■ 


3^3  -^3  ^3  *^3  *^s  ✓^3v"^3,^3~ ^3  ^3  ^3  ^3  ,-^3  3^,v^yr^3'^3v^i3'i^3>^3>^3  ^3t^3~? 

•JL^- 

|  cr '“  the  western  world 

EE  IfflBBiilmM  ggyyf 

T  9231 

gg  28.  GILBERT  41.  GIBBON  II  C  84  iO  gj?^?! 

5^  GALILEO 

j^5-  HARVEY  42‘ KANT 

2p  rFRVANTF..^  AMERICAN  STATE 

^  *  PAPERS 

30.  FRANCIS  BACON  THE  FEDERALIST 

^5^-  _  J*  S^w^w^f. 

F?r  31.  DESCARTES 

?^2^Z~Z~L 

55^  SPINOZA  44.  BOSWELL 

^ry3J-  «^fa^?5r?5r^ 

32.  MILTON  45.  LAVOISIER 

i^£“  FOURIER 

»• PASCAL  FARADAY  gggg| 

34.  NEWTON  ..  „-_„  y^a^y-a 

^  HUYGENS  46.  HEGEL  ggyg! 

47*  GOETHE 

35.  LOCKE 

BERKELEY  48.  MELVILLE 

HUME 

49.  DARWIN 

36.  swift  yyyy! 

STERNE  50.  MARX  '££££ 

ENGELS  w^wriSHS^i 

37.  FIELDING 

51.  TOLSTOY  *a»sa»»a»j&>i 

38.  MONTESQUIEU 

^  ROUSSEAU  52.  DOSTOEVSKY 

IP*  39.  ADAM  SMITH  53.  WILLIAM  JAMES 

gjp  40.  GIBBON  I  54.  FREUD 

PP  .  ?EF  ^  F  ^rr^: 

§g  fwmrr  »  ^  tlCH00L  district  .^iH 

~^r j-  ’  ''rv  ,k  *-»  At  Z0NJ\ 

«^?5^g^5^aE?aE5E«pjS^5?S^5F75Ew^  J53  ^^^w^wywj^wEwrwFTa^^wJ  ^ 


ROBERT  VICKROY 


GREAT  BOOKS 
OF  THE  WESTERN  WORLD 

ROBERT  MAYNARD  HUTCHINS,  EDITOR  IN  CHIEF 


II. 

EUCLID 
ARCHIMEDES 
APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 
NICOMACHUS 


Mortimer  J.  Adler,  Associate  Editor 

Members  of  the  Advisory  Board:  Stringfellow  Barr,  Scott  Buchanan,  John  Erskine, 
Clarence  H.  Faust,  Alexander  Meiklejohn,  Joseph  J.  Schwab,  Mark  Van  Doren. 
Editorial  Consultants:  A.  F.  B.  Clark,  F.  L.  Lucas,  Walter  Murdoch. 
Wallace  Brockway,  Executive  Editor 


^coi  t,\ero 

03  ROW  ViR 3T23W  <IHT  30 


"  n m ;iom<ra ,?z  hot  jh  cm  •  xyam  tjihhcm 


.11 

Giulia 
13  <3  3  iAIHOSk 
K^;i33  30  1  i\A0J  103 K 
l  r»'OKf  /  O  .'JA 


•>i  iterant'  taajaA 

■  '  ""  HC  .  H  :  JA  i  O  KJD 


THE  THIRTEEN  BOOKS 
OF  EUCLID’S  ELEMENTS 


THE  WORKS  OF  ARCHIMEDES 
INCLUDING  THE  METHOD 


ON  CONIC  SECTIONS 

BY  APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 


INTRODUCTION  TO 
ARITHMETIC 

BY  NICOMACHUS  OF  GERASA 


William  Benton,  Publisher 
ENCYCLOPAEDIA  BRITANNICA,  INC. 
CHICAGO  •  LONDON  •  TORONTO  •  GENEVA  •  SYDNEY  .  TOKYO 


The  Thirteen  Books  of  Euclid’s  Elements  and  The  Works  of  Archimedes , 
including  The  Method ,  translated  by  Sir  Thomas  L.  Heath, 
are  reprinted  by  arrangement  with  Cambridge  University  Press 

Conics  is  reprinted  by  arrangement  with  the  translator,  R.  Catesby  Taliaferro. 
Copyright,  1939,  by  R.  Catesby  Taliaferro 


Nicomachus  of  Gerasa:  Introduction  to  Arithmetic ,  by  Martin  Luther  D’Ooge, 

Frank  Egleston  Robbins,  and  Louis  Charles  Karpinski,  is  reprinted  by  arrangement  with 
The  Regents  of  the  University  of  Michigan  (The  University  of  Michigan  Press). 
Copyright,  1926,  by  Francis  W.  Kelsey 


THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CHICAGO 
The  Great  Books 

is  published  with  the  editorial  advice  of  the  faculties 
of  The  University  of  Chicago 


© 

x952 

by  Encyclopedia  Britannica,  Inc. 

Copyright  under  International  Copyright  Union 

All  Rights  Reserved  under  Pan  American  and  Universal  Copyright 
Conventions  by  Encyclopedia  Britannica,  Inc. 

Library  of  Congress  Catalog  Card  Number:  55-10320 


GENERAL  CONTENTS 


THE  THIRTEEN  BOOKS 
OF  EUCLID’S  ELEMENTS,  Page  1 
Translated  by  Sir  Thomas  L.  Heath 


THE  WORKS  OF  ARCHIMEDES 
INCLUDING  THE  METHOD,  Page  403 
Translated  by  Sir  Thomas  L.  Heath 


CONICS,  Page  603 
By  Apollonius  of  Perga 
Translated  by  R.  Catesby  Taliaferro 


INTRODUCTION  TO  ARITHMETIC,  Page  811 
By  Nicomachus  of  Gerasa 
Translated  by  Martin  L.  D’Ooge 


?!  /  )  .  if  .  1 


.r  r  )/;iV  >T/[ 


'  •'  ■  -  O?  <OJ;  r>l; 


EUCLID’S  ELEMENTS 


BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTE 
Euclid,  fl.  c.  300  b.c. 


Euclid  is  said  to  have  been  younger  than  the  first  pupils  of  Plato  but  older 
than  Archimedes,  which  would  place  the  time  of  his  flourishing  about  300  b.c. 
He  probably  received  his  early  mathematical  education  in  Athens  from  the 
pupils  of  Plato,  since  most  of  the  geometers  and  mathematicians  on  whom  he 
depended  were  of  that  school.  Proclus,  the  Neo-Plat onist  of  the  fifth  century, 
asserts  that  Euclid  was  of  the  school  of  Plato  and  “intimate  with  that  philos¬ 
ophy.”  His  opinion,  however,  may  have  been  based  only  on  his  view  that  the 
treatment  of  the  five  regular  (“Platonic”)  solids  in  Book  XIII  is  the  “end  of 
the  whole  Elements .” 

The  only  other  fact  concerning  Euclid  is  that  he  taught  and  founded  a  school 
at  Alexandria  in  the  time  of  Ptolemy  I,  who  reigned  from  306  to  283  b.c.  The 
evidence  for  the  place  comes  from  Pappus  (fourth  century  a.d.),  who  notes 
that  Apollonius  “spent  a  very  long  time  with  the  pupils  of  Euclid  at  Alexan¬ 
dria,  and  it  was  thus  that  he  acquired  such  a  scientific  habit  of  thought.” 
Proclus  claims  that  it  was  Ptolemy  I  who  asked  Euclid  if  there  was  no  shorter 
way  to  geometry  than  the  Elements  and  received  as  answer:  “There  is  no  royal 
road  to  geometry.”  The  other  story  about  Euclid  that  has  come  down  from 
antiquity  concerns  his  answer  to  a  pupil  who  at  the  end  of  his  first  lesson  in 
geometry  asked  what  he  would  get  by  learning  such  things,  whereupon  Euclid 
called  his  slave  and  said:  “Give  him  a  coin  since  he  must  needs  make  gain  by 
what  he  learns.” 

Something  of  Euclid's  character  would  seem  to  be  disclosed  in  the  remark  of 
Pappus  regarding  Euclid's  “scrupulous  fairness  and  his  exemplary  kindness 
towards  all  who  advance  mathematical  science  to  however  small  an  extent.” 
The  context  of  the  remark  seems  to  indicate,  however,  that  Pappus  is  not  giv¬ 
ing  a  traditional  account  of  Euclid  but  offering  an  explanation  of  his  own  of 
Euclid's  failure  to  go  further  than  he  did  with  his  investigation  of  a  certain 
problem  in  conics. 

Euclid's  great  work,  the  thirteen  books  of  the  Elements ,  must  have  become  a 
classic  soon  after  publication.  From  the  time  of  Archimedes  they  are  constant¬ 
ly  referred  to  and  used  as  a  basic  text-book.  It  was  recognized  in  antiquity  that 
Euclid  had  drawn  upon  all  his  predecessors.  According  to  Proclus,  he  “collect¬ 
ed  many  of  the  theorems  of  Eudoxus,  perfected  many  of  those  of  Theatetus, 
and  also  brought  to  incontrovertible  demonstration  the  things  which  were  only 
loosely  proved  by  his  predecessors.”  The  other  extant  works  of  Euclid  include: 
the  Data ,  for  use  in  the  solution  of  problems  by  geometrical  analysis,  On  Di¬ 
visions  (of  figures),  the  Optics,  and  the  Phenomena ,  a  treatise  on  the  geometry 
of  the  sphere  for  use  in  astronomy.  His  lost  Elements  of  Music  may  have  pro¬ 
vided  the  basis  for  the  extant  Sectio  Canonis  on  the  Pythagorean  theory  of 
music.  Of  lost  geometrical  works  all  except  one  belonged  to  higher  geometry. 

Since  the  later  Greeks  knew  nothing  about  the  life  of  Euclid,  the  mediaeval 


IX 


X 


BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTE 


translators  and  editors  were  left  to  their  own  devices.  He  was  usually  called 
Megarensis,  through  confusion  with  the  philosopher  Eucleides  of  Megara, 
Plato's  contemporary.  The  Arabs  found  that  the  name  of  Euclid,  which  they 
took  to  be  compounded  from  ucli  (key)  and  dis  (measure)  revealed  the  “key  of 
geometry."  They  claimed  that  the  Greek  philosophers  used  to  post  upon  the 
doors  of  their  schools  the  well-known  notice:  “Let  no  one  come  to  our  school 
who  has  not  learned  the  Elements  of  Euclid,"  thus  transferring  the  inscription 
over  Plato's  Academy  to  all  scholastic  doors  and  substituting  the  Elements  for 
geometry. 


CONTENTS 


Biographical  Note,  p.  ix 


BOOK 

I. 

Definitions,  Postulates, 

Common  Notions 

i 

Propositions 

2 

BOOK 

II. 

Definitions 

30 

Propositions 

30 

BOOK 

III. 

Definitions 

41 

Propositions 

41 

BOOK 

IV. 

Definitions 

67 

Propositions 

67 

BOOK 

V. 

Definitions 

81 

Propositions 

82 

BOOK 

VI. 

Definitions 

99 

Propositions 

99 

BOOK 

VII. 

Definitions 

127 

Propositions 

128 

BOOK 

VIII. 

150 

BOOK 

IX. 

171 

BOOK 

X. 

Definitions  I. 

191 

Propositions  1 — 47 

191-229 

Definitions  II. 

229 

Propositions  48 — 84 

229-264 

Definitions  III. 

264 

Propositions  85 — 115 

264-300 

BOOK 

XI. 

Definitions 

301 

Propositions 

302 

BOOK 

XII. 

Propositions 

338 

BOOK 

XIII. 

Propositions 

369 

xi 


yr  f  ,,  _r  ,y  > 

i  .<t  ,3toK  viAbiu  oi  'orfl 


^  •  n  >‘I  .  .  fCl 

.1 

ao<  >a 

1 

^orroZ  ;  <  <  o') 

s 

^vrom-  i 

■  * 

ivorrr/ri;  U 

.11 

>rooa 

Og 

aKo;  -  i>o«if  c[ 

r; 

SKom^r;  (I 

ill 

>IOH 

«7uri  ovw'f 

-/bin/  Q 

.71 

A(  >  a 

18 

avjciLi  .  r  :i<] 

.7 

>i<  6i 

xoos 

69 

8/  n*  ion  t 

TSi 

c  ;orr  o  Toa^i 

161 

.1  n  iv"i 

m>oa 

—  f  -  i  rn~-  iO  ^I 

I  >TTmi&&<I 

±  2S 

t'  31  v:oiti8<> 

J^2 

JI’  /orri  viQ 

•os-t.-r 

'7 T :  / l  -LlO 

.IX 

zoos 

/om  &Hon*l 

Oil  js040  I 

xooa 

-/.o:  ;■ i^c  i  i 

.mz  >rooa 

BOOK  ONE 


DEFINITIONS 

1.  A  point  is  that  which  has  no  part. 

2.  A  line  is  breadthless  length. 

3.  The  extremities  of  a  line  are  points. 

4.  A  straight  line  is  a  line  which  lies  evenly  'with  the  points  on  itself. 

5.  A  surface  is  that  which  has  length  and  breadth  only. 

6.  The  extremities  of  a  surface  are  lines. 

7.  A  plane  surface  is  a  surface  which  lies  evenly  with  the  straight  lines  on  it¬ 
self. 

8.  A  plane  angle  is  the  inclination  to  one  another  of  two  lines  in  a  plane  which 
meet  one  another  and  do  not  lie  in  a  straight  line. 

9.  And  when  the  lines  containing  the  angle  are  straight,  the  angle  is  called 
rectilineal . 

10.  When  a  straight  line  set  up  on  a  straight  line  makes  the  adjacent  angles 
equal  to  one  another,  each  of  the  equal  angles  is  right  and  the  straight  line 
standing  on  the  other  is  called  a  perpendicular  to  that  on  which  it  stands. 

11.  An  obtuse  angle  is  an  angle  greater  than  a  right  angle. 

12.  An  acute  angle  is  an  angle  less  than  a  right  angle. 

13.  A  boundary  is  that  which  is  an  extremity  of  anything. 

14.  A  figure  is  that  which  is  contained  by  any  boundary  or  boundaries. 

15.  A  circle  is  a  plane  figure  contained  by  one  line  such  that  all  the  straight 
lines  falling  upon  it  from  one  point  among  those  lying  within  the  figure  are 
equal  to  one  another; 

16.  And  the  point  is  called  the  centre  of  the  circle. 

17.  A  diameter  of  the  circle  is  any  straight  line  drawn  through  the  centre  and 
terminated  in  both  directions  by  the  circumference  of  the  circle,  and  such  a 
straight  line  also  bisects  the  circle. 

18.  A  semicircle  is  the  figure  contained  by  the  diameter  and  the  circumfer¬ 
ence  cut  off  by  it.  And  the  centre  of  the  semicircle  is  the  same  as  that  of  the 
circle. 

19.  Rectilineal  figures  are  those  which  are  contained  by  straight  lines,  trilat¬ 
eral  figures  being  those  contained  by  three,  quadrilateral  those  contained  by 
four,  and  multilateral  those  contained  by  more  than  four  straight  lines. 

20.  Of  trilateral  figures,  an  equilateral  triangle  is  that  which  has  its  three  sides 
equal,  an  isosceles  triangle  that  which  has  two  of  its  sides  alone  equal,  and  a 
scalene  triangle  that  which  has  its  three  sides  unequal. 

21.  Further,  of  trilateral  figures,  a  right-angled  triangle  is  that  which  has  a 
right  angle,  an  obtuse-angled  triangle  that  which  has  an  obtuse  angle,  and  an 
acute-angled  triangle  that  which  has  its  three  angles  acute. 

1 


2 


EUCLID 


22.  Of  quadrilateral  figures,  a  square  is  that  which  is  both  equilateral  and 
right-angled;  an  oblong  that  which  is  right-angled  but  not  equilateral;  a  rhom¬ 
bus  that  which  is  equilateral  but  not  right-angled;  and  a  rhomboid  that  which 
has  its  opposite  sides  and  angles  equal  to  one  another  but  is  neither  equilateral 
nor  right-angled.  And  let  quadrilaterals  other  than  these  be  called  trapezia. 

23.  Parallel  straight  lines  are  straight  lines  which,  being  in  the  same  plane 
and  being  produced  indefinitely  in  both  directions,  do  not  meet  one  another  in 
either  direction. 

POSTULATES 

Let  the  following  be  postulated : 

1.  To  draw  a  straight  line  from  any  point  to  any  point. 

2.  To  produce  a  finite  straight  line  continuously  in  a  straight  line. 

3.  To  describe  a  circle  with  any  centre  and  distance. 

4.  That  all  right  angles  are  equal  to  one  another. 

5.  That,  if  a  straight  line  falling  on  two  straight  lines  make  the  interior  an¬ 
gles  on  the  same  side  less  than  two  right  angles,  the  two  straight  lines,  if  pro¬ 
duced  indefinitely,  meet  on  that  side  on  which  are  the  angles  less  than  the  two 
right  angles. 

COMMON  NOTIONS 

1.  Things  which  are  equal  to  the  same  thing  are  also  equal  to  one  another. 

2.  If  equals  be  added  to  equals,  the  wholes  are  equal. 

3.  If  equals  be  subtracted  from  equals,  the  remainders  are  equal. 

[7]  4.  Things  which  coincide  with  one  another  are  equal  to  one  another. 

[8]  5.  The  whole  is  greater  than  the  part. 


BOOK  I.  PROPOSITIONS 
Proposition  1 

On  a  given  finite  straight  line  to  construct  an  equilateral  triangle . 

Let  AB  be  the  given  finite  straight  line. 

Thus  it  is  required  to  construct  an  equi¬ 
lateral  triangle  on  the  straight  line  AB. 

With  centre  A  and  distance  AB  let  the 
circle  BCD  be  described;  [Post.  3] 

again,  with  centre  B  and  distance  BA  let 
the  circle  ACE  be  described;  [Post.  3] 
and  from  the  point  C,  in  which  the  circles 
cut  one  another,  to  the  points  A ,  B  let  the 
straight  lines  CA ,  CB  be  joined.  [Post.  1] 

Now,  since  the  point  A  is  the  centre  of  the  circle  CDB, 

AC  is  equal  to  AB.  [Def.  15] 

Again,  since  the  point  B  is  the  centre  of  the  circle  CAE , 

BC  is  equal  to  BA .  [Def.  15] 

But  CA  was  also  proved  equal  to  AB; 

therefore  each  of  the  straight  lines  CA,  CB  is  equal  to  AB. 

And  things  which  are  equal  to  the  same  thing  are  also  equal  to  one  another; 

therefore  CA  is  also  equal  to  CB.  [ C .  N.  1] 

Therefore  the  three  straight  lines  CA,  AB,  BC  are  equal  to  one  another. 


ELEMENTS  I  3 

Therefore  the  triangle  ABC  is  equilateral;  and  it  has  been  constructed  on  the 

given  finite  straight  line  AS.  /TD  .  \  ,  ,  ,  .  * 

&  (Being)  what  it  was  required  to  do. 

Proposition  2 

To  place  at  a  given  point  (as  an  extremity)  a  straight  line  equal  to  a  given 
straight  line. 

Let  A  be  the  given  point,  and  BC  the  given  straight  line. 

Thus  it  is  required  to  place  at  the  point  A  (as 
an  extremity)  a  straight  line  equal  to  the  given 
straight  line  BC. 

From  the  point  A  to  the  point  B  let  the  straight 
line  AB  be  joined;  [Post.  1J 

and  on  it  let  the  equilateral  triangle  DAB  be  con¬ 
structed.  [i.  1] 

Let  the  straight  lines  AE,  BF  be  produced  in  a 
straight  line  with  DA,  DB ;  [Post.  2] 

with  centre  B  and  distance  BC  let  the  circle  CGH 
be  described;  [Post.  31 

and  again,  with  centre  D  and  distance  DG  let  the  circle  GKL  be  described. 

[Post.  3] 

Then,  since  the  point  B  is  the  centre  of  the  circle  CGH , 

SC  is  equal  to  BG. 

Again,  since  the  point  D  is  the  centre  of  the  circle  GKL , 

DL  is  equal  to  DG. 

And  in  these  DA  is  equal  to  DB ; 

therefore  the  remainder  AL  is  equal  to  the  remainder  BG.  [C.N.  3] 
But  BC  was  also  proved  equal  to  BG; 

therefore  each  of  the  straight  lines  AL,  BC  is  equal  to  BG. 

And  things  which  are  equal  to  the  same  thing  are  also  equal  to  one  another; 

[C.N.  11 

therefore  AL  is  also  equal  to  BC. 

Therefore  at  the  given  point  A  the  straight  line  AL  is  placed  equal  to  the 
gi\en  straight  line  BC.  (Being)  what  it  was  required  to  do. 

Proposition  3 

Given  two  unequal  straight  lines,  to  cut  off  from  the  greater  a  straight  line 
equal  to  the  less. 

Let  AB,  C  be  the  two  given  unequal  straight 
lines,  and  let  AS  be  the  greater  of  them. 

Thus  it  is  required  to  cut  off  from  AS  the  greater 
a  straight  line  equal  to  C  the  less. 

At  the  point  A  let  AD  be  placed  equal  to  the 
straight  line  C;  [i.  2] 

and  with  centre  A  and  distance  AD  let  the  circle 
B  DEF  be  described.  [Post.  31 

Now,  since  the  point  A  is  the  centre  of  the  circle 
DEF, 

AE  is  equal  to  AD.  [Def.  15] 


4 


EUCLID 


But  C  is  also  equal  to  AD. 

Therefore  each  of  the  straight  lines  AE,  C  is  equal  to  AD; 

so  that  AE  is  also  equal  to  C .  [C.N.  1] 

Therefore,  given  the  two  straight  lines  AB ,  C,  from  AB  the  greater  AE  has 
been  cut  off  equal  to  C  the  less. 

(Being)  what  it  was  required  to  do. 

Proposition  4 

If  two  triangles  have  the  two  sides  equal  to  two  sides  respectively ,  and  have  the  an¬ 
gles  contained  by  the  equal  straight  lines  equal ,  they  will  also  have  the  base  equal  to 
the  base ,  the  triangle  will  be  equal  to  the  triangle ,  and  the  remaining  angles  will  be 
equal  to  the  remaining  angles  respectively ,  namely  those  which  the  equal  sides  subtend. 

Let  ABC,  DEF  be  two  triangles  having  the  two  sides  AB,  AC  equal  to  the 
two  sides  DE,  DF  respectively,  namely  AB  to  DE  and  AC  to  DF,  and  the  an¬ 
gle  BA  C  equal  to  the  angle  EDF. 

I  say  that  the  base  BC  is  also  equal  to  the  base  EF ,  the  triangle  ABC  will  be 
equal  to  the  triangle  DEF ,  and  the  remaining  angles  will  be  equal  to  the  re¬ 
maining  angles  respectively,  namely  those  which  the  equal  sides  subtend,  that 
is,  the  angle  ABC  to  the  angle  DEF,  and  the  angle  ACB  to  the  angle  DFE. 

For,  if  the  triangle  ABC  be  applied  to 
the  triangle  DEF, 

and  if  the  point  A  be  placed  on  the  point  D 
and  the  straight  line  AB  on  DE, 
then  the  point  B  will  also  coincide  with 
E,  because  AB  is  equal  to  DE. 

Again,  AB  coinciding  with  DE, 
the  straight  line  AC  wall  also  coincide  with  DF,  because  the  angle  BAC  is  equal 
to  the  angle  EDF ; 

hence  the  point  C  will  also  coincide  with  the  point  F,  because  AC  is  again 
equal  to  DF. 

But  B  also  coincided  with  E ; 

hence  the  base  BC  will  coincide  with  the  base  EF. 

[For  if,  when  B  coincides  with  E  and  C  with  F,  the  base  BC  does  not  coincide 
with  the  base  EF,  two  straight  lines  will  enclose  a  space:  which  is  impossible. 

Therefore  the  base  BC  will  coincide  with  EF]  and  will  be  equal  to  it.  [C.N.  4] 
Thus  the  whole  triangle  ABC  will  coincide  with  the  wrhole  triangle  DEF,  and 
will  be  equal  to  it. 

And  the  remaining  angles  will  also  coincide  with  the  remaining  angles  and 
will  be  equal  to  them, 

the  angle  ABC  to  the  angle  DEF, 
and  the  angle  ACB  to  the  angle  DFE. 

Therefore  etc. 

(Being)  what  it  was  required  to  prove. 

Proposition  5 

In  isosceles  triangles  the  angles  at  the  base  are  equal  to  one  another,  and ,  if  the  equal 
straight  lines  be  produced  f  urther,  the  angles  under  the  base  will  be  equal  to  one 
another. 

Let  ABC  be  an  isosceles  triangle  having  the  side  AB  equal  to  the  side  AC; 


ELEMENTS  I  5 

and  let  the  straight  lines  BD.  CE  be  produced  further  in  a  straight  line  with 
AB,  AC.  “  ~  [Post  2] 

I  say  that  the  angle  ABC  is  equal  to  the  angle  ACB.  and  the  angle  CBB  to 
the  angle  BCE. 

Let  a  point  F  be  taken  at  random  on  BD : 
from  AE  the  greater  let  AG  be  cut  off  equal  to  AF  the 
less:  [i-  3] 

and  let  the  straight  lines  FC ,  GB  be  joined.  [Post.  1] 
Then,  since  AF  is  equal  to  AG  and  AB  to  AC, 
the  two  sides  FA,  AC  are  equal  to  the  two  sides 
GA,  AB.  respectively; 

and  they  contain  a  common  angle,  the  angle  FAG. 
Therefore  the  base  FC  is  equal  to  the  base  GB , 
and  the  triangle  AFC  is  equal  to  the  triangle  AGB , 
and  the  remaining  angles  will  be  equal  to  the  remaining  angles  respectively, 
namely  those  which  the  equal  sides  subtend, 

that  is,  the  angle  ACT  to  the  angle  ABG , 
and  the  angle  AFC  to  the  angle  AGB.  [i.  4] 

And.  since  the  whole  AF  is  equal  to  the  whole  AG, 
and  in  these  A B  is  equal  to  AC, 
the  remainder  BF  is  equal  to  the  remainder  CG. 

But  FC  was  also  proved  equal  to  GB ; 

therefore  the  two  sides  BF,  FC  are  equal  to  the  two  sides  CG.  GB  respectively; 
and  the  angle  BFC  is  equal  to  the  angle  CGB, 
while  the  base  BC  is  common  to  them: 
therefore  the  triangle  BFC  is  also  equal  to  the  triangle  CGB,  and  the  remaining 
angles  will  be  equal  to  the  remaining  angles  respectively,  namely  those  which 
the  equal  sides  subtend; 

therefore  the  angle  FBC  is  equal  to  the  angle  GCB, 
and  the  angle  BCF  to  the  angle  CBG. 

Accordingly,  since  the  whole  angle  ABG  was  proved  equal  to  the  angle  ACF, 
and  in  these  the  angle  CBG  is  equal  to  the  angle  BCF . 
the  remaining  angle  ABC  is  equal  to  the  remaining  angle  ACB ; 
and  they  are  at  the  base  of  the  triangle  ABC . 

But  the  angle  FBC  was  also  proved  equal  to  the  angle  GCB ; 
and  they  are  under  the  base. 

Therefore  etc.  Q. 


E.  D. 


Proposition  6 


If  in  a  triangle  two  angle s  he  equal  to  one  another ,  the  s ides  which  subtend  the  ecqual 
angles  will  also  be  equal  to  one  another. 

Let  ABC  be  a  triangle  having  the  angle  ABC  equal  to  the  angle  ACB; 

I  say  that  the  side  AB  is  also  equal  to  the  side  AC. 

For,  if  AB  is  unequal  to  AC,  one  of  them  is  greater. 

Let  AB  be  greater:  and  from  AB  the  greater  let  DB  be  cut 
off  equal  to  AC  the  less; 

let  DC  be  joined. 

Then,  since  DB  is  equal  to  AC, 

and  BC  is  common, 


6 


EUCLID 


the  two  sides  DB,  BC  are  equal  to  the  two  sides  AC,  CB  respectively; 
and  the  angle  DBC  is  equal  to  the  angle  ACB; 
therefore  the  base  DC  is  equal  to  the  base  AB , 
and  the  triangle  DBC  will  be  equal  to  the  triangle  ACB , 
the  less  to  the  greater: 
which  is  absurd. 

Therefore  AB  is  not  unequal  to  AC; 

it  is  therefore  equal  to  it. 

Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  7 

Given  two  straight  lines  constructed  on  a  straight  line  (, from  its  extremities )  and 
meeting  in  a  point ,  there  cannot  be  constructed  on  the  same  straight  line  ( from  its 
extremities),  and  on  the  same  side  of  it,  two  other  straight  lines  meeting  in  another 
point  and  equal  to  the  former  two  respectively,  namely  each  to  that  which  has  the 
saine  extremity  with  it. 

For,  if  possible,  given  two  straight  lines  AC,  CB  constructed  on  the  straight 
line  AB  and  meeting  at  the  point  C,  let  two  other  straight 
lines  AD,  DB  be  constructed  on  the  same  straight  line 
AB,  on  the  same  side  of  it,  meeting  in  another  point  D 
and  equal  to  the  former  two  respectively,  namely  each  to 
that  which  has  the  same  extremity  with  it,  so  that  CA  is 
equal  to  DA  which  has  the  same  extremity  A  with  it,  and 
CB  to  DB  which  has  the  same  extremity  B  with  it;  and  let 
CD  be  joined. 

Then,  since  AC  is  equal  to  AD, 

the  angle  ACD  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  ADC ;  [i.  5] 

therefore  the  angle  ADC  is  greater  than  the  angle  DCB; 
therefore  the  angle  CDB  is  much  greater  than  the  angle  DCB. 

Again,  since  CB  is  equal  to  DB, 

the  angle  CDB  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  DCB . 

But  it  was  also  proved  much  greater  than  it: 

which  is  impossible. 

Therefore  etc.  Q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  8 

If  two  triayigles  have  the  two  sides  equal  to  two  sides  respectively,  and  have  also  the 
base  equal  to  the  base,  they  will  also  have  the  angles  equal  which  are  contained  by 
the  equal  straight  lines. 

Let  ABC,  DEF  be  two  triangles  having 
the  two  sides  AB,  AC  equal  to  the  two  sides 
DE,  DF  respectively,  namely  AB  to  DE,  and 
AC  to  DF;  and  let  them  have  the  base  BC 
equal  to  the  base  EF; 

I  say  that  the  angle  BAG  is  also  equal  to 
the  angle  EDF. 

For,  if  the  triangle  ABC  be  applied  to  the  triangle  DEF,  and  if  the  point  B 
be  placed  on  the  point  E  and  the  straight  line  BC  on  EF, 
the  point  C  will  also  coincide  with  F} 


7 


ELEMENTS  I 


because  BC  is  equal  to  EF. 

Then,  BC  coinciding  with  EF, 

BA,  AC  will  also  coincide  with  ED,  DF; 
for,  if  the  base  BC  coincides  with  the  base  EF,  and  the  sides  BA,  AC  do  not 
coincide  with  ED,  DF  but  fall  beside  them  as  EG,  GF, 

then,  given  two  straight  lines  constructed  on  a  straight  line  (from  its  ex¬ 
tremities)  and  meeting  in  a  point,  there  will  have  been  constructed  on  the  same 
straight  line  (from  its  extremities),  and  on  the  same  side  of  it,  two  other  straight 
lines  meeting  in  another  point  and  equal  to  the  former  two  respectively,  name¬ 
ly  each  to  that  wilich  has  the  same  extremity  with  it. 

But  they  cannot  be  so  constructed.  [i.  7] 

Therefore  it  is  not  possible  that,  if  the  base  BC  be  applied  to  the  base  EF, 
the  sides  BA,  AC  should  not  coincide  with  ED,  DF ; 

they  will  therefore  coincide, 

so  that  the  angle  BA  C  will  also  coincide  with  the  angle  EDF,  and  will  be  equal 
to  it. 

If  therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  9 


To  bisect  a  given  rectilineal  angle. 

Let  the  angle  BAC  be  the  given  rectilineal  angle. 

Thus  it  is  required  to  bisect  it. 

Let  a  point  D  be  taken  at  random  on  .45; 

let  AE  be  cut  off  from  AC  equal  to  AD:  [i.  3] 

let  DE  be  joined,  and  on  DE  let  the  equilateral  triangle  DEF  be 
constructed; 

let  AF  be  joined. 

I  say  that  the  angle  BAC  has  been  bisected  by  the  straight  line  AF. 
For,  since  AD  is  equal  to  AE, 

and  AF  is  common, 

the  two  sides  DA,  AF  are  equal  to  the  two  sides  EA,  AF  respectively. 
And  the  base  DF  is  equal  to  the  base  EF; 

therefore  the  angle  DAF  is  equal  to  the  angle  EAF.  [i.  8] 

Therefore  the  given  rectilineal  angle  BAC  has  been  bisected  by  the  straight 
line  AF.  q.  e.  f. 


Proposition  10 

To  bisect  a  given  finite  straight  line. 

Let  AB  be  the  given  finite  straight  fine. 

Thus  it  is  required  to  bisect  the  finite  straight  line  AB. 

Let  the  equilateral  triangle  ABC  be  constructed  on  it,  [i.  1] 

and  let  the  angle  ACB  be  bisected  by  the  straight  line 
CD;  ~  [i.  9] 

I  say  that  the  straight  line  AB  has  been  bisected  at 
the  point  D. 

For,  since  AC  is  equal  to  CB , 

and  CD  is  common, 

the  two  sides  AC,  CD  are  equal  to  the  two  sides  BC,  CD 
respectively; 

and  the  angle  ACD  is  equal  to  the  angle  BCD; 


8 


EUCLID 


therefore  the  base  AD  is  equal  to  the  base  BD.  [i.  4] 

Therefore  the  given  finite  straight  line  AB  has  been  bisected  at  D.  q.  e.  f. 

Proposition  11 

To  draw  a  straight  line  at  right  angles  to  a  given  straight  line  from  a  given 
'point  on  it. 

Let  AB  be  the  given  straight  line,  and  C  the  given  point  on  it. 

Thus  it  is  required  to  draw  from  the  point  C  sl  straight  line  at  right  angles  to 
the  straight  line  AB . 

Let  a  point  D  be  taken  at  random  on  AC; 
let  CE  be  made  equal  to  CD;  [i.  3] 
on  DE  let  the  equilateral  triangle  FDE  be  con¬ 
structed,  [i.  1] 

and  let  FC  be  joined; 

I  say  that  the  straight  line  FC  has  been 
drawn  at  right  angles  to  the  given  straight  line  ^ 

AB  from  C  the  given  point  on  it. 

For,  since  DC  is  equal  to  CE, 

and  CF  is  common, 
the  two  sides  DC,  CF  are  equal  to  the  two  sides  EC,  CF  respectively; 
and  the  base  DF  is  equal  to  the  base  FE ; 
therefore  the  angle  DCF  is  equal  to  the  angle  ECF ;  [i.  8] 

and  they  are  adjacent  angles. 

But,  when  a  straight  line  set  up  on  a  straight  line  makes  the  adjacent  angles 
equal  to  one  another,  each  of  the  equal  angles  is  right;  [Def.  10] 

therefore  each  of  the  angles  DCF,  FCE  is  right. 

Therefore  the  straight  line  CF  has  been  drawn  at  right  angles  to  the  given 
straight  line  AB  from  the  given  point  C  on  it.  q.  e.  f. 

Proposition  12 

To  a  given  infinite  straight  line ,  from  a  given  point  which  is  not  on  it,  to  draw  a 
perpendicular  straight  line . 

Let  ABbe  the  given  infinite  straight  line,  and  C  the  given  point  which  is  not 
on  it; 

thus  it  is  required  to  draw  to  the  given  infinite  straight  line  AB,  from  the  given 
point  C  which  is  not  on  it,  a  perpendicular 
straight  line. 

For  let  a  point  D  be  taken  at  random 
on  the  other  side  of  the  straight  line  AB, 
and  with  centre  C  and  distance  CD  let 
the  circle  EFG  be  described;  [Post.  3] 
let  the  straight  line  EG  be  bisected  at  H, 


and  let  the  straight  lines  CG,  CH,  CE  be 
joined.  [Post.  1] 

I  say  that  CH  has  been  drawn  perpendicular  to  the  given  infinite  straight 
line  AB  from  the  given  point  C  which  is  not  on  it. 

For,  since  GH  is  equal  to  HE, 

and  HC  is  common, 


9 


ELEMENTS  I 

the  two  sides  GH,  HC  are  equal  to  the  two  sides  EH,  HC  respectively; 
and  the  base  CG  is  equal  to  the  base  CE; 
therefore  the  angle  CHG  is  equal  to  the  angle  EHC.  [i.  8] 

And  they  are  adjacent  angles. 

But,  when  a  straight  line  set  up  on  a  straight  line  makes  the  adjacent  angles 
equal  to  one  another,  each  of  the  equal  angles  is  right,  and  the  straight  line 
standing  on  the  other  is  called  a  perpendicular  to  that  on  which  it  stands. 

[Def.  10] 

Therefore  CH  has  been  drawn  perpendicular  to  the  given  infinite  straight 
line  AB  from  the  given  point  C  which  is  not  on  it.  Q.  e.  f. 

Proposition  13 

If  a  straight  line  set  up  on  a  straight  line  make  angles ,  it  will  make  either  two  right 
angles  or  angles  equal  to  two  right  angles. 

For  let  an}^  straight  line  AB  set  up  on  the  straight  line  CD  make  the  angles 
CBA,  ABD; 

I  say  that  the  angles  CBA ,  ABD  are  either  two  rights  angles  or  equal  to  two 
right  angles. 

Now,  if  the  angle  CBA  is  equal  to  the  angle  ABD, 
they  are  two  right  angles.  [Def.  10] 

But,  if  not,  let  BE  be  drawn  from  the  point  B  at 
^  right  angles  to  CD;  [i.  11] 

therefore  the  angles  CBE ,  EBD  are  two  right  angles. 
Then,  since  the  angle  CBE  is  equal  to  the  two  angles  CBA,  ABE , 
let  the  angle  EBD  be  added  to  each ; 

therefore  the  angles  CBE ,  EBD  are  equal  to  the  three  angles  CBA ,  ABE, 
EBD .  [C.N.  2] 

Again,  since  the  angle  DBA  is  equal  to  the  two  angles  DBE,  EBA, 
let  the  angle  ABC  be  added  to  each; 

therefore  the  angles  DBA,  ABC  are  equal  to  the  three  angles  DBE,  EBA, 
ABC.  [C.N.  2] 

But  the  angles  CBE,  EBD  were  also  proved  equal  to  the  same  three  angles; 
and  things  which  are  equal  to  the  same  thing  are  also  equal  to  one  another; 

[C.N.  1] 

therefore  the  angles  CBE ,  EBD  are  also  equal  to  the  angles  DBA,  ABC. 
But  the  angles  CBE,  EBD  are  two  right  angles; 

therefore  the  angles  DBA,  ABC  are  also  equal  to  two  right  angles. 
Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  14 

If  with  any  straight  line ,  and  at  a  point  on  it,  two  straight  lines  not  lying  on  the 
same  side  make  the  adjacent  angles  equal  to  two  right  angles,  the  two  straight  lines 
will  be  in  a  straight  line  with  one  another. 

For  with  any  straight  line  AB,  and  at  the  point  B  on  it,  let  the  two  straight 
lines  BC,  BD  not  lying  on  the  same  side  make  the  adjacent  angles  ABC,  ABD 
equal  to  two  right  angles; 

I  say  that  BD  is  in  a  straight  line  with  CB. 

For,  if  BD  is  not  in  a  straight  line  with  BC,  let  BE  be  in  a  straight  line  with 
CB. 


10  EUCLID 

Then,  since  the  straight  line  AB  stands  on  the  straight  line  CBE , 

the  angles  ABC ,  ABE  are  equal  to  two  right  angles.  [i.  13] 

But  the  angles  ABC ,  ABD  are  also  equal  to  two 
right  angles; 

therefore  the  angles  CBA,  ABE  are  equal  to  the 

angles  CBA ,  ABD.  [Post.  4  and  C.N.  1]  _ 

Let  the  angle  CBA  be  subtracted  from  each;  C  B  D 

therefore  the  remaining  angle  ABE  is  equal  to  the  remaining  angle  ABD, 

[C.N.  3] 

the  less  to  the  greater:  which  is  impossible. 

Therefore  BE  is  not  in  a  straight  line  with  CB. 

Similarly  we  can  prove  that  neither  is  any  other  straight  line  except  BD. 
Therefore  CB  is  in  a  straight  line  with  BD. 

Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  15 

If  two  straight  lines  cut  one  another ,  they  make  the  vertical  angles  equal  to  one 
another. 

For  let  the  straight  lines  AB,  CD  cut  one  another  at 
the  point  E ; 

I  say  that  the  angle  A  EC  is  equal  to  the  angle  DEB, 
and  the  angle  CEB  to  the  angle  AED. 

For,  since  the  straight  line  AE  stands  on  the  straight 
line  CD,  making  the  angles  CEA ,  AED, 

the  angles  CEA,  AED  are  equal  to  two  right  angles.  [i.  13] 
Again,  since  the  straight  line  DE  stands  on  the  straight  line  AB,  making  the 
angles  AED,  DEB, 

the  angles  AED,  DEB  are  equal  to  two  right  angles.  [i.  13] 
But  the  angles  CEA,  AED  were  also  proved  equal  to  two  right  angles; 
therefore  the  angles  CEA,  AED  are  equal  to  the  angles  AED,  DEB. 

[Post.  4  and  C.N.  1] 

Let  the  angle  AED  be  subtracted  from  each; 

therefore  the  remaining  angle  CEA  is  equal  to  the  remaining  angle  BED. 

[C.N.  3] 

Similarly  it  can  be  proved  that  the  angles  CEB,  DEA  are  also  equal. 
Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 

[Porism.  From  this  it  is  manifest  that,  if  two  straight  lines  cut  one  another, 
they  will  make  the  angles  at  the  point  of  section  equal  to  four  right  angles.] 

Proposition  16 

In  any  triangle,  if  one  of  the  sides  be  produced ,  the  exterior  angle  is  greater  than 
either  of  the  interior  and  opposite  angles. 

Let  ABC  be  a  triangle,  and  let  one  side  of  it  BC  be  produced  to  D; 

I  say  that  the  exterior  angle  ACD  is  greater  than  either  of  the  interior  and 
opposite  angles  CBA,  BAG. 

Let  AC  be  bisected  at  E  [i.  10],  and  let  BE  be  joined  and  produced  in  a 
straight  line  to  F ; 

let  EF  be  made  equal  to  BE,  [i.  3] 

let  FC  be  joined  [Post.  1],  and  let  AC  be  drawn  through  to  G.  [Post.  2] 


11 


ELEMENTS  I 

Then,  since  AE  is  equal  to  EC,  and  BE  to  EF, 

the  two  sides  AE,  EB  are  equal  to  the  two  sides  CE ,  EF  respectively; 

A  P  and  the  angle  AEB  is  equal  to  the  angle  FEC, 

for  they  are  vertical  angles.  [i.  15] 
/  \  /  Therefore  the  base  AB  is  equal  to  the  base  FC, 

/  /  and  ^  triangle  ABE  is  equal  to  the  triangle  CFE, 

/ \  /  and  the  remaining  angles  are  equal  to  the  remain- 

/y^  \/  ing  angles  respectively,  namely,  those  which  the 

B  c\  D  equal  sides  subtend;  [i.  4] 

\  therefore  the  angle  BAE  is  equal  to  the  angle  ECF . 

\  But  the  angle  ECD  is  greater  than  the  angle 

ECF;  [C.N.  5] 

therefore  the  angle  A  CD  is  greater  than  the  angle  BAE. 

Similarly  also,  if  BC  be  bisected,  the  angle  BCG,  that  is,  the  angle  ACD 
[i.  15],  can  be  proved  greater  than  the  angle  ABC  as  well. 

Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  17 

In  any  triangle  two  angles  taken  together  in  any  manner  are  less  than  two 
right  angles . 

Let  ABC  be  a  triangle; 

I  say  that  two  angles  of  the  triangle  ABC  taken  together  in  any  manner  are 

less  than  two  right  angles. 

For  let  BC  be  produced  to  D.  [Post.  2] 
Then,  since  the  angle  ACD  is  an  exte¬ 
rior  angle  of  the  triangle  ABC , 
it  is  greater  than  the  interior  and  opposite 
-  angle  ABC.  [i.  16] 

Let  the  angle  ACB  be  added  to  each; 
therefore  the  angles  ACD,  ACB  are  greater  than  the  angles  ABC,  BCA. 
But  the  angles  ACD,  ACB  are  equal  to  two  right  angles.  [i.  13] 

Therefore  the  angles  ABC,  BCA  are  less  than  two  right  angles. 

Similarly  we  can  prove  that  the  angles  BAG,  ACB  are  also  less  than  two 
right  angles,  and  so  are  the  angles  CAB,  ABC  as  well. 

Therefore  etc.  Q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  18 

In  any  triangle  the  greater  side  subtends  the  greater  angle. 

For  let  ABC  be  a  triangle  having  the  side  AC  greater  than  AB; 

I  say  that  the  angle  ABC  is  also  greater  than  the  angle  BCA. 

For,  since  AC  is  greater  than  AB,  let  AD 
be  made  equal  to  AB  [i.  3],  and  let  BD  be 
joined. 

Then,  since  the  angle  ADB  is  an  exterior 
angle  of  the  triangle  BCD , 
it  is  greater  than  the  interior  and  opposite 
angle  DCB.  [i.  16] 

But  the  angle  ADB  is  equal  to  the  angle  ABD, 

since  the  side  AB  is  equal  to  AD; 


12 


EUCLID 


therefore  the  angle  ABD  is  also  greater  than  the  angle  ACB j 
therefore  the  angle  ABC  is  much  greater  than  the  angle  ACB. 
Therefore  etc. 

Proposition  19 

In  any  triangle  the  greater  angle  is  subtended  by  the  greater  side. 

Let  ABC  be  a  triangle  having  the  angle  ABC  greater  than  the 
I  say  that  the  side  AC  is  also  greater  than  the  side  AB . 

For,  if  not,  AC  is  either  equal  to  AB  or  less. 

Now  AC  is  not  equal  to  AB ; 

for  then  the  angle  ABC  would  also  have  been  equal  to  the  angle 
ACB)  [i.  5] 

but  it  is  not; 

therefore  AC  is  not  equal  to  AB. 

Neither  is  AC  less  than  A B, 
for  then  the  angle  ABC  would  also  have  been  less  than  the  angle  ACB ;  [i.  18] 

but  it  is  not; 

therefore  AC  is  not  less  than  AB. 

And  it  was  proved  that  it  is  not  equal  either. 

Therefore  AC  is  greater  than  AB. 

Therefore  etc.  Q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  20 

In  any  triangle  two  sides  taken  together  in  any  manner  are  greater  than  the  re¬ 
maining  one. 

For  let  ABC  be  a  triangle; 

I  say  that  in  the  triangle  AjBC  two  sides  taken  together  in  any  manner  are 
greater  than  the  remaining  one,  namely 

BAy  AC  greater  than  BC, 

ABy  BC  greater  than  AC, 

BCy  CA  greater  than  AB. 

For  let  BA  be  drawn  through  to  the  point  D,  let  DA  be  made  equal  to  CA, 
and  let  DC  be  joined. 

Then,  since  DA  is  equal  to  AC, 

the  angle  ADC  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  ACD ;  [i.  5] 
therefore  the  angle  BCD  is  greater  than  the  angle  ADC. 

[C.N.  5] 

And,  since  DCB  is  a  triangle  having  the  angle  BCD  greater 
than  the  angle  BDCy 

and  the  greater  angle  is  subtended  by  the  greater  side,  [i.  19] 
therefore  DB  is  greater  than  BC. 

But  DA  is  equal  to  AC; 

therefore  BA,  AC  are  greater  than  BC. 

Similarly  we  can  prove  that  ABy  BC  are  also  greater  than  CA,  and  BCy  CA 
than  AB. 

Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 


D 


Q.  E.  D. 


angle  BCA ; 


Proposition  21 

If  on  one  of  the  sides  of  a  triangley  from  its  extremities ,  there  be  constructed  two 


13 


ELEMENTS  I 


straight  lines  meeting  within  the  triangle ,  the  straight  lines  so  constructed  will  be 
less  than  the  remaining  two  sides  of  the  triangle ,  but  will  contain  a  greater  angle. 

On  BC,  one  of  the  sides  of  the  triangle  ABC ,  from  its  extremities  B ,  C,  let 
the  two  straight  lines  BD ,  DC  be  constructed  meeting  within  the  triangle; 

I  say  that  BD,  DC  are  less  than  the  remaining  two  sides  of  the  triangle  BA, 
AC,  but  contain  an  angle  BDC  greater  than  the  angle  BA C. 

For  let  BD  be  drawn  through  to  E . 

Then,  since  in  any  triangle  two  sides  are  greater 
than  the  remaining  one,  [i.  20] 

therefore,  in  the  triangle  ABE ,  the  two  sides  AB, 
AE  are  greater  than  BE. 

Let  EC  be  added  to  each; 

therefore  BA,  AC  are  greater  than  BE,  EC. 
Again,  since,  in  the  triangle  CED, 
the  two  sides  CE,  ED  are  greater  than  CD, 
let  DB  be  added  to  each; 
therefore  CE,  EB  are  greater  than  CD,  DB. 

But  BA,  AC  were  proved  greater  than  BE,  EC; 

therefore  BA,  AC  are  much  greater  than  BD,  DC. 

Again,  since  in  any  triangle  the  exterior  angle  is  greater  than  the  interior 
and  opposite  angle,  [i.  16] 


therefore,  in  the  triangle  CDE, 
the  exterior  angle  BDC  is  greater  than  the  angle  CED. 

For  the  same  reason,  moreover,  in  the  triangle  ABE  also, 

the  exterior  angle  CEB  is  greater  than  the  angle  BAC. 

But  the  angle  BDC  was  proved  greater  than  the  angle  CEB ; 

therefore  the  angle  BDC  is  much  greater  than  the  angle  BAC. 
Therefore  etc.  Q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  22 

Out  of  three  straight  lines,  which  are  equal  to  three  given  straight  lines,  to  construct 
a  triangle:  thus  it  is  necessary  that  two  of  the  straight  lines  taken  together  in  any 
manner  should  be  greater  than  the  remaining  one.  [i.  20] 

Let  the  three  given  straight  lines  be  A,  B,  C,  and  of  these  let  two  taken  to¬ 
gether  in  any  manner  be  greater  than  the  remaining  one, 


namely 

and 


A ,  B  greater  than  C , 

A,  C  greater  than  B, 

B,  C  greater  than  A; 


A 

B 

C 


14 


EUCLID 


thus  it  is  required  to  construct  a  triangle  out  of  straight  lines  equal  to  A,  B,  C . 

Let  there  be  set  out  a  straight  line  DE ,  terminated  at  D  but  of  infinite  length 
in  the  direction  of  E, 

and  let  DF  be  made  equal  to  A,  FG  equal  to  B ,  and  GH  equal  to  C.  [i.  3] 
With  centre  F  and  distance  FD  let  the  circle  DKL  be  described; 
again,  with  centre  G  and  distance  GH  let  the  circle  KLH  be  described; 
and  let  KF,  KG  be  joined; 

I  say  that  the  triangle  KFG  has  been  constructed  out  of  three  straight  lines 
equal  to  A,  B ,  C. 

For,  since  the  point  F  is  the  centre  of  the  circle  DKL , 

FD  is  equal  to  FK. 

But  FD  is  equal  to  A  ; 

therefore  KF  is  also  equal  to  A. 

Again,  since  the  point  G  is  the  centre  of  the  circle  LKH , 

GH  is  equal  to  GK. 

But  GH  is  equal  to  C; 

therefore  KG  is  also  equal  to  C . 

And  FG  is  also  equal  to  B\ 

therefore  the  three  straight  lines  KF,  FG,  GK  are  equal  to  the  three  straight 
lines  A,  B,  C. 

Therefore  out  of  the  three  straight  lines  KF,  FG,  GK,  which  are  equal  to  the 
three  given  straight  lines  A,  B,  C,  the  triangle  KFG  has  been  constructed. 

Q.  E.  F. 


Proposition  23 

On  a  given  straight  line  and  at  a  point  on  it  to  construct  a  rectilineal  angle  equal  to 
a  given  rectilineal  angle . 

Let  AB  be  the  given  straight  line,  A  the  point  on  it,  and  the  angle  DCE  the 
given  rectilineal  angle; 

thus  it  is  required  to  construct  on  the  given  straight  line  AB,  and  at  the 
point  A  on  it,  a  rectilineal  angle  equal  to  the  given  rectilineal  angle  DCE . 


On  the  straight  lines  CD,  CE  respectively  let  the  points  D,  E  be  taken  at 
random; 

let  DE  be  joined, 

and  out  of  three  straight  lines  which  are  equal  to  the  three  straight  lines  CD, 
DE,  CE  let  the  triangle  AFG  be  constructed  in  such  a  way  that  CD  is  equal  to 
AF,  CE  to  AG,  and  further  DE  to  FG.  [i.  22] 

Then,  since  the  two  sides  DC,  CE  are  equal  to  the  two  sides  FA,  AG  respec¬ 
tively, 

and  the  base  DE  is  equal  to  the  base  FG, 

the  angle  DCE  is  equal  to  the  angle  FAG.  [i.  8] 


15 


ELEMENTS  I 

Therefore  on  the  given  straight  line  AB,  and  at  the  point  A  on  it,  the  recti¬ 
lineal  angle  FAG  has  been  constructed  equal  to  the  given  rectilineal  angle 
DCE.  Q.  E.  F. 


Proposition  24 

If  two  triangles  have  the  two  sides  equal  to  two  sides  respectively ,  but  have  the  one  of 
the  angles  contained  by  the  equal  straight  lines  greater  than  the  other ,  they  will  also 
have  the  base  greater  than  the  base. 

Let  ABC,  DEF  be  two  triangles  having  the  two  sides  ABt  AC  equal  to  the 
two  sides  DE ,  DF  respectively,  namely  AB  to  DE,  and  AC  to  DF ,  and  let  the 
angle  at  A  be  greater  than  the  angle  at  D; 

I  say  that  the  base  BC  is  also  greater  than  the  base  EF. 

For,  since  the  angle  BAC  is  greater 
than  the  angle  EDF ,  let  there  be  con¬ 
structed,  on  the  straight  line  DE,  and  at 
the  point  D  on  it,  the  angle  EDG  equal  to 
the  angle  BAC)  [i.  23] 

let  DG  be  made  equal  to  either  of  the  two 
straight  lines  AC,  DF,  and  let  EG,  FG  be 
joined. 

Then,  since  AB  is  equal  to  DE,  and  AC  to  DG, 

the  two  sides  BA,  AC  are  equal  to  the  two  sides  ED,  DG,  respectively; 
and  the  angle  BAC  is  equal  to  the  angle  EDG) 
therefore  the  base  BC  is  equal  to  the  base  EG.  [i.  4] 

Again,  since  DF  is  equal  to  DG, 

the  angle  DGF  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  DFG)  [i.  5] 

therefore  the  angle  DFG  is  greater  than  the  angle  EGF. 

Therefore  the  angle  EFG  is  much  greater  than  the  angle  EGF. 

And,  since  EFG  is  a  triangle  having  the  angle  EFG  greater  than  the  angle 
EGF, 

and  the  greater  angle  is  subtended  by  the  greater  side,  [i.  19] 
the  side  EG  is  also  greater  than  EF. 

But  EG  is  equal  to  BC. 

Therefore  BC  is  also  greater  than  EF. 

Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  25 

If  two  triangles  have  the  two  sides  equal  to  two  sides  respectively,  but  have  the  base 
greater  than  the  base,  they  will  also  have  the  one  of  the  angles  contained  by  the  equal 
straight  lines  greater  than  the  other. 

Let  ABC,  DEF  be  two  triangles  having  the  two  sides  AB,  AC  equal  to  the 
two  sides  DE,  DF  respectively,  namely  AB  to  DE,  and  AC  to  DF)  and  let  the 
base  BC  be  greater  than  the  base  EF) 

I  say  that  the  angle  BAC  is  also  greater  than  the  angle  EDF. 

For,  if  not,  it  is  either  equal  to  it  or  less. 

Now  the  angle  BAC  is  not  equal  to  the  angle  EDF)  for  then  the  base  BC 
would  also  have  been  equal  to  the  base  EF,  [i.  4] 

but  it  is  not ; 

therefore  the  angle  BAC  is  not  equal  to  the  angle  EDF. 


16  EUCLID 

Neither  again  is  the  angle  BAC  less  than  the  angle  EDF;  for  then  the  base 
BC  would  also  have  been  less  than  the  base  EF,  [i.  24) 

A  D 


E  F 

but  it  is  not;  therefore  the  angle  BAC  is  not  less  than  the  angle  EDF. 
But  it  was  proved  that  it  is  not  equal  either; 

therefore  the  angle  BAC  is  greater  than  the  angle  EDF. 
Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  26 

If  two  triangles  have  the  two  angles  equal  to  two  angles  respectively ,  and  one  side 
equal  to  one  side ,  namely,  either  the  side  adjoining  the  equal  angles,  or  that  sub - 
tending  one  of  the  equal  angles ,  they  will  also  have  the  remaining  sides  equal  to  the 
remaining  sides  a?id  the  remaining  angle  to  the  remaining  angle. 

Let  ABC,  DEF  be  two  triangles  having  the  two  angles  ABC,  BCA  equal  to 
the  two  angles  DEF,  EFD  respectively,  namely  the  angle  ABC  to  the  angle 
DEF,  and  the  angle  BCA  to  the  angle  EFD;  and  let  them  also  have  one  side 
equal  to  one  side,  first  that  adjoining  the  equal  angles,  namely  BC  to  EF; 

I  say  that  they  will  also  have  the  remaining  sides  equal  to  the  remaining 
sides  respectively,  namely  AB  to  DE  and  AC  to  DF,  and  the  remaining  angle 
to  the  remaining  angle,  namely  the  angle  BAC  to  the  angle  EDF. 


For,  if  AB  is  unequal  to  DE,  one  of  them  is  greater. 

Let  AB  be  greater,  and  let  BG  be  made  equal  to  DE;  and  let  GC  be  joined. 
Then,  since  BG  is  equal  to  DE,  and  BC  to  EF, 

the  two  sides  GB ,  BC  are  equal  to  the  two  sides  DE,  EF  respectively; 
and  the  angle  GBC  is  equal  to  the  angle  DEF; 
therefore  the  base  GC  is  equal  to  the  base  DF, 
and  the  triangle  GBC  is  equal  to  the  triangle  DEF, 
and  the  remaining  angles  will  be  equal  to  the  remaining  angles,  namely  those 
which  the  equal  sides  subtend;  [i.  4} 

therefore  the  angle  GCB  is  equal  to  the  angle  DFE. 

But  the  angle  DFE  is  by  hypothesis  equal  to  the  angle  BCA ; 

therefore  the  angle  BCG  is  equal  to  the  angle  BCA , 
the  less  to  the  greater:  which  is  impossible. 

Therefore  AB  is  not  unequal  to  DE, 

and  is  therefore  equal  to  it. 

But  BC  is  also  equal  to  EF; 


ELEMENTS  I  17 

therefore  the  two  sides  AB,  BC  are  equal  to  the  two  sides  DE,  EF  res¬ 
pectively, 

and  the  angle  ABC  is  equal  to  the  angle  DEF ; 
therefore  the  base  AC  is  equal  to  the  base  DF, 
and  the  remaining  angle  BAG  is  equal  to  the  remaining  angle  EDF.  [i.  4] 

Again,  let  sides  subtending  equal  angles  be  equal,  as  AB  to  DE; 

I  say  again  that  the  remaining  sides  will  be  equal  to  the  remaining  sides, 
namely  AC  to  DF  and  BC  to  EF,  and  further  the  remaining  angle  BAC  is  equal 
to  the  remaining  angle  EDF . 

For,  if  BC  is  unequal  to  EF ,  one  of  them  is  greater. 

Let  BC  be  greater,  if  possible,  and  let  BH  be  made  equal  to  EF;  let  AH  be 
joined. 

Then,  since  BH  is  equal  to  EF,  and  AB  to  DE, 
the  two  sides  AB,  BH  are  equal  to  the  two  sides  DE,  EF  respectively,  and  they 
contain  equal  angles; 

therefore  the  base  AH  is  equal  to  the  base  DF, 
and  the  triangle  ABH  is  equal  to  the  triangle  DEF, 
and  the  remaining  angles  will  be  equal  to  the  remaining  angles,  namely  those 
which  the  equal  sides  subtend;  [i.  4] 

therefore  the  angle  BHA  is  equal  to  the  angle  EFD. 

But  the  angle  EFD  is  equal  to  the  angle  BCA ; 
therefore,  in  the  triangle  AHC,  the  exterior  angle  BHA  is  equal  to  the  interior 
and  opposite  angle  BCA : 

which  is  impossible.  [i.  16] 

Therefore  BC  is  not  unequal  to  EF, 

and  is  therefore  equal  to  it. 

But  AB  is  also  equal  to  DE; 

therefore  the  two  sides  AB,  BC  are  equal  to  the  two  sides  DE,  EF  respectively, 
and  they  contain  equal  angles; 

therefore  the  base  AC  is  equal  to  the  base  DF, 
the  triangle  ABC  equal  to  the  triangle  DEF, 
and  the  remaining  angle  BAC  equal  to  the  remaining  angle  EDF .  [i.  4] 

Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  27 

If  a  straight  line  falling  on  two  straight  lines  make  the  alternate  angles  equal  to  one 
another,  the  straight  lines  will  he  parallel  to  one  another. 

For  let  the  straight  line  EF  falling  on  the  two  straight  lines  AB,  CD  make 
the  alternate  angles  AEF,  EFD  equal  to  one  another; 

I  say  that  AB  is  parallel  to  CD. 

For,  if  not,  AB,  CD  when  produced  will  meet 
either  in  the  direction  of  B,  D  or  towards  A,  C. 

Let  them  be  produced  and  meet,  in  the  direc¬ 
tion  of  B,  D,  at  C. 

Then,  in  the  triangle  GEF, 
the  exterior  angle  AEF  is  equal  to  the  interior  and  opposite  angle  EFG: 

which  is  impossible.  [i.  16] 

Therefore  AB,  CD  when  produced  will  not  meet  in  the  direction  of  B,  D . 
Similarly  it  can  be  proved  that  neither  will  they  meet  towards  A,  C. 


18 


EUCLID 


But  straight  lines  which  do  not  meet  in  either  direction  are  parallel ; 


Therefore  etc. 


therefore  AB  is  parallel  to  CD. 


[Def.  23] 

Q.  E.  D. 


Proposition  28 

If  a  straight  line  falling  on  two  straight  lines  make  the  exterior  angle  equal  to  the 
interior  and  opposite  angle  on  the  same  side}  or  the  interior  angles  on  the  same  side 
equal  to  two  right  angles,  the  straight  lines  will  he  parallel  to  one  another. 

For  let  the  straight  line  EF  falling  on  the  two  straight  lines  AB,  CD  make 
the  exterior  angle  EGB  equal  to  the  interior  and  opposite  angle  GHD,  or  the 
interior  angles  on  the  same  side,  namely  BGH,  GHD ,  equal  to  two  right  angles; 
I  say  that  AB  is  parallel  to  CD. 

For,  since  the  angle  EGB  is  equal  to  the  angle 
GHD , 

while  the  angle  EGB  is  equal  to  the  angle  AGH, 

[i.  15] 

the  angle  AGH  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  GHD ; 
and  they  are  alternate ; 
therefore  AB  is  parallel  to  CD.  [i.  27] 

Again,  since  the  angles  BGH,  GHD  are  equal  to  two  right  angles,  and  the 
angles  AGH,  BGH  are  also  equal  to  two  right  angles,  [i.  13] 

the  angles  AGH,  BGH  are  equal  to  the  angles  BGH,  GHD. 

Let  the  angle  BGH  be  subtracted  from  each; 

therefore  the  remaining  angle  AGH  is  equal  to  the  remaining  angle  GHD ; 

and  they  are  alternate; 

therefore  AB  is  parallel  to  CD.  [i.  27] 

Therefore  etc.  Q.  e.  d.] 


Proposition  29 

A  straight  line  falling  on  parallel  straight  lines  makes  the  alternate  angles  equal  to 
one  another,  the  exterior  angle  equal  to  the  interior  and  opposite  angle ,  and  the  in¬ 
terior  angles  on  the  same  side  equal  to  two  right  angles. 

For  let  the  straight  line  EF  fall  on  the  parallel  straight  lines  AB,  CD) 

I  say  that  it  makes  the  alternate  angles  AGH ,  GHD  equal,  the  exterior  angle 
EGB  equal  to  the  interior  and  opposite  angle  GHD,  and  the  interior  angles  on 
the  same  side,  namely  BGH,  GHD,  equal  to  two  right  angles. 

For,  if  the  angle  AGH  is  unequal  to  the  angle 
GHD,  one  of  them  is  greater. 

Let  the  angle  AGH  be  greater. 

Let  the  angle  BGH  be  added  to  each; 
therefore  the  angles  A  GH,  BGH  are  greater  than  the 
angles  BGH,  GHD. 

But  the  angles  AGH,  BGH  are  equal  to  two  right 
angles;  [i.  13] 

therefore  the  angles  BGH,  GHD  are  less  than  two  right  angles. 

But  straight  lines  produced  indefinitely  from  angles  less  than  two  right  an¬ 
gles  meet;  [Post.  5] 

therefore  AB,  CD,  if  produced  indefinitely,  will  meet; 


19 


ELEMENTS  I 

but  they  do  not  meet,  because  they  are  by  hypothesis  parallel. 
Therefore  the  angle  AGH  is  not  unequal  to  the  angle  GHD, 
and  is  therefore  equal  to  it. 

Again,  the  angle  AGH  is  equal  to  the  angle  EGB ;  [i.  15] 

therefore  the  angle  EGB  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  GHD .  [C.K.  1] 

Let  the  angle  BGH  be  added  to  each; 

therefore  the  angles  EGB,  BGH  are  equal  to  the  angles  BGH,  GHD.  [C..Y.  2] 
But  the  angles  EGB,  BGH  are  equal  to  two  right  angles;  [i.  13] 

therefore  the  angles  BGH,  GHD  are  also  equal  to  two  right  angles. 
Therefore  etc.  Q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  30 

Straight  lines  parallel  to  the  same  straight  line  are  also  parallel  to  one  another . 
Let  each  of  the  straight  lines  AB,  CD  be  parallel  to  EF;  I  say  that  AB  is  also 
parallel  to  CD. 

A _ g/  B  For  let  the  straight  line  GK  fall  upon  them. 

~ ~7  Then,  since  the  straight  line  GKhas  fallen  on  the  paral- 

- ~r -  lei  straight  lines  AB,  EF, 

c  K  /  the  angle  AGK  is  equal  to  the  angle  GHF.  [i.  29] 

/  Again,  since  the  straight  line  GK  has  fallen  on  the  pa¬ 

rallel  straight  lines  EF,  CD, 

the  angle  GHF  is  equal  to  the  angle  GKD.  [i.  29] 

But  the  angle  AGK  was  also  proved  equal  to  the  angle  GHF; 

therefore  the  angle  AGK  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  GKD;  [C.Y.  1] 
and  they  are  alternate. 

Therefore  AB  is  parallel  to  CD.  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  31 

Through  a  given  point  to  draw  a  straight  line  parallel  to  a  given  straight 
line . 

Let  A  be  the  given  point,  and  BC  the  given  straight  line; 
thus  it  is  required  to  draw  through  the  point  A  a  straight  line  parallel  to  the 
straight  line  BC. 

Let  a  point  D  be  taken  at  random  on  BC, 
and  let  AD  be  joined;  on  the  straight  line  DA, 
and  at  the  point  A  on  it,  let  the  angle  DAE  be 
constructed  equal  to  the  angle  ADC  [i.  23];  and 
let  the  straight  line  AF  be  produced  in  a  straight 
line  with  EA. 

Then,  since  the  straight  line  AD  falling  on  the  two  straight  lines  BC,  EF  has 
made  the  alternate  angles  EAD,  ADC  equal  to  one  another, 

therefore  EAF  is  parallel  to  BC.  [i.  27] 

Therefore  through  the  given  point  A  the  straight  line  EAF  has  been  drawn 
parallel  to  the  given  straight  line  BC.  Q.  e.  f. 


Proposition  32 

In  any  triangle,  if  one  of  the  sides  he  produced,  the  exterior  angle  is  equal  to  the  two 
interior  and  opposite  angles,  and  the  three  interior  angles  of  the  triangle  are  equal 
to  two  right  angles. 


20  EUCLID 

Let  ABC  be  a  triangle,  and  let  one  side  of  it  BC  be  produced  to  D ; 

I  say  that  the  exterior  angle  ACD  is  equal  to  the  two  interior  and  opposite 
angles  CAB,  ABC ,  and  the  three  interior  angles  of  the  triangle  ABC,  BCA , 
CAB  are  equal  to  two  right  angles. 

For  let  CE  be  drawn  through  the  point  C  parallel  to  the  straight  line  AB. 

[i.  31] 

Then,  since  AB  is  parallel  to  CE, 

and  AC  has  fallen  upon  them, 
the  alternate  angles  BAC ,  ACE  are  equal  to  one 
another.  [i.  29] 

Again,  since  AB  is  parallel  to  CE, 
and  the  straight  line  BD  has  fallen  upon  them, 
the  exterior  angle  ECD  is  equal  to  the  interior 
and  opposite  angle  ABC.  [i.  29] 

But  the  angle  ACE  was  also  proved  equal  to  the  angle  BAC; 
therefore  the  whole  angle  ACD  is  equal  to  the  two  interior  and  opposite  angles 
BAC,  ABC. 

Let  the  angle  ACB  be  added  to  each; 

therefore  the  angles  ACD,  ACB  are  equal  to  the  three  angles  ABC,  BCA , 
CAB. 

But  the  angles  ACD,  ACB  are  equal  to  two  right  angles;  [i.  13] 

therefore  the  angles  ABC ,  BCA ,  CAB  are  also  equal  to  two  right  angles. 

Therefore  etc.  Q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  33 

The  straight  lines  joining  equal  and  parallel  straight  lines  (at  the  extremities  which 
are)  in  the  same  directions  ( respectively )  are  themselves  also  equal  and  parallel. 

Let  AB,  CD  be  equal  and  parallel,  and  let  the  straight  lines  AC,  BD  join 
them  (at  the  extremities  which  are)  in  the  same  directions  (respectively) ; 

I  say  that  AC,  BD  are  also  equal  and  parallel. 

Let  BC  be  joined. 

Then,  since  AB  is  parallel  to  CD,  and  BC  has 
fallen  upon  them, 

the  alternate  angles  ABC,  BCD  are  equal  to  one 
another.  [i.  29] 

And,  since  AB  is  equal  to  CD, 

and  BC  is  common, 
the  two  sides  AB,  BC  are  equal  to  the  two  sides  DC,  CB  ; 
and  the  angle  ABC  is  equal  to  the  angle  BCD; 

therefore  the  base  AC  is  equal  to  the  base  BD, 
and  the  triangle  ABC  is  equal  to  the  triangle  DCB, 
and  the  remaining  angles  will  be  equal  to  the  remaining  angles  respectively, 
namely  those  which  the  equal  sides  subtend;  [i.  4] 

therefore  the  angle  ACB  is  equal  to  the  angle  CBD. 

And,  since  the  straight  line  BC  falling  on  the  two  straight  lines  AC,  BD  has 
made  the  alternate  angles  equal  to  one  another, 

AC  is  parallel  to  BD.  [i.  27] 

And  it  was  also  proved  equal  to  it. 

Therefore  etc. 


Q.  E.  D. 


ELEMENTS  I 


21 


Proposition  34 

In  parallelogrammic  areas  the  opposite  sides  and  angles  are  equal  to  one  another , 
and  the  diameter  bisects  the  areas. 

Let  ACDB  be  a  parallelogrammic  area,  and  BC  its  diameter; 

I  say  that  the  opposite  sides  and  angles  of  the  parallelogram  ACDB  are  equal 

to  one  another,  and  the  diameter  BC  bisects  it. 
For,  since  AB  is  parallel  to  CD, 
and  the  straight  line  BC  has  fallen  upon  them, 
the  alternate  angles  ABC ,  BCD  are  equal  to  one 
another.  *  [i.  29] 

Again,  since  AC  is  parallel  to  BD ,  and  BC  has 
fallen  upon  them, 
the  alternate  angles  ACB ,  CBD  are  equal  to  one  another.  [i.  29] 
Therefore  ABC,  DCB  are  two  triangles  having  the  two  angles  ABC,  BCA 
equal  to  the  two  angles  DCB,  CBD  respectively,  and  one  side  equal  to  one  side, 
namely  that  adjoining  the  equal  angles  and  common  to  both  of  them,  BC; 
therefore  they  will  also  have  the  remaining  sides  equal  to  the  remaining 
sides  respectively,  and  the  remaining  angle  to  the  remaining  angle;  [i.  26] 
therefore  the  side  AB  is  equal  to  CD, 
and  AC  to  BD, 

and  further  the  angle  BAG  is  equal  to  the  angle  CDS. 

And,  since  the  angle  ABC  is  equal  to  the  angle  BCD , 

and  the  angle  CBD  to  the  angle  ACB, 
the  whole  angle  ABD  is  equal  to  the  whole  angle  ACD.  [C.N.  2] 
And  the  angle  BAC  was  also  proved  equal  to  the  angle  CDB. 

Therefore  in  parallelogrammic  areas  the  opposite  sides  and  angles  are  equal 
to  one  another. 

I  say,  next,  that  the  diameter  also  bisects  the  areas. 

For,  since  AB  is  equal  to  CD, 

and  BC  is  common, 

the  two  sides  AB,  BC  are  equal  to  the  two  sides  DC,  CB  respectively; 
and  the  angle  ABC  is  equal  to  the  angle  BCD; 
therefore  the  base  AC  is  also  equal  to  DB, 
and  the  triangle  ABC  is  equal  to  the  triangle  DCB .  [i.  4] 

Therefore  the  diameter  BC  bisects  the  parallelogram  ACDB .  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  35 

Parallelograms  which  are  on  the  same  base  and,  in  the  same  parallels  are  equal  to 
one  another. 

Let  A  BCD,  EBCF  be  parallelograms  on  the  same  base  BC  and  in  the  same 
parallels  AF,  BC; 


For,  since  A  BCD  is  a  parallelogram, 

AD  is  equal  to  BC.  [i.  34] 

For  the  same  reason  also 

EF  is  equal  to  BC, 

so  that  AD  is  also  equal  to  EF;  [C.N.  1] 

and  DE  is  common; 


22  EUCLID 

therefore  the  whole  AE  is  equal  to  the  whole  DF.  [C.N.  2] 
But  AB  is  also  equal  to  DC;  [i.  34] 

therefore  the  two  sides  EA ,  AB  are  equal  to  the  two  sides  FD,  DC  respectively, 
and  the  angle  FDC  is  equal  to  the  angle  EAB, 

the  exterior  to  the  interior;  [i.  29] 

therefore  the  base  EB  is  equal  to  the  base  FC, 
and  the  triangle  EAB  will  be  equal  to  the  triangle  FDC.  [i.  4] 
Let  DGE  be  subtracted  from  each; 

therefore  the  trapezium  ABGD  which  remains  is  equal  to  the  trapezium  EGCF 
which  remains.  [C.N.  3] 

Let  the  triangle  GBC  be  added  to  each ; 
therefore  the  whole  parallelogram  ABCD  is  equal  to  the  whole  parallelogram 
EBCF.  [C.N.  2] 

Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  36 

Parallelograms  which  are  on  equal  bases  and  in  the  same  'parallels  are  equal  to  one 
another. 

Let  ABCD,  EFGH  be  parallelograms  which  are  on  equal  bases  BC,  FG  and 
in  the  same  parallels  AH,  BG; 

I  say  that  the  parallelogram  ABCD  is  equal  to  EFGH. 

For  let  BE,  CH  be  joined. 

Then,  since  BC  is  equal  to  FG, 
while 

FG  is  equal  to  EH, 

BC  is  also  equal  to  EH.  [C.N.  1] 

But  they  are  also  parallel. 

And  EB,  HC  join  them; 
but  straight  lines  joining  equal  and  parallel  straight  lines  (at  the  extremities 
which  are)  in  the  same  directions  (respectively)  are  equal  and  parallel,  [i.  33] 


Therefore  EBCH  is  a  parallelogram.  [i.  34] 

And  it  is  equal  to  ABCD; 

for  it  has  the  same  base  BC  with  it,  and  is  in  the  same  parallels  BC,  AH  with. 
it.  [i.  35] 

For  the  same  reason  also  EFGH  is  equal  to  the  same  EBCH;  [i.  35] 

so  that  the  parallelogram  ABCD  is  also  equal  to  EFGH.  [C.N.  1] 

Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  37 


Triangles  which  are  on  the  same  base  and  in  the  same  parallels  are  equal  to  one 
another. 


Let  ABC ,  DBC  be  triangles  on  the  same  base  BC  and  in  the  same  parallels 
AD,  BC; 

...  F 

triangle  DBC. 

Let  AD  be  produced  in  both  directions  to 
E,F; 

through  B  let  BE  be  drawn  parallel  to  CA, 

[i.  31] 


23 


ELEMENTS  I 


and  through  C  let  CF  be  drawn  parallel  to  ED.  [i.  31] 

Then  each  of  the  figures  EEC  A ,  DBCF  is  a  parallelogram;  and  they  are 
equal, 

for  they  are  on  the  same  base  EC  and  in  the  same  parallels  EC ,  EF.  [i.  35] 
Moreover  the  triangle  ABC  is  half  of  the  parallelogram  EBCA ;  for  the  di¬ 
ameter  AB  bisects  it.  [i.  34] 

And  the  triangle  DEC  is  half  of  the  parallelogram  DBCF ;  for  the  diameter 
DC  bisects  it.  [i.  34] 

[But  the  halves  of  equal  things  are  equal  to  one  another.] 

Therefore  the  triangle  ABC  is  equal  to  the  triangle  DBC. 

Therefore  etc.  Q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  38 

Triangles  which  are  on  equal  bases  and  in  the  same  parallels  are  equal  to 
one  another . 

Let  ABC ,  DEF  be  triangles  on  equal  bases  BC,  EF  and  in  the  same  parallels 
BC,  AD; 

I  say  that  the  triangle  ABC  is  equal  to  the  triangle  DEF. 

For  let  AD  be  produced  in  both  directions  to  G,  H; 

through  B  let  BG  be  drawn  parallel  to  CA ,  [i.  31] 

and  through  F  let  FH  be  drawn  parallel 
to  DE. 

Then  each  of  the  figures  GBCA,  DEFH 
is  a  parallelogram; 

and  GBCA  is  equal  to  DEFH; 
for  they  are  on  equal  bases  BC ,  EF  and 
in  the  same  parallels  BF ,  GH.  [i.  36] 
Moreover  the  triangle  ABC  is  half  of  the  parallelogram  GBCA ;  for  the  diam¬ 
eter  AB  bisects  it.  [i.  34] 

And  the  triangle  FED  is  half  of  the  parallelogram  DEFH;  for  the  diameter 
DF  bisects  it.  [i.  34] 

[But  the  halves  of  equal  things  are  equal  to  one  another.] 

Therefore  the  triangle  ABC  is  equal  to  the  triangle  DEF. 

Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  39 

Equal  triangles  which  are  on  the  same  base  and  on  the  same  side  are  also  in  the 
same  parallels. 

Let  ABC ,  DBC  be  equal  triangles  which  are  on  the  same  base  BC  and  on 
the  same  side  of  it; 

[I  say  that  they  are  also  in  the  same  parallels.] 

And  [For]  let  AD  be  joined;  I  say  that  AD  is  parallel  to  BC. 

For,  if  not,  let  AE  be  drawn  through  the  point  A 
parallel  to  the  straight  line  BC ,  [i.  31] 

and  let  EC  be  joined. 

Therefore  the  triangle  ABC  is  equal  to  the  triangle 
EEC; 

for  it  is  on  the  same  base  BC  with  it  and  in  the  same 
parallels.  [i.  37] 


24  EUCLID 

therefore  DBC  is  also  equal  to  EBC ,  [ C.N .  1] 

the  greater  to  the  less:  which  is  impossible. 

Therefore  AE  is  not  parallel  to  BC. 

Similarly  we  can  prove  that  neither  is  any  other  straight  line  except  AD; 
therefore  AD  is  parallel  to  BC. 

Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  40 

Equal  triangles  which  are  on  equal  bases  and  on  the  same  side  are  also  in  the  same 
'parallels. 

Let  ABC ,  CDE  be  equal  triangles  on  equal  bases  BC,  CE  and  on  the  same 
side. 

I  say  that  they  are  also  in  the  same  parallels. 

For  let  AD  be  joined; 

I  say  that  AD  is  parallel  to  BE. 

For,  if  not,  let  AF  be  drawn  through  A  parallel  to  BE 
[i.  31],  and  let  FE  be  joined. 

Therefore  the  triangle  ABC  is  equal  to  the  triangle 
FCE; 

for  they  are  on  equal  bases  BC ,  CE  and  in  the  same  parallels  BE,  AF.  [i.  38] 

But  the  triangle  ABC  is  equal  to  the  triangle  DCE; 

therefore  the  triangle  DCE  is  also  equal  to  the  triangle  FCE , 

'  [C.N.  1] 

the  greater  to  the  less :  which  is  impossible. 

Therefore  .4F  is  not  parallel  to  BE. 

Similarly  we  can  prove  that  neither  is  any  other  straight  line  except  AD; 
therefore  AD  is  parallel  to  BE. 

Therefore  etc.  Q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  41 

If  a  parallelogram  have  the  same  base  with  a  triangle  and  be  in  the  same  parallels , 
the  parallelogram  is  double  of  the  triangle. 

For  let  the  parallelogram  ABCD  have  the  same  base  BC  with  the  triangle 
EBC,  and  let  it  be  in  the  same  parallels  BC,  AE; 

I  say  that  the  parallelogram  ABCD  is  double  of  the 
triangle  BEC. 

For  let  AC  be  joined. 

Then  the  triangle  ABC  is  equal  to  the  triangle  EBC; 
for  it  is  on  the  same  base  BC  with  it  and  in  the  same 
parallels  BC,  AE.  [i.  37] 

But  the  parallelogram  ABCD  is  double  of  the  triangle  ABC; 

for  the  diameter  AC  bisects  it;  [i.  34] 

so  that  the  parallelogram  ABCD  is  also  double  of  the  triangle  EBC. 
Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  42 


To  construct,  in  a  given  rectilineal  angle,  a  parallelogram  equal  to  a  given  triangle. 

Let  ABC  be  the  given  triangle,  and  D  the  given  rectilineal  angle; 
thus  it  is  required  to  construct  in  the  rectilineal  angle  D  a  parallelogram  equal 


ELEMENTS  I 


25 


to  the  triangle  ABC . 

Let  BC  be  bisected  at  E,  and  let  AE 
be  joined; 

on  the  straight  line  EC,  and  at  the  point 
E  on  it,  let  the  angle  CEF  be  constructed 
equal  to  the  angle  D ;  [i.  23] 

through  A  let  AG  be  drawn  parallel  to  EC,  and  [i.  31] 

through  C  let  CG  be  drawn  parallel  to  EF. 

Then  FECG  is  a  parallelogram. 

And,  since  BE  is  equal  to  EC, 

the  triangle  ABE  is  also  equal  to  the  triangle  AEC, 
for  they  are  on  equal  bases  BE,  EC  and  in  the  same  parallels  BC,  AG;  [i.  38] 
therefore  the  triangle  ABC  is  double  of  the  triangle  AEC . 

But  the  parallelogram  FECG  is  also  double  of  the  triangle  AEC ,  for  it  has 
the  same  base  with  it  and  is  in  the  same  parallels  with  it;  [i.  41] 

therefore  the  parallelogram  FECG  is  equal  to  the  triangle  ABC. 

And  it  has  the  angle  CEF  equal  to  the  given  angle  D. 

Therefore  the  parallelogram  FECG  has  been  constructed  equal  to  the  given 
triangle  ABC,  in  the  angle  CEF  which  is  equal  to  D.  q.  e.  f. 


Proposition  43 

In  any  parallelogram  the  complements  of  the  parallelograms  about  the  diameter  are 
equal  to  one  another. 

Let  A  BCD  be  a  parallelogram,  and  AC  its  diameter; 
and  about  AC  let  EH,  FG  be  parallelograms,  and  BK,  KD  the  so-called  com¬ 
plements; 

I  say  that  the  complement  BK  is  equal  to  the  complement  KD. 

For,  since  ABCD  is  a  parallelogram,  and  AC  its  diameter, 

the  triangle  ABC  is  equal  to  the  triangle  ACD.  [i.  34] 

Again,  since  EH  is  a  parallelogram,  and  AK  is 
its  diameter, 

the  triangle  AEK  is  equal  to  the  triangle  AHK. 
For  the  same  reason 

the  triangle  KFC  is  also  equal  to  KGC. 

Now,  since  the  triangle  AEK  is  equal  to  the 
triangle  AHK, 

and  KFC  to  KGC , 

the  triangle  AEK  together  with  KGC  is  equal  to  the  triangle  AHK  together 
with  KFC.  [C.N.  2] 

And  the  whole  triangle  ABC  is  also  equal  to  the  whole  ADC; 
therefore  the  complement  BK  which  remains  is  equal  to  the  complement  KD 
which  remains.  [C.N.  3] 

Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  44 

To  a  given  straight  line  to  apply ,  in  a  given  rectilineal  angle ,  a  parallelogram  equal 
to  a  given  triangle. 

Let  AB  be  the  given  straight  line,  C  the  given  triangle  and  D  the  given  recti¬ 
lineal  angle; 


26 


EUCLID 


thus  it  is  required  to  apply  to  the  given  straight  line  AB ,  in  an  angle  equal  to 
the  angle  D,  a  parallelogram  equal  to  the  given  triangle  C. 

Let  the  parallelogram  BEFG  be  constructed  equal  to  the  triangle  C,  in  the 
angle  EBG  which  is  equal  to  D  [i.  42] ;  let  it  be  placed  so  that  BE  is  in  a  straight 
line  with  AB ;  let  FG  be  drawn  through  to  H,  and  let  AH  be  drawn  through  A 
parallel  to  either  BG  or  EF.  [i.  31] 

Let  HB  be  joined. 

Then,  since  the  straight 
line  HF  falls  upon  the 
parallels  AH,  EF, 
the  angles  AHF,  HFE  are 
equal  to  two  right  angles. 

[I.  29] 

Therefore  the  angles  BHG,  GFE  are  less  than  two  right  angles; 
and  straight  lines  produced  indefinitely  from  angles  less  than  two  right  angles 
meet;  [Post.  5] 

therefore  HB,  FE,  when  produced,  will  meet. 

Let  them  be  produced  and  meet  at  K ;  through  the  point  K  let  KL  be  drawn 
parallel  to  either  EA  or  FH,  [i.  31] 

and  let  HA,  GB  be  produced  to  the  points  L,  M . 

Then  HLKF  is  a  parallelogram, 

j UK  is  its  diameter,  and  AG,  ME  are  parallelograms,  and  LB,  BF  the  so-called 
complements,  about  HK; 

therefore  LB  is  equal  to  BF.  [i.  43] 

But  BF  is  equal  to  the  triangle  C; 

therefore  LB  is  also  equal  to  C.  [C.N.  1] 

And,  since  the  angle  GBE  is  equal  to  the  angle  ABM,  [i.  15] 

while  the  angle  GBE  is  equal  to  D, 
the  angle  ABM  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  D. 

Therefore  the  parallelogram  LB  equal  to  the  given  triangle  C  has  been  ap¬ 
plied  to  the  given  straight  line  AB,  in  the  angle  ABM  which  is  equal  to  Z>. 

Q.  E.  F. 

Proposition  45 


To  construct,  in  a  given  rectilineal  angle,  a  parallelogram  equal  to  a  given  rec¬ 
tilineal  figure. 

Let  ABCD  be  the  given  rectilineal  figure  and  E  the  given  rectilineal  angle; 
thus  it  is  required  to  construct,  in  the  given  angle  E,  a  parallelogram  equal  to 
the  rectilineal  figure  ABCD. 


Let  DB  be  joined,  and  let  the  parallelogram  FH  be  constructed  equal  to  the 
triangle  ABD,  in  the  angle  HKF  which  is  equal  to  E)  [i.  42] 

let  the  parallelogram  GM  equal  to  the  triangle  DBC  be  applied  to  the  straight 


ELEMENTS  I 


27 

[1.44] 


line  GH,  in  the  angle  GHM  which  is  equal  to  E. 

Then,  since  the  angle  E  is  equal  to  each  of  the  angles  HKF,  GHM , 

the  angle  HKF  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  GHM .  [C. X.  1] 

Let  the  angle  KHG  be  added  to  each; 

therefore  the  angles  FKH ,  KHG  are  equal  to  the  angles  KHG ,  GHM . 

But  the  angles  FKH.  KHG  are  equal  to  two  right  angles;  [i.  29] 

therefore  the  angles  KHG .  GHM  are  also  equal  to  two  right  angles. 
Thus,  with  a  straight  line  GH.  and  at  the  point  H  on  it,  two  straight  lines 
KH,  HM  not  lying  on  the  same  side  make  the  adjacent  angles  equal  to  two 
right  angles; 

therefore  KH  is  in  a  straight  line  with  HM.  [i.  14] 

And,  since  the  straight  line  HG  falls  upon  the  parallels  KM ,  FG,  the  alter¬ 
nate  angles  MHG ,  HGF  are  equal  to  one  another.  [i.  29] 

Let  the  angle  HGL  be  added  to  each; 

therefore  the  angles  MHG ,  HGL  are  equal  to  the  angles  HGF.  HGL.  [C.Y.  2] 
But  the  angles  MHG,  HGL  are  equal  to  two  right  angles;  [i.  29] 

therefore  the  angles  HGF ,  HGL  are  also  equal  to  two  right  angles.  [CY.  1] 
Therefore  FG  is  in  a  straight  line  with  GL.  [i.  14] 

And.  since  FK  is  equal  and  parallel  to  HG,  [i.  34] 

and  HG  to  ML  also, 

KF  is  also  equal  and  parallel  to  ML  :  [C.X.  1:  i.  30] 

and  the  straight  lines  KM,  FL  join  them  (at  their  extremities) ;  therefore  KM, 
FL  are  also  equal  and  parallel.  [i.  33] 

Therefore  KFLM  is  a  parallelogram. 

And,  since  the  triangle  ABD  is  equal  to  the  parallelogram  FH, 

and  DBC  to  GM, 

the  whole  rectilineal  figure  A  BCD  is  equal  to  the  whole  parallelogram  KFLM. 

Therefore  the  parallelogram  KFLM  has  been  constructed  equal  to  the  given 
rectilineal  figure  ABCD,  in  the  angle  FKM  which  is  equal  to  the  given  angle  E. 

Q.  E.  F. 


Proposition  46 

On  a  given  straight  line  to  describe  a  square. 

Let  AB  be  the  given  straight  line;  thus  it  is  required  to 
describe  a  square  on  the  straight  line  AB. 

Let  AC  be  drawn  at  right  angles  to  the  straight  line  AB 
from  the  point  A  on  it  [i.  11],  and  let  AD  be  made  equal 
to  AB; 

through  the  point  D  let  DE  be  drawn  parallel  to  AB. 
and  through  the  point  B  let  BE  be  drawn  parallel  to  AD. 

[i-311 

Therefore  ADEB  is  a  parallelogram: 

therefore  AB  is  equal  to  DE.  and  AD  to  BE.  [i.  34] 
But  AB  is  equal  to  AD; 

therefore  the  four  straight  lines  BA,  AD.  DE.  EB  are  equal  to  one  another; 
therefore  the  parallelogram  ADEB  is  equilateral. 

I  say  next  that  it  is  also  right-angled. 

For,  since  the  straight  line  AD  falls  upon  the  parallels  AB,  DE , 
the  angles  BAD,  ADE  are  equal  to  twu  right  angles. 


[i.  29] 


28 


EUCLID 


But  the  angle  BAD  is  right; 

therefore  the  angle  ADE  is  also  right. 

And  in  parallelogrammic  areas  the  opposite  sides  and  angles  are  equal  to  one 
another;  [i.  34] 

therefore  each  of  the  opposite  angles  ABE ,  BED  is  also  right. 
Therefore  ADEB  is  right-angled. 

And  it  was  also  proved  equilateral. 

Therefore  it  is  a  square;  and  it  is  described  on  the  straight  line  AB.  q.  e.  f. 

Proposition  47 

In  right-angled  triangles  the  square  on  the  side  subtending  the  right  angle  is  equal 
to  the  squares  on  the  sides  containing  the  right  angle . 

Let  ABC  be  a  right-angled  triangle  having  the  angle  BAC  right; 

I  say  that  the  square  on  BC  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  BA ,  AC. 

For  let  there  be  described  on  BC  the 
square  BDEC ,  and  on  BA ,  AC  the  squares 
GB ,  HC ;  [i.  46] 

through  A  let  A L  be  drawn  parallel  to 
either  BD  or  CE,  and  let  AD,  FC  be  joined. 

Then,  since  each  of  the  angles  BAC , 

BAG  is  right,  it  follows  that  with  a 
straight  line  BA ,  and  at  the  point  A  on  it,  F 
the  two  straight  lines  AC,  AG  not  lying  on 
the  same  side  make  the  adjacent  angles 
equal  to  two  right  angles; 
therefore  CA  is  in  a  straight  line  with  AG. 

[i.  14] 

For  the  same  reason 
BA  is  also  in  a  straight  line  with  AH. 

And,  since  the  angle  DBC  is  equal  to  the 
angle  FBA :  for  each  is  right: 

let  the  angle  ABC  be  added  to  each; 
therefore  the  whole  angle  DBA  is  equal  to  the  whole  angle  FBC.  [ C.N .  2] 
And,  since  DB  is  equal  to  BC,  and  FB  to  BA, 

the  two  sides  AB,  BD  are  equal  to  the  two  sides  FB,  BC  respectively; 
and  the  angle  ABD  is  equal  to  the  angle  FBC; 
therefore  the  base  AD  is  equal  to  the  base  FC, 
and  the  triangle  ABD  is  equal  to  the  triangle  FBC.  [i.  4] 

Now  the  parallelogram  BL  is  double  of  the  triangle  ABD,  for  they  have  the 
same  base  BD  and  are  in  the  same  parallels  BD,  AL.  [i.  41] 

And  the  square  GB  is  double  of  the  triangle  FBC, 
for  they  again  have  the  same  base  FB  and  are  in  the  same  parallels  FB,  GC. 

[i.  41] 

[But  the  doubles  of  equals  are  equal  to  one  another.] 

Therefore  the  parallelogram  BL  is  also  equal  to  the  square  GB. 

Similarly,  if  AE,  BK  be  joined, 

the  parallelogram  CL  can  also  be  proved  equal  to  the  square  HC ; 
therefore  the  whole  square  BDEC  is  equal  to  the  two  squares  GB,  HC.  [C.N.  2] 
And  the  square  BDEC  is  described  on  BC, 


ELEMENTS  I 


29 


and  the  squares  GB,  HC  on  BA,  AC. 

Therefore  the  square  on  the  side  BC  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  the  sides  BA, 
AC. 

Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  48 

If  in  a  triangle  the  square  on  one  of  the  sides  be  equal  to  the  squares  on  the  remain¬ 
ing  two  sides  of  the  triangle,  the  angle  contained  by  the  remaining  two  sides  of  the 
triangle  is  right. 

For  in  the  triangle  ABC  let  the  square  on  one  side  BC  be  equal  to  the  squares 
on  the  sides  BA,  AC; 

I  say  that  the  angle  BAG  is  right. 

For  let  AD  be  drawn  from  the  point  A  at  right  angles  to 
the  straight  line  AC,  let  AD  be  made  equal  to  BA,  and  let 
DC  be  joined. 

Since  DA  is  equal  to  AB, 

the  square  on  DA  is  also  equal  to  the  square  on  AB. 

Let  the  square  on  AC  be  added  to  each; 
therefore  the  squares  on  DA,  AC  are  equal  to  the  squares 
on  BA,  AC. 

But  the  square  on  DC  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  DA,  AC,  for  the  angle  DAC 
is  right;  [i.  47] 

and  the  square  on  BC  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  BA,  AC,  for  this  is  the  hy¬ 
pothesis; 

therefore  the  square  on  DC  is  equal  to  the  square  on  BC, 
so  that  the  side  DC  is  also  equal  to  BC. 

And,  since  DA  is  equal  to  AB, 

and  AC  is  common, 

the  two  sides  DA,  AC  are  equal  to  the  two  sides  BA,  AC; 
and  the  base  DC  is  equal  to  the  base  BC ; 
therefore  the  angle  DAC  is  equal  to  the  angle  BAC.  [i.  8] 

But  the  angle  DAC  is  right; 

therefore  the  angle  BAC  is  also  right. 


Therefore  etc. 


Q.  E.  D. 


BOOK  TWO 


DEFINITIONS 

1.  Any  rectangular  parallelogram  is  said  to  be  contained  by  the  two  straight 
lines  containing  the  right  angle. 

2.  And  in  any  parallelogrammic  area  let  any  one  whatever  of  the  parallelo¬ 
grams  about  its  diameter  with  the  two  complements  be  called  a  gnomon. 


BOOK  II.  PROPOSITIONS. 

Proposition  1 

If  there  he  two  straight  lines ,  and  one  of  them  he  cut  into  any  number  of  segments 
whatever ,  the  rectangle  contained  by  the  two  straight  lines  is  equal  to  the  rectangles 
contained  by  the  uncut  straight  line  and  each  of  the  segments. 

Let  A,  BC  be  two  straight  lines,  and  let  BC  be  cut  at  random  at  the  points 
D,E; 

I  say  that  the  rectangle  contained  by  A,  BC  is  equal  to  the  rectangle  con¬ 
tained  by  A,  BD ,  that  contained  by  A,  DE  and  that  contained  by  A,  EC. 
For  let  BF  be  drawn  from  B  at  right  angles 

to  BC;  [i.  11]  a _ - _ - 

let  BG  be  made  equal  to  A,  [i.  3] 
through  G  let  GH  be  drawn  parallel  to  BC, 

[l.  31] 

and  through  D,  E ,  C  let  DK,  EL,  CH  be  drawn 
parallel  to  BG. 

Then  BH  is  equal  to  BK ,  DL,  EH. 

Now  BH  is  the  rectangle  A,  BC ,  for  it  is 
contained  by  GB,  BC,  and  BG  is  equal  to  A ; 

BK  is  the  rectangle  A,  BD,  for  it  is  contained  by  GB,  BD,  and  BG  is  equal  to  A ; 
and  DL  is  the  rectangle  A,  DE,  for  DK,  that  is  BG  is  equal  to  A.  [i.  34] 
Similarly  also  EH  is  the  rectangle  A,  EC. 

Therefore  the  rectangle  A,  BC  is  equal  to  the  rectangle  A,  BD,  the  rectangle 
A,  DE  and  the  rectangle  A,  EC. 

Therefore  etc.  Q.  e.  d. 


K  L  H 

Proposition  2 

If  a  straight  line  be  cut  at  random,  the  rectangle  contained  by  the  whole  and  both 
of  the  segments  is  equal  to  the  square  on  the  whole. 

For  let  the  straight  line  AB  be  cut  at  random  at  the  point  C; 

I  say  that  the  rectangle  contained  by  AB,  BC  together  with  the  rectangle 
contained  by  BA,  AC  is  equal  to  the  square  on  AB. 

30 


ELEMENTS  II  31 

For  let  the  square  ADEB  be  described  on  AB  [i.  46],  and  let  CF  be  drawn 
through  C  parallel  to  either  AD  or  BE .  [i.  31] 

Then  AE  is  equal  to  AF,  CE. 

Now  AE  is  the  square  on  AB; 

AF  is  the  rectangle  contained  by  BA,  AC,  for  it  is  con¬ 
tained  by  DA,  AC,  and  AD  is  equal  to  AB; 
and  CE  is  the  rectangle  AB,  BC,  for  BE  is  equal  to  AB. 
Therefore  the  rectangle  BA,  AC  together  with  the  rectangle 
AB,  BC  is  equal  to  the  square  on  AB. 

Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  3 

If  a  straight  line  he  cut  at  random,  the  rectangle  contained  by  the  whole  and  one  of 
the  segments  is  equal  to  the  rectangle  contained  by  the  segments  and  the  square  on 
the  aforesaid  segment. 

For  let  the  straight  line  A  B  be  cut  at  random  at  C; 

I  say  that  the  rectangle  contained  by  AB,  BC  is  equal  to  the  rectangle  con¬ 
tained  by  AC,  CB  together  with  the  square  on  BC. 
For  let  the  square  CDEB  be  described  on  CB;  [i.  46] 
let  ED  be  drawn  through  to  F, 
and  through  A  let  AF  be  drawn  parallel  to  either  CD 
or  BE.  [i.  31] 

Then  AE  is  equal  to  AD,  CE. 

Now  AE  is  the  rectangle  contained  by  AB,  BC,  for 
it  is  contained  by  AB,  BE,  and  BE  is  equal  to  BC; 
AD  is  the  rectangle  AC,  CB,  for  DC  is  equal  to  CB; 
and  DB  is  the  square  on  CB. 

Therefore  the  rectangle  contained  by  AB,  BC  is  equal  to  the  rectangle  con¬ 
tained  by  AC,  CB  together  with  the  square  on  BC. 

Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  4 

If  a  straight  line  be  cut  at  random,  the  square  on  the  whole  is  equal  to  the  squares 
on  the  segments  and  twice  the  rectangle  contained  by  the  segments. 

For  let  the  straight  line  A  B  be  cut  at  random  at  C; 

I  say  that  the  square  on  AB  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  AC,  CB  and  twice  the 
rectangle  contained  by  AC,  CB. 

For  let  the  square  ADEB  be  described  on  AB, 

[i.  46] 

let  BD  be  joined; 

through  C  let  CF  be  drawn  parallel  to  either  AD  or 
EB, 

and  through  G  let  HK  be  drawn  parallel  to  either  AB 
or  DE.  [i.  31] 

Then,  since  CF  is  parallel  to  AD,  and  BD  has  fallen 
on  them, 

the  exterior  angle  CGB  is  equal  to  the  interior  and  opposite  angle  ADB.  [i.  29] 
But  the  angle  ADB  is  equal  to  the  angle  ABD, 

since  the  side  BA  is  also  equal  to  AD; 


[1.5] 


32  EUCLID 

therefore  the  angle  CGB  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  GBC , 

so  that  the  side  BC  is  also  equal  to  the  side  CG.  [i.  6] 

But  CB  is  equal  to  GK ,  and  CG  to  KB ;  [i.  34] 

therefore  GK  is  also  equal  to  KB ; 
therefore  CGKB  is  equilateral. 

I  say  next  that  it  is  also  right-angled. 

For,  since  CG  is  parallel  to  BK, 

the  angles  KBC,  GCB  are  equal  to  two  right  angles.  [i.  29] 

But  the  angle  KBC  is  right; 

therefore  the  angle  BCG  is  also  right, 
so  that  the  opposite  angles  CGK ,  GKB  are  also  right.  [i.  34] 

Therefore  CGKB  is  right-angled; 

and  it  was  also  proved  equilateral; 
therefore  it  is  a  square; 
and  it  is  described  on  CB . 

For  the  same  reason 

HF  is  also  a  square; 

and  it  is  described  on  HG ,  that  is  AC.  [i.  34] 

Therefore  the  squares  HF ,  KC  are  the  squares  on  AC,  CB. 

Now,  since  AG  is  equal  to  GE , 

and  AG  is  the  rectangle  AC,  CB,  for  GC  is  equal  to  CB, 
therefore  GE  is  also  equal  to  the  rectangle  AC,  CB. 

Therefore  AG,  GE  are  equal  to  twice  the  rectangle  AC,  CB. 

But  the  squares  HF,  CK  are  also  the  squares  on  AC,  CB;  therefore  the  four 
areas  HF,  CK,  AG,  GE  are  equal  to  the  squares  on  AC,  CB  and  twice  the  rec¬ 
tangle  contained  by  AC,  CB. 

But  HF,  CK,  AG,  GE  are  the  whole  ADEB, 

which  is  the  square  on  AB. 

Therefore  the  square  on  AB  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  AC,  CB  and  twice  the 
rectangle  contained  by  AC,  CB. 

Therefore  etc.  Q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  5 

If  a  straight  line  be  cut  into  equal  and  unequal  segments,  the  rectangle  contained 
by  the  unequal  segments  of  the  whole  together  with  the  square  on  the  straight  line 
between  the  points  of  section  is  equal  to  the  square  on  the  half. 

For  let  a  straight  line  AB  be  cut  into  equal  segments  at  C  and  into  unequal 
segments  at  D; 

I  say  that  the  rectangle  contained  by 
AD,  DB  together  with  the  square  on 
CD  is  equal  to  the  square  on  CB. 

For  let  the  square  CEFB  be  described 
on  CB,  [i.  46] 

and  let  BE  be  joined; 
through  D  let  DG  be  drawn  parallel  to 
either  CE  or  BF, 
through  H  again  let  KM  be  drawn  parallel  to  either  AB  or  EF, 
and  again  through  A  let  AK  be  drawn  parallel  to  either  CL  or  BM.  [i.  31] 

Then,  since  the  complement  CH  is  equal  to  the  complement  HF,  [i.  43] 


33 


ELEMENTS  II 


let  DM  be  added  to  each; 
therefore  the  whole  CM  is  equal  to  the  whole  DF. 

But  CM  is  equal  to  AL , 

since  AC  is  also  equal  to  CB;  [i.  36] 

therefore  AL  is  also  equal  to  DF. 

Let  CH  be  added  to  each; 

therefore  the  whole  AH  is  equal  to  the  gnomon  NOP. 

But  AH  is  the  rectangle  AD,  DB,  for  DH  is  equal  to  DB. 

therefore  the  gnomon  NOP  is  also  equal  to  the  rectangle  AD,  DB. 

Let  LG,  which  is  equal  to  the  square  on  CD,  be  added  to  each; 
therefore  the  gnomon  NOP  and  LG  are  equal  to  the  rectangle  contained  by 
AD,  DB  and  the  square  on  CD. 

But  the  gnomon  NOP  and  LG  are  the  whole  square  CEFB ,  which  is  de¬ 
scribed  on  CB; 

therefore  the  rectangle  contained  by  AD,  DB  together  with  the  square  on  CD 
is  equal  to  the  square  on  CB. 

Therefore  etc.  Q.  e  .d. 


Proposition  6 

If  a  straight  line  be  bisected  and  a  straight  line  be  added  to  it  in  a  straight  line,  the 
rectangle  contained  by  the  whole  with  the  added  straight  line  and  the  added  straight 
line  together  with  the  square  on  the  half  is  equal  to  the  square  on  the  straight  line 
made  up  of  the  half  and  the  added  straight  line. 

For  let  a  straight  line  AB  be  bisected  at  the  point  C,  and  let  a  straight  line 
BD  be  added  to  it  in  a  straight  line; 

I  say  that  the  rectangle  contained  by  AD,  DB  together  with  the  square  on 
CB  is  equal  to  the  square  on  CD. 

For  let  the  square  CEFD  be  described  on  CD,  [i.  46] 

and  let  DE  be  joined; 

through  the  point  B  let  BG  be  drawn  parallel  to  either  EC  or  DF, 
through  the  point  H  let  KM  be  drawn  parallel  to  either  AB  or  EF, 
and  further  through  A  let  AK  be  drawn  parallel  to  either  CL  or  DM.  [i.  31] 

Then,  since  AC  is  equal  to  CB, 

AL  is  also  equal  to  CH.  [i.  36] 
But  CH  is  equal  to  HF.  [i.  43] 

Therefore  AL  is  also  equal  to  HF. 

Let  CM  be  added  to  each; 
therefore  the  wdiole  AM  is  equal  to  the 
gnomon  NOP. 

But  AM  is  the  rectangle  AD,  DB, 

E  G  F  for  DM  is  equal  to  DB; 

therefore  the  gnomon  NOP  is  also  equal  to  the  rectangle  AD.  DB. 

Let  LG.  which  is  equal  to  the  square  on  BC,  be  added  to  each; 
therefore  the  rectangle  contained  by  AD,  DB  together  with  the  square  on  CB 
is  equal  to  the  gnomon  NOP  and  LG. 

But  the  gnomon  NOP  and  LG  are  the  whole  square  CEFD ,  w'hich  is  de¬ 
scribed  on  CD; 

therefore  the  rectangle  contained  by  AD,  DB  together  with  the  square  on  CB 
is  equal  to  the  square  on  CD. 

Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 


34 


EUCLID 


Proposition  7 

If  a  straight  line  he  cut  at  random ,  the  square  on  the  whole  and  that  on  one  of  the 
segments  both  together  are  equal  to  twice  the  rectangle  contained  hu  the  whole  and 
the  said  segment  and  the  square  on  the  remaining  segment. 

For  let  a  straight  line  AB  be  cut  at  random  at  the  point  C; 

I  say  that  the  squares  on  AB,  BC  are  equal  to  twice  the  rectangle  contained 
by  AB,  BC  and  the  square  on  CA . 

For  let  the  square  ADEB  be  described  on  AB,  [i.  46] 

and  let  the  figure  be  drawn. 

Then,  since  AG  is  equal  to  GE  [i.  43],  let  CF  be  added  to  each; 
therefore  the  whole  AF  is  equal  to  the  whole  CE. 

Therefore  AF,  CE  are  double  of  AF. 

But  AF,  CE  are  the  gnomon  KLM  and  the  square  CF; 
therefore  the  gnomon  KLM  and  the  square  CF  are 
double  of  AF. 

But  twice  the  rectangle  AB,  BC  is  also  double  of  AF; 
for  BF  is  equal  to  BC; 

therefore  the  gnomon  KLM  and  the  square  CF  are  equal 
to  twice  the  rectangle  AB,  BC. 

Let  DG,  which  is  the  square  on  AC,  be  added  to  each; 
therefore  the  gnomon  KLM  and  the  squares  BG,  GD  are  equal  to  twice  the 
rectangle  contained  by  AB,  BC  and  the  square  on  AC. 

But  the  gnomon  KLM  and  the  squares  BG,  GD  are  the  wrhole  ADEB  and 
CF, 

which  are  squares  described  on  AB,  BC; 
therefore  the  squares  on  AB,  BC  are  equal  to  twice  the  rectangle  contained  by 
AB,  BC  together  with  the  square  on  AC. 

Therefore  etc.  Q.  e.  d. 


(  G 

A-/ 

K  A 

/ M 

/ 

Proposition  8 

If  a  straight  line  be  cut  at  random,  four  times  the  rectangle  contained  by  the  whole 
and  one  of  the  segments  together  with  the  square  on  the  remaining  segment  is  equal 
to  the  square  described  on  the  whole  and  the  aforesaid  segment  as  on  one  straight  line. 
For  let  a  straight  line  AB  be  cut  at  random  at  the  point  C; 

I  say  that  four  times  the  rectangle  contained  by  AB,  BC  together  with  the 
square  on  AC  is  equal  to  the  square  described  on  AB,  BC  as  on  one  straight 
line. 

For  let  [the  straight  line]  BD  be  produced  in  a  straight  line  [with  AB],  and 
let  BD  be  made  equal  to  CB; 

let  the  square  AEFD  be  described  on  AD,  and  let  the  figure  be  drawn  double. 
Then,  since  CB  is  equal  to  BD,  while  CB  is  equal  to  GK,  and  BD  to  KN, 
therefore  GK  is  also  equal  to  KN. 

For  the  same  reason 

QR  is  also  equal  to  RP. 

And,  since  BC  is  equal  to  BD,  and  GK  to  KN, 

therefore  CK  is  also  equal  to  KD,  and  GR  to  RN.  [i.  36] 

But  CK  is  equal  to  RN,  for  they  are  complements  of  the  parallelogram  CP; 

[I.  43] 


35 


ELEMENTS  II 


therefore  KD  is  also  equal  to  GR; 

therefore  the  four  areas  DK ,  CK}  GR,  RN  are  equal  to  one  another. 
Therefore  the  four  are  quadruple  of  CK. 

Again,  since  CB  is  equal  to  BD, 

while  BD  is  equal  to  BK ,  that  is  CG , 
and  CB  is  equal  to  GK,  that  is  GQ, 
therefore  CG  is  also  equal  to  GQ. 

And,  since  CG  is  equal  to  GQ,  and  QR  to 
RP , 

AG  is  also  equal  to  MQ,  and  QL  to  RF.  [i.  36] 
But  MQ  is  equal  to  QL,  for  they  are  comple¬ 
ments  of  the  parallelogram  ML ;  [i.  43] 

therefore  AG  is  also  equal  to  RF; 
therefore  the  four  areas  AG,  MQ,  QL,  RF  are 
equal  to  one  another. 

Therefore  the  four  are  quadruple  of  AG. 
But  the  four  areas  CK,  KD,  GR,  RN  were  proved  to  be  quadruple  of  CK; 
therefore  the  eight  areas,  which  contain  the  gnomon  STU,  are  quadruple  of 
AK. 


Now,  since  AK  is  the  rectangle  AB ,  BD,  for  BK  is  equal  to  BD, 
therefore  four  times  the  rectangle  AB,  BD  is  quadruple  of  AK. 

But  the  gnomon  STU  was  also  proved  to  be  quadruple  of  AK; 
therefore  four  times  the  rectangle  AB,  BD  is  equal  to  the  gnomon  STU. 
Let  OH,  wdiich  is  equal  to  the  square  on  AC,  be  added  to  each; 
therefore  four  times  the  rectangle  AB,  BD  together  with  the  square  on  AC  is 
equal  to  the  gnomon  STU  and  OH. 

But  the  gnomon  STU  and  OH  are  the  whole  square  AEFD, 
which  is  described  on  AD; 

therefore  four  times  the  rectangle  AB,  BD  together  with  the  square  on  AC  is 
equal  to  the  square  on  AD. 

But  BD  is  equal  to  BC; 

therefore  four  times  the  rectangle  contained  by  AB,  BC  together  with  the 
square  on  AC  is  equal  to  the  square  on  AD,  that  is  to  the  square  described  on 
AB  and  BC  as  on  one  straight  line. 

Therefore  etc.  Q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  9 

If  a  straight  line  be  cut  into  equal  and  unequal  segments,  the  squares  on  the  unequal 
segments  of  the  whole  are  double  of  the  square  on  the  half  and  of  the  square  on  the 
straight  line  between  the  points  of  section. 

For  let  a  straight  line  AB  be  cut  into  equal  segments  at  C,  and  into  unequal 
segments  at  D; 

I  say  that  the  squares  on  AD,  DB  are  double  of  the  squares  on  AC,  CD. 
For  let  CE  be  drawn  from  C  at  right  angles  to  AB,  and  let  it  be  made  equal 
to  either  AC  or  CB; 

let  EA,  EB  be  joined, 
let  DF  be  drawn  through  D  parallel  to  EC, 
and  FG  through  F  parallel  to  AB, 
and  let  AF  be  joined. 


36 


EUCLID 


Then,  since  AC  is  equal  to  CE , 

the  angle  EAC  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  AEC. 

And,  since  the  angle  at  C  is  right, 

the  remaining  angles  EAC ,  AEC  are  equal  to  one  right  angle,  [i.  32] 
And  they  are  equal; 

therefore  each  of  the  angles  CEA ,  CAE  is 
half  a  right  angle. 

For  the  same  reason 

each  of  the  angles  CEB ,  EBC  is  also  half 
a  right  angle; 

therefore  the  whole  angle  AEB  is  right. 

And,  since  the  angle  GEF  is  half  a 
right  angle. 

and  the  angle  EGF  is  right,  for  it  is  equal 
to  the  interior  and  opposite  angle  ECB, 


the  remaining  angle  EFG  is  half  a  right  angle;  [i.  32] 

therefore  the  angle  GEF  is  equal  to  the  angle  EFG , 

so  that  the  side  EG  is  also  equal  to  GF.  [i.  6] 

Again,  since  the  angle  at  B  is  half  a  right  angle, 
and  the  angle  FDB  is  right,  for  it  is  again  equal  to  the  interior  and  opposite 
angle  ECB ,  [i.  29] 

the  remaining  angle  BFD  is  half  a  right  angle;  [i.  32] 

therefore  the  angle  at  B  is  equal  to  the  angle  DFB, 
so  that  the  side  FD  is  also  equal  to  the  side  DB.  [i.  6] 

Now,  since  AC  is  equal  to  CE , 

the  square  on  AC  is  also  equal  to  the  square  on  CE ; 


therefore  the  squares  on  AC,  CE  are  double  of  the  square  on  AC. 

But  the  square  on  EA  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  AC,  CE ,  for  the  angle  ACE 
is  right;  [i.  47] 

therefore  the  square  on  EA  is  double  of  the  square  on  AC. 

Again,  since  EG  is  equal  to  GF, 

the  square  on  EG  is  also  equal  to  the  square  on  GF; 
therefore  the  squares  on  EG,  GF  are  double  of  the  square  on  GF. 

But  the  square  on  EF  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  EG,  GF; 

therefore  the  square  on  EF  is  double  of  the  square  on  GF. 

But  GF  is  equal  to  CD;  [i.  34] 

therefore  the  square  on  EF  is  double  of  the  square  on  CD. 

But  the  square  on  EA  is  also  double  of  the  square  on  AC; 
therefore  the  squares  on  AE,  EF  are  double  of  the  squares  on  AC,  CD. 
And  the  square  on  A F  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  AE,  EF;  for  the  angle  AEF 
is  right;  [i.  47] 

therefore  the  square  on  A F  is  double  of  the  squares  on  AC,  CD. 

But  the  squares  on  AD,  DF  are  equal  to  the  square  on  AF,  for  the  angle  at 
D  is  right;  [i.  47] 

therefore  the  squares  on  AD,  DF  are  double  of  the  squares  on  AC,  CD. 
And  DF  is  equal  to  DB; 

therefore  the  squares  on  AD,  DB  are  double  of  the  squares  on  AC,  CD. 
Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 


E 


ELEMENTS  II 


37 


'•r. 


Proposition  10 


If  a  straight  line  he  bisected ,  and  a  straight  line  be  added  to  it  in  a  straight  line ,  the 
square  on  the  whole  with  the  added  straight  line  and  the  square  on  the  added  straight 
line  both  together  are  double  of  the  square  on  the  half  and  of  the  square  described  on 
the  straight  line  made  up  of  the  half  and  the  added  straight  line  as  on  one  straight 
line. 

For  let  a  straight  line  AS  be  bisected  at  C,  and  let  a  straight  lineSS  be  added 
to  it  in  a  straight  line; 

I  say  that  the  squares  on  AD,  DB  are  double  of  the  squares  on  AC,  CD. 

For  let  CE  be  drawn  from  the  point  C  at 
right  angles  to  AB  [i.  11],  and  let  it  be  made 
equal  to  either  AC  or  CB  [i.  3]; 

let  EA ,  EB  be  joined; 
through  E  let  EF  be  drawn  parallel  to  AD, 
and  through  D  let  FD  be  drawn  parallel  to 
CE.  [i.  31] 

Then,  since  a  straight  line  EF  falls  on  the 
parallel  straight  lines  EC,  FD, 
the  angles  CEF,  EFD  are  equal  to  two  right  angles;  [i.  29] 
therefore  the  angles  FEB,  EFD  are  less  than  two  right  angles. 

But  straight  lines  produced  from  angles  less  then  two  right  angles  meet; 

[i.  Post.  5] 

therefore  EB,  FD,  if  produced  in  the  direction  B ,  D,  will  meet. 

Let  them  be  produced  and  meet  at  G, 

and  let  AG  be  joined. 

Then,  since  AC  is  equal  to  CE, 

the  angle  EAC  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  AEC\ 
and  the  angle  at  C  is  right; 

therefore  each  of  the  angles  EAC,  A  EC  is  half  a  right  angle. 

For  the  same  reason 

each  of  the  angles  CEB,  EBC  is  also  half  a  right  angle; 
therefore  the  angle  AEB  is  right. 

And,  since  the  angle  EBC  is  half  a  right  angle, 

the  angle  DBG  is  also  half  a  right  angle. 

But  the  angle  BDG  is  also  right, 

for  it  is  equal  to  the  angle  DCE,  they  being  alternate; 
therefore  the  remaining  angle  DGB  is  half  a  right  angle; 
therefore  the  angle  DGB  is  equal  to  the  angle  DBG, 
so  that  the  side  BD  is  also  equal  to  the  side  GD. 

Again,  since  the  angle  EGF  is  half  a  right  angle, 
and  the  angle  at  F  is  right,  for  it  is  equal  to  the  opposite  angle,  the  angle  at  C, 

[i.  34] 

the  remaining  angle  FEG  is  half  a  right  angle; 
therefore  the  angle  EGF  is  equal  to  the  angle  FEG, 
so  that  the  side  GF  is  also  equal  to  the  side  EF. 

Now,  since  the  square  on  EC  is  equal  to  the  square  on  CA, 

the  squares  on  FJC,  CA  are  double  of  the  square  on  CA. 

But  the  square  on  EA  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  EC,  CA;  [i.  47] 


[1.5] 
[i.  32] 


[i.  15] 

[I.  29] 
[I.  32] 

[1.6] 


[I.  32] 

[I.  6] 


38  EUCLID 

therefore  the  square  on  EA  is  double  of  the  square  on  AC.  [C.N.  1] 
Again,  since  FG  is  equal  to  EF , 

the  square  on  FG  is  also  equal  to  the  square  on  FE ; 
therefore  the  squares  on  GF ,  FE  are  double  of  the  square  on  EF. 

But  the  square  on  EG  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  GF ,  FE;  [i.  47] 

therefore  the  square  on  EG  is  double  of  the  square  on  EF. 

And  EF  is  equal  to  CD;  [i.  34] 

therefore  the  square  on  EG  is  double  of  the  square  on  CD. 

But  the  square  on  EA  was  also  proved  double  of  the  square  on  AC; 
therefore  the  squares  on  AE,  EG  are  double  of  the  squares  on  AC,  CD. 
And  the  square  on  AG  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  AE,  EG;  [i.  47] 

therefore  the  square  on  AG  is  double  of  the  squares  on  AC,  CD. 

But  the  squares  on  AD,  DG  are  equal  to  the  square  on  AG;  [i.  47] 

therefore  the  squares  on  AD,  DG  are  double  of  the  squares  on  AC,  CD. 
And  DG  is  equal  to  DB; 

therefore  the  squares  on  AD,  DB  are  double  of  the  squares  on  AC,  CD. 
Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  11 

To  cut  a  given  straight  line  so  that  the  rectangle  contained  by  the  whole  and  one  of 
the  segments  is  equal  to  the  square  on  the  remaining  segment. 

Let  AB  be  the  given  straight  line; 

thus  it  is  required  to  cut  AB  so  that  the  rectangle  contained  by  the  whole  and 
one  of  the  segments  is  equal  to  the  square  on  the  remaining  segment. 

For  let  the  square  ABDC  be  described  on  AB;  [i.  46] 

let  AC  be  bisected  at  the  point  E,  and  let  BE  be  joined; 
let  CA  be  drawn  through  to  F ,  and  let  EF  be  made  equal 
to  BE;  1 

let  the  square  FH  be  described  on  AF,  and  let  GH  be 
drawn  through  to  K. 

I  say  that  AB  has  been  cut  at  H  so  as  to  make  the  rec-  a 
tangle  contained  by  AB ,  BH  equal  to  the  square  on  AH. 

For,  since  the  straight  line  AC  has  been  bisected  at  E,  and 
FA  is  added  to  it,  E 

the  rectangle  contained  by  CF,  FA  together  with  the  square 
on  A E  is  equal  to  the  square  on  EF.  [n.  6]  ( 

But  EF  is  equal  to  EB; 
therefore  the  rectangle  CF,  FA  together  with  the  square  on  AE  is  equal  to  the 
square  on  EB. 

But  the  squares  on  BA,  AE  are  equal  to  the  square  on  EB,  for  the  angle  at 
A  is  right:  [i.  47] 

therefore  the  rectangle  CF,  FA  together  with  the  square  on  AE  is  equal  to  the 
squares  on  BA,  AE. 

Let  the  square  on  AE  be  subtracted  from  each; 
therefore  the  rectangle  CF,  FA  which  remains  is  equal  to  the  square  on  AB. 

Now  the  rectangle  CF,  FA  is  FK,  for  AF  is  equal  to  FG; 

and  the  square  on  AB  is  AD; 
therefore  FK  is  equal  to  AD. 

Let  AK  be  subtracted  from  each; 


G 


H  E 

K  D 


39 


ELEMENTS  II 

therefore  FH  which  remains  is  equal  to  HD. 

And  HD  is  the  rectangle  AB ,  BH,  for  AB  is  equal  to  BD; 

and  FH  is  the  square  on  AH; 
therefore  the  rectangle  contained  by  AB,  BH  is  equal  to  the  square  on  HA. 
therefore  the  given  straight  line  AB  has  been  cut  at  H  so  as  to  make  the  rec¬ 
tangle  contained  by  AB,  BH  equal  to  the  square  on  HA.  q.  e.  f. 


Proposition  12 


In  obtuse-angled  triangles  the  square  on  the  side  subtending  the  obtuse  angle  is 
greater  than  the  squares  on  the  sides  containing  the  obtuse  angle  by  twice  the  rec¬ 
tangle  contained  by  one  of  the  sides  about  the  obtuse  angle,  namely  that  on  which  the 
perpendicular  falls,  and  the  straight  line  cut  off  outside  by  the  perpendicular  to¬ 
wards  the  obtuse  angle. 

Let  ABC  be  an  obtuse-angled  triangle  having  the  angle  BAC  obtuse,  and  let 
BD  be  drawn  from  the  point  B  perpendicular  to  CA  produced; 

I  say  that  the  square  on  BC  is  greater  than  the  squares  on  BA,  AC  by  twice 
the  rectangle  contained  by  CA,  AD. 

B  For,  since  the  straight  line  CD  has  been  cut  at  ran- 

dom  at  the  point  A, 

the  square  on  DC  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  CA,  AD 
\  and  twice  the  rectangle  contained  by  CA,  AD.  [n.  4] 

\  Let  the  square  on  DB  be  added  to  each ; 

_ \ therefore  the  squares  on  CD,  DB  are  equal  to  the 

DA  C  squares  on  CA,  AD,  DB  and  twice  the  rectangle  CA, 


AD. 


But  the  square  on  CB  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  CD,  DB,  for  the  angle  at  D 
is  right;  [i.  47] 

and  the  square  on  A B  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  AD,  DB;  [i.  47] 
therefore  the  square  on  CB  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  CA,  AB  and  twice  the 
rectangle  contained  by  CA,  AD; 

so  that  the  square  on  CB  is  greater  than  the  squares  on  CA,  AB  by  twice  the 
rectangle  contained  by  CA,  AD. 

Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  13 

In  acute-angled  triangles  the  square  on  the  side  subtending  the  acute  angle  is  less 
than  the  squares  on  the  sides  containing  the  acute  angle  by  twice  the  rectangle  con¬ 
tained  by  one  of  the  sides  about  the  acute  angle,  namely  that  on  which  the  perpen¬ 
dicular  falls ,  and  the  straight  line  cut  off  within  by  the  perpendicular  towards  the 
acute  angle. 

Let  ABC  be  an  acute-angled  triangle  having  the  angle  at  B  acute,  and  let 
AD  be  drawn  from  the  point  A  perpendicular  to  BC; 

I  say  that  the  square  on  AC  is  less  than  the  squares 
on  CB,  BA  by  twice  the  rectangle  contained  by  CB,  BD. 

For,  since  the  straight  line  CB  has  been  cut  at  ran¬ 
dom  at  D, 

the  squares  on  CB,  BD  are  equal  to  twice  the  rec¬ 
tangle  contained  by  CB,  BD  and  the  square  on  DC. 

[H.  7] 


40  EUCLID 

Let  the  square  on  DA  be  added  to  each; 
therefore  the  squares  on  CB ,  BD ,  DA  are  equal  to  twice  the  rectangle  con¬ 
tained  by  CB ,  BD  and  the  squares  on  AD,  DC. 

But  the  square  on  AB  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  BD,  DA,  for  the  angle  at  D 
is  right;  [i.  47] 

and  the  square  on  AC  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  AD,  DC) 
therefore  the  squares  on  CB,  BA  are  equal  to  the  square  on  AC  and  twice  the 
rectangle  CB,  BD, 

so  that  the  square  on  AC  alone  is  less  than  the  squares  on  CB,  BA  by  twice  the 
rectangle  contained  by  CB,  BD. 

Therefore  etc.  Q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  14 

To  construct  a  square  equal  to  a  given  rectilineal  figure . 

Let  A  be  the  given  rectilineal  figure; 
thus  it  is  required  to  construct  a  square  equal  to  the  rectilineal  figure  A. 

For  let  there  be  constructed 
the  rectangular  parallelogram  BD 
equal  to  the  rectilineal  figure  A. 

[i.  45] 

Then,  if  BE  is  equal  to  ED, 
that  which  was  enjoined  will 
have  been  done;  for  a  square  BD 
has  been  constructed  equal  to  the  rectilineal  figure  A. 

But,  if  not,  one  of  the  straight  lines  BE,  ED  is  greater. 

Let  BE  be  greater,  and  let  it  be  produced  to  F; 

let  EF  be  made  equal  to  ED,  and  let  BF  be  bisected  at  G. 

With  centre  G  and  distance  one  of  the  straight  lines  GB,  GF  let  the  semi¬ 
circle  BHF  be  described;  let  DE  be  produced  to  H,  and  let  GH  be  joined. 

Then,  since  the  straight  line  BF  has  been  cut  into  equal  segments  at  G,  and 
into  unequal  segments  at  E, 

the  rectangle  contained  by  BE,  EF  together  with  the  square  on  EG  is  equal  to 
the  square  on  GF.  [n.  5] 

But  GF  is  equal  to  GH; 

therefore  the  rectangle  BE,  EF  together  with  the  square  on  GE  is  equal  to  the 
square  on  GH. 

But  the  squares  on  HE,  EG  are  equal  to  the  square  on  GH;  [i.  47] 

therefore  the  rectangle  BE,  EF  together  with  the  square  on  GE  is  equal  to  the 
squares  on  HE,  EG. 

Let  the  square  on  GE  be  subtracted  from  each; 
therefore  the  rectangle  contained  by  BE,  EF  which  remains  is  equal  to  the 
square  on  EH. 

But  the  rectangle  BE,  EF  is  BD,  for  EF  is  equal  to  ED; 

therefore  the  parallelogram  BD  is  equal  to  the  square  on  HE. 

And  BD  is  equal  to  the  rectilineal  figure  A. 

Therefore  the  rectilineal  figure  A  is  also  equal  to  the  square  which  can  be 
described  on  EH. 

Therefore  a  square,  namely  that  which  can  be  described  on  EH,  has  been 
constructed  equal  to  the  given  rectilineal  figure  A.  q.  e.  f. 


BOOK  THREE 


DEFINITIONS 

1.  Equal  circles  are  those  the  diameters  of  which  are  equal,  or  the  radii  of 
which  are  equal. 

2.  A  straight  line  is  said  to  touch  a  circle  which,  meeting  the  circle  and  being 
produced,  does  not  cut  the  circle. 

3.  Circles  are  said  to  touch  one  another  which,  meeting  one  another,  do  not 
cut  one  another. 

4.  In  a  circle  straight  lines  are  said  to  be  equally  distant  from  the  centre  when 
the  perpendiculars  drawn  to  them  from  the  centre  are  equal. 

5.  And  that  straight  line  is  said  to  be  at  a  greater  distance  on  which  the  great¬ 
er  perpendicular  falls. 

6.  A  segment  of  a  circle  is  the  figure  contained  by  a  straight  line  and  a  cir¬ 
cumference  of  a  circle. 

7.  An  angle  of  a  segment  is  that  contained  by  a  straight  line  and  a  circum¬ 
ference  of  a  circle. 

8.  An  angle  in  a  segment  is  the  angle  which,  when  a  point  is  taken  on  the  cir¬ 
cumference  of  the  segment  and  straight  lines  are  joined  from  it  to  the  extrem¬ 
ities  of  the  straight  line  which  is  the  base  of  the  segment ,  is  contained  by  the 
straight  lines  so  joined. 

9.  And,  when  the  straight  lines  containing  the  angle  cut  off  a  circumference, 
the  angle  is  said  to  stand  upon  that  circumference. 

10.  A  sector  of  a  circle  is  the  figure  which,  when  an  angle  is  constructed  at  the 
centre  of  the  circle,  is  contained  by  the  straight  lines  containing  the  angle  and 
the  circumference  cut  off  by  them. 

11.  Similar  segments  of  circles  are  those  which  admit  equal  angles,  or  in  which 
the  angles  are  equal  to  one  another. 

BOOK  III.  PROPOSITIONS 
Proposition  1 

To  find  the  centre  of  a  given  circle. 

Let  ABC  be  the  given  circle; 

thus  it  is  required  to  find  the  centre  of  the  circle  ABC. 

Let  a  straight  line  AB  be  drawn  through  it  at  random,  and  let  it  be  bisected 
at  the  point  D\ 

from  D  let  DC  be  drawn  at  right  angles  to  AB  and  let  it  be  drawn  through  to 
E\  let  CE  be  bisected  at  F; 

I  say  that  F  is  the  centre  of  the  circle  ABC. 

For  suppose  it  is  not,  but,  if  possible,  let  G  be  the  centre, 

41 


42  EUCLID 

and  let  GA,  GD ,  GB  be  joined. 

Then,  since  AD  is  equal  to  DB,  and  DG  is  common, 
the  two  sides  AD,  DG  are  equal  to  the  two  sides  BD,  DG  respectively; 
and  the  base  GA  is  equal  to  the  base  GB,  for  they  are 
radii; 

therefore  the  angle  ADG  is  equal  to  the  angle  GDB. 

8] 

But,  when  a  straight  line  set  up  on  a  straight  line 
makes  the  adjacent  angles  equal  to  one  another,  each  of 
the  equal  angles  is  right;  [i.  Def.  10] 

therefore  the  angle  GDB  is  right. 

But  the  angle  FDB  is  also  right; 
therefore  the  angle  FDB  is  equal  to  the  angle  GDB, 
the  greater  to  the  less:  which  is  impossible. 

Therefore  G  is  not  the  centre  of  the  circle  ABC. 

Similarly  we  can  prove  that  neither  is  any  other  point  except  F. 

Therefore  the  point  F  is  the  centre  of  the  circle  ABC. 

Porism.  From  this  it  is  manifest  that,  if  in  a  circle  a  straight  line  cut  a 
straight  line  into  two  equal  parts  and  at  right  angles,  the  centre  of  the  circle  is 
on  the  cutting  straight  line.  q.  e.  f. 


C 


Proposition  2 

If  on  the  circumference  of  a  circle  two  points  be  taken  at  random,  the  straight  line 
joining  the  points  will  fall  within  the  circle. 

Let  ABC  be  a  circle,  and  let  two  points  A,  B  be  taken  at  random  on  its  cir¬ 
cumference; 

I  say  that  the  straight  line  joined  from  A  to  B  will  fall  within  the  circle. 
For  suppose  it  does  not,  but,  if  possible,  let  it  fall  outside,  as  AEB; 
let  the  centre  of  the  circle  ABC  be  taken  [hi.  1],  and  let  it  be  D;  let  DA,  DB  be 
joined,  and  let  DFE  be  drawn  through. 

Then,  since  DA  is  equal  to  DB, 
the  angle  DAE  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  DBE.  [i.  5] 

And,  since  one  side  AEB  of  the  triangle  DAE  is  pro¬ 
duced, 

the  angle  DEB  is  greater  than  the  angle  DAE.  [i.  16] 

But  the  angle  DAE  is  equal  to  the  angle  DBE ; 
therefore  the  angle  DEB  is  greater  than  the  angle 
DBE. 

And  the  greater  angle  is  subtended  by  the  greater 
side;  [i.  19] 

therefore  DB  is  greater  than  DE. 

But  DB  is  equal  to  DF ; 

therefore  DF  is  greater  than  DE, 
the  less  than  the  greater:  which  is  impossible. 

Therefore  the  straight  line  joined  from  A  to  B  will  not  fall  outside  the  circle. 
Similarly  we  can  prove  that  neither  will  it  fall  on  the  circumference  itself; 
therefore  it  will  fall  within. 


Therefore  etc. 


Q.  E.  D. 


ELEMENTS  III 


43 


Proposition  3 

If  in  a  circle  a  straight  line  through  the  centre  bisect  a  straight  line  not  through 
the  centre ,  it  also  cuts  it  at  right  angles;  and  if  it  cut  it  at  right  angles,  it  also 
bisects  it. 

Let  ABC  be  a  circle,  and  in  it  let  a  straight  line  CD  through  the  centre  bisect 
a  straight  line  AB  not  through  the  centre  at  the  point  F; 

I  say  that  it  also  cuts  it  at  right  angles. 

For  let  the  centre  of  the  circle  ABC  be  taken,  and  let  it  be  F;  let  EA ,  EB  be 
joined. 

Then,  since  AF  is  equal  to  FB ,  and  FE  is  common, 
two  sides  are  equal  to  two  sides; 
and  the  base  EA  is  equal  to  the  base  EB ; 
therefore  the  angle  AFE 
is  equal  to  the  angle  BFE.  [i.  8] 

But,  when  a  straight  line  set  up  on  a  straight  line 
makes  the  adjacent  angles  equal  to  one  another,  each 
of  the  equal  angles  is  right;  [i.  Def.  10] 

therefore  each  of  the  angles  AFE,  BFE  is  right. 
Therefore  CD,  which  is  through  the  centre,  and 
bisects  AB  which  is  not  through  the  centre,  also  cuts  it  at  right  angles. 
Again,  let  CD  cut  AB  at  right  angles; 

I  say  that  it  also  bisects  it,  that  is,  that  AF  is  equal  to  FB. 

For,  with  the  same  construction, 

since  EA  is  equal  to  EB, 

the  angle  EAF  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  EBF .  [i.  5] 

But  the  right  angle  AFE  is  equal  to  the  right  angle  BFE,  therefore  EAF, 
EBF  are  two  triangles  having  two  angles  equal  to  two  angles  and  one  side 
equal  to  one  side,  namely  EF,  which  is  common  to  them,  and  subtends  one  of 
the  equal  angles; 

therefore  they  will  also  have  the  remaining  sides  equal  to  the  remaining  sides; 

[i.  26] 

therefore  AF  is  equal  to  FB. 

Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  4 

If  in  a  circle  two  straight  lines  cut  one  another  which  are  not  through  the  centre, 
they  do  not  bisect  one  another. 

Let  ABCD  be  a  circle,  and  in  it  let  the  two  straight  lines  AC,  BD ,  which  are 
not  through  the  centre,  cut  one  another  at  F; 

I  say  that  they  do  not  bisect  one  another. 

For,  if  possible,  let  them  bisect  one  another,  so  that 
AE  is  equal  to  EC,  and  BE  to  ED ; 
let  the  centre  of  the  circle  ABCD  be  taken  [hi.  1], 
and  let  it  be  F;  let  FE  be  joined. 

Then,  since  a  straight  line  FE  through  the  centre 
bisects  a  straight  line  AC  not  through  the  centre, 

it  also  cuts  it  at  right  angles;  [in.  3] 
therefore  the  angle  FEA  is  right. 


44  EUCLID 

Again,  since  a  straight  line  FE  bisects  a  straight  line  BD , 

it  also  cuts  it  at  right  angles;  [iii.  3] 

therefore  the  angle  FEB  is  right. 

But  the  angle  FEA  was  also  proved  right; 
therefore  the  angle  FEA  is  equal  to  the  angle  FEB,  the  less  to  the  greater: 
which  is  impossible. 

Therefore  AC,  BD  do  not  bisect  one  another. 

Therefore  etc.  Q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  5 

If  two  circles  cut  one  another,  they  will  not  have  the  same  centre. 

For  let  the  circles  ABC,  CDG  cut  one  another  at  the  points  B,  C ; 

I  say  that  they  will  not  have  the  same  centre. 

For,  if  possible,  let  it  be  E;  let  EC  be  joined,  and  let  EFG  be  drawn  through 
at  random. 

Then,  since  the  point  E  is  the  centre  of  the  circle 
ABC, 

EC  is  equal  to  EF.  [i.  Def.  15] 

Again,  since  the  point  E  is  the  centre  of  the  circle 
CDG, 

EC  is  equal  to  EG. 

But  EC  was  proved  equal  to  EF  also; 
therefore  EF  is  also  equal  to  EG,  the  less  to  the 
greater:  which  is  impossible. 

Therefore  the  point  E  is  not  the  centre  of  the  circles  ABC,  CDG. 
Therefore  etc.  Q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  6 

If  two  circles  touch  one  another,  they  will  not  have  the  same  centre. 

For  let  the  two  circles  ABC,  CDE  touch  one  another  at  the  point  C; 

I  say  that  they  will  not  have  the  same  centre. 

For,  if  possible,  let  it  be  F;  let  FC  be  joined,  and  let  FEB  be  drawn  through 
at  random. 

Then,  since  the  point  F  is  the  centre  of  the  circle 
ABC, 

FC  is  equal  to  FB. 

Again,  since  the  point  F  is  the  centre  of  the 
circle  CDE, 

FC  is  equal  to  FE. 

But  FC  was  proved  equal  to  FB ; 
therefore  FE  is  also  equal  to  FB,  the  less  to  the 
greater:  which  is  impossible. 

Therefore  F  is  not  the  centre  of  the  circles  ABC, 

Therefore  etc.  Q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  7 

If  on  the  diameter  of  a  circle  a  point  be  taken  which  is  not  the  centre  of  the  circle, 
and  from  the  point  straight  lines  fall  upon  the  circle,  that  will  be  greatest  on  which 
the  centre  is,  the  remainder  of  the  same  diameter  will  be  least,  and  of  the  rest  the 


45 


ELEMENTS  III 


nearer  to  the  straight  line  through  the  centre  is  alivays  greater  than  the  more  remote , 
and  only  two  equal  straight  lines  will  fall  from  the  point  on  the  circle ,  one  on  each 
side  of  the  least  straight  line . 

Let  ABCD  be  a  circle,  and  let  A D  be  a  diameter  of  it;  on  AD  let  a  point  F  be 
taken  which  is  not  the  centre  of  the  circle,  let  E  be  the  centre  of  the  circle, 
and  from  F  let  straight  lines  FB,  FC,  FG  fall  upon  the  circle  ABCD; 

I  say  that  FA  is  greatest,  FD  is  least,  and  of  the  rest  FB  is  greater  than  FC, 
and  FC  than  FG. 

For  let  BE,  CE ,  GE  be  joined. 

Then,  since  in  any  triangle  two  sides  are  greater  than  the  remaining  one, 

[i.  20] 


For  the  same  reason 


EB ,  EF  are  greater  than  BF . 

But  AE  is  equal  to  BE; 

therefore  AF  is  greater  than  BF. 

Again,  since  BE  is  equal  to  CE,  and  FE  is  com¬ 
mon, 

the  two  sides  BE,  EF  are  equal  to  the  two  sides 
CE,  EF. 

But  the  angle  BEF  is  also  greater  than  the  angle 
CEF; 

therefore  the  base  BF  is  greater  than  the  base  CF. 

[i.  24] 


CF  is  also  greater  than  FG. 

Again,  since  GF,  FE  are  greater  than  EG, 

and  EG  is  equal  to  ED, 

GF,  FE  are  greater  than  ED. 

Let  EF  be  subtracted  from  each; 

therefore  the  remainder  GF  is  greater  than  the  remainder  FD. 

Therefore  FA  is  greatest,  FD  is  least,  and  FB  is  greater  than  FC,  and  FC 
than  FG. 

I  say  also  that  from  the  point  F  only  two  equal  straight  lines  will  fall  on  the 
circle  ABCD,  one  on  each  side  of  the  least  FD. 

For  on  the  straight  line  EF,  and  at  the  point  E  on  it,  let  the  angle  FEH  be 
constructed  equal  to  the  angle  GEF  [i.  23],  and  let  FH  be  joined. 

Then,  since  GE  is  equal  to  EH, 

and  EF  is  common, 

the  two  sides  GE,  EF  are  equal  to  the  two  sides  HE,  EF; 
and  the  angle  GEF  is  equal  to  the  angle  HEF; 
therefore  the  base  FG  is  equal  to  the  base  FH.  [i.  4] 

I  say  again  that  another  straight  line  equal  to  FG  will  not  fall  on  the  eircle 
from  the  point  F. 

For,  if  possible,  let  FK  so  fall. 

Then,  since  FK  is  equal  to  FG,  and  FH  to  FG, 

FK  is  also  equal  to  FH, 

the  nearer  to  the  straight  line  through  the  centre  being  thus 
remote:  which  is  impossible. 

Therefore  another  straight  line  equal  to  GF  will  not  fall 
upon  the  circle; 


equal  to  the  more 
from  the  point  F 


46 


Therefore  etc. 


EUCLID 

therefore  only  one  straight  line  will  so  fall. 


Q.  E.  D. 


Proposition  8 

If  a  point  be  taken  outside  a  circle  and  from  the  point  straight  lines  be  drawn 
through  to  the  circle ,  one  of  which  is  through  the  centre  and  the  others  are  drawn  at 
random ,  then ,  of  the  straight  lines  which  fall  on  the  concave  circumference ,  that 
through  the  centre  is  greatest ,  while  of  the  rest  the  nearer  to  that  through  the  centre  is 
always  greater  than  the  more  remote ,  but ,  of  the  straight  lines  falling  on  the  convex 
circumference,  that  between  the  point  and  the  diameter  is  least,  while  of  the  rest  the 
nearer  to  the  least  is  always  less  than  the  more  remote ,  and  only  two  equal  straight 
lines  will  fall  on  the  circle  from  the  point ,  one  on  each  side  of  the  least. 

Let  ABC  be  a  circle,  and  let  a  point  D  be  taken  outside  ABC ;  let  there  be 
drawn  through  from  it  straight  lines  DA,  DE,  DF,  DC,  and  let  DA  be  through 
the  centre; 

I  say  that,  of  the  straight  lines  falling  on  the  concave  circumference  AEFC, 
the  straight  line  DA  through  the  centre  is  greatest, 

while  DE  is  greater  than  DF  and  DF  than  DC ; 
but,  of  the  straight  lines  falling  on  the  convex  circumference  HLKG,  the 
straight  line  DG  between  the  point  and  the  diameter  AG  is  least;  and  the 
nearer  to  the  least  DG  is  always  less  than  the  more  remote,  namely  DK 
than  DL,  and  DL  than  DH. 

For  let  the  centre  of  the  circle  ABC  be  taken  fra.  1], 
and  let  it  be  M;  let  ME,  MF,  MC ,  MK,  ML,  MH  be 
joined. 

Then,  since  AM  is  equal  to  EM,  let  MD  be  added 
to  each; 

therefore  AD  is  equal  to  EM,  MD. 

But  EM,  MD  are  greater  than  ED ; 

therefore  AD  is  also  greater  than  ED. 

Again,  since  ME  is  equal  to  MF, 
and  MD  is  common, 

therefore  EM,  MD  are  equal  to  FM,  MD; 
and  the  angle  EMD  is  greater  than  the  angle  FMD; 
therefore  the  base  ED  is  greater  than  the  base  FD. 

Similarly  we  can  prove  that  FD  is  greater  than  CD;  therefore  DA  is  greatest, 
while  DE  is  greater  than  DF,  and  DF  than  DC. 

Next,  since  MK,  KD  are  greater  than  MD,  [i.  20] 

and  MG  is  equal  to  MK, 

therefore  the  remainder  KD  is  greater  than  the  remainder  GD, 
so  that  GD  is  less  than  KD. 

And,  since  on  MD,  one  of  the  sides  of  the  triangle  MLD,  two  straight  lines 
MK,  KD  were  constructed  meeting  within  the  triangle, 

therefore  MK,  KD  are  less  than  ML,  LD;  [i.  21] 

and  MK  is  equal  to  ML; 

therefore  the  remainder  DK  is  less  than  the  remainder  DL. 

Similarly  we  can  prove  that  DL  is  also  less  than  DH; 

therefore  DG  is  least,  while  DK  is  less  than  DL,  and  DL  than  DH. 

I  say  also  that  only  two  equal  straight  lines  will  fall  from  the  point  D  on  the 


47 


ELEMENTS  III 

circle,  one  on  each  side  of  the  least  DG . 

On  the  straight  line  MD,  and  at  the  point  M  on  it, 
let  the  angle  DMB  be  constructed  equal  to  the  angle  KMD ,  and  let  DB  be 
joined. 

Then,  since  MK  is  equal  to  MB , 

and  MD  is  common, 

the  two  sides  KM,  MD  are  equal  to  the  two  sides  BM,  MD  respectively; 
and  the  angle  KMD  is  equal  to  the  angle  BMD; 
therefore  the  base  DK  is  equal  to  the  base  DB.  [i.  4] 

I  say  that  no  other  straight  line  equal  to  the  straight  line  DK  will  fall  on 
the  circle  from  the  point  D. 

For,  if  possible,  let  a  straight  line  so  fall,  and  let  it  be  DN . 

Then,  since  DK  is  equal  to  DN, 

while  DK  is  equal  to  DB, 

DB  is  also  equal  to  DN, 

that  is,  the  nearer  to  the  least  DG  equal  to  the  more  remote:  which  was  proved 
impossible. 

Therefore  no  more  than  two  equal  straight  lines  will  fall  on  the  circle  ABC 
from  the  point  D,  one  on  each  side  of  DG  the  least. 

Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  9 

If  a  point  be  taken  within  a  circle ,  and  more  than  two  equal  straight  lines  fall  from 
the  point  on  the  circle ,  the  point  taken  is  the  centre  of  the  circle . 

Let  ABC  be  a  circle  and  D  a  point  within  it,  and  from  D  let  more  than  two 

equal  straight  lines,  namely  DA,  DB,  DC,  fall  on 
the  circle  ABC ; 

I  say  that  the  point  D  is  the  centre  of  the  circle 
ABC . 

For  let  AB,  BC  be  joined  and  bisected  at  the 
points  E,  F,  and  let  ED,  FD  be  joined  and  drawn 
through  to  the  points  G,  K,  H,  L. 

Then,  since  AE  is  equal  to  EB,  and  ED  is  com¬ 
mon, 

the  two  sides  AE,  ED  are  equal  to  the  two  sides 
BE,  ED; 

and  the  base  DA  is  equal  to  the  base  DB; 
therefore  the  angle  A  ED  is  equal  to  the  angle  BED.  [i.  8] 

Therefore  each  of  the  angles  AED,  BED  is  right;  [i.  Def.  10] 

therefore  GK  cuts  AB  into  two  equal  parts  and  at  right  angles. 

And  since,  if  in  a  circle  a  straight  line  cut  a  straight  line  into  two  equal  parts 
and  at  right  angles,  the  centre  of  the  circle  is  on  the  cutting  straight  line, 

[hi.  1,  Por.] 

the  centre  of  the  circle  is  on  GK. 

For  the  same  reason 

the  centre  of  the  circle  ABC  is  also  on  HL. 

And  the  straight  lines  GK,  HL  have  no  other  point  common  but  the  point  D ; 

therefore  the  point  D  is  the  centre  of  the  circle  ABC. 

Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 


48 


EUCLID 


Proposition  10 

A  circle  does  not  cut  a  circle  at  more  points  than  two . 

For,  if  possible,  let  the  circle  ABC  cut  the  circle  DEF  at  more  points  than 
two,  namely  B,  C,  F,  H; 

let  BH ,  BG  be  joined  and  bisected  at  the  points  if,  L, 
and  from  if,  L  let  ifC,  LM  be  drawn  at  right  angles  to  BH,  BG  and  carried 
through  to  the  points  A,  E. 

Then,  since  in  the  circle  ABC  a  straight  line  AC  cuts  a  straight  line  BH  into 
two  equal  parts  and  at  right  angles, 

the  centre  of  the  circle  ABC  is  on  AC. 

[hi.  1,  Por.] 

Again,  since  in  the  same  circle  ABC  a 
straight  line  NO  cuts  a  straight  line  BG  into 
two  equal  parts  and  at  right  angles, 

the  centre  of  the  circle  ABC  is  on  NO. 

But  it  was  also  proved  to  be  on  AC,  and 
the  straight  lines  AC,  NO  meet  at  no  point 
except  at  P; 

therefore  the  point  P  is  the  centre  of  the 
circle  ABC. 

Similarly  we  can  prove  that  P  is  also  the  centre  of  the  circle  DEF; 
therefore  the  two  circles  ABC ,  DEF  which  cut  one  another  have  the  same  cen¬ 
tre  P:  which  is  impossible.  [hi.  5] 

Therefore  etc.  Q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  11 

If  two  circles  touch  one  another  internally,  and  their  centres  be  taken,  the  straight 
line  joining  their  centres,  if  it  be  also  produced,  will  fall  on  the  point  of  contact  of 
the  circles. 

For  let  the  two  circles  ABC,  ADE  touch  one  another  internally  at  the  point 
A,  and  let  the  centre  F  of  the  circle  ABC,  and  the  centre  G  of  ADE ,  be  taken; 

I  say  that  the  straight  line  joined  from  G  to  F 
and  produced  will  fall  on  A. 

For  suppose  it  does  not,  but,  if  possible,  let  it 
fall  as  FGH,  and  let  AF,  AG  be  joined. 

Then,  since  AG,  GF  are  greater  than  FA,  that 
is,  than  FH, 

let  FG  be  subtracted  from  each ; 
therefore  the  remainder  AG  is  greater  than  the 
remainder  GH. 

But  AG  is  equal  to  GD; 

therefore  GD  is  also  greater  than  GH. 

the  less  than  the  greater:  which  is  impossible. 

Therefore  the  straight  line  joined  from  F  to 
G  will  not  fall  outside; 

therefore  it  will  fall  at  A  on  the  point  of  contact. 

Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d 


h 


ELEMENTS  III 


49 


Proposition  12 

If  two  circles  touch  one  another  externally,  the  straight  line  joining  their  centres  will 
pass  through  the  point  of  contact. 

For  let  the  two  circles  ABC,  ADE  touch  one  another  externally  at  the  point 
A,  and  let  the  centre  F  of  ABC,  and  the  centre  G  of  ADE,  be  taken; 

I  say  that  the  straight  line  joined  from  F  to  G  will  pass  through  the  point 
of  contact  at  .4 . 

For  suppose  it  does  not,  but,  if  possible,  let  it  pass  as  FCDG ,  and  let  AF,  AG 

be  joined. 

Then,  since  the  point  F  is  the  centre  of 
the  circle  ABC , 

FA  is  equal  to  FC . 

Again,  since  the  point  G  is  the  centre  of 
the  circle  ADE, 

GA  is  equal  to  GD . 

But  FA  was  also  proved  equal  to  FC; 
therefore  FA,  AG  are  equal  to  FC,  GD, 
so  that  the  whole  FG  is  greater  than  FA, 
AG\ 

but  it  is  also  less  [i.  20]:  which  is  impossible. 

Therefore  the  straight  line  joined  from  F  to  G  will  not  fail  to  pass  through 
the  point  of  contact  at  A ; 

therefore  it  will  pass  through  it. 

Therefore  ete.  q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  13 

A  circle  does  not  touch  a  circle  at  more  points  than  one ,  whether  it  touch  it  inter¬ 
nally  or  externally. 

For,  if  possible,  let  the  circle  ABDC  touch  the  circle  EBFD,  first  internally, 
at  more  points  than  one,  namely  D ,  B. 

Let  the  centre  G  of  the  circle  ABDC,  and  the  centre  H  of  EBFD,  be  taken. 
Therefore  the  straight  line  joined  from  G  to  H  will  fall  on  B,  D.  [hi.  11] 

Let  it  so  fall,  as  BGHD. 

Then,  since  the  point  G  is  the  centre  of  the 
circle  A  BCD, 

BG  is  equal  to  GD; 
therefore  BG  is  greater  than  HD; 
therefore  BH  is  much  greater  than  HD. 
Again,  since  the  point  H  is  the  centre  of  the 
circle  EBFD, 

BH  is  equal  to  HD: 

but  it  was  also  proved  much  greater  than  it: 
which  is  impossible. 

Therefore  a  circle  does  not  touch  a  circle  in¬ 
ternally  at  more  points  than  one. 

I  say  further  that  neither  does  it  so  touch  it  externally. 

For,  if  possible,  let  the  circle  ACK  touch  the  circle  ABDC  at  more  points 
than  one,  namely  A,  C, 


50 


EUCLID 

and  let  AC  be  joined. 

Then,  since  on  the  circumference  of  each  of  the  circles  ABDC ,  ACK  two 
points  A,  C  have  been  taken  at  random,  the  straight  line  joining  the  points 
will  fall  within  each  circle;  [hi.  2] 

but  it  fell  within  the  circle  ABDC  and  outside  ACK  [hi.  Def.  3]:  which  is  ab¬ 
surd. 

Therefore  a  circle 'does  not  touch  a  circle  externally  at  more  points  than  one. 

And  it  was  proved  that  neither  does  it  so  touch  it  internally. 

Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  14 

In  a  circle  equal  straight  lines  are  equally  distant  from  the  centre ,  and  those  which 
are  equally  distant  from  the  centre  are  equal  to  one  another . 

Let  ABDC  be  a  circle,  and  let  AS,  CD  be  equal  straight  lines  in  it; 

I  say  that  AS,  CD  are  equally  distant  from  the  centre. 

For  let  the  centre  of  the  circle  ABDC  be  taken  [hi.  1],  and  let  it  be  S;  from 
E  let  EF,  EG  be  drawn  perpendicular  to  AS,  CD,  and  let  AE,  EC  be  joined. 

Then,  since  a  straight  line  EF  through  the  centre  cuts  a  straight  line  AS  not 
through  the  centre  at  right  angles,  it  also  bisects  it.  [hi.  3] 

Therefore  AS  is  equal  to  FB; 

therefore  AS  is  double  of  AS. 

For  the  same  reason 

CD  is  also  double  of  CG; 
and  AS  is  equal  to  CD; 
therefore  AF  is  also  equal  to  CG. 

And,  since  AE  is  equal  to  EC, 
the  square  on  AS  is  also  equal  to  the  square 
But  the  squares  on  AF,  EF  are  equal  to  the  square  on  AS,  for  the  angle  at  F  is 
right; 

and  the  squares  on  EG,  GC  are  equal  to  the  square  on  EC,  for  the  angle  at  G  is 
right;  [i.  47] 

therefore  the  squares  on  AS,  FE  are  equal  to  the  squares  on  CG,  GE, 
of  which  the  square  on  AS  is  equal  to  the  square  on  CG,  for  AS  is  equal  to  CG; 
therefore  the  square  on  FE  which  remains  is  equal  to  the  square  on  EG, 
therefore  EF  is  equal  to  EG. 

But  in  a  circle  straight  lines  are  said  to  be  equally  distant  from  the  centre 
when  the  perpendiculars  drawn  to  them  from  the  centre  are  equal  [hi.  Def.  4]; 
therefore  AB,  CD  are  equally  distant  from  the  centre. 

Next,  let  the  straight  lines  AB,  CD  be  equally  distant  from  the  centre;  that 
is,  let  EF  be  equal  to  EG. 

I  say  that  AS  is  also  equal  to  CD. 

For,  wdth  the  same  construction,  wre  can  prove,  similarly,  that  AS  is  double 
of  AS,  and  CD  of  CG. 

And,  since  AE  is  equal  to  CE, 

the  square  on  AS  is  equal  to  the  square  on  CE. 

But  the  squares  on  EF,  FA  are  equal  to  the  square  on  AS,  and  the  squares  on 
EG,  GC  equal  to  the  square  on  CE.  [i.  47] 

Therefore  the  squares  on  EF,  FA  are  equal  to  the  squares  on  EG,  GC, 
of  vrhich  the  square  on  EF  is  equal  to  the  square  on  EG,  for  EF  is  equal  to  EG; 


ELEMENTS  III  51 

therefore  the  square  on  AF  which  remains  is  equal  to  the  square  on  CG; 

therefore  AF  is  equal  to  CG. 

And  AB  is  double  of  AF,  and  CD  double  of  CG; 

therefore  A B  is  equal  to  CD. 

Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  15 

Of  straight  lines  in  a  circle  the  diameter  is  greatest,  and  of  the  rest  the  nearer  to  the 
centre  is  always  greater  than  the  more  remote. 

Let  ABCD  be  a  circle,  let  AD  be  its  diameter  and  E  the  centre;  and  let  BC 
be  nearer  to  the  diameter  AD,  and  FG  more  remote; 

I  say  that  AD  is  greatest  and  BC  greater  than  FG. 
For  from  the  centre  E  let  EH,  EK  be  drawn  perpen¬ 
dicular  to  BC,  FG. 

Then,  since  BC  is  nearer  to  the  centre  and  FG  more 
remote,  EK  is  greater  than  EH.  [hi.  Def.  5] 

Let  EL  be  made  equal  to  EH,  through  L  let  LM  be 
drawn  at  right  angles  to  EK  and  carried  through  to  N, 
and  let  ME,  EN,  FE,  EG  be  joined. 

Then,  since  EH  is  equal  to  EL, 

BC  is  also  equal  to  MN.  [hi.  14] 

Again,  since  AD  is  equal  to  EM,  and  ED  to  EN, 

AD  is  equal  to  ME,  EN. 

But  ME,  EN  are  greater  than  MN,  [i.  20] 

and  MN  is  equal  to  BC; 
therefore  AD  is  greater  than  BC. 

And,  since  the  two  sides  ME,  EN  are  equal  to  the  two  sides  FE,  EG, 
and  the  angle  MEN  greater  than  the  angle  FEG, 
therefore  the  base  MN  is  greater  than  the  base  FG.  [i.  24] 

But  MN  was  proved  equal  to  BC. 

Therefore  the  diameter  AD  is  greatest  and  BC  greater  than  FG. 

Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  16 

The  straight  line  drawn  at  right  angles  to  the  diameter  of  a  circle  from  its  extremity 
will  fall  outside  the  circle,  and  into  the  space  between  the  straight  line  and  the  cir¬ 
cumference  another  straight  line  cannot  be  interposed ;  further  the  angle  of  the  semi¬ 
circle  is  greater,  and  the  remaining  angle  less,  than  any  acute  rectilineal  angle. 
Let  ABC  be  a  circle  about  D  as  centre  and  AB  as  diameter; 

I  say  that  the  straight  line  drawn  from  A  at  right  angles  to  AD  from  its 
extremity  will  fall  outside  the  circle. 

For  suppose  it  does  not,  but,  if  possible,  let  it  fall  within  as  CA,  and  let  DC 
be  joined. 

Since  DA  is  equal  to  DC, 

the  angle  DAC  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  A  CD.  [i.  5] 

But  the  angle  DAC  is  right; 

therefore  the  angle  A  CD  is  also  right: 

thus,  in  the  triangle  A  CD,  the  two  angles  DAC,  A  CD  are  equal  to  two  right 
angles:  which  is  impossible.  [i.  17] 


52  EUCLID 

Therefore  the  straight  line  drawn  from  the  point  A  at  right  angles  to  BA  will 
not  fall  within  the  circle. 

Similarly  we  can  prove  that  neither  will  it  fall 
on  the  circumference; 

therefore  it  will  fall  outside. 

Let  it  fall  as  AE: 

I  say  next  that  into  the  space  between  the 
straight  line  AE  and  the  circumference  CHA 
another  straight  line  cannot  be  interposed. 

For,  if  possible,  let  another  straight  line  be  so 
interposed,  as  FA,  and  let  DG  be  drawn  from  the 
point  D  perpendicular  to  FA. 

Then,  since  the  angle  AGD  is  right, 

and  the  angle  DAG  is  less  than  a  right  angle, 

AD  is  greater  than  DG.  [i.  19] 

But  DA  is  equal  to  DH : 

therefore  DH  is  greater  than  DG,  the  less  than  the  greater :  which  is  impossible. 

Therefore  another  straight  line  cannot  be  interposed  into  the  space  between 
the  straight  line  and  the  circumference. 

I  say  further  that  the  angle  of  the  semicircle  contained  by  the  straight  line 
BA  and  the  circumference  CHA  is  greater  than  any  acute  rectilineal  angle, 
and  the  remaining  angle  contained  by  the  circumference  CHA  and  the  straight 
line  AE  is  less  than  any  acute  rectilineal  angle. 

For,  if  there  is  any  rectilineal  angle  greater  than  the  angle  contained  by  the 
straight  line  DA  and  the  circumference  CHA,  and  any  rectilineal  angle  less  than 
the  angle  contained  by  the  circumference  CHA  and  the  straight  line  AE,  then 
into  the  space  between  the  circumference  and  the  straight  line  AE  a  straight 
line  will  be  interposed  such  as  will  make  an  angle  contained  by  straight  lines 
which  is  greater  than  the  angle  contained  by  the  straight  line  BA  and  the  cir¬ 
cumference  CHA,  and  another  angle  contained  by  straight  lines  which  is  less 
than  the  angle  contained  by  the  circumference  CHA  and  the  straight  line  AE. 

But  such  a  straight  line  cannot  be  interposed; 
therefore  there  will  not  be  any  acute  angle  contained  by  straight  lines  which 
is  greater  than  the  angle  contained  by  the  straight  line  BA  and  the  circum¬ 
ference  CHA ,  nor  yet  any  acute  angle  contained  by  straight  lines  which  is  less 
than  the  angle  contained  by  the  circumference  CHA  and  the  straight  line  AE. — 

Porism.  From  this  it  is  manifest  that  the  straight  line  drawn  at  right  angles 
to  the  diameter  of  a  circle  from  its  extremity  touches  the  circle,  Q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  17 

From  a  given  point  to  draw  a  straight  line  touching  a  given  circle. 

Let  A  be  the  given  point,  and  BCD  the  given  circle; 
thus  it  is  required  to  draw  from  the  point  A  a  straight  line  touching  the  circle 
BCD. 

For  let  the  centre  E  of  the  circle  be  taken:  [m.  1] 

let  AE  be  joined,  and  with  centre  E  and  distance  EA  let  the  circle  AEG  be 
described; 

from  D  let  DF  be  drawn  at  right  angles  to  EA, 
and  let  EF,  AB  be  joined; 


B 


ELEMENTS  III 


53 


I  say  that  AB  has  been  drawn  from  the  point  A  touching  the  circle  BCD. 
For,  since  Ei s  the  centre  of  the  circles  BCD ,  AFG, 

EA  is  equal  to  EF ,  and  ED  to  EB] 
therefore  the  two  sides  AE,  EB  are  equal  to  the  two  sides  FE ,  ED ; 

and  they  contain  a  common  angle,  the  angle  at  E ; 

therefore  the  base  DF  is  equal  to  the  base  AB, 
and  the  triangle  DEF  is  equal  to  the  triangle  BE  A, 
and  the  remaining  angles  to  the  remaining  angles; 

[i.  4] 

therefore  the  angle  EDF  is  equal  to  the  angle  EBA. 
But  the  angle  EDF  is  right; 

therefore  the  angle  EBA  is  also  right. 

Now  EB  is  a  radius; 

and  the  straight  line  drawn  at  right  angles  to  the  di¬ 
ameter  of  a  circle,  from  its  extremity,  touches  the 
circle;  [hi.  16,  Por.] 

therefore  AB  touches  the  circle  BCD. 

Therefore  from  the  given  point  A  the  straight  line  AB  has  been  drawn 
touching  the  circle  BCD.  Q.  e.  f. 

Proposition  18 

If  a  straight  line  touch  a  circle,  and  a  straight  line  be  joined  from  the  centre  to  the 
point  of  contact ,  the  straight  line  so  joined  will  be  perpendicular  to  the  tangent. 

For  let  a  straight  line  DE  touch  the  circle  ABC  at  the  point  C ,  let  the  centre 
F  of  the  circle  ABC  be  taken,  and  let  FC  be  joined  from  F  to  C; 

I  say  that  FC  is  perpendicular  to  DE. 

For,  if  not,  let  FG  be  drawn  from  F  perpen¬ 
dicular  to  DE. 

Then,  since  the  angle  FGC  is  right, 

the  angle  FCG  is  acute;  [i.  17] 
and  the  greater  angle  is  subtended  by  the  great¬ 
er  side;  [i.  19] 

therefore  FC  is  greater  than  FG. 

But  FC  is  equal  to  FB\ 

therefore  FB  is  also  greater  than  FG, 
the  less  than  the  greater:  which  is  impossible. 

Therefore  FG  is  not  perpendicular  to  DE. 

Similarly  wre  can  prove  that  neither  is  any  other  straight  line  except  FC ; 

therefore  FC  is  perpendicular  to  DE. 

Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  19 


If  a  straight  line  touch  a  circle ,  and  from  the  point  of  contact  a  straight  line  be 
drawn  at  right  angles  to  the  tangent ,  the  centre  of  the  circle  will  be  on  the  straight 
line  so  drawn. 

For  let  a  straight  line  DE  touch  the  circle  ABC  at  the  point  C,  and  from  C 
let  CA  be  drawn  at  right  angles  to  DE ; 

I  say  that  the  centre  of  the  circle  is  on  AC. 

For  suppose  it  is  not,  but,  if  possible,  let  F  be  the  centre, 


54  EUCLID 

and  let  CF  be  joined. 

Since  a  straight  line  DE  touches  the  circle 
ABC, 

and  FC  has  been  joined  from  the  centre  to  the 
point  of  contact, 

FC  is  perpendicular  to  DE ;  [in.  18] 

therefore  the  angle  FCE  is  right. 

But  the  angle  ACE  is  also  right; 
therefore  the  angle  FCE  is  equal  to  the  angle 
ACE , 

the  less  to  the  greater:  which  is  impossible. 

Therefore  F  is  not  the  centre  of  the  circle  ABC. 

Similarly  we  can  prove  that  neither  is  any  other  point  except  a  point  on  AC. 

Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  20 

In  a  circle  the  angle  at  the  centre  is  double  of  the  angle  at  the  circumference ,  when 
the  angles  have  the  same  circumference  as  base. 

Let  ABC  be  a  circle,  let  the  angle  BEC  be  an  angle  at  its  centre,  and  the 
angle  BAG  an  angle  at  the  circumference,  and  let  them  have  the  same  circum¬ 
ference  BC  as  base; 

I  say  that  the  angle  BEC  is  double  of  the  angle 
BAG. 

For  let  AE  be  joined  and  drawn  through  to  F . 

Then,  since  EA  is  equal  to  EB , 
the  angle  EAB  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  EBA ;  [i.  5] 
therefore  the  angles  EAB,  EBA  are  double  of  the 
angle  EAB. 

But  the  angle  BEF  is  equal  to  the  angles  EAB, 

EBA;  [1.32] 

therefore  the  angle  BEF  is  also  double  of  the  angle 
EAB. 

For  the  same  reason 

the  angle  FEC  is  also  double  of  the  angle  EAC. 

Therefore  the  whole  angle  BEC  is  double  of  the  whole  angle  BAG. 

Again  let  another  straight  line  be  inflected,  and  let  there  be  another  angle 
BDC;  let  DE  be  joined  and  produced  to  G. 

Similarly  then  we  can  prove  that  the  angle  GEC  is  double  of  the  angle  EDC , 
of  which  the  angle  GEB  is  double  of  the  angle  EDB ; 
therefore  the  angle  BEC  which  remains  is  double  of  the  angle  BDC. 

Therefore  etc.  Q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  21 

In  a  circle  the  angles  in  the  same  segment  are  equal  to  one  another. 

Let  ABCD  be  a  circle,  and  let  the  angles  BAD,  BED  be  angles  in  the  same 
segment  BAED; 

I  say  that  the  angles  BAD,  BED  are  equal  to  one  another. 

For  let  the  centre  of  the  circle  ABCD  be  taken,  and  let  it  be  F;  let  BFy  FD 
be  joined. 


ELEMENTS  III 


Now,  since  the  angle  BFD  is  at  the  centre, 
and  the  angle  BAD  at  the  circumference, 
and  they  have  the  same  circumference  BCD  as  base, 
therefore  the  angle  BFD  is  double  of  the  angle 
BAD.  [hi.  20] 

For  the  same  reason 

the  angle  BFD  is  also  double  of  the  angle  BED ; 
therefore  the  angle  BAD  is  equal  to  the  angle  BED. 

Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  22 


The  opposite  angles  of  quadrilaterals  in  circles  are  equal  to  two  right 
angles . 

Let  ABCD  be  a  circle,  and  let  ABCD  be  a  quadrilateral  in  it; 

I  say  that  the  opposite  angles  are  equal  to  two  right  angles. 

Let  AC,  BD  be  joined. 

Then,  since  in  any  triangle  the  three  angles  are  equal 
to  two  right  angles,  [i.  32] 

the  three  angles  CAB,  ABC,  BCA  of  the  triangle  ABC 
are  equal  to  two  right  angles. 

But  the  angle  CAB  is  equal  to  the  angle  BDC,  for  they 
are  in  the  same  segment  BADC;  [hi.  21] 

and  the  angle  ACB  is  equal  to  the  angle  ADB,  for  they 
are  in  the  same  segment  ADCB ; 
therefore  the  whole  angle  ADC  is  equal  to  the  angles  BAG,  ACB. 

Let  the  angle  ABC  be  added  to  each; 

therefore  the  angles  ABC,  BAC ,  ACB  are  equal  to  the  angles  ABC,  ADC. 
But  the  angles  ABC,  BAC,  ACB  are  equal  to  two  right  angles; 

therefore  the  angles  ABC,  ADC  are  also  equal  to  two  right  angles. 
Similarly  we  can  prove  that  the  angles  BAD,  DCB  are  also  equal  to  two 
right  angles. 

Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  23 

On  the  same  straight  line  there  cannot  be  constructed  two  similar  and  unequal 
segments  of  circles  on  the  same  side. 

For,  if  possible,  on  the  same  straight  line  AB  let  two  similar  and  unequal 
segments  of  circles  4  CZ?,  ADB  be  constructed  on  the 
same  side; 

let  A  CD  be  drawn  through,  and  let  CB,  DB  be  joined. 

Then,  since  the  segment  ACB  is  similar  to  the  seg¬ 
ment  ADB , 

and  similar  segments  of  circles  are  those  which  admit  equal  angles  [hi.  Def.  11], 
the  angle  ACB  is  equal  to  the  angle  ADB,  the  exterior  to  the  interior:  which  is 
impossible.  [i.  1G] 

Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  n. 


A  B 


56 


EUCLID 


Proposition  24 

Similar  segments  of  circles  on  equal  straight  lines  are  equal  to  one  another. 

For  let  AEB,  CFD  be  similar  segments  of  circles  on  equal  straight  lines  AB, 
CD ; 

I  say  that  the  segment  AEB  is  equal  to  the  segment  CFD. 

For,  if  the  segment  AEB  be  applied  to  CFD ,  and  if  the  point  A  be  placed  on 
C  and  the  straight  line  AB  on  CD, 

the  point  B  will  also  coincide  with  the  point  D ,  because  AB  is  equal  to  CD; 


A  B  C  D 


and,  AB  coinciding  with  CD, 
the  segment  AEB  will  also  coincide  with  CFD. 

For,  if  the  straight  line  AB  coincide  with  CD  but  the  segment  AEB  do  not 
coincide  with  CFD , 

it  will  either  fall  within  it,  or  outside  it; 
or  it  will  fall  awry,  as  CGD ,  and  a  circle  cuts  a  circle  at  more  points  than  two: 
which  is  impossible.  [hi.  10] 

Therefore,  if  the  straight  line  AB  be  applied  to  CD,  the  segment  AEB  will 
not  fail  to  coincide  with  CFD  also; 

therefore  it  will  coincide  with  it  and  will  be  equal  to  it. 

Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  25 

Given  a  segment  of  a  circle,  to  describe  the  complete  circle  of  which  it  is  a  segment. 

Let  ABC  be  the  given  segment  of  a  circle; 
thus  it  is  required  to  describe  the  complete  circle  belonging  to  the  segment 
ABC,  that  is,  of  which  it  is  a  segment. 

For  let  AC  be  bisected  at  D,  let  DB  be  drawn  from  the  point  D  at  right 
angles  to  AC,  and  let  AB  be  joined; 

the  angle  ABD  is  then  greater  than,  equal  to,  or  less  than  the  angle  BAD. 
First  let  it  be  greater; 

and  on  the  straight  line  BA,  and  at  the  point  A  on  it,  let  the  angle  BAE  be 
constructed  equal  to  the  angle  ABD;  let  DB  be  drawn 
through  to  E,  and  let  EC  be  joined. 

Then,  since  the  angle  ABE  is  equal  to  the  angle  BAE , 
the  straight  line  EB  is  also  equal  to  EA.  [i.  6] 

And,  since  AD  is  equal  to  DC,  and  DE  is  common, 
the  two  sides  AD,  DE  are  equal  to  the  two  sides  CD, 

DE  respectively; 

and  the  angle  ADE  is  equal  to  the  angle  CDE,  for  each 
is  right; 

therefore  the  base  AE  is  equal  to  the  base  CE. 

But  AE  was  proved  equal  to  BE; 

therefore  BE  is  also  equal  to  CE; 


C 


ELEMENTS  III 


57 


therefore  the  three  straight  lines  AE ,  EB,  EC  are  equal  to  one  another. 
Therefore  the  circle  drawn  with  centre  E  and  distance  one  of  the  straight 
lines  AE,  EB,  EC  will  also  pass  through  the  remaining  points  and  will  have 
been  completed.  [in.  9] 

Therefore,  given  a  segment  of  a  circle,  the  complete  circle  has  been  described. 

And  it  is  manifest  that  the  segment  ABC  is  less  than  a  semi¬ 
circle,  because  the  centre  E  happens  to  be  outside  it. 

Similarly,  even  if  the  angle  ABD  be  equal  to  the  angle 
BAD, 

AD  being  equal  to  each  of  the  two  BD,  DC, 
the  three  straight  lines  DA,  DB,  DC  will  be  equal  to  one  an¬ 
other, 

D  will  be  the  centre  of  the  completed  circle, 
and  ABC  will  clearly  be  a  semicircle. 

But,  if  the  angle  ABD  be  less  than  the  angle  BAD,  and  if  we  construct,  on 
the  straight  line  BA  and  at  the  point  A  on  it,  an  angle  equal 
to  the  angle  ABD,  the  centre  will  fall  on  DB  within  the  seg¬ 
ment  ABC,  and  the  segment  ABC  will  clearly  be  greater  than 
a  semicircle. 

Therefore,  given  a  segment  of  a  circle,  the  complete 
circle  has  been  described.  q.  e.  f. 

Proposition  26 

In  equal  circles  equal  angles  stand  on  equal  circumferences,  whether  they  stand  at 
the  centres  or  at  the  circumferences. 

Let  ABC,  DEF  be  equal  circles,  and  in  them  let  there  be  equal  angles, 
namely  at  the  centres  the  angles  BGC,  EHF,  and  at  the  circumferences  the 
angles  BAG,  EDF; 

I  say  that  the  circumference  BKC  is  equal  to  the  circumference  ELF. 

For  let  BC,  EF  be  joined. 

Now,  since  the  circles  ABC,  DEF 
are  equal, 

the  radii  are  equal. 

Thus  the  two  straight  lines  BG, 
GC  are  equal  to  the  two  straight 
lines  EH,  HF ; 

and  the  angle  at  G  is  equal  to  the 
angle  at  H; 

therefore  the  base  BC  is  equal  to  the  base  EF.  [i.  4] 

And,  since  the  angle  at  A  is  equal  to  the  angle  at  D, 

the  segment  BAC  is  similar  to  the  segment  EDF;  [hi.  Def.  11] 
and  they  are  upon  equal  straight  lines. 

But  similar  segments  of  circles  on  equal  straight  lines  are  equal  to  one  an¬ 
other;  [hi.  24] 

therefore  the  segment  BAC  is  equal  to  EDF. 

But  the  whole  circle  ABC  is  also  equal  to  the  whole  circle  DEF ; 
therefore  the  circumference  BKC  which  remains  is  equal  to  the  circumference 
ELF. 

Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 


58 


EUCLID 


Proposition  27 

In  equal  circles  angles  standing  on  equal  circumferences  are  equal  to  one  another , 
whether  they  stand  at  the  centres  or  at  the  circumferences. 

For  in  equal  circles  ABC,  DEF,  on  equal  circumferences  BC,  EF,  let  the 
angles  BGC,  EHF  stand  at  the  centres  G,  H,  and  the  angles  BA  C,  EDF  at  the 
circumferences; 

I  say  that  the  angle  BGC  is  equal  to  the  angle  EHF, 

and  the  angle  BAC  is  equal  to  the  angle  EDF. 

For,  if  the  angle  BGC  is  unequal  to 
the  angle  EHF, 

one  of  them  is  greater. 

Let  the  angle  BGC  be  greater:  and  on 
the  straight  line  BG,  and  at  the  point 
G  on  it,  let  the  angle  BGK  be  con¬ 
structed  equal  to  the  angle  EHF  [i.  23]. 

Now  equal  angles  stand  on  equal 
circumferences,  when  they  are  at  the  centres;  [in.  26] 

therefore  the  circumference  BK  is  equal  to  the  circumference  EF. 

But  EF  is  equal  to  BC; 

therefore  BK  is  also  equal  to  BC,  the  less  to  the  greater:  which  is  impossible. 
Therefore  the  angle  BGC  is  not  unequal  to  the  angle  EHF ; 

therefore  it  is  equal  to  it. 

And  the  angle  at  A  is  half  of  the  angle  BGC, 

and  the  angle  at  D  half  of  the  angle  EHF;  [hi.  20] 

therefore  the  angle  at  A  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  at  D. 

Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  28 

I n  equal  circles  equal  straight  lines  cut  off  equal  circumferences ,  the  greater  equal 
to  the  greater  and  the  less  to  the  less. 

Let  ABC,  DEF  be  equal  circles,  and  in  the  circles  let  AB,  DE  be  equal 
straight  lines  cutting  off  ACB,  DFE  as  greater  circumferences  and  AGB,  DHE 
as  lesser; 

I  say  that  the  greater  circumference  ACB  is  equal  to  the  greater  circumfer¬ 
ence  DFE,  and  the  less  circumference  AGB  to  DHE. 

For  let  the  centres  K,  L  of  the  circles 
be  taken,  and  let  AK,  KB,  DL,  LE  be 
joined. 

Now,  since  the  circles  are  equal, 
the  radii  are  also  equal; 
therefore  the  two  sides  AK,  KB  are  equal 
to  the  two  sides  DL,  LE; 

and  the  base  AB  is  equal  to  the  base  DE; 
therefore  the  angle  AKB  is  equal  to  the  angle  DLE.  [i.  8] 

But  equal  angles  stand  on  equal  circumferences,  when  they  are  at  the  cen¬ 
tres;  [hi.  26] 

therefore  the  circumference  AGB  is  equal  to  DHE. 

And  the  whole  circle  ABC  is  also  equal  to  the  whole  circle  DEF; 


ELEMENTS  III  59 

therefore  the  circumference  ACB  which  remains  is  also  equal  to  the  circum¬ 
ference  DFE  which  remains. 

Therefore  etc.  Q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  29 

In  equal  circles  equal  circumferences  are  subtended  by  equal  straight  lines. 

Let  ABC ,  DEF  be  equal  circles,  and  in  them  let  equal  circumferences  BGC, 
EHF  be  cut  off;  and  let  the  straight  lines  BC ,  EF  be  joined; 

I  say  that  BC  is  equal  to  EF. 

For  let  the  centres  of  the  circles 
be  taken,  and  let  them  be  K,  L; 
let  BK,  KC,  EL,  LF  be  joined. 

Now,  since  the  circumference 
BGC  is  equal  to  the  circumfer¬ 
ence  EHF , 

the  angle  BKC  is  also  equal  to 
the  angle  ELF.  [hi.  27] 

And,  since  the  circles  ABC ,  DEF  are  equal, 

the  radii  are  also  equal; 

therefore  the  two  sides  BK7  KC  are  equal  to  the  two  sides  EL ,  LF;  and  they 
contain  equal  angles; 

therefore  the  base  BC  is  equal  to  the  base  EF.  [i.  4] 

Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  30 

To  bisect  a  given  circumference . 

Let  ADB  be  the  given  circumference; 

thus  it  is  required  to  bisect  the  circumference  ADB. 

Let  AB  be  joined  and  bisected  at  C;  from  the 
point  C  let  CD  be  drawn  at  right  angles  to  the 
straight  line  AB ,  and  let  AD,  DB  be  joined. 

Then,  since  AC  is  equal  to  CB,  and  CD  is  com¬ 
mon. 

the  two  sides  AC,  CD  are  equal  to  the  two  sides  BC,  CD; 

and  the  angle  A  CD  is  equal  to  the  angle  BCD,  for  each  is  right; 

therefore  the  base  AD  is  equal  to  the  base  DB.  [i.  4] 

But  equal  straight  lines  cut  off  equal  circumferences,  the  greater  equal  to  the 
greater,  and  the  less  to  the  less;  [hi.  28] 

and  each  of  the  circumferences  AD,  DB  is  less  than  a  semicircle; 
therefore  the  circumference  AD  is  equal  to  the  circumference  DB. 
Therefore  the  given  circumference  has  been  bisected  at  the  point  D. 

Q.  E.  F. 


Proposition  31 

In  a  circle  the  angle  in  the  semicircle  is  right,  that  in  a  greater  segment  less  than 
a  right  angle ,  and  that  in  a  less  segment  greater  than  a  right  angle;  and  further  the 
angle  of  the  greater  segment  is  greater  than  a  right  angle ,  and  the  angle  of  the  less 
segment  less  than  a  right  angle. 

Let  A  BCD  be  a  circle,  let  BC  be  its  diameter,  and  E  its  centre,  and  let  BA, 
AC,  AD,  DC  be  joined; 


60 


EUCLID 


I  say  that  the  angle  BAC  in  the  semicircle  BAC  is  right, 
the  angle  ABC  in  the  segment  ABC  greater  than  the  semicircle  is  less  than  a 
right  angle, 

and  the  angle  A  DC  in  the  segment  ADC  less  than 
the  semicircle  is  greater  than  a  right  angle. 

Let  AE  be  joined,  and  let  BA  be  carried 
through  to  F . 

Then,  since  BE  is  equal  to  EA, 
the  angle  ABE  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  BAE. 

[1.5] 

Again,  since  CE  is  equal  to  EA, 
the  angle  ACE  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  CAE. 

[1.5] 

Therefore  the  whole  angle  BAC  is  equal  to  the  two  angles  ABC,  ACB. 

But  the  angle  FAC  exterior  to  the  triangle  ABC  is  also  equal  to  the  two 
angles  ABC,  ACB;  [i.  32] 

therefore  the  angle  BAC  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  FAC; 

therefore  each  is  right;  [i.  Def.  10] 

therefore  the  angle  BAC  in  the  semicircle  BAC  is  right. 

Next,  since  in  the  triangle  ABC  the  two  angles  ABC,  BAC  are  less  than  two 
right  angles,  [i.  17] 


and  the  angle  BAC  is  a  right  angle, 
the  angle  ABC  is  less  than  a  right  angle; 
and  it  is  the  angle  in  the  segment  ABC  greater  than  the  semicircle. 
Next,  since  ABCD  is  a  quadrilateral  in  a  circle, 
and  the  opposite  angles  of  quadrilaterals  in  circles  are  equal  to  two  right 
angles,  [hi.  22] 


while  the  angle  ABC  is  less  than  a  right  angle, 
therefore  the  angle  ADC  which  remains  is  greater  than  a  right  angle; 
and  it  is  the  angle  in  the  segment  ADC  less  than  the  semicircle. 

I  say  further  that  the  angle  of  the  greater  segment,  namely  that  contained 
by  the  circumference  ABC  and  the  straight  line  AC,  is  greater  than  a  right 
angle; 

and  the  angle  of  the  less  segment,  namely  that  contained  by  the  circumference 
ADC  and  the  straight  line  AC,  is  less  than  a  right  angle. 

This  is  at  once  manifest. 

For,  since  the  angle  contained  by  the  straight  lines  BA,  AC  is  right, 
the  angle  contained  by  the  circumference  ABC  and  the  straight  line  AC  is 
greater  than  a  right  angle. 

Again,  since  the  angle  contained  by  the  straight  lines  AC,  AF  is  right, 
the  angle  contained  by  the  straight  line  CA  and  the  circumference  ADC  is  less 
than  a  right  angle. 

Therefore  etc.  Q.  e*  d. 


Proposition  32 


If  a  straight  line  touch  a  circle ,  and  f  rom  the  point  of  contact  there  be  drawn  across, 
in  the  circle,  a  straight  line  cutting  the  circle,  the  angles  which  it  makes  with  the 
tangent  will  be  equal  to  the  angles  in  the  alternate  segments  of  the  circle . 

For  let  a  straight  line  EF  touch  the  circle  ABCD  at  the  point  B ,  and  from 


ELEMENTS  III 


61 


the  point  B  let  there  be  drawn  across,  in  the  circle  ABCD,  a  straight  line  BD 
cutting  it; 

I  say  that  the  angles  which  BD  makes  with  the  tangent  EF  will  be  equal  to  the 
angles  in  the  alternate  segments  of  the  circle,  that  is,  that  the  angle  FBD  is 
equal  to  the  angle  constructed  in  the  segment  BAD ,  and  the  angle  EBD  is 

equal  to  the  angle  constructed  in  the  segment  DCB. 

For  let  BA  be  drawn  from  B  at  right  angles  to 
EF , 

let  a  point  C  be  taken  at  random  on  the  circumfer¬ 
ence  BD, 

and  let  AD,  DC,  CB  be  joined. 

Then,  since  a  straight  line  EF  touches  the  circle 
ABCD  at  B , 

and  BA  has  been  drawn  from  the  point  of  contact 
at  right  angles  to  the  tangent,  the  centre  of  the 
circle  ABCD  is  on  BA.  [hi.  19] 

Therefore  BA  is  a  diameter  of  the  circle  ABCD ; 

therefore  the  angle  ADB,  being  an  angle  in  a  semicircle,  is  right,  [hi.  31] 
Therefore  the  remaining  angles  BAD ,  ABD  are  equal  to  one  right  angle. 

[i.  32] 


But  the  angle  ABF  is  also  right; 

therefore  the  angle  ABF  is  equal  to  the  angles  BAD,  ABD. 

Let  the  angle  ABD  be  subtracted  from  each; 
therefore  the  angle  DBF  which  remains  is  equal  to  the  angle  BAD  in  the  al¬ 
ternate  segment  of  the  circle. 

Next,  since  ABCD  is  a  quadrilateral  in  a  circle, 

its  opposite  angles  are  equal  to  two  right  angles.  [hi.  22] 

But  the  angles  DBF,  DBE  are  also  equal  to  two  right  angles; 
therefore  the  angles  DBF ,  DBE  are  equal  to  the  angles  BAD,  BCD, 
of  which  the  angle  BAD  was  proved  equal  to  the  angle  DBF ; 
therefore  the  angle  DBE  which  remains  is  equal  to  the  angle  DCB  in  the  alter¬ 
nate  segment  DCB  of  the  circle. 

Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  33 


On  a  given  straight  line  to  describe  a  segment  of  a  circle  admitting  an  angle  equal 
to  a  given  rectilineal  angle. 

Let  AB  be  the  given  straight  line,  and  the  angle  at  C  the  given  rectilineal 


angle; 


thus  it  is  required  to  describe  on  the 
given  straight  line  AB  a  segment  of  a 
circle  admitting  an  angle  equal  to  the 
angle  at  C. 

The  angle  at  C  is  then  acute,  or  right, 
or  obtuse. 

First,  let  it  be  acute,  and,  as  in  the 
first  figure,  on  the  straight  line  AB,  and 
at  the  point  A,  let  the  angle  BAD  be 
constructed  equal  to  the  angle  at  C; 


62  EUCLID 

therefore  the  angle  BAD  is  also  acute. 

Let  AE  be  drawn  at  right  angles  to  DA,  let  AB  be  bisected  at  F,  let  FG  be 
drawn  from  the  point  F  at  right  angles  to  A B,  and  let  GB  be  joined. 

Then,  since  AF  is  equal  to  FB, 

and  FG  is  common, 

the  two  sides  AF ,  FG  are  equal  to  the  twro  sides  BF,  FG; 
and  the  angle  AFG  is  equal  to  the  angle  BFG; 
therefore  the  base  AG  is  equal  to  the  base  BG.  [i.  4] 

Therefore  the  circle  described  with  centre  G  and  distance  GA  will  pass 
through  B  also. 

Let  it  be  drawn,  and  let  it  be  ABE; 

let  EB  be  joined. 

Now- ,  since  AD  is  drawn  from  A ,  the  extremity  of  the  diameter  AE ,  at  right 
angles  to  AE, 

therefore  AD  touches  the  circle  ABE.  [hi.  16,  Por.] 

Since  then  a  straight  line  AD  touches  the  circle  ABE, 
and  from  the  point  of  contact  at  A  a  straight  line  A  B  is  drawn  across  in  the 
circle  ABE, 

the  angle  DAB  is  equal  to  the  angle  AEB  in  the  alternate  segment  of  the 
circle.  [in.  32] 

But  the  angle  DAB  is  equal  to  the  angle  at  C; 

therefore  the  angle  at  C  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  AEB . 

Therefore  on  the  given  straight  line  AB  the  segment  AEB  of  a  circle  has 
been  described  admitting  the  angle  AEB  equal  to  the  given  angle,  the  angle 
at  C. 

Next  let  the  angle  at  C  be  right;  { 

and  let  it  be  again  required  to  describe 
on  AB  a  segment  of  a  circle  admit¬ 
ting  an  angle  equal  to  the  right  angle 

at  C.  _ c 

Let  the  angle  BAD  be  constructed  E 

equal  to  the  right  angle  at  C,  as  is  the 
case  in  the  second  figure; 
let  A  B  be  bisected  at  F,  and  wdth  centre 
F  and  distance  either  FA  or  FB  let  the 
circle  AEB  be  described. 

Therefore  the  straight  line  AD  touches  the  circle  A  BE,  because  the  angle 
at  A  is  right.  [hi.  16,  Por.] 

And  the  angle  BAD  is  equal  to  the  angle  in  the  segment  AEB,  for  the  latter 
too  is  itself  a  right  angle,  being  an  angle  in  a  semicircle.  [hi.  31] 

But  the  angle  BAD  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  at  C. 

Therefore  the  angle  AEB  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  at  C. 

Therefore  again  the  segment  AEB  of  a  circle  has  been  described  on  AB  ad¬ 
mitting  an  angle  equal  to  the  angle  at  C . 

Next,  let  the  angle  at  C  be  obtuse; 

and  on  the  straight  line  AB,  and  at  the  point  A,  let  the  angle  BAD  be  con¬ 
structed  equal  to  it,  as  is  the  case  in  the  third  figure; 

let  AE  be  drawn  at  right  angles  to  AD,  let  AB  be  again  bisected  at  F,  let  FG 
be  drawn  at  right  angles  to  AB,  and  let  GB  be  joined. 


63 


ELEMENTS  III 


Then,  since  AF  is  again  equal  to  FB , 

and  FG  is  common, 

Dthe  two  sides  AF,  FG  are  equal  to 
the  two  sides  BF ,  FG; 
and  the  angle  AFG  is  equal  to  the 
angle  BFG; 

therefore  the  base  AG  is  equal  to 
the  base  BG.  [i.  4] 

Therefore  the  circle  described 
with  centre  G  and  distance  GA 
will  pass  through  B  also;  let  it  so 
pass,  as  AEB. 

Now,  since  AD  is  drawn  at  right  angles  to  the  diameter  AE  from  its  ex¬ 
tremity, 


AD  touches  the  circle  AEB.  [m.  16,  Poi\] 

And  A  B  has  been  drawn  across  from  the  point  of  contact  at  A ; 
therefore  the  angle  BAD  is  equal  to  the  angle  constructed  in  the  alternate  seg¬ 
ment  AHB  of  the  circle.  [hi.  32] 

But  the  angle  BAD  is  equal  to  the  angle  at  C. 

Therefore  the  angle  in  the  segment  AHB  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  at  C . 
Therefore  on  the  given  straight  line  AB  the  segment  AHB  of  a  circle  has 
been  described  admitting  an  angle  equal  to  the  angle  at  C.  q.  e.  f. 


Proposition  34 

From  a  given  circle  to  cut  off  a  segment  admitting  an  angle  equal  to  a  given  rec¬ 
tilineal  angle. 

Let  ABC  be  the  given  circle,  and  the  angle  at  D  the  given  rectilineal  angle; 
thus  it  is  required  to  cut  off  from  the  circle  ABC  a  segment  admitting  an  angle 
equal  to  the  given  rectilineal  angle,  the  angle  at  D . 

Let  EF  be  drawn  touching  ABC  at  the  point  B,  and  on  the  straight  line  FB, 
and  at  the  point  B  on  it,  let  the  angle  FBC  be  constructed  equal  to  the  angle 

at  D.  [i.  23] 

Then,  since  a  straight  line  EF 
touches  the  circle  ABC , 
and  BC  has  been  drawn  across  from 
the  point  of  contact  at  B} 
the  angle  FBC  is  equal  to  the  angle  con¬ 
structed  in  the  alternate  segment  BAG. 

[hi.  32] 

But  the  angle  FBC  is  equal  to  the  angle  at  D; 

therefore  the  angle  in  the  segment  BAG  is  equal  to  the  angle  at  D. 
Therefore  from  the  given  circle  ABC  the  segment  BAC  has  been  cut  off  ad¬ 
mitting  an  angle  equal  to  the  given  rectilineal  angle,  the  angle  at  D.  q.  e.  f. 

Proposition  35 

If  in  a  circle  two  straight  lines  cut  one  another ,  the  rectangle  contained  by  the  seg¬ 
ments  of  the  one  is  equal  to  the  rectangle  contained  by  the  segments  of  the  other. 

For  in  the  circle  ABCD  let  the  two  straight  lines  AC,  BD  cut  one  another  at 
the  point  E; 


64 


EUCLID 


I  say  that  the  rectangle  contained  by  AE,  EC  is  equal  to  the  rectangle  con¬ 
tained  by  DE,  EB . 

If  now  AC,  BD  are  through  the  centre,  so  that  E  is 
the  centre  of  the  circle  ABCD , 

it  is  manifest  that,  AE ,  EC,  DE ,  EB  being  equal, 
the  rectangle  contained  by  AE,  EC  is  also  equal  to  the 
rectangle  contained  by  DE,  EB. 

Next  let  AC,  DB  not  be  through  the  centre;  let  the 
centre  of  ABCD  be  taken,  and  let  it  be  F; 

from  F  let  FG,  FH  be  drawn  perpendicular  to  the  straight  lines  AC,  DB,  and 
let  FB,  FC ,  FE  be  joined. 

Then,  since  a  straight  line  GF  through  the  centre 
cuts  a  straight  line  AC  not  through  the  centre  at  right 
angles, 

it  also  bisects  it;  [hi.  3] 

therefore  AG  is  equal  to  GC. 

Since,  then,  the  straight  line  AC  has  been  cut  into 
equal  parts  at  G  and  into  unequal  parts  at  E , 
the  rectangle  contained  by  AE,  EC  together  with  the 
square  on  EG  is  equal  to  the  square  on  GC;  [n.  5] 

Let  the  square  on  GF  be  added; 

therefore  the  rectangle  AE,  EC  together  with  the  squares  on  GE,  GF  is  equal 
to  the  squares  on  CG,  GF. 

But  the  square  on  FE  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  EG,  GF,  and  the  square  on 
FC  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  CG,  GF;  [i.  47] 

therefore  the  rectangle  AE,  EC  together  with  the  square  on  FE  is  equal  to  the 
square  on  FC. 

And  FC  is  equal  to  FB; 

therefore  the  rectangle  AE,  EC  together  with  the  square  on  EF  is  equal  to  the 
square  on  FB. 

For  the  same  reason,  also, 

the  rectangle  DE,  EB  together  with  the  square  on  FE  is  equal  to  the  square  on 
FB. 


But  the  rectangle  AE,  EC  together  with  the  square  on  FE  w^as  also  proved 
equal  to  the  square  on  FB; 

therefore  the  rectangle  AE,  EC  together  with  the  square  on  FE  is  equal  to  the 
rectangle  DE,  EB  together  with  the  square  on  FE. 

Let  the  square  on  FE  be  subtracted  from  each; 
therefore  the  rectangle  contained  by  AE,  EC  winch  remains  is  equal  to  the  rec¬ 
tangle  contained  by  DE,  EB. 

Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  36 

If  a  point  be  taken  outside  a  circle  and  from  it  there  fall  on  the  circle  two  straight 
lines,  and  if  one  of  them  cut  the  circle  and  the  other  touch  it,  the  rectangle  contained 
by  the  whole  of  the  straight  line  which  cuts  the  circle  and  the  straight  line  intercepted 
on  it  outside  between  the  point  and  the  convex  circumfererice  will  be  equal  to  the 
square  on  the  tangent. 

For  let  a  point  D  be  taken  outside  the  circle  ABC,  and  from  D  let  the  two 


ELEMENTS  III  65 

straight  lines  DC  A,  DB  fall  on  the  circle  ABC;  let  DC  A  cut  the  circle  ABC  and 
let  BD  touch  it; 

I  say  that  the  rectangle  contained  by  AD,  DC  is  equal  to  the  square 
on  DB. 

Then  DC  A  is  either  through  the  centre  or  not  through 
the  centre. 

First  let  it  be  through  the  centre,  and  let  F  be  the  centre 
of  the  circle  ABC;  let  FB  be  joined; 

therefore  the  angle  FBD  is  right.  [hi.  18] 
And,  since  AC  has  been  bisected  at  F,  and  CD  is  added 
to  it, 

the  rectangle  AD,  DC  together  with  the  square  on  FC  is 
equal  to  the  square  on  FD.  fn.  6] 

But  FC  is  equal  to  FB; 

therefore  the  rectangle  AD,  DC  together  with  the  square  on  FB  is  equal  to  the 
square  on  FD. 

And  the  squares  on  FB,  BD  are  equal  to  the  square  on  FD;  [i.  47] 

therefore  the  rectangle  AD,  DC  together  with  the  square  on  FB  is  equal  to  the 
squares  on  FB,  BD. 

Let  the  square  on  FB  be  subtracted  from  each; 
therefore  the  rectangle  AD,  DC  which  remains  is  equal  to  the  square  on  the 
tangent  DB. 

Again,  let  DC  A  not  be  through  the  centre  of  the  circle  ABC; 

let  the  centre  E  be  taken,  and  from  E ,  let  EF  be 
drawn  perpendicular  to  AC; 
let  EB,  EC,  ED  be  joined. 

Then  the  angle  EBD  is  right.  [hi.  18] 

And,  since  a  straight  line  EF  through  the  centre 
cuts  a  straight  line  AC  not  through  the  centre  at 
right  angles, 

it  also  bisects  it;  [hi.  3] 

therefore  AF  is  equal  to  FC. 

Now,  since  the  straight  line  AC  has  been  bisected  at  the  point  F,  and  CD  is 
added  to  it, 

the  rectangle  contained  by  AD,  DC  together  with  the  square  on  FC  is  equal  to 
the  square  on  FD.  [n.  6] 

Let  the  square  on  FE  be  added  to  each ; 
therefore  the  rectangle  AD,  DC  together  with  the  squares  on  CF,  FE  is  equal 
to  the  squares  on  FD,  FE. 

But  the  square  on  EC  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  CF,  FE,  for  the  angle  EFC 
is  right;  [i.  47] 

and  the  square  on  ED  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  DF,  FE; 
therefore  the  rectangle  AD,  DC  together  with  the  square  on  EC  is  equal  to  the 
square  on  ED. 

And  EC  is  equal  to  EB; 

therefore  the  rectangle  AD,  DC  together  with  the  square  on  EB  is  equal  to  the 
square  on  ED. 

But  the  squares  on  EB,  BD  are  equal  to  the  square  on  ED,  for  the  angle 
EBD  is  right;  [i.  47] 


66  EUCLID 

therefore  the  rectangle  AD ,  DC  together  with  the  square  on  EB  is  equal  to  the 
squares  on  EB,  BD. 

Let  the  square  on  EB  be  subtracted  from  each; 
therefore  the  rectangle  AD,  DC  which  remains  is  equal  to  the  square  on  DB. 
Therefore  etc.  Q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  37 

If  a  point  be  taken  outside  a  circle  and  from  the  point  there  fall  on  the  circle  two 
straight  lines,  if  one  of  them  cut  the  circle ,  and  the  other  fall  on  it,  and  if  further  the 
rectangle  contained  by  the  whole  of  the  straight  line  which  cuts  the  circle  and  the 
straight  line  intercepted  on  it  outside  between  the  point  and  the  convex  circumference 
be  equal  to  the  square  on  the  straight  line  which  falls  on  the  circle,  the  straight  line 
which  falls  on  it  will  touch  the  circle. 

For  let  a  point  D  be  taken  outside  the  circle  ABC ;  from  D  let  the  two 
straight  lines  DC  A,  DB  fall  on  the  circle  ABC; 
let  DC  A  cut  the  circle  and  DB  fall  on  it;  and 
let  the  rectangle  AD,  DC  be  equal  to  the  square 
on  DB. 

I  say  that  DB  touches  the  circle  ABC. 

For  let  DE  be  drawn  touching  ABC;  let 
the  centre  of  the  circle  ABC  be  taken,  and  let 
it  be  F;  let  FE,  FB,  FD  be  joined. 

Thus  the  angle  FED  is  right.  [hi.  18] 

Now,  since  DE  touches  the  circle  ABC,  and  DC  A  cuts  it,  the  rectangle  AD, 
DC  is  equal  to  the  square  on  DE.  [hi.  36] 

But  the  rectangle  AD,  DC  was  also  equal  to  the  square  on  DB; 
therefore  the  square  on  DE  is  equal  to  the  square  on  DB; 
therefore  DE  is  equal  to  DB. 

And  FE  is  equal  to  FB; 

therefore  the  two  sides  DE,  EF  are  equal  to  the  two  sides  DB,  BF; 
and  FD  is  the  common  base  of  the  triangles; 
therefore  the  angle  DEF  is  equal  to  the  angle  DBF.  [i.  8] 

But  the  angle  DEF  is  right; 

therefore  the  angle  DBF  is  also  right. 

And  FB  produced  is  a  diameter; 

and  the  straight  line  drawn  at  right  angles  to  the  diameter  of  a  circle,  from  its 
extremity,  touches  the  circle;  [hi.  16,  Por.] 

therefore  DB  touches  the  circle. 

Similarly  this  can  be  proved  to  be  the  case  even  if  the  centre  be  on  AC. 

Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 


BOOK  FOUR 


DEFINITIONS 

1.  A  rectilineal  figure  is  said  to  be  inscribed  in  a  rectilineal  figure  when  the 
respective  angles  of  the  inscribed  figure  lie  on  the  respective  sides  of  that  in 
which  it  is  inscribed. 

2.  Similarly  a  figure  is  said  to  be  circumscribed  about  a  figure  when  the  respec¬ 
tive  sides  of  the  circumscribed  figure  pass  through  the  respective  angles  of 
that  about  which  it  is  circumscribed. 

3.  A  rectilineal  figure  is  said  to  be  inscribed  in  a  circle  when  each  angle  of  the 
inscribed  figure  lies  on  the  circumference  of  the  circle. 

4.  A  rectilineal  figure  is  said  to  be  circumscribed  about  a  circle ,  when  each  side 
of  the  circumscribed  figure  touches  the  circumference  of  the  circle. 

5.  Similarly  a  circle  is  said  to  be  inscribed  in  a  figure  when  the  circumference 
of  the  circle  touches  each  side  of  the  figure  in  which  it  is  inscribed. 

6.  A  circle  is  said  to  be  circumscribed  about  a  figure  when  the  circumference 
of  the  circle  passes  through  each  angle  of  the  figure  about  which  it  is  circum¬ 
scribed. 

7.  A  straight  line  is  said  to  b e  fitted  into  a  circle  when  its  extremities  are  on 
the  circumference  of  the  circle. 


BOOK  IV.  PROPOSITIONS 
Proposition  1 

Into  a  given  circle  to  fit  a  straight  line  equal  to  a  given  straight  line  which  is  not 
greater  than  the  diameter  of  the  circle. 

Let  ABC  be  the  given  circle,  and  D  the  given  straight  line  not  greater  than 
the  diameter  of  the  circle; 

thus  it  is  required  to  fit  into  the  circle  ABC  a  straight  line  equal  to  the  straight 

line  D. 

Let  a  diameter  BC  of  the  circle  ABC  be 
drawn. 

Then,  if  BC  is  equal  to  D,  that  which  was 
enjoined  will  have  been  done;  for  BC  has 
been  fitted  into  the  circle  ABC  equal  to  the 
straight  line  D. 

But,  if  BC  is  greater  than  D, 
let  CE  be  made  equal  to  Z),  and  with  centre 
C  and  distance  CE  let  the  circle  EAF  be  described; 

let  CA  be  joined. 

Then,  since  the  point  C  is  the  centre  of  the  circle  EAF , 

67 


68 


EUCLID 

CA  is  equal  to  CE. 


But  CE  is  equal  to  D ; 

therefore  D  is  also  equal  to  CA. 

Therefore  into  the  given  circle  ABC  there  has  been  fitted  CA  equal  to  the 
given  straight  line  D.  Q.  e.  f. 

Proposition  2 

In  a  given  circle  to  inscribe  a  triangle  equiangular  with  a  given  triangle. 

Let  ABC  be  the  given  circle,  and  DEF  the  given  triangle; 
thus  it  is  required  to  inscribe  in  the  circle  ABC  a  triangle  equiangular  with  the 
triangle  DEF. 

Let  GH  be  drawn  touching  the  circle  ABC  at  A  [hi.  16,  Por.];  on  the  straight 
line  AH,  and  at  the  point  A  on  it,  let  the  angle  HAC  be  constructed  equal  to 
the  angle  DEF, 

and  on  the  straight  line  AG,  and  at 
the  point  A  on  it,  let  the  angle  GAB 
be  constructed  equal  to  the  angle 
DFE;  [i.  23] 

let  BC  be  joined. 

Then,  since  a  straight  fine  AH 
touches  the  circle  ABC , 
and  from  the  point  of  contact  at  A  the 
straight  line  AC  is  drawn  across  in  the 
circle, 

therefore  the  angle  HAC  is  equal  to 
the  angle  ABC  in  the  alternate  segment  of  the  circle.  [hi.  32] 

But  the  angle  HAC  is  equal  to  the  angle  DEF ; 

therefore  the  angle  ABC  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  DEF. 

For  the  same  reason 

the  angle  ACB  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  DFE; 
therefore  the  remaining  angle  BAG  is  also  equal  to  the  remaining  angle  EDF. 

[i.  32] 

Therefore  in  the  given  circle  there  has  been  inscribed  a  triangle  equiangular 
with  the  given  triangle.  q.  e.  f. 


Proposition  3 

About  a  given  circle  to  circumscribe  a  triangle  equiangular  with  a  given  triangle. 

Let  ABC  be  the  given  circle,  and  DEF  the  given  triangle; 
thus  it  is  required  to  circumscribe  about  the  circle  ABC  a  triangle  equiangular 
with  the  triangle  DEF. 

Let  EF  be  produced  in  both 
directions  to  the  points  G,  H, 
let  the  centre  K  of  the  circle  ABC 
be  taken  [hi.  1],  and  let  the  straight 
line  KB  be  drawn  across  at  ran¬ 
dom; 

on  the  straight  line  KB,  and  at  the 
point  K  on  it,  let  the  angle  BKA  be  constructed  equal  to  the  angle  DEG, 

and  the  angle  BKC  equal  to  the  angle  DFH ;  [i.  23] 


ELEMENTS  IV  69 

and  through  the  points  A,  B,  C  let  LAM ,  MBN ,  NCL  be  drawn  touching  the 
circle  ABC.  [hi.  16,  Por.] 

Now,  since  LM,  MN ,  NL  touch  the  circle  ABC  at  the  points  A,  B,  C, 
and  KAy  KB ,  KC  have  been  joined  from  the  centre  K  to  the  points  A}  B>  C, 
therefore  the  angles  at  the  points  A,  Bf  C  are  right.  [hi.  18] 
And,  since  the  four  angles  of  the  quadrilateral  AMBK  are  equal  to  four 
right  angles,  inasmuch  as  AMBK  is  in  fact  divisible  into  two  triangles, 
and  the  angles  KAM ,  KBM  are  right, 
therefore  the  remaining  angles  AKB ,  AMB  are  equal  to  two  right  angles. 
But  the  angles  DEG,  DEE  are  also  equal  to  two  right  angles;  [i.  13] 

therefore  the  angles  AKB,  AMB  are  equal  to  the  angles  DEG,  DEF, 
of  which  the  angle  AKB  is  equal  to  the  angle  DEG ; 
therefore  the  angle  AMB  which  remains  is  equal  to  the  angle  DEF  which  re¬ 
mains. 

Similarly  it  can  be  proved  that  the  angle  LNB  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  DFE ; 

therefore  the  remaining  angle  MLN  is  equal  to  the  angle  EDF.  [i.  32] 
Therefore  the  triangle  LMN  is  equiangular  with  the  triangle  DEF]  and  it 
has  been  circumscribed  about  the  circle  ABC. 

Therefore  about  a  given  circle  there  has  been  circumscribed  a  triangle  equi¬ 
angular  with  the  given  triangle.  Q.  e.  f. 


Proposition  4 


In  a  given  triangle  to  inscribe  a  circle. 

Let  ABC  be  the  given  triangle; 
thus  it  is  required  to  inscribe  a  circle  in  the  triangle  ABC. 

A  Let  the  angles  ABC ,  ACB  be  bisected  by 

the  straight  lines  BD,  CD  [i.  9],  and  let 
these  meet  one  another  at  the  point  D ; 
from  D  let  DE,  DF,  DG  be  drawn  perpendi¬ 
cular  to  the  straight  lines  AB,  BC,  CA. 

Now,  since  the  angle  ABD  is  equal  to  the 
angle  CBD, 

and  the  right  angle  BED  is  also  equal  to  the 
right  angle  BFD, 

EBD,  FBD  are  two  triangles  having  two  angles  equal  to  two  angles  and  one 
side  equal  to  one  side,  namely  that  subtending  one  of  the  equal  angles,  which  is 
BD  common  to  the  triangles; 

therefore  they  will  also  have  the  remaining  sides  equal  to  the  remaining  sides; 

[i.  26] 

therefore  DE  is  equal  to  DF. 

For  the  same  reason 


DG  is  also  equal  to  DF. 

Therefore  the  three  straight  lines  DE,  DF,  DG  are  equal  to  one  another; 
therefore  the  circle  described  with  centre  D  and  distance  one  of  the  straight 
lines  DE,  DF,  DG  will  pass  also  through  the  remaining  points,  and  will  touch 
the  straight  lines  AB,  BC,  CA,  because  the  angles  at  the  points  E,  F,  G  are 
right. 

For,  if  it  cuts  them,  the  straight  line  drawn  at  right  angles  to  the  diameter  of 


70  EUCLID 

the  circle  from  its  extremity  will  be  found  to  fall  within  the  circle:  which  was 
proved  absurd;  [hi.  16] 

therefore  the  circle  described  with  centre  D  and  distance  one  of  the  straight 
lines  DE ,  DF ,  DG  will  not  cut  the  straight  lines  AB,  BC,  CA ; 
therefore  it  will  touch  them,  and  will  be  the  circle  inscribed  in  the  triangle 
ABC.  [iv.  Def.  5] 

Let  it  be  inscribed,  as  FGE. 

Therefore  in  the  given  triangle  ABC  the  circle  EFG  has  been  inscribed. 

Q.  E.  F. 


Proposition  o 

About  a  given  triangle  to  circumscribe  a  circle . 

Let  ABC  be  the  given  triangle; 

thus  it  is  required  to  circumscribe  a  circle  about  the  given  triangle  ABC . 


Let  the  straight  lines  AB ,  AC  be  bisected  at  the  points  D,  E  [i.  10],  and  from 
the  points  D,  E  let  DF,  EF  be  drawn  at  right  angles  to  AB,  AC; 
they  will  then  meet  within  the  triangle  ABC,  or  on  the  straight  line  BC,  or 
outside  BC. 

First  let  them  meet  within  at  F,  and  let  FB ,  FC,  FA  be  joined. 

Then,  since  AD  is  equal  to  DB, 

and  DF  is  common  and  at  right  angles, 
therefore  the  base  AF  is  equal  to  the  base  FB.  [i.  4] 

Similarly  we  can  prove  that 

CF  is  also  equal  to  AF; 
so  that  FB  is  also  equal  to  FC ; 

therefore  the  three  straight  lines  FA,  FB,  FC  are  equal  to  one  another. 

Therefore  the  circle  described  with  centre  F  and  distance  one  of  the  straight 
lines  FA,  FB,  FC  will  pass  also  through  the  remaining  points,  and  the  circle 
will  have  been  circumscribed  about  the  triangle  ABC. 

Let  it  be  circumscribed,  as  ABC. 

Next,  let  DF,  EF  meet  on  the  straight  line  BC  at  F,  as  is  the  case  in  the  se¬ 
cond  figure;  and  let  AF  be  joined. 

Then,  similarly,  we  shall  prove  that  the  point  F  is  the  centre  of  the  circle 
circumscribed  about  the  triangle  ABC. 

Again,  let  DF,  EF  meet  outside  the  triangle  ABC  at  F,  as  is  the  case  in  the 
third  figure,  and  let  AF,  BF,  CF  be  joined. 

Then  again,  since  AD  is  equal  to  DB, 

and  DF  is  common  and  at  right  angles, 
therefore  the  base  AF  is  equal  to  the  base  BF.  [i.  4] 

Similarly  we  can  prove  that 

CF  is  also  equal  to  AF; 
so  that  BF  is  also  equal  to  FC; 


ELEMENTS  IV  71 

therefore  the  circle  described  with  centre  F  and  distance  one  of  the  straight 
lines  FA,  FB ,  FC  will  pass  also  through  the  remaining  points,  and  will  have 
been  circumscribed  about  the  triangle  ABC. 

Therefore  about  the  given  triangle  a  circle  has  been  circumscribed. 

Q.  E.  F. 

And  it  is  manifest  that,  when  the  centre  of  the  circle  falls  within  the  triangle, 
the  angle  B AC,  being  in  a  segment  greater  than  the  semicircle,  is  less  than  a 
right  angle; 

when  the  centre  falls  on  the  straight  line  BC ,  the  angle  BAC ,  being  in  a  semi¬ 
circle,  is  right; 

and  when  the  centre  of  the  circle  falls  outside  the  triangle,  the  angle  BAC ,  be¬ 
ing  in  a  segment  less  than  the  semicircle,  is  greater  than  a  right  angle,  [hi.  31] 


Proposition  6 

In  a  given  circle  to  inscribe  a  square . 

Let  ABCD  be  the  given  circle; 

thus  it  is  required  to  inscribe  a  square  in  the  circle  ABCD. 

Let  two  diameters  AC,  BD  of  the  circle  ABCD  be 
drawn  at  right  angles  to  one  another,  and  let  AB,  BC, 
CD,  DA  be  joined. 

Then,  since  BE  is  equal  to  ED,  for  E  is  the  centre, 
and  EA  is  common  and  at  right  angles, 
therefore  the  base  AB  is  equal  to  the  base  AD.  [i.  4] 
For  the  same  reason 

each  of  the  straight  lines  BC,  CD  is  also  equal  to  each 
of  the  straight  lines  AB,  AD; 

therefore  the  quadrilateral  ABCD  is  equilateral. 

I  say  next  that  it  is  also  right-angled. 

For,  since  the  straight  line  BD  is  a  diameter  of  the  circle  ABCD, 
therefore  BAD  is  a  semicircle; 
therefore  the  angle  BAD  is  right.  [hi.  31] 

For  the  same  reason 

each  of  the  angles  ABC ,  BCD,  CD  A  is  also  right; 
therefore  the  quadrilateral  ABCD  is  right-angled. 

But  it  w*as  also  proved  equilateral ; 

therefore  it  is  a  square;  [i.  Def.  22] 

and  it  has  been  inscribed  in  the  circle  ABCD. 

Therefore  in  the  given  circle  the  square  ABCD  has  been  inscribed,  q.  e.  f. 


Proposition  7 

About  a  given  circle  to  circumscribe  a  square . 

Let  ABCD  be  the  given  circle; 

thus  it  is  required  to  circumscribe  a  square  about  the  circle  ABCD. 

Let  two  diameters  AC,  BD  of  the  circle  ABCD  be  drawn  at  right  angles  to 
one  another,  and  through  the  points  A,  B,  C,  D  let  FG,  GH,  HK,  KF  be  drawn 
touching  the  circle  ABCD.  [hi.  16,  Por.] 

Then,  since  FG  touches  the  circle  ABCD, 

and  EA  has  been  joined  from  the  centre  E  to  the  point  of  contact  at  A , 

therefore  the  angles  at  A  are  right.  [in.  IS] 


72 


EUCLID 


For  the  same  reason 

the  angles  at  the  points  B,  C,  D  are  also  right. 

Now,  since  the  angle  AEB  is  right, 

and  the  angle  EBG  is  also  right, 
therefore  GH  is  parallel  to  AC.  [i.  28] 

For  the  same  reason 

AC  is  also  parallel  to  FK , 
so  that  GH  is  also  parallel  to  FK.  [i.  30] 

Similarly  we  can  prove  that 
each  of  the  straight  lines  GF ,  HK  is  parallel  to  BED. 

Therefore  GK ,  GC,  AK ,  FB,  BK  are  parallelograms; 

therefore  GF  is  equal  to  HK,  and  GH  to  FK. 

And,  since  AC  is  equal  to  BD , 

and  AC  is  also  equal  to  each  of  the  straight  lines  GH,  FK, 
while  BD  is  equal  to  each  of  the  straight  lines  GF,  HK,  [i.  34] 
therefore  the  quadrilateral  FGHK  is  equilateral. 

I  say  next  that  it  is  also  right-angled. 

For,  since  GBEA  is  a  parallelogram, 

and  the  angle  AEB  is  right, 

therefore  the  angle  AGB  is  also  right.  [i.  34] 

Similarly  we  can  prove  that 

the  angles  at  H,  K,  F  are  also  right. 

Therefore  FGHK  is  right-angled. 

But  it  was  also  proved  equilateral; 

therefore  it  is  a  square; 

and  it  has  been  circumscribed  about  the  circle  ABCD. 

Therefore  about  the  given  circle  a  square  has  been  circumscribed.  Q.  e.  f. 


Proposition  8 

In  a  given  square  to  inscribe  a  circle. 

Let  ABCD  be  the  given  square; 

thus  it  is  required  to  inscribe  a  circle  in  the  given  square  ABCD. 

Let  the  straight  lines  AD,  AB  be  bisected  at  the 
points  E,  F  respectively,  [i.  10] 

through  E  let  EH  be  drawn  parallel  to  either  AB  or 
CD,  and  through  F  let  FK  be  drawn  parallel  to  either 
AD  or  BC;  [i.  31] 

therefore  each  of  the  figures  AK,  KB,  AH,  HD,  AG, 

GC,  BG ,  GD  is  a  parallelogram,  and  their  opposite 
sides  are  evidently  equal.  [i.  34] 

Now,  since  AD  is  equal  to  AB, 

and  AB  is  half  of  AD,  and  AF  half  of  AB, 
therefore  AE  is  equal  to  AF, 
so  that  the  opposite  sides  are  also  equal; 
therefore  FG  is  equal  to  GE. 

Similarly  we  can  prove  that  each  of  the  straight  lines  GH,  GK  is  equal  to 
each  of  the  straight  lines  FG,  GE; 

therefore  the  four  straight  lines  GE,  GF,  GH,  GK  are  equal  to  one  another. 


ELEMENTS  IV  73 

Therefore  the  circle  described  with  centre  G  and  distance  one  of  the  straight 
lines  GE ,  GF ,  GH ,  GK  will  pass  also  through  the  remaining  points. 

And  it  will  touch  the  straight  lines  AB,  BC,  CD,  DA,  because  the  angles  at 
E,  F,  H,  K  are  right. 

For,  if  the  circle  cuts  AB,  BC,  CD ,  DA,  the  straight  line  drawn  at  right  an¬ 
gles  to  the  diameter  of  the  circle  from  its  extremity  will  fall  within  the  circle: 
which  was  proved  absurd;  [in.  16] 

therefore  the  circle  described  with  centre  G  and  distance  one  of  the  straight 
lines  GE,  GF,  GH,  GK  will  not  cut  the  straight  lines  AB,  BC,  CD,  DA. 

Therefore  it  will  touch  them,  and  will  have  been  inscribed  in  the  square 

ABCD. 

Therefore  in  the  given  square  a  circle  has  been  inscribed.  q.  e.  f. 

Proposition  9 

About  a  given  square  to  circumscribe  a  circle . 

Let  ABCD  be  the  given  square; 

thus  it  is  required  to  circumscribe  a  circle  about  the  square  ABCD. 

For  let  AC,  BD  be  joined,  and  let  them  cut  one  another  at  E. 

Then,  since  DA  is  equal  to  AB,  and  AC  is  common, 

therefore  the  two  sides  DA,  AC  are  equal  to  the  two 
sides  BA,  AC; 

and  the  base  DC  is  equal  to  the  base  BC ; 
therefore  the  angle  DAC  is  equal  to  the  angle  BAG. 

[i.  8] 

Therefore  the  angle  DAB  is  bisected  by  AC. 

Similarly  we  can  prove  that  each  of  the  angles  ABC, 
BCD,  CD  A  is  bisected  by  the  straight  lines  AC,  DB. 

Now,  since  the  angle  DAB  is  equal  to  the  angle  ABC, 

and  the  angle  EAB  is  half  the  angle  DAB, 
and  the  angle  EBA  half  the  angle  ABC, 
therefore  the  angle  EAB  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  EBA; 

so  that  the  side  EA  is  also  equal  to  EB.  [i.  6] 

Similarly  we  can  prove  that  each  of  the  straight  lines  EA,  EB  is  equal  to 
each  of  the  straight  lines  EC,  ED. 

Therefore  the  four  straight  lines  EA,  EB,  EC,  ED  are  equal  to  one  another. 

Therefore  the  circle  described  with  centre  E  and  distance  one  of  the  straight 
lines  EA,  EB,  EC,  ED  will  pass  also  through  the  remaining  points; 
and  it  will  have  been  circumscribed  about  the  square  ABCD. 

Let  it  be  circumscribed,  as  ABCD. 

Therefore  about  the  given  square  a  circle  has  been  circumscribed,  q.  e.  f. 

Proposition  10 

To  construct  an  isosceles  triangle  having  each  of  the  angles  at  the  base  double  of  the 
remaining  one. 

Let  any  straight  line  AB  be  set  out,  and  let  it  be  cut  at  the  point  C  so  that 
the  rectangle  contained  by  AB,  BC  is  equal  to  the  square  on  CA  ;  [n.  1 1] 

with  centre  A  and  distance  AB  let  the  circle  BDE  be  described, 
and  let  there  be  fitted  in  the  circle  BDE  the  straight  line  BD  equal  to  the  straight 
line  AC  which  is  not  greater  than  the  diameter  of  the  circle  BDE.  [iv.  1] 


74  EUCLID 

Let  AD,  DC  be  joined,  and  let  the  circle  ACD  be  circumscribed  about  the 
triangle  A  CD. 

Then,  since  the  rectangle  AB ,  BC  is  equal  to 
the  square  on  AC, 

and  AC  is  equal  to  BD, 

therefore  the  rectangle  AB,  BC  is  equal  to  the 
square  on  BD. 

And,  since  a  point  B  has  been  taken  outside 
the  circle  ACD, 

and  from  B  the  two  straight  lines  BA,  BD  have 
fallen  on  the  circle  ACD,  and  one  of  them  cuts 
it,  while  the  other  falls  on  it, 
and  the  rectangle  AB,  BC  is  equal  to  the  square 
on  BD, 

therefore  BD  touches  the  circle  ACD.  [hi.  37] 

Since,  then,  BD  touches  it,  and  DC  is  drawn  across  from  the  point  of  con¬ 
tact  at  D, 

therefore  the  angle  BDC  is  equal  to  the  angle  DAC  in  the  alternate  segment  of 
the  circle.  [hi.  32] 

Since,  then,  the  angle  BDC  is  equal  to  the  angle  DAC , 
let  the  angle  CD  A  be  added  to  each; 
therefore  the  whole  angle  BDA  is  equal  to  the  two  angles  CD  A,  DAC. 
But  the  exterior  angle  BCD  is  equal  to  the  angles  CD  A,  DAC;  [i.  32] 
therefore  the  angle  BDA  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  BCD. 

But  the  angle  BDA  is  equal  to  the  angle  CBD ,  since  the  side  AD  is  also 
equal  to  AB;  [i.  5] 

so  that  the  angle  DBA  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  BCD. 

Therefore  the  three  angles  BDA,  DBA,  BCD  are  equal  to  one  another. 

And,  since  the  angle  DBC  is  equal  to  the  angle  BCD, 

the  side  BD  is  also  equal  to  the  side  DC.  [i.  6] 

But  BD  is  by  hypothesis  equal  to  CA ; 

therefore  CA  is  also  equal  to  CD, 
so  that  the  angle  CD  A  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  DAC;  [i.  5] 
therefore  the  angles  CD  A,  DAC  are  double  of  the  angle  DAC. 

But  the  angle  BCD  is  equal  to  the  angles  CD  A,  DAC; 

therefore  the  angle  BCD  is  also  double  of  the  angle  CAD. 

But  the  angle  BCD  is  equal  to  each  of  the  angles  BDA,  DBA; 
therefore  each  of  the  angles  BDA,  DBA  is  also  double  of  the  angle  DAB. 
Therefore  the  isosceles  triangle  ABD  has  been  constructed  having  each  of 
the  angles  at  the  base  DB  double  of  the  remaining  one.  Q.  e.  f. 

Proposition  11 

In  a  given  circle  to  inscribe  an  equilateral  and  equiangular  pentagon. 

Let  ABCDE  be  the  given  circle; 

thus  it  is  required  to  inscribe  in  the  circle  ABCDE  an  equilateral  and  equi¬ 
angular  pentagon. 

Let  the  isosceles  triangle  FGH  be  set  out  having  each  of  the  angles  at  G,  H 
double  of  the  angle  at  F;  [iv.  10] 

let  there  be  inscribed  in  the  circle  ABCDE  the  triangle  ACD  equiangular  with 


ELEMENTS  IV  75 

the  triangle  FGH ,  so  that  the  angle  CAD  is  equal  to  the  angle  at  F  and  the 
angles  at  (7,  H  respectively  equal  to  the  angles  ACD ,  CD  A)  [iv.  2] 

therefore  each  of  the  angles  ACD ,  CD  A  is  also 
double  of  the  angle  CAD. 

Now  let  the  angles  ACD ,  CD  A  be  bisected 
respectively  by  the  straight  lines  CE,  DB  [i.  9], 
and  let  AB,  BC ,  DE ,  be  joined. 

Then,  since  each  of  the  angles  ACD ,  CDA  is 
double  of  the  angle  CADj 
and  they  have  been  bisected  by  the  straight 
lines  CE ,  DB , 

therefore  the  five  angles  DAC,  ACE,  ECD,  CDB,  BDA  are  equal  to  one  an¬ 
other. 

But  equal  angles  stand  on  equal  circumferences;  [hi.  26] 

therefore  the  five  circumferences  AB,  BC,  CD,  DE,  EA  are  equal  to  one  an¬ 
other. 

But  equal  circumferences  are  subtended  by  equal  straight  lines;  [hi.  29] 
therefore  the  five  straight  lines  AB,  BC,  CD,  DE,  EA  are  equal  to  one  another; 
therefore  the  pentagon  ABCDE  is  equilateral. 

I  say  next  that  it  is  also  equiangular. 

For,  since  the  circumference  AB  is  equal  to  the  circumference  DE,  let  BCD 
be  added  to  each; 

therefore  the  whole  circumference  A  BCD  is  equal  to  the  whole  circumference 
EDCB. 

And  the  angle  AED  stands  on  the  circumference  ABCD,  and  the  angle  BAE 
on  the  circumference  EDCB ; 

therefore  the  angle  BAE  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  AED.  [in.  27] 
For  the  same  reason 

each  of  the  angles  ABC,  BCD,  CDE  is  also  equal  to  each  of  the  angles  BAE, 
AED ; 

therefore  the  pentagon  ABCDE  is  equiangular. 

But  it  was  also  proved  equilateral; 

therefore  in  the  given  circle  an  equilateral  and  equiangular  pentagon  has  been 
inscribed.  Q.  e.  f. 


Proposition  12 

About  a  given  circle  to  circumscribe  an  equilateral  and  equiangular  pentagon . 

Let  ABCDE  be  the  given  circle; 

thus  it  is  required  to  circumscribe  an  equilateral  and  equiangular  pentagon 
about  the  circle  ABCDE. 

Let  A,  B,  C,  D,  E  be  conceived  to  be  the  angular  points  of  the  inscribed 
pentagon,  so  that  the  circumferences  AB,  BC,  CD,  DE,  EA  are  equal;  [iv.  11] 
through  A,  B,  C,  D,  E  let  GH,  HK,  KL,  LM,  MG  be  drawn  touching  the  circle; 

[ill.  16,  For.] 

let  the  centre  F  of  the  circle  ABCDE  be  taken  [hi.  1],  and  let  FB,  FK,  FC ,  FL , 
FD  be  joined. 

Then,  since  the  straight  line  KL  touches  the  circle  ABCDE  at  C, 
and  FC  has  been  joined  from  the  centre  F  to  the  point  of  contact  at  C , 

therefore  FC  is  perpendicular  to  KL;  [in.  18] 


76  EUCLID 

therefore  each  of  the  angles  at  C  is  right. 

For  the  same  reason 

the  angles  at  the  points  B ,  D  are  also  right. 

And,  since  the  angle  FCK  is  right, 

therefore  the  square  on  FK  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  FC,  CK. 

For  the  same  reason  [i.  47] 

the  square  on  FK  is  also  equal  to  the  squares  on 
FB,  BK; 

so  that  the  squares  on  FC,  CK  are  equal  to  the 
squares  on  FB,  BK, 

of  which  the  square  on  FC  is  equal  to  the  square  on 
FB; 

therefore  the  square  on  CK  which  remains  is  equal 
to  the  square  on  BK. 

Therefore  BK  is  equal  to  CK. 

And,  since  FB  is  equal  to  FC, 

and  FK  common, 

the  two  sides  BF,  FK  are  equal  to  the  two  sides  CF,  FK ;  and  the  base  BK 
equal  to  the  base  CK; 

therefore  the  angle  BFK  is  equal  to  the  angle  KFC,  [i.  8] 

and  the  angle  BKF  to  the  angle  FKC. 

Therefore  the  angle  BFC  is  double  of  the  angle  KFC, 
and  the  angle  BKC  of  the  angle  FKC. 

For  the  same  reason 

the  angle  CFD  is  also  double  of  the  angle  CFL , 
and  the  angle  DLC  of  the  angle  FLC. 

Now,  since  the  circumference  BC  is  equal  to  CD, 

the  angle  BFC  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  CFD.  [hi.  27] 

And  the  angle  BFC  is  double  of  the  angle  KFC,  and  the  angle  DFC  of  the 
angle  LFC ; 

therefore  the  angle  KFC  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  LFC. 

But  the  angle  FCK  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  FCL; 
therefore  FKC ,  FLC  are  two  triangles  having  two  angles  equal  to  two  angles 
and  one  side  equal  to  one  side,  namely  FC  which  is  common  to  them; 
therefore  they  will  also  have  the  remaining  sides  equal  to  the  remaining  sides, 
and  the  remaining  angle  to  the  remaining  angle;  [i.  26] 

therefore  the  straight  line  KC  is  equal  to  CL, 
and  the  angle  FKC  to  the  angle  FLC, 

And,  since  KC  is  equal  to  CL, 

therefore  KL  is  double  of  KC. 

For  the  same  reason  it  can  be  proved  that 

HK  is  also  double  of  BK. 

And  BK  is  equal  to  KC ; 

therefore  HK  is  also  equal  to  KL. 

Similarly  each  of  the  straight  lines  HG ,  GM ,  ML  can  also  be  proved  equal  to 
each  of  the  straight  lines  HK,  KL; 

therefore  the  pentagon  GHKLM  is  equilateral. 

I  say  next  that  it  is  also  equiangular. 

For,  since  the  angle  FKC  is  equal  to  the  angle  FLC, 


G 


77 


ELEMENTS  IV 

and  the  angle  HKL  was  proved  double  of  the  angle  FKC , 
and  the  angle  KLM  double  of  the  angle  FLC , 
therefore  the  angle  HKL  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  KLM. 

Similarly  each  of  the  angles  KHG,  HGM,  GML  can  also  be  proved  equal  to 
each  of  the  angles  HKL,  KLM ; 

therefore  the  five  angles  GHK,  HKL,  KLM,  LMG,  MGH  are  equal  to  one  an¬ 
other. 

Therefore  the  pentagon  GHKLM  is  equiangular. 

And  it  was  also  proved  equilateral;  and  it  has  beefi  circumscribed  about  the 
circle  ABODE.  q.  e.  f. 


Proposition  13 


In  a  given  pentagon,  which  is  equilateral  and  equiangular,  to  inscribe  a  circle. 
Let  ABODE  be  the  given  equilateral  and  equiangular  pentagon; 

thus  it  is  required  to  inscribe  a  circle  in  the  pentagon  ABODE. 

For  let  the  angles  BCD,  ODE  be  bisected  by  the  straight  lines  OF,  DF  re¬ 
spectively;  and  from  the  point  F,  at  which  the  straight  lines  OF,  DF  meet  one 
another,  let  the  straight  lines  FB,  FA,  FE  be  joined. 

Then,  since  BO  is  equal  to  CD,  and  OF  common, 

the  two  sides  BO,  OF  are  equal  to  the  two  sides 
DC,  OF; 

and  the  angle  BCF  is  equal  to  the  angle  DCF ; 
therefore  the  base  BF  is  equal  to  the  base  DF, 
and  the  triangle  BCF  is  equal  to  the  triangle  DCF, 
and  the  remaining  angles  will  be  equal  to  the  re¬ 
maining  angles,  namely  those  which  the  equal  sides 
subtend.  [i.  4] 

Therefore  the  angle  CBF  is  equal  to  the  angle 
CDF. 


And,  since  the  angle  CDE  is  double  of  the  angle  CDF, 

and  the  angle  CDE  is  equal  to  the  angle  ABC, 
while  the  angle  CDF  is  equal  to  the  angle  CBF ; 
therefore  the  angle  CBA  is  also  double  of  the  angle  CBF; 
therefore  the  angle  ABF  is  equal  to  the  angle  FBC; 
therefore  the  angle  ABC  has  been  bisected  by  the  straight  line  BF. 
Similarly  it  can  be  proved  that 

the  angles  BAE,  AED  have  also  been  bisected  by  the  straight  lines  FA,  FE 
respectively. 

Now  let  FG,  FH,  FK,  FL,  FM  be  drawn  from  the  point  F  perpendicular  to 
the  straight  lines  AB,  BC,  CD,  DE,  EA. 

Then,  since  the  angle  HCF  is  equal  to  the  angle  KCF, 

and  the  right  angle  FHC  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  FKC, 

FHC ,  FKC  are  two  triangles  having  two  angles  equal  to  two  angles  and  one 
side  equal  to  one  side,  namely  FC  which  is  common  to  them  and  subtends  one 
of  the  equal  angles; 

therefore  they  will  also  have  the  remaining  sides  equal  to  the  remaining  sides; 

^  [i.  20] 

therefore  the  perpendicular  FH  is  equal  to  the  perpendicular  FK. 
Similarly  it  can  be  proved  that 


78  EUCLID 

each  of  the  straight  lines  FL,  FM ,  FG  is  also  equal  to  each  of  the  straight  lines 
FH,  FK; 

therefore  the  five  straight  lines  FG,  FH,  FK,  FL,  FM  are  equal  to  one  another. 

Therefore  the  circle  described  with  centre  F  and  distance  one  of  the  straight 
lines  FG,  FH,  FK,  FL,  FM  will  pass  also  through  the  remaining  points; 
and  it  will  touch  the  straight  lines  AB,  BC,  CD,  DE,  EA ,  because  the  angles  at 
the  points  G,  H,  K,  L,  M  are  right. 

For,  if  it  does  not  touch  them,  but  cuts  them, 
it  will  result  that  the  straight  line  drawn  at  right  angles  to  the  diameter  of  the 
circle  from  its  extremity  falls  within  the  circle:  which  was  proved  absurd. 

[iii.  16] 

Therefore  the  circle  described  with  centre  F  and  distance  one  of  the  straight 
lines  FG,  FH,  FK,  FL,  FM  will  not  cut  the  straight  lines  AB,  BC,  CD,  DE,  EA ; 

therefore  it  will  touch  them. 

Let  it  be  described,  as  GHKLM. 

Therefore  in  the  given  pentagon,  which  is  equilateral  and  equiangular,  a 
circle  has  been  inscribed.  q.  e.  f. 


Proposition  14 

About  a  given  pentagon,  which  is  equilateral  and  equiangular,  to  circumscribe  a 
circle . 

Let  ABCDE  be  the  given  pentagon,  which  is  equilateral  and  equiangular; 
thus  it  is  required  to  circumscribe  a  circle  about  the 
pentagon  ABCDE . 

Let  the  angles  BCD,  CDE  be  bisected  by  the  straight 
lines  CF,  DF  respectively,  and  from  the  point  F,  at 
which  the  straight  lines  meet,  let  the  straight  lines  FB, 

FA,  FE  be  joined  to  the  points  B,  A,  E . 

Then  in  manner  similar  to  the  preceding  it  can  be 
proved  that  the  angles  CBA,  BAE,  AED  have  also 
been  bisected  by  the  straight  lines  FB,  FA,  FE  respec¬ 
tively. 

Now,  since  the  angle  BCD  is  equal  to  the  angle  CDE, 

and  the  angle  FCD  is  half  of  the  angle  BCD, 
and  the  angle  CDF  half  of  the  angle  CDE, 
therefore  the  angle  FCD  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  CDF, 

so  that  the  side  FC  is  also  equal  to  the  side  FD.  [i.  6] 

Similarly  it  can  be  proved  that 

each  of  the  straight  lines  FB,  FA,  FE  is  also  equal  to  each  of  the  straight  lines 
FC,  FD; 

therefore  the  five  straight  lines  FA,  FB,  FC,  FD,  FE  are  equal  to  one  another. 

Therefore  the  circle  described  with  centre  F  and  distance  one  of  the  straight 
lines  FA,  FB,  FC,  FD,  FE  will  pass  also  through  the  remaining  points,  and 
will  have  been  circumscribed. 

Let  it  be  circumscribed,  and  let  it  be  ABCDE. 

Therefore  about  the  given  pentagon,  which  is  equilateral  and  equiangular,  a 
circle  has  been  circumscribed.  Q.  e.  f. 


ELEMENTS  IV 


79 


Proposition  15 

In  a  given  circle  to  inscribe  an  equilateral  and  equiangular  hexagon. 

Let  ABCDEF  be  the  given  circle; 

thus  it  is  required  to  inscribe  an  equilateral  and  equiangular  hexagon  in  the 
circle  ABCDEF. 

Let  the  diameter  AD  of  the  circle  ABCDEF  be  drawn; 

let  the  centre  G  of  the  circle  be  taken,  and  wuth  centre  D 
and  distance  DG  let  the  circle  EGCH  be  described; 
let  EG.  CG  be  joined  and  carried  through  to  the  points 
B,F, 

and  let  AB ,  BC,  CD,  DE,  EF.  FA  be  joined. 

I  say  that  the  hexagon  ABCDEF  is  equilateral  and 
equiangular. 

For,  since  the  point  G  is  the  centre  of  the  circle 
ABCDEF, 

GE  is  equal  to  GD. 

Again,  since  the  point  D  is  the  centre  of  the  circle 
GCH. 

DE  is  equal  to  DG. 

But  GE  wa s  proved  equal  to  GD ; 

therefore  GE  is  also  equal  to  ED; 
therefore  the  triangle  EGD  is  equilateral; 
and  therefore  its  three  angles  EGD.  GDE ,  DEG  are  equal  to  one  another,  inas¬ 
much  as.  in  isosceles  triangles,  the  angles  at  the  base  are  equal  to  one  another. 

[i.  5] 

And  the  three  angles  of  the  triangle  are  equal  to  two  right  angles;  [i.  32] 
therefore  the  angle  EGD  is  one-third  of  two  right  angles. 

Similarly,  the  angle  DGC  can  also  be  proved  to  be  one-third  of  two  right 
angles. 

And,  since  the  straight  line  CG  standing  on  EB  makes  the  adjacent  angles 
EGC ,  CGB  equal  to  two  right  angles, 

therefore  the  remaining  angle  CGB  is  also  one-third  of  two  right  angles. 
Therefore  the  angles  EGD.  DGC ,  CGB  are  equal  to  one  another; 
so  that  the  angles  vertical  to  them,  the  angles  BGA ,  AGF,  FGE  are  equal. 

[i.  15] 

Therefore  the  six  angles  EGD ,  DGC ,  CGB ,  BGA ,  AGF ,  FGE  are  equal  to 
one  another. 

But  equal  angles  stand  on  equal  circumferences;  [hi.  26] 

therefore  the  six  circumferences  AB.  BC,  CD,  DE.  EF,  FA  are  equal  to  one 
another. 

And  equal  circumferences  are  subtended  by  equal  straight  lines;  [m.  29] 
therefore  the  six  straight  lines  are  equal  to  one  another; 
therefore  the  hexagon  ABCDEF  is  equilateral. 

I  say  next  that  it  is  also  equiangular. 

For,  since  the  circumference  FA  is  equal  to  the  circumference  ED, 
let  the  circumference  ABCD  be  added  to  each; 
therefore  the  wdiole  FABCD  is  equal  to  the  wdiole  EDCBA; 
and  the  angle  FED  stands  on  the  circumference  FABCD, 


80 


EUCLID 


and  the  angle  AFE  on  the  circumference  EDCBA ; 
therefore  the  angle  AFE  is  equal  to  the  angle  DEF.  [in.  27] 

Similarly  it  can  be  proved  that  the  remaining  angles  of  the  hexagon  ABC  DEF 
are  also  severally  equal  to  each  of  the  angles  AFE,  FED ; 

therefore  the  hexagon  ABCDEF  is  equiangular. 

But  it  was  also  proved  equilateral; 

and  it  has  been  inscribed  in  the  circle  ABCDEF. 

Therefore  in  the  given  circle  an  equilateral  and  equiangular  hexagon  has 
been  inscribed.  q.  e.  f. 

Porism.  From  this  it  is  manifest  that  the  side  of  the  hexagon  is  equal  to  the 
radius  of  the  circle. 

And,  in  like  manner  as  in  the  case  of  the  pentagon,  if  through  the  points  of 
division  on  the  circle  we  draw  tangents  to  the  circle,  there  will  be  circumscribed 
about  the  circle  an  equilateral  and  equiangular  hexagon  in  conformity  with 
what  was  explained  in  the  case  of  the  pentagon. 

And  further  by  means  similar  to  those  explained  in  the  case  of  the  pentagon 
we  can  both  inscribe  a  circle  in  a  given  hexagon  and  circumscribe  one  about  it. 

Q.  E.  F. 

Proposition  16 

In  a  given  circle  to  inscribe  a  fifteen-angled  figure  which  shall  be  both  equilateral 
and  equiangular. 

Let  ABCD  be  the  given  circle; 

thus  it  is  required  to  inscribe  in  the  circle  ABCD  a  fifteen-angled  figure  which 
shall  be  both  equilateral  and  equiangular. 

In  the  circle  ABCD  let  there  be  in¬ 
scribed  a  side  AC  of  the  equilateral  tri¬ 
angle  inscribed  in  it,  and  a  side  AB  of  an 
equilateral  pentagon; 

therefore,  of  the  equal  segments  of  which 
there  are  fifteen  in  the  circle  ABCD ,  there 
will  be  five  in  the  circumference  A  BC  which 
is  one-third  of  the  circle,  and  there  will  be 
three  in  the  circumference  AB  which  is 
one-fifth  of  the  circle; 
therefore  in  the  remainder  BC  there  will 
be  two  of  the  equal  segments. 

Let  BC  be  bisected  at  E ;  [hi.  30] 

therefore  each  of  the  circumferences  BE,  EC  is  a  fifteenth  of  the  circle  ABCD. 

If  therefore  we  join  BE,  EC  and  fit  into  the  circle  ABCD  straight  lines  equal 
to  them  and  in  contiguity,  a  fifteen-angled  figure  which  is  both  equilateral  and 
equiangular  will  have  been  inscribed  in  it.  Q.  e.  f. 

And,  in  like  manner  as  in  the  case  of  the  pentagon,  if  through  the  points  of 
division  on  the  circle  we  draw  tangents  to  the  circle,  there  will  be  circum¬ 
scribed  about  the  circle  a  fifteen-angled  figure  which  is  equilateral  and  equi¬ 
angular. 

And  further,  by  proofs  similar  to  those  in  the  case  of  the  pentagon,  we  can 
both  inscribe  a  circle  in  the  given  fifteen-angled  figure  and  circumscribe  one 
about  it.  Q.  e.  f. 


BOOK  FIVE 


DEFINITIONS 

1.  A  magnitude  is  a  part  of  a  magnitude,  the  less  of  the  greater,  when  it 
measures  the  greater. 

2.  The  greater  is  a  multiple  of  the  less  when  it  is  measured  by  the  less. 

3.  A  ratio  is  a  sort  of  relation  in  respect  of  size  between  two  magnitudes  of 
the  same  kind. 

4.  Magnitudes  are  said  to  have  a  ratio  to  one  another  which  are  capable, 
when  multiplied,  of  exceeding  one  another. 

5.  Magnitudes  are  said  to  be  in  the  same  ratio ,  the  first  to  the  second  and  the 
third  to  the  fourth,  when,  if  any  equimultiples  whatever  be  taken  of  the  first 
and  third,  and  any  equimultiples  whatever  of  the  second  and  fourth,  the  for¬ 
mer  equimultiples  alike  exceed,  are  alike  equal  to,  or  alike  fall  short  of,  the  lat¬ 
ter  equimultiples  respectively  taken  in  corresponding  order. 

6.  Let  magnitudes  which  have  the  same  ratio  be  called  proportional. 

7.  When,  of  the  equimultiples,  the  multiple  of  the  first  magnitude  exceeds 
the  multiple  of  the  second,  but  the  multiple  of  the  third  does  not  exceed  the 
multiple  of  the  fourth,  then  the  first  is  said  to  have  a  greater  ratio  to  the  second 
than  the  third  has  to  the  fourth. 

8.  A  proportion  in  three  terms  is  the  least  possible. 

9.  When  three  magnitudes  are  proportional,  the  first  is  said  to  have  to  the 
third  the  duplicate  ratio  of  that  which  it  has  to  the  second. 

10.  When  four  magnitudes  are  < continuously  >  proportional,  the  first  is 
said  to  have  to  the  fourth  the  triplicate  ratio  of  that  which  it  has  to  the  second, 
and  so  on  continually,  whatever  be  the  proportion. 

11.  The  term  corresponding  magnitudes  is  used  of  antecedents  in  relation  to 
antecedents,  and  of  consequents  in  relation  to  consequents. 

12.  Alternate  ratio  means  taking  the  antecedent  in  relation  to  the  antecedent 
and  the  consequent  in  relation  to  the  consequent. 

13.  Inverse  ratio  means  taking  the  consequent  as  antecedent  in  relation  to 
the  antecedent  as  consequent. 

14.  Composition  of  a  ratio  means  taking  the  antecedent  together  with  the 
consequent  as  one  in  relation  to  the  consequent  by  itself. 

15.  Separation  of  a  ratio  means  taking  the  excess  by  which  the  antecedent 
exceeds  the  consequent  in  relation  to  the  consequent  by  itself. 

16.  Conversion  of  a  ratio  means  taking  the  antecedent  in  relation  to  the  ex¬ 
cess  by  which  the  antecedent  exceeds  the  consequent. 

17.  A  ratio  ex  aequali  arises  when,  there  being  several  magnitudes  and  an¬ 
other  set  equal  to  them  in  multitude  which  taken  two  and  two  are  in  the  same 
proportion,  as  the  first  is  to  the  last  among  the  first  magnitudes,  so  is  the  first 
to  the  last  among  the  second  magnitudes; 

81 


82  EUCLID 

Or,  in  other  words,  it  means  taking  the  extreme  terms  by  virtue  of  the  re¬ 
moval  of  the  intermediate  terms. 

18.  A  'perturbed  proportion  arises  when,  there  being  three  magnitudes  and 
another  set  equal  to  them  in  multitude,  as  antecedent  is  to  consequent  among 
the  first  magnitudes,  so  is  antecedent  to  consequent  among  the  second  magni¬ 
tudes,  while,  as  the  consequent  is  to  a  third  among  the  first  magnitudes,  so  is  a 
third  to  the  antecedent  among  the  second  magnitudes. 

BOOK  V.  PROPOSITIONS 
Proposition  1 

If  there  be  any  number  of  magnitudes  whatever  which  are,  respectively ,  equimul¬ 
tiples  of  any  magnitudes  equal  in  multitude,  then,  whatever  multiple  one  of  the 
magnitudes  is  of  one ,  that  multiple  also  will  all  be  of  all. 

Let  any  number  of  magnitudes  whatever  AB,  CD  be  respectively  equimulti¬ 
ples  of  any  magnitudes  E,  F  equal  in  multitude; 

I  say  that,  whatever  multiple  AB  is  of  E,  that  multiple  will  AB,  CD  also  be 
of  E ,  F. 

A  G  B  C  H  D 


E -  F - 

For,  since  AB  is  the  same  multiple  of  E  that  CD  is  of  F ,  as  many  magnitudes 
as  there  are  in  AB  equal  to  E,  so  many  also  are  there  in  CD  equal  to  F. 

Let  AB  be  divided  into  the  magnitudes  AG,  GB  equal  to  E, 
and  CD  into  CH,  HD  equal  to  F ; 

then  the  multitude  of  the  magnitudes  AG,  GB  will  be  equal  to  the  multitude  of 
the  magnitudes  CH,  HD. 

Now,  since  AG  is  equal  to  E,  and  CH  to  F, 

therefore  AG  is  equal  to  E,  and  AG,  CH  to  E,  F. 

For  the  same  reason 

GB  is  equal  to  E,  and  GB,  HD  to  E,  F; 
therefore,  as  many  magnitudes  as  there  are  in  A B  equal  to  E,  so  many  also  are 
there  in  AB,  CD  equal  to  E,  F; 

therefore,  whatever  multiple  AB  is  of  E,  that  multiple  will  AB,  CD  also  be  of 
E,  F. 

Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  2 

If  a  first  magnitude  be  the  same  multiple  of  a  second  that  a  third  is  of  a  fourth,  and 
a  fifth  also  be  the  same  multiple  of  the  second  that  a  sixth  is  of  the  fourth,  the  sum  of 
the  first  and  fifth  will  also  be  the  same  multiple  of  the  second  that  the  sum  of  the 
third  and  sixth  is  of  the  fourth.  B  G 

Let  a  first  magnitude,  AB,  be  the  same  A - 1 - 1 - 1 - 1 - 1 

multiple  of  a  second,  C,  that  a  third,  DE,  q _ 

is  of  a  fourth,  F,  and  let  a  fifth,  BG,  also  D _ ) _ _ E _ ]  H 

be  the  same  multiple  of  the  second,  C , 

that  a  sixth,  EH,  is  of  the  fourth  F ;  F - 

I  say  that  the  sum  of  the  first  and  fifth,  AG,  will  be  the  same  multiple  of  the 


ELEMENTS  83 

second,  C,  that  the  sum  of  the  third  and  sixth,  DH,  is  of  the  fourth,  F. 

For,  since  A  B  is  the  same  multiple  of  C  that  DE  is  of  F,  therefore,  as  many 
magnitudes  as  there  are  in  A  B  equal  to  C,  so  many  also  are  there  in  DE  equal 
to  F. 

For  the  same  reason  also, 

as  many  as  there  are  in  BG  equal  to  C,  so  many  are  there  also  in  EH  equal  to  F; 
therefore,  as  many  as  there  are  in  the  whole  AG  equal  to  C,  so  many  also  are 
there  in  the  whole  DH  equal  to  F. 

Therefore,  whatever  multiple  AG  is  of  C,  that  multiple  also  is  DH  of  F. 
Therefore  the  sum  of  the  first  and  fifth,  AG,  is  the  same  multiple  of  the  sec¬ 
ond,  C,  that  the  sum  of  the  third  and  sixth,  DH,  is  of  the  fourth,  F. 
Therefore  etc.  Q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  3 

If  a  first  magnitude  be  the  same  multiple  of  a  second  that  a  third  is  of  a  fourth,  and 
if  equimultiples  be  taken  of  the  first  and  third,  then  also  ex  aequali  the  magnitudes 
taken  will  be  equimultiples  respectively,  the  one  of  the  second,  and  the  other  of  the 
fourth. 

Let  a  first  magnitude  A  be  the  same  multiple  of  a  second  B  that  a  third  C  is 
of  a  fourth  D,  and  let  equimultiples  EF,  GH  be  taken  of  A,  C\ 

I  say  that  EF  is  the  same  multiple  of  B  that  GH  is  of  D. 

For,  since  EF  is  the  same  multiple  of  A  that  GH  is  of  C,  therefore,  as  many 
magnitudes  as  there  are  in  EF  equal  to  A,  so  many  also  are  there  in  GH  equal 
to  C. 

Let  EF  be  divided  into  the  magnitudes  EK,  KF  equal  to  A,  and  GH  into  the 
magnitudes  GL,  LH  equal  to  C; 

then  the  multitude  of  the  magnitudes  EK,  KF  will  be  equal  to  the  multitude 

A _ i _ | _ |  of  the  magnitudes  GL,  LH. 

And,  since  A  is  the  same  multiple 

B - '  of  B  that  C  is  of  D, 

E _ K _ F  while  EK  is  equal  to  A,  and  GL  to  C, 

therefore  EK  is  the  same  multiple 

C - 1 - , - »  0f  g  that  GL  is  of  D . 

D - 1  For  the  same  reason 

G _ L _ H  KF  is  the  same  multiple  of  B  that 

LH  is  of  D. 

Since,  then,  a  first  magnitude  EK  is  the  same  multiple  of  a  second  B  that  a 
third  GL  is  of  a  fourth  D, 

and  a  fifth  KF  is  also  the  same  multiple  of  the  second  B  that  a  sixth  LH  is  of 
the  fourth  D, 

therefore  the  sum  of  the  first  and  fifth,  EF,  is  also  the  same  multiple  of  the 
second  B  that  the  sum  of  the  third  and  sixth,  GH,  is  of  the  fourth  D.  [v.  2] 
Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  4 

If  a  first  magnitude  have  to  a  second  the  same  ratio  as  a  third  to  a  fourth ,  any 
equimultiples  whatever  of  the  first  and  third  will  also  have  the  same  ratio  to  any 
equimultiples  whatever  of  the  second  and  fourth  respectively,  taken  in  corresponding 
order. 


84  EUCLID 

For  let  a  first  magnitude  A  have  to  a  second  B  the  same  ratio  as  a  third  C  to 
a  fourth  D)  and  let  equimultiples  E ,  F  be  taken  of  A,  C,  and  G ,  H  other,  chance, 
equimultiples  of  B,  D; 

I  say  that,  as  E  is  to  G ,  so  is  F  to  H . 


For  let  equimultiples  if ,  L  ^ 

be  taken  of  E ,  F,  and  other, 
chance,  equimultiples  ilf,  N  8 
ofG,  B.  E 

Since  E  is  the  same  multi-  q 
pie  of  A  that  F  is  of  C,  K< 

and  equimultiples  if,  L  of  E, 

F  have  been  taken, 

therefore  K  is  the  same  mul-  C- 


tiple  of  A  that  L  is  of  C.  D _ 

[v.3] 

For  the  same  reason  1 

M  is  the  same  multiple  of  H - « - 1 - 

B  that  N  is  of  D.  l - * _ _ 

And,  since,  as  A  is  to  B,  _ _ _ 

so  is  C  to  D, 

and  of  A,  C  equimultiples  if,  L  have  been  taken, 
and  of  B,  D  other,  chance,  equimultiples  M,  A, 
therefore,  if  if  is  in  excess  of  Af,  L  also  is  in  excess  of  N, 

if  it  is  equal,  equal,  and  if  less,  less.  [v.  Def.  5] 

And  if,  L  are  equimultiples  of  E,  F, 
and  M,  N  other,  chance,  equimultiples  of  G ,  H ; 

therefore,  as  E  is  to  (?,  so  is  F  to  H.  [v.  Def.  5] 

Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  5 

If  a  magnitude  be  the  same  multiple  of  a  magnitude  that  a  part  subtracted  is  of  a 
part  subtracted ,  the  remainder  will  also  be  the  same  multiple  of  the  remainder  that 
the  whole  is  of  the  whole. 

For  let  the  magnitude  AB  be  the  same  multiple  of  the  magnitude  CD  that 
the  part  AE  subtracted  is  of  the  part  CF  subtracted; 

I  say  that  the  remainder  EB  is  also  the  same  multiple  of  the  remainder 
FD  that  the  whole  A B  is  of  the  whole  CD. 

A  t  ,  E  t  f  B 

G  C  F  D 

! - 1 - i - i 

For,  whatever  multiple  AE  is  of  CF,  let  EB  be  made  that  multiple  of  CG. 

Then,  since  AE  is  the  same  multiple  of  CF  that  EB  is  of  GC, 

therefore  AE  is  the  same  multiple  of  CF  that  AB  is  of  GF.  [v.  1] 

But,  by  the  assumption,  AE  is  the  same  multiple  of  CF  that  AB  is  of  CD. 

Therefore  AB  is  the  same  multiple  of  each  of  the  magnitudes  GF ,  CD) 
therefore  GF  is  equal  to  CD. 

Let  CF  be  subtracted  from  each; 


85 


ELEMENTS  V 

therefore  the  remainder  GC  is  equal  to  the  remainder  FD. 

And,  since  AE  is  the  same  multiple  of  CF  that  EB  is  of  GC, 

and  GC  is  equal  to  DF, 

therefore  AE  is  the  same  multiple  of  CF  that  EB  is  of  FD. 

But,  by  hypothesis, 

AE  is  the  same  multiple  of  CF  that  AB  is  of  CD; 
therefore  EB  is  the  same  multiple  of  FD  that  AB  is  of  CD. 

That  is,  the  remainder  EB  will  be  the  same  multiple  of  the  remainder  FD 
that  the  whole  AB  is  of  the  whole  CD. 

Therefore  etc.  Q-  E-  D- 

-  *  f 

Proposition  6 

If  two  magnitudes  be  equimultiples  of  two  magnitudes ,  and  any  magnitudes  sub¬ 
tracted  from  them  be  equimultiples  of  the  same ,  the  remainders  also  are  either  equal 
to  the  same  or  equimultiples  of  them . 

For  let  two  magnitudes  AB ,  CD  be  equimultiples  of  two  magnitudes  E ,  F, 

and  let  AG,  CH  subtracted  from  them  be  equimul- 
A  :  {  G  B  tiples  of  the  same  two  E ,  F; 

I  say  that  the  remainders  also,  GB,  HD,  are 
E  either  equal  to  E,  F  or  equimultiples  of  them. 

K — + — i - 1 — + — ?  For,  first,  let  GB  be  equal  to  E; 

r  I  say  that  HD  is  also  equal  to  F. 

For  let  CK  be  made  equal  to  F. 

Since  AG  is  the  same  multiple  of  E  that  CH  is  of  F, 

while  GB  is  equal  to  E  and  KC  to  F , 
therefore  AB  is  the  same  multiple  of  E  that  KH  is  of  F.  [v.  2] 
But,  by  hypothesis,  AB  is  the  same  multiple  of  E  that  CD  is  of  F; 

therefore  KII  is  the  same  multiple  of  F  that  CD  is  of  F. 

Since  then  each  of  the  magnitudes  KH,  CD  is  the  same  multiple  of  F, 
therefore  KH  is  equal  to  CD. 

Let  CH  be  subtracted  from  each; 

therefore  the  remainder  KC  is  equal  to  the  remainder  HD. 

But  F  is  equal  to  KC; 

therefore  HD  is  also  equal  to  F. 

Hence,  if  GB  is  equal  to  E,  HD  is  also  equal  to  F. 

Similarly  we  can  prove  that,  even  if  GB  be  a  multiple  of  E,  HD  is  also  the 
same  multiple  of  F. 

Therefore  etc.  Q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  7 

Equal  magnitudes  have  to  the  same  the  same  ratio,  as  also  has  the  same  to  equal 
magnitudes. 

Let  A,  B  be  equal  magnitudes  and  C  any  other,  chance,  magnitude; 

I  say  that  each  of  the  magnitudes  A,  B  has  the  same  ratio  to  C,  and  C  has 
the  same  ratio  to  each  of  the  magnitudes  A,  B. 

For  let  equimultiples  D,  E  of  A,  B  be  taken,  and  of  C  another,  chance,  multi¬ 
ple  F. 

Then,  since  D  is  the  same  multiple  of  A  that  E  is  of  B,  while  A  is  equal  to  By 
therefore  D  is  equal  to  E. 


86 


EUCLID 


But  F  is  another,  chance,  magnitude. 

If  therefore  D  is  in  excess  of  F,  E  is  also  in  excess  of  F,  if  equal  to  it,  equal ; 

and,  if  less,  less.  A _  pt  t  .  T  t 

And  D,  E  are  equimultiples  of  A,  B, 

while  F  is  another,  chance,  multiple  of  C ;  B  E '  '  '  ’  * 

therefore,  as  A  is  to  C,  so  is  B  to  C.  c, _ 4  _ , _ t  , 

[y.  Def.  5] 

I  say  next  that  C  also  has  the  same  ratio  to  each  of  the  magnitudes  A,  B. 
For,  with  the  same  construction,  we  can  prove  similarly  that  D  is  equal  to  E ; 
and  F  is  some  other  magnitude. 

If  therefore  F  is  in  excess  of  Dy  it  is  also  in  excess  of  E,  if  equal,  equal;  and,  if 
less,  less. 

And  F  is  a  multiple  of  C,  while  D ,  E  are  other,  chance,  equimultiples  of  A,  B; 

therefore,  as  C  is  to  A,  so  is  C  to  B.  [v.  Def.  5] 

Therefore  etc. 

Porism.  From  this  it  is  manifest  that,  if  any  magnitudes  are  proportional, 
they  will  also  be  proportional  inversely.  q.  e.  d. 


C- 

F- 

K- 

D- 

L- 

M- 

N- 


Proposition  8 

Of  unequal  magnitudes ,  the  greater  has  to  the  same  a  greater  ratio  than  the  less  has; 
and  the  same  has  to  the  less  a  greater  ratio  than  it  has  to  the  greater. 

Let  AB,  C  be  unequal  magnitudes,  and  let  AB  be  greater;  let  D  be  another, 
chance,  magnitude; 

I  say  that  AB  has  to  D  a  greater  ratio  A  e  B 

than  C  has  to  D,  and  D  has  to  C  a  greater 
ratio  than  it  has  to  AB. 

For,  since  A  B  is  greater  than  C,  let  BE 
be  made  equal  to  C ; 

then  the  less  of  the  magnitudes  AE ,  EB,  if 
multiplied,  will  sometime  be  greater  than 
D.  [v.  Def.  4] 

First,  let  AS  be  less  than  EB; 
let  AE  be  multiplied,  and  let 
FG  be  a  multiple  of  it  which  is  greater  than  D ; 

then,  whatever  multiple  FG  is  of  AE,  let  GH  be  made  the  same  multiple  of  EB 
and  K  of  C; 

and  let  L  be  taken  double  of  D,  M  triple  of  it,  and  successive  multiples  in¬ 
creasing  by  one,  until  what  is  taken  is  a  multiple  of  D  and  the  first  that  is 
greater  than  K.  Let  it  be  taken,  and  let  it  be  N  which  is  quadruple  of  D  and  the 
first  multiple  of  it  that  is  greater  than  K. 

Then,  since  K  is  less  than  N  first, 

therefore  K  is  not  less  than  M. 

And,  since  FG  is  the  same  multiple  of  AE  that  GH  is  of  EB, 

therefore  FG  is  the  same  multiple  of  AE  that  FH  is  of  AB.  [v.  1] 
But  FG  is  the  same  multiple  of  AE  that  K  is  of  C; 

therefore  FH  is  the  same  multiple  of  AB  that  K  is  of  C; 
therefore  FH ,  K  are  equimultiples  of  AB,  C. 

Again,  since  GH  is  the  same  multiple  of  EB  that  K  is  of  C, 

and  EB  is  equal  to  C , 


ELEMENTS  V 


87 


therefore  GH  is  equal  to  K . 

But  K  is  not  less  than  M ; 

therefore  neither  is  GH  less  than  M. 

And  FG  is  greater  than  D; 

therefore  the  whole  FH  is  greater  than  D,  M  together. 

But  D,  M  together  are  equal  to  N,  inasmuch  as  M  is  triple  of  D,  and  M,  D 
together  are  quadruple  of  D,  while  N  is  also  quadruple  of  D;  whence  M,  D  to¬ 
gether  are  equal  to  N. 

But  FH  is  greater  than  M,  D; 

therefore  FH  is  in  excess  of  N, 
while  K  is  not  in  excess  of  N. 

And  FH,  K  are  equimultiples  of  AB,  C,  while  N  is  another,  chance,  multiple 
of  D; 

therefore  AB  has  to  D  a  greater  ratio  than  C  has  to  D .  [v.  Def.  7] 
I  say  next,  that  D  also  has  to  C  a  greater  ratio  than  D  has  to  AB. 

For,  with  the  same  construction,  we  can  prove  similarly  that  N  is  in  excess 
of  K ,  while  N  is  not  in  excess  of  FH. 

And  A  is  a  multiple  of  D , 

while  FH,  K  are  other,  chance,  equimultiples  of  AB,  C; 
therefore  D  has  to  C  a  greater  ratio  than  D  has  to  AB.  [v.  Def.  7] 
Again,  let  AE  be  greater  than  EB . 

Then  the  less,  EB,  if  multiplied,  will  sometime  be  greater  than  D.  [v.  Def.  4] 

Let  it  be  multiplied,  and  let  GH  be  a 

_ multiple  of  EB  and  greater  than  D; 

and,  whatever  multiple  GH  is  of  EB,  let 
G  h  FG  be  made  the  same  multiple  of  AE,  and 

- 1 - ' - + - '  K  of  C. 

1  Then  we  can  prove  similarly  that  FH, 

— 1  K  are  equimultiples  of  AB,  C; 

_1 _ ,  and,  similarly,  let  N  be  taken  a  multiple 

| _ | _ |  of  D  but  the  first  that  is  greater  than  FG, 

so  that  FG  is  again  not  less  than  M. 

1  1  1  '  But  GH  is  greater  than  D; 

therefore  the  whole  FH  is  in  excess  of  D,  M,  that  is,  of  N. 

Now  K  is  not  in  excess  of  N,  inasmuch  as  FG  also,  which  is  greater  than  GH, 
that  is,  than  K,  is  not  in  excess  of  N. 

And  in  the  same  manner,  by  following  the  above  argument,  we  complete  the 
demonstration. 

Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  9 

Magnitudes  which  have  the  same  ratio  to  the  same  are  equal  to  one  another;  and 
magnitudes  to  which  the  same  has  the  same  ratio  are  equal. 

For  let  each  of  the  magnitudes  A,  B  have  the  same  ratio  to  C; 

I  say  that  A  is  equal  to  B . 

A -  B -  Eor,  otherwise,  each  of  the  magnitudes  A, 

c _  B  would  not  have  had  the  same  ratio  to  C; 

but  it  has;  [v.  8] 

therefore  A  is  equal  to  B. 


88  EUCLID 

Again,  let  C  have  the  same  ratio  to  each  of  the  magnitudes  A,  B; 

I  say  that  A  is  equal  to  B . 

For,  otherwise,  C  would  not  have  had  the  same  ratio  to  each  of  the  magni¬ 
tudes  A,  B;  [v.  8] 

but  it  has; 

therefore  A  is  equal  to  B. 

Therefore  etc.  Q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  10 

Of  magnitudes  which  have  a  ratio  to  the  same ,  that  which  has  a  greater  ratio  is 
greater ;  and  that  to  which  the  same  has  a  greater  ratio  is  less. 

For  let  A  have  to  C  a  greater  ratio  than  B  has  to  C ; 

I  say  that  A  is  greater  than  B. 

A -  B - 

C - — 

For,  if  not,  A  is  either  equal  to  B  or  less. 

Now  A  is  not  equal  to  B; 

for  in  that  case  each  of  the  magnitudes  A,  B  would  have  had  the  same  ratio  to 
C ;  [v.  7] 

but  they  have  not; 
therefore  A  is  not  equal  to  B . 

Nor  again  is  A  less  than  B ; 

for  in  that  case  A  would  have  had  to  C  a  less  ratio  than  B  has  to  C;  [v.  8] 

but  it  has  not; 

therefore  A  is  not  less  than  B. 

But  it  was  proved  not  to  be  equal  either; 

therefore  A  is  greater  than  B. 

Again,  let  C  have  to  B  a  greater  ratio  than  C  has  to  A; 

I  say  that  B  is  less  than  A. 

For,  if  not,  it  is  either  equal  or  greater. 

Now  B  is  not  equal  to  A ; 

for  in  that  case  C  would  have  had  the  same  ratio  to  each  of  the  magnitudes  A, 
B;  [v.  7] 

but  it  has  not; 

therefore  A  is  not  equal  to  B. 

Nor  again  is  B  greater  than  A ; 

for  in  that  case  C  would  have  had  to  £  a  less  ratio  than  it  has  to  A;  [v.  8] 

but  it  has  not; 

therefore  B  is  not  greater  than  A. 

But  it  was  proved  that  it  is  not  equal  either; 

therefore  B  is  less  than  A. 

Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  11 

Ratios  which  are  the  same  with  the  same  ratio  are  also  the  same  with  one  another. 
For,  as  A  is  to  B,  so  let  C  be  to  D , 

and,  as  C  is  to  D,  so  let  E  be  to  F; 


ELEMENTS  V  89 

I  say  that,  as  A  is  to  B ,  so  is  E  to  F. 

For  of  Ay  C,  E  let  equimultiples  G,  H}  K  be  taken,  and  of  B ,  D ,  F  other, 


A- 

B- 

G- 

L- 


C- 

D- 

H- 

M- 


chance,  equimultiples  L,  M,  N. 

Then  since,  as  A  is  to  7i,  so  is  C  to  D, 

and  of  A,  C  equimultiples  G,  H  have  been  taken, 
and  of  By  D  other,  chance,  equimultiples  L,  ilf, 
therefore,  if  G  is  in  excess  of  L,  H  is  also  in  excess  of  M, 
if  equal,  equal, 
and  if  less,  less. 

Again,  since,  as  C  is  to  D ,  so  is  E  to  F, 

and  of  Cy  E  equimultiples  H,  K  have  been  taken, 
and  of  Dy  F  other,  chance,  equimultiples  ikf,  N, 
therefore,  if  H  is  in  excess  of  M,  K  is  also  in  excess  of  N, 
if  equal,  equal, 
and  if  less,  less. 

But  we  saw  that,  if  H  was  in  excess  of  M,  G  was  also  in  excess  of  L;  if  equal, 
equal;  and  if  less,  less; 

so  that,  in  addition,  if  G  is  in  excess  of  L,  K  is  also  in  excess  of  Nf 

if  equal,  equal, 
and  if  less,  less. 

And  Gy  K  are  equimultiples  of  A,  E, 

while  Ly  N  are  other,  chance,  equimultiples  of  By  F; 
therefore,  as  A  is  to  By  so  is  E  to  F. 

Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  12 

If  any  number  of  magnitudes  be  proportional ,  as  one  of  the  antecedents  is  to  one 
of  the  consequents,  so  will  all  the  antecedents  be  to  all  the  consequents. 

Let  any  number  of  magnitudes  A,  By  C,  Dy  Ey  F  be  proportional,  so  that,  as 
A  is  to  By  so  is  C  to  D  and  E  to  F; 

I  say  that,  as  A  is  to  5,  so  are  A,  Cy  E  to  B,  Z),  F. 

For  of  A,  Cy  E  let  equimul- 

A -  B -  C- 

D -  E -  F- 


tiples  Gy  H,  K  be  taken, 
and  of  B,  D}  F  other,  chance, 
equimultiples  L,  M,  N. 

Then  since,  as  A  is  to  B,  so 

-  is  C  to  Dy  and  E  to  F, 

and  of  A}  Cy  E  equimultiples 
Gy  //,  K  have  been  taken, 

and  of  B,  D,  F  other,  chance,  equimultiples  L,  M,  N , 
therefore,  if  G  is  in  excess  of  L,  II  is  also  in  excess  of  M ,  and  K  of  N, 

if  equal,  equal, 


L- 

M- 

N- 


90  EUCLID 

and  if  less,  less; 
so  that,  in  addition, 

if  G  is  in  excess  of  L,  then  G,  H ,  K  are  in  excess  of  L,  M,  N , 
if  equal,  equal, 
and  if  less,  less. 

Now  G  and  G,  H,  K  are  equimultiples  of  A  and  A,  C,  E,  since,  if  any  number 
of  magnitudes  whatever  are  respectively  equimultiples  of  any  magnitudes 
equal  in  multitude,  whatever  multiple  one  of  the  magnitudes  is  of  one,  that 
multiple  also  will  all  be  of  all.  [v.  1] 

For  the  same  reason 

L  and  L,  M ,  N  are  also  equimultiples  of  B  and  B,  D,  F; 

therefore,  as  A  is  to  B,  so  are  A,  C,  E  to  B,  D,  F.  [v.  Def.  5] 
Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  13 

If  a  first  magnitude  have  to  a  second  the  same  ratio  as  a  third  to  a  fourth ,  and  the 
third  have  to  the  fourth  a  greater  ratio  than  a  fifth  has  to  a  sixth,  the  first  will  also 
have  to  the  second  a  greater  ratio  than  the  fifth  to  the  sixth . 

For  let  a  first  magnitude  A  have  to  a  second  B  the  same  ratio  as  a  third  C 
has  to  a  fourth  D, 

and  let  the  third  C  have  to  the  fourth  D  a  greater  ratio  than  a  fifth  E  has  to  a 
sixth  F; 

I  say  that  the  first  A  will  also  have  to  the  second  B  a  greater  ratio  than  the 
fifth  E  to  the  sixth  F. 

A - —  C -  M -  G - — 

B -  D -  N -  K - - 


E - 

F - 

H - 

L - - 

For,  since  there  are  some  equimultiples  of  C,  E, 
and  of  D,  F  other,  chance,  equimultiples,  such  that  the  multiple  of  C  is  in  ex¬ 
cess  of  the  multiple  of  D , 

while  the  multiple  of  E  is  not  in  excess  of  the  multiple  of  F,  [v.  Def.  7] 

let  them  be  taken, 

and  let  G,  H  be  equimultiples  of  C ,  E, 
and  K ,  L  other,  chance,  equimultiples  of  D ,  F , 
so  that  G  is  in  excess  of  K ,  but  H  is  not  in  excess  of  L; 
and,  whatever  multiple  G  is  of  C,  let  M  be  also  that  multiple  of  A, 
and,  whatever  multiple  K  is  of  D ,  let  N  be  also  that  multiple  of  B. 
Now,  since,  as  A  is  to  B,  so  is  C  to  D, 

and  of  Ay  C  equimultiples  M ,  G  have  been  taken, 
and  of  B ,  D  other,  chance,  equimultiples  N,  K, 
therefore,  if  M  is  in  excess  of  N,  G  is  also  in  excess  of  K , 
if  equal,  equal, 


ELEMENTS  V 
and  if  less,  less. 


91 

[v.  Def.  5] 


But  G  is  in  excess  of  K; 

therefore  M  is  also  in  excess  of  N. 

But  H  is  not  in  excess  of  L; 

and  M,  H  are  equimultiples  of  A,  E, 
and  N,  L  other,  chance,  equimultiples  of  B,  F; 
therefore  A  has  to  B  a  greater  ratio  than  E  has  to  F.  [v.  Def.  7] 
Therefore  etc.  Q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  14 

If  a  first  magnitude  have  to  a  second  the  same  ratio  as  a  third  has  to  a  fourth ,  and 
the  first  be  greater  than  the  third ,  the  second  will  also  be  greater  than  the  fourth ;  if 
equal ,  equal;  and  if  less,  less. 

For  let  a  first  magnitude  A  have  the  same  ratio  to  a  second  B  as  a  third  C 
has  to  a  fourth  D ;  and  let  A  be  greater  than  C; 

I  say  that  B  is  also  greater  than  D. 

For,  since  A  is  greater  than  C , 

A - C  and  b  is  another,  chance,  magnitude, 

B _  D -  therefore  A  has  to  B  a  greater  ratio 

than  C  has  to  B.  [v.  8] 

But,  as  A  is  to  B,  so  is  C  to  D ; 

therefore  C  has  also  to  D  a  greater  ratio  than  C  has  to  B.  [v.  13] 
But  that  to  which  the  same  has  a  greater  ratio  is  less;  [v.  10] 

therefore  D  is  less  than  B; 
so  that  B  is  greater  than  D. 

Similarly  we  can  prove  that,  if  A  be  equal  to  C,  B  will  also  be  equal  to  D ; 

and,  if  A  be  less  than  C,  B  will  also  be  less  than  D. 

Therefore  etc.  Q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  15 

Parts  have  the  same  ratio  as  the  same  multiples  of  them  taken  in  corresponding 
order. 

For  let  AB  be  the  same  multiple  of  C  that  DE  is  of  F; 

I  say  that,  as  C  is  to  F,  so  is  AB  to  DE. 

For,  since  AB  is  the  same  multiple 
^  G  H  b  C  °f  C  that  DE  is  of  F ,  as  many  magni- 

'  p  ~  1  '  1  1  tudes  as  there  are  in  AB  equal  to  C, 

Dl - 1 - 1 - 'E  Fh - •  so  many  are  there  also  in  DE  equal 

to  F. 

Let  AB  be  divided  into  the  magnitudes  AG,  GH,  HB  equal  to  C, 
and  DE  into  the  magnitudes  DK,  KL,  LE  equal  to  F; 
then  the  multitude  of  the  magnitudes  AG,  GH,  HB  will  be  equal  to  the  multi¬ 
tude  of  the  magnitudes  DK,  KL,  LE. 

And,  since  AG,  GH,  HB  are  equal  to  one  another, 

and  DK,  KL,  LE  are  also  equal  to  one  another, 
therefore,  as  AG  is  to  DK,  so  is  GH  to  KL,  and  II B  to  LE.  [v.  7] 
Therefore,  as  one  of  the  antecedents  is  to  one  of  the  consequents,  so  will  all 
the  antecedents  be  to  all  the  consequents;  [v.  12] 

therefore,  as  AG  is  to  DK,  so  is  AB  to  DE. 


92  EUCLID 

But  AG  is  equal  to  C  and  DK  to  F; 

therefore,  as  C  is  to  F,  so  is  AB  to  DE. 

Therefore  etc.  Q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  16 

If  four  magnitudes  be  proportional ,  they  will  also  be  proportional  alternately. 

Let  A}  B,  C,  D  be  four  proportional  magnitudes, 

so  that,  as  A  is  to  B ,  so  is  C  to  D; 

I  say  that  they  will  also  be  so  alternately,  that  is,  as  A  is  to  C ,  so  is  B  to  D. 

A -  C _ 

B -  o - 

Ei - 1 - 1 - 1  G| - 1 - 1 

F. - , - , - ,  Hi - , - , 

For  of  Ay  B  let  equimultiples  E,  F  be  taken, 

and  of  Cy  D  other,  chance,  equimultiples  G,  H. 

Then,  since  E  is  the  same  multiple  of  A  that  F  is  of  B, 

and  parts  have  the  same  ratio  as  the  same  multiples  of  them,  [v.  15] 
therefore,  as  A  is  to  B,  so  is  E  to  F. 

But  as  A  is  to  B}  so  is  C  to  D ; 

therefore  also,  as  C  is  to  D,  so  is  E  to  F.  [v.  11] 

Again,  since  G,  H  are  equimultiples  of  C,  D, 

therefore,  as  C  is  to  Z),  so  is  G  to  H.  [v.  15] 

But,  as  C  is  to  D,  so  is  E  to  F; 

therefore  also,  as  E  is  to  F,  so  is  G  to  H.  [v.  11] 

But,  if  four  magnitudes  be  proportional,  and  the  first  be  greater  than  the 
third, 

the  second  will  also  be  greater  than  the  fourth; 
if  equal,  equal; 

and  if  less,  less.  [v.  14] 

Therefore,  if  E  is  in  excess  of  G,  F  is  also  in  excess  of  H , 

if  equal,  equal, 
and  if  less,  less. 

Now  Ey  F  are  equimultiples  of  A,  By 

and  Gy  H  other,  chance,  equimultiples  of  C,  D; 

therefore,  as  A  is  to  C ,  so  is  B  to  D.  [v.  Def.  5] 

Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  17 

If  magnitudes  be  proportional  componendo,  they  will  also  be  proportional  sepa- 
rando. 

Let  ABy  BEy  CD ,  DF  be  magnitudes  proportional  componendo,  so  that,  as 
AB  is  to  BE,  so  is  CD  to  DF; 

I  say  that  they  will  also  be  proportional  separando ,  that  is,  as  AE  is  to  EB , 
so  is  CF  to  DF. 

For  of  AE,  EB,  CF,  FD  let  equimultiples  GH,  HK,  LM ,  MN  be  taken, 
and  of  EB,  FD  other,  chance,  equimultiples,  KO ,  NP. 


ELEMENTS  V  93 

Then,  since  GH  is  the  same  multiple  of  AE  that  HK  is  of  EB , 

therefore  GH  is  the  same  multiple  of  AE  that  GK  is  of  A B.  [v.  1] 

But  GH  is  the  same  multiple  of  AE  that  LM  is  of  CF; 

therefore  GK  is  the  same  multiple  of  AB  that  LM  is  of  CF. 

A  E  B  C  F  D 


G _ H _ K _ 0 

L  M  N  P 

- 1 - 1 - 


Again,  since  LM  is  the  same  multiple  of  CF  that  MN  is  of  FD, 

therefore  LM  is  the  same  multiple  of  CF  that  LN  is  of  CD.  [v.  1] 
But  LM  was  the  same  multiple  of  CF  that  GK  is  of  AB; 

therefore  GK  is  the  same  multiple  of  AB  that  LN  is  of  CD. 
Therefore  GK,  LN  are  equimultiples  of  AB,  CD. 

Again,  since  HK  is  the  same  multiple  of  EB  that  MN  is  of  FD, 
and  KO  is  also  the  same  multiple  of  EB  that  NP  is  of  FD, 
therefore  the  sum  HO  is  also  the  same  multiple  of  EB  that  MP  is  of  FD. 

[v.  2] 

And,  since,  as  AB  is  to  BE,  so  is  CD  to  DF, 

and  of  AB,  CD  equimultiples  GK,  LN  have  been  taken, 
and  of  EB,  FD  equimultiples  HO,  MP, 
therefore,  if  GK  is  in  excess  of  HO,  LN  is  also  in  excess  of  MP, 

if  equal,  equal, 
and  if  less,  less. 


Let  GH  be  in  excess  of  KO; 

then,  if  HK  be  added  to  each, 

GK  is  also  in  excess  of  HO. 

But  we  saw  that,  if  GK  was  in  excess  of  HO,  LN  was  also  in  excess  of  MP; 
therefore  LN  is  also  in  excess  of  MP, 
and,  if  MN  be  subtracted  from  each, 

LM  is  also  in  excess  of  NP; 

so  that,  if  GH  is  in  excess  of  KO,  LM  is  also  in  excess  of  NP. 
Similarly  we  can  prove  that, 

if  GH  be  equal  to  KO,  LM  will  also  be  equal  to  NP, 
and  if  less,  less. 

And  GH,  LM  are  equimultiples  of  AE,  CF, 

while  KO,  NP  are  other,  chance,  equimultiples  of  EB,  FD; 
therefore,  as  A E  is  to  EB,  so  is  CF  to  FD. 

Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  18 

If  magnitudes  be  proportional  separando,  they  will  also  be  proportional  compo- 
nendo. 

Let  AE,  EB,  CF,  FD  be  magnitudes  proportional  separando,  so  that,  as  AE 
is  to  EB,  so  is  CF  to  FD; 

I  say  that  they  will  also  be  proportional  componendo,  that  is,  as  AB  is  to  BE, 
so  is  CD  to  FD. 


94  EUCLID 

For,  if  CD  be  not  to  DF  as  AB  to  BE, 
then,  as  AB  is  to  BE,  so  will  CD  be  either  to  some  magnitude  less  than  DF  or 
to  a  greater. 

First,  let  it  be  in  that  ratio  to  a  less  mag-  a _ E  b 

nitude  DG.  q 

Then,  since,  as  AB  is  to  BE,  so  is  CD  to  c - - b 

DG, 

they  are  magnitudes  proportional  componendo ; 
so  that  they  wall  also  be  proportional  separando.  [v.  17] 

Therefore,  as  AE  is  to  EB,  so  is  CG  to  GD. 

But  also,  by  hypothesis, 

as  AE  is  to  EB,  so  is  CF  to  FD. 

Therefore  also,  as  CG  is  to  GD,  so  is  CF  to  FD.  [v.  11] 

But  the  first  CG  is  greater  than  the  third  CF; 

therefore  the  second  GD  is  also  greater  than  the  fourth  FD.  [v.  14] 

But  it  is  also  less:  which  is  impossible. 

Therefore,  as  AB  is  to  BE,  so  is  not  CD  to  a  less  magnitude  than  FD. 

Similarly  we  can  prove  that  neither  is  it  in  that  ratio  to  a  greater; 
it  is  therefore  in  that  ratio  to  FD  itself. 

Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  19 

If,  as  a  whole  is  to  a  whole,  so  is  a  part  subtracted  to  a  part  subtracted,  the  remainder 
will  also  be  to  the  remainder  as  whole  to  whole. 

For,  as  the  whole  AB  is  to  the  whole  CD,  so  let  the  part  AE  subtracted  be  to 
the  part  CF  subtracted; 

I  say  that  the  remainder  EB  will  also  be  to  the  remainder  A - 1 - B 

FD  as  the  whole  AB  to  the  whole  CD.  c  F  D 

For  since,  as  AB  is  to  CD,  so  is  AE  to  CF,  1 

alternately  also,  as  BA  is  to  AE,  so  is  DC  to  CF.  [v.  16] 

And,  since  the  magnitudes  are  proportional  componendo,  they  will  also  be 
proportional  separando,  [v.  17] 

that  is,  as  BE  is  to  EA,  so  is  DF  to  CF, 
and,  alternately, 

as  BE  is  to  DF,  so  is  EA  to  FC.  fv.  16] 

But,  as  AE  is  to  CF,  so  by  hypothesis  is  the  whole  AB  to  the  whole  CD. 
Therefore  also  the  remainder  EB  will  be  to  the  remainder  FD  as  the  whole 
AB  is  to  the  whole  CD.  [v.  11] 

Therefore  etc. 

[Porism.  From  this  it  is  manifest  that,  if  magnitudes  be  proportional  com¬ 
ponendo,  they  will  also  be  proportional  convertendo.]  Q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  20 

If  there  be  three  magnitudes ,  and  others  equal  to  them  in  multitude,  which  taken 
two  and  two  are  in  the  same  ratio,  and  if  ex  aequali  the  first  be  greater  than  the 
third,  the  fourth  will  also  be  greater  than  the  sixth ;  if  equal,  equal;  and,  if  less,  less. 

Let  there  be  three  magnitudes  A,  B,  C,  and  others  D,  E,  F  equal  to  them  in 
multitude,  which  taken  two  and  two  are  in  the  same  ratio,  so  that, 

as  A  is  to  B,  so  is  D  to  E, 


95 


ELEMENTS  V 

and,  as  B  is  to  C,  so  is  E  to  F; 

and  let  A  be  greater  than  C  ex  aequali; 

I  say  that  D  will  also  be  greater  than  F;  if  A  is  equal  to  C,  equal;  and,  if  less, 
less. 

For,  since  A  is  greater  than  C, 

A _ -  D _  and  B  is  some  other  magnitude, 

B _  E _ |  and  the  greater  has  to  the  same  a  greater 

ratio  than  the  less  has,  [v.  8] 

C  F  i  therefore  A  has  to  B  a  greater  ratio 

than  C  has  to  B. 

But,  as  A  is  to  B ,  so  is  D  to  E , 

and,  as  C  is  to  B,  inversely,  so  is  F  to  E; 
therefore  D  has  also  to  E  a  greater  ratio  than  F  has  to  E.  [v.  13] 
But,  of  magnitudes  which  have  a  ratio  to  the  same,  that  which  has  a  greater 
ratio  is  greater;  [v.  10] 

therefore  D  is  greater  than  F. 

Similarly  we  can  prove  that,  if  A  be  equal  to  C,  D  will  also  be  equal  to  F; 
and  if  less,  less. 

Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  21 

If  there  be  three  magnitudes,  and  others  equal  to  them  in  multitude ,  which  taken 
two  and  two  together  are  in  the  same  ratio ,  and  the  proportion  of  them  be  perturbed , 
then ,  if  ex  aequali  the  first  magnitude  is  greater  than  the  third ,  the  fourth  will  also 
be  greater  than  the  sixth;  if  equal ,  equal;  and  if  less ,  less. 

Let  there  be  three  magnitudes  A,  B,  C,  and  others  D ,  Ef  F  equal  to  them  in 
multitude,  which  taken  two  and  two  are  in  the  same  ratio,  and  let  the  propor¬ 
tion  of  them  be  perturbed,  so  that, 

as  A  is  to  B ,  so  is  E  to  F, 
and,  as  B  is  to  C,  so  is  D  to  E , 

and  let  A  be  greater  than  C  ex  aequali; 

I  say  that  D  will  also  be  greater  than  F;  if  A  is  equal  to  C,  equal;  and  if 
less,  less. 

A _ _  D _  For,  since  A  is  greater  than  C, 

B _  E _  and  B  is  some  other  magnitude, 

c _  F _ _  therefore  A  has  to  B  a  greater 

ratio  than  C  has  to  B .  [v.  8] 

But,  as  A  is  to  B ,  so  is  E  to  F, 

and,  as  C  is  to  B,  inversely,  so  is  E  to  D. 

Therefore  also  E  has  to  F  a  greater  ratio  than  E  has  to  D.  [v.  13] 
But  that  to  which  the  same  has  a  greater  ratio  is  less;  [v.  10] 

therefore  F  is  less  than  D ; 
therefore  D  is  greater  than  F. 

Similarly  we  can  prove  that,  if  A  be  equal  to  C,  D  will  also  be  equal  to  F; 
and  if  less,  less. 

Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 


96 


EUCLID 


Proposition  22 

If  there  be  any  number  of  magnitudes  whatever ,  and  others  equal  to  them  in  multi¬ 
tude ,  which  taken  two  and  two  together  are  in  the  same  ratio ,  they  will  also  be  in 
the  same  ratio  ex  aequali. 

Let  there  be  any  number  of  magnitudes  A,  B,  C,  and  others  D,  E ,  F  equal  to 
them  in  multitude,  which  taken  two  and  two  together  are  in  the  same  ratio,  so 
that, 

as  A  is  to  By  so  is  D  to  Ef 
and,  as  B  is  to  C,  so  is  E  to  F; 

I  say  that  they  will  also  be  in  the  same  ratio  ex  aequali , 
cthat  is,  as  A  is  to  C,  so  is  D  to  F>. 

For  oi  Ay  D  let  equimultiples  G,  H  be  taken, 

and  of  By  E  other,  chance,  equimultiples  K ,  L; 
and,  further,  of  C,  F  other,  chance,  equimultiples  M,  N. 

A -  B -  C - 

D -  E -  F - 

G - 1 -  K - 1 - 1 -  M - i - 

H - 1 -  L - 1 - 1 -  N - 1 - 

Then,  since,  as  A  is  to  5,  so  is  D  to  Ey 

and  of  Ay  D  equimultiples  G,  H  have  been  taken, 
and  of  By  E  other,  chance,  equimultiples  K,  L, 

therefore,  as  G  is  to  K}  so  is  H  to  L.  [v.  4] 

For  the  same  reason  also, 

as  K  is  to  My  so  is  L  to  N. 

Since,  then,  there  are  three  magnitudes  G,  K,  M,  and  others  Hy  L,  N  equal  to 
them  in  multitude,  which  taken  two  and  two  together  are  in  the  same  ratio, 
therefore,  ex  aequaliy  if  G  is  in  excess  of  M,  H  is  also  in  excess  of  Ar; 

if  equal,  equal;  and  if  less,  less.  [v.  20] 

And  Gy  H  are  equimultiples  of  A ,  Z>, 

and  My  N  other,  chance,  equimultiples  of  C,  F. 

Therefore,  as  A  is  to  C,  so  is  D  to  F .  [v.  Def.  5] 

Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  23 

If  there  be  three  magnitudes ,  and  others  equal  to  them  in  multitude ,  which  taken 
two  and  two  together  are  in  the  same  ratio ,  and  the  proportion  of  them  be  perturbedy 
they  will  also  be  in  the  same  ratio  ex  aequali. 

Let  there  be  three  magnitudes  A,  B ,  C,  and  others  equal  to  them  in  multi¬ 
tude,  which,  taken  two  and  two  together,  are  in  the  same  proportion,  namely 
Dy  Ey  F)  and  let  the  proportion  of  them  be  perturbed,  so  that, 

as  A  is  to  By  so  is  E  to  F, 
and,  as  B  is  to  C,  so  is  D  to  E\ 

I  say  that,  as  A  is  to  C,  so  is  D  to  F. 

Of  Ay  By  D  let  equimultiples  G,  Hy  K  be  taken, 

and  of  Cy  Ey  F  other,  chance,  equimultiples  L,  M,  N. 

Then,  since  G,  H  are  equimultiples  of  A,  B, 


ELEMENTS  V  97 

and  parts  have  the  same  ratio  as  the  same  multiples  of  them,  [v.  15] 
therefore,  as  A  is  to  B,  so  is  G  to  H. 

For  the  same  reason  also, 

A -  B -  C - 

D -  E -  F - 

G - ♦ - 1 -  H - 1 - 1 -  L - 1 - 

K - 1 - + -  M - 1 -  N - , - 

as  E  is  to  F,  so  is  M  to  N. 

And,  as  A  is  to  B,  so  is  E  to  F; 


therefore  also,  as  G  is  to  H,  so  is  M  to  N.  [v.  11] 

Next,  since,  as  B  is  to  C,  so  is  D  to  E , 

alternately,  also,  as  B  is  to  Z),  so  is  C  to  E.  [v.  16] 

And,  since  H,  K  are  equimultiples  of  B,  D, 

and  parts  have  the  same  ratio  as  their  equimultiples, 

therefore,  as  B  is  to  D,  so  is  H  to  K.  [v.  15] 

But,  as  B  is  to  D,  so  is  C  to  E; 

therefore  also,  as  H  is  to  K,  so  is  C  to  E.  [v.  11] 

Again,  since  L,  M  are  equimultiples  of  C,  B, 

therefore,  as  C  is  to  Ef  so  is  L  to  M.  [v.  15] 

But,  as  C  is  to  E,  so  is  H  to  K; 

therefore  also,  as  H  is  to  K,  so  is  L  to  Af,  [v.  11] 

and,  alternately,  as  H  is  to  L,  so  is  K  to  M.  [v.  16] 

But  it  was  also  proved  that, 

as  G  is  to  HT  so  is  M  to  N. 


Since,  then,  there  are  three  magnitudes  G,  H}  L ,  and  others  equal  to  them  in 
multitude  K ,  M,  N,  which  taken  two  and  two  together  are  in  the  same  ratio, 
and  the  proportion  of  them  is  perturbed, 
therefore,  ex  aequali ,  if  G  is  in  excess  of  L,  K  is  also  in  excess  of  N ; 

if  equal,  equal;  and  if  less,  less.  [v.  21] 

And  Gy  K  are  equimultiples  of  A.  D, 

and  L  N  of  C,  F. 

Therefore,  as  A  is  to  C,  so  is  D  to  F. 

Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  24 

If  a  first  magnitude  have  to  a  second  the  same  ratio  as  a  third  has  to  a  fourth ,  and 
also  a  fifth  have  to  the  second  the  same  ratio  as  a  sixth  to  the  fourth,  the  first  and  fifth 
added  together  will  have  to  the  second  the  same  ratio  as  the  third  and  sixth  have  to 
the  fourth . 

Let  a  first  magnitude  AB  have  to  a  second  C  the  same  ratio  as  a  third  DE 

has  to  a  fourth  F; 

A - 5 _ G  and  let  also  a  fifth  BG  have  to  the  second  C 

C _  the  same  ratio  as  a  sixth  EH  has  to  the 

D _ | _ j_|  fourth  F; 

P _  Isay  that  the  first  and  fifth  added  together, 

AG,  will  have  to  the  second  C  the  same  ratio 
as  the  third  and  sixth,  DH,  has  to  the  fourth  F. 

For  since,  as  BG  is  to  C,  so  is  Eli  to  F, 


98  EUCLID 

inversely,  as  C  is  to  BG,  so  is  F  to  EH . 

Since,  then,  as  AB  is  to  C,  so  is  DE  to  F , 

and,  as  C  is  to  BG,  so  is  F  to  EH, 
therefore,  ex  aequali,  as  AB  is  to  BG,  so  is  DE  to  EH.  [v.  22] 
And,  since  the  magnitudes  are  proportional  separando,  they  will  also  be  pro¬ 
portional  componendo ;  [v.  18] 

therefore,  as  AG  is  to  GB,  so  is  DH  to  HE. 

But  also,  as  BG  is  to  C,  so  is  EH  to  F; 

therefore,  ex  aequali,  as  AG  is  to  C,  so  is  DH  to  F .  [v.  22] 

Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  25 

If  four  magnitudes  be  proportional,  the  greatest  and  the  least  are  greater  than  the 
remaining  two. 

Let  the  four  magnitudes  AB,  CD,  E,  F  be  proportional  so  that,  as  AB  is  to 
CD,  so  is  E  to  F,  and  let  AB  be  the  greatest  of  them  and  F  the  least; 

I  say  that  AB,  F  are  greater  than  CD,  E.  G  B 

For  let  AG  be  made  equal  to  E,  and  CH  equal  to  A - 1 - 

F.  E - 

Since,  as  AB  is  to  CD,  so  is  E  to  F,  c _ H  p 

and  E  is  equal  to  AG,  and  F  to  CH, 
therefore,  as  AB  is  to  CD,  so  is  AG  to  CH.  F 

And  since,  as  the  whole  AB  is  to  the  whole  CD,  so  is  the  part  AG  subtracted 
to  the  part  CH  subtracted, 

the  remainder  GB  will  also  be  to  the  remainder  HD  as  the  whole  AB  is  to  the 
whole  CD.  [v.  19] 

But  AB  is  greater  than  CD; 

therefore  GB  is  also  greater  than  HD. 

And,  since  AG  is  equal  to  E,  and  CH  to  F, 

therefore  AG,  F  are  equal  to  CH,  E. 

And  if,  GB,  HD  being  unequal,  and  GB  greater,  AG,  F  be  added  to  GB  and 
CH,  E  be  added  to  HD, 

it  follows  that  AB,  F  are  greater  than  CD,  E. 

Therefore  etc. 


Q.  E.  D. 


BOOK  SIX 


DEFINITIONS 

1.  Similar  rectilineal  figures  are  such  as  have  their  angles  severally  equal  and 
the  sides  about  the  equal  angles  proportional. 

2.  A  straight  line  is  said  to  have  been  cut  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio  when,  as 
the  whole  line  is  to  the  greater  segment,  so  is  the  greater  to  the  less. 

3.  The  height  of  any  figure  is  the  perpendicular  drawn  from  the  vertex  to  the 
base. 


BOOK  VI.  PROPOSITIONS 
Proposition  1 

Triangles  and  parallelograms  which  are  under  the  same  height  are  to  one  another 
as  their  bases. 

Let  ABC ,  ACD  be  triangles  and  EC,  CF  parallelograms  under  the  same 
height; 

I  say  that,  as  the  base  BC  is  to  the  base  CD,  so  is  the  triangle  ABC  to  the 
triangle  ACD ,  and  the  parallelogram  EC  to  the  parallelogram  CF. 

For  let  BD  be  produced  in  both  di¬ 
rections  to  the  points  H,  L  and  let  [any 
number  of  straight  lines]  BG,  GH  be 
made  equal  to  the  base  BC,  and  any 
number  of  straight  lines  DK,  KL  equal 
to  the  base  CD ; 

let  AG,  AH,  AK,  AL  be  joined. 
Then,  since  CB,  BG,  GH  are  equal  to 
one  another, 

the  triangles  ABC,  AGB,  AHG  are  also  equal  to  one  another,  [i.  38] 
Therefore,  whatever  multiple  the  base  HC  is  of  the  base  BC,  that  multiple 
also  is  the  triangle  AHC  of  the  triangle  ABC. 

For  the  same  reason, 

whatever  multiple  the  base  LC  is  of  the  base  CD,  that  multiple  also  is  the  tri¬ 
angle  ALC  of  the  triangle  ACD; 

and,  if  the  base  HC  is  equal  to  the  base  CL,  the  triangle  AHC  is  also  equal  to 
the  triangle  ACL,  [i.  38] 

if  the  base  HC  is  in  excess  of  the  base  CL,  the  triangle  AHC  is  also  in  excess  of 
the  triangle  ACL , 

and,  if  less,  less. 

Thus,  there  being  four  magnitudes,  two  bases  BC,  CD  and  two  triangles 
ABC,  ACD, 


99 


100  EUCLID 

equimultiples  have  been  taken  of  the  base  BC  and  the  triangle  ABC ,  namely 
the  base  HC  and  the  triangle  AHC, 

and  of  the  base  CD  and  the  triangle  ADC  other,  chance,  equimultiples,  namely 
the  base  LC  and  the  triangle  ALC ; 

and  it  has  been  proved  that, 

if  the  base  HC  is  in  excess  of  the  base  CL,  the  triangle  AHC  is  also  in  excess  of 
the  triangle  ALC ; 

if  equal,  equal;  and,  if  less,  less. 

Therefore,  as  the  base  BC  is  to  the  base  CD,  so  is  the  triangle  ABC  to  the 
triangle  ACD.  [v.  Def.  5] 

Next,  since  the  parallelogram  EC  is  double  of  the  triangle  ABC ,  [i.  41] 

and  the  parallelogram  FC  is  double  of  the  triangle  ACD, 
while  parts  have  the  same  ratio  as  the  same  multiples  of  them,  [v.  15] 
therefore,  as  the  triangle  ABC  is  to  the  triangle  ACD ,  so  is  the  parallelogram 
EC  to  the  parallelogram  FC. 

Since,  then,  it  was  proved  that,  as  the  base  BC  is  to  CD,  so  is  the  triangle 
ABC  to  the  triangle  ACD, 

and,  as  the  triangle  ABC  is  to  the  triangle  A  CD,  so  is  the  parallelogram  EC  to 
the  parallelogram  CF, 

therefore  also,  as  the  base  BC  is  to  the  base  CD,  so  is  the  parallelogram  EC  to 
the  parallelogram  FC.  [v.  11] 

Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  2 

If  a  straight  line  he  drawn  parallel  to  one  of  the  sides  of  a  triangle,  it  will  cut  the 
sides  of  the  triangle  proportionally ;  and,  if  the  sides  of  the  triangle  he  cut  propor¬ 
tionally,  the  line  joining  the  points  of  section  will  be  parallel  to  the  remaining  side 
of  the  triangle. 

For  let  DE  be  drawn  parallel  to  BC,  one  of  the  sides  of  the  triangle  ABC; 

I  say  that,  as  BD  is  to  DA,  so  is  CE  to  EA. 

For  let  BE,  CD  be  joined. 

Therefore  the  triangle  BDE  is  equal  to  the  triangle 
CDE; 

for  they  are  on  the  same  base  DE  and  in  the  same  paral¬ 
lels  DE,  BC.  [i.  38] 

And  the  triangle  ADE  is  another  area. 

But  equals  have  the  same  ratio  to  the  same;  [v.  7] 
therefore,  as  the  triangle  BDE  is  to  the  triangle  ADE,  so  is  the  triangle  CDE  to 
the  triangle  ADE. 

But,  as  the  triangle  BDE  is  to  ADE,  so  is  BD  to  DA; 
for,  being  under  the  same  height,  the  perpendicular  drawn  from  E  to  AB,  they 
are  to  one  another  as  their  bases.  [vi.  1] 

For  the  same  reason  also, 

as  the  triangle  CDE  is  to  ADE,  so  is  CE  to  EA. 

Therefore  also,  as  BD  is  to  DA,  so  is  CE  to  EA.  [v.  11] 

Again,  let  the  sides  AB,  AC  of  the  triangle  ABC  be  cut  proportionally,  so 
that,  as  BD  is  to  DA,  so  is  CE  to  EA;  and  let  DE  be  joined. 

I  say  that  DE  is  parallel  to  BC. 


101 


ELEMENTS  VI 


For,  with  the  same  construction, 

since,  as  BD  is  to  DA ,  so  is  CE  to  EA, 
but,  as  BD  is  to  DA,  so  is  the  triangle  BDE  to  the  triangle  ADE , 
and,  as  CE  is  to  EA ,  so  is  the  triangle  CDE  to  the  triangle  ADE ,  [vi.  1] 

therefore  also, 

as  the  triangle  BDE  is  to  the  triangle  ADE ,  so  is  the  triangle  CDE  to  the  tri¬ 
angle  ADE.  [v.  11] 

Therefore  each  of  the  triangles  BDE,  CDE  has  the  same  ratio  to  ADE. 
Therefore  the  triangle  BDE  is  equal  to  the  triangle  CDE;  [v.  9] 

and  they  are  on  the  same  base  DE. 

But  equal  triangles  which  are  on  the  same  base  are  also  in  the  same  parallels. 

[i.  39] 

Therefore  DE  is  parallel  to  BC. 

Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  3 


If  an  angle  of  a  triangle  be  bisected  and  the  straight  line  cutting  the  angle  cut  the 
base  also,  the  segments  of  the  base  will  have  the  same  ratio  as  the  remaining  sides 
of  the  triangle ;  and,  if  the  segments  of  the  base  have  the  same  ratio  as  the  remaining 
sides  of  the  triangle ,  the  straight  line  joined  from  the  vertex  to  the  point  of  section 
will  bisect  the  angle  of  the  triangle. 

Let  ABC  be  a  triangle,  and  let  the  angle  BAC  be  bisected  by  the  straight 
line  AD; 


I  say  that,  as  BD  is  to  CD,  so  is  BA  to  AC. 
For  let  CE  be  drawn  through  C  parallel  to 
DA,  and  let  BA  be  carried  through  and  meet 
it  at  E. 

Then,  since  the  straight  line  AC  falls  upon 
the  parallels  AD,  EC, 
the  angle  ACE  is  equal  to  the  angle  CAD. 

[i.  29] 

But  the  angle  CAD  is  by  hypothesis  equal 
to  the  angle  BAD; 

therefore  the  angle  BAD  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  ACE. 

Again,  since  the  straight  line  BAE  falls  upon  the  parallels  AD,  EC, 

the  exterior  angle  BAD  is  equal  to  the  interior  angle  AEG.  [i.  29] 
But  the  angle  ACE  was  also  proved  equal  to  the  angle  BAD; 

therefore  the  angle  ACE  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  AEC, 

so  that  the  side  AE  is  also  equal  to  the  side  AC.  [i.  6] 

And,  since  AD  has  been  drawn  parallel  to  EC,  one  of  the  sides  of  the  triangle 
BCE, 


therefore,  proportionally,  as  BD  is  to  DC,  so  is  BA  to  AE. 

But  AE  is  equal  to  AC;  [vi.  2] 

therefore,  as  BD  is  to  DC,  so  is  BA  to  AC. 

Again,  let  BA  be  to  AC  as  BD  to  DC,  and  let  AD  be  joined; 

I  say  that  the  angle  BAC  has  been  bisected  by  the  straight  line  AD. 

For,  with  the  same  construction, 

since,  as  BD  is  to  DC,  so  is  BA  to  AC, 
and  also,  as  BD  is  to  DC,  so  is  BA  to  AE:  for  AD  has  been  drawn  parallel  to 


102  EUCLID 

EC,  one  of  the  sides  of  the  triangle  BCE :  [vi.  2] 

therefore  also,  as  BA  is  to  AC,  so  is  BA  to  AE .  [v.  11] 

Therefore  AC  is  equal  to  AE,  [v.  9] 

so  that  the  angle  A  EC  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  ACE .  [i.  5] 

But  the  angle  A  EC  is  equal  to  the  exterior  angle  BAD,  [i.  29] 

and  the  angle  ACE  is  equal  to  the  alternate  angle  CAD;  [id.] 
therefore  the  angle  BAD  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  CAD. 

Therefore  the  angle  BAG  has  been  bisected  by  the  straight  line  AD. 
Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  4 

In  equiangular  triangles  the  sides  about  the  equal  angles  are  proportional,  and 
those  are  corresponding  sides  which  subtend  the  equal  angles. 

Let  ABC,  DCE  be  equiangular  triangles  having  the  angle  ABC  equal  to  the 
angle  DCE,  the  angle  BAC  to  the  angle  CDE, 
and  further  the  angle  ACB  to  the  angle  CED; 

I  say  that  in  the  triangles  ABC,  DCE  the 
sides  about  the  equal  angles  are  proportional, 
and  those  are  corresponding  sides  which 
subtend  the  equal  angles. 

For  let  BC  be  placed  in  a  straight  line 
with  CE. 

Then,  since  the  angles  ABC ,  ACB  are  less 
than  two  right  angles,  [i.  17] 

and  the  angle  ACB  is  equal  to  the  angle  DEC, 
therefore  the  angles  ABC,  DEC  are  less  than  two  right  angles; 


therefore  BA,  ED,  when  produced,  will  meet.  [i.  Post.  5] 
Let  them  be  produced  and  meet  at  F. 

Now,  since  the  angle  DCE  is  equal  to  the  angle  ABC, 

BF  is  parallel  to  CD.  [i.  28] 

Again,  since  the  angle  ACB  is  equal  to  the  angle  DEC, 

AC  is  parallel  to  FE.  [i.  28] 

Therefore  FACD  is  a  parallelogram; 

therefore  FA  is  equal  to  DC,  and  AC  to  FD.  [i.  34] 

And,  since  AC  has  been  drawn  parallel  to  FE,  one  side  of  the  triangle  FBE, 
therefore,  as  BA  is  to  AF,  so  is  BC  to  CE.  [vi.  2] 

But  AF  is  equal  to  CD; 

therefore,  as  BA  is  to  CD,  so  is  BC  to  CE, 
and  alternately,  as  AB  is  to  BC,  so  is  DC  to  CE.  [v.  16] 

Again,  since  CD  is  parallel  to  BF, 

therefore,  as  BC  is  to  CE,  so  is  FD  to  DE.  [vi.  2] 

But  FD  is  equal  to  AC; 

therefore,  as  BC  is  to  CE,  so  is  AC  to  DE, 
and  alternately,  as  BC  is  to  CA,  so  is  CE  to  ED.  [v.  16] 

Since,  then,  it  was  proved  that, 

as  AB  is  to  BC,  so  is  DC  to  CE, 
and,  as  BC  is  to  CA,  so  is  CE  to  ED; 

therefore,  ex  aequali,  as  BA  is  to  AC,  so  is  CD  to  DE.  [v.  22] 
Therefore  etc.  Q.  e.  d. 


ELEMENTS  VI 


103 


Proposition  5 

If  two  triangles  have  their  sides  proportional ,  the  triangles  will  be  equiangular  and 
will  have  those  angles  equal  which  the  corresponding  sides  subtend. 

Let  ABC ,  DBF  be  two  triangles  having  their  sides  proportional,  so  that, 
as  AB  is  to  BC,  so  is  DE  to  EF , 
as  BC  is  to  CA ,  so  is  EF  to  FD , 
and  further,  as  BA  is  to  AC,  so  is  ED  to  DF) 

I  say  that  the  triangle  ABC  is  equiangular  with  the  triangle  DEF,  and  they 
will  have  those  angles  equal  which  the  corresponding  sides  subtend,  namely 
the  angle  ABC  to  the  angle  DEF ,  the  angle  BCA  to  the  angle  EFD ,  and  fur¬ 
ther  the  angle  BAG  to  the  angle  EDF. 

For  on  the  straight  line  EF,  and  at  the  points  E,  F  on  it,  let  there  be  con¬ 
structed  the  angle  FEG  equal  to  the  angle  ABC ,  and  the  angle  EFG  equal  to 
the  angle  ACB)  [i.  23] 

therefore  the  remaining  angle  at  A  is  equal  to  the  remaining  angle  at  G.  [i.  32] 
Therefore  the  triangle  ABC  is  equiangular  with  the  triangle  GEF. 

Therefore  in  the  triangles  ABC , 
GEF  the  sides  about  the  equal 
angles  are  proportional,  and  those 
are  corresponding  sides  which  sub¬ 
tend  the  equal  angles;  [vi.  4] 

therefore,  as  AB  is  to  BC,  so  is  GE 
to  EF. 

But,  as  A  B  is  to  BC,  so  by  hypo¬ 
thesis  is  DE  to  EF) 
therefore,  as  DE  is  to  EF,  so  is  GE  to  EF.  [v.  11] 

Therefore  each  of  the  straight  lines  DE,  GE  has  the  same  ratio  to  EF) 

therefore  DE  is  equal  to  GE.  [v.  9] 

For  the  same  reason 

DF  is  also  equal  to  GF. 

Since  then  DE  is  equal  to  EG, 

and  EF  is  common, 

the  two  sides  DE,  EF  are  equal  to  the  two  sides  GE,  EF) 
and  the  base  DF  is  equal  to  the  base  FG) 
therefore  the  angle  DEF  is  equal  to  the  angle  GEF,  [i.  8] 

and  the  triangle  DEF  is  equal  to  the  triangle  GEF, 
and  the  remaining  angles  are  equal  to  the  remaining  angles,  namely  those 
which  the  equal  sides  subtend.  [i.  4] 

Therefore  the  angle  DFE  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  GFE, 
and  the  angle  EDF  to  the  angle  EGF. 

And,  since  the  angle  FED  is  equal  to  the  angle  GEF , 

while  the  angle  GEF  is  equal  to  the  angle  ABC , 
therefore  the  angle  ABC  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  DEF. 

For  the  same  reason 

the  angle  ACB  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  DFE, 
and  further,  the  angle  at  A  to  the  angle  at  D) 
therefore  the  triangle  ABC  is  equiangular  with  the  triangle  DEF. 
Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 


104 


EUCLID 


Proposition  6 

If  two  triangles  have  one  angle  equal  to  one  angle  and  the  sides  about  the  equal  angles 
proportional ,  the  triangles  will  be  equiangular  and  will  have  those  angles  equal 
which  the  corresponding  sides  subtend. 

Let  ABC ,  DEF  be  two  triangles  having  one  angle  B AC  equal  to  one  angle 
EDF  and  the  sides  about  the  equal  angles  proportional,  so  that, 
as  BA  is  to  AC,  so  is  ED  to  DF ; 

I  say  that  the  triangle  ABC  is  equiangular  with  the  triangle  DEF ,  and  will 
have  the  angle  ABC  equal  to  the  angle  DEF ,  and  the  angle  ACB  to  the  angle 
DFE. 

For  on  the  straight  line  DF,  and  at  the  points  D,  F  on  it,  let  there  be  con¬ 
structed  the  angle  FDG  equal  to  either  of  the  angles  BAG,  EDF,  and  the  angle 
DFG  equal  to  the  angle  ACB;  [i.  23] 

therefore  the  remaining  angle  at  B  is  equal  to  the  remaining  angle  at  G .  [i.  32] 

Therefore  the  triangle  ABC  is  equiangular  with  the  triangle  DGF. 

Therefore,  proportionally,  as  BA  is  to  AC,  so  is  GD  to  DF.  [vi.  4] 

But,  by  hypothesis,  as  BA  is  to  AC,  so  also  is  ED  to  DF; 
therefore  also,  as  ED  is  to  DF,  so  is 
GD  to  DF.  [v.  11] 

Therefore  ED  is  equal  to  DG;  [v.  9] 
and  DF  is  common; 
therefore  the  two  sides  ED,  DF  are 
equal  to  the  two  sides  GD,  DF;  and 
the  angle  EDF  is  equal  to  the  angle 
GDF; 

therefore  the  base  EF  is  equal  to  the  base  GF, 
and  the  triangle  DEF  is  equal  to  the  triangle  DGF, 
and  the  remaining  angles  will  be  equal  to  the  remaining  angles,  namely  those 
which  the  equal  sides  subtend.  [i.  4] 

Therefore  the  angle  DFG  is  equal  to  the  angle  DFE, 

and  the  angle  DGF  to  the  angle  DEF. 

But  the  angle  DFG  is  equal  to  the  angle  ACB; 

therefore  the  angle  ACB  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  DFE. 

And,  by  hypothesis,  the  angle  BAG  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  EDF; 
therefore  the  remaining  angle  at  B  is  also  equal  to  the  remaining  angle  at  E; 

[i.  32] 

therefore  the  triangle  ABC  is  equiangular  with  the  triangle  DEF. 

Therefore  etc.  Q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  7 

If  two  triangles  have  one  angle  equal  to  one  angle,  the  sides  about  other  angles 
proportional,  and  the  remaining  angles  either  both  less  or  both  not  less  than  a  right 
angle,  the  triangles  will  be  equiangular  and  will  have  those  angles  equal,  the  sides 
about  which  are  proportional. 

Let  ABC,  DEF  be  two  triangles  having  one  angle  equal  to  one  angle,  the 
angle  BAC  to  the  angle  EDF,  the  sides  about  other  angles  ABC,  DEF  pro¬ 
portional,  so  that,  as  AB  is  to  BC,  so  is  DE  to  EF,  and,  first,  each  of  the  re¬ 
maining  angles  at  C,  F  less  than  a  right  angle; 


ELEMENTS  VI 


105 

I  say  that  the  triangle  ABC  is  equiangular  with  the  triangle  DEF}  the  angle 
ABC  will  be  equal  to  the  angle  DEF,  and  the  remaining  angle,  namely  the 

angle  at  C,  equal  to  the  remaining  angle,  the 
angle  at  F. 

For,  if  the  angle  ABC  is  unequal  to  the 
angle  DEF ,  one  of  them  is  greater. 

Let  the  angle  ABC  be  greater; 
and  on  the  straight  line  AB,  and  at  the  point 
B  on  it,  let  the  angle  ABG  be  constructed 
equal  to  the  angle  DEF .  [i.  23] 

Then,  since  the  angle  A  is  equal  to  D, 
and  the  angle  ABG  to  the  angle  DEF, 
therefore  the  remaining  angle  AGB  is  equal  to  the  remaining  angle  DFE.  [i.  32] 
Therefore  the  triangle  ABG  is  equiangular  with  the  triangle  DEF. 
Therefore,  as  AB  is  to  BG ,  so  is  DE  to  EF.  [vi.  4] 

But,  as  DE  is  to  EF,  so  by  hypothesis  is  A  B  to  BC ; 
therefore  AB  has  the  same  ratio  to  each  of  the  straight  lines  BC,  BG;  [v.  11] 

therefore  BC  is  equal  to  BG,  [v.  9] 

so  that  the  angle  at  C  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  BGC.  [i.  5] 

But,  by  hypothesis,  the  angle  at  C  is  less  than  a  right  angle; 

therefore  the  angle  BGC  is  also  less  than  a  right  angle; 
so  that  the  angle  AGB  adjacent  to  it  is  greater  than  a  right  angle,  [i.  13] 
And  it  was  proved  equal  to  the  angle  at  F; 

therefore  the  angle  at  F  is  also  greater  than  a  right  angle. 

But  it  is  by  hypothesis  less  than  a  right  angle:  which  is  absurd. 

Therefore  the  angle  ABC  is  not  unequal  to  the  angle  DEF ; 

therefore  it  is  equal  to  it. 

But  the  angle  at  A  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  at  D; 
therefore  the  remaining  angle  at  C  is  equal  to  the  remaining  angle  at  F.  [i.  32] 
Therefore  the  triangle  ABC  is  equiangular  with  the  triangle  DEF. 

But,  again,  let  each  of  the  angles  at  C ,  F  be  supposed  not  less  than  a  right 
A  angle; 

I  say  again  that,  in  this  case  too,  the  triangle 
ABC  is  equiangular  with  the  triangle  DEF. 

For,  with  the  same  construction,  we  can  prove 
similarly  that 

BC  is  equal  to  BG; 

so  that  the  angle  at  C  is  also  equal  to  the  angle 
BGC.  [i.  5] 

But  the  angle  at  C  is  not  less  than  a  right  angle; 
therefore  neither  is  the  angle  BGC  less  than  a  right  angle. 

Thus  in  the  triangle  BGC  the  two  angles  are  not  less  than  two  right  angles : 
which  is  impossible.  [i.  17] 

Therefore,  once  more,  the  angle  ABC  is  not  unequal  to  the  angle  DEF; 
therefore  it  is  equal  to  it. 

But  the  angle  at  A  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  at  D; 
therefore  the  remaining  angle  at  C  is  equal  to  the  remaining  angle  at  F.  [i.  32] 
Therefore  the  triangle  ABC  is  equiangular  with  the  triangle  DEF. 
Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 


106 


EUCLID 


Proposition  8 

If  in  a  right-angled  triangle  a  perpendicular  he  drawn  from  the  right  angle  to  the 
base,  the  triangles  adjoining  the  perpendicular  are  similar  both  to  the  whole  and  to 
one  another. 

Let  ABC  be  a  right-angled  triangle  having  the  angle  BAC  right,  and  let  AD 
be  drawn  from  A  perpendicular  to  BC; 

I  say  that  each  of  the  triangles  ABD,  ADC  is  similar  to  the  whole  ABC 
and,  further,  they  are  similar  to  one  another. 

For,  since  the  angle  BAC  is  equal  to  the  angle  ADB,  for  each  is  right, 
and  the  angle  at  B  is  common  to  the  two  triangles 
ABC  and  ABD, 

therefore  the  remaining  angle  AC B  is  equal  to  the 
remaining  angle  BAD;  [i.  32] 

therefore  the  triangle  ABC  is  equiangular  with 
the  triangle  ABD. 

Therefore,  as  BC  which  subtends  the  right 
angle  in  the  triangle  ABC  is  to  BA  which  sub¬ 
tends  the  right  angle  in  the  triangle  ABD,  so  is 
A B  itself  which  subtends  the  angle  at  C  in  the  triangle  ABC  to  BD  which 
subtends  the  equal  angle  BAD  in  the  triangle  ABD,  and  so  also  is  A C  to  AD 
which  subtends  the  angle  at  B  common  to  the  two  triangles.  [vi.  4] 

Therefore  the  triangle  ABC  is  both  equiangular  to  the  triangle  ABD  and 
has  the  sides  about  the  equal  angles  proportional. 

Therefore  the  triangle  ABC  is  similar  to  the  triangle  ABD.  [vi.  Def.  1] 
Similarly  we  can  prove  that 

the  triangle  ABC  is  also  similar  to  the  triangle  ADC; 
therefore  each  of  the  triangles  ABD,  ADC  is  similar  to  the  whole  ABC. 

I  say  next  that  the  triangles  ABD,  ADC  are  also  similar  to  one  another. 
For,  since  the  right  angle  BDA  is  equal  to  the  right  angle  ADC, 
and  moreover  the  angle  BAD  was  also  proved  equal  to  the  angle  at  C, 
therefore  the  remaining  angle  at  B  is  also  equal  to  the  remaining  angle  DAC; 

[i.  32] 

therefore  the  triangle  ABD  is  equiangular  with  the  triangle  ADC. 
Therefore,  as  BD  which  subtends  the  angle  BAD  in  the  triangle  ABD  is  to 
DA  which  subtends  the  angle  at  C  in  the  triangle  ADC  equal  to  the  angle  BAD , 
so  is  AD  itself  which  subtends  the  angle  at  B  in  the  triangle  ABD  to  DC  which 
subtends  the  angle  DAC  in  the  triangle  ADC  equal  to  the  angle  at  B ,  and  so 
also  is  BA  to  AC,  these  sides  subtending  the  right  angles;  [vi.  4] 

therefore  the  triangle  ABD  is  similar  to  the  triangle  ADC .  [vi.  Def.  1] 
Therefore  etc. 

Porism.  From  this  it  is  clear  that,  if  in  a  right-angled  triangle  a  perpendic¬ 
ular  be  drawn  from  the  right  angle  to  the  base,  the  straight  line  so  drawn  is  a 
mean  proportional  between  the  segments  of  the  base.  Q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  9 

From  a  given  straight  line  to  cut  off  a  prescribed  part. 

Let  AB  be  the  given  straight  line; 

thus  it  is  required  to  cut  off  from  AB  &  prescribed  part. 


107 


ELEMENTS  VI 


Let  the  third  part  be  that  prescribed. 

Let  a  straight  line  AC  be  drawn  through  from  A  containing  with  A B  any 
angle; 


let  a  point  D  be  taken  at  random  on  AC,  and  let 
DE,  EC  be  made  equal  to  AD.  [i.  3] 

Let  BC  be  joined,  and  through  D  let  DF  be  drawn 
parallel  to  it.  [i.  31] 

Then,  since  FD  has  been  drawn  parallel  to  BC , 
one  of  the  sides  of  the  triangle  ABC , 
therefore,  proportionally,  as  CD  is  to  DA,  so  is  BF 
to  FA.  [vi.  2] 

But  CD  is  double  of  DA ; 

therefore  BF  is  also  double  of  FA ; 
therefore  BA  is  triple  of  AF. 

Therefore  from  the  given  straight  line  AB  the  prescribed  third  part  AF  has 
been  cut  off.  q.  e.  f. 


Proposition  10 

To  cut  a  given  uncut  straight  line  similarly  to  a  given  cut  straight  line. 

Let  AB  be  the  given  uncut  straight  line,  and  AC  the  straight  line  cut  at  the 

points  D,  E;  and  let  them  be  so  placed  as  to  con¬ 
tain  any  angle; 

let  CB  be  joined,  and  through  D,  E  let  DF ,  EG 
be  drawn  parallel  to  BC,  and  through  D  let 
DHK  be  drawn  parallel  to  AB.  [i.  31] 

Therefore  each  of  the  figures  FH ,  HB  is  a 
parallelogram; 

therefore  DH  is  equal  to  FG  and  HK  to  GB. 

[i.34] 

Now,  since  the  straight  line  HE  has  been  drawn  parallel  to  KC ,  one  of  the 
sides  of  the  triangle  DKC, 

therefore,  proportionally,  as  CE  is  to  ED,  so  is  KH  to  HD.  [vi.  2] 
But  KH  is  equal  to  BG,  and  HD  to  GF; 

therefore,  as  CE  is  to  ED,  so  is  BG  to  GF. 

Again,  since  FD  has  been  drawn  parallel  to  GE,  one  of  the  sides  of  the  tri¬ 
angle  AGE, 

therefore,  proportionally,  as  ED  is  to  DA,  so  is  GF  to  FA.  [vi.  2] 
But  it  was  also  proved  that, 

as  CE  is  to  ED,  so  is  BG  to  GF ; 
therefore,  as  CE  is  to  ED,  so  is  BG  to  GF, 
and,  as  ED  is  to  DA,  so  is  GF  to  FA. 

Therefore  the  given  uncut  straight  line  AB  has  been  cut  similarly  to  the 
given  cut  straight  line  AC.  q.  e.  f. 


C 


Proposition  11 

To  two  given  straight  lines  to  find  a  third  proportional. 

Let  BA,  AC  be  the  two  given  straight  lines,  and  let  them  be  placed  so  as  to 
contain  any  angle; 

thus  it  is  required  to  find  a  third  proportional  to  BA,  AC. 


108 


EUCLID 


For  let  them  be  produced  to  the  points  D ,  E,  and  let 
AC;  [i.3] 

let  BC  be  joined,  and  through  D  let  DE  be  drawn  par- 
allel  to  it.  [i.  31] 

Since,  then,  BC  has  been  drawn  parallel  to  DE}  one 
of  the  sides  of  the  triangle  ADE ,  proportionally,  as  A  5 
is  to  BD ,  so  is  AC  to  CE.  [vi.  2] 

But  BD  is  equal  to  AC; 

therefore,  as  A B  is  to  AC,  so  is  AC  to  CE. 
Therefore  to  two  given  straight  lines  AB,  AC  a  third 
proportional  to  them,  CE ,  has  been  found.  q.  e.  f. 


BD  be  made  equal  to 
A 


Proposition  12 


To  three  given  straight  lines  to  find  a  fourth  proportional. 

Let  A,  By  C  be  the  three  given  straight  lines; 

thus  it  is  required  to  find  a  fourth  proportional  to  A,  B}  C . 


Let  two  straight  lines  DE ,  DF  be  set  out  containing  any  angle  EDF; 
let  DG  be  made  equal  to  A,  GE  equal  to  B ,  and  further  DH  equal  to  C; 

let  GH  be  joined,  and  let  EF  be  drawn  through  E  parallel  to  it.  [i.  31] 
Since,  then,  GH  has  been  drawn  parallel  to  EFy  one  of  the  sides  of  the  tri¬ 
angle  DEF , 

therefore,  as  DG  is  to  GE ,  so  is  DH  to  HF.  [vi.  2] 

But  DG  is  equal  to  A,  GE  to  B,  and  DH  to  C; 

therefore,  as  A  is  to  B,  so  is  C  to  HF. 

Therefore  to  the  three  given  straight  lines  A,  B,  C  a  fourth  proportional  HF 
has  been  found.  q.  e.  f. 


Proposition  13 

To  two  given  straight  lines  to  find  a  mean  proportional . 

Let  AB,  BC  be  the  two  given  straight  lines; 
thus  it  is  required  to  find  a  mean  proportional  to  AB, 

BC. 

Let  them  be  placed  in  a  straight  line,  and  let  the 
semicircle  ADC  be  described  on  AC; 
let  BD  be  drawn  from  the  point  B  at  right  angles  to 
the  straight  line  AC,  and  let  AD,  DC  be  joined. 

Since  the  angle  ADC  is  an  angle  in  a  semicircle,  it  is  right.  [hi.  31] 

And,  since,  in  the  right-angled  triangle  ABC,  DB  has  been  drawn  from  the 
right  angle  perpendicular  to  the  base, 


ELEMENTS  VI  109 

therefore  DB  is  a  mean  proportional  between  the  segments  of  the  base,  AB, 
BC.  [vi.  8,  Por.] 

Therefore  to  the  two  given  straight  lines  AB,  BC  a  mean  proportional  DB 
has  been  found.  Q.  e.  f. 

Proposition  14 

In  equal  and  equiangular  'parallelograms  the  sides  about  the  equal  angles  are  re¬ 
ciprocally  proportional ;  and  equiangular  parallelograms  in  which  the  sides  about 
the  equal  angles  are  reciprocally  proportional  are  equal. 

Let  AB,  BC  be  equal  and  equiangular  parallelograms  having  the  angles  at 
B  equal,  and  let  DB,  BE  be  placed  in  a  straight  line; 

therefore  FB,  BG  are  also  in  a  straight  line. 

[i.  14] 

I  say  that,  in  AB,  BC,  the  sides  about  the 
equal  angles  are  reciprocally  proportional,  that 
is  to  say,  that,  as  DB  is  to  BE,  so  is  GB  to 
BF. 

For  let  the  parallelogram  FE  be  completed. 
Since,  then,  the  parallelogram  AB  is  equal 
to  the  parallelogram  BC, 
and  FE  is  another  area, 

therefore,  as  AB  is  to  FE,  so  is  BC  to  FE.  [v.  7] 

But,  as  .4 B  is  to  FE,  so  is  DB  to  BE,  [vi.  1] 

and,  as  BC  is  to  FE,  so  is  GB  to  BF.  [id.] 

therefore  also,  as  DB  is  to  BE,  so  is  GB  to  BF.  [v.  11] 

Therefore  in  the  parallelograms  AB,  BC  the  sides  about  the  equal  angles  are 
reciprocally  proportional. 

Next,  let  GB  be  to  BF  as  DB  to  BE ; 

I  say  that  the  parallelogram  AB  is  equal  to  the  parallelogram  BC. 

For  since,  as  DB  is  to  BE,  so  is  GB  to  BF, 
while,  as  DB  is  to  BE,  so  is  the  parallelogram  AB  to  the  parallelogram  FE, 

[vi.  1] 

and,  as  GB  is  to  BF,  so  is  the  parallelogram  BC  to  the  parallelogram  FE,  [vi.  1] 
therefore  also,  as  AB  is  to  FE,  so  is  BC  to  FE;  [v.  11] 

therefore  the  parallelogram  AB  is  equal  to  the  parallelogram  BC.  [v.  9] 
Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  15 

In  equal  triangles  which  have  one  angle  equal  to  one  angle  the  sides  about  the  equal 
angles  are  reciprocally  proportional;  and  those  triangles  which  have  one  angle  equal 
to  one  angle,  and  in  which  the  sides  about  the  equal  angles  are  reciprocally  propor¬ 
tional,  are  equal. 

Let  ABC,  ADE  be  equal  triangles  having  one  angle  equal  to  one  angle, 
namely  the  angle  BAC  to  the  angle  DAE; 

I  say  that  in  the  triangles  ABC ,  ADE  the  sides  about  the  equal  angles  are 
reciprocally  proportional,  that  is  to  say,  that, 

as  CA  is  to  AD,  so  is  EA  to  AB. 

For  let  them  be  placed  so  that  CA  is  in  a  straight  line  with  AD; 
therefore  EA  is  also  in  a  straight  line  with  AB. 


[I.  14] 


EUCLID 


110 

Let  BD  be  joined. 

Since,  then,  the  triangle  ABC  is  equal  to  the  triangle  ADE ,  and  BAD  is  an¬ 
other  area, 

therefore,  as  the  triangle  CAB  is  to  the  triangle  BAD ,  so  is 
the  triangle  EAD  to  the  triangle  BA D.  [v.  7] 

But,  as  CAB  is  to  BAD,  so  is  CA  to  AD,  [vi.  1] 

and,  as  EAD  is  to  BAD,  so  is  EA  to  AB .  [id.] 

Therefore  also,  as  CA  is  to  AD,  so  is  EA  to  AB.  [v.  11] 

Therefore  in  the  triangles  ABC ,  ADE  the  sides  about 
the  equal  angles  are  reciprocally  proportional. 

Next,  let  the  sides  of  the  triangles  ABC ,  ADE  be  recip¬ 
rocally  proportional,  that  is  to  say,  let  EA  be  to  AB  as 
CA  to  AD; 

I  say  that  the  triangle  ABC  is  equal  to  the  triangle  ADE . 

For,  if  BD  be  again  joined, 

since,  as  CA  is  to  AD,  so  is  EA  to  AB, 
while,  as  CA  is  to  AD,  so  is  the  triangle  ABC  to  the  triangle  BAD, 
and,  as  EA  is  to  AB,  so  is  the  triangle  EAD  to  the  triangle  BAD,  [vi.  1] 
therefore,  as  the  triangle  ABC  is  to  the  triangle  BAD,  so  is  the  triangle  EAD 
to  the  triangle  BAD .  [v.  11] 

Therefore  each  of  the  triangles  ABC,  EAD  has  the  same  ratio  to  BAD. 
Therefore  the  triangle  ABC  is  equal  to  the  triangle  EAD.  [v.  9] 

Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  16 

If  four  straight  lines  he  proportional,  the  rectangle  contained  by  the  extremes  is 
equal  to  the  rectangle  contained  by  the  means;  and,  if  the  rectangle  contained  by  the 
extremes  be  equal  to  the  rectangle  contained  by  the  means,  the  four  straight  lines 
will  be  proportional. 

Let  the  four  straight  lines  AB,  CD,  E,  F  be  proportional,  so  that,  as  A B  is  to 
CD,  so  is  E  to  F; 

I  say  that  the  rectangle  contained  by  AB,  F  is  equal  to  the  rectangle  con¬ 
tained  by  CD,  E. 


ll  - -  -  ■ 

H 

A  B 

E -  f - 

Let  AG,  CH  be  drawn  from  the  points  A,  C  at  right  angles  to  the  straight 
lines  AB,  CD,  and  let  AG  be  made  equal  to  F,  and  CH  equal  to  E. 

Let  the  parallelograms  BG,  DH  be  completed. 

Then  since,  as  A  B  is  to  CD,  so  is  E  to  F , 

while  E  is  equal  to  CH,  and  F  to  AG, 
therefore,  as  A B  is  to  CD,  so  is  CH  to  AG. 

Therefore  in  the  parallelograms  BG,  DII  the  sides  about  the  equal  angles 
are  reciprocally  proportional. 

But  those  equiangular  parallelograms  in  which  the  sides  about  the  equal 
angles  are  reciprocally  proportional  are  equal;  [vi.  14] 


Ill 


ELEMENTS  VI 

therefore  the  parallelogram  BG  is  equal  to  the  parallelogram  DH . 

And  BG  is  the  rectangle  AB,  F,  for  AG  is  equal  to  F; 

and  DH  is  the  rectangle  CD,  E ,  for  E  is  equal  to  CH; 
therefore  the  rectangle  contained  by  AB,  F  is  equal  to  the  rectangle  contained 
by  CD,  E. 

Next,  let  the  rectangle  contained  by  AB,  F  be  equal  to  the  rectangle  con¬ 
tained  by  CD,  E; 

I  say  that  the  four  straight  lines  will  be  proportional,  so  that,  as  A B  is  to 
CD,  so  is  E  to  F. 

For,  with  the  same  construction, 

since  the  rectangle  AB,  F  is  equal  to  the  rectangle  CD,  E, 
and  the  rectangle  AB,  F  is  BG,  for  AG  is  equal  to  F, 
and  the  rectangle  CD,  E  is  DH,  for  CH  is  equal  to  E, 
therefore  BG  is  equal  to  DH. 

And  they  are  equiangular. 

But  in  equal  and  equiangular  parallelograms  the  sides  about  the  equal  angles 
are  reciprocally  proportional.  [vi.  14] 

Therefore,  as  A B  is  to  CD,  so  is  CH  to  AG. 

But  CH  is  equal  to  E,  and  AG  to  F; 

therefore,  as  AB  is  to  CD,  so  is  E  to  F. 

Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  17 

If  three  straight  lines  be  proportional,  the  rectangle  contained  by  the  extremes  is 
equal  to  the  square  on  the  mean;  and,  if  the  rectangle  contained  by  the  extremes  be 
equal  to  the  square  on  the  mean,  the  three  straight  lines  will  be  proportional. 

Let  the  three  straight  lines  A,  B,  C  be  proportional,  so  that,  as  A  is  to  B,  so 
is  B  to  G; 

I  say  that  the  rectangle  contained  by  A,  C  is  equal  to  the  square  on  B , 

A _  Let  D  be  made  equal  to  B. 

Then,  since,  as  A  is  to  B,  so  is  B 
B -  D -  to  C, 

c _  and  B  is  equal  to  D, 

therefore,  as  A  is  to  B,  so  is  D  to  C. 
But,  if  four  straight  lines  be  proportional,  the  rectangle  contained  by  the 
extremes  is  equal  to  the  rectangle  contained  by  the  means.  [vi.  16] 

Therefore  the  rectangle  A,  C  is  equal  to  the  rectangle  B ,  D. 

But  the  rectangle  B ,  D  is  the  square  on  B,  for  B  is  equal  to  D; 
therefore  the  rectangle  contained  by  A,  C  is  equal  to  the  square  on  B. 
Next,  let  the  rectangle  A,  C  be  equal  to  the  square  on  B;  I  say  that,  as  A  is 
to  B ,  so  is  B  to  C. 

For,  with  the  same  construction, 

since  the  rectangle  A,  C  is  equal  to  the  square  on  B , 
while  the  square  on  B  is  the  rectangle  B,  D,  for  B  is  equal  to  D, 
therefore  the  rectangle  A,  C  is  equal  to  the  rectangle  B,  D. 

But,  if  the  rectangle  contained  by  the  extremes  be  equal  to  that  contained 
by  the  means,  the  four  straight  lines  are  proportional.  [vi.  16] 

Therefore,  as  A  is  to  B,  so  is  D  to  C . 


EUCLID 


112 

But  B  is  equal  to  D; 

therefore,  as  A  is  to  B ,  so  is  B  to  C. 

Therefore  etc.  >  q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  18 

On  a  given  straight  line  to  describe  a  rectilineal  figure  similar  and  similarly  situated 
to  a  given  rectilineal  figure. 

Let  A B  be  the  given  straight  line  and  CE  the  given  rectilineal  figure; 
thus  it  is  required  to  describe  on  the  straight  line  A  B  a  rectilineal  figure  similar 
and  similarly  situated  to  the  rectilineal  figure  CE. 

Let  DF  be  joined,  and  on  the 
straight  line  A  B,  and  at  the 
points  Ay  B  on  it,  let  the  angle 
GAB  be  constructed  equal  to  the 
angle  at  C,  and  the  angle  ABG 
equal  to  the  angle  CDF .  [i.  23] 

Therefore  the  remaining  angle 
CFD  is  equal  to  the  angle  AGB; 

therefore  the  triangle  FCD  is  equiangular  with  the  triangle  GAB. 

Therefore,  proportionally,  as  FD  is  to  GBy  so  is  FC  to  GAy  and  CD  to  AB. 

Again,  on  the  straight  line  BGy  and  at  the  points  By  G  on  it,  let  the  angle 
BGH  be  constructed  equal  to  the  angle  DFEy  and  the  angle  GBH  equal  to  the 
angle  FDE.  [i.  23] 

Therefore  the  remaining  angle  at  E  is  equal  to  the  remaining  angle  at  H ; 

[I.  32] 

therefore  the  triangle  FDE  is  equiangular  with  the  triangle  GBH ; 
therefore,  proportionally,  as  FD  is  to  GBy  so  is  FE  to  GHy  and  ED  to  HB . 

[vi.  4] 

But  it  was  also  proved  that,  as  FD  is  to  GBy  so  is  FC  to  GAy  and  CD  to  AB; 
therefore  also,  as  FC  is  to  AG,  so  is  CD  to  ABy  and  FE  to  GHy  and  further  ED 
to  HB. 

And,  since  the  angle  CFD  is  equal  to  the  angle  AGBy 
and  the  angle  DFE  to  the  angle  BGHy 
therefore  the  whole  angle  CFE  is  equal  to  the  whole  angle  AGH. 

For  the  same  reason 

the  angle  CDE  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  ABH. 

And  the  angle  at  C  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  at  A, 

and  the  angle  at  E  to  the  angle  at  H. 

Therefore  AH  is  equiangular  with  CE; 

and  they  have  the  sides  about  their  equal  angles  proportional; 

therefore  the  rectilineal  figure  AH  is  similar  to  the  rectilineal  figure  CE. 

[vi.  Def.  1] 

Therefore  on  the  given  straight  line  AB  the  rectilineal  figure  AH  has  been 
described  similar  and  similarly  situated  to  the  given  rectilineal  figure  CE. 

Q.  E.  F. 

Proposition  19 

'  i  i  >  ■’/  1  , 

Similar  triangles  are  to  one  another  in  the  duplicate  ratio  of  the  corresponding  sides. 

Let  ABCy  DEF  be  similar  triangles  having  the  angle  at  B  equal  to  the  angle 


0 


ELEMENTS  VI 


113 


at  E ,  and  such  that,  as  A  B  is  to  BC,  so  is  DE  to  EF ,  so  that  BC  corresponds 
to  EF)  [v.  Def.  11] 

I  say  that  the  triangle  ABC  has  to  the  triangle  DEF  a  ratio  duplicate  of 
that  which  BC  has  to  EF. 


For  let  a  third  proportional  BG  be 
taken  to  BC,  EF,  so  that,  as  BC  is  to 
EF,  so  is  EF  to  BG;  [vi.  11] 

and  let  AG  be  joined. 

Since  then,  as  AB  is  to  BC,  so  is  DE 
to  EF, 

therefore,  alternately,  as  AB  is  to  DE, 
so  is  BC  to  EF.  [v.  16] 

But,  as  BC  is  to  EF,  so  is  EF  to  BG; 

therefore  also,  as  AB  is  to  DE,  so  is  EF  to  BG.  [v.  11] 

Therefore  in  the  triangles  ABG,  DEF  the  sides  about  the  equal  angles  are 
reciprocally  proportional. 

But  those  triangles  which  have  one  angle  equal  to  one  angle,  and  in  which 
the  sides  about  the  equal  angles  are  reciprocally  proportional,  are  equal; 

[vi.  15] 


therefore  the  triangle  ABG  is  equal  to  the  triangle  DEF. 

Now  since,  as  BC  is  to  EF,  so  is  EF  to  BG, 
and,  if  three  straight  lines  be  proportional,  the  first  has  to  the  third  a  ratio 
duplicate  of  that  which  it  has  to  the  second,  [v.  Def.  9] 

therefore  BC  has  to  BG  a  ratio  duplicate  of  that  which  CB  has  to  EF. 

But,  as  CB  is  to  BG,  so  is  the  triangle  ABC  to  the  triangle  ABG ;  [vi.  1] 
therefore  the  triangle  ABC  also  has  to  the  triangle  ABG  a  ratio  duplicate  of 
that  which  BC  has  to  EF. 

But  the  triangle  ABG  is  equal  to  the  triangle  DEF ; 
therefore  the  triangle  ABC  also  has  to  the  triangle  DEF  a  ratio  duplicate  of 
that  which  BC  has  to  EF. 

Therefore  etc. 

Porism.  From  this  it  is  manifest  that,  if  three  straight  lines  be  proportional, 
then,  as  the  first  is  to  the  third,  so  is  the  figure  described  on  the  first  to  that 
which  is  similar  and  similarly  described  on  the  second.  Q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  20 

Similar  polygons  are  divided  into  similar  triangles,  and  into  triangles  equal  in 
multitude  and  in  the  same  ratio  as  the  wholes,  and  the  polygon  has  to  the  polygon 
a  ratio  duplicate  of  that  which  the  corresponding  side  has  to  the  corresponding  side. 
Let  ABCDE,  FGHKL  be  similar  polygons,  and  let  AB  correspond  to  FG ; 
I  say  that  the  polygons  ABCDE,  FGHKL  are  divided  into  similar  triangles, 
and  into  triangles  equal  in  multitude  and  in  the  same  ratio  as  the  wholes,  and 
the  polygon  ABCDE  has  to  the  polygon  FGHKL  a  ratio  duplicate  of  that 
which  AB  has  to  FG. 

Let  BE,  EC,  GL,  LH  be  joined. 

Now,  since  the  polygon  ABCDE  is  similar  to  the  polygon  FGHKL, 
the  angle  BAE  is  equal  to  the  angle  GFL ; 
and,  as  BA  is  to  AE,  so  is  GF  to  FL.  [vi.  Def.  1] 

Since  then  ABE,  FGL  are  two  triangles  having  one  angle  equal  to  one  angle 


114  EUCLID 

and  the  sides  about  the  equal  angles  proportional, 

therefore  the  triangle  ABE  is  equiangular  with  the  triangle  FGL;  [vi.  6] 
so  that  it  is  also  similar;  [vi.  4  and  Def.  1] 

therefore  the  angle  ABE  is 
equal  to  the  angle  FGL. 

But  the  whole  angle  ABC  is 
also  equal  to  the  whole  angle 
FGH  because  of  the  similarity 
of  the  polygons; 
therefore  the  remaining  angle 
EBC  is  equal  to  the  angle 
LGH. 

And,  since,  because  of  the  similarity  of  the  triangles  ABE,  FGL , 
as  EB  is  to  BA,  so  is  LG  to  GF , 
and  moreover  also,  because  of  the  similarity  of  the  polygons, 
as  A  B  is  to  BC,  so  is  FG  to  GH, 

therefore,  ex  aequali,  as  EB  is  to  BC,  so  is  LG  to  GH ;  [v.  22] 

that  is,  the  sides  about  the  equal  angles  EBC,  LGH  are  proportional; 
therefore  the  triangle  EBC  is  equiangular  with  the  triangle  LGH,  [vi.  6] 
so  that  the  triangle  EBC  is  also  similar  to  the  triangle  LGH.  [vi.  4  and  Def.  1] 

For  the  same  reason 

the  triangle  ECD  is  also  similar  to  the  triangle  LHK. 

Therefore  the  similar  polygons  ABCDE,  FGHKL  have  been  divided  into 
similar  triangles,  and  into  triangles  equal  in  multitude. 

I  say  that  they  are  also  in  the  same  ratio  as  the  wholes,  that  is,  in  such  man¬ 
ner  that  the  triangles  are  proportional,  and  ABE,  EBC,  ECD  are  antecedents, 
while  FGL ,  LGH,  LHK  are  their  consequents,  and  that  the  polygon  ABCDE 
has  to  the  polygon  FGHKL  a  ratio  duplicate  of  that  which  the  corresponding 
side  has  to  the  corresponding  side,  that  is  AB  to  FG. 

For  let  AC,  FH  be  joined. 

Then  since,  because  of  the  similarity  of  the  polygons, 

the  angle  ABC  is  equal  to  the  angle  FGH, 
and,  as  A B  is  to  BC,  so  is  FG  to  GH, 
the  triangle  ABC  is  equiangular  with  the  triangle  FGH;  [vi.  6] 
therefore  the  angle  BAC  is  equal  to  the  angle  GFH, 
and  the  angle  BCA  to  the  angle  GHF. 

And,  since  the  angle  BAM  is  equal  to  the  angle  GFN, 

and  the  angle  ABM  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  FGN, 
therefore  the  remaining  angle  AMB  is  also  equal  to  the  remaining  angle  FNG; 

[I.  32] 

therefore  the  triangle  ABM  is  equiangular  with  the  triangle  FGN. 

Similarly  we  can  prove  that 

the  triangle  BMC  is  also  equiangular  with  the  triangle  GNH. 

Therefore,  proportionally,  as  AM  is  to  MB,  so  is  FN  to  NG, 
and,  as  BM  is  to  MC,  so  is  GN  to  NH; 

so  that,  in  addition,  ex  aequali, 

as  AM  is  to  MC,  so  is  FN  to  NH. 

But,  as  AM  is  to  MC,  so  is  the  triangle  ABM  to  MBC,  and  AME  to  EMC; 
for  they  are  to  one  another  as  their  bases.  [vi.  1] 


ELEMENTS  VI  115 

Therefore  also,  as  one  of  the  antecedents  is  to  one  of  the  consequents,  so  are 
all  the  antecedents  to  all  the  consequents;  [v.  12] 

therefore,  as  the  triangle  AMB  is  to  BMC ,  so  is  ABE  to  CBE . 

But,  as  AMB  is  to  BMC ,  so  is  AM  to  MC\ 
therefore  also,  as  AM  is  to  MC,  so  is  the  triangle  ABE  to  the  triangle  EBC . 

For  the  same  reason  also, 

as  FN  is  to  NH,  so  is  the  triangle  FGL  to  the  triangle  GLH . 

And,  as  AM  is  to  MC,  so  is  FN  to  NH; 
therefore  also,  as  the  triangle  ABE  is  to  the  triangle  BEC ,  so  is  the  triangle 
FGL  to  the  triangle  GLH ; 

and,  alternately,  as  the  triangle  ABE  is  to  the  triangle  FGL ,  so  is  the  triangle 
BEC  to  the  triangle  GLH. 

Similarly  we  can  prove,  if  BD,  GK  be  joined,  that,  as  the  triangle  BEC  is  to 
the  triangle  LGH,  so  also  is  the  triangle  ECD  to  the  triangle  LHK. 

And  since,  as  the  triangle  ABE  is  to  the  triangle  FGL,  so  is  EBC  to  LGH, 
and  further  ECD  to  LHK , 

therefore  also,  as  one  of  the  antecedents  is  to  one  of  the  consequents,  so  are  all 
the  antecedents  to  all  the  consequents;  [v.  12] 

therefore,  as  the  triangle  ABE  is  to  the  triangle  FGL , 
so  is  the  polygon  ABCDE  to  the  polygon  FGHKL. 

But  the  triangle  ABE  has  to  the  triangle  FGL  a  ratio  duplicate  of  that  which 
the  corresponding  side  AB  has  to  the  corresponding  sid eFG;  for  similar  tri¬ 
angles  are  in  the  duplicate  ratio  of  the  corresponding  sides.  [vi.  19] 

Therefore  the  polygon  ABCDE  also  has  to  the  polygon  FGHKL  a  ratio  dup¬ 
licate  of  that  which  the  corresponding  side  AB  has  to  the  corresponding  side 
FG. 

Therefore  etc. 

Porism.  Similarly  also  it  can  be  proved  in  the  case  of  quadrilaterals  that 
they  are  in  the  duplicate  ratio  of  the  corresponding  sides.  And  it  was  also 
proved  in  the  case  of  triangles;  therefore  also,  generally,  similar  rectilineal 
figures  are  to  one  another  in  the  duplicate  ratio  of  the  corresponding  sides. 

Q.  E.  D. 


Proposition  21 

Figures  which  are  similar  to  the  same  rectilineal  figure  are  also  similar  to 
one  another. 

For  let  each  of  the  rectilineal  figures  A,  B  be  similar  to  C;  I  say  that  A  is 
also  similar  to  B. 

For,  since  A  is  similar  to  C , 


it  is  equiangular  with  it  and  has  the  sides  about  the  equal  angles  proportional. 

[vi.  Def.  1] 


Again,  since  B  is  similar  to  C, 


116  EUCLID 

it  is  equiangular  with  it  and  has  the  sides  about  the  equal  angles  proportional. 

Therefore  each  of  the  figures  A,  B  is  equiangular  with  C  and  with  C  has  the 
sides  about  the  equal  angles  proportional; 

therefore  A  is  similar  to  B.  q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  22 

If  four  straight  lines  be  proportional ,  the  rectilineal  figures  similar  and  similarly 
described  upon  them  will  also  be  proportional;  and  if  the  rectilineal  figures  similar 
and  similarly  described  upon  them  be  proportional ,  the  straight  lines  will  them¬ 
selves  also  be  proportional. 

Let  the  four  straight  lines  AB ,  CD,  EF,  GH  be  proportional, 
so  that,  as  AB  is  to  CD,  so  is  EF  to  GH, 
and  let  there  be  described  on  AB,  CD  the  similar  and  similarly  situated  recti¬ 
lineal  figures  KAB,  LCD, 

and  on  EF,  GH  the  similar  and  similarly  situated  rectilineal  figures  MF,  NH; 
I  say  that,  as  KAB  is  to  LCD,  so  is  MF  to  NH. 

For  let  there  be  taken  a  third  proportional  0  to  AB,  CD,  and  a  third  pro¬ 
portional  P  to  EF,  GH.  [vi.  11] 

Then  since,  as  A B  is  to  CD,  so  is  EF  to  GH, 

and,  as  CD  is  to  0,  so  is  GH  to  P, 
therefore,  ex  aequali,  as  AB  is  to  0,  so  is  EF  to  P.  [v.  22] 

But,  as  AB  is  to  0,  so  is  KAB  to  LCD,  [vi.  19,  Por.] 

and,  as  EF  is  to  P,  so  is  MF  to  NH ; 
therefore  also,  as  KAB  is  to  LCD,  so  is  MF  to  NH.  [v.  11] 

Ann 

C  D  E  F  G  H 

_  _  Z7 

0  R 

Next,  let  MF  be  to  NH  as  KAB  is  to  LCD; 

I  say  also  that,  as  A B  is  to  CD,  so  is  EF  to  GH. 

For,  if  EF  is  not  to  GH  as  AB  to  CD, 

let  EF  be  to  QR  as  AB  to  CD,  [vi.  12] 

and  on  QR  let  the  rectilineal  figure  SR  be  described  similar  and  similarly  sit¬ 
uated  to  either  of  the  two  MF,  NH.  [vi.  18] 

Since  then,  as  AB  is  to  CD,  so  is  EF  to  QR, 
and  there  have  been  described  on  AB,  CD  the  similar  and  similarly  situated 
figures  KAB,  LCD, 

and  on  EF,  QR  the  similar  and  similarly  situated  figures  MF,  SR, 
therefore,  as  KAB  is  to  LCD,  so  is  MF  to  SR. 

But  also,  by  hypothesis, 

as  KAB  is  to  LCD ,  so  is  MF  to  NH; 
therefore  also,  as  MF  is  to  SR,  so  is  MF  to  NH. 


[v.  11] 


117 


ELEMENTS  VI 

Therefore  MF  has  the  same  ratio  to  each  of  the  figures  NH,  SR; 

therefore  NH  is  equal  to  SR.  [v.  9] 

But  it  is  also  similar  and  similarly  situated  to  it; 

therefore  GH  is  equal  to  QR. 

And,  since,  as  AB  is  to  CD,  so  is  EF  to  QR, 

while  QR  is  equal  to  GH, 
therefore,  as  AB  is  to  CD,  so  is  EF  to  GH. 

Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  23 

Equiangular  'parallelograms  have  to  one  another  the  ratio  compounded  of  the  ratios 
of  their  sides. 

Let  AC,  CF  be  equiangular  parallelograms  having  the  angle  BCD  equal  to 
the  angle  ECG; 

I  say  that  the  parallelogram  AC  has  to  the  parallelogram  CF  the  ratio  com¬ 
pounded  of  the  ratios  of  the  sides. 


For  let  them  be  placed  so  that  BC  is  in  a  straight  line  with  CG; 

therefore  DC  is  also  in  a  straight  line  with  CE. 

Let  the  parallelogram  DG  be  completed; 

let  a  straight  line  K  be  set  out,  and  let  it  be  contrived  that, 
as  BC  is  to  CG,  so  is  K  to  L, 

and,  as  DC  is  to  CE,  so  is  L  to  M.  [vi.  12] 

Then  the  ratios  of  K  to  L  and  of  L  to  M  are  the  same  as  the  ratios  of  the 
sides,  namely  of  BC  to  CG  and  of  DC  to  CE. 

But  the  ratio  of  K  to  M  is  compounded  of  the  ratio  of  K  to  L  and  of  that  of 
L  to  M ; 

so  that  K  has  also  to  M  the  ratio  compounded  of  the  ratios  of  the  sides. 
Now  since,  as  BC  is  to  CG ,  so  is  the  parallelogram  AC  to  the  parallelogram 
CH ,  [vi.  1] 

while,  as  BC  is  to  CG,  so  is  K  to  L. 
therefore  also,  as  K  is  to  L,  so  is  AC  to  CH.  [v.  11] 

Again,  since,  as  DC  is  to  CE,  so  is  the  parallelogram  CH  to  CF,  [vi.  1] 
while,  as  DC  is  to  CE,  so  is  L  to  M, 

therefore  also,  as  L  is  to  M,  so  is  the  parallelogram  CH  to  the  parallelogram 
CF.  [v.  11] 

Since,  then,  it  was  proved  that,  as  K  is  to  L,  so  is  the  parallelogram  AC  to  the 
parallelogram  CH, 

and,  as  L  is  to  M,  so  is  the  parallelogram  CH  to  the  parallelogram  CF, 
therefore,  ex  aequali,  as  K  is  to  M,  so  is  AC  to  the  parallelogram  CF. 

But  K  has  to  M  the  ratio  compounded  of  the  ratios  of  the  sides; 
therefore  AC  also  has  to  CF  the  ratio  compounded  of  the  ratios  of  the  sides. 
Therefore  etc.  Q.  e.  d. 


118 


EUCLID 


Proposition  24 

In  any  parallelogram  the  parallelograms  about  the  diameter  are  similar  both  to  the 
whole  and  to  one  another . 

Let  ABCD  be  a  parallelogram,  and  AC  its  diameter,  and  let  EG,  HK  be 
parallelograms  about  AC; 

I  say  that  each  of  the  parallelograms  EG,  HK  is 
similar  both  to  the  whole  ABCD  and  to  the  other. 

For,  since  EF  has  been  drawn  parallel  to  BC,  one 
of  the  sides  of  the  triangle  ABC, 
proportionally,  as  BE  is  to  EA,  so  is  CF  to  FA. 

[vi.  2] 

Again,  since  FG  has  been  drawn  parallel  to  CD,  one  of  the  sides  of  the  tri¬ 
angle  ACD, 

proportionally,  as  CF  is  to  FA,  so  is  DG  to  GA.  [vi.  2] 

But  it  was  proved  that, 

as  CF  is  to  FA,  so  also  is  BE  to  EA ; 
therefore  also,  as  BE  is  to  EA,  so  is  DG  to  GA, 
and  therefore,  componendo, 

as  BA  is  to  AE,  so  is  DA  to  AG,  [v.  18] 

and,  alternately, 

as  BA  is  to  AD,  so  is  EA  to  AG.  [v.  16] 

Therefore  in  the  parallelograms  ABCD,  EG,  the  sides  about  the  common 
angle  BAD  are  proportional. 

And,  since  GF  is  parallel  to  DC, 

the  angle  AFG  is  equal  to  the  angle  DC  A; 
and  the  angle  DAC  is  common  to  the  two  triangles  ADC,  AGF; 
therefore  the  triangle  ADC  is  equiangular  with  the  triangle  AGF. 

For  the  same  reason 

the  triangle  ACB  is  also  equiangular  with  the  triangle  AFE, 
and  the  whole  parallelogram  ABCD  is  equiangular  with  the  parallelogram  EG. 
Therefore,  proportionally, 

as  AD  is  to  DC,  so  is  AG  to  GF, 
as  DC  is  to  CA,  so  is  GF  to  FA, 
as  AC  is  to  CB ,  so  is  AF  to  FE, 
and  further,  as  CB  is  to  BA,  so  is  FE  to  EA. 

And,  since  it  was  proved  that, 

as  DC  is  to  CA,  so  is  GF  to  FA, 
and,  as  AC  is  to  CB,  so  is  AF  to  FE, 

therefore,  ex  aequali,  as  DC  is  to  CB,  so  is  GF  to  FE.  [v.  22] 
Therefore  in  the  parallelograms  ABCD,  EG  the  sides  about  the  equal  angles 
are  proportional; 

therefore  the  parallelogram  ABCD  is  similar  to  the  parallelogram  EG. 

[vi.  Def.  1] 

For  the  same  reason 

the  parallelogram  ABCD  is  also  simitar  to  the  parallelogram  KH; 
therefore  each  of  the  parallelograms  EG,  HK  is  similar  to  ABCD. 

But  figures  similar  to  the  same  rectilineal  figure  are  also  similar  to  one  an¬ 
other;  [vi.  21] 


ELEMENTS  VI  119 

therefore  the  parallelogram  EG  is  also  similar  to  the  parallelogram  HK. 
Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  25 

To  construct  one  and  the  same  figure  similar  to  a  given  rectilineal  figure  and  equal 
to  another  given  rectilineal  figure. 

Let  ABC  be  the  given  rectilineal  figure  to  which  the  figure  to  be  constructed 
must  be  similar,  and  D  that  to  which  it  must  be  equal; 
thus  it  is  required  to  construct  one  and  the  same  figure  similar  to  ABC  and 
equal  to  D . 


Let  there  be  applied  to  BC  the  parallelogram  BE  equal  to  the  triangle  ABC 
[i.  44],  and  to  CE  the  parallelogram  CM  equal  to  D  in  the  angle  FCE  which  is 
equal  to  the  angle  CBL.  [i.  45] 

Therefore  BC  is  in  a  straight  line  with  CF ,  and  LE  with  EM. 

Now  let  GH  be  taken  a  mean  proportional  to  BC ,  CF  [vi.  13],  and  on  GH  let 
KGH  be  described  similar  and  similarly  situated  to  ABC.  [vi.  18] 

Then,  since,  as  BC  is  to  GH,  so  is  GH  to  CF, 
and,  if  three  straight  lines  be  proportional,  as  the  first  is  to  the  third,  so  is  the 
figure  on  the  first  to  the  similar  and  similarly  situated  figure  described  on  the 
second,  [vi.  19,  Por.] 

therefore,  as  BC  is  to  CF,  so  is  the  triangle  ABC  to  the  triangle  KGH. 
But,  as  BC  is  to  CF,  so  also  is  the  parallelogram  BE  to  the  parallelogram  EF. 

[vi.  1] 

Therefore  also,  as  the  triangle  ABC  is  to  the  triangle  KGH,  so  is  the  paral¬ 
lelogram  BE  to  the  parallelogram  EF) 

therefore,  alternately,  as  the  triangle  ABC  is  to  the  parallelogram  BE,  so  is  the 
triangle  KGH  to  the  parallelogram  EF.  [v.  16] 

But  the  triangle  ABC  is  equal  to  the  parallelogram  BE; 

therefore  the  triangle  KGH  is  also  equal  to  the  parallelogram  EF. 

But  the  parallelogram  EF  is  equal  to  D ; 

therefore  KGH  is  also  equal  to  D. 

And  KGH  is  also  similar  to  ABC. 

Therefore  one  and  the  same  figure  KGH  has  been  constructed  similar  to  the 
given  rectilineal  figure  ABC  and  equal  to  the  other  given  figure  D.  q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  26 

If  Jr om  a  parallelogram  there  be  taken  away  a  parallelogra  m  similar  and  simila  rly 
situated  to  the  whole  and  having  a  common  angle  with  it,  it  is  about  the  same  dia¬ 
meter  with  the  whole. 

For  from  the  parallelogram  A  BCD  let  there  be  taken  away  the  parallelo- 


120  EUCLID 

gram  AF  similar  and  similarly  situated  to  ABCD ,  and  having  the  angle  DAB 
common  with  it; 

I  say  that  ABCD  is  about  the  same  diameter  with 
AF. 

For  suppose  it  is  not,  but,  if  possible,  let  AHC  be 
the  diameter  <  of  ABCD>,  let  GF  be  produced  and 
carried  through  to  H ,  and  let  HK  be  drawn  through 
H  parallel  to  either  of  the  straight  lines  AD ,  BC. 

[i.  31] 

Since,  then,  ABCD  is  about  the  same  diameter  with  KG,  therefore,  as  DA  is 
to  AB,  so  is  GA  to  AK.  [vi.  24] 

But  also,  because  of  the  similarity  of  ABCD,  EG, 

as  BA  is  to  AB,  so  is  GA  to  AE ; 
therefore  also,  as  GA  is  to  AK,  so  is  GA  to  AE.  [v.  11] 

Therefore  GA  has  the  same  ratio  to  each  of  the  straight  lines  AK,  AE. 

Therefore  AE  is  equal  to  AK  [v.  9],  the  less  to  the  greater:  wrhich  is  impos¬ 
sible. 

Therefore  ABCD  cannot  but  be  about  the  same  diameter  with  AF; 
therefore  the  parallelogram  ABCD  is  about  the  same  diameter  with  the  paral¬ 
lelogram  AF. 

Therefore  etc.  Q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  27 

Of  all  the  'parallelograms  applied  to  the  same  straight  line  and  deficient  by  parallelo - 
grammic  figures  similar  and  similarly  situated  to  that  described  on  the  half  of  the 
straight  line ,  that  parallelogram  is  greatest  which  is  applied  to  the  half  of  the  straight 
line  and  is  similar  to  the  defect. 

Let  AB  be  a  straight  line  and  let  it  be  bisected  at  C;  let  there  be  applied  to 
the  straight  line  AB  the  parallelogram  AD  defi¬ 
cient  by  the  parallelogrammic  figure  DB  described 
on  the  half  of  AB,  that  is,  CB; 

I  say  that,  of  the  parallelograms  applied  to  AB 
and  deficient  by  parallelogrammic  figures  similar 
and  similarly  situated  to  DB,  AD  is  greatest. 

For  let  there  be  applied  to  the  straight  line  AB 
the  parallelogram  AF  deficient  by  the  parallelo¬ 
grammic  figure  FB  similar  and  similarly  situated 
to  DB; 

I  say  that  AB  is  greater  than  AF. 

For,  since  the  parallelogram  DB  is  similar  to  the  parallelogram  FB, 

they  are  about  the  same  diameter.  {vi.  26] 

Let  their  diameter  DB  be  drawn,  and  let  the  figure  be  described. 

Then,  since  CF  is  equal  to  FE,  [i.  43] 

and  FB  is  common, 

therefore  the  whole  CH  is  equal  to  the  w’hole  KE. 

But  CH  is  equal  to  CG,  since  AC  is  also  equal  to  CB.  [i.  36] 

Therefore  GC  is  also  equal  to  EK. 

Let  CB  be  added  to  each; 

therefore  the  wdiole  AF  is  equal  to  the  gnomon  LMN; 


ELEMENTS  VI  121 

so  that  the  parallelogram  DB,  that  is,  AD ,  is  greater  than  the  parallelogram 
AF. 

Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  28 

To  a  given  straight  line  to  apply  a  parallelogram  equal  to  a  given  rectilineal  figure 
and  deficient  by  a  parallelogrammic  figure  similar  to  a  given  one:  thus  the  given 
rectilineal  figure  must  not  be  greater  than  the  parallelogram  described  on  the  half  of 
the  straight  line  and  similar  to  the  defect. 

Let  AB  be  the  given  straight  line,  C  the  given  rectilineal  figure  to  which  the 
figure  to  be  applied  to  A B  is  required  to  be  equal,  not  being  greater  than  the 
parallelogram  described  on  the  half  of  AB  and  similar  to  the  defect,  and  D  the 
parallelogram  to  which  the  defect  is  required  to  be  similar; 
thus  it  is  required  to  apply  to  the  given  straight  line  AB  a  parallelogram  equal 
to  the  given  rectilineal  figure  C  and  deficient  by  a  parallelogrammic  figure 
which  is  similar  to  D. 

Let  AB  be  bisected  at  the  point  E ,  and  on  EB  let  EBFG  be  described  similar 
and  similarly  situated  to  D;  [vi.  18] 

let  the  parallelogram  AG  be  completed. 

If  then  AG  is  equal  to  G,  that  which  was  enjoined  will  have  been  done; 
for  there  has  been  applied  to  the  given  straight  line  AB  the  parallelogram  AG 
equal  to  the  given  rectilineal  figure  C  and  deficient  by  a  parallelogrammic  fig¬ 
ure  GB  which  is  similar  to  D . 


But,  if  not,  let  HE  be  greater  than  C. 

Now  HE  is  equal  to  GB; 

therefore  GB  is  also  greater  than  C. 

Let  KLMN  be  constructed  at  once  equal  to  the  excess  by  which  GB  is 
greater  than  C  and  similar  and  similarly  situated  to  D ,  [vi.  25] 

But  D  is  similar  to  GB; 

therefore  KM  is  also  similar  to  GB.  [vi.  21] 

Let,  then,  KL  correspond  to  GB,  and  LM  to  GF. 

Now,  since  GB  is  equal  to  C,  KM, 

therefore  GB  is  greater  than  KM ; 
therefore  also  GE  is  greater  than  KL,  and  GF  than  LM. 

Let  GO  be  made  equal  to  KL,  and  GP  equal  to  LM ;  and  let  the  parallelo¬ 
gram  OGPQ  be  completed; 

therefore  it  is  equal  and  similar  to  KM. 

Therefore  GQ  is  also  similar  to  GB;  [vi.  21] 


122  EUCLID 

therefore  GQ  is  about  the  same  diameter  with  GB .  [vi.  26] 
Let  GQB  be  their  diameter,  and  let  the  figure  be  described. 

Then,  since  BG  is  equal  to  C,  KM, 

and  in  them  GQ  is  equal  to  KM, 

therefore  the  remainder,  the  gnomon  UWV,  is  equal  to  the  remainder  C . 
And,  since  PR  is  equal  to  OS, 

let  QB  be  added  to  each; 
therefore  the  whole  PB  is  equal  to  the  whole  OB. 

But  OB  is  equal  to  TE ,  since  the  side  AE  is  also  equal  to  the  side  EB ;  [i.  36] 
therefore  TE  is  also  equal  to  PB. 

Let  OS  be  added  to  each; 

therefore  the  whole  TS  is  equal  to  the  whole,  the  gnomon  VWU. 

But  the  gnomon  VWU  was  proved  equal  to  C; 

therefore  TS  is  also  equal  to  C. 

Therefore  to  the  given  straight  line  AB  there  has  been  applied  the  parallelo¬ 
gram  ST  equal  to  the  given  rectilineal  figure  C  and  deficient  by  a  parallelo- 
grammic  figure  QB  which  is  similar  to  D.  q.  e.  f. 

Proposition  29 

To  a  given  straight  line  to  apply  a  parallelogram  equal  to  a  given  rectilineal  figure 
and  exceeding  by  a  parallelogrammic  figure  similar  to  a  given  one. 

Let  AB  be  the  given  straight  line,  C  the  given  rectilineal  figure  to  which  the 
figure  to  be  applied  to  A  B  is  required  to  be  equal,  and  D  that  to  which  the  ex¬ 
cess  is  required  to  be  similar; 

thus  it  is  required  to  apply  to  the  straight  line  AB  a  parallelogram  equal  to  the 
rectilineal  figure  C  and  exceeding  by  a  parallelogrammic  figure  similar  to  D. 


Let  AB  be  bisected  at  E; 

let  there  be  described  on  EB  the  parallelogram  BE  similar  and  similarly  sit¬ 
uated  to  D; 

and  let  GH  be  constructed  at  once  equal  to  the  sum  of  BF ,  C  and  similar  and 
similarly  situated  to  D.  [vi.  25] 

Let  KH  correspond  to  FL  and  KG  to  FE. 

Now,  since  GH  is  greater  than  FB , 

therefore  KH  is  also  greater  than  FL,  and  KG  than  FE. 

Let  FL,  FE  be  produced, 

let  FLM  be  equal  to  KH,  and  FEN  to  KG, 
and  let  MN  be  completed; 
therefore  MN  is  both  equal  and  similar  to  GH. 


ELEMENTS  VI 


123 


But  GH  is  similar  to  EL ; 

therefore  MN  is  also  similar  to  EL ;  [vi.  21] 

therefore  EL  is  about  the  same  diameter  with  MN.  [vi.  26] 
Let  their  diameter  FO  be  drawn,  and  let  the  figure  be  described. 

Since  GH  is  equal  to  EL,  C, 

while  GH  is  equal  to  MN, 
therefore  MN  is  also  equal  to  EL,  C. 

Let  EL  be  subtracted  from  each; 

therefore  the  remainder,  the  gnomon  XWV,  is  equal  to  C. 

Now,  since  AE  is  equal  to  EB, 

AN  is  also  equal  to  NB  [i.  36],  that  is,  to  LP  [i.  43] 

Let  EO  be  added  to  each; 

therefore  the  whole  AO  is  equal  to  the  gnomon  VWX. 

But  the  gnomon  VWX  is  equal  to  C; 

therefore  AO  is  also  equal  to  C. 

Therefore  to  the  given  straight  line  AB  there  has  been  applied  the  parallelo¬ 
gram  AO  equal  to  the  given  rectilineal  figure  C  and  exceeding  by  a  parallelo- 
grammic  figure  QP  which  is  similar  to  D,  since  PQ  is  also  similar  to  EL  [vi.  24]. 

Q.  E.  F. 

Proposition  30 


To  cut  a  given  finite  straight  line  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio . 

Let  AB  be  the  given  finite  straight  line; 

thus  it  is  required  to  cut  AB  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio. 

On  AB  let  the  square  BC  be  described;  and  let  there  be 
applied  to  AC  the  parallelogram  CD  equal  to  BC  and  ex¬ 
ceeding  by  the  figure  AD  similar  to  BC.  [vi.  29] 

Now  BC  is  a  square; 

therefore  AD  is  also  a  square. 

And,  since  BC  is  equal  to  CD, 
let  CE  be  subtracted  from  each; 

therefore  the  remainder  BF  is  equal  to  the  remainder  AD. 

But  it  is  also  equiangular  with  it; 
therefore  in  BF,  AD  the  sides  about  the  equal  angles  are 
reciprocally  proportional;  [vi.  14] 

therefore,  as  FE  is  to  ED,  so  is  AE  to  EB. 

But  FE  is  equal  to  AB,  and  ED  to  AE. 

Therefore,  as  BA  is  to  AE,  so  is  AE  to  EB. 

And  AB  is  greater  than  AB; 

therefore  AB  is  also  greater  than  EB. 

Therefore  the  straight  line  AB  has  been  cut  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio  at 
B,  and  the  greater  segment  of  it  is  AB.  Q.  e.  f. 


E  B 

Proposition  31 

In  right-angled  triangles  the  figure  on  the  side  subtending  the  right  angle  is  equal 
to  the  similar  and  similarly  described  figures  on  the  sides  containing  the  right  angle. 
Let  ABC  be  a  right-angled  triangle  having  the  angle  BAC  right; 

I  say  that  the  figure  on  BC  is  equal  to  the  similar  and  similarly  described 
figures  on  BA,  AC. 


124  EUCLID 

Let  AD  be  drawn  perpendicular. 

Then  since,  in  the  right-angled  triangle  ABC ,  AD  has  been  drawn  from  the 
right  angle  at  A  perpendicular  to  the  base  BC, 
the  triangles  ABD,  ADC  adjoining  the  per¬ 
pendicular  are  similar  both  to  the  whole 
ABC  and  to  one  another.  [vi.  8] 

And,  since  ABC  is  similar  to  ABD , 
therefore,  as  CB  is  to  BA,  so  is  A B  to  BD. 

[vi.  Def.  1] 

And,  since  three  straight  lines  are  propor¬ 
tional, 

as  the  first  is  to  the  third,  so  is  the  figure 
on  the  first  to  the  similar  and  similarly 
described  figure  on  the  second,  [vi.  19,  Por.] 

Therefore,  as  CB  is  to  BD,  so  is  the  figure  on  CB  to  the  similar  and  similarly 
described  figure  on  BA. 

For  the  same  reason  also, 

as  BC  is  to  CD,  so  is  the  figure  on  BC  to  that  on  CA ; 
so  that,  in  addition, 

as  BC  is  to  BD,  DC,  so  is  the  figure  on  BC  to  the  similar  and  similarly  described 
figures  on  BA,  AC. 

But  BC  is  equal  to  BD,  DC; 

therefore  the  figure  on  BC  is  also  equal  to  the  similar  and  similarly  described 
figures  on  BA,  AC. 

Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  32 

If  two  triangles  having  two  sides  'proportional  to  two  sides  be  placed  together  at  one 
angle  so  that  their  corresponding  sides  are  also  parallel,  the  remaining  sides  of  the 
triangles  will  be  in  a  straight  line. 

Let  ABC,  DCE  be  two  triangles  having  the  two  sides  BA,  AC  proportional 
to  the  two  sides  DC,  DE,  so  that,  as  AB  is  to  AC,  so  is  DC  to  DE,  and  AB  par¬ 
allel  to  DC,  and  AC  to  DE; 

I  say  that  BC  is  in  a  straight  line  with  CE. 

For,  since  AB  is  parallel  to  DC, 
and  the  straight  line  AC  has  fallen  upon 
them, 

the  alternate  angles  BAC,  ACD  are  equal  to 
one  another.  [i.  29] 

For  the  same  reason 

the  angle  CDE  is  also  equal  to  the  angle 
ACD; 

so  that  the  angle  BAC  is  equal  to  the  angle 
CDE . 

And,  since  ABC,  DCE  are  two  triangles  having  one  angle,  the  angle  at  A, 
equal  to  one  angle,  the  angle  at  D, 

and  the  sides  about  the  equal  angles  proportional, 
so  that,  as  BA  is  to  AC,  so  is  CD  to  DE, 
therefore  the  triangle  ABC  is  equiangular  with  the  triangle  DCE;  [vi.  6] 


D 


ELEMENTS  VI  125 

therefore  the  angle  ABC  is  equal  to  the  angle  DCE . 

But  the  angle  ACD  was  also  proved  equal  to  the  angle  BAC ; 

therefore  the  whole  angle  ACE  is  equal  to  the  two  angles  ABC ,  BAC. 

Let  the  angle  ACB  be  added  to  each; 

therefore  the  angles  ACE ,  ACB  are  equal  to  the  angles  BAC,  ACB,  CBA. 
But  the  angles  BAC,  ABC,  ACB  are  equal  to  two  right  angles;  [r.  32] 
therefore  the  angles  ACE,  ACB  are  also  equal  to  two  right  angles. 
Therefore  with  a  straight  line  AC,  and  at  the  point  C  on  it,  the  two  straight 
lines  BC,  CE  not  lying  on  the  same  side  make  the  adjacent  angles  ACE ,  ACB 
equal  to  two  right  angles; 

therefore  BC  is  in  a  straight  line  with  CE.  [i.  14] 

Therefore  etc.  Q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  33 

In  equal  circles  angles  have  the  same  ratio  as  the  circumferences  on  which  they 
stand,  whether  they  stand  at  the  centres  or  at  the  circumferences. 

Let  ABC,  DEF  be  equal  circles,  and  let  the  angles  BGC,  EHF  be  angles  at 
their  centres  G,  H,  and  the  angles  BAC,  EDF  angles  at  the  circumferences; 

I  say  that,  as  the  circumference  BC  is  to  the  circumference  EF,  so  is  the  angle 
BGC  to  the  angle  EHF,  and  the  angle  BAC  to  the  angle  EDF. 

For  let  any  number  of  consecu¬ 
tive  circumferences  CK,  KL  be 
made  equal  to  the  circumference 
BC, 

and  any  number  of  consecutive 
circumferences  FM,  MN  equal  to 
the  circumference  EF ; 
and  let  GK,  GL,  HM,  HN  be 
joined. 

Then,  since  the  circumferences  BC,  CK,  KL  are  equal  to  one  another, 

the  angles  BGC,  CGK,  KGL  are  also  equal  to  one  another;  [hi.  27] 
therefore,  whatever  multiple  the  circumference  BL  is  of  BC,  that  multiple  also 
is  the  angle  BGL  of  the  angle  BGC. 

For  the  same  reason  also, 

whatever  multiple  the  circumference  NE  is  of  EF,  that  multiple  also  is  the 
angle  NHE  of  the  angle  EHF . 

If  then  the  circumference  BL  is  equal  to  the  circumference  EN,  the  angle 
BGL  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  EHN ;  [hi.  27] 

if  the  circumference  BL  is  greater  than  the  circumference  EN,  the  angle  BGL 
is  also  greater  than  the  angle  EHN ; 

and.  if  less,  less. 

There  being  then  four  magnitudes,  two  circumferences  BC,  EF,  and  two 
angles  BGC,  EHF, 

there  have  been  taken,  of  the  circumference  BC  and  the  angle  BGC  equimulti¬ 
ples,  namely  the  circumference  BL  and  the  angle  BGL , 
and  of  the  circumference  EF  and  the  angle  EHF  equimultiples,  namely  the 
circumference  EN  and  the  angle  EHN. 

And  it  has  been  proved  that, 

if  the  circumference  BL  is  in  excess  of  the  circumference  EN, 


126  EUCLID 

the  angle  BGL  is  also  in  excess  of  the  angle  EHN ; 
if  equal,  equal; 
and  if  less,  less. 

Therefore,  as  the  circumference  JSC  is  to  EF)  so  is  the  angle  BGC  to  the 
angle  EHF.  [v.  Def.  5] 

But,  as  the  angle  BGC  is  to  the  angle  EHF ,  so  is  the  angle  B AC  to  the  angle 
EDF;  for  they  are  doubles  respectively. 

Therefore  also,  as  the  circumference  BC  is  to  the  circumference  EF ,  so  is  the 
angle  BGC  to  the  angle  EHF,  and  the  angle  BAC  to  the  angle  EDF . 
Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 


BOOK  SEVEN 


DEFINITIONS 

1.  An  unit  is  that  by  virtue  of  which  each  of  the  things  that  exist  is  called 
one. 

2.  A  number  is  a  multitude  composed  of  units. 

3.  A  number  is  a  part  of  a  number,  the  less  of  the  greater,  when  it  measures 
the  greater; 

4.  but  parts  when  it  does  not  measure  it. 

5.  The  greater  number  is  a  multiple  of  the  less  when  it  is  measured  by  the 
less. 

6.  An  even  number  is  that  which  is  divisible  into  two  equal  parts. 

7.  An  odd  number  is  that  which  is  not  divisible  into  two  equal  parts,  or  that 
which  differs  by  an  unit  from  an  even  number. 

8.  An  even-times  even  number  is  that  which  is  measured  by  an  even  number 
according  to  an  even  number. 

9.  An  even-times  odd  number  is  that  which  is  measured  by  an  even  number 
according  to  an  odd  number. 

10.  An  odd-times  odd  number  is  that  which  is  measured  by  an  odd  number 
according  to  an  odd  number. 

11.  A  prime  number  is  that  which  is  measured  by  an  unit  alone. 

12.  Numbers  prime  to  one  another  are  those  which  are  measured  by  an  unit 
alone  as  a  common  measure. 

13.  A  composite  number  is  that  which  is  measured  by  some  number. 

14.  Numbers  composite  to  one  another  are  those  which  are  measured  by  some 
number  as  a  common  measure. 

15.  A  number  is  said  to  multiply  a  number  when  that  which  is  multiplied  is 
added  to  itself  as  many  times  as  there  are  units  in  the  other,  and  thus  some 
number  is  produced. 

16.  And,  when  two  numbers  having  multiplied  one  another  make  some  num¬ 
ber,  the  number  so  produced  is  called  plane)  and  its  sides  are  the  numbers 
which  have  multiplied  one  another. 

17.  And,  when  three  numbers  having  multiplied  one  another  make  some 
number,  the  number  so  produced  is  solid ,  and  its  sides  are  the  numbers  which 
have  multiplied  one  another. 

18.  A  square  number  is  equal  multiplied  by  equal,  or  a  number  which  is  con¬ 
tained  by  two  equal  numbers. 

19.  And  a  cube  is  equal  multiplied  by  equal  and  again  by  equal,  or  a  number 
which  is  contained  by  three  equal  numbers. 

20.  Numbers  are  proportional  when  the  first  is  the  same  multiple,  or  the 
same  part,  or  the  same  parts,  of  the  second  that  the  third  is  of  the  fourth. 

127 


128  EUCLID 

21.  Similar  plane  and  solid  numbers  are  those  which  have  their  sides  pro¬ 
portional. 

22.  A  perfect  number  is  that  which  is  equal  to  its  own  parts. 

BOOK  VII.  PROPOSITIONS 

Proposition  1 

Two  unequal  numbers  being  set  out ,  and  the  less  being  continually  subtracted  in 
turn  from  the  greater ,  if  the  number  which  is  left  never  measures  the  one  before  it 
until  an  unit  is  left ,  the  original  numbers  will  be  prime  to  one  another . 

For.  the  less  of  two  unequal  numbers  AS,  CD  being  continually  subtracted 
from  the  greater,  let  the  number  which  is  left  never  measure  the  one  before 
it  until  an  unit  is  left; 

I  say  that  AS,  CD  are  prime  to  one  another,  that  is,  that  an  unit  alone 
measures  AS,  CD. 

For,  if  AS,  CD  are  not  prime  to  one  another,  some  number  will  measure 
them. 

Let  a  number  measure  them,  and  let  it  be  E;  let  CZ>,  measuring  BF ,  leave 
FA  less  than  itself, 

let  AF .  measuring  DG,  leave  GC  less  than  itself, 
and  let  GC,  measuring  FH,  leave  an  unit  HA. 

Since,  then,  E  measures  CD ,  and  CD  measures  SF, 
therefore  E  also  measures  SF. 

But  it  also  measures  the  whole  BA  ; 

therefore  it  will  also  measure  the  remainder  AF. 

But  AF  measures  DG) 

therefore  E  also  measures  DG . 

But  it  also  measures  the  whole  DC ; 

therefore  it  will  also  measure  the  remainder  CG. 

But  CG  measures  FH ; 

therefore  E  also  measures  FH. 

But  it  also  measures  the  whole  FA ; 
therefore  it  will  also  measure  the  remainder,  the  unit  AS,  though  it  is  a  num¬ 
ber:  which  is  impossible. 

Therefore  no  number  will  measure  the  numbers  AS,  CD)  therefore  AB ,  CD 
are  prime  to  one  another.  [vn.  Def.  12] 

Q.  E.  D. 

Proposition  2 

Given  two  numbers  not  prime  to  one  another,  to  find  their  greatest  common  measure . 

Let  AS,  CD  be  the  two  given  numbers  not  prime  to  one  another. 

Thus  it  is  required  to  find  the  greatest  common  measure  of  AS,  CD. 

If  now  CD  measures  AS — and  it  also  measures  itself — CD  is  a  common 
measure  of  CZ),  AS. 

And  it  is  manifest  that  it  is  also  the  greatest;  for  no  greater  number  than  CD 
will  measure  CD. 

But,  if  CD  does  not  measure  AS,  then,  the  less  of  the  numbers  AS,  CD  being 
continually  subtracted  from  the  greater,  some  number  will  be  left  which  will 
measure  the  one  before  it. 


ELEMENTS  VII 


129 


For  an  unit  will  not  be  left;  otherwise  AB,  CD  will  be  prime  to  one  another 
[vii.  1],  which  is  contrary  to  the  hypothesis. 

Therefore  some  number  will  be  left  w*hich  will  measure  the  one  before  it. 
Now'  let  CD ,  measuring  BE,  leave  EA  less  than  itself, 
let  EA,  measuring  DF,  leave  FC  less  than  itself, 
and  let  CF  measure  AE. 

Since  then,  CF  measures  AE,  and  AE  measures  DF, 

|  therefore  CF  will  also  measure  DF . 

r  But  it  also  measures  itself ; 

therefore  it  will  also  measure  the  wrhole  CD. 

But  CD  measures  BE ; 

therefore  CF  also  measures  BE. 

But  it  also  measures  EA  ; 

therefore  it  will  also  measure  the  whole  BA. 

But  it  also  measures  CD; 

therefore  CF  measures  AB,  CD. 

Therefore  CF  is  a  common  measure  of  AB,  CD. 

I  say  next  that  it  is  also  the  greatest. 

For,  if  CF  is  not  the  greatest  common  measure  of  AB,  CD,  some  number 
w'hich  is  greater  than  CF  will  measure  the  numbers  AB,  CD. 

Let  such  a  number  measure  them,  and  let  it  be  G . 

Now',  since  G  measures  CD,  w'hile  CD  measures  BE,  G  also  measures  BE. 
But  it  also  measures  the  w'hole  BA ; 

therefore  it  will  also  measure  the  remainder  AE. 

But  AE  measures  DF; 

therefore  G  will  also  measure  DF. 

But  it  also  measures  the  wiiole  DC; 

therefore  it  will  also  measure  the  remainder  CF,  that  is,  the  greater  will  meas¬ 
ure  the  less:  which  is  impossible. 

Therefore  no  number  which  is  greater  than  CF  will  measure  the  numbers 
AB,  CD; 

therefore  CF  is  the  greatest  common  measure  of  AB,  CD. 

Porism.  From  this  it  is  manifest  that,  if  a  number  measure  tw'o  numbers,  it 
will  also  measure  their  greatest  common  measure.  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  3 


Given  three  number  snot 'prime  to  one  another,  to  find  their  greatest  common  measure. 
Let  A,  B,  C  be  the  three  given  numbers  not  prime  to  one  another; 

thus  it  is  required  to  find  the  greatest  common  meas¬ 
ure  of  A,  B,  C. 

For  let  the  greatest  common  measure,  D,  of  the  tw*o 
A  g  numbers  A,  B  be  taken;  [vn.  2] 

c  then  D  either  measures,  or  does  not  measure,  C. 

D  El  f|  First,  let  it  measure  it. 

But  it  measures  A,  B  also; 
therefore  D  measures  A,  B ,  C; 
therefore  D  is  a  common  measure  of  A ,  B,  C. 

I  say  that  it  is  also  the  greatest. 

For,  if  D  is  not  the  greatest  common  measure  of  A,  B,  C ,  some  number  wiiich 


130 


EUCLID 


is  greater  than  D  will  measure  the  numbers  A,  B,  C. 

Let  such  a  number  measure  them,  and  let  it  be  E. 

Since  then  E  measures  A,  J3,  C, 

it  will  also  measure  A,  B; 

therefore  it  wall  also  measure  the  greatest  common  measure  of  A,  B. 

[vn.  2,  Por.] 

But  the  greatest  common  measure  of  A,  B  is  D; 

therefore  E  measures  Z),  the  greater  the  less:  which  is  impossible. 
Therefore  no  number  which  is  greater  than  D  will  measure  the  numbers 

A  B ,  C; 

therefore  D  is  the  greatest  common  measure  of  A,  B>  C. 

Next,  let  D  not  measure  C; 

I  say  first  that  C,  D  are  not  prime  to  one  another. 

For,  since  A,  B,  C  are  not  prime  to  one  another,  some  number  will  measure 
them. 

Now  that  which  measures  A,  B,  C  will  also  measure  A ,  B ,  and  will  measure 
D,  the  greatest  common  measure  of  A,  B.  [vn.  2,  Por.] 

But  it  measures  C  also; 

therefore  some  number  mil  measure  the  numbers  D ,  C; 
therefore  Z),  C  are  not  prime  to  one  another. 

Let  then  their  greatest  common  measure  E  be  taken.  [vn.  2] 

Then,  since  E  measures  D, 

and  D  measures  A ,  By 
therefore  E  also  measures  A ,  B . 

But  it  measures  C  also; 

therefore  E  measures  A,  B,  C; 
therefore  E  is  a  common  measure  of  A,  B,  C. 

I  say  next  that  it  is  also  the  greatest. 

For,  if  E  is  not  the  greatest  common  measure  of  A,  B,  C,  some  number  which 
is  greater  than  E  will  measure  the  numbers  A,  B,  C. 

Let  such  a  number  measure  them,  and  let  it  be  F . 

Now,  since  F  measures  A,  jB,  C, 

it  also  measures  A,  B; 

therefore  it  wall  also  measure  the  greatest  common  measure  of  A,  B. 

[vn.  2,  Por.] 

But  the  greatest  common  measure  of  A,  B  is  D; 

therefore  F  measures  Z). 

And  it  measures  C  also; 

therefore  F  measures  Z),  C; 

therefore  it  will  also  measure  the  greatest  common  measure  of  Z),  C. 

[vii.  2,  Por.] 

But  the  greatest  common  measure  of  Z),  C  is  E; 

therefore  F  measures  E,  the  greater  the  less:  which  is  impossible 
Therefore  no  number  which  is  greater  than  E  will  measure  the  numbers  A, 
By  C; 

therefore  E  is  the  greatest  common  measure  of  A,  B,  C. 


Q.  E.  D. 


ELEMENTS  VII 


131 


Proposition  4 

Any  number  is  either  a  part  or  parts  of  any  number ,  the  less  of  the  greater . 

Let  A,  BC  be  two  numbers,  and  let  BC  be  the  less; 

I  say  that  BC  is  either  a  part,  or  parts,  of  A. 

For  Ay  BC  are  either  prime  to  one  another  or  not. 

First,  let  A,  BC  be  prime  to  one  another. 

Then,  if  BC  be  divided  into  the  units  in  it,  each  unit  of  those 
in  BC  will  be  some  part  of  A;  so  that  BC  is  parts  of  A. 

Next  let  Ay  BC  not  be  prime  to  one  another;  then  BC  either 
measures,  or  does  not  measure,  A. 

If  now  BC  measures  A ,  BC  is  a  part  of  A. 

But,  if  not,  let  the  greatest  common  measure  D  of  A,  BC  be  taken;  [vn.  2] 
and  let  BC  be  divided  into  the  numbers  equal  to  D,  namely  BE,  EF,  FC. 
Now,  since  D  measures  A,  D  is  a  part  of  A. 

But  D  is  equal  to  each  of  the  numbers  BE,  EF,  FC ; 
therefore  each  of  the  numbers  BE,  EF,  FC  is  also  a  part  of  A;  so  that  BC  is 
parts  of  A. 

Therefore  etc.  Q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  5 


If  a  number  be  a  part  of  a  number ,  and  another  be  the  same  part  of  another ,  the 
sum  will  also  be  the  same  part  of  the  sum  that  the  one  is  of  the  one. 

For  let  the  number  A  be  a  part  of  BC, 

and  another,  D ,  the  same  part  of  another  EF  that  A  is  of  BC ; 

I  say  that  the  sum  of  A,  D  is  also  the  same  part  of  the 
sum  of  BC,  EF  that  A  is  of  BC. 

For  since,  whatever  part  A  is  of  BC,  D  is  also  the  same 
part  of  EF, 

therefore,  as  many  numbers  as  there  are  in  BC  equal  to  A, 
so  many  numbers  are  there  also  in  EF  equal  to  D. 

Let  BC  be  divided  into  the  numbers  equal  to  A,  namely 
BG,  GC, 

and  EF  into  the  numbers  equal  to  D ,  namely  EH,  HF; 
then  the  multitude  of  BG,  GC  will  be  equal  to  the  multitude  of  EH,  HF. 
And,  since  BG  is  equal  to  A,  and  EH  to  D, 

therefore  BG,  EH  are  also  equal  to  A,  D. 

For  the  same  reason 


GC,  HF  are  also  equal  to  A,  D. 

Therefore,  as  many  numbers  as  there  are  in  BC  equal  to  A,  so  many  are 
there  also  in  BC,  EF  equal  to  A,  D. 

Therefore,  whatever  multiple  BC  is  of  A,  the  same  multiple  also  is  the  sum 
of  BC,  EF  of  the  sum  of  A,  D. 

Therefore,  whatever  part  A  is  to  BC,  the  same  part  also  is  the  sum  of  A,  D 
of  the  sum  of  BC,  EF.  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  6 

If  a  number  be  parts  of  a  number,  and  another  be  the  same  parts  of  another,  the 
sum  will  also  be  the  same  parts  of  the  sum  that  the  one  is  of  the  one. 


132  EUCLID 

For  let  the  number  A  B  be  parts  of  the  number  C,  and  another,  DE ,  the 
same  parts  of  another,  F ,  that  AB  is  of  C; 

I  say  that  the  sum  of  AB,  DE  is  also  the  same  parts  of  the  sum  of  C,  F 
that  AB  is  of  C. 

For  since,  whatever  parts  AB  is  of  C ,  DE  is  also  the 
same  parts  of  F, 

therefore,  as  many  parts  of  C  as  there  are  in  AB,  so  many 
parts  of  F  are  there  also  in  DE . 

Let  AB  be  divided  into  the  parts  of  C ,  namely  AG,  GB, 
and  DE  into  the  parts  of  F ,  namely  DH ,  HE; 
thus  the  multitude  of  AG,  GB  wdll  be  equal  to  the  multitude  of  DH,  HE. 
And  since,  whatever  part  AG  is  of  C,  the  same  part  is  DH  of  F  also, 
therefore,  whatever  part  AG  is  of  C,  the  same  part  also  is  the  sum  of  AG,  DH 
of  the  sum  of  C ,  F.  [vn.  5] 

For  the  same  reason, 

whatever  part  GB  is  of  C,  the  same  part  also  is  the  sum  of  GB,  HE  of  the  sum 
of  C,  F. 

Therefore,  whatever  parts  AB  is  of  C,  the  same  parts  also  is  the  sum  of  AB, 
DE  of  the  sum  of  C,  F.  q.  e.  d. 


A 

C 

D 

G 

H 

B 

E 

Proposition  7 

If  a  number  be  that  part  of  a  number,  which  a  number  subtracted  is  of  a  number 
subtracted,  the  remainder  will  also  be  the  same  part  of  the  remainder  that  the  whole 
is  of  the  whole . 

For  let  the  number  A  B  be  that  part  of  the  number  CD  which  AE  subtracted 
is  of  CF  subtracted; 

I  say  that  the  remainder  EB  is  also  the  same  part  of  the  remainder  FD  that 
the*  whole  A  B  is  of  the  whole  CD. 


A  E  B 

- 1 - 

G  _  C _ F _ D 


For,  whatever  part  A  E  is  of  CF,  the  same  part  also  let  EB  be  of  CG. 

Now  since,  whatever  part  AE  is  of  CF,  the  same  part  also  is  EB  of  CG, 
therefore,  whatever  part  AE  is  of  CF,  the  same  part  also  is  AB  of  GF.  [vn.  5] 

But,  whatever  part  A E  is  of  CF,  the  same  part  also,  by  hypothesis,  is  AB  of 
CD; 

therefore,  whatever  part  A B  is  of  GF,  the  same  part  is  it  of  CD  also; 
therefore  GF  is  equal  to  CD. 

Let  CF  be  subtracted  from  each; 

therefore  the  remainder  GC  is  equal  to  the  remainder  FD. 

Now  since,  whatever  part  A E  is  of  CF,  the  same  part  also  is  EB  of  GC, 
while  GC  is  equal  to  FD, 

therefore,  whatever  part  AE  is  of  CF,  the  same  part  also  is  EB  of  FD. 

But,  whatever  part  AE  is  of  CF,  the  same  part  also  is  AB  of  CD; 
therefore  also  the  remainder  EB  is  the  same  part  of  the  remainder  FD  that  the 
whole  AB  is  of  the  whole  CD.  Q.  e.  d. 


ELEMENTS  VII 


133 


Proposition  8 

If  a  number  be  the  same  parts  of  a  number  that  a  number  subtracted  is  of  a  number 
subtracted ,  the  remainder  will  also  be  the  same  parts  of  the  remainder  that  the  whole 
is  of  the  whole. 

For  let  the  number  AB  be  the  same  parts  of  the  number  CD  that  AE  sub¬ 
tracted  is  of  CF  subtracted; 

I  say  that  the  remainder  EB  is  also  the  same  parts  of  the  remainder  FD 
that  the  whole  AB  is  of  the  whole  CD. 

For  let  GH  be  made  equal  to  AB. 

C - £ - ?  Therefore,  whatever  parts  GH  is  of  CD,  the 

G  M  K  N  H  same  parts  also  is  A  E  of  CF. 

Let  GH  be  divided  into  the  parts  of  CD, 

: - T - 1 - -  namely  GK,  KH,  and  AE  into  the  parts  of  CF, 

namely  AL,  LE; 

thus  the  multitude  of  GK,  KH  will  be  equal  to  the  multitude  of  AL,  LE. 
Now  since,  whatever  part  GK  is  of  CD,  the  same  part  also  is  A L  of  CF , 
while  CD  is  greater  than  CF, 
therefore  GK  is  also  greater  than  AL. 

Let  GM  be  made  equal  to  AL. 

Therefore,  whatever  part  GK  is  of  CD,  the  same  part  also  is  GM  of  CF; 
therefore  also  the  remainder  MK  is  the  same  part  of  the  remainder  FD  that 
the  whole  GK  is  of  the  whole  CD.  [vn.  7] 

Again,  since,  whatever  part  KH  is  of  CD,  the  same  part  also  is  EL  of  CF, 
while  CD  is  greater  than  CF, 
therefore  IIK  is  also  greater  than  EL. 

Let  KN  be  made  equal  to  EL. 

Therefore,  whatever  part  KH  is  of  CD,  the  same  part  also  is  KN  of  CF; 
therefore  also  the  remainder  NH  is  the  same  part  of  the  remainder  FD  that  the 
whole  KH  is  of  the  whole  CD.  [vn.  7] 

But  the  remainder  MK  was  also  proved  to  be  the  same  part  of  the  remainder 
FD  that  the  whole  GK  is  of  the  whole  CD; 

therefore  also  the  sum  of  MK,  NH  is  the  same  parts  of  DF  that  the  whole  HG 
is  of  the  whole  CD. 

But  the  sum  of  MK,  NH  is  equal  to  EB, 

and  HG  is  equal  to  BA; 

therefore  the  remainder  EB  is  the  same  parts  of  the  remainder  FD  that  the 
whole  AB  is  of  the  whole  CD.  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  9 

If  a  number  be  a  part  of  a  number,  and  another  be  the  same  part  of  another,  alter - 
nately  also,  whatever  part  or  parts  the  first  is  of  the  third ,  the  same  part,  or  the  same 
parts ,  will  the  second  also  be  of  the  fourth. 

For  let  the  number  A  be  a  part  of  the  number  BC,  and  an- 
B  E  other,  D,  the  same  part  of  another,  EF,  that  A  is  of  BC; 

I  say  that,  alternately  also,  whatever  part  or  parts  A  is  of 
G  •  D  D,  the  same  part  or  parts  is  BC  of  EF  also. 

A  r  p  For  since,  whatever  part  A  is  of  BC,  the  same  part  also  is 

D  of  EF, 


134  EUCLID 

therefore,  as  many  numbers  as  there  are  in  BC  equal  to  A,  so  many  also  are 
there  in  EF  equal  to  D. 

Let  BC  be  divided  into  the  numbers  equal  to  A,  namely  BG,  GC, 
and  EF  into  those  equal  to  D,  namely  EH ,  HF ; 
thus  the  multitude  of  BG,  GC  will  be  equal  to  the  multitude  of  EH,  HF. 
Now,  since  the  numbers  BG,  GC  are  equal  to  one  another,  and  the  numbers 
EH,  HF  are  also  equal  to  one  another, 

while  the  multitude  of  BG,  GC  is  equal  to  the  multitude  of  EH,  HF, 
therefore,  whatever  part  or  parts  BG  is  of  EH,  the  same  part  or  the  same  parts 
is  GC  of  HF  also; 

so  that,  in  addition,  whatever  part  or  parts  BG  is  of  EH,  the  same  part  also,  or 
the  same  parts,  is  the  sum  BC  of  the  sum  EF.  [vn.  5,  6] 

But  BG  is  equal  to  A,  and  EH  to  D; 

therefore,  whatever  part  or  parts  A  is  of  D,  the  same  part  or  the  same  parts  is 
BC  of  EF  also.  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  10 

If  a  number  be  parts  of  a  number,  and  another  be  the  same  parts  of  another,  alter¬ 
nately  also,  whatever  parts  or  part  the  first  is  of  the  third ,  the  same  parts  or  the  same 
part  will  the  second  also  be  of  the  fourth. 

For  let  the  number  AB  be  parts  of  the  number  C,  and  another,  DE,  the  same 
parts  of  another,  F; 

I  say  that,  alternately  also,  whatever  parts  or  part  AB  is 
of  DE,  the  same  parts  or  the  same  part  is  C  of  F  also. 

For  since,  whatever  parts  A  B  is  of  C,  the  same  parts 
also  is  DE  of  F, 

therefore,  as  many  parts  of  C  as  there  are  in  AB,  so  many 
parts  also  of  F  are  there  in  DE. 

Let  AB  be  divided  into  the  parts  of  C,  namely  AG,  GB, 
and  DE  into  the  parts  of  F,  namely  DH,  HE ; 
thus  the  multitude  of  AG,  GB  will  be  equal  to  the  multitude  of  DH,  HE. 
Now  since,  whatever  part  AG  is  of  C,  the  same  part  also  is  DH  of  F, 
alternately  also,  whatever  part  or  parts  AG  is  of  DH, 

the  same  part  or  the  same  parts  is  C  of  F  also.  [vn.  9] 

For  the  same  reason  also, 

whatever  part  or  parts  GB  is  of  HE,  the  same  part  or  the  same  parts  is  C  of  F 
also; 

so  that,  in  addition,  whatever  parts  or  part  AB  is  of  DE,  the  same  parts  also, 
or  the  same  part,  is  C  of  F.  [vn.  5,  6] 

Q.  E.  D. 


Proposition  11 

If,  as  whole  is  to  whole,  so  is  a  number  subtracted  to  a  number  subtracted,  the  re¬ 
mainder  will  also  be  to  the  remainder  as  whole  to  whole. 

As  the  whole  A B  is  to  the  whole  CD,  so  let  AE  subtracted  be  to  CF  sub¬ 
tracted; 

I  say  that  the  remainder  EB  is  also  to  the  remainder  FD  as  the  whole  AB 
to  the  whole  CD. 

Since,  as  AB  is  to  CD.  so  is  AE  to  CF , 


A 

E 

B 


C 

F 

D 


ELEMENTS  VII  135 

whatever  part  or  parts  AB  is  of  CD ,  the  same  part  or  the  same 
parts  is  A E  of  CF  also;  [vn.  Def.  20] 

Therefore  also  the  remainder  EB  is  the  same  part  or  parts  of  FD 
that  A  B  is  of  CD.  [vn.  7,  8] 

Therefore,  as  EB  is  to  FD,  so  is  AB  to  CD.  [vn.  Def.  20] 

Q.  E.  D. 


Proposition  12 

If  there  be  as  many  numbers  as  we  please  in  proportion ,  then ,  as  one  of  the  ante¬ 
cedents  is  to  one  of  the  consequents ,  so  are  all  the  antecedents  to  all  the  consequents. 
Let  A,  B,  C,  D  be  as  many  numbers  as  we  please  in  proportion,  so  that, 
as  A  is  to  B,  so  is  C  to  D; 

I  say  that,  as  A  is  to  B ,  so  are  A,  C  to  B,  D. 

For  since,  as  A  is  to  B ,  so  is  C  to  D, 

A |  B  C  D  whatever  part  or  parts  A  is  of  B,  the  same  part  or  parts  is  C  of 
D  also.  [vii.  Def.  20] 

Therefore  also  the  sum  of  A,  C  is  the  same  part  or  the  same  parts  of  the  sum 
of  B,  D  that  A  is  of  B.  [vn.  5,  6] 

Therefore,  as  A  is  to  B ,  so  are  A,  C  to  B ,  D.  [vn.  Def.  20] 

Q.  E.  D. 


Proposition  13 

If  four  numbers  be  proportional,  they  will  also  be  proportional  alternately. 

Let  the  four  numbers  A,  B,  C,  D  be  proportional,  so  that, 
as  A  is  to  B,  so  is  C  to  D; 

I  say  that  they  will  also  be  proportional  alternately,  so  that, 
as  A  is  to  C ,  so  will  B  be  to  D. 

For  since,  as  A  is  to  B,  so  is  C  to  D , 
therefore,  whatever  part  or  parts  A  is  of  B,  the  same  part  or 
the  same  parts  is  C  of  D  also.  [vii.  Def.  20] 

Therefore,  alternately,  whatever  part  or  parts  A  is  of  C , 
the  same  part  or  the  same  parts  is  B  of  D  also.  [vii.  10] 
Therefore,  as  A  is  to  C,  so  is  B  to  D.  [vii.  Def.  20] 

Q.  E.  D. 


Proposition  14 

If  there  be  as  many  numbers  as  we  please,  and  others  equal  to  them  in  multitude , 
which  taken  two  and  two  are  in  the  same  ratio ,  they  will  also  be  in  the  same  ratio 
ex  aequali. 

Let  there  be  as  many  numbers  as  we  please  A,  B,  C,  and  others  equal  to 
them  in  multitude  D,  E,  F,  which  taken  two  and  two  are  in  the  same  ratio,  so 
that, 

_  _ P -  as  A  is  to  B,  so  is  D  to  E, 

A  - - -  and,  as  B  is  to  C ,  so  is  E  to  F; 

B  _  I  say  that,  ex  aequali , 

C  F  as  A  is  to  C,  so  also  is  D  to  F. 

For,  since,  as  A  is  to  B,  so  is  D  to  E, 

therefore,  alternately, 
as  A  is  to  D,  so  is  B  to  E. 

Again,  since,  as  B  is  to  C ,  so  is  E  to  F, 


[vii.  13] 


136  EUCLID 

therefore,  alternately, 

as  B  is  to  E,  so  is  C  to  F .  fyn.  13] 

But,  as  B  is  to  E ,  so  is  A  to  D; 

therefore  also,  as  A  is  to  D,  so  is  C  to  F. 

Therefore,  alternately, 

as  A  is  to  C,  so  is  D  to  F .  [id.] 

Proposition  15 

If  an  unit  measure  any  number ,  and  another  number  measure  any  other  number 
the  same  number  of  times ,  alternately  also ,  the  unit  will  measure  the  third  number 
the  same  number  of  times  that  the  second  measures  the  fourth . 

For  let  the  unit  A  measure  any  number  BC , 
and  let  another  number  D  measure  any 
other  number  EF  the  same  number  of 
times; 

I  say  that,  alternately  also,  the  unit  A 
measures  the  number  D  the  same  number 
of  times  that  BC  measures  EF, 

For,  since  the  unit  A  measures  the  number  BC  the  same  number  of  times 
that  D  measures  EF, 

therefore,  as  many  units  as  there  are  in  BC ,  so  many  numbers  equal  to  D  are 
there  in  EF  also. 

Let  BC  be  divided  into  the  units  in  it,  BG ,  GH ,  HC , 

and  EF  into  the  numbers  EK ,  KL ,  LF  equal  to  D. 

Thus  the  multitude  of  BG,  GH,  HC  will  be  equal  to  the  multitude  of  EK, 
KL,  LF, 

And,  since  the  units  BG,  GH,  HC  are  equal  to  one  another, 

and  the  numbers  EK,  KL,  LF  are  also  equal  to  one  another, 
while  the  multitude  of  the  units  BG,  GH,  HC  is  equal  to  the  multitude  of  the 
numbers  EK,  KL,  LF,  j 

therefore,  as  the  unit  BG  is  to  the  number  EK,  so  will  the  unit  GH  be  to  the 
number  KL,  and  the  unit  HC  to  the  number  LF. 

Therefore  also,  as  one  of  the  antecedents  is  to  one  of  the  consequents,  so  will 
all  the  antecedents  be  to  all  the  consequents;  [vn.  12] 

therefore,  as  the  unit  BG  is  to  the  number  EK,  so  is  BC  to  EF. 

But  the  unit  BG  is  equal  to  the  unit  A,  „  •' 

and  the  number  EK  to  the  number  D. 

Therefore,  as  the  unit  A  is  to  the  number  D,  so  is  BC  to  EF. 

Therefore  the  unit  A  measures  the  number  D  the  same  number  of  times  that 
BC  measures  EF.  Q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  16 

If  two  numbers  by  multiplying  one  another  make  certain  numbers,  the  numbers  so 
produced  will  be  equal  to  one  another. 

Let  A,  B  be  two  numbers,  and  let  A  by  multiplying  B  make  C,  and  B  by 
multiplying  A  make  D ; 

I  say  that  C  is  equal  to  D. 

For,  since  A  by  multiplying  B  has  made  C; 

therefore  B  measures  C  according  to  the  units  in  A. 


ELEMENTS  VII 


137 


But  the  unit  E  also  measures  the  number  A  according  to  the  units  in  it; 
therefore  the  unit  E  measures  A  the  same  number  of  times  that  B  measures  C. 

Therefore,  alternately,  the  unit  E 
A  measures  the  number  B  the  same  num- 

- B  ber  of  times  that  A  measures  C  [vn.  15]. 

C -  Again,  since  B  by  multiplying  A  has 

D -  made  D , 

_ ^  therefore  A  measures  D  according  to  the 

units  in  B . 

But  the  unit  E  also  measures  B  according  to  the  units  in  it; 
therefore  the  unit  E  measures  the  number  B  the  same  number  of  times  that  A 
measures  D. 

But  the  unit  E  measured  the  number  B  the  same  number  of  times  that  A 
measures  C ; 

therefore  A  measures  each  of  the  numbers  C ,  D  the  same  number  of  times. 
Therefore  C  is  equal  to  D.  q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  17 

If  a  number  by  multiplying  two  numbers  make  certain  numbers ,  the  numbers  so 
produced  unll  have  the  same  ratio  as  the  numbers  multiplied. 

For  let  the  number  A  be  multiplying  the  two  numbers  B ,  C  make  D}  E ; 

I  say  that,  as  B  is  to  C,  so  is  D  to  E. 

For,  since  A  by  multiplying  B  has  made  Z), 

therefore  B  measures  D  according  to  the  units  in  A. 

But  the  unit  F  also  meas- 
A  ures  the  number  A  according 

B - -  C -  to  the  units  in  it; 

_ 5 _  _ _ £ -  therefore  the  unit  F  measures 

_ p  the  number  A  the  same  num¬ 
ber  of  times  that B measures/). 
Therefore,  as  the  unit  F  is  to  the  number  A,  so  is  B  to  D.  [vn.  Def.  20] 
For  the  same  reason, 

as  the  unit  F  is  to  the  number  A,  so  also  is  C  to  E; 
therefore  also,  as  B  is  to  Z),  so  is  C  to  E. 

Therefore,  alternately,  as  B  is  to  C,  so  is  D  to  E.  fvn.  13] 

Q.  E.  D. 

Proposition  18 

If  two  numbers  by  multiplying  any  number  make  certain  numbers ,  the  numbers  so 
produced  will  have  the  same  ratio  as  the  multipliers. 

For  let  two  numbers  A,  B  by  multiplying  any  number  C  make  Z),  E ; 

I  say  that,  as  A  is  to  B ,  so  is  D  to  E. 

For,  since  A  by  multiplying  C  has  made  Z>, 
therefore  also  C  by  multiplying  A  has  made  D. 

~  [vn.  16] 

For  the  same  reason  also 
C  by  multiplying  B  has  made  E. 

Therefore  the  number  C  by  multiplying  the  two  numbers  A,  B  has  made/),  E. 
Therefore,  as  A  is  to  B,  so  is  D  to  E.  [vn.  17] 

Q.  E.  D. 


A- 

B- 

D- 

E- 


138 


EUCLID 


Proposition  19 

If  four  numbers  be  proportional ,  the  number  produced  from  the  first  and  fourth 
will  be  equal  to  the  number  produced  from  the  second  and  third;  and ,  if  the  number 
produced  from  the  first  and  fourth  be  equal  to  that  produced  from  the  second  and 
third ,  the  four  numbers  will  be  proportional. 

Let  A,  B,  Cy  D  be  four  numbers  in  proportion,  so  that, 
as  A  is  to  By  so  is  C  to  D; 

and  let  A  by  multiplying  D  make  Ey  and  let  B  by  multiplying  C  make  F ; 

I  say  that  E  is  equal  to  F. 

For  let  A  by  multiplying  C  make  G. 

Since,  then,  A  by  multiplying  C  has  made  Gy  and  by  multiplying  D  has 
made  Ey 

the  number  A  by  multiplying  the  two  numbers  C,  D 
has  made  G,  E. 

Therefore,  as  C  is  to  D,  so  is  G  to  E.  [vn.  17] 

But,  as  C  is  to  D,  so  is  A  to  B; 

therefore  also,  as  A  is  to  B ,  so  is  G  to  E. 

Again,  since  A  by  multiplying  C  has  made  G, 
but,  further,  B  has  also  by  multiplying  C  made  F , 
the  two  numbers  A}  B  by  multiplying  a  certain  num¬ 
ber  C  have  made  G,  F. 

Therefore,  as  A  is  to  By  so  is  G  to  F.  [vn.  18] 

But  further,  as  A  is  to  B ,  so  is  G  to  E  also; 

therefore  also,  as  G  is  to  E,  so  is  G  to  F . 

Therefore  G  has  to  each  of  the  numbers  E,  F  the  same  ratio; 

therefore  E  is  equal  to  F.  [cf.  v.  9] 

Again,  let  E  be  equal  to  F; 

I  say  that,  as  A  is  to  B,  so  is  C  to  D. 

For,  with  the  same  construction, 

since  E  is  equal  to  F, 

therefore,  as  G  is  to  E,  so  is  G  to  F.  [cf.  v.  7] 

But,  as  G  is  to  E}  so  is  C  to  D,  [vn.  17] 

and,  as  G  is  to  F,  so  is  A  to  B.  [vn.  18] 

Therefore  also,  as  A  is  to  B,  so  is  C  to  D.  Q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  20 

The  least  numbers  of  those  which  have  the  same  ratio  with  them  measure  those  which 
have  the  same  ratio  the  same  number  of  times ,  the  greater  the  greater  and  the  less 
the  less. 

For  let  CD,  EF  be  the  least  numbers  of  those  which  have  the  same  ratio 
with  A,  B; 

I  say  that  CD  measures  A  the  same  number  of  times  that  EF  measures  B. 
Now  CD  is  not  parts  of  A. 

For,  if  possible,  let  it  be  so; 

therefore  EF  is  also  the  same  parts  of  B  that  CD  is  of  A. 

[vn.  13  and  Def.  20] 

Therefore,  as  many  parts  of  A  as  there  are  in  CD,  so  many  parts  of  B  are 
there  also  in  EF. 


ELEMENTS  VII  139 

Let  CD  be  divided  into  the  parts  of  A ,  namely  CG,  GDy  and  EF  into  the 
parts  of  B,  namely  EH,  HF ; 

thus  the  multitude  of  CG ,  GD  will  be  equal  to  the  multitude  of  EH,  HF. 

Now,  since  the  numbers  CG,  GD  are  equal  to  one  another, 
and  the  numbers  EH,  HF  are  also  equal  to  one  another, 
while  the  multitude  of  CG,  GD  is  equal  to  the  multitude  of 
A  b  r  EH,HF, 

c  E  therefore,  as  CG  is  to  EH,  so  is  GD  to  HF. 

G  H  Therefore  also,  as  one  of  the  antecedents  is  to  one  of  the 
p  consequents,  so  will  all  the  antecedents  be  to  all  the  conse- 
quents.  [vn.  12] 

Therefore,  as  CG  is  to  EH,  so  is  CD  to  EF. 

Therefore  CG,  EH  are  in  the  same  ratio  with  CD,  EF,  being  less  than  they: 
which  is  impossible,  for  by  hypothesis  CD,  EF  are  the  least  numbers  of  those 
which  have  the  same  ratio  with  them. 

Therefore  CD  is  not  parts  of  A ; 

therefore  it  is  a  part  of  it.  [vn.  4] 

And  EF  is  the  same  part  of  B  that  CD  is  of  A;  [vn.  13  and  Def.  20] 

therefore  CD  measures  A  the  same  number  of  times  that  EF  measures  B. 

Q.  E.  D. 


Proposition  21 

Numbers  prime  to  one  another  are  the  least  of  those  which  have  the  same  ratio  with 
them. 

Let  A,  B  be  numbers  prime  to  one  another; 

I  say  that  A,  B  are  the  least  of  those  which  have 
B  the  same  ratio  with  them. 

For,  if  not,  there  will  be  some  numbers  less  than 
A,  B  which  are  in  the  same  ratio  with  A,  B. 

Let  them  be  C,  D. 

Since,  then,  the  least  numbers  of  those  which  have  the  same  ratio  measure 
those  which  have  the  same  ratio  the  same  number  of  times,  the  greater  the 
greater  and  the  less  the  less,  that  is,  the  antecedent  the  antecedent  and  the 
consequent  the  consequent,  [vn.  20] 

therefore  C  measures  A  the  same  number  of  times  that  D  measures  B. 
Now,  as  many  times  as  C  measures  A,  so  many  units  let  there  be  in  E. 
Therefore  D  also  measures  B  according  to  the  units  in  E. 

And,  since  C  measures  A  according  to  the  units  in  E, 

therefore  E  also  measures  A  according  to  the  units  in  C.  [vii.  16] 
For  the  same  reason 

E  also  measures  B  according  to  the  units  in  D.  [vn.  16] 

Therefore  E  measures  A,  B  which  are  prime  to  one  another:  which  is  im¬ 
possible.  [vii.  Def.  12] 

Therefore  there  will  be  no  numbers  less  than  A,  B  which  are  in  the  same 
ratio  with  A,  B. 

Therefore  A,  B  are  the  least  of  those  which  have  the  same  ratio  with  them. 

Q.  e.  n. 


140 


EUCLID 


Proposition  22 

The  least  numbers  of  those  which  have  the  same  ratio  with  them  are  prime  to  one 
another. 

Let  A,  B  be  the  least  numbers  of  those  which  have  the  same  ratio  with  them; 
I  say  that  A,  B  are  prime  to  one  another. 

For,  if  they  are  not  prime  to  one  another,  some  a _ 

number  wall  measure  them.  _ 

Let  some  number  measure  them,  and  let  it  be  C. 

And,  as  many  times  as  C  measures  A ,  so  many  c 
units  let  there  be  in  D,  D 

and,  as  many  times  as  C  measures  B ,  so  many  units  E - 

let  there  be  in  E. 

Since  C  measures  A  according  to  the  units  in  D, 

therefore  C  by  multiplying  D  has  made  A .  [vn.  Def.  15] 
For  the  same  reason  also 

C  by  multiplying  E  has  made  B. 

Thus  the  number  C  by  multiplying  the  two  numbers  D,  E  has  made  A,  B; 

therefore,  as  D  is  to  E,  so  is  A  to  B;  [vn.  17] 

therefore  D ,  E  are  in  the  same  ratio  with  A,  B ,  being  less  than  they:  which  is 
impossible. 

Therefore  no  number  will  measure  the  numbers  A,  B. 

Therefore  A,  B  are  prime  to  one  another.  q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  23 

If  two  numbers  be  prime  to  one  another ,  the  number  which  measures  the  one  of  them 
will  be  prime  to  the  remaining  number. 

Let  A,  B  be  two  numbers  prime  to  one  another,  and  let  any  number  C 
measure  A ; 

I  say  that  C,  B  are  also  prime  to  one  another. 

For,  if  C,  B  are  not  prime  to  one  another, 

some  number  will  measure  C,  B. 

Let  a  number  measure  them,  and  let  it  be  D. 

Since  D  measures  C,  and  C  measures  A,  therefore  D  also 
measures  A. 

But  it  also  measures  B; 

therefore  D  measures  A,  B  which  are  prime  to  one  another:  A  B  C  D 
which  is  impossible.  [vn.  Def.  12] 

Therefore  no  number  will  measure  the  numbers  C,  B. 

Therefore  C,  B  are  prime  to  one  another.  Q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  24 

If  two  numbers  be  prime  to  any  number ,  their  product  also  will  be  prime  to  the  same. 

For  let  the  two  numbers  A,  B  be  prime  to  any  number  C,  and  let  A  by  mul¬ 
tiplying  B  make  D ; 

I  say  that  C,  D  are  prime  to  one  another. 

For,  if  C,  D  are  not  prime  to  one  another,  some  number  will  measure  C,  D. 
Let  a  number  measure  them,  and  let  it  be  E. 

Now,  since  C,  A  are  prime  to  one  another, 


ELEMENTS  VII 


141 


B 


and  a  certain  number  E  measures  C, 
therefore  A,  E  are  prime  to  one  another.  [vn.  23] 

As  many  times,  then,  as  E  measures  D ,  so  many  units  let  there  be  in 

F\ 

therefore  F  also  measures 
D  according  to  the  units  in  E.  [vn.  16] 

Therefore  E  by  multiplying  F  has  made  D.  [vn.  Def.  15] 
But,  further,  A  by  multiplying  B  has  also  made  D ; 
therefore  the  product  of  E ,  F  is  equal  to  the  product  of 
A,  B. 

But,  if  the  product  of  the  extremes  be  equal  to  that  of 
the  means,  the  four  numbers  are  proportional;  [vn.  19] 
therefore,  as  E  is  to  A,  so  is  B  to  F. 

But  Ay  E  are  prime  to  one  another, 

numbers  which  are  prime  to  one  another  are  also  the  least  of  those  which  have 
the  same  ratio,  [vii.  21] 

and  the  least  numbers  of  those  which  have  the  same  ratio  with  them  measure 
those  which  have  the  same  ratio  the  same  number  of  times,  the  greater  the 
greater  and  the  less  the  less,  that  is,  the  antecedent  the  antecedent  and  the 
consequent  the  consequent;  [vn.  20] 

therefore  E  measures  B. 

But  it  also  measures  C ; 

therefore  E  measures  B ,  C  which  are  prime  to  one  another:  which  is  impossible. 

[vii.  Def.  12] 

Therefore  no  number  will  measure  the  numbers  C,  D. 

Therefore  C,  D  are  prime  to  one  another.  q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  25 

If  two  numbers  be  prime  to  one  another ,  the  product  of  one  of  them  into  itself  will 
be  prime  to  the  remaining  one . 

Let  Ay  B  be  two  numbers  prime  to  one  another, 

and  let  A  by  multiplying  itself  make  C ; 

I  say  that  B,  C  are  prime  to  one  another. 

For  let  D  be  made  equal  to  A. 

1  b  Since  A,  B  are  prime  to  one  another,  and  A  is  equal  to  D , 
therefore  Z),  B  are  also  prime  to  one  another. 

Therefore  each  of  the  two  numbers  D,  A  is  prime  to  B ; 

therefore  the  product  of  D,  A  will  also  be  prime  to  B .  [vii.  24] 
But  the  number  which  is  the  product  of  D,  A  is  C. 

Therefore  C,  B  are  prime  to  one  another.  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  26 

If  two  numbers  be  prime  to  two  numbersy  both  to  eachy  their  products  also  will  be 
prime  to  one  another. 

For  let  the  two  numbers  A,  B  be  prime 
to  the  two  numbers  C,  D ;  both  to  each, 
B  D  and  |e|-  4  ky  multiplying  B  make  F,  and  let 

E -  C  by  multiplying  D  make  F; 

F -  I  say  that  F,  F  are  prime  to  one  another. 


142  EUCLID 

For,  since  each  of  the  numbers  A,  B  is  prime  to  C, 

therefore  the  product  of  A,  B  will  also  be  prime  to  C.  [vn.  24] 
But  the  product  of  A,  B  is  E\ 

therefore  E ,  C  are  prime  to  one  another. 

For  the  same  reason 

E,  D  are  also  prime  to  one  another. 

Therefore  each  of  the  numbers  C,  D  is  prime  to  E. 

Therefore  the  product  of  C,  D  will  also  be  prime  to  E.  [vn.  24] 

But  the  product  of  C,  D  is  F. 

Therefore  E ,  F  are  prime  to  one  another.  q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  27 

If  two  numbers  be  prime  to  one  another ,  and  each  by  multiplying  itself  make  a 
certain  number ,  the  products  will  be  prime  to  one  another;  and ,  if  the  original 
numbers  by  multiplying  the  products  make  certain  numbers ,  the  latter  will  also 
be  prime  to  one  another  [and  this  is  always  the  case  with  the  extremes]. 

Let  Af  B  be  two  numbers  prime  to  one  another, 
let  A  by  multiplying  itself  make  C,  and  by  multiplying  C  make  D, 
and  let  B  by  multiplying  itself  make  Ey  and  by  multiply¬ 
ing  E  make  F ; 

I  say  that  both  C,  E  and  D ,  F  are  prime  to  one  another. 

For,  since  A,  B  are  prime  to  one  another,  and  A  by 
multiplying  itself  has  made  C , 

therefore  C,  B  are  prime  to  one  another,  [vn.  25] 

Since,  then,  C,  B  are  prime  to  one  another, 

and  B  by  multiplying  itself  has  made  E , 

therefore  C,  E  are  prime  to  one  another. 

Again,  since  A,  B  are  prime  to  one  another, 

and  B  by  multiplying  itself  has  made  E , 
therefore  A,  E  are  prime  to  one  another. 

Since,  then,  the  two  numbers  A,  C  are  prime  to  the  two  numbers  B,  E,  both 
to  each, 

therefore  also  the  product  of  A,  C  is  prime  to  the  product  of  B,  E.  [vn.  26] 
And  the  product  of  A,  C  is  D}  and  the  product  of  By  E  is  F . 

Therefore  D,  F  are  prime  to  one  another.  q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  28 

If  two  numbers  be  prime  to  one  another,  the  sum  will  also  be  prime  to  each  of  them; 
and,  if  the  sum  of  two  numbers  be  prime  to  any  one  of  them,  the  original  numbers 
will  also  be  prime  to  one  another. 

For  let  two  numbers  AB,  BC  prime  to  one  another  be  added; 

I  say  that  the  sum  AC  is  also  prime  to  each  of 
the  numbers  AB,  BC.  A  b  C 

For,  if  CA,  AB  are  not  prime  to  one  another,  — g — 

some  number  will  measure  CA,  AB. 

Let  a  number  measure  them,  and  let  it  be  D. 

Since  then  D  measures  CA,  AB, 

therefore  it  will  also  measure  the  remainder  BC. 


[id.] 

[id.] 


ELEMENTS  VII 


143 


But  it  also  measures  BA ; 

therefore  D  measures  AB,  BC  which  are  prime  to  one  another:  which  is  im¬ 
possible.  [vn.  Def.  12] 

Therefore  no  number  will  measure  the  numbers  CA,  AB;  therefore  CA ,  AB 
are  prime  to  one  another. 

For  the  same  reason 

AC ,  CB  are  also  prime  to  one  another. 

Therefore  CA  is  prime  to  each  of  the  numbers  AB ,  BC . 

Again,  let  CA,  AB  be  prime  to  one  another; 

I  say  that  AB,  BC  are  also  prime  to  one  another. 

For,  if  AB,  BC  are  not  prime  to  one  another, 

some  number  will  measure  AB,  BC. 

Let  a  number  measure  them,  and  let  it  be  D. 

Now,  since  D  measures  each  of  the  numbers  AB,  BC,  it  will  also  measure 
the  whole  CA. 

But  it  also  measures  AB; 

therefore  D  measures  CA,  AB  which  are  prime  to  one  another: 

which  is  impossible.  [vn.  Def.  12] 

Therefore  no  number  will  measure  the  numbers  AB,  BC. 

Therefore  AB,  BC  are  prime  to  one  another.  q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  29 

Any  prime  number  is  prime  to  any  number  which  it  does  not  measure. 

Let  A  be  a  prime  number,  and  let  it  not  measure  B; 

I  say  that  B,  A  are  prime  to  one  another. 

For,  if  B,  A  are  not  prime  to  one  another, 

A  some  number  will  measure  them. 

- - B  Let  C  measure  them. 

- C  Since  C  measures  B, 

and  A  does  not  measure  B, 
therefore  C  is  not  the  same  with  A. 

Now,  since  C  measures  B,  A, 

therefore  it  also  measures  A  which  is  prime,  though  it  is  not  the  same  with  it: 

which  is  impossible. 

Therefore  no  number  will  measure  B,  A. 

Therefore  A,  B  are  prime  to  one  another.  q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  30 

If  two  numbers  by  multiplying  one  another  make  some  number,  and  any  prime 
number  measure  the  product,  it  will  also  measure  one  of  the  original  numbers. 
For  let  the  two  numbers  A,  B  by  multiplying  one  another  make  C,  and  let 

any  prime  number  D  measure  C ; 

A  I  say  that  D  measures  one  of  the  numbers  A,  B. 

B -  For  iet  it  not  measure  A. 

C -  Now  D  is  prime; 

D _  therefore  A,  D  are  prime  to  one  another,  [vn.  29] 

E _  And,  as  many  times  as  D  measures  C,  so  many 

units  let  there  be  in  E. 

Since  then  D  measures  C  according  to  the  units  in  E, 


144  EUCLID 

therefore  D  by  multiplying  E  has  made  C.  [vii.  Def.  15] 
Further,  A  by  multiplying  B  has  also  made  C ; 

therefore  the  product  of  D,  E  is  equal  to  the  product  of  A ,  B. 
Therefore,  as  D  is  to  A,  so  is  B  to  E.  [vn.  19] 

But  D,  A  are  prime  to  one  another, 

primes  are  also  least,  [vii.  21] 

and  the  least  measure  the  numbers  which  have  the  same  ratio  the  same  num¬ 
ber  of  times,  the  greater  the  greater  and  the  less  the  less,  that  is,  the  antecedent 
the  antecedent  and  the  consequent  the  consequent;  [vii.  20] 

therefore  D  measures  B. 

Similarly  we  can  also  show  that,  if  D  does  not  measure  By  it  will  measure  A . 
Therefore  D  measures  one  of  the  numbers  A,  B.  q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  31 

Any  composite  number  is  measured  by  some  prime  number. 

Let  A  be  a  composite  number; 

I  say  that  A  is  measured  by  some  prime  number. 

For,  since  A  is  composite, 

some  number  will  measure  it. 

Let  a  number  measure  it,  and  let  it  be  B .  A - 

Now,  if  B  is  prime,  wThat  was  enjoined  will  have  g _ 

been  done.  c 

But  if  it  is  composite,  some  number  will  measure  it. 

Let  a  number  measure  it,  and  let  it  be  C. 

Then,  since  C  measures  B , 

and  B  measures  A, 
therefore  C  also  measures  A. 

And,  if  C  is  prime,  what  was  enjoined  will  have  been  done. 

But  if  it  is  composite,  some  number  will  measure  it. 

Thus,  if  the  investigation  be  continued  in  this  way,  some  prime  number  will 
be  found  which  will  measure  the  number  before  it,  which  will  also  measure  A. 

For,  if  it  is  not  found,  an  infinite  series  of  numbers  will  measure  the  number 
A ,  each  of  which  is  less  than  the  other: 

which  is  impossible  in  numbers. 

Therefore  some  prime  number  will  be  found  which  will  measure  the  one 
before  it,  vrhich  will  also  measure  A. 

Therefore  any  composite  number  is  measured  by  some  prime  number. 

Q.  E.  D. 

Proposition  32 

Any  number  either  is  prime  or  is  measured  by  some  prime  number . 

Let  A  be  a  number; 

I  say  that  A  either  is  prime  or  is  measured  by  some  A _ 

prime  number. 

If  now  A  is  prime,  that  which  was  enjoined  will  have  been  done. 

But  if  it  is  composite,  some  prime  number  will  measure  it.  [vii.  31] 

Therefore  any  number  either  is  prime  or  is  measured  by  some  prime  number. 

Q.  E.  D. 


ELEMENTS  VII 


145 


Proposition  33 


H 


Given  as  many  numbers  as  we  please ,  to  find  the  least  of  those  which  have  the  same 
ratio  with  them. 

Let  A,  By  C  be  the  given  numbers,  as  many  as  we  please; 

thus  it  is  required  to  find  the  least  of  those  which 
have  the  same  ratio  with  A,  By  C. 

A,  By  C  are  either  prime  to  one  another  or  not. 
Now,  if  A,  B,  C  are  prime  to  one  another,  they 
are  the  least  of  those  which  have  the  same  ratio 
with  them.  [vn.  21] 

But,  if  not,  let  D  the  greatest  common  measure 
of  Ay  By  C  be  taken,  [vn.  3] 

and,  as  many  times  as  D  measures  the  numbers  A, 
By  C  respectively,  so  many  units  let  there  be  in  the 
numbers  Z?,  F,  G  respectively. 

Therefore  the  numbers  Z?,  Fy  G  measure  the  numbers  A,  B,  C  respectively 
according  to  the  units  in  D.  [vn.  16] 

Therefore  E ,  F,  G  measure  A,  B,  C  the  same  number  of  times; 

therefore  E ,  Fy  G  are  in  the  same  ratio  with  A,  B,  C.  [vn.  Def.  20] 
I  say  next  that  they  are  the  least  that  are  in  that  ratio. 

For,  if  Ey  Fy  G  are  not  the  least  of  those  which  have  the  same  ratio  with  A, 

By  Cy 

there  will  be  numbers  less  than  Z?,  F}  G  which  are  in  the  same  ratio  with  A, 
By  C. 


L  M 


Let  them  be  H,  Ky  L; 

therefore  H  measures  A  the  same  number  of  times  that  the  numbers  Ky  L 
measure  the  numbers  B,  C  respectively. 

Now,  as  many  times  as  H  measures  A,  so  many  units  let  there  be 
in  M  ; 

therefore  the  numbers  K}  L  also  measure  the  numbers  By  C  respectively  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  units  in  M . 

And,  since  H  measures  A  according  to  the  units  in  ilZ, 

therefore  M  also  measures  A  according  to  the  units  in  H.  [vn.  16] 
For  the  same  reason 

M  also  measures  the  numbers  By  C  according  to  the  units  in  the  numbers  Ky  L 
respectively; 

Therefore  M  measures  A,  B,  C. 

Now,  since  H  measures  A  according  to  the  units  in  My 

therefore  H  by  multiplying  M  has  made  A.  [vn.  Def.  15] 
For  the  same  reason  also 

E  by  multiplying  D  has  made  A. 

Therefore  the  product  of  E,  D  is  equal  to  the  product  of  ZZ,  M. 

Therefore,  as  E  is  to  H,  so  is  M  to  Z).  [vn.  19] 

But  E  is  greater  than  ZZ; 

therefore  M  is  also  greater  than  D. 

And  it  measures  A,  By  C: 

which  is  impossible,  for  by  hypothesis,  D  is  the  greatest  common  measure  of 

Ay  By  C. 


146  EUCLID 

Therefore  there  cannot  be  any  numbers  less  than  B,  P,  G  which  are  in  the 
same  ratio  with  A,  B,  C. 

Therefore  E,  B,  G  are  the  least  of  those  which  have  the  same  ratio  with  A , 
B}  C.  Q.  E.  D. 

Proposition  34 

Given  two  numbersy  to  find  the  least  number  which  they  measure. 

Let  Ay  B  be  the  two  given  numbers; 

thus  it  is  required  to  find  the  least  number  which  they  measure. 

Now  Ay  B  are  either  prime  to  one  another  or  not. 

First,  let  A,  B  be  prime  to  one  another,  and  let  A 
by  multiplying  B  make  C ; 

therefore  also  B  by  multiplying  A  has  made  C.  A  B 

Therefore  A}  B  measure  C.  c - - - 

I  say  next  that  it  is  also  the  least  number  they  - — d 

measure.  E _  F _ 

For,  if  not,  A,  B  will  measure  some  number 
which  is  less  than  C. 

Let  them  measure  D . 

Then,  as  many  times  as  A  measures  Z>,  so  many  units  let  there  be  in  E, 
and,  as  many  times  as  B  measures  D,  so  many  units  let  there  be  in  F; 
therefore  A  by  multiplying  E  has  made  Z>, 

and  B  by  multiplying  F  has  made  D ;  [vn.  Def.  15] 

therefore  the  product  of  A ,  E  is  equal  to  the  product  of  B,  F . 
Therefore,  as  A  is  to  B,  so  is  F  to  E.  [vn.  19] 

But  Ay  B  are  prime, 

primes  are  also  least,  [vn.  21] 

and  the  least  measure  the  numbers  which  have  the  same  ratio  the  same  number 
of  times,  the  greater  the  greater  and  the  less  the  less;  [vn.  20] 

therefore  B  measures  Ey  as  consequent  consequent. 

And,  since  A  by  multiplying  B,  E  has  made  C,  Z), 

therefore,  as  B  is  to  B,  so  is  C  to  D.  [vn.  17] 

But  B  measures  E ; 

therefore  C  also  measures  D,  the  greater  the  less: 
which  is  impossible. 

Therefore  A,  B  do  not  measure  any  number  less  than  C; 

therefore  C  is  the  least  that  is  measured  by  A,  B. 

Next,  let  A,  B  not  be  prime  to  one  another, 
and  let  P,  B,  the  least  numbers  of  those  which  have  the  same  ratio  with  A,  B, 
be  taken;  [vn.  33] 

therefore  the  product  of  A,  B  is  equal  to  the  product  of  B,  B.  [vn.  19] 


And  let  A  by  multiplying  B  make  C ; 

therefore  also  B  by  multiplying  F  has  made  C ;  - - -  - - — 

therefore  A,  B  measure  C.  _ F  _ F 

I  say  next  that  it  is  also  the  least  number 
that  they  measure.  C 

For,  if  not,  A,  B  will  measure  some  number  '  D 

which  is  less  than  C.  - G  — H 

Let  them  measure  D. 


ELEMENTS  VII 


147 


And,  as  many  times  as  A  measures  D,  so  many  units  let  there  be  in  G, 
and,  as  many  times  as  B  measures  D,  so  many  units  let  there  be  in  H. 
Therefore  A  by  multiplying  G  has  made  D, 

and  B  by  multiplying  H  has  made  D. 

Therefore  the  product  of  A,  G  is  equal  to  the  product  of  B,  H; 

therefore,  as  A  is  to  B ,  so  is  H  to  G.  [vn.  19] 

But,  as  A  is  to  B,  so  is  F  to  E. 

Therefore  also,  as  F  is  to  B,  so  is  H  to  G. 

But  F,  E  are  least, 

and  the  least  measure  the  numbers  which  have  the  same  ratio  the  same  num¬ 
ber  of  times,  the  greater  the  greater  and  the  less  the  less;  [vn.  20] 

therefore  E  measures  G. 

And,  since  A  by  multiplying  E,  G  has  made  C,  D} 

therefore,  as  E  is  to  G,  so  is  C  to  D.  [vn.  17] 

But  E  measures  G; 

therefore  C  also  measures  D ,  the  greater  the  less: 
which  is  impossible. 

Therefore  A ,  B  will  not  measure  any  number  which  is  less  than  C. 
Therefore  C  is  the  least  that  is  measured  by  A,  B.  q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  35 

If  two  numbers  measure  any  number ,  the  least  number  measured  by  them  will  also 
measure  the  same. 

For  let  the  two  numbers  A,  B  measure  any  number  CD, 
and  let  E  be  the  least  that  they  measure; 

I  say  that  E  also  measures  CD. 

For,  if  E  does  not  measure  CD,  let  B,  measuring  DF ,  leave  CF  less  than 
itself. 

A _  B _  Now,  since  A,  B  measure  E , 

F  ^  and  E  measures  DF. 

p  .  _  ^  1 

therefore  A,  B  will  also  measure  DF. 

E -  But  they  also  measure  the  whole  CD; 

therefore  they  will  also  measure  the  remainder  CF  which  is  less  than  B: 

which  is  impossible. 

Therefore  E  cannot  fail  to  measure  CD; 

therefore  it  measures  it.  q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  36 

Given  three  numbers ,  to  find  the  least  number  which  they  measure. 

Let  A,  B,  C  be  the  three  given  numbers; 

thus  it  is  required  to  find  the  least  number  which  they 
A -  measure. 

B _  Let  D,  the  least  number  measured  by  the  two  num- 

c _  bers  A,  B,  be  taken.  [vn.  34] 

_  Then  C  either  measures,  or  does  not  measure,  D. 

First,  let  it  measure  it. 

E  But  A,  B  also  measure  D; 

therefore  A,  B,  C  measure  D. 

I  say  next  that  it  is  also  the  least  that  they  measure. 


148  EUCLID 

For,  if  not,  A,  B,  C  will  measure  some  number  which  is  less  than  D. 

Let  them  measure  E . 

Since  A,  By  C  measure  E, 

therefore  also  A,  B  measure  E. 

Therefore  the  least  number  measured  by  A,  B  will  also  measure  E .  [vn.  35] 
But  D  is  the  least  number  measured  by  A,  B; 

therefore  D  will  measure  E ,  the  greater  the  less: 
which  is  impossible. 

Therefore  A,  B,  C  will  not  measure  any  number  which  is  less  than  D ; 

therefore  D  is  the  least  that  Ay  By  C  measure. 

Again,  let  C  not  measure  Z), 

and  let  E ,  the  least  number  measured  by  C,  D,  be  A _ 

taken.  [vn.  34]  _ 

Since  A.  B  measure  D. 

c 

and  D  measures  Ey 

therefore  also  A ,  B  measure  E.  D - - - 

But  C  also  measures  E ;  - E 

therefore  also  A,  B,  C  measure  E.  _ P 

I  say  next  that  it  is  also  the  least  that  they  measure. 

For,  if  not,  Ay  ByC  will  measure  some  number  which  is  less  than  E. 

Let  them  measure  F. 

Since  A,  By  C  measure  Fy 

therefore  also  A,  B  measure  F; 

therefore  the  least  number  measured  by  A,  B  will  also  measure  F .  [vii.  35] 
But  D  is  the  least  number  measured  by  A,  B; 

therefore  D  measures  F. 

But  C  also  measures  F; 

therefore  Dy  C  measure  Fy 

so  that  the  least  number  measured  by  Dy  C  will  also  measure  F . 

But  E  is  the  least  number  measured  by  Cy  D; 

therefore  E  measures  Fy  the  greater  the  less: 
which  is  impossible. 

Therefore  A,  ByC  will  not  measure  any  number  which  is  less  than  E . 
Therefore  E  is  the  least  that  is  measured  by  A,  By  C.  q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  37 

If  a  number  be  measured  by  any  number ,  the  number  which  is  measured  will  have 
a  part  called  by  the  same  name  as  the  measuring  number. 

For  let  the  number  A  be  measured  by  any  number  B ; 

I  say  that  A  has  a  part  called  by  the  same  name  as  B.  A _ 

For,  as  many  times  as  B  measures  A,  so  many  units  let  g _ 

there  be  in  C. 

Since  B  measures  A  according  to  the  units  in  C,  c  “ 

and  the  unit  D  also  measures  the  number  C  according  D 
to  the  units  in  it, 

therefore  the  unit  D  measures  the  number  C  the  same  number  of  times  as  B 
measures  A. 

Therefore,  alternately,  the  unit  D  measures  the  number  B  the  same  number 
of  times  as  C  measures  A;  [vn.  15] 


ELEMENTS  VII  149 

therefore,  whatever  part  the  unit  D  is  of  the  number  B ,  the  same  part  is  C  of  A 
also. 

But  the  unit  D  is  a  part  of  the  number  B  called  by  the  same  name  as  it; 
therefore  C  is  also  a  part  of  A  called  by  the  same  name  as  By 
so  that  A  has  a  part  C  which  is  called  by  the  same  name  as  B.  q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  38 


If  a  number  have  any  part  whatever ,  it  will  be  measured  by  a  number  called  by  the 
same  name  as  the  part . 

For  let  the  number  A  have  any  part  whatever,  B, 

and  let  C  be  a  number  called  by  the  same  name  as  the  part  B; 

A _ _  I  say  that  C  measures  A. 

For,  since  B  is  a  part  of  A  called  by  the  same  name 
~B  as  C , 

and  the  unit  D  is  also  a  part  of  C  called  by  the  same 
— D  name  as  it, 

therefore,  whatever  part  the  unit  D  is  of  the  number  C, 
the  same  part  is  B  of  A  also ; 

therefore  the  unit  D  measures  the  number  C  the  same  number  of  times  that  B 
measures  A . 

Therefore,  alternately,  the  unit  D  measures  the  number  B  the  same  number 
of  times  that  C  measures  A.  [vn.  15] 

Therefore  C  measures  A .  q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  39 


To  find  the  number  which  is  the  least  that  will  have  given  parts . 

Let  A}  By  C  be  the  given  parts; 

thus  it  is  required  to  find  the  number  which  is  the  least  that  will  have  the  parts 

Ay  By  C. 

Let  D}  Ey  F  be  numbers  called  by  the  same  name  as  the  parts  A,  B,  C, 

and  let  G,  the  least  number  measured 
by  Dy  Ey  F,  be  taken.  [vn.  36] 

Therefore  G  has  parts  called  by  the 
same  name  as  D ,  Ey  F.  [vn.  37] 
__G  But  Ay  By  C  are  parts  called  by  the 
same  name  as  D,  Ey  F; 
therefore  G  has  the  parts  A,  B,  C. 

I  say  next  that  it  is  also  the  least  number  that  has. 

For,  if  not,  there  will  be  some  number  less  than  G  which  will  have  the  parts 
Ay  By  C. 


A 

D 


-H 


Let  it  be  H . 

Since  H  has  the  parts  A ,  B ,  C, 

therefore  H  will  be  measured  by  numbers  called  by  the  same  name  as  the  parts 
Ay  By  C.  [vn.  38] 

But  Dy  Ey  F  are  numbers  called  by  the  same  name  as  the  parts  Ay  B}  C; 

therefore  H  is  measured  by  Z),  Ey  F. 

And  it  is  less  than  G:  which  is  impossible. 

Therefore  there  will  be  no  number  less  than  G  that  will  have  the  parts  A , 
By  C.  Q.  E.  D. 


BOOK  EIGHT 


Proposition  1 

If  there  be  as  many  numbers  as  we  please  in  continued  proportion ,  and  the  extremes 
of  them  be  prime  to  one  another,  the  numbers  are  the  least  of  those  which  have  the 
same  ratio  with  them. 

Let  there  be  as  many  numbers  as  we  please,  A,  B,  C,  D,  in  continued  pro¬ 


portion, 

and  let  the  extremes  of  them  A,  D  be 

prime  to  one  another;  A -  E - 

I  say  that  A,  B,  C ,  D  are  the  least  of  B -  F - 

those  which  have  the  same  ratio  with  them.  c -  G - 

For,  if  not,  let  E ,  F,  G ,  H  be  less  than  A,  q _  H _ 

B ,  C,  D ,  and  in  the  same  ratio  with  them. 


Now,  since  A,  B,  C,  D  are  in  the  same  ratio  with  E ,  F,  G ,  H, 
and  the  multitude  of  the  numbers  A,  B,  C,  D  is  equal  to  the  multitude  of  the 
numbers  E ,  F ,  G,  H, 

therefore,  ex  aequali , 

as  A  is  to  D,  so  is  E  to  H.  [vn.  14] 

But  A ,  D  are  prime, 

primes  are  also  least,  [vn.  21] 

and  the  least  numbers  measure  those  which  have  the  same  ratio  the  same  num¬ 
ber  of  times,  the  greater  the  greater  and  the  less  the  less,  that  is,  the  antecedent 
the  antecedent  and  the  consequent  the  consequent.  [vn.  20] 

Therefore  A  measures  E,  the  greater  the  less: 

which  is  impossible. 

Therefore  E ,  F,  G,  H  which  are  less  than  A,  B,  C,  D  are  not  in  the  same 
ratio  with  them. 

Therefore  A,  B,  C,  D  are  the  least  of  those  which  have  the  same  ratio  with 
them.  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  2 

To  find  numbers  in  continued  proportion ,  as  many  as  may  be  prescribed,  and  the 
least  that  are  in  a  given  ratio. 

Let  the  ratio  of  A  to  B  be  the  given  ratio  in  least  numbers; 
thus  it  is  required  to  find  numbers  in  continued  proportion,  as  many  as  may  be 
prescribed,  and  the  least  that  are  in  the  ratio  of  A  to  B. 

Let  four  be  prescribed; 

let  A  by  multiplying  itself  make  C,  and  by  multiplying  B  let  it  make  D; 
let  B  by  multiplying  itself  make  E ; 
further,  let  A  by  multiplying  C,  D,  E  make  F,  G,  H. 

150 


151 


ELEMENTS  VIII 

and  let  B  by  multiplying  E  make  K. 

Now,  since  A  by  multiplying  itself  has  made  G, 

and  by  multiplying  B  has  made  D, 

_ A  - C  therefore,  as  A  is  to  B,  so  is  G  to  D. 

[vii.  17] 

B  D  Again,  since  A  by  multiplying  B 

- E  has  made  D , 

p _  _ q  and  B  by  multiplying  itself  has  made 

E} 

therefore  the  numbers  A,  B  by  mul- 

- - - K  tiplying  B  have  made  the  numbers 

D,  E  respectively. 

Therefore,  as  A  is  to  B}  so  is  D  to  E , 

But,  as  A  is  to  B,  so  is  G  to  D; 

therefore  also,  as  C  is  to  D,  so  is  D  to  E . 

And,  since  A  by  multiplying  G,  D  has  made  F ,  G, 

therefore,  as  C  is  to  D ,  so  is  F  to  G. 

But,  as  C  is  to  D ,  so  was  A  to  B; 

therefore  also,  as  A  is  to  B ,  so  is  F  to  G. 

Again,  since  A  by  multiplying  E  has  made  G,  H , 
therefore,  as  D  is  to  E ,  so  is  G  to  H . 

But,  as  D  is  to  E ,  so  is  A  to  B. 

Therefore  also,  as  A  is  to  B ,  so  is  G  to  H. 

And,  since  A,  B  by  multiplying  E  have  made  H,  K} 

therefore,  as  A  is  to  B,  so  is  H  to  K. 

But,  as  A  is  to  B ,  so  is  F  to  G,  and  G  to  H. 

Therefore  also,  as  F  is  to  G,  so  is  G  to  H,  and  H  to  K; 
therefore  G,  Df  E,  and  F,  G,  H ,  K  are  proportional  in  the  ratio  of  A  to  B. 

I  say  next  that  they  are  the  least  numbers  that  are  so. 

For,  since  A,  B  are  the  least  of  those  which  have  the  same  ratio  with  them, 
and  the  least  of  those  which  have  the  same  ratio  are  prime  to  one  another, 

[vn.  22] 

therefore  A,  B  are  prime  to  one  another. 

And  the  numbers  A,  B  by  multiplying  themselves  respectively  have  made 
the  numbers  C,  E ,  and  by  multiplying  the  numbers  C,  E  respectively  have 
made  the  numbers  F,  K\ 

therefore  C,  E  and  F,  K  are  prime  to  one  another  respectively.  [vn.  27] 
But,  if  there  be  as  many  numbers  as  we  please  in  continued  proportion,  and 
the  extremes  of  them  be  prime  to  one  another,  they  are  the  least  of  those  which 
have  the  same  ratio  with  them.  [vm.  1] 

Therefore  G,  D,  E  and  F}  G,  H,  K  are  the  least  of  those  which  have  the  same 
ratio  with  A,  B.  q.  e.  d. 

Porism.  From  this  it  is  manifest  that,  if  three  numbers  in  continued  propor¬ 
tion  be  the  least  of  those  which  have  the  same  ratio  with  them,  the  extremes  of 
them  are  squares,  and,  if  four  numbers,  cubes. 

Proposition  3 

If  as  many  numbers  as  we  please  in  continued  proportion  be  the  least  of  those  which 
have  the  same  ratio  with  them ,  the  extremes  of  them  are  prime  to  one  another . 


[vii.  18] 


[vn.  17] 


[vii.  17] 


[vh.  18] 


EUCLID 


152 

Let  as  many  numbers  as  we  please,  A,  B,  C,  D,  in  continued  proportion  be 
the  least  of  those  which  have  the  same  ratio  with  them; 


A 


B 


C 


- G  - H 


K 


L 


M 


N 


0 

I  say  that  the  extremes  of  them  A,  D  are  prime  to  one  another. 

For  let  twro  numbers  E ,  F ,  the  least  that  are  in  the  ratio  of  A,  B,  C,  D,  be 
taken,  [vn.  33] 

then  three  others  G,  H ,  K  with  the  same  property; 

and  others,  more  by  one  continually,  [vm.  2] 

until  the  multitude  taken  becomes  equal  to  the  multitude  of  the  numbers  A, 

By  Cy  D. 

Let  them  be  taken,  and  let  them  be  L,  M ,  N,  0 . 

Now,  since  Z?,  F  are  the  least  of  those  which  have  the  same  ratio  with  them, 
they  are  prime  to  one  another.  [vn.  22] 

And,  since  the  numbers  E ,  F  by  multiplying  themselves  respectively  have 
made  the  numbers  G,  K ,  and  by  multiplying  the  numbers  G,  K  respectively 
have  made  the  numbers  L,  0,  [vm.  2,  Por.] 

therefore  both  Gy  K  and  L,  0  are  prime  to  one  another.  [vii.  27] 
And,  since  A,  B,  C,  D  are  the  least  of  those  which  have  the  same  ratio  with 
them, 

wrhile  Ly  My  N>  0  are  the  least  that  are  in  the  same  ratio  with  A,  B,  Cy  D, 
and  the  multitude  of  the  numbers  A,  5,  C,  D  is  equal  to  the  multitude  of  the 
numbers  Ly  My  N,  0, 

therefore  the  numbers  A,  By  C,  D  are  equal  to  the  numbers  L,  My  N ,  0  re¬ 
spectively; 

therefore  A  is  equal  to  L,  and  D  to  0. 

And  Ly  0  are  prime  to  one  another. 

Therefore  A,  D  are  also  prime  to  one  another.  q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  4 

Given  as  many  ratios  as  we  please  in  least  numbers ,  to  find  numbers  in  continued 
proportion  which  are  the  least  in  the  given  ratios. 

Let  the  given  ratios  in  least  numbers  be  that  of  A  to  By  that  of  C  to  Z>,  and 
that  of  E  to  F; 

thus  it  is  required  to  find  numbers  in  continued  proportion  wdiich  are  the  least 
that  are  in  the  ratio  of  A  to  By  in  the  ratio  of  C  to  D,  and  in  the  ratio  of  E  to  F. 
Let  Gy  the  least  number  measured  by  B,  C ,  be  taken.  [vn.  34] 

And,  as  many  times  as  B  measures  G,  so  many  times  also  let  A  measure  iZ, 
and,  as  many  times  as  C  measures  G,  so  many  times  also  let  D  measure  K . 
Nowt  E  either  measures  or  does  not  measure  K . 

First,  let  it  measure  it. 


153 


ELEMENTS  VIII 


And,  as  many  times  as  E  measures  if,  so  many  times  let  F  measure  L  also. 
Now,  since  A  measures  H  the  same  number  of  times  that  B  measures  G, 
therefore,  as  A  is  to  B,  so  is  H  to  G.  [vn.  Def.  20,  vn.  13] 

A —  B - 

C -  D - 

E -  F - 


0 -  - H 


For  the  same  reason  also, 

as  C  is  to  Dy  so  is  G  to  if, 
and  further,  as  E  is  to  F,  so  is  if  to  L; 
therefore  ii,  G,  if,  L  are  continuously  proportional  in  the  ratio  of  A  to  By  in 
the  ratio  of  C  to  Dy  and  in  the  ratio  of  E  to  F. 

I  say  next  that  they  are  also  the  least  that  have  this  property. 

For,  if  Hy  Gy  if,  L  are  not  the  least  numbers  continuously  proportional  in  the 
ratios  of  A  to  B}  of  C  to  Dy  and  of  E  to  F,  let  them  be  N,  0,  M,  P. 

Then  since,  as  A  is  to  5,  so  is  N  to  0, 

while  Ay  B  are  least, 

and  the  least  numbers  measure  those  which  have  the  same  ratio  the  same  num¬ 
ber  of  times,  the  greater  the  greater  and  the  less  the  less,  that  is,  the  antecedent 
the  antecedent  and  the  consequent  the  consequent; 

therefore  B  measures  0.  [vn.  20] 

For  the  same  reason 

C  also  measures  0 ; 
therefore  By  C  measure  0; 

therefore  the  least  number  measured  by  B}  C  will  also  measure  0.  [vn.  35] 
But  G  is  the  least  number  measured  by  By  C; 

therefore  G  measures  0,  the  greater  the  less: 
which  is  impossible. 

Therefore  there  will  be  no  numbers  less  than  H,  G,  if,  L  which  are  continu¬ 
ously  in  the  ratio  of  A  to  B ,  of  C  to  D ,  and  of  E  to  F. 

Next,  let  E  not  measure  if. 

A -  C—  E - 

B -  D -  F - 

G -  H - 


M 

0 

N 

P 


Let  My  the  least  number  measured  by  E}  if,  be  taken. 

And,  as  many  times  as  if  measures  My  so  many  times  let  Hy  G  measure  N,  O 
respectively, 


154  EUCLID 

and,  as  many  times  as  E  measures  M,  so  many  times  let  F  measure  P  also. 
Since  H  measures  N  the  same  number  of  times  that  G  measures  0, 

therefore,  as  H  is  to  G,  so  is  N  to  0.  [vn.  13  and  Def .  20] 
But,  as  H  is  to  G,  so  is  A  to  B ; 

therefore  also,  as  A  is  to  By  so  is  N  to  0. 

For  the  same  reason  also, 

as  C  is  to  Dy  so  is  0  to  M. 

Again,  since  E  measures  M  the  same  number  of  times  that  F  measures  P, 
therefore,  as  E  is  to  P,  so  is  M  to  P;  [vn.  13  and  Def.  20] 
therefore  Ny  0,  M ,  P  are  continuously  proportional  in  the  ratios  of  A  to  Bf  of 
C  to  D,  and  of  E  to  F . 

I  say  next  that  they  are  also  the  least  that  are  in  the  ratios  A:  ByC:Dy  E:F. 
For,  if  not,  there  will  be  some  numbers  less  than  N,  0,  M,  P  continuously 
proportional  in  the  ratios  A :  B,  C:Dy  E:F. 

Let  them  be  Qy  Ry  Sy  T. 

Now  since,  as  Q  is  to  Ry  so  is  A  to  B. 

while  Ay  B  are  least, 

and  the  least  numbers  measure  those  which  have  the  same  ratio  with  them  the 
same  number  of  times,  the  antecedent  the  antecedent  and  the  consequent  the 
consequent,  [vn.  20] 

therefore  B  measures  R. 

For  the  same  reason  C  also  measures  R ; 

therefore  By  C  measure  R. 

Therefore  the  least  number  measured  by  By  C  will  also  measure  R .  [vn.  35] 
But  G  is  the  least  number  measured  by  By  C; 

therefore  G  measures  R. 

And,  as  G  is  to  Ry  so  is  K  to  S:  [vn.  13] 

therefore  K  also  measures  S. 

But  E  also  measures  S; 

therefore  Ey  K  measure  S. 

Therefore  the  least  number  measured  by  Et  K  will  also  measure  S.  [vn.  35] 
But  M  is  the  least  number  measured  by  Ey  K; 

therefore  M  measures  Sy  the  greater  the  less: 
which  is  impossible. 

Therefore  there  will  not  be  any  numbers  less  than  N,  0,  M ,  P  continuously 
proportional  in  the  ratios  of  A  to  By  of  C  to  D,  and  of  E  to  F; 
therefore  N,  0,  My  P  are  the  least  numbers  continuously  proportional  in  the 
ratios  A:  By  C:  Dy  E:  F.  Q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  5 

Plane  numbers  have  to  one  another  the  ratio  compounded  of  the  ratios  of  their  sides. 

Let  Ay  B  be  plane  numbers,  and  let  the  numbers  C,  D  be  the  sides  of  A ,  and 
E,  F  of  B; 

I  say  that  A  has  to  B  the  ratio  compounded  of  the  ratios  of  the  sides. 

For,  the  ratios  being  given  which  C  has  to  E  and  D  to  Fy  let  the  least  num¬ 
bers  G,  Hy  K  that  are  continuously  in  the  ratios  C:EyD:F  be  taken,  so  that, 

as  C  is  to  Ey  so  is  G  to  Hy 
and,  as  D  is  to  F,  so  is  H  to  K. 

And  let  D  by  multiplying  E  make  L. 


[viii.  4] 


ELEMENTS  VIII  155 

Now,  since  D  by  multiplying  C  has  made  A,  and  by  multiplying  E  has 
made  L, 

therefore,  as  C  is  to  E ,  so  is  A  to  L.  [vn.  17] 

But,  as  C  is  to  E,  so  is  G  to  H; 

therefore  also,  as  G  is  to  H,  so  is  A  to  L. 

_ A  Again,  since  E  by  multiplying  D  has  made  L,  and 

further  by  multiplying  F  has  made  B, 

B  therefore,  as  D  is  to  F,  so  is  L  to  B.  [vn.  17] 

c  D  But,  as  D  is  to  F,  so  is  H  to  K ; 

E  F  therefore  also,  as  H  is  to  K,  so  is  L  to  B . 

- — —  G  But  it  was  also  proved  that, 

- H  as  G  is  to  H)  so  is  A  to  L ; 

_ X  therefore,  ex  aequali , 

- 1  as  G  is  to  K ,  so  is  A  to  B.  [vn.  14] 

But  G  has  to  K  the  ratio  compounded  of  the  ratios  of  the  sides; 
therefore  A  also  has  to  B  the  ratio  compounded  of  the  ratios  of  the  sides. 

Q.  E.  D. 

Proposition  6 

If  there  be  as  many  numbers  as  we  please  in  continued  proportion ,  and  the  first  do 
not  measure  the  second ,  neither  will  any  other  measure  any  other. 

Let  there  be  as  many  numbers  as  we  please,  A,  B,  C,  D,  E,  in  continued  pro¬ 
portion,  and  let  A  not  measure  B; 

I  say  that  neither  will  any  other  measure  any  other. 

Now  it  is  manifest  that  A ,  B, 

- A  C,  B,  E  do  not  measure  one  an- 

_ B  other  in  order;  for  A  does  not 

_ C  even  measure  B. 

I  say,  then,  that  neither  wall 
D  any  other  measure  any  other. 

- E  For,  if  possible,  let  A  measure 

_ F  c. 

_ G  And,  however  many  A,  B,  C 

- H  are,  let  as  many  numbers  F,  G, 

H,  the  least  of  those  which  have 
the  same  ratio  with  A,  B,  C,  be  taken.  [vn.  33] 

Now,  since  F,  G,  H  are  in  the  same  ratio  with  A,  B,  G,  and  the  multitude  of 
the  numbers  A,  B,  C  is  equal  to  the  multitude  of  the  numbers  F,  G,  H, 

therefore,  ex  aequaliy  as  A  is  to  C,  so  is  F  to  H.  [vn.  14] 

And  since,  as  A  is  to  B,  so  is  F  to  G, 

while  A  does  not  measure  B, 
therefore  neither  does  F  measure  G;  [vn.  Def.  20] 

therefore  F  is  not  an  unit,  for  the  unit  measures  any  number. 

Now  F,  H  are  prime  to  one  another.  [vm.  3] 

And,  as  F  is  to  //,  so  is  A  to  C; 

therefore  neither  does  A  measure  C. 

Similarly  we  can  prove  that  neither  will  any  other  measure  any  other. 

Q.  E.  D. 


156 


EUCLID 


Proposition  7 

If  there  be  as  many  numbers  as  we  please  in  continued  proportion ,  and  the  first 
measure  the  last ,  it  will  measure  the  second  also. 

Let  there  be  as  many  numbers  as  we  please,  A,  B,  C,  D,  in  continued  pro¬ 
portion;  and  let  A  measure  D;  fl  _  __ 

I  say  that  A  also  measures  B. 

For,  if  A  does  not  measure  B,  neither 
will  any  other  of  the  numbers  measure  any 
other.  [vm.  6] 

But  A  measures  D. 

Therefore  A  also  measures  B .  q.  e.  d. 


D- 

B- 

G- 

H- 

K- 

L- 


E- 

M- 

N- 

F- 


Proposition  8 

If  between  two  numbers  there  fall  numbers  in  continued  proportion  with  them ,  then , 
however  many  numbers  fall  between  them  in  continued  proportion,  so  many  mil 
also  fall  in  continued  proportion  between  the  numbers  which  have  the  same  ratio 
with  the  original  numbers. 

Let  the  numbers  C,  D  fall  between  the  two  numbers  A,  Bin  continued  pro¬ 
portion  with  them,  and  let  E  be  made  in  the  same  ratio  to  F  as  A  is  to  B; 

I  say  that,  as  many  numbers  as  have  fallen  between  A,  Bin  continued  pro¬ 
portion,  so  many  will  also  fall  between  E,  F  in  continued  proportion. 

For,  as  many  as  A,  B,  C,  D 
are  in  multitude,  let  so  many 
numbers  G ,  H ,  K,  L ,  the  least 
of  those  which  have  the  same 
ratio  with  A,  C,  D ,  B ,  be 
taken;  [vn.  33] 

therefore  the  extremes  of 
them  G,  L  are  prime  to  one 
another.  [vm.  3] 

Now,  since  A,  C,  D,  B  are  in  the  same  ratio  with  G,  H ,  K ,  L, 
and  the  multitude  of  the  numbers  A,  C,  D,  B  is  equal  to  the  multitude  of  the 
numbers  G ,  H ,  K ,  L, 

therefore,  ex  aequali ,  as  A  is  to  B ,  so  is  G  to  L.  [vn.  14] 

But,  as  A  is  to  B ,  so  is  E  to  F; 

therefore  also,  as  G  is  to  L,  so  is  E  to  F. 

But  G,  L  are  prime, 

primes  are  also  least,  [vn.  21] 

and  the  least  numbers  measure  those  which  have  the  same  ratio  the  same  num¬ 
ber  of  times,  the  greater  the  greater  and  the  less  the  less,  that  is,  the  anteced¬ 
ent  the  antecedent  and  the  consequent  the  consequent.  [vii.  20] 

Therefore  G  measures  E  the  same  number  of  times  as  L  measures  F. 

Next,  as  many  times  as  G  measures  E,  so  many  times  let  H ,  K  also  measure 
M ,  N  respectively; 

therefore  G,  H ,  K ,  L  measure  E,  M ,  N,  F  the  same  number  of  times. 

Therefore  G ,  H,  K ,  L  are  in  the  same  ratio  with  E,  M,  N,  F .  [vii.  Def.  20] 
But  G ,  H ,  K,  L  are  in  the  same  ratio  with  A,  C,  D,  B; 

therefore  A,  C,  D,  B  are  also  in  the  same  ratio  with  E ,  M,  N,  F. 


ELEMENTS  VIII  157 

[•r  But  A,  C,  D ,  B  are  in  continued  proportion; 

therefore  E ,  AT,  A7”,  F  are  also  in  continued  proportion. 

Therefore,  as  many  numbers  as  have  fallen  between  A,  B  in  continued  pro¬ 
portion  with  them,  so  many  numbers  have  also  fallen  between  F,  F  in  con¬ 
tinued  proportion.  q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  9 

If  two  numbers  be  prime  to  one  another ,  and  numbers  fall  between  them  in  con¬ 
tinued  proportion ,  theny  however  many  numbers  fall  between  them  in  continued 
proportion ,  so  many  will  also  fall  between  each  of  them  and  an  unit  in  continued 
proportion . 

Let  Ay  B  be  two  numbers  prime  to  one  another,  and  let  C,  D  fall  between 
them  in  continued  proportion, 

and  let  the  unit  E  be  set  out; 

I  say  that,  as  many  numbers  as  fall  between  A,  B  in  continued  proportion,  so 
many  will  also  fall  between  either  of  the  numbers  A,  B  and  the  unit  in  con¬ 
tinued  proportion. 

For  let  two  numbers  F,  G,  the  least  that  are  in  the  ratio  of  At  C,  D,  B,  be 
taken, 

three  numbers  H ,  Ky  L  with  the  same  property, 
and  others  more  by  one  continually,  until  their  multitude  is  equal  to  the  multi¬ 
tude  of  Ay  Cy  Dy  B.  [vm.  2] 


E- 

F— 

G— 


M- 

N- 

0- 

P- 


Let  them  be  taken,  and  let  them  be  M ,  Ny  0,  P. 

It  is  now  manifest  that  F  by  multiplying  itself  has  made  H  and  by  multiply¬ 
ing  H  has  made  M ,  while  G  by  multiplying  itself  has  made  L  and  by  multiply¬ 
ing  L  has  made  P.  [vm.  2,  For.] 

And,  since  M,  N,  0,  P  are  the  least  of  those  which  have  the  same  ratio  with 

Fy  Gy 

and  A,  Cy  Dy  B  are  also  the  least  of  those  which  have  the  same  ratio  with 
F,  Gy  [vm.  1] 

while  the  multitude  of  the  numbers  M ,  A,  0,  P  is  equal  to  the  multitude  of  the 
numbers  Ay  C,  Z),  B, 

therefore  Mt  Ar,  0,  P  are  equal  to  Af  C,  D}  B  respectively; 
therefore  M  is  equal  to  A,  and  P  to  B. 

Now,  since  F  by  multiplying  itself  has  made  Hy 

therefore  F  measures  H  according  to  the  units  in  F. 

But  the  unit  E  also  measures  F  according  to  the  units  in  it; 
therefore  the  unit  E  measures  the  number  F  the  same  number  of  times  as  F 
measures  //. 


158  EUCLID 

Therefore,  as  the  unit  E  is  to  the  number  F,  so  is  F  to  H .  [vn.  Def.  20] 

Again,  since  F  by  multiplying  H  has  made  M, 

therefore  H  measures  M  according  to  the  units  in  F. 

But  the  unit  E  also  measures  the  number  F  according  to  the  units  in  it; 
therefore  the  unit  E  measures  the  number  F  the  same  number  of  times  as  H 
measures  M. 

Therefore,  as  the  unit  E  is  to  the  number  F,  so  is  H  to  M. 

But  it  was  also  proved  that,  as  the  unit  E  is  to  the  number  F,  so  is  F  to  H ; 
therefore  also,  as  the  unit  E  is  to  the  number  F,  so  is  F  to  H,  and  H  to  M. 
But  M  is  equal  to  A ; 

therefore,  as  the  unit  E  is  to  the  number  F,  so  is  F  to  H ,  and  H  to  A. 

For  the  same  reason  also, 

as  the  unit  E  is  to  the  number  (?,  so  is  G  to  L  and  L  to  B. 
Therefore,  as  many  numbers  as  have  fallen  between  A,  B  in  continued  pro¬ 
portion,  so  many  numbers  also  have  fallen  between  each  of  the  numbers  A,  B 
and  the  unit  E  in  continued  proportion.  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  10 

If  numbers  fall  between  each  of  two  numbers  and  an  unit  in  continued  proportion 
however  many  numbers  fall  between  each  of  them  and  an  unit  in  continued  pro¬ 
portion,  so  many  also  will  fall  between  the  numbers  themselves  in  continued  propor¬ 
tion. 

For  let  the  numbers  D,  E  and  F,  G  respectively  fall  between  the  two  num¬ 
bers  A,  B  and  the  unit  C  in  continued  proportion; 

I  say  that,  as  many  numbers  as  have  fallen  between  each  of  the  numbers  A,  B 
and  the  unit  C  in  continued  proportion,  so  many  numbers  will  also  fall  between 
A,  B  in  continued  proportion. 

For  let  D  by  multiplying  F  make  H ,  and  let  the  numbers  D ,  F  by  multiply¬ 
ing  H  make  K ,  L  respectively. 

Now,  since,  as  the  unit  C 


C— 

D— 

E - 


is  to  the  number  D ,  so  is  D 
to  E, 

therefore  the  unit  C  measures 
the  number  D  the  same  num¬ 
ber  of  times  as  D  measures 

E.  [vil.  Def.  20]  f _  K _ 

But  the  unit  C  measures  Q _  L _ 

the  number  D  according  to 
the  units  in  D; 

therefore  the  number  D  also  measures  E  according  to  the  units  in  D ; 
therefore  D  by  multiplying  itself  has  made  E. 

Again,  since,  as  C  is  to  the  number  D ,  so  is  E  to  A, 
therefore  the  unit  C  measures  the  number  D  the  same  number  of  times  as  E 
measures  A. 

But  the  unit  C  measures  the  number  D  according  to  the  units  in  D\ 
therefore  E  also  measures  A  according  to  the  units  in  D ; 
therefore  D  by  multiplying  E  has  made  A. 

For  the  same  reason  also 

F  by  multiplying  itself  has  made  G ,  and  by  multiplying  G  has  made  B. 


ELEMENTS  VIII  159 

And,  since  D  by  multiplying  itself  has  made  E  and  by  multiplying  F  has 
made  Hy 

therefore,  as  D  is  to  F,  so  is  E  to  H.  [vn.  17] 

For  the  same  reason  also, 

as  D  is  to  Fy  so  is  H  to  G.  [vn.  18] 

Therefore  also,  as  E  is  to  H,  so  is  H  to  G. 

Again,  since  D  by  multiplying  the  numbers  E,  H  has  made  A,  K  respec¬ 
tively, 

therefore,  as  E  is  to  H,  so  is  A  to  K.  [vn.  17] 

But,  as  E  is  to  H ,  so  is  D  to  F; 

therefore  also,  as  D  is  to  F,  so  is  A  to  K. 

Again,  since  the  numbers  D ,  F  by  multiplying  H  have  made  Ky  L  respec¬ 
tively, 

therefore,  as  D  is  to  F,  so  is  K  to  L.  [vn.  18] 

But,  as  D  is  to  F,  so  is  A  to  K ; 

therefore  also,  as  A  is  to  Ky  so  is  K  to  L. 

Further,  since  F  by  multiplying  the  numbers  H,  G  has  made  Ly  B  respec¬ 
tively, 

therefore,  as  H  is  to  G,  so  is  L  to  B,  [vn.  17] 

But,  as  H  is  to  G,  so  is  D  to  F; 

therefore  also,  as  D  is  to  F,  so  is  L  to  B . 

But  it  was  also  proved  that, 

as  D  is  to  F,  so  is  A  to  K  and  K  to  L; 
therefore  also,  as  A  is  to  Ky  so  is  K  to  L  and  L  to  B . 

Therefore  A,  K)  L,  B  are  in  continued  proportion. 

Therefore,  as  many  numbers  as  fall  between  each  of  the  numbers  Ay  B  and 
the  unit  C  in  continued  proportion,  so  many  also  will  fall  between  A,  B  in  con¬ 
tinued  proportion.  Q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  11 

Between  two  square  numbers  there  is  one  mean  proportional  number ,  and  the  square 
has  to  the  square  the  ratio  duplicate  of  that  which  the  side  has  to  the  side . 

Let  A,  B  be  square  numbers, 

and  let  C  be  the  side  of  A ,  and  D  of  B\ 

I  say  that  between  Ay  B  there  is  one  mean  proportional  number,  and  A  has 
to  B  the  ratio  duplicate  of  that  which  C  has  to  D. 
For  let  C  by  multiplying  D  make  E. 

B -  Now,  since  A  is  a  square  and  C  is  its  side, 

C -  D -  therefore  C  by  multiplying  itself  has  made  A. 

£ _  For  the  same  reason  also, 

D  by  multiplying  itself  has  made  B. 

Since,  then,  C  by  multiplying  the  numbers  C,  D  has  made  A ,  E  respectively, 
therefore,  as  C  is  to  D,  so  is  A  to  E.  [vn.  17] 

For  the  same  reason  also, 

as  C  is  to  Dy  so  is  E  to  B.  [vn.  18] 

Therefore  also,  as  A  is  to  F,  so  is  E  to  B. 

Therefore  between  A ,  B  there  is  one  mean  proportional  number. 

I  say  next  that  A  also  has  to  B  the  ratio  duplicate  of  that  which  C  has  to  D. 
For,  since  A,  E,  B  are  three  numbers  in  proportion, 


160  EUCLID 

therefore  A  has  to  B  the  ratio  duplicate  of  that  which  A  has  to  E.  [v.  Def.  9] 
But,  as  A  is  to  E ,  so  is  C  to  D. 

Therefore  A  has  to  B  the  ratio  duplicate  of  that  which  the  side  C  has  to  D. 

Q.  E.  D. 

Proposition  12 

Between  two  cube  numbers  there  are  two  mean  proportional  numbers,  and  the  cube 
has  to  the  cube  the  ratio  triplicate  of  that  which  the  side  has  to  the  side. 

Let  A,  B  be  cube  numbers, 

and  let  C  be  the  side  of  A ,  and  D  of  B; 

I  say  that  between  A,  B  there  are  two  mean  proportional  numbers,  and  A  has 
to  B  the  ratio  triplicate  of  that  which  C  has  to  D. 

For  let  C  by  multiplying 

itself  make  E,  and  by  multi-  A  E 

plying  D  let  it  make  F ;  B -  F - 

let  D  by  multiplying  itself  c H _  G _ 

make  (?,  D _  K _ 

and  let  the  numbers  C,  D  by 
multiplying  F  make  H ,  K  respectively. 

Now,  since  A  is  a  cube,  and  C  its  side, 

and  C  by  multiplying  itself  has  made  E, 
therefore  C  by  multiplying  itself  has  made  E  and  by  multiplying  E  has  made  A . 
For  the  same  reason  also 

D  by  multiplying  itself  has  made  G  and  by  multiplying  G  has  made  B. 

And,  since  C  by  multiplying  the  numbers  C,  D  has  made  E,  F  respectively, 
therefore,  as  C  is  to  D ,  so  is  E  to  F.  [vn.  17] 

For  the  same  reason  also, 

as  C  is  to  D ,  so  is  F  to  G.  [vn.  18] 

Again,  since  C  by  multiplying  the  numbers  E,  F  has  made  A,  H  respectively, 
therefore,  as  E  is  to  F,  so  is  A  to  H.  [vn.  17] 

But,  as  E  is  to  F,  so  is  C  to  D. 

Therefore  also,  as  C  is  to  D ,  so  is  A  to  H . 

Again,  since  the  numbers  C,  D  by  multiplying  F  have  made  H,  K  respec¬ 
tively, 

therefore,  as  C  is  to  D ,  so  is  H  to  K.  [vn.  18] 

Again,  since  D  by  multiplying  each  of  the  numbers  F,  G  has  made  K,  B  re¬ 
spectively, 

therefore,  as  F  is  to  G ,  so  is  K  to  B.  [vn.  17] 

But,  as  F  is  to  G ,  so  is  C  to  D; 

therefore  also,  as  C  is  to  D ,  so  is  A  to  H,  H  to  K ,  and  K  to  B. 
Therefore  H ,  K  are  two  mean  proportionals  between  A,  B. 

I  say  next  that  A  also  has  to  B  the  ratio  triplicate  of  that  which  C  has  to  D. 
For,  since  A,  H,  K,  B  are  four  numbers  in  proportion, 
therefore  A  has  to  B  the  ratio  triplicate  of  that  which  A  has  to  H.  [v.  Def.  10] 
But,  as  A  is  to  H ,  so  is  C  to  D ; 

therefore  A  also  has  to  B  the  ratio  triplicate  of  that  which  C  has  to  D. 

Q.  E.  D. 


ELEMENTS  VIII 


161 


Proposition  13 

If  there  he  as  many  numbers  as  we  please  in  continued  proportion ,  and  each  by 
multiplying  itself  make  some  number,  the  products  will  be  proportional;  and,  if  the 
original  numbers  by  multiplying  the  products  make  certain  numbers,  the  latter  will 
also  be  proportional . 

Let  there  be  as  many  numbers  as  we  please,  A,  B,  C,  in  continued  propor¬ 
tion,  so  that,  as  A  is  to  B,  so  is  B  to  C; 

let  A,  B,  C  by  multiplying  themselves  make  D,  E ,  F,  and  by  multiplying  D ,  E} 
F  let  them  make  G,  H,  K; 

I  say  that  D,  E ,  F  and  G,  H ,  K  are  in  continued  proportion. 


A 

B- 

C 

D. 

E 

F. 

L. 

0 


G- 

H- 

K. 

M- 

N- 

P. 

Q- 


For  let  A  by  multiplying  B  make  L, 
and  let  the  numbers  A,  B  by  multiplying  L  make  M,  N  respectively. 
And  again  let  B  by  multiplying  C  make  0, 
and  let  the  numbers  B ,  C  by  multiplying  0  make  P ,  Q  respectively. 
Then,  in  manner  similar  to  the  foregoing,  we  can  prove  that 
D,  L ,  E  and  G,  M,  N,  H  are  continuously  proportional  in  the  ratio  of  A  to  B, 
and  further  E ,  0,  F  and  H ,  P,  Q,  K  are  continuously  proportional  in  the  ratio 
of  B  to  C. 

Now,  as  A  is  to  B,  so  is  B  to  C; 

therefore  D,  L,  E  are  also  in  the  same  ratio  with  E,  0,  F, 
and  further  G,  M,  N,  H  in  the  same  ratio  with  H,  P,  Q,  K. 

And  the  multitude  of  D ,  L,  E  is  equal  to  the  multitude  of  E,  0,  F  and  that 
of  G,  M,  iV,  H  to  that  of  H,  P,  Q,  K; 

therefore,  ex  aequali , 
as  D  is  to  E,  so  is  E  to  F, 

and,  as  G  is  to  H ,  so  is  H  to  K.  [vn.  14] 

Q.  E.  D. 


Proposition  14 


If  a  square  measure  a  square,  the  side  will  also  measure  the  side;  and,  if  the  side 
measure  the  side,  the  square  will  also  measure  the  square. 

Let  A,  B  be  square  numbers,  let  C ,  D  be  their  sides,  and  let  A  measure  B ; 

A _ _  I  say  that  C  also  measures  D. 

For  let  C  by  multiplying  D  make  E ; 

B  therefore  A,  E,  B  are  continuously  proportional  in  the 

— c  - D  ratio  of  C  to  D.  [vm.  11] 

E -  And,  since  A,  E,  B  are  continuously  proportional, 

and  A  measures  B, 

therefore  A  also  measures  E.  [vm.  7] 


162 


EUCLID 


And,  as  A  is  to  E,  so  is  C  to  D ; 

therefore  also  C  measures  D .  [vn.  Def.  20] 

Again,  let  C  measure  D; 

I  say  that  A  also  measures  B. 

For,  with  the  same  construction,  we  can  in  a  similar  manner  prove  that  Ay 
E,  B  are  continuously  proportional  in  the  ratio  of  C  to  D. 

And  since,  as  C  is  to  D,  so  is  A  to  E , 

and  C  measures  D, 

therefore  A  also  measures  E.  [vn.  Def.  20] 

And  A,  E,  B  are  continuously  proportional; 

therefore  A  also  measures  B . 

Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  15 

If  a  cube  number  measure  a  cube  number ,  the  side  urill  also  measure  the  side;  andy 
if  the  side  measure  the  side ,  the  cube  will  also  measure  the  cube . 

For  let  the  cube  number  A  measure  the  cube  B, 

and  let  C  be  the  side  of  A  and  D  of  B; 

I  say  that  C  measures  D. 

For  let  C  by  multiplying  itself  make  E , 

and  let  D  by  multiplying  itself  make  G ; 
further,  let  C  by  multiplying  D  make  F, 
and  let  C,  D  by  multiplying  F  make  H}  K  respectively. 

Now  it  is  manifest  that  F,  F,  A _ 

G  and  A,  H ,  Ky  B  are  continu¬ 
ously  proportional  in  the  ratio 
of  C  to  D.  [vm.  11,  12] 

And,  since  A,  H ,  K ,  B  are 
continuously  proportional, 
and  A  measures  B , 
therefore  it  also  measures  H. 

[vm.  7] 

And,  as  A  is  to  H,  so  is  C  to  D; 

therefore  C  also  measures  D .  [vn.  Def.  20] 

Next,  let  C  measure  D ; 

I  say  that  A  will  also  measure  B. 

For,  with  the  same  construction,  we  can  prove  in  a  similar  manner  that  A, 
H}  K,  B  are  continuously  proportional  in  the  ratio  of  C  to  D . 

And,  since  C  measures  D, 

and,  as  C  is  to  D ,  so  is  A  to  H, 
therefore  A  also  measures  Hf  [vn.  Def.  20] 

so  that  A  measures  B  also.  Q.  e.  d. 


C- 
D — 

E — 

G - 

F - 


H- 

K- 


Proposition  16 

If  a  square  number  do  not  measure  a  square  number ,  neither  urill  the  side  measure 
the  side;  and ,  if  the  side  do  not  measure  the  side ,  neither  will  the  square  measure 
the  square. 

Let  A,  B  be  square  numbers,  and  let  C,  D  be  their  sides;  and  let  A  not  meas¬ 
ure  B; 


163 


ELEMENTS  VIII 


A -  I  say  that  neither  does  C  measure  D. 

B _  For,  if  C  measures  D,  A  will  also  measure  B.  [vm.  14] 

c _  But  A  does  not  measure  B ; 

therefore  neither  will  C  measure  D. 

D  .  Again,  let  C  not  measure  D\ 

I  say  that  neither  will  A  measure  B. 

For,  if  A  measures  B ,  C  will  also  measure  D.  [vm.  14] 

But  C  does  not  measure  D; 

therefore  neither  will  A  measure  B .  q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  17 


If  a  cube  number  do  not  measure  a  cube  number ,  neither  will  the  side  measure  the 
side;  and ,  if  the  side  do  not  measure  the  side ,  neither  will  the  cube  measure  the  cube . 
For  let  the  cube  number  A  not  measure  the  cube  number  B , 
and  let  C  be  the  side  of  A,  and  D  of  B; 

I  say  that  C  will  not  measure  D. 

For  if  C  measures  D,  A  will  also  measure  B. 

[vm.  15] 

But  A  does  not  measure  B ; 

therefore  neither  does  C  measure  D. 


A — 
B— 
C— 
D— 


Again,  let  C  not  measure  D; 

I  say  that  neither  will  A  measure  B. 

For,  if  A  measures  B,  C  will  also  measure  D.  [vm.  15] 

But  C  does  not  measure  D; 

therefore  neither  will  A  measure  B .  Q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  18 

Between  two  similar  plane  numbers  there  is  one  mean  proportional  number;  and 
the  plane  number  has  to  the  plane  number  the  ratio  duplicate  of  that  which  the 
corresponding  side  has  to  the  corresponding  side. 

Let  A,  B  be  two  similar  plane  numbers,  and  let  the  numbers  C,  D  be  the 
sides  of  Ay  and  E}  F  of  B. 


A -  C - 

B -  D - 

E - 


Now,  since  similar  plane  numbers  are  those  which  have  their  sides  propor¬ 
tional,  [vn.  Def.  21] 

therefore,  as  C  is  to  Z),  so  is  E  to  F. 

I  say  then  that  between  A ,  B  there  is  one  mean  proportional  number,  and  A 
has  to  B  the  ratio  duplicate  of  that  which  C  has  to  E}  or  D  to  F,  that  is,  of  that 
which  the  corresponding  side  has  to  the  corresponding  side. 

Now  since,  as  C  is  to  Z),  so  is  E  to  F, 

therefore,  alternately,  as  C  is  to  E ,  so  is  D  to  F.  [vn.  13] 

And,  since  A  is  plane,  and  C,  D  are  its  sides, 

therefore  D  by  multiplying  C  has  made  A. 

For  the  same  reason  also 


164  EUCLID 

E  by  multiplying  F  has  made  B . 

Now  let  D  by  multiplying  E  make  G. 

Then,  since  D  by  multiplying  C  has  made  A,  and  by  multiplying  E  has  made 

G, 

therefore,  as  C  is  to  E ,  so  is  A  to  (7.  [vn.  17] 

But,  as  C  is  to  E ,  so  is  D  to  F; 

therefore  also,  as  D  is  to  F,  so  is  A  to  G. 

Again,  since  E  by  multiplying  D  has  made  (7,  and  by  multiplying  F  has 
made  B , 

therefore,  as  D  is  to  F,  so  is  G  to  B .  [vn.  17] 

But  it  was  also  proved  that, 

as  D  is  to  F,  so  is  A  to  G; 
therefore  also,  as  A  is  to  (7,  so  is  G  to  B. 

Therefore  A,  (7,  B  are  in  continued  proportion. 

Therefore  between  A,  B  there  is  one  mean  proportional  number. 

I  say  next  that  A  also  has  to  B  the  ratio  duplicate  of  that  which  the  corres¬ 
ponding  side  has  to  the  corresponding  side,  that  is,  of  that  which  C  has  to  E  or 
D  to  F. 

For,  since  A,  (7,  B  are  in  continued  proportion, 

A  has  to  B  the  ratio  duplicate  of  that  which  it  has  to  G.  [v.  Def.  9] 

And,  as  A  is  to  (7,  so  is  C  to  E ,  and  so  is  D  to  F. 

Therefore  A  also  has  to  B  the  ratio  duplicate  of  that  which  C  has  to  E  or  D 
to  F.  Q.  E.  D. 

Proposition  19 

Between  two  similar  solid  numbers  there  fall  two  mean  'proportional  numbers;  and 
the  solid  number  has  to  the  similar  solid  number  the  ratio  triplicate  of  that  which 
the  corresponding  side  has  to  the  corresponding  side . 

Let  A,  B  be  two  similar  solid  numbers,  and  let  C,  D,  E  be  the  sides  of  A,  and 
F,  G,  H  of  B. 

Now,  since  similar  solid  numbers  are  those  which  have  their  sides  propor¬ 
tional,  [vii.  Def.  21] 

therefore,  as  C  is  to  D,  so  is  F  to  (7, 
and,  as  D  is  to  E}  so  is  G  to  H. 

I  say  that  between  A,  B  there  fall  two  mean  proportional  numbers,  and  A 
has  to  B  the  ratio  triplicate  of  that  which  C  has  to  F9  D  to  (7,  and  also  E  to  H. 

A - 

B - 

C-  F 

D—  G 

E -  H 

K  — 

L - 

M- - 

For  let  C  by  multiplying  D  make  K ,  and  let  F  by  multiplying  G  make  L. 

Now,  since  C,  D  are  in  the  same  ratio  with  F,  (7, 
and  K  is  the  product  of  C,  D ,  and  L  the  product  of  F,  (7,  K ,  L  are  similar  plane 
numbers;  [vn.  Def.  21] 


ELEMENTS  VIII  165 

therefore  between  K ,  L  there  is  one  mean  proportional  number.  [viii.  18] 
Let  it  be  M. 

Therefore  M  is  the  product  of  D,  F ,  as  was  proved  in  the  theorem  preceding 
this.  [viii.  18] 

Now,  since  D  by  multiplying  C  has  made  K)  and  by  multiplying  V  has  made 
M, 

therefore,  as  C  is  to  F,  so  is  K  to  M .  [vn.  17] 

But,  as  K  is  to  M,  so  is  M  to  L. 

Therefore  K ,  M ,  L  are  continuously  proportional  in  the  ratio  of  C  to  F. 

And  since,  as  C  is  to  D ,  so  is  F  to  (7, 

alternately  therefore,  as  C  is  to  F,  so  is  D  to  G .  [vn.  13] 

For  the  same  reason  also, 

as  D  is  to  G ,  so  is  E  to  H. 


Therefore  K,  M ,  L  are  continuously  proportional  in  the  ratio  of  C  to  F,  in 
the  ratio  of  D  to  (7,  and  also  in  the  ratio  of  E  to  H. 

Next,  let  E ,  H  by  multiplying  M  make  N,  0  respectively. 

Now,  since  A  is  a  solid  number,  and  C,  D,  E  are  its  sides, 

therefore  E  by  multiplying  the  product  of  C,  D  has  made  A . 

But  the  product  of  C,  D  is  K; 

therefore  E  by  multiplying  K  has  made  A. 

For  the  same  reason  also 

H  by  multiplying  L  has  made  B . 

Now,  since  E  by  multiplying  K  has  made  A ,  and  further  also  by  multiplying 
M  has  made  N, 

therefore,  as  K  is  to  M,  so  is  A  to  N.  [vn.  17] 

But,  as  K  is  to  M,  so  is  C  to  F,  D  to  (7,  and  also  E  to  H; 

therefore  also,  as  C  is  to  F,  D  to  (7,  and  E  to  Hy  so  is  A  to  N. 

Again,  since  B,  H  by  multiplying  M  have  made  Nf  0  respectively, 

therefore,  as  E  is  to  H ,  so  is  N  to  0.  [vn.  18] 

But,  as  E  is  to  H,  so  is  C  to  F  and  D  to  (7; 
therefore  also,  as  C  is  to  F,  D  to  G ,  and  E  to  H ,  so  is  A  to  N  and  N  to  0. 

Again,  since  H  by  multiplying  M  has  made  0,  and  further  also  by  multiply¬ 
ing  L  has  made  B, 

therefore,  as  M  is  to  L,  so  is  0  to  B.  [vn.  17] 

But,  as  M  is  to  L,  so  is  C  to  F,  D  to  (7,  and  E  to  H . 

Therefore  also,  as  C  is  to  F,  D  to  (7,  and  E  to  B,  so  not  only  is  0  to  B,  but 
also  A  to  N  and  N  to  0. 

Therefore  A,  N,  0,  B  are  continuously  proportional  in  the  aforesaid  ratios 
of  the  sides. 

I  say  that  A  also  has  to  B  the  ratio  triplicate  of  that  which  the  correspond¬ 
ing  side  has  to  the  corresponding  side,  that  is,  of  the  ratio  which  the  number  C 
has  to  F,  or  D  to  (7,  and  also  E  to  H. 

For,  since  A,  Ar,  0,  B  are  four  numbers  in  continued  proportion, 
therefore  A  has  to  B  the  ratio  triplicate  of  that  which  A  has  to  N.  [v.  Def.  10] 

But,  as  A  is  to  N ,  so  it  was  proved  that  C  is  to  F,  D  to  G ,  and  also  E  to  H. 

Therefore  A  also  has  to  B  the  ratio  triplicate  of  that  which  the  correspond¬ 
ing  side  has  to  the  corresponding  side,  that  is,  of  the  ratio  which  the  number 
C  has  to  F,  D  to  (7,  and  also  E  to  II .  q.  e.  d. 


166 


EUCLID 


Proposition  20 

If  one  mean  proportional  number  fall  between  two  numbers ,  the  numbers  will  be 
similar  plane  numbers. 

For  let  one  mean  proportional  number  C  fall  between  the  two  numbers 
A,  B; 

I  say  that  A7  B  are  similar  plane  numbers. 

Let  Z>,  E,  the  least  numbers  of  those  which  have  the  same  ratio  with  A ,  C, 
betaken;  [vn.  33] 

therefore  D  measures  A  the  same  number  of  times  that  E  measures  C.  [vn.  20] 
Now,  as  many  times  as  D  measures  A,  so  many  units  let  there  be  in  F; 
therefore  F  by  multiplying  D  has  made  A, 
so  that  A  is  plane,  and  D,  F  are  its  sides. 

Again,  since  D,  E  are  the  least  of  the  numbers  which  have  the  same  ratio 
with  C,  B, 

therefore  D  measures  C  the  same  number  of  times  that  E  measures  B.  [vii.  20] 

A -  D - 

B -  E - 

C - 

F - 

G - 

As  many  times,  then,  as  E  measures  5,  so  many  units  let  there  be  in  G; 
therefore  E  measures  B  according  to  the  units  in  G; 
therefore  G  by  multiplying  E  has  made  B . 

Therefore  B  is  plane,  and  JEJ,  G  are  its  sides. 

Therefore  A,  B  are  plane  numbers. 

I  say  next  that  they  are  also  similar. 

For,  since  F  by  multiplying  D  has  made  A,  and  by  multiplying  E  has 
made  C, 

therefore,  as  D  is  to  E,  so  is  A  to  C,  that  is,  C  to  B.  [vii.  17] 
Again,  since  E  by  multiplying  F,  G  has  made  C,  B  respectively, 

therefore,  as  F  is  to  G ,  so  is  C  to  B.  [vii.  17] 

But,  as  C  is  to  B ,  so  is  D  to  E\ 

therefore  also,  as  D  is  to  E,  so  is  F  to  G. 

And  alternately,  as  D  is  to  F,  so  is  E  to  G.  [vn.  13] 

Therefore  A,  B  are  similar  plane  numbers;  for  their  sides  are  proportional. 

Q.  E.  D. 


Proposition  21 

If  two  mean  proportional  numbers  fall  between  two  numbers ,  the  numbers  are  simi¬ 
lar  solid  numbers. 

For  let  two  mean  proportional  numbers  C,  D  fall  between  the  two  numbers 
A,  B; 

I  say  that  A,  B  are  similar  solid  numbers. 

For  let  three  numbers  E ,  F,  G ,  the  least  of  those  which  have  the  same  ratio 
with  A,  C9  D,  be  taken;  [vn.  33  or  vm.  2] 


ELEMENTS  VIII  167 

therefore  the  extremes  of  them  E,  G  are  prime  to  one  another.  [vm.  3] 

Now,  since  one  mean  proportional  number  F  has  fallen  between  E ,  G , 

therefore  E,  G  are  similar  plane  numbers.  [vm.  20] 

Let,  then,  H}  K  be  the  sides  of  E ,  and  L,  M  of  G . 

Therefore  it  is  manifest  from  the  theorem  before  this  that  E ,  F,  G  are  con¬ 
tinuously  proportional  in  the  ratio  of  H  to  L  and  that  of  K  to  M. 


A -  E  — 

B -  F - 

C -  G - 

D -  H- 

N —  K  — 

0 -  L- 

M - 


Now,  since  E}  F,  G  are  the  least  of  the  numbers  which  have  the  same  ratio 
with  A,  C,  D, 

and  the  multitude  of  the  numbers  E ,  F,  G  is  equal  to  the  multitude  of  the  num¬ 
bers  A,  C,  D, 

therefore,  ex  aequali)  as  E  is  to  (?,  so  is  A  to  D.  [vn.  14] 

But  E ,  G  are  prime, 

primes  are  also  least,  [vn.  21] 

and  the  least  measure  those  which  have  the  same  ratio  with  them  the  same 
number  of  times,  the  greater  the  greater  and  the  less  the  less,  that  is,  the  ante¬ 
cedent  the  antecedent  and  the  consequent  the  consequent;  [vii.  20] 

therefore  E  measures  A  the  same  number  of  times  that  G  measures  D. 

Now,  as  many  times  as  E  measures  A,  so  many  units  let  there  be  in  N. 

Therefore  N  by  multiplying  E  has  made  A. 

But  E  is  the  product  of  H,  K; 

therefore  N  by  multiplying  the  product  of  H ,  K  has  made  A. 

Therefore  A  is  solid,  and  H ,  i£,  N  are  its  sides. 

Again,  since  £,  F}  G  are  the  least  of  the  numbers  which  have  the  same  ratio 
as  C,  D,  B, 

therefore  E  measures  C  the  same  number  of  times  that  G  measures  B. 

Now,  as  many  times  as  E  measures  C,  so  many  units  let  there  be  in  0. 

Therefore  G  measures  B  according  to  the  units  in  0; 

therefore  0  by  multiplying  G  has  made  B . 

But  G  is  the  product  of  L,  M ; 

therefore  0  by  multiplying  the  product  of  L,  M  has  made  B. 

Therefore  B  is  solid,  and  L,  M ,  0  are  its  sides; 

therefore  A,  B  are  solid. 

I  say  that  they  are  also  similar. 

For,  since  N,  0  by  multiplying  E  have  made  A,  C, 

therefore,  as  N  is  to  0,  so  is  A  to  C,  that  is,  E  to  F.  [vn.  18] 

But,  as  E  is  to  F,  so  is  H  to  L  and  K  to  M ; 

therefore  also,  as  II  is  to  L,  so  is  K  to  M  and  N  to  0. 

And  H}  K}  N  are  the  sides  of  A,  and  0,  L,  M  the  sides  of  B . 

Therefore  A,  B  are  similar  solid  numbers.  Q.  e.  d. 


168 


EUCLID 


Proposition  22 

If  three  numbers  be  in  continued  proportion,  and  the  first  be  square ,  the  third  will 
also  be  square. 

Let  A,  B,C  be  three  numbers  in  continued  proportion,  and  let  A  the  first  be 

square;  A _ 

I  say  that  C  the  third  is  also  square.  B 

For,  since  between  A,  C  there  is  one  mean  propor¬ 
tional  number,  B,  c  - - 

therefore  A,  C  are  similar  plane  numbers.  [vm.  20] 

But  A  is  square; 

therefore  C  is  also  square.  q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  23 

If  four  numbers  be  in  continued  proportion ,  and  the  first  be  cube ,  the  fourth  will 
also  be  cube. 

Let  A,  B,  C,  D  be  four  numbers  in  continued  proportion,  and  let  A  be  cube; 
I  say  that  D  is  also  cube. 

For,  since  between  A,  D  there  are  two  mean  A - 

proportional  numbers  B ,  C ,  B - 

therefore  A,  D  are  similar  solid  numbers.  c - 

[viii.  21]  D - 

But  A  is  cube; 

therefore  D  is  also  cube.  q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  24 

If  two  numbers  have  to  one  another  the  ratio  which  a  square  number  has  to  a  square 
number ,  and  the  first  be  square,  the  second  will  also  be  square. 

For  let  the  two  numbers  A,  B  have  to  one  another  the  ratio  which  the 

square  number  C  has  to  the  square  number  D,  and  A _ 

let  A  be  square; 

I  say  that  B  is  also  square.  ^ 

For,  since  C,  D  are  square,  D _ 

C,  D  are  similar  plane  numbers. 

Therefore  one  mean  proportional  number  falls  between  C ,  D. 

And,  as  C  is  to  D,  so  is  A  to  B; 

therefore  one  mean  proportional  number  falls  between  A,  B  also. 

And  A  is  square; 

therefore  B  is  also  square. 

Proposition  25 

If  two  numbers  have  to  one  another  the  ratio  which  a  cube  number  has  to  a  cube 
number,  and  the  first  be  cube ,  the  second  will  also  be  cube. 

For  let  the  two  numbers  A,  B  have  to  one  another  the  ratio  which  the  cube 
number  C  has  to  the  cube  number  D,  and  let  A  be  cube; 

I  say  that  B  is  also  cube. 

For,  since  C ,  D  are  cube, 

C ,  D  are  similar  solid  numbers. 


[vm.  18] 
[vm.  8] 
[vm.  22] 

Q.  E.  D. 


169 


ELEMENTS  VIII 

Therefore  two  mean  proportional  numbers  fall  between  C,  D.  [viii.  19] 
And,  as  many  numbers  as  fall  between  C,  D  in  continued  proportion,  so 

many  will  also  fall  between 

A -  E  those  which  have  the  same 

B - -  F -  ratio  with  them;  [viii.  8] 

C -  so  that  two  mean  propor- 

0 - - — - -  tional  numbers  fall  between 

A,  B  also. 

Let  Ef  F  so  fall. 

Since,  then,  the  four  numbers  A,  E7  Fy  B  are  in  continued  proportion, 

and  A  is  cube, 

therefore  B  is  also  cube.  [viii.  23] 

Q.  E.  D. 


Proposition  26 

Similar  plane  numbers  have  to  one  another  the  ratio  which  a  square  number  has 
to  a  square  number. 

Lot  Ay  B  be  similar  plane  numbers; 

I  say  that  A  has  to  B  the  ratio  which  a  square  number  has  to  a  square  number. 

A -  B - 

C - 

D -  E -  F - 

For,  since  Af  B  are  similar  plane  numbers, 

therefore  one  mean  proportional  number  falls  between  A,  B.  [viii.  18] 
Let  it  so  fall,  and  let  it  be  C; 

and  let  D ,  E}  F,  the  least  numbers  of  those  which  have  the  same  ratio  with  A, 
C,  By  be  taken;  [vn.  33  or  viii.  2] 

therefore  the  extremes  of  them  D ,  F  are  square,  [viii.  2,  Por.] 
And  since,  as  D  is  to  F,  so  is  A  to  B, 

and  D,  F  are  square, 

therefore  A  has  to  B  the  ratio  which  a  square  number  has  to  a  square  number. 

Q.  E.  D. 


Proposition  27 

Similar  solid  numbers  have  to  one  another  the  ratio  which  a  cube  number  has  to  a 
cube  number. 

Let  Ay  B  be  similar  solid  numbers; 

I  say  that  A  has  to  B  the  ratio  which  a  cube  number  has  to  a  cube  number. 

A -  C - 

B -  D - 


E -  F -  G -  H - 

For,  since  A,  B  are  similar  solid  numbers, 
therefore  two  mean  proportional  numbers  fall  between  A,  B. 


[viii.  19] 


EUCLID 


170 

Let  C,  D  so  fall, 

and  let  E ,  F,  G ,  H ,  the  least  numbers  of  those  which  have  the  same  ratio  with 
A,  C ,  D ,  B,  and  equal  with  them  in  multitude,  be  taken;  [vn.  33  or  viii.  2] 
therefore  the  extremes  of  them  E,  H  are  cube.  [viii.  2,  Por.] 
And,  as  E  is  to  H ,  so  is  A  to  B ; 

therefore  A  also  has  to  B  the  ratio  which  a  cube  number  has  to  a  cube  number. 

Q.  E.  D. 


BOOK  NINE 


Proposition  1 

If  two  similar  plane  numbers  by  multiplying  one  another  make  some  number ,  the 
product  will  be  square . 

Let  A,  B  be  two  similar  plane  numbers,  and  let  A  by  multiplying  B  make  C ; 

_  I  say  that  C  is  square. 

g _  For  let  A  by  multiplying  itself  make  D. 

Therefore  D  is  square. 

Since  then  A  by  multiplying  itself  has  made 
D  “  D,  and  by  multiplying  B  has  made  C, 

therefore,  as  A  is  to  B ,  so  is  D  to  C.  [vii.  17] 

And,  since  A,  B  are  similar  plane  numbers, 
therefore  one  mean  proportional  number  falls  between  A,  B.  [viii.  18] 

But,  if  numbers  fall  between  two  numbers  in  continued  proportion,  as  many 
as  fall  between  them,  so  many  also  fall  between  those  which  have  the  same 
ratio;  [viii.  8] 

so  that  one  mean  proportional  number  falls  between  D>  C  also. 

And  D  is  square; 

therefore  C  is  also  square.  [viii.  22] 

Q.  E.  D. 

Proposition  2 

If  two  numbers  by  multiplying  one  another  make  a  square  number ,  they  are  similar 
plane  numbers. 

Let  A,  B  be  two  numbers,  and  let  A  by  multiplying  B  make  the  square  num¬ 
ber  C; 

A _  I  say  that  A,  B  are  similar  plane  numbers. 

B _  For  let  A  by  multiplying  itself  make  D ; 

therefore  D  is  square. 

Now,  since  A  by  multiplying  itself  has 


D  made  jD,  and  by  multiplying  B  has  made  C, 

therefore,  as  A  is  to  B,  so  is  D  to  C.  [vn.  17] 

And,  since  D  is  square,  and  C  is  so  also, 

therefore  D ,  C  are  similar  plane  numbers. 

Therefore  one  mean  proportional  number  falls  between  D,  C.  [viii.  18] 
And,  as  D  is  to  C,  so  is  A  to  B; 

therefore  one  mean  proportional  number  falls  between  A,  B  also.  [viii.  8] 
But,  if  one  mean  proportional  number  fall  between  two  numbers,  they  are 
similar  plane  numbers;  [viii.  20] 

therefore  A,  B  are  similar  plane  numbers.  Q.  e.  d. 

171 


172 


EUCLID 


Proposition  3 

If  a  cube  number  by  multiplying  itself  make  some  number ,  the  product  will  be 
cube. 

For  let  the  cube  number  A  by  multiplying  itself  make  B ; 

I  say  that  B  is  cube. 

For  let  (7,  the  side  of  A,  be  taken,  and  let  C  by  multiplying  itself  make  D. 
It  is  then  manifest  that  C  by  multiplying  D  has  made  A. 

Now,  since  C  by  multiplying  itself  has  made  Z),  A 

therefore  C  measures  D  according  to  the  units  in  itself.  8 

But  further  the  unit  also  measures  C  according  to  the  q  _  D 

units  in  it; 

therefore,  as  the  unit  is  to  (7,  so  is  C  to  D .  [vir.  Def.  20] 

Again,  since  C  by  multiplying  D  has  made  A , 

therefore  D  measures  A  according  to  the  units  in  C . 

But  the  unit  also  measures  C  according  to  the  units  in  it; 

therefore,  as  the  unit  is  to  (7,  so  is  D  to  A. 

But,  as  the  unit  is  to  C,  so  is  C  to  D; 

therefore  also,  as  the  unit  is  to  (7,  so  is  C  to  Z),  and  D  to  A. 
Therefore  between  the  unit  and  the  number  A  two  mean  proportional  num¬ 
bers  (7,  D  have  fallen  in  continued  proportion. 

Again,  since  A  by  multiplying  itself  has  made  B, 

therefore  A  measures  B  according  to  the  units  in  itself. 

But  the  unit  also  measures  A  according  to  the  units  in  it; 

therefore,  as  the  unit  is  to  A,  so  is  A  to  B.  [vn.  Def.  20] 
But  between  the  unit  and  A  two  mean  proportional  numbers  have  fallen; 
therefore  two  mean  proportional  numbers  will  also  fall  between  A,  B.  [vm.  8] 
But,  if  two  mean  proportional  numbers  fall  between  two  numbers,  and  the 
first  be  cube,  the  second  will  also  be  cube.  [vm.  23] 

And  A  is  cube; 

therefore  B  is  also  cube.  Q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  4 

If  a  cube  number  by  multiplying  a  cube  number  make  some  number ,  the  product 
will  be  cube. 

For  let  the  cube  number  A  by  multiplying  the  cube  number  B  make  C; 

I  say  that  C  is  cube.  A _ 

For  let  A  by  multiplying  itself  make  D ;  g 

therefore  D  is  cube.  [ix.  3] 

And,  since  A  by  multiplying  itself  has 
made  Z),  and  by  multiplying  B  has  made  C 

therefore,  as  A  is  to  B ,  so  is  D  to  (7. 

And,  since  A,  B  are  cube  numbers, 

A,  B  are  similar  solid  numbers. 

Therefore  two  mean  proportional  numbers  fall  between  A,  B; 
so  that  two  mean  proportional  numbers  will  fall  between  D ,  (7  also. 

And  D  is  cube; 

therefore  C  is  also  cube 


[vii  .  17] 

[vm.  19] 
[vm.  8] 


[VIII ;  23] 
Q.  E.  D. 


ELEMENTS  IX 


173 


Proposition  5 


If  a  cube  number  by  multiplying  any  number  make  a  cube  number ,  the  multiplied 
number  will  also  be  cube . 

For  let  the  cube  number.  A  by  multiplying  any  number  B  make  the  cube 
number  C ; 

I  say  that  B  is  cube. 

A -  For  let  A  by  multiplying  itself  make  D ; 

B _ _  therefore  D  is  cube.  [ix.  3] 

c _ _ _  Now,  since  A  by  multiplying  itself  has 

n  made  D ,  and  by  multiplying  B  has  made 

c, 

therefore,  as  A  is  to  B ,  so  is  D  to  (7.  [vn.  17] 

And  since  D,  C  are  cube, 

they  are  similar  solid  numbers. 

Therefore  two  mean  proportional  numbers  fall  between  D ,  (7.  [vm.  19] 
And,  as  D  is  to  <7,  so  is  A  to  B ; 

therefore  two  mean  proportional  numbers  fall  between  A,  B  also.  [vm.  8] 
And  A  is  cube; 

therefore  B  is  also  cube.  [vm.  23] 


Proposition  6 

If  a  number  by  multiplying  itself  make  a  cube  number ,  it  will  itself  also  be  cube. 
For  let  the  number  A  by  multiplying  itself  make  the  cube  number  B ; 

I  say  that  A  is  also  cube. 

A -  ~  For  let  A  by  multiplying  B  make  C. 

B _  Since,  then,  A  by  multiplying  itself  has  made  B ,  and 

c _  by  multiplying  B  has  made  C, 

therefore  C  is  cube. 

And,  since  A  by  multiplying  itself  has  made  5, 

therefore  A  measures  B  according  to  the  units  in  itself. 

But  the  unit  also  measures  A  according  to  the  units  in  it. 

Therefore,  as  the  unit  is  to  A,  so  is  A  to  B.  [vn.  Def.  20] 

And,  since  A  by  multiplying  B  has  made  (7, 

therefore  B  measures  C  according  to  the  units  in  A. 

But  the  unit  also  measures  A  according  to  the  units  in  it. 

Therefore,  as  the  unit  is  to  A,  so  is  B  to  C.  [vn.  Def.  20] 

But,  as  the  unit  is  to  A,  so  is  A  to  B; 

therefore  also,  as  A  is  to  B ,  so  is  B  to  C. 

And,  since  B ,  C  are  cube, 

they  are  similar  solid  numbers. 

Therefore  there  are  two  mean  proportional  numbers  between  B,  C.  [vm.  19] 
And,  as  B  is  to  (7,  so  is  A  to  B . 

Therefore  there  are  two  mean  proportional  numbers  between  A,  B  also. 

[viii.  8] 

And  B  is  cube; 

therefore  A  is  also  cube.  [cf.  vm.  23] 

Q.  E.  D. 


174 


EUCLID 


Proposition  7 

If  a  composite  number  by  multiplying  any  number  make  some  number ,  the  product 
will  be  solid. 

For,  let  the  composite  number  A  by  multiplying  any  number  B  make  C; 

I  say  that  C  is  solid. 

For,  since  A  is  composite,  it  will  be  a _ 

measured  by  some  number.  B _ 

[vn.  Def.  13]  c 

Let  it  be  measured  by  D;  .. 

and,  as  many  times  as  D  measures  A,  D  E  “ - 

so  many  units  let  there  be  in  E. 

Since,  then,  D  measures  A  according  to  the  units  in  E, 

therefore  E  by  multiplying  D  has  made  A.  [vn.  Def.  15] 

And,  since  A  by  multiplying  B  has  made  C, 

and  A  is  the  product  of  D ,  E , 

therefore  the  product  of  D,  E  by  multiplying  B  has  made  C . 

Therefore  C  is  solid,  and  D,  E ,  B  are  its  sides.  q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  8 

If  as  many  numbers  as  we  please  beginning  from  an  unit  be  in  continued  propor¬ 
tion,  the  third  from  the  unit  will  be  square,  as  will  also  those  which  successively 
leave  out  one;  the  fourth  will  be  cube,  as  will  also  all  those  which  leave  out  two;  and 
the  seventh  will  be  at  once  cube  and  square ,  as  will  also  those  which  leave  out  five. 

Let  there  be  as  many  numbers  as  we  please,  A,  By  C,  D,  E ,  F,  beginning 
from  an  unit  and  in  continued  proportion; 

I  say  that  B,  the  third  from  the  unit,  is  square,  as  are  also  B‘  " 

all  those  which  leave  out  one;  C,  the  fourth,  is  cube,  as  c _ 

are  also  all  those  which  leave  out  two;  and  F ,  the  sev-  p 
enth,  is  at  once  cube  and  square,  as  are  also  all  those  E 
which  leave  out  five. 

For  since,  as  the  unit  is  to  A,  so  is  A  to  B, 
therefore  the  unit  measures  the  number  A  the  same  number  of  times  that  A 
measures  B .  [vn.  Def.  20] 

But  the  unit  measures  the  number  A  according  to  the  units  in  it; 
therefore  A  also  measures  B  according  to  the  units  in  A. 

Therefore  A  by  multiplying  itself  has  made  B ; 

therefore  B  is  square. 

And,  since  B ,  C,  D  are  in  continued  proportion,  and  B  is  square, 

therefore  D  is  also  square.  [vm.  22] 

For  the  same  reason 

F  is  also  square. 

Similarly  we  can  prove  that  all  those  which  leave  out  one  are  square. 

I  say  next  that  C,  the  fourth  from  the  unit,  is  cube,  as  are  also  all  those  which 
leave  out  two. 

For  since,  as  the  unit  is  to  A,  so  is  B  to  C, 
therefore  the  unit  measures  the  number  A  the  same  number  of  times  that  B 
measures  C. 

But  the  unit  measures  the  number  A  according  to  the  units  in  A ; 


175 


ELEMENTS  IX 

therefore  B  also  measures  C  according  to  the  units  in  A. 

Therefore  A  by  multiplying  B  has  made  C. 

Since  then  A  by  multiplying  itself  has  made  B ,  and  by  multiplying  B  has 
made  C, 

therefore  C  is  cube. 

And,  since  C,  D,  E ,  F  are  in  continued  proportion,  and  C  is  cube, 

therefore  F  is  also  cube.  [vm.  23] 

But  it  was  also  proved  square; 

therefore  the  seventh  from  the  unit  is  both  cube  and  square. 
Similarly  we  can  prove  that  all  the  numbers  which  leave  out  five  are  also 
both  cube  and  square.  Q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  9 

If  as  many  numbers  as  we  please  beginning  from  an  unit  be  in  continued  propor¬ 
tion,  and  the  number  after  the  unit  be  square ,  all  the  rest  will  also  be  square.  And, 
if  the  number  after  the  unit  be  cube ,  all  the  rest  will  also  be  cube . 

Let  there  be  as  many  numbers  as  we  please,  A,  B,  C,  D ,  E ,  F,  beginning 
A  from  an  unit  and  in  continued  proportion,  and  let  A, 

B~  the  number  after  the  unit,  be  square; 

c _  I  say  that  all  the  rest  will  also  be  square. 

D _  Now  it  has  been  proved  that  B,  the  third  from  the 

E  unit,  is  square,  as  are  also  all  those  which  leave  out  one; 

F _  [ix.  8] 

I  say  that  all  the  rest  are  also  square. 

For,  since  A,  B,  C  are  in  continued  proportion, 

and  A  is  square, 

therefore  C  is  also  square.  [vm.  22] 

Again,  since  B,  C ,  D  are  in  continued  proportion, 

and  B  is  square, 

D  is  also  square.  [vm.  22] 

Similarly  we  can  prove  that  all  the  rest  are  also  square. 

Next,  let  A  be  cube; 

I  say  that  all  the  rest  are  also  cube. 

Now’  it  has  been  proved  that  C,  the  fourth  from  the  unit,  is  cube,  as  also  are 
all  those  w’hich  leave  out  two;  [ix.  8] 

I  say  that  all  the  rest  are  also  cube. 

For,  since,  as  the  unit  is  to  A,  so  is  A  to  B, 
therefore  the  unit  measures  A  the  same  number  of  times  as  A  measures  B. 
But  the  unit  measures  A  according  to  the  units  in  it; 

therefore  A  also  measures  B  according  to  the  units  in  itself ; 
therefore  A  by  multiplying  itself  has  made  B. 

And  A  is  cube. 

But,  if  a  cube  number  by  multiplying  itself  make  some  number,  the  product 
is  cube.  [ix.  3] 

Therefore  B  is  also  cube. 

And,  since  the  four  numbers  A,  B,  C,  D  are  in  continued  proportion, 

and  A  is  cube, 

D  also  is  cube.  [vm.  23] 


176 


EUCLID 


For  the  same  reason 

E  is  also  cube,  and  similarly  all  the  rest  are  cube.  q.  e.  d. 
Proposition  10 


If  as  many  numbers  as  we  please  beginning  from  an  unit  be  in  continued  propor¬ 
tion,  and  the  number  after  the  unit  be  not  square,  neither  will  any  other  be  square 
except  the  third  from  the  unit  and  all  those  which  leave  out  one.  And,  if  the  number 
after  the  unit  be  not  cube ,  neither  will  any  other  be  cube  except  the  fourth  from  the 
unit  and  all  those  which  leave  out  two. 

Let  there  be  as  many  numbers  as  we  please,  A,  B,C,  D,  E ,  F,  beginning  from 
an  unit  and  in  continued  proportion, 

and  let  A,  the  number  after  the  unit,  not  be  square; 

I  say  that  neither  will  any  other  be  square  except  the  third  from  the  unit 
<and  those  which  leave  out  one>. 

For,  if  possible,  let  C  be  square. 

But  B  is  also  square;  [ix.  8] 

[therefore  B,  C  have  to  one  another  the  ratio 
which  a  square  number  has  to  a  square  number]. 

And,  as  B  is  to  C,  so  is  A  to  B; 
therefore  A ,  B  have  to  one  another  the  ratio 
which  a  square  number  has  to  a  square  number; 

[so  that  A,  B  are  similar  plane  numbers]. 

And  B  is  square; 


A- 

B- 

C- 

D- 

E- 

F- 


[viii.  26,  converse] 


therefore  A  is  also  square: 
which  is  contrary  to  the  hypothesis. 

Therefore  C  is  not  square. 

Similarly  we  can  prove  that  neither  is  any  other  of  the  numbers  square  ex¬ 
cept  the  third  from  the  unit  and  those  which  leave  out  one. 

Next,  let  A  not  be  cube. 

I  say  that  neither  will  any  other  be  cube  except  the  fourth  from  the  unit  and 
those  which  leave  out  two. 

For,  if  possible,  let  D  be  cube. 

Now  C  is  also  cube;  for  it  is  fourth  from  the  unit.  [ix.  S] 

And,  as  C  is  to  D,  so  is  B  to  C ; 

therefore  B  also  has  to  C  the  ratio  which  a  cube  has  to  a  cube. 

And  C  is  cube; 


therefore  B  is  also  cube.  [vm.  25] 

And  since,  as  the  unit  is  to  A,  so  is  A  to  B , 

and  the  unit  measures  A  according  to  the  units  in  it, 
therefore  A  also  measures  B  according  to  the  units  in  itself ; 
therefore  A  by  multiplying  itself  has  made  the  cube  number  B. 

But,  if  a  number  by  multiplying  itself  make  a  cube  number,  it  is  also  itself 
cube.  [ix.  6] 

Therefore  A  is  also  cube: 

which  is  contrary  to  the  hypothesis. 

Therefore  D  is  not  cube. 

Similarly  we  can  prove  that  neither  is  any  other  of  the  numbers  cube  except 
the  fourth  from  the  unit  and  those  which  leave  out  two.  Q.  e.  d. 


ELEMENTS  IX 


177 


Proposition  11 


If  as  many  numbers  as  we  please  beginning  from  an  unit  be  in  continued  propor¬ 
tion ,  the  less  measures  the  greater  according  to  some  one  of  the  numbers  which  have 
place  among  the  proportional  numbers. 

Let  there  be  as  many  numbers  as  we  please,  B ,  C,  £>,  £7,  beginning  from  the 
unit  A  and  in  continued  proportion; 

A _  I  say  that  B}  the  least  of  the  numbers  B}  C,  D ,  £7, 

measures  E  according  to  some  one  of  the  numbers  C,  D. 
B  For  since,  as  the  unit  A  is  to  B ,  so  is  D  to  £7, 

C  therefore  the  unit  A  measures  the  number  B  the  same 

D  number  of  times  as  D  measures  £7; 

E - - —  therefore,  alternately,  the  unit  A  measures  D  the  same 

number  of  times  as  B  measures  £7.  [vn.  15] 

But  the  unit  A  measures  D  according  to  the  units  in  it; 

therefore  B  also  measures  £7  according  to  the  units  in  D ; 
so  that  B  the  less  measures  £7  the  greater  according  to  some  number  of  those 
which  have  place  among  the  proportional  numbers. — 

Porism.  And  it  is  manifest  that,  whatever  place  the  measuring  number  has, 
reckoned  from  the  unit,  the  same  place  also  has  the  number  according  to  which 
it  measures,  reckoned  from  the  number  measured,  in  the  direction  of  the  num¬ 
ber  before  it. —  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  12 

If  as  many  numbers  as  we  please  beginning  from  an  unit  be  in  continued  propor¬ 
tion ,  by  however  many  prime  numbers  the  last  is  measured ,  the  next  to  the  unit  will 
also  be  measured  by  the  same. 

Let  there  be  as  many  numbers  as  we  please,  A,  jB,  C,  £>,  beginning  from  an 
unit,  and  in  continued  proportion; 

I  say  that,  by  however  many  prime  numbers  D  is  measured,  A  will  also  be 
measured  by  the  same. 

For  let  D  be  measured  by  any  prime  number  £7; 

A -  F -  I  say  that  £7  measures  A. 

B -  G -  For  suppose  it  does  not; 

C -  H _  now  E  is  prime,  and  any  prime 

D -  number  is  prime  to  any  which  it 

E  —  does  not  measure ;  [vn .  29] 

therefore  £7,  A  are  prime  to  one  another. 

And,  since  £7  measures  D,  let  it  measure  it  according  to  F, 
therefore  £7  by  multiplying  F  has  made  D. 

Again,  since  A  measures  D  according  to  the  units  in  C,  [ix.  11  and  Por.] 
therefore  A  by  multiplying  C  has  made  D. 

But,  further,  £7  has  also  by  multiplying  F  made  £>; 

therefore  the  product  of  A,  C  is  equal  to  the  product  of  £7,  F. 
Therefore,  as  A  is  to  £7,  so  is  F  to  C.  [vn.  19] 

But  A,  £7  are  prime, 

primes  are  also  least,  [vii.  21] 

and  the  least  measure  those  which  have  the  same  ratio  the  same  number  of 
times,  the  antecedent  the  antecedent  and  the  consequent  the  consequent; 

[vii.  20] 


178  EUCLID 

therefore  E  measures  C. 

Let  it  measure  it  according  to  G; 

therefore  E  by  multiplying  G  has  made  C. 

But,  further,  by  the  theorem  before  this, 

.4  has  also  by  multiplying  B  made  C.  [ix.  11  and  Por] 

Therefore  the  product  of  A,  B  is  equal  to  the  product  of  E ,  G. 

Therefore,  as  A  is  to  E ,  so  is  G  to  B.  [vii.  19] 

But  A ,  E  are  prime, 

primes  are  also  least,  [vii.  21] 

and  the  least  numbers  measure  those  which  have  the  same  ratio  with  them  the 
same  number  of  times,  the  antecedent  the  antecedent  and  the  consequent  the 

consequent  :  [vii.  20] 

therefore  E  measures  B. 

Let  it  measure  it  according  to  H ; 

therefore  E  by  multiplying  H  has  made  B. 

But,  further,  A  has  also  by  multiplying  itself  made  B;  [ix.  8] 

therefore  the  product  of  E ,  H  is  equal  to  the  square  on  A. 

Therefore,  as  E  is  to  A,  so  is  A  to  H.  [vii.  19] 

But  A,  E  are  prime, 

primes  are  also  least,  [vii.  21] 

and  the  least  measure  those  which  have  the  same  ratio  the  same  number  of 
times,  the  antecedent  the  antecedent  and  the  consequent  the  consequent; 

[vii.  20] 

therefore  E  measures  A ,  as  antecedent  antecedent. 

But.  again,  it  also  does  not  measure  it: 

which  is  impossible. 

Therefore  E,  A  are  not  prime  to  one  another. 

Therefore  they  are  composite  to  one  another. 

But  numbers  composite  to  one  another  are  measured  by  some  number. 

[vii.  Def.  14] 

And,  since  E  is  by  hypothesis  prime, 
and  the  prime  is  not  measured  by  any  number  other  than  itself, 

therefore  E  measures  A,  Er 
so  that  E  measures  A. 

[But  it  also  measures  D; 

therefore  E  measures  A,  D.] 

Similarly  we  can  prove  that,  by  however  many  prime  numbers  D  is  meas¬ 
ured,  A  will  also  be  measured  by  the  same.  Q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  13 

If  as  many  numbers  as  we  please  beginning  from  an  unit  be  in  continued  propor¬ 
tion,  and  the  number  after  the  unit  be  prime ,  the  greatest  will  not  be  measured  by 
any  except  those  which  have  a  place  among  the  proportional  numbers. 

Let  there  be  as  many  numbers  as  we  please,  A,  By  G,  D,  beginning  from  an 
unit  and  in  continued  proportion,  and  let  A,  the  number  after  the  unit,  be  prime; 

I  say  that  D,  the  greatest  of  them,  will  not  be  measured  by  an}"  other  number 
except  A,  B,  C. 

For,  if  possible,  let  it  be  measured  by  Ey  and  let  E  not  be  the  same  with  any 
of  the  numbers  A,  Bf  C. 


179 


ELEMENTS  IX 

It  is  then  manifest  that  E  is  not  prime. 

For,  if  E  is  prime  and  measures  Z), 
it  will  also  measure  A  [ix.  12],  which  is  prime,  though  it  is  not  the  same  with  it: 

which  is  impossible. 
Therefore  E  is  not  prime. 

B  F  Therefore  it  is  composite. 

C - —  G -  But  any  composite  num- 

D _ _ H -  ber  is  measured  by  some 

prime  number;  [vn.  31] 
therefore  E  is  measured  by  some  prime  number. 

I  say  next  that  it  will  not  be  measured  by  any  other  prime  except  A. 

For,  if  E  is  measured  by  another, 

and  E  measures  D, 
that  other  will  also  measure  Z); 

so  that  it  will  also  measure  A  [ix.  12],  which  is  prime,  though  it  is  not  the  same 
with  it: 

which  is  impossible. 

Therefore  A  measures  E. 

And,  since  E  measures  D ,  let  it  measure  it  according  to  F. 

I  say  that  F  is  not  the  same  with  any  of  the  numbers  A,  5,  C. 

For,  if  F  is  the  same  with  one  of  the  numbers  A,  B,  C, 
and  measures  D  according  to  E , 

therefore  one  of  the  numbers  A,  B,  C  also  measures  D  according  to  E. 

But  one  of  the  numbers  A,  B,  C  measures  D  according  to  some  one  of  the 
numbers  A,  B,  C;  [ix.  11] 

therefore  E  is  also  the  same  with  one  of  the  numbers  A,  B,  C: 
which  is  contrary  to  the  hypothesis. 

Therefore  F  is  not  the  same  as  any  one  of  the  numbers  A,  B,  C. 

Similarly  we  can  prove  that  F  is  measured  by  A,  by  proving  again  that  F  is 
not  prime. 

For,  if  it  is,  and  measures  D , 

it  will  also  measure  A  [ix.  12],  which  is  prime,  though  it  is  not  the  same  with  it: 

which  is  impossible; 
therefore  F  is  not  prime. 

Therefore  it  is  composite. 

But  any  composite  number  is  measured  by  some  prime  number;  [vn.  31] 
therefore  F  is  measured  by  some  prime  number. 

I  say  next  that  it  will  not  be  measured  by  any  other  prime  except  A . 

For,  if  any  other  prime  number  measures  F} 

and  F  measures  Z), 
that  other  wrill  also  measure  D ; 

so  that  it  will  also  measure  A  [ix.  12],  which  is  prime,  though  it  is  not  the  same 
with  it: 

which  is  impossible. 

Therefore  A  measures  F. 

And,  since  E  measures  D  according  to  F, 

therefore  E  by  multiplying  F  has  made  Z). 

But,  further,  A  has  also  by  multiplying  C  made  D;  [ix.  11] 

therefore  the  product  of  A,  C  is  equal  to  the  product  of  E ,  F. 


180  EUCLID 

Therefore,  proportionally,  as  A  is  to  E>  so  is  F  to  C.  [vn.  19] 

But  A  measures  E ; 

therefore  F  also  measures  C. 

Let  it  measure  it  according  to  G. 

Similarly,  then,  we  can  prove  that  G  is  not  the  same  with  any  of  the  numbers 
Ay  By  and  that  it  is  measured  by  A. 

And,  since  F  measures  C  according  to  G 

therefore  F  by  multiplying  G  has  made  C. 

But,  further,  A  has  also  by  multiplying  B  made  C;  [ix.  11] 

therefore  the  product  of  A,  B  is  equal  to  the  product  of  F,  G. 
Therefore,  proportionally,  as  A  is  to  F,  so  is  G  to  B.  [vn.  19] 

But  A  measures  F; 

therefore  G  also  measures  B. 

Let  it  measure  it  according  to  H. 

Similarly  then  we  can  prove  that  H  is  not  the  same  with  A. 

And,  since  G  measures  B  according  to  H , 

therefore  G  by  multiplying  H  has  made  B. 

But,  further,  A  has  also  by  multiplying  itself  made  B;  [ix.  8] 

therefore  the  product  of  B,  G  is  equal  to  the  square  on  A. 
Therefore,  as  H  is  to  A,  so  is  A  to  G.  [vn.  19] 

But  A  measures  G; 

therefore  H  also  measures  A ,  which  is  prime,  though  it  is  not  the  same  with  it: 

which  is  absurd. 

Therefore  D  the  greatest  will  not  be  measured  by  any  other  number  except 
Ay  By  C .  Q.  E.  D. 

Proposition  14 

If  a  number  be  the  least  that  is  measured  by  prime  numbers ,  it  will  not  be  measured 
by  any  other  prime  number  except  those  originally  measuring  it. 

For  let  the  number  A  be  the  least  that  is  measured  by  the  prime  numbers 

B, C,D;  a 

I  say  that  A  will  not  be  measured  by  A  B 

any  other  prime  number  except  B,  C,  D.  E -  C - 

For,  if  possible,  let  it  be  measured  F _  D 

by  the  prime  number  E,  and  let  E  not 

be  the  same  with  any  one  of  the  numbers  B,  C,  D. 

Now,  since  E  measures  A,  let  it  measure  it  according  to  F ; 

therefore  E  by  multiplying  F  has  made  A. 

And  A  is  measured  by  the  prime  numbers  B,  C,  D. 

But,  if  two  numbers  by  multiplying  one  another  make  some  number,  and 
any  prime  number  measure  the  product,  it  will  also  measure  one  of  the  original 
numbers;  [vn.  30] 

therefore  B,  C,  D  will  measure  one  of  the  numbers  B,  F. 

Now  they  will  not  measure  E; 

for  E  is  prime  and  not  the  same  with  any  one  of  the  numbers  By  C,  D. 

Therefore  they  will  measure  Fy  which  is  less  than  A : 
which  is  impossible,  for  A  is  bv  hypothesis  the  least  number  measured  by  B, 

C,  D. 

Therefore  no  prime  number  will  measure  A  except  B,  C,  D.  Q.  e.  d. 


ELEMENTS  IX 


181 


Proposition  15 

If  three  numbers  in  continued  proportion  be  the  least  of  those  which  have  the  same 
ratio  with  them ,  any  two  whatever  added  together  will  be  prime  to  the  remaining 
number. 

Let  A,  B,  C,  three  numbers  in  continued  proportion,  be  the  least  of  those 
which  have  the  same  ratio  with  them: 

A  g _  1 

I  say  that  any  two  of  the  numbers  A,  B,C  whatever 

C -  added  together  are  prime  to  the  remaining  number, 

p  £  p  namely  A ,  B  to  C;  B,  C  to  A ;  and  further,  A ,  C  to  B. 

For  let  two  numbers  DE ,  EF ,  the  least  of  those 
which  have  the  same  ratio  with  A,  B,  C,  be  taken.  [viii.  2] 

It  is  then  manifest  that  DE  by  multiplying  itself  has  made  A,  and  by  multi¬ 
plying  EF  has  made  B,  and,  further,  EF  by  multiplying  itself  has  made  C. 

[viii.  2] 

Now,  since  DE,  EF  are  least, 

they  are  prime  to  one  another.  [vn.  22] 

But,  if  two  numbers  be  prime  to  one  another, 

their  sum  is  also  prime  to  each;  [vn.  28] 

therefore  DF  is  also  prime  to  each  of  the  numbers  DE,  EF. 

But,  further,  DE  is  also  prime  to  EF; 

therefore  DF,  DE  are  prime  to  EF. 

But,  if  two  numbers  be  prime  to  any  number, 

their  product  is  also  prime  to  the  other;  [vn.  24] 

so  that  the  product  of  FD,  DE  is  prime  to  EF; 
hence  the  product  of  FD,  DE  is  also  prime  to  the  square  on  EF.  [vn.  25] 

But  the  product  of  FD,  DE  is  the  square  on  DE  together  with  the  product  of 
DE,  EF;  [ii.  3] 

therefore  the  square  on  DE  together  with  the  product  of  DE,  EF  is  prime  to 
the  square  on  EF. 

And  the  square  on  DE  is  A, 

the  product  of  DE,  EF  is  B, 
and  the  square  on  EF  is  C; 
therefore  A,  B  added  together  are  prime  to  C. 

Similarly  we  can  prove  that  B,  C  added  together  are  prime  to  A. 

I  say  next  that  A,  C  added  together  are  also  prime  to  B. 

For,  since  DF  is  prime  to  each  of  the  numbers  DE,  EF, 
the  square  on  DF  is  also  prime  to  the  product  of  DE,  EF.  [vn.  24,  25] 

But  the  squares  on  DE,  EF  together  with  twice  the  product  of  DE,  EF  are 
equal  to  the  square  on  DF;  [n.  4] 

therefore  the  squares  on  DE,  EF  together  with  twice  the  product  of  DE,  EF 
are  prime  to  the  product  of  DE,  EF. 

Separando,  the  squares  on  DE,  EF  together  with  once  the  product  of  DE, 
EF  are  prime  to  the  product  of  DE,  EF. 

Therefore,  separando  again,  the  squares  on  DE,  EF  are  prime  to  the  product 
of  DE,  EF. 

And  the  square  on  DE  is  A, 

the  product  of  DE,  EF  is  B, 
and  the  square  on  EF  is  C. 


182  EUCLID 

Therefore  A,  C  added  together  are  prime  to  B.  q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  16 

If  two  numbers  be  prime  to  one  another ,  the  second  will  not  be  to  any  other  number 
as  the  first  is  to  the  second. 

For  let  the  two  numbers  A,  B  be  prime  to  one  another; 

I  say  that  B  is  not  to  any  other  number  as  A  is  to  B .  A _ 

For,  if  possible,  as  A  is  to  B,  so  let  B  be  to  C.  B _ 

Now  A,  B  are  prime,  _ _ 

primes  are  also  least,  [vn.  21] 

and  the  least  numbers  measure  those  which  have  the  same  ratio  the  same 
number  of  times,  the  antecedent  the  antecedent  and  the  consequent  the  conse¬ 
quent;  [vii.  20] 

therefore  A  measures  B  as  antecedent  antecedent. 

But  it  also  measures  itself ; 

therefore  A  measures  A,  B  which  are  prime  to  one  another: 
which  is  absurd. 

Therefore  B  will  not  be  to  C,  as  A  is  to  B .  q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  17 

If  there  be  as  many  numbers  as  we  please  in  continued  proportion ,  and  the  extremes 
of  them  be  prime  to  one  another,  the  last  will  not  be  to  any  other  number  as  the  first 
to  the  second. 

For  let  there  be  as  many  numbers  as  we  please,  A,  B ,  C ,  D ,  in  continued  pro¬ 
portion, 

and  let  the  extremes  of  them,  A,  D ,  be  prime  to  A  B 

one  another;  C - 

I  say  that  D  is  not  to  any  other  number  as  A  d - 

is  to  B.  E _ 

For,  if  possible,  as  A  is  to  B,  so  let  D  be  to  E ; 

therefore,  alternately,  as  A  is  to  D ,  so  is  B  to  E .  [vn.  13] 
But  A,  D  are  prime, 

primes  are  also  least,  [vn.  21] 

and  the  least  numbers  measure  those  which  have  the  same  ratio  the  same  num¬ 
ber  of  times,  the  antecedent  the  antecedent  and  the  consequent  the  conse¬ 
quent.  [vii.  20] 

Therefore  A  measures  B. 

And,  as  A  is  to  B,  so  is  B  to  C. 

Therefore  B  also  measures  C; 

so  that  A  also  measures  C. 

And  since,  as  B  is  to  C,  so  is  C  to  D , 

and  B  measures  C, 
therefore  C  also  measures  D . 

But  A  measured  C ; 

so  that  A  also  measures  D . 

But  it  also  measures  itself ; 

therefore  A  measures  A,  D  which  are  prime  to  one  another: 
which  is  impossible. 

Therefore  D  will  not  be  to  any  other  number  as  A  is  to  B. 


Q.  E.  D. 


ELEMENTS  IX 


183 


Proposition  18 

Given  two  numbers ,  to  investigate  whether  it  is  possible  to  find  a  third  proportional 
to  them. 

Let  A,  B  be  the  given  two  numbers,  and  let  it  be  required  to  investigate 
whether  it  is  possible  to  find  a  third  proportional  to  them. 

Now  A)  B  are  either  prime  to  one  another  or  not. 

And,  if  they  are  prime  to  one  another,  it  has  been  proved  that  it  is  impossible 
to  find  a  third  proportional  to  them.  [ix.  16] 

Next,  let  A,  B  not  be  prime  to  one  another, 

and  let  B  by  multiplying  itself  make  C. 

Then  A  either  measures  C  or  does  not  measure  it. 

First,  let  it  measure  it  according  to  D\ 

therefore  A  by  multiplying  D  has  made  C. 

But,  further,  B  has  also  by  multiplying  itself  made  C ; 

therefore  the  product  of  A,  D  is  equal  to  the  square  on  B. 
Therefore,  as  A  is  to  B,  so  is  B  to  D\  [vn.  19] 

therefore  a  third  proportional  number  D  has  been  found  to  A,  B. 

Next,  let  A  not  measure  C\ 


I  say  that  it  is  impossible  to  find  a  third  proportional  number  to  A,  B . 
For,  if  possible,  let  D ,  such  third  proportional,  have  been  found. 

Therefore  the  product  of  A,  D  is  equal  to  the  square  on  B. 

But  the  square  on  B  is  C ; 

therefore  the  product  of  A,  D  is  equal  to  C. 

Hence  A  by  multiplying  D  has  made  C; 

therefore  A  measures  C  according  to  D. 

But,  by  hypothesis,  it  also  does  not  measure  it: 

which  is  absurd. 

Therefore  it  is  not  possible  to  find  a  third  proportional  number  to  A,  B  when 
A  does  not  measure  C.  Q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  19 

Given  three  numbers ,  to  investigate  when  it  is  possible  to  find  a  fourth  proportional 

A _  to  them. 

Let  A,  B,  C  be  the  given  three  numbers,  and  let 
B  it  be  required  to  investigate  when  it  is  possible  to 

c -  find  a  fourth  proportional  to  them. 

[The  Greek  text  of  this  proposition  is  corrupt.  However,  analagously  to  Proposition  18 
the  condition  that  a  fourth  proportional  to  A,  B,  C  exists  is  that  A  measure  the  product 
of  B  and  C.] 

Proposition  20 

Prime  nu?nbers  are  more  than  any  assigned  multitude  of  prime  numbers. 

Let  A,  B,  C  be  the  assigned  prime  numbers; 

I  say  that  there  are  more  prime  numbers  than  A,  B,  C. 


A — 

B - 

C - 

E - 


184  EUCLID 

For  let  the  least  number  measured  by  A,  B,  C  be  taken, 

and  let  it  be  DE; 
let  the  unit  DF  be  added  to  DE . 

Then  EF  is  either  prime  or  not. 

First,  let  it  be  prime; 
then  the  prime  numbers  A,  B ,  C,  EF  have 
been  found  which  are  more  than  A, B,  C. 

Next,  let  EF  not  be  prime; 

therefore  it  is  measured  by  some  prime  number.  [vn.  31] 

Let  it  be  measured  by  the  prime  number  G. 

I  say  that  G  is  not  the  same  with  any  of  the  numbers  A,  B,  C. 

For,  if  possible,  let  it  be  so. 

Now  A,  B,  C  measure  DE) 

therefore  G  also  will  measure  DE. 

But  it  also  measures  EF. 

Therefore  G,  being  a  number,  will  measure  the  remainder,  the  unit  DF: 

which  is  absurd. 

Therefore  G  is  not  the  same  with  any  one  of  the  numbers  A,  B,  C. 

And  by  hypothesis  it  is  prime. 

Therefore  the  prime  numbers  A,  B,  C,  G  have  been  found  which  are  more 
than  the  assigned  multitude  of  A,  B,  C.  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  21 

If  as  many  even  numbers  as  we  please  be  added  together ,  the  whole  is  even. 

For  let  as  many  even  numbers  as  we  please,  AB,  BC ,  CD,  DE,  be  added  to¬ 
gether; 

I  say  that  the  whole  AE  is  even. 

For,  since  each  of  the  numbers  AB, 

BC,  CD,  DE  is  even,  it  has  a  half  part;  A  B _ C _ D  e 

[vii.  Def.  6] 

so  that  the  whole  AE  also  has  a  half  part. 

But  an  even  number  is  that  which  is  divisible  into  two  equal  parts;  [id.] 

therefore  AE  is  even.  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  22 

If  as  many  odd  numbers  as  we  please  be  added  together,  and  their  multitude  be  even, 
the  whole  will  be  even. 

For  let  as  many  odd  numbers  as  we  please,  AB,  BC,  CD,  DE,  even  in  multi¬ 
tude,  be  added  together; 

I  say  that  the  whole  AE  is  even. 

For,  since  each  of  the  numbers 

AB,  BC,  CD,  DE  is  odd,  if  an  unit  A  ^ _ £ _ $  E 

be  subtracted  from  each,  each  of 

the  remainders  will  be  even;  [vn.  Def.  7] 

so  that  the  sum  of  them  will  be  even.  [ix.  21] 

But  the  multitude  of  the  units  is  also  even. 

Therefore  the  whole  AE  is  also  even.  [ix.  21] 

Q.  E.  D. 


ELEMENTS  IX 


185 


Proposition  23 

If  as  many  odd  numbers  as  we  please  be  added  together ,  and  their  multitude  be  odd , 
the  whole  will  also  be  odd. 

For  let  as  many  odd  numbers  as  we  please,  AB,  BC ,  CD ,  the  multitude  of 

which  is  odd,  be  added  together; 

A  ? _ £ _ I  say  that  the  whole  AD  is  also  odd. 

Let  the  unit  DE  be  subtracted  from  CD ; 
therefore  the  remainder  CE  is  even.  [vn.  Def.  7] 

But  CA  is  also  even;  [ix.  22] 

therefore  the  whole  AE  is  also  even.  [ix.  21] 

And  DE  is  an  unit. 

Therefore  AD  is  odd.  [vn.  Def.  7] 

Q.  E.  D. 


Proposition  24 

If  from  an  even  number  an  even  number  be  subtracted ,  the  remainder  will  be  even. 

For  from  the  even  number  AB  let  the  even  number  BC  be  subtracted: 

A  c  b  I  say  that  the  remainder  CA  is  even. 

~  '  For,  since  AB  is  even,  it  has  a  half  part.  [vn.  Def.  6] 

For  the  same  reason  BC  also  has  a  half  part; 
so  that  the  remainder  [CA  also  has  a  half  part,  and]  AC  is  therefore  even. 

Q.  E.  D. 


Proposition  25 

If  from  an  even  number  an  odd  number  be  subtracted ,  the  remainder  will  be  odd. 

For  from  the  even  number  AB  let  the  odd  number  BC  be  subtracted; 

A  C  D  B  I  say  that  the  remainder  CA  is  odd. 

For  let  the  unit  CD  be  subtracted  from  BC; 
therefore  DB  is  even.  [vn.  Def.  7] 


But  AB  is  also  even; 

therefore  the  remainder  AD  is  also  even. 
And  CD  is  an  unit; 

therefore  CA  is  odd. 


Proposition  26 


[ix.  24] 
[vn.  Def.  7] 

Q.  E.  D. 


D  B 


If  from  an  odd  number  an  odd  number  be  subtracted ,  the  remainder  will  be  even. 
For  from  the  odd  number  AB  let  the  odd  number  BC  be  subtracted; 

I  say  that  the  remainder  CA  is  even. 

For,  since  AB  is  odd,  let  the  unit  BD  be  subtracted; 
therefore  the  remainder  AD  is  even.  [vii.  Def.  7] 

For  the  same  reason  CD  is  also  even;  [vn.  Def.  7] 

so  that  the  remainder  CA  is  also  even.  [ix.  24] 

Q.  E.  D. 


Proposition  27 

If  from  an  odd  number  an  even  number  be  subtracted ,  the  remainder  will  be  odd. 
For  from  the  odd  number  AB  let  the  even  number  BC  be  subtracted; 


186  EUCLID 

I  say  that  the  remainder  CA  is  odd. 

Let  the  unit  AD  be  subtracted; 

therefore  DB  is  even.  [vn.  Def.  7]  AJD _ £ _ B 

But  BC  is  also  even; 

therefore  the  remainder  CD  is  even.  [ix.  24] 

Therefore  CA  is  odd.  [vii.  Def.  7] 

Q.  E.  D. 


Proposition  28 

If  an  odd  number  by  multiplying  an  even  number  make  some  number ,  the  product 
will  be  even. 

For  let  the  odd  number  A  by  multiplying  the  even  number  B  make  C; 

I  say  that  C  is  even. 

For,  since  A  by  multiplying  B  has  made  C, 
therefore  C  is  made  up  of  as  many  numbers  equal  to  B  ® 
as  there  are  units  in  A.  [vn.  Def.  15] 

And  B  is  even; 

therefore  C  is  made  up  of  even  numbers. 

But,  if  as  many  even  numbers  as  we  please  be  added  together,  the  whole  is 
even.  [ix.  21] 

Therefore  C  is  even.  Q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  29 

If  an  odd  number  by  multiplying  an  odd  number  make  some  number ,  the  product 
will  be  odd. 

For  let  the  odd  number  A  by  multiplying  the  odd  number  B  make  C; 

I  say  that  C  is  odd.  A 

For,  since  A  by  multiplying  B  has  made  C, 
therefore  C  is  made  up  of  as  many  numbers  equal  to 

B  as  there  are  units  in  A.  [vn.  Def.  15]  c - 

And  each  of  the  numbers  A,  B  is  odd; 
therefore  C  is  made  up  of  odd  numbers  the  multitude  of  which  is  odd. 

Thus  C  is  odd.  [ix.  23] 

Q.  E.  D. 


Proposition  30 

If  an  odd  number  measure  an  even  number ,  it  will  also  measure  the  half  of  it. 
For  let  the  odd  number  A  measure  the  even  number  B; 

I  say  that  it  will  also  measure  the  half  of  it.  A_ 

For,  since  A  measures  B ,  B _ 

let  it  measure  it  according  to  C; 

I  say  that  C  is  not  odd. 

For,  if  possible,  let  it  be  so. 

Then,  since  A  measures  B  according  to  C, 

therefore  A  by  multiplying  C  has  made  B. 

Therefore  B  is  made  up  of  odd  numbers  the  multitude  of  which  is  odd. 
Therefore  B  is  odd:  [ix.  23] 

which  is  absurd,  for  by  hypothesis  it  is  even. 

Therefore  C  is  not  odd; 


187 


ELEMENTS  IX 

therefore  C  is  even. 

Thus  A  measures  B  an  even  number  of  times. 

For  this  reason  then  it  also  measures  the  half  of  it.  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  31 

If  an  odd  number  be  prime  to  any  number ,  it  will  also  be  prime  to  the  double  of  it. 
For  let  the  odd  number  A  be  prime  to  any  number  B , 
and  let  C  be  double  of  B ; 

_  I  say  that  A  is  prime  to  C. 

For,  if  they  are  not  prime  to  one  another, 
some  number  will  measure  them. 

Let  a  number  measure  them,  and  let  it  be  D. 
Now  A  is  odd; 
therefore  D  is  also  odd. 

And  since  D  which  is  odd  measures  C, 

and  C  is  even, 

therefore  [Z)]  will  measure  the  half  of  C  also.  [ix.  30] 

But  B  is  half  of  C ; 

therefore  D  measures  B. 

But  it  also  measures  A ; 

therefore  D  measures  A ,  B  which  are  prime  to  one  another: 
which  is  impossible. 

Therefore  A  cannot  but  be  prime  to  C. 

Therefore  A ,  C  are  prime  to  one  another.  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  32 

Each  of  the  numbers  which  are  continually  doubled  beginning  from  a  dyad  is  even- 
times  even  only. 

For  let  as  many  numbers  as  we  please,  B ,  C,  D,  have  been  continually  doub¬ 
led  beginning  from  the  dyad  A ; 

_  I  say  that  B ,  C,  D  are  even-times  even  only. 

Now  that  each  of  the  numbers  By  C ,  D  is 
8  even-times  even  is  manifest;  for  it  is 

c  doubled  from  a  dyad. 

I  say  that  it  is  also  even-times  even  only. 

For  let  an  unit  be  set  out. 

Since  then  as  many  numbers  as  we  please  beginning  from  an  unit  are  in  con¬ 
tinued  proportion, 

and  the  number  A  after  the  unit  is  prime, 
therefore  D ,  the  greatest  of  the  numbers  A,  By  C,  D ,  will  not  be  measured  by 
any  other  number  except  A,  B,  C.  [ix.  13] 

And  each  of  the  numbers  A,  B,  C  is  even; 

therefore  D  is  even-times  even  only.  [vn.  Def.  8] 

Similarly  we  can  prove  that  each  of  the  numbers  By  C  is  even-times  even 
only.  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  33 

If  a  number  have  its  half  odd ,  it  is  even-times  odd  only. 
For  let  the  number  A  have  its  half  odd; 


188  EUCLID 

I  say  that  A  is  even-times  odd  only. 

Now  that  it  is  even-times  odd  is  manifest  ;  for  the  half  of  it,  being  odd,  meas¬ 
ures  it  an  even  number  of  times.  [vn.  Def.  9] 

I  say  next  that  it  is  also  even-times  odd  only.  _ 

For,  if  A  is  even-times  even  also,  A 

it  will  be  measured  by  an  even  number  according  to  an  even  number; 

[vn.  Def.  8] 

so  that  the  half  of  it  will  also  be  measured  by  an  even  number  though  it  is  odd : 

which  is  absurd. 

Therefore  A  is  even-times  odd  only.  q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  34 

If  a  number  neither  be  one  of  those  which  are  continually  doubled  from  a  dyad ,  nor 
have  its  half  odd ,  it  is  both  even-times  even  and  even-times  odd . 

For  let  the  number  A  neither  be  one  of  those  doubled  from  a  dyad,  nor  have 
its  half  odd; 

I  say  that  A  is  both  even-times  even  and  even-times  odd.  A 

Now  that  A  is  even-times  even  is  manifest; 

for  it  has  not  its  half  odd.  [vn.  Def.  8] 

I  say  next  that  it  is  also  even- times  odd. 

For,  if  we  bisect  A,  then  bisect  its  half,  and  do  this  continually,  we  shall 
come  upon  some  odd  number  which  will  measure  A  according  to  an  even  num¬ 
ber. 

For,  if  not,  we  shall  come  upon  a  dyad, 

and  A  will  be  among  those  which  are  doubled  from  a  dyad: 
which  is  contrary  to  the  hypothesis. 

Thus  A  is  even-times  odd. 

But  it  was  also  proved  even-times  even. 

Therefore  A  is  both  even-times  even  and  even-times  odd.  q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  35 


If  as  many  numbers  as  we  please  be  in  continued  proportion ,  and  there  be  sub¬ 
tracted  from  the  second  and  the  last  numbers  equal  to  the  first,  then ,  as  the  excess  of 
the  second  is  to  the  first ,  so  will  the  excess  of  the  last  be  to  all  those  before  it. 

Let  there  be  as  many  numbers  as  we  please  in  continued  proportion,  A ,  BC , 
D ,  EF,  beginning  from  A  as  least, 

and  let  there  be  subtracted  from  BC  and  A— 

EF  the  numbers  BG ,  FH,  each  equal  — C 

to  A;  D - — 

I  say  that,  as  GC  is  to  A,  so  is  EH  E _ _ , _ t  ,  f 

to  A,  BCy  D.  L  K  H 

For  let  FK  be  made  equal  to  BCy  and  FL  equal  to  D. 

Then,  since  FK  is  equal  to  BCy 

and  of  these  the  part  FH  is  equal  to  the  part  BGy 
therefore  the  remainder  HK  is  equal  to  the  remainder  GC. 

And  since,  as  EF  is  to  Dy  so  is  D  to  BCy  and  BC  to  A , 

while  D  is  equal  to  FL ,  BC  to  FKy  and  A  to  FH, 
therefore,  as  EF  is  to  FL,  so  is  LF  to  FK,  and  FK  to  FH. 
Separando ,  as  EL  is  to  LF,  so  is  LK  to  FK,  and  KH  to  FH.  [vn.  11,  13] 


ELEMENTS  IX  189 

Therefore  also,  as  one  of  the  antecedents  is  to  one  of  the  consequents,  so  are 
all  the  antecedents  to  all  the  consequents;  [vii.  12] 

therefore,  as  KH  is  to  FH ,  so  are  EL,  LK ,  KH  to  LF,  FK ,  HF. 

But  KH  is  equal  to  CG,  FH  to  A,  and  LF,  FK,  HF  to  D,  BC ,  A; 
therefore,  as  CG  is  to  A,  so  is  EH  to  D,  BC,  A. 

Therefore,  as  the  excess  of  the  second  is  to  the  first,  so  is  the  excess  of  the 
last  to  all  those  before  it.  q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  36 

If  as  many  numbers  as  we  please  beginning  from  an  unit  be  set  out  continuously 
in  double  proportion,  until  the  sum  of  all  becomes  prime ,  and  if  the  sum  multiplied 
into  the  last  make  some  number,  the  product  will  be  perfect. 

For  let  as  many  numbers  as  we  please,  A,  B,  C,  D,  beginning  from  an  unit 
be  set  out  in  double  proportion,  until  the  sum  of  all  becomes  prime, 

let  E  be  equal  to  the  sum,  and  let  E  by  multiplying  D  make  FG ; 

I  say  that  FG  is  perfect. 

For,  however  many  A,  B,  C,  D  are  in  multitude,  let  so  many  E,  HK,  L,  M 
be  taken  in  double  proportion  beginning  from  E; 

therefore,  ex  aequali,  as  A  is  to  D,  so  is  E  to  M.  [vn.  14] 

Therefore  the  product  of  E,  D  is  equal  to  the  product  of  A,  M.  [vn.  19] 

And  the  product  of  E,  D  is  FG ; 

therefore  the  product  of  A,  M  is  also  FG. 

Therefore  A  by  multiplying  M  has  made  FG ; 

therefore  M  measures  FG  according  to  the  units  in  A. 

And  A  is  a  dyad; 

therefore  FG  is  double  of  M. 

— A  - B 

- C 

D 


P -  Q - 

But  M,  L,  HK,  E  are  continuously  double  of  each  other; 
therefore  E,  HK,  L,  M,  FGare  continuously  proportional  in  double  proportion. 

Now  let  there  be  subtracted  from  the  second  II K  and  the  last  FG  the  num¬ 
bers  IIN,  FO,  each  equal  to  the  first  E ; 

therefore,  as  the  excess  of  the  second  is  to  the  first,  so  is  the  excess  of  the  last  to 
all  those  before  it.  [ix.  35] 

Therefore,  as  NK  is  to  E,  so  is  OG  to  M,  L,  KH,  E. 

And  NK  is  equal  to  E\ 

therefore  OG  is  also  equal  to  M,  L,  IIK,  E. 

But  FO  is  also  equal  to  E, 

and  E  is  equal  to  A,  B,  C,  D  and  the  unit. 

Therefore  the  whole  FG  is  equal  to  E,  HK,  L,  M  and  A,  B,  C,  D  and  the 
unit; 


and  it  is  measured  by  them. 


190  EUCLID 

I  say  also  that  FG  will  not  be  measured  by  any  other  number  except  A,  B, 
C,  D ,  E ,  HK ,  L,  M  and  the  unit. 

For,  if  possible,  let  some  number  P  measure  FG, 
and  let  P  not  be  the  same  with  any  of  the  numbers  A,  B,  C ,  D ,  E ,  HK,  L,  M. 
And,  as  many  times  as  P  measures  FG,  so  many  units  let  there  be  in  Q; 

therefore  Q  by  multiplying  P  has  made  FG. 

But,  further,  E  has  also  by  multiplying  D  made  FG; 

therefore,  as  E  is  to  Q,  so  is  P  to  D.  [vn.  19] 

And,  since  A,  B,C,D  are  continuously  proportional  beginning  from  an  unit, 
therefore  D  will  not  be  measured  by  any  other  number  except  A,  B,  C.  [ix.  13] 
And,  by  hypothesis,  P  is  not  the  same  with  any  of  the  numbers  A,  B,  C; 

therefore  P  will  not  measure  D. 

But,  as  P  is  to  D,  so  is  E  to  Q; 

therefore  neither  does  E  measure  Q.  [vn.  Def.  20] 

And  E  is  prime; 

and  any  prime  number  is  prime  to  any  number  which  it  does  not  measure. 

[vii.  29] 

Therefore  E,  Q  are  prime  to  one  another. 

But  primes  are  also  least,  [vii.  21] 

and  the  least  numbers  measure  those  which  have  the  same  ratio  the  same  num¬ 
ber  of  times,  the  antecedent  the  antecedent  and  the  consequent  the  conse¬ 
quent;  [vii.  20] 

and,  as  E  is  to  Q,  so  is  P  to  D; 

therefore  E  measures  P  the  same  number  of  times  that  Q  measures  D. 
But  D  is  not  measured  by  any  other  number  except  A,  B,  C; 

therefore  Q  is  the  same  with  one  of  the  numbers  A,  B,  C. 

Let  it  be  the  same  with  B. 

And,  however  many  B,  C,  D  are  in  multitude,  let  so  many  E,  HK,  L  be 
taken  beginning  from  E. 

Now  E,  HK,  L  are  in  the  same  ratio  with  B,  C,  D; 

therefore,  ex  aequali,  as  B  is  to  D,  so  is  E  to  L.  [vii.  14] 

Therefore  the  product  of  B,  L  is  equal  to  the  product  of  D,  E .  [vii.  19] 

But  the  product  of  D,  E  is  equal  to  the  product  of  Q,  P; 

therefore  the  product  of  Q,  P  is  also  equal  to  the  product  of  B,  L. 
Therefore,  as  Q  is  to  B,  so  is  L  to  P .  [vii.  19] 

And  Q  is  the  same  with  B; 

therefore  L  is  also  the  same  with  P: 

which  is  impossible,  for  by  hypothesis  P  is  not  the  same  with  any  of  the  num¬ 
bers  set  out. 

Therefore  no  number  will  measure  FG  except  A,  B,  C,  D,  E,  HK,  L,  M  and 
the  unit. 

And  FG  was  proved  equal  to  A,  B,  C,  D,  E,  HK,  L,  M  and  the  unit; 
and  a  perfect  number  is  that  which  is  equal  to  its  own  parts;  [vii.  Def.  22] 

therefore  FG  is  perfect.  Q.  e.  d. 


BOOK  TEN 


DEFINITIONS  I 

1.  Those  magnitudes  are  said  to  be  commensurable  which  are  measured  by 
the  same  measure,  and  those  incommensurable  which  cannot  have  any  com¬ 
mon  measure. 

2.  Straight  lines  are  commensurable  in  square  when  the  squares  on  them  are 
measured  by  the  same  area,  and  incommensurable  in  square  when  the  squares 
on  them  cannot  possibly  have  any  area  as  a  common  measure. 

3.  With  these  hypotheses,  it  is  proved  that  there  exist  straight  lines  infinite 
in  multitude  which  are  commensurable  and  incommensurable  respectively, 
some  in  length  only,  and  others  in  square  also,  with  an  assigned  straight  line. 
Let  then  the  assigned  straight  fine  be  called  rational ,  and  those  straight  lines 
which  are  commensurable  with  it,  whether  in  length  and  in  square  or  in  square 
only,  rational ,  but  those  which  are  incommensurable  with  it  irrational. 

4.  And  let  the  square  on  the  assigned  straight  line  be  called  rational  and 
those  areas  which  are  commensurable  with  it  rational ,  but  those  which  are  in¬ 
commensurable  with  it  irrational ,  and  the  straight  lines  which  produce  them 
irrational ,  that  is,  in  case  the  areas  are  squares,  the  sides  themselves,  but  in 
case  they  are  any  other  rectilineal  figures,  the  straight  lines  on  which  are  de¬ 
scribed  squares  equal  to  them. 

BOOK  X.  PROPOSITIONS 
Proposition  1 

Two  unequal  magnitudes  being  set  out ,  if  from  the  greater  there  be  subtracted  a  mag¬ 
nitude  greater  than  its  half ,  and  from  that  which  is  left  a  magnitude  greater  than  its 
half,  and  if  this  process  be  repeated  continually,  there  will  be  left  some  magnitude 
which  will  be  less  than  the  lesser  magnitude  set  out. 

Let  AB,  C  be  two  unequal  magnitudes  of  which  AB  is  the  greater: 

I  say  that,  if  from  AB  there  be  subtracted 
K  H  c  a  magnitude  greater  than  its  half,  and  from 

A  '  1  B  “  that  which  is  left  a  magnitude  greater  than 

D _ i _ ♦ _ e  its  half,  and  if  this  process  be  repeated 

F  G  continually,  there  will  be  left  some  magni¬ 

tude  which  wall  be  less  than  the  magnitude  C . 

For  C  if  multiplied  will  sometime  be  greater  than  AB.  [cf.  v.  Def.  4] 

Let  it  be  multiplied,  and  let  DE  be  a  multiple  of  C,  and  greater  than  AB; 
let  DE  be  divided  into  the  parts  DF,  FG ,  GE  equal  to  C , 
from  AB  let  there  be  subtracted  BH  greater  than  its  half, 
and,  from  AH,  H K  greater  than  its  half, 

191 


192  EUCLID 

and  let  this  process  be  repeated  continually  until  the  divisions  in  AB  are  equal 
in  multitude  with  the  divisions  in  DE. 

Let,  then,  AK,  KH ,  HB  be  divisions  which  are  equal  in  multitude  with  DF , 
FG,  GE. 

Now,  since  DE  is  greater  than  AB , 

and  from  DE  there  has  been  subtracted  EG  less  than  its  half, 
and,  from  AB,  BH  greater  than  its  half, 
therefore  the  remainder  GD  is  greater  than  the  remainder  HA. 

And,  since  GD  is  greater  than  HA, 

and  there  has  been  subtracted,  from  GD,  the  half  GF, 
and,  from  HA,  HK  greater  than  its  half, 
therefore  the  remainder  DF  is  greater  than  the  remainder  AK. 

But  DF  is  equal  to  C; 

therefore  C  is  also  greater  than  AK. 

Therefore  AK  is  less  than  C. 

Therefore  there  is  left  of  the  magnitude  AB  the  magnitude  AK  which  is  less 
than  the  lesser  magnitude  set  out,  namely  C.  q.  e.  d. 

And  the  theorem  can  be  similarly  proved  even  if  the  parts  subtracted  be 
halves. 

Proposition  2 

If,  when  the  less  of  two  unequal  magnitudes  is  continually  subtracted  in  turn  from 
the  greater,  that  which  is  left  never  measures  the  one  before  it,  the  magnitudes  will 
be  incommensurable. 

For,  there  being  two  unequal  magnitudes  AB,  CD,  and  AB  being  the  less, 
when  the  less  is  continually  subtracted  in  turn  from  the  greater,  let  that  which 
is  left  over  never  measure  the  one  before  it; 

I  say  that  the  magnitudes  AB,  CD  are  incommensurable. 

For,  if  they  are  commensur¬ 
able,  some  magnitude  will  meas-  £  ^ 

ure  them. 

Let  a  magnitude  measure  c  +—  D 

them,  if  possible,  and  let  it  be  E) 

let  AB,  measuring  FD,  leave  CF  less  than  itself, 
let  CF  measuring  BG,  leave  AG  less  than  itself, 
and  let  this  process  be  repeated  continually,  until  there  is  left  some  magnitude 
which  is  less  than  E. 

Suppose  this  done,  and  let  there  be  left  AG  less  than  E. 

Then,  since  E  measures  AB, 

while  AB  measures  DF, 
therefore  E  will  also  measure  FD. 

But  it  measures  the  whole  CD  also; 

therefore  it  will  also  measure  the  remainder  CF. 

But  CF  measures  BG; 

therefore  E  also  measures  BG. 

But  it  measures  the  whole  AB  also; 
therefore  it  will  also  measure  the  remainder  AG,  the  greater  the  less: 

which  is  impossible. 


193 


ELEMENTS  X 

Therefore  no  magnitude  will  measure  the  magnitudes  AB ,  CD; 

therefore  the  magnitudes  AB,  CD  are  incommensurable,  [x.  Def.  1] 
Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  3 

Given  two  commensurable  magnitudes ,  to  find  their  greatest  com  mon 
measure. 

Let  the  two  given  commensurable  magnitudes  be  AB ,  CD  of  which  AB  is  the 
less; 

thus  it  is  required  to  find  the  greatest  common  measure  of  AB,  CD. 

Now  the  magnitude  AB  either  measures  CD  or  it  does  not. 

If  then  it  measures  it — and  it  measures  itself  also — AB  is  a  common  meas¬ 
ure  of  AB,  CD. 

And  it  is  manifest  that  it  is  also  the  greatest; 

for  a  greater  magnitude  than  the  magnitude  AB  will  not  measure  AB. 
Next,  let  AB  not  measure  CD. 

Then,  if  the  less  be  continually 
F  subtracted  in  turn  from  the  greater, 

-  A  i - B  that  which  is  left  over  will  sometime 

q _ , _ D  measure  the  one  before  it,  because 

E  AB,  CD  are  not  incommensurable; 

[cf.  x.  2] 

let  AB,  measuring  ED,  leave  EC  less  than  itself, 
let  EC,  measuring  FB,  leave  AF  less  than  itself, 
and  let  AF  measure  CE. 

Since,  then,  AF  measures  CE, 

while  CE  measures  FB, 
therefore  AF  will  also  measure  FB. 

But  it  measures  itself  also; 

therefore  AF  will  also  measure  the  whole  AB. 

But  AB  measures  DE; 

therefore  AF  will  also  measure  ED. 

But  it  measures  CE  also; 

therefore  it  also  measures  the  whole  CD. 

Therefore  AF  is  a  common  measure  of  AB,  CD. 

I  say  next  that  it  is  also  the  greatest. 

For,  if  not,  there  will  be  some  magnitude  greater  than  AF  which  will  meas¬ 
ure  AB,  CD. 

Let  it  be  G. 

Since  then  G  measures  AB, 

while  AB  measures  ED, 
therefore  G  will  also  measure  ED. 

But  it  measures  the  whole  CD  also; 

therefore  G  will  also  measure  the  remainder  CE. 

But  CE  measures  FB ; 

therefore  G  will  also  measure  FB. 

But  it  measures  the  whole  AB  also, 
and  it  will  therefore  measure  the  remainder  AF,  the  greater  the  less: 

which  is  impossible. 


194  EUCLID 

Therefore  no  magnitude  greater  than  AF  wall  measure  AB,  CD; 

therefore  AF  is  the  greatest  common  measure  of  AB,  CD. 
Therefore  the  greatest  common  measure  of  the  two  given  commensurable 
magnitudes  AB,  CD  has  been  found.  q.  e.  d. 

Porism.  From  this  it  is  manifest  that,  if  a  magnitude  measure  two  magni¬ 
tudes,  it  will  also  measure  their  greatest  common  measure. 

Proposition  4 

Given  three  commensurable  magnitudes ,  to  find  their  greatest  common  measure . 

Let  A,  B,  C  be  the  three  given  commensurable  magnitudes; 
thus  it  is  required  to  find  the  greatest  common  measure  of  A,  B,  C. 

Let  the  greatest  common  measure  of  the  two 
magnitudes  A,  B  be  taken,  and  let  it  be  D;  [x.  3]  A  ” 

then  D  either  measures  C,  or  does  not  measure  it.  B - 

First,  let  it  measure  it.  C - 

Since  then  D  measures  C,  D _  _  ^ _ 

while  it  also  measures  A,  B, 

therefore  D  is  a  common  measure  of  A,  B,  C. 

And  it  is  manifest  that  it  is  also  the  greatest; 
for  a  greater  magnitude  than  the  magnitude  D  does  not  measure  A ,  B. 

Next,  let  D  not  measure  C. 

I  say  first  that  C,  D  are  commensurable. 

For,  since  A,  B,  C  are  commensurable, 

some  magnitude  will  measure  them, 
and  this  will  of  course  measure  A,  B  also; 
so  that  it  will  also  measure  the  greatest  common  measure  of  A,  B ,  namely  D. 

[x.  3,  Por.] 

But  it  also  measures  C ; 

so  that  the  said  magnitude  will  measure  C,  D; 
therefore  C,  D  are  commensurable. 

Now  let  their  greatest  common  measure  be  taken,  and  let  it  be  E .  [x.  3] 

Since  then  E  measures  D , 

while  D  measures  A,  B, 
therefore  E  will  also  measure  A,  B. 

But  it  measures  C  also; 

therefore  E  measures  A ,  B ,  C; 
therefore  E  is  a  common  measure  of  A ,  B,  C. 

I  say  next  that  it  is  also  the  greatest. 

For,  if  possible,  let  there  be  some  magnitude  F  greater  than  E ,  and  let  it 
measure  A,  B,  C. 

Now,  since  F  measures  A,  B,  C, 

it  will  also  measure  A,  B , 

and  will  measure  the  greatest  common  measure  of  A,  B.  [x.  3,  Por.] 
But  the  greatest  common  measure  of  A,  B  is  D; 

therefore  F  measures  D. 

But  it  measures  C  also; 

therefore  F  measures  C,  D; 

therefore  F  will  also  measure  the  greatest  common  measure  of  C,  D. 

[x.  3,  Por.] 


ELEMENTS  X 


195 


But  that  is  E; 

therefore  F  will  measure  E ,  the  greater  the  less: 
which  is  impossible. 

Therefore  no  magnitude  greater  than  the  magnitude  E  will  measure  A,  B ,  C; 
therefore  E  is  the  greatest  common  measure  of  A,  B,  C  if  D  do  not  measure  C, 
and,  if  it  measure  it,  D  is  itself  the  greatest  common  measure. 
Therefore  the  greatest  common  measure  of  the  three  given  commensurable 
magnitudes  has  been  found. 

Porism.  From  this  it  is  manifest  that,  if  a  magnitude  measure  three  magni¬ 
tudes,  it  will  also  measure  their  greatest  common  measure. 

Similarly  too,  with  more  magnitudes,  the  greatest  common  measure  can  be 
found,  and  the  porism  can  be  extended.  Q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  5 

Commensurable  magnitudes  have  to  one  another  the  ratio  which  a  number  has  to  a 
number. 

Let  A,  B  be  commensurable  magnitudes; 

I  say  that  A  has  to  B  the  ratio  which  a  number  has  to  a  number. 

For,  since  A,  B  are  commensurable,  some  magnitude  will  measure  them. 
Let  it  measure  them,  and  let  it  be  C. 

And,  as  many  times  as  C  meas- 
A  B  C  ures  Ay  so  many  units  let  there  be 


“  and,  as  many  times  as  C  meas- 

-  ures  B,  so  many  units  let  there 

be  in  E. 

Since  then  C  measures  A  according  to  the  units  in  D , 

while  the  unit  also  measures  D  according  to  the  units  in  it, 
therefore  the  unit  measures  the  number  D  the  same  number  of  times  as  the 
magnitude  C  measures  A ; 

therefore  as  C,  is  to  A,  so  is  the  unit  to  D;  [vn.  Def.  20] 
therefore,  inversely,  as  A  is  to  C,  so  is  D  to  the  unit.  [cf.  v.  7,  Por.] 

Again,  since  C  measures  B  according  to  the  units  in  B, 

while  the  unit  also  measures  E  according  to  the  units  in  it, 
therefore  the  unit  measures  E  the  same  number  of  times  as  C  measures  B ; 
therefore,  as  C  is  to  B,  so  is  the  unit  to  E. 

But  it  was  also  proved  that, 

as  A  is  to  (7,  so  is  D  to  the  unit; 
therefore,  ex  aequali , 

as  A  is  to  B,  so  is  the  number  D  to  E .  [v.  22] 

Therefore  the  commensurable  magnitudes  A,  B  have  to  one  another  the 
ratio  which  the  number  D  has  to  the  number  E.  q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  6 

If  two  magnitudes  have  to  one  another  the  ratio  which  a  number  has  to  a  number , 
the  magnitudes  will  be  commensurable. 

For  let  the  two  magnitudes  A,  B  have  to  one  another  the  ratio  which  the 
number  D  has  to  the  number  B; 

I  say  that  the  magnitudes  A,  B  are  commensurable. 


196  EUCLID 

For  let  A  be  divided  into  as  many  equal  parts  as  there  are  units  in  D, 
and  let  C  be  equal  to  one  of  them; 
and  let  F  be  made  up  of  as 
many  magnitudes  equal  to  C 

as  there  are  units  in  E.  A  1  1  B  C - 

Since  then  there  are  in  A  D - 

as  many  magnitudes  equal  to  E -  F - 

C  as  there  are  units  in  D , 

whatever  part  the  unit  is  of  D,  the  same  part  is  C  of  A  also; 

therefore,  as  C  is  to  A ,  so  is  the  unit  to  D.  [vn.  Def.  20] 
But  the  unit  measures  the  number  Z>; 

therefore  C  also  measures  A . 

And  since,  as  C  is  to  A,  so  is  the  unit  to  D, 
therefore,  inversely,  as  A  is  to  C,  so  is  the  number  D  to  the  unit. 

[cf.  v.  7,  Por.] 

Again,  since  there  are  in  F  as  many  magnitudes  equal  to  C  as  there  are  units 
in  Ey 

therefore,  as  C  is  to  Fy  so  is  the  unit  to  E.  [vn.  Def.  20] 
But  it  was  also  proved  that, 

as  A  is  to  Cy  so  is  D  to  the  unit; 
therefore,  ex  aequali ,  as  A  is  to  F,  so  is  D  to  E.  [v.  22] 

But,  as  D  is  to  Ey  so  is  A  to  B; 

therefore  also,  as  A  is  to  B,  so  is  it  to  F  also.  [v.  11] 

Therefore  A  has  the  same  ratio  to  each  of  the  magnitudes  By  F; 

therefore  B  is  equal  to  F.  [v.  9] 

But  C  measures  F; 

therefore  it  measures  B  also. 

Further  it  measures  A  also; 

therefore  C  measures  Ay  B . 

Therefore  A  is  commensurable  with  B. 

Therefore  etc. 

Porism.  From  this  it  is  manifest  that,  if  there  be  two  numbers,  as  D,  Ey  and 
a  straight  line,  as  A,  it  is  possible  to  make  a  straight  line  [F]  such  that  the 
given  straight  line  is  to  it  as  the  number  D  is  to  the  number  E. 

And,  if  a  mean  proportional  be  also  taken  between  A,  Fy  as  B, 
as  A  is  to  Fy  so  will  the  square  on  A  be  to  the  square  on  B,  that  is,  as  the  first 
is  to  the  third,  so  is  the  figure  on  the  first  to  that  which  is  similar  and  similarly 
described  on  the  second.  [vi.  19,  Por.] 

But,  as  A  is  to  F,  so  is  the  number  D  to  the  number  E ; 
therefore  it  has  been  contrived  that,  as  the  number  D  is  to  the  number  B,  so 
also  is  the  figure  on  the  straight  line  A  to  the  figure  on  the  straight  line  B. 

Q.  E.  D. 


Proposition  7 

Incommensurable  magnitudes  have  not  to  one  another  the  ratio  which  a  number  has 
to  a  number. 

Let  Ay  B  be  incommensurable  magnitudes; 

I  say  that  A  has  not  to  B  the  ratio  which  a  number  has  to  a  number. 

For,  if  A  has  to  B  the  ratio  which  a  number  has  to  a  number,  A  will  be  com- 


ELEMENTS  X 


197 
[x.  6] 


mensurable  with  B. 

But  it  is  not; 

A  therefore  A  has  not  to  B  the  ratio  which  a  number  has  to  a  num- 
B  ber. 

Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  8 

If  two  magnitudes  have  not  to  one  another  the  ratio  which  a  number  has  to  a  number , 
the  magnitudes  will  be  incommensurable . 

For  let  the  two  magnitudes  A,  B  not  have  to  one  another  the  ratio  which  a 
number  has  to  a  number; 

A  I  say  that  the  magnitudes  A,  B  are  incommensurable. 

- g -  For,  if  they  are  commensurable,  A  will  have  to  B  the  ratio 

-  winch  a  number  has  to  a  number.  [x.  5] 

But  it  has  not; 

therefore  the  magnitudes  A,  B  are  incommensurable. 

Therefore  etc.  Q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  9 

The  squares  on  straight  lines  commensurable  in  length  have  to  one  another  the  ratio 
which  a  square  number  has  to  a  square  number;  and  squares  which  have  to  one  an¬ 
other  the  ratio  which  a  square  number  has  to  a  square  number  will  also  have  their 
sides  commensurable  in  length .  But  the  squares  on  straight  lines  incommensurable 
in  length  have  not  to  one  another  the  ratio  which  a  square  number  has  to  a  square 
number;  and  squares  which  have  not  to  one  another  the  ratio  which  a  square 
number  has  to  a  square  number  will  not  have  their  sides  commensurable  in  length 
either. 

For  let  A}  B  be  commensurable  in  length; 

I  say  that  the  square  on  A  has  to  the 

- A -  - B -  square  on  B  the  ratio  which  a  square 

— £ -  number  has  to  a  square  number. 

-2 _  For,  since  A  is  commensurable  in 

length  with  B, 

therefore  A  has  to  B  the  ratio  winch  a  number  has  to  a  number.  [x.  5] 

Let  it  have  to  it  the  ratio  winch  C  has  to  D. 

Since  then,  as  A  is  to  B,  so  is  C  to  D, 

w’hile  the  ratio  of  the  square  on  A  to  the  square  on  B  is  duplicate  of  the  ratio 
of  A  to  B, 

for  similar  figures  are  in  the  duplicate  ratio  of  their  corresponding  sides; 

[vi.  20,  Por.] 

and  the  ratio  of  the  square  on  C  to  the  square  on  D  is  duplicate  of  the  ratio  of 
C  to  D , 

for  between  tw*o  square  numbers  there  is  one  mean  proportional  number,  and 
the  square  number  has  to  the  square  number  the  ratio  duplicate  of  that  winch 
the  side  has  to  the  side;  [vm.  11] 

therefore  also,  as  the  square  on  A  is  to  the  square  on  B,  so  is  the  square  on  C 
to  the  square  on  D. 

Next,  as  the  square  on  A  is  to  the  square  on  B,  so  let  the  square  on  C  be  to 
the  square  on  D ; 


198  EUCLID 

I  say  that  A  is  commensurable  in  length  with  B. 

For  since,  as  the  square  on  A  is  to  the  square  on  B,  so  is  the  square  on  C  to 
the  square  on  D , 

while  the  ratio  of  the  square  on  A  to  the  square  on  B  is  duplicate  of  the  ratio 
of  A  to  B , 

and  the  ratio  of  the  square  on  C  to  the  square  on  D  is  duplicate  of  the  ratio  of 
C  to  Z), 

therefore  also,  as  A  is  to  B ,  so  is  C  to  D . 

Therefore  A  has  to  B  the  ratio  which  the  number  C  has  to  the  number  D ; 

therefore  A  is  commensurable  in  length  with  B .  [x.  6] 

Next,  let  A  be  incommensurable  in  length  with  B ; 

I  say  that  the  square  on  A  has  not  to  the  square  on  B  the  ratio  which  a 
square  number  has  to  a  square  number. 

For,  if  the  square  on  A  has  to  the  square  on  B  the  ratio  which  a  square  num¬ 
ber  has  to  a  square  number,  A  will  be  commensurable  with  B. 

But  it  is  not; 

therefore  the  square  on  A  has  not  to  the  square  on  B  the  ratio  which  a  square 
number  has  to  a  square  number. 

Again,  let  the  square  on  A  not  have  to  the  square  on  B  the  ratio  winch  a 
square  number  has  to  a  square  number; 

I  say  that  A  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  B. 

For,  if  A  is  commensurable  with  B ,  the  square  on  A  will  have  to  the  square 
on  B  the  ratio  which  a  square  number  has  to  a  square  number. 

But  it  has  not; 

therefore  A  is  not  commensurable  in  length  with  B . 

Therefore  etc. 

Porism.  And  it  is  manifest  from  wiiat  has  been  proved  that  straight  lines 
commensurable  in  length  are  ahvays  commensurable  in  square  also,  but  those 
commensurable  in  square  are  not  ahvays  commensurable  in  length  also. 

[Lemma.  It  has  been  proved  in  the  arithmetical  books  that  similar  plane 
numbers  have  to  one  another  the  ratio  vilich  a  square  number  has  to  a  square 
number,  [vm.  26] 

and  that,  if  twTo  numbers  have  to  one  another  the  ratio  winch  a  square  number 
has  to  a  square  number,  they  are  similar  plane  numbers.  [Converse  of  vm.  26] 
And  it  is  manifest  from  these  propositions  that  numbers  which  are  not  simi¬ 
lar  plane  numbers,  that  is,  those  wilich  have  not  their  sides  proportional,  have 
not  to  one  another  the  ratio  winch  a  square  number  has  to  a  square  number. 

For,  if  they  have,  they  will  be  similar  plane  numbers:  vilich  is  contrary  to 
the  hypothesis. 

Therefore  numbers  winch  are  not  similar  plane  numbers  have  not  to  one 
another  the  ratio  vilich  a  square  number  has  to  a  square  number.] 

Proposition  10 

To  find  two  straight  lines  incommensurable ,  the  one  in  length  only)  and  the  other  in 
square  also,  with  an  assigned  straight  line . 

Let  A  be  the  assigned  straight  line; 

thus  it  is  required  to  find  tw^o  straight  lines  incommensurable,  the  one  in  length 
only,  and  the  other  in  square  also,  with  A. 

Let  tvTo  numbers  B ,  C  be  set  out  vilich  have  not  to  one  another  the  ratio 


ELEMENTS  X  199 

which  a  square  number  has  to  a  square  number,  that  is,  which  are  not  similar 
plane  numbers; 

and  let  it  be  contrived  that, 

A -  as  B  is  to  C,  so  is  the  square  on  A  to  the  square  on  D 

D -  — for  we  have  learnt  how  to  do  this —  [x.  6,  Por.] 

E -  therefore  the  square  on  A  is  commensurable  with  the 

B _  square  on  D.  [x.  6] 

C _ -  And,  since  B  has  not  to  C  the  ratio  which  a  square  num¬ 

ber  has  to  a  square  number, 

therefore  neither  has  the  square  on  A  to  the  square  on  D  the  ratio  which  a 
square  number  has  to  a  square  number; 

therefore  A  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  D.  [x.  9] 

Let  E  be  taken  a  mean  proportional  between  A,  D; 
therefore,  as  A  is  to  D,  so  is  the  square  on  A  to  the  square  on  E.  [v.  Def.  9] 
But  A  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  D; 
therefore  the  square  on  A  is  also  incommensurable  with  the  square  on  E\ 

[x.  11] 

therefore  A  is  incommensurable  in  square  with  E. 

Therefore  two  straight  lines  D,  E  have  been  found  incommensurable,  D  in 
length  only,  and  E  in  square  and  of  course  in  length  also,  with  the  assigned 
straight  line  A.  Q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  11 


If  four  magnitudes  be  proportional ,  and  the  first  be  commensurable  with  the  second, 
the  third  will  also  be  commensurable  with  the  fourth;  and ,  if  the  first  be  incommen¬ 
surable  with  the  second ,  the  third  will  also  be  incommensurable  with  the  fourth. 

Let  Aj  B,  C,  D  be  four  magnitudes  in  proportion,  so  that,  as  A  is  to  B,  so  is 
C  to  Z), 

and  let  A  be  commensurable  with  B ; 

A -  B -  I  say  that  C  will  also  be  commensurable 

C -  D -  with  D. 

For,  since  A  is  commensurable  with  B , 
therefore  A  has  to  B  the  ratio  wilich  a  number  has  to  a  number.  [x.  5] 

And,  as  A  is  to  B ,  so  is  C  to  D; 

therefore  C  also  has  to  D  the  ratio  winch  a  number  has  to  a  number; 

therefore  C  is  commensurable  with  D.  [x.  6] 

Next,  let  A  be  incommensurable  with  B; 

I  say  that  C  will  also  be  incommensurable  with  D. 

For,  since  A  is  incommensurable  with  B3 
therefore  A  has  not  to  B  the  ratio  winch  a  number  has  to  a  number.  [x.  7] 
And,  as  A  is  to  B,  so  is  C  to  D; 

therefore  neither  has  C  to  D  the  ratio  which  a  number  has  to  a  number; 

therefore  C  is  incommensurable  with  D.  [x.  S] 

Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  12 

Magnitudes  commensurable  with  the  same  magnitude  are  commensurable  with  one 
another  also. 

For  let  each  of  the  magnitudes  A,  B  be  commensurable  with  C; 


200  EUCLID 

I  say  that  A  is  also  commensurable  with  B . 

For,  since  A  is  commensurable  with  C, 
therefore  A  has  to  C  the  ratio 

which  a  number  has  to  a  A -  C -  B - 

number.  [x.  5]  - D 

Let  it  have  the  ratio  which  - e  - H 

D  has  to  E.  - F  - K 

Again,  since  C  is  commen-  - g  - L 

surable  with  B , 

therefore  C  has  to  B  the  ratio  which  a  number  has  to  a  number.  [x.  5] 

Let  it  have  the  ratio  which  F  has  to  G. 

And,  given  any  number  of  ratios  we  please,  namely  the  ratio  which  D  has  to 
E  and  that  which  F  has  to  (?, 

let  the  numbers  H ,  K ,  L  be  taken  continuously  in  the  given  ratios;  [cf.  vm.  4] 


so  that,  as  D  is  to  E ,  so  is  H  to  K , 
and,  as  F  is  to  (?,  so  is  K  to  L. 

Since,  then,  as  A  is  to  C,  so  is  D  to  E, 

while,  as  D  is  to  E ,  so  is  H  to  K , 
therefore  also,  as  A  is  to  C,  so  is  H  to  K.  [v.  11] 

Again,  since,  as  C  is  to  B>  so  is  F  to  G, 

while,  as  F  is  to  G,  so  is  K  to  L, 
therefore  also,  as  C  is  to  B ,  so  is  K  to  L.  [v.  11] 

But  also,  as  A  is  to  C,  so  is  H  to  K\ 

therefore,  ex  aequali ,  as  A  is  to  B,  so  is  H  to  L.  [v.  22] 

Therefore  A  has  to  B  the  ratio  which  a  number  has  to  a  number; 

therefore  A  is  commensurable  with  B .  [x.  6] 

Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  13 

If  two  magnitudes  be  commensurable ,  and  the  one  of  them  be  incommensurable  with 
any  magnitude ,  the  remaining  one  will  also  be  incommensurable  with  the  same. 

Let  A,  B  be  two  commensurable  magnitudes,  and  let  one  of  them,  A,  be  in¬ 
commensurable  with  any  other  magnitude  C ; 

I  say  that  the  remaining  one,  B ,  will  also  be  incom-  A - - 

mensurable  with  C.  C - 

For,  if  B  is  commensurable  with  C,  B— — - 

while  A  is  also  commensurable  with  B, 

A  is  also  commensurable  with  C.  [x.  12] 

But  it  is  also  incommensurable  with  it: 

which  is  impossible. 

Therefore  B  is  not  commensurable  with  C; 

therefore  it  is  incommensurable  with  it. 

Therefore  etc.  Q.  e.  d. 


Lemma 

Given  two  unequal  straight  lines ,  to  find  by  what  square  the  square  on  the  greater  is 
greater  than  the  square  on  the  less. 

Let  ABy  C  be  the  given  two  unequal  straight  lines,  and  let  AB  be  the  greater 
of  them; 


ELEMENTS  X  201 

thus  it  is  required  to  find  by  what  square  the  square  on  AB  is  greater  than  the 
square  on  C. 

Let  the  semicircle  ADB  be  described  on  AB , 
and  let  AD  be  fitted  into  it  equal  to  C;  [iv.  1] 
let  DB  be  joined. 

It  is  then  manifest  that  the  angle  ADB  is 
right,  [hi.  31] 

and  that  the  square  on  AB  is  greater  than  the 
square  on  AD,  that  is,  C,  by  the  square  on  DB.  [i.  47] 

Similarly  also,  if  two  straight  lines  be  given,  the  straight  line  the  square  on 
which  is  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  them  is  found  in  this  manner: 

Let  AD ,  DB  be  the  given  two  straight  lines,  and  let  it  be  required  to  find  the 
straight  line  the  square  on  which  is  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  them. 
Let  them  be  placed  so  as  to  contain  a  right  angle,  that  formed  by  AD ,  DB ; 

and  let  AB  be  joined. 

It  is  again  manifest  that  the  straight  line  the  square  on  which  is  equal  to  the 
sum  of  the  squares  on  AD,  DB  is  AB.  [i.  47] 

Q.  E.  D. 


Proposition  14 


If  four  straight  lines  he  proportional,  and  the  square  on  the  first  he  greater  than  the 
square  on  the  second  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  commensurable  with  the  first, 
the  square  on  the  third  will  also  be  greater  than  the  square  on  the  fourth  by  the  square 
on  a  straight  line  commensurable  with  the  third. 

And ,  if  the  square  on  the  first  be  greater  than  the  square  on  the  second  by  the  square 
on  a  straight  line  incommensurable  with  the  first ,  the  square  on  the  third,  will  also 
be  greater  than  the  square  on  the  fourth  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  incommen¬ 
surable  with  the  third. 

Let  A,  B,  C,  D  be  four  straight  lines  in  proportion,  so  that,  as  A  is  to  B,  so  is 
C  to  D; 


and  let  the  square  on  A  be  greater  than  the  square  on  B 
by  the  square  on  E, 

and  let  the  square  on  C  be  greater  than  the  square  on  D 
by  the  square  on  F; 

I  say  that,  if  A  is  commensurable  with  E,  C  is  also  com¬ 
mensurable  with  F, 

and,  if  A  is  incommensurable  with  E,  C  is  also  incom¬ 
mensurable  with  F. 

For  since,  as  A  is  to  B,  so  is  C  to  D , 

A  B  C  q  therefore  also,  as  the  square  on  A  is  to  the  square  on  B, 
so  is  the  square  on  C  to  the  square  on  D.  [vi.  22] 

But  the  squares  on  E,  B  are  equal  to  the  square  on  A, 

and  the  squares  on  D,  F  are  equal  to  the  square  on  C. 

Therefore,  as  the  squares  on  E,  B  are  to  the  square  on  B,  so  are  the  squares 
on  D,  F  to  the  square  on  D ; 

therefore,  separando,  as  the  square  on  E  is  to  the  square  on  B,  so  is  the  square 
on  F  to  the  square  on  D;  [v.  17] 

therefore  also,  as  E  is  to  B ,  so  is  F  to  D;  [vi.  22] 

therefore,  inversely,  as  B  is  to  E,  so  is  D  to  F. 


202  EUCLID 

But,  as  A  is  to  B,  so  also  is  C  to  D; 

therefore,  ex  aequali ,  as  A  is  to  E ,  so  is  C  to  F.  [v.  22] 

Therefore,  if  A  is  commensurable  with  E,  C  is  also  commensurable  with  F, 
and,  if  A  is  incommensurable  with  E ,  C  is  also  incommensurable  with  F .  [x.  11] 
Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  15 

If  two  commensurable  magnitudes  be  added  together ,  the  whole  will  also  be  commen¬ 
surable  with  each  of  them;  and ,  if  the  whole  be  commensurable  with  one  of  them ,  the 
original  magnitudes  will  also  be  commensurable . 

For  let  the  two  commensurable  magnitudes  AB ,  BC  be  added  together; 

I  say  that  the  whole  AC  is  also  commen¬ 
surable  with  each  of  the  magnitudes  AB ,  B 

BC .  A - * - C 

For,  since  AB,  BC  are  commensurable, 
some  magnitude  will  measure  them.  D 

Let  it  measure  them,  and  let  it  be  D. 

Since  then  D  measures  AB,  BC ,  it  will  also  measure  the  whole  AC. 

But  it  measures  AB,  BC  also; 

therefore  D  measures  AB,  BC,  AC; 
therefore  AC  is  commensurable  with  each  of  the  magnitudes  AB,  BC. 

[x.  Def.  1] 

Next,  let  AC  be  commensurable  with  AB; 

I  say  that  AB,  BC  are  also  commensurable. 

For,  since  AC,  A B  are  commensurable,  some  magnitude  will  measure  them. 
Let  it  measure  them,  and  let  it  be  D. 

Since  then  D  measures  CA,  AB,  it  will  also  measure  the  remainder  BC. 
But  it  measures  AB  also; 

therefore  D  will  measure  AB,  BC; 
therefore  AB,  BC  are  commensurable.  [x.  Def.  1] 

Therefore  etc.  Q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  16 

If  two  incommensurable  magnitudes  be  added  together,  the  whole  will  also  be  in¬ 
commensurable  with  each  of  them;  and,  if  the  whole  be  incommensurable  with  one 
of  them,  the  original  magnitudes  will  also  be  incommensurable. 

For  let  the  two  incommensurable  magnitudes  AB,  BC  be  added 
together;  I  say  that  the  whole  AC  is  also  incommensurable  with 
each  of  the  magnitudes  AB,  BC. 

For,  if  CA,  AB  are  not  incommensurable,  some  magnitude 
will  measure  them. 

Let  it  measure  them,  if  possible,  and  let  it  be  D. 

Since  then  D  measures  CA,  AB, 

therefore  it  will  also  measure  the  remainder  BC. 

But  it  measures  AB  also; 

therefore  D  measures  AB,  BC. 

Therefore  AB,  BC  are  commensurable; 

but  they  were  also,  by  hypothesis,  incommensurable: 
which  is  impossible. 


203 


ELEMENTS  X 

Therefore  no  magnitude  will  measure  CA,  AB; 

therefore  CA,  AB  are  incommensurable.  [x.  Def.  1] 

Similarly  we  can  prove  that  AC,  CB  are  also  incommensurable. 

Therefore  AC  is  incommensurable  with  each  of  the  magnitudes  AB,  BC . 
Next,  let  AC  be  incommensurable  with  one  of  the  magnitudes  AB,  BC. 
First,  let  it  be  incommensurable  with  AB; 

I  say  that  AB,  BC  are  also  incommensurable. 

For,  if  they  are  commensurable,  some  magnitude  will  measure  them. 

Let  it  measure  them,  and  let  it  be  D. 

Since,  then,  D  measures  AB,  BC, 

therefore  it  will  also  measure  the  wiiole  AC. 

But  it  measures  AB  also; 

therefore  D  measures  CA,  AB. 

Therefore  CA,  AB  are  commensurable; 

but  they  w*ere  also,  by  hypothesis,  incommensurable: 
winch  is  impossible. 

Therefore  no  magnitude  will  measure  AB,  BC; 

therefore  AB,  BC  are  incommensurable.  [x.  Def.  1] 

Therefore  etc.  Q.  e.  d. 


Lemma 

If  to  any  straight  line  there  be  applied  a  parallelogram  deficient  by  a  square  figure, 
the  applied  parallelogram  is  equal  to  the  rectangle  contained  by  the  segments  of  the 
straight  line  resulting  from  the  application. 

For  let  there  be  applied  to  the  straight  line  AB  the  parallelogram  AD  de¬ 
ficient  by  the  square  figure  DB; 

I  say  that  AD  is  equal  to  the  rectangle  contained 
by  AC,  CB. 

This  is  indeed  at  once  manifest; 

for,  since  DB  is  a  square, 

DC  is  equal  to  CB; 

and  AD  is  the  rectangle  AC,  CD,  that  is,  the  rectangle  AC,  CB. 
Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  17 

If  there  be  two  unequal  straight  lines,  and  to  the  greater  there  be  applied  to  a  parallel¬ 
ogram  equal  to  the  fourth  part  of  the  square  on  the  less  and  deficient  by  a  square 
figure,  and  if  it  divide  it  into  parts  which  are  commensurable  in  length,  then  the 
square  on  the  greater  will  be  greater  than  the  square  on  the  less  by  the  square  on  a 
straight  line  commensurable  with  the  greater. 

And,  if  the  square  on  the  greater  be  greater  than  the  square  on  the  less  by  the  square 
on  a  straight  line  commensurable  with  the  greater,  and  if  there  be  applied  to  the 
greater  a  parallelogram  equal  to  the  fourth  part  of  the  square  on  the  less  and  defi¬ 
cient  by  a  square  figure ,  it  will  divide  it  into  parts  which  are  commensurable  in 
length. 

Let  A,  BC  be  tw’o  unequal  straight  lines,  of  winch  BC  is  the  greater, 
and  let  there  be  applied  to  BC  a  parallelogram  equal  to  the  fourth  part  of  the 
square  on  the  less,  -4,  that  is,  equal  to  the  square  on  the  half  of  .4,  and  deficient 
by  a  square  figure.  Let  this  be  the  rectangle  BD ,  DC,  [cf.  Lemma] 


204  EUCLID 

and  let  BD  be  commensurable  in  length  with  DC; 

I  say  that  the  square  on  BC  is  greater  than  the  square  on  A  by  the  square  on 
a  straight  line  commensurable  with  BC. 

For  let  BC  be  bisected  at  the  point  E ,  - + - 

and  let  EF  be  made  equal  to  DE. 

Therefore  the  remainder  DC  is  equal  to  BF.  r . \ 

And,  since  the  straight  line  BC  has  been  cut  into  ;  j 

equal  parts  at  E,  and  into  unequal  parts  at  D ,  £ - ^ - £ - g - C 

therefore  the  rectangle  contained  by  BD ,  DC ,  together 

with  the  square  on  ED,  is  equal  to  the  square  on  EC;  [n.  5] 

And  the  same  is  true  of  their  quadruples; 
therefore  four  times  the  rectangle  BD,  DC,  together  with  four  times  the  square 
on  DE,  is  equal  to  four  times  the  square  on  EC. 

But  the  square  on  A  is  equal  to  four  times  the  rectangle  BD,  DC; 
and  the  square  on  DF  is  equal  to  four  times  the  square  on  DE,  for  DF  is  double 
of  DE. 

And  the  square  on  BC  is  equal  to  four  times  the  square  on  EC,  for  again  BC 
is  double  of  CE. 

Therefore  the  squares  on  A,  DF  are  equal  to  the  square  on  BC, 
so  that  the  square  on  BC  is  greater  than  the  square  on  A  by  the  square  on  DF. 

It  is  to  be  proved  that  BC  is  also  commensurable  with  DF. 

Since  BD  is  commensurable  in  length  with  DC, 

therefore  BC  is  also  commensurable  in  length  with  CD.  [x.  15] 

But  CD  is  commensurable  in  length  with  CD,  BF,  for  CD  is  equal  to  BF. 

[x.  6] 

Therefore  BC  is  also  commensurable  in  length  with  BF,  CD,  [x.  12] 

so  that  BC  is  also  commensurable  in  length  with  the  remainder  FD;  [x.  15] 
therefore  the  square  on  BC  is  greater  than  the  square  on  A  by  the  square  on  a 
straight  line  commensurable  with  BC. 

Next,  let  the  square  on  BC  be  greater  than  the  square  on  A  by  the  square  on 
a  straight  line  commensurable  with  BC, 

let  a  parallelogram  be  applied  to  BC  equal  to  the  fourth  part  of  the  square  on 
A  and  deficient  by  a  square  figure,  and  let  it  be  the  rectangle  BD,  DC. 

It  is  to  be  proved  that  BD  is  commensurable  in  length  with  DC. 

With  the  same  construction,  we  can  prove  similarly  that  the  square  on  BC 
is  greater  than  the  square  on  A  by  the  square  on  FD. 

But  the  square  on  BC  is  greater  than  the  square  on  A  by  the  square  on  a 
straight  line  commensurable  with  BC. 

Therefore  BC  is  commensurable  in  length  with  FD, 
so  that  BC  is  also  commensurable  in  length  with  the  remainder,  the  sum  of 


BF,  DC.  [x.  15] 

But  the  sum  of  BF,  DC  is  commensurable  with  DC,  [x.  6] 

so  that  BC  is  also  commensurable  in  length  with  CD;  [x.  12] 

and  therefore,  separando,  BD  is  commensurable  in  length  with  DC.  [x.  15] 

Therefore  etc.  Q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  18 

If  there  be  two  unequal  straight  lines ,  and  to  the  greater  there  be  applied  a  parallel¬ 
ogram  equal  to  the  fourth  part  of  the  square  on  the  less  and  deficient  by  a  square 


205 


ELEMENTS  X 

figure ,  and  if  it  divide  it  into  parts  which  are  incommensurable .  the  .square  on  the 
greater  will  be  greater  than  the  square  on  the  less  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line 
incommensurable  with  the  greater. 

A  nd.  if  the  square  on  the  greater  be  greater  than  the  square  on  the  less  by  the  square 
on  a  straight  line  incommensurable  with  the  greater ,  and  if  there  be  applied  to  the 
greater  a  parallelogram  equal  to  the  fourth  part  of  the  square  on  the  less  and  deficient 
by  a  square  figure,  it  divides  it  into  parts  which  are  incommensurable. 

Let  A,  BC  be  two  unequal  straight  lines,  of  which  BC  is  the  greater, 

and  to  BC  let  there  be  applied  a  parallelogram  equal  to  the  fourth 
B  part  of  the  square  on  the  less.  A,  and  deficient  by  a  square  figure. 

Let  this  be  the  rectangle  BD .  DC,  [cf.  Lemma  before  x.  17] 

and  let  BD  be  incommensurable  in  length  with  DC; 
a  I  say  that  the  square  on  BC  is  greater  than  the  square  on  A  by 
the  square  on  a  straight  line  incommensurable  with  BC. 

For,  with  the  same  construction  as  before,  we  can  prove  simi¬ 
larly  that  the  square  on  BC  is  greater  than  the  square  on  A  by 
the  square  on  FD. 

It  is  to  be  proved  that  BC  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  DF . 
Since  BD  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  DC. 

therefore  BC  is  also  incommensurable  in  length  with  CD.  [x.  16" 
But  DC  is  commensurable  with  the  sum  of  BF.  DC;  [x.  6] 

therefore  BC  is  also  incommensurable  with  the  sum  of  BF.  DC;  [x.  13] 

so  that  BC  is  also  incommensurable  in  length  with  the  remainder  FD.  [x.  16] 
And  the  square  on  BC  is  greater  than  the  square  on  A  by  the  square  on  FD  : 
therefore  the  square  on  BC  is  greater  than  the  square  on  A  by  the  square  on  a 
straight  line  incommensurable  with  BC. 

Again,  let  the  square  on  BC  be  greater  than  the  square  on  A  by  the  square  on 
a  straight  line  incommensurable  with  BC,  and  let  there  be  applied  to  BC  a 
parallelogram  equal  to  the  fourth  part  of  the  square  on  A  and  deficient  by  a 
square  figure.  Let  this  be  the  rectangle  BD.  DC. 

It  is  to  be  proved  that  BD  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  DC. 

For,  with  the  same  construction,  we  can  prove  similarly  that  the  square  on 
BC  is  greater  than  the  square  on  A  by  the  square  on  FD. 

But  the  square  on  BC  is  greater  than  the  square  on  A  by  the  square  on  a 
straight  line  incommensurable  with  BC; 

therefore  BC  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  FD. 
so  that  BC  is  also  incommensurable  with  the  remainder,  the  sum  of  BF.  DC. 


•[x.  16] 

But  the  sum  of  BF,  DC  is  commensurable  in  length  with  DC;  [x.  6] 

therefore  BC  is  also  incommensurable  in  length  with  DC,  [x.  13] 
so  that,  separando,  BD  is  also  incommensurable  in  length  with  DC.  [x.  16] 
Therefore  etc.  Q.  e.  d. 


Lemma 

Since  it  has  been  proved  that  straight  lines  commensurable  in  length  are  al¬ 
ways  commensurable  in  square  also,  while  those  commensurable  in  square  are 
not  always  commensurable  in  length  also,  but  can  of  course  be  either  com¬ 
mensurable  or  incommensurable  in  length,  it  is  manifest  that,  if  any  straight 
line  be  commensurable  in  length  with  a  given  rational  straight  line,  it  is  called 


206  EUCLID 

rational  and  commensurable  with  the  other  not  only  in  length  but  in  square 
also,  since  straight  lines  commensurable  in  length  are  always  commensurable 
in  square  also. 

But,  if  any  straight  line  be  commensurable  in  square  with  a  given  rational 
straight  line,  then,  if  it  is  also  commensurable  in  length  with  it,  it  is  called  in 
this  case  also  rational  and  commensurable  with  it  both  in  length  and  in  square; 
but,  if  again  any  straight  line,  being  commensurable  in  square  with  a  given 
rational  straight  line,  be  incommensurable  in  length  with  it,  it  is  called  in  this 
case  also  rational  but  commensurable  in  square  only. 


Proposition  19 

The  rectangle  contained  by  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in  length  is 
rational. 

For  let  the  rectangle  AC  be  contained  by  the  rational  straight  lines  ABy  BC 
commensurable  in  length; 

I  say  that  AC  is  rational. 

For  on  A B  let  the  square  AD  be  described; 

therefore  AD  is  rational.  [x.  Def.  4] 

And,  since  AB  is  commensurable  in  length  with  BC, 
while  AB  is  equal  to  BD, 

therefore  BD  is  commensurable  in  length  with  BC. 

And,  as  BD  is  to  BC ,  so  is  DA  to  AC.  [vi.  1] 

Therefore  DA  is  commensurable  with  AC.  [x.  11] 

But  DA  is  rational; 

therefore  AC  is  also  rational.  [x.  Def.  4] 

Therefore  etc.  Q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  20 


If  a  rational  area  be  applied  to  a  rational  straight  line ,  it  produces  as  breadth  a 
straight  line  rational  and  commensurable  in  length  with  the  straight  line  to  which 
it  is  applied. 

For  let  the  rational  area  AC  be  applied  to  AB,  a  straight  line  once  more 
rational  in  any  of  the  aforesaid  ways,  producing  BC  as  breadth; 

I  say  that  BC  is  rational  and  commensurable  in  length  with  BA. 

For  on  AB  let  the  square  AD  be  described;  Di - 

therefore  AD  is  rational.  [x.  Def.  4] 

But  AC  is  also  rational; 

therefore  DA  is  commensurable  with  AC.  _ 

And,  as  DA  is  to  AC,  so  is  DB  to  BC.  [vi.  1] 

Therefore  DB  is  also  commensurable  with  BC;  [x.  11] 
and  DB  is  equal  to  BA ; 
therefore  AB  is  also  commensurable  with  BC. 

But  AB  is  rational;  C‘ - 

therefore  BC  is  also  rational  and  commensurable  in  length  with  AB. 
Therefore  etc.  Q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  21 

The  rectangle  contained  by  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only 
is  irrational ,  and  the  side  of  the  square  equal  to  it  is  irrational.  Let  the  latter  be 
called  medial. 


ELEMENTS  X 


207 


For  let  the  rectangle  AC  be  contained  by  the  rational  straight  lines  AB,  BC 
commensurable  in  square  only; 

I  say  that  AC  is  irrational,  and  the  side  of  the  square  equal  to  it  is  irrational; 
and  let  the  latter  be  called  medial. 

D|  For  on  AB  let  the  square  AD  be  described; 

therefore  AD  is  rational.  [x.  Def.  4] 

B _ A  And,  since  AB  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  BC, 

for  by  hypothesis  they  are  commensurable  in  square  only, 
while  A  B  is  equal  to  BD , 

therefore  DB  is  also  incommensurable  in  length  with  BC. 

cl _  And,  as  DB  is  to  BC,  so  is  AD  to  AC;  [vi.  1] 

therefore  DA  is  incommensurable  with  AC.  [x.  11] 

But  DA  is  rational ; 

therefore  AC  is  irrational, 

so  that  the  side  of  the  square  equal  to  AC  is  also  irrational.  [x.  Def.  4] 

And  let  the  latter  be  called  medial.  q.  e.  d. 


Lemma 

If  there  be  two  straight  lines,  then,  as  the  first  is  to  the  second,  so  is  the 
square  on  the  first  to  the  rectangle  contained  by  the  two  straight  lines. 

F  E  G  Let  FE,  EG  be  two  straight  lines. 

T  I  say  that,  as  FE  is  to  EG,  so  is  the  square  on 

FE  to  the  rectangle  FE,  EG. 

_ _  For  on  FE  let  the  square  DF  be  described, 

D  and  let  GD  be  completed. 

Since  then,  as  FE  is  to  EG,  so  is  FD  to  DG,  [vi.  1] 

and  FD  is  the  square  on  FE, 

and  DG  the  rectangle  DE,  EG,  that  is,  the  rectangle  FE,  EG, 
therefore,  as  FE  is  to  EG,  so  is  the  square  on  FE  to  the  rectangle  FE,  EG. 

Similarly  also,  as  the  rectangle  GE,  EF  is  to  the  square  on  EF,  that  is,  as  GD 
is  to  FD,  so  is  GE  to  EF.  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  22 

The  square  on  a  medial  straight  line,  if  applied  to  a  rational  straight  line,  produces 
as  breadth  a  straight  line  rational  and  incommensurable  in  length  with  that  to  which 
it  is  applied. 

Let  A  be  medial  and  CB  rational, 
and  let  a  rectangular  area  BD  equal  to  the 
square  on  A  be  applied  to  BC,  producing  CD  as 
breadth ; 

I  say  that  CD  is  rational  and  incommensur¬ 
able  in  length  with  CB. 

For,  since  A  is  medial,  the  square  on  it  is 
equal  to  a  rectangular  area  contained  by  ra¬ 
tional  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square 
only.  [x.  21] 

Let  the  square  on  it  be  equal  to  GF. 

But  the  square  on  it  is  also  equal  to  BD; 

therefore  BD  is  equal  to  GF. 


208  EUCLID 

But  it  is  also  equiangular  with  it; 

and  in  equal  and  equiangular  parallelograms  the  sides  about  the  equal  angles 
are  reciprocally  proportional;  [vi.  14] 

therefore,  proportionally,  as  BC  is  to  EG ,  so  is  EF  to  CD. 

Therefore  also,  as  the  square  on  BC  is  to  the  square  on  EG ,  so  is  the  square 
on  EF  to  the  square  on  CD.  [vi.  22] 

But  the  square  on  CB  is  commensurable  with  the  square  on  EG ,  for  each  of 
these  straight  lines  is  rational; 

therefore  the  square  on  EF  is  also  commensurable  with  the  square  on  CD. 

[x.  11] 

But  the  square  on  EF  is  rational; 

therefore  the  square  on  CD  is  also  rational;  [x.  Def.  4] 

therefore  CD  is  rational. 

And,  since  EF  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  EG, 

for  they  are  commensurable  in  square  only, 
and,  as  EF  is  to  EG,  so  is  the  square  on  EF  to  the  rectangle  FE,  EG,  [Lemma] 
therefore  the  square  on  EF  is  incommensurable  with  the  rectangle  FE,  EG. 

[x.  11] 

But  the  square  on  CD  is  commensurable  with  the  square  on  EF,  for  the 
straight  lines  are  rational  in  square; 

and  the  rectangle  DC,  CB  is  commensurable  with  the  rectangle  FE,  EG,  for 
they  are  equal  to  the  square  on  A ; 

therefore  the  square  on  CD  is  also  incommensurable  with  the  rectangle  DC, 
CB.  [x.  13] 

But,  as  the  square  on  CD  is  to  the  rectangle  DC,  CB,  so  is  DC  to  CB; 

[Lemma] 

therefore  DC  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  CB.  [x.  11] 
Therefore  CD  is  rational  and  incommensurable  in  length  with  CB. 

Q.  E.  D. 

Proposition  23 

A  straight  line  commensurable  with  a  medial  straight  line  is  medial 
Let  A  be  medial,  and  let  B  be  commensurable  with  A ; 

I  say  that  B  is  also  medial. 

For  let  a  rational  straight  line  CD  be  set  out,  A 

and  to  CD  let  the  rectangular  area  CE  equal  to  the  - 

square  on  A  be  applied,  producing  ED  as  breadth;  _ 

therefore  ED  is  rational  and  incommensurable  in 
length  with  CD.  [x.  22] 

And  let  the  rectangular  area  CF  equal  to  the  square 
on  B  be  applied  to  CD,  producing  DF  as  breadth. 

Since,  then,  A  is  commensurable  with  B, 
the  square  on  A  is  also  commensurable  with  the  j: — 

square  on  B. 

But  EC  is  equal  to  the  square  on  A, 

and  CF  is  equal  to  the  square  on  B; 
therefore  EC  is  commensurable  with  CF. 

And,  as  EC  is  to  CF,  so  is  ED  to  DF; 

therefore  ED  is  commensurable  in  length  with  DF. 


B 

C 


D  F 


[VI.  1] 
[X.  11] 


209 


ELEMENTS  X 


But  ED  is  rational  and  incommensurable  in  length  with  DC; 
therefore  DF  is  also  rational  [x.  Def.  3]  and  incommensurable  in  length  with 
DC.  [x.  13] 

Therefore  CD,  DF  are  rational  and  commensurable  in  square  only. 

But  the  straight  line  the  square  on  which  is  equal  to  the  rectangle  contained 
by  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only  is  medial;  [x.  21] 
therefore  the  side  of  the  square  equal  to  the  rectangle  CD,  DF  is  medial. 

And  B  is  the  side  of  the  square  equal  to  the  rectangle  CD,  DF; 

therefore  B  is  medial.  Q.  e.  d. 

Porism.  From  this  it  is  manifest  that  an  area  commensurable  with  a  medial 
area  is  medial. 

[And  in  the  same  way  as  was  explained  in  the  case  of  rationals  [Lemma 
following  x.  18]  it  follows,  as  regards  medials,  that  a  straight  line  commensur¬ 
able  in  length  with  a  medial  straight  line  is  called  medial  and  commensurable 
with  it  not  only  in  length  but  in  square  also,  since,  in  general,  straight  lines 
commensurable  in  length  are  always  commensurable  in  square  also. 

But,  if  any  straight  line  be  commensurable  in  square  with  a  medial  straight 
line,  then,  if  it  is  also  commensurable  in  length  with  it,  the  straight  lines  are 
called,  in  this  case  too,  medial  and  commensurable  in  length  and  in  square, 
but,  if  in  square  only,  they  are  called  medial  straight  lines  commensurable  in 
square  only.] 

Proposition  24 


The  rectangle  contained  by  medial  straight  lines  commensurable  in  length  is  medial. 

For  let  the  rectangle  AC  be  contained  by  the  medial  straight  lines  AB,  BC 
which  are  commensurable  in  length; 

_ c  I  say  that  AC  is  medial. 

For  on  AB  let  the  square  AD  be  described; 

therefore  AD  is  medial. 

And,  since  AB  is  commensurable  in  length  with  BC, 

A _ B  while  AB  is  equal  to  BD, 

therefore  DB  is  also  commensurable  in  length  with  BC ; 
so  that  DA  is  also  commensurable  with  AC.  [vi.  1,  x.  11] 
But  DA  is  medial; 

therefore  AC  is  also  medial.  [x.  23,  Por.] 

Q.  E.  D. 


Proposition  25 


The  rectangle  contained  by  medial  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only  is 
either  rational  or  medial. 

For  let  the  rectangle  AC  be  contained  by  the  medial  straight  lines  AB,  BC 
wilich  are  commensurable  in  square  only; 

I  say  that  AC  is  either  rational  or  medial. 

For  on  AB,  BC  let  the  squares  AD,  BE  be  described; 

therefore  each  of  the  squares  AD,  BE  is  medial. 

Let  a  rational  straight  line  FG  be  set  out, 
to  FG  let  there  be  applied  the  rectangular  parallelogram  Gil  equal  to  AD,  pro¬ 
ducing  FH  as  breadth, 

to  II M  let  there  be  applied  the  rectangular  parallelogram  MK  equal  to  AC, 
producing  HK  as  breadth, 


210 


EUCLID 


and  further  to  KN  let  there  be  similarly  applied  NL  equal  to  BE,  producing 
KL  as  breadth; 

therefore  FH,  HK ,  KL  are  in  a  straight  line. 

Since  then  each  of  the  squares  AD,  BE 
is  medial, 

and  AD  is  equal  to  GH,  and  BE  to  NL, 
therefore  each  of  the  rectangles  GH,  NL  is 
also  medial. 

And  they  are  applied  to  the  rational 
straight  line  FG; 

therefore  each  of  the  straight  lines  FH,  KL 
is  rational  and  incommensurable  in  length 
with  FG.  [x.  22] 

And,  since  AD  is  commensurable  with  BE, 

therefore  GH  is  also  commensurable  with  NL. 

And,  as  GH  is  to  NL,  so  is  FH  to  KL;  [vi.  1] 

therefore  FH  is  commensurable  in  length  with  KL.  [x.  11] 
Therefore  FH,  KL  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in  length; 


D  B 

[x.  19] 


therefore  the  rectangle  FH,  KL  is  rational 
And,  since  DB  is  equal  to  BA,  and  OB  to  BC , 

therefore,  as  DB  is  to  BC,  so  is  AB  to  BO. 

But,  as  DB  is  to  BC,  so  is  DA  to  AC, 

and,  as  AB  is  to  BO,  so  is  AC  to  CO; 
therefore,  as  DA  is  to  AC,  so  is  AC  to  CO. 

But  AD  is  equal  to  GH,  AC  to  MK  and  CO  to  NL; 

therefore,  as  GH  is  to  MK,  so  is  MK  to  NL; 
therefore  also,  as  FH  is  to  HK,  so  is  HK  to  KL; 
therefore  the  rectangle  FH,  KL  is  equal  to  the  square  on  HK. 

But  the  rectangle  FH,  KL  is  rational; 

therefore  the  square  on  HK  is  also  rational. 

Therefore  HK  is  rational. 

And,  if  it  is  commensurable  in  length  with  FG, 

HN  is  rational; 

but,  if  it  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  FG, 

KH,  HM  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only,  and  there¬ 
fore  HN  is  medial.  [x.  21] 

Therefore  HN  is  either  rational  or  medial. 

But  HN  is  equal  to  AC; 

therefore  AC  is  either  rational  or  medial. 

Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 


[vi.  1] 
[id.] 


[vi.  1,  v.  11] 
[vi.  17] 


[x.  19] 


Proposition  26 

A  medial  area  does  not  exceed  a  medial  area  by  a  rational  area. 

For,  if  possible,  let  the  medial  area  AB  exceed  the  medial  area  AC  by  the 
rational  area  DB, 

and  let  a  rational  straight  line  EF  be  set  out; 
to  EF  let  there  be  applied  the  rectangular  parallelogram  FH  equal  to  AB,  pro¬ 
ducing  EH  as  breadth, 

and  let  the  rectangle  FG  equal  to  AC  be  subtracted; 


211 


ELEMENTS  X 

therefore  the  remainder  BD  is  equal  to  the  remainder  KH. 

But  DB  is  rational ; 

r  *  e  therefore  KH  is  also  rational. 

Since,  then,  each  of  the  rectangles  AB , 
AC  is  medial, 

and  AB  is  equal  to  FH,  and  AC  to  FG, 

G  therefore  each  of  the  rectangles  FH,  FG  is 
also  medial. 

H  And  they  are  applied  to  the  rational 
straight  line  EF; 

therefore  each  of  the  straight  lines  HE,  EG  is  rational  and  incommensurable  in 
length  with  EF.  [x.  22] 

And,  since  [DB  is  rational  and  is  equal  to  KH, 

therefore]  KH  is  [also]  rational; 
and  it  is  applied  to  the  rational  straight  line  EF; 
therefore  GH  is  rational  and  commensurable  in  length  with  EF.  [x.  20] 

But  EG  is  also  rational,  and  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  EF; 

therefore  EG  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  GH.  [x.  13] 
And,  as  EG  is  to  GH,  so  is  the  square  on  EG  to  the  rectangle  EG,  GH ; 
therefore  the  square  on  EG  is  incommensurable  with  the  rectangle  EG,  GH. 

[x.  11] 

But  the  squares  on  EG,  GH  are  commensurable  with  the  square  on  EG,  for 
both  are  rational; 

and  twice  the  rectangle  EG,  GH  is  commensurable  with  the  rectangle  EG,  GH, 


for  it  is  double  of  it;  [x.  6] 

therefore  the  squares  on  EG,  GH  are  incommensurable  with  twice  the  rec¬ 
tangle  EG,  GH;  [x.  13] 

therefore  also  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  EG,  GH  and  twice  the  rectangle  EG, 
GH,  that  is,  the  square  on  EH  [n.  4]  is  incommensurable  with  the  squares  on 
EG,  GH.  [x.  16] 

But  the  squares  on  EG,  GH  are  rational; 

therefore  the  square  on  EH  is  irrational.  [x.  Def.  4] 

Therefore  EH  is  irrational. 

But  it  is  also  rational : 

which  is  impossible. 

Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  27 

To  find  medial  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only  which  contain 
a  rational  rectangle. 

Let  two  rational  straight  lines  A,  £  commensurable  in  square 
only  be  set  out; 

let  C  be  taken  a  mean  proportional  between  A,  B,  [vi.  13] 
and  let  it  be  contrived  that, 
as  A  is  to  B,  so  is  C  to  D.  [vi.  12] 

Then,  since  A,  B  are  rational  and  commensurable  in 
square  only, 

the  rectangle  A,  B,  that  is,  the  square  on  C 
[vi.  17],  is  medial. 


[X.  21] 


212 


EUCLID 


Therefore  C  is  medial.  [x.  21] 

And  since,  as  A  is  to  B,  so  is  C  to  D , 

and  A,  B  are  commensurable  in  square  only, 
therefore  C,  D  are  also  commensurable  in  square  only.  [x.  11] 
And  C  is  medial; 

therefore  D  is  also  medial.  [x.  23,  addition] 

Therefore  C,  D  are  medial  and  commensurable  in  square  only. 

I  say  that  they  also  contain  a  rational  rectangle. 

For  since,  as  A  is  to  B,  so  is  C  to  D , 

therefore,  alternately,  as  A  is  to  C,  so  is  B  to  D.  [v.  16] 

But,  as  A  is  to  C ,  so  is  C  to  B ; 

therefore  also,  as  C  is  to  B,  so  is  B  to  D; 
therefore  the  rectangle  C,  D  is  equal  to  the  square  on  B . 

But  the  square  on  B  is  rational; 

therefore  the  rectangle  C,  D  is  also  rational. 

Therefore  medial  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only  have  been 
found  which  contain  a  rational  rectangle.  q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  28 

To  find  medial  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only,  which  contain  a  medial 
rectangle . 

Let  the  rational  straight  lines  A,  B,C  commensurable  in  square  only  be  set 
out; 

let  D  be  taken  a  mean  proportional  between  A ,  B,  [vi.  13] 
and  let  it  be  contrived  that, 

as  B  is  to  C,  so  is  D  to  E .  [vi.  12] 

Since  A,  B  are  rational  straight 

lines  commensurable  in  square  only,  A - 

therefore  the  rectangle  A,  B,  that  B -  D 

is,  the  square  on  D  [vi.  17],  is  medi-  c _  E - 

al.  [x.  21] 

Therefore  D  is  medial.  [x.  21] 

And  since  B ,  C  are  commensurable  in  square  only, 
and,  as  B  is  to  C,  so  is  D  to  E, 

therefore  D ,  E  are  also  commensurable  in  square  only.  [x.  11] 
But  D  is  medial; 

therefore  E  is  also  medial.  [x.  23,  addition] 

Therefore  D ,  E  are  medial  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only. 

I  say  next  that  they  also  contain  a  medial  rectangle. 

For  since,  as  B  is  to  C,  so  is  D  to  E, 

therefore,  alternately,  as  B  is  to  D ,  so  is  C  to  E .  [v.  16] 

But,  as  B  is  to  D,  so  is  D  to  A  ; 

therefore  also,  as  D  is  to  A,  so  is  C  to  E; 
therefore  the  rectangle  A,  C  is  equal  to  the  rectangle  D,  E.  [vi.  16] 
But  the  rectangle  A,  C  is  medial;  [x.  21] 

therefore  the  rectangle  D,  E  is  also  medial. 

Therefore  medial  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only  have  been 
found  which  contain  a  medial  rectangle.  Q.  e.  d. 


ELEMENTS  X 


213 


Lemma  1 

To  find  two  square  numbers  such  that  their  sum  is  also  square. 

Let  two  numbers  AS,  BC  be  set  out,  and  let  them  be  either  both  even  or 
both  odd. 

- 1 - 1 -  Then  since,  whether  an  even  number  is  sub- 

A  0  C  B  traded  from  an  even  number,  or  an  odd  number 

from  an  odd  number,  the  remainder  is  even,  [ix.  24,  26] 

therefore  the  remainder  AC  is  even. 

Let  AC  be  bisected  at  D. 

Let  A  S,  BC  also  be  either  similar  plane  numbers,  or  square  numbers,  which 
are  themselves  also  similar  plane  numbers. 

Now  the  product  of  AB ,  BC  together  with  the  square  on  CD  is  equal  to  the 
square  on  BD.  [n.  6] 

And  the  product  of  AB ,  BC  is  square,  inasmuch  as  it  was  proved  that,  if  two 
similar  plane  numbers  by  multiplying  one  another  make  some  number,  the 
product  is  square.  [ix.  1] 

Therefore  two  square  numbers,  the  product  of  AS,  SC,  and  the  square  on 
CD,  have  been  found  which,  when  added  together,  make  the  square  on  BD. 

And  it  is  manifest  that  two  square  numbers,  the  square  on  BD  and  the 
square  on  CD,  have  again  been  found  such  that  their  difference,  the  product 
of  AS,  SC,  is  a  square,  whenever  AS,  SC  are  similar  plane  numbers. 

But  when  they  are  not  similar  plane  numbers,  two  square  numbers,  the 
square  on  BD  and  the  square  on  DC,  have  been  found  such  that  their  differ¬ 
ence,  the  product  of  AS,  SC,  is  not  square.  q.  e.  d. 

Lemma  2 

To  find  two  square  numbers  such  that  their  sum  is  not  square. 

For  let  the  product  of  AS,  SC,  as  we  said,  be  square, 

and  CA  even, 

and  let  CA  be  bisected  by  D. 

It  is  then  manifest  that  the  square  pro- 

]  Ilf-, _ , _  duct  of  AS,  SC  together  with  the  square 

AG  H  D  F  C  3  on  CD  is  equal  to  the  square  on  BD. 

[See  Lemma  1] 

Let  the  unit  DE  be  subtracted; 

therefore  the  product  of  AS,  SC  together  with  the  square  on  CE  is  less  than 
the  square  on  BD. 

I  say  then  that  the  square  product  of  AS,  SC  together  with  the  square  on 
CE  will  not  be  square. 

For,  if  it  is  square,  it  is  either  equal  to  the  square  on  BE,  or  less  than  the 
square  on  BE,  but  cannot  any  more  be  greater,  lest  the  unit  be  divided. 

First,  if  possible,  let  the  product  of  AS,  SC  together  with  the  square  on  CE 
be  equal  to  the  square  on  BE, 

and  let  GA  be  double  of  the  unit  DE. 

Since  then  the  whole  AC  is  double  of  the  whole  CD, 
and  in  them  AG  is  double  of  DE, 
therefore  the  remainder  GC  is  also  double  of  the  remainder  EC ; 
therefore  GC  is  bisected  by  E. 


214  EUCLID 

Therefore  the  product  of  GB ,  BC  together  with  the  square  on  CE  is  equal  to 
the  square  on  BE.  [n.  6] 

But  the  product  of  AB,  BC  together  with  the  square  on  CE  is  also,  by  hy¬ 
pothesis,  equal  to  the  square  on  BE; 

therefore  the  product  of  GB,  BC  together  with  the  square  on  CE  is  equal  to  the 
product  of  AB,  BC  together  with  the  square  on  CE. 

And,  if  the  common  square  on  CE  be  subtracted, 

it  follows  that  AB  is  equal  to  GB: 
which  is  absurd. 

Therefore  the  product  of  AB,  BC  together  with  the  square  on  CE  is  not 
equal  to  the  square  on  BE. 

I  say  next  that  neither  is  it  less  than  the  square  on  BE. 

For,  if  possible,  let  it  be  equal  to  the  square  on  BF, 
and  let  HA  be  double  of  DF. 

Now  it  will  again  follow  that  HC  is  double  of  CF; 

so  that  CH  has  also  been  bisected  at  F, 
and  for  this  reason  the  product  of  HB,  BC  together  with  the  square  on  FC  is 
equal  to  the  square  on  BF.  [n.  6] 

But,  by  hypothesis,  the  product  of  AB,  BC  together  with  the  square  on  CE 
is  also  equal  to  the  square  on  BF. 

Thus  the  product  of  HB,  BC  together  with  the  square  on  CF  will  also  be 
equal  to  the  product  of  AB,  BC  together  with  the  square  on  CE: 

which  is  absurd. 

Therefore  the  product  of  AB,  BC  together  with  the  square  on  CE  is  not  less 
than  the  square  on  BE. 

And  it  was  proved  that  neither  is  it  equal  to  the  square  on  BE. 

Therefore  the  product  of  AB,  BC  together  with  the  square  on  CE  is  not 
square.  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  29 

To  find  two  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only  and  such  that  the 
square  on  the  greater  is  greater  than  the  square  on  the  less  by  the  square  on  a  straight 
line  commensurable  in  length  with  the  greater. 

For  let  there  be  set  out  any  rational  straight  line  AB,  and  two  square  num¬ 
bers  CD,  DE  such  that  their  difference  CE  is  not  square;  [Lemma  1] 

let  there  be  described  on  AB  the  semicircle  AFB, 
and  let  it  be  contrived  that, 

as  DC  is  to  CE,  so  is  the  square  on  BA  to  the  square  on  AF.  [x.  6,  Por.] 
Let  FB  be  joined. 

Since,  as  the  square  on  BA  is  to  the  square  on  AF, 
so  is  DC  to  CE, 

therefore  the  square  on  BA  has  to  the  square  on  AF 
the  ratio  which  the  number  DC  has  to  the  number 
CE; 

therefore  the  square  on  BA  is  commensurable  with 
the  square  on  AF.  [x.  6] 

But  the  square  on  AB  is  rational;  [x.  Def.  4] 

therefore  the  square  on  A F  is  also  rational;  [id.] 

therefore  AF  is  also  rational. 


ELEMENTS  X  215 

And,  since  DC  has  not  to  CE  the  ratio  which  a  square  number  has  to  a 
square  number, 

neither  has  the  square  on  BA  to  the  square  on  A  F  the  ratio  which  a  square 
number  has  to  a  square  number; 

therefore  A B  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  A  F.  [x.  9] 

Therefore  BA ,  AF  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only. 
And  since,  as  DC  is  to  CE,  so  is  the  square  on  BA  to  the  square  on  AF , 
therefore,  convertendo ,  as  CD  is  to  DE ,  so  is  the  square  on  AB  to  the  square  on 
BF.  [v.  19,  Por.,  hi.  31,  I.  47] 

But  CD  has  to  DE  the  ratio  which  a  square  number  has  to  a  square  number: 
therefore  also  the  square  on  AB  has  to  the  square  on  BF  the  ratio  which  a 
square  number  has  to  a  square  number; 

therefore  A  B  is  commensurable  in  length  with  BF.  [x.  9] 

And  the  square  on  A B  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  AF,  FB ; 
therefore  the  square  on  A  B  is  greater  than  the  square  on  A  F  by  the  square  on 
BF  commensurable  with  AB. 

Therefore  there  have  been  found  two  rational  straight  lines  BA,  AF  com¬ 
mensurable  in  square  only  and  such  that  the  square  on  the  greater  A  B  is 
greater  than  the  square  on  the  less  AF  by  the  square  on  BF  commensurable  in 
length  with  AB.  Q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  30 

To  find  two  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only  and  such  that  the 
square  on  the  greater  is  greater  than  the  square  on  the  less  by  the  square  on  a  straight 
line  incommensurable  in  length  with  the  greater. 

Let  there  be  set  out  a  rational  straight  line  AB, 

and  two  square  numbers  CE,  ED  such  that  their 
sum  CD  is  not  square;  [Lemma  2] 

let  there  be  described  on  A B  the  semicircle  AFB, 
let  it  be  contrived  that, 

as  DC  is  to  CE,  so  is  the  square  on  BA  to  the 
square  on  AF .  [x.  6,  Por.] 

and  let  FB  be  joined. 

Then,  in  a  similar  manner  to  the  preceding, 
C  E  D  w^e  can  prove  that  BA,  AF  are  rational  straight 

lines  commensurable  in  square  only. 

And  since,  as  DC  is  to  CE,  so  is  the  square  on  BA  to  the  square  on  AF, 
therefore,  convertendo,  as  CD  is  to  DE,  so  is  the  square  on  AB  to  the  square  on 
BF.  [v.  19,  Por.,  in.  31,  i.  47] 

But  CD  has  not  to  DE  the  ratio  wrhich  a  square  number  has  to  a  square 
number; 

therefore  neither  has  the  square  on  A  B  to  the  square  on  BF  the  ratio  which  a 
square  number  has  to  a  square  number; 

therefore  AB  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  BF.  [x.  9] 

And  the  square  on  A  B  is  greater  than  the  square  on  A  F  by  the  square  on  FB 
incommensurable  with  AB. 

Therefore  AB,  AF  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only, 
and  the  square  on  AB  is  greater  than  the  square  on  AF  by  the  square  on  FB 
incommensurable  in  length  with  AB.  Q.  e.  d. 


216 


EUCLID 


Proposition  31 

To  find  two  medial  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  onlyy  containing  a 
rational  rectangley  and  such  that  the  square  on  the  greater  is  greater  than  the  square 
on  the  less  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  commensurable  in  length  with  the  greater . 

Let  there  be  set  out  two  rational  straight  lines  A,  B  commensurable  in 
square  only  and  such  that  the  square  on  A ,  being  the  greater, 
is  greater  than  the  square  on  B  the  less  by  the  square  on  a 
straight  line  commensurable  in  length  with  A.  [x.  29] 

And  let  the  square  on  C  be  equal  to  the  rectangle  A,  B. 

Now  the  rectangle  A,  B  is  medial;  [x.  21] 

therefore  the  square  on  C  is  also  medial; 

therefore  C  is  also  medial.  [x.  21] 

Let  the  rectangle  C,  D  be  equal  to  the  square  on  B.  A  B  C  D 

Now  the  square  on  B  is  rational; 

therefore  the  rectangle  C,  D  is  also  rational. 

And  since,  as  A  is  to  B ,  so  is  the  rectangle  A,  B  to  the  square  on  By 
while  the  square  on  C  is  equal  to  the  rectangle  A,  By 
and  the  rectangle  Cy  D  is  equal  to  the  square  on  B , 
therefore,  as  A  is  to  B ,  so  is  the  square  on  C  to  the  rectangle  C ,  D. 

But,  as  the  square  on  C  is  to  the  rectangle  Cy  Dy  so  is  C  to  D; 

therefore  also,  as  A  is  to  By  so  is  C  to  D. 

But  A  is  commensurable  with  B  in  square  only; 

therefore  C  is  also  commensurable  with  D  in  square  only.  [x.  11] 
And  C  is  medial; 

therefore  D  is  also  medial.  [x.  23,  addition] 

And  since,  as  A  is  to  By  so  is  C  to  Dy 

and  the  square  on  A  is  greater  than  the  square  on  B  by  the  square  on  a  straight 
line  commensurable  with  Ay 

therefore  also  the  square  on  C  is  greater  than  the  square  on  D  by  the  square  on 
a  straight  line  commensurable  with  C.  [x.  14] 

Therefore  two  medial  straight  lines  Cy  D ,  commensurable  in  square  only  and 
containing  a  rational  rectangle,  have  been  found,  and  the  square  on  C  is  greater 
than  the  square  on  D  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  commensurable  in  length 
with  C. 

Similarly  also  it  can  be  proved  that  the  square  on  C  exceeds  the  square  on 
D  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  incommensurable  with  C,  when  the  square 
on  A  is  greater  than  the  square  on  B  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  incom¬ 
mensurable  with  A.  [x.  30] 


Proposition  32 

To  find  two  medial  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  onlyy  containing  a 
medial  rectangle ,  and  such  that  the  square  on  the  greater  is  greater  than  the  square 
on  the  less  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  commensurable  with  the  greater . 

Let  there  be  set  out  three  rational  straight  lines  Ay  By  C  commensurable  in 
square  only,  and  such  that  the  square  on  A  is  greater  than  the  square  on  C  by 
the  square  on  a  straight  line  commensurable  with  Ay  [x.  29] 

and  let  the  square  on  D  be  equal  to  the  rectangle  Ay  B. 

Therefore  the  square  on  D  is  medial; 


ELEMENTS  X 


217 


therefore  D  is  also  medial.  [x.  21] 

Let  the  rectangle  D,  E  be  equal  to  the  rectangle  B,  C. 

A _  Then  since,  as  the  rectangle  A , 

0 _  B  is  to  the  rectangle  B,  C,  so  is  A 

B -  to  C; 

E -  while  the  square  on  D  is  equal  to 

C  the  rectangle  A,  B, 

and  the  rectangle  D ,  E  is  equal  to  the  rectangle  By  C, 
therefore,  as  A  is  to  C,  so  is  the  square  on  D  to  the  rectangle  D,  E. 

But,  as  the  square  on  D  is  to  the  rectangle  Z),  E,  so  is  D  to  E; 

therefore  also,  as  A  is  to  C,  so  is  D  to  E. 

But  A  is  commensurable  with  C  in  square  only; 

therefore  D  is  also  commensurable  with  E  in  square  only.  [x.  11] 
But  D  is  medial; 

therefore  E  is  also  medial.  [x.  23,  addition] 

And,  since,  as  A  is  to  Cy  so  is  D  to  E , 

while  the  square  on  A  is  greater  than  the  square  on  C  by  the  square  on  a 
straight  line  commensurable  with  Ay 

therefore  also  the  square  on  D  will  be  greater  than  the  square  on  E  by  the 
square  on  a  straight  line  commensurable  with  D .  [x.  14] 

I  say  next  that  the  rectangle  Z),  E  is  also  medial. 

For,  since  the  rectangle  B,  C  is  equal  to  the  rectangle  Z),  E,  while  the  rectan¬ 
gle  B ,  C  is  medial,  [x.  21] 

therefore  the  rectangle  Z),  E  is  also  medial. 

Therefore  two  medial  straight  lines  Z),  E ,  commensurable  in  square  only, 
and  containing  a  medial  rectangle,  have  been  found  such  that  the  square  on 
the  greater  is  greater  than  the  square  on  the  less  by  the  square  on  a  straight 
line  commensurable  with  the  greater. 

Similarly  again  it  can  be  proved  that  the  square  on  D  is  greater  than  the 
square  on  E  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  incommensurable  with  Z),  when 
the  square  on  A  is  greater  than  the  square  on  C  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line 
incommensurable  with  A .  [x.  30] 


Lemma 

Let  ABC  be  a  right-angled  triangle  having  the  angle  A  right,  and  let  the 
perpendicular  AD  be  drawn; 

I  say  that  the  rectangle  CB ,  BD  is  equal  to  the 
square  on  BAy 

the  rectangle  BCy  CD  equal  to  the  square  on  CAy 
the  rectangle  BD ,  DC  equal  to  the  square  on  ADy 
and,  further,  the  rectangle  BCy  AD  equal  to  the 
rectangle  BAy  AC. 

And  first  that  the  rectangle  CBy  BD  is  equal  to  the  square  on  BA. 

For,  since  in  a  right-angled  triangle  AD  has  been  drawn  from  the  right  angle 
perpendicular  to  the  base, 

therefore  the  triangles  ABDy  ADC  are  similar  both  to  the  whole  ABC  and  to 
one  another.  [vi.  8] 

And  since  the  triangle  ABC  is  similar  to  the  triangle  ABDy  therefore,  as  CB 
is  to  BAy  so  is  BA  to  BD ;  [vi.  4] 


218  EUCLID 

therefore  the  rectangle  CB ,  BD  is  equal  to  the  square  on  AB.  [vi.  17] 

For  the  same  reason  the  rectangle  BC,  CD  is  also  equal  to  the  square  on  AC. 
And  since,  if  in  a  right-angled  triangle  a  perpendicular  be  drawn  from  the 
right  angle  to  the  base,  the  perpendicular  so  drawn  is  a  mean  proportional  be¬ 
tween  the  segments  of  the  base,  [vi.  8,  Por.] 

therefore,  as  BD  is  to  DA,  so  is  AD  to  DC; 
therefore  the  rectangle  BD,  DC  is  equal  to  the  square  on  AD.  [vi.  17] 

I  say  that  the  rectangle  BC,  AD  is  also  equal  to  the  rectangle  BA,  AC. 
For  since,  as  we  said,  ABC  is  similar  to  ABD, 

therefore,  as  BC  is  to  CA ,  so  is  BA  to  AD.  [vi.  4] 

Therefore  the  rectangle  BC,  AD  is  equal  to  the  rectangle  BA,  AC.  [vi.  16] 

Q.  E.  D. 


Proposition  33 


To  find  two  straight  lines  incommensurable  in  square  which  make  the  sum  of  the 
squares  on  them  rational  but  the  rectangle  contained  by  them  medial. 

Let  there  be  set  out  two  rational  straight  lines  AB,  BC  commensurable  in 
square  only  and  such  that  the  square  on 
the  greater  AB  is  greater  than  the  square 
on  the  less  BC  by  the  square  on  a  straight 
line  incommensurable  with  AB,  [x.  30] 
let  BC  be  bisected  at  D, 
let  there  be  applied  to  AB  a  parallelogram 
equal  to  the  square  on  either  of  the 
straight  lines  BD,  DC  and  deficient  by  a  square  figure,  and  let  it  be  the  rec¬ 
tangle  AE,  EB;  [vi.  28] 


let  the  semicircle  AFB  be  described  on  AB, 
let  EF  be  drawn  at  right  angles  to  AB, 
and  let  AF,  FB  be  joined. 

Then,  since  AB,  BC  are  unequal  straight  lines, 
and  the  square  on  A B  is  greater  than  the  square  on  BC  by  the  square  on  a 
straight  line  incommensurable  with  AB, 

while  there  has  been  applied  to  AB  a  parallelogram  equal  to  the  fourth  part  of 
the  square  on  BC,  that  is,  to  the  square  on  half  of  it,  and  deficient  by  a  square 
figure,  making  the  rectangle  AE,  EB, 

therefore  AE  is  incommensurable  with  EB.  [x.  18] 

And,  as  AE  is  to  EB,  so  is  the  rectangle  BA,  AE  to  the  rectangle  AB,  BE, 
while  the  rectangle  BA,  AE  is  equal  to  the  square  on  AF, 
and  the  rectangle  AB,  BE  to  the  square  on  BF; 
therefore  the  square  on  AF  is  incommensurable  with  the  square  on  FB; 
therefore  AF,  FB  are  incommensurable  in  square. 

And,  since  AB  is  rational, 

therefore  the  square  on  A B  is  also  rational; 
so  that  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  AF,  FB  is  also  rational.  [i.  47] 
And  since,  again,  the  rectangle  AE,  EB  is  equal  to  the  square  on  EF, 
and,  by  hypothesis,  the  rectangle  AE,  EB  is  also  equal  to  the  square  on  BD, 
therefore  FE  is  equal  to  BD; 
therefore  BC  is  double  of  FE, 

so  that  the  rectangle  AB,  BC  is  also  commensurable  with  the  rectangle  AB,  EF. 


ELEMENTS  X  219 

But  the  rectangle  AB ,  BC  is  medial;  [x.  21] 

therefore  the  rectangle  AB,  EF  is  also  medial.  [x.  23,  Por.] 

But  the  rectangle  AB,  EF  is  equal  to  the  rectangle  AF,  FB ;  [Lemma] 
therefore  the  rectangle  AF ,  FB  is  also  medial. 

But  it  was  also  proved  that  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  these  straight  lines  is 
rational. 

Therefore  two  straight  lines  AF,  FB  incommensurable  in  square  have  been 
found  which  make  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  them  rational,  but  the  rectangle 
contained  by  them  medial.  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  34 

To  find  two  straight  lines  incommensurable  in  square  which  make  the  sum  of  the 
squares  on  them  medial  but  the  rectangle  contained  by  them  rational . 

Let  there  be  set  out  two  medial  straight  lines  AB,  BC ,  commensurable  in 
square  only,  such  that  the  rectangle  which  they  contain  is  rational,  and  the 
square  on  A B  is  greater  than  the  square  on  BC  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line 
incommensurable  with  AB;  [x.  31 ,  ad  fin.] 

let  the  semicircle  ADB  be  described 
on  AB, 

let  BC  be  bisected  at  E , 
let  there  be  applied  to  AB  a  parallelo¬ 
gram  equal  to  the  square  on  BE  and 
A  F  B  E  C  deficient  by  a  square  figure,  namely 

the  rectangle  AF,  FB;  [vi.  28] 

therefore  AF  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  FB.  [x.  18] 
Let  FD  be  drawn  from  F  at  right  angles  to  AB, 
and  let  AD,  DB  be  joined. 

Since  AF  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  FB, 
therefore  the  rectangle  BA,  AF  is  also  incommensurable  with  the  rectangle 
AB,  BF.  [x.  11] 

But  the  rectangle  BA,  AF  is  equal  to  the  square  on  AD,  and  the  rectangle 
AB,  BF  to  the  square  on  DB; 

therefore  the  square  on  AD  is  also  incommensurable  with  the  square  on  DB. 

And,  since  the  square  on  AB  is  medial, 
therefore  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  AD,  DB  is  also  medial.  [hi.  31,  i.  47] 
And,  since  BC  is  double  of  DF, 

therefore  the  rectangle  AB,  BC  is  also  double  of  the  rectangle  AB,  FD. 

But  the  rectangle  AB,  BC  is  rational; 

therefore  the  rectangle  AB,  FD  is  also  rational.  [x.  6] 

But  the  rectangle  AB,  FD  is  equal  to  the  rectangle  AD,  DB;  [Lemma] 
so  that  the  rectangle  AD,  DB  is  also  rational. 

Therefore  two  straight  lines  AD,  DB  incommensurable  in  square  have  been 
found  which  make  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  them  medial,  but  the  rectangle 
contained  by  them  rational.  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  35 

To  find  two  straight  lines  incommensurable  in  square  which  make  the  sum  of  the 
squares  on  them  medial  and  the  rectangle  contained  by  them  medial  and  moreover 
incommensurable  with  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  them. 


220  EUCLID 

Let  there  be  set  out  two  medial  straight  lines  AB,  BC  commensurable  in 
square  only,  containing  a  medial  rectangle,  and  such  that  the  square  on  A B  is 
greater  than  the  square  on  BC  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  incommensur¬ 
able  with  AB;  [x.  32,  ad  fin.] 

let  the  semicircle  ADB  be  described  on  A B, 
and  let  the  rest  of  the  construction  be  as  above. 

Then,  since  AF  is  incommensur¬ 
able  in  length  with  FB ,  [x.  18] 

AD  is  also  incommensurable  in  square 
with  DB.  [x.  11] 

And,  since  the  square  on  45  is 
medial, 

therefore  the  sum  of  the  squares  on 
AD,  DB  is  also  medial,  [hi.  31,  i.  47] 

And,  since  the  rectangle  AF,  FB  is  equal  to  the  square  on  each  of  the  straight 
lines  BE,  DF , 

therefore  BE  is  equal  to  DF; 
therefore  BC  is  double  of  FD, 

so  that  the  rectangle  AB,  BC  is  also  double  of  the  rectangle  AB,  FD. 

But  the  rectangle  AB,  BC  is  medial; 

therefore  the  rectangle  AB,  FD  is  also  medial.  [x.  32;  Por.] 
And  it  is  equal  to  the  rectangle  AD,  DB ;  [Lemma  after  x.  32] 

therefore  the  rectangle  AD,  DB  is  also  medial. 

And,  since  AB  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  BC, 
while  CB  is  commensurable  with  BE, 
therefore  AB  is  also  incommensurable  in  length  with  BE,  [x.  13] 
so  that  the  square  on  A B  is  also  incommensurable  with  the  rectangle  AB,  BE. 

[x.  11] 

But  the  squares  on  AD,  DB  are  equal  to  the  square  on  AB,  [i.  47] 

and  the  rectangle  AB,  FD,  that  is,  the  rectangle  AD,  DB,  is  equal  to  the  rec¬ 
tangle  AB,  BE; 

therefore  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  AD,  DB  is  incommensurable  with  the  rec¬ 
tangle  AD,  DB. 

Therefore  two  straight  lines  AD,  DB  incommensurable  in  square  have  been 
found  which  make  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  them  medial  and  the  rectangle 
contained  by  them  medial  and  moreover  incommensurable  with  the  sum  of  the 
squares  on  them.  q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  36 

If  two  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only  be  added  together,  the 
whole  is  irrational;  and  let  it  be  called  binomial. 

For  let  two  rational  straight  lines  AB,  BC  commensurable  in  square  only  be 
added  together; 

I  say  that  the  whole  AC  is  irrational. 

For,  since  AB  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  ^  g  q 

BC — for  they  are  commensurable  in  square  only — 
and,  as  AB  is  to  BC,  so  is  the  rectangle  AB,  BC  to  the  square  on  BC, 
therefore  the  rectangle  A  B,  BC  is  incommensurable  with  the  square 

onBC.  [x.ll] 


ELEMENTS  X 


221 


But  twice  the  rectangle  AB ,  BC  is  commensurable  with  the  rectangle  AB, 
BC  [x.  6],  and  the  squares  on  AB ,  BC  are  commensurable  with  the  square  on 
BC — for  AB,  BC  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only — 

[x.  15] 

therefore  twice  the  rectangle  AB,  BC  is  incommensurable  with  the  squares  on 
AB,  BC.  [x.  13] 

And,  componendo,  twice  the  rectangle  AB,  BC  together  with  the  squares  on 
AB,  BC,  that  is,  the  square  on  AC  [n.  4],  is  incommensurable  with  the  sum  of 
the  squares  on  AB,  BC.  [x.  16] 

But  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  AB,  BC  is  rational; 

therefore  the  square  on  AC  is  irrational, 

so  that  AC  is  also  irrational.  [x.  Def.  4] 

And  let  it  be  called  binomial.  q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  37 

If  two  medial  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only  and  containing  a  ra¬ 
tional  rectangle  be  added  together ,  the  whole  is  irrational ;  and  let  it  be  called  a  first 
bimedial  straight  line. 

For  let  two  medial  straight  lines  AB,  BC  commensurable  in  square  only  and 
containing  a  rational  rectangle  be  added  together; 

I  say  that  the  whole  AC  is  irrational. 

A  0  q  For,  since  AB  is  incommensurable  in 

length  with  BC, 

therefore  the  squares  on  AB,  BC  are  also  incommensurable  with  twice  the  rec¬ 
tangle  AB,  BC ;  [cf.  x.  36, 11.  9-20] 

and,  componendo,  the  squares  on  AB,  BC  together  with  twice  the  rectangle 
AB,  BC,  that  is,  the  square  on  AC  [n.  4],  is  incommensurable  with  the  rec¬ 
tangle  AB,  BC.  [x.  16] 

But  the  rectangle  AB,  BC  is  rational,  for,  by  hypothesis,  AB,  BC  are  straight 
lines  containing  a  rational  rectangle; 

therefore  the  square  on  AC  is  irrational; 

therefore  AC  is  irrational.  [x.  Def.  4] 

And  let  it  be  called  a  first  bimedial  straight  line.  Q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  38 

If  two  medial  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only  and  containing  a  medial 
rectangle  be  added  together,  the  whole  is  irrational;  and  let  it  be  called  a  second 
bimedial  straight  line. 

For  let  two  medial  straight  lines  AB,  BC  commensurable  in  square  only  and 

containing  a  medial  rectangle  be  added  to- 
A _ ! _ -C  gether; 

I  say  that  AC  is  irrational. 

For  let  a  rational  straight  line  DE  be  set 
out,  and  let  the  parallelogram  DF  equal  to 
the  square  on  AC  be  applied  to  DE,  produc¬ 
ing  DG  as  breadth.  [i.  44] 

Then,  since  the  square  on  AC  is  equal  to 
the  squares  on  AB,  BC  and  twice  the  rectangle  AB,  BC,  [n.  4] 

let  EH,  equal  to  the  squares  on  AB,  BC,  be  applied  to  DE; 


222  EUCLID 

therefore  the  remainder  HF  is  equal  to  twice  the  rectangle  AB ,  BC . 

And,  since  each  of  the  straight  lines  AB,  BC  is  medial, 

therefore  the  squares  on  AB,  BC  are  also  medial. 

But,  by  hypothesis,  twice  the  rectangle  AB,  BC  is  also  medial. 

And  EH  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  AB,  BC, 

while  FH  is  equal  to  twice  the  rectangle  AB,  BC; 
therefore  each  of  the  rectangles  EH,  HF  is  medial. 

And  they  are  applied  to  the  rational  straight  line  BE; 
therefore  each  of  the  straight  lines  DH,  HG  is  rational  and  incommensurable 
in  length  with  DE.  fx.  22] 

Since  then  A B  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  BC, 
and,  as  AB  is  to  BC,  so  is  the  square  on  AB  to  the  rectangle  AB,  BC, 
therefore  the  square  on  AB  is  incommensurable  with  the  rectangle  AB,  BC . 

[x.  11] 

But  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  AB,  BC  is  commensurable  with  the  square  on 
AB,  [x.  15] 

and  twice  the  rectangle  AB,  BC  is  commensurable  with  the  rectangle  AB,  BC. 

(x.  6] 

Therefore  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  AB,  BC  is  incommensurable  with  twice 
the  rectangle  AB,  BC.  [x.  13] 

But  EH  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  AB,  BC, 

and  HF  is  equal  to  twice  the  rectangle  AB,  BC. 

Therefore  EH  is  incommensurable  with  HF, 

so  that  DH  is  also  incommensurable  in  length  with  HG.  [vi.  1,  x.  11] 
Therefore  DH,  HG  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only; 

so  that  DG  is  irrational.  [x.  36] 

But  DE  is  rational ; 

and  the  rectangle  contained  by  an  irrational  and  a  rational  straight  line  is  ir¬ 
rational;  [cf.  x.  20] 

therefore  the  area  DF  is  irrational, 
and  the  side  of  the  square  equal  to  it  is  irrational.  [x.  Def.  4] 
But  AC  is  the  side  of  the  square  equal  to  DF; 

therefore  AC  is  irrational. 

And  let  it  be  called  a  second  bimedial  straight  line.  q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  39 

If  two  straight  lines  incommensurable  in  square  which  make  the  sum  of  the  squares 
on  them  rational,  but  the  rectangle  contained  by  them  medial,  be  added  together,  the 
whole  straight  line  is  irrational:  and  let  it  be  called  major. 

For  let  twTo  straight  lines  AB,  BC  incommensurable  in  square,  and  fulfilling 

the  given  conditions  [x.  33],  be  added  together; _ _ 

I  say  that  AC  is  irrational.  A  ~B  C 

For,  since  the  rectangle  AB,  BC  is  medial, 

twice  the  rectangle  AB,  BC  is  also  medial,  [x.  6  and  23,  Por.] 
But  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  AB,  BC  is  rational; 
therefore  twice  the  rectangle  AB,  BC  is  incommensurable  with  the  sum  of  the 
squares  on  AB,  BC, 

so  that  the  squares  on  AB,  BC  together  with  twice  the  rectangle  AB,  BC,  that 


ELEMENTS  X  223 

is,  the  square  on  AC,  is  also  incommensurable  with  the  sum  of  the  squares  on 
AB,  BC;  [x.  16] 

therefore  the  square  on  AC  is  irrational, 

so  that  AC  is  also  irrational.  [x.  Def.  4] 

And  let  it  be  called  major .  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  40 

If  two  straight  lines  incommensurable  in  square  which  make  the  sum  of  the  squares 
on  them  medial ,  but  the  rectangle  contained  by  them  rational ,  be  added  together ,  the 
whole  straight  line  is  irrational;  and  let  it  be  called  the  side  of  a  rational  plus  a 
medial  area. 

For  let  two  straight  lines  AB,  BC  incommensurable  in  square,  and  fulfilling 
A  B  C  giyen  conditions  [x.  34],  be  added  together; 

- 1  I  say  that  AC  is  irrational. 

For,  since  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  AB,  BC  is  medial,  while  twice  the  rec¬ 
tangle  AB,  BC  is  rational, 

therefore  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  AB,  BC  is  incommensurable  with  twice  the 
rectangle  AB,  BC ; 

so  that  the  square  on  AC  is  also  incommensurable  with  twice  the  rectangle  AB, 
BC.  [x.  16] 

But  twice  the  rectangle  AB,  BC  is  rational; 

therefore  the  square  on  AC  is  irrational. 

Therefore  AC  is  irrational.  [x.  Def.  4] 

And  let  it  be  called  the  side  of  a  rational  plus  a  medial  area.  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  41 

If  two  straight  lines  incommensurable  in  square  which  make  the  sum  of  the  squares 
on  them  medial ,  and  the  rectangle  contained  by  them  medial  and  also  incommen¬ 
surable  with  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  them,  be  added  together,  the  whole  straight 
line  is  irrational ;  and  let  it  be  called  the  side  of  the  sum  of  two  medial  areas. 

For  let  two  straight  lines  AB,  BC  incommensurable  in  square  and  satisfying 
the  given  conditions  [x.  35]  be  added  together; 

I  say  that  AC  is  irrational. 

Let  a  rational  straight  line  DE  be  set  out,  and  let  there 
be  applied  to  DE  the  rectangle  DF  equal  to  the  squares  on 
AB,  BC,  and  the  rectangle  GH  equal  to  twice  the  rec¬ 
tangle  AB,  BC; 

therefore  the  whole  DH  is  equal  to  the  square  on  AC.  [n.  4] 
Now,  since  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  AB,  BC  is  medial, 
and  is  equal  to  DF, 
therefore  DF  is  also  medial. 

And  it  is  applied  to  the  rational  straight  line  DE; 
therefore  DG  is  rational  and  incommensurable  in  length 
with  DE.  [x.  22] 

_ i  For  the  same  reason  GK  is  also  rational  and  incommen- 

A  B  C  surable  in  length  with  GF,  that  is,  DE. 

And,  since  the  squares  on  AB,  BC  are  incommensurable  with  twice  the  rec¬ 
tangle  AB,  BC, 


DF  is  incommensurable  with  GH; 


224  EUCLID 

so  that  DG  is  also  incommensurable  with  GK.  [vi.  1,  x.  11] 
And  they  are  rational; 

therefore  DG,  GK  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only; 

therefore  DK  is  irrational  and  what  is  called  binomial.  [x.  36] 
But  DE  is  rational; 

therefore  DH  is  irrational,  and  the  side  of  the  square  which  is  equal  to  it  is  ir¬ 
rational.  [x.  Def.  4] 

But  AC  is  the  side  of  the  square  equal  to  HD ; 

therefore  AC  is  irrational. 

And  let  it  be  called  the  side  of  the  sum  of  two  medial  areas .  q.  e.  d. 

Lemma 

And  that  the  aforesaid  irrational  straight  lines  are  divided  only  in  one  way 
into  the  straight  lines  of  which  they  are  the  sum  and  which  produce  the  types 
in  question,  we  will  now  prove  after  premising  the  following  lemma. 

Let  the  straight  line  A  B  be  set  out,  let  the  whole  be  cut  into  unequal  parts 
at  each  of  the  points  C,  D, 
and  let  AC  be  supposed  greater  than  DB; 

I  say  that  the  squares  on  AC,  CB  are  greater  a  d  e  C  b 

than  the  squares  on  AD,  DB. 

For  let  AB  be  bisected  at  E. 

Then,  since  AC  is  greater  than  DB, 

let  DC  be  subtracted  from  each; 
therefore  the  remainder  AD  is  greater  than  the  remainder  CB. 

But  AE  is  equal  to  EB; 

therefore  DE  is  less  than  EC ; 

therefore  the  points  C,  D  are  not  equidistant  from  the  point  of  bisection. 

And,  since  the  rectangle  AC,  CB  together  with  the  square  on  EC  is  equal  to 
the  square  on  EB,  [ii.  5] 

and,  further,  the  rectangle  AD,  DB  together  with  the  square  on  DE  is  equal  to 
the  square  on  EB,  [id.] 

therefore  the  rectangle  AC,  CB  together  with  the  square  on  EC  is  equal  to  the 
rectangle  AD,  DB  together  with  the  square  on  DE. 

And  of  these  the  square  on  DE  is  less  than  the  square  on  EC; 
therefore  the  remainder,  the  rectangle  AC,  CB,  is  also  less  than  the  rectangle 
AD,  DB, 

so  that  twice  the  rectangle  AC,  CB  is  also  less  than  twice  the  rectangle  AD, 
DB. 

Therefore  also  the  remainder,  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  AC,  CB,  is  greater 
than  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  AD,  DB.  Q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  42 

A  binomial  straight  line  is  divided  into  its  terms  at  one  point  only . 

Let  AB  be  a  binomial  straight  line  divided  into  its  terms  at  C; 

therefore  AC,  CB  are  rational  straight  lines  - 1 - 1 - 

commensurable  in  square  only.  A  D  C  B 

I  say  that  AB  is  not  divided  at  another  point  into  twro  rational  straight  lines 
commensurable  in  square  only. 


ELEMENTS  X  225 

For,  if  possible,  let  it  be  divided  at  D  also,  so  that  AD ,  DB  are  also  rational 
straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only. 

It  is  then  manifest  that  AC  is  not  the  same  with  DB. 

For,  if  possible,  let  it  be  so. 

Then  AD  will  also  be  the  same  as  CB, 

and,  as  AC  is  to  CB,  so  will  BD  be  to  DA; 
thus  AB  will  be  divided  at  D  also  in  the  same  way  as  by  the  division  at  C: 
which  is  contrary  to  the  hypothesis. 

Therefore  AC  is  not  the  same  with  DB. 

For  this  reason  also  the  points  C,  D  are  not  equidistant  from  the  point  of  bi¬ 
section. 

Therefore  that  by  which  the  squares  on  AC,  CB  differ  from  the  squares  on 
AD,  DB  is  also  that  by  which  twice  the  rectangle  AD,  DB  differs  from  twice 
the  rectangle  AC,  CB, 

because  both  the  squares  on  AC,  CB  together  with  twice  the  rectangle  AC, 
CB,  and  the  squares  on  AD,  DB  together  with  twice  the  rectangle  AD,  DB, 
are  equal  to  the  square  on  AB.  [n.  4] 

But  the  squares  on  AC,  CB  differ  from  the  squares  on  AD,  DB  by  a  rational 
area, 

for  both  are  rational; 

therefore  twice  the  rectangle  AD,  DB  also  differs  from  twice  the  rectangle  AC, 
CB  by  a  rational  area,  though  they  are  medial  [x.  21]: 

winch  is  absurd,  for  a  medial  area  does  not  exceed  a  medial  by  a  rational  area. 

[x.  26] 

Therefore  a  binomial  straight  line  is  not  divided  at  different  points; 

therefore  it  is  divided  at  one  point  only.  q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  43 

A  first  bimedial  straight  line  is  divided  at  one  point  only. 

Let  AB  be  a  first  bimedial  straight  line  divided  at  C,  so  that  AC,  CB  are 

_ _ t  ) _  medial  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square 

A  D  c  B  on]y  and  containing  a  rational  rectangle ;  [x.  37] 

I  say  that  AB  is  not  so  divided  at  another  point. 

For,  if  possible,  let  it  be  divided  at  D  also,  so  that  AD,  DB  are  also  medial 
straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only  and  containing  a  rational  rec¬ 
tangle. 

Since,  then,  that  by  which  twice  the  rectangle  AD,  DB  differs  from  twice 
the  rectangle  AC,  CB  is  that  by  which  the  squares  on  AC,  CB  differ  from  the 
squares  on  AD,  DB, 

wiiile  twice  the  rectangle  AD,  DB  differs  from  twice  the  rectangle  AC,  CB  by 
a  rational  area — for  both  are  rational — 

therefore  the  squares  on  AC,  CB  also  differ  from  the  squares  on  AD,  DB  by  a 
rational  area,  though  they  are  medial: 

which  is  absurd.  [x.  26] 

Therefore  a  first  bimedial  straight  line  is  not  divided  into  its  terms  at  differ¬ 
ent  points; 

therefore  it  is  so  divided  at  one  point  only.  q.  e.  d. 


226 


EUCLID 


Proposition  44 

A  second  bimedial  straight  line  is  divided  at  one  point  only. 

Let  AB  be  a  second  bimedial  straight  line  divided  at  C,  so  that  AC,  CB  are 
medial  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only  and  containing  a  medial 
rectangle;  [x.  38] 

it  is  then  manifest  that  C  is  not  at  the  point  of  bisection,  because  the  segments 
are  not  commensurable  in  length. 

I  say  that  AB  is  not  so  divided  at  another  point. 

A  D  C  B 


For,  if  possible,  let  it  be  divided  at  D  also,  so  that  AC  is  not  the  same  with 
DB ,  but  AC  is  supposed  greater; 

it  is  then  clear  that  the  squares  on  AD,  DB  are  also,  as  we  proved  above  [Lem¬ 
ma],  less  than  the  squares  on  AC,  CB; 

and  suppose  that  AD,  DB  are  medial  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square 
only  and  containing  a  medial  rectangle. 

Now  let  a  rational  straight  line  EF  be  set  out, 
let  there  be  applied  to  EF  the  rectangular  parallelogram  EK  equal  to  the 
square  on  A  B, 

and  let  EG,  equal  to  the  squares  on  AC,  CB,  be  subtracted; 
therefore  the  remainder  HK  is  equal  to  twice  the  rectangle  AC,  CB.  [ii.  4] 
Again,  let  there  be  subtracted  EL,  equal  to  the  squares  on  AD,  DB,  which 
were  proved  less  than  the  squares  on  AC,  CB  [Lemma]; 
therefore  the  remainder  MK  is  also  equal  to  twice  the  rectangle  AD,  DB. 
Xow,  since  the  squares  on  AC,  CB  are  medial, 

therefore  EG  is  medial. 

And  it  is  applied  to  the  rational  straight  line  EF; 
therefore  EH  is  rational  and  incommensurable  in  length  with  EF.  [x.  22] 
For  the  same  reason 

HN  is  also  rational  and  incommensurable  in  length  with  EF. 

And,  since  AC,  CB  are  medial  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only, 
therefore  AC  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  CB. 

But,  as  AC  is  to  CB,  so  is  the  square  on  AC  to  the  rectangle  AC,  CB; 
therefore  the  square  on  AC  is  incommensurable  with  the  rectangle  AC,  CB. 

[x.  11] 

But  the  squares  on  AC,  CB  are  commensurable  with  the  square  on  AC;  for 
AC,  CB  are  commensurable  in  square.  [x.  15] 

And  twice  the  rectangle  AC,  CB  is  commensurable  with  the  rectangle  AC, 
CB.  [x.  6] 

Therefore  the  squares  on  AC,  CB  are  also  incommensurable  with  twice  the 
rectangle  AC,  CB.  [x.  13] 


227 


ELEMENTS  X 

But  EG  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  AC,  CB, 

and  HK  is  equal  to  twice  the  rectangle  AC,  CB; 
therefore  EG  is  incommensurable  with  HK, 
so  that  EH  is  also  incommensurable  in  length  with  HN.  [vi.  1,  x.  11] 

And  they  are  rational; 

therefore  EH,  HN  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only. 

But,  if  two  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only  be  added 
together,  the  whole  is  the  irrational  which  is  called  binomial.  [x.  36] 

Therefore  EN  is  a  binomial  straight  line  divided  at  H. 

In  the  same  way  EM,  MN  will  also  be  proved  to  be  rational  straight  lines 
commensurable  in  square  only; 

and  EN  will  be  a  binomial  straight  line  divided  at  different  points,  H  and  M. 
And  EH  is  not  the  same  with  MN. 

For  the  squares  on  AC,  CB  are  greater  than  the  squares  on  AD,  DB. 

But  the  squares  on  AD,  DB  are  greater  than  twice  the  rectangle  AD,  DB; 
therefore  also  the  squares  on  AC,  CB,  that  is,  EG,  are  much  greater  than  twice 
the  rectangle  AD,  DB,  that  is,  MK, 

so  that  EH  is  also  greater  than  MN. 

Therefore  EH  is  not  the  same  with  MN.  Q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  45 

A  major  straight  line  is  divided  at  one  and  the  same  point  only . 

Let  AB  be  a  major  straight  line  divided  at  C,  so  that  AC,  CB  are  incommen- 
c  surable  in  square  and  make  the  sum  of  the 

- - » - 1 - p  squares  on  AC,  CB  rational,  but  the  rectangle 

A  AC,  CB  medial; 

I  say  that  AB  is  not  so  divided  at  another  point. 

For,  if  possible,  let  it  be  divided  at  D  also,  so  that  AD,  DB  are  also  incom¬ 
mensurable  in  square  and  make  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  AD,  DB  rational, 
but  the  rectangle  contained  by  them  medial. 

Then,  since  that  by  which  the  squares  on  AC,  CB  differ  from  the  squares  on 
AD,  DB  is  also  that  by  which  twice  the  rectangle  AD,  DB  differs  from  twice 
the  rectangle  AC,  CB, 

while  the  squares  on  AC,  CB  exceed  the  squares  on  AD,  DB  by  a  rational  area 
— for  both  are  rational — 

therefore  twice  the  rectangle  AD,  DB  also  exceeds  twice  the  rectangle  AC,  CB 
by  a  rational  area,  though  they  are  medial : 

which  is  impossible.  [x.  26] 

Therefore  a  major  straight  line  is  not  divided  at  different  points; 

therefore  it  is  only  divided  at  one  and  the  same  point.  q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  46 

The  side  of  a  rational  plus  a  medial  area  is  divided  at  one  point  only. 

Let  AB  be  the  side  of  a  rational  plus  a  medial  area  divided  at  C,  so  that  AC, 

CB  are  incommensurable  in  square  and  make  the 

A - + — £  g  sum  of  the  squares  on  AC,  CB  medial,  but  twice 

the  rectangle  AC,  CB  rational;  [x.  40] 

I  say  that  AB  is  not  so  divided  at  another  point. 

For,  if  possible,  let  it  be  divided  at  D  also,  so  that  AD,  DB  are  also  incom- 


22 8  EUCLID 

mensurable  in  square  and  make  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  AD,  DB  medial,  but 
twice  the  rectangle  AD,  DB  rational. 

Since,  then,  that  by  which  twice  the  rectangle  AC,  CB  differs  from  twice  the 
rectangle  AD,  DB  is  also  that  by  which  the  squares  on  AD,  DB  differ  from  the 
squares  on  AC,  CB, 

while  twice  the  rectangle  AC,  CB  exceeds  twice  the  rectangle  AD,  DB  by  a 
rational  area, 

therefore  the  squares  on  AD,  DB  also  exceed  the  squares  on  AC,  CB  by  a  ra¬ 
tional  area,  though  they  are  medial : 

which  is  impossible.  [x.  26] 

Therefore  the  side  of  a  rational  plus  a  medial  area  is  not  divided  at  different 
points; 

therefore  it  is  divided  at  one  point  only.  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  47 


The  side  of  the  sum  of  two  medial  areas  is  divided  at  one  'point  only. 

Let  AB  be  divided  at  C,  so  that  AC,  CB  are  incommensurable  in  square  and 
make  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  AC,  CB  medial,  and  the  rectangle  AC,  CB 
medial  and  also  incommensurable  with  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  them; 

I  say  that  A  B  is  not  divided  at  another  point  so  as  to  fulfil  the  given  conditions. 
For,  if  possible,  let  it  be  divided 
at  D,  so  that  again  AC  is  of  course 
not  the  same  as  BD,  but  AC  is  sup¬ 
posed  greater; 

let  a  rational  straight  line  EF  be 
set  out, 

and  let  there  be  applied  to  EF  the 
rectangle  EG  equal  to  the  squares  on 
AC,  CB, 

and  the  rectangle  HK  equal  to  twice 
the  rectangle  AC,  CB; 
therefore  the  whole  EK  is  equal  to 
the  square  on  AB.  [n.  4] 

Again,  let  EL,  equal  to  the  squares  on  AD,  DB,  be  applied  to  EF; 
therefore  the  remainder,  twice  the  rectangle  AD,  DB,  is  equal  to  the  remainder 
MK. 


D-- 


C- 


B 


And  since,  by  hypothesis,  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  AC,  CB  is  medial, 
therefore  EG  is  also  medial. 

And  it  is  applied  to  the  rational  straight  line  EF; 
therefore  HE  is  rational  and  incommensurable  in  length  with  EF.  [x.  22] 
For  the  same  reason 

HX  is  also  rational  and  incommensurable  in  length  with  EF. 

And,  since  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  AC,  CB  is  incommensurable  with  twice 
the  rectangle  AC,  CB, 

therefore  EG  is  also  incommensurable  with  GX, 
so  that  EH  is  also  incommensurable  with  HN.  [vi.  1,  x.  11] 
And  they  are  rational; 

therefore  EH.  HX  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only; 

therefore  EX  is  a  binomial  straight  line  divided  at  H.  [x.  36] 


229 


ELEMENTS  X 

Similarly  we  can  prove  that  it  is  also  divided  at  M. 

And  EH  is  not  the  same  with  MN; 

therefore  a  binomial  has  been  divided  at  different  points: 

which  is  absurd.  [x.  42] 

Therefore  a  side  of  the  sum  of  two  medial  areas  is  not  divided  at  different 
points; 

therefore  it  is  divided  at  one  point  only.  q.  e.  d. 

DEFINITIONS  II 

1.  Given  a  rational  straight  line  and  a  binomial,  divided  into  its  terms,  such 
that  the  square  on  the  greater  term  is  greater  than  the  square  on  the  lesser  by 
the  square  on  a  straight  line  commensurable  in  length  with  the  greater,  then, 
if  the  greater  term  be  commensurable  in  length  with  the  rational  straight  line 
set  out,  let  the  whole  be  called  a  first  binomial  straight  line; 

2.  but  if  the  lesser  term  be  commensurable  in  length  with  the  rational 
straight  line  set  out,  let  the  whole  be  called  a  second  binomial ; 

3.  and  if  neither  of  the  terms  be  commensurable  in  length  with  the  rational 
straight  line  set  out,  let  the  whole  be  called  a  third  binomial . 

4.  Again,  if  the  square  on  the  greater  term  be  greater  than  the  square  on  the 
lesser  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  incommensurable  in  length  with  the 
greater,  then,  if  the  greater  term  be  commensurable  in  length  with  the  rational 
straight  line  set  out,  let  the  whole  be  called  a  fourth  binomial ; 

5.  if  the  lesser,  a  fifth  binomial ; 

6.  and  if  neither,  a  sixth  binomial. 

Proposition  48 

To  find  the  first  binomial  straight  line . 

Let  two  numbers  AC,  CB  be  set  out  such  that  the  sum  of  them  AB  has  to 

_  _  BC  the  ratio  which  a  square  number  has  to  a 

H  square  number,  but  has  not  to  CA  the  ratio 

_ , _  which  a  square  number  has  to  a  square  num- 

E  F  G  ber;  [Lemma  1  after  x.  28] 

- - £  "B  let  any  rational  straight  line  D  be  set  out,  and 

let  EF  be  commensurable  in  length  with  D. 
Therefore  EF  is  also  rational. 

Let  it  be  contrived  that, 

as  the  number  BA  is  to  AC,  so  is  the  square  on  EF  to  the  square  on  FG. 

[x.  6,  Por.] 

But  AB  has  to  AC  the  ratio  which  a  number  has  to  a  number; 
therefore  the  square  on  EF  also  has  to  the  square  on  FG  the  ratio  which  a  num¬ 
ber  has  to  a  number, 

so  that  the  square  on  EF  is  commensurable  with  the  square  on  FG.  [x.  6] 

And  EF  is  rational; 

therefore  FG  is  also  rational. 

And,  since  BA  has  not  to  AC  the  ratio  which  a  square  number  has  to  a 
square  number, 

neither,  therefore,  has  the  square  on  EF  to  the  square  on  FG  the  ratio  which  a 
square  number  has  to  a  square  number; 

therefore  EF  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  FG.  [x.  9] 


230  EUCLID 

Therefore  EF,  FG  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only; 

therefore  EG  is  binomial.  [x.  36] 

I  say  that  it  is  also  a  first  binomial  straight  line. 

For  since,  as  the  number  BA  is  to  AC,  so  is  the  square  on  EF  to  the  square 
on  FG, 

while  BA  is  greater  than  AC, 

therefore  the  square  on  EF  is  also  greater  than  the  square  on  FG. 

Let  then  the  squares  on  FG,  H  be  equal  to  the  square  on  EF. 

Now  since,  as  BA  is  to  AC,  so  is  the  square  on  EF  to  the  square  on  FG, 

therefore,  convertendo, 

as  AB  is  to  BC,  so  is  the  square  on  EF  to  the  square  on  H.  [v.  19,  Por.] 
But  AB  has  to  BC  the  ratio  which  a  square  number  has  to  a  square  number; 
therefore  the  square  on  EF  also  has  to  the  square  on  H  the  ratio  which  a  square 
number  has  to  a  square  number. 

Therefore  EF  is  commensurable  in  length  with  H ;  [x.  9] 

therefore  the  square  on  EF  is  greater  than  the  square  on  FG  by  the  square  on  a 
straight  line  commensurable  with  EF. 

And  EF,  FG  are  rational,  and  EF  is  commensurable  in  length  with  D. 
Therefore  EF  is  a  first  binomial  straight  line.  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  49 


c-- 


To  find  the  second  binomial  straight  line. 

Let  two  numbers  AC,  CB  be  set  out  such  that  the  sum  of  them  AB  has  to  BC 
the  ratio  which  a  square  number  has  to  a  square  num¬ 
ber,  but  has  not  to  AC  the  ratio  which  a  square  num¬ 
ber  has  to  a  square  number; 

let  a  rational  straight  line  D  be  set  out,  and  let  EF  be 
commensurable  in  length  with  D; 

therefore  EF  is  rational. 

Let  it  be  contrived  then  that, 
as  the  number  CA  is  to  AB,  so  also  is  the  square  on  EF 
to  the  square  on  FG;  [x.  6,  Por.] 

therefore  the  square  on  EF  is  commensurable  with  the  square  on  FG.  [x.  6] 

Therefore  FG  is  also  rational. 

Now,  since  the  number  CA  has  not  to  AB  the  ratio  which  a  square  number 
has  to  a  square  number,  neither  has  the  square  on  EF  to  the  square  on  FG  the 
ratio  which  a  square  number  has  to  a  square  number. 

Therefore  EF  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  FG;  [x.  9] 

therefore  EF,  FG  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only; 

therefore  EG  is  binomial.  [x.  36] 

It  is  next  to  be  proved  that  it  is  also  a  second  binomial  straight  fine. 

For  since,  inversely,  as  the  number  BA  is  to  AC,  so  is  the  square  on  GF  to 
the  square  on  FE, 


while  BA  is  greater  than  AC, 

therefore  the  square  on  GF  is  greater  than  the  square  on  FE. 

Let  the  squares  on  EF,  H  be  equal  to  the  square  on  GF; 
therefore,  convertendo,  as  AB  is  to  BC,  so  is  the  square  on  FG  to  the  square  on 
H.  [v.  19,  Por.] 

But  AB  has  to  BC  the  ratio  which  a  square  number  has  to  a  square  number; 


ELEMENTS  X  231 

therefore  the  square  on  FG  also  has  to  the  square  on  H  the  ratio  which  a  square 
number  has  to  a  square  number. 

Therefore  FG  is  commensurable  in  length  with  H ;  [x.  9] 

so  that  the  square  on  FG  is  greater  than  the  square  on  FE  by  the  square  on  a 
straight  line  commensurable  with  FG . 

And  FG ,  FE  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only,  and 
EF,  the  lesser  term,  is  commensurable  in  length  with  the  rational  straight  line 
D  set  out. 

Therefore  EG  is  a  second  binomial  straight  line.  Q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  50 

To  find  the  third  binomial  straight  line . 

Let  two  numbers  AC,  CB  be  set  out  such  that  the  sum  of  them  AB  has  to 
BC  the  ratio  which  a  square  number  has  to  a  square  number,  but  has  not  to 
AC  the  ratio  which  a  square  number  has  to  a  square  number. 

Let  any  other  number  D,  not 
K  A  c  B  square,  be  set  out  also,  and  let 

E _  1  it  not  have  to  either  of  the  num- 

G  D  bers  BA,  AC  the  ratio  which  a 

F  1  H  square  number  has  to  a  square 

number. 

Let  any  rational  straight  line  E  be  set  out, 
and  let  it  be  contrived  that,  as  D  is  to  AB,  so  is  the  square  on  E  to  the  square 
on  FG;  [x.  6,  Por.] 

therefore  the  square  on  E  is  commensurable  with  the  square  on  FG.  [x.  6] 
And  E  is  rational; 

therefore  FG  is  also  rational. 

And,  since  D  has  not  to  AB  the  ratio  which  a  square  number  has  to  a  square 
number, 

neither  has  the  square  on  E  to  the  square  on  FG  the  ratio  which  a  square  num¬ 
ber  has  to  a  square  number; 

therefore  E  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  FG.  [x.  9] 

Next  let  it  be  contrived  that,  as  the  number  BA  is  to  AC,  so  is  the  square  on 
FG  to  the  square  on  GEL;  [x.  6,  Por.] 

therefore  the  square  on  FG  is  commensurable  with  the  square  on  GH.  [x.  6] 
But  FG  is  rational; 

therefore  GH  is  also  rational. 

And,  since  BA  has  not  to  AC  the  ratio  which  a  square  number  has  to  a 
square  number, 

neither  has  the  square  on  FG  to  the  square  on  HG  the  ratio  which  a  square  num¬ 
ber  has  to  a  square  number; 

therefore  FG  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  GH.  [x.  9] 

Therefore  FG,  GH  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only; 

therefore  FH  is  binomial.  [x.  36] 

I  say  next  that  it  is  also  a  third  binomial  straight  line. 

For  since,  as  D  is  to  AB,  so  is  the  square  on  E  to  the  square  on  FG, 
and,  as  BA  is  to  AC,  so  is  the  square  on  FG  to  the  square  on  GH, 
therefore,  ex  aequali,  as  D  is  to  AC,  so  is  the  square  on  E  to  the  square  on  GH. 

[v.  22] 


232  EUCLID 

But  D  has  not  to  AC  the  ratio  which  a  square  number  has  to  a  square  num¬ 
ber; 

therefore  neither  has  the  square  on  E  to  the  square  on  GH  the  ratio  which  a 
square  number  has  to  a  square  number; 

therefore  E  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  GH.  [x.  9] 

And  since,  as  BA  is  to  AC,  so  is  the  square  on  EG  to  the  square  on  GH, 
therefore  the  square  on  FG  is  greater  than  the  square  on  GH. 

Let  then  the  squares  on  GH,  K  be  equal  to  the  square  on  FG ; 
therefore,  convertendo ,  as  AB  is  to  BC,  so  is  the  square  on  FG  to  the  square  on 
K.  [v.  19,  Por.] 

But  AB  has  to  BC  the  ratio  which  a  square  number  has  to  a  square  number; 
therefore  the  square  on  FG  also  has  to  the  square  on  K  the  ratio  which  a  square 
number  has  to  a  square  number; 

therefore  FG  is  commensurable  in  length  with  K.  [x.  9] 

Therefore  the  square  on  FG  is  greater  than  the  square  on  GH  by  the  square 
on  a  straight  line  commensurable  with  FG. 

And  FG,  GH  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only,  and 
neither  of  them  is  commensurable  in  length  with  E. 

Therefore  FH  is  a  third  binomial  straight  line.  q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  51 

To  find  the  fourth  binomial  straight  line. 

Let  two  numbers  AC,  CB  be  set  out  such  that  AB  neither  has  to  BC,  nor  yet 
to  AC,  the  ratio  which  a  square  number  has  to  a  square  number. 

Let  a  rational  straight  line  D  be  set  out, 

and  let  EF  be  commensurable  in  length  with  D;  a  ^ 

therefore  EF  is  also  rational. 

Let  it  be  contrived  that,  as  the  number  BA  is  to  AC,  so  is  the  D 

square  on  EF  to  the  square  on  FG;  [x.  6,  Por.] 

therefore  the  square  on  EF  is  commensurable  with  the  square  c 
on  FG;  [x.  6]  f 


therefore  FG  is  also  rational.  B 

Now,  since  BA  has  not  to  AC  the  ratio  which  a  square  H 

number  has  to  a  square  number, 

neither  has  the  square  on  EF  to  the  square  on  FG  the  ratio  G 

which  a  square  number  has  to  a  square  number; 

therefore  EF  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  FG.  [x.  9] 


Therefore  EF,  FG  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only; 

so  that  EG  is  binomial. 

I  say  next  that  it  is  also  a  fourth  binomial  straight  line. 

For  since,  as  BA  is  to  AC,  so  is  the  square  on  EF  to  the  square  on  FG, 
therefore  the  square  on  EF  is  greater  than  the  square  on  FG. 

Let  then  the  squares  on  FG,  H  be  equal  to  the  square  on  EF; 
therefore,  convertendo,  as  the  number  AB  is  to  BC,  so  is  the  square  on  EF  to 
the  square  on  H.  [v.  19,  Por.] 

But  AB  has  not  to  BC  the  ratio  which  a  square  number  has  to  a  square 
number; 

therefore  neither  has  the  square  on  EF  to  the  square  on  H  the  ratio  which  a 
square  number  has  to  a  square  number. 


ELEMENTS  X 


233 


Therefore  EF  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  H;  [x.  9] 

therefore  the  square  on  EF  is  greater  than  the  square  on  GF  by  the  square  on 
a  straight  line  incommensurable  with  EF. 

And  EF,  FG  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only,  and 
EF  is  commensurable  in  length  with  D. 

Therefore  EG  is  a  fourth  binomial  straight  line.  Q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  52 

To  find  the  fifth  binomial  straight  line. 

Let  two  numbers  AC,  CB  be  set  out  such  that  AB  has  not  to  either  of  them 
the  ratio  which  a  square  number  has  to  a  square  number; 

let  any  rational  straight  line  D  be  set  out, 
and  let  EF  be  commensurable  with  D ; 
therefore  EF  is  rational. 

Let  it  be  contrived  that,  as  CA  is  to  AB,  so  is  the  square  on  EF 
to  the  square  on  FG.  [x.  6,  Por.] 

But  CA  has  not  to  AB  the  ratio  which  a  square  number 
has  to  a  square  number; 

therefore  neither  has  the  square  on  EF  to  the  square  on  FG  the 
ratio  which  a  square  number  has  to  a  square  number. 

Therefore  EF,  FG  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable 
in  square  only;  [x.  9] 

therefore  EG  is  binomial.  [x.  36] 

I  say  next  that  it  is  also  a  fifth  binomial  straight  line. 

For  since,  as  CA  is  to  AB,  so  is  the  square  on  EF  to  the  square  on  FG, 
inversely,  as  BA  is  to  AC,  so  is  the  square  on  FG  to  the  square  on  FE; 
therefore  the  square  on  GF  is  greater  than  the  square  on  FE. 

Let  then  the  squares  on  EF,  H  be  equal  to  the  square  on  GF; 
therefore,  convertendo,  as  the  number  AB  is  to  BC,  so  is  the  square  on  GF  to 
the  square  on  H.  [v.  19,  Por.] 

But  AB  has  not  to  BC  the  ratio  which  a  square  number  has  to  a  square 
number; 

therefore  neither  has  the  square  on  FG  to  the  square  on  H  the  ratio  which  a 
square  number  has  to  a  square  number. 

Therefore  FG  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  H;  [x.  9] 

so  that  the  square  on  FG  is  greater  than  the  square  on  FE  by  the  square  on  a 
straight  line  incommensurable  with  FG. 

And  GF,  FE  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only,  and 
the  lesser  term  EF  is  commensurable  in  length  with  the  rational  straight  line 
D  set  out. 

Therefore  EG  is  a  fifth  binomial  straight  line.  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  53 

To  find  the  sixth  binomial  straight  line. 

Let  two  numbers  AC,  CB  be  set  out  such  that  AB  has  not  to  either  of  them 
the  ratio  which  a  square  number  has  to  a  square  number; 
and  let  there  also  be  another  number  D  which  is  not  square  and  which  has  not 
to  either  of  the  numbers  BA,  AC  the  ratio  wrhich  a  square  number  has  to  a 
square  number. 


234 


EUCLID 


Let  any  rational  straight  line  E  be  set  out, 
and  let  it  be  contrived  that,  as  D  is  to  AB ,  so  is  the  square  on  E  to  the 
square  on  FG ;  [x.  6,  Por.] 

therefore  the  square  on  E  is  commensurable  with  the 
square  on  FG.  [x.  6]  A 

And  E  is  rational; 

therefore  FG  is  also  rational. 

Now,  since  D  has  not  to  AB  the  ratio  which  a  square 
number  has  to  a  square  number,  c 

neither  has  the  square  on  E  to  the  square  on  FG  the  ratio 
which  a  square  number  has  to  a  square  number;  B 

therefore  E  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  FG.  [x.  9] 

Again,  let  it  be  contrived  that,  as  BA  is  to  AC,  so  is  the 
square  on  FG  to  the  square  on  GH.  [x.  6,  Por.] 

Therefore  the  square  on  FG  is  commensurable  with  the  square  on  HG.  [x.  6] 
Therefore  the  square  on  HG  is  rational; 

therefore  HG  is  rational. 

And,  since  BA  has  not  to  AC  the  ratio  which  a  square  number  has  to  a 
square  number, 

neither  has  the  square  on  FG  to  the  square  on  GH  the  ratio  which  a  square 
number  has  to  a  square  number; 

therefore  FG  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  GH.  [x.  9] 

Therefore  FG,  GH  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only; 

therefore  FH  is  binomial.  [x.  36] 

It  is  next  to  be  proved  that  it  is  also  a  sixth  binomial  straight  line. 

For  since,  as  D  is  to  AB,  so  is  the  square  on  E  to  the  square  on  FG, 
and  also,  as  BA  is  to  AC,  so  is  the  square  on  FG  to  the  square  on  GH, 
therefore,  ex  aequali,  as  D  is  to  AC,  so  is  the  square  on  E  to  the  square  on  GH . 

[v.  22] 

But  D  has  not  to  AC  the  ratio  which  a  square  number  has  to  a  square  num¬ 
ber; 


therefore  neither  has  the  square  on  E  to  the  square  on  GH  the  ratio 
which  a  square  number  has  to  a  square  number; 
therefore  E  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  GH.  [x.  9] 

But  it  was  also  proved  incommensurable  with  FG; 

therefore  each  of  the  straight  lines  FG,  GH  is  incommensurable 
in  length  with  E. 

And,  since,  as  BA  is  to  AC,  so  is  the  square  on  FG  to  the  square  on  GH, 
therefore  the  square  on  FG  is  greater  than  the  square  on  GH. 

Let  then  the  squares  on  GH,  K  be  equal  to  the  square  on  FG; 

therefore,  convertendo,  as  AB  is  to  BC,  so  is  the  square  on  FG 

to  the  square  on  K.  [v.  19,  Por.] 

But  AB  has  not  to  BC  the  ratio  winch  a  square  number  has  to  a  square 
number; 

so  that  neither  has  the  square  on  FG  to  the  square  on  K  the  ratio  which  a 
square  number  has  to  a  square  number. 

Therefore  FG  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  K;  [x.  9] 

therefore  the  square  on  FG  is  greater  than  the  square  on  GH  by  the  square  on 
a  straight  line  incommensurable  with  FG. 


ELEMENTS  X 


235 


B 

And  FG ,  GH  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only,  and 
neither  of  them  is  commensurable  in  length  with  the  rational  straight  line  E 
set  out. 

Therefore  FH  is  a  sixth  binomial  straight  line.  q.  e.  d. 

Lemma 

Let  there  be  two  squares  A B,  BC ,  and  let  them  be  placed  so  that  DB  is  in  a 
straight  line  with  BE; 

therefore  FB  is  also  in  a  straight  line  with  BG. 

Let  the  parallelogram  AC  be  completed; 

I  say  that  AC  is  a  square,  that  DG  is  a  mean  proportional 
between  A B,  BC ,  and  further  that  DC  is  a  mean  propor¬ 
tional  between  AC,  CB. 

For,  since  DB  is  equal  to  BF ,  and  BE  to  BG , 
therefore  the  whole  DE  is  equal  to  the  whole  FG. 

But  DE  is  equal  to  each  of  the  straight  lines  AH,  KC, 
and  FG  is  equal  to  each  of  the  straight  lines  AK ,  HC  [i.  34]; 
therefore  each  of  the  straight  lines  AH,  KC  is  also  equal  to  each  of  the  straight 
lines  AK,  HC. 

Therefore  the  parallelogram  AC  is  equilateral. 

And  it  is  also  rectangular; 

therefore  AC  is  a  square. 

And  since,  as  FB  is  to  BG,  so  is  DB  to  BE, 

while,  as  FB  is  to  BG,  so  is  AB  to  DG, 
and,  as  DB  is  to  BE,  so  is  DG  to  BC,  [vi.  1] 

therefore  also,  as  A  B  is  to  DG,  so  is  DG  to  BC.  [v.  11] 

Therefore  DG  is  a  mean  proportional  between  AB,  BC. 

I  say  next  that  DC  is  also  a  mean  proportional  between  AC,  CB. 

For  since,  as  AD  is  to  DK,  so  is  KG  to  GC — 
for  they  are  equal  respectively — 

and,  componendo ,  as  AK  is  to  KD,  so  is  KC  to  CG,  [v.  18] 
while,  as  AK  is  to  KD,  so  is  AC  to  CD, 
and,  as  KC  is  to  CG,  so  is  DC  to  CB,  [vi.  1] 

therefore  also,  as  AC  is  to  DC,  so  is  DC  to  BC.  [v.  11] 

Therefore  DC  is  a  mean  proportional  between  AC,  CB. 

Being  what  it  was  proposed  to  prove. 


Proposition  54 

If  an  area  be  contained  by  a  rational  straight  line  and  the  first  binomial,  the  “side” 
of  the  area  is  the  irrational  straight  line  which  is  called  binomial. 

For  let  the  area  AC  be  contained  by  the  rational  straight  line  AB  and  the 
first  binomial  AD; 

I  say  that  the  “side”  of  the  area  AC  is  the  irrational  straight  line  which  is 
called  binomial. 

For,  since  AD  is  a  first  binomial  straight  line,  let  it  be  divided  into  its  terms 
at  E, 

and  let  AE  be  the  greater  term. 

It  is  then  manifest  that  AE,  ED  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable 
in  square  only, 


236  EUCLID 

the  square  on  AE  is  greater  than  the  square  on  ED  by  the  square  on  a  straight 
line  commensurable  with  AE , 

and  AE  is  commensurable  in  length  with  the  rational  straight  line  AB  set  out. 

[x.  Deff.  ii.  1] 

Let  ED  be  bisected  at  the  point  F. 


Then,  since  the  square  on  A  E  is  greater  than  the  square  on  ED  by  the  square 
on  a  straight  line  commensurable  with  AE, 

therefore,  if  there  be  applied  to  the  greater  AE  a  parallelogram  equal  to  the 
fourth  part  of  the  square  on  the  less,  that  is,  to  the  square  on  EF,  and  deficient 
by  a  square  figure,  it  divides  it  into  commensurable  parts.  [x.  17] 

Let  then  the  rectangle  AG,  GE  equal  to  the  square  on  EF  be  applied  to  AE) 
therefore  AG  is  commensurable  in  length  with  EG. 

Let  GH ,  EK,  FL  be  drawn  from  G,  E,  F  parallel  to  either  of  the  straight 
lines  AB,  CD; 

let  the  square  SN  be  constructed  equal  to  the  parallelogram  AH,  and  the 
square  A TQ  equal  to  GK ,  [n.  14] 

and  let  them  be  placed  so  that  MN  is  in  a  straight  line  with  NO; 
therefore  RN  is  also  in  a  straight  line  with  NP. 

And  let  the  parallelogram  SQ  be  completed; 

therefore  SQ  is  a  square.  [Lemma] 

Now,  since  the  rectangle  AG,  GE  is  equal  to  the  square  on  EF, 

therefore,  as  AG  is  to  EF,  so  is  FE  to  EG;  [vi.  17] 

therefore  also,  as  AH  is  to  EL,  so  is  EL  to  KG;  [vi.  1] 

therefore  EL  is  a  mean  proportional  between  AH,  GK. 

But  AH  is  equal  to  SN,  and  GK  to  NQ; 

therefore  EL  is  a  mean  proportional  between  SN,  NQ. 

But  MR  is  also  a  mean  proportional  between  the  same  SN,  NQ;  [Lemma] 
therefore  EL  is  equal  to  MR, 
so  that  it  is  also  equal  to  PO. 

But  AH,  GK  are  also  equal  to  SN,  NQ; 
therefore  the  whole  AC  is  equal  to  the  whole  SQ,  that  is,  to  the  square  on  MO; 
therefore  MO  is  the  “side”  of  AC. 

I  say  next  that  MO  is  binomial. 

For,  since  AC  is  commensurable  with  GE, 
therefore  AE  is  also  commensurable  with  each  of  the  straight  lines  AG,  GE. 

[x.  15] 

But  AE  is  also,  by  hypothesis,  commensurable  with  AB; 

therefore  AG,  GE  are  also  commensurable  with  AB.  [x.  12] 
And  AB  is  rational; 

therefore  each  of  the  straight  lines  AG,  GE  is  also  rational; 
therefore  each  of  the  rectangles  AH,  GK  is  rational, 


[x.  19] 


237 


ELEMENTS  X 

and  AH  is  commensurable  with  GK. 

But  AH  is  equal  to  SN,  and  GK  to  NQ ; 
therefore  SN,  NQ ,  that  is,  the  squares  on  MN,  NO ,  are  rational  and  commen¬ 
surable. 

And,  since  AE  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  ED , 
while  AE  is  commensurable  with  AG ,  and  DE  is  commensurable  with  EF, 

therefore  AG  is  also  incommensurable  with  EF ,  [x.  13] 

so  that  A  H  is  also  incommensurable  with  EL.  [vi.  1,  x.  11] 
But  AH  is  equal  to  SN,  and  EL  to  MR; 

therefore  SN  is  also  incommensurable  with  MR. 

But,  as  SN  is  to  MR,  so  is  PN  to  NR;  [vi.  1] 

therefore  PN  is  incommensurable  with  NR.  [x.  11] 

But  PN  is  equal  to  MN,  and  NR  to  NO; 

therefore  MN  is  incommensurable  with  NO. 

And  the  square  on  MN  is  commensurable  with  the  square  on  NO, 

and  each  is  rational; 

therefore  MN,  NO  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only. 
Therefore  MO  is  binomial  [x.  36]  and  the  “side”  of  AC.  q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  55 

If  an  area  be  contained  by  a  rational  straight  line  and  the  second  binomial,  the 
“side”  of  the  area  is  the  irrational  straight  line  which  is  called  a  first  bimedial. 

For  let  the  area  A  BCD  be  contained  by  the  rational  straight  line  A  B  and 
the  second  binomial  AD; 

I  say  that  the  “side”  of  the  area  AC  is  a  first  bimedial  straight  line. 

For,  since  AD  is  a  second  binomial  straight  line,  let  it  be  divided  into  its 
terms  at  E,  so  that  AD  is  the  greater  term; 

therefore  AE,  ED  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only, 
the  square  on  AD  is  greater  than  the  square  on  ED  by  the  square  on  a  straight 
line  commensurable  with  AD, 

and  the  lesser  term  ED  is  commensurable  in  length  with  AB.  [x.  Deff.  n.  2] 
Let  ED  be  bisected  at  F, 

and  let  there  be  applied  to  AD  the  rectangle  AG,  GE  equal  to  the  square  on  EF 
and  deficient  by  a  square  figure; 

therefore  AG  is  commensurable  in  length  with  GE.  [x.  17] 

Through  G,  E,  F  let  GH,  EK,  FL  be  drawn  parallel  to  AB,  CD, 
let  the  square  SN  be  constructed  equal  to  the  parallelogram  AH,  and  the 
square  NQ  equal  to  GK, 


and  let  them  be  placed  so  that  MN  is  in  a  straight  line  with  NO; 
therefore  RN  is  also  in  a  straight  line  with  NP. 

Let  the  square  SQ  be  completed. 


238  EUCLID 

It  is  then  manifest  from  what  was  proved  before  that  MR  is  a  mean  propor¬ 
tional  between  SN ,  NQ  and  is  equal  to  EL,  and  that  MO  is  the  “side”  of  the 
area  AC. 

It  is  now  to  be  proved  that  MO  is  a  first  bimedial  straight  line. 

Since  AE  is  commensurable  in  length  with  ED, 

while  ED  is  commensurable  wdth  AB, 
therefore  AE  is  incommensurable  with  AB.  [x.  13] 

And,  since  AG  is  commensurable  with  EG, 

AE  is  also  commensurable  with  each  of  the  straight  lines  AG,  GE.  [x.  15] 
But  AE  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  AB; 

therefore  AG,  GE  are  also  incommensurable  with  AB.  [x.  13] 
Therefore  BA,  AG  and  BA,  GE  are  pairs  of  rational  straight  lines  commen¬ 
surable  in  square  only; 

so  that  each  of  the  rectangles  AH,  GK  is  medial.  [x.  21] 

Hence  each  of  the  squares  SN,  NQ  is  medial. 

Therefore  MN,  NO  are  also  medial. 

And,  since  AG  is  commensurable  in  length  with  GE, 

AH  is  also  commensurable  with  GK,  [vi.  1,  x.  11] 

that  is,  SN  is  commensurable  with  NQ, 
that  is,  the  square  on  MN  with  the  square  on  NO. 

And,  since  AE  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  ED, 
while  AE  is  commensurable  with  AG, 
and  ED  is  commensurable  with  EF, 
therefore  AG  is  incommensurable  wath  EF;  [x.  13] 

so  that  AH  is  also  incommensurable  with  EL, 
that  is,  SN  is  incommensurable  with  MR, 

that  is,  PN  with  NR,  [vi.  1,  x.  11] 

that  is,  MN  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  NO. 

But  MN,  NO  were  proved  to  be  both  medial  and  commensurable  in  square; 
therefore  MN,  NO  are  medial  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only. 

I  say  next  that  they  also  contain  a  rational  rectangle. 

For,  since  DE  is,  by  hypothesis,  commensurable  with  each  of  the  straight 
lines  AB,  EF, 

therefore  EF  is  also  commensurable  with  EK.  [x.  12] 

And  each  of  them  is  rational; 

therefore  EL,  that  is,  MR  is  rational,  [x.  19] 

and  MR  is  the  rectangle  MN,  NO. 

But,  if  two  medial  straight  fines  commensurable  in  square  only  and  contain¬ 
ing  a  rational  rectangle  be  added  together,  the  whole  is  irrational  and  is  called 
a  first  bimedial  straight  fine.  [x.  37] 

Therefore  MO  is  a  first  bimedial  straight  fine.  Q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  56 

If  an  area  be  contained  by  a  rational  straight  line  and  the  third  binomial,  the  “ side ” 
of  the  area  is  the  irrational  straight  line  called  a  second  bimedial. 

For  let  the  area  ABCD  be  contained  by  the  rational  straight  fine  AB  and  the 
third  binomial  AD  divided  into  its  terms  at  E,  of  which  terms  AE  is  the  greater; 

I  say  that  the  “side”  of  the  area  AC  is  the  irrational  straight  fine  called  a 
second  bimedial. 


239 


ELEMENTS  X 

For  let  the  same  construction  be  made  as  before. 
Now,  since  AD  is  a  third  binomial  straight  line, 


therefore  AE ,  ED  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only, 
the  square  on  AE  is  greater  than  the  square  on  ED  by  the  square  on  a  straight 
line  commensurable  with  AE, 

and  neither  of  the  terms  AE,  ED  is  commensurable  in  length  with  AB. 

[x.  Deff.  ii.  3] 

Then,  in  manner  similar  to  the  foregoing,  we  shall  prove  that  MO  is  the 
“side”  of  the  area  AC, 

and  MN,  NO  are  medial  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only; 

so  that  MO  is  bimedial. 

It  is  next  to  be  proved  that  it  is  also  a  second  bimedial  straight  line. 

Since  DE  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  AB,  that  is,  with  EK , 
and  DE  is  commensurable  with  EF, 
therefore  EF  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  EK.  [x.  13] 
And  they  are  rational; 

therefore  FE,  EK  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only. 
Therefore  EL,  that  is,  MR,  is  medial.  [x.  21] 

And  it  is  contained  by  MN,  NO; 

therefore  the  rectangle  MN,  NO  is  medial. 

Therefore  MO  is  a  second  bimedial  straight  line.  [x.  38] 

Q.  E.  D. 


Proposition  57 

If  an  area  be  contained  by  a  rational  straight  line  and  the  fourth  binomial,  the 
“side”  of  the  area  is  the  irrational  straight  line  called  major. 

For  let  the  area  AC  be  contained  by  the  rational  straight  line  AB  and  the 
fourth  binomial  AD  divided  into  its  terms  at  E,  of  which  terms  let  AE  be  the 
greater; 

I  say  that  the  “side”  of  the  area  ACis  the  irrational  straight  line  called  major. 
For,  since  AD  is  a  fourth  binomial  straight  line, 
therefore  AE,  ED  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only, 
the  square  on  A E  is  greater  than  the  square  on  ED  by  the  square  on  a  straight 
line  incommensurable  with  AE, 

and  AE  is  commensurable  in  length  with  AB.  [x.  Deff.  n.  4] 
Let  DE  be  bisected  at  F, 

and  let  there  be  applied  to  AE  a  parallelogram,  the  rectangle  AG,  GE,  equal  to 
the  square  on  EF; 

therefore  AG  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  GE.  [x.  18] 
Let  GH,  EK,  FL  be  drawn  parallel  to  AB, 


240  EUCLID 

and  let  the  rest  of  the  construction  be  as  before; 
it  is  then  manifest  that  MO  is  the  “side”  of  the  area  AC. 


It  is  next  to  be  proved  that  MO  is  the  irrational  straight  line  called  major. 

Since  AG  is  incommensurable  with  EG , 

AH  is  also  incommensurable  with  GK,  that  is,  SN  with  XQ ;  [vi.  1,  x.  11] 
therefore  MX ,  XO  are  incommensurable  in  square. 

And,  since  AE  is  commensurable  with  AB, 

AK  is  rational;  [x.  19] 

and  it  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  MX ,  XO; 
therefore  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  MX,  XO  is  also  rational. 

And,  since  DE  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  AB ,  that  is,  with  EK, 
while  DE  is  commensurable  with  EF, 
therefore  EF  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  EK.  [x.  13] 

Therefore  EK,  EF  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only; 

therefore  LE ,  that  is,  MR,  is  medial.  [x.  21] 

And  it  is  contained  by  MX,  XO; 

therefore  the  rectangle  MN,  XO  is  medial. 

And  the  [sum]  of  the  squares  on  MX,  XO  is  rational, 

and  MX,  XO  are  incommensurable  in  square. 

But,  if  two  straight  lines  incommensurable  in  square  and  making  the  sum  of 
the  squares  on  them  rational,  but  the  rectangle  contained  by  them  medial,  be 
added  together,  the  whole  is  irrational  and  is  called  major.  [x.  39] 

Therefore  MO  is  the  irrational  straight  line  called  major  and  is  the  “side”  of 
the  area  AC.  Q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  58 

If  an  area  be  contained  by  a  rational  straight  line  and  the  fifth  binomial,  the  “szde” 
of  the  area  is  the  irrational  straight  line  called  the  side  of  a  rational  plus  a  medial 
area. 

For  let  the  area  AC  be  contained  by  the  rational  straight  line  AB  and  the 
fifth  binomial  AD  divided  into  its  terms  at  E,  so  that  AE  is  the  greater  term; 

I  say  that  the  “side”  of  the  area  AC  is  the  irrational  straight  line  called  the 
side  of  a  rational  plus  a  medial  area. 

For  let  the  same  construction  be  made  as  before  shown; 

it  is  then  manifest  that  MO  is  the  “side”  of  the  area  AC. 

It  is  then  to  be  proved  that  MO  is  the  side  of  a  rational  plus  a  medial  area. 

For,  since  AG  is  incommensurable  with  GE,  [x.  18] 

therefore  AH  is  also  commensurable  with  HE,  [vi.  1,  x.  11] 
that  is,  the  square  on  MN  with  the  square  on  XO; 
therefore  MX,  XO  are  incommensurable  in  square. 


241 


ELEMENTS  X 

And,  since  AD  is  a  fifth  binomial  straight  line,  and  ED  the  lesser  segment, 
therefore  ED  is  commensurable  in  length  with  AB.  [x.  Deff.  n.  5] 

A _ G  E  F  D  _ _ R  Q 


M 

B  HK  L  C 


S  P 


R _ Q 


N 

But  AE  is  incommensurable  with  ED ; 

therefore  A B  is  also  incommensurable  in  length  with  AE.  [x.  13] 
Therefore  AK,  that  is,  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  M N,  NO ,  is  medial,  [x.  21] 
And,  since  DE  is  commensurable  in  length  with  AB,  that  is,  with  EK , 
while  DE  is  commensurable  with  EF, 
therefore  EF  is  also  commensurable  with  EK.  [x.  12] 

And  EK  is  rational; 

therefore  EL,  that  is,  MR,  that  is,  the  rectangle  MN,  NO,  is  also  rational. 

[x.  19] 

Therefore  MN,  NO  are  straight  lines  incommensurable  in  square  which 
make  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  them  medial,  but  the  rectangle  contained  by 
them  rational. 

Therefore  MO  is  the  side  of  a  rational  plus  a  medial  area  [x.  40]  and  is  the 
“side”  of  the  area  AC.  q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  59 

If  an  area  be  contained  by  a  rational  straight  line  and  the  sixth  binomial,  the  “side” 
of  the  area  is  the  irrational  straight  line  called  the  side  of  the  sum  of  two  medial  areas. 

For  let  the  area  ABCD  be  contained  by  the  rational  straight  line  AB  and 
the  sixth  binomial  AD,  divided  into  its  terms  at  E,  so  that  AE  is  the  greater 
term; 

I  say  that  the  “side”  of  AC  is  the  side  of  the  sum  of  two  medial  areas. 

Let  the  same  construction  be  made  as  before  shown. 


It  is  then  manifest  that  MO  is  the  “side”  of  AC,  and  that  MN  is  incommen¬ 
surable  in  square  with  NO. 

Now,  since  EA  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  AB, 
therefore  EA,  AB  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only; 
therefore  AK,  that  is,  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  MN,  NO,  is  medial.  [x.  21] 
Again,  since  ED  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  AB, 


242  EUCLID 

therefore  FE  is  also  incommensurable  with  EK ;  [x.  13] 

therefore  FE,  EK  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only; 
therefore  EL,  that  is,  MR,  that  is,  the  rectangle  MN ,  NO,  is  medial,  [x.  21] 
And,  since  AE  is  incommensurable  with  EF , 

AK  is  also  incommensurable  with  EL.  [vi.  1,  x.  11] 

But  AK  is  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  MN,  NO, 

and  EL  is  the  rectangle  MN,  NO; 

therefore  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  MN,  NO  is  incommensurable  with  the 
rectangle  MN,  NO. 

And  each  of  them  is  medial,  and  MN,  NO  are  incommensurable  in  square. 
Therefore  MO  is  the  side  of  the  sum  of  two  medial  areas  [x.  41],  and  is  the 
“side”  of  AC.  q.  e.  d. 


Lemma 

If  a  straight  line  be  cut  into  unequal  parts,  the  squares  on  the  unequal  parts 
are  greater  than  twice  the  rectangle  contained  by  the  unequal  parts. 

Let  AB  be  a  straight  line,  and  let  it  be  cut  into  A  d  C  B 

unequal  parts  at  C,  and  let  AC  be  the  greater;  1  *  1  '  1 

I  say  that  the  squares  on  AC,  CB  are  greater  than  twice  the  rectangle  AC,  CB. 
For  let  AB  be  bisected  at  D. 

Since,  then,  a  straight  line  has  been  cut  into  equal  parts  at  D,  and  into  un¬ 
equal  parts  at  C, 

therefore  the  rectangle  AC,  CB  together  with  the  square  on  CD  is  equal  to  the 
square  on  AD,  [n.  5] 

so  that  the  rectangle  AC,  CB  is  less  than  the  square  on  AD; 
therefore  twice  the  rectangle  AC,  CB  is  less  than  double  of  the  square  on  AD. 

But  the  squares  on  AC,  CB  are  double  of  the  squares  on  AD,  DC;  [n.  9] 
therefore  the  squares  on  AC,  CB  are  greater  than  twice  the  rectangle  AC,  CB. 

Q.  E.  D. 


Proposition  60 

The  square  on  the  binomial  straight  line  applied  to  a  rational  straight  line  pro¬ 
duces  as  breadth  the  first  binomial . 

Let  AD  be  a  binomial  straight  line  divided  into  its  terms  at  C,  so  that  AC  is 
the  greater  term; 

let  a  rational  straight  line  DE  be  set  out, 
and  let  DEFG  equal  to  the  square  on  A  B  be  applied  to  DE  producing  DC  as  its 
breadth ; 

I  say  that  DC  is  a  first  binomial  straight  line. 

For  let  there  be  applied  to  DE  the  rectangle  DH  d _ km  ni  g 

equal  to  the  square  on  AC,  and  KL  equal  to  the 
square  on  BC; 

therefore  the  remainder,  twice  the  rectangle  AC, 

CB,  is  equal  to  MF . 

Let  MG  be  bisected  at  N,  and  let  NO  be  drawn  L - 1 — - 1 - - 

parallel  [to  ML  or  GF].  , 

Therefore  each  of  the  rectangles  MO,  NF  is  A  C  B 

equal  to  once  the  rectangle  AC,  CB. 

Now,  since  AD  is  a  binomial  divided  into  its  terms  at  C, 


ELEMENTS  X  243 

therefore  AC,  CB  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only; 

[x.  36] 

therefore  the  squares  on  AC,  CB  are  rational  and  commensurable  with  one  an¬ 
other, 

so  that  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  AC,  CB  is  also  rational.  [x.  15] 
And  it  is  equal  to  DL; 

therefore  DL  is  rational. 

And  it  is  applied  to  the  rational  straight  line  DE; 

therefore  DM  is  rational  and  commensurable  in  length  with  DE.  [x.  20] 
Again,  since  AC,  CB  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square 
only, 

therefore  twice  the  rectangle  AC,  CB,  that  is  MF,  is  medial,  [x.  21] 
And  it  is  applied  to  the  rational  straight  line  ML ; 
therefore  MG  is  also  rational  and  incommensurable  in  length  with  ML,  that  is, 
DE.  [x.  22] 

But  MD  is  also  rational  and  is  commensurable  in  length  with  DE; 

therefore  DM  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  MG.  [x.  13] 
And  they  are  rational; 

therefore  DM,  MG  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only; 

therefore  DG  is  binomial.  [x.  36] 

It  is  next  to  be  proved  that  it  is  also  a  first  binomial  straight  line. 

Since  the  rectangle  AC,  CB  is  a  mean  proportional  between  the  squares  on 
AC,  CB,  [cf.  Lemma  after  x.  53] 

therefore  MO  is  also  a  mean  proportional  between  DH,  KL. 
Therefore,  as  DH  is  to  MO,  so  is  MO  to  KL, 

that  is,  as  DK  is  to  MN,  so  is  MN  to  MK;  [vi.  1] 

therefore  the  rectangle  DK,  KM  is  equal  to  the  square  on  MN.  [vi.  17] 
And,  since  the  square  on  AC  is  commensurable  with  the  square  on  CB, 
DH  is  also  commensurable  with  KL, 
so  that  DK  is  also  commensurable  with  KM.  [vi.  1,  x.  11] 
And,  since  the  squares  on  AC,  CB  are  greater  than  twice  the  rectangle  AC, 
CB,  [Lemma] 

therefore  DL  is  also  greater  than  MF, 
so  that  DM  is  also  greater  than  MG.  [vi.  1] 

And  the  rectangle  DK,  KM  is  equal  to  the  square  on  MN,  that  is,  to  the 
fourth  part  of  the  square  on  MG, 

and  DK  is  commensurable  with  KM. 

But,  if  there  be  twro  unequal  straight  lines,  and  to  the  greater  there  be  ap¬ 
plied  a  parallelogram  equal  to  the  fourth  part  of  the  square  on  the  less  and  de¬ 
ficient  by  a  square  figure,  and  if  it  divide  it  into  commensurable  parts,  the 
square  on  the  greater  is  greater  than  the  square  on  the  less  by  the  square  on  a 
straight  line  commensurable  with  the  greater;  [x.  17] 

therefore  the  square  on  DM  is  greater  than  the  square  on  MG  by  the  square 
on  a  straight  line  commensurable  with  DM. 

And  DM,  MG  are  rational, 

and  DM,  wThich  is  the  greater  term,  is  commensurable  in  length  with  the  ra¬ 
tional  straight  line  DE  set  out. 

Therefore  DG  is  a  first  binomial  straight  line.  [x.  Deff.  II.  1] 

Q.  E.  D. 


244 


EUCLID 


Proposition  61 


K  M 


H  L 


The  square  on  the  first  bimedial  straight  line  applied  to  a  rational  straight  line  pro¬ 
duces  as  breadth  the  second  binomial. 

Let  AB  be  a  first  bimedial  straight  line  divided  into  its  medials  at  C,  of 
which  medials  AC  is  the  greater; 
let  a  rational  straight  line  DE  be  set  out, 
and  let  there  be  applied  to  DE  the  parallelogram 
DF  equal  to  the  square  on  AB,  producing  DG  as 
its  breadth; 

I  say  that  DG  is  a  second  binomial  straight  line. 

For  let  the  same  construction  as  before  be  made. 

Then,  since  A  B  is  a  first  bimedial  divided  at  C,  ^ - £ - B 

therefore  AC,  CB  are  medial  straight  lines  com¬ 
mensurable  in  square  only,  and  containing  a  rational  rectangle,  [x.  37] 

so  that  the  squares  on  AC,  CB  are  also  medial.  [x.  2l] 

Therefore  DL  is  medial.  [x.  15  and  13,  Por.] 

And  it  has  been  applied  to  the  rational  straight  line  DE ; 
therefore  MD  is  rational  and  incommensurable  in  length  with  DE.  [x.  22] 
Again,  since  twice  the  rectangle  AC,  CB  is  rational,  MF  is  also  rational. 
And  it  is  applied  to  the  rational  straight  line  ML; 
therefore  MG  is  also  rational  and  commensurable  in  length  with  ML,  that  is, 
DE;  [x.  20] 

therefore  DM  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  MG.  [x.  13] 

And  they  are  rational; 

therefore  DM,  MG  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only; 

therefore  DG  is  binomial.  [x.  36] 

It  is  next  to  be  proved  that  it  is  also  a  second  binomial  straight  line. 

For,  since  the  squares  on  AC,  CB  are  greater  than  twice  the  rectangle  AC, 

CB, 


therefore  DL  is  also  greater  than  MF, 
so  that  DM  is  also  greater  than  MG.  [vi.  1] 

And,  since  the  square  on  AC  is  commensurable  with  the  square  on  CB, 
DH  is  also  commensurable  with  KL , 
so  that  DK  is  also  commensurable  with  KM.  [vi.  1,  x.  11] 
And  the  rectangle  DK,  KM  is  equal  to  the  square  on  MN; 
therefore  the  square  on  DM  is  greater  than  the  square  on  MG  by  the  square  on 
a  straight  line  commensurable  with  DM.  [x.  17] 

And  MG  is  commensurable  in  length  with  DE. 

Therefore  DG  is  a  second  binomial  straight  line.  [x.  Deff.  n.  2] 


Proposition  62 

The  square  on  the  second  bimedial  straight  line  applied  to  a  rational  straight  line 
produces  as  breadth  the  third  binomial. 

Let  AB  be  a  second  bimedial  straight  line  divided  into  its  medials  at  C,  so 
that  AC  is  the  greater  segment; 
let  DE  be  any  rational  straight  line, 

and  to  DE  let  there  be  applied  the  parallelogram  DF  equal  to  the  square  on 
AB  and  producing  DG  as  its  breadth; 


K  M 


ELEMENTS  X  245 

I  say  that  DG  is  a  third  binomial  straight  line. 

Let  the  same  construction  be  made  as  before  shown. 

Then,  since  4B  is  a  second  bimedial  divided 
at  C, 

therefore  AC,  CB  are  medial  straight  lines  com¬ 
mensurable  in  square  only  and  containing  a 
medial  rectangle,  [x.  38] 

_  so  that  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  AC,  CB  is  also 

E  H  L  0  F  medial.  [x.  15  and  23  Por.] 

A  c  B  And  it  is  equal  to  DL) 

therefore  DL  is  also  medial. 

And  it  is  applied  to  the  rational  straight  line  DE ; 
therefore  MD  is  also  rational  and  incommensurable  in  length  with  DE.  [x.  22] 
For  the  same  reason, 

MG  is  also  rational  and  incommensurable  in  length  with  ML,  that  is,  with  DE ; 
therefore  each  of  the  straight  lines  DM,  MG  is  rational  and  incommensurable 
in  length  with  DE . 

And,  since  AC  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  CB, 
and,  as  AC  is  to  CB,  so  is  the  square  on  AC  to  the  rectangle  AC,  CB, 
therefore  the  square  on  AC  is  also  incommensurable  with  the  rectangle  AC, 
CB.  [x.  11] 

Hence  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  AC,  CB  is  incommensurable  with  twice  the 
rectangle  AC,  CB,  [x.  12,  13] 

that  is,  DL  is  incommensurable  with  MF, 
so  that  DM  is  also  incommensurable  with  MG.  [vi.  1,  x.  11] 
And  they  are  rational; 

therefore  DG  is  binomial.  [x.  36] 

It  is  to  be  proved  that  it  is  also  a  third  binomial  straight  line. 

In  manner  similar  to  the  foregoing  we  may  conclude  that  DM  is  greater  than 
MG, 

and  that  DK  is  commensurable  with  KM. 

And  the  rectangle  DK,  KM  is  equal  to  the  square  on  MN; 
therefore  the  square  on  DM  is  greater  than  the  square  on  MG  by  the  square  on 
a  straight  line  commensurable  with  DM. 

And  neither  of  the  straight  lines  DM,  MG  is  commensurable  in  length  with 
DE. 

Therefore  DG  is  a  third  binomial  straight  line.  [x.  Deff.  n.  3] 

Q.  E.  D. 


Proposition  63 

The  square  on  the  major  straight  line  applied  to  a  rational  straight  line  produces 
as  breadth  the  fourth  binomial. 

Let  AB  be  a  major  straight  line  divided  at  C,  so  that  AC  is  greater  than  CB ; 
let  DE  be  a  rational  straight  line, 

and  to  DE  let  there  be  applied  the  parallelogram  DF  equal  to  the  square  on 
AB  and  producing  DG  as  its  breadth; 

I  say  that  DG  is  a  fourth  binomial  straight  line. 

Let  the  same  construction  be  made  as  before  shown. 

Then,  since  AB  is  a  major  straight  line  divided  at  C, 


246 


EUCLID 


K  M 


AC ,  CB  are  straight  lines  incommensurable  in  square  which  make  the  sum  of 
the  squares  on  them  rational,  but  the  rectangle  contained  by  them  medial. 

[x.  39] 

Since,  then,  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  AC,  CB 
is  rational,  therefore  DL  is  rational; 
therefore  DM  is  also  rational  and  commensurable 
in  length  with  DE.  [x.  20] 

Again,  since  twice  the  rectangle  AC,  CB,  that 
is,  MF,  is  medial, 

and  it  is  applied  to  the  rational  straight  line  ML,  e  h  L  0  F 

therefore  MG  is  also  rational  and  incommensurable  ^ - £ - g 

in  length  with  DE;  [x.  22] 

therefore  DM  is  also  incommensurable  in  length  with  MG.  [x.  13] 
Therefore  DM,  MG  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square 
only; 

therefore  DG  is  binomial.  [x.  36] 

It  is  to  be  proved  that  it  is  also  a  fourth  binomial  straight  line. 

In  manner  similar  to  the  foregoing  we  can  prove  that  DM  is  greater  than 
MG, 


and  that  the  rectangle  DK,  KM  is  equal  to  the  square  on  MN. 

Since  then  the  square  on  AC  is  incommensurable  with  the  square  on  CB, 
therefore  DH  is  also  incommensurable  with  KL, 
so  that  DK  is  also  incommensurable  with  KM.  [vi.  1,  x.  11] 
But,  if  there  be  two  unequal  straight  lines,  and  to  the  greater  there  be  ap¬ 
plied  a  parallelogram  equal  to  the  fourth  part  of  the  square  on  the  less  and 
deficient  by  a  square  figure,  and  if  it  divide  it  into  incommensurable  parts, 
then  the  square  on  the  greater  will  be  greater  than  the  square  on  the  less  by  the 
square  on  a  straight  line  incommensurable  in  length  with  the  greater;  [x.  18] 
therefore  the  square  on  DM  is  greater  than  the  square  on  MG  by  the  square  on 
a  straight  line  incommensurable  with  DM. 

And  DM,  MG  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only, 
and  DM  is  commensurable  with  the  rational  straight  line  DE  set  out. 

Therefore  DG  is  a  fourth  binomial  straight  line.  [x.  Deff.  ii.  4] 


Q.  E.  D. 


Proposition  64 


The  square  on  the  side  of  a  rational  plus  a  medial  area  applied  to  a  rational  straight 
line  produces  as  breadth  the  fifth  binomial. 

Let  AB  be  the  side  of  a  rational  plus  a  medial  area,  divided  into  its  straight 
lines  at  C,  so  that  AC  is  the  greater; 
let  a  rational  straight  line  DE  be  set  out, 
and  let  there  be  applied  to  DE  the  parallelogram 
DF  equal  to  the  square  on  AB,  producing  DG  as 
its  breadth; 

I  say  that  DG  is  a  fifth  binomial  straight  line. 

Let  the  same  construction  as  before  be  made. 

Since  then  A B  is  the  side  of  a  rational  plus  a 
medial  area,  divided  at  C, 
therefore  AC,  CB  are  straight  lines  incommensurable  in  square  which  make 


K  M 


H  L 


ELEMENTS  X  247 

the  sum  of  the  squares  on  them  medial,  but  the  rectangle  contained  by  them 
rational.  [x.  40] 

Since,  then,  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  AC ,  CB  is  medial, 

therefore  DL  is  medial, 

so  that  DM  is  rational  and  incommensurable  in  length  with  DE.  [x.  22] 
Again,  since  twice  the  rectangle  AC ,  CB,  that  is  MF,  is  rational, 

therefore  MG  is  rational  and  commensurable  with  DE.  [x.  20] 
Therefore  DM  is  incommensurable  with  MG\  [x.  13] 

therefore  DM,  MG  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only; 

therefore  DG  is  binomial.  [x.  36] 

I  say  next  that  it  is  also  a  fifth  binomial  straight  line. 


For  it  can  be  proved  similarly  that  the  rectangle  DK ,  KM  is  equal  to  the 
square  on  MN, 

and  that  DK  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  KM ; 
therefore  the  square  on  DM  is  greater  than  the  square  on  MG  by  the  square 
on  a  straight  line  incommensurable  with  DM.  [x.  18] 

And  DM,  MG  are  commensurable  in  square  only,  and  the  less,  MG,  is  com¬ 
mensurable  in  length  with  DE. 

Therefore  DG  is  a  fifth  binomial.  q.  e.  d. 


K  M 


Proposition  65 

The  square  on  the  side  of  the  sum  of  two  medial  areas  applied  to  a  rational  straight 
line  produces  as  breadth  the  sixth  binomial. 

Let  A  B  be  the  side  of  the  sum  of  two  medial  areas,  divided  at  C, 
let  DE  be  a  rational  straight  line, 

and  let  there  be  applied  to  DE  the  parallelogram  DF  equal  to  the  square  on 
A B,  producing  DG  as  its  breadth; 

I  say  that  DG  is  a  sixth  binomial  straight  line. 

For  let  the  same  construction  be  made  as  before. 

Then,  since  A B  is  the  side  of  the  sum  of  two 
medial  areas,  divided  at  C, 
therefore  AC,  CB  are  straight  lines  incommensur¬ 
able  in  square  which  make  the  sum  of  the  squares 
on  them  medial,  the  rectangle  contained  by  them 
medial,  and  moreover  the  sum  of  the  squares  on 
them  incommensurable  with  the  rectangle  con¬ 
tained  by  them,  [x.  41] 

so  that,  in  accordance  with  what  was  before 
proved,  each  of  the  rectangles  DL,  MF  is  medial. 
And  they  are  applied  to  the  rational  straight  line  DE ; 
therefore  each  of  the  straight  lines  DM,  MG  is  rational  and  incommensurable 
in  length  with  DE.  [x.  22] 

And,  since  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  AC,  CB  is  incommensurable  with  twice 
the  rectangle  AC,  CB, 

therefore  DL  is  incommensurable  with  MF. 

Therefore  DM  is  also  incommensurable  with  MG ;  [vi.  1,  x.  11] 

therefore  DM,  MG  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only; 

therefore  DG  is  binomial.  [x.  36] 

I  say  next  that  it  is  also  a  sixth  binomial  straight  line. 


H  L 


B 


248  EUCLID 

Similarly  again  we  can  prove  that  the  rectangle  DK,  KM  is  equal  to  the 
square  on  MNy 

and  that  DK  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  KM ; 
and,  for  the  same  reason,  the  square  on  DM  is  greater  than  the  square  on  MG 
by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  incommensurable  in  length  with  DM. 

And  neither  of  the  straight  lines  DM,  MG  is  commensurable  in  length  with 
the  rational  straight  line  DE  set  out. 

Therefore  DG  is  a  sixth  binomial  straight  line.  q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  66 

A  straight  line  commensurable  in  length  with  a  binomial  straight  line  is  itself  also 
binomial  and  the  same  in  order. 

Let  AB  be  binomial,  and  let  CD  be  commensurable  in  length  with  AB; 

I  say  that  CD  is  binomial  and  the  same  E 

in  order  with  AB.  A - ♦ - B 

For,  since  AB  is  binomial,  c _ £ _ D 

let  it  be  divided  into  its  terms  at  E, 

and  let  AE  be  the  greater  term; 

therefore  AE,  EB  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only. 


[x.  36] 

Let  it  be  contrived  that, 

as  AB  is  to  CD,  so  is  AE  to  CF ;  [vi.  12] 

therefore  also  the  remainder  EB  is  to  the  remainder  FD  as  AB  is  to  CD.  [v.  19] 
But  AB  is  commensurable  in  length  with  CD; 
therefore  AE  is  also  commensurable  with  CF,  and  EB  with  FD.  [x.  11] 

And  AE,  EB  are  rational; 

therefore  CF,  FD  are  also  rational. 

And,  as  AE  is  to  CF,  so  is  EB  to  FD.  [v.  11] 

Therefore,  alternately,  as  AE  is  to  EB,  so  is  CF  to  FD.  [v.  16] 

But  AE,  EB  are  commensurable  in  square  only; 

therefore  CF,  FD  are  also  commensurable  in  square  only.  [x.  11] 
And  they  are  rational; 

therefore  CD  is  binomial.  [x.  36] 

I  say  next  that  it  is  the  same  in  order  with  AB. 

For  the  square  on  AE  is  greater  than  the  square  on  EB  either  by  the  square 


on  a  straight  line  commensurable  with  AE  or  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line 
incommensurable  with  it. 

If  then  the  square  on  AE  is  greater  than  the  square  on  EB  by  the  square  on 
a  straight  line  commensurable  with  AE, 

the  square  on  CF  will  also  be  greater  than  the  square  on  FD  by  the  square  on  a 
straight  line  commensurable  with  CF.  [x.  14] 

And,  if  AE  is  commensurable  with  the  rational  straight  line  set  out,  CF  will 
also  be  commensurable  with  it,  [x.  12] 

and  for  this  reason  each  of  the  straight  lines  AB,  CD  is  a  first  binomial,  that  is, 
the  same  in  order.  [x.  Deff.  n.  1] 

But,  if  EB  is  commensurable  with  the  rational  straight  line  set  out,  FD  is 
also  commensurable  with  it,  [x.  12] 

and  for  this  reason  again  CD  will  be  the  same  in  order  with  AB, 

for  each  of  them  will  be  a  second  binomial.  [x.  Deff.  n.  2] 


ELEMENTS  X  249 

But,  if  neither  of  the  straight  lines  AE,  EB  is  commensurable  with  the  ra¬ 
tional  straight  line  set  out,  neither  of  the  straight  lines  CF,  FD  will  be  com¬ 
mensurable  with  it,  [x.  13] 

and  each  of  the  straight  lines  AB ,  CD  is  a  third  binomial.  [x.  Deff.  n.  3] 
But,  if  the  square  on  A  E  is  greater  than  the  square  on  EB  by  the  square  on 
a  straight  line  incommensurable  with  AE, 

the  square  on  CF  is  also  greater  than  the  square  on  FD  by  the  square  on  a 
straight  line  incommensurable  with  CF.  [x.  14] 

And,  if  AE  is  commensurable  with  the  rational  straight  line  set  out,  CF  is 
also  commensurable  with  it, 

and  each  of  the  straight  lines  AB,  CD  is  a  fourth  binomial.  [x.  Deff.  n.  4] 
But,  if  EB  is  so  commensurable,  so  is  FD  also, 
and  each  of  the  straight  lines  AB,  CD  will  be  a  fifth  binomial,  [x.  Deff.  n.  5] 
But,  if  neither  of  the  straight  lines  AE,  EB  is  so  commensurable,  neither  of 
the  straight  lines  CF,  FD  is  commensurable  with  the  rational  straight  line  set 
out, 

and  each  of  the  straight  lines  AB,  CD  will  be  a  sixth  binomial,  [x.  Deff.  n.  G] 
Hence  a  straight  line  commensurable  in  length  with  a  binomial  straight  line 
is  binomial  and  the  same  in  order.  q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  67 

A  straight  line  commensurable  in  length  with  a  bimedial  straight  line  is  itself  also 
bimedial  and  the  same  in  order. 

Let  AB  be  bimedial,  and  let  CD  be  commensurable  in  length  with  AB; 

A  E  B  I  say  CD  is  bimedial  and  the  same  in  order  with  AB. 

~  p“ '  D  For,  since  AB  is  bimedial, 

- + -  let  it  be  divided  into  its  medials  at  E; 

therefore  AE,  EB  are  medial  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only. 

[x.  37,  38] 

And  let  it  be  contrived  that, 

as  AB  is  to  CD,  so  is  AE  to  CF; 

therefore  also  the  remainder  EB  is  to  the  remainder  FD  as  AB  is  to  CD.  [v.  19] 
But  AB  is  commensurable  in  length  with  CD; 
therefore  AE,  EB  are  also  commensurable  with  CF,  FD  respectively,  [x.  11] 
But  AE,  EB  are  medial; 

therefore  CF,  FD  are  also  medial.  [x.  23] 

And  since,  as  AE  is  to  EB,  so  is  CF  to  FD.  [v.  11] 

and  AE,  EB  are  commensurable  in  square  only, 

CF,  FD  are  also  commensurable  in  square  only.  [x.  11] 

But  they  wrere  also  proved  medial; 

therefore  CD  is  bimedial. 

I  say  next  that  it  is  also  the  same  in  order  with  AB. 

For  since,  as  A  E  is  to  EB,  so  is  CF  to  FD, 
therefore  also,  as  the  square  on  A E  is  to  the  rectangle  AE,  EB,  so  is  the  square 
on  CF  to  the  rectangle  CF,  FD; 

therefore,  alternately, 

as  the  square  on  AE  is  to  the  square  on  CF,  so  is  the  rectangle  AE,  EB  to  the 
rectangle  CF,  FD.  [v.  16] 

But  the  square  on  A E  is  commensurable  with  the  square  on  CF; 


250  EUCLID 

therefore  the  rectangle  AE,  EB  is  also  commensurable  with  the 
rectangle  CF,  FD. 

If  therefore  the  rectangle  AE ,  EB  is  rational, 

the  rectangle  CF,  FD  is  also  rational, 

[and  for  this  reason  CD  is  a  first  bimedial];  [x.  37] 

but  if  medial,  medial,  [x.  23,  PorJ 

and  each  of  the  straight  fines  AB,  CD  is  a  second  bimedial.  [x.  38] 
And  for  this  reason  CD  will  be  the  same  in  order  with  AB.  q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  68 

A  straight  line  commensurable  urith  a  major  straight  line  is  itself  also  major . 

Let  AB  be  major,  and  let  CD  be  commensurable  with  AB ; 

I  say  that  CD  is  major. 

Let  AB  be  divided  at  E; 

therefore  AE,  EB  are  straight  fines  incommensurable  in  square 
which  make  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  them  rational,  but  the  rec¬ 
tangle  contained  b}'  them  medial.  [x.  39] 

Let  the  same  construction  be  made  as  before. 

Then  since,  as  AB  is  to  CD,  so  is  AE  to  CF,  and  EB  to  FD, 

therefore  also,  as  AE  is  to  CF,  so  is  EB  to  FD.  [v.  11] 

But  AB  is  commensurable  with  CD; 

therefore  AE,  EB  are  also  commensurable  with  CF,  FD  respectively,  [x.  11] 
And  since,  as  AE  is  to  CF,  so  is  EB  to  FD, 

alternately  also, 

as  AE  is  to  EB,  so  is  CF  to  FD;  [v.  16] 

therefore  also,  componendo, 

as  AB  is  to  BE,  so  is  CD  to  DF;  [v.  18] 

therefore  also,  as  the  square  on  AB  is  to  the  square  on  BE,  so  is  the  square  on 
CD  to  the  square  on  DF.  [vi.  20] 

Similarly  we  can  prove  that,  as  the  square  on  AB  is  to  the  square  on  AE,  so 
also  is  the  square  on  CD  to  the  square  on  CF. 

Therefore  also,  as  the  square  on  AB  is  to  the  squares  on  AE,  EB,  so  is  the 
square  on  CD  to  the  squares  on  CF,  FD; 

therefore  also,  alternately, 

as  the  square  on  AB  is  to  the  square  on  CD,  so  are  the  squares  on  AE,  EB  to 
the  squares  on  CF,  FD.  [v.  16] 

But  the  square  on  AB  is  commensurable  with  the  square  on  CD; 
therefore  the  squares  on  AE,  EB  are  also  commensurable  with  the  squares  on 
CF,  FD. 

And  the  squares  on  AE,  EB  together  are  rational; 

therefore  the  squares  on  CF,  FD  together  are  rational. 

Similarly  also  twice  the  rectangle  AE,  EB  is  commensurable  with  twice  the 
rectangle  CF,  FD. 

And  twice  the  rectangle  AE,  EB  is  medial; 

therefore  twice  the  rectangle  CF,  FD  is  also  medial,  [x.  23,  Por.] 
Therefore  CF,  FD  are  straight  fines  incommensurable  in  square  which  make, 
at  the  same  time,  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  them  rational,  but  the  rectangle 
contained  by  them  medial;  therefore  the  whole  CD  is  the  irrational  straight 
fine  called  major.  [x.  39] 


ELEMENTS  X 


251 


Therefore  a  straight  line  commensurable  with  the  major  straight  line  is 
major.  Q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  69 

A  straight  line  commensurable  with  the  side  of  a  rational  plus  a  medial  area  is 
itself  also  the  side  of  a  rational  plus  a  medial  area. 

Let  AB  be  the  side  of  a  rational  plus  a  medial  area,  and  let  CD  be  commen¬ 
surable  with  AB; 

A  it  is  to  be  proved  that  CD  is  also  the  side  of  a  rational  plus  a 

medial  area. 

c  Let  AB  be  divided  into  its  straight  lines  at  E; 

therefore  AE,  EB  are  straight  lines  incommensurable  in  square 
which  make  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  them  medial,  but  the 
E  rectangle  contained  by  them  rational.  [x.  40] 

F  -  Let  the  same  construction  be  made  as  before. 

B  D  We  can  then  prove  similarly  that 

CD,  FD  are  incommensurable  in  square, 
and  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  AE,  EB  is  commensurable  with  the  sum  of  the 
squares  on  CD,  FD , 

and  the  rectangle  AE,  EB  with  the  rectangle  CF ,  FD; 
so  that  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  CF,  FD  is  also  medial,  and  the  rectangle  CF, 
FD  rational. 

Therefore  CD  is  the  side  of  a  rational  plus  a  medial  area.  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  70 


A  straight  line  commensurable  with  the  side  of  the  sum  of  two  medial  areas  is  the 
side  of  the  sum  of  two  medial  areas. 

Let  AB  be  the  side  of  the  sum  of  tw’o  medial  areas,  and  CD  commensurable 
with  AB; 


A 


C 


Ei  F- 


B 


D 


it  is  to  be  proved  that  CD  is  also  the  side  of  the  sum  of  twT>  medial 
areas. 

For,  since  AB  is  the  side  of  the  sum  of  tw^o  medial  areas, 
let  it  be  divided  into  its  straight  lines  at  E ; 
therefore  AE,  EB  are  straight  lines  incommensurable  in  square 
w’hich  make  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  them  medial,  the  rectangle 
contained  by  them  medial,  and  furthermore  the  sum  of  the 
squares  on  AE,  EB  incommensurable  with  the  rectangle  AE,  EB. 

[x.  41] 


Let  the  same  construction  be  made  as  before. 

We  can  then  prove  similarly  that 

CF,  FD  are  also  incommensurable  in  square, 
the  sum  of  the  squares  on  AE,  EB  is  commensurable  with  the  sum  of  the 
squares  on  CF,  FD, 

and  the  rectangle  AE,  EB  with  the  rectangle  CF,  FD; 
so  that  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  CF,  FD  is  also  medial, 
the  rectangle  CF,  FD  is  medial, 

and  moreover  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  CF,  FD  is  incommensurable  with  the 
rectangle  CF,  FD. 

Therefore  CD  is  the  side  of  the  sum  of  twTo  medial  areas. 


Q.  E.  D. 


252 


EUCLID 


Proposition  71 

If  a  rational  and  a  medial  area  be  added  together ,  four  irrational  straight  lines 
arise ,  namely  a  binomial  or  a  first  bimedial  or  a  major  or  a  side  of  a  rational  plus 
a  medial  area . 

Let  AB  be  rational,  and  CD  medial; 

I  say  that  the  “side”  of  the  area  AD  is  a  binomial  or  a  first  bimedial  or  a  ma¬ 
jor  or  a  side  of  a  rational  plus  a  medial  area. 

For  AB  is  either  greater  or  less  than  CD. 

First,  let  it  be  greater; 

let  a  rational  straight  line  EF  be  set  out, 
let  there  be  applied  to  EF  the  rectangle  EG  equal  to  AB ,  producing  EH  as 
breadth, 

and  let  HI ,  equal  to  DC,  be  applied  to  EF,  producing  HK  as  breadth. 

Then,  since  AB  is  rational 
and  is  equal  to  EG,  £ - 9 - 

therefore  EG  is  also  rational.  E  H  K 

And  it  has  been  applied  to  T 

EF,  producing  EH  as 
breadth; 

therefore  EH  is  rational  and 
commensurable  in  length 

with  EF.  [x.  20]  jt - £ - 

Again,  since  CD  is  medial  b  d 

and  is  equal  to  HI, 

therefore  HI  is  also  medial. 

And  it  is  applied  to  the  rational  straight  line  EF,  producing  HK  as  breadth; 
therefore  HK  is  rational  and  incommensurable  in  length  with  EF  [x.  22] 
And,  since  CD  is  medial, 

while  AB  is  rational, 

therefore  AD  is  incommensurable  with  CD, 
so  that  EG  is  also  incommensurable  with  HI. 

But,  as  EG  is  to  HI,  so  is  EH  to  HK;  [vi.  1] 

therefore  EH  is  also  incommensurable  in  length  with  HK.  [x.  11] 
And  both  are  rational; 

therefore  EH,  HK  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only; 

therefore  EK  is  a  binomial  straight  line,  divided  at  H.  [x.  36] 
And,  since  AB  is  greater  than  CD, 

while  AB  is  equal  to  EG  and  CD  to  HI, 
therefore  EG  is  also  greater  than  HI; 
therefore  EH  is  also  greater  than  HK. 

The  square,  then,  on  EH  is  greater  than  the  square  on  HK  either  by  the 
square  on  a  straight  line  commensurable  in  length  with  EH  or  by  the  square 
on  a  straight  line  incommensurable  with  it. 

First,  let  the  square  on  it  be  greater  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  com¬ 
mensurable  with  itself. 

Now  the  greater  straight  line  HE  is  commensurable  in  length  with  the  ra¬ 
tional  straight  line  EF  set  out; 

therefore  EK  is  a  first  binomial.  [x.  Deff.  n.  1] 


ELEMENTS  X 


253 


But  EF  is  rational; 

and,  if  an  area  be  contained  by  a  rational  straight  line  and  the  first  binomial, 
the  side  of  the  square  equal  to  the  area  is  binomial.  [x.  54] 

Therefore  the  “side”  of  El  is  binomial; 

so  that  the  “side”  of  AD  is  also  binomial. 

Next,  let  the  square  on  EH  be  greater  than  the  square  on  HK  by  the  square 
on  a  straight  line  incommensurable  with  EH. 

Now  the  greater  straight  line  EH  is  commensurable  in  length  with  the  ra¬ 
tional  straight  line  EF  set  out; 

therefore  EK  is  a  fourth  binomial.  [x.  Deff.  n.  4] 

But  EF  is  rational; 

and,  if  an  area  be  contained  by  a  rational  straight  line  and  the  fourth  binomial, 
the  “side”  of  the  area  is  the  irrational  straight  line  called  major.  [x.  57] 
Therefore  the  “side”  of  the  area  El  is  major; 

so  that  the  “side”  of  the  area  AD  is  also  major. 

Next,  let  AB  be  less  than  CD; 

therefore  EG  is  also  less  than  HI, 
so  that  EH  is  also  less  than  HK. 

Now  the  square  on  HK  is  greater  than  the  square  on  EH  either  by  the 
square  on  a  straight  line  commensurable  with  HK  or  by  the  square  on  a 
straight  line  incommensurable  with  it. 

First,  let  the  square  on  it  be  greater  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  com¬ 
mensurable  in  length  with  itself. 

Now  the  lesser  straight  line  EH  is  commensurable  in  length  with  the  ra¬ 
tional  straight  line  EF  set  out; 

therefore  EK  is  a  second  binomial.  [x.  Deff.  ii.  2] 

But  EF  is  rational, 

and,  if  an  area  be  contained  by  a  rational  straight  line  and  the  second  binomial, 
the  side  of  the  square  equal  to  it  is  a  first  bimedial;  [x.  55] 

therefore  the  “side”  of  the  area  El  is  a  first  bimedial. 
so  that  the  “side”  of  AD  is  also  a  first  bimedial. 

Next,  let  the  square  on  HK  be  greater  than  the  square  on  HE  by  the  square 
on  a  straight  line  incommensurable  with  HK. 

Now  the  lesser  straight  line  EH  is  commensurable  with  the  rational  straight 
line  EF  set  out; 

therefore  EK  is  a  fifth  binomial.  [x.  Deff.  n.  5] 

But  EF  is  rational; 

and,  if  an  area  be  contained  by  a  rational  straight  line  and  the  fifth  binomial, 
the  side  of  the  square  equal  to  the  area  is  a  side  of  a  rational  plus  a  medial  area. 

[x.  58] 

Therefore  the  “side”  of  the  area  El  is  a  side  of  a  rational  plus  a  medial  area, 
so  that  the  “side”  of  the  area  AD  is  also  a  side  of  a  rational  plus  a  medial  area. 
Therefore  etc.  Q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  72 

If  two  medial  areas  incommensurable  with  one  another  be  added  together ,  the  re¬ 
maining  two  irrational  straight  lines  arise,  namely  either  a  second  bimedial  or  a 
side  of  the  sum  of  two  medial  areas. 


254  EUCLID 

For  let  two  medial  areas  AB ,  CD  incommensurable  with  one  another  be 
added  together; 

I  say  that  the  “side”  of  the  area  AD  is  either  a  second  bimedial  or  a  side  of 
the  sum  of  two  medial  areas. 


For  A B  is  either  greater  or  less  than  CD. 

First,  if  it  so  chance,  let  AB  be  greater  than  CD. 

Let  the  rational  straight  line  EF  be  set  out, 
and  to  EF  let  there  be  applied  the  rectangle  EG  equal  to  AB  and  producing  EH 
as  breadth,  and  the  rectangle  HI  equal  to  CD  and  producing  HK  as  breadth. 
Now,  since  each  of  the  areas  AB,  CD  is  medial, 

therefore  each  of  the  areas  EG,  HI  is  also  medial. 

And  they  are  applied  to  the  rational  straight  line  FE ,  producing  EH,  HK  as 
breadth; 

therefore  each  of  the  straight  lines  EH,  HK  is  rational  and  incommensurable 


in  length  with  EF.  [x.  22] 

And,  since  A B  is  incommensurable  with  CD, 

and  AB  is  equal  to  EG,  and  CD  to  HI, 
therefore  EG  is  also  incommensurable  with  HI. 

But,  as  EG  is  to  HI,  so  is  EH  to  HK ;  [vi.  1] 

therefore  EH  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  HK.  [x.  11] 

Therefore  EH,  HK  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square 
only; 

therefore  EK  is  binomial.  [x.  36] 


But  the  square  on  EH  is  greater  than  the  square  on  HK  either  by  the  square 
on  a  straight  line  commensurable  with  EH  or  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line 
incommensurable  with  it. 

First,  let  the  square  on  it  be  greater  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  com¬ 
mensurable  in  length  with  itself. 

Now  neither  of  the  straight  lines  EH,  HK  is  commensurable  in  length  with 
the  rational  straight  line  EF  set  out; 

therefore  EK  is  a  third  binomial.  [x.  Deff.  n.  3] 

But  EF  is  rational; 

and,  if  an  area  be  contained  by  a  rational  straight  line  and  the  third  binomial, 
the  “side”  of  the  area  is  a  second  bimedial;  [x.  56] 

therefore  the  “side”  of  El,  that  is,  of  AD,  is  a  second  bimedial. 

Next,  let  the  square  on  EH  be  greater  than  the  square  on  HK  by  the  square 
on  a  straight  line  incommensurable  in  length  with  EH. 

Now  each  of  the  straight  lines  EH,  HK  is  incommensurable  in  length 
with  EF ; 

therefore  EK  is  a  sixth  binomial.  [x.  Deff.  ii.  6] 

But,  if  an  area  be  contained  by  a  rational  straight  line  and  the  sixth  bi- 


ELEMENTS  X  255 

nomial,  the  “side”  of  the  area  is  the  side  of  the  sum  of  two  medial  areas;  [x.  59] 
so  that  the  “side”  of  the  area  AD  is  also  the  side  of  the  sum  of  two  medial 
areas. 

Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 

The  binomial  straight  line  and  the  irrational  straight  lines  after  it  are  neither 
the  same  with  the  medial  nor  with  one  another. 

For  the  square  on  a  medial,  if  applied  to  a  rational  straight  line,  produces  as 
breadth  a  straight  line  rational  and  incommensurable  in  length  with  that  to 
which  it  is  applied.  [x.  22] 

But  the  square  on  the  binomial,  if  applied  to  a  rational  straight  line,  pro¬ 
duces  as  breadth  the  first  binomial.  [x.  60] 

The  square  on  the  first  bimedial,  if  applied  to  a  rational  straight  line,  pro¬ 
duces  as  breadth  the  second  binomial.  [x.  61] 

The  square  on  the  second  bimedial,  if  applied  to  a  rational  straight  line,  pro¬ 
duces  as  breadth  the  third  binomial.  [x.  62] 

The  square  on  the  major,  if  applied  to  a  rational  straight  line,  produces  as 
breadth  the  fourth  binomial.  [x.  63] 

The  square  on  the  side  of  a  rational  plus  a  medial  area,  if  applied  to  a  ra¬ 
tional  straight  line,  produces  as  breadth  the  fifth  binomial.  [x.  64] 

The  square  on  the  side  of  the  sum  of  two  medial  areas,  if  applied  to  a  rational 
straight  line,  produces  as  breadth  the  sixth  binomial.  [x.  65] 

And  the  said  breadths  differ  both  from  the  first  and  from  one  another:  from 
the  first  because  it  is  rational,  and  from  one  another  because  they  are  not  the 
same  in  order; 

so  that  the  irrational  straight  lines  themselves  also  differ  from  one  another. 

Proposition  73 

If  from  a  rational  straight  line  there  he  subtracted  a  rational  straight  line  commen¬ 
surable  with  the  whole  in  square  only ,  the  remainder  is  irrational ;  and  let  it  be 
called  an  apotome. 

For  from  the  rational  straight  line  AB  let  the  rational  straight  line  JSC,  com¬ 
mensurable  with  the  whole  in  square  only,  be  subtracted; 

- 1 -  I  say  that  the  remainder  AC  is  the  irrational  straight 

B  line  called  apotome. 

For,  since  AB  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  JSC, 
and,  as  AB  is  to  BC,  so  is  the  square  on  AB  to  the  rectangle  AB,  BC, 
therefore  the  square  on  AB  is  incommensurable  with  the  rectangle  AB,  BC. 

[x.  11] 

But  the  squares  on  AB,  BC  are  commensurable  with  the  square  on  AB, 

[x.  15] 

and  twice  the  rectangle  AB,  BC  is  commensurable  with  the  rectangle  AB,  BC. 

[x.  6] 

And,  inasmuch  as  the  squares  on  AB,  BC  are  equal  to  twice  the  rectangle 
AB,  BC  together  with  the  square  on  CA,  [n.  7] 

therefore  the  squares  on  AB,  BC  are  also  incommensurable  with  the  remain¬ 
der,  the  square  on  AC.  [x.  13,  16] 

But  the  squares  on  AB,  BC  are  rational; 

therefore  AC  is  irrational.  [x.  Def.  4] 

And  let  it  be  called  an  apotome.  q.  e.  d. 


256 


EUCLID 


Proposition  74 

If  from  a  medial  straight  line  there  be  subtracted  a  medial  straight  line  which  is 
commensurable  with  the  whole  in  square  only ,  and  which  contains  with  the  whole  a 
rational  rectangle ,  the  remainder  is  irrational.  And  let  it  be  called  a  first  apotome 
of  a  medial  straight  line. 

For  from  the  medial  straight  line  AB  let  there  be  subtracted  the  medial 
straight  line  BC  which  is  commensurable  with  AB  in  square  only  and  with  AB 
makes  the  rectangle  AB,  BC  rational; 

I  say  that  the  remainder  AC  is  irrational;  and  let  it  A  c  B 

be  called  a  first  apotome  of  a  medial  straight  fine.  - 1 - * 

For,  since  AB,  BC  are  medial, 

the  squares  on  AB,  BC  are  also  medial. 

But  twice  the  rectangle  AB,  BC  is  rational; 
therefore  the  squares  on  AB,  BC  are  incommensurable  with  twice  the  rectan¬ 
gle  AB,  BC) 

therefore  twice  the  rectangle  AB,  BC  is  also  incommensurable  with  the  re¬ 
mainder,  the  square  on  AC,  [cf.  n.  71 

since,  if  the  w*hole  is  incommensurable  with  one  of  the  magnitudes,  the  original 
magnitudes  will  also  be  incommensurable.  [x.  16] 

But  twice  the  rectangle  AB,  BC  is  rational; 

therefore  the  square  on  AC  is  irrational; 

therefore  AC  is  irrational.  [x.  Def.  4] 

And  let  it  be  called  a  first  apotome  of  a  medial  straight  fine.  Q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  75 

If  from  a  medial  straight  line  there  be  subtracted  a  medial  straight  line  which  is 
commensurable  with  the  whole  in  square  only ,  and  which  contains  with  the  whole  a 
medial  rectangle,  the  remainder  is  irrational;  and  let  it  be  called  a  second  apotome 
of  a  medial  straight  line. 

For  from  the  medial  straight  fine  AB  let  there  be  subtracted  the  medial 
straight  line  CB  wiiieh  is  commensurable  with  the  whole  AB  in  square  only 
and  such  that  the  rectangle  AB,  BC  which  it  contains  with  the  wiiole  AB,  is 
medial;  [x.  28] 

I  say  that  the  remainder  AC  is  irrational;  and  let  it  be  called  a  second  apotome 
of  a  medial  straight  line. 


A  C 


For  let  a  rational  straight  fine  DI  be  set  out, 
let  DE ,  equal  to  the  squares  on  AB,  BC,  be  applied  to  DI,  producing  DG  as 
breadth, 


ELEMENTS  X  257 

and  let  DH  equal  to  twice  the  rectangle  AB ,  BC  be  applied  to  DI,  producing 
DF  as  breadth; 

therefore  the  remainder  FE  is  equal  to  the  square  on  AC.  [n.  7] 
Now,  since  the  squares  on  AB)  BC  are  medial  and  commensurable, 

therefore  DE  is  also  medial.  [x.  15  and  23,  Por.] 

And  it  is  applied  to  the  rational  straight  line  DI ,  producing  DG  as  breadth; 
therefore  DG  is  rational  and  incommensurable  in  length  with  DI.  [x.  22] 
Again,  since  the  rectangle  AB,  BC  is  medial, 

therefore  twice  the  rectangle  AB,  BC  is  also  medial,  [x.  23,  Por.] 
And  it  is  equal  to  DH; 

therefore  DH  is  also  medial. 

And  it  has  been  applied  to  the  rational  straight  line  DI,  producing  DF  as 
breadth; 

therefore  DF  is  rational  and  incommensurable  in  length  with  DI.  fx.  22] 
And,  since  AB,  BC  are  commensurable  in  square  only, 

therefore  AB  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  BC; 
therefore  the  square  on  AB  is  also  incommensurable  with  the  rectangle  AB, 
BC.  [x.  11] 

But  the  squares  on  AB,  BC  are  commensurable  with  the  square  on  AB, 

[x.  15] 

and  twice  the  rectangle  AB,  BC  is  commensurable  with  the  rectangle  AB,  BC; 

[x.  6] 

therefore  twice  the  rectangle  AB,  BC  is  incommensurable  with  the  squares  on 
AB,  BC.  [x.  13] 

But  DE  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  AB,  BC, 

and  DH  to  twice  the  rectangle  AB,  BC; 
therefore  DE  is  incommensurable  with  DH. 

But,  as  DE  is  to  DH,  so  is  GD  to  DF;  [vi.  1] 

therefore  GD  is  incommensurable  with  DF.  [x.  11] 

And  both  are  rational; 

therefore  GD,  DF  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only; 

therefore  FG  is  an  apotome.  [x.  73] 

But  DI  is  rational, 

and  the  rectangle  contained  by  a  rational  and  an  irrational  straight  line  is  ir¬ 
rational,  [deduction  from  x.  20] 

and  its  “side”  is  irrational. 

And  AC  is  the  “side”  of  FE; 

therefore  AC  is  irrational. 

And  let  it  be  called  a  second  apotome  of  a  medial  straight  line.  q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  76 

If  from  a  straight  line  there  be  subtracted  a  straight  line  which  is  incommensurable 
in  square  with  the  whole  and  which  with  the  whole  makes  the  squares  on  them  added 
together  rational,  but  the  rectangle  contained  by  them  medial,  the  remainder  is  ir¬ 
rational;  and  let  it  be  called  minor. 

For  from  the  straight  line  AB  let  there  be  subtracted  the  straight  line  BC 

- -  which  is  incommensurable  in  square  with  the  whole 

B  and  fulfils  the  given  conditions.  [x.  33] 

I  say  that  the  remainder  AC  is  the  irrational  straight  line  called  minor. 


258  EUCLID 

For,  since  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  AB,  BC  is  rational,  while  twice  the  rec¬ 
tangle  AB,  BC  is  medial, 

therefore  the  squares  on  AB,  BC  are  incommensurable  with  twice  the  rectangle 
AB,  BC; 

and,  convertendo,  the  squares  on  AB,  BC  are  incommensurable  with  the  re¬ 
mainder,  the  square  on  AC.  [n.  7,  x.  16] 

But  the  squares  on  AB,  BC  are  rational; 

therefore  the  square  on  AC  is  irrational; 
therefore  AC  is  irrational. 

And  let  it  be  called  minor.  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  77 

If  from  a  straight  line  there  be  subtracted  a  straight  line  which  is  incommensurable 
in  square  with  the  whole,  and  which  with  the  whole  makes  the  sum  of  the  squares  on 
tiem  medial,  but  twice  the  rectangle  contained  by  them  rational ,  the  remainder  is 
irrational ;  and  let  it  be  called  that  which  produces  with  a  rational  area  a  medial 
whole. 

For  from  the  straight  line  AB  let  there  be  subtracted  the  straight  line  BC 
which  is  incommensurable  in  square  with  AB  and  fulfils  the  given  con¬ 
ditions;  [x.  34]  h 

I  say  that  the  remainder  AC  is  the  irrational  straight  line  aforesaid. 

For,  since  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  AB,  BC  is  medial, 
while  twice  the  rectangle  AB,  BC  is  rational, 
therefore  the  squares  on  AB,  BC  are  incommensurable  with  twice  the 
rectangle  AB,  BC; 

therefore  the  remainder  also,  the  square  on  AC,  is  incommensurable 
with  twice  the  rectangle  AB,  BC.  [n.  7,  x.  16]  B 

And  twice  the  rectangle  AB,  BC  is  rational; 

therefore  the  square  on  AC  is  irrational; 
therefore  AC  is  irrational. 

And  let  it  be  called  that  which  produces  with  a  rational  area  a  medial  whole. 

Q.  E.  D. 


Proposition  78 

Tf  from  a  straight  line  there  be  subtracted  a  straight  line  which  is  incommensurable 
in  square  with  the  whole  and  which  with  the  whole  makes  the  sum  of  the  squares  on 
them  medial,  twice  the  rectangle  contained  by  them  medial,  and  further,  the  squares 
on  them  incommensurable  with  twice  the  rectangle  contained  by  them,  the  remainder 
is  irrational ;  and  let  it  be  called  that  which  produces  with  a  medial  area  a  medial 
whole. 

For  from  the  straight  line  AB  let  there  be  subtracted  the  straight  line  BC 
incommensurable  in  square  with  AB  and  fulfilling  D 
the  given  conditions;  [x.  35] 

I  say  that  the  remainder  AC  is  the  irrational 
straight  line  called  that  which  produces  with  a  medial 
area  a  medial  whole. 

For  let  a  rational  straight  line  DI  be  set  out,  _ 

to  DI  let  there  be  applied  DE  equal  to  the  squares  1 
on  AB,  BC,  producing  DG  as  breadth,  A 


C 


B 


ELEMENTS  X  259 

and  let  DH  equal  to  twice  the  rectangle  AB,  BC  be  subtracted. 
Therefore  the  remainder  FE  is  equal  to  the  square  on  AC,  [n.  7] 

so  that  AC  is  the  “side*’  of  FE. 

Now,  since  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  AB,  BC  is  medial  and  is  equal  to  DE, 

therefore  DE  is  medial. 

And  it  is  applied  to  the  rational  straight  line  DI ,  producing  DG  as  breadth ; 
therefore  DG  is  rational  and  incommensurable  in  length  with  DI.  [x.  22] 
Again,  since  twice  the  rectangle  AB,  BC  is  medial  and  is  equal  to  DH, 

therefore  DH  is  medial. 

And  it  is  applied  to  the  rational  straight  line  DI,  producing  DF  as  breadth; 
therefore  DF  is  also  rational  and  incommensurable  in  length  with  DI.  [x.  22] 
And,  since  the  squares  on  AB,  BC  are  incommensurable  with  twice  the  rec¬ 
tangle  AB,  BC, 

therefore  DE  is  also  incommensurable  with  DH. 

But,  as  DE  is  to  DH,  so  also  is  DG  to  DF ;  [vi.  1] 

therefore  DG  is  incommensurable  with  DF.  [x.  11] 

And  both  are  rational; 

therefore  GD ,  DF  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only. 
Therefore  FG  is  an  apotome.  [x.  73] 

And  FH  is  rational ; 

but  the  rectangle  contained  by  a  rational  straight  line  and  an  apotome  is  ir¬ 
rational,  [deduction  from  x.  20] 

and  its  “side”  is  irrational. 

And  AC  is  the  “side”  of  FE; 

therefore  AC  is  irrational. 

And  let  it  be  called  that  which  produces  with  a  medial  area  a  medial  whole. 

Q.  E.  D. 

Proposition  79 

To  an  apotome  only  one  rational  straight  line  can  be  annexed  which  is  commensu¬ 
rable  with  the  whole  in  square  only. 

Let  AB  be  an  apotome,  and  BC  an  annex  to  it; 

A  B  CD  therefore  AC,  CB  are  rational  straight  lines 

♦  4  commensurable  in  square  only.  [x.  73] 

I  say  that  no  other  rational  straight  line  can  be  annexed  to  AB  wLtich  is 
commensurable  with  the  wdiole  in  square  only. 

For,  if  possible,  let  BD  be  so  annexed; 

therefore  AD,  DB  are  also  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square 
only.  [x.  73] 

Now,  since  the  excess  of  the  squares  on  AD,  DB  over  twice  the  rectangle 
AD,  DB  is  also  the  excess  of  the  squares  on  AC,  CB  over  twice  the  rectangle 
AC,  CB, 

for  both  exceed  by  the  same,  the  square  on  AB,  [n.  7] 

therefore,  alternately,  the  excess  of  the  squares  on  AD,  DB  over  the  squares 
on  AC,  CB  is  the  excess  of  twice  the  rectangle  AD,  DB  over  twice  the  rec¬ 
tangle  AC,  CB. 

But  the  squares  on  AD,  DB  exceed  the  squares  on  AC,  CB  by  a  rational  area, 

for  both  are  rational; 

therefore  twice  the  rectangle  AD,  DB  also  exceeds  twice  the  rectangle  AC,  CB 
by  a  rational  area: 


260  EUCLID 

which  is  impossible, 

for  both  are  medial  [x.  21],  and  a  medial  area  does  not  exceed  a  medial  by  a 
rational  area.  [x.  26] 

Therefore  no  other  rational  straight  line  can  be  annexed  to  A B  which  is 
commensurable  with  the  whole  in  square  only. 

Therefore  only  one  rational  straight  line  can  be  annexed  to  an  apotome 
which  is  commensurable  with  the  whole  in  square  only.  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  80 

To  a  first  apotome  of  a  medial  straight  line  only  one  medial  straight  line  can  he 
annexed  which  is  commensurable  with  the  whole  in  square  only  and  which  contains 
with  the  whole  a  rational  rectangle. 

For  let  AB  be  a  first  apotome  of  a  medial  A  B  CD 

straight  line,  and  let  BC  be  an  annex  to  AB;  1  1 

therefore  AC,  CB  are  medial  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only  and 
such  that  the  rectangle  AC,  CB  which  they  contain  is  rational;  [x.  74] 

I  say  that  no  other  medial  straight  line  can  be  annexed  to  AB  which  is  com¬ 
mensurable  with  the  whole  in  square  only  and  which  contains  with  the  whole 
a  rational  area. 

For,  if  possible,  let  DB  also  be  so  annexed; 
therefore  AD,  DB  are  medial  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only  and 
such  that  the  rectangle  AD,  DB  which  they  contain  is  rational.  [x.  74] 

Now,  since  the  excess  of  the  squares  on  AD,  DB  over  twice  the  rectangle 
AD,  DB  is  also  the  excess  of  the  squares  on  AC,  CB  over  twice  the  rectangle 
AC,  CB, 

for  they  exceed  by  the  same,  the  square  on  AB,  [n.  7] 

therefore,  alternately,  the  excess  of  the  squares  on  AD,  DB  over  the  squares 
on  AC,  CB  is  also  the  excess  of  twice  the  rectangle  AD,  DB  over  twice  the  rec¬ 
tangle  AC,  CB. 

But  twice  the  rectangle  AD,  DB  exceeds  twice  the  rectangle  AC,  CB  by  a 
rational  area, 

for  both  are  rational. 

Therefore  the  squares  on  AD,  DB  also  exceed  the  squares  on  AC,  CB  by  a 
rational  area: 

wilich  is  impossible, 

for  both  are  medial  [x.  15  and  23,  Por.],  and  a  medial  area  does  not  exceed  a 
medial  by  a  rational  area.  [x.  26] 

Therefore  etc.  Q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  81 

To  a  second  apotome  of  a  medial  straight  line  only  one  medial  straight  line  can  he 
annexed  which  is  commensurable  with  the  whole  in  square  only  and  which  contains 
with  the  whole  a  medial  rectangle. 

Let  AB  be  a  second  apotome  of  a  medial  straight  line  and  BC  an  annex  to 
AB; 

therefore  AC,  CB  are  medial  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only  and 
such  that  the  rectangle  AC,  CB  wilich  they  contain  is  medial.  [x.  75] 

I  say  that  no  other  medial  straight  fine  can  be  annexed  to  AB  wilich  is  com- 


ELEMENTS  X 


261 


C  D 


mensurable  with  the  whole  in  square  only  and  which  contains  with  the  whole 
a  medial  rectangle. 

For,  if  possible,  let  BD  also  be  so  annexed; 

therefore  AD ,  DB  are  also  medial  straight  lines  com¬ 
mensurable  in  square  only  and  such  that  the  rectangle 
AD,  DB  which  they  contain  is  medial.  [x.  75] 

Let  a  rational  straight  line  EF  be  set  out, 
let  EG  equal  to  the  squares  on  AC,  CB  be  applied  to 
EF,  producing  EM  as  breadth, 

and  let  HG  equal  to  twice  the  rectangle  AC,  CB  be  sub¬ 
tracted,  producing  HM  as  breadth; 

therefore  the  remainder  EL  is  equal  to  the 

square  on  AB,  [n,  7] 

so  that  AB  is  the  “side”  of  EL. 

Again,  let  El  equal  to  the  squares  on  AD,  DB  be  ap¬ 
plied  to  EF,  producing  EN  as  breadth. 

But  EL  is  also  equal  to  the  square  on  AB; 
therefore  the  remainder  HI  is  equal  to  twice  the  rec¬ 
tangle  AD,  DB.  [ii.  7] 

Now,  since  AC,  CB  are  medial  straight  lines, 
therefore  the  squares  on  AC,  CB  are  also  medial. 
And  they  are  equal  to  EG; 

therefore  EG  is  also  medial.  [x.  15  and  23,  Por.} 

And  it  is  applied  to  the  rational  straight  line  EF,  producing  EM  as  breadth; 
therefore  EM  is  rational  and  incommensurable  in  length  with  EF.  [x.  22] 
Again,  since  the  rectangle  AC,  CB  is  medial, 

twice  the  rectangle  AC,  CB  is  also  medial.  [x.  23,  Por.] 
And  it  is  equal  to  HG; 

therefore  HG  is  also  medial. 

And  it  is  applied  to  the  rational  straight  line  EF,  producing  HM  as  breadth; 
therefore  HM  is  also  rational  and  incommensurable  in  length  with  EF.  [x.  22] 
And,  since  AC,  CB  are  commensurable  in  square  only, 

therefore  AC  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  CB. 

But,  as  AC  is  to  CB,  so  is  the  square  on  AC  to  the  rectangle  AC,  CB; 
therefore  the  square  on  AC  is  incommensurable  with  the  rectangle  AC,  CB. 

[x.  11] 

But  the  squares  on  AC,  CB  are  commensurable  with  the  square  on  AC, 
while  twice  the  rectangle  AC,  CB  is  commensurable  with  the  rectangle  AC, 
CB;  [x.  6] 

therefore  the  squares  on  AC,  CB  are  incommensurable  with  twice  the  rec¬ 
tangle  AC,  CB.  [x.  13] 

And  EG  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  AC,  CB, 

while  GH  is  equal  to  twice  the  rectangle  AC,  CB; 
therefore  EG  is  incommensurable  with  IIG. 

But,  as  EG  is  to  HG,  so  is  EM  to  IIM;  [vi.  1] 

therefore  EM  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  MH.  [x.  11] 
And  both  are  rational; 

therefore  EM,  MII  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only; 

therefore  EH  is  an  apotome,  and  II M  an  annex  to  it.  [x.  73] 


262  EUCLID 

Similarly  we  can  prove  that  HN  is  also  an  annex  to  it; 
therefore  to  an  apotome  different  straight  lines  are  annexed  which  are  com¬ 
mensurable  with  the  wholes  in  square  only: 

which  is  impossible.  [x.  79] 

Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  82 

To  a  minor  straight  line  only  one  straight  line  can  be  annexed  which  is  incommen¬ 
surable  in  square  with  the  whole  and  which  makes,  with  the  whole,  the  sum  of  the 
squares  on  them  rational  but  twice  the  rectangle  contained  by  them  medial . 

Let  AB  be  the  minor  straight  line,  and  let  BC  be  an  annex  to  AB; 
therefore  AC,  CB  are  straight  lines  incommensurable  in  square  which  make 
the  sum  of  the  squares  on  them  rational,  but  twice  a  B  CD 

the  rectangle  contained  by  them  medial.  [x.  76]  1  ' 

I  say  that  no  other  straight  line  can  be  annexed  to  AB  fulfilling  the  same 
conditions. 

For,  if  possible,  let  BD  be  so  annexed; 
therefore  AD,  DB  are  also  straight  fines  incommensurable  in  square  which  ful¬ 
fil  the  aforesaid  conditions.  [x.  76] 

Now,  since  the  excess  of  the  squares  on  AD,  DB  over  the  squares  on  AC,  CB 
is  also  the  excess  of  twice  the  rectangle  AD,  DB  over  twice  the  rectangle  AC , 
CB, 

wThile  the  squares  on  AD,  DB  exceed  the  squares  on  AC,  CB  by  a  rational  area, 

for  both  are  rational, 

therefore  twice  the  rectangle  AD,  DB  also  exceeds  twice  the  rectangle  AC,  CB 
by  a  rational  area: 

winch  is  impossible,  for  both  are  medial.  [x.  26] 

Therefore  to  a  minor  straight  fine  only  one  straight  fine  can  be  annexed 
wilich  is  incommensurable  in  square  with  the  w’hole  and  which  makes  the 
squares  on  them  added  together  rational,  but  twice  the  rectangle  contained  by 
them  medial.  Q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  83 

To  a  straight  line  which  produces  with  a  rational  area  a  medial  whole  only  one 
straight  line  can  be  annexed  which  is  incommensurable  in  square  with  the  whole 
straight  line  and  which  with  the  whole  straight  line  makes  the  sum  of  the  squares  on 
them  medial,  but  twice  the  rectangle  contained  by  them  rational. 

Let  AB  be  the  straight  fine  winch  produces  with  a  rational  area  a  medial 
wrhole, 

and  let  BC  be  an  annex  to  AB;  A  B  CD 

therefore  AC,  CB  are  straight  fines  incommensu-  1  1 

rable  in  square  winch  fulfil  the  given  conditions.  [x.  77] 

I  say  that  no  other  straight  fine  can  be  annexed  to  AB  which  fulfils  the  same 
conditions. 

For,  if  possible,  let  BD  be  so  annexed; 

therefore  AD,  DB  are  also  straight  fines  incommensurable  in  square  winch  ful¬ 
fil  the  given  conditions.  [x.  77] 

Since  then,  as  in  the  preceding  cases, 

the  excess  of  the  squares  on  AD,  DB  over  the  squares  on  AC,  CB  is  also  the 


263 


ELEMENTS  X 

excess  of  twice  the  rectangle  AD,  DB  over  twice  the  rectangle  AC,  CB, 
while  twice  the  rectangle  AD,  DB  exceeds  twice  the  rectangle  AC,  CB  by  a 
rational  area, 

for  both  are  rational, 

therefore  the  squares  on  AD,  DB  also  exceed  the  squares  on  AC,  CB  by  a 
rational  area: 

which  is  impossible,  for  both  are  medial.  [x.  26] 

Therefore  no  other  straight  line  can  be  annexed  to  AB  which  is  incommen¬ 
surable  in  square  with  the  whole  and  which  with  the  whole  fulfils  the  aforesaid 
conditions; 

therefore  only  one  straight  line  can  be  so  annexed.  q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  84 


To  a  straight  line  which  'produces  with  a  medial  area  a  medial  whole  only  one 
straight  line  can  he  annexed  which  is  incommensurable  in  square  with  the  whole 
straight  line  and  which  with  the  whole  straight  line  makes  the  sum  of  the  squares 
on  them  medial  and  twice  the  rectangle  contained  by  them  both  medial  and  also  in¬ 
commensurable  with  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  them. 

Let  A  B  be  the  straight  line  which  produces  with  a  medial  area  a  medial 
whole, 


and  BC  an  annex  to  it; 

therefore  AC,  CB  are  straight  lines  incommensurable  in  square  which  fulfil  the 
aforesaid  conditions.  [x.  78] 

I  say  that  no  other  straight  line  can 

A  B _ C  D  be  annexed  to  AB  which  fulfils  the 

aforesaid  conditions. 

For,  if  possible,  let  BD  be  so  an¬ 
nexed, 

so  that  AD,  DB  are  also  straight  lines 
incommensurable  in  square  which 
make  the  squares  on  AD,  DB  added 
together  medial,  twice  the  rectangle 
AD,  DB  medial,  and  also  the  squares 
on  AD,  DB  incommensurable  with  twice  the  rectangle  AD,  DB.  [x.  78] 

Let  a  rational  straight  line  EF  be  set  out, 
let  EG  equal  to  the  squares  on  AC,  CB  be  applied  to  EF,  producing  EM  as 
breadth, 

and  let  HG  equal  to  twice  the  rectangle  AC,  CB  be  applied  to  EF,  producing 
HM  as  breadth; 

therefore  the  remainder,  the  square  on  AB  [n.  7],  is  equal  to  EL; 
therefore  AB  is  the  “side”  of  EL. 

Again,  let  El  equal  to  the  squares  on  AD,  DB  be  applied  to  EF,  producing 
EN  as  breadth. 


But  the  square  on  A B  is  also  equal  to  EL; 
therefore  the  remainder,  twice  the  rectangle  AD,  DB  [n.  7],  is  equal  to  III. 
Now,  since  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  AC,  CB  is  medial  and  is  equal  to  EG, 
therefore  EG  is  also  medial. 

And  it  is  applied  to  the  rational  straight  line  EF,  producing  EM  as  breadth; 
therefore  EM  is  rational  and  incommensurable  in  length  with  EF.  [x.  22] 


264  EUCLID 

Again,  since  twice  the  rectangle  AC,  CB  is  medial  and  is  equal  to  HG, 
therefore  HG  is  also  medial. 

And  it  is  applied  to  the  rational  straight  line  EF,  producing  HM  as  breadth; 

therefore  HM  is  rational  and  incommensurable  in  length  with  EF .  [x.  22] 
And,  since  the  squares  on  AC,  CB  are  incommensurable  with  twice  the  rec¬ 
tangle  AC,  CB, 

EG  is  also  incommensurable  with  HG; 
therefore  EM  is  also  incommensurable  in  length  with  MH.  [vi.  1,  x.  11] 
And  both  are  rational ; 

therefore  EM,  MH  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only; 

therefore  EH  is  an  apotome,  and  HM  an  annex  to  it.  [x.  73] 
Similarly  we  can  prove  that  EH  is  again  an  apotome  and  HN  an  annex  to  it. 
Therefore  to  an  apotome  different  rational  straight  lines  are  annexed  which 
are  commensurable  with  the  wholes  in  square  only: 

which  was  proved  impossible.  [x.  79] 

Therefore  no  other  straight  line  can  be  so  annexed  to  AB . 

Therefore  to  AB  only  one  straight  line  can  be  annexed  which  is  incommen¬ 
surable  in  square  with  the  whole  and  which  with  the  whole  makes  the  squares 
on  them  added  together  medial,  twice  the  rectangle  contained  by  them  medial, 
and  also  the  squares  on  them  incommensurable  with  twice  the  rectangle  con¬ 
tained  by  them.  q.  e.  d. 


DEFINITIONS  III 

1.  Given  a  rational  straight  line  and  an  apotome,  if  the  square  on  the  whole 
be  greater  than  the  square  on  the  annex  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  com¬ 
mensurable  in  length  with  the  whole,  and  the  whole  be  commensurable  in 
length  with  the  rational  straight  line  set  out,  let  the  apotome  be  called  a  first 
apotome . 

2.  But  if  the  annex  be  commensurable  in  length  with  the  rational  straight 
line  set  out,  and  the  square  on  the  whole  be  greater  than  that  on  the  annex  by 
the  square  on  a  straight  line  commensurable  with  the  whole,  let  the  apotome 
be  called  a  second  apotome . 

3.  But  if  neither  be  commensurable  in  length  with  the  rational  straight  line 
set  out,  and  the  square  on  the  whole  be  greater  than  the  square  on  the  annex 
by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  commensurable  with  the  whole,  let  the  apotome 
be  called  a  third  apotome. 

4.  Again,  if  the  square  on  the  whole  be  greater  than  the  square  on  the  annex 
by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  incommensurable  with  the  whole,  then,  if  the 
whole  be  commensurable  in  length  with  the  rational  straight  line  set  out,  let 
the  apotome  be  called  a  fourth  apotome; 

5.  if  the  annex  be  so  commensurable,  &  fifth; 

6.  and,  if  neither,  a  sixth. 


Proposition  85 

To  find  the  first  apotome. 

Let  a  rational  straight  line  A  be  set  out, 

and  let  BG  be  commensurable  in  length  with  A ; 
therefore  BG  is  also  rational. 


ELEMENTS  X 


265 


Let  two  square  numbers  DE .  EF  be  set  out.  and  let  their  difference  ED  not 
be  square; 


Q  c  G  therefore  neither  has  ED  to  DF 

A  >  the  ratio  which  a  square  num- 

H -  - 1 - -  ber  has  to  a  square  number. 

E  F  D  Let  it  be  contrived  that, 

as  ED  is  to  DF,  so  is  the  square  on  BG  to  the  square  on  GC ;  [x.  6,  Por.] 

therefore  the  square  on  BG  is  commensurable  with  the  square  on  GC.  [x.  6] 
But  the  square  on  BG  is  rational; 

therefore  the  square  on  GC  is  also  rational; 
therefore  GC  is  also  rational. 

And,  since  ED  has  not  to  DF  the  ratio  which  a  square  number  has  to  a 
square  number, 

therefore  neither  has  the  square  on  BG  to  the  square  on  GC  the  ratio  which  a 
square  number  has  to  a  square  number; 

therefore  BG  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  GC.  [x.  9] 

And  both  are  rational; 

therefore  BG,  GC  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only; 

therefore  BC  is  an  apotome.  [x.  73] 

I  say  next  that  it  is  also  a  first  apotome. 

For  let  the  square  on  H  be  that  by  which  the  square  on  BG  is  greater  than 
the  square  on  GC. 

Now  since,  as  ED  is  to  FD,  so  is  the  square  on  BG  to  the  square  on  GC, 

therefore  also,  convertendo ,  [v.  19,  Por.] 

as  DE  is  to  EF,  so  is  the  square  on  GB  to  the  square  on  H. 

But  DE  has  to  EF  the  ratio  which  a  square  number  has  to  a  square  number, 

for  each  is  square; 

therefore  the  square  on  GB  also  has  to  the  square  on  H  the  ratio  which  a  square 
number  has  to  a  square  number; 

therefore  BG  is  commensurable  in  length  with  H.  [x.  9] 

.And  the  square  on  BG  is  greater  than  the  square  on  GC  by  the  square  on  H; 
therefore  the  square  on  BG  is  greater  than  the  square  on  GC  by  the  square  on 
a  straight  line  commensurable  in  length  with  BG. 

And  the  whole  BG  is  commensurable  in  length  with  the  rational  straight  line 
A  set  out. 

Therefore  BC  is  a  first  apotome.  [x.  Deff.  in.  1] 

Therefore  the  first  apotome  BC  has  been  found. 

(Being)  that  which  it  was  required  to  find.  Q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  86 

To  find  the  second  apotome. 

Let  a  rational  straight  line  A  be  set  out,  and  GC  commensurable  in  length 
with  A ; 

therefore  GC  is  rational. 

Let  two  square  numbers  DE.  EF  be  set  out.  and  let  their  difference  DF  not 
be  square. 

Now  let  it  be  contrived  that,  as  FD  is  to  DE,  so  is  the  square  on  CG  to  the 
square  on  GB.  [x.  6,  Por.] 

Therefore  the  square  on  CG  is  commensurable  with  the  square  on  GB.  [x.  6] 


266  EUCLID 

But  the  square  on  CG  is  rational; 

therefore  the  square  on  GB  is  also  rational; 
therefore  BG  is  rational. 

And,  since  the  square  on  GC  has  not  to  the 

square  on  GB  the  ratio  which  a  square  num-  - ^ - 

ber  has  to  a  square  number,  B  C  G 

CG  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  GB.  1 

[x.  9]  _ H _ 

And  both  are  rational; 

therefore  CG,  GB  are  rational  straight  lines  £  F  d 

commensurable  in  square  only; 

therefore  BC  is  an  apotome.  [x.  73] 

I  say  next  that  it  is  also  a  second  apotome. 

For  let  the  square  on  H  be  that  by  which  the  square  on  BG  is  greater  than 
the  square  on  GC . 

Since  then,  as  the  square  on  BG  is  to  the  square  on  GC,  so  is  the  number  ED 
to  the  number  DF, 

therefore,  convertendo , 

as  the  square  on  BG  is  to  the  square  on  H,  so  is  DE  to  EF.  [v.  19,  Por.] 
And  each  of  the  numbers  DE,  EF  is  square; 
therefore  the  square  on  BG  has  to  the  square  on  H  the  ratio  which  a  square 
number  has  to  a  square  number; 

therefore  BG  is  commensurable  in  length  with  H .  [x.  9] 

And  the  square  on  BG  is  greater  than  the  square  on  GC  by  the  square  on  H ; 
therefore  the  square  on  BG  is  greater  than  the  square  on  GC  by  the  square  on  a 
straight  line  commensurable  in  length  with  BG . 

And  CG,  the  annex,  is  commensurable  with  the  rational  straight  line  A  set 
out. 

Therefore  BC  is  a  second  apotome.  [x.  Deff.  hi.  2] 

Therefore  the  second  apotome  BC  has  been  found.  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  87 

To  find  the  third  apotome. 

Let  a  rational  straight  line  A  be  set  out, 

let  three  numbers  E,  BC,  CD  be  set  out  _ a _ 

which  have  not  to  one  another  the  ratio  G 

which  a  square  number  has  to  a  square  num-  - * - 

ber,  but  let  CB  have  to  BD  the  ratio  which  a  K 

square  number  has  to  a  square  number. 

Let  it  be  contrived  that,  as  E  is  to  BC,  so  is  - E 

the  square  on  A  to  the  square  on  FG,  _ , _ _ 

and,  as  BC  is  to  CD,  so  is  the  square  on  FG  B  D  C 

to  the  square  on  GH.  [x.  6,  Por.] 

Since  then,  as  E  is  to  BC,  so  is  the  square  on  A  to  the  square  on  FG, 
therefore  the  square  on  A  is  commensurable  with  the  square  on  FG.  [x.  6] 
But  the  square  on  A  is  rational; 

therefore  the  square  on  FG  is  also  rational; 
therefore  FG  is  rational. 


ELEMENTS  X  267 

And,  since  E  has  not  to  BC  the  ratio  which  a  square  number  has  to  a  square 
number, 

therefore  neither  has  the  square  on  A  to  the  square  on  FG  the  ratio  which  a 
square  number  has  to  a  square  number; 

therefore  A  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  FG.  [ x .  9] 

Again,  since,  as  BC  is  to  CD.  so  is  the  square  on  FG  to  the  square  on  GH , 
therefore  the  square  on  FG  is  commensurable  with  the  square  on  GH.  [x.  6] 
But  the  square  on  FG  is  rational; 

therefore  the  square  on  GH  is  also  rational; 
therefore  GH  is  rational. 

And,  since  BC  has  not  to  CD  the  ratio  which  a  square  number  has  to  a 
square  number, 

therefore  neither  has  the  square  on  FG  to  the  square  on  GH  the  ratio  which  a 
square  number  has  to  a  square  number; 

therefore  FG  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  GH.  [x.  9] 

And  both  are  rational  ; 

therefore  FG.  GH  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only  ; 

therefore  FH  is  an  apotome.  [x.  73] 

I  say  next  that  it  is  also  a  third  apotome. 

For  since,  as  E  is  to  BC ,  so  is  the  square  on  A  to  the  square  on  FG. 
and,  as  BC  is  to  CD,  so  is  the  square  on  FG  to  the  square  on  HG , 
therefore,  ex  aequali ,  as  E  is  to  CD.  so  is  the  square  on  A  to  the  square  on  HG. 

[v.  22] 

But  E  has  not  to  CD  the  ratio  which  a  square  number  has  to  a  square  number; 
therefore  neither  has  the  square  on  A  to  the  square  on  GH  the  ratio  which  a 
square  number  has  to  a  square  number; 

therefore  A  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  GH.  [x.  9] 

Therefore  neither  of  the  straight  lines  FG,  GH  is  commensurable  in  length 
with  the  rational  straight  line  A  set  out. 

Now  let  the  square  on  K  be  that  by  which  the  square  on  FG  is  greater  than 
the  square  on  GH. 

Since  then,  as  BC  is  to  CD,  so  is  the  square  on  FG  to  the  square  on  GHy 
therefore,  convertendo ,  as  BC  is  to  BD.  so  is  the  square  on  FG  to  the  square 
on  K.  [v.  19.  Por.] 

But  BC  has  to  BD  the  ratio  which  a  square  number  has  to  a  square  number; 
therefore  the  square  on  FG  also  has  to  the  square  on  K  the  ratio  which  a  square 
number  has  to  a  square  number. 

Therefore  FG  is  commensurable  in  length  with  K ,  [x.  9] 

and  the  square  on  FG  is  greater  than  the  square  on  GH  by  the  square  on  a 
straight  line  commensurable  with  FG. 

And  neither  of  the  straight  lines  FG,  GH  is  commensurable  in  length  with 
the  rational  straight  line  A  set  out; 

therefore  FH  is  a  third  apotome.  [x.  Deff.  in.  3] 

Therefore  the  third  apotome  FH  has  been  found.  q.  e.  d. 

Proposition*  88 

To  find  the  fourth  apotome. 

Let  a  rational  straight  line  A  be  set  out,  and  BG  commensurable  in  length 
with  it; 


268  EUCLID 

therefore  BG  is  also  rational. 

Let  two  numbers  DF ,  FE  be  set  out  such  that  the  whole  DE  has  not  to 
either  of  the  numbers  DF ,  EF  the  ratio  which  a  square  number  has  to  a 
square  number. 


B  C  G 

- 1 - 


Let  it  be  contrived  that,  as  DE  is  to  EF ,  so  is  the  square  on  BG  to  the  square 
on(?C;  [x.  6,  Por.] 

therefore  the  square  on  BG  is  commensurable  with  the  square  on  GC .  [x.  6] 

But  the  square  on  BG  is  rational; 

therefore  the  square  on  GC  is  also  rational; 
therefore  GC  is  rational. 

Now,  since  DE  has  not  to  EF  the  ratio  which  a  square  number  has  to  a 
square  number, 

therefore  neither  has  the  square  on  BG  to  the  square  on  GC  the  ratio  which  a 
square  number  has  to  a  square  number; 

therefore  BG  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  GC.  [x.  9] 

And  both  are  rational; 

therefore  BG ,  GC  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only; 

therefore  BC  is  an  apotome.  [x.  73] 

Now  let  the  square  on  H  be  that  by  which  the  square  on  BG  is  greater  than 
the  square  on  GC. 

Since  then,  as  DE  is  to  EF,  so  is  the  square  on  BG  to  the  square  on  GC, 
therefore  also,  convertendo,  as  ED  is  to  DF,  so  is  the  square  on  GB  to  the  square 
on  H.  [v.  19,  Por.] 

But  ED  has  not  to  DF  the  ratio  which  a  square  number  has  to  a  square 
number; 

therefore  neither  has  the  square  on  GB  to  the  square  on  H  the  ratio  which  a 
square  number  has  to  a  square  number; 

therefore  BG  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  H .  [x.  9] 

And  the  square  on  BG  is  greater  than  the  square  on  GC  by  the  square  on  H\ 
therefore  the  square  on  BG  is  greater  than  the  square  on  GC  by  the  square  on 
a  straight  line  incommensurable  with  BG. 

And  the  whole  BG  is  commensurable  in  length  with  the  rational  straight  line 
A  set  out. 

Therefore  BC  is  a  fourth  apotome.  [x.  Deff.  hi.  4] 

Therefore  the  fourth  apotome  has  been  found.  q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  89 

To  find  the  fifth  apotome. 

Let  a  rational  straight  line  A  be  set  out,  and  let  CG  be  commensurable  in 
length  with  A ; 

therefore  CG  is  rational. 

Let  two  numbers  DF,  FE  be  set  out  such  that  DE  again  has  not  to  either  of 
the  numbers  DF,  FE  the  ratio  which  a  square  number  has  to  a  square  number; 


c1 


ELEMENTS  X  269 

and  let  it  be  contrived  that,  as  EE  is  to  ED,  so  is  the  square  on  CG  to  the 
square  on  GB. 

Therefore  the  square  on  GB  is  also  rational;  [x.  6] 

therefore  BG  is  also  rational. 

Now  since7  as  DE  is  to  EF ,  so  is  the  square  on  BG  to 
the  square  on  GC, 

while  DEhas  not  to  EE  the  ratio  which  a  square  number  has 
to  a  square  number, 

therefore  neither  has  the  square  on  BG  to  the  square  on  GC 
the  ratio  which  a  square  number  has  to  a  square  number; 
-F  therefore  BG  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  GC.  [x.  9] 
And  both  are  rational; 

therefore  BG,  GC  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable 
' E  in  square  only; 

therefore  BC  is  an  apotome.  [x.  73] 

I  say  next  that  it  is  also  a  fifth  apotome. 

For  let  the  square  on  H  be  that  by  which  the  square  on  BG  is  greater  than 
the  square  on  GC. 

Since  then,  as  the  square  on  BG  is  to  the  square  on  GC,  so  is  DE  to  EE. 
therefore,  convertendo ,  as  ED  is  to  DF,  so  is  the  square  on  BG  to  the  square 
on  H .  [v.  19,  Por.] 

But  ED  has  not  to  DF  the  ratio  which  a  square  number  has  to  a  square 
number; 

therefore  neither  has  the  square  on  BG  to  the  square  on  H  the  ratio  which  a 
square  number  has  to  a  square  number; 

therefore  BG  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  H.  x.  9] 

And  the  square  on  BG  is  greater  than  the  square  on  GC  by  the  square  on  H : 
therefore  the  square  on  GB  is  greater  than  the  square  on  GC  by  the  square  on 
a  straight  line  incommensurable  in  length  with  GB. 

And  the  annex  CG  is  commensurable  in  length  with  the  rational  straight  line 
A  set  out; 

therefore  BC  is  a  fifth  apotome.  [x.  Deii.  in.  5] 

Therefore  the  fifth  apotome  BC  has  been  found.  q.  e.  d. 


Pbqpositiox  90 

To  find  the  sixth  apotome. 

Let  a  rational  straight  line  A  be  set  out.  and  three  numbers  E.  BC,  CD  not 

having  to  one  another  the  ratio  which  a  square 

. _  number  has  to  a  square  number;  and  further 

let  CB  also  not  have  to  BD  the  ratio  which  a 

r - £ - q  square  number  has  to  a  square  number. 

K _  Let  it  be  contrived  that,  as  E  is  to  BC,  so  is 

the  square  on  A  to  the  square  on  FG. 

£  and,  as  BC  is  to  CD,  so  is  the  square  on  FG  to 

_  the  square  on  GH.  [x.  6.  Por.] 

B  -  -  Now  since,  as  E  is  to  BC,  so  is  the  square 

on  A  to  the  square  on  FG. 

therefore  the  square  on  A  is  commensurable  with  the  square  on  FG.  [x.  6] 
But  the  square  on  A  is  rational; 


270  EUCLID 

therefore  the  square  on  FG  is  also  rational; 
therefore  FG  is  also  rational. 

And,  since  E  has  not  to  BC  the  ratio  which  a  square  number  has  to  a  square 
number, 

therefore  neither  has  the  square  on  A  to  the  square  on  FG  the  ratio  which  a 
square  number  has  to  a  square  number; 

therefore  A  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  FG .  [x.  9] 

Again,  since,  as  BC  is  to  CD,  so  is  the  square  on  FG  to  the  square  on  GH, 
therefore  the  square  on  FG  is  commensurable  with  the  square  on  GH.  [x.  6] 
But  the  square  on  FG  is  rational; 

therefore  the  square  on  GH  is  also  rational; 
therefore  GH  is  also  rational. 

And,  since  BC  has  not  to  CD  the  ratio  which  a  square  number  has  to  a 
square  number, 

therefore  neither  has  the  square  on  FG  to  the  square  on  GH  the  ratio  which  a 
square  number  has  to  a  square  number; 

therefore  FG  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  GH.  [x.  9] 

And  both  are  rational; 

therefore  FG,  GH  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only; 

therefore  FH  is  an  apotome.  [x.  73] 

I  say  next  that  it  is  also  a  sixth  apotome. 

For  since,  as  E  is  to  BC,  so  is  the  square  on  A  to  the  square  on  FG, 
and,  as  BC  is  to  CD,  so  is  the  square  on  FG  to  the  square  on  GH, 
therefore,  ex  aequali,  as  E  is  to  CD,  so  is  the  square  on  A  to  the  square  on  GH. 

[v.  22] 

But  E  has  not  to  CD  the  ratio  which  a  square  number  has  to  a  square  num¬ 
ber; 

therefore  neither  has  the  square  on  A  to  the  square  on  GH  the  ratio  which  a 
square  number  has  to  a  square  number; 

therefore  A  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  GH;  [x.  9] 

therefore  neither  of  the  straight  lines  FG,  GH  is  commensurable  in  length  with 
the  rational  straight  line  A. 

Now"  let  the  square  on  K  be  that  by  winch  the  square  on  FG  is  greater  than 
the  square  on  GH. 

Since  then,  as  BC  is  to  CD,  so  is  the  square  on  FG  to  the  square  on  GH, 
therefore,  convertendo,  as  CB  is  to  BD,  so  is  the  square  on  FG  to  the  square 
on  K.  [y.  19,  Por.] 

But  CB  has  not  to  BD  the  ratio  winch  a  square  number  has  to  a  square  num¬ 
ber; 

therefore  neither  has  the  square  on  FG  to  the  square  on  K  the  ratio  wilich  a 
square  number  has  to  a  square  number; 

therefore  FG  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  K.  [x.  9] 

And  the  square  on  FG  is  greater  than  the  square  on  GH  by  the  square  on  K ; 
therefore  the  square  on  FG  is  greater  than  the  square  on  GH  by  the  square  on 
a  straight  line  incommensurable  in  length  with  FG. 

And  neither  of  the  straight  lines  FG,  GH  is  commensurable  with  the  rational 
straight  line  A  set  out. 

Therefore  FH  is  a  sixth  apotome.  [x.  Deff.  hi.  6] 

Therefore  the  sixth  apotome  FH  has  been  found.  Q.  e.  d. 


ELEMENTS  X 


271 


Proposition  91 


If  an  area  be  contained  by  a  rational  straight  line  and  a  first  apotome ,  the  “side” 
of  the  area  is  an  apotome. 

For  let  the  area  AB  be  contained  by  the  rational  straight  line  AC  and  the 
first  apotome  AD; 

I  say  that  the  “side”  of  the  area  AB  is  an  apotome. 

For,  since  AD  is  a  first  apotome,  let  DG  be  its  annex; 
therefore  AG ,  GD  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only. 

[x.  73] 

And  the  whole  AG  is  commensurable  with  the  rational  straight  line  AC  set 


out, 

and  the  square  on  AG  is  greater  than  the  square  on  GD  by  the  square  on  a 
straight  line  commensurable  in  length  with  AG;  [x.  Deff.  hi.  1] 

if  therefore  there  be  applied  to  AG  a  parallelogram  equal  to  the  fourth  part  of 
the  square  on  DG  and  deficient  by  a  square  figure,  it  divides  it  into  commen¬ 
surable  parts.  [x.  17] 


therefore  each  of  the  straight  lines 

AC. 


Let  DG  be  bisected  at  E , 
let  there  be  applied  to  AG  a  parallel¬ 
ogram  equal  to  the  square  on  EG  and 
deficient  by  a  square  figure, 
and  let  it  be  the  rectangle  AF ,  FG ; 
therefore  AF  is  commensurable 
with  FG. 

And  through  the  points  E,  F,  G  let 
EH,  FI,  GK  be  drawn  parallel  to  AC. 

Now,  since  AF  is  commensurable 
in  length  with  FG, 

therefore  AG  is  also  commensurable 
in  length  with  each  of  the  straight 
lines  AF,  FG.  [x.  15] 

But  A  G  is  commensurable  with  A  C ; 
r,  FG  is  commensurable  in  length  with 

[x.  12] 


And  AC  is  rational; 

therefore  each  of  the  straight  lines  AF,  FG  is  also  rational, 

so  that  each  of  the  rectangles  AI,  FK  is  also  rational.  [x.  19] 
Now,  since  DE  is  commensurable  in  length  with  EG, 
therefore  DG  is  also  commensurable  in  length  with  each  of  the  straight  lines 
DE,  EG.  [x.  15] 

But  DG  is  rational  and  incommensurable  in  length  with  AG; 
therefore  each  of  the  straight  lines  DE,  EG  is  also  rational  and  incommensur¬ 
able  in  length  with  AC;  [x.  13] 

therefore  each  of  the  rectangles  DH,  EK  is  medial.  [x.  21] 

Now  let  the  square  LM  be  made  equal  to  AI,  and  let  there  be  subtracted 
the  square  NO  having  a  common  angle  with  it,  the  angle  LPM,  and  equal  to 
FK; 


therefore  the  squares  LM,  NO  are  about  the  same  diameter,  [vi.  26] 
Let  PR  be  their  diameter,  and  let  the  figure  be  drawn. 


272  EUCLID 

Since  then  the  rectangle  contained  by  AF,  FG  is  equal  to  the  square  on  EG, 
therefore,  as  AF  is  to  EG,  so  is  EG  to  FG.  [vi.  17] 

But,  as  AF  is  to  EG,  so  is  AI  to  EK, 

and,  as  EG  is  to  FG,  so  is  EK  to  KF;  [vi.  l] 

therefore  EK  is  a  mean  proportional  between  AI,  KF.  [v.  11] 
But  MN  is  also  a  mean  proportional  between  LM,  NO,  as  was  before  proved, 

[Lemma  after  x.  53] 

and  A I  is  equal  to  the  square  LM,  and  KF  to  NO  ; 
therefore  MN  is  also  equal  to  EK. 

But  EK  is  equal  to  DH,  and  MN  to  LO ; 

therefore  DK  is  equal  to  the  gnomon  UVW  and  NO. 

But  AK  is  also  equal  to  the  squares  LM,  AT0; 

therefore  the  remainder  AB  is  equal  to  ST. 

But  ST  is  the  square  on  LN; 

therefore  the  square  on  LN  is  equal  to  AB; 
therefore  LN  is  the  “side”  of  AB. 

I  say  next  that  LN  is  an  apotome. 

For,  since  each  of  the  rectangles  AI,  FK  is  rational, 
and  they  are  equal  to  LM,  NO, 

therefore  each  of  the  squares  LM,  NO,  that  is,  the  squares  on  LP ,  PN  respec¬ 
tively,  is  also  rational; 

therefore  each  of  the  straight  lines  LP,  PN  is  also  rational. 

Again,  since  DH  is  medial  and  is  equal  to  LO, 

therefore  LO  is  also  medial. 

Since,  then,  LO  is  medial, 

while  NO  is  rational, 

therefore  LO  is  incommensurable  with  NO. 

But,  as  LO  is  to  NO,  so  is  LP  to  PN;  [vi.  1] 

therefore  LP  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  PN.  [x.  11] 
And  both  are  rational; 

therefore  LP,  PN  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only; 

therefore  LN  is  an  apotome.  [x.  73] 

And  it  is  the  “side”  of  the  area  AB; 

therefore  the  “side”  of  the  area  AB  is  an  apotome. 

Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  92 

If  an  area  be  contained  by  a  rational  straight  line  and  a  second  apotome,  the  “side” 
of  the  area  is  a  first  apotome  of  a  medial  straight  line. 

For  let  the  area  AB  be  contained  by  the  rational  straight  line  AC  and  the 
second  apotome  AD; 

I  say  that  the  “side”  of  the  area  AB  is  a  first  apotome  of  a  medial  straight  line. 
For  let  DG  be  the  annex  to  AD; 

therefore  AG,  GD  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only, 

[x.  73] 

and  the  annex  DG  is  commensurable  with  the  rational  straight  line  AC  set  out, 
while  the  square  on  the  whole  AG  is  greater  than  the  square  on  the  annex  GD 
by  the  square  on  a  straight  fine  commensurable  in  length  with  AG. 

[x.  Deff.  hi.  2] 


ELEMENTS  X 


273 


Since,  then,  the  square  on  A G  is  greater  than  the  square  on  GD  by  the  square 
on  a  straight  line  commensurable  with  AG , 

therefore,  if  there  be  applied  to  AG  a 
parallelogram  equal  to  the  fourth  part 
of  the  square  on  GD  and  deficient  by  a 
square  figure,  it  divides  it  into  com¬ 
mensurable  parts.  [x.  17] 

Let  then  DG  be  bisected  at  F, 
let  there  be  applied  to  AG  a  parallelo¬ 
gram  equal  to  the  square  on  EG  and 
deficient  by  a  square  figure, 
and  let  it  be  the  rectangle  AF,  FG; 
therefore  AF  is  commensurable  in 
length  with  FG. 

Therefore  AG  is  also  commensurable 
in  length  with  each  of  the  straight 
lines  AF,  FG.  [x.  15] 

But  AG  is  rational  and  incommensurable  in  length  with  AC; 
therefore  each  of  the  straight  lines  AF,  FG  is  also  rational  and  incommensu¬ 
rable  in  length  with  AC;  [x.  13] 

therefore  each  of  the  rectangles  A7,  FK  is  medial.  [x.  21] 

Again,  since  DE  is  commensurable  with  FG, 
therefore  DG  is  also  commensurable  with  each  of  the  straight  lines  DE,  EG . 

[x.  15] 


But  DG  is  commensurable  in  length  with  AC. 

Therefore  each  of  the  rectangles  DH ,  EK  is  rational.  [x.  19] 

Let  then  the  square  LM  be  constructed  equal  to  A/, 
and  let  there  be  subtracted  NO  equal  to  FK  and  being  about  the  same  angle 
with  LM,  namely  the  angle  LPM ; 

therefore  the  squares  LM ,  NO  are  about  the  same  diameter,  [vi.  26 
Let  PR  be  their  diameter,  and  let  the  figure  be  drawn. 

Since  then  A/,  FK  are  medial  and  are  equal  to  the  squares  on  LP ,  PN, 
the  squares  on  LP,  PN  are  also  medial ; 
therefore  LP,  PAT  are  also  medial  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only. 
And,  since  the  rectangle  AF,  FG  is  equal  to  the  square  on  FG, 

therefore,  as  AF  is  to  FG,  so  is  EG  to  FG,  [vi.  17] 

while,  as  AF  is  to  FG,  so  is  A/  to  EK, 
and,  as  FG  is  to  FG,  so  is  EK  to  FK;  [vi.  1] 

therefore  EK  is  a  mean  proportional  between  A7,  FK.  [v.  11] 

But  MN  is  also  a  mean  proportional  between  the  squares  LM,  NO, 
and  A7  is  equal  to  LM,  and  FK  to  AT); 
therefore  MN  is  also  equal  to  EK. 

But  DH  is  equal  to  EK,  and  LO  equal  to  MN; 

therefore  the  whole  DK  is  equal  to  the  gnomon  UVW  and  NO. 

Since,  then,  the  whole  AK  is  equal  to  LM,  A T0, 

and.  in  these,  DK  is  equal  to  the  gnomon  UVW  and  AT), 
therefore  the  remainder  AB  is  equal  to  TS. 

But  TS  is  the  square  on  LN; 

therefore  the  square  on  LAr  is  equal  to  the  area  AB; 


274  EUCLID 

therefore  LN  is  the  “side”  of  the  area  AB . 

I  say  that  LN  is  a  first  apotome  of  a  medial  straight  line. 

For,  since  EK  is  rational  and  is  equal  to  LO , 

therefore  LO,  that  is,  the  rectangle  LP,  PN,  is  rational. 

But  NO  was  proved  medial; 

therefore  LO  is  incommensurable  with  NO, 

But,  as  LO  is  to  NO ,  so  is  LP  to  PiV;  [vi.  l] 

therefore  LP ,  PN  are  incommensurable  in  length.  [x.  11] 

Therefore  LP ,  PN  are  medial  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only, 
which  contain  a  rational  rectangle; 

therefore  LN  is  a  first  apotome  of  a  medial  straight  line.  [x.  74] 
And  it  is  the  “side”  of  the  area  AB. 

Therefore  the  “side”  of  the  area  AB  is  a  first  apotome  of  a  medial  straight 
line.  Q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  93 

If  an  area  be  contained  by  a  rational  straight  line  and  a  third  apotome ,  the  “side” 
of  the  area  is  a  second  apotome  of  a  medial  straight  line. 

For  let  the  area  AB  be  contained  by  the  rational  straight  line  AC  and  the 
third  apotome  AD; 

I  say  that  the  “side”  of  the  area  AB  is  a  second  apotome  of  a  medial  straight 
line. 

For  let  DG  be  the  annex  to  AD; 

therefore  AG,  GD  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only, 
and  neither  of  the  straight  lines  AG,  GD  is  commensurable  in  length  with  the 
rational  straight  line  AC  set  out, 

while  the  square  on  the  whole  AG  is  greater  than  the  square  on  the  annex  DG 
by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  commensurable  with  AG.  [x.  Deff.  hi.  3] 
Since,  then,  the  square  on  AG  is  greater  than  the  square  on  GD  by  the  square 
on  a  straight  line  commensurable  with  AG, 
therefore,  if  there  be  applied  to  AG  a 
parallelogram  equal  to  the  fourth  part 
of  the  square  on  DG  and  deficient  by 
a  square  figure,  it  will  divide  it  into 
commensurable  parts.  [x.  17] 

Let  then  DG  be  bisected  at  B, 
let  there  be  applied  to  AG  a  parallelo¬ 
gram  equal  to  the  square  on  EG  and 
deficient  by  a  square  figure, 
and  let  it  be  the  rectangle  AP,  FG. 

Let  EH,  FI,  GK  be  drawn  through 
the  points  E,  F,  G  parallel  to  AC. 

Therefore  AF,  FG  are  commensu¬ 
rable; 

therefore  A 7  is  also  commensurable 
with  PTC.  [vi.  1,  x.  11] 

And,  since  AP,  FG  are  commensurable  in  length, 
therefore  AG  is  also  commensurable  in  length  with  each  of  the  straight  lines 
AP,  FG.  [x.  15] 


ELEMENTS  X  275 

But  AG  is  rational  and  incommensurable  in  length  with  AC; 

so  that  AF ,  FG  are  so  also.  [x.  13] 

Therefore  each  of  the  rectangles  AI,  FK  is  medial.  [x.  21] 

Again,  since  DE  is  commensurable  in  length  with  EG , 
therefore  DG  is  also  commensurable  in  length  with  each  of  the  straight  lines 
DE,  EG.  [x.  15] 

But  GD  is  rational  and  incommensurable  in  length  with  AC; 
therefore  each  of  the  straight  lines  DE,  EG  is  also  rational  and  incommensu¬ 
rable  in  length  with  AC;  [x.  13] 

therefore  each  of  the  rectangles  DH ,  EK  is  medial.  [x.  21] 

And,  since  AG,  GD  are  commensurable  in  square  only, 

therefore  AG  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  GD. 

But  AG  is  commensurable  in  length  with  AF,  and  DG  with  EG; 

therefore  AF  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  EG.  [x.  13] 
But,  as  AF  is  to  EG,  so  is  AI  to  EK;  [vi.  1] 

therefore  AI  is  incommensurable  with  EK.  [x.  11] 

Now  let  the  square  LM  be  constructed  equal  to  AI, 
and  let  there  be  subtracted  NO  equal  to  FK  and  being  about  the  same  angle 
with  LM ; 

therefore  LM,  NO  are  about  the  same  diameter.  [vi.  26] 

Let  PR  be  their  diameter,  and  let  the  figure  be  drawn. 

Now,  since  the  rectangle  AF,  FG  is  equal  to  the  square  on  EG, 

therefore,  as  AF  is  to  EG,  so  is  EG  to  FG.  [vi.  17] 

But,  as  AF  is  to  EG,  so  is  AI  to  EK, 

and,  as  EG  is  to  FG,  so  is  EK  to  FK;  [vi.  1] 

therefore  also,  as  AI  is  to  EK,  so  is  EK  to  FK;  [v.  11] 

therefore  EK  is  a  mean  proportional  between  AI,  FK. 


But  MN  is  also  a  mean  proportional  between  the  squares  LM,  NO, 
and  AI  is  equal  to  LM,  and  FK  to  NO; 
therefore  EK  is  also  equal  to  MN. 

But  MN  is  equal  to  LO,  and  EK  equal  to  DH ; 

therefore  the  whole  DK  is  also  equal  to  the  gnomon  UVW  and  NO. 

But  AK  is  also  equal  to  LM,  NO; 

therefore  the  remainder  AB  is  equal  to  ST,  that  is,  to  the  square  on  LN; 

therefore  LN  is  the  “side”  of  the  area  AB. 

I  say  that  LN  is  a  second  apotome  of  a  medial  straight  line. 

For,  since  AI,  FK  were  proved  medial,  and  are  equal  to  the  squares  on  LP, 
PN, 

therefore  each  of  the  squares  on  LP,  PN  is  also  medial; 
therefore  each  of  the  straight  lines  LP,  PN  is  medial. 

And,  since  AI  is  commensurable  with  FK,  [vi.  1,  x.  11] 

therefore  the  square  on  LP  is  also  commensurable  with  the  square  on  PN. 
Again,  since  AI  was  proved  incommensurable  with  EK, 

therefore  LM  is  also  incommensurable  with  MN, 
that  is,  the  square  on  LP  with  the  rectangle  LP,  PN; 
so  that  LP  is  also  incommensurable  in  length  with  PN;  [vi.  1,  x.  11] 

therefore  LP,  PN  are  medial  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only. 

I  say  next  that  they  also  contain  a  medial  rectangle. 

For,  since  EK  was  proved  medial,  and  is  equal  to  the  rectangle  LP,  PN , 


276  EUCLID 

therefore  the  rectangle  LP,  PN  is  also  medial, 
so  that  LP ,  PN  are  medial  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only  which 
contain  a  medial  rectangle. 

Therefore  LN  is  a  second  apotome  of  a  medial  straight  line;  [x.  75] 

and  it  is  the  “side”  of  the  area  AB. 

Therefore  the  “side”  of  the  area  AB  is  a  second  apotome  of  a  medial  straight 
line.  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  94 


If  an  area  be  contained  by  a  rational  straight  line  and  a  fourth  apotome ,  the  “side” 
of  the  area  is  minor . 

For  let  the  area  AB  be  contained  by  the  rational  straight  line  AC  and  the 
fourth  apotome  AD ; 

I  say  that  the  “side”  of  the  area  AB  is  minor. 

For  let  DG  be  the  annex  to  AD; 

therefore  AG,  GD  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only, 
AG  is  commensurable  in  length  with  the  rational  straight  line  AC  set  out, 
and  the  square  on  the  whole  AG  is  greater  than  the  square  on  the  annex  DG  by 
the  square  on  a  straight  line  incommensurable  in  length  with  AG, 

[x.  Deff.  hi.  4] 


Since,  then,  the  square  on  AG  is 
greater  than  the  square  on  GD  by  the 
square  on  a  straight  line  incommen¬ 
surable  in  length  with  AG, 
therefore,  if  there  be  applied  to  AG  a 
parallelogram  equal  to  the  fourth  part 
of  the  square  on  DG  and  deficient  by 
a  square  figure,  it  will  divide  it  into 
incommensurable  parts.  [x.  18] 

Let  then  DG  be  bisected  at  E , 
let  there  be  applied  to  AG  a  parallelo¬ 
gram  equal  to  the  square  on  EG  and 
deficient  by  a  square  figure, 
and  let  it  be  the  rectangle  AF,  FG; 
therefore  AF  is  incommensurable  in 
length  with  FG. 

Let  EH,  FI,  GK  be  drawn  through  E,  F,  G  parallel  to  AC,  BD. 

Since,  then,  AG  is  rational  and  commensurable  in  length  with  AC, 

therefore  the  whole  AK  is  rational.  [x.  19] 

Again,  since  DG  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  AC,  and  both  are  ra¬ 
tional, 


therefore  DK  is  medial.  [x.  21] 

Again,  since  AF  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  FG, 

therefore  AI  is  also  incommensurable  with  FK.  [vi.  1,  x.  11] 
Now  let  the  square  LM  be  constructed  equal  to  AI, 
and  let  there  be  subtracted  NO  equal  to  FK  and  about  the  same  angle,  the 
angle  LPM. 

Therefore  the  squares  LM,  NO  are  about  the  same  diameter.  [vi.  26] 
Let  PR  be  their  diameter,  and  let  the  figure  be  drawn. 


ELEMENTS  X  277 

Since,  then,  the  rectangle  AF,  FG  is  equal  to  the  square  on  EG, 

therefore,  proportionally,  as  AF  is  to  EG,  so  is  EG  to  FG.  [vi.  17] 
But,  as  AF  is  to  EG,  so  is  A I  to  EK, 

and,  as  EG  is  to  FG,  so  is  EK  to  FK;  [vi.  1] 

therefore  EK  is  a  mean  proportional  between  AI,  FK.  [v.  11] 


But  MN  is  also  a  mean  proportional  between  the  squares  LM,  NO, 
and  AI  is  equal  to  LM,  and  FK  to  NO; 
therefore  EK  is  also  equal  to  MN. 

But  DH  is  equal  to  EK,  and  LO  is  equal  to  MN ; 

therefore  the  whole  DK  is  equal  to  the  gnomon  UVW  and  NO. 

Since,  then,  the  whole  AK  is  equal  to  the  squares  LM,  NO, 
and,  in  these,  DK  is  equal  to  the  gnomon  UVW  and  the  square  NO, 
therefore  the  remainder  AB  is  equal  to  ST,  that  is,  to  the  square  on  LN; 
therefore  LN  is  the  “side”  of  the  area  AB. 

I  say  that  LN  is  the  irrational  straight  line  called  minor. 

For,  since  AK  is  rational  and  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  LP,  PN, 
therefore  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  LP,  PN  is  rational. 

Again,  since  DK  is  medial, 

and  DK  is  equal  to  twice  the  rectangle  LP,  PN, 
therefore  twice  the  rectangle  LP,  PN  is  medial. 

And,  since  A I  was  proved  incommensurable  with  FK, 
therefore  the  square  on  LP  is  also  incommensurable  with  the  square  on  PN. 

Therefore  LP,  PN  are  straight  lines  incommensurable  in  square  which  make 
the  sum  of  the  squares  on  them  rational,  but  twice  the  rectangle  contained  by 
them  medial. 

Therefore  LN  is  the  irrational  straight  line  called  minor;  [x.  76] 

and  it  is  the  “side”  of  the  area  AB. 

Therefore  the  “side”  of  the  area  AB  is  minor.  q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  95 

If  an  area  be  contained  by  a  rational  straight  line  and  a  fifth  apotome ,  the  “side” 
of  the  area  is  a  straight  line  which  produces  with  a  rational  area  a  medial  whole. 

For  let  the  area  AB  be  contained  by  the  rational  straight  line  AC  and  the 
fifth  apotome  AD; 

I  say  that  the  “side”  of  the  area  AB  is  a  straight  line  which  produces  with 
a  rational  area  a  medial  whole. 

For  let  DG  be  the  annex  to  AD; 

therefore  AG,  GD  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only, 
the  annex  GD  is  commensurable  in  length  with  the  rational  straight  line  AC 
set  out, 

and  the  square  on  the  whole  AG  is  greater  than  the  square  on  the  annex  DG  by 
the  square  on  a  straight  line  incommensurable  with  AG.  [x.  Deff.  hi.  5] 

Therefore,  if  there  be  applied  to  AG  a  parallelogram  equal  to  the  fourth  part 
of  the  square  on  DG  and  deficient  by  a  square  figure,  it  will  divide  it  into  in¬ 
commensurable  parts.  [x.  IS] 

Let  then  DG  be  bisected  at  the  point  E, 
let  there  be  applied  to  AG  a  parallelogram  equal  to  the  square  on  EG  and  de¬ 
ficient  by  a  square  figure,  and  let  it  be  the  rectangle  AF,  FG; 

therefore  AF  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  FG. 


278  EUCLID 

Now,  since  AG  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  CA,  and  both  are  rational, 

therefore  AK  is  medial.  |x.  211 

Again,  since  DG  is  rational  and 
commensurable  in  length  with  AC , 

DK  is  rational.  [x.  19] 

Now  let  the  square  LM  be  con¬ 
structed  equal  to  A I ,  and  let  the 
square  NO  equal  to  FK  and  about 
the  same  angle,  the  angle  LPM ,  be 
subtracted; 

therefore  the  squares  LM ,  NO  are 
about  the  same  diameter.  [vi.  26] 

Let  PR  be  their  diameter,  and  let 
the  figure  be  drawn. 

Similarly  then  we  can  prove  that 
LN  is  the  “side”  of  the  area  AB. 

I  say  that  LN  is  the  straight  line 
which  produces  with  a  rational  area  a  medial  whole. 

For,  since  AK  was  proved  medial  and  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  LP,  PN, 
therefore  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  LP,  PN  is  medial. 

Again,  since  DK  is  rational  and  is  equal  to  twice  the  rectangle  LP,  PN, 
the  latter  is  itself  also  rational. 

And,  since  AI  is  incommensurable  with  FK, 
therefore  the  square  on  LP  is  also  incommensurable  with  the  square  on  PN; 
therefore  LP,  PN  are  straight  lines  incommensurable  in  square  which  make 
the  sum  of  the  squares  on  them  medial  but  twice  the  rectangle  contained  by 
them  rational. 

Therefore  the  remainder  LN  is  the  irrational  straight  line  called  that  which 
produces  with  a  rational  area  a  medial  whole;  [x.  77] 

and  it  is  the  “side”  of  the  area  AB. 

Therefore  the  “side”  of  the  area  AB  is  a  straight  line  which  produces  with  a 
rational  area  a  medial  whole.  Q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  96 

If  an  area  be  contained  by  a  rational  straight  line  and  a  sixth  apotome,  the  “side” 
of  the  area  is  a  straight  line  which  produces  with  a  medial  area  a  medial  whole. 

For  let  the  area  AB  be  contained  by  the  rational  straight  line  AC  and  the 
sixth  apotome  AD; 

I  say  that  the  “side”  of  the  area  AB  is  a  straight  line  which  produces  with 
a  medial  area  a  medial  whole. 

For  let  DG  be  the  annex  to  AD; 

therefore  AG,  GD  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only, 
neither  of  them  is  commensurable  in  length  with  the  rational  straight  line  AC 
set  out, 

and  the  square  on  the  whole  AG  is  greater  than  the  square  on  the  annex  DG  by 
the  square  on  a  straight  line  incommensurable  in  length  with  AG. 

[x.  Deff.  hi.  6] 

Since,  then,  the  square  on  AG  is  greater  than  the  square  on  GD  by  the  square 
on  a  straight  line  incommensurable  in  length  with  AG, 


279 


ELEMENTS  X 

therefore,  if  there  be  applied  to  AG  a  parallelogram  equal  to  the  fourth  part  of 
the  square  on  DG  and  deficient  by  a  square  figure,  it  will  divide  it  into  incom¬ 
mensurable  parts.  [x.  18] 

Let  then  DG  be  bisected  at  E , 
let  there  be  applied  to  AG  a  parallelo¬ 
gram  equal  to  the  square  on  EG  and 
deficient  by  a  square  figure,  and  let 
it  be  the  rectangle  AF,  FG; 
therefore  AF  is  incommensurable  in 
length  with  FG. 

But,  as  AF  is  to  FG,  so  is  AI  to 

FK;  [vi.  1] 

therefore  A I  is  incommensurable  with 
FK.  [x.  11] 

And,  since  AG,  AC  are  rational 
straight  lines  commensurable  in 
square  only, 

AK  is  medial.  [x.  21] 

straight  lines  and  incommensurable  in 

length, 

DK  is  also  medial.  [x.  21] 

Now,  since  AG,  GD  are  commensurable  in  square  only, 

therefore  AG  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  GD. 

But,  as  AG  is  to  GD,  so  is  AK  to  KD;  [vi.  1] 

therefore  AK  is  incommensurable  with  KD.  [x.  11] 

Nowr  let  the  square  LM  be  constructed  equal  to  AI, 

and  let  NO  equal  to  FK,  and  about  the  same  angle,  be  subtracted; 
therefore  the  squares  LM,  NO  are  about  the  same  diameter,  [vi.  26] 

Let  PR  be  their  diameter,  and  let  the  figure  be  drawm. 

Then  in  manner  similar  to  the  above  w~e  can  prove  that  LN  is  the  “side”  of 
the  area  AB. 

I  say  that  LN  is  a  straight  line  winch  produces  with  a  medial  area  a  medial 
wrhole. 

For,  since  AK  was  proved  medial  and  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  LP,  PN, 
therefore  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  LP,  PN  is  medial. 

Again,  since  DK  w^as  proved  medial  and  is  equal  to  twice  the  rectangle  LP, 
PN, 

twice  the  rectangle  LP,  PN  is  also  medial. 

And,  since  AK  wras  proved  incommensurable  with  DK, 
the  squares  on  LP,  PN  are  also  incommensurable  with  twice  the  rectangle  LP, 
PN. 

And,  since  A 7  is  incommensurable  with  FK, 
therefore  the  square  on  LP  is  also  incommensurable  with  the  square  on  PN; 
therefore  LP,  PN  are  straight  lines  incommensurable  in  square  which  make 
the  sum  of  the  squares  on  them  medial,  twice  the  rectangle  contained  by  them 
medial,  and  further,  the  squares  on  them  incommensurable  with  twice  the  rec¬ 
tangle  contained  by  them. 

Therefore  LN  is  the  irrational  straight  line  called  that  which  produces  with 
a  medial  area  a  medial  wiiole;  [x.  78] 


Again,  since  AC,  DG  are  rational 


2S0  EUCLID 

and  it  is  the  “side”  of  the  area  AS. 

Therefore  the  “side”  of  the  area  is  a  straight  line  which  produces  with  a  me¬ 
dial  area  a  medial  whole.  q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  97 

The  square  on  an  apotome  applied  to  a  rational  straight  line  produces  as  breadth 
a  first  apotome . 

Let  AS  be  an  apotome,  and  CD  rational, 
and  to  CD  let  there  be  applied  CE  equal  to  the  square  on  AS  and  producing 
CF  as  breadth; 

I  say  that  CF  is  a  first  apotome. 

For  let  BG  be  the  annex  to 

-4S;  _  A  B  G 

therefore  AG,  GB  are  rational  * 

straight  fines  commensurable  c _ F _ n _ k  m 

in  square  only.  [x.  73] 

To  CD  let  there  be  applied 

CH  equal  to  the  square  on  AG, _ 

and  KL  equal  to  the  square  on  D  E  0  H  L 

BG . 

Therefore  the  whole  CL  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  AG,  GB,  and,  in  these,  CE 
is  equal  to  the  square  on  AS; 

therefore  the  remainder  FL  is  equal  to  twice  the  rectangle  AG,  GB.  [n.  7] 
Let  FM  be  bisected  at  the  point  N, 

and  let  NO  be  drawn  through  N  parallel  to  CD; 
therefore  each  of  the  rectangles  FO,  Li V  is  equal  to  the  rectangle  AG,  GB. 
Now,  since  the  squares  on  AG,  GB  are  rational, 

and  DM  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  AG,  GB, 
therefore  DM  is  rational. 

And  it  has  been  applied  to  the  rational  straight  line  CD.  producing  CM  as 
breadth; 

therefore  CM  is  rational  and  commensurable  in  length  with  CD.  [x.  20] 
Again,  since  twice  the  rectangle  AG,  GB  is  medial,  and  FL  is  equal  to  twice 
the  rectangle  AG,  GB, 

therefore  FL  is  medial. 

And  it  is  applied  to  the  rational  straight  fine  CD.  producing  FM  as  breadth; 

therefore  FM  Is  rational  and  incommensurable  in  length  with  CD.  [x.  22] 
And,  since  the  squares  on  AG,  GB  are  rational, 

while  twice  the  rectangle  AG,  GB  is  medial, 
therefore  the  squares  on  AG,  GB  are  incommensurable  with  twice  the  rec¬ 
tangle  AG,  GB. 

And  CL  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  AG,  GB, 

and  FL  to  twice  the  rectangle  AG,  GB, 
therefore  DM  is  incommensurable  with  FL. 

But,  as  DM  is  to  FL,  so  is  CM  to  FM;  [vi.  1] 

therefore  CM  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  FM.  [x.  11] 
And  both  are  rational; 

therefore  CM,  MF  are  rational  straight  fines  commensurable  in  square  only; 

therefore  CF  is  an  apotome.  [x.  73] 


ELEMENTS  X 


281 


I  say  next  that  it  is  also  a  first  apotome. 

For,  since  the  rectangle  AG,  GB  is  a  mean  proportional  between  the  squares 
on  AG,  GB, 

and  CH  is  equal  to  the  square  on  AG, 

KL  equal  to  the  square  on  BG, 
and  NL  equal  to  the  rectangle  AG,  GB, 
therefore  NL  is  also  a  mean  proportional  between  CH,  KL; 
therefore,  as  CH  is  to  NL,  so  is  NL  to  KL. 

But,  as  CH  is  to  NL,  so  is  CK  to  NM , 

and,  as  NL  is  to  KL,  so  is  NM  to  KM;  [vi.  1] 

therefore  the  rectangle  CK,  KM  is  equal  to  the  square  on  NM  [vi.  17],  that  is, 
to  the  fourth  part  of  the  square  on  FM. 

And,  since  the  square  on  AG  is  commensurable  with  the  square  on  GB, 

CH  is  also  commensurable  with  KL. 

But,  as  CH  is  to  KL,  so  is  CK  to  KM;  [vi.  1] 

therefore  CK  is  commensurable  with  KM.  [x.  11] 

Since,  then,  CM,  MF  are  two  unequal  straight  lines, 
and  to  CM  there  has  been  applied  the  rectangle  CK,  KM  equal  to  the  fourth 
part  of  the  square  on  FM  and  deficient  by  a  square  figure, 
while  CK  is  commensurable  with  KM, 
therefore  the  square  on  CM  is  greater  than  the  square  on  MF  by  the  square  on 
a  straight  line  commensurable  in  length  with  CM.  [x.  17] 

And  CM  is  commensurable  in  length  with  the  rational  straight  line  CD  set 
out; 

therefore  CF  is  a  first  apotome.  [x.  Deff.  hi.  1] 

Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  98 

The  square  on  a  first  apotome  of  a  medial  straight  line  applied  to  a  rational  straight 
line  produces  as  breadth  a  second  apotome. 

Let  AB  be  a  first  apotome  of  a  medial  straight  line  and  CD  a  rational  straight 
line, 

and  to  CD  let  there  be  applied  CE  equal  to  the  square  on  AB,  producing  CF  as 
breadth; 

I  say  that  CF  is  a  second  apotome. 

For  let  BG  be  the  annex  to  AB; 

therefore  AG,  GB  are  medial  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only 
which  contain  a  rational  rectangle.  [x.  74] 

To  CD  let  there  be  applied 

A - ? - -  CH  equal  to  the  square  on  AG, 

r  F  isj  k  m  producing  CK  as  breadth,  and 

KL  equal  to  the  square  on  GB, 
producing  KM  as  breadth; 
therefore  the  whole  CL  is 
equal  to  the  squares  on  AG, 
“  GB; 

therefore  CL  is  also  medial.  [x.  15  and  23,  Por.] 

And  it  is  applied  to  the  rational  straight  line  CD,  producing  CM  as  breadth; 
therefore  CM  is  rational  and  incommensurable  in  length  with  CD.  [x.  22] 


282  EUCLID 

Now,  since  CL  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  AG,  GB, 

and,  in  these,  the  square  on  AB  is  equal  to  CE, 
therefore  the  remainder,  twice  the  rectangle  AG,  GB,  is  equal  to  FL.  [n.  7] 
But  twice  the  rectangle  AG,  GB  is  rational; 

therefore  FL  is  rational. 

And  it  is  applied  to  the  rational  straight  line  FE,  producing  FM  as  breadth; 
therefore  FM  is  also  rational  and  commensurable  in  length  'with  CD.  [x.  20] 
Now,  since  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  AG,  GB,  that  is,  CL,  is  medial,  while 
twice  the  rectangle  AG,  GB,  that  is,  FL,  is  rational, 

therefore  CL  is  incommensurable  with  FL. 

But,  as  CL  is  to  FL,  so  is  CM  to  FM ;  [vi.  1] 

therefore  CM  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  FM.  [x.  11] 
And  both  are  rational; 

therefore  CM,  MF  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only; 

therefore  CF  is  an  apotome.  [x.  73] 

I  say  next  that  it  is  also  a  second  apotome. 

For  let  FM  be  bisected  at  N, 

and  let  NO  be  drawn  through  N  parallel  to  CD ; 
therefore  each  of  the  rectangles  FO,  NL  is  equal  to  the  rectangle  AG,  GB. 

Now7,  since  the  rectangle  AG,  GB  is  a  mean  proportional  between  the  squares 
on  AG,  GB, 

and  the  square  on  AG  is  equal  to  CH, 
the  rectangle  AG,  GB  to  NL, 
and  the  square  on  BG  to  KL, 

therefore  NL  is  also  a  mean  proportional  between  CH,  KL ; 
therefore,  as  CH  is  to  NL,  so  is  NL  to  KL. 

But,  as  CH  is  to  NL,  so  is  CK  to  NM, 

and,  as  NL  is  to  KL,  so  is  NM  to  MK;  [vi.  1] 

therefore,  as  CK  is  to  NM,  so  is  NM  to  KM;  [v.  11] 

therefore  the  rectangle  CK,  KM  is  equal  to  the  square  on  NM  [vi.  17],  that  is, 
to  the  fourth  part  of  the  square  on  FM. 

Since,  then,  CM,  MF  are  twrn  unequal  straight  lines,  and  the  rectangle  CK, 
KM  equal  to  the  fourth  part  of  the  square  on  MF  and  deficient  by  a  square 
figure  has  been  applied  to  the  greater,  CM,  and  divides  it  into  commensurable 
parts, 

therefore  the  square  on  CM  is  greater  than  the  square  on  MF  by  the  square  on 
a  straight  line  commensurable  in  length  vdth  CM.  [x.  17] 

And  the  annex  FM  is  commensurable  in  length  with  the  rational  straight 
line  CD  set  out; 

therefore  CF  is  a  second  apotome.  [x.  Deff.  hi.  2] 

Therefore  etc.  Q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  99 

The  square  on  a  second  apotome  of  a  medial  straight  line  applied  to  a  rational 
straight  line  produces  as  breadth  a  third  apotome. 

Let  AB  be  a  second  apotome  of  a  medial  straight  line,  and  CD  rational, 
and  to  CD  let  there  be  applied  CE  equal  to  the  square  on  AB,  producing  CF  as 
breadth; 


I  say  that  CF  is  a  third  apotome. 


ELEMENTS  X 


233 


For  let  BG  be  the  annex  to  AB; 
therefore  AG,  GB  are  medial  straight 
which  contain  a  medial  rectangle. 

A  B  G 


lines  commensurable  in  square  only 

[x.  75] 

Let  CH  equal  to  the  square 
on  A  G  be  applied  to  CD,  pro¬ 
ducing  CK  as  breadth, 
and  let  KL  equal  to  the  square 
on  BG  be  applied  to  KH.  pro¬ 
ducing  KM  as  breadth; 
therefore  the  whole  CL  is  equal 
to  the  squares  on  AG,  GB: 
therefore  CL  is  also  medial.  [x.  15  and  23,  Por.] 

And  it  is  applied  to  the  rational  straight  line  CD,  producing  CM  as  breadth; 
therefore  CM  is  rational  and  incommensurable  in  length  with  CD,  x  22] 
Now,  since  the  whole  CL  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  AG,  GB.  and.  in  these. 
CE  is  equal  to  the  square  on  AB, 

therefore  the  remainder  LF  is  equal  to  twice  the  rectangle  AG,  GB.  [n.  7] 
Let  then  FM  be  bisected  at  the  point  X, 

and  let  XO  be  drawn  parallel  to  CD; 

therefore  each  of  the  rectangles  FO,  XL  is  equal  to  the  rectangle  AG,  GB. 
But  the  rectangle  AG,  GB  is  medial; 

therefore  FL  is  also  medial. 

And  it  is  applied  to  the  rational  straight  line  EF.  producing  FM  as  breadth: 
therefore  FM  is  also  rational  and  incommensurable  in  length  with  CD.  [x.  22) 
And.  since  AG.  GB  are  commensurable  in  square  only, 

therefore  AG  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  GB; 
therefore  the  square  on  AG  is  also  incommensurable  with  the  rectangle  AG. 
GB,  ‘  fvi.  1.  x.  11] 

But  the  squares  on  AG.  GB  are  commensurable  with  the  square  on  AG. 
and  twice  the  rectangle  AG.  GB  with  the  rectangle  AG,  GB; 
therefore  the  squares  on  AG.  GB  are  incommensurable  with  twice  the  rectangle 
AG.  GB.  [x.  13] 

But  CL  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  AG.  GB. 

and  FL  is  equal  to  twice  the  rectangle  AG.  GB; 
therefore  CL  is  also  incommensurable  with  FL. 

But.  as  CL  is  to  FL.  so  is  CM  to  FM:  [vi.  1] 

therefore  CM  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  FM.  [x.  11] 
And  both  are  rational; 

therefore  CM.  MF  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only; 

therefore  CF  is  an  apotome.  [x.  73] 

I  say  next  that  it  is  also  a  third  apotome. 

For,  since  the  square  on  AG  is  commensurable  with  the  square  on  GB, 
therefore  CH  is  also  commensurable  with  KL. 
so  that  CK  is  also  commensurable  with  KM.  fvi.  1.  x.  11] 
And.  since  the  rectangle  AG.  GB  is  a  mean  proportional  between  the  squares 
on  AG,  GB, 

and  CH  is  equal  to  the  square  on  AG. 

KL  equal  to  the  square  on  GB. 
and  XL  equal  to  the  rectangle  AG.  GB; 


284  EUCLID 

therefore  NL  is  also  a  mean  proportional  between  CH ,  KL; 
therefore,  as  CH  is  to  NL,  so  is  NL  to  KL. 

But,  as  CH  is  to  NL ,  so  is  CK  to  NM, 

and,  as  NL  is  to  KL,  so  is  NM  to  KM;  [yi.  l] 

therefore,  as  CK  is  to  MN,  so  is  MN  to  KM;  [v.  11] 

therefore  the  rectangle  CK ,  KM  is  equal  to  [the  square  on  MN,  that  is,  to]  the 
fourth  part  of  the  square  on  FM. 

Since,  then,  CM ,  MF  are  two  unequal  straight  lines,  and  a  parallelogram 
equal  to  the  fourth  part  of  the  square  on  FM  and  deficient  by  a  square  figure 
has  been  applied  to  CM,  and  divides  it  into  commensurable  parts, 
therefore  the  square  on  CM  is  greater  than  the  square  on  MF  by  the  square  on 
a  straight  line  commensurable  with  CM.  [x.  17] 

And  neither  of  the  straight  lines  CM,  MF  is  commensurable  in  length  with 
the  rational  straight  line  CD  set  out; 

therefore  CF  is  a  third  apotome.  [x.  Deff.  hi.  3] 

Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  100 

The  square  on  a  minor  straight  line  applied  to  a  rational  straight  line  produces  as 
breadth  a  fourth  apotome. 

Let  AB  be  a  minor  and  CD  a  rational  straight  line,  and  to  the  rational 
straight  line  CD  let  CE  be  applied  equal  to  the  square  on  AB  and  producing 
CF  as  breadth; 

I  say  that  CF  is  a  fourth  apotome. 

For  let  BG  be  the  annex  to 
AB; 

therefore  AG,  GB  are  straight 
lines  incommensurable  in 
square  which  make  the  sum 
of  the  squares  on  AG,  GB  ra¬ 
tional,  but  twice  the  rectangle 
AG,  GB  medial.  [x.  76] 

To  CD  let  there  be  applied  CH  equal  to  the  square  on  AG  and  producing  CK 
as  breadth, 

and  KL  equal  to  the  square  on  BG,  producing  KM  as  breadth; 
therefore  the  whole  CL  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  AG,  GB. 

And  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  AG,  GB  is  rational; 

therefore  CL  is  also  rational. 

And  it  is  applied  to  the  rational  straight  line  CD,  producing  CM  as  breadth: 
therefore  CM  is  also  rational  and  commensurable  in  length  with  CD.  [x.  20] 

And,  since  the  whole  CL  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  AG,  GB,  and,  in  these,  CE 
is  equal  to  the  square  on  AB, 

therefore  the  remainder  FL  is  equal  to  twice  the  rectangle  AG,  GB.  [n.  7] 

Let  then  FM  be  bisected  at  the  point  N, 
and  let  NO  be  drawn  through  N  parallel  to  either  of  the  straight  lines  CD,  ML; 
therefore  each  of  the  rectangles  FO,  NL  is  equal  to  the  rectangle  AG,  GB. 

And,  since  twice  the  rectangle  AG,  GB  is  medial  and  is  equal  to  FL, 
therefore  FL  is  also  medial. 

And  it  is  applied  to  the  rational  straight  line  FE,  producing  FM  as  breadth; 


A  B  G 


C _ F _ N _ KM 


D  E  0  H  L 


ELEMENTS  X  285 

therefore  FM  is  rational  and  incommensurable  in  length  with  CD.  [x.  22] 
And,  since  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  AG.  GB  is  rational, 
while  twice  the  rectangle  AGy  GB  is  medial, 
the  squares  on  AG,  GB  are  incommensurable  with  twice  the  rectangle  AG,  GB. 
But  GL  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  AG,  GB, 

and  FL  equal  to  twice  the  rectangle  AG,  GB ; 
therefore  CL  is  incommensurable  with  FL. 

But,  as  CL  is  to  FL.  so  is  CM  to  MF;  [vi.  1] 

therefore  CM  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  MF.  [x.  11] 
And  both  are  rational ; 

therefore  CM,  MF  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only; 

therefore  CF  is  an  apotome.  [x.  73] 

I  say  that  it  is  also  a  fourth  apotome. 

For,  since  AG,  GB  are  incommensurable  in  square, 
therefore  the  square  on  AG  is  also  incommensurable  with  the  square  on  GB. 
And  CH  is  equal  to  the  square  on  AG, 

and  KL  equal  to  the  square  on  GB ; 
therefore  CH  is  incommensurable  with  KL. 

But,  as  CH  is  to  KL,  so  is  CK  to  KM)  [vi.  1] 

therefore  CK  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  KM.  [x.  11] 
.And,  since  the  rectangle  AG,  GB  is  a  mean  proportional  between  the  squares 
on  AG,  GB, 

and  the  square  on  AG  is  equal  to  CH, 
the  square  on  GB  to  KL, 
and  the  rectangle  AG,  GB  to  XL, 
therefore  XL  is  a  mean  proportional  between  CH,  KL; 
therefore,  as  CH  is  to  XL,  so  is  XL  to  KL. 

But,  as  CH  is  to  XL,  so  is  CK  to  XM, 

and,  as  XL  is  to  KL,  so  is  XM  to  KM;  [vi.  1] 

therefore,  as  CK  is  to  MX,  so  is  MX  to  KM;  [v.  11] 

therefore  the  rectangle  CK,  KM  is  equal  to  the  square  on  MX  [vi.  17],  that  is, 
to  the  fourth  part  of  the  square  on  FM. 

Since  then  CM.  MF  are  two  unequal  straight  lines,  and  the  rectangle  CK. 
KM  equal  to  the  fourth  part  of  the  square  on  MF  and  deficient  by  a  square 
figure  has  been  applied  to  CM  and  divides  it  into  incommensurable  parts, 
therefore  the  square  on  CM  is  greater  than  the  square  on  MF  by  the  square  on 
a  straight  line  incommensurable  with  CM.  [x.  18] 

And  the  whole  CM  is  commensurable  in  length  with  the  rational  straight 
line  CD  set  out; 

therefore  CF  is  a  fourth  apotome.  [x.  Deff.  in.  4] 

Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  101 

The  square  on  the  straight  line  which  produces  with  a  rational  area  a  medial  whole , 
if  applied  to  a  rational  straight  line,  produces  as  breadth  a  fifth  apotome. 

Let  AB  be  the  straight  line  which  produces  with  a  rational  area  a  medial 
whole,  and  CD  a  rational  straight  line,  and  to  CD  let  CE  be  applied  equal  to 
the  square  on  AB  and  producing  CF  as  breadth; 

I  say  that  CF  is  a  fifth  apotome. 

For  let  BG  be  the  annex  to  AB; 


286 


EUCLID 


therefore  AG,  GB  are  straight  lines  incommensurable  in  square  which  make 
the  sum  of  the  squares  on  them  medial  but  twice  the  rectangle  contained  by 


[x.  77] 


them  rational 

To  CD  let  there  be  applied 
CH  equal  to  the  square  on  AG, 
and  KL  equal  to  the  square  on 
GB ; 

therefore  the  whole  CL  is  equal 
to  the  squares  on  AG,  GB. 

But  the  sum  of  the  squares 
on  AG,  GB  together  is  medial; 
therefore  CL  is  medial. 

And  it  is  applied  to  the  rational  straight  line  CD,  producing  CM  as  breadth; 

therefore  CM  is  rational  and  incommensurable  with  CD.  [x.  22] 
And,  since  the  whole  CL  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  AG,  GB , 
and,  in  these,  CE  is  equal  to  the  square  on  AB, 
therefore  the  remainder  FL  is  equal  to  twice  the  rectangle  AG,  GB.  [n.  7] 
Let  then  FM  be  bisected  at  N, 

and  through  N  let  NO  be  drawn  parallel  to  either  of  the  straight  lines  CD,  ML; 
therefore  each  of  the  rectangles  FO,  NL  is  equal  to  the  rectangle  AG,  GB. 
And,  since  twice  the  rectangle  AG,  GB  is  rational  and  equal  to  FL, 

therefore  FL  is  rational. 

And  it  is  applied  to  the  rational  straight  line  EF,  producing  FM  as  breadth; 
therefore  FM  is  rational  and  commensurable  in  length  with  CD.  [x.  20] 
Now,  since  CL  is  medial,  and  FL  rational, 

therefore  CL  is  incommensurable  with  FL. 

But,  as  CL  is  to  FL,  so  is  CM  to  MF;  [vi.  1] 

therefore  CM  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  MF.  [x.  11] 
And  both  are  rational; 

therefore  CM,  MF  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only; 

therefore  CF  is  an  apotome.  [x.  73] 

I  say  next  that  it  is  also  a  fifth  apotome. 

For  w’e  can  prove  similarly  that  the  rectangle  CK ,  KM  is  equal  to  the  square 
on  NM,  that  is,  to  the  fourth  part  of  the  square  on  FM. 

And,  since  the  square  on  AG  is  incommensurable  with  the  square  on  GB, 
wiiile  the  square  on  AG  is  equal  to  CH, 
and  the  square  on  GB  to  KL, 
therefore  CH  is  incommensurable  with  KL. 

But,  as  CH  is  to  KL,  so  is  CK  to  KM;  [vi.  1] 

therefore  CK  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  KM.  [x.  11] 
Since  then  CM,  MF  are  tw^o  unequal  straight  lines, 
and  a  parallelogram  equal  to  the  fourth  part  of  the  square  on  FM  and  deficient 
by  a  square  figure  has  been  applied  to  CM,  and  divides  it  into  incommensu¬ 
rable  parts, 

therefore  the  square  on  CM  is  greater  than  the  square  on  MF  by  the  square  on 
a  straight  line  incommensurable  with  CM.  [x.  18] 

And  the  annex  FM  is  commensurable  with  the  rational  straight  line  CD  set  out ; 

therefore  CF  is  a  fifth  apotome.  [x.  Deff.  hi.  5] 

q.  e.  n. 


ELEMENTS  X 


287 


Proposition  102 

The  square  on  the  straight  line  which  produces  with  a  medial  area  a  medial  whole, 
if  applied  to  a  rational  straight  line,  produces  as  breadth  a  sixth  apotome. 

Let  AB  be  the  straight  line  which  produces  with  a  medial  area  a  medial 
whole,  and  CD  a  rational  straight  line, 

and  to  CD  let  CE  be  applied  equal  to  the  square  on  AB  and  producing  CF  as 
breadth; 

I  say  that  CF  is  a  sixth  apotome. 

For  let  BG  be  the  annex  to  AB; 

therefore  AG,  GB  are  straight 
lines  incommensurable  in 
square  which  make  the  sum  of 
the  squares  on  them  medial, 
twice  the  rectangle  AG,  GB 
medial,  and  the  squares  on 
AG,  GB  incommensurable  with 
twice  the  rectangle  AG,  GB. 

[x.  78] 

Now  to  CD  let  there  be  applied  CH  equal  to  the  square  on  AG  and  produc¬ 
ing  CK  as  breadth, 

and  KL  equal  to  the  square  on  BG ; 
therefore  the  whole  CL  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  AG,  GB ; 
therefore  CL  is  also  medial. 

And  it  is  applied  to  the  rational  straight  line  CD,  producing  CM  as  breadth; 
therefore  CM  is  rational  and  incommensurable  in  length  with  CD.  [x.  22] 
Since  now  CL  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  AG,  GB, 

and,  in  these,  CE  is  equal  to  the  square  on  AB, 
therefore  the  remainder  FL  is  equal  to  twice  the  rectangle  AG,  GB.  [n.  7] 
And  twice  the  rectangle  AG,  GB  is  medial; 

therefore  FL  is  also  medial. 

And  it  is  applied  to  the  rational  straight  line  FE,  producing  FM  as  breadth; 
therefore  FM  is  rational  and  incommensurable  in  length  with  CD.  [x.  22] 
And,  since  the  squares  on  AG,  GB  are  incommensurable  with  twice  the  rec¬ 
tangle  AG,  GB, 

and  CL  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  AG,  GB, 
and  FL  equal  to  twice  the  rectangle  AG,  GB, 
therefore  CL  is  incommensurable  with  FL. 

But,  as  CL  is  to  FL,  so  is  CM  to  MF;  [vi.  1] 

therefore  CM  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  MF.  [x.  11] 
And  both  are  rational. 

Therefore  CM,  MF  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only; 

therefore  CF  is  an  apotome.  [x.  73] 

I  say  next  that  it  is  also  a  sixth  apotome. 

For,  since  FL  is  equal  to  twice  the  rectangle  AG,  GB, 
let  FM  be  bisected  at  N, 
and  let  NO  be  drawn  through  N  parallel  to  CD; 
therefore  each  of  the  rectangles  FO,  NL  is  equal  to  the  rectangle  AG,  GB. 
And,  since  AG,  GB  are  incommensurable  in  square, 


A  B  G 

- 1 - 

C _ F _ N _ KM 


D  E  0  H  L 


288  EUCLID 

therefore  the  square  on  A  G  is  incommensurable  with  the  square  on  GB. 

But  CH  is  equal  to  the  square  on  AG , 

and  KL  is  equal  to  the  square  on  GB ; 
therefore  CH  is  incommensurable  with  KL. 

But,  as  CH  is  to  KL,  so  is  CK  to  KM;  [vi.  i] 

therefore  CK  is  incommensurable  with  KM.  [x.  11] 

And,  since  the  rectangle  AG,  GB  is  a  mean  proportional  between  the  squares 
on  AG,  GB, 

and  CH  is  equal  to  the  square  on  AG, 

KL  equal  to  the  square  on  GB, 
and  NL  equal  to  the  rectangle  AG,  GB, 
therefore  NL  is  also  a  mean  proportional  between  CH,  KL; 
therefore,  as  CH  is  to  NL,  so  is  NL  to  KL. 

And  for  the  same  reason  as  before  the  square  on  CM  is  greater  than  the 
square  on  MF  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  incommensurable  with  CM. 

[x.  18] 

And  neither  of  them  is  commensurable  with  the  rational  straight  line  CD 
set  out; 

therefore  CF  is  a  sixth  apotome.  [x.  Deff.  hi.  6] 

Q.  E.  D. 

Proposition  103 

A  straight  line  commensurable  in  length  with  an  apotome  is  an  apotome  and  the 
same  in  order. 

Let  AB  be  an  apotome, 

and  let  CD  be  commensurable  in  length  with  AB;  ^ - S - - 

I  say  that  CD  is  also  an  apotome  and  the  same  in  C _ D _ F 

order  with  AB. 

For,  since  AB  is  an  apotome,  let  BE  be  the  annex  to  it; 
therefore  AE ,  EB  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only. 

[x.  73] 

Let  it  be  contrived  that  the  ratio  of  BE  to  DF  is  the  same  as  the  ratio  of  AB 
to  CD;  [vi.  12] 

therefore  also,  as  one  is  to  one,  so  are  all  to  all;  [v.  12] 

therefore  also,  as  the  whole  AE  is  to  the  whole  CF,  so  is  AB  to  CD. 

But  AB  is  commensurable  in  length  with  CD. 

Therefore  AE  is  also  commensurable  with  CF,  and  BE  with  DF.  [x.  11] 

And  AE,  EB  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only; 
therefore  CF,  FD  are  also  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only. 

[x.  13] 

Now  since,  as  A E  is  to  CF,  so  is  BE  to  DF, 

alternately  therefore,  as  AE  is  to  EB,  so  is  CF  to  FD.  [v.  16] 

And  the  square  on  A E  is  greater  than  the  square  on  EB  either  by  the  square 
on  a  straight  line  commensurable  with  AE  or  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line 
incommensurable  with  it. 

If  then  the  square  on  A  E  is  greater  than  the  square  on  EB  by  the  square  on 
a  straight  line  commensurable  with  AE,  the  square  on  CF  will  also  be  greater 
than  the  square  on  FD  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  commensurable  with 
CF.  "  [x.  14] 


ELEMENTS  X  289 

And,  if  AE  is  commensurable  in  length  with  the  rational  straight  line  set  out, 

CF  is  so  also,  [x.  12] 

if  BE,  then  DF  also,  [id.] 

and,  if  neither  of  the  straight  lines  AE,  EB,  then  neither  of  the  straight  lines 
CF,  FD.  [x.  13] 

But,  if  the  square  on  AE'  is  greater  than  the  square  on  EB  by  the  square  on 
a  straight  line  incommensurable  with  AE, 

the  square  on  CF  will  also  be  greater  than  the  square  on  FD  by  the  square  on 
a  straight  line  incommensurable  with  CF.  [x.  14] 

And,  if  AE  is  commensurable  in  length  wi th  the  rational  straight  line  set  out, 

CF  is  so  also, 

if  BE,  then  DF  also,  [x.  12] 

and,  if  neither  of  the  straight  lines  AE,  EB,  then  neither  of  the  straight  lines 
CF,  FD.  '  [x.  13] 

Therefore  CD  is  an  apotome  and  the  same  in  order  with  AB .  q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  104 

A  straight  line  commensurable  with  an  apotome  of  a  medial  straight  line  is  an 
apotome  of  a  medial  straight  line  and  the  same  in  order. 

Let  AB  be  an  apotome  of  a  medial  straight  line, 

and  let  CD  be  commensurable  in  length  with.  AB; 

I  say  that  CD  is  also  an  apotome  of  a  medial  straight 

^ - + -  line  and  the  same  in  order  with  AB. 

C _ D _ F  For,  since  AB  is  an  apotome  of  a  medial  straight 

line,  let  EB  be  the  annex  to  it. 

Therefore  AE,  EB  are  medial  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only. 

[x.  74,  75] 

Let  it  be  contrived  that,  as  AB  is  to  CD,  so  is  BE  to  DF;  [vi.  12] 

therefore  AE  is  also  commensurable  with  CF,  and  BE  with  DF.  [v.  12,  x.  11] 
But  AE,  EB  are  medial  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only; 
therefore  CF,  FD  are  also  medial  straight  lines  [x.  23]  commensurable  in 
square  only;  [x.  13] 

therefore  CD  is  an  apotome  of  a  medial  straight  line.  [x.  74,  75] 
I  say  next  that  it  is  also  the  same  in  order  with  AB. 

Since,  as  AE  is  to  EB,  so  is  CF  to  FD, 
therefore  also,  as  the  square  on  AE  is  to  the  rectangle  AE,  EB,  so  is  the  square 
on  CF  to  the  rectangle  CF,  FD. 

But  the  square  on  AE  is  commensurable  with  the  square  on  CF; 
therefore  the  rectangle  AE,  EB  is  also  commensurable  with  the  rectangle  CF, 
FD.  [v.  16,  x.  11] 

Therefore,  if  the  rectangle  AE,  EB  is  rational,  the  rectangle  CF,  FD  will 
also  be  rational,  [x.  Def.  4] 

and  if  the  rectangle  AE,  EB  is  medial,  the  rectangle  CF,  FD  is  also  medial. 

[x.  23,  Por.] 

Therefore  CD  is  an  apotome  of  a  medial  straight  line  and  the  same  in  order 
with  AB.  [x.  74,  75] 

Q.  E.  D. 


290 


EUCLID 


Proposition  105 

A  straight  line  commensurable  with  a  minor  straight  line  is  minor. 

Let  AB  be  a  minor  straight  line,  and  CD  commensurable  with  AB; 

I  say  that  CD  is  also  minor.  A  be 

Let  the  same  construction  be  made  as  before;  - 1 - 

then,  since  AE ,  EB  are  incommensurable  in  square,  C _ D _ F 

[x.  76] 

therefore  CF,  FD  are  also  incommensurable  in  square.  [x.  13] 
Now  since,  as  AE  is  to  EB ,  so  is  CF  to  FD,  [v.  12,  v.  16] 

therefore  also,  as  the  square  on  AE  is  to  the  square  on  EB,  so  is  the  square  on 
CF  to  the  square  on  FD.  [vi.  22] 

Therefore,  componendo,  as  the  squares  on  AE,  EB  are  to  the  square  on  EB, 
so  are  the  squares  on  CF,  FD  to  the  square  on  FD.  [v.  18] 

But  the  square  on  BE  is  commensurable  with  the  square  on  DF ; 
therefore  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  AE,  EB  is  also  commensurable  with  the 
sum  of  the  squares  on  CF,  FD.  [v.  16,  x.  11] 

But  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  AE,  EB  is  rational;  [x.  76] 

therefore  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  CF,  FD  is  also  rational,  [x.  Def.  4] 
Again,  since,  as  the  square  on  AE  is  to  the  rectangle  AE,  EB,  so  is  the 
square  on  CF  to  the  rectangle  CF,  FD, 

while  the  square  on  A  E  is  commensurable  with  the  square  on  CF, 
therefore  the  rectangle  AE,  EB  is  also  commensurable  with  the  rectangle  CF, 
FD. 

But  the  rectangle  AE,  EB  is  medial;  [x.  76] 

therefore  the  rectangle  CF,  FD  is  also  medial;  [x.  23,  Por.] 
therefore  CF,  FD  are  straight  lines  incommensurable  in  square  which  make 
the  sum  of  the  squares  on  them  rational,  but  the  rectangle  contained  by  them 
medial. 

Therefore  CD  is  minor.  [x.  76] 

Q.  E.  D. 


Proposition  106 

A  straight  line  commensurable  with  that  which  produces  with  a  rational  area  a 
medial  whole  is  a  straight  line  which  produces  with  a  rational  area  a  medial  whole. 
Let  AS  be  a  straight  line  which  produces  with  a  rational  area  a  medial  whole, 
and  CD  commensurable  with  AB: 

1  ARE 

I  say  that  CD  is  also  a  straight  line  which  produces  - - 1 - 

with  a  rational  area  a  medial  whole.  C _ D _ F 

For  let  BE  be  the  annex  to  AB; 

therefore  AE,  EB  are  straight  lines  incommensurable  in  square  which  make 
the  sum  of  the  squares  on  AE,  EB  medial,  but  the  rectangle  contained  by  them 
rational.  [x.  77] 

Let  the  same  construction  be  made. 

Then  we  can  prove,  in  manner  similar  to  the  foregoing,  that  CF,  FD  are  in 
the  same  ratio  as  AE,  EB, 

the  sum  of  the  squares  on  AE,  EB  is  commensurable  with  the  sum  of  the 
squares  on  CF,  FD, 

and  the  rectangle  AE,  EB  with  the  rectangle  CF,  FD; 


ELEMENTS  X  291 

so  that  CF,  FD  are  also  straight  lines  incommensurable  in  square  which  make 
the  sum  of  the  squares  on  CF,  FD  medial,  but  the  rectangle  contained  by  them 
rational. 

Therefore  CD  is  a  straight  line  which  produces  with  a  rational  area  a  medial 
whole.  [x.  77] 

Q.  E.  D. 


Proposition  107 

A  straight  line  commensurable  with  that  which  produces  with  a  medial  area  a 
medial  whole  is  itself  also  a  straight  line  which  produces  with  a  medial  area  a  medial 
whole. 

Let  AS  be  a  straight  line  which  produces  with  a  medial  area  a  medial  whole, 

A  BE  anC^  ^  CD  be  commensurable  with  AS; 

- 1 -  I  say  that  CD  is  also  a  straight  line  which  produces 

C _ D _ F  with  a  medial  area  a  medial  whole. 

For  let  BE  be  the  annex  to  AS, 
and  let  the  same  construction  be  made; 
therefore  AS,  SS  are  straight  lines  incommensurable  in  square  which  make 
the  sum  of  the  squares  on  them  medial,  the  rectangle  contained  by  them  me¬ 
dial,  and  further,  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  them  incommensurable  with  the 
rectangle  contained  by  them.  [x.  78] 

Now,  as  was  proved,  AS,  SS  are  commensurable  with  CF,  FD, 
the  sum  of  the  squares  on  AS,  SS  with  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  CF,  FD, 
and  the  rectangle  AS,  SS  with  the  rectangle  CF,  FD ; 
therefore  CF,  FD  are  also  straight  lines  incommensurable  in  square  winch 
make  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  them  medial,  the  rectangle  contained  by  them 
medial,  and  further,  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  them  incommensurable  with  the 
rectangle  contained  by  them. 

Therefore  CD  is  a  straight  line  winch  produces  with  a  medial  area  a  medial 
wiiole.  [x.  78] 

Q.  E.  D. 


Proposition  108 

If  from  a  rational  area  a  medial  area  be  subtracted,  the  “side”  of  the  remaining 
area  becomes  one  of  two  irrational  straight  lines ,  either  an  apotome  or  a  minor 
straight  line . 

For  from  the  rational  area  SC  let  the  medial  area  BD  be  subtracted; 

I  say  that  the  “side”  of  the  remainder  SC 
becomes  one  of  twTo  irrational  straight 
lines,  either  an  apotome  or  a  minor  straight 
line. 

For  let  a  rational  straight  line  FG  be 
set  out, 

to  FG  let  there  be  applied  the  rectangular 
parallelogram  GH  equal  to  SC, 
and  let  GK  equal  to  DB  be  subtracted ; 
therefore  the  remainder  SC  is  equal  to  LH. 

Since,  then,  SC  is  rational,  and  BD 
medial, 


292  EUCLID 

while  BC  is  equal  to  GH,  and  BD  to  GK , 
therefore  GH  is  rational,  and  GK  medial. 

And  they  are  applied  to  the  rational  straight  line  FG; 
therefore  FH  is  rational  and  commensurable  in  length  with  FG ,  [x.  20] 

while  FK  is  rational  and  incommensurable  in  length  with  FG;  [x.  22] 

therefore  FH  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  FK.  [x.  13] 

Therefore  FH ,  FK  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only; 

therefore  KH  is  an  apotome  [x.  73],  and  KF  the  annex  to  it. 

Now  the  square  on  HF  is  greater  than  the  square  on  FK  by  the  square  on  a 
straight  line  either  commensurable  with  HF  or  not  commensurable. 

First,  let  the  square  on  it  be  greater  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  com¬ 
mensurable  with  it. 

Now  the  whole  HF  is  commensurable  in  length  with  the  rational  straight 
line  FG  set  out; 

therefore  KH  is  a  first  apotome.  [x.  Deff.  hi.  1] 

But  the  “side”  of  the  rectangle  contained  by  a  rational  straight  line  and  a 
first  apotome  is  an  apotome.  [x.  91] 

Therefore  the  “side”  of  LH ,  that  is,  of  EC ,  is  an  apotome. 

But,  if  the  square  on  HF  is  greater  than  the  square  on  FK  by  the  square  on 
a  straight  line  incommensurable  with  HF , 

while  the  whole  FH  is  commensurable  in  length  with  the  rational  straight  line 
FG  set  out, 

KH  is  a  fourth  apotome.  [x.  Deff.  hi.  4] 

But  the  “side”  of  the  rectangle  contained  by  a  rational  straight  line  and  a 
fourth  apotome  is  minor.  [x.  94] 

Q.  E.  D. 


Proposition  109 


If  from  a  medial  area  a  rational  area  be  subtracted ,  there  arise  two  other  irrational 
straight  lines,  either  a  first  apotome  of  a  medial  straight  line  or  a  straight  line  which 
produces  with  a  rational  area  a  medial  whole. 

For  from  the  medial  area  BC  let  the  rational  area  BD  be  subtracted. 

I  say  that  the  “'side”  of  the  remainder  EC  becomes  one  of  two  irrational 
straight  fines,  either  a  first  apotome  of  a  medial  straight  fine  or  a  straight  fine 
which  produces  with  a  rational  area  a  medial  whole. 

For  let  a  rational  straight  fine  FG  be  set 
out, 

and  let  the  areas  be  similarly  applied. 

It  follows  then  that  FH  is  rational  and 
incommensurable  in  length  with  FG, 
while  KF  is  rational  and  commensurable  in 
length  with  FG; 

therefore  FH,  FK  are  rational  straight  fines 
commensurable  in  square  only;  [x.  13] 


K  H 


therefore  KH  is  an  apotome,  and  FK  the  annex  to  it.  [x.  73] 
Now  the  square  on  HF  is  greater  than  the  square  on  FK  either  by  the  square 
on  a  straight  fine  commensurable  with  HF  or  by  the  square  on  a  straight  fine 
incommensurable  with  it. 


ELEMENTS  X  293 

If  then  the  square  on  HF  is  greater  than  the  square  on  FK  by  the  square  on 
a  straight  line  commensurable  with  HF , 

while  the  annex  FK  is  commensurable  in  length  with  the  rational  straight  line 
FG  set  out, 

KH  is  a  second  apotome.  [x.  Deff.  hi.  2] 

But  FG  is  rational; 

so  that  the  “side”  of  LH ,  that  is,  of  EC ,  is  a  first  apotome  of  a  medial  straight 
line.  [x.  92] 

But,  if  the  square  on  HF  is  greater  than  the  square  on  FK  by  the  square  on 
a  straight  line  incommensurable  with  HF, 

while  the  annex  FK  is  commensurable  in  length  with  the  rational  straight  line 
FG  set  out, 

KH  is  a  fifth  apotome;  [x.  Deff.  hi.  5] 

so  that  the  “side”  of  EC  is  a  straight  line  which  produces  with  a  rational  area  a 
medial  whole.  [x.  95] 

Q.  E.  D. 


Proposition  110 


If  from  a  medial  area  there  be  subtracted  a  medial  area  incommensurable  with  the 
whole ,  the  two  remaining  irrational  straight  lines  arise ,  either  a  second  apotome  of 
a  medial  straight  line  or  a  straight  line  which  produces  with  a  medial  area  a  medial 
whole . 

For,  as  in  the  foregoing  figures,  let  there  be  subtracted  from  the  medial  area 
BC  the  medial  area  BD  incommensurable  with  the  whole; 

I  say  that  the  “side”  of  EC  is  one  of 
two  irrational  straight  lines,  either  a  sec¬ 
ond  apotome  of  a  medial  straight  line  or 
a  straight  line  which  produces  with  a 
medial  area  a  medial  whole. 

For,  since  each  of  the  rectangles  BC, 
BD  is  medial, 

and  BC  is  incommensurable  with  BD, 
it  follow’s  that  each  of  the  straight  lines 
b  L  FH ,  FK  will  be  rational  and  incommen¬ 
surable  in  length  with  FG.  [x.  22] 

And,  since  BC  is  incommensurable  with  BD, 

that  is,  GH  with  GK, 

HF  is  also  incommensurable  with  FK;  [vi.  1,  x.  11] 

therefore  FH,  FK  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only; 

therefore  KH  is  an  apotome.  [x.  73] 

If  then  the  square  on  FH  is  greater  than  the  square  on  FK  by  the  square  on 
a  straight  line  commensurable  with  FH, 

w  hile  neither  of  the  straight  lines  FH,  FK  is  commensurable  in  length  with  the 
rational  straight  line  FG  set  out, 

KH  is  a  third  apotome.  [x.  Deff.  hi.  3] 


But  KL  is  rational, 

and  the  rectangle  contained  by  a  rational  straight  line  and  a  third  apotome  is 
irrational. 


294  EUCLID 

and  the  “side”  of  it  is  irrational,  and  is  called  a  second  apotome  of  a  medial 
straight  line;  [x.  93] 

so  that  the  “side”  of  LH ,  that  is,  of  EC ,  is  a  second  apotome  of  a  medial  straight 
line. 

But,  if  the  square  on  FH  is  greater  than  the  square  on  FK  by  the  square  on 
a  straight  line  incommensurable  with  FH, 

while  neither  of  the  straight  lines  HF ,  FK  is  commensurable  in  length  with  FG , 

KH  is  a  sixth  apotome.  [x.  Deff.  hi.  6] 

But  the  “side”  of  the  rectangle  contained  by  a  rational  straight  line  and  a 
sixth  apotome  is  a  straight  line  which  produces  with  a  medial  area  a  medial 
whole.  [x.  96] 

Therefore  the  “side”  of  LH,  that  is,  of  EC,  is  a  straight  line  which  produces 
with  a  medial  area  a  medial  whole.  q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  111 

The  apotome  is  not  the  same  with  the  binomial  straight  line. 

Let  AB  be  an  apotome; 

I  say  that  AB  is  not  the  same  with  the  binomial 

straight  line.  ^ - ? 

For,  if  possible,  let  it  be  so;  D  G  E  F 

let  a  rational  straight  line  DC  be  set  out,  and  to  CD  - + — - 

let  there  be  applied  the  rectangle  CE  equal  to  the 
square  on  AB  and  producing  DE  as  breadth. 

Then,  since  AB  is  an  apotome, 

DE  is  a  first  apotome.  [x.  97] 

Let  EF  be  the  annex  to  it; 

therefore  DF,  FE  are  rational  straight  lines  commen¬ 
surable  in  square  only, 

the  square  on  DF  is  greater  than  the  square  on  FE  by  £ - 

the  square  on  a  straight  line  commensurable  with  DF, 

and  DF  is  commensurable  in  length  with  the  rational  straight  line  DC  set  out. 

[x.  Deff.  hi.  1] 

Again,  since  AB  is  binomial, 

therefore  DE  is  a  first  binomial  straight  line.  [x.  60] 

Let  it  be  divided  into  its  terms  at  G, 

and  let  DG  be  the  greater  term; 

therefore  DG,  GE  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only, 
the  square  on  DG  is  greater  than  the  square  on  GE  by  the  square  on  a  straight 
line  commensurable  with  DG,  and  the  greater  term  DG  is  commensurable  in 
length  with  the  rational  straight  line  DC  set  out.  [x.  Deff.  n.  1] 

Therefore  DF  is  also  commensurable  in  length  with  DG;  [x.  12] 

therefore  the  remainder  GF  is  also  commensurable  in  length  with  DF.  [x.  15] 
But  DF  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  EF; 

therefore  FG  is  also  incommensurable  in  length  with  EF.  [x.  13] 
Therefore  GF,  FE  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only; 

therefore  EG  is  an  apotome.  [x.  73] 

But  it  is  also  rational : 


which  is  impossible. 


ELEMENTS  X  295 

Therefore  the  apotome  is  not  the  same  with  the  binomial  straight  line. 

Q.  E.  D. 

The  apotome  and  the  irrational  straight  lines  following  it  are  neither  the  same  with 
the  medial  straight  line  nor  with  one  another. 

For  the  square  on  a  medial  straight  line,  if  applied  to  a  rational  straight  line, 
produces  as  breadth  a  straight  line  rational  and  incommensurable  in  length 
with  that  to  which  it  is  applied,  [x.  22] 

while  the  square  on  an  apotome,  if  applied  to  a  rational  straight  line,  produces 
as  breadth  a  first  apotome,  [x.  97] 

the  square  on  a  first  apotome  of  a  medial  straight  line,  if  applied  to  a  rational 
straight  line,  produces  as  breadth  a  second  apotome,  [x.  9S] 

the  square  on  a  second  apotome  of  a  medial  straight  line,  if  applied  to  a  ra¬ 
tional  straight  line,  produces  as  breadth  a  third  apotome,  [x.  99] 

the  square  on  a  minor  straight  fine,  if  applied  to  a  rational  straight  line,  pro¬ 
duces  as  breadth  a  fourth  apotome,  [x.  100] 

the  square  on  the  straight  line  which  produces  with  a  rational  area  a  medial 
whole,  if  applied  to  a  rational  straight  line,  produces  as  breadth  a  fifth  apo¬ 
tome,  [x.  101] 

and  the  square  on  the  straight  line  which  produces  with  a  medial  area  a  medial 
whole,  if  applied  to  a  rational  straight  line,  produces  as  breadth  a  sixth  apo¬ 
tome.  [x.  102] 

Since  then  the  said  breadths  differ  from  the  first  and  from  one  another,  from 
the  first  because  it  is  rational,  and  from  one  another  since  they  are  not  the 
same  in  order, 

it  is  clear  that  the  irrational  straight  lines  themselves  also  differ  from  one  an¬ 
other. 

And,  since  the  apotome  has  been  proved  not  to  be  the  same  as  the  binomial 
straight  line,  [x.  Ill] 

but,  if  applied  to  a  rational  straight  line,  the  straight  lines  following  the  apo¬ 
tome  produce,  as  breadths,  each  according  to  its  own  order,  apotomes,  and 
those  following  the  binomial  straight  line  themselves  also,  according  to  their 
order,  produce  the  binomials  as  breadths, 

therefore  those  following  the  apotome  are  different,  and  those  following  the 
binomial  straight  fine  are  different,  so  that  there  are,  in  order,  thirteen  irra¬ 
tional  straight  lines  in  all, 

Medial, 

Binomial, 

First  bimedial. 

Second  bimedial. 

Major, 

“Side”  of  a  rational  plus  a  medial  area, 

“Side”  of  the  sum  of  two  medial  areas, 

Apotome, 

First  apotome  of  a  medial  straight  line, 

Second  apotome  of  a  medial  straight  line, 

Minor, 

Producing  with  a  rational  area  a  medial  whole. 

Producing  with  a  medial  area  a  medial  whole. 


296 


EUCLID 


Proposition  112 

The  square  on  a  rational  straight  line  applied  to  the  binomial  straight  line  produces 
as  breadth  an  apotome  the  terms  of  which  are  commensurable  with  the  terms  of  the 
binomial  and  moreover  in  the  same  ratio;  and  further ,  the  apotome  so  arising  will 
have  the  same  order  as  the  binomial  straight  line . 

Let  A  be  a  rational  straight  line, 

let  BC  be  a  binomial,  and  let  DC  be  its  greater  term; 
let  the  rectangle  BC ,  EF  be  equal  to  the  square  on  A ; 

A - 

0  D  C  G 


KEF  H 

I  say  that  EF  is  an  apot  ome  the  terms  of  which  are  commensurable  with  CD, 
DB ,  and  in  the  same  ratio,  and  further,  EF  will  have  the  same  order  as  BC. 
For  again  let  the  rectangle  BD ,  G  be  equal  to  the  square  on  A. 

Since,  then,  the  rectangle  SC,  EF  is  equal  to  the  rectangle  BD,  G, 

therefore,  as  CB  is  to  BD,  so  is  G  to  EF.  [vi.  16] 

But  CB  is  greater  than  BD ; 

therefore  G  is  also  greater  than  EF.  [v.  16,  v.  14] 

Let  EH  be  equal  to  G; 

therefore,  as  CB  is  to  BD,  so  is  HE  to  EF; 
therefore,  separando,  as  CD  is  to  BD,  so  is  IiF  to  FE.  [v.  17] 
Let  it  be  contrived  that,  as  HF  is  to  FE,  so  is  FK  to  KE; 
therefore  also  the  whole  HK  is  to  the  whole  KF  as  FK  is  to  KE; 
for,  as  one  of  the  antecedents  is  to  one  of  the  consequents,  so  are  all  the  ante¬ 
cedents  to  all  the  consequents.  [v.  12] 

But,  as  FK  is  to  KE,  so  is  CD  to  DB;  [v.  11] 

therefore  also,  as  HK  is  to  KF,  so  is  CD  to  DB.  [id.] 

But  the  square  on  CD  is  commensurable  with  the  square  on  DB;  [x.  36] 
therefore  the  square  on  HK  is  also  commensurable  with  the  square  on  KF. 

[vi.  22,  x.  11] 

And,  as  the  square  on  HK  is  to  the  square  on  KF,  so  is  HK  to  KE,  since  the 
three  straight  lines  HK,  KF,  KE  are  proportional.  [v.  Def.  9] 

Therefore  HK  is  commensurable  in  length  with  KE, 

so  that  HE  is  also  commensurable  in  length  with  EK.  [x.  15] 
Now,  since  the  square  on  A  is  equal  to  the  rectangle  EH,  BD, 
while  the  square  on  A  is  rational, 
therefore  the  rectangle  EH,  BD  is  also  rational. 

And  it  is  applied  to  the  rational  straight  line  BD; 

therefore  EH  is  rational  and  commensurable  in  length  with  BD;  [x.  20] 
so  that  EK,  being  commensurable  with  it,  is  also  rational  and  commensurable 
in  length  with  BD. 

Since,  then,  as  CD  is  to  DB,  so  is  FK  to  KE, 

while  CD,  DB  are  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only, 

therefore  FK,  KE  are  also  commensurable  in  square  only.  [x.  11] 


ELEMENTS  X 


297 


But  KE  is  rational; 

therefore  FK  is  also  rational. 

Therefore  FK,  KE  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only; 

therefore  EF  is  an  apotome.  [x.  73] 

Now  the  square  on  CD  is  greater  than  the  square  on  DB  either  by  the  square 
on  a  straight  line  commensurable  with  CD  or  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line 
incommensurable  with  it. 

If  then  the  square  on  CD  is  greater  than  the  square  on  DB  by  the  square  on 
a  straight  line  commensurable  with  CD,  the  square  on  FK  is  also  greater  than 
the  square  on  KE  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  commensurable  with  FK. 

[x.  14] 

And,  if  CD  is  commensurable  in  length  with  the  rational  straight  line  set  out, 

so  also  is  FK;  [x.  11,  12] 

if  BD  is  so  commensurable, 

so  also  is  KE;  [x.  12] 

but,  if  neither  of  the  straight  lines  CD,  DB  is  so  commensurable, 
neither  of  the  straight  lines  FK,  KE  is  so. 

But,  if  the  square  on  CD  is  greater  than  the  square  on  DB  by  the  square  on 
a  straight  line  incommensurable  with  CD, 

the  square  on  FK  is  also  greater  than  the  square  on  KE  by  the  square  on  a 
straight  line  incommensurable  with  FK.  [x.  14] 

And,  if  CD  is  commensurable  with  the  rational  straight  line  set  out, 

so  also  is  FK; 
if  BD  is  so  commensurable, 
so  also  is  KE; 

but,  if  neither  of  the  straight  lines  CD,  DB  is  so  commensurable, 
neither  of  the  straight  lines  FK,  KE  is  so; 
so  that  FE  is  an  apotome,  the  terms  of  which,  FK,  KE  are  commensurable  with 
the  terms  CD,  DB  of  the  binomial  straight  line  and  in  the  same  ratio,  and  it 
has  the  same  order  as  BC.  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  113 

The  square  on  a  rational  straight  line,  if  applied,  to  an  apotome ,  produces  as  breadth 
the  binomial  straight  line  the  terms  of  which  are  commensurable  with  the  terms  of 
the  apotome  and  in  the  same  ratio;  and  further,  the  binomial  so  arising  has  the  same 
order  as  the  apotome. 

Let  A  be  a  rational  straight  line  and  BD  an  apotome,  and  let  the  rectangle 
BD,  KH  be  equal  to  the  square  on  A,  so  that  the  square  on 
the  rational  straight  line  A  when  applied  to  the  apotome 
BD  produces  KH  as  breadth; 

I  say  that  KH  is  a  binomial  straight  line  the  terms  of 
which  are  commensurable  with  the  terms  of  BD  and  in  the 
same  ratio;  and  further,  KH  has  the  same  order  as  BD. 

For  let  DC  be  the  annex  to  BD; 
therefore  BC,  CD  are  rational  straight  lines  commensu¬ 
rable  in  square  only.  [x.  73] 

Let  the  rectangle  BC,  G  be  also  equal  to  the  square 
on  A. 

But  the  square  on  A  is  rational; 


L 

D- 

H 

B 

298  EUCLID 

therefore  the  rectangle  BC ,  G  is  also  rational. 

And  it  has  been  applied  to  the  rational  straight  line  BC ; 

therefore  G  is  rational  and  commensurable  in  length  with  BC.  [x.  20} 
Since  now  the  rectangle  BC ,  G  is  equal  to  the  rectangle  BD,  KH , 

therefore,  proportionally,  as  CB  is  to  BD,  so  is  KH  to  G.  [vi.  16} 
But  BC  is  greater  than  BD; 

therefore  KH  is  also  greater  than  G.  [v.  16,  v.  14] 

Let  KE  be  made  equal  to  G; 

therefore  KE  is  commensurable  in  length  with  BC. 

And  since,  as  CB  is  to  BD,  so  is  HK  to  KE, 
therefore,  convertendo ,  as  BC  is  to  CD,  so  is  KH  to  HE.  [v.  19,  Por.] 

Let  it  be  contrived  that,  as  KH  is  to  HE,  so  is  HF  to  FE; 
therefore  also  the  remainder  KF  is  to  FH  as  KH  is  to  HE,  that  is,  as  BC  is  to 
CD.  [v.  19] 

But  BC,  CD  are  commensurable  in  square  only; 

therefore  KF,  FH  are  also  commensurable  in  square  only.  [x.  11} 
And  since,  as  KH  is  to  HE,  so  is  KF  to  FH, 

while,  as  KH  is  to  HE,  so  is  HF  to  FE, 
therefore  also,  as  KF  is  to  FH,  so  is  HF  to  FE,  [v.  11] 

so  that  also,  as  the  first  is  to  the  third,  so  is  the  square  on  the  first  to  the 
square  on  the  second;  [v.  Def.  9] 

therefore  also,  as  KF  is  to  FE,  so  is  the  square  on  KF  to  the  square  on  FH. 
But  the  square  on  KF  is  commensurable  with  the  square  on  FH, 
for  KF,  FH  are  commensurable  in  square; 
therefore  KF  is  also  commensurable  in  length  with  FE,  [x.  11] 
so  that  KF  is  also  commensurable  in  length  with  KE.  [x.  15] 
But  KE  is  rational  and  commensurable  in  length  with  BC; 
therefore  KF  is  also  rational  and  commensurable  in  length  with  BC.  [x.  12] 
And,  since,  as  BC  is  to  CD,  so  is  KF  to  FH, 

alternately,  as  BC  is  to  KF,  so  is  DC  to  FH.  [v.  16] 

But  BC  is  commensurable  with  KF; 

therefore  FH  is  also  commensurable  in  length  with  CD.  [x.  11] 
But  BC,  CD  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only; 
therefore  KF,  FH  are  also  rational  straight  lines  [x.  Def.  3]  commensurable  in 
square  only; 

therefore  KH  is  binomial.  [x.  36] 

If  now  the  square  on  BC  is  greater  than  the  square  on  CD  by  the  square  on  a 
straight  line  commensurable  with  BC, 

the  square  on  KF  will  also  be  greater  than  the  square  on  FH  by  the  square  on  a 
straight  line  commensurable  with  KF.  [x.  14] 

And,  if  BC  is  commensurable  in  length  with  the  rational  straight  line  set  out, 

so  also  is  KF; 

if  CD  is  commensurable  in  length  with  the  rational  straight  line  set  out, 

so  also  is  FH, 

but,  if  neither  of  the  straight  lines  BC,  CD, 
then  neither  of  the  straight  lines  KF,  FH. 

But,  if  the  square  on  BC  is  greater  than  the  square  on  CD  by  the  square  on  a 
straight  line  incommensurable  with  BC, 

the  square  on  KF  is  also  greater  than  the  square  on  FH  by  the  square  on  a 


ELEMENTS  X  299 

straight  line  incommensurable  with  KF.  [x.  14] 

And,  if  BC  is  commensurable  with  the  rational  straight  line  set  out, 

so  also  is  KF; 
if  CD  is  so  commensurable, 
so  also  is  FH; 

but,  if  neither  of  the  straight  lines  BC,  CD, 
then  neither  of  the  straight  lines  KF,  FH. 

Therefore  KH  is  a  binomial  straight  line,  the  terms  of  which  KF.  FH  are 
commensurable  with  the  terms  BC,  CD  of  the  apotome  and  in  the  same  ratio, 
and  further,  KH  has  the  same  order  as  BD .  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  114 


If  an  area  be  contained  by  an  apotome  and  the  binomial  straight  line  the  terms  of 
which  are  commensurable  with  the  terms  of  the  apotome  and  in  the  same  ratio,  the 
“side”  of  the  area  is  rational. 

For  let  an  area,  the  rectangle  AB,  CD,  be  contained  by  the  apotome  AB  and 

the  binomial  straight  line  CD, 

A  b  f  and  let  CE  be  the  greater  term  of  the  latter; 

1  let  the  terms  CE,  ED  of  the  binomial  straight 

C _  f  D  line  be  commensurable  with  the  terms  AF,  FB  of 

G  the  apotome  and  in  the  same  ratio; 

”  and  let  the  “side”  of  the  rectangle  AB,  CD  be  G; 

_ H _  I  say  that  G  is  rational. 

K  L  M  For  let  a  rational  straight  line  H  be  set  out, 

"  1  and  to  CD  let  there  be  applied  a  rectangle  equal 

to  the  square  on  H  and  producing  KL  as  breadth, 
Therefore  KL  is  an  apotome. 

Let  its  terms  be  KM.  ML  commensurable  with  the  terms  CE,  ED  of  the  bi¬ 
nomial  straight  line  and  in  the  same  ratio.  [x.  112] 

But  CE,  ED  are  also  commensurable  with  AF,  FB  and  in  the  same  ratio: 

therefore,  as  AF  is  to  FB,  so  is  KM  to  ML. 

Therefore,  alternately,  as  AF  is  to  KM,  so  is  BF  to  LM; 
therefore  also  the  remainder  AB  is  to  the  remainder  KL  as  AF  is  to  KM.  [v.  19] 
But  AF  is  commensurable  with  KM;  [x.  12] 

therefore  AB  is  also  commensurable  with  KL.  [x.  11] 

And,  as  AB  is  to  KL,  so  is  the  rectangle  CD,  AB  to  the  rectangle  CD,  KL; 

[vi.  1] 

therefore  the  rectangle  CD,  AB  is  also  commensurable  with  the  rectangle  CD. 
KL.  [x.  11] 


But  the  rectangle  CD,  KL  is  equal  to  the  square  on  H ; 
therefore  the  rectangle  CD,  AB  is  commensurable  with  the  square  on  H. 
But  the  square  on  G  is  equal  to  the  rectangle  CD,  AB; 

therefore  the  square  on  G  is  commensurable  with  the  square  on  H. 
But  the  square  on  H  is  rational; 

therefore  the  square  on  G  is  also  rational; 
therefore  G  is  rational. 

And  it  is  the  “side*’  of  the  rectangle  CD,  AB. 

Therefore  etc. 


300  EUCLID 

Porism.  And  it  is  made  manifest  to  us  by  this  also  that  it  is  possible  for  a 
rational  area  to  be  contained  by  irrational  straight  lines.  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  115 

From  a  medial  straight  line  there  arise  irrational  straight  lines  infinite  in  number , 
and  none  of  them  is  the  same  as  any  of  the  preceding. 

Let  A  be  a  medial  straight  line; 

I  say  that  from  A  there  arise  irrational 
straight  lines  infinite  in  number,  and  none  A 

of  them  is  the  same  as  any  of  the  preceding.  B - 

Let  a  rational  straight  line  B  be  set  out,  c _ 

and  let  the  square  on  C  be  equal  to  the 

rectangle  B,  A;  D - 

therefore  C  is  irrational;  [x.  Def.  4] 

for  that  which  is  contained  by  an  irrational  and  a  rational  straight  line  is  ir¬ 
rational.  [deduction  from  x.  20] 

And  it  is  not  the  same  with  any  of  the  preceding; 
for  the  square  on  none  of  the  preceding,  if  applied  to  a  rational  straight  line 
produces  as  breadth  a  medial  straight  line. 

Again,  let  the  square  on  D  be  equal  to  the  rectangle  B,  C ; 
therefore  the  square  on  D  is  irrational.  [deduction  from  x.  20] 

Therefore  D  is  irrational;  [x.  Def.  4] 

and  it  is  not  the  same  with  any  of  the  preceding,  for  the  square  on  none  of  the 
preceding,  if  applied  to  a  rational  straight  line,  produces  C  as  breadth. 

Similarly,  if  this  arrangement  proceeds  ad  infinitum ,  it  is  manifest  that  from 
the  medial  straight  line  there  arise  irrational  straight  lines  infinite  in  number, 
and  none  is  the  same  with  any  of  the  preceding.  q.  e.  d. 


BOOK  ELEVEN 


DEFINITIONS 

1.  A  solid  is  that  which  has  length,  breadth,  and  depth. 

2.  An  extremity  of  a  solid  is  a  surface. 

3.  A  straight  line  is  at  right  angles  to  a  plane ,  when  it  makes  right  angles  with 
all  the  straight  lines  which  meet  it  and  are  in  the  plane. 

4.  A  plane  is  at  right  angles  to  a  plane  when  the  straight  lines  drawn,  in  one  of 
the  planes,  at  right  angles  to  the  common  section  of  the  planes  are  at  right 
angles  to  the  remaining  plane. 

5.  The  inclination  of  a  straight  line  to  a  plane  is,  assuming  a  perpendicular 
drawn  from  the  extremity  of  the  straight  line  which  is  elevated  above  the  plane 
to  the  plane,  and  a  straight  line  joined  from  the  point  thus  arising  to  the  ex¬ 
tremity  of  the  straight  line  which  is  in  the  plane,  the  angle  contained  by  the 
straight  line  so  drawn  and  the  straight  line  standing  up. 

6.  The  inclination  of  a  plane  to  a  plane  is  the  acute  angle  contained  by  the 
straight  lines  drawn  at  right  angles  to  the  common  section  at  the  same  point, 
one  in  each  of  the  planes. 

7.  A  plane  is  said  to  be  similarly  inclined  to  a  plane  as  another  is  to  another 
when  the  said  angles  of  the  inclinations  are  equal  to  one  another. 

8.  Parallel  planes  are  those  which  do  not  meet. 

9.  Similar  solid  figures  are  those  contained  by  similar  planes  equal  in  multi¬ 
tude. 

10.  Equal  and  similar  solid  figures  are  those  contained  by  similar  planes 
equal  in  multitude  and  in  magnitude. 

11.  A  solid  angle  is  the  inclination  constituted  by  more  than  two  lines  which 
meet  one  another  and  are  not  in  the  same  surface,  towards  all  the  lines. 

Otherwise :  A  solid  angle  is  that  which  is  contained  by  more  than  two  plane 
angles  which  are  not  in  the  same  plane  and  are  constructed  to  one  point. 

12.  A  pyramid  is  a  solid  figure,  contained  by  planes,  which  is  constructed 
from  one  plane  to  one  point. 

13.  A  prism  is  a  solid  figure  contained  by  planes  two  of  which,  namely  those 
which  are  opposite,  are  equal,  similar  and  parallel,  while  the  rest  are  parallelo¬ 
grams. 

14.  When,  the  diameter  of  a  semicircle  remaining  fixed,  the  semicircle  is  car¬ 
ried  round  and  restored  again  to  the  same  position  from  which  it  began  to  be 
moved,  the  figure  so  comprehended  is  a  sphere. 

15.  The  axis  of  the  sphere  is  the  straight  line  which  remains  fixed  and  about 
which  the  semicircle  is  turned. 

16.  The  centre  of  the  sphere  is  the  same  as  that  of  the  semicircle. 

17.  A  diameter  of  the  sphere  is  any  straight  line  drawn  through  the  cent  re  and 

301 


302  EUCLID 

terminated  in  both  directions  by  the  surface  of  the  sphere. 

18.  When,  one  side  of  those  about  the  right  angle  in  a  right-angled  triangle 
remaining  fixed,  the  triangle  is  carried  round  and  restored  again  to  the  same 
position  from  which  it  began  to  be  moved,  the  figure  so  comprehended  is  a  cone . 

And,  if  the  straight  line  which  remains  fixed  be  equal  to  the  remaining  side 
about  the  right  angle  which  is  carried  round,  the  cone  will  be  right-angled ;  if 
less,  obtuse-angled ;  and  if  greater,  acute-angled . 

19.  The  axis  of  the  cone  is  the  straight  line  which  remains  fixed  and  about 
which  the  triangle  is  turned. 

20.  And  the  base  is  the  circle  described  by  the  straight  line  which  is  carried 
round. 

21.  When,  one  side  of  those  about  the  right  angle  in  a  rectangular  parallelo¬ 
gram  remaining  fixed,  the  parallelogram  is  carried  round  and  restored  again  to 
the  same  position  from  which  it  began  to  be  moved,  the  figure  so  comprehend¬ 
ed  is  a  cylinder . 

22.  The  axis  of  the  cylinder  is  the  straight  line  which  remains  fixed  and  about 
which  the  parallelogram  is  turned. 

23.  And  the  bases  are  the  circles  described  by  the  two  sides  opposite  to  one 
another  which  are  carried  round. 

24.  Similar  cones  and  cylinders  are  those  in  which  the  axes  and  the  diameters 
of  the  bases  are  proportional. 

25.  A  cube  is  a  solid  figure  contained  by  six  equal  squares. 

26.  An  octahedron  is  a  solid  figure  contained  by  eight  equal  and  equilateral 
triangles. 

27.  An  icosahedron  is  a  solid  figure  contained  by  twenty  equal  and  equi¬ 
lateral  triangles. 

28.  A  dodecahedron  is  a  solid  figure  contained  by  twelve  equal,  equilateral, 
and  equiangular  pentagons. 


BOOK  XI.  PROPOSITIONS 
Proposition  1 

A  part  of  a  straight  line  cannot  be  in  the  plane  of  reference  and  a  part  in  a  plane 
more  elevated. 

For,  if  possible,  let  a  part  AB  of  the  straight  line  ABC  be  in  the  plane  of  ref¬ 
erence,  and  a  part  BC  in  a  plane  more  elevated. 

There  will  then  be  in  the  plane  of  reference  some 
straight  line  continuous  with  AB  in  a  straight  line. 

Let  it  be  BD\ 

therefore  AB  is  a  common  segment  of  the  two  straight 
lines  ABC,  ABD: 

which  is  impossible,  inasmuch  as,  if  we  describe  a  circle 
with  centre  B  and  distance  AB,  the  diameters  will  cut 
off  unequal  circumferences  of  the  circle. 

Therefore  a  part  of  a  straight  line  cannot  be  in  the 
plane  of  reference,  and  a  part  in  a  plane  more  elevated. 


Q.  E.  D. 


ELEMENTS  XI 


303 


Proposition  2 

If  two  straight  lines  cut  one  another,  they  are  in  one  plane,  and  every  triangle  is  in 
one  plane. 

For  let  the  two  straight  lines  AB,  CD  cut  one  another  at  the  point  E; 

I  say  that  AB,  CD  are  in  one  plane,  and  every  triangle  is  in  one  plane. 
For  let  points  F,  G  be  taken  at  random  on  EC,  EB, 

let  CB ,  FG  be  joined, 
and  let  FH ,  GK  be  drawn  across; 

I  say  first  that  the  triangle  ECB  is  in  one  plane. 

For,  if  part  of  the  triangle  ECB,  either  FHC  or  GBK,  is  in  the  plane  of  ref¬ 
erence,  and  the  rest  in  another, 
a  part  also  of  one  of  the  straight  lines  EC,  EB  will 
be  in  the  plane  of  reference,  and  a  part  in  another. 

But,  if  the  part  FCBG  of  the  triangle  ECB  be  in 
the  plane  of  reference,  and  the  rest  in  another, 
a  part  also  of  both  the  straight  lines  EC,  EB  will 
be  in  the  plane  of  reference  and  a  part  in  another: 

which  was  proved  absurd.  [xi.  1] 
Therefore  the  triangle  ECB  is  in  one  plane. 
But,  in  whatever  plane  the  triangle  ECB  is,  in 
that  plane  also  is  each  of  the  straight  lines  EC,  EB, 
and,  in  whatever  plane  each  of  the  straight  lines  EC,  EB  is,  in  that  plane  are 
AB,  CD  also.  [xi.  1] 

Therefore  the  straight  lines  AB,  CD  are  in  one  plane, 

and  every  triangle  is  in  one  plane.  Q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  3 

If  two  planes  cut  one  another,  their  common  section  is  a  straight  line . 

For  let  the  two  planes  AB,  BC  cut  one  another, 

and  let  the  line  DB  be  their  common  section; 

I  say  that  the  line  DB  is  a  straight  line. 

For,  if  not,  from  D  to  B  let  the  straight  line  DEB  be 
joined  in  the  plane  AB, 
and  in  the  plane  BC  the  straight  line  DFB. 

Then  the  two  straight  lines  DEB ,  DFB  will  have  the 
same  extremities,  and  will  clearly  enclose  an  area: 
which  is  absurd. 

Therefore  DEB,  DFB  are  not  straight  lines. 
Similarly  we  can  prove  that  neither  will  there  be 
any  other  straight  line  joined  from  D  to  B  except  DB 
the  common  section  of  the  planes  AB,  BC. 

Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  4 

If  a  straight  line  he  set  up  at  right  angles  to  two  straight  lines  which  cut  one  another, 
at  their  common  point  of  section,  it  will  also  be  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  through 
them. 


304  EUCLID 

For  let  a  straight  line  EF  be  set  up  at  right  angles  to  the  two  straight  lines 
AB ,  CD,  which  cut  one  another  at  the  point  E,  from  E; 

I  say  that  EF  is  also  at  right  angles  to  the 
plane  through  AB,  CD. 

For  let  AE,  EB,  CE,  ED  be  cut  off  equal  to 
one  another, 

and  let  any  straight  line  GEH  be  drawn  across 
through  E,  at  random; 

let  AD,  CB  be  joined, 

and  further,  let  FA,  FG,  FD,  FC ,  FH,  FB  be 
joined  from  the  point  F  taken  at  random  <on 
EF>. 

Now,  since  the  two  straight  lines  AE,  ED  are  equal  to  the  two  straight  lines 
CE,  EB,  and  contain  equal  angles,  [i.  15] 

therefore  the  base  AD  is  equal  to  the  base  CB, 
and  the  triangle  AED  will  be  equal  to  the  triangle  CEB ;  [i.  4] 

so  that  the  angle  DAE  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  EBC. 

But  the  angle  AEG  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  BEH;  [i.  15] 

therefore  AGE,  BEH  are  two  triangles  which  have  two  angles  equal  to  two 
angles  respectively,  and  one  side  equal  to  one  side,  namely  that  adjacent  to  the 
equal  angles,  that  is  to  say,  AE  to  EB ; 

therefore  they  will  also  have  the  remaining  sides  equal  to  the  remaining  sides. 

[I.  26] 

Therefore  GE  is  equal  to  EH,  and  AG  to  BH. 

And,  since  AE  is  equal  to  EB, 

while  FE  is  common  and  at  right  angles, 
therefore  the  base  FA  is  equal  to  the  base  FB.  [i.  4] 

For  the  same  reason 

FC  is  also  equal  to  FD. 

And,  since  AD  is  equal  to  CB, 

and  FA  is  also  equal  to  FB, 

the  two  sides  FA,  AD  are  equal  to  the  two  sides  FB,  BC  respectively; 
and  the  base  FD  was  proved  equal  to  the  base  FC ; 
therefore  the  angle  FAD  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  FBC.  [i.  8] 
And  since,  again,  AG  was  proved  equal  to  BH, 

and  further,  FA  also  equal  to  FB, 
the  two  sides  FA,  AG  are  equal  to  the  two  sides  FB,  BH. 

And  the  angle  FAG  was  proved  equal  to  the  angle  FBH; 

therefore  the  base  FG  is  equal  to  the  base  FH.  [i.  4] 

Now  since,  again,  GE  was  proved  equal  to  EH, 

and  EF  is  common, 

the  two  sides  GE,  EF  are  equal  to  the  two  sides  HE,  EF ; 
and  the  base  FG  is  equal  to  the  base  FH) 
therefore  the  angle  GEF  is  equal  to  the  angle  HEF.  [i.  8] 

Therefore  each  of  the  angles  GEF,  HEF  is  right. 

Therefore  FE  is  at  right  angles  to  GH  drawn  at  random  through  E. 
Similarly  we  can  prove  that  FE  mil  also  make  right  angles  with  all  the 
straight  lines  which  meet  it  and  are  in  the  plane  of  reference. 

But  a  straight  line  is  at  right  angles  to  a  plane  when  it  makes  right  angles 


F 


ELEMENTS  XI  305 

with  all  the  straight  lines  which  meet  it  and  are  in  that  same  plane;  [xi.  Def.  3] 
therefore  FE  is  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  of  reference. 

But  the  plane  of  reference  is  the  plane  through  the  straight  lines  AB ,  CD. 
Therefore  FE  is  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  through  AB ,  CD. 

Therefore  etc.  Q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  5 

If  a  straight  line  be  set  up  at  right  angles  to  three  straight  lines  which  meet  one  an¬ 
other,  at  their  common  point  of  section ,  the  three  straight  lines  are  in  one  plane. 

For  let  a  straight  line  A B  be  set  up  at  right  angles  to  the  three  straight  lines 
BC ,  BD,  BE,  at  their  point  of  meeting  at  B; 

I  say  that  BC,  BD,  BE  are  in  one  plane. 

For  suppose  they  are  not,  but,  if  possible,  let  BD, 
BE  be  in  the  plane  of  reference  and  BC  in  one  more 
elevated; 

let  the  plane  through  AB,  BC  be  produced; 
it  will  thus  make,  as  common  section  in  the  plane  of 
reference,  a  straight  line.  [xi.  3] 

Let  it  make  BF. 

Therefore  the  three  straight  lines  AB,  BC,  BF  are  in  one  plane,  namely  that 
drawn  through  AB,  BC. 

Now,  since  AB  is  at  right  angles  to  each  of  the  straight  lines  BD,  BE, 
therefore  AB  is  also  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  through  BD,  BE.  [xi.  4] 
But  the  plane  through  BD,  BE  is  the  plane  of  reference; 

therefore  AB  is  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  of  reference. 

Thus  AB  will  also  make  right  angles  with  all  the  straight  lines  which  meet  it 
and  are  in  the  plane  of  reference.  [xi.  Def.  3] 

But  BF  which  is  in  the  plane  of  reference  meets  it; 

therefore  the  angle  ABF  is  right. 

But,  by  hypothesis,  the  angle  ABC  is  also  right; 

therefore  the  angle  ABF  is  equal  to  the  angle  ABC. 

And  they  are  in  one  plane: 

which  is  impossible. 

Therefore  the  straight  line  BC  is  not  in  a  more  elevated  plane; 

therefore  the  three  straight  lines  BC,  BD,  BE  are  in  one  plane. 
Therefore,  if  a  straight  line  be  set  up  at  right  angles  to  three  straight  lines, 
at  their  point  of  meeting,  the  three  straight  lines  are  in  one  plane,  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  6 

If  two  straight  lines  be  at  right  angles  to  the  same  plane,  the  straight  lines  will  be 
parallel. 

For  let  the  two  straight  lines  AB,  CD  be  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  of  ref¬ 
erence; 

I  say  that  AB  is  parallel  to  CD. 

For  let  them  meet  the  plane  of  reference  at  the  points  B,  D, 
let  the  straight  line  BD  be  joined, 
let  DE  be  drawn,  in  the  plane  of  reference,  at  right  angles  to  BD, 
let  DE  be  made  equal  to  AB, 


306 


EUCLID 
and  let  BE,  AE ,  AD  be  joined. 

Now,  since  AS  is  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  of  reference,  it  will  also  make 
right  angles  with  all  the  straight  lines  which  meet  it  and  are  in  the  plane  of  ref¬ 


erence. 

But  each  of  the  straight  lines  BD,  BE  is  in  the 
plane  of  reference  and  meets  AB; 
therefore  each  of  the  angles  ABD ,  ABE  is  right. 
For  the  same  reason 

each  of  the  angles  CDB ,  CDE  is  also  right. 

And,  since  AB  is  equal  to  DE, 

and  BD  is  common, 

the  two  sides  AB,  BD  are  equal  to  the  two  sides 
ED,  DB; 

and  they  include  right  angles; 


[xi.  Def.  3] 


[1.  4] 


[1.8] 


therefore  the  base  AD  is  equal  to  the  base  BE. 

And,  since  AB  is  equal  to  DE, 

while  AD  is  also  equal  to  BE, 
the  two  sides  AB,  BE  are  equal  to  the  two  sides  ED,  DA ; 
and  AE  is  their  common  base; 
therefore  the  angle  ABE  is  equal  to  the  angle  EDA . 

But  the  angle  ABE  is  right; 

therefore  the  angle  EDA  is  also  right; 
therefore  ED  is  at  right  angles  to  DA. 

But  it  is  also  at  right  angles  to  each  of  the  straight  lines  BD,  DC ; 
therefore  ED  is  set  up  at  right  angles  to  the  three  straight  lines  BD,  DA,  DC  at 
their  point  of  meeting; 

therefore  the  three  straight  lines  BD,  DA,  DC  are  in  one  plane. 

But,  in  whatever  plane  DB,  DA  are,  in  that  plane  is  AB  also, 
for  every  triangle  is  in  one  plane; 
therefore  the  straight  lines  AB,  BD,  DC  are  in  one  plane. 

And  each  of  the  angles  ABD,  BDC  is  right; 

therefore  AB  is  parallel  to  CD. 

Therefore  etc. 


[xi.  5] 
[xi.  2] 


[i.  28] 
E.  D. 


Proposition  7 

If  two  straight  lines  be  parallel  and  points  be  taken  at  random  on  each  of  them,  the 
straight  line  joining  the  points  is  in  the  same  plane  with  the  parallel  straight  lines. 

Let  AB,  CD  be  two  parallel  straight  lines, 
and  let  points  E,  F  be  taken  at  random  on  them 
respectively; 

I  say  that  the  straight  line  joining  the  points  E,  F 
is  in  the  same  plane  with  the  parallel  straight  lines. 

For  suppose  it  is  not,  but,  if  possible,  let  it  be  in 
a  more  elevated  plane  as  EGF, 

and  let  a  plane  be  drawn  through  EGF) 
it  will  then  make,  as  section  in  the  plane  of  reference,  a  straight  line.  [xi.  3] 
Let  it  make  it,  as  EF; 

therefore  the  two  straight  lines  EGF,  EF  will  enclose  an  area: 
which  is  impossible. 


ELEMENTS  XI  307 

Therefore  the  straight  line  joined  from  E  to  F  is  not  in  a  plane  more  elevated; 
therefore  the  straight  line  joined  from  E  to  F  is  in  the  plane  through  the  par¬ 
allel  straight  lines  AB,  CD. 

Therefore  etc.  Q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  8 

If  two  straight  lines  be  parallel ,  and  one  of  them  be  at  right  angles  to  any  plane,  the 
remaining  one  will  also  be  at  right  angles  to  the  same  plane. 

Let  AB,  CD  be  two  parallel  straight  lines, 

and  let  one  of  them,  AB,  be  at  right  angles  to 
the  plane  of  reference; 

I  say  that  the  remaining  one,  CD,  will  also  be  at 
right  angles  to  the  same  plane. 

For  let  AB,  CD  meet  the  plane  of  reference  at 
the  points  B,  D, 

and  let  BD  be  joined; 

therefore  AB,  CD,  BD  are  in  one  plane,  [xi.  7] 
Let  DE  be  drawn,  in  the  plane  of  reference,  at 
right  angles  to  BD, 
let  DE  be  made  equal  to  AB, 
and  let  BE,  AE,  AD  be  joined. 

Now,  since  AB  is  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  of  reference, 
therefore  AB  is  also  at  right  angles  to  all  the  straight  lines  which  meet  it  and 
are  in  the  plane  of  reference;  [xi.  Def.  3] 

therefore  each  of  the  angles  ABD,  ABE  is  right. 

And,  since  the  straight  line  BD  has  fallen  on  the  parallels  AB,  CD, 

therefore  the  angles  ABD,  CDB  are  equal  to  two  right  angles,  [i.  29] 
But  the  angle  ABD  is  right; 

therefore  the  angle  CDB  is  also  right; 
therefore  CD  is  at  right  angles  to  BD. 

And,  since  AB  is  equal  to  DE, 

and  BD  is  common, 

the  two  sides  AB,  BD  are  equal  to  the  two  sides  ED,  DB; 
and  the  angle  ABD  is  equal  to  the  angle  EDB, 
for  each  is  right; 

therefore  the  base  AD  is  equal  to  the  base  BE. 

And,  since  AB  is  equal  to  DE, 

and  BE  to  AD, 

the  two  sides  AB,  BE  are  equal  to  the  two  sides  ED.  DA  respectively, 
and  AE  is  their  common  base; 
therefore  the  angle  ABE  is  equal  to  the  angle  EDA. 

But  the  angle  ABE  is  right; 

therefore  the  angle  EDA  is  also  right; 
therefore  ED  is  at  right  angles  to  AD. 

But  it  is  also  at  right  angles  to  DB ; 

therefore  ED  is  also  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  through  BD ,  DA.  [xi.  4] 
Therefore  ED  will  also  make  right  angles  with  all  the  straight  lines  which 
meet  it  and  are  in  the  plane  through  BD,  DA. 

But  DC  is  in  the  plane  through  BD,  DA,  inasmuch  as  AB,  BD  are  in  the 


EUCLID 


308 

plane  through  BD ,  DA,  [xi.  2] 

and  DC  is  also  in  the  plane  in  which  AB,  BD  are. 

Therefore  ED  is  at  right  angles  to  DC, 

so  that  CD  is  also  at  right  angles  to  DE . 

But  CD  is  also  at  right  angles  to  BD. 

Therefore  CD  is  set  up  at  right  angles  to  the  two  straight  lines  DE,  DB 
which  cut  one  another,  from  the  point  of  section  at  D; 
so  that  CD  is  also  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  through  DE,  DB.  [xi.  4] 
But  the  plane  through  DE,  DB  is  the  plane  of  reference; 

therefore  CD  is  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  of  reference. 

Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  9 

Straight  lines  which  are  parallel  to  the  same  straight  line  and  are  not  in  the  same 
plane  with  it  are  also  parallel  to  one  another. 

For  let  each  of  the  straight  lines  AB,  CD  be  parallel  to  EF,  not  being  in  the 
same  plane  with  it; 

I  sa}^  that  AB  is  parallel  to  CD. 

For  let  a  point  G  be  taken  at  random  on 
EF, 

and  from  it  let  there  be  drawn  GH,  in  the 
plane  through  EF,  AB,  at  right  angles  to  F 
EF,  and  GK  in  the  plane  through  FE,  CD 
again  at  right  angles  to  EF. 

Now,  since  EF  is  at  right  angles  to  each  of 
the  straight  lines  GH,  GK, 
therefore  EF  is  also  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  through  GH,  GK.  [xi.  4] 
And  EF  is  parallel  to  AB; 

therefore  AB  is  also  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  through  HG,  GK.  [xi.  8] 
For  the  same  reason 

CD  is  also  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  through  HG,  GK; 
therefore  each  of  the  straight  lines  AB,  CD  is  at  right  angles  to  the  plane 
through  HG,  GK. 

But,  if  two  straight  lines  be  at  right  angles  to  the  same  plane,  the  straight 
lines  are  parallel;  [xi.  6] 

therefore  AB  is  parallel  to  CD.  q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  10 

If  two  straight  lines  meeting  one  another  he  parallel  to  two  straight  lines  meeting  one 
another  not  in  the  same  plane,  they  will  contain  equal  angles. 

For  let  the  two  straight  lines  AB,  BC  meeting  one  another  be  parallel  to  the 
two  straight  lines  DE,  EF  meeting  one  another,  not  in  the  same  plane; 

I  say  that  the  angle  ABC  is  equal  to  the  angle  DEF. 

For  let  BA,  BC,  ED,  EF  be  cut  off  equal  to  one  another,  and  let  AD,  CF, 
BE,  AC,  DF  be  joined. 

Now,  since  BA  is  equal  and  parallel  to  ED, 

therefore  AD  is  also  equal  and  parallel  to  BE. 

For  the  same  reason 

CF  is  also  equal  and  parallel  to  BE. 


[i.  33] 


ELEMENTS  XI  309 

Therefore  each  of  the  straight  lines  AD ,  CF  is  equal  and  parallel  to  BE. 

But  straight  lines  which  are  parallel 
to  the  same  straight  line  and  are  not  in 
the  same  plane  with  it  are  parallel  to 
one  another;  [xi.  9] 

therefore  AD  is  parallel  and  equal  to  CF. 

And  AC,  DF  join  them; 
therefore  AC  is  also  equal  and  parallel 
to  DF.  [i.  33] 

Now,  since  the  two  sides  AB,  BC  are 
equal  to  the  two  sides  DE ,  EF, 
and  the  base  AC  is  equal  to  the  base  DF , 
therefore  the  angle  ABC  is  equal  to  the  angle  DEF.  [i.  8] 

Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  11 

From  a  given  elevated  point  to  draw  a  straight  line  perpendicular  to  a  given  plane. 

Let  A  be  the  given  elevated  point,  and  the  plane  of  reference  the  given  plane; 
thus  it  is  required  to  draw  from  the  point  A  a  straight  line  perpendicular  to  the 
plane  of  reference. 

Let  any  straight  line  BC  be  drawn,  at  random,  in 
the  plane  of  reference, 

and  let  AD  be  drawn  from  the  point  A 

perpendicular  to  BC.  [i.  12] 

If  then  AD  is  also  perpendicular  to  the  plane  of 
reference,  that  which  was  enjoined  will  have  been 
done. 

But,  if  not,  let  DE  be  drawn  from  the  point  D  at 
right  angles  to  BC  and  in  the  plane  of  reference,  [i.  11] 
let  AF  be  drawn  from  A  perpendicular  to  DE ,  [i.  12] 

and  let  GH  be  drawn  through  the  point  F  parallel  to  BC.  [i.  31] 
Now,  since  BC  is  at  right  angles  to  each  of  the  straight  lines  DA,  DE, 
therefore  BC  is  also  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  through  ED,  DA.  [xi.  4] 
And  GH  is  parallel  to  it; 

but,  if  two  straight  lines  be  parallel,  and  one  of  them  be  at  right  angles  to  any 
plane,  the  remaining  one  will  also  be  at  right  angles  to  the  same  plane;  [xi.  8] 
therefore  GH  is  also  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  through  ED,  DA. 

Therefore  GH  is  also  at  right  angles  to  all  the  straight  lines  which  meet  it 
and  are  in  the  plane  through  ED,  DA.  [xi.  Def.  3] 

But  AF  meets  it  and  is  in  the  plane  through  ED,  DA ; 

therefore  GH  is  at  right  angles  to  FA, 
so  that  FA  is  also  at  right  angles  to  GH. 

But  AF  is  also  at  right  angles  to  DE ; 
therefore  A  F  is  at  right  angles  to  each  of  the  straight  lines  GH,  DE. 

But,  if  a  straight  line  be  set  up  at  right  angles  to  two  straight  lines  which  cut 
one  another,  at  the  point  of  section,  it  will  also  be  at  right  angles  to  the  plane 
through  them;  [xi.  4] 

therefore  FA  is  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  through  ED,  GH. 

But  the  plane  through  ED,  GH  is  the  plane  of  reference; 


310  EUCLID 

therefore  AF  is  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  of  reference. 

Therefore  from  the  given  elevated  point  A  the  straight  line  AF  has  been 
drawn  perpendicular  to  the  plane  of  reference.  q.  e.  f. 

Proposition  12 

To  set  up  a  straight  line  at  right  angles  to  a  given  plane  from  a  given  point  in  it. 
Let  the  plane  of  reference  be  the  given  plane, 
and  A  the  point  in  it; 

thus  it  is  required  to  set  up  from  the  point  A  a  straight 
line  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  of  reference. 

Let  any  elevated  point  B  be  conceived, 

from  B  let  BC  be  drawn  perpendicular  to 

the  plane  of  reference,  [xi.  11] 

and  through  the  point  A  let  AD  be  drawn 

parallel  to  BC.  [i.  31] 

Then,  since  AD,  CB  are  two  parallel  straight  lines, 
while  one  of  them,  BC,  is  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  of  reference, 
therefore  the  remaining  one,  AD,  is  also  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  of  refer¬ 
ence.  [xi.  8] 

Therefore  AD  has  been  set  up  at  right  angles  to  the  given  plane  from  the 
point  A  in  it.  q.  e.  f. 


Proposition  13 

From  the  same  point  two  straight  lines  cannot  be  set  up  at  right  angles  to  the  same 
plane  on  the  same  side. 

For,  if  possible,  from  the  same  point  A  let  the  two  straight  lines  AB,  AC  be 
set  up  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  of  reference  and 
on  the  same  side, 

and  let  a  plane  be  drawn  through  BA,  AC; 
it  will  then  make,  as  section  through  A  in  the  plane 
of  reference,  a  straight  line.  [xi.  3] 

Let  it  make  DAE ; 

therefore  the  straight  lines  AB,  AC, 

DAE  are  in  one  plane. 

And,  since  CA  is  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  of 
reference,  it  will  also  make  right  angles  with  all  the  straight  lines  which  meet 
it  and  are  in  the  plane  of  reference.  [xi.  Def.  3] 

But  DAE  meets  it  and  is  in  the  plane  of  reference; 

therefore  the  angle  CAE  is  right. 

For  the  same  reason 

the  angle  BAE  is  also  right; 
therefore  the  angle  CAE  is  equal  to  the  angle  BAE. 

And  they  are  in  one  plane : 

which  is  impossible. 

Therefore  etc.  Q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  14 

Planes  to  which  the  same  straight  line  is  at  right  angles  will  be  parallel. 

For  let  any  straight  line  A B  be  at  right  angles  to  each  of  the  planes  CD,  EF ; 


311 


ELEMENTS  XI 

I  say  that  the  planes  are  parallel. 

For,  if  not,  they  will  meet  when  produced. 

Let  them  meet; 

they  will  then  make,  as  common  section, 
a  straight  line.  [xi.  3] 

Let  them  make  GII ; 
let  a  point  K  be  taken  at  random  on  GH, 
and  let  AK ,  BK  be  joined. 

Now,  since  AB  is  at  right  angles  to 
the  plane  EF} 

therefore  AB  is  also  at  right  angles  to  BK  which  is  a  straight  line  in  the  plane 
EF  produced;  [xi.  Def.  3] 

therefore  the  angle  ABK  is  right. 

For  the  same  reason 

the  angle  BAK  is  also  right. 

Thus,  in  the  triangle  ABK ,  the  two  angles  ABK ,  BAK  are  equal  to  two 
right  angles: 

which  is  impossible.  [i.  17] 

Therefore  the  planes  CD ,  EF  will  not  meet  when  produced; 

therefore  the  planes  CD ,  EF  are  parallel.  [xi.  Def.  8] 

Therefore  planes  to  which  the  same  straight  line  is  at  right  angles  are  par¬ 
allel.  Q.  E.  D. 


Proposition  15 

If  two  straight  lines  meeting  one  another  be  parallel  to  two  straight  lines  meeting 
one  another ,  not  being  in  the  same  plane ,  the  planes  through  them  are  parallel. 
For  let  the  two  straight  lines  AB,  BC  meeting  one  another  be  parallel  to  the 

two  straight  lines  DE ,  EF  meeting  one  another, 
not  being  in  the  same  plane;  I  say  that  the 
planes  produced  through  AB,  BC  and  DE,  EF 
will  not  meet  one  another. 

For  let  BG  be  drawn  from  the  point  B  per¬ 
pendicular  to  the  plane  through  DE,  EF  [xi.  11], 
and  let  it  meet  the  plane  at  the  point  G; 
through  G  let  GH  be  drawn  parallel  to  ED,  and 
GK  parallel  to  EF.  [i.  31] 

Now’,  since  BG  is  at  right  angles  to  the  plane 
through  DE,  EF, 

therefore  it  will  also  make  right  angles  with  all  the  straight  lines  w’hich  meet  it 
and  are  in  the  plane  through  DE,  EF.  [xi.  Def.  3] 

But  each  of  the  straight  lines  GH ,  GK  meets  it  and  is  in  the  plane  through 
DE,  EF] 

therefore  each  of  the  angles  BGH ,  BGK  is  right. 

And,  since  BA  is  parallel  to  GH,  [xi.  9] 

therefore  the  angles  GBA,  BGH  are  equal  to  two  right  angles,  [i.  29] 
But  the  angle  BGH  is  right; 

therefore  the  angle  GBA  is  also  right; 
therefore  GB  is  at  right  angles  to  BA. 

For  the  same  reason 


312  EUCLID 

GB  is  also  at  right  angles  to  BC . 

Since  then  the  straight  line  GB  is  set  up  at  right  angles  to  the  two  straight 
lines  BA,  BC  which  cut  one  another,  therefore  GB  is  also  at  right  angles  to  the 
plane  through  BA,  BC .  [xi.  4] 

But  planes  to  which  the  same  straight  line  is  at  right  angles  are  parallel ; 

[xi.  14] 

therefore  the  plane  through  AB,  BC  is  parallel  to  the  plane  through  DE ,  EF. 

Therefore,  if  two  straight  lines  meeting  one  another  be  parallel  to  two 
straight  lines  meeting  one  another,  not  in  the  same  plane,  the  planes  through 
them  are  parallel.  q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  16 

If  two  parallel  planes  be  cut  by  any  plane,  their  common  sections  are  parallel. 
For  let  the  two  parallel  planes  AB,  CD  be  cut  by  the  plane  EFGH , 
and  let  EF,  GH  be  their  common  sections; 

I  say  that  EF  is  parallel  to  GH. 


For,  if  not,  EF,  GH  will,  when  produced,  meet  either  in  the  direction  of  F,  H 
or  of  E,  G. 

Let  them  be  produced,  as  in  the  direction  of  F,  H,  and  let  them,  first,  meet 
at  K. 

Xow,  since  EFK  is  in  the  plane  AB, 

therefore  all  the  points  on  EFK  are  also  in  the  plane  AB.  [xi.  1] 

But  K  is  one  of  the  points  on  the  straight  line  EFK ; 

therefore  K  is  in  the  plane  AB. 

For  the  same  reason 

K  is  also  in  the  plane  CD ; 

therefore  the  planes  AB,  CD  will  meet  when  produced. 

But  thejr  do  not  meet,  because  they  are,  by  hypothesis,  parallel; 
therefore  the  straight  lines  EF,  GH  will  not  meet  when  produced  in  the  direc¬ 
tion  of  F,  H. 

Similarly  we  can  prove  that  neither  mil  the  straight  lines  EF,  GH  meet 
when  produced  in  the  direction  of  E,  G. 

But  straight  lines  which  do  not  meet  in  either  direction  are  parallel. 

[i.  Def.  23] 


Therefore  EF  is  parallel  to  GH. 
Therefore  etc. 


Q.  E.  D. 


ELEMENTS  XI 


313 


Proposition  17 

If  two  straight  lines  be  cut  by  parallel  planes ,  they  will  be  cut  in  the  same  ratios . 

For  let  the  two  straight  lines  A  B,  CD  be  cut  by  the  parallel  planes  GH ,  KL , 
MN  at  the  points  A,  E,  B  and  C,  F,  D  ; 

I  say  that,  as  the  straight  line  AE  is  to 
EB,  so  is  CF  to  FD. 

For  let  AC,  BD ,  AD  be  joined, 
let  AD  meet  the  plane  KL  at  the  point  0, 
and  let  EO,  OF  be  joined. 

Now,  since  the  two  parallel  planes  KLy 
MN  are  cut  by  the  plane  EBDOy 
their  common  sections  EOy  BD  are  parallel. 

[xi.  16] 

For  the  same  reason,  since  the  two 
parallel  planes  GH,  KL  are  cut  by  the 
plane  AOFCy 

their  common  sections  AC,  OF  are  parallel. 

m 

And,  since  the  straight  line  EO  has  been  drawn  parallel  to  BDy  one  of  the 
sides  of  the  triangle  ABD , 

therefore,  proportionally,  as  AE  is  to  EB}  so  is  AO  to  OD.  [vi.  2] 
Again,  since  the  straight  line  OF  has  been  drawn  parallel  to  AC,  one  of  the 
sides  of  the  triangle  ADC , 

proportionally,  as  AO  is  to  OD ,  so  is  CF  to  FD.  [id.] 

But  it  was  also  proved  that,  as  AO  is  to  OD,  so  is  A E  to  EB; 

therefore  also,  as  AE  is  to  EB}  so  is  CF  to  FD.  [v.  11] 

Therefore  etc.  Q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  18 

If  a  straight  line  be  at  right  angles  to  any  plane ,  all  the  planes  through  it  will  also 
be  at  right  angles  to  the  same  plane. 

For  let  any  straight  line  A B  be  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  of  reference; 

I  say  that  all  the  planes  through  AB  are  also 
at  right  angles  to  the  plane  of  reference. 

For  let  the  plane  DE  be  drawn  through  AB, 
let  CE  be  the  common  section  of  the  plane  DE 
and  the  plane  of  reference, 
let  a  point  F  be  taken  at  random  on  CE, 
and  from  F  let  FG  be  drawn  in  the  plane  DE 
at  right  angles  to  CE.  [i.  11] 

Now,  since  AB  is  at  right  angles  to  the  plane 
of  reference,  AB  is  also  at  right  angles  to  all  the  straight  lines  which  meet  it 
and  are  in  the  plane  of  reference;  [xi.  Def.  3] 

so  that  it  is  also  at  right  angles  to  CE; 
therefore  the  angle  ABF  is  right. 

But  the  angle  GFB  is  also  right; 

therefore  AB  is  parallel  to  FG. 

But  AB  is  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  of  reference; 


[I.  28] 


314  EUCLID 

therefore  FG  is  also  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  of  reference,  [xi.  8] 
Now  a  plane  is  at  right  angles  to  a  plane,  when  the  straight  lines  drawn,  in 
one  of  the  planes,  at  right  angles  to  the  common  section  of  the  planes  are  at 
right  angles  to  the  remaining  plane.  [xi.  Def.  4] 

And  FG,  drawn  in  one  of  the  planes  DE  at  right  angles  to  CE ,  the  common 
section  of  the  planes,  was  proved  to  be  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  of  reference; 
therefore  the  plane  DE  is  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  of  reference. 

Similarly  also  it  can  be  proved  that  all  the  planes  through  AB  are  at  right 
angles  to  the  plane  of  reference. 

Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  19 

If  two  planes  which  cut  one  another  be  at  right  angles  to  any  plane,  their  common 
section  will  also  be  at  right  angles  to  the  same  plane . 

For  let  the  two  planes  AB,  BC  be  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  of  reference, 
and  let  BD  be  their  common  section; 

I  say  that  BD  is  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  of 
reference. 

For  suppose  it  is  not,  and  from  the  point  D  let 
DE  be  drawn  in  the  plane  AS  at  right  angles  to  the 
straight  line  AD,  and  DF  in  the  plane  BC  at  right 
angles  to  CD. 

Now,  since  the  plane  AB  is  at  right  angles  to 
the  plane  of  reference, 

and  DE  has  been  drawn  in  the  plane  AB  at  right 
angles  to  AD,  their  common  section, 
therefore  DE  is  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  of  reference.  [xi.  Def.  4] 

Similarly  we  can  prove  that 

DF  is  also  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  of  reference. 

Therefore  from  the  same  point  D  two  straight  lines  have  been  set  up  at  right 
angles  to  the  plane  of  reference  on  the  same  side: 

which  is  impossible.  [xi.  13] 

Therefore  no  straight  line  except  the  common  section  DB  of  the  planes  AB, 
BC  can  be  set  up  from  the  point  D  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  of  reference. 
Therefore  etc.  Q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  20 

If  a  solid  angle  be  contained  by  three  plane  angles,  any  two,  taken  together  in  any 
manner,  are  greater  than  the  remaining  one. 

For  let  the  solid  angle  at  A  be  contained  by  the  three  plane  angles  BAG, 
CAD,  DAB;  D 

I  say  that  any  two  of  the  angles  B A  C,  CAD, 

DAB ,  taken  together  in  any  manner,  are 
greater  than  the  remaining  one. 

If  now  the  angles  BAC,  CAD,  DAB  are 
equal  to  one  another,  it  is  manifest  that  any 
two  are  greater  than  the  remaining  one. 

But,  if  not,  let  BAC  be  greater, 

and  on  the  straight  line  AB,  and  at  the  point  A  on  it,  let  the  angle  BAE  be 


315 


ELEMENTS  XI 

constructed,  in  the  plane  through  BA,  AC,  equal  to  the  angle  DAB ; 

let  AE  be  made  equal  to  AD, 
and  let  BEC,  drawn  across  through  the  point  E ,  cut  the  straight  lines  AB,  AC 
at  the  points  B ,  C ; 

let  DB,  DC  be  joined. 

Now.,  since  DA  is  equal  to  AE, 

and  AB  is  common, 
two  sides  are  equal  to  two  sides; 
and  the  angle  DAB  is  equal  to  the  angle  BAE; 
therefore  the  base  DB  is  equal  to  the  base  BE .  [i.  4] 

And,  since  the  two  sides  BD,  DC  are  greater  than  BC,  [i.  20] 

and  of  these  DB  was  proved  equal  to  BE, 
therefore  the  remainder  DC  is  greater  than  the  remainder  EC. 

Now,  since  DA  is  equal  to  AE, 

and  AC  is  common, 

and  the  base  DC  is  greater  than  the  base  EC, 
therefore  the  angle  DAC  is  greater  than  the  angle  EAC.  [i.  25] 
But  the  angle  DAB  was  made  equal  to  the  angle  BAE ; 

therefore  the  angles  DAB,  DAC  are  greater  than  the  angle  BAC. 
Similarly  we  can  prove  that  the  remaining  angles  also,  taken  together  two 
and  two,  are  greater  than  the  remaining  one. 

Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  21 

Any  solid  angle  is  contained  by  plane  angles  less  than  four  right  angles. 

Let  the  angle  at  A  be  a  solid  angle  contained  by  the  plane  angles  BAC , 
CAD ,  DAB; 

I  say  that  the  angles  BAC,  CAD ,  DAB  are  less 
than  four  right  angles. 

For  let  points  B,  C,  D  be  taken  at  random  on  the 
straight  lines  AB,  AC,  AD  respectively, 
and  let  BC,  CD ,  DB  be  joined. 

Now,  since  the  solid  angle  at  B  is  contained  by 
the  three  plane  angles  CBA,  ABD,  CBD, 
any  two  are  greater  than  the  remaining  one; 

[xi.  20] 

therefore  the  angles  CBA,  ABD  are  greater  than  the  angle  CBD. 

For  the  same  reason 

the  angles  BCA,  ACD  are  also  greater  than  the  angle  BCD,  and  the  angles 
CD  A,  ADB  are  greater  than  the  angle  CDB; 

therefore  the  six  angles  CBA,  ABD,  BCA,  ACD,  CD  A ,  ADB  are  greater  than 
the  three  angles  CBD,  BCD,  CDB. 

But  the  three  angles  CBD,  BDC,  BCD  are  equal  to  two  right  angles;  [i.  32] 
therefore  the  six  angles  CBA,  ABD,  BCA,  ACD,  CDA,  ADB  are  greater  than 
two  right  angles. 

And,  since  the  three  angles  of  each  of  the  triangles  ABC,  ACD,  ADB  are 
equal  to  two  right  angles, 

therefore  the  nine  angles  of  the  three  triangles,  the  angles  CBA,  ACB,  BAC, 
ACD,  CDA,  CAD,  ADB,  DBA,  BAD  are  equal  to  six  right  angles; 


C 


318  EUCLID 

and  of  them  the  six  angles  ABC ,  BCA,  ACD ,  CZX4,  DBA  are  greater 

than  two  right  angles; 

therefore  the  remaining  three  angles  BAG,  CAD,  DAB  containing  the  solid 
angle  are  less  than  four  right  angles. 

Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  22 

If  there  he  three  plane  angles  of  which  two,  taken  together  in  any  manner,  are  greater 
than  the  remaining  one,  and  they  are  contained  by  equal  straight  lines,  it  is  possible 
to  construct  a  triangle  out  of  the  straight  lines  joining  the  extremities  of  the  equal 
straight  lines . 

Let  there  be  three  plane  angles  ABC,  DEF,  GHK,  of  which  two,  taken  to¬ 
gether  in  any  manner,  are  greater  than  the  remaining  one,  namely 
the  angles  ABC ,  DEF  greater  than  the  angle  GHK , 
the  angles  DEF,  GHK  greater  than  the  angle  ABC , 
and,  further,  the  angles  GHK ,  ABC  greater  than  the  angle  DEF; 
let  the  straight  lines  AB,  BC,  DEy  EFy  GH ,  HK  be  equal, 
and  let  AC,  DF,  GK  be  joined; 

I  say  that  it  is  possible  to  construct  a  triangle  out  of  straight  lines  equal  to  AC, 
DF,  GK,  that  is,  that  any  two  of  the  straight  lines  AC,  DF,  GK  are  greater 
than  the  remaining  one. 


Now,  if  the  angles  ABC,  DEF,  GHK  are  equal  to  one  another,  it  is  manifest 
that,  AC,  DF,  GK  being  equal  also,  it  is  possible  to  construct  a  triangle  out  of 
straight  lines  equal  to  AC,  DF,  GK. 

But,  if  not,  let  them  be  unequal, 
and  on  the  straight  line  HK,  and  at  the  point  H  on 
it,  let  the  angle  KHL  be  constructed  equal  to  the 
angle  ABC; 

let  HL  be  made  equal  to  one  of  the  straight  lines  AB, 

BC,  DE ,  EF,  GH,  HK, 

and  let  KL,  GL  be  joined. 

Now,  since  the  two  sides  AB,  BC  are  equal  to  the 
two  sides  KH,  HL, 

and  the  angle  at  B  is  equal  to  the  angle  KHL, 

therefore  the  base  AC  is  equal  to  the  base  KL.  [i.  4] 

And,  since  the  angles  ABC,  GHK  are  greater  than  the  angle  DEF, 
while  the  angle  ABC  is  equal  to  the  angle  KHL, 
therefore  the  angle  GHL  is  greater  than  the  angle  DEF. 

And,  since  the  two  sides  GH,  HL  are  equal  to  the  two  sides  DE,  EF, 


317 


ELEMENTS  XI 

and  the  angle  GHL  is  greater  than  the  angle  DEF, 
therefore  the  base  GL  is  greater  than  the  base  DF.  [i.  24] 

But  GK)  KL  are  greater  than  GL . 

Therefore  GK,  KL  are  much  greater  than  DF. 

But  KL  is  equal  to  AC; 

therefore  AC ,  GK  are  greater  than  the  remaining  straight  line  DF. 
Similarly  we  can  prove  that 

AC,  DF  are  greater  than  GK, 
and  further,  DF,  GK  are  greater  than  AC. 

Therefore  it  is  possible  to  construct  a  triangle  out  of  straight  lines  equal  to 
AC,  DF,  GK.  ^  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  23 

To  construct  a  solid  angle  out  of  three  plane  angles  two  of  which ,  taken  together  in 
any  manner,  are  greater  than  the  remaining  one:  thus  the  three  angles  must  be  less 
than  four  right  angles. 

Let  the  angles  ABC,  DEF,  GHK  be  the  three  given  plane  angles,  and  let  two 
of  these,  taken  together  in  any  manner,  be  greater  than  the  remaining  one, 
while,  further,  the  three  are  less  than  four  right  angles; 
thus  it  is  required  to  construct  a  solid  angle  out  of  angles  equal  to  the  angles 
ABC,  DEF ,  GHK. 


Let  AB,  BC,  DE,  EF,  GH ,  HK  be  cut  off  equal  to  one  another, 
and  let  AC,  DF,  GK  be  joined; 

it  is  therefore  possible  to  construct  a  triangle  out  of  straight  lines  equal  to  AC, 
DF,  GK.  [xi.  22] 

Let  LMN  be  so  constructed  that  AC  is  equal  to 
LM,  DF  to  MN,  and  further,  GK  to  NL, 
let  the  circle  LMN  be  described  about  the  triangle 
LMN, 

let  its  centre  be  taken,  and  let  it  be  0 ; 
let  LO,  MO,  NO  be  joined; 

I  say  that  AB  is  greater  than  LO. 

For,  if  not,  AB  is  either  equal  to  LO,  or  less. 
First,  let  it  be  equal. 

Then,  since  AB  is  equal  to  LO, 
while  AB  is  equal  to  BC,  and  OL  to  OM, 
the  two  sides  AB,  BC  are  equal  to  the  two  sides  LO,  OM  respectively; 
and,  by  hypothesis,  the  base  AC  is  equal  to  the  base  LM; 

therefore  the  angle  ABC  is  equal  to  the  angle  LOM.  [i.  8] 

For  the  same  reason 


318  EUCLID 

the  angle  DEF  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  MON , 
and  further  the  angle  GHK  to  the  angle  NOL; 
therefore  the  three  angles  ABC ,  DEF ,  GHK  are  equal  to  the  three  angles  LOM, 
MON ,  NOL. 

But  the  three  angles  LOM,  MON ,  NOL  are  equal  to  four  right  angles; 
therefore  the  angles  ABC ,  DEF ,  are  equal  to  four  right  angles. 

But  they  are  also,  by  hypothesis,  less  than  four  right  angles: 

which  is  absurd. 

Therefore  AB  is  not  equal  to  LO. 

I  say  next  that  neither  is  AB  less  than  LO. 

For,  if  possible,  let  it  be  so, 

and  let  OP  be  made  equal  to  AB ,  and  OQ  equal  to  BC, 
and  let  PQ  be  joined. 

Then,  since  AB  is  equal  to  BC7 

OP  is  also  equal  to  OQ, 
so  that  the  remainder  LP  is  equal  to  QM. 

Therefore  LM  is  parallel  to  PQ,  [vi.  2] 

and  LMO  is  equiangular  with  PQO;  [i.  29] 

therefore,  as  OL  is  to  LM,  so  is  OP  to  PQ;  [vi.  4] 

and  alternately,  as  LO  is  to  OP,  so  is  LM  to  PQ.  [v.  16] 

But  LO  is  greater  than  OP; 

therefore  LM  is  also  greater  than  PQ. 

But  LM  was  made  equal  to  AC; 

therefore  AC  is  also  greater  than  PQ. 

Since,  then,  the  two  sides  AB,  BC  are  equal  to  the  two  sides  PO ,  OQ, 
and  the  base  AC  is  greater  than  the  base  PQ, 
therefore  the  angle  ABC  is  greater  than  the  angle  POQ.  [i.  25] 
Similarly  we  can  prove  that 

the  angle  DEF  is  also  greater  than  the  angle  MON, 
and  the  angle  GHK  greater  than  the  angle  NOL. 

Therefore  the  three  angles  ABC,  DEF ,  GHK  are  greater  than  the  three 
angles  LOM,  MON,  NOL. 

But,  by  hypothesis,  the  angles  ABC ,  DEF,  GHK  are  less  than  four  right 
angles; 

therefore  the  angles  LOM,  MON,  NOL  are  much  less  than  four  right  angles. 
But  they  are  also  equal  to  four  right  angles: 

which  is  absurd. 

Therefore  AB  is  not  less  than  LO. 

And  it  was  proved  that  neither  is  it  equal; 

therefore  AB  is  greater  than  LO. 

Let  then  OR  be  set  up  from  the  point  0  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  of  the 
circle  LMN,  [xi.  12] 

and  let  the  square  on  OR  be  equal  to  that  area  by  which  the  square  on  A B  is 
greater  than  the  square  on  LO;  [Lemma] 

let  RL,  RM,  RN  be  joined. 

Then,  since  RO  is  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  of  the  circle  LMN, 
therefore  RO  is  also  at  right  angles  to  each  of  the  straight  lines  LO,  MO,  NO. 
And,  since  LO  is  equal  to  OM, 

while  OR  is  common  and  at  right  angles, 


ELEMENTS  XI  319 

therefore  the  base  RL  is  equal  to  the  base  RM.  [i.  4] 

For  the  same  reason 

RN  is  also  equal  to  each  of  the  straight  lines  RL,  RM ; 
therefore  the  three  straight  lines  RL,  RM,  RN  are  equal  to  one  another. 

Next,  since  by  hypothesis  the  square  on  OR  is  equal  to  that  area  by  which 
the  square  on  AB  is  greater  than  the  square  on  LO, 

therefore  the  square  on  AB  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  LO,  OR. 

But  the  square  on  LR  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  LO,  OR,  for  the  angle  LOR 
is  right;  [i.  47] 

therefore  the  square  on  AB  is  equal  to  the  square  on  RL ; 
therefore  AB  is  equal  to  RL. 

But  each  of  the  straight  lines  BC,  DE,  EF,  GH,  HK  is  equal  to  AB, 
while  each  of  the  straight  lines  RM,  RN  is  equal  to  RL ; 
therefore  each  of  the  straight  lines  AB,  BC,  DE,  EF,  GH,  HK 
is  equal  to  each  of  the  straight  lines  RL,  RM,  RN. 

And,  since  the  two  sides  LR,  RM  are  equal  to  the  two  sides  AB,  BC, 
and  the  base  LM  is  by  hypothesis  equal  to  the  base  AC, 
therefore  the  angle  LRM  is  equal  to  the  angle  ABC.  [i.  8] 

For  the  same  reason 

the  angle  MRN  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  DEF, 
and  the  angle  LRN  to  the  angle  GHK. 

Therefore,  out  of  the  three  plane  angles  LRM,  MRN,  LRN,  which  are  equal 
to  the  three  given  angles  ABC,  DEF,  GHK,  the  solid  angle  at  R  has  been  con¬ 
structed,  which  is  contained  by  the  angles  LRM,  MRN,  LRN.  q.  e.  f. 


Lemma 

But  how  it  is  possible  to  take  the  square  on  OR  equal  to  that  area  by  which 
the  square  on  AB  is  greater  than  the  square  on  LO,  we  can  show  as  follows. 

Let  the  straight  lines  AB,  LO  be  set  out, 
and  let  AB  be  the  greater; 
let  the  semicircle  ABC  be  described  on  AB, 
and  into  the  semicircle  ABC  let  AC  be  fitted  equal  to  the 
straight  line  LO,  not  being  greater  than  the  diameter  AB; 

[iv.  1] 

let  CB  be  joined 

Since  then  the  angle  ACB  is  an  angle  in  the  semicircle  ACB, 

therefore  the  angle  ACB  is  right.  [hi.  31] 

Therefore  the  square  on  AB  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  AC,  CB.  [i.  47] 
Hence  the  square  on  A B  is  greater  than  the  square  on  AC  by  the  square  on 
CB. 

But  AC  is  equal  to  LO. 

Therefore  the  square  on  AB  is  greater  than  the  square  on  LO  by  the  square 
on  CB. 

If  then  we  cut  off  OR  equal  to  BC,  the  square  on  AB  will  be  greater  than  the 
square  on  LO  by  the  square  on  OR.  q.  e.  f. 


Proposition  24 

If  a  solid  be  contained  by  parallel  planes,  the  opposite  planes  in  it  are  equal  and 
parallelogrammic. 


320  EUCLID 

For  let  the  solid  CDHG  be  contained  by  the  parallel  planes  AC,  GF,  AH, 
DF,  BF,  AE ; 

I  say  that  the  opposite  planes  in  it  are 
equal  and  parallelogrammic. 

For,  since  the  two  parallel  planes  BG,  CE 
are  cut  by  the  plane  AC, 
their  common  sections  are  parallel,  [xi.  16] 

Therefore  AB  is  parallel  to  DC. 

Again,  since  the  two  parallel  planes  BF, 

AE  are  cut  by  the  plane  AC, 
their  common  sections  are  parallel,  [xi.  16] 

Therefore  BC  is  parallel  to  AD. 

But  AB  was  also  proved  parallel  to  DC; 

therefore  AC  is  a  parallelogram. 

Similarly  we  can  prove  that  each  of  the  planes  DF,  FG,  GB,  BF,  AE  is  a 
parallelogram. 

Let  AH,  DF  be  joined. 

Then,  since  AB  is  parallel  to  DC,  and  BH  to  CF, 
the  two  straight  lines  AB,  BH  which  meet  one  another  are  parallel  to  the  two 
straight  lines  DC,  CF  which  meet  one  another,  not  in  the  same  plane; 

therefore  they  will  contain  equal  angles;  [xi.  10] 

therefore  the  angle  ABH  is  equal  to  the  angle  DCF. 

And,  since  the  two  sides  AB,  BH  are  equal  to  the  two  sides  DC,  CF, 

[I.  34] 

and  the  angle  ABH  is  equal  to  the  angle  DCF , 
therefore  the  base  AD  is  equal  to  the  base  DF, 
and  the  triangle  ABH  is  equal  to  the  triangle  DCF.  [i.  4] 

And  the  parallelogram  BG  is  double  of  the  triangle  ABH,  and  the  parallelo¬ 
gram  CE  double  of  the  triangle  DCF;  [i.  34] 

therefore  the  parallelogram  BG  is  equal  to  the  parallelogram  CE. 

Similarly  we  can  prove  that 

AC  is  also  equal  to  GF, 
and  AD  to  BF. 

Therefore  etc.  Q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  25 

If  a  parallelepipedal  solid  be  cut  by  a  plane  which  is  parallel  to  the  opposite  planes, 
then,  as  the  base  is  to  the  base,  so  will  the  solid  be  to  the  solid. 

For  let  the  parallelepipedal  solid  A  BCD  be  cut  by  the  plane  FG  which  is 
parallel  to  the  opposite  planes  RA,  DH; 

I  say  that,  as  the  base  AEFV  is  to  the  base  EHCF,  so  is  the  solid  ABFU  to 
the  solid  EGCD. 

For  let  AH  be  produced  in  each  direction, 
let  any  number  of  straight  lines  whatever,  AK,  KL ,  be  made  equal  to  AD, 
and  any  number  whatever,  HM,  MN,  equal  to  EH; 
and  let  the  parallelograms  LP,  KV,  HW,  MS  and  the  solids  LQ,  KR,  DM,  MT 
be  completed. 

Then,  since  the  straight  lines  LK,  KA,  AE  are  equal  to  one  another, 
the  parallelograms  LP,  KV,  AF  are  also  equal  to  one  another, 


321 


ELEMENTS  XI 

KO,  KB ,  AG  are  equal  to  one  another, 
and  further,  LX,  KQ,  AR  are  equal  to  one  another,  for  they  are  opposite. 

[xi.  24] 


For  the  same  reason 

the  parallelograms  EC,  HW,  MS  are  also  equal  to  one  another, 

HG,  HI,  IN  are  equal  to  one  another, 
and  further,  DH,  MY,  NT  are  equal  to  one  another. 

Therefore  in  the  solids  LQ,  KR,  A  U  three  planes  are  equal  to  three  planes. 
But  the  three  planes  are  equal  to  the  three  opposite; 

therefore  the  three  solids  LQ,  KR,  A  U  are  equal  to  one  another. 

For  the  same  reason 

the  three  solids  ED,  DM,  MT  are  also  equal  to  one  another. 
Therefore,  whatever  multiple  the  base  LF  is  of  the  base  AF,  the  same  multi¬ 
ple  also  is  the  solid  LU  of  the  solid  AU. 

For  the  same  reason, 

whatever  multiple  the  base  NF  is  of  the  base  FH,  the  same  multiple  also  is  the 
solid  NU  of  the  solid  HU. 

And,  if  the  base  LF  is  equal  to  the  base  NF,  the  solid  LU  is  also  equal  to  the 
solid  NU; 

if  the  base  LF  exceeds  the  base  NF,  the  solid  LU  also  exceeds  the  solid  NU; 
and,  if  one  falls  short,  the  other  falls  short. 

Therefore,  there  being  four  magnitudes,  the  two  bases  AF,  FH,  and  the  two 
solids  A  U,  UH, 

equimultiples  have  been  taken  of  the  base  AF  and  the  solid  AU,  namely  the 
base  LF  and  the  solid  LU , 

and  equimultiples  of  the  base  HF  and  the  solid  HU,  namely  the  base  NF  and 
the  solid  NU, 

and  it  has  been  proved  that,  if  the  base  LF  exceeds  the  base  FN,  the  solid  LU 
also  exceeds  the  solid  NU, 

if  the  bases  are  equal,  the  solids  are  equal, 
and  if  the  base  falls  short,  the  solid  falls  short, 

Therefore,  as  the  base  AF  is  to  the  base  FH,  so  is  the  solid  AU  to  the 
solid  UII.  [v.  Def.  5] 


Proposition  26 

On  a  given  straight  line,  and  at  a  given  point  on  it,  to  construct  a  solid  angle  equal 
to  a  given  solid  angle. 


322 


EUCLID 


Let  A  B  be  the  given  straight  line,  A  the  given  point  on  it,  and  the  angle  at 
D,  contained  by  the  angles  EDC,  EDF,  FDC,  the  given  solid  angle; 
thus  it  is  required  to  construct  on  the  straight  line  AB,  and  at  the  point  A  on 
it,  a  solid  angle  equal  to  the  solid  angle  at  D . 

For  let  a  point  F  be  taken 

at  random  on  DF,  ah 

let  FG  be  drawn  from  F  per¬ 
pendicular  to  the  plane 
through  ED,  DC,  and  let  it 
meet  the  plane  at  G ,  [xi.  11] 
let  DG  be  joined, 
let  there  be  constructed  on 
the  straight  line  AB  and  at 
the  point  A  on  it  the  angle 
BAL  equal  to  the  angle 
EDC ,  and  the  angle  BAK 
equal  to  the  angle  EDG, 

[i.  23] 

let  AK  be  made  equal  to  DG, 

let  KH  be  set  up  from  the  point  K  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  through  BA,  AL, 

[xi.  12] 


let  KH  be  made  equal  to  GF , 
and  let  HA  be  joined; 

I  say  that  the  solid  angle  at  A,  contained  by  the  angles  BAL,  BAH,  HAL 
is  equal  to  the  solid  angle  at  D  contained  by  the  angles  EDC,  EDF,  FDC . 
For  let  AB,  DE  be  cut  off  equal  to  one  another, 

and  let  HB,  KB,  FE,  GE  be  joined. 

Then,  since  FG  is  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  of  reference,  it  will  also  make 
right  angles  with  all  the  straight  lines  which  meet  it  and  are  in  the  plane  of  ref¬ 
erence;  [xi.  Def.  3] 

therefore  each  of  the  angles  FGD,  FGE  is  right. 

For  the  same  reason 

each  of  the  angles  HKA,  HKB  is  also  right. 

And,  since  the  two  sides  KA,  AB  are  equal  to  the  two  sides  GD,  DE  respec¬ 
tively, 

and  they  contain  equal  angles, 

therefore  the  base  KB  is  equal  to  the  base  GE.  [i.  4] 

But  KH  is  also  equal  to  GF, 

and  they  contain  right  angles; 
therefore  HB  is  also  equal  to  FE.  [i.  4] 

Again,  since  the  two  sides  AK,  KH  are  equal  to  the  two  sides  DG,  GF, 
and  they  contain  right  angles, 

therefore  the  base  AH  is  equal  to  the  base  FD.  [i.  4] 

But  AB  is  also  equal  to  DE; 

therefore  the  two  sides  HA,  AB  are  equal  to  the  two  sides  DF,  DE. 

And  the  base  HB  is  equal  to  the  base  FE; 

therefore  the  angle  BAH  is  equal  to  the  angle  EDF. 

For  the  same  reason 

the  angle  HAL  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  FDC. 


[1.8] 


323 


ELEMENTS  XI 

And  the  angle  BAL  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  EDC . 

Therefore  on  the  straight  line  AB,  and  at  the  point  A  on  it,  a  solid  angle  has 
been  constructed  equal  to  the  given  solid  angle  at  D.  q.  e.  f. 

Proposition  27 

On  a  given  straight  line  to  describe  a  parallelepipedal  solid  similar  and  similarly 
situated  to  a  given  parallelepipedal  solid. 

Let  AB  be  the  given  straight  line  and  CD  the  given  parallelepipedal  solid; 
thus  it  is  required  to  describe  on  the  given  straight  line  AB  a  parallelepipedal 
solid  similar  and  similarly  situated  to  the  given  parallelepipedal  solid  CD. 

For  on  the  straight  line 
AB  and  at  the  point  A  on 
it  let  the  solid  angle,  con¬ 
tained  by  the  angles  BAH. 
HAK,  KAB ,  be  constructed 
equal  to  the  solid  angle  at 
C,  so  that  the  angle  BAH  is 
equal  to  the  angle  ECF.  the 
angle  BAK  equal  to  the 
angle  ECG ,  and  the  angle  KAH  to  the  angle  GCF ; 

and  let  it  be  contrived  that, 
as  EC  is  to  CG ,  so  is  BA  to  AK, 
and,  as  GC  is  to  CF,  so  is  KA  to  AH.  [vi.  12] 

Therefore  also,  ex  aequali, 

as  EC  is  to  CF,  so  is  BA  to  AH.  [v.  22] 

Let  the  parallelogram  HB  and  the  solid  AL  be  completed. 

Now  since,  as  EC  is  to  CG ,  so  is  BA  to  AK, 
and  the  sides  about  the  equal  angles  ECG ,  BAK  are  thus  proportional, 
therefore  the  parallelogram  GE  is  similar  to  the  parallelogram  KB. 

For  the  same  reason 

the  parallelogram  KH  is  also  similar  to  the  parallelogram  GF,  and  further,  FE 
to  HB; 

therefore  three  parallelograms  of  the  solid  CD  are  similar  to  three  parallelo¬ 
grams  of  the  solid  AL. 

But  the  former  three  are  both  equal  and  similar  to  the  three  opposite  par¬ 
allelograms, 

and  the  latter  three  are  both  equal  and  similar  to  the  three  opposite  parallelo¬ 
grams; 

therefore  the  whole  solid  CD  is  similar  to  the  whole  solid  AL.  [xi.  Def.  9] 
Therefore  on  the  given  straight  line  AB  there  has  been  described  AL  similar 
and  similarly  situated  to  the  given  parallelepipedal  solid  CD.  Q.  e.  f. 

Proposition  28 

If  a  parallelepipedal  solid  be  cut  by  a  plane  through  the  diagonals  of  the  opposite 
planes,  the  solid  will  be  bisected  by  the  plane. 

For  let  the  parallelepipedal  solid  AB  be  cut  by  the  plane  CDEF  through  the 
diagonals  CF,  DE  of  opposite  planes; 

I  say  that  the  solid  AB  will  be  bisected  by  the  plane  CDEF. 

For,  since  the  triangle  CGF  is  equal  to  the  triangle  CFB, 


[i.  34] 


324  EUCLID 

and  ADE  to  DEH, 

while  the  parallelogram  CA  is  also  equal  to  the  parallelo-  B _  F 

gram  EB,  for  they  are  opposite,  and  GE  to  CH,  A 

therefore  the  prism  contained  by  the  two  triangles  H/-i - s' 

CGF ,  ADE  and  the  three  parallelograms  GE ,  AC ,  CE  /  \  S^/'l  / 

is  also  equal  to  the  prism  contained  by  the  two  triangles  / - j-J G 

CFB,  DEH  and  the  three  parallelograms  CH,  BE ,  CE ;  j/s'  ]/ 

for  they  are  contained  by  planes  equal  both  in  multi-  o  A 

tude  and  in  magnitude.  [xi.  Def.  10] 

Hence  the  whole  solid  AB  is  bisected  by  the  plane  CDEF .  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  29 

Parallelepipedal  solids  which  are  on  the  same  base  and  of  the  same  height ,  and  in 
which  the  extremities  of  the  sides  which  stand  up  are  on  the  same  straight  lines,  are 
equal  to  one  another . 

Let  CM,  CN  be  parallelepipedal  solids  on  the  same  base  AB  and  of  the  same 
height, 

and  let  the  extremities  of  their  sides  which 
stand  up,  namely  AG,  AF ,  LM ,  LN ,  CD, 

CE,  BH ,  BK,  be  on  the  same  straight  lines 
FN,  DK ; 

I  say  that  the  solid  CM  is  equal  to  the 
solid  CN. 

For,  since  each  of  the  figures  CH,  CK  is  a 
parallelogram,  CB  is  equal  to  each  of  the 
straight  lines  DH,  EK ,  [i.  34] 

hence  DH  is  also  equal  to  EK. 

Let  EH  be  subtracted  from  each; 

therefore  the  remainder  DE  is  equal  to  the  remainder  HK. 

Hence  the  triangle  DCE  is  also  equal  to  the  triangle  HBK,  [i.  8,  4] 

and  the  parallelogram  DG  to  the  parallelogram  HN.  [i.  36] 

For  the  same  reason 

the  triangle  AFG  is  also  equal  to  the  triangle  MEN. 

But  the  parallelogram  CF  is  equal  to  the  parallelogram  BM ,  and  CG  to  BN, 
for  they  are  opposite; 

therefore  the  prism  contained  by  the  two  triangles  AFG,  DCE  and  the  three 
parallelograms  AD,  DG,  CG  is  equal  to  the  prism  contained  by  the  two  tri¬ 
angles  MLN,  HBK  and  the  three  parallelograms  BM,  HN,  BN. 

Let  there  be  added  to  each  the  solid  of  which  the  parallelogram  AB  is  the 
base  and  GEHM  its  opposite; 

therefore  the  whole  parallelepipedal  solid  CM  is  equal  to  the  whole  parallele¬ 
pipedal  solid  CN. 

Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  30 

Parallelepipedal  solids  which  are  on  the  same  base  and  of  the  same  height ,  and  in 
which  the  extremities  of  the  sides  which  stand  up  are  not  on  the  same  straight  lines, 
are  equal  to  one  another. 


ELEMENTS  XI 


325 


Let  CM ,  CN  be  parallelepipedal  solids  on  the  same  base  AB  and  of  the  same 
height, 

and  let  the  extremities  of  their  sides 
which  stand  up,  namely  AF ,  AG,  LM , 

LN ,  CZ),  CE ,  BiZ,  Bi£,  not  be  on  the 
same  straight  lines; 

I  say  that  the  solid  CM  is  equal  to  the 
solid  CN. 

For  let  NK,  DH  be  produced  and 
meet  one  another  at  R, 
and  further,  let  FM,  GE  be  produced  to 

p,  Q; 

let  AO,  LP ,  CQ ,  BR  be  joined. 

Then  the  solid  CM,  of  which  the  parallelogram  ACBL  is  the  base,  and 
FDHM  its  opposite,  is  equal  to  the  solid  CP,  of  which  the  parallelogram  ACBL 
is  the  base,  and  OQRP  its  opposite; 

for  they  are  on  the  same  base  ACBL  and  of  the  same  height,  and  the  extremi¬ 
ties  of  their  sides  which  stand  up,  namely  AF,  AO,  LM,  LP,  CD,  CQ,  BH,  BR, 
are  on  the  same  straight  lines  FP,  DR.  [xi.  29] 

But  the  solid  CP,  of  which  the  parallelogram  ACBL  is  the  base,  and  OQRP 
its  opposite,  is  equal  to  the  solid  CN,  of  which  the  parallelogram  ACBL  is  the 
base  and  GEKN  its  opposite; 

for  they  are  again  on  the  same  base  ACBL  and  of  the  same  height,  and  the  ex¬ 
tremities  of  their  sides  which  stand  up,  namely  AG,  AO,  CE,  CQ,  LN,  LP,  BK, 
BR,  are  on  the  same  straight  lines  GQ,  NR. 

Hence  the  solid  CM  is  also  equal  to  the  solid  CN. 

Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  31 

Parallelepipedal  solids  which  are  on  equal  bases  and  of  the  same  height  are  equal 
to  one  another. 

Let  the  parallelepipedal  solids  AE,  CF,  of  the  same  height,  be  on  equal  bases 
AB,  CD. 

I  say  that  the  solid  AE  is  equal  to  the  solid  CF. 


First,  let  the  sides  which  stand  up,  IIK,  BE,  AG,  LM,  PQ,  DF,  CO,  RS,  be 
at  right  angles  to  the  bases  AB,  CD; 


326  EUCLID 

let  the  straight  line  RT  be  produced  in  a  straight  line  with  CR; 
on  the  straight  line  RT ,  and  at  the  point  R  on  it,  let  the  angle  TRU  be  con¬ 
structed  equal  to  the  angle  ALB,  [i.  23] 

let  RT  be  made  equal  to  AL,  and  R U  equal  to  LB, 
and  let  the  base  RW  and  the  solid  XU  be  completed. 

Now,  since  the  two  sides  TR,  RU  are  equal  to  the  two  sides  AL,  LB, 
and  they  contain  equal  angles, 

therefore  the  parallelogram  RW  is  equal  and  similar  to  the  parallelogram  HL . 
Since  again  AL  is  equal  to  RT,  and  LM  to  RS, 

and  they  contain  right  angles, 

therefore  the  parallelogram  RX  is  equal  and  similar  to  the  parallelogram  AM. 
For  the  same  reason 

LE  is  also  equal  and  similar  to  SU; 

therefore  three  parallelograms  of  the  solid  AE  are  equal  and  similar  to  three 
parallelograms  of  the  solid  XU. 

But  the  former  three  are  equal  and  similar  to  the  three  opposite,  and  the 
latter  three  to  the  three  opposite;  [xi.  24] 

therefore  the  whole  parallelepipedal  solid  AE  is  equal  to  the  whole  parallele- 
pipedal  solid  XU.  [xi.  Def.  10] 

Let  DR,  WU  be  drawn  through  and  meet  one  another  at  Y , 
let  aTb  be  drawn  through  T  parallel  to  DY , 
let  PD  be  produced  to  a, 
and  let  the  solids  YX,  RI  be  completed. 

Then  the  solid  XY,  of  which  the  parallelogram  RX  is  the  base  and  Yc  its  op¬ 
posite,  is  equal  to  the  solid  XU  of  which  the  parallelogram  RX  is  the  base  and 
UV  its  opposite, 

for  they  are  on  the  same  base  RX  and  of  the  same  height,  and  the  extremities 
of  their  sides  which  stand  up,  namely  RY,  RU,  Tb ,  TW ,  Se,  Sd,  Xc ,  XV,  are 
on  the  same  straight  lines  YW,  eV.  [xi.  29] 

But  the  solid  XU  is  equal  to  AE; 

therefore  the  solid  XY  is  also  equal  to  the  solid  AE. 

And,  sinco  the  parallelogram  RUWT  is  equal  to  the  parallelogram  YT, 
for  they  are  on  the  same  base  RT  and  in  the  same  parallels  RT,  YW,  [i.  35] 
while  RUWT  is  equal  to  CD,  since  it  is  also  equal  to  AB, 
therefore  the  parallelogram  YT  is  also  equal  to  CD. 

But  DT  is  another  parallelogram; 

therefore,  as  the  base  CD  is  to  DT,  so  is  YT  to  DT.  [v.  7] 

And,  since  the  parallelepipedal  solid  Cl  has  been  cut  by  the  plane  RF  which 
is  parallel  to  opposite  planes, 

as  the  base  CD  is  to  the  base  DT,  so  is  the  solid  CF  to  the  solid  RI.  [xi.  25] 
For  the  same  reason, 

since  the  parallelepipedal  solid  YI  has  been  cut  by  the  plane  RX  which  is  par¬ 
allel  to  opposite  planes, 

as  the  base  YT  is  to  the  base  TD,  so  is  the  solid  YX  to  the  solid  RI.  [xi.  25] 
But,  as  the  base  CD  is  to  DT,  so  is  YT  to  DT; 
therefore  also,  as  the  solid  CF  is  to  the  solid  RI,  so  is  the  solid  YX  to  RI. 

[v.  11] 

Therefore  each  of  the  solids  CF,  YX  has  to  RI  the  same  ratio; 

therefore  the  solid  CF  is  equal  to  the  solid  YX.  [v.  9] 


327 


ELEMENTS  XI 

But  YX  was  proved  equal  to  AE; 

therefore  AE  is  also  equal  to  CF. 

Next,  let  the  sides  standing  up,  AG,  HK ,  BE,  LM,  CN,  PQ,  DF,  RS,  not  be 
at  right  angles  to  the  bases  AB,  CD; 

I  say  again  that  the  solid  AE  is  equal  to  the  solid  CF. 


For  from  the  points  K,  E,  G,  M,  Q,  F,  N,  S  let  KO,  ET,  GU,  MV,  QW,  FX, 
NY,  SI  be  drawn  perpendicular  to  the  plane  of  reference,  and  let  them  meet 
the  plane  at  the  points  0,  T,  U,  V,  W,  X,  Y ,  I, 

and  let  OT,  OU ,  UV,  TV,  WX,  WY,  YI,  IX  be  joined. 

Then  the  solid  KV  is  equal  to  the  solid  QI, 
for  they  are  on  the  equal  bases  KM,  QS  and  of  the  same  height,  and  their  sides 
which  stand  up  are  at  right  angles  to  their  bases.  [First  part  of  this  Prop.] 
But  the  solid  KV  is  equal  to  the  solid  AE, 

and  QI  to  CF; 

for  they  are  on  the  same  base  and  of  the  same  height,  while  the  extremities  of 
their  sides  which  stand  up  are  not  on  the  same  straight  lines.  [xi.  30] 

Therefore  the  solid  AE  is  also  equal  to  the  solid  CF. 

Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  32 

Parallelepipedal  solids  which  are  of  the  same  height  are  to  one  another  as  their  bases. 
Let  AB,  CD  be  parallelepipedal  solids  of  the  same  height; 

I  say  that  the  parallelepipedal  solids  AB,  CD  are  to  one  another  as  their  bases, 
that  is,  that,  as  the  base  AE  is  to  the  base  CF,  so  is  the  solid  AB  to  the  solid 
CD. 

D  K 

cm 

C  G  H 


For  let  FH  equal  to  AE  be  applied  to  FG,  [i.  45] 

and,  on  FH  as  base,  and  with  the  same  height  as  that  of  CD,  let  the  parallele¬ 
pipedal  solid  GK  be  completed. 

Then  the  solid  AB  is  equal  to  the  solid  GK; 
for  they  are  on  equal  bases  AE,  FH  and  of  the  same  height.  [xi.  31] 

And,  since  the  parallelepipedal  solid  CK  is  cut  by  the  plane  DG  which  is 
parallel  to  opposite  planes, 


328  EUCLID 

therefore,  as  the  base  CF  is  to  the  base  FH ,  so  is  the  solid  CD  to  the  solid  DH. 

[xi.  25] 

But  the  base  FH  is  equal  to  the  base  AE, 

and  the  solid  GK  to  the  solid  AB; 

therefore  also,  as  the  base  AE  is  to  the  base  CF ,  so  is  the  solid  AB  to  the  solid 
CD . 

Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  33 

Similar  parallelepipedal  solids  are  to  one  another  in  the  triplicate  ratio  of  their 
corresponding  sides. 

Let  AB,  CD  be  similar  parallelepipedal  solids, 

and  let  AE  be  the  side  corresponding  to  CF) 

I  say  that  the  solid  AB  has  to  the  solid  CD  the  ratio  triplicate  of  that  which 
AE  has  to  CF. 


For  let  EKy  EL,  EM  be  produced  in  a  straight  line  with  AE,  GE,  HE, 
let  EK  be  made  equal  to  CF,  EL  equal  to  FN,  and  further,  EM  equal  to  FR , 
and  let  the  parallelogram  KL  and  the  solid  KP  be  completed. 

Now,  since  the  two  sides  KE,  EL  are  equal  to  the  two  sides  CF,  FN, 
while  the  angle  KEL  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  CFN,  inasmuch  as  the  angle 
AEG  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  CFN  because  of  the  similarity  of  the  solids  AB, 
CD, 

therefore  the  parallelogram  KL  is  equal  <and  similar >  to  the  parallelogram 
CNi 

For  the  same  reason 

the  parallelogram  KM  is  also  equal  and  similar  to  CR, 
and  further,  EP  to  DF; 

therefore  three  parallelograms  of  the  solid  KP  are  equal  and  similar  to  three 
parallelograms  of  the  solid  CD. 


ELEMENTS  XI  329 

But  the  former  three  parallelograms  are  equal  and  similar  to  their  opposites, 
and  the  latter  three  to  their  opposites;  [xi.  24] 

therefore  the  whole  solid  KP  is  equal  and  similar  to  the  whole  solid  CD. 

[xi.  Def.  10] 

Let  the  parallelogram  GK  be  completed, 
and  on  the  parallelograms  GK,  KL  as  bases,  and  with  the  same  height  as  that 
of  AB,  let  the  solids  EO,  LQ  be  completed. 

Then  since  owing  to  the  similarity  of  the  solids  AB,  CD, 

as  AE  is  to  CF,  so  is  EG  to  FN,  and  EH  to  FR, 
while  CF  is  equal  to  EK,  FN  to  EL,  and  FR  to  EM, 
therefore,  as  AE  is  to  EK,  so  is  GE  to  EL,  and  HE  to  EM. 

But,  as  A E  is  to  EK,  so  is  AG  to  the  parallelogram  GK, 
as  GE  is  to  EL,  so  is  GK  to  KL, 
and,  as  HE  is  to  EM,  so  is  QE  to  KM;  [vi.  1] 

therefore  also,  as  the  parallelogram  AG  is  to  GK,  so  is  GK  to  KL,  and  QE  to 
KM. 

But,  as  AG  is  to  GK,  so  is  the  solid  AB  to  the  solid  EO, 

as  GK  is  to  KL,  so  is  the  solid  OE  to  the  solid  QL, 
and,  as  QE  is  to  KM,  so  is  the  solid  QL  to  the  solid  KP;  [xi.  32] 
therefore  also,  as  the  solid  AB  is  to  EO,  so  is  EO  to  QL,  and  QL  to  KP. 

But,  if  four  magnitudes  be  continuously  proportional,  the  first  has  to  the 
fourth  the  ratio  triplicate  of  that  which  it  has  to  the  second;  [v.  Def.  10] 
therefore  the  solid  AB  has  to  KP  the  ratio  triplicate  of  that  which  AB  has  to 
EO. 

But,  as  A B  is  to  EO,  so  is  the  parallelogram  AG  to  GK,  and  the  straight  line 
AE  to  EK  [vi.  1]; 

hence  the  solid  AB  has  also  to  KP  the  ratio  triplicate  of  that  which  AE  has  to 
EK. 

But  the  solid  KP  is  equal  to  the  solid  CD, 

and  the  straight  line  EK  to  CF; 

therefore  the  solid  AB  has  also  to  the  solid  CD  the  ratio  triplicate  of  that  which 
the  corresponding  side  of  it,  AE,  has  to  the  corresponding  side  CF. 

Therefore  etc.  Q.  e.  d. 

Porism.  From  this  it  is  manifest  that,  if  four  straight  lines  be  Ccontinuous- 
ly>  proportional,  as  the  first  is  to  the  fourth,  so  will  a  parallelepipedal  solid  on 
the  first  be  to  the  similar  and  similarly  described  parallelepipedal  solid  on  the 
second,  inasmuch  as  the  first  has  to  the  fourth  the  ratio  triplicate  of  that  which 
it  has  to  the  second. 

Proposition  34 

In  equal  parallelepipedal  solids  the  bases  are  reciprocally  proportional  to  the 
heights;  and  those  parallelepipedal  solids  in  which  the  bases  are  reciprocally  pro¬ 
portional  to  the  heights  are  equal. 

Let  AB,  CD  be  equal  parallelepipedal  solids; 

I  say  that  in  the  parallelepipedal  solids  AB,  CD  the  bases  are  reciprocally 
proportional  to  the  heights, 

that  is,  as  the  base  EH  is  to  the  base  NQ,  so  is  the  height  of  the  solid  CD  to  the 
height  of  the  solid  AB. 

First,  let  the  sides  which  stand  up,  namely  AG,  EF,  LB,  II K,  CM,  NO,  PD, 


330  EUCLID 

QR ,  be  at  right  angles  to  their  bases; 

I  say  that,  as  the  base  EH  is  to  the  base  NQ,  so  is  CM  to  AG. 

If  now  the  base  EH  is  equal  to  the  base  NQ, 

while  the  solid  AB  is  also  equal  to  the  solid  CD, 

CM  will  also  be  equal  to  AG. 

For  parallelepipedal  solids  of  the  same  height  are  to  one  another  as  the 
bases;  [xi.  32] 

and,  as  the  base  EH  is  to  NQ,  so  will  CM  be  to  AG, 
and  it  is  manifest  that  in  the  parallelepipedal  solids  AB,  CD  the  bases  are  re¬ 
ciprocally  proportional  to  the  heights. 

Next,  let  the  base  EH  not  be  equal  to  the  base  NQ, 

but  let  EH  be  greater. 

R  D 


C  N 


Now  the  solid  AB  is  equal  to  the  solid  CD; 

therefore  CM  is  also  greater  than  AG. 

Let  then  CT  be  made  equal  to  AG, 

and  let  the  parallelepipedal  solid  VC  be  completed  on  NQ  as  base  and  with  CT 
as  height. 

Now,  since  the  solid  AB  is  equal  to  the  solid  CD, 
and  CV  is  outside  them, 

while  equals  have  to  the  same  the  same  ratio,  [v.  7] 

therefore,  as  the  solid  AB  is  to  the  solid  CV,  so  is  the  solid  CD  to  the  solid  CV. 

But,  as  the  solid  AB  is  to  the  solid  CV,  so  is  the  base  EH  to  the  base  NQ, 
for  the  solids  AB,  CV  are  of  equal  height;  [xi.  32] 

and,  as  the  solid  CD  is  to  the  solid  CV,  so  is  the  base  MQ  to  the  base  TQ 
[xi.  25]  and  CM  to  CT  [vi.  1]; 

therefore  also,  as  the  base  EH  is  to  the  base  NQ,  so  is  MC  to  CT. 

But  CT  is  equal  to  AG; 

therefore  also,  as  the  base  EH  is  to  the  base  NQ,  so  is  MC  to  AG. 

Therefore  in  the  parallelepipedal  solids  AB,  CD  the  bases  are  reciprocally 
proportional  to  the  heights. 

Again,  in  the  parallelepipedal  solids  AB,  CD  let  the  bases  be  reciprocally 
proportional  to  the  heights,  that  is,  as  the  base  EH  is  to  the  base  NQ,  so  let  the 
height  of  the  solid  CD  be  to  the  height  of  the  solid  AB; 

I  say  that  the  solid  AB  is  equal  to  the  solid  CD. 

Let  the  sides  which  stand  up  be  again  at  right  angles  to  the  bases. 

Now,  if  the  base  EH  is  equal  to  the  base  NQ, 


ELEMENTS  XI  331 

and,  as  the  base  EH  is  to  the  base  NQ,  so  is  the  height  of  the  solid  CD  to  the 
height  of  the  solid  AB , 

therefore  the  height  of  the  solid  CD  is  also  equal  to  the  height  of  the  solid  AB. 

But  parallelepipedal  solids  on  equal  bases  and  of  the  same  height  are  equal 
to  one  another;  [xi.  31] 

therefore  the  solid  AB  is  equal  to  the  solid  CD. 

Next,  let  the  base  EH  not  be  equal  to  the  base  NQ, 

but  let  EH  be  greater; 

therefore  the  height  of  the  solid  CD  is  also  greater  than  the  height  of  the  solid 
AB , 

that  is,  CM  is  greater  than  AG. 

Let  CT  be  again  made  equal  to  AG , 

and  let  the  solid  CV  be  similarly  completed. 

Since,  as  the  base  EH  is  to  the  base  ArQ,  so  is  MC  to  AG, 
while  AG  is  equal  to  CT, 

therefore,  as  the  base  EH  is  to  the  base  NQ,  so  is  CM  to  CT. 

But,  as  the  base  EH  is  to  the  base  NQ,  so  is  the  solid  AB  to  the  solid  CV, 
for  the  solids  AB,  CV  are  of  equal  height;  [xi.  32] 

and,  as  CM  is  to  CT,  so  is  the  base  MQ  to  the  base  QT  [vi.  1] 
and  the  solid  CD  to  the  solid  CV.  [xi.  25] 

Therefore  also,  as  the  solid  AB  is  to  the  solid  CV,  so  is  the  solid  CD  to  the 
solid  CV; 

therefore  each  of  the  solids  AB,  CD  has  to  CV  the  same  ratio. 
Therefore  the  solid  AB  is  equal  to  the  solid  CD.  [v.  9] 

Now  let  the  sides  which  stand  up,  FE,  BL,  GA,  HK,  ON,  DP,  MC,  RQ,  not 
be  at  right  angles  to  their  bases; 

let  perpendiculars  be  drawn  from  the  points  F,  G,  B,  K,  0,  M,  D,  R  to  the 

planes  through  EH,  NQ, 

and  let  them  meet  the  planes  at  S,  T,  U,  V,  W,  X,  Y,  a, 
and  let  the  solids  FV,  Oa  be  completed; 

I  say  that,  in  this  case  too,  if  the  solids  AB,  CD  are  equal,  the  bases  are  re¬ 
ciprocally  proportional  to  the  heights,  that  is,  as  the  base  EH  is  to  the  base 
NQ,  so  is  the  height  of  the  solid  CD  to  the  height  of  the  solid  AB. 

Since  the  solid  AB  is  equal  to  the  solid  CD, 


while  AB  is  equal  to  BT, 

for  they  are  on  the  same  base  FK  and  of  the  same  height; 


[xi.  29,  30] 


332 


EUCLID 


and  the  solid  CD  is  equal  to  DX , 

for  they  are  again  on  the  same  base  RO  and  of  the  same  height;  [id.] 
therefore  the  solid  BT  is  also  equal  to  the  solid  DX. 

Therefore,  as  the  base  FK  is  to  the  base  OR,  so  is  the  height  of  the  solid  DX 
to  the  height  of  the  solid  BT.  [Part  i.] 

But  the  base  FK  is  equal  to  the  base  EH, 

and  the  base  OR  to  the  base  NQ ; 

therefore,  as  the  base  EH  is  to  the  base  NQ,  so  is  the  height  of  the  solid  DX  to 
the  height  of  the  solid  BT. 

But  the  solids  DX,  BT  and  the  solids  DC,  BA  have  the  same  heights  respec¬ 
tively; 

therefore,  as  the  base  EH  is  to  the  base  ATQ,  so  is  the  height  of  the  solid  DC  to 
the  height  of  the  solid  AB. 

Therefore  in  the  parallelepipedal  solids  AB,  CD  the  bases  are  reciprocally 
proportional  to  the  heights. 

Again,  in  the  parallelepipedal  solids  AB,  CD  let  the  bases  be  reciprocally 
proportional  to  the  heights, 

that  is,  as  the  base  EH  is  to  the  base  NQ,  so  let  the  height  of  the  solid  CD  be  to 
the  height  of  the  solid  AB; 

I  say  that  the  solid  AB  is  equal  to  the  solid  CD. 

For,  with  the  same  construction, 

since,  as  the  base  EH  is  to  the  base  NQ,  so  is  the  height  of  the  solid  CD  to  the 
height  of  the  solid  AB, 

while  the  base  EH  is  equal  to  the  base  FK, 
and  NQ  to  OR, 

therefore,  as  the  base  FK  is  to  the  base  OR,  so  is  the  height  of  the  solid  CD  to 
the  height  of  the  solid  AB. 

But  the  solids  AB,  CD  and  BT,  DX  have  the  same  heights  respectively; 
therefore,  as  the  base  FK  is  to  the  base  OR,  so  is  the  height  of  the  solid  DX  to 
the  height  of  the  solid  BT. 

Therefore  in  the  parallelepipedal  solids  BT,  DX  the  bases  are  reciprocally 
proportional  to  the  heights; 

therefore  the  solid  BT  is  equal  to  the  solid  DX.  [Part  i.] 

But  BT  is  equal  to  BA, 

for  they  are  on  the  same  base  FK  and  of  the  same  height;  [xi.  29,  30] 

and  the  solid  DX  is  equal  to  the  solid  DC.  [id.] 

Therefore  the  solid  AB  is  also  equal  to  the  solid  CD.  q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  35 

If  there  be  two  equal  plane  angles,  and  on  their  vertices  there  be  set  up  elevated 
straight  lines  containing  equal  angles  with  the  original  straight  lines  respectively, 
if  on  the  elevated  straight  lines  points  be  taken  at  random  and  perpendiculars  be 
drawn  from  them  to  the  planes  in  which  the  original  angles  are,  and  if  from  the 
points  so  arising  in  the  planes  straight  lines  be  joined  to  the  vertices  of  the  original 
angles ,  they  will  contain,  with  the  elevated  straight  lines ,  equal  angles. 

Let  the  angles  BAC,  EDF  be  two  equal  rectilineal  angles,  and  from  the 
points  A,  D  let  the  elevated  straight  lines  AG,  DM  be  set  up  containing,  with 
the  original  straight  lines,  equal  angles  respectively,  namely,  the  angle  MDE 
to  the  angle  GAB  and  the  angle  MDF  to  the  angle  GAC, 


333 


ELEMENTS  XI 


let  points  G ,  M  be  taken  at  random  on  AG)  DM, 
let  GL,  MN  be  drawn  from  the  points  G,  M  perpendicular  to  the  planes  through 
BA,  AC  and  ED,  DF,  and  let  them  meet  the  planes  at  L,  N, 

and  let  LA,  ND  be  joined; 

I  say  that  the  angle  GAL  is  equal  to  the  angle  MDN . 

Let  AH  be  made  equal 
to  DM, 

and  let  HK  be  drawn 
through  the  point  H  paral¬ 
lel  to  GL. 

But  GL  is  perpendicular 
to  the  plane  through  BA, 
AC; 

therefore  HK  is  also  per¬ 
pendicular  to  the  plane 
through  BA,  AC.  [xi.  8] 
From  the  points  K,  N  let  KC,  NF,  KB,  NE  be  drawn  perpendicular  to  the 
straight  lines  AC,  DF,  AB,  DE, 

and  let  HC,  CB,  MF,  FE  be  joined. 

Since  the  square  on  HA  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  HK,  KA, 

and  the  squares  on  KC,  CA  are  equal  to  the  square  on  KA,  [i.  47] 
therefore  the  square  on  HA  is  also  equal  to  the  squares  on  HK,  KC,  CA. 

But  the  square  on  HC  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  HK,  KC;  [i.  47] 

therefore  the  square  on  HA  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  HC,  CA. 
Therefore  the  angle  HCA  is  right.  [i.  48] 

For  the  same  reason 


the  angle  DFM  is  also  right. 

Therefore  the  angle  ACH  is  equal  to  the  angle  DFM. 

But  the  angle  HAC  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  MDF. 

Therefore  MDF,  HAC  are  two  triangles  which  have  two  angles  equal  to  two 
angles  respectively,  and  one  side  equal  to  one  side,  namely,  that  subtending 
one  of  the  equal  angles,  that  is,  HA  equal  to  MD; 

therefore  they  will  also  have  the  remaining  sides  equal  to  the  remaining  sides 
respectively.  [i.  26] 

Therefore  AC  is  equal  to  DF. 

Similarly  we  can  prove  that  AB  is  also  equal  to  DE. 

Since  then  AC  is  equal  to  DF,  and  AB  to  DE, 

the  two  sides  CA,  AB  are  equal  to  the  two  sides  FD,  DE. 

But  the  angle  CAB  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  FDE; 
therefore  the  base  BC  is  equal  to  the  base  EF,  the  triangle  to  the  triangle,  and 
the  remaining  angles  to  the  remaining  angles;  [i.  4] 

therefore  the  angle  ACB  is  equal  to  the  angle  DFE. 

But  the  right  angle  ACK  is  also  equal  to  the  right  angle  DFAT; 
therefore  the  remaining  angle  BCK  is  also  equal  to  the  remaining  angle  EFN . 

For  the  same  reason 

the  angle  CBK  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  FEN. 

Therefore  BCK,  EFN  are  two  triangles  which  have  two  angles  equal  to  two 
angles  respectively,  and  one  side  equal  to  one  side,  namely,  that  adjacent  to 
the  equal  angles,  that  is,  BC  equal  to  EF; 


334  EUCLID 

therefore  they  will  also  have  the  remaining  sides  equal  to  the  remaining  sides. 

[i.  26] 

Therefore  CK  is  equal  to  FN. 

But  AC  is  also  equal  to  DF ; 

therefore  the  two  sides  AC,  CK  are  equal  to  the  two  sides  DF,  FN; 
and  they  contain  right  angles. 

Therefore  the  base  AK  is  equal  to  the  base  DN .  [i.  4] 

And,  since  AH  is  equal  to  DM, 

the  square  on  AH  is  also  equal  to  the  square  on  DM. 

But  the  squares  on  AK,  KH  are  equal  to  the  square  on  AH, 

for  the  angle  AKH  is  right;  [i.  47] 

and  the  squares  on  DN,  NM  are  equal  to  the  square  on  DM, 

for  the  angle  DNM  is  right;  [i.  47] 

therefore  the  squares  on  AK,  KH  are  equal  to  the  squares  on  DN,  NM; 

and  of  these  the  square  on  AK  is  equal  to  the  square  on  DN ; 
therefore  the  remaining  square  on  KH  is  equal  to  the  square  on  NM; 
therefore  HK  is  equal  to  MN. 

And,  since  the  two  sides  HA,  AK  are  equal  to  the  two  sides  MD,  DN  re¬ 
spectively, 

and  the  base  HK  was  proved  equal  to  the  base  MN, 
therefore  the  angle  HAK  is  equal  to  the  angle  MDN.  [i.  8] 

Therefore  etc. 

Porism.  From  this  it  is  manifest  that,  if  there  be  two  equal  plane  angles,  and 
if  there  be  set  up  on  them  elevated  straight  lines  which  are  equal  and  contain 
equal  angles  with  the  original  straight  lines  respectively,  the  perpendiculars 
drawn  from  their  extremities  to  the  planes  in  which  are  the  original  angles  are 
equal  to  one  another.  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  36 

If  three  straight  lines  be  proportional ,  the  parallelepipedal  solid  formed  out  of  the 
three  is  equal  to  the  parallelepipedal  solid  on  the  mean  which  is  equilateral,  but 
equiangular  with  the  aforesaid  solid. 

Let  A,  B,  C  be  three  straight  lines  in  proportion,  so  that,  as  A  is  to  B,  so  is  B 
to  C; 


B 


C - 

I  say  that  the  solid  formed  out  of  A,  B,  C  is  equal  to  the  solid  on  B  which 
is  equilateral,  but  equiangular  with  the  aforesaid  solid. 


ELEMENTS  XI  335 

Let  there  be  set  out  the  solid  angle  at  E  contained  by  the  angles  DEG ,  GEF, 
FED , 

let  each  of  the  straight  lines  DE,  GE ,  EF  be  made  equal  to  B,  and  let  the  par- 
allelepipedal  solid  EK  be  completed, 

let  LM  be  made  equal  to  A, 

and  on  the  straight  line  LM,  and  at  the  point  L  on  it,  let  there  be  constructed  a 
solid  angle  equal  to  the  solid  angle  at  E,  namely  that  contained  by  NLO ,  OLM , 
MLN; 

let  LO  be  made  equal  to  B ,  and  LN  equal  to  C. 

Now,  since,  as  A  is  to  B ,  so  is  B  to  C, 

while  A  is  equal  to  LM,  B  to  each  of  the  straight  lines  LO,  ED,  and  C  to  LN, 
therefore,  as  LM  is  to  EF,  so  is  DE  to  LN. 

Thus  the  sides  about  the  equal  angles  NLM,  DEF  are  reciprocally  propor¬ 
tional; 

therefore  the  parallelogram  MN  is  equal  to  the  parallelogram  DF.  [vi.  14] 
And,  since  the  angles  DEF,  NLM  are  two  plane  rectilineal  angles,  and  on 
them  the  elevated  straight  lines  LO,  EG  are  set  up  which  are  equal  to  one  an¬ 
other  and  contain  equal  angles  with  the  original  straight  lines  respectively, 
therefore  the  perpendiculars  drawn  from  the  points  G,  0  to  the  planes  through 
NL,  LM  and  DE,  EF  are  equal  to  one  another;  [xi.  35,  Por.] 

hence  the  solids  LH,  EK  are  of  the  same  height. 

But  parallelepipedal  solids  on  equal  bases  and  of  the  same  height  are  equal 
to  one  another;  [xi.  31] 

therefore  the  solid  HL  is  equal  to  the  solid  EK. 

And  LH  is  the  solid  formed  out  of  A,  B,  C,  and  EK  the  solid  on  B; 
therefore  the  parallelepipedal  solid  formed  out  of  A,  B,  C  is  equal  to  the  solid 
on  B  which  is  equilateral,  but  equiangular  with  the  aforesaid  solid. 

Q.  E.  D. 


Proposition  37 

If  four  straight  lines  he  proportional ,  the  parallelepipedal  solids  on  them  which  are 
similar  and  similarly  described  will  also  be  proportional;  and,  if  the  parallelepipe¬ 
dal  solids  on  them  which  are  similar  and  similarly  described  be  proportional ,  the 
straight  lines  will  themselves  also  be  proportional. 

Let  AB,  CD,  EF,  GH  be  four  straight  lines  in  proportion,  so  that,  as  A B  is 
to  CD,  so  is  EF  to  GH; 

and  let  there  be  described  on  AB,  CD,  EF,  GH  the  similar  and  similarly  situ- 


f\ 


K 

A 


A  B 


L 


\ 

K 

\ 

\ 

C  D 


N 


ated  parallelepipedal  solids  KA,  LC,  ME,  NG; 

I  say  that,  as  KA  is  to  LC,  so  is  ME  to  NG. 


336  EUCLID 

For,  since  the  parallelepipedal  solid  KA  is  similar  to  LC , 
therefore  KA  has  to  LC  the  ratio  triplicate  of  that  which  AB  has  to  CD. 

[xi.  33] 

For  the  same  reason 

ME  also  has  to  NG  the  ratio  triplicate  of  that  which  EF  has  to  GH.  [id.] 
And,  as  AB  is  to  CD,  so  is  EF  to  GH. 

Therefore  also,  as  AK  is  to  LC,  so  is  ME  to  NG. 

Next,  as  the  solid  AK  is  to  the  solid  LC,  so  let  the  solid  ME  be  to  the  solid 
NG; 

I  say  that,  as  the  straight  line  AB  is  to  CD,  so  is  EF  to  GH . 

For  since,  again,  KA  has  to  LC  the  ratio  triplicate  of  that  which  AB  has  to 
CD,  [xi.  33] 

and  ME  also  has  to  NG  the  ratio  triplicate  of  that  which  EF  has  to  GH,  [id] 
and,  as  KA  is  to  LC,  so  is  ME  to  NG, 
therefore  also,  as  AB  is  to  CD,  so  is  EF  to  GH. 

Therefore  etc.  Q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  38 

If  the  sides  of  the  opposite  planes  of  a  cube  be  bisected,  and  planes  be  carried  through 
the  points  of  section,  the  common  section  of  the  planes  and  the  diameter  of  the  cube 
bisect  one  another. 

For  let  the  sides  of  the  opposite  planes  CF,  AH  of  the  cube  AF  be  bisected 
at  the  points  K,  L,  M,  N,  0,  Q,  P,  R,  and  through  the  points  of  section  let  the 
planes  KN,  OR  be  carried; 

let  US  be  the  common  section  of  the  planes,  and  DG  the  diameter  of  the  cube 
AF. 

I  say  that  UT  is  equal  to  TS,  and  DT  to  TG. 

For  let  DU,  UE,  BS,  SG  be  joined. 

Then,  since  DO  is  parallel  to  PE, 

the  alternate  angles  DOU,  UPE  are  equal  to  one  another.  [i.  29] 
And,  since  DO  is  equal  to  PE,  and 
OU  to  UP, 

and  they  contain  equal  angles, 
therefore  the  base  DU  is  equal  to  the 
base  UE, 

the  triangle  DOU  is  equal  to  the  tri¬ 
angle  PUE, 

and  the  remaining  angles  are  equal  to 
the  remaining  angles;  [i.  4] 
therefore  the  angle  OUD  is  equal  to 
the  angle  PUE. 

For  this  reason  DUE  is  a  straight 
line.  [i.  14] 

For  the  same  reason,  BSG  is  also  a 
straight  line, 

and  BS  is  equal  to  SG. 

Now,  since  CA  is  equal  and  paral¬ 
lel  to  DB, 

-while  CA  is  also  equal  and  parallel  to  EG, 


ELEMENTS  XI  337 

therefore  DB  is  also  equal  and  parallel  to  EG.  [xi.  9] 

And  the  straight  lines  DE ,  BG  join  their  extremities; 

therefore  DE  is  parallel  to  BG.  [i.  33] 

Therefore  the  angle  EDT  is  equal  to  the  angle  BGT , 

for  they  are  alternate;  [i.  29] 

and  the  angle  DTU  is  equal  to  the  angle  GTS.  [i.  15] 


Therefore  DTU ,  GTS  are  two  triangles  which  have  two  angles  equal  to  two 
angles,  and  one  side  equal  to  one  side,  namely  that  subtending  one  of  the  equal 
angles,  that  is,  DU  equal  to  GS, 

for  they  are  the  halves  of  DE ,  BG; 

therefore  they  will  also  have  the  remaining  sides  equal  to  the  remaining  sides. 

[i.  26] 

Therefore  DT  is  equal  to  TG,  and  UT  to  TS. 

Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  39 

If  there  he  two  prisms  of  equal  height ,  and  one  have  a  parallelogram  as  base  and  the 
other  a  triangle ,  and  if  the  parallelogram  he  double  of  the  triangle ,  the  prisms  will 
be  equal. 

Let  ABCDEF ,  GHKLMN  be  two  prisms  of  equal  height, 
let  one  have  the  parallelogram  AF  as  base,  and  the  other  the  triangle  GHK, 
and  let  the  parallelogram  AF  be  double  of  the  triangle  GHK ; 

I  say  that  the  prism  ABCDEF  is  equal  to  the  prism  GHKLMN . 


For  let  the  solids  AO,  GP  be  completed. 

Since  the  parallelogram  AF  is  double  of  the  triangle  GHK, 
while  the  parallelogram  HK  is  also  double  of  the  triangle  GHK,  [i.  34] 

therefore  the  parallelogram  AF  is  equal  to  the  parallelogram  IIK. 

But  parallelepipedal  solids  which  are  on  equal  bases  and  of  the  same  height 
are  equal  to  one  another;  [xi.  31] 

therefore  the  solid  AO  is  equal  to  the  solid  GP. 

And  the  prism  ABCDEF  is  half  of  the  solid  AO, 

and  the  prism  GHKLMN  is  half  of  the  solid  GP;  [xi.  28] 
therefore  the  prism  ABCDEF  is  equal  to  the  prism  GHKLMN . 
Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 


BOOK  TWELVE 


PROPOSITIONS 
Proposition  1 

Similar  polygons  inscribed  in  circles  are  to  one  another  as  the  squares  on  the  dia¬ 
meters . 

Let  ABC ,  FGH  be  circles, 

let  ABODE ,  FGHKL  be  similar  polygons  inscribed  in  them,  and  let  BM ,  GN 
be  diameters  of  the  circles; 

I  say  that,  as  the  square  on  BM  is  to  the  square  on  GN ,  so  is  the  polygon 
ABODE  to  the  polygon  FGHKL. 

For  let  BE,  AM,  GL,  FN  be  joined. 

Now,  since  the  polygon  ABODE  is  similar  to  the  polygon  FGHKL, 


the  angle  BAE  is  equal  to  the  angle  GFL, 
and,  as  BA  is  to  AE,  so  is  GF  to  FL.  [vi.  Def.  1] 

Thus  BAE,  GFL  are  two  triangles  which  have  one  angle  equal  to  one  angle, 
namely  the  angle  BAE  to  the  angle  GFL,  and  the  sides  about  the  equal  angles 
proportional; 

therefore  the  triangle  ABE  is  equiangular  with  the  triangle  FGL .  [vi.  6] 

Therefore  the  angle  AEB  is  equal  to  the  angle  FLG. 

But  the  angle  AEB  is  equal  to  the  angle  AMB, 

for  they  stand  on  the  same  circumference;  [hi.  27] 

and  the  angle  FLG  to  the  angle  FNG; 
therefore  the  angle  AMB  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  FNG. 

But  the  right  angle  BAM  is  also  equal  to  the  right  angle  GFN;  [in.  31] 
therefore  the  remaining  angle  is  equal  to  the  remaining  angle,  [i.  32] 
Therefore  the  triangle  ABM  is  equiangular  with  the  triangle  FGN. 
Therefore,  proportionally,  as  BM  is  to  GN,  so  is  BA  to  GF . 

338 


[vi.  4] 


ELEMENTS  XII  339 

But  the  ratio  of  the  square  on  BM  to  the  square  on  GN  is  duplicate  of  the 
ratio  of  BM  to  GN, 

and  the  ratio  of  the  polygon  ABODE  to  the  polygon  FGHKL  is  duplicate  of 
the  ratio  of  BA  to  GF;  [yi.  20] 

therefore  also,  as  the  square  on  BM  is  to  the  square  on  GN,  so  is  the  polygon 
ABODE  to  the  polygon  FGHKL. 

Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  2 

Circles  are  to  one  another  as  the  squares  on  the  diameters. 

Let  ABCD,  EFGH  be  circles,  and  BD,  FH  their  diameters; 

I  say  that,  as  the  circle  ABCD  is  to  the  circle  EFGH,  so  is  the  square  on  BD 
to  the  square  on  FH. 


A 


For,  if  the  square  on  BD  is  not  to  the  square  on  FH  as  the  circle  ABCD  is  to 
the  circle  EFGH, 

then,  as  the  square  on  BD  is  to  the  square  on  FH,  so  will  the  circle  ABCD  be 
either  to  some  less  area  than  the  circle  EFGH,  or  to  a  greater. 

First,  let  it  be  in  that  ratio  to  a  less  area  S. 

Let  the  square  EFGH  be  inscribed  in  the  circle  EFGH ;  then  the  inscribed 
square  is  greater  than  the  half  of  the  circle  EFGH,  inasmuch  as,  if  through  the 
points  E,  F,  G,  H  we  draw  tangents  to  the  circle,  the  square  EFGH  is  half  the 
square  circumscribed  about  the  circle,  and  the  circle  is  less  than  the  circum¬ 
scribed  square; 

hence  the  inscribed  square  EFGH  is  greater  than  the  half  of  the  circle  EFGH. 
Let  the  circumferences  EF,  FG ,  GH,  HE  be  bisected  at  the  points  K,  L ,  M, 

Ar, 

and  let  EK,  KF,  FL ,  LG,  GM,  MH,  HN,  NE  be  joined; 
therefore  each  of  the  triangles  EKF,  FLG,  GMH,  HNE  is  also  greater  than 
the  half  of  the  segment  of  the  circle  about  it,  inasmuch  as,  if  through  the 
points  K,  L,  M,  N  we  draw  tangents  to  the  circle  and  complete  the  parallelo¬ 
grams  on  the  straight  lines  EF,  FG,  GII,  HE,  each  of  the  triangles  EKF,  FLG, 
GMH,  HNE  will  be  half  of  the  parallelogram  about  it, 

while  the  segment  about  it  is  less  than  the  parallelogram; 
hence  each  of  the  triangles  EKF,  FLG,  GMH,  LINE  is  greater  than  the  half  of 
the  segment  of  the  circle  about  it. 

Thus,  by  bisecting  the  remaining  circumferences  and  joining  straight  lines, 


340  EUCLID 

and  by  doing  this  continually,  we  shall  leave  some  segments  of  the  circle  which 
will  be  less  than  the  excess  by  which  the  circle  EFGH  exceeds  the  area  S. 

For  it  was  proved  in  the  first  theorem  of  the  tenth  book  that,  if  two  unequal 
magnitudes  be  set  out,  and  if  from  the  greater  there  be  subtracted  a  magnitude 
greater  than  the  half,  and  from  that  which  is  left  a  greater  than  the  half,  and  if 
this  be  done  continually,  there  will  be  left  some  magnitude  which  will  be  less 
than  the  lesser  magnitude  set  out. 

Let  segments  be  left  such  as  described,  and  let  the  segments  of  the  circle 
EFGH  on  EK ,  KF ,  FL ,  LG,  GM ,  MH,  HN ,  NE  be  less  than  the  excess  by 
which  the  circle  EFGH  exceeds  the  area  S. 

Therefore  the  remainder,  the  polygon  EKFLGMHN ,  is  greater  than  the 
area  S. 

Let  there  be  inscribed,  also,  in  the  circle  ABCD  the  polygon  AOBPCQDR 
similar  to  the  polygon  EKFLGMHN ; 

therefore,  as  the  square  on  BD  is  to  the  square  on  FH,  so  is  the  polygon 
AOBPCQDR  to  the  polygon  EKFLGMHN .  [xii.  1] 

But,  as  the  square  on  BD  is  to  the  square  on  FH,  so  also  is  the  circle  ABCD 
to  the  area  S; 

therefore  also,  as  the  circle  ABCD  is  to  the  area  S,  so  is  the  polygon  AOBPCQDR 
to  the  polygon  EKFLGMHN;  [v.  11] 

therefore,  alternately,  as  the  circle  ABCD  is  to  the  polygon  inscribed  in  it,  so 
is  the  area  S  to  the  polygon  EKFLGMHN .  [v.  16] 

But  the  circle  ABCD  is  greater  than  the  polygon  inscribed  in  it; 

therefore  the  area  S  is  also  greater  than  the  polygon  EKFLGMHN . 

But  it  is  also  less: 

which  is  impossible. 

Therefore,  as  the  square  on  BD  is  to  the  square  on  FH,  so  is  not  the  circle 
ABCD  to  any  area  less  than  the  circle  EFGH. 

Similarly  we  can  prove  that  neither  is  the  circle  EFGH  to  any  area  less  than 
the  circle  ABCD  as  the  square  on  FH  is  to  the  square  on  BD. 

I  say  next  that  neither  is  the  circle  ABCD  to  any  area  greater  than  the  circle 
EFGH  as  the  square  on  BD  is  to  the  square  on  FH. 

For,  if  possible,  let  it  be  in  that  ratio  to  a  greater  area  S. 

Therefore,  inversely,  as  the  square  on  FH  is  to  the  square  on  DB,  so  is  the 
area  S  to  the  circle  ABCD. 

But,  as  the  area  S  is  to  the  circle  ABCD,  so  is  the  circle  EFGH  to  some  area 
less  than  the  circle  ABCD; 

therefore  also,  as  the  square  on  FH  is  to  the  square  on  BD,  so  is  the  circle 
EFGH  to  some  area  less  than  the  circle  ABCD :  [v.  11] 

which  was  proved  impossible. 

Therefore,  as  the  square  on  BD  is  to  the  square  on  FH,  so  is  not  the  circle 
ABCD  to  any  area  greater  than  the  circle  EFGH. 

And  it  was  proved  that  neither  is  it  in  that  ratio  to  any  area  less  than  the 
circle  EFGH ; 

therefore,  as  the  square  on  BD  is  to  the  square  on  FH,  so  is  the  circle  ABCD  to 
the  circle  EFGH . 

Therefore  etc. 


Q.  E.  D. 


ELEMENTS  XII 


341 


Lemma 

I  say  that,  the  area  S  being  greater  than  the  circle  EFGH ,  as  the  area  S  is  to 
the  circle  A  BCD ,  so  is  the  circle  EFGH  to  some  area  less  than  the  circle  A  BCD. 

For  let  it  be  contrived  that,  as  the  area  S  is  to  the  circle  ABCD ,  so  is  the 
circle  EFGH  to  the  area  T. 

I  say  that  the  area  T  is  less  than  the  circle  ABCD. 

For  since,  as  the  area  S  is  to  the  circle  ABCD ,  so  is  the  circle  EFGH  to  the 
area  T, 

therefore,  alternately,  as  the  area  S  is  to  the  circle  EFGH ,  so  is  the  circle  ABCD 
to  the  area  T.  [v.  16] 

But  the  area  £  is  greater  than  the  circle  EFGH ; 

therefore  the  circle  ABCD  is  also  greater  than  the  area  T. 

Hence,  as  the  area  S  is  to  the  circle  ABCD ,  so  is  the  circle  EFGH  to  some 
area  less  than  the  circle  ABCD.  q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  3 

Any  pyramid  which  has  a  triangular  base  is  divided  into  two  pyramids  equal  and 
similar  to  one  another ,  similar  to  the  whole  and  having  triangular  bases ,  and  into 
two  equal  prisms;  and  the  two  prisms  are  greater  than  the  half  of  the  whole  pyramid. 

Let  there  be  a  pyramid  of  which  the  triangle  ABC  is  the  base  and  the  point 
D  the  vertex; 

I  say  that  the  pyramid  ABCD  is  divided  into 
two  pyramids  equal  to  one  another,  having  tri¬ 
angular  bases  and  similar  to  the  whole  pyramid, 
and  into  two  equal  prisms;  and  the  two  prisms 
are  greater  than  the  half  of  the  whole  pyramid. 

For  let  AB,  BC,  CA ,  AD,  DB,  DC  be  bisected 
at  the  points  E,  F ,  G,  H,  K ,  L,  and  let  HE,  EG, 

GH,  HK,  KL,  LH,  KF,  FG  be  joined. 

Since  AE  is  equal  to  EB,  and  AH  to  DH, 

therefore  EH  is  parallel  to  DB.  [vi.  2] 

For  the  same  reason 

HK  is  also  parallel  to  AB. 

Therefore  HEBK  is  a  parallelogram; 

therefore  HK  is  equal  to  EB.  [i.  34] 

But  EB  is  equal  to  EA ; 

therefore  AE  is  also  equal  to  HK. 

But  AH  is  also  equal  to  HD ; 

therefore  the  two  sides  EA,  AH  are  equal  to  the  two  sides  KII,  HD  respec¬ 
tively, 

and  the  angle  EAH  is  equal  to  the  angle  KHD; 

therefore  the  base  EH  is  equal  to  the  base  KD.  [i.  4] 

Therefore  the  triangle  AEII  is  equal  and  similar  to  the  triangle  HKD. 

For  the  same  reason 

the  triangle  AIIG  is  also  equal  and  similar  to  the  triangle  II LD. 

Now,  since  two  straight  lines  EII,  IIG  meeting  one  another  are  parallel  to 
two  straight  lines  KD,  DL  meeting  one  another,  and  are  not  in  the  same  plane, 
they  will  contain  equal  angles.  [xi.  10] 


342  EUCLID 

Therefore  the  angle  EHG  is  equal  to  the  angle  KDL. 

And,  since  the  two  straight  lines  EH,  HG  are  equal  to  the  two  KD,  DL  re¬ 
spectively, 

and  the  angle  EHG  is  equal  to  the  angle  KDL , 
therefore  the  base  EG  is  equal  to  the  base  KL;  [i.  4] 

therefore  the  triangle  EHG  is  equal  and  similar  to  the  triangle  KDL . 

For  the  same  reason 

the  triangle  AEG  is  also  equal  and  similar  to  the  triangle  HKL. 

Therefore  the  pyramid  of  which  the  triangle  AEG  is  the  base  and  the  point 
H  the  vertex  is  equal  and  similar  to  the  pyramid  of  which  the  triangle  HKL  is 
the  base  and  the  point  D  the  vertex.  [xi.  Def.  10] 

And,  since  HK  has  been  drawn  parallel  to  AB,  one  of  the  sides  of  the  tri¬ 
angle  ADB, 

the  triangle  ADB  is  equiangular  to  the  triangle  DHK,  [i.  29] 
and  they  have  their  sides  proportional; 
therefore  the  triangle  ADB  is  similar  to  the  triangle  DHK.  [vi.  Def.  1] 

For  the  same  reason 

the  triangle  DBC  is  also  similar  to  the  triangle  DKL ,  and  the  triangle  ADC  to 
the  triangle  DLH. 

Now,  since  the  two  straight  lines  BA,  AC  meeting  one  another  are  parallel 
to  the  two  straight  lines  KH ,  HL  meeting  one  another,  not  in  the  same  plane, 
they  will  contain  equal  angles.  [xi.  10] 

Therefore  the  angle  BAC  is  equal  to  the  angle  KHL. 

And,  as  BA  is  to  AC,  so  is  KH  to  HL ; 

therefore  the  triangle  ABC  is  similar  to  the  triangle  HKL. 

Therefore  also  the  pyramid  of  which  the  triangle  ABC  is  the  base  and  the 
point  D  the  vertex  is  similar  to  the  pyramid  of  which  the  triangle  HKL  is  the 
base  and  the  point  D  the  vertex. 

But  the  pyramid  of  which  the  triangle  HKL  is  the  base  and  the  point  D  the 
vertex  was  proved  similar  to  the  pyramid  of  which  the  triangle  AEG  is  the 
base  and  the  point  H  the  vertex. 

Therefore  each  of  the  pyramids  AEGH,  HKLD  is  similar  to  the  whole  pyra¬ 
mid  ABCD. 

Next,  since  BF  is  equal  to  FC , 

the  parallelogram  EBFG  is  double  of  the  triangle  GFC. 

And  since,  if  there  be  two  prisms  of  equal  height,  and  one  have  a  parallelo¬ 
gram  as  base,  and  the  other  a  triangle,  and  if  the  parallelogram  be  double  of 
the  triangle,  the  prisms  are  equal,  [xi.  39] 

therefore  the  prism  contained  by  the  two  triangles  BKF,  EHG,  and  the  three 
parallelograms  EBFG,  EBKH,  HKFG  is  equal  to  the  prism  contained  by  the 
two  triangles  GFC,  HKL  and  the  three  parallelograms  KFCL ,  LCGH,  HKFG. 

And  it  is  manifest  that  each  of  the  prisms,  namely  that  in  which  the  paral¬ 
lelogram  EBFG  is  the  base  and  the  straight  line  HK  is  its  opposite,  and  that  in 
which  the  triangle  GFC  is  the  base  and  the  triangle  HKL  its  opposite,  is  great¬ 
er  than  each  of  the  pyramids  of  which  the  triangles  AEG ,  HKL  are  the  bases 
and  the  points  H,  D  the  vertices, 

inasmuch  as,  if  we  join  the  straight  lines  EF,  EK,  the  prism  in  which  the  paral¬ 
lelogram  EBFG  is  the  base  and  the  straight  line  HK  its  opposite  is  greater  than 
the  pyramid  of  which  the  triangle  EBF  is  the  base  and  the  point  K  the  vertex. 


ELEMENTS  XII  343 

But  the  pyramid  of  which  the  triangle  EBF  is  the  base  and  the  point  K  the 
vertex  is  equal  to  the  pyramid  of  which  the  triangle  AEG  is  the  base  and  the 
point  H  the  vertex; 

for  they  are  contained  by  equal  and  similar  planes. 

Hence  also  the  prism  in  which  the  parallelogram  EBFG  is  the  base  and  the 
straight  line  HK  its  opposite  is  greater  than  the  pyramid  of  which  the  triangle 
AEG  is  the  base  and  the  point  H  the  vertex. 

But  the  prism  in  which  the  parallelogram  EBFG  is  the  base  and  the  straight 
line  HK  its  opposite  is  equal  to  the  prism  in  which  the  triangle  GFC  is  the  base 
and  the  triangle  HKL  its  opposite, 

and  the  pyramid  of  which  the  triangle  AEG  is  the  base  and  the  point  H  the 
vertex  is  equal  to  the  pyramid  of  which  the  triangle  HKL  is  the  base  and  the 
point  D  the  vertex. 

Therefore  the  said  two  prisms  are  greater  than  the  said  two  pyramids  of 
which  the  triangles  AEG,  HKL  are  the  bases  and  the  points  H,  D  the  vertices. 

Therefore  the  whole  pyramid,  of  which  the  triangle  ABC  is  the  base  and  the 
point  D  the  vertex,  has  been  divided  into  two  pyramids  equal  to  one  another 
and  into  two  equal  prisms,  and  the  two  prisms  are  greater  than  the  half  of  the 
whole  pyramid.  q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  4 

If  there  be  two  pyramids  of  the  same  height  which  have  triangular  bases ,  and  each 
of  them  be  divided  into  two  pyramids  equal  to  one  another  and  similar  to  the  whole, 
and  into  two  equal  prisms,  then,  as  the  base  of  the  one  pyramid  is  to  the  base  of 
the  other  pyramid,  so  will  all  the  prisms  in  the  one  pyramid  be  to  all  the  prisms, 
being  equal  in  multitude,  in  the  other  pyramid . 

Let  there  be  two  pyramids  of  the  same  height  which  have  the  triangular 
bases  ABC,  DEF,  and  vertices  the  points  G,  H, 

and  let  each  of  them  be  divided  into  two  pyramids  equal  to  one  another  and 
similar  to  the  whole  and  into  two  equal  prisms;  [xn.  3] 

I  say  that,  as  the  base  ABC  is  to  the  base  DEF,  so  are  all  the  prisms  in  the 
pyramid  A  BCG  to  all  the  prisms,  being  equal  in  multitude,  in  the  pyramid 
DEFH , 


For,  since  BO  is  equal  to  OC,  and  AL  to  LC, 

therefore  LO  is  parallel  to  AB, 
and  the  triangle  ABC  is  similar  to  the  triangle  LOC. 


344 


EUCLID 


For  the  same  reason 

the  triangle  DEF  is  also  similar  to  the  triangle  RVF. 

And,  since  BC  is  double  of  CO,  and  EF  of  FV, 

therefore,  as  BC  is  to  CO,  so  is  EF  to  FV. 

And  on  BC,  CO  are  described  the  similar  and  similarly  situated  rectilineal 
figures  ABC ,  LOC, 

and  on  EF,  FV  the  similar  and  similarly  situated  figures  DEF,  RVF ; 
therefore,  as  the  triangle  ABC  is  to  the  triangle  LOC,  so  is  the  triangle  DEF  to 
the  triangle  RVF;  [vi.  22] 

therefore,  alternately,  as  the  triangle  ABC  is  to  the  triangle  DEF,  so  is  the  tri¬ 
angle  LOC  to  the  triangle  RVF.  [v.  16] 

But,  as  the  triangle  LOC  is  to  the  triangle  RVF,  so  is  the  prism  in  which  the 
triangle  LOC  is  the  base  and  PMN  its  opposite,  to  the  prism  in  which  the  tri¬ 
angle  RVF  is  the  base  and  STU  its  opposite;  [Lemma  following] 

therefore  also,  as  the  triangle  ABC  is  to  the  triangle  DEF,  so  is  the  prism  in 
which  the  triangle  LOC  is  the  base  and  PMN  its  opposite,  to  the  prism  in 
which  the  triangle  RVF  is  the  base  and  STU  its  opposite. 

But,  as  the  said  prisms  are  to  one  another,  so  is  the  prism  in  which  the  par¬ 
allelogram  KBOL  is  the  base  and  the  straight  line  PM  its  opposite,  to  the  prism 
in  which  the  parallelogram  QEVR  is  the  base  and  the  straight  line  ST  its  op¬ 
posite.  [xi.  39;  cf.  xii.  3] 

Therefore  also  the  two  prisms,  that  in  which  the  parallelogram  KBOL  is  the 
base  and  PM  its  opposite,  and  that  in  which  the  triangle  LOC  is  the  base  and 
PMN  its  opposite,  are  to  the  prisms  in  which  QEVR  is  the  base  and  the  straight 
line  ST  its  opposite  and  in  which  the  triangle  RVF  is  the  base  and  STU  its  op¬ 
posite  in  the  same  ratio.  [v.  12] 

Therefore  also,  as  the  base  ABC  is  to  the  base  DEF,  so  are  the  said  two 
prisms  to  the  said  two  prisms. 

And  similarly,  if  the  pyramids  PMNG,  STUH  be  divided  into  two  prisms 
and  two  pyramids, 

as  the  base  PMN  is  to  the  base  STU,  so  will  the  two  prisms  in  the  pyramid 
PMNG  be  to  the  two  prisms  in  the  pyramid  STUH. 

But,  as  the  base  PMN  is  to  the  base  STU,  so  is  the  base  ABC  to  the  base 
DEF ; 

for  the  triangles  PMN ,  STU  are  equal  to  the  triangles  LOC,  RVF  respectively. 

Therefore  also,  as  the  base  ABC  is  to  the  base  DEF,  so  are  the  four  prisms  to 
the  four  prisms. 

And  similarly  also,  if  we  divide  the  remaining  pyramids  into  two  pyramids 
and  into  two  prisms,  then,  as  the  base  ABC  is  to  base  the  DEF,  so  will  all  the 
prisms  in  the  pyramid  ABCG  be  to  all  the  prisms,  being  equal  in  multitude,  in 
the  pyramid  DEFH.  Q.  e.  d. 

Lemma 

But  that,  as  the  triangle  LOC  is  to  the  triangle  RVF,  so  is  the  prism  in 
which  the  triangle  LOC  is  the  base  and  PMN  its  opposite,  to  the  prism  in 
which  the  triangle  RVF  is  the  base  and  STU  its  opposite,  we  must  prove  as 
follows. 

For  in  the  same  figure  let  perpendiculars  be  conceived  drawn  from  G,  H  to 


ELEMENTS  XII  345 

the  planes  ABC ,  DEF ;  these  are  of  course  equal  because,  by  hypothesis,  the 
pyramids  are  of  equal  height. 

Now,  since  the  two  straight  lines  GC  and  the  perpendicular  from  G  are  cut 
by  the  parallel  planes  ABC ,  PMN ; 

they  will  be  cut  in  the  same  ratios.  [xi.  17] 

And  GC  is  bisected  by  the  plane  PMN  at  N ; 
therefore  the  perpendicular  from  G  to  the  plane  ABC  will  also  be  bisected  by 
the  plane  PMN . 

For  the  same  reason 

the  perpendicular  from  H  to  the  plane  DEF  will  also  be  bisected  by  the  plane 
STU. 

And  the  perpendiculars  from  (7,  H  to  the  planes  ABC ,  DEF  are  equal ; 
therefore  the  perpendiculars  from  the  triangles  PMN ,  STU  to  the  planes 
ABC ,  DEF  are  also  equal. 

Therefore  the  prisms  in  which  the  triangles  LOG,  RVF  are  bases,  and  PMN , 
STU  their  opposites,  are  of  equal  height. 

Hence  also  the  parallelepipedal  solids  described  from  the  said  prisms  are  of 
equal  height  and  are  to  one  another  as  their  bases;  [xi.  32] 

therefore  their  halves,  namely  the  said  prisms,  are  to  one  another  as  the  base 
LOC  is  to  the  base  RVF .  q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  5 

Pyramids  which  are  of  the  same  height  and  have  triangular  bases  are  to  one  another 
as  the  bases. 

Let  there  by  pyramids  of  the  same  height,  of  which  the  triangles  ABC ,  DEF 
are  the  bases  and  the  points  G}  H  the  vertices; 

I  say  that,  as  the  base  ABC  is  to  the  base  DEF,  so  is  the  pyramid  ABCG  to 
the  pyramid  DEFH. 


For,  if  the  pyramid  ABCG  is  not  to  the  pyramid  DEFH  as  the  base  ABC  is 
to  the  base  DEF, 

then,  as  the  base  ABC  is  to  the  base  DEF,  so  will  the  p}^ramid  ABCG  be  either 
to  some  solid  less  than  the  pyramid  DEFH  or  to  a  greater. 

Let  it,  first,  be  in  that  ratio  to  a  less  solid  IF,  and  let  the  pyramid  DEFH  be 
divided  into  two  pyramids  equal  to  one  another  and  similar  to  the  whole  and 
into  two  equal  prisms; 


346  EUCLID 

then  the  two  prisms  are  greater  than  the  half  of  the  whole  pyramid,  [xn.  3] 

Again,  let  the  pyramids  arising  from  the  division  be  similarly  divided, 
and  let  this  be  done  continually  until  there  are  left  over  from  the  pyramid 
DEFH  some  pyramids  which  are  less  than  the  excess  by  which  the  pyramid 
DEFH  exceeds  the  solid  W.  [x.  1] 

Let  such  be  left,  and  let  them  be,  for  the  sake  of  argument,  DQRS,  STUH; 
therefore  the  remainders,  the  prisms  in  the  pyramid  DEFH ,  are  greater  than 
the  solid  W. 

Let  the  pyramid  ABCG  also  be  divided  similarly,  and  a  similar  number  of 
times,  with  the  pyramid  DEFH ; 

therefore,  as  the  base  ABC  is  to  the  base  DEF ,  so  are  the  prisms  in  the  pyra¬ 
mid  ABCG  to  the  prisms  in  the  pyramid  DEFH.  [xn.  4] 

But,  as  the  base  ABC  is  to  the  base  DEF ,  so  also  is  the  pyramid  ABCG  to 
the  solid  W; 

therefore  also,  as  the  pyramid  ABCG  is  to  the  solid  W,  so  are  the  prisms  in  the 
pyramid  ABCG  to  the  prisms  in  the  pyramid  DEFH ;  [v.  11] 

therefore,  alternately,  as  the  pyramid  ABCG  is  to  the  prisms  in  it,  so  is  the 
solid  W  to  the  prisms  in  the  pyramid  DEFH.  [v.  16] 

But  the  pyramid  ABCG  is  greater  than  the  prisms  in  it; 
therefore  the  solid  W  is  also  greater  than  the  prisms  in  the  pyramid  DEFH. 

But  it  is  also  less : 

which  is  impossible. 

Therefore  the  prism  ABCG  is  not  to  any  solid  less  than  the  pyramid  DEFH 
as  the  base  ABC  is  to  the  base  DEF. 

Similarly  it  can  be  proved  that  neither  is  the  pyramid  DEFH  to  any  solid 
less  than  the  pyramid  ABCG  as  the  base  DEF  is  to  the  base  ABC . 

I  say  next  that  neither  is  the  pyramid  ABCG  to  any  solid  greater  than  the 
pyramid  DEFH  as  the  base  ABC  is  to  the  base  DEF. 

For,  if  possible,  let  it  be  in  that  ratio  to  a  greater  solid  W; 
therefore,  inversely,  as  the  base  DEF  is  to  the  base  ABC,  so  is  the  solid  W  to 
the  pyramid  ABCG. 

But,  as  the  solid  W  is  to  the  solid  ABCG ,  so  is  the  pyramid  DEFH  to  some 
solid  less  than  the  pyramid  ABCG ,  as  was  before  proved;  [xn.  2,  Lemma] 
therefore  also,  as  the  base  DEF  is  to  the  base  ABC,  so  is  the  pyramid  DEFH 
to  some  solid  less  than  the  pyramid  ABCG :  [v.  11] 

which  was  proved  absurd. 

Therefore  the  pyramid  ABCG  is  not  to  any  solid  greater  than  the  pyramid 
DEFH  as  the  base  ABC  is  to  the  base  DEF. 

But  it  was  proved  that  neither  is  it  in  that  ratio  to  a  less  solid. 

Therefore,  as  the  base  ABC  is  to  the  base  DEF,  so  is  the  pyramid  ABCG  to 
the  pyramid  DEFH.  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  6 

Pyramids  which  are  of  the  same  height  and  have  polygonal  bases  are  to  one  another 
as  the  bases. 

Let  there  be  pyramids  of  the  same  height  of  which  the  polygons  ABCDE , 
FGHKL  are  the  bases  and  the  points  M,  N  the  vertices; 

I  say  that,  as  the  base  ABCDE  is  to  the  base  FGHKL,  so  is  the  pyramid 
ABCDEM  to  the  pyramid  FGHKLN. 


347 


ELEMENTS  XII 

For  let  AC,  AD,  FH,  FK  be  joined. 

Since  then  ABCM,  ACDM  are  two  pyramids  which  have  triangular  bases 
and  equal  height, 

they  are  to  one  another  as  the  bases;  [xn.  5] 

therefore,  as  the  base  ABC 
is  to  the  base  ACD,  so  is  the 
pyramid  ABCM  to  the  pyr¬ 
amid  ACDM. 

And,  componendo ,  as  the 
base  ABCD  is  to  the  base 
ACD,  so  is  the  pyramid 
ABCDM  to  the  pyramid 
ACDM.  [v.  18] 

But  also,  as  the  base  ACD 
is  to  the  base  ADE,  so  is  the 
pyramid  ACDM  to  the  pyr¬ 
amid  AD  EM.  [xn.  5] 

Therefore,  ex  aequali,  as  the  base  ABCD  is  to  the  base  ADE,  so  is  the  pyra¬ 
mid  ABC  DIM  to  the  pyramid  ADEM.  [v.  22] 

And  again,  componendo,  as  the  base  ABCDE  is  to  the  base  ADE,  so  is  the 
pyramid  ABCDEM  to  the  pyramid  ADEM.  [v.  18] 

Similarly  also  it  can  be  proved  that,  as  the  base  FGHKL  is  to  the  base  FGH, 
so  is  the  pyramid  FGHKLN  to  the  pyramid  FGHN. 

And,  since  ADEM,  FGHN  are  two  pyramids  which  have  triangular  bases 
and  equal  height, 

therefore,  as  the  base  ADE  is  to  the  base  FGH ,  so  is  the  pyramid  ADEM  to 
the  pyramid  FGHN.  [xn.  5] 

But,  as  the  base  ADE  is  to  the  base  ABCDE,  so  was  the  pyramid  ADEM  to 
the  pyramid  ABCDEM. 

Therefore  also,  ex  aequali,  as  the  base  ABCDE  is  to  the  base  FGH,  so  is  the 
pyramid  ABCDEM  to  the  pyramid  FGHN.  [v.  22] 

But  further,  as  the  base  FGH  is  to  the  base  FGHKL,  so  also  was  the  pyra¬ 
mid  FGHN  to  the  pyramid  FGHKLN. 

Therefore  also,  ex  aequali ,  as  the  base  ABCDE  is  to  the  base  FGHKL,  so  is 
the  pyramid  ABCDEM  to  the  pyramid  FGHKLN.  [v.  22] 

Q.  E.  D. 


Proposition  7 

Any  prism  which  has  a  triangular  base  is  divided  into  three  pyramids  equal  to  one 
another  which  have  triangular  bases. 

Let  there  be  a  prism  in  which  the  triangle  ABC  is  the  base  and  DEF  its  op¬ 
posite; 

I  say  that  the  prism  ABCDEF  is  divided  into  three  pyramids  equal  to  one 
another,  which  have  triangular  bases. 

For  let  BD,  EC,  CD  be  joined. 

Since  ABED  is  a  parallelogram,  and  BD  is  its  diameter, 

therefore  the  triangle  ABB  is  equal  to  the  triangle  EBD;  [i.  34] 
therefore  also  the  pyramid  of  which  the  triangle  ABD  is  the  base  and  the  point 
C  the  vertex  is  equal  to  the  pyramid  of  which  the  triangle  DEB  is  the  base  and 


EUCLID 


348 

the  point  C  the  vertex.  [xn.  5] 

But  the  pyramid  of  which  the  triangle  DEB  is  the  base  and  the  point  C  the 
vertex  is  the  same  with  the  pyramid  of  which  the 
triangle  EBC  is  the  base  and  the  point  D  the 
vertex; 

for  they  are  contained  by  the  same  planes. 

Therefore  the  pyramid  of  which  the  triangle 
ABD  is  the  base  and  the  point  C  the  vertex  is  also 
equal  to  the  pyramid  of  which  the  triangle  EBC  is 
the  base  and  the  point  D  the  vertex. 

Again,  since  FCBE  is  a  parallelogram, 
and  CE  is  its  diameter, 
the  triangle  CEF  is  equal  to  the  triangle  CBE.  [i.  34] 

Therefore  also  the  pyramid  of  which  the  triangle  BCE  is  the  base  and  the 
point  D  the  vertex  is  equal  to  the  pyramid  of  which  the  triangle  ECF  is  the 
base  and  the  point  D  the  vertex.  [xn.  5] 

But  the  pyramid  of  which  the  triangle  BCE  is  the  base  and  the  point  D  the 
vertex  was  proved  equal  to  the  pyramid  of  which  the  triangle  ABD  is  the  base 
and  the  point  C  the  vertex; 

therefore  also  the  pyramid  of  which  the  triangle  CEF  is  the  base  and  the  point 
D  the  vertex  is  equal  to  the  pyramid  of  which  the  triangle  ABD  is  the  base  and 
the  point  C  the  vertex; 

therefore  the  prism  ABCDEF  has  been  divided  into  three  pyramids  equal  to 
one  another  which  have  triangular  bases. 

And,  since  the  pyramid  of  which  the  triangle  ABD  is  the  base  and  the  point 
C  the  vertex  is  the  same  with  the  pyramid  of  which  the  triangle  CAB  is  the 
base  and  the  point  D  the  vertex, 

for  they  are  contained  by  the  same  planes, 
while  the  pyramid  of  which  the  triangle  ABD  is  the  base  and  the  point  C  the 
vertex  was  proved  to  be  a  third  of  the  prism  in  which  the  triangle  ABC  is  the 
base  and  DEF  its  opposite, 

therefore  also  the  pyramid  of  which  the  triangle  ABC  is  the  base  and  the  point 
D  the  vertex  is  a  third  of  the  prism  which  has  the  same  base,  the  triangle  ABC, 
and  DEF  as  its  opposite. 

Porism.  From  this  it  is  manifest  that  any  pyramid  is  a  third  part  of  the 
prism  which  has  the  same  base  with  it  and  equal  height.  Q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  8 

Similar  pyramids  which  have  triangular  bases  are  in  the  triplicate  ratio  of  their 
corresponding  sides. 

Let  there  be  similar  and  similarly  situated  pyramids  of  which  the  triangles 
ABC,  DEF  are  the  bases  and  the  points  G,  H  the  vertices; 

I  say  that  the  pyramid  ABCG  has  to  the  pyramid  DEFH  the  ratio  triplicate 
of  that  which  BC  has  to  EF. 

For  let  the  parallelepipedal  solids  BGML,  EHQP  be  completed. 

Now,  since  the  pyramid  ABCG  is  similar  to  the  pyramid  DEFH, 
therefore  the  angle  ABC  is  equal  to  the  angle  DEF, 
the  angle  GBC  to  the  angle  HEF , 
and  the  angle  ABG  to  the  angle  DEH; 


F 


349 


ELEMENTS  XII 

and,  as  AB  is  to  DE ,  so  is  BC  to  EF ,  and  BG  to  EH. 
And  since,  as  AB  is  to  DE,  so  is  BC  to  EF, 

and  the  sides  are  proportional  about  equal  angles, 


therefore  the  parallelogram  BM  is  similar  to  the  parallelogram  EQ . 

For  the  same  reason 

BN  is  also  similar  to  ER,  and  BK  to  EO; 
therefore  the  three  parallelograms  MB,  BK,  BN  are  similar  to  the  three  EQ, 
EO,  ER. 

But  the  three  parallelograms  MB,  BK,  BN  are  equal  and  similar  to  their 
three  opposites, 

and  the  three  EQ,  EO,  ER  are  equal  and  similar  to  their  three  opposites. 

[xi.  24] 

Therefore  the  solids  BGML,  EHQP  are  contained  by  similar  planes  equal  in 
multitude. 

Therefore  the  solid  BGML  is  similar  to  the  solid  EHQP. 

But  similar  parallelepipedal  solids  are  in  the  triplicate  ratio  of  their  corres¬ 
ponding  sides.  [xi.  33] 

Therefore  the  solid  BGML  has  to  the  solid  EHQP  the  ratio  triplicate  of  that 
which  the  corresponding  side  BC  has  to  the  corresponding  side  EF. 

But,  as  the  solid  BGML  is  to  the  solid  EHQP,  so  is  the  pyramid  A  BCG  to 
the  pyramid  DEFH, 

inasmuch  as  the  pyramid  is  a  sixth  part  of  the  solid,  because  the  prism  which  is 
half  of  the  parallelepipedal  solid  [xi.  28]  is  also  triple  of  the  pyramid,  [xn.  7] 

Therefore  the  pyramid  ABCG  also  has  to  the  pyramid  DEFH  the  ratio  trip¬ 
licate  of  that  which  BC  has  to  EF.  q.  e.  d. 

Porism.  From  this  it  is  manifest  that  similar  pyramids  which  have  polygonal 
bases  are  also  to  one  another  in  the  triplicate  ratio  of  their  corresponding  sides. 

For,  if  they  are  divided  into  the  pyramids  contained  in  them  which  have  tri¬ 
angular  bases,  by  virtue  of  the  fact  that  the  similar  polygons  forming  their 
bases  are  also  divided  into  similar  triangles  equal  in  multitude  and  correspond¬ 
ing  to  the  wholes,  [vi.  20] 

then,  as  the  one  pyramid  which  has  a  triangular  base  in  the  one  complete  pyra¬ 
mid  is  to  the  one  pyramid  which  has  a  triangular  base  in  the  other  complete 
pyramid,  so  also  will  all  the  pyramids  which  have  triangular  bases  contained 
in  the  one  pyramid  be  to  all  the  pyramids  which  have  triangular  bases  con¬ 
tained  in  the  other  pyramid  [v.  12],  that  is,  the  pyramid  itself  which  has  a 
polygonal  base,  to  the  pyramid  which  has  a  polygonal  base. 


350  EUCLID 

But  the  pyramid  which  has  a  triangular  base  is  to  the  pyramid  which  has  a 
triangular  base  in  the  triplicate  ratio  of  the  corresponding  sides; 
therefore  also  the  pyramid  which  has  a  polygonal  base  has  to  the  pyramid 
which  has  a  similar  base  the  ratio  triplicate  of  that  which  the  side  has  to  the 
side. 


Proposition  9 

In  equal  pyramids  which  have  triangular  bases  the  bases  are  reciprocally  propor¬ 
tional  to  the  heights;  and  those  pyramids  in  which  the  bases  are  reciprocally  propor¬ 
tional  to  the  heights  are  equal 

For  let  there  be  equal  pyramids  wdiich  have  the  triangular  bases  ABC ,  DEF 
and  vertices  the  points  G,  H ; 

I  say  that  in  the  pyramids  ABCG,  DEFH  the  bases  are  reciprocally  propor¬ 
tional  to  the  heights,  that  is,  as  the  base  ABC  is  to  the  base  DEF,  so  is  the 
height  of  the  pyramid  DEFH  to  the  height  of  the  pyramid  ABCG . 


For  let  the  parallelepipedal  solids  BGML ,  EHQP  be  completed. 

Now,  since  the  pyramid  ABCG  is  equal  to  the  pyramid  DEFH , 
and  the  solid  BGML  is  six  times  the  pyramid  ABCG , 
and  the  solid  EHQP  six  times  the  pyramid  DEFH , 
therefore  the  solid  BGML  is  equal  to  the  solid  EHQP. 

But  in  equal  parallelepipedal  solids  the  bases  are  reciprocally  proportional 
to  the  heights;  [xi.  34] 

therefore,  as  the  base  BM  is  to  the  base  EQ ,  so  is  the  height  of  the  solid  EHQP 
to  the  height  of  the  solid  BGML. 

But,  as  the  base  BM  is  to  EQ ,  so  is  the  triangle  ABC  to  the  triangle  DEF. 

[i-  34] 

Therefore  also,  as  the  triangle  ABC  is  to  the  triangle  DEF,  so  is  the  height 
of  the  solid  EHQP  to  the  height  of  the  solid  BGML.  [v.  11] 

But  the  height  of  the  solid  EHQP  is  the  same  with  the  height  of  the  pyramid 
DEFH, 

and  the  height  of  the  solid  BGML  is  the  same  with  the  height  of  the  pyramid 
ABCG, 

therefore,  as  the  base  ABC  is  to  the  base  DEF,  so  is  the  height  of  the  pyramid 
DEFH  to  the  height  of  the  pyramid  ABCG. 

Therefore  in  the  pyramids  ABCG,  DEFH  the  bases  are  reciprocally  propor¬ 
tional  to  the  heights. 


ELEMENTS  XII  351 

Next,  in  the  pyramids  A  BCG,  DEFH  let  the  bases  be  reciprocally  propor¬ 
tional  to  the  heights; 

that  is,  as  the  base  ABC  is  to  the  base  DEF ,  so  let  the  height  of  the  pyramid 
DEFH  be  to  the  height  of  the  pyramid  ABCG) 

I  say  that  the  pyramid  ABCG  is  equal  to  the  pyramid  DEFH. 

For,  with  the  same  construction, 

since,  as  the  base  ABC  is  to  the  base  DEF ,  so  is  the  height  of  the  pyramid 
DEFH  to  the  height  of  the  pyramid  ABCG , 

while,  as  the  base  ABC  is  to  the  base  DEF ,  so  is  the  parallelogram  BM  to  the 
parallelogram  EQ , 

therefore  also,  as  the  parallelogram  BM  is  to  the  parallelogram  EQ,  so  is  the 
height  of  the  pyramid  DEFH  to  the  height  of  the  pyramid  ABCG.  [v.  11] 
But  the  height  of  the  pyramid  DEFH  is  the  same  with  the  height  of  the  par¬ 
allelepiped  EHQP, 

and  the  height  of  the  pyramid  ABCG  is  the  same  with  the  height  of  the  paral¬ 
lelepiped  BGML ; 

therefore,  as  the  base  BM  is  to  the  base  EQ,  so  is  the  height  of  the  parallele¬ 
piped  EHQP  to  the  height  of  the  parallelepiped  BGML. 

But  those  parallelepipedal  solids  in  w'hich  the  bases  are  reciprocally  propor¬ 
tional  to  the  heights  are  equal;  [xi.  34] 

therefore  the  parallelepipedal  solid  BGML  is  equal  to  the  parallelepipedal  solid 
EHQP . 

And  the  pyramid  ABCG  is  a  sixth  part  of  BGML,  and  the  pyramid  DEFH  a 
sixth  part  of  the  parallelepiped  EHQP ; 

therefore  the  pyramid  ABCG  is  equal  to  the  pyramid  DEFH. 
Therefore  etc.  Q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  10 

Any  cone  is  a  third  part  of  the  cylinder  which  has  the  same  base  with  it  and  equal 
height . 

For  let  a  cone  have  the  same  base,  namely  the  circle  ABCD,  with  a  cylinder 
and  equal  height; 

I  say  that  the  cone  is  a  third  part  of  the 
cylinder,  that  is,  that  the  cylinder  is  triple  of 
the  cone. 

For  if  the  cylinder  is  not  triple  of  the  cone, 
the  cylinder  will  be  either  greater  than  triple 
or  less  than  triple  of  the  cone. 

First  let  it  be  greater  than  triple, 
and  let  the  square  ABCD  be  inscribed  in 
the  circle  ABCD ;  [iv.  6] 

then  the  square  ABCD  is  greater  than  the 
half  of  the  circle  ABCD. 

From  the  square  A  BCD  let  there  be  set  up 
a  prism  of  equal  height  with  the  cylinder. 
Then  the  prism  so  set  up  is  greater  than  the  half  of  the  cylinder, 
inasmuch  as,  if  wTe  also  circumscribe  a  square  about  the  circle  ABCD  [iv.  7], 
the  square  inscribed  in  the  circle  ABCD  is  half  of  that  circumscribed  about  it, 
and  the  solids  set  up  from  them  are  parallelepipedal  prisms  of  equal  height, 


352  EUCLID 

while  parallelepipedal  solids  which  are  of  the  same  height  are  to  one  another  as 
their  bases;  [xi.  32] 

therefore  also  the  prism  set  up  on  the  square  A  BCD  is  half  of  the  prism  set  up 
from  the  square  circumscribed  about  the  circle  ABCD ; 

[cf.  xi.  28,  or  xii.  6  and  7,  Por.] 
and  the  cylinder  is  less  than  the  prism  set  up  from  the  square  circumscribed 
about  the  circle  ABCD; 

therefore  the  prism  set  up  from  the  square  ABCD  and  of  equal  height  with  the 
cylinder  is  greater  than  the  half  of  the  cylinder. 

Let  the  circumferences  AB ,  BC,  CD,  DA  be  bisected  at  the  points  E , 
F  G  H 

and  let  AE,  EB,  BF,  FC,  CG,  GD,  DH,  HA  be  joined; 
then  each  of  the  triangles  AEB,  BFC,  CGD,  DHA  is  greater  than  the  half  of 
that  segment  of  the  circle  ABCD  which  is  about  it,  as  we  proved  before. 

[xii.  2] 

On  each  of  the  triangles  AEB,  BFC ,  CGD,  DHA  let  prisms  be  set  up  of 
equal  height  with  the  cylinder; 

then  each  of  the  prisms  so  set  up  is  greater  than  the  half  part  of  that  segment 
of  the  cylinder  which  is  about  it, 

inasmuch  as,  if  we  draw  through  the  points  E,  F,  G,  H  parallels  to  AB,  BC, 
CD,  DA,  complete  the  parallelograms  on  AB,  BC,  CD,  DA,  and  set  up  from 
them  parallelepipedal  solids  of  equal  height  with  the  cylinder,  the  prisms  on  the 
triangles  AEB ,  BFC,  CGD,  DHA  are  halves  of  the  several  solids  set  up; 
and  the  segments  of  the  cylinder  are  less  than  the  parallelepipedal  solids  set  up; 
hence  also  the  prisms  on  the  triangles  AEB,  BFC,  CGD,  DHA  are  greater  than 
the  half  of  the  segments  of  the  cylinder  about  them. 

Thus,  bisecting  the  circumferences  that  are  left,  joining  straight  lines,  set¬ 
ting  up  on  each  of  the  triangles  prisms  of  equal  height  with  the  cylinder, 

and  doing  this  continually, 

we  shall  leave  some  segments  of  the  cylinder  which  mil  be  less  than  the  excess 
by  which  the  cylinder  exceeds  the  triple  of  the  cone.  [x.  1] 

Let  such  segments  be  left,  and  let  them  be  AE,  EB,  BF,  FC,  CG,  GD,  DH, 
HA; 

therefore  the  remainder,  the  prism  of  which  the  polygon  AEBFCGDH  is  the 
base  and  the  height  is  the  same  as  that  of  the  cylinder,  is  greater  than  triple  of 
the  cone. 

But  the  prism  of  which  the  polygon  AEBFCGDH  is  the  base  and  the  height 
the  same  as  that  of  the  cylinder  is  triple  of  the  pyramid  of  which  the  polygon 
AEBFCGDH  is  the  base  and  the  vertex  is  the  same  as  that  of  the  cone; 

[xii.  7,  Por.] 

therefore  also  the  pyramid  of  which  the  polygon  AEBFCGDH  is  the  base  and 
the  vertex  is  the  same  as  that  of  the  cone  is  greater  than  the  cone  which  has  the 
circle  ABCD  as  base. 

But  it  is  also  less,  for  it  is  enclosed  by  it: 

which  is  impossible. 

Therefore  the  cylinder  is  not  greater  than  triple  of  the  cone. 

I  say  next  that  neither  is  the  cylinder  less  than  triple  of  the  cone, 

For,  if  possible,  let  the  cylinder  be  less  than  triple  of  the  cone, 
therefore,  inversely,  the  cone  is  greater  than  a  third  part  of  the  cylinder. 


353 


ELEMENTS  XII 

Let  the  square  A  BCD  be  inscribed  in  the  circle  A  BCD) 
therefore  the  square  ABCD  is  greater  than  the  half  of  the  circle  ABCD. 

Now  let  there  be  set  up  from  the  square  ABCD  a  pyramid  having  the  same 
vertex  with  the  cone ; 

therefore  the  pyramid  so  set  up  is  greater  than  the  half  part  of  the  cone, 
seeing  that,  as  we  proved  before,  if  we  circumscribe  a  square  about  the  circle, 
the  square  ABCD  will  be  half  of  the  square  circumscribed  about  the  circle, 
and  if  we  set  up  from  the  squares  parallelepipedal  solids  of  equal  height  with 
the  cone,  which  are  also  called  prisms,  the  solid  set  up  from  the  square  ABCD 
will  be  half  of  that  set  up  from  the  square  circumscribed  about  the  circle; 

for  they  are  to  one  another  as  their  bases.  [xi.  32] 

Hence  also  the  thirds  of  them  are  in  that  ratio; 
therefore  also  the  pyramid  of  which  the  square  ABCD  is  the  base  is  half  of  the 
pyramid  set  up  from  the  square  circumscribed  about  the  circle. 

And  the  pyramid  set  up  from  the  square  about  the  circle  is  greater  than  the 
cone, 

for  it  encloses  it. 

Therefore  the  pyramid  of  which  the  square  ABCD  is  the  base  and  the  vertex 
is  the  same  with  that  of  the  cone  is  greater  than  the  half  of  the  cone. 

Let  the  circumferences  AB,  BC ,  CD)  DA  be  bisected  at  the  points  E, 
F  G  H 

and  let  AE,  EB,  BF ,  FC,  CG ,  GD ,  DH,  HA  be  joined; 
therefore  also  each  of  the  triangles  AEB ,  BFC ,  CGD,  DHA  is  greater  than  the 
half  part  of  that  segment  of  the  circle  ABCD  which  is  about  it. 

Now,  on  each  of  the  triangles  AEB,  BFC,  CGDy  DHA  let  pyramids  be  set  up 
which  have  the  same  vertex  as  the  cone ; 

therefore  also  each  of  the  pyramids  so  set  up  is,  in  the  same  manner,  greater 
than  the  half  part  of  that  segment  of  the  cone  which  is  about  it. 

Thus,  by  bisecting  the  circumferences  that  are  left,  joining  straight  lines, 
setting  up  on  each  of  the  triangles  a  pyramid  which  has  the  same  vertex  as  the 
cone, 

and  doing  this  continually, 

we  shall  leave  some  segments  of  the  cone  which  will  be  less  than  the  excess  by 
which  the  cone  exceeds  the  third  part  of  the  cylinder.  [x.  1] 

Let  such  be  left,  and  let  them  be  the  segments  on  AEy  EB,  BFy  FCy  CG,  GD, 
DH,  HA) 

therefore  the  remainder,  the  pyramid  of  which  the  polygon  AEBFCGDH  is 
the  base  and  the  vertex  the  same  with  that  of  the  cone,  is  greater  than  a  third 
part  of  the  cylinder. 

But  the  pyramid  of  which  the  polygon  AEBFCGDH  is  the  base  and  the  ver¬ 
tex  the  same  with  that  of  the  cone  is  a  third  part  of  the  prism  of  which  the 
polygon  AEBFCGDH  is  the  base  and  the  height  is  the  same  with  that  of  the 
cylinder; 

therefore  the  prism  of  which  the  polygon  AEBFCGDH  is  the  base  and  the 
height  is  the  same  with  that  of  the  cylinder  is  greater  than  the  cylinder  of 
which  the  circle  ABCD  is  the  base. 

But  it  is  also  less,  for  it  is  enclosed  by  it: 

which  is  impossible. 

Therefore  the  cylinder  is  not  less  than  triple  of  the  cone. 


354  EUCLID 

But  it  was  proved  that  neither  is  it  greater  than  triple; 

therefore  the  cylinder  is  triple  of  the  cone; 
hence  the  cone  is  a  third  part  of  the  cylinder. 

Therefore  etc.  Q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  11 

Cones  and  cylinders  which  are  of  the  same  height  are  to  one  another  as  their  bases . 

Let  there  be  cones  and  cylinders  of  the  same  height, 
let  the  circles  ABCD ,  EFGH  be  their  bases,  KL ,  MN  their  axes  and  AC,  EG 
the  diameters  of  their  bases; 

I  say  that,  as  the  circle  ABCD  is  to  the  circle  EFGH ,  so  is  the  cone  AL  to 
the  cone  EN. 


/ 

7 

X 

z 

/ 

0 

z: 

For,  if  not,  then,  as  the  circle  ABCD  is  to  the  circle  EFGH ,  so  will  the  cone 
AL  be  either  to  some  solid  less  than  the  cone  EN  or  to  a  greater. 

First,  let  it  be  in  that  ratio  to  a  less  solid  0,  and  let  the  solid  X  be  equal  to 
that  by  which  the  solid  0  is  less  than  the  cone  EN ; 

therefore  the  cone  EN  is  equal  to  the  solids  0,  X . 

Let  the  square  EFGH  be  inscribed  in  the  circle  EFGH ; 

therefore  the  square  is  greater  than  the  half  of  the  circle. 

Let  there  be  set  up  from  the  square  EFGH  a  pyramid  of  equal  height  with 
the  cone; 

therefore  the  pyramid  so  set  up  is  greater  than  the  half  of  the  cone, 
inasmuch  as,  if  we  circumscribe  a  square  about  the  circle,  and  set  up  from  it  a 
pyramid  of  equal  height  with  the  cone,  the  inscribed  pyramid  is  half  of  the  cir¬ 
cumscribed  pyramid, 

for  they  are  to  one  another  as  their  bases,  [xn.  6] 

while  the  cone  is  less  than  the  circumscribed  pyramid. 

Let  the  circumferences  EF ,  FG ,  GH ,  HE  be  bisected  at  the  points  P,  Q ,  R ,  S, 
and  let  HP,  PE,  EQ ,  QF,  FR,  RG,  GS,  SH  be  joined. 

Therefore  each  of  the  triangles  HPE,  EQF,  FRG,  GSH  is  greater  than  the 
half  of  that  segment  of  the  circle  which  is  about  it. 

On  each  of  the  triangles  HPE,  EQF,  FRG,  GSH  let  there  be  set  up  a  pyra¬ 
mid  of  equal  height  with  the  cone; 

therefore,  also,  each  of  the  pyramids  so  set  up  is  greater  than  the  half  of  that 
segment  of  the  cone  which  is  about  it. 

Thus,  bisecting  the  circumferences  which  are  left,  joining  straight  lines,  set- 


355 


ELEMENTS  XII 

ting  up  on  each  of  the  triangles  pyramids  of  equal  height  with  the  cone, 

and  doing  this  continually, 
we  shall  leave  some  segments  of  the  cone  which  will  be  less  than  the  solid  X. 

[x.  1] 

Let  such  be  left,  and  let  them  be  the  segments  on  HP,  PE,  EQ,  QF,  FR,  RG , 
GS,  SH; 

therefore  the  remainder,  the  pyramid  of  which  the  polygon  HPEQFRGS  is  the 
base  and  the  height  the  same  with  that  of  the  cone,  is  greater  than  the  solid  0. 

Let  there  also  be  inscribed  in  the  circle  ABCD  the  polygon  DTAUBVCW 
similar  and  similarly  situated  to  the  polygon  HPEQFRGS, 

and  on  it  let  a  pyramid  be  set  up  of  equal  height  with  the  cone  AL. 
Since  then,  as  the  square  on  AC  is  to  the  square  on  EG,  so  is  the  polygon 
DTA  UBVCW  to  the  polygon  HPEQFRGS ,  [xn.  1] 

while,  as  the  square  on  AC  is  to  the  square  on  EG,  so  is  the  circle  ABCD  to  the 
circle  EFGH,  [xn.  2] 

therefore  also,  as  the  circle  ABCD  is  to  the  circle  EFGH,  so  is  the  polygon 
DTAUBVCW  to  the  polygon  HPEQFRGS. 

But,  as  the  circle  ABCD  is  to  the  circle  EFGH,  so  is  the  cone  AL  to  the 
solid  0, 

and,  as  the  polygon  DTAUBVCW  is  to  the  polygon  HPEQFRGS,  so  is  the 
pyramid  of  which  the  polygon  DTAUBVCW  is  the  base  and  the  point  L  the 
vertex  to  the  pyramid  of  which  the  polygon  HPEQFRGS  is  the  base  and  the 
point  N  the  vertex.  [xn.  6] 

Therefore  also,  as  the  cone  .A  L  is  to  the  solid  0,  so  is  the  pyramid  of  which 
the  polygon  DTA  UBVCW  is  the  base  and  the  point  L  the  vertex  to  the  pyra¬ 
mid  of  which  the  polygon  HPEQFRGS  is  the  base  and  the  point  N  the  vertex; 

[v.  11] 

therefore,  alternately,  as  the  cone  AL  is  to  the  pyramid  in  it,  so  is  the  solid  0 
to  the  pyramid  in  the  cone  EN.  [v.  16] 

But  the  cone  AL  is  greater  than  the  pyramid  in  it; 
therefore  the  solid  0  is  also  greater  than  the  pyramid  in  the  cone  EN. 

But  it  is  also  less: 

which  is  absurd. 

Therefore  the  cone  AL  is  not  to  any  solid  less  than  the  cone  EN  as  the  circle 
ABCD  is  to  the  circle  EFGH. 

Similarly  we  can  prove  that  neither  is  the  cone  EN  to  any  solid  less  than  the 
cone  AL  as  the  circle  EFGH  is  to  the  circle  ABCD. 

I  say  next  that  neither  is  the  cone  AL  to  any  solid  greater  than  the  cone  EN 
as  the  circle  ABCD  is  to  the  circle  EFGH. 

For,  if  possible,  let  it  be  in  that  ratio  to  a  greater  solid  0; 
therefore,  inversely,  as  the  circle  EFGH  is  to  the  circle  ABCD,  so  is  the  solid  0 
to  the  cone  AL. 

But,  as  the  solid  0  is  to  the  cone  AL,  so  is  the  cone  EN  to  some  solid  less 
than  the  cone  AL; 

therefore  also,  as  the  circle  EFGH  is  to  the  circle  ABCD,  so  is  the  cone  EN  to 
some  solid  less  than  the  cone  AL: 

which  was  proved  impossible. 

Therefore  the  cone  AL  is  not  to  any  solid  greater  than  the  cone  EN  as  the 
circle  ABCD  is  to  the  circle  EFGH. 


356  EUCLID 

But  it  was  proved  that  neither  is  it  in  this  ratio  to  a  less  solid; 
therefore,  as  the  circle  ABCD  is  to  the  circle  EFGH ,  so  is  the  cone  AL  to  the 
cone  EN. 

But,  as  the  cone  is  to  the  cone,  so  is  the  cylinder  to  the  cylinder, 

for  each  is  triple  of  each;  [xn.  10] 

Therefore  also,  as  the  circle  ABCD  is  to  the  circle  EFGH,  so  are  the  cylin¬ 
ders  on  them  which  are  of  equal  height. 

Therefore  etc.  Q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  12 

Similar  cones  and  cylinders  are  to  one  another  in  the  triplicate  ratio  of  the  diameters 
in  their  bases. 

Let  there  be  similar  cones  and  cylinders, 
let  the  circles  ABCD ,  EFGH  be  their  bases,  BD,  FH  the  diameters  of  the  bases, 
and  KL,  MN  the  axes  of  the  cones  and  cylinders; 

I  say  that  the  cone  of  which  the  circle  ABCD  is  the  base  and  the  point  L  the 
vertex  has  to  the  cone  of  which  the  circle  EFGH  is  the  base  and  the  point  N 
the  vertex  the  ratio  triplicate  of  that  which  BD  has  to  FH. 


For,  if  the  cone  ABCDL  has  not  to  the  cone  EFGHN  the  ratio  triplicate  of 
that  which  BD  has  to  FH , 

the  cone  ABCDL  will  have  that  triplicate  ratio  either  to  some  solid  less  than 
the  cone  EFGHN  or  to  a  greater. 

First,  let  it  have  that  triplicate  ratio  to  a  less  solid  0. 

Let  the  square  EFGH  be  inscribed  in  the  circle  EFGH ;  [iv.  6] 

therefore  the  square  EFGH  is  greater  than  the  half  of  the  circle  EFGH . 

Now  let  there  be  set  up  on  the  square  EFGH  a  pyramid  having  the  same 
vertex  with  the  cone; 

therefore  the  pyramid  so  set  up  is  greater  than  the  half  part  of  the  cone. 

Let  the  circumferences  EF,  FG ,  GH,  HE  be  bisected  at  the  points  P,  Q ,  R ,  S, 
and  let  EP,  PF,  FQ,  QG ,  GR,  RH,  HS ,  SE  be  joined. 

Therefore  each  of  the  triangles  EPF ,  FQG,  GRH ,  HSE  is  also  greater  than 
the  half  part  of  that  segment  of  the  circle  EFGH  which  is  about  it. 

Now  on  each  of  the  triangles  EPF,  FQG ,  GRH ,  HSE  let  a  pyramid  be  set  up 
having  the  same  vertex  with  the  cone; 


ELEMENTS  XII  357 

therefore  each  of  the  pyramids  so  set  up  is  also  greater  than  the  half  part  of 
that  segment  of  the  cone  which  is  about  it. 

Thus,  bisecting  the  circumferences  so  left,  joining  straight  lines,  setting  up 
on  each  of  the  triangles  pyramids  having  the  same  vertex  with  the  cone, 

and  doing  this  continually, 

we  shall  leave  some  segments  of  the  cone  which  will  be  less  than  the  excess  by 
which  the  cone  EFGHN  exceeds  the  solid  0.  [x.  1] 

Let  such  be  left,  and  let  them  be  the  segments  on  EP ,  PF,  FQ ,  QG,  GR ,  RH, 
HS,  SE: 

therefore  the  remainder,  the  pyramid  of  which  the  polygon  EPFQGRHS  is  the 
base  and  the  point  N  the  vertex,  is  greater  than  the  solid  0. 

Let  there  be  also  inscribed  in  the  circle  ABCD  the  polygon  ATBUCVDW 
similar  and  similarly  situated  to  the  polygon  EPFQGRHS, 
and  let  there  be  set  up  on  the  polygon  ATBUCVDW  a  pyramid  having  the 
same  vertex  with  the  cone; 

of  the  triangles  containing  the  pyramid  of  which  the  polygon  ATBUCVDW 
is  the  base  and  the  point  L  the  vertex  let  LBT  be  one, 
and  of  the  triangles  containing  the  pyramid  of  which  the  polygon  EPFQGRHS 
is  the  base  and  the  point  N  the  vertex  let  NFP  be  one; 

and  let  KT,  MP  be  joined. 

Now,  since  the  cone  ABCDL  is  similar  to  the  cone  EFGHN , 
therefore,  as  BD  is  to  FH,  so  is  the  axis  KL  to  the  axis  MN.  [xi.  Def.  24] 
But,  as  BD  is  to  FH,  so  is  BK  to  FM ; 

therefore  also,  as  BK  is  to  FM,  so  is  KL  to  MN. 

And,  alternately,  as  BK  is  to  KL,  so  is  FM  to  MN.  [v.  16] 

And  the  sides  are  proportional  about  equal  angles,  namely  the  angles  BKL, 
FMN ; 

therefore  the  triangle  BKL  is  similar  to  the  triangle  FMN .  [vi.  6] 

Again,  since,  as  BK  is  to  KT,  so  is  FM  to  MP, 

and  they  are  about  equal  angles,  namely  the  angles  BKT ,  FMP, 
inasmuch  as,  whatever  part  the  angle  BKT  is  of  the  four  right  angles  at  the 
centre  K,  the  same  part  also  is  the  angle  FMP  of  the  four  right  angles  at  the 
centre  M; 

since  then  the  sides  are  proportional  about  equal  angles, 
therefore  the  triangle  BKT  is  similar  to  the  triangle  FMP.  [vi.  6] 
Again,  since  it  was  proved  that,  as  BK  is  to  KL,  so  is  FM  to  MN, 
while  BK  is  equal  to  KT,  and  FM  to  PM, 
therefore,  as  TK  is  to  KL,  so  is  PM  to  MN; 
and  the  sides  are  proportional  about  equal  angles,  namely  the  angles  TKL, 
PMN,  for  they  are  right; 

therefore  the  triangle  LKT  is  similar  to  the  triangle  NMP.  [vi.  6] 
And  since,  owing  to  the  similarity  of  the  triangles  LKB,  NMF, 
as  LB  is  to  BK,  so  is  NF  to  FM, 
and,  owing  to  the  similarity  of  the  triangles  BKT,  FMP, 
as  KB  is  to  BT,  so  is  MF  to  FP, 
therefore,  ex  aequali ,  as  LB  is  to  BT,  so  is  NF  to  FP.  [v.  22] 
Again,  since,  owing  to  the  similarity  of  the  triangles  LTK,  NPM, 
as  LT  is  to  TK,  so  is  NP  to  PM, 
and,  owing  to  the  similarity  of  the  triangles  TKB,  PMF, 


358  EUCLID 

as  KT  is  to  TB ,  so  is  MP  to  PF; 
therefore,  ex  aequali ,  as  LT  is  to  TB ,  so  is  NP  to  PF.  [v.  22] 
But  it  was  also  proved  that,  as  TB  is  to  BL ,  so  is  PF  to  FN. 

Therefore,  ex  aequali ,  as  TL  is  to  LB,  so  is  PN  to  NF.  [v.  22] 

Therefore  in  the  triangles  LTB,  NPF  the  sides  are  proportional; 

therefore  the  triangles  LTB,  NPF  are  equiangular;  [vi.  5] 

hence  they  are  also  similar.  [vi.  Def.  1] 

Therefore  the  pyramid  of  which  the  triangle  BKT  is  the  base  and  the  point 
L  the  vertex  is  also  similar  to  the  pyramid  of  which  the  triangle  FMP  is  the 
base  and  the  point  N  the  vertex, 

for  they  are  contained  by  similar  planes  equal  in  multitude.  [xi.  Def.  9] 
But  similar  pyramids  which  have  triangular  bases  are  to  one  another  in  the 
triplicate  ratio  of  their  corresponding  sides.  [xn.  8] 

Therefore  the  pyramid  BKTL  has  to  the  pyramid  FMPN  the  ratio  tripli¬ 
cate  of  that  which  BK  has  to  FM. 

Similarly,  by  joining  straight  lines  from  A,  W,  D,  V,  C ,  U  to  K ,  and  from 
E,  S,  H,  R,  G,  Q  to  M ,  and  setting  up  on  each  of  the  triangles  pyramids  which 
have  the  same  vertex  with  the  cones, 

we  can  prove  that  each  of  the  similarly  arranged  pyramids  will  also  have  to 
each  similarly  arranged  pyramid  the  ratio  triplicate  of  that  which  the  corres¬ 
ponding  side  BK  has  to  the  corresponding  side  FM,  that  is,  which  BD  has  to 
FH. 

And,  as  one  of  the  antecedents  is  to  one  of  the  consequents,  so  are  all  the 
antecedents  to  all  the  consequents;  [v.  12] 

therefore  also,  as  the  pyramid  BKTL  is  to  the  pyramid  FMPN ,  so  is  the  whole 
pyramid  of  which  the  polygon  ATBUCVDW  is  the  base  and  the  point  L  the 
vertex  to  the  whole  pyramid  of  which  the  polygon  EPFQGRHS  is  the  base  and 
the  point  N  the  vertex; 

hence  also  the  pyramid  of  which  A  TB  UCVDW  is  the  base  and  the  point  L  the 
vertex  has  to  the  pyramid  of  which  the  polygon  EPFQGRHS  is  the  base  and 
the  point  RT  the  vertex  the  ratio  triplicate  of  that  which  BD  has  to  FH. 

But,  by  hypothesis,  the  cone  of  which  the  circle  A  BCD  is  the  base  and  the 
point  L  the  vertex  has  also  to  the  solid  0  the  ratio  triplicate  of  that  which  BD 
has  to  FH; 

therefore,  as  the  cone  of  which  the  circle  ABCD  is  the  base  and  the  point  L  the 
vertex  is  to  the  solid  0,  so  is  the  pyramid  of  which  the  polygon  ATBUCVDW 
is  the  base  and  L  the  vertex  to  the  pyramid  of  which  the  polygon  EPFQGRHS 
is  the  base  and  the  point  N  the  vertex; 

therefore,  alternately,  as  the  cone  of  which  the  circle  ABCD  is  the  base  and  L 
the  vertex  is  to  the  pyramid  contained  in  it  of  which  the  polygon  A  TBUCVDW 
is  the  base  and  L  the  vertex,  so  is  the  solid  0  to  the  pyramid  of  which  the  poly¬ 
gon  EPFQGRHS  is  the  base  and  N  the  vertex.  [v.  16] 

But  the  said  cone  is  greater  than  the  pyramid  in  it; 

for  it  encloses  it. 

Therefore  the  solid  0  is  also  greater  than  the  pyramid  of  which  the  polygon 
EPFQGRHS  is  the  base  and  N  the  vertex. 

But  it  is  also  less: 

which  is  impossible. 

Therefore  the  cone  of  which  the  circle  ABCD  is  the  base  and  L  the  vertex 


ELEMENTS  XII  359 

has  not  to  any  solid  less  than  the  cone  of  which  the  circle  EFGH  is  the  base  and 
the  point  N  the  vertex  the  ratio  triplicate  of  that  which  BD  has  to  FH. 

Similarly  we  can  prove  that  neither  has  the  cone  EFGHN  to  any  solid  less 
than  the  cone  ABCDL  the  ratio  triplicate  of  that  which  FH  has  to  BD. 

I  say  next  that  neither  has  the  cone  ABCDL  to  any  solid  greater  than  the 
cone  EFGHN  the  ratio  triplicate  of  that  which  BD  has  to  FH. 

For,  if  possible,  let  it  have  that  ratio  to  a  greater  solid  0. 

Therefore,  inversely,  the  solid  0  has  to  the  cone  ABCDL  the  ratio  triplicate 
of  that  which  FH  has  to  BD. 

But,  as  the  solid  0  is  to  the  cone  ABCDL ,  so  is  the  cone  EFGHN  to  some 
solid  less  than  the  cone  ABCDL. 

Therefore  the  cone  EFGHN  also  has  to  some  solid  less  than  the  cone  ABCDL 
the  ratio  triplicate  of  that  which  FH  has  to  BD : 

which  was  proved  impossible. 

Therefore  the  cone  ABCDL  has  not  to  any  solid  greater  than  the  cone 
EFGHN  the  ratio  triplicate  of  that  which  BD  has  to  FH. 

But  it  was  proved  that  neither  has  it  this  ratio  to  a  less  solid  than  the  cone 
EFGHN. 

Therefore  the  cone  ABCDL  has  to  the  cone  EFGHN  the  ratio  triplicate  of 
that  which  BD  has  to  FH. 

But,  as  the  cone  is  to  the  cone,  so  is  the  cylinder  to  the  cylinder, 
for  the  cylinder  which  is  on  the  same  base  as  the  cone  and  of  equal  height  with 
it  is  triple  of  the  cone;  [xn.  10] 

therefore  the  cylinder  also  has  to  the  cylinder  the  ratio  triplicate  of  that  which 
BD  has  to  FH. 

Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  13 

If  a  cylinder  be  cut  by  a  plane  which  is  parallel  to  its  opposite  planes ,  then,  as  the 
cylinder  is  to  the  cylinder ,  so  will  the  axis  be  to  the  axis. 

For  let  the  cylinder  AD  be  cut  by  the  plane  GH  which  is  parallel  to  the  op¬ 
posite  planes  A B,  CD, 

and  let  the  plane  GH  meet  the  axis  at  the  point  K\ 

I  say  that,  as  the  cylinder  BG  is  to  the  cylinder  GD ,  so  is  the  axis  EK  to  the 
axis  KF. 

For  let  the  axis  EF  be  produced 
in  both  directions  to  the  points 
L,  M, 

and  let  there  be  set  out  any 
number  whatever  of  axes  EN , 
NL  equal  to  the  axis  EK, 
and  any  number  whatever  FO , 
OM  equal  to  FK ; 

and  let  the  cylinder  PTF  on  the  axis  LM  be  conceived  of  which  the  circles  PQ, 
VW  are  the  bases. 

Let  planes  be  carried  through  the  points  N,  0  parallel  to  AB,  CD  and  to  the 
bases  of  the  cylinder  PW, 

and  let  them  produce  the  circles  RS,  TU  about  the  centres  N,  0. 

Then,  since  the  axes  LN,  NE,  EK  are  equal  to  one  another, 


U  w 


360  EUCLID 

therefore  the  cylinders  QR,  RB ,  BG  are  to  one  another  as  their  bases,  [xn.  11] 
But  the  bases  are  equal ; 

therefore  the  cylinders  QR,  RB,  BG  are  also  equal  to  one  another. 

Since  then  the  axes  LN ,  NE,  EK  are  equal  to  one  another, 

and  the  cylinders  QR,  RB,  BG  are  also  equal  to  one  another, 
and  the  multitude  of  the  former  is  equal  to  the  multitude  of  the  latter, 
therefore,  whatever  multiple  the  axis  KL  is  of  the  axis  EK,  the  same  multiple 
also  will  the  cylinder  QG  be  of  the  cylinder  GB. 

For  the  same  reason,  whatever  multiple  the  axis  MK  is  of  the  axis  KF,  the 
same  multiple  also  is  the  cylinder  W G  of  the  cylinder  GD. 

And,  if  the  axis  KL  is  equal  to  the  axis  KM,  the  cylinder  QG  will  also  be 
equal  to  the  cylinder  GW, 

if  the  axis  is  greater  than  the  axis,  the  cylinder  will  also  be  greater  than  the 
cylinder, 

and  if  less,  less. 

Thus,  there  being  four  magnitudes,  the  axes  EK,  KF  and  the  cylinders  BG, 
GD, 

there  have  been  taken  equimultiples  of  the  axis  EK  and  of  the  cylinder  BG, 
namely  the  axis  LK  and  the  cylinder  QG, 

and  equimultiples  of  the  axis  KF  and  of  the  cylinder  GD,  namely  the  axis  KM 
and  the  cylinder  GW ; 

and  it  has  been  proved  that, 

if  the  axis  KL  is  in  excess  of  the  axis  KM,  the  cylinder  QG  is  also  in  excess  of 
the  cylinder  GW, 

if  equal,  equal, 
and  if  less,  less. 

Therefore,  as  the  axis  EK  is  to  the  axis  KF,  so  is  the  cylinder  BG  to  the  cyl¬ 
inder  GD.  [v.  Def.  5] 

Q.  E.  D. 


Proposition  14 

Cones  and  cylinders  which  are  on  equal  bases  are  to  one  another  as  their  heights . 
For  let  EB,  FD  be  cylinders  on  equal  bases,  the  circles  AB,  CD ; 

I  say  that,  as  the  cylinder  EB  is  to  the  cyl¬ 
inder  FD,  so  is  the  axis  GH  to  the  axis  KL. 

For  let  the  axis  KL  be  produced  to  the 
point  N, 

let  LN  be  made  equal  to  the  axis  GH, 
and  let  the  cylinder  CM  be  conceived  about 
LN  as  axis. 

Since  then  the  cylinders  EB,  CM  are  of  the 
same  height,  they  are  to  one  another  as  their 
bases  [xn.  11] 

But  the  bases  are  equal  to  one  another: 

therefore  the  cylinders  EB,  CM  are  also  equal. 

And,  since  the  cylinder  FM  has  been  cut  by  the  plane  CD  which  is  parallel  to 
its  opposite  planes, 

therefore,  as  the  cylinder  CM  is  to  the  cylinder  FD,  so  is  the  axis  LN  to  the 
axis  KL.  [xn.  13] 


361 


ELEMENTS  XII 

But  the  cylinder  CM  is  equal  to  the  cylinder  EB , 

and  the  axis  LN  to  the  axis  GH; 
therefore,  as  the  cylinder  EB  is  to  the  cylinder  FD ,  so  is  the  axis  GH  to  the  axis 
KL. 

But,  as  the  cylinder  EB  is  to  the  cylinder  FD ,  so  is  the  cone  ABG  to  the  cone 
CDK.  [xn.  10] 

Therefore  also,  as  the  axis  GH  is  to  the  axis  KL,  so  is  the  cone  ABG  to  the 
cone  CDK  and  the  cylinder  EB  to  the  cylinder  FD.  Q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  15 

In  equal  cones  and  cylinders  the  bases  are  reciprocally  proportional  to  the  heights; 
and  those  cones  and  cylinders  in  which  the  bases  are  reciprocally  proportional  to 
the  heights  are  equal. 

Let  there  be  equal  cones  and  cylinders  of  which  the  circles  ABCD ,  EFGH 
are  the  bases; 

let  AC,  EG  be  the  diameters  of  the  bases, 
and  KL,  MN  the  axes,  which  are  also  the  heights  of  the  cones  or  cylinders; 
let  the  cylinders  AO,  EP  be  completed. 

I  say  that  in  the  c}dinders  AO,  EP  the  bases  are  reciprocally  proportional  to 
the  heights, 

that  is,  as  the  base  ABCD  is  to  the  base  EFGH,  so  is  the  height  MN  to  the 
height  KL. 


For  the  height  LK  is  either  equal  to  the  height  MN  or  not  equal. 

First,  let  it  be  equal. 

Now  the  cylinder  AO  is  also  equal  to  the  cylinder  EP. 

But  cones  and  cjdinders  which  are  of  the  same  height  are  to  one  another  as 
their  bases;  [xn.  11] 

therefore  the  base  ABCD  is  also  equal  to  the  base  EFGH. 

Hence  also,  reciprocally,  as  the  base  ABCD  is  to  the  base  EFGH ,  so  is  the 
height  MN  to  the  height  KL. 

Next,  let  the  height  LK  not  be  equal  to  MN, 

but  let  MN  be  greater; 

from  the  height  MN  let  QN  be  cut  off  equal  to  KL, 
through  the  point  Q  let  the  cylinder  EP  be  cut  by  the  plane  TUS  parallel  to 
the  planes  of  the  circles  EFGH,  RP, 

and  let  the  cylinder  ES  be  conceived  erected  from  the  circle  EFGH  as  base  and 
with  height  NQ. 

Now,  since  the  cylinder  AO  is  equal  to  the  cylinder  EP, 
therefore,  as  the  cylinder  AO  is  to  the  cylinder  ES,  so  is  the  cylinder  EP  to  the 
cylinder  ES.  [v.  7] 


362  EUCLID 

But,  as  the  cylinder  AO  is  to  the  cylinder  ES ,  so  is  the  base  A  BCD  to  the 
base  EFGH, 

for  the  cylinders  AO ,  ES  are  of  the  same  height;  [xn.  11] 
and,  as  the  cylinder  EP  is  to  the  cylinder  ES,  so  is  the  height  MN  to  the  height 
QN, 

for  the  cylinder  EP  has  been  cut  by  a  plane  which  is  parallel  to  its  opposite 
planes.  [xn.  13] 

Therefore  also,  as  the  base  ABCD  is  to  the  base  EFGH,  so  is  the  height  MN 
to  the  height  QN.  [v.  11] 

But  the  height  QN  is  equal  to  the  height  KL ; 
therefore,  as  the  base  ABCD  is  to  the  base  EFGH,  so  is  the  height  MN  to  the 
height  KL . 

Therefore  in  the  cylinders  AO,  EP  the  bases  are  reciprocally  proportional  to 
the  heights. 

Next,  in  the  cylinders  AO,  EP  let  the  bases  be  reciprocally  proportional  to 
the  heights, 

that  is,  as  the  base  ABCD  is  to  the  base  EFGH,  so  let  the  height  MN  be  to  the 
height  KL) 

I  say  that  the  cylinder  AO  is  equal  to  the  cylinder  EP. 

For,  with  the  same  construction, 

since,  as  the  base  ABCD  is  to  the  base  EFGH,  so  is  the  height  MN  to  the 
height  KL, 

while  the  height  KL  is  equal  to  the  height  QN, 
therefore,  as  the  base  ABCD  is  to  the  base  EFGH,  so  is  the  height  MN  to  the 
height  QN. 

But,  as  the  base  ABCD  is  to  the  base  EFGH,  so  is  the  cylinder  AO  to  the 
cylinder  ES, 

for  they  are  of  the  same  height;  [xii.  11] 

and,  as  the  height  MN  is  to  QN,  so  is  the  cylinder  EP  to  the  cylinder  ES; 

[xii.  13] 

therefore,  as  the  cylinder  AO  is  to  the  cylinder  ES,  so  is  the  cylinder  EP  to  the 
cylinder  ES.  [v.  11] 

Therefore  the  cylinder  AO  is  equal  to  the  cylinder  EP.  [v.  9] 

And  the  same  is  true  for  the  cones  also.  Q.  e.  d. 


Proposition  16 

Given  two  circles  about  the  same  centre,  to  inscribe  in  the  greater  circle  an  equi¬ 
lateral  polygon  with  an  even  number  of  sides  which  does  not  touch  the  lesser  circle. 

Let  ABCD ,  EFGH  be  the  two  given  circles 
about  the  same  centre  K; 

thus  it  is  required  to  inscribe  in  the  greater 
circle  ABCD  an  equilateral  polygon  with  an 
even  number  of  sides  which  does  not  touch  the 
circle  EFGH. 

For  let  the  straight  line  BKD  be  drawn 
through  the  centre  K, 

and  from  the  point  G  let  GA  be  drawn  at  right 
angles  to  the  straight  line  BD  and  carried 
through  to  C ; 


363 


ELEMENTS  XII 

therefore  AC  touches  the  circle  EFGH.  [hi.  16,  Por.] 

Then,  bisecting  the  circumference  BAD ,  bisecting  the  half  of  it,  and  doing 
this  continually,  we  shall  leave  a  circumference  less  than  AD.  [x.  1] 

Let  such  be  left,  and  let  it  be  LD; 

from  L  let  LM  be  drawn  perpendicular  to  BD  and  carried  through  to  N , 

and  let  LD,  DN  be  joined; 
therefore  LD  is  equal  to  DN.  [hi.  3,  i.  4] 

Now,  since  LN  is  parallel  to  AC, 

and  AC  touches  the  circle  EFGH , 
therefore  LN  does  not  touch  the  circle  EFGH ; 
therefore  LD,  DN  are  far  from  touching  the  circle  EFGH. 

If  then  we  fit  into  the  circle  ABCD  straight  lines  equal  to  the  straight  line 
LD  and  placed  continuously,  there  will  be  inscribed  in  the  circle  ABCD  an 
equilateral  polygon  with  an  even  number  of  sides  which  does  not  touch  the 
lesser  circle  EFGH.  q.  e.  f. 


Proposition  17 

Given  two  spheres  about  the  same  centre,  to  inscribe  in  the  greater  sphere  a  poly¬ 
hedral  solid  which  does  not  touch  the  lesser  sphere  at  its  surface. 

Let  two  spheres  be  conceived  about  the  same  centre  A ; 
thus  it  is  required  to  inscribe  in  the  greater  sphere  a  polyhedral  solid  which 
does  not  touch  the  lesser  sphere  at  its  surface. 


Let  the  spheres  be  cut  by  any  plane  through  the  centre; 

then  the  sections  will  be  circles, 


364  EUCLID 

inasmuch  as  the  sphere  was  produced  by  the  diameter  remaining  fixed  and  the 
semicircle  being  carried  round  it;  [xi.  Def.  14] 

hence,  in  whatever  position  we  conceive  the  semicircle  to  be,  the  plane  carried 
through  it  will  produce  a  circle  on  the  circumference  of  the  sphere. 

And  it  is  manifest  that  this  circle  is  the  greatest  possible, 
inasmuch  as  the  diameter  of  the  sphere,  which  is  of  course  the  diameter  both  of 
the  semicircle  ana  of  the  circle,  is  greater  than  all  the  straight  lines  drawn 
across  in  the  circle  or  the  sphere. 

Let  then  BCDE  be  the  circle  in  the  greater  sphere, 

and  FGH  the  circle  in  the  lesser  sphere; 
let  two  diameters  in  them,  BD,  CE ,  be  drawn  at  right  angles  to  one  another; 
then,  given  the  two  circles  BCDE ,  FGH  about  the  same  centre,  let  there  be 
inscribed  in  the  greater  circle  BCDE  an  equilateral  polygon  with  an  even  num¬ 
ber  of  sides  which  does  not  touch  the  lesser  circle  FGH , 

let  BK,  KL,  LM ,  ME  be  its  sides  in  the  quadrant  BE, 
let  KA  be  joined  and  carried  through  to  N, 
let  AO  be  set  up  from  the  point  A  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  of  the  circle 
BCDE ,  and  let  it  meet  the  surface  of  the  sphere  at  0, 

and  through  AO  and  each  of  the  straight  lines  BD,  KN  let  planes  be  carried; 
they  will  then  make  greatest  circles  on  the  surface  of  the  sphere,  for  the  reason 
stated. 

Let  them  make  such, 

and  in  them  let  BOD ,  KON  be  the  semicircles  on  BD,  KN. 

Now,  since  OA  is  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  of  the  circle  BCDE, 
therefore  all  the  planes  through  OA  are  also  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  of  the 
circle  BCDE ;  [xi.  18] 

hence  the  semicircles  BOD,  KON  are  also  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  of  the 
circle  BCDE. 

And,  since  the  semicircles  BED,  BOD,  KON  are  equal, 

for  they  are  on  the  equal  diameters  BD,  KN, 
therefore  the  quadrants  BE,  BO,  KO  are  also  equal  to  one  another. 

Therefore  there  are  as  many  straight  lines  in  the  quadrants  BO,  KO  equal  to 
the  straight  lines  BK,  KL,  LM,  ME  as  there  are  sides  of  the  polygon  in  the 
quadrant  BE. 

Let  them  be  inscribed,  and  let  them  be  BP,  PQ,  QR,  RO  and  KS,  ST,  TU, 
UO, 

let  SP,  TQ,  UR  be  joined, 

and  from  P,  S  let  perpendiculars  be  drawn  to  the  plane  of  the  circle  BCDE ; 

[xi.  11] 

these  will  fall  on  BD,  KN,  the  common  sections  of  the  planes, 
inasmuch  as  the  planes  of  BOD,  KON  are  also  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  of 
the  circle  BCDE.  [cf.  xi.  Def.  4] 

Let  them  so  fall,  and  let  them  be  PV,  SIT, 

and  let  JVV  be  joined. 

Now  since,  in  the  equal  semicircles  BOD,  KON,  equal  straight  lines  BP,  KS 
have  been  cut  off, 

and  the  perpendiculars  PV,  SW  have  been  drawn, 
therefore  PV  is  equal  to  STL,  and  BV  to  KW.  [m.  27,  i.  26] 

But  the  whole  BA  is  also  equal  to  the  whole  KA ; 


365 


ELEMENTS  XII 

therefore  the  remainder  V A  is  also  equal  to  the  remainder  WA; 
therefore,  as  BV  is  to  VA ,  so  is  KW  to  W A; 

therefore  WV  is  parallel  to  KB.  [vi.  2] 

And,  since  each  of  the  straight  lines  PV,  SW  is  at  right  angles  to  the  plane 
of  the  circle  BCDE , 

therefore  PE  is  parallel  to  SW.  [xi.  6] 

But  it  was  also  proved  equal  to  it; 

therefore  WV,  SP  are  also  equal  and  parallel.  [i.  33] 

And,  since  WV  is  parallel  to  SP, 

while  WV  is  parallel  to  KB, 
therefore  SP  is  also  parallel  to  KB.  [xi.  9] 

And  BP,  KS  join  their  extremities; 

therefore  the  quadrilateral  KBPS  is  in  one  plane, 
inasmuch  as,  if  two  straight  lines  be  parallel,  and  points  be  taken  at  random 
on  each  of  them,  the  straight  line  joining  the  points  is  in  the  same  plane  with 
the  parallels.  [xx.  7] 

For  the  same  reason 

each  of  the  quadrilaterals  SPQT,  TQRU  is  also  in  one  plane. 

But  the  triangle  URO  is  also  in  one  plane.  [xi.  2] 

If  then  we  conceive  straight  lines  joined  from  the  points  P,  S,  Q,  T,  R,  U  to 
A,  there  will  be  constructed  a  certain  polyhedral  solid  figure  between  the  cir¬ 
cumferences  BO,  KO ,  consisting  of  pyramids  of  which  the  quadrilaterals 
KBPS,  SPQT,  TQRU  and  the  triangle  URO  are  the  bases  and  the  point  A  the 
vertex. 

And,  if  we  make  the  same  construction  in  the  case  of  each  of  the  sides  KL, 
LM,  ME  as  in  the  case  of  BK,  and  further,  in  the  case  of  the  remaining  three 
quadrants, 

there  will  be  constructed  a  certain  polyhedral  figure  inscribed  in  the  sphere  and 
contained  by  pyramids,  of  which  the  said  quadrilaterals  and  the  triangle  URO, 
and  the  others  corresponding  to  them,  are  the  bases  and  the  point  A  the  vertex. 

I  say  that  the  said  polyhedron  will  not  touch  the  lesser  sphere  at  the  surface 
on  which  the  circle  FGH  is. 

Let  AX  be  drawn  from  the  point  A  perpendicular  to  the  plane  of  the  quadri¬ 
lateral  KBPS,  and  let  it  meet  the  plane  at  the  point  X;  [xi.  11] 

let  XB,  XK  be  joined. 

Then,  since  AX  is  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  of  the  quadrilateral  KBPS , 
therefore  it  is  also  at  right  angles  to  all  the  straight  lines  which  meet  it  and  are 
in  the  plane  of  the  quadrilateral.  [xi.  Def.  3] 

Therefore  AX  is  at  right  angles  to  each  of  the  straight  lines  BX,  XK. 

And,  since  A B  is  equal  to  AK, 

the  square  on  A B  is  also  equal  to  the  square  on  AK. 

And  the  squares  on  AX,  XB  are  equal  to  the  square  on  A B, 

for  the  angle  at  X  is  right;  [i.  47] 

and  the  squares  on  AX,  XK  are  equal  to  the  square  on  AK.  [id.] 
Therefore  the  squares  on  AX,  XB  are  equal  to  the  squares  on  AX,  XK. 
Let  the  square  on  AX  be  subtracted  from  each; 
therefore  the  remainder,  the  square  on  BX,  is  equal  to  the  remainder,  the 
square  on  XK; 


therefore  BX  is  equal  to  XK. 


366  EUCLID 

Similarly  we  can  prove  that  the  straight  lines  joined  from  X  to  P,  S  are 
equal  to  each  of  the  straight  lines  BX ,  XK. 

Therefore  the  circle  described  with  centre  X  and  distance  one  of  the  straight 
lines  XB,  XK  will  pass  through  P,  S  also, 

and  KBPS  will  be  a  quadrilateral  in  a  circle. 

Now,  since  KB  is  greater  than  WV, 

while  WV  is  equal  to  SP , 
therefore  KB  is  greater  than  SP. 

But  KB  is  equal  to  each  of  the  straight  lines  KS,  BP; 

therefore  each  of  the  straight  lines  KS,  BP  is  greater  than  SP. 

And,  since  KBPS  is  a  quadrilateral  in  a  circle, 

and  KB,  BP,  KS  are  equal,  and  PS  less, 
and  BX  is  the  radius  of  the  circle, 

therefore  the  square  on  KB  is  greater  than  double  of  the  square  on  BX. 

Let  KZ  be  drawn  from  K  perpendicular  to  BV. 

Then,  since  BD  is  less  than  double  of  DZ , 
and,  as  BD  is  to  DZ,  so  is  the  rectangle  DB ,  BZ  to  the  rectangle  DZ,  ZB, 
if  a  square  be  described  upon  BZ  and  the  parallelogram  on  ZD  be  completed, 
then  the  rectangle  DB,  BZ  is  also  less  than  double  of  the  rectangle  DZ,  ZB. 

And,  if  KD  be  joined, 

the  rectangle  DB,  BZ  is  equal  to  the  square  on  BK , 
and  the  rectangle  DZ,  ZB  equal  to  the  square  on  KZ;  [hi.  31,  vi.  8  and  Por.} 
therefore  the  square  on  KB  is  less  than  double  of  the  square  on  KZ. 

But  the  square  on  KB  is  greater  than  double  of  the  square  on  BX ; 
therefore  the  square  on  KZ  is  greater  than  the  square  on  BX. 

And,  since  BA  is  equal  to  KA, 

the  square  on  BA  is  equal  to  the  square  on  AK. 

And  the  squares  on  BX,  XA  are  equal  to  the  square  on  BA, 

and  the  squares  on  KZ,  ZA  equal  to  the  square  on  KA;  [i.  47] 
therefore  the  squares  on  BX,  XA  are  equal  to  the  squares  on  KZ,  ZA, 
and  of  these  the  square  on  KZ  is  greater  than  the  square  on  BX; 
therefore  the  remainder,  the  square  on  ZA,  is  less  than  the  square  on  XA. 

Therefore  AX  is  greater  than  AZ; 

therefore  AX  is  much  greater  than  AG. 

And  AX  is  the  perpendicular  on  one  base  of  the  polyhedron, 
and  AG  on  the  surface  of  the  lesser  sphere; 
hence  the  polyhedron  will  not  touch  the  lesser  sphere  on  its  surface. 

Therefore,  given  two  spheres  about  the  same  centre,  a  polyhedral  solid  has 
been  inscribed  in  the  greater  sphere  which  does  not  touch  the  lesser  sphere  at 
its  surface.  q.  e.  f. 

Porism.  But  if  in  another  sphere  also  a  polyhedral  solid  be  inscribed  similar 
to  the  solid  in  the  sphere  BCDE, 

the  polyhedral  solid  in  the  sphere  BCDE  has  to  the  polyhedral  solid  in  the 
other  sphere  the  ratio  triplicate  of  that  which  the  diameter  of  the  sphere  BCDE 
has  to  the  diameter  of  the  other  sphere. 

For,  the  solids  being  divided  into  their  pyramids  similar  in  multitude  and 
arrangement,  the  pyramids  will  be  similar. 

But  similar  pyramids  are  to  one  another  in  the  triplicate  ratio  of  their  cor¬ 
responding  sides;  [xn.  8,  Por.] 


ELEMENTS  XII  367 

therefore  the  pyramid  of  which  the  quadrilateral  KBPS  is  the  base,  and  the 
point  A  the  vertex,  has  to  the  similarly  arranged  pyramid  in  the  other  sphere 
the  ratio  triplicate  of  that  which  the  corresponding  side  has  to  the  correspond¬ 
ing  side,  that  is,  of  that  which  the  radius  AB  of  the  sphere  about  A  as  centre 
has  to  the  radius  of  the  other  sphere. 

Similarly  also  each  pyramid  of  those  in  the  sphere  about  A  as  centre  has  to 
each  similarly  arranged  pyramid  of  those  in  the  other  sphere  the  ratio  tripli¬ 
cate  of  that  which  AB  has  to  the  radius  of  the  other  sphere. 

And,  as  one  of  the  antecedents  is  to  one  of  the  consequents,  so  are  all  the 
antecedents  to  all  the  consequents;  [v.  12] 

hence  the  whole  polyhedral  solid  in  the  sphere  about  A  as  centre  has  to  the 
whole  polyhedral  solid  in  the  other  sphere  the  ratio  triplicate  of  that  which  AB 
has  to  the  radius  of  the  other  sphere,  that  is,  of  that  which  the  diameter  BD 
has  to  the  diameter  of  the  other  sphere.  Q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  18 

Spheres  are  to  one  another  in  the  triplicate  ratio  of  their  respective  diameters. 

Let  the  spheres  ABC ,  DEF  be  conceived, 

and  let  BC}  EF  be  their  diameters; 

I  say  that  the  sphere  ABC  has  to  the  sphere  DEF  the  ratio  triplicate  of  that 
which  BC  has  to  EF. 

For,  if  the  sphere  ABC  has  not  to  the  sphere  DEF  the  ratio  triplicate  of  that 
which  BC  has  to  EF , 

then  the  sphere  ABC  will  have  either  to  some  less  sphere  than  the  sphere  DEFy 
or  to  a  greater,  the  ratio  triplicate  of  that  which  BC  has  to  EF. 

First,  let  it  have  that  ratio  to  a  less  sphere  GHK , 


let  DEF  be  conceived  about  the  same  centre  with  GHK , 
let  there  be  inscribed  in  the  greater  sphere  DEF  a  polyhedral  solid  which  does 
not  touch  the  lesser  sphere  GHK  at  its  surface,  [xn.  17] 


368  EUCLID 

and  let  there  also  be  inscribed  in  the  sphere  ABC  a  polyhedral  solid  similar  to 
the  polyhedral  solid  in  the  sphere  DEF ; 

therefore  the  polyhedral  solid  in  ABC  has  to  the  polyhedral  solid  in  DEF  the 
ratio  triplicate  of  that  which  BC  has  to  EF .  [xn.  17,  Por.] 

But  the  sphere  ABC  also  has  to  the  sphere  GHK  the  ratio  triplicate  of  that 
which  BC  has  to  EF; 

therefore,  as  the  sphere  ABC  is  to  the  sphere  GHK ,  so  is  the  polyhedral  solid 
in  the  sphere  ABC  to  the  polyhedral  solid  in  the  sphere  DEF; 
and,  alternately,  as  the  sphere  ABC  is  to  the  polyhedron  in  it,  so  is  the  sphere 
GHK  to  the  polyhedral  solid  in  the  sphere  DEF.  [v.  16] 

But  the  sphere  ABC  is  greater  than  the  polyhedron  in  it; 
therefore  the  sphere  GHK  is  also  greater  than  the  polyhedron  in  the  sphere 
DEF. 

But  it  is  also  less, 

for  it  is  enclosed  by  it. 

Therefore  the  sphere  ABC  has  not  to  a  less  sphere  than  the  sphere  DEF  the 
ratio  triplicate  of  that  which  the  diameter  BC  has  to  EF. 

Similarly  we  can  prove  that  neither  has  the  sphere  DEF  to  a  less  sphere  than 
the  sphere  ABC  the  ratio  triplicate  of  that  which  EF  has  to  BC. 

I  say  next  that  neither  has  the  sphere  ABC  to  any  greater  sphere  than  the 
sphere  DEF  the  ratio  triplicate  of  that  which  BC  has  to  EF. 

For,  if  possible,  let  it  have  that  ratio  to  a  greater,  LMN; 
therefore,  inversely,  the  sphere  LMN  has  to  the  sphere  ABC  the  ratio  tripli¬ 
cate  of  that  which  the  diameter  EF  has  to  the  diameter  BC. 

But,  inasmuch  as  LMN  is  greater  than  DEF, 
therefore,  as  the  sphere  LMN  is  to  the  sphere  ABC,  so  is  the  sphere  DEF  to 
some  less  sphere  than  the  sphere  ABC,  as  was  before  proved,  [xn.  2,  Lemma] 

Therefore  the  sphere  DEF  also  has  to  some  less  sphere  than  the  sphere  ABC 
the  ratio  triplicate  of  that  which  EF  has  to  BC : 

which  was  proved  impossible. 

Therefore  the  sphere  ABC  has  not  to  any  sphere  greater  than  the  sphere 
DEF  the  ratio  triplicate  of  that  which  BC  has  to  EF. 

But  it  was  proved  that  neither  has  it  that  ratio  to  a  less  sphere. 

Therefore  the  sphere  ABC  has  to  the  sphere  DEF  the  ratio  triplicate  of  that 
which  BC  has  to  EF.  q.  e.  d. 


BOOK  THIRTEEN 


PROPOSITIONS 
Proposition  1 


If  a  straight  line  be  cut  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio ,  the  square  on  the  greater  seg¬ 
ment  added  to  the  half  of  the  whole  is  five  times  the  square  on  the  half. 

For  let  the  straight  line  A B  be  cut  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio  at  the  point  C, 
and  let  AC  be  the  greater  segment; 
let  the  straight  line  AD  be  produced  in  a  straight  line  with  CA , 

and  let  AD  be  made  half  of  AB; 

I  say  that  the  square  on  CD  is  five  times  the 
square  on  AD. 

For  let  the  squares  AE,  DF  be  described  on 
AB,  DC , 

and  let  the  figure  in  DF  be  drawn; 
let  FC  be  carried  through  to  G. 

Now,  since  AB  has  been  cut  in  extreme  and 
mean  ratio  at  C, 

therefore  the  rectangle  AB,  BC  is  equal  to  the 
square  on  AC.  [vi.  Def.  3,  vi.  17] 

And  CE  is  the  rectangle  AB,  BC,  and  FH 
the  square  on  AC; 

therefore  CE  is  equal  to  FH. 

And,  since  BA  is  double  of  AD, 
while  BA  is  equal  to  KA,  and  AD  to  AH, 
therefore  KA  is  also  double  of  AH. 

But,  as  KA  is  to  AH,  so  is  CK  to  CH ;  [vi.  1] 

therefore  CK  is  double  of  CH. 

But  LH,  HC  are  also  double  of  CH. 

Therefore  KC  is  equal  to  LH,  HC. 

But  CE  was  also  proved  equal  to  HF; 

therefore  the  whole  square  AE  is  equal  to  the  gnomon  MNO. 

And,  since  BA  is  double  of  AD, 

the  square  on  BA  is  quadruple  of  the  square  on  AD, 
that  is,  AE  is  quadruple  of  DH. 

But  AE  is  equal  to  the  gnomon  MNO; 

therefore  the  gnomon  MNO  is  also  quadruple  of  AP; 
therefore  the  whole  DF  is  five  times  AP. 

And  DF  is  the  square  on  DC,  and  A  P  the  square  on  DA ; 

therefore  the  square  on  CD  is  five  times  the  square  on  DA. 
Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 


369 


370 


EUCLID 


Proposition  2 

If  the  square  on  a  straight  line  he  five  times  the  square  on  a  segment  of  it,  then , 
when  the  double  of  the  said  segment  is  cut  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio ,  the  greater 
segment  is  the  remaining  part  of  the  original  straight  line . 

For  let  the  square  on  the  straight  line  AB  be  five  times  the  square  on  the 
segment  AC  of  it, 

and  let  CD  be  double  of  AC; 

I  say  that,  when  CD  is  cut  in  extreme  and  mean 
ratio,  the  greater  segment  is  CB. 

Let  the  squares  AF,  CG  be  described  on  AB, 

CD  respectively, 

let  the  figure  in  A  F  be  drawn, 
and  let  BE  be  drawn  through. 

Now,  since  the  square  on  BA  is  five  times  the 
square  on  AC, 

AF  is  five  times  AH. 

Therefore  the  gnomon  MNO  is  quadruple  of 
AH. 

And,  since  DC  is  double  of  CA, 
therefore  the  square  on  DC  is  quadruple  of  the 
square  on  CA,  that  is,  CG  is  quadruple  of  AH. 

But  the  gnomon  MNO  was  also  proved  quad¬ 
ruple  of  AH; 

therefore  the  gnomon  MNO  is  equal  to  CG. 

And,  since  DC  is  double  of  CA, 

while  DC  is  equal  to  CK,  and  AC  to  CH, 

therefore  KB  is  also  double  of  BH.  [vi.  1] 

But  LH,  HB  are  also  double  of  HB; 

therefore  KB  is  equal  to  LH,  HB. 

But  the  whole  gnomon  MNO  was  also  proved  equal  to  the  whole  CG; 
therefore  the  remainder  HF  is  equal  to  BG. 

And  BG  is  the  rectangle  CD,  DB, 

for  CD  is  equal  to  DG ; 
and  HF  is  the  square  on  CB ; 

therefore  the  rectangle  CD,  DB  is  equal  to  the  square  on  CB. 

Therefore,  as  DC  is  to  CB,  so  is  CB  to  BD. 

But  DC  is  greater  than  CB; 

therefore  CB  is  also  greater  than  BD. 

Therefore,  when  the  straight  line  CD  is  cut  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio,  CB 
is  the  greater  segment. 

Therefore  etc.  Q.  e.  d. 


Lemma 

That  the  double  of  AC  is  greater  than  BC  is  to  be  proved  thus. 

If  not,  let  BC  be,  if  possible,  double  of  CA. 

Therefore  the  square  on  BC  is  quadruple  of  the  square  on  CA; 

therefore  the  squares  on  BC,  CA  are  five  times  the  square  on  CA. 

But,  by  hypothesis,  the  square  on  BA  is  also  five  times  the  square  on  CA; 


371 


ELEMENTS  XIII 

therefore  the  square  on  BA  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  BC ,  CA : 

which  is  impossible.  [n.  4] 

Therefore  CB  is  not  double  of  AC. 

Similarly  we  can  prove  that  neither  is  a  straight  line  less  than  CB  double  of 
CA; 

for  the  absurdity  is  much  greater. 

Therefore  the  double  of  AC  is  greater  than  CB.  q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  3 

If  a  straight  line  be  cut  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio ,  the  square  on  the  lesser  segment 
added  to  the  half  of  the  greater  segment  is  five  times  the  square  on  the  half  of  the 
greater  segment. 

For  let  any  straight  line  AB  be  cut  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio  at  the  point  C, 

let  AC  be  the  greater  segment, 
and  let  AC  be  bisected  at  I) ; 

I  say  that  the  square  on  BD  is  five  times  the 
square  on  DC. 

For  let  the  square  AE  be  described  on  AB, 
and  let  the  figure  be  drawn  double. 

Since  AC  is  double  of  DC, 
therefore  the  square  on  AC  is  quadruple  of 
the  square  on  DC, 
that  is,  RS  is  quadruple  of  FG . 

And,  since  the  rectangle  AB,  BC  is  equal 
to  the  square  on  AC, 

and  CE  is  the  rectangle  AB,  BC, 
therefore  CE  is  equal  to  RS. 

But  RS  is  quadruple  of  FG; 

therefore  CE  is  also  quadruple  of  FG. 

Again,  since  AD  is  equal  to  DC, 

HK  is  also  equal  to  KF. 

Hence  the  square  GF  is  also  equal  to  the  square  HL. 

Therefore  GK  is  equal  to  KL,  that  is  MN  to  NE; 

hence  MF  is  also  equal  to  FE. 

But  MF  is  equal  to  CG; 

therefore  CG  is  also  equal  to  FE. 

Let  CN  be  added  to  each ; 

therefore  the  gnomon  OPQ  is  equal  to  CE. 

But  CE  was  proved  quadruple  of  GF; 

therefore  the  gnomon  OPQ  is  also  quadruple  of  the  square  FG. 
Therefore  the  gnomon  OPQ  and  the  square  FG  are  five  times  FG. 

But  the  gnomon  OPQ  and  the  square  FG  are  the  square  DN. 

And  DN  is  the  square  on  DB,  and  GF  the  square  on  DC. 

Therefore  the  square  on  DB  is  five  times  the  square  on  DC.  q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  4 

If  a  straight  line  be  cut  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio ,  the  square  on  the  whole  and  the 
square  on  the  lesser  segment  together  are  triple  of  the  square  on  the  greater  segment. 
Let  AB  be  a  straight  line, 


G 

0.'' 

yf 
/  » 

/ 

.y 

Q 

/ 

K 

F 

372  EUCLID 

let  it  be  cut  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio  at  C,  and  let  AC  be  the  greater  segment; 

I  say  that  the  squares  on  A  B,  BC  are  triple  of  the 
square  on  CA. 

For  let  the  square  ADEB  be  described  on  ABy 
and  let  the  figure  be  drawn. 

Since,  then,  AB  has  been  cut  in  extreme  and  mean 
ratio  at  C, 

and  AC  is  the  greater  segment, 
therefore  the  rectangle  AB ,  BC  is  equal  to  the  square 
on  AC.  [vi.  Def.  3,  vi.  17] 

And  AK  is  the  rectangle  AB,  BC ,  and  HG  the  square 
on  AC; 

therefore  AK  is  equal  to  HG . 

And,  since  AF  is  equal  to  FE , 

let  CK  be  added  to  each; 
therefore  the  whole  AK  is  equal  to  the  whole  CE; 
therefore  AK,  CE  are  double  of  AK. 

But  AK,  CE  are  the  gnomon  LMN  and  the  square  CK; 

therefore  the  gnomon  LMN  and  the  square  CK  are  double  of  AK. 

But,  further,  AK  was  also  proved  equal  to  HG; 
therefore  the  gnomon  LMN  and  the  squares  CK,  HG  are  triple  of  the  square 
HG. 

And  the  gnomon  LMN  and  the  squares  CK,  HG  are  the  whole  square  AE 
and  CK,  which  are  the  squares  on  AB,  BC, 

while  HG  is  the  square  on  AC. 

Therefore  the  squares  on  AB,  BC  are  triple  of  the  square  on  AC. 

Q.  E.  D. 


Proposition  5 

1  A 

If  a  straight  line  be  cut  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio ,  and  there  be  added  to  it  a  straight 
line  equal  to  the  greater  segment,  the  whole  straight  line  has  been  cut  in  extreme  and 
mean  ratio ,  and  the  original  straight  line  is  the  greater  segment. 

For  let  the  straight  line  A B  be  cut  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio  at  the  point  C, 
let  AC  be  the  greater  segment,  and  let  AD 
be  equal  to  AC. 

I  say  that  the  straight  line  DB  has  been  cut 
in  extreme  and  mean  ratio  at  A,  and  the  ori¬ 
ginal  straight  line  A B  is  the  greater  segment. 

For  let  the  square  AE  be  described  on  AB, 
and  let  the  figure  be  drawn. 

Since  AB  has  been  cut  in  extreme  and 
mean  ratio  at  C, 

therefore  the  rectangle  AB,  BC  is  equal  to 
the  square  on  AC.  [vi.  Def.  3,  vi.  17] 

And  CE  is  the  rectangle  AB,  BC,  and  CH  the  square  on  AC; 

therefore  CE  is  equal  to  HC. 

But  HE  is  equal  to  CE, 


373 


ELEMENTS  XIII 

and  DH  is  equal  to  HC; 
therefore  DH  is  also  equal  to  HE . 

Therefore  the  whole  DK  is  equal  to  the  whole  AE. 

And  DK  is  the  rectangle  BD,  DA, 

for  AD  is  equal  to  DL ; 
and  AE  is  the  square  on  45; 

therefore  the  rectangle  BD ,  DA  is  equal  to  the  square  on  AB. 
Therefore,  as  DB  is  to  BA,  so  is  BA  to  AD.  [vi.  17] 

And  DB  is  greater  than  BA ; 

therefore  BA  is  also  greater  than  AD.  [v.  14] 

Therefore  DB  has  been  cut  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio  at  A,  and  AB  is  the 
greater  segment.  Q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  6 

If  a  rational  straight  line  be  cut  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio,  each  of  the  segments  is 
the  irrational  straight  line  called  apotome. 

Let  AB  be  a  rational  straight  line, 
let  it  be  cut  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio  at  C, 

D _ A _ C  B  and  let  AC  be  the  greater  segment; 

I  say  that  each*of  the  straight  lines  AC,  CB 
is  the  irrational  straight  line  called  apotome. 
For  let  BA  be  produced,  and  let  AD  be  made  half  of  BA. 

Since,  then,  the  straight  line  AB  has  been  cut  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio, 
and  to  the  greater  segment  AC  is  added  AD  which  is  half  of  AB, 
therefore  the  square  on  CD  is  five  times  the  square  on  DA.  [xm.  1] 
Therefore  the  square  on  CD  has  to  the  square  on  DA  the  ratio  which  a  num¬ 
ber  has  to  a  number; 

therefore  the  square  on  CD  is  commensurable  with  the  square  on  DA.  [x.  6] 
But  the  square  on  DA  is  rational, 

for  DA  is  rational,  being  half  of  AB  which  is  rational; 

therefore  the  square  on  CD  is  also  rational;  [x.  Def.  4] 

therefore  CD  is  also  rational. 

And,  since  the  square  on  CD  has  not  to  the  square  on  DA  the  ratio  which  a 
square  number  has  to  a  square  number, 

therefore  CD  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  DA ;  [x.  9] 

therefore  CD,  DA  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only; 

therefore  AC  is  an  apotome.  [x.  73] 

Again,  since  AB  has  been  cut  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio, 
and  AC  is  the  greater  segment, 

therefore  the  rectangle  AB,  BC  is  equal  to  the  square  on  AC.  [vi.  Def.  3,  vi.  17] 
Therefore  the  square  on  the  apotome  AC,  if  applied  to  the  rational  straight 
line  AB,  produces  BC  as  breadth. 

But  the  square  on  an  apotome,  if  applied  to  a  rational  straight  line,  produces 
as  breadth  a  first  apotome;  [x.  97] 

therefore  CB  is  a  first  apotome. 

And  CA  was  also  proved  to  be  an  apotome. 

Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 


374 


EUCLID 


Proposition  7 

If  three  angles  of  an  equilateral  pentagon ,  taken  either  in  order  or  not  in  order ,  be 
equal ,  pentagon  will  be  equiangular. 

For  in  the  equilateral  pentagon  ABCDE  let,  first,  three  angles  taken  in  or¬ 
der,  those  at  A,  B ,  C,  be  equal  to  one  another;  A 

I  say  that  the  pentagon  ABODE  is  equiangular. 

For  let  AC,  BE,  FD  be  joined. 

Now,  since  the  two  sides  CB ,  BA  are  equal  to  the 
two  sides  BA,  AE  respectively, 
and  the  angle  CBA  is  equal  to  the  angle  BAE, 
therefore  the  base  AC  is  equal  to  the  base  BE, 
the  triangle  ABC  is  equal  to  the  triangle  ABE, 
and  the  remaining  angles  will  be  equal  to  the  remai 
angles,  namely  those  which  the  equal  sides  subtend,  [i.  4] 
that  is,  the  angle  BCA  to  the  angle  BE  A,  and  the  angle  ABE  to  the  angle  CAB ; 

hence  the  side  AF  is  also  equal  to  the  side  BF .  [i.  6] 

But  the  whole  AC  was  also  proved  equal  to  the  whole  BE ; 

therefore  the  remainder  FC  is  also  equal  to  the  remainder  FE . 

But  CD  is  also  equal  to  DE. 

Therefore  the  two  sides  FC,  CD  are  equal  to  the  two  sides  FE,  ED ; 
and  the  base  FD  is  common  to  them; 
therefore  the  angle  FCD  is  equal  to  the  angle  FED.  [i.  8] 

But  the  angle  BCA  was  also  proved  equal  to  the  angle  AEB; 
therefore  the  whole  angle  BCD  is  also  equal  to  the  whole  angle  AED. 

But,  by  hypothesis,  the  angle  BCD  is  equal  to  the  angles  at  A,  B ; 

therefore  the  angle  AED  is  also  equal  to  the  angles  at  A,  B. 
Similarly  we  can  prove  that  the  angle  CDE  is  also  equal  to  the  angles  at  A, 
B,  C; 

therefore  the  pentagon  ABCDE  is  equiangular. 

Next,  let  the  given  equal  angles  not  be  angles  taken  in  order,  but  let  the 
angles  at  the  points  A,  C,  D  be  equal; 

I  say  that  in  this  case  too  the  pentagon  ABCDE  is  equiangular. 

For  let  BD  be  joined. 

Then,  since  the  two  sides  BA,  AE  are  equal  to  the  two  sides  BC,  CD, 
and  they  contain  equal  angles, 
therefore  the  base  BE  is  equal  to  the  base  BD, 
the  triangle  ABE  is  equal  to  the  triangle  BCD, 
and  the  remaining  angles  will  be  equal  to  the  remaining  angles, 

namely  those  which  the  equal  sides  subtend;  [i.  4] 

therefore  the  angle  AEB  is  equal  to  the  angle  CDB. 

But  the  angle  BED  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  BDE, 

since  the  side  BE  is  also  equal  to  the  side  BD.  [i.  5] 

Therefore  the  whole  angle  AED  is  equal  to  the  whole  angle  CDE. 

But  the  angle  CDE  is,  by  hypothesis,  equal  to  the  angles  at  A,  C; 

therefore  the  angle  AED  is  also  equal  to  the  angles  at  A,  C. 

For  the  same  reason 

the  angle  ABC  is  also  equal  to  the  angles  at  A,  C,  D. 

Therefore  the  pentagon  ABCDE  is  equiangular.  q.  e.  d. 


ELEMENTS  XIII 


375 


K  \ 

^B 

i  \ 

/I 

Proposition  8 

If  in  an  equilateral  and  equiangular  pentagon  straight  lines  subtend  two  angles 
taken  in  order ,  they  cut  one  another  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio ,  and  their  greater 
segments  are  equal  to  the  side  of  the  pentagon. 

For  in  the  equilateral  and  equiangular  pentagon  ABCDE  let  the  straight 

lines  AC,  BE,  cutting  one  another  at  the  point  H, 
subtend  two  angles  taken  in  order,  the  angles  at 
A,  B; 

I  say  that  each  of  them  has  been  cut  in  extreme 
and  mean  ratio  at  the  point  H,  and  their  greater  seg¬ 
ments  are  equal  to  the  side  of  the  pentagon. 

For  let  the  circle  ABCDE  be  circumscribed  about 
the  pentagon  ABCDE.  [iv.  14] 

Then,  since  the  two  straight  lines  EA,  AB  are 
equal  to  the  two  AB,  BC, 
and  they  contain  equal  angles, 
therefore  the  base  BE  is  equal  to  the  base  AC, 
the  triangle  ABE  is  equal  to  the  triangle  ABC, 
and  the  remaining  angles  will  be  equal  to  the  remaining  angles  respectively, 
namely  those  which  the  equal  sides  subtend.  [i.  4] 

Therefore  the  angle  BAC  is  equal  to  the  angle  ABE ; 

therefore  the  angle  AHE  is  double  of  the  angle  BAH.  [i.  32] 
But  the  angle  EAC  is  also  double  of  the  angle  BAC, 
inasmuch  as  the  circumference  EDC  is  also  double  of  the  circumference  CB; 

[hi.  28,  vi.  33] 

therefore  the  angle  HAE  is  equal  to  the  angle  AHE ; 
hence  the  straight  line  HE  is  also  equal  to  EA,  that  is,  to  AB.  [i.  6] 
And,  since  the  straight  line  BA  is  equal  to  AE, 

the  angle  ABE  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  AEB.  [i.  5] 

But  the  angle  ABE  was  proved  equal  to  the  angle  BAH; 

therefore  the  angle  BEA  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  BAH. 

And  the  angle  ABE  is  common  to  the  two  triangles  ABE  and  ABH; 
therefore  the  remaining  angle  BAE  is  equal  to  the  remaining  angle  AHB;  [i.  32] 
therefore  the  triangle  ABE  is  equiangular  with  the  triangle  ABH; 

therefore,  proportionally,  as  EB  is  to  BA,  so  is  A B  to  BH.  [vi.  4] 
But  BA  is  equal  to  EH ; 

therefore,  as  BE  is  to  EH,  so  is  EH  to  HB. 

And  BE  is  greater  than  EH ; 

therefore  EH  is  also  greater  than  HB.  [v.  14] 

Therefore  BE  has  been  cut  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio  at  H,  and  the  greater 
segment  HE  is  equal  to  the  side  of  the  pentagon. 

Similarly  we  can  prove  that  AC  has  also  been  cut  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio 
at//,  and  its  greater  segment  C//  is  equal  to  the  side  of  the  pentagon.  q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  9 

If  the  side  of  the  hexagon  and  that  of  the  decagon  inscribed  in  the  same  circle  be  ad¬ 
ded  together,  the  whole  straight  line  has  been  cut  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio,  and  its 
greater  segment  is  the  side  of  the  hexagon. 


EUCLID 


376 

Let  ABC  be  a  circle; 
of  the  figures  inscribed  in  the  circle  ABC  let  BC  be  the  side  of  a  decagon,  CD 
that  of  a  hexagon, 

and  let  them  be  in  a  straight  line; 

I  say  that  the  whole  straight  line  BD  has  been  cut 
in  extreme  and  mean  ratio,  and  CD  is  its  greater 
segment. 

For  let  the  centre  of  the  circle,  the  point  E,  be 
taken, 

let  EB}  EC,  ED  be  joined, 
and  let  BE  be  carried  through  to  A . 

Since  BC  is  the  side  of  an  equilateral  decagon, 
therefore  the  circumference  ACB  is  five  times  the 
circumference  BC ; 

therefore  the  circumference  AC  is  quadruple  of  CB. 

But,  as  the  circumference  AC  is  to  CB,  so  is 
the  angle  AEG  to  the  angle  CEB ;  [vi.  33] 

therefore  the  angle  AEC  is  quadruple  of  the  angle  CEB . 


And,  since  the  angle  EBC  is  equal  to  the  angle  ECB,  [i.  5] 

therefore  the  angle  AEC  is  double  of  the  angle  ECB .  [i.  32] 

And,  since  the  straight  line  EC  is  equal  to  CD, 
for  each  of  them  is  equal  to  the  side  of  the  hexagon  inscribed  in  the  circle  ABC, 

[iv.  15,  Por.] 

the  angle  CED  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  CDE;  [i.  5] 

therefore  the  angle  ECB  is  double  of  the  angle  EDC.  [i.  32] 
But  the  angle  AEC  was  proved  double  of  the  angle  ECB; 


therefore  the  angle  AEC  is  quadruple  of  the  angle  EDC. 

But  the  angle  AEC  was  also  proved  quadruple  of  the  angle  BEC; 

therefore  the  angle  EDC  is  equal  to  the  angle  BEC . 

But  the  angle  EBD  is  common  to  the  two  triangles  BEC  and  BED; 
therefore  the  remaining  angle  BED  is  also  equal  to  the  remaining  angle  ECB; 

[i.  32] 

therefore  the  triangle  EBD  is  equiangular  with  the  triangle  EBC. 
Therefore,  proportionally,  as  DB  is  to  BE,  so  is  EB  to  BC.  [vi.  4] 

But  EB  is  equal  to  CD. 

Therefore,  as  BD  is  to  DC,  so  is  DC  to  CB. 

And  BD  is  greater  than  DC ; 

therefore  DC  is  also  greater  than  CB. 

Therefore  the  straight  line  BD  has  been  cut  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio,  and 
DC  is  its  greater  segment.  Q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  10 

If  an  equilateral  pentagon  be  inscribed  in  a  circle,  the  square  on  the  side  of  the  pent - 
agon  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  the  side  of  the  hexagon  and  on  that  of  the  deca¬ 
gon  inscribed  in  the  same  circle. 

Let  ABCDE  be  a  circle, 

and  let  the  equilateral  pentagon  ABCDE  be  inscribed  in  the  circle  ABCDE. 
I  say  that  the  square  on  the  side  of  the  pentagon  ABCDE  is  equal  to  the 


D 


ELEMENTS  XIII  377 

squares  on  the  side  of  the  hexagon  and  on  that  of  the  decagon  inscribed  in  the 
circle  ABODE . 

For  let  the  centre  of  the  circle,  the  point  F,  be  taken, 

let  AF  be  joined  and  carried  through  to  the  point  G, 
let  FB  be  joined, 

let  FH  be  drawn  from  F  perpendicular  to  AB  and  be  carried  through  to  K, 

let  AK,  KB  be  joined, 

let  FL  be  again  drawn  from  F  perpendicular  to  AK,  and  be  carried  through  to 

M, 

and  let  KN  be  joined. 

Since  the  circumference  A  BCG  is  equal 
to  the  circumference  AEDG, 

and  in  them  ABC  is  equal  to  AED , 
therefore  the  remainder,  the  circumference 
CG,  is  equal  to  the  remainder  GD. 

But  CD  belongs  to  a  pentagon; 
therefore  CG  belongs  to  a  decagon. 
And,  since  FA  is  equal  to  FB, 
and  FH  is  perpendicular, 
therefore  the  angle  AFK  is  also  equal  to 
the  angle  KFB.  [i.  5,  i.  26] 

Hence  the  circumference  AK  is  also 
equal  to  KB ;  [m.  26] 

therefore  the  circumference  A B  is  double 
of  the  circumference  BK; 
therefore  the  straight  line  AK  is  a  side  of  a  decagon. 

For  the  same  reason 

AK  is  also  double  of  KM. 

Now,  since  the  circumference  AB  is  double  of  the  circumference  BKy 
while  the  circumference  CD  is  equal  to  the  circumference  AB, 
therefore  the  circumference  CD  is  also  double  of  the  circumference  BK. 

But  the  circumference  CD  is  also  double  of  CG; 

therefore  the  circumference  CG  is  equal  to  the  circumference  BK. 

But  BK  is  double  of  KM,  since  KA  is  so  also; 

therefore  CG  is  also  double  of  KM. 

But,  further,  the  circumference  CB  is  also  double  of  the  circumference  BK, 
for  the  circumference  CB  is  equal  to  BA. 

Therefore  the  whole  circumference  GB  is  also  double  of  BM ; 

hence  the  angle  GFB  is  also  double  of  the  angle  BFM.  [vi.  33] 
But  the  angle  GFB  is  also  double  of  the  angle  FAB, 

for  the  angle  FAB  is  equal  to  the  angle  ABF. 

Therefore  the  angle  BFN  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  FAB. 

But  the  angle  ABF  is  common  to  the  two  triangles  ABF  and  BFN; 
therefore  the  remaining  angle  AFB  is  equal  to  the  remaining  angle  BNF;  [i.  32] 
therefore  the  triangle  ABF  is  equiangular  with  the  triangle  BFN. 
Therefore,  proportionally,  as  the  straight  line  A  B  is  to  BF,  so  is  FB  to  BN; 

[vi.  4] 

therefore  the  rectangle  AB,  BN  is  equal  to  the  square  on  BF.  [vi.  17] 
Again,  since  AL  is  equal  to  LK , 


378  EUCLID 

while  LN  is  common  and  at  right  angles, 
therefore  the  base  KN  is  equal  to  the  base  AN;  [i.  4] 

therefore  the  angle  LKN  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  LAN . 

But  the  angle  LAN  is  equal  to  the  angle  KBN ; 

therefore  the  angle  LKN  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  KBN. 

And  the  angle  at  A  is  common  to  the  two  triangles  AKB  and  AKN. 
Therefore  the  remaining  angle  AKB  is  equal  to  the  remaining  angle  KNA ; 

[i.  32] 

therefore  the  triangle  KB  A  is  equiangular  with  the  triangle  KNA. 
Therefore,  proportionally,  as  the  straight  line  BA  is  to  AK,  so  is  KA  to  AN ; 

[vi.  4] 

therefore  the  rectangle  BA,  AN  is  equal  to  the  square  on  AK.  [vi.  171 

But  the  rectangle  ABy  BN  was  also  proved  equal  to  the  square  on  BF; 
therefore  the  rectangle  ABy  BN  together  with  the  rectangle  BAy  ANy  that  is, 
the  square  on  BA  [n.  2],  is  equal  to  the  square  on  BF  together  with  the  square 
on  AK. 

And  BA  is  a  side  of  the  pentagon,  BF  of  the  hexagon  [iv.  15,  Por.],  and  AK 
of  the  decagon. 

Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  11 

If  in  a  circle  which  has  its  diameter  rational  an  equilateral  pentagon  be  inscribed , 
the  side  of  the  pentagon  is  the  irrational  straight  line  called  minor. 

For  in  the  circle  ABODE  which  has  its  diameter  rational  let  the  equilateral 
pentagon  ABODE  be  inscribed; 

I  say  that  the  side  of  the  pentagon  is  the  irrational  straight  line  called  minor. 
For  let  the  centre  of  the  circle,  the  point  Fy  be  taken, 
let  AFy  FB  be  joined  and  carried 
through  to  the  points,  Gy  Hy 
let  AC  be  joined, 
and  let  FK  be  made  a  fourth 
part  of  AF. 

Now  AF  is  rational; 
therefore  FK  is  also  rational. 

But  BF  is  also  rational; 
therefore  the  whole  BK  is  rational. 

And,  since  the  circumference 
ACG  is  equal  to  the  circumfer¬ 
ence  ADGy 

and  in  them  ABC  is  equal  to 
AEDy 

therefore  the  remainder  CG  is 
equal  to  the  remainder  GD. 

And,  if  we  join  ADy  we  conclude 

and  CD  is  double  of  CL. 

For  the  same  reason 

the  angles  at  M  are  also  right, 
and  AC  is  double  of  CM. 

Since  then  the  angle  ALC  is  equal  to  the  angle  AMFy 


379 


ELEMENTS  XIII 

and  the  angle  LAC  is  common  to  the  two  triangles  ACL  and  AMF, 
therefore  the  remaining  angle  ACL  is  equal  to  the  remaining  angle  MFA ; 

[i.  32] 

therefore  the  triangle  ACL  is  equiangular  with  the  triangle  AMF ; 
therefore,  proportionally,  as  LC  is  to  CA ,  so  is  MF  to  FA. 

And  the  doubles  of  the  antecedents  may  be  taken; 
therefore,  as  the  double  of  LC  is  to  CA ,  so  is  the  double  of  MF  to  FA. 

But,  as  the  double  of  MF  is  to  FA,  so  is  MF  to  the  half  of  FA ; 
therefore  also,  as  the  double  of  LC  is  to  CA,  so  is  MF  to  the  half  of  FA. 

And  the  halves  of  the  consequents  may  be  taken; 
therefore,  as  the  double  of  LC  is  to  the  half  of  CA,  so  is  MF  to  the  fourth  of  FA. 
And  DC  is  double  of  LC,  CM  is  half  of  CA,  and  FK  a  fourth  part  of  FA ; 

therefore,  as  DC  is  to  CM,  so  is  MF  to  FK. 

Componendo  also,  as  the  sum  of  DC,  CM  is  to  CM,  so  is  MK  to  KF;  [v.  18] 
therefore  also,  as  the  square  on  the  sum  of  DC,  CM  is  to  the  square  on  CM,  so 
is  the  square  on  MK  to  the  square  on  KF. 

And  since,  when  the  straight  line  subtending  two  sides  of  the  pentagon,  as 
AC,  is  cut  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio,  the  greater  segment  is  equal  to  the  side 
of  the  pentagon,  that  is,  to  DC,  [xm.  8] 

while  the  square  on  the  greater  segment  added  to  the  half  of  the  whole  is  five 
times  the  square  on  the  half  of  the  whole,  [xm.  1] 

and  CM  is  half  of  the  whole  AC, 

therefore  the  square  on  DC,  CM  taken  as  one  straight  line  is  five  times  the 
square  on  CM. 

But  it  was  proved  that,  as  the  square  on  DC,  CM  taken  as  one  straight  line  is 
to  the  square  on  CM,  so  is  the  square  on  MK  to  the  square  on  KF; 
therefore  the  square  on  MK  is  five  times  the  square  on  KF. 

But  the  square  on  KF  is  rational, 

for  the  diameter  is  rational; 
therefore  the  square  on  MK  is  also  rational; 
therefore  MK  is  rational. 

And,  since  BF  is  quadruple  of  FK, 

therefore  BK  is  five  times  KF; 

therefore  the  square  on  BK  is  twenty-five  times  the  square  on  KF. 

But  the  square  on  MK  is  five  times  the  square  on  KF; 

therefore  the  square  on  BK  is  five  times  the  square  on  KM ; 
therefore  the  square  on  BK  has  not  to  the  square  on  KM  the  ratio  which  a 
square  number  has  to  a  square  number; 

therefore  BK  is  incommensurable  in  length  with  KM.  [x.  9] 
And  each  of  them  is  rational. 

Therefore  BK,  KM  are  rational  straight  lines  commensurable  in  square  only. 
But,  if  from  a  rational  straight  line  there  be  subtracted  a  rational  straight 
line  which  is  commensurable  with  the  whole  in  square  only,  the  remainder  is 
irrational,  namely  an  apotome; 

therefore  MB  is  an  apotome  and  MK  the  annex  to  it.  [x.  73] 
I  say  next  that  MB  is  also  a  fourth  apotome. 

Let  the  square  on  N  be  equal  to  that  by  which  the  square  on  BK  is  greater 
than  the  square  on  KM; 

therefore  the  square  on  BK  is  greater  than  the  square  on  KM  by  the  square  onN. 


380  EUCLID 

And,  since  KF  is  commensurable  with  FB, 

componendo  also,  KB  is  commensurable  with  FB.  [x.  15] 

But  BF  is  commensurable  with  BH ; 

therefore  BK  is  also  commensurable  with  BH.  [x.  12] 

And,  since  the  square  on  BK  is  five  times  the  square  on  KM, 
therefore  the  square  on  BK  has  to  the  square  on  KM  the  ratio  which  5  has  to  1. 

Therefore,  convertendo,  the  square  on  BK  has  to  the  square  on  N  the  ratio 
which  5  has  to  4  [v.  19,  Por.],  and  this  is  not  the  ratio  which  a  square  number 
has  to  a  square  number; 

therefore  BK  is  incommensurable  with  N;  [x.  9] 

therefore  the  square  on  BK  is  greater  than  the  square  on  KM  by  the  square  on 
a  straight  line  incommensurable  with  BK. 

Since  then  the  square  on  the  whole  BK  is  greater  than  the  square  on  the  an¬ 
nex  KM  by  the  square  on  a  straight  line  incommensurable  with  BK, 
and  the  whole  BK  is  commensurable  with  the  rational  straight  line,  BH,  set 
out, 

therefore  MB  is  a  fourth  apotome.  [x.  Deff.  hi.  4] 

But  the  rectangle  contained  by  a  rational  straight  line  and  a  fourth  apotome 
is  irrational, 

and  its  square  root  is  irrational,  and  is  called  minor.  [x.  94] 

But  the  square  on  A B  is  equal  to  the  rectangle  HB,  BM, 
because,  when  AH  is  joined,  the  triangle  ABH  is  equiangular  with  the  triangle 
ABM,  and,  as  HB  is  to  BA,  so  is  AB  to  BM. 

Therefore  the  side  AB  of  the  pentagon  is  the  irrational  straight  line  called 
minor.  q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  12 

If  an  equilateral  triangle  be  inscribed  in  a  circle,  the  square  on  the  side  of  the  tri¬ 
angle  is  triple  of  the  square  on  the  radius  of  the  circle . 

Let  ABC  be  a  circle, 

and  let  the  equilateral  triangle  ABC  be  inscribed  in  it; 

I  say  that  the  square  on  one  side  of  the  triangle 
ABC  is  triple  of  the  square  on  the  radius  of  the  circle. 

For  let  the  centre  D  of  the  circle  ABC  be  taken, 
let  AD  be  joined  and  carried  through  to  E, 
and  let  BE  be  joined. 

Then,  since  the  triangle  ABC  is  equilateral, 
therefore  the  circumference  BEC  is  a  third  part  of 
the  circumference  of  the  circle  ABC. 

Therefore  the  circumference  BE  is  a  sixth  part  of 
the  circumference  of  the  circle; 
therefore  the  straight  line  BE  belongs  to  a  hexagon; 

therefore  it  is  equal  to  the  radius  DE.  [iv.  15,  Por.] 

And,  since  AE  is  double  of  DE, 

the  square  on  A  E  is  quadruple  of  the  square  on  ED,  that  is,  of  the  square  on 
BE. 

But  the  square  on  AE  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  AB,  BE ;  [hi.  31,  i.  47] 
therefore  the  squares  on  AB,  BE  are  quadruple  of  the  square  on  BE. 

Therefore,  separando,  the  square  on  AB  is  triple  of  the  square  on  BE. 


A 


ELEMENTS  XIII 


381 


But  BE  is  equal  to  DE; 

therefore  the  square  on  AB  is  triple  of  the  square  on  DE. 

Therefore  the  square  on  the  side  of  the  triangle  is  triple  of  the  square  on  the 
radius.  Q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  13 

To  construct  a  pyramid ,  to  comprehend  it  in  a  given  sphere,  and  to  prove  that  the 
square  on  the  diameter  of  the  sphere  is  one  and  a  half  times  the  square  on  the  side  of 
the  pyramid. 

Let  the  diameter  AB  of  the  given  sphere  be  set  out, 

and  let  it  be  cut  at  the  point  C  so  that  AC  is  double  of  CB; 
let  the  semicircle  ADB  be  described  on  AB, 
let  CD  be  drawn  from  the  point  C  at  right  angles  to  AB, 
and  let  DA  be  joined; 

let  the  circle  EFG  which  has  its  radius  equal  to  DC  be  set  out, 
let  the  equilateral  triangle  EFG  be  inscribed  in  the  circle  EFG ,  [iv.  2] 

let  the  centre  of  the  circle,  the  point  H,  be  taken,  [hi.  1] 

let  EH,  HF,  HG  be  joined; 

from  the  point  H  let  HK  be  set  up  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  of  the  circle 
EFG,  [xi .  12] 

let  HK  equal  to  the  straight  line  AC  be  cut  off  from  HK, 
and  let  KE,  KF,  KG  be  joined. 


Now,  since  KH  is  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  of  the  circle  EFG, 
therefore  it  will  also  make  right  angles  with  all  the  straight  lines  which  meet  it 
and  are  in  the  plane  of  the  circle  EFG.  [xi.  Def.  3] 

But  each  of  the  straight  lines  HE,  HF,  HG  meets  it: 
therefore  HK  is  at  right  angles  to  each  of  the  straight  lines  HE,  HF,  HG. 
And,  since  AC  is  equal  to  HK,  and  CD  to  HE, 

and  they  contain  right  angles, 

therefore  the  base  DA  is  equal  to  the  base  KE.  [i.  4] 

For  the  same  reason 

each  of  the  straight  lines  KF,  KG  is  also  equal  to  DA ; 
therefore  the  three  straight  lines  KE,  KF,  KG  are  equal  to  one  another. 

And,  since  AC  is  double  of  CB, 

therefore  A  B  is  triple  of  BC. 


382  EUCLID 

But,  as  AB  is  to  BC,  so  is  the  square  on  AD  to  the  square  on  DC ,  as  will  be 
proved  afterwards. 

Therefore  the  square  on  AD  is  triple  of  the  square  on  DC. 

But  the  square  on  FE  is  also  triple  of  the  square  on  EH)  [xm.  12] 

and  DC  is  equal  to  EH; 
therefore  DA  is  also  equal  to  EF. 

But  DA  was  proved  equal  to  each  of  the  straight  lines  KE ,  KF ,  KG; 
therefore  each  of  the  straight  lines  EF ,  FG}  GE  is  also  equal  to  each  of  the 
straight  lines  KE,  KF,  KG; 

therefore  the  four  triangles  EFG,  KEF,  KFG,  KEG  are  equilateral. 

Therefore  a  pyramid  has  been  constructed  out  of  four  equilateral  triangles, 
the  triangle  EFG  being  its  base  and  the  point  K  its  vertex. 

It  is  next  required  to  comprehend  it  in  the  given  sphere  and  to  prove  that 
the  square  on  the  diameter  of  the  sphere  is  one  and  a  half  times  the  square  on 
the  side  of  the  pyramid. 

For  let  the  straight  line  HL  be  produced  in  a  straight  line  with  KH, 
and  let  HL  be  made  equal  to  CB. 

Now,  since,  as  AC  is  to  CD,  so  is  CD  to  CB,  [vi.  8,  Por.] 

while  AC  is  equal  to  KH,  CD  to  HE,  and  CB  to  HL, 
therefore,  as  KH  is  to  HE,  so  is  EH  to  HL; 
therefore  the  rectangle  KH,  HL  is  equal  to  the  square  on  EH.  [vi.  17] 

And  each  of  the  angles  KHE,  EHL  is  right; 
therefore  the  semicircle  described  on  KL  will  pass  through  E  also. 

[cf.  vi.  8,  hi.  31] 

If  then,  KL  remaining  fixed,  the  semicircle  be  carried  round  and  restored  to 
the  same  position  from  which  it  began  to  be  moved,  it  mil  also  pass  through 
the  points  F,  G, 

since,  if  FL,  LG  be  joined,  the  angles  at  F,  G  similarly  become  right  angles; 
and  the  pyramid  will  be  comprehended  in  the  given  sphere. 

For  KL,  the  diameter  of  the  sphere,  is  equal  to  the  diameter  AB  of  the  given 
sphere,  inasmuch  as  KH  was  made  equal  to  AC,  and  HL  to  CB. 

I  say  next  that  the  square  on  the  diameter  of  the  sphere  is  one  and  a  half 
times  the  square  on  the  side  of  the  pyramid. 

For,  since  AC  is  double  of  CB, 

therefore  AB  is  triple  of  BC; 
and,  convertendo,  BA  is  one  and  a  half  times  AC. 

But,  as  BA  is  to  AC,  so  is  the  square  on  BA  to  the  square  on  AD. 

Therefore  the  square  on  BA  is  also  one  and  a  half  times  the  square  on  AD. 

And  BA  is  the  diameter  of  the  given  sphere,  and  AD  is  equal  to  the  side  of 
the  pyramid. 

Therefore  the  square  on  the  diameter  of  the  sphere  is  one  and  a  half  times 
the  square  on  the  side  of  the  pyramid.  Q.  e.  d. 

Lemma 

It  is  to  be  proved  that,  as  AB  is  to  BC,  so  is  the  square  on  AD  to  the  square 
on  DC. 

For  let  the  figure  of  the  semicircle  be  set  out, 

let  DB  be  joined, 

let  the  square  EC  be  described  on  AC, 


383 


ELEMENTS  XIII 

and  let  the  parallelogram  FB  be  completed. 

Since  then,  because  the  triangle  DAB  is  equiangular  with  the  triangle  DAC, 

as  BA  is  to  AD ,  so  is  DA  to  AC,  [vi.  8,  vi.  4] 
therefore  the  rectangle  BA,  AC  is  equal  to 
the  square  on  AD.  [vi.  17] 
And  since,  as  A  B  is  to  BC,  so  is  EB  to  BF , 

[vi.  1] 

and  EB  is  the  rectangle  BA,  AC,  for  EA  is 
equal  to  AC, 

and  BF  is  the  rectangle  AC,  CB, 
therefore,  as  AB  is  to  BC,  so  is  the  rectangle 
BA,  AC  to  the  rectangle  AC,  CB . 

And  the  rectangle  BA,  AC  is  equal  to  the 
square  on  AD,  and  the  rectangle  AC,  CB  to 
the  square  on  DC, 

for  the  perpendicular  DC  is  a  mean  propor¬ 
tional  between  the  segments  AC,  CB  of  the 
base,  because  the  angle  ADB  is  right.  [vi.  8,  Por.] 

Therefore,  as  AB  is  to  BC,  so  is  the  square  on  AD  to  the  square  on  DC. 

Q.  E.  D. 


Proposition  14 


To  construct  an  octahedron  and  comprehend  it  in  a  sphere,  as  in  the  preceding  case; 
and  to  prove  that  the  square  on  the  diameter  of  the  sphere  is  double  of  the  square  on 
the  side  of  the  octahedron. 

Let  the  diameter  AB  of  the  given  sphere  be  set  out, 
and  let  it  be  bisected  at  C ; 
let  the  semicircle  ADB  be  described  on  AB, 
let  CD  be  drawn  from  C  at  right  angles  to  AB, 
let  DB  be  joined; 

let  the  square  EFGH,  having  each  of  its  sides  equal  to  DB,  be  set  out, 

let  HF,  EG  be  joined, 

from  the  point  K  let  the  straight  line  KL  be  set  up  at  right  angles  to  the  plane 
of  the  square  EFGH  [xi.  12],  and  let  it  be  carried  through  to  the  other  side  of 
the  plane,  as  KM ; 

from  the  straight  lines  KL,  KM  let  KL,  KM  be  respectively  cut  off  equal  to 
one  of  the  straight  lines  EK,  FK,  GK,  HK, 


and  let  LE,  LF,  LG,  LH, 
ME,  MF,  MG,  MH  be 
joined. 

Then,  since  KE  is  equal 
to  KH, 

and  the  angle  EKH  is  right, 
therefore  the  square  on  HE 
is  double  of  the  square  on 
EK.  [i.  47] 

Again,  since  LK  is  equal 
to  KE\ 


and  the  angle  LKE  is  right, 


384  EUCLID 

therefore  the  square  on  EL  is  double  of  the  square  on  EK.  [id.] 
But  the  square  on  HE  was  also  proved  double  of  the  square  on  EK) 
therefore  the  square  on  LE  is  equal  to  the  square  on  EH; 
therefore  LE  is  equal  to  EH. 

For  the  same  reason 

LH  is  also  equal  to  HE) 
therefore  the  triangle  LEH  is  equilateral. 

Similarly  we  can  prove  that  each  of  the  remaining  triangles  of  which  the 
sides  of  the  square  EFGH  are  the  bases,  and  the  points  L,  M  the  vertices,  is 
equilateral; 

therefore  an  octahedron  has  been  constructed  which  is  contained  by  eight  equi¬ 
lateral  triangles. 

It  is  next  required  to  comprehend  it  in  the  given  sphere,  and  to  prove  that 
the  square  on  the  diameter  of  the  sphere  is  double  of  the  square  on  the  side  of 
the  octahedron. 

For,  since  the  three  straight  lines  LK,  KM ,  KE  are  equal  to  one  another, 
therefore  the  semicircle  described  on  LM  will  also  pass  through  E. 

And  for  the  same  reason, 

if,  LM  remaining  fixed,  the  semicircle  be  carried  round  and  restored  to  the 
same  position  from  which  it  began  to  be  moved, 

it  will  also  pass  through  the  points  F,  G ,  H, 
and  the  octahedron  will  have  been  comprehended  in  a  sphere. 

I  say  next  that  it  is  also  comprehended  in  the  given  sphere. 

For,  since  LK  is  equal  to  KM, 

while  KE  is  common, 
and  they  contain  right  angles, 

therefore  the  base  LE  is  equal  to  the  base  EM.  [i.  4] 

And,  since  the  angle  LEM  is  right,  for  it  is  in  a  semicircle,  [hi.  31] 

therefore  the  square  on  LM  is  double  of  the  square  on  LE.  [i.  47] 
Again,  since  AC  is  equal  to  CB , 

A  B  is  double  of  BC. 

But,  as  AB  is  to  BC,  so  is  the  square  on  AB  to  the  square  on  BD) 
therefore  the  square  on  A B  is  double  of  the  square  on  BD. 

But  the  square  on  LM  was  also  proved  double  of  the  square  on  LE. 

And  the  square  on  DB  is  equal  to  the  square  on  LE,  for  EH  was  made  equal 
to  DB . 

Therefore  the  square  on  AB  is  also  equal  to  the  square  on  LM) 
therefore  AB  is  equal  to  LM. 

And  AB  is  the  diameter  of  the  given  sphere; 

therefore  LM  is  equal  to  the  diameter  of  the  given  sphere. 
Therefore  the  octahedron  has  been  comprehended  in  the  given  sphere,  and 
it  has  been  demonstrated  at  the  same  time  that  the  square  on  the  diameter  of 
the  sphere  is  double  of  the  square  on  the  side  of  the  octahedron,  q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  15 

To  construct  a  cube  and  comprehend  it  in  a  sphere,  like  the  pyramid ;  and  to  prove 
that  the  square  on  the  diameter  of  the  sphere  is  triple  of  the  square  on  the  side  of  the 
cube. 

Let  the  diameter  A B  of  the  given  sphere  be  set  out, 


385 


ELEMENTS  XIII 


and  let  it  be  cut  at  C  so  that  AC  is  double  of  CB; 
let  the  semicircle  ADB  be  described  on  AB, 
let  CD  be  drawn  from  C  at  right  angles  to  AB, 
and  let  DB  be  joined; 

let  the  square  EFGH  having  its  side  equal  to  DB  be  set  out, 
from  E,  F,  G,  H  let  EK ,  FL ,  GM ,  HN  be  drawn  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  of 
the  square  EFGH , 

from  EK ,  FL ,  GM,  HN  let  EK,  FL,  GM,  HN  respectively  be  cut  off  equal  to 
one  of  the  straight  lines  EF,  FG,  GH,  HE, 

and  let  KL,  LM,  MN,  NK  be  joined; 

therefore  the  cube  FN  has  been  constructed  which  is  contained  by  six  equal 
squares. 


It  is  then  required  to  com¬ 
prehend  it  in  the  given  sphere, 
and  to  prove  that  the  square 
on  the  diameter  of  the  sphere 
is  triple  of  the  square  on  the 
side  of  the  cube. 

For  let  KG,  EG  be  joined. 
Then,  since  the  angle  KEG 
is  right,  because  KE  is  also  at 
right  angles  to  the  plane  EG 
[xi.  Def.  3] 

therefore  the  semicircle  described  on  KG  will  also  pass  through  the  point  E. 
Again,  since  GF  is  at  right  angles  to  each  of  the  straight  lines  FL,  FE , 

GF  is  also  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  FK ; 
hence  also,  if  we  join  FK,  GF  will  be  at  right  angles  to  FK ; 
and  for  this  reason  again  the  semicircle  described  on  GK  will  also  pass 

through  F. 

Similarly  it  will  also  pass  through  the  remaining  angular  points  of  the  cube. 
If  then,  KG  remaining  fixed,  the  semicircle  be  carried  round  and  restored  to 
the  same  position  from  which  it  began  to  be  moved, 

the  cube  will  be  comprehended  in  a  sphere. 

I  say  next  that  it  is  also  comprehended  in  the  given  sphere. 

For,  since  GF  is  equal  to  FE, 

and  the  angle  at  F  is  right, 

therefore  the  square  on  FG  is  double  of  the  square  on  EF. 

But  EF  is  equal  to  EK ; 

therefore  the  square  on  EG  is  double  of  the  square  on  EK ; 
hence  the  squares  on  GE,  EK,  that  is  the  square  on  GK  [i.  47],  is  triple  of  the 
square  on  EK. 

And,  since  A B  is  triple  of  BC , 

while,  as  A B  is  to  BC,  so  is  the  square  on  AB  to  the  square  on  BD. 
therefore  the  square  on  A B  is  triple  of  the  square  on  BD. 

But  the  square  on  GK  was  also  proved  triple  of  the  square  on  KE. 

And  KE  was  made  equal  to  DB; 

therefore  KG  is  also  equal  to  AB. 

And  AB  is  the  diameter  of  the  given  sphere; 

therefore  KG  is  also  equal  to  the  diameter  of  the  given  sphere. 


and  of  course  to  the  straight  line  EG  also, 


EUCLID 


386 

Therefore  the  cube  has  been  comprehended  in  the  given  sphere ;  and  it  has 
been  demonstrated  at  the  same  time  that  the  square  on  the  diameter  of  the 
sphere  is  triple  of  the  square  on  the  side  of  the  cube.  q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  16 

To  construct  an  icosahedron  and  comprehend  it  in  a  sphere ,  like  the  aforesaid 
figures ;  and  to  prove  that  the  side  of  the  icosahedron  is  the  irrational  straight  line 
called  minor. 

Let  the  diameter  AB  of  the  given  sphere  be  set  out, 

and  let  it  be  cut  at  C  so  that  AC  is  quadruple  of  CB , 
let  the  semicircle  ADB  be  described  on  AB, 
let  the  straight  line  CD  be  drawn  from  C  at  right  angles  to  AB, 
and  let  DB  be  joined; 


let  the  circle  EFGHK  be  set  out  and  let  its  radius  be  equal  to  DB, 
let  the  equilateral  and  equiangular  pentagon  EFGHK  be  inscribed  in  the  circle 
EFGHK , 

let  the  circumferences  EF ,  FG,  GH,  HK,  KE  be  bisected  at  the  points  L,  M , 
N,  0,  P , 

and  let  LM,  MN ,  NO,  OP,  PL,  EP  be  joined. 

Therefore  the  pentagon  LMNOP  is  also  equilateral, 

and  the  straight  line  EP  belongs  to  a  decagon. 

Now  from  the  points  E,  F,  G,  H,  K  let  the  straight  lines  EQ,  FR,  GS,  HT, 
K  U  be  set  up  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  of  the  circle,  and  let  them  be  equal 
to  the  radius  of  the  circle  EFGHK, 

let  QR,  RS,  ST,  TU,  UQ,  QL,  LR,  RM ,  MS,  SN ,  NT,  TO,  OU,  UP,  PQ  be 
joined. 


ELEMENTS  XIII  387 

Now,  since  each  of  the  straight  lines  EQ ,  KU  is  at  right  angles  to  the  same 
plane, 

therefore  EQ  is  parallel  to  KU.  [xi.  6] 

But  it  is  also  equal  to  it; 

and  the  straight  lines  joining  those  extremities  of  equal  and  parallel  straight 
lines  which  are  in  the  same  direction  are  equal  and  parallel.  [i.  33] 

Therefore  QU  is  equal  and  parallel  to  EK . 

But  EK  belongs  to  an  equilateral  pentagon; 
therefore  QU  also  belongs  to  the  equilateral  pentagon  inscribed  in  the  circle 
EFGHK. 

For  the  same  reason 

each  of  the  straight  lines  QR,  RS ,  ST,  TU  also  belongs  to  the  equilateral  pen¬ 
tagon  inscribed  in  the  circle  EFGHK ; 

therefore  the  pentagon  QRSTU  is  equilateral. 

And,  since  QE  belongs  to  a  hexagon, 

and  EP  to  a  decagon, 
and  the  angle  QEP  is  right, 
therefore  QP  belongs  to  a  pentagon; 

for  the  square  on  the  side  of  the  pentagon  is  equal  to  the  square  on  the  side  of 
the  hexagon  and  the  square  on  the  side  of  the  decagon  inscribed  in  the  same 
circle.  [xm.  10] 

For  the  same  reason 

PU  is  also  a  side  of  a  pentagon.  4 
But  QU  also  belongs  to  a  pentagon; 

therefore  the  triangle  QPU  is  equilateral. 

For  the  same  reason 

each  of  the  triangles  QLR ,  RMS ,  SNT ,  TOU  is  also  equilateral. 

And,  since  each  of  the  straight  lines  QL ,  QP  was  proved  to  belong  to  a  pen¬ 
tagon, 

and  LP  also  belongs  to  a  pentagon, 
therefore  the  triangle  QLP  is  equilateral. 

For  the  same  reason 

each  of  the  triangles  LRM,  MSN,  NTO ,  OUP  is  also  equilateral. 

Let  the  centre  of  the  circle  EFGHK ,  the  point  V ,  be  taken; 

from  V  let  VZ  be  set  up  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  of  the  circle, 
let  it  be  produced  in  the  other  direction,  as  VX, 
let  there  be  cut  off  VW,  the  side  of  a  hexagon,  and  each  of  the  straight  lines 
VX,  WZ,  being  sides  of  a  decagon, 

and  let  QZ,  QW,  UZ,  EV,  LV ,  LX,  XM  be  joined. 

Now,  since  each  of  the  straight  lines  VW,  QE  is  at  right  angles  to  the  plane 
of  the  circle, 

therefore  VW  is  parallel  to  QE .  [xi.  6] 

But  they  are  also  equal; 

therefore  EV,  QW  are  also  equal  and  parallel.  [i.  33] 

But  EV  belongs  to  a  hexagon; 

therefore  QW  also  belongs  to  a  hexagon. 

And,  since  QW  belongs  to  a  hexagon, 

and  WZ  to  a  decagon, 
and  the  angle  QWZ  is  right, 


388  EUCLID 

therefore  QZ  belongs  to  a  pentagon.  [xm.  10] 

For  the  same  reason 

UZ  also  belongs  to  a  pentagon, 

inasmuch  as,  if  we  join  VK ,  WU ,  they  will  be  equal  and  opposite,  and  VK, 
being  a  radius,  belongs  to  a  hexagon;  [iv.  15,  Por.] 

therefore  WU  also  belongs  to  a  hexagon. 

But  WZ  belongs  to  a  decagon, 

and  the  angle  UWZ  is  right; 
therefore  UZ  belongs  to  a  pentagon.  [xm.  10] 

But  QU  also  belongs  to  a  pentagon; 

therefore  the  triangle  QUZ  is  equilateral. 

For  the  same  reason 

each  of  the  remaining  triangles  of  which  the  straight  lines  QR ,  RS,  ST,  TU  are 
the  bases,  and  the  point  Z  the  vertex,  is  also  equilateral. 

Again,  since  VL  belongs  to  a  hexagon, 

and  VX  to  a  decagon, 
and  the  angle  LVX  is  right, 

therefore  LX  belongs  to  a  pentagon.  [xiii.  10] 

For  the  same  reason, 

if  we  join  MV,  which  belongs  to  a  hexagon, 

MX  is  also  inferred  to  belong  to  a  pentagon. 

But  LM  also  belongs  to  a  pentagon; 

therefore  the  triangle  LMX  is  equilateral. 

Similarly  it  can  be  proved  that  each  of  the  remaining  triangles  of  which  MN, 
NO,  OP,  PL  are  the  bases,  and  the  point  X  the  vertex,  is  also  equilateral. 

Therefore  an  icosahedron  has  been  constructed  which  is  contained  by  twenty 
equilateral  triangles. 

It  is  next  required  to  comprehend  it  in  the  given  sphere,  and  to  prove  that 
the  side  of  the  icosahedron  is  the  irrational  straight  line  called  minor. 

For,  since  VW  belongs  to  a  hexagon, 

and  WZ  to  a  decagon, 

therefore  VZ  has  been  cut  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio  at  IF, 

and  VW  is  its  greater  segment;  [xiii.  9] 

therefore  as  ZV  is  to  VW,  so  is  VW  to  WZ. 

But  VW  is  equal  to  VE,  and  WZ  to  VX; 

therefore,  as  ZV  is  to  VE,  so  is  EV  to  VX. 

And  the  angles  ZVE,  EVX  are  right; 

therefore,  if  we  join  the  straight  line  EZ,  the  angle  XEZ  will  be  right  because 
of  the  similarity  of  the  triangles  XEZ,  VEZ. 

For  the  same  reason, 

since,  as  ZV  is  to  VW,  so  is  VW  to  WZ, 
and  ZV  is  equal  to  XW,  and  VW  to  WQ, 
therefore,  as  XW  is  to  WQ,  so  is  QW  to  WZ. 

And  for  this  reason  again, 

if  we  join  QX,  the  angle  at  Q  will  be  right;  [vi.  8] 

therefore  the  semicircle  described  on  XZ  will  also  pass  through  Q.  [hi.  31] 
And  if,  XZ  remaining  fixed,  the  semicircle  be  carried  round  and  restored  to 
the  same  position  from  which  it  began  to  be  moved,  it  will  also  pass  through  Q 
and  the  remaining  angular  points  of  the  icosahedron, 


389 


ELEMENTS  XIII 

and  the  icosahedron  will  have  been  comprehended  in  a  sphere. 

I  say  next  that  it  is  also  comprehended  in  the  given  sphere. 

For  let  VW  be  bisected  at  A'. 

Then,  since  the  straight  line  VZ  has  been  cut  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio  at 

W, 

and  ZW  is  its  lesser  segment, 

therefore  the  square  on  ZW  added  to  the  half  of  the  greater  segment,  that  is 
W A ',  is  five  times  the  square  on  the  half  of  the  greater  segment;  [xm.  3] 
therefore  the  square  on  ZA'  is  five  times  the  square  on  AAV. 

And  ZX  is  double  of  ZA' ,  and  VW  double  of  AAV) 

therefore  the  square  on  ZX  is  five  times  the  square  on  WV. 

And,  since  AC  is  quadruple  of  CB, 

therefore  A  B  is  five  times  BC . 

But,  as  AB  is  to  BC,  so  is  the  square  on  AB  to  the  square  on  BD; 

[vi.  8,  v.  Def.  9] 

therefore  the  square  on  AB  is  five  times  the  square  on  BD . 

But  the  square  on  ZX  was  also  proved  to  be  five  times  the  square  on  VW. 
And  DB  is  equal  to  VW, 

for  each  of  them  is  equal  to  the  radius  of  the  circle  EFGHK ; 
therefore  AB  is  also  equal  to  XZ. 

And  A B  is  the  diameter  of  the  given  sphere; 

therefore  XZ  is  also  equal  to  the  diameter  of  the  given  sphere. 
Therefore  the  icosahedron  has  been  comprehended  in  the  given  sphere. 

I  say  next  that  the  side  of  the  icosahedron  is  the  irrational  straight  line 
called  minor. 

For,  since  the  diameter  of  the  sphere  is  rational, 
and  the  square  on  it  is  five  times  the  square  on  the  radius  of  the  circle  EFGHK, 
therefore  the  radius  of  the  circle  EFGHK  is  also  rational; 
hence  its  diameter  is  also  rational. 

But,  if  an  equilateral  pentagon  be  inscribed  in  a  circle  which  has  its  diameter 
rational,  the  side  of  the  pentagon  is  the  irrational  straight  line  called  minor. 

[xiii.  11] 

And  the  side  of  the  pentagon  EFGHK  is  the  side  of  the  icosahedron. 
Therefore  the  side  of  the  icosahedron  is  the  irrational  straight  line  called 
minor. 

Porism.  From  this  it  is  manifest  that  the  square  on  the  diameter  of  the 
sphere  is  five  times  the  square  on  the  radius  of  the  circle  from  which  the  icosa¬ 
hedron  has  been  described,  and  that  the  diameter  of  the  sphere  is  composed  of 
the  side  of  the  hexagon  and  two  of  the  sides  of  the  decagon  inscribed  in  the 
same  circle.  q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  17 

To  construct  a  dodecahedron  and  comprehend  it  in  a  sphere ,  like  the  aforesaid 
figures ,  and  to  prove  that  the  side  of  the  dodecahedron  is  the  irrational  straight  line 
called  apotome. 

Let  ABCD,  CBEF ,  two  planes  of  the  aforesaid  cube  at  right  angles  to  one 
another,  be  set  out, 

let  the  sides  AB ,  BC,  CD,  DA,  EF,  EB,  FC  be  bisected  at  G,  //,  K,  L ,  M ,  N ,  0 
respectively, 


390  EUCLID 

let  GK ,  HL,  MH ,  AO  be  joined. 

let  the  straight  lines  NP,  PO ,  PQ  be  cut  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio  at  the 
points  P,  S ,  T  respectively, 

and  let  PP,  PP,  TQ  be  their  greater  segments; 
from  the  points  P,  P,  T  let  RU ,  PF,  TIE  be  set  up  at  right  angles  to  the  planes 
of  the  cube  towards  the  outside  of  the  cube, 

let  them  be  made  equal  to  PP,  PP,  TQ, 
and  let  UB,  BW ,  WCy  CVy  VU  be  joined. 

I  say  that  the  pentagon  UBWCV 
is  equilateral,  and  in  one  plane,  and  is 
further  equiangular. 

For  let  PP,  SBy  VB  be  joined. 

Then,  since  the  straight  line  NP  has 
been  cut  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio 
at  P, 

and  PP  is  the  greater  segment, 
therefore  the  squares  on  PNy  NR  are 
triple  of  the  square  on  PP.  [xm.  4] 

But  PN  is  equal  to  NBy  and  PP  to 
RU) 

therefore  the  squares  on  BN ,  NR  are 
triple  of  the  square  on  RU. 

But  the  square  on  PP  is  equal  to  the 
squares  on  BN ,  NR;  [i.  47] 

therefore  the  square  on  PP  is  triple  of 
the  square  on  RU) 

hence  the  squares  on  PP,  RU  are  quad¬ 
ruple  of  the  square  on  RU . 

But  the  square  on  P U  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  PP,  RU) 

therefore  the  square  on  BU  is  quadruple  of  the  square  on  RU) 
therefore  BU  is  double  of  RU. 

But  VU  is  also  double  of  URy 

inasmuch  as  SR  is  also  double  of  PP,  that  is,  of  RU) 
therefore  BU  is  equal  to  UV. 

Similarly  it  can  be  proved  that  each  of  the  straight  lines  BW}  WCy  CV  is 
also  equal  to  each  of  the  straight  lines  BU,  UV. 

Therefore  the  pentagon  BUVCW  is  equilateral. 

I  say  next  that  it  is  also  in  one  plane. 

For  let  PX  be  drawn  from  P  parallel  to  each  of  the  straight  lines  RU,  PF 
and  towards  the  outside  of  the  cube,  and  let  XH,  HW  be  joined; 

I  say  that  XHW  is  a  straight  line. 

For,  since  HQ  has  been  cut  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio  at  T ,  and  QT  is  its 
greater  segment, 

therefore,  as  HQ  is  to  QT,  so  is  QT  to  TH. 

But  HQ  is  equal  to  HP,  and  QT  to  each  of  the  straight  lines  TW,  PX) 
therefore,  as  HP  is  to  PX,  so  is  WT  to  TH. 

And  HP  is  parallel  to  TW, 

for  each  of  them  is  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  BD) 
and  TH  is  parallel  to  PX, 


[xi.  6] 


391 


ELEMENTS  XIII 

for  each  of  them  is  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  BF.  [id.] 

But  if  two  triangles,  as  XPH ,  H TW,  which  have  two  sides  proportional  to 
two  sides  be  placed  together  at  one  angle  so  that  their  corresponding  sides  are 
also  parallel, 

the  remaining  straight  lines  will  be  in  a  straight  line;  [vi.  32] 
therefore  XH  is  in  a  straight  line  with  HW. 

But  every  straight  line  is  in  one  plane;  [xi.  1] 

therefore  the  pentagon  UBWCV  is  in  one  plane. 

I  say  next  that  it  is  also  equiangular. 

For,  since  the  straight  line  NP  has  been  cut  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio  at 
R ,  and  PR  is  the  greater  segment, 

while  PR  is  equal  to  PS, 

therefore  NS  has  also  been  cut  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio  at  P, 

and  NP  is  the  greater  segment;  [xm.  5] 

therefore  the  squares  on  NS,  SP  are  triple  of  the  square  on  NP.  [xm.  4] 

But  NP  is  equal  to  NB,  and  PS  to  SV ; 

therefore  the  squares  on  NS,  SV  are  triple  of  the  square  on  NB; 
hence  the  squares  on  VS,  SN,  NB  are  quadruple  of  the  square  on  NB. 

But  the  square  on  SB  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  SN,  NB; 
therefore  the  squares  on  BS,  SV,  that  is,  the  square  on  BV — for  the  angle  VSB 
is  right — is  quadruple  of  the  square  on  NB; 

therefore  VB  is  double  of  BN. 

But  BC  is  also  double  of  BN ; 

therefore  BV  is  equal  to  BC. 

And,  since  the  two  sides  BU ,  UV  are  equal  to  the  two  sides  BW,  WC, 
and  the  base  BV  is  equal  to  the  base  BC, 
therefore  the  angle  BUV  is  equal  to  the  angle  BWC.  [i.  8] 

Similarly  we  can  prove  that  the  angle  UVC  is  also  equal  to  the  angle  BWC; 
therefore  the  three  angles  BWC,  BUV ,  UVC  are  equal  to  one  another. 

But  if  in  an  equilateral  pentagon  three  angles  are  equal  to  one  another,  the 
pentagon  will  be  equiangular,  [xm.  7] 

therefore  the  pentagon  BUVCW  is  equiangular. 

And  it  was  also  proved  equilateral; 

therefore  the  pentagon  BUVCW  is  equilateral  and  equiangular,  and  it  is  on 
one  side  BC  of  the  cube. 

Therefore,  if  we  make  the  same  construction  in  the  case  of  each  of  the  twelve 
sides  of  the  cube, 

a  solid  figure  will  have  been  constructed  which  is  contained  by  twelve  equi¬ 
lateral  and  equiangular  pentagons,  and  which  is  called  a  dodecahedron. 

It  is  then  required  to  comprehend  it  in  the  given  sphere,  and  to  prove  that 
the  side  of  the  dodecahedron  is  the  irrational  straight  line  called  apotome. 

For  let  XP  be  produced,  and  let  the  produced  straight  line  be  XZ; 
therefore  PZ  meets  the  diameter  of  the  cube,  and  they  bisect  one  another, 
for  this  has  been  proved  in  the  last  theorem  but  one  of  the  eleventh  book. 

[xi.  38] 

Let  them  cut  at  Z; 

therefore  Z  is  the  centre  of  the  sphere  which  comprehends  the  cube, 
and  ZP  is  half  of  the  side  of  the  cube. 

Let  UZ  be  joined. 


392  EUCLID 

Now,  since  the  straight  line  NS  has  been  cut  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio 
at  P, 

and  NP  is  its  greater  segment, 

therefore  the  squares  on  NS,  SP  are  triple  of  the  square  on  NP.  [xm.  4] 
But  NS  is  equal  to  XZ , 

inasmuch  as  NP  is  also  equal  to  PZ ,  and  XP  to  PS. 

But  further,  PS  is  also  equal  to  XU, 

since  it  is  also  equal  to  RP; 

therefore  the  squares  on  ZX,  XU  are  triple  of  the  square  on  NP. 

But  the  square  on  UZ  is  equal  to  the  squares  on  ZX,  XU) 

therefore  the  square  on  UZ  is  triple  of  the  square  on  NP. 

But  the  square  on  the  radius  of  the  sphere  which  comprehends  the  cube  is 
also  triple  of  the  square  on  the  half  of  the  side  of  the  cube, 
for  it  has  previously  been  shown  how  to  construct  a  cube  and  comprehend  it  in 
a  sphere,  and  to  prove  that  the  square  on  the  diameter  of  the  sphere  is  triple  of 
the  square  on  the  side  of  the  cube.  [xm.  15] 

But,  if  whole  is  so  related  to  whole,  so  is  half  to  half  also; 

and  NP  is  half  of  the  side  of  the  cube; 
therefore  UZ  is  equal  to  the  radius  of  the  sphere  which  comprehends  the  cube. 
And  Z  is  the  centre  of  the  sphere  which  comprehends  the  cube; 

therefore  the  point  U  is  on  the  surface  of  the  sphere. 

Similarly  we  can  prove  that  each  of  the  remaining  angles  of  the  dodecahe¬ 
dron  is  also  on  the  surface  of  the  sphere; 

therefore  the  dodecahedron  has  been  comprehended  in  the  given  sphere. 

I  say  next  that  the  side  of  the  dodecahedron  is  the  irrational  straight  line 
called  apotome. 

For  since,  when  NP  has  been  cut  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio,  RP  is  the  great¬ 
er  segment, 

and,  when  PO  has  been  cut  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio,  PS  is  the  greater  seg¬ 
ment, 

therefore,  when  the  whole  NO  is  cut  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio,  RS  is  the  great¬ 
er  segment. 

[Thus,  since,  as  NP  is  to  PR,  so  is  PR  to  RN, 

the  same  is  true  of  the  doubles  also, 
for  parts  have  the  same  ratio  as  their  equimultiples;  [v.  15] 
therefore  as  NO  is  to  RS,  so  is  RS  to  the  sum  of  NR,  SO. 

But  NO  is  greater  than  RS; 

therefore  RS  is  also  greater  than  the  sum  of  NR,  SO; 
therefore  NO  has  been  cut  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio, 
and  RS  is  its  greater  segment.] 

But  RS  is  equal  to  UV; 

therefore,  when  JVOis  cut  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio,  £/Fisthe  greater  segment. 
And,  since  the  diameter  of  the  sphere  is  rational, 

and  the  square  on  it  is  triple  of  the  square  on  the  side  of  the  cube, 
therefore  NO,  being  a  side  of  the  cube,  is  rational. 

[But  if  a  rational  line  be  cut  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio,  each  of  the  segments 
is  an  irrational  apotome.] 

Therefore  UV,  being  a  side  of  the  dodecahedron,  is  an  irrational  apotome. 

[xm.  6] 


ELEMENTS  XIII  393 

Porism.  From  this  it  is  manifest  that,  when  the  side  of  the  cube  is  cut  in  ex¬ 
treme  and  mean  ratio,  the  greater  segment  is  the  side  of  the  dodecahedron. 

Q.  E.  D. 

Proposition  18 

To  set  out  the  sides  of  the  five  figures  and  to  compare  them  with  one  another. 

Let  AB ,  the  diameter  of  the  given  sphere,  be  set  out, 
and  let  it  be  cut  at  C  so  that  AC  is  equal  to 
CB,  and  at  D  so  that  AD  is  double  of  DB ; 
let  the  semicircle  AEB  be  described  on  AS, 
from  C,  D  let  CE ,  DF  be  drawn  at  right 
angles  to  AB, 

and  let  AF,  FB ,  EB  be  joined. 

Then,  since  AD  is  double  of  DB , 
therefore  AB  is  triple  of  BD. 

Convertendo ,  therefore,  BA  is  one  and  a 
half  times  AD. 

But,  as  BA  is  to  AD,  so  is  the  square  on 
BA  to  the  square  on  AF,  [v.  Def.  9,  vi.  8] 
for  the  triangle  AFB  is  equiangular  with 
the  triangle  AFD; 
therefore  the  square  on  BA  is  one  and  a  half  times  the  square  on  AF. 

But  the  square  on  the  diameter  of  the  sphere  is  also  one  and  a  half  times  the 
square  on  the  side  of  the  pyramid.  [xm.  13] 

And  AB  is  the  diameter  of  the  sphere; 

therefore  AF  is  equal  to  the  side  of  the  pyramid. 

Again,  since  AD  is  double  of  DB. 

therefore  AB  is  triple  of  BD. 

But,  as  AB  is  to  BD,  so  is  the  square  on  AB  to  the  square  on  BF] 

[vi.  8,  v.  Def.  9] 

therefore  the  square  on  A  B  is  triple  of  the  square  on  BF. 

But  the  square  on  the  diameter  of  the  sphere  is  also  triple  of  the  square  on 
the  side  of  the  cube.  [xiii.  15] 

And  AB  is  the  diameter  of  the  sphere; 

therefore  BF  is  the  side  of  the  cube. 

And,  since  AC  is  equal  to  CB, 

therefore  AB  is  double  of  BC. 

But,  as  AB  is  to  BC,  so  is  the  square  on  AB  to  the  square  on  BE ; 
therefore  the  square  on  AB  is  double  of  the  square  on  BE. 

But  the  square  on  the  diameter  of  the  sphere  is  also  double  of  the  square  on 
the  side  of  the  octahedron.  [xm.  14] 

And  AF  is  the  diameter  of  the  given  sphere; 

therefore  BE  is  the  side  of  the  octahedron. 

Next,  let  AG  be  drawn  from  the  point  A  at  right  angles  to  the  straight  line 
AB, 

let  AG  be  made  equal  to  AB, 
let  GG  be  joined, 

and  from  H  let  HK  be  drawn  perpendicular  to  AB. 

Then,  since  GA  is  double  of  AC, 


394  EUCLID 

for  GA  is  equal  to  AB , 
and,  as  GA  is  to  AC,  so  is  HK  to  KC , 
therefore  HK  is  also  double  of  KC. 

Therefore  the  square  on  HK  is  quadruple  of  the  square  on  KC; 
therefore  the  squares  on  HK,  KC,  that  is,  the  square  on  HC,  is  five  times  the 
square  on  KC. 

But  HC  is  equal  to  CB; 

therefore  the  square  on  BC  is  five  times  the  square  on  CK. 

And,  since  AB  is  double  of  CB, 

and,  in  them,  AD  is  double  of  DB , 
therefore  the  remainder  BD  is  double  of  the  remainder  DC. 
Therefore  BC  is  triple  of  CD; 

therefore  the  square  on  BC  is  nine  times  the  square  on  CD. 

But  the  square  on  BC  is  five  times  the  square  on  CK ; 

therefore  the  square  on  CK  is  greater  than  the  square  on  CD; 
therefore  CK  is  greater  than  CD. 

Let  CL  be  made  equal  to  CK, 

from  L  let  LM  be  drawn  at  right  angles  to  AB, 
and  let  MB  be  joined. 

Now,  since  the  square  on  BC  is  five  times  the  square  on  CK, 
and  AB  is  double  of  BC,  and  KL  double  of  CK, 
therefore  the  square  on  AB  is  five  times  the  square  on  KL. 

But  the  square  on  the  diameter  of  the  sphere  is  also  five  times  the  square  on 
the  radius  of  the  circle  from  which  the  icosahedron  has  been  described. 

[xm.  16,  Por.] 

And  AB  is  the  diameter  of  the  sphere; 
therefore  KL  is  the  radius  of  the  circle  from  which  the  icosahedron  has  been 
described; 

therefore  KL  is  a  side  of  the  hexagon  in  the  said  circle.  [iv.  15,  Por.] 

And,  since  the  diameter  of  the  sphere  is  made  up  of  the  side  of  the  hexagon 
and  two  of  the  sides  of  the  decagon  inscribed  in  the  same  circle, 

[XIII.  16,  Por.] 

and  AB  is  the  diameter  of  the  sphere, 
while  KL  is  a  side  of  the  hexagon, 
and  AK  is  equal  to  LB, 

therefore  each  of  the  straight  lines  AK,  LB  is  a  side  of  the  decagon  inscribed 
in  the  circle  from  which  the  icosahedron  has  been  described. 

And,  since  LB  belongs  to  a  decagon,  and  ML  to  a  hexagon, 
for  ML  is  equal  to  KL,  since  it  is  also  equal  to  HK,  being  the  same  distance 
from  the  centre,  and  each  of  the  straight  lines  HK,  KL  is  double  of  KC, 

therefore  MB  belongs  to  a  pentagon.  [xm.  10] 

But  the  side  of  the  pentagon  is  the  side  of  the  icosahedron;  [xm.  16] 

therefore  MB  belongs  to  the  icosahedron. 

Now,  since  FB  is  a  side  of  the  cube, 

let  it  be  cut  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio  at  N, 
and  let  AB  be  the  greater  segment; 
therefore  NB  is  a  side  of  the  dodecahedron.  [xm.  17,  Por.] 
And,  since  the  square  on  the  diameter  of  the  sphere  was  proved  to  be  one  and 
a  half  times  the  square  on  the  side  AF  of  the  pyramid,  double  of  the  square  on 


395 


ELEMENTS  XIII 

the  side  BE  of  the  octahedron  and  triple  of  the  side  FB  of  the  cube, 
therefore,  of  parts  of  which  the  square  on  the  diameter  of  the  sphere  contains 
six,  the  square  on  the  side  of  the  pyramid  contains  four,  the  square  on  the  side 
of  the  octahedron  three,  and  the  square  on  the  side  of  the  cube  two. 

Therefore  the  square  on  the  side  of  the  pyramid  is  four-thirds  of  the  square 
on  the  side  of  the  octahedron,  and  double  of  the  square  on  the  side  of  the  cube; 
and  the  square  on  the  side  of  the  octahedron  is  one  and  a  half  times  the  square 
on  the  side  of  the  cube. 

The  said  sides,  therefore,  of  the  three  figures,  I  mean  the  pyramid,  the  octa¬ 
hedron  and  the  cube,  are  to  one  another  in  rational  ratios. 

But  the  remaining  two,  I  mean  the  side  of  the  icosahedron  and  the  side  of 
the  dodecahedron,  are  not  in  rational  ratios  either  to  one  another  or  to  the 
aforesaid  sides; 

for  they  are  irrational,  the  one  being  minor  [xm.  16]  and  the  other  an  apotome 
[xiii.  17]. 

That  the  side  MB  of  the  icosahedron  is  greater  than  the  side  NB  of  the  do¬ 
decahedron  we  can  prove  thus. 

For,  since  the  triangle  FDB  is  equiangular  with  the  triangle  FA  B,  [vi.  8] 
proportionally,  as  DB  is  to  BF ,  so  is  BF  to  BA.  [vi.  4] 

And,  since  the  three  straight  lines  are  proportional, 
as  the  first  is  to  the  third,  so  is  the  square  on  the  first  to  the  square  on  the 
second;  [v.  Def.  9,  vi.  20,  Por.] 

therefore,  as  DB  is  to  BA,  so  is  the  square  on  DB  to  the  square  on  BF; 
therefore,  inversely,  as  A  B  is  to  BD,  so  is  the  square  on  FB  to  the  square  on 
BD. 

But  A B  is  triple  of  BD; 

therefore  the  square  on  FB  is  triple  of  the  square  on  BD. 

But  the  square  on  AD  is  also  quadruple  of  the  square  on  DB, 

for  AD  is  double  of  DB; 

therefore  the  square  on  AD  is  greater  than  the  square  on  FB; 
therefore  AD  is  greater  than  FB; 
therefore  AL  is  by  far  greater  than  FB. 

And,  when  AL  is  cut  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio, 

KL  is  the  greater  segment, 

inasmuch  as  LK  belongs  to  a  hexagon,  and  KA  to  a  decagon;  [xm.  9] 

and,  when  FB  is  cut  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio,  NB  is  the  greater  segment; 
therefore  KL  is  greater  than  NB. 

But  KL  is  equal  to  LM ; 

therefore  LM  is  greater  than  NB. 

Therefore  MB,  which  is  a  side  of  the  icosahedron,  is  by  far  greater  than  NB 
which  is  a  side  of  the  dodecahedron.  q.  e.  d. 


I  say  next  that  no  other  figure,  besides  the  said  five  figures ,  can  be  constructed 
which  is  contained  by  equilateral  and  equiangular  figures  equal  to  one  another. 
For  a  solid  angle  cannot  be  constructed  with  two  triangles,  or  indeed  planes. 
With  three  triangles  the  angle  of  the  pyramid  is  constructed,  with  four  the 
angle  of  the  octahedron,  and  with  five  the  angle  of  the  icosahedron; 


396  EUCLID 

but  a  solid  angle  cannot  be  formed  by  six  equilateral  and  equiangular  triangles 
placed  together  at  one  point, 

for,  the  angle  of  the  equilateral  triangle  being  two-thirds  of  a  right  angle,  the 
six  will  be  equal  to  four  right  angles: 

which  is  impossible,  for  any  solid  angle  is  contained  by  angles  less  than  four 
right  angles.  [xi.  21] 

For  the  same  reason,  neither  can  a  solid  angle  be  constructed  by  more  than 
six  plane  angles. 

By  three  squares  the  angle  of  the  cube  is  contained,  but  by  four  it  is  impos¬ 
sible  for  a  solid  angle  to  be  contained, 

for  they  will  again  be  four  right  angles. 

By  three  equilateral  and  equiangular  pentagons  the  angle  of  the  dodeca¬ 
hedron  is  contained; 

but  by  four  such  it  is  impossible  for  any  solid  angle  to  be  contained. 

for,  the  angle  of  the  equilateral  pentagon  being  a  right  angle  and  a  fifth,  the 

four  angles  will  be  greater  than  four  right  angles: 

which  is  impossible. 

Neither  again  will  a  solid  angle  be  contained  by  other  polygonal  figures  by 
reason  of  the  same  absurdity. 

Therefore  etc.  q.  e.  d. 

Lemma 

But  that  the  angle  of  the  equilateral  and  equiangular  'pentagon  is  a  right  angle 
and  a  fifth  we  must  prove  thus. 

Let  ABODE  be  an  equilateral  and  equiangular  pentagon, 
let  the  circle  ABODE  be  circumscribed 
about  it, 

let  its  centre  F  be  taken, 
and  let  FA,  FB ,  FC ,  FD,  FE  be  joined. 

Therefore  they  bisect  the  angles  of  the 
pentagon  at  A,  B,  0,  D ,  E. 

And,  since  the  angles  at  F  are  equal  to 
four  right  angles  and  are  equal, 
therefore  one  of  them,  as  the  angle  AFB,  is 
one  right  angle  less  a  fifth; 
therefore  the  remaining  angles  FAB,  ABF 
consist  of  one  right  angle  and  a  fifth. 

But  the  angle  FAB  is  equal  to  the  angle 
FBC ; 

therefore  the  whole  angle  ABC  of  the  pentagon  consists  of  one  right  angle  and 
a  fifth.  q.  e.  d. 


THE  WORKS  OF  ARCHIMEDES 
INCLUDING  THE  METHOD 


BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTE 
Archimedes,  c.  287-212  b.c. 


Archimedes  was  a  citizen  of  Syracuse,  in  Sicily,  where  he  was  born  around  the 
year  287  b.c.  He  was  intimate  with  Hiero,  King  of  Syracuse,  and  with  his  son, 
Gelo,  and  Plutarch  says  that  he  was  related  to  them.  In  his  Sand-Reckoner , 
which  was  dedicated  to  Gelo,  Archimedes  speaks  of  his  father,  Pheidias,  as  an 
astronomer  who  investigated  the  sizes  and  distances  of  the  sun  and  moon. 

As  a  young  man  Archimedes  seems  to  have  spent  some  time  in  Egypt,  where 
he  invented  the  water-screw  as  a  means  of  drawing  water  out  of  the  Nile  for 
irrigating  the  fields,  though  it  is  also  said  that  he  invented  this  machine  to  drain 
bilge  water  from  a  huge  ship  built  for  King  Hiero.  He  may  have  studied  with 
the  pupils  of  Euclid  in  Alexandria.  It  was  probably  there  that  he  made  the 
friendship  of  Conon  of  Samos  and  Eratosthenes.  To  Conon  he  was  in  the  habit 
of  communicating  his  discoveries  before  their  publication,  and  it  was  for  Era¬ 
tosthenes  that  he  wrote  the  Method  and  through  him  that  he  addressed  the 
famous  Cattle-Problem  to  the  mathematicians  of  Alexandria — if  the  tradition  is 
to  be  credited  that  associates  Archimedes  with  this  problem.  After  the  death  of 
Conon,  Archimedes  sent  his  discoveries  to  Conon's  friend  and  pupil,  Dositheus 
of  Pelusium,  to  whom  four  of  the  extant  treatises  are  dedicated. 

His  mechanical  inventions  won  great  fame  for  Archimedes  and  figure  largely 
in  the  traditions  about  him.  After  discovering  the  solution  of  the  problem  To 
move  a  given  weight  by  a  given  force,  he  boasted  to  King  Hiero:  “Give  me  a  place 
to  stand  on  and  I  can  move  the  earth.”  Asked  for  a  practical  demonstration,  he 
contrived  a  machine  by  which  with  the  use  of  only  one  arm  he  drew  out  of  the 
dock  a  large  ship,  laden  with  passengers  and  goods,  vrhich  the  combined  strength 
of  the  Syracusans  could  scarcely  move.  From  that  day  Hiero  ordered  that 
“Archimedes  was  to  be  believed  in  everything  he  might  say.”  At  the  king's  re¬ 
quest  Archimedes  then  made  for  him  catapults,  battering  rams,  cranes,  and 
many  other  engines  of  vTar,  which  were  later  used  with  such  success  in  the 
defense  of  Syracuse  against  the  Romans  that  they  were  unable  to  take  the  city 
except  by  treachery.  There  is  also  a  story  in  Lucian  that  Archimedes  set  fire 
to  the  Roman  ships  by  an  arrangement  of  burning  glasses. 

Although  Archimedes  acquired  by  his  mechanical  inventions  “the  renowm  of 
more  than  human  sagacity,”  according  to  Plutarch,  he  “would  not  deign  to 
leave  behind  him  any  commentary  or  wrriting  on  such  subjects,”  since  he  con¬ 
sidered  them  “sordid  and  ignoble.”  He  did,  however,  wTrite  a  description,  now 
lost,  of  an  apparatus,  composed  of  concentric  glass  spheres  moved  by  vTater 
powrer,  representing  the  Eudoxian  system  of  the  wrorld.  This  astronomical  ma¬ 
chine,  which  survived  to  be  seen  and  described  by  Cicero  in  his  Republic,  wras 
sufficiently  accurate  to  show7  the  eclipses  of  the  sun  and  the  moon.  Except  for 
this  lost  work  On  Sphere-making ,  Archimedes  wrote  only  on  strictly  mathemat¬ 
ical  subjects.  He  took  all  the  mathematical  sciences  for  his  province:  arithme¬ 
tic,  geometry,  astronomy,  mechanics,  and  hydrostatics.  Unlike  Euclid  and  Apol- 

399 


400  BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTE 

lonius  he  wrote  no  textbooks.  Of  his  writings,  although  some  have  been  lost, 
the  most  important  have  survived. 

The  absorption  of  Archimedes  in  his  mathematical  investigations  was  so 
great  that  he  forgot  his  food  and  neglected  his  person,  and  when  carried  by 
force  to  the  bath,  Plutarch  records,  “he  used  to  trace  geometrical  figures  in  the 
ashes  of  the  fire  and  diagrams  in  the  oil  on  his  body.”  Asked  by  Hiero  to  dis¬ 
cover  whether  a  goldsmith  had  alloyed  with  silver  the  gold  of  his  crown,  Ar¬ 
chimedes  found  the  answer  while  bathing  by  considering  the  water  displaced 
by  his  body,  whereupon  he  is  reported  to  have  run  home  in  his  excitement  with¬ 
out  his  clothes,  shouting,  “Eureka”  (I  have  found  it). 

Archimedes’  preoccupation  with  mathematics  is  even  said  to  have  been  the 
cause  of  his  death.  In  the  general  massacre  which  followed  the  capture  of  Syra¬ 
cuse  by  Marc-ellus  in  212  b.c.,  Archimedes  was  so  intent  upon  a  mathematical 
diagram  that  he  took  no  notice,  and  when  ordered  by  a  soldier  to  attend  the 
victorious  general,  he  refused  until  he  should  have  solved  his  problem,  where¬ 
upon  he  was  slain  by  the  enraged  soldier.  No  blame  attaches  to  the  Roman 
general,  Marcellus,  since  he  had  given  orders  to  spare  the  house  and  person  of 
the  mathematician,  and  in  the  midst  of  his  triumph  he  lamented  the  death  of 
Archimedes,  provided  him  with  an  honorable  burial,  and  befriended  his  sur¬ 
viving  relatives.  In  accordance  with  the  expressed  desire  of  Archimedes,  his 
family  and  friends  inscribed  on  his  tomb  the  figure  of  his  favorite  theorem,  on 
the  sphere  and  the  circumscribed  cylinder,  and  the  ratio  of  the  containing  solid 
to  the  contained.  When  Cicero  was  in  Sicily  as  quaestor  in  75  b.c.,  he  dis¬ 
covered  the  neglected  and  forgotten  tomb  of  Archimedes  near  the  Agrigentine 
Gate  and  piously  restored  it. 


CONTENTS 


Biographical  Note,  399 

On  the  sphere  and  cylinder,  book  i,  403 
On  the  sphere  and  cylinder,  book  n,  434 
Measurement  of  a  circle,  447 
On  conoids  and  spheroids,  452 
On  spirals,  482 

On  the  equilibrium  of  planes,  book  i,  502 
On  the  equilibrium  of  planes,  book  ii,  510 
The  sand-reckoner,  520 
Quadrature  of  the  parabola,  527 
On  floating  bodies,  book  i,  538 
On  floating  bodies,  book  ii,  543 
Book  of  lemmas,  561 

The  method  treating  of  mechanical  problems,  569 


:  ,  71  «  *  *  t  l  t 

•>  «>/  •-■a-.  > ) 


ON  THE  SPHERE  AND  CYLINDER 
BOOK  ONE 


Archimedes  to  Dositheus  greeting 

“On  a  former  occasion  I  sent  you  the  investigations  which  I  had  up  to  that 
time  completed,  including  the  proofs,  showing  that  any  segment  bounded  by  a 
straight  line  and  a  section  of  a  right-angled  cone  [a  parabola]  is  four-thirds  of 
the  triangle  which  has  the  same  base  with  the  segment  and  equal  height  .  Since 
then  certain  theorems  not  hitherto  demonstrated  have  occurred  to  me,  and  I 
have  worked  out  the  proofs  of  them.  They  are  these:  first,  that  the  surface  of 
any  sphere  is  four  times  its  greatest  circle;  next,  that  the  surface  of  any  seg¬ 
ment  of  a  sphere  is  equal  to  a  circle  whose  radius  is  equal  to  the  straight  line 
drawn  from  the  vertex  of  the  segment  to  the  circumference  of  the  circle  which 
is  the  base  of  the  segment;  and,  further,  that  any  cylinder  having  its  base  equal 
to  the  greatest  circle  of  those  in  the  sphere,  and  height  equal  to  the  diameter  of 
the  sphere,  is  itself  \i.e.  in  content]  half  as  large  again  as  the  sphere,  and  its 
surface  also  [including  its  bases]  is  half  as  large  again  as  the  surface  of  the 
sphere.  Now  these  properties  were  all  along  naturally  inherent  in  the  figures 
referred  to,  but  remained  unknown  to  those  who  were  before  my  time  engaged 
in  the  study  of  geometry.  Having,  however,  now  discovered  that  the  proper¬ 
ties  are  true  of  these  figures,  I  cannot  feel  any  hesitation  in  setting  them  side 
by  side  both  with  my  former  investigations  and  with  those  of  the  theorems  of 
Eudoxus  on  solids  vrhich  are  held  to  be  most  irrefragably  established,  namely, 
that  any  pyramid  is  one  third  part  of  the  prism  virich  has  the  same  base  with 
the  pyramid  and  equal  height,  and  that  any  cone  is  one  third  part  of  the  cylin¬ 
der  wrhich  has  the  same  base  with  the  cone  and  equal  height.  For,  though  these 
properties  also  vTere  naturally  inherent  in  the  figures  all  along,  yet  they  w^ere  in 
fact  unknowm  to  all  the  many  able  geometers  who  lived  before  Eudoxus,  and 
had  not  been  observed  by  any  one.  Now,  however,  it  will  be  open  to  those  who 
possess  the  requisite  ability  to  examine  these  discoveries  of  mine.  They  ought 
to  have  been  published  virile  Conon  v^as  still  alive,  for  I  should  conceive  that 
he  vTould  best  have  been  able  to  grasp  them  and  to  pronounce  upon  them  the 
appropriate  verdict;  but,  as  I  judge  it  vrell  to  communicate  them  to  those  w  ho 
are  conversant  with  mathematics,  I  send  them  to  you  with  the  proofs  v'ritten 
out,  virich  it  will  be  open  to  mathematicians  to  examine.  Farevrell. 

“I  first  set  out  the  axioms  and  the  assumptions  virich  I  have  used  for  the 
proofs  of  my  propositions.” 


403 


404 


ARCHIMEDES 


DEFINITIONS 

1.  “There  are  in  a  plane  certain  terminated  bent  lines,  which  either  lie  wholly 
on  the  same  side  of  the  straight  lines  joining  their  extremities,  or  have  no  part 
of  them  on  the  other  side.” 

2.  “I  apply  the  term  concave  in  the  same  direction  to  a  line  such  that,  if  any 
two  points  on  it  are  taken,  either  all  the  straight  lines  connecting  the  points 
fall  on  the  same  side  of  the  line,  or  some  fall  on  one  and  the  same  side  while 
others  fall  on  the  line  itself,  but  none  on  the  other  side.” 

3.  “Similarly  also  there  are  certain  terminated  surfaces,  not  themselves  be¬ 
ing  in  a  plane  but  having  their  extremities  in  a  plane,  and  such  that  they  will 
either  be  wholly  on  the  same  side  of  the  plane  containing  their  extremities,  or 
have  no  part  of  them  on  the  other  side.” 

4.  “I  apply  the  term  concave  in  the  same  direction  to  surfaces  such  that,  if  any 
two  points  on  them  are  taken,  the  straight  lines  connecting  the  points  either  all 
fall  on  the  same  side  of  the  surface,  or  some  fall  on  one  and  the  same  side  of  it 
while  some  fall  upon  it,  but  none  on  the  other  side.” 

5.  “I  use  the  term  solid  sector,  when  a  cone  cuts  a  sphere,  and  has  its  apex  at 
the  centre  of  the  sphere,  to  denote  the  figure  comprehended  by  the  surface  of 
the  cone  and  the  surface  of  the  sphere  included  within  the  cone.” 

6.  “I  apply  the  term  solid  rhombus ,  when  two  cones  with  the  same  base  have 
their  apices  on  opposite  sides  of  the  plane  of  the  base  in  such  a  position  that 
their  axes  lie  in  a  straight  line,  to  denote  the  solid  figure  made  up  of  both  the 
cones.” 

ASSUMPTIONS 

1.  “0/  all  lines  which  have  the  same  extremities  the  straight  line  is  the  least” 

2.  “Of  other  lines  in  a  plane  and  having  the  same  extremities,  [any  two]  such 
are  unequal  whenever  both  are  concave  in  the  same  direction  and  one  of  them 
is  either  wholly  included  between  the  other  and  the  straight  line  which  has  the 
same  extremities  with  it,  or  is  partly  included  by,  and  is  partly  common  with, 
the  other;  and  that  [line]  which  is  included  is  the  lesser  [of  the  two].” 

3.  “Similarly,  of  surfaces  which  have  the  same  extremities,  if  those  extremi¬ 
ties  are  in  a  plane,  the  plane  is  the  least  [in  area].” 

4.  “Of  other  surfaces  with  the  same  extremities,  the  extremities  being  in  a 
plane,  [any  two]  such  are  unequal  whenever  both  are  concave  in  the  same  di¬ 
rection  and  one  surface  is  either  wholly  included  between  the  other  and  the 
plane  which  has  the  same  extremities  with  it,  or  is  partly  included  by,  and 
partly  common  with,  the  other;  and  that  [surface]  which  is  included  is  the  lesser 
[of  the  two  in  area].” 

5.  “Further,  of  unequal  lines,  unequal  surfaces,  and  unequal  solids,  the 
greater  exceeds  the  less  by  such  a  magnitude  as,  when  added  to  itself,  can  be 
made  to  exceed  any  assigned  magnitude  among  those  which  are  comparable 
with  [it  and  with]  one  another. 

“These  things  being  premised,  if  a  polygon  be  inscribed  in  a  circle ,  it  is  plain 
that  the  perimeter  of  the  inscribed  polygon  is  less  than  the  circumference  of  the 
circle;  for  each  of  the  sides  of  the  polygon  is  less  than  that  part  of  the  circum¬ 
ference  of  the  circle  which  is  cut  off  by  it.” 


ON  THE  SPHERE  AND  CYLINDER  I 


405 


Proposition  1 

If  a  polygon  be  circumscribed  about  a  circle,  the 
perimeter  of  the  circumscribed  polygon  is  greater 
than  the  perimeter  of  the  circle . 

Let  any  two  adjacent  sides,  meeting  in  A, 
touch  the  circle  at  P,  Q  respectively. 

Then  [Assumptions,  2] 

PA+AQ>( arc  PQ). 

A  similar  inequality  holds  for  each  angle  of  the 
polygon;  and,  by  addition,  the  required  result  fol¬ 
lows. 

Proposition  2 


Given  two  unequal  magnitudes,  it  is  possible  to  find  two  unequal  straight  lines  such 
that  the  greater  straight  line  has  to  the  less  a  ratio  less  than  the  greater  magnitude 
has  to  the  less. 

Let  AB,D  represent  the  two  unequal  magnitudes,  AB 
E  being  the  greater. 

A  Suppose  BC  measured  along  BA  equal  to  D,  and  let  GH  be 

H  ’  any  straight  line. 

■c  Then,  if  CA  be  added  to  itself  a  sufficient  number  of 

times,  the  sum  will  exceed  D.  Let  AF  be  this  sum,  and  take  E 
on  GH  produced  such  that  GH  is  the  same  multiple  of  HE 
d  that  AF  is  of  AC. 

Thus  EH  :  HG  =  AC  :  AF. 

But,  since  AF>D  (or  CB), 

B  AC  :AF<AC  :CB. 

Therefore,  componendo, 

EG:GH<AB  :D. 

Hence  EG ,  GH  are  two  lines  satisfying  the  given  condition. 


Proposition  3 


Given  two  unequal  magnitudes  and  a  circle ,  it  is  possible  to  inscribe  a  polygon  in 
the  circle  and  to  describe  another  about  it  so  that  the  side  of  the  circumscribed  poly¬ 
gon  may  have  to  the  side  of  the  inscribed  polygon  a  ratio  less  than  that  of  the  greater 
magnitude  to  the  less. 


D 


Let  A,  B  represent  the  given  magnitudes,  A  being  the  greater. 

Find  [Prop.  2]  two  straight  lines  F ,  KL,  of  which  F  is  the  greater,  such  that 

F  :  KL<A  :  B.  (1). 


ARCHIMEDES 


406 

Draw  LM  perpendicular  to  LK  and  of  such  length  that  KM  =  F. 

In  the  given  circle  let  CE ,  DG  be  two  diameters  at  right  angles.  Then,  bisect¬ 
ing  the  angle  DOC,  bisecting  the  half  again,  and  so  on,  we  shall  arrive  ulti¬ 
mately  at  an  angle  (as  NOC)  less  than  twice  the  angle  LKM. 

Join  iVC,  which  (by  the  construction)  will  be  the  side  of  a  regular  polygon 
inscribed  in  the  circle.  Let  OP  be  the  radius  of  the  circle  bisecting  the  angle 
NOC  (and  therefore  bisecting  NC  at  right  angles,  in  H ,  say),  and  let  the  tan¬ 
gent  at  P  meet  OC,  ON  produced  in  S,  T  respectively. 

N ow,  since  Z  CON  <  2  Z  LKM , 

AHOC<  Z  LKM, 
and  the  angles  at  H ,  L  are  right; 

therefore  MK  :  LK  >  OC  :  OH 
>OP  :  OH. 

Hence  ST  :  CN<MK  :  LK 

<F  :  LK; 

therefore,  a  fortiori,  bv  (1), 

ST  :CN<A  :B. 

Thus  two  polygons  are  found  satisfying  the  given  condition. 

Proposition  4 

Again ,  given  two  unequal  magnitudes  and  a  sector ,  it  is  possible  to  describe  a  poly¬ 
gon  about  the  sector  and  to  inscribe  another  in  it  so  that  the  side  of  the  circumscribed 
polygon  may  have  to  the  side  of  the  inscribed  polygon  a  ratio  less  than  the  greater 
magnitude  has  to  the  less . 

[The  “inscribed  polygon”  found  in  this  proposition  is  one  which  has  for  two 
sides  the  two  radii  bounding  the  sector,  while  the  remaining  sides  (the  number 
of  which  is,  by  construction,  some  power  of  2)  subtend  equal  parts  of  the  arc  of 
the  sector;  the  “circumscribed  polygon”  is  formed  by  the  tangents  parallel  to 
the  sides  of  the  inscribed  polygon  and  by  the  two  bounding  radii  produced.] 


T 


K 


In  this  case  we  make  the  same  construction  as  in  the  last  proposition  except 
that  we  bisect  the  angle  COD  of  the  sector,  instead  of  the  right  angle  between 
two  diameters,  then  bisect  the  half  again,  and  so  on.  The  proof  is  exactly 
similar  to  the  preceding  one. 


Proposition  5 

Given  a  circle  and  two  unequal  magnitudes ,  to  describe  a  polygon  about  the  circle 
and  inscribe  another  in  it,  so  that  the  circumscribed  polygon  may  have  to  the  in¬ 
scribed  a  ratio  less  than  the  greater  magnitude  has  to  the  less. 


ON  THE  SPHERE  AND  CYLINDER  I  407 

Let  A  be  the  given  circle  and  B, 
C  the  given  magnitudes,  B  being  the 
greater. 

Take  two  unequal  straight  lines 
D,  E}  of  which  D  is  the  greater, 
such  that  D  :  E<B  :  C  [Prop.  2], 
and  let  F  be  a  mean  proportional 
between  D)  E  so  that  D  is  also 
greater  than  F. 

Describe  (in  the  manner  of  Prop. 
3)  one  polygon  about  the  circle, 
and  inscribe  another  in  it,  so  that 
r  the  side  of  the  former  has  to  the  side 

of  the  latter  a  ratio  less  than  the  ratio  D  :  F. 

Thus  the  duplicate  ratio  of  the  side  of  the  former  polygon  to  the  side  of  the 
latter  is  less  than  the  ratio  D 2  :  F2. 

But  the  said  duplicate  ratio  of  the  sides  is  equal  to  the  ratio  of  the  areas  of 
the  polygons,  since  they  are  similar; 

therefore  the  area  of  the  circumscribed  polygon  has  to  the  area  of  the  in¬ 
scribed  polygon  a  ratio  less  than  the  ratio  D 2  :  F2,  or  D  :  E,  and  a  fortiori  less 
than  the  ratio  B  :  C . 

Proposition  6 

“Similarly  we  can  show  that,  given  two  unequal  magnitudes  and  a  sector ,  it  is 
possible  to  circumscribe  a  polygon  about  the  sector  and  inscribe  in  it  another  similar 
one  so  that  the  circumscribed  may  have  to  the  inscribed  a  ratio  less  than  the  greater 
magnitude  has  to  the  less. 

“And  it  is  likewise  clear  that,  if  a  circle  or  a  sector ,  as  well  as  a  certain  area ,  be 
given ,  it  is  possible ,  by  inscribing  regular  polygons  in  the  circle  or  sector ,  and  by 
continually  inscribing  such  in  the  remaining  segments ,  to  leave  segments  of  the 
circle  or  sector  which  are  [ together ]  less  than  the  given  area .  For  this  is  proved  in 
the  Elements  [Eucl.  xn.  2]. 

“But  it  is  yet  to  be  proved  that,  given  a  circle  or  sector  and  an  area ,  it 
is  possible  to  describe  a  polygon  about  the  circle  or  sector ,  such  that  the  area  re¬ 
maining  between  the  circumference  and  the  circumscribed  figure  is  less  than  the 

given  area  ” 

The  proof  for  the  circle  (which,  as 
Archimedes  says,  can  be  equally  ap¬ 
plied  to  a  sector)  is  as  follows. 

Let  A  be  the  given  circle  and  B  the 
given  area. 

Now,  there  being  two  unequal  mag¬ 
nitudes  A+B  and  A ,  let  a  polygon 
( C )  be  circumscribed  about  the  circle 
and  a  polygon  (/)  inscribed  in  it  [as  in 
Prop.  5], 


so  that 

C  :I<A+B  :  A. 

The  circumscribed  polygon  ( C )  shall  be  that  required. 


(1). 


ARCHIMEDES 


408 

For  the  circle  (A)  is  greater  than  the  inscribed  polygon  (I). 
Therefore,  from  (1),  a  fortiori, 

C  :A<A+B  :A, 

whence  C<A+B, 

or  C-A<B. 


Proposition  7 

If  in  an  isosceles  cone  [i.e.  a  right  circular  cone ]  a  'pyramid  be  inscribed  having  an 
equilateral  base ,  the  surface  of  the  pyramid  excluding  the  base  is  equal  to  a  triangle 
having  its  base  equal  to  the  perimeter  of  the  base  of  the  pyramid  and  its  height  equal 
to  the  perpendicular  drawn  from  the  apex  on  one  side  of  the  base. 

Since  the  sides  of  the  base  of  the  pyramid  are  equal,  it  follows  that  the  per¬ 
pendiculars  from  the  apex  to  all  the  sides  of  the  base  are  equal;  and  the  proof 
of  the  proposition  is  obvious. 

Proposition  8 

If  a  pyramid  be  circumscribed  about  an  isosceles  cone ,  the  surface  of  the  pyramid 
excluding  its  base  is  equal  to  a  triangle  having  its  base  equal  to  the  perimeter  of  the 
base  of  the  pyramid  and  its  height  equal  to  the  side  [i.e.  a  generator]  of  the  cone. 

The  base  of  the  pyramid  is  a  polygon  circumscribed  about  the  circular  base 
of  the  cone,  and  the  line  joining  the  apex  of  the  cone  or  pyramid  to  the  point 
of  contact  of  any  side  of  the  polygon  is  perpendicular  to  that  side.  Also  all 
these  perpendiculars,  being  generators  of  the  cone,  are  equal;  whence  the  prop¬ 
osition  follows  immediately. 

Proposition  9 

If  in  the  circular  base  of  an  isosceles  cone  a  chord  be  placed ,  and  from  its  extremi¬ 
ties  straight  lines  be  drawn  to  the  apex  of  the  cone ,  the  triangle  so  formed  will  be  less 
than  the  portion  of  the  surface  of  the  cone  intercepted  between  the  lines  drawn  to  the 
apex. 

Let  ABC  be  the  circular  base  of  the  cone,  and  0  its  apex. 

Draw  a  chord  AB  in  the  circle,  and  join  OA ,  OB.  Bisect  the  arc  ACB  in  C , 
and  join  AC,  BC,  OC. 

Then  A  OAC+  A  OBC  >  A  OAB. 

Let  the  excess  of  the  sum  of  the  first  two  triangles  over  the  third  be  equal 
to  the  area  D. 

Then  D  is  either  less  than 
the  sum  of  the  segments  A  EC, 

CFB ,  or  not  less. 

I.  Let  D  be  not  less  than  the 
sum  of  the  segments  referred 
to. 

We  have  now  two  surfaces 

(1)  that  consisting  of  the 
portion  OAEC  of  the  surface 
of  the  cone  together  with  the 
segment  A  EC,  and 

(2)  the  triangle  OAC; 


ON  THE  SPHERE  AND  CYLINDER  I  409 

and,  since  the  two  surfaces  have  the  same  extremities  (the  perimeter  of  the 
triangle  OAC ),  the  former  surface  is  greater  than  the  latter,  which  is  included 
by  it  [Assumptions,  3  or  4]. 

Hence  (surface  OAEC)  +  (segment  AEC)  >  A  OAC. 

Similarly  (surface  OCFB)  +  (segment  CFB)  >  A OBC. 

Therefore,  since  D  is  not  less  than  the  sum  of  the  segments,  we  have,  by 
addition, 

(surface  OAECFB)+D>  AOAC+AOBC 

>  AOAB+D,  by  hypothesis. 

Taking  away  the  common  part  D ,  we  have  the  required  result. 

II.  Let  D  be  less  than  the  sum  of  the  segments  AEC ,  CFB. 

If  now  we  bisect  the  arcs  AC,  CB,  then  bisect  the  halves,  and  so  on,  we  shall 
ultimately  leave  segments  which  are  together  less  than  D.  [Prop.  6] 

Let  AGE,  EHC,  CKF ,  FLB  be  those  segments,  and  join  OE,  OF. 

Then,  as  before, 

(surface  OAGE)  +  (segment  AGE)  >  A OAE 
and  (surface  OEHC )  +  (segment  EHC)  >  AOEC. 

Therefore  (surface  OAGHC)  +  (segments  AGE ,  EHC) 

>AOAE+AOEC 
>  A  OAC,  a  fortiori. 

Similarly  for  the  part  of  the  surface  of  the  cone  bounded  by  OC,  OB  and 
the  arc  CFB. 

Hence,  by  addition, 

(surface  OAGEHCKFLB)  +  (segments  AGE,  EHC,  CKF,  FLB) 

>  AOAC+AOBC 

>  AOAB+D,  by  hypothesis. 

But  the  sum  of  the  segments  is  less  than  D,  and  the  required  result  follows. 

Proposition  10 

If  in  the  plane  of  the  circular  base  of  an  isosceles  cone  two  tangents  be  drawn  to  the 
circle  meeting  in  a  point,  and  the  points  of  contact  and  the  point  of  concourse  of  the 
tangents  be  respectively  joined  to  the  apex  of  the  cone ,  the  sum  of  the  two  triangles 
formed  by  the  joining  lines  and  the  two  tangents  are  together  greater  than  the  in¬ 
cluded  portion  of  the  surface  of  the  cone. 

Let  ABC  be  the  circular  base  of  the  cone,  0  its  apex,  AD,  BD  the  two  tan¬ 
gents  to  the  circle  meeting  in  D.  Join  OA,  OB,  OD. 

Let  ECF  be  drawn  touching  the  circle  at  C,  the  middle  point  of  the  arc  ACB, 
and  therefore  parallel  to  AB.  Join  OE,  OF. 

Then  ED + DF  >  EF , 

and,  adding  AE+FB  to  each  side, 

AD+DB>AE+EF+FB. 

Now  OA,  OC,  OB,  being  generators  of  the  cone,  are  equal,  and  they  are 
respectively  perpendicular  to  the  tangents  at  A,  C,  B. 

It  follows  that 

AOAD+AODB  >  AO  AE+  A  OEF+  A  OFB. 

Let  the  area  G  be  equal  to  the  excess  of  the  first  sum  over  the  second. 

G  is  then  either  less,  or  not  less,  than  the  sum  of  the  spaces  EAIIC,  FCKB 
remaining  between  the  circle  and  the  tangents,  which  sum  we  will  call  L. 

I.  Let  G  be  not  less  than  L. 


ARCHIMEDES 


410 

We  have  now  two  surfaces 

(1)  that  of  the  pyramid  with  apex  0  and  base  AEFB ,  excluding  the  face 
OAB, 

(2)  that  consisting  of  the  part  OACB  of  the  surface  of  the  cone  together  with 
the  segment  ACB. 

These  two  surfaces  have  the  same  extremities,  viz.  the  perimeter  of  the  tri¬ 
angle  OAB ,  and,  since  the  former  includes  the  latter,  the  former  is  the  greater 
[. Assumptions ,  4]. 

That  is,  the  surface  of  the  pyramid  exclusive  of  the  face  OAB  is  greater  than 
the  sum  of  the  surface  OACB  and  the  segment  ACB. 

Taking  away  the  segment  from  each  sum,  w’e  have 

AOAE+  AOEF+ AOFB+L>the  surface  OAHCKB . 

And  G  is  not  less  than  L . 

It  follows  that 

AOAE+  AOEF+ AOFB+G, 

W'hich  is  by  hypothesis  equal  to 
AOAD+AODB,  is  greater  than  the 
same  surface. 

II.  Let  G  be  less  than  L. 

If  w’e  bisect  the  arcs  AC ,  CB  and 
draw’  tangents  at  their  middle  points, 
then  bisect  the  halves  and  draw  tan¬ 
gents,  and  so  on,  w’e  shall  lastly  arrive 
at  a  polygon  such  that  the  sum  of  the 
parts  remaining  between  the  sides  of 
the  polygon  and  the  circumference  of 
the  segment  is  less  than  G . 

Let  the  remainders  be  those  be¬ 
tween  the  segment  and  the  polygon 
APQRSB ,  and  let  their  sum  be  M. 

Join  OP,  OQ ,  etc. 

Then,  as  before, 

AOAE+AOEF+  A OFB  >  AOAP+AOPQ-\ - h  A OSB. 

Also,  as  before, 

(surface  of  pyramid  0 APQRSB  excluding  the  face  OAB)  >  the  part  OACB  of 
the  surface  of  the  cone  together  with  the  segment  ACB. 

Taking  awray  the  segment  from  each  sum, 

AOAP+  AOPQ+  •  *  -+Af  >the  part  OACB  of  the  surface  of  the  cone. 

Hence,  a  fortiori , 

A  OAE+  AOEF+  AOFB+G, 
w’hich  is  by  hypothesis  equal  to 

AOAD+AODBj 

is  greater  than  the  part  OACB  of  the  surface  of  the  cone. 


Proposition  11 

If  a  plane  parallel  to  the  axis  of  a  right  cylinder  cut  the  cylinder ,  the  part  of  the 
surface  of  the  cylinder  cut  off  by  the  plane  is  greater  than  the  area  of  the  parallel - 
ogram  in  which  the  plane  cuts  it. 


ON  THE  SPHERE  AND  CYLINDER  I 


411 


Proposition  12 

If  at  the  extremities  of  two  generators  of  any  right  cylinder  tangents  be  drawn  to  the 
circular  bases  in  the  planes  of  those  bases  respectively ,  and  if  the  pairs  of  tangents 
meet ,  the  parallelograms  formed  by  each  generator  and  the  two  corresponding  tan¬ 
gents  respectively  are  together  greater  than  the  included  portion  of  the  surface  of  the 
cylinder  between  the  two  generators. 

[The  proofs  of  these  two  propositions  follow  exactly  the  methods  of  Props.  9, 
10  respectively,  and  it  is  therefore  unnecessary  to  reproduce  them.] 

“From  the  properties  thus  proved  it  is  clear  (1)  that,  if  a  pyramid  be  in¬ 
scribed  in  an  isosceles  cone ,  the  surface  of  the  pyramid  excluding  the  base  is  less 
than  the  surface  of  the  cone  [excluding  the  base],  and  (2)  that,  if  a  pyramid  be 
circumscribed  about  an  isosceles  cone ,  the  surface  of  the  pyramid  excluding  the  base 
is  greater  than  the  surface  of  the  cone  excluding  the  base. 

“It  is  also  clear  from  what  has  been  proved  both  (1)  that,  if  a  prism  be  in¬ 
scribed  in  a  right  cylinder ,  the  surface  of  the  prism  made  up  of  its  parallelograms 
[i.e.  excluding  its  bases ]  is  less  than  the  surface  of  the  cylinder  excluding  its  bases , 
and  (2)  that,  if  a  prism  be  circumscribed  about  a  right  cylinder ,  the  surface  of  the 
prism  made  up  of  its  parallelograms  is  greater  than  the  surface  of  the  cylinder 
excluding  its  bases” 

Proposition  13 

The  surface  of  any  right  cylinder  excluding  the  bases  is  equal  to  a  circle  whose 
radius  is  a  mean  proportional  between  the  side  [i.e.  a  generator ]  of  the  cylinder  and 
the  diameter  of  its  base. 

Let  the  base  of  the  cylinder  be  the  circle  A,  and  make  CD  equal  to  the  diam¬ 
eter  of  this  circle,  and  EF  equal  to  the  height  of  the  cylinder. 

Let  II  be  a  mean  proportional 
between  CD,  EF,  and  B  a  circle 
with  radius  equal  to  H. 

Then  the  circle  B  shall  be 
equal  to  the  surface  of  the  cylin¬ 
der  (excluding  the  bases),  which 
we  will  call  S. 

For,  if  not,  B  must  be  either 
greater  or  less  than  S. 

I.  Suppose  B<S. 

Then  it  is  possible  to  circum¬ 
scribe  a  regular  polygon  about 
B,  and  to  inscribe  another  in  it, 
such  that  the  ratio  of  the  former 
to  the  latter  is  less  than  the 
ratio  S  :  B. 

Suppose  this  done,  and  cir¬ 
cumscribe  about  A  a  polygon 
similar  to  that  described  about  B;  then  erect  on  the  polygon  about  A  a  prism 
of  the  same  height  as  the  cylinder.  The  prism  will  therefore  be  circumscribed 
to  the  cylinder. 

Let  KD ,  perpendicular  to  CD,  and  FL ,  perpendicular  to  EF,  be  each  equal 
to  the  perimeter  of  the  polygon  about  A.  Bisect  CD  in  M,  and  join  MK. 


412  ARCHIMEDES 

Then  AKDM  =  the  polygon  about  A. 

Also  OEL  =  surface  of  prism  (excluding  bases). 

Produce  FE  to  N  so  that  FE  =  EN,  and  join  NL. 

Now  the  polygons  about  A ,  B,  being  similar,  are  in  the  duplicate  ratio  of 
the  radii  of  A,  B. 

Thus 

AKDM  :  (polygon  about  B)=MD 2  :  H2 

=MD 2  :  CD  •  EF 
=  MD  :  NF 
=  AKDM  :  A LFN 

(since  DK  =  FL ). 

Therefore  (polygon  about  B)  =  A  LFN 

—  OEL 

=  (surface  of  prism  about  A ), 

from  aboye. 

But  (polygon  about  B)  :  (polygon  in  B)  <S  :  B. 

Therefore 

(surface  of  prism  about  A)  :  (polygon  in  B)  <S  :  B, 
and,  alternately, 

(surface  of  prism  about  A)  :  S<  (polygon  in  B)  :  B) 
which  is  impossible,  since  the  surface  of  the  prism  is  greater  than  >S,  while  the 
polygon  inscribed  in  B  is  less  than  B. 

Therefore  B<S. 

II.  Suppose  B>S. 

Let  a  regular  polygon  be  circumscribed  about  B  and  another  inscribed  in  it 
so  that 

(polygon  about  B)  :  (polygon  in  B)  <B  :  S. 

Inscribe  in  A  a  polygon  similar  to  that  inscribed  in  B,  and  erect  a  prism  on 
the  polygon  inscribed  in  A  of  the  same  height  as  the  cylinder. 

Again,  let  DK,  FL ,  drawn  as  before,  be  each  equal  to  the  perimeter  of  the 
polygon  inscribed  in  A. 

Then,  in  this  case, 

AKDM >  (polygon  inscribed  in  A) 

(since  the  perpendicular  from  the  centre  on  a  side  of  the  polygon  is  less  than 
the  radius  of  A). 

Also  A  LFN  =  OEL  =  surface  of  prism  (excluding  bases). 

Now 

(polygon  in  A)  :  (polygon  in  B)  =  MD 2  :  H 2, 

=  AKDM  :  A  LFN,  as  before. 

And  AKDM >  (polygon  in  A). 

Therefore 

ALFN,  or  (surface  of  prism)  >  (polygon  in  B). 

But  this  is  impossible,  because 

(polygon  about  B)  :  (polygon  in  B)  <B  :  S, 

<  (polygon  about  B)  :  S ,  a  fortiori , 
so  that  (polygon  in  B)  >S, 

>  (surface  of  prism),  a  fortiori. 

Hence  B  is  neither  greater  nor  less  than  S,  and  therefore 

B=S . 


ON  THE  SPHERE  AND  CYLINDER  I 


413 


Proposition  14 

The  surface  of  any  isosceles  cone  excluding  the  base  is  equal  to  a  circle  whose  radius 
is  a  mean  proportional  between  the  side  of  the  cone  [a  generator ]  and  the  radius  of 
the  circle  which  is  the  base  of  the  cone. 

Let  the  circle  A  be  the  base  of  the  cone;  draw  G  equal  to  the  radius  of  the 
circle,  and  D  equal  to  the  side  of  the  cone,  and  let  E  be  a  mean  proportional 

Draw  a  circle  B  with  radius  equal 
to  E. 

Then  shall  B  be  equal  to  the  surface 
of  the  cone  (excluding  the  base), 
which  we  will  call  S. 

If  not,  B  must  be  either  greater  or 
less  than  S. 

I.  Suppose  B<S. 

Let  a  regular  polygon  be  described 
about  B  and  a  similar  one  inscribed 
in  it  such  that  the  former  has  to  the 
latter  a  ratio  less  than  the  ratio  S  :  B . 

Describe  about  A  another  similar  polygon,  and  on  it  set  up  a  pyramid  with 
apex  the  same  as  that  of  the  cone. 

Then  (polygon  about  A)  :  (polygon  about  B) 

=  C2 :  E2 
=  C  :D 

=  (polygon  about  A)  :  (surface  of  pyramid  excluding  base). 

Therefore 

(surface  of  pyramid  =  (polygon  about  B). 

Now  (potygon  about  B)  :  (polygon  in  B)  <S  :  B . 

Therefore 

(surface  of  pyramid)  :  (polygon  in  B)  <S  :  B, 
which  is  impossible,  (because  the  surface  of  the  pyramid  is  greater  than  S, 
while  the  polygon  in  B  is  less  than  B ). 

Hence  B<S. 

II.  Suppose  B  >S. 

Take  regular  polygons  circumscribed  and  inscribed  to  B  such  that  the  ratio 
of  the  former  to  the  latter  is  less  than  the  ratio  B  :  S. 

Inscribe  in  A  a  similar  polygon  to  that  inscribed  in  B,  and  erect  a  pyramid 
on  the  polygon  inscribed  in  A  with  apex  the  same  as  that  of  the  cone. 

In  this  case 

(polygon  in  A)  :  (polygon  in  B)  =  C 2  :  E2 

—  C\  D 

>  (polygon  in  A)  :  (surface  of  pyramid  excluding  base). 

This  is  clear  because  the  ratio  of  C  to  D  is  greater  than  the  ratio  of  the 
perpendicular  from  the  centre  of  A  on  a  side  of  the  polygon  to  the  perpen¬ 
dicular  from  the  apex  of  the  cone  on  the  same  side. 

Therefore 

(surface  of  pyramid)  >  (polygon  in  B). 

But  (polygon  about  B)  :  (polygon  in  B)  <B  :  S. 


ARCHIMEDES 


414 

Therefore,  a  fortiori , 

(polygon  about  B)  :  (surface  of  pyramid)  <B  :  S ; 
which  is  impossible. 

Since  therefore  B  is  neither  greater  nor  less  than  S, 

B=S . 

Proposition  15 

The  surface  of  any  isosceles  cone  has  the  same  ratio  to  its  base  as  the  side  of  the  cone 
has  to  the  radius  of  the  base. 

By  Prop.  14,  the  surface  of  the  cone  is  equal  to  a  circle  whose  radius  is  a 
mean  proportional  between  the  side  of  the  cone  and  the  radius  of  the  base. 

Hence,  since  circles  are  to  one  another  as  the  squares  of  their  radii,  the  prop¬ 
osition  follows. 


Proposition  16 

If  an  isosceles  cone  be  cut  by  a  plane  parallel  to  the  base,  the  portion  of  the  surface 
of  the  cone  between  the  parallel  planes  is  equal  to  a  circle  whose  radius  is  a  mean 
proportional  between  (1)  the  portion  of  the  side  of  the  cone  intercepted  by  the  paral¬ 
lel  planes  and  (2)  the  line  which  is  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  radii  of  the  circles  in  the 
parallel  planes. 

Let  OAB  be  a  triangle  through  the  axis  of  a  cone,  DE  its  intersection  with 
the  plane  cutting  off  the  frustum,  and  OFC  the  axis  of  the  cone. 

Then  the  surface  of  the  cone  OAB  is  equal  to  a  circle  o 

lvhose  radius  is  equal  to  \/ OA  • AC .  [Prop.  14.] 

Similarly  the  surface  of  the  cone  ODE  is  equal  to  a 
circle  whose  radius  is  equal  to  \/ OD  •  DF. 

And  the  surface  of  the  frustum  is  equal  to  the  differ¬ 
ence  between  the  two  circles. 

Now 

OA  AC-OD  DF  =  DA  • AC+OD  AC-OD  DF. 

But  OD-AC=OADF, 

since  OA  :  AC  =  OD  :  DF. 

Hence  OA  -AC  —  OD-DF  =  DA-AC+DA  -DF 

=  DA  •  (AC+DF). 

And,  since  circles  are  to  one  another  as  the  squares  of  their  radii,  it  follows  that 
the  difference  between  the  circles  whose  radii  are  a/ OA .  AC,  a/ OD-DF  respec¬ 
tively  is  equal  to  a  circle  whose  radius  is  \J DA  •  (AC+DF) . 

Therefore  the  surface  of  the  frustum  is  equal  to  this  circle. 

LEMMAS 

“1.  Cones  having  equal  height  have  the  same  ratio  as  their  bases ;  and  those  having 
equal  bases  have  the  same  ratio  as  their  heights l. 

2.  If  a  cylinder  be  cut  by  a  plane  parallel  to  the  base,  then,  as  the  cylinder  is  to 
the  cylinder,  so  is  the  axis  to  the  axis'1. 

Euclid  xii.  11.  “Cones  and  cylinders  of  equal  height  are  to  one  another  as  their  bases.” 
Euclid  xii.  14.  “Cones  and  cylinders  on  equal  bases  are  to  one  another  as  their  heights.” 

2Euclid  xii.  13.  “If  a  cylinder  be  cut  by  a  plane  parallel  to  the  opposite  planes  [the  bases], 
then,  as  the  cjdinder  is  to  the  cylinder,  so  will  the  axis  be  to  the  axis.” 


ON  THE  SPHERE  AND  CYLINDER  I  415 

3.  The  cones  which  have  the  same  bases  as  the  cylinders  [ and  equal  height ]  are  in 
the  same  ratio  as  the  cylinders. 

4.  Also  the  bases  of  equal  cones  are  reciprocally  proportional  to  their  heights; 
and  those  cones  whose  bases  are  reciprocally  proportional  to  their  heights  are 
equal } 

5.  Also  the  cones ,  the  diameters  of  whose  bases  have  the  same  ratio  as  their  axes, 
are  to  one  another  in  the  triplicate  ratio  of  the  diameters  of  the  bases.2 

And  all  these  propositions  have  been  proved  by  earlier  geometers.” 

Proposition  17 

If  there  be  two  isosceles  cones ,  and  the  surface  of  one  cone  be  equal  to  the  base  of  the 
other,  while  the  perpendicular  from  the  centre  of  the  base  [of  the  first  cone]  on  the 
side  of  that  cone  is  equal  to  the  height  [of  the  second],  the  cones  will  be  equal. 

Let  OAB,  DBF  be  triangles  through  the  axes  of  two  cones  respectively,  C,  G 

the  centres  of  the  respective  bases, 
GH  the  perpendicular  from  G  on  FD ; 
and  suppose  that  the  base  of  the  cone 
OH  Bis  equal  to  the  surface  of  the  cone 
DEF,  and  that  OC  =  GH. 

Then,  since  the  base  of  OAB  is 
equal  to  the  surface  of  DEF, 

(base  of  cone  OAB)  :  (base  of  cone 
DEF ) 

=  (surface  of  DEF)  :  (base  of  DEF) 

=  DF:FG  [Prop.  15] 

=  DG  :  GH,  by  similar  triangles, 

=  DG  :  OC. 

are  reciprocally  proportional  to  their 
heights;  whence  the  cones  are  equal.  [Lemma  4.] 

Proposition  18 

Any  solid  rhombus  consisting  of  isosceles  cones  is  equal  to  the  cone  which  has  its 
base  equal  to  the  surface  of  one  of  the  cones  composing  the  rhombus  and  its  height 
equal  to  the  perpendicular  drawn  from  the  apex  of  the  second  cone  to  one  side  of 
the  first  cone. 

Let  the  rhombus  be  OABD  consisting  of  two  cones  with  apices  0,  D  and 
with  a  common  base  (the  circle  about  AB  as  diameter). 

Let  FHK  be  another  cone  with  base  equal  to  the  surface  of  the  cone  OAB 
and  height  FG  equal  to  DE,  the  perpendicular  from  D  on  OB. 

Then  shall  the  cone  FHK  be  equal  to  the  rhombus. 

Construct  a  third  cone  LMN  with  base  (the  circle  about  M N)  equal  to  the 
base  of  OAB  and  height  LP  equal  to  OD. 

q^uclid  xii.  15.  “The  bases  of  equal  cones  and  cylinders  are  reciprocally  proportional  to 
their  heights;  and  those  cones  and  cylinders  whose  bases  are  reciprocally  proportional  to 
their  heights  are  equal.” 

2Euclid  xii.  12.  “Similar  cones  and  cylinders  are  to  one  another  in  the  triplicate  ratio  of  the 
diameters  of  their  bases.” 


B 


Therefore  the  bases  of  the  cones 


416 


ARCHIMEDES 


Then,  since  LP  =  OD , 

LP  :  CD  —  OD  :  CD. 

But  [ Lemma  1]  OD  :  CD  =  (rhombus  OADB )  :  (cone  DAB), 

and  LP  :  CD  =  (cone  LMN)  :  (cone  DAB). 

It  follows  that  f 


(rhombus  OADB)  =  (cone  LMN).  (1) 

Again,  since  AB  =  .l/JV,  and 

(surface  of  (MB)  =  (base  of  FHK ), 

(base  of  FHK)  :  (base  of  LAfiV)  =  (surface  of  (MB)  :  (base  of  OAB) 

=  OB:BC  [Prop.  15] 

=  OD  :  DE ,  by  similar  triangles, 

=  LP  :  BG,  by  hypothesis. 

Thus,  in  the  cones  FHK ,  LMN ,  the  bases  are  reciprocally  proportional  to 
the  heights. 

Therefore  the  cones  FHK,  LMN  are  equal, 
and  hence,  by  (1)  the  cone  FHK  is  equal  to  the  given  solid  rhombus. 

Proposition  19 


If  an  isosceles  cone  be  cut  by  a  plane  parallel  to  the  base,  and  on  the  resulting 
circular  section  a  cone  be  described  having  as  its  apex  the  centre  of  the  base  [of  the 
first  cone],  and  if  the  rhombus  so  formed  be  taken  away  from  the  whole  cone,  the 
part  remaining  will  be  equal  to  the  cone  with  base  equal  to  the  surface  of  the  portion 
of  the  first  cone  between  the  parallel  planes  and  with  height  equal  to  the  perpen¬ 
dicular  drawn  from  the  centre  of  the  base  of  the  first  cone  on  one  side  of  that  cone. 

Let  the  cone  OAB  be  cut  by  a  plane  parallel  to  the  base  in  the  circle  on  DE 
as  diameter.  Let  C  be  the  centre  of  the  base  of  the  cone,  and  with  C  as  apex  and 
the  circle  about  DE  as  base  describe  a  cone,  making  with  the  cone  ODE  the 
rhombus  ODCE. 

Take  a  cone  FGH  with  base  equal  to  the  surface  of  the  frustum  DABE  and 
height  equal  to  the  perpendicular  (CK)  from  C  on  AO. 

Then  shall  the  cone  FGH  be  equal  to  the  difference  between  the  cone  OAB 
and  the  rhombus  ODCE. 

Take  (1)  a  cone  LMN  with  base  equal  to  the  surface  of  the  cone  OAB,  and 
height  equal  to  CK, 

(2)  a  cone  PQR  with  base  equal  to  the  surface  of  the  cone  ODE  and  height 
equal  to  CK. 


ON  THE  SPHERE  AND  CYLINDER  I  417 

Now,  since  the  surface  of  the  cone  OAB  is  equal  to  the  surface  of  the  cone 
ODE  together  with  that  of  the  frustum  DABE ,  we  have,  by  the  construction, 


(base  of  LMN)  =  (base  of  F(7tf)  +  (base  of  PQR) 
and,  since  the  heights  of  the  three  cones  are  equal, 

(cone  LMN )  =  (cone  FG£0  +  (cone  PQR). 

But  the  cone  LMN  is  equal  to  the  cone  OAB  [Prop.  17],  and  the  cone  PQR 
is  equal  to  the  rhombus  ODCE  [Prop.  18]. 

Therefore  (cone  OAB)  =  (cone  FGH)  +  (rhombus  ODCE),  and  the  proposi¬ 
tion  is  proved. 

Proposition  20 

If  one  of  the  two  isosceles  cones  forming  a  rhombus  be  cut  by  a  plane  parallel  to  the 
base  and  on  the  resulting  circular  section  a  cone  be  described  having  the  same  apex 
as  the  second  cone ,  and  if  the  resulting  rhombus  be  taken  from  the  whole  rhombus, 
the  remainder  will  be  equal  to  the  cone  with  base  equal  to  the  surface  of  the  portion 
of  the  cone  between  the  parallel  planes  and  with  height  equal  to  the  perpendicular 
drawn  from  the  apex  of  the  second  cone  to  the  side  of  the  first  cone . 


Let  the  rhombus  be  OACB,  and  let  the  cone  OAB  be  cut  by  a  plane  parallel 
to  its  base  in  the  circle  about  DE  as  diameter.  With  this  circle  as  base  and  C 


418  ARCHIMEDES 

as  apex  describe  a  cone,  which  therefore  with  ODE  forms  the  rhombus  ODCE . 

Take  a  cone  FGH  with  base  equal  to  the  surface  of  the  frustum  DA  BE  and 
height  equal  to  the  perpendicular  ( CK )  from  C  on  OA. 

The  cone  FGH  shall  be  equal  to  the  difference  between  the  rhombi  OACB , 
ODCE. 

For  take  (1)  a  cone  LAIN  with  base  equal  to  the  surface  of  OAB  and  height 
equal  to  CK, 

(2)  a  cone  PQR,  with  base  equal  to  the  surface  of  ODE,  and  height  equal 
to  CK. 

Then,  since  the  surface  of  OAB  is  equal  to  the  surface  of  ODE  together  with 
that  of  the  frustum  DABE,  we  have,  by  construction, 

(base  of  LMN)  =  (base  of  PQP)  +  (base  of  FGH), 
and  the  three  cones  are  of  equal  height  ; 
therefore  (cone  LAIN)  =  (cone  PQR)  +  (cone  FGH). 

But  the  cone  LMN  is  equal  to  the  rhombus  OACB,  and  the  cone  PQR  is 
equal  to  the  rhombus  ODCE  [Prop.  18]. 

Hence  the  cone  FGH  is  equal  to  the  difference  between  the  two  rhombi 
OACB,  ODCE . 

Proposition  21 

A  regular  polygon  of  an  even  number  of  sides  being  inscribed  in  a  circle,  as 
ABC  •  •  -A'  •  •  C'B'A,  so  that  AA'  is  a  diameter,  if  two  angular  points  next  but 
one  to  each  other ,  as  B,  B',  be  joined,  and  the  other  lines  parallel  to  BB'  and  joining 
pairs  of  angular  points  be  drawn,  as  CC',  DD'  *  •  *,  then 
(BB'+CC'+  •  •  •)  :  AA'  =  A'B  :  BA. 

Let  BB ',  CC' ,  DD',  •  •  •  meet  AAf 
in  F,  G,  H,  •  -  ■ ;  and  let  CB ',  DC', 

•  •  •  be  joined  meeting  A  A'  in  K,  L, 

•  •  •  respectively. 

Then  clearly  CB' ,  DC',  •  •  •  are 
parallel  to  one  another  and  to  AB. 

Hence,  by  similar  triangles, 

BF  :  FA  =B'F  :  FK 
=  CG  :  GK 
=  C'G  :  GL 


=  E'I  :  I  A'; 

and,  summing  the  antecedents  and 
consequents  respectively,  we  have 
C BB'+CC'+  -•-):  AA'  =  BF  :  FA 
=  A'B  :  BA. 

Proposition  22 

If  a  polygon  be  inscribed  in  a  segment  of  a  circle  LAL '  so  that  all  its  sides  exclud¬ 
ing  the  base  are  equal  and  their  number  even,  as  LK  •  •  *A  •  •  • K'L ' ,  A  being  the 
middle  point  of  the  segment,  and  if  the  lines  BB' ,  CC',  •  •  •  parallel  to  the  base  LL ' 
and  joining  pairs  of  angular  points  be  drawn,  then 

(BB'+CC'+  •  •  -+LM)  :  AM=A'B  :  BA, 
where  AI  is  the  middle  point  of  LL'  and  AA'  is  the  diameter  through  M. 


D‘ 


ON  THE  SPHERE  AND  CYLINDER  I  419 


Joining  CB\  DC' ,  •  •  •  LK' ,  as  in  the 
last  proposition,  and  supposing  that 
they  meet  AM  in  P,  Q,  •  •  •/?,  while 
BB'j  CC ',  •  •  *,  KK'  meet  AM  in  F , 
G,  -  Hf  we  have,  by  similar  tri¬ 
angles, 

BF  :FA=B'F  :FP 
=  CG:PG 
=  C'G:GQ 


=  LM  :RM; 

and,  summing  the  antecedents  and 
consequents,  we  obtain 

(BB'+CC'+ - VLM)  :  AM 

=BF : FA 
=  A'B  :  BA. 


Proposition  23 

Take  a  great  circle  ABC  •  •  •  of  a  sphere,  and  inscribe  in  it  a  regular  polygon 
whose  sides  are  a  multiple  of  four  in  number.  Let  A  A',  MM'  be  diameters  at 
right  angles  and  joining  opposite  angular  points  of  the  polygon. 

Then,  if  the  polygon  and  great 
circle  revolve  together  about  the 
diameter  A  A the  angular  points  of 
the  polygon,  except  A,  A',  will  de¬ 
scribe  circles  on  the  surface  of  the 
sphere  at  right  angles  to  the  diame¬ 
ter  AA\  Also  the  sides  of  the  poly¬ 
gon  will  describe  portions  of  conical 
surfaces,  e.g.  BC  will  describe  a 
surface  forming  part  of  a  cone  whose 
base  is  a  circle  about  CC'  as  diameter 
and  whose  apex  is  the  point  in  which 
CBy  C'B'  produced  meet  each  other 
and  the  diameter  AA'. 

Comparing  the  hemisphere  MAM' 
and  that  half  of  the  figure  described 
by  the  revolution  of  the  polygon 
which  is  included  in  the  hemisphere,  we  see  that  the  surface  of  the  hemisphere 
and  the  surface  of  the  inscribed  figure  have  the  same  boundaries  in  one  plane 
(viz.  the  circle  on  MM'  as  diameter),  the  former  surface  entirely  includes  the 
latter,  and  they  are  both  concave  in  the  same  direction. 

Therefore  [. Assumptions ,  4]  the  surface  of  the  hemisphere  is  greater  than  that 
of  the  inscribed  figure;  and  the  same  is  true  of  the  other  halves  of  the  figures. 

Hence  the  surface  of  the  sphere  is  greater  than  the  surface  described  by  the  rev¬ 
olution  of  the  polygon  inscribed  in  the  great  circle  about  the  diameter  of  the  great 
circle . 


420 


ARCHIMEDES 


Proposition  24 

If  a  regular  polygon  AB  •  •  -A'  •  •  B'A,  the  number  of  whose  sides  is  a  multiple  of 
four ,  be  inscribed  in  a  great  circle  of  a  sphere ,  and  if  BB'  subtending  two  sides  be 
joined ,  and  all  the  other  lines  parallel  to  BB'  and  joining  pairs  of  angular  points 
be  drawn ,  then  the  surface  of  the  figure  inscribed  in  the  sphere  by  the  revolution  of 
the  polygon  about  the  diameter  A  A'  is 
equal  to  a  circle  the  square  of  whose 
radius  is  equal  to  the  rectangle 
BA(BB'+CC'+---). 

The  surface  of  the  figure  is  made 
up  of  the  surfaces  of  parts  of  different 
cones. 

Now  the  surface  of  the  cone  ABB' 
is  equal  to  a  circle  whose  radius  is  a 
y/BA^BB9.  [Prop.  14] 

The  surface  of  the  frustum  BB'C'C 
is  equal  to  a  circle  of  radius 

VBC-i(BB'+CC'),  [Prop.  16] 

and  so  on. 

It  follows,  since  BA=BC=  •  •*, 
that  the  whole  surface  is  equal  to  a 

circle  whose  radius  is  equal  to _ 

y/BA(BB'+CC'+  •  •  -+MM'+  •  •  -  +  FF'). 

Proposition  25 

The  surface  of  the  figure  inscribed  in  a  sphere  as  in  the  last  propositions ,  consisting 
of  portions  of  conical  surfaces,  is  less  than  four  times  the  greatest  circle  in  the 
sphere. 

Let  AB  •  *  -A'  •  •  'B'A  be  a  regular  polygon  inscribed  in  a  great  circle,  the 
number  of  its  sides  being  a  multiple  of  four. 

As  before,  let  BB'  be  drawn  sub¬ 
tending  two  sides,  and  CC',  •••FF/ 
parallel  to  BB'. 

Let  R  be  a  circle  such  that  the 
square  of  its  radius  is  equal  to 
AB(BB'+CC'+---  +  YY '), 
so  that  the  surface  of  the  figure  in¬ 
scribed  in  the  sphere  is  equal  to  R. 

[Prop.  24] 

Now 

(. BB'+CC'+---+YY ')  :AA' 

=A'B  :  AB,  [Prop.  21] 
whence  AB(BB'+CC'+  •  •  -  +  FF') 

=AA'-A'B. 

Hence  (radius  of  R)2  =  A  A'  -A'B 

<AA'2. 

Therefore  the  surface  of  the  inscribed  figure,  or  the  circle  R ,  is  less  than  four 
times  the  circle  AMA'M'. 


M' 


M 


ON  THE  SPHERE  AND  CYLINDER  I 


421 


Proposition  26 

The  figure  inscribed  as  above  in  a  sphere  is  equal  [in  volume ]  to  a  cone  whose  base 
is  a  circle  equal  to  the  surface  of  the  figure  inscribed  in  the  sphere  and  whose  height 
is  equal  to  the  perpendicular  drawn  from  the  centre  of  the  sphere  to  one  side  of  the 
polygon . 

Suppose,  as  before,  that  AB  ••  -A'  •  •  B'A  is  the  regular  polygon  inscribed  in 
a  great  circle,  and  let  BB',  CC' ,  •  •  •  be  joined. 

With  apex  0  construct  cones 
whose  bases  are  the  circles  on 
BB',  CC',  •  •  •  as  diameters  in 
planes  perpendicular  to  AA'. 

Then  OBAB'  is  a  solid 
rhombus,  and  its  volume  is 
equal  to  a  cone  whose  base  is 
equal  to  the  surface  of  the  cone 
ABB'  and  whose  height  is 
equal  to  the  perpendicular 
from  0  on  AB  [Prop.  18].  Let 
the  length  of  the  perpendicu¬ 
lar  be  p. 

Again,  if  CB ,  C'B'  produced 
meet  in  T,  the  portion  of  the 
solid  figure  which  is  described 
by  the  revolution  of  the  tri¬ 
angle  BOC  about  A  A'  is  equal  to  the  difference  between  the  rhombi  OCTC' 
and  OBTB ',  i.e.  to  a  cone  whose  base  is  equal  to  the  surface  of  the  frustum 
BB'C'C  and  whose  height  is  p  [Prop.  20]. 

Proceeding  in  this  manner,  and  adding,  we  prove  that,  since  cones  of  equal 
height  are  to  one  another  as  their  bases,  the  volume  of  the  solid  of  revolution 
is  equal  to  a  cone  with  height  p  and  base  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  surfaces  of  the 
cone  BAB' ,  the  frustum  BB'C'C,  etc.,  i.e.  a  cone  with  height  p  and  base  equal 
to  the  surface  of  the  solid. 


M 


Proposition  27 

The  figure  inscribed  in  the  sphere  as  before  is  less  than  four  times  the  cone  whose 
base  is  equal  to  a  great  circle  of  the  sphere  and  whose  height  is  equal  to  the  radius 
of  the  sphere. 

By  Prop.  26  the  volume  of  the  solid  figure  is  equal  to  a  cone  whose  base  is 
equal  to  the  surface  of  the  solid  and  whose  height  is  p,  the  perpendicular  from 
0  on  any  side  of  the  polygon.  Let  R  be  such  a  cone. 

Take  also  a  cone  S  with  base  equal  to  the  great  circle,  and  height  equal  to 
the  radius,  of  the  sphere. 

Now,  since  the  surface  of  the  inscribed  solid  is  less  than  four  times  the  great 
circle  [Prop.  25],  the  base  of  the  cone  R  is  less  than  four  times  the  base  of  the 
cone  S. 

Also  the  height  (p)  of  R  is  less  than  the  height  of  S . 

Therefore  the  volume  of  R  is  less  than  four  times  that  of  S ;  and  the  proposi¬ 
tion  is  proved. 


422 


ARCHIMEDES 


Proposition  28 

Let  a  regular  polygon,  whose  sides  are  a  multiple  of  four  in  number,  be  circum¬ 
scribed  about  a  great  circle  of  a  given  sphere,  as  AB  •  •  A’  •  •  • B' A ;  and  about 
the  polygon  describe  another  circle,  which  will  therefore  have  the  same  centre 
as  the  great  circle  of  the  sphere.  Let  A  A'  bisect  the  polygon  and  cut  the  sphere 
in  a,  a'. 

If  the  great  circle  and  the  circum¬ 
scribed  polygon  revolve  together 
about  AA'y  the  great  circle  will  de¬ 
scribe  the  surface  of  a  sphere,  the  an¬ 
gular  points  of  the  polygon  except  A, 

A'  will  move  round  the  surface  of  a 
larger  sphere,  the  points  of  contact  of 
the  sides  of  the  polygon  with  the  great 
circle  of  the  inner  sphere  will  describe 
circles  on  that  sphere  in  planes  per¬ 
pendicular  to  AA',  and  the  sides  of 
the  polygon  themselves  will  describe 
portions  of  conical  surfaces.  The  cir¬ 
cumscribed  figure  will  thus  be  greater 
than  the  sphere  itself. 

Let  any  side,  as  BM,  touch  the 
inner  circle  in  K ,  and  let  K'  be  the  point  of  contact  of  the  circle  with  B'M'. 

Then  the  circle  described  by  the  revolution  of  KK '  about  A  A'  is  the  boun¬ 
dary  in  one  plane  of  twro  surfaces 

(1)  the  surface  formed  by  the  revolution  of  the  circular  segment  KaK\  and 

(2)  the  surface  formed  by  the  revolution  of  the  part  KB  •  •  -A  •  •  *j B'K'  of  the 
polygon. 

Now  the  second  surface  entirely  includes  the  first,  and  they  are  both  concave 
in  the  same  direction; 

therefore  [. Assumptions ,  4]  the  second  surface  is  greater  than  the  first. 

The  same  is  true  of  the  portion  of  the  surface  on  the  opposite  side  of  the 
circle  on  KK'  as  diameter. 

Hence,  adding,  w^e  see  that  the  surface  of  the  figure  circumscribed  to  the  given 
sphere  is  greater  than  that  of  the  sphere  itself. 

Proposition  29 

In  a  figure  circumscribed  to  a  sphere  in  the  manner  shown  in  the  previous  proposi¬ 
tion  the  surface  is  equal  to  a  circle  the  square  on  whose  radius  is  equal  to 

AB(BB'+CC'+  -  •  •). 

For  the  figure  circumscribed  to  the  sphere  is  inscribed  in  a  larger  sphere,  and 
the  proof  of  Prop.  24  applies. 


M 


Proposition  30 

The  surface  of  a  figure  circumscribed  as  before  about  a  sphere  is  greater  than  four 
times  the  great  circle  of  the  sphere. 

Let  AB  •  •  • A '  •  •  B'A  be  the  regular  polygon  of  4 n  sides  which  by  its  revolu- 


ON  THE  SPHERE  AND  CYLINDER  I 


423 


tion  about  AA'  describes  the  figure  circumscribing  the  sphere  of  which  ama'm' 

is  a  great  circle.  Suppose  aa',  A  A'  to 
be  in  one  straight  line. 

Let  R  be  a  circle  equal  to  the  sur¬ 
face  of  the  circumscribed  solid. 

Now 

(. BB'+CC'+  •  •  •)  :AA'  —  A'B  :BA , 
[as  in  Prop.  21] 

so  that 

AB(BB'+CC'+  •  •  -)  =  AA'A'B. 
Hence  (radius  of  R)  =  \/AA'  A'B 

[Prop.  29] 
>A'B. 

But  A'B  =  20 Py  where  P  is  the  point 
in  which  AB  touches  the  circle 
ama'm'. 

Therefore  (radius  of  R)  >  (diam¬ 
eter  of  circle  ama'm')) 

whence  R,  and  therefore  the  surface  of  the  circumscribed  solid,  is  greater  than 
four  times  the  great  circle  of  the  given  sphere. 


Proposition  31 

The  solid  of  revolution  circumscribed  as  before  about  a  sphere  is  equal  to  a  cone 
whose  base  is  equal  to  the  surface  of  the  solid  and  whose  height  is  equal  to  the  radius 
of  the  sphere. 

The  solid  is,  as  before,  a  solid  inscribed  in  a  larger  sphere;  and,  since  the 
perpendicular  on  any  side  of  the  revolving  polygon  is  equal  to  the  radius  of  the 
inner  sphere,  the  proposition  is  identical  with  Prop.  26. 

Cor.  The  solid  circumscribed  about  the  smaller  sphere  is  greater  than  four  times 
the  cone  whose  base  is  a  great  circle  of  the  sphere  and  whose  height  is  equal  to  the 
radius  of  the  sphere. 

For,  since  the  surface  of  the  solid  is  greater  than  four  times  the  great  circle 
of  the  inner  sphere  [Prop.  30],  the  cone  whose  base  is  equal  to  the  surface  of  the 
solid  and  whose  height  is  the  radius  of  the  sphere  is  greater  than  four  times  the 
cone  of  the  same  height  which  has  the  great  circle  for  base.  [Lemma  1.] 

Hence,  by  the  proposition,  the  volume  of  the  solid  is  greater  than  four  times 
the  latter  cone. 


Proposition  32 

If  a  regular  polygon  with  4 n  sides  be  inscribed  in  a  great  circle  of  a  sphere ,  as 
ab  •••«'••  *6'a,  and  a  similar  polygon  AB  ••  A'  •  •  B'A  be  described  about  the 
great  circle ,  and  if  the  polygons  revolve  with  the  great  circle  about  the  diameters  aa' , 
A  A'  respectively ,  so  that  they  describe  the  surfaces  of  solid  figures  inscribed  in  arid 
circumscribed  to  the  sphere  respectively ,  then 

(1)  the  surfaces  of  the  circumscribed  and  inscribed  figures  are  to  one  another  in 
the  duplicate  ratio  of  their  sides,  and 

(2)  the  figures  themselves  [i.e.  their  volumes ]  arc  in  the  triplicate  ratio  of  their 
sides. 


424 


ARCHIMEDES 


[Prop.  29] 
[Prop.  24] 


(1)  Let  A  A',  aa'  be  in  the  same  straight  line,  and  let  MmOm'M'  be  a  diam¬ 
eter  at  right  angles  to  them. 

Join  BB',  CCf ,  •  •  •  and  bb',  cc',  •  •  •  which  will  all  be  parallel  to  one  another 
and  MM'. 

Suppose  Ry  S  to  be  circles  such  that 

R  =  (surface  of  circumscribed  solid), 

S  =  (surface  of  inscribed  solid). 

Then  (radius  of  R)2  —  AB(BB'+CC'+  •  *  •) 

(radius  of  S)2  =  ab(bb'-\~cc'+  •  •  •)* 

And,  since  the  polygons  are  simi¬ 
lar,  the  rectangles  in  these  two  equa¬ 
tions  are  similar,  and  are  therefore 
in  the  ratio  of 

AB2  :  ab2. 

Hence 

(surface  of  circumscribed  solid) :  (sur¬ 
face  of  inscribed  solid)  =  AB2  :  ab2. 

(2)  Take  a  cone  V  whose  base  is 
the  circle  R  and  whose  height  is 
equal  to  Oa,  and  a  cone  W  whose 
base  is  the  circle  S  and  whose  height 
is  equal  to  the  perpendicular  from  0 
on  aby  which  we  will  call  p. 

Then  V,  W  are  respectively  equal 
to  the  volumes  of  the  circumscribed 
and  inscribed  figures. 

Now,  since  the  polygons  are  similar, 

AB  :  ab  =  Oa  :  p 

=  (height  of  cone  V)  :  (height  of  cone  W) ; 
and,  as  shown  above,  the  bases  of  the  cones  (the  circles  R,  S )  are  in  the  ratio 
of  AB2  to  ab2. 

Therefore  V  :  W  =  AB3  :  ab3. 


[Props.  31,  26] 


Proposition  33 

The  surface  of  any  sphere  is  equal  to  four  times  the  greatest  circle  in  it. 

Let  C  be  a  circle  equal  to  four  times  the  great  circle. 

Then,  if  C  is  not  equal  to  the  surface  of  the  sphere,  it  must  either  be  less  or 
greater. 

I.  Suppose  C  less  than  the  surface  of  the  sphere. 

It  is  then  possible  to  find  two  lines  0,  7,  of  which  0  is  the  greater,  such  that 
:  7  <  (surface  of  sphere)  :  C.  [Prop.  2] 

Take  such  lines,  and  let  b  be  a  mean  proportional  between  them. 

Suppose  similar  regular  polygons  with  An  sides  circumscribed  about  and 
inscribed  in  a  great  circle  such  that  the  ratio  of  their  sides  is  less  than  the 
ratio  p  :  8.  [Prop.  3] 

Let  the  polygons  with  the  circle  revolve  together  about  a  diameter  common 
to  all,  describing  solids  of  revolution  as  before. 


425 


ON  THE  SPHERE  AND  CYLINDER  I 

Then  (surface  of  outer  solid)  ;  (surface  of  inner  solid) 

=  (side  of  outer)2  :  (side  of  inner)2  [Prop.  32] 

<  p2  :  82,  or  P  :  y 

<  (surface  of  sphere)  :  C,  a  fortiori. 


M 


But  this  is  impossible,  since  the  surface  of  the  circumscribed  solid  is  greater 
than  that  of  the  sphere  [Prop.  28],  while  the  surface  of  the  inscribed  solid  is  less 
than  C  [Prop.  25]. 

Therefore  C  is  not  less  than  the  surface  of  the  sphere. 

II.  Suppose  C  greater  than  the  surface  of  the  sphere. 

Take  lines  P9  7,  of  which  p  is  the  greater,  such  that 
P  :  y<C  :  (surface  of  sphere). 

Circumscribe  and  inscribe  to  the  great  circle  similar  regular  polygons,  as  be¬ 
fore,  such  that  their  sides  are  in  a  ratio  less  than  that  of  P  to  6,  and  suppose 
solids  of  revolution  generated  in  the  usual  manner. 

Then,  in  this  case, 

(surface  of  circumscribed  solid)  :  (surface  of  inscribed  solid) 

<C  :  (surface  of  sphere). 

But  this  is  impossible,  because  the  surface  of  the  circumscribed  solid  is 
greater  than  C  [Prop.  30],  while  the  surface  of  the  inscribed  solid  is  less  than 
that  of  the  sphere  [Prop.  23]. 

Thus  C  is  not  greater  than  the  surface  of  the  sphere. 

Therefore,  since  it  is  neither  greater  nor  less,  C  is  equal  to  the  surface  of  the 
sphere. 

Proposition  34 

Any  sphere  is  equal  to  four  times  the  cone  which  has  its  base  equal  to  the  greatest 
circle  in  the  sphere  and  its  height  equal  to  the  radius  of  the  sphere. 

Let  the  sphere  be  that  of  which  ama'm'  is  a  great  circle. 

If  now  the  sphere  is  not  equal  to  four  times  the  cone  described,  it  is  either 
greater  or  less. 

I.  If  possible,  let  the  sphere  be  greater  than  four  times  the  cone. 

Suppose  V  to  be  a  cone  whose  base  is  equal  to  four  times  the  great  circle  and 
whose  height  is  equal  to  the  radius  of  the  sphere. 


426  ARCHIMEDES 

Then,  by  hypothesis,  the  sphere  is  greater  than  V ;  and  two  lines  P,  y  can  be 
found  (of  which  P  is  the  greater)  such  that 

P  :  y  <  (volume  of  sphere)  :  V. 

Between  P  and  y  place  two  arithmetic  means  8 ,  e. 

As  before,  let  similar  regular  polygons  with  sides  4 n  in  number  be  circum¬ 
scribed  about  and  inscribed  in  the  great  circle,  such  that  their  sides  are  in  a 
ratio  less  than  ft  :  8 . 

Imagine  the  diameter  aar  of  the  circle  to  be  in  the  same  straight  line  with  a 
diameter  of  both  polygons,  and  imagine  the  latter  to  revolve  with  the  circle 
about  aaf,  describing  the  surfaces  of  two  solids  of  revolution.  The  volumes  of 
these  solids  are  therefore  in  the  triplicate  ratio  of  their  sides.  [Prop.  32] 

Thus  (vol.  of  outer  solid)  :  (vol.  of  inscribed  solid) 

<  :  53,  by  hypothesis, 

<  P  :  7,  a  fortiori  (since  P  :  y  >  P3  :  53), 

<  (volume  of  sphere)  :  V,  a  fortiori . 


But  this  is  impossible,  since  the  volume  of  the  circumscribed  solid  is  greater 
than  that  of  the  sphere  [Prop.  28],  while  the  volume  of  the  inscribed  solid  is 
less  than  V  [Prop.  27]. 

Hence  the  sphere  is  not  greater  than  V,  or  four  times  the  cone  described  in 
the  enunciation. 

II.  If  possible,  let  the  sphere  be  less  than  V. 

In  this  case  we  take  P,  y  (p  being  the  greater)  such  that 
P  :  y<V  :  (volume  of  sphere). 

The  rest  of  the  construction  and  proof  proceeding  as  before,  we  have  finally 
(volume  of  outer  solid)  :  (volume  of  inscribed  solid) 

<V  :  (volume  of  sphere). 

But  this  is  impossible,  because  the  volume  of  the  outer  solid  is  greater  than 
V  [Prop.  31,  Cor.],  and  the  volume  of  the  inscribed  solid  is  less  than  the  volume 
of  the  sphere. 

Hence  the  sphere  is  not  less  than  V. 

Since  then  the  sphere  is  neither  less  nor  greater  than  V,  it  is  equal  to  V,  or  to 
four  times  the  cone  described  in  the  enunciation. 


ON  THE  SPHERE  AND  CYLINDER  I 


427 


Coe.  From  what  has  been  proved  it  follows  that  every  cylinder  whose  base  is 


the  greatest  circle  in  a  sphere  and  whose  height  is  equal  to  the  diameter  of  the  sphere 
is  f  of  the  sphere ,  and  its  surface  together  with  its  bases  is  f  of  the  surface  of  the 
sphere. 


For  the  cylinder  is  three  times  the  cone  with  the  same  base  and  height  [Eucl. 
xn.  10],  i.e.  six  times  the  cone  with  the  same  base  and  with  height  equal  to  the 
radius  of  the  sphere. 

But  the  sphere  is  four  times  the  latter  cone  [Prop.  34].  Therefore  the  cylinder 
is  f  of  the  sphere. 

Again,  the  surface  of  a  cylinder  (excluding  the  bases)  is  equal  to  a  circle 
whose  radius  is  a  mean  proportional  between  the  height  of  the  cylinder  and  the 
diameter  of  its  base  [Prop.  13]. 

In  this  case  the  height  is  equal  to  the  diameter  of  the  base  and  therefore  the 
circle  is  that  whose  radius  is  the  diameter  of  the  sphere,  or  a  circle  equal  to  four 
times  the  great  circle  of  the  sphere. 

Therefore  the  surface  of  the  cylinder  with  the  bases  is  equal  to  six  times  the 
great  circle. 

And  the  surface  of  the  sphere  is  four  times  the  great  circle  [Prop.  33] ;  whence 
(surface  of  cylinder  with  bases)  =|  -  (surface  of  sphere). 


Proposition  35 


If  in  a  segment  of  a  circle  LAU  {where  A  is  the  middle  point  of  the  arc)  a  polygon 
LK  •  •  -A  •  •  • K'L '  be  inscribed  of  which  LU  is  one  side ,  while  the  other  sides  are  2 n 
in  number  and  all  equal ,  and  if  the  polygon  revolve  with  the  segment  about  the 
diameter  AM,  generating  a  solid  figure  inscribed  in  a  segment  of  a  sphere ,  then  the 
surface  of  the  inscribed  solid  is  equal  to  a  circle  the  square  on  whose  radius  is  equal 
to  the  rectangle 


A 


The  surface  of  the  inscribed  figure  is 
made  up  of  portions  of  surfaces  of  cones. 


If  we  take  these  successively,  the 
surface  of  the  cone  BAB'  is  equal  to 
a  circle  whose  radius  is 


VAB-%BB'.  [Prop.  14] 


K 


The  surface  of  the  frustum  of  a  cone 
k'  BCC'B'  is  equal  to  a  circle  whose  radius 


is 


AB - 2 - ;  [Prop.  1G] 


and  so  on. 


Proceeding  in  this  way  and  adding, 
we  find,  since  circles  are  to  one  another 


as  the  squares  of  their  radii,  that  the 
surface  of  the  inscribed  figure  is  equal  to  a  circle  whose  radius  is 


LW 


428 


ARCHIMEDES 


Proposition  36 

The  surface  of  the  figure  inscribed  as  before  in  the  segment  of  a  sphere  is  less  than 
that  of  the  segment  of  the  sphere. 

This  is  clear,  because  the  circular  base  of  the  segment  is  a  common  boundary 
of  each  of  two  surfaces,  of  which  one,  the  segment,  includes  the  other,  the  solid, 
while  both  are  concave  in  the  same  direction  [Assumptions,  4]. 

Proposition  37 

The  surface  of  the  solid  figure  inscribed  in  the  segment  of  the  sphere  by  the  revolu¬ 
tion  of  LK  •  •  A  •  •  -K'L'  about  AM  is  less 
than  a  circle  with  radius  equal  to  AL. 

Let  the  diameter  AM  meet  the  circle 
of  which  LAL'  is  a  segment  again  in  A' . 

Join  A'B. 

As  in  Prop.  35,  the  surface  of  the 
inscribed  solid  is  equal  to  a  circle  the 
square  on  whose  radius  is 

AB(BB'+CC'+  *  •  -+KK'+LM). 

But  this  rectangle 

—  A'B  AM  [Prop.  22] 

<A'A  AM 
<AL\ 

Hence  the  surface  of  the  inscribed 
solid  is  less  than  the  circle  whose  radius 
is  AL. 


A 


Proposition  38 

The  solid  figure  described  as  before  in  a  segment  of  a  sphere  less  than  a  hemisphere , 
together  with  the  cone  whose  base  is  the  base  of  the  segment  and  whose  apex  is  the 
centre  of  the  sphere ,  is  equal  to  a  cone  whose  base  is  equal  to  the  surface  of  the 
inscribed  solid  and  whose  height  is  equal  to  the  perpendicular  from  the  centre  of  the 
sphere  on  any  side  of  the  polygon. 

Let  0  be  the  centre  of  the  sphere,  and  p  the  length  of  the  perpendicular  from 
0  on  AB. 

Suppose  cones  described 
with  0  as  apex,  and  with  the 
circles  on  BB',  CC',  •  •  •  as 
diameters  as  bases. 

Then  the  rhombus  OBAB ' 
is  equal  to  a  cone  whose  base 
is  equal  to  the  surface  of  the 
cone  BAB',  and  whose 
height  is  p.  [Prop.  18] 

Again,  if  CB ,  C'B'  meet  in  l' 

T,  the  solid  described  by 
the  triangle  BOC  as  the 

polygon  revolves  about  AO  is  the  difference  between  the  rhombi  OCTC'  and 
OBTB',  and  is  therefore  equal  to  a  cone  whose  base  is  equal  to  the  surface  of 


429 


ON  THE  SPHERE  AND  CYLINDER  I 

the  frustum  BCC'B'  and  whose  height  is  p.  [Prop.  20] 

Similarly  for  the  part  of  the  solid  described  by  the  triangle  COD  as  the  poly¬ 
gon  revolves;  and  so  on. 

Hence,  b}r  addition,  the  solid  figure  inscribed  in  the  segment  together  with 
the  cone  OLL'  is  equal  to  a  cone  whose  base  is  the  surface  of  the  inscribed  solid 
and  whose  height  is  p. 

Cor.  The  cone  whose  base  is  a  circle  with  radius  equal  to  AL  and  whose  height 
is  equal  to  the  radius  of  the  sphere  is  greater  than  the  sum  of  the  inscribed  solid  and 
the  cone  OLL'. 

For,  by  the  proposition,  the  inscribed  solid  together  with  the  cone  OLL'  is 
equal  to  a  cone  with  base  equal  to  the  surface  of  the  solid  and  with  height  p. 

This  latter  cone  is  less  than  a  cone  with  height  equal  to  OA  and  with  base 
equal  to  the  circle  whose  radius  is  AL ,  because  the  height  p  is  less  than  OA, 
while  the  surface  of  the  solid  is  less  than  a  circle  with  radius  AL.  [Prop.  37] 

Proposition  39 

Let  laV  be  a  segment  of  a  great  circle  of  a  sphere,  being  less  than  a  semicircle. 
Let  0  be  the  centre  of  the  sphere,  and  join  01,  01'.  Suppose  a  polygon  circum¬ 
scribed  about  the  sector  OlaV  such  that  its  sides,  excluding  the  two  radii,  are  2 n 
in  number  and  all  equal,  as  LK,  •  •  • BA ,  AB' ,  •  •  -K'L' ;  and  let  OA  be  that 
radius  of  the  great  circle  which  bisects  the  segment  laV. 

The  circle  circumscribing  the  polygon  will  then  have  the  same  centre  0  as 
the  given  great  circle. 

Now  suppose  the  polygon  and  the  two  circles  to  revolve  together  about  OA. 
The  two  circles  will  describe  spheres,  the  angular  points  except  A  will  describe 

circles  on  the  outer  sphere,  with 
diameters  BB'  etc.,  the  points 
of  contact  of  the  sides  with  the 
inner  segment  will  describe 
circles  on  the  inner  sphere,  the 
sides  themselves  will  describe 
the  surfaces  of  cones  or  frusta 
of  cones,  and  the  whole  figure 
circumscribed  to  the  segment  of 
the  inner  sphere  by  the  revolu¬ 
tion  of  the  equal  sides  of  the 
polygon  will  have  for  its  base 
the  circle  on  LL'  as  diameter. 

The  surface  of  the  solid  figure  so  circumscribed  about  the  sector  of  the  sphere 
[ excluding  its  base ]  will  be  greater  than  that  of  the  segment  of  the  sphere  whose  base 
is  the  circle  on  IV  as  diameter. 

For  draw  the  tangents  IT,  VT '  to  the  inner  segment  at  l,  V.  These  with  the 
sides  of  the  polygon  will  describe  by  their  revolution  a  solid  whose  surface  is 
greater  than  that  of  the  segment  [Assumptions,  4]. 

But  the  surface  described  by  the  revolution  of  IT  is  less  than  that  described 
by  the  revolution  of  LT,  since  the  angle  TIL  is  a  right  angle,  and  therefore 
LT>IT. 

Hence,  a  fortiori ,  the  surface  described  by  LK  •  •  A  •  •  • K'L '  is  greater  than 
that  of  the  segment. 


A 


ARCHIMEDES 


430 

Cor.  The  surface  of  the  figure  so  described  about  the  sector  of  the  sphere  is  equal 
to  a  circle  the  square  on  whose  radius  is  equal  to  the  rectangle 
AB  (BB'+CC'+  •  •  •+KK'+±LL'). 

For  the  circumscribed  figure  is  inscribed  in  the  outer  sphere,  and  the  proof 
of  Prop.  35  therefore  applies. 


Proposition  40 


The  surface  of  the  figure  circumscribed  to  the  sector  as  before  is  greater  than  a  circle 
whose  radius  is  equal  to  al. 

Let  the  diameter  ^4aO  meet  the  great  circle  and  the  circle  circumscribing  the 
revolving  polygon  again  in  a',  A'.  Join  A'B,  and  let  ON  be  drawn  to  N ,  the 
point  of  contact  of  AB  with  the  inner  circle. 

Now,  by  Prop.  39,  Cor.,  the  surface  of  the  solid  figure  circumscribed  to  the 
sector  01 A  i  is  equal  to  a  circle  the  square  on  whose  radius  is  equal  to  the 
rectangle 


AB  (^BB'+CC'+  ■  •  • +KK'+ 

But  this  rectangle  is  equal  to 
A'B  AM  [as  in  Prop.  22]. 

Next,  since  AL',  al'  are  paral¬ 
lel,  the  triangles  AML',  ami'  are 
similar.  And  AL'>al'\  therefore 
AM>am. 

Also  A'B  =  20N  =  aa'. 

Therefore  A'B  • AM>am  • aa ' 

>al'\ 

Hence  the  surface  of  the  solid 
figure  circumscribed  to  the  sector 
is  greater  than  a  circle  whose 
radius  is  equal  to  al',  or  ah 

Cor.  1.  The  volume  of  the  figure 
circumscribed  about  the  sector  to¬ 
gether  with  the  cone  whose  apex  is  0 
and  base  the  circle  on  LL '  as  diam¬ 
eter,  is  equal  to  the  volume  of  a  cone 
whose  base  is  equal  to  the  surface 
of  the  circumscribed  figure  and  whose  height  is  ON. 

For  the  figure  is  inscribed  in  the  outer  sphere  which  has  the  same  centre  as 
the  inner.  Hence  the  proof  of  Prop.  38  applies. 

Cor.  2.  The  volume  of  the  circumscribed  figure  with  the  cone  OLL '  is  greater 
than  the  cone  whose  base  is  a  circle  with  radius  equal  to  al  and  whose  height  is 
equal  to  the  radius  (Oa)  of  the  inner  sphere. 

For  the  volume  of  the  figure  with  the  cone  OLL'  is  equal  to  a  cone  whose 
base  is  equal  to  the  surface  of  the  figure  and  whose  height  is  equal  to  ON. 

And  the  surface  of  the  figure  is  greater  than  a  circle  with  radius  equal  to  al 
[Prop.  40],  while  the  heights  Oa,  ON  are  equal. 


LL'\ 

’TV* 


ON  THE  SPHERE  AND  CYLINDER  I 


431 


Proposition  41 

Let  laV  be  a  segment  of  a  great  circle  of  a  sphere  which  is  less  than  a  semicircle. 

Suppose  a  polygon  inscribed  in  the  sector  OlaV  such  that  the  sides  Ik ,  •  •  -ba, 
ab',  •  •  ’k'V  are  2 n  in  number  and  all  equal.  Let  a  similar  polygon  be  circum¬ 
scribed  about  the  sector  so  that  its  sides  are  parallel  to  those  of  the  first  poly¬ 
gon;  and  draw  the  circle  circumscribing  the  outer  polygon. 

Now  let  the  polygons  and  circles  revolve  together  about  OaA ,  the  radius 
bisecting  the  segment  laV . 

Then  (1)  the  surfaces  of  the  outer  and  inner  solids  of  revolution  so  described  are 
in  the  ratio  of  AB 2  to  ab2,  and  (2)  their  volumes  together  with  the  corresponding 
cones  with  the  same  base  and  with  apex  0  in  each  case  are  as  ABZ  to  abz . 

(1)  For  the  surfaces  are  equal  to  circles  the  squares  on  whose  radii  are  equal 
respectively  to 

AB  (bB'+CC'-\ - f KK’+^y),  [Prop.  39,  Cor.] 

and  ab  {bV -\-cc' +  •  •  [Prop.  35] 


But  these  rectangles  are  in  the 
ratio  of  AB2  to  ab2.  Therefore 
so  are  the  surfaces. 

(2)  Let  OnN  be  drawn  per¬ 
pendicular  to  ab  and  AB;  and 
suppose  the  circles  which  are 
equal  to  the  surfaces  of  the 
outer  and  inner  solids  of  revo¬ 
lution  to  be  denoted  by  S,  s 
respectively. 

Now  the  volume  of  the  cir¬ 
cumscribed  solid  together  with 
the  cone  OLL'  is  equal  to  a 
cone  wiiose  base  is  S  and  viiose  height  is  ON  [Prop.  40,  Cor.  1]. 

And  the  volume  of  the  inscribed  figure  with  the  cone  OlV  is  equal  to  a  cone 
with  base  s  and  height  On  [Prop.  38]. 

But  S  :  s  =  AB2  :  ab2, 

and  ON  :  On  —  AB  :  ab. 

Therefore  the  volume  of  the  circumscribed  solid  together  with  the  cone  OLV 
is  to  the  volume  of  the  inscribed  solid  together  with  the  cone  Oil'  as  ABZ  is  to 
abz  [Lemma  5]. 


A 


Proposition  42 

If  laV  be  a  segment  of  a  sphere  less  than  a  hemisphere  and  Oa  the  radius  perpen¬ 
dicular  to  the  base  of  the  segment,  the  surface  of  the  segment  is  equal  to  a  circle 
whose  radius  is  equal  to  al . 

Let  R  be  a  circle  whose  radius  is  equal  to  al.  Then  the  surface  of  the  segment, 
which  w*e  will  call  S,  must,  if  it  be  not  equal  to  R,  be  either  greater  or  less 
than  R. 


432  ARCHIMEDES 

I.  Suppose,  if  possible,  S>R. 

Let  lal'  be  a  segment  of  a  great  circle  which  is  less  than  a  semicircle.  Join  01 
Or,  and  let  similar  polygons 
with  2 n  equal  sides  be  circum¬ 
scribed  and  inscribed  to  the 
sector,  as  in  the  previous  prop¬ 
ositions,  but  such  that 
(circumscribed  polygon)  :  (in¬ 
scribed  polygon)  <S  :R. 

[Prop.  6] 

Let  the  polygons  now  revolve 
with  the  segment  about  OaA , 
generating  solids  of  revolution 
circumscribed  and  inscribed  to  the  segment  of  the  sphere. 

Then 

(surface  of  outer  solid)  :  (surface  of  inner  solid) 

=AB2  :  ab 2  [Prop.  41] 

=  (circumscribed  polygon)  :  (inscribed  polygon) 

<S  :  R,  by  hypothesis. 

But  the  surface  of  the  outer  solid  is  greater  than  S  [Prop.  39]. 

Therefore  the  surface  of  the  inner  solid  is  greater  than  R ;  which  is  impossible, 
by  Prop.  37. 

II.  Suppose,  if  possible,  S<R. 

In  this  case  we  circumscribe  and  inscribe  polygons  such  that  their  ratio  is 
less  than  R  :  S;  and  we  arrive  at  the  result  that 

(surface  of  outer  solid)  :  (surface  of  inner  solid) 

<R  :  S. 

But  the  surface  of  the  outer  solid  is  greater  than  R  [Prop.  40].  Therefore  the 
surface  of  the  inner  solid  is  greater  than  S  :  which  is  impossible  [Prop.  36]. 
Hence,  since  S  is  neither  greater  nor  less  than  R, 

S  =  R. 


A 


a' 


Proposition  43 

Even  if  the  segment  of  the  sphere  is  greater  than  a  hemisphere ,  its  surface  is  still 
equal  to  a  circle  whose  radius  is  equal  to  al. 

For  let  lal'a'  be  a  great  circle  of  the  sphere,  aa'  being  the  diameter  perpen¬ 
dicular  to  IV ;  and  let  la'V  be  a  segment  less  than  a 
semicircle. 

Then,  by  Prop.  42,  the  surface  of  the  segment  la'V 
of  the  sphere  is  equal  to  a  circle  with  radius  equal  to 
a'l. 

Also  the  surface  of  the  whole  sphere  is  equal  to  a 
circle  with  radius  equal  to  aa'  [Prop.  33]. 

But  aa'2—a'l2  =  al2,  and  circles  are  to  one  another 
as  the  squares  on  their  radii. 

Therefore  the  surface  of  the  segment  lal',  being 
the  difference  between  the  surfaces  of  the  sphere  and 
of  la'V,  is  equal  to  a  circle  with  radius  equal  to  al. 


ON  THE  SPHERE  AND  CYLINDER  I 


433 


Proposition  44 


The  volume  of  any  sector  of  a  sphere  is  equal  to  a  cone  whose  base  is  equal  to  the 
surface  of  the  segment  of  the  sphere  included  in  the  sector ,  and  whose  height  is  equal 
to  the  radius  of  the  sphere . 

Let  R  be  a  cone  whose  base  is  equal  to  the  surface  of  the  segment  laV  of  a 
sphere  and  whose  height  is  equal  to  the  radius  of  the  sphere;  and  let  S  be  the 
volume  of  the  sector  Olal'. 


Then,  if  S  is  not  equal  to  R, 
it  must  be  either  greater  or 
less. 

I.  Suppose,  if  possible,  that 
S>R. 

Find  two  straight  lines  P, 
7,  of  which  P  is  the  greater, 
such  that 

P  :  y<S  :R; 

and  let  5,  c  be  two  arithmetic 
means  between  p,  y . 

Let  lal'  be  a  segment  of  a 
great  circle  of  the  sphere.  Join 
01,  01',  and  let  similar  poly¬ 
gons  with  2  n  equal  sides  be 
circumscribed  and  inscribed  to 
the  sector  of  the  circle  as  before,  but  such  that  their  sides  are  in  a  ratio  less 
than  P  :  5.  [Prop.  4], 

Then  let  the  two  polygons  revolve  with  the  segment  about  OaA,  generating 
two  solids  of  revolution. 

Denoting  the  volumes  of  these  solids  by  F,  v  respectively,  we  have 

(F+cone  OLL ')  :  (r+cone  OU')  =  AB*  :  ab 3  [Prop.  41] 

<  p3  :  6s 

<  P  :  7,  a  fortiori , 

<S  :  R,  by  hypothesis. 

Now  (F+cone  OLL')  >S. 

Therefore  also  (y+cone  Oil')  >R. 

But  this  is  impossible,  by  Prop.  38,  Cor.  combined  with  Props.  42,  43. 

Hence 

II.  Suppose,  if  possible,  that  S<R. 

In  this  case  wTe  take  P,  y  such  that 

P  :  7 <R  :  S, 

and  the  rest  of  the  construction  proceeds  as  before. 

We  thus  obtain  the  relation 

(F+cone  OLL')  :  (v+cone  Oil')  <R  :  S. 

Now'  (r+cone  Oil')  <S. 

Therefore  (F+cone  OLL')<R; 

which  is  impossible,  by  Prop.  40,  Cor.  2  combined  with  Props.  42,  43. 

Since  then  S  is  neither  greater  nor  less  than  R, 


A 


Pm 

€* 

7 


S  =  R. 


ON  THE  SPHERE  AND  CYLINDER 


BOOK  TWO 


Archimedes  to  Dositheus  greeting. 

“On  a  former  occasion  you  asked  me  to  write  out  the  proofs  of  the  problems 
the  enunciations  of  which  I  had  myself  sent  to  Conon.  In  point  of  fact  they 
depend  for  the  most  part  on  the  theorems  of  which  I  have  already  sent  you  the 
demonstrations,  namely  (1)  that  the  surface  of  any  sphere  is  four  times  the 
greatest  circle  in  the  sphere,  (2)  that  the  surface  of  any  segment  of  a  sphere  is 
equal  to  a  circle  whose  radius  is  equal  to  the  straight  line  drawn  from  the  ver¬ 
tex  of  the  segment  to  the  circumference  of  its  base,  (3)  that  the  cylinder  whose 
base  is  the  greatest  circle  in  any  sphere  and  whose  height  is  equal  to  the  diam¬ 
eter  of  the  sphere  is  itself  in  magnitude  half  as  large  again  as  the  sphere,  while 
its  surface  [including  the  two  bases]  is  half  as  large  again  as  the  surface  of  the 
sphere,  and  (4)  that  any  solid  sector  is  equal  to  a  cone  whose  base  is  the  circle 
which  is  equal  to  the  surface  of  the  segment  of  the  sphere  included  in  the  sec¬ 
tor,  and  whose  height  is  equal  to  the  radius  of  the  sphere.  Such  then  of  the 
theorems  and  problems  as  depend  on  these  theorems  I  have  written  out  in  the 
book  which  I  send  herewith ;  those  which  are  discovered  by  means  of  a  different 
sort  of  investigation,  those  namely  which  relate  to  spirals  and  the  conoids,  I 
will  endeavour  to  send  you  soon. 

“The  first  of  the  problems  wras  as  follows:  Given  a  sphere ,  to  find  a  plane  area 
equal  to  the  surface  of  the  sphere . 

“The  solution  of  this  is  obvious  from  the  theorems  aforesaid.  For  four  times 
the  greatest  circle  in  the  sphere  is  both  a  plane  area  and  equal  to  the  surface  of 
the  sphere. 

“The  second  problem  was  the  following.” 

Proposition  1  (Problem) 

Given  a  cone  or  a  cylinder ,  to  find  a  sphere  equal  to  the  cone  or  to  the  cylinder. 

If  V  be  the  given  cone  or  cylinder,  we  can  make  a  cylinder  equal  to  fV.  Let 
this  cylinder  be  the  cylinder  whose  base  is  the  circle  on  AB  as  diameter  and 
wiiose  height  is  OD . 

Now',  if  wTe  could  make  another  cylinder,  equal  to  the  cylinder  (OD)  but  such 
that  its  height  is  equal  to  the  diameter  of  its  base,  the  problem  would  be  solved, 
because  this  latter  cylinder  would  be  equal  to  fF,  and  the  sphere  w  hose  diam¬ 
eter  is  equal  to  the  height  (or  to  the  diameter  of  the  base)  of  the  same  cylinder 
w^ould  then  be  the  sphere  required  [I.  34,  Cor.]. 

Suppose  the  problem  solved,  and  let  the  cylinder  ( CG )  be  equal  to  the  cylin¬ 
der  ( OD),  while  EF ,  the  diameter  of  the  base,  is  equal  to  the  height  CG. 

434 


ON  THE  SPHERE  AND  CYLINDER  II  435 


Then,  since  in  equal  cylinders  the  heights  and  bases  are  reciprocally  pro¬ 
portional, 


AB2  :  EF2  —  CG  :  OD 
=  EF:OD. 


(1) 


G 


Suppose  MN  to  be  such  a  line  that 

EF2  =  ABMN.  (2) 

Hence  AB  :  EF  =  EF  :  MNy 

and,  combining  (1)  and  (2),  we  have 

AB  :MN  =  EF  :0D, 
or  AB  :  EF  =  MN:OD. 

Therefore  AB:EF=EF:  MN = MN  :  OD , 

and  EFy  MN  are  two  mean  proportionals  between  ABy  OD. 

The  synthesis  of  the  problem  is  therefore  as  follows.  Take  two  mean  pro¬ 
portionals  EF,  MN  between  AB  and  OD,  and  describe  a  cylinder  whose  base 
is  a  circle  on  EF  as  diameter  and  whose  height  CG  is  equal  to  EF. 

Then,  since 

AB  :  EF  =  EF  :  MN  —  MN  :  OD, 

EF2  =  AB  • MN , 

and  therefore  AB2  :  EF2  =  AB  :  MN 

=EF : OD 
—  CG  :  OD; 

whence  the  bases  of  the  two  cylinders  (OD),  (CG)  are  reciprocally  proportional 
to  their  heights. 

Therefore  the  cylinders  are  equal,  and  it  follows  that 

cylinder  (CG)=fF. 

The  sphere  on  EF  as  diameter  is  therefore  the  sphere  required,  being  equal 
to  V. 

Proposition  2 

If  BAB'  be  a  segment  of  a  sphere ,  BB'  a  diameter  of  the  base  of  the  segment ,  and  0 
the  centre  of  the  sphere ,  and  if  AA'  be  the  diameter  of  the  sphere  bisecting  BB'  in 
My  then  the  volume  of  the  segment  is  equal  to  that  of  a  cone  whose  base  is  the  same 
as  that  of  the  segment  and  whose  height  is  hy  where 

h  :AM  =  OA'+A'M  :  A'M. 

Measure  MH  along  MA  equal  to  h,  and  Mil'  along  MA'  equal  to  h where 
h'  :  A'M  =  0A+ AM  :  AM. 


436  ARCHIMEDES 

Suppose  the  three  cones  constructed  which  have  0,  H,  H'  for  their  apices 
and  the  base  ( BB ')  of  the  segment  for  their  common  base.  Join  AB, A'B. 


Let  C  be  a  cone  whose  base  is  equal  to  the  surface  of  the  segment  BAB '  of 
the  sphere,  i.e.  to  a  circle  with  radius  equal  to  AB  [I.  42],  and  whose  height  is 
equal  to  OA . 

Then  the  cone  C  is  equal  to  the  solid  sector  OBAB'  [I.  44]. 

Now,  since  HM  :  MA  =  0A'+A'M  :  A'M , 

dividendo ,  HA  :  AM  =  0A  :A'M, 

and,  alternately,  HA  :  AO  =AM  :  MA', 
so  that 

HO  :  OA  =AA'  :  A'M 
=  A£2  :  BM 2 

=  (base  of  cone  C)  :  (circle  on  BB'  as  diameter). 

But  OA  is  equal  to  the  height  of  the  cone  C ;  therefore,  since  cones  are  equal  if 
their  bases  and  heights  are  reciprocally  proportional,  it  follows  that  the  cone  C 
(or  the  solid  sector  OBAB')  is  equal  to  a  cone  whose  base  is  the  circle  on  BB'  as 
diameter  and  whose  height  is  equal  to  OH. 

And  this  latter  cone  is  equal  to  the  sum  of  two  others  having  the  same  base 
and  with  heights  OM ,  MH ,  i.e.  to  the  solid  rhombus  OBHB'. 

Hence  the  sector  OBAB '  is  equal  to  the  rhombus  OBHB'. 

Taking  awray  the  common  part,  the  cone  OBB', 

the  segment  BAB'  =  the  cone  HBB'. 

Similarly,  by  the  same  method,  wTe  can  prove  that 

the  segment  BA'B'  =  the  cone  H'BB'. 

Alternative  proof  of  the  latter  property. 

Suppose  D  to  be  a  cone  whose  base  is  equal  to  the  surface  of  the  whole  sphere 
and  wiiose  height  is  equal  to  OA. 

Thus  D  is  equal  to  the  volume  of  the  sphere.  [I.  33,  34] 

Now,  since  A  OA'-\-A'M  :  A'M  =  HM  :MA , 
dividendo  and  alternando ,  as  before, 

■  •  •  V 

Again,  since 

Componendo , 

Alternately, 


OA  :AH=A’M:MA. 

■A.  !  \L 

H'M  :  MA'  =  OA +AM  :  AM, 

>  %  y,  #  i’n 

H'A!  :  OA =A'M  :  MA 

—  OA  :  AH,  from  above. 

H’O  :  OA  =0H  :  HA, 

(i) 

H'O  :  OH  =  OA  :  AH, 

(2) 

437 


ON  THE  SPHERE  AND  CYLINDER  II 

and,  componendo,  HH'  :  HO  =  OH  :  HA, 

=H'0:0A,  from  (1), 
whence  HH'  •  OA  =  H'O  •  OH.  (3) 

Next,  since  H'O  :  OH  =  OA  :  AH,  by  (2), 

=  A'M  :MA, 

(H'O+OII)2 :  H'O  •  OH  =  (A'M+MA )2  :  A'Af  •  MA, 
whence,  by  means  of  (3), 

HH'2  :  HH'  •  OA  =  AA'2 :  A'Af  •  M A, 
or  :OA=AA'2  :  BJkf 2. 

Now  the  cone  D ,  which  is  equal  to  the  sphere,  has  for  its  base  a  circle  whose 
radius  is  equal  to  AA' ,  and  for  its  height  a  line  equal  to  OA. 

Hence  this  cone  D  is  equal  to  a  cone  whose  base  is  the  circle  on  BB'  as  diam¬ 
eter  and  whose  height  is  equal  to  HH'; 

therefore  the  cone  D  =  the  rhombus  HBH'B', 

or  the  rhombus  HBH fB'  =  the  sphere. 

But  the  segment  BAB'  =  the  cone  HBB'; 

therefore  the  remaining  segment  BA'B'  =  the  cone  H'BB'. 

Cor.  The  segment  BAB'  is  to  a  cone  with  the  same  base  and  equal  height  in  the 
ratio  of  OA' + A' M  to  A'M . 


Proposition  3  (Problem) 

To  cut  a  given  sphere  by  a  plane  so  that  the  surfaces  of  the  segments  may  have  to 
one  another  a  given  ratio. 

Suppose  the  problem  solved.  Let  AA'  be  a  diameter  of  a  great  circle  of  the 

sphere,  and  suppose  that  a  plane  per¬ 
pendicular  to  A  A'  cuts  the  plane  of  the 
great  circle  in  the  straight  line  BB', 
and  AA'  in  M ,  and  that  it  divides  the 
sphere  so  that  the  surface  of  the  seg¬ 
ment  BAB '  has  to  the  surface  of  the 
segment  BA'B'  the  given  ratio. 

Now  these  surfaces  are  respectively 
equal  to  circles  with  radii  equal  to  AB , 
A'B  [I.  42,  43]. 

Hence  the  ratio  AB2  :  A'B 2  is  equal  to 
the  given  ratio,  i.e.  AM  is  to  MA'  in  the 
given  ratio. 

Accordingly  the  synthesis  proceeds  as  follows. 

If  H  :  K  be  the  given  ratio,  divide  AA'  in  M  so  that 

AM  :  MA'  =  H  :  K. 

Then  AM  :  MA'  =  AB2 :  A'B2 

=  (circle  with  radius  AB)  :  (circle  with  radius  A'B) 

=  (surface  of  segment  BAB')  :  (surface  of  segment  BA'B'). 

Thus  the  ratio  of  the  surfaces  of  the  segments  is  equal  to  the  ratio  H  :  K. 


Proposition  4  (Problem) 

To  cut  a  given  sphere  by  a  plane  so  that  the  volumes  of  the  segments  are  to  one 
another  in  a  given  ratio. 

Suppose  the  problem  solved,  and  let  the  required  plane  cut  the  great  circle 


438  ARCHIMEDES 

ABA '  at  right  angles  in  the  line  BB\  Let  AAf  be  that  diameter  of  the  great 
circle  which  bisects  BB'  at  right  angles  (in  M),  and  let  0  be  the  centre  of  the 
sphere. 


Take  H  on  OA  produced,  and  H'  on  OA'  produced,  such  that 

OA'+A'M  :  A'M =HM  :  MA,  (1) 

and  OA+AM  :  AM  =  H'M  :  MA '.  (2) 

Join  BH,  B'H,  BH',  B'H '. 

Then  the  cones  HBB',  H'BB'  are  respectively  equal  to  the  segments  BAB', 
BA'B'  of  the  sphere  [Prop.  2]. 

Hence  the  ratio  of  the  cones,  and  therefore  of  their  altitudes,  is  given,  i.e. 

HM  :  H'M  =  the  given  ratio.  (3) 

We  have  now  three  equations  (1),  (2),  (3),  in  which  there  appear  three  as  yet 
undetermined  points  M ,  H,  H ' ;  and  it  is  first  necessary  to  find,  by  means  of 
them,  another  equation  in  which  only  one  of  these  points  (M)  appears,  i.e.  we 
have,  so  to  speak,  to  eliminate  H ,  H'. 

Now,  from  (3),  it  is  clear  that  HH'  :  H'M  is  also  a  given  ratio;  and  Archi¬ 
medes’  method  of  elimination  is,  first ,  to  find  values  for  each  of  the  ratios 
A'H'  :  H'M  and  HH'  :  H'A'  which  are  alike  independent  of  H ,  H',  and  then, 
secondly,  to  equate  the  ratio  compounded  of  these  two  ratios  to  the  known 
value  of  the  ratio  HH'  :  H'M . 

(a)  To  find  such  a  value  for  A'H'  :  H'M, 

It  is  at  once  clear  from  equation  (2)  above  that 

A'H'  :  H'M  =  OA  :  OA  +AM.  (4) 

(b)  To  find  such  a  value  for  HH'  :  A'H'. 

From  (1)  we  derive 

A'M  :  MA  =  OA'+A'M  :  HM 

—  OA'  :  AH)  (5) 

and,  from  (2),  A'M  :  MA  =H'M  :  OA+AM 

=A'H'  :  OA.  (6) 

Thus  HA  :AO  =  OA':A'H', 

whence  OH  :  0 A'  =  OH'  :  A'H', 

or  OH  :  OH' —  0 A'  :A'H'. 

It  follows  that 

HH'  :  OH'  =  OH'  :  A'H', 
or  HH'  H'A' =  OH'2. 

Therefore  HH'  :H'A'  =  OH'2  :  H'A'2 

=  A  A'2  :  A'M2,  by  means  of  (6) 

(c)  To  express  the  ratios  A'H'  :  H'M  and  HH'  :  H'M  more  simply  we  make 


ON  THE  SPHERE  AND  CYLINDER  II  439 

the  following  construction.  Produce  OA  to  D  so  that  OA=AD.  ( D  will  lie  be¬ 
yond  H ,  for  A'M >MA,  and  therefore,  by  (5),  OA>AH.) 

Then  A'H'  :H'M  =  OA  :OA+AM 

=  AD  :  DM.  (7) 

Now  divide  AD  at  E  so  that 

HH'  :  H'M=AD  :  DE.  (8) 

Thus,  using  equations  (8),  (7)  and  the  value  of  HH'  :  H'A'  above  found,  we 
have 

AD  :  DE  =  HH'  :  H'M 

=  (HH'  :H'A')  -(A'H'  :  H'M) 

=  (AA'2:A'M2)  •(AD:  DM). 

But  AD  :  DE  =  (DM  :  DE)  •(. AD  :  DM). 

Therefore  MD  :  DE  =  AA'2  :  A'M2.  (9) 

And  D  is  given,  since  AD  =  OA.  Also  AD  :  DE  (being  equal  to  HH'  :  H'M)  is 
a  given  ratio.  Therefore  DE  is  given. 

Hence  the  'problem  reduces  itself  to  the  problem  of  dividing  A'D  into  two  parts  at 
M  so  that 

MD  :  (a  given  length)  =  (a  given  area)  :  A'M2. 

Archimedes  adds:  “If  the  problem  is  propounded  in  this  general  form,  it 
requires  a  biopurpos  [i.e.  it  is  necessary  to  investigate  the  limits  of  possibility], 
but,  if  there  be  added  the  conditions  subsisting  in  the  present  case,  it  does  not 
require  a  bLopurpos.” 

In  the  present  case  the  problem  is: 

Given  a  straight  line  A' A  produced  to  D  so  that  A' A  =  2 AD,  and  given  a  point  E 
on  AD ,  to  cut  AA'  in  a  point  M  so  that 

A  A'2  :  A'M2  =  MD  :  DE. 

“And  the  analysis  and  synthesis  of  both  problems  will  be  given  at  the  end.”1 

The  synthesis  of  the  main  problem  will  be  as  follows.  Let  R  :  S  be  the  given 
ratio,  R  being  less  than  S.  A  A'  being  a  diameter  of  a  great  circle,  and  0  the 
centre,  produce  OA  to  D  so  that  OA  =AD,  and  divide  AD  in  E  so  that 

AE  :ED  =  R:S. 

Then  cut  A  A'  in  M  so  that 

MD  :  DE  =  A  A'2  :  A'M2. 

Through  M  erect  a  plane  perpendicular  to  AA';  this  plane  will  then  divide 
the  sphere  into  segments  wdrich  will  be  to  one  another  as  R  to  S. 

Take  H  on  A' A  produced,  and  H'  on  A  A'  produced,  so  that 

OA'+A'M  :  A'M  =  HM  :  MA,  (1) 

OA+AM  :  AM  =  H'M  :  MA'.  (2) 

We  have  then  to  showr  that 

HM  :  MH'  =  R  :  S ,  or  AE  :  ED. 

(a)  We  first  find  the  value  of  HH'  :  H'A'  as  follows. 

As  w’as  shovm  in  the  analysis  (6), 

HH'  H'A'  =  0H'2, 

or  HH'  :  H'A'  =  OH'2  :  H'A'2 

=  AA'2  :  A'M2 

—  MD  :  DE ,  by  construction. 

xAs  Archimedes’  commentator,  Eutocius,  notes:  “.  .  .  we  do  not  find  the  promise  kept  in 
any  of  the  copies.”  Sir  Thomas  Heath’s  translation  of  Eutocius’  note  on  the  matter,  along 
with  the  solutions  of  Dionysodorus  and  Diodes,  is  omitted  from  this  edition. — Ed. 


ARCHIMEDES 


440 

(j 3)  Next  we  have 

H'A'  :  H'M=OA  :  OA+AM 
=AD  :  DM. 

Therefore  HH'  :  HlM=  (HH'  :  H'A')  -(H'A'  :  H'M) 

=  (MD  :  DE)  (AD:  DM) 

=AD:DE , 

whence  JO/  :  MW  =  AE  :  ED 

=  R  :  S.  q.  e.  d. 

Proposition  5  (Problem) 

T o  construct  a  segment  of  a  sphere  similar  to  one  segment  and  equal  in  volume  to 
another . 

Let  ABB '  be  one  segment  whose  vertex  is  A  and  whose  base  is  the  circle  on 
BBf  as  diameter;  and  let  DEF  be  another  segment  whose  vertex  is  D  and 
whose  base  is  the  circle  on  EF  as  diameter.  Let  AA' ,  DD'  be  diameters  of  the 
great  circles  passing  through  BB',  EF  respectively,  and  let  0,  C  be  the  respec¬ 
tive  centres  of  the  spheres. 

Suppose  it  required  to  draw  a  segment  similar  to  DEF  and  equal  in  volume 
to  ABB'. 

Analysis.  Suppose  the  problem  solved,  and  let  def  be  the  required  segment, 
d  being  the  vertex  and  ef  the  diameter  of  the  base.  Let  dd'  be  the  diameter  of 
the  sphere  which  bisects  ef  at  right  angles,  c  the  centre  of  the  sphere. 


Let  il/,  Gy  g  be  the  points  where  BB'y  EF,  ef  are  bisected  at  right  angles  by 
AA' ,  DD' ,  dd'  respectively,  and  produce  OA ,  CD,  cd  respectively  to  //,  K,  k , 
so  that 

OA'+A'M  :  A'M=HM  :  MA } 

CD'+D'G  :  D'G  =  KG  :  GD  , 
cd'+d'g  :  d'g  =  kg  :  gd  J 

and  suppose  cones  formed  with  vertices  J/,  K,  k  and  with  the  same  bases  as  the 
respective  segments.  The  cones  will  then  be  equal  to  the  segments  respectively 
[Prop.  2]. 

Therefore,  by  hypothesis, 


441 


ON  THE  SPHERE  AND  CYLINDER  II 
the  cone  IIBB'  —  the  cone  kef . 

Hence 

(circle  on  diameter  BB')  :  (circle  on  diameter  ef)—kg  :  HM, 
so  that  BB '2  :  eP= kg  :  HM  (1) 

But,  since  the  segments  DEF ,  def  are  similar,  so  are  the  cones  KEF,  kef . 
Therefore  KG  :  EF  —  kg  :  ef. 

And  the  ratio  KG  :  EF  is  given.  Therefore  the  ratio  kg  :  ef  is  given. 
Suppose  a  length  R  taken  such  that 

kg  :ef=HM  :R.  (2) 

Thus  R  is  given. 

Again,  since  kg  :  HM  —  BB'2  :  ep  =  ef  :  R,  by  (1)  and  (2),  -suppose  a  length  S 
taken  such  that 

eP  =  BB '  •£, 

or  BB'2  :  eP  =  BB'  :  S. 

Thus  BB'  \ef—ef:S  =  S  :  R, 

and  ef,  S  are  two  mean  proportionals  in  continued  proportion  between  BB' ,  R . 

Synthesis.  Let  ABB',  DEF  be  great  circles,  AAf,  DD'  the  diameters  bisecting 
BB',  EF  at  right  angles  in  M,  G  respectively,  and  0,  C  the  centres. 

Take  H,  K  in  the  same  way  as  before,  and  construct  the  cones  HBB' ,  KEF, 
which  are  therefore  equal  to  the  respective  segments  ABB',  DEF. 

Let  R  be  a  straight  line  such  that 

KG  :  EF=HM  :  R, 

and  between  BB',  R  take  two  mean  proportionals  ef,  S . 

On  ef  as  base  describe  a  segment  of  a  circle  with  vertex  d  and  similar  to  the 
segment  of  a  circle  DEF.  Complete  the  circle,  and  let  dd'  be  the  diameter 
through  d,  and  c  the  centre.  Conceive  a  sphere  constructed  of  which  def  is  a 
great  circle,  and  through  ef  draw  a  plane  at  right  angles  to  dd'. 

Then  shall  def  be  the  required  segment  of  a  sphere. 

For  the  segments  DEF,  def  of  the  spheres  are  similar,  like  the  circular  seg¬ 
ments  DEF,  def. 

Produce  cd  to  k  so  that 

cd'+d'g  :  d'g  =  kg  :  gd. 

The  cones  KEF ,  kef  are  then  similar. 

Therefore  kg  :  ef= KG  :  EF  =  HM  :  R, 

whence  kg  :  HM  —  ef  :  R. 

But,  since  BB' ,  ef,  S,  R  are  in  continued  proportion, 

BB'2  :  eP  —  BB'  :  S 
=  ef :  R 
—  kg  :  HM. 

Thus  the  bases  of  the  cones  IIBB',  kef  are  reciprocal^  proportional  to  their 
heights.  The  cones  are  therefore  equal,  and  def  is  the  segment  required,  being 
equal  in  volume  to  the  cone  kef.  [Prop.  2] 


Proposition  6  (Problem) 

Given  two  segments  of  spheres,  to  find  a  third  segment  of  a  sphere  similar  to  one  of 
the  given  segments  and  having  its  surface  equal  to  that  of  the  other. 

Let  ABB'  be  the  segment  to  whose  surface  the  surface  of  the  required  seg¬ 
ment  is  to  be  equal,  ABA'B'  the  great  circle  whose  plane  cuts  the  plane  of  the 


442  ARCHIMEDES 

base  of  the  segment  ABB '  at  right  angles  in  BB'.  Let  AA'  be  the  diameter 
which  bisects  BBr  at  right  angles. 

Let  DEF  be  the  segment  to  which  the  required  segment  is  to  be  similar, 
DED'F  the  great  circle  cutting  the  base  of  the  segment  at  right  angles  in  EF. 
Let  DD '  be  the  diameter  bisecting  EF  at  right  angles  in  G. 

Suppose  the  problem  solved,  def  being  a  segment  similar  to  DEF  and  having 
its  surface  equal  to  that  of  ABB';  and  complete  the  figure  for  def  as  for  DEF, 
corresponding  points  being  denoted  by  small  and  capital  letters  respectively. 
Join  AB}  DF ,  df . 

Now,  since  the  surfaces  of 
the  segments  def ,  ABB'  are 
equal,  so  are  the  circles  on 
df,  AB  as  diameters; 

[I.  42,  43] 

that  is,  df=AB. 

From  the  similarity  of  the 
segments  DEF,  def  we  obtain 
d'd  :dg  =  D'D  :DG, 
and  dg  :  df=DG  :  DF; 
whence  d'd  :  df = D'D  :  DF, 
or  d'd:AB=D'D  :DF. 

But  AB,  D'D ,  DF  are  all 
given; 

therefore  d'd  is  given. 

Accordingly  the  synthesis 
is  as  follows. 

Take  d'd  such  that 

d'd  :  AB  =  D'D  :DF .  (1) 

Describe  a  circle  on  d'd  as  diameter,  and  conceive  a  sphere  constructed  of 
which  this  circle  is  a  great  circle. 

Divide  d'd  at  g  so  that 

d'g:gd  =  D'G:GD, 

and  draw  through  g  a  plane  perpendicular  to  d'd  cutting  off  the  segment  def 
of  the  sphere  and  intersecting  the  plane  of  the  great  circle  in  ef.  The  segments 
def ,  DEF  are  thus  similar,  and 

dg  :  df=DG  :  DF. 

But  from  above,  componendo, 

d'd  :  dg  =  D'D:  DG. 

Therefore,  ex  aequali ,  d'd  :  df=D'D  :  DF, 

whence,  by  (1),  df=AB. 

Therefore  the  segment  def  has  its  surface  equal  to  the  surface  of  the  segment 
ABB'  [I.  42,  43],  while  it  is  also  similar  to  the  segment  DEF. 

Proposition  7  (Problem) 

From  a  given  sphere  to  cut  off  a  segment  by  a  plane  so  that  the  segment  may  have  a 
given  ratio  to  the  cone  which  has  the  same  base  as  the  segment  and  equal  height . 

Let  A  A'  be  the  diameter  of  a  great  circle  of  the  sphere.  It  is  required  to  draw 
a  plane  at  right  angles  to  A  A'  cutting  off  a  segment,  as  ABB',  such  that  the 
segment  ABB'  has  to  the  cone  ABB'  a  given  ratio. 


o 


ON  THE  SPHERE  AND  CYLINDER  II 


443 


Analysis. 

Suppose  the  problem  solved,  and  let  the  plane  of  section  cut  the  plane  of  the 
great  circle  in  BB ',  and  the  diameter  A  A'  in  M .  Let  0  be  the  centre  of  the 
sphere. 

Produce  OA  to  H  so  that 

OA'+A'M  :  A'M  —  HM  :  MA.  (1) 

Thus  the  cone  HBBf  is  equal 
to  the  segment  ABB' . 

[Prop.  2] 

Therefore  the  given  ratio 
- .  p  must  be  equal  to  the  ratio  of 
the  cone  HBB'  to  the  cone 
ABB',  i.e .  to  the  ratio  HM  : 
MA. 

Hence  the  ratio  0A'+ 
A'M:A'M  is  given;  and 
therefore  A'M  is  given. 
dtopiayos. 


Now 
so  that 


OA'  :A'M>OA'  :  A'A , 
OA'+A'M  :  A'M>OA'+A'A  :  A'A 
>3  : 2. 


Thus,  in  order  that  a  solution  may  he  possible ,  it  is  a  necessary  condition  that 
the  given  ratio  must  be  greater  than  3  :  2. 

The  synthesis  proceeds  thus. 

Let  AA'  be  a  diameter  of  a  great  circle  of  the  sphere,  0  the  centre. 

Take  a  line  DE ,  and  a  point  F  on  it,  such  that  DE  :  EF  is  equal  to  the  given 
ratio,  being  greater  than  3  :  2. 

Now,  since  OA'+A'A  :  A'A  =  3:2, 

DE:EF>OA'+A'A  :A'A , 
so  that  DF  :  FE>OA'  :  A'A. 

Hence  a  point  M  can  be  found  on  A  A'  such  that 

DF  :  FE  =  OA'  :  A'M.  (2) 

Through  M  draw  a  plane  at  right  angles  to  A  A'  intersecting  the  plane  of  the 
great  circle  in  BB',  and  cutting  off  from  the  sphere  the  segment  ABB'. 

As  before,  take  H  on  OA  produced  such  that 

OA'+A'M  :  A'M  =  HM  :  MA. 

Therefore  HM  :  MA  =DE  :  EF,  by  means  of  (2). 

It  follows  that  the  cone  HBB',  or  the  segment  ABB',  is  to  the  cone  ABB'  in 
the  given  ratio  DE  :  EF. 


Proposition  8 


If  a  sphere  be  cut  by  a  plane  not  passing  through  the  centre  into  two  segments 
A'BB',  ABB',  of  which  A'BB'  is  the  greater,  then  the  ratio 
(segmt.  A'BB')  :  ( segmt .  ABB') 

<{surface  of  A'BB')2  :  ( surface  of  ABB '} 
but>  (surface  of  A'BB')1  :  ( surface  of  ABB')1. 

Let  the  plane  of  section  cut  a  great  circle  A  'BAB'  at  right  angles  in  BB',  and 
let  A  A'  be  the  diameter  bisecting  BB'  at  right  angles  in  M. 

Let  0  be  the  centre  of  the  sphere. 


ARCHIMEDES 


444 

Join  A'B,  AB. 

As  usual,  take  H  on  0.1  produced,  and  II'  on  0.1 '  produced,  so  that 


OA'+A'M  :  A'M  =  HM  :  MA,  (1) 

OA +AM  :  AM = H'M  :  MA',  (2) 

and  conceive  cones  drawn  each  with  the  same  base  as  the  two  segments  and 
with  apices  H,  II'  respectively.  The  cones  are  then  respectively  equal  to  the 
segments  [Prop.  2],  and  they  are  in  the  ratio  of  their  heights  HM,  H'M. 

Also 

(surface  of  A'BB')  :  (surface  of  ABB')  =A'B 2  :  AB 2  [I.  42,  43] 

=  A'M  :AM. 

We  have  therefore  to  prove 

(a)  that  H'M  :  MH  <A  'M2 :  MA 2, 

( b )  that  H'M  :  MH>A’M*  :  MAK 

(a)  From  (2)  above,  .  }  t  , 

A'M  :  AM = H'M  :  OA+AM 

=  H' A'  :  OA',  since  0A=0A'. 

Since  A'M>  AM,  H'A’>0A';  therefore,  if  we  take  K  on  II' A'  so  that 
0A'=A'K,  K  will  fall  between  II'  and  A'. 

And,  bv  (1),  A'M  :  AM = KM  :  MH. 

Thus  KM  :  MH=H'A'  :  A'K,  since  A'K=0A',  f 

>H'M  :  MK. 

Therefore  H'M  -MH  <  KM2. 

It  follows  that 

H'M  MH  :  MH2<KM 2  :  MH2, 
or  H'M  :  MH  <  KM2  :  MH2 


(b)  Since 

<A'M2  :  AM2,  by  (1). 

0A'  =  0A, 

Therefore 

A'M  -MA  <A'0-0A, 

A'M  :0 A’ <0 A  :  AM 

<H' A' :  A'M,  by  means  of  (2). 
A'M2<H'A'  •  OA' 

<H'A'  A'K. 

Take  a  point  N  on  A' A  such  that 

;  V.n  i. 

Thus 

A'N2=H'A'  ■  A'K. 

H'A' :  A'K=A'N2 :  A'K2. 

(3) 

Also 

H'A' :  A'N = A'N  :  A'K, 

and,  componendo, 

H'N  :  A'N =NK  :  A'K, 


ON  THE  SPHERE  AND  CYLINDER  II  445 

whence  A'N2 :  A'K2  =  H'N 2  :  NK 2. 

Therefore,  by  (3), 

H'A'  :A'K=H'N2:NK2. 

Now  H'M  :  Afif  >  ff'Ar  :  NK. 

Therefore  H'M 2 :  ATK2  >  77'A'  :  A'TC  r  * 

>H'A'  :  OA' 

>A'M  :  ALA,  by  (2),  as  above, 

>OA'+A'Af  :Aff7,  by  (1), 

>KM  :  MH. 

Hence  ff'Af2  :MH2  =  (H'M2  :  MK2)  •  (Of2  :  Afif2) 

>  (Of  :  Af//)  (Of2  :  ilf/f2). 

It  follows  that 

H'M  :  MH>KM*  :  Af/f* 

>A'Af*  :  AAf a,  by  (1). 

Proposition  9 

Of  all  segments  of  spheres  which  have  equal  surfaces  the  hemisphere  is  the  greatest 
in  volume . 

Let  ABA'B'  be  a  great  circle  of  a  sphere,  A  A'  being  a  diameter,  and  0  the 
centre.  Let  the  sphere  be  cut  by  a  plane,  not  passing  through  0,  perpendicular 
to  AA'  (at  Af),  and  intersecting  the  plane  of  the  great  circle  in  BB' .  The  seg¬ 
ment  ABB'  may  then  be  either  less  than  a  hemisphere  as  in  Fig.  1,  or  greater 
than  a  hemisphere  as  in  Fig.  2. 

Let  DED'E'  be  a  great  circle  of  another  sphere,  DD'  being  a  diameter  and  C 
the  centre.  Let  the  sphere  be  cut  by  a  plane  through  C  perpendicular  to  DD' 
and  intersecting  the  plane  of  the  great  circle  in  the  diameter  EE'. 

Suppose  the  surfaces  of  the  segment  ABB '  and  of  the  hemisphere  DEE'  to 
be  equal. 


Since  the  surfaces  are  equal,  AB  =  DE.  [I.  42,  43] 

Now,  in  Fig.  1,  AB2>2AM2  and  <2A02, 

and,  in  Fig.  2,  AB2 <2AM2  and  >2 AO2. 

Hence,  if  72  be  taken  on  A  A'  such  that 

AR2  =  %AB2, 


ARCHIMEDES 


446 

R  will  fall  between  0  and  M. 

Also,  since  AB2  =  DE 2,  AR  =  CI). 

Produce  OA'  to  K  so  that  OA' =  A' K,  and  produce  A' A  to  H  so  that 

A'K:  A'M=HA  :  AM, 

or ,  componendo,  A'K-\-A'M :  A'M—HM  :  MA.  (1) 

Thus  the  cone  HBB'  is  equal  to  the  segment  ABB'.  [Prop.  2] 

Again,  produce  CD  to  F  so  that  CD=DF,  and  the  cone  FEE1  will  be  equal 
to  the  hemisphere  DEE'.  [Prop.  2] 

Now  AR  R A' > AM  ■ MA ', 

and  AR2  =  %AB2  =  %AM  -AA'=AM -A'K. 

Hence 

AR  RA'+RA2>AM  ■ MA'+AM  A'K, 
or  AA'  AR>AM  MK 

>HM  -A'M,  by  (1). 

Therefore  AA'  :  A'M > HM  :  AR, 

or  AB2 :  BM2>HM  :  AR, 

i.e.  AR2  :  BM2>HM  :  2AR,  since  AB2=2AR2, 

>HM  :  CF. 

Thus,  since  AR  =  CD,  or  CE, 

(circle  on  diam.  EE')  :  (circle  on  diam.  BB')>HM  :  CF. 

It  follows  that 

(the  cone  FEE')>  (the  cone  HBB'), 

and  therefore  the  hemisphere  DEE'  is  greater  in  volume  than  the  segment 
ABB'. 


MEASUREMENT  OF  A  CIRCLE 


Proposition  1 

The  area  of  any  circle  is  equal  to  a  right-angled  triangle  in  which  one  of  the  sides 
about  the  right  angle  is  equal  to  the  radius ,  and  the  other  to  the  circumference ,  of 
the  circle . 


Let  ABCD  be  the  given  circle,  K  the  triangle  described. 

Then,  if  the  circle  is  not  equal  to  K,  it  must  be  either  greater  or  less. 

I.  If  possible,  let  the  circle  be  greater  than  K. 

Inscribe  a  square  ABCD ,  bisect  the  arcs  AB,  BC ,  CD ,  DA,  then  bisect  (if 
necessary)  the  halves,  and  so  on,  until  the  sides  of  the  inscribed  polygon  whose 
angular  points  are  the  points  of  division  subtend  segments  whose  sum  is  less 
than  the  excess  of  the  area  of  the  circle  over  K . 

Thus  the  area  of  the  polygon  is  greater  than  K. 

Let  AE  be  any  side  of  it,  and  ON  the  perpendicular  on  AE  from  the  centre  0. 

Then  ON  is  less  than  the  radius  of  the  circle  and  therefore  less  than  one  of 
the  sides  about  the  right  angle  in  K.  Also  the  perimeter  of  the  polygon  is  less 
than  the  circumference  of  the  circle,  i.e.  less  than  the  other  side  about  the  right 
angle  in  K. 

Therefore  the  area  of  the  polygon  is  less  than  K;  which  is  inconsistent  with 
the  hypothesis. 

Thus  the  area  of  the  circle  is  not  greater  than  K. 

II.  If  possible,  let  the  circle  be  less  than  K. 

Circumscribe  a  square,  and  let  two  adjacent  sides,  touching  the  circle  in  E, 
H,  meet  in  T.  Bisect  the  arcs  between  adjacent  points  of  contact  and  draw  the 

447 


448  ARCHIMEDES 

tangents  at  the  points  of  bisection.  Let  A  be  the  middle  point  of  the  arc  EH, 
and  FAG  the  tangent  at  A. 

Then  the  angle  TAG  is  a  right  angle. 

Therefore  TG  >  GA 

>GH. 

It  follows  that  the  triangle  FTG  is  greater  than  half  the  area  TEAR. 

Similarly,  if  the  arc  AH  be  bisected  and  the  tangent  at  the  point  of  bisection 
be  drawn,  it  will  cut  off  from  the  area  GAH  more  than  one-half. 

Thus,  by  continuing  the  process,  we  shall  ultimately  arrive  at  a  circum¬ 
scribed  polygon  such  that  the  spaces  intercepted  between  it  and  the  circle  are 
together  less  than  the  excess  of  K  over  the  area  of  the  circle. 

Thus  the  area  of  the  polygon  will  be  less  than  K. 

Now,  since  the  perpendicular  from  0  on  any  side  of  the  polygon  is  equal  to 
the  radius  of  the  circle,  while  the  perimeter  of  the  polygon  is  greater  than  the 
circumference  of  the  circle,  it  follows  that  the  area  of  the  polygon  is  greater 
than  the  triangle  K ;  which  is  impossible. 

Therefore  the  area  of  the  circle  is  not  less  than  K. 

Since  then  the  area  of  the  circle  is  neither  greater  nor  less  than  K,  it  is  equal 
to  it. 


Proposition  2 

The  area  of  a  circle  is  to  the  square  on  ite  diameter  as  11  to  141. 


Proposition  3 

The  ratio  of  the  circumference  of  any  circle  to  its  diameter  is  less  than  3-f  but 
greater  than  3fr  2- 

I.  Let  AB  be  the  diameter  of  any  circle,  0  its  centre,  AC  the  tangent  at  A  ; 
and  let  the  angle  AOC  be  one-third  of  a  right  angle. 

Then  OA  :  AC[  =  V 3  :  1]  >  265  :  153,  (1) 

and  OC:CA[  =  2  :  1]  =  306  :  153.  (2) 

First ,  draw  OD  bisecting  the  angle  AOC  and  meeting  AC  in  D. 

Now  CO  :  OA  =  CD:DA ,  [Eucl.  VI.  3] 

so  that  [CO+OA  :  OA  =  CA  :  DA,  or] 

“ CO+OA  :  CA  =  OA  :  AD. 

Therefore  [bv  (1)  and  (2)] 

OA  :  AD>57\  :  153.  (3) 

The  text  of  this  proposition  is  not  satisfactory,  and  Archimedes  cannot  have  placed  it 
before  Proposition  3,  as  the  approximation  depends  upon  the  result  of  that  proposition. 

2In  view  of  the  interesting  questions  arising  out  of  the  arithmetical  content  of  this  proposi¬ 
tion  of  Archimedes,  it  is  necessary,  in  reproducing  it,  to  distinguish  carefully  the  actual  steps 
set  out  in  the  text  as  we  have  it  from  the  intermediate  steps  (mostly  supplied  by  Eutocius) 
which  it  is  convenient  to  put  in  for  the  purpose  of  making  the  proof  easier  to  follow.  Accord¬ 
ingly  all  the  steps  not  actually  appearing  in  the  text  have  been  enclosed  in  square  brackets, 
in  order  that  it  may  be  clearly  seen  how  far  Archimedes  omits  actual  calculations  and  only 
gives  results.  It  will  be  observed  that  he  gives  two  fractional  approximations  to  \/3  (one 
being  less  and  the  other  greater  than  the  real  value)  without  any  explanation  as  to  how  he 
arrived  at  them;  and  in  like  manner  approximations  to  the  square  roots  of  several  large 
numbers  which  are  not  complete  squares  are  merely  stated. 


449 


MEASUREMENT  OF  A  CIRCLE 

Hence  OD 2 :  AH2[=  (OA2+ZLD2)  :  AH2 

>(5712+1532)  :  1532] 

>349450  : 23409, 

so  that  OD  :  DA  >  591*  :  153.  (4) 


Secondly,  let  OE  bisect  the  angle  A  OD,  meeting  AD  in  E. 

[Then  DO  :  OA  —DE  :  EA, 

so  that  DO+OA  :  DA=0A  :  AE.\ 

Therefore  OA  :  AE  [>  (591*4-571)  :  153,  by  (3)  and  (4)] 

>1162|  :  153.  (5) 

[It  follows  that 

OE 2 :  EA*>  {(1162DH-1532}  :  1532 

X1350534H+23409)  :  23409 
>1373943ff:  23409.]  ■) 

Thus  OE :  EA  >1172* :  153.  (6) 

Thirdly,  let  OF  bisect  the  angle  AOE  and  meet  AE  in  F. 

We  thus  obtain  the  result  [corresponding  to  (3)  and  (5)  above]  that 
OA  :  AF[>  (1162|+1172|)  :  153] 

>  2334J  :  153.  (7) 

[Therefore  OF2 :  FA*>  { (2334|)2+1532}  :  1532 

>5472132^  :  23409.] 

Thus  OF  :FA> 2339|  :  153.  (8) 

Fourthly,  let  OG  bisect  the  angle  AOF,  meeting  AE  in  G. 

We  have  then 

OA  :AG  [>(2334H-2339|)  :  153,  by  means  of  (7)  and  (8)] 

>4673|  :  153. 

Now  the  angle  AOC,  which  is  one-third  of  a  right  angle,  has  been  bisected 
four  times,  and  it  follows  that 

Z  .4  OG = ^  (a  right  angle). 

Make  the  angle  AO l I  on  the  other  side  of  OA  equal  to  the  angle  AOG,  and 
let  GA  produced  meet  Oil  in  II. 

Then  AGOII (a  right  angle). 


450 


ARCHIMEDES 


Thus  GH  is  one  side  of  a  regular  polygon  of  96  sides  circumscribed  to  the 
given  circle. 

And,  since  OA  :  AG> 4673?  :  153, 

while  AB=20A,  GH— 2 AG, 

it  follows  that 

AB  :  (perimeter  of  polygon  of  96  sides)[>4673§  :  153  X  96] 

>  4673§  :  14688. 


But 


14688  667| 

4673j  d+4673§ 

<3t. 


Therefore  the  circumference  of  the  circle  (being  less  than  the  perimeter  of 
the  polygon)  is  a  fortiori  less  than  3y  times  the  diameter  AB. 

II.  Next  let  AB  be  the  diameter  of  a  circle,  and  let  AC,  meeting  the  circle  in 
C,  make  the  angle  CAB  equal  to  one-third  of  a  right  angle.  Join  BC . 

Then  AC  :  CB[  =  \/3  : 1]  <  1351  :  780. 

First ,  let  AD  bisect  the  angle  BAC  and  meet  BC  in  d  and  the  circle  in  D. 
Join  BD. 

Then  ZBAD  =  ZdAC 

=  ZdBD, 

and  the  angles  at  D,  C  are  both  right  angles. 

It  follows  that  the  triangles  ADB,  [. ACd\ ,  BDd  are  similar. 


Therefore 

AD :DB=BD :Dd 
[ =AC:Cd] 

=AB  :Bd 

= AB-{- AC  :  Bd+Cd 
=AB+AC:BC 

[Eucl.  vi.  3] 

or 

BA+AC  :BC= AD  :DB. 

[But 

AC  :  CB  <  1351  :  780,  from  above, 

while 

BA :BC= 2 : 1 

=  1560  : 780.] 

Therefore 

AD  :DB< 2911  :  780. 

(1) 

[Hence 

AB2  :  BD2<( 291P+7802)  :  7802 
<9082321  : 608400.] 

Thus 

AB  :  BD<3013f  :  780. 

(2) 

Secondly,  let  AE  bisect  the  angle  BAD ,  meeting  the  circle  in  E;  and  let  BE 
be  joined. 

Then  we  prove, 

in  the  same  way  as  before,  that 

AE 

:EB[=BA+AD:BD 

<(3013f+2911)  :  780,  by  (1)  and  (2)] 
<5924|  :  780 
<5924|XA:780XA 

<1823  : 240. 

(3) 

[Hence 

AB2 :  BE2<(  18232 +  2402)  :  2402 
<3380929  : 57600.] 

Therefore 

AB  :  BE  <1838^t  :  240. 

(4) 

Thirdly,  let  AF  bisect  the  angle  BAE,  meeting  the  circle  in  F. 

MEASUREMENT  OF  A  CIRCLE  451 

Thus  AF  :FB[=BA+AE  :BE 

<3661*  :  240,  by  (3)  and  (4)] 

<3661*XTff  ■  240 X-H 

<1007:66.  (5) 


[It  follows  that 

AB2  :  BF2  <  (10072+662)  :  662 
<1018405  : 4356.] 

Therefore  AB  :  BF  <1009-$ :  66.  (6) 

Fourthly,  let  the  angle  BAF  be  bisected  by  AG  meeting  the  circle  in  G. 

Then  AG  :  GB[=BA+AF  :  BF] 

<2016| :  66,  by  (5)  and  (6). 

[And  AB2 :  BG2<  {(2016i)2+662!  :  662 

<4069284*  :  4356.] 

Therefore  AB  :  BG <2017*  :  66, 

whence  BG  :  AB>00  : 2017*.  (7) 

[Now  the  angle  BAG  which  is  the  result  of  the  fourth  bisection  of  the  angle 
BAG,  or  of  one-third  of  a  right  angle,  is  equal  to  one-fortyeighth  of  a  right 
angle. 

Thus  the  angle  subtended  by  BG  at  the  centre  is 

*  (a  right  angle).] 

Therefore  BG  is  a  side  of  a  regular  inscribed  polygon  of  96  sides. 

It  follows  from  (7)  that 

(perimeter  of  polygon)  :  AB  [>96X66  :  2017?] 

>6336  :  2017j. 


And 


6336 


20171 


r>3*. 


Much  more  then  is  the  circumference  of  the  circle  greater  than  times  the 
diameter. 

Thus  the  ratio  of  the  circumference  to  the  diameter 

<C3f  but  >34t. 


OX  CONOIDS  AND  SPHEROIDS 


INTRODUCTION1 


“Archimedes  to  Dositheus  greeting. 

“In  this  book  I  have  set  forth  and  send  you  the  proofs  of  the  remaining 
theorems  not  included  in  what  I  sent  you  before,  and  also  of  some  others  dis¬ 
covered  later  which,  though  I  had  often  tried  to  investigate  them  previously, 
I  had  failed  to  arrive  at  because  I  found  their  discovery  attended  with  some 
difficulty.  And  this  is  why  even  the  propositions  themselves  were  not  published 
with  the  rest.  But  afterwards,  when  I  had  studied  them  with  greater  care,  I 
discovered  what  I  had  failed  in  before. 

“Now  the  remainder  of  the  earlier  theorems  were  propositions  concerning 
the  right-angled  conoid  [paraboloid  of  revolution] ;  but  the  discoveries  which  I 
have  now  added  relate  to  an  obtuse-angled  conoid  [hyperboloid  of  revolution] 
and  to  spheroidal  figures,  some  of  which  I  call  oblong  and  others  flat.” 

I.  “Concerning  the  right-angled  conoid  it  was  laid  down  that,  if  a  section  of  a 
right-angled  cone  [a  parabola]  be  made  to  revolve  about  the  diameter  [axis] 
which  remains  fixed  and  return  to  the  position  from  which  it  started,  the  figure 
comprehended  by  the  section  of  the  right-angled  cone  is  called  a  right-angled 
conoid ,  and  the  diameter  which  has  remained  fixed  is  called  its  axis ,  while  its 
vertex  is  the  point  in  which  the  axis  meets  the  surface  of  the  conoid.  And  if  a 
plane  touch  the  right-angled  conoid,  and  another  plane  drawn  parallel  to  the 
tangent  plane  cut  off  a  segment  of  the  conoid,  the  base  of  the  segment  cut  off 
is  defined  as  the  portion  intercepted  by  the  section  of  the  conoid  on  the  cutting 
plane,  the  vertex  [of  the  segment]  as  the  point  in  which  the  first  plane  touches 
the  conoid,  and  the  axis  [of  the  segment]  as  the  portion  cut  off  within  the  seg¬ 
ment  from  the  fine  drawn  through  the  vertex  of  the  segment  parallel  to  the 
axis  of  the  conoid. 

“The  questions  propounded  for  consideration  were” 

(1)  “why,  if  a  segment  of  the  right-angled  conoid  be  cut  off  by  a  plane  at 
right  angles  to  the  axis,  will  the  segment  so  cut  off  be  half  as  large  again  as  the 
cone  which  has  the  same  base  as  the  segment  and  the  same  axis,  and” 

(2)  “why,  if  two  segments  be  cut  off  from  the  right-angled  conoid  by  planes 
drawn  in  any  manner,  will  the  segments  so  cut  off  have  to  one  another  the 
duplicate  ratio  of  their  axes.” 

II.  “'Respecting  the  obtuse-angled  conoid  we  lay  down  the  following  prem¬ 
isses.  If  there  be  in  a  plane  a  section  of  an  obtuse-angled  cone  [a  hyperbola],  its 

lThe  whole  of  this  introductory  matter,  including  the  definitions,  is  translated  literally 
from  the  Greek  text  in  order  that  the  terminology  of  Archimedes  may  be  faithfully  repre¬ 
sented.  When  this  has  once  been  set  out,  nothing  will  be  lost  by  returning  to  modern  phrase¬ 
ology  and  notation.  These  will  accordingly  be  employed,  as  usual,  when  we  come  to  the 
actual  propositions  of  the  treatise. 


452 


ON  CONOIDS  AND  SPHEROIDS  453 

diameter  [axis],  and  the  nearest  lines  to  the  section  of  the  obtuse-angled  cone 
\i.e.  the  asymptotes  of  the  hyperbola],  and  if,  the  diameter  [axis]  remaining 
fixed,  the  plane  containing  the  aforesaid  lines  be  made  to  revolve  about  it  and 
return  to  the  position  from  which  it  started,  the  nearest  lines  to  the  section  of 
the  obtuse-angled  cone  [the  asymptotes]  wall  clearly  comprehend  an  isosceles 
cone  whose  vertex  will  be  the  point  of  concourse  of  the  nearest  lines  and  whose 
axis  will  be  the  diameter  [axis]  which  has  remained  fixed.  The  figure  compre¬ 
hended  by  the  section  of  the  obtuse-angled  cone  is  called  an  obtuse-angled 
conoid  [hyperboloid  of  revolution],  its  axis  is  the  diameter  which  has  remained 
fixed,  and  its  vertex  the  point  in  which  the  axis  meets  the  surface  of  the  conoid. 
The  cone  comprehended  by  the  nearest  lines  to  the  section  of  the  obtuse- 
angled  cone  is  called  [the  cone]  enveloping  the  conoid ,  and  the  straight  line 
between  the  vertex  of  the  conoid  and  the  vertex  of  the  cone  enveloping  the 
conoid  is  called  [the  line]  adjacent  to  the  axis.  And  if  a  plane  touch  the  obtuse- 
angled  conoid,  and  another  plane  drawn  parallel  to  the  tangent  plane  cut  off  a 
segment  of  the  conoid,  the  base  of  the  segment  so  cut  off  is  defined  as  the  por¬ 
tion  intercepted  by  the  section  of  the  conoid  on  the  cutting  plane,  the  vertex  [of 
the  segment]  as  the  point  of  contact  of  the  plane  which  touches  the  conoid,  the 
axis  [of  the  segment]  as  the  portion  cut  off  within  the  segment  from  the  line 
drawn  through  the  vertex  of  the  segment  and  the  vertex  of  the  cone  enveloping 
the  conoid;  and  the  straight  line  between  the  said  vertices  is  called  adjacent 
to  the  axis. 

“Right-angled  conoids  are  all  similar;  but  of  obtuse-angled  conoids  let  those 
be  called  similar  in  which  the  cones  enveloping  the  conoids  are  similar. 

“The  following  questions  are  propounded  for  consideration”: 

(1)  “why,  if  a  segment  be  cut  off  from  the  obtuse-angled  conoid  by  a  plane 
at  right  angles  to  the  axis,  the  segment  so  cut  off  has  to  the  cone  which  has  the 
same  base  as  the  segment  and  the  same  axis  the  ratio  which  the  line  equal  to 
the  sum  of  the  axis  of  the  segment  and  three  times  the  line  adjacent  to  the  axis 
bears  to  the  line  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  axis  of  the  segment  and  twice  the  line 
adjacent  to  the  axis,  and” 

(2)  “why,  if  a  segment  of  the  obtuse-angled  conoid  be  cut  off  by  a  plane  not 
at  right  angles  to  the  axis,  the  segment  so  cut  off  will  bear  to  the  figure  which 
has  the  same  base  as  the  segment  and  the  same  axis,  being  a  segment  of  a  cone, 
the  ratio  which  the  line  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  axis  of  the  segment  and  three 
times  the  line  adjacent  to  the  axis  bears  to  the  line  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  axis 
of  the  segment  and  twice  the  line  adjacent  to  the  axis.” 

III.  “Concerning  spheroidal  figures  we  lay  down  the  following  premisses.  If 
a  section  of  an  acute-angled  cone  [ellipse]  be  made  to  revolve  about  the  greater 
diameter  [major  axis]  which  remains  fixed  and  return  to  the  position  from 
which  it  started,  the  figure  comprehended  by  the  section  of  the  acute-angled 
cone  is  called  an  oblong  spheroid.  But  if  the  section  of  the  acute-angled  cone 
revolve  about  the  lesser  diameter  [minor  axis]  which  remains  fixed  and  return 
to  the  position  from  which  it  started,  the  figure  comprehended  by  the  section 
of  the  acute-angled  cone  is  called  a  flat  spheroid.  In  either  of  the  spheroids  the 
axis  is  defined  as  the  diameter  [axis]  which  has  remained  fixed,  the  vertex  as  the 
point  in  which  the  axis  meets  the  surface  of  the  spheroid,  the  centre  as  the 
middle  point  of  the  axis,  and  the  diameter  as  the  line  drawn  through  the  centre 
at  right  angles  to  the  axis.  And,  if  parallel  planes  touch,  without  cutting,  either 


454  ARCHIMEDES 

of  the  spheroidal  figures,  and  if  another  plane  be  drawn  parallel  to  the  tangent 
planes  and  cutting  the  spheroid,  the  base  of  the  resulting  segments  is  defined 
as  the  portion  intercepted  by  the  section  of  the  spheroid  on  the  cutting  plane, 
their  vertices  as  the  points  in  which  the  parallel  planes  touch  the  spheroid,  and 
their  axes  as  the  portions  cut  off  within  the  segments  from  the  straight  line 
joining  their  vertices.  And  that  the  planes  touching  the  spheroid  meet  its  sur¬ 
face  at  one  point  only,  and  that  the  straight  line  joining  the  points  of  contact 
passes  through  the  centre  of  the  spheroid,  we  shall  prove.  Those  spheroidal 
figures  are  called  similar  in  which  the  axes  have  the  same  ratio  to  the  ‘diam¬ 
eters/  And  let  segments  of  spheroidal  figures  and  conoids  be  called  similar  if 
they  are  cut  off  from  similar  figures  and  have  their  bases  similar,  while  their 
axes,  being  either  at  right  angles  to  the  planes  of  the  bases  or  making  equal 
angles  with  the  corresponding  diameters  [axes]  of  the  bases,  have  the  same 
ratio  to  one  another  as  the  corresponding  diameters  [axes]  of  the  bases. 

“The  following  questions  about  spheroids  are  propounded  for  considera¬ 
tion/ ; 

(1)  “why,  if  one  of  the  spheroidal  figures  be  cut  by  a  plane  through  the 
centre  at  right  angles  to  the  axis,  each  of  the  resulting  segments  will  be  double 
of  the  cone  having  the  same  base  as  the  segment  and  the  same  axis;  while,  if 
the  plane  of  section  be  at  right  angles  to  the  axis  without  passing  through  the 
centre,  (a)  the  greater  of  the  resulting  segments  will  bear  to  the  cone  which  has 
the  same  base  as  the  segment  and  the  same  axis  the  ratio  which  the  fine  equal 
to  the  sum  of  half  the  straight  fine  which  is  the  axis  of  the  spheroid  and  the 
axis  of  the  lesser  segment  bears  to  the  axis  of  the  lesser  segment,  and  (6)  the 
lesser  segment  bears  to  the  cone  which  has  the  same  base  as  the  segment  and 
the  same  axis  the  ratio  which  the  fine  equal  to  the  sum  of  half  the  straight  fine 
which  is  the  axis  of  the  spheroid  and  the  axis  of  the  greater  segment  bears  to 
the  axis  of  the  greater  segment”; 

(2)  “why,  if  one  of  the  spheroids  be  cut  by  a  plane  passing  through  the 
centre  but  not  at  right  angles  to  the  axis,  each  of  the  resulting  segments  will  be 
double  of  the  figure  having  the  same  base  as  the  segment  and  the  same  axis  and 
consisting  of  a  segment  of  a  cone. 

(3)  “But,  if  the  plane  cutting  the  spheroid  be  neither  through  the  centre  nor 
at  right  angles  to  the  axis,  (a)  the  greater  of  the  resulting  segments  will  have  to 
the  figure  which  has  the  same  base  as  the  segment  and  the  same  axis  the  ratio 
which  the  fine  equal  to  the  sum  of  half  the  fine  joining  the  vertices  of  the  seg¬ 
ments  and  the  axis  of  the  lesser  segment  bears  to  the  axis  of  the  lesser  segment, 
and  (b)  the  lesser  segment  will  have  to  the  figure  with  the  same  base  as  the 
segment  and  the  same  axis  the  ratio  which  the  fine  equal  to  the  sum  of  half  the 
fine  joining  the  vertices  of  the  segments  and  the  axis  of  the  greater  segment 
bears  to  the  axis  of  the  greater  segment.  And  the  figure  referred  to  is  in  these 
cases  also  a  segment  of  a  cone. 

“When  the  aforesaid  theorems  are  proved,  there  are  discovered  by  means  of 
them  many  theorems  and  problems. 

“Such,  for  example,  are  the  theorems”: 

(1)  “that  similar  spheroids  and  similar  segments  both  of  spheroidal  figures 
and  conoids  have  to  one  another  the  triplicate  ratio  of  their  axes,  and” 

(2)  “that  in  equal  spheroidal  figures  the  squares  on  the  ‘diameters’  are  re¬ 
ciprocally  proportional  to  the  axes,  and,  if  in  spheroidal  figures  the  squares  on 


ON  CONOIDS  AND  SPHEROIDS  455 

the  'diameters’  are  reciprocally  proportional  to  the  axes,  the  spheroids  are 
equal. 

“Such  also  is  the  problem,  From  a  given  spheroidal  figure  or  conoid  to  cut 
off  a  segment  by  a  plane  drawn  parallel  to  a  given  plane  so  that  the  segment 
cut  off  is  equal  to  a  given  cone  or  cylinder  or  to  a  given  sphere. 

“After  prefixing  therefore  the  theorems  and  directions  which  are  necessary 
for  the  proof  of  them,  I  will  then  proceed  to  expound  the  propositions  them¬ 
selves  to  you.  Farewell.' ” 

DEFINITIONS 

“If  a  cone  be  cut  by  a  plane  meeting  all  the  sides  [generators]  of  the  cone,  the 
section  will  be  either  a  circle  or  a  section  of  an  acute-angled  cone  [an  ellipse].  If 
then  the  section  be  a  circle,  it  is  clear  that  the  segment  cut  off  from  the  cone 
towards  the  same  parts  as  the  vertex  of  the  cone  will  be  a  cone.  But,  if  the 
section  be  a  section  of  an  acute-angled  cone  [an  ellipse],  let  the  figure  cut  off 
from  the  cone  towards  the  same  parts  as  the  vertex  of  the  cone  be  called  a 
segment  of  a  cone .  Let  the  base  of  the  segment  be  defined  as  the  plane  compre¬ 
hended  by  the  section  of  the  acute-angled  cone,  its  vertex  as  the  point  which  is 
also  the  vertex  of  the  cone,  and  its  axis  as  the  straight  line  joining  the  vertex 
of  the  cone  to  the  centre  of  the  section  of  the  acute-angled  cone. 

“And  if  a  cylinder  be  cut  by  two  parallel  planes  meeting  all  the  sides  [gen¬ 
erators]  of  the  cylinder,  the  sections  will  be  either  circles  or  sections  of  acute- 
angled  cones  [ellipses]  equal  and  similar  to  one  another.  If  then  the  sections  be 
circles,  it  is  clear  that  the  figure  cut  off  from  the  cylinder  between  the  parallel 
planes  will  be  a  cylinder.  But,  if  the  sections  be  sections  of  acute-angled  cones 
[ellipses],  let  the  figure  cut  off  from  the  cylinder  between  the  parallel  planes  be 
called  a  frustum  of  a  cylinder.  And  let  the  bases  of  the  frustum  be  defined  as  the 
planes  comprehended  by  the  sections  of  the  acute-angled  cones  [ellipses],  and 
the  axis  as  the  straight  line  joining  the  centres  of  the  sections  of  the  acute- 
angled  cones,  so  that  the  axis  will  be  in  the  same  straight  line  with  the  axis  of 
the  cylinder.” 

^  Lemma 

If  in  an  ascending  arithmetical  'progression  consisting  of  the  magnitudes  Ai> 
A2,  •  •  ’An  the  common  difference  be  equal  to  the  least  term  A\f  then 
n  -An<2(Ai-K42+  •  *  *+An), 
arid  >2(Ai+A2+  •  •  -+An_i). 

[The  proof  of  this  is  given  incidentally  in  the  treatise  On  Spirals,  Prop.  11. 
By  placing  fines  side  by  side  to  represent  the  terms  of  the  progression  and  then 
producing  each  so  as  to  make  it  equal  to  the  greatest  term,  Archimedes  gives 
the  equivalent  of  the  following  proof. 

If  Sn  =  A i  — {—  A o — f~  *  *  •  A n — i  — An) 

we  have  also  Sn=An+An_i+An_2+  •  •  •+Ai. 

And  Ai+An-i  =  A2+An-2=  •  •  *  =  An. 

Therefore  2Sn  =  (n+l)An, 

whence  n  • An<2Sn , 

and  n-An>2Sn_i. 

Thus,  if  the  progression  is  a,  2a,  •  •  na, 

o  _ft(w+l)_ 

—  2  u, 


456 


ARCHIMEDES 


and 
but 

Proposition  1 


nia<2S„, 

>2  £„_!.] 


■Ki  be  two  series  of  magnitudes  such  that 

B *'  1  M 


*  -  +  KS) 


If  Ai,  Bi,  Ci ,  •  •  • Ki  and  A 2,  B 2,  C2, 

A 1  i  B\ —A2 

Bi  :  C1  —  B2  :  C2,  and  so  an, 

and  if  A  3,  2?3,  C3,  •  •  A3  and  A  a,  Ba,  Ca,  •  •  *iu  be  two  other  series  such  that 
A\  1 A z  =  A2  •  Aa , 

Bi  :  Bz  —  B2  :  #4,  and  $0  on, 

then  (Ai+I?i-}-(7i+  > •  -+i£i)  :  (A3+£3+C3+ 

=  (A2+B2A-C2A-  *  *  '+K2)  :  (A4+B4+  • 

The  proof  is  as  follows. 

Since  Az  :  Ai  =  Aa  :  A2, 

and  Ai  :  Bi  =  A2  :  B2, 

while  Bi  :  Bz—Bo  :  Ba, 

we  have,  ez  aequali ,  A  3  :  Bz  =  A  a  :  B a. 

Similarly  i?3  :  Cz=Ba  :  C4,  and  so  on. 

Again,  it  follows  from  equations  (a)  that 

A\  \  A2  =  B\  \  J52  =  Ci  t  (7 2 =  • 

Therefore 


G8) 


V) 1 


(7) 


A 1 :  A 2  =  (Ai+£i+Ci+  •  •  *+ifi)  :  (A 2+^2+  *  *  • +X2), 
or  (Ai+^Bi+Cid-  •  •  *+AY)  :  Ai  =  (A2+-B2+C2+  •  •  *+if2)  :  A*; 
and  Ai  :  Az  =  A2  :  Aa, 

while  from  equations  (7)  it  follows  in  like  manner  that 

Az  :  (A3+jB3+C3+  *  *  ,JrKz)  —  Aa  (A4+.B4+C4+  *  *  --\-Ka). 

By  the  last  three  equations,  ex  aequali , 

(A1+B1+C1+  •  •  -+Ki)  :  (Az+Bz+Cz+  *  •  -+^3) 

=  (A2  +  i?2+Cf2+  *  *  *+^2)  •  (A4  +  S4  +  C4+  *  *  *+^4). 

Cor.  If  any  terms  in  the  third  and  fourth  series  corresponding  to  terms  in 
the  first  and  second  be  left  out,  the  result  is  the  same.  For  example,  if  the  last 
terms  Kz,  Ka  are  absent, 

(A1+B1+C1+  •  •  *+i£i)  :  (A3+2?3+C3+  •  •  *+/3) 

=  (A2-I-B2+C2+  *  *  *+^2)  :  (A4+B4+C4+  •  •  *+^4), 
where  I  immediately  precedes  K  in  each  series. 


Lemma  to  Proposition  2 
[On  Spirals ,  Prop.  10.] 

If  A\,  A  2,  Az,  •  •  -An  ben  lines  forming  an  ascending  arithmetical  progression  in 
which  the  common  difference  is  equal  to  the  least  term  A\,  then 

(n+l)An2+A1(A1+A2+A3+  •  •  •  +An)  =  3(A12+A22+A32+  •  *  -+An2). 
Let  the  lines  An,  An_  1,  An_2,  . .  ,A\  be  placed  in  a  row  from  left  to  right. 
Produce  An_  1,  An_2,  .  .  .  A\  until  they  are  each  equal  to  An ,  so  that  the  parts 
produced  are  respectively  equal  to  Ai,  A2,  . .  ,An-i. 

Taking  each  line  successively,  we  have 

2An2  =  2A„2, 

(Ai+An_i)2  =  Ai2+A2n_i+2Ai  *An_i, 

(A2+An_2)2= A22+A2n_2+2A2  *An_2, 


ON  CONOIDS  AND  SPHEROIDS 


457 


(A n- i + A i)*2  —  A  2»- 1 + A i2+ 2 A n_i  • A\ . 

And,  by  addition, 

(n+l)An2  =  2(A12+A22+  •  •  -+A,2) 
+2Ai  •An_i+2A2  *An_2+  •  •  •  +2An_i  -A\. 

Therefore,  in  order  to  obtain  the  re¬ 
quired  result,  we  have  to  prove  that 
2(Ai  -An_i+A2  'An- 2+  •  •  '-\-An-i  -Ai)  + 

Ai(Ai+A2+A.3+  •  •  •A~An) 
=A12+A22+ - VAn2.  (a) 

Now 

2A2  'An^  — A  i  A An-2,  because  A2  =  2Ai, 
2A3  •An_3  =  Ai  *6An_3,  because  Az  =  3Ai, 


2An-i  'Ai  =  Ai  '2(n  —  l)Ai. 

It  follows  that 

2(Ai  *4n_i+42  'An- 2+  •  •  '+An-i  -Ai)  + 
Ai(Ai-f-A2-f-  •  •  *+An)  =  A\{ An+3An_i+ 
5An_2+  •  •  — 

And  this  last  expression  can  be  proved  to  be  equal  to 

Ai2+A22+  •  •  '-\~An2. 

For  An2  =  Ai(n  An) 

=  Ai{  4ft+(n-  l)An} 

= Ai{An+2(An-i+An_2+  •  •  *+Ai)}; 
because  (n  — l)An  =  An_i+Ai 

+An-2+A2 

+ . 

+Ai+An_i. 

Similarly  A  2n_i  =  A  i  { A  n-i + 2  (A  n_2 + A  n-z 4 - b  A  x) } , 


A  22  =  A  i  (A  2 4~  2  A  i) , 

A12  =  A1-A1; 

whence,  by  addition, 

Ai24-A22  4-A32+  •  •  -  +  An2 = Ai{An+3An-i+5An-2+  •  •  *  +  (2r— l)Ai}. 
Thus  the  equation  marked  (a)  above  is  true;  and  it  follows  that 
(n+l)An2+Ai(Ai+A2+Az+  •  •  *4“4.n)  =  3(Ai24~A.224~  •  •  'A~An2). 

Cor.  1.  From  this  it  is  evident  that 

n  *Ar2<3(A124-A22  4-  •  •  -+An2).  (1) 

Also  Hn2  =  Ai{An4“2(An_i4-An-2d - Mi)},  as  above, 

so  that  Hn2>Ai(An4-An_H - (-Hi), 

and  therefore 

An24-Ai(Ai4-A24-  •  •  •4Mn)<2An2. 

It  follows  from  the  'proposition  that 

n  •An2>3(A124-A224-  ■  •  44U.  .  (2) 

Cor.  2.  All  these  results  will  hold  if  we  substitute  similar  figures  for  squares 
on  all  the  lines;  for  similar  figures  are  in  the  duplicate  ratio  of  their  sides. 


Ai  A  o 


A n_ £  An_2  A n _j 


An  Ati-i  A n_ s  A3  A2  Ai 


458 


ARCHIMEDES 


Proposition  2 

If  Aiy  A«  •  •  *An  be  any  number  of  areas  such  that 

Ai  =  ax-\~x2, 

Ai  —  a  -2#+ (2a;)2, 

A3  =  a  -3x+(3x)2, 


An  =  a  • nx+(nx )2, 

then  n  • An  :  (A1+A2+  *  *  •- \-An)  <(a-\-nx )  :  (2~^l^), 

and  n  *An  :  (A1+A2+  *  *  *+^-n-i)>(a+na:)  : 

For,  by  the  Lemma  immediately  preceding  Prop.  1, 

n  • anx  <  ( ax+a  • 2x+ - ha  *nx), 

and  >2(ax+a  -2x+ - ha*n  —  lx). 

Also,  by  the  Lemma  preceding  this  proposition, 

n  *(nx)2<3{^2+(2x)2+(3x)2+  •  •  -  +  {nx)2) 
and  >3{z2+(2:c)2+  •  •  -+(n  —  lx)2} . 

Hence 

<[(aa;+x2)  +  {a  -2a;+(2:r)2H - b{a  *na;+(nz)2}], 

and  _  _ 

>[(a£+£2)+{a  -2a;+(2:r)2}  + - h{a  *n  —  \x+(n—  lx)2}], 

or  2|£+1<H)!</1i+Ai+...+a,i 

and  >Ai+A.2+  •  •  *+An-i. 

It  follows  that 

n-An:(Ai+A2d - hAn)<n{a -nx+(nx)2}  :  |^^+n-gX-|, 

or  n  -An  :  (A1+A2+  •  •  *+An)<(a+n:r)  :  (2"^^)’ 

also  n  *A„  :  (A1+A2+  *  •  •+An-i)>(a+na;)  : 

Proposition  3 

(1)7/  TP,  TP'  be  two  tangents  to  any  conic  meeting  in  T ,  and  if  Qq ,  Q'g'  be  any 
two  chords  parallel  respectively  to  TP,  TP'  and  meeting  in  0,  then 
QO  -Oq  :  Q'O  Oq'  =  TP2  :  TP'2. 

“And  this  is  proved  in  the  elements  of  conics.”1 

(2)  If  QQ'  be  a  chord  of  a  parabola  bisected  in  V  by  the  diameter  PV,  and  if  PV 
be  of  constant  length,  then  the  areas  of  the  triangle  PQQ'  and  of  the  segment  PQQ' 
are  both  constant  whatever  be  the  direction  of  QQ\ 

Let  ABB'  be  the  particular  segment  of  the  parabola  whose  vertex  is  A,  so 
that  BB '  is  bisected  perpendicularly  by  the  axis  at  the  point  H ,  where  AH  =  PV. 
Draw  QD  perpendicular  to  PV. 


*In  the  treatises  on  conics  by  Aristaeus  and  Euclid. 


ON  CONOIDS  AND  SPHEROIDS  459 

Let  pa  be  the  parameter  of  the  principal  ordinates,  and  let  p  be  another  line 
of  such  length  that 

QV2:QD2  =  p:pa; 

it  will  then  follow  that  p  is  equal  to  the  par¬ 
ameter  of  the  ordinates  to  the  diameter  PV , 
i.e.  those  which  are  parallel  to  QV. 

“For  this  is  proved  in  the  conics.”1 
Thus  QV2^pPV. 

And  BH2  =  pa  AH,  while  AH  =  PV. 
Therefore  QV2  :  BH2  =  p  :  pa . 

But  QV2:QD2  =  p:pa; 

hence  BH  =  QD. 

Thus  BH  -AH  =  QD  PV, 

and  therefore  A  ABB'  =  A  PQQ' ; 
that  is,  the  area  of  the  triangle  PQQ'  is  con¬ 
stant  so  long  as  PV  is  of  constant  length. 
Hence  also  the  area  of  the  segment  PQQ '  is  constant  under  the  same  condi¬ 
tions;  for  the  segment  is  equal  to  f  A  PQQ'.  [Quadrature  of  the  Parabola,  Prop. 
17  or  24.] 


Pa 


Proposition  4 

The  area  of  any  ellipse  is  to  that  of  the  auxiliary  circle  as  the  minor  axis  to  the 
major. 

Let  A  A'  be  the  major  and  BB'  the  minor  axis  of  the  ellipse,  and  let  BBr 
meet  the  auxiliary  circle  in  b,  b'. 

Suppose  0  to  be  such  a  circle  that 

(circle  AbA'b')  :0  =  CA  :  CB. 

Then  shall  0  be  equal  to  the  area  of  the  ellipse. 


b' 


For,  if  not,  0  must  be  either  greater  or  less  than  the  ellipse. 

I.  If  possible,  let  0  be  greater  than  the  ellipse. 

We  can  then  inscribe  in  the  circle  0  an  equilateral  polygon  of  An  sides  such 
that  its  area  is  greater  than  that  of  the  ellipse,  [cf.  On  the  Sphere  and  Cylinder , 
I.  6.] 

The  theorem  which  is  here  assumed  by  Archimedes  as  known  ...  is  easily  deduced  from 
Apollonius  I.  49.  .  , . 


460  ARCHIMEDES 

Let  this  be  done,  and  inscribe  in  the  auxiliary  circle  of  the  ellipse  the  polygon 

AefbghA' . .  .  similar  to  that  inscribed  in  0.  Let  the  perpendiculars  eM,fN, _ 

on  A  A'  meet  the  ellipse  in  E,  F,. . .  respectively.  Join  AE ,  EF ,  FB ,. . . . 

Suppose  that  P'  denotes  the  area  of  the  polygon  inscribed  in  the  auxiliary 
circle,  and  P  that  of  the  polygon  inscribed  in  the  ellipse. 

Then,  since  all  the  lines  eM ,  fN,  •  •  *  are  cut  in  the  same  proportions  at  E , 

i.e.  eM:  EM=fN  :  FN=  •  •  -  =  bC  :  BC , 

the  pairs  of  triangles,  as  eAM ',  EAM,  and  the  pairs  of  trapeziums,  as  eMNf, 
EMNFj  are  all  in  the  same  ratio  to  one  another  as  bC  to  BC,  or  as  CA  to  CB . 
Therefore,  by  addition, 

P'  :P  =  CA  :  CB. 

Now  P'  :  (polygon  inscribed  in  0) 

=  (circle  AbA‘ V)  :0 
=  CA  :  CB,  by  hypothesis. 

Therefore  P  is  equal  to  the  polygon  inscribed  in  0. 

But  this  is  impossible,  because  the  latter  polygon  is  by  hypothesis  greater 
than  the  ellipse,  and  a  fortiori  greater  than  P. 

Hence  0  is  not  greater  than  the  ellipse. 

II.  If  possible,  let  0  be  less  than  the  ellipse. 

In  this  case  we  inscribe  in  the  ellipse  a  polygon  P  with  4 n  equal  sides  such 
that  P>0 . 

Let  the  perpendiculars  from  the  angular  points  on  the  axis  A  A'  be  produced 
to  meet  the  auxiliary  circle,  and  let  the  corresponding  polygon  (P')  in  the 
circle  be  formed. 

Inscribe  in  0  a  polygon  similar  to  P\ 

Then  P'  :P  =  CA  :CB 

=  (circle  AbA'b')  :  0,  by  hypothesis, 

=  P'  :  (polygon  inscribed  in  0 ). 

Therefore  the  polygon  inscribed  in  0  is  equal  to  the  polygon  P;  which  is 
impossible,  because  P>0. 

Hence  0,  being  neither  greater  nor  less  than  the  ellipse,  is  equal  to  it;  and 
the  required  result  follows. 

Proposition  5 

If  AA',  BB'  be  the  major  and  minor  axis  of  an  ellipse  respectively ,  and  if  d  be  the 
diameter  of  any  circle ,  then 

{area  of  ellipse)  :  {area  of  circle)  =  A  A'  •  BB '  :  d2. 

For 

(area  of  ellipse)  :  (area  of  auxiliary  circle)  =  BB'  :  A  A'  [Prop.  4] 

=AA'-BB'  :AA'2. 

And 

(area  of  aux.  circle)  :  (area  of  circle  with  diam.  d) =  AA'2  :  d 2. 
Therefore  the  required  result  follows  ex  aequali . 

Proposition  6 

The  areas  of  ellipses  are  as  the  rectangles  under  their  axes . 

This  follows  at  once  from  Props.  4,  5. 

Cor.  The  areas  of  similar  ellipses  are  as  the  squares  of  corresponding  axes. 


ON  CONOIDS  AND  SPHEROIDS 


461 


Proposition  7 

Given  an  ellipse  with  centre  C)  and  a  line  CO  drawn  perpendicular  to  its  plane ,  it 
is  possible  to  find  a  circular  cone  with  vertex  0  and  such  that  the  given  ellipse  is  a 
section  of  it  [or,  in  other  words ,  to  find  the  circular  sections  of  the  cone  with  vertex  0 
passing  through  the  circumference  of  the  ellipse ]. 

Conceive  an  ellipse  with  BB'  as  its  minor  axis  and  lying  in  a  plane  perpen¬ 
dicular  to  that  of  the  paper.  Let  CO  be  drawn  perpendicular  to  the  plane  of  the 
ellipse,  and  let  0  be  the  vertex  of  the  required  cone.  Produce  OB ,  OC,  OB' ,  and 
in  the  same  plane  with  them  draw  BED  meeting  OC,  OB'  produced  in  E,  D 
respectively  and  in  such  a  direction  that 

BE  ED  :E02  =  CA2  :C02, 
where  CA  is  half  the  major  axis  of  the  ellipse. 

“And  this  is  possible,  since 

BE  •  ED  :  E02>BC  •  CB'  :  CO2.” 

[Both  the  construction  and  this  proposition  are  assumed  as  known.] 

Now  conceive  a  circle  with  BD  as  diam¬ 
eter  lying  in  a  plane  at  right  angles  to 
that  of  the  paper,  and  describe  a  cone  with 
this  circle  for  its  base  and  with  vertex  0. 

We  have  therefore  to  prove  that  the 
given  ellipse  is  a  section  of  the  cone,  or,  if 
P  be  any  point  on  the  ellipse,  that  P  lies 
on  the  surface  of  the  cone. 

Draw  PN  perpendicular  to  BB'.  Join 
ON  and  produce  it  to  meet  BD  in  M,  and 
let  MQ  be  drawn  in  the  plane  of  the  circle 
on  BD  as  diameter  perpendicular  to  BD 
and  meeting  the  circle  in  Q .  Also  let  FG, 
HK  be  drawn  through  E ,  M  respectively 
parallel  to  BB'. 

QM 2 :  HM  *  MK  =  BM  •  MD  :  HM  •  MIC 
=BE • ED : FE  • EG 
=  (BE  •  ED  :  EO2)  •  (EO2  :  FE  •  EG) 

=  (CA2  :  CO2)  (CO 2 :  BC  •  CB') 

—  CA2 :  CB2 
=  PN2  :  BN  *  NB'. 

Therefore  QM2  :  PN 2  =  HM  MK  :  BN  •  NB' 

=  OM2  :  ON2; 

whence,  since  PN,  QM  are  parallel,  OPQ  is  a  straight  line. 

But  Q  is  on  the  circumference  of  the  circle  on  BD  as  diameter;  therefore  OQ 
is  a  generator  of  the  cone,  and  hence  P  lies  on  the  cone. 

Thus  the  cone  passes  through  all  points  on  the  ellipse. 

Proposition  8 

Given  an  ellipse ,  a  plane  through  one  of  its  axes  AA'  and  perpendicxdar  to  the 
plane  of  the  ellipse,  and  a  line  CO  drawn  from  C,  the  centre,  in  the  given  plane 
through  A  A'  but  not  perpendicular  to  AA' ,  it  is  possible  to  find  a  cone  with  vertex 


o 


We  have  then 


462  ARCHIMEDES 

0  such  that  the  given  ellipse  is  a  section  of  it  [or,  in  other  words ,  to  find  the  circular 
sections  of  the  cone  with  vertex  0  whose  surface  passes  through  the  circumference 
of  the  ellipse ]. 

By  hypothesis,  OA,  OA'  are  unequal.  Produce  OA '  to  D  so  that  OA  =  OD. 
Join  AD,  and  draw  FG  through  C  parallel  to  it. 

The  given  ellipse  is  to  be  supposed  to  lie  in  a  plane  perpendicular  to  the 
plane  of  the  paper.  Let  BB'  be  the  other  axis  of  the  ellipse. 

Conceive  a  plane  through  AD  perpendicular  to  the  plane  of  the  paper,  and 
in  it  describe  either  (a),  if  CB2  =  FC  •  CG,  a  circle  with  diameter  AD,  or  ( b ),  if 
not,  an  ellipse  on  AD  as  axis  such  that,  if  d  be  the  other  axis, 

d2  :  AD2  =  CB2  :  FC  •  CG. 

Take  a  cone  with  vertex  0  whose  sur¬ 
face  passes  through  the  circle  or  ellipse 
just  drawn.  This  is  possible  even  when 
the  curve  is  an  ellipse,  because  the  line 
from  0  to  the  middle  point  of  AD  is  per¬ 
pendicular  to  the  plane  of  the  ellipse, 
and  the  construction  is  effected  by 
means  of  Prop.  7. 

Let  P  be  any  point  on  the  given  el¬ 
lipse,  and  we  have  only  to  prove  that  P 
lies  on  the  surface  of  the  cone  so  de¬ 
scribed. 

Draw  PN  perpendicular  to  AA'.  Join 
ON,  and  produce  it  to  meet  AD  in  M. 

Through  M  draw  HK  parallel  to  A' A. 

Lastly,  draw  MQ  perpendicular  to 
the  plane  of  the  paper  (and  therefore 
perpendicular  to  both  HK  and  AD) 
meeting  the  ellipse  or  circle  about  AD 
(and  therefore  the  surface  of  the  cone)  in  Q . 

Then 

QM2 :  HM  •  MK  =  { QM 2 :  DM  •  MA)  •  {DM  *  MA  :  HM  •  MK) 

=  {d2  :  AD2)  •  {FC  •  CG  :  A'C  •  CA) 

=  { CB 2 :  FC  •  CG)  •  {FC  •  CG  :  A'C  •  CA) 

—  CB2 :  CA2 
=  PN2  :  A'N  •  NA. 

Therefore,  alternately, 

QM2 :  PN2  =  HM  •  MK  :  A'N  •  NA 
=  0M2 :  ON2. 

Thus,  since  PN,  QM  are  parallel,  OPQ  is  a  straight  line;  and,  Q  being  on  the 
surface  of  the  cone,  it  follows  that  P  is  also  on  the  surface  of  the  cone. 

Similarly  all  points  on  the  ellipse  are  also  on  the  cone,  and  the  ellipse  is 
therefore  a  section  of  the  cone. 

Proposition  9 

Given  an  ellipse,  a  plane  through  one  of  its  axes  and  perpendicular  to  that  of  the 
ellipse,  and  a  straight  line  CO  drawn  from  the  centre  C  of  the  ellipse  in  the  given 
plane  through  the  axis  but  not  perpendicular  to  that  axis,  it  is  possible  to  find  a 


o 


ON  CONOIDS  AND  SPHEROIDS 


463 


cylinder  with  axis  OC  such  that  the  ellipse  is  a  section  of  it  [or,  in  other  words ,  to 
find  the  circular  sections  of  the  cylinder  with  axis  OC  whose  surface  passes  through 
the  circumference  of  the  given  ellipse]. 

Let  AA'  be  an  axis  of  the  ellipse,  and  suppose  the  plane  of  the  ellipse  to  be 
perpendicular  to  that  of  the  paper,  so  that  OC  lies  in  the  plane  of  the  paper. 

Draw  AD,  A'E  parallel  to  CO,  and  let 
DE  be  the  line  through  0  perpendicular 
to  both  AD  and  A'E. 

We  have  now  three  different  cases 
according  as  the  other  axis  BB'  of  the 
ellipse  is  (1)  equal  to,  (2)  greater  than, 
or  (3)  less  than,  DE. 

(1)  Suppose  BB'=DE. 

Draw  a  plane  through  DE  at  right 
angles  to  OC,  and  in  this  plane  describe 
a  circle  on  DE  as  diameter.  Through 
this  circle  describe  a  cylinder  with  axis  OC. 

This  cylinder  shall  be  the  cylinder  required,  or  its  surface  shall  pass  through 
every  point  P  of  the  ellipse. 

For,  if  P  be  any  point  on  the  ellipse,  draw  PN  perpendicular  to  AA'; 
through  N  draw  NM  parallel  to  CO  meeting  DE  in  M,  and  through  M,  in  the 
plane  of  the  circle  on  DE  as  diameter,  draw  MQ  perpendicular  to  DE,  meeting 
the  circle  in  Q. 

Then,  since  DE  —  BB', 

PN 2  :  AN  •  NA'  —  DO2  :  AC  *  CA'. 

And  DM  •  ME  :  AN  -  N A' =  DO2  :  AC2, 

since  AD,  NM,  CO,  A'E  are  parallel. 

Therefore  PN2  =  DM  •  ME 

=  QM2, 

by  the  property  of  the  circle. 

Hence,  since  PN,  QM  are  equal  as  well  as  parallel,  PQ  is  parallel  to  MN  and 
therefore  to  CO.  It  follows  that  PQ  is  a  generator  of  the  cylinder,  whose  surface 
accordingly  passes  through  P. 

(2)  If  BB'>DE,  we  take  E'  on  A'E  such  that  DE'  —  BB'  and  describe  a 
circle  on  DE'  as  diameter  in  a  plane  perpendicular  to  that  of  the  paper;  and  the 
rest  of  the  construction  and  proof  is  exactly  similar  to  those  given  for  case  (1). 

(3)  Suppose  BB'  <DE. 

Take  a  point  K  on  CO  produced  such 
that 

D02-CB2  =  0K2. 

From  K  draw  KR  perpendicular  to 
the  plane  of  the  paper  and  equal  to  CB. 
Thus  OR2  =  OK2+CB2  =  OD2. 

In  the  plane  containing  DE,  OR  de¬ 
scribe  a  circle  on  DE  as  diameter. 
Through  this  circle  (which  must  pass 
through  R)  draw  a  cylinder  with  axis  OC. 
We  have  then  to  prove  that,  if  P  be 
any  point  on  the  given  ellipse,  P  lies  on  the  cylinder  so  described. 


464  ARCHIMEDES 

Draw  PN  perpendicular  to  AA',  and  through  N  draw  NM  parallel  to  CO 
meeting  DE  in  M.  In  the  plane  of  the  circle  on  DE  as  diameter  draw  MQ 
perpendicular  to  DE  and  meeting  the  circle  in  Q . 

Lastly,  draw  QH  perpendicular  to  NM  produced.  QH  will  then  be  perpen¬ 
dicular  to  the  plane  containing  AC,  DE ,  i.e.  the  plane  of  the  paper. 

Now’  QH 2  :  QM2  =  KR2  :  OR2,  by  similar  triangles. 

And  QM2 :  AN  NA'  =  DM  •  ME  :  AN  •  NA' 

=  0D2  :  CA2. 

Hence,  ex  aequali ,  since  OR  =  OD, 

QH 2 :  AN  •  NA'=KR 2 :  CA 2 
=  CB2  :  CA2 
=  PN2  :AN  NA'. 

Thus  QH  =  PN.  And  QH,  PN  are  also  parallel.  Accordingly  PQ  is  parallel  to 
MN,  and  therefore  to  CO,  so  that  PQ  is  a  generator,  and  the  cylinder  passes 
through  P. 

Proposition  10 

It  wras  proved  by  the  earlier  geometers  that  any  two  cones  have  to  one  another 
the  ratio  compounded  of  the  ratios  of  their  bases  and  of  their  heights.1  The  same 
method  of  proof  will  show’  that  any  segments  of  cones  have  to  one  another  the 
ratio  compounded  of  the  ratios  of  their  bases  and  of  their  heights . 

The  proposition  that  any  ‘ frustum 1  of  a  cylinder  is  triple  of  the  conical  segment 
which  has  the  same  base  as  the  frustum  and  equal  height  is  also  proved  in  the  same 
manner  as  the  proposition  that  the  cylinder  is  triple  of  the  cone  which  has  the 
sa?ne  base  as  the  cylinder  and  equal  height.2 

Proposition  11 

(1)  If  a  paraboloid  of  revolution  be  cut  by  a  plane  through,  or  parallel  to,  the  axis, 
the  section  will  be  a  parabola  equal  to  the  original  parabola  which  by  its  revolution 
generates  the  paraboloid.  And  the  axis  of  the  section  will  be  the  intersection  between 
the  cutting  plane  and  the  plane  through  the  axis  of  the  paraboloid  at  right  angles 
to  the  cutting  plane. 

If  the  paraboloid  be  cut  by  a  plane  at  right  angles  to  its  axis,  the  section  will  be  a 
circle  whose  centre  is  on  the  axis . 

(2)  If  a  hyperboloid  of  revolution  be  cut  by  a  plane  through  the  axis,  parallel  to 
the  axis,  or  through  the  centre,  the  section  will  be  a  hyperbola,  (a)  if  the  section  be 
through  the  axis,  equal,  (b)  if  parallel  to  the  axis,  similar,  ( c )  if  through  the  centre, 
not  similar ,  to  the  onginal  hyperbola  which  by  its  revolution  generates  the  hyper¬ 
boloid.  And  the  axis  of  the  section  will  be  the  intersection  of  the  cutting  plane  and 
the  plane  through  the  axis  of  the  hyperboloid  at  right  angles  to  the  cutting  plane. 

Any  section  of  the  hyperboloid  by  a  plane  at  right  angles  to  the  axis  will  be  a 
circle  whose  centre  is  on  the  axis. 

(3)  If  any  of  the  spheroidal  figures  be  cut  by  a  plane  through  the  axis  or  parallel 
to  the  axis,  the  section  will  be  an  ellipse,  (a)  if  the  section  be  through  the  axis, 
equal ,  (b)  if  parallel  to  the  axis,  similar,  to  the  ellipse  which  by  its  revolution  gen - 

^his  follows  from  Eucl.  xii.  11  and  14  taken  together.  Cf.  On  the  Sphere  and  Cylinder  i, 
Lemma  1. 

2This  proposition  was  proved  by  Eudoxus,  as  stated  in  the  preface  to  On  the  Sphere  and 
Cylinder  i.  Cf.  Eucl.  xn.  10. 


ON  CONOIDS  AND  SPHEROIDS  465 

erates  the  figure .  And  the  axis  of  the  section  will  be  the  intersection  of  the  cutting 
plane  and  the  plane  through  the  axis  of  the  spheroid  at  right  angles  to  the  catting 
plane . 

If  the  section  be  by  a  plane  at  right  angles  to  the  axis  of  the  spheroid ,  it  will  be  a 
circle  whose  centre  is  on  the  axis. 

(4)  If  any  of  the  said  figures  be  cut  by  a  plane  through  the  axis ,  and  if  a  per¬ 
pendicular  be  drawn  to  the  plane  of  section  from  any  point  on  the  surface  of  the 
figure  but  not  on  the  section ,  that  perpendicular  will  fall  within  the  section . 

“And  the  proofs  of  all  these  propositions  are  evident.” 


Proposition  12 


If  a  paraboloid  of  revolution  be  cut  by  a  plane  neither  parallel  nor  pendicular  to 
the  axis ,  and  if  the  plane  through  the  axis  perpendicular  to  the  cutting  plane  inter¬ 
sect  it  in  a  straight  line  of  which  the  portion  intercepted  within  the  paraboloid  is 
RR',  the  section  of  the  paraboloid  will  be  an  ellipse  whose  major  axis  is  RRf  and 
whose  minor  axis  is  equal  to  the  perpendicular  distance  between  the  lines  through 
R,  R'  parallel  to  the  axis  of  the  paraboloid. 

Suppose  the  cutting  plane  to  be  perpendicular  to  the  plane  of  the  paper,  and 
let  the  latter  be  the  plane  through  the  axis  ANF  of  the  paraboloid  which  inter¬ 
sects  the  cutting  plane  at  right  angles  in  RR'.  Let  RH  be  parallel  to  the  axis  of 
the  paraboloid,  and  RfH  perpendicular  to  RH. 

Let  Q  be  any  point  on  the  section  made  by  the  cutting  plane,  and  from  Q 
draw  QM  perpendicular  to  RR'.  QM  will  therefore  be  perpendicular  to  the 
plane  of  the  paper. 

Through  M  draw  DMFE  perpendicular  to  the  axis  ANF  meeting  the  para¬ 
bolic  section  made  by  the  plane  of  the  paper  in  D,  E.  Then  QM  is  perpendicular 

to  DE ,  and,  if  a  plane  be  drawn  through 
DE ,  QM ,  it  will  be  perpendicular  to  the 
axis  and  will  cut  the  paraboloid  in  a  circu¬ 
lar  section. 

Since  Q  is  on  this  circle, 

QM2  =  DM  •  ME. 

Again,  if  PT  be  that  tangent  to  the  para¬ 
bolic  section  in  the  plane  of  the  paper  which 
is  parallel  to  RR',  and  if  the  tangent  at  A 
meet  PT  in  0 ,  then,  from  the  property  of 
the  parabola, 


DM  •  ME  :  RM  •  MR' = AO2 :  OP 2  [Prop.  3  (1)] 

=A02 :  OT2,  since  AN  =  AT. 


Therefore  QM 2  :  RM  •  MR'  =  AO 2  :  OT 2 


=  R'H2  :RR'2, 
by  similar  triangles. 

Hence  Q  lies  on  an  ellipse  whose  major  axis  is  RR'  and  whose  minor  axis  is 
equal  to  R'H. 


Propositions  13,  14 

If  a  hyperboloid  of  revolution  be  cut  by  a  plane  meeting  all  the  generators  of  the 
enveloping  cone,  or  if  an  ‘ oblong ’  spheroid  be  cut  by  a  plane  not  perpendicular  to 


466  ARCHIMEDES 

the  axis,1  and  if  a  plane  through  the  axis  intersect  the  cutting  plane  at  right  angles 
in  a  straight  line  on  which  the  hyperboloid  or  spheroid  intercepts  a  length  RR', 
then  the  section  by  the  cutting  plane  will  be  an  ellipse  whose  major  axis  is  RR'. 

Suppose  the  cutting  plane  to  be  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  of  the  paper,  and 
suppose  the  latter  plane  to  be  that  through  the  axis  ANF  which  intersects  the 


T 


cutting  plane  at  right  angles  in  RR'.  The  section  of  the  hyperboloid  or  spheroid 
by  the  plane  of  the  paper  is  thus  a  hyperbola  or  ellipse  having  ANF  for  its 
transverse  or  major  axis. 

Take  any  point  on  the  section  made  by  the  cutting  plane,  as  Q ,  and  draw 
QM  perpendicular  to  RR'.  QM  will  then  be  perpendicular  to  the  plane  of  the 
paper. 

Through  M  draw  DFE  at  right  angles  to  the  axis  ANF  meeting  the  hyper¬ 
bola  or  ellipse  in  D,  E;  and  through  QM ,  DE  let  a  plane  be  described.  This 
plane  will  accordingly  be  perpendicular  to  the  axis  and  will  cut  the  hyperboloid 
or  spheroid  in  a  circular  section. 

Thus  QM2=DM  •  ME. 

Let  PT  be  that  tangent  to  the  hyperbola  or  ellipse  which  is  parallel  to  RR', 
and  let  the  tangent  at  A  meet  PT  in  0. 

Then,  by  the  property  of  the  hyperbola  or  ellipse, 

DM  •  ME  :  RM  •  MR'  =  OA 2  :  OP2, 
or  QM 2 :  RM  •  MR'  =  OA2 :  OP2. 

Now  (1)  in  the  hyperbola  OA<OP ,  because  AT<AN ,  and  accordingly 

OT<OP ,  while  OA<OT, 

(2)  in  the  ellipse,  if  KK'  be  the  diameter  parallel  to  RR',  and  BB'  the 
minor  axis, 

BC  •  CB ' :  KC-CK'  =  OA 2 :  OP2; 
and  BC  •  CB'<KC  CK',  so  that  OA  <0P. 

Hence  in  both  cases  the  locus  of  Q  is  an  ellipse  whose  major  axis  is  RR'. 

Cor.  1.  If  the  spheroid  be  a  ‘flat’  spheroid,  the  section  will  be  an  ellipse,  and 
everything  will  proceed  as  before  except  that  RR'  will  in  this  case  be  the 
minor  axis. 

Archimedes  begins  Prop.  14  for  the  spheroid  with  the  remark  that,  when  the  cutting  plane 
passes  through  or  is  parallel  to  the  axis,  the  case  is  clear.  Cf.  Prop.  11  (3). 


ON  CONOIDS  AND  SPHEROIDS  467 

Cor  2.  In  all  conoids  or  spheroids  parallel  sections  will  be  similar,  since  the 
ratio  OA 2  :  OP 2  is  the  same  for  all  the  parallel  sections. 

Proposition  15 

(1)  If  from  any  point  on  the  surface  of  a  conoid  a  line  he  drawn ,  in  the  case  of  the 
paraboloid ,  parallel  to  the  axis ,  and,  in  the  case  of  the  hyperboloid ,  parallel  to  any 
line  passing  through  the  vertex  of  the  enveloping  cone ,  the  part  of  the  straight  line 
which  is  in  the  same  direction  as  the  convexity  of  the  surface  will  fall  without  it, 
and  the  part  which  is  in  the  other  direction  within  it. 

For,  if  a  plane  be  drawn,  in  the  case  of  the  paraboloid,  through  the  axis  and 
the  point,  and,  in  the  case  of  the  hyperboloid,  through  the  given  point  and 
through  the  given  straight  line  drawn  through  the  vertex  of  the  enveloping 
cone,  the  section  by  the  plane  will  be  (a)  in  the  paraboloid  a  parabola  whose 
axis  is  the  axis  of  the  paraboloid,  (6)  in  the  hyperboloid  a  hyperbola  in  which 
the  given  line  through  the  vertex  of  the  enveloping  cone  is  a  diameter.1 

[Prop.  11] 

Hence  the  property  follows  from  the  plane  properties  of  the  conics. 

(2)  If  a  plane  touch  a  conoid  without  cutting  it,  it  will  touch  it  at  one  point  only , 
and  the  plane  drawn  through  the  point  of  contact  and  the  axis  of  the  conoid  will  be 
at  right  angles  to  the  plane  which  touches  it. 

For,  if  possible,  let  the  plane  touch  at  two  points.  Draw  through  each  point 
a  parallel  to  the  axis.  The  plane  passing  through  both  parallels  will  therefore 
either  pass  through,  or  be  parallel  to,  the  axis.  Hence  the  section  of  the  conoid 
made  by  this  plane  will  be  a  conic  [Prop.  11  (1),  (2)],  the  two  points  will  lie  on 
this  conic,  and  the  line  joining  them  will  lie  within  the  conic  and  therefore 
within  the  conoid.  But  this  line  will  be  in  the  tangent  plane,  since  the  twro 
points  are  in  it.  Therefore  some  portion  of  the  tangent  plane  will  be  within  the 
conoid;  wilich  is  impossible,  since  the  plane  does  not  cut  it. 

Therefore  the  tangent  plane  touches  in  one  point  only. 

That  the  plane  through  the  point  of  contact  and  the  axis  is  perpendicular 
to  the  tangent  plane  is  evident  in  the  particular  case  wiiere  the  point  of  contact 
is  the  vertex  of  the  conoid.  For,  if  twTo  planes  through  the  axis  cut  it  in  twro 
conics,  the  tangents  at  the  vertex  in  both  conics  will  be  perpendicular  to  the 
axis  of  the  conoid.  And  all  such  tangents  will  be  in  the  tangent  plane,  winch 
must  therefore  be  perpendicular  to  the  axis  and  to  any  plane 
through  the  axis. 

If  the  point  of  contact  P  is  not  the  vertex,  draw  the  plane 
passing  through  the  axis  AN  and  the  point  P.  It  will  cut  the 
conoid  in  a  conic  wiiose  axis  is  AN  and  the  tangent  plane  in  a  line 
DPE  touching  the  conic  at  P.  Drawr  PNP '  perpendicular  to  the 
axis,  and  drawT  a  plane  through  it  also  perpendicular  to  the  axis. 
This  plane  will  make  a  circular  section  and  meet  the  tangent 
plane  in  a  tangent  to  the  circle,  wilich  will  therefore  be  at  right 
angles  to  PN.  Hence  the  tangent  to  the  circle  will  be  at  right 
angles  to  the  plane  containing  PN,  AN;  and  it  follow’s  that  this 
last  plane  is  perpendicular  to  the  tangent  plane. 

H'here  seems  to  be  some  error  in  the  text  here,  which  says  that  “the  diameter ”  (i.e.  axis) 
of  the  hyperbola  is  “the  straight  line  drawn  in  the  conoid  from  the  vertex  of  the  cone.”  But 
this  straight  line  is  not,  in  general,  the  axis  of  the  section. 


468 


ARCHIMEDES 


Proposition  16 

(1)  If  a  plane  touch  any  of  the  spheroidal  figures  without  cutting  it,  it  will  touch 
at  one  point  only ,  and  the  plane  through  the  point  of  contact  and  the  axis  will  he  at 
right  angles  to  the  tangent  plane . 

This  is  proved  by  the  same  method  as  the  last  proposition. 

(2)  If  any  conoid  or  spheroid  be  cut  by  a  plane  through  the  axis ,  and  if  through 
any  tangent  to  the  resulting  conic  a  plane  be  erected  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  of 
section ,  the  plane  so  erected  will  touch  the  conoid  or  spheroid  in  the  same  point  as 
that  in  which  the  line  touches  the  conic. 

For  it  cannot  meet  the  surface  at  any  other  point.  If  it  did,  the  perpendicular 
from  the  second  point  oil  the  cutting  plane  would  be  perpendicular  also  to  the 
tangent  to  the  conic  and  would  therefore  fall  outside  the  surface.  But  it  must 
fall  within  it.  [Prop.  11  (4)] 

(3)  If  two  parallel  planes  touch  any  of  the  spheroidal  figures,  the  line  joining  the 
points  of  contact  will  pass  through  the  centre  of  the  spheroid. 

If  the  planes  are  at  right  angles  to  the  axis,  the  proposition  is  obvious.  If  not, 
the  plane  through  the  axis  and  one  point  of  contact  is  at  right  angles  to  the 
tangent  plane  at  that  point.  It  is  therefore  at  right  angles  to  the  parallel  tan¬ 
gent  plane,  and  therefore  passes  through  the  second  point  of  contact.  Hence 
both  points  of  contact  lie  on  one  plane  through  the  axis,  and  the  proposition 

is  reduced  to  a  plane  one. 

' 

Proposition  17 

If  two  parallel  planes  touch  any  of  the  spheroidal  figures,  and  another  plane  be 
drawn  parallel  to  the  tangent  planes  and  passing  through  the  centre ,  the  line  drawn 
through  any  point  of  the  circumference  of  the  resulting  section  parallel  to  the  chord 
of  contact  of  the  tangent  planes  will  fall  outside  the  spheroid. 

This  is  proved  at  once  by  reduction  to  a  plane  proposition. 

Archimedes  adds  that  it  is  evident  that,  if  the  plane  parallel  to  the  tangent 
planes  does  not  pass  through  the  centre,  a  straight  line  drawn  in  the  manner 
described  will  fall  without  the  spheroid  in  the  direction  of  the  smaller  segment 
but  within  it  in  the  other  direction. 

Proposition  18 

Any  spheroidal  figure  which  is  cut  by  a  plane  through  the  centre  is  divided ,  both 
as  regards  its  surface  and  its  volume ,  into  two  equal  parts  by  that  plane. 

To  prove  this,  Archimedes  takes  another  equal  and  similar  spheroid,  divides 
it  similarly  by  a  plane  through  the  centre,  and  then  uses  the  method  of 
application. 

Propositions  19,  20 

Given  a  segment  cut  off  by  a  plane  from  a  paraboloid  or  hyperboloid  of  revolution , 
or  a  segment  of  a  spheroid  less  than  half  the  spheroid  also  cut  off  by  a  plane ,  it  is 
possible  to  inscribe  in  the  segment  one  solid  figure  and  to  circumscribe  about  it 
another  solid  figure ,  each  made  up  of  cylinders  or  “frusta”  of  cylinders  of  equal 
height ,  and  such  that  the  circumscribed  figure  exceeds  the  inscribed  figure  by  a 
volume  less  than  that  of  any  given  solid. 

Let  the  plane  base  of  the  segment  be  perpendicular  to  the  plane  of  the  paper, 


ON  CONOIDS  AND  SPHEROIDS  469 

and  let  the  plane  of  the  paper  be  the  plane  through  the  axis  of  the  conoid  or 
spheroid  which  cuts  the  base  of  the  segment  at  right  angles  in  BC.  The  section 
in  the  plane  of  the  paper  is  then  a  conic  BAC.  [Prop.  11] 

Let  EAF  be  that  tangent  to  the  conic  which  is  parallel  to  BC,  and  let  A  be 
the  point  of  contact.  Through  EAF  draw  a  plane  parallel  to  the  plane  through 
BC  bounding  the  segment.  The  plane  so  drawn  will  then  touch  the  conoid  or 
spheroid  at  A .  [Prop.  1G] 

(1)  If  the  base  of  the  segment  is  at  right  angles  to  the  axis  of  the  conoid  or 
spheroid,  A  will  be  the  vertex  of  the  conoid  or  spheroid,  and  its  axis  AD  will 
bisect  BC  at  right  angles. 

(2)  If  the  base  of  the  segment  is  not  at  right  angles  to  the  axis  of  the  conoid 
or  spheroid,  we  draw  AD 

(a)  in  the  paraboloid,  parallel  to  the  axis, 

(b)  in  the  hyperboloid,  through  the  centre  (or  the  vertex  of  the  enveloping 
cone), 

(c)  in  the  spheroid,  through  the  centre, 

and  in  all  the  cases  it  will  follow  that  AD  bisects  BC  in  D. 

Then  A  will  be  the  vertex  of  the  segment,  and  AD  will  be  its  axis. 

Further,  the  base  of  the  segment  will  be  a  circle  or  an  ellipse  with  BC  as 
diameter  or  as  an  axis  respectively,  and  with  centre  D.  We  can  therefore 
describe  through  this  circle  or  ellipse  a  cylinder  or  a  'frustum7  of  a  cylinder 

[Prop.  9] 

Dividing  this  cylinder  or  frustum 
continually  into  equal  parts  by  planes 
parallel  to  the  base,  wre  shall  at  length 
arrive  at  a  cylinder  or  frustum  less  in 
volume  than  any  given  solid. 

Let  this  cylinder  or  frustum  be  that 
whose  axis  is  OD ,  and  let  AD  be  divided 
into  parts  equal  to  OD,  at  L,  M, .... 
Through  L,  M, . .  .  drawr  lines  parallel  to 
BC  meeting  the  conic  in  P,  Q, , . . ,  and  through  these  lines  draw  planes  parallel 
to  the  base  of  the  segment.  These  will  cut  the  conoid  or  spheroid  in  circles  or 
similar  ellipses.  On  each  of  these  circles  or  ellipses  describe  two  cylinders  or 
frusta  of  cjdinders  each  with  axis  equal  to  OD,  one  of  them  lying  in  the  direc¬ 
tion  of  A  and  the  other  in  the  direction  of  D,  as  shovTn  in  the  figure. 

Then  the  cylinders  or  frusta  of  cylinders  drawn  in  the  direction  of  A  make 
up  a  circumscribed  figure,  and  those  in  the  direction  of  D  an  inscribed  figure, 
in  relation  to  the  segment. 

Also  the  cylinder  or  frustum  PG  in  the  circumscribed  figure  is  equal  to  the 
cylinder  or  frustum  PH  in  the  inscribed  figure,  QI  in  the  circumscribed  figure 
is  equal  to  QK  in  the  inscribed  figure,  and  so  on. 

Therefore,  by  addition, 

(circumscribed  fig.)  =  (inscr.  fig. )  +  (cylinder  or  frustum  whose  axis  is  OD). 

But  the  cylinder  or  frustum  vThose  axis  is  OD  is  less  than  the  given  solid 
figure;  wThence  the  proposition  follows. 

"Having  set  out  these  preliminary  propositions,  let  us  proceed  to  demon¬ 
strate  the  theorems  propounded  with  reference  to  the  figures.7 7 


wnose  axis  is 


470 


ARCHIMEDES 


Propositions  21,  22 

Any  segment  of  a  paraboloid  of  revolution  is  half  as  large  again  as  the  cone  or 
segment  of  a  cone  which  has  the  same  base  and  the  same  axis . 

Let  the  base  of  the  segment  be  perpendicular  to  the  plane  of  the  paper,  and 
let  the  plane  of  the  paper  be  the  plane  through  the  axis  of  the  paraboloid  which 
cuts  the  base  of  the  segment  at  right  angles  in  BC  and  makes  the  parabolic 
section  BAC. 

Let  EF  be  that  tangent  to  the  parabola  which  is  parallel  to  BC ,  and  let  A 
be  the  point  of  contact. 

Then  (1),  if  the  plane  of  the  base  of  the  segment  is  perpendicular  to  the  axis 
of  the  paraboloid,  that  axis  is  the  line  AD  bisecting  BC  at  right  angles  in  D . 

(2)  If  the  plane  of  the  base  is  not  perpendicular  to  the  axis  of  the  paraboloid, 
draw  AD  parallel  to  the  axis  of  the  paraboloid.  AD  will  then  bisect  5C,  but 
not  at  right  angles. 

Draw  through  EF  a  plane  parallel  to  the  base  of  the  segment.  This  will  touch 
the  paraboloid  at  A ,  and  A  will  be  the  vertex  of  the  segment,  AD  its  axis. 

The  base  of  the  segment  will  be  a  circle  with  diameter  BC  or  an  ellipse  with 
BC  as  major  axis. 

Accordingly  a  cylinder  or  a  frustum  of  a  cylinder  can  be  found  passing 
through  the  circle  or  ellipse  and  having  AD  for  its  axis  [Prop.  9] ;  and  likewise 
a  cone  or  a  segment  of  a  cone  can  be  drawn  passing  through  the  circle  or 
ellipse  and  having  A  for  vertex  and  AD  for  axis.  [Prop.  8] 

Suppose  X  to  be  a  cone  equal  to  f  (cone  or  segment  of  cone  ABC).  The  cone 
X  is  therefore  equal  to  half  the  cylinder  or  frustum  of  a  cylinder  EC. 

[Cf.  Prop.  10] 

We  shall  prove  that  the  volume  of  the  segment  of  the  paraboloid  is  equal 
to  X. 

If  not,  the  segment  must  be  either  greater  or  less  than  X. 

I.  If  possible,  let  the  segment  be  greater  than  X. 

We  can  then  inscribe  and  circumscribe,  as  in  the  last  proposition,  figures 
made  up  of  cylinders  or  frusta  of  cylinders  with  equal  height  and  such  that 
(circumscribed  fig.)  —  (inscribed  fig.)  <  (segment)  —X. 

Let  the  greatest  of  the  cylinders  or  frusta  forming  the  circumscribed  figure 
be  that  wrhose  base  is  the  circle  or  ellipse  about  BC  and  whose  axis  is  ODy  and 
let  the  smallest  of  them  be  that  wrhose  base  is  the  circle  or  ellipse  about  PP ' 
and  wrhose  axis  is  AL. 

Let  the  greatest  of  the  cylin¬ 
ders  forming  the  inscribed  figure 
be  that  whose  base  is  the  circle  or 
ellipse  about  RR'  and  w-hose  axis 
is  OD ,  and  let  the  smallest  be  that 
whose  base  is  the  circle  or  ellipse 
about  PP '  and  whose  axis  is  LM . 

Produce  all  the  plane  bases  of 
the  cylinders  or  frusta  to  meet  the 
surface  of  the  complete  cylinder  or  frustum  EC. 

Now,  since 

(circumscribed  fig.)  —  (inscr.  fig.)  <  (segment)  —  Xy 


F  A  e 


471 


ON  CONOIDS  AND  SPHEROIDS 

it  follows  that  (inscribed  figure)  >X.  (a) 

Next,  comparing  successively  the  cylinders  or  frusta  with  heights  equal  to 
OD  and  respectively  forming  parts  of  the  complete  cylinder  or  frustum  EC 
and  of  the  inscribed  figure,  we  have 

(first  cylinder  or  frustum  in  EC)  :  (first  in  inscr.  fig.) 

—  BD2  :RO 2 
=AD : AO 

=  BD  :  TO,  where  AB  meets  OR  in  T. 

And  (second  cylinder  or  frustum  in  EC)  :  (second  in  inscr.  fig.) 

=  HO  :  SN,  in  like  manner, 

and  so  on. 

Hence  [Prop.  1]  (cylinder  or  frustum  EC)  :  (inscribed  figure) 

=  (BD+HO+  •  •  •)  :  (TO+SN+  •  •  •), 

where  BD ,  HO,  . .  .are  all  equal,  and  BD ,  TO,  SN,  . .  .diminish  in  arithmetical 
progression. 

But  [Lemma  preceding  Prop.  1] 

BD+HO+  •  •  ->2  (TO+SN+  •  •  •). 

Therefore  (cylinder  or  frustum  EC) >2  (inscribed  fig.), 
or  X >  (inscribed  fig.) ; 

which  is  impossible,  by  (a)  above. 

II.  If  possible,  let  the  segment  be  less  than  X . 

In  this  case  we  inscribe  and  circumscribe  figures  as  before,  but  such  that 
(circumscr.  fig.)  — (inscr.  fig.)  <X— (segment), 
whence  it  follows  that 

(circumscribed  figure)  <  X.  ( 0) 

And,  comparing  the  cylinders  or  frusta  making  up  the  complete  cylinder  or 
frustum  CE  and  the  circumscribed  figure  respectively,  we  have 

(first  cylinder  or  frustum  in  CE)  :  (first  in  circumscr.  fig.) 

=  BD2:BD 2 
=  BD  :  BD. 

(second  in  CE)  :  (second  in  circumscr.  fig.) 

=  H02:R0 2 
=AD : AO 
=  H0  :  TO, 

and  so  on. 

Hence  [Prop.  1] 

(cylinder  or  frustum  CE)  :  (circumscribed  fig.) 

=  (BD+HO+  •  •  •)  :  (BD+TO+  •  •  •), 

<2:1,  [Lemma  preceding  Prop.  1] 

and  it  follows  that 

X  <  (circumscribed  fig.) ; 
which  is  impossible,  by  (/3). 

Thus  the  segment,  being  neither  greater  nor  less  than  X,  is  equal  to  it,  and 
therefore  to  f  (cone  or  segment  of  cone  ABC). 

Proposition  23 

If  from  a  paraboloid  of  revolution  two  segments  be  cut  off,  one  by  a  plane  perpen¬ 
dicular  to  the  axis,  the  other  by  a  plane  not  perpendicular  to  the  axis,  and  if  the 
axes  of  the  segments  are  equal,  the  segments  will  be  equal  in  volume. 


472  ARCHIMEDES 

Let  the  two  planes  be  supposed  perpendicular  to  the  plane  of  the  paper,  and 
let  the  latter  plane  be  the  plane  through  the  axis  of  the  paraboloid  cutting  the 
other  two  planes  at  right  angles  in  BB ',  QQ '  respectively  and  the  paraboloid 
itself  in  the  parabola  QPQ'B' . 

Let  AN,  PV  be  the  equal  axes  of  the  seg¬ 
ments,  and  Ay  P  their  respective  vertices. 

Draw  QL  parallel  to  AN  or  PV  and  Q'L 
perpendicular  to  QL. 

Now,  since  the  segments  of  the  parabolic 
section  cut  off  by  BB ' ,  QQ '  have  equal  axes, 
the  triangles  ABBfy  PQQ'  are  equal  [Prop.  3]. 
Also,  if  QD  be  perpendicular  to  PV,  QD  =  BN 
0  (as  in  the  same  Prop.  3). 

Conceive  two  cones  drawn  with  the  same 
bases  as  the  segments  and  with  A,  P  as  ver¬ 
tices  respectively.  The  height  of  the  cone  PQQ' 
is  then  PK ,  where  PK  is  perpendicular  to  QQ'. 

Now  the  cones  are  in  the  ratio  compounded 
of  the  ratios  of  their  bases  and  of  their 
heights,  i.e.  the  ratio  compounded  of  (1)  the 
ratio  of  the  circle  about  BB'  to  the  ellipse 
about  QQ' ,  and  (2)  the  ratio  of  AN  to  PK. 
That  is  to  say,  we  have,  by  means  of  Props.  5,  12, 

(cone  ABB')  :  (cone  PQQ')  =  (BB'2  :  QQ'  -  Q'L)  -(AN  :  PIC). 

And  BB'  =  2 BN  =  2 QD  =  Q'L ,  while  QQ'  =  2QV. 

Therefore 

(cone  ABB')  :  (cone  PQQ')  =  (QD  :  QV)  -(AN  :  PK) 

=  (PK  :  PV)  -(AN  :  PK) 

=  AN  :PV. 

Since  AN =PV ,  the  ratio  of  the  cones  is  a  ratio  of  equality;  and  it  follows 
that  the  segments,  being  each  half  as  large  again  as  the  respective  cones  [Prop. 
22],  are  equal. 


Proposition  24 


If  from  a  paraboloid  of  revolution  two  segments  be  cut 
off  by  planes  drawn  in  any  manner ,  the  segments  will  be 
to  one  another  as  the  squares  on  their  axes. 

For  let  the  paraboloid  be  cut  by  a  plane  through 
the  axis  in  the  parabolic  section  P'PApp',  and  let  the 
axis  of  the  parabola  and  paraboloid  be  ANN'. 

Measure  along  ANN'  the  lengths  AN,  AN'  equal  to 
the  respective  axes  of  the  given  segments,  and  through 
Ny  N'  draw  planes  perpendicular  to  the  axis,  making 
circular  sections  on  Pp,  P'p'  as  diameters  respectively. 
With  these  circles  as  bases  and  with  the  common  ver¬ 
tex  A  let  two  cones  be  described. 

Now  the  segments  of  the  paraboloid  whose  bases 
are  the  circles  about  Pp,  P'p'  are  equal  to  the  given 
segments  respectively,  since  their  respective  axes  are 


473 


ON  CONOIDS  AND  SPHEROIDS 

equal  [Prop.  23] ;  and,  since  the  segments  APpy  AP'p '  are  half  as  large  again 
as  the  cones  APpy  APfp'  respectively,  we  have  only  to  show  that  the  cones 
are  in  the  ratio  of  AN2  to  AN'2. 

But 

(cone  APp)  :  (cone  AP'p')  -  (PN2  :  P'N'2)  -(AN  :  AN’) 

=  (AN  :  AN')  -(AN  :  AN') 

=AN2 :  AN'2; 

thus  the  proposition  is  proved. 

Propositions  25,  26 

In  any  hyperboloid  of  revolution ,  if  A  be  the  vertex  and  AD  the  axis  of  any  segment 
cut  off  by  a  plane ,  and  if  CA  be  the  semidiameter  of  the  hyperboloid  through  A 
(CA  being  of  course  in  the  same  straight  line  with  AD)y  then 
(segment)  :  (cone  with  same  base  and  axis ) 

=  (AD+3CA)  :  (AD+2CA). 

Let  the  plane  cutting  off  the  segment  be  perpendicular  to  the  plane  of  the 
paper,  and  let  the  latter  plane  be  the  plane  through  the  axis  of  the  hyperboloid 
which  intersects  the  cutting  plane  at  right  angles  in  BB' ,  and  makes  the  hyper¬ 
bolic  segment  BAB'.  Let  C  be  the  centre  of  the  hyperboloid  (or  the  vertex  of 
the  enveloping  cone) . 

Let  EF  be  that  tangent  to  the  hyperbolic  section  which  is  parallel  to  BB'. 
Let  EF  touch  at  Ay  and  join  CA.  Then  CA  produced  will  bisect  BB'  at  Dy  CA 
will  be  a  semi-diameter  of  the  hyperboloid,  A  will  be  the  vertex  of  the  segment, 
and  AD  its  axis.  Produce  AC  to  A'  and  II ,  so  that  AC  =  CA' =A'H. 

Through  EF  draw  a  plane  parallel  to  the  base  of  the  segment.  This  plane 
will  touch  the  hyperboloid  at  A. 

Then  (1),  if  the  base  of  the  segment  is  at  right  angles  to  the  axis  of  the 
hyperboloid,  A  will  be  the  vertex,  and  AD  the  axis,  of  the  hyperboloid  as  well 
as  of  the  segment,  and  the  base  of  the  segment  will  be  a  circle  on  BB'  as 
diameter. 

(2)  If  the  base  of  the  segment  is  not  perpendicular  to  the  axis  of  the  hyper¬ 
boloid,  the  base  will  be  an  ellipse  on  BB'  as  major  axis.  [Prop.  13] 

Then  we  can  draw7  a  cylinder  or  a  frustum  of  a  cylinder  EBB'F  passing 
through  the  circle  or  ellipse  about  BB'  and  having  AD  for  its  axis;  also  w’e  can 
describe  a  cone  or  a  segment  of  a  cone  through  the  circle  or  ellipse  and  having 
A  for  its  vertex. 

We  have  to  prove  that 

(segment  ABB')  :  (cone  or  segment  of  cone  ABB')  =  HD  :  A'D. 

Let  V  be  a  cone  such  that 

V  :  (cone  or  segment  of  cone  ABB')  =IID  :  A'Dy  (a) 

and  we  have  to  prove  that  V  is  equal  to  the  segment. 

Now’ 

(cylinder  or  frustum  EB ')  :  (cone  or  segmt.  of  cone  ABB')  =  3  :  1. 

Therefore,  by  means  of  (a),  (cylinder  or  frustum  EB')  :  V  =  A'D  :  •  (0) 

u 

If  the  segment  is  not  equal  to  V,  it  must  either  be  greater  or  less. 

I.  If  possible,  let  the  segment  be  greater  than  V. 

Inscribe  and  circumscribe  to  the  segment  figures  made  up  of  cylinders  or 
frusta  of  cylinders,  with  axes  along  AD  and  all  equal  to  one  another,  such  that 


474  ARCHIMEDES 

(circumscribed  fig.)  —  (inscr.  fig.)  <  (segmt.)  —  V, 
whence  (inscribed  figure)  >  V.  (y) 

Produce  all  the  planes  forming  the  bases  of  the  cylinders  or  frusta  of  cylin¬ 
ders  to  meet  the  surface  of  the  complete  cylinder  or  frustum  EB'. 


Then,  if  ND  be  the  axis  of  the  greatest  cylinder  or  frustum  in  the  circum¬ 
scribed  figure,  the  complete  cylinder  will  be  divided  into  cylinders  or  frusta 
each  equal  to  this  greatest  cylinder  or  frustum. 

Let  there  be  a  number  of  straight  lines  a  equal  to  A  A'  and  as  many  in  num¬ 
ber  as  the  parts  into  which  AD  is  divided  by  the  bases  of  the  cylinders  or  frus¬ 
ta.  To  each  line  a  apply  a  rectangle  which  shall  overlap  it  by  a  square,  and  let 
the  greatest  of  the  rectangles  be  equal  to  the  rectangle  AD  • AfD  and  the  least 
equal  to  the  rectangle  AL  • A'L ;  also  let  the  sides  of  the  overlapping  squares 
b,  p,  q, .  . .  I  be  in  descending  arithmetical  progression.  Thus  b,p,q,. .  .1  will  be 
respectively  equal  to  AD,  AN,  AM,...AL,  and  the  rectangles  ( ab+b 2), 
(ap+p2),. . .  ( al+l 2)  will  be  respectively  equal  to  AD  A'D,  AN  A'N>. .  .AL  • 
A'L. 

Suppose,  further,  that  we  have  a  series  of  spaces  S  each  equal  to  the  largest 
rectangle  AD  A'D  and  as  many  in  number  as  the  diminishing  rectangles. 

Comparing  now  the  successive  cylinders  or  frusta  (1)  in  the  complete  cylin- 


ON  CONOIDS  AND  SPHEROIDS  475 

der  or  frustum  EB'  and  (2)  in  the  inscribed  figure,  beginning  from  the  base  of 
the  segment,  we  have 

(first  cylinder  or  frustum  in  EB')  :  (first  in  inscr.  figure) 

=  BD 2  :  PX2 

—  AD  A'D  :  AN  • A'N ,  from  the  hyperbola, 

=  5  :  ( ap+V 2)- 

Again 

(second  cylinder  or  frustum  in  EB ')  :  (second  in  inscr.  fig.) 

=  BD2  :  QM2 
-AD  A'D  :  AM  A'M 
=  S  :  ( aq+q2)y 

and  so  on. 

The  last  cylinder  or  frustum  in  the  complete  cylinder  or  frustum  EB'  has  no 
cylinder  or  frustum  corresponding  to  it  in  the  inscribed  figure. 

Combining  the  proportions,  we  have  [Prop.  1] 

(cylinder  or  frustum  EB')  :  (inscribed  figure) 

=  (sum  of  all  the  spaces  S )  :  (ap+p2)  +  (a2+#2)  +  •  •  • 

>(a+6):(|+|)  [Prop.  2] 


>A'D  :-g-,  sincea  =  AA',  b  —  AD, 

>(EB')  :  V,  by  (0)  above. 

Hence  (inscribed  figure)  <  V. 

But  this  is  impossible,  because,  by  (7)  above,  the  inscribed  figure  is  greater 
than  V . 

II.  Next  suppose,  if  possible,  that  the  segment  is  less  than  V. 

In  this  case  we  circumscribe  and  inscribe  figures  such  that 

(circumscribed  fig.)  —  (inscribed  fig.)  <  T  —  (segment), 
whence  we  derive 

V >  (circumscribed  figure).  ($) 

We  now  compare  successive  cylinders  or  frusta  in  the  complete  cylinder  or 
frustum  and  in  the  circumscribed  figure;  and  we  have 

(first  cylinder  or  frustum  in  EB')  :  (first  in  circumscribed  fig.) 

=  S  ’  S 

=  S  :  (ab+b2), 

(second  in  EB')  :  (second  in  circumscribed  fig.) 

=  S  :  (ap+p2), 

and  so  on. 

Hence  [Prop.  1] 

(cylinder  or  frustum  EB')  :  (circumscribed  fig.) 

=  (sum  of  all  spaces  S)  :  ( ab+b2)  +  (ap+p2)+  •  •  • 


<(EBr)  :  V,  by  (0)  above. 


[Prop.  2] 


476  ARCHIMEDES 

Hence  the  circumscribed  figure  is  greater  than  V ;  which  is  impossible,  by 
( S )  above. 

Thus  the  segment  is  neither  greater  nor  less  than  V,  and  is  therefore  equal 
to  it. 

Therefore,  by  (a), 

(segment  ABB')  :  (cone  or  segment  of  cone  ABB') 

=  (AD+SCA)  :  (AD+2CA). 

Propositions  27,  28,  29,  30 

(1)  In  any  spheroid  whose  centre  is  (7,  if  a  plane  meeting  the  axis  cut  off  a  segment 
not  greater  than  half  the  spheroid  and  having  A  for  its  vertex  and  AD  for  its  axis , 
and  if  A' D  be  the  axis  of  the  remaining  segment  of  the  spheroid ,  then 
(first  segmt.)  :  (cone  or  segmt.  of  cone  with  same  base  and  axis) 

=  CA+A'D:A'D 
[  =  SCA-AD:2CA-AD]. 

(2)  Asa  particular  case ,  if  the  plane  passes  through  the  centre ,  so  that  the  seg¬ 
ment  is  half  the  spheroid ,  half  the  spheroid  is  double  of  the  cone  or  segment  of  a 
cone  which  has  the  same  vertex  and  axis. 

Let  the  plane  cutting  off  the  segment  be  at  right  angles  to  the  plane 
of  the  paper,  and  let  the  latter  plane  be  the  plane  through  the  axis  of  the 
spheroid  which  intersects  the  cut¬ 
ting  plane  in  BB '  and  makes  the 
elliptic  section  ABA'B' . 

Let  EF,  E'F '  be  the  two  tan¬ 
gents  to  the  ellipse  which  are  par¬ 
allel  to  BB',  let  them  touch  it  in 
A,  A',  and  through  the  tangents 
draw  planes  parallel  to  the  base  of 
the  segment.  These  planes  will 
touch  the  spheroid  at  A,  A',  which 
will  be  the  vertices  of  the  two  seg¬ 
ments  into  which  it  is  divided.  Also 
A  A'  will  pass  through  the  centre  C 
and  bisect  BB'  in  D . 

Then  (1)  if  the  base  of  the  seg¬ 
ments  be  perpendicular  to  the  axis 
of  the  spheroid,  A,  A'  will  be  the 
vertices  of  the  spheroid  as  wTell  as 
of  the  segments,  A  A'  will  be  the 
axis  of  the  spheroid,  and  the  base 
of  the  segments  will  be  a  circle  on 
BB'  as  diameter; 

(2)  if  the  base  of  the  segments 
be  not  perpendicular  to  the  axis 
of  the  spheroid,  the  base  of  the 
segments  will  be  an  ellipse  of  which 
BB'  is  one  axis,  and  AD,  A'D  will 
be  the  axes  of  the  segments  respec¬ 
tively. 


ON  CONOIDS  AND  SPHEROIDS  477 

We  can  now  draw  a  cylinder  or  a  frustum  of  a  cylinder  EBB'F  through  the 
circle  or  ellipse  about  BB'  and  having  AD  for  its  axis;  and  we  can  also  draw  a 
cone  or  a  segment  of  a  cone  passing  through  the  circle  or  ellipse  about  BB'  and 
having  A  for  its  vertex. 

We  have  then  to  show  that,  if  CA'  be  produced  to  H  so  that  CA'  —  A' H , 
(segment  ABB')  :  (cone  or  segment  of  cone  ABB')  =  HD  :  A'D. 

Let  F  be  such  a  cone  that 

V  :  (cone  or  segment  of  cone  ABB') —HD  :  A'D)  (a) 

and  we  have  to  show  that  the  segment  ABB'  is  equal  to  F. 

But,  since 

(cylinder  or  frustum  EB')  :  (cone  or  segment  of  cone  ABB')  —  3  :  1, 
we  have,  by  the  aid  of  (a), 

(cylinder  or  frustum  EB')  :  F  =  A'D  (£) 

Now’,  if  the  segment  ABB'  is  not  equal  to  F,  it  must  be  either  greater  or  less. 

I.  Suppose,  if  possible,  that  the  segment  is  greater  than  F. 

Let  figures  be  inscribed  and  circumscribed  to  the  segment  consisting  of 
cylinders  or  frusta  of  cylinders,  with  axes  along  AD  and  all  equal  to  one 
another,  such  that 

(circumscribed  fig.)  —  (inscribed  fig.)  <  (segment)  —  F, 
w’hence  it  follow’s  that 

(inscribed  fig.)>F.  (7) 

Produce  all  the  planes  forming  the  bases  of  the  cylinders  or  frusta  to 
meet  the  surface  of  the  complete  cylinder  or  frustum  EB ' .  Thus,  if  ND  be  the 
axis  of  the  greatest  cylinder  or  frustum  of  a  cylinder  in  the  circumscribed 
figure,  the  complete  cylinder  or  frustum  EB'  will  be  divided  into  cylinders 
or  frusta  of  cylinders  each  equal  to  the  greatest  of  those  in  the  circumscribed 
figure. 

Take  straight  lines  da'  each  equal  to  A'D  and  as  many  in  number  as  the 
parts  into  winch  AD  is  divided  by  the  bases  of  the  cylinders  or  frusta,  and 
measure  da  along  da'  equal  to  AD.  It  follow’s  that  aa'  =  2CD. 

Apply  to  each  of  the  lines  a'd  rectangles  with  height  equal  to  ad,  and  draw’ 
the  squares  on  each  of  the  lines  ad  as  in  the  figure.  Let  S  denote  the  area  of  each 
complete  rectangle. 

From  the  first  rectangle  take  aw’ay  a  gnomon  with  breadth  equal  to  AN  (i.e. 
with  each  end  of  a  length  equal  to  AW);  take  aw’ay  from  the  second  rectangle 
a  gnomon  with  breadth  equal  to  AM,  and  so  on,  the  last  rectangle  having  no 
gnomon  taken  from  it. 

Then 

the  first  gnomon  =  A'D  AD  —  ND  -{A'D— AN) 

=  A  'D  A  N +ND  A  N 
=ANA'N . 

Similarly, 

the  second  gnomon  =  AM  • A'M , 

and  so  on. 

And  the  last  gnomon  (that  in  the  last  rectangle  but  one)  is  equal  to  AL  ■ A'L . 

Also,  after  the  gnomons  are  taken  aw’ay  from  the  successive  rectangles,  the 
remainders  (which  w’e  will  call  R\,  R 2,  •  •  •  Rn ,  where  n  is  the  number  of  rec¬ 
tangles  and  accordingly  Rn  —  S)  are  rectangles  applied  to  straight  lines  each  of 


478  ARCHIMEDES 

length  aa'  and  “exceeding  by  squares”  whose  sides  are  respectively  equal  to 
DN ,  DM,. .  .DA. 

For  brevity,  let  DN  be  denoted  by  x,  and  aa '  or  2 CD  by  c,  so  that 
Ri  =  cx+x2,  R2  =  c  -2x+(2o;)2,  •  •  • 

Then,  comparing  successively  the  cylinders  or  frusta  of  cylinders  (1)  in  the 
complete  cylinder  or  frustum  EB'  and  (2)  in  the  inscribed  figure,  we  have 
(first  cylinder  or  frustum  in  EB')  :  (first  in  inscribed  fig.) 

=  BD2:PN 2 
=AD  A'D:ANA'N 
=  S  :  (first  gnomon) ; 

(second  cylinder  or  frustum  in  EB')  :  (second  in  inscribed  fig.) 

=  S  :  (second  gnomon), 

and  so  on. 

The  last  of  the  cylinders  or  frusta  in  the  cylinder  or  frustum  EB'  has  none 
corresponding  to  it  in  the  inscribed  figure,  and  there  is  no  corresponding 
gnomon. 

Combining  the  proportions,  we  have  [by  Prop.  1] 

(cylinder  or  frustum  EB')  :  (inscribed  fig.) 

=  (sum  of  all  spaces  S)  :  (sum  of  gnomons). 

Now  the  differences  between  S  and  the  successive  gnomons  are  Ri,  R2)  . . . Rn , 
while 

Ri  =  cx+x2, 

R2  =  c  -2x+(2x)2, 


where  b  =  nx  =  AD. 
Hence  [Prop.  2] 


Rn  =  cb + b2 = S, 


(sum  of  all  spaces  S)  :  (Ri-\-R2~\~  *  *  •+  Rn)  ^(cAb)  : 
It  follows  that 

(sum  of  all  spaces  £)  :  (sum  of  gnomons)  >(c+ b)  : 


>A'D 


HD 

3  ‘ 


Thus 


(cylinder  or  frustum  EB')  :  (inscribed  fig.) 

>A’D:W 


>  (cylinder  or  frustum  EB')  :  V, 

from  (0)  above. 

Therefore  (inscribed  fig.)  <  V ; 

which  is  impossible,  by  (7)  above. 

Hence  the  segment  ABB'  is  not  greater  than  V. 

II.  If  possible,  let  the  segment  ABB'  be  less  than  V. 

We  then  inscribe  and  circumscribe  figures  such  that 

(circumscribed  fig.) —  (inscribed  fig.)  <F  — (segment), 
whence  V>  (circumscribed  fig.).  (5) 

In  this  case  we  compare  the  cylinders  or  frusta  in  (EB')  with  those  in  the 
circumscribed  figure. 


ON  CONOIDS  AND  SPHEROIDS 


479 


Thus 


(first  cylinder  or  frustum  in  EB')  :  (first  in  circumscribed  fig.) 
=  S:S ; 

(second  in  EB')  :  (second  in  circumscribed  fig.) 

=  £  :  (first  gnomon), 


and  so  on. 
Lastly 

Now 


And 
so  that 


(last  in  EB')  :  (last  in  circumscribed  fig.) 
=  S  :  (last  gnomon). 


{£+(all  the  gnomons)}  =  nS  —  {R1+R2+ 

nS  :  i?i+i?2+  *  *  *  +/2n-i  >  (c+6)  :  ^2^3) 7 


+i?n_  1). 

6> 


[Prop.  2] 


nS  :  {£+(all  the  gnomons)}  <(c+6)  : 

It  follows  that,  if  we  combine  the  above  proportions  as  in  Prop.  1,  we  obtain 
(cylinder  or  frustum  EB')  :  (circumscribed  fig.) 

«c+W:(§+f) 


< A'D  : 


HD 


<{EB')  :V,  by  (0)  above. 

Hence  the  circumscribed  figure  is  greater  than  V ;  which  is  impossible,  by  (5) 
above. 

Thus,  since  the  segment  ABB '  is  neither  greater  nor  less  than  V,  it  is  equal 
to  it;  and  the  proposition  is  proved. 

(2)  The  particular  case  [Props.  27,  28]  where  the  segment  is  half  the  spheroid 
differs  from*  the  above  in  that  the  distance  CD  or  c/2  vanishes,  and  the  rec¬ 
tangles  cb+b 2  are  simply  squares  (62),  so  that  the  gnomons  are  simply  the 
differences  between  6 2  and  x2,  b2  and  (2x)2,  and  so  on. 

Instead  therefore  of  Prop.  2  we  use  the  Lemma  to  Prop.  2,  Cor.  1,  given  above 


ratio  3  :  2,  whence  (segment  ABB')  :  (cone  or  segment  of  cone  ABB')  =  2  :  1. 


^  we  obtain  the 


[On  Spirals ,  Prop.  10],  and  instead  of  the  ratio  (c+6)  :  ^ 


Propositions  31,  32 

If  a  plane  divide  a  spheroid  into  two  unequal  segments ,  and  if  AN ,  A'N  be  the 
axes  of  the  lesser  and  greater  segments  respectively ,  while  C  is  the  centre  of  the 
spheroid ,  then 

(1 greater  segmt.)  :  {cone  or  segmt.  of  cone  with  same  base  and  axis) 

=  CA+AN  :  AN. 

Let  the  plane  dividing  the  spheroid  be  that  through  PP'  perpendicular  to 
the  plane  of  the  paper,  and  let  the  latter  plane  be  that  through  the  axis  of  the 
spheroid  which  intersects  the  cutting  plane  in  PP'  and  makes  the  elliptic 
section  PAP' A'. 

Draw  the  tangents  to  the  ellipse  which  are  parallel  to  PP';  let  them  touch 
the  ellipse  at  A,  A',  and  through  the  tangents  draw  planes  parallel  to  the  base 
of  the  segments.  These  planes  will  touch  the  spheroid  at  A ,  A' ,  the  line  AA' 


480  ARCHIMEDES 

will  pass  through  the  centre  C  and  bisect  PP'  in  N,  while  AN,  A'N  will  be  the 
axes  of  the  segments. 


Then  (1)  if  the  cutting  plane  be  perpendicular  to  the  axis  of  the  spheroid, 
A  A' will  be  that  axis,  and  A,  A'  will  be  the  vertices  of  the  spheroid  as  wTell  as  of 
the  segments.  Also  the  sections  of  the  spheroid  by  the  cutting  plane  and  all 
planes  parallel  to  it  will  be  circles. 

(2)  If  the  cutting  plane  be  not  perpendicular  to  the  axis,  the  base  of  the 
segments  will  be  an  ellipse  of  which  PP'  is  an  axis,  and  the  sections  of  the 
spheroid  by  all  planes  parallel  to  the  cutting  plane  will  be  similar  ellipses. 

Draw  a  plane  through  C  parallel  to  the  base  of  the  segments  and  meeting  the 
plane  of  the  paper  in  BB'. 

Construct  three  cones  or  segments  of  cones,  tw^o  having  A  for  their  common 
vertex  and  the  plane  sections  through  PP ' ,  BB'  for  their  respective  bases,  and 
a  third  having  the  plane  section  through  PP '  for  its  base  and  A'  for  its  vertex. 

Produce  CA  to  H  and  CA'  to  H'  so  that 

AH=A'IP  =  CA. 

We  have  then  to  prove  that 

(segment  A'PP')  i  (cone  or  segment  of  cone  A'PP') 

=  CA+AN  :  AN 
=NH  :  AN. 

Nowr  half  the  spheroid  is  double  of  the  cone  or  segment  of  a  cone  ABB' 
[Props.  27,  28].  Therefore 

(the  spheroid)  =4(cone  or  segment  of  cone  ABB'). 

But 

(cone  or  segmt.  of  cone  ABB')  :  (cone  or  segmt.  of  cone  APP') 

=  (CA  :  AN)  •  (PC2  :  PN2) 

=  (CA  :  AN)  •  (CA  •  CA'  :  AN  •  A'N).  (a) 

If  we  measure  A  A  along  A  A'  so  that 

A K •  AC =  AC •  AN 

we  have  AK  •  A'N  :  AC  ■  A'N  =  C A  AN, 

and  the  compound  ratio  in  (a)  becomes 

(AK  ■  A'N  :  CA  ■  A'N )  •  (CA  ■  CA' :  ;LV  •  A'N), 

AK  ■  CA'  :  AN  ■  A'N. 


i.e. 


ON  CONOIDS  AND  SPHEROIDS 


481 


Thus 

(cone  or  segmt.  of  cone  ABB')  :  (cone  or  segmt.  of  cone  APP') 

=AK  ■  CA'  :  AN  ■  A'N. 

But  (cone  or  segment  of  cone  APP')  :  (segment  APP') 

=A'N:NH'  [Props.  29,  30] 

=  AN  -A'N  :  AN  ■  NH'. 

Therefore,  ex  aequali, 

(cone  or  segment  of  cone  ABB')  :  (segment  APP') 

-AK  •  CA'  :  AN  ■  NH', 
so  that  (spheroid)  :  (segment  APP') 

=  HH'  •  AK  :  AN  ■  NH', 
since  HH'=+CA'. 

Hence  (segment  A'PP')  :  (segment  APP') 

=  (HH'  ■  AK-AN  •  NH')  :  AN  ■  NH' 

=  (AIC  ■  NH+NH'  ■  NK)  :  AN  •  NH'. 


Further, 


,c  • 


and 


(segment  APP')  :  (cone  or  segment  of  cone  APP') 
=NH' :  A'N 

=ANNH'  :  AN -A'N, 

r  .  ■  '  . . ' •  ■  !  ,  ■  ' 


(cone  or  segmt.  of  cone  APP')  :  (cone  or  segmt.  of  cone  A'PP') 
=  AN:  A'N 
=AN  •  A'N  :  A'N2. 

From  the  last  three  proportions  we  obtain,  ex  aequali, 

(segment  A'PP')  :  (cone  or  segment  of  cone  A'PP') 

=  (AK  ■  NH+NH'  ■  NK)  :  A'N 2 
=  (AK  ■  NH+NH'  ■  NK)  :  (CA2+NH'  ■  CN) 

=  (AK  ■  NH+NH'  ■  NK)  :  (AK  ■  AN+NH'  •  CN). 

But  1 

AK  NH  :  AK  -AN=NH  :  AN 

=CA+AN : AN 

—AK+CA  :  CA  (since  AK  :  AC=AC  :  AN) 
=HK  :  CA 

=  HK-NH  :CA-AN 
—NK  :  CN 

=  NH'  ■  NK  :NH'  •  CN. 

Hence  the  ratio  in  (/3)  is  equal  to  the  ratio 

AK  NH  :  AK  •  AN,  or  NH  :  AN. 

■-  '!  .Vir  S'*  -  1  '  v:  „•! 


]  IV  I 
ih>.. 

■?  c  i  ; 


03) 


/: . ) 


Therefore 

'  ,  ly 


(segment  A'PP')  :  (cone  or  segment  of  cone  A'PP') 
=NI1  :  AN 


ii 

1  r>  iioJ 
>  11  }  * .?  * 

•  i  oil .  */ii 


'ja  ■ . 

f 


•if  . 


~CA+AN  :AN. 


\»Ji 


ifi>  *i 


*v  t  i  * 
^  h. 


ON  SPIRALS 


“ Archimedes  to  Dositheus  greeting. 

“Of  most  of  the  theorems  which  I  sent  to  Conon,  and  of  which  you  ask  me 
from  time  to  time  to  send  you  the  proofs,  the  demonstrations  are  already  be¬ 
fore  you  in  the  books  brought  to  you  by  Heracleides;  and  some  more  are  also 
contained  in  that  which  I  now  send  you.  Do  not  be  surprised  at  my  taking  a 
considerable  time  before  publishing  these  proofs.  This  has  been  owing  to  my 
desire  to  communicate  them  first  to  persons  engaged  in  mathematical  studies 
and  anxious  to  investigate  them.  In  fact,  how  many  theorems  in  geometry 
which  have  seemed  at  first  impracticable  are  in  time  successfully  worked  out ! 
Now  Conon  died  before  he  had  sufficient  time  to  investigate  the  theorems 
referred  to;  otherwise  he  w^ould  have  discovered  and  made  manifest  all  these 
things,  and  would  have  enriched  geometry  by  many  other  discoveries  besides. 
For  I  know  vrell  that  it  wras  no  common  ability  that  he  brought  to  bear  on 
mathematics,  and  that  his  industry  was  extraordinary.  But,  though,  many 
years  have  elapsed  since  Conors  death,  I  do  not  find  that  any  one  of  the  prob¬ 
lems  has  been  stirred  by  a  single  person.  I  wish  now  to  put  them  in  review  one 
by  one,  particularly  as  it  happens  that  there  are  two  included  among  them 
which  are  impossible  of  realisation  [and  which  may  serve  as  a  warning]  how^ 
those  vrho  claim  to  discover  everything  but  produce  no  proofs  of  the  same  may 
be  confuted  as  having  actually  pretended  to  discover  the  impossible. 

“What  are  the  problems  I  mean,  and  what  are  those  of  which  you  have 
already  received  the  proofs,  and  those  of  which  the  proofs  are  contained  in  this 
book  respectively,  I  think  it  proper  to  specify.  The  first  of  the  problems  was, 
Given  a  sphere,  to  find  a  plane  area  equal  to  the  surface  of  the  sphere;  and  this 
was  first  made  manifest  on  the  publication  of  the  book  concerning  the  sphere, 
for,  when  it  is  once  proved  that  the  surface  of  any  sphere  is  four  times  the 
greatest  circle  in  the  sphere,  it  is  clear  that  it  is  possible  to  find  a  plane  area 
equal  to  the  surface  of  the  sphere.  The  second  was,  Given  a  cone  or  a  cylinder, 
to  find  a  sphere  equal  to  the  cone  or  cylinder;  the  third,  To  cut  a  given  sphere 
by  a  plane  so  that  the  segments  of  it  have  to  one  another  an  assigned  ratio;  the 
fourth,  To  cut  a  given  sphere  by  a  plane  so  that  the  segments  of  the  surface 
have  to  one  another  an  assigned  ratio;  the  fifth,  To  make  a  given  segment  of  a 
sphere  similar  to  a  given  segment  of  a  sphere;1  the  sixth,  Given  two  segments 
of  either  the  same  or  different  spheres,  to  find  a  segment  of  a  sphere  which 
shall  be  similar  to  one  of  the  segments  and  have  its  surface  equal  to  the  surface 
of  the  other  segment.  The  seventh  was,  From  a  given  sphere  to  cut  off  a  seg¬ 
ment  by  a  plane  so  that  the  segment  bears  to  the  cone  which  has  the  same  base 

1Cf.  On  the  Sphere  and  Cylinder ,  II.  5. 

482 


ON  SPIRALS  483 

as  the  segment  and  equal  height  an  assigned  ratio  greater  than  that  of  three  to 
two.  Of  all  the  propositions  just  enumerated  Heracleides  brought  you  the 
proofs.  The  proposition  stated  next  after  these  was  wrong,  viz.  that,  if  a  sphere 
be  cut  by  a  plane  into  unequal  parts,  the  greater  segment  will  have  to  the  less 
the  duplicate  ratio  of  that  which  the  greater  surface  has  to  the  less.  That  this 
is  wrong  is  obvious  by  what  I  sent  you  before;  for  it  included  this  proposition: 
If  a  sphere  be  cut  into  unequal  parts  by  a  plane  at  right  angles  to  any  diameter 
in  the  sphere,  the  greater  segment  of  the  surface  will  have  to  the  less  the  same 
ratio  as  the  greater  segment  of  the  diameter  has  to  the  less,  while  the  greater 
segment  of  the  sphere  has  to  the  less  a  ratio  less  than  the  duplicate  ratio  of  that 
which  the  greater  surface  has  to  the  less,  but  greater  than  the  sesqui-alterate1 
of  that  ratio.  The  last  of  the  problems  was  also  wrong,  viz.  that,  if  the  diameter 
of  any  sphere  be  cut  so  that  the  square  on  the  greater  segment  is  triple  of  the 
square  on  the  lesser  segment,  and  if  through  the  point  thus  arrived  at,  a  plane 
be  drawn  at  right  angles  to  the  diameter  and  cutting  the  sphere,  the  figure  in 
such  a  form  as  is  the  greater  segment  of  the  sphere  is  the  greatest  of  all  the 
segments  which  have  an  equal  surface.  That  this  is  wrong  is  also  clear  from  the 
theorems  which  I  before  sent  you.  For  it  was  there  proved  that  the  hemisphere 
is  the  greatest  of  all  the  segments  of  a  sphere  bounded  by  an  equal  surface. 

* ‘After  these  theorems  the  following  were  propounded  concerning  the  cone.2 
If  a  section  of  a  right-angled  cone  [a  parabola],  in  which  the  diameter  [axis] 
remains  fixed,  be  made  to  revolve  so  that  the  diameter  [axis]  is  the  axis  [of 
revolution],  let  the  figure  described  by  the  section  of  the  right-angled  cone  be 
called  a  conoid .  And  if  a  plane  touch  the  conoidal  figure  and  another  plane 
drawn  parallel  to  the  tangent  plane  cut  off  a  segment  of  the  conoid,  let  the  base 
of  the  segment  cut  off  be  defined  as  the  cutting  plane,  and  the  vertex  as  the 
point  in  which  the  other  plane  touches  the  conoid.  Now,  if  the  said  figure  be 
cut  by  a  plane  at  right  angles  to  the  axis,  it  is  clear  that  the  section  will  be  a 
circle;  but  it  needs  to  be  proved  that  the  segment  cut  off  will  be  half  as  large 
again  as  the  cone  which  has  the  same  base  as  the  segment  and  equal  height. 
And  if  two  segments  be  cut  off  from  the  conoid  by  planes  drawn  in  any  man¬ 
ner,  it  is  clear  that  the  sections  will  be  sections  of  acute-angled  cones  [ellipses] 
if  the  cutting  planes  be  not  at  right  angles  to  the  axis;  but  it  needs  to  be  proved 
that  the  segments  will  bear  to  one  another  the  ratio  of  the  squares  on  the  lines 
drawn  from  their  vertices  parallel  to  the  axis  to  meet  the  cutting  planes.  The 
proofs  of  these  propositions  are  not  yet  sent  to  you. 

“After  these  came  the  following  propositions  about  the  spiral,  which  are  as 
it  were  another  sort  of  problem  having  nothing  in  common  with  the  foregoing; 
and  I  have  written  out  the  proofs  of  them  for  you  in  this  book.  They  are  as 
follows.  If  a  straight  line  of  which  one  extremity  remains  fixed  be  made  to 
revolve  at  a  uniform  rate  in  a  plane  until  it  returns  to  the  position  from  which 
it  started,  and  if,  at  the  same  time  as  the  straight  line  revolves,  a  point  move 
at  a  uniform  rate  along  the  straight  line,  starting  from  the  fixed  extremity,  the 
point  will  describe  a  spiral  in  the  plane.  I  say  then  that  the  area  bounded  by 
the  spiral  and  the  straight  line  which  has  returned  to  the  position  from  which 
it  started  is  a  third  part  of  the  circle  described  with  the  fixed  point  as  centre 
and  with  radius  the  length  traversed  by  the  point  along  the  straight  line  during 

^ee  On  the  Sphere  and  Cylinder ,  II.  8. 

2This  should  be  presumably  “the  conoid not  “the  cone.” 


ARCHIMEDES 


484 

the  one  revolution.  And,  if  a  straight  line  touch  the  spiral  at  the  extreme  end 
of  the  spiral,  and  another  straight  line  be  drawn  at  right  angles  to  the  line 
which  has  revolved  and  resumed  its  position  from  the  fixed  extremity  of  it,  so 
as  to  meet  the  tangent,  I  say  that  the  straight  line  so  drawn  to  meet  it  is  equal 
to  the  circumference  of  the  circle.  Again,  if  the  revolving  line  and  the  point 
moving  along  it  make  several  revolutions  and  return  to  the  position  from 
w^hich  the  straight  line  started,  I  say  that  the  area  added  by  the  spiral  in  the 
third  revolution  will  be  double  of  that  added  in  the  second,  that  in  the  fourth 
three  times,  that  in  the  fifth  four  times,  and  generally  the  areas  added  in  the 
later  revolutions  will  be  multiples  of  that  added  in  the  second  revolution 
according  to  the  successive  numbers,  wiiile  the  area  bounded  by  the  spiral  in 
the  first  revolution  is  a  sixth  part  of  that  added  in  the  second  revolution.  Also, 
if  on  the  spiral  described  in  one  revolution  tw'o  points  be  taken  and  straight 
lines  be  drawn  joining  them  to  the  fixed  extremity  of  the  revolving  line,  and  if 
tw'o  circles  be  drawm  with  the  fixed  point  as  centre  and  radii  the  lines  drawm 
to  the  fixed  extremity  of  the  straight  line,  and  the  shorter  of  the  twTo  lines  be 
produced,  I  say  that  (1)  the  area  bounded  by  the  circumference  of  the  greater 
circle  in  the  direction  of  (the  part  of)  the  spiral  included  between  the  straight 
lines,  the  spiral  (itself)  and  the  produced  straight  line  will  bear  to  (2)  the  area 
bounded  by  the  circumference  of  the  lesser  circle,  the  same  (part  of  the)  spiral 
and  the  straight  line  joining  their  extremities  the  ratio  winch  (3)  the  radius  of 
the  lesser  circle  together  with  twro  thirds  of  the  excess  of  the  radius  of  the 
greater  circle  over  the  radius  of  the  lesser  bears  to  (4)  the  radius  of  the  lesser 
circle  together  with  one  third  of  the  said  excess. 

“The  proofs  then  of  these  theorems  and  others  relating  to  the  spiral  are 
given  in  the  present  book.  Prefixed  to  them,  after  the  manner  usual  in  other 
geometrical  w^orks,  are  the  propositions  necessary  to  the  proofs  of  them.  And 
here  too,  as  in  the  books  previously  published,  I  assume  the  following  lemma, 
that,  if  there  be  (tw’o)  unequal  lines  or  (two)  unequal  areas,  the  excess  by 
which  the  greater  exceeds  the  less  can,  by  being  [continually]  added  to  itself,  be 
made  to  exceed  any  given  magnitude  among  those  winch  are  comparable  with 
[it  and  with]  one  another.’ 7 

Proposition  1 

If  a  point  move  at  a  uniform  rate  along  any  liney  and  two  lengths  he  taken  on  ity 
they  will  be  proportional  to  the  times  of  describing  them. 

Two  unequal  lengths  are  taken  on  a  straight  line,  and  twTo  lengths  on  another 
straight  line  representing  the  times;  and  they  are  proved  to  be  proportional  by 
taking  equimultiples  of  each  length  and  the  corresponding  time  after  the  man¬ 
ner  of  Eucl.  V,  Def.  5. 

Proposition  2 

If  each  of  two  points  on  different  lines  respectively  move  along  them  each  at  a  uni¬ 
form  rate ,  and  if  lengths  be  taken ,  one  on  each  liney  forming  pairs ,  such  that  each 
pair  are  described  in  equal  times ,  the  lengths  will  be  porportionals. 

This  is  proved  at  once  by  equating  the  ratio  of  the  lengths  taken  on  one  line 
to  that  of  the  times  of  description,  vilich  must  also  be  equal  to  the  ratio  of  the 
lengths  taken  on  the  other  line. 


ON  SPIRALS 


485 


Proposition  3 


Given  any  number  of  circles ,  it  is  possible  to  find  a  straight  line  greater  than  the 
sum  of  all  their  circumferences. 

For  we  have  only  to  describe  polygons  about  each  and  then  take  a  straight 
line  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  perimeters  of  the  polygons. 

Proposition  4 

Given  two  unequal  lines,  viz.  a  straight  line  and  the  circumference  of  a  circle,  it  is 
possible  to  find  a  straight  line  less  than  the  greater  of  the  two  lines  and  greater  than 
the  less. 

For,  by  the  Lemma,  the  excess  can,  by  being  added  a  sufficient  number  of 
times  to  itself,  be  made  to  exceed  the  lesser  line. 

Thus  e.g.,  if  c>l  (where  c  is  the  circumference  of  the  circle  and  l  the  length 
of  the  straight  line),  we  can  find  a  number  n  such  that 

7l{c  —  l)^>l. 


Therefore 

and 


c  — 1> 


l 

n} 


c>  Z- 1 — >  l. 
n 


Hence  we  have  only  to  divide  l  into  n  equal  parts  and  add  one  of  them  to  l. 
The  resulting  line  will  satisfy  the  condition. 

Proposition  5 


Given  a  circle  with  centre  0,  and  the  tangent  to  it  at  a  point  A,  it  is  possible  to  draw 
from  0  a  straight  line  OPF ,  meeting  the  circle  in  P  and  the  tangent  in  F ,  such  that, 
if  c  be  the  circumference  of  any  given  circle  whatever , 

FP  :  OP  <  (arc  AP)  :  c. 

Take  a  straight  line,  as  D,  greater  than 
the  circumference  c.  [Prop.  3] 

Through  0  draw  OH  parallel  to  the 
given  tangent,  and  draw  through  A  a  line 
APH ,  meeting  the  circle  in  P  and  OH  in 
H,  such  that  the  portion  PH  intercepted 
between  the  circle  and  the  line  OH  may 
be  equal  to  D.  Join  OP  and  produce  it  to 
meet  the  tangent  in  F. 

Then  FP  :  OP  =  AP  :  PH,  by  parallels, 
=  AP  :  D 
<(arc  AP)  :c. 


Proposition  6 

Given  a  circle  with  centre  0,  a  chord  AB  less  than  the  diameter ,  and  OM  the  per¬ 
pendicular  on  AB  from  0,  it  is  possible  to  draw  a  straight  line  OFP ,  meeting  the 
chord  AB  in  F  and  the  circle  in  P,  such  that 

FP  :  PB  =  D  :E, 

where  D  :  E  is  any  given  ratio  less  than  BM  :  MO. 

Draw  OH  parallel  to  AB,  and  BT  perpendicular  to  BO  meeting  OH  in  T. 


486  ARCHIMEDES 

Then  the  triangles  BMO,  OBT  are  similar,  and  therefore 

BM  :MO  =  OB  :  BT, 

whence  D  :  E<OB  :  BT . 

Suppose  that  a  line  PH  (greater 
than  BT)  is  taken  such  that 
D  :  E  =  OB  :  PH, 

and  let  PH  be  so  placed  that  it 
passes  through  B  and  P  lies  on  the 
circumference  of  the  circle,  while 
H  is  on  the  line  OH .  (PH  will  fall 
outside  BT ,  because  PH>BT.) 

Join  OP  meeting  AB  in  F. 

We  now  have 

FP  :  PB  =  OP  :  PH 
=  OB  :  PH 
=D  :  E. 


Proposition  7 

Given  a  circle  with  centre  0,  a  chord  AB  less  than  the  diameter ,  and  OM  the  per¬ 
pendicular  on  it  from  0,  it  is  possible  to  draw  from  0  a  straight  line  OPF ,  meeting 
the  circle  in  P  and  AB  produced  in  F,  such  that 

FP:PB  =  D:E, 

where  D  :  E  is  any  given  ratio  greater  than  BM  :  MO. 

Draw  OT  parallel  to  AB ,  and  BT  perpendic¬ 
ular  to  BO  meeting  OT  in  T. 

In  this  case, 

D  :  E>BM  :  MO 

>0B  :  BT,  by  similar  triangles. 

Take  a  line  PH  (less  than  BT)  such  that 
D  :  E  =  OB  :  PH, 

and  place  PH  so  that  P,  H  are  on  the  circle  and 
on  OT  respectively,  while  HP  produced  passes 
through  B. 

Then  FP  :PB=0P  :  PH 

=D:E. 

Proposition  8 

Given  a  circle  with  centre  0,  a  chord  AB  less  than  the  diameter,  the  tangent  at  B, 
and  the  perpendicular  OM  from  0  on  AB,  it  is  possible  to  draw  from  0  a  straight 
line  OFP,  meeting  the  chord  AB  in  F,  the  circle  in  P  and  the  tangent  in  G,  such 
that 

FP  :  BG=D  :  E, 

where  D  :  E  is  any  given  ratio  less  than  BM  :  MO. 

If  OT  be  drawn  parallel  to  AB  meeting  the  tangent  at  B  in  T, 

BM  :MO  =  OB  :  BT, 
so  that  D  :  E<OB  :  BT. 

Take  a  point  C  on  TB  produced  such  that 

D  \  E  —  OB  :  BC, 

BC>BT. 


E 


whence 


ON  SPIRALS 


487 


Through  the  points  0,  T,  C  describe 
a  circle,  and  let  OB  be  produced  to 
meet  this  circle  in  K. 

Then,  since  BC>BT1  and  OB  is 
perpendicular  to  CT ,  it  is  possible  to 
draw  from  0  a  straight  line  OGQ , 
meeting  CT  in  G  and  the  circle  about 
OTC  in  Q,  such  that  GQ  =  BK. 

Let  OGQ  meet  AB  in  F  and  the 
original  circle  in  P . 

Now  CG  •  GT  =  OG  •  GQ; 

and  OF  :  OG  =  BT  :  GT, 

so  that  OF  GT  =  OG  BT. 

It  follows  that 


CG  •  GT  :  OF  •  GF  =  OG  •  GQ  :  OG  •  PF, 
or  CG:OF  =  GQ:BT 

=  BK  :  BT ,  bv  construction, 
=PC:OP 
=  BC  :  OP. 

Hence  OP : OF =BC  :  CG, 

and  therefore  PF  :  OP  =  BG  :  PC, 

or  PF :BG=OP :BC 

=0B :BC 
=  D  :E. 


Proposition  9 


Gu’erc  a  circle  with  centre  0,  a  chord  AB  less  than  the  diameter ,  the  tangent  at  B , 
and  the  'perpendicular  OM  from  0  on  ABy  it  is  possible  to  draw  from  0  a  straight 
line  OPGF,  meeting  the  circle  in  P,  the  tangent  in  G,  and  AB  produced  in  F, 
such  that 

FP  :  BG  =  D  :  F, 

where  D  :  E  is  any  given  ratio  greater  than  BM  :  MO. 

Let  OF  be  drawn  parallel  to  AB 
meeting  the  tangent  at  B  in  F. 
Then 

D  :  E>BM  :  MO 

>  OB  :  B  F,  by  similar  triangles. 
Produce  TB  to  C  so  that 

D:E  =  OB:BC, 
whence  BC<BT. 

Describe  a  circle  through  the 
points  0,  F,  C,  and  produce  OB  to 
meet  this  circle  in  K. 

Then,  since  TB>BC,  and  OB  is 
perpendicular  to  CF,  it  is  possible  to 
draw  from  0  a  line  OGQ ,  meeting 
CF  in  G,  and  the  circle  about  OTC 
in  Q,  such  that  GQ  =  BK.  Let  OQ  meet  the  original  circle  in  P  and  AB  pro¬ 
duced  in  F. 


4S8  ARCHIMEDES 

We  now  prove,  exactly  as  in  the  last  proposition,  that 

CG  : OF  =  BK : BT 
=  BC  :  OP. 

Thus,  as  before, 

OP  :  OF=BC  :  CG, 
and  OP  :  PF=BC  :  BG, 

whence  PF  :  BG = OP  :  BC 

=  OB  :  BC 
=  D  :  E. 

Proposition  10 

f  Ai,  .4  2,  A  3,  •  •  -An  be  n  lines  forming  an  ascending  arithmetical  progression  in 
which  the  common  difference  is  equal  to  Ai,  the  least  term,  then 

(n-\-l)An2-\-Ai(AiA~Ai-\-  •  •  •+A„)=3(Ai2+A.22+  •  •  •A‘An2). 

[Archimedes’  proof  of  this  proposition  is  given  above,  pp.  45G-7,  and  it  is 
there  pointed  out  that  the  result  is  equivalent  to 


l2+22+3H - +n2  = 


n(n+l)(2n+l) 

6 


■] 


Cor.  1.  It  follows  from  this  'proposition  that 

n  -An2 <3(Ai2+A22+  •  •  *-f  An2), 

and  also  that 

n  •  A  n2  >  3  ( A  i2 + A  22 +  •  •  *+An_i2). 

[For  the  proof  of  the  latter  inequality  see  p.  457  above.] 

Cor.  2.  All  the  resxdts  will  equally  hold  if  similar  figures  are  substituted  for 
squares. 

Proposition  11 

If  Ai,  A 2,  •  •  -An  be  n  lines  forming  an  ascending  arithmetical  progression  [in 
which  the  common  difference  is  equal  to  the  least  term  AJ,  then 

(n-l)An2  :  (An2+An_i2+  •  •  -+A22)<An2  :  {An^Al+^An-Aly\; 
but 

_  (n  — l)An2  :  (An_12+An_22+  *  •  *+Ai2)>An2 :  {An^A1+^(An-A1y}. 
[Archimedes  sets  out  the  terms  side  by  side  in  the 
manner  shown  in  the  figure,  where  BC  =  An)  DE=  9  ?  i  t  u 

An— i, . .  .RS=Ai,  and  produces  DE ,  FG,  . .  .RS  until 
they  are  respectively  equal  to  BC  or  An,  so  that  EH , 

GI,  . .  .SU  in  the  figure  are  respectively  equal  to  Ah 
A  2 ...  A  n— 1»  He  further  measures  lengths  BK,  DL, 

FM ,  . .  .PV  along  BC,  DE,  FG,  . .  .PQ  respectively 
each  equal  to  RS. 

The  figure  makes  the  relations  between  the  terms 
easier  to  see  with  the  eye,  but  the  use  of  so  large  a 
number  of  letters  makes  the  proof  somewhat  difficult 

to  follow,  and  it  may  be  more  clearly  represented  as  b  d  f  PR 

follows.] 

It  is  evident  that  (An  —  A\)  =An_i. 

The  following  proportion  is  therefore  obviously  true,  viz. 

(n—\)An~ :  (n— 1)(AM  ■A1+iAn^)  =  AJ  :  {An  A.+Kin-ii)2! 


E- 

G- 

G 

■  L 

M  V- 

S 

ON  SPIRALS  489 

In  order  therefore  to  prove  the  desired  result,  we  have  only  to  show  that 
(?i  —  l)An  •AiJr\(n  —  l)An-\2<(An2']-ATl-\2Jr  •  •  -+A.22) 
but  >  (A„_i2+An_22+  •  *  -+Ai2). 

I.  To  prove  the  first  inequality,  we  have 

(n—l)An  *Ai+J(n  —  l)An~i2 

=  (n-r)i12+(n-l)irAn_1+i(n-l)4n_12.  (1) 

And 

An2+An-i2+  *  •  *+/l22  =  (An_i+Ai)2+(An-2+Ai)2+  •  •  -  +  (Ai+Ai)2 

=  (in_l2  +  in_22+  *  *  -+A.12) 

+  (n  —  l)Ai2 

+2A:i(A„_i+An_2+  •  *  *+Ai) 

=  (An_i2+An-22+  *  *  *+Ai2) 

+  (n-l)A!2 

+Ai{ An_i+A„_2+An-3+  *  *  ,JrA\ 

+A1+A2+  •  •  •+An_2+An_i} 

=  (An_!2+An_22+  •  •  -+Ai2) 

+  (n-l)Ai2 

A~nA\  An- 1.  (2) 

Comparing  the  right-hand  sides  of  (1)  and  (2),  we  see  that  (n— l)Ai2  is  com¬ 
mon  to  both  sides,  and 

(tt-l)Ai  ‘An-i<nAi-An-i, 
while,  by  Prop.  10,  Cor.  1, 

i(n  l)A„_i2  <An_i2+An_22+  •  •  *+Ai2. 

It  follows  therefore  that 

(n—l)An  *Ai+-|(n  —  l)An-i2 < (An2+An-i2+  *  *  -+A.22); 
and  hence  the  first  part  of  the  proposition  is  proved. 

II.  We  have  now,  in  order  to  prove  the  second  result,  to  show  that 

(?i  —  l)An  -Ai+J  (n— l)4n-i2>  (An-i2+An_22+  •  •  *+Ai2). 

The  right-hand  side  is  equal  to 

(An-2+Ai)2+(An-3+A1)2+  . .  .  +  (A1+A1)2+A12 
=  An_22+An-32+  *  *  *+Ai2 
+  (n~l)A!2 

+2Ai(An_2+An_3+  •  •  -+Ai) 

=  (An_22+An_32+  •  •  *+Ai2) 

+  (n~l)A12 

+  Aif  i„_2+in-3+  *  *  -+Ai  1 

I +Ai  A-A2  +  •  • -+An_  2/ 

=  (4n_22+in-32+  *  *  *+Ai2) 

+  (n~l)Ai2 

Ar{n  —  2)A\’An-\.  (3) 

Comparing  this  expression  with  the  right-hand  side  of  (1)  above,  we  see  that 
(n  —  l)Ai2  is  common  to  both  sides,  and 

(n-l)Ai  •An-\>{n  —  2)Ai  An- 1} 
while,  bv  Prop.  10,  Cor.  1, 

i(w-  l)An-l2>  (4B-22  +  in-32+  *  *  ‘+AP). 

Hence  (n— l)An  -A\A-\(n  —  l)An_i2>  (An_i2+An_22+  *  •  *+Ai2); 

and  the  second  required  result  follows. 

Cor.  The  results  in  the  above  'proposition  are  equally  true  if  similar  figures  be 
substituted  for  squares  on  the  several  lines. 


490 


ARCHIMEDES 


DEFINITIONS 

1.  If  a  straight  line  drawn  in  a  plane  revolve  at  a  uniform  rate  about  one 
extremity  which  remains  fixed  and  return  to  the  position  from  which  it  started, 
and  if,  at  the  same  time  as  the  line  revolves,  a  point  move  at  a  uniform  rate 
along  the  straight  line  beginning  from  the  extremity  which  remains  fixed,  the 
point  will  describe  a  spiral  (e\i£)  in  the  plane. 

2.  Let  the  extremity  of  the  straight  line  which  remains  fixed  while  the 
straight  line  revolves  be  called  the  origin  of  the  spiral. 

3.  And  let  the  position  of  the  line  from  which  the  straight  line  began  to 
revolve  be  called  the  initial  line  in  the  revolution. 

4.  Let  the  length  which  the  point  that  moves  along  the  straight  line  de¬ 
scribes  in  one  revolution  be  called  the  first  distance ,  that  which  the  same  point 
describes  in  the  second  revolution  the  second  distance ,  and  similarly  let  the 
distances  described  in  further  revolutions  be  called  after  the  number  of  the 
particular  revolution. 

5.  Let  the  area  bounded  by  the  spiral  described  in  the  first  revolution  and 
the  first  distance  be  called  the  first  area ,  that  bounded  by  the  spiral  described 
in  the  second  revolution  and  the  second  distance  the  second  area ,  and  similarly 
for  the  rest  in  order. 

6.  If  from  the  origin  of  the  spiral  any  straight  line  be  drawn,  let  that  side  of 
it  which  is  in  the  same  direction  as  that  of  the  revolution  be  called  forward 
(TpoayovfjLeva),  and  that  which  is  in  the  other  direction  backward  (ei royeva). 

7.  Let  the  circle  drawn  with  the  origin  as  centre  and  the  first  distance  as 
radius  be  called  the  first  circle ,  that  drawn  with  the  same  centre  and  twice  the 
radius  the  second  circle ,  and  similarly  for  the  succeeding  circles. 


Proposition  12 

If  any  number  of  straight  lines  drawn  from  the  origin  to  meet  the  spiral  make  equal 
angles  with  one  another ,  the  lines  will  be  in  arithmetical  progression . 

[The  proof  is  obvious.] 


Proposition  13 

If  a  straight  line  touch  the  spiral ,  it  will  touch  it  in  one  point  only . 

Let  0  be  the  origin  of  the  spiral,  and  BC  a  tangent  to  it. 

If  possible,  let  BC  touch  the  spiral  in  two 
points  P,  Q.  Join  OP,  OQ,  and  bisect  the  angle 
POQ  by  the  straight  line  OR  meeting  the 
spiral  in  R. 

Then  [Prop.  12]  OR  is  an  arithmetic  mean 
between  OP  and  OQ,  or 

OP+OQ  =  20P. 

But  in  any  triangle  POQ,  if  the  bisector  of  the 
angle  POQ  meets  PQ  in  K , 

0P+0Q>20A. 

Therefore  OK<OR ,  and  it  follows  that  some  point  on  BC  between  P  and  Q 
lies  within  the  spiral.  Hence  BC  cuts  the  spiral;  which  is  contrary  to  the 
hypothesis. 


ON  SPIRALS 


491 


Proposition  14 


If  0  be  the  origin,  and  P,  Q  two  points  on  the  first  turn  of  the  spiral,  and  if  OP, 
OQ  produced  meet  the  “first  circle ”  AKP'Q '  in  P',  Q'  respectively,  OA  being  the 
initial  line ,  then 


OP  :  OQ  — (arc  AKP')  :  (arc  AKQ'). 

For,  while  the  revolving  line  OA  moves 
about  0,  the  point  A  on  it  moves  uniformly 
along  the  circumference  of  the  circle  A  KP'Q' , 
and  at  the  same  time  the  point  describing 
the  spiral  moves  uniformly  along  OA. 

Thus,  while  A  describes  the  arc  AKP' , 
the  moving  point  on  OA  describes  the 
length  OP,  and,  while  A  describes  the  arc 
AKQ' ,  the  moving  point  on  OA  describes  the 
distance  OQ. 

Hence 

OP  :  OQ=  (arc  AKP')  :  (arc  AKQ'). 

[Prop.  2] 


Proposition  15 

If  P,  Q  be  points  on  the  second  turn  of  the  spiral,  and  OP,  OQ  meet  the  “first  circle ” 
AKP'Q'  in  P',  Q' ,  as  in  the  last  proposition,  and  if  c  be  the  circumference  of  the 
“first  circle  ,”  then 

OP  :  0<?=c+( arc  AKP')  :  c+( arc  AKQ'). 

For,  while  the  moving  point  on  OA  describes  the  distance  OP,  the  point  A 
describes  the  whole  of  the  circumference  of  the  “first  circle”  together  with  the 
arc  AKP';  and,  while  the  moving  point  on  OA  describes  the  distance  OQ,  the 
point  A  describes  the  whole  circumference  of  the  “first  circle”  together  with  the 
arc  AKQ' . 

Cor.  Similarly,  if  P,  Q  are  on  the  nth  turn  of  the  spiral, 

OP  :  OQ  =  (n-l)c+(arc  AKP')  :  (n-l)c+(arc  AKQ'). 

Propositions  16,  17 

If  BC  be  the  tangent  at  P,  any  point  on  the  spiral,  PC  being  the  “ forward ”  part  of 
BC,  and  if  OP  be  joined,  the  angle  OPC  is  obtuse  ivhile  the  angle- OPB  is  acute. 

I.  Suppose  P  to  be  on  the  first  turn  of 
the  spiral. 

Let  OA  be  the  initial  line,  AKP'  the 
“first  circle.”  Draw  the  circle  DLP  with 
centre  0  and  radius  OP,  meeting  OA  in 
D.  This  circle  must  then,  in  the  “forward” 
direction  from  P,  fall  within  the  spiral, 
and  in  the  “backward”  direction  outside 
it,  since  the  radii  vectores  of  the  spiral  are 
on  the  “forward  side”  greater,  and  on  the 
“backward”  side  less,  than  OP.  Hence  the 
angle  OPC  cannot  be  acute,  since  it  can¬ 
not  be  less  than  the  angle  between  OP  and 


492  ARCHIMEDES 

the  tangent  to  the  circle  at  P,  which  is  a  right  angle. 

It  only  remains  therefore  to  prove  that  OPC  is  not  a  right  angle. 

If  possible,  let  it  be  a  right  angle.  BC  will  then  touch  the  circle  at  P. 

Therefore  [Prop.  5]  it  is  possible  to  draw  a  line  OQC  meeting  the  circle 
through  P  in  Q  and  BC  in  C,  such  that 

CQ  :  0Q<  (arc  PQ)  :  (arc  DLP ).  (1) 

Suppose  that  OC  meets  the  spiral  in  R  and  the  “first  circle”  in  Rf ;  and  produce 
OP  to  meet  the  “first  circle”  in  P'. 

From  (1)  it  follows,  componendo,  that 

CO  :  OQ  <  (arc  DLQ)  :  (arc  DLP ) 

<(arc  AKRf)  :  (arc  AKP') 

<OR  :  OP.  [Prop.  14] 

But  this  is  impossible,  because  OQ  =  OP, 
and  OR<OC. 

Hence  the  angle  OPC  is  not  a  right 
angle.  It  was  also  proved  not  to  be  acute. 

Therefore  the  angle  OPC  is  obtuse,  and 
the  angle  OPB  consequently  acute. 

II.  If  P  is  on  the  second,  or  the  nth 
turn,  the  proof  is  the  same,  except  that 
in  the  proportion  (1)  above  we  have  to 
substitute  for  the  arc  DLP  an  arc  equal 
to  (p+arc  DLP)  or  (n  —  1  -p+arc  DLP),  where  p  is  the  perimeter  of  the  circle 
DLP  through  P.  Similarly,  in  the  later  steps,  p  or  (n  — l)p  win  be  added  to 
each  of  the  arcs  DLQ  and  DLP ,  and  c  or  (n  —  l)c  to  each  of  the  arcs  AKR' , 
AKP',  where  c  is  the  circumference  of  the  “first  circle”  AKP'. 

Propositions  18,  19 

I.  If  OA  be  the  initial  line ,  A  the  end  of  the  first  turn  of  the  spiral ,  and  if  the 
tangent  to  the  spiral  at  A  be  drawn,  the  straight  line  OB  drawn  from  0  perpendic¬ 
ular  to  OA  will  meet  the  said  tangent  in  some  point  B ,  and  OB  v:ill  be  equal  to  the 
circumference  of  the  ufirst  circle .”  . 

II.  If  A'  be  the  end  of  the  second  turn ,  the  perpendicular  OB  will  meet  the  tan¬ 
gent  at  A'  in  some  point  B',  and  OB'  will  be  equal  to  2  ( circumference  of  “ second 
circle1'). 

III.  Generally,  if  An  be  the  end  of  the  nth  turn,  and  OB  meet  the  tangent  at 

An  in  B n,  then  OBn  =  ?wn) 

where  cn  is  the  circumference  of  the  “ nth  circle.11 

I.  Let  AKC  be  the  “first  circle.”  Then,  since  the  “backward”  angle  between 
OA  and  the  tangent  at  A  is  acute  [Prop.  16],  the  tangent  will  meet  the  “first 
circle”  in  a  second  point  C.  And  the  angles  CAO ,  BOA  are  together  less  than 
two  right  angles;  therefore  OB  will  meet  AC  produced  in  some  point  B. 

Then,  if  e  be  the  circumference  of  the  first  circle,  we  have  to  prove  that 

OB  —  c. 

If  not,  OB  must  be  either  greater  or  less  than  c. 

(1)  If  possible,  suppose  OB>c . 

Measure  along  OB  a  length  OD  less  than  OB  but  greater  than  c. 

We  have  then  a  circle  AKC ,  a  chord  AC  in  it  less  than  the  diameter,  and  a 
ratio  AO  :  OD  which  is  greater  than  the  ratio  AO  :  OB  or  (what  is,  by  similar 


c 


ON  SPIRALS 


493 


triangles,  equal  to  it)  the  ratio  of  \AC  to  the  perpendicular  from  0  on  AC. 
Therefore  [Prop.  7]  we  can  draw  a  straight  line  OFF ,  meeting  the  circle  in  P 
and  CA  produced  in  F,  such  that 


FP  :PA=AO  :0D. 

Thus,  alternately,  since  AO  =  PO , 

FP  :  PO  =  PA  :  OD 

<(arc  PA)  :  c , 

since  (arc  PA) > PA,  and  OD>c. 

Componendo, 

FO  :  PO  <  (c+arc  PA)  :  c 
<0Q  :  OA, 

where  OF  meets  the  spiral  in  Q.  [Prop.  15] 

Therefore,  since  OA=OP,  FO<OQ ;  which  is  impossible. 

Hence  01?  >c. 

(2)  If  possible,  suppose  0B<c. 

Measure  OE  along  OB  so  that  OE  is  greater  than  OB  but  less  than  c. 

In  this  case,  since  the  ratio  ^40  :  OE  is  less  than  the  ratio  AO  :  OB  (or  the 
ratio  of  \AC  to  the  perpendicular  from  0  on  AC),  we  can  [Prop.  8]  draw  a  line 
OF'P'G,  meeting  AC  in  F ',  the  circle  in  P' ,  and  the  tangent  at  A  to  the  circle 
in  G}  such  that 

F'P'  :  AG  =  A0  :  OE. 

Let  OP'G  cut  the  spiral  in  Q' . 

Then  we  have,  alternately, 

F'P' :  P'O  —  AG  :  OE 

>  (arc  AP')  :  c, 

because  AG>(arc  AP'),  and  0E<c. 

Therefore 

F'O  :P'0<  (arc  AKP’)  :c 

<0Q'  :  OA .  [Prop.  14] 

But  this  is  impossible,  since  OA  =0P',  and  OQ'  <0F'. 

Hence  OB  <c. 

Since  therefore  OB  is  neither  greater  nor  less  than  c, 

OB  =  c. 

II.  Let  A'K'C'  be  the  “second  circle,”  A'C'  being  the  tangent  to  the  spiral 


494  ARCHIMEDES 

at  A'  (which  will  cut  the  second  circle,  since  the  “backward”  angle  OA'C'  is 
acute).  Thus,  as  before,  the  perpendicular  OB'  to  OA'  will  meet  A'C'  produced 
in  some  point  B'. 

If  then  c'  is  the  circumference  of  the  “second  circle,”  we  have  to  prove  that 

0B'  =  2c'. 


For,  if  not,  OB'  must  be  either  greater  or  less  than  2 c'. 

(1)  If  possible,  suppose  0B'>2c'. 

Measure  OD'  along  OB'  so  that  OD'  is  less  than  OB'  but  greater  than  2c', 
Then,  as  in  the  case  of  the  “first  circle”  above,  we  can  draw  a  straight  line 
OPF  meeting  the  “second  circle”  in  P  and  C'A'  produced  in  F,  such  that 

FP  :  PA'  =A'0  :0D'. 


Let  OF  meet  the  spiral  in  Q. 

We  now  have,  since  A'0  =  P0 , 

FP  :PO  =  PA'  :0D' 

<(arc  A'P)  :2c', 

because  (arc  A'P)>A'P  and  OD'>2c\ 

Therefore  FO  :  PO  <  (2c'+arc  A'P)  :  2c' 

<OQ  :OA'.  [Prop.  15,  Cor.] 

Hence  FO<OQ ;  which  is  impossible. 

Thus  OB' >  2c'. 

Similarly,  as  in  the  case  of  the  “first  circle,”  we  can  prove  that 

OB'<2c'. 


Therefore  OB'  =  2c'. 

III.  Proceeding,  in  like  manner,  to  the  “third”  and  succeeding  circles,  we 
shall  prove  that 


OBn  =  ncn. 


Proposition  20 

I.  If  P  be  any  point  on  the  first  turn  of  the  spiral  and  OT  he  drawn  perpendic¬ 
ular  to  OP ,  OT  will  meet  the  tangent  at  P  to  the  spiral  in  some  point  T;  and ,  if  the 
circle  drawn  with  centre  0  and  radius  OP  meet  the  initial  line  in  K ,  then  OT  is 
equal  to  the  arc  of  this  circle  between  K  and  P  measured  in  the  “ forward ”  direction 
of  the  spiral. 


ON  SPIRALS 


495 


II.  Generally ,  if  P  be  a  point  on  the  nth  turn ,  and  the  notation  be  as  before , 
wAffe  p  represents  the  circumference  of  the  circle  with  radius  OP, 

OT  =  (n  —  l)p+arc  KP  {measured  “forward” ). 

I.  Let  P  be  a  point  on  the  first  turn  of  the  spiral,  OA  the  initial  line,  PR  the 
tangent  at  P  taken  in  the  “backward”  direction. 

Then  [Prop.  16]  the  angle  OPR 
is  acute.  Therefore  PR  meets  the 
circle  through  P  in  some  point 
P;  and  also  OT  will  meet  PR 
produced  in  some  point  P. 

If  now  OP  is  not  equal  to  the 
arc  KRP ,  it  must  be  either  great¬ 
er  or  less. 

(1)  If  possible,  let  OP  be  greater 
than  the  arc  KRP. 

Measure  0  U along  OT  less  than 
OP  but  greater  than  the  arc 
KRP. 

Then,  since  the  ratio  PO  :  OU 
is  greater  than  the  ratio  PO  :  OP, 
or  (what  is,  by  similar  triangles, 
equal  to  it)  the  ratio  of  JPP  to  the  perpendicular  from  0  on  PR,  we  can  draw 
a  line  OQF ,  meeting  the  circle  in  Q  and  RP  produced  in  F ,  such  that 

FQ  :  PQ  =  PO  :  OU.  [Prop.  7] 

Let  OF  meet  the  spiral  in  Q'. 

We  have  then 

FQ  :  QO  =  PQ  :  OU 

<(arc  PQ )  :  (arc  KRP),  by  hypothesis. 

Componendo , 

FO:QO<  (arc  KRQ)  :  (arc  KRP) 

<OQ'  :  OP.  [Prop.  14] 

But  QO  =  OP. 

Therefore  FO<OQ'\  which  is  impossible. 

Hence  OP> (arc  XPP). 

(2)  The  proof  that  OP< (arc  KRP)  follows  the  method  of  Prop.  18,  I.  (2), 
exactly  as  the  above  follows  that  of  Prop.  18,  I.  (1). 

Since  then  OP  is  neither  greater  nor  less  than  the  arc  KRP,  it  is  equal  to  it. 

II.  If  P  be  on  the  second  turn,  the  same  method  shows  that 

OP  =  p+ (arc  KRP ); 

and,  similarly,  we  have,  for  a  point  P  on  the  nth  turn, 

OP=  (n  — l)p+(arc  KRP). 


Propositions  21,  22,  23 

Given  an  area  bounded  by  any  arc  of  a  spiral  and  the  lines  joining  the  extremities 
of  the  arc  to  the  origin,  it  is  possible  to  circumscribe  about  the  area  one  figure,  and 
to  inscribe  in  it  another  figure,  each  consisting  of  similar  sectors  of  circles,  and 
such  that  the  circumscribed  figure  exceeds  the  inscribed  by  less  than  any  assigned 
area . 

For  let  BC  be  any  arc  of  the  spiral,  0  the  origin.  Draw  the  circle  with  centre 


496  ARCHIMEDES 

0  and  radius  OC,  where  C  is  the  “forward”  end  of  the  arc. 

Then,  by  bisecting  the  angle  BOC ,  bisecting  the  resulting  angles,  and  so  on 
continually,  we  shall  ultimately  arrive  at 
an  angle  COr  cutting  off  a  sector  of  the 
circle  less  than  any  assigned  area.  Let  COr 
be  this  sector. 

Let  the  other  lines  dividing  the  angle 
BOC  into  equal  parts  meet  the  spiral  in 
P,  Q,  and  let  Or  meet  it  in  R.  With  0  as 
centre  and  radii  OP,  OP,  OQ,  OR  respec¬ 
tively  describe  arcs  of  circles  Pp',  bBq ', 
pQr qRc' ,  each  meeting  the  adjacent 
radii  as  shown  in  the  figure.  In  each  case 
the  arc  in  the  “forward”  direction  from 
each  point  will  fall  within,  and  the  arc 
in  the  “backward”  direction  outside,  the 
spiral. 

We  have  now  a  circumscribed  figure  and  an  inscribed  figure  each  consisting 
of  similar  sectors  of  circles.  To  compare  their  areas,  we  take  the  successive 
sectors  of  each,  beginning  from  00,  and  compare  them. 

The  sector  OCr  in  the  circumscribed  figure  stands  alone. 

And  (sector  ORq)  —  (sector  0Rc')r 

(sector  0Qp)  =  (sector  OQr'), 

(sector  0Pb)  =  (sector  OPq' ), 

while  the  sector  OPp'  in  the  inscribed  figure  stands  alone. 

Hence,  if  the  equal  sectors  be  taken  away,  the  difference  between  the  cir¬ 
cumscribed  and  inscribed  figures  is  equal  to  the  difference  between  the  sectors 
OCr  and  OBp')  and  this  difference  is  less  than  the  sector  OCr,  wdiich  is  itself 
less  than  any  assigned  area. 

The  proof  is  exactly  the  same  whatever  be  the  number  of  angles  into  vdiich 
the  angle  BOC  is  divided,  the  only  difference  being 
that,  wdien  the  arc  begins  from  the  origin,  the  o 
smallest  sectors  OPb,  OPq'  in  each  figure  are  equal, 
and  there  is  therefore  no  inscribed  sector  standing 
by  itself,  so  that  the  difference  between  the  cir¬ 
cumscribed  and  inscribed  figures  is  equal  to  the 
sector  OCr  itself. 

Thus  the  proposition  is  universally  true. 

Cor.  Since  the  area  bounded  by  the  spiral  is 
intermediate  in  magnitude  between  the  circum¬ 
scribed  and  inscribed  figures,  it  follows  that 

(1)  a  figure  can  be  circumscribed  to  the  area  such  that  it  exceeds  the  area  by  less 
than  any  assigned  spacey 

(2)  a  figure  can  be  inscribed  such  that  the  area  exceeds  it  by  less  than  any 
assigned  space . 


Proposition  24 

The  area  bounded  by  the  first  turn  of  the  spiral  and  the  initial  line  is  equal  to 
one-third  of  the  ufirst  circle ”  [  =  ^7r(27ra)2,  wdiere  the  spiral  is  r  =  ad]. 


ON  SPIRALS  497 

[The  same  proof  shows  equally  that,  if  OP  be  any  radius  vector  in  the  first 
turn  of  the  spiral  the  area  of  the  portion  of  the  spiral  bounded  thereby  is  equal  to 
one-third  of  that  sector  of  the  circle  drawn  with  radius  OP  which  is  bounded  by  the 
initial  line  and  OP,  measured  in  the  “ forward ”  direction  from  the  initial  line.] 
Let  0  be  the  origin,  OA  the  initial  line,  A  the  extremity  of  the  first  turn. 
Draw  the  “first  circle,”  i.e.  the  circle  with  0  as  centre  and  OA  as  radius. 
Then,  if  Ci  be  the  area  of  the  first  circle,  Ri  that  of  the  first  turn  of  the  spiral 
bounded  by  OA,  we  have  to  prove  that 

Ri  =  %Ci. 

For,  if  not,  Ah  must  be  either  greater  or  less  than  C\. 

I.  If  possible,  suppose  R\<%Ci. 

We  can  then  circumscribe  a  figure  about  Ri  made  up  of  similar  sectors  of 
circles  such  that,  if  F  be  the  area  of  this  figure, 

F — R\  <  JCi  —  Ri, 

whence  F  <\C\. 

Let  OP,  OQ,  •  •  •  be  the  radii  of 
the  circular  sectors,  beginning  from 
the  smallest.  The  radius  of  the  largest 
is  of  course  OA . 

The  radii  then  form  an  ascending 
arithmetical  progression  in  which  the 
common  difference  is  equal  to  the 
least  term  OP.  If  n  be  the  number  of 
A  the  sectors,  we  have  [by  Prop.  10, 
Cor.  1] 

n-  OA2<3(OP2+OQ2+  ••• +OA 2); 
and,  since  the  similar  sectors  are  pro¬ 
portional  to  the  squares  on  their 
radii,  it  follows  that 

Ci<3F, 

or  F>iCi. 

But  this  is  impossible,  since  F  was  less  than  %Ci. 

Therefore  Ri<%Ci. 

II.  If  possible,  suppose  Ri>lCi. 

We  can  then  inscribe  a  figure  made  up  of  similar  sectors  of  circles  such  that, 
if  /  be  its  area, 

Ri—f  <Ri—iCi, 

whence  f>\C\. 

If  there  are  (n— T)  sectors,  their  radii,  as  OP,  OQ,  •  •  *,  form  an  ascending 
arithmetical  progression  in  which  the  least  term  is  equal  to  the  common  differ¬ 
ence,  and  the  greatest  term,  as  OY ,  is  equal  to  (n—l)OP. 

Thus  [Prop.  10,  Cor.  1] 

n  OA2>3(OP2+OQ2+ - VOY2),  \ 

whence  Ci>3/, 

or  f<iC  i; 

which  is  impossible,  since  f>iOi. 

Therefore  R\>\C\.  I'dil  •  i  i 

Since  then  R\  is  neither  greater  nor  less  than  \C\, 

Ri^lCi. 


498 


ARCHIMEDES 


Propositions  25,  26,  27 

[Prop.  25.]  If  A2  be  the  end  of  the  second  turn  of  the  spiral ,  the  area  hounded  by  the 
second  turn  and  OA  2  is  to  the  area  of  the  u second  circle”  in  the  ratio  of  7  to  12,  being 
the  ratio  of  {r2ri+|(r2  — ri)2}  to  r22,  where  ri,  r2  are  the  radii  of  the  “first”  and 
“second”  circles  respectively . 

[Prop.  26.]  If  BC  be  any  arc  measured  in  the  “forward”  direction  on  any  turn  of 
a  spiral ,  not  being  greater  than  the  complete  turny  and  if  a  circle  be  drawn  with  0 
as  centre  and  OC  as  radius  meeting  OB  in  B' ,  then 

(area  of  spiral  between  OBy  OC)  :  (sector  OB'C) 

=  {OC  OB+±(OC-OBy}  :  OC2. 

[Prop.  27.]  If  Ri  be  the  area  of  the  first  turn  of  the  spiral  bounded  by  the  initial 
line ,  R2  the  area  of  the  ring  added  by  the  second  complete  turn ,  Rz  that  of  the  ring 
added  by  the  third  turny  and  so  ony  then 

i?3  =  2i22,  i?4  =  3J?2,  jB5  =  47?2,  •  •  *,  Rn  =  (n  —  1  )R2. 

Also  i?2  =  6/2i. 

[Archimedes’  proof  of  Prop.  25  is,  mutatis  mutandis ,  the  same  as  his  proof  of 
the  more  general  Prop.  26.  The  latter  will  accordingly  be  given  here,  and 
applied  to  Prop.  25  as  a  particular  case.] 

Let  BC  be  an  arc  measured  in  the  “forward”  direction  on  any  turn  of  the 
spiral,  CKB '  the  circle  drawn  with  0  as  centre  and  OC  as  radius. 


Take  a  circle  such  that  the  square  of  its  radius  is  equal  to 

OCOB+\(OC-OBY , 

and  let  <r  be  a  sector  in  it  whose  central  angle  is  equal  to  the  angle  BOC. 
Thus  <j  :  (sector  OB'C)  =  {OC  •  OB+\(OC-OBY }  :  OC\ 

and  we  have  therefore  to  prove  that 

(area  of  spiral  OBC)  =  <r. 

For,  if  not,  the  area  of  the  spiral  OBC  (which  we  will  call  S)  must  be  either 
greater  or  less  than  a. 

I.  Suppose,  if  possible,  S<a. 

Circumscribe  to  the  area  S  a  figure  made  up  of  similar  sectors  of  circles,  such 
that,  if  F  be  the  area  of  the  figure, 

F-S<*-S , 

F  <<r. 


whence 


ON  SPIRALS  499 

Let  the  radii  of  the  successive  sectors,  starting  from  OB ,  be  OP,  OQ,  •  •  OC. 
Produce  OP,  OQ ,  •  •  •  to  meet  the  circle  CKB',  •  •  • 

If  then  the  lines  OP,  OP,  OQ, .  .  .00  be  n  in  number,  the  number  of  sectors 
in  the  circumscribed  figure  will  be  (n  —  1),  and  the  sector  OB'C  will  also  be 
divided  into  (n  —  1)  equal  sectors.  Also  OP,  OP,  OQ,  •  •  00  will  form  an  ascend¬ 
ing  arithmetical  progression  of  n  terms. 

Therefore  [see  Prop.  11  and  Cor.] 

(n-l)OO2 :  (OP2+OQ2+  •  •  -+002)<002  :  {00  •  OP+^OO-OP)2} 

<  (sector  OB'C )  :  o-,  by  hypothesis. 
Hence,  since  similar  sectors  are  as  the  squares  of  their  radii, 

(sector  OB'C)  :  F  <  (sector  OB'C)  :  a, 
so  that  F><r. 

But  this  is  impossible,  because  F <g. 

Therefore  P<o\ 

II.  Suppose,  if  possible,  S>cr. 

Inscribe  in  the  area  S  a  figure  made  up  of  similar  sectors  of  circles  such  that, 
if  /  be  its  area, 

S-f<S-a , 

whence  f><r. 

Suppose  OP,  OP, . .  .OF  to  be  the  radii  of  the  successive  sectors  making  up 
the  figure/,  being  (n  — 1)  in  number. 

We  shall  have  in  this  case  [see  Prop.  11  and  Cor.] 

(n-l)OC2  :  (OP2+OP2+  •  •  *+0F2)>002  :  {00  •  OP+KOC-OP)2}, 
whence  (sector  OB'C)  :/>( sector  OB'C)  :  <r> 

so  that  /< o’. 

But  this  is  impossible,  because  f>cr. 

Therefore  S><r. 

Since  then  S  is  neither  greater  nor  less  than  o-,  it  follows  that 

P  =  <r. 

In  the  particular  case  where  P  coincides  with  Ai,  the  end  of  the  first  turn  of 
the  spiral,  and  0  with  A2,  the  end  of  the  second  turn,  the  sector  OB'C  becomes 
the  complete  “second  circle,”  that,  namely,  with  0A2  (or  r2)  as  radius. 

Thus  (area  of  spiral  bounded  by  0A2)  :  (“second  circle”) 

=  {r2ri+K^2-ri)2}  :r22 
=  (2+|)  :  4  (since  r2  =  2ri) 

=  7  :  12. 

Again,  the  area  of  the  spiral  bounded  by  0A2  is  equal  to  Pi+P2  (i.e.  the  area 
bounded  by  the  first  turn  and  OAi,  together  with  the  ring  added  by  the  second 
turn).  Also  the  “second  circle”  is  four  times  the  “first  circle,”  and  therefore 
equal  to  12  Pi. 

Hence  (Pi-j-P2)  i  12Pi  =  7  :  12, 

or  Pi+P2  =  7Pi. 

Thus  P2  =  6Pi.  (1) 

Next,  for  the  third  turn,  we  have 

(P1+P2+P3)  :  (“third  circle”)  =  {r3  r2+§(^-r2)2}  :  r32 

=  (3  •  2+-§)  :  32 
=  19  :  27, 

(“third  circle”)  =9( “first  circle”) 

=  27  Pi; 


and 


500  ARCHIMEDES 

therefore  i?i+i?2+i?3  =  19Riy 

and,  by  (1)  above,  it  follows  that 

=  2#2,  (2) 

and  so  on. 

Generally,  we  have 

CRi+i?2d - \-Rn)  :  (nth  circle)  =  [rn  rn_i+K^n-rn_i)2}  :  rn2, 

(Ri+R2-\ - \~Rn~i)  :  (n—  1th  circle)  =  {rn-i  rn_2+|(rn_i-rn_2)2}  :  rn_i2, 

and  (nth  circle)  :  (n—  1th  circle)  —rn2  :  rn_i2. 

Therefore 

(#i+/22-f-  *  *  --\-Rn)  ■  (-B1+/Z2+  •  •  *+I?n- 1) 

=  {w(n-l)+£}  :  {(n  — l)(n  — 2)+|} 

=  {3n(n-l)  +  l}  :  {3(n-l)(n-2)  +  l}. 

Dirimendo , 

*  (/2i+/?2+  *  *  *H-i?n-i)  =  6(n  —  1)  :  {3(n—  l)(n  —  2)  +  l}.  (a) 

Similarly 

Rn- 1  '  (i?i+/?2+  •  *  -+I?n-2)  =6(n— 2)  :  {3(n  — 2)(n— 3)  +  l }, 
from  which  we  derive 

Rn- 1  •  (-Ri  +  ^2+  *  *  -~\-Rn- 1) 

=  6(n  — 2)  :  {6(n-2)+3(n-2)(n-3)  +  l} 

=  6(n  — 2)  :  {3(n-l)(n-2)  +  l}.  (0). 

Combining  (a)  and  (0),  we  obtain 

#n  :  /?n_i  =  (n  — 1)  :  (n-2). 

Thus 

#2,  #3,  •  *  %Rn  are  in  the  ratio  of  the  successive  numbers  1,  2,  3  •  •  *(n—  1). 


Proposition  28 

If  0  be  the  origin  and  BC  any  arc  measured  in  the  “forward”  direction  on  any  turn 
of  the  spiral ,  let  two  circles  be  drawn  (1)  with  centre  0 ,  and  radius  OB ,  meeting 
OC  in  C and  (2)  with  centre  0  and  radius  OCy  meeting  OB  produced  in  B'. 
Then ,  if  E  denote  the  area  bounded  by  the  larger  circular  arc  B,C)  the  line  B'By 
and  the  spiral  BCy  while  F  denotes  the  area  bounded  by  the  smaller  arc  BC' ,  the 
line  CC'  and  the  spiral  BCy 

E  :  F={OB+t(OC-OB)}  :  {OB+\(OC-OB)}. 

Let  a  denote  the  area  of  the  lesser  sector  OBC'; 
then  the  larger  sector  OB'C  is  equal  to  a+F+E. 

Thus  [Prop.  26] 

(<r+F)  :  (<r+F+2?)  = 

{OC  •  OB+\(OC-OBY }  :  OC2,  (1) 

whence 

E  :  (<r+F)  =  [OC{OC-OB)-\{OC-OBY\ 

:  { OC-OB+\(OC-OBY } 

=  \OB(OC-OB)+UOC~OB)2} 

:  \OC-OB+\{OC-OBY).  (2) 

Again 

(a+F+E)  :a  =  OC2:OB 2. 

Therefore,  by  the  first  proportion  above,  ex  aequaliy 

(a+F)  :  (7=  {OC  •  OB+UOC-OB)2}  :  OB2y 


ON  SPIRALS  501 

whence 

(<7+F)  :  F=  { OC  •  OB+WC-OBY } 

:  { OB(OC-OB)+UOC-OB)2\ . 

Combining  this  with  (2)  above,  we  obtain 

E  :F={OB(OC-OB)+UOC-OB)2}  :  \OB{OC-OB)+\{OC-OBy } 

=  [OB+WC-OB)]  :  {OB+UOC-OB)}. 


ON  THE  EQUILIBRIUM  OF  PLANES  OR 
THE  CENTRES  OF  GRAVITY  OF  PLANES 

BOOK  ONE 


“ I  postulate  the  following”: 

1.  “Equal  weights  at  equal  distances  are  in  equilibrium,  and  equal  weights 
at  unequal  distances  are  not  in  equilibrium  but  incline  towards  the  weight 
which  is  at  the  greater  distance.” 

2.  “If,  when  weights  at  certain  distances  are  in  equilibrium,  something  be 
added  to  one  of  the  weights,  they  are  not  in  equilibrium  but  incline  towards 
that  weight  to  which  the  addition  was  made.” 

3.  “Similarly,  if  anything  be  taken  away  from  one  of  the  weights,  they  are  not 
in  equilibrium  but  incline  towards  the  weight  from  which  nothing  was  taken.” 

4.  “When  equal  and  similar  plane  figures  coincide  if  applied  to  one  another, 
their  centres  of  gravity  similarly  coincide.” 

5.  “In  figures  which  are  unequal  but  similar,  the  centres  of  gravity  will  be 
similarly  situated.  By  points  similarly  situated  in  relation  to  similar  figures  I 
mean  points  such  that,  if  straight  lines  be  drawn  from  them  to  the  equal  angles, 
they  make  equal  angles  with  the  corresponding  sides.” 

6.  “If  magnitudes  at  certain  distances  be  in  equilibrium,  (other)  magnitudes 
equal  to  them  will  also  be  in  equilibrium  at  the  same  distances.” 

7.  “In  any  figure  whose  perimeter  is  concave  in  (one  and)  the  same  direction 
the  centre  of  gravity  must  be  within  the  figure.” 

Proposition  1 

Weights  which  balance  at  equal  distances  are  equal. 

For,  if  they  are  unequal,  take  away  from  the  greater  the  difference  between 
the  two.  The  remainders  will  then  not  balance  [Post.  3] ;  wThich  is  absurd. 

Therefore  the  weights  cannot  be  unequal. 

Proposition  2 

Unequal  weights  at  equal  distances  will  not  balance  but  will  incline  towards  the 
greater  weight. 

For  take  away  from  the  greater  the  difference  between  the  two.  The  equal 
remainders  will  therefore  balance  [Post.  1].  Hence,  if  we  add  the  difference 
again,  the  weights  will  not  balance  but  incline  towards  the  greater  [Post.  2]. 

Proposition  3 

Unequal  weights  will  balance  at  unequal  distances ,  the  greater  weight  being  at  the 
lesser  distance . 

Let  A,  B  be  two  unequal  weights  (of  which  A  is  the  greater)  balancing  about 
C  at  distances  AC,  BC  respectively. 


502 


503 


ON  THE  EQUILIBRIUM  OF  PLANES  I 


Then  shalMC  be  less  than  BC. 
For,  if  not,  take  away  from  A  the 
weight  (A—B).  The  remainders 
will  then  incline  towards  B  [Post. 
3],  But  this  is  impossible,  for  (1) 
if  AC  —  CB,  the  equal  remainders 
will  balance,  or  (2)  if  AC>CB , 
they  will  incline  towards  A  at  the 
greater  distance  [Post.  1]. 


Hence  AC<CB. 

Conversely ,  if  the  weights  balance,  and  AC<CB ,  then  A>B. 


Proposition  4 

If  two  equal  weights  have  not  the  same  centre  of  gravity ,  the  centre  of  gravity  of  both 
taken  together  is  at  the  middle  point  of  the  line  joining  their  centres  of  gravity. 
[Proved  from  Prop.  3  by  reductio  ad  absurdum.] 

Proposition  5 

If  three  equal  magnitudes  have  their  centres  of  gravity  on  a  straight  line  at  equal 
distances ,  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  system  will  comcide  with  that  of  the  middle 
magnitude. 

[This  follows  immediately  from  Prop.  4.] 

Cor.  1.  The  same  is  true  of  any  odd  number  of  magnitudes  if  those  which  are  at 
equal  distances  from  the  middle  one  are  equal ,  while  the  distances  between  their 
centres  of  gravity  are  equal. 

Cor.  2.  If  there  be  an  even  number  of  magnitudes  with  their  centres  of  gravity 
situated  at  equal  distances  on  one  straight  line ,  and  if  the  two  middle  ones  be  equal , 
while  those  which  are  equidistant  from  them  ( on  each  side)  are  equal  respectively , 
the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  system  is  the  middle  point  of  the  line  joining  the  centres 
of  gravity  of  the  two  middle  ones. 


Propositions  6,  7 

Two  magnitudes ,  whether  commensurable  [Prop.  6]  or  incommensurable  [Prop.  7], 
balance  at  distances  reciprocally  proportional  to  the  magnitudes. 

I.  Suppose  the  magnitudes  A,  B  to  be  commensurable,  and  the  points  A ,  B 
to  be  their  centres  of  gravity.  Let  DE  be  a  straight  line  so  divided  at  C  that 


N 


is  bisected  at  E,  as  HK  is  bisected  at  D. 
Thus  LH,  HK  must  each  contain  N  i 


We  have  then  to  prove  that,  if  A 
be  placed  at  E  and  B  at  D,  C  is  the 
centre  of  gravity  of  the  two  taken 
together. 

Since  A ,  B  are  commensurable, 
so  are  DC ,  CE.  Let  N  be  a  common 
measure  of  DC ,  CE.  Make  DH,  DK 
each  equal  to  CE ,  and  EL  (on  CE 
produced)  equal  to  CD.  Then  Eli  = 
CD,  since  DH  =  CE.  Therefore  LH 

even  number  of  times. 


504  ARCHIMEDES 

Take  a  magnitude  0  such  that  0  is  contained  as  many  times  in  A  as  N  is 
contained  in  LH,  whence 

A  :  0  =  LH  :  iY. 

But  B  :  A  =  CE  :  DC 

=  HK :  LH. 

Hence,  ex  aequali ,  B  :  0  =  HK  :  N,  or  0  is  contained  in  B  as  many  times  as  N 
is  contained  in  HK. 

Thus  0  is  a  common  measure  of  A,  B. 

Divide  LHy  HK  into  parts  each  equal  to  N,  and  A,  B  into  parts  each  equal 
to  0.  The  parts  of  A  will  therefore  be  equal  in  number  to  those  of  LH,  and  the 
parts  of  B  equal  in  number  to  those  of  HK.  Place  one  of  the  parts  of  A  at  the 
middle  point  of  each  of  the  parts  N  of  LH,  and  one  of  the  parts  of  B  at  the 
middle  point  of  each  of  the  parts  N  of  HK. 

Then  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  parts  of  A  placed  at  equal  distances  on  LH 
will  be  at  E,  the  middle  point  of  LH  [Prop.  5,  Cor.  2],  and  the  centre  of  gravity 
of  the  parts  of  B  placed  at  equal  distances  along  HK  will  be  at  D,  the  middle 
point  of  HK . 

Thus  we  may  suppose  A  itself  applied  at  E,  and  B  itself  applied  at  D. 

But  the  system  formed  by  the  parts  0  of  A  and  B  together  is  a  system  of 
equal  magnitudes  even  in  number  and  placed  at  equal  distances  along  LK. 
And,  since  LE  =  CD,  and  EC  =  DK,  LC  =  CK ,  so  that  C  is  the  middle  point  of 
LK.  Therefore  C  is  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  system  ranged  along  LK. 

Therefore  A  acting  at  E  and  B  acting  at  D  balance  about  the  point  C. 

II.  Suppose  the  magnitudes  to  be  incommensurable,  and  let  them  be  (A+a) 


and  B  respectively  Let  DE  be  a  line  divided  at  C  so  that 

(A+a)  :  B  =  DC  :  CE. 

Then,  if  (A+a)  placed  at  E  and 

B  Dlaced  at  D  do  not  balance  d  <r 

E 

about  C,  (A+a)  is  either  too  great 
to  balance  B ,  or  not  great  enough. 

r 

Suppose,  if  possible,  that  (A+a) 
is  too  great  to  balance  B.  Take  from 
(A+a)  a  magnitude  a  smaller  than 
the  deduction  which  would  make 

B 

a 

A 

the  remainder  balance  B ,  but  such 

that  the  remainder  A  and  the  magnitude  B  are  commensurable. 

Then,  since  A,  B  are  commensurable,  and 

A  :  B<DC  :  CE, 

A  and  B  will  not  balance  [Prop.  6],  but  D  will  be  depressed. 

But  this  is  impossible,  since  the  deduction  a  was  an  insufficient  deduction 
from  (A+a)  to  produce  equilibrium,  so  that  E  was  still  depressed. 

Therefore  (A+a)  is  not  too  great-  to  balance  B;  and  similarly  it  may  be 
proved  that  B  is  not  too  great  to  balance  (A+a). 

Hence  (A+a),  B  taken  together  have  their  centre  of  gravity  at  C. 

Proposition  8 

If  AB  be  a  magnitude  whose  centre  of  gravity  is  C,  and  AD  a  part  of  it  whose 
centre  of  gravity  is  F,  then  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  remaining  part  will  be  a  point 
G  on  FC  produced  such  that 


F 

C  G  H 

ON  THE  EQUILIBRIUM  OF  PLANES  I  505 

E  GC  :CF=  (AD)  :(DE). 

For,  if  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  re¬ 
mainder  (DE)  be  not  G,  let  it  be  a  point 
H.  Then  an  absurdity  follows  at  once 
D  8  from  Props.  6,  7. 

Proposition  9 

The  centre  of  gravity  of  any  parallelogram  lies  on  the  straight  line  joining  the 
middle  points  of  opposite  sides. 

Let  A  BCD  be  a  parallelogram,  and  let  EF  join  the  middle  points  of  the 
opposite  sides  AD,  BC. 

If  the  centre  of  gravity  does  not  lie  on  EF,  suppose  it  to  be  H ,  and  draw  HK 
parallel  to  AD  or  BC  meeting  EF  in  K. 

Then  it  is  possible,  by  bisecting  ED,  then 
bisecting  the  halves,  and  so  on  continually, 
to  arrive  at  a  length  EL  less  than  KH.  Divide 
both  AE  and  ED  into  parts  each  equal  to 
EL,  and  through  the  points  of  division  draw 
parallels  to  AB  or  CD. 

We  have  then  a  number  of  equal  and  simi¬ 
lar  parallelograms,  and,  if  any  one  be  applied 
to  any  other,  their  centres  of  gravity  coincide  [Post.  4].  Thus  we  have  an 
even  number  of  equal  magnitudes  whose  cent  res  of  gravity  lie  at  equal  distances 
along  a  straight  line.  Hence  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  whole  parallelogram 
will  lie  on  the  line  joining  the  centres  of  gravity  of  the  two  middle  parallel¬ 
ograms  [Prop.  5,  Cor.  2]. 

But  this  is  impossible,  for  H  is  outside  the  middle  parallelograms. 

Therefore  the  centre  of  gravity  cannot  but  lie  on  EF. 

Proposition  10 

The  centre  of  gravity  of  a  parallelogram  is  the  point  of  in  tersection  of  its  diagonals. 

For,  by  the  last  proposition,  the  centre  of  gravity  lies  on  each  of  the  lines 
which  bisect  opposite  sides.  Therefore  it  is  at  the  point  of  their  intersection ; 
and  this  is  also  the  point  of  intersection  of  the  diagonals. 

Alternative  proof. 

Let  ABCD  be  the  given  parallelogram,  and  BD  a  diagonal.  Then  the  tri¬ 
angles  ABD,  CDB  are  equal  and  similar,  so  that  [Post.  4],  if  one  be  applied  to 
the  other,  their  centres  of  gravity  will  fall  one  upon  the  other. 

Suppose  F  to  be  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the 
triangle  ABD.  Let  G  be  the  middle  point  of  BD. 
Join  FG  and  produce  it  to  II,  so  that  FG=GIL 
If  we  then  apply  the  triangle  ABD  to  the  tri¬ 
angle  CDB  so  that  AD  falls  on  CB  and  AB  on 
CD,  the  point  F  will  fall  on  H. 

But  [by  Post.  4]  F  will  fall  on  the  centre  of  grav¬ 
ity  of  CDB.  Therefore  H  is  the  centre  of  gravity  of  CDB. 

Hence,  since  F,  II  are  the  centres  of  gravity  of  the  two  equal  triangles,  the 
centre  of  gravity  of  the  whole  parallelogram  is  at  the  middle  point  of  FII,  i.e. 
at  the  middle  point  of  BD,  which  is  the  intersection  of  the  two  diagonals. 


506 


ARCHIMEDES 


Proposition  11 

If  abc,  ABC  be  two  similar  triangles ,  and  g ,  G  two  points  in  them  similarly  situ¬ 
ated  with  respect  to  them  respectively ,  then ,  if  g  be  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the 
triangle  abc ,  G  must  be  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  triangle  ABC. 

Suppose 

ab  :bc  :  ca  —  AB  :  BC  :  CA. 

The  proposition  is  proved  by 
an  obvious  reductio  ad  absurdum. 

For,  if  G  be  not  the  centre  of 
gravity  of  the  triangle  ABC ,  sup¬ 
pose  H  to  be  its  centre  of  gravity. 

Post.  5  requires  that  g ,  H 
shall  be  similarly  situated  with 
respect  to  the  triangles  respec¬ 
tively;  and  this  leads  at  once  to 
the  absurdity  that  the  angles  HAB,  GAB  are  equal. 


Proposition  12 

Given  two  similar  triangles  abc ,  ABC ,  and  d,  D  the  middle  points  of  be,  BC 
respectively ,  then,  if  the  centre  of  gravity  of  abc  lie  on  ad,  that  of  ABC  will  lie 
on  AD. 

Let  g  be  the  point  on  ad  which 
is  the  centre  of  gravity  of  abc. 

Take  G  on  AD  such  that 
ad  :  ag  =  AD  :  AG, 
and  join  gb,  gc,  GB,  GC. 

Then,  since  the  triangles  are 
similar,  and  bd,  BD  are  the 
halves  of  be,  BC  respectively, 
ab  :  bd—AB  :  BD, 
and  the  angles  abd,  ABD  are  equal. 

Therefore  the  triangles  abd,  ABD  are  similar,  and 

Z  bad=  /.BAD. 

Also  ba  :  ad  — BA  :  AD, 

while,  from  above,  ad  :  ag  =  AD  :  AG. 

Therefore  ba  :  ag  =  BA  :  AG,  while  the  angles  bag,  BAG  are  equal. 

Hence  the  triangles  bag,  BAG  are  similar,  and 

/abg=  /ABG. 

And,  since  the  angles  abd,  ABD  are  equal,  it  follows  that 

/gbd=  /GBD. 

In  exactly  the  same  manner  we  prove  that 

/gac=  /GAC, 

/aeg=  /  ACG , 

/gcd=  / GCD . 

Therefore  g,  G  are  similarly  situated  with  respect  to  the  triangles  respec¬ 
tively;  whence  [Prop.  11]  G  is  the  centre  of  gravity  of  ABC. 


507 


ON  THE  EQUILIBRIUM  OF  PLANES  I 
Proposition  13 

In  any  triangle  the  centre  of  gravity  lies  on  the  straight  line  joining  any  angle  to 
the  middle  'point  of  the  opposite  side. 

Let  ABC  be  a  triangle  and  D  the  middle  point  of  BC.  Join  AD.  Then  shall 
the  centre  of  gravity  he  on  AD. 

For,  if  possible,  let  this  not  be  the  case,  and  let  H  be  the  centre  of  gravity. 

Then,  if  we  bisect  DC,  then 
bisect  the  halves,  and  so  on,  we 
shall  at  length  arrive  at  a  length, 
as  DE ,  less  than  HI.  Divide 
both  BD  and  DC  into  lengths 
each  equal  to  DE,  and  through 
the  points  of  division  draw  lines 
each  parallel  to  DA  meeting  BA 
and  AC  in  points  as  K ,  L,  M  and 
N,  P ,  Q  respectively. 

Join  MN,  LP ,  KQ ,  which 
lines  will  then  be  each  parallel 
to  BC. 

We  have  now  a  series  of  parallelograms  as  FQ,  TP,  SN,  and  AD  bisects 
opposite  sides  in  each.  Thus  the  centre  of  gravity  of  each  parallelogram  lies 
on  AD  [Prop.  9],  and  therefore  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  figure  made  up  of 
them  all  lies  on  AD. 

Let  the  centre  of  gravity  of  all  the  parallelograms  taken  together  be  0.  Join 
OH  and  produce  it;  also  draw  CV  parallel  to  DA  meeting  OH  produced  in  V. 
Now,  if  n  be  the  number  of  parts  into  which  AC  is  divided, 

A  ADC  :  (sum  of  triangles  on  AN,  NP,  •  •  ■ )=AC 2  :  (AN2+NP2+  •  •  •) 

=  n2  :  n 
=  n  :  1 
=  AC  :  AN. 

Similarly 

A ABD  :  (sum  of  triangles  on  AM,  ML,  •  •  •)  =  AB  :  AM. 

And  AC  :  AN  =  AB  :  AM. 

It  follows  that 

A  ABC  :  (sum  of  all  the  small  As)  =  CA  :  AN 

>  VO  :  OH,  by  parallels. 

Suppose  OV  produced  to  X  so  that 

A  ABC  :  (sum  of  small  As)  =XO  :  OH, 

whence,  dividendo, 

(sum  of  parallelograms)  :  (sum  of  small  As )=XH  :  HO. 

Since  then  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  triangle  ABC  is  at  H,  and  the  centre  of 
gravity  of  the  part  of  it  made  up  of  the  parallelograms  is  at  0 ,  it  follows  from 
Prop.  8  that  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  remaining  portion  consisting  of  all  the 
small  triangles  taken  together  is  at  X. 

But  this  is  impossible,  since  all  the  triangles  are  on  one  side  of  the  line 
through  X  parallel  to  AD. 

Therefore  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  triangle  cannot  but  lie  on  AD. 


Draw  HI  parallel  to  CB  meeting  AD  in  I. 


508 


ARCHIMEDES 


Alternative  proof. 

Suppose,  if  possible,  that  H ,  not  lying  on  AD,  is  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the 
triangle  ABC.  Join  AH,  BH ,  CH.  Let  E ,  F  be  the  middle  points  of  CA,  AB 
respectively,  and  join  DE,  EF,  FD.  Let  EF  meet  AD  in  M. 

Draw  FK,  EL  parallel  to  AH  meeting  BH, 

CH  in  K,  L  respectively.  Join  KD ,  HD,  LD, 

KL.  Let  KL  meet  DH  in  N,  and  join  MN. 

Since  DE  is  parallel  to  AB,  the  triangles 

ABC,  EDC  are  similar. 

And,  since  CE  =  EA,  and  EL  is  parallel  to 

AH,  it  follows  that  CL  =  LH.  And  CD  =  DB. 

Therefore  BH  is  parallel  to  DL. 

Thus  in  the  similar  and  similarly  situated 
triangles  ABC,  EDC  the  straight  lines  AH, 

BH  are  respectively  parallel  to  EL,DL;  and  it 
follows  that  H,  L  are  similarly  situated  with 
respect  to  the  triangles  respectively. 

But  H  is,  by  hypothesis,  the  centre  of  gravity  of  ABC.  Therefore  L  is  the 
centre  of  gravity  of  EDC.  [Prop.  11] 

Similarly  the  point  K  is  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  triangle  FBD. 

And  the  triangles  FBD,  EDC  are  equal,  so  that  the  centre  of  gravity  of  both 
together  is  at  the  middle  point  of  KL,  i.e.  at  the  point  N. 

The  remainder  of  the  triangle  ABC,  after  the  triangles  FBD,  EDC  are  de¬ 
ducted,  is  the  parallelogram  AFDE,  and  the  centre  of  gravity  of  this  paral¬ 
lelogram  is  at  M,  the  intersection  of  its  diagonals. 

It  follows  that  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  whole  triangle  ABC  must  lie  on 
MN)  that  is,  MN  must  pass  through  H,  which  is  impossible  (since  MN  is 
parallel  to  AH). 

Therefore  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  triangle  ABC  cannot  but  he  on  AD. 

Proposition  14 

It  follows  at  once  from  the  last  proposition  that  the  centre  of  gravity  of  any 
triangle  is  at  the  intersection  of  the  lines  drawn  from  any  two  angles  to  the  middle 
points  of  the  opposite  sides  respectively. 

Proposition  15 

If  AD,  BC  he  the  two  parallel  sides  of  a  trapezium  ABCD ,  AD  being  the  smaller, 
and  if  AD,  BC  be  bisected  at  E,  F  respectively,  then  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the 
trapezium  is  at  a  point  G  on  EF  such  that 

GE  :  GF  =  (2BC+AD)  :  (2 AD+BC). 

Produce  BA,  CD  to  meet  at  0.  Then  FE  produced  will  also  pass  through  0, 
since  AE  =  ED ,  and  BF  =  FC. 

Now  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  triangle  OAD  will  lie  on  OE,  and  that  of  the 
triangle  OBC  will  lie  on  OF.  [Prop.  13] 

It  follows  that  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  remainder,  the  trapezium  ABCD, 
will  also  he  on  OF.  [Prop.  8] 

Join  BD,  and  divide  it  at  L,  M  into  three  equal  parts.  Through  L,  M  draw 
PQ ,  RS  parallel  to  BC  meeting  BA  in  P,  R,  FE  in  W,  V,  and  CD  in  Q,  S 
respectively. 


A 


509 


ON  THE  EQUILIBRIUM  OF  PLANES  I 


Join  DF,  BE  meeting  PQ  in  H  and  RS  in  K  respectively. 


Now,  since  BL  = 

FH  = 


\BD , 

\ FD. 

Therefore  H  is  the  centre  of  grav¬ 
ity  of  the  triangle  DBC. 

Similarly,  since  EK  =  \BE,  it  fol¬ 
lows  that  K  is  the  centre  of  gravity 
of  the  triangle  ADB. 

Therefore  the  centre  of  gravity  of 
the  triangles  DBC ,  ADB  together, 
i.e.  of  the  trapezium,  lies  on  the  line 
HK . 

But  it  also  lies  on  OF. 

Therefore,  if  OF,  HK  meet  in  G ,  G 
is  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  trape¬ 
zium. 


Hence  [Props.  6,  7] 

A  DBC  :  A  ABD  =  KG  :  GH 
=  VG  :  GW. 

But  A  DBC  :  A  ABD  =  BC  :  AD. 

Therefore  BC  :  AD  =  VG:  GW. 

It  follows  that 

(2 BC+AD)  :  (2AD+BC)  =  (2VG+GW)  :  (2GW+VG) 

=EG:GF.  q.e.d. 


ON  THE  EQUILIBRIUM  OF  PLANES 
BOOK  TWO 


Proposition  1 

If  P ,  Pf  be  two  parabolic  segments  and  D,  E  their  centres  of  gravity  respectively , 
the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  two  segments  taken  together  will  be  at  a  point  C  on  DE 
determined  by  the  relation 

P  :P'  =  CE  :CD. 

In  the  same  straight  line  with  DE  measure  EH,  EL  each  equal  to  DC ,  and 
DK  equal  to  DH ;  whence  it  follows  at  once  that  DK  =  CE ,  and  also  that 

KC  =  CL. 


Apply  a  rectangle  M N  equal  in  area  to  the  parabolic  segment  P  to  a  base 
equal  to  KH,  and  place  the  rectangle  so  that  KH  bisects  it,  and  is  parallel 
to  its  base. 

Then  D  is  the  centre  of  gravity  of  MN,  since  KD  =  DH. 

Produce  the  sides  of  the  rectangle  which  are  parallel  to  KH,  and  complete 
the  rectangle  NO  whose  base  is  equal  to  HL.  Then  E  is  the  centre  of  gravity 
of  the  rectangle  A T0. 

Now  (MN)  :  (NO)  =  KH  :  HL 

=DH : EH 
=  CE  :  CD 
=  P:P'. 

But  (MN)=P. 

Therefore  (NO)=P\ 

Also,  since  C  is  the  middle  point  of  KL,  C  is  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the 
whole  parallelogram  made  up  of  the  two  parallelograms  (MN),  (NO),  which 
are  equal  to,  and  have  the  same  centres  of  gravity  as,  P,  P'  respectively. 

Hence  C  is  the  centre  of  gravity  of  P,  P'  taken  together. 

510 


ON  THE  EQUILIBRIUM  OF  PLANES  II  511 

DEFINITION  AND  LEMMAS  PRELIMINARY  TO  PROPOSITION  2 

“If  in  a  segment  bounded  by  a  straight  line  and  a  section  of  a  right-angled 
cone  [a  parabola]  a  triangle  be  inscribed  having  the  same  base  as  the  segment 
and  equal  height,  if  again  triangles  be  inscribed  in  the  remaining  segments 
having  the  same  bases  as  the  segments  and  equal  height,  and  if  in  the  remain¬ 
ing  segments  triangles  be  inscribed  in  the  same  manner,  let  the  resulting  figure 
be  said  to  be  inscribed  in  the  recognised  manner  in  the  segment. 

“And  it  is  plain” 

(1)  “that  the  lines  joining  the  two  angles  of  the  figure  so  inscribed  which  are  near¬ 
est  to  the  vertex  of  the  segment ,  and  the  next  pairs  of  angles  in  order ,  will  be  parallel 
to  the  base  of  the  segment ,” 

(2)  “that  the  said  lines  will  be  bisected  by  the  diameter  of  the  segment ,  and” 

(3)  “that  they  will  cut  the  diameter  in  the  proportions  of  the  successive  odd  num¬ 
bers,  the  number  one  having  reference  to  [ the  length  adjacent  to]  the  vertex  of  the 
segment. 

“And  these  properties  wall  have  to  be  proved  in  their  proper  places.” 

Proposition  2 

If  a  figure  be  “ inscribed  in  the  recognised  manner ”  in  a  parabolic  segment ,  the 
centre  of  gravity  of  the  figure  so  inscribed  will  lie  on  the  diameter  of  the  segment. 

For,  in  the  figure  of  the  foregoing  lemmas,  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the 
trapezium  BRrb  must  lie  on  XOy  that  of  the  trapezium  RQqr  on  WX,  and  so 
on,  while  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  triangle  PAp  lies  on  AV. 

Hence  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  whole  figure  lies  on  AO. 

Proposition  3 

If  BAB ',  bab'  be  two  similar  parabolic  segments  whose  diameters  are  AO,  ao 
respectively,  and  if  a  figure  be  inscribed  in  each  segment  “in  the  recognised  man¬ 
ner,”  the  number  of  sides  in  each  figure  being  equal,  the  centres  of  gravity  of  the 
inscribed  figures  will  divide  AO,  ao  in  the  same  ratio.1 

Suppose  BRQPAP'Q'R'B' ,  brqpap'q'r'b '  to  be  the  two  figures  inscribed  “in 
the  recognised  manner.”  Join  PP',  QQ' ,  RR'  meeting  AO  in  L,  M,  N,  and  pp' , 
qq',  rr'  meeting  ao  in  l,  m,  n. 

Then  [Lemma  (3)] 

AL  :  LM  :  MN  :  NO  =  1  :  3  :  5  :  7 

=  al  :lm  :  mn  :  no, 

so  that  AO,  ao  are  divided  in  the  same  proportion. 

Also,  by  reversing  the  proof  of  Lemma  (3),  we  see  that 
PP'  :  pp'  =  QQ'  :  qq'  =  RR'  :  rr'  =  BB'  :  bb'. 

Since  then  RR'  :  BB'  =  rr'  :  bb',  and  these  ratios  respectively  determine  the 
proportion  in  which  NO,  no  are  divided  by  the  centres  of  gravity  of  the  tra¬ 
pezia  BRR'B' ,  brr'b'  [i.  15],  it  follows  that  the  centres  of  gravity  of  the  trapezia 
divide  NO,  no  in  the  same  ratio. 

Similarly  the  centres  of  gravity  of  the  trapezia  RQQ'R' ,  rqq'r'  divide  MN, 
mn  in  the  same  ratio  respectively,  and  so  on. 

Archimedes  enunciates  this  proposition  as  true  of  similar  segments,  but  it  is  equally  true 
of  segments  which  are  not  similar,  as  the  course  of  the  proof  will  show. 


512  ARCHIMEDES 

Lastly,  the  centres  of  gravity  of  the  triangles  PAP ',  pap'  divide  AL ,  al 
respectively  in  the  same  ratio. 


B 


Moreover  the  corresponding  trapezia  and  triangles  are,  each  to  each,  in  the 
same  proportion  (since  their  sides  and  heights  are  respectively  proportional), 
while  AO,  ao  are  divided  in  the  same  proportion. 

Therefore  the  centres  of  gravity  of  the  complete  inscribed  figures  divide 
AO,  ao  in  the  same  proportion. 


Proposition  4 

The  centre  of  gravity  of  any  parabolic  segment  cut  off  by  a  straight  line  lies  on  the 
diameter  of  the  segment. 

Let  BAB'  be  a  parabolic  segment,  A  its 
vertex  and  AO  its  diameter. 

Then,  if  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  seg¬ 
ment  does  not  lie  on  AO,  suppose  it  to  be, 
if  possible,  the  point  F.  Draw  FE  parallel 
to  AO  meeting  BB'  in  E. 

Inscribe  in  the  segment  the  triangle 
ABB'  having  the  same  vertex  and  height 
as  the  segment,  and  take  an  area  S  such  A 
that 

A  ABB'  :  S  =  BE  :  EO. 

We  can  then  inscribe  in  the  segment  “in 
the  recognised  manner”  a  figure  such  that 
the  segments  of  the  parabola  left  over  are 
together  less  than  S.1 

Tor  Prop.  20  of  the  Quadrature  of  the  Parabola  proves  that,  if  in  any  segment  the  triangle 
with  the  same  base  and  height  be  inscribed,  the  triangle  is  greater  than  half  the  segment; 
whence  it  appears  that,  each  time  that  we  increase  the  number  of  the  sides  of  the  figure 
inscribed  ‘fin  the  recognised  manner,”  we  take  away  more  than  half  of  the  remaining  seg¬ 
ments. 


ON  THE  EQUILIBRIUM  OF  PLANES  II  513 

Let  the  inscribed  figure  be  drawn  accordingly;  its  centre  of  gravity  then  lies 
on  AO  [Prop.  2].  Let  it  be  the  point  H. 

Join  HF  and  produce  it  to  meet  in  K  the  line  through  B  parallel  to  AO . 

Then  we  have 

(inscribed  figure)  :  (remainder  of  segmt.)>  A  ABB'  :  S 

>BE : EO 
>KF  :  FH. 

Suppose  L  taken  on  HK  produced  so  that  the  former  ratio  is  equal  to  the  ratio 
LF  :  FH. 

Then,  since  H  is  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  inscribed  figure,  and  F  that  of 
the  segment,  L  must  be  the  centre  of  gravity  of  all  the  segments  taken  together 
which  form  the  remainder  of  the  original  segment.  [I.  8] 

But  this  is  impossible,  since  all  these  segments  lie  on  one  side  of  the  line 
drawn  through  L  parallel  to  AO  (Cf.  Post.  7]. 

Hence  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  segment  cannot  but  lie  on  AO. 

Proposition  5 

If  in  a  parabolic  segment  a  figure  be  inscribed  “in  the  recognised  manner  ”  the 
centre  of  gravity  of  the  segment  is  nearer  to  the  vertex  of  the  segment  than  the  centre 
of  gravity  of  the  inscribed  figure  is. 

Let  BAB '  be  the  given  segment,  and  AO  its  diame¬ 
ter.  First ,  let  ABB'  be  the  triangle  inscribed  “in  the 
recognised  manner.” 

Divide  AO  in  F  so  that  AF  =  2F0]  F  is  then  the 
centre  of  gravity  of  the  triangle  ABB'. 

Bisect  AB,  AB'  in  D,D'  respectively,  and  join  DD' 
meeting  AO  in  E.  Draw  DQ ,  D'Q'  parallel  to  OA  to 
meet  the  curve.  QD,  Q'D'  will  then  be  the  diameters  of 
the  segments  whose  bases  are  AB,  AB',  and  the  cen¬ 
tres  of  gravity  of  those  segments  will  lie  respectively 
on  QD,  Q'D'  [Prop.  4].  Let  them  be  H ,  H' ,  and  join 
HH'  meeting  AO  in  K. 

Now  QD,  Q'D'  are  equal,1  and  therefore  the  seg¬ 
ments  of  which  they  are  the  diameters  are  equal  [On 
Conoids  and  Spheroids,  Prop.  3]. 

Also,  since  QD,  Q'D'  are  parallel,  and  DE  =  ED ',  K  is  the  middle  point  of 
HH'. 

Hence  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  equal  segments  AQB,  AQ'B'  taken  to¬ 
gether  is  K,  where  K  lies  between  E  and  A.  And  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the 
triangle  ABB'  is  F. 

It  follows  that  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  whole  segment  BAB'  lies  between 
K  and  F,  and  is  therefore  nearer  to  the  vertex  A  than  F  is. 

Secondly,  take  the  five-sided  figure  BQAQ'B'  inscribed  “in  the  recognised 
manner,”  QD,  Q'D'  being,  as  before,  the  diameters  of  the  segments  AQB. 
AQ'B'. 

Then,  by  the  first  part  of  this  proposition,  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  seg¬ 
ment  AQB  (lying  of  course  on  QD)  is  nearer  to  Q  than  the  centre  of  gravity  of 

!This  may  either  be  inferred  from  Lemma  (1)  above  (since  QQ' ,  DD'  are  both  parallel  to 
BE'),  or  from  Prop.  19  of  the  Quadrature  of  the  Parabola,  which  applies  equally  to  Q  or  Q'. 


514  ARCHIMEDES 

the  triangle  AQB  is.  Let  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  segment  be  H ,  and  that  of 
the  triangle  I. 

Similarly  let  H'  be  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  seg¬ 
ment  AQ'B', and  /'that  of  the  triangle  AQ'B'. 

It  follows  that  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  two  seg¬ 
ments  AQB,  AQ'B'  taken  together  is  K,  the  middle 
point  of  HH',  and  that  of  the  two  triangles  AQB , 

AQ'B'  is  L,  the  middle  point  of  IF. 

If  now  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  triangle  ABB'  be  A 
F,  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  whole  segment  BAB' 

(i.e.  that  of  the  triangle  ABB'  and  the  two  segments 
AQB ,  AQ'B'  taken  together)  is  a  point  G  on  KF  de¬ 
termined  by  the  proportion 

(sum  of  segments  AQB,  AQ'B')  :  AABB'  —  FG  :  GK. 

[1.6,7] 

And  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  inscribed  figure 
BQAQ'B'  is  a  point  F'  on  LF  determined  by  the  proportion 

(AAQB+AAQ'B')  :  A ABB'  =  FF'  :  F'L.  [I.  6,  7] 

[Hence  FG  :  GK> FF'  :  F'L, 

or  GK  :  FG<F'L  :  FF', 

and,  componendo ,  FK  :  FG<FL  :  FF' ,  while  FK>FL.] 

Therefore  FG>FF' ,  or  G  lies  nearer  than  F'  to  the  vertex  A. 

Using  this  last  result,  and  proceeding  in  the  same  way,  we  can  prove  the 
proposition  for  any  figure  inscribed  “in  the  recognised  manner.” 

Proposition  6 

Given  a  segment  of  a  parabola  cut  off  by  a  straight  line,  it  is  possible  to  inscribe  in 
it  “in  the  recognised  manner ”  a  figure  such  that  the  distance  between  the  centres  of 
gravity  of  the  segment  and  of  the  inscribed  figure  is  less  than  any  assigned  length. 

Let  BAB '  be  the  segment,  AO  its  diam¬ 
eter,  G  its  centre  of  gravity,  and  ABB' 
the  triangle  inscribed  “in  the  recognised 
manner.” 

Let  D  be  the  assigned  length  and  S  an 
area  such  that 

AG  :D  =  AABB'  :S. 

In  the  segment  inscribe  “in  the  recog¬ 
nised  manner”  a  figure  such  that  the  sum 
of  the  segments  left  over  is  less  than  S. 

Let  F  be  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  in¬ 
scribed  figure. 

We  shall  prove  that  FG<D. 

For,  if  not,  FG  must  be  either  equal  to, 
or  greater  than,  D. 

And  clearly 

(inscribed  fig.)  :  (sum  of  remaining  segmts.) 

>AABB'  :S 
>AG  :  D 

>AG  :  FG,  by  hypothesis  (since  FG<D). 


B 


ON  THE  EQUILIBRIUM  OF  PLANES  II  515 

Let  the  first  ratio  be  equal  to  the  ratio  KG  :  FG  (where  K  lies  on  GA  pro¬ 
duced)  ;  and  it  follows  that  K  is  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  small  segments 
taken  together.  [I.  8] 

But  this  is  impossible,  since  the  segments  are  all  on  the  same  side  of  a  line 
drawn  through  K  parallel  to  BB' . 

Hence  FG  cannot  but  be  less  than  D. 


Proposition  7 

If  there  he  two  similar  parabolic  segments ,  their  centres  of  gravity  divide  their 
diameters  in  the  same  ratio . 

Let  BAB',  bab'  be  the  two  similar 
segments,  AO,  ao  their  diameters, 
and  G,  g  their  centres  of  gravity  re¬ 
spectively. 

Then,  if  G,  g  do  not  divide  AO,  ao 
respectively  in  the  same  ratio,  suppose 
H  to  be  such  a  point  on  AO  that 
AH  :  HO  —  ag  :  go ; 

and  inscribe  in  the  segment  BAB'  “in 
the  recognised  manner”  a  figure  such 
that,  if  F  be  its  centre  of  gravity, 

GF<GH.  [Prop.  6] 
Inscribe  in  the  segment  bab'  “in 
the  recognised  manner”  a  similar 


figure;  then,  if  /  be  the  centre  of  gravity  of  this  figure, 

ag  <  af. 

And,  by  Prop.  3,  af  :fo  =  AF  :  FO. 

But  ~  AF  :  FO<AH  :  HO 

<ag  :  go,  by  hypothesis. 

Therefore  af  :fo<ag  :  go;  which  is  impossible. 

It  follows  that  G,  g  cannot  but  divide  AO,  ao  in  the  same  ratio. 


[Prop.  5] 


Proposition  8 

If  AO  be  the  diameter  of  a  parabolic  segment,  and  G  its  centre  of  gravity,  then 

AG=%GO. 

Let  the  segment  be  BAB' .  Inscribe  the  triangle  ABB'  “in  the  recognised 
manner,”  and  let  F  be  its  centre  of  gravity. 

Bisect  AB,  AB'  in  D,  D ' ,  and  draw  DQ,  D'Q'  parallel  to  OA  to  meet  the 
curve,  so  that  QD ,  Q'D'  are  the  diameters  of  the  segments  AQB,  AQ'B' 
respectively. 

Let  H,  H'  be  the  centres  of  gravity  of  the  segments  AQB,  AQ'B'  respective¬ 
ly.  Join  QQ',  HH'  meeting  AO  in  V,  K  respectively. 

K  is  then  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  two  segments  AQB,  AQ'B'  taken 
together. 

Now  AG  :  GO  =  QH  :  HD,  [Prop.  7} 

whence  AO  :  OG  =  QD  :  HD. 

But  AO  =  WD  [as  is  easily  proved  by  means  of  Lemma  (3),  p.  5111. 

Therefore  OG  —  MID ; 

and,  by  subtraction,  AG  —  ^QH. 


516  ARCHIMEDES 

Also,  by  Lemma  (2),  QQ'  is  parallel  to  BB'  and  therefore  to  DD'.  It  follows 
from  Prop.  7  that  HH'  is  also  parallel  to  QQ'  or 
DD', 

and  hence  QH=VK. 

Therefore  AG  =  AVK, 

and  AV+KG  =  3VK. 

Measuring  VL  along  VK  so  that  VL  =  \AV,  we  have 
KG  =  3LK.  (1) 

Again  AO  =  AAV  [Lemma  (3)] 

=  3 AL,  since  A  V  =  3 VL, 

whence  AL  —  \AO  =  OF.  (2) 

Now,  by  I.  6,  7, 

A  ABB'  :  (sum  of  segmts.  AQB,  AQ'B')  =  KG  :  GF, 
and  AABB'  =  3(sum  of  segments  AQB,  AQ'B') 

[since  the  segment  ABB'  is  equal  to  iAABB' 

0 Quadrature  of  the  Parabola,  Props.  17,  24)]. 

Hence 
But 

Therefore 


And,  from  (2), 

Therefore 

and 

But 


KG  =  3GF. 

KG  =  3LK,  from  (1)  above. 

LF  =  LK+KG+GF 
=  5  GF. 

LF=(AO-AL-OF)  =  \AO  =  OF. 
OF  =  5GF, 

0G  =  <5GF . 

A0  =  30F=15GF. 


Therefore,  by  subtraction, 


AG  =  9GF 

=  |G0. 


Proposition  9  (Lemma) 


If  a,  b,  c,  d  be  four  lines  in  continued  proportion  and  in  descending  order  of  magni¬ 
tude,  and  if 

d  :  {a  —  d)—x  :  f(a— c), 

and  (2a+46+6c+3d)  i  (5u-b  1064-  10c -J- 5d)  =y  t  ( a  —  c), 

it  is  required  to  prove  that 


x+y  =  ia. 

[The  following  is  the  proof  given  by  Archimedes,  with  the 
only  difference  that  it  is  set  out  in  algebraical  instead  of  geo¬ 
metrical  notation.  This  is  done  in  the  particular  case  simply 
in  order  to  make  the  proof  easier  to  follow.  Archimedes  exhi¬ 
bits  his  lines  in  the  figure  reproduced  in  the  margin,  but,  now 
that  it  is  possible  to  use  algebraical  notation,  there  is  no  advan¬ 
tage  in  using  the  figure  and  the  more  cumbrous  notation  which 
only  obscures  the  course  of  the  proof.  The  relation  between 
Archimedes,  figure  and  the  letters  used  below  is  as  follows: 

AB  =  a,  PB  =  6,  AB  =  c,  EB  =  d,  ZH  =  z,  H 6  =  y,  AO  =  z.] 


O 

H 

Z 


A 


•r 

A 


We  have 


a  _  b  _  c 
bed 


(i) 


B 

11 


mo 


517 


whence 

and  therefore 

Now 


ON  THE  EQUILIBRIUM  OF  PLANES  II 
a  —  b_ b  —  c _c  —  d 

a—b_b—c_a_b_c 
b—c  c  —  d  bed 

2 (a+6)  _a+6 _a+6  6_  a  —  c  b  —  c  _  a  —  c 
c  be  b  —  c  c  —  d  c  —  d 


2c  c 

And,  in  like  manner, 

6+c  _  6+c  c_  a  —  c 
d  c  d  c  —  d' 

It  follows  from  the  last  two  relations  that 

a  —  c  2a+36+c 
c  —  d  2c+d 

Suppose  z  to  be  so  taken  that 

2a+4o+4c+2d  a  —  c 
2c+d  z 

a  —  c-\-z  2a+46+6c+3d 


so  that  z<(c  —  d). 
Therefore 

And,  by  hypothesis, 

so  that 


a  —  c  2(a+d)+4(6+c) 

> 

a  —  c  _  5(a+d)  +  10(6+c) 
y  2a+46  +  6c+3d  ' 

a  —  c-\-z  __  5(<x+d)  + 10(6 -pc) _ 5 

y  2(a+d)+4(6+c)  2 


Again,  dividing  (3)  by  (4)  crosswise,  we  obtain 

z  2&+36+C 

c  —  d  2(&+d)  +4(6+c)  * 
c  —  d — z  6  +  3c  +  2d 


whence 

But,  by  (2), 


c — d  2(&+d)  — {—  4(£>  — f-  c) 

c—d_a  —  b  3(6  —  c)_2(c  —  d) 


so  that 


d  b  3c  2d  ’ 

c  —  d _ ( a  —  6)  +3(6  —  c)  — t-  2(c — d) 

d  6+3c+2d 

Combining  (6)  and  (7),  we  have 

c  —  d  —  z  _  (a  —  6) +3(6  —  c)  +  2(c  —  d) 
d  2(a+d)+4(6+c)  ; 

c  —  z  3cr  — f-  66  — (—  3c 


whence 

And,  since  [by  (1)] 


we  have 
whence 


d  2(a+d)+4(6+c) 

c  —  d  __  b  —  c  _a  —  b 
c+d  6+c  a+6’ 

c—d  c+d 
a  —  c  6+c+a+6’ 

a  —  d  a+26+2c+d  2(u+d)+4(6+c) 


a  —  c  a  +  26  +  c 


2(a+c)  +  46 


(2) 


(3) 

(4) 


(5) 


(6) 


(7) 


(8) 


(9) 


518 


ARCHIMEDES 


Thus 


a  —  d 
i(a—c) 


and  therefore,  by  hypothesis, 


2(q-f -d)  -f-4(6-f-c) 
~f{2(a+c)+4J>}  ’ 


But,  by  (8), 


d  2(a+d)+4(6+c) 
t {2(a+c)+46}  * 
c — z  __  3a+66+3c 

d  2(a+d)+4(5+c)  ’ 


and  it  follows,  ea;  aequali,  that 


And,  by  (5), 

Therefore 

or 


c—z  3(a+c)+66  5  3  5 

x_"  —  f{2(a+c)+46}~~3  2  —  2* 
a  —  c+z  _5 

y  '2* 

5_  a 
2  — 

x+2/  =  |a. 


Proposition  10 

//  PP'B'B  be  the  'portion  of  a  parabola  intercepted  between  two  parallel  chords 
PP' ,  BB'  bisected  respectively  in  N,  0  by  the  diameter  ANO  (N  being  nearer  than 
0  to  A,  the  vertex  of  the  segments ),  and  if  NO  be  divided  into  five  equal  parts  of 
which  LM  is  the  middle  one  ( L  being  nearer  than  M  to  N),  then ,  if  G  be  a  point 
on  LM  such  that 

LG  :  GM  =  BO 2 -(2PN+BO)  :  PN 2  -(2BO+PN), 

G  will  be  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  area  PP'B'B. 

Take  a  line  ao  equal  to  AO,  and  an  on  it  equal  to  AN.  Let  p,  q  be  points  on 
the  line  ao  such  that 

ao:aq  =  aq:an,  (1) 

ao:an  =  aq:ap,  (2) 

[whence  ao  :  aq  =  aq  :  an  =  an  :  ap,  or  ao,  aq,  an,  ap  are  lines  in  continued  pro¬ 
portion  and  in  descending  order  of  magnitude]. 

Measure  along  GA  a  length  GF  such  that 

op  :ap  =  OL  :  GF.  (3) 

Then,  since  PN,  BO  are  ordinates  to  ANO, 

BO2 :  PN2=AO  :  AN 
=  ao  :  an 

=  ao 2 :  aq2,  by  (1), 


so  that 

BO  :  PN  =  ao  :  aq, 

(4) 

and 

BOz  :  PNz  =  aoz  :  aqz 

=  (ao  :  aq)  •( aq  :  an)  -(an  :  ap) 

=  ao  :  ap. 

(5) 

Thus 

whence 

(segment  BAB')  :  (segment  PAP') 

=  A  BAB'  :  A  PAP' 

=  BOz  :  PNZ 
=  ao  :  ap, 

(area  PP'B'B)  :  (segment  PAP')  =  op  :  ap 

ON  THE  EQUILIBRIUM  OF  PLANES  II 

=  OL  :  GF,  by  (3), 
=  iON  :GF. 

Now 


519 


(6) 


■t 


BO-  (2 PN+BO)  :  BO3 
=  (2 PN+BO)  :  BO 
=  (2ag+ao)  :  ao,  by  (4), 
BO3  :  PN3 

=  ao  :ap,  by  (5), 
and 

PN3 :  PN 2  (2 BO+PN) 

=  PN  :  (2 BO+PN) 

=  a,q  :  (2 ao+aq),  by  (4), 
=  ap  :  (2 an+ap),  by  (2). 
Hence,  ex  aequali, 

BO 2  (2 PN+BO)  :  PN 2  ■ 
(2BO+PN)  =  {2aq+ao)  : 

(2  an+ap), 


LG  :  GM  =  (2a^+ao)  :  (2 an+ap). 

Componendo,  and  multiplying  the  antecedents  by  5, 

ON  :  GM=  (5(ao+ap)  +  10(a5+an)}  :  (2an+ap). 

But 

ON  :  OM  =  5  :  2=  {5(ao+ap)+10(ag+an)J  :  {2(ao+ap)+4(ag+a?i)}. 

It  follows  that 

ON  :  00=  |5(ao+op)  +  10(ag+an)}  :  (2ao+4ag+6an+3ap). 
Therefore 

(2ao+4ag+6an+3ap)  :  \5(ao+ap)  +  10(aq+an)}  =0G  : 

=  00 

And  ap  :  (ao—ap)  =  ap  :  op 

—  GF  :  OL,  by  hypothesis, 

=  GF  :  %on, 

while  ao,  aq,  an,  ap  are  in  continued  proportion. 

Therefore,  by  Prop.  9, 

GF+OG  =  OF= f  ao  =  10  A . 

Thus  F  is  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  segment  BAB' . 

Let  H  be  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  segment  PAP' ,  so  that  AH  =  §AN . 
And,  since  AF=%A0, 

we  have,  by  subtraction,  HF=%0N. 

But,  by  (6)  above, 

(area  PP'B'B )  :  (segment  PAP’)  =  %0N  :  GF 

=  HF  :  FG. 

Thus,  since  F,  Ii  are  the  centres  of  gravity  of  the  segments  BAB',  PAP'  re¬ 
spectively,  it  follows  [by  I.  6,  7]  that  G  is  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  area 
PP'B'B. 


ON 
:  on. 


[Prop.  8] 


THE  SAND-RECKONER 


“There  are  some,  King  Gelon,  who  think  that  the  number  of  the  sand  is 
infinite  in  multitude;  and  I  mean  by  the  sand  not  only  that  which  exists  about 
Syracuse  and  the  rest  of  Sicily  but  also  that  which  is  found  in  every  region 
whether  inhabited  or  uninhabited.  Again  there  are  some  who,  without  regard¬ 
ing  it  as  infinite,  yet  think  that  no  number  has  been  named  which  is  great 
enough  to  exceed  its  multitude.  And  it  is  clear  that  they  who  hold  this  view,  if 
they  imagined  a  mass  made  up  of  sand  in  other  respects  as  large  as  the  mass 
of  the  earth,  including  in  it  all  the  seas  and  the  hollows  of  the  earth  filled  up 
to  a  height  equal  to  that  of  the  highest  of  the  mountains,  would  be  many  times 
further  still  from  recognising  that  any  number  could  be  expressed  which  ex¬ 
ceeded  the  multitude  of  the  sand  so  taken.  But  I  will  try  to  show  you  by  means 
of  geometrical  proofs,  which  you  will  be  able  to  follow,  that,  of  the  numbers 
named  by  me  and  given  in  the  work  which  I  sent  to  Zeuxippus,  some  exceed 
not  only  the  number  of  the  mass  of  sand  equal  in  magnitude  to  the  earth  filled 
up  in  the  way  described,  but  also  that  of  a  mass  equal  in  magnitude  to  the 
universe.  Now  you  are  aware  that  ‘universe’  is  the  name  given  by  most  astron¬ 
omers  to  the  sphere  whose  centre  is  the  centre  of  the  earth  and  whose  radius  is 
equal  to  the  straight  line  between  the  centre  of  the  sun  and  the  centre  of  the 
earth.  This  is  the  common  account  (ra  ypacfrojitva),  as  you  have  heard  from 
astronomers.  But  Aristarchus  of  Samos  brought  out  a  book  consisting  of  some 
hypotheses,  in  which  the  premisses  lead  to  the  result  that  the  universe  is  many 
times  greater  than  that  now  so  called.  His  hypotheses  are  that  the  fixed  stars 
and  the  sun  remain  unmoved,  that  the  earth  revolves  about  the  sun  in  the 
circumference  of  a  circle,  the  sun  lying  in  the  middle  of  the  orbit,  and  that  the 
sphere  of  the  fixed  stars,  situated  about  the  same  centre  as  the  sun,  is  so  great 
that  the  circle  in  which  he  supposes  the  earth  to  revolve  bears  such  a  propor¬ 
tion  to  the  distance  of  the  fixed  stars  as  the  centre  of  the  sphere  bears  to  its 
surface.  Now  it,  is  easy  to  see  that  this  is  impossible;  for,  since  the  centre  of  the 
sphere  has  no  magnitude,  we  cannot  conceive  it  to  bear  any  ratio  whatever  to 
the  surface  of  the  sphere.  We  must  however  take  Aristarchus  to  mean  this: 
since  we  conceive  the  earth  to  be,  as  it  were,  the  centre  of  the  universe,  the 
ratio  which  the  earth  bears  to  what  we  describe  as  the  ‘universe’  is  the  same  as 
the  ratio  which  the  sphere  containing  the  circle  in  which  he  supposes  the  earth 
to  revolve  bears  to  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars.  For  he  adapts  the  proofs  of  his 
results  to  a  hypothesis  of  this  kind,  and  in  particular  he  appears  to  suppose  the 
magnitude  of  the  sphere  in  which  he  represents  the  earth  as  moving  to  be  equal 
to  what  we  call  the  ‘universe.’ 

“I  say  then  that,  even  if  a  sphere  were  made  up  of  the  sand,  as  great  as 
Aristarchus  supposes  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars  to  be,  I  shall  still  prove  that, 

520 


521 


THE  SAND-RECKONER 

of  the  numbers  named  in  the  Principles,1  some  exceed  in  multitude  the  number 
of  the  sand  which  is  equal  in  magnitude  to  the  sphere  referred  to,  provided 
that  the  following  assumptions  be  made.” 

1.  “The  perimeter  of  the  earth  is  about  3,000,000  stadia  and  not  greater. 

“It  is  true  that  some  have  tried,  as  you  are  of  course  aware,  to  prove  that  the 
said  perimeter  is  about  300,000  stadia.  But  I  go  further  and,  putting  the  mag¬ 
nitude  of  the  earth  at  ten  times  the  size  that  my  predecessors  thought  it,  I 
suppose  its  perimeter  to  be  about  3,000,000  stadia  and  not  greater.” 

2.  “The  diameter  of  the  earth  is  greater  than  the  diameter  of  the  moon,  and  the 
diameter  of  the  sun  is  greater  than  the  diameter  of  the  earth. 

“In  this  assumption  I  follow  most  of  the  earlier  astronomers.” 

3.  “The  diameter  of  the  sun  is  about  30  times  the  diameter  of  the  moon  and  not 
greater. 

“It  is  true  that,  of  the  earlier  astronomers,  Eudoxus  declared  it  to  be  about 
nine  times  as  great,  and  Pheidias  my  father  twelve  times,  while  Aristarchus 
tried  to  prove  that  the  diameter  of  the  sun  is  greater  than  18  times  but  less 
than  20  times  the  diameter  of  the  moon.  But  I  go  even  further  than  Aristar¬ 
chus,  in  order  that  the  truth  of  my  proposition  may  be  established  beyond 
dispute,  and  I  suppose  the  diameter  of  the  sun  to  be  about  30  times  that  of  the 
moon  and  not  greater.” 

4.  “The  diameter  of  the  sun  is  greater  than  the  side  of  the  chiliagon  inscribed  in 
the  greatest  circle  in  the  ( sphere  of  the)  universe. 

“I  make  this  assumption  because  Aristarchus  discovered  that  the  sun  ap¬ 
peared  to  be  about  T^yth  part  of  the  circle  of  the  zodiac,  and  I  myself  tried,  by 
a  method  which  I  will  now  describe,  to  find  experimentally  (opyaviK&'s)  the 
angle  subtended  by  the  sun  and  having  its  vertex  at  the  eye.” 

[Up  to  this  point  the  treatise  has  been  literally  translated  because  of  the 
historical  interest  attaching  to  the  ipsissima  verba  of  Archimedes  on  such  a 
subject.  The  rest  of  the  work  can  now  be  more  freely  reproduced,  and,  before 
proceeding  to  the  mathematical  contents  of  it,  it  is  only  necessary  to  remark 
that  Archimedes  next  describes  how  he  arrived  at  a  higher  and  a  lower  limit 
for  the  angle  subtended  by  the  sun.  This  he  did  by  taking  a  long  rod  or  ruler, 
fastening  on  the  end  of  it  a  small  cylinder  or  disc,  pointing  the  rod  in  the  direc¬ 
tion  of  the  sun  just  after  its  rising  (so  that  it  was  possible  to  look  directly  at 
it),  then  putting  the  cylinder  at  such  a  distance  that  it  just  concealed,  and 
just  failed  to  conceal,  the  sun,  and  lastly  measuring  the  angles  subtended 
by  the  cylinder.  He  explains  also  the  correction  which  he  thought  it  neces¬ 
sary  to  make  because  “the  eye  does  not  see  from  one  point  but  from  a  certain 
area.”] 

The  result  of  the  experiment  was  to  show  that  the  angle  subtended  by  the 
diameter  of  the  sun  was  less  than  ygyth  part,  and  greater  than  ^oth  part,  of  a 
right  angle. 

To  prove  that  (on  this  assumption)  the  diameter  of  the  sun  is  greater  than  the 
side  of  a  chiliagon,  or  figure  with  1000  equal  sides,  inscribed  in  a  great  circle  of  the 
“universe.1^ 

Suppose  the  plane  of  the  paper  to  be  the  plane  passing  through  the  centre 
of  the  sun,  the  centre  of  the  earth  and  the  eye,  at  the  time  when  the  sun  has 


lA  lost  work  of  Archimedes. 


522  ARCHIMEDES 

just  risen  above  the  horizon.  Let  the  plane  cut  the  earth  in  the  circle  EHL  and 
the  sun  in  the  circle  FKG,  the  centres  of  the  earth  and  sun  being  C,  0  respec¬ 
tively,  and  E  being  the  position  of  the  eye. 

Further,  let  the  plane  cut  the  sphere  of  the  “universe”  (i.e.  the  sphere  whose 
centre  is  C  and  radius  CO)  in  the  great  circle  AOB. 

Draw  from  E  two  tangents  to  the  circle  FKG  touching  it  at  P,  Q,  and  from 
C  draw  two  other  tangents  to  the  same  circle  touching  it  in  F,  G  respectively. 

Let  CO  meet  the  sections  of  the  earth  and  sun  in  H,  K  respectively;  and  let 
CFy  CG  produced  meet  the  great  circle  AOB  in  A,  B. 

Join  EO ,  OF,  OG,  0Py  OQ,  AB,  and  let  AB  meet  CO  in  M. 

Now  CO>EO ,  since  the  sun  is  just  above  the  horizon. 

Therefore  Z  PEQ  >  Z  FCG. 

but^  ^  F | w^ere  R  represents  a  right  angle. 


Thus  Z  FCG  <  xirP,  a  fortiori , 

and  the  chord  AB  subtends  an  arc  of  the  great  circle  which  is  less  than  ^i^th 
of  the  circumference  of  that  circle,  i.e. 

AP<(side  of  656-sided  polygon  inscribed  in  the  circle). 

Now  the  perimeter  of  any  polygon  inscribed  in  the  great  circle  is  less  than 
_4_4 CO.  [Cf.  Measurement  of  a  circle ,  Prop.  3.] 

'  Therefore  AB  :  CO  <11  : 1148, 

and,  a  fortiori,  AB<t^oCO.  (a) 

Again,  since  CA  =  CO,  and  AM  is  perpendicular  to  CO,  while  OF  is  perpen¬ 
dicular  to  CA ,  AM  =  OF. 

Therefore  AB  =  2AM  =  (diameter  of  sun) . 

Thus  (diameter  of  sun)<T£o 00,  by  (a), 

and,  a  fortiori,  (diameter  of  earth)  <twoCO. 

Hence  CH+0K<rh)C0, 

so  that  HK>mC0 , 


[Assumption  2] 


THE  SAND-RECKONER 


523 


or  CO  :  HK  <  100 

And  CO>CF , 

while  HK<EQ. 

Therefore  CF  :  EQ <100  :  99.  (fi) 

Now  in  the  right-angled  triangles  CFOy  EQOy  of  the  sides  about  the  right 
angles,  OF  =  OQ ,  but  EQ<CF  (since  EO<CO). 

Therefore  Z  OEQ  :  Z  OCF  >  CO  :  EOy 

but  <CF:EQ.1 

Doubling  the  angles, 

Z.PEQ 


99. 


But 

Therefore 


ZACB<CF  :  EQ 

<100  :  99,  by  (/3)  above. 
ZPEQ>-zjjoR,  by  hypothesis. 


It  follows  that  the  arc  AB  is  greater  than  -rrath  of  the  circumference  of  the 
great  circle  AOB. 

Hence,  a  fortiori , 

AB>(side  of  chiliagon  inscribed  in  great  circle), 
and  AB  is  equal  to  the  diameter  of  the  sun,  as  proved  above. 

The  following  results  can  now  he  proved: 

(< diameter  of  “universe”)  <10,000  (< diameter  of  earth) , 
and  (diameter  of  “universe”)  <  10,000,000,000  stadia. 

(1)  Suppose,  for  brevity,  that  du  represents  the  diameter  of  the  “universe,” 
d8  that  of  the  sun,  de  that  of  the  earth,  and  dm  that  of  the  moon. 

By  hypothesis,  d8>30dm,  [Assumption  3] 

and  de>dm]  [Assumption  2] 

therefore  d8  <  30  de. 

Now,  by  the  last  proposition, 

da>(side  of  chiliagon  inscribed  in  great  circle), 
so  that  (perimeter  of  chiliagon)  <  1000d8 

<30,000d*. 

But  the  perimeter  of  any  regular  polygon  with  more  sides  than  6  inscribed 
in  a  circle  is  greater  than  that  of  the  inscribed  regular  hexagon,  and  therefore 
greater  than  three  times  the  diameter.  Hence 

(perimeter  of  chiliagon)  >  Mu¬ 
lt  follows  that  du  <  10,000de. 

(2)  (Perimeter  of  earth)  >3,000,000  stadia, 

and  (perimeter  of  earth)  >Me- 

Therefore  de  <  1,000,000  stadia, 

whence  du  <  10,000,000,000  stadia. 


[Assumption  1] 


Assumption  5 

Suppose  a  quantity  of  sand  taken  not  greater  than  a  poppy-seed,  and  sup¬ 
pose  that  it  contains  not  more  than  10,000  grains. 


JThe  proposition  here  assumed  is  of  course  equivalent  to  the  trigonometrical  formula 
which  states  that,  if  a,  @  are  the  circular  measures  of  two  angles,  each  less  than  a  right  angle, 
of  which  a  is  the  greater,  then 


524  ARCHIMEDES 

Next  suppose  the  diameter  of  the  poppy-seed  to  be  not  less  than  TVth  of  a 
finger-breadth. 

Orders  and  periods  of  numbers 

I.  We  have  traditional  names  for  numbers  up  to  a  myriad  (10,000);  we  can 
therefore  express  numbers  up  to  a  myriad  myriads  (100,000,000).  Let  these 
numbers  be  called  numbers  of  the  first  order . 

Suppose  the  100,000,000  to  be  the  unit  of  the  second  order ,  and  let  the  second 
order  consist  of  the  numbers  from  that  unit  up  to  ( 100,000,000) 2. 

Let  this  again  be  the  unit  of  the  third  order  of  numbers  ending  with  (100,- 
000, 000)3;  and  so  on,  until  we  reach  the  100,000,000^  order  of  numbers  ending 
with  ( 100,000,000) 100’000'000,  which  we  will  call  P. 

II.  Suppose  the  numbers  from  1  to  P  just  described  to  form  the  first  period. 

Let  P  be  the  unit  of  the  first  order  of  the  second  period ,  and  let  this  consist  of 

the  numbers  from  P  up  to  100,000,000P. 

Let  the  last  number  be  the  unit  of  the  second  order  of  the  second  period ,  and 
let  this  end  with  (100,000,000) 2P. 

We  can  go  on  in  this  way  till  we  reach  the  100,000,000^  order  of  the  second 
period  ending  with  (IOOjOOOjOOO)100'000-000  P,  or  P2. 

III.  Taking  P2  as  the  unit  of  the  first  order  of  the  third  period ,  we  proceed  in 
the  same  way  till  we  reach  the  100,000,000^  order  of  the  third  period  ending 
with  P3. 

IV.  Taking  P3  as  the  unit  of  the  first  order  of  the  fourth  period ,  we  continue 
the  same  process  until  we  arrive  at  the  100,000,000/ft  order  of  the  100,000,000^/t 
period  ending  with  P1^, 000,000  This  last  number  is  expressed  by  Archimedes  as 
“a  myriad-myriad  units  of  the  myriad-myriad-th  order  of  the  myriad-myriad-th 
period  (at  pvpLaKLfxpvpLoaras  Trepioftov  p.vpLO.Kiapvpio(rT&v  aptOpccv  pvpicu  pvpiades) ” 
which  is  easily  seen  to  be  100,000,000  times  the  product  of  (100,000,000) 

99,999,999  an(J  p99,999,999?  J  q  piOO.OOO.OOO. 

OCTADS 

Consider  the  series  of  terms  in  continued  proportion  of  which  the  first  is  1 
and  the  second  10  [i.e.  the  geometrical  progression  1,  101,  102,  103,  •  •■•].  The 
first  octad  of  these  terms  [i.e.  1,  101,  102,  •  •  -107]  fall  accordingly  under  the  first 
order  of  the  first  period  above  described,  the  second  octad  [i.e.  108,  109,  •  •  -1015] 
under  the  second  order  of  the  first  period ,  the  first  term  of  the  octad  being  the 
unit  of  the  corresponding  order  in  each  case.  Similarly  for  the  third  octad,  and 
so  on.  We  can,  in  the  same  way,  place  any  number  of  octads. 

Theorem 

If  there  be  any  number  of  terms  of  a  series  in  continued  proportion ,  say  Ah  A 2, 
As,  •  •  •  Amy  •  •  •  An,  •  •  •  Am+n-  1,  •  •  •  of  which  Ai  =  1,  A2  =  10  [so  that  the  series 
forms  the  geometrical  progression  1,  101,  102,  •  •  -10™-1,  •  •  10n_1,  •  •  -10m+n~2, 

•  •  •],  and  if  any  two  terms  as  Am,  An  be  taken  and  multiplied ,  the  product  Am  *An 
will  be  a  term  in  the  same  series  and  will  be  as  many  terms  distant  from  An  as  Am 
is  distant  from  A\;  also  it  will  be  distant  from  A\  by  a  number  of  terms  less  by  one 
than  the  sum  of  the  numbers  of  terms  by  which  Am  and  An  respectively  are  distant 
from  Ai. 

Take  the  term  which  is  distant  from  An  by  the  same  number  of  terms  as  Am 


THE  SAND-RECKONER  525 

is  distant  from  A\.  This  number  of  terms  is  m  (the  first  and  last  being  both 
counted).  Thus  the  term  to  be  taken  is  m  terms  distant  from  Anj  and  is  there¬ 
fore  the  term  Am+n-i- 

We  have  therefore  to  prove  that 

Am  *  A  r.  Hm-f-n — 1* 

Now  terms  equally  distant  from  other  terms  in  the  continued  proportion  are 
proportional. 

Thus  ~  —  • 

A 1  An 

But  Am  =  Am-Ai,  since  Ai  =  l. 

Therefore  Am+Tl-i  =  Am  -An.  (1) 

The  second  result  is  now  obvious,  since  Am  is  m  terms  distant  from  Ai,  A n 
is  n  terms  distant  from  Ah  and  Am+n- 1  is  (ra+n— 1)  terms  distant  from  A\. 

Application  to  the  number  of  the  sand 

By  Assumption  5  [p.  523], 

(diam.  of  poppy-seed) <xo (finger-breadth); 
and,  since  spheres  are  to  one  another  in  the  triplicate  ratio  of  their  diameters, 
it  follows  that 

(sphere  of  diam.  1  finger-breadth)  >64,000  poppy-seeds 

>64,000X10,000 
>640,000,000 
>6  units  of  second  grains 
order +40,000,000  of 
units  of  first  order  sand. 

(a  fortiori)  <  10  units  of  second 
order  of  numbers. 

We  now  gradually  increase  the  diameter  of  the  supposed  sphere,  multiplying 
it  by  100  each  time.  Thus,  remembering  that  the  sphere  is  thereby  multiplied 
by  1003  or  1,000,000,  the  number  of  grains  of  sand  which  would  be  contained 
in  a  sphere  with  each  successive  diameter  ma}T  be  arrived  at  as  follows. 


Diameter  of  sphere. 

(1)  100  finger-breadths 


(2)  10,000  finger-breadths 


(3)  1  stadium 

(<10,000  finger-breadths) 

(4)  100  stadia 


(5)  10,000  stadia 


Corresponding  number  of  grains  of  sand. 
<1,009,000X10  units  of  second  order 
<(7th  term  of  series)  X  ( 10th  term  of  series) 
<16th  term  of  series  [i.e.  1015] 

<[107  or]  10,000,000  units  of  the  second  order. 

<  1,000,000  X  (last  number) 

<(7th  term  of  series)  X  (16th  term) 

<22nd  term  of  series  [i.e.  1021] 

<[105  or]  100,000  units  of  third  order. 

<  100,000  units  of  third  order. 

<  1 ,000,000  X  (last  number) 

<(7th  term  of  series)  X  (22nd  term) 

<28th  term  of  series  [1027] 

<[103  or]  1,000  units  of  fourth  order. 

<  1,000,000  X  (last  number) 

<(7th  term  of  series)  X(28t-h  term) 

<34th  term  of  series  [1033] 

<10  units  of  fifth  order. 


526 


ARCHIMEDES 


(6)  1,000,000  stadia 


(7)  100,000,000  stadia 


(8)  10,000,000,000  stadia 


<  (7th  term  of  series)  X  (34th  term) 

<40th  term  [1039] 

<[107  or]  10,000,000  units  of  fifth  order. 

<  (7th  term  of  series)  X  (40th  term) 

<46th  term  [1045] 

<[105  or]  100,000  units  of  sixth  order. 

<  (7th  term  of  series)  X  (46th  term) 

<52nd  term  of  series  [1051] 

<[103  or]  1,000  units  of  seventh  order. 


But,  by  the  proposition  above  [p.  523], 

(diameter  of  “universe”)  <10,000,000,000  stadia. 

Hence  the  number  of  grains  of  sand  which  could  be  contained  in  a  sphere  of  the 
size  of  our  “universe”  is  less  than  1,000  units  of  the  seventh  order  of  numbers 
[or  1051]. 

From  this  we  can  prove  further  that  a  sphere  of  the  size  attributed  by  Aristar¬ 
chus  to  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars  would  contain  a  number  of  grains  of  sand  less 
than  10,000,000  units  of  the  eighth  order  of  numbers  [or  1056+7  =  1063]. 

For,  by  hypothesis, 

(earth)  :  (“universe”)  =  (“universe”)  :  (sphere  of  fixed  stars). 

And  [p.  523] 

(diameter  of  “universe”) <10,000  (diam.  of  earth); 

whence 

(diam.  of  sphere  of  fixed  stars)  <  10,000  (diam.  of  “universe”). 
Therefore 

(sphere  of  fixed  stars)  <  (10, 000)3  -(“universe”). 

It  follows  that  the  number  of  grains  of  sand  which  would  be  contained  in  a 
sphere  equal  to  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars 

< (10, 000)3X  1,000  units  of  seventh  order 
<(13th  term  of  series)  X  (52nd  term  of  series) 

<64th  term  of  series  [i.e.  1063] 

<[107  or]  10,000,000  units  of  eighth  order  of  numbers. 


Conclusion. 

“I  conceive  that  these  things,  King  Gelon,  will  appear  incredible  to  the 
great  majority  of  people  who  have  not  studied  mathematics,  but  that  to  those 
who  are  conversant  therewith  and  have  given  thought  to  the  question  of  the 
distances  and  sizes  of  the  earth,  the  sun  and  moon  and  the  whole  universe,  the 
proof  will  carry  conviction.  And  it  was  for  this  reason  that  I  thought  the  sub¬ 
ject  would  be  not  inappropriate  for  your  consideration.” 


QUADRATURE  OF  THE  PARABOLA 


‘Archimedes  to  Dositheus  greeting. 

“When  I  heard  that  Conon,  who  was  my  friend  in  his  lifetime,  was  dead,  but 
that  you  were  acquainted  with  Conon  and  withal  versed  in  geometry,  while  I 
grieved  for  the  loss  not  only  of  a  friend  but  of  an  admirable  mathematician,  I 
set  myself  the  task  of  communicating  to  you,  as  I  had  intended  to  send  to 
Conon,  a  certain  geometrical  theorem  which  had  not  been  investigated  before 
but  has  now  been  investigated  by  me,  and  which  I  first  discovered  by  means  of 
mechanics  and  then  exhibited  by  means  of  geometry.  Now  some  of  the  earlier 
geometers  tried  to  prove  it  possible  to  find  a  rectilineal  area  equal  to  a  given 
circle  and  a  given  segment  of  a  circle;  and  after  that  they  endeavoured  to 
square  the  area  bounded  by  the  section  of  the  whole  cone  and  a  straight  line, 
assuming  lemmas  not  easily  conceded,  so  that  it  was  recognised  by  most  people 
that  the  problem  was  not  solved.  But  I  am  not  aware  that  any  one  of  my 
predecessors  has  attempted  to  square  the  segment  bounded  by  a  straight  line 
and  a  section  of  a  right-angled  cone  [a  parabola],  of  which  problem  I  have  now 
discovered  the  solution.  For  it  is  here  shown  that  every  segment  bounded  by  a 
straight  line  and  a  section  of  a  right-angled  cone  [a  parabola]  is  four-thirds  of 
the  triangle  which  has  the  same  base  and  equal  height  with  the  segment,  and 
for  the  demonstration  of  this  property  the  following  lemma  is  assumed:  that 
the  excess  by  which  the  greater  of  (two)  unequal  areas  exceeds  the  less  can,  by 
being  added  to  itself,  be  made  to  exceed  any  given  finite  area.  The  earlier 
geometers  have  also  used  this  lemma;  for  it  is  b}r  the  use  of  this  same  lemma 
that  they  have  shown  that  circles  are  to  one  another  in  the  duplicate  ratio  of 
their  diameters,  and  that  spheres  are  to  one  another  in  the  triplicate  ratio  of 
their  diameters,  and  further  that  every  pyramid  is  one  third  part  of  the  prism 
which  has  the  same  base  with  the  pyramid  and  equal  height;  also,  that  every 
cone  is  one  third  part  of  the  cylinder  having  the  same  base  as  the  cone  and 
equal  height  they  proved  by  assuming  a  certain  lemma  similar  to  that  afore¬ 
said.  And,  in  the  result,  each  of  the  aforesaid  theorems  has  been  accepted  no 
less  than  those  proved  without  the  lemma.  As  therefore  my  work  now  pub¬ 
lished  has  satisfied  the  same  test  as  the  propositions  referred  to,  I  have  written 
out  the  proof  and  send  it  to  you,  first  as  investigated  by  means  of  mechanics, 
and  afterwards  too  as  demonstrated  by  geometry.  Prefixed  are,  also,  the  ele¬ 
mentary  propositions  in  conics  which  are  of  service  in  the  proof.  Farewell.” 


527 


528 


ARCHIMEDES 


Proposition  1 

If  from  a  point  on  a  parabola  a  straight  line  be  drawn  which  is  either  itself  the  axis 
or  parallel  to  the  axis,  as  PV,  and  if  QQ'  be  a  chord  parallel  to  the  tangent  to  the 
parabola  at  P  and  meeting  PV  in  V,  then 

QV=VQ'. 

Conversely,  if  QV  =  VQ',  the  chord  QQ'  will  be  parallel  to  the  tangent  at  P. 


Proposition  2 

If  in  a  parabola  QQ'  be  a  chord  parallel  to  the  tangent  at  P,  and  if  a  straight  line  be 
drawn  through  P  which  is  either  itself  the  axis  or  parallel  to  the  axis,  and  which 
meets  QQ'  in  V  and  the  tangent  at  Q  to  the  parabola  in  T ,  then 

PV  =  PT. 


If  from  a  point  on  a  parabola  a  straight  line  be  drawn  which  is  either  itself  the  axis 
or  parallel  to  the  axis ,  as  PV,  and  if  from  two  other  points  Q,  Q'  on  the  parabola 
straight  lines  be  drawn  parallel  to  the  tangent  at  P  and  meeting  PV  in  V ,  V' 
respectively ,  then  PV  :  PV'  —  QV2 :  Q'V '2. 

“And  these  propositions  are  proved  in  the  elements  of  conics A” 

Proposition  4 

If  Qq  be  the  base  of  any  segment  of  a  parabola ,  and  P  the  vertex  of  the  segment ,  and 
if  the  diameter  through  any  other  point  R  meet  Qq  in  0  and  QP  ( produced  if 
necessary)  in  P,  then  QV  :  VO  — OF  :  FR . 

Draw  the  ordinate  RW  to  PV,  meeting  QP  in  K. 

Then  PV  :  PW=QV2  :  RW2; 

whence,  by  parallels,  PQ  :  PK  —  PQ2  :  PF2. 

xi.e.  in  the  treatises  on  conics  by  Euclid  and  Aristaeus. 


529 


QUADRATURE  OF  THE  PARABOLA 
In  other  words,  PQ,  PF ,  PK  are  in  continued  proportion;  therefore 


PQ  :  PF  —  PF  :  PK 

=  PQ±PF  :PF±PK 
=  QF  :  KF. 

Hence,  by  parallels,  QV  :  VO  =  OF  :  FR. 

Proposition  5 

If  Qq  be  the  base  of  any  segment  of  a  parabolay  P  the  vertex  of  the  segment ,  and  PV 
its  diameter ,  and  if  the  diameter  of  the  parabola  through  any  other  point  R  meet 
Qq  in  0  and  the  tangent  at  Q  in  E ,  then 

QO  :  Oq  =  ER  :  RO. 

Let  the  diameter  through  R  meet  QP 
in  F. 

Then,  by  Prop.  4, 

QV  :VO  =  OF  :FR. 

Since  QV  =  Vq,  it  follows  that 

QV  :qO  =  OF  :OR.  (1) 

Also,  if  UP  meet  the  tangent  in  T, 

PT  =  PV,  and  therefore  EF  =  OF. 
Accordingly,  doubling  the  antecedents 
in  (1),  we  have 

Qq  :  qO  =  OE  :  ORy 
whence  QO  :  Oq  —  ER  :  RO. 

Propositions  6,  71 

Suppose  a  lever  AOB  placed  horizontally  and  supported  at  its  middle  point  0.  Let 
a  triangle  BCD  in  which  the  angle  C  is  right  or  obtuse  be  suspended  from  B  and  0, 
so  that  C  is  attached  to  0  and  CD  is  in  the  same  vertical  line  with  0.  Theny  if  P  be 
such  an  area  asy  when  suspended  from  A ,  will  keep  the  system  in  equilibrium , 

P  =  $ABCD. 

Tn  Prop.  6  Archimedes  takes  the  separate  case  in  which  the  angle  BCD  of  the  triangle  is 
a  right  angle  so  that  C  coincides  with  0  in  the  figure  and  F  with  E.  He  then  proves,  in  Prop. 
7,  the  same  property  for  the  triangle  in  which  BCD  is  an  obtuse  angle,  by  treating  the  tri¬ 
angle  as  the  difference  between  two  right-angled  triangles  BOD ,  BOC  and  using  the  result  of 
Prop.  6. 1  have  combined  the  two  propositions  in  one  proof,  for  the  sake  of  brevity.  The  same 
remark  applies  to  the  propositions  following  Props.  6,  7. 


530 


ARCHIMEDES 


Take  a  point  E  on  OB  such  that  BE  =  2 OEy  and  draw  EFH  parallel  to  OCD 
meeting  BC ,  BD  in  F,  H  respectively. 

Let  G  be  the  middle  point  of  FH. 

Then  G  is  the  centre  of  gravity  of 
the  triangle  BCD. 

Hence,  if  the  angular  points  J5,  C  be 
set  free  and  the  triangle  be  suspended 
by  attaching  F  to  Ey  the  triangle  will 
hang  in  the  same  position  as  before, 
because  EFG  is  a  vertical  straight  line.  “For  this  is  proved.”1 

Therefore,  as  before,  there  will  be  equilibrium. 

Thus  P  :  ABCD  =  OE  :  AO 

=  1:3, 

or  P  =  \ABCD . 

Propositions  8,  9 

Suppose  a  lever  AOB  placed  horizontally  and  supported  at  its  middle  point  0.  Let 
a  triangle  BCD ,  right-angled  or  obtuse-angled  at  C,  be  suspended  from  the  points 
By  E  on  OBy  the  angular  point  C  being  so  attached  to  E  that  the  side  CD  is  in  the 
same  vertical  line  with  E.  Let  Q  be  an  area  such  that 

AO  :  OE  =  ABCD  :  Q. 

Theny  if  an  area  P  suspended  f  rom 
A  keep  the  system  in  equilibriumy 
P<ABCD  but>Q. 

Take  G  the  centre  of  gravity 
of  the  triangle  BCDy  and  draw 
GH  parallel  to  DC ,  i.e.  vertically, 
meeting  BO  in  H . 

We  may  now  suppose  the  tri¬ 
angle  BCD  suspended  from  H , 
and,  since  there  is  equilibrium, 


whence 

Also 

Therefore,  by  (1), 
and 


A  BCD  :P  =  AO:OHy 
P  <  ABCD. 

A  BCD  :Q  =  AO  :OE. 
ABCD  :Q>  ABCD  :Pf 
P>Q. 


a) 


Propositions  10,  11 

Suppose  a  lever  AOB  placed  horizontally  and  supported  at  0,  its  middle  point . 
Let  CDEF  be  a  trapezium  which  can  be  so  placed  that  its  parallel  sides  CDy  FE 
are  vertical  while  C  is  vertically  below  0,  and  the  other  sides  CFy  DE  meet  in  B. 
Let  EF  meet  BO  in  Hy  and  let  the  trapezium  be  suspended  by  attaching  F  to  H 
and  C  to  0.  Further ,  suppose  Q  to  be  an  area  such  that 
AO  :  OH  =  {trapezium  CDEF )  :  Q. 

Theny  if  P  be  the  area  which ,  when  suspended  from  A ,  keeps  the  system  in  equi* 
libriumy 

P<Q. 


doubtless  in  the  lost  book  wept  $vy$v. 


531 


QUADRATURE  OF  THE  PARABOLA 


The  same  is  true  in  the  particular  case  where  the  angles  at  C,  F  are  right ,  and 
consequently  C,  F  coincide  with  0,  H  respectively . 

Divide  OH  in  K  so  that 


(2 CD+FE)  :  (2 FE+CD)=HK  :  KO. 

Draw  KG  parallel  to  OD ,  and 
let  G  be  the  middle  point  of  the 
portion  of  KG  intercepted  with¬ 
in  the  trapezium.  Then  G  is  the 
centre  of  gravity  of  the  trape¬ 
zium  [On  the  equilibrium  of 
planes ,  I.  15]. 

Thus  w’e  may  suppose  the  tra¬ 
pezium  suspended  from  K ,  and 


the  equilibrium  will  remain  undisturbed. 

Therefore  AO  :  OK  =  (trapezium  CDEF)  :  P, 

and,  by  hypothesis,  AO  :  OH  =  (trapezium  CDEF)  :  Q. 
Since  0K<0H ,  it  follows  that 

P<Q. 


Propositions  12,  13 

If  the  trapezium  CDEF  be  placed  as  in  the  last  propositions ,  except  that  CD  is 
vertically  below  a  point  L  on  OB  instead  of  being  below  0,  and  the  trapezium  is 
suspended  from  L ,  H ,  suppose  that  Q,  R  are  areas  such  that 
AO  :  OH  =  (trapezium  CDEF)  :  Q , 
and  AO  :  0L  =  (trapezium  CDEF)  :  R. 

If  then  an  area  P  suspended 
from  A  keep  the  system  in  equilib- 
rium , 

P>R  butCQ. 

Take  the  centre  of  gravity  G 
of  the  trapezium,  as  in  the  last 
propositions,  and  let  the  line 
through  G  parallel  to  DC  meet 
OB  in  K. 

Then  W’e  may  suppose  the  tra¬ 
pezium  suspended  from  K ,  and 
there  will  still  be  equilibrium. 
Therefore  (trapezium  CDEF)  :  P  =  AO  :  OK. 

Hence  (trapezium  CDEF)  :  P>  (trapezium  CDEF)  :  Q, 

but  <  (trapezium  CDEF)  :  R. 

It  follow’s  that  P<Q  but  >R. 


Propositions  14,  15 

Let  Qq  be  the  base  of  any  segment  of  a  parabola.  Then,  if  tw’o  lines  be  draw’n 
from  Q,  q}  each  parallel  to  the  axis  of  the  parabola  and  on  the  same  side  of  Qq 
as  the  segment  is,  either  (1)  the  angles  so  formed  at  Q,  q  are  both  right  angles, 
or  (2)  one  is  acute  and  the  other  obtuse.  In  the  latter  case  let  the  angle  at  q 
be  the  obtuse  angle. 

Divide  Qq  into  any  number  of  equal  parts  at  the  points  Oi,  0 2,  •  •  0n.  Draw 


532  ARCHIMEDES 

through  q,  Oi,  02,  •  •  0n  diameters  of  the  parabola  meeting  the  tangent  at  Q  in 
E ,  Eh  E2,  •  *  'En  and  the  parabola  itself  in  q,  Rh  R2,  •  •  • Rn .  Join  QR1}  QR2 ,  •  •  • 
QRn  meeting  qE,  OiEh  02E2,  •  •  -On-iPn-i  in  F,  Fh  F2f  •  •  -Fn_ r. 

Let  the  diameters  Eq,  E1O1,  •  •  EnOn  meet  a  straight  line  QOA  drawn  through 
Q  perpendicular  to  the  diameters  in  the  points  0,  Hi,  H2,  •  •  Hn  respectively. 
(In  the  particular  case  where  Qq  is  itself  perpendicular  to  the  diameters  q  will 
coincide  with  0,  Oi  with  Hi,  and  so  on.) 

It  is  required  to  prove  that 

(1)  A EqQ<3(sum  of  trapezia  FOi,  Fx02,  •  •  Fn-iOn  and  A EnOnQ), 

(2)  AEqQ>3(sum  of  trapezia  Ri02,R20z,  •  •  • Rn-iOn  and  A RnOnQ)- 


Suppose  AO  made  equal  to  OQ,  and  conceive  QOA  as  a  lever  placed  hori¬ 
zontally  and  supported  at  0.  Suppose  the  triangle  EqQ  suspended  from  OQ  in 
the  position  drawn,  and  suppose  that  the  trapezium  EOi  in  the  position  drawn 
is  balanced  by  an  area  Pi  suspended  from  A,  the  trapezium  Ei02  in  the  position 
drawn  is  balanced  by  the  area  P2  suspended  from  A,  and  so  on,  the  triangle 
EnOnQ  being  in  like  manner  balanced  by  Pn+i- 

Then  P1+P2+  •  •  -+Pn+i  will  balance  the  whole  triangle  EqQ  as  drawn,  and 
therefore  P1+P2+  •  •  -+Pn+iz=iAEqQ.  [Props.  6,  7] 

Again  AO  :  OHi  =  QO  :  OHi 

=  Qq  :  qOi 

=  EiOi  :  O1P1  [by  means  of  Prop.  5] 

=  (trapezium  EOi)  :  (trapezium  POi) ; 
whence  [Props.  10,  11]  (POi)>Pi. 


533 


QUADRATURE  OF  THE  PARABOLA 

Next  AO  :  OH\  =  EiO\  :  0\R\ 

=  (Pi02)  :{Ri02),  (a) 

while  AO  OH %  =  E2O2  ’  O2R2 

=  (El02):(F10  2);  (/?) 

and,  since  (a)  and  (0)  are  simultaneously  true,  we  have,  by  Props.  12,  13, 

(Pi02)>P2>(Pi02). 

Similarly  it  may  be  proved  that 

(F 20s)  >Pz>  ( P203 ) , 

and  so  on. 

Lastly  [Props.  8,  9]  AEnOnQ>Pn+i>  ARnOnQ- 
By  addition,  we  obtain 

(1)  (F0i)  +  (Fi02)+  •  •  -  +  (Fn.1On)  +  AEnOnQ>Pi+P2+  -  •  -+Pn+ 1 

>IA  EqQ, 

or  AEqQ<3(F0l+Fl02+  •  •  -+Fn^0n+ AEnOnQ). 

(2)  (Pl02)  +  (P203)+  *  *  -  +  (Pn-lOn)  +  APnO„Q  <P2  +  P3+  *  *  *T“Pn+l 

<Pi+P2H - bPn+1,  a  fortiori, 

<\AEqQ, 

or  AP(?Q>3(Pi02+P203+  •  •  -  Rn-iOn-\-  ARnOnQ)  • 


Proposition  16 

Suppose  Qq  to  be  the  base  of  a  parabolic  segment ,  q  being  not  more  distant  than  Q 
from  the  vertex  of  the  parabola.  Draw  through  q  the  straight  line  qE  parallel  to  the 
axis  of  the  parabola  to  meet  the  tangent  at  Q  in  E.  It  is  required  to  prove  that 

(area  of  segment)  =\AEqQ. 

For,  if  not,  the  area  of  the  segment  must 
be  either  greater  or  less  than  EqQ. 

I.  Suppose  the  area  of  the  segment  greater 
than  \A EqQ.  Then  the  excess  can,  if  contin¬ 
ually  added  to  itself,  be  made  to  exceed  A  EqQ. 
And  it  is  possible  to  find  a  submultiple  of  the 
triangle  EqQ  less  than  the  said  excess  of  the 
segment  over  f  A  EqQ. 

Let  the  triangle  FqQ  be  such  a  submultiple 
of  the  triangle  EqQ.  Divide  Eq  into  equal  parts 
each  equal  to  qF ,  and  let  all  the  points  of  divi¬ 
sion  including  F  be  joined  to  Q  meeting  the 
parabola  in  Pi,P2,  •  ♦  Rn  respectively.  Through 
Pi,  P2,  •  •  -Rn  draw  diameters  of  the  parabola 
meeting  qQ  in  Oi,  02,  •  •  • On  respectively. 

Let  O1P1  meet  QP2  in  F\. 

Let  O2R2  meet  QRi  in  Di  and  QRZ  in  P2. 
Let  O3P3  meet  QR2  in  D2  and  QP4  in  P3, 
and  so  on. 

We  have,  by  hypothesis, 

AFtfQ<(area  of  segment)— A  EqQ, 

or  (area  of  segment)  —  AFqQ>\AEqQ.  (a) 

Now,  since  all  the  parts  of  qE,  as  qF  and  the  rest,  are  equal,  OiPi  =  PiFi, 
02Di  =  Z)iP2  =  P2F2,  and  so  on;  therefore 


534  ARCHIMEDES 

A FqQ  —  (JF0i+/?i02+i)i03+  *  •  •) 

=  (FOi+ F1D1+ F2D2+  *  *  '+^-12)71-1+  ASnffnQ).  (/3) 

But  (area  of  segment)  <  (FO1+F1O2+ - h^n-iOn+  A EnOnQ). 

Subtracting,  we  have 

(area  of  segment)  —  AFqQ<(R102+Rz0s+ - b#n_iOn+  ARnOnQ), 

whence,  a  fortiori,  by  (a), 

\AEqQ  <  (/21O2+-K2O3+  •  •  *+72n-iOn+  ARnOnQ)» 

But  this  is  impossible,  since  [Props.  14,  15] 

\AEqQ>(R\0<LJrR‘2.0zJr  •  *  *+22n-iOn+  ARnOnQ)- 
Therefore  (area  of  segment) A EqQ. 

II.  If  possible,  suppose  the  area  of  the  segment  less  than  \AEqQ. 

Take  a  submultiple  of  the  triangle  EqQ,  as  the  triangle  FqQ,  less  than  the 
excess  of  \A  EqQ  over  the  area  of  the  segment,  and  make  the  same  construc¬ 
tion  as  before. 

Since  AFqQ<\AEqQ  —  (area  of  segment) , 

it  follows  that 

AF#Q+(area  of  segment)  A  EqQ 

<  (F 0 1  F lO 2 T"  *  *  *  +  Fn_iOn+  AEnOnQ)- 

[Props.  14,  15] 

Subtracting  from  each  side  the  area  of  the  segment,  we  have 
A  FqQ  <  (sum  of  spaces  qFRh  R1F1R2,  •  •  EnRnQ) 

<(FOi+fYDi+  *  •  •+f'n-iDn-i+ AEnRnQ),  sl  fortiori; 
which  is  impossible,  because,  by  (0)  above, 

A  FqQ  =  FOi~\-  F\D\-\-  •  •  •+F»-iI?n-i+  AEnRnQ. 

Hence  (area  of  segment)  A  EqQ. 

Since  then  the  area  of  the  segment  is  neither  less  nor  greater  than  %A  EqQ, 
it  is  equal  to  it. 


Proposition  17 

It  is  now  manifest  that  the  area  of  any  segment  of  a  parabola  is  four-thirds  of  the 
triangle  which  has  the  same  base  as  the  segment  and  equal  height . 

Let  Qq  be  the  base  of  the  segment,  P  its  vertex. 

Then  PQq  is  the  inscribed  triangle  with  the  same 
base  as  the  segment  and  equal  height. 

Since  P  is  the  vertex  of  the  segment,  the  diame¬ 
ter  through  P  bisects  Qq.  Let  V  be  the  point  of  bi¬ 
section. 

Let  VP,  and  qE  drawn  parallel  to  it,  meet  the  tan¬ 
gent  at  Q  in  T,  E  respectively. 

Then,  by  parallels, 

qE  =  2VT, 

and  PV  =  PT,  [Prop.  2] 

so  that  VT  =  2PV. 

Hence  AEqQ  =  4,APQq. 

But,  by  Prop.  16,  the  area  of  the  segment  is  equal  to 
|A  EqQ. 

Therefore  (area  of  segment)  =f  A  PQq- 


Def.  “In  segments  bounded  by  a  straight  line  and  any  curve  I  call  the 


535 


QUADRATURE  OF  THE  PARABOLA 

straight  line  the  base ,  and  the  height  the  greatest  perpendicular  drawn  from  the 
curve  to  the  base  of  the  segment,  and  the  vertex  the  point  from  which  the 
greatest  perpendicular  is  drawn.” 


Q 


Proposition  18 

If  Qq  be  the  base  of  a  segment  of  a  parabola,  and  V  the 
middle  point  of  Qq,  and  if  the  diameter  through  V  meet  the 
curve  in  P ,  then  P  is  the  vertex  of  the  segment. 

For  Qq  is  parallel  to  the  tangent  at  P  [Prop.  1].  Therefore, 
of  all  the  perpendiculars  which  can  be  drawn  from  points 
on  the  segment  to  the  base  Qq,  that  from  P  is  the  greatest. 
Hence,  by  the  definition,  P  is  the  vertex  of  the  segment. 

Proposition  19 

If  Qq  be  a  chord  of  a  parabola  bisected  in  V  by  the  diameter 
PV,  and  if  RM  be  a  diameter  bisecting  QV  in  M,  and  RW 
be  the  ordinate  from  R  to  PV,  then 
PV  —  ^RM. 

For,  by  the  property  of  the  parabola, 

PV  :PW=QV2:RW2 
=  4PW2 :  RW2, 

so  that  PV  =  4PTF, 

whence  PV  =  %RM. 


Proposition  20 


Q 


If  Qq  be  the  base,  and  P  the  vertex,  of  a  parabolic  segment , 
then  the  triangle  PQq  is  greater  than  half  the  segment 

PQq- 

For  the  chord  Qq  is  parallel  to  the  tangent  at  P,  and 
the  triangle  PQq  is  half  the  parallelogram  formed  by  Qq, 
the  tangent  at  P,  and  the  diameters  through  Q,  q. 

Therefore  the  triangle  PQq  is  greater  than  half  the 
segment. 

Cor.  It  follows  that  it  is  possible  to  inscribe  in  the  seg¬ 
ment  a  polygon  such  that  the  segments  left  over  are  together 
less  than  any  assigned  area. 


Q 


Proposition  21 

If  Qq  be  the  base,  and  P  the  vertex ,  of  any  parabolic  seg¬ 
ment,  and  if  R  be  the  vertex  of  the  segment  cut  off  by  PQ , 
then 

APQq  =  8APRQ . 

The  diameter  through  R  will  bisect  the  chord  PQ, 
and  therefore  also  QV,  where  PV  is  the  diameter  bisect¬ 
ing  Qq.  Let  the  diameter  through  R  bisect  PQ  in  Y  and 
QV  in  M.  Join  PM. 

By  Prop.  19,  PV  =  {RM. 

Also  PV  =  2YM. 

Therefore  YM  =  2  R  Y, 


536 

ARCHIMEDES 

and 

apqm =2APRQ. 

Hence 

apqv=±aprq, 

and 

APQq  =  8APRQ. 

Also,  if  RW,  the  ordinate  from  R  to  PV,  be  produced  to  meet  the  curve 
again  in  r,  RW  =  rW, 

and  the  same  proof  shows  that 

APQq  =  8APrq. 


Proposition  22 

If  there  be  a  series  of  areas  A,  B,  C,  D,  *  •  *  each  of  which  is  four  times  the  next  in 
order ,  and  if  the  largest ,  A,  be  equal  to  the  triangle  PQq  inscribed  in  a  'parabolic 
segment  PQq  and  having  the  same  base  ivith  it  and  equal  height ,  then 
(A+B+C+D+  •  •  • )<(area  of  segment  PQq). 

For,  since  APQq  =  SAPRQ  =  SAPqr ,  where  R,  r  are 
the  vertices  of  the  segments  cut  off  by  PQ ,  Pq,  as  in  the 
last  proposition, 

APQq  =  ±(A  PQR  A  A  Pqr) . 

Therefore ,  since  A  PQq  =  A , 

APQR+APqr  =  B. 

In  like  manner  we  prove  that  the  triangles  similarly  in¬ 
scribed  in  the  remaining  segments  are  together  equal  to 
the  area  C,  and  so  on. 

Therefore  A—BACAD—  •  •  •  is  equal  to  the  area  of 
a  certain  inscribed  polygon,  and  is  therefore  less  than 
the  area  of  the  segment. 


Proposition  23 

Given  a  series  of  areas  A,  B.  C ,  D,  •  *  Zf  of  which  A  is  the  greatest ,  and  each  is 
equal  to  four  times  the  next  in  order ,  then 

AABACA  •  •  -4-Z+^Z  = 

Take  areas  b,  c,  d,  ■  ■  •  such  that 
b  =  \B, 
c  =  iC, 

d  =  \D,  and  so  on. 

Then,  since  b  =  \B, 
and  B  =  jA, 

B+b  =  \A. 

Similarly  C+c  =  \B. 


Therefore 

B  AC  -{-DA  •  *  •  AZ  AbAcAdA  •  •  *-(-2  = 
I(AABACA---AY). 

But 

bAcAdA-  •  •  -Ay  =  \ (BACAD —  •  •  •AY). 
Therefore,  bv  subtraction, 

BACADA-"AZ+z  =  U 
or  AABACA  •  *  'AZA\Z=%A. 


537 


QUADRATURE  OF  THE  PARABOLA 
Proposition  24 

Evenj  segment  bounded  by  a  parabola  and  a  chord  Qq  is  equal  to  four-thirds  of  the 
triangle  which  has  the  same  base  as  the  segment  and  equal  height . 

Suppose  K  =  %APQq, 

where  P  is  the  vertex  of  the  segment ;  and  we  have  then  to  prove  that  the  area 
of  the  segment  is  equal  to  K. 

For,  if  the  segment  be  not  equal  to  K ,  it  must  either  be 
greater  or  less. 

I.  Suppose  the  area  of  the  segment  greater  than  K. 

If  then  we  inscribe  in  the  segments  cut  off  by  PQ,  Pq 
triangles  which  have  the  same  base  and  equal  height,  i.e. 
triangles  with  the  same  vertices  P,  r  as  those  of  the  seg¬ 
ments,  and  if  in  the  remaining  segments  we  inscribe  tri¬ 
angles  in  the  same  manner,  and  so  on,  we  shall  finally  have 
segments  remaining  whose  sum  is  less  than  the  area  by 
which  the  segment  PQq  exceeds  K. 

Therefore  the  polygon  so  formed  must  be  greater  than 
the  area  K;  which  is  impossible,  since  [Prop.  23] 
A-\-B-\-C- f-  •  •  *4 -Z < ^A , 
where  A  =  A  PQq. 

Thus  the  area  of  the  segment  cannot  be  greater  than  K. 

II.  Suppose,  if  possible,  that  the  area  of  the  segment  is  less  than  K. 

If  then  APQq  =  A ,  B  =  \A,  C  =  and  so  on,  until  we  arrive  at  an  area  X 
such  that  X  is  less  than  the  difference  between  K  and  the  segment,  we  have 
A -p  P  A  (7 -p  *  *  ■  ~P  X  -p ^X  =  A  [Prop.  23] 

=  K. 

Now,  since  K  exceeds  A+P+C+  •  •  -+X  by  an  area  less  than  X,  and  the 
area  of  the  segment  by  an  area  greater  than  X,  it  follows  that 
A+B+C+  •  •  *+X>(the  segment); 
which  is  impossible,  by  Prop.  22  above. 

Hence  the  segment  is  not  less  than  K . 

Thus,  since  the  segment  is  neither  greater  nor  less  than  K , 

(area  of  segment  PQq)=K  =  ^APQq. 


ON  FLOATING  BODIES 
BOOK  ONE 


POSTULATE  1 

“Let  it  be  supposed  that  a  fluid  is  of  such  a  character  that,  its  parts  lying 
evenly  and  being  continuous,  that  part  which  is  thrust  the  less  is  driven  along 
by  that  which  is  thrust  the  more ;  and  that  each  of  its  parts  is  thrust  by  the 
fluid  which  is  above  it  in  a  perpendicular  direction  if  the  fluid  be  sunk  in  any¬ 
thing  and  compressed  by  anything  else.” 

Proposition  1 

If  a  surface  be  cut  by  a  plane  always  passing  through  a  certain  point ,  and  if  the 
section  be  always  a  circumference  [of  a  circle ]  whose  centre  is  the  aforesaid  pointy 
the  surface  is  that  of  a  sphere. 

For,  if  not,  there  will  be  some  two  lines  drawn  from  the  point  to  the  surface 
which  are  not  equal. 

Suppose  0  to  be  the  fixed  point,  and  A,  B  to  be  two  points  on  the  surface 
such  that  OAy  OB  are  unequal.  Let  the  surface  be  cut  by  a  plane  passing 
through  OAy  OB.  Then  the  section  is,  by  hypothesis,  a  circle  whose  centre  is  0. 

Thus  OA=OB ;  which  is  contrary  to  the  assumption.  Therefore  the  surface 
cannot  but  be  a  sphere. 

Proposition  2 

The  surface  of  any  fluid  at  rest  is  the  surface  of  a  sphere  whose  centre  is  the  same 
as  that  of  the  earth. 

Suppose  the  surface  of  the  fluid  cut  by  a  plane  through  0,  the  centre  of  the 
earth,  in  the  curve  ABCD. 

ABCD  shall  be  the  circumference  of  a  circle. 

For,  if  not,  some  of  the  lines  drawn  from  0  to  the  curve  will  be  unequal. 
Take  one  of  them,  OB ,  such  that  OB  is  greater  than  some  of  the  lines  from  0 
to  the  curve  and  less  than  others.  Draw  a  circle  with  OB  as  radius.  Let  it  be 
EBFy  which  will  therefore  fall  partly  within  and  partly  without  the  surface 
of  the  fluid. 

Draw  OGH  making  with  OB  an  angle 
equal  to  the  angle  EOB,  and  meeting  the 
surface  in  H  and  the  circle  in  G.  Draw7  also 
in  the  plane  an  arc  of  a  circle  PQR  with 
centre  0  and  within  the  fluid. 

Then  the  parts  of  the  fluid  along  PQR 
are  uniform  and  continuous,  and  the  part 
PQ  is  compressed  by  the  part  between  it 
and  ABy  wiiile  the  part  QR  is  compressed  by  the  part  between  QR  and  BH . 

538 


539 


ON  FLOATING  BODIES  I 

Therefore  the  parts  along  PQ,  QR  will  be  unequally  compressed,  and  the  part 
which  is  compressed  the  less  will  be  set  in  motion  by  that  which  is  compres¬ 
sed  the  more. 

Therefore  there  will  not  be  rest;  which  is  contrary  to  the  hypothesis. 
Hence  the  section  of  the  surface  will  be  the  circumference  of  a  circle  whose 
centre  is  0;  and  so  will  all  other  sections  by  planes  through  0. 

Therefore  the  surface  is  that  of  a  sphere  with  centre  0. 


Proposition  3 

Of  solids  those  which ,  size  for  size,  are  of  equal  weight  with  a  fluid  will ,  if  let  down 
into  the  fluid,  be  immersed  so  that  they  do  not  project  above  the  surface  but  do  not 
sink  lower. 

If  possible,  let  a  certain  solid  EFHG  of  equal  weight,  volume  for  volume, 
with  the  fluid  remain  immersed  in  it  so  that  part  of  it,  EBCF ,  projects  above 
the  surface. 

Draw7  through  0,  the  centre  of  the  earth,  and  through  the  solid  a  plane  cut¬ 
ting  the  surface  of  the  fluid  in  the  circle  ABCD. 

Conceive  a  pyramid  with  vertex  0  and  base  a  parallelogram  at  the  surface 
of  the  fluid,  such  that  it  includes  the  immersed  portion  of  the  solid.  Let  this 

pyramid  be  cut  by  the  plane  of  ABCD  in  OL, 
OM.  Also  let  a  sphere  within  the  fluid  and  be¬ 
low7  GH  be  described  with  centre  0,  and  let  the 
plane  of  ABCD  cut  this  sphere  in  PQR . 

Conceive  also  another  pyramid  in  the  fluid 
with  vertex  0,  continuous  with  the  former 
pyramid  and  equal  and  similar  to  it.  Let  the 
pyramid  so  described  be  cut  in  OM,  ON  by 
the  plane  of  ABCD. 

Lastly,  let  STUV  be  a  part  of  the  fluid  within  the  second  pyramid  equal  and 
similar  to  the  part  BGHC  of  the  solid,  and  let  SV  be  at  the  surface  of  the  fluid. 

Then  the  pressures  on  PQ,  QR  are  unequal,  that  on  PQ  being  the  greater. 
Hence  the  part  at  QR  will  be  set  in  motion  by  that  at  PQ,  and  the  fluid  will 
not  be  at  rest;  wiiich  is  contrary  to  the  hypothesis. 

Therefore  the  solid  will  not  stand  out  above  the  surface. 

Nor  will  it  sink  further,  because  all  the  parts  of  the  fluid  will  be  under  the 
same  pressure. 


Proposition  4 

A  solid  lighter  than  a  fluid  will,  if  immersed  in  it,  not  be  completely  submerged, 
but  part  of  it  will  project  above  the  surface. 

In  this  case,  after  the  manner  of  the  previous  proposition,  wTe  assume  the 
solid,  if  possible,  to  be  completely  submerged  and  the  fluid  to  be  at  rest  in  that 
position,  and  we  conceive  (1)  a  pyramid  with  its  vertex  at  0,  the  centre  of  the 
earth,  including  the  solid,  (2)  another  pyramid  continuous  with  the  former  and 
equal  and  similar  to  it,  with  the  same  vertex  0,  (3)  a  portion  of  the  fluid  within 
this  latter  pyramid  equal  to  the  immersed  solid  in  the  other  pyramid,  (4)  a 
sphere  with  centre  0  whose  surface  is  belowr  the  immersed  solid  and  the  part 
of  the  fluid  in  the  second  pyramid  corresponding  thereto.  We  suppose  a  plane 
to  be  drawn  through  the  centre  0  cutting  the  surface  of  the  fluid  in  the  circle 


540 


ARCHIMEDES 


ABC ,  the  solid  in  S,  the  first  pyramid  in  OA,  OB,  the  second  pyramid  in  OB, 
OC ,  the  portion  of  the  fluid  in  the  second  pyr¬ 
amid  in  K,  and  the  inner  sphere  in  PQR. 

Then  the  pressures  on  the  parts  of  the  fluid 
at  PQ,  QR  are  unequal,  since  S  is  lighter  than 
K.  Hence  there  will  not  be  rest;  which  is  con¬ 
trary  to  the  hypothesis. 

Therefore  the  solid  £  cannot,  in  a  condi¬ 
tion  of  rest,  be  completely  submerged. 


Proposition  5 

Any  solid  lighter  than  a  fluid  will ,  if  placed  in  the  fluid ,  he  so  far  immersed  that 
the  weight  of  the  solid  will  be  equal  to  the  weight  of  the  fluid  displaced. 

For  let  the  solid  be  EGHF ,  and  let  BGHC  be  the  portion  of  it  immersed 
when  the  fluid  is  at  rest.  As  in  Prop.  3,  conceive  a  pyramid  with  vertex  0  in¬ 
cluding  the  solid,  and  another  pyramid  with  the  same  vertex  continuous  with 
the  former  and  equal  and  similar  to  it.  Sup¬ 
pose  a  portion  of  the  fluid  STUV  at  the 
base  of  the  second  pyramid  to  be  equal  and 
similar  to  the  immersed  portion  of  the  solid; 
and  let  the  construction  be  the  same  as  in 
Prop.  3. 

Then,  since  the  pressure  on  the  parts  of 
the  fluid  at  PQ,  QR  must  be  equal  in  order 
that  the  fluid  may  be  at  rest,  it  follows  that 
the  weight  of  the  portion  STUV  of  the  fluid  must  be  equal  to  the  weight  of 
the  solid  EGHF.  And  the  former  is  equal  to  the  weight  of  the  fluid  displaced 
by  the  immersed  portion  of  the  solid  BGHC. 


Proposition  6 

If  a  solid  lighter  than  a  fluid  be  forcibly  immersed  in  it,  the  solid  will  be  driven 
upwards  by  a  force  equal  to  the  difference  between  its  weight  and  the  weight  of  the 
fluid  displaced. 

For  let  A  be  completely  immersed  in  the  fluid,  and  let  G  represent  the  weight 
of  A,  and  ( G+H )  the  weight  of  an  equal  volume  of  the  fluid.  Take  a  solid  D, 
whose  weight  is  H  and  add  it  to  A.  Then  the  weight  of  (. A  +D )  is  less  than  that 
of  an  equal  volume  of  the  fluid;  and,  if  (A+D)  is  immersed  in  the  fluid,  it  will 
project  so  that  its  weight  will  be  equal  to  the  weight 
of  the  fluid  displaced.  But  its  weight  is  (G+H). 

Therefore  the  weight  of  the  fluid  displaced  is 
(G+H),  and  hence  the  volume  of  the  fluid  displaced 
is  the  volume  of  the  solid  A.  There  will  accordingly 
be  rest  with  A  immersed  and  D  projecting. 

Thus  the  weight  of  D  balances  the  upward  force 
exerted  by  the  fluid  on  A,  and  therefore  the  latter 
force  is  equal  to  H,  which  is  the  difference  between 
the  weight  of  A  and  the  weight  of  the  fluid  which  A 
displaces. 


ON  FLOATING  BODIES  I 


541 


Proposition  7 

A  solid  heavier  than  a  fluid  will ,  if  placed  in  it ,  descend  to  the  bottom  of  the  fluid, 
and  the  solid  will ,  when  weighed  in  the  fluid,  be  lighter  than  its  true  weight  by  the 
weight  of  the  fluid  displaced . 

(1)  The  first  part  of  the  proposition  is  obvious,  since  the  part  of  the  fluid 
under  the  solid  will  be  under  greater  pressure,  and  therefore  the  other  parts 
will  give  way  until  the  solid  reaches  the  bottom. 

(2)  Let  A  be  a  solid  heavier  than  the  same  volume  of  the  fluid,  and  let 
(< G+H )  represent  its  weight,  while  G  represents  the  weight  of  the  same  volume 
of  the  fluid. 

Take  a  solid  B  lighter  than  the  same  volume 
of  the  fluid,  and  such  that  the  weight  of  B  is  G, 
while  the  weight  of  the  same  volume  of  the  fluid 
is  (G+H). 

Let  A  and  B  be  now  combined  into  one  solid 
and  immersed.  Then,  since  (A+B)  will  be  of  the 
same  weight  as  the  same  volume  of  fluid,  both 
weights  being  equal  to  (G+II)+G,  it  follows 
that  (A+B)  will  remain  stationary  in  the  fluid. 

Therefore  the  force  which  causes  A  by  itself  to  sink  must  be  equal  to  the 
upward  force  exerted  by  the  fluid  on  B  by  itself.  This  latter  is  equal  to  the 
difference  between  (G+H)  and  G  [Prop.  6].  Hence  A  is  depressed  by  a  force 
equal  to  H,  i.e.  its  weight  in  the  fluid  is  H,  or  the  difference  between  (G+H) 
and  G. 


POSTULATE  2 

“Let  it  be  granted  that  bodies  which  are  forced  upwards  in  a  fluid  are  forced 
upwards  along  the  perpendicular  [to  the  surface]  which  passes  through  their 
centre  of  gravity.” 


Proposition  8 

If  a  solid  in  the  form  of  a  segment  of  a  sphere,  and  of  a  substance  lighter  than  a 
fluid ,  be  immersed  in  it  so  that  its  base  does  not  touch  the  surface,  the  solid  will  rest 
in  such  a  position  that  its  axis  is  perpendicular  to  the  surface;  and,  if  the  solid  be 
forced  into  such  a  position  that  its  base  touches  the  fluid  on  one  side  and  be  then 
set  free ,  it  will  not  remain  in  that  position  but  will  return  to  the  symmetrical 
position. 


Proposition  9 

If  a  solid  in  the  form  of  a  segment  of  a  sphere,  and  of  a  substance  lighter  than  a 
fluid,  be  immersed  in  it  so  that  its  base  is  completely  below  the  surface,  the  solid 
will  rest  in  such  a  position  that  its  axis  is  perpendicular  to  the  surface. 

[The  proof  of  this  proposition  has  only  survived  in  a  mutilated  form.  It  deals 
moreover  with  only  one  case  out  of  three  which  are  distinguished  at  the  begin¬ 
ning,  viz.  that  in  which  the  segment  is  greater  than  a  hemisphere.  .  .  .] 
Suppose,  first,  that  the  segment  is  greater  than  a  hemisphere.  Let  it  be  cut 
by  a  plane  through  its  axis  and  the  centre  of  the  earth;  and,  if  possible,  let  it 
be  at  rest  in  the  position  shown  in  the  figure,  where  A B  is  the  intersection  of 


542  ARCHIMEDES 

the  plane  with  the  base  of  the  segment,  DE  its  axis,  C  the  centre  of  the  sphere 
of  which  the  segment  is  a  part,  0  the  centre  of  the  earth. 

The  centre  of  gravity  of  the  portion  of 
the  segment  outside  the  fluid,  as  F,  lies  on 
OC  produced,  its  axis  passing  through  C. 

Let  G  be  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the 
segment.  Join  FG ,  and  produce  it  to  H  so 
that 

FG  :  GH  =  (volume  of  immersed  portion)  : 

(rest  of  solid). 

Join  OH. 

Then  the  weight  of  the  portion  of  the 
solid  outside  the  fluid  acts  along  FO ,  and 
the  pressure  of  the  fluid  on  the  immersed  portion  along  OH,  while  the 
weight  of  the  immersed  portion  acts  along  HO  and  is  by  hypothesis  less  than 
the  pressure  of  the  fluid  acting  along  OH. 

Hence  there  will  not  be  equilibrium,  but  the  part  of  the  segment  towards  A 
w  ill  ascend  and  the  part  towards  B  descend,  until  DE  assumes  a  position  per¬ 
pendicular  to  the  surface  of  the  fluid. 


ON  FLOATING  BODIES 
BOOK  TWO 


Proposition  1 

If  a  solid  lighter  than  a  fluid  he  at  rest  in  it ,  the  weight  of  the  solid  will  be  to  that  of 
the  same  volume  of  the  fluid  as  the  immersed  portion  of  the  solid  is  to  the  whole. 
Let  ( A  +B)  be  the  solid,  B  the  portion  immersed  in  the  fluid. 

Let  ( C+D )  be  an  equal  volume  of  the  fluid, 
C  being  equal  in  volume  to  A  and  B  to  D. 

Further  suppose  the  line  E  to  represent  the 
weight  of  the  solid  ( A+B ),  (F+G)  to  repre¬ 
sent  the  weight  of  (C+D),  and  G  that  of  D. 
Then 

weight  of  (A+B)  :  weight  of  (C+D)  — 

E  :  (F+G).  (1) 

And  the  weight  of  (A+B)  is  equal  to  the 
weight  of  a  volume  B  of  the  fluid  [I.  5],  i.e. 
to  the  weight  of  D. 

That  is  to  say,  E  =  G. 

Hence,  by  (1), 

weight  of  (A+B)  :  weight  of  (C+D)  =  G  :  F+G 

=  D  :  C+D 
=  B  :  A+B. 


Proposition  2 

If  a  right  segment  of  a  paraboloid  of  revolution  whose  axis  is  not  greater  than  f  p 
(where  p  is  the  principal  parameter  of  the  generating  parabola),  and  whose  specific 
gravity  is  less  than  that  of  a  fluid,  be  placed  in  the  fluid  with  its  axis  inclined  to  the 
vertical  at  any  angle,  but  so  that  the  base  of  the  segment  does  not  touch  the  surface 
of  the  fluid,  the  segment  of  the  paraboloid  will  not  remain  in  that  position  but  will 
return  to  the  position  in  which  its  axis  is  vertical. 

Let  the  axis  of  the  segment  of  the  paraboloid  be  AN,  and  through  AN  draw 
a  plane  perpendicular  to  the  surface  of  the  fluid.  Let  the  plane  intersect  the 
paraboloid  in  the  parabola  BAB',  the  base  of  the  segment  of  the  paraboloid 
in  BB ',  and  the  plane  of  the  surface  of  the  fluid  in  the  chord  QQ'  of  the 
parabola. 

Then,  since  the  axis  AN  is  placed  in  a  position  not  perpendicular  to  QQ', 
BB'  will  not  be  parallel  to  QQ'. 

Draw  the  tangent  PT  to  the  parabola  which  is  parallel  to  QQ',  and  let  P  be 
the  point  of  contact.1 

lThe  rest  of  the  proof  ...  is  given  in  brackets  as  supplied  by  Commandinus. 

543 


544  ARCHIMEDES 

[From  F  draw  PV  parallel  to  AN  meeting  QQ'  in  V.  Then  PV  will  be  a 
diameter  of  the  parabola,  and  also  the  axis  of  the  portion  of  the  paraboloid 
immersed  in  the  fluid. 

Let  C  be  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  pa¬ 
raboloid  BAB',  and  F  that  of  the  portion 
immersed  in  the  fluid.  Join  FC  and  produce 
it  to  H  so  that  H  is  the  centre  of  gravity  of 
the  remaining  portion  of  the  paraboloid 
above  the  surface. 

Then,  since  A  AT  =  f  A  C, 

and  AN>lp, 

it  follows  that  AC>^. 

Therefore,  if  CP  be  joined,  the  angle  CPT 
is  acute.  Hence,  if  CK  be  drawn  perpendicular  to  FT,  K  will  fall  between  P 
and  T.  And,  if  FL,  HM  be  drawn  parallel  to  CK  to  meet  PT ,  they  will  each 
be  perpendicular  to  the  surface  of  the  fluid. 

Now  the  force  acting  on  the  immersed  portion  of  the  segment  of  the  parabo¬ 
loid  will  act  upwards  along  LF,  while  the  weight  of  the  portion  outside  the 
fluid  will  act  downwards  along  HM. 

Therefore  there  will  not  be  equilibrium,  but  the  segment  will  turn  so  that  B 
will  rise  and  B'  will  fall,  until  AN  takes  the  vertical  position.] 

Proposition  3 

If  a  right  segment  of  a  paraboloid  of  revolution  whose  axis  is  not  greater  than  -f p 
{where  p  is  the  parameter ),  and  whose  specific  gravity  is  less  than  that  of  a  fluid , 
be  placed  in  the  fluid  with  its  axis  inclined  at  any  angle  to  the  vertical ,  but  so  that 
its  base  is  entirely  submerged ,  the  solid  will  not  remain  in  that  position  but  will 
return  to  the  position  in  which  the  axis  is  vertical. 

Let  the  axis  of  the  paraboloid  be  AN,  and  through  AN  draw  a  plane  perpen¬ 
dicular  to  the  surface  of  the  fluid  intersecting  the  paraboloid  in  the  parabola 
BAB1 ,  the  base  of  the  segment  in  BNB' ,  and  the  plane  of  the  surface  of  the 
fluid  in  the  chord  QQ'  of  the  parabola. 

Then,  since  AN,  as  placed,  is  not  perpen¬ 
dicular  to  the  surface  of  the  fluid,  QQ'  and 
BBf  will  not  be  parallel. 

Draw  PT  parallel  to  QQ'  and  touching  the 
parabola  at  F.  Let  PT  meet  N A  produced  in 
T .  Draw  the  diameter  PV  bisecting  QQ'  in  V. 

PV  is  then  the  axis  of  the  portion  of  the 
paraboloid  above  the  surface  of  the  fluid. 

Let  C  be  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  whole 
segment  of  the  paraboloid,  F  that  of  the  por¬ 
tion  above  the  surface.  Join  FC  and  produce 
it  to  II  so  that  H  is  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  immersed  portion. 

P 

Then,  since  AC>^f  the  angle  CPT  is  an  acute  angle,  as  in  the  last  prop- 
£ 

osition. 


B' 


ON  FLOATING  BODIES  II  545 

Hence,  if  CK  be  drawn  perpendicular  to  PT ,  K  will  fall  between  P  and  T. 
Also,  if  HM ,  FL  be  drawn  parallel  to  CK,  they  will  be  perpendicular  to  the 
surface  of  the  fluid. 

And  the  force  acting  on  the  submerged  portion  will  act  upwards  along  HM, 
while  the  weight  of  the  rest  will  act  downwards  along  LF  produced. 

Thus  the  paraboloid  mil  turn  until  it  takes  the  position  in  which  A N  is 
vertical. 


Proposition  4 

Given  a  right  segment  of  a  paraboloid  of  revolution  whose  axis  AN  is  greater  than 
f  p  {where  p  is  the  parameter),  and  whose  specific  gravity  is  less  than  that  of  a  fluid 
but  bears  to  it  a  ratio  not  less  than  (AN  —  %p)2  :  AN2,  if  the  segment  of  the  parabo¬ 
loid  be  placed  in  the  fluid  with  its  axis  at  any  inclination  to  the  vertical ,  but  so  that 
its  base  does  not  touch  the  surface  of  the  fluid,  it  will  not  remain  in  that  position  but 
will  return  to  the  position  in  which  its  axis  is  vertical. 

Let  the  axis  of  the  segment  of  the  paraboloid  be  AN,  and  let  a  plane  be 
drawn  through  AN  perpendicular  to  the  surface  of  the  fluid  and  intersecting 

the  segment  in  the  parabola  BAB' ,  the  base 
of  the  segment  in  BB' ,  and  the  surface  of 
the  fluid  in  the  chord  QQ'  of  the  parabola. 

Then  AN,  as  placed,  will  not  be  perpendic¬ 
ular  to  QQ'. 

Draw  PT  parallel  to  QQ'  and  touching  the 
parabola  at  P.  Draw  the  diameter  PV  bisect¬ 
ing  QQ'  in  V.  Thus  PV  will  be  the  axis  of  the 
submerged  portion  of  the  solid. 

Let  C  be  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the 
whole  solid,  F  that  of  the  immersed  portion. 
J oin  FC  and  produce  it  to  H  so  that  H  is  the 
centre  of  gravity  of  the  remaining  portion. 
AN  —  ^AC, 

AN>%p, 

AC>1 

V 

Measure  CO  along  CA  equal  to  and  OR  along  OC  equal  to  %AO. 

A 

Then,  since  AN  =  %AC, 

and  A  R  =  f /1 0, 

we  have,  by  subtraction,  NR  =  %OC. 

That  is,  AN-AR  =  §OC 

=  4P> 

or  AR  =  (AN-$p). 

Thus  (AN-lp)2  :  AN2=AR 2  :  AN2, 

and  therefore  the  ratio  of  the  specific  gravity  of  the  solid  to  that  of  the  fluid  is, 
by  the  enunciation,  not  less  than  the  ratio  AR2  :  AN2. 

But,  by  Prop.  1,  the  former  ratio  is  equal  to  the  ratio  of  the  immersed  por¬ 
tion  to  the  whole  solid,  i.e.  to  the  ratio  PV2 :  AN2  [On  Conoids  and  Spheroids, 
Prop.  24] . 

Hence  PV2 :  AN2<AR2 :  AN2, 


B' 


Now,  since 
and 

it  follows  that 


546  ARCHIMEDES 

or  PV  <CAR. 

It  follows  that  PF{  =  IPVXIAR 

<AO . 

If,  therefore,  OK  be  drawn  from  0  perpendicular  to  OA ,  it  will  meet  PF  be¬ 
tween  P  and  F. 

Also,  if  CK  be  joined,  the  triangle  KCO  is  equal  and  similar  to  the  triangle 
formed  by  the  normal,  the  subnormal  and  the  ordinate  at  P  (since  CO  =  \p  or 
the  subnormal,  and  KO  is  equal  to  the  ordinate). 

Therefore  CK  is  parallel  to  the  normal  at  P,  and  therefore  perpendicular  to 
the  tangent  at  P  and  to  the  surface  of  the  fluid. 

Hence,  if  parallels  to  CK  be  drawn  through  P,  H,  they  will  be  perpendicular 
to  the  surface  of  the  fluid,  and  the  force  acting  on  the  submerged  portion  of  the 
solid  will  act  upwards  along  the  former,  while  the  weight  of  the  other  portion 
will  act  downwards  along  the  latter. 

Therefore  the  solid  will  not  remain  in  its  position  but  will  turn  until  AN 
assumes  a  vertical  position. 

Proposition  5 

Given  a  right  segment  of  a  'paraboloid  of  revolution  such  that  its  axis  AN  is  greater 
than  jp  {where  p  is  the  parameter ),  and  its  specific  gravity  is  less  than  that  of  a 
fluid  but  in  a  ratio  to  it  not  greater  than  the  ratio  {AN2  —  (AN  —  ip)2}  :  AN2,  if 
the  segment  be  placed  in  the  fluid  with  its  axis  inclined  at  any  angle  to  the  vertical , 
but  so  that  its  base  is  completely  submerged ,  it  will  not  remain  in  that  position  but 
will  return  to  the  position  in  which  AN  is  vertical . 

Let  a  plane  be  drawn  through  AN,  as  placed,  perpendicular  to  the  surface 
of  the  fluid  and  cutting  the  segment  of  the  paraboloid  in  the  parabola  BAB', 
the  base  of  the  segment  in  BB',  and  the 
plane  of  the  surface  of  the  fluid  in  the  chord 
QQ'  of  the  parabola. 

Draw  the  tangent  PT  parallel  to  QQ ', 
and  the  diameter  PV ,  bisecting  QQ',  will 
accordingly  be  the  axis  of  the  portion  of  the 
paraboloid  above  the  surface  of  the  fluid. 

Let  F  be  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  por¬ 
tion  above  the  surface,  C  that  of  the  whole 
solid,  and  produce  FC  to  H ,  the  centre  of 
gravity  of  the  immersed  portion. 

V  P 

As  in  the  last  proposition,  AC> ->  and  we  measure  CO  along  CA  equal  to 

and  OR  along  OC  equal  to  %A0. 

Then  AN  =  %AC,  and  AR  =  %AO; 

and  we  derive,  as  before,  AR  =  {AN  —  \p). 

Now,  by  hypothesis, 

(spec,  gravity  of  solid)  :  (spec,  gravity  of  fluid) 

>  {AN2 -{AN -lp)2\  :  AN2 
>{AN2-AR2)  :  AN2, 

Therefore 

(portion  submerged)  :  (whole  solid) 

>{AN2-AR2)  :  AN2, 


T  P 


547 


OX  FLOATING  BODIES  II 

and  (whole  solid)  :  (portion  above  surface) 

>A.Y2  :  AR2. 

Thus  AX-  :  PY->AX-  :  AR2, 

whence  PV<AR , 

and  PF<fAF 

<AO . 

Therefore,  if  a  perpendicular  to  AC  be  drawn  from  0.  it  will  meet  PF  in 
some  point  K  between  P  and  F . 

.And,  since  CO  =  Fp ,  CK  will  be  perpendicular  to  PT .  as  in  the  last  prop¬ 
osition. 

Now  the  force  acting  on  the  submerged  portion  of  the  solid  will  act  upwards 
through  H,  and  the  weight  of  the  other  portion  downwards  through  F,  in  direc¬ 
tions  parallel  in  both  cases  to  CK;  whence  the  proposition  follows. 


Proposition  6 

If  a  right  segment  of  a  paraboloid  lighter  than  a  fluid  be  such  that  its  axis  AM  is 
greater  than  ip.  but  AM  :  ip  <15  :  4,  and  if  the  segment  be  placed  in  the  fluid 
icith  its  axis  so  inclined  to  the  vertical  that  its  base  touches  the  fluid ,  it  will  never 
remain  in  such  a  position  that  the  base  touches  the  surface  in  one  point  only. 

Suppose  the  segment  of  the  paraboloid  to  be  placed  in  the  position  described, 
and  let  the  plane  through  the  axis  AM  perpendicular  to  the  surface  of  the  fluid 
intersect  the  segment  of  the  paraboloid  in  the  parabolic  segment  BAB'  and  the 
plane  of  the  surface  of  the  fluid  in  BQ. 

Take  C  on  AM  such  that  AC=2CM 
(or  so  that  C  is  the  centre  of  gravity  of 
the  segment  of  the  paraboloid),  and 
measure  CK  along  CA  such  that 
AM  :  CK=  15  :  4. 

Thus  .43/  :  CK>AM  :  \p.  by  hypo¬ 
thesis;  therefore  CK<\p. 

Measure  CO  along  CA  equal  to 
Also  draw  KR  perpendicular  to  AC 
meeting  the  parabola  in  R. 

Draw  the  tangent  PT  parallel  to  BQ. 
and  through  P  draw  the  diameter  PI”  bisecting  BQ  in  V  and  meeting  KR  in  I. 


Then 

“for  this  is  proved 
.And 
whence 
Thus 
Therefore 
It  follows  that 


PY:PI  =  KM:AK. 


or> 

CK  =  AAU  =  iAC: 

AK  =  AC-  CK  =  %AC  =  f .4  M. 
KM  =  §AM. 

KM  =  UK. 

rr^PL 


so  that 

Let  F  be  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  immersed  portion  of  the  paraboloid,  so 
that  PF  =  2FI  .  Produce  FC  to  H,  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  portion  above 
the  surface. 

Draw  OL  perpendicular  to  PV. 


548 


ARCHIMEDES 


Then,  since  CO  =  \p,  CL  must  be  per¬ 
pendicular  to  PT  and  therefore  to  the 
surface  of  the  fluid. 

And  the  forces  acting  on  the  immersed 
portion  of  the  paraboloid  and  the  portion 
above  the  surface  act  respectively  upwards 
and  downwards  along  lines  through  F  and 
H  parallel  to  CL. 

Hence  the  paraboloid  cannot  remain  in 
the  position  in  which  B  just  touches  the 
surface,  but  must  turn  in  the  direction  of 
increasing  the  angle  PTM. 

The  proof  is  the  same  in  the  case  where 
the  point  I  is  not  on  VP  but  on  VP  pro¬ 
duced,  as  in  the  second  figure. 


Proposition  7 


Given  a  right  segment  of  a  'paraboloid  of  revolution  lighter  than  a  fluid  and  such 
that  its  axis  AM  is  greater  than  f p,  but  AM  :  \p  <  15  :  4,  if  the  segment  be  placed 
in  the  fluid  so  that  its  base  is  entirely  submerged ,  it  will  never  rest  in  such  a  posi¬ 
tion  that  the  base  touches  the  surface  of  the  fluid  at  one  point  only. 

Suppose  the  solid  so  placed  that  one  point  of  the  base  only  ( B )  touches  the 
surface  of  the  fluid.  Let  the  plane  through  B  and  the  axis  AM  cut  the  solid  in 
the  parabolic  segment  BAB'  and  the  plane  of  the  surface  of  the  fluid  in  the 
chord  BQ  of  the  parabola. 

Let  C  be  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  segment,  so  that  AC  =  2 CM ;  and  meas¬ 
ure  CK  along  CA  such  that 
AM  :CIC=  15:4. 

It  follows  that  CK  < \p. 

Measure  CO  along  CA  equal  to  \p. 

Draw  KR  perpendicular  to  AM  meeting 
the  parabola  in  R. 

Let  PT,  touching  at  P,  be  the  tangent 
to  the  parabola  which  is  parallel  to  BQ, 
and  PV  the  diameter  bisecting  BQ,  i.e. 
the  axis  of  the  portion  of  the  paraboloid 
above  the  surface. 

Then,  as  in  the  last  proposition,  we  prove  that 


PV0;>m, 


and  PI  =2 IV. 

or  < 

Let  F  be  the  centre  of  gravit}"  of  the  portion  of  the  solid  above  the  surface;  join 
FC  and  produce  it  to  H,  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  portion  submerged. 

Draw  OL  perpendicular  to  PV ;  and,  as  before,  since  CO  —  ^p,  CL  is  perpen¬ 
dicular  to  the  tangent  PT.  And  the  lines  through  H,  F  parallel  to  CL  are  per¬ 
pendicular  to  the  surface  of  the  fluid;  thus  the  proposition  is  established  as 
before. 

The  proof  is  the  same  if  the  point  I  is  not  on  VP  but  on  VP  produced. 


ON  FLOATING  BODIES  II 


549 


Proposition  8 

Given  a  solid  in  the  form  of  a  right  segment  of  a  'paraboloid  of  revolution  whose  axis 
AM  is  greater  than  f p,  but  such  that  AM  :  \p  <  15  :  4,  and  whose  specific  gravity 
bears  to  that  of  a  fluid  a  ratio  less  than  (AM  —  fp)2  :  AM2,  then ,  if  the  solid  be 
placed  in  the  fluid  so  that  its  base  does  not  touch  the  fluid  and  its  axis  is  inclined 
at  an  angle  to  the  vertical ,  the  solid  will  not  return  to  the  position  in  which  its  axis 
is  vertical  and  will  not  remain  in  any  position  except  that  in  which  its  axis  makes 
with  the  surface  of  the  fluid  a  certain  angle  to  be  described. 

Let  am  be  taken  equal  to  the  axis 
AM,  and  let  c  be  a  point  on  am 
such  that  ac  =  2cm.  Measure  co 
along  ca  equal  to  \p,  and  or  along 
oc  equal  to  \ao. 

Let  X+Y  be  a  straight  line  such 
that 

(spec.  gr.  of  solid)  :  (spec.  gr.  of 
fluid)  =  (X+Y)2  :  am2,  .(a) 
and  suppose  X  =  2Y. 

Now  ar  =  iao  =  §(%am— %p) 

=  am  —  jp 
=  AM—\p. 

Therefore,  by  hypothesis, 
(X+Y)2  :  am2 <ar2  :  am2, 
whence  (X+Y)  <ar,  and  therefore 
X<ao. 

Measure  ob  along  oa  equal  to  X,  and  draw  bd  perpendicular  to  ab  and  of  such 
length  that  bd2  =  \co  •  ab.  (fi) 

Join  ad. 

Now  let  the  solid  be  placed  in  the  fluid  with  its  axis  AM  inclined  at  an  angle 
to  the  vertical.  Through  AM  draw  a  plane  perpendicular  to  the  surface  of  the 
fluid,  and  let  this  plane  cut  the  paraboloid  in  the  parabola  BAB'  and  the  plane 
of  the  surface  of  the  fluid  in  the  chord  QQ'  of  the  parabola. 

Draw  the  tangent  PT  parallel  to  QQ',  touching  at  P,  and  let  PV  be  the 
diameter  bisecting  QQ'  in  V  (or  the  axis  of  the  immersed  portion  of  the  solid), 
and  PN  the  ordinate  from  P. 

Measure  AO  along  AM  equal  to  ao,  and  OC  along  OM  equal  to  oc,  and  draw 
OL  perpendicular  to  PV. 

J.  Suppose  the  angle  OTP  greater  than  the  angle  dab. 


Thus 

PN*:NTi>db*:ba*. 

But 

PN2 :  NT2  =  p  :  AAN 

=  co  :  NT, 

and 

db- :  ba2  =  \co  :  ab,  by  (/3). 

Therefore 

NT  <2ab, 

or 

AN  <ab, 

whence 

NO>bo  (since  ao  =  AO ) 

>X. 

Now  (X+Y)2 

:  am?  =  (spec.  gr.  of  solid)  :  (spec.  gr.  of  fluid) 

=  (portion  immersed)  :  (rest  of  solid) 


550  ARCHIMEDES 

=  PV2:AM 2, 

so  that  X+Y=PV . 

But  PL(=NO)>X 

>i(X+Y),  since  X  =  2Y, 

>1 PV, 

or  PV  <fPL, 

and  therefore  PL>2LV. 

Take  a  point  P  on  PV  so  that  PF  =  2FV,  i.e.  so  that  F  is  the  centre  of  grav¬ 
ity  of  the  immersed  portion  of  the  solid. 

Also  AC  =  ac  =  %am  =  %AM,  and  therefore  C  is  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the 
whole  solid. 

Join  FC  and  produce  it  to  H ,  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  portion  of  the  solid 
above  the  surface. 

Now,  since  CO  =  \p,  CL  is  perpendicular  to  the  surface  of  the  fluid; 
therefore  so  are  the  parallels  to  CL  through  F  and  H.  But  the  force  on  the 
immersed  portion  acts  upwards  through  F  and  that  on  the  rest  of  the  solid 
downwards  through  H. 

Therefore  the  solid  will  not  rest  but  turn  in 
the  direction  of  diminishing  the  angle  MTP . 

II.  Suppose  the  angle  OTP  less  than  the 
angle  dab.  In  this  case,  we  shall  have,  in¬ 
stead  of  the  above  results,  the  following, 

AN>ab , 

NO<X. 

Also  PF>fPL, 

and  therefore  PL  <  2 LV. 

Make  PF  equal  to  2 FV,  so  that  F  is  the 
centre  of  gravity  of  the  immersed  portion. 

And,  proceeding  as  before,  we  prove  in 
this  case  that  the  solid  will  turn  in  the  di¬ 
rection  of  increasing  the  angle  MTP. 

III.  When  the  angle  MTP  is  equal  to  the  angle  dab,  equalities  replace 
inequalities  in  the  results  obtained,  and  L  is  itself  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the 
immersed  portion.  Thus  all  the  forces  act  in  one  straight  line,  the  perpendicu¬ 
lar  CL;  therefore  there  is  equilibrium,  and  the  solid  will  rest  in  the  position 
described. 


B' 


Proposition  9 

Given  a  solid  in  the  form  of  a  right  segment  of  a  paraboloid  of  revolution  whose  axis 
AM  is  greater  than  f  p,  but  such  that  AM  :%p<  15  :  4,  and  whose  specific  gravity 
bears  to  that  of  a  fluid  a  ratio  greater  than  {AM2  —  (AM — Jp)2}  :  AM2,  then,  if 
the  solid  be  placed  in  the  fluid  with  its  axis  inclined  at  an  angle  to  the  vertical  but 
so  that  its  base  is  entirely  below  the  surface ,  the  solid  will  not  return  to  the  position 
in  which  its  axis  is  vertical  and  will  not  remain  in  any  position  except  that  in 
which  its  axis  makes  with  the  surface  of  the  fluid  an  angle  equal  to  that  described 
in  the  last  proposition. 

Take  am  equal  to  AM,  and  take  c  on  am  such  that  ac  —  2cm.  Measure  co 
along  ca  equal  to  \p,  and  ar  along  ac  such  that  ar  =  fao. 

Let  X+  Y  be  such  a  line  that 


ON  FLOATING  BODIES  II 


551 


(spec.  gr.  of  solid) 
and  suppose  X  =  2  Y. 

d 

A  .  ,, 

a  b  ore  m 


(spec.  gr.  of  fluid)  =  {am2  —  (X+  Y)2}  :  am2 


ar  =  f  ao 


Now 

=  f(f  am  —  \p) 

=AM—\p. 

Therefore,  by  hypothesis, 
am2  —  ar2  :am2<  {am2  —  (X\-Y)2}'-  am2, 
whence  X+Y  <ar, 

and  therefore  X  <ao. 

Make  ob  (measured  along  oa)  equal 
to  X ,  and  draw  bd  perpendicular  to  ba 
and  of  such  length  that 

bd 2  =  \co  •  ab. 

Join  ad. 

Now  suppose  the  solid  placed  as  in 
the  figure  with  its  axis  AM  inclined  to 
the  vertical.  Let  the  plane  through  AM 
perpendicular  to  the  surface  of  the 
fluid  cut  the  solid  in  the  parabola  BAB ' 
and  the  surface  of  the  fluid  in  QQ'. 

Let  PT  be  the  tangent  parallel  to  QQ',  PV  the  diameter  bisecting  QQ'  or) 
the  axis  of  the  portion  of  the  paraboloid  above  the  surface),  PN  the  ordinate 
from  P. 

I.  Suppose  the  angle  MTP  greater  than  the  angle  dab.  Let  AM  be  cut  as 
before  in  C  and  0  so  that  „4C  =  2Cilf,  OC  =  Jp,  and  accordingly  AM,  am  are 
equally  divided.  Draw  OL  perpendicular  to  PV. 

Then,  we  have,  as  in  the  last  proposition, 

PN2  :  NT2>db2 :  ba2, 
whence  co  :  NT  >  \co  :  ab, 

and  therefore  AN <ab. 

It  follows  that  NO>bo 

>X. 

Again,  since  the  specific  gravity  of  the  solid  is  to  that  of  the  fluid  as  the 
immersed  portion  of  the  solid  to  the  whole, 

AM2  —  (X+Y)2 :  AM2  =  AM2  —  PV2 :  AM2, 
or  (X+Y)2 :  AM2  =  PV2  :  AM2. 

That  is,  X+Y=PV. 

And  PL  (or  NO)  >X 


>1  PV, 


so  that  PL>2LV. 

Take  F  on  PV  so  that  PF  =  2FV.  Then  F 
is  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  portion  of  the 
solid  above  the  surface. 

Also  C  is  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  whole 
solid.  Join  FC  and  produce  it  to  H,  the  cen¬ 
tre  of  gravity  of  the  immersed  portion. 

Then,  since  CO  —  \p ,  CL  is  perpendicular 
to  PT  and  to  the  surface  of  the  fluid;  and 
the  foree  acting  on  the  immersed  portion  of  the  solid  acts  upwards  along  the 


552  ARCHIMEDES 

parallel  to  CL  through  H,  while  the  weight  of  the  rest  of  the  solid  acts  down¬ 
wards  along  the  parallel  to  CL  through  F. 

Hence  the  solid  will  not  rest  but  turn  in  the  direction  of  diminishing  the 
angle  MTP . 

II.  Exactly  as  in  the  last  proposition,  we  prove  that,  if  the  angle  MTP  be 
less  than  the  angle  dab ,  the  solid  will  not  remain  in  its  position  but  will  turn 
in  the  direction  of  increasing  the  angle  MTP . 

III.  If  the  angle  MTP  is  equal  to  the  angle  dab ,  the  solid  mil  rest  in  that 
position,  because  L  and  F  will  coincide,  and  all  the  forces  will  act  along  the 
one  line  CL. 

Proposition  10 

Given  a  solid  in  the  form  of  a  right  segment  of  a  'paraboloid  of  revolution  in  which 
the  axis  AM  is  of  a  length  such  that  AM  :%p>  15  :  4,  and  supposing  the  solid 
placed  in  a  fluid  of  greater  specific  gravity  so  that  its  base  is  entirely  above  the 
surface  of  the  fluids  to  investigate  the  positions  of  rest. 


(Preliminary) 

Suppose  the  segment  of  the  paraboloid  to  be  cut  by  a  plane  through  its  axis 
AM  in  the  parabolic  segment  BABi  of  which  BBi  is  the  base. 

Divide  AM  at  C  so  that  AC  =  2CM,  and  measure  CK  along  CA  so  that 

AM  :CK  =  15:4,  (a) 

whence,  by  the  hypothesis,  CK>^p. 

Suppose  CO  measured  along 
CA  equal  to  \p,  and  take  a  point 
R  on  AM  such  that 
MR  =  %CO. 

Thus  AR  =  AM— MR 
=  %(AC  —  CO) 

=  £40. 

Join  BA,  draw  KA2  perpendicu¬ 
lar  to  AM  meeting  BA  in  A2, 
bisect  BA  in  Az,  and  draw  A2M2j 
AzMz  parallel  to  AM  meeting 
BM  in  M2,  Mz  respectively. 

On  A2M2,  AzMz  as  axes  de¬ 
scribe  parabolic  segments  simi¬ 
lar  to  the  segment  BABi.  (It  fol¬ 
lows,  by  similar  triangles,  that 
BM  will  be  the  base  of  the  seg¬ 
ment  whose  axis  is  AzM 3  and 
BB 2  the  base  of  that  whose  axis 
is  A2M2)  where  BB2  —  2BM2.) 

The  parabola  BA2B2  mil  then 
pass  through  C. 

[For 

BM2  :  M2M  =  BM2 :  A2K 
=  KM  :  AK 


r 


553 


ON  FLOATING  BODIES  II 
=  CM+CK:AC-CK 

=9:6  (« 

=  MA  :  AC. 

Thus  C  is  seen  to  be  on  the  parabola  BA2B2  by  the  converse  of  Prop.  4  of  the 
Quadrature  of  the  Parabola.] 

Also,  if  a  perpendicular  to  AM  be  drawn  from  0,  it  will  meet  the  parabola 
BA2Bo  in  two  points,  as  Q2,  P2.  Let  QiQ2QzD  be  drawn  through  Q2  parallel  to 
AM  meeting  the  parabolas  BABh  BAzM  respectively  in  Qi,  Q3  and  BM  in  D ; 
and  let  P1P2P3  be  the  corresponding  parallel  to  AM  through  P2.  Let  the  tan¬ 
gents  to  the  outer  parabola  at  Pi,  Qi  meet  MA  produced  in  Th  U  respectively. 

Then,  since  the  three  parabolic  segments  are  similar  and  similarly  situated, 
with  their  bases  in  the  same  straight  line  and  having  one  common  extremity, 
and  since  Q1Q2Q3D  is  a  diameter  common  to  all  three  segments,  it  follows  that 
Q1Q2  •  Q2Q3 =  (B2Bi  :  B\B) '  (BM  :  MB2)> 

Now  B2Bi  :  B\B  =  MM2  :  BM  (dividing  by  2) 

=  2:5,  by  means  of  (/3)  above. 

And  BM  :MB2  =  BM  :(2BM2-BM) 

=  5  :  (6  —  5),  by  means  of  (/3), 

=  5  : 1. 

It  follows  that  Q1Q2  :  ^2^3  =  2  :  1, 

or  QiQ2==  2Q2Q3.I 

Similarly  P1P2  =  2P2P3.  J 

Also,  since  MR  =  f CO  =  f p, 

AR  =  AM-MR 
=  AM-\V. 

(Enunciation) 

If  the  segment  of  the  'paraboloid  be  placed  in  the  fluid  with  its  base  entirely  above 
the  surface ,  then 
(I.)  if 

(spec.  gr.  of  solid)  :  (spec.  gr.  of  fluid)  <AR2  :  AM 2 

[■ <(AM-lpY:AM 2], 

the  solid  will  rest  in  the  position  in  which  its  axis  AM  is  vertical ; 

(II.)  if 

(spec.  gr.  of  solid)  :  (spec.  gr.  of  fluid)  <AR2  :  AM2 

but>QiQz2  :  AM2, 

the  solid  will  not  rest  with  its  base  touching  the  surface  of  the  fluid  in  one  point 
only ,  but  in  such  a  position  that  its  base  does  not  touch  the  surface  at  any  point 
and  its  axis  makes  with  the  surface  an  angle  greater  than  U; 

(III.  a)  if 

(spec.  gr.  of  solid)  :  (spec.  gr.  of  fluid)  =QiQz2  :  AM2, 
the  solid  will  rest  and  remain  in  the  position  in  which  the  base  touches  the  surface 
of  the  fluid  at  one  point  only  and  the  axis  makes  with  the  surface  an  angle  equal 
to  U ; 

(III.  b)  if 

(spec.  gr.  of  solid )  :  (spec.  gr.  of  fluid)  =PiP32  :  AM2, 
the  solid  will  rest  with  its  base  touching  the  surface  of  the  fluid  at  one  point  only 
and  with  its  axis  inclined  to  the  surface  at  an  angle  equal  to  7\; 


554 


ARCHIMEDES 


(IV.)  if 

(spec.  gr.  of  solid )  :  (spec.  gr.  of  fluid)  >PiP32  :  AM 2 

but<QiQs2 :  AM 2, 

soZfd  will  rest  and  remain  in  a  position  with  its  base  more  submerged ; 

(V.)  if 

(spec.  gr.  of  solid)  :  (spec.  gr.  of  fluid)  <PiP32  :  AM 2, 
the  solid  will  rest  in  a  position  in  which  its  axis  is  inclined  to  the  surface  of  the 
fluid  at  an  angle  less  than  T\ ,  but  so  that  the  base  does  not  even  touch  the  surface 
at  one  point. 

(Proof) 

(I.)  Since  AM>\p ,  and 

(spec.  gr.  of  solid)  :  (spec.  gr.  of  fluid)  <  (AM— \p)2  :  AM2, 
it  follows,  by  Prop.  4,  that  the  solid  will  be  in  stable  equilibrium  with  its  axis 
vertical. 

(II.)  In  this  case 

(spec.  gr.  of  solid)  :  (spec.  gr.  of  fluid)  <AR2  :  AM2 

but  >  QiQz2 :  AM2. 


Suppose  the  ratio  of  the  specific  gravities  to  be  equal  to  l 2  :  AM2,  so  that 

1<AR  but>QiQ3. 

Place  P'V'  between  the  two  parabolas  BABh  BP 3  QzM  equal  to  l  and  paral¬ 
lel  to  AM;  and  let  P'V'  meet  the  intermediate  parabola  in  F' . 

Then,  by  the  same  proof  as  before,  we  obtain 

PfF'  =  2F'V'. 

Let  P'T',  the  tangent  at  P'  to  the  outer  parabola,  meet  MA  in  T',  and  let 
P'N'  be  the  ordinate  at  P'. 

Join  BV’  and  produce  it  to  meet  the  outer  parabola  in  Q'.  Let  OQ2P2  meet 
P'V'  in  I. 

Now,  since,  in  two  similar  and  similarly  situated  parabolic  segments  with 
bases  BM ,  BBi  in  the  same  straight  line,  BV',  BQ'  are  drawn  making  the  same 
angle  with  the  bases, 

BV'  :BQ'=BM  :BBi 

=  1:2, 

BV'  =  V'Q'. 


so  that 


555 


OX  FLOATING  BODIES  II 

Suppose  the  segment  of  the  paraboloid  placed  in  the  fluid,  as  described,  with 

its  axis  inclined  at  an  angle  to  the 
vertical,  and  with  its  base  touching 
the  surface  at  one  point  B  only. 
Let  the  solid  be  cut  by  a  plane 
through  the  axis  and  perpendicu¬ 
lar  to  the  surface  of  the  fluid, 
and  let  the  plane  intersect  the 
solid  in  the  parabolic  segment 
BAB'  and  the  plane  of  the  sur¬ 
face  of  the  fluid  in  BQ. 

Take  the  points  C,  0  on  AM  as 
before  described.  Draw  the  tan¬ 
gent  parallel  to  BQ  touching  the 
parabola  in  P  and  meeting  AM 
in  T;  and  let  PV  be  the  diameter 
bisecting  BQ  (i.e.  the  axis  of  the 
immersed  portion  of  the  solid). 

Then  l 2  :  AM2  =  (spec.  gr.  of  solid)  :  (spec.  gr.  of  fluid) 

=  (portion  immersed)  :  (whole  solid) 

=  PF2:Ai¥2, 

whence  P'V'  =  l  =  PV. 

Thus  the  segments  in  the  two  figures,  namely  BP'Q' ,  BPQf  are  equal  and 
similar. 

Therefore  ZPTN=  Z  P'T'N'. 

Also  AT=AT'}  AN  =  AN'y  PN  =  P'N '. 

Now,  in  the  first  figure,  P'l  <2 IV'. 

Therefore,  if  OL  be  perpendicular  to  PV  in  the  second  figure, 

PL<2LV. 

Take  F  on  LV  so  that  PF  =  2FV}  i.e.  so  that  F  is  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the 
immersed  portion  of  the  solid.  And  C  is  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  whole  solid. 
Join  FC  and  produce  it  to  H ,  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  portion  above  the 
surface. 

Now,  since  CO  =  |p,  CL  is  perpendicular  to  the  tangent  at  P  and  to  the 
surface  of  the  fluid.  Thus,  as  before,  we  prove  that  the  solid  will  not  rest  with  B 
touching  the  surface,  but  will  turn  in  the  direction  of  increasing  the  angle 
PTN. 

Hence,  in  the  position  of  rest,  the  axis  AM  must  make  with  the  surface  of 
the  fluid  an  angle  greater  than  the  angle  U  which  the  tangent  at  Qi  makes 
with  AM. 

(III.  a)  In  this  case 

(spec.  gr.  of  solid)  :  (spec.  gr.  of  fluid)  =  Q\Qz2  :  AM2. 

Let  the  segment  of  the  paraboloid  be  placed  in  the  fluid  so  that  its  base 
nowhere  touches  the  surface  of  the  fluid,  and  its  axis  is  inclined  at  an  angle 
to  the  vertical. 

Let  the  plane  through  AM  perpendicular  to  the  surface  of  the  fluid  cut  the 
paraboloid  in  the  parabola  BAB'  and  the  plane  of  the  surface  of  the  fluid  in 
QQ'.  Let  PT  be  the  tangent  parallel  to  QQ',  PV  the  diameter  bisecting  QQ'f 
PN  the  ordinate  at  P. 


B' 


556  ARCHIMEDES 

Divide  AM  as  before  at  <7,  0. 

In  the  other  figure  let  QiN'  be  the  ordinate  at  Qi.  Join  BQZ  and  produce  it 
to  meet  the  outer  parabola  in  q.  Then  BQs  =  Qzq,  and  the  tangent  Q\U  is 
parallel  to  Bq.  Now 

QjQz2  :  AM2  =  (spec.  gr.  of  solid)  :  (spec.  gr.  of  fluid) 

=  (portion  immersed)  :  (whole  solid) 

=  PV2  :  AM2. 

Therefore  QiQs  =  PV ;  and  the 
segments  QPQ ',  BQiq  of  the 
paraboloid  are  equal  in  volume. 

And  the  base  of  one  passes 
through  B,  while  the  base  of  the 
other  passes  through  Q,  a  point 
nearer  to  A  than  B  is. 

It  follows  that  the  angle  be¬ 
tween  QQ'  and  BB'  is  less  than 
the  angle  BiBq. 

Therefore 

ZU <  ZPTN, 
whence  AN '  >  AN  7 
and  therefore 

N'O (or  QiQ2)  <PL, 
where  OL  is  perpendicular  to 
PV. 

It  follows,  since  QiQ2  =  2Q2Q3, 
that 

PL>2LV. 

Therefore  F,  the  centre  of 
gravity  of  the  immersed  portion 
of  the  solid,  is  between  P  and 
L,  while,  as  before,  CL  is  per¬ 
pendicular  to  the  surface  of  the 
fluid. 

Producing  FC  to  Hy  the  cen¬ 
tre  of  gravity  of  the  portion  of 
the  solid  above  the  surface,  we 
see  that  the  solid  must  turn  in 
the  direction  of  diminishing  the 
angle  PTN  until  one  point  B  of 
the  base  just  touches  the  surface 
of  the  fluid. 

When  this  is  the  case,  we  shall 
have  a  segment  BPQ  equal  and  similar  to  the  segment  BQiq,  the  angle  PTN 
will  be  equal  to  the  angle  U,  and  AN  will  be  equal  to  AN'. 

Hence  in  this  case  PL  =  2LV,  and  F,  L  coincide,  so  that  Fy  C,  H  are  all  in 
one  vertical  straight  line. 

Thus  the  paraboloid  will  remain  in  the  position  in  which  one  point  B  of  the 
base  touches  the  surface  of  the  fluid,  and  the  axis  makes  with  the  surface  an 
angle  equal  to  U. 


B' 


ON  FLOATING  BODIES  II 


557 


(III.  6)  In  the  case  where 

(spec.  gr.  of  solid)  :  (spec.  gr.  of  fluid)  =  PiP32  :  AM2, 
we  can  prove  in  the  same  way  that,  if  the  solid  be  placed  in  the  fluid  so  that  its 
axis  is  inclined  to  the  vertical  and  its  base  does  not  anywhere  touch  the  surface 
of  the  fluid,  the  solid  will  take  up  and  rest  in  the  position  in  which  one  point 
only  of  the  base  touches  the  surface,  and  the  axis  is  inclined  to  it  at  an  angle 
equal  to  T\  (in  the  figure  on  p.  552). 

(IV.)  In  this  case 

(spec.  gr.  of  solid)  :  (spec.  gr.  of  fluid)  >PiP32  :  AM2 

but  <QiQ32  :  AM2. 

Suppose  the  ratio  to  be  equal  to  l 2  :  AM2,  so  that  l  is  greater  than  PiP3  but 
less  than  QiQz. 


Place  P'V'  between  the  pa¬ 
rabolas  BPiQi ,  BPZ  Qz  so  that 
P'V '  is  equal  to  l  and  parallel 
to  AM,  and  let  P'V'  meet  the 
intermediate  parabola  in  F' 
and  OQ2P2  in  /. 

Join  BV'  and  produce  it  to 
meet  the  outer  parabola  in  q. 

Then,  as  before,  BV'  =  V'q, 
and  accordingly  the  tangent 
P'T '  at  P'  is  parallel  to  Bq .  Let 
P'N'  be  the  ordinate  of  P'. 

1.  Now  let  the  segment  be 
placed  in  the  fluid,  first,  with 
its  axis  so  inclined  to  the  ver¬ 
tical  that  its  base  does  not 


B' 


anywhere  touch  the  surface  of  the  fluid. 

Let  the  plane  through  AM  perpendicular  to  the  surface  of  the  fluid  cut  the 
paraboloid  in  the  parabola  BAB'  and  the  plane  of  the  surface  of  the  fluid  in 

QQ'.  Let  PT  be  the  tangent  par¬ 
allel  to  QQ',  PV  the  diameter 
bisecting  QQ'.  Divide  AM  at  C, 
0  as  before,  and  draw  OL  per¬ 
pendicular  to  PV. 

Then,  as  before,  we  have  PV 
=  l  =  P'V'. 

Thus  the  segments  BP'q ,  QPQ'  of 
the  paraboloid  are  equal  in  vol¬ 
ume;  and  it  follows  that  the  angle 
between  QQ'  and  BB'  is  less  than 
the  angle  B\Bq. 

Therefore 

Z  P'T'N'  <  Z  PTN, 
and  hence  AN'>AN , 
so  that  N0>N'0, 

i.e.  PL  >  P'l 

>P'F',  a  fortiori. 


558  ARCHIMEDES 

Thus  PL>2LV ,  so  that  F}  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  immersed  portion  of 
the  solid,  is  between  L  and  P,  while  CL  is  perpendicular  to  the  surface  of  the 
fluid. 


b' 


If  then  we  produce  FC  to  H ,  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  portion  of  the  solid 
above  the  surface,  we  prove  that  the  solid  will  not  rest  but  turn  in  the  direc¬ 
tion  of  diminishing  the  angle  PTN . 

2.  Next  let  the  paraboloid  be  so  placed  in  the  fluid  that  its  base  touches  the 
surface  of  the  fluid  at  one  point  B  only,  and  let  the  construction  proceed  as 
before. 


Then  PV  =  P'7',  and  the  segments  BPQ,  BP'q  are  equal  and  similar,  so  that 

ZPTN  =  AP'T'N'. 

AN  =  AN',  N0=N'0, 

P'l  =  PL, 

PL>2LV. 


It  follows  that 
and  therefore 
whence 


559 


ON  FLOATING  BODIES  II 

Thus  F  again  lies  between  P  and  L,  and,  as  before,  the  paraboloid  will  turn 
in  the  direction  of  diminishing  the  angle  PTN,  i.e.  so  that  the  base  will  be  more 
submerged. 

(V.)  In  this  case 

(spec.  gr.  of  solid)  :  (spec.  gr.  of  fluid)  <PiP32  :  AM2. 

If  then  the  ratio  is  equal  to  l 2  :  AM2,  Z<PiP3.  Place  P'V'  between  the  parabo¬ 
las  BP1Q1  and  BP3Q3  equal  in  length  to  l  and  parallel  to  AM.  Let  P'V'  meet 
the  intermediate  parabola  in  F'  and  OP 2  in  I. 

Join  BV'  and  produce  it  to  meet  the  outer  parabola  in  q.  Then,  as  before, 
BV'  —  V'q,  and  the  tangent  P'T'  is  parallel  to  Bq. 

1.  Let  the  paraboloid  be  so  placed  in  the  fluid  that  its  base  touches  the  sur¬ 
face  at  one  point  only. 


B' 


Let  the  plane  through  AM  perpendicular  to  the  surface  of  the  fluid  cut  the 
paraboloid  in  the  parabolic  section  BAB'  and  the  plane  of  the  surface  of  the 
fluid  in  BQ. 

Making  the  usual  construction,  we  find 

PV  =  l  =  P'V', 

and  the  segments  BPQ ,  BPiq  are  equal  and  similar. 

Therefore  A  PTN  =  Z  P'T'N', 

and  AN  =  AN ',  N'0  =  N0. 

Therefore  PL  =  P7, 

whence  it  follows  that  PL<2LV. 

Thus  P,  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  immersed  portion  of  the  solid,  lies  between 
L  and  V,  while  CL  is  perpendicular  to  the  surface  of  the  fluid. 

Producing  FC  to  //,  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  portion  above  the  surface, 
we  prove,  as  usual,  that  there  will  not  be  rest,  but  the  solid  will  turn  in  the 
direction  of  increasing  the  angle  PTN ,  so  that  the  base  will  not  anywhere 
touch  the  surface. 


560  ARCHIMEDES 

2.  The  solid  will  however  rest  in  a  position  where  its  axis  makes  with  the 
surface  of  the  fluid  an  angle  less  than  TV 


B' 


For  let  it  be  placed  so  that  the  angle  PTN  is  not  less  than  TV 
Then,  with  the  same  construction  as  before,  PV  =  l  =  P'V'. 

And,  since  Z  T<  Z  Ti, 

AN>ANh 

and  therefore  NO<NiO ,  where  P1N1  is  the  ordinate  of  Pi. 

Hence  PL<PiP2. 

But  P1P2>P'P/. 

Therefore  PL  >  §PF, 

so  that  P,  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  immersed  portion  of  the  solid,  lies  be¬ 
tween  P  and  L. 

Thus  the  solid  will  turn  in  the  direction  of  diminishing  the  angle  PTN  until 
that  angle  becomes  less  than  TV 


BOOK  OF  LEMMAS 


Proposition  1 


If  two  circles  touch  at  A ,  and  if  BD ,  EF  he  parallel  diameters  in  them ,  ADF  zs  a 
straight  line . 


A 


Let  0,  C  be  the  centres  of  the  circles,  and  let 
OC  be  joined  and  produced  to  A.  Draw  DH  par¬ 
allel  to  AO  meeting  OF  in  H. 

Then,  since  OH  =  CD  =  CA, 

and  OF  =  OA, 

we  have,  by  subtraction,  HF  =  CO  =  DH. 

Therefore  ZHDF=  ZHFD. 

Thus  both  the  triangles  CAD ,  iTDF  are  isos¬ 
celes,  and  the  third  angles  ACD ,  DifF  in  each 
are  equal.  Therefore  the  equal  angles  in  each 
are  equal  to  one  another,  and 

ZADC=ADFH. 


Add  to  each  the  angle  CDF,  and  it  follows  that 

AADC+  ACDF  =  ACDF+ A  DFH 
=  (two  right  angles). 

Hence  ADF  is  a  straight  line. 

The  same  proof  applies  if  the  circles  touch  externally. 


Proposition  2 

Let  AB  he  the  dia?neter  of  a  semicircle ,  and  let  the  tangents  to  it  at  B  and  at  any 
other  point  D  on  it  meet  in  T.  If  now  DE  he  drawn  perpendicular  to  AB,  and  if 
AT,  DE  meet  in  F, 

DF  =  FE. 


H 


Produce  AD  to  meet  BT  produced  in  II.  Then  the  angle  ADB  in  the  semi¬ 
circle  is  right;  therefore  the  angle  BDH  is  also  right.  And  TB ,  TD  are  equal. 

Therefore  T  is  the  centre  of  the  semicircle  on  BII  as  diameter,  which  passes 
through  D. 

Hence  HT=TB. 

And,  since  DE,  II B  are  parallel,  it  follows  that  DF  =  FE . 

561 


562 


ARCHIMEDES 
Proposition  3 

Let  P  be  any  point  on  a  segment  of  a  circle  whose  base  is  AB,  and  let  PN  be  per¬ 
pendicular  to  AB.  Take  D  on  AB  so  that  AN  =  ND.  If  now  PQ  be  an  arc  equal 
to  the  arc  PA,  and  BQ  be  joined, 

BQ,  BD  shall  be  equal . 

Join  PA,  PQ,  PD,  DQ . 

Then,  since  the  arcs  PA,  PQ  are  equal, 

PA=PQ . 

But,  since  AN  —  ND,  and  the  angles  at 
N  are  right, 

PA=PD. 

Therefore  PQ  =  PD , 

and  Z  PQD  =  Z  PDQ. 

Now,  since  A,  P,  Q,  B  are  concyclic, 

Z  PAD  A-  Z  PQB  =  (two  right  angles), 
whence  Z  PDA  +  Z  PQB  =  (two  right  angles) 

=  ZPDA+  LPDB. 

Therefore  Z  PQB  =  Z  PDB ; 

and,  since  the  parts,  the  angles  PQD,  PDQ,  are  equal, 

ABQD=  ABDQ, 

and  BQ=BD. 

Proposition  4 

If  AB  be  the  diameter  of  a  semicircle  and  N  any  point  on  AB,  and  if  semicircles 
be  described  within  the  first  semicircle  and  having  AN,  BN  as  diameters  respec¬ 
tively,  the  figure  included  between  the  circumferences  of  the  three  semicircles  is 
“ what  Archimedes  called  an  appriXos”;1  and  its  area  is  equal  to  the  circle  on  PN 
as  diameter,  where  PN  is  perpendicular  to  AB  and  meets  the  original  semicircle 
in  P. 

For 

AB2  =  AN2+NB2+2AN  NB 
=AN2+NB2+2PN2. 

But  circles  (or  semicircles)  are 
to  one  another  as  the  squares 
of  their  radii  (or  diameters). 

Hence 

(semicircle  on  AB)  =  { sum  of 
semicircles  on  AN,  NB) 

+2 (semicircle  on  PN). 

That  is,  the  circle  on  PN  as  diameter  is  equal  to  the  difference  between  the 
semicircle  on  AB  and  the  sum  of  the  semicircles  on  AN,  NB,  i.e.  is  equal  to  the 
area  of  the  apfirfkos. 

Proposition  5 

Let  AB  be  the  diameter  of  a  semicircle,  C  any  point  on  AB,  and  CD  perpendicular 
to  it,  and  let  semicircles  be  described  within  the  first  semicircle  and  having  AC,  CB 
as  diameters.  Then,  if  two  circles  be  drawn  touching  CD  on  different  sides  and  each 
touching  two  of  the  semicircles ,  the  circles  so  drawn  will  be  equal. 

Let  one  of  the  circles  touch  CD  at  E,  the  semicircle  on  AB  in  F,  and  the 
semicircle  on  AC  in  G. 

1apPr)\os  is  literally  “a  shoemaker’s  knife.” 


BOOK  OF  LEMMAS  563 

Draw  the  diameter  EH  of  the  circle,  which  will  accordingly  be  perpendicular 
to  CD  and  therefore  parallel  to  AB. 

Join  FH,  HA,  and  FE,  EB .  Then,  by  Prop.  1,  FHA,  FEB  are  both  straight 
lines,  since  EH,  AB  are  parallel. 

For  the  same  reason  AGE,  CGH  are  straight  lines. 

Let  AF  produced  meet  CD  in  D,  and  let  AE  produced  meet  the  outer  semi¬ 
circle  in  7.  Join  BI,  ID. 

Then,  since  the  angles  AFB,  ACD  are  right,  the  straight  lines  AD,  AB  are 
such  that  the  perpendiculars  on  each  from  the  extremity  of  the  other  meet  in 
the  point  E .  Therefore,  by  the  properties  of  triangles,  AE  is  perpendicular  to 
the  line  joining  B  to  D. 


o 


But  AE  is  perpendicular  to  BI. 

Therefore  BID  is  a  straight  line. 

Now,  since  the  angles  at  G,  I  are  right,  CH  is  parallel  to  BD. 

Therefore  AB  :  BC  =  AD  :  DH 

=  AC  :  HE, 

so  that  AC-CB  =  AB-  HE. 

In  like  manner,  if  d  is  the  diameter  of  the  other  circle,  we  can  prove  that 

ACCB=ABd. 

Therefore  d  =  HE,  and  the  circles  are  equal. 

Proposition  6 

Let  AB,  the  diameter  of  a  semicircle ,  be  divided  at  C  so  that  AC  =  %CB  [or  in  any 
ratio].  Describe  semicircles  within  the  first  semicircle  and  on  AC,  CB  as  diameters, 
and  suppose  a  circle  drawn  touching  all  three  semicircles.  If  GH  be  the  diameter 
of  this  circle,  to  find  the  relation  between  GH  and  AB. 

Let  GH  be  that  diameter  of  the  circle  which  is  parallel  to  AB,  and  let  the 
circle  touch  the  semicircles  on  AB,  AC,  CB  in  D,  E,  F  respectively. 

Join  AG,  GD  and  BH,  HD.  Then,  by  Prop.  1,  AGD,  BIID  are  straight  lines. 
For  a  like  reason  AEII,  BFG  are  straight  lines,  as  also  are  CEG,  CFH. 

Let  AD  meet  the  semicircle  on  A C  in  I,  and  let  BD  meet  the  semicircle  on 
CB  in  K.  Join  Cl,  CK  meeting  AE,  BF  respectively  in  L,  M,  and  let  GL,  II M 
produced  meet  AB  in  N ,  P  respectively. 


564 


ARCHIMEDES 


Now,  in  the  triangle  AGC,  the  perpendiculars  from  A ,  C  on  the  opposite 
sides  meet  in  L.  Therefore,  by 
the  properties  of  triangles,  GLN 
is  perpendicular  to  AC. 

Similarly  HMP  is  perpendi¬ 
cular  to  CB. 

Again,  since  the  angles  at  I, 

K,  D  are  right,  CK  is  parallel  to 
AD,  and  Cl  to  BD. 

Therefore  AC  :  CB  =  AL  :  LH 
=  AN  :NP , 
and  BC  :CA  =  BM  :MG 

=  BP  :  PN. 

Hence  AN  :  NP  =  NP  :PB , 
or  AN,  NP,  PB  are  in  continued  proportion. 

Nov/,  in  the  case  where  AC=%CB, 

AN=sNp=*PB, 

whence  BP  :  PN  :  NA  :  AB  =  4  :  6  :  9  :  19. 

Theref  ore  GH  =  NP  =  t$A  B . 

And  similarly  GH  can  be  found  when  AC  :  CB  is  equal  to  any  other  given 
ratio. 


Proposition  7 

If  circles  be  circumscribed  about  and  inscribed  in  a  square ,  the  circumscribed 
circle  is  double  of  the  inscribed  circle. 

For  the  ratio  of  the  circumscribed  to  the  inscribed  circle  is  equal  to  that  of 
the  square  on  the  diagonal  to  the  square  itself,  i.e.  to  the  ratio  2:1. 

Proposition  8 

If  A B  be  any  chord  of  a  circle  whose  centre  is  0,  and  if  AB  be  'produced  to  C  so  that 
BC  is  equal  to  the  radius ;  if  further  CO  meet  the  circle  in  D  a,nd  be  produced  to 
meet  the  circle  a  second  time  in  E ,  the  arc  AE  will  be  equal  to  three  times  the  arc 
BD. 

Draw  the  chord  EF  parallel  to  AB ,  and 
join  OB ,  OF. 

Then,  since  the  angles  OEF,  OFE  are 
equal, 

ACOF  =  2  AOEF 

=  2  ZBCO,  by  parallels, 

=  2  Z  BOD,  since  BC  =  BO. 

Therefore 

Z  BOF  =  3Z  BOD, 
so  that  the  arc  BF  is  equal  to  three  times  the  arc  BD. 

Hence  the  arc  AE,  which  is  equal  to  the  arc  BF,  is  equal  to  three  times  the 
arc  BD. 

Proposition  9 

If  in  a  circle  two  chords  AB,  CD  which  do  not  pass  through  the  centre  intersect  at 
right  angles,  then 


BOOK  OF  LEMMAS  565 

(arc  AD)  +  (arc  CB)  =  (arc  AC)  +  (arc  DB ). 

Let  the  chords  intersect  at  0,  and  draw  the  diameter  EF  parallel  to  AB 

intersecting  CD  in  H .  EF  will  thus  bisect  CD  at 
right  angles  in  H ,  and 

(arc  ED)  =  (arc  EC). 

Also  EDF,  ECF  are  semicircles,  while 
(arc  ED)  =  (arc  Z?A)  +  (arc  AD). 
Therefore 

(sum  of  arcs  CF,  EA ,  AD)  =  (arc  of  a  semicircle). 
And  the  arcs  AE,  BF  are  equal. 

Therefore 

(arc  CZ?)  +  (arc  AD)  =  (arc  of  a  semicircle). 
Hence  the  remainder  of  the  circumference,  the 
sum  of  the  arcs  AC,  DB ,  is  also  equal  to  a  semi¬ 
circle;  and  the  proposition  is  proved. 


Proposition  10 


Suppose  that  TA ,  TB  are  two  tangents  to  a  circle ,  while  TC  cuts  it.  Let  BD  be  the 
chord  through  B  parallel  to  TC,  and  let  AD  meet  TC  in  E.  Then,  if  EH  be  drawn 
perpendicidar  to  BD,  it  will  bisect  it  in  H. 

Let  AB  meet  TC  in  F,  and  join  BE. 

Now  the  angle  TAB  is  equal  to  the 
angle  in  the  alternate  segment,  i.e. 

Z  TAB= AADB 

=  ZAET,  by  parallels. 
Hence  the  triangles  EAT,  AFT  have 
one  angle  equal  and  another  (at  T)  com¬ 
mon.  They  are  therefore  similar,  and 
FT  :  AT  =  AT  :ET. 
Therefore  ET  >TF=TA2 
=  TB2. 

It  follows  that  the  triangles  EB T,  BFT 
are  similar. 

Therefore  Z  TEB  =  Z  TBF 

=  Z  TAB. 

But  the  angle  TEB  is  equal  to  the  angle  EBD,  and  the  angle  TAB  was 
proved  equal  to  the  angle  EDB. 

Therefore  Z  EDB  =  Z  EBD. 

And  the  angles  at  H  are  right  angles. 

It  follows  that  BH  =  HD. 


Proposition  11 

If  two  chords  AB,  CD  in  a  circle  intersect  at  right  angles  in  a  point  0,  not  being 
the  centre,  then 

A02+B02+C02+D02  =  (diameter)2. 

Draw  the  diameter  CE,  and  join  AC,  CB,  AD,  BE. 


566 


ARCHIMEDES 


Then  the  angle  CAO  is  equal  to  the  angle  CEB  in 
the  same  segment,  and  the  angles  AOC,  EBC  are 
right;  therefore  the  triangles  AOC,  EBC  are  similar, 
and 

ZACO=  LECB. 

It  follows  that  the  subtended  arcs,  and  therefore 
the  chords  AD,  BE,  are  equal. 

Thus  (A02+D02)  +  (B02+C02)  =AD2+BC2 

=  BE2+BC2 
=  CE\ 


Proposition  12 

If  AB  be  the  diameter  of  a  semicircle,  and  TP,  TQ  the  tangents  to  it  from  any 
point  T,  and  if  AQ,  BP  be  joined  meeting  in  R,  then  TR  is  perpendicular  to  AB. 
Let  TR  produced  meet  AB  in  M,  and  join  PA,  QB. 

Since  the  angle  APB  is  right, 

Z  PAB+  Z  PBA  =  (a  right  angle) 

=  Z.AQB. 

Add  to  each  side  the  angle  RBQ,  and 
Z  PAB+  Z  QBA  =  (exterior)  Z  PRQ. 

But 

Z  TPR  =  Z  PAB,  and  Z  TQR  =  Z  QBA , 
in  the  alternate  segments; 
therefore  Z  TPR+  Z  TQR  =  Z  PRQ. 

It  follows  from  this  that 

TP=TQ  =  TR. 

[For,  if  PT  be  produced  to  0  so  that  TO=TQ,  we  have 

Z  TOQ=  Z  TQO. 

And,  by  hypothesis,  ZPRQ  =  Z  TPR+TQR. 

By  addition,  Z  POQ+  Z  PRQ  =  Z  TPR+OQR. 

It  follows  that,  in  the  quadrilateral  OPRQ,  the  opposite  angles  are  together 
equal  to  two  right  angles.  Therefore  a  circle  will  go  round  OPQR,  and  T  is  its 
centre,  because  TP  =T0=  TQ.  Therefore  TR  =  TP.] 

Thus  Z  TRP  =  Z  TPR  =  Z  PAM. 

Adding  to  each  the  angle  PRM, 

Z  PAM  +  Z  PRM=  Z  TRP+  Z  PRM 
=  (two  right  angles). 

Theref  ore  Z  A  PR  +  Z  AMR  =  (two  right  angles) , 

whence  Z.  AMR  =  ( a  right  angle) . 

Proposition  13 

If  a  diameter  AB  of  a  circle  meet  any  chord  CD,  not  a 
diameter,  in  E,  and  if  AM,  BN  be  drawn  perpendicu¬ 
lar  to  CD,  then 

CN  =  DM. 

Let  0  be  the  centre  of  the  circle,  and  OH  perpen¬ 
dicular  to  CD.  Join  BM,  and  produce  HO  to  meet 
BM  in  K. 

Then  CH  =  HD. 


567 


And,  by  parallels,  since 

Therefore 

Accordingly 


BOOK  OF  LEMMAS 

BO  =  OA , 

BK  =  KM . 

NH  =  HM . 

CN  =  DM. 


Proposition  14 


Le£  ACB  be  a  semicircle  on  AB  as  diameter ,  ana  let  AD ,  ££7  be  equal  lengths 
measured  along  AB  from  A ,  £  respectively.  On  AD ,  ££  as  diameters  describe 
semicircles  on  the  side  towards  C ,  and  on  £2?  as  diameter  a  semicircle  on  the  op¬ 
posite  side .  Le£  the  perpendicular  to  A  B  through  0,  the  centre  of  the  first  semi¬ 
circle,  meet  the  opposite  semicircles  in  C,  F  respectively. 

Then  shall  the  area  of  the  figure  bounded  by  the  circumferences  of  all  the  semi¬ 
circles  be  equal  to  the  area  of  the  circle  on  CF  as  diameter. 


c 


Therefore 

(area  of  “salinon”)  = 


By  Eucl.  ii.  10,  since  ED  is  bisected 
at  0  and  produced  to  A , 

EA2+AD2  =  2(E02+0A2), 
and  CF  =  OA+OE  =  EA. 

Therefore 

AB2+DE2  =  4:(E02+0A2)  = 
2{CF2+AD2). 

But  circles  (and  therefore  semi¬ 
circles)  are  to  one  another  as  the 
squares  on  their  radii  (or  diameters). 
Therefore 

(sum  of  semicircles  on  AB,  DE) 

=  (circle  on  CF)  +  (sum  of  semicircles 
on  AD,  BE). 

of  circle  on  CF  as  diam.). 


Proposition  15 


Let  AB  be  the  diameter  of  a  circle,  AC  a  side  of  an  inscribed  regular  pentagon,  D 
the  middle  point  of  the  arc  AC.  Join  CD  and  produce  it  to  meet  BA  produced  in 
E ;  join  AC,  DB  meeting  in  F,  and  draw  FM  perpendicular  to  AB.  Then 

EM  =  {radius  of  circle). 

Let  0  be  the  centre  of  the  circle,  and  join  DA,  DM,  DO,  CB . 

Now  A  ABC  =  f(right  angle), 

and  Z  ABD  =  Z  DBC  =  i(right  angle), 

whence  Z  AOD  =  -f  (right  angle). 

Further,  the  triangles  FCB,  FMB  are  equal  in  all  respects. 

Therefore,  in  the  triangles  DCB,  DMB,  the  sides  CB,  MB  being  equal  and 
BD  common,  while  the  angles  CBD,  MBD  are  equal, 

ABCD=  Z.BMD  =  f (right  angle). 

But  Z  BCD-\-  Z  BAD  =  (two  right  angles) 


so  that 
and 

Therefore 


=  Z.BAD+  /-DAE 
=  ABMD+  ADMA, 
ADAE=  A  BCD, 

ABAD=  AAMD. 

AD  =  MD. 


ARCHIMEDES 


56S 

Now,  in  the  triangle  DMO , 

Zil/OD  =  f  (right  angle), 
Z  DMO  =  f  (right  angle) . 


Therefore  Z  ODM  =  f (right  angle)  =  AOD; 

whence  OM  =  MD. 

Again  Z  EDA  =  (supplement  of  ADC ) 

=  ZODH 
=  f  (right  angle) 

-  A  ODM. 

Therefore,  in  the  triangles  EDA,  ODM , 

ZEDA=  ZODM, 

ZEAD=  ZOMDj 
and  the  sides  AD,  MD  are  equal. 

Hence  the  triangles  are  equal  in  all  respects,  and 

EA=MO. 

Therefore  EM  =  A0. 

Moreover  DE  =  DO ;  and  it  follows  that,  since  DE  is  equal  to  the  side  of  an 
inscribed  hexagon,  and  DC  is  the  side  of  an  inscribed  decagon,  EC  is  divided 
at  D  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio  [i.e.  EC  :  ED  — ED  :  DC];  “and  this  is  proved 
in  the  book  of  the  Elements  ”  [Eucl.  xm.  9:  “If  the  side  of  the  hexagon  and  the 
side  of  the  decagon  inscribed  in  the  same  circle  be  put  together,  the  whole 
straight  line  is  divided  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio,  and  the  greater  segment  is 
the  side  of  the  hexagon.”] 


THE  METHOD  TREATING  OF  MECHANICAL 

PROBLEMS 


“ Archimedes  to  Eratosthenes  greeting. 

“I  sent  you  on  a  former  occasion  some  of  the  theorems  discovered  by  me, 
merely  writing  out  the  enunciations  and  inviting  you  to  discover  the  proofs, 
which  at  the  moment  I  did  not  give.  The  enunciations  of  the  theorems  which  I 
sent  were  as  follows : 

1.  “If  in  a  right  prism  with  a  parallelogrammic  base  a  cylinder  be  inscribed 
which  has  its  bases  in  the  opposite  parallelograms,1  and  its  sides  [i.e.  four  gen¬ 
erators]  on  the  remaining  planes  (faces)  of  the  prism,  and  if  through  the  centre 
of  the  circle  which  is  the  base  of  the  cylinder  and  (through)  one  side  of  the 
square  in  the  plane  opposite  to  it  a  plane  be  drawn,  the  plane  so  drawn  will  cut 
off  from  the  cylinder  a  segment  which  is  bounded  by  two  planes  and  the  sur¬ 
face  of  the  cylinder,  one  of  the  two  planes  being  the  plane  which  has  been 
drawn  and  the  other  the  plane  in  which  the  base  of  the  cylinder  is,  and  the 
surface  being  that  which  is  between  the  said  planes;  and  the  segment  cut  off 
from  the  cylinder  is  one  sixth  part  of  the  whole  prism. 

2.  “If  in  a  cube  a  cylinder  be  inscribed  which  has  its  bases  in  the  opposite 
parallelograms2  and  touches  with  its  surface  the  remaining  four  planes  (faces), 
and  if  there  also  be  inscribed  in  the  same  cube  another  cylinder  which  has  its 
bases  in  other  parallelograms  and  touches  with  its  surface  the  remaining  four 
planes  (faces),  then  the  figure  bounded  by  the  surfaces  of  the  cylinders,  which 
is  within  both  cylinders,  is  two-thirds  of  the  whole  cube. 

“Now  these  theorems  differ  in  character  from  those  communicated  before; 
for  we  compared  the  figures  then  in  question,  conoids  and  spheroids  and  seg¬ 
ments  of  them,  in  respect  to  size,  with  figures  of  cones  and  cylinders:  but  none 
of  those  figures  have  yet  been  found  to  be  equal  to  a  solid  figure  bounded  by 
planes;  whereas  each  of  the  present  figures  bounded  by  two  planes  and  surfaces 
of  cylinders  is  found  to  be  equal  to  one  of  the  solid  figures  which  are  bounded 
by  planes.  The  proofs  then  of  these  theorems  I  have  written  in  this  book  and 
now  send  to  you.  Seeing  moreover  in  you,  as  I  say,  an  earnest  student,  a  man 
of  considerable  eminence  in  philosophy,  and  an  admirer  [of  mathematical  in¬ 
quiry],  I  thought  fit  to  write  out  for  you  and  explain  in  detail  in  the  same  book 
the  peculiarity  of  a  certain  method,  by  which  it  wall  be  possible  for  you  to  get 
a  start  to  enable  you  to  investigate  some  of  the  problems  in  mathematics  by 
means  of  mechanics.  This  procedure  is,  I  am  persuaded,  no  less  useful  even  for 
the  proof  of  the  theorems  themselves;  for  certain  things  first  became  clear  to 
me  by  a  mechanical  method,  although  they  had  to  be  demonstrated  by  geom- 

irThe  parallelograms  are  apparently  squares. 

2i.e.  squares. 


5G9 


570  ARCHIMEDES 

etry  afterwards  because  their  investigation  by  the  said  method  did  not  furnish 
an  actual  demonstration.  But  it  is  of  course  easier,  when  we  have  previously 
acquired,  by  the  method,  some  knowledge  of  the  questions,  to  supply  the  proof 
than  it  is  to  find  it  without  any  previous  knowledge.  This  is  a  reason  why,  in 
the  case  of  the  theorems  the  proof  of  which  Eudoxus  was  the  first  to  discover, 
namely  that  the  cone  is  a  third  part  of  the  cylinder,  and  the  pyramid  of  the 
prism,  having  the  same  base  and  equal  height,  we  should  give  no  small  share 
of  the  credit  to  Democritus  who  was  the  first  to  make  the  assertion  with  regard 
to  the  said  figure  though  he  did  not  prove  it.  I  am  myself  in  the  position  of 
having  first  made  the  discovery  of  the  theorem  now  to  be  published  [by  the 
method  indicated],  and  I  deem  it  necessary  to  expound  the  method  partly  be¬ 
cause  I  have  already  spoken  of  it  and  I  do  not  want  to  be  thought  to  have 
uttered  vain  words,  but  equally  because  I  am  persuaded  that  it  will  be  of  no 
little  service  to  mathematics;  for  I  apprehend  that  some,  either  of  my  contem¬ 
poraries  or  of  m}'  successors,  will,  by  means  of  the  method  when  once  estab¬ 
lished,  be  able  to  discover  other  theorems  in  addition,  which  have  not  yet 
occurred  to  me. 

“First  then  I  will  set  out  the  very  first  theorem  which  became  known  to  me 
by  means  of  mechanics,  namely  that 

“Any  segment  of  a  section  of  a  right-angled  cone  ( i.e .  a  parabola)  is  four-thirds 
of  the  triangle  which  has  the  same  base  and  equal  height , 

and  after  this  I  will  give  each  of  the  other  theorems  investigated  by  the  same 
method.  Then,  at  the  end  of  the  book,  I  will  give  the  geometrical”  [proofs  of 
the  propositions]... 

[I  premise  the  following  propositions  which  I  shall  use  in  the  course  of  the 
work.] 

1.  “If  from  [one  magnitude  another  magnitude  be  subtracted  which  has  not 
the  same  centre  of  gravity,  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  remainder  is  found  by] 
producing  [the  straight  line  joining  the  centres  of  gravity  of  the  whole  magni¬ 
tude  and  of  the  subtracted  part  in  the  direction  of  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the 
whole]  and  cutting  off  from  it  a  length  which  has  to  the  distance  between  the 
said  centres  of  gravity  the  ratio  which  the  weight  of  the  subtracted  magnitude 
has  to  the  weight  of  the  remainder.”  [On  the  Equilibrium  of  Planes ,  i.  8] 

2.  “If  the  centres  of  gravity  of  any  number  of  magnitudes  whatever  be  on 

the  same  straight  line,  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  magnitude  made  up  of  all 
of  them  will  be  on  the  same  straight  line.”  [Cf.  Ibid.  i.  5] 

3.  “The  centre  of  gravity  of  any  straight  line  is  the  point  of  bisection  of  the 

straight  line.”  [Cf.  Ibid.  i.  4] 

4.  “The  centre  of  gravity  of  any  triangle  is  the  point  in  which  the  straight 

lines  drawn  from  the  angular  points  of  the  triangle  to  the  middle  points  of  the 
(opposite)  sides  cut  one  another.”  [Ibid.  i.  13,  14] 

5.  “The  centre  of  gravity  of  any  parallelogram  is  the  point  in  which  the 

diagonals  meet.”  [Ibid.  i.  10] 

6.  “The  centre  of  gravity  of  a  circle  is  the  point  which  is  also  the  centre  [of 
the  circle].” 

7.  “The  centre  of  gravity  of  any  cylinder  is  the  point  of  bisection  of  the  axis.” 

8.  “The  centre  of  gravity  of  any  cone  is  [the  point  which  divides  its  axis  so 
that]  the  portion  [adjacent  to  the  vertex  is]  triple  [of  the  portion  adjacent  to 
the  base].” 


THE  METHOD  TREATING  OF  MECHANICAL  PROBLEMS  571 

[All  these  propositions  have  already  been]  proved.1  [Besides  these  I  require 
also  the  following  proposition,  which  is  easily  proved: 

If  in  two  series  of  magnitudes  those  of  the  first  series  are,  in  order,  propor¬ 
tional  to  those  of  the  second  series  and  further],  “the  magnitudes  [of  the  first 
series],  either  all  or  some  of  them,  are  in  any  ratio  whatever  [to  those  of  a  third 
series],  and  if  the  magnitudes  of  the  second  series  are  in  the  same  ratio  to  the 
corresponding  magnitudes  [of  a  fourth  series],  then  the  sum  of  the  magnitudes 
of  the  first  series  has  to  the  sum  of  the  selected  magnitudes  of  the  third  series 
the  same  ratio  which  the  sum  of  the  magnitudes  of  the  second  series  has  to  the 
sum  of  the  (correspondingly)  selected  magnitudes  of  the  fourth  series.”  [On 
Conoids  and  Spheroids ,  Prop.  L] 


Proposition  1 


Let  ABC  be  a  segment  of  a  parabola  bounded  by  the  straight  line  AC  and 
the  parabola  ABC ,  and  let  D  be  the  middle  point  of  AC.  Draw  the  straight  line 
DBE  parallel  to  the  axis  of  the  parabola  and  join  AB,  BC . 

Then  shall  the  segment  ABC  be  i  of  the  triangle  ABC. 

From  A  draw  AKF  parallel  to  DE ,  and  let  the  tangent  to  the  parabola  at  C 
meet  DBE  in  E  and  AKF  in  F .  Produce  CB  to  meet  AF  in  K,  and  again  pro¬ 
duce  CK  to  H ,  making  KH  equal  to  CK. 

Consider  CH  as  the  bar  of  a  balance,  K  being  its  middle  point. 

Let  MO  be  any  straight  line  parallel  to  ED,  and  let  it  meet  CF,  CK,  AC  in 
M,  N,  0  and  the  curve  in  P. 

Now,  since  CE  is  a  tangent  to  the  parabola  and  CD  the  semi-ordinate, 


EB  =  BD; 

for  this  is  proved  in  the  Elements  [of  Conics].,,2 
Since  FA,  MO  are  parallel  to  ED,  it  follows  that 
FK  =  KA,  MN=NO. 

Now,  by  the  property  of  the 
parabola,  “proved  in  a  lem¬ 
ma,” 

MO  :  OP  =  CA  :  AO  [Cf.  Quad¬ 
rature  of  Parabola,  Prop.  5] 
=  CK  :  KN 

[Eucl.  vi.  2] 

=  HK:KN. 

Take  a  straight  line  TG 
equal  to  OP,  and  place  it  with 
its  centre  of  gravity  at  II,  so 
that  TH  =  HG ;  then,  since  N 
is  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the 
straight  line  MO,  and 
MO  :  TG  =  HK  :  KN, 
it  follows  that  TG  at  II  and  MO  at  N  will  be  in  equilibrium  about  K.  [On  the 
Equilibrium  of  Planes,  i.  G,  7] 


*Thc  problem  of  finding  the  centre  of  gravity  of  a  cone  is  not  solved  in  any  extant  work 
of  Archimedes. 

2i.e.  the  works  on  conics  by  Aristaeus  and  Euclid. 


572  ARCHIMEDES 

Similarly,  for  all  other  straight  lines  parallel  to  DE  and  meeting  the  arc  of 
the  parabola,  (1)  the  portion  intercepted  between  FC,  AC  with  its  middle 
point  on  KC  and  (2)  a  length  equal  to  the  intercept  between  the  curve  and  AC 
placed  with  its  centre  of  gravity  at  H  will  be  in  equilibrium  about  K. 

Therefore  K  is  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  whole  system  consisting  (1)  of  all 
the  straight  lines  as  MO  intercepted  between  FC,  AC  and  placed  as  they 
actually  are  in  the  figure  and  (2)  of  all  the  straight  lines  placed  at  H  equal  to 
the  straight  lines  as  PO  intercepted  between  the  curve  and  AC. 

And,  since  the  triangle  CFA  is  made  up  of  all  the  parallel  lines  like  MO, 
and  the  segment  CBA  is  made  up  of  all  the  straight  lines  like  PO  within  the 
curve, 

it  follows  that  the  triangle,  placed  where  it  is  in  the  figure,  is  in  equilibrium 
about  K  with  the  segment  CBA  placed  with  its  centre  of  gravity  at  H. 

Divide  KC  at  W  so  that  CK  =  3KW ; 

then  W  is  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  triangle  ACF ;  “for  this  is  proved  in  the 
books  on  equilibrium”  ( kv  rots  iaoppo'mKo'is). 

[Cf.  On  the  Equilibrium  of  Planes  i.  15] 

Therefore  A  ACF  :  (segment  ABC)—HK  :  KW 

=  3:1. 

Therefore  segment  ABC  =  \AACF. 

But  AACF  =  4AA£C. 

Therefore  segment  ABC  =  f  A  ABC. 

“Now  the  fact  here  stated  is  not  actually  demonstrated  by  the  argument 
used;  but  that  argument  has  given  a  sort  of  indication  that  the  conclusion  is 
true.  Seeing  then  that  the  theorem  is  not  demonstrated,  but  at  the  same  time 
suspecting  that  the  conclusion  is  true,  we  shall  have  recourse  to  the  geometri¬ 
cal  demonstration  which  I  myself  discovered  and  have  already  published.” 


Proposition  2 

We  can  investigate  by  the  same  method  the  propositions  that 

(1)  Any  sphere  is  (in  respect  of  solid  content )  four  times  the  cone  with  base  equal 
to  a  great  circle  of  the  sphere  and  height  equal  to  its  radius;  and 

(2)  the  cylinder  with  base  equal  to  a  great  circle  of  the  sphere  and  height  equal 
to  the  diameter  is  1J  times  the  sphere. 

(1)  Let  ABCD  be  a  great  circle  of  a  sphere,  and  AC,  BD  diameters  at  right 
angles  to  one  another. 

Let  a  circle  be  drawn  about  BD  as  diameter  and  in  a  plane  perpendicular 
to  AC, and  on  this  circle  as  base  let  a  cone  be  described  with  A  as  vertex.  Let 
the  surface  of  this  cone  be  produced  and  then  cut  by  a  plane  through  C  parallel 
to  its  base;  the  section  will  be  a  circle  on  EF  as  diameter.  On  this  circle  as  base 
let  a  cylinder  be  erected  with  height  and  axis  AC,  and  produce  CA  to  H , 
making  AH  equal  to  CA. 

Let  CH  be  regarded  as  the  bar  of  a  balance,  A  being  its  middle  point. 

Draw  any  straight  line  MN  in  the  plane  of  the  circle  ABCD  and  parallel  to 
BD.  Let  MN  meet  the  circle  in  0,  P,  the  diameter  AC  in  S,  and  the  straight 
lines  AF,  AF  in  Q,  R  respectively.  Join  AO. 

Through  MN  draw  a  plane  at  right  angles  to  AC; 


THE  METHOD  TREATING  OF  MECHANICAL  PROBLEMS  573 

this  plane  will  cut  the  cylinder  in  a  circle  with  diameter  MN,  the  sphere  in  a 
circle  with  diameter  OP,  and  the  cone  in  a  circle  with  diameter  QR. 

Now,  since  MS  =  AC,  and  QS  =  AS, 

MS  SQ  =  CA  -AS 
=  A02 

=  OS2+SQ2. 

And,  since  HA=AC, 

HA : AS  =  CA : AS 
=  MS  :  SQ 
=  MS2 :  MS  -SQ 
=  MS 2 :  0 OS2+SQ 2), 
from  above, 

=MN2  :  (OP2+QR2) 

=  (circle,  diam.  MN)  :  (circle,  diam.  OP 
+ circle,  diam.  QR ). 

That  is, 

HA  :AS=  (circle  in  cylinder)  :  (circle  in  sphere+circle  in  cone). 

Therefore  the  circle  in  the  cylinder,  placed  where  it  is,  is  in  equilibrium, 
about  A,  with  the  circle  in  the  sphere  together  with  the  circle  in  the  cone,  if 
H  both  the  latter  circles  are  placed 

with  their  centres  of  gravity  at  H. 

Similarly  for  the  three  corre¬ 
sponding  sections  made  by  a  plane 
perpendicular  to  AC  and  passing 
through  any  other  straight  line  in 
the  parallelogram  LF  parallel  to 
EF. 

If  we  deal  in  the  same  way  with 
all  the  sets  of  three  circles  in  which 
planes  perpendicular  to  AC  cut  the 
cylinder,  the  sphere  and  the  cone, 
and  which  make  up  those  solids  re¬ 
spectively,  it  follows  that  the  cylin¬ 
der,  in  the  place  where  it  is,  will 
be  in  equilibrium  about  A  with 
the  sphere  and  the  cone  together, 


M 


L  V 

A  X  ( 

B 

/O/Q 

s  RX^ 

D 

K 

E  W  C  Y  F 

when  both  are  placed  with  their  centres  of  gravity  at  H. 

Therefore,  since  K  is  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  cylinder, 

HA  :  AK=  (cylinder)  :  (sphere +  cone  A  EF). 

But  HA  =  2AK ; 

therefore  cylinder  =  2 (sphered- cone  AEF). 

Now  cylinder  =  3 (cone  AEF);  [Eucl.  xii.  10] 

therefore  cone  AEF  =  2 (sphere). 

But,  since  EF  =  2BD, 

cone  AEF  =  8(cone  ABD ); 
therefore  sphere  =  4(cone  ABD). 

(2)  Through  B ,  D  draw  VBW,  XDY  parallel  to  AC; 
and  imagine  a  cylinder  which  has  AC  for  axis  and  the  circles  on  VX ,  WY  as 
diameters  for  bases. 


574 


ARCHIMEDES 


Then  cylinder  7F  =  2(cylinder  VD) 

=  6(cone  ABD)  [Eucl.  xn.  10] 

=  f(sphere),  from  above. 


Q.E.D. 

“From  this  theorem,  to  the  effect  that  a  sphere  is  four  times  as  great  as  the 
cone  with  a  great  circle  of  the  sphere  as  base  and  with  height  equal  to  the 
radius  of  the  sphere,  I  conceived  the  notion  that  the  surface  of  any  sphere  is 
four  times  as  great  as  a  great  circle  in  it;  for,  judging  from  the  fact  that  any 
circle  is  equal  to  a  triangle  with  base  equal  to  the  circumference  and  height 
equal  to  the  radius  of  the  circle,  I  apprehended  that,  in  like  manner,  any  sphere 
is  equal  to  a  cone  with  base  equal  to  the  surface  of  the  sphere  and  height  equal 
to  the  radius.” 


Proposition  3 

By  this  method  we  can  also  investigate  the  theorem  that 
A  cylinder  with  base  equal  to  the  greatest  circle  in  a  spheroid  and  height  equal 
to  the  axis  of  the  spheroid  is  If  times  the  spheroid; 
and,  when  this  is  established,  it  is  plain  that 

If  any  spheroid  be  cut  by  a  plane  through  the  centre  and  at  right  angles  to  the 
axis,  the  half  of  the  spheroid  is  double  of  the  cone  which  has  the  same  base  and  the 
same  axis  as  the  segment  ( i.e .  the  half  of  the  spheroid). 

Let  a  plane  through  the  axis  of  a  spheroid  cut  its  surface  in  the  ellipse 
ABCD ,  the  diameters  (i.e.  axes)  of  which  are  AC,  BD ;  and  let  K  be  the  centre. 


Draw  a  circle  about  BD  as  diame¬ 
ter  and  in  a  plane  perpendicular  to 
AC;  imagine  a  cone  with  this  circle  as 
base  and  A  as  vertex  produced  and 
cut  by  a  plane  through  C  parallel  to 
its  base;  the  section  will  be  a  circle  in 
a  plane  at  right  angles  to  AC  and 
about  EF  as  diameter. 

Imagine  a  cylinder  with  the  latter 
circle  as  base  and  axis  .4  C  ;  produce 
CA  to  H,  making  AH  equal  to  CA. 

Let  HC  be  regarded  as  the  bar  of  a 
balance,  A  being  its  middle  point. 

In  the  parallelogram  LF  draw  any 
straight  line  MN  parallel  to  EF  meet¬ 
ing  the  ellipse  in  0,  P  and  AE,  AF, 
AC  in  Q,  R,  S  respectively. 

If  now  a  plane  be  drawn  through 
MN  at  right  angles  to  AC,  it  will  cut 
the  C3rlinder  in  a  circle  with  diame¬ 
ter  MN,  the  spheroid  in  a  circle  with 
with  diameter  QR. 


H 


diameter  OP,  and  the  cone  in  a  circle 


THE  METHOD  TREATING  OF  MECHANICAL  PROBLEMS  575 
Since  HA=AC, 

HA : AS  =  CA : AS 
=  EA  :AQ 
=  MS  :  SQ. 

Therefore 

HA  :  AS  =  MS2 :  MS  -SQ. 

But,  by  the  property  of  the  ellipse, 

AS  -SC  :  SO2  =  AK2:  KB 2 
=  A&2  :SQ2; 

therefore  SQ2 :  SO 2  =  AS2  :  AS -SC 

=  SQ2 :  SQ  -  QM, 

and  accordingly  S02  =  SQ  -  QM. 

Add  SQ2  to  each  side,  and  we  have 

S02+SQ2  =  SQ  -SM. 

Therefore,  from  above,  we  have 

HA  :  AS  =  MS2  :(S02+SQ2) 

=  MN 2 :  0 OP2+QR 2) 

=  (circle,  diam.  MN)  :  (circle,  diam.  OP+circle,  diam.  QR ). 

That  is, 

HA  :  AS=  (circle  in  cylinder)  :  (circle  in  spheroid + circle  in  cone). 
Therefore  the  circle  in  the  cylinder,  in  the  place  where  it  is,  is  in  equilibrium, 
about  A,  with  the  circle  in  the  spheroid  and  the  circle  in  the  cone  together,  if 
both  the  latter  circles  are  placed  with  their  centres  of  gravity  at  H. 

Similarly  for  the  three  corresponding  sections  made  by  a  plane  perpendicu¬ 
lar  to  AC  and  passing  through  any  other  straight  line  in  the  parallelogram  LF 
parallel  to  EF. 

If  we  deal  in  the  same  way  with  all  the  sets  of  three  circles  in  which  planes 
perpendicular  to  AC  cut  the  cylinder,  the  spheroid  and  the  cone,  and  which 
make  up  those  figures  respectively,  it  follows  that  the  cylinder,  in  the  place 
where  it  is,  will  be  in  equilibrium  about  A  with  the  spheroid  and  the  cone 
together,  when  both  are  placed  with  their  centres  of  gravity  at  H . 

Therefore,  since  K  is  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  cylinder, 

HA  :  A K  =  (cylinder)  :  (spheroid + cone  AEF). 

But  HA=2AK; 

therefore  cylinder  =  2(spheroid+cone  AEF). 

And  cylinder  =  3 (cone  AEF);  [Eucl.  xn.  10] 

therefore  cone  A£,F  =  2(spheroid). 

But,  since  EF  =  2j3D, 

cone  A£'F  =  8(cone  ABD); 
therefore  spheroid  =  4(cone  ABD)y 

and  half  the  spheroid  =  2 (cone  ABD). 

Through  B,  D  draw  VBW,  XDY  parallel  to  AC; 
and  imagine  a  cylinder  which  has  AC  for  axis  and  the  circles  on  VXf  WY  as 
diameters  for  bases. 

Then  cylinder  FF  =  2(cylinder  VD) 

=  6(cone  ABD) 

=  f (spheroid),  from  above. 


Q.E.D. 


376 


ARCHIMEDES 


Proposition  4 

Any  segment  of  a  right-angled  conoid  ( i.e .  a  paraboloid  of  revolution)  cut  off  by  a 
plane  at  right  angles  to  the  axis  is  1§  times  the  cone  which  has  the  same  base  and 
the  same  axis  as  the  segment. 

This  can  be  investigated  by  our  method,  as  follows. 

Let  a  paraboloid  of  revolution  be  cut  by  a  plane  through  the  axis  in  the 
parabola  BAC; 

and  let  it  also  be  cut  by  another  plane  at  right  angles  to  the  axis  and  intersect¬ 
ing  the  former  plane  in  BC .  Produce  DA,  the  axis  of  the  segment,  to  H,  making 
II A  equal  to  AD. 

Imagine  that  HD  is  the  bar  of  a  balance,  A  being  its  middle  point. 

The  base  of  the  segment  being  the  circle  on  BC  as  diameter  and  in  a  plane 
perpendicular  to  AD, 
imagine  (1)  a  cone  drawn  with  the  latter 
circle  as  base  and  A  as  vertex,  and  (2)  a 
cylinder  with  the  same  circle  as  base  and 
AD  as  axis. 

In  the  parallelogram  EC  let  any  straight 
line  MN  be  drawn  parallel  to  BC,  and 
through  MN  let  a  plane  be  drawn  at  right 
angles  to  AD;  this  plane  will  cut  the  cylin¬ 
der  in  a  circle  with  diameter  MN  and  the 
paraboloid  in  a  circle  with  diameter  OP. 

Now,  BAC  being  a  parabola  and  BD, 

OS  ordinates, 

DA  :  AS  =  BD2  :  OS2, 
or  HA  :  AS  — MS2  :  SO2. 

Therefore 


HA  :  AS  =  (circle,  rad.  MS)  :  (circle,  rad.  OS) 

=  (circle  in  cylinder)  :  (circle  in  paraboloid). 

Therefore  the  circle  in  the  cylinder,  in  the  place  where  it  is,  will  be  in  equi¬ 
librium  about  A  with  the  circle  in  the  paraboloid,  if  the  latter  is  placed  with 
its  centre  of  gravity  at  H. 

Similarly  for  the  two  corresponding  circular  sections  made  by  a  plane  per¬ 
pendicular  to  AD  and  passing  through  any  other  straight  line  in  the  parallelo¬ 
gram  which  is  parallel  to  BC. 

Therefore,  as  usual,  if  we  take  all  the  circles  making  up  the  whole  cylinder 
and  the  whole  segment  and  treat  them  in  the  same  way,  wre  find  that  the 
cylinder,  in  the  place  where  it  is,  is  in  equilibrium  about  A  with  the  segment 
placed  with  its  centre  of  gravity  at  H. 

If  K  is  the  middle  point  of  AD,  K  is  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  cylinder; 
therefore  HA  :  A K  =  (cylinder)  :  (segment). 

Therefore  cylinder  =  2  (segment). 

And  cylinder  =  3 (cone  ABC);  [Eucl.  xii.  10] 

therefore  segment  =  -§(cone  ABC) . 


THE  METHOD  TREATING  OF  MECHANICAL  PROBLEMS  577 


Proposition  5 

The  centre  of  gravity  of  a  segment  of  a  right-angled  conoid  ( i.e .  a  paraboloid  of 
revolution)  cut  off  by  a  plane  at  right  angles  to  the  axis  is  on  the  straight  line  which 
is  the  axis  of  the  segment ,  and  divides  the  said  straight  line  in  such  a  way  that  the 
portion  of  it  adjacent  to  the  vertex  is  double  of  the  remaining  portion . 

This  can  be  investigated  by  the  method,  as  follows. 

Let  a  paraboloid  of  revolution  be  cut  by  a  plane  through  the  axis  in  the 
parabola  BAC ; 

and  let  it  also  be  cut  by  another  plane  at  right  angles  to  the  axis  and  intersect¬ 
ing  the  former  plane  in  BC. 

Produce  DA,  the  axis  of  the  segment,  to  H ,  making  HA  equal  to  AD)  and 
imagine  DH  to  be  the  bar  of  a  balance,  its  middle  point  being  A. 

The  base  of  the  segment  being  the  circle  on  BC  as  diameter  and  in  a  plane 
perpendicular  to  AD, 

imagine  a  cone  with  this  circle  as  base  and  A  as  vertex,  so  that  AB,  AC  are 
generators  of  the  cone. 


In  the  parabola  let  any  double  ordinate 
OP  be  drawn  meeting  AB,  AD,  AC  in  Q,  S, 
R  respectively. 

Now,  from  the  propert}'  of  the  parabola, 
BD2 :  OS2  =  DA  :  AS 
=  BD  :  QS 
=  BD 2  :  BD  •  QS. 
Therefore  OS2  =  BD  •  QS, 
or  BD  :  OS  =  OS  :  QS, 

whence  BD  :  QS  =  OS 2 :  QS2. 

But  BD  :  QS  =  AD  :  AS 

=  HA  :  AS. 

Therefore  HA  :AS  =  OS 2  :  QS2 
=  OP2 :  QR2. 

If  now  through  OP  a  plane  be  drawn  at 
right  angles  to  AD,  this  plane  cuts  the  par¬ 
aboloid  in  a  circle  with  diameter  OP  and 
the  cone  in  a  circle  with  diameter  QR. 

We  see  therefore  that  HA  :  AS=  (circle,  diam.  OP)  :  (circle,  diam.  QR) 

=  (circle  in  paraboloid)  :  (circle  in  cone) ; 
and  the  circle  in  the  paraboloid,  in  the  place  where  it  is,  is  in  equilibrium  about 
A  with  the  circle  in  the  cone  placed  with  its  centre  of  gravity  at  H. 

Similarly  for  the  two  corresponding  circular  sections  made  by  a  plane  per¬ 
pendicular  to  A  D  and  passing  through  any  other  ordinate  of  the  parabola. 

Dealing  therefore  in  the  same  way  with  all  the  circular  sections  which  make 
up  the  whole  of  the  segment  of  the  paraboloid  and  the  cone  respectively,  we  see 
that  the  segment  of  the  paraboloid,  in  the  place  where  it  is,  is  in  equilibrium 
about  A  with  the  cone  placed  with  its  centre  of  gravity  at  H. 

Now,  since  A  is  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  whole  system  as  placed,  and  the 
centre  of  gravity  of  part  of  it,  namely  the  cone,  as  placed,  is  at  H,  the  centre 
of  gravity  of  the  rest,  namely  the  segment,  is  at  a  point  K  on  HA  produced 
such  that  HA  :  A  K  =  (segment)  :  (cone). 

But  segment  =  f (cone).  [Prop.  4] 


H 


578  ARCHIMEDES 

Therefore  HA  =  f  AK; 

that  is,  K  divides  AD  in  such  a  way  that  AK  =  2KD . 

Proposition  6 

The  centre  of  gravity  of  any  hemisphere  [is  on  the  straight  line  which]  is  its  axis , 
and  divides  the  said  straight  line  in  such  a  way  that  the  portion  of  it  adjacent  to  the 
surface  of  the  hemisphere  has  to  the  remaining  portion  the  ratio  which  5  has  to  3. 

Let  a  sphere  be  cut  by  a  plane  through  its  centre  in  the  circle  ABCD; 
let  AC,  BD  be  perpendicular  diameters  of  this  circle, 
and  through  BD  let  a  plane  be  drawn  at  right  angles  to  AC . 

The  latter  plane  will  cut  the  sphere  in  a  circle  on  BD  as  diameter. 

Imagine  a  cone  with  the  latter  circle  as  base  and  A  as  vertex. 

Produce  CA  to  H ,  making  AH  equal  to  CA,  and  let  HC  be  regarded  as  the 
bar  of  a  balance,  A  being  its  middle  point. 

In  the  semicircle  BAD,  let  any  straight  line  OP  be 
drawn  parallel  to  BD  and  cutting  AC  in  E  and  the  two 
generators,  AB,  AD  of  the  cone  in  Q,  R  respectively. 

Join  AO. 

Through  OP  let  a  plane  be  drawn  at  right  angles  to 
AC) 

this  plane  will  cut  the  hemisphere  in  a  circle  with  di¬ 
ameter  OP  and  the  cone  in  a  circle  with  diameter  QR. 

Now 

HA : AE=AC : AE 
=A02 :  AE2 
=  (OE2+AE2)  :  AE2 
=  (OE2JcQE2)  :QE 2 

=  (circle,  diam.  OP+circle,  diam.  QR)  : 

(circle,  diam.  QR). 

Therefore  the  circles  with  diameters  OP,  QR,  in  the 
places  where  they  are,  are  in  equilibrium  about  A  with  the  circle  with 
diameter  QR  if  the  latter  is  placed  with  its  centre  of  gravity  at  H. 

And,  since  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  two  circles  with  diameters  OP,  QR 
taken  together,  in  the  place  where  they  are,  is  .  .  . 

[There  is  a  lacuna  here;  but  the  proof  can  easily  be  completed  on  the  lines 
of  the  corresponding  but  more  difficult  case  in  Prop.  8. 

We  proceed  thus  from  the  point  where  the  circles  with  diameters  OP,  QR, 
in  the  place  where  they  are,  balance,  about  A,  the  circle  with  diameter  QR 
placed  with  its  centre  of  gravity  at  H. 

A  similar  relation  holds  for  all  the  other  sets  of  circular  sections  made  by 
other  planes  passing  through  points  on  AG  and  at  right  angles  to  AG. 

Taking  then  all  the  circles  which  fill  up  the  hemisphere  BAD  and  the  cone 
ABD  respectively,  we  find  that 

the  hemisphere  BAD  and  the  cone  ABD,  in  the  places  where  they  are,  together 
balance,  about  A,  a  cone  equal  to  ABD  placed  with  its  centre  of  gravity  at  H. 

Let  the  cylinder  Jf+N  be  equal  to  the  cone  ABD. 

Then,  since  the  cylinder  J/+ Ar  placed  with  its  centre  of  gravity  at  H  bal¬ 
ances  the  hemisphere  BAD  and  the  cone  ABD  in  the  places  where  they  are, 
suppose  that  the  portion  M  of  the  cylinder,  placed  with  its  centre  of  gravity  at 


THE  METHOD  TREATING  OF  MECHANICAL  PROBLEMS  579 

H,  balances  the  cone  ABD  (alone)  in  the  place  where  it  is;  therefore  the  por¬ 
tion  N  of  the  cylinder  placed  with  its  centre  of  gravity  at  H  balances  the 
hemisphere  (alone)  in  the  place  where  it  is. 

Now  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  cone  is  at  a  point  V  such  that  AG  =  4GV ; 
therefore,  since  M  at  H  is  in  equilibrium  with  the  cone, 

M  :  (cone)  =f AG  :  HA=UC  :  AC , 
whence  M  =  f  (cone) . 

But  M +N  =  (cone) ;  therefore  N  =  f(cone). 

Now  let  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  hemisphere  be  at  IF,  which  is  somewhere 
on  AG. 

Then,  since  N  at  H  balances  the  hemisphere  alone, 

(hemisphere)  :  N  =  HA  :  A  IF. 

But  the  hemisphere  BAD  =  twice  the  cone  ABD ; 

[On  the  Sphere  and  Cylinder  i.  34  and  Prop.  2  above] 
and  N  =  f(cone),  from  above. 

Therefore  2  :  i  =  HA  :  AW 

=  2AG:AW, 

whence  ATF  =  |AG,  so  that  IF  divides  AG  in  such  a  way  that 

AW  :  WG  =  5  :  3.] 

Proposition  7 

We  can  also  investigate  by  the  same  method  the  theorem  that 
[Any  segment  of  a  sphere  has ]  to  the  cone  [with  the  same  base  and  height  the  ratio 
which  the  sum  of  the  radius  of  the  sphere  and  the  height  of  the  complementary 
segment  has  to  the  height  of  the  complementary  segment .] 

[There  is  a  lacuna  here;  but  all  that  is  missing  is  the  construction,  and  the 
construction  is  easily  understood  by  means  of  the  figure.  BAD  is  of  course  the 

segment  of  the  sphere  the  vol¬ 
ume  of  which  is  to  be  compared 
with  the  volume  of  a  cone  with 
the  same  base  and  height.] 

The  plane  drawn  through 
MN  and  at  right  angles  to  AC 
will  cut  the  cylinder  in  a  circle 
with  diameter  MN,  the  seg¬ 
ment  of  the  sphere  in  a  circle 
with  diameter  OP,  and  the 
cone  on  the  base  EF  in  a  circle 
with  diameter  QR. 

In  the  same  way  as  before 
[cf.  Prop.  2]  we  can  prove 
that  the  circle  with  diameter 
MN,  in  the  place  where  it  is,  is 
in  equilibrium  about  A  with 
the  two  circles  with  diameters 
OP,  QR  if  these  circles  are  both 
moved  and  placed  with  their 
centres  of  gravity  at  //. 

The  same  thing  can  be  proved  of  all  sets  of  three  circles  in  which  the  cylin- 


580  ARCHIMEDES 

der,  the  segment  of  the  sphere,  and  the  cone  with  the  common  height  AG  are 
all  cut  by  any  plane  perpendicular  to  AC. 

Since  then  the  sets  of  circles  make  up  the  whole  cylinder,  the  whole  segment 
of  the  sphere  and  the  whole  cone  respectively,  it  follows  that  the  cylinder,  in 
the  place  where  it  is,  is  in  equilibrium  about  A  with  the  sum  of  the  segment  of 
the  sphere  and  the  cone  if  both  are  placed  with  their  centres  of  gravity  at  H . 
Divide  AG  at  W,  V  in  such  a  way  that 

AW=WG,AV=3VG. 

Therefore  W  will  be  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  cylinder,  and  V  will  be  the 
centre  of  gra/vity  of  the  cone. 

Since,  now,  the  bodies  are  in  equilibrium  as  described, 

(cylinder)  :  (cone  AEF+segment  BAD  of  sphere)  =  HA  :  AW. 


[The  rest  of  the  proof  is  lost;  but  it  can  easily  be  supplied  thus: 

We  have 

(cone  AEF+ segmt.  BAD )  :  (cylinder)  =AW  :  AC 

=  AW  ‘AC  :  AC2. 

:  (cone  AEF)  =  AC2  :  %EG2 
=  AC2:iAG2. 

:  (cone  AEF)  =AW -AC  :  \AG2 
=  :  -AG 

:  (cone  AEF)  =  \\AC-\AQ)  :  \AG. 

:  (cone  ABD)  =EG2 :  DG2 

=AG2 :  AG  •  GC 
=AG:GC 
=  \AG:\GC. 

Therefore,  ex  aequali, 

(segment  BAD)  :  (cone  ABD)  =  (\AC-\AG)  :  \GC 

=  (UC-AG)  :  GC 
=  (^AC+GC)  :  GC.  q.e.d.] 

Proposition  8 

[The  enunciation,  the  setting-out,  and  a  few  words  of  the  construction  are 
missing. 

The  enunciation  however  can  be  supplied  from  that  of  Prop.  9,  with  which 
it  must  be  identical  except  that  it  cannot  refer  to  “any  segment,”  and  the 
presumption  therefore  is  that  the  proposition  was  enunciated  with  reference 
to  one  kind  of  segment  only,  i.e.  either  a  segment  greater  than  a  hemisphere 
or  a  segment  less  than  a  hemisphere. 

Heiberg's  figure  corresponds  to  the  case  of  a  segment  greater  than  a  hemi¬ 
sphere.  The  segment  investigated  is  of  course  the  segment  B AD.  The  setting-out 
and  construction  are  self-evident  from  the  figure.] 

Produce  AC  to  H,  0,  making  HA  equal  to  AC  and  CO  equal  to  the  radius  of 
the  sphere; 

and  let  HC  be  regarded  as  the  bar  of  a  balance,  the  middle  point  being  A. 

In  the  plane  cutting  off  the  segment  describe  a  circle  with  G  as  centre  and 
radius  (GE)  equal  to  AG;  and  on  this  circle  as  base,  and  with  A  as  vertex,  let  a 
cone  be  described.  AE,  AF  are  generators  of  this  cone. 


But  (cylinder) 

Therefore,  ex  aequali , 

(cone  AEF +segmt.  BAD) 

whence  (segmt.  BAD) 

Again  (cone  AEF) 


THE  METHOD  TREATING  OF  MECHANICAL  PROBLEMS  581 

Draw  KL ,  through  any  point  Q  on  AG,  parallel  to  EF  and  cutting  the  seg¬ 
ment  in  K,  L,  and  AE ,  AF  in  R,  P  respectively.  Join  AK. 

Now 

HA  :  AQ  —  CA : AQ 
=AK2:AQ 2 
=  (KQ2+QA2)  :  QA2 
=  (KQ2+PQ2):PQ2 

=  (circle,  diam.  KL+circle,  diam.  PR)  :  (circle,  diam.  PR). 

Imagine  a  circle  equal  to  the  circle  with  diam¬ 
eter  PR  placed  with  its  centre  of  gravity  at  H\ 
therefore  the  circles  on  diameters  KL,  PR,  in 
the  places  where  they  are,  are  in  equilibrium 
about  A  with  the  circle  with  diameter  PR 
placed  with  its  centre  of  gravity  at  H . 

Similarly  for  the  corresponding  circular  sec¬ 
tions  made  by  any  other  plane  perpendicular 
to  AG. 

Therefore,  taking  all  the  circular  sections 
wilich  make  up  the  segment  ABD  of  the  sphere 
and  the  cone  AEF  respectively,  we  find  that 
the  segment  ABD  of  the  sphere  and  the  cone 
AEF,  in  the  places  where  they  are,  are  in  equi¬ 
librium  with  the  cone  AEF  assumed  to  be 
placed  with  its  centre  of  gravity  at  H. 

Let  the  cylinder  M+N  be  equal  to  the  cone 
AEF  w'hich  has  A  for  vertex  and  the  circle  on 
EF  as  diameter  for  base. 

Divide  AG  at  V  so  that 

AG=4VG; 

therefore  V  is  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  cone  AEF ;  “for  this  has  been  proved 
before.” 

Let  the  cylinder  M+N  be  cut  by  a  plane  perpendicular  to  the  axis  in  such 
a  way  that  the  cylinder  M  (alone),  placed  with  its  centre  of  gravity  at  H,  is  in 
equilibrium  with  the  cone  AEF. 

Since  M+N  suspended  at  H  is  in  equilibrium  with  the  segment  ABD  of  the 
sphere  and  the  cone  AEF  in  the  places  wiiere  they  are, 
while  M,  also  at  H,  is  in  equilibrium  with  the  cone  AEF  in  the  place  wiiere  it  is, 
it  follows  that 

A"  at  H  is  in  equilibrium  with  the  segment  ABD  of  the  sphere  in  the  place 
where  it  is. 

Now  (segment  ABD  of  sphere)  :  (cone  ABD)=OG  :  GC; 

“for  this  is  already  proved”  [Cf.  On  the  Sphere  and  Cylinder  n.  2  Cor.  as  well 
as  Prop.  7  ante] . 

And  (cone  ABD)  :  (cone  AEF) 

=  (circle,  diam.  BD)  :  (circle,  diam.  EF) 

=  BD 2  :  EF2 
=  BG2 :  GE2 
=  CG  •  GA  :  GA2 
=  CG:GA. 


ARCHIMEDES 


582 

Therefore,  ex  aequali , 

(segment  ABD  of  sphere)  :  (cone  AEF)—OG  :  GA . 

Take  a  point  IF  on  AG  such  that 

AW  :  IFG  =  (GA+4GC)  :  (GA+2GC). 

We  have  then,  inversely, 

GW  :  WA  =  (2GC+GA )  :  (4 GC+GA), 

and,  componendo , 

GA  :  AW  —  (6GC+2GA)  :  (4GC+GA). 

But  GO  =  J(6GG+2GA),  [for  GO— GC  =  §(CG+GA)] 

and  GF=i(4GG+GA); 

therefore  GA  :  A  IF  =  0G  :  GF, 

and,  alternately  and  inversely, 

OG:GA  =  CV  :WA. 

It  follows,  from  above,  that 

(segment  ABD  of  sphere)  :  (cone  AEF)  =  CV  :  TFA. 

Now,  since  the  cylinder  M  with  its  centre  of  gravity  at  H  is  in  equilibrium 
about  A  with  the  cone  AEF  with  its  centre  of  gravity  at  V, 

(cone  AEF)  :  (cylinder  M)=HA  :  AV 

—  CA  :AV; 

and,  since  the  cone  AEF  =  the  cylinder  M+N ,  we  have,  dividendo  and  inver- 
tendo,  (cylinder  M)  :  (cylinder  N)—AV  :  CV. 

Hence,  componendo , 

(cone  AEF)  :  (cylinder  N)  =  CA  :  CV 

=  HA  :  CV. 

But  it  was  proved  that 

(segment  ABD  of  sphere)  :  (cone  AEF)  =  CV  :  TFA; 
therefore,  ex  aequali , 

(segment  ABD  of  sphere)  :  (cylinder  N)  =HA  :  AW. 

And  it  was  above  proved  that  the  cylinder  N  at  H  is  in  equilibrium  about  A 
with  the  segment  ABD ,  in  the  place  where  it  is; 

therefore,  since  H  is  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  cylinder  N,  W  is  the  centre 
of  gravity  of  the  segment  ABD  of  the  sphere. 


Proposition  9 

In  the  same  way  we  can  investigate  the  theorem  that 

The  centre  of  gravity  of  any  segment  of  a  sphere  is  on  the  straight  line  which  is 
the  axis  of  the  segment ,  and  divides  this  straight  line  in  such  a  way  that  the  part 
of  it  adjacent  to  the  vertex  of  the  segment  has  to  the  remaining  part  the  ratio  which 
the  sum  of  the  axis  of  the  segment  and  four  times  the  axis  of  the  complementary 
segment  has  to  the  sum  of  the  axis  of  the  segment  and  double  the  axis  of  the  com¬ 
plementary  segment. 

[As  this  theorem  relates  to  uany  segment”  but  states  the  same  result  as  that 
proved  in  the  preceding  proposition,  it  follows  that  Prop.  8  must  have  related 
to  one  kind  of  segment,  either  a  segment  greater  than  a  semicircle  (as  in  Hei¬ 
berg's  figure  of  Prop.  8)  or  a  segment  less  than  a  semicircle;  and  the  present 
proposition  completed  the  proof  for  both  kinds  of  segments.  It  would  only 
require  a  slight  change  in  the  figure,  in  any  case.] 


THE  METHOD  TREATING  OF  MECHANICAL  PROBLEMS  583 


Proposition  10 

By  this  method  too  we  can  investigate  the  theorem  that 

[. A  segment  of  an  obtuse-angled  conoid  ( i.e .  a  hyperboloid  of  revolution)  has  to 
the  cone  which  has]  the  same  base  [as  the  segment  and  equal  height  the  same  ratio 
as  the  sum  of  the  axis  of  the  segment  and  three  times ]  the  11  annex  to  the  axis”  (i.e. 
half  the  transverse  axis  of  the  hyperbolic  section  through  the  axis  of  the  hyper¬ 
boloid ,  or,  in  other  words ,  the  distance  between  the  vertex  of  the  segment  and  the 
vertex  of  the  enveloping  cone)  has  to  the  sum  of  the  axis  of  the  segment  and  double 
of  the  uannex”  [this  is  the  theorem  proved  in  On  Conoids  and  Spheroids ,  Prop. 
25],  “and  also  many  other  theorems,  which,  as  the  method  has  been  made  clear 
by  means  of  the  foregoing  examples,  I  mil  omit,  in  order  that  I  may  now  pro¬ 
ceed  to  compass  the  proofs  of  the  theorems  mentioned  above.” 


Proposition  11 

If  in  a  right  prism  with  square  bases  a  cylinder  be  inscribed  having  its  bases  in 
opposite  square  faces  and  touching  with  its  surface  the  remaining  four  parallelo - 
grammic  faces ,  and  if  through  the  centre  of  the  circle  which  is  the  base  of  the  cylin¬ 
der  and  one  side  of  the  opposite  square  face  a  plane  be  drawnt  the  figure  cut  off  by 
the  plane  so  drawn  is  one  sixth  part  of  the  whole  prism . 

“This  can  be  investigated  by  the  method,  and,  when  it  is  set  out,  I  mil  go 
back  to  the  proof  of  it  by  geometrical  considerations.” 

[The  investigation  by  the  mechanical  method  is  contained  in  the  two  Propo¬ 
sitions,  11,  12.  Prop.  13  gives  another  solution  which,  although  it  contains  no 
mechanics,  is  still  of  the  character  which  Archimedes  regards  as  inconclusive, 
since  it  assumes  that  the  solid  is  actually  made  up  of  parallel  plane  sections 

and  that  an  auxiliary  parabola  is  actually  made 
up  of  parallel  straight  lines  in  it.  Prop.  14  added 
the  conclusive  geometrical  proof.] 

Let  there  be  a  right  prism  with  a  cylinder  in¬ 
scribed  as  stated. 

Let  the  prism  be  cut  through  the  axis  of  the 
prism  and  cylinder  by  a  plane  perpendicular  to 
the  plane  which  cuts  off  the  portion  of  the  cylin¬ 
der;  let  this  plane  make,  as  section,  the  parallelo¬ 
gram  AB,  and  let  it  cut  the  plane  cutting  off  the 
portion  of  the  cylinder  (which  plane  is  perpen¬ 
dicular  to  AB)  in  the  straight  line  BC. 

Let  CD  be  the  axis  of  the  prism  and  cylinder, 
let  EF  bisect  it  at  right  angles,  and  through  EF 
let  a  plane  be  drawn  at  right  angles  to  CD ;  this  plane  will  cut  the  prism  in  a 
square  and  the  cylinder  in  a  circle. 

Let  MN  be  the  square  and  OPQR  the  circle,  and  let  the  circle  touch  the  sides 
of  the  square  in  0,  P,  Q,  R  [F,  E  in  the  first  figure  are  identical  with  0,  Q 
respectively].  Let  II  be  the  centre  of  the  circle. 

Let  KL  be  the  intersection  of  the  plane  through  EF  perpendicular  to 
the  axis  of  the  cylinder  and  the  plane  cutting  off  the  portion  of  the  cylinder; 
KL  is  bisected  by  OHQ  [and  passes  through  the  middle  point  of  HQ], 


0  B 


584 


ARCHIMEDES 


Let  any  chord  of  the  circle,  as  ST,  be  drawn  perpendicular  to  HQ,  meeting 
HQ  in  IF; 

and  through  ST  let  a  plane  be  drawn  at  right  angles  to  OQ  and  produced 
on  both  sides  of  the  plane  of  the  circle  OPQR. 

The  plane  so  drawn  will  cut  the  half  cylinder 
having  the  semicircle  PQR  for  section  and  the 
axis  of  the  prism  for  height  in  a  parallelogram, 
one  side  of  which  is  equal  to  ST  and  another  is  a 
generator  of  the  cylinder;  and  it  will  also  cut  the 
portion  of  the  cylinder  cut  off  in  a  parallelogram, 
one  side  of  which  is  equal  to  ST  and  the  other  is 
equal  and  parallel  to  UV  (in  the  first  figure). 

UV  will  be  parallel  to  BY  and  will  cut  off, 
along  EG  in  the  parallelogram  DE ,  the  seg¬ 
ment  El  equal  to  QW. 

Now,  since  EC  is  a  parallelogram,  and  VI  is  parallel  to  GC, 

EG  :  GI=  YC  :  CV 
—BY : UV 


=  ( O  in  half  cyl.)  :  (O  in  portion  of  cyl.). 

And  EG  =  HQ ,  GI  =  HW,  QII  =  OH ; 
therefore  OH  :  HW  =  (O  in  half  cyl.)  :  (D  in  portion). 

Imagine  that  the  parallelogram  in  the  portion  of  the  cylinder  is  moved  and 
placed  at  0  so  that  0  is  the  centre  of  gravity,  and  that  OQ  is  the  bar  of  a 
balance,  H  being  its  middle  point. 

Then,  since  IF  is  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  parallelogram  in  the  half  cyl¬ 
inder,  it  follows  from  the  above  that  the  parallelogram  in  the  half  cylinder,  in 
the  place  where  it  is,  with  its  centre  of  gravity  at  IF,  is  in  equilibrium  about  H 
with  the  parallelogram  in  the  portion  of  the  cylinder  when  placed  with  its 
centre  of  gravity  at  0. 

Similarly  for  the  other  parallelogrammic  sections  made  by  any  plane  per¬ 
pendicular  to  OQ  and  passing  through  any  other  chord  in  the  semicircle  PQR 
perpendicular  to  OQ. 

If  then  we  take  all  the  parallelograms  making  up  the  half  cylinder  and  the 
portion  of  the  cylinder  respectively,  it  follows  that  the  half  cylinder,  in  the 
place  where  it  is,  is  in  equilibrium  about  H  with  the  portion  of  the  cylinder  cut 
off  when  the  latter  is  placed  with  its  centre  of  gravity  at  0. 


Proposition  12 

Let  the  parallelogram  (square)  MN  perpendicular  to  the  axis,  with  the  circle 
OPQR  and  its  diameters  OQ,  PR,  be  drawn  separately. 

Join  HG,  HM,  and  through  them  draw  planes  at  right  angles  to  the  plane 
of  the  circle,  producing  them  on  both  sides  of  that  plane. 

This  produces  a  prism  with  triangular  section  GHM  and  height  equal  to  the 
axis  of  the  cylinder;  this  prism  is  f  of  the  original  prism  circumscribing  the 
cylinder. 

Let  LK ,  UT  be  drawn  parallel  to  OQ  and  equidistant  from  it,  cutting  the 
circle  in  K,  T,  RP  in  S,  F,  and  GH,  HM  in  IF,  V  respectively. 

Through  LK,  UT  draw’  planes  at  right  angles  to  PR,  producing  them  on 
both  sides  of  the  plane  of  the  circle; 


THE  METHOD  TREATING  OF  MECHANICAL  PROBLEMS  585 

these  planes  produce  as  sections  in  the  half  cylinder  PQR  and  in  the  prism 
GHM  four  parallelograms  in  which  the  heights  are  equal  to  the  axis  of  the 
cylinder,  and  the  other  sides  are  equal  to  KS,  TF,  LW,  UV  respectively . 


Now  (radius 

or 


[The  rest  of  the  proof  is  missing,  but,  as 
Zeuthen  says,  the  result  obtained  and  the 
method  of  arriving  at  it  are  plainly  indicated 
by  the  above. 

Archimedes  wishes  to  prove  that  the  half 
cylinder  PQR ,  in  the  place  where  it  is,  balances 
the  prism  GHM ,  in  the  place  where  it  is,  about 
H  as  fixed  point. 

He  has  first  to  prove  that  the  elements  (1) 
the  parallelogram  with  side  =  KS  and  (2)  the 
parallelogram  with  side  =  LIF,  in  the  places 
where  they  are,  balance  about  S ,  or,  in  other 
words  that  the  straight  lines  SK ,  LW ,  in  the 
places  where  they  are,  balance  about  S. 
of  circle  OPQR)2  =  SK2+SH 2, 

£L2  =  aSA2+£IF2. 


Therefore  LS2 -  SW2  =  SK2, 

and  accordingly  (LS+SW)  • LW=SK 2, 

whence  ±(LS+SW)  :  ±SK=SK  :  LW. 

And  !(L£+$I7)  is  the  distance  of  the  centre  of  gravity  of  LW  from  S, 
while  %SK  is  the  distance  of  the  centre  of  gravity  of  SK  from  S. 

Therefore  SK  and  LW,  in  the  places  where  they  are,  balance  about  S. 

Similarly  for  the  corresponding  parallelograms. 

Taking  all  the  parallelogrammic  elements  in  the  half  cylinder  and  prism 
respectively,  we  find  that 

the  half  cylinder  PQR  and  the  prism  GHM,  in  the  places  where  they  are  re¬ 
spectively,  balance  about  H. 

From  this  result  and  that  of  Prop.  11  we  can  at  once  deduce  the  volume  of 
the  portion  cut  off  from  the  cylinder.  For  in  Prop.  11  the  portion  of  the  cylin¬ 
der,  placed  with  its  centre  of  gravity  at  0,  is  shown  to  balance  (about  H)  the 
half-cylinder  in  the  place  where  it  is.  By  Prop.  12  we  may  substitute  for  the 
half-cylinder  in  the  place  where  it  is  the  prism  GHM  of  that  proposition  turned 
the  opposite  way  relatively  to  RP.  The  centre  of  gravity  of  the  prism  as  thus 
placed  is  at  a  point  (say  Z)  on  HQ  such  that  HZ  =  § HQ. 

Therefore,  assuming  the  prism  to  be  applied  at  its  centre  of  gravity,  we  have 
(portion  of  cylinder)  :  (prism)  =  §  HQ  :  OH 

=  2:3; 

therefore  (portion  of  cylinder)  =  f  (prism  GHM) 

=  ^(original  prism). 


Proposition  13 


Let  there  be  a  right  prism  with  square  bases,  one  of  which  is  ABCD ; 

in  the  prism  let  a  cylinder  be  inscribed,  the  base  of  which  is  the  circle  EFGH 

touching  the  sides  of  the  square  ABCD  in  E,  F,  G,  II. 

Through  the  centre  and  through  the  side  corresponding  to  CD  in  the  square 


oS6  ARCHIMEDES 

face  opposite  to  ABCD  let  a  plane  be  drawn;  this  will  cut  off  a  prism  equal 
to  \  of  the  original  prism  and  formed  by  three  parallelograms  and  two  triangles, 
the  triangles  forming  opposite  faces. 

In  the  semicircle  EFG  describe  the  parabola  which  has  FK  for  axis  and 
passes  through  E,  G;  draw  MX  parallel  to  KF  meeting  GE  in  M,  the  para¬ 
bola  in  L,  the  semicircle  in  0  and  CD  in  X. 

Then  '  MXXL=XF 2; 

“for  this  is  clear.”  [Cf.  Apollonius,  Conics  i.  11] 

[The  parameter  is  of  course  equal  to  GK  or  KF.] 

Therefore  MX  :  XL  =  GK 2  :  LS2. 

Through  MX  draw  a  plane  at  right  angles  to 
EG; 

this  will  produce  as  sections  (1)  in  the  prism  cut 
off  from  the  whole  prism  a  right-angled  triangle, 
the  base  of  which  is  MX,  while  the  perpendicular 
is  perpendicular  at  X  to  the  plane  ABCD  and 
equal  to  the  axis  of  the  cylinder,  and  the  hypot¬ 
enuse  is  in  the  plane  cutting  the  cylinder,  and 
(2)  in  the  portion  of  the  cylinder  cut  off  a  right- 
angled  triangle  the  base  of  which  is  MO,  while 
the  perpendicular  is  the  generator  of  the  cylinder 
perpendicular  at  0  to  the  plane  KX ,  and  the 
hypotenuse  is . 


[There  is  a  lacuna  here,  to  be  supplied  as  follows. 

Since  MX  :  XL  =  GK2 :  LS 2 

=  MX2 :  LS2, 

it  follows  that  MX  :  ML  =  MX* :  (MX2-LS2) 

=  MX2 :  (MX2-MK2) 

=  MX2 :  MO2. 

But  the  triangle  (1)  in  the  prism  is  to  the  triangle  (2)  in  the  portion  of  the 
cylinder  in  the  ratio  of  MX2  :  MO2. 

Therefore  (A  in  prism)  :  (A  in  portion  of  cylinder) 

=  MX  :  ML 

=  (straight  line  in  rect.  DG)  :  (straight  line  in  parabola). 

We  now  take  all  the  corresponding  elements  in  the  prism,  the  portion  of  the 
cylinder,  the  rectangle  DG  and  the  parabola  EFG  respectively]; 
and  it  will  follow  that 

(all  the  As  in  prism)  :  (all  the  As  in  portion  of  cylinder) 

=  (all  the  str.  lines  in  ODG)  :  (all  the  straight  lines  between  parabola  and  EG). 

But  the  prism  is  made  up  of  the  triangles  in  the  prism,  [the  portion  of  the 
cylinder  is  made  up  of  the  triangles  in  it],  the  parallelogram  DG  of  the  straight 
lines  in  it  parallel  to  KF,  and  the  parabolic  segment  of  the  straight  lines  paral¬ 
lel  to  KF  intercepted  between  its  circumference  and  EG; 
therefore  (prism)  :  (portion  of  cylinder) 

=  (OGD)  :  (parabolic  segment  EFG). 

But  OGD  =  % (parabolic  segment  EFG); 

“for  this  is  proved  in  my  earlier  treatise.”  [Quadrature  of  Parabola] 

Therefore  prism  =  #(portion  of  cylinder). 


THE  METHOD  TREATING  OF  MECHANICAL  PROBLEMS  5S7 

If  then  we  denote  the  portion  of  the  cylinder  by  2,  the  prism  is  3,  and  the 
original  prism  circumscribing  the  cylinder  is  12  (being  4  times  the  other  prism) ; 
therefore  the  portion  of  the  cylinder  =  ^(original  prism),  q.e.d. 

[The  above  proposition  and  the  next  are  peculiarly  interesting  for  the  fact 
that  the  parabola  is  an  auxiliary  curve  introduced  for  the  sole  purpose  of 
analytically  reducing  the  required  cubature  to  the  known  quadrature  of  the 
parabola.] 

Proposition  14 

Let  there  be  a  right  prism  with  square  bases  [and  a  cylinder  inscribed  therein 
having  its  base  in  the  square  ABCD  and  touching  its  sides  at  E)  Fy  Gy  H) 
let  the  cylinder  be  cut  by  a  plane  through  EG  and  the  side  corresponding  to 
CD  in  the  square  face  opposite  to  ABCD.] 

This  plane  cuts  off  from  the  prism  a  prism,  and  from  the  cylinder  a  portion 
of  it. 

It  can  be  proved  that  the  portion  of  the  cylinder  cut  off  by  the  plane  is  ^ 
of  the  whole  prism. 

But  we  will  first  prove  that  it  is  possible  to  inscribe  in  the  portion  cut  off 
from  the  cylinder,  and  to  circumscribe  about  it,  solid  figures  made  up  of 
prisms  which  have  equal  height  and  similar  triangular  bases,  in  such  a  way 
that  the  circumscribed  figure  exceeds  the  inscribed  by  less  than  any  assigned 
magnitude . 


But  it  was  proved  that 

(prism  cut  off  by  oblique  plane)  <-§(figure  inscribed  in  portion  of  cylinder). 
Now  (prism  cut  off)  :  (inscribed  figure) 

=  ODG  :  (Os  inscribed  in  parabolic  segment) ; 
therefore  ODG<f(Os  in  parabolic  segment): 

which  is  impossible,  since  “it  has  been  proved  elsewhere”  that  the  parallelo¬ 
gram  DG  is  f  of  the  parabolic  segment. 

Consequently . 

. not  greater. 


And  (all  the  prisms  in  prism  cut  off) 

:  (all  prisms  in  circumscr.  figure) 

=  (all  Os  in  ODG)  :  (all  Os  in  fig.  circumscr.  about  parabolic  segmt.); 
therefore 

(prism  cut  off)  :  (figure  circumscr.  about  portion  of  cylinder) 

=  (ODG )  :  (figure  circumscr.  about  parabolic  segment). 

But  the  prism  cut  off  by  the  oblique  plane  is>f  of  the  solid  figure  circum¬ 
scribed  about  the  portion  of  the  cylinder. .... 


[There  are  large  gaps  in  the  exposition  of  this  geometrical  proof,  but  the 
way  in  which  the  method  of  exhaustion  was  applied,  and  the  parallelism  be¬ 
tween  this  and  other  applications  of  it,  are  clear.  The  first  fragment  shows  that 
solid  figures  made  up  of  prisms  were  circumscribed  and  inscribed  to  the  por¬ 
tion  of  the  cylinder.  The  parallel  triangular  faces  of  these  prisms  were  perpen¬ 
dicular  to  GE  in  the  figure  of  Prop.  13;  they  divided  GE  into  equal  portions  of 
the  requisite  smallness;  each  section  of  the  portion  of  the  cylinder  by  such  a 


588  ARCHIMEDES 

plane  was  a  triangular  face  common  to  an  inscribed  and  a  circumscribed  right 
prism.  The  planes  also  produced  prisms  in  the  prism  cut  off  by  the  same 
oblique  plane  as  cuts  off  the  portion  of  the  cylinder  and  standing  on  GD  as  base. 

The  number  of  parts  into  which  the  parallel  planes  divided  GE  was  made 
great  enough  to  secure  that  the  circumscribed  figure  exceeded  the  inscribed 
figure  by  less  than  a  small  assigned  magnitude. 


The  second  part  of  the  proof  began  with  the  assumption  that  the  portion  of 
the  cylinder  is>#  of  the  prism  cut  off;  and  this  was  proved  to  be  impossible, 
by  means  of  the  use  of  the  auxiliary  parabola  and  the  proportion 

MN  :  ML  =  MN2 :  MO2 
which  are  employed  in  Prop.  13. 

We  may  supply  the  missing  proof  as  follows. 

In  the  accompanying  figure  are  represented  (1)  the 
first  element-prism  circumscribed  to  the  portion  of 
the  cjdinder,  (2)  two  element-prisms  adjacent  to  the 
ordinate  OM ,  of  which  that  on  the  left  is  circum¬ 
scribed  and  that  on  the  right  (equal  to  the  other) 
inscribed,  (3)  the  corresponding  element-prisms 
forming  part  of  the  prism  cut  off  ( CC'GEDD ')  which 
is  \  of  the  original  prism. 

In  the  second  figure  are  shown  element-rectangles 
circumscribed  and  inscribed  to  the  auxiliary  parab¬ 
ola,  which  rectangles  correspond  exactly  to  the  cir¬ 
cumscribed  and  inscribed  element-prisms  represented 
in  the  first  figure  (the  length  of  GM  is  the  same  in 
both  figures,  and  the  breadths  of  the  element-rec¬ 
tangles  are  the  same  as  the  heights  of  the  element- 
prisms)  ;  the  corresponding  element-rectangles  form¬ 
ing  part  of  the  rectangle  GD  are  similarly  shown. 

For  convenience  we  suppose  that  GE  is  divided  into  an  even  number 
of  equal  parts,  so  that  GK  contains  an  integral  number  of  these  parts. 


THE  METHOD  TREATING  OF  MECHANICAL  PROBLEMS  589 

For  the  sake  of  brevity  we  will  call  each  of  the  two  element-prisms  of  which 
OM  is  an  edge  “el.  prism  (0)”  and  each  of  the  element-prisms  of  which  MNN ' 
is  a  common  face  “el.  prism  (N)”  Similarly  we  will  use  the  corresponding 
abbreviations  “el.  rect.  (L)”  and  “el.  rect.  ( N )”  for  the  corresponding  elements 
in  relation  to  the  auxiliary  parabola  as  shown  in  the  second  figure. 

Now  it  is  easy  to  see  that  the  figure  made  up  of  all  the  inscribed  prisms  is 
less  than  the  figure  made  up  of  the  circumscribed  prisms  by  twice  the  final 
circumscribed  prism  adjacent  to  FKy  i.e.  by  twice  “el.  prism  ( N )”;  and,  as  the 
height  of  this  prism  may  be  made  as  small  as  vre  please  by  dividing  GK  into 
sufficiently  small  parts,  it  follows  that  inscribed  and  circumscribed  solid  figures 
made  up  of  element-prisms  can  be  dravm  differing  by  less  than  any  assigned 
solid  figure. 

(1)  Suppose,  if  possible,  that 

(portion  of  cylinder)  >§ (prism  cut  off), 
or  (prism  cut  off)  <f  (portion  of  cylinder). 

Let  (prism  cut  off)  =f(portion  of  cylinder  —  X),  say. 

Construct  circumscribed  and  inscribed  figures  made  up  of  element-prisms, 
such  that 

(circumscr.  fig.)  —  (inscr.  fig.)<X. 

Therefore  (inscr.  fig.) > (circumscr.  fig.— X), 

and  a  fortiori  >  (portion  of  cyl.  —  X). 

It  follows  that 

(prism  cut  off)  <f (inscribed  figure). 

Considering  now  the  element-prisms  in  the  prism  cut  off  and  those  in  the 
inscribed  figure  respectively,  vre  have 

el.  prism  ( N )  :  el.  prism  ( 0)=MN 2  :  MO 2 

=MN  :  ML  [as  in  Prop.  13] 

=  el.  rect.  (N)  :  el.  rect.  (L). 

It  follows  that 

2 {el.  prism  ( N )}  :  2 {el.  prism  (0)}  =2 {el.  rect.  (X)}  :  2 {el.  rect.  (L)}. 

(There  are  really  two  more  prisms  and  rectangles  in  the  first  and  third  than 
there  are  in  the  second  and  fourth  terms  respectively;  but  this  makes  no  differ¬ 
ence  because  the  first  and  third  terms  may  be  multiplied  by  a  common  factor 
as  n/(n— 2)  without  affecting  the  truth  of  the  proportion.  Cf.  the  proposition 
from  On  Conoids  and  Spheroids  quoted  on  p.  571  above.) 

Therefore 

(prism  cut  off)  :  (figure  inscr.  in  portion  of  cyl.) 

=  (rect.  GD)  :  (fig.  inscr.  in  parabola). 

But  it  wras  proved  above  that 

(prism  cut  off)  <f (fig.  inscr.  in  portion  of  cyl.); 
therefore  (rect.  GD)  <f(fig.  inscr.  in  parabola), 

and,  Si  fortiori  (rect.  GD)  <f  (parabolic  segmt.): 
which  is  impossible,  since 

(rect.  GD)  =f(parabolic  segmt.). 

Therefore  (portion  of  cyl.)  is  not  greater  than  §  (prism  cut  off). 

(2)  In  the  second  lacuna  must  have  come  the  beginning  of  the  next  reductio 
ad  absurdum  demolishing  the  other  possible  assumption  that  the  portion  of  the 
cylinder  is<§  of  the  prism  cut  off. 

In  this  case  our  assumption  is  that 


590  ARCHIMEDES 

(prism  cut  off) >f(portion  of  cylinder); 
and  we  circumscribe  and  inscribe  figures  made  up  of  element-prisms,  such  that 
(prism  cut  off)  >f  (fig.  circumscr.  about  portion  of  cyl.). 

We  now  consider  the  element-prisms  in  the  prism  cut  off  and  in  the  circum¬ 
scribed  figure  respectively,  and  the  same  argument  as  above  gives 
(prism  cut  off)  :  (fig.  circumscr.  about  portion  of  cyl.) 

=  (rect.  GD)  :  (fig.  circumscr.  about  parabola), 
whence  it  follows  that 

(rect.  GD)  >f(fig.  circumscribed  about  parabola), 
and,  a  fortiori, 

(rect.  GD)>f (parabolic  segment): 
which  is  impossible,  since 

(rect.  GD)  =f (parabolic  segmt.). 

Therefore 

(portion  of  cyl.)  is  not  less  than  § (prism  cut  off). 

But  it  was  also  proved  that  neither  is  it  greater; 
therefore  (portion  of  cyl.)  =  f (prism  cut  off) 

=  ^(original  prism).] 


[Proposition  15] 

[This  proposition,  which  is  lost,  would  be  the  mechanical  investigation  of  the 
second  of  the  two  special  problems  mentioned  in  the  preface  to  the  treatise, 
namely  that  of  the  cubature  of  the  figure  included  between  two  cylinders,  each 
of  which  is  inscribed  in  one  and  the  same  cube  so  that  its  opposite  bases  are  in 
two  opposite  faces  of  the  cube  and  its  surface  touches  the  other  four  faces. 

Zeuthen  has  shown  how  the  mechanical  method  can  be  applied  to  this  case. 

In  the  accompanying  figure  VWYX  is  a  section  of  the  cube  by  a  plane  (that 
of  the  paper)  passing  through  the 
axis  BD  of  one  of  the  cylinders 
inscribed  in  the  cube  and  parallel 
to  two  opposite  faces. 

The  same  plane  gives  the  circle 
ABCD  as  the  section  of  the  other 
inscribed  cylinder  with  axis  per¬ 
pendicular  to  the  plane  of  the 
paper  and  extending  on  each  side 
of  the  plane  to  a  distance  equal  to 
the  radius  of  the  circle  or  half  the 
side  of  the  cube. 

AC  is  the  diameter  of  the  circle 
which  is  perpendicular  to  BD. 

Join  AB,AD  and  produce  them 
to  meet  the  tangent  at  C  to  the 
circle  in  E,  F . 

Then  EC  =  CF=CA. 

Let  LG  be  the  tangent  at  A,  and  complete  the  rectangle  EFGL. 

Draw  straight  lines  from  A  to  the  four  corners  of  the  section  in  which  the 
plane  through  BD  perpendicular  to  AK  cuts  the  cube.  These  straight  lines,  if 


THE  METHOD  TREATING  OF  MECHANICAL  PROBLEMS  591 

produced,  ■will  meet  the  plane  of  the  face  of  the  cube  opposite  to  A  in  four 
points  forming  the  four  corners  of  a  square  in  that  plane  with  sides  equal  to 
EF  or  double  of  the  side  of  the  cube,  and  we  thus  have  a  pyramid  with  A  for 
vertex  and  the  latter  square  for  base. 

Complete  the  prism  (parallelepiped)  with  the  same  base  and  height  as  the 
pyramid. 

Draw  in  the  parallelogram  LF  any  straight  line  M N  parallel  to  EF,  and 
through  MN  draw  a  plane  at  right  angles  to  AC. 

This  plane  cuts — 

(1)  the  solid  included  by  the  two  cylinders  in  a  square  with  side  equal  to  OP, 

(2)  the  prism  in  a  square  with  side  equal  to  MN,  and 

(3)  the  pyramid  in  a  square  with  side  equal  to  QR. 

Produce  CA  to  H,  making  HA  equal  to  AC,  and  imagine  PC  to  be  the  bar 
of  a  balance. 

Now,  as  in  Prop.  2,  since  MS  =  AC,  QS  =  AS , 

MS  -SQ  =  CA  • AS 
=  A02 

=  OS2+SQ2. 

Also  HA  :AS  =  CA  :AS 
=  MS  :  SQ 
=  MS2  :  MS  • SQ 

—MS2  :  (OS2+SQ2),  from  above, 

=  MN2 :  (OP2+QR2) 

=  (square,  side  MN)  :  (sq.,  side  OP+sq.,  side  QR). 
Therefore  the  square  with  side  equal  to  MN,  in  the  place  where  it  is,  is  in 
equilibrium  about  A  with  the  squares  with  sides  equal  to  OP,  QR  respectively 
placed  with  their  centres  of  gravity  at  H. 

Proceeding  in  the  same  way  with  the  square  sections  produced  by  other 
planes  perpendicular  to  AC,  we  finally  prove  that  the  prism,  in  the  place  where 
it  is,  is  in  equilibrium  about  A  with  the  solid  included  by  the  two  cylinders  and 
the  pyramid,  both  placed  with  their  centres  of  gravity  at  H. 

Now  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  prism  is  at  K . 

Therefore  HA  :AK=  (prism)  :  (solid + pyramid) 

or  2:1  =  (prism)  :  (solid prism). 

Therefore  2  (solid)  +f (prism)  =  (prism). 

It  follows  that 

(solid  included  by  cylinders)  =  i (prism) 

=  f(cube).  Q.E.D. 

There  is  no  doubt  that  Archimedes  proceeded  to,  and  completed,  the  rigor¬ 
ous  geometrical  proof  by  the  method  of  exhaustion. 

As  observed  by  Prof.  C.  Juel  (Zeuthen  l.c.),  the  solid  in  the  present  proposi¬ 
tion  is  made  up  of  8  pieces  of  cylinders  of  the  type  of  that  treated  in  the  pre¬ 
ceding  proposition.  As  however  the  two  propositions  are  separately  stated, 
there  is  no  doubt  that  Archimedes’  proofs  of  them  were  distinct. 

In  this  case  AC  would  be  divided  into  a  very  large  number  of  equal  parts  and 
planes  would  be  drawn  through  the  points  of  division  perpendicular  to  AC. 
These  planes  cut  the  solid,  and  also  the  cube  VY,  in  square  sections.  Thus  we 
can  inscribe  and  circumscribe  to  the  solid  the  requisite  solid  figures  made  up  of 
element-prisms  and  differing  by  less  than  any  assigned  solid  magnitude;  the 


592  ARCHIMEDES 

prisms  have  square  bases  and  their  heights  are  the  small  segments  of  AC.  The 
element-prism  in  the  inscribed  and  circumscribed  figures  which  has  the  square 
equal  to  OP2  for  base  corresponds  to  an  element-prism  in  the  cube  which  has 
for  base  a  square  with  side  equal  to  that  of  the  cube;  and  as  the  ratio  of  the 
element-prisms  is  the  ratio  OS2  :  BK 2,  we  can  use  the  same  auxiliary  parabola, 
and  work  out  the  proof  in  exactly  the  same  way,  as  in  Prop.  14.] 


i 


CONICS 


801/(0 


BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTE 
Apollonius,  c.  262 -c.  200  b.c. 


Apollonius  was  born  at  Perga  in  Pamphylia,  Asia  Minor,  some  twenty-five 
years  after  the  birth  of  Archimedes,  which  would  place  his  birth  around  the 
year  262  b.c.  He  seems  to  have  gone  when  quite  young  to  Alexandria,  where, 
according  to  Pappus,  the  fourth  century  mathematician,  he  was  attracted  by 
the  reputation  of  the  astronomer,  Aristarchus  of  Samos.  Apollonius  studied 
under  the  successors  of  Euclid  at  Alexandria  and  continued  to  reside  there  dur¬ 
ing  the  reigns  of  Ptolemy  Euergetes  and  of  Ptolemy  Philopator  (247-203  b.c.). 
He  was  also  for  some  time  in  Pergamum,  where  he  made  the  acquaintance  of 
the  mathematician,  Eudemus,  to  whom  he  dedicated  the  first  three  books  of  his 
Conics ,  and  of  King  Attalus  I  (269-197  b.c.),  to  whom  the  remaining  five  books 
of  the  Conics  were  dedicated. 

Apollonius  appears  to  have  been  associated  with  the  leading  mathematicians 
of  his  day.  In  the  dedicatory  epistles  of  the  Conics  he  records  that  he  met  Phil- 
onides  while  on  a  trip  to  Ephesus  and  that  he  undertook  the  composition  of 
this  work  in  the  first  instance  for  Naucrates,  who  was  staying  in  Alexandria. 
Speaking  in  the  same  place  of  the  preceding  writers  on  conics,  Apollonius  points 
out  their  limitations  and  inadequacies  in  such  a  way  that  some  of  his  readers, 
such  as  Pappus,  have  considered  him  boastful  and  envious,  but  it  would  seem 
that  Apollonius  is  only  trying  to  explain  the  appearance  of  a  new  text-book  on 
the  elements  of  conics  (Books  i-iv)  and  the  publication  of  his  own  original  and 
more  advanced  investigations  (Books  v-viu). 

The  Conics  were  at  once  recognized  as  the  authoritative  treatise  on  the  sub¬ 
ject,  winning  for  their  author  the  name  of  “the  great  geometer.”  They  are  reg¬ 
ularly  cited  by  later  writers.  Pappus  added  a  group  of  lemmas,  and  Eutocius 
( fl .  500  a.d.)  edited  and  commented  on  the  first  four  books.  These  books  are 
extant  in  the  original  Greek;  the  fifth,  sixth,  and  seventh  books  exist  in  an  Ara¬ 
bic  translation;  the  eighth  book  is  known  only  indirectly. 

Although  the  titles  and  a  general  indication  of  the  contents  of  other  works 
by  Apollonius  are  given  by  later  writers,  especially  by  Pappus,  only  one,  the 
Cutting  of  a  Ratio,  has  survived,  and  that,  like  parts  of  the  Conics ,  only  in  an 
Arabic  version.  All  of  the  original  work,  with  the  exception  of  the  second  half  of 
the  Conics ,  has  perished.  Books  not  extant  but  known  through  Pappus  are: 
Cutting  of  an  Area,  Determinate  Section,  Tangencies,  Inclinations,  and  Plane 
Loci .  He  wrote  on  irrationals  and,  like  Archimedes,  devised  a  system  of  multi¬ 
plication  for  counting  large  numbers  and  calculated  an  approximate  value  for 
the  ratio  of  the  circumference  of  a  circle  to  the  diameter.  The  ancient  writers 
also  record  that  Apollonius  wrote  On  the  Burning-Glass,  in  which  he  probably 
treated  the  properties  of  the  parabola,  a  work  comparing  the  dodecahedron 
and  the  icosahedron  inscribed  in  the  same  sphere,  and  a  book,  perhaps  on  the 
general  principles  of  mathematics,  in  which  he  criticized  and  suggested  im¬ 
provements  for  Euclid’s  Elements.  Lastly,  in  astronomy  he  is  credited  by  Ptol- 

595 


596  BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTE 

emy  with  an  explanation  of  the  motion  of  the  planets  by  means  of  epicycles 
and  eccentric  circles.  He  seems  to  have  been  especially  interested  in  the  theory 
of  the  moon,  and  the  Alexandrians  are  said  to  have  called  him  Epsilon  from  the 
resemblance  of  that  Greek  letter  to  the  lunar  crescent. 


CONTENTS 


Biographical  Note,  p.  595 
BOOK  I,  p.  603  BOOK  II,  p.  682  BOOK  III,  p.  731 


597 


'  coifl 


' 


TRANSLATOR’S  NOTE 


If  on  first  appearance  this  treatise  should  seem  to  the  reader  a  jumble  of 
propositions,  rigorous  indeed,  but  without  much  rhyme  or  reason  in 
their  sequence,  then  he  can  be  sure  he  has  not  read  aright,  and  as  with 
the  planets,  he  must  look  further  to  save  the  appearances.  There  are 
one  or  twro  hypotheses  at  least  that  can  order  the  apparent  wanderings 
of  parabolas,  hyperbolas,  and  ellipses  through  the  first  four  books.  Such 
hypotheses  are  the  analogies  between  the  three  sections,  and  especially 
the  development  of  the  analogy  between  the  hyperbola  and  the  ellipse 
reaching  its  culmination,  in  the  first  book,  with  the  final  theorem,  the 
construction  of  conjugate  opposite  sections. 

In  First  Definitions  1.5,  Apollonius  innocently  defines  two  kinds  of 
diameters,  the  transverse  and  the  upright.  Each  one,  in  a  conic  section, 
bisects  all  the  straight  lines  parallel  to  the  other.  But  the  upright  diam¬ 
eter,  defined  here  only  as  to  position,  has,  in  the  case  of  the  ellipse,  nat¬ 
ural  bounds  fixed  by  the  section  itself,  and  in  Proposition  1. 15  we  find 
it  is  the  mean  proportional  between  the  corresponding  transverse  diam¬ 
eter  (or  conjugate  diameter)  and  its  parameter.  The  transverse  diam¬ 
eter,  in  turn,  is  the  mean  proportional  between  the  upright  diameter  (or 
conjugate)  and  its  parameter,  so  “upright”  and  “transverse”  become 
meaningless  terms,  in  the  case  of  the  ellipse,  for  something  better  ex¬ 
pressed  by  the  symmetrical  relation  “conjugate”  (First  Def.  1.6).  Im¬ 
mediately,  in  Proposition  I.  16,  as  if  arbitrarily,  the  upright  diameter  of 
the  hyperbola  is  bounded  in  the  same  way,  given  a  definite  magnitude, 
and  becomes  “the  second  diameter.”  But  so  far  transverse  and  upright 
diameters,  or  transverse  and  second  diameters,  are  distinct  things  in  the 
case  of  the  hyperbola,  and  there  seems  to  be  little  reason  for  giving  this 
second  diameter  in  magnitude  vofios  has  not  yet  become  <i>vcn$.  That 
the  upright  diameter  should  be  given  even  in  position  for  the  hyperbola 
becomes  only  very  significant  with  two  pairs  of  propositions — Proposi¬ 
tions  1.37  and  38,  and  1.39  and  40 — where  it  is  shown  that  certain 
properties  holding  for  ordinates  to  the  transverse  diameter  of  the  hy¬ 
perbola  and  ellipse  hold  also  for  the  ordinates  to  their  conjugates.  But 
it  is  only  with  the  final  proposition  of  the  first  book  (1.60)  that  the 
magnitude  of  the  hyperbola’s  second  diameter  is  justified  in  magnitude 
as  well  as  position.  It  is  the  corresponding  diameter  of  the  opposite  sec¬ 
tions  conjugate  to  the  first.  And  this  analogy  between  the  hyperbola 

599 


600  APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 

and  ellipse  now  stands  on  the  threshold  of  a  vast  development.  For  this 
theorem,  coming  as  a  climax  to  the  first  book,  makes  possible  the  main 
theme  of  the  second  book:  the  asymptotes,  those  strange  lines  all  but 
touching  each  opposite  section  (II.  2, 13, 14)  and  forming  a  single  bound 
between  each  adjacent  pair  (II.  15,  17),  so  making  the  hyperbola  an  all 
but  closed  section,  a  puckered  ellipse,  a  mouth  turned  inside  out.  And 
in  the  third  book,  the  fruits  of  this  analogy  are  gathered  as  in  the  espe¬ 
cially  nice  case  of  Proposition  III. 15. 


Although  this  translation  is  literal,  we  have  not  hesitated  to  use  such 
symbols  and  abbreviations  as,  without  prejudicing  any  Greek  number 
theory  or  introducing  any  modern  theory  of  symbols,  would  yet  make 
the  reading  and  the  mechanic  of  study  easier  and  at  the  same  time  pre¬ 
serve  all  the  rigor  of  Greek  mathematics. 

As  for  the  Greek  text,  wre  have  used  Heiberg,  and  have  constantly  re¬ 
ferred  to  the  editio  princeps  of  Halley.  In  certain  instances  we  have  been 
glad  to  consult  the  very  excellent  French  translation  of  Paul  Ver  Eecke 
(Desclee  de  Brouwer,  Bruges,  1923).  We  have  also  deferred,  at  all  rel¬ 
evant  points,  to  the  English  usage  of  T.  L.  Heath’s  translation  of 
Euclid’s  Elements. 


EXAMPLES  OF  ABBREVIATIONS 
AND  SYMBOLS  USED 


A  =B  for  A  is  equal  to  B. 

A+B  for  A  added  to  B. 

A—B  for  B  subtracted  from  A. 

A  :  B  :  :  C  :  D  for  A  is  to  B  as  C  is  to  D . 

rect.  AB ,  BC  for  rectangle  AB  ,BC. 

sq.  AB  for  square  on  AB. 

ar.  for  area. 

pllg.  for  parallelogram. 

trgl.  for  triangle. 

quadr.  for  quadrilateral. 

rect.  AB,BC  :  rect.  CD,DE  comp.  AB  :CD,BC  :  DE 
for  ratio  of  rectangle  AByBC  to  rectangle  CD,DE  is 
compounded  of  the  ratio  of  AB  to  CD  and  of  BC  to 
DE. 

ratio  comp.  AB  :  BC ,  CD  :  DE  —  ratio  comp.  XV  :  YZ , 
ZW :  WV  for  ratio  compounded  of  AB  to  BC  and  of 
CD  to  DE  is  the  same  as  the  ratio  compounded  of  XY 
to  FZ  and  of  ZW  to  WV. 

A  >B  for  A  is  greater  than  B. 

A  <B  for  A  is  less  than  B. 
rt.  angle  for  right  angle. 


601 


*  •  '  '  *  it: 


BOOK  OXE 


Apollonius  to  Eudemus,  greetings. 

If  you  are  restored  in  body,  and  other  things  go  with  you  to  your  mind,  well 
and  good;  and  we  too  fare  pretty  well.  At  the  time  I  was  with  you  in  Perga- 
mum,  I  observed  you  were  quite  eager  to  be  kept  informed  of  the  work  I  was 
doing  in  conics.  And  so  I  have  sent  you  this  first  book  revised,  and  we  shall 
dispatch  the  others  when  we  are  satisfied  with  them.  For  I  don’t  believe  you 
have  forgotten  hearing  from  me  how  I  worked  out  the  plan  for  these  conics  at 
the  request  of  Xauc rates,  the  geometer,  at  the  time  he  was  with  us  in  Alexan¬ 
dria  lecturing,  and  how  on  arranging  them  in  eight  books  we  immediately 
communicated  them  in  great  haste  because  of  his  near  departure,  not  revising 
them  but  putting  down  whatever  came  to  us  with  the  intention  of  a  final  going 
over.  And  so  finding  now  the  occasion  of  correcting  them,  one  book  after 
another,  we  publish  them.  And  since  it  happened  that  some  others  among 
those  frequenting  us  got  acquainted  with  the  first  and  second  books  before  the 
revision,  don’t  be  surprised  if  you  come  upon  them  in  a  different  form. 

Of  the  eight  books  the  first  four  belong  to  a  course  in  the  elements.  The  first 
book  contains  the  generation  of  the  three  sections  and  of  the  opposite  branches, 
and  the  principal  properties  (rd  apxiKd  orpxr^uara)  in  them  worked  out  more 
fully  and  universally  than  in  the  writings  of  others.  The  second  book  contains 
the  properties  (rd  cripL^aivovra)  having  to  do  with  the  diameters  and  axes  and 
also  the  asymptotes,  and  other  things  of  a  general  and  necessary  use  for  limits 
of  possibility  (xpos  rois  Si opicruois).  And  what  I  call  diameters  and  what  I  call 
axes  you  will  know  from  this  book.  The  third  book  contains  many  incredible 
theorems  of  use  for  the  construction  of  solid  loci  and  for  limits  of  possibility  of 
which  the  greatest  part  and  the  most  beautiful  are  new.  And  when  we  had 
grasped  these,  we  knew  that  the  three-line  and  four-line  locus  had  not  been 
constructed  by  Euclid,  but  only  a  chance  part  of  it  and  that  not  very'  happily. 
For  it  was  not  possible  for  this  construction  to  be  completed  without  the  addi¬ 
tional  things  found  by  us.  The  fourth  book  shows  in  how  many  ways  the  sec¬ 
tions  of  a  cone  intersect  with  each  other  and  with  the  circumference  of  a  circle, 
and  contains  other  things  in  addition  none  of  which  has  been  written  up  by  our 
predecessors,  that  is  in  how’  many  points  the  section  of  a  cone  or  the  circumfer¬ 
ence  of  a  circle  and  the  opposite  branches  meet  the  opposite  branches.  The  rest 
of  the  books  are  fuller  in  treatment.  For  there  is  one  dealing  more  fully  with 
maxima  and  minima,  and  one  with  equal  and  similar  sections  of  a  cone,  and 
one  with  limiting  theorems,  and  one  with  determinate  conic  problems.  And  so 
indeed,  with  all  of  them  published,  those  happening  upon  them  can  judge 
them  as  they  see  fit.  Good-bye. 


603 


604 


APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 


First  Definitions 

1.  If  from  a  point  a  straight  line  is  joined  to  the  circumference  of  a  circle 
which  is  not  in  the  same  plane  with  the  point,  and  the  line  is  produced  in  both 
directions,  and  if,  with  the  point  remaining  fixed,  the  straight  line  being  ro¬ 
tated  about  the  circumference  of  the  circle  returns  to  the  same  place  from 
which  it  began,  then  the  generated  surface  composed  of  the  two  surfaces  lying 
vertically  opposite  one  another,  each  of  which  increases  indefinitely  as  the 
generating  straight  line  is  produced  indefinitely,  I  call  a  conic  surface,  and  I 
call  the  fixed  point  the  vertex,  and  the  straight  line  drawn  from  the  vertex  to 
the  center  of  the  circle  the  axis. 

2.  And  the  figure  contained  by  the  circle  and  by  the  conic  surface  between 
the  vertex  and  the  circumference  of  the  circle  I  call  a  cone,  and  the  point 
which  is  also  the  vertex  of  the  surface  I  call  the  vertex  of  the  cone,  and  the 
straight  line  drawn  from  the  vertex  to  the  center  of  the  circle  the  axis,  and  the 
circle  the  base  of  the  cone. 

3.  I  call  right  cones  those  having  axes  perpendicular  to  their  bases,  and 
oblique  those  not  having  axes  perpendicular  to  their  bases. 

4.  Of  any  curved  line  which  is  in  one  plane  I  call  that  straight  line  the  diam¬ 
eter  which,  drawn  from  the  curved  line,  bisects  all  straight  lines  drawn  to  this 
curved  line  parallel  to  some  straight  line;  and  I  call  the  end  of  that  straight 
line  (the  diameter)  situated  on  the  curved  line  the  vertex  of  the  curved  line, 
and  I  say  that  each  of  these  parallels  is  drawn  ordinatewise  to  the  diameter 
(rerayphcos  ext  rrjv  bidperpov  KarrjxOaL),1 

5.  Likewise  of  any  two  curved  lines  lying  in  one  plane  I  call  that  straight  line 
the  transverse  diameter  [bidperpos  xAcryfa)  which  cuts  the  two  curved  lines  and 
bisects  all  the  straight  lines  drawn  to  either  of  the  curved  lines  parallel  to  some 
straight  line;  and  I  call  the  ends  of  the  diameter  situated  on  the  curved  lines 
the  vertices  of  the  curved  lines;  and  I  call  that  straight  line  the  upright  diam¬ 
eter  (diapeTpos  opOia)  which,  lying  between  the  two  curved  lines,  bisects  all  the 
straight  lines  intercepted  between  the  curved  lines  and  drawn  parallel  to  some 
straight  line;  and  I  say  that  each  of  the  parallels  is  drawn  ordinatewise  to  the 
diameter. 

6.  The  two  straight  lines  each  of  which  being  a  diameter  bisects  the  straight 
lines  parallel  to  the  other  I  call  the  conjugate  diameters  (avfvyeis  bca pkrpoi)  of 
a  curved  line  and  of  two  curved  lines. 

7.  And  I  call  that  straight  line  the  axis  of  a  curved  line  and  of  two  curved 
lines  which  being  a  diameter  of  the  curved  line  or  lines  cuts  the  parallel  straight 
lines  at  right  angles. 

8.  And  I  call  those  straight  lines  the  conjugate  axes  of  a  curved  line  and  of 
two  curved  lines  which  being  conjugate  diameters  cut  the  straight  lines  parallel 
to  each  other  at  right  angles. 

Proposition  1 

The  straight  lines  drawn  from  the  vertex  of  the  conic  surface  to  points  on  the  surface 
are  on  that  surface . 

Let  there  be  a  conic  surface  whose  vertex  is  the  point  A,  and  let  there  be 

1  We  shall  follow  modern  usage  and  generally  call  these  parallels  ordinates. 


CONICS  I 


605 


taken  some  point  B  on  the  conic  surface,  and  let  a  straight  line  ACB  be  joined. 
I  say  that  the  straight  line  ACB  is  on  the  conic  surface. 

For  if  possible,  let  it  not  be, 
and  let  the  straight  line  DE 
be  the  line  generating  the 
surface,  and  EF  be  the  circle 
along  which  ED  is  moved. 
Then  if,  the  point  A  remain¬ 
ing  fixed,  the  straight  line  DE 
is  moved  along  the  circum¬ 
ference  of  the  circle  EF,  it 
will  also  go  through  the  point 
B  (Def.  1),  and  two  straight 
lines  will  have  the  same  ends. 
And  this  is  absurd. 

Therefore  the  straight  line 
joined  from  A  to  B  cannot 
not  be  on  the  surface.  There¬ 
fore  it  is  on  the  surface. 

Porism 

It  is  also  evident  that,  if  a  straight  line  is  joined  from  the  vertex  to  some 
point  among  those  within  the  surface,  it  will  fall  within  the  conic  surface;  and 
if  it  is  joined  to  some  point  among  those  without,  it  will  be  outside  the  surface. 

Proposition  2 

If  on  either  one  of  the  two  vertically  opposite  surfaces  two  points  are  taken,  and  the 
straight  line  joining  the  points  does  not  verge  to  the  vertex,  then  it  will  fall  within 
the  surface,  and  produced  it  will  fall  outside . 

Let  there  be  a  conic  surface  whose  vertex  is  the  point  A,  and  a  circle  BC 


along  whose  circumference  the  generating  straight  line  is  moved,  and  let  two 
points  D  and  E  be  taken  on  either  one  of  the  two  vertically  opposite  surfaces, 


606  APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 

and  let  the  joining  straight  line  DE  not  verge  to  the  point  A. 

I  say  that  the  straight  line  DE  will  be  within  the  surface,  and  produced  will 
be  without. 

Let  AE  and  AD  be  joined  and  produced.  Then  they  will  fall  on  the  circum¬ 
ference  of  the  circle  (i.  1).  Let  them  fall  to  the  points  B  and  C}  and  let  BC  be 
joined.  Therefore  the  straight  line  BC  will  be  within  the  circle,  and  so  too  with¬ 
in  the  conic  surface. 

Then  let  a  point  F  be  taken  at  random  on  DE ,  and  let  the  straight  line  AF 
be  joined  and  produced.  Then  it  will  fall  on  the  straight  line  BC ;  for  the  tri¬ 
angle  BCA  is  in  one  plane  (Eucl.  xi.  2).  Let  it  fall  to  the  point  G .  Since  then 
the  point  G  is  within  the  conic  surface,  therefore  the  straight  line  AG  is  also 
within  the  conic  surface  (i.  1,  porism),  and  so  too  the  point  F  is  within  the 
conic  surface.  Then  likewise  it  will  be  shown  that  all  the  points  on  the  straight 
line  DE  are  within  the  surface.  Therefore  the  straight  line  DE  is  within  the 
surface. 

Then  let  DE  be  produced  to  H .  I  say  then  it  will  fall  outside  the  conic 
surface. 

For  if  possible,  let  there  be  some  point  H  of  it  not  outside  the  conic  surface, 
and  let  AH  be  joined  and  produced.  Then  it  will  fall  either  on  the  circumfer¬ 
ence  of  the  circle  or  within  (i.  1  and  porism).  And  this  is  impossible,  for  it  falls 
on  BC  produced,  as  for  example  to  the  point  K.  Therefore  the  straight  line  EH 
is  outside  the  surface. 

Therefore  the  straight  line  DE  is  within  the  conic  surface,  and  produced 
is  outside. 


Proposition  3 

If  a  cone  is  cut  by  a  plane  through  the  vertex ,  the  section  is  a  triangle. 

Let  there  be  a  cone  wiiose  vertex  is  the  point  A  and  wiiose 
base  is  the  circle  BC ;  and  let  it  be  cut  by  some  plane  through 
the  point  A;  and  let  it  make,  as  sections,  lines  AB  and  AC  on 
the  surface,  and  the  straight  line  BC  in  the  base. 

I  say  that  ABC  is  a  triangle. 

For  since  the  line  joined  from  A  to  B  is  the  common  section 
of  the  cutting  plane  and  of  the  surface  of  the  cone,  therefore 
AB  is  a  straight  line.  And  likewise  also  AC.  And  BC  is  also  a 
straight  line.  Therefore  ABC  is  a  triangle. 

If  then  a  cone  is  cut  by  some  plane  through  the  vertex, 
the  section  is  a  triangle. 


Proposition  4 

If  either  one  of  the  vertically  opposite  surfaces  is  cut  by  some  plane  parallel  to  the 
circle  along  which  the  straight  line  generating  the  surface  is  moved ,  the  plane  cut 
off  within  the  surface  will  be  a  circle  having  its  center  on  the  axis ,  and  the  figure 
contained  by  the  circle  and  the  conic  surface  intercepted  by  the  cutting  plane  on  the 
side  of  the  vertex  will  be  a  cone. 

Let  there  be  a  conic  surface  wiiose  vertex  is  the  point  A  and  wiiose  circle 
along  which  the  straight  line  generating  the  surface  is  moved  is  BC ;  and  let  it 
be  cut  by  some  plane  parallel  to  the  circle  BC ,  and  let  it  make  on  the  surface 
as  a  section  the  line  DE. 


607 


CONICS  I 

I  say  that  the  line  DE  is  a  circle  having  its  center  on  the  axis. 

For  let  the  point  F  be  taken  as  the  center  of  the  circle  BC ,  and  let  AF  be 
joined.  Therefore  AF  is  the  axis  (Def.  1)  and  meets  the  cutting  plane.  Let  it 
meet  it  at  the  point  G ,  and  let  some  plane  be  produced  through  AF.  Then  the 


section  will  be  the  triangle  ABC  (i.  3).  And  since  the  points  D,  G,  E  are  points 
in  the  cutting  plane,  and  are  also  in  the  plane  of  the  triangle  ABC ,  therefore 
DGE  is  a  straight  line  (Eucl.  xi.  3). 

Then  let  some  point  H  be  taken  on  the  line  DE ,  and  let  AH  be  joined  and 
produced.  Then  it  falls  on  the  circumference  BC  (i.  1).  Let  it  meet  it  at  K,  and 
let  GH  and  FK  be  joined.  And  since  two  parallel  planes,  DE  and  BC ,  are  cut 
by  a  plane  ABC ,  their  common  sections  are  parallel  (Eucl.  xi.  16).  Therefore 
the  straight  line  DE  is  parallel  to  the  straight  line  BC.  Then  for  the  same  rea¬ 
son  the  straight  line  GH  is  also  parallel  to  the  straight  line  KF.  Therefore 
FA  :  AG  ::FB  :  DG  :  :  FC  :  GE  : :  FK  :GH  (Eucl.  vi.  4). 

And  BF  =  KF  =  FC 

Therefore  also  DG  =  GH  =  GE  (Eucl.  v.  9). 

Then  likewise  we  could  show  also  that  all  the  straight  lines  falling  from  the 
point  G  on  the  line  DE  are  equal  to  each  other. 

Therefore  the  line  DE  is  a  circle  having  its  center  on  the  axis. 

And  it  is  evident  that  the  figure  contained  by  the  circle  DE  and  the  conic 
surface  cut  off  by  it  on  the  side  of  the  point  A  is  a  cone. 

And  it  is  therewith  proved  that  the  common  section  of  the  cutting  plane 
and  of  the  axial  triangle  (triangle  through  the  axis)  is  a  diameter  of  the  circle. 

Proposition  5 

If  an  oblique  cone  is  cut  by  a  plane  through  the  axis  at  right  angles  to  the  base ,  and 
is  also  cut  by  another  plane  on  the  one  hand  at  right  angles  to  the  axial  triangle, 
and  on  the  other  cutting  off  on  the  side  of  the  vertex  a  triangle  similar  to  the  axial 


608  APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 

triangle  and  lying  subcontrariwise,  then  the  section  is  a  circle ,  and  let  such  a 
section  be  called  svhcontrary . 

Let  there  be  an  oblique  cone  whose  vertex  is  the  point  A  and  whose  base  is 
the  circle  BC ,  and  let  it  be  cut  by  a  plane  through  the 
axis  perpendicular  to  the  circle  BC,  and  let  it  make  as 
a  section  the  triangle  ABC  (i.  3).  Then  let  it  also  be 
cut  by  another  plane  perpendicular  to  the  triangle 
ABC  and  cutting  off  on  the  side  of  the  point  A  the 
triangle  AKG  similar  to  the  triangle  ABC  and  lying 
subcontrariwise,  that  is,  so  that  the  angle  AKG  is 
equal  to  the  angle  ABC.  And  let  it  make  as  a  section 
on  the  surface,  the  line  GHK. 

I  say  that  the  line  GHK  is  a  circle. 

For  let  any  points  H  and  L  be  taken  on  the  lines 
GHK  and  BC,  and  from  the  points  H  and  L  let  per¬ 
pendiculars  be  dropped  to  the  plane  through  the  tri¬ 
angle  ABC.  Then  they  will  fall  to  the  common  sec¬ 
tions  of  the  planes  (Eucl.  xi.  def.  6).  Let  them  fall  as 
for  example  FH  and  LM .  Therefore  FH  is  parallel  to 
LM  (Eucl.  xi.  6). 

Then  let  the  straight  line  DFE  be  drawn  through  F  parallel  to  BC;  and  FH 
is  also  parallel  to  LM.  Therefore  the  plane  through  FH  and  BE  is  parallel  to 
the  base  of  the  cone  (Eucl.  xi.  15).  Therefore  it  is  a  circle  whose  diameter  is  the 
straight  line  DE  (i.  4). 

Therefore 

rect.  DF  ,FE  =  sq.  FH  (Eucl.  in.  31  and  vi.  8,  porism). 

And  since  ED  is  parallel  to  BC,  angle  ADE  is  equal  to  angle  ABC.  And  angle 
AKG  is  supposed  equal  to  angle  ABC.  And  therefore  angle  AKG  is  equal  to 
angle  ADE.  And  the  vertical  angles  at  the  point  F  are  also  equal.  Therefore 
triangle  DFG  is  similar  to  triangle  KFE,  and  therefore 
EF  :  FK  :  :  GF  :  FD  (Eucl.  vi.  4). 

Therefore 

rect.  EF,  FD  =  rect.  KF ,  FG  (Eucl.  vi.  16). 

But  it  has  been  shown  that 

sq.  FH  =  rect.  EF,  FD; 

and  therefore 

rect.  KF,  FG  =  sq.  FH. 

Likewise  then  all  the  perpendiculars  drawn  from  the  line  GHK  to  the  straight 
line  GK  could  also  be  shown  to  be  equal  in  square  to  the  rectangle,  in  each 
case,  contained  by  the  segments  of  the  straight  line  GK. 

Therefore  the  section  is  a  circle  whose  diameter  is  the  straight  line  GK. 

Proposition  6 

If  a  cone  is  cut  by  a  plane  through  the  axis,  and  some  point  is  taken  on  the  surface 
of  the  cone  which  is  not  on  a  side  of  the  axial  triangle,  and  from  it  is  drawn  a 
straight  line  parallel  to  some  straight  line  which  is  a  perpendicular  from  the  cir- 
cumference  of  the  circle  to  the  base  of  the  triangle,  then  it  meets  the  axial  triangle, 
and  on  being  produced  to  the  other  side  of  the  surface  it  will  be  bisected  by  the 
triangle. 


A 


609 


CONICS  I 

Let  there  be  a  cone  whose  vertex  is  the  point  A  and  whose  base  is  the  circle 
BC ,  and  let  the  cone  be  cut  by  a  plane  through  the  axis,  and  let  it  make  a  com¬ 
mon  section  the  triangle  A  BC  (i.  3);  and  from  some  point  M  of  those  on  the 


circumference,  let  the  straight  line  MN  be  drawn  perpendicular  to  the  straight 
line  BC .  Then  let  some  point  D  be  taken  on  the  surface  of  the  cone,  and 
through  D  let  the  straight  line  DE  be  drawn  parallel  to  MN. 

I  say  that  the  straight  line  DE  produced  will  meet  the  plane  of  the  triangle 
ABC ,  and,  if  further  produced  toward  the  other  side  of  the  cone  until  it  meet 
its  surface,  will  be  bisected  by  the  triangle  ABC. 

Let  the  straight  line  AD  be  joined  and  be  produced.  Therefore  it  will  meet 
the  circumference  of  the  circle  BC  (i.  1).  Let  it  meet  it  at  K  and  from  K  let  the 
straight  line  KHL  be  drawn  perpendicular  to  the  straight  line  BC.  Therefore 
KH  is  parallel  to  MN ,  and  therefore  to  DE  (Eucl.  xi.  9). 

Let  the  straight  line  AH  be  joined  from  A  to  H.  Since  then  in  the  triangle 
AHK  the  straight  line  DE  is  parallel  to  the  straight  line  HK ,  therefore  DE 
produced  will  meet  AH.  But  AH  is  in  the  plane  of  ABC ;  therefore  DE  will 
meet  the  plane  of  the  triangle  ABC. 

For  the  same  reasons  it  also  meets  AH;  let  it  meet  it  at  Fy  and  let  DF  be 
produced  in  a  straight  line  until  it  meet  the  surface  of  the  cone.  Let  it  meet 
it  at  G. 

I  say  that  DF  is  equal  to  FG . 

For  since  A  ,G,L  are  points  on  the  surface  of  the  cone,  but  also  in  the  plane 
extended  through  the  straight  lines  AH,  AK ,  DG ,  KL ,  which  is  a  triangle 
through  the  vertex  of  the  cone  (i.  3),  therefore  A,  G,  L  are  points  on  the  com¬ 
mon  section  of  the  cone's  surface  and  of  the  triangle.  Therefore  the  line  through 
A,  G,  L  is  a  straight  line.  Since  then  in  the  triangle  ALK  the  straight  line  DG 
has  been  drawn  parallel  to  the  base  KHL  and  some  straight  line  AFH  has  been 
drawn  across  them  from  the  point  A,  therefore 

KI1  :  IJL  :  :  DF  :  FG  (Eucl.  vi.  2). 


610  APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 

But  KH  is  equal  to  HL,  since  KL  is  a  chord  in  circle  BC  perpendicular  to  the 
diameter  (Eucl.  hi.  3).  Therefore  DF  is  equal  to  FG. 

Proposition  7 

If  a  cone  is  cut  by  a  plane  through  the  axis ,  and  if  it  is  also  cut  by  another  plane 
cutting  the  plane  the  base  of  the  cone  is  in ,  in  a  straight  line  perpendicular  either 
to  the  base  of  the  axial  triangle  or  to  it  produced,  then  the  straight  lines  drawn  from 
the  resulting  section  on  the  cone’s  surface,  made  by  the  cutting  plane,  parallel  to  the 
straight  line  perpendicular  to  the  base  of  the  triangle  will  fall  on  the  common  sec¬ 
tion  of  the  cutting  plane  and  of  the  axial  triangle,  and  f  urther  produced  to  the  other 
side  of  the  section,  are  bisected  by  the  common  section;  and  if  it  is  a  right  cone  the 
straight  line  in  the  base  will  be  perpendicular  to  the  common  section  of  the  cutting 
plane  and  of  the  axial  triangle,  and  if  oblique,  it  will  not  always  be  perpendicular, 
but  whenever  the  plane  through  the  axis  is  perpendicular  to  the  base  of  the  cone. 

Let  there  be  a  cone  whose  vertex  is  the  point  A  and  whose  base  is  the  circle 
BC,  and  let  it  be  cut  by  a  plane  through  the  axis  and  let  it  make  as  a  section 

A 


A 


C 


the  triangle  ABC  (i.  3).  And  let  it  also  be  cut  by  another  plane  cutting  the 
plane  the  circle  BC  is  in,  in  the  straight  line  DE  perpendicular  either  to  the 
straight  line  BC  or  to  it  produced,  and  let  it  make  as  a  section  on  the  surface  of 
the  cone  the  line  DFE.  Then  the  straight  line  FG  is  the  common  section  of  the 
cutting  plane  and  of  the  triangle  ABC.  And  let  any  point  H  be  taken  on  the  sec¬ 
tion  DFE,  and  let  the  straight  line  HK  be  drawn  through  H  parallel  to  the 
straight  line  DE. 

I  say  that  the  straight  line  HK  meets  the  straight  line  FG,  and,  on  being 
produced  to  the  other  side  of  the  section  DFE,  will  be  bisected  by  FG. 

For  since  a  cone  whose  vertex  is  the  point  A  and  whose  base  is  the  circle  BC 
has  been  cut  by  a  plane  through  its  axis,  and  makes  as  a  section  the  triangle 
ABC,  and  some  point  H  on  the  surface,  not  on  a  side  of  the  triangle  ABC,  has 
been  taken,  and  since  the  straight  line  DG  is  perpendicular  to  the  straight  line 
BC,  therefore  the  straight  line  drawn  through  H  parallel  to  DG,  that  is  HK, 
meets  the  triangle  ABC ,  and  if  further  produced  to  the  other  side  of  the  sur¬ 
face,  will  be  bisected  by  the  triangle  (i.  6). 


CONICS  I  611 

Then  since  the  straight  line  drawn  through  H  parallel  to  the  straight  line 
DE  meets  the  triangle  ABC  and  is  in  the  plane  of  the  section  BFE,  therefore 


it  will  fall  on  the  common  section  of  the  cutting  plane  and  of  the  triangle  ABC . 
But  the  straight  line  FG  is  the  common  section  of  the  planes.  Therefore  the 
straight  line  drawn  through  H  parallel  to  DE  will  fall  on  FG,  and,  if  further 
produced  to  the  other  side  of  the  section  DFE,  will  be  bisected  by  the  straight 
line  FG, 

Then  either  the  cone  is  a  right  cone,  or  the  axial  triangle  ABC  is  perpendic¬ 
ular  to  the  circle  BC ,  or  neither. 

First  let  the  cone  be  a  right  cone.  Then  the  triangle  ABC  would  be  perpen¬ 
dicular  to  the  circle  BC  (Def.  3:  Eucl.  xi.  IS).  Since  then  the  plane  ABC  is 
perpendicular  to  the  plane  BCf  and  the  straight  line  DE  has  been  drawn  in  one 
of  the  planes,  BC ,  perpendicular  to  their  common  section  the  straight  line  BC , 
therefore  the  straight  line  DE  is  perpendicular  to  the  triangle  ABC  (Eucl.  xi. 
def.  4),  and  therefore  to  all  the  straight  lines  touching  it  and  in  the  triangle 
ABC  (Eucl.  xi.  def.  3).  And  so  it  is  also  perpendicular  to  the  straight  line  FG. 

Then  let  the  cone  not  be  a  right  cone.  If  now  the  axial  triangle  is  perpen¬ 
dicular  to  the  circle  BC}  we  could  likewise  show  that  DE  is  perpendicular 
to  FG. 

Then  letthe  axial  triangle  ABC  not  be  perpendicular  to  the  circleBC.  — I  say 
that  DE  is  not  perpendicular  to  FG.  For  if  possible,  let  it  be.  And  it  is  also 
perpendicular  to  the  straight  line  BC.  Therefore  DE  is  perpendicular  to  both 
BC  and  FG,  and  therefore  it  will  be  perpendicular  to  the  plane  through  BC  and 
FG.  But  the  plane  through  BC  and  GF  is  the  triangle  ABC ,  and  therefore  DE 
is  perpendicular  to  the  triangle  ABC.  And  therefore  all  the  planes  through  it 
are  perpendicular  to  the  triangle  ABC.  But  one  of  the  planes  through  DE  is  the 
circle  BC ;  therefore  the  circle  BC  is  perpendicular  to  the  triangle  ABC .  And  so 
the  triangle  ABC  will  also  be  perpendicular  to  the  circle  BC.  And  this  is  not 
supposed.  Therefore  the  straight  line  DE  is  not  perpendicular  to  the  straight 
line  FG. 


612 


APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 


PORISM 

Then  from  this  it  is  evident  that  the  straight  line  FG  is  the  diameter  of  the 
section  DFE,  since  it  bisects  the  straight  lines  drawn  parallel  to  some  straight 
line  DE ,  and  that  it  is  possible  for  some  parallels  to  be  bisected  by  the  diameter 
FG  and  not  be  perpendicular. 

Proposition  8 

If  a  cone  is  cut  by  a  plane  through  its  axis,  and  is  cut  by  another  plane  cutting  the 
base  of  the  cone  in  a  straight  line  perpendicular  to  the  base  of  the  axial  triangle, 
and  if  the  diameter  of  the  resulting  section  on  the  surface  is  either  parallel  to  one 
of  the  sides  of  the  triangle  or  meets  one  of  them  beyond  the  vertex  of  the  cone,  and 
the  surface  of  the  cone  and  the  cutting  plane  are  produced  indefinitely,  then  the 
section  will  also  increase  indefinitely,  and  some  straight  line  drawn  from  the  sec¬ 
tion  of  the  cone  parallel  to  the  straight  line  in  the  base  of  the  cone  will  cut  off  from 
the  diameter  on  the  side  of  the  vertex  a  straight  line  equal  to  any  given  straight  line . 


Let  there  be  a  cone  whose  vertex  is  the  point  A  and  whose  base  is  the  circle 
BC,  and  let  it  be  cut  by  a  plane  through  its  axis,  and  let  it  make  as  a  section 
the  triangle  ABC  (i.  3).  And  let  it  be  cut  also  by  another  plane  cutting  the 


CONICS  I 


613 

circle  BC  in  a  straight  line  DE  perpendicular  to  the  straight  line  BC,  and  let  it 
make  as  a  section  on  the  surface  the  line  DFE.  And  let  the  diameter  FG  of  the 
section  DFE  be  either  parallel  to  the  straight  line  AC  or  on  being  produced 
meet  it  beyond  the  point  A  (i.  7  and  porism). 

I  say  that,  if  both  the  surface  of  the  cone  and  the  cutting  plane  are  produced 
indefinitely,  the  section  DFE  also  will  increase  indefinitely. 

For  let  both  the  surface  of  the  cone  and  the  cutting  plane  be  produced.  Then 
it  is  evident  that  also  the  straight  lines  AB ,  AC,  FG  will  be  therewith  produced. 
Since  the  straight  line  FG  is  either  parallel  to  AC  or  produced  meets  it  beyond 
the  point  A,  therefore  the  straight  lines  FG  and  AC  on  being  produced  in  the 
direction  of  C  and  G  will  never  meet.  Then  let  them  be  produced  and  let  some 
point  H  be  taken  at  random  on  the  straight  line  FG,  and  let  the  straight  line 
KHL  be  drawn  through  the  point  H  parallel  to  the  straight  line  BC,  and 
MHN  parallel  to  DE .  Therefore  the  plane  through  KL  and  MN  is  parallel  to 
the  plane  through  BC  and  DE  (Eucl.  xi.  15).  Therefore  the  plane  KLMN  is 
a  circle  (i.  4). 

And  since  the  points  D,  E,  M,  N  are  in  the  cutting  plane  and  also  on  the 
surface  of  the  cone,  therefore  they  are  on  the  common  section.  Therefore  the 
section  DFE  has  increased  to  the  points  M  and  N.  Therefore,  with  the  surface 
of  the  cone  and  the  cutting  plane  increased  to  the  circle  KLMN,  the  section 
DFE  has  also  increased  to  the  points  M  and  N.  Then  likewise  we  could  show 
also,  that  if  the  surface  of  the  cone  and  the  cutting  plane  are  extended  indefi¬ 
nitely,  the  section  MDFEN  will  also  increase  indefinitely. 

And  it  is  evident  that  some  straight  line  will  cut  off  on  straight  line  FH  on 
the  side  of  point  F  a  straight  line  equal  to  any  given  straight  line.  For  if  we  lay 
dowm  the  straight  line  FX  equal  to  the  given  straight  line,  and  draw  a  parallel 
to  DE  through  X,  it  will  meet  the  section,  just  as  the  straight  line  through  H 
was  also  proved  to  meet  the  section  in  the  points  M  and  N.  And  so  some 
straight  line  is  drawn  meeting  the  section,  parallel  to  DE,  and  cutting  off  on 
FG  on  the  side  of  point  H  a  straight  line  equal  to  the  given  straight  line. 

Proposition  9 

If  a  cone  is  cut  by  a  plane  meeting  both  sides  of  the  axial  triangle,  and  neither 
parallel  to  the  base  nor  situated  subcontrariwise ,  then  the  section  will  not  be  a  circle. 

Let  there  be  a  cone  whose  vertex  is 
the  point  A  and  whose  base  is  the 
circle  BC,  and  let  it  be  cut  by  some 
plane  neither  parallel  to  the  base  nor 
situated  subcontrariwise,  and  let  it 
make  as  a  section  on  the  surface  the 
line  DKE. 

I  say  that  the  line  DKE  will  not  be 
a  circle. 

For  if  possible,  let  it  be,  and  let  the 
cutting  plane  meet  the  base,  and  let 
the  straight  line  FG  be  the  common 
section  of  the  planes,  and  let  the 
point  H  be  the  center  of  the  circle 
BC,  and  let  the  straight  line  IIG  be 


614  APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 

drawn  from  it  perpendicular  to  the  straight  line  FG.  And  let  a  plane  be  ex¬ 
tended  through  GH  and  the  axis  and  let  it  make  as  sections  on  the  conic  sur¬ 
face  the  straight  lines  BA  and  AC  (i.  1).  Since  then  D,  E,  G  are  points  in  the 
plane  through  the  line  DKE ,  and  also  in  the  plane  through  the  points  A,  B,  C, 
therefore  D,  E,  G  are  points  on  the  common  section  of  the  planes.  Therefore 
GED  is  a  straight  line  (Eucl.  xi.  3). 

Then  let  some  point  K  be  taken  on  the  line  DKE ,  and  through  K  let  the 
straight  line  KL  be  drawn  parallel  to  the  straight  line  FG ;  then  KM  will  be 
equal  to  ML  (i.  7).  Therefore  the  straight  line  DE  is  the  diameter  of  the  circle 
DKLE  (Def.  4).  Then  let  the  straight  line  NMX  be  drawn  through  M  parallel 
to  the  straight  line  BC.  But  KL  is  also  parallel  to  FG.  And  so  the  plane  through 
the  straight  lines  NX  and  KM  is  parallel  to  the  plane  through  the  straight 
lines  BC  and  FG,  that  is  to  the  base  (Eucl.  xi.  15),  and  the  section  will  be  a 
circle  (i.  4).  Let  it  be  the  circle  NKX. 

And  since  the  straight  line  FG  is  perpendicular  to  the  straight  line  BG,  the 
straight  line  KM  is  also  perpendicular  to  the  straight  line  NX  (Eucl.  xi.  10). 
And  so 

rect.  NM, MX  =  sq.  KM  (Eucl.  hi.  31;  vi.  8,  porism) 

But 

rect.  DM, ME  —  sq.  KM, 

for  the  line  DKEL  is  supposed  a  circle,  and  the  straight  line  DE  is  its  diameter. 
Therefore 

rect.  NM,MX  =  rect.  DM,  ME. 

Therefore 

MN  :  MD  :  :  EM  :  MX  (Eucl.  vi.  16). 

Therefore  triangle  DMN  is  similar  to  triangle  XME  (Eucl.  vi.  6;  vi.  def.  1), 
and  angle  DNM  is  equal  to  angle  MEX.  But  angle  DNM  is  equal  to  angle 
ABC,  for  the  straight  line  NX  is  parallel  to  the  straight  line  BC.  And  therefore 
angle  ABC  is  equal  to  angle  MEX.  Therefore  the  section  is  subcontrary  (i.  5). 
And  this  is  not  supposed.  Therefore  the  line  DKE  is  not  a  circle. 

Proposition  10 

If  two  'points  are  taken  on  the  section  of  a  cone ,  the  straight  line  joining  the  two 
points  will  fall  within  the  section,  and  produced  in  a 
straight  line  it  will  fall  outside. 

Let  there  be  a  cone  whose  vertex  is  the  point  A, 
and  whose  base  is  the  circle  BC,  and  let  it  be  cut  by  a 
plane  through  the  axis,  and  let  it  make  as  a  section 
the  triangle  ABC  (i.  3).  Then  let  it  also  be  cut  by 
another  plane,  and  let  it  make  as  a  section  on  the 
surface  of  the  cone  the  line  DEF,  and  let  two  points 
G  and  H  be  taken  on  the  line  DEF. 

I  say  that  the  straight  line  joining  the  two  points  G 
and  H  will  fall  within  the  line  DEF,  and  produced  in 
a  straight  line  it  will  fall  outside. 

For  since  a  cone,  whose  vertex  is  the  point  A  and 
whose  base  is  the  circle  BC,  has  been  cut  by  a  plane 
through  the  axis,  and  some  points  G  and  H  have  been 
taken  on  its  surface  winch  are  not  on  a  side  of  the  axial 


615 


CONICS  I 

triangle,  and  since  the  straight  line  joining  G  and  H  does  not  verge  to  the  point 
A,  therefore  the  straight  line  joining  G  and  H  will  fall  within  the  cone,  and 
produced  in  a  straight  line  it  will  fall  outside  (i.  2);  consequently  also  out¬ 
side  the  section  DFE. 


Proposition  11 


If  a  cone  is  cut  by  a  plane  through  its  axis ,  and  also  cut  by  another  plane  cutting 
the  base  of  the  cone  in  a  straight  line  perpendicular  to  the  base  of  the  axial  triangle , 
and  if  further  the  diameter  of  the  section  is  parallel  to  one  side  of  the  axial  triangle , 
then  any  straight  line  which  is  drawn  from  the  section  of  the  cone  to  its  diameter 
parallel  to  the  common  section  of  the  cutting  plane  and  of  the  cone's  base ,  will  equal 
in  square  the  rectangle  contained  by  the  straight  line  cut  off  by  it  on  the  diameter 
beginning  from  the  section's  vertex  and  by  another  straight  line  which  has  the  ratio 
to  the  straight  line  between  the  angle  of  the  cone  and  the  vertex  of  the  section  that  the 
square  on  the  base  of  the  axial  triangle  has  to  the  rectangle  contained  by  the  remain¬ 
ing  two  sides  of  the  triangle.  And  let  such  a  section  be  called  a  parabola  (irapa^ohii). 

Let  there  be  a  cone  whose  vertex  is  the  point  A,  and  whose  base  is  the  circle 
BC,  and  let  it  be  cut  by  a  plane  through  its  axis,  and  let  it  make  as  a  section  the 
triangle  ABC  (i.  3).  And  let  it  also  be  cut  by  another  plane  cutting  the  base  of 
the  cone  in  the  straight  line  DE  perpendicular  to  the  straight  line  BC ,  and  let 
it  make  as  a  section  on  the  surface  of  the  cone  the  line  DFE,  and  let  the  diam¬ 
eter  of  the  section  FG  (i.  7,  and  def.  4)  be  parallel  to  one  side  AC  of  the  axial 
triangle.  And  let  the  straight  line  FH  be  drawn  from  the  point  F  perpendicular 
to  the  straight  line  FG,  and  let  it  be  contrived  that 

sq.  BC  :  rect.  BA,  AC  :  :  FH  :  FA. 

And  let  some  point  K  be  taken  at  random  on  the 
section,  and  through  K  let  the  straight  line  KL  be 
drawn  parallel  to  the  straight  line  DE. 

I  say  that  sq.  KL  =  rect.  HF,  FL . 

For  let  the  straight  line  MN  be  drawn  through  L 
parallel  to  the  straight  line  BC.  And  the  straight  line 
DE  is  also  parallel  to  the  straight  line  KL.  Therefore 
the  plane  through  KL  and  MN  is  parallel  to  the 
plane  through  BC  and  DE  (Eucl.  xi.  15),  that  is  to 
the  base  of  the  cone.  Therefore  the  plane  through  KL 
and  MN  is  a  circle  whose  diameter  is  MN  (i.  4).  And 
KL  is  perpendicular  to  MN  since  DE  is  also  perpen¬ 
dicular  to  BC  (Eucl.  xi.  10).  Therefore 
rect.  ML,  LN  =  sq.  KL  (Eucl.  hi.  31;  vi.  8,  porism). 

And  since 

sq.  BC  :  rect.  BA’AC  ::HF  :  FA, 

and 

sq.  BC  :  rect.  BA ,  AC  comp.  BC  :C  A,  BC:  BA  (Eucl.  vi.  23), 
therefore 


A 


But 


II F  :  FA  comp.  BC  :  C A, BC  :  BA. 


and 


BC  :  CA  :  :  MN  :  NA  :  :  ML  :  LF  (Eucl.  vi.  4), 

BC  :  BA  :  :  MN  :  MA  :  :  LM  :  MF  :  :  NL  :  FA  (Eucl.  vi.  2). 


616  APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 

Therefore 

HF  :  FA  comp.  ML  :  LF}  NL  :  FA. 

But 

rect.  ML,LN  :  rect.  LF,  FA  comp.  ML  :  LF)  LN  :  FA  (Eucl.  vi.  23). 
Therefore 

HF  :  :  FA::  rect.  ML,LN  :  rect.  LF,  FA 
But,  with  the  straight  line  FL  taken  as  common  height, 

HF  :  FA  :  :  rect.  HF ,  FL  :  rect.  LF,  FA  (Eucl.  vi.  1), 

therefore 

rect.  ML,LN  :  rect.  LF,  FA  :  :  rect.  HF,  FL  :  rect.  LF,  FA  (Eucl.  v.  11). 
Therefore 

rect.  ML,LN  =  rect.  HF  ,FL  (Eucl.  v.  9). 

But 

rect.  ML, LN  =  sq.  KL , 

therefore  also 

sq.  7vL  =  rect.  i?F,  FL. 

And  let  such  a  section  be  called  a  parabola,  and  let  HF  be  called  the  straight 
line  to  which  the  straight  lines  drawn  ordinatewise  to  the  diameter  FG  are 
applied  in  square  ( Trap  rjv  dvvara i  al  Karayopevat,  reraypevu s  ewl  rrjv  ZH  biaperpov ), 
and  let  it  also  be  called  the  upright  side  (opdla).1 

Proposition  12 

If  a  cone  is  cut  by  a  plane  through  its  axis ,  and  also  by  another  plane  cutting  the 
base  of  the  cone  in  a  straight  line  perpendicular  to  the  base  of  the  axial  triangle , 
and  if  the  diameter  of  the  section  produced  meets  one  side  of  the  axial  triangle 
beyond  the  vertex  of  the  cone ,  then  any  straight  line  which  is  drawn  from  the  section 
to  its  diameter  parallel  to  the  common  section  of  the  cutting  plane  and  of  the  cone’s 
base ,  will  equal  in  square  some  area  applied  to  a  straight  line  to  which  the  straight 
line  added  along  the  diameter  of  the  section  and  subtending  the  exterior  angle  of  the 
triangle  has  the  ratio  that  the  square  on  the  straight  line  drawn  from  the  cone’s 
vertex  to  the  triangle’s  base  parallel  to  the  section’s  diameter  has  to  the  rectangle 
contained  by  the  sections  of  the  base  which  this  straight  line  makes  when  drawn , 
this  area  having  as  breadth  the  straight  line  cut  off  on  the  diameter  beginning  from 
the  section’s  vertex  by  this  straight  line  from  the  section  to  the  diameter  and  exceed¬ 
ing  (virepfiaWov)  by  a  figure  ( eUos ),  similar  and  similarly  situated  to  the  rectangle 
contained  by  the  straight  line  subtending  the  exterior  angle  of  the  triangle  and  by 
the  parameter.  And  let  such  a  section  be  called  an  hyperbola  (virepPoXi}). 

Let  there  be  a  cone  wiiose  vertex  is  the  point  A  and  wrhose  base  is  the  circle 
BC,  and  let  it  be  cut  by  a  plane  through  its  axis,  and  let  it  make  as  a  section 
the  triangle  ABC  (i.  3).  And  let  it  also  be  cut  by  another  plane  cutting  the  base 
of  the  cone  in  the  straight  line  DE  perpendicular  to  BC  the  base  of  the  triangle 
ABC ,  and  let  it  make  as  a  section  on  the  surface  of  the  cone  the  line  DFE ,  and 

JThe  Greek  of  the  phrase  “the  straight  line  to  which  the  straight  lines  drawn  ordinatewise 
to  the  diameter  are  applied  in  square, 77  that  is  fj  Trap  fjv  bvvavraL  al  KarayopevaL  Ttraypkvws 
€7rl  rijp  8i aperpov,  soon  becomes  abbreviated  to  T}  t rap  tfv  dvvavrai  at  narayopevai  and  to  i)  Trap 
fjv  hvvavrai.  We  shall  translate  these  abbreviations  by  the  word  “parameter.7 ’  And  we  shall 
later  on,  after  proposition  XIV  shorten  the  long  expression  to  “the  parameter  of  the  ordinates 
to  the  diameter.’7 

The  Latin  translation  of  opdla  (7 r\evpa)  is  latus  rectum  which  has  become  an  English  term 
too. 


617 


CONICS  I 


let  FG  the  diameter  of  the  section  (i.  7  and  def.  4)  when  produced  meet  AC  one 
side  of  the  triangle  ABC  beyond  the  vertex  of  the  cone  at  the  point  H.  And  let 
the  straight  line  AK  be  drawn  through  A  parallel  to  the 
diameter  of  the  section  FG,  and  let  it  cut  BC.  And  let 
the  straight  line  FL  be  drawn  from  F  perpendicular  to 
FG,  and  let  it  be  contrived  that 

sq.  KA  :  rect.  BK,KC  :  :  FH  :  FL. 

And  let  some  point  M  be  taken  at  random  on  the  sec¬ 
tion,  and  through  M  let  the  straight  line  MN  be  drawn 
parallel  to  DE ,  and  through  N  let  the  straight  line 
NOX  be  drawn  parallel  to  FL.  And  let  the  straight  line 
HL  be  joined  and  produced  to  X,  and  let  the  straight 
lines  LO  and  XP  be  drawn  through  L  and  X  parallel 
to  FN. 

I  say  that  MN  is  equal  in  square  to  the  parallelo¬ 
gram  FX  which  is  applied  to  FL,  having  FN  as 
breadth,  and  exceeding  by  a  figure  LX  similar  to  the 
rectangle  contained  by  HF  and  FL. 

For  let  the  straight  line  RNS  be  drawn  through  N 
parallel  to  BC;  and  NM  is  also  parallel  to  DE.  There¬ 
fore  the  plane  through  MN  and  RS  is  parallel  to  the  plane  through  BC  and 
DE,  that  is  to  the  base  of  the  cone  (Eucl.  xi.  15).  Therefore  if  the  plane  is 
produced  through  MN  and  RS,  the  section  will  be  a  circle  whose  diameter  is 
the  straight  line  RNS  (i.  4).  And  MN  is  perpendicular  to  it.  Therefore 

rect.  RN,  NS  =  sq.  MN. 

And  since 

sq.  AK  :  rect.  BK,KC  :  :  FH  :  FL, 

and 

sq.  AK  :  rect.  BK,KC  comp.  AK  :  KC,  AK  :  KB  (Eucl.  vi.  23), 
therefore  also 


FH  :  FL  comp.  AK  :  KC  ,AK  :  KB. 

But 

AK  :  KC  : :  HG  :  GC  :  :  HN  :  NS  (Eucl.  vi.  4), 

and 

AK  :  KB  : :  FG  :  GB  :  :  FN  :  NR. 

Therefore 

HF  :  FL  comp.  HN  :  NS, FN  :  NR. 

And 

rect.  HN,  NF  :  rect.  SN,  NR  comp.  TIN  :NS,FN  :  NR  (Eucl.  vi.  23). 
Therefore  also 

rect,  HN,  NF  :  rect.  SN,  NR  :  :  HF  :  FL  :  :  HN  :  NX  (Eucl.  vi.  4). 

But,  with  the  straight  line  FN  taken  as  common  height, 

HN  :  NX  :  :  rect.  HN,  NF  :  rect.  FN,  NX  (Eucl.  vi.  1). 

Therefore  also 

rect.  HN,  NF  :  rect.  SN,  NR  :  :  rect.  IIN,  NF  :  rect.  XN,  NF  (Eucl.  v.  11). 
Therefore 


rect.  SN,  NR  =  rect.  XN,  NF  (Eucl.  v.  9). 

But  it  was  shown 


sq.  A/W  =  rect.  SN,NR; 


618 

therefore  also 


APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 


sq.  MN  =  rect.  XN  ,NF. 

But  the  rectangle  contained  by  XN  and  NF  is  the  parallelogram  XF .  There¬ 
fore  the  straight  line  MN  is  equal  in  square  to  XF  which  is  applied  to  the 
straight  line  FL,  having  FN  as  breadth,  and  exceeding  by  the  parallelogram 
LX  similar  to  the  rectangle  contained  by  HF  and  FL  (Eucl.  vi.  24). 

And  let  such  a  section  be  called  an  hyperbola,  and  let  LF  be  called  the 
straight  line  to  which  the  straight  lines  drawn  ordinatewise  to  FG  are  applied 
in  square;  and  let  the  same  straight  line  also  be  called  the  upright  side,  and 
the  straight  line  FH  the  transverse  side. 

Proposition  13 

If  a  cone  is  cut  by  a  plane  through  its  axis,  and  is  also  cut  by  another  plane  on  the 
one  hand  meeting  both  sides  of  the  axial  triangle,  and  on  the  other  extended  neither 
parallel  to  the  base  nor  subcontrariwise,  and  if  the  plane  the  base  of  the  cone  is  in, 
and  the  cutting  plane  meet  in  a  straight  line  perpendicular  either  to  the  base  of  the 
axial  triangle  or  to  it  produced ,  then  any  straight  line  which  is  drawn  from  the 
section  of  the  cone  to  the  diameter  of  the  section  parallel  to  the  common  section  of 
the  planes,  will  equal  in  square  some  area  applied  to  a  straight  line  to  which  the 
diameter  of  the  section  has  the  ratio  that  the  square  on  the  straight  line  drawn  from 
the  cone’s  vertex  to  the  triangle’s  base  parallel  to  the  section’s  diameter  has  to  the 
rectangle  contained  by  the  intercepts  of  this  straight  line  {on  the  base )  from  the 
sides  of  the  triangle ,  an  area  having  as  breadth  the  straight  line  cut  off  on  the  diam¬ 
eter  beginning  from  the  section’s  vertex  by  this  straight  line  from  the  section  to  the 
diameter,  and  deficient  {kWFurov)  by  a  figure  similar  and  similarly  situated  to 
the  rectangle  contained  by  the  diameter  and  parameter.  And  let  such  a  section  be 
called  an  ellipse  (eWei^is). 

Let  there  be  a  cone  whose  vertex  is  the  point  A  and  whose  base  is  the  circle 
BC,  and  let  it  be  cut  by  a  plane  through  its  axis,  and  let  it  make  as  a  section 


the  triangle  ABC .  And  let  it  also  be  cut  by  another  plane  on  the  one  hand 
meeting  both  sides  of  the  axial  triangle  and  on  the  other  extended  neither 
parallel  to  the  base  of  the  cone  nor  subcontrariwise,  and  let  it  make  as  a  section 
on  the  surface  of  the  cone  the  line  DE .  And  let  the  common  section  of  the  cut- 


619 


CONICS  I 


ting  plane  and  of  the  plane  the  base  of  the  cone  is  in,  be  the  straight  line  FG 
perpendicular  to  the  straight  line  BC ,  and  let  the  diameter  of  the  section  be 
the  straight  line  ED  (i.  7  and  Def.  4).  And  let  the  straight  line  EH  be  drawn 
from  E  perpendicular  to  ED ,  and  let  the  straight  line  AK  be  drawn  through 
A  parallel  to  ED,  and  let  it  be  contrived  that 

sq.  AK  :  rect.  BK>KC  : :  DE  :  EH. 

And  let  some  point  L  be  taken  on  the  section,  and  let  the  straight  line  LM  be 
drawn  through  L  parallel  to  FG. 

I  say  that  the  straight  line  LM  is  equal  in  square  to  some  area  which  is 
applied  to  EH,  having  EM  as  breadth  and  deficient  by  a  figure  similar  to  the 
rectangle  contained  by  DE  and  EH. 

For  let  the  straight  line  DH  be  joined,  and  on  the  one  hand  let  the  straight 
line  MXN  be  drawn  through  M  parallel  to  HE,  and  on  the  other  let  the 
straight  lines  HN  and  XO  be  drawn  through  H  and  X  parallel  to  EM,  and  let 
the  straight  line  PMR  be  drawn  through  M  parallel  to  BC. 

Since  then  PR  is  parallel  to  BC,  and  LM  is  also  parallel  to  FG,  therefore  the 
plane  through  LM  and  PR  is  parallel  to  the  plane  through  FG  and  BC,  that  is 
to  the  base  of  the  cone  (Eucl.  xi.  15).  If  therefore  a  plane  is  extended  through 
LM  and  PR,  the  section  will  be  a  circle  whose  diameter  is  PR  (i.  4).  And  LM 
is  perpendicular  to  it.  Therefore 

rect.  PM,  MR  =  sq.  LM. 

And  since 

sq.  AK  :  rect.  BK,  KC  :  :  ED  :  EH, 

and 


sq.  AK  :  rect.  BK,  KC  comp.  AK  :  KB,  AK  :  KC  (Eucl.  vi.  23), 

but 

AK  :  KB  ::  EG  :GB  :  :  EM  :  MP  (Eucl.  vi.  4), 

and 


AK  :  KC  :  :  DG  :  GC  :  :  DM  :  MR, 

therefore 

DE  :  EH  comp.  EM  :  MP,  DM  :  MR. 

But 

rect.  EM,  MD  :  rect.  PM,  MR  comp.  EM  :  MP,  DM  :  MR  (Eucl.  vi.  23). 
Therefore 

rect.  EM  ,MD  :  rect.  PM , MR  :  :  DE  :  EH  :  :  DM  :  MX  (Eucl.  vi.  4). 
And,  with  the  straight  line  ME  taken  as  common  height, 

DM  :  MX  :  :  rect.  DM,  ME  rect.  XM,  ME  (Eucl.  vi.  1). 

Therefore  also 

rect.  DM,  ME  :  rect.  PM,  MR  :  :  rect.  DM,  ME  :  rect.  XM,  ME  (Eucl.  v.  11). 
Therefore 


rect.  PM,  MR  =  rect.  XM,  ME  (Eucl.  v.  9). 
But  it  was  shown 


therefore  also 


rect.  PM,  MR  =  sq.  LM; 


rect.  XM,  ME  —  sq.  LM. 

Therefore  the  straight  line  LM  is  equal  in  square  to  the  parallelogram  MO 
which  is  applied  to  the  straight  line  HE,  having  EM  as  breadth  and  deficient 
by  the  figure  ON  similar  to  the  rectangle  contained  bv  DE  and  EH  (Eucl. 
vi.  24). 


620  APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 

And  let  such  a  section  be  called  an  ellipse,  and  let  EH  be  called  the  straight 
line  to  which  the  straight  lines  drawn  ordinatewise  to  DE  are  applied  in 
square,  and  let  the  same  straight  line  also  be  called  the  upright  side,  and  the 
straight  line  ED  the  transverse  side. 

Proposition  14 

If  the  vertically  opposite  surfaces  are  cut  by  a  plane  not  through  the  vertexf  the 
section  on  each  of  the  two  surfaces  will  be  that  which  is  called  the  hyperbola;  and  the 
diameter  of  the  two  sections  will  be  the  same  straight  line;  and  the  straight  lines ,  to 
which  the  straight  lines  drawn  to  the  diameter  parallel  to  the  straight  line  in  the 
cone}s  base  are  applied  in  square ,  are  equal;  and  the  transverse  side  of  the  figure , 
that  between  the  vertices  of  the  sectionsy  is  common.  And  let  such  sections  be  called 
opposite  (avTiKeijjievai) . 

Let  there  be  the  vertically  opposite  surfaces  whose  vertex  is  the  point  A,  and 
let  them  be  cut  by  a  plane  not  through  the  vertex,  and  let  it  make  as  sections 
on  the  surface  the  lines  DEF  and  GHK. 

I  say  that  each  of  the  two  sections  DEF  and  GHK  is  the  so-called  hyperbola. 

For  let  there  be  the  circle  BDCF  along  which  the  line  generating  the  surface 
moves,  and  let  the  plane  XGOK  be  extended  parallel  to  it  on  the  vertically 
opposite  surface;  and  the  straight  lines  FD  and  GK 
are  common  sections  of  the  sections  GHK  and  FED , 
and  of  the  circles  (i.  4).  Then  they  will  be  parallel 
(Eucl.  xi.  16).  And  let  the  straight  line  LAU  be  the 
axis  of  the  conic  surface,  and  the  points  L  and  U  be 
the  centers  of  the  circles,  and  let  a  straight  line 
drawm  from  L  perpendicular  to  the  straight  line  FD 
be  produced  to  the  points  B  and  C,  and  let  a  plane  be 
produced  through  the  straight  line  BC  and  the  axis. 

Then  it  will  make  as  sections  in  the  circles  the  paral¬ 
lel  straight  lines  XO  and  BC  (Eucl.  xi.  16),  and  on 
the  surface  the  straight  lines  BAO  and  CAX  (i.  1 
and  Def.  4). 

Then  the  straight  line  XO  will  be  perpendicular 
to  the  straight  line  GK,  since  the  straight  line  BC 
is  also  perpendicular  to  the  straight  line  FD,  and 
each  of  the  two  is  parallel  to  the  other  (Eucl.  xi. 

10).  And  since  the  plane  through  the  axis  meets  the 
sections  in  the  points  M  and  N  within  the  lines,  it 
is  clear  that  the  plane  also  cuts  the  lines.  Let  it  cut  them  at  H  and  E ;  therefore 
M,  E,  H,  and  Ar  are  points  on  the  plane  through  the  axis  and  in  the  plane  the 
lines  are  in;  therefore  the  line  MEHN  is  a  straight  line  (Eucl.  xi.  3).  It  is  also 
evident  both  that  X,  H,  A,  and  C  are  in  a  straight  line  and  B,E,  A,  and  0  also. 
For  they  are  both  on  the  conic  surface  and  in  the  plane  through  the  axis  (i.  1). 

Let  then  the  straight  lines  HR  and  EP  be  drawm  from  H  and  E  perpendic¬ 
ular  to  HE,  and  let  the  straight  line  SAT  be  drawm  through  A  parallel  to 
MEHN ,  and  let  it  be  contrived  that 

HE  :  EP  :  :  sq.  AS  :  rect.  BS,  SC, 

and 

EH  :  HR::  sq.  AT  :  rect.  OT,  TX . 


G 


621 


CONICS  I 


Since  then  a  cone,  whose  vertex  is  the  point  A  and  whose  base  is  the  circle  BC, 
has  been  cut  by  a  plane  through  its  axis,  and  it  has  made  as  a  section  the 
triangle  ABC ;  and  it  has  also  been  cut  by  another  plane  cutting  the  base  of  the 
cone  in  the  straight  line  DMF  perpendicular  to  the  straight  line  BC,  and  it  has 
made  as  a  section  on  the  surface  the  line  DEF;  and  the  diameter  ME  produced 
has  met  one  side  of  the  axial  triangle  beyond  the  vertex  of  the  cone,  and 
through  the  point  A  the  straight  line  AS  has  been  drawn  parallel  to  the  diam¬ 
eter  of  the  section  EM ,  and  from  E  the  straight  line  EP  has  been  drawn  per¬ 
pendicular  to  the  straight  line  EM,  and 

EH  :EP:  :  sq.  AS  :  rect.  BS,  SC, 

therefore  the  section  DEF  is  an  hyperbola  (i.  12),  and  EP  is  the  straight  line 
to  which  the  straight  lines  drawn  ordinatewise  to  EM  are  applied  in  square, 
and  the  straight  line  HE  is  the  transverse  side  of  the  figure.  And  likewise  GHK 
is  also  an  hyperbola  whose  diameter  is  the  straight  line  HN  and  whose  straight 
line  to  which  the  straight  lines  drawn  ordinatewise  to  HN  are  applied  is  HR, 
and  the  transverse  side  of  whose  figure  is  HE. 

I  say  that  the  straight  line  HR  is  equal  to  the  straight  line  EP. 

For  since  BC  is  parallel  to  XO, 

AS  :  SC  ::  AT  :  TX 

and 

AS:  SB::  AT:  TO. 


But 


sq.  AaS  :  rect.  BS,SC  comp.  :  SC,  AS  :  SB  (Eucl.  vi.  23) 

and 

sq.  AT  :  rect.  XT,  TO  comp.  AT  :  TX,AT  :  TO ; 

therefore 

sq.  AS  :  rect.  BS,SC  :  :  sq  .AT  :  rect.  XT,  TO. 


Also 

and 


sq.  AS  :  rect.  BS,SC  ::  HE:  EP, 
sq.  AT  :  rect.  XT,  TO  ::  HE:  HR. 


Therefore  also 

HE  :  EP  :  :  EH  :  HR  (Eucl.  v.  11). 


Therefore 

EP  —  HR  (Eucl.  v.  9). 


Proposition  15 

If  in  an  ellipse  a  straight  line,  drawn  ordinatewise  from  the  midpoint  of  the  diam¬ 
eter,  is  produced  both  ways  to  the  section ,  and  if  it  is  contrived  that,  as  the  straight 
line  so  produced  is  to  the  diameter,  so  is  the  diameter  to  some  straight  line ,  then  any 
straight  line  which  is  drawn,  from  the  section  to  the  straight  line  produced,  parallel 
to  the  diameter,  will  equal  in  square  the  area  applied  to  this  third  proportional  and 
having  as  breadth  the  straight  line  cut  off  by  it  beginning  from  the  section  and 
deficient  by  a  figure  similar  to  the  rectangle  contained  by  the  straight  line  to  which 
the  straight  lines  are  drawn  and  by  the  parameter;  and  if  f  urther  produced  to  the 
other  side  of  the  section,  will  be  bisected  by  the  straight  line  to  which  it  has  been 
drawn. 

Let  there  be  an  ellipse  whose  diameter  is  the  straight  line  AB,  and  let  AB 
be  bisected  at  the  point  C,  and  through  C  let  the  straight  line  DCE  be  drawn 


622 


APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 


ordinatewise  and  produced  both  ways  to  the  section,  and  from  the  point  D  let 
the  straight  line  DF  be  drawn  perpendicular  to  DE .  And  let  it  be  contrived 
that 

DE  :  AB  :  :  AB  :  DF 
And  let  some  point  G  be  taken 
on  the  section,  and  through  G  let 
the  straight  line  GH  be  drawn 
parallel  to  AB ,  and  let  EF  be 
joined,  and  through  H  let  the 
straight  line  HLbe  drawn  parallel 
to  DF ,  and  through  F  and  L  let  N 
the  straight  lines  FK  and  LM  be 
drawn  parallel  to  HD. 

I  say  that  the  straight  line  GH 
is  equal  in  square  to  the  area  DL 
which  is  applied  to  the  straight  line  DF,  having  as  breadth  the  straight  line  DH 
and  deficient  by  a  figure  LF  similar  to  the  rectangle  contained  by  ED  and  DF. 

For  let  AN  be  the  parameter  of  the  ordinates  to  AB,  and  let  BN  be  joined; 
and  through  G  let  the  straight  line  GX  be  drawn  parallel  to  DE,  and  through 
X  and  C  let  the  straight  lines  XO  and  CP  be  drawn  parallel  to  AN,  and 
through  N,  0,  and  P  let  the  straight  lines  NU,  OS,  and  TP  be  drawn  parallel 
to  AB.  Therefore 

sq.  DC  — sly.  AP,  sq.  GX  —  ar.  AO  (i.  13). 

And  since 

BA  :  AN  :  :  BC  :CP  :  :  PT  :  TN  (Eucl.  vi.  4), 

and 


and 


BC  =  CA  =  TP, 


therefore 


CP  =  TA , 


and 


ar.  AP  =  sly.  TR, 


Since  also 


ar.  XT  =  sly.  TU . 


ar.  OT  =  sly.  OR  (Eucl.  i.  43), 
and  area  AD  is  common,  therefore 

ar.  TU  =  sly.  NS. 


But 


ar.  TU  =  sly.  TX, 

and  TS  is  common.  Therefore 

ar.  NP  =  sly.  PA=ar.  AO+sly.  PO; 

and  so 
Also 


ar.  PA  — sly.  AO  =  ar.  PO. 


and 

therefore 


ar.  AP  =  sq.  CD,  ar.  A0  =  sq.  XG , 
ar.  OP  =  rect.  OS,SP; 
sq.  CD  — sq.  GX  =  rect.  OS,SP . 


CONICS  I  623 

Since  also  the  straight  line  DP  has  been  cut  into  equal  parts  at  C,  and  into 
unequal  parts  at  II ,  therefore 

rect.  EH,HD+ sq.  CP  =  sq.  CD  (Eucl.  n.  5), 


or 

Therefore 

but 

therefore 
And  since 
therefore 
that  is 
And 

and  since 
or 

and  since 
and 


rect.  PP,PD+sq.  XG  =  sq.  CD. 
sq.  CD  — sq.  XG  =  rect.  EH,  HD; 
sq.  CD-sq.  XG  =  rect.  OS,SP ; 
rect.  PP,PD  =  rect.  OD,DD. 

DE  :AB::AB:  DF, 

DE  :  DP  :  :  sq.  DP  :  sq.  AB  (Eucl.  vi.  20), 

DE  :  DF  :  :  sq.  CD  :  sq.  CD  (Eucl.  v.  15); 
rect.  PC,  CA  =  rect.  PC,  CD  =  sq.  CD  (i.  13); 
DE:DF::EH  :  HL  (Eucl.  vi.  4), 

DE  :  DF  :  :  rect.  EH,  HD  :  rect.  DH,HL  (Eucl.  vi.  1), 
'  DE:DF  :  :  rect.  DC,  CD  :  sq.  CD, 
rect.  DC,  CD  :  sq.  CD  :  :  rect.  OS,SP  :  sq.  OD,1 


therefore  also 

rect.  PP,  PD  :  rect.  DH,HL  :  :  rect.  0S,SP  :  sq.  OD. 

And 

rect.  PP,PD  =  rect.  OS,SP ; 

therefore 

rect.  DP,PL  =  sq.  0>S  =  sq.  CP. 

Therefore  the  straight  line  GP  is  equal  in  square  to  the  area  DL  which  is  ap¬ 
plied  to  the  straight  line  DF,  deficient  by  a  figure  FL  similar  to  the  rectangle 
contained  by  PD  and  DF  (Eucl.  vi.  24). 

I  say  then  that  also,  if  produced  to  the  other  side  of  the  section,  the  straight 
line  GP  will  be  bisected  by  the  straight  line  DP. 

For  let  it  be  produced  and  let  it  meet  the  section  at  W,  and  let  the  straight 
line  WY  be  drawn  through  Y  parallel  to  GX,  and  through  Y  let  the  straight 
line  YZ  be  drawn  parallel  to  AN.  And  since 

GX  =  WY, 

therefore  also 

sq.  GX  =  sq.  WY. 


•This  follows  from  the  proportions 

PC  :  CB  : :  PS  :  OS  (Eucl.  vi.  4), 

PC  :  CB  : :  rect.  PC,  CB  :  sq.  CB, 

PS  :  OS  : :  rect.  PS,  OS  :  sq.  OS  (Eucl.  vi.  1). 


and 

and 


624 

But 


APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 


and 

Therefore 

And 

therefore  also 
And  separando 
Therefore 
And  also 


sq.  GX  =  rect.  AX,XO  (i.  13), 
sq.  IFF  =  rect.  AY,  YZ  (i.  13). 
OX  :ZY  ::YA:AX  (Eucl.  vi.  16). 
OX  :  ZY  :  :  XB  :  BY  (Eucl.  vi.  4); 

YA  :  AX  :  :  XB  :  BY. 

YX  :  AX  :  :  YX  :  BY  (Eucl.  v.  17). 
AX=YB. 


AC  =  CB\ 

therefore  also  the  remainders 


and  so  also 


XC  =  CY ; 


GH  =  HW. 

Therefore  the  straight  line  HG,  produced  to  the  other  side  of  the  section,  is 
bisected  by  the  straight  line  DH. 


Proposition  16 

If  through  the  midpoint  of  the  transverse  side  of  the  opposite  sections  a  straight  line 
he  drawn  parallel  to  a  straight  line  drawn  ordinatewise ,  it  will  be  a  diameter  of  the 
opposite  sections  conjugate  to  the  diameter  just  mentioned. 

Let  there  be  the  opposite  sections  whose  diameter  is  the  straight  line  AB, 


and  let  AB  be  bisected  at  C,  and  through  C  let  the  straight  line  CD  be  drawn 
parallel  to  a  straight  line  drawn  ordinatewise. 

I  say  that  the  straight  line  CD  is  a  diameter  conjugate  to  AB. 

For  let  the  straight  lines  AE  and  BF  be  the  parameters,  and  let  the  straight 


625 


CONICS  I 


lines  AF  and  BE  be  joined  and  produced,  and  let  some  point  G  be  taken  at 
random  on  either  section,  and  through  G  let  the  straight  line  GH  be  drawn 
parallel  to  AB ,  and  from  G  and  H  let  the  straight  lines  GK  and  HL  be  drawn 
ordinatewise,  and  through  K  and  L  let  the  straight  lines  KM  and  LN  be 
drawn  parallel  to  AE  and  BF.  Since  then 

GK  =  HL  (Eucl.  i.  34), 


therefore  also 

But 

sq.  GK  =  sq.  HL, 

and 

sq.  GK  =  rect.  AK,ICM  (i.  12), 

therefore 

sq.  HL  =  rect.  BL,LN  (i.  12); 

And  since 

rect.  AK,KM  =  rect.  BL,LN. 

therefore 

AE  =  BF, 

But 

AE  :  AB  :  :  BF  :  BA  (Eucl.  v.  7). 

and  as 

AE  :  AB  :  :  MK  :  KB  (Eucl.  vi.  4), 

And  therefore 

BF  :  BA  :  :  NL  :  LA  (Eucl.  vi.  4). 

MK  :  KB  :  :  NL  :  LA. 

But,  with  KA  taken  as  common  height, 

MK  :  ICB::  rect.  MK,KA  :  rect.  BK,KA} 
and,  with  BL  taken  as  common  height, 

NL  :  LA  :  :  rect.  NL,LB  :  rect.  AL,LB. 

And  therefore 

rect.  MK,KA  :  rect.  BK,KA  :  :  rect.  NL,LB  :  rect.  ALyLB. 

And  alternately 

rect.  MK , KA  :  rect.  NLyLB  :  :  rect.  BK,KA  :  rect.  AL}LB  (Eucl.  v.  16). 


And 

therefore 

rect.  AK,  KM = rect.  BL,  LN ; 

therefore 

rect.  BK, KA  =  rect.  AL,LB; 

AK  =  LB.1 

But  also 

' 

and  therefore 

AC  =  CB, 

and  so  also 

ICC  =  CL) 

GX  =  XH. 

^he  intermediary  steps  to  this  conclusion  are  as  follows.  If 

rect.  BK,  KA  =rect.  AL,  LB 


then 

or 

and  componendo 

BK  :  LB  : :  AL  :  KA, 

BA  +AK  :  LB::  BA +LB  :  AK 

BA  A  AKA- LB  :  LB::  BA+LB+AK  :  AK. 

626  APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 

Therefore  the  straight  line  GH  has  been  bisected  by  the  straight  line  XCD ;  and 
is  parallel  to  the  straight  line  AB.  Therefore  the  straight  line  XCD  is  a  diam¬ 
eter  and  conjugate  to  the  straight  line  AB  (Defs.  4,  6). 

Second  Definitions 

9.  Let  the  midpoint  of  the  diameter  of  both  the  hyperbola  and  the  ellipse 
be  called  the  center  of  the  section,  and  let  the  straight  line  drawn  from  the 
center  to  meet  the  section  be  called  the  radius  of  the  section. 

10.  And  likewise  let  the  midpoint  of  the  transverse  side  of  the  opposite 
sections  be  called  the  center. 

11.  And  let  the  straight  line  drawn  from  the  center  parallel  to  an  ordinate, 
being  a  mean  proportional  to  the  sides  of  the  figure  (to  eidos)  and  bisected  by 
the  center,  be  called  the  second  diameter. 

Proposition  17 

If  in  a  section  of  a  cone  a  straight  line  is  drawn  from  the  vertex  of  the  line ,  and 
parallel  to  an  ordinate,  it  will  fall  outside  the  section  (Cf.  Eucl.  iii.  16). 

Let  there  be  a  section  of  a  cone,  whose  diameter  is  the  straight  line  AB. 

I  say  that  the  straight  line  drawn  from  the  vertex, 
that  is  from  the  point  A,  parallel  to  an  ordinate,  will 
fall  outside  the  section. 

For  if  possible,  let  it  fall  within  as  AC.  Since  then  a 
point  C  has  been  taken  at  random  on  a  section  of  a 
cone,  therefore  the  straight  line  drawn  from  the  point 
C  within  the  section  parallel  to  an  ordinate  will  meet 
the  diameter  AB  and  will  be  bisected  by  it  (i.  7). 

Therefore  the  straight  line  AC  produced  will  be  bisect¬ 
ed  by  the  straight  fine  AB.  And  this  is  absurd.  For 
the  straight  line  AC,  if  produced,  will  fall  outside  the 
section  (i.  10).  Therefore  the  straight  line  drawn  from 
the  point  A  parallel  to  an  ordinate  will  not  fall  within 
the  line;  therefore  it  will  fall  outside;  and  therefore  it 
is  tangent  to  the  section. 


Proposition  18 

If  a  straight  line,  meeting  a  section  of  a  cone  and  produced  both  ways,  falls  outside 
the  section ,  and  some  point  is  taken  within  the  section,  and  through  it  a  parallel 
to  the  straight  line  meeting  the  section  is  drawn,  the  parallel  so  drawn ,  if  produced 
both  ways,  will  meet  the  section. 

Let  there  be  a  section  of  a  cone  and 
the  straight  line  AFB  meeting  it,  and 
let  it  fall,  wiien  produced  both  ways,  out¬ 
side  the  section.  And  let  some  point  C  be 
taken  within  the  section,  and  through  C 
let  the  straight  line  CD  be  drawm  parallel 
to  the  straight  fine  AB. 

I  say  that  the  straight  line  CD  pro¬ 
duced  both  w^ays  will  meet  the  section. 

For  let  some  point  E  be  taken  on  the 


CONICS  I  627 

section,  and  let  the  straight  line  EF  be  joined.  And  since  the  straight  line  AB 
is  parallel  to  CD,  and  some  straight  line  EF  meets  AB,  therefore  CD  produced 
will  also  meet  EF .  And  if  it  meets  EF  between  the  points  E  and  F,  it  is  evi¬ 
dent  that  it  also  meets  the  section,  but  if  beyond  the  point  E,  that  it  will  first 
meet  the  section.  Therefore  CD  produced  to  the  side  of  points  D  and  E  meets 
the  section.  Then  likewise  we  could  show  that,  produced  to  the  side  of  points 
F  and  B,  it  also  meets  it.  Therefore  the  straight  line  CD  produced  both  ways 
will  meet  the  section. 


Proposition  19 

In  every  section  of  a  cone ,  any  straight  line  drawn  from  the  diameter  parallel  to 
an  ordinate,  will  meet  the  section . 

Let  there  be  a  section  of  a  cone  wrhose  diameter  is  the  straight  line  AB,  and 
let  some  point  B  be  taken  on  the  diameter,  and 
through  B  let  the  straight  line  BC  be  drawn  parallel 
to  an  ordinate. 

I  say  that  the  straight  line  BC  produced  will 
meet  the  section. 

For  let  some  point  D  be  taken  on  the  section.  But 
A  is  also  on  the  section;  therefore  the  straight  line 
joined  from  A  to  D  will  fall  within  the  section  (i. 

10).  And  since  the  straight  line  drawn  from  A  paral¬ 
lel  to  an  ordinate  falls  outside  the  section  (i.  17), 
and  the  straight  line  AD  meets  it,  and  the  straight  line  BC  is  parallel  to  the 
ordinate,  therefore  BC  will  also  meet  AD.  And  if  it  meets  AD  between  the 
points  A  and  D,  it  is  evident  that  it  will  also  meet  the  section,  but,  if  beyond 
point  D  as  at  E,  that  it  will  first  meet  the  section.  Therefore  the  straight  line 
drawn  from  B  parallel  to  an  ordinate  will  meet  the  section. 

Proposition  20 

If  in  a  parabola  two  straight  lines  are  dropped  ordinatewise  to  the  diameter,  the 
squares  on  them  will  be  to  each  other  as  the  straight  lines  cut  off  by  them  on  the 
diameter  beginning  from  the  vertex1  are  to  each  other. 

Let  there  be  a  parabola  whose  diameter  is  the  straight 
line  AB,  and  let  some  points  C  and  D  be  taken  on  it, 
and  from  the  points  C  and  D  let  the  straight  lines  CE 
and  DF  be  dropped  ordinatewise  to  AB. 

I  say  that 

sq.  DF  :  sq.  CE  :  :  FA  :  AE. 

For  let  AG  be  the  parameter;  therefore 
sq.  DF  =  rect.  FA, AG, 

and 

sq.  CE  =  rect.  EA,AG  (i.  11). 

Therefore 

sq.  DF  :  sq.  CE  :  :  rect.  FA, AG  :  rect.  EA,AG. 

But 

rect.  FA,  AG  :  rect.  EA,AG  :  :  FA  :  AE  (Fuel.  vi.  1); 

1  These  are  usually  called  “abscissas”  from  the  Latin  abscindere, 


to  cut  off. 


628  APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 

and  therefore 

sq.  DF  :  sq.  CE  :  :  FA  :  AE. 

Proposition  21 

If  in  an  hyperbola  or  ellipse  or  in  the  circumference  of  a  circle  straight  lines  are 
dropped  ordinatewise  to  the  diameter ,  the  squares  on  them  will  be  to  the  areas  con¬ 
tained  by  the  straight  lines  cut  off  by  them  beginning  from  the  ends  of  the  transverse 
side  of  the  figure ,  as  the  upright  side  of  the  figure  is  to  the  transverse ,  and  to  each 
other  as  the  areas  contained  by  the  straight  lines  cut  off  ( abscissas ),  as  we  have  said. 
Let  there  be  an  hyperbola  or  ellipse  or  circumference  of  a  circle  whose  diam¬ 


eter  is  AB  and  whose  parameter  is  the  straight  line  AC,  and  let  the  straight 
lines  DE  and  FG  be  dropped  ordinatewise  to  the  diameter. 


sq.  FG  :  sq.  DE  :  :  rect.  AG,GB  :  rect.  AE,EB . 


For  let  the  straight  line  BC  determining  the  figure  be  joined,  and  through 
E  and  G  let  the  straight  lines  EH  and  GK  be  drawn  parallel  to  the  straight  line 
AC.  Therefore 


629 


CONICS  I 


And  since 


sq.  FG  =  rect.  KG,GA 
sq.  DE  =  rect.  HE,EA  (i.  12,13). 


KG  :  GB  :  :CA  :  AB ; 
and,  with  AG  taken  as  common  height, 

KG  :GB::  rect.  KG,GA  :  rect.  BG,GA, 

therefore 

CA  :  AB  :  :  rect.  KG,GA  :  rect.  BG,GA. 


or 

CA  :  AB  :  :  sq.  FG  :  rect.  BG,GA . 

Then  also  for  the  same  reasons 

CA  :  AB  :  :  sq.  Z)Z?  :  rect.  BE,EA . 

And  therefore 

sq.  FG  :  rect.  BGyGA  :  :  sq.  J9Z?  :  rect.  BEyEA ; 

alternately 

sq.  FG  :  sq.  DE  :  :  rect.  SG,GA  :  rect.  BEyEA.1 
Proposition  22 

//  a  straight  line  cuts  a  'parabola  or  hyperbola  in  two  pointsy  not  meeting  the  diam¬ 
eter  inside,  it  will y  if  produced,  meet  the  diameter  of  the  section  outside  the  section . 

Let  there  be  a  parabola  or  hyperbola  whose  diameter  is  the  straight  line  AB , 
and  let  some  straight  line  cut  the  section  in  two  points  C  and  D . 


I  say  that  the  straight  line  DC,  if  produced,  will  meet  the  straight  line  AB 
outside  the  section. 

For  let  the  straight  lines  CE  and  DB  be  dropped  ordinatewise  from  C  and 
D;  and  first  let  the  section  be  a  parabola.  Since  then  in  the  parabola 
sq.  CE  :  sq.  DB  :  :  EA  :  AB  (i.  20), 

and 

EA>AB, 

lEutocius  commenting  says:  “It  is  to  be  noted  that  the  parameter,  that  is  the  upright  side, 
in  the  case  of  the  circle  is  equal  to  the  diameter.  For  if 

sq.  DE  :  rect.  AE,  EB  :  :  CA ,  ABt 
and  only  in  the  case  of  the  circle 

sq.  DE  =  rect.  AE,  EB , 

therefore  also  CA=AB. 

“And  this  must  also  be  noted  that  the  ordinates  on  the  circumference  of  the  circle  are  in 
every  case  perpendicular  to  the  diameter  and  are  in  a  straight  line  with  the  parallels  to  AC 
(Eucl.  hi.  3,  4).” 


630 

therefore  also 


APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 


And  so  also 


sq.  CE>  sq.  DB  (Eucl.  v.  14). 
CE>DB. 


And  they  are  parallel;  therefore  CD  produced  will  meet  the  diameter  AB  out¬ 
side  the  section  (i.  10;  Eucl.  i.  33). 

But  then  let  it  be  an  hyperbola.  Since  then  in  the  hyperbola 

sq.  CE  :  sq.  DB  :  :  rect.  FE,EA  :  rect.  FB,BA  (i.  21), 
therefore  also 


sq.  CE>  sq.  DB. 

And  they  are  parallel;  therefore  the  straight  line  CD  produced  will  meet  the 
diameter  of  the  section  outside  the  section. 


Proposition  23 

If  a  straight  line  lying  between  the  two  ( conjugate )  diameters 1  cuts  the  ellipse,  it 
will ,  when  produced ,  meet  each  of  the  diameters  outside  the  section . 

Let  there  be  an  ellipse  whose  diameters  are  the 
straight  lines  AB  and  CD  (i.  15),  and  let  some 
straight  line  EF  lying  between  the  diameters  AB  and 
CD  cut  the  section. 

I  say  that  the  straight  line  EF,  when  produced, 
will  meet  each  of  the  straight  lines  AB  and  CD  out¬ 
side  the  section. 

For  let  the  straight  lines  GE  and  FH  be  dropped 
ordinatewise  from  E  and  F  to  AB;  and  the  straight 
lines  EK  and  FL  ordinatewise  to  CD.  Therefore 

sq.  EG  :  sq.  FH  :  :  rect.  BG,GA  :  rect.  BH,HA  (i.  21) 

and 

sq.  FL  :  sq.  EK  :  :  rect.  DL,LC  :  rect.  DK,KC  (i.  21). 

And 

rect.  BG,  GA  >  rect.  BH,  HA ; 

for  the  point  G  is  nearer  the  midpoint  (Eucl.  vi.  27;  ii.  5);  and 

rect.  DL,LC>  rect.  DK,KC; 

therefore  also 

sq.  GE>  sq.  FH, 

and 

sq.  FL> sq.  EK; 

therefore  also 

GE>FH, 

and 

FL>EK. 

And  GE  is  parallel  to  FH,  and  FL  to  EK;  therefore  the  straight  line  EF  pro¬ 
duced  will  meet  each  of  the  diameters  AB  and  CD  outside  the  section  (i.  10; 
Eucl.  i.  33). 

JSo  far  Apollonius,  by  theorems  i.  6,  13,  15,  has  shown,  for  every  ellipse,  the  existence  of 
at  least  one  diameter  and  of  one  set  of  conjugate  diameters,  but  of  no  more.  He  can  therefore 
now  speak  of  “the  two  diameters.”  Later  on  he  will  show  the  existence  of  an  infinite  number 
of  such  sets.  The  same  is  true  of  hyperbolas. 


CONICS  I 


631 


Proposition  24 

If  a  straight  line ,  meeting  a  'parabola  or  hyperbola  at  a  point ,  when  produced  both 
ways ,  /aZZs  outside  the  section ,  then  it  will  meet  the  diameter. 

Let  there  be  a  parabola  or  hyperbola 
whose  diameter  is  the  straight  line  AB ,  and 
let  the  straight  line  CDE  meet  it  at  D ,  and, 
when  produced  both  ways,  let  it  fall  outside 
the  section. 

I  say  that  it  will  meet  the  diameter  AB. 
For  let  some  point  F  be  taken  on  the  sec¬ 
tion,  and  let  the  straight  line  DF  be  joined; 
therefore  DF  produced  will  meet  the  diameter 
of  the  section  (i.  22).  Let  it  meet  it  at  A ;  and 
the  straight  line  CDE  lies  between  the  section 
and  the  straight  line  FDA.  And  therefore  the 
line  CDE  produced  will  meet  the  diameter 
outside  the  section. 

Proposition  25 

If  a  straight  line ,  meeting  an  ellipse  between  the  two  {conjugate)  diameters  and 
produced  both  ways ,  falls  outside  the  section ,  it  will  meet  each  of  the  diameters. 
Let  there  be  an  ellipse  whose  diameters  are  the  straight  lines  AB  and  CD 

(i.  15),  and  let  EF,  some  straight  line  between  the 
two  diameters,  meet  it  at  G ,  and  produced  both 
ways  fall  outside  the  section. 

I  say  that  the  straight  line  EF  will  meet  each  of 
the  straight  lines  AB  and  CD. 

Let  the  straight  lines  GH  and  GK  be  dropped 
ordinatewise  to  the  straight  lines  AB  and  CD  re¬ 
spectively.  Since  GK  is  parallel  to  AB  (i.  15),  and 
some  straight  line  GF  has  met  GK,  therefore  it  will 
also  meet  AB.  Then  likewise  EF  will  also  meet  CD. 


Proposition  26 

If  in  a  parabola  or  hyperbola  a  straight  line  is  drawn  parallel  to  the  diameter  of  the 


section ,  it  will  meet  the  section  in  one 
point  only . 

Let  there  first  be  a  parabola  whose 
diameter  is  the  straight  line  ABC ,  and 
whose  upright  side  is  the  straight  line 
AD,  and  let  the  straight  line  EF  be 
drawn  parallel  to  AB. 

I  say  that  the  straight  line  EF  pro¬ 
duced  will  meet  the  section. 

For  let  some  point  E  be  taken  on 
EF,  and  from  E  let  the  straight  line 
EG  be  drawn  parallel  to  an  ordinate, 
and  let 


632 


APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 


rect.  Di,4C>sq.  GE , 

and  from  C  let  CH  be  erected  ordinatewise  (i.  19).  Therefore 
sq.  HC  =  rect.  DA, AC  (i.  11). 


But 


therefore 


rect.  DA,AC> sq.  EG) 


therefore 


sq.  HC >sq.  EG) 


HC>  EG. 

And  they  are  parallel;  therefore  the  straight  line  EF  produced  cuts  the  straight 
line  HC)  and  so  it  will  also  meet  the  section. 

Let  it  meet  it  at  the  point  K . 

Then  I  say  also  that  it  will  meet  it  in  the  one  point  K  only. 

For  if  possible,  let  it  also  meet  it  in  the  point  L.  Since  then  a  straight  line 
cuts  a  parabola  in  two  points,  if  produced  it  will  meet  the  diameter  of  the 
section  (i.  22).  And  this  is  absurd,  for  it  is  supposed  parallel.  Therefore  the 
straight  line  EF  produced  meets  the  section  in  only  one  point. 

Next  let  the  section  be  an  hyperbola,  and  the  straight  line  AB  the  transverse 


side  of  the  figure,  and  the  straight  line  AD  the  upright  side,  and  let  the  straight 
line  DB  be  joined  and  produced.  Then  with  the  same  things  being  constructed, 
let  the  straight  line  CM  be  drawn  from  C  parallel  to  AD.  Since  then 
rect.  MC,CA> rect.  DA, AC, 

and 

sq.  CH  =  rect.  MC,CA, 

and 

rect.  DA,AC>sq.  GE, 

therefore  also 


And  so  also 


sq.  CH>sq.  GE. 


CH>GE, 

and  the  same  things  as  in  the  first  case  will  come  to  pass. 


CONICS  I 


633 


Proposition  27 

7/  a  straight  line  cuts  the  diameter  of  a  parabola ,  then  produced  both  ways  it  will 
meet  the  section. 

Let  there  be  a  parabola  whose  diameter  is  the  straight  line  AB,  and  let  some 
straight  line  CD  cut  it  within  the  section. 

I  say  that  the  straight  line  CD  produced 
both  ways  will  meet  the  section. 

For  let  some  straight  line  AE  be  drawn 
from  A  parallel  to  an  ordinate;  therefore  the 
straight  line  AE  will  fall  outside  the  section 
(i.  17). 

Then  either  the  straight  line  CD  is  parallel 
to  the  straight  line  AE  or  not. 

If  now  it  is  parallel  to  it,  it  has  been  drop¬ 
ped  ordinatewise,  so  that  produced  both  ways 
it  will  meet  the  section  (i.  18). 

Next  let  it  not  be  parallel  to  AE,  but  pro¬ 
duced  let  it  meet  AE  at  E.  Then  it  is  evident 
that  it  meets  the  section  the  side  the  point  E 
is  on;  for  if  it  meets  AE,  a  fortiori  it  cuts  the 
section. 

I  say  that,  produced  the  other  way,  it  also  meets  the  section.  For  let  the 
straight  line  MA  be  the  parameter  and  the  straight  line  GF  an  ordinate,  and 
let 

sq.  AD  — red.  BA,AF  (Eucl.  vi.  11), 

and  let  the  straight  line  BK,  parallel  to  the  ordinate,  meet  the  straight  line 
DC  at  C .  Since 

rect.  BA,AF  =  sq.  AD, 


hence 

and  therefore, 

Therefore  also 

But  since 

hence 

But 

and 

Therefore 


AB  :  AD  :  :  AD  :  AF; 

BD  :  DF  :  :  AB  :  AD  (Eucl.  v.  19). 
sq.  BD  :  sq.  DF  :  :  sq.  AB  :  sq.  AD. 
sq.  AD  =  rect.  BA,AF , 

AB  :  AF  :  :  sq.  AB  :  sq.  AD  :  :  sq.  BD  :  sq.  FD . 
sq.  BD  :  sq.  DF  :  :  sq.  BC  :  sq.  FG, 

AB  :  AF  :  :  rect.  BA,  AM  :  rect.  FA,  AM. 


and  alternately 


sq.  BC  :  sq.  FG  :  :  rect.  BA,  AM  :  rect.  FA, AM; 


sq.  BC  :  rect.  BA,  AM  :  :  sq.  FG  :  rect.  FA,  AM. 
sq.  EG  =  rect,  FA, AM 


But 


634  APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 

because  of  the  section  (i.  11).  Therefore  also 

sq.  £C  =  rect.  BA, AM. 

But  the  straight  line  AM  is  the  upright  side,1  and  the  straight  line  BC  is  paral¬ 
lel  to  an  ordinate.  Therefore  the  section  passes  through  the  point  C  (i.  20),  and 
the  straight  line  CD  meets  the  section  at  the  point  C . 


Proposition  28 

If  a  straight  line  touches  one  of  the  opposite  sections ,  and  some  point  is  taken 
within  the  other  section ,  and  through  it  a  straight  line  is  drawn  parallel  to  the 
tangent ,  then  produced  both  ways ,  it  will  meet  the  section. 

Let  there  be  opposite  sections  whose  diameter  is  the  straight  line  AB,  and 
let  some  straight  line  CD  touch  the  section  A ,  and  let  some  point  E  be  taken 
within  the  other  section,  and  through  E  let  the  straight  line  EF  be  drawn 
parallel  to  the  straight  line  CD. 

I  say  that  the  straight  line  EF  produced  both  ways  will  meet  the  section. 


Since  then  it  has  been  proved  that  the  straight  line  CD  produced  will  meet 
the  diameter  AB  (i.  24),  and  EF  is  parallel  to  it,  therefore  EF  produced  will 
meet  the  diameter.  Let  it  meet  it  at  G,  and  let  AH  be  made  equal  to  GB,  and 
through  H  let  HK  (i.  18)  be  drawn  parallel  to  EF,  and  let  the  straight  line  KL 
be  dropped  ordinatewise,  and  let  GM  be  made  equal  to  LH ,  and  let  the  straight 
line  MN  be  drawn  parallel  to  an  ordinate  and  let  GN  be  further  produced  in 
the  same  straight  line.  And  since  KL  is  parallel  to  MN,  and  KH  to  GN,  and 
LM  is  one  straight  line,  triangle  KHL  is  similar  to  triangle  HMN.  And 

LH  =  GM ; 

therefore 


And  so  also 


KL  =  MN. 


And  since 


sq.  KL  =  sq.  MN. 


and 


LH  =  GM, 


and  AB  is  common,  therefore 


AH  =  BG, 
BL=AM ; 


JThe  text  reads  TrXayLa  which  is  impossible.  I  have  corrected  to  * opOLa . 


CONICS  I 


635 


therefore 

reet.  BL,  LA  =  rect.  AM, MB. 

Therefore 

rect.  BL,LA  :  sq.  LK  :  :  rect.  AM,  MB  :  sq.  MN. 

And 

rect.  BL,LA  :  sq.  LK  :  :  the  transverse  :  the  upright  (i.  21); 
therefore  also 

rect.  AM, MB  :  sq.  MN  :  :  the  transverse  :  the  upright. 

Therefore  the  point  N  is  on  the  section.  Therefore  the  straight  line  EF  pro¬ 
duced  will  meet  the  section  at  the  point  N  (i.  21). 

Likewise  then  it  could  be  shown.  that  produced  to  the  other  side  it  will  meet 
the  section. 

Proposition  29 

If  in  opposite  sections  a  straight  line  is  drawn  through  the  center  to  meet  either  of 
the  sections ,  then  produced  it  will  cut  the  other  section. 

Let  there  be  opposite  sections  wiiose  diameter  is  the  straight  line  AB,  and 
wiiose  center  is  the  point  C,  and  let  the  straight  line  CD  cut  the  section  AD. 


I  say  that  it  will  also  cut  the  other  section. 

For  let  the  straight  line  ED  be  dropped  ordinatewise,  and  let  the  straight 
line  BF  be  made  equal  to  the  straight  line  AE,  and  let  the  straight  line  FG  be 
drawn  ordinatewise  (i.  19).  And  since 

EA  =  BF, 

and  AB  is  common,  therefore 

rect.  BE,EA  =rect.  BF,FA. 

And  since 

rect.  BE,EA  :  sq.  DE  :  :  the  transverse  :  the  upright  (i.  21), 

but  also 

rect.  BF,FA  :  sq.  FG  :  :  the  transverse  :  the  upright  (i.  21), 
therefore  also 

rect.  BE,EA  :  sq.  DE  :  :  rect.  BF,  FA  :  sq.  FG  (i.  14). 

But 

rect.  BE,EA=  rect.  BF,FA; 

therefore  also 

sq.  DE  =  sq.  FG. 

Since  then 

EC  =  CF , 


636 

and 


APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 


DE  =  FG , 

and  EF  is  a  straight  line,  and  ED  is  parallel  to  FG,  therefore  DG  is  also  a 
straight  line  (Eucl.  vi.  32).  And  therefore  CD  will  also  cut  the  other  section. 

Proposition  30 

If  in  an  ellipse  or  in  opposite  sections  a  straight  line  is  drawn  in  both  directions 
from  the  center ,  meeting  the  section ,  it  will  be  bisected  at  the  center . 

Let  there  be  an  ellipse  or  opposite  sections,  and  their  diameter  the  straight 
line  AB,  and  their  center  C,  and  through  C  let  some  straight  line  DCE  be 
drawn  (i.  29). 


I  say  that  the  straight  line  CD  is  equal  to  the  straight  line  CE. 

For  let  the  straight  lines  DF  and  EG  be  drawn  ordinatewise.  And  since 
rect.  BF,FA  :  sq.  FD  :  :  the  transverse  :  the  upright  (i.  21), 

but  also 

rect.  AG,GB  :  sq.  GE  :  :  the  transverse  :  the  upright  (i.  21), 
therefore  also 

rect.  BFyFA  :  sq.  FD  :  :  rect.  AGyGB  :  sq.  GE  (i.  14). 

And  alternately 

rect.  BFyFA  :  rect.  AGyGB  :  :  sq.  FD  :  sq.  GE. 

But 

sq.  FD  :  sq.  GE  :  :  sq.  FC  :  sq.  CG  (Eucl.  vi.  4); 
therefore  alternately 

rect.  BFyFA  :  sq.  FC  :  :  rect.  AGyGB  :  sq.  CG. 

Therefore  also,  componendo  in  the  case  of  the  ellipse,  and  inversely  and  con - 
vertendo  in  the  case  of  the  opposite  sections  (Eucl.  v.  Defs.  14,13,16), 
sq.  AC  :  sq.  CF  :  :  sq.  BC  :  sq.  CG  (Eucl.  n.  5,6); 
and  alternately.  But 


therefore  also 


sq.  C£  =  sq.  AC) 
sq.  CG  —  sq.  CF. 


Therefore 


CONICS  I 


637 


CG  =  CF . 

And  the  straight  lines  DF  and  GE  are  parallel;  therefore  also 

DC  =  CE. 


Proposition  31 

If  on  the  transverse  side  of  the  figure  of  an  hyperbola  some  point  be  taken  cutting 
off  from  the  vertex  of  the  section  not  less  than  half  of  the  transverse  side  of  the  figure, 
and  a  straight  line  be  drawn  from  it  to  meet  the  section ,  then ,  when  further  pro¬ 
duced,  it  will  fall  within  the  section  on  the  near  side  of  the  section . 

Let  there  be  an  hyperbola  whose  diameter  is  the  straight  line  AB,  and  let  C 
some  point  on  the  diameter  be  taken  cutting  off  the  straight  line  CB  not  less 


than  half  of  AB,  and  let  some  straight  line  CD  be  drawn  to  meet  the  section. 
I  say  that  the  straight  line  CD  produced  will  fall  within  the  section. 

For  if  possible,  let  it  fall  outside  the  section  as  the  line  CDE  (i.  24),  and  from 
E  a  point  at  random  let  the  straight  line  EG  be  dropped  ordinatewise,  also  DH ; 
and  first  let 

AC  =  CB . 

And  since 

sq.  EG  :  sq.  DH >sq.  FG  :  sq.  DH  (Eucl.  v.  8), 

but 


sq.  EG  :  sq.  DH  :  :  sq.  CG  :  sq.  CH 
because  of  EG’s  being  parallel  to  DH,  and 

sq.  FG  :  sq.  DH  :  :  rect.  AG,GB  :  rect.  AH,HB 
because  of  the  section  (i.  21), 
therefore 

sq.  CG  :  sq.  CH>  rect.  AG,GB  :  rect.  AH,HB} 

Alternately  therefore 

sq.  CG  :  rect.  AG,GB> sq.  CH  :  rect.  AH,HB 
Therefore  separando 

sq.  CB  :  rect.  AG,GB> sq.  CB  :  rect.  AH,HB\ 
and  this  is  impossible  (Eucl.  v.  8).  Therefore  the  straight  line  CDE  will  not 
fall  outside  the  section;  therefore  inside.  And  for  this  reason  the  straight  line 
from  some  one  of  the  points  on  the  straight  line  AC  will  a  fortiori  fall  inside, 
since  it  will  also  fall  inside  CD. 


lThe  rules  governing  operations  on  inequalities  in  proportions  are  not  developed  by 
Euclid  in  Book  V  of  the  Elements.  But  they  can  be  deduced  on  Euclid’s  principles. 


638 


APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 


Proposition  32 

If  a  straight  line  is  drawn  through  the  vertex  of  a  section  of  a  cone}  parallel  to  an 
ordinate ,  then  it  touches  the  section ,  and  another  straight  line  will  not  fall  into  the 
space  between  the  conic  section  and  this  straight  line. 

Let  there  be  a  section  of  a  cone,  first  the  so-called  parabola  whose  diameter 
is  the  straight  line  AB ,  and  from  A  let  the  straight  line  AC  be  drawn  parallel 
to  an  ordinate. 

Now  it  has  been  shown  that  it  falls  outside  the 
section  (i.  17). 

Then  I  say  that  also  another  straight  line  will  not 
fall  into  the  space  between  the  straight  line  AC 
and  the  section. 

For  if  possible,  let  it  fall  in,  as  the  straight  line 
AD ,  and  let  some  point  D  be  taken  on  it  at  ran¬ 
dom,  and  let  the  straight  line  DE  be  dropped  or- 
dinatewise,  and  let  the  straight  line  AF  be  the 
parameter  of  the  ordinates.  And  since 
sq.  DE  :  sq.  EA  >sq.  GE  :  sq.  EA  (Eucl.  v.  8), 
and 

sq.  GE  =  rect.  FA,AE  (i.  11), 
therefore  also 

sq.  DE  :  sq.  EA> rect.  FA,AE  :  sq.  EA, 
or 

>FA  :  EA. 

Let  it  be  contrived  then  that 

sq.  DE  :  sq.  EA  : :  FA  :  HA  (Eucl.  vi.  20,11), 
and  through  the  point  H  let  the  straight  line  HLK  be  drawn  parallel  to  ED. 
Since  then 

sq.  DE  :  sq.  EA  :  :  FA  :  AH  :  :  rect.  FA,  AH  :  sq.  AH, 

and 

sq.  DE  :  sq.  EA  :  :  sq.  KH  :  sq.  HA  (Eucl.  vi.  22), 

and 

sq.  HL  =  rect.  FA,  AH  (i.  11), 

therefore  also 

sq.  KH  :  sq.  HA  :  :  sq.  LH  :  sq.  HA. 

Therefore 

KH  =  HL ; 

and  this  is  absurd.  Therefore  another  straight  line  will  not  fall  into  the  space 
between  the  straight  line  AC  and  the  section. 

Next  let  the  section  be  an  hyperbola  or  ellipse  or  circumference  of  a  circle 
whose  diameter  is  the  straight  line  AB,  and  whose  upright  side  is  the  straight 
line  AF;  and  let  the  straight  line  BF  be  joined  and  produced,  and  from  the 
point  A  let  the  straight  line  AC  be  drawn  parallel  to  an  ordinate. 

Now  it  has  been  shown  that  it  falls  outside  the  section  (i.  17). 

Then  I  say  that  also  another  straight  line  will  not  fall  into  the  space  be¬ 
tween  the  straight  line  AC  and  the  section. 

For  if  possible,  let  it  fall,  as  the  straight  line  AD,  and  let  some  point  D  be 
taken  at  random  on  it,  and  from  it  let  the  straight  line  DE  be  dropped  ordi- 


CONICS  I  639 

natewise,  and  through  E  let  the  straight  line  EM  be  drawn  parallel  to  the 
straight  line  AF. 


And  since 

sq.  GE  =  rect.  AE , EM  (i.  12,13) 
let  it  be  contrived  that 


rect.  AE,EN  =  sq.  DE , 

and  let  the  straight  line  joining  AN  cut  the  straight  line  FM  at  X,  and  through 
X  let  the  straight  line  XH  be  drawn  parallel  to  FA,  and  through  H,  HLK 
parallel  to  AC.  Since  then 

sq.  DE  =  rect.  AM,EN, 

hence 


and  therefore 


NE  :  ED  :  :  DE  :  EA ; 


But 


NE  :  EA  :  :  sq.  DE  :  sq.  EA  (Eucl.  vi.  20). 


and 


NE  :  EA  :  :  XII  :  IIA, 


Therefore 


sq.  DE  :  sq.  EA  :  :  sq.  KII  :  sq.  IIA. 
XII  :  IIA  :  :  sq.  KII  :  sq.  IIA  ; 


640  APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 

therefore 

XH  :  HK  :  :  KH  :  HA  (Eucl.  yi.  20). 

Therefore 

sq.  KH  =  rect.  AH,HX) 

but  also 

sq.  LH  =  rect.  AH,  HX 
because  of  the  section  (i.  12,13); 
therefore 

sq.  KH  =  sq.  HL ; 

and  this  is  absurd.  Therefore  another  straight  line  will  not  fall  into  the  space 
between  the  straight  line  AC  and  the  section. 

Proposition  33 

If  in  a  'parabola  some  point  is  taken ,  and  from  it  an  ordinate  is  dropped  to  the 
diameter ,  and ,  to  the  straight  line  cut  off  by  it  on  the  diameter  from  the  vertex ,  a 
straight  line  in  the  same  straight  line  from  its  extremity  is  made  equal ,  then  the 
straight  line  joined  from  the  point  thus  resulting  to  the  point  taken  will  touch  the 
section. 

Let  there  be  a  parabola  whose  diameter  is  the 
straight  line  AB,  and  let  the  straight  line  CD  be 
dropped  ordinatewise,  and  let  the  straight  line 
AE  be  made  equal  to  the  straight  line  ED,  and 
let  the  straight  line  AC  be  joined. 

I  say  that  the  straight  line  AC  produced  will 
fall  outside  the  section. 

For  if  possible,  let  it  fall  within,  as  the  straight 
line  CF,  and  let  the  straight  line  GB  be  dropped 
ordinatewise.  And  since 

sq.  BG  :  sq.  CD>  sq.  FB  :  sq.  CD, 
but 


and 

therefore 

But 


sq.  FB  :  sq.  CD  :  :  sq.  BA  :  sq.  AD, 
sq.  BG  :  sq.  CD  :  :  BE  :  DE  (i.  20), 

BE  :  DE>  sq.  BA  :  sq.  AD. 

BE  :  DE  :  :  4  rect.  BE ,  EA  :  4  rect.  DE,  EA ; 


therefore  also 

4  rect.  BE,EA  :  4  rect.  DE,EA> sq.  AB  :  sq.  AD. 

Therefore  alternately 

4  rect.  BE,EA  :  sq.  AB> 4  rect.  DE,EA  :  sq.  AD) 
and  this  is  absurd;  for  since 

AE  =  DE, 

hence 

4  rect.  DE,EA  =sq.  AD. 

But 

4  rect.  BE ,E A  <sq.  AB) 

for  E  is  not  the  midpoint  of  AB  (Eucl.  vi.  27 ;  n.  5).  Therefore  the  straight  line 
AC  does  not  fall  within  the  section;  therefore  it  touches  it. 


CONICS  I 


641 


Proposition  34 

If  on  an  hyperbola  or  ellipse  or  circumference  of  a  circle  some  point  is  taken,  and 
from  it  a  straight  line  is  dropped  ordinaiewise  to  the  diameter ,  and  whatever  ratio 
the  straight  lines  cut  off  by  the  ordinate  from  the  ends  of  the  figure’s  transverse  side 
have  to  each  other ,  that  ratio  have  the  segments  of  the  transverse  side  to  each  other 
so  that  the  segments  from  the  vertex  are  corresponding ,  then  the  straight  line  joining 
the  point  taken  on  the  transverse  side  and  that  taken  on  the  section  will  touch  the 
section . 

Let  there  be  an  hyperbola  or  ellipse  or  circumference  of  a  circle  whose  diam- 


/ 


eter  is  the  straight  line  AB,  and  let  some  point  C  be  taken  on  the  section,  and 
from  C  let  the  straight  line  CD  be  drawn  ordinatewise,  and  let  it  be  contrived 
that 

BD  :  DA  :  :  BE  :  EA,1 
and  let  the  straight  line  EC  be  joined. 

I  say  that  the  straight  line  CE  touches  the  section. 

irThis  construction  is  easy.  In  the  case  of  the  hyperbola,  componendo. 

BD+DA  :  DA  :  :  BA  :  E A ; 
and  in  the  case  of  the  ellipse,  separando 

BD-DA  :  DA  :  :  BA  :  EA. 

This  proportion  is  the  same  as  the  harmonic  proportion  defined  by  Nicomachus  in  fiis 
Introduction  to  Arithmetic.  For  if 

BD  :  DA  :  :  BE  :  EA, 

then  BD+DA  :  BD  :  :  BA  :  BE 

and  BA  :  BD  : :  BE-EA  :  BE. 

Hence  BD+DA  :  BA  :  :  BA  :  BE-EA, 

Rut  DA  =  BD  -  BA ,  EA  -  BA—  BE. 

Therefore  2 BD-BA  :  BA  :  :  BA  :  2 BE -BA. 

And  so  BA  is  the  harmonic  mean  between  BD  and  BE. 


642 


APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 


For  if  possible,  let  it  cut  it,  as  the  straight  line  ECF,  and  let  some  point  F 
be  taken  on  it,  and  let  the  straight  line  GFH  be  dropped  ordinatewise,  and  let 
the  straight  lines  AL  and  BK  be  drawn  through  A  and  B  parallel  to  the 
straight  line  EC ,  and  let  the  straight  lines  DC ,  BC ,  and  GC  be  joined  and  pro¬ 
duced  to  the  points  M,  X,  and  K.  And  since 

BD  :  DA  :  :  BE  :  EA, 

but 


and 

therefore 


BD  :  DA  :  :  BK  :  AN, 

BE  :  AE  : :  BC  :  CX  :  :  BK  :  XN  (Eucl.  vi.  4), 


therefore 


BK  :  AN  :  :  BK  :  XN; 


AN  =  NX. 


Therefore 

Therefore 


rect.  AA7,ArX>rect.  AO, OX  (Eucl.  vi.  27;  n.  5). 
NX  :X0>0 A  :  AN.1 


But 

NX  :  XO  : :  KB  :  BM  (Eucl.  vi.  4); 

therefore 

KB  :  BM>OA  :  AN. 

Therefore 

rect.  KB,  AN  >vect.  BM,OA. 

And  so 

rect.  KB,  AN  :  sq.  CE>rect.  BM,OA  :  sq.  CE  (Eucl.  v.  8). 

But 

rect.  KB,  AN  :  sq.  CE  :  :  rect.  BD,DA  :  sq.  DE 
through  the  similarity  of  the  triangles  BKD,  ECD ,  and  NAD,2  and 


1Eutocius,  commenting,  says:  “For  since 

rect.  AA,ATX>rect.  AO,  OX, 
let  rect.  AN,  NX  =  rect.  AO,  XP 

where  XP  is  some  line  such  that  XP>XC; 

therefore  OA  :  AN  : :  NX  :  XP. 

But  NX  :  XO>NX  :  XP  (Eucl.  v.  8) 

and  therefore  NX  :  XO>OA  :  AN. 

“Then  the  converse  is  also  evident  that,  if 

NX  :  XO>OA  :  AN, 

then  rect.  XN,NA> rect.  AO, OX. 

“For  let  it  be  that  OA  :  AN  : :  NX  :  XP, 

where  XP>XO ; 

therefore  rect.  XN,  NA  =rect.  AO,  XP; 

and  so  rect.  XN,NA> rect.  AO,OX.n 

2Eutocius,  commenting,  says:  “Since  then,  because  AN,  EC,  and  KB  are  parallel, 

AN:  EC::  AD:  DE, 
and  EC:  KB:  :  ED  :  DB, 

therefore  ex  aequali  AN  :  KB  : :  AD  :  DB; 

therefore  also  sq.  AN  :  rect.  AN,  KB  : :  sq  .AD  :  rect.  AD,  DB. 

But  sq.  EC  :  sq.  AN  :  :  sq.  ED  :  sq.  AD; 

therefore  ex  aequali  sq.  EC  :  rect.  AN, KB  :  :  sq.  ED  :  rect.  AD,DB ; 
and  inversely  rect.  KB,  AN  :  sq.  EC  :  :  rect.  AD,  DB  :  sq.  ED.” 

A  similar  proof  holds  for  the  proportion  following. 


CONICS  I 

rect.  BM,OA  :  sq.  CE  : :  rect.  BG,GA  :  sq.  GE; 


643 


therefore 

rect.  BD}DA  :  sq.  J9Z?>rect.  BG,GA  :  sq.  GE. 

Therefore  alternately 

rect.  BD}  DA  :  rect.  BG,GA>  sq.  DE  :  sq.  GE. 

But 

rect.  BD}DA  :  rect.  AG,GB  :  :  sq.  CD  :  sq.  GH  (i.  21), 

and 

sq.  DE  :  sq.  EG  :  :  sq.  CD  :  sq.  FG  (Eucl.  vi.  4), 

therefore  also 

sq.  CD  :  sq.  HG>  sq.  CD  :  sq.  FG. 

Therefore 

HG<FG  (Eucl.  v.  10); 

and  this  is  impossible.  Therefore  the  straight  line  EC  does  not  cut  the  section; 
therefore  it  touches  it. 

Proposition  35 

If  a  straight  line  touches  a  parabola ,  meeting  the  diameter  outside  the  section ,  the 
straight  line  drawn  from  the  point  of  contact  ordinatewise  to  the  diameter  will  cut 
off  on  the  diameter  beginning  from  the  vertex  of  the  section  a  straight  line  equal  to 
the  straight  line  between  the  vertex  and  the  tangent ,  and  no  straight  line  will  fall 
into  the  space  between  the  tangent  and  the  section. 

Let  there  be  a  parabola  whose  diameter  is  the  straight  line  AB ,  and  let  the 
straight  line  BC  be  erected  ordinatewise,  and  let  the  straight  line  AC  be  tan¬ 
gent  to  the  section. 

I  say  that  the  straight  line  AG  is  equal  to 
the  straight  line  GB. 

For  if  possible,  let  it  be  unequal  to  it,  and 
let  the  straight  line  GE  be  made  equal  to 
AG,  and  let  the  straight  line  EF  be  erected 
ordinatewise,  and  let  the  straight  line  AF  be 
joined.  Therefore  AF  produced  will  meet  the 
straight  line  AC  (i.  33);  and  this  is  impossi¬ 
ble.  For  two  straight  lines  will  have  the  same 
ends.  Therefore  the  straight  line  AG  is  not 
unequal  to  the  straight  line  GB;  therefore  it 
is  equal. 

Then  I  say  that  no  straight  line  will  fall  into  the  space  between  the  straight 
line  AC  and  the  section. 

For  if  possible,  let  the  straight  line  CD  fall  in  between,  and  let  GE  be  made 
equal  to  GDy  and  let  the  straight  line  EF  be  erected  ordinatewise.  Therefore 
the  straight  line  joined  from  D  to  F  touches  the  section  (i.  33) ;  therefore  pro¬ 
duced  it  will  fall  outside  it.  And  so  it  will  meet  DC,  and  two  straight  lines  will 
have  the  same  ends;  and  this  is  impossible.  Therefore  a  straight  line  will  not 
fall  into  the  space  between  the  section  and  the  straight  line  AC. 

Proposition  36 

If  some  straight  line}  meeting  the  transverse  side  of  the  figure  touches  a?i  hyperbola 
or  ellipse  or  circumference  of  a  circle ,  and  a  straight  line  is  dropped  from  the  point 


APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 


644 

of  contact  ordinatewise  to  the  diameter ,  then  as  the  straight  line  cut  off  by  the  tan¬ 
gent  from  the  end  of  the  transverse  side  is  to  the  straight  line  cut  off  by  the  tangent 
from  the  other  end  of  that  side ,  so  will  the  straight  line  cut  off  by  the  ordinate  from 
the  end  of  the  side  be  to  the  straight  line  cut  off  by  the  ordinate  from  the  other  end  of 
the  side  in  such  a  way  that  the  corresponding  straight  lines  are  continuous;  and 
another  straight  line  will  not  fall  into  the  space  between  the  tangent  and  the  section 
of  the  cone. 

Let  there  be  an  hyperbola  or  ellipse  or  circumference  of  a  circle  whose  diam¬ 
eter  is  the  straight  line  AB ,  and  let  the  straight  line  CD  be  tangent,  and  let  the 
straight  line  CE  be  dropped  ordinatewise. 

I  say  that 

BE  :  EA  :  :  BD  :  DA. 

For  if  it  is  not,  let  it  be 

BD  :  DA  : :  BG  :  GA, 

and  let  the  straight  line  GF  be  erected  ordinatewise;  therefore  the  straight  line 


joined  from  D  to  F  will  touch  the  section  (i.  34);  therefore  produced  it  will 
meet  CD.  Therefore  two  straight  lines  will  have  the  same  ends;  and  this  is 
impossible. 

I  say  that  no  straight  line  will  fall  between  the  section  and  the  straight  line 
CD. 

For  if  possible,  let  it  fall  between,  as  the  straight  line  CH ,  and  let  it  be  con¬ 
trived  that 

BH  :  HA  :  :  BG  :  GA} 

and  let  the  straight  line  GF  be  erected  ordinatewise ;  therefore  the  straight  line 
joined  from  H  to  F,  when  produced,  will  meet  HC  (i.  34).  Therefore  two 
straight  lines  will  have  the  same  ends;  and  this  is  impossible.  Therefore  a 
straight  line  will  not  fall  into  the  space  between  the  section  and  the  straight 
line  CD. 


CONICS  I 


645 


Proposition  37 

If  a  straight  line  touching  an  hyperbola  or  ellipse  or  circumference  of  a  circle  meets 
the  diameter ,  and  from  the  point  of  contact  to  the  diameter  a  straight  line  is  dropped 
ordinatewise ,  then  the  straight  line  cut  off  by  the  ordinate  from  the  center  of  the 
section  with  the  straight  line  cut  off  by  the  tangent  from  the  center  of  the  section  will 
contain  an  area  equal  to  the  square  on  the  radius  of  the  section ,  and  with  the 
straight  line  between  the  ordinate  and  the  tangent  will  contain  an  area  having  the 
ratio  to  the  square  on  the  ordinate  which  the  transverse  has  to  the  upright. 

Let  there  be  an  hyperbola  or  ellipse  or  circumference  of  a  circle  whose  diam¬ 
eter  is  the  straight  line  ABy  and  let  the  straight  line  CD  be  drawn  tangent,  and 
let  the  straight  line  CE  be  dropped  ordinatewise,  and  let  the  point  F  be  the 
center. 

I  say  that 

rect.  DFy  FE  =  sq.  FB, 

and 

rect.  DE  ,EF  :  sq.  EC  :  :  the  transverse  :  the  upright. 

For  since  CD  touches  the  section,  and  CE  has  been  dropped  ordinatewise, 
hence 

AD  :  DB  :  :  AE  :  EB  (i.  36). 

Therefore  componendo 

AD+DB  :  DB  : :  AE+EB  :  EB. 

And  let  the  halves  of  the  antecedents  be  taken  (Eucl.  v.  15) ;  in  the  case  of  the 


hyperbola  we  shall  say :  but 


half  (AE+EB)  =FE, 

and 

half  AB  =  FB; 

therefore 


FE  :EB:  :  FB  :  BD. 


Therefore  convertendo 


FE  :  FB  :  :  FB  :  FD, 


646 

APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 

therefore 

rect.  EF,FD  =  sq.  FB. 

And  since 

FE  :  EB  :  :  FB  :  BD  :  :  AF  :  BD, 

alternately 

AF  :  FE  : :  DB  :  BE; 

componendo 

AE  :EF  :  :DE  :EB; 

and  so 

rect.  AE,EB= rect.  FE,ED. 

But 

rect.  AE  ,EB 

:  sq.  CE  :  :  the  transverse  :  the  upright  (i.  21); 

therefore  also 

rect.  FE,ED  :  sq.  CE  :  :  the  transverse  :  the  upright. 
And  in  the  case  of  the  ellipse  and  of  the  circle  we  shall  say:  but 

half  (AD+DB)=DF, 

and 

therefore 

Therefore  convertendo 
Therefore 
But 
and 


half  AB  =  FB; 

FD  :  DB  :  :  FB  :  BE. 

DF  :  FB  :  :  BF  :  FE. 
rect.  DF,  FE  =  sq.  BF. 

rect.  DF,  FF  =  rect.  DE,EF+ sq.  FE  (Eucl.  n.  3), 


sq.  BF  =  rect.  AE,EB+ sq.  FE  (Eucl.  n.  5). 

Let  the  common  square  on  EF  be  subtracted ;  therefore 

rect.  DE,EF  =  rect.  AE,EB. 

Therefore 

rect.  DE,EF  :  sq.  CE  :  :  rect.  AE,EB  :  sq.  CF. 

But 

rect.  AE,EB  :  sq.  CE  :  :  the  transverse  :  the  upright  (i.  21). 
Therefore 

rect.  DE,EF  :  sq.  CE  :  :  the  transverse  :  the  upright. 


Proposition  38 

If  a  straight  line  touching  an  hyperbola  or  ellipse  or  circumference  of  a  circle  meets 
the  second  diameter ,  and  from  the  point  of  contact  a  straight  line  is  dropped  to  the 
same  diameter  parallel  to  the  other  diameter ,  then  the  straight  line  cut  off  by  the 

dropped  straight  (^Karrjy  pevTjff  line  from  the  center  of  the  section  with  the  straight 

- 

1  When  this  word  Kar-qy^evT)  is  used  in  connection  with  the  first  diameter  we  translate  it  as 
“ordinate,”  but  we  have  preferred  to  stick  more  closely  to  the  original  when  it  is  referred 
to  the  second  diameter.  For,  although  it  is  certainly  an  ordinate  in  the  case  of  the  ellipse,  yet 
in  the  case  of  the  hyperbola  it  is  only  analogically  an  ordinate.  This  analogy,  however,  be¬ 
comes  stronger  and  stronger  as  the  treatise  moves  on.  It  is,  therefore,  no  accident  that 
KarTjy ixkvTf  is  used  in  both  cases.  On  the  other  hand  in  First  Definitions,  i.  5,  Apollonius  defi¬ 
nitely  calls  both  cases  ordinates  as  if  announcing  the  culmination  of  an  analogy  to  be  worked 
out  in  the  course  of  the  treatise. 


CONICS  I 


647 


line  cut  off  by  the  tangent  from  the  center  of  the  section  will  contain  an  area  equal 
to  the  square  on  the  half  of  the  second  diameter ,  and  with  the  straight  line  between 
the  dropped  straight  line  and  the  tangent  will  contain  an  area  having  a  ratio  to  the 
square  on  the  dropped  straight  line  which  the  upright  side  of  the  figure  has  to  the 
transverse. 

Let  there  be  an  hyperbola  or  ellipse  or  circumference  of  a  circle  whose  diam¬ 
eter  is  the  straight  line  AGB,  and  whose  second  diameter  is  the  straight  line 
CGD,  and  let  the  straight  line  ELF ,  meeting  CD  at  F,  be  a  tangent  to  the 
section,  and  let  the  straight  line  HE  be  parallel  to  AB . 

I  say  that 

rect.  FG,GH  =  sq.  GCf 

and 

rect.  GH,HF  :  sq.  HE  :  :  the  upright  :  the  transverse. 

Let  the  straight  line  ME  be  drawn  ordinatewise;  therefore 

rect.  GMjML  :  sq.  ME  :  :  the  transverse  :  the  upright  (i.  37). 


But 

the  transverse  BA  :  CD  :  :  CD  :  the  upright  (see  Def.  11); 
and  therefore 

the  transverse  :  the  upright  :  :  sq.  BA  :  sq.  CD  (Eucl.  vi.  20); 
and  as  the  quarters  of  them,  that  is 

the  transverse  :  the  upright  :  :  sq.  GA  :  sq.  GC; 

therefore  also 

rect.  GMjML  :  sq.  ME  :  :  sq.  GA  :  sq.  GC. 

But 


or 


rect.  GM,ML  :  sq.  ME  comp.  GM  :  MEyLM  :  ME, 
rect.  GM,ML  :  sq.  ME  comp.  GM  :  GH,  LM  :  ME. 


APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 


648 


Therefore  inversely 

sq.  CG  :  sq.  GA  comp.  EM  :  MG  or  HG  :  GM,  EM  :  ML  or  FG  :  GL . 
Therefore 

sq.  GC  :  sq.  GA  comp.  HG  :  GM,  FG  :  GL, 
which  is  the  same  as 

rect,  FG,GH  :  rect.  MG,GL. 

Therefore 

rect.  FG,GH  :  rect.  MG,GL  :  :  sq.  CG  :  sq.  GA. 

And  alternately  therefore 

rect.  FG,GH  :  sq.  CG  :  :  rect.  MG,GL  :  sq.  GA. 

But 

rect.  MG,GL  =  sq.  GA  (i.  37), 

therefore  also 


rect.  FG,GH  =  sq.  CG. 

Again  since 

the  upright  :  the  transverse  :  :  sq.  EM  :  rect.  GM,ML  (i.  37), 

and 


sq.  EM  :  rect.  GM,ML  comp.  EM  :  GM,EM  :  ML 


or 

sq.  EM  :  rect.  GM,ML  comp.  HG  :  HH,FG  :  GL  or  FH  :  HE 
which  is  the  same  as 

rect,  FH,  HG  :  sq.  HH; 

therefore 

rect.  FH,HG  :  sq.  HE  :  :  the  upright  :  the  transverse. 

With  the  same  things  supposed,  it  remains  to  be  shown  that,  as  the  straight 
line  between  the  tangent  and  the  end  of  the  (second)  diameter  on  the  same 
side  with  the  dropped  straight  line  is  to  the  straight  line  between  the  tangent 
and  the  second  diameter,  so  is  the  straight  line  between  the  other  end  and  the 
dropped  straight  line  to  the  straight  line  between  the  first  end  and  the  dropped 
straight  line. 

For  since 

rect.  FG,GH  =  sq.  GC  =  rect.  CG,GD  (2  para,  above), 
for 


therefore 


CG  =  GD , 


therefore 
And  convertendo 


rect,  FG,GH  =  rect.  CG,GD; 
FG:GD::CG  :  GH. 


GF  :  FD  : :  GC  :  CH. 

And  let  the  doubles  of  the  antecedents  be  taken ;  but 

2GF  =  CF+FL 


because 


and 

therefore 
And  separando 


CG  =  GD, 

2  GC  =  CD; 

CF+FD  :  FD  :  :  DC  :  CH. 


CONICS  I  649 

CF  :  FD  :  :  DH  :  HC  ; 

and  this  was  to  be  shown. 

Then  it  is  clear  from  what  has  been  said  that  the  straight  line  EF  touches 
the  section,  either  if 

rect.  FG,GH  =  sq.  GC, 

or  if 

rect.  FH,HG  :  sq.  GC 

in  the  ratio  we  said ;  for  it  could  be  shown  conversely. 

Proposition  39 

If  a  straight  line  touching  an  hyperbola  or  ellipse  or  circumference  of  a  circle  meets 
the  diameter ,  and  from  the  point  of  contact  a  straight  line  is  dropped  ordinatewise 
to  the  diameter ,  then  whichever  of  the  two  straight  lines  is  taken  of  which  one  is  the 
straight  line  between  the  ordinate  and  the  center  of  the  section ,  and  the  other  is 
between  the  ordinate  and  the  tangent ,  then  the  ordinate  will  have  to  it  the  ratio  com¬ 
pounded  of  the  ratio  of  the  other  of  the  two  straight  lines  to  the  ordinate  and  of  the 
ratio  of  the  upright  side  of  the  figure  to  the  transverse. 

Let  there  be  an  hyperbola  or  ellipse  or  circumference  of  a  circle  whose  diam¬ 
eter  is  the  straight  line  ABy  and  let  the  center  of  it  be  the  point  Ff  and  let  the 
straight  line  CD  be  drawn  tangent  to  the  section,  and  the  straight  line  CE  be 
dropped  ordinatewise. 

I  say  that 

CE  :  FE  comp,  the  upright  :  the  transverse,  ED  :  EC , 

and 

CE  :  ED  comp,  the  upright  :  the  transverse,  FE  :  EC. 

For  let 

rect.  FE,ED  =  rect.  ECyG. 


G 


And  since 

rect.  FE}ED  :  sq.  CE  :  :  the  transverse  :  the  upright  (i.  37), 


650 

and 


APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 


rect.  FE,ED  =  rect.  CE,G , 

therefore 

rect.  CE  ,G  :  sq.  CE  :  :  G  :  CE  :  :  the  transverse  :  the  upright. 
And  since 


hence 


rect.  FE,ED  =  rect.  CEyG , 


FE  :  EC  ::  G  :  ED. 


And  since 
but 

therefore 


CE  :  ED  comp.  CE  :G,G:  ED, 

CE  :  G  :  :  the  upright  :  the  transverse, 

CE  :  ED  comp,  the  upright  :  the  transverse,  FE  :  EC. 


Proposition  40 

If  a  straight  line  touching  an  hyperbola  or  ellipse  or  circumference  of  a  circle  meets 
the  second  diameter ,  and  from  the  point  of  contact  a  straight  line  is  dropped  to  the 
same  diameter  parallel  to  the  other  diameter ,  then  whichever  of  the  two  straight  lines 
is  taken  of  which  one  is  the  straight  line  between  the  dropped  straight  line  and  the 
center  of  the  section ,  and  the  other  is  between  the  dropped  straight  line  and  the 


tangent ,  the  dropped  straight  line  will  have  to  it  the  ratio  compounded  of  the  ratio 
of  the  transverse  side  to  the  upright  and  of  the  ratio  of  the  other  of  the  two  straight 
lines  to  the  dropped  straight  line. 

Let  there  be  an  hyperbola  or  ellipse  or  circumference  of  a  circle  AB,  and  its 
diameter  the  straight  line  BFC,  and  its  second  diameter  the  straight  line  DFE , 
and  let  the  straight  line  HLA  be  drawn  tangent,  and  the  straight  line  AG 
parallel  to  the  straight  line  BC. 


CONICS  I 


651 


I  say  that 

AG  :  HG  comp,  the  transverse  :  the  upright,  FG  :  GA, 

and 

AG  :  FG  comp,  the  transverse  :  the  upright,  HG  :  GA. 

Let 

rect.  GA,K  =  rect.  HG,  GF. 

And  since 

the  upright  :  the  transverse  :  :  rect.  HG  ,GF  :  sq.  GA  (i.  38), 

and 

rect.  GA,K  =  rect.  HG,GF, 

therefore  also 

rect.  GA,K  :  sq.  GA  :  :  K  :  AG  :  :  the  upright  :  the  transverse. 

And  since 

AG  :  GF  comp.  AG:K,K:GF, 

but 

AG  :  K  :  :  the  transverse  :  the  upright, 

and 

K  :GF  : :  HG  :  GA 

because 

rect.  HG,GF  —  rect.  AG,K , 

therefore 

AG  :  GF  comp,  the  transverse  :  the  upright,  GH  :  GA. 
Proposition  41 

If  in  an  hyperbola  or  ellipse  or  circumference  of  a  circle  a  straight  line  is  dropped 
ordinatewise  to  the  diameter ,  and  equiangular  parallelogrammic  figures  are  de¬ 
scribed  both  on  the  ordinate  and  on  the  radius ,  and  the  ordinate  side  has  to  the 
remaining  side  of  the  figure  the  ratio  compounded  of  the  ratio  of  the  radius  to  the 
remaining  side  of  its  figure,  and  of  the  ratio  of  the  upright  side  of  the  section's 
figure  to  the  transverse,  then  the  figure  on  the  straight  line  between  the  center  and  the 
ordinate,  similar  to  the  figure  on  the  radius,  is  in  the  case  of  the  hyperbola  greater 
than  the  figure  on  the  ordinate  by  the  figure  on  the  radius ,  and,  in  the  case  of  the 
ellipse  and  circumference  of  a  circle ,  together  with  the  figure  on  the  ordinate  is 
equal  to  the  figure  on  the  radius. 

Let  there  be  an  hyperbola  or  ellipse  or  circumference  of  a  circle  whose  diam¬ 
eter  is  the  straight  line  AB,  and  center  the  point  E,  and  let  the  straight  line 
CD  be  dropped  ordinatewise,  and  on  the  straight  lines  EA  and  CD  let  the 
equiangular  figures  AF  and  DG  be  described,  and  let 

CD  :  CG  comp.  AE  :  EF ,  the  upright  :  the  transverse. 

I  say  that,  with  the  figure  on  ED  similar  to  AF,  in  the  base  of  the  hyperbola, 

figure  on  ED—AF+GD , 
and  in  the  case  of  the  ellipse  and  circle, 

figure  on  ED+GD  =  AF. 

For  let  it  be  contrived  that 

the  upright  :  the  transverse  :  :  DC  :  CH. 

And  since 

DC  :  CII  :  :  the  upright  :  the  transverse, 

but 

DC  :  CH  :  :  sq.  DC  :  rect.  DC,CH 


652  APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 

and 

the  upright :  the  transverse  :  :  sq.  DC  :  rect.  BD ,  DA  (i.  21), 


therefore 
And  since 


rect.  BD}DA=  rect.  DC,CH. 

DC  :  CG  comp.  AE  :  EF,  the  upright  :  the  transverse 


or 

and  further 


DC  :  CG  comp.  AE  :  EF}  DC  :  CH , 


:  CG  comp.  Z)C  :  CH,CH  :  CG, 

therefore 

ratio  comp.  AE  :  EF,  DC  :  CH  =  ratio  comp.  DC  :  CH,CH  :  CG. 
Let  the  common  ratio,  DC  :  CH,  be  taken  away;  therefore 

AE  :  EF  : :  CH  :  CG. 

But 


and 


HC  :  CG  :  :  rect.  HC,CD  :  rect.  GC,CD, 
AE  :  EF  :  :  sq.  AZ?  :  rect.  AE,EF; 


therefore 


CONICS  I 


653 


rect.  HC,CD  :  rect.  GC,CD  :  :  sq.  AE  :  rect.  AE,EF . 

And  it  has  been  shown  that 

rect.  HC,  CD  =  rect.  BD,  DA ; 

therefore 

rect.  BD,DA  :  rect.  GC,CD  :  :  sq.  AE  :  rect.  AE,EF . 

Alternately 

rect.  BD,DA  :  sq.  AE  :  :  rect.  GC,CD  :  rect.  AE,EF. 

And 

rect.  GC,CD  :  rect,  AE,EE  :  :  pllg.  DG  :  pllg.  FA; 
for  they  are  equiangular  and  have  to  one  another  the  ratio  compounded  of 
their  sides,  GC  :  AE  and  CD  :  EF  (Eucl.  vi.  23);  and  therefore 
rect.  BD,DA  :  sq.  EA  :  :  pllg.  DG  :  pllg.  FA. 

Moreover  in  the  case  of  the  hyperbola  we  are  to  say:  componendo 
rect.  BD,DA  + sq.  AE  :  sq.  AE  :  :  pllg.  GD+ pllg.  AF  :  pllg.  AFy 
or 

sq.  DE  :  sq.  EA  :  :  pllg.  GE+pllg.  AF  :  pllg.  AF  (Eucl.  n.  6). 

And  as  the  square  on  DE  is  to  the  square  on  EA,  so  is  the  figure  described  on 
ED,  similar  and  similarly  situated  to  the  parallelogram  AF,  to  the  parallelo¬ 
gram  AF  (Eucl.  vi.  20,  porism) ;  therefore,  with  the  figure  on  ED  similar  to  the 
parallelogram  AF, 

pllg.  GD+p\\g.  AF  :  pllg.  AF  :  :  figure  on  ED  :  pllg.  AF. 

Therefore 

figure  on  EE  =  pllg.  GD+pllg.  AF, 
the  figure  on  ED  being  similar  to  the  parallelogram  AF. 

And  in  the  case  of  the  ellipse  and  of  the  circumference  of  a  circle  we  shall 
say:  since  then 

whole  sq.  AE  :  whole  pllg.  AF  :  : 
rect.  AD,  DB  subtracted  :  pllg.  DG  subtracted, 
also  remainder  is  to  remainder  as  whole  to  whole  (Eucl.  v.  19). 

And 

sq.  AE  — rect.  BD,DA=sq.  DE  (Eucl.  n.  5); 

therefore 

sq.  DE  :  pllg.  AE— pllg.  DG  :  :  sq.  AE  :  pHg.  AF. 

But 

sq.  AE  :  pllg.  AF  :  :  sq.  DE  :  figure  on  DE  (Eucl.  vi.  20,  porism) 
the  figure  on  DE  being  similar  to  the  parallelogram  AF.  Therefore,  the  figure 
on  DE  being  similar  to  the  parallelogram  AF, 

sq.  DE  :  pllg.  AF—DG  :  :  sq.  DE  :  figure  on  DE. 

Therefore,  the  figure  on  DE  being  similar  to  the  parallelogram  AF, 
figure  on  Z)E  =  pllg.  A  F  —  pllg.  DG. 

Therefore 

figure  on  DE+ pllg.  DG  =  pllg.  AF. 

Proposition  42 

If  a  straight  line  touching  a  parabola  meets  the  diameter,  and  from  the  point  of 
contact  a  straight  line  is  dropped  ordinatewise  to  the  diameter ,  and ,  some  point 
being  taken  on  the  section,  two  straight  lines  are  dropped  to  the  diameter,  one  of 
them  parallel  to  the  tangent,  and  the  other  parallel  to  the  straight  line  dropped  from 


APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 


654 


the  point  of  contact ,  then  the  triangle  resulting  from  them  is  equal  to  the  parallelo¬ 
gram  contained  by  the  straight  line  dropped  from  the  point  of  contact  and  by  the 
straight  line  cut  off  by  the  parallel  from  the  vertex  of  the  section. 

Let  there  be  a  parabola,  whose  diameter  is  the  straight  line  AB ,  and  let  the 
straight  line  AC  be  drawn  tangent  to  the  section,  and  let  the  straight  line  CH 
be  dropped  ordinatewise,  and  from  some  point  at  random  let  the  straight  line 
DF  be  dropped  ordinatewise,  and  through  the  point  D  let  the  straight  line  DE 
be  drawn  parallel  to  the  straight  line  AC,  and  through  the  point  C  the  straight 
line  CG  parallel  to  the  straight  line  BF ,  and  through  the  point  B  the  straight 
line  BG  parallel  to  the  straight  line  HC. 

I  say  that 


trgl.  DEF  =  pllg.  GF. 

For  since  the  straight  line  AC  touches  the 
section,  and  the  straight  line  CH  has  been 
dropped  ordinatewise, 

AB  =  BH  (i.  35); 

therefore 

AH  =  2BH. 


Therefore 

trgl.  AHC  =  pllg.  BC  (Eucl.  i.  41). 

And  since 

sq.  CH  :  sq.  DF  :  :  HB  :  BF 
because  of  the  section  (i.  20),  but 

sq.  CH  :  sq.  DF  :  :  trgl.  ACH  :  trgl 


.  EDF  (Eucl.  vi.  19)3 


and 


HB  :  BF  :  :  pllg.  GH  :  pllg.  GF  (Eucl.  vi.  1), 

therefore 

trgl.  ACH  :  trgl.  EDF  :  :  pllg.  HG  :  pllg.  FG. 
Therefore  alternately 

trgl.  AHC  :  pllg.  BC  :  :  trgl.  EDF  :  pllg.  GF. 

But 

trgl.  ACH  =  pllg.  GH; 

therefore 

trgl.  EDF  =  pllg.  GF. 


Proposition  43 

If  a  straight  line  touching  an  hyperbola  or  ellipse  or  circumference  of  a  circle  meets 
the  diameter ,  and  from  the  point  of  contact  a  straight  line  is  dropped  ordinatewise 
to  the  diameter ,  and  a  parallel  to  it  is  drawn  through  the  vertex  meeting  the  straight 
line  drawn  through  the  point  of  contact  and  the  center ,  and ,  some  point  being  taken 
on  the  section ,  two  straight  lines  are  drawn  to  the  diameter ,  one  of  which  is  parallel 
to  the  tangent  and  the  other  parallel  to  the  straight  line  dropped  from  the  point  of 
contact ,  then  the  triangle  resulting  from  them ,  in  the  case  of  the  hyperbola ,  will  be 
less  than  the  triangle  the  straight  line  through  the  center  and  the  point  of  co?itaet 
cuts  off ,  by  the  triangle  on  the  radius  similar  to  the  triangle  cut  off ;  and  in  the  case 
of  the  ellipse  and  the  circumference  of  the  circle)  together  with  the  triangle  cut  off 
from  the  center ,  will  be  equal  to  the  triangle  on  the  radius  similar  to  the  triangle 
cut  off. 

Let  there  be  an  hyperbola  or  ellipse  or  circumference  of  a  circle  whose  diam- 


655 


CONICS  I 

eter  is  the  straight  line  AB ,  and  center  the  point  (7,  and  let  the  straight  line  DE 
be  drawn  tangent  to  the  section,  and  let  the  straight  line  CE  be  joined,  and  let 
the  straight  line  EF  be  dropped  ordinatewise,  and  let  some  point  G  be  taken 
on  the  section,  and  let  the  straight  line  GH  be  drawn  parallel  to  the  tangent, 
and  let  the  straight  line  GK  be  dropped  ordinatewise,  and  through  B  let  the 
straight  line  BL  be  erected  ordinatewise. 

I  say  that  triangle  KMC  differs  from  triangle  CLB  by  triangle  GKH . 


For  since  the  straight  line  ED  touches,  and  the  straight  line  EF  has  been 
dropped,  hence 

EF  :  FD  comp.  CF  :  FE)  the  upright  :  the  transverse  (i.  39). 

But 

EF  .FD  ::GK:KH, 

and 

CF  :  FE  :  :  CB  :  BL  (Eucl.  vi.  4); 

therefore 

GK  :  KH  comp.  BC  :  BL ,  the  upright  :  the  transverse. 

And  through  those  things  shown  in  the  forty-first  theorem  (i.  41),  triangle 
CKM  differs  from  triangle  BCL  by  triangle  GHK ;  for  the  same  things  have 
also  been  shown  in  the  case  of  the  parallelograms,  their  doubles. 

Proposition  44 

If  a  straight  line  touching  one  of  the  opposite  sections  meets  the  diameter ,  and  from 
the  point  of  contact  some  straight  line  is  dropped  ordinatewise  to  the  diameter ,  and 
a  parallel  to  it  is  drawn  through  the  vertex  of  the  other  section  meeting  the  straight 
line  drawn  through  the  point  of  contact  and  the  center ,  and,  some  point  being  taken 
at  random  on  the  section ,  let  straight  lines  be  dropped  to  the  diameter ,  one  of  which 


656  APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 

is  parallel  to  the  tangent  and  the  other  parallel  to  the  straight  line  dropped  ordinate- 
wise  from  the  point  of  contact ,  then  the  triangle  resulting  from  them  will  be  less  than 
the  triangle  the  dropped  straight  line  cuts  off  from  the  center  of  the  section ,  by  the 
triangle  on  the  radius  similar  to  the  triangle  cut  off. 

Let  there  be  the  opposite  sections  AF  and  BE ,  and  let  their  diameter  be  the 
straight  line  AB,  and  center  the  point  C ,  and  from  some  point  F  of  those  on  the 
section  FA  let  the  straight  line  FG  be  drawn  tangent  to  the  section,  and  the 
straight  line  FO  ordinatewise,  and  let  the  straight  line  CF  be  joined  and  pro¬ 
duced,  as  CE  (i.  29),  and  through  B  let  the  straight  line  BL  be  drawn  parallel 
to  the  straight  line  FO,  and  let  some  point  N  be  taken  on  the  section  BE,  and 
from  X  let  the  straight  line  XH  be  dropped  ordinatewise,  and  let  the  straight 
line  XK  be  drawn  parallel  to  the  straight  line  FG. 

I  say  that 

trgl.  HKX+ trgl.  CBL  =  trgl.  CMH 


For  through  E  let  the  straight  line  ED  be  drawn  tangent  to  the  section  BE, 
and  let  the  straight  line  EX  be  drawn  ordinatewise.  Since  then  FA  and  BE  are 
opposite  sections  whose  diameter  is  AB,  and  the  straight  line  through  whose 
center  is  FCE ,  and  FG  and  ED  are  tangents  to  the  section,  hence  DE  is  parallel 
to  FG.1  And  the  straight  line  XK  is  parallel  to  FG;  therefore  XK  is  also  parallel 
to  ED,  and  the  straight  line  MH  to  BL.  Since  then  BE  is  an  hyperbola,  whose 
diameter  is  the  straight  line  AB,  and  whose  center  is  C ,  and  the  straight  line 
DE  is  tangent  to  the  section,  and  EX  drawn  ordinatewise,  and  BL  is  parallel 
to  EX,  and  X  has  been  taken  on  the  section  as  the  point  from  which  XH  has 

iEutocius,  commenting,  says:  “For  since  AF  is  an  hyperbola,  and  BG  a  tangent,  and  FO 
an  ordinate,  rect.  OC,CG  =  sq.  CA 

(i.  37)  likewise  then  also  rect.  XC,  CD  —  sq.  CB. 

Therefore  rect.  OC ,  CG  :  sq.  AC  :  :  rect.  XC,  CD  :  sq.  BC , 

and  alternately,  rect.  OC,  CG  :  rect.  XC,  CD  :  :  sq  .AC  :  sq.  CB. 

But  sq.  AC  =  s q.  CB; 

therefore  also  rect.  OC,  CG  =  rect.  XC,  CD. 

And  OC  =  CX  (i.  14,30); 

and  therefore  GC  =  CD; 

and  also  FC  =  CE  (i.  30); 

theref  ore  FC  —  EC,  CG  =  CD. 

And  they  contain  equal  angles  at  the  point  C;  for  they  are  vertical.  And  so  also 

FG  =  ED 

and  angle  CFG  =  angle  CED. 

And  they  are  alternate;  therefore  the  straight  line  FG  is  parallel  to  the  straight  line  ED” 


CONICS  I  657 

been  dropped  ordinatewise,  and  KN  has  been  drawn  parallel  to  DE ,  therefore 
trgh  NHK+ trgl.  JBCL  =  trgl.  HMC; 
for  this  has  been  shown  in  the  forty-third  theorem  (i.  43). 

Proposition  45 

If  a  straight  line  touching  an  hyperbola  or  ellipse  or  circumference  of  a  circle  meets 
the  second  diameter ,  and  from  the  point  of  contact  some  straight  line  is  dropped  to 
the  same  diameter  parallel  to  the  other  diameter ,  and  through  the  point  of  contact 
and  the  center  a  straight  line  is  produced ,  and,  some  point  being  taken  at  random 
on  the  section ,  two  straight  lines  are  drawn  to  the  second  diameter  one  of  which  is 
parallel  to  the  tangent  and  the  other  parallel  to  the  dropped  straight  liney  then  the 
triangle  resulting  from  them  is  greater ,  in  the  case  of  the  hyperbola ,  than  the  tri¬ 
angle  the  dropped  straight  line  cuts  off  from  the  center ,  by  the  triangle  whose  base 
is  the  tangent  and  vertex  is  the  center  of  the  section ,  and,  in  the  case  of  the  ellipse 
and  circle ,  together  with  the  triangle  cut  off  will  be  equal  to  the  triangle  whose  base 
is  the  tangent  and  whose  vertex  is  the  center  of  the  section. 

Let  there  be  an  hyperbola  or  ellipse  or  circumference  of  a  circle  ABC ,  whose 


diameter  is  the  straight  line  AH,  and  second  diameter  HD,  and  center  H,  and 
let  the  straight  line  CML  touch  it  at  C,  and  let  the  straight  line  CD  be  drawn 
parallel  to  AH,  and  let  the  straight  line  HC  be  joined  and  produced,  and  let 
some  point  B  be  taken  at  random  on  the  section,  and  from  B  let  the  straight 
lines  BE  and  BF  be  drawn  from  B  parallel  to  the  straight  lines  LC  and  CD. 

I  say  that,  in  the  case  of  the  hyperbola, 

trgl.  BEF  =  trgl.  GHF+ trgl.  LCII, 
and,  in  the  case  of  the  ellipse  and  circle, 

trgl.  BEF+ trgl.  FGH  =  trgl.  CLH. 

For  let  the  straight  lines  CK  and  BN  be  drawn  parallel  to  DII.  Since  then 
the  straight  line  CM  is  tangent,  and  the  straight  line  CK  has  been  dropped 
ordinatewise,  hence 

CK  :  KH  comp.  MK  :  KC,  the  upright  :  the  transverse  (i.  39), 


658 

and 


APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 


MK  :  KC  : :  CD  :  DL  (Eucl.  vi.  4); 


L 


therefore 

CK  :  KH  comp.  CD  :  DL)  the  upright  :  the  transverse. 

And  triangle  CDL  is  the  figure  on  KH;  and  triangle  CKH ,  that  is  triangle 
CDH,  is  the  figure  on  CK,  that  is  on  DH;  therefore,  in  the  case  of  the  hyper¬ 
bola, 

trgl.  CDL =trgl.  CKH+ trgl.  on  AH  similar  to  trgl.  CDL , 
and,  in  the  case  of  the  ellipse  and  the  circle, 

trgl.  CDH+ trgl.  CDL  =  trgl.  on  AH  similar  to  trgl.  CDL ; 
for  this  was  also  shown  in  the  case  of  their  doubles  in  the  forty-first  theorem 
(i.  41). 

Since  then  triangle  CDL  differs  either  from  triangle  CKH  or  from  triangle 
CDH  by  the  triangle  on  AH  similar  to  triangle  CDL ,  and  it  also  differs  by 
triangle  CHL  therefore 

trgl.  CHL  =  trgl.  on  AH  similar  to  trgl.  CDL. 

Since  then  triangle  BFE  is  similar  to  triangle  CDL ,  and  triangle  GFH  to  tri¬ 
angle  CDH,  therefore  they  have  the  same  ratio.1  And  triangle  BFE  is  described 
on  NH  between  the  ordinate  and  the  center,  and  triangle  GFH  on  the  ordinate 
BN,  that  is  on  FH;  and  by  things  already  shown  (i.  41)  triangle  BFE  differs 
from  triangle  GHF  b}^  the  triangle  on  AH  similar  to  CDL,  and  so  also  by  tri¬ 
angle  CHL . 


xThat  is  (Eucl.  vi.  4).  BF  :  FE  :  :  CD  :  DL 

and  GF  :  FH  : :  CD  :  DH  :  :  CK  :  KH. 

Therefore  these  first  ratios  can  be  substituted  in  the  central  proportion  of  the  theorem 
CK  :  KH  comp.  CD  :  DL,  the  upright :  the  transverse, 
and  so  satisfy  i.  41. 


CONICS  I 


659 


Proposition  46 

If  a  straight  line  touching  a  parabola  meets  the  diameter ,  the  straight  line  drawn 
through  the  point  of  contact  parallel  to  the  diameter  in  the  direction  of  the  section 
bisects  the  straight  lines  drawn  in  the  section  parallel  to  the  tangent. 

Let  there  be  a  parabola  whose  diameter  is  the  straight  line  ABD,  and  let  the 


straight  line  AC  touch  the  section  (i.  24),  and  through  C  let  the  straight  line 
HCM  be  drawn  parallel  to  the  straight  line  AD  (i.  26),  and  let  some  point  L 
be  taken  at  random  on  the  section,  and  let  the  straight  line  LNFE  (i.  18,22) 
be  drawn  parallel  to  AC. 

I  say  that 

LN  =  NF. 

Let  the  straight  lines  BH ,  KFG ,  and  LMD  be  drawn  ordinatewise.  Since 
then  by  the  things  already  shown  in  the  forty-second  theorem  (i.  42) 

trgl.  Z?LZ)==  pllg.  BM, 

and 

trgl.  EFG  =  pllg.  BIC , 

therefore  the  remainders 

pllg.  GM  =  quadr.  LFGD. 

Let  the  common  pentagon  MDGFN  be  subtracted;  therefore  the  remainders 

trgl.  KFN  =  trgl.  LMN. 

And  KF  is  parallel  to  LM;  therefore 

FN  =  LN  (Eucl.  vi.  22,  lemma). 

Proposition  47 

If  a  straight  line  touching  an  hyperbola  or  ellipse  or  circumference  of  a  circle  meets 
the  diameter ,  and  through  the  point  of  contact  and  the  center  a  straight  line  is  drawn 
in  the  direction  of  the  section ,  it  bisects  the  straight  lines  drawn  in  the  section  paral¬ 
lel  to  the  tangent. 

Let  there  be  an  hyperbola  or  ellipse  or  circumference  of  a  circle  w’hose  diam¬ 
eter  is  the  straight  line  AB  and  center  C,  and  let  the  straight  line  DE  be  drawn 
tangent  to  the  section,  and  let  the  straight  line  CE  be  joined  and  produced,  and 


660  APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 

let  a  point  N  be  taken  at  random  on  the  section,  and  through  N  let  the  straight 
line  HNOG  be  drawn  parallel. 

I  say  that 

NO  =  OG. 

For  let  the  straight  lines  XNF ,  BL,  and  GMK  be  dropped  ordinatewise. 
Therefore  by  things  already  shown  in  the  forty-third  theorem  (i.  43) 

trgl.  HNF  =  quadr.  LBFX, 
and  trgl.  GHK  =  quadr.  LBKM. 


Therefore  the  remainders 

quadr,  NGKF  =  quadr.  MKFX; 

Let  the  common  pentagon  ONFKM  be  subtracted; 
therefore  the  remainders 

trgl.  OMG  =  trgl.  NXO. 

And  the  straight  line  MG  is  parallel  to  the  straight  line  NX;  therefore 
NO  =  OG  (Eucl.  vi.  22,  lemma). 


Proposition  48 

If  a  straight  line  touching  one  of  the  opposite  sections  meets  the  diameter ,  and 
through  the  point  of  contact  and  the  center  a  straight  line  produced  cuts  the  other 
section ,  then  whatever  line  is  drawn  in  the  other  section  parallel  to  the  tangent ,  will 
he  bisected  by  the  straight  line  produced. 

Let  there  be  opposite  sections  whose  diameter  is  the  straight  line  AB  and 
center  C,  and  let  the  straight  line  KL  touch  the  section  A,  and  let  the  straight 
line  LC  be  joined  and  produced  (i.  29),  and  let  some  point  N  be  taken  on  the 


CONICS  I  661 

section  B,  and  through  N  let  the  straight  line  NG  be  drawn  parallel  to  the 
straight  line  LK. 


I  say  that 

NO  =  OG . 

For  let  the  straight  line  ED  be  drawn  through  E  tangent  to  the  section; 
therefore  ED  is  parallel  to  LK  (i.  44,  note).  And  so  also  to  NG.  Since  then  BNG 
is  an  hyperbola  whose  center  is  C  and  tangent  DE,  and  since  CE  has  been 
joined  and  a  point  N  has  been  taken  on  the  section  and  through  it  NG  has  been 
drawn  parallel  to  DE ,  by  a  theorem  already  shown  (i.  47)  for  the  hyperbola 

NO  =  OG. 

Proposition  49 

If  a  straight  line  touching  a  'parabola  meets  the  diameter ,  and  through  the  point  of 
contact  a  parallel  to  the  diameter  is  drawn,  and  from  the  vertex  a  straight  line  is 
drawn  parallel  to  an  ordinate ,  and  it  is  contrived  that  as  the  segment  of  the  tangent 
between  the  erected  straight  line  and  the  point  of  contact  is  to  the  segment  of  the 
parallel  between  the  point  of  contact  and  the  erected  straight  line,  so  is  some  straight 
line  to  the  double  of  the  tangent,  then  whatever  straight  line  is  drawn  [parallel  to  the 
tangent ]  from  the  section  to  the  straight  line  drawn  through  the  point  of  contact 
parallel  to  the  diameter,  will  equal  in  square  the  rectangle  contained  by  the  straight 
line  found  and  by  the  straight  line  cut  off  by  it  from  the  point  of  contact . 

Let  there  be  a  parabola  whose  diameter  is  the  straight  line  MBC,  and  CD  its 
tangent,  and  through  D  let  the  straight  line  FDN  be  drawn  parallel  to  the 
straight  line  BC,  and  let  the  straight  line  FB  be  erected  ordinatewise  (i.  17), 

and  let  it  be  contrived  that 
ED  :  DF  :  :  some  straight  line 
G  :  2 CD, 

and  let  some  point  K  be  taken  on 
the  section,  and  let  the  straight 
line  KLP  be  drawn  through  K 
parallel  to  CD. 
q  I  say  that 

sq.  KL  =  rect.  G,DL 
that  is  that,  with  the  straight  line 
DL  as  diameter,  the  straight  line 
G  is  the  upright  side. 

For  let  the  straight  lines  DX 
and  KNM  be  dropped  ordinate¬ 
wise.  And  since  the  straight  line 


662  APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 

CD  touches  the  section,  and  the  straight  line  DX  has  been  dropped  ordinate- 
wise,  then 

CB  =  BX  (i.  35). 

But 

BX  =  FD 

and  therefore 

CB  =  FD. 

And  so  also 

trgl.  ECB  =  trgl.  EFD. 

Let  the  common  figure  DEBMN  be  added;  therefore 
quadr.  DCMN  =  pllg.  FM 

=  trgl.  KPM  (i.  42). 

Let  the  common  quadrilateral  LPMN  be  subtracted;  therefore  the  remainders 

trgl.  KLN  =  pllg.  LC. 

And 

therefore 
And  since 
and 

therefore  also 
But 
and 

therefore 


angle  DLP  =  angle  KLN ; 
rect.  KL,  LN  =  2  rect.  LD,DC ,1 
ED  :  DF  :  :  G  :  2CD, 

ED  :  DF  :  :  KL  :  LN, 

G  :  2CD  :  :KL:LN. 

KL  :  LN  :  sq.  KL  :  rect.  KL,  LN, 

G  :  2CD  :  :  rect.  G,DL  :  2rect.  LD,DC; 


1Eutocius,  commenting,  says:  “For  let  the  triangle  KLN  and  the  parallelogram  DLPC  be 
set  out.  And  since  trgl.  KLN  =  pllg.  DPf 

let  the  straight  line  NR  be  drawn  through  N  parallel  to  LK ,  and 
through  Ky  KR  parallel  to  LN ;  therefore  LR  is  a  parallelogram  and 

pllg.  LR  =  2  trgl.  KLN) 
and  so  also  pllg.  LR= 2  pllg.  DP. 

Then  let  the  straight  lines  DC  and  LP  be  produced  to  S  and  T,  and 
let  CS  be  made  equal  to  DC,  and  PT  to  LP,  and  let  ST  be  joined; 
therefore 

pllg.  DP  =  2  pllg.  DP; 
and  so  pllg.  LR  =  pllg.  LS. 

But  it  is  also  equiangular  with  it  because  of  the  angles  at  L  being  vertical;  but  in  equal  and 
equiangular  parallelograms  the  sides  about  the  equal  angles  are  reciprocally  proportional; 
therefore  KL  :  LT  or  DS  :  :  DL  :  LNf 

and  rect.  KLfLN =rect.  LD,DS. 

And  since  DS  =  2 DC, 

hence  rect.  KLy  LN  =  2  rect.  LD,  DC. 

“And  if  DC  is  parallel  to  LP,  and  CP  is  not  parallel  to  LD,  it  is  clear  DC  PL  is  a  trapezoid, 
and  so  I  say  that  rect.  KLfLN =rect,  DL,  CD-fLP. 

For  if  LP  is  filled  out,  as  we  have  said  before,  and  the  straight  lines  DC  and  LP  are  produced, 
and  CS  is  made  equal  to  LP,  and  PT  to  DC,  and  the  straight  line  ST  is  joined,  then 

pllg.  DT  =  2DPy 

and  the  same  demonstration  will  fit.  And  this  will  be  useful  in  what  follows  (i.  50).” 


663 


CONICS  I 


sq.  KL  :  rect.  KL,LN  :  :  rect.  G,DL  :  2rect.  CD,DL. 
And  alternately;  but 

rect.  KLy  LN  =  2rect.  CZ),Z)L; 

therefore  also 

sq.  KL  =  rect.  G,DL. 

Proposition  50 


If  a  straight  line  touching  an  hyperbola  or  ellipse  or  circumference  of  a  circle 
meets  the  diameter ,  and  a  straight  line  is  produced  through  the  point  of  contact  and 
the  center ,  and  from  the  vertex  a  straight  line  erected  parallel  to  an  ordinate  meets 
the  straight  line  drawn  through  the  point  of  contact  and  the  center ,  and  if  it  is  con¬ 
trived  that  as  the  segment  of  the  tangent  between  the  point  of  contact  and  the  straight 
line  erected  is  to  the  segment  of  the  straight  line)  drawn  through  the  point  of  contact 
and  the  center ,  between  the  point  of  contact  and  the  straight  line  erected ,  so  some 
straight  line  is  to  the  double  of  the  tangent ,  then  whatever  straight  line  is  drawn 
from  the  section  to  the  straight  line  drawn  through  the  point  of  contact  and  the 
center ,  parallel  to  the  tangent ,  will  equal  in  square  a  rectangular  area  applied  to 
the  straight  line  found ,  having  as  breadth  the  straight  line  cut  off  by  it  from  the 


K 


664  APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 

point  of  contact ,  and  exceeding ,  in  Z/ie  case  0/  the  hyperbola ,  by  a  figure  similar  to 
the  rectangle  contained  by  the  double  of  the  straight  line  between  the  center  and  the 
point  of  contact  and  by  the  straight  line  found;  but  in  the  case  of  the  ellipse  and 
circle,  defective  by  it . 

Let  there  be  an  hyperbola  or  ellipse  or  circumference  of  a  circle  whose  diam¬ 
eter  is  the  straight  line  AB ,  and  center  C,  and  let  the  straight  line  DE  be  a 
tangent,  and  let  the  straight  line  CE  be  joined  and  produced  both  ways,  and 
let  the  straight  line  CK  be  made  equal  to  the  straight  line  EC,  and  through  B 
let  the  straight  line  BFG  be  erected  ordinatewise,  and  through  E  let  the 
straight  line  EH  be  drawn  perpendicular  to  EC,  and  let  it  be  that 

FE:  EG::  EH:  2  ED, 

Cases  II 


665 


CONICS  I 

and  let  the  straight  line  HK  be  joined  and  produced,  and  let  some  point  L  be 
taken  on  the  section,  and  through  it  let  the  straight  line  LMX  be  drawn 
parallel  to  ED,  and  the  straight  line  LRN  parallel  to  BG ,  and  the  straight  line 
MP  parallel  to  EH. 

1  say  that 

sq.  LM  =  rect.  EM  ,MP. 

For  let  the  straight  line  CSO  be  drawn  through  C  parallel  to  KP.  And  since 

EC  =  CK , 

and 

Cases  I 

EC  :  KC  :  :  ES  :  SH 

therefore  also 

ES  =  SH. 

Cases  II 
And  since 

FE  :  EG::  HE  :  2  ED, 

and 

2  ES  =  EH, 

therefore  also 

FE  :  EG  :  :  SE  :  ED. 

And 

FE  :  EG  ::  LM  :  MR; 

therefore 

LM  :  MR  :  :  SE  :  ED. 

And  since  it  was  shown  (I.  43)  that,  in  the  case  of  the  hyperbola, 
trgl.  RNC  =  ivg\.  LNX +trgl.  GBC , 

=  trgl.  LNX+ trgl.  CDE,1 
and,  in  the  case  of  the  ellipse  and  circle, 

trgl.  RNC+ trgl.  LNX  =  trgl.  GBC 
=  trgl.  CDE; 

therefore,  in  the  case  of  the  hyperbola  with  the  common  triangle  ECD  and  the 
common  quadrilateral  NRMX  subtracted,  and  in  the  case  of  the  ellipse  and 
circle  with  the  common  triangle  MXC  subtracted,2 

]That  trgl.  GBC  —  trgl.  CDE 

is  proved  by  Apollonius  in  the  course  of  another  proof  of  i.  43,  reported  by  Eutocius.  It  is 
also  proved  in  iii.  1,  without  the  help  of  intervening  propositions. 

2  The  position  of  point  L  furnishes  different  cases  which  at  times,  as  in  the  present  the¬ 
orem,  require  a  change  in  the  course  of  the  proof.  The  figures  marked  “Cases  I”  are  drawn 
to  fit  the  proof  as  set  down,  but  we  have  added  figures  marked  “Cases  II”  as  an  example  of 
the  possible  differences. 

For  the  hyperbola  of  Case  II,  instead  of  the  subtraction  in  the  theorem  above,  we  have 
trgl.  RNC  =  trgl.  LNX+ trgl.  CDE 
quadr.  M CNL  =  quadr.  MCNL. 

Subtracting  the  first  equals  from  the  second  identitv,  we  have 

trgl.  LMR  =  quadr.  MEDX. 

The  rest  of  the  proof  is  the  same. 

For  the  ellipse  and  circle  of  Case  II,  we  have  as  in  the  theorem  above 
trgl.  RXC+ trgl.  LNX  =  trgl.  CDE, 
and  subtracting  the  common  triangle  CMX, 

trgl.  LMR  =  trgl.  CDE  — trgl  CMX; 
therefore  rect.  LM,MR  =  rect.  EM  ,ED-\- MX. 

For  let  CM  be  made  equal  to  CM'  and  CX  to  CX'.  Then 


666 


APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 


trgl.  LMR  =  qiiaclr.  MEDX. 

And  MX  is  parallel  to  DE,  and 

angle  LMR  =  angle  EMX ; 

therefore 

rect.  LM,MR  =  rect.  EM,ED+MX  (i.  49,  note,  para.  2). 
And  since 

MC  :  CE  :  :  MX  :  ED 

and 

therefore 
And  componendo 
alternately 
But 
and 
or 


MC  :  CE  :  :  MO  : 

J/0  :  ES  :  :  AfX  :  ED 
MO+ES  :  ES  :  :  MI+BD  : 

4/0+ES  :  MX+ED  ::ES:ED 

MO+ES  :  MX+ED  :  :  rect.  MO+&S,SAf  :  rect.  MX+ED, EM, 
ES:  ED::  LM  :  MR::  FE  :  EG  (Eucl.  vi.  4) 

ES  :  ED  :  :  sq.  LM  :  rect.  LM,MR ; 


therefore 

rect.  MO+ES, ME  :  rect.  MX+ED, EM  :  :  sq.  LM  :  rect.  LM,MR . 
And  alternately 

rect.  MO+ES, ME  :  sq.  LM  :  :  rect.  MX+ED, EM  :  rect.  LM,  MR. 

But 

rect.  LM,MR  =  rect.  ME, MX+ED  (above); 

therefore 

sq.  LM  —  rect.  EM, MO+ES. 

And 

SE  =  SH, 

and 

SH  =  OP ; 

therefore 

sq.  LM  =  rect.  EM,MP. 


Proposition  51 

If  a  straight  line  touching  either  of  the  opposite  sections  meets  the  diameter ,  and 
through  the  point  of  contact  and  the  center  some  straight  line  is  produced  to  the 
other  section,  and  from  the  vertex  a  straight  line  is  erected  parallel  to  an  ordinate 
and  meets  the  straight  line  drawn  through  the  point  of  contact  and  the  center,  and 
if  it  is  contrived  that,  as  the  segment  of  the  tangent  between  the  straight  line  erected 


trgl.  CDF -trgl.  CAfX  =  quadr.  M'EDX', 
and  M'X'  is  parallel  to  ED,  and 

angle  EM’X'=  angle  RML. 

These  cases  will  come  up  again  in  Book  III,  and  in  general 
it  is  convenient  to  think  of  quadrilateral  MEDX  as  standing  for  the  difference  of  the  two 
triangles  when  one  pair  of  its  sides  cross  each  other. 


667 


CONICS  I 

and  the  point  of  contact  is  to  the  segment  of  the  straight  line ,  drawn  through  the 
point  of  coiitact  and  the  center ,  between  the  point  of  contact  and  the  straight  line 
erected ,  so  is  some  straight  line  to  the  double  of  the  tangent ,  then  whatever  straight 
line  in  the  other  of  the  sections  is  drawn  to  the  straight  line  through  the  point  of 
contact  and  the  center ,  parallel  to  the  tangent}  will  equal  in  square  the  rectangle 
applied  to  the  straight  line  found ,  having  as  breadth  the  straight  line  cut  off  by  it 
from  the  point  of  contact  and  exceeding  by  a  figure  similar  to  the  rectangle  con¬ 
tained  by  the  straight  line  between  the  opposite  sections  and  the  straight  line  found. 

Let  there  be  opposite  sections  whose  diameter  is  the  straight  line  AB  and 


center  E,  and  let  the  straight  line  CD  be  drawn  tangent  to  the  section  B  and 
the  straight  line  CE  joined  and  produced  (i.  29),  and  let  the  straight  line  BLG 
be  drawn  ordinatewise  (i.  17),  and  let  it  be  contrived  that 
LC  :  CG  :  :  some  straight  line  K  :2 CD. 

Now  it  is  evident  that  the  straight  lines  in  the  section  BC,  parallel  to  CD 
and  drawn  to  EC  produced  are  equal  in  square  to  the  areas  applied  to  K ,  hav¬ 
ing  as  breadths  the  straight  line  cut  off  by  them  from  the  point  of  contact,  and 
exceeding  by  a  figure  similar  to  the  rectangle  CF,  K;  for 

FC  =  2CE. 

I  say  then  that  in  section  FA  the  same  thing  will  come  about. 

For  let  the  straight  line  MF  be  drawn  through  F  tangent  to  the  section  AF, 
and  let  the  straight  line  AXN  be  erected  ordinatewise.  And  since  BC  and  AF 
are  opposite  sections,  and  CD  and  MF  are  tangents  to  them,  therefore  CD  is 
equal  and  parallel  to  MF  (i.  44,  note).  But  also 

CE  =  EF; 

therefore  also 

ED  =  EM. 

And  since 

LC  :  CG  :  :  K  :  2 CD  or  2MF, 

therefore  also 

XF.FN  ::K :  2  MF. 

Since  then  A F  is  an  hyperbola  whose  diameter  is  AB  and  tangent  MF,  and  AN 
has  been  drawn  ordinatewise,  and 

XF  :  FN  :  :  K  :  2FM, 

hence  any  lines  drawn  from  the  section  to  EF  produced,  parallel  to  FM,  will 
equal  in  square  the  rectangle  contained  by  the  straight  line  K  and  the  line  cut 
off  by  them  from  F,  exceeding  by  a  figure  similar  to  the  rectangle  CF,  K  (i.  50). 

And  with  these  things  shown,  it  is  at  once  evident  that  in  the  parabola  each 
of  the  straight  lines  draw  n  off  parallel  to  the  original  diameter  is  a  diameter 


668  APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 

(i.  46),  but  in  the  hyperbola  and  ellipse  and  opposite  sections  each  of  the 
straight  lines  drawn  through  the  center  is  a  diameter  (i.  47-48) ;  and  that  in  the 
parabola  the  straight  lines  dropped  to  each  of  the  diameters  parallel  to  the  tan¬ 
gents  will  equal  in  square  the  rectangles  applied  to  it  (i.  49),  but  in  the  hyper¬ 
bola  and  opposite  sections  they  will  equal  in  square  the  areas  applied  to  it  and 
exceeding  by  the  same  figure  (i.  50-51),  but  in  the  ellipse  the  areas  applied  to 
it  and  defective  by  the  same  figure  (i.  50) ;  and  that  all  the  things  which  have 
been  already  proved  about  the  sections  as  following  when  the  principal  diam¬ 
eters  are  used,1  will  also,  those  very  same  things,  follow  when  the  other 
diameters  are  taken. 

Proposition  52  (Problem) 

Given  a  straight  line  in  a  plane  bounded  at  one  point ,  to  find  in  the  plane  the  sec¬ 
tion  of  a  cone  called  parabola ,  whose  diameter  is  the  given  straight  line ,  and  whose 
vertex  is  the  end  of  the  straight  line ,  and  where  whatever  straight  line  is  dropped 
from  the  section  to  the  diameter  at  a  given  angle ,  unit  equal  in  square  the  rectangle 
contained  by  the  straight  line  cut  off  by  it  from  the  vertex  of  the  section  and  by  some 
other  given  straight  line. 

Let  there  be  the  straight  line  AB  given  in  position  and  bounded  at  the  point 
Ay  and  another  straight  line  CD  given  in  magnitude,  and  first  let  the  given 


angle  be  a  right  angle ;  it  is  required  then  to  find  a  parabola  in  the  plane  of 
reference  whose  diameter  is  the  straight  line  AB  and  whose  vertex  is  the  point 
A,  and  whose  upright  side  is  the  straight  fine  CD,  and  where  the  straight  lines 
dropped  ordinatewise  will  be  dropped  at  a  right  angle,  that  is  so  that  AB  is  the 
axis  (First  Def.  i.  7). 

Let  AB  be  produced  to  D,  and  let  CG  be  taken  as  the  fourth  part  of  CD, 
and  let 

EA>CGy 

and  let 


Therefore 

and 

therefore  also 


CD  :  H  :  :  H  :  EA. 

CD  :  EA  :  :  sq.  H  :  sq.  EAy 
CD<4EA; 
sq.  H< 4  sq.  EA. 


*The  principal  diameter  (5ux /serpos  a px^)  is  that  whose  being  is  established  in  1.7,  porism. 


CONICS  I 


669 


Therefore 


H < 2EA ; 

and  so  the  two  straight  lines EA  are  greater  than//.  It  is  therefore  possible  for  a 
triangle  to  be  constructed  from  H  and  two  straight  lines  EA .  Then  let  the  tri¬ 
angle  EAF  be  constructed  on  EA  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  of  reference  so  that 

EA=AF, 

and 


H  =  FE, 

and  let  the  straight  line  AK  be  drawn  parallel  to  FE,  and  FK  to  EA,  and  let  a 
cone  be  conceived  whose  vertex  is  the  point  F  and  whose  base  is  the  circle 
about  diameter  KA,  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  through  AFX.  Then  the  cone 
will  be  a  right  cone  (First  Def .  i.  3) ;  for 

AF  =  FK. 


And  let  the  cone  be  cut  by  a  plane  parallel  to  the  circle  KA,  and  let  it  make 
as  a  section  the  circle  MNX  (i.  4),  at  right  angles  clearly  to  the  plane  through 
MFN,  and  let  the  straight  line  MN  be  the  common  section  of  the  circle  MNX 
and  of  the  triangle  MFN ;  therefore  it  is  the  diameter  of  the  circle.  And  let  the 
straight  line  XL  be  the  common  section  of  the  plane  of  reference  and  of  the 
circle.  Since  then  circle  MNX  is  at  right  angles  to  triangle  MFN,  and  the  plane 
of  reference  also  at  right  angles  to  triangle  MFN,  therefore  the  straight  line  LX, 
their  common  section,  is  at  right  angles  to  triangle  MFN,  that  is  to  triangle 
KFA  (Eucl.  xi.  19) ;  and  therefore  it  is  perpendicular  to  all  the  straight  lines 
touching  it  and  in  the  triangle;  and  so  it  is  perpendicular  to  both  MN  and  AB. 

Again  since  a  cone,  whose  base  is  the  circle  MNX  and  whose  vertex  is  the 
point  F,  has  been  cut  by  a  plane  at  right  angles  to  the  triangle  MFN  and  makes 
as  a  section  circle  MNX,  and  since  it  has  also  been  cut  by  another  plane,  the 
plane  of  reference,  cutting  the  base  of  the  cone  in  a  straight  line  XL  at  right 
angles  to  MN  which  is  the  common  section  of  the  circle  MNX  and  the  triangle 
MFN,  and  the  common  section  of  the  plane  of  reference  and  of  the  triangle 
MFN,  the  straight  line  AB,  is  parallel  to  the  side  of  the  cone  FKM,  therefore 
the  resulting  section  of  the  cone  in  the  plane  of  reference  is  a  parabola,  and  its 
diameter  AB  (i.  11),  and  the  straight  lines  dropped  ordinatewise  from  the  sec¬ 
tion  to  AB  will  be  dropped  at  right  angles;  for  they  are  parallel  to  XL  which  is 
perpendicular  to  AB.  And  since 

CD  :  H  : :  H  :  EA, 

and 

EA=AF=FK 

and 

H  =  EF=AK, 

therefore 

CD  :  AK  :  :  AK  :  AF. 

And  therefore 

CD  :  AF  :  :  sq.  AK  :  sq.  AF  or  rect.  AF,  FK. 

Therefore  CD  is  the  upright  side  of  the  section;  for  this  has  been  shown  in  the 
eleventh  theorem  (i.  11). 

Proposition  53  (Problem) 

With  the  same  things  supposed,  let  the  given  angle  not  be  right,  and  let  the 
angle  HAE  be  made  equal  to  it  and  let 


670 


APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 


AH  =  half  CD, 

and  from  H  let  the  straight  line  HE  be  drawn  perpendicular  to  AE,  and 
through  E  let  the  straight  line  EL  be  drawn  parallel  to  BH,  and  from  A  let  the 
straight  line  A  L  be  drawn  perpendicu¬ 
lar  to  EL,  and  let  EL  be  bisected  at 
K,  and  from  K  let  the  straight  line 
KM  be  drawn  perpendicular  to  EL 
and  produced  to  F  and  G,  and  let 
rect.  LK,  KM  =  sq.  AL.  And  given  the 
two  straight  lines  LK  and  KM,  KL  in 
position  and  bounded  at  K ,  and  KM 
in  magnitude,  and  let  a  parabola  be 
described  with  a  right  angle  wiiose 
diameter  is  the  straight  line  KL,  and 
whose  vertex  is  the  point  K,  and 
wiiose  upright  side  is  the  straight  line 
KM,  as  has  been  shown  before  (i.  52) ; 
and  it  will  pass  through  the  point  A 

KpnQ  1  1  Qp 

sq.  AL  =  rect.  LK,KM  (i.  11), 
and  the  straight  line  EA  will  touch  the  section  because 

EK  =  KL  (i.  33). 

And  HA  is  parallel  to  EKL;  therefore  HAB  is  the  diameter  of  the  section,  and 
the  straight  lines  dropped  to  it  parallel  to  AE  will  be  bisected  by  AB  (i.  46). 
And  they  will  be  dropped  at  angle  HAE .  And  since 

angle  AEH  =  angle  AGF, 

and  angle  at  A  is  common,  therefore  triangle  AHE  is  similar  to  triangle  AGF. 
Therefore 

EA  : :  FA  :  AG] 


therefore 


But 


therefore 


HA 


2 AH  :  2 AE  :  :  FA  :  AG. 


CD  =  2AH] 


FA  :  AG  : :  CD  :  2 AE. 

Then  by  things  already  shown  in  the  forty-ninth  theorem  (i.  49)  the  straight 
line  CD  is  the  upright  side. 


Proposition  54 

Given  two  bounded  straight  lines  perpendicular  to  each  other,  one  of  them  being 
produced  on  the  side  of  the  right  angle,  to  find  on  the  straight  line  produced  the 
section  of  a  cone  called  hyperbola  in  the  same  plane  with  the  straight  lines,  so  that 
the  straight  line  produced  is  a  diameter  of  the  section  and  the  point  at  the  angle  is 
the  vertex,  and  where  whatever  straight  line  is  dropped  from  the  section  to  the  diam¬ 
eter,  making  an  angle  equal  to  the  given  angle,  will  equal  in  square  the  rectangle 
applied  to  the  other  straight  line  having  as  breadth  the  straight  line  cut  off  by  the 
dropped  straight  line  beginning  with  the  vertex  and  exceeding  by  a  figure  similar 
and  similarly  situated  to  that  contained  by  the  original  straight  lines . 

Let  there  be  the  two  bounded  straight  lines  AB  and  BC  perpendicular  to 


CONICS  I  671 

each  other,  and  let  AB  be  produced  to  D ;  it  is  required  then  to  find  in  the  plane 
through  the  lines  AB,  BC  an  hyperbola  whose  diameter  will  be  the  straight 


fine  ABD  and  vertex  B,  and  upright  side  the  straight  line  BC,  and  where  the 
straight  fines  dropped  from  the  section  to  BD  at  the  given  angle  will  equal  in 
square  the  rectangles  applied  to  BC  having  as  breadths  the  straight  fines  cut 
off  by  them  from  B  and  exceeding  by  a  figure  similar  and  similarly  situated  to 
the  rectangle  AB,  BC. 

First  let  the  given  angle  be  a  right  angle,  and  on  AB  let  a  plane  be  erected  at 
right  angles  to  the  plane  of  reference,  and  let  the  circle  AEBF  be  described  in  it 
about  AB,  so  that  the  segment  of  the  circle’s  diameter  within  the  sector  AEB 
has  to  the  segment  of  the  diameter  within  the  sector  AFB  a  ratio  not  greater 
than  that  of  AB  to  BC,1  and  let  AEB  be  bisected  at  E,  and  let  the  straight  fine 

'Eutocius,  commenting,  adds:  “Let  there  be  two  straight  lines  AB  and  BC,  and  let  it  be 
required  to  describe  a  circle  on  A B  so  that  its  diameter  is  cut  by  A B  in  such  a  way  that  the 

part  of  it  on  the  side  of  C  has  to  the  remainder  a  ratio  not 
greater  than  that  of  AB  to  BC. 

“Now  let  it  be  supposed  that  they  have  the  same  ratio, 
and  let  AB  be  bisected  at  D ,  and  through  it  let  the  straight 
line  EDF  be  drawn  perpendicular  to  AB,  and  let  it  be  con¬ 
trived  that  AB  :  BC  :  :  ED  :  DF, 

and  let  EF  be  bisected;  then  it  is  clear  that  if 
AB  =  BC 

and  ED  -  DF, 

the  point  D  will  be  the  midpoint  of  EF,  and  if 
AB>BC 

and  ED>DF, 

the  midpoint  will  be  below  D,  and  if 


F 


672 


APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 


EK  be  drawn  perpendicular  from  E  to  the  straight  line  AB  and  let  it  be  pro¬ 
duced  to  L;  therefore  the  straight  line  EL  is  a  diameter  (Eucl.  in.  1).  If  then 

AB  :  BC  :  :  EK  :  KL 

we  use  point  L,  but  if  not,  let  it  be  contrived  that 

AB  :  BC  :  :  EK  :  KM 


with 


KMCKL  (Eucl.  v.  8), 

and  through  M  let  MF  be  drawn  parallel  to  ABy  and  let  AFy  EF ,  and  FB  be 
joined,  and  through  B  let  BX  be  drawn  parallel  to  FE.  Since  then 

angle  AFE  =  angle  EFBy 


but 


angle  AFE  =  angle  AXBy 


and 

therefore  also 


angle  EFB  =  angle  XBFy 
angle  XBF  =  angle  FXB  ; 


therefore  also 


FB  =  FX. 


Let  a  cone  be  conceived  whose  vertex  is  the  point  F  and  whose  base  is  the 
circle  about  diameter  BX  at  right  angles  to  triangle  BFX .  Then  the  cone  will 
be  a  right  cone;  for 


FB  =  FX. 


Then  let  the  straight  lines  BFy  FXy  and  MF  be  produced,  and  let  the  cone 
be  cut  by  a  plane  parallel  to  the  circle  BX ;  then  the  section  mil  be  a  circle 
(i.  4).  Let  it  be  the  circle  GPR;  and  so  GH  mil  be  the  diameter  of  the  circle 
(i.  4,  end).  And  let  the  straight  line  PDR  be  the  common  section  of  circle  GH 
and  of  the  plane  of  reference ;  then  PDR  mil  be  perpendicular  to  both  of  the 
straight  lines  GH  and  DB ;  for  both  of  the  circles  XB  and  HG  are  perpendicular 
to  triangle  FGHy  and  the  plane  of  reference  is  perpendicular  to  triangle  FGH ; 
and  therefore  their  common  section  the  straight  line  PDR  is  perpendicular  to 
triangle  FGH ;  therefore  it  makes  right  angles  also  with  all  the  straight  lines 
touching  it  and  in  the  same  plane. 


AB  <BC, 

it  will  be  above  D. 

“And  now  let  it  be  below  as  G,  and  with  center  G  and  radius  GF  let  a  circle  be  described; 
then  it  will  have  to  pass  either  within  or  without  the  points  A  and  B.  And  if  it  should  pass 
through  the  points  A  and  B,  what  wTas  enjoined  would  be  done;  but  let  it  fall  beyond  the 
points  A  and  B,  and  let  the  straight  line  AB,  produced  both  wrays,  meet  the  circumference 
at  H  and  K,  and  let  FH,  HE,  EK  and  KF  be  joined,  and  let  MB  be  drawm  through  B 
parallel  to  FK,  and  BL  parallel  to  KE,  and  let  MA  and  AL  be  joined;  then  these  will  also  be 
parallel  to  FH  and  HE  because  AD  =  DB 

and  DH  =  DK 

and  FDE  is  perpendicular  to  HK.  And  since  the  angle  at  K  is  a  right  angle,  and  MB  and  BL 
are  parallel  to  FK  and  KE,  therefore  the  angle  at  B  is  a  right  angle;  then  for  the  same  reasons 
also  the  angle  at  A.  And  so  the  circle  described  on  ML  will  pass  through  the  points  A  and  B 
(Eucl.  hi.  31).  Let  the  circle  MALB  be  described.  And  since  MB  is  parallel  to  FK, 

FD  :  DM  :  :  KD  :  DB. 

Then  likewise  also  KD  :  DB  :  :  ED  :  DL. 

And  therefore  FD  :  DM  :  :  ED  :  DL. 

And  alternately,  ED  :  DF  :  :  AB  :  BC  : :  LD  :  DM. 

“And  likewise  if  the  circle  described  on  FE  cuts  AB,  the  same  thing  could  be  showm.” 


673 


CONICS  I 


And  since  a  cone  whose  base  is  circle  GH  and  vertex  F ,  has  been  cut  by  a 
plane  perpendicular  to  triangle  FGH ,  and  has  also  been  cut  by  another  plane, 
the  plane  of  reference,  in  the  straight  line  PDR  perpendicular  to  the  straight 
line  GDH ,  and  the  common  section  of  the  plane  of  reference  and  of  triangle 
GFH,  that  is  the  straight  line  DB ,  produced  in  the  direction  of  B,  meets  the 
straight  line  GF  at  A,  therefore  by  things  already  shown  before  (i.  12)  the 
section  PBR  will  be  an  hyperbola  whose  vertex  is  the  point  B,  and  where  the 
straight  lines  dropped  ordinatewise  to  BD  will  be  dropped  at  a  right  angle;  for 
they  are  parallel  to  straight  line  PDR .  And  since 

AB  :  BC  :  :  EK  :  KM, 

and 

EK  :  KM  : :  EN  :  NF  :  :  rect.  EN,  NF  :  sq.  NF, 

t  Vi  prpfnrp 

AB  :  BC  :  :  rect.  EN,NF  :  sq.  NF. 

And 


therefore 


rect.  EN,  AT'7  =  rect.  AN,NB; 


But 


AB:CB  :  :  rect.  AN,  NB  :  sq.  NF. 


but 


rect.  AN,  NB  :  sq.  NF  comp.  AN  :  NF,  BN  :  NF; 


and 

therefore 
that  is 


AN  :  NF  :  :  AD  :  DG  :  :  FO  :  OG, 
BN  :  NF  :  :  FO  :  OH; 

AB  :  BC  comp.  FO  :  OG,FO  :  OH, 


sq.  FO  :  rect.  OG,OH . 

Therefore 

AB  :  BC  :  :  sq.  FO  :  rect.  OG,OH. 

And  the  straight  line  FO  is  parallel  to  the  straight  line  AD;  therefore  the 
straight  line  AB  is  the  transverse  side,  and  BC  the  upright  side;  for  these 
things  have  been  shown  in  the  twelfth  theorem  (i.  12). 


Proposition  55  (Problem) 

Then  let  the  given  angle  not  be  a  right  angle,  and  let  there  be  the  two  given 
straight  lines  AB  and  AC,  and  let  the  given  angle  be  equal  to  angle  BAH;  then 
it  is  required  to  describe  an  hyperbola  whose  diameter  will  be  the  straight  line 
AB,  and  upright  side  AC,  and  where  the  ordinates  will  be  dropped  at  angle 
HAB . 

Let  the  straight  line  AB  be  bisected  at  D,  and  let  the  semicircle  AFD  be 
described  on  AD,  and  let  some  straight  line  F G,  parallel  to  AH,  be  drawn  to 
the  semicircle  making 

sq.  FG  :  rect.  DG,  GA  :  :  AC  :  AB,1 


1Eutocius>  commenting,  gives  this  construction:  “Let  there  be  the  semicircle  ABC  on  the 
diameter  AC,  and  the  given  ratio  EF  to  FG,  and  let  it  be  required  to  do  what  is  proposed. 

“Let  FH  be  made  equal  to  EF,  and  let  HG  be  bisected  at  K ,  and  let  the  straight  line  CB 
be  drawn  in  the  semicircle  at  angle  ACB  (the  required  angle),  and  from  the  center  L  let  the 
straight  line  LS  be  drawn  perpendicular  to  it,  and  produced  let  it  meet  the  circumference  at 


674  APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 

and  let  the  straight  line  FHD  be  joined  and  produced  to  D, 
and  let 


FD  .DL: :  DL  :  DH, 
and  let  DK  be  made  equal  to  DL,  and  let 

rect.  LF  ,FM  =  sq.  AF, 

and  let  KM  be  joined,  and  through  L  let  LN  be  drawn  perpendicular  to  KF 
and  let  it  be  produced  towards  X .  And  with  two  given  bounded  straight  lines 
KL  and  LN  perpendicular  to  each  other,  let  an  hyperbola  be  described  whose 
transverse  side  is  KL,  and  upright  side  LN,  and  where  the  straight  lines 
dropped  from  the  section  to  the  diameter  will  be  dropped  at  a  right  angle  and 
will  equal  in  square  the  rectangle  applied  to  LN  having  as  breadths  the  straight 
lines  cut  off  by  them  from  L  and  exceeding  by  a  figure  similar  to  rectangle  KL, 
LN  (i.  54) ;  and  the  section  will  pass  through  A ;  for 
sq.  AF  =  rect.  LF,FM  (i.  12). 


N,  and  through  N  let  NM  be  drawn  parallel  to  CB;  therefore  it  will  touch  the  circle.  And  let 
it  be  contrived  that  FH  :  HK  :  :  MX  :  XN, 

and  let  NO  be  made  equal  to  XN,  and  let 
the  straight  lines  LX  and  LO  cutting  the 
semicircle  at  P  and  R  be  joined,  and  let  the 
straight  line  PRD  be  joined. 

Since  then  XN  =  NOf 
and  NL  is  common  and  perpendicular, 
therefore 

LO  -  LX.  G  k  h  F 

And  also  LP  =  LR ; 

and  therefore  the  remainders  PO=RX. 

Therefore  PRD  is  parallel  to  MO.  And 

FH:HK  : :  MX  :  NX; 
and  HK  :  HG  :  :  NX  :  XO; 

therefore  ex  aequali  FH  :  HG  : :  MX  :  XO; 

inversely  HG  :  FH  : :  XO  :  MX; 

componendo  GF  :  FH  :  :  OM  :  MX 

or  GF  :  FE  ::  PD  :  DR. 

And  PD  :  DR  :  :  rect.  PD,  DR  :  sq.  DR , 

but  rect.  PD}DR  =  rect.  AD,  DC  (Eucl.  in.  36); 

therefore  GF  :  FE  : :  rect.  AD,  DC  :  sq.  DR. 

Therefore  inversely  FE  :  GF  :  :  sq.  DR  :  rect.  AD,  DC” 


CONICS  I 


675 


And  AH  will  touch  it;  for 

rect.  FD,  DH  =  sq.  DL  (i.  37). 

And  so  AB  is  a  diameter  of  the  section  (i.  51).  And  since 

CA  :  2 AD  or  AB  :  :  sq.  FG  :  rect.  DG,GA, 


but 

or 

and 

therefore 
But  also 


CA  :  2 AD  comp.  CA  :  2  AH,  2 AH  :  2 AD 
CA  :  2 AD  comp.  CA  :  2AHyAH  :  AD 
AH  :  AD::  FG:  GD, 

CA  :  AB  comp.  CA  :  2 AH,  FG  :  GD. 
sq.  FG  :  rect.  DG,GA  comp.  FG  :  GD,  FG  :  GA; 


therefore 

ratio  comp.  CA  :  2AH,FG  :  GD  —  ratio  comp.  FG  :  GA,FG  :  GD. 

Let  the  common  ratio  FG  :  GD  be  taken  away;  therefore 

CA  :  2 AH  : :  FG  :  GA. 

But 

FG  :  GA  :  :  OA  :  AX, 

therefore 

CA  :  2 AH  : :  OA  :  AX. 

But  whenever  this  is  so,  the  straight  line  AC  is  a  parameter;  for  this  has  been 
shown  in  the  fiftieth  theorem  (i.  50). 

Proposition  56  (Problem) 


Given  two  bounded  straight  lines  perpendicular  to  each  other ,  to  find  about  one  of 
them  as  diameter  and  in  the  same  plane  with  the  two  straight  lines  the  section  of  a 
cone  called  ellipse ,  whose  vertex  will  be  the  point  at  the  right  angle,  and  where  the 
straight  lines  dropped  ordinatewise  from  the  section  to  the  diameter  at  a  given  angle 
will  equal  in  square  the  rectangles  applied  to  the  other  straight  line,  having  as 
breadth  the  straight  line  cut  off  by  them  from  the  vertex  of  the  section  and  defective 
by  a  figure  similar  and  similarly  situated  to  the  rectangle  contained  by  the  given 
straight  lines . 

Let  there  be  two  given  straight  lines  AB  and  AC  perpendicular  to  each  other, 


D 


676 


APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 


of  which  the  greater  is  the  straight  line  AB;  then  it  is  required  to  describe  in 
the  plane  of  reference  an  ellipse  whose  diameter  will  be  the  straight  line  AB 
and  vertex  A ,  and  upright  side  AC,  and  where  the  ordinates  will  be  dropped 
from  the  section  to  the  diameter  at  a  given  angle  and  will  equal  in  square  the 
rectangles  applied  to  AC  having  as  breadths  the  straight  lines  cut  off  by  them 
from  A  and  defective  by  a  figure  similar  and  similarly  situated  to  rectangle 
BA,  AC. 

And  first  let  the  given  angle  be  a  right  angle,  and  let  a  plane  be  erected  from 
AB  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  of  reference,  and  in  it,  on  AB,  let  the  sector  of  a 
circle  ADB  be  described,  and  its  midpoint  be  D,  and  let  the  straight  lines  DA 
and  DB  be  joined,  and  let  the  straight  line  AX  be  made  equal  to  AC,  and 
through  X  let  the  straight  line  XO  be  drawn  parallel  to  DB,  and  through  0  let 
OF  be  drawn  parallel  to  AB,  and  let  DF  be  joined  and  let  it  meet  AB  produced 
at  E ;  then  we  will  have 

AB  :  AC  :  :  AB  :  AX  :  :  DA  :  AO  :  :  DE  :  EF. 

And  let  the  straight  lines  AF  and  FB  be  joined  and  produced,  and  let  some 
point  G  be  taken  at  random  on  FA,  and  through  it  let  the  straight  line  GL 
be  drawn  parallel  to  DE  and  let  it  meet  AB  produced  at  K ;  then  let  FO  be  pro¬ 
duced  and  let  it  meet  GK  at  L.  Since  then 

arc  AD  =  arc  DB, 

angle  ABD  =  angle  DFB  (Eucl.  hi.  27). 

And  since 


angle  EFA  =  angle  FDA  +  angle  FAD, 
but 

angle  FAD  =  angle  FBD, 

and 

angle  FDA  =  angle  FBA, 

therefore  also 

angle  EFA  =  angle  DBA  =  angle  DFB. 
And  also  DE  is  parallel  to  LG ;  therefore 

angle  EFA  =  angle  FGH, 

and 

angle  DFB  =  angle  FHG 

And  so  also 

angle  FGH  =  angle  FHG, 

and 


FG  =  FH. 

Then  let  circle  GHN  be  described  about  HG  at  right  angles  to  triangle  HGF, 
let  a  cone  be  conceived  whose  base  is  the  circle  GHN,  and  whose  vertex  is  the 
point  F;  then  the  cone  will  be  a  right  cone  because 

FG  =  FH. 

And  since  the  circle  GHN  is  at  right  angles  to  plane  HGF,  and  the  plane  of 
reference  is  also  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  through  GH  and  HF,  therefore 
their  common  section  will  be  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  through  GH  and  HF. 
Then  let  their  common  section  be  the  straight  line  KM;  therefore  the  straight 
line  KM  is  perpendicular  to  both  of  the  straight  lines  AK  and  KG. 

And  since  a  cone  whose  base  is  the  circle  GHN,  and  whose  vertex  is  the 
point  F,  has  been  cut  by  a  plane  through  the  axis  and  makes  as  a  section  tri¬ 
angle  GHF,  and  has  been  cut  also  by  another  plane  through  AK  and  KM, 


CONICS  I  677 

which  is  the  plane  of  reference,  in  the  straight  line  KM  which  is  perpendicular 
to  GK ,  and  the  plane  meets  the  sides  of  the  cone  FG  and  FH ,  therefore  the 
resulting  section  is  an  ellipse  whose  diameter  is  AB  and  where  the  ordinates 
will  be  dropped  at  a  right  angle  (i.  13);  for  they  are  parallel  to  KM.  And  since 
DE  :  EF  :  :  rect.  DE,  EF  or  rect.  BE,EA  :  sq.  EF, 

and 

rect.  BE,EA  :  sq.  EF  comp.  BE  :  EF,  AE  :  EF, 
but 

BE  :EF  :  :  BK  :  KH, 

and 

AE  :  EF  :  :  AK  :  KG  :  :  FL  :  LG, 

therefore 

BA  :  AC  comp.  FL  :  LG,  FL  :  LH  (see  above), 
w  hich  is  the  same  as 

sq.  FL  :  rect.  GL,LH; 

therefore 

BA:  AC::  sq.  FL  :  rect.  GL,  LH. 

And  whenever  this  is  so,  the  straight  line  AC  is  the  upright  side  of  the  figure, 
as  has  been  shown  in  the  thirteenth  theorem  (i.  13). 


Proposition  57  (Problem) 

With  the  same  things  supposed  let  the  straight  line  AB  be  less  than  AC,  and 
let  it  be  required  to  describe  an  ellipse  about  diameter  AB  so  that  AC  is  the 
upright. 

Let  AS  be  bisected  at  D,  and  from  D  let  the  straight  line  EDF  be  drawn 
perpendicular  to  AS,  and  let 

sq.  FS  =  rect.  BA,  AC 

so  that 

FD  =  DE, 

and  let  FG  be  drawn  parallel  to  AS,  and  let  it  be 
contrived  that 

AC  :AB::EF:  FG; 

therefore  also 

EF>FG . 

And  since 

rect.  CA,  AS  =  sq.  EF, 

hence 

CA  :  AS  :  :  sq.  FE  :  sq.  AS  :  :  sq.  DF  :  sq.  DA. 
But 

CA:AB::EF  :  FG, 

therefore 

EF  :  FG  :  :  sq.  FD  :  sq.  DA. 

But 

sq.  SD  =  rect.  FD,DE; 

therefore 

EF  :  FG  :  :  rect.  ED.DF  :  sq.  AD. 

Then  with  two  bounded  straight  lines  situated  at  right  angles  to  each  other 
and  with  EF  greater,  let  an  ellipse  be  described  whose  diameter  is  EF  and 
upright  side  FG  (i.  56) ;  then  the  section  will  pass  through  A  because 


678 


APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 
rect.  FD,DE  :  sq.  DA  :  :  EF  :  FG  (i.  21). 


And 

AD=DB ; 

then  it  will  also  pass  through  B.  Then  an  ellipse  has  been  described  about  AB. 
And  since 

CA  :  AB  :  :  sq.  FD  :  sq.  DA, 

and 

sq.  DA  =  rect.  AD,DB, 

therefore 

CA  :  AB  :  :  sq.  DF  :  rect.  AD,DB. 

And  so  the  straight  line  AC  is  an  upright  side  (i.  21). 

Proposition  58  (Problem) 


But  then  let  the  given  angle  not  be  a  right  angle,  and  let  the  angle  BAD  be 
equal  to  it,  and  let  the  straight  line  AB  be  bisected  at  E ,  and  let  the  semicircle 
AFE  be  described  on  AE,  and  in  it  let  the  straight  line  FG  be  drawn  parallel 
to  AD  making 

sq.  FG  :  rect.  AG,  GE  ::CA:  AB,1 

and  let  the  straight  lines  AF  and  EF  be  joined  and  produced,  and  let 

DE  :  EH  : :  EH  : :  EF, 


1Eutocius>  commenting,  gives  this  construction:  “Let  there  be  the  semicircle  ABC  and 
within  it  some  straight  line  AB  (at  the  required  angle  to  AC),  and  let  two  unequal  straight 
lines  DE  and  EF  be  laid  down,  and  let  EF  be  produced  to  G ,  and  let  FG  be  made  equal  to 
DE ,  and  let  the  whole  line  EG  be  bisected  at  H ,  and  let  the  center  of  the  circle,  K,  be  taken, 
and  from  it  let  a  perpendicular  be  drawn  to  AB  and  let  it  meet  the  circumference  at  L,  and 
through  L  let  LM  be  drawn  parallel  to  AB,  and  let  KA  produced  meet  LM  at  M,  and  let  it 
be  contrived  that  HF  :  FG  : :  LM  :  MN, 

and  let  LX  —  LN , 

and  let  the  straight  lines  NK  and  KX  be  joined  and  produced,  and  let  the  circle,  finished 
out,  cut  them  at  P  and  0,  and  let  the  straight  line 
ORP  be  joined. 

:  LM  :  MN, 

:  LN  :  NM; 

:  NM  :  NL, 

:  MN  :  NX; 

FE  :  :  NM  :  MX. 


1 ‘Since  then 
componendo 
inversely 
and 

separando 
And  since 


FH  :  FG 
HG:GF 
FG  :  GH 
FG  :  GE 
FG 

NL  =  LX, 

and  the  straight  line  LK  is  common  and  at  right 
angles,  therefore  also 

KN=KX . 

And  also  KO=KP; 

therefore  NX  is  parallel  to  OP.  Therefore  triangle 
KMN  is  similar  to  triangle  OKR  and  triangle  KMX 
to  triangle  PRK. 


Therefore 
But  also 
and  therefore 
and  alternately 
But  NM 

and  OR : 

and  therefore 

DE  :  EF  : :  sq.  OR  :  rect.  OR,  RP. 

And  rect.  OR,  RP  =  rect.  AR,RC  (Eucl.  in.  35). 
Therefore  DE  :  EF  :  :  sq.  OR  :  rect.  AR,  RC .” 


KM  :  KR  :  :  MN  :  RO. 

KM  :  KR  :  :  MX  :  PR; 

NM  :  RO  :  :  MX  :  PR; 

NM  :  MX  ::R0:  RP. 

MX  : :  GF  :  FE  : :  DE  :  EF, 
RP  : :  sq.  OR  :  rect.  0R,RP; 


CONICS  I 


679 


and  let 

EK  =  EH , 

and  let  it  be  contrived  that 

rect.  HF ,  FL  =  sq.  AF, 

and  let  the  straight  line  KL  be  joined,  and  from 
H  let  the  straight  line  HMX  be  drawn  perpen¬ 
dicular  to  HF  and  so  parallel  to  the  straight  line 
AFL ;  for  the  angle  at  F  is  right.  And  with  the 
two  given  bounded  straight  lines  KH ,  and  HM 
perpendicular  to  each  other,  let  an  ellipse  be 
described  whose  transverse  diameter  is  KH, 
and  the  upright  side  of  whose  figure  is  HM, 
and  where  the  ordinates  to  HK  will  be  dropped 
at  right  angles  (i.  56-57);  then  the  section  will 
pass  through  A  because  sq.  FA  =rect.  HF,  FL 
(i.  13).  And  since 

HE  =  EK, 

and 

AE  =  EB, 

the  section  will  also  pass  through  B ,  and  E  will  be  the  center,  and  the  straight 
line  AEB  the  diameter.  And  the  straight  line  DA  will  touch  the  section  because 

rect.  DE,  EF  =  sq.  EH. 


And  since 


but 


and 


CA  :  AB  :  :  sq.  FG  :  rect,  AG,GE, 

CA  :  AB  comp.  CA  :  2 AD,  2 AD  :  AB  or  DA  :  AE, 
sq.  FG.  =  rect.  AG,  GE  comp.  FG  :  GE,  FG  :  GA, 


therefore 

ratio  comp.  CA  :  2 AD, DA  :  AF  =  ratio  comp.  FG  :  GE,FG  :  GA. 

But 

DA  :  AE  :  :  FG  :  GE; 

and  the  common  ratio  being  taken  away,  we  -will  have 

CA  :  2 AD  :  :  FG  :  GA 
or 

CA  :  2AD  :  :  XA  :  AiV. 

And  whenever  this  is  so,  the  straight  line  AC  is  the  upright  side  of  the  figure 
(i.  SON 


Proposition  59  (Problem) 

Given  two  bounded  straight  lines  perpendicular  to  each  other ,  to  find  opposite 
sections  whose  diameter  is  one  of  the  given  straight  lines,  and  whose  vertex  is  the 
ends  of  the  straight  line,  and  where  the  straight  lines  dropped  in  each  of  the  sec¬ 
tions  at  a  given  angle  will  equal  in  square  the  rectangles  applied  to  the  other  of  the 
straight  lines  and  exceeding  by  a  figure  similar  to  the  rectangle  contained  by  the 
given  straight  lines. 

Let  there  be  the  two  given  bounded  straight  lines  BE  and  BII,  perpendicular 
to  each  other,  and  let  the  given  angle  be  G;  then  it  is  required  to  describe 


680  APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 

opposite  sections  about  one  of  the  straight  lines  BE  and  BH,  so  that  the 
ordinates  are  dropped  at  an  angle  G. 


And  given  the  two  straight  lines  BE  and  BH,  let  an  hyperbola  be  described 
whose  transverse  diameter  will  be  the  straight  line  BE,  and  the  upright  side  of 
whose  figure  will  be  HB,  and  where  the  ordinates  to  BE  produced  will  be  at  an 
angle  G,  and  let  it  be  the  line  ABC;  for  we  have  already  described  how  this 
must  be  done  (i.  55).  Then  let  the  straight  line  EK  be  drawn  through  E  per¬ 
pendicular  to  BE  and  equal  to  BH,  and  let  another  hyperbola  DEF  be  like¬ 
wise  described  whose  diameter  is  BE  and  the  upright  side  of  whose  figure  is 
EK,  and  where  the  ordinates  from  the  section  will  be  dropped  at  a  same  angle 
G.  Then  it  is  evident  that  B  and  E  are  opposite  sections,  and  there  is  one 
diameter  for  them,  and  their  uprights  are  equal. 

Proposition  60  (Problem) 

Given  two  straight  lines  bisecting  each  other ,  to  describe  about  each  of  them  opposite 
sections,  so  that  the  straight  lines  are  their  conjugate  diameters  and  the  diameter  of 
one  pair  of  opposite  sections  is  equal  in  square  to  the  figure  of  the  other  pair ,  and 
likewise  the  diameter  of  the  second  pair  of  opposite  sections  is  equal  in  square  to 
the  figure  of  the  first  pair. 

Let  there  be  the  two  given  straight  lines  AC  and  DE  bisecting  each  other; 
then  it  is  required  to  describe  opposite  sections  about  each  of  them  as  a  diam¬ 
eter  so  that  the  straight  lines  AC  and  DE  are  conjugates  in  them,  and  DE  is 
equal  in  square  to  the  figure  about  AC,  and  AC  is  equal  in  square  to  the  figure 
about  DE. 

Let 

rect.  AC,  CL  =  sq.  DE, 

and  let  LC  be  perpendicular  to  CA.  And  given  two  straight  lines  AC  and  CL 
perpendicular  to  each  other,  let  the  opposite  sections  RAG  and  HCK  be 
described  whose  transverse  diameter  wall  be  CA  and  whose  upright  side  will  be 
CL,  and  where  the  ordinates  from  the  sections  to  CA  will  be  dropped  at  the 
given  angle  (i.  59).  Then  the  straight  line  DE  will  be  a  second  diameter  of  the 
opposite  sections  (Sec.  Def.,  i.  11);  for  it  is  the  mean  proportion  between  the 
sides  of  the  figure,  and,  parallel  to  an  ordinate,  it  has  been  bisected  at  B. 


Then  again  let 


CONICS  I 


681 


rect.  DE,DF  =  sq.  AC, 


and  let  DF  be  perpendicular  to  DE.  And  given  two  straight  lines  ED  and  DF 
lying  perpendicular  to  each  other,  let  the  opposite  sections  MDN  and  OEX 
be  described,  whose  transverse  diameter  will  be  DE  and  the  upright  side  of 
whose  figure  will  be  DF ,  and  where  the  ordinates  from  the  sections  will  be 
dropped  to  DE  at  the  given  angle  (i.  59);  then  the  straight  fine  AC  will  also 
be  a  second  diameter  of  the  sections  MDN  and  XEO.  And  so  AC  bisects  the 
parallels  to  DE  between  the  sections  RAG  and  HCKy  and  DE  the  parallels  to 
AC;  and  this  it  was  required  to  do. 

And  let  such  sections  be  called  conjugate. 


BOOK  TWO 


Apollonius  to  Eudemus, 

If  you  are  well,  well  and  good,  and  I  too  fare  pretty  well. 

I  have  sent  you  my  son  Apollonius  bringing  you  the  second  book  of  the 
conics  as  arranged  by  us.  Go  through  it  then  carefully  and  acquaint  those  with 
it  worthy  of  sharing  in  such  things.  And  Philonides,  the  geometer,  I  introduced 
to  you  in  Ephesus,  if  ever  he  happen  about  Pergamum,  acquaint  him  with  it 
too.  And  take  care  of  yourself,  to  be  well.  Good-bye. 

Proposition  1 

If  a  straight  line  touch  an  hyperbola  at  its  vertexy  and  from  it  on  both  sides  of  the 
diameter  a  straight  line  is  cut  off  equal  to  the  straight  line  equal  in  square  to  the 
fourth  of  the  figure ,  then  the  straight  lines  drawn  from  the  center  of  the  section  to 
the  ends  thus  taken  on  the  tangent  will  not  meet  the  section . 

Let  there  be  an  hyperbola  whose  diameter  is  the  straight  line  AB  and  center 
C,  and  upright  the  straight  line  BF;  and  let  the  straight  line  DE  touch  the 


section  at  B,  and  let  the  squares  on  BD  and  BE  each  be  equal  to  the  fourth  of 
the  figure  AB,  BF ,  and  the  straight  lines  CD  and  CE  be  joined  and  produced. 
I  say  that  they  will  not  meet  the  section. 

For  if  possible,  let  CD  meet  the  section  at  G,  and  from  G  let  the  straight  line 
GH  be  dropped  ordinatewise;  therefore  it  is  parallel  to  DB  (i.  17).  Since  then 
AB  :  BF  :  :  sq.  AB  :  rect.  AB,BF, 

682 


CONICS  II 


6S3 


but 

and 


sq.  CB  =  fourth  sq.  AB, 


therefore 
And  also 
therefore 
Therefore 


sq.  BD  =  fourth  rect.  AB.BF. 

AB  :  BF  :  :  sq.  CB  :  sq.  DB  :  :  sq.  CH  :  sq.  HG . 
A£  :  J5F  :  :  rect,  AH  JIB  :  sq.  HG  (i.  21); 
sq.  CH  :  sq.  tfG  :  :  rect.  AH,HB  :  sq.  HG. 


rect,  AHyHB  =  sq.  CH; 

and  this  is  absurd  (Eucl.  n.  6).  Therefore  the  straight  line  CD  will  not  meet 
the  section.  Then  likewise  we  could  show  that  neither  does  CE;  therefore  the 
straight  lines  CD  and  CE  are  asymptotes  (6.<jvixtvtutoi)1  to  the  section. 


Proposition  2 

With  the  same  things  it  is  to  he  shown  that  a  straight  line  cutting  the  angle  con¬ 
tained  by  the  straight  lines  DC  and  CE  is  not  another  asymptote. 

For  if  possible,  let  CH  be  it,  and  let  the  straight  line  BH  be  drawn  through  B 
parallel  to  CD  and  let  it  meet  CH  at  H ,  and  let  DG  be  made  equal  to  BH  and 


let  GH  be  joined  and  produced  to  the  points  K,  L,  and  M.  Since  then  BH  and 
DG  are  equal  and  parallel,  DB  and  HG  are  also  equal  and  parallel.  And  since 
AB  is  bisected  at  C  and  a  straight  line  BL  is  added  to  it, 

rect,  AL , LB +sq.  CB  =  sq.  CL  (Eucl.  n.  6). 

Likewise  then,  since  GM  is  parallel  to  DEy  and 

DB  =  BEy 


xThe  word  kavunTUTCK  means  literally  “not  capable  of  meeting”  and  is  used  in  a  general 
way  in  Euclid  to  refer  to  any  non-secant  lines  or  planes.  In  Apollonius  it  is  also  used  in  this 
way,  as  for  instance  in  ii.  14,  porism,  where  it  refers  to  any  straight  lines  not  meeting  the 
hyperbola.  The  special  case  where  in  English  the  lines  are  spoken  of  as  asymptotes  is  the  one 
defined  here.  Book  II,  proposition  14,  porism  further  declares  their  peculiar  property  and 
significance. 


684 

APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 

therefore  also 

GL  =  LM. 

And  since 

GH  =  DB, 

therefore 

GK>DB. 

And  also 

KM>BE, 

since  also 

LM>BE; 

therefore 

rect.  MK,KG> rect.  DB,BE 

>sq.  DB. 

Since  then 

AB  :  BF  : :  sq.  CB  :  sq.  BD  (n.  1), 

but 

AB  :  BF  :  :  rect.  AL,LB  :  sq.  LK  (i.  21), 

and 

sq.  CB  :  sq.  BD  : :  sq.  CL  :  sq.  LG, 

therefore  also 

sq.  CL  :  sq.  LG  :  :  rect.  AL,LB  :  sq.  LK. 

Since  then 

whole  sq.  LC  :  whole  sq.  LG  :  : 

part  subtr.  rect.  AL,LB  :  part  subtr.  sq.  LK, 

therefore  also 

that  is 
Therefore 


sq.  LC  :  sq.  LG  :  :  remainder  sq.  CB  :  remainder  rect.  MK,KG, 
sq.  CB  :  rect.  MK,KG  :  :  sq.  CB  :  sq.  DB. 


sq.  DjB  =  rect.  MK,  KG; 

and  this  is  absurd;  for  it  has  been  shown  to  be  greater  than  it.  Therefore  the 
straight  line  CH  is  not  an  asymptote  to  the  section. 


Proposition  3 

If  a  straight  line  touches  an  hyperbola,  it  will  meet  both  of  the  asymptotes  and  it 
will  be  bisected  at  the  point  of  contact ,  and  the  square  on  each  of  its  segments  will  be 
equal  to  the  fourth  of  the  figure  resulting  on  the  diameter  drawn  through  the  point 
of  contact. 

Let  there  be  the  hyperbola  ABC ,  and  its  center  E,  and  asymptotes  FE  and 
EG,  and  let  some  straight  line  HK  touch  it  at  B . 

I  say  that  the  straight  line  HK  produced  will  meet  the  straight  lines  FE 
and  EG. 

For  if  possible,  let  it  not  meet  them,  and  let  EB  be  joined  and  produced,  and 
let  ED  be  made  equal  to  EB ;  therefore  the  straight  line  BD  is  a  diameter. 
Then  let  the  squares  on  HB  and  BK  each  be  made  equal  to  the  fourth  of  the 
figure  on  BD,  and  let  EH  and  EK  be  joined.  Therefore  they  are  asymptotes 
(n.  1);  and  this  is  absurd  (n.  2);  for  FE  and  EG  are  supposed  asymptotes. 
Therefore  KH  produced  will  meet  the  asymptotes  EF  and  EG  at  F  and  G. 


CONICS  II  685 

I  say  then  also  that  the  squares  on  BF  and  BG  will  each  be  equal  to  the 
fourth  of  the  figure  on  BD. 


For  let  it  not  be,  but  if  possible,  let  the  squares  on  BH  and  BK  each  be  equal 
to  the  fourth  of  the  figure.  Therefore  HE  and  EK  are  asymptotes  (n.  1);  and 
this  is  absurd  (n.  2).  Therefore  the  squares  on  FB  and  BG  will  each  be  equal 
to  the  fourth  of  the  figure  on  BD . 

Proposition  4  (Problem) 


Given  two  straight  lines  containing  an  angle  and  a  point  within  the  angley  to 
describe  through  the  point  the  section  of  a  cone  called  hyperbola  so  that  the  given 
straight  lines  are  its  asymptotes. 

Let  there  be  the  two  straight  lines  AC  and  AB  containing  a  chance  angle  at 
Ay  and  let  some  point  D  be  given,  and  let  it  be  required  to  describe  through  D 
an  hyperbola  to  the  asymptotes  CA  and  AB. 


Let  the  straight  line  AD  be 
joined  and  produced  to  Ey 
and  let  AE  be  made  equal  to 
DAy  and  let  the  straight  line 
DF  be  drawn  through  D  par¬ 
allel  to  ABy  and  let  FC  be 
made  equal  to  AF}  and  let  CD 
be  joined  and  produced  to  B , 
and  let  it  be  contrived  that 
rect.  DEyG  =  sq.  CBy 
and  with  AD  extended  let  an 
hyperbola  be  described  about 
it  through  D  so  that  the 
ordinates  equal  in  square  the  areas  applied  to  G  and  exceeding  by  a  figure 
similar  to  rectangle  DEyG.  Since  then  DF  is  parallel  to  BAy  and 

CF  =  FAy 

therefore 


and  so 


And 


CD  =  DB ; 
sq.  CB  =  4  sq.  CD. 
sq.  CB  =  rect.  DE}G; 


686  APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 

therefore  the  squares  on  CD  and  DB  are  each  equal  to  the  fourth  part  of  the 
figure  DE,  G.  Therefore  the  straight  fines  AB  and  AC  are  asymptotes  to  the 
hyperbola  described. 


Proposition  5 

If  the  diameter  of  a  'parabola  or  hyperbola  bisects  some  straight  line,  the  tangent 
to  the  section  at  the  end  of  the  diameter  will  be  parallel  to  the  bisected  straight  line. 

Let  there  be  the  parabola  or  hyperbola  ABC  whose  diameter  is  the  straight 
fine  DBE,  and  let  the  straight  fine  FBG  touch 
the  section,  and  let  some  straight  fine  AEC  be 
drawn  in  the  section  making  AE  equal  to 
EC. 

I  say  that  AC  is  parallel  to  FG. 

For  if  not,  let  the  straight  fine  CH  be  drawn 
through  C  parallel  to  FG  and  let  HA  be 
joined.  Since  then  ARC  is  a  parabola  or  hyper¬ 
bola  whose  diameter  is  DE,  and  tangent  FG, 
and  CH  is  parallel  to  it,  therefore 
CK  =  KH  (i.  46,47). 

But  also 

CE  =  EA. 

Therefore  AH  is  parallel  to  KE;  and  this  is 
absurd;  for  produced  it  meets  BD  (i.  22). 


Proposition  6 

If  the  diameter  of  an  ellipse  or  circumference  of  a  circle  bisects  some  straight  line 
not  through  the  center,  the  tangent  to  the  section  at  the  end  of  the  diameter  will  be 
parallel  to  the  bisected  straight  line. 

Let  there  be  an  ellipse  or  circumference  of  a  circle  whose  diameter  is  the 
straight  fine  AB,  and  let  AB  bisect  CD,  a  straight 
fine  not  through  the  center,  at  the  point  E. 

I  sav  that  the  tangent  to  the  section  at  A  is  par¬ 
allel  to  CD. 

For  let  it  not  be,  but  if  possible,  let  DF  be  parallel 
to  the  tangent  at  A ;  therefore 
DG  =  FG. 

But  also 

DE  =  EC ; 

therefore  CF  is  parallel  to  GE;  and  this  is  absurd. 

For  if  G  is  the  center  of  the  section  AB,  the  straight 

fine  CF  will  meet  the  straight  fine  AB  (i.  23) ;  and  if  it  is  not,  suppose  it  to  be 
K,  and  let  DK  be  joined  and  produced  to  H,  and  let  CH  be  joined.  Since 
then 

DK  =  KH, 

and  also 

DE  =  EC , 

therefore  CH  is  parallel  to  AB.  But  also  CF;  and  this  is  absurd.  Therefore  the 
tangent  at  A  is  parallel  to  CD. 


CONICS  II 


687 


Proposition  7 


If  a  straight  line  touches  a  section  of  a  cone  or  circumference  of  a  circle ,  and  a 
parallel  to  it  is  drawn  in  the  section  and  bisected ,  the  straight  line  joined  from  the 
point  of  contact  to  the  midpoint  will  be  a  diameter  of  the  section . 

Let  there  be  a  section  of  a  cone  or  cir¬ 
cumference  of  a  circle  ABC ,  and  FG  tan¬ 
gent  to  it,  and  AC  parallel  to  FG  and 
bisected  at  E ,  and  let  BE  be  joined. 

I  say  that  BE  is  a  diameter  of  the  sec¬ 
tion. 

For  let  it  not  be,  but,  if  possible,  let  BH 
be  a  diameter  of  the  section.  Therefore 
AH  =  HC  (First  Def.  i.  4); 
and  this  is  absurd;  for 

AE  =  EC . 

Therefore  BH  will  not  be  a  diameter  of  the 
section.  Then  likewise  we  could  show  that  there  is  no  other  than  BE. 

Proposition  8 

If  a  straight  line  meets  an  hyperbola  in  two  points ,  produced  both  ways  it  will 
meet  the  asymptotes ,  and  the  straight  lines  cut  off  on  it  by  the  section  from  the 
asymptotes  will  be  equal . 

Let  there  be  the  hyperbola  ABC,  and  the  asymptotes  ED  and  DF ,  and  let 
some  straight  line  AC  meet  ABC. 


I  say  that  produced  both  ways  it  will  meet  the  asymptotes. 

Let  AC  be  bisected  at  G  and  let  DG  be  joined.  Therefore  it  is  a  diameter  of 
the  section  (n.  7);  therefore  the  tangent  at  B  is  parallel  to  AC  (ii.  5,  6).  Then 
let  HBK  be  the  tangent  (i.  32) ;  then  it  will  meet  ED  and  DF  (n.  3).  Since  then 
AC  is  parallel  to  KH ,  and  KH  meets  DK  and  Dll,  therefore  also  AC  will  meet 
DE  and  DF. 

Let  it  meet  them  at  E  and  F;  and 

II B  =  BK  (ii.  3); 


therefore  also 


FG  =  GE. 


And  so  also 


CF  =  AE. 


688 


APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 


If  a  straight  line  meeting  the  asymptotes 
the  section  in  one  point  only. 

For  let  the  straight  line  CD  meeting 
the  asymptotes  CA,AD  be  bisected  by 
the  hyperbola  at  the  point  E. 

I  say  that  it  touches  the  hyperbola 
at  no  other  point. 

For  if  possible,  let  it  touch  it  at  B. 
Therefore 

CE  =  BD  (ii.  8); 

and  this  is  absurd;  for  CE  is  supposed 
equal  to  ED.  Therefore  it  will  not  touch 
the  section  at  another  point. 


bisected  by  the  hyperbola ,  it  will  touch 


Proposition  9 
is 


Proposition  10 

If  some  straight  line  cutting  the  section  meet  both  of  the  asymptotes ,  the  rectangle 
contained  by  the  straight  lines  cut  off  between  the  asymptotes  and  the  section  is 
equal  to  the  fourth  of  the  figure  resulting  on  the  diameter  bisecting  the  straight  lines 
drawn  parallel  to  the  drawn  straight  line. 

Let  there  be  the  hyperbola  ABC ,  and  let  DE,EF  be  its  asymptotes,  and  let 
some  straight  line  DF  be  drawn  cutting  the  section  and  the  asymptotes,  and 
let  AC  be  bisected  at  G,  and  let  GE  be  joined,  and  let  EH  be  made  equal  to  BE, 
and  let  BM  be  drawn  from  B  perpendicular  to  HEB ;  therefore  BH  is  a  diam¬ 
eter  (n.  7),  and  BM  the  upright  side. 

I  say  that 

rect.  DA,AF  =  fourth  rect.  HB,BM , 

then  likewise  also 

rect.  DC,  CF  =  fourth  rect.  HB,BM. 

For  let  KL  be  drawn  through  B  tangent  to  the  section;  therefore  it  is 


parallel  to  DF  (n.  6).  And  since  it  has  been  shown 

HB  :  BM  :  :  sq.  EB  :  sq.  BK  :  :  sq.  EG  :  sq.  GD  (ii.  1,  3), 

and 

HB  :  BM  :  :  rect.  HG,  GB  :  sq.  GA  (i.  21), 


CONICS  II  689 

therefore 

sq.  EG  :  sq.  GD  :  :  rect.  HG,GB  :  sq.  GA . 

Since  then 

whole  sq.  EG  :  whole  sq.  GD  :  : 
part  subtr.  rect.  HG,GB  :  part  subtr.  sq.  AG, 

therefore  also 

remainder  sq.  EB  :  remainder  rect.  DA,AF  :  :  sq.  EG  :  sq.  GD, 
or 

remainder  sq.  EB  :  remainder  rect.  DA,AF  :  :  sq.  EB  :  sq.  BK. 
Therefore 

rect.  FA ,  AD  =  sq.  BK. 

Then  likewise  it  could  be  shown  also  that 

rect.  DC  ,CF  =  sq.  BL; 

therefore  also 

rect.  FA, AD  =  rect.  DC ,CF. 

Proposition  11 

If  some  straight  line  cut  each  of  the  straight  lines  containing  the  angle  adjacent  to 
the  angle  containing  the  hyperbola,  it  will  meet  the  section  in  one  point  only,  and 
the  rectangle  contained  by  the  straight  lines  cut  off  between  the  containing  straight 
lines  and  the  section  will  be  equal  to  the  fourth  part  of  the  square  on  the  diameter 
drawn  parallel  to  the  cutting  straight  line. 

Let  there  be  an  hyperbola  whose  asymptotes  are  CA,AD,  and  let  DA  be 
produced  to  E,  and  through  some  point  E  let  EF  be  drawn  cutting  EA  and  AC. 

Now  it  is  evident  that  it  meets  the  section  in  one  point  only;  for  the  straight 
line  drawn  through  A  parallel  to  EF  as  AB  will  cut  angle  CAD  and  will  meet 
the  section  (n.  2)  and  be  its  diameter  (i.  50) ;  therefore  EF  will  meet  the  section 
in  one  point  only  (i.  26). 

Let  it  meet  it  at  G. 

I  say  then  also  that 

rect.  EG,GF  =  sq.  AB. 

For  let  the  straight  line  HGLK  be  drawn  ordinatewise  through  G ;  therefore 


the  tangent  through  B  is  parallel  to  GH  (n.  5).  Let  it  be  CD.  Since  then 

CB  =  BD  (ii.  3), 

therefore 

sq.  CB  or  rect.  CB,BD  :  sq.  BA  comp.  CB  :  BA,DB  :  BA. 


690 

But 


APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 


and 

therefore 
But  also 
therefore 


CB  :  BA::  HG  :  GF, 

DB  :  BA  :  :  GK  :  GE ; 
sq.  CB  :  sq.  BA  comp.  HG  :  GF,  KG  :  GE . 
rect.  KG,GH  :  rect.  FG,GF  comp.  #G  :  GF, KG  :  GF; 


rect.  KG,GH  :  rect.  EG,GF  :  :  sq.  CF  :  sq.  BA. 

Alternately 

rect.  FG,G#  :  sq.  CB  :  :  rect.  EG, GF  :  sq.  BA. 
But  it  was  shown 


therefore  also 


rect.  KG,GH  =  sq.  CB  (n.  10); 


rect.  EG,GF  =  sq.  AB. 


Proposition  12 

If  two  straight  lines  at  chance  angles  are  drawn  to  the  asymptotes  from  some  point 
of  those  on  the  section,  and  parallels  are  drawn  to  them  from  some  point  of  those  on 
the  section,  then  the  rectangle  contained  by  the  parallels  will  be  equal  to  that  con¬ 
tained  by  those  straight  lines  to  which  they  were  drawn  parallel. 

Let  there  be  an  hyperbola  whose 
asymptotes  are  AB  and  BC,  and  let 
some  point  D  be  taken  on  the  section, 
and  from  it  let  DE  and  DF  be  dropped 
to  AB  and  BC,  and  let  some  other 
point  on  the  section  G  be  taken,  and 
through  G  let  GH  and  GK  be  drawn 
parallel  to  ED  and  DF. 

I  say  that 

rect.  ED, DF  =  rect.  HG,GK. 

For  let  DG  be  joined  and  produced 
to  A  and  C.  Since  then 
rect.  AD,DC  =  rect.  AG ,GC  (n.  8), 
therefore 

AG:  AD: :  DC  :  CG. 

But 

AG  :  AD  : :  GH  :  ED, 

and 

DC  :  CG  :  :  DF  :  GK ; 

therefore 

GH  :  DE  :  :  DF  :  GK 

Therefore 

rect.  ED,DF  =  rect.  HG,GK. 

Proposition  13 

If  in  the  place  bounded  by  the  asymptotes  and  the  section  some  straight  line  is 
drawn  parallel  to  one  of  the  asymptotes,  it  will  meet  the  section  in  one  point  only. 


CONICS  II  691 

Let  there  be  an  hyperbola  whose  asymptotes  are  CA  and  AB,  and  let  some 
>int  E  be  taken,  and  through  it  let  EF  be  drawn  parallel  to  AB. 

I  say  that  it  will  meet  the  section. 
For  if  possible,  let  it  not  meet  it, 
and  let  some  point  G  on  the  section 
be  taken,  and  through  G  let  GC  and 
GH  be  drawn  parallel  to  CA  and  AB, 
and  let 

rect.  CG,GH  =  rect.  AE,EF , 
and  let  AF  be  joined  and  produced; 
then  it  will  meet  the  section  (i.  2).  Let 
itmeet  it  at  K ,  and  through  K  parallel 
to  CA  and  AB  let  KL  and  KD  be 
drawn;  therefore 

rect.  CG,GH  =  rect.  LK,KD  (n.  12). 
rect.  CG,GH  =  rect.  AE,EF ; 

therefore 

rect.  LK,KD  or  rect.  AX,  LA  =  rect.  AE,EF ; 
and  this  is  impossible;  for  both 

KL>EF 

and 

LA>AE . 

Therefore  EF  will  meet  the  section. 

Let  it  meet  it  at  M . 

I  say  then  that  it  will  not  meet  it  at  any  other  point. 

For  if  possible,  let  it  also  meet  it  at  N ,  and  through  M  and  N  let  MX  and 
NB  be  drawn.  parallel  to  CA.  Therefore 

rect.  EM,MX  =  rect.  EN,NB  (n.  12); 

and  this  is  impossible.  Therefore  it  will  not  meet  the  section  in  another  point. 


And  it  is  supposed  that  also 


Proposition  14 

The  asymptotes  and  the  section ,  if  produced  indefinitely ,  draw  nearer  to  each  other 
and  they  reach  a  distance  less  than  any  given  distance . 

Let  there  be  an  hyperbola  whose  asymptotes  are  AB  and  AC,  and  a  given 


distance  K. 

I  say  that  AB  and  AC  and  the  sec- 
tion,  if  produced,  drawr  nearer  to  each 
other  and  will  reach  a  distance  less 

y  than  K. 

/  For  let  EHF  and  CGD  be  drawn 

parallel  to  the  tangent,  and  let  AH  be 

- hJ/A  / 

1 K  joined  and  produced  to  X.  Since  then 

'""O/Sg-G  / 

rect.  CG,GD  =  rect.  FH,HE  (ii.  10), 

therefore 

DG  :  FH  :  :  HE  :  CG . 

But 


DG>FH  (i.  8,  26); 


692  APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 

therefore  also 

HE>CG. 

Then  likewise  we  could  show  that  the  succeeding  straight  lines  are  less. 

Then  let  the  distance  EL  be  taken  less  than  K}  and  through  L  let  LN  be 
drawn  parallel  to  AC;  therefore  it  will  meet  the  section  (n.  13).  Let  it  meet  it 
at  Ar,  and  through  N  let  MNB  be  drawn  parallel  to  EF .  Therefore 

MN  =  EL 

and  so 

MN  <K. 

PORISM 

Then  from  this  it  is  evident  that  the  straight  lines  AB  and  AC  are  nearer 
than  all  the  asymptotes  to  the  section,  and  the  angle  contained  by  BA,  AC  is 
clearly  less  than  that  contained  by  other  asymptotes  to  the  section. 

Proposition  15 

The  asymptotes  of  opposite  sections  are  common. 

Let  there  be  opposite  sections  whose  diameter  is  AB  and  center  C. 

I  say  that  the  asymptotes  of  the  sections  A  and  B  are  common. 

Let  the  straight  lines  DAE  and  FBG  be  drawn  tangent  to  the  sections 
through  the  points  A  and  B ;  they  are  therefore  parallel  (i.  44,  note).  Then  let 


each  of  the  straight  lines  DA,  AE ,  FB ,  and  BG  be  cut  off  equal  in  square  to  the 
fourth  of  the  figure  applied  to  AB)  therefore 

DA  =  AE  =  FB  =  BG. 

Then  let  CD,  CE,  CF,  and  CG  be  joined.  Then  it  is  evident  that  DC  is  in  a 
straight  with  CG  and  CE  with  CF  because  of  the  parallels.  Since  then  it  is  an 
hyperbola  whose  diameter  is  AB  and  tangent  DE,  and  DA  and  AE  are  each 
equal  in  square  to  the  fourth  of  the  figure  applied  to  AB,  therefore  DC  and 
CE  are  asymptotes  (n.  1).  For  the  same  reasons  then  FC  and  CG  are  also 
asymptotes  to  section  B.  Therefore  the  asymptotes  of  opposite  sections  are 
common. 

Proposition  16 

If  in  opposite  sections  some  straight  line  is  drawn  cutting  each  of  the  straight  lines 
containing  the  angle  adjacent  to  the  angles  containing  the  sections ,  it  will  meet 


CONICS  II  693 

each  of  the  opposite  sections  in  one  point  only,  and  the  straight  lines  cut  off  on  it 
by  the  sections  from  the  asymptotes  will  be  equal . 

For  let  there  be  the  opposite  sections  A  and  B  whose  center  is  C  and 
asymptotes  DCG  and  ECF ,  and  let  some  straight  line  HK  be  drawn  through 
cutting  each  of  the  straight  lines  DC  and  CF . 

I  say  that  produced  it  will  meet  each  of  the  sections  in  one  point  only. 

For  since  DC  and  CE  are  asymptotes  of  section  A ,  and  some  straight  line 
HK  has  been  drawn  across  cutting  both  of  the  straight  lines  containing  the 
adjacent  angle  DCF,  therefore  HK  produced  will  meet  the  section  (u.  11). 
Then  likewise  also  B. 

Let  it  meet  them  at  L  and  M. 

Let  the  straight  line  ACB  be  drawn  through  C  parallel  to  LM ;  therefore 


and 

And  so  also 
and 


rect.  KL,LH  =  sq.  AC  (n.  11) 
rect.  HM,MK  =  sq.  CB  (n.  11). 
rect.  KL,LH  =  rect.  HM,MK, 
LH  =  KM. 


Proposition  17 

The  asymptotes  of  conjugate  opposite  sections  are  common. 

Let  there  be  conjugate  opposite  sections  whose  conjugate  diameters  are  AB 
and  CD,  and  whose  center  is  E. 


APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 


694 

I  say  that  their  asymptotes  are  common. 

For  let  the  straight  lines  FAG,  GDH,  HBK ,  and  KCF  be  drawn  through 
the  points  A,  B,  C,  and  D  touching  the  sections;  therefore  FGHK  is  a  parallelo¬ 
gram  (i.  44,  note).  Then  let  FEH  and  KEG  be  joined;  therefore  they  are 
straight  lines  (n.  15)  and  diagonals  of  the  parallelogram,  and  they  are  all 
bisected  at  the  point  E.  And  since  the  figure  on  AB  is  equal  to  the  square  on 
CD  (i.  60),  and 

CE  =  ED, 

therefore  each  of  the  squares  on  FA,  AG,  KB,  and  BH  is  equal  to  a  fourth  of 
the  figure  on  AB.  Therefore  the  straight  lines  FEH  and  KEG  are  asymptotes 
of  the  sections  A  and  B  (n.  1).  Then  likewise  we  could  show  that  the  same 
straight  lines  are  also  asymptotes  of  the  sections  C  and  D .  Therefore  the 
asymptotes  of  conjugate  opposite  sections  are  common. 

Proposition  18 

If  a  straight  line  meeting  one  of  the  conjugate  opposite  sections,  when  produced 
both  ways,  falls  outside  the  section ,  it  will  meet  both  of  the  adjacent  sections  in  one 
point  only. 

Let  there  be  the  conjugate  opposite  sections  A,  B,  C,  and  D,  and  let  some 
straight  line  EF  meet  the  section  C  and  produced  both  ways  fall  outside  the 
section. 

I  say  that  it  will  meet  both  of  the  sections  A  and  B  in  one  point  only. 

For  let  GH  and  KL  be  asymptotes  of  the  sections.  Therefore  EF  meets  both 


GH  and  KL  (n.  3).  Then  it  is  evident  that  it  will  also  meet  the  sections  A  and 
B  in  one  point  only  (n.  16). 


Proposition  19 

If  some  straight  line  is  drawn  touching  some  one  of  the  conjugate  opposite  sections 
at  random,  it  will  meet  the  adjacent  sections  and  will  be  bisected  at  the  point  of 
contact. 

Let  there  be  the  conjugate  opposite  sections  A,  B,  C,  and  D,  and  let  some 
straight  line  ECF  touch  it  at  C. 

I  say  that  produced  it  will  meet  sections  A  and  B  and  will  be  bisected  at  C . 
It  is  evident  now  that  it  will  meet  sections  A  and  B  (n.  18) ;  let  it  meet  them 
at  G  and  H. 


I  say  that 


CONICS  II 


CG  =  CH. 


695 


For  let  the  asymptotes  of  the  sections  KL  and  M N  be  drawn.  Therefore 

EG  =  FH  (ii.  16), 

and 

CE  =  CF  (ii.  3), 

and 

CG  =  CH . 

Proposition  20 

If  a  straight  line  touches  one  of  the  conjugate  opposite  sections ,  and  two  straight 
lines  are  drawn  through  their  center ,  one  through  the  point  of  contact ,  and  one  par¬ 
allel  to  the  tangent  until  it  meet  one  of  the  adjacent  sectionSy  then  the  straight  line 
touching  the  section  at  the  point  of  meeting  will  be  parallel  to  the  straight  line 
drawn  through  the  point  of  contact  and  the  center ,  and  those  through  the  points  of 
contact  and  the  center  will  be  conjugate  diameters  of  the  opposite  sections . 

Let  there  be  conjugate  opposite  sections  whose  conjugate  diameters  are  the 


696 


APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 


straight  lines  AB  and  CD,  and  center  Y,  and  let  EF  be  drawn  touching  the 
section  A,  and  produced  let  it  meet  CY  at  T,  and  let  EY  be  joined  and  pro¬ 
duced  to  X,  and  through  Y  let  YG  be  drawn  parallel  to  EF,  and  through  G  let 
IIG  be  drawn  touching  the  section. 

I  say  that  HG  is  parallel  to  YE,  and  GO  and  EX  are  conjugate  diameters. 
For  let  the  straight  lines  KE ,  GL,  and  CRP  be  drawn  ordinatewise,  and  let 
AM  and  CN  be  the  parameters.  Since  then 

BA  :  AM  :  :  NC  :  CD  (i.  60), 
but 

BA  :  AM  :  :  rect.  YK,  KF  :  sq.  KE  (i.  37), 

and 

NC  :  CD::  sq.  GL  :  rect.  YL,LH  (i.  37), 

therefore  also 


But 

and 


rect.  YK,KF  :  sq.  EK  :  :  sq.  GL  :  rect.  YL,LH. 
rect.  YK,KF  :  sq.  EK  comp.  YK  :  KE,  FK  :  KE, 


sq.  GL  :  rect.  YL,LH  comp.  GL  :  LY,  GL  :  LH ; 

therefore 

ratio  comp.  YK  :  KE,FK  :  KE  =  ratio  comp.  GL  :  LY,  GL  :  LH ; 
and  of  these 


FK  :  KE  :  :  GL  :  LY ; 

for  each  of  the  straight  lines  EK,  KF,  and  FE  is  parallel  to  each  of  the  straight 
lines  YL,  LG,  and  GY  respectively.  Therefore  as  remainder 

YK  :  KE  ::GL  :  LH. 

Also  the  sides  about  the  equal  angles  at  K  and  L  are  proportional;  therefore 
triangle  EKY  is  similar  to  triangle  GHL  and  will  have  equal  the  angles  the 
corresponding  sides  subtend.  Therefore 

angle  EYK  =  angle  LGH . 


But  also 


and  therefore 


angle  KYG  =  angle  LGY) 


angle  EYG  =  angle  HGY. 

Therefore  EY  is  parallel  to  GH. 

Then  let  it  be  contrived  that 

PG  :  GR  :  :  HG  :  S; 

therefore  &  is  a  half  of  the  parameter  of  the  ordinates  to  the  diameter  GO  in 
sections  C  and  D  (i.  51).  And  since  CD  is  the  second  diameter  of  the  sections 
A  and  B,  and  ET  meets  it,  therefore 

rect.  TY,EK  =  sq.  CY ; 

for  if  we  draw  from  E  a  parallel  to  KY,  the  rectangle  contained  by  TY  and  the 
straight  line  cut  off  by  the  parallel  will  be  equal  to  the  square  on  CY  (i.  38). 
And  therefore 

TY  :  EK  :  :  sq.  TY  :  sq.  YC  (Eucl.  vi.  20). 

But 


TY  :  EK  :  :  TF  :  FE 
or 

TY  :  EK  :  :  trgl.  TYF  :  trgl.  EFY  (Eucl.  vi.  1), 


and 


CONICS  II  697 

sq.  TY  :  sq.  CY  :  :  trgl.  YTF  :  trgl.  YCP  (Eucl.  vi.  19) 


or 


sq.  TY  :  sq.  CY  :  :  trgl.  YTF  :  trgl.  GHY  (hi.  1). 
trgl.  TYF  :  trgl.  EFY  :  :  trgl.  TFY  :  trgl.  YGH. 
trgl.  GHY  =  trgl.  FEE. 


Therefore 
Therefore 
But  they  also  have 

angle  HGY  =  angle  YEF; 

for  EY  is  parallel  to  GH ,  and  EF  to  GF.  Therefore  the  sides  about  the  equal 
angles  are  reciprocally  proportional  (Eucl.  vi.  15).  Therefore 

GH  :  EY  : :  EF  :  GF; 

therefore 

rect.  HG,GY  =  rect.  FE,EE. 

And  since 

/S  :  HG  : :  RG  :  GPy 

and 

RG  :  GP  :  :  YE  :  EF; 

for  they  are  parallel;  therefore  also 

S  :  HG  :  :  YE  :  EF. 

But,  with  FG  taken  as  common  height, 

S  :  HG  :  rect.  S,YG  :  rect.  HG,GY, 

and 

YE  .EF::  sq.  YE  :  rect.  YE}  EF. 

And  therefore 

rect.  SJG  :  rect.  HG,GY  :  :  sq.  YE  :  rect.  FE, EF. 

Alternately 

rect.  S,GF  :  sq.  EF  :  :  rect.  EG,GF  :  rect.  EE,EF. 

But 

rect.  HG,GY  =  rect.  FE,EE  (above), 

therefore  also 

rect.  aS,GF  =  sq.  EF. 

And  rectangle  S,GY  is  a  fourth  of  the  figure  on  GO;  for 

GF  =  half  GO, 

and  £  is  the  parameter;  and 

sq.  EF  =  fourth  sq.  EX; 
for 

EF  =  YX. 

Therefore  the  square  on  EF  is  equal  to  the  figure  on  GO.  Then  likewise  we 
could  show  also  that  GO  is  equal  in  square  to  the  figure  on  EX.  Therefore  EX 
and  GO  are  conjugate  diameters  of  the  opposite  sections  A,  E,  G,  and  D . 


Proposition  21 

The  same  things  being  supposed  it  is  to  be  shown  that  the  point  of  meeting  of  the 
tangents  is  on  one  of  the  asymptotes. 

Let  there  be  conjugate  opposite  sections,  whose  diameters  are  the  straight 
lines  AB  and  CD,  and  let  the  straight  lines  AE  and  EC  be  drawn  tangent. 

I  say  that  the  point  E  is  on  the  asymptote. 


698  APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 

For  since  the  square  on  CY  is  equal  to  the  fourth  of  the  figure  on  A  B  (i.  60), 
and 


sq.  AE  =  sq.  CY  (n.  17), 

therefore  also  the  square  on  AE  is  equal  to  the  fourth  part  of  the  figure  on  AB. 
Let  EY  be  joined;  therefore  EY  is  an  asymptote  (n.  1);  therefore  the  point  E 
is  on  the  asymptote. 

Proposition  22 

If  in  conjugate  opposite  sections  a  radius  is  drawn  to  any  one  of  the  sections ,  and  a 
parallel  is  drawn  to  it  meeting  one  of  the  adjacent  sections  and  meeting  the 
asymptoteSj  then  the  rectangle  contained  by  the  segments  produced  between  the 
section  and  the  asymptotes  on  the  straight  line  drawn  is  equal  to  the  square  on  the 
radius. 

Let  there  be  the  conjugate  opposite  sections  A,  B,C  and  D,  and  let  there  be 
the  asymptotes  of  the  sections  YEF  and  YGH ,  and  from  the  center  Y  let  some 
straight  fine  YCD  be  drawn  across,  and  let  HE  be  drawn  parallel  to  it  cutting 
both  the  adjacent  section  and  the  asymptotes. 

I  say  that 

rect.  EK,KH  =  sq.  CY. 

Let  KL  be  bisected  at  M,  and  let  MY  be  joined  and  produced;  therefore  AB 
is  the  diameter  of  the  sections  A  and  B  (i.  51,  end).  And  since  the  tangent  at  A 
is  parallel  to  EH  (n.  5),  therefore  EH  has  been  dropped  ordinatewise  to  AB 
(i.  17).  And  the  center  is  F;  therefore  AB  and  CD  are  conjugate  diameters 
(First  Def.  i.  6).  Therefore  the  square  on  CY  is  equal  to  the  fourth  of  the  figure 


on  AB  (i.  60).  And  the  rectangle  HK ,  KE  is  equal  to  the  fourth  part  of  the 
figure  on  AB  (n.  10);  therefore  also 

rect.  HK,KE  =  sq.  CY. 


CONICS  II 


699 


Proposition  23 

If  in  conjugate  opposite  sections  some  radius  is  drawn  to  any  one  of  the  sections , 
and  a  parallel  is  drawn  to  it  meeting  the  three  adjacent  sections ,  then  the  rectangle 
contained  by  the  segments  produced  between  the  three  sections  on  the  straight  line 
drawn  is  twice  the  square  on  the  radius. 

Let  there  be  the  conjugate  opposite  sections  A,  B,  C,  and  D,  and  let  the 
center  of  the  section  be  F,  and  from  the  point  F  let  some  straight  line  CY  be 
drawn  to  meet  any  one  of  the  sections,  and  let  KL  be  drawn  parallel  to  CY 
cutting  the  three  adjacent  sections. 

I  say  that 

rect.  KM,  ML  =  2  sq.  CY. 

Let  the  asymptotes  to  the  sections,  EF  and  GH ,  be  drawn;  therefore 


sq.  CY  =  rect.  HM,ME  (n.  22)=*  rect.  HK,KE  (n.  11). 

And 

rect.  HM,  ME + rect.  HK,KE  =  rect.  LM,MK 
because  of  the  straight  lines  on  the  ends  being  equal  (n.  8,  16).  Therefore  also 

rect.  LM,MK  =  2  sq.  CY. 

Proposition  24 

If  two  straight  lines  meet  a  parabola  each  at  two  points ,  and  if  a  point  of  meeting 
of  neither  one  of  them  is  contained  by  the  points  of  meeting  of  the  other,  then  the 
straight  lines  will  meet  each  other  outside  the  section. 

Let  there  be  the  parabola  ABCD,  and  let 
the  two  straight  lines  AB  and  CD  meet 
ABCD,  and  let  a  point  of  meeting  of  neither 
of  them  be  contained  by  the  points  of  meet¬ 
ing  of  the  other. 

I  say  that  the  straight  lines  produced 
will  meet  each  other. 

Let  the  diameters  of  the  section,  EBF 
and  GCH,  be  drawn  through  the  points  B 
and  C;  therefore  they  are  parallel  (i.  51, 
end)  and  each  one  cuts  the  section  in  one 
point  only  (i.  26).  Then  let  BC  be  joined; 
therefore 

angle  EBC+ angle  BCG  =  2  rt.  angles, 


700  APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 

and  DC  and  BA  produced  make  angles  less  than  two  right  angles.  Therefore 
they  will  meet  each  other  outside  the  section  (i.  10;  Eucl.  Post.  5). 

Proposition  25 

If  two  straight  lines  meet  an  hyperbola  each  at  two  points ,  and  if  a  point  of  meeting 
of  neither  of  them  is  contained  by  the  points  of  meeting  of  the  other ,  then  the  straight 
lines  will  meet  each  other  outside  the  section ,  but  within  the  angle  containing  the 
section. 

Let  there  be  an  hyperbola,  whose  asymptotes  are  AB  and  AC,  and  let  the 
two  straight  lines  EF  and  GH  cut  the  section,  and  let  a  point  of  meeting  of 
neither  of  them  be  contained  by  the 
points  of  meeting  of  the  other. 

I  say  that  the  straight  lines  EF 
and  GH  produced  will  meet  outside 
the  section,  but  within  the  angle 
CAB. 

For  let  the  straight  lines  AF  and 
AH  be  joined  and  produced,  and  let 
FH  be  joined.  And  since  the  straight 
lines  EF  and  GH  produced  cut  the 
angles  AFH  and  AHF,  and  the  said 
angles  are  less  than  two  right  angles 
(Eucl.  i.  17),  the  straight  lines  EF 
and  GH  produced  will  meet  each  other  outside  the  section,  but  within  the 
angle  B AC. 

Then  we  could  likewise  show  it,  even  if  the  straight  lines  EF  and  GH  are 
tangents  to  the  sections. 

Proposition  26 

If  in  an  ellipse  or  circumference  of  a  circle  two  straight  lines  not  through  the 
center  cut  each  other,  then  they  do  not  bisect  each  other . 

For  if  possible,  in  the  ellipse  or  circumference  of  a  circle  let  the  two  straight 
lines  CD  and  EF  not  through  the  center  bisect 
each  other  at  G,  and  let  the  point  H  be  the  center 
of  the  section,  and  let  GH  be  joined  and  produced 
to  A  and  B. 

Since  then  the  straight  line  AB  is  a  diameter 
bisecting  EF,  therefore  the  tangent  at  A  is  para¬ 
llel  to  EF  (n.  6).  We  could  then  likewise  show 
that  it  is  also  parallel  to  CD.  And  so  also  EF  is 
parallel  to  CD.  And  this  is  impossible.  Therefore 
CD  and  EF  do  not  bisect  each  other. 

Proposition  27 

If  two  straight  lines  touch  an  ellipse  or  circumference  of  a  circle,  and  if  the 
straight  line  joining  the  points  of  contact  is  through  the  center  of  the  section ,  the 
tangents  will  be  parallel;  but  if  not,  they  will  meet  on  the  same  side  of  the  center. 


CONICS  II  701 

Let  there  be  the  ellipse  or  circumference  of  a  circle  AB,  and  let  the  straight 
lines  CAD  and  EBF  touch  it,  and  AB  be  joined,  and  first  let  it  be  through  the 
center. 


I  say  that  CD  is  parallel  to  EF. 

For  since  AB  is  a  diameter  of  the  section,  and  CD  touches  it  at  A,  therefore 
CD  is  parallel  to  the  ordinates  to  AB  (i.  17).  Then  for  the  same  reasons  BF  is 
also  parallel  to  the  same  ordinates.  Therefore  CD  is  also  parallel  to  EF. 

Then  let  AB  not  be  through  the  center,  as  in  the  second  drawing,  and  let  the 
diameter  AH  be  drawn,  and  let  KHL  be  drawn  tangent  through  H ;  therefore 
KL  is  parallel  to  CD.  Therefore  EF  produced  will  meet  CD  on  the  same  side  of 
the  center  as  AD. 

Proposition  28 

If  in  a  section  of  a  cone  or  circumference  of  a  circle  some  straight  line  bisects  two 
parallel  straight  lines ,  then  it  will  be  a  diameter  of  the  section. 

For  let  AB  and  CD,  two  parallel  straight  lines  in  a 
conic  section,  be  bisected  at  E  and  F,  and  let  EF  be 
joined  and  produced. 

I  say  that  it  is  a  diameter  of  the  section. 

For  if  not,  let  the  straight  line  GFH  be  so  if  possi¬ 
ble.  Therefore  the  tangent  at  G  is  parallel  to  AB  (n.  5, 
6).  And  so  the  same  straight  line  is  parallel  to  CD.  And 
GH  is  a  diameter;  therefore 

CH  =  HD  (First  Def.  i.  4) 
and  this  is  impossible;  for  it  is  supposed 
CE  =  ED 

Therefore  GH  is  not  a  diameter.  Then  likewise  we 
could  show  that  there  is  no  other  except  EF.  There¬ 
fore  EF  will  be  a  diameter  of  the  section. 

Proposition  29 

If  in  a  section  of  a  cone  or  circumference  of  a  circle  two  tangents  meet ,  the  straight 
line  drawn  from  their  point  of  meeting  to  the  midpoint  of  the  straight  line  joining 
the  points  of  contact  is  a  diameter  of  the  section. 

Let  there  be  a  section  of  a  cone  or  circumference  of  a  circle  to  which  let  the 
straight  lines  AB  and  AC,  meeting  at  A,  be  drawn  tangent,  and  let  BC  be 
joined  and  bisected  at  D,  and  let  AD  be  joined. 


702 


APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 


I  say  that  it  is  a  diameter  of  the  section. 

For  if  possible,  let  DE  be  a  diameter,  and  let  EC  be  joined;  then  it  will  cut 
the  section  (i.  35,  36).  Let  it  cut  it  at  F, 
and  through  F  let  FKG  be  drawn  parallel 
to  CDB.  Since  then 

CD=DB 

also 

FH  =  HG 

And  since  the  tangent  at  L  is  parallel  to  BC 
(ii.  5,  6),  and  FG  is  also  parallel  to  SC,  there¬ 
fore  also  FG  is  parallel  to  the  tangent  at  L. 

Therefore 

FH  =  HK  (i.  46,  47); 

and  this  is  impossible.  Therefore  DE  is  not  a 
diameter.  Then  likewise  we  could  show  that 
there  is  no  other  except  AD. 

Proposition 


If  two  straight  lines  tangent  to  a  section  of  a  cone  or  to  a  circumference  of  a  circle 
meet ,  the  diameter  drawn  from  the  point  of  meeting  will  bisect  the  straight  line 
joining  the  points  of  contact . 

Let  there  be  the  section  of  a  cone  or  circumference  of  a  circle  SC,  and  let  two 
tangents  BA  and  AC  be  drawn  to  it  meeting  at  A,  and  let  SC  be  joined  and  let 
AD  be  drawn  through  A  as  a  diameter  of  the  section. 

I  say  that 

DB  =  DC 

For  let  it  not  be,  but  if  possible,  let 
BE  =  EC , 

and  let  AS  be  joined;  therefore  AS  is  a  diam¬ 
eter  of  the  section  (n.  29).  But  AS  is  also  a 
diameter ;  and  this  is  absurd.  For  if  the  section 
is  an  ellipse,  the  point  A  at  which  the  diame¬ 
ters  meet  each  other,  will  be  a  center  outside 
the  section ;  and  this  is  impossible ;  and  if  the 
section  is  a  parabola,  the  diameters  meet 
each  other  (i.  51,  end);  and  if  it  is  an  hyper¬ 
bola,  and  the  straight  lines  BA  and  AC  meet 
the  section  without  containing  one  another’s 
points  of  meeting,  then  the  center  is  within  the  angle  containing  the  hyperbola 
(n.  25) ;  but  it  is  also  on  it,  for  it  has  been  supposed  a  center  since  DA  and  AE 
are  diameters  (i.  51,  end);  and  this  is  absurd.  Therefore  BE  is  not  equal  to 
EC. 


Proposition  31 

If  two  straight  lines  touch  each  of  the  opposite  sections ,  then  if  the  straight  line 
joining  the  points  of  contact  falls  through  the  center ,  the  tangents  will  be  parallel , 
but  if  notj  they  will  meet  on  the  same  side  as  the  center. 

Let  there  be  the  opposite  sections  A  and  B,  and  let  the  straight  lines  CAD 
and  EBF  be  tangent  to  them  at  A  and  B ,  and  let  the  straight  line  joined  from 


703 


CONICS  II 

A  to  B  fall  first  through  the  center  of  the  sections. 

I  say  that  CD  is  parallel  to  EF. 

For  since  they  are  opposite  sections  of  which  AB  is  a  diameter,  and  CD 
touches  one  of  them  at  A ,  therefore  the  straight  line  drawn  through  B  parallel 


parallel  to  EF. 

Then  let  the  straight  line  from  A  to  B  not  be  through  the  center  of  the  sec¬ 
tions,  and  let  AG  be  drawn  as  a  diameter  of  the  sections,  and  let  HK  be  drawn 
tangent  to  the  section;  therefore  HK  is  parallel  to  CD ,  and  since  the  straight 
lines  EF  and  HK  touch  an  hyperbola,  therefore  they  will  meet  (n.  25,  end). 
And  HK  is  parallel  to  CD ;  therefore  also  the  straight  lines  CD  and  EF  pro¬ 
duced  will  meet.  And  it  is  evident  they  are  on  the  same  side  as  the  center. 

Proposition  32 

If  straight  lines  meet  each  of  the  opposite  sections ,  in  one  point  when  touching  or  in 
two  points  when  cutting,  and,  when  produced,  the  straight  lines  meet,  then  their 
point  of  meeting  will  be  in  the  angle  adjacent  to  the  angle  containing  the  section . 


Let  there  be  opposite  sections  and  the  straight  lines  AB  and  CD  either 


704  APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 

touching  the  opposite  sections  in  one  point  or  cutting  them  in  two  points,  and 
let  them  meet  when  produced. 

I  say  that  their  point  of  meeting  will  be  in  the  angle  adjacent  to  the  angle 
containing  the  section. 

Let  FG  and  HK  be  asymptotes  to  the  sections;  therefore  AB  produced  will 
meet  the  asymptotes  (n.  8).  Let  it  meet  them  at  Ii  and  G.  And  since  FK  and 
HG  are  supposed  as  meeting,  it  is  evident  that  either  they  will  meet  in  the 
place  under  angle  HLF  or  in  that  under  angle  KLG.  And  likewise  also,  if  they 
touch  (n.  3). 

Proposition  33 

If  a  straight  line  meeting  one  of  the  opposite  sections ,  when  produced  both  waysy 
falls  outside  the  section ,  it  will  not  meet  the  other  section ,  but  will  fall  through  the 
three  places  of  which  one  is  that  contained  by  the  angle  containing  the  section ,  and 
two  are  those  contained  by  the  angle  adjacent  to  the  angle  containing  the  section. 
Let  there  be  the  opposite  sections  A  and  B,  and  let  some  straight  line  CD 


cut  A,  and,  wiien  produced  both  ways,  let  it  fall  outside  the  section. 

I  say  that  the  straight  line  CD  does  not  meet  the  section  B. 

For  let  EF  and  GH  be  drawn  as  asymptotes  to  the  sections;  therefore  CD 
produced  will  meet  the  asymptotes  (n.  8).  And  it  only  meets  them  in  the  points 
E  and  H.  And  so  it  will  not  meet  the  section  B. 

And  it  is  evident  that  it  will  fall  through  the  three  places.  For  if  some  straight 
line  meets  both  of  the  opposite  sections,  it  will  meet  neither  of  the  opposite 
sections  in  two  points.  For  if  it  meets  it  in  twTo  points,  by  wrhat  has  just  been 
proved  it  will  not  meet  the  other  section. 

Proposition  34 

If  some  straight  line  touch  one  of  the  opposite  sections  and  a  parallel  to  it  be  drawn 
in  the  other  section ,  then  the  straight  line  drawn  from  the  point  of  contact  to  the 
midpoint  of  the  parallel  will  be  a  diameter  of  the  opposite  sections. 

Let  there  be  the  opposite  sections  A  and  B,  and  let  some  straight  line  CD 
touch  one  of  them  A ,  at  A,  and  let  EF  be  drawn  parallel  to  CD  in  the  other 
section,  and  let  it  be  bisected  at  G,  and  let  AG  be  joined. 

I  say  that  AG  is  a  diameter  of  the  opposite  sections. 

For  if  possible,  let  AHK  be.  Therefore  the  tangent  at  H  is  parallel  to  CD 


CONICS  II  705 

(n.31).  But  CD  is  also  parallel  to  EF;  and  therefore  the  tangent  at  H  is  parallel 
to  EF.  Therefore 


and  this  is  impossible;  for 

EG  —  GF 

Therefore  AH  is  not  a  diameter  of  the  opposite  sections. 

Therefore  AB  is. 

Proposition  35 

If  a  diameter  in  one  of  the  opposite  sections  bisects  some  straight  line ,  the  straight 
line  touching  the  other  section  at  the  end  of  the  diameter  will  be  parallel  to  the 
bisected  straight  line. 

Let  there  be  the  opposite  sections  A  and  B ,  and  let  their  diameter  AB  bisect 
the  straight  line  CD  in  section  B  at  E. 


I  say  that  the  tangent  to  the  section  at  A  is  parallel  to  CD. 

For  if  possible,  let  DF  be  parallel  to  the  tangent  to  the  section  at  A ;  therefore 

DG  =  GF  (1.  48). 

But  also 

DE  =  EC. 

Therefore  CF  is  parallel  to  EG;  and  this  is  impossible;  for  produced  it  meets  it 
(1.  22).  Therefore  DF  is  not  parallel  to  the  tangent  to  the  section  at  A  nor  is 
any  other  straight  line  except  CD. 

Proposition  36 

If  parallel  straight  lines  are  drawn ,  one  in  each  of  the  opposite  sections,  then  the 
straight  line  joining  their  midpoints  will  be  a  diameter  of  the  opposite  sections . 


706  APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 

Let  there  be  the  opposite  sections  A  and  B ,  and  let  the  straight  lines  CD  and 
EF  be  drawn,  one  in  each  of  them,  and  let  them  be  parallel,  and  let  them  both 


be  bisected  at  points  G  and  Hy  and  let  GH  be  joined. 

I  say  that  GH  is  a  diameter  of  the  opposite  sections. 

For  if  not,  let  GK  be  one.  Therefore  the  tangent  to  A  is  parallel  to  CD 
(n.  5);  and  so  also  to  EF .  Therefore 

EK  =  KF  (i.  48); 
and  this  is  impossible,  since  also 

EH  =  HF 

Therefore  GK  is  not  a  diameter  of  the  opposite  sections.  Therefore  GH  is. 

Proposition  37 

If  a  straight  line  not  through  the  center  cuts  the  opposite  sections ,  then  the  straight 
line  joined  from  its  midpoint  to  the  center  is  a  so-called  upright  diameter  of  the 
opposite  sections ,  and  the  straight  line  drawn  from  the  center  parallel  to  the  bisected 
straight  line  is  a  transverse  diameter  conjugate  to  it. 

Let  there  be  the  opposite  sections  A  and  B ,  and  let  some  straight  line  CD 
not  through  the  center  cut  the  sections  A  and  B  and  let  it  be  bisected  at  E , 
and  let  Y  be  the  center  of  the  sections,  and  let  YE  be  joined,  and  through  Y 
let  AB  be  drawn  parallel  to  CD. 

I  say  that  the  straight  lines  AB  and  EY  are  conjugate  diameters  of  the 
sections. 

For  let  DY  be  joined  and  produced  to  F,  and  let  CF  be  joined.  Therefore 

DY=YF  (i.  30). 

But  also 

DE  =  EC; 


CONICS  II 


707 


therefore  EY  is  parallel  to  FC.  Let  BA  be  produced  to  G.  And  since 

DY  =  YF, 


therefore  also 


and  so  also 


EY  =  FG; 


CG  =  FG. 

Therefore  the  tangent  at  A  is  parallel  to  CF  (n.  5);  and  so  also  to  EY.  There¬ 
fore  EY  and  AB  are  conjugate  diameters  (i.  16). 


Proposition  38 

If  two  straight  lines  meeting  touch  opposite  sections ,  the  straight  line  joined  from 
the  point  of  meeting  to  the  midpoint  of  the  straight  line  joining  the  points  of 
contact  will  he  a  so-called  upright  diameter  of  the  opposite  sections ,  and  the  straight 
line  drawn  through  the  center  parallel  to  the  straight  line  joining  the  points  of 
contact  is  a  transverse  diameter  conjugate  to  it. 

Let  there  be  the  opposite  sections  A  and  B,  and  CY  and  YD  touching  the 
sections,  and  let  CD  be  joined  and  bisected  at  E ,  and  let  EY  be  joined. 

I  say  that  the  diameter  EY  is  a  so-called  upright,  and  the  straight  line  drawn 
through  the  center  parallel  to  CD  is  a  transverse  diameter  conjugate  to  it. 

For  if  possible,  let  EF  be  a  diameter,  and  let  F  be  a  point  taken  at  random; 
therefore  DY  will  meet  EF.  Let  it  meet  it  at  F,  and  let  CF  be  joined;  therefore 


CF  will  hit  the  section  (i.  32).  Let  it  hit  it  at  A,  and  through  A  let  AB  be 
drawn  parallel  to  CD.  Since  then  EF  is  a  diameter,  and  bisects  CD,  it  also 
bisects  the  parallels  to  it  (First  Def.  i.  4).  Therefore 

AG  =  GB. 

And  since 

CE  =  ED , 

and  is  on  triangle  CFD ,  therefore  also 

AG  =  GK . 

And  so  also 

GK  =  GB ; 

and  this  is  impossible.  Therefore  EF  will  not  be  a  diameter. 


Proposition  39 

If  two  straight  lines  meeting  touch  opposite  sections ,  the  straight  line  drawn 
through  the  center  and  the  point  of  meeting  of  the  tangents  bisects  the  straight  line 
joining  the  points  of  contact. 


708  APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 

Let  there  be  the  opposite  sections  A  and  By  and  let  two  straight  lines  CE  and 


ED  be  drawn  touching  A  and  B,  and  let  CD  be  joined,  and  let  EF  be  drawn  as 
a  diameter. 

I  say  that 

CF  =  FD. 

For  if  not,  let  CD  be  bisected  at  (?,  and  let  GE  be  joined;  therefore  GE  is  a 
diameter  (n.  38).  But  EF  is  also;  therefore  E  is  the  center  (i.  31,  end).  There¬ 
fore  the  point  of  meeting  of  the  tangents  is  at  the  center  of  the  sections;  and 
this  is  absurd  (n.  32).  Therefore  CF  is  not  unequal  to  FD.  Therefore  equal. 

Proposition  40 

If  two  straight  lines  touching  opposite  sections  meet ,  and  through  the  point  of 
meeting  a  straight  line  is  drawn ,  parallel  to  the  straight  line  joining  the  points  of 
contact,  and  meeting  the  sections ,  then  the  straight  lines  drawn  from  the  points  of 
meeting  to  the  midpoint  of  the  straight  line  joining  the  points  of  contact  touch  the 
sections . 

Let  there  be  the  opposite  sections  A  and  B ,  and  let  two  straight  lines  CE  and 
ED  be  drawn  touching  A  and  B,  and  let  CD  be  joined,  and  through  E  let  FEG 
be  drawn  parallel  to  CD,  and  let  CD  be  bisected  at  H ,  and  let  FH  and  HG  be 
joined. 

I  say  that  FH  and  HG  touch  the  sections. 

Let  EH  be  joined;  therefore  EH  is  an  upright  diameter,  and  the  straight 
line  drawn  through  the  center  parallel  to  CD  a  transverse  diameter  conjugate 
to  it  (n.  38).  And  let  the  center  Y  be  taken,  and  let  AYB  be  drawn  parallel  to 
CD]  therefore  HE  and  AB  are  conjugate  diameters.  And  CH  has  been  drawn 


ordinatewise  to  the  second  diameter,  and  CE  has  been  drawn  touching  the 
section  and  meeting  the  second  diameter.  Therefore  the  rectangle  EY,YH  is 


CONICS  II  709 

equal  to  the  square  on  the  half  of  the  second  diameter  (i.  38),  that  is  to  the 
fourth  part  of  the  figure  on  AB  (Second  Def.  i.  10).  And  since  FE  has  been 
drawn  ordinatewise  and  FH  joined,  therefore  FH  touches  the  section  A  (i.  38). 
Likewise  then  also  GH  touches  section  B.  Therefore  FH  and  HG  touch  sec¬ 
tions  A  and  B. 

Proposition  41 

If  in  opposite  sections  two  straight  lines  not  through  the  center  cut  each  other ,  then 
they  do  not  bisect  each  other. 

Let  there  be  the  opposite  sections  A  and  5,  and  in  A  and  B  let  the  two 
straight  lines  CB  and  AD  not  through  the  center  cut  each  other  at  E. 

I  say  that  they  do  not  bisect  each  other. 

For  if  possible,  let  them  bisect  each  other,  and  let  Y  be  the  center  of  the  sec¬ 
tions,  and  let  EY  be  joined;  therefore  EY  is  a  diameter  (n.  37).  Let  YF  be 
drawn  through  Y  parallel  to  BC;  therefore  YF  is  a  diameter  and  conjugate  to 


EY  (n.  37).  Therefore  the  tangent  at  F  is  parallel  to  EY  (First  Def.  i.  6).  Then 
for  the  same  reasons,  with  HK  drawn  parallel  to  AD)  the  tangent  at  H  is 
parallel  to  EY)  and  so  also  the  tangent  at  F  is  parallel  to  the  tangent  at  H ;  and 
this  is  absurd;  for  it  has  been  shown  it  also  meets  it  (n.  31).  Therefore  the 
straight  lines  CB  and  AD  not  being  through  the  center  do  not  bisect  each  other. 

Proposition  42 

If  in  conjugate  opposite  sections  two  straight  lines  not  through  the  center  cut  each 
other ,  they  do  not  bisect  each  other. 

Let  there  be  the  conjugate  opposite  sections  A,  B,  C  and  D ,  and  in  A,  B,  C 


and  D  let  the  two  straight  lines  not  through  the  center,  EF  and  GII,  cut  each 
other  at  K. 


710  APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 

I  say  that  they  do  not  bisect  each  other. 

For  if  possible,  let  them  bisect  each  other,  and  let  the  center  of  the  sections 
be  Yy  and  let  AB  be  drawn  parallel  to  EF  and  CD  to  HGy  and  let  KY  be 
joined;  therefore  KY  and  AB  are  conjugate  diameters  (n.  37).  Likewise  YK 
and  CD  are  also  conjugate  diameters.  And  so  also  the  tangent  at  A  is  parallel 
to  the  tangent  at  C ;  and  this  is  impossible;  for  it  meets  it,  since  the  tangent  at 
C  cuts  the  sections  A  and  B  (n.  19),  and  the  tangent  at  A  sections  C  and  D ;  it  is 
evident  also  that  their  point  of  meeting  is  in  the  place  under  angle  AYC 
(n.  21).  Therefore  the  straight  lines  EF  and  GH  not  being  through  the  center 
do  not  bisect  each  other. 

Proposition  43 

If  a  straight  line  cuts  one  of  the  conjugate  opposite  sections  in  two  points ,  and 
through  the  center  one  straight  line  is  drawn  to  the  midpoint  of  the  cutting  straight 
line  and  another  straight  line  is  drawn  parallel  to  the  cutting  straight  liney  they  will 
be  conjugate  diameters  of  the  opposite  sections . 

Let  there  be  the  conjugate  opposite  sections  A,  By  C  and  Dy  and  let  some 
straight  line  cut  section  A  at  the  two  points  E  and  Fy  and  let  FE  be  bisected  at 
G,  and  let  Y  be  center,  and  let  YG  be  joined,  and  let  CY  be  drawn  parallel  to 
EF. 

I  say  that  AY  and  YC  are  conjugate  diameters. 

For  since  A  Y  is  a  diameter,  and  bisects  EFy  the  tangent  at  A  is  parallel  to 


EF  (li.  5);  and  so  also  to  CY.  Since  then  they  are  opposite  sections,  and  a 
tangent  has  been  drawn  to  one  of  them,  Ay  at  A,  and  from  the  center  Y  one 
straight  line  YA  is  joined  to  the  point  of  contact,  and  another  CY  has  been 
drawn  parallel  to  the  tangent,  therefore  YA  and  CY  are  conjugate  diameters; 
for  this  has  been  shown  before  (n.  20). 

Proposition  44  (Problem) 

Given  a  section  of  a  coney  to  find  a  diameter. 

Let  there  be  the  given  conic  section  on  which  are  the  points  AyByCyD  and 
E.  Then  it  is  required  to  find  a  diameter. 

Let  it  have  been  done,  and  let  it  be  CH .  Then  with  DF  and  EH  drawn  or- 
dinatewise  and  produced 


DF  =  FBy 


COXICS  II 


711 


and 

EH  =  HA  (First  Def.  i.  4). 

If  then  we  fix  the  straight  lines  BD  and  EA  in 
position  to  be  parallel,  the  points  H  and  F  will 
be  given.  And  so  HFC  will  be  given  in  position. 

Then  it  will  be  constructed  (awTedTjaerat)  thus: 
let  there  be  the  given  conic  section  on  wilich  are 
the  points  A ,  B,C,  D  and  E ,  and  let  the  straight 
lines  BD  and  AE  be  drawn  parallel,  and  be  bisected 
at  F  and  H.  And  the  straight  line  FH  joined  will 
be  a  diameter  of  the  section  (First  Def.  i.  4).  And 
in  the  same  w*ay  we  could  also  find  an  indefinite 
number  of  diameters. 


Proposition  45  (Problem) 

Given  an  ellipse  or  hyperbola ,  to  find  the  center. 

And  this  is  evident;  for  if  twn  diameters  of  the  section,  AB  and  CZ),  are 


drawn  through  (n.  44),  the  point  at  wilich  they  cut  each  other  will  be  the  center 
of  the  section,  as  indicated  below*. 

Proposition  46  (Problem) 

Given  a  section  of  a  cone ,  to  find  the  axis. 

Let  the  given  section  of  a  cone  first  be  a  parabola,  on  vilich  are  the  points 
F,  C  and  E.  Then  it  is  required  to  find  its  axis. 

For  let  AB  be  drawn  as  a  diameter  of  it  (i.  44).  If  then  AB  is  an  axis,  what 
was  enjoined  wrould  have  been  done;  but  if  not,  let  it  have  been  done,  and  let 
CD  be  the  axis;  therefore  the  axis  CD  is  parallel  to  AB  (i.  51,  end)  and  bisects 
the  straight  lines  drawn  perpendicular  to  it  (First  Def.  i.  7).  And  the  perpen¬ 
diculars  to  CD  are  also  perpendiculars  to  AB ;  and  so  CD  bisects  the  perpendic- 


712  APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 

ulars  to  AB.  If  then  I  fix  EF,  the  perpendicular  to  AB,  it  will  be  given  in  posi¬ 
tion,  and  therefore 

ED  =  DF ; 

therefore  the  point  D  is  given.  Therefore  through  the 
given  point  D,  CD  has  been  drawn  parallel  in  position 
to  AB\  therefore  CD  is  given  in  position. 

Then  it  will  be  constructed  thus:  let  there  be  the 
given  parabola  on  wilich  are  the  points  F ,  E  and  A, 
and  let  AB,  a  diameter  of  it,  be  drawn  (n.  44),  and  let 
BE  be  drawn  perpendicular  to  it  and  let  it  be  pro¬ 
duced  to  F.  If  then 

EB  =  BF, 

it  is  evident  that  AB  is  the  axis  (First  Def .  i.  7) ;  but  if 
not,  let  EF  be  bisected  by  D,  and  let  CD  be  drawn 
parallel  to  AB .  Then  it  is  evident  that  CD  is  the  axis 
of  the  section;  for  being  parallel  to  a  diameter,  that  is  being  a  diameter  (i.  51, 
end),  it  bisects  EF  at  right  angles.  Therefore  CD  has  been  found  as  the  axis  of 
the  given  parabola  (First  Def.  i.  7). 

And  it  is  evident  that  the  parabola  has  only  one  axis.  For  if  there  is  another, 
as  AB,  it  will  be  parallel  to  CD  (i.  51,  end).  And  it  cuts  EF ,  and  so  it  also 
bisects  it  (First  Def.  i.  4). 

Therefore 

BE  =  BF; 

and  this  is  absurd. 

Proposition  47  (Problem) 

Given  an  hyperbola  or  ellipse,  to  find  the  axis . 

Let  there  be  the  hyperbola  or  ellipse  ABC ;  then  it  is  required  to  find  its  axis. 
Let  it  have  been  found  and  let  it  be  KD,  and  K  the  center  of  the  section; 
therefore  KD  bisects  the  ordinates  to  itself  and  at  right  angles  (First  Def.  I.  7). 


Let  the  perpendicular  CD  A  be  drawm,  and  let  KA  and  KC  be  joined.  Since 
then 

CD  =  DA , 

therefore 


CK=KA. 

If  then  w^e  fix  the  given  point  C,  CK  will  be  given.  And  so  the  circle  described 
with  center  K  and  radius  KC  will  also  pass  through  A  and  will  be  given  in 
position.  And  the  section  ABC  is  also  given  in  position;  therefore  the  point  A 


CONICS  II  713 

is  given.  But  the  point  C  is  also  given;  therefore  CA  is  given  in  position.  Also 

CD  =  DA, 

therefore  the  point  D  is  given.  But  also  K  is  given;  therefore  DK  is  given  in 
position. 

Then  it  will  be  constructed  thus :  let  there  be  the  given  hyperbola  or  ellipse 
ABC ,  and  let  K  be  taken  as  its  center;  and  let  a  point  C  be  taken  at  random  on 
the  section,  and  let  the  circle  CEA,  with  center  K  and  radius  KC ,  be  de¬ 
scribed,  and  let  CA  be  joined  and  bisected  at  D,  and  let  KCy  KD ,  and  KA  be 
joined,  and  let  KD  be  drawn  through  to  B . 

Since  then 

AD  =  DC 

and  DK  is  common,  therefore  the  two  straight  lines  CD  and  DK  are  equal  to 
the  two  straight  lines  AD  and  DK}  and 

base  iL4  =base  KC. 

Therefore  KBD  bisects  ADC  at  right  angles.  Therefore  KD  is  an  axis  (First 
Def.  i.  7). 

Let  MKN  be  drawn  through  K  parallel  to  CA ;  therefore  MN  is  the  axis  of 
the  section  conjugate  to  BK  (First  Def.  i.  8). 

Proposition  48  (Problem) 

Then  with  these  things  shown ,  let  it  be  next  in  order  to  show  that  there  are  no  other 
axes  of  the  same  sections . 

For  if  possible,  let  there  also  be  another  axis  KG.  Then  in  the  same  way  as 
before,  with  AH  drawn  perpendicular, 

AH  =  HL  (First  Def.  i.  4); 


and  so  also 


AK  =  KL. 


714 

But  also 


APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 


therefore 


AK  =  KC ; 


KL  =  KC ; 

and  this  is  absurd. 

Now  that  the  circle  AEC  does  not  hit  the  section  also  in  another  point  be¬ 
tween  the  points  A ,  B  and  C,  is  evident  in  the  case  of  the  hyperbola;  and  in  the 
case  of  the  ellipse  let  the  perpendiculars  CR  and  LS  be  drawn.  Since  then 

KC  =  KL ; 


for  they  are  radii;  also 
But 


sq.  KC  =  sq.  KL. 


sq.  CR+ sq.  RK  =  sq.  CK , 

and 


therefore 

Therefore 

Again  since 
and  also 
therefore 
Therefore 


sq.  ii£+sq.  SL  =  sq.  LK\ 

sq.  CR+ sq.  222£  =  sq.  ZGS+sq.  SL. 

difference  between  sq.  CR  and  sq.  SL  — 
difference  between  sq.  KS  and  sq.  RK . 

rect.  MR,RN+ sq.  RK  =  sq.  .Of, 

rect.  ilf£,&/V+sq.  Sif  =  sq.  Of  (Eucl.  n.  5), 

rect.  MR,RN+sq.  RK  =  rect.  MS,SN+ sq. 


difference  between  sq.  and  sq.  02  = 
difference  between  rect.  MR,RN  and  rect.  MS,SN. 
And  it  was  shown  that 

difference  between  sq.  SK  and  sq.  KR  = 
difference  between  sq.  CR  and  sq.  SL ; 

therefore 


difference  between  sq.  CR  and  sq.  SL  = 
difference  between  rect.  MR,RN  and  rect.  MS,SN. 
And  since  CR  and  LS  are  ordinates 

sq.  CR  :  rect.  MR,RN  :  :  sq.  SL  :  rect.  MS,SN  (i.  21). 
But  the  same  difference  was  also  shown  for  both;  therefore 

sq.  CR  —  rect.  MR,RN, 


and 


sq.  SL  =  rect.  MS,  SN  (Eucl.  V.  16,  17,  9). 

Therefore  the  line  LCM  is  a  circle;  and  this  is  absurd;  for  it  is  supposed  an 
ellipse. 


Proposition  49  (Problem) 

Given  a  section  of  a  cone  and  a  point  not  within  the  section ,  to  draw  from  the  point 
a  straight  line  touching  the  section  in  one  point. 

Let  the  given  section  of  a  cone  first  be  a  parabola  whose  axis  is  BD.  Then  it  is 


CONICS  II  715 

required  to  draw  a  straight  line  as  prescribed  from  the  given  point  which  is  not 
within  the  section. 

Then  the  given  point  is  either  on  the  line  or  on  the  axis  or  somewhere  else 
outside. 

Now  let  it  be  on  the  line,  and  let  it  be  A,  and  let  it  have  been  done,  and  let  it 

be  AE ,  and  let  AD  be  drawn  perpendicular; 
then  it  will  be  given  in  position.  And 
BE  =  BD  (i.  35); 

and  BD  is  given;  therefore  BE  is  also  given. 
And  the  point  B  is  given;  therefore  E  is  also 
given.  But  A  also;  therefore  AE  is  given  in 
position. 

Then  it  mil  be  constructed  thus:  let  AD 
be  drawn  perpendicular  from  A,  and  let  BE 
be  made  equal  to  BD,  and  let  AE  be  joined. 
Then  it  is  evident  that  it  touches  the  section 
(i.  33). 

Again  let  the  given  point  E  be  on  the  axis, 
and  let  it  have  been  done,  and  let  AE  be 
drawn  tangent,  and  let  AD  be  drawn  perpendicular;  therefore 

BE  =  BD  (i.  35). 

And  BE  is  given; therefore  also  BD  is  given.  And  the  point  B  is  given; therefore 
D  is  also  given.  And  DA  is  perpendicular;  therefore  DA  is  given  in  position. 
Therefore  the  point  A  is  given.  But  also  E;  therefore  AE  is  given  in  position. 

Then  it  will  be  constructed  thus:  let  BD  be  made  equal  to  BE,  and  from  D 
let  DA  be  drawn  perpendicular  to  ED,  and  let  AE  be  joined.  Then  it  is  evident 
that  AE  touches  (i.  33). 

And  it  is  evident  also  that,  even 
if  the  given  point  is  the  same  as  B, 
the  straight  line  drawn  from  B  per¬ 
pendicular  touches  the  section  (i. 
17). 

Then  let  C  be  the  given  point, 
and  let  it  have  been  done,  and  let 
CA  be  it,  and  through  C  let  CF  be 
drawn  parallel  to  the  axis,  that  is  to 
BD;  therefore  CF  is  given  in  posi¬ 
tion.  And  from  A  let  AF  be  drawn 
ordinate  wise  to  CF;  then 
CG  =  FG  (i.  35). 

And  the  point  G  is  given;  therefore 
F  is  also  given.  And  FA  has  been 
erected  ordinatewise,  that  is,  parallel  to  the  tangent  at  G  (i.  32) ;  therefore  FA 
is  given  in  position.  Therefore  A  is  also  given;  but  also  C.  Therefore  CA  is 
given  in  position. 

It  will  be  constructed  thus:  let  CF  be  drawn  through  C  parallel  to  BD,  and 
let  FG  be  made  ecfual  to  CG,  and  let  FA  be  drawn  parallel  to  the  tangent  at  G 
(above),  and  let  AC  be  joined.  It  is  evident  then  that  this  will  do  the  problem 
(i.  33). 


716  APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 

Again  let  it  be  an  hyperbola  whose  axis  is  DBC  and  center  H ,  and  asymp¬ 
totes  HE  and  HF.  Then  the  given  point  will  be  given  either  on  the  section  or 


on  the  axis  or  within  angle  EHF  or  in  the  adjacent  place  or  on  one  of  the 
asymptotes  containing  the  section  or  in  the  place  between  the  straight  lines 
containing  the  angle  vertical  to  angle  EHF . 

Let  the  point  A  first  be  on  the  section,  and  let  it  have  been  done,  and  let  AG 
be  tangent,  and  let  AD  be  drawn  perpendicular,  and  let  BC  be  the  transverse 
side  of  the  figure;  then 

CD  :DB: :  CG  :  GB  (i.  36). 

And  the  ratio  of  CD  to  DB  is  given;  for  both  the  straight  lines  are  given;  there¬ 
fore  also  the  ratio  of  CG  to  GB  is  given.  And  BC  is  given;  therefore  point  G  is 
given.  But  also  A ;  therefore  AG  is  given  in  position. 

It  will  be  constructed  thus:  let  AD  be  drawn  perpendicular  from  A,  and  let 

CG  :  GB  :  :  CD  :  DB; 

and  let  AG  be  joined.  Then  it  is  evident  that  AG  touches  the  section  (i.  34). 

Then  again  let  the  given  point  G  be  on  the  axis,  and  let  it  have  been  done, 
and  let  AG  be  drawn  tangent,  and  let  AD  be  drawn  perpendicular.  Then  for 
the  same  reasons 

CG  :  GB  : :  CD  :  DB  (i.  36). 

And  BC  is  given;  therefore  the  point  D  is  given.  And  DA  is  perpendicular; 
therefore  DA  is  given  in  position.  And  also  the  section  is  given  in  position; 
therefore  the  point  A  is  given.  But  also  G;  therefore  AG  is  given  in  position. 

Then  it  will  be  constructed  thus:  let  the  other  things  be  supposed  the  same, 
and  let  it  be  contrived  that 

CG:GB::  CD:  DB, 

and  let  DA  be  drawn  perpendicular,  and  let  AG  be  joined.  Then  it  is  evident 
that  AG  does  the  problem  (i.  34),  and  that  from  G  another  tangent  to  the 
section  could  be  drawn  on  the  other  side. 

With  the  same  things  supposed  let  the  given  point  K  be  in  the  place  inside 
angle  EHF ,  and  let  it  be  required  to  draw  a  tangent  to  the  section  from  K .  Let 
it  have  been  done,  and  it  be  KA,  and  let  KH  be  joined  and  produced,  and  let 
HN  be  made  equal  to  LH ,  therefore  they  are  all  given.  Then  also  LN  will  be 
given.  Then  let  AM  be  drawn  ordinatewuse  to  MN; 
then  also 


NK  :  KL  :  :  MN  :  ML 


CONICS  II  717 

And  the  ratio  of  NK  to  KL  is  given;  therefore  also  the  ratio  of  NM  to  ML  is 
given.  And  the  point  L  is  given,  therefore  also  M  is  given.  And  MA  has  been 

erected  parallel  to  the  tan¬ 
gent  at  L;  therefore  MA  is 
given  in  position.  And  also 
the  section  ALB  is  given  in 
position;  therefore  the  point 
A  is  given.  But  K  is  also 
given;  therefore  AK  is 
given. 

Then  it  will  be  construct¬ 
ed  thus:  let  the  other  things 
be  supposed  the  same,  and 
the  given  point  K)  and  KH 
be  joined  and  produced,  and 
let  HN  be  made  equal  to  HL ,  and  let  it  be  contrived  that 

NK  :  KL  :  :  NM  :  ML 

and  let  MA  be  drawn  parallel  to  the  tangent  at  L  (above),  and  let  KA  be 
joined;  therefore  KA  touches  the  section  (i.  34). 

And  it  is  evident  that  a  tangent  to  the  section  could  also  be  drawn  to  the 
other  side. 

With  the  same  things  supposed  let  the  given  point  F  be  on  one  of  the 
asymptotes  containing  the  section,  and  let  it  be  required  to  draw  from  F  a 
tangent  to  the  section.  And  let  it  have  been  done,  and  let  it  be  F AE)  and 
through  A  let  AD  be  drawn  parallel  to  EH ;  then 

DH  =  DF , 

since  also 

FA—AE  (ii.  3). 

And  FH  is  given;  therefore  also  point  D  is  given.  And  through  the  given  point 

D ,  DA  has  been  drawn  parallel  in 
position  to  EH)  therefore  DA  is  given 
in  position.  And  the  section  is  also 
given  in  position;  therefore  the  point 
A  is  given.  But  F  is  also  given;  there¬ 
fore  the  straight  line  FAE  is  given  in 
position. 

Then  it  will  be  constructed  thus: 
let  there  be  the  section  AB,  and 
asymptotes  EH  and  HF ,  and  the 
given  point  F  on  one  of  the  asymp¬ 
totes  containing  the  section,  and  let 
FH  be  bisected  at  /),  and  through  D 
let  DA  be  drawm  parallel  to  HE ,  and  let  FA  be  joined.  And  since 

FD  =  DH , 

therefore  also 

FA=AE. 

And  so  by  things  showm  before,  the  straight  line  FA  E  touches  the  section 
(ii.  9). 

With  the  same  things  supposed,  let  the  given  point  be  in  the  place  under  the 


718  APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 

angle  adjacent  to  the  straight  lines  containing  the  section,  and  let  it  be  K ;  it  is 
required  then  to  draw  a  tangent  to  the  section  from  K.  And  let  it  have  been 


done,  and  let  it  be  KA,  and  let  KH  be  joined  and  produced;  then  it  will  be 
given  in  position.  If  then  a  given  point  C  is  taken  on  the  section,  and  through 
C,  CD  is  drawn  parallel  to  KH,  it  will  be  given  in  position.  And  if  CD  is 
bisected  at  E ,  and  HE  is  joined  and  produced,  it  will  be,  in  position,  a  diameter 
conjugate  to  KH  (First  Def.  i.  6).  Then  let  HG  be  made  equal  to  BH,  and 
through  A  let  AL  be  drawn  parallel  to  BH ;  then  because  KL  and  BG  are  con¬ 
jugate  diameters,  and  AK  a  tangent,  and  AL  a  straight  line  drawn  parallel  to 
BG,  therefore  rectangle  KH,  HL  is  equal  to  the  fourth  part  of  the  figure  on  BG 
(i.  38).  Therefore  rectangle  KH,  HL  is  given.  And  KH  is  given;  therefore  HL 
is  also  given.  But  it  is  also  given  in  position;  and  the  point  H  is  given;  therefore 
L  is  also  given.  And  through  L,  LA  has  been  drawn  parallel  in  position  to  BG ; 
therefore  LA  is  given  in  position.  And  the  section  is  also  given  in  position; 
therefore  the  point  A  is  given.  But  also  K ;  therefore  AK  is  given  in  position. 

Then  it  will  be  constructed  thus:  let  the  other  things  be  supposed  the  same, 
and  let  the  given  point  K  be  in  the  aforesaid  place,  and  let  KH  be  joined  and 
produced,  and  let  some  point  C  be  taken,  and  let  CD  be  dravrn  parallel  to  KH, 
and  let  CD  be  bisected  by  E  and  let  EH  be  joined  and  produced,  and  let  HG 
be  made  equal  to  BH)  therefore  GB  is  a  transverse  diameter  conjugate  to  KHL 
(First  Def.  i.  6).  Then  let  rectangle  KH,  HL  be  made  equal  to  the  fourth  of 
the  figure  on  BG,  and  through  L  let  LA  be  drawm  parallel  to  BG,  and  let  KA  be 
joined;  then  it  is  clear  that  KA  touches  the  section  by  the  converse  of  the 
theorem  (i.  38). 

And  if  it  is  given  in  the  place  between  the  straight  lines  FH  and  HP,  the 
problem  is  impossible.  For  the  tangent  will  cut  GH.  And  so  it  will  meet  both 
FH  and  HP)  and  this  is  impossible  by  the  things  shown  in  the  thirty-first 
theorem  of  the  first  book  (i.  31)  and  in  the  third  of  this  book  (ii.  3). 

With  the  same  things  supposed  let  the  section  be  an  ellipse,  and  the  given 
point  A  on  the  section,  and  let  it  be  required  to  draw  from  A  a  tangent  to  the 
section.  Let  it  have  been  done,  and  let  it  be  AG,  and  let  AD  be  drawn  from  A 
ordinatewise  to  the  axis  BC)  then  the  point  D  will  be  given,  and 

CD  :  DB  :  :  CG  :  GB  (i.  36). 

And  the  ratio  of  CD  to  DB  is  given;  therefore  the  ratio  of  CG  to  GB  is  also 
given.  Therefore  the  point  G  is  given.  But  also  A;  therefore  AG  is  given  in 
position. 


CONICS  II  719 

Then  it  will  be  constructed  thus:  let  AD  be  drawn  perpendicular,  and  let 

CG  :GB::  CD:  DE , 

and  let  AG  be  joined.  Then  it  is 
evident  that  AG  touches,  as  also  in 
the  case  of  the  hyperbola  (i.  34). 

Then  again  let  the  given  point 
be  Ky  and  let  it  be  required  to 
draw  a  tangent.  Let  it  have  been 
done,  and  let  it  be  KA,  and  let  the 
straight  line  KLH  be  joined  to  the 
center  H  and  produced  to  N ;  then 
it  will  be  given  in  position.  And  if  AM  is  drawn  ordinatewise,  then 
NK  :  KL  : :  NM  :  ML  (i.  36). 

And  the  ratio  oiNK:  KL  is  given;  therefore  the 
ratio  of  MN  to  LM  is  also  given.  Therefore 
the  point  M  is  given.  And  MA  has  been  erect¬ 
ed  ordinatewise;  for  it  is  parallel  to  the  tan¬ 
gent  at  L;  therefore  MA  is  given  in  position. 
Therefore  the  point  A  is  given.  But  also  K; 
therefore  KA  is  given  in  position. 

And  the  construction  (awdt ais)  is  the  same 
as  for  the  preceding. 


Proposition  50  (Problem) 

Given  the  section  of  a  cone ,  to  draw  a  tangent  which  will  make  with  the  axis ,  on  the 
same  side  as  the  section ,  an  angle  equal  to  a  given  acute  angle. 

Let  the  section  of  a  cone  first  be  a  parabola  wiiose  axis  is  AB;  then  it  is  re¬ 
quired  to  draw’  a  tangent  to  the  section  w’hich  will  make  with  the  axis  AB,  on 
the  same  side  as  the  section,  an  angle  equal  to  the  given  acute  angle. 

Let  it  have  been  done,  and  let  it  be  CD ;  therefore  angle  BDC  is  given.  Let  BC 


be  drawn  perpendicular;  then  the  angle  at  B  is  also  given.  Therefore  the  ratio 
of  DB  to  BC  is  given.  But  the  ratio  of  BD  to  BA  is  given;  therefore  also  the 
ratio  of  AB  to  BC  is  given.  And  the  angle  at  B  is  given;  therefore  angle  BAC 


720  APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 

is  also  given.  And  it  is  in  position  with  respect  to  BA  and  the  given  point  A ; 
therefore  CA  is  given  in  position.  And  the  section  is  also  given  in  position; 
therefore  the  point  C  is  given.  And  CD  touches;  therefore  CD  is  given  in 
position. 

Then  the  problem  will  be  constructed  thus:  let  the  given  section  of  a  cone 
first  be  a  parabola  whose  axis  is  AB,  and  the  given  acute  angle,  angle  EFG,  and 
let  some  point  E  be  taken  on  EF,  and  let  EG  be  drawn  perpendicular,  and  let 
FG  be  bisected  by  H ,  and  let  HE  be  joined,  and  let  angle  BAG  be  constructed 
equal  to  angle  GHE,  and  let  BC  be  drawn  perpendicular,  and  let  AD  be  made 
equal  to  BA,  and  let  CD  be  joined.  Therefore  CD  is  tangent  to  the  section 
(i.  33). 

I  say  then  that 

angle  CDB  =  angle  EFG. 

For  since 

FG  :  GH  :  :  DB  :  BA 

and 

HG  :GE  : :  AB  :  BC, 

therefore  ex  aequali 

FG  :  GE  :  :  DB  :  BC, 

And  the  angles  at  G  and  B  are  right  angles,  therefore 

angle  at  F—  angle  at  D. 

Let  the  section  be  an  hyperbola,  and  let  it  have  been  done,  and  let  CD  be 
tangent,  and  let  the  center  of  the  section  Y  be  taken,  and  let  CY  be  joined,  and 
let  CE  be  perpendicular;  therefore  the  ratio  of  rectangle  YE,  ED  to  the  square 
on  CE  is  given;  for  it  is  the  same  as  the  transverse  to  the  upright  (i.  37).  And 
the  ratio  of  the  square  on  CE  to  the  square  on  ED  is  given;  for  each  of  the 
rectangles  CD,  DE  and  DE,  EC  is  given.  Therefore  the  ratio  of  rectangle  YE, 
ED  to  the  square  on  ED  is 
given;  and  so  also  the  ratio  of 
YE  to  ED  is  given.  And  the 
angle  at  E  is  given;  therefore 
the  angle  at  Y  is  also  given. 

Then  some  straight  line  CY 
has  been  drawn  across  in 
position  with  respect  to  the 
straight  fine  YE  and  to  the 
given  point  Y  at  a  given 
angle;  therefore  CY  is  given 
in  position.  And  the  section 
is  also  given  in  position;  therefore  the  point  C  is  given.  And  CD  has  been 
drawn  across  as  tangent;  therefore  CD  is  given  in  position. 

Let  the  asymptote  to  the  section  YF  be  drawn;  therefore  CD  produced  will 
meet  the  asymptote  (n.  3).  Let  it  meet  it  at  F.  Therefore 

angle  FDE>  angle  FYD 

Therefore,  for  the  construction,  the  given  acute  angle  will  have  to  be  greater 
than  half  the  angle  contained  by  the  asymptotes. 

Then  the  problem  will  be  constructed  thus:  let  there  be  the  given  hyperbola 
whose  axis  is  AB,  and  asymptote  YF,  and  the  given  acute  angle  KHG  greater 
than  angle  AYF,  and  let 


721 


CONICS  II 

angle  KHL  =  angle  AYF , 
and  let  AF  be  drawn  from  A  perpendicular  to  AB ,  and  let  some  point  G  be 


taken  on  GH ,  and  let  GK  be  drawn  from  it  perpendicular  to  HK.  Since  then 

angle  FYA  =  angle  LHK , 
and  also  the  angles  at  A  and  K  are  right,  therefore 

YA  :  AF  :  :  HK  :  KL 
HK  :  KL>HK  :  KG; 

therefore  also 


And  so  also 
But 

therefore  also 


YA  :AF>HK:KG. 
sq.  YA  :  sq.  AF>  sq.  FA"  :  sq.  KG. 
sq.  YA  :  sq.  AF  :  :  transverse  :  upright  (n.  1); 


transverse  :  upright  >sq.  HK  :  sq.  KG. 

If  then  we  shall  contrive  that 

sq.  YA  :  sq.  AF  :  :  some  other  :  sq.  KG, 
it  will  be  greater  than  the  square  on  HK.  Let  it  be  the  rectangle  MK,  KH;  and 
let  GM  be  joined.  Since  then 

sq.  MK  >vect.  MK,  KH, 


therefore 


sq.  MK  :  sq.  AG>rect.  MK,  KH  :  sq.  KG 
>sq.  YA  :  sq.  AF. 

And  if  we  shall  contrive  that 

sq.  MK  :  sq.  KG  :  :  sq.  YA  :  some  other, 
it  will  be  to  a  magnitude  less  than  the  square  on  AF;  and  the  straight  line 
joined  from  Y  to  the  point  taken  will  make  similar  triangles,  and  therefore 

angle  AFA>angle  GMK. 

Let  angle  AYC  be  made  equal  to  angle  GMK;  therefore  YC  will  cut  the  sec¬ 
tion  (n.  2).  Let  it  cut  it  at  C,  and  from  C  let  CD  be  drawn  tangent  to  the 
section  (n.  49),  and  CE  drawn  perpendicular;  therefore  triangle  CYE  is  similar 
to  triangle  GMK.  Therefore 

sq.  YE  :  sq.  EC  :  :  sq.  MK  :  sq.  KG. 


722 

But  also 


APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 


and 


transverse  :  upright  :  :  rect.  YE, ED  :  sq.  EC  (i.  37), 


transverse  :  upright  :  :  rect.  MK,KH  :  sq.  KG. 

And  inversely 

sq.  CE  :  rect.  YE,  ED  :  :  sq.  GK  :  rect.  MK,KH ; 
therefore  ex  aequali 

sq.  YE  :  rect.  YE, ED  :  :  sq.  MK  :  rect.  MK,KH . 
And  therefore 


YE:  ED::  MK  :  KH. 


But  also  we  had 


CE  :  EY  :  :  GK  :  KM; 

therefore  ex  aequali 

CE  :  ED  ::GK:  KH. 

And  the  angles  at  E  and  K  are  right  angles;  therefore 

angle  at  D  =  angle  GHK . 

Let  the  section  be  an  ellipse  whose  axis  is  AB.  Then  it  is  required  to  draw  a 
tangent  to  the  section  which  with  the  axis  will  contain,  on  the  same  side  as  the 
section,  an  angle  equal  to  the  given  acute  angle. 

Let  it  have  been  done,  and  let  it  be  CD.  Therefore  angle  CD  A  is  given.  Let 
CE  be  drawn  perpendicular;  therefore  the  ratio  of  the  square  on  DE  to  the 
square  on  EC  is  given.  Let  Y  be  the  center  of  the  section,  and  let  CY  be  joined. 
Then  the  ratio  of  the  square  on  CE  to  the  rectangle  DE,  EY  is  given;  for  it  is 
the  same  as  the  ratio  of  the  upright  to  the  transverse  (i.  37),  and  therefore  the 
ratio  of  the  square  on  DE  to  rectangle  DE,  EY  is  given;  and  therefore  the  ratio 
of  DE  to  EY  is  given.  And  of  DE  to  EC ;  therefore  also  the  ratio  of  CE  to  EY 
is  given.  And  the  angle  at  E  is  right;  therefore  the  angle  at  Y  is  given.  And  it 
is  given  with  respect  to  a  straight  line  given  in  position  and  to  a  given  point; 
therefore  the  point  C  is  given.  And  from  the  given  point  C  let  CD  be  drawn 
tangent;  therefore  CD  is  given  in  position. 


Then  the  problem  will  be  constructed  thus:  let  there  be  the  given  acute 
angle  FGH,  and  let  some  point  F  be  taken  on  FG ,  and  let  FH  be  drawn  per¬ 
pendicular,  and  let  it  be  contrived  that 

upright  :  transverse  :  :  sq.  FH  :  rect.  GH,HK, 
and  let  KF  be  joined,  and  let  Y  be  the  center  of  the  section,  and  let  angle  A  YC 
be  constructed  equal  to  angle  GKF,  and  let  CD  be  drawn  tangent  to  the 
section  (n.  49). 

I  say  that  CD  does  the  problem,  that  is, 

angle  CDE  =  angle  FGH . 


CONICS  II 


723 


For  since 
therefore  also 


YE  :  EC  :  :KH  : 


FH , 


sq.  YE  :  sq.  EC  :  :  sq.  KH  :  sq.  FH. 

But  also 

sq.  EC  :  rect.  DEyEY  :  :  sq.  FH  :  rect.  KH,  HG; 
for  each  is  the  same  ratio  as  that  of  the  upright  to  the  transverse  (i.  37,  and 
above).  And  ex  aequali;  therefore 

sq.  YE  :  rect.  DEyEY  :  :  sq.  KH  :  rect.  KHyHG. 

And  therefore 


YE  :  ED  :  :  KH  :  HG. 


But  also 


ex  aequali ,  therefore 


YE  :  EC  : :  KH  :  FH; 


DE  :  EC  :  :  HG  :  FH. 

And  the  sides  about  the  right  angles  are  proportional;  therefore 

angle  CDE  =  angle  FGH. 

Therefore  CD  does  the  problem. 


Proposition  51  (Problem) 

Given  a  section  of  a  cone ,  to  draw  a  tangent  which  with  the  diameter  drawn  through 
the  point  of  contact  will  contain  an  angle  equal  to  a  given  acute  angle. 

Let  the  given  section  of  a  cone  first  be  a  parabola  whose  axis  is  AB,  and  the 
given  angle  H;  then  it  is  required  to  draw  a  tangent  to  the  parabola  which  with 


the  diameter  from  the  point  of  contact  will  contain  an  angle  equal  to  the 
angle  at  H. 

Let  it  have  been  done,  and  let  CD  be  drawn  a  tangent  making  with  the 
diameter  EC  drawn  through  the  point  of  contact  angle  ECD  equal  to  angle  //, 
and  let  CD  meet  the  axis  at  D  (i.  24).  Since  then  AD  is  parallel  to  EC  (i.  51, 
end), 

angle  ADC  =  angle  ECD. 

But  angle  ECD  is  given;  for  it  is  equal  to  angle  H;  therefore  angle  ADC  is  also 
given. 

Then  it  will  be  constructed  thus:  let  there  be  a  parabola  whose  axis  is  ABy 


724 


APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 


and  the  given  angle  H.  Let  CD  be  drawn  a  tangent  to  the  section  making  with 
the  axis  the  angle  ADC  equal  to  angle  i?  (n.  50),  and  through  C  let  EC  be 
drawn  parallel  to  AB.  Since  then 

angle  H  =  angle  ADC , 


and 


therefore  also 


angle  ADC  =  angle  ECD} 


angle  H  =  angle  ECD. 

Let  the  section  be  an  hyperbola  whose  axis  is  AB,  and  center  E ,  and  asymp¬ 
tote  ET,  and  the  given  acute  angle  Q,  and  let  CD  be  tangent,  and  let  CE  be 
joined  doing  the  problem,  and  let  CG  be  drawn  perpendicular.  Therefore  the 
ratio  of  the  transverse  to  the  upright  is  given;  and  so  also  the  ratio  of  rectangle 
EG,GD  to  the  square  on  CG  (i.  37).  Then  let  some  given  straight  line  FH  be 
laid  out,  and  on  it  let  there  be  described  a  segment  of  a  circle  admitting  an 
angle  equal  to  angle  Q  (Eucl.  hi.  33) ;  therefore  it  will  be  greater  than  a  semi¬ 
circle  (Eucl.  hi.  31).  And  from  some  point  K  of  those  on  the  circumference  let 
KL  be  drawn  perpendicular  making 


> 


rect.  FL,  LH  :  sq.  LK  :  :  transverse 
and  let  FK  and  KH  be  joined.  Since  then 

angle  FKH  =  angle  ECD , 


but  also 


:  upright, 


and 


rect.  EG,GD  :  sq.  GC  :  :  transverse  :  upright, 
rect.  FLy  LH  :  sq.  LK  :  :  transverse  :  upright, 


>1 

A 


CONICS  II  725 

therefore  triangle  KFL  is  similar  to  triangle  ECG,  and  triangle  FHK  to  triangle 
ECD }  And  so 

angle  HFK  =  angle  CED. 

Then  it  will  be  constructed  thus:  let  there  be  the  given  hyperbola  AC,  and 
axis  AB,  and  center  E,  and  given  acute  angle  Q,  and  let  the  given  ratio  of  the 
transverse  to  the  upright  be  the  same  as  YZ  to  Y W,  and  let  WZ  be  bisected  at 

U,  and  let  a  given  straight  line  FH  be 
laid  out,  and  on  it  let  there  be  described 
a  segment  of  a  circle,  greater  than 
semicircle  and  admitting  an  angle  equal 
to  angle  Q  (Eucl.  hi.  31,  33),  and  let  it 
be  FKH ,  and  let  the  center  of  the  circle 
X  be  taken,  and  from  X  let  XO  be 
drawn  perpendicular  to  FH,  and  let  XO 
be  cut  at  P  in  the  ratio  of  UW  to  WY, 
and  through  P  let  PK  be  drawn  paral¬ 
lel  to  FH,  and  from  K  let  KL  be  drawn 
perpendicular  to  FH  produced,  and  let 
FK  and  KH  be  joined,  and  let  LK  be 
produced  to  M,  and  from  X  let  .YA"  be 
drawn  perpendicular  to  it;  therefore  it 
is  parallel  to  FH.  And  therefore 
X P  :  PO  or  UW  :  WY  : :  XK  :  KL. 

And  doubling  the  antecedents 

ZW  :  WY  :  MK  :  KL ; 

componenclo 

ZY  :  YW  :  :  ML  :  LK. 

But 

ML  :  LK  :  :  rect.  ML,LK  :  sq.  LK) 

therefore 

Z7  :  YW  :  :  rect.  ML.LK  :  sq.  LK  :  :  rect.  FL.LH  :  sq.  LK  (Eucl.  m.  36). 

1  Pappus,  in  lemma  IX  to  this  book:  “Let  triangle  ABC  be  similar  to  triangle  DEF,  and 
triangle  AGE  to  DEH;  the  result  is 

rect.  BC ,  CG  :  sq.  CA  :  :  rect.  EF,  FH  :  sq.  DF . 


W 


A 


E  H  F  B  G  C 


“For  since  because  of  similarity 

whole  angle  A  =  whole  angle  D, 
and  angle  BAG  =  angle  EDH, 

therefore  remaining  angle  GAC  =  remaining  angle  HDF. 

But  also  angle  C  —  angle  F; 

therefore  GC  :  CA  :  :  HF  :  FD 

But  also  BC  :  CA  ::EF  :  FD; 

therefore  also  compounded  ratio  is  the  same  with  compounded.  Therefore 
rect.  BCjCG  :  sq.  CA  :  :  rect.  EF,  FH  :  sq.  FDA 


726 

But 


APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 


ZY  :  YW  :  :  transverse  :  upright; 

therefore  also 

rect.  FL,LH  :  sq.  LK  :  :  transverse  :  upright. 

Then  let  AT  be  drawn  from  A  perpendicular  to  AB .  Since  then 
sq.  EA  :  sq.  AT  :  :  transverse  :  upright  (n.  1), 

and  also 

transverse  :  upright  :  :  rect.  FL,LH  :  sq.  LK, 

and 

sq.  FL  :  sq.  LK>  rect.  FL,LH  :  sq.  LK, 

therefore  also 

sq.  FL  :  sq.  LK> sq.  EA  :  sq.  AT. 

And  the  angles  at  A  and  L  are  right  angles;  therefore 

angle  F  <  angle  E . 

Then  let  angle  AEC  be  constructed  equal  to  angle  LFK ;  therefore  EC  will  meet 
the  section  (n.  2).  Let  it  meet  it  at  C.  Then  let  CD  be  drawn  tangent  from  C 
(n.  49),  and  let  CG  be  drawn  perpendicular;  then 

transverse  :  upright :  :  rect.  EG,GD  :  sq.  CG  (i.  37). 

Therefore  also 

rect.  FL,LH  :  sq.  LK  :  :  rect.  EG,GD  :  sq.  CG 
therefore  triangle  KFL  is  similar  to  triangle  ECG,  and  triangle  KHL  to  tri¬ 
angle  CGD,  and  triangle  KFH  to  triangle  CED.  And  so 
angle  ECD  =  angle  FKH  =  angle  Q. 

And  if  the  ratio  of  the  transverse  to  the  upright  is  equal  to  equal,  KL 
touches  the  circle  FKH  (Eucl.  hi.  37),  and  the  straight  line  joined  from  the 
center  to  K  will  be  parallel  to  FH  and  itself  will  do  the  problem. 


Proposition  52 


If  a  straight  line  touches  an  ellipse  making  an  angle  with  the  diameter  drawn 
through  the  point  of  contact ,  it  is  not  less  than  the  angle  adjacent  to  the  one  con¬ 
tained  by  the  straight  lines  deflected  at  the  middle  of  the  section. 

Let  there  be  an  ellipse  wrhose  axes  are  AB  and  CD,  and  center  E,  and  let  AB 
be  the  major  axis,  and  let  the  straight  line 
GFL  touch  the  section,  and  let  AC,  CB,  and 
FE  be  joined,  and  let  BC  be  produced  to  L. 

I  say  that  angle  LFE  is  not  less  than  angle 
LCA. 

For  FE  is  either  parallel  to  LB  or  not.  & 

Let  it  first  be  parallel;  and 
AE  =  EB ; 

therefore  also 

AH  =  HC. 


And  FE  is  a  diameter;  therefore  the  tangent  at  F  is  parallel  to  AC  (n.  6).  But 
also  FE  is  parallel  to  LB ;  therefore  FHCL  is  a  parallelogram,  and  therefore 

angle  LFH  =  angle  LCH . 

And  since  AE  and  EB  are  each  greater  than  EC,  angle  ACB  is  obtuse;  there¬ 
fore  angle  LCA  is  acute.  And  so  also  angle  LFE.  And  therefore  angle  GFE  is 
obtuse. 

Then  let  EF  not  be  parallel  to  LB,  and  let  FK  be  drawn  perpendicular; 


CONICS  II  727 

therefore  LBE  is  not  equal  to  angle  FEA.  But 

rt.  angle  at  E  =  rt.  angle  at  K ; 
therefore  it  is  not  true  that 

sq.  BE  :  sq.  EC  :  :  sq.  EK  :  sq.  KF. 

But 

sq.  BE  :  sq.  EC  :  :  rect.  AE,EB  :  sq.  EC  :  :  transverse  :  upright  (i.  21 ) 
and 

transverse  :  upright  :  :  rect.  GK,KE  :  sq.  KF  (i.  37). 

Therefore  it  is  not  true  that 

rect.  GK,KE  :  sq.  KF  :  :  sq.  KE  :  sq.  KF. 

Therefore  GK  is  not  equal  to  KE.  Let  there  be  laid  out  a  segment  of  a  circle 


MUN  admitting  an  angle  equal  to  angle  ACB  (Eucl.  hi.  33) ;  and  angle  ACB  is 
obtuse;  therefore  MUN  is  a  segment  less  than  a  semicircle  (Eucl.  m.  31).  Then 
let  it  be  contrived  that 

GK  :  KE  : :  NX  :  XM, 

and  from  X  let  UXY  be  drawn  at  right  angles,  and  let  NU  and  UM  be  joined, 
and  let  MN  be  bisected  at  T)  and  let  OTP  be  drawn  at  right  angles;  therefore 
it  is  a  diameter.  Let  the  center  be  R,  and  from  it  let  RS  be  drawn  perpendicular, 
and  ON  and  OM  be  joined.  Since  then 

angle  MON  =  angle  ACB} 

and  AB  and  MN  have  been  bisected,  the  one  at  E  and  the  other  at  T ,  and  the 
angles  at  E  and  T  are  right  angles,  therefore  triangles  OTN  and  BEC  are 
similar.  Therefore 


And  since 
and 


sq.  TN  :  sq.  TO  :  :  sq.  BE  :  sq.  EC. 
TR  =  SX , 


therefore 
and  convertendo 


RO>SUy 

RO:TR>SU  :SX; 


RO  :  OT<SU  :  UX. 

And,  doubling  the  antecedents,  therefore 

PO  :  TO<YU  :  UX. 


And  separando 


PT  :  TOCYX  :  UX. 


728 


APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 


But 

PT  :  TO  :  :  sq.  TN  :  sq.  TO  :  :  sq.  BE  :  sq.  EC  :  :  transverse  :  upright  (i.  21), 
and 

transverse  :  upright  :  :  rect.  GK,KE  :  sq.  KF  (i.  37); 

■fLprpfnr'P 

rect.  GK,KE  :  sq.  KF<YX  :  XU 

<rect,  YX,XU  :  sq.  XU 
<rect.  NX,XM  :  sq.  XC7. 

If  then  we  contrive  it  that 

rect.  GK,KE  :  sq.  KF  :  :  rect.  MX,XN  :  some  other, 
it  will  be  greater  than  the  square  on  XU.  Let  it  be  to  the  square  on  XW.  Since 
then 

GK  :  KE  :  :  NX  :  XM, 
and  KF  and  YW  are  perpendicular,  and 

rect.  GK,KE  :  sq.  KF  :  :  rect.  MX,XN  :  sq.  XW, 

therefore 

angle  GFE  =  angle  MWN. 

Therefore 

angle  MUN  or  angle  ,4C£>angle  GFE, 
and  the  adjacent  angle  LFH  is  greater  than  angle  LCH. 

Therefore  angle  LFH  is  not  less  than  angle  LCH. 

_ |  ** 

Proposition  53  (Problem) 

Given  an  ellipse,  to  draw  a  tangent  which  will  make  with  the  diameter  drawn 
through  the  point  of  contact  an  angle  equal  to  a  given  acute  angle ;  then  it  is  re¬ 
quired  that  the  given  acute  angle  be  not  less  than  the  angle  adjacent  to  the  angle 
contained  by  the  straight  lines  deflected  at  the  middle  of  the  section. 

Let  there  be  the  given  ellipse  whose  major  axis  is  AB  and  minor  axis  CD, 
and  center  E,  and  let  AC  and  CB  be  joined,  and  let  angle  U  be  the  given  angle 


not  less  than  angle  ACG]  and  so  also  angle  ACB  is  not  less  than  angle  F. 
Therefore  angle  U  is  either  greater  than  or  equal  to  angle  ACG. 

Let  it  first  be  equal;  and  through  E  let  EK  be  drawn  parallel  to  BC,  and 
through  K  let  KH  be  drawn  tangent  to  the  section  (n.  49).  Since  then 

AE  =  EB , 

and 

AE  :  EB  :  :  AF  :  FC, 


therefore 


AF  =  FC. 


CONICS  II 


729 


And  KE  is  a  diameter;  therefore  the  tangent  to  the  section  at  K ,  that  is  HKG , 
is  parallel  to  CA  (n.  6).  And  also  EK  is  parallel  to  GB;  therefore  KFCG  is  a 
parallelogram;  and  therefore 

angle  GKF  =  angle  GCF. 

And  angle  GCF  is  equal  to  the  given  angle,  that  is  U ;  therefore  also 

angle  GKE  =  angle  U . 

Then  let 

angle  U >  angle  ACG; 

then  inversely 

angle  F<angle  ACB. 

Let  a  circle  be  laid  out,  and  let  a  segment  be  taken  from  it,  and  let  it  be  MNP 
admitting  an  angle  equal  to  angle  Y,  and  let  MP  be  bisected  at  0,  and  from  0 
let  NOR  be  drawn  at  right  angles  to  MP}  and  let  NM  and  NP  be  joined;  there¬ 
fore 

angle  MNP <angle  ACB. 

But 

angle  MN0  =  ha\i  angle  MNP , 

and 

angle  A  C2?  =  half  angle  ACB ; 

therefore 

angle  MNO  <angle  ACE. 

And  the  angles  at  E  and  0  are  right  angles,  therefore 

AE  :  EC  >  OM  :  ON. 


And  so  also 


But 

and 


sq.  AE  :  sq.  EC>  sq.  MO  :  sq.  NO. 
sq.  AE—  rect.  AE,EB, 

sq.  MO  =  rect.  MO ,  OP  =  rect.  NO ,  OR  (Eucl.  hi.  35); 


therefore 

rect.  AEyEB  :  sq.  EC  or  transverse  :  upright  (i.  21  )>R0  :  ON. 


730 

Then  let  it  be  that 


APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 


transverse  :  upright  :  :  QA'  :  A'X ' , 
and  let  QX'  be  bisected  at  Y' .  Since  then 

transverse  :  upright  >RO  :  ON, 

also 

QA'  \  A'X' >RO  :  ON. 

And  componendo 

QX'  :  X'A'>RN  :  NO. 

Let  the  center  of  the  circle  be  W ;  and  so  also 

Y'X'  :X' A' >WN  :  NO. 

And  separando 

A'Y'  :  A'X' >  WO  :  ON. 

Then  let  it  be  contrived  that 

A'Y'  :  A'X'  :  :  TFO  :  less  than  ON 
such  as  10,  and  let  IX  and  XT  and  WZ  be  drawn  parallel. 

Therefore 

A'Y'  :  A'X'  :  :  WO  :  01 :  :  ZS  :  SX; 

and  componendo 

Y'X'  :  X'A'  ::ZX:  XS. 

And  doubling  the  antecedents, 

QX' :  X'A'  ::TX:  XS. 

And  separando 

QA'  :  A'X'  or  transverse:  upright  :  :  TS  :  SX. 

Then  let  MX  and  XP  be  joined,  and  let  angle  AEK  be  constructed  on  straight 
line  AE  at  point  E  equal  to  angle  MPX ,  and  through  K  let  KH  be  drawn 
touching  the  section  (n.  49),  and  let  KL  be  dropped  ordinatewise.  Since  then 

angle  MPX  =  angle  AEK, 

and 


rt.  angle  at  >S  =  rt.  angle  at  L , 
therefore  triangle  XSP  is  equiangular  with  triangle  KEL. 
And 


transverse  :  upright  :  :  TS  :  SX  :  :  rect.  TS,SX  : 
sq.  SX  :  :  rect.  MX,SP  :  sq.  SX ; 

therefore  triangle  KLE  is  similar  to  triangle  SXP,  and  triangle  MXP  to 
triangle  KHE,  and  therefore 

angle  MXP  =  angle  HKE. 


But 


angle  MXP  =  angle  MNP  =  angle  F; 

therefore  also 

angle  HKE  =  angle  Y. 

And  therefore 

adjacent  angle  GKE  =  adjacent  angle  U. 

Therefore  GH  has  been  drawn  across  tangent  to  the  section  and  making 
with  the  diameter  KE,  drawn  through  the  point  of  contact,  angle  GKE  equal 
to  the  given  angle  U ;  and  this  it  was  required  to  do. 


BOOK  THREE 


Proposition  1 

If  straight  lines ,  touching  a  section  of  a  cone  or  circumference  of  a  circle ,  meet,  and 
diameters  are  drawn  through  the  'points  of  contact  meeting  the  tangents ,  the  re¬ 
sulting  vertically  related  triangles  will  be  equal. 

Let  there  be  the  section  of  a  cone  or  circumference  of  a  circle  AB,  and  let  AC 
and  BD ,  meeting  at  E,  touch  AB,  and  let  the  diameters  of  the  section  CB  and 


DA  be  drawn  through  A  and  B ,  meeting  the  tangents  at  C  and  D. 

I  sav  that 

trgl.  ADE  =  trgl.  EBC. 

For  let  AF  be  drawn  from  A  parallel  to  BD ;  therefore  it  has  been  dropped 
ordinatewise  (i.  32).  Then  in  the  case  of  the  parabola 
pllg.  ADBF  =  trgl.  ACF  (i.  42), 
and,  with  the  common  area  AEBF  subtracted, 

trgl.  A DE  =  trg\.  CBE . 

And  in  the  case  of  the  others  let  the  diameters  meet  at  center  G.  Since  then 

731 


732 


APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 


AF  has  been  dropped  ordinatewise,  and  AC  touches, 
rect.  FG,  GC  =  sq.  BG  (i.  37). 


Therefore 
therefore  also 


FG  :GB  : :  BG  :  GC ; 

FG:GC  : :  sq.  FG  :  sq.  GB  (Eucl.  vi.  20). 


But 

sq.  FG  :  sq.  GB  :  :  trgl.  AGF  :  trgl.  DGB  (Eucl.  vi.  19), 

and 

FG  :GC  : :  trgl.  AGF  :  trgl.  AGC; 

therefore  also 

trgl.  AGF  :  trgl.  AGC  :  :  trgl.  AGF  :  trgl.  DGB . 

Therefore 

trgl.  AGC  =  trgl.  DGB. 

Let  the  common  area  DGBE  be  subtracted;  therefore  as  remainders, 

trgl.  AFD  =  trgl.  CEB . 


Proposition  2 

With  the  same  things  supposed ,  if  some  point  is  taken  on  the  section  or  circumfer¬ 
ence  of  a  circle ,  and  through  it  parallels  to  the  tangents  are  drawn  as  far  as  the 
diameters ,  then  the  quadrilateral  produced  on  one  of  the  tangents  and  one  of  the 
diameters  will  be  equal  to  the  triangle  produced  on  the  same  tangent  and  the  other 
diameter . 

For  let  there  be  a  section  of  a  cone  or  circumference  of  a  circle  AB  and  let 


CONICS  III  733 

AEG  and  BED  be  tangents,  and  AD  and  BC  diameters,  and  let  some  point  G 


be  taken  on  the  section,  and  GKL  and  GMF  be  drawn  parallel  to  the  tangents. 

I  say  that 

trgl.  A/M  =  quadr.  CLGL 

For  triangle  GKM  has  been  shown  equal  to  quadrilateral  AL  (i.  42,  43),  let 
the  common  quadrilateral  IK  be  added  or  subtracted,  and 

trgl.  4/Af  =  quadr.  CG } 

Proposition  3 

With  the  same  things  supposed,  if  two  points  are  taken  on  the  section  or  circumfer¬ 
ence  of  a  circle ,  and  through  them  parallels  to  the  tangents  are  drawn  as  far  as  the 
diameters ,  the  quadrilaterals  produced  by  the  straight  lines  drawn ,  and  standing  on 
the  diameters  as  bases ,  are  equal  to  each  other . 

For  let  there  be  the  section  and  tangents  and  diameters  as  said  before,  and 
let  two  points  at  random  F  and  G  be  taken  on  the  section,  and  through  F  let 
the  straight  lines  FHKL  and  NFIM  be  drawn  parallel  to  the  tangents,  and 
through  G  the  straight  lines  GXO  and  HPR. 

I  say  that 

quadr.  LG  =  quadr.  MH, 

'Eutocius,  commenting,  gives  the  proof  for  another  and  important  case:  “It  must  be 
remarked  that,  if  the  point  G  is  taken  between  A  and  B  so  that  the  parallels  are,  for  instance, 


734 

and 


APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 


quadr.  LN  =  quadr.  RN. 
For  since  it  has  already  been  shown  that 

trgl.  RPA  =  quadr.  CG  (hi.  2), 


and 


and 


trgl.  AMI  =  quadr.  CF  (hi.  2), 


trgl.  RPA=  trgl.  AA/7+quadr.  PM, 

therefore  also 

quadr.  CG  =  quadr.  CF+ quadr.  PM; 


MIGI  and  LGK,  one  must  draw  LK  to  the  section,  at  N  for  instance,  and  through  N  draw 


NX  parallel  to  BD;  for  by  what  was  said  in  the  forty-ninth  and  fiftieth  theorems  of  the  first 
book  (i.  49,50)  and  in  the  notes  to  them 

trgl.  KNX  =  quadr.  KC. 

But  triangle  KXN  is  similar  to  triangle  KMG  because  MG  is  parallel  to  NX;  but  it  is  also 
equal  to  it  because  AC  is  a  tangent,  and  GN  is  parallel  to  it,  and  MX  is  a  diameter,  and 

GK=KN . 

Since  then  trgl.  KNX  =  quadr.  KC  =  trgl.  KMG, 

with  the  common  quadrilateral  AG  subtracted,  as  remainders 

trgl.  AIM  =  quadr.  CG.” 

It  will  be  noticed  that,  just  as  in  the  second  note  to  i.  50,  the  quadrilateral  CG  is  to  be 
considered  as  the  difference  between  the  triangles  CIF  and  GFL. 


CONICS  III 


735 


and  so 


quadr.  C(?  =  quadr.  CH+ quadr.  RF. 


Let  the  common  quadrilateral  CH  be  subtracted;  therefore  as  remainders 

quadr.  LG  =  quadr.  HM . 

And  therefore  as  wholes 

quadr.  LN  =  quadr.  RN . 

Proposition  4 

If  two  straight  lines  touching  opposite  sections  meet  each  other ,  anc?  diameters  are 
drawn  through  the  points  of  contact  meeting  the  tangents ,  then  the  triangles  at  the 
tangents  will  he  equal. 

Let  there  be  the  opposite  sections  A  and  B,  and  let  the  tangents  to  them,  AC 
and  BC ,  meet  at  C,  and  let  D  be  the  center  of  the  sections  and  let  AB  and  CD 
be  joined,  and  CD  produced  to  E ,  and  let  DA  and  BD  also  be  joined  and  pro¬ 
duced  to  F  and  G. 

I  say  that 

trgl.  AGD  =  trgl.  BDFy 

and 

trgl.  ACF  =  trgl.  BCG. 

For  let  HL  be  drawn  through  II  tangent  to  the  section;  therefore  it  is  paral¬ 
lel  to  AG  (i.  44,  note).  And  since 

AD=DII  (i.  30), 


736 


APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 

trgl.  AGD = trgl.  DHL  (Eucl.  vi.  19). 

r-  p 


But 

therefore  also 
And  so  also 


trgl.  DHL  =  trgl.  BDF  (in.  1); 
trgl.  AGD  =  trgl.  BDF 
trgl.  ACF  =  trgl.  BCG. 


Proposition  5 

If  two  straight  lines  touching  opposite  sections  meet ,  and  some  point  is  taken  on 
either  of  the  sections ,  and  from  it  two  straight  lines  are  drawn,  the  one  parallel  to 
the  tangent ,  the  other  parallel  to  the  line  joining  the  points  of  contact ,  then  the 
triangle  produced  by  them  on  the  diameter  drawn  through  the  point  of  meeting 
differs  from  the  triangle  cut  off  at  the  point  of  meeting  of  the  tangents  by  the  tri¬ 
angle  cut  off  on  the  tangent  and  the  diameter  drawn  through  the  point  of  contact. 

Let  there  be  the  opposite  sections  A  and  B  whose  center  is  C,  and  let  tan¬ 
gents  ED  and  DF  meet  at  D,  and  let  EF  and  CD  be  joined,  and  let  CD  be  pro¬ 


duced,  and  let  FC  and  EC  be  joined  and  produced,  and  let  some  point  Q  be 
taken  on  the  section,  and  through  it  let  HGKL  be  drawn  parallel  to  EF,  and 
GM  parallel  to  DF. 

I  say  that  triangle  GHM  differs  from  triangle  KHD  by  triangle  KLF . 

For  since  CD  has  been  shown  to  be  a  diameter  of  the  opposite  sections  (n. 


CONICS  III  737 

39,  38),  and  EF  to  be  an  ordinate  to  it  (n.  38;  First  Def.  i.  5),  and  GH  has  been 


drawn  parallel  to  EF ,  and  MG  parallel  to  DF,  therefore  triangle  GHM  differs 
from  triangle  CLH  by  triangle  CDF  (i.  45,  or  i.  44,  according  to  the  case).  And 
so  triangle  GHM  differs  from  triangle  KHD  by  triangle  KLF. 

And  it  is  evident  that 

trgl.  KLF  —  quadr.  MGKD. 

Proposition  6 

With  the  same  things  supposed ,  if  some  point  is  taken  on  one  of  the  opposite  sec¬ 
tions,  and  from  it  parallels  to  the  tangents  are  drawn  meeting  the  tangents  and  the 
diameters ,  then  the  quadrilateral  produced  by  them  on  one  of  the  tangents  and  on 
one  of  the  diameters  will  be  equal  to  the  triangle  produced  on  the  same  tangent  and 
the  other  diameter . 

Let  there  be  opposite  sections  of  which  AEC  and  BED  are  diameters,  and  let 
AF  and  BG  touch  the  section  A  B  meeting  each  other  at  H ,  and  let  some  point 
K  be  taken  on  the  section,  and  from  it  let  KML  and  KNX  be  drawn  parallel 
to  the  tangents. 

I  say  that 

quadr.  AjF  =  trgl.  AIN. 

Now  since  AB  and  CD  are  opposite  sections,  and  AF,  meeting  BD,  touches 


section  AB,  and  KL  has  been  drawn  parallel  to  AF,  therefore 


738 


APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 
trgl.  AIN  =  quadr.  KF  (hi.  2)1 


Proposition  7 

With  the  same  things  supposed ,  i/  points  are  taken  on  each  of  the  sections ,  and  from 
them  parallels  to  the  tangents  are  drawn  meeting  the  tangents  and  the  diameters , 
then  the  quadrilaterals  produced  by  the  straight  lines  drawn  and  standing  on  the 
diameters  as  bases  will  be  equal  to  each  other. 

For  let  the  aforesaid  things  be  supposed,  and  let  points  K  and  L  be  taken  on 
both  sections,  and  through  them  let  MKPRY  and  NSTLQ  be  drawn  parallel 
to  AF,  and  NIOKX  and  YWULZ  parallel  to  BG. 

I  say  that  what  was  said  in  the  enunciation  will  be  so. 


For  since 

trgl.  AOI  =  quadr.  RO  (hi.  2), 

1  Another  and  important  case  where  the  point  K  falls  between  C  and  D  is  given  by  Eutocius 
in  his  commentary  to  this  proposition.  It  is  as  follows:  “.  .  .  and  let  CPR  be  drawn  from  C 
tangent  to  the  section;  then  it  is  evident  that  it  is  parallel  to  AF  and  ML  (i.  44,  note).  And 
since  it  has  been  shown  in  the  second  theorem  (in.  2)  in  the  figure  of  the  hyperbola  that 
trgl.  PNC  —  quadr.  LP  (m.  2,  note), 
let  the  common  quadrilateral  MP  be  added;  therefore 

trgl.  MKN  =  quadr.  MLRC. 

Let  there  be  added  the  common  triangle  CRE ,  which  is  equal  to  triangle  AEF  by  i.  44,  note 
(and  i.  30),  therefore 


trgl.  AEF  =  quadr.  KLEN. 

Let  the  common  quadrilateral  FENI  be  added;  therefore,  in  whole, 

trgl.  AIN  =  quadr.  KLFI. 

And  likewise  also  trgl.  BOL  =  quadr.  KNGO.” 


739 


conics  m 

let  the  quadrilateral  EO  be  added  to  both;  therefore 
whole  trgl.  A£?F  =  quadr.  KE. 

But  also 

trgl.  £G2?  =  quadr.  LE  (m.  5,  note); 

and 

trgl.  AEF  =  trgl.  BGE  (in.  1); 

therefore 

quadr.  LE  =  quadr.  IKRE . 

Let  the  common  quadrilateral  NE  be  added;  therefore  as  wholes 
whole  quadr.  TK  =  quadr.  IL, 

and  also 

quadr.  KU  =  quadr.  RL. 


Proposition  8 

With  the  same  things  supposed,  instead  of  K  and  L  let  there  be  taken  the 
points  C  and  D  at  which  the  diameters  hit  the  sections,  and  through  them  let 
the  parallels  to  the  tangents  be  drawn. 

I  say  that 

quadr.  Z)G  =  quadr.  FC 

and 

quadr.  XI  =  quadr.  OT. 


For  since  it  was  shown 

trgl.  AG#  =  trgl.  HBF  (m.  1), 

and  the  straight  line  from  A  to  B  is  parallel  to  the  straight  line  from  G  to  F,1 
therefore 

AE  :  EG  :  :  BE  :  EF; 

and  convertendo 


EA  :  AG  :  :  EB  :  BF. 


And  also 


CA:AE::DB:  BE; 


JFor  the  point  H  falls  within  the  angle  AEB  (n.  25),  and  the  straight  line  drawn  from  H 
to  the  midpoint  of  AB}  that  is  S,  is  a  diameter  (n.  29),  and  must  therefore  pass  through  E 
(i.  51,  end).  An  analogous  series  of  propositions  is  found  for  the  opposite  sections:  ii.  32, 
38,39. 

Then,  since  trgl.  GHA  =trgl.  FHBt 

therefore  trgl.  GFB  =  trgl.  GFA. 

Their  bases  are  the  same,  therefore  their  heights  are  equal  (Eucl.  vi.  1). 


740  APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 

for  each  is  double  the  other;  therefore  ex  aequali 

CA  :  AG  :  :  DB  :  BF. 

And  the  triangles  are  similar  because  of  the  parallels;  therefore 

trgl.  CTA  :  trgl.  AHG  :  :  trgl.  XBD  :  trgl.  HBF  (Eucl.  vi.  19). 
And  alternately;  but 

trgl.  AHG= trgl.  HBF  (hi.  1); 

therefore 

trgl.  CTA  =  trgl.  XBD. 

As  parts  of  these  it  was  shown 

trgl.  AHG  =  trgl.  HBF ; 
therefore  also  as  remainders 

quadr.  =  quadr.  CH. 

And  so  also 

quadr.  DG  =  quadr.  CF. 

And  since  CO  is  parallel  to  AF, 

trgl.  C0E= trgl.  AEF. 

And  likewise  also 

trgl.  DEI  =  trgl.  BEG . 

But 

trgl.  BEG  =  trgl.  AEF  (hi.  1); 

therefore  also 

trgl.  COE  =  trgl.  DEL 

And  also 

quadr.  DG  =  quadr.  CF  (above). 

Therefore,  as  wholes, 

quadr.  XI  =  quadr.  OT. 


Proposition  9 

With  the  same  things  supposed,  if  one  of  the  points  is  between  the  diameters, 
as  K,  and  the  other  is  the  same  with  one  of  the  points  C  and  D ,  for  instance  C, 
and  the  parallels  are  drawn,  I  say  that 

trgl.  CEO  =  quadr.  KE> 

quadr.  LO  =  quadr.  LM . 


And  this  is  evident.  For  since  it  was  shown 

trgl.  CEO  =  trgl.  AEF , 


and 


CONICS  III 


741 


and 

therefore  also 
And  so  also 
and 


trgl.  AEF  =  quadr.  KE  (hi.  5,  note), 
trgl.  CEO  =  quadr.  KE. 
trgl.  CRM  —  quadr.  KO , 
quadr.  KC  =  quadr.  LO. 


Proposition  10 

With  the  same  things  supposed,  let  K  and  L  be  taken  not  as  points  at  which 
the  diameters  hit  the  sections. 

Then  it  is  to  be  shown  that 

quadr.  LTRY  =  quadr.  QYKI. 

For  since  the  straight  lines  AF  and  BG  touch,  and  AE  and  BE  are  diameters 


through  the  points  of  contact,  and  LT  and  KI  are  parallel  to  the  tangents, 
trgl.  TUE  =  trgl.  UQL+ trgl.  EFA  (i.  44). 

And  likewise  also 

trgl.  XEI  =  trgl.  XRK+ trgl.  BEG. 

But 

trgl.  EFA=  trgl.  BEG  (hi.  1); 

therefore 

trgl.  TUE- trgl.  UQL  =  trgl.  XEI- trgl.  XRK. 

Therefore 

trgl.  7W+trgl.  XRK  =  t rgl.  XEI+t rgl.  UQL. 

Let  the  common  area  KXEULY  be  added;  therefore 
quadr.  LTRY  =  quadr.  QYKI. 

Proposition  11 

With  the  same  things  supposed,  if  some  point  is  taken  on  either  of  the  sections ,  and 
from  it  parallels  are  drawn ,  one  parallel  to  the  tangent  and  the  other  parallel  to  the 
straight  line  joining  the  points  of  contact ,  then  the  triangle  produced  by  them  on  the 
diameter  drawn  through  the  point  of  meeting  of  the  tangents  differs  from  the  tri- 


APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 


742 

angle  cut  off  on  the  tangent  and  the  diameter  drawn  through  the  point  of  contact 
by  the  triangle  cut  off  at  the  point  of  meeting  of  the  tangents. 

Let  there  be  the  opposite  sections  AB  and  CD,  and  let  the  tangents  AE  and 
DE  meet  at  E,  and  let  the  center  be  H,  and  let  AD  and  EHG  be  joined,  and  let 
some  point  B  be  taken  at  random  on  the  section  AB,  and  through  it  let  BFL  be 
drawn  parallel  to  AG,  and  BM  parallel  to  AE. 

I  say  that  triangle  BFM  differs  from  triangle  AKL  by  triangle  KEF. 

For  it  is  evident  that  AD  is  bisected  by  EH  (n.  39,  and  n.  29)  ,  and  that  EH  is 
a  diameter  conjugate  to  the  diameter  drawn  through  H  parallel  to  AD  (n.  38) ; 
and  so  AG  is  an  ordinate  to  EG  (First  Def.  i.  6). 

Since  then  GE  is  a  diameter,  and  AE  touches,  and  AG  is  an  ordinate,  and, 
with  point  B  taken  on  the  section,  BF  has  been  dropped  to  EG  parallel  to  AG, 


and  BM  parallel  to  AE,  therefore  it  is  clear  that  triangle  BMF  differs  from 
triangle  LHF  by  triangle  HAE  (i.  45;  i.  43). 1  And  so  also  triangle  BMF  differs 
from  triangle  AKL  by  triangle  KFE. 

And  it  has  been  proved  at  the  same  time  that 

quadr.  BKEM  =  trgl.  LKA 

Proposition  12 

With  the  same  things  being  so,  if  on  one  of  the  sections  two  points  are  taken,  and 
parallels  are  drawn  from  each  of  them,  likewise  the  quadrilaterals  produced  by 
them  will  be  equal. 

1That  is,  in  the  first  case, 

trgl.  BMF  =  trgl.  LHF+ trgl.  HAE  (i.  45); 

in  the  second  case,  only  the  more  general  statement  “differs”  holds  true  (i.  43).  It  will  be 
noticed  these  are  different  cases  of  i.  43  and  i.  45  from  those  given  in  the  text  itself. 


743 


CONICS  III 

For  let  there  be  the  same  things  as  before,  and  let  the  points  5  and  K  be 
taken  at  random  on  section  AB.  and  through  them  let  LBMN  and  KXOUP 


be  drawn  parallel  to  AD,  and  BXR  and  LKS  parallel  to  AE. 
I  say  that 

quadr.  55  =  quadr.  KR. 

For  since  it  has  been  shown 

trgl.  A  OP  =  quadr.  KOES  (hi.  11,  end) 

and 


trgl.  AMN  =  quadr.  BMER  (hi.  11,  end), 
therefore,  as  remainders,  either 

quadr.  KR  —  quadr.  50  =  quadr.  MP 


or 


quadr.  iCR+quadr.  50  =  quadr.  MP. 

And,  with  the  common  quadrilateral  50  added  or  subtracted, 

quadr.  55  =  quadr.  XS. 


Proposition  13 

If  in  conjugate  opposite  sections  straight  lines  tangent  to  the  adjacent  sections 
meet,  and  diameters  are  drawn  through  the  points  of  contact,  then  the  triangles 
whose  common  vertex  is  the  center  of  the  opposite  sections  will  be  equal. 

Let  there  be  conjugate  opposite  sections  on  which  there  are  the  points  A,  5, 
C  and  D,  and  let  BE  and  AE,  meeting  at  E,  touch  the  sections  A  and  5,  and 
let  II  be  the  center,  and  let  AH  and  BH  be  joined  and  produced  to  D  and  C. 


APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 


744 

I  say  that 

trgl.  BFH  =  trgl.  AGH. 

For  let  AK  and  LHM  be  drawn  through  A  and  H  parallel  to  BE.  Since  then 
BFE  touches  the  section  B,  and  DHB  is  a  diameter  through  the  point  of  con¬ 
tact,  and  LM  is  parallel  to  BE ,  LM  is  a  diameter  conjugate  to  diameter  BD, 
the  so-called  second  diameter  (n.  20) ;  and  therefore  AK  has  been  drawn  or¬ 
dinate  wise  to  BD.  And  AG  touches;  therefore 

rect.  KH,HG  =  sq.  BH  (i.  38). 


Therefore 

But 


KH  :  HB  :  :  BH  :  GH . 


therefore  also 


KH  :  HB  :  :  KA  :  BF  :  :  AH  :  HF ; 


AH  :  HF  :  :  BH  :  GH. 

And  the  angles  BHF  and  GHF  are  equal  to  two  right  angles;  therefore 

trgl.  AGH  =  trgl.  BHF. 


Proposition  14 

With  the  same  things  supposed ,  if  some  point  is  taken  on  any  one  of  the  sections , 
and  from  it  parallels  to  the  tangents  are  drawn  as  far  as  the  diameters ,  then  the 
triangle  produced  at  the  center  will  differ  from  the  triangle  produced  about  the 
same  angle  by  the  triangle  having  the  tangent  as  base ,  and  center  as  vertex. 

Let  the  other  things  be  the  same,  and  let  some  point  X  be  taken  on  section 


CONICS  III  745 

j B,  and  through  it  let  XRS  be  drawn  parallel  to  AG  and  XTO  parallel  to  BE. 
I  say  that  triangle  OHT  differs  from  triangle  XST  by  triangle  HBF. 

For  let  A  U  be  drawn  from  A  parallel  to  BF.  Since  then,  because  of  the  same 
things  as  before,  LHM  is  a  diameter  of  the  section  AL ,  and  DHB  is  a  second 
diameter  and  conjugate  to  it  (n,  20),  and  AG  is  a  tangent  at  A,  and  A U  has 
been  dropped  parallel  to  LM ,  therefore 

AU  :  UG  comp.  HU  :  UA, 
transverse  side  of  figure  on  LM  :  upright  (i.  40). 

But 

AU  :  UG  ::  XT  :  TS, 

and 

HU  :  UA  :  :  HT  :  TO  :  HB  :  BF, 

and 

transverse  side  of  figure  on  LM  :  upright  :  : 
upright  side  of  figure  on  BD  :  transverse  (i.  GO). 

Therefore 

XT  :  TS  comp.  HB  :  BF,  upright  side  of  figure  on  BD  :  transverse 
or 

XT  :  TS  comp.  HT  :  TO ,  upright  side  of  figure  on  BD  :  transverse. 

And  by  things  shown  in  the  forty-first  theorem  of  the  first  book  (i.  41),  triangle 
THO  differs  from  triangle  XTS  by  triangle  BFH. 

And  so  also  by  triangle  AGH  (hi,  13). 

Proposition  15 

If  straight  lines  touching  one  of  the  conjugate  opposite  sections  meet ,  and  diameters 
are  drawn  through  the  points  of  contact ,  and  some  point  is  taken  on  any  one  of  the 
conjugate  sections ,  and  from  it  parallels  to  the  tangents  are  drawn  as  far  as  the 
diameters ,  then  the  triangle  produced  by  them  at  the  section  is  greater  than  the 
triangle  produced  at  the  center  by  the  triangle  having  the  tangent  as  base  and  the 
center  of  the  opposite  sections  as  vertex.1 

Let  there  be  conjugate  opposite  sections  AB ,  GS ,  T,  and  X ,  whose  center  is 
H ,  and  let  ADE  and  BDC  touch  the  section  AB ,  and  let  the  diameters  AHFW 
and  BHT  be  drawn  through  the  points  of  contact  A  and  B ,  and  let  some  point 
S  be  taken  on  the  section  GS ,  and  through  it  let  SFL  be  drawn  parallel  to  BC 
and  SU  parallel  to  AE. 

I  say  that 

trgl.  SLU  =  trgl.  HLF+ trgl.  HOB 

For  let  XHG  be  drawn  through  H  parallel  to  BC,  and  KIG  through  G  parallel 
to  AE,  and  SO  parallel  to  BT;  then  it  is  evident  that  XG  is  a  diameter  conju¬ 
gate  to  BT  (n,  20),  and  that  SO  being  parallel  to  BT  has  been  dropped  ordi- 
natewise  to  HGO  (First  Def.  i.  6),  and  that  SLHO  is  a  parallelogram. 

Since  then  BC  touches,  and  BII  is  through  the  point  of  contact,  and  AE  is 
another  tangent,  let  it  be  contrived  that 

DB  :  BE  :  :  MN  :  2BC; 

therefore  MN  is  the  so-called  upright  side  of  the  figure  on  BT  (i.  50).  Let  MN 
be  bisected  at  P;  therefore 

!This  proposition  comes  as  a  climax  to  a  long  series,  and  shows  that  the  conjugate  opposite 
sections  taken  as  a  unit  have  the  same  property  as  the  other  conic  sections.  The  conjugate 
opposite  sections  seem  to  be  a  sort  of  fifth  section. 


746 


APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 

DB:  BE::  MP  :  BC. 

Then  let  it  be  contrived  that 

XG  :  TB  :  :  TB  :  R;  (a) 


then  R  also  will  be  the  so-called  upright  side  of  the  figure  applied  to  XG 

(i.  16,  60). 


Since  then 

but 

and 

therefore 

And 

because 

and 

and 

therefore 

Alternately 

But 


DB:  BE::  MP  :  BC,  (fi) 

DB  :  BE  :  :  sq.  DB  :  rect.  DB,  BE, 

MP  :  BC  :  :  rect.  MP,  BH  :  rect.  CB<BH, 
sq.  DB  :  rect.  DB,BE  :  :  rect.  MP,  BH  :  rect.  CB,BH. 
rect.  MP,  BH  =  sq.  HG, 

sq.  XG  =  rect.  TB,MN  (i.  16)  (7) 

rect.  MP,BH  =  fourth  rect.  TB,MN 
sq.  HG  =  fourth  sq.  XG; 
sq.  DB  :  rect.  DB,BE  :  :  sq.  HG  :  rect.  CB,BH . 
sq.  DB  :  sq.  HG  :  :  rect.  DB,  BE  :  rect.  CB,  BH. 


sq.  DB  :  sq.  HG  :  :  trgl.  DBE  :  trgl.  GHI; 
for  they  are  similar;  and 

rect.  DB,BE  :  rect.  CB,BH  :  :  trgl.  DBE  :  trgl.  CBH; 

therefore 

trgl.  DBE  :  trgl.  GHI  :  :  trgl.  DBE  :  trgl.  CBH. 

Therefore 

trgl.  GHI  =  trgl.  CBH. 


Again  since 


but 

and 

therefore 


CONICS  III 

HB  :  BC  comp.  HB  :  MP,  MP  :  BC, 

HB  :  MP  :  :  TB  :  MN  :  R  :  XG  (above,  a  and  y), 
MP  :  BC  : :  DB  :  BE  (above,  0) 


747 


HB  :  BC  comp.  DB  :  BE,  R  :  XG. 

And  since  BC  is  parallel  to  SL,  and  triangle  HCB  is  similar  to  triangle  HLF, 
and 

HB  :  BC  : :  HL  :  LF, 

thprpforp 

HL  :  LF  comp.  R  :  XG,DB  :  BE 
or 

HL  :  LF  comp.  R  :  XG,HG  :  HI. 

Since  then  GS  is  an  hyperbola  having  XG  as  a  diameter,  and  R  as  an  upright 
side,  and,  from  some  point  S,  SO  has  been  dropped  ordinatewise,  and  figure 
HIG  has  been  described  on  radius  HG ,  and  figure  HLF  has  been  described  on 
the  ordinate  SO  or  its  equal  HL ,  and  on  HO  the  straight  line  between  the  cen¬ 
ter  and  the  ordinate  or  on  SL  its  equal  the  figure  SLU  has  been  described  sim¬ 
ilar  to  the  figure  HIG  described  on  the  radius,  and  there  are  the  compounded 
ratios  as  already  given,  therefore 

trgl.  SLU  =  trgl.  HLF+t rgl.  HCB  (i.  41). 


Proposition  16 


If  two  straight  lines  touching  a  section  of  a  cone  or  circumference  of  a  circle  meet , 
and  from  some  point  of  those  on  the  section  a  straight  line  is  drawn  parallel  to  one 
tangent  and  cutting  the  section  and  the  other  tangent ,  then,  as  the  squares  on  the 
tangents  are  to  each  other ,  so  the  area  contained  by  the  straight  lines  between  the 
section  and  the  tangent  will  be  to  the  square  cut  off  at  the  point  of  contact . 

Let  there  be  the  section  of  a  cone  or  circumference  of  a  circle  AB,  and  let  the 
straight  lines  AC  and  CB,  meeting  at  C ,  touch  it,  and  let  some  point  D  be 
taken  on  the  section  AB,  and  through  it  let  EDF  be  drawn  parallel  to  CB. 

I  say  that 

sq.  BC  :  sq.  AC  :  :  rect.  FE ,  ED  :  sq.  EA. 

For  let  the  diameters  AGH  and  KBL  be  drawn  through  A  and  B ,  and  DMN 
through  D  parallel  to  A L;  it  is  at  once  evident,  that 

DK  =  KF  (i.  46,  47), 

and 


and 

Since  then 


trgl.  AEG  —  quadr.  LD  (hi.  2), 
trgl.  BLC  =  trgl.  ACH  (hi.  1). 


DK  =  KF 


and  DE  is  added, 

rect.  FE,  ED+ sq.  DK  =  sq.  KE . 

And  since  triangle  ELK  is  similar  to  triangle  DNK , 

sq.  EK  :  sq.  KD  :  :  trgl.  EKL  :  trgl.  DNK . 


748  APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 

And  alternately 

whole  sq.  EK  :  whole  trgl.  ELK  : : 
part  subtracted  sq.  DK  :  part  subtracted  trgl.  DNK. 


Therefore  also 

remainder  rect.  FE ,  ED  :  remainder  quadr.  DL  :  :  sq.  EK  :  trgl.  ELK 

But 

sq.  EK  :  trgl.  ELK  :  :  sq.  CB  :  trgl.  EEC; 

therefore  also 

rect.  FE,ED  :  quadr.  LD  :  :  sq.  CB  :  trgl.  LCB. 

But 

quadr.  LD  =  trgl.  AEG, 

and 

trgl.  BLC  =  trgl.  ACE; 

therefore  also 

rect.  FEyED  :  trgl.  AEG  :  :  sq.  CB  :  trgl.  ACE. 

Alternately 

rect.  FEyED  :  sq.  CE  :  :  trgl.  AEG  :  trgl.  ACE. 

But 

trgl.  AEG  :  trgl.  ACE  :  :  sq.  EA  :  sq.  AC; 

therefore  also 

rect.  FEyED  :  sq.  CB  :  :  sq.  EA  :  sq.  AC. 

And  alternately. 


CONICS  III 


749 


Proposition  17 

If  two  straight  lines  touching  a  section  of  a  cone  or  circumference  of  a  circle  meet , 
and  two  points  are  taken  at  random  on  the  section ,  and  from  them  in  the  section 
are  drawn  parallel  to  the  tangents  straight  lines  cutting  each  other  and  the  line  of 
the  section ,  then  as  the  squares  on  the  tangents  are  to  each  other ,  so  ivill  the  rec¬ 
tangles  contained  by  the  straight  lines  taken  similarly . 

Let  there  be  the  section  of  a  cone  or  circumference  of  a  circle  AB ;  and  tan¬ 
gents  to  AB,  AC  and  CB ,  meeting  at  C;  and  let  points  D  and  E  be  taken  at 
random  on  the  section,  and  through  them  at  EFIK  and  DFGH  be  drawn  paral¬ 
lel  to  AC  and  CB. 

I  say  that 

sq.  CA  :  sq.  CB  :  :  rect.  KF,  FE  :  rect.  HF,  FD. 

For  let  the  diameters  ALMN  and  BOXP  be  drawn  through  A  and  B ,  and  let 
the  tangents  and  parallels  be  produced  to  the  diameters,  and  let  DX  and  EM 
be  drawn  from  D  and  E  parallel  to  the  tangents;  then  it  is  evident  that 
KI  =  IE.  HG  =  GD  (i.  46,  47). 

Since  then  KE  has  been  cut  equally  at  I  and  unequally  at  F , 
rect.  KF,  FE+ sq.  FI  =  sq.  El  (Eucl.  n.  5) 


And  since  the  triangles  are  similar  because  of  the  parallels, 
whole  sq.  El  :  whole  trgl.  IME  :  : 


750 


APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 


part  subtracted  sq.  IF  :  part  subtracted  trgl.  FIL. 
Therefore  also 

remainder  rect.  KF,  FE  :  remainder  quadr.  FM  :  :  whole 
sq.  El  :  whole  trgl.  IME 

But 

sq.  El  :  trgl.  IME  :  :  sq.  CA  :  trgl.  CAN  : 

Therefore 


But 


rect.  KF,  FE  :  quadr.  FM  :  :  sq.  CA  :  trgl.  CAN . 


trgl.  CAiV  =  trgl.  CPB  (hi.  1), 

and 


therefore 


quadr.  FM  =  quadr.  FX  (hi.  3); 


rect.  KF,  FE  :  quadr.  FX  :  :  sq.  CA  :  trgl.  CPB . 
Then  likewise  it  could  be  shown  that 

rect.  HF ,  FD  :  quadr.  FX  :  :  sq.  CB  :  trgl.  CPD. 

Since  then 

rect.  KF,  FE  :  quadr.  FX  :  :  sq.  CA  :  trgl.  CPD, 

and  inversely 

quadr.  FX  :  rect.  HF,  FD  :  :  trgl.  CPB  :  sq.  CB, 
therefore  ex  aequali 

sq.  CA  :  sq.  CB  :  :  rect.  KF,  FE  :  rect.  HF,  FD. 


Proposition  18 

If  two  straight  lines  touching  opposite  sections  meet,  and  some  point  is  taken  on 
either  one  of  the  sections,  and  from  it  some  straight  line  is  drawn  parallel  to  one  of 
the  tangents  cutting  the  section  and  the  other  tangent,  then  as  the  squares  on  the 
tangents  are  to  each  other,  so  will  the  rectangle  contained  hy  the  straight  lines 
between  the  section  and  the  tangent  be  to  the  square  on  the  straight  line  cut  off  at 
the  point  of  contact. 

Let  there  be  the  opposite  sections  AB  and  MN,  and  tangents  ACL  and  BCH, 
and  through  the  points  of  contact  the  diameters  AM  and  BN,  and  let  some 
point  D  be  taken  at  random  on  the  section  MN,  and  through  it  let  EDF  be 
drawn  parallel  to  BH. 


I  say  that 

sq.  BC  :  sq.  CA  :  :  rect.  FE,  ED  :  sq.  AE. 

For  let  DX  be  drawn  through  D  parallel  to  AE.  Since  then  AB  is  an  hyper- 


751 


CONICS  III 


bola  and  BN  its  diameter  and  BH  a  tangent  and  DF  parallel  to  BH,  therefore 

FO  =  OD  (i.  48). 

And  ED  is  added:  therefore 

rect.  FE,  ED+ sq.  D0  =  sq.  EO  (Eucl.  n.  6). 

And  since  EL  is  parallel  to  DX ,  triangle  EOL  is  similar  to  triangle  DXO. 
Therefore 

whole  sq.  EO  :  whole  trgl.  EOL  :  : 
part  subtracted  sq.  DO  :  part  subtracted  trgl.  DXO ; 
therefore  also 

remainder  rect.  DE,  EF  :  remainder  quadr.  DL  :  :  sq.  EO  :  trgl.  EOL . 

But 


sq.  OE  :  trgl.  EOL  :  :  sq.  BC  :  trgl.  BCL ; 


therefore  also 


And 

and 

therefore 
But  also 


rect.  FE,  ED  :  quadr.  DL  :  :  sq.  BC  :  trgl.  BCL. 
quadr.  Z)L  =  trgl.  AEG  (m.  6,  note), 
trgl.  jBCL  =  trgl.  ACH  (hi.  1); 
rect.  FE,ED  :  trgl.  AEG  :  :  sq.  BC  :  trgl.  ACH . 


trgl.  AEG  :  sq.  EA  :  :  trgl.  ACH  :  sq.  AC; 
therefore  ex  aequali 

sq.  BC  :  sq.  AC  :  :  rect.  FE,ED  :  sq.  .EA.1 


1Eutocius  gives  an  alternative  proof  of  Apollonius',  demonstrating  another  and  important 
case:  “For  let  there  be  the  opposite  sections  A  and  B,  and  tangents  to  them  AC  and  CB 
meeting  at  C,  and  let  D  be  taken  on  section  B,  and  through  it  let  EDF  be  drawn  parallel 
to  AC.  I  say  that 

sq.  AC  :  sq.  CB  :  :  rect.  EF,FD  :  sq.  FB. 

“For  let  AHG  be  drawn  as  a  diameter  through  A,  and  through  B  and  G ,  GK  and  BL 
parallel  to  EF.  Since  then  BH  touches  the  hyperbola  at  B,  and  BL  has  been  drawn  ordinate- 
wise,  AL:  LG: :  AH  :  HG  (i.  36). 


But 
and 
therefore  also 
And  alternately 
and 

But  it  was  shown 
therefore  also 


CB  :  BK  : :  AC  :  KG. 

AC  :CB::  ICG  :  KB, 
sq.  AC  :  sq.  CB  :  :  sq.  GK  :  sq.  KB. 
sq.  GK  :  sq.  KB  :  :  rect.  EF,  FD  :  sq.  FB; 
sq.  AC  :  sq.  CB  : :  rect.  EF,  FD  :  sq.  FB .” 


752 


APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 


Proposition  19 

If  two  straight  lines  touching  opposite  sections  meet ,  and  parallels  to  the  tangents 
are  drawn  cutting  each  other  and  the  section ,  then ,  as  the  squares  on  the  tangents 
are  to  each  other ,  so  will  the  rectangle  contained  by  the  straight  lines  between  the 
section  and  the  point  of  meeting  of  the  straight  lines  be  to  the  rectangle  contained  by 
the  straight  lines  taken  similarly . 

Let  there  be  opposite  sections  whose  diameters  are  AC  and  BD  and  center 
in  E ,  and  let  the  tangents  AF  and  FD  meet  at  F,  and  let  GHIKL  and  MNXOL 
be  drawn  from  any  points  parallel  to  AF  and  FD. 

I  say  that 

sq.  AF  :  sq.  FD  : :  rect.  GL,LI  :  rect.  ML,  LX. 


Let  IP  and  XR  be  drawn  through  X  and  I  parallel  to  AF  and  FD. 

BH  touches  the  hyperbola  at  B,  and  BL  has  been  drawn  ordinatewise, 
AL  :  LG  :  :  AH  :  HG  (i,  36) 

And  since 

sq.  AF  :  trgl.  AFS  :  :  sq.  HL  :  trgl.  HLO  :  :  sq.  HI  :  trgl.  HIP, 
therefore 

remainder  rect.  GL,LI  :  remainder  quadr.  I  POL  : :  sq.  AF  :  trgl  .AFS. 
But 

trgl.  AFS  =  trgl.  DTF  (hi.  4), 

and 

quadr.  IPOL  =  quadr.  KRXL  (in.  7); 

therefore  also 

sq.  AF  :  trgl.  DTF  :  :  rect.  GL,LI  :  quadr.  KRXL. 

But 


trgl.  DTF  :  sq.  FD  :  :  quadr.  KRXL  :  rect.  ML, LX  (likewise); 
and  therefore  ex  aequali 

sq.  AF  :  sq.  FD  :  :  rect.  GL,LI  :  rect.  ML,  LX. 


Proposition  20 


If  two  straight  lines  touching  opposite  sections  meet,  and  through  the  point  of 
meeting  some  straight  line  is  drawn  parallel  to  the  straight  line  joining  the  points 
of  contact  and  meeting  each  of  the  sections,  and  some  other  straight  line  is  drawn 
parallel  to  the  same  straight  line  and  cutting  the  sections  and  the  tangents,  then,  as 
the  rectangle  contained  by  the  straight  lines  drawn  from  the  point  of  meeting  to 
cut  the  sections  is  to  the  square  on  the  tangent,  so  is  the  rectangle  contained  by  the 


CONICS  III  753 

straight  lines  between  the  sections  and  the  tangent  to  the  square  on  the  straight  line 
cut  off  at  the  point  of  contact. 

Let  there  be  the  opposite  sections  A B  and  CD  whose  center  is  E  and  tangents 
AF  and  CF,  and  let  AC  be  joined,  and  let  EF  and  AE  be  joined  and  produced, 
and  let  BFH  be  drawn  through  F  parallel  to  AC ,  and  let  the  point  K  be  taken 
at  random,  and  through  it  let  KLSMNX  be  drawn  parallel  to  AC. 

I  say  that 

rect.  BF,  FD  :  sq.  FA  : :  rect.  KL,LX  :  sq.  AL. 


For  let  KP  and  BR  be  drawn  from  K  and  B  parallel  to  AF.  Since  then 
sq.  BF  :  trgl.  BFR  :  :  sq.  KS  :  trgl.  KSP  : :  sq.  LS  :  trgl.  LSF, 

and 

sq.  KS  :  trgl.  KSP  :  : 
remainder  rect.  KL ,  LX  (Eucl.  n.  5)  : 
remainder  quadr.  KLFP  (Eucl.  v.  19). 


and 

and 

and 

therefore 

And 

then 


sq.  5F  =  rect.  BF ,  FD  (n.  39,  38), 
trgl.  BRF  —  trgl.  AFH  (m.  11  and  special  case), 
quadr.  KLFP  =  trgl.  ALN  (m.  5), 
rect.  BF,FD  :  trgl.  AFH  :  :  rect.  KL,LX  :  trgl.  ALN . 
trgl.  AFH  :  sq.  AF  :  :  trgl.  ALN  :  sq.  AL; 
rect.  BF,  FD  :  sq.  FA  :  :  rect.  KL,LX  :  sq.  AL. 


Proposition  21 

With  the  same  things  supposed ,  if  two  points  are  taken  on  the  section ,  and  through 
them  straight  lines  are  drawn ,  the  one  parallel  to  the  tangent ,  the  other  parallel  to 
the  straight  line  joining  the  points  of  contact,  and  cutting  each  other  arul  the  sec - 
tions,  then ,  as  the  rectangle  contained  by  the  straight  lines  drawn  from  the  point 


754  APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 

of  meeting  to  cut  the  sections  is  to  the  square  on  the  tangent ,  so  will  the  rectangle 
contained  by  the  straight  lines  between  the  sections  and  the  point  of  meeting  be  to 
the  rectangle  contained  by  the  straight  lines  between  the  section  and  the  point  of 
meeting. 

For  let  there  be  the  same  things  as  before,  and  let  points  G  and  K  be  taken, 
and  through  them  let  NXGOPR  and  KST  be  drawn  parallel  to  AF,  and  GLM 
and  KOWIYZQ  parallel  to  AC. 

I  say  that 

rect.  BF ,  FD  :  sq.  FA  :  :  reet.  KO,OQ  :  rect.  NO,OG. 


For  since 

sq.  AF  :  trgl.  AFH  :  :  sq.  AL  :  trgl.  ALM  :  :  sq.  XO  :  trgl.  XOZ 

and 

sq.  XO  :  trgl.  XOZ  :  :  sq.  XG  :  trgl.  XGM, 
therefore  whole  sq.  XO  :  whole  trgl.  XOZ  :  : 

part  subtracted  sq.  XG  :  part  subtracted  trgl.  XGM , 
therefore  also 

remainder  rect.  NO,OG  :  remainder  quadr.  GOZM  :  :  sq.  AF  :  trgl.  AFH. 
But 

trgl.  AFH  =  trgl.  BUF  (hi.  11,  end,  special  case), 

and 

quadr.  GOZM  =  quadr.  KORT  (hi.  12); 

therefore 

sq.  AF  :  trgl.  BFU  :  :  rect.  NO,OG  :  quadr.  KORT. 

But  it  was  shown  (in  the  course  of  hi.  20)  trgl.  BUF  :  sq.  BF  or  rect.  BF,  FD 
(n.  39,  38)  :  :  quadr.  KORT  :  rect.  KO ,  OQ ; 
therefore  ex  aequali 

sq.  AF  :  rect.  BF,  FD  :  :  rect.  NO,OG  :  rect.  KO,OQ. 

And  inversely 

rect.  BF,  FD  :  sq.  FA  :  :  rect.  KO,OQ  :  rect.  NO,OG. 
Proposition  22 

If  two  parallel  straight  lines  touch  opposite  sections ,  and  any  straight  lines  are 
drawn  cutting  each  other,  and  the  sections ,  one  parallel  to  the  tangent ,  the  other 
parallel  to  the  straight  line  joining  the  points  of  contact,  then  as  the  transverse  side 


COXICS  III  755 

of  the  figure  on  the  straight  line  joining  the  points  of  contact  is  to  the  upright , 
so  the  rectangle  contained  by  the  straight  lines  between  the  sections  and  the  point 
of  meeting  will  be  to  the  rectangle  contained  by  the  straight  lines  between  the  section 
and  the  point  of  meeting. 

Let  there  be  the  opposite  sections  .4  and  B.  and  let  AC  and  BD  be  parallel 
and  tangent  to  them,  and  let  AB  be  joined.  Then  let  EXG  be  drawn  across 
parallel  to  AB  and  KELM  parallel  to  AC. 

I  say  that 

AB  :  upright  side  of  the  figure  :  :  rect.  GE.EX  :  rect.  KE.EM. 

Let  XN  and  GE  be  drawn  through  G  and  X  parallel  to  AC. 


For  since  AC  and  BD  are  parallels  tangent  to  the  sections.  AB  is  a  diameter 
(n.  31 ),  and  KL.  XX.  and  GF  are  ordinates  to  it  (i.  32);  then  (i.  21) 

AB  :  upright  side  : : 

rect.  BL.LA  :  sq.  LK  : :  rect.  BX.XA  :  sq.  XX  or  sq.  LK 
Therefore 

whole  rect.  BL.LA  :  whole  sq.  LK  : : 
part  subtracted  rect.  BX.  NA  :  part  subtracted  sq.  LE, 


or 

rect.  BL.LA  :  sq.  LK  : :  rect.  FA. AX  :  sq.  LE, 

for 

NA=BF  (i.  21); 

therefore  also 

remainder  rect.  FL.LX  :  remainder  rect.  KE.EM  :  :  AB  :  upright. 

But 


therefore 


rect.  FL,LAT=rect.  GE.EX ; 

AB  the  transverse  side  of  figure  :  upright  :  : 
rect.  GE.EX  :  rect.  KE.EM. 


Proposition*  23 

If  in  conjugate  opposite  sections  two  straight  lines  touching  contrary  sections  meet 
in  any  one  section  at  random,  and  any  straight  lines  are  drawn  parallel  to  the 
tangents  and  cutting  each  other  and  the  other  opposite  sections,  then,  as  the  squares 
on  the  tangents  are  to  each  other ,  so  the  rectangle  contained  by  the  straight  lines 
between  the  sections  and  the  point  of  meeting  will  be  to  the  rectangle  contained  by 
the  straight  lines  similarly  taken. 


756  APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 

Let  there  be  the  conjugate  opposite  sections  AB ,  CD,  EF,  and  GH ,  and  their 
center  i£,  and  let  ATFCL  and  EYDL,  tangents  to  the  sections  AB  and  EF 


meet  at  L,  and  let  AK  and  EK  be  joined  and  produced  to  B  and  F,  and  let 
GMXXO  be  drawn  from  G  parallel  to  AL ,  and  HPRXS  from  H  parallel  to  EL. 

I  say  that 

sq.  EL  :  sq.  LA  :  :  rect.  HX.XS  :  rect.  GX,XD. 

For  let  ST  be  drawn  through  5  parallel  to  AL,  and  OU  from  0  parallel  to 
EL.  Since  then  BE  is  a  diameter  of  the  conjugate  opposite  sections  AB,  CD, 
EF  and  GH,  and  EL  touches  the  section,  and  HS  has  been  drawn  parallel  to  it, 
HP  =  PS  (n.  20;  First  Def.  i.  5), 
and  for  the  same  reasons 

GM  =  MO 


And  since 

sq.  EL  :  trgl.  EWL  :  :  sq.  PS  :  trgl.  PTS  :  :  sq.  PX  :  trgl.  PNX, 

also 

remainder  rect.  HX,XS  :  remainder  quadr.  TX,XS  :  :  sq.  EL  :  trgl.  WLE. 
But 


trgl.  EWL  =  trgl.  ALY  (in.  4), 

and 

quadr.  TXXS  =  quadr.  XRUO  (in.  15) j1 

therefore 

sq.  EL  :  trgl.  ALY  :  :  rect.  HX,XS  :  quadr.  XRUO. 

But 

trgl.  AYL  :  sq.  AL  :  :  quadr.  XRUO  :  rect.  GX, XO  (same  way); 
therefore  ex  aequali 

sq.  EL  :  sq.  AL  :  :  rect.  HX,XS  :  rect.  GX,XO. 


Proposition  24 


If  in  conjugate  opposite  sections  two  straight  lines  are  drawn  from  the  center 
through  to  the  sections,  and  one  of  them  is  taken  as  the  transverse  diameter  and  the 
other  as  the  upright  diameter,  and  any  straight  lines  are  drawn  parallel  to  the  two 
diameters  and  meeting  each  other  and  the  sections,  and  the  point  of  meeting  of  the 
straight  lines  is  the  place  between  the  four  sections ,  then  the  rectangle  contained  by 


1This  is  the  case  of  m.  15  where  the  tangents  are  one  to  each  of  the  opposite  sections. 
Compare  with  the  two  cases  of  hi.  12  and  m.  18. 

For  trgl.  !T*SP— trgl.  APP=trgl.  ANK  (in.  15), 

and  trgl.  MOU  —  trgl.  MX K  =  trgl.  ANK  (hi.  15). 


CONICS  III  757 

the  segments  of  the  parallel  to  the  transverse  diameter  together  with  the  rectangle 
to  which  the  rectangle  contained  by  the  segments  of  the  parallel  to  the  upright 
diameter  has  the  ratio  which  the  square  on  the  upright  diameter  has  to  the  square  on 
the  transverse ,  will  be  equal  to  twice  the  square  on  the  half  of  the  transverse. 

Let  there  be  the  conjugate  opposite  sections  A,  B,  C  and  D  whose  center  is 
E ,  and  from  E  let  the  transverse  diameter  A  EC  and  the  upright  diameter  DEB 
be  drawn  through,  and  let  FGHIKL  and  MNXOPR  be  drawn  parallel  to  AC 
and  DB  and  meeting  each  other  at  X;  and  first  let  X  be  within  the  angle  SEW 
or  the  angle  UET . 

I  say  that  the  rectangle  FX,  XL  together  with  the  rectangle  to  which  the 
rectangle  RX ,  XM  has  the  ratio  which  the  square  on  DB  has  to  the  square  on 
ACy  is  equal  to  twice  the  square  on  AE. 

For  let  the  asymptotes  of  the  sections  SET  and  UEW  be  drawn,  and 
through  Ay  SGAW  tangent  to  the  section. 

Since  then 

rect.  >SA,AIF  =  sq.  DE  (i.  60;  n.  1), 


therefore 

rect.  SAyAW  :  sq.  EA  :  :  sq.  DE  :  sq.  EA. 

And 

rect.  SAyAW  :  sq.  AE  comp.  SA  :  AEyWA  :  AE. 

But 

SA:AE::  NX  :  XH 

and 

WA  :  AE  :  :  PX  :  XIC; 

therefore 

sq.  DE  :  sq.  AE  comp.  NX  :  XHyPX  :  XK. 

But 

rect.  PXyXN  :  rect.  KXyXH  comp.  NX  :  XHyPX  :  XK} 

therefore 

sq.  DE  :  sq.  AE  :  :  rect.  PX}XN  :  rect.  KXyXH. 
Therefore  also 

sq.  DE  :  sq.  AE  :  :  sq.  ZLE+rect.  PXyXN  :  sq.  AiJ+rect.  KXyXH. 

And 

sq.  jD2?  =  rect.  PM,MN  (ii.  ll)=rect.  RN}NM  (n.  16), 

and 

sq.  AE  =  rect.  KFyFH  (ii.  ll)  =  rect.  LH,HF  (n.  16); 


758  APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 

therefore 

sq.  DE  :  sq.  AE  :  :  rect.  PX,XN +rect.  RN,NM  : 
rect.  KX,XH+ rect.  LH,HF 

And 

rect.  PX,XN+ rect.  FAT,  NM  =  rect.  RX,XM? 

therefore 

sq.  DE  :  sq.  AF  :  :  rect.  RX,XM  :  rect.  KX,XH+ rect.  FF,  FF. 

Then  it  must  be  shown  that 

rect.  FX,XL+rect.  KX,XH+ rect.  KF,FH  =  2  sq.  AF. 

Let  the  common  square  AE ,  that  is  rectangle  FF,  FF,  be  subtracted;  therefore 
it  remains  to  be  shown  that 

rect.  FX,XL+ rect.  FX,XF  =  sq.  AF. 

And  this  is  so;  for 

rect.  FXyXL+ rect.  FX,XF  =  rect.  LH,HF,\ 
rect.  FX,XL+ rect.  FX,XF  =  rect.  FF, FH  (n.  16), 

=  sq.  AE  (n.  11). 

Then  let  the  straight  lines  FL  and  MR  meet  on  one  of  the  asymptotes  at  H. 
Then 

rect.  FH,HL  =  sq.  AE, 

and 

rect.  MH,HR  =  sq.  DE  (n.  11,  16); 

therefore 

sq.  DE  :  sq.  AE  :  :  rect.  MH,ER  :  rect.  FH,HL. 


And  so  we  want  twice  rectangle  FH,HL  to  equal  twice  the  square  on  AE . 
And  it  does. 

xFor  RP=NM  (n.  8), 

and  RO=OM  (ii.  3), 

therefore  PO=ON. 

But  rect.  PX,XN-\- sq.  OX  =  sq.  ON  (Eucl.  n.  5), 

and,  for  the  same  reasons, 

rect.  RN,NM +sq.  ON  =  sq.  OM, 
and  rect.  RX,XM +sq.  OX  =  sq.  OM. 

Hence  rect.  RN,NM+ sq.  ON- rect.  FX,XM+sq.  OX, 

and,  adding  equals  to  equals, 

rect.  RN,NM+ sq.  OAr+rect.  PX,XN +sq.  OX  =  rect.  ^X,X3/+sq.  OX+sq.  ON. 
Subtracting  the  common  squares, 

rect.  RN,  NM +rect.  PX,XN  =  rect.  RXf  XM. 
fBy  the  same  manner  of  proof  as  in  the  note  above,  but  using  also  Euclid  n.  6,  because  of 
the  different  position  of  the  point  X. 


CONICS  III  759 

And  let  the  point  A"  be  within  the  angle  SEK  or  angle  WET .  Then  likewise 
by  the  composition  of  ratios. 

sq.  DE  :  sq.  AE  :  :  rect.  PX,XN  :  rect.  KX,XH. 

And 

sq.  FF  =  rect,  PM,  RX  =  rect.  RX,  XM, 

and 

sq.  AL  =  rect.  FH,HL; 

therefore 

rect,  RX,XM  :  rect.  FH.HL  :  : 


part  subtracted  rect,  PX,XN  :  part  subtracted  rect,  KX,XH. 
Therefore  also 

rect.  RX, XM  :  rect,  FH.HL  :  : 
remainder  rect,  RX,XM  :  remainder  (sq.  AE  —  rect,  KX,XH) 
Therefore  it  must  be  shown  that 

rect,  FX,XL  +  (sq.  AF-rect.  KX,XH)=2  sq.  AE. 

Let  the  common  square  on  AE,  that  is  rectangle  FH,  HL ,  be  subtracted; 
therefore  it  remains  to  be  shown  that 

rect,  KX,XH+( sq.  AF-rect.  KX,XH)  =  sq.  AE. 

And  this  is  so;  for 

rect.  KX,XH+sq.  AE— rect.  KX,XH  =  sq.  AE. 

Proposition  25 

With  the  same  things  supposed,  let  the  point  of  meeting  of  the  parallels  to 
AC  and  BD  be  within  one  of  the  sections  D  and  B ,  as  set  out  below,  at  A’. 

I  say  that  the  rectangle  contained  by  the  segments  of  the  parallel  to  the 
transverse,  that  is  rectangle  OX,  XX,  will  be  greater  than  the  rectangle  to 
which  the  rectangle  contained  by  the  segments  of  the  parallel  to  the  upright 
diameter,  that  is  rectangle  RX, XM,  has  the  ratio  which  the  square  on  the 
upright  diameter  has  to  the  square  on  the  transverse  by  twice  the  square  on 
the  half  of  the  transverse. 

For,  for  the  same  reasons, 

sq.  DE  :  sq.  AE  :  :  rect.  PX.XH  :  rect.  SX,XL. 

and 

sq.  DE  —  rect,  PM,  MH, 

and 

sq.  AE  =  rect.  LO,OS  (u.  11); 


760  APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 

therefore  also 

sq.  DE  :  sq.  AE  :  :  rect.  PM,MH  :  rect.  LO,OS. 

And  since 

whole  rect.  PX,XH  :  whole  rect.  LX,XS  :  : 


part  subtracted  rect.  PM, MH  :  part  subtracted  rect.  LO,OS , 
or  rect.  ST,  TL  (n.  22), 

therefore  also 

remainder  rect.  RX,SM  :  remainder  rect.  TX,XK 
(first  note  to  hi.  24;  n.  8)  :  :  sq.  DE  :  sq.  AE. 

Therefore  it  must  be  shown  that 

rect.  OX,  XN  =  vect.  TX,  XK+2  sq.  AE. 

Let  the  common  rectangle  TX,XK  be  subtracted;  therefore  it  must  be  shown 
that 

rect.  OT,  TN  (first  note  to  hi.  24)  =2  sq.  AE. 

And  it  is  (n.  23). 

Proposition  26 

And  if  the  point  of  meeting  of  the  parallels  at  X  is  within  one  of  the  sections 
A  and  C,  as  set  out  below,  then  the  rectangle  contained  by  the  segments  of  the 
parallel  to  the  transverse,  that  is  rectangle  LX,  XF,  will  be  less  than  the  rec¬ 
tangle  to  which  the  rectangle  contained  by  the  segments  of  the  other  parallel, 
that  is  rectangle  RX,  XG,  has  the  ratio  which  the  square  on  the  upright  diam¬ 
eter  has  to  the  square  on  the  transverse  by  twice  the  square  on  half  of  the 
transverse. 

For,  since  for  the  same  reasons  as  before 

sq.  DE  :  sq.  AE  :  :  rect.  TFX,X£  :  rect.  KX,XH , 

therefore  also 

whole  rect.  RX,XGl  :  whole  rect.  KX,XH+ sq.  AE  :  : 
sq.  upright  diameter  :  sq.  transverse. 

Therefore  it  must  be  shown  that 

rect.  LX,XF+2  sq.  AE  =  rect.  KX,XH+ sq.  AE. 

xFor  by  n.  11  rect,  DE; 

and  RW  =  GS  (n.  16). 

Therefore  by  the  first  note  to  in.  24,  and  n.  16, 

rect,  \VX,XS+sq.  DE  =  rect.  WX,XS+rect.  WG,GS  =  vect.  RX,  XG. 


CONICS  III  761 

Let  the  common  square  on  AE  be  subtracted;  therefore  it  remains  to  be 
shown  that 


rect.  LX,  XF+sq.  AL  =  rect.  ICX,XH 
or 

rect.  LX,XF+rect.  LH, HE  =  rect.  KX,XH.  (n.  16,  11). 

And  it  is,  for 

rect.  LH,HF+ rect.  LX,  XF  =  rect.  KX,XH.1 
Proposition  27 

If  the  conjugate  diameters  of  an  ellipse  or  circumference  of  a  circle  are  drawn ,  and 
one  of  them  is  called  the  upright  diameter  and  the  other  the  transverse ,  and  two 
straight  lines ,  meeting  each  other  and  the  line  of  the  section ,  are  drawn  parallel  to 
them ,  then  the  squares  on  the  straight  lines  cut  off  on  the  straight  line  drawn  paral¬ 
lel  to  the  transverse  between  the  point  of  meeting  of  the  straight  lines  and  the  line 
of  the  section  plus  the  figures  described  on  the  straight  lines  cut  off  on  the  straight 
line  drawn  parallel  to  the  upright  diameter  between  the  point  of  meeting  of  the 
straight  lines  and  the  line  of  the  section ,  figures  similar  and  similarly  situated  to 
the  figure  on  the  upright  diameter ,  will  be  equal  to  the  square  on  the  transverse 
diameter. 

For  let  there  be  the  ellipse  or  circumference  of  a  circle  ABCD,  whose  center 
is  E ,  and  let  two  of  its  conjugate  diameters  be  drawn,  the  upright  AEC  and  the 
transverse  BED,  and  let  NGFH  and  KFLM  be  drawn  parallel  to  AC  and  BD. 

I  say  that  the  squares  on  NF  and  FH  plus  the  figures  described  on  KF  and 
FM,  similar  and  similarly  situated  to  the  figure  on  AC  will  be  equal  to  the 
square  on  BD. 

Let  XX  be  drawn  from  N  parallel  to  AE;  therefore  it  has  been  dropped  or- 
dinatewise  to  BD.  And  let  BP  be  the  upright  side.  Now  since 

BP:AC::AC:BD  (i.  15), 

therefore  also 

BP  :  BD  :  :  sq.  AC  :  sq.  BD. 

And 

sq.  BD  —  figure  on  AC; 

therefore 

BP  :  BD  :  :  sq.  AC  :  figure  on  AC. 


!This  is  another  case  of  the  first  noto  to  in.  24. 


762 

And 


APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 


sq.  AC  :  figure  on  AC  :  : 

sq.  NX  :  figure  on  NX  similar  to  the  figure  on  AC  (Eucl.  vi.  22); 


therefore  also 

BP  :  BD  :  :  sq.  NX  :  figure  on  NX  similar  to  the  figure  on  AC. 

And  also 

BP  :BD::  sq.  NX  :  rect.  EX,  XL  (i.  21); 

therefore 

figure  on  NX  or  FL  similar  to  the  figure  on  AC  =  rect.  BX,XD. 

Then  likewise  we  could  show  that 

figure  on  KL  similar  to  the  figure  on  AC  =  rect.  BL,LD. 

And  since  the  straight  line  NH  has  been  cut  equally  at  G  and  unequally  at  F, 
sq.  HF+ sq.  EX  =  2[sq.  HG+ sq.  GE]  =  2[sq.  XG+ sq.  GF]  (Eucl.  vi.  9). 
Then  for  the  same  reasons  also 

sq.  ilfE+sq.  FK  =  2[sq.  KL-\- sq.  LE], 

and  the  figure  on  MF  and  FK  similar  to  the  figure  on  AC  are  double  the 
similar  figures  on  KL  and  LF. 

And 

figure  on  XL+figure  on  FL  —  rect.  BX,XD+ rect.  BL,LD  (above), 

and 

sq.  ATG+sq.  GE  =  sq.  XE+sq.  EL; 

therefore 

sq.  NF-\- sq.  FH + figures  on  KF  and  FM  similar  to  the  figure  on  AC  = 
2[rect.  EX,XD+rect.  BL,LD-\- sq.  XE+sq.  EL]. 

And  since  the  straight  line  BD  has  been  cut  equally  at  E  and  unequally  at  X, 
rect.  EX,XE+ sq.  XE  =  sq.  BE  (Eucl.  n.  5). 

And  likewise  also 

rect.  BLyLD-\- sq.  LE  =  sq.  BE; 

and  so 

rect.  BX,XD+ rect.  BL,LD+ sq.  XE+sq.  LE  —  2  sq.  BE. 
Therefore  the  squares  on  NF  and  FH  together  with  figures  on  KF  and  FM 
similar  to  the  figure  on  CA  are  double  the  square  on  BE.  But  also 

sq.  BD  —  2  sq.  BE; 

therefore  the  squares  on  NF  and  FH  plus  the  figures  on  KF  and  FM  similar 
to  the  figure  on  AC  are  equal  to  the  square  on  BD. 


CONICS  III 


763 


Proposition  28 

If  in  conjugate  opposite  sections  conjugate  diameters  are  drawn ,  and  one  of  them 
is  called  the  upright ,  and  the  other  the  transverse ,  and  two  straight  lines  are  drawn 
parallel  to  them  and  meeting  each  other  and  the  sections ,  then  the  squares  on  the 
straight  lines  cut  off  on  the  straight  line  drawn  parallel  to  the  upright  between  the 
point  of  meeting  of  the  straight  lines  and  the  sections  have  to  the  squares  on  the 
straight  lines  cut  off  on  the  straight  line  drawn  parallel  to  the  transverse  between  the 
point  of  meeting  of  the  straight  lines  and  the  sections  the  ratio  which  the  square  on 
the  upright  diameter  has  to  the  square  on  the  transverse  diameter. 

Let  there  be  the  conjugate  opposite  sections  A,  B,  C,  and  D  and  let  A  EC 
be  the  upright  diameter  and  BED  the  transverse,  and  let  FGHK  and  LGMN 


be  drawn  parallel  to  them  and  cutting  each  other  and  the  sections. 

I  say  that 

sq.  LG+ sq.  GN  :  sq.  FG+ sq.  GK  :  :  sq.  AC  :  sq.  BD. 

For  let  LX  and  FO  be  drawn  ordinatewise  from  F  and  L ;  therefore  they  are 
parallel  to  AC  and  BD.  And  from  B  let  the  upright  side  for  BD ,  BP,  be  drawn; 
then  it  is  evident  that 

PB  :  BD  :  :  sq.  AC  :  sq.  BD  (i.  15)  :  :  sq.  AE  :  sq.  EB  :  : 
sq.  FO  :  rect.  BO,OD  (i.  21)  :  :  rect.  CX,  XA  :  sq.  LX  (i.  60,  21). 
Therefore  as  one  of  the  antecedents  is  to  one  of  the  consequents,  so  are  all  of  the 
antecedents  to  all  of  the  consequents  (Eucl.  v.  12);  therefore 
sq.  AC  :  sq.  BD  :  :  rect.  CX,  XA+sq. AE+sq.  OF  :  rect.  DO,  OB+ sq.  BE , 

+  sq.  LX 


sq.  AC  :  sq.  BD  :  :  rect.  CX,  XA+sq.  AE+ sq.  EH  : 
rect.  DO,OB-\- sq.  EE+ sq.  ME. 

But 

rect.  CX, XA+sq.  AE  =  sq.  XE, 

and 

rect,  DO, OB  A-  sq.  BE  =  sq.  OE  (Eucl.  n.  6); 

therefore 

sq.  AC  :  sq.  BD  :  :  sq.  XE+sq.  EH  :  sq.  OE+sq.  EM  :  : 
sq.  LM+sq.  MG  :  sq.  FH+ sq.  IIG. 

And,  as  has  been  shown, 

sq.  -YG+sq.  GL  =  2[sq.  LM + sq.  MG], 


764 

and 


APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 


sq.  FG+ sq.  GK  =  2[sq.  FH+ sq.  i?G]  (Eucl.  n.  9); 

therefore  also 

sq.  AC  :  sq.  BD  :  :  sq.  XG+sq.  GL  :  sq.  FG+ sq.  GX. 
Proposition  29 

With  the  same  things  supposed ,  tfie  parallel  to  the  upright  diameter  cuts  the 
asymptotes ,  //len  squares  on  the  straight  lines  cut  off  on  the  straight  line  drawn 
parallel  to  the  upright  between  the  point  of  meeting  of  the  straight  lines  and  the 
asymptotes  plus  the  half  of  the  square  on  the  upright  diameter  has  to  the  squares  on 
the  straight  lines  cut  off  on  the  straight  line  drawn  parallel  to  the  transverse  be¬ 
tween  the  point  of  meeting  of  the  straight  lines  and  the  sections  the  ratio  which  the 
square  on  the  upright  diameter  has  to  the  square  on  the  transverse. 

For  let  there  be  the  same  things  as  before,  and  let  NL  cut  the  asymptotes  at 
X  and  0. 

It  is  to  be  shown  that 

sq.  XG+sq.  GO+half  sq.  AC  :  sq.  FG+sq.  GK  :  :  sq.  AC  :  sq.  BD, 
or 


sq.  XG+sq.  GO+ 2  sq.  AE  :  sq.  FG+sq.  GK  :  :  sq.  AC  :  sq.  BD. 


For  since 


LX  =  ON  (n.  16), 

sq.  LG+sq.  GN+ 2  rect.  XX,XL  =  sq.  XG+sq.  GO;1 2 

therefore 

sq.  XG+sq.  GO+2  sq.  +F  =  sq.  LG+sq.  GN. 

And 

sq.  LG+sq.  GN  :  sq.  FG+sq.  GK  :  :  sq.  AC  :  sq.  BD  (hi.  28); 
therefore  also 

sq.  XG+sq.  GO+2  sq.  AE  ;  sq.  FG+sq.  GK  *  i  sq.  AC  sq.  BD. 


1'Fot 

OM  =  MX. 

Therefore,  as  in  a  lemma  of  Pappus,  since 

2  rect.  NXyXL+2  sq.  MX  =  2  sq.  ML  (Eucl.  ii.  5), 
adding  the  common  square  on  GM , 

2  rect.  NX,  XL +2  sq.  MX+2  sq.  GM  =  2  sq.  ML+2  sq.  GM. 

And 

2  sq.  ML+2  sq.  GM  =  sq.  XG+sq.  LG 

and 

2  sq.  MX+2  sq.  GM  -sq.  OG+ sq.  GX  (Eucl.  n.  9). 
Therefore  as  above. 


CONICS  III 


765 


Proposition  30 

If  two  straight  lines  touching  an  hyperbola  meet ,  and  through  the  points  of  contact 
a  straight  line  is  produced ,  and  through  the  point  of  meeting  a  straight  line  is 
drawn  parallel  to  some  one  of  the  asymptotes  and  cutting  both  the  section  and  the 
straight  line  joining  the  points  of  contact ,  then  the  straight  line  between  the  point  of 
meeting  and  the  straight  line  joining  the  points  of  contact  will  be  bisected  by  the 
section} 

Let  there  be  the  hyperbola 
ABC ,  and  let  AD  and  DC  be 
tangents  and  EF  and  FG 
asymptotes,  and  let  AC  be 
joined,  and  through  D  paral¬ 
lel  to  FE  let  DKL  be  drawn. 
I  sav  that 

DK  =  KL. 

For  let  FDBM  be  joined 
and  produced  both  ways,  and 
let  FH  be  made  equal  to  BF , 
and  through  the  points  B  and 
K  let  BE  and  K N  be  drawn 
parallel  to  AC;  therefore  they  have  been  dropped  ordinatewise  (n.  30,  5,  7). 
And  since  triangle  BEF  is  similar  to  triangle  DNK ,  therefore 

sq.  DN  :  sq.  NK  :  :  sq.  BF  :  sq.  BE.  (a) 

And 


therefore  also 


But 


therefore  also 


Therefore 


sq.  BF  :  sq.  BE  :  :  HB  :  upright  (ii.  1); 
sq.  DN  :  sq.  NK  :  :  HB  :  upright. 

HB  :  upright  :  :  rect.  HNfNB  :  sq.  NK  (i.  21); 
sq.  DN  :  sq.  NK  :  :  rect.  MNyNB  :  sq.  NK. 
rect.  HN,NB  =  sq.  DN. 


05) 


lThe  propositions  from  30  to  34  inclusive  are  one  special  case,  and  propositions  35  and  36 
are  another  special  case  of  proposition  37.  The  first  group  takes  the  line  drawn  through  the 
intersection  of  the  tangents  as  parallel  to  an  asymptote.  The  second  group  takes  one 
of  the  tangents  as  an  asymptote.  Proposition  34,  lying  between,  is  special  in  both 
these  ways. 

In  proposition  37  we  have  the  line  CF  divided  by  the  section  at  D  and  F,  and  at  E 
by  the  straight  line  joining  the  points  of  contact,  in  such  a  way  that 

CF  :  CD::  FE  :  ED. 

This  is  the  same  form  of  the  harmonic  proportion  as  we  found  in  i.  34,  and  DF  is  the 
harmonic  mean  between  CF  and  FE. 

If  we  argue  by  analogy  from  this  proportion,  treating  infinity  as  a  definite  magnitude, 
and  two  such  infinities  as  would  occur  here  as  equal  and  subject  to  the  general  laws 
of  magnitudes,  we  can  immediately  deduce  the  special  cases  of  propositions  30  to  36.  Thus 
in  the  case  of  the  first  group,  CF  and  FE  both  become  infinite,  therefore  CD  is  equal  to 
ED. 


766 

And  also 


APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 


rect.  MF,FD  =  sq.  FB  (i.  37), 

because  AD  touches  and  AM  has  been  dropped  ordinatewise;  and  so  also 
rect.  HN,NB+sq.  FB  =  rect.  MF,FD  + sq.  DN. 

But 

rect.  HN,NB+ sq.  FL  =  sq.  FA7  (Eucl.  n.  6); 

and  therefore 

rect.  MF,FD+sq.  DN  —  sq.  FA7. 

Therefore  DM  has  been  bisected  at  N  with  DF  added  (Eucl.  n.  6).  And  KN 
and  LM  are  parallel;  therefore 

DK  =  KL. 

Proposition  31 

If  two  straight  lines  touching  opposite  sections  meet ,  and  a  straight  line  is  produced 
through  the  points  of  contact ,  and  through  the  point  of  meeting  a  straight  line  is 
drawn  parallel  to  the  asymptote  and  cutting  both  the  section  and  the  straight  line 
joining  the  points  of  contact ,  then  the  straight  line  between  the  point  of  meeting  and 
the  straight  line  joining  the  points  of  contact  will  be  bisected  by  the  section. 

Let  there  be  the  opposite  sections  A  and  B ,  and  tangents  AC  and  CBy  and 
let  AB  be  joined  and  produced,  and  let  FE  be  an  asymptote  and  through  C  let 
CGH  be  drawn  parallel  to  FE. 

I  say  that 

CG  =  GH. 


Let  CE  be  joined  and  produced  to  D,  and  through  E  and  G  let  NEKM  and 
GX  be  drawn  parallel  to  AB,  and  through  G  and  K  let  KF  and  GL  be  drawn 
parallel  to  CD. 

Since  triangle  KFE  is  similar  to  triangle  MLG, 

sq.  KE  :  sq.  KF  :  :  sq.  ML  :  sq.  LG. 

And  it  has  been  shown 

sq.  KEKE  :  sq.  KF  :  :  rect.  NL,LI\  :  sq.  LG  (a  and  13  of  hi.  30); 
therefore 

rect.  NL,LK  =  sq.  ML. 

Let  the  square  on  KE  be  added  to  each;  therefore 

rect.  NL,LK+sq.  KE  =  sq.  LE  =  sq.  GX  =  sq.  ML+sq.  KE. 

And 

sq.  GX  :  sq.  ML+sq.  KE  :  :  sq.  XC  :  sq.  LG+sq.  KF  (Eucl.  vi.  4;  v.  12); 
therefore 

sq.  XC  =  sq.  LG+sq.  KF. 


And 


CONICS  III 


767 


sq.  LG  =  sq.  XE 

and 

sq.  KF  —  sq.  on  half  of  second  diameter  (n.  1), 

=  rect.  CE,ED  (i.  38); 

therefore 

sq.  XC  =  sq.  XE+ rect.  CE,ED. 

Therefore  the  straight  line  CD  has  been  cut  equally  at  X  and  unequally  at  E 
(Eucl.  ii.  5). 

And  DH  is  parallel  to  GX ;  therefore 

CG  =  GH. 


Proposition  32 


If  two  straight  lines  touching  an  hyperbola  meet ,  and  a  straight  line  is  produced 
through  the  points  of  contact ,  and  a  straight  line  is  drawn  through  the  point  of 
meeting  of  the  tangents  parallel  to  the  straight  line  joining  the  points  of  contact , 
and  a  straight  line  is  drawn  through  the  midpoint  of  the  straight  line  joining  the 
points  of  contact  parallel  to  one  of  the  asymptotes ,  then  the  straight  line  cut  off 
between  this  midpoint  and  the  parallel  will  be  bisected  by  the  section. 

Let  there  be  the  hyperbola  ABC ,  whose  center  is  D ,  and  asymptote  DE ,  and 
let  AF  and  FC  touch,  and  let  CA  and  FD  be  joined  and  produced  to  G  and  H; 

then  it  is  evident  that 
AH  =  HC. 

Then  let  FK  be  drawn 
through  F  parallel  to  AC, 
and  HLK  through  H  para¬ 
llel  to  DE. 

I  say  that 

KL  =  HL. 

Let  LM  and  BE  be  drawn 
through  B  and  L  parallel  to 
AC;  then,  as  has  been  al¬ 
ready  shown  (ill.  30,  a ,  0, 
and  conclusion), 
sq.  DB  :  sq.  BE  :  :  sq.  HM  :  sq.  ML  :  :  rect.  BM,MG  :  sq.  ML; 
therefore 


And  also 


rect,  GM,MB  =  sq.  MH. 


rect,  HD,DF  =  sq.  DB. 

because  AF  touches,  and  AH  has  been  dropped  ordinatewise  (i.  37);  therefore 
rect.  GM,MB+ sq.  DB  =  rect.  HD,DF+ sq.  MH  =  sq.  DM  (Eucl.  n.  6). 
Therefore  FH  has  been  bisected  at  M  with  DF  added.  And  KF  and  LM  are 
parallel;  therefore 

KL  =  LH. 


Proposition  33 

If  two  straight  lines  touching  opposite  sections  meet ,  and  one  straight  line  is  pro¬ 
duced  through  the  points  of  contact ,  and  another  straight  line  is  drawn  through  the 
point  of  meeting  of  the  tangents  parallel  to  the  straight  line  joining  the  points  of 


768  APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 

contact ,  and  still  another  straight  line  is  drawn  through  the  midpoint  of  the  straight 
line  joining  the  points  of  contact  parallel  to  one  of  the  asymptotes  and  meeting  the 
section ,  and  the  parallel  drawn  through  the  point  of  meeting ,  then  the  straight  line 
between  the  midpoint  and  the  parallel  will  be  bisected  by  the  section . 

Let  there  be  the  opposite  sections  ABC  and  DEF,  and  tangents  AG  and  DG 
and  center  H,  and  asymptote  KH,  and  let  HG  be  joined  and  produced,  and 
also  let  ALD  be  joined;  then  it  is  evident  that  it  is  bisected  at  L  (n.  30).  Then 
let  BHE  and  CGF  be  drawn  through  G  and  H  parallel  to  AD,  and  LMN 
through  L  parallel  to  HK. 


I  say  that 

LM  =  MN. 

For  let  EK  and  MX  be  dropped  from  E  and  M  parallel  to  GH,  and  MP 
through  M  parallel  to  AD. 

Since  then  through  things  already  shown  (hi.  30,  a  and  0) 
sq.  HE  :  sq.  EK  :  :  rect.  BX,XE  :  sq.  XM, 

therefore 

sq.  HE  :  sq.  EK  :  :  rect.  BX,XE+ sq.  HE  :  sq.  KE+ sq.  XM.  (Eucl.  v.  12) 
or 

sq.  HE  :  sq.  EK  :  :  sq.  HX  :  sq.  KE+ sq.  XM  (Eucl.  n.  6). 

But  it  has  been  shown  (i.  38;  n.  1) 

sq.  EK  =  rect.  GH,HL 

and 


therefore 


sq.  XM  =  sq.  HP ; 


sq. 

And 

therefore 

Therefore 


HE  :  sq.  EK  :  :  sq.  HX  or  sq.  MP  :  rect.  GH,HL+ sq.  HP. 
sq.  HE  :  sq.  EK  :  :  sq.  MP  :  sq.  PL  (Eucl.  vi.  4); 
sq.  MP  :  sq.  PL  :  :  sq.  MP  :  rect.  GH,HL+ sq.  HP. 


sq.  PL  =  rect.  GH,HL+ sq.  HP. 

Therefore  the  straight  line  LG  has  been  cut  equally  at  P  and  unequally  at  H 
(Eucl.  ii.  5). 

And  MP  and  GN  are  parallel;  therefore 

LM  —  MN. 


conics  m 


769 


Proposition  34 


If  some  point  is  taken  an  ane  of  the  asymptotes  of  an  hyperbola ,  and  a  straight  line 
from  it  touches  the  section ,  and  through  the  point  of  contact  a  parallel  to  the  asymp¬ 
tote  is  drawn ,  then  the  straight  line  drawn  from  the  point  taken  parallel  to  the  other 
asymptote  will  be  bisected  by  the  section. 

Let  there  be  the  hyperbola  AB ,  and  the  asymptotes  CD  and  DE ,  and  let  a 
point  C  be  taken  at  random  on  CD,  and  through  it  let  CBE  be  drawn  touching 


And  since 


the  section,  and  through  B  let  FBG  be 
drawn  parallel  to  CD,  and  through  C 
let  CAG  be  drawn  parallel  to  DE. 

I  say  that 

CA  =AG. 

For  let  AH  be  drawn  through  A 
parallel  to  CD,  and  BK  through  B 
parallel  to  DE.  Since  then 
CB  =  BE  (n.  3), 
therefore  also 

CK  =  KD 

and 

DF  =  FE. 


and 

and 


rect.  KB.BF  =  rect.  CA.AH  (n.  12), 
BF  =  DK  =  CK, 


therefore 

Therefore 

And 


AH  =  DC, 


rect.  DC,CA=  rect.  GC,CK. 
DC  :  CK  ::GC  :  CA. 


therefore  also 
Therefore 


CD  =  2CK ; 
GC  =  2  CA. 


CA=AG. 


Proposition  35 

With  the  same  things  being  so,  if  from  the  point  taken  some  straight  line  is  drawn 
cutting  the  section  at  two  points ,  then  as  the  whole  straight  line  is  to  the  straight 
line  cut  off  outside,  so  will  the  segments  of  the  straight  line  cut  off  inside  be  to  each 
other . 

For  let  there  be  the  hyperbola  AB  and  the  asymptotes  CD  and  DE ,  and 
CBE  touching  and  HB  parallel,  and  through  C  let  some  straight  line  CALFG 
be  drawn  across  cutting  the  section  at  A  and  F. 

I  say  that 

FC  :CAz:FL:  AL. 

For  let  CNX ,  KAM,  OPBR,  and  FU  be  drawn  through  C,  A,  B  and  F 


770  APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 

parallel  to  DE;  and  APS  and  TFRMX  through  A  and  F  parallel  to  CD. 
Since  then 

AC  =  FG  (ii.  8), 

therefore  also 


KA  =  TG  (Eucl.  vi.  4). 
KA=DS ; 

TG  =  DS. 

CK  —  DU. 
CK=DU, 

DK  =  CU ; 


But 

therefore  also 
And  so  also 
And  since 
also 

therefore 
And 
and 
and 
and 

therefore  also 
But 
for 
and 

therefore 
and 

remainder  pllg.  MH  :  remainder  pllg.  BK  :  :  whole  pllg.  MD  :  whole  pllg.  OX 
And  since 

pllg.  DA  =  pllg.  DB , 
let  the  common  parallel ogram  DP  be  subtracted; 
therefore 

pllg.  KP  =  pllg.  PH. 

Let  the  common  parallelogram  AB  be  added;  therefore 
whole  pllg.  BK  =  whole  pllg.  AH. 

Therefore 


DK  :  CK  :  :  CU  :  CK . 

CU  :  CK  :  :  FC  :  AC , 

FC  :  AC  :  :  MK  :  KA , 

MK  :  iL4  :  :  pllg.  MD  :  pllg.  DA  (Eucl.  vi.  1), 
DK  :  CK  :  :  pllg.  HK  :  pllg.  KN; 
pllg.  MD  :  pllg.  DA  :  :  pllg.  HK  :  pllg.  KN. 
pllg.  DA  =  pllg.  DB  (n.  12)  =  pllg.  ON; 

CB  =  BE  (ii.  3), 

DO  =  OC ; 

pllg.  MD  :  pllg.  ON  :  :  pllg.  HK  :  pllg.  KZV. 


But 


and 


pllg.  MD  :  pllg.  DA  :  :  pllg.  MH  :  pllg.  AH. 
pllg.  MD  :  pllg.  DA  :  :  MK  :  KA  :  :  FC  :  AC, 


CONICS  III  771 

pllg.  MH  :  pllg.  AH  :  :  MW  :WA::FL:  LA  ; 

therefore  also 

FC  :AC::FL:  LA. 

Proposition  36 

With  the  same  things  being  so ,  if  the  straight  line  drawn  across  from  the  point 
neither  cuts  the  section  at  two  points  nor  is  parallel  to  the  asymptote ,  it  will  meet  the 
opposite  section ,  and  as  the  whole  straight  line  is  to  the  straight  line  between  the 
section  and  the  parallel  through  the  point  of  contact ,  so  will  the  straight  line  be¬ 
tween  the  opposite  section  and  the  asymptote  be  to  the  straight  line  between  the 
asymptote  and  the  other  section. 

Let  there  be  the  opposite  sections  A  and  B  whose  center  is  C  and  asymptotes 
DE  and  FG,  and  let  some  point  G  be  taken  on  CG.  and  from  it  let  GBE  be 
drawn  tangent,  and  GH  neither  parallel  to  CE  nor  cutting  the  section  in  two 
points  (i.  26). 

It  has  been  shown  that  GH  produced  meets  CD  and  therefore  also  section  A. 
Let  it  meet  it  at  A,  and  let  KBL  be  drawn  through  B  parallel  to  CG. 

I  say  that 

AK  :  KH  :  :  AG  :  GH. 


For  let  HM  and  AX  be  drawn  from  the  points  A  and  H  parallel  to  CG,  and 
BX ,  GP.  and  RHSN  from  B,  G  and  H  parallel  to  DE.  Since  then 

AD  =  GH  (n.  16), 

AG:GH  ::DH  :  HG 

But 

AG  :  GH  : :  NS  :  SHt 

and 

DH  :  GH  :  :  CS  :  SG; 

And  therefore 

NS  :  SH  : :  CS  :  SG. 

But 

NS  :  SH  :  :  pllg.  NC  :  pllg.  C/7, 

and 

CS:SG::  pllg.  RC  :  pllg.  RG; 

therefore  also 

pllg.  ArC  :  pllg.  C/7  :  :  pllg.  RC  :  pllg.  RG. 

And  as  one  is  to  one  so  are  all  to  all;  therefore 


772 

pllg.  NC 
And  since 

also 

and 

And 

therefore  also 

Therefore 

pllg.  NC 
or 

But 

since  also 
and 

Therefore 

But 

and 

therefore  also 


APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 

:  pllg.  CH  :  :  whole  pllg.  NL  :  whole  pllg.  CH+ pllg.  RG. 
EB  =  BG, 

LB  =  BP 

pllg.  LX  =  pllg.  BG. 
pllg.  LX  =  pllg.  CH  (n.  12); 
pllg.  BG  =  pllg.  CH. 

:  pllg.  CH  :  :  whole  pllg.  NL  :  whole  pllg.  BG+ pllg.  RG 
pllg.  NC  :  pllg.  CH  :  :  pllg.  NL  :  pllg.  RX. 
pllg.  i?X  =  pllg.  LH , 
pllg.  CH  =  pllg.  BC  (n.  12), 
pllg.  MB  =  pllg.  XH. 

pllg.  NC  :  pllg.  CH  :  :  pllg.  NL  :  pllg.  LH. 
pllg.  ArC  :  pllg.  CH  :  :  NS  :  SH  :  :  AG  :  GH, 
pllg.  NL  :  pllg.  LH  :  :  NR  :  RH  :  :  AK  :  KH\ 

AK  :KH  ::  AG:  GH. 


Proposition  37 

If  two  straight  lines  touching  a  section  of  a  cone  or  circumference  of  a  circle  or 
opposite  sections  meet ,  and  a  straight  line  is  joined  to  their  points  of  contact ,  and 
from  the  point  of  meeting  of  the  tangents  some  straight  line  is  drawn  across  cutting 
the  line  (of  the  section )  at  two  points ,  then  as  the  whole  straight  line  is  to  the 
straight  line  cut  off  ou  tside ,  so  will  the  segments  produced  by  the  straight  line  joining 
the  points  of  contact  be  to  each  other. 

Let  there  be  the  section  of  a  cone  AB  and  tangents  AC  and  CB  and  let  AB 
be  joined,  and  let  CDEF  be  drawn  across. 

I  say  that 

CF  :  CD  ::FE:  ED. 

Let  the  diameters  CH  and  AK  be  drawn  through  C  and  A,  and  through  F 
and  D,  DP,  FR,  LFM  and  NDO  parallel  to  AH  and  LC .  Since  then  LFM  is 
parallel  to  XDO, 

FC  :  CD  :  :  LF  :  XD  :  :  FM  :  DO  :  :  LM  :  XO ; 

and  therefore 

sq.  LM  :  sq.  XO  :  :  sq.  FM  :  sq.  DO. 


But 


sq.  LM  :  sq.  XO  :  :  trgl.  LMC  :  trgl.  XCO  (Eucl.  vi.  19) 


CONICS  III 


773 


sq.  FM  :  sq.  DO  :  :  trgl.  FRM  :  trgl.  DPO; 

therefore  also 

trgl.  LMC  :  trgl.  XCO  :  :  trgl.  FRM  :  trgl.  DPO  :  : 

:  :  remainder  quadr.  LCRF  :  remainder  quadr.  XCP 

But 

quadr.  LCRF  =  trgl.  ALK  (hi.  2;  m.  11), 


and 

quadr.  XCPD  =  trgl.  ANX  (hi.  2;  in.  11); 


L 


L 


therefore 

sq.  LM  :  sq.  XO  :  :  trgl.  ALK  :  trgl.  ANX . 

But 


sq.  LM  :  sq.  XO  :  :  sq.  FC  :  sq.  CD, 

and 

trgl.  :  trgl.  AiVX  :  :  sq.  LA  :  sq.  :  :  sq.  FE  :  sq.  ED) 
therefore  also 


sq.  FC  :  sq.  CD  :  :  sq.  FE  :  sq.  ED. 


And  therefore 


FC  :  CD: :  FE  :  ED. 


774 


APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 

C 


With  the  same  things  being  so,  if  some  straight  line  is  drawn  through  the  point  of 
meeting  of  the  tangents  parallel  to  the  straight  line  joining  the  points  of  contact , 
and  a  straight  line  drawn  through  the  midpoint  of  the  straight  line  joining  the 
points  of  contact  cuts  the  section  in  two  points  and  the  straight  line  through  the 
point  of  meeting  parallel  to  the  straight  line  joining  the  points  of  contact ,  then  as 
the  whole  straight  line  drawn  across  is  to  the  straight  line  cut  off  outside  between  the 
section  and  the  parallel,  so  will  the  segments  produced  by  the  straight  line  joined 
to  the  points  of  contact  be  to  each  other . 

Let  there  be  the  section 
A B  and  tangents  AC  and  BC 
and  A B  the  straight  line  join¬ 
ing  the  points  of  contact,  and 
AN  and  CM  diameters;  then 
it  is  evident  that  A  B  has  been 
bisected  at  E  (n.  30,  39). 

Let  CO  be  drawn  from  C 
parallel  to  AB,  and  let 
FEDO  be  drawn  across 
through  E. 

I  say  that 

FO  :  OD  :  :  FE  :  ED. 


775 


CONICS  III 


For  let  LFKM  and  DHGXN  be 
drawn  through  F  and  D  parallel  to 
AB .  and  through  F  and  G ,  F/?  and 
GP  parallel  to  LC.  Then  likewise  as 
before  (m.  37)  it  will  be  shown  that 
sq.  LM  :  sq.  XH  : :  sq.  LA  :  sq.  AX. 
And 

sq.  LM  :  sq.  XH  : :  sq.  LC  :  sq.  CX  : : 

sq.  FO  :  sq.  OD, 

and 

sq.  LA  :  sq.  AX  : :  sq.  FE  :  sq.  ED) 
therefore 

sq.  FO  :  sq.  OD  :  :  sq.  FE  :  sq.  FD, 
and 

FO  :  OD  :  :  FE  :  ED. 


L 


Proposition  39 

If  two  straight  lines  touching  opposite  sections  meet .  and  a  straight  line  is  pro¬ 
duced  through  the  points  of  contact .  and  a  straight  line  drawn  from  the  point  of 
meeting  of  the  tangents  cuts  both  of  the  sections  and  the  straight  line  joining  the 
points  of  contact ,  then  as  the  whole  straight  line  drawn  across  is  to  the  straight  line 


776 


APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 

cut  off  outside  between  the  section  and  the  straight  line  joining  the  'points  of  con¬ 
tact,  so  will  the  segments  of  the  straight  line  produced  by  the  segments  and  the  point 
of  meeting  of  the  tangents  be  to  each  other. 

Let  there  be  the  opposite  sections  A  and  B  whose  center  is  C  and  tangents 
AD  and  DB ,  and  let  AB  and  CD  be  joined  and  produced,  and  through  D  let 
some  straight  line  EDFG  be  drawn  across. 

I  say  that 

EG  :  GF  :  :  ED  :  DF. 

For  let  AC  be  joined  and  produced,  and  through  E  and  F  let  EHS  and 
FLMNXO  be  drawn  parallel  to  AB ,  and  parallel  to  AD,  EP  and  FR. 

Since  then  FX  and  ES  are  parallel,  and  EF ,  XS,  and  HM  have  been  drawn 
through  to  them, 

EH  :  HS  :  :  FM  :  MX. 

And  alternately 

EH  :  FM  :  :  HS  :  MX; 

therefore  also 

sq.  EH  :  sq.  FM  :  :  sq.  HS  :  sq.  MX. 


But 

sq.  EH  :  sq.  FM  :  :  trgl.  EHP  :  trgl.  FRM, 

and 

sq.  HS  :  sq.  MX  :  :  trgl.  DHS  :  trgl.  XMD; 

f horPmVP  qioa 

trgl.  EHP  :  trgl.  FRM  :  :  trgl.  DHS  :  trgl.  XMD. 
trgl.  EHP  =  trgl.  ASK+trgl  DHS  (in.  11), 


And 


CONICS  III  777 

and 

trgl.  FRM  =  trgl.  AAW+trgl.  XMD  (hi.  11); 

therefore 

trgl.  DHS  :  trgl.  XMD  :  :  trgl.  ASK+trgl  DHS  :  trgl.  AXX+ trgl.  XMD , 
and 

remainder  trgl.  ASK  :  remainder  trgl.  AXX  :  :  trgl.  DHS  :  trgl.  XMD. 
But 

trgl.  ASK  :  trgl.  AXX  :  :  sq.  AL4  :  sq.  AX  :  :  sq.  EG  :  sq.  F(?,* 

and 

trgl.  DHS  :  trgl.  AAVZ)  :  :  sq.  tfZ)  :  sq.  DM  :  :  sq.  ED  :  sq.  DA. 
Therefore  also 

EG  :FG::  ED  :  DF. 


Proposition  40 


With  the  same  things  being  so.  if  a  straight  line  is  drawn  through  the  point  of  meet¬ 
ing  of  the  tangents  parallel  to  the  straight  line  joining  the  points  of  contact ,  and  if  a 
straight  line  drawn  from  the  midpoint  of  the  straight  line  joining  the  points  of 
contact  cuts  both  of  the  sections  and  the  straight  line  parallel  to  the  straight  line 
joining  the  points  of  contact ,  then  as  the  whole  straight  line  drawn  across  is  to  the 
straight  line  cut  off  outside  between  the  parallel  and  the  section ,  so  will  the  straight 
line's  segments  produced  by  the  sections  and  the  straight  line  joining  the  points  of 
contact  be  to  each  other. 

Let  there  be  the  opposite  sections  A  and  B  whose  center  is  C,  and  tangents 
AD  and  DB.  and  let  AB  and  CDE  be  joined;  therefore 

AE  =  EB  (ii.  39). 

And  from  D  let  FDG  be  drawn  parallel  to  AB.  and  from  E,  LE  at  random. 

I  say  that 

HL  :  LK  :  :  HE  :  EK. 

From  H  and  K  let  NMHX  and  KOP  be  drawn  parallel  to  AB.  and  HR  and 
KS  parallel  to  AD.  and  let  XACT  be  drawn  through. 

Since  then  XAU  and  MAP  have  been  drawn  across  the  parallels  XM  and 
KP, 

XA  :  AU  ::  M A  :  AP. 

But 

XA  :  AU  :  :  HE  :  EK; 

and 

HE  :  EK  :  :  HX  :  KO 

because  of  the  similarity  of  the  triangles  HEX  and  KEO;  therefore 

HX  :  KO  :  :  MA  :  AP; 

therefore  also 


sq.  HX  :  sq.  KO  :  :  sq.  MA  :  sq.  AP. 


*For 

and 

and 

therefore  ex  aequali 


EG  :  TG  :  :  KA  :  TA, 
TG  :  TF  :  :  TA  :  T. Y, 


TG-TF  :  TG  :  :  TA-TX  :  TA; 
EG  :  FG  :  :  KA  :  AX. 


778  APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 

But 

sq.  HN  :  sq.  KO  :  :  trgl.  HRN  :  trgl.  KSOy 

and 

sq.  MA  :  sq.  AP  :  :  trgl.  XMA  :  trgl.  AUP; 


therefore  also 


trgl.  HRN  :  trgl.  KSO  :  :  trgl.  XMA  :  trgl.  AUP. 

And 

trgl.  HXR  =  trgl.  XMA+  trgl.  MND  (m.  11), 

and 

trgl.  E&0  =  trgl.  AUP+t rgl.  DOP  (m.  11); 

therefore  also 

trgl.  XMA+  trgl.  MND  :  trgl.  AUP+ trgl.  DOP  :  :  trgl.  XMA  :  trgl.  A  UP; 
therefore  also 

remainder  trgl.  NMD  :  remainder  trgl.  DOP  :  :  whole  :  whole. 

But 

trgl.  XMA  :  trgl.  AUP  :  :  sq.  XA  :  sq.  AUy 

and 

trgl.  NMD  :  trgl.  DOP  :  :  sq.  MN  :  sq.  PO; 

therefore  also 


But 

and 

and 

therefore  also 
Therefore 


sq.  MN  :  sq.  PO  :  :  sq.  XA  :  sq.  AU. 
sq.  MN  :  sq.  PO  :  :  sq.  AT)  :  sq.  OD, 
sq.  XA  :  sq.  AU  :  :  sq.  HE  :  sq.  EX, 
sq.  ND  :  sq.  PO  :  :  sq.  HL  :  sq.  LK ; 
sq.  PE  :  sq.  EX  :  :  sq.  HL  :  sq.  EE. 

PE  :  EK  :  :  HL  :  LK. 


Proposition  41 

7/  straight  lines  touching  a  'parabola  meet  each  other ,  they  will  be  cut  in  the 
same  ratio. 

Let  there  be  the  parabola  ABC}  and  tangents  APE,  EEC  and  PEE. 


CONICS  III 


779 


I  say  that 

CF  :  FE  :  :  ED  :  DA  :  :  FB  :  BD. 
For  let  AC  be  joined  and  bisected  at  G. 


AK  = 


Then  it  is  evident  that  the  straight 
line  from  E  to  G  is  a  diameter  of  the 
section,  (n.  29). 

If  then  it  goes  through  B ,  DF  is 
parallel  to  AC,  (n.  5)  and  will  be  bi¬ 
sected  by  EG,  and  therefore 
AD  =  DE  (i.  35), 

and 

CF  =  FE  (i.  35), 

and  what  vras  sought  is  apparent. 

Let  it  not  go  through  B,  but 
through  H ,  and  let  KHL  be  drawn 
through  H  parallel  to  AC;  therefore 
it  will  touch  the  section  at  H  (i.  32), 
and  because  of  things  already  said 
(i.  35), 

KE 


and 


LC  =  LE. 


Let  MNBX  be  drawm  through  B  parallel  to  EG,  and  AO  and  CP  through  A 
and  C  parallel  to  DF.  Since  then  MB  is  parallel  to  EH,  MB  is  a  diameter 
(i.  40;  i.  51,  end);  and  DF  touches  at  B;  therefore  AO  and  CP  have  been 
dropped  ordinate  wise  (n.  5;  First  Def.  i.  4).  And  since  MB  is  a  diameter,  and 
CM  a  tangent,  and  CP  an  ordinate, 


and  so  also 
And  since 
and 

and  alternately 
But 

therefore  also 
And 

therefore  ex  aequali 
and  convertendo 


MB  =  BP  (i.  35), 
MF  =  FC. 

MF  =  FC 
EL  =  LC, 

MC  :CF  :  :  EC:  CL; 
MC  :  EC  :  :  CF  :  CL. 
MC  :  EC  :  :  XC  :  CG; 
CF  :  CL::  XC  :  CG. 
CL  :  EC  :  :  CG  :  CA; 
CA  :XC  ::  EC:  CF, 
EC  :FE::CA:  AX; 
CF  :  FE  :  :  XC  :  AX. 


separando 


780 


APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 

Again  since  MB  is  a  diameter  and  AN  a  tangent  and 
AO  an  ordinate, 

NB  =  BO  (i.  35), 

and 

ND  =  DA . 

And  also 

EK=KA; 

therefore 

AE  :  KA  : :  NA  :  DA; 

alternately 

AE  :  NA  :  :  KA  :  DA. 

But 

AO  :  NA  ::GA:  AX; 

therefore  also 

KA  :  DA  : :  GA  :  AX. 

And  also 

AE  :  KA  :  :  CA  :  GA; 

therefore,  ex  acquali, 

AE  :  DA  : :  C A  :  AX; 

separando , 

ED  :  DA::  XC  :  AX. 

And  it  was  also  shown 

XC  :  AX  : :  CF  :  FE; 

therefore 

CF  :  EF  :  :  ED  :  DA. 

Again  since 

XC  :  AX  : :  CP  :  AO, 

and 

CP  =  2BF , 

and 

CM =2  MFy 

and 

AO  =  2 

and 

AAr  =  2  AO, 

therefore 

AT  :  AX  : :  FB  :  BD  : :  CF  :  FE  : :  ED  :  DA. 

Proposition  42 

Jf  an  hyperbola  or  ellipse  or  circumference  of  a  circle  or  opposite  sections 
straight  lines  are  drawn  from  the  vertex  of  the  diameter  parallel  to  an  ordinate ,  and 
some  other  straight  line  at  random  is  drawn  tangent ,  it  will  cut  off  from  them 
straight  lines  containing  a  rectangle  equal  to  the  fourth  part  of  the  figure  to  the  same 
diameter . 

For  let  there  be  some  one  of  the  aforesaid  sections,  whose  diameter  is  AB} 
and  from  A  and  B  let  AC  and  DB  be  drawn  parallel  to  an  ordinate,  and  let 
some  other  straight  line  CED  be  tangent  at  E. 

I  say  that 

rect.  AC,BD  —  fourth  part  of  figure  to  AB. 


CONICS  III  781 

For  let  its  center  be  F,  and  through  it  let  FG  be  drawn  parallel  to  AC  and  BD. 
Since  then  AC  and  BD  are  parallel,  and  FG  is  also  parallel,  therefore  it  is  the 
diameter  conjugate  to  AB  (First  Def.,  i.  6);  and  so 

sq.  FG  =  fourth  part  of  figure  to  AB  (Sec.  Def.  i.  3). 


If  then  FG  goes  through  E  in  the  case  of  the  ellipse  and  circle, 

AC  =  FG  =  BD  (n.  7), 
and  it  is  immediately  evident  that 

rect.  AC,BD  =  sq.  FG  or  fourth  part  of  figure  to  AB. 

Then  let  it  not  go  through  it,  and  let  DC  and  BA  produced  meet  at  K,  and 
let  EL  be  drawn  through  E  parallel  to  AC,  and  EM  parallel  to  AB. 

Since  then 

rect.  AF.FL  =  sq.  AF  (i.  37), 

KF  :  AF  : :  AF  :  FL, 


782 

and 


APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 


inversely 
componendo  or  separando 
Therefore  also 
Therefore 


KA  :  AL  :  :  KF  :  AF  or  FB  (Eucl.  v.  19); 
FB  :  KF  :  :  AL  :  KA ; 

BK:KF  ::LK:  KA . 

DB:FH  ::EL:  CA . 


rect.  Z)R,(L4  =rect.  FH,EL, 
=  rect.  HF,FM. 


But 


rect.  #F,FM  =  sq.  FG  (i.  38), 

=  fourth  figure  to  A.R  (Sec.  Def.  i.  11); 

therefore  also 

rect.  DB,CA  =  fourth  figure  to  AB . 


Proposition  43 


If  a  straight  line  touch  an  hyperbola ,  it  will  cut  off  from  the  asymptotes ,  beginning 
with  the  center  of  the  section ,  straight  lines  containing  a  rectangle  equal  to  the  rec¬ 
tangle  contained  by  the  straight  lines  cut  off  by  the  tangent  at  the  section's  vertex  at 
its  axis. 

Let  there  be  the  hyperbola  AB,  and  asymptotes  CD  and  DE,  and  axis  BD, 
and  let  FBG  be  drawn  through  B  tangent,  and  some  other  tangent  at  random, 
CAH. 

I  say  that 

rect.  FD , DG  =  rect.  CD,DH. 

For  let  AK  and  BL  be  drawn  from 
A  and  B  parallel  to  DG,  and  AM  and 
BN  parallel  to  CD.  Since  then  CAH 
touches, 

CA=AH  (ii.  3); 

and  so 

CH  =  2AH 

and 

CD  =  2  AM 

and 

DH  =  2AK . 

Therefore 

rect.  CD,DH  =  4  rect.  KA,AM. 

Then  likewise  it  could  be  shown 

rect.  FD,DG  =  4  rect.  LB,  BN. 

But 


rect.  KA,AM  =  rect.  LB,  BN  (n.  12). 

Therefore  also 

rect.  CD,DH  =  rect.  FD,DG. 

Then  likewise  it  could  be  shown,  even  if  DB  were  some  other  diameter  and 
not  the  axis. 


CONICS  III 


783 


Proposition  44 

If  two  straight  lines  touching  an  hyperbola  or  opposite  sections  meet  the  asymp¬ 
totes ,  then  the  straight  lines  drawn  to  the  sections  will  be  parallel  to  the  straight  line 
joining  the  points  of  contact . 


For  let  there  be  either  the  hyperbola  or  the  opposite  sections  AB ,  and  asymp¬ 
totes  CD  and  DE ,  and  tangents  CAHF  and  EBHG ,  and  let  AB ,  EG,  and  CE  be 
joined. 

I  say  that  they  are  parallel. 

For  since 

rect.  CD,  DF  =  rect.  GD,DE  (iii.  43), 

therefore 

CD  :  DE  ::GD  :  DF; 

therefore  CE  is  parallel  to  FG.  And  therefore 

HF  :  FC  :  :  HG  :  GE. 


And 


FC  :  AF  :  :  GE  :  GF; 

for  each  is  double  (n.  3);  therefore  ex  aequali 

HG  :  GB  :  :  HF  :  FA. 
Therefore  FG  is  parallel  to  AB. 


Proposition  45 

If  in  an  hyperbola  or  ellipse  or  circumference  of  a  circle  or  opposite  sections 
straight  lines  are  drawn  from  the  vertex  of  the  axis  at  right  angles ,  and  a  rectangle 
equal  to  the  fourth  part  of  the  figure  is  applied  to  the  axis  on  each  side  and  exceed - 


784  APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 

ing  by  a  square  figure  in  the  case  of  the  hyperbola  and  opposite  sections ,  but  defi¬ 
cient  in  the  case  of  the  ellipse ,  and  some  straight  line  is  drawn  tangent  to  the  section 
and  meeting  the  perpendicular  straight  lines ,  then  the  straight  lines  drawn  from  the 
points  of  meeting  to  the  points  produced  by  the  application  make  right  angles  at  the 
aforesaid  points.1 

Let  there  be  one  of  the  sections  mentioned  whose  axis  is  A B,  and  AC  and  BD 


1  “The  points  of  application”  are  in  modem  terminology  the  foci  of  the  conics.  The  circle 
is  seen  here  as  an  ellipse  whose  two  foci  or  focal  points  coincide  with  the  center.  This  theory 
is,  of  course,  a  special  application  of  Euclid  vi.  28  and  29,  two  theorems  on  which  depends 
one  whole  side  of  Greek  geometry'. 

Apollonius  never  speaks  of  the  focus  of  the  parabola,  but  it  can  be  found  by  analogy  with 
the  ellipse. 

Thus  in  the  ellipse  above 

rect.  AF,  FB=  fourth  rect.  AB,R 
where  R  is  the  parameter.  Or 

rect.  AF,  (AB—AF)  =fourth  rect.  AB,  R 
or 

AF  :  fourth  R  :  :  AB  :  (AB—AF). 

Then  if  we  consider  the  ellipse  as  its  axis,  AB  gets  as  large  as  we  please;  we  can  think  of  it  as 
approaching  as  near  as  we  please  to  a  parabola  with  parameter  R.  The  ratio  AB  :  (AB  —AF) 
approaches  as  near  as  we  please  to  equality  and  hence  also  the  ratio 
AF  :  fourth  R.  At  the  limit  we  can  think  of  the  ellipse  as  the  parabola, 
its  axis  AB  as  infinite,  and  AB  as  equal  to  AB—AF.  Then  AF  will  be 
equal  to  a  fourth  R.  Thus  the  focus  of  a  parabola  will  be  defined  as  the  c 

point  on  its  axis  at  a  distance  from  the  vertex  equal  to  one  quarter  of 

the  parameter.  Then  many  of  the  properties  of  the  foci  of  the  ellipse  - ^ 

can  be  proved  analogously  for  the  parabola.  Thus  in  the  case  of  this 
proposition,  FD  will  become  parallel  to  CE.  Hence  any  straight  line 
from  the  focus  of  a  parabola  parallel  to  a  tangent  will  make  a  right  angle  with  the  straight 
line  drawn  from  the  focus  to  the  intersection  of  the  tangent  and  the  perpendicular  to  the 
axis  at  the  vertex. 


CONICS  III 


785 


at  right  angles,  and  CED  tangent,  and  let  the  rectangle  AF.FB  and  the  rec¬ 
tangle  AG,GB  equal  to  the  fourth  part  of  the  figure  be  applied  on  each  side 
(Eucl.  vi.  28.  29),  as  has  been  said,  and  let  CF ,  CG ,  DF ,  and  DG  be  joined. 

I  say  that  angle  CFD  and  angle  CGD  are  each  a  right  angle. 

For  since  it  has  been  shown 

rect.  AC,BD  =  fourth  figure  on  AB  (hi.  42), 

and  since  also 

rect.  AF,FB  =  fourth  figure  on  AB , 

therefore 

rect.  AC,BD  =  rect.  AF,  FB. 

Therefore 


AC  :  AF  :  :  FB  :  BD. 

And  the  angles  at  points  A  and  B  are  right;  therefore 

angle  ACF  =  angle  BFD  (Eucl.  vi.  6), 


and 


angle  AFC  =  angle  FDB. 

And  since  angle  CAF  is  right,  therefore 

angle  ACF+angle  AFC  =  1  rt.  angle. 
And  it  has  also  been  shown  that 

angle  ACF  =  angle  DFB : 

therefore 


Therefore 


angle  AFC+angle  DFB  =  1  right  angle. 


angle  DFC  =  1  right  angle. 
Then  likewise  it  could  also  be  shown 

angle  CGD  =  1  right  angle. 


Proposition  46 


With  the  same  things  being  so,  the  straight  lines  joined  make  equal  angles  with  the 
tangents. 

For  with  the  same  things  supposed,  I  say  that 

angle  ACF  =  angle  DCG 


and 

angle  CDF  =  angle  BDG. 

For  since  it  has  been  shown 
that  both  angle  CFD  and  angle 
CGD  are  right  angles  (m.45),  the 
circle  described  about  CD  as  a 
diameter  will  pass  through  points 
F  and  G ;  therefore 

angle  DCG  =  angle  DFG; 
for  they  are  on  the  same  segment 
of  the  circle.  And  it  was  shown 
angle  DFG  =  angle  ACF  (hi.  45); 
and  so 

angle  DCG  =  angle  ACF. 

And  likewise  also 

angle  CDF  =  angle  BDG. 


786 


APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 


Proposition  47 

With  the  same  things  being  so,  the  straight  line  drawn  from  the  point  of  meeting 
of  the  joined  straight  lines  to  the  point  of  contact  will  be  perpendicular  to  the 
tangent. 

For  let  the  same  things  as  before  be  supposed  and  let  CG  and  FD  meet  each 
other  at  H ,  and  let  CD  and  BA  produced  meet  at  K ,  and  let  EH  be  joined. 

I  say  that  EH  is  perpendicular  to  CD. 

For  if  not,  let  HL  be  drawn  from  H  perpendicular  to  CD.  Since  then 
angle  CDF  —  angle  GBD  (in.  46), 

and  also 

rt.  angle  DBC  =  rt.  angle  DLH, 


therefore  triangle  DGB  is  similar  to  triangle  LHD.  Therefore 

GD  :  DH  :  :  BD  :  DL. 

But 

GD  :  DH  ::  FC  :  CH 

because  the  angles  at  F  and  G  are  right  angles  (hi.  45)  and  the  angles  at  H  are 
equal;  but 

FC  :  CH  : :  AC  :  CL 

because  of  the  similarity  of  the  triangles  AFC  and  LCH  (hi.  46) ;  therefore  also 

BD  :  DL  :  :  AC  :  CL. 

Alternately 

BD  :  AC  :  :  DL  :  CL. 

But 

BD  :  AC  :  :  BK  :  KA  : 


therefore  also 


DL  :  CL  :  :  BK  :  KA. 


CONICS  III  787 

Let  EM  be  drawn  from  E  parallel  to  AC;  therefore  it  will  have  been  dropped 
ordinatewise  to  AB  (n.  7);  and 

BK  :  KA  :  :  BM  :  MA. 


And 

therefore  also 


BM  :  MA  : :  DE  :  EC) 


DL  :  CL  : :  DE  :  EC) 

and  this  is  absurd.  Therefore  HL  is  not  perpendicular  nor  is  any  other  straight 
line  except  HE .* 


Proposition  48 


With  the  same  things  being  so,  it  must  be  shown  that  the  straight  lines  drawn  from 
the  point  of  contact  to  the  points  produced  by  the  application  make  equal  angles 
with  the  tangent. 


*There  is  the  analogous  theorem  for  the  parabola.  FD  becomes  a  straight  line  parallel  to 


CE  and  CG  a  straight  line  parallel  to  AB.  Again  HE  is  perpendicular  to  CE}  and  this  can  be 
proved  rigorously  as  well  as  understood  by  analogy. 


7 SS  APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 

For  let  the  same  things  be  supposed,  and  let  EF  and  EG  be  joined. 

I  say  that 

angle  CEF  =  angle  GED. 

For  since  angles  DGH  and  DEH  are  right  angles  (hi.  45.  47),  the  circle 
described  about  DH  as  a  diameter  will  pass  through  the  points  E  and  G  (Eucl. 
hi.  31);  and  so 

angle  DHG  =  angle  DEG  (Eucl.  hi.  21); 
for  they  are  in  the  same  segment.  Likewise  then  also 

angle  CEF  =  angle  CHF. 

But 

angle  CHF  =  angle  DHG\ 
for  they  are  vertical  angles;  therefore  also 

angle  CEF  =  angle  DEG* 

Proposition  49 

With  the  same  things  being  so,  if  from  one  of  the  'points  (of  application)  a  per - 
pendicular  is  drawn  to  the  tangent ,  then  the  straight  lines  from  that  point  to  the 
ends  of  the  axis  make  a  right  angle . 


*Here  there  is  another  and  important  analogous  theorem  for  the  parabola.  EG  becomes 
parallel  to  AB,  and 


angle  DEG  =  angle  CEF. 


CONICS  III 


789 


For  let  the  same  things  be  supposed,  and  let  the  perpendicular  GH  be  drawn 
from  G  to  CD,  and  let  AH  and  BH  be  joined. 

I  say  that  angle  AHB  is  a  right  angle. 

For  since  angle  DBG  is  a  right  angle  and  also  angle  DHG,  the  circle  described 
about  DG  as  a  diameter  will  pass  through  H  and  B,  and 

angle  BHG  =  angle  BDG. 

But  it  was  shown 

angle  AGC  =  angle  BDG  (hi.  4G); 

therefore  also 

angle  BHG  =  angle  A(?C  =  angle  AHC  (Fuel.  hi.  21). 

And  so  also 


angle  CHG  =  angle  AHB. 

But  angle  CHG  is  a  right  angle;  therefore  also  angle  AHB  is  a  right  angle. 


Proposition  50 

With  the  same  things  being  so,  if  from  the  center  of  the  section  there  falls  to  the 
tangent  a  straight  line  parallel  to  the  straight  line  drawn  through  the  point  of  con - 
tact  and  one  of  the  points  {of  application),  then  it  will  be  equal  to  one  half  the  axis. 

For  let  there  be  the  same  things  as  before  and  let  H  be  the  center,  and  let  EF 
be  joined,  and  let  DC  and  BA  meet  at  K,  and  through  H  let  HL  be  drawn 
parallel  to  EF. 

I  say  that 

HL  =  HB. 


For  let  EG,  AL,  LG  be  joined,  and  through  G  let  GM  be  drawn  parallel  to 
EF.  Since  then 

rect.  AF,  FB  =  rect.  AG,  GB  (See  hi.  45), 


700 

therefore 


APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 


But  also 
therefore  also 


And  so  also 


AF  =  GB. 
AH  =  HB; 
FH  =  HG. 


EL  =  LM. 


And  since  it  was  shown  (in.  48) 

angle  CEF  =  angle  DEG, 

and 

angle  C'EF  =  angle  EMG , 

therefore  also 

angle  EMG  =  angle  DEG. 

And  therefore 


EG  =  GM. 


But  it  was  also  shown 

EL  =  LM 

therefore  GL  is  perpendicular  to  EM.  And  so  through  what  was  shown  before 
(m.  49)  angle  ALB  is  a  right  angle,  and  the  circle  described  about  AB  as  a 
diameter  will  pass  through  L.  And 

HA=HB ; 

therefore  also,  since  HL  is  a  radius  of  the  semicircle, 

UL  =  HB. 


Proposition  51 

If  a  rectangle  equal  to  the  fourth  part  of  the  figure  is  applied  from  both  sides  to  the 
axis  of  an  hyperbola  or  opposite  sections  and  exceeding  by  a  square  figure,  and 
straight  lines  are  deflected  from  the  resulting  points  of  application  to  either  one  of 
the  sections ,  then  the  greater  of  the  tv:o  straight  lines  exceeds  the  less  by  exactly  as 
much  as  the  axis. 

For  let  there  be  an  hyperbola  or  opposite  sections  whose  axis  is  AB  and 
center  C.  and  let  each  of  the  rectangles  AD,  DB  and  AE ,  EB  be  equal  to  the 
fourth  part  of  the  figure,  and  from  points  E  and  D  let  the  straight  fines  EF  and 
FD  be  deflected  to  the  fine  of  the  section. 

I  say  that 

EF  =  FD-rAB 


CONICS  III 


791 


Let  FKH  be  drawn  tangent  through  F,  and  GCH  through  C  parallel  to  FD ; 
therefore 

angle  KHG  —  angle  KFD ; 
for  they  are  alternate.  And 

angle  KFD  =  angle  GFH  (hi.  48); 

therefore 

GF  =  GH. 


But 

since  also 


GF  =  GE, 
AE  =  BD 


and 


AC  =  CB 


and 

and  therefore 


EC  =  CD; 


GH  =  EG. 


And  so 

FE  =  2GH. 

And  since  it  has  been  shown  (hi.  50) 

CH  =  CB * 

therefore 

FE  =  2(GC  CB). 

But 

FD  =  2GC, 

and 

AB  =  2CB; 

therefore 

FE  =  FD  -f-  AB. 

And  so  EF  is  greater  than  FD  by  AB. 


Proposition  52 


If  in  an  ellipse  a  rectangle  equal  to  the  fourth  part  of  the  figure  is  applied  from  both 
sides  to  the  major  axis  and  deficient  by  a  square  figure,  and  from  the  points  result¬ 
ing  from  the  application  straight  lines  are  deflected  to  the  line  of  the  section ,  then 
they  will  be  equal  to  the  axis. 

Let  there  be  an  ellipse,  whose  major  axis  is  AB,  and  let  each  of  the  rectangles 
AC,  CB  and  AD,  DB  be  equal  to  the  fourth  of  the  figure,  and  from  C  and  D  let 
the  straight  lines  CE  and  ED  have  been  deflected  to  the  line  of  the  section. 

I  say  that 

CE+ED  =  AB. 


*For 


GF  =  GH, 

and,  by  iii.  50,  a  line  C(X)  drawn  parallel  to  GF  is  equal  to  CB.  But  also 


Hence 


C(X)=CH. 


CII  =  CB. 


792 


APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 


Let  FEH  be  drawn  tangent,  and  G  be  center  and  through  it  let  GKH  be 
drawn  parallel  to  CE.  Since  then 

Angle  CEF— angle  HEK  (m.  48), 

and 

angle  CEF  =  angle  EHK, 


therefore  also 
Therefore  also 
And  since 
and 

therefore  also 

and  so  also 

And  for  this  reason 

and 

and 

But  also 
therefore 


angle  EHK  =  angle  HEK . 
HK  =  KE . 

AG  =  GB, 

AC  =  DBf 
CG  =  GD ; 
EK=KD. 

ED  =  2HK, 

EC  =  2KG, 
ED+EC  =  2GH. 

AB  =  2GH  (m.  50); 
AB=ED+EC. 


Proposition  53 


If  in  an  hyperbola  or  ellipse  or  circumference  of  a  circle  or  opposite  sections  straight 
lines  are  drawn  from  the  vertex  of  a  diameter  parallel  to  an  ordinate ,  and  straight 
lines  drawn  from  the  same  ends  to  the  same  point  on  the  line  of  the  section  cut  the 
parallels ,  then  the  rectangle  contained  by  the  straight  lines  cut  off  is  equal  to  the 
figure  on  that  same  diameter. 

Let  there  be  one  of  the  aforesaid  sections  ABC  whose  diameter  is  AC,  and 
let  AD  and  CE  be  drawn  parallel  to  an  ordinate,  and  let  ABE  and  CBD  be 
drawn  across. 

I  say  that 

rect.  AD,  EC  =  figure  on  AC. 

For  let  BF  be  drawn  from  B  parallel  to  an  ordinate. 


CONICS  III 


793 


Therefore 

rect.  AF,FC  :  sq.  FB  : :  transverse  side  :  upright  side 
:  :  sq.  AC  :  the  figure  (i.  21). 


But 

therefore 

But 

and 

therefore 
And  also 
therefore 
Therefore 


rect.  AF ,  FC  :  sq.  FB  comp.  AF  :  FB.FC  :  FB; 
figure  :  sq.  AC  comp.  FB  :  AF ,  FB  :  FC. 

AF  :  FB  :  :  AC  :  CE, 

FC  :  FB  : :  AC  :  AD; 
figure  :  sq.  AC  comp.  CE  :  AC,  AD  :  AC. 
rect.  ADfCE  :  sq.  AC  comp.  CE  :  AC,  AD  :  AC; 
figure  :  sq.  AC  :  :  rect.  AD,  CE  :  sq.  AC. 
rect.  AD,CE  =  figure  on  AC. 


Proposition  54 

If  two  tangents  to  a  section  of  a  cone  or  to  a  circumference  of  a  circle  meet,  and 
through  the  points  of  contact  parallels  to  the  tangents  are  drawn,  and  from  the 
points  of  contact .  to  the  same  point  of  the  line  of  the  section,  straight  lines  are  drawn 
across  cutting  the  parallels,  then  the  rectangle  contained  by  the  straight  lines  cut 


794  APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 

off  to  the  square  on  the  straight  line  joining  the  points  of  contact  has  a  ratio  com¬ 
pounded  of  the  ratio  which  the  inside  segment  line  joining  the  point  of  meeting  of 
the  tangents  and  the  midpoint  of  the  straight  line  joining  the  points  of  contact  has  in 
square  to  the  remainder ,  and  of  the  ratio  which  the  rectangle  contained  by  the  tan¬ 
gents  has  to  the  fourth  part  of  the  square  on  the  straight  line  joining  the  points  of 
contact. 

Let  there  be  a  section  of  a  cone  or  circumference  of  a  circle  ABC  and  tan¬ 
gents  AD  and  CD,  and  let  AC  be  joined  and  bisected  at  E,  and  let  DBE  be 
joined,  and  let  AF  be  drawn  from  A  parallel  to  CD,  and  CG  from  C  parallel  to 
AD,  and  let  some  point  H  on  the  section  be  taken,  and  let  the  straight  lines  AH 
and  CH  be  joined  and  produced  to  G  and  F. 

I  say  that 

rect.  AF,  CG  :  sq.  AC  comp.  sq.  EB  :  sq.  BD,  rect.  AD,  DC. 
fourth  sq.  AC  or  rect.  AE,EC. 

For  let  KHOXL  be  drawn  from  H  parallel  to  AC,  and  from  B,  MBN  parallel 
to  AC)  then  it  is  evident  that  MN  is  tangent  (n.  29,  5,  6).  Since  then 

AE  =  EC, 

also 

MB  =  BN. 

and 

KO  =  OL 

and 

HO  =  OX  (ii.  7) 


and 


CONICS  III 


795 


KH  =  XL. 

Since  then  MB  and  MA  are  tangents  and  KHL  has  been  drawn  parallel  to 
MB, 

sq.  AM  :  sq.  MB  :  :  sq.  AK  :  rect. 
XK,KH  (hi.  16) 
or 

sq.  AM  :  rect.  MB,  BN  :  :  sq.  AK  : 
rect.  LH,HK. 

And 

rect.  NC,AM  :  sq.  AM  :  :  rect.  LC, 
AK  :  sq.  AK  (Eucl.  vi.  2;  v,  18); 
therefore  ex  aequali 
rect.  NC,AM  :  rect.  MB,  BN  :  : 
rect.  LC,AK  :  rect.  LH,  HK. 

But 

rect.  LC,AK  :  rect.  LH,HK  comp. 
LC  :  LH,  AK  :  HK 
or 

rect.  LC,AK  :  rect.  LH,HK  comp.  FA  :  AC,GC  :  CA 
which  is  the  same  as 

rect.  GC,FA  :  sq.  CA. 


796  APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 

Therefore 

rect.  NC,  AM  :  rect.  MB,  BN  :  :  rect.  GC,FA  :  sq.  CA . 

But,  with  the  rectangle  ND,  DM  taken  as  a  mean, 

rect.  NC,AM  :  rect.  MB,  BN  comp, 
rect.  NCjAM  :  rect.  ND.DM,  rect.  ND,DM  :  rect.  MB,  BN) 
therefore 

rect.  GC,  FA  :  sq.  CA  comp. 

rect.  NC,  AM  :  rect.  ND,  DM,  rect.  ND,DM  :  rect.  MB,  BN. 

But 

rect.  NC,  AM  :  rect.  ND,  DM  :  :  sq.  EB  :  sq.  BD, 

and 

rect.  ND,DM  :  rect.  NB,BM  :  :  rect.  CD,  DA  :  rect.  CE,EA ; 
therefore 

rect.  GC,FA  :  sq.  CA  comp.  sq.  BE  :  sq.  BD,  rect.  CD, DA  :  rect.  CE,EA. 

Proposition  55 

If  two  straight  lines  touching  opposite  sections  meet,  and  through  the  point  of 
meeting  a  straight  line  is  drawn  parallel  to  the  straight  line  joining  the  points  of 
contact ,  and,  from  the  points  of  contact  parallels  to  the  tangents  are  drawn  across, 
and  straight  lines  are  produced  from  the  points  of  contact  to  the  same  point  of  one 
of  the  sections  cutting  the  parallels,  then  the  rectangle  contained  by  the  straight  lines 
cut  off  will  have  to  the  square  on  the  straight  line  joining  the  points  of  contact  the 
ratio  which  the  rectangle  contained  by  the  tangents  has  to  the  square  on  the  straight 
line  drawn  through  the  point  of  meeting  parallel  to  the  straight  line  joining  the 
points  of  contact ,  as  far  as  the  section. 

Let  there  be  the  opposite  sections  ABC  and  DEF ,  and  tangents  to  them  AG 
and  GD,  and  let  AD  be  joined,  and  from  G  let  CGE  be  drawn  parallel  to  AD, 
and  from  A,  AM  parallel  to  DG,  and  from  D,  DM  parallel  to  AG,  and  let  some 
point  F  be  taken  on  the  section  DF,  and  let  ANF  and  FDH  be  joined. 

I  say  that 

sq.  CG  :  rect.  AG,GD  :  :  sq.  AD  :  rect.  HA,DN . 

For  let  FLKB  be  drawn  through  F  parallel  to  AD. 


797 


CONICS  III 


Since  then  it  has  been  shown  that 

sq.  EG  :  sq.  GD  :  :  rect.  BL,  LF  :  sq.  DL  (hi.  20), 

and 


and 


CG=EG  (ii.  38), 


BK  =  LF  (ii.  38), 

therefore 

sq.  CG  :  sq.  GD  :  :  rect.  KF ,  FL  :  sq.  DL. 

And  also 

sq.  GD  :  rect.  AG,GD  :  :  sq.  DL  :  rect.  DL,AK  (Eucl.  vi.  2,  1); 
therefore  ex  aequali 

sq.  GC  :  rect.  AG,  GD  :  :  rect.  KF ,  FL  :  rect.  DL,AK . 

But 

rect.  KF ,  FL  :  rect.  DL,AK  comp.  KF  :  AK,  FL  :  DL. 

But 


and 


KF  :  AK  : :  AD  :  LJV, 


therefore 
And  also 
therefore 


EL  :  DL  :  :  AD  :  HA] 

sq.  CG  :  rect.  AG,GD  comp.  AD  :  DN ,  AD  :  HA. 
sq.  AD  :  rect.  HA,DN  comp.  AD  :  DN}  AD  :  HA ; 
sq.  CG  :  rect.  AG,GD  :  :  sq.  AD  :  rect.  HA,DN . 


Proposition  56 

If  two  straight  lines  touching  one  of  the  opposite  sections  meet ,  and  parallels  to 
the  tangents  are  drawn  through  the  points  of  contact,  and  straight  lines  cutting  the 
parallels  are  drawn  from  the  points  of  contact  to  the  same  point  of  the  other  section, 
then  the  rectangle  contained  by  the  straight  lines  cut  off  will  have  to  the  square  on 
the  straight  line  joining  the  points  of  contact  the  ratio  compounded  of  the  ratio 
which,  of  the  straight  line  joining  the  point  of  meeting  and  the  midpoint,  that  part 
between  the  midpoint  and  the  other  section  has  in  square  to  that  part  between  the 
same  section  and  the  point  of  meeting,  and  of  the  ratio  which  the  rectangle  con¬ 
tained  by  the  tangents  has  to  the  fourth  part  of  the  square  on  the  straight  line  join¬ 
ing  the  points  of  contact. 

Let  there  be  the  opposite  sections  A B  and  CD  whose  center  is  0,  and  tan¬ 
gents  AEFG  and  BEHK,  and  let  AB  be  joined,  and  bisected  at  L,  and  let  LE 
be  joined  and  drawn  across  to  D,  and  let  AM  be  drawn  from  A  parallel  to  BE, 
and  BN  from  B  parallel  to  AE,  and  let  some  point  C  be  taken  on  the  section 
CD,  and  let  CBM  and  CAN  be  joined. 

I  say  that 

rect.  MA,  BN  :  sq.  AB  comp.  sq.  LD  :  sq.  DE,  rect.  AE,  EB  : 
fourth  sq.  dB  or  rect.  AL,  LB. 

For  let  GCK  and  II DF  be  drawn  from  C  and  D  parallel  to  AL;  then  it  is 
evident  that 

HD  =  DF, 

and 

KX  =  XG, 


798 

and  also 


APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 


XC  =  XP ; 


and  so  also 

CK  =  GP. 

And  since  AB  and  DC  are  opposite  sections,  and  BEH  and  HD  are  tangents 
and  KG  is  parallel  to  DH ,  therefore 

sq.  BH  :  sq.  HD  :  :  sq.  BK  :  rect.  PK ,  KC  (in.  18,  note). 

Rut 

sq.  HD  =  rect.  HD,DF , 
rect.  PK,  KC  =  rect.  BC,CG. 

Therefore 

sq.  BH  :  rect.  LTD,  DF  :  :  sq.  BB  :  rect.  KC,CG. 

And  also 


rect.  FA,BH  :  sq.  BH  :  :  rect.  GA,BK  :  sq.  BK) 
therefore  ex  aequali 

rect.  FA,BH  :  rect.  HD,DF  :  :  rect.  GA,BK  :  rect.  KC,CG. 
And,  with  rectangle  HE ,  EF  taken  as  a  mean, 

rect.  FA,BH  :  rect.  HD  DF  comp, 
rect.  FA,HB  :  rect.  HE,EF ,  rect.  HE,  EF  :  rect.  HD,DF; 

and 

rect.  FA,HB  :  rect.  HE,EF  :  :  sq.  LD  :  sq.  DZ?, 

and 

rect.  HE,EF  :  rect.  HD,DF  :  :  rect.  AE,EB  :  rect.  AL,LB ; 
therefore 


And 


rect.  GA,BK  :  rect.  KC,CG  comp.  sq.  LD  :  sq.  DE}  rect.  AF,  F5  : 

rect.  AL,LB. 


But 

and 

therefore 


rect.  GA,BK  :  rect.  KC,  CG  comp.  BK  :  i£C,GA  :  CG. 

:  KC  :  :  A/A  :  AB, 

GA  :  CG  :  :  BiV  :  AB; 

rect.  AfA,  BAr  :  sq.  AB  comp.  MA  :  AB,  BAr  :  AB 
comp.  sq.  LD  :  sq.  DE,  rect.  AB,  BB  :  rect.  AL,  LB. 


APPENDIX 


799 


Translator’s  Appendix  on  THREE-and 
Four-Line  Loci 

The  three-line  locus  property  of  conics  is  easily  deduced  for  the  ellipse,  hy¬ 
perbola,  parabola  and  circle  from  in.  54;  and  for  the  opposite  sections  from 
in.  55  and  56.  The  three-line  locus  property  of  conics  can  be  stated  thus.  Any 
conic  section  or  circle  or  pair  of  opposite  sections  can  be  considered  as  the  locus 
of  points  whose  distances  from  three  given  fixed  straight  lines  (the  distances 
being  either  perpendicular  or  at  a  given  constant  angle  to  each  of  the  given 
straight  lines,  although  the  constant  angle  may  be  different  for  each  of  the 
three  straight  lines)  are  such  that  the  square  of  one  of  the  distances  is  always 
in  a  constant  ratio  to  the  rectangle  contained  by  the  other  two  distances. 

It  is  shown  in  m.  54  that  in  the  case  of  conic  sections  and  circles 
rect.  AF,  CG  :  sq.  AC  comp.  sq.  EB  :  sq.  BD,  rect.  AD,  DC  :  fourth  sq.  AC. 
Now  if  we  consider  the  straight  lines  AD,  DC,  and  AC  as  fixed  and  given  and 
therefore  straight  line  DE  fixed  and  given  as  bisecting  AC,  then  it  is  evident 
that  the  straight  lines  AC,  EB,  BD,  AD,  DC,  and  therefore  the  squares  on 
them  and  the  rectangles  contained  by  them,  are  also  fixed  and  given.  Then 
although  as  the  point  H  is  taken  at  different  points  along  the  conic,  the  straight 
lines  AF  and  CG  change  in  magnitude,  nevertheless  the  magnitude  of  the  rec¬ 
tangle  AF,  CG,  because  of  the  above  proportion  remains  constant. 

For  let  EX  be  drawn  parallel  to  BE,  and  HY  to  AD,  and  HZ  to  DC.  Then 
HX  is  the  distance  from  H  to  AC  at  a  given  angle,  and  A  Y  because  of  parallels 

represents  the  distance  from  H  to 
AD  at  another  given  angle,  and  ZC 
represents  the  distance  from  H  to 
DC  at  another  given  angle.  Then 
by  similar  triangles 

CZ  :  ZH  :  :  AC  :  AF, 

AY:  YH  ::AC  :  CG; 
therefore  compounding 
rect.  CZ,  AY  :  rect.  ZH ,  YH  :  :  sq. 
AC  :  rect.  AF ,  CG. 

Now  we  have  seen  that  the  rec¬ 
tangle  AF,  CG  is  a  constant  mag¬ 
nitude  as  the  point  H  changes, 
and  the  square  on  AC  is  constant; 
therefore  their  ratio  is  constant. 
Therefore 

rect.  CZ  ,  AY  :  rect,  ZH ,  YH  is  a 

constant  ratio . (1) 

Again  by  similar  triangles 

ZH  :  HX  :  :  CD  :  DE, 

YH  :  HX  :  :  AD  :  DE ; 
therefore  compounding 
rect.  ZH,YII  :  sq.  II X  :  :  rect.  CD, 
AD  :  sq.  DE. 

But  rectangle  CD,  AD  and  the 
square  on  DE  are  constant  magni- 


800 


APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 


(2) 


tudes  as  the  point  H  changes;  therefore  their  ratio  is  constant.  Therefore 
rect.  ZH,  YH  :  sq.  H X  is  a  constant  ratio 
Compounding  (1)  and  (2),  we  get  a  constant  ratio,  that  is 
rect.  CZ,AY  :  sq.  HX  is  a  constant  ratio. 

In  other  words,  as  the  point  H 
changes,  the  rectangle  contained 
by  the  distances  from  H  to  two  of 
the  given  straight  lines  (at  given 
angles  to  those  straight  lines)  has 
a  constant  ratio  to  the  square  on 
the  distance  to  the  third  straight 
line  (at  a  given  angle  to  that 
straight  line).  And  it  can  easily  be 
proved  by  means  of  similar  triangles 
that  if  any  other  three  angles  are 
chosen  for  the  distances,  than  those 
chosen  here  for  the  demonstration, 
then  the  corresponding  ratio  will 
be  constant,  although  not  equal. 

The  four-line  locus  property  can  be  easily  deduced  from  the  three-line.  If  to 
any  conic  section  we  construct  four  tangents  AG ,  BE,  AI,  and  EC,  and  the 
straight  lines  FG,  GI,  ID ,  and  DF}  joining  the  points  of  contact;  and  draw  the 
distances  from  any  point  H  on  the  conic  to  these  straight  lines  at  any  given 
angles  (perpendiculars  are  convenient),  then  by  the  three-line  locus  property 
with  respect  to  triangle  FBG  for  any  point  H  on  the  conic 

rect.  HXjHV  :  sq.  HP  is  constant;  (a) 


with  respect  to  triangle  AIG 

rect.  HX.  HY  :  sq.  HR  is  constant;  03) 

with  respect  to  triangle  DCI 

rect.  HY ,HZ  :  sq.  HS  is  constant;  (7) 

with  respect  to  triangle  EFD 

rect.  HZ,HY  :  sq.  HQ  is  constant  (5) 

It  will  be  noticed  that  we  have  taken  in  succession  a  pair  of  adjacent  tangents 
and  the  straight  line  joining  their  points  of  contact.  It  will  also  be  noticed  that 
the  rectangles  in  the  four  ratios  present  a  cyclical  arrangement,  so  that  if  the 


APPENDIX  SOI 

inverse  of  (a)  is  compounded  with  (j3),  and  the  inverse  of  (7)  with  (5),  we  would 
have  two  constant  ratios 

pllpd.  HY .  HP.  HP  :  pllpd.  HV.HR.HR,  (e) 

pllpd.  HV,  HS.  HS  :  pllpd.  HY,  HQ.  HQ  (f) 

Again  compounding  the  first  of  these  with  the  second,  we  would  have  finally 
rect.  HP,  HS  :  rect.  HQ,  HR,  a  constant  ratio. 

And  this  is  the  property  of  the  four-line  locus,  namely  the  locus  of  points  H 
such  that  the  rectangle  contained  by  the  distances  from  points  H  to  any  two 
given  fixed  straight  lines  FG  and  ID  has  to  the  rectangle  contained  by  the 
distances  from  H  to  two  other  fixed  straight  lines,  IG,  FD.  a  constant  ratio. 

The  rigorous  method  of  effecting  these  compoundings  is  as  follows.  For  in¬ 
verting  ( a),  bv  Eucl.  xi,  32  we  have  the  constant  ratios 

sq.  HP  :  rect.  HX,HV  :  :  pllpd.  HP.  HP ,  HY  :  pllpd.  HX,HV.  HY, 
rect.  HX,HY  :  sq.  HR  :  :  pllpd.  HX,HY.  HY  :  pllpd.  HR.HRJIV. 
Hence,  bv  definition,  the  ratio  (a  constant  one)  compounded  of  these  two  is 
pllpd.  HY,  HP,  HP  :  pllpd.  HV,  HR.  HR. 

And  in  the  same  way  we  find  the  constant  ratio  compounded  of  the  inverse  of 
(7)  and  (5).  Now 

pllpd.  HY.  HP.  HP  :  pllpd.  HV,  HR, HR  comp.  HY  :  HV,  sq.  HP  :  sq.  HR. 
pllpd.  HV.  HS, HS  :  pllpd.  HY.  HQ. HQ  comp.  HV  :  HY,  sq.  HS  :  sq.  HQ. 
IF  then  we  take  two  lines  M  and  X  such  that 

HP  :  HR  :  :  HR:  M,  (v) 

HS  :  HQ::  HQ:  X ,  (0) 

then 

sq.  HP  :  sq.  HR  :  :  HP  :  M, 

sq.  HS  :  sq.  HQ  :  :  HS  :  X. 

Hence 

ratio  comp.  HY  :  HV,  sq.  HP  :  sq.  HR  ratio  comp.  HY  :  HV,  HP  :  M 
ratio  comp.  HV  :  HY,  sq.  HS  :  sq.  HQ  ratio  comp.  HV  :  HY,  HS  :  X. 
But 

rect.  HY.HP  :  rect.  HV,M  comp.  HY  :  HV.  HP  :  M. 
rect,  HV,HS  :  rect.  HY,X  comp.  IIV  :  HY.  HS  :  X; 

and 

pllpd.  HY,  HP.HS  :  pllpd.  IIV.  M.HS  :  :  rect.  HY.HP  :  rect.  HV,  M, 

pllpd.  HV.  HS,  M  :  pllpd.  HY,  X.M  :  :  rect.  HV.HS  :  rect.  HY.X; 

and  these  are  constant  ratios.  Hence  compounding,  we  get  the  constant  ratio 
pllpd.  HY,  HP,  HS  :  pllpd.  HY,  X,M, 
which  is  the  same  as  the  constant  ratio 

rect,  HP,  HS  :  rect.  X,  M. 

Now,  taking  L  and  0  as  some  constants, 

rect,  HP,  HS  :  rect.  X,  M  ::L:0 

and 

rect.  HPIHS  :  rect,  HR.  HQ  :  :  rect,  HR.  HQ  :  rect.  M.X. 
by  compounding  (77)  and  (0).  But  equal  ratios  have  equal  duplicate  ratios 
(Heath’s  note  to  Euclid,  vi,  22)  and  hence 

rect,  HP,  HS  :  rect,  HR.  IIQ  is  constant. 

In  the  case  of  opposite  sections,  it  is  shown  in  hi.  50 
rect,  MA,SX  :  sq.  AB  comp.  sq.  LD  :  sq.  DE,  rect.  AE,  EB  :  fourth  sq.  AB. 
Then  it  is  evident  for  the  same  reasons  as  before  that  for  different  points  C  the 


802  APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 

magnitudes  MA  and  BN  may  change,  but  the  rectangle  MAyBN  is  a  constant 
magnitude. 

For  as  before,  let  CX  be  drawn  parallel  to  DE ,  CY  to  EAyCZ  to  EB .  By 
similar  triangles 

AY  :  YC  :  :  AB  :  BN , 

BZ:ZC  ::AB:MA ; 

therefore  compounding 

rect.  AYyBZ  :  rect.  YCyZC  :  :  sq.  AB  :  rect.  MA,BN. 

Since  rectangle  MA,BN  is  constant  as  C  changes,  and  also  the  square  on  AB 
is  constant,  therefore 

rect.  AYyBZ  :  rect.  YCyZC  is  a  constant  ratio  (1) 

Again  by  similar  triangles 

ZC  :  CX  :  :  EB  :  ELy 


Hence 


rect.  YC,  ZC  :  sq.  CX  :  :  rect.  EByEA  :  sq.  EL. 


rect.  YCyZC  :  sq.  CX  is  a  constant  ratio  (2) 

Compounding  (1)  and  (2)  we  have  a  constant  ratio 

rect.  AYyBZ:  sq.  CX. 

But  AY  and  BZ  are  equal  to  CA'  and  CB' ,  the  distances  from  C.  This  is  the 
property  of  the  three-line  locus  of  section  C  with  respect  to  the  straight  lines 
EA  and  EB  tangents  to  the  other  section,  and  EB  the  straight  line  joining 
their  points  of  contact.  And  so  one  opposite  section  is  a  three  line-locus  to  the 
tangents  to  the  other  of  the  opposite  sections.  That  it  is  also  a  four-line  locus 
could  be  shown  in  the  same  way  as  before. 

Again  from  hi.  55  we  can  conclude  that  both  of  the  opposite  sections  to¬ 
gether  are  a  three-line  locus  to  the  triangle  formed  by  a  tangent  to  each  of  the 
sections  and  the  straight  line  joining  their  points  of  contact.  For  by  in.  55 
rect.  HAyDN  :  sq.  AD  :  :  rect.  AG,GD  :  sq.  CG. 

Now  since  the  three  last  terms  of  this  proportion  are  evidently  constants  as  the 
point  F  changes,  therefore  also,  although  HA  and  DN  change  with  Fy  yet  rec¬ 
tangle  HAy  DN  remains  constant  in  magnitude.  Then  reproducing  the  figure  of 


APPENDIX  803 

in.  55.  we  drop  YF  parallel  to  DL,  and  FZ  to  KA ,  and  FX  to  GE,  where  E  is 
the  midpoint  of  AD.  Then  by  similar  triangles 


YD  :  FY  : :  AD  :  HA, 

AZ  :  FZ  : :  AD  :  DiV; 

therefore  compounding 

rect.  FD,  AZ  :  rect.  FY,  FZ  :  :  sq.  AD  :  rect.  HA,  DN . 

But  the  last  two  terms  are  constant,  therefore 

rect.  YD,  AZ  :  rect.  FY,  FZ  is  a  constant  ratio  (1) 

Again  by  similar  triangles 

FY  :  FX  : :  DG  :  EG, 

FZ  :  FX  : :  AG  :  EG; 

therefore  compounding 

rect.  FY,  FZ  :  sq.  FX  :  :  rect.  DG,AG  :  rect.  ED, EG, 

But  the  last  two  terms  are  constant,  therefore 

rect.  FY ,FZ  :  sq.  FX  is  a  constant  ratio  (2) 

Compounding  (1)  and  (2),  we  see  that 

rect.  YD,AZ  :  sq.  FX  is  a  constant  ratio. 

But  this  is  the  definition  of  a  three-line  locus  that  the  rectangle  contained  by 
the  distances  from  any  point  on  the  locus  to  two  fixed  straight  lines  have  to  the 
square  on  the  distance  to  a  third  fixed  straight  line  a  constant  ratio.  But 

DY  =  LF , 

AZ  =  KF , 

and  FX  is  the  distance  from  F  to  AD.  And  so  the  ratio  fulfills  the  definition. 

Furthermore,  if  we  consider  B  the  point  of  intersection  of  the  straight  line 
KF ,  drawn  parallel  to  AD,  with  the  other  opposite  section,  and  draw  BS  paral¬ 
lel  to  FY,  BR  to  FX,  and  BT  to  FZ,  since  they  are  parallels  between  parallels, 

BR  =  FX, 

KF  =  AZ, 

TA  =  BK. 


804  APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA 

But  it  was  shown  in  the  course  of  hi.  55  that 

BK  =  LF , 

BL  =  KF. 

Hence 

TA  =  BK  =  YD  =  LF, 

AZ  =  KF  =  BL. 

Therefore 

rect.  LF,  KF  :  sq.  FX  :  :  rect.  BK,  BL  :  sq.  BR . 

Hence  any  point  B  on  one  opposite  section  fulfills  the  same  constant  ratio  with 
respect  to  its  distances  from  the  three  fixed  lines  AD,  GD,  and  AG  as  any  point 
F  on  the  other  opposite  section. 

It  can  be  similarly  deduced  that  the  opposite  sections  are  together  a  four- 
line  locus  with  respect  to  any  four  fixed  straight  lines  joining  points,  two  on 
each  section  (the  points  being  four  points  of  contact  of  four  tangents,  and  the 
straight  lines,  the  straight  lines  joining  them). 


To  sum  up,  a  parabola,  ellipse,  circle,  and  hyperbola  are  three-line  loci  with 
respect  to  anjr  two  tangents  to  them  and  a  straight  line  joining  the  points  of 
contact.  One  opposite  section  is  also  a  three-line  locus  with  respect  to  any  two 
tangents  to  the  other  section  together  with  the  straight  line  joining  their 
points  of  contact.  The  two  opposite  sections  together  are  a  three  line-locus 
with  respect  to  two  tangents,  each  to  one  of  the  sections,  together  with  the 
straight  line  joining  their  points  of  contact. 

The  parabola,  ellipse,  circle,  and  hyperbola  are  four-line  loci  with  respect  to 
any  inscribed  quadrilateral.  One  opposite  section  is  also  a  four-line  locus  with 
respect  to  any  quadrilateral  inscribed  in  the  other  section.  The  two  opposite 
sections  together  are  a  four-line  locus  to  any  four  straight  lines  joining  four 
points,  two  lying  on  each  opposite  section. 


INTRODUCTION  TO  ARITHMETIC 


:  mi/tcma  o  r  yo  roue  tv 


- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTE 
Nicomachus.  fl .  C.  A.D.  100 


Xicomach rs  of  Gerasa  flourished  around  the  end  of  the  first  century  of  our 
era.  In  one  of  his  surviving  books,  the  Introduction  to  Harmonics,  he  mentions  a 
certain  Thrasyllus.  presumably  Thrasyllus  of  Meades,  a  writer  on  music,  who 
lived  in  the  reign  of  Tiberius.  Another  book  by  Nicomachus.  the  Introduction  to 
Arithmetic ,  was  translated  into  Latin  by  Apuleius  under  the  Antonines.  This 
places  the  life  of  Nicomachus  somewhere  between  the  middle  of  the  first  cen¬ 
tury  and  the  middle  of  the  second  century.  Perhaps  the  fact  that  Ptolemy, 
whose  recorded  astronomical  observations  were  made  between  a.d.  127  and 
151.  is  not  mentioned  in  the  Introduction  to  Harmonics  makes  it  probable  that 
he  was  not  yet  famous  at  the  time  Nicomachus  was  writing. 

The  manuscripts  of  Nicomachus'  books  and  the  scholia  call  him  “of  Gerasa.” 
The  best  known  city  of  that  name  was  in  Palestine  and  was  primarily  Greek. 
However,  it  can  hardly  be  supposed  that  Nicomachus  received  all  of  his  philo¬ 
sophical  and  mathematical  education  at  Gerasa.  He  probably  studied  at  Alex¬ 
andria,  at  this  time  the  center  of  mathematical  studies  and  of  Xeo-Pythagor- 
eanism.  Jamblichus  says  of  Nicomachus:  “The  man  is  great  in  mathematics, 
and  had  as  instructors  those  that  were  most  skilled  in  the  subject.” 

Nothing  is  known  of  the  personal  life  of  Nicomachus  except  what  is  said  or 
implied  in  the  dedication  of  the  Introduction  to  Harmonics  to  an  unknown  lady: 
“But  I  must  spur  on  all  my  zeal,  most  noble  and  august  lady,  since  it  is  you 
that  bid  me.  .  .  .  And.  if  the  gods  are  willing,  just  as  soon  as  I  shall  have  leisure 
and  a  rest  from  my  joume wings.  I  will  compile  for  you  a  better  and  more  de¬ 
tailed  Introduction  dealing  with  this  very’  subject  .  .  .  and,  so  that  you  may  the 
more  easily  follow  the  argument,  I  will  take  my  beginning,  say,  from  the  same 
point  as  that  at  which  I  began  your  instruction  when  I  was  expounding  the 
subject  to  you.” 

Nicomachus  appears  to  have  been  an  important  member  of  the  Xeo- Pytha¬ 
gorean  group,  though  his  extant  writings  would  seem  to  indicate  that  he  was  a 
popularizer  and  a  compiler  of  manuals  and  not  the  head  of  a  school.  Besides  the 
Introduction  to  Arithmetic  and  the  Introduction  to  Harmonics .  he  also  wrote  a 
book  on  the  mystical  doctrine  of  number  called  Theologoumena  Arithmeticac , 
which  is  one  of  the  best  sources  on  Xeo-Pythagoreanism;  extracts  and  para¬ 
phrases  of  this  work  survive  in  a  later  anonymous  work  of  the  same  name  and 
in  the  Bibliotheca,  a  collection  of  extracts  from  ancient  works  made  in  the  ninth 
century'  by  Photius.  patriarch  of  Constantinople.  Nicomachus  also  wrote  an 
Introduction  to  Geometry  and  a  Life  of  Pythagoras ,  which  have  not  survived,  and 
a  larger  work  on  music,  possibly  that  promised  in  the  dedication  to  the  Intro¬ 
duction  to  Harmonics,  of  which  we  have  oniy  fragments.  He  may  have  written  a 
book  on  the  interpretation  of  Plato,  though  the  evidence  for  it  is  flight ,  and 
also  an  Introduction  to  Astronomy,  thereby  completing  the  quadrivial  series. 

The  success  of  the  Introduction  to  Arithmetic  must  have  been  immediate.  It 


808  BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTE 

was  used  as  a  text  book  throughout  later  antiquity  and,  in  the  Latin  para¬ 
phrase  of  Boethius,  throughout  the  Middle  Ages.  It  had  a  host  of  commenta¬ 
tors.  In  the  PhilopatriSy  attributed  to  Lucian,  a  character  says:  “You  reckon 
like  Nicomachus.”  This  remark  lends  itself  to  more  than  one  interpretation, 
but  in  any  case  it  is  evidence  of  his  fame.  Nicomachus  also  appears  to  have 
been  considered  one  of  the  “golden  chain,”  or  succession,  of  true  philosophers; 
for  Proclus,  the  fifth  century  Neo-Platonist,  who  belonged  to  that  “chain,” 
claimed,  on  the  basis  of  a  dream,  that  he  had  within  him  the  soul  of  Nicomachus. 


CONTENTS 


Biographical  Note  p.  807 
BOOK  I,  p.  811  BOOK  II,  p.  829 


809 


. ..  r 
d  i  /  L  /  J  > 

to  ;x-f~ 

x  .m.  .  xi' 


BOOK  ONE 


CHAPTER  I 

[1  ]  The  ancients,  who  under  the  leadership 
of  Pythagoras  first  made  science  systematic, 
defined  philosophy  as  the  love  of  wisdom.  In¬ 
deed  the  name  itself  means  this,  and  before 
Pythagoras  all  who  had  knowledge  were  called 
“wise”  indiscriminately — a  carpenter,  for  ex¬ 
ample,  a  cobbler,  a  helmsman,  and  in  a  word 
anyone  who  was  versed  in  any  art  or  handi¬ 
craft.  Pythagoras,  however,  restricting  the  title 
so  as  to  apply  to  the  knowledge  and  compre¬ 
hension  of  reality,  and  calling  the  knowledge 
of  the  truth  in  this  the  only  wisdom,  naturally 
designated  the  desire  and  pursuit  of  this  knowl¬ 
edge  philosophy,  as  being  desire  for  wisdom. 

[2]  He  is  more  worthy  of  credence  than  those 
who  have  given  other  definitions,  since  he  makes 
clear  the  sense  of  the  term  and  the  thing  de¬ 
fined.  This  “wisdom”  he  defined  as  the  knowl¬ 
edge,  or  science,  of  the  truth  in  real  things,  con¬ 
ceiving  “science”  to  be  a  steadfast  and  firm 
apprehension  of  the  underlying  substance,  and 
“real  things”  to  be  those  which  continue  uni¬ 
formly  and  the  same  in  the  universe  and  never 
depart  even  briefly  from  their  existence;  these 
real  things  would  be  things  immaterial,  by  shar¬ 
ing  in  the  substance  of  which  everything  else 
that  exists  under  the  same  name  and  is  so  called 
is  said  to  be  “this  particular  thing,”  and  exists. 

[3]  For  bodily,  material  things  are,  to  be 
sure,  forever  involved  in  continuous  flow  and 
change — in  imitation  of  the  nature  and  pecul¬ 
iar  quality  of  that  eternal  matter  and  substance 
which  has  been  from  the  beginning,  and  which 
was  all  changeable  and  variable  throughout. 
The  bodiless  things,  however,  of  which  we  con¬ 
ceive  in  connection  with  or  together  with  mat¬ 
ter,  such  as  qualities,  quantities,  configurations, 
largeness,  smallness,  equality,  relations,  actu¬ 
alities,  dispositions,  places,  times,  all  those 
things,  in  a  word,  whereby  the  qualities  found 
in  each  body  are  comprehended — all  these  are 
of  themselves  immovable  and  unchangeable, 
but  accidentally  they  share  in  and  partake  of 
the  affections  of  the  body  to  which  they  belong. 


[4]  Now  it  is  with  such  things  that  “wisdom” 
is  particularly  concerned,  but  accidentally  also 
with  things  that  share  in  them,  that  is,  bodies. 

CHAPTER  II 

[1]  Those  things,  however,  are  immaterial, 
eternal,  without  end,  and  it  is  their  nature  to 
persist  ever  the  same  and  unchanging,  abiding 
by  their  own  essential  being,  and  each  one  of 
them  is  called  real  in  the  proper  sense.  But 
what  are  involved  in  birth  and  destruction, 
growth  and  diminution,  all  kinds  of  change  and 
participation,  are  seen  to  vary  continually,  and 
while  they  are  called  real  things,  by  the  same 
term  as  the  former,  so  far  as  they  partake  of 
them,  they  are  not  actually  real  by  their  own 
nature;  for  they  do  not  abide  for  even  the  short¬ 
est  moment  in  the  same  condition,  but  are  al¬ 
ways  passing  over  in  all  sorts  of  changes.  [2] 
To  quote  the  words  of  Timaeus,  in  Plato,1 
“What  is  that  which  always  is,  and  has  no 
birth,  and  what  is  that  which  is  always  becom¬ 
ing  but  never  is?  The  one  is  apprehended  by 
the  mental  processes,  with  reasoning,  and  is 
ever  the  same;  the  other  can  be  guessed  at  by 
opinion  in  company  with  unreasoning  sense,  a 
thing  which  becomes  and  passes  away,  but 
never  really  is.” 

[3]  Therefore,  if  we  crave  for  the  goal  that 
is  worthy  and  fitting  for  man,  namely,  happi¬ 
ness  of  life2 — and  this  is  accomplished  by  phil¬ 
osophy  alone  and  by  nothing  else,  and  philoso¬ 
phy,  as  I  said,  means  for  us  desire  for  wisdom, 
and  wisdom  the  science  of  the  truth  in  things, 
and  of  things  some  are  properly  so  called,  others 
merely  share  the  name — it  is  reasonable  and 
most  necessary  to  distinguish  and  systematize 
the  accidental  qualities  of  things. 

[4]  Things,  then,  both  those  properly  so 
called  and  those  that  simply  have  the  name, 
are  some  of  them  unified  and  continuous,  for 
example,  an  animal,  the  universe,  a  tree,  and 

1 Timaeus ,  27. 

2The  word  used  by  Xicomachus,  evfata,  is 
once  employed  by  Aristotle  in  the  Ethics ,  1.  S. 
1 098b  20  ff.‘ 


NICOMACHUS  OF  GERASA 


812 

the  like,  which  are  properly  and  peculiarly 
called  “magnitudes” ;  others  are  discontinuous, 
in  a  side-by-side  arrangement,  and,  as  it  were, 
in  heaps,  which  are  called  “multitudes,”  a 
flock,  for  instance,  a  people,  a  heap,  a  chorus, 
and  the  like. 

[o]  Wisdom,  then,  must  be  considered  to  be 
the  knowledge  of  these  two  forms.  Since,  how¬ 
ever,  all  multitude  and  magnitude  are  by  their 
own  nature  of  necessity  infinite — for  multitude 
starts  from  a  definite  root  and  never  ceases  in¬ 
creasing;  and  magnitude,  when  division  begin¬ 
ning  with  a  limited  whole  is  carried  on,  cannot 
bring  the  dividing  process  to  an  end,  but  pro¬ 
ceeds  therefore  to  infinity — and  since  sciences 
are  always  sciences  of  limited  things,  and  never 
of  infinites,  it  is  accordingly  evident  that  a  sci¬ 
ence  dealing  either  with  magnitude,  per  se,  or 
with  multitude,  per  se,  could  never  be  formu¬ 
lated,  for  each  of  them  is  limitless  in  itself,  mul¬ 
titude  in  the  direction  of  the  more,  and  magni¬ 
tude  in  the  direction  of  the  less.  A  science,  how¬ 
ever,  would  arise  to  deal  with  something  sepa¬ 
rated  from  each  of  them,  with  quantity,  set  off 
from  multitude,  and  size,  set  off  from  magni¬ 
tude. 

CHAPTER  III 

[1]  Again,  to  start  afresh,  since  of  quantity 
one  kind  is  viewed  by  itself,  having  no  relation 
to  anything  else,  as  “even,”  “odd,”  “perfect,” 
and  the  like,  and  the  other  is  relative  to  some¬ 
thing  else  and  is  conceived  of  together  with  its 
relationship  to  another  thing,  like  “double,” 
“'greater,”  “smaller,”  “half,”  “one  and  one- 
half  times,”  “one  and  one-third  times,”  and  so 
forth,  it  is  clear  that  tw'o  scientific  methods  will 
lay  hold  of  and  deal  with  the  whole  investiga¬ 
tion  of  quantity;  arithmetic,  absolute  quantity, 
and  music,  relative  quantity.1 

[2]  And  once  more,  inasmuch  as  part  of 
“size”  is  in  a  state  of  rest  and  stability,  and 
another  part  in  motion  and  revolution,  tw^o 
other  sciences  in  the  same  wTay  will  accurately 
treat  of  “size,”  geometry  the  part  that  abides 
and  is  at  rest,  astronomy  that  w'hich  moves  and 
revolves. 

[3]  Without  the  aid  of  these,  then,  it  is  not 
possible  to  deal  accurately  with  the  forms  of 
being  nor  to  discover  the  truth  in  things,  knowl¬ 
edge  of  wiiich  is  wisdom,  and  evidently  not  even 
to  philosophize  properly,  for  “just  as  painting 
contributes  to  the  menial  arts  toward  correct¬ 
ness  of  theory,  so  in  truth  lines,  numbers,  har¬ 
monic  intervals,  and  the  revolutions  of  circles 

lCL  Aristotle,  Met.,  IV.  15.  1020b  26. 


bear  aid  to  the  learning  of  the  doctrines  of  wis¬ 
dom,”  says  the  Pythagorean  Androcydes.  [4] 
Likewise  Archytas  of  Tarentum,  at  the  begin¬ 
ning  of  his  treatise  On  Harmony ,  says  the  same 
thing,  in  about  these  words:  “It  seems  to  me 
that  they  do  well  to  study  mathematics,  and 
it  is  not  at  all  strange  that  they  have  correct 
knowiedge  about  each  thing,  wrhat  it  is.  For  if 
they  knewr  rightly  the  nature  of  the  wfliole,  they 
w~ere  also  likely  to  see  wrell  what  is  the  nature 
of  the  parts.  About  geometry,  indeed,  and  arith¬ 
metic  and  astronomy,  they  have  handed  dowm 
to  us  a  clear  understanding,  and  not  least  also 
about  music.  For  these  seem  to  be  sister  sci¬ 
ences;  for  they  deal  with  sister  subjects,  the 
first  tw’o  forms  of  being.” 

[o]  Plato,  too,  at  the  end  of  the  thirteenth 
book  of  the  Laws ,  to  wiiich  some  give  the  title 
The  Philosopher ,  because  he  investigates  and 
defines  in  it  what  sort  of  man  the  real  philoso¬ 
pher  should  be,  in  the  course  of  his  summary  of 
what  had  previously  been  fully  set  forth  and 
established,  adds:  “Every  diagram,  system  of 
numbers,  every  scheme  of  harmony,  and  every 
lawT  of  the  movement  of  the  stars,  ought  to  ap¬ 
pear  one  to  him  who  studies  rightly;  and  what 
we  say  will  properly  appear  if  one  studies  all 
things  looking  to  one  principle,  for  there  will 
be  seen  to  be  one  bond  for  all  these  things,  and 
if  any  one  attempts  philosophy  in  any  other 
w'ay  he  must  call  on  Fortune  to  assist  him.  For 
there  is  never  a  path  without  these;  this  is  the 
wTay,  these  the  studies,  be  they  hard  or  easy; 
by  this  course  must  one  go,  and  not  neglect  it. 
The  one  who  has  attained  all  these  things  in 
the  wray  I  describe,  him  I  for  my  part  call  wis¬ 
est,  and  this  I  maintain  through  thick  and 
thin.”  [6]  For  it  is  clear  that  these  studies  are 
like  ladders  and  bridges  that  cariy  our  minds 
from  things  apprehended  by  sense  and  opinion 
to  those  comprehended  by  the  mind  and  un¬ 
derstanding,  and  from  those  material,  physical 
things,  our  foster-brethren  knowm  to  us  from 
childhood,  to  the  things  with  wiiich  w~e  are  un¬ 
acquainted,  foreign  to  our  senses,  but  in  their 
immateriality  and  eternity  more  akin  to  our 
souls,  and  above  all  to  the  reason  wfliich  is  in 
our  souls. 

[7]  And  likewise  in  Plato's  Republic ,  wrhen 
the  interlocutor  of  Socrates  appears  to  bring 
certain  plausible  reasons  to  bear  upon  the 
mathematical  sciences,  to  show^  that  they  are 
useful  to  human  life;  arithmetic  for  reckoning, 
distributions,  contributions,  exchanges,  and 
partnerships,  geometry  for  sieges,  the  found¬ 
ing  of  cities  and  sanctuaries,  and  the  partition 


INTRODUCTION  TO  ARITHMETIC  I. 


of  land,  music  for  festivals,  entertainment,  and 
the  worship  of  the  gods,  and  the  doctrine  of  the 
spheres,  or  astronomy,  for  farming,  navigation 
and  other  undertakings,  revealing  beforehand 
the  proper  procedure  and  suitable  season,  Soc¬ 
rates,  reproaching  him,  says:  “You  amuse  me, 
because  you  seem  to  fear  that  these  are  useless 
studies  that  I  recommend ;  but  that  is  very  dif¬ 
ficult,  nay,  impossible.  For  the  eye  of  the  soul, 
blinded  and  buried  by  other  pursuits,  is  re¬ 
kindled  and  aroused  again  by  these  and  these 
alone,  and  it  is  better  that  this  be  saved  than 
thousands  of  bodily  eyes,  for  by  it  alone  is  the 
truth  of  the  universe  beheld.”1 

CHAPTER  IV 

[  1]  Which  then  of  these  four  methods  must 
we  first  learn?  Evidently,  the  one  which  natu¬ 
rally  exists  before  them  all,  is  superior  and  takes 
the  place  of  origin  and  root  and,  as  it  were,  of 
mother  to  the  others.  [2]  And  this  is  arithme¬ 
tic,2  not  solely  because  we  said  that  it  existed 
before  all  the  others  in  the  mind  of  the  creating 
God  like  some  universal  and  exemplary  plan, 
relying  upon  which  as  a  design  and  archetypal 
example  the  creator  of  the  universe  sets  in  order 
his  material  creations  and  makes  them  attain 
to  their  proper  ends;  but  also  because  it  is  nat¬ 
urally  prior  in  birth,  inasmuch  as  it  abolishes 
other  sciences  with  itself,3  but  is  not  abolished 
together  with  them.  For  example,  “animal”  is 
naturally  antecedent  to  “man,”  for  abolish  “an¬ 
imal”  and  “man”  is  abolished;  but  if  “man” 
be  abolished,  it  no  longer  follows  that  “animal” 
is  abolished  at  the  same  time.  And  again,  “man” 
is  antecedent  to  “schoolteacher”;  for  if  “man” 
does  not  exist,  neither  does  “schoolteacher,” 
but  if  “schoolteacher”  is  nonexistent,  it  is  still 
possible  for  “man”  to  be.  Thus  since  it  has  the 
property  of  abolishing  the  other  ideas  with  it¬ 
self,  it  is  likewise  the  older. 

[3]  Conversely,  that  is  called  younger  and 
posterior  which  implies  the  other  thing  with 
itself,4  but  is  not  implied  by  it,  like  “musician,” 
for  this  always  implies  “man.”  Again,  take 
“horse” ;  “animal”  is  always  implied  along  with 
“horse,”  but  not  the  reverse;  for  if  “animal” 
exists,  it  is  not  necessary  that  “horse”  should 
exist,  nor  if  “man”  exists,  must  “musician” 
also  be  implied. 

1 Republic ,  527  fT. 

2Plato,  Rep.,  522. 

3Cf.  below  II.  22.  3.  Cf.  Aristotle,  Met.,  1019s 
1  fT. 

4Cf.  Aristotle,  e.  g.,  Top.,  VI.  G.  144b  17:  also 

Top.,  II.  4.  Ill*  25  ff. 


813 

[4]  So  it  is  with  the  foregoing  sciences;  if 
geometry  exists,  arithmetic  must  also  needs  be 
implied,  for  it  is  with  the  help  of  this  latter 
that  we  can  speak  of  triangle,  quadrilateral, 
octahedron,  icosahedron,  double,  eightfold,  or 
one  and  one-half  times,  or  anything  else  of  the 
sort  which  is  used  as  a  term  by  geometry,  and 
such  things  cannot  be  conceived  of  without  the 
numbers  that  are  implied  with  each  one.  For 
how  can  “triple”  exist,  or  be  spoken  of,  unless 
the  number  3  exists  beforehand,  or  “eightfold” 
without  8?  But  on  the  contrary  3,  4,  and  the 
rest  might  be  without  the  figures  existing  to 
which  they  give  names.  [5 ]  Hence  arithmetic 
abolishes  geometry  along  with  itself,  but  is  not 
abolished  by  it,  and  while  it  is  implied  by  ge¬ 
ometry,  it  does  not  itself  imply  geometry. 

CHAPTER  V 

[1]  And  once  more  is  this  true  in  the  case  of 
music;  not  only  because  the  absolute  is  prior  to 
the  relative,  as  “great”  to  “greater”  and  “rich” 
to  “richer”  and  “man”  to  “father,”  but  also 
because  the  musical  harmonies,  diatessaron, 
diapente,  and  diapason,  are  named  for  num¬ 
bers;  similarly  all  of  their  harmonic  ratios  are 
arithmetical  ones,  for  the  diatessaron  is  the 
ratio  of  4:3,  the  diapente  that  of  3:2,  and 
the  diapason  the  double  ratio;  and  the  most 
perfect,  the  didiapason,  is  the  quadruple 
ratio. 

[2]  More  evidently  still  astronomy  attains 
through  arithmetic  the  investigations  that  per¬ 
tain  to  it,  not  alone  because  it  is  later  than 
geometry5  in  origin — for  motion  naturally 
comes  after  rest — nor  because  the  motions  of 
the  stars  have  a  perfectly  melodious  harmony, 
but  also  because  risings,  settings,  progressions, 
retrogressions,  increases,  and  all  sorts  of  phases 
are  governed  by  numerical  cycles  and  quanti¬ 
ties. 

[3]  So  then  we  have  rightly  undertaken  first 
the  systematic  treatment  of  this,  as  the  science 
naturally  prior,  more  honorable,  and  more  ven¬ 
erable,  and,  as  it  were,  mother  and  nurse  of  the 
rest;  and  here  we  will  take  our  start  for  the 
sake  of  clearness. 

CHAPTER  VI 

[1]  All  that  has  by  nature  with  systematic 
method  been  arranged  in  the  universe  seems 
both  in  part  and  as  a  whole  to  have  been  deter¬ 
mined  and  ordered  in  accordance  with  number, 
by  the  forethought  and  the  mind  of  him  that 

‘Cf.  Plato,  Rep.,  528. 


NICOMACHUS  OF  GERASA 


814 

created  all  things;  for  the  pattern  was  fixed, 
like  a  preliminary  sketch,  by  the  domination 
of  number  preexistent  in  the  mind  of  the  world- 
creating  God,  number  conceptual  only  and  im¬ 
material  in  every  way,  but  at  the  same  time  the 
true  and  the  eternal  essence,  so  that  with  refer¬ 
ence  to  it,  as  to  an  artistic  plan,  should  be  cre¬ 
ated  all  these  things,  time,  motion,  the  heavens, 
the  stars,  all  sorts  of  revolutions. 

[2]  It  must  needs  be,  then,  that  scientific 
number,  being  set  over  such  things  as  these, 
should  be  harmoniously  constituted,  in  accord¬ 
ance  with  itself;  not  by  any  other  but  by  itself. 
[ 8]  Everything  that  is  harmoniously  constitut¬ 
ed  is  knit  together  out  of  opposites  and,  of 
course,  out  of  real  things;  for  neither  can  non¬ 
existent  things  be  set  in  harmony,  nor  can 
things  that  exist,  but  are  like  one  another,  nor 
yet  things  that  are  different,  but  have  no  rela¬ 
tion  one  to  another.  It  remains,  accordingly, 
that  those  things  out  of  which  a  harmony  is 
made  are  both  real,  different,  and  things  with 
some  relation  to  one  another. 

[ 4]  Of  such  things,  therefore,  scientific  num¬ 
ber  consists;  for  the  most  fundamental  species 
in  it  are  two,  embracing  the  essence  of  quan¬ 
tity,  different  from  one  another  and  not  of  a 
wholly  different  genus,  odd  and  even,  and  they 
are  reciprocally  woven  into  harmony  with  each 
other,  inseparably  and  uniformly,  by  a  wonder¬ 
ful  and  divine  Nature,  as  straightway  we  shall 
see. 

CHAPTER  VII 

[1]  Number  is  limited  multitude  or  a  com¬ 
bination  of  units  or  a  flow  of  quantity  made  up 
of  units ;  and  the  first  division  of  number  is  even 
and  odd. 

[2]  The  even1  is  that  which  can  be  divided 
into  two  equal  parts  without  a  unit  intervening 
in  the  middle;  and  the  odd  is  that  which  cannot 
be  divided  into  two  equal  parts  because  of  the 
aforesaid  intervention  of  a  unit. 

[8]  Now  this  is  the  definition  after  the  ordi¬ 
nary  conception ;  by  the  Pythagorean  doctrine, 
however,  the  even  number  is  that  which  admits 
of  division  into  the  greatest  and  the  smallest 
parts  at  the  same  operation,  greatest  in  size 
and  smallest  in  quantity,  in  accordance  with 
the  natural  contrariety  of  these  two  genera; 
and  the  odd  is  that  which  does  not  allow  this 
to  be  done  to  it,  but  is  divided  into  two  unequal 
parts. 

[4]  In  still  another  way,  by  the  ancient  defi- 

lCf.  Euclid,  VII,  Def.  6. 


nition,  the  even  is  that  which  can  be  divided 
alike  into  two  equal  and  two  unequal  parts,  ex¬ 
cept  that  the  dyad,  which  is  its  elementary 
form,  admits  but  one  division,  that  into  equal 
parts ;  and  in  any  division  whatsoever  it  brings 
to  light  only  one  species  of  number,  however  it 
may  be  divided,  independent  of  the  other.  The 
odd  is  a  number  which  in  any  division  whatso¬ 
ever,  which  necessarily  is  a  division  into  un¬ 
equal  parts,  shows  both  the  two  species  of  num¬ 
ber  together,  never  without  intermixture  one 
with  another,  but  always  in  one  another’s  com¬ 
pany. 

[5]  By  the  definition  in  terms  of  each  other, 
the  odd  is  that  which  differs  by  a  unit  from  the 
even  in  either  direction,  that  is,  toward  the 
greater  or  the  less,  and  the  even  is  that  which 
differs  by  a  unit  in  either  direction  from  the 
odd,  that  is,  is  greater  by  a  unit  or  less  by  a 
unit. 

CHAPTER  VIII 

[1]  Every  number  is  at  once  half  the  sum  of 
the  two  on  either  side  of  itself,  and  similarly 
half  the  sum  of  those  next  but  one  in  either 
direction,  and  of  those  next  beyond  them,  and 
so  on  as  far  as  it  is  possible  to  go.  [2]  Unity 
alone,  because  it  does  not  have  two  numbers 
on  either  side  of  it,  is  half  merely  of  the  adjoin¬ 
ing  number;  hence  unity  is  the  natural  starting 
point  of  all  number. 

[8]  By  subdivision  of  the  even,  there  are  the 
even-times  even,  the  odd-times  even,  and  the 
even-times  odd.  The  even-times  even  and  the 
even-times  odd  are  opposite  to  one  another, 
like  extremes,  and  the  odd-times  even  is  com¬ 
mon  to  them  both  like  a  mean  term. 

[4]  Now  the  even-times  even2  is  a  number 
which  is  itself  capable  of  being  divided  into  two 
equal  parts,  in  accordance  with  the  properties 
of  its  genus,  and  with  each  of  its  parts  similarly 
capable  of  division,  and  again  in  the  same  way 
each  of  their  parts  divisible  into  two  equals  un¬ 
til  the  division  of  the  successive  subdivisions 
reaches  the  naturally  indivisible  unit.  [5]  Take 
for  example  64;  one  half  of  this  is  32,  and  of 
this  16,  and  of  this  the  half  is  8,  and  of  this  4, 
and  of  this  2,  and  then  finally  unity  is  half  of 
the  latter,  and  this  is  naturally  indivisible  and 
will  not  admit  of  a  half. 

[0]  It  is  a  property  of  the  even-times  even 
that,  whatever  part  of  it  be  taken,  it  is  always 

2Euclid,s  definition  is:  “The  even- times  even 
number  is  that  which  is  measured  by  an  even 
number  an  even  number  of  times”  Elements ,  VII, 
Def.  8. 


INTRODUCTION  TO  ARITHMETIC  I.  815 


I 


even-times  even  in  designation,  and  at  the  same 
time,  by  the  quantity  of  the  units  in  it,  even- 
times  even  in  value;  and  that  neither  of  these 
two  things  will  ever  share  in  the  other  class. 
[7]  Doubtless  it  is  because  of  this  that  it  is 
called  even-times  even,  because  it  is  itself  even 
and  always  has  its  parts,  and  the  parts  of  its 
parts  down  to  unity,  even  both  in  name  and  in 
value;  in  other  words,  every  part  that  it  has  is 
even-times  even  in  name  and  even-times  even 
in  value. 

[S]  There  is  a  method  of  producing  the  even- 
times  even,  so  that  none  will  escape,  but  all 
successively  fall  under  it,  if  you  do  as  follows: 

[9]  As  you  proceed  from  unity,  as  from  a  root, 
by  the  double  ratio  to  infinity,  as  many  terms 
as  there  are  will  all  be  even-times  even,  and  it 
is  impossible  to  find  others  besides  these;  for 
instance,  1,  2,  4,  8, 16, 32,  64, 128,  256,  512.  .  .  . 

[10]  Now  each  of  the  numbers  set  forth  was 
produced  by  the  double  ratio,  beginning  with 
unity,  and  is  in  every  respect  even-times  even, 
and  every  part  that  it  may  be  found  to  have  is 
always  named  from  some  one  of  the  numbers 
before  it  in  the  series,  and  the  sum  of  units  in 
this  part  is  the  same  as  one  of  the  numbers  be¬ 
fore  it,  by  a  system  of  mutual  correspondence, 
indeed,  and  interchange.  If  there  is  an  even 
number  of  terms  of  the  double  ratio  from  unity, 
not  one  mean  term  can  be  found,  but  always 
two,  from  which  the  correspondence  and  inter¬ 
change  of  factors  and  values,  values  and  fac¬ 
tors,  will  proceed  in  order,  going  first  to  the  two 
on  either  side  of  the  means,  then  to  the  next  on 
either  side,  until  it  comes  to  the  extreme  terms, 
so  that  the  whole  will  correspond  in  value  to 
unity  and  unity  to  the  whole.  For  example,  if 
we  set  down  128  as  the  largest  term,  the  num¬ 
ber  of  terms  will  be  even,  for  there  are  eight  in 
all  up  to  this  number;  and  they  will  not  have 
one  mean  term,  for  this  is  impossible  with  an 
even  number,  but  of  necessity  two,  8  and  16. 
These  will  correspond  to  each  other  as  factors ; 
for  of  the  whole,  128,  16  is  one  eighth  and  con¬ 
versely  8  is  one  sixteenth.  Thence  proceeding 
in  either  direction,  we  find  that  32  is  one  fourth, 
and  4  one  thirty-second,  and  again  64  is  one 
half,  and  2  one  sixty-fourth,  and  finally  at  the 
extremes  unity  is  one  one-hundred-twenty- 
eighth,  and  conversely  128  is  the  whole,  to  cor¬ 
respond  with  unity. 

[11]  If,  however,  the  series  consists  of  an 
odd  number  of  terms,  seven  for  example,  and 
we  deal  with  64,  there  will  be  of  necessity  one 
mean  term  in  accordance  with  the  nature  of 
the  odd;  the  mean  term  will  correspond  to  it¬ 


self  because  it  has  no  partner;  and  those  on 
either  side  of  it  in  turn  will  correspond  to  one 
another  until  this  correspondence  ends  in  the 
extremes.  Unity,  for  example,  will  be  one  sixty- 
fourth,  and  64  the  whole,  corresponding  to  uni¬ 
ty;  32  is  one  half,  and  2  one  thirty-second;  16 
is  one  fourth,  and  4  one  sixteenth;  and  8  the 
eighth  part,  with  nothing  else  to  correspond 
to  it. 

[12]  It  is  the  property  of  all  these  terms 
when  they  are  added  together  successively  to 
be  equal  to  the  next  in  the  series,  lacking  one 
unit,  so  that  of  necessity  their  summation  in 
any  way  whatsoever  will  be  an  odd  number, 
for  that  which  fails  by  a  unit  of  being  equal  to 
an  even  number  is  odd.  [13]  This  observation 
will  be  of  use  to  us  very  shortly  in  the  construc¬ 
tion  of  perfect  numbers.1  But  to  take  an  exam¬ 
ple,  the  terms  from  unity  preceding  256  in  the 
series,  when  added  together,  are  within  1  of 
equaling  256,  and  all  the  terms  before  128,  the 
term  immediately  preceding,  are  similarly  equal 
to  128  save  for  one  unit;  and  to  the  next  terms 
the  sums  of  those  below  them  are  similarly  re¬ 
lated.  Thus  unity  itself2  is  within  one  unit  of 
equaling  the  next  term,  which  is  2,  and  these 
two  together  fail  by  1  of  equaling  the  next,  and 
the  three  together  are  within  1  of  the  next  in 
order,  and  you  will  find  that  this  goes  on  with¬ 
out  interruption  to  infinity. 

[14]  This  too  it  is  very  needful  to  recall;  If 
the  number  of  terms  of  the  even-times  even 
series  dealt  with  is  even,  the  product  of  the  ex¬ 
tremes  will  always  be  equal  to  the  product  of 
the  means;  if  there  is  an  odd  number  of  terms, 
the  product  of  the  extremes  will  be  equal  to  the 
square  of  the  mean.  For,  in  the  case  of  an  even 
number  of  terms,  1  times  128  is  equal  to  8  times 
16  and  further  to  2  times  64  and  again  to  4 
times  32,  and  this  is  so  in  every  case;  and  with 
an  odd  number  of  terms,  1  times  64  equals  2 
times  32,  and  this  equals  4  times  16,  and  this 
again  equals  8  times  8,  the  mean  term  alone 
multiplied  by  itself. 

CHAPTER  IX 

[1]  The  even-times  odd  number  is  one  which 
is  by  its  genus  itself  even,  but  is  specifically  op¬ 
posed  to  the  aforesaid  even-times  even.  It  is  a 
number  of  which,  though  it  admits  of  the  divi¬ 
sion  into  two  equal  halves,  after  the  fashion  of 
the  genus  common  to  it  and  the  even-times 
even,  the  halves  are  not  immediately  divisible 

'See  Chapter  16. 

2Cf.  on  1.8.7. 


NICOMACHUS  OF  GERASA 


816 

into  two  equals,  for  example,  6,  10,  14,  18,  22, 
26,  and  the  like;  for  after  these  have  been  di¬ 
vided  their  halves  are  found  to  be  indivisible. 

[2]  It  is  the  property  of  the  even-times  odd 
that  whatever  factor  it  may  be  discovered  to 
have  is  opposite  in  name  to  its  value,  and  that 
the  quantity  of  every  part  is  opposite  in  value 
to  its  name,  and  that  the  numerical  value  of  its 
part  never  by  any  means  is  of  the  same  genus 
as  its  name.  To  take  a  single  example,  the  num¬ 
ber  18,  its  half,  with  an  even  name,  is  9,  odd  in 
value;  its  third  part,  again,  with  an  odd  desig¬ 
nation,  is  6,  even  in  value;  conversely,  the  sixth 
part  is  3  and  the  ninth  part  2;  and  in  other 
numbers  the  same  peculiarity  will  be  found. 

[3]  It  is  possibly  for  this  reason  that  it  re¬ 
ceived  such  a  name,  that  is,  because,  although 
it  is  even,  its  halves  are  at  once  odd. 

[ 4]  This  number  is  produced  from  the  series 
beginning  with  unity,  with  a  difference  of  2, 
namely,  the  odd  numbers,  set  forth  in  proper 
order  as  far  as  you  like  and  then  multiplied  by 
2.  The  numbers  produced  would  be,  in  order, 
these:  6,  10, 14, 18,  22,  26,  30,  and  so  on,  as  far 
as  you  care  to  proceed.  The  greater  terms  al¬ 
ways  differ  by  4  from  the  next  smaller  ones, 
the  reason  for  which  is  that  their  original  basic 
forms,  the  odd  numbers,  exceed  one  another  by 
2  and  were  multiplied  by  2  to  make  this  series, 
and  2  times  2  makes  4. 

[5]  Accordingly,  in  the  natural  series  of  num¬ 
bers  the  even-times  odd  numbers  will  be  found 
fifth  from  one  another,  exceeding  one  another 
by  a  difference  of  4,  passing  over  three  terms, 
and  produced  by  the  multiplication  of  the  odd 
numbers  by  2. 

[6]  They  are  said  to  be  opposite  in  proper¬ 
ties  to  the  even-times  even,  because  of  these 
the  greatest  extreme  term  alone  is  divisible, 
while  of  these  former  the  smallest  only  proved 
to  be  indivisible;  and  in  particular  because  in 
the  former  case  the  reciprocal  arrangement  of 
parts1  from  extremes  to  mean  term  or  terms 
makes  the  product  of  the  former  equal  to  the 
square  or  product  of  the  latter;  but  in  this  case 
by  the  same  correspondence  and  comparison 
the  mean  term  is  one  half  the  sum  of  the  ex¬ 
tremes,  or  if  there  should  be  two  means,  their 
sum  equals  that  of  the  two  extremes. 

CHAPTER  X 

[1]  The  odd-times  even  number  is  the  one 
which  displays  the  third  form  of  the  even,  be¬ 
longing  in  common  to  both  the  previously  men- 

JCf.  I.  8. 10. 


tioned  species  like  a  single  mean  between  two 
extremes,  for  in  one  respect  it  resembles  the 
even- times  even,  and  in  another  the  even-times 
odd,  and  that  property  wdierein  it  varies  from 
the  one  it  shares  with  the  other,  and  by  that 
property  which  it  shares  with  the  one  it  differs 
from  the  other. 

[2]  The  odd- times  even  number  is  an  even 
number  which  can  be  divided  into  two  equal 
parts,  whose  parts  also  can  so  be  divided,  and 
sometimes  even  the  parts  of  its  parts,  but  it 
cannot  carry  the  division  of  its  parts  as  far  as 
unity.  Such  numbers  are  24,  28,  40;  for  each  of 
these  has  its  own  half  and  indeed  the  half  of  its 
half,  and  sometimes  one  is  found  among  them 
that  will  allow  the  halving  to  be  carried  even 
farther  among  its  parts.  There  is  none,  how¬ 
ever,  that  will  have  its  parts  divisible  into  halves 
as  far  as  the  naturally  indivisible  unit. 

[3]  Now  in  admitting  more  than  one  divi¬ 
sion,  the  odd-times  even  is  like  the  even-times 
even  and  unlike  the  even-times  odd;  but  in  that 
its  subdivision  never  ends  with  unity,  it  is  like 
the  even-times  odd  and  unlike  the  even-times 
even. 

[4]  It  alone  has  at  once  the  proper  qualities 
of  each  of  the  former  two,2  and  then  again  prop¬ 
erties  which  belong  to  neither  of  them;  for  of 
them  one  had  only  the  highest  term  divisible, 
and  the  other  only  the  smallest  indivisible,  but 
this  neither;  for  it  is  observed  to  have  more  di¬ 
visions  than  one  in  the  greater  term,  and  more 
than  one  indivisible  in  the  lesser. 

[o]  Furthermore,  there  are  in  it  certain  parts 
whose  names  are  not  opposed  to  their  values 
nor  of  the  opposite  genus,3  after  the  fashion  of 
the  even-times  even ;  and  there  are  also  always 
other  parts  of  a  name  opposite  and  contrary  in 
kind  to  their  values,  after  the  fashion  of  the 
even-times  odd.  For  example,  in  24,  there  are 
parts  not  opposed  in  name  to  their  values,  the 
fourth  part,  6,  the  half,  12,  the  sixth,  4,  and  the 
twelfth,  2;  but  the  third  part,  8,  the  eighth,  3, 
and  the  twenty-fourth,  1,  are  opposed;  and  so 
it  is  wdth  the  rest. 

[6]  This  number  is  produced  by  a  somewhat 
complicated  method,  and  shows,  after  a  fash¬ 
ion,  even  in  its  manner  of  production,  that  it 
is  a  mixture  of  both  other  kinds.  For  whereas 
the  even-times  even  is  made  from  even  num¬ 
bers,  the  doubles  from  unity  to  infinity,  and 
the  even-times  odd  from  the  odd  numbers  from 
3,  progressing  to  infinity,  this  must  be  woven 

2Cf.  I.  9.  6. 

3Cf.  1. 8. 7;  9. 2. 


INTRODUCTION  TO  ARITHMETIC  I. 


together  out  of  both  classes,  as  being  common 
to  both.  [7]  Let  us  then  set  forth  the  odd  num¬ 
bers  from  3  by  themselves  in  due  order  in  one 
series : 

3,  5,  7,  9,  11,  13,  15,  17,  19,  .  .  . 
and  the  even-times  even,  beginning  with  4, 
again  one  after  another  in  a  second  series  after 
their  own  order: 

4,  8,  16,  32,  64,  128,  256,  .  . . 
as  far  as  you  please.  [8]  Now  multiply  by  the 
first  number  of  either  series — it  makes  no  dif¬ 
ference  which — from  the  beginning  and  in  order 
all  those  in  the  remaining  series  and  note  down 
the  resulting  numbers;  then  again  multiply  by 
the  second  number  of  the  same  series  the  same 
numbers  once  more,  as  far  as  you  can,  and  write 
down  the  results;  then  with  the  third  number 
again  multiply  the  same  terms  anew,  and  how¬ 
ever  far  you  go  you  will  get  nothing  but  the 
odd-times  even  numbers. 

[9]  For  the  sake  of  illustration  let  us  use  the 
first  term  of  the  series  of  odd  numbers  and  mul¬ 
tiply  by  it  all  the  terms  in  the  second  series  in 
order,  thus:  3  X  4,  3  X  8,  3  X  16,  3  X  32,  and 
so  on  to  infinity.  The  results  will  be  12,  24,  48, 
96,  which  we  must  note  down  in  one  line.  Then 
taking  a  new  start  do  the  same  thing  with  the 
second  number,  5X4,  5X8,  5X16,  5X32.  The 
results  will  be  20, 40, 80, 160.  Then  do  the  same 
thing  once  more  with  7,  the  third  number,  7  X 
4,  7X8,  7X16,  7X32.  The  results  are  28,  56, 


817 

term,  or  their  product,  should  there  be  two. 
Tims  this  one  species  has  the  peculiar  proper¬ 
ties  of  them  both,  because  it  is  a  natural  mix¬ 
ture  of  them  both. 

CHAPTER  XI 

[1]  Again,  while  the  odd  is  distinguished  over 
against  the  even  in  classification  and  has  noth¬ 
ing  in  common  with  it,  since  the  latter  is  di¬ 
visible  into  equal  halves  and  the  former  is  not 
thus  divisible,  nevertheless  there  are  found 
three  species  of  the  odd,1  differing  from  one  an¬ 
other,  of  which  the  first  is  called  the  prime  and 
incomposite,2  that  which  is  opposed  to  it  the 
secondary  and  composite,  and  that  which  is 
midway  between  both  of  these  and  is  viewed  as 
a  mean  among  extremes,  namely,  the  variety 
which,  in  itself,  is  secondary  and  composite, 
but  relatively  is  prime  and  incomposite. 

[2]  Now  the  first  species,  the  prime  and  in¬ 
composite,  is  found  whenever  an  odd  number 
admits  of  no  other  factor  save  the  one  with  the 
number  itself  as  denominator,  which  is  always 
unity;  for  example,  3,  5,  7,  11,  13,  17,  19,  23, 
29,  31.  None  of  these  numbers  will  by  any 
chance  be  found  to  have  a  fractional  part  with 
a  denominator  different  from  the  number  it¬ 
self,  but  only  the  one  with  this  as  denominator, 
and  this  part  will  be  unity  in  each  case;  for  3 
has  only  a  third  part,  which  has  the  same  de¬ 
nominator  as  the  number  and  is  of  course  uni- 


Odd  numbers 

3 

5 

7 

9 

11 

13 

15 

Even-times  even 

4 

8 

16 

32 

64 

128 

256 

12 

24 

48 

96 

192 

384 

768 

20 

40 

80 

160 

320 

640 

1280 

Odd-times  even  numbers, 

28 

56 

112 

224 

448 

896 

1792 

£ 

36 

72 

144 

288 

576 

1152 

2304 

44 

88 

176 

352 

704 

1408 

2816 

Length 


112,  224;  and  in  the  same  way  as  far  as  you 
care  to  go,  you  will  get  similar  results. 

[10]  Now  when  you  arrange  the  products  of 
multiplication  by  each  term  in  its  proper  line, 
making  the  lines  parallel,  in  marvelous  fashion 
there  will  appear  along  the  breadth  of  the  table 
the  peculiar  property  of  the  even-times  odd, 
that  the  mean  term  is  always  half  the  sum  of 
the  extremes,  if  there  should  be  one  mean,  and 
the  sum  of  the  means  equals  the  sum  of  the  ex¬ 
tremes  if  two.  But  along  the  length  of  the  table 
the  property  of  the  even-times  even  will  appear; 
for  the  product  of  the  extremes  is  equal  to  the 
square  of  the  mean,  should  there  be  one  mean 


ty,  5  a  fifth,  7  a  seventh,  and  11  only  an  elev¬ 
enth  part,  and  in  all  of  them  these  parts  are 
unity. 

[3]  It  has  received  this  name  because  it  can 
be  measured  only  by  the  number  which  is  first 
and  common  to  all,  unity,  and  by  no  other; 
moreover,  because  it  is  produced  by  no  other 
number  combined  with  itself  save  unity  alone; 
for  5  is  5X1,  and  7  is  7X1,  and  the  others  in 
accordance  with  their  own  quantity.  To  be  sure, 
when  they  are  combined  with  themselves,  other 

‘Cf.  Euclid,  Elcm.y  VII,  Doff.,  1 1-14. 

2Cf.  Euclid,  Elcm.y  VII,  Def.  11;  Aristotle,  Top., 
VIII.  2.  157"  39. 


NICOMACHUS  OF  GERASA 


818 

numbers  might  be  produced,  originating  from 
them  as  from  a  fountain  and  a  root,  wherefore 
they  are  called  “prime/1  because  they  exist  be¬ 
forehand  as  the  beginnings  of  the  others.  For 
every  origin  is  elementary  and  incomposite,  in¬ 
to  which  everything  is  resolved  and  out  of  which 
everything  is  made,  but  the  origin  itself  cannot 
be  resolved  into  anything  or  constituted  out  of 
anything. 

CHAPTER  XII 

[1]  The  secondary,  composite  number1  is  an 
odd  number,  indeed,  because  it  is  distinguished 
as  a  member  of  this  same  class,  but  it  has  no 
elementary  quality,  for  it  gets  its  origin  by  the 
combination  of  something  else.  For  this  reason 
it  is  characteristic  of  the  secondary  number  to 
have,  in  addition  to  the  fractional  part  with 
the  number  itself  as  denominator,  yet  another 
part  or  parts  with  different  denominators,  the 
former  always,  as  in  all  cases,  unity,  the  latter 
never  unity,  but  always  either  that  number  or 
those  numbers  by  the  combination  of  which  it 
was  produced.  For  example,  9,  15,  21,  25,  27, 
33,  35,  39;  each  one  of  these  is  measured  by 
unity,  as  other  numbers  are,  and  like  them  has 
a  fractional  part  with  the  same  denominator  as 
the  number  itself,  by  the  nature  of  the  class 
common  to  them  all;  but  by  exception  and  more 
peculiarly  they  also  employ  a  part,  or  parts, 
with  a  different  denominator;  9,  in  addition  to 
the  ninth  part,  has  a  third  part  besides;  15  a 
third  and  a  fifth  besides  a  fifteenth;  21  a  sev¬ 
enth  and  a  third  besides  a  twenty-first,  and  25, 
in  addition  to  the  twenty-fifth,  which  has  as  a 
denominator  25  itself,  also  a  fifth,  with  a  dif¬ 
ferent  denominator. 

[2]  It  is  called  secondary,  then,  because  it 
can  employ  yet  another  measure  along  with 
unity,  and  because  it  is  not  elementary,  but  is 
produced  by  some  other  number  combined  with 
itself  or  with  something  else;  in  the  case  of  9, 
3;  in  the  case  of  15,  5  or,  by  Zeus,  3;  and  those 
following  in  the  same  fashion.  And  it  is  called 
composite  for  this,  or  some  such,  reason:  that 
it  may  be  resolved  into  those  numbers  out  of 
which  it  was  made,  since  it  can  also  be  measured 
by  them.  For  nothing  that  can  be  broken  down 
is  incomposite,  but  by  all  means  composite. 

CHAPTER  XIII 

[1]  Xow  while  these  two  species  of  the  odd 
are  opposed  to  each  other  a  third  one2  is  con- 

^f.  Euclid,  Elements.  VII,  Def.  14. 

2Cf.  Euclid,  Elements ,  VII,  Def.  13. 


ceived  of  between  them,  deriving,  as  it  were, 
its  specific  form  from  them  both,  namely  the 
number  which  is  in  itself  secondary  and  com¬ 
posite,  but  relatively  to  another  number  is 
prime  and  incomposite.  This  exists  when  a  num¬ 
ber,  in  addition  to  the  common  measure,  unity, 
is  measured  by  some  other  number  and  is  there¬ 
fore  able  to  admit  of  a  fractional  part,  or  parts, 
with  denominator  other  than  the  number  itself, 
as  well  as  the  one  with  itself  as  denominator. 
When  this  is  compared  with  another  number 
of  similar  properties,  it  is  found  that  it  cannot 
be  measured  by  a  measure  common  to  the  oth¬ 
er,  nor  does  it  have  a  fractional  part  with  the 
same  denominator  as  those  in  the  other.  As  an 
illustration,  let  9  be  compared  with  25.  Each 
in  itself  is  secondary  and  composite,  but  rela¬ 
tively  to  each  other  they  have  only  unity  as  a 
common  measure,  and  no  factors  in  them  have 
the  same  denominator,  for  the  third  part  in  the 
former  does  not  exist  in  the  latter  nor  is  the 
fifth  part  in  the  latter  found  in  the  former. 

[2]  The  production  of  these  numbers  is  called 
by  Eratosthenes  the  “sieve,”  because  we  take 
the  odd  numbers  mingled  together  and  indis¬ 
criminate  and  out  of  them  by  this  method  of 
production  separate,  as  by  a  kind  of  instrument 
or  sieve,  the  prime  and  incomposite  by  them¬ 
selves,  and  the  secondary  and  composite  by 
themselves,  and  find  the  mixed  class  by  them¬ 
selves. 

[3]  The  method  of  the  “sieve”  is  as  follows. 
I  set  forth  all  the  odd  numbers  in  order,  begin¬ 
ning  with  3,  in  as  long  a  series  as  possible,  and 
then  starting  with  the  first  I  observe  what  ones 
it  can  measure,  and  I  find  that  it  can  measure 
the  terms  two  places  apart,  as  far  as  we  care 
to  proceed.  And  I  find  that  it  measures  not  as 
it  chances  and  at  random,  but  that  it  will  meas¬ 
ure  the  first  one,  that  is,  the  one  two  places  re¬ 
moved,  by  the  quantity  of  the  one  that  stands 
first  in  the  series,  that  is,  by  its  own  quantity, 
for  it  measures  it  3  times;  and  the  one  two 
places  from  this  by  the  quantity  of  the  second 
in  order,  for  this  it  will  measure  5  times;  and 
again  the  one  two  places  farther  on  by  the  quan¬ 
tity  of  the  third  in  order,  or  7  times,  and  the  one 
two  places  still  farther  on  by  the  quantity  of 
the  fourth  in  order,  or  9  times,  and  so  ad  infini¬ 
tum  in  the  same  way. 

[4]  Then  taking  a  fresh  start  I  come  to  the 
second  number  and  observe  what  it  can  meas¬ 
ure,  and  find  that  it  measures  all  the  terms 
four  places  apart,  the  first  by  the  quantity  of 
the  first  in  order,  or  3  times;  the  second  by  that 
of  the  second,  or  5  times;  the  third  by  that  of 


INTRODUCTION  TO  ARITHMETIC  I. 


the  third,  or  7  times;  and  in  this  order  ad  infi¬ 
nitum, . 

[o]  Again,  as  before,  the  third  term  7,  taking 
over  the  measuring  function,  will  measure 
terms  six  places  apart,  and  the  first  by  the 
quantity  of  3,  the  first  of  the  series,  the  second 
by  that  of  5,  for  this  is  the  second  number,  and 
the  third  by  that  of  7,  for  this  has  the  third 
position  in  the  series. 

[ 6]  And  analogously  throughout,  this  proc¬ 
ess  will  go  on  without  interruption,  so  that  the 
numbers  will  succeed  to  the  measuring  func¬ 
tion  in  accordance  with  their  fixed  position  in 
the  series;  the  interval  separating  terms  meas¬ 
ured  is  determined  by  the  orderly  progress  of 
the  even  numbers  from  2  to  infinity,  or  by  the 
doubling  of  the  position  in  the  series  occupied 
by  the  measuring  term,  and  the  number  of 
times  a  term  is  measured  is  fixed  by  the  orderly 
advance  of  the  odd  numbers  in  series  from  3. 

[7]  Now  if  you  mark  the  numbers  with  cer¬ 
tain  signs,  you  will  find  that  the  terms  which 
succeed  one  another  in  the  measuring  function 
neither  measure  all  the  same  number — and 
sometimes  not  even  two  will  measure  the  same 
one — nor  do  absolutely  all  of  the  numbers  set 
forth  submit  themselves  to  a  measure,  but  some 
entirely  avoid  being  measured  by  any  number 
whatsoever,  some  are  measured  by  one  only, 
and  some  by  two  or  even  more.  [8]  Now  these 
that  are  not  measured  at  all,  but  avoid  it,  are 
primes  and  incomposites,  sifted  out  as  it  were 
by  a  sieve;  those  measured  by  only  one  meas¬ 
ure  in  accordance  with  its  own  quantity  will 
have  but  one  fractional  part  with  denominator 
different  from  the  number  itself,  in  addition  to 
the  part  with  the  same  denominator;  and  those 
which  are  measured  by  one  measure  only,  but 
in  accordance  with  the  quantity  of  some  other 
number  than  the  measure  and  not  its  own,  or 
are  measured  by  two  measures  at  the  same 
time,  will  have  several  fractional  parts  with 
other  denominators  besides  the  one  with  the 
same  as  the  number  itself;  these  will  be  second¬ 
ary  and  composite. 

[9]  The  third  division,  the  one  common  to 
both  the  former,  which  is  in  itself  secondary 
and  composite  but  primary  and  incomposite  in 
relation  to  another,  will  consist  of  the  numbers 
produced  when  some  prime  and  incomposite 
number  measures  them  in  accordance  with  its 
own  quantity,  if  one  thus  produced  be  compared 
to  another  of  similar  origin.  For  example,  if  9, 
which  was  produced  by  3  measuring  by  its  own 
quantity,  for  it  is  3  times  3,  be  compared  with 
25,  which  was  produced  from  5  measuring  by 


819 

its  own  quantity,  for  it  is  5  times  5,  these  num¬ 
bers  have  no  common  measure  except  unity. 

[10]  We  shall  now  investigate  how  we  may 
have  a  method1  of  discerning  whether  numbers 
are  prime  and  incomposite,  or  secondary  and 
composite,  relatively  to  each  other,  since  of  the 
former  unity  is  the  common  measure,  but  of 
the  latter  some  other  number  also  besides  uni¬ 
ty;  and  wThat  this  number  is. 

[11]  Suppose  there  be  given  us  two  odd  num¬ 
bers  and  some  one  sets  the  problem  and  directs 
us  to  determine  whether  they  are  prime  and 
incomposite  relatively  to  each  other  or  second¬ 
ary  and  composite,  and  if  they  are  secondary 
and  composite,  what  number  is  their  common 
measure.  We  must  compare  the  given  numbers 
and  subtract  the  smaller  from  the  larger  as 
many  times  as  possible;  then  after  this  sub¬ 
traction,  subtract  in  turn  from  the  other  as 
many  times  as  possible;  for  this  changing  about 
and  subtraction  from  one  and  the  other  in  turn 
will  necessarily  end  either  in  unity  or  in  some 
one  and  the  same  number,  which  will  necessar¬ 
ily  be  odd.  [12]  Now  when  the  subtractions 
terminate  in  unity  they  show  that  the  numbers 
are  prime  and  incomposite  relatively  to  each 
other;  and  when  they  end  in  some  other  num¬ 
ber,  odd  in  quantity  and  twice  produced,  then 
say  that  they  are  secondary  and  composite  rel¬ 
atively  to  each  other,  and  that  their  common 
measure  is  that  very  number  which  twice  ap¬ 
pears. 

For  example,  if  the  given  numbers  were  23 
and  45,  subtract  23  from  45,  and  22  will  be  the 
remainder;  subtracting  this  from  23,  the  re¬ 
mainder  is  1,  subtracting  this  from  22  as  many 
times  as  possible  you  will  end  with  unity. 
Hence  they  are  prime  and  incomposite  to  one 
another,  and  unity,  which  is  the  remainder,  is 
their  common  measure. 

[13]  But  if  one  should  propose  other  num¬ 
bers,  21  and  49, 1  subtract  the  smaller  from  the 
larger  and  28  is  the  remainder.  Then  again  I 
subtract  the  same  21  from  this,  for  it  can  be 
done,  and  the  remainder  is  7.  This  I  subtract 
in  turn  from  21  and  14  remains;  from  which  I 
subtract  7  again,  for  it  is  possible,  and  7  will 
remain.  But  it  is  not  possible  to  subtract  7  from 
7 ;  hence  the  termination  of  the  process  with  a 
repeated  7  has  been  brought  about,  and  you 
may  declare  the  original  numbers  21  and  49 
secondary  and  composite  relatively  to  each 

rrhis  mode  of  determining  common  factors  is 
found  in  Euclid  (VII.  1;  X.  2)  and  is  commonly 
termed  the  Euclidean  method  of  finding  the  great¬ 
est  common  divisor  of  numbers. 


NICOMACHUS  OF  GERASA 


820 

other,  and  7  their  common  measure  in  addition 
to  the  universal  unit. 

CHAPTER  XIV 

[  1]  To  make  again  a  fresh  start,  of  the  simple 
even  numbers,  some  are  superabundant,  some 
deficient,  like  extremes  set  over  against  each 
other,  and  some  are  intermediary  between  them 
and  are  called  perfect.  [2]  Those  which  are  said 
to  be  opposites  to  one  another,  the  superabun¬ 
dant  and  deficient,  are  distinguished  from  one 
another  in  the  relation  of  inequality1  in  the  di¬ 
rections  of  the  greater  and  the  less;  for  apart 
from  these  no  other  form  of  inequality  could 
be  conceived,  nor  could  evil,2  disease,  dispro¬ 
portion,  unseemliness,  nor  any  such  thing,  save 
in  terms  of  excess  or  deficiency.  For  in  the  realm 
of  the  greater3  there  arise  excesses,  overreach¬ 
ing,  and  superabundance,  and  in  the  less  need, 
deficiency,  privation,  and  lack;  but  in  that 
which  lies  between  the  greater  and  the  less, 
namely,  the  equal,  are  virtues,  wealth,  modera¬ 
tion,  propriety,  beauty,  and  the  like,  to  which 
the  aforesaid  form  of  number,  the  perfect,  is 
most  akin. 

[3]  Now  the  superabundant  number  is  one 
which  has,  over  and  above  the  factors  which 
belong  to  it  and  fall  to  its  share,  others  in  addi¬ 
tion,  just  as  if  an  animal  should  be  created  with 
too  many  parts  or  limbs,  with  ten  tongues,  as 
the  poet  says,4  and  ten  mouths,  or  with  nine 
lips,  or  three  rows  of  teeth,  or  a  hundred  hands, 
or  too  many  fingers  on  one  hand.  Similarly  if, 
when  all  the  factors  in  a  number  are  examined 
and  added  together  in  one  sum,  it  proves  upon 
investigation  that  the  number's  own  factors  ex¬ 
ceed  the  number  itself,  this  is  called  a  super¬ 
abundant  number,  for  it  oversteps  the  symme¬ 
try  which  exists  between  the  perfect  and  its 
own  parts.  Such  are  12,  24,  and  certain  others, 
for  12  has  a  half,  6,  a  third,  4,  a  fourth,  3,  a 
sixth,  2,  and  a  twelfth,  1,  which  added  together 
make  16,  which  is  more  than  the  original  12; 
its  parts,  therefore,  are  greater  than  the  whole 
itself.  [4]  And  24  has  a  half,  a  third,  fourth, 
sixth,  eighth,  twelfth,  and  twenty-fourth, 
which  are  12,  8,  6,  4,  3,  2,  1.  Added  together 
they  make  36,  which,  compared  to  the  original 
number,  24,  is  found  to  be  greater  than  it,  al¬ 
though  made  up  solely  of  its  factors.  Hence  in 
this  case  also  the  parts  are  in  excess  of  the 
whole. 

1Cf .  I.  17.  2,  4,  6;  also  I.  23.  4. 

2Cf.  Arist.,  Ethics ,  II.  6.  1106b  33. 

3Cf.  Arist.,  Ethics ,  II.  6.  1106b  24,  33. 

4Homer,  Odyssey,  XII.  85  £f. 


CHAPTER  XV 

[1]  The  deficient  number  is  one  which  has 
qualities  the  opposite  of  those  pointed  out,  and 
whose  factors  added  together  are  less  in  com¬ 
parison  than  the  number  itself.  It  is  as  if  some 
animal  should  fall  short  of  the  natural  number 
of  limbs  or  parts,  or  as  if  a  man  should  have 
but  one  eye,  as  in  the  poem,  “And  one  round 
orb  was  fixed  in  his  brow";  or  as  though  one 
should  be  one-handed,  or  have  fewer  than  five 
fingers  on  one  hand,  or  lack  a  tongue,  or  some 
such  member.  Such  a  one  would  be  called  de¬ 
ficient  and  so  to  speak  maimed,  after  the  pe¬ 
culiar  fashion  of  the  number  whose  factors  are 
less  than  itself,  such  as  8  or  14.  For  8  has  the 
factors  half,  fourth,  and  eighth,  which  are  4,  2, 
and  1,  and  added  together  they  make  7,  and 
less  than  the  original  number.  The  parts,  there¬ 
fore,  fall  short  of  making  up  the  whole.  [2] 
Again,  14  has  a  half,  a  seventh,  a  fourteenth, 
7,  2,  and  1,  respectively;  and  all  together  they 
make  10,  less  than  the  original  number.  So  this 
number  also  is  deficient  in  its  parts,  with  re¬ 
spect  to  making  up  the  whole  out  of  them. 

CHAPTER  XVI 

[1]  While  these  two  varieties  are  opposed 
after  the  manner  of  extremes,  the  so-called  per¬ 
fect  number5  appears  as  a  mean,  which  is  dis¬ 
covered  to  be  in  the  realm  of  equality,  and 
neither  makes  its  parts  greater  than  itself,  add¬ 
ed  together,  nor  shows  itself  greater  than  its 
parts,  but  is  always  equal  to  its  own  parts.  For 
the  equal  is  always  conceived  of  as  in  the  mid¬ 
ground  between  greater  and  less,  and  is,  as  it 
were,  moderation  between  excess  and  deficien¬ 
cy,  and  that  which  is  in  tune,  between  pitches 
too  high  and  too  low. 

[2]  Now  when  a  number,  comparing  with 
itself  the  sum  and  combination  of  all  the  fac¬ 
tors  whose  presence  it  will  admit,  neither  ex¬ 
ceeds  them  in  multitude  nor  is  exceeded  by 
them,  then  such  a  number  is  properly  said  to 
be  perfect,  as  one  which  is  equal  to  its  own 
parts.  Such  numbers  are  6  and  28;  for  6  has  the 
factors  half,  third,  and  sixth,  3,  2,  and  1,  re¬ 
spectively,  and  these  added  together  make  6 
and  are  equal  to  the  original  number,  and 
neither  more  nor  less.  Twenty-eight  has  the 
factors  half,  fourth,  seventh,  fourteenth,  and 
twenty-eighth,  which  are  14, 7, 4, 2  and  1 ;  these 
added  together  make  28,  and  so  neither  are  the 

Euclid’s  definition,  Elem.,  VII.  22,  is:  “A  per¬ 
fect  number  is  one  that  is  equal  to  its  own  parts." 


INTRODUCTION  TO  ARITHMETIC  I. 


parts  greater  than  the  whole  nor  the  whole 
greater  than  the  parts,  but  their  comparison 
is  in  equality,  which  is  the  peculiar  quality  of 
the  perfect  number. 

[3]  It  comes  about  that  even  as  fair  and  ex¬ 
cellent  things  are  few  and  easily  enumerated, 
while  ugly  and  evil  ones  are  widespread,  so  also 
the  superabundant  and  deficient  numbers  are 
found  in  great  multitude  and  irregularly  placed 
— for  the  method  of  their  discovery  is  irregu¬ 
lar — but  the  perfect  numbers  are  easily  enum¬ 
erated  and  arranged  with  suitable  order;  for 
only  one  is  found  among  the  units,  6,  only  one 
other  among  the  tens,  28,  and  a  third  in  the 
rank  of  the  hundreds,  496  alone,  and  a  fourth 
within  the  limits  of  the  thousands,  that  is,  be¬ 
low  ten  thousand,  8,128.  And  it  is  their  accom¬ 
panying  characteristic  to  end  alternately  in  6 
or  8,  and  always  to  be  even. 

[4]  There  is  a  method  of  producing  them,1 
neat  and  unfailing,  which  neither  passes  by  any 
of  the  perfect  numbers  nor  fails  to  differentiate 
any  of  those  that  are  not  such,  which  is  carried 
out  in  the  following  w-ay. 

You  must  set  forth  the  even-times  even  num¬ 
bers  from  unity,  advancing  in  order  in  one  line, 
as  far  as  you  please:  1,  2,  4,  8,  16,  32,  64,  128, 
256,  512,  1,024,  2,048,  4,096.  .  . .  Then  you 
must  add  them  together,  one  at  a  time,  and 
each  time  you  make  a  summation  observe  the 
result  to  see  wThat  it  is.  If  you  find  that  it  is  a 
prime,  incomposite  number,  multiply  it  by  the 
quantity  of  the  last  number  added,  and  the  re¬ 
sult  will  always  be  a  perfect  number.  If,  how¬ 
ever,  the  result  is  secondary  and  composite,  do 
not  multiply,  but  add  the  next  and  observe 
again  wiiat  the  resulting  number  is;  if  it  is  sec¬ 
ondary  and  composite,  again  pass  it  by  and  do 
not  multiply;  but  add  the  next;  but  if  it  is 
prime  and  incomposite,  multiply  it  by  the  last 
term  added,  and  the  result  will  be  a  perfect 
number;  and  so  on  to  infinity.  In  similar  fash¬ 
ion  you  will  produce  all  the  perfect  numbers  in 
succession,  overlooking  none. 

For  example,  to  1  I  add  2,  and  observe  the 
sum,  and  find  that  it  is  3,  a  prime  and  incom¬ 
posite  number  in  accordance  with  our  previous 
demonstrations;  for  it  has  no  factor  with  de¬ 
nominator  different  from  the  number  itself,  but 
only  that  with  denominator  agreeing.  There¬ 
fore  I  multiply  it  by  the  last  number  to  be  tak¬ 
en  into  the  sum,  that  is,  2;  I  get  6,  and  this  I 
declare  to  be  the  first  perfect  number  in  actu¬ 
ality,  and  to  have  those  parts  w  hich  are  beheld 

'Cf.  Euclid  (IX.  36). 


821 

in  the  numbers  of  which  it  is  composed.  For  it 
will  have  unity  as  the  factor  with  denominator 
the  same  as  itself,  that  is,  its  sixth  part;  and  3 
as  the  half,  wrhich  is  seen  in  2,  and  conversely 
2  as  its  third  part. 

[5]  Twenty-eight  likewise  is  produced  by 
the  same  method  wrhen  another  number,  4,  is 
added  to  the  previous  ones.  For  the  sum  of  the 
three,  1,  2,  and  4,  is  7,  and  is  found  to  be  prime 
and  incomposite,  for  it  admits  only  the  factor 
with  denominator  like  itself,  the  seventh  part. 
Therefore  I  multiply  it  by  the  quantity  of  the 
term  last  taken  into  the  summation,  and  my 
result  is  28,  equal  to  its  owrn  parts,  and  having 
its  factors  derived  from  the  numbers  already 
adduced,  a  half  corresponding  to  2;  a  fourth, 
to  7;  a  seventh,  to  4;  a  fourteenth  to  offset  the 
half;  and  a  twenty-eighth,  in  accordance  writh 
its  own  nomenclature,  wrhich  is  1  in  all  num¬ 
bers. 

[6]  When  these  have  been  discovered,  6 
among  the  units  and  28  in  the  tens,  you  must 
do  the  same  to  fashion  the  next.  [ 7]  Again  add 
the  next  number,  8,  and  the  sum  is  15.  Observ¬ 
ing  this,  I  find  that  we  no  longer  have  a  prime 
and  incomposite  number,  but  in  addition  to  the 
factor  with  denominator  like  the  number  itself, 
it  has  also  a  fifth  and  a  third,  with  unlike  de¬ 
nominators.  Hence  I  do  not  multiply  it  by  8, 
but  add  the  next  number,  16,  and  31  results. 
As  this  is  a  prime,  incomposite  number,  of  ne¬ 
cessity  it  will  be  multiplied,  in  accordance  with 
the  general  rule  of  the  process,  by  the  last  num¬ 
ber  added,  16,  and  the  result  is  496,  in  the  hun¬ 
dreds  ;  and  then  comes  8,128  in  the  thousands, 
and  so  on,  as  far  as  it  is  convenient  for  one  to 
follow. 

[8]  Now  unity  is  potentially  a  perfect  num¬ 
ber,  but  not  actually;  for  taking  it  from  the 
series  as  the  very  first  I  observe  wrhat  sort  it  is, 
according  to  the  rule,  and  find  it  prime  and  in¬ 
composite  ;  for  it  is  so  in  very  truth,  not  by  par¬ 
ticipation  like  the  rest,  but  it  is  the  primary 
number  of  all,  and  alone  incomposite.  [9]  I 
multiply  it,  therefore,  by  the  last  term  taken 
into  the  summation,  that  is,  by  itself,  and  my 
result  is  1;  for  1  times  1  equals  1.  [10]  Thus 
unity  is  perfect  potentially;  for  it  is  potentially 
equal  to  its  ow  n  parts,  the  others  actually. 

CHAPTER  XVII 

[1]  Now  that  wre  have  given  a  preliminary 
systematic  account  of  absolute  quantity  we 
come  in  turn  to  relative  quantity. 

[2]  Of  relative  quantity,  then,  the  highest 
generic  divisions  are  two,  equality  and  inequal- 


822  NICOMACHUS  OF  GERASA 


ity;  for  everything  viewed  in  comparison  with 
another  thing  is  either  equal  or  unequal,  and 
there  is  no  third  thing  besides  these. 

[3]  Now7  the  equal  is  seen,  wiien  of  the  things 
compared  one  neither  exceeds  nor  falls  short  in 
comparison  with  the  other,  for  example,  100 
compared  with  100,  10  with  10,  2  with  2,  a 
mina  with  a  mina,  a  talent  with  a  talent,  a  cu¬ 
bit  with  a  cubit,  and  the  like,  either  in  bulk, 
length,  weight,  or  any  kind  of  quantity.  [4] 
And  as  a  peculiar  characteristic,  also  this  rela¬ 
tion  is  of  itself  not  to  be  divided  or  separated, 
as  being  most  elementary,  for  it  admits  of  no 
difference.  For  there  is  no  such  thing  as  this 
kind  of  equality  and  that  kind,  but  the  equal  ex¬ 
ists  in  one  and  the  same  manner.  [5]  And  that 
wThich  corresponds  to  an  equal  thing,  to  be  sure, 
does  not  have  a  different  name  from  it,  but  the 
same;  like  “friend,”  “neighbor,”  “comrade,” 
so  also  “equal”;  for  it  is  equal  to  an  equal. 

[ 6]  The  unequal,  on  the  other  hand,  is  split 
up  by  subdivisions,  and  one  part  of  it  is  the 
greater,  the  other  the  less,  wThich  have  opposite 
names  and  are  antithetical  to  one  another  in 
their  quantity  and  relation.  For  the  greater  is 
greater  than  some  other  thing,  and  the  less 
again  is  less  than  another  thing  in  comparison, 
and  their  names  are  not  the  same,  but  they 
each  have  different  ones,  for  example,  “father” 
and  “son,”  “striker”  and  “struck,”  “teacher” 
and  “pupil,”  and  the  like. 

[7]  Moreover,  of  the  greater,  separated  by 
a  second  subdivision  into  five  species,  one  kind 
is  the  multiple,  another  the  superparticular,  an¬ 
other  the  superpartient,  another  the  multiple 
superparticular,  and  another  the  multiple  su¬ 
perpartient.  [8]  And  of  its  opposite,  the  less, 
there  arise  similarly  by  subdivision  five  species, 
opposed  to  the  foregoing  five  varieties  of  the 
greater,  the  submultiple,  subsuperparticular, 
subsuperpartient,  submultiple-superparticu¬ 
lar,  andsubmultiple-superpartient;  foraswdiole 
answers  to  wThole,  smaller  to  greater,  so  also  the 
varieties  correspond,  each  to  each,  in  the  afore¬ 
said  order,  wfith  the  prefix  sub-. 

CHAPTER  XVIII 

[1]  Once  more,  then;  the  multiple  is  the  spe¬ 
cies  of  the  greater  first  and  most  original  by 
nature,  as  straightway  w^e  shall  see,  and  it  is  a 
number  wThich,  wrhen  it  is  observed  in  compari¬ 
son  wTith  another,  contains  the  wThole  of  that 
number  more  than  once.  For  example,  com¬ 
pared  with  unity,  all  the  successive  numbers 
beginning  with  2  generate  in  their  proper  order 
the  regular  forms  of  the  multiple;  for  2,  in  the 


first  place,  is  and  is  called  the  double,  3  triple, 
4  quadruple,  and  so  on;  for  “more  than  once” 
means  twice,  or  three  times,  and  so  on  in  suc¬ 
cession  as  far  as  you  like. 

[2]  Answering  to  this  is  the  submultiple, 
wrhich  is  itself  primary  in  the  smaller  division 
of  inequality.  It  is  the  number  wThich,  wThen  it 
is  compared  with  a  larger,  is  able  to  measure  it 
completely  more  than  once,  and  “more  than 
once”  starts  wfith  twice  and  goes  on  to  infinity. 

[3]  If  then  it  measures  the  larger  number  that 
is  being  compared  twfice  only,  it  is  properly 
called  the  subdouble,  as  1  is  of  2;  if  thrice,  sub¬ 
triple,  as  1  of  3;  if  four  times,  subquadruple,  as 
1  of  4,  and  so  on  in  succession. 

[4]  While  each  of  these,  the  multiple  and 
the  submultiple,  is  generically  infinite,  the  va¬ 
rieties  by  subdivision  and  the  species  also  are 
observed  naturally  to  make  an  infinite  series. 
For  the  double,  beginning  with  2,  goes  on 
through  all  the  even  numbers,  as  we  select  al¬ 
ternate  numbers  out  of  the  natural  series;  and 
these  will  be  called  doubles  in  comparison  with 
the  even  and  odd  numbers  successively  placed 
beginning  with  unity.  [5]  All  the  numbers  from 
the  beginning  tw^o  places  apart,  and  third  in 
order,  are  triples,  for  example,  3,  6,  9,  12,  15, 
18,  21,  24.  It  is  their  property  to  be  alternately 
odd  and  even,  and  they  themselves  in  the  regu¬ 
lar  series  from  unity  are  triples  of  all  the  num¬ 
bers  in  succession  as  far  as  one  wishes  to  go  on 
writh  the  process. 

[6]  The  quadruples  are  those  in  the  fourth 
places,  three  apart,  for  instance,  4,  8,  12,  16, 
20,  24,  28,  32,  and  so  on.  These  are  the  quad¬ 
ruples  of  the  regular  series  of  numbers  from 
unity  going  on  as  far  as  one  finds  it  convenient 
to  follow.  It  belongs  to  them  all  to  be  even;  for 
one  needs  only  to  take  the  alternate  terms  out 
of  the  even  numbers  already  selected.  Thus 
necessarily  it  is  true  that  the  even  numbers, 
with  no  further  designation,  are  all  doubles, 
the  alternate  ones  quadruples,  those  twTo  places 
apart  sextuples  and  those  three  places  apart 
octuples,  and  this  series  w'ill  go  on,  on  this 
same  analogy,  indefinitely. 

[7]  The  quintuples  will  be  seen  to  be  those 
four  places  apart,  placed  fifth  from  one  an¬ 
other,  and  themselves  the  quintuples  of  the 
successive  numbers  beginning  with  unity.  Al¬ 
ternately  they  are  odd  and  even,  like  the 
triples. 

CHAPTER  XIX 

[1]  The  superparticular,  the  second  species 
of  the  greater  both  natural^  and  in  order,  is  a 


INTRODUCTION  TO  ARITHMETIC  I. 


number  that  contains  within  itself  the  whole 
of  the  number  compared  with  it,  and  some  one 
factor  of  it  besides. 

[ 2]  If  this  factor  is  a  half,  the  greater  of  the 
terms  compared  is  called  specifically  sesquial- 
ter,  and  the  smaller  subsesquialter;  if  it  is  a 
third,  sesquitertian  and  subsesquitertian;  and 
as  you  go  on  throughout  it  will  always  thus 
agree,  so  that  these  species  also  will  progress 
to  infinity,  even  though  they  are  species  of  an 
unlimited  genus. 

For  it  comes  about  that  the  first  species,  the 
sesquialter  ratio,  has  as  its  consequents  the 
even  numbers  in  succession  from  2,  and  no 
other  at  all,  and  as  antecedents  the  triples  in 
succession  from  3,  and  no  other.  [3]  These 
must  be  joined  together  regularly,  first  to  first, 
second  to  second,  third  to  third — 3:2,  6:4,  9:6, 
12:8 — and  the  analogous  numbers  to  the  ones 
corresponding  to  them  in  position. 

[4]  If  we  care  to  investigate  the  second  spe¬ 
cies  of  the  superparticular,  the  sesquitertian 
(for  the  fraction  naturally  following  after  the 
half  is  the  third),  we  shall  have  this  definition 
of  it — a  number  which  contains  the  whole  of 
the  number  compared,  and  a  third  of  it  in  addi¬ 
tion  to  the  whole.  We  may  have  examples  of 
it,  in  the  proper  order,  in  the  successive  quad¬ 
ruples  beginning  with  4  joined  to  the  triples 
from  3,  each  term  with  the  one  in  the  corre¬ 
sponding  position  in  the  series,  for  example,  4: 
3,  8: 6, 12:9,  and  so  on  to  infinity.  [5]  It  is  plain 
that  that  which  corresponds  to  the  sesquiter¬ 
tian  but  is  called  with  the  prefix  sub-,  subses¬ 
quitertian,  is  the  number,  the  whole  of  which 
is  contained  and  a  third  part  in  addition,  for 
example,  3:4,  6:8,  9:12,  and  the  similar  pairs 
of  numbers  in  the  same  position  in  the  series. 

[6]  And  we  must  observe  the  never-failing 
corollary  of  all  this,  that  the  first  forms  in  each 
series,  the  so-called  root  numbers,  are  next  to 
one  another  in  the  natural  series;  the  next  after 
the  root-forms  show  an  interval  of  only  one 
number;  the  third  two;  the  fourth  three;  the 
fifth  four;  and  so  on,  as  far  as  you  like.  [7] 
Furthermore,  that  the  fraction  after  which 
each  of  the  superparticulars  is  named  is  seen  in 
the  lesser  of  the  root  numbers,  never  in  the 
greater. 

[8]  That  by  nature  and  by  no  disposition  of 
ours  the  multiple  is  a  more  elementary  and  an 
older  form  than  the  superparticular  we  shall 
shortly  learn,  through  a  somewhat  intricate 
process.  And  here,  for  a  simple  demonstration, 
we  must  prepare  in  regular  and  parallel  lines 
the  multiples  specified  above,  according  to  their 


823 

varieties,  first  the  double  in  one  line,  then  in  a 
second  the  triple,  then  the  quadruple  in  a  third, 
and  so  on  as  far  as  the  tenfold  multiples,  so 
that  we  may  detect  their  order  and  variety, 
their  regulated  progress,  and  which  of  them  is 
naturally  prior,  and  indeed  other  corollaries  de¬ 
lightful  in  their  exactness.  Let  the  diagram  be 
as  follows:  [9] 


1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

10 

2 

4 

6 

8 

10 

12 

14 

16 

18 

20 

3 

6 

9 

12 

15 

18 

21 

24 

27 

30 

4 

8 

12 

16 

20 

24 

28 

32 

36 

40 

5 

10 

15 

20 

25 

30 

35 

40 

45 

50 

6 

12 

18 

24 

30 

36 

42 

48 

54 

60 

7 

14 

21 

28 

35 

42 

49 

56 

63 

70 

8 

16 

24 

32 

40 

48 

56 

64 

72 

80 

9 

18 

27 

36 

45 

54 

63 

72 

81 

90 

10 

20 

30 

40 

50 

60 

70 

80 

90 

100 

[10]  Let  there  be  set  forth  in  the  first  row 
the  natural  series  from  unity,  and  then  in  order 
those  species  of  the  multiple  which  we  were 
bidden  to  insert. 

[11]  Now  then  in  comparison  with  the  first 
rows  beginning  with  unity,  if  we  read  both 
across  and  up  and  down  in  the  form  of  the  let¬ 
ter  gamma,  the  next  rows  both  ways,  them¬ 
selves  in  the  form  of  a  gamma,  beginning  with 
4,  are  multiples  according  to  the  first  form  of 
the  multiple,  for  they  are  doubles.  The  first 
differs  by  unity  from  the  first,  the  second  from 
the  second  by  2,  the  third  from  the  third  by  3, 
the  next  by  4,  those  following  by  5,  and  you 
will  find  that  this  follows  throughout. 

The  third  rows  in  both  directions  from  9, 
their  common  origin,  will  be  the  triples  of  the 
terms  in  that  same  first  row  according  to  the 
second  form  of  the  multiple;  the  cross-lines  like 
the  letter  chi,  ending  in  the  term  3  in  either  di¬ 
rection,  are  to  be  taken  into  consideration.  [  12] 
The  difference,  for  these  numbers,  will  progress 
after  the  series  of  the  even  numbers,  being  2 
for  the  first,  4  for  the  next,  6  for  the  third;  and 
this  difference  Nature  has  of  her  own  accord  in¬ 
terpolated  for  us  between  these  rows  that  are 
being  examined,  as  is  evident  in  the  diagram. 

[13]  The  fourth  row,  whose  common  origin 
in  both  directions  is  16,  and  whose  cross-lines 
end  with  the  terms  4,  exhibits  the  third  species 
of  multiple,  the  quadruple,  when  it  is  compared 
with  that  same  first  row  according  to  corre¬ 
sponding  positions,  first  term  with  first,  second 
with  second,  third  with  third,  and  so  on.  Again, 
the  differences  of  these  numbers  are  3,  6,  then 
9,  then  12,  and  the  quantities  that  progress  by 
steps  of  3.  These  numbers  are  detected  in  the 


NICOMACHUS  OF  GERASA 


824 

structure  of  the  diagram  in  places  just  above 
the  quadruples,  and  in  the  subsequent  forms  of 
the  multiple  the  analogy  will  hold  throughout. 

[14]  In  comparison  with  the  second  line 
reading  either  way,  which  begins  witfi\he  com¬ 
mon  origin  4  and  runs  over  in  cross-lines  to  the 
term  2  in  each  row,  the  lines  which  are  next  in 
order  beneath  display  the  first  species  of  the 
superparticular,  that  is,  the  sesquialter,  be¬ 
tween  terms  occupying  corresponding  places. 
Thus  by  divine  nature,  not  by  our  convention 
or  agreement,  the  superparticulars  are  of  later 
origin  than  the  multiples.  For  illustration,  3  is 
the  sesquialter  of  2,  6  of  4,  9  of  6,  12  of  8,  15  of 
10,  and  throughout  thus.  They  have  as  a  dif¬ 
ference  the  successive  numbers  from  unity,  like 
those  before  them. 

[lo]  The  sesqui tertians,  the  second  species 
of  superparticular,  proceed  with  a  regular,  even 
advance  from  4: 3,  8:6, 12:9,  16:12,  and  so  on; 
having  also  a  regular  increase  of  their  differ¬ 
ences.  [16]  And  in  the  other  multiple  and  su¬ 
perparticular  relations  you  will  see  that  the  re¬ 
sults  are  in  harmony  and  not  by  any  means 
inconsistent  as  you  go  on  to  infinity. 

[17]  The  following  feature  of  the  diagram, 
moreover,  is  of  no  less  exactness.  The  terms  at 
the  corners  are  units;  the  one  at  the  beginning 
a  simple  unit,  that  at  the  end  the  unit  of  the 
third  course,  and  the  other  two  units  of  the 
second  course  appearing  twice;  so  that  the 
product  (of  the  first  two)  is  equal  to  the  square 
(of  the  last).  [18]  Furthermore,  in  reading 
either  way  there  is  an  even  progress  from  unity 
to  the  tens,  and  again  on  the  opposite  sides  two 
other  progressions  from  10  to  100. 

[19]  The  terms  on  the  diagonal  from  1  to 
100  are  all  square  numbers,  the  products  of 
equals  by  equals,  and  those  flanking  them  on 
either  side  are  all  heteromecic,  unequal,  and 
the  products  of  sides  cf  which  one  is  greater 
than  the  other  by  unity;  and  so  the  sum  of  two 
successive  squares  and  twice  the  heteromecic 
numbers  between  them  is  always  a  square,  and 
conversely  a  square  is  ahvays  produced  from 
the  twro  heteromecic  numbers  on  the  sides  and 
twice  the  square  between  them. 

[20]  An  ambitious  person  might  find  many 
other  pleasing  things  displayed  in  this  diagram, 
upon  which  it  is  not  now  the  time  to  dw'ell,  for 
we  have  not  yet  gained  recognition  of  them 
from  our  Introduction ,  and  so  wre  must  turn  to 
the  next  subject.  For  after  these  twTo  geneiic 
relations  of  the  multiple  and  the  superparticu¬ 
lar  and  the  other  twTo,  opposite  to  them,  with 
the  prefix  sub-,  the  submultiple  and  the  sub¬ 


superparticular,  there  are  in  the  greater  divi¬ 
sion  of  inequalit}^  the  superpartient,  and  in  the 
less  its  opposite,  the  subsuperpartient. 

CHAPTER  XX 

[1]  It  is  the  superpartient  relation  wiien  a 
number  contains  within  itself  the  wThole  of  the 
number  compared  and  in  addition  more  than 
one  part  of  it;  and  “more  than  one”  starts  with 
2  and  goes  on  to  all  the  numbers  in  succession. 
Thus  the  root-form  of  the  superpartient  is  nat¬ 
urally  the  one  wrhich  has  in  addition  to  the 
w  hole  twro  parts  of  the  number  compared,  and 
as  a  species  will  be  called  superbipartient;  after 
this  the  one  with  three  parts  besides  the  whole 
will  be  called  supertripartient  as  a  species;  then 
comes  the  superquadripartient,  the  superquin- 
tipartient,  and  so  forth. 

[2]  The  parts  have  their  root  and  origin  with 
the  third,  for  it  is  impossible  in  this  case  to  be¬ 
gin  with  the  half.  For  if  w^e  assume  that  any 
number  contains  twTo  halves  of  the  compared 
number,  besides  the  whole  of  it,  we  shall  inad¬ 
vertently  be  setting  up  a  multiple  instead  of  a 
superpartient,  because  each  whole,  plus  twro 
halves  of  it,  added  together  makes  double  the 
original  number.  Thus  it  is  most  necessary  to 
start  with  two  thirds,  then  two  fifths,  twro  sev¬ 
enths,  and  after  these  twro  ninths,  following  the 
advance  of  the  odd  numbers;  for  two  quartern, 
for  example,  again  are  a  half,  twro  sixths  a 
third,  and  thus  again  superparticulars  will  be 
produced  instead  of  superpartients,  wilich  is 
not  the  problem  laid  before  us  nor  in  accord 
with  the  systematic  construction  of  our  science. 

[3]  After  the  superpartient  the  subsuper¬ 
partient  immediately  is  produced,  whenever  a 
number  is  completely  contained  in  the  one  com¬ 
pared  with  it,  and  in  addition  several  parts  of 
it,  2,  3,  4,  or  5,  and  so  on. 

CHAPTER  XXI 

[1]  The  regular  arrangement  and  orderly 
production  of  both  species  are  discovered  wThen 
w*e  set  forth  the  successive  even  and  odd  num¬ 
bers,  beginning  with  3,  and  compare  with  them 
simple  series  of  odd  numbers  only,  from  5  in 
succession,  first  to  first — that  is,  5  to  3, — sec¬ 
ond  to  second — that  is,  7  to  4, — third  to  third 
— that  is,  9  to  5, — fourth  to  fourth — that  is,  11 
to  6, —  and  so  on  in  the  same  order  as  far  as 
you  like.  In  this  way  the  forms  of  the  super¬ 
partient  and  the  subsuperpartient,  in  due  order, 
will  be  disclosed  through  the  root-forms  of  each 
species,  the  superbipartient  first,  then  the  su¬ 
pertripartient,  superquadripartient,  and  super- 


INTRODUCTION  TO  ARITHMETIC  I. 


quintipai  tient,  and  further  in  succession  in  sim¬ 
ilar  manner;  for  after  the  root-forms  of  each 
species  the  ones  which  follow  them  will  be  pro¬ 
duced  by  doubling,  or  tripling,  both  the  terms, 
and  in  general  by  multiplying  after  the  regular 
forms  of  the  multiple. 


825 

nerically,  it  will  have  in  its  subdivisions  accord¬ 
ing  to  species  a  sort  of  diversification  and 
change  of  names  proper  both  to  the  first  part 
of  the  name  and  to  the  second.  For  instance, 
in  the  first  part,  that  is,  the  multiple,  it  will 
have  double,  triple,  quadruple,  quintuple,  and 


Table  of  the  superpartients 


Root-forms 

5 

3 

7 

4 

0 

5 

11 

6 

13 

7 

10 

6 

14 

S 

18 

10 

22 

12 

26 

14 

15 

9 

21 

12 

27 

15 

33 

18 

39 

21 

20 

12 

28 

16 

36 

20 

44 

24 

52 

28 

25 

15 

35 

20 

45 

25 

55 

30 

65 

35 

30 

18 

42 

24 

54 

30 

66 

36 

78 

42 

35 

21 

40 

28 

63 

35 

77 

42 

91 

49 

40 

24 

56 

32 

72 

40 

8S 

48 

104 

56 

45 

27 

63 

36 

81 

45 

99 

54 

117 

63 

[2]  It  must  be  observed  that  from  the  two 
parts  in  addition  to  the  whole  which  are  con¬ 
tained  in  the  greater  term,  we  are  to  under¬ 
stand  “third,”  in  the  case  of  three  parts, 
“fourth,”*  with  four  parts,  “fifth,”  with  five, 
“sixth,”  and  so  on,  so  that  the  order  of  nomen¬ 
clature  is  something  like  this:  superbipartient, 
supertripartient,  superquadripartient,  then  su- 
perquintipartient,  and  similarly  with  the  rest. 

[3]  Now  the  simple,  uncompounded  rela¬ 
tions  of  relative  quantity  are  these  which  have 
been  enumerated.  Those  which  are  compound¬ 
ed  of  them  and  as  it  were  woven  out  of  two 
into  one  are  the  following,  of  which  the  ante¬ 
cedents  are  the  multiple  superparticular  and 
multiple  superpartient,  and  the  consequents 
the  ones  that  immediately  arise  in  connection 
with  each  of  the  former,  named  with  the  prefix 
sub-;  together  with  the  multiple  superparticu¬ 
lar  the  submultiple  superparticular,  and  with 
the  multiple  superpartient  the  submultiple  su¬ 
perpartient.  In  the  subdivision  of  the  genei’a 
the  species  of  the  one  will  correspond  to  those 
of  the  other,  these  also  having  names  with  the 
prefix  sub-. 

CHAPTER  XXII 

[1  ]  Now  the  multiple  superparticular  is  a  re¬ 
lation  in  which  the  greater  of  the  compared 
terms  contains  within  itself  the  lesser  term 
more  than  once  and  in  addition  some  one  part 
of  it,  whatever  this  may  be. 

[2]  As  a  compound,  such  a  number  is  dou¬ 
bly  diversified  after  the  peculiarities  of  nomen¬ 
clature  of  its  components  on  either  side;  for  in¬ 
asmuch  as  the  multiple  superparticular  is  com¬ 
posed  of  the  multiple  and  superparticular  ge- 


so  forth,  and  in  the  second  part,  generically 
from  the  superparticular,  its  specific  forms  in 
due  order,  the  sesquialter,  sesquitertian,  ses- 
quiquartan,  sesquiquintan,  and  so  on,  so  that 
the  combination  will  proceed  in  somewhat  this 
order: 

Double  sesquialter,  double  sesquitertian, 
double  sesquiquartan,  double  sesquiquintan, 
double  sesquisextan,  and  analogously. 

Beginning  once  more :  triple  sesquialter,  tri¬ 
ple  sesquitertian,  triple  sesquiquartan,  triple 
sesquiquintan. 

Again :  quadruple  sesquialter,  quadruple  ses¬ 
quitertian,  quadruple  sesquiquartan,  quadru¬ 
ple  sesquiquintan. 

Again:  quintuple  sesquialter,  quintuple  ses¬ 
quitertian,  quintuple  sesquiquartan,  quintuple 
sesquiquintan,  and  the  forms  analogous  to 
these  ad  infinitum,  'Whatever  number  of  times 
the  greater  contains  the  whole  of  the  smaller, 
by  this  quantity  the  first  part  of  the  ratio  of 
the  terms  joined  together  in  the  multiple  super- 
particular  is  named ;  and  whatever  may  be  the 
factor,  in  addition  to  the  whole  several  times 
contained,  that  is,  in  the  greater  term,  from 
this  is  named  the  second  kind  of  ratio  of  which 
the  multiple  superparticular  is  compounded. 

[3]  Examples  of  it  are  these:  5  is  the  double 
sesquialter  of  2;  7  the  double  sesquitertian  of 
3;  9  the  double  sesquiquartan  of  4;  11  the  dou¬ 
ble  sesquiquintan  of  5.  You  will  furthermore 
always  produce  them  in  regular  order,  in  this 
fashion,  by  comparing  with  the  successive  even 
and  odd  numbers  from  2  the  odd  numbers,  ex¬ 
clusively,  from  5,  first  with  first,  second  with 
second,  third  with  third,  and  the  others  each 
with  the  one  in  the  same  position  in  the  series. 


826  NICOMACHUS  OF  GERASA 


The  successive  terms  beginning  with  5  and  dif¬ 
fering  by  5  will  be  without  exception  double 
sesquialters  of  all  the  successive  even  numbers 
from  2  on,  when  terms  in  the  same  position  in 
the  series  are  compared ;  and  beginning  with  3, 
if  all  those  with  a  difference  of  3  be  set  forth, 
as  3,  6,  9,  12,  15,  18,  21,  and  in  another  series 
there  be  set  forth  those  that  differ  by  7,  to  in¬ 
finity,  as  7, 14,  21, 28,  35,  42,  49,  and  the  great¬ 
er  be  compared  with  the  smaller,  first  to  first, 
second  to  second,  third  to  third,  fourth  to 
fourth,  and  so  on,  the  second  species  will  ap¬ 
pear,  the  double  sesquitertian,  disposed  in  its 
proper  order. 

[ 4]  Then  again,  to  take  a  fresh  start,  if  the 
simple  series  of  quadruples  be  set  forth,  4,  8, 
12,  16,  20,  24,  28,  32,  and  then  there  be  placed 
beside  it  in  another  series  the  successive  num¬ 
bers  beginning  with  9,  and  increasing  by  9,  as 
9, 18,  27,  36, 45,  54,  we  shall  have  revealed  once 
more  the  multiple  superparticular  in  a  specific 
form,  that  is,  the  double  sesquiquartan  in  its 
proper  order;  and  any  one  who  desires  can  con¬ 
trive  this  to  an  unlimited  extent. 

[ 5]  The  second  kind  begins  with  the  triple 
sesquialter,  such  as  7:2,  14:4,  and  in  general 
the  numbers  that  advance  by  steps  of  7  com¬ 
pared  with  the  even  numbers  in  order  from  2. 

[6]  Then  once  more,  10 : 3  is  the  first  triple  ses¬ 
quitertian,  20:6  the  second,  and,  in  a  word,  the 
multiples  of  10  in  succession,  compared  with 
the  successive  triples.  This  indeed  we  can  ob¬ 
serve  with  greater  exactitude  and  clearness  in 
the  table  studied  above,  for  in  comparison  with 
the  first  row  the  succeeding  rows  in  order,1 
compared  as  whole  rows,  display  the  forms  of 
the  multiple  in  regular  order  up  to  infinity  when 
they  are  all  compared  in  each  case  to  the  same 
first  row;  and  when  each  row  is  compared  to 
all  those  above  it,  in  succession,  the  second  row 
being  taken  as  our  starting  point,  all  the  forms 
of  the  superparticular  are  produced  in  their 
proper  order;  and  if  we  start  with  the  third 
row,  all  of  those  beginning  with  the  fifth  that 
are  odd  in  the  series  when  they  are  compared 
with  this  same  third  row,  and  those  following 
it,  will  show  all  the  forms  of  the  superpartient 
in  proper  order.  In  the  case  of  the  multiple  su¬ 
perparticular,  the  comparisons  will  have  a  nat¬ 
ural  order  of  their  own  if  we  start  with  the  sec¬ 
ond  row  and  compare  the  terms  from  the  fifth, 
first  to  first,  second  to  second,  third  to  third, 
and  so  on,  and  then  the  terms  of  the  seventh 
row  to  the  third,  those  of  the  ninth  to  the 

deferring  to  the  table  in  Chapter  19. 


fourth,  and  follow  the  corresponding  order  as 
far  as  we  are  able  to  go.  [7]  It  is  plain  that  here 
too  the  smaller  terms  have  names  correspond¬ 
ing  to  the  larger  ones,  with  the  prefix  sub-,  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  nomenclature  given  them  all. 

CHAPTER  XXIII 

[1]  The  multiple  superpartient  is  the  re¬ 
maining  relation  of  number.  This,  and  the  re¬ 
lation  called  by  a  corresponding  name  with  the 
prefix  sub-,  exist  when  a  number  contains  the 
whole  of  the  number  compared  more  than  once 
(that  is,  twice,  thrice,  or  any  number  of  times) 
and  certain  parts  of  it,  more  than  one,  either 
two,  three,  or  four,  and  so  on,  besides.  [2] 
These  parts2  are  not  halves,  for  the  reasons  men¬ 
tioned  above,  but  either  thirds,  fourths,  or 
fifths,  and  so  on. 

[8]  From  what  has  already  been  said  it  is 
not  hard  to  conceive  of  the  varieties  of  this  re¬ 
lation,  for  they  are  differentiated  in  the  same 
way  as,  and  consistently  with,  those  that  pre¬ 
cede,  double  superbipartient,  double  supertri- 
partient,  double  superquadripartient,  and  so 
on.  For  example,  8  is  the  double  superbiparti¬ 
ent  of  3,  16  of  6,  and  in  general  the  numbers 
beginning  with  8  and  differing  by  8  are  double 
superbipartients  of  those  beginning  with  3  and 
differing  by  3,  when  those  in  corresponding 
places  in  the  series  are  compared,  and  in  the 
case  of  the  other  varieties  one  could  ascertain 
their  proper  sequence  by  following  out  what 
has  already  been  said.  In  this  case,  too,  we  must 
conceive  that  the  nomenclature  of  the  number 
compared  goes  along  and  suffers  corresponding 
changes,  with  the  addition  of  the  prefix  sub-. 

[4]  Thus  we  come  to  the  end  of  our  specula¬ 
tion  upon  the  ten  arithmetical  relations  for  a 
first  Introduction.  There  is,  however,  a  method 
very  exact  and  necessary  for  all  discussion  of 
the  nature  of  the  universe  which  very  clearly 
and  indisputably  presents  to  us  the  fact  that 
that  which  is  fair  and  limited,  and  which  sub¬ 
jects  itself  to  knowledge,3  is  naturally  prior  to 
the  unlimited,  incomprehensible,  and  ugly,  and 
furthermore  that  the  parts  and  varieties  of  the 
infinite  and  unlimited  are  given  shape  and 
boundaries  by  the  former,  and  through  it  at¬ 
tain  to  their  fitting  order  and  sequence,  and 
like  objects  brought  beneath  some  seal  or  meas¬ 
ure,  all  gain  a  share  of  likeness  to  it  and  simi¬ 
larity  of  name  when  they  fall  under  its  influ¬ 
ence.  For  thus  it  is  reasonable  that  the  rational 

2See  20.  2  above. 

3Cf.  I.  2.  5. 


INTRODUCTION  TO  ARITHMETIC  I. 


part  of  the  soul  will  be  the  agent  which  put*  in 
order  the  irrational  part,  and  passion  and  ap¬ 
petite,  which  find  their  places  in  the  two  forms 
of  inequality,  will  be  regulated  by  the  reason¬ 
ing  faculty  as  though  by  a  kind  of  equality  and 
sameness.  [6]  And  from  this  equalizing  process 
there  will  properly  result  for  us  the  so-called 
ethical  virtues,  sobriety,1  courage,  gentleness, 
self-control,  fortitude,  and  the  like. 

[6]  Let  us  then  consider  the  nature  of  the 
principle  that  pertains  to  these  universal  mat¬ 
ters.  It  is  capable  of  pro  wing  that  all  the  com¬ 
plex  species  of  inequality  and  the  varieties  of 
these  species  are  produced  out  of  equality,  first 
and  alone,  as  from  a  mother  and  root. 

[7]  Let  there  be  given  us  equal  numbers  in 
three  terms,  first,  units,  then  two’s  in  another 
group  of  three,  then  three’s,  next  four’s,  five's, 
and  so  on  as  far  as  you  like.  For  them,  as  the 
setting  forth  of  these  terms  has  come  about  by 
a  divine,  and  not  human,  contrivance,  nay,  by 
Nature  herself,  multiples  will  first  be  produced, 
and  among  these  the  double  will  lead  the  way, 
the  triple  after  the  double,  the  quadruple  next, 
and  then  the  quintuple,  and,  following  the  or¬ 
der  we  have  previously  recognized,  ad  infini¬ 
tum;  second,  the  superparticular,  and  here 
again  the  first  form,  the  sesquialter,  will  lead, 
and  the  next  after  it,  the  sesqui tertian,  will  fol¬ 
low,  and  after  them  the  next  in  order,  the  ses- 
qui quartan,  the  sesquiquintan.  the  sesquisex- 
tan,  and  so  on  ad  infinitum:  third,  the  super- 
partient,  which  once  more  the  superbipartient 
will  lead,  the  supertripartient  will  follow  im¬ 
mediately  upon  it,  and  then  will  come  the 
superquadri  part  lent,  the  superquintipartient, 
and  according  to  the  foregoing  as  far  as  one 
may  proceed. 

[S]  Now  you  must  have  certain  rules,  like 
invariable  and  inviolable  natural  laws,  follow¬ 
ing  which  the  whole  aforesaid  advance  and 
progress  from  equality  may  go  on  without  fail¬ 
ure.  These  are  the  directions:  Make  the  first 
equal  to  the  first,  the  second  equal  to  the  sum 
of  the  first  and  second,  and  the  third  to  the  sum 
of  the  first,  twice  the  second,  and  the  third. 
For  if  you  fashion  according  to  these  rules  you 
would  get  first  all  the  forms  of  the  multiple  in 
order  out  of  the  three  given  terms  of  the  equal¬ 
ity,  as  it  were,  sprouting  and  growing  without 
your  paying  any  heed  or  offering  any  aid.  From 
equality  you  will  first  get  the  double:  from  the 
double  the  triple,  from  the  triple  successively 

*Cf.  Aristotle,  Ethics,  1107b  4  ff.  See  ibid., 
llOSMff.;  1145b  8  ff. 


S27 

the  quadruple,  and  from  this  the  quintuple  in 
due  order,  and  so  on.  [9]  From  these  same  mul¬ 
tiples  in  their  regular  order,  reversed,  there  are 
immediately  produced  by  a  sort  of  natural  ne¬ 
cessity  through  the  agency  of  the  same  three 
rules  the  superparticulars,  and  these  not  as  it 
chances  and  irregularly  but  in  their  proper  se¬ 
quence:  for  from  the  first,  the  double,  reversed, 
comes  the  first,  the  sesquialter,  and  from  the 
second,  the  triple,  the  second  in  this  class,  the 
sesqui  tertian:  then  the  sesquiquartan  from  the 
quadruple,  and  in  general  each  one  from  the 
one  of  similar  name.  [10]  And  with  a  fresh 
start,  if  the  superparticulars  are  set  forth  in 
the  order  of  their  production,  but  with  terms 
reversed,  the  superpartients,  which  naturally 
follow  them,  are  brought  to  light,  the  superbi¬ 
partient  from  the  sesquialter,  the  supertripar¬ 
tient  from  the  sesquitertian,  the  superquadri- 
partient  from  the  sesquiquartan,  and  so  on  ad 
infinitum.  [11]  If.  however,  the  superparticu¬ 
lars  are  set  forth  with  terms  not  in  reverse  but 
in  direct  order,  there  are  produced  through  the 
three  rules  the  multiple  superparticulars,  the 
double  sesquialter  out  of  the  first,  the  sesqui¬ 
alter:  the  double  sesquitertian  from  the  second, 
the  sesquitertian.  the  double  sesquiquartan 
from  the  third,  the  sesquiquartan,  and  so  on. 
[12]  From  those  produced  by  the  reversal  of 
the  superparticular,  that  is,  the  superpartients. 
and  from  those  produced  without  such  revers¬ 
al,  the  multiple  superparticulars,  there  are  once 
more  produced,  in  the  same  way  and  by  the 
same  rules,  both  when  the  terms  are  in  direct 
or  reverse  order,  the  numbers  that  show  the 
remaining  numerical  relations. 

[IS]  The  following  must  suffice  as  illustra¬ 
tions  of  all  that  has  been  said  hitherto,  the  pro¬ 
duction  of  these  numbers  and  their  sequence, 
and  the  use  of  direct  and  of  reverse  order.  [14] 
From  the  relation  and  proportion  in  terms  of 
the  sesquialter,  reversed  so  as  to  begin  with  the 
largest  term,  there  arises  a  relation  in  super- 
partient  ratios,  the  superbipartient:  and  from 
it  in  direct  order,  beginning  with  the  smallest 
term,  a  multiple  superparticular  relation,  the 
double  sesquialter.  For  example,  from  9,  6.  4, 
we  get  either  9,  15.  25  or  4.  10.  25.  From  the 
relation  in  terms  of  sesquitertians,  beeinning 
with  the  greatest  term,  is  derived  a  superpar- 
tient,  the  supertripartient:  beginning  with  the 
smallest  term,  a  double  sesquitertian.  For  ex¬ 
ample.  from  16,  12,  9  comes  either  16.  2>.  49 
or  9,  21,  49.  And  from  the  relation  in  term'  of 
sesquiquartan*,  when  it  i«  arrange  1  to  becin 
with  the  largest  term,  is  derived  a  superpar- 


NICOMACHUS  OF  GERASA 


82S 

tient,  the  superquadripartient:  when  it  starts 
with  the  smallest  term,  a  multiple  superpar- 
tieular,  the  double  sesquiquintan;  for  instance, 
from  25,  20,  16  comes  either  25,  45,  81  or  16, 
36,  81. 

[15]  In  the  case  of  all  these  relations  that 
are  thus  differentiated,  and  of  the  one  from 
which  both  of  the  differentiated  ones  are 
derived,  the  last  term  is  always  the  same 
and  a  square;  the  first  term  becomes  the 
smallest,  and  invariably  the  extremes  are 
squares. 

[16]  Moreover  the  multiple  superpartients 
and  superpartients  of  other  kinds  are  made  to 
appear  in  yet  another  way  out  of  the  superpar¬ 
tients;  for  example,  from  the  superbipart ient 
relation  arranged  so  as  to  begin  with  the  small¬ 


est  term  comes  the  double  superbipartient,  but, 
arranged  so  as  to  start  with  the  greatest,  the 
superpartient  ratio  of  8: 5.  Thus  from  9,  15,  25 
comes  either  9,  24,  64  or  25,  40,  64.  From  the 
supertripartient,  beginning  with  the  smallest 
term,  we  have  the  double  supertripartient,  and, 
beginning  with  the  largest,  the  ratio  of  11:7. 
Thus,  from  16,  28,  49  comes  either  16,  44,  121 
or  49,  77, 121.  [17]  Again,  from  the  superquin- 
tipartient,  as,  for  example,  25,  45,  81,  begin¬ 
ning  with  the  lesser  term  we  derive  the  double 
superquintipartient  in  the  terms  25,  70,  196, 
but  beginning  with  the  greater  a  superpartient 
again,  the  ratio  of  14:9,  in  the  terms  81,  126, 
196.  And  you  will  find  the  results  analogous 
and  in  agreement  with  the  foregoing  in  all  suc¬ 
cessive  cases  to  infinity. 


BOOK  TWO 


CHAPTER  I 

[1]  An  element  is  said  to  be,  and  is,  the 
smallest  thing  which  enters  into  the  composi¬ 
tion  of  an  object  and  the  least  thing  into  which 
it  can  be  analyzed.  Letters,  for  example,  are 
called  the  elements  of  literate  speech,  for  out 
of  them  all  articulate  speech  is  composed  and 
into  them  finally  it  is  resolved.  Sounds  are  the 
elements  of  ail  melody;  for  they  are  the  begin¬ 
ning  of  its  composition  and  into  them  it  is  re¬ 
solved.  The  so-called  four  elements  of  the  uni¬ 
verse  in  general  are  simple  bodies,  fire,  water, 
air,  and  earth;  for  out  of  them  in  the  first  in¬ 
stance  we  account  for  the  constitution  of  the 
universe,  and  into  them  finally  we  conceive  of 
it  as  being  resolved. 

We  wish  also  to  prove  that  equality  is  the 
elementary  principle1  of  relative  number;  for 
of  absolute  number,  number  per  se,  unity  and 
the  dyad  are  the  most  primitive  elements,  the 
least  things  out  of  which  it  is  constructed,  even 
to  infinity,  by  which  it  has  its  growth,  and  with 
which  its  analysis  into  smaller  terms  comes  to 
an  end.  [£]  We  have,  however,  demonstrated 
that  in  the  realm  of  inequality  advance  and 
increase  have  their  origin  in  equality  and  go  on 
to  absolutely  all  the  relations  with  a  certain 
regularity  through  the  operation  of  the  three 
rules.2  It  remains,  then,  in  order  to  make  it  an 
element  in  very  truth,  to  prove  that  analyses 
also  finally  come  to  an  end  in  equality.  Let  this 
then  be  considered  our  procedure. 

CHAPTER  II 

[1]  Suppose  then  you  are  given  three  terms, 
in  any  relation  whatsoever  and  in  any  ratio, 
whether  multiple,  superparticular,  superparti- 
ent,  or  a  compound  of  these,  multiple  super¬ 
particular  or  multiple  superpartient,  provided 
only  that  the  mean  term  is  seen  to  be  in  the 
same  ratio  to  the  lesser  as  the  greater  to  the 
mean,  and  vice  versa.  Subtract  always  from 


the  mean  the  lesser  term,  whether  it  be  first  or 
last  in  order,  and  set  down  the  lesser  term  it¬ 
self  as  the  first  term  of  your  new  series;  then 
put  as  your  second  term  what  remains  from 
the  second  after  the  subtraction;  then  after 
having  subtracted  the  sum  of  the  new  first  term 
and  twice  the  new  second  term  from  the  re¬ 
maining  number — that  is,  the  greater  of  the 
numbers  originally  given  you — make  the  re¬ 
mainder  your  third  term,  and  the  resulting 
numbers  will  be  in  some  other  ratio,  naturally 
more  primitive.  [2]  And  if  again  in  the  same 
way  you  subtract  the  remainder  from  these 
same  terms,  it  will  be  found  that  your  three 
terms  have  passed  back  into  three  others  more 
primitive,  and  3rou  will  find  that  this  always 
takes  place  as  a  consequence,  until  they  are  re¬ 
duced  to  equality,  whence  by  every  necessity 
it  appears  evident  that  equality  is  the  elemen¬ 
tary  principle  of  relative  quantity. 

[3]  There  follows  upon  this  speculation  a 
most  elegant  principle,  extremely  useful  in  its 
application  to  the  Platonic  psychogony3  and 
the  problem  of  all  harmonic  intervals;  for  in 
the  Platonic  passage  we  are  frequently  bidden, 
for  the  sake  of  the  argument,  to  set  up  series  of 
intervals  of  two,  three,  four,  five,  or  an  infinite 
number  of  sesquialter  ratios,  or  two  sesquiter- 
tians,  sesquiquartans,  sesquioctaves,  or  super- 
particulars  of  any  kind  whatsoever,  and  in  each 
case  three,  four,  or  five  of  them,  or  as  many  as 
may  be  directed.  [4]  It  is  reasonable  that  we 
should  do  this  not  in  an  unscientific,  unintelli¬ 
gent  fashion,  it  may  be  even  blunderingly,  but 
artistically,  surely,  and  quickly,  by  the  follow¬ 
ing  procedure. 

CHAPTER  III 

[1]  Every  multiple  will  stand  at  the  head1 
of  as  many  superparticular  ratios  correspond¬ 
ing  in  name  with  itself  as  it  itself  chances  to  be 
removed  from  unity,  and  no  more  nor  less  un¬ 
der  any  circumstances. 

3See  Plato,  Timaeus ,  35  IT. 

^Refers  to  the  table  in  Chapter  4. 


'See  on  I.  23.  4. 
2See  on  I.  23.  8. 


820 


830 


NICOMACHUS  OF  GERASA 


[2]  The  doubles,  then,  will  produce1  sesqui- 
alters,  the  first  one,  the  second  two,  the  third 
three,  the  fourth  four,  the  fifth  five,  the  sixth 
six,  and  neither  more  nor  less,  but  by  every 
necessity  when  the  superparticulars  that  are 
generated  attain  the  proper  number,  that  is, 
when  their  number  agrees  with  the  multiples 
that  have  generated  them,  at  that  point  by  a 
divine  device,  as  it  were,  there  is  found  the 


Sixteen,  the  fourth  double,  will  stand  at  the 
head  of  four  sesquialters,  24,  36,  54,  and  finally 
81,  so  that  they  may  of  necessity  be  equal  in 
number  to  what  generated  them;  for  81  by  its 
nature  is  not  divisible  by  2.  And  this,  as  you  go 
on,  you  will  find  holds  true  in  similar  fashion  to 
infinity. 

[4]  For  the  sake  of  illustration  let  there  be 
set  down  the  table  of  the  doubles,  thus: 


The  double  ratio  in  the  breadth  of  the  table 

1  2  4 

8 

16 

32 

64 

3  6 

12 

24 

48 

96 

The  triple  ratio  along 

9 

18 

36 

72 

144 

The  sesquialter  ra¬ 

the  hypotenuse 

27 

54 

108 

216 

tio  in  the  depth 

81 

162 

324 

243 

486 

729 

number  which  terminates  them  all  because  it 
naturally  is  not  divisible  by  that  factor  where¬ 
by  the  progression  of  the  superparticul 
went  on. 


CHAPTER  IV 
[1]  We  must  make  a  similar  table  in  illus- 


tration  of  the  triple: 

27 

81 

243 

729 

36 

108 

324 

972 

48 

144 

432 

1296 

64 

192 

576 

1728 

256 

768 

2304 

1024 

3072 

4096 

The  triple  ratio  in  the  breadth 

1 

The  quadruple  ratio 
on  the  hypotenuse 


9 

12 

16 


From  the  triples  all  the  sesquitertians  will 
proceed,  likewise  equal  in  number  to  the  num¬ 
ber  of  the  generating  terms,  and  coming  to  an 
end,  after  the  independence  of  their  advance  is 
lost,  in  numbers  not  divisible  by  3.  Similarly  the 
sesquiquartans  come  from  the  quadruples, reach¬ 
ing  a  culmination  after  their  independent  pro¬ 
gression  in  a  number  that  is  not  divisible  by  4. 

[8]  As  an  example,  since  doubles  generate 
sesquialters  corresponding  to  them  in  number, 
the  first  row  of  multiples  will  be  1,  2,  4,  8,  16, 
32,  64.  Now  since  2  is  the  first  after  unity,  this 
will  be  the  origin  of  one  sesquialter  only,  3, 
which  number  is  not  divisible  by  2,  so  that  an¬ 
other  sesquialter  might  arise  out  of  it.  The  first 
double,  therefore,  is  productive  of  but  one  ses¬ 
quialter,  and  the  second,  4,  of  two.  For  it  pro¬ 
duces  its  own  sesquialter,  6,  and  that  of  6,  9, 
but  there  is  none  for  9  because  it  has  no  half. 
Eight,  which  is  the  third  double,  is  father  to 
three  sesquialters;  one  its  own,  12;  the  second, 
18,  the  sesquialter  of  12;  and  third,  27,  that  of 
18 ;  there  is  no  fourth  one,  however,  because  of 
the  general  rule,  for  27  is  not  divisible  by  2. 

^ee  I.  19.  2. 


In  the  foregoing  table  we  shall  observe  that 
in  the  same  way  the  first  triple,  3,  stands  at  the 
head  of  but  one  sesquitertian  ratio,  4,  its  own 
sesquitertian,  which  immediately  shuts  off  the 
development  of  another  like  it;  for  4  is  not  di¬ 
visible  by  3,  and  hence  will  not  have  a  sesqui¬ 
tertian.  The  second  triple  is  9,  and  hence  will 
begin  a  series  of  only  two  sesquitertian  ratios, 
12,  its  own,  and  16,  that  of  12;  but  16  cuts  off 
further  progress,  for  it  is  not  divisible  by  3  and 
hence  will  not  have  a  sesquitertian.  [2]  Next 
in  order  is  the  triple  27,  three  times  removed 
from  1,  for  the  triples  progress  thus:  1,  3,  9,  27. 
Therefore  this  number  will  stand  at  the  head 
of  three  sesquitertian  ratios  and  no  more.  The 
first  is  its  own,  36 ;  the  second  the  sesquitertian 
of  36,  48;  the  third  that  of  the  last,  64,  and  this 
no  longer  has  a  third  part  and  therefore  will 
not  admit  of  a  sesquitertian.  The  fourth  leads 
a  series  of  four  sesquitertians  and  the  fifth,  of 
course,  five. 

[8]  Such,  then,  is  the  illustration;  and  for 
the  other  multiples  let  the  manner  of  your  ta¬ 
bles  be  the  same.  Observe  that  likewise  here 
as  we  found  to  be  true  in  our  previous  discus’ 


INTRODUCTION  TO  ARITHMETIC  II. 


sion,  Nature  shows  us  that  the  doubles  are  more 
nearly  original  than  the  triples,  the  triples  than 
the  quadruples,  these  latter  than  the  quintu¬ 
ples,  and  so  on  throughout.  For  the  highest 
rows  of  figures,  across  the  breadth  of  the  tables, 
if  they  are  doubles,  will  have  doubles  lying  par¬ 
allel  to  them,  and  the  numbers  lying  diagonal¬ 
ly,  on  the  hypotenuse,  will  be  of  the  next  suc¬ 
ceeding  variety,  greater  by  1,  that  is,  triples, 
seen  also  in  a  series  of  parallel  lines.  If,  how¬ 
ever,  there  are  triples  across  the  breadth,  the 
diagonals  will  by  all  means  be  quadruples;  if 
the  former  are  quadruples,  then  the  latter  are 
quintuples,  and  so  forth. 

CHAPTER  V 

[1]  It  remains,  after  we  have  explained  what 
other  ratios  are  produced  by  combination  of 
ratios,  to  pass  on  to  the  succeeding  topics  of 
the  Introduction . 

[2]  Notv  the  first  two  ratios  of  the  super¬ 
particular,  combined,  produce  the  first  ratio  of 
the  multiple,  namely,  the  double;  for  every 
double  is  a  combination  of  sesquialter  and  ses- 
quitertian,  and  every  sesquialter  and  sesqui- 
tertian  combined  will  invariably  produce 
a  double. 

For  example,  since  3  is  the  sesquialter  of  2, 
and  4  the  sesquitertian  of  3,  4  will  be  the  dou¬ 
ble  of  2,  and  is  a  combination  of  sesquialter  and 
sesquitertian.  Again,  as  6  is  the  double  of  3,  we 
shall  find  between  them  some  number  that  will 
of  necessity  preserve  the  sesquitertian  ratio  to 
the  one  and  the  sesquialter  to  the  other;  and 
indeed  4,  lying  between  6  and  3,  gives  the  ses¬ 
quitertian  ratio  to  3  and  the  sesquialter  to  6. 

[3]  It  was  rightly  said,  then,  that  the  double, 
when  resolved,  is  resolved  into  the  sesquialter 
and  the  sesquitertian,  and  that  when  sesqui¬ 
alter  and  sesquitertian  are  combined  there 
arises  the  double,  and  that  the  first  twx>  forms 
of  the  superparticular  combined  make  the  first 
form  of  the  multiple. 

[4]  But  again,  to  take  another  start,  this 
first  form  of  the  multiple  w’hich  has  thus  been 
produced,  together  with  the  first  form  of  the 
superparticular,  will  produce  the  next  form  of 
the  same  class,  that  is,  the  second  multiple,  the 
triple;  for  from  every  multiple  and  sesquialter 
combined  a  triple  of  necessity  arises.  For  ex¬ 
ample,  as  the  double  of  6  is  12,  and  the  sesqui¬ 
alter  of  this  is  18,  then  immediately  18  is  the 
triple  of  6;  and  to  take  another  method,  if  I  do 
not  care  to  make  12  the  mean  term,  but  rather 
9,  the  sesquialter  of  6,  the  same  result  will  come 
about,  without  deviation  and  harmoniously; 


831 

for  w’hile  18  is  the  double  of  9  it  will  preserve 
the  triple  ratio  to  6.  Hence  from  the  sesquialter 
and  the  double,  the  first  forms  of  the  superpar¬ 
ticular  and  the  multiple,  there  arises  by  com¬ 
bination  the  second  form  of  the  multiple,  the 
triple,  and  into  them  it  is  always  resolved.  [5] 
For  look  you;  6,  which  is  the  triple  of  2,  will 
have  a  mean  term  3,  which  will  exhibit  two 
ratios,  the  sesquialter  with  regard  to  2,  and  the 
double  ratio  of  6  to  itself. 

But  if  this  triple  ratio,  likewise,  the  second 
form  of  the  multiple,  is  combined  with  the  ses¬ 
quitertian,  which  is  the  second  form  of  the  su¬ 
perparticular,  there  would  be  produced  from 
them  the  next  form  of  the  multiple,  namely, 
the  quadruple,  and  this  also  will  of  necessity  be 
resolved  into  them  after  the  same  fashion  as 
the  cases  previously  set  forth;  and  the  quadru¬ 
ple,  taking  into  combination  the  sesquiquartan, 
will  make  the  quintuple,  and,  once  more,  the 
latter  with  the  sesquiquintan  will  make  the  sex¬ 
tuple,  and  so  on  to  the  end.  Thus  the  multiples 
in  regular  order  from  the  beginning  with  the 
superparticulars  in  regular  order  from  the  be¬ 
ginning  will  be  found  to  produce  the  next  larger 
multiples.  For  the  double  with  the  sesquialter 
makes  the  triple,  the  triple  with  the  sesquiter¬ 
tian  the  quadruple,  the  quadruple  with  the  ses¬ 
quiquartan  the  quintuple,  and  as  far  as  you 
wish  to  proceed  no  contrary’  result  will  appear. 

CHAPTER  VI 

[1  ]  Up  to  this  point  then  w*e  have  sufficiently 
discussed  relative  number,  by  a  process  of  se¬ 
lection  measuring  out  what  is  easily  compre¬ 
hended  and  appropriate  to  the  nature  of  the 
matters  thus  far  introduced.  Whatever  remains 
to  be  said  on  this  topic  will  be  filled  in  after  we 
have  put  it  aside  and  have  first  discussed  cer¬ 
tain  subjects  w*hich  involve  a  more  serviceable 
inquirvy  having  to  do  with  the  properties  of  ab¬ 
solute  number,  not  relative.  For  mathematical 
speculations  are  always  to  be  interlocked  and 
to  be  explained  one  by  means  of  another.  The 
subjects  which  we  must  first  survey  and  ob¬ 
serve  are  concerned  with  linear,  plane,  and  solid 
numbers,  cubical  and  spherical,  equilateral  and 
scalene,  “bricks,”  “beams,”  “w’edges,”  and  the 
like,  the  tradition  concerning  which,  to  be  sure, 
since  they  are  more  closely  related  to  magni¬ 
tude,  is  properly  given  in  the  Geometrical  Intro¬ 
duction.  Yet  the  germs  of  these  ideas  are  taken 
over  into  arithmetic,  as  the  science  w’hich  is  the 
mother  of  geometry  and  more  elementary’  than 
it.  For  we  recall  that  a  short  time  ago  w’e  saw’ 
that  arithmetic  abolishes  the  other  sciences 


NICOMACHUS  OF  GERASA 


832 

with  itself,  but  is  not  abolished  by  them,  and 
conversely  is  of  necessity  implied  by  them  but 
does  not  itself  imply  them. 

[2]  First,  however,  we  must  recognize  that 
each  letter  by  which  we  indicate  a  number, 
such  as  iota,  the  sign  for  10,  kappa  for  20,  and 
omega  for  800,  designates  that  number  by 
man's  convention  and  agreement,  not  by  na¬ 
ture.  On  the  other  hand,  the  natural,  unarti¬ 
ficial,  and  therefore  simplest  indication  of  num¬ 
bers  would  be  the  setting  forth  one  beside  the 
other  of  the  units  contained  in  each.  For  exam¬ 
ple,  the  writing  of  one  unit  by  means  of  one 
alpha  will  be  the  sign  for  1 ;  two  units  side  by 
side,  that  is,  a  series  of  two  alphas,  will  be  the 
sign  for  2;  when  three  are  put  in  a  line  it  will 
be  the  character  for  3,  four  in  a  line  for  4,  five 
for  5,  and  so  on.  For  by  means  of  such  a  nota¬ 
tion  and  indication  alone  could  the  schemat¬ 
ic  arrangement  of  the  plane  and  solid  num¬ 
bers  mentioned  be  made  clear  and  evident, 
thus: 

The  number  1,  a 

The  number  2,  a  a 

The  number  3,  a  a  a 

The  number  4,  a  a  a  a 

The  number  5,  a  a  a  a  a 

and  further  in  similar  fashion. 

[3]  Unity,  then,  occupying  the  place  and 
character  of  a  point,  will  be  the  beginning  of 
intervals  and  of  numbers,  but  not  itself  an  in¬ 
terval  or  a  number,  just  as  the  point  is  the  be¬ 
ginning  of  a  line,  or  an  interval,  but  is  not  it¬ 
self  line  or  interval.  Indeed,  when  a  point  is 
added  to  a  point,  it  makes  no  increase,  for  when 
an  non-dimensional  thing  is  added  to  another 
non-dimensional  thing,  it  will  not  thereby  have 
dimension;  just  as  if  one  should  examine  the 
sum  of  nothing  added  to  nothing,  which  makes 
nothing.  We  saw1  a  similar  thing  also  in  the 
case  of  equality  among  the  relatives;  for  a  pro¬ 
portion  is  preserved — as  the  first  is  to  the  sec¬ 
ond,  so  the  second  is  to  the  third — but  no  in¬ 
terval  is  generated  in  the  relation  of  the  ex¬ 
tremes  to  each  other,  as  there  is  in  all  the  other 
relations  with  the  exception  of  equality.  In  ex¬ 
actly  the  same  way  unit}r  alone  out  of  all  num¬ 
ber,  when  it  multiplies  itself,  produces  nothing 
greater  than  itself. 

Unity,  therefore,  is  non-dimensional  and  ele¬ 
mentary,  and  dimension  first  is  found  and  seen 
in  2,  then  in  3,  then  in  4,  and  in  succession  in 
the  following  numbers;  for  “dimension”  is  that 

T.  23.  7  ff. 


which  is  conceived  of  as  between  two  limits. 

[4]  The  first  dimension  is  called  “line,”  for 
“line”  is  that  which  is  extended  in  one  direc¬ 
tion.  Two  dimensions  are  called  “surface,”  for 
a  “surface”  is  that  which  is  extended  in  two 
directions.  Three  dimensions  are  called  “solid,” 
for  a  “solid”  is  that  which  is  extended  in  three 
directions,  and  it  is  by  no  means  possible  to 
conceive  of  a  solid  which  has  more  than  three 
dimensions,  depth,  breadth,  and  length.  By 
these  are  defined  the  six  directions  which  are 
said  to  exist  in  connection  with  every  body  and 
by  which  motions  in  space  are  distinguished, 
forward,  backward,2  up,  down,  right  and  left; 
for  of  necessity  two  directions  opposite  to  each 
other  follow  upon  each  dimension,  up  and  down 
upon  one,  forward  and  backward  upon  the  sec¬ 
ond,  and  right  and  left  upon  the  third. 

[o]  The  statement,  also,  as  it  happens,  can 
be  made  conversely  thus:  If  a  thing  is  solid,  it 
has  by  all  means  three  dimensions,  length, 
depth  and  breadth;  and  conversely,  if  it  has 
the  three  dimensions,  it  is  always  a  solid,  and 
nothing  else. 

[ 6]  That  wThich  has  but  two  dimensions, 
therefore,  will  not  be  a  solid,  but  a  surface,  for 
the  latter  admits  of  but  two  dimensions.  Here 
too  it  is  possible  similarly  to  reverse  the  state¬ 
ment;  directly  stated,  a  surface  is  that  which 
has  two  dimensions,  and  conversely,  that  which 
has  two  dimensions  is  alwa3rs  a  surface. 

[7]  The  surface,  then,  is  exceeded  by  the 
solid  by  one  dimension,  and  the  line  is  exceeded 
by  the  surface  by  one,  for  the  line  is  that  which 
is  extended  in  but  one  direction  and  has  only 
one  dimension,  and  it  falls  short  of  the  solid  by 
two  dimensions.  The  point  falls  short  of  the 
latter  by  one  dimension,  and  hence  it  has  al¬ 
ready  been  stated  that  it  is  non-dimensional, 
since  it  falls  short  of  the  solid  by  three  dimen¬ 
sions,  of  the  surface  by  two,  and  of  the  line  by 
one. 

CHAPTER  VII 

[1]  The  point,  then,  is  the  beginning  of  di¬ 
mension,  but  not  itself  a  dimension,  and  like- 
vise  the  beginning  of  a  line,  but  not  itself  a 
line:  the  line  is  the  beginning  of  surface,  but 
not  surface;  and  the  beginning  of  the  two-di¬ 
mensional,  but  not  itself  extended  in  two  direc¬ 
tions.  [2]  Naturally,  too,  surface  is  the  begin¬ 
ning  of  body,  but  not  itself  body,  and  likewise 
the  beginning  of  the  three-dimensional,  but  not 
itself  extended  in  three  directions. 

2Cf.  Plato,  Timaeus ,  43. 


INTRODUCTION  TO  ARITHMETIC  II. 


[3]  Exactly  the  same  in  numbers,  unity  is 
the  beginning  of  all  number  that  advances  unit 
by  unit  in  one  direction;  linear  number  is  the 
beginning  of  plane  number,  which  spreads  out 
like  a  plane  in  one  more  dimension;  and  plane 
number  is  the  beginning  of  solid  number,  which 
possesses  a  depth1  in  the  third  dimension,  be¬ 
sides  the  original  ones.  To  illustrate  and  classi¬ 
fy,  linear  numbers  are  all  those  which  begin 
with  2  and  advance  by  the  addition  of  1  in  one 
and  the  same  dimension;  and  plane  numbers 
are  those2  that  begin  with  3  as  their  most  ele¬ 
mentary  root  and  proceed  through  the  next 
succeeding  numbers.  They  receive  their  names 
also  in  the  same  order;  for  there  are  first  the 
triangles,  then  the  squares,  the  pentagons  after 
these,  then  the  hexagons,  the  heptagons,  and 
so  on  indefinitely,  and,  as  we  said,  they  are 
named  after  the  successive  numbers  beginning 
with  3. 

[4]  The  triangle,  therefore,  is  found  to  be 
the  most  original  and  elementary  form  of  the 
plane  number.  This  we  can  see  from  the  fact 
that,  among  plane  figures,3  graphically  repre¬ 
sented,  if  lines  are  drawn  from  the  angles  to 
the  centers  each  rectilinear  figure  will  by  all 
means  be  resolved  into  as  many  triangles  as  it 
has  sides;  but  the  triangle  itself,  if  treated  like 
the  rest,  will  not  change  into  anything  else  but 
itself.  Hence  the  triangle  is  elementary  among 
these  figures;  for  everything  else  is  resolved  in¬ 
to  it,  but  it  into  nothing  else.  From  it  the  others 
likewise  would  be  constituted,  but  it  from  no 
other.  It  is  therefore  the  element  of  the  others, 
and  has  itself  no  element,  [o]  Likewise,  as  the 
argument  proceeds  in  the  realm  of  numerical 
forms,  it  will  confirm  this  statement. 

CHAPTER  VIII 

[1]  Now  a  triangular  number  is  one  which, 
when  it  is  analyzed  into  units,  shapes  into  tri¬ 
angular  form  the  equilateral  placement  of  its 
parts  in  a  plane.  3,  6,  10,  15,  21,  28,  and  so  on, 
are  examples  of  it;  for  their  regular  formations, 
expressed  graphically,  will  be  at  once  triangu¬ 
lar  and  equilateral.  As  you  advance  you  will 
find  that  such  a  numerical  series  as  far  as  you 
like  takes  the  triangular  form,  if  you  put  as  the 
most  elementary  form  the  one  that  arises  from 
unity,  so  that  unity  may  appear  to  be  poten¬ 
tially  a  triangle,  and  3  the  first  actually. 

[2]  Their  sides  will  increase  by  the  succes- 

xCf.  Plato,  Timann t,  53. 

2Put  cf.  Euclid,  in  Elements ,  VII,  Dcf.  17. 

sCf.  Plato,  Timaeus,  53  ff. 


833 

sive  numbers,  for  the  side  of  the  one  potentially 
first  is  unity;  that  of  the  one  actually  first,  that 
is,  3,  is  2;  that  of  6,  which  is  actually  second,  3; 
that  of  the  third,  4;  the  fourth,  5;  the  fifth,  6; 
and  so  on. 

[3]  The  triangular  number  is  produced  from 
the  natural  series  of  number  set  forth  in  a  line, 
and  b}r  the  continued  addition  of  successive 
terms,  one  by  one,  from  the  beginning;  for  by 
the  successive  combinations  and  additions  of 
another  term  to  the  sum,  the  triangular  num¬ 
bers  in  regular  order  are  completed.  For  exam¬ 
ple,  from  this  natural  series,  1,  2,  3,  4,  5,  C,  7, 
8,  9,  10,  11,  12,  13,  14,  15,  I  take  the  first  term 
and  have  the  triangular  number  which  is  po¬ 
tentially  first,  1,  a 

/  a  \  ,*  then  adding  the 
next  term  I  get  the  triangle  actually  first,  for  2 
plus  1  equals  3.  In  its  graphic  representation  it 
is  thus  made  up:  Two  units,  side  by  side,  are 
set  beneath  one  unit,  and  the  number  three  is 
made  a  triangle : 


Then  when  next  after  these  the  following  num¬ 
ber,  3,  is  added,  simplified  into  units,  and  joined 
to  the  former,  it  gives  6,  the  second  triangle  in 
actuality,  and  furthermore,  it  graphically  rep¬ 
resents  this  number: 


Again,  the  number  that  naturally  follows,  4, 
added  in  and  set  down  below  the  former,  re¬ 
duced  to  units,  gives  the  one  in  order  next  after 
the  aforesaid,  10,  and  takes  a  triangular  form: 


5,  after  this,  then  0,  then  7,  and  all  the  num¬ 
bers  in  order,  are  added,  so  that  regularly  the 
sides  of  each  triangle  will  consist  of  as  many 


834 


NICOMACHUS  OF  GERASA 


numbers  as  have  been  added  from  the  natural 
series  to  produce  it: 


CHAPTER  IX 


[1  ]  The  square  is  the  next  number  after  this, 
which  shows  us  no  longer  3,  like  the  former, 
but  4  angles  in  its  graphic  representation,  but 
is  none  the  less  equilateral.  Take,  for  example, 
1,  4,  9,  16,  25,  36,  49,  64,  81,  100;  for  the  rep¬ 
resentations  of  these  numbers  are  equilateral, 
square  figures,  as  here  shown:  and  it  will  be 
similar  as  far  as  you  wish  to  go : 


a  a 
a  a 

4 


a 

a 

a 

a 

a 

a 

a 

a 

a 

9 


a 

a 

a 

a 

a 

a 

a 

a 

a 

a 

a 

a 

a 

a 

a 

a 

a 

a 

a 

a 

a 

a 

a 

a 

a 

a 

a 

a 

a 

a 

a 

a 

a 

a 

a 

a 

a 

a 

a 

a 

a 

16  25 


[2]  It  is  true  of  these  numbers,  as  it  was  also 
of  the  preceding,  that  the  advance  in  their  sides 
progresses  with  the  natural  series.  The  side  of 
the  square  potentially  first,  1,  is  1;  that  of  4, 
the  first  in  actuality,  2;  that  of  9,  actually  the 
second,  3;  that  of  16,  the  next,  actually  the 


third,  4;  that  of  the  fourth,  5;  of  the  fifth,  6, 
and  so  on  in  general  with  all  that  follow. 

[3]  This  number  also  is  produced  if  the  nat¬ 
ural  series  is  extended  in  a  line,  increasing  by 
1,  and  no  longer  the  successive  numbers  are 
added  to  the  numbers  in  order,  as  was  shown 
before,  but  rather  all  those  in  alternate  places, 
that  is,  the  odd  numbers.  For  the  first,  1,  is 
potentially  the  first  square;  the  second,  1  plus 
3,  is  the  first  in  actuality;  the  third,  1  plus  3 
plus  5,  is  the  second  in  actuality;  the  fourth,  1 
plus  3  plus  5  plus  7,  is  the  third  in  actuality; 
the  next  is  produced  by  adding  9  to  the  former 
numbers,  the  next  by  the  addition  of  11,  and 
so  on. 

[4]  In  these  cases,  also,  it  is  a  fact  that  the 
side  of  each  consists  of  as  many  units  as  there 
are  numbers  taken  into  the  sum  to  produce  it. 

CHAPTER  X 

[1]  The  pentagonal  number  is  one  which 
likewise  upon  its  resolution  into  units  and  de¬ 
piction  as  a  plane  figure  assumes  the  form  of 
an  equilateral  pentagon.  1,  5,  12,  22,  35,  51,  70, 
and  analogous  numbers  are  examples.  [2]  Each 
side  of  the  first  actual  pentagon,  5,  is  2,  for  1  is 
the  side  of  the  pentagon  potentially  first,  1 ;  3 
is  the  side  of  12,  the  second  of  those  listed;  4, 
that  of  the  next,  22;  5,  that  of  the  next  in  order, 
35,  and  6  of  the  succeeding  one,  51,  and  so  on. 
In  general  the  side  contains  as  many  units  as 
are  the  numbers  that  have  been  added  together 
to  produce  the  pentagon,  chosen  out  of  the  nat¬ 
ural  arithmetical  series  set  forth  in  a  row.  For 
in  a  like  and  similar  manner,  there  are  added 
together  to  produce  the  pentagonal  numbers 
the  terms  beginning  with  1  to  any  extent  what¬ 
ever  that  are  two  places  apart,  that  is,  those 
that  have  a  difference  of  3. 

Unity  is  the  first  pentagon,  potentially,  and 
is  thus  depicted : 

(JL) 

5,  made  up  of  1  plus  4,  is  the  second,  similarly 
represented : 


a  a 
a  a 


12,  the  third,  is  made  up  out  of  the  two  former 
numbers  with  7  added  to  them,  so  that  it  may 
have  3  as  a  side,  as  three  numbers  have  been 


INTRODUCTION  TO  ARITHMETIC  II.  835 


added  to  make  it.  Similarly  the  preceding  pen¬ 
tagon,  5,  was  the  combination  of  two  numbers 
and  had  2  as  its  side.  The  graphic  representa¬ 
tion  of  12  is  this: 


The  other  pentagonal  numbers  will  be  produced 
by  adding  together  one  after  another  in  due 
order  the  terms  after  7  that  have  the  difference 
3,  as,  for  example,  10,  13,  16,  19,  22,  25,  and  so 
on.  The  pentagons  will  be  22,  35,  51,  70,  92, 
117,  and  so  forth. 

CHAPTER  XI 

[1]  The  hexagonal,  heptagonal,  and  suc¬ 
ceeding  numbers  will  be  set  forth  in  their  series 
by  following  the  same  process,  if  from  the  nat¬ 
ural  series  of  number  there  be  set  forth  series 
with  their  differences  increasing  by  1.  For  as 
the  triangular  number  was  produced  by  admit¬ 
ting  into  the  summation  the  terms  that  differ 
by  1  and  do  not  pass  over  any  in  the  series;  as 
the  square  was  made  by  adding  the  terms  that 
differ  by  2  and  are  one  place  apart,  and  the 
pentagon  similarly  by  adding  terms  with  a  dif¬ 
ference  of  3  and  two  places  apart  fand  we  have 
demonstrated  these,  by  setting  forth  examples 
both  of  them  and  of  the  polygonal  numbers 
made  from  them),  so  likewise  the  hexagons  will 
have  as  their  root-numbers  those  which  differ 
by  4  and  are  three  places  apart  in  the  series, 
which  added  together  in  succession  will  pro¬ 
duce  the  hexagons.  For  example,  1,  5,  9, 13,  17, 
21,  and  so  on;  so  that  the  hexagonal  numbers 
produced  will  be  1,  6,  15,  28,  45,  66,  and  so  on, 
as  far  as  one  wishes  to  go. 

[2]  The  heptagonals,  which  follow'  these, 
have  as  their  root-numbers  terms  differing  by 
5  and  four  places  apart  in  the  series,  like  1,  6, 
11,  16,  21,  26,  31,  36,  and  so  on.  The  heptagons 
that  thus  arise  are  1,  7,  18,  34,  55,  81,  112,  148 
and  so  forth. 

[3]  The  octagonals  increase  after  the  same 
fashion,  with  a  difference  of  6  in  their  root- 


numbers  and  corresponding  variation  in  their 
total  constitution. 

[4]  In  order  that,  as  you  survey  all  cases, 
you  may  have  a  rule  generally  applicable,  note 
that  the  root-numbers  of  any  polygonal  differ 
by  2  less  than  the  number  of  the  angles  shown 
by  the  name  of  the  polygonal — that  is,  by  1  in 
the  triangle,  2  in  the  square,  3  in  the  pentagon, 
4  in  the  hexagon,  5  in  the  heptagon,  and  so  on, 
with  similar  increase. 

CHAPTER  XII 

[1]  Concerning  the  nature  of  plane  polvgon- 
als  this  is  sufficient  for  a  first  Introduction.  That, 
however,  the  doctrine  of  these  numbers  is  to 
the  highest  degree  in  accord  with  their  geomet¬ 
rical  representation,  and  not  out  of  harmony 
with  it,  would  be  evident,  not  only  from  the 
graphic  representation  in  each  case,  but  also 
from  the  following:  Every  square  figure  diag¬ 
onally  divided  is  resolved  into  two  triangles 
and  every  square  number  is  resolved  into  two 
consecutive  triangular  numbers,  and  hence  is 
made  up  of  tw'o  successive  triangular  numbers. 
For  example,  1,  3,  6,  10,  15,  21,  28,  36,  45,  55, 
and  so  on,  are  triangular  numbers  and  1,  4,  9, 
16,  25,  36,  49,  64,  SI,  100,  squares.  [2]  If  you 
add  any  two  consecutive  triangles  that  you 
please,  you  will  always  make  a  square,  and 
hence,  whatever  square  you  resolve,  you  will 
be  able  to  make  two  triangles  of  it. 

Again,  any  triangle  joined  to  any  square  fig¬ 
ure  makes  a  pentagon,  for  example,  the  triangle 
1  joined  with  the  square  4  makes  the  pentagon 
5;  the  next  triangle,  3  of  course,  with  9,  the 
next  square,  makes  the  pentagon  12:  the  next, 
6,  with  the  next  square,  16,  gives  the  next  pen¬ 
tagon,  22;  10  and  25  give  35;  and  so  on 

[3]  Similarly,  if  the  triangles  are  added  to 
the  pentagons,  following  the  same  order,  they 
will  produce  the  hexagonals  in  due  order,  and 
again  the  same  triangles  with  the  latter  will 
make  the  heptagonals  in  order,  the  octagonals 
after  the  heptagonals,  and  so  on  to  infinity. 

[4]  To  remind  us,  let  us  set  forth  rows  of  the 
polygonals,  w'ritten  in  parallel  lines,  as  follows: 
The  first  row,  triangles,  the  next  squares,  after 
them  pentagonals,  then  hexagonals,  then  hep¬ 
tagonals,  then  if  one  wishes,  the  succeeding 
polygonals. 


Triangles 

1 

3 

6 

10 

15 

21 

28 

36 

45 

55 

Squares 

1 

4 

9 

16 

25 

36 

49 

CA 

SI 

100 

Pentagonals 

1 

5 

12 

22 

35 

51 

70 

92 

117 

145 

Hexagonals 

1 

6 

15 

28 

45 

66 

91 

120 

153 

190 

Heptagonals 

1 

7 

18 

34 

55 

81 

112 

148 

189 

235 

NICOMACHUS  OF  GERASA 


836 

You  can  also  set  forth  the  succeeding  polygon- 
als  in  similar  parallel  lines. 

[ o]  In  general,  you  will  find  that  the  squares 
are  the  sum  of  the  triangles  above  those  that 
occupy  the  same  place  in  the  series,  plus  the 
numbers  of  that  same  class  in  the  next  place 
back;  for  example,  4  equals  3  plus  1,  9  equals 

6  plus  3,  16  equals  10  plus  6,  25  equals  15  plus 
10,  36  equals  21  plus  15,  and  so  on. 

The  pentagons  are  the  sum  of  the  squares 
above  them  in  the  same  place  in  the  series,  plus 
the  elementary  triangles  that  are  one  place  fur¬ 
ther  back  in  the  series;  for  example,  5  equals  4 
plus  1,  12  equals  9  plus  3,  22  equals  16  plus  6, 
35  equals  25  plus  10,  and  so  on. 

[6]  Again,  the  hexagonals  are  similarly  the 
sums  of  the  pentagons  above  them  in  the  same 
place  in  the  series  plus  the  triangles  one  place 
back;  for  instance,  6  equals  5  plus  1,15  equals 
12  plus  3,  28  equals  22  plus  6,  45  equals  35  plus 
10,  and  as  far  as  you  like. 

[7]  The  same  applies  to  the  heptagonals,  for 

7  is  the  sum  of  6  and  1,  18  equals  15  plus  3,  34 
equals  28  plus  6,  and  so  on.  Thus  each  polyg¬ 
onal  number  is  the  sum  of  the  polygonal  in  the 
same  place  in  the  series  with  one  less  angle, 
plus  the  triangle,  in  the  highest  row,  one  place 
back  in  the  series. 

[8]  Naturally,  then,  the  triangle  is  the  ele¬ 
ment  of  the  polygon  both  in  figures  and  in 
numbers,  and  we  say  this  because  in  the  table, 
reading  either  up  and  down  or  across,  the  suc¬ 
cessive  numbers  in  the  rows  are  discovered  to 
have  as  differences  the  triangles  in  regular  order. 

CHAPTER  XIII 

[1]  From  this  it  is  easy  to  see  what  the  solid 
number  is  and  how  its  series  advances  with 
equal  sides;  for  the  number  which,  in  addition 
to  the  two  dimensions  contemplated  in  graphic 
representation  in  a  plane,  length,  and  breadth, 
has  a  third  dimension,  which  some  call  depth, 
others  thickness,  and  some  height,  that  num¬ 
ber  would  be  a  solid  number,  extended  in  three 
directions  and  having  length,  depth,  and 
breadth. 

[2]  This  first  makes  its  appearance  in  the 
so-called  pyramids.  These  are  produced  from 
rather  wide  bases  narrowing  to  a  sharp  apex, 
first  after  the  triangular  form  from  a  triangular 
base,  second  after  the  form  of  the  square  from 
a  square  base,  and  succeeding  these  after  the 
pentagonal  form  from  a  pentagonal  base,  then 
similarly  from  the  hexagon,  heptagon,  octagon, 
and  so  on  indefinitely. 

[3]  Exactly  so  among  the  geometrical  solid 


figures;  if  one  imagines  three  lines  from  the 
three  angles  of  an  equilateral  triangle,  equal 
in  length  to  the  sides  of  the  triangle,  converg¬ 
ing  in  the  dimension  height  to  one  and  the  same 
point,  a  pyramid  would  be  produced,  bounded 
by  four  triangles,  equilateral  and  equal  one  to 
the  other,  one  the  original  triangle,  and  the 
other  three  bounded  by  the  aforesaid  three 
lines.  [4]  And  again,  if  one  conceives  of  four 
lines  starting  from  a  square,  equal  in  length  to 
the  sides  of  the  square,  each  to  each,  and  again 
converging  in  the  dimension  height  to  one  and 
the  same  point,  a  pyramid  would  be  completed 
with  a  square  base  and  diminishing  in  square 
form,  bounded  by  four  equilateral  triangles  and 
one  square,  the  original  one.  [o]  And  starting 
from  a  pentagon,  hexagon,  heptagon,  and  how¬ 
ever  far  you  care  to  go,  lines  equal  in  number 
to  the  angles,  erected  in  the  same  fashion  from 
the  angles  and  converging  to  one  and  the  same 
point,  will  complete  a  pyramid  named  from  its 
pentagonal,  hexagonal,  or  heptagonal  base,  or 
similarly. 

[6]  So  likewise  among  numbers,  each  linear 
number  increases  from  unity,  as  from  a  point, 
as  for  example,  1, 2, 3, 4,  5,  and  successive  num¬ 
bers  to  infinity;  and  from  these  same  numbers, 
which  are  linear  and  extended  in  one  direction, 
combined  in  no  random  manner,  the  polygonal 
and  plane  numbers  are  fashioned — the  trian¬ 
gles  by  the  combination  of  root-numbers  im¬ 
mediately  adjacent,  the  square  by  adding  every 
other  term,  the  pentagons  every  third  term, 
and  so  on.  [7]  In  exactly  the  same  way,  if  the 
plane  polygonal  numbers  are  piled  one  upon 
the  other  and  as  it  were  built  up,  the  pyramids 
that  are  akin  to  each  of  them  are  produced,  the 
triangular  pyramid  from  the  triangles,  the 
square  pyramid  from  the  squares,  the  pentag¬ 
onal  from  the  pentagons,  the  hexagonal  from 
the  hexagons,  and  so  on  throughout. 

[8]  The  pyramids  with  a  triangular  base, 
then,  in  their  proper  order,  are  these:  1,  4,  10, 
20,  35,  56,  84,  and  so  on;  and  their  origin  is  the 
piling  up  of  the  triangular  numbers  one  upon 
the  other,  first  1,  then  1,  3,  then  1,  3,  6,  then 
10  in  addition  to  these,  and  next  15  together 
with  the  foregoing,  then  21  besides  these,  next 
28,  and  so  on  to  infinity. 

[9]  It  is  clear  that  the  greatest  number  is 
conceived  of  as  being  lowest,  for  it  is  discov¬ 
ered  to  be  the  base;  the  next  succeeding  one 
is  on  top  of  it,  and  the  next  on  top  of  that; 
until  unity  appears  at  the  apex  and,  so  to 
speak,  tapers  off  the  completed  pyramid  into 
a  point. 


INTRODUCTION  TO  ARITHMETIC  II. 


CHAPTER  XIV 

[1]  The  next  pyramids  in  order  are  those 
with  a  square  base  which  rise  in  this  shape  to 
one  and  the  same  point.  These  are  formed  in 
the  same  way  as  the  triangular  pyramids  of 
which  we  have  just  spoken.  For  if  I  extend  in 
series  the  square  numbers  in  order  beginning 
with  unity,  thus,  1,  4,  9,  16,  25,  36,  49,  64,  81, 
100,  and  again  set  the  successive  terms,  as  in 
a  pile,  one  upon  the  other  in  the  dimension 
height,  when  I  put  1  on  top  of  4,  the  first  ac¬ 
tual  pyramid  with  square  base,  5  is  produced, 
for  here  again  unity  is  potentially  the  first.  [2] 
Once  more,  I  put  this  same  pyramid  entire, 
composed  of  5  units,  just  as  it  is,  upon  the 
square  9,  and  there  is  made  up  for  me  the  pyra¬ 
mid  14,  with  square  base  and  side  3 — for  the 
former  pyramid  had  the  side  2,  and  the  one 
potentially  first  1  as  a  side.  For  here  too  each 
side  of  any  pyramid  whatsoever  must  consist 
of  as  many  units  as  there  are  polygonal  num¬ 
bers  piled  together  to  create  it. 

[3]  Again,  I  place  the  whole  pyramid  14, 
with  the  square  9  as  its  base,  upon  the  square 
16  and  I  have  30,  the  third  actual  pyramid  of 
those  that  have  a  square  base,  and  by  the  same 
order  and  procedure  from  a  pentagonal,  hex¬ 
agonal,  or  heptagonal  base,  and  even  going  on 
farther,  we  shall  produce  pyramids  by  piling 
upon  one  another  the  corresponding  polygonal 
numbers,  starting  with  unity  as  the  smallest 
and  going  on  to  infinity  in  each  case. 

[4]  From  this  too  it  becomes  evident  that 
triangles  are  the  most  elementary;  for  abso¬ 
lutely  all  of  the  pyramids  that  are  exhibited 
and  shown,  with  the  various  polygonal  bases, 
are  bounded  by  triangles  up  to  the  apex. 

[3]  But  lest  vre  be  heedless  of  truncated,  bi- 
truncated,  and  tri-truncated  pyramids,  the 
names  of  which  we  are  sure  to  encounter  in  sci¬ 
entific  writings,  you  may  know  that  if  a  pyra¬ 
mid  with  any  sort  of  polygon  as  its  base,  tri¬ 
angle,  square,  pentagon,  or  any  of  the  succeed¬ 
ing  polygons  of  the  kind,  when  it  increases  by 
this  process  of  piling  up  does  not  taper  off  into 
unity,  it  is  called  simply  truncated  when  it  is 
left  without  the  natural  apex  that  belongs  to 
all  pyramids;  for  it  does  not  terminate  in  the 
potential  polygon,  unity,  as  in  some  one  point, 
but  in  another  polygon,  and  an  actual  one,  and 
unity  is  not  its  apex,  but  its  upper  boundary 
becomes  a  plane  figure  with  the  same  number 
of  angles  as  the  base.  If,  however,  in  addition 
to  the  failure  to  terminate  in  unity  it  does  not 
even  terminate  in  the  polygon  next  to  unity  and 


837 

the  first  in  actuality,  such  a  pyramid  is  called 
bi-truncated,  and  if,  still  further,  it  does  not 
have  the  second  actual  polygon  at  its  upper 
limit,  but  only  the  one  next  beneath,  it  will  be 
called  tri-truncated,  yes,  even  four  times  trun¬ 
cated,  if  it  does  not  have  the  next  one  as  its 
limit,  or  five  times  truncated  at  the  next  step, 
and  so  on  as  far  as  you  care  to  carry  the  nomen¬ 
clature. 

CHAPTER  XV 

[1]  While  the  origin,  advance,  increase,  and 
nature  of  the  equilateral  solid  numbers  of  py¬ 
ramidal  appearance  is  the  foregoing,  with  its 
seed  and  root  in  the  polygonal  numbers  and 
the  piling  up  of  them  in  their  regular  order, 
there  is  another  series  of  solid  numbers  of  a 
different  kind,  consisting  of  the  so-called  cubes, 
“beams,”  “bricks,”  “wedges,”  spheres  and  par- 
allelepipedons,  which  has  the  order  of  its  prog¬ 
ress  somewhat  as  follows : 

[2]  The  foregoing  squares  1,  4,  9,  16,  25,  36, 
49,  64,  and  so  on,  which  are  extended  in  two 
directions  and  in  their  graphic  representation 
in  a  plane  have  only  length  and  breadth,  will 
take  on  yet  a  third  dimension  and  be  solids  and 
extended  in  three  directions  if  each  is  multi¬ 
plied  by  its  own  side;  4,  wThich  is  2  times  2,  is 
again  multiplied  by  2,  to  make  8;  9,  which  is  3 
times  3,  is  again  increased  by  3  in  another  di¬ 
mension  and  gives  27;  16,  which  is  4  times  4,  is 
multiplied  by  its  own  side,  4,  and  64  results ;  and 
so  on  with  the  succeeding  squares  throughout. 

[ 3]  Here,  too,  the  sides  will  be  composed  of 
as  many  units  as  were  in  the  sides  of  the  squares 
from  which  they  arose,  in  each  case;  the  sides 
of  8  will  be  2,  like  those  of  4;  those  of  27,  3,  like 
those  of  9;  those  of  64,  4,  like  those  of  16;  and 
so  on,  so  that  likewise  the  side  of  unity,  the 
potential  cube,  will  be  1,  which  is  the  side  of 
the  potential  square,  1. 

In  general,  each  square  is  a  single  plane,  and 
has  four  angles  and  four  sides,  while  each  sev¬ 
eral  cube,  having  increased  out  of  some  one 
square  multiplied  by  its  own  side,  will  have  al¬ 
ways  six  plane  surfaces,  each  equal  to  the  origi¬ 
nal  square,  and  twelve  edges,  each  equal  to  and 
containing  exactly  the  same  number  of  units 
as  each  side  of  the  original  square,  and  eight 
solid  angles,  each  of  which  is  bounded  by  three 
edges  like  in  each  case  to  the  sides  of  the  origi¬ 
nal  square. 

CHAPTER  XVI 

[1]  Now  since  the  cube  is  a  solid  figure  with 
equal  sides  in  all  dimensions,  in  length,  depth, 


NICOMACHUS  OF  GERASA 


838 

and  breadth,  and  is  equally  extended  in  all  the 
six  so-called  directions,1  it  follows  that  there  is 
opposed  to  it  that  which  has  its  dimensions  in 
no  case  equal  to  one  another,  but  its  depth  un¬ 
equal  to  its  breadth  and  its  length  unequal  to 
either  of  these,  for  example  2  times  3  times  4, 
or  2  times  4  times  8,  or  3  times  5  times  12,  or 
a  figure  which  follows  some  other  scheme  of  in¬ 
equality. 

[2]  Such  solid  figures,  in  which  the  dimen¬ 
sions  are  everywhere  unequal  one  to  another, 
are  called  scalene  in  general.  Some,  however, 
using  other  names,  call  them  “wedges,”  for  car¬ 
penters7,  house-builders7  and  blacksmiths7 
wedges  and  those  used  in  other  crafts,  having 
unequal  sides  in  every  direction,  are  fashioned 
so  as  to  penetrate ;  they  begin  with  a  sharp  end 
and  continually  broaden  out  unequally  in  all 
the  dimensions.  Some  also  call  them  sphekiskoij 
“wasps/7  because  wasps7  bodies  also  are  very 
like  them,  compressed  in  the  middle  and  show¬ 
ing  the  resemblance  mentioned.  From  this  also 
the  sphekoma ,  “point  of  the  helmet,77  must  de¬ 
rive  its  name,  for  where  it  is  compressed  it  imi¬ 
tates  the  waist  of  the  wasp.  Others  call  the  same 
numbers  “altars,77  using  their  own  metaphor, 
for  the  altars  of  ancient  style,  particularly  the 
Ionic,  do  not  have  the  breadth  equal  to  the 
depth,  nor  either  of  these  equal  to  the  length, 
nor  the  base  equal  to  the  top,  but  are  of  varied 
dimensions  everywhere. 

[8]  Now  whereas  the  two  kinds  of  numbers, 
cube  and  scalene,  are  extremes,  the  one  equally 
extended  in  every  dimension,  the  other  un¬ 
equally,  the  so-called  parallelepipedons  are  sol¬ 
id  numbers  like  means  between  them.  The  plane 
surfaces  of  these  are  heteromecic  numbers,2  just 
as  in  the  case  of  the  cubes  the  faces  were  squares, 
as  has  been  shown. 

CHAPTER  XVII 

[  1]  Again,  then,  to  take  a  fresh  start,  a  num¬ 
ber  is  called  heteromecic  if  its  representation, 
when  graphically  described  in  a  plane,  is  quad¬ 
rilateral  and  quadrangular,  to  be  sure,  but  the 
sides  are  not  equal  one  to  another,  nor  is  the 
length  equal  to  the  breadth,  but  they  differ  by 

1.  Examples  are  2,  6,  12,  20,  30,  42,  and  so  on, 
for  if  one  represents  them  graphically  he  will 
always  construct  them  thus:  1  times  2  equals 

2,  2  times  3  equals  6,  3  times  4  equals  12,  and 
the  succeeding  ones  similarly,  4  times  5,  5  times 
6,  6  times  7,  7  times  8,  and  thus  indefinitely, 

4Cf.  II.  6.  4. 

2See  the  following  chapter. 


provided  only  that  one  side  is  greater  than  the 
other  by  1  and  by  no  other  number.  If,  how¬ 
ever,  the  sides  differ  otherwise  than  by  1,  for 
instance,  by  2,  3,  4  or  succeeding  numbers,  as 
in  2  times  4,  3  times  6,  4  times  8,  or  however 
else  they  may  differ,  then  no  longer  will  such  a 
number  be  properly  called  a  heteromecic,  but 
an  oblong  number.  For  the  ancients  of  the 
school  of  Pythagoras  and  his  successors  saw 
“the  other773  and  “otherness77  primarily  in  2, 
and  “the  same77  and  “sameness77  in  1,  as  the 
twTo  beginnings  of  all  things,  and  these  twro  are 
found  to  differ  from  each  other  only  by  1.  Thus 
“the  other77  is  fundamentally  “other77  by  1,  and 
by  no  other  number,  and  for  this  reason  cus¬ 
tomarily  “other77  is  used,  among  those  wiio 
speak  correctly,  of  two  things  and  not  of  more 
than  twTo. 

[2]  Moreover,  it  wTas  showm  that  all  odd  num¬ 
ber  is  given  its  specific  form4  by  unity,  and  all 
even  number  by  2.  Hence  wTe  shall  naturally 
say  that  the  odd  partakes  of  the  nature  of  “the 
same,77  and  the  even  of  that  of  “the  other77; 
for  indeed  there  are  produced  by  the  succes¬ 
sive  additions  of  each  of  these — naturally,  and 
not  by  our  decree — by  the  addition  of  the 
odd  numbers  from  1  to  infinity  the  class  of 
the  squares,  and  by  the  addition  of  the  evens 
from  2  to  infinity,  that  of  the  heteromecic 
numbers.5 

[3]  There  is,  accordingly,  every  reason  to 
think  that  the  square  once  more  shares  in  the 
nature  of  the  same;  for  its  sides  display  the 
same  ratio,  alike,  unchanging  and  firmly  fixed 
in  equality,  to  themselves;  wdiile  the  hetero¬ 
mecic  number  partakes  of  the  nature  of  the 
other;  for  just  as  1  is  differentiated  from  2,  dif¬ 
fering  by  1  alone,  thus  also  the  sides  of  every 
heteromecic  number  differ  from  one  another, 
one  differing  from  the  other  by  1  alone. 

To  illustrate,  if  I  have  set  out  before  me  the 
successive  numbers  in  series  beginning  with  1, 
and  select  and  arrange  by  themselves  the  odd 
numbers  in  the  line  and  the  even  by  themselves 
in  another,  there  are  obtained  these  tw'o  series: 

1,  3,  5,  7,  9, 11, 13, 15, 17, 19,  21,  23,  25,  27 

2,  4,  6,  8, 10, 12, 14, 16, 18,  20,  22,  24,  26,  28 

[4]  Now,  then,  the  beginning  of  the  odd  series 
is  unity,  which  is  of  the  same  class  as  the  series 
and  possesses  the  nature  of  “the  same,77  and  so 
whether  it  multiplies  itself  in  twro  dimensions 

3Cf.  Plato,  Timaeus,  35  ff. 

4Cf.  I.  7.  2. 

6Cf.  II.  18.  2  and  20.  3. 


839 


INTRODUCTION  TO  ARITHMETIC  II. 


or  in  three  it  is  not  made  different,  nor  yet  does 
it  make  any  other  number  depart  from  what  it 
was  originally,1  but  keeps  it  just  as  it  was.  Such 
a  property  it  is  impossible  to  find  in  any  other 
number.  [5]  Of  the  other  series  the  beginning 
is  2,  which  is  similar  in  kind  to  this  series  and 
imitates  “otherness”;  for  whether  it  multiplies 
itself  or  another  number,  it  causes  a  change,2 
for  example,  2  times  2,  2  times  3. 

[ 6]  But  in  cases  like  8  times  8  times  2,  or  8 
times  8  times  3,  such  solid  forms  are  called 
“bricks,”  the  product  of  a  number  by  itself  and 
then  by  a  smaller  number ;  if,  however,  a  greater 
height  is  joined  to  the  square,  as  in  3  times  3 
times  7,  3  times  3  times  8,  or  3  times  3  times  9, 
or  however  many  times  the  square  be  taken, 
provided  only  it  be  a  greater  number  of  times 
than  the  square  itself,  then  the  number  is  a 
“beam,”  the  product  of  a  number  by  itself  and 
then  by  a  larger  number.  The  “wedges,”  to  be 
sure,  were  the  products  of  three  unequal  num¬ 
bers,  and  cubes  of  three  equal  ones. 

[7]  Among  the  cubes,  some  of  them,  in  addi¬ 
tion  to  being  the  product  of  three  equal  num¬ 
bers,  have  the  further  property  of  ending  at 
every  multiplication  in  the  same  number  as 
that  from  which  they  began;  these  are  called 
spherical,  and  also  recurrent.  Such  indeed  are 
those  with  sides  5  or  6;  for  however  many  times 
I  increase  each  one  of  these,  it  will  by  all  means 
end  each  time  in  the  same  figure,  the  derivative 
of  6  in  6  and  that  of  5  in  5.  For  example,  the 
product  of  5  times  5  will  end  in  5,  and  so  will 
5  times  this  product  and  if  necessary,  5  times 
this  again,  and  to  infinity  no  other  concluding 
term  will  be  found  except  5.  From  6,  too,  in  the 
same  fashion  6  and  no  other  will  be  the  con¬ 
cluding  term;  and  so  1  likewise  is  potentially 
spherical  and  recurrent,  for  as  is  reasonable  it 
has  the  same  property  as  the  spheres  and  circles. 
For  each  one  of  them,  circling  and  turning 
around,  ends  where  it  begins.  And  so  these 
numbers  aforesaid  are  the  only  ones  of  the 
products  of  equal  factors  to  return  to  the  same 
starting  point  from  which  they  began,  in  the 
course  of  all  their  increases.  If  they  increase  in 
the  manner  of  planes,  in  two  dimensions,  they 
are  called  circular,  like  1,  25,  and  36,  derived 
from  1  times  1,  5  times  5,  and  6  times  6;  but  if 
they  have  three  dimensions,  or  are  multiplied 
still  further  than  this,  they  are  called  spherical 
solid  numbers,  for  example  1,  125,  216,  or, 
again,  1,  625,  1,296. 

!Cf.  II.  6.  3. 

2Cf.  Aristotle,  On  the  Soul,  406b  13. 


CHAPTER  XVIII 

[1]  Regarding  the  solid  numbers  this  is  for 
the  present  sufficient.  The  physical  philoso¬ 
phers,  however,  and  those  that  take  their  start 
with  mathematics,  call  “the  same”  and  “the 
other”  the  principles  of  the  universe,  and  it  has 
been  shown  that  “the  same”  inheres  in  unity 
and  the  odd  numbers,  to  which  unity  gives  spe¬ 
cific  form,  and  to  an  even  greater  degree  in  the 
squares,  made  by  the  continued  addition  of  odd 
numbers,  because  in  their  sides  they  share  in 
equality;  while  “the  other”  inheres  in  2  and 
the  whole  even  series,  which  is  given  specific 
form  by  2,  and  particularly  in  the  heteromecic 
numbers,  which  are  made  by  the  continued  ad¬ 
dition  of  the  even  numbers,  because  of  the  share 
of  the  original  inequality3  and  “otherness” 
which  they  have  in  the  difference  between  their 
sides.  Therefore  it  is  most  necessary  further  to 
demonstrate  how  in  these  two,  as  in  origins  and 
seeds,  there  are  potentially  existent  all  the  pe¬ 
culiar  properties  of  number,  of  its  forms  and 
subdivisions,  of  all  its  relations,  of  polygonals, 
and  the  like. 

[ 2]  First,  however,  we  must  make  the  dis¬ 
tinction  whereby  the  oblong  (promecic)  num¬ 
ber  differs  from  the  heteromecic.  The  hetero¬ 
mecic  is,  as  was  stated  above,4  the  product  of  a 
number  multiplied  by  another  larger  than  the 
first  by  1,  for  example,  6,  which  is  2  times  3,  or 
12,  which  is  3  times  4.  But  the  oblong  is  simi¬ 
larly  the  product  of  two  differing  numbers,  dif¬ 
fering,  however,  not  by  1  but  by  some  larger 
number,  as  2  times  4,  3  times  6,  4  times  8,  and 
similar  numbers,  which  in  a  way  exceed  in 
length  and  overstep  the  difference  of  1. 

[3]  Therefore,  since  squares  are  produced 
from  the  multiplication  of  numbers  by  their 
own  length,  and  have  their  length  the  same  as 
their  breadth,  properly  speaking  they  would  be 
called  “idiomecic”  or  “tautomecic”;  for  exam¬ 
ple,  2  times  2,  3  times  3,  4  times  4,  and  the 
rest.  And  if  this  is  true,  they  will  admit  in  every 
way  of  sameness  and  equality,  and  for  this 
reason  are  limited  and  come  to  an  end ;  for  “the 
equal”  and  “the  same”  are  so  in  one  definite 
way.  But  since  the  heteromecic  numbers  are 
produced  by  the  multiplication  of  a  number  by 
not  its  own,  but  another  number’s  length,  they 
are  therefore  called  “heteromecic,”  and  admit 
of  infinity  and  boundlessness. 

[4]  In  this  way,  then,  all  numbers  and  the 

*Cf.  II.  17.  2. 

4Cf.  II.  17.  1. 


840  NICOMACHUS  OF  GERASA 


objects  in  the  universe  which  have  been  cre¬ 
ated  with  reference  to  them  are  divided  and 
classified  and  are  seen  to  be  opposite  one  to  an¬ 
other,  and  well  do  the  ancients  at  the  very  be¬ 
ginning  of  their  account  of  Nature  make  the 
first  subdivision  in  their  cosmogony  on  this 
principle.  Thus  Plato1  mentions  the  distinction 
between  the  natures  of  “the  same”  and  “the 
other,”  and  again,  that  between  the  essence 
which  is  indivisible  and  always  the  same  and 
the  one  which  is  divided;  and  Philolaus  says 
that  existent  things  must  all  be  either  limitless 
or  limited,  or  limited  and  limitless  at  the  same 
time,  by  which  it  is  generally  agreed  that  he 
means  that  the  universe  is  made  up  out  of  lim¬ 
ited  and  limitless  things  at  the  same  time,  ob¬ 
viously  after  the  image  of  number,  for  all  num¬ 
ber  is  composed  of  unity  and  the  dyad,  even 
and  odd,  and  these  in  truth  display  equality 
and  inequality,  sameness  and  otherness,  the 
bounded  and  the  boundless,  the  defined  and 
the  undefined. 

CHAPTER  XIX 

[1]  That  we  may  be  clearly  persuaded  of 
what  is  being  said,  namely,  that  things  are 
made  up  of  warring  and  opposite  elements2  and 
have  in  all  likelihood  taken  on  harmony — and 
harmony  always  arises  from  opposites;  for  har¬ 
mony  is  the  unification  of  the  diverse  and  the 
reconciliation  of  the  contrary-minded — let  us 
set  forth  in  two  parallel  lines  no  longer,  as  just 
previously,  the  even  numbers  from  2  by  them¬ 
selves  and  the  odd  numbers  from  1,  but  the 
numbers  that  are  produced  from  these  by  add¬ 
ing  them  successively  together,  the  squares 
from  the  odd  numbers,  and  the  heteromecic 
from  the  even.  For  if  we  give  careful  attention 
to  their  setting  forth,  we  shall  admire  their  mu¬ 
tual  friendship  and  their  cooperation  to  pro¬ 
duce  and  perfect  the  remaining  forms,  to  the 
end  that  we  may  with  probability  conceive  that 
also  in  the  nature  of  the  universe  from  some 
such  source  as  this  a  similar  thing  was  brought 
about  by  universal  providence. 

[2]  Let  the  two  series  then  be  as  follows: 
That  of  the  squares,  from  unity,  1,  4,  9,  16,  25, 
36,  49,  64,  81,  100,  121,  144, 169,  196,  225,  and 
that  of  the  heteromecic  numbers,  beginning 
with  2  and  proceeding  thus,  2,  6,  12,  20,  30,  42, 
56,  72,  90,  110,  132,  156,  182,  210,  240. 

[8]  In  the  first  place,  then,  the  first  square 
is  the  fundamental  multiple  of  the  first  hetero- 

*Cf.  Plato,  Timeaus,  35. 

2Plato,  Timaeus ,  30. 


mecic  number;  the  second,  compared  to  the 
second,  is  its  sesquialter;  the  third,  sesquiter- 
tian  of  the  third;  the  fourth,  sesquiquartan  of 
the  fourth;  then  sesquiquintan,  sesquisextan, 
and  so  on  similarly  ad  infinitum .  Their  differ¬ 
ences,  too,  will  increase  according  to  the  suc¬ 
cessive  numbers  from  1;  the  difference  of  the 
first  terms  is  1,  of  the  second  2,  of  the  third  3, 
and  so  on.  Next,  if  first  the  second  term  of  the 
squares  be  compared  with  the  first  heteromecic 
number,  the  third  with  the  second,  the  fourth 
with  the  third,  and  the  rest  similarly,  they  will 
keep  unchanged  the  same  ratios  as  before,  but 
their  differences  will  begin  to  progress  no  longer 
from  1,  but  from  2,  remaining  the  same  as  be¬ 
fore,  and  according  to  the  advance  observed  in 
the  former  comparison,  the  first  to  the  first  will 
be  the  first,  or  root-form,  multiple,  the  second 
to  the  second  the  second  sesquialter  from  the 
root-form,  the  third  to  the  third  the  third  ses- 
quitertian  from  the  root-form,  and  the  succeed¬ 
ing  terms  will  go  on  in  similar  fashion. 

[4]  Furthermore,  the  squares  among  them¬ 
selves  will  have  only  the  odd  numbers  as  dif¬ 
ferences,  the  heteromecic,  even  numbers.  And 
if  we  put  the  first  heteromecic  number  as  a 
mean  term  between  the  first  two  squares,  the 
second  between  the  next  two,  the  third  between 
the  two  following,  and  the  fourth  between  the 
two  next  succeeding,  therein  will  be  seen  still 
more  regularly  the  numerical  relations  in  groups 
of  three  terms.  For  as  4  is  to  2,  so  is  2  to  1 ;  and 
as  9  is  sesquialter  to  6,  so  is  6  to  4;  and  as  16  to 
12,  so  is  12  to  9,  and  so  on,  with  both  numbers 
and  ratios  regularly  advancing.  As  the  greater 
is  to  the  mean,  so  will  the  mean  be  to  the  lesser, 
and  not  in  the  same  ratio,  but  always  a  differ¬ 
ent  one,  by  an  increase.  In  all  the  groupings, 
too,  the  product  of  the  extremes  is  equal  to  the 
square  of  the  mean;  and  the  extremes,  plus 
twice  the  mean,  by  exchange  will  always  give 
a  square.  What  is  neatest  of  all,  from  the  addi¬ 
tion  of  both  there  comes  about  the  production 
of  the  triangles  in  due  order,  showing  that  the 
nature  of  these  is  more  ancient3  than  the  origin 
of  ail  things,  thus:  1  plus  2,  2  plus  4,  4  plus  6, 
6  plus  9,  9  plus  12,  12  plus  16,  16  plus  20,  and 
by  this  process  the  triangles,  which  give  rise  to 
the  polygons,  come  forth  in  order. 

CHAPTER  XX 

[1]  Still  further,  every  square  plus  its  own 
side  becomes  heteromecic,  or  by  Zeus,  if  its  side 
is  subtracted  from  it.  Thus,  “the  other”  is  con- 

3Cf.  II.  17.  3;  18.  1  and  II.  7.  4;  cf.  12.  8 


INTRODUCTION  TO  ARITHMETIC  II. 


ceived  of  as  being  both  greater  and  smaller  than 
“the  same,”  since  it  is  produced,  both  by  addi¬ 
tion  and  by  subtraction,  in  the  same  way  that 
the  two  kinds  of  inequality1  also,  the  greater 
and  the  less,  have  their  origin  from  the  appli¬ 
cation  of  addition  or  subtraction  to  equality. 
[ 2]  This  also  is  sufficient  evidence  that  the  two 
forms  partake  of  sameness  and  otherness,  of 
otherness  in  an  indefinite  fashion,  but  of  same¬ 
ness  definitely,  1  and  2  generically,  but  the  odd 
of  sameness  after  the  manner  of  a  subordinate 
species  because  it  belongs  to  the  same  class  as 
1,  and  the  even  of  otherness  because  it  is  homo¬ 
geneous  with  2. 

[3]  There  is  also  a  still  clearer  reason  why 
the  square,  since  it  is  the  product  of  the  addi¬ 
tion  of  odd  numbers,  is  akin  to  sameness,  and 
the  heteromecic  numbers  to  otherness  because 
it  is  made  up  by  adding  even  numbers;  for  as 
though  they  were  friends  of  one  another,  these 
two  forms  share  in  their  two  rows  the  same  dif¬ 
ferences  when  they  do  not  have  the  same  ra¬ 
tios,  and  conversely  the  same  ratios  when  they 
do  not  have  the  same  differences.  For  the  dif¬ 
ference  between  4  and  2  in  the  double  ratio  is 
found  between  6  and  4  as  a  superparticular; 
and  again  the  difference  between  9  and  6,  as  a 
sesquialter,  is  found  between  12  and  9  as  a  ses- 
qui tertian,  and  so  on.  What  is  the  same  in  qual¬ 
ity  is  different  in  quantity,  and  just  the  oppo¬ 
site,  what  is  the  same  in  quantity  is  different 
in  quality.  [4]  Again,  it  is  clear  that  in  all  their 
relations  the  same  difference  between  two 
terms  will  necessarily  be  called  fractions  with 
names  that  differ  by  1,  and  be  the  half  of  one 
and  the  third  of  the  other,  or  the  third  of  one 
and  the  quarter  of  the  other,  or  the  fourth  of 
one  and  the  fifth  of  the  other,  and  so  on. 

[o]  But  what  will  most  of  all  confirm  the 
fact  that  the  odd,  and  never  the  even,  is  pre¬ 
eminently  the  cause  of  sameness,  is  to  be  dem¬ 
onstrated  in  every  series  beginning  with  1  fol¬ 
lowing  some  ratio,  for  example,  the  double  ra¬ 
tio,  1,  2,  4,  8,  16,  32,  64,  128,  256,  or  the  triple, 
1,3,  9,  27,  81,  243,  729,  2,187,  and  as  far  as  you 
like.  You  will  find  that  of  necessity  all  the  terms 
in  the  odd  places  in  the  series  are  squares,  and 
no  others  by  any  device  whatsoever,  and  that 
no  square  is  to  be  found  in  an  even  place. 

But  all  the  products  of  a  number  multiplied 
twice  into  itself,  that  is,  the  cubes,  which  are 
extended  in  three  dimensions  and  seen  to  share 
in  sameness  to  an  even  greater  extent,  arc  the 
product  of  the  odd  numbers,  not  the  even,  1, 

1Cf .  I.  17.  G. 


841 

8,  27,  64,  125,  and  216,  and  those  that  go  on 
analogously,  in  a  simple,  unvaried  progression 
as  well.  For  when  the  successive  odd  numbers 
are  set  forth  indefinitely  beginning  with  1,  ob¬ 
serve  this:  The  first  one  makes  the  potential 
cube;  the  next  two,  added  together,  the  second; 
the  next  three,  the  third;  the  four  next  follow¬ 
ing,  the  fourth;  the  succeeding  five,  the  fifth; 
the  next  six,  the  sixth;  and  so  on. 

CHAPTER  XXI 

[1  ]  After  this  it  would  be  the  proper  time 
to  incorporate  the  nature  of  proportions,  a 
thing  most  essential  for  speculation  about  the 
nature  of  the  universe  and  for  the  propositions 
of  music,  astronomy,  and  geometry,  and  not 
least  for  the  study  of  the  works  of  the  ancients, 
and  thus  to  bring  the  Introduction  to  Arithmetic 
to  the  end  that  is  at  once  suitable  and  fitting. 

[2]  A  proportion,  then,  is  in  the  proper  sense, 
the  combination  of  two  or  more  ratios,  but  by 
the  more  general  definition  the  combination  of 
two  or  more  relations,  even  if  they  are  not 
brought  under  the  same  ratio,  but  rather  a  dif¬ 
ference,  or  something  else. 

[3]  Now  a  ratio2  is  the  relation  of  two  terms 
to  one  another,  and  the  combination  of  such  is 
a  proportion,  so  that  three  is  the  smallest  num¬ 
ber  of  terms  of  which  the  latter  is  composed, 
although  it  can  be  a  series  of  more,  subject  to 
the  same  ratio  or  the  same  difference.  For  ex¬ 
ample,  1:2  is  one  ratio,  where  there  are  two 
terms;  but  2:4  is  another  similar  ratio;  hence 

1,  2,  4  is  a  proportion,  for  it  is  a  combination 
of  ratios,  or  of  three  terms  which  are  observed 
to  be  in  the  same  ratio  to  one  another.  [4]  The 
same  thing  may  be  observed  also  in  greater 
numbers  and  longer  series  of  terms;  for  let  a 
fourth  term,  8,  be  joined  to  the  former  after  4, 
again  in  a  similar  relation,  the  double,  and  then 
16  after  8  and  so  on. 

[5]  Now  if  the  same  term,  one  and  unchang¬ 
ing,  is  compared  to  those  on  either  side  of  it, 
to  the  greater  as  consequent  and  to  the  lessor 
as  antecedent,  such  a  proportion  is  called  con¬ 
tinued;  for  example,  1,  2,  4  is  a  continued  pro¬ 
portion  as  regards  quality3,  for  4:2  equals  2:1, 
and  conversely  1 :2  equals  2:4.  In  quantity,  1, 

2,  3,  for  example,  is  a  continued  proportion,  for 
as  3  exceeds  2,  so  2  exceeds  1,  and  conversely, 
as  1  is  less  than  2,  by  so  much  2  is  less  than  3. 

[(i]  If,  however,  one  term  answers  to  the 
lesser  term,  and  becomes  its  antecedent  and  a 

2Cf.  Euclid,  Elements ,  V,  irn’t. 

*Cf.  1 1. 22. 2;  23.  4  below. 


NICOMACHUS  OF  GERASA 


S42 

greater  term,  and  another,  not  the  same,  takes 
the  place  of  consequent  and  lesser  term  with 
reference  to  the  greater,  such  a  mean  and  such 
a  proportion  is  called  no  longer  continued,  but 
disjunct:  for  example,  as  regards  quality,  1,  2, 
4,  8,  for  2:1  equals  S:4,  and  conversely  1:2 
equals  4 :  8,  and  again  1 : 4  equals  2 :  S  or  4:1 
equals  8:2;  and  in  quantity,  1,  2,  3,  4,  for  as  1 
is  exceeded  by  2,  by  so  much  3  is  exceeded  by 
4,  or  as  4  exceeds  3,  so  2  exceeds  1,  and  by  in¬ 
terchange,  as  3  exceeds  1,  so  4  exceeds  2,  or 
as  1  is  exceeded  by  3,  by  so  much  2  is  exceed¬ 
ed  by  4. 

CHAPTER  XXII 

[  1]  The  first  three  proportions,  then,  which 
are  acknowledged  by  all  the  ancients,  Pythag¬ 
oras,  Plato,  and  Aristotle,  are  the  arithmetic, 
geometric,  and  harmonic:  and  there  are  three 
others  subcontrary  to  them,  which  do  not  have 
names  of  their  own,  but  are  called  in  more  gen¬ 
eral  terms  the  fourth,  fifth,  and  sixth  forms  of 
mean:  after  which  the  modems  discover  four 
others  as  well,  making  up  the  number  ten, 
which,  according  to  the  Pythagorean  view,  is 
the  most  perfect  possible.  It  was  in  accordance 
with  this  number  indeed  that  not  long  ago  the 
ten  relations  were  observed  to  take  their  proper 
number,  the  so-called  ten  categories,  the  divi¬ 
sions  and  forms  of  the  extremities  of  our  hands 
and  feet,  and  countless  other  things  which  we 
shall  notice  in  the  proper  place. 

[2]  Xow,  however,  we  must  treat  from  the 
beginning,  first,  that  form  of  proportion  which 
by  quantity  reconciles  and  binds  together  the 
comparison  of  the  terms,  which  is  a  quantita¬ 
tive  equality  as  regards  the  difference  of  the 
several  terms  to  one  another.  This  would  be 
the  arithmetic  proportion,  for  it  was  previously 
reported  that  quantity  is  its  peculiar  belong¬ 
ing.  [3]  What,  then,  is  the  reason  that  we  shall 
treat  of  this  first,  and  not  another?  Is  it  not 
clear  that  Xature  shows  it  forth  before  the  rest? 
For  in  the  natural  series  of  simple  numbers, 
beginning  with  1,  with  no  term  passed  over  or 
omitted,  the  definition  of  this  proportion  alone 
is  preserved:  moreover,  in  our  previous  state¬ 
ments,1  we  demonstrated  that  the  Arithmetical 
I ntrod action  itself  is  antecedent  to  all  the  others, 
because  it  abolishes  them  together  with  itself, 
but  is  not  abolished  together  with  them,  and 
because  it  is  implied  by  them,  but  does  not  im- 
ply^  them.  Thus  it  is  natural  that  the  mean 
which  shares  the  name  of  arithmetic  will  not 

lCf.  I.  4.  2  ff. 


unreasonably  take  precedence  of  the  means 
which  are  named  for  the  other  sciences,  the  ge¬ 
ometric  and  harmonic;  for  it  is  plain  that  all 
the  more  will  it  take  precedence  over  the  sub¬ 
contraries,  over  which  the  first  three  hold  the 
leadership.  [4]  As  the  first  and  original,  there¬ 
fore,  since  it  is  most  deserving  of  the  honor,  let 
the  arithmetic  proportion  have  its  discussion 
at  our  hands  before  the  others. 

CHAPTER  XXIII 

[1]  It  is  an  arithmetic  proportion,  then, 
whenever  three  or  more  terms  are  set  forth  in 
succession,  or  are  so  conceived,  and  the  same 
quantitative  difference  is  found  to  exist  be¬ 
tween  the  successive  numbers,  but  not  the  same 
ratio  among  the  terms,  one  to  another.  For  ex¬ 
ample,  1,  2,  3,  4,  5,  6,  7,  8,  9, 10,  11,  12,  13;  for 
in  this  natural  series  of  numbers,  examined  con¬ 
secutively  and  without  any  omissions,  every 
term  whatsoever  is  discovered  to  be  placed  be¬ 
tween  two  and  to  preserve  the  arithmetic  pro¬ 
portion  to  them.  For  its  differences  as  com¬ 
pared  with  those  ranged  on  either  side  of  it  are 
equal :  the  same  ratio,  however,  is  not  preserved 
among  them. 

[2]  And  we  understand  that  in  such  a  series 
there  comes  about  both  a  continued  and  a  dis¬ 
junct  proportion;  for  if  the  same  middle  term 
a  ns  we  is  to  those  on  either  side  as  both  ante¬ 
cedent  and  consequent,  it  would  be  a  continued 
proportion,  but  if  there  is  another  mean  along 
with  it,  a  disjunct  proportion  comes  about. 

[3]  Xow  if  we  separate  out  of  this  series  any 
three  consecutive  terms  whatsoever,  after  the 
form  of  the  continued  proportion,  or  four  or 
more  terms  after  the  disjunct  form,  and  con¬ 
sider  them,  the  difference  of  them  all  would  be 
1 ,  but  their  ratios  would  be  different  through¬ 
out.  If,  however,  again  we  select  three  or  more 
terms,  not  adjacent,  but  separated,  separated 
nevertheless  by  a  constant  interval,  if  one  term 
was  omitted  in  setting  down  each  term,  the 
difference  in  even'  case  will  be  2 ;  and  once  more 
with  three  terms  it  will  be  a  continued  propor¬ 
tion;  with  more,  disjunct.  If  two  terms  are 
omitted,  the  difference  will  always  be  3  in  all 
of  them,  continued  or  disjunct;  if  three,  4;  if 
four,  5:  and  so  on. 

[4]  Such  a  proportion,  therefore,  partakes 
in  equal  quantity  in  its  differences,  but  of  un¬ 
equal  quality;  for  this  reason  it  is  arithmetic. 
If  on  the  contrary  it  partook  of  similar  quality, 
but  not  quantity,  it  would  be  geometric  instead 
of  arithmetic. 

[6]  A  thing  is  peculiar  to  this  proportion 


INTRODUCTION  TO  ARITHMETIC  II. 


that  does  not  belong  to  any  other,  namely,  the 
mean  is  either  half  of,  or  equal  to,  the  sum  of 
the  extremes,  whether  the  proportion  be  viewed 
as  continuous  or  disjunct  or  by  alternation;  for 
either  the  mean  term  with  itself,  or  the  mean 
terms  with  one  another,  are  equal  to  the  sum 
of  the  extremes. 

[6]  It  has  still  another  peculiarity;  what  ra¬ 
tio  each  term  has  to  itself,  this  the  differences 
have  to  the  differences;  that  is,  they  are  equal. 

Again,  the  thing  which  is  most  exact,  and 
which  has  escaped  the  notice  of  the  majority, 
the  product  of  the  extremes  when  compared  to 
the  square  of  the  mean  is  found  to  be  smaller 
than  it  by  the  product  of  the  differences, 
whether  they  be  1,  2,  3,  4,  or  any  number  what¬ 
ever. 

In  the  fourth  place,  a  thing  which  all  previ¬ 
ous  writers  also  have  noted,  the  ratios  between 
the  smaller  terms  are  larger,  as  compared  to 
those  between  the  greater  terms.  It  will  be 
shown  that  in  the  harmonic  proportion,  on  the 
contrary,  the  ratios  between  the  greater  terms 
are  greater  than  those  between  the  smaller;  for 
this  reason  the  harmonic  proportion  is  subcon¬ 
trary  to  the  arithmetic,  and  the  geometric  is 
midway  between  them,  as  it  were,  between 
extremes,  for  this  proportion  has  the  ratios 
between  the  greater  terms  and  those  between 
the  smaller  equal,  and  we  have  seen  that  the 
equal  is  in  the  middle  ground  between  the 
greater  and  the  less.  So  much,  then,  about  the 
arithmetic  proportion. 

CHAPTER  XXIV 

[1]  The  next  proportion1  after  this  one,  the 
geometric,  is  the  only  one  in  the  strict  sense  of 
the  word  to  be  called  a  proportion,  because  its 
terms  are  seen  to  be  in  the  same  ratio.  It  exists 
whenever,  of  three  or  more  terms,  as  the  great¬ 
est  is  to  the  next  greatest,  so  the  latter  is  to  the 
one  following,  and  if  there  are  more  terms,  as 
this  again  is  to  the  one  following  it,  but  they 
do  not,  however,  differ  from  one  another  by  the 
same  quantity,  but  rather  by  the  same  quality 
of  ratio,  the  opposite  of  what  was  seen  to  be 
the  case  with  the  arithmetic  proportion. 

[2]  For  an  example,  set  forth  the  numbers 
beginning  with  1  that  advance  by  the  double 
ratio,  1,  2,  4,  8,  16,  32,  64,  and  so  on,  or  by  the 
triple  ratio,  1,  3,  9,  27,  81,  243,  and  so  on,  or  by 
the  quadruple,  or  in  some  similar  way.  In  each 
one  of  these  series  three  adjacent  terms,  or  four, 
or  any  number  whatever  that  may  be  taken, 

*Cf.  Euclid,  Elements ,  VII,  Def.  21. 


843 

will  give  the  geometric  proportion  to  one  an¬ 
other;  as  the  first  is  to  the  next  smaller,  so  is 
that  to  the  next  smaller,  and  again  that  to  the 
next  smaller,  and  so  on  as  far  as  you  care  to  go, 
and  also  by  alternation.  For  instance,  2,  4,  8; 
the  ratio  which  8  bears  to  4,  that  4  bears  to  2, 
and  conversely;  they  do  not,  however,  have  the 
same  quantitative  difference.  Again,  2,  4,  8, 16; 
for  not  only  does  16  have  the  same  ratio  to  8  as 
before,  though  not  the  same  difference,  but  also 
by  alternation  it  preserves  a  similar  relation — 
as  16  is  to  4,  so  8  is  to  2,  and  conversely,  as  2  is 
to  8,  so  4  is  to  16;  and  disjunctly,  as  2  is  to  4, 
so  8  is  to  16;  and  conversely  and  in  disjunct 
form,  as  16  is  to  8  so  4  is  to  2;  for  it  has  the 
double  ratio. 

[3]  The  geometric  proportion  has  a  peculiar 
property  shared  by  none  of  the  rest,  that  the 
differences  of  the  terms  are  in  the  same  ratio  to 
each  other  as  the  terms  to  those  adjacent  to 
them,  the  greater  to  the  less,  and  vice  versa. 
Still  another  property  is  that  the  greater  terms 
have  as  a  difference,  with  respect  to  the  lesser, 
the  lesser  terms  themselves,  and  similarly  dif¬ 
ference  differs  from  difference,  by  the  smaller 
difference  itself,  if  the  terms  are  set  forth  in  the 
double  ratio;  in  the  triple  ratio  both  terms  and 
differences  will  have  as  a  difference  twice  the 
next  smaller,  in  the  quadruple  ratio  thrice,  in 
the  quintuple  four  times,  and  so  on. 

[4]  Geometric  proportions  come  about  not 
only  among  the  multiples,  but  also  among  all 
the  superparticular,  superpartient,  and  mixed 
forms,  and  the  peculiar  property  of  this  pro¬ 
portion  in  all  cases  is  preserved,  that  in  the 
continued  proportions  the  product  of  the  ex¬ 
tremes  is  equal  to  the  square  of  the  mean,  but 
in  disjunct  proportions,  or  those  with  a  greater 
number  of  terms,  even  if  they  are  not  contin¬ 
ued,  but  with  an  even  number  of  terms,  that 
the  product  of  the  extremes  equals  that  of  the 
means. 

[5 ]  As  an  illustration  of  the  fact  that  in  all 
the  relations,  all  kinds  of  multiples,  superpar¬ 
ticulars,  superpartients,  and  mixed  ratios  the 
peculiar  property  of  this  proportion  is  pre¬ 
served,  letjffiat  suffice2  and  be  sufficient  for  us 
wherein  we  fashioned,  beginning  with  equali- 
ty,  by  the  three  rules  all  the  kinds  of  inequality 
out  of  one  another,  when  they  were  in  both 
direct  and  reverse  order;  for  each  act  of  fash¬ 
ioning  and  each  series  set  forth  is  a  geometric 
proportion  with  all  the  aforesaid  properties  as 
well  as  a  fourth,  namely,  that  they  keep  the 

2Cf.  I.  23.  7  If. 


NICOMACHUS  OF  GERASA 


844 

same  ratio  in  both  the  greater  and  the  smaller 
terms.  Moreover,  if  we  set  forth  the  series 
shared  by  both  heteromecic  and  square  num¬ 
bers,  one  by  one,  containing  the  terms  in  both 
series,  and  then  selecting  the  terms  by  groups 
of  three  beginning  with  1,  examine  them,  in 
each  case  setting  down  the  last  of  the  former 
group  as  the  starting  point  of  the  next,  we  shall 
find  that  from  the  multiple  relation — that  is, 
the  double — all  the  kinds  of  superparticulars 
appear  one  after  the  other,  the  sesquialter,  ses- 
quitertian,  sesquiquartan,  and  so  on. 

[6]  It  would  be  most  seasonable,  now  that 
we  have  reached  this  point,  to  mention  a  corol¬ 
lary  that  is  of  use  to  us  for  a  certain  Platonic 
theorem:1  for  plane  numbers  are  bound  togeth¬ 
er  always  by  a  single  mean,  solids  by  two,  in 
the  form  of  a  proportion.  For  with  two  con¬ 
secutive  squares2  only  one  mean  term  is  dis¬ 
covered  which  preserves  the  geometric  propor¬ 
tion,  as  antecedent  to  the  smaller  and  conse¬ 
quent  to  the  greater  term,  and  never  more  than 
one.  Hence  we  conceive  of  two  intervals  be¬ 
tween  the  mean  term  and  each  extreme,  in  the 
relation  of  similar  ratios.  [7]  Again,  with  two 
consecutive  cubes3  only  two  middle  terms  in 
proper  ratio  are  found,  in  accordance  with  the 
geometric  proportion,  never  more;  hence  there 
are  three  intervals,  one,  that  between  the  mean 
terms  compared  to  one  another,  and  two  be¬ 
tween  the  extremes  and  the  means  on  either 
side.  [8]  Thus  the  solid  forms  are  called  three- 
dimensional  and  the  plane  ones  two-dimension¬ 
al;  for  example,  1  and  4  are  planes,  and  2  a 
middle  term  in  proportion,  or  again  4  and  9, 
two  squares,  and  their  middle  term  6,  held  by 
the  greater  and  holding  the  lesser  term  in  the 
same  ratio  as  that  in  which  one  difference  holds 
the  other.  [9]  The  reason  for  this  is  that  the 
sides  of  the  two  squares,  one  belonging  pecu¬ 
liarly  to  each,  both  together  produced  this  very 
number  6.  In  cubes,  however,  for  example  8 
and  27,  no  longer  one  but  two  mean  terms  are 
found,  12  and  18,  which  put  themselves  and 
the  terms  in  the  same  ratio  as  that  which  the 
differences  bear  to  one  another;  and  the  reason 
of  this  is  that  the  two  mean  terms  are  the  prod¬ 
ucts  of  the  sides  of  the  cubes  commingled,  2 
times  2  times  3  and  3  times  3  times  2. 

[10]  In  general,  then,  if  a  square  takes  a 
square,  that  is,  multiplies  it,  it  always  makes 
a  square;  but  if  a  square  multiplies  a  hetero- 

lTimaeus ,  32. 

2Cf.  Euclid,  Elements ,  VIII,  11. 

*Cf.  Euclid,  Elements ,  VIII,  12. 


mecic  number,  or  vice  versa,  it  never  makes  a 
square ;  and  if  cube  multiplies  cube,  a  cube  will 
always  result,  but  if  a  heteromecic  number  mul¬ 
tiplies  a  cube,  or  vice  versa,  never  is  the  result 
a  cube.  In  precisely  the  same  way  if  an  even 
number  multiplies  an  even  number,  the  prod¬ 
uct  is  always  even  and  if  odd  multiplies  odd 
always  odd ;  but  if  odd  multiplies  even  or  even 
odd,  the  result  will  always  be  even  and  never 
odd.  [11]  These  matters  will  receive  their  prop¬ 
er  elucidation  in  the  commentary  on  Plato, 
with  reference  to  the  passage  on  the  so-called 
marriage  number  in  the  Republic*  introduced 
in  the  person  of  the  Muses.  So  then  let  us  pass 
over  to  the  third  proportion,  the  so-called  har¬ 
monic,  and  analyze  it. 

CHAPTER  XXV 

[1]  The  proportion  that  is  placed  in  the  third 
order  is  one  called  the  harmonic,  which  exists 
whenever  among  three  terms  the  mean  on  ex¬ 
amination  is  observed  to  be  neither  in  the  same 
ratio  to  the  extremes,  antecedent  of  one  and 
consequent  of  the  other,  as  in  the  geometric 
proportion,  nor  with  equal  intervals,  but  an  in¬ 
equality  of  ratios,  as  in  the  arithmetic,  but  on 
the  contrary,  as  the  greatest  term  is  to  the 
smallest,  so  the  difference  between  greatest  and 
mean  terms  is  to  the  difference  between  mean 
and  smallest  term.  For  example,  take  3,  4,  6, 
or  2,  3,  6.  For  6  exceeds  4  by  one  third  of  itself, 
since  2  is  one  third  of  6,  and  3  falls  short  of  4 
by  one  third  of  itself,  for  1  is  one  third  of  3.  In 
the  first  example,  the  extremes  are  in  double 
ratio  and  their  differences  with  the  mean  term 
are  again  in  the  same  double  ratio  to  one  an¬ 
other;  but  in  the  second  they  are  each  in  the 
triple  ratio. 

[2]  It  has  a  peculiar  property,  opposite,  as 
we  have  said,5  to  that  of  the  arithmetic  pro¬ 
portion;  for  in  the  latter  the  ratios  were  greater 
among  the  smaller  terms,  and  smaller  among 
the  greater  terms.  Here,  however,  on  the  con¬ 
trary,  those  among  the  greater  terms  are  great¬ 
er  and  those  among  the  smaller  terms  smaller, 
so  that  in  the  geometric  proportion,  like  a  mean 
between  them,  there  may  be  observed  the 
equality  of  ratios  on  either  side,  a  midground 
between  greater  and  smaller. 

[3]  Furthermore,  in  the  arithmetic  propor¬ 
tion  the  mean  term  is  seen  to  be  greater  and 
smaller  than  those  on  either  side  by  the  same 
fraction  of  itself,  but  by  different  fractions  of 

4 Republic ,  546  ff. 

6Cf.  II.  23.  6. 


INTRODUCTION  TO  ARITHMETIC  II. 


the  terms  that  flank  it;  in  the  harmonic,  how* 
ever,  it  is  the  opposite,  for  the  middle  term  is 
greater  and  less  than  the  terms  on  either  side 
by  different  fractions  of  itself,  but  always  the 
same  fraction  of  those  terms  at  its  sides,  a  half 
of  them  or  a  third:  but  the  geometric,  as  if  in 
the  midground  between  them,  shows  this  prop¬ 
erty  neither  in  the  mean  term  exclusively  nor 
in  the  extremes,  but  in  both  mean  and  extreme. 

[4]  Once  more,  the  harmonic  proportion  has 
as  a  peculiar  property  the  fact  that  when  the 
extremes  are  added  together  and  multiplied  by 
the  mean,  it  makes  twice  the  product  of  them¬ 
selves  multiplied  by  one  another. 

[o]  The  harmonic  proportion  was  so  called 
because  the  arithmetic  proportion  was  distin¬ 
guished  b}*  quantity,  showing  an  equality  in 
this  respect  with  the  intervals  from  one  term 
to  another,  and  the  geometric  by  quality,  giv¬ 
ing  similar  qualitative  relations  between  one 
term  and  another,  but  this  form,  with  refer¬ 
ence  to  relativity,  appears  now  in  one  form, 
now  in  another,  neither  in  its  terms  exclusively 
nor  in  its  differences  exclusively,  but  partly  in 
the  terms  and  partly  in  the  differences:  for  as 
the  greatest  term  is  to  the  smallest,  so  also  is 
the  difference  between  the  greatest  and  the  next 
greatest,  or  middle,  term  to  the  difference  be¬ 
tween  the  least  term  and  the  middle  term,  and 
vice  versa. 

CHAPTER  XXVI 

[1]  In  the  classification  of  Being  previously 
set  forth  we  recognized  the  relative  *as  a  thing 
peculiar  to  harmonic  theory ;  but  the  musical 
ratios  of  the  harmonic  intervals  are  also  rather 
to  be  found  in  this  proportion.  The  most  ele¬ 
mentary  is  the  diatessaron,  in  the  sesquitertian 
ratio,  4:3,  which  is  the  ratio  of  term  to  term2 
in  the  example  in  the  double  ratio,  or  of  differ¬ 
ence  to  difference  in  that  which  follows,  the 
triple,  for  these  differences  are  of  6  to  2  or  again 
of  6  to  3.  Immediately  following  is  the  diapente, 
which  is  the  sesquialter,  3:2  or  again,  6:4,  the 
ratio  of  term  to  term.  Then  the  combination3 
of  both  of  these,  sesquialter  and  sesquitertian, 
the  diapason,  which  comes  next,  is  in  the  dou¬ 
ble  ratio,  6:3  in  both  of  the  examples,  the  ratio 
of  term  to  term.  The  following  interval,  that 
of  the  diapason  and  diapente  together,  which 
preserves  the  triple  ratio  of  the  two  of  them 
together,  since  it  is  the  combination  of  double 

*See  I.  3.  1. 

*The  examples  referred  to  are  the  harmonic  pro¬ 
portions  cited  in  II.  25.  1. 

3Cf.  II.  5.  2. 


845 

and  sesquialter,  is  as  6:2,  the  ratio  of  term  to 
term  in  the  example  in  the  triple  ratio,  and 
likewise  of  difference  to  difference  in  the  same, 
and  in  the  proportion  with  double  ratio  it  is 
the  ratio  of  the  greatest  term  to  the  difference 
between  that  term  and  the  mean  term,  or  of 
the  difference  between  the  extremes  to  the  dif¬ 
ference  between  the  smaller  terms.  The  last 
and  greatest  interval,  the  so-called  di-diapason, 
as  it  were  twice  the  double,  which  is  in  the 
quadruple  ratio,  is  as  the  middle  term  in  the 
proportion  in  the  double  ratio  to  the  difference 
between  the  lesser  terms,  or  as  the  difference 
between  the  extremes,  in  the  example  in  the 
triple  ratio,  to  the  difference  between  the  lesser 
terms. 

[2]  Some,  however,  agreeing  with  Philolaus, 
believe  that  the  proportion  is  called  harmonic 
because  it  attends  upon  all  geometric  harmony, 
and  they  say  that  “geometric  harmony”  is  the 
cube  because  it  is  harmonized  in  all  three  di¬ 
mensions,  being  the  product  of  a  number  thrice 
multiplied  together.  For  in  eveiy  cube  this  pro¬ 
portion  Is  mirrored;  there  are  in  even'  cube  12 
sides,  8  angles  and  6  faces;  hence  S,  the  mean 
between  6  and  12,  is  according  to  harmonic 
proportion,  for  as  the  extremes  are  to  each  oth¬ 
er,  so  is  the  difference  between  greatest  and 
middle  term  to  that  between  the  middle  and 
smallest  terms,  and,  again,  the  middle  term  is 
greater  than  the  smallest  by  one  fraction  of  it¬ 
self  and  by  another  is  less  than  the  greater 
term,  but  is  greater  and  smaller  by  one  and  the 
same  fraction  of  the  extremes.  And  again,  the 
sum  of  the  extremes  multiplied  by  the  mean 
makes  double  the  product  of  the  extremes  mul¬ 
tiplied  together.  The  diatessaron  is  found  in 
the  ratio  8:6,  which  is  sesquitertian,  the  dia¬ 
pente  in  12:8,  which  is  sesquialter;  the  diapa¬ 
son,  the  combination  of  these  two,  in  12:6,  the 
double  ratio;  the  diapason  and  diapente  com¬ 
bined,  which  is  triple,  in  the  ratio  of  the  differ¬ 
ence  of  the  extremes  to  that  of  the  smaller 
terms,  and  the  di-diapason  is  the  ratio  of  the 
middle  term  to  the  difference  between  itself 
and  the  lesser  term.  Most  properly,  then,  has 
it  been  called  harmonic. 

CHAPTER  XXVII 

[1]  Just  as  in  the  division  of  the  musical 
canon,  when  a  single  string  is  stretched  or  one 
length  of  a  pipe  is  used,  with  immovable  ends, 
and  the  mid-point  shifts  in  the  pipe  by  means 
of  the  finger-holes,  in  the  string  by  means  of 
the  bridge,  and  as  in  one  way  after  another  the 
aforesaid  proportions,  arithmetic,  geometric, 


NICOMACHUS  OF  GERASA 


846 

and  harmonic,  can  be  produced,  so  that  the  fact 
becomes  apparent  that  they  are  logically  and 
very  properly  named,  since  they  are  brought 
about  through  changing  and  shifting  the  mid¬ 
dle  term  in  different  ways,  so  too  it  is  both 
reasonable  and  possible  to  insert  the  mean  term 
that  fits  each  of  the  three  proportions  between 
two  arithmetic  terms,  which  stay  fixed  and  do 
not  change,  whether  they  are  both  even  or  odd. 
In  the  arithmetic  proportion  this  mean  term  is 
one  that  exceeds  and  is  exceeded  by  an  equal 
amount;  in  the  geometric  proportion  it  is  dif¬ 
ferentiated  from  the  extremes  by  the  same  ra¬ 
tio,  and  in  the  harmonic  it  is  greater  and  smaller 
than  the  extremes  by  the  same  fraction  of  those 
same  extremes. 

[2]  Let  there  be  given  then,  first,  two  even 
terms,  between  which  we  must  find  how  the 
three  means  would  be  inserted,  and  what  they 
are.  Let  them  be  10  and  40. 

[8]  First,  then,  I  fit  to  them  the  arithmetic 
mean.  It  is  25,  and  the  attendant  properties  of 
the  arithmetic  proportion  are  all  preserved;  for 
as  each  term  is  to  itself,  so  also  is  difference  to 
difference;  they  are  in  equality,  therefore.  And 
as  much  as  the  greater  exceeds  the  means  by 
so  much  the  latter  exceeds  the  lesser  term;  the 
sum  of  the  extremes  is  twice  the  mean;  the  ra¬ 
tio  of  the  lesser  terms  is  greater  than  that  of 
the  greater;  the  product  of  the  extremes  is  less 
than  the  square  of  the  mean  by  the  amount  of 
the  square  of  the  differences;  and  the  middle 
term  is  greater  and  less  than  the  extremes  by 
the  same  fraction  of  itself,  but  by  different  frac¬ 
tions  regarded  as  parts  of  the  extremes. 

[4]  If,  however,  I  insert  20  as  a  mean  be¬ 
tween  the  given  even  terms,  the  properties  of 
the  geometrical  proportion  come  into  view  and 
those  of  the  arithmetic  are  done  away  with. 
For  as  the  greater  term  is  to  the  middle  term, 
so  is  the  middle  term  to  the  lesser;  the  product 
of  the  extremes  is  equal  to  the  square  of  the 
mean;  the  differences  are  observed  to  be  in  the 
same  ratio  to  one  another  as  that  of  the  terms; 
neither  in  the  extremes  alone  nor  in  the  middle 
term  alone  does  there  reside  the  sameness  of 
the  fraction  concerned  in  the  relative  excess 
and  deficiency  of  the  terms,  but  in  the  middle 
term  and  one  of  the  extremes  by  turns;  and 
both  between  greater  and  smaller  terms  there 
is  the  same  ratio. 

[o]  But  if  I  select  16  as  the  mean,  again  the 
properties  of  the  two  former  proportions  dis¬ 
appear  and  those  of  the  harmonic  are  seen  to 
remain  fixed,  with  respect  to  the  two  even 
terms.  For  as  the  greatest  term  is  to  the  least, 


so  is  the  difference  of  the  greater  terms  to  that 
of  the  lesser;  by  what  fractions,  seen  as  frac¬ 
tions  of  the  greater  term,  the  mean  is  smaller 
than  the  greater  term,  by  these  the  same  mean 
term  is  greater  than  the  smallest  term  when 
they  are  looked  upon  as  fractions  of  the  small¬ 
est  term;  the  ratio  between  the  greater  terms 
is  greater,  and  that  of  the  smaller  terms,  small¬ 
er,  a  thing  which  is  not  true  of  any  other  pro¬ 
portion;  and  the  sum  of  the  extremes  multi¬ 
plied  by  the  mean  is  double  the  product  of  the 
extremes. 

[6]  If,  however,  the  two  terms  that  are  given 
are  not  even  but  odd,  like  5,  45,  the  same  num¬ 
ber,  25,  will  make  the  arithmetic  proportion; 
and  the  reason  for  this  is  that  the  terms  on 
either  side  overpass  it  and  fail  to  come  up  to  it 
by  an  equal  number,  keeping  the  same  quanti¬ 
tative  difference  with  respect  to  it.  15  substi¬ 
tuted  makes  the  geometric  proportion,  as  it  is 
the  triple  and  subtriple  of  each  respectively; 
and  if  9  takes  over  the  function  of  mean  term 
it  gives  the  harmonic  j  for  by  those  parts  of  the 
smaller  term  by  which  it  exceeds,  namely,  four 
fifths  of  the  smaller,  it  is  also  less  than  the 
greater,  if  they  be  regarded  as  parts  of  the 
greater  term,  for  this  too  is  four  fifths,  and  if 
you  try  all  the  previously  mentioned  proper¬ 
ties  of  the  harmonic  ratio  you  will  find  that 
they  will  fit. 

[7]  And  let  this  be  your  method  whereby 
you  might  scientifically  fashion  the  mean  terms 
that  are  illustrated  in  the  three  proportions. 
For  the  two  terms  given  you,  whether  odd  or 
even,  you  will  find  the  arithmetic  mean  by  add¬ 
ing  the  extremes  and  putting  down  half  of  them 
as  the  mean,  or  if  you  divide  by  2  the  excess  of 
the  greater  over  the  smaller,  and  add  this  to 
the  smaller,  you  will  have  the  mean.  As  for  the 
geometric  mean,  if  you  find  the  square  root  of 
the  product  of  the  extremes,  you  will  produce 
it,  or,  observing  the  ratio  of  the  terms  to  one 
another,  divide  this  by  2  and  make  the  mean, 
for  example,  the  double,  in  the  case  of  a  quad¬ 
ruple  ratio.  For  the  harmonic  mean,  you  must 
multiply  the  difference  of  the  extremes  by  the 
lesser  term  and  divide  the  product  by  the  sum 
of  the  extremes,  then  add  the  quotient  to  the 
lesser  term,  and  the  result  will  be  the  harmonic 
mean. 

CHAPTER  XXVIII 

[  1]  So  much,  then,  concerning  the  three  pro¬ 
portions  celebrated  by  the  ancients,  which  we 
have  discussed  the  more  clearly  and  at  length 
for  just  this  reason,  that  they  are  to  be  met 


INTRODUCTION  TO  ARITHMETIC  II. 


with  frequently  and  in  various  forms  in  the 
writings  of  those  authors.  The  succeeding  forms, 
however,  we  must  only  epitomize,  since  they 
do  not  occur  frequently  in  the  ancient  writings, 
but  are  included  merely  for  the  sake  of  our  own 
acquaintance  with  them  and,  so  to  speak,  for 
the  completeness  of  our  reckoning.  [2]  They 
are  set  forth  by  us  in  an  order  based  on  their 
opposition  to  the  three  archetypes  already  de¬ 
scribed,  since  they  are  fashioned  out  of  them 
and  have  the  same  order. 

[3]  The  fourth,  and  the  one  called  subcon¬ 
trary,  because  it  is  opposite  to,  and  has  oppo¬ 
site  properties  to,  the  harmonic  proportion,  ex¬ 
ists  when,  in  three  terms,  as  the  greatest  is  to 
the  smallest,  so  the  difference  of  the  smaller 
terms  is  to  that  of  the  greater,  for  example  3, 
5,  6.  For  the  terms  compared  are  seen  to  be  in 
the  double  ratio,  and  it  is  plain  wherein  it  is 
opposite  to  the  harmonic  proportion ;  for  where¬ 
as  they  both  have  the  same  extreme  terms,  and 
in  double  ratio,  in  the  former  the  difference  of 
the  greater  terms  as  compared  to  that  of  the 
lesser  preserved  the  same  ratio  as  that  of  the 
extremes,  but  in  this  proportion  just  the  re¬ 
verse,  the  difference  of  the  smaller  compared 
with  that  of  the  greater.  You  must  know  that 
its  peculiar  property  is  this.  The  product  of  the 
greater  and  the  mean  terms  is  twice  the  prod¬ 
uct  of  the  mean  and  the  smaller;  for  6  times  5 
is  twice  5  times  3. 

[4]  The  two  proportions,  fifth  and  sixth,  were 
both  fashioned  after  the  geometrical,  and  they 
differ  from  each  other  thus. 

The  fifth  form  exists,  whenever,  among  three 
terms,  as  the  middle  term  is  to  the  lesser,  so 
their  difference  is  to  the  difference  between  the 
greater  and  the  mean,  as  in  2,  4,  5,  for  4  is  the 
middle  term,  the  double  of  2,  the  lesser,  and  2 
is  the  double  of  1 — the  difference  of  the  small¬ 
est  terms  as  compared  with  that  of  the  largest. 
That  which  makes  it  contrary  to  the  geometric 
proportion  is  that  in  the  former,1  as  the  middle 
term  is  to  the  lesser,  so  the  excess  of  the  greater 
over  the  mean  is  to  the  excess  of  the  mean  over 
the  lesser  term,  whereas  in  this  proportion,  on 
the  contrary,  it  is  the  difference  of  the  lesser 
compared  to  that  of  the  greater.  Nevertheless 
it  is  peculiar  to  this  proportion  that  the  prod¬ 
uct  of  the  greatest  by  the  middle  term  is  dou¬ 
ble  that  of  the  greatest  by  the  smallest,  for  5 
times  4  is  twice  5  times  2. 

[5]  The  sixth  form2  comes  about  when,  in  a 

’Cf.  II.  24. 

2Cf.  Euclid,  Elem.,  V.,  Def.  16. 


847 

group  of  three  terms,  as  the  greatest  is  to  the 
mean,  so  the  excess  of  the  mean  over  the  lesser 
is  to  the  excess  of  the  greater  over  the  mean, 
for  example  1,  4,  6,  for  both  are  in  the  sesqui- 
alter  ratio.  There  is  in  this  case  also  a  reason¬ 
able  cause  for  its  opposition  to  the  geometrical; 
for  here,  too,  the  likeness  of  the  ratios  reverses, 
as  in  the  fifth  form. 

[6 ]  These  are  the  six  proportions  commonly 
spoken  of  among  previous  writers,  the  three 
prototypes  having  lasted  from  the  times  of  Py¬ 
thagoras  down  to  Aristotle  and  Plato,  and  the 
three  others,  opposites  of  the  former,  coming 
into  use  among  the  commentators  and  sectari¬ 
ans  who  succeeded  these  men.  But  certain  men 
have  devised  in  addition,  by  shifting  the  terms 
and  differences  of  the  former,  four  more  which 
do  not  much  appear  in  the  writings  of  the  an¬ 
cients,  but  have  been  sparingly  touched  upon 
as  an  over-nice  detail.  These,  however,  we  must 
run  over  in  the  following  fashion,  lest  we  seem 
ignorant. 

[7]  The  first  of  them,  and  the  seventh  in  the 
list  of  them  all,  exists  when,  as  the  greatest 
term  is  to  the  least,  so  their  difference  is  to  the 
difference  of  the  lesser  terms,  as  6,  8,  9,  for  on 
comparison  the  ratio  of  each  is  seen  to  be  the 
sesquialter. 

[8]  The  eighth  proportion,  which  is  the  sec¬ 
ond  of  this  group,  comes  about  when,  as  the 
greatest  is  to  the  least  term,  so  the  difference 
of  the  extremes  is  to  the  difference  of  the  greater 
terms,  as  6,  7,  9;  for  this  also  has  sesquialters 
for  the  two  ratios. 

[9]  The  ninth  in  the  complete  list,  and  third 
in  the  number  of  those  subsequently  invented, 
exists  when  there  are  three  terms  and  ^whatever 
ratio  the  mean  bears  to  the  least,  that  also  the 
difference  of  the  extremes  has  in  comparison 
with  that  of  the  smallest  terms,  as  4,  6,  7. 

[10]  The  tenth,  in  the  full  list,  which  con¬ 
cludes  them  all,  and  the  fourth  in  the  series 
presented  by  the  moderns,  is  seen  when,  among 
three  terms,  as  the  mean  is  to  the  lesser,  so  the 
difference  of  the  extremes  is  to  the  difference 
of  the  greater  terms,  as  3,  5,  S,  for  it  is  the 
superbipartient  ratio  in  each  pair. 

[11]  To  sum  up,  then,  let  the  terms  of  the 
ten  proportions  be  set  forth  in  one  illustration, 
for  the  sake  of  easy  comprehension : 

First:  1,2,  3  Sixth:  1,4,  6 
Second:  1,  2,  4  Seventh:  6,  8,  9 
Third:  3,  4,  6  Eighth:  6,  7,  9 
Fourth:  3,  5,  G  Ninth :  4,  6,  7 
Fifth:  2,  4,5  Tenth:  3,  5,  8 


848 


NICOMACHUS  OF  GERASA 


CHAPTER  XXIX 

[  1]  It  remains  for  me  to  discuss  briefly  the 
most  perfect  proportion,  that  which  is  three- 
dimensional  and  embraces  them  all,  and  which 
is  most  useful  for  all  progress  in  music  and  in 
the  theory  of  the  nature  of  the  universe.  This 
alone  would  properly  and  truly  be  called  har¬ 
mony1  rather  than  the  others,  since  it  is  not  a 
plane,  nor  bound  together  by  only  one  mean 
term,  but  with  two,  so  as  thus  to  be  extended 
in  three  dimensions,2  just  as  a  while  ago  it  was 
explained  that  the  cube  is  harmony. 

[2]  When,  therefore,  there  are  two  extreme 
terms,  both  of  three  dimensions,  either  num¬ 
bers  multiplied  thrice  by  themselves  so  as  to 
be  a  cube,  or  numbers  multiplied  twice  by 
themselves  and  once  by  another  number  so  as 
to  be  either  “beams”  or  “bricks,”  or  the  prod¬ 
ucts  of  three  unequal  numbers,  so  as  to  be  sca¬ 
lene,  and  between  them  there  are  found  two 
other  terms  which  preserve  the  same  ratios  to 
the  extremes  alternately  and  together,  in  such 
a  manner  that,  while  one  of  them  preserves  the 
harmonic  proportion,  the  other  completes  the 
arithmetic,  it  is  necessary  that  in  such  a  dis¬ 
position  of  the  four  the  geometric  proportion 
appear,  on  examination,  commingled  with  both 
mean  terms — as  the  greatest  is  to  the  third  re¬ 
moved  from  it,  so  is  the  second  from  it  to  the 
fourth ;  for  such  a  situation  makes  the  product 
of  the  means  equal  to  the  product  of  the  ex¬ 
tremes.  And  again,  if  the  greatest  term  be 

*Cf.  II.  26.  2. 

2Cf.  II.  24.  6. 


shown  to  differ  from  the  one  next  beneath  it  by 
the  amount  whereby  this  latter  differs  from  the 
least  term,  such  an  array  becomes  an  arith¬ 
metic  proportion  and  the  sum  of  the  extremes 
is  twice  the  mean.  But  if  the  third  term  from 
the  greatest  exceeds  and  is  exceeded  by  the 
same  fraction  of  the  extremes,  it  is  harmonic 
and  the  product  of  the  mean  by  the  sum  of 
the  extremes  is  double  the  product  of  the  ex¬ 
tremes. 

[8]  Let  this  be  an  example  of  this  propor¬ 
tion,  6,  8,  9,  12.  6  is  a  scalene  number,  derived 
from  1  times  2  times  3,  and  12  comes  from  the 
successive  multiplication  of  2  times  2  times  3 ; 
of  the  mean  terms  the  lesser  is  from  1  times  2 
times  4,  and  the  greater  from  1  times  3  times  3. 
The  extremes  are  both  solid  and  three-dimen¬ 
sional,  and  the  means  are  of  the  same  class. 
According  to  the  geometric  proportion,  as  12 
is  to  8,  so  9  is  to  6;  according  to  the  arithmetic, 
as  12  exceeds  9,  by  so  much  does  9  exceed  6; 
and  by  the  harmonic,  by  the  fraction  by  which 
8  exceeds  6,  viewed  as  a  fraction  of  6,  8  is  also 
exceeded  by  12,  viewed  as  a  fraction  of  12. 

[4]  Moreover  8: 6  or  12:9  is  the  diatessaron, 
in  sesquitertian  ratio;  9:6  or  12:8  is  the  dia- 
pente  in  the  sesquialter;  12:6  is  the  diapason 
in  the  double.  Finally,  9:8  is  the  interval  of  a 
tone,  in  the  superoctave  ratio,  which  is  the 
common  measure  of  all  the  ratios  in  music, 
since  it  is  also  the  more  familiar,  because  it  is 
likewise  the  difference  between  the  first  and 
most  elementary  intervals. 

[5]  And  let  this  be  sufficient  concerning  the 
phenomena  and  properties  of  number,  for  a 
first  Introduction. 


PRINTED  IN  THE  U.S.A. 


I 


&&&& 


£7=5^ 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS,  Volumes  2  and  3 


•5=*52*5 


•t2*53*s 


•53*52*5! 


*7*53*^*72*73*52*53*^*^*^*^*»2*^*^*^*^*^*53*52*^*^3*^*52*53*-^*53*^*52*v2*53*^*^*^*^*72*»‘ 


*52*52* 


*52*52* 


*52*52* 


*52*52* 


552*53* 


*52*52* 


52*52* 


*52*52* 


*52*52* 


*52*52* 


*52*52* 


53*52* 


52*52* 


52*52* 


52*52* 


533*52* 


*5?*52* 


52*52* 


52*52* 


52*52* 


52*52* 


52*52* 


52*52* 


52*52* 


•W^p 


52*5^ 


-  53*53* 


2*52* 


52*52* 


52*52* 


52*52* 


52*52* 


52*52* 


52*52* 


52*52* 


52*52* 


ANGEL 

ANIMAL 

ARISTOCRACY 

ART 

ASTRONOMY 
BEAUTY 
BEING 
CAUSE 
CHANCE 
CHANGE 
CITIZEN 
CONSTITUTION 
COURAGE 
CUSTOM  AND 
CONVENTION 
DEFINITION 
DEMOCRACY 
DESIRE 
DIALECTIC 
DUTY 

EDUCATION 

ELEMENT 

EMOTION 

ETERNITY 

EVOLUTION 

EXPERIENCE 


FAMILY 

FATE 

FORM 

GOD 

GOOD  AND  EVIL 

GOVERNMENT 

HABIT 

HAPPINESS 

HISTORY 

HONOR 

HYPOTHESIS 

IDEA 

IMMORTALITY 

INDUCTION 

INFINITY 

JUDGMENT 

JUSTICE 

KNOWLEDGE 

LABOR 

LANGUAGE 

LAW 

LIBERTY 

LIFE  AND  DEATH 

LOGIC 

LOVE 

MAN 

MATHEMATICS 


52*52*5 


52*52*5 


A1A1; 

7S7S7 


52*52*5 


52*52*5 


52*52*5 


52*52*5 


52*52*5 


52*52*5 


*2*52*5 


73*73*7 


52*52*5 


-53*73*7?} 


73*7^5} 


52*52*5} 


52*52*5 


52*52*5} 


53*53*7 


52*52*5 


72*73*73 


53*53*7! 


53*53*7t 


53*53*7-1 


53*53*7 


53*53*5" 


52*52*5} 


52*52*52 


7*3*7 


52*52*5 


53*53*7 


53*53*7 


53*53*7 


53*53*7 


53*53*5? 


52*52*5 


53*-5?*5? 


53**53*5? 


53*53*5? 


53*53*7 


53*53*5? 


53*53*5? 


53*- 53*5? 


53*52*7?, 


*53**3*535v3*-53*5?*5:3*52*53*53*535*53*53*'53*53*5??*5?3*53*53*53*5?*53i*53*53*53*53*53*53*73*53*53*53*7?*53*53*5? 


*53*53*5?*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*''53*5?*-53*53*53*53*53*5:?*53*5 


*-53*53**3*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*7 


i*52*52*52*52*52*52*52*52*52*52*52*52*52*52* 


53*5??*53*53*53*-53*53*53*53*53*- 53*5?3*53*53*53*7 


*53*53v53V3'53*53*5?353*53*5?*53-"-53*53*53'5??*5?3H3*-53S3*53*53*53*53*53*53''53''53*53*53*53*53*'3*53*53*53*7? 


*53*53*53'-53*53*53*53*53*53*52*53*53*53*53'-53*53*53*53*52*53*5?*52*53v52*53*52*52*52*52*52*53*53*53,5?*5?*5: 


*53*5?*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53''53*-53*-53*53*53*53*5?*53*53*53*53*53*53v53*53*^*53*53*53*5?*53*53*53?5?*52*7 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS,  Volumes  2  and  3 


is^» 


^33- 


l£3^ 


w 


MATTER 
MECHANICS 
MEDICINE 
MEMORY  AND 
IMAGINATION 
METAPHYSICS 
MIND 

MONARCHY 
NATURE 
NECESSITY  AND 
CONTINGENCY 
OLIGARCHY 
ONE  AND  MANY 
OPINION 
OPPOSITION 
PHILOSOPHY 
PHYSICS 

PLEASURE  AND  PAIN 

POETRY 

PRINCIPLE 

PROGRESS 

PROPHECY 

PRUDENCE 

PUNISHMENT 

QUALITY 

QUANTITY 

REASONING 


RELATION 
RELIGION 
REVOLUTION 
RHETORIC 
SAME  AND  OTHER 
SCIENCE 
SENSE 

SIGN  AND  SYMBOL 
SIN 

SLAVERY 

SOUL 

SPACE 

STATE 

TEMPERANCE 
THEOLOGY 
TIME 
TRUTH 
TYRANNY 
UNIVERSAL  AND 
PARTICULAR 
VIRTUE  AND  VICE 
WAR  AND  PEACE 
WEALTH 
WILL 
WISDOM 
WORLD 
forttJPfr, ',.,,m  .S 


\  8416 


VAIL  SCH< 
VA 


CT  #20 

,*A1 


?^?V5P73^ 


