at  GREAT  BOOKS  OF  THE  WESTERN  WORLD 


hr=^ 

?7^ 

7V^ 

77^ 


T'T^’ 

7^^ 


Introductory  Volumes: 

1.  The  Great  Conversation 

2.  The  Great  Ideas  I 

3.  The  Great  Ideas  II 


4.  HOMER 

5.  AESCHYLUS 
SOPHOCLES 
EURIPIDES 
ARISTOPHANES 

6.  HERODOTUS 
THUCYDIDES 

7.  PLATO 

8.  ARISTOTLE  I 

9.  ARISTOTLE  II 

10.  HIPPOCRATES 
GALEN 

11.  EUCLID 
ARCHIMEDES 
APOLLONIUS 
NICOMACHUS 


12.  LUCRETIUS 
EPICTETUS 
MARCUS  AURELIUS 

13.  VIRGIL 

14.  PLUTARCH 

15.  TACITUS 

16.  PTOLEMY 
COPERNICUS 
KEPLER 

17.  PLOTINUS 

18.  AUGUSTINE 

19.  THOMAS  AQUINAS  I 

20.  THOMAS  AQUINAS  II 

21.  DANTE 

22.  CHAUCER 

23.  MACHIAVELLI 
HOBBES 

24.  RABELAIS 

25.  MONTAIGNE 

26.  SHAKESPEARE  I 

27.  SHAKESPEARE  II 


7^77^77^77 


«77^7^; 


V’^T’^'T^V 


T^T^T^" 


GREAT  BOOKS  OF  THE  WESTERN  WORLD 


zS:r7^r^r^ 


SFT^^ 


28.  GILBERT 
GALILEO 
HARVEY 


29.  CERVANTES 

30.  FRANCIS  BACON 


31.  DESCARTES 
SPINOZA 


32.  MILTON 

33.  PASCAL 


34.  NEWTON 
HUYGENS 


35.  LOCKE 
BERKELEY 
HUME 


36.  SWIFT 
STERNE 


37.  FIELDING 


38.  MONTESQUIEU 
ROUSSEAU 


39.  ADAM  SMITH 

40.  GIBBON  I 


41.  GIBBON  II 

42.  KANT 


43.  AMERICAN  STATE 
PAPERS 

THE  FEDERALIST 
J.  S.  MILL 


44.  BOSWELL 


45.  LAVOISIER 
FOURIER 
FARADAY 


46.  HEGEL 

47.  GOETHE 

48.  MELVILLE 

49.  DARWIN 


50.  MARX 
ENGELS 


51.  TOLSTOY 

52.  DOSTOEVSKY 

53.  WILLIAM  JAMES 

54.  FREUD 


. 


GREAT  BOOKS 
OF  THE  WESTERN  WORLD 

ROBERT  MAYNARD  HUTCHINS,  EDITOR  IN  CHIEF 


42. 

KANT 


Mortimer  J.  Adler,  Associate  Editor 

Members  of  the  Advisory  Board:  Stringfellow  Barr,  Scott  Buchanan,  John  Erskine, 
Clarence  H.  Faust,  Alexander  Meiklejohn,  Joseph  J.  Schwab,  Mark  Van  Doren. 
Editorial  Consultants:  A.  F.  B.  Clark,  F.  L.  Lucas,  Walter  Murdoch. 
Wallace  Brockway,  Executive  Editor 


The  Critique  of  Pure  Reason 
The  Critique  of  Practical  Reason 

AND  OTHER  ETHICAL  TREATISES 

The  Critique  of  Judgement 

BY  IMMANUEL  KANT 


William  Benton,  Publisher 
ENCYCLOPEDIA  BRITANNICA,  INC. 


CHICAGO  ■  LONDON  ■  TORONTO  ■  GENEVA  ■  SYDNEY  ■  TOKYO  ■  MANILA 


The  Critique  of  Practical  Reason,  Fundamental  Principles  of  the  Meta¬ 
physic  of  Morals,  and  Preface  and  Introduction  to  the  Metaphysical 
Elements  of  Ethics,  With  a  Note  on  Conscience,  are  reprinted  from 
Kant's  Critique  of  Practical  Reason  and  Other  Works  on  the  Theory  of 
Ethics,  published  by  Longmans,  Green  &  Co.,  New  York  and  London, 
by  permission  of  the  Executors  of  the  translator,  Thomas  Kingsmill 
Abbott. 

General  Introduction  to  the  Metaphysic  of  Morals  and  The  Science  of 
Right,  translated  by  W.  Hastie,  are  reprinted  by  arrangement  with  T.  & 
T.  Clark,  Edinburgh. 

The  Critique  of  Judgement ,  translated  by  James  Creed  Meredith,  is  re¬ 
printed  by  arrangement  with  Oxford  University  Press. 


THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CHICAGO 
The  Great  Books 

is  published  with  the  editorial  advice  of  the  faculties 
of  The  University  of  Chicago 

No  part  of  this  work  may  be  reproduced  or  utilized  in  any  form  or  by  any 
means,  electronic  or  mechanical,  including  photocopying,  recording,  or  by  any 
information  storage  and  retrieval  system,  without  permission  in  writing  from  the 
publisher. 

© 

x952 

by  Encyclopedia  Britannica,  Inc. 


Copyright  under  International  Copyright  Union 

All  Rights  Reserved  under  Pan  American  and  Universal  Copyright 
Conventions  by  Encyclopedia  Britannica,  Inc. 

Library  of  Congress  Catalog  Card  Number:  55-10348 
International  Standard  Book  Number:  0-85229—163-9 


BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTE 

Immanuel  Kant,  1724-1804 


Kant  was  born  at  Konigsberg  in  East  Prussia 
on  April  22,  1724.  His  father,  a  saddler  in  the 
city,  was  descended  from  a  Scottish  immigrant; 
his  mother  was  German.  Both  parents  were  de¬ 
voted  followers  of  the  Pietist  branch  of  the  Lu¬ 
theran  Church,  and  it  was  largely  through  the 
influence  of  their  pastor  that  Kant,  who  was  the 
fourth  of  eleven  children  but  the  eldest  surviv¬ 
ing  son,  obtained  an  education. 

In  his  eighth  year  Kant  entered  the  Col¬ 
legium  Fredericianum,  which  his  pastor  direct¬ 
ed.  It  was  a  "Latin  School,"  and  during  the  eight 
and  a  half  years  that  he  was  there,  Kant  ac¬ 
quired  a  love  for  the  Latin  classics,  especially 
for  Lucretius.  In  1740  he  enrolled  in  the  Uni¬ 
versity  of  Konigsberg  as  a  theological  student. 
Though  he  attended  courses  in  theology,  and 
even  preached  on  one  or  two  occasions,  he  was 
principally  attracted  to  mathematics  and  phys¬ 
ics.  Given  access  to  the  library  of  his  professor 
in  these  subjects,  he  read  Newton  and  Leibniz 
and  in  1744  started  his  first  book,  dealing  with 
the  problem  of  kinetic  forces.  By  that  time  he 
had  decided  to  pursue  an  academic  career,  but 
on  failing  to  obtain  the  post  of  under-tutor  in 
one  of  the  schools  attached  to  the  university,  he 
was  compelled  for  financial  reasons  to  with¬ 
draw  and  seek  a  position  as  a  family  tutor. 

During  the  nine  years  that  Kant  was  a  tutor 
(1746-1755),  he  was  employed  by  three  differ¬ 
ent  families.  In  this  position  he  was  introduced 
to  the  influential  society  of  the  city,  acquired 
social  grace,  and  made  his  farthest  travels 
from  his  native  city,  which  took  him  to  Arns- 
dorf,  about  sixty  miles  from  Konigsberg.  In 
1755,  aided  by  a  relative,  he  was  able  to 
complete  his  degree  at  the  university  and 
assume  the  role  of  Privat-docent ,  or  lecturer. 
The  three  dissertations  he  presented  for  this 
post  dealt  respectively  with  fire,  the  first  prin¬ 
ciples  of  metaphysical  knowledge,  and  “the  ad¬ 
vantages  to  natural  philosophy  of  a  metaphysic 
connected  with  geometry."  With  the  opening 
of  the  winter  term  he  began  his  lectures.  At 
first  he  restricted  himself  to  mathematics  and 
physics,  and  that  year  and  the  next  he  pub¬ 


lished  several  scientific  works,  dealing  with  the 
different  races  of  men,  the  nature  of  winds,  the 
causes  of  earthquakes,  and  the  general  theory 
of  the  heavens.  But  he  soon  branched  into 
other  subjects,  including  logic,  metaphysics, 
and  moral  philosophy.  He  even  lectured  on 
fireworks  and  fortifications,  and  gave  every 
summer  for  thirty  years  a  popular  course  on 
physical  geography.  Kant  enjoyed  great  suc¬ 
cess  as  a  lecturer;  his  style,  which  differed 
markedly  from  that  of  his  books,  was  humor¬ 
ous  and  vivid,  enlivened  by  many  examples 
drawn  from  his  wide  reading  in  English  and 
French  literature,  and  in  books  of  travel  and 
geography,  as  well  as  in  science  and  philosophy. 

During  his  fifteen  years  as  a  Privat-docent , 
Kant’s  fame  as  writer  and  lecturer  steadily 
increased.  Though  he  failed  twice  to  obtain  a 
professorship  at  Konigsberg,  he  continued  to 
refuse  appointments  elsewhere.  The  only  aca¬ 
demic  preferment  he  received  during  this 
lengthy  probation  was  the  post  of  under-librar¬ 
ian,  which  he  was  given  in  1766.  Finally  in  1770 
he  obtained  the  chair  of  logic  and  metaphysics. 
In  later  years  he  served  six  times  as  dean 
of  the  philosophical  faculty  and  twice  as  rector. 

Kant’s  inaugural  dissertation  as  professor,  On 
the  Form  and  Principles  of  the  Sensible  and 
Intelligible  World,  indicated  the  direction  of 
his  philosophical  interests.  In  submitting  it  to 
a  friend  that  same  year,  he  wrote:  "For  about 
a  year  I  flatter  myself  that  I  have  attained  that 
conception  which  I  have  no  fear  that  I  shall 
ever  change,  though  I  may  expand  it,  by  means 
of  which  all  kinds  of  metaphysical  questions 
can  be  tested  according  to  sure  and  easy  cri¬ 
teria,  and  by  means  of  which  it  can  be  decided 
with  certainty  how  far  their  solution  is  possi¬ 
ble."  But  it  was  not  until  1781  that  the  Critique 
of  Pure  Reason  appeared,  although  he  declared 
that  the  actual  writing  took  but  four  or  five 
months.  In  the  same  letter  he  also  noted  his  in¬ 
tention  to  investigate  "pure  moral  philosophy" 
and  to  systematize  his  metaphysics  of  morals, 
which  was  first  accomplished  in  1785  with  the 
publication  of  the  Fundamental  Principles  of 


v 


BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTE 


vi 

the  Metaphysic  of  Morals.  The  Critique  of 
Practical  Reason  was  brought  out  in  1788  and 
the  Critique  of  Judgement  two  years  later. 

The  "critical  philosophy"  was  soon  being 
taught  in  every  important  German-speaking 
university,  and  young  men  flocked  to  Konigs- 
berg  as  a  shrine  of  philosophy.  In  some  cases 
the  Prussian  Government  even  undertook  the 
expense  of  their  support.  Kant  came  to  be  con¬ 
sulted  as  an  oracle  on  all  kinds  of  questions,  in¬ 
cluding  such  subjects  as  the  lawfulness  of  vac¬ 
cination.  Such  homage  did  not  interrupt  Kant’s 
regular  habits.  Scarcely  five  feet  tall,  with  a  de¬ 
formed  chest,  and  suffering  from  weak  health, 
he  maintained  throughout  his  life  a  severe  regi¬ 
men.  It  was  arranged  with  such  regularity  that 
people  set  their  clocks  according  to  his  daily 
walk  along  the  street  named  for  him  the  Phi¬ 
losopher’s  Walk.  Until  old  age  prevented  him, 
he  is  said  to  have  missed  this  regular  appearance 
only  on  the  occasion  when  Rousseau’s  Emile  so 
engrossed  him  that  for  several  days  he  stayed 
at  home. 


As  early  as  1789  Kant’s  health  began  to  de¬ 
cline  seriously.  He  still  had  many  literary  proj¬ 
ects,  but  found  it  impossible  to  write  more  than 
a  few  hours  a  day.  In  1792  with  the  appearance 
of  his  work,  On  Religion  Within  the  Limits  of 
Reason  Alone,  he  became  involved  in  a  dispute 
with  the  Prussian  authorities  on  the  right  to  ex¬ 
press  religious  opinions,  and  at  the  request  of 
the  government  he  remained  silent  for  some 
years  on  the  subject.  In  1795  he  published  his 
treatise  on  Perpetual  Peace.  In  1797,  after  a 
career  of  forty-two  years,  he  delivered  his  last 
lecture  and  retired  from  the  university.  The  fol¬ 
lowing  year,  by  way  of  asserting  his  right  to  re¬ 
sume  theological  discussions,  he  wrote  on  the 
conflict  of  the  faculties  in  the  university.  This 
proved  to  be  Kant’s  last  book;  the  large  work, 
at  which  he  labored  until  his  death,  on  the  con¬ 
nection  between  physics  and  metaphysics  was 
found  to  be  only  a  repetition  of  his  already  pub¬ 
lished  works.  After  a  gradual  decline,  which  was 
painful  to  himself  and  his  friends,  he  died 
February  12,  1804. 


GENERAL  CONTENTS 


The  Critique  of  Pure  Reason,  page  I 
Translated,  by  J.  M.  D.  Meiklejohn 

Fundamental  Principles  of 
the  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  page  253 
Translated  by  Thomas  Kingsmill  Abbott 

The  Critique  of  Practical  Reason,  page  291 
Translated  by  Thomas  Kingsmill  Abbott 

Preface  and  Introduction  to 
the  Metaphysical  Elements  of  Ethics,  page  365 
With  a  Note  on  Conscience 
Translated  by  Thomas  Kingsmill  Abbott 

General  Introduction  to 
the  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  page  383 
Translated  by  W.  Hastie 

The  Science  of  Right,  page  397 
Translated  by  W.  Hastie 

The  Critique  of  Judgement,  page  461 
Translated  by  James  Creed  Meredith 


. 


CONTENTS 


CRITIQUE  OF  PURE  REASON 


Biographical  Note  v 

Preface  to  the  First  Edition,  1781  1 

Preface  to  the  Second  Edition,  1787  5 

Introduction 

I.  Of  the  Difference  between  Pure  and  Em¬ 
pirical  Knowledge  14 

II.  The  Human  Intellect ,  even  in  an  unphilo- 
sophical  state ,  is  in  possession  of  certain 
cognitions1' a  priori”  14 

III.  Philosophy  stands  in  need  of  a  Science 

which  shall  determine  the  possibility ,  prin¬ 
ciples  ,  and  extent  of  Human  Knowledge  “a 
priori”  1 5 

IV.  Of  the  Difference  between  Analytical  and 

Synthetical  Judgements  16 

V.  In  all  Theoretical  Sciences  of  Reason ,  Syn¬ 
thetical  Judgements" a  priori” are  contained 
as  Principles  17 

VI.  The  Universal  Problem  of  Pure  Reason  ig 

VII.  Idea  and  Division  of  a  Particular  Science , 
under  the  Name  of  a  Critique  of  Pure 
Reason  20 

I.  TRANSCENDENTAL  DOCTRINE 
OF  ELEMENTS 

First  Part.  Transcendental  Aesthetic 
§  1.  Introductory  23 

Sect.  I.  Of  Space 

§  2.  Metaphysical  Exposition  of  this  Concep¬ 
tion  24 

§  3.  Transcendental  Exposition  of  the  Concep¬ 
tion  of  Space  24 

§  4.  Conclusions  from  the  foregoing  Concep¬ 
tions  25 

Sect.  II.  Of  Time 

§  5.  Metaphysical  Exposition  of  this  Concep¬ 
tion  26 

§  6.  Transcendental  Exposition  of  the  Concep¬ 
tion  of  Time  27 

§  7.  Conclusions  from  the  above  Conceptions 

27 

§  8.  Elucidation  28 

§  9.  General  Remarks  on  Transcendental  Aes¬ 
thetic  29 


§10.  Conclusion  of  the  Transcendental  Aes- 
thetic  33 

Second  Part.  Transcendental  Logic 
Introduction.  Idea  of  a  Transcendental  Logic 

I.  Of  Logic  in  general  34 

II.  Of  Transcendental  Logic  35 

III.  Of  the  Division  of  General  Logic  into 

Analytic  and  Dialectic  36 

IV.  Of  the  Division  of  Transcendental  Logic 

into  Transcendental  Analytic  and  Dia¬ 
lectic  37 

Transcendental  Logic.  First  Division 
Transcendental  Analytic ,  §1  38 

book  1 

Analytic  of  Conceptions.  §  2  38 

Chap.  I.  Of  the  Transcendental  Clue  to  the 
Discovery  of  all  Pure  Conceptions  of  the  Un¬ 
derstanding 

Introductory.  §  3  38 

Sect.  1.  Of  the  Logical  Use  of  the  Under¬ 
standing  in  general.  §  4  39 

Sect.  11.  Of  the  Logical  Function  of  the  Un¬ 
derstanding  in  Judgements.  §  5  39 

Sect.  hi.  Of  the  Pure  Conceptions  of  the  Un¬ 
derstanding,  or  Categories.  §  6  41 

Chap.  II.  Of  the  Deduction  of  the  Pure  Con¬ 
ceptions  of  the  Understanding 
Sect.  1.  Of  the  Principles  of  Transcendental 
Deduction  in  general.  §  9  45 

Transition  to  the  Transcendental  Deduc¬ 
tion  of  the  Categories.  §10  47 

Sect.  11.  Transcendental  Deduction  of  the 
Pure  Conceptions  of  the  Understanding. 
§  11 

Of  the  Possibility  of  a  Conjunction  of  the 
manifold  representations  given  by  Sense  48 
Of  the  Originally  Synthetical  Unity  of  Ap¬ 
perception.  §  12  49 

The  Principle  of  the  Synthetical  Unity  of 
Apperception  is  the  highest  Principle  of  all 
exercise  of  the  Understanding.  §  13  50 

What  Objective  Unity  of  Self-conscious¬ 
ness  is.  §  14  51 


IX 


CONTENTS 


x 

The  Logical  Form  of  all  Judgements  con¬ 
sists  in  the  Objective  Unity  of  Appercep¬ 
tion  of  the  Conceptions  contained  therein. 
§  IS  51 

All  Sensuous  Intuitions  are  subject  to  the 
Categories,  as  Conditions  under  which 
alone  the  manifold  Content  of  them  can  be 
united  in  one  Consciousness.  §  16  52 

Observation.  §  17  52 

In  Cognition,  its  Application  to  Objects  of 
Experience  is  the  only  legitimate  use  of  the 
Category.  §  18  53 

Of  the  Application  of  the  Categories  to 
Objects  of  the  Senses  in  general.  §  20  54 

Transcendental  Deduction  of  the  univer¬ 
sally  possible  employment  in  experience  of 
the  Pure  Conceptions  of  the  Understand¬ 
ing.  §  22  56 

Result  of  this  Deduction  of  the  Concep¬ 
tions  of  the  Understanding.  §  23  58 

Short  view  of  the  above  Deduction  59 
Transcendental  Analytic — book  ii 
Analytic  of  Principles  59 

Introduction .  Of  the  Transcendental  Faculty  of 
Judgement  in  General  60 

Transcendental  Doctrine  of  the  Faculty  of 
Judgement,  or,  Analytic  0}  Principles 
Chap.  I.  Of  the  Schematism  of  the  Pure  Con¬ 
ceptions  of  the  Understanding  61 

Chap.  II.  System  of  all  Principles  of  the  Pure 
Understanding  64 

System  of  the  Principles  of  the  Pure  Under¬ 
standing 

Sect.  1.  Of  the  Supreme  Principle  of  all  An¬ 
alytical  Judgements  64 

Seer.  11.  Of  the  Supreme  Principle  of  all  Syn¬ 
thetical  Judgements  65 

Sect.  hi.  Systematic  Representation  of  all 
Synthetical  Principles  of  the  Pure  Under¬ 
standing  66 

1.  Axioms  of  Intuition  68 

2.  Anticipations  of  Perception  69 

3.  Analogies  of  Experience  72 

A.  First  Analogy.  Principle  of  the  Per¬ 
manence  of  Substance  74 

B.  Second  Analogy.  Principle  of  the  Suc¬ 

cession  of  Time  according  to  the  law  of 
Causality  76 

C.  Third  Analogy.  Principle  of  Co-exist¬ 

ence  according  to  the  law  of  Reciprocity 
or  Community  83 

4.  The  Postulates  of  Empirical  Thought  85 

Refutation  of  Idealism  88 

General  Remark  on  the  System  of  Principles  91 
Chap.  III.  Of  the  Ground  of  the  division  of  all 
objects  into  Phenomena  and  Noumena  93 


Appendix.  Of  the  Equivocal  Nature  or  Am¬ 
phiboly  of  the  Conceptions  of  Reflection  from 
the  Confusion  of  the  Transcendental  with  the 
Empirical  use  of  the  Understanding  99 
Remark  on  the  Amphiboly  of  the  Conceptions 
of  Reflection  101 

Tra?iscendental  Logic.  Second  Division 
Transcendental  Dialectic.  Introduction 

I.  Of  Transcendental  Illusory  Appeara?ice  108 
II.  Of  Pure  Reason  as  the  Seat  of  Transcen¬ 


dental  Illusory  Appearance  ioq 

A.  Of  Reason  in  General  109 

B.  Of  the  Logical  Use  of  Reason  no 

C.  Of  the  Pure  Use  of  Reason  in 

BOOK  I.  Of  the  Conceptions  of  Pure  Rea¬ 
son  1 1 2 

Sect.  1.  Of  Ideas  in  General  113 

Sect.  11.  Of  Transcendental  Ideas  115 

Sect.  hi.  System  of  Transcendental  Ideas  119 

BOOK  II.  Of  the  Dialectical  Procedure  of  Pure 
Reason  120 


CHAP.  I.  Of  the  Paralogisms  of  Pure  Reason 

121 

Refutation  of  the  Argument  of  Mendelssohn 
for  the  Substantiality  or  Permanence  of  the 
Soul  124 

Conclusion  of  the  Solution  of  the  Psychological 
Paralogism  128 

General  Remark  on  the  Transition  from  Ra¬ 
tional  Psychology  to  Cosmology  128 

CHAP.  II.  The  Antinomy  of  Pure  Reason  129 
Sect.  1.  System  of  Cosmological  Ideas  130 
Sect.  11.  Antithetic  of  Pure  Reason  133 
First  Conflict  of  the  Transcendental 
Ideas  135 

Observations  on  the  First  Antinomy  136 
Second  Conflict  of  the  Transcendental 
Ideas  137 

Observations  on  the  Second  Antinomy 

138 

Third  Conflict  of  the  Transcendental 
Ideas  140 

Observations  on  the  Third  Antinomy 

141 

Fourth  Conflict  of  the  Transcendental 
Ideas  143 

Observations  on  the  Fourth  Antinomy 

144 

Sect.  hi.  Of  the  Interest  of  Reason  in  these 
Self-contradictions  14b 

Sect.  iv.  Of  the  Necessity  Imposed  upon 
Pure  Reason  of  presenting  a  Solution  of  its 
Transcendental  Problems  149 

Sect.  v.  Sceptical  Exposition  of  the  Cosmo- 


CONTEXTS 


logical  Problems  presented  in  the  four 
Transcendental  Ideas  152 

Sect.  vi.  Transcendental  Idealism  as  the  Key 
to  the  Solution  of  Pure  Cosmological  Dia¬ 
lectic  153 

Sect.  vii.  Critical  Solution  of  the  Cosmolog¬ 
ical  Problem  155 

Sect.  viii.  Regulative  Principle  of  Pure  Rea¬ 
son  in  relation  to  the  Cosmological  Ideas 

158 

Sect.  ix.  Of  the  Empirical  Use  of  the  Regu¬ 
lative  Principle  of  Reason  with  regard  to 
the  Cosmological  Ideas  159 

I.  Solution  of  the  Cosmological  Idea 
of  the  Totality  of  the  Composition 
of  Phenomena  in  the  Universe  160 

II.  Solution  of  the  Cosmological  Idea 
of  the  Totality  of  the  Division  of  a 
Whole  given  in  Intuition  161 

Concluding  Remark  on  the  Solution 
of  the  Transcendental  Mathemati¬ 
cal  Ideas — and  Introductory  to  the 
Solution  of  the  Dynamical  Ideas 

163 

III.  Solution  of  the  Cosmological  Idea 
of  the  Totality  of  the  Deduction  of 
Cosmical  Events  from  their  Causes 

164 

Possibility  of  Freedom  in  Harmony 
with  the  Universal  Law  of  Natural 
Necessity  165 

Exposition  of  the  Cosmological  Idea 
of  Freedom  in  Harmony  with  the 
Universal  Law  of  Natural  Necessity 

166 

IV.  Solution  of  the  Cosmological  Idea 
of  the  Totality  of  the  Dependence 


of  Phenomenal  Existences  171 
Concluding  Remarks  on  the  Antin¬ 
omy  of  Pure  Reason  172 

CHAP.  III.  The  Ideal  of  Pure  Reason 
Sect.  1.  Of  the  Ideal  in  General  173 

Sect.  n.  Of  the  Transcendental  Ideal  (Pro¬ 
to  typon  Trans cendentale)  174 


xi 

Sect.  hi.  Of  the  Arguments  Employed  by 
Speculative  Reason  in  Proof  of  the  Exist¬ 
ence  of  a  Supreme  Being  177 

Sect.  iv.  Of  the  Impossibility  of  an  Ontolog¬ 
ical  Proof  of  the  Existence  of  God  179 

Sect.  v.  Of  the  Impossibility  of  a  Cosmolog¬ 
ical  Proof  of  the  Existence  of  God  182 

Detection  and  Explanation  of  the  Dialecti¬ 
cal  Illusion  in  all  Transcendental  Argu¬ 
ments  for  the  Existence  of  a  Necessary 
Being  185 

Sect.  vi.  Of  the  Impossibility  of  a  Physico- 
Theological  Proof  187 

Sect.  vii.  Critique  of  all  Theology  based  up¬ 
on  Speculative  Principles  of  Reason  190 
Appendix.  Of  the  Regulative  Employment 
of  the  Ideas  of  Pure  Reason  193 

Of  the  Ultimate  End  of  the  Natural  Di¬ 
alectic  of  Human  Reason  200 


II.  TRANSCENDENTAL  DOCTRINE 
OF  METHOD 

CHAP.  I.  The  Discipline  of  Pure  Reason  210 
Sect.  1.  The  Discipline  of  Pure  Reason  in  the 
Sphere  of  Dogmatism  21 1 

Sect.  11.  The  Discipline  of  Pure  Reason  in 
Polemics  218 

Sect.  hi.  The  Discipline  of  Pure  Reason  in 
Hypothesis  227 

Sect.  iv.  The  Discipline  of  Pure  Reason  in 
Relation  to  Proofs  230 

CHAP.  II.  The  Canon  of  Pure  Reason  233 
Sect.  1.  Of  the  Ultimate  End  of  the  Pure  Use 
of  Reason  234 

Sect.  11.  Of  the  Ideal  of  the  Summum  Bo- 
num  as  a  Determining  Ground  of  the  Ulti¬ 
mate  End  of  Pure  Reason  236 

Sect.  hi.  Of  Opinion,  Knowledge,  and  Belief 

240 

CHAP.  III.  The  Architectonic  of  Pure  Reason 

243 

CHAP.  IV.  The  History  of  Pure  Reason  248 


■ 


PREFACE  TO  THE  FIRST  EDITION,  1781 


Human  reason,  in  one  sphere  of  its  cognition,  is 
called  upon  to  consider  questions,  which  it  can¬ 
not  decline,  as  they  are  presented  by  its  own  na¬ 
ture,  but  which  it  cannot  answer,  as  they  tran¬ 
scend  every  faculty  of  the  mind. 

It  falls  into  this  difficulty  without  any  fault  of 
its  own.  It  begins  with  principles,  which  cannot 
be  dispensed  with  in  the  field  of  experience,  and 
the  truth  and  sufficiency  of  which  are,  at  the 
same  time,  insured  by  experience.  With  these 
principles  it  rises,  in  obedience  to  the  laws  of 
its  own  nature,  to  ever  higher  and  more  remote 
conditions.  But  it  quickly  discovers  that,  in  this 
way,  its  labours  must  remain  ever  incomplete, 
because  new  questions  never  cease  to  present 
themselves;  and  thus  it  finds  itself  compelled 
to  have  recourse  to  principles  which  transcend 
the  region  of  experience,  while  they  are  regarded 
by  common  sense  without  distrust.  It  thus  falls 
into  confusion  and  contradictions,  from  which  it 
conjectures  the  presence  of  latent  errors,  which, 
however,  it  is  unable  to  discover,  because  the 
principles  it  employs,  transcending  the  limits  of 
experience,  cannot  be  tested  by  that  criterion. 
The  arena  of  these  endless  contests  is  called 
Metaphysic. 

Time  was,  when  she  was  the  queen  of  all  the 
sciences;  and,  if  we  take  the  will  for  the  deed, 
she  certainly  deserves,  so  far  as  regards  the  high 
importance  of  her  object-matter,  this  title  of 
honour.  Now,  it  is  the  fashion  of  the  time  to 
heap  contempt  and  scorn  upon  her;  and  the 
matron  mourns,  forlorn  and  forsaken,  like  Hec- 

uba*.  __  . 

Modo  maxima  rerum , 

Tot  generis ,  natisque  potens  .  .  . 

Nunc  trahor  exul,  inops} 

At  first,  her  government,  under  the  admin¬ 
istration  of  the  dogmatists ,  was  an  absolute 
despotism.  But,  as  the  legislative  continued  to 
show  traces  of  the  ancient  barbaric  rule,  her  em¬ 
pire  gradually  broke  up,  and  intestine  wars  intro¬ 
duced  the  reign  of  anarchy ;  while  the  sceptics , 
like  nomadic  tribes,  who  hate  a  permanent  habi¬ 
tation  and  settled  mode  of  living,  attacked  from 
time  to  time  those  who  had  organized  themselves 
into  civil  communities.  But  their  number  was, 

1  Ovid,  Metamorphoses,  [xiii,  508-510.  “But  late  on 
the  pinnacle  of  fame,  strong  in  my  many  sons  .  .  .  now 
exiled,  penniless.”] 


very  happily,  small;  and  thus  they  could  not 
entirely  put  a  stop  to  the  exertions  of  those 
who  persisted  in  raising  new  edifices,  although 
on  no  settled  or  uniform  plan.  In  recent  times 
the  hope  dawned  upon  us  of  seeing  those  dis¬ 
putes  settled,  and  the  legitimacy  of  her  claims 
established  by  a  kind  of  physiology  of  the  human 
understanding — that  of  the  celebrated  Locke. 
But  it  was  found  that — although  it  was  affirmed 
that  this  so-called  queen  could  not  refer  her  de¬ 
scent  to  any  higher  source  than  that  of  common 
experience,  a  circumstance  which  necessarily 
brought  suspicion  on  her  claims — as  this  gene¬ 
alogy  was  incorrect,  she  persisted  in  the  ad¬ 
vancement  of  her  claims  to  sovereignty.  Thus 
metaphysics  necessarily  fell  back  into  the  anti¬ 
quated  and  rotten  constitution  of  dogmatism , 
and  again  became  obnoxious  to  the  contempt 
from  which  efforts  had  been  made  to  save  it.  At 
present,  as  all  methods,  according  to  the  general 
persuasion,  have  been  tried  in  vain,  there  reigns 
nought  but  weariness  and  complete  indifferent- 
ism — the  mother  of  chaos  and  night  in  the  sci¬ 
entific  world,  but  at  the  same  time  the  source  of, 
or  at  least  the  prelude  to,  the  re-creation  and 
reinstallation  of  a  science,  when  it  has  fallen 
into  confusion,  obscurity,  and  disuse  from  ill- 
directed  effort. 

For  it  is  in  reality  vain  to  profess  indifference 
in  regard  to  such  inquiries,  the  object  of  which 
cannot  be  indifferent  to  humanity.  Besides,  these 
pretended  indifferentists,  however  much  they 
may  try  to  disguise  themselves  by  the  assump¬ 
tion  of  a  popular  style  and  by  changes  on  the 
language  of  the  schools,  unavoidably  fall  into 
metaphysical  declarations  and  propositions, 
which  they  profess  to  regard  with  so  much  con¬ 
tempt.  At  the  same  time,  this  indifference,  which 
has  arisen  in  the  world  of  science,  and  which 
relates  to  that  kind  of  knowledge  which  we 
should  wish  to  see  destroyed  the  last,  is  a  phe¬ 
nomenon  that  well  deserves  our  attention  and 
reflection.  It  is  plainly  not  the  effect  of  the  lev¬ 
ity,  but  of  the  matured  judgement 2  of  the  age, 

2  We  very  often  hear  complaints  of  the  shallowness  of 
the  present  age,  and  of  the  decay  of  profound  science. 
But  I  do  not  think  that  those  which  rest  upon  a  secure 
foundation,  such  as  mathematics,  physical  science,  etc., 
in  the  least  deserve  this  reproach,  but  that  they  rather 
maintain  their  ancient  fame,  and  in  the  latter  case,  in- 


THE  CRITIQUE 


which  refuses  to  be  any  longer  entertained  with 
illusory  knowledge.  It  is,  in  fact,  a  call  to  reason, 
again  to  undertake  the  most  laborious  of  all 
tasks — that  of  self-examination — and  to  estab¬ 
lish  a  tribunal,  which  may  secure  it  in  its  well- 
grounded  claims,  while  it  pronounces  against  all 
baseless  assumptions  and  pretensions,  not  in  an 
arbitrary  manner,  but  according  to  its  own  eter¬ 
nal  and  unchangeable  laws.  This  tribunal  is  noth¬ 
ing  less  than  the  critical  investigation  of  pure 
reason. 

I  do  not  mean  by  this  a  criticism  of  books  and 
systems,  but  a  critical  inquiry  into  the  faculty 
of  reason,  with  reference  to  the  cognitions  to 
which  it  strives  to  attain  without  the  aid  of  ex¬ 
perience;  in  other  words,  the  solution  of  the 
question  regarding  the  possibility  or  impossibil¬ 
ity  of  metaphysics,  and  the  determination  of  the 
origin,  as  well  as  of  the  extent  and  limits  of  this 
science.  All  this  must  be  done  on  the  basis  of 
principles. 

This  path — the  only  one  now  remaining — has 
been  entered  upon  by  me;  and  I  flatter  myself 
that  I  have,  in  this  way,  discovered  the  cause  of 
— and  consequently  the  mode  of  removing — all 
the  errors  which  have  hitherto  set  reason  at  va¬ 
riance  with  itself,  in  the  sphere  of  non-empirical 
thought.  I  have  not  returned  an  evasive  answer 
to  the  questions  of  reason,  by  alleging  the  in¬ 
ability  and  limitation  of  the  faculties  of  the 
mind;  I  have,  on  the  contrary,  examined  them 
completely  in  the  light  of  principles,  and,  after 
having  discovered  the  cause  of  the  doubts  and 
contradictions  into  which  reason  fell,  have 
solved  them  to  its  perfect  satisfaction.  It  is 
true,  these  questions  have  not  been  solved  as 
dogmatism,  in  its  vain  fancies  and  desires,  had 
expected;  for  it  can  only  be  satisfied  by  the  ex¬ 
ercise  of  magical  arts,  and  of  these  I  have  no 
knowledge.  But  neither  do  these  come  within 
the  compass  of  our  mental  powers;  and  it  was 
the  duty  of  philosophy  to  destroy  the  illusions 
which  had  their  origin  in  misconceptions,  what¬ 
ever  darling  hopes  and  valued  expectations  may 
be  ruined  by  its  explanations.  My  chief  aim  in 
this  work  has  been  thoroughness;  and  I  make 

deed,  far  surpass  it.  The  same  would  be  the  case  with 
the  other  kinds  of  cognition,  if  their  principles  were  but 
firmly  established.  In  the  absence  of  this  security,  in¬ 
difference,  doubt,  and  finally,  severe  criticism  are  rather 
signs  of  a  profound  habit  of  thought.  Our  age  is  the  age 
of  criticism,  to  which  everything  must  be  subjected. 
The  sacredness  of  religion,  and  the  authority  of  legis¬ 
lation,  are  by  many  regarded  as  grounds  of  exemption 
from  the  examination  of  this  tribunal.  But,  if  they  are 
exempted,  they  become  the  subjects  of  just  suspicion, 
and  cannot  lay  claim  to  sincere  respect,  which  reason 
accords  only  to  that  which  has  stood  the  test  of  a  free 
and  public  examination. 


bold  to  say  that  there  is  not  a  single  metaphys¬ 
ical  problem  that  does  not  find  its  solution,  or  at 
least  the  key  to  its  solution,  here.  Pure  reason 
is  a  perfect  unity;  and  therefore,  if  the  principle 
presented  by  it  prove  to  be  insufficient  for  the 
solution  of  even  a  single  one  of  those  questions 
to  which  the  very  nature  of  reason  gives  birth, 
we  must  reject  it,  as  we  could  not  be  perfectly 
certain  of  its  sufficiency  in  the  case  of  the 
others. 

While  I  say  this,  I  think  I  see  upon  the  counte¬ 
nance  of  the  reader  signs  of  dissatisfaction  min¬ 
gled  with  contempt,  when  he  hears  declarations 
which  sound  so  boastful  and  extravagant;  and 
yet  they  are  beyond  comparison  more  moder¬ 
ate  than  those  advanced  by  the  commonest 
author  of  the  commonest  philosophical  pro¬ 
gramme,  in  which  the  dogmatist  professes  to 
demonstrate  the  simple  nature  of  the  soul,  or 
the  necessity  of  a  primal  being.  Such  a  dogmatist 
promises  to  extend  human  knowledge  beyond 
the  limits  of  possible  experience ;  while  I  humbly 
confess  that  this  is  completely  beyond  my  pow¬ 
er.  Instead  of  any  such  attempt,  I  confine  my¬ 
self  to  the  examination  of  reason  alone  and  its 
pure  thought;  and  I  do  not  need  to  seek  far  for 
the  sum-total  of  its  cognition,  because  it  has  its 
seat  in  my  own  mind.  Besides,  common  logic 
presents  me  with  a  complete  and  systematic 
catalogue  of  all  the  simple  operations  of  reason; 
and  it  is  my  task  to  answer  the  question  how  far 
reason  can  go,  without  the  material  presented 
and  the  aid  furnished  by  experience. 

So  much  for  the  completeness  and  thorough¬ 
ness  necessary  in  the  execution  of  the  present 
task.  The  aims  set  before  us  are  not  arbitrarily 
proposed,  but  are  imposed  upon  us  by  the  nature 
of  cognition  itself. 

The  above  remarks  relate  to  the  matter  of  our 
critical  inquiry.  As  regards  the  form,  there  are 
two  indispensable  conditions,  which  any  one 
who  undertakes  so  difficult  a  task  as  that  of  a 
critique  of  pure  reason,  is  bound  to  fulfil.  These 
conditions  are  certitude  and  clearness. 

As  regards  certitude ,  I  have  fully  convinced 
myself  that,  in  this  sphere  of  thought,  opinion 
is  perfectly  inadmissible,  and  that  everything 
which  bears  the  least  semblance  of  an  hypoth¬ 
esis  must  be  excluded,  as  of  no  value  in  such  dis¬ 
cussions.  For  it  is  a  necessary  condition  of  every 
cognition  that  is  to  be  established  upon  a  priori 
grounds  that  it  shall  be  held  to  be  absolutely 
necessary;  much  more  is  this  the  case  with  an 
attempt  to  determine  all  pure  a  priori  cognition, 
and  to  furnish  the  standard — and  consequently 
an  example — of  all  apodeictic  (philosophical) 


OF  PURE 

certitude.  Whether  I  have  succeeded  in  what  I 
professed  to  do,  it  is  for  the  reader  to  deter¬ 
mine;  it  is  the  author’s  business  merely  to  ad¬ 
duce  grounds  and  reasons,  without  determining 
what  influence  these  ought  to  have  on  the  mind 
of  his  judges.  But,  lest  anything  he  may  have 
said  may  become  the  innocent  cause  of  doubt 
in  their  minds,  or  tend  to  weaken  the  effect 
which  his  arguments  might  otherwise  produce — 
he  may  be  allowed  to  point  out  those  passages 
which  may  occasion  mistrust  or  difficulty,  al¬ 
though  these  do  not  concern  the  main  purpose 
of  the  present  work.  He  does  this  solely  with 
the  view  of  removing  from  the  mind  of  the 
reader  any  doubts  which  might  affect  his  judge¬ 
ment  of  the  work  as  a  whole,  and  in  regard  to 
its  ultimate  aim. 

I  know  no  investigations  more  necessary  for 
a  full  insight  into  the  nature  of  the  faculty  which 
we  call  understanding ,  and  at  the  same  time  for 
the  determination  of  the  rules  and  limits  of  its 
use,  than  those  undertaken  in  the  second  chapter 
of  the  “Transcendental  Analytic,”  under  the 
title  of  u  Deduction  of  the  Pure  Conceptions  of 
the  Understanding’7 ;  and  they  have  also  cost  me 
by  far  the  greatest  labour — labour  which,  I 
hope,  will  not  remain  uncompensated.  The  view 
there  taken,  which  goes  somewhat  deeply  into 
the  subject,  has  two  sides.  The  one  relates  to 
the  objects  of  the  pure  understanding,  and  is 
intended  to  demonstrate  and  to  render  compre¬ 
hensible  the  objective  validity  of  its  a  priori 
conceptions;  and  it  forms  for  this  reason  an  es¬ 
sential  part  of  the  Critique.  The  other  considers 
the  pure  understanding  itself,  its  possibility  and 
its  powers  of  cognition — that  is,  from  a  subjec¬ 
tive  point  of  view;  and,  although  this  exposition 
is  of  great  importance,  it  does  not  belong  essen¬ 
tially  to  the  main  purpose  of  the  work,  because 
the  grand  question  is  what  and  how  much  can 
reason  and  understanding,  apart  from  experi¬ 
ence,  cognize,  and  not,  how  is  the  faculty  of 
thought  itself  possible?  As  the  latter  is  an  in¬ 
quiry  into  the  cause  of  a  given  effect,  and  has 
thus  in  it  some  semblance  of  an  hypothesis  (al¬ 
though,  as  I  shall  show  on  another  occasion, 
this  is  really  not  the  fact),  it  would  seem  that, 
in  the  present  instance,  I  had  allowed  myself  to 
enounce  a  mere  opinion ,  and  that  the  reader 
must  therefore  be  at  liberty  to  hold  a  different 
opinion.  But  I  beg  to  remind  him  that,  if  my 
subjective  deduction  does  not  produce  in  his 
mind  the  conviction  of  its  certitude  at  which 
I  aimed,  the  objective  deduction,  with  which 
alone  the  present  work  is  properly  concerned,  is 
in  every  respect  satisfactory. 


REASON  3 

As  regards  clearness,  the  reader  has  a  right  to 
demand,  in  the  first  place,  discursive  or  logical 
clearness,  that  is,  on  the  basis  of  conceptions, 
and,  secondly,  intuitive  or  aesthetic  clearness,  by 
means  of  intuitions,  that  is,  by  examples  or  oth¬ 
er  modes  of  illustration  in  concreto.  I  have  done 
what  I  could  for  the  first  kind  of  intelligibility. 
This  was  essential  to  my  purpose;  and  it  thus 
became  the  accidental  cause  of  my  inability  to 
do  complete  justice  to  the  second  requirement. 
I  have  been  almost  always  at  a  loss,  during  the 
progress  of  this  work,  how  to  settle  this  ques¬ 
tion.  Examples  and  illustrations  always  appeared 
to  me  necessary,  and,  in  the  first  sketch  of  the 
Critique,  naturally  fell  into  their  proper  places. 
But  I  very  soon  became  aware  of  the  magnitude 
of  my  task,  and  the  numerous  problems  with 
which  I  should  be  engaged;  and,  as  I  perceived 
that  this  critical  investigation  would,  even  if 
delivered  in  the  driest  scholastic  manner,  be  far 
from  being  brief,  I  found  it  unadvisable  to  en¬ 
large  it  still  more  with  examples  and  explana¬ 
tions,  which  are  necessary  only  from  a  popular 
point  of  view.  I  was  induced  to  take  this  course 
from  the  consideration  also  that  the  present 
work  is  not  intended  for  popular  use,  that  those 
devoted  to  science  do  not  require  such  helps,  al¬ 
though  they  are  always  acceptable,  and  that  they 
would  have  materially  interfered  with  my  pres¬ 
ent  purpose.  Abbe  Terrasson  remarks  with  great 
justice  that,  if  we  estimate  the  size  of  a  work, 
not  from  the  number  of  its  pages,  but  from  the 
time  which  we  require  to  make  ourselves  master 
of  it,  it  may  be  said  of  many  a  book  that  it  would 
he  much  shorter,  if  it  were  not  so  short.  On  the 
other  hand,  as  regards  the  comprehensibility  of 
a  system  of  speculative  cognition,  connected  un¬ 
der  a  single  principle,  we  may  say  with  equal 
justice:  many  a  book  would  have  been  much 
clearer,  if  it  had  not  been  intended  to  be  so  very 
clear.  For  explanations  and  examples,  and  other 
helps  to  intelligibility,  aid  us  in  the  comprehen¬ 
sion  of  parts,  but  they  distract  the  attention,  dis¬ 
sipate  the  mental  power  of  the  reader,  and  stand 
in  the  way  of  his  forming  a  clear  conception  of 
the  whole;  as  he  cannot  attain  soon  enough  to  a 
survey  of  the  system,  and  the  colouring  and  em¬ 
bellishments  bestowed  upon  it  prevent  his  ob¬ 
serving  its  articulation  or  organization — which 
is  the  most  important  consideration  with  him, 
when  he  comes  to  judge  of  its  unity  and  stability. 

The  reader  must  naturally  have  a  strong  in¬ 
ducement  to  co-operate  with  the  present  author, 
if  he  has  formed  the  intention  of  erecting  a  com¬ 
plete  and  solid  edifice  of  metaphysical  science, 
according  to  the  plan  now  laid  before  him.  Meta- 


4 

physics,  as  here  represented,  is  the  only  science 
which  admits  of  completion — and  with  little  la¬ 
bour,  if  it  is  united,  in  a  short  time ;  so  that  noth¬ 
ing  will  be  left  to  future  generations  except  the 
task  of  illustrating  and  applying  it  didactically. 
For  this  science  is  nothing  more  than  the  inven¬ 
tory  of  all  that  is  given  us  by  pure  reason ,  sys¬ 
tematically  arranged.  Nothing  can  escape  our 
notice;  for  what  reason  produces  from  itself 
cannot  lie  concealed,  but  must  be  brought  to  the 
light  by  reason  itself,  so  soon  as  we  have  discov¬ 
ered  the  common  principle  of  the  ideas  we  seek. 
The  perfect  unity  of  this  kind  of  cognitions, 
which  are  based  upon  pure  conceptions,  and  un¬ 
influenced  by  any  empirical  element,  or  any  pe¬ 
culiar  intuition  leading  to  determinate  experi¬ 
ence,  renders  this  completeness  not  only  prac¬ 
ticable,  but  also  necessary. 

Tecum  habita,  et  noris  quam  sit  tibi  curta 
supellex } 

1  Persius.  [ Satirae  iv.  52.  “Dwell  with  yourself,  and 
you  will  know  how  short  your  household  stuff  is.”] 


Such  a  system  of  pure  speculative  reason  I 
hope  to  be  able  to  publish  under  the  title  of  Met¬ 
aphysic  oj  Nature.  The  content  of  this  work 
(which  will  not  be  half  so  long)  will  be  very 
much  richer  than  that  of  the  present  Critique , 
which  has  to  discover  the  sources  of  this  cogni¬ 
tion  and  expose  the  conditions  of  its  possibility, 
and  at  the  same  time  to  clear  and  level  a  fit  foun¬ 
dation  for  the  scientific  edifice.  In  the  present 
work,  I  look  for  the  patient  hearing  and  the 
impartiality  of  a  judge;  in  the  other,  for  the 
good-will  and  assistance  of  a  co-labourer.  For, 
however  complete  the  list  of  principles  for  this 
system  maybe  in  the  Critique ,  the  correctness  of 
the  system  requires  that  no  deduced  conceptions 
should  be  absent.  These  cannot  be  presented  a 
priori ,  but  must  be  gradually  discovered;  and, 
while  the  synthesis  of  conceptions  has  been  fully 
exhausted  in  the  Critique,  it  is  necessary  that,  in 
the  proposed  work,  the  same  should  be  the  case 
with  their  analysis.  But  this  will  be  rather  an 
amusement  than  a  labour. 


PREFACE  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION,  1787 


Whether  the  treatment  of  that  portion  of  our 
knowledge  which  lies  within  the  province  of  pure 
reason  advances  with  that  undeviating  certainty 
which  characterizes  the  progress  of  science ,  we 
shall  be  at  no  loss  to  determine.  If  we  find  those 
who  are  engaged  in  metaphysical  pursuits,  un¬ 
able  to  come  to  an  understanding  as  to  the  meth¬ 
od  which  they  ought  to  follow;  if  we  find  them, 
after  the  most  elaborate  preparations,  invaria¬ 
bly  brought  to  a  stand  before  the  goal  is  reached, 
and  compelled  to  retrace  their  steps  and  strike 
into  fresh  paths,  we  may  then  feel  quite  sure 
that  they  are  far  from  having  attained  to  the  cer¬ 
tainty  of  scientific  progress  and  may  rather  be 
said  to  be  merely  groping  about  in  the  dark.  In 
these  circumstances  we  shall  render  an  impor¬ 
tant  service  to  reason  if  we  succeed  in  simply 
indicating  the  path  along  which  it  must  travel,  in 
order  to  arrive  at  any  results — even  if  it  should 
be  found  necessary  to  abandon  many  of  those 
aims  which,  without  reflection,  have  been  pro¬ 
posed  for  its  attainment. 

That  logic  has  advanced  in  this  sure  course, 
even  from  the  earliest  times,  is  apparent  from 
the  fact  that,  since  Aristotle,  it  has  been  unable 
to  advance  a  step  and,  thus,  to  all  appearance  has 
reached  its  completion.  For,  if  some  of  the  mod¬ 
erns  have  thought  to  enlarge  its  domain  by  in¬ 
troducing  psychological  discussions  on  the  men¬ 
tal  faculties,  such  as  imagination  and  wit,  meta¬ 
physical  discussions  on  the  origin  of  knowledge 
and  the  different  kinds  of  certitude,  according  to 
the  difference  of  the  objects  (idealism,  scepti¬ 
cism,  and  so  on),  or  anthropological  discussions 
on  prejudices,  their  causes  and  remedies:  this 
attempt,  on  the  part  of  these  authors,  only 
shows  their  ignorance  of  the  peculiar  nature  of 
logical  science.  We  do  not  enlarge  but  disfigure 
the  sciences  when  we  lose  sight  of  their  respec¬ 
tive  limits  and  allow  them  to  run  into  one  an¬ 
other.  Now  logic  is  enclosed  within  limits  which 
admit  of  perfectly  clear  definition;  it  is  a  sci¬ 
ence  which  has  for  its  object  nothing  but  the  ex¬ 
position  and  proof  of  the  formal  laws  of  all 
thought,  whether  it  be  a  priori  or  empirical, 
whatever  be  its  origin  or  its  object,  and  what¬ 
ever  the  difficulties — natural  or  accidental — 
which  it  encounters  in  the  human  mind. 

The  early  success  of  logic  must  be  attributed 


exclusively  to  the  narrowness  of  its  field,  in 
which  abstraction  may,  or  rather  must,  be  made 
of  all  the  objects  of  cognition  with  their  char¬ 
acteristic  distinctions,  and  in  which  the  under¬ 
standing  has  only  to  deal  with  itself  and  with  its 
own  forms.  It  is,  obviously,  a  much  more  dif¬ 
ficult  task  for  reason  to  strike  into  the  sure  path 
of  science,  where  it  has  to  deal  not  simply  with 
itself,  but  with  objects  external  to  itself.  Hence, 
logic  is  properly  only  a  propaedeutic — forms,  as 
it  were,  the  vestibule  of  the  sciences;  and  while 
it  is  necessary  to  enable  us  to  form  a  correct 
judgement  with  regard  to  the  various  branches 
of  knowledge,  still  the  acquisition  of  real,  sub¬ 
stantive  knowledge  is  to  be  sought  only  in  the 
sciences  properly  so  called,  that  is,  in  the  objec¬ 
tive  sciences. 

Now  these  sciences,  if  they  can  be  termed  ra¬ 
tional  at  all,  must  contain  elements  of  a  priori 
cognition,  and  this  cognition  may  stand  in  a 
twofold  relation  to  its  object.  Either  it  may 
have  to  determine  the  conception  of  the  object 
— which  must  be  supplied  extraneously,  or  it 
may  have  to  establish  its  reality.  The  former  is 
theoretical ,  the  latter  practical,  rational  cogni¬ 
tion.  In  both,  the  pure  or  a  priori  element  must 
be  treated  first,  and  must  be  carefully  distin¬ 
guished  from  that  which  is  supplied  from  other 
sources.  Any  other  method  can  only  lead  to  ir¬ 
remediable  confusion. 

Mathematics  and  physics  are  the  two  theo¬ 
retical  sciences  which  have  to  determine  their 
objects  a  priori .  The  former  is  purely  a  priori, 
the  latter  is  partially  so,  but  is  also  dependent 
on  other  sources  of  cognition. 

In  the  earliest  times  of  which  history  affords 
us  any  record,  mathematics  had  already  entered 
on  the  sure  course  of  science,  among  that  won¬ 
derful  nation,  the  Greeks.  Still  it  is  not  to  be 
supposed  that  it  was  as  easy  for  this  science  to 
strike  into,  or  rather  to  construct  for  itself,  that 
royal  road,  as  it  was  for  logic,  in  which  reason 
has  only  to  deal  with  itself.  On  the  contrary,  I 
believe  that  it  must  have  remained  long — chief¬ 
ly  among  the  Egyptians — in  the  stage  of  blind 
groping  after  its  true  aims  and  destination,  and 
that  it  was  revolutionized  by  the  happy  idea  of 
one  man,  who  struck  out  and  determined  for  all 
time  the  path  which  this  science  must  follow, 


5 


THE  CRITIQUE 


and  which  admits  of  an  indefinite  advancement. 
The  history  of  this  intellectual  revolution — 
much  more  important  in  its  results  than  the  dis¬ 
covery  of  the  passage  round  the  celebrated  Cape 
of  Good  Hope — and  of  its  author,  has  not  been 
preserved.  But  Diogenes  Laertius,  in  naming  the 
supposed  discoverer  of  some  of  the  simplest  el¬ 
ements  of  geometrical  demonstration — elements 
which,  according  to  the  ordinary  opinion,  do  not 
even  require  to  be  proved — makes  it  apparent 
that  the  change  introduced  by  the  first  indica¬ 
tion  of  this  new  path,  must  have  seemed  of  the 
utmost  importance  to  the  mathematicians  of 
that  age,  and  it  has  thus  been  secured  against 
the  chance  of  oblivion.  A  new  light  must  have 
flashed  on  the  mind  of  the  first  man  ( Thales , 
or  whatever  may  have  been  his  name)  who  dem¬ 
onstrated  the  properties  of  the  isosceles  triangle. 
For  he  found  that  it  was  not  sufficient  to  medi¬ 
tate  on  the  figure,  as  it  lay  before  his  eyes,  or 
the  conception  of  it,  as  it  existed  in  his  mind, 
and  thus  endeavour  to  get  at  the  knowledge  of 
its  properties,  but  that  it  was  necessary  to  pro¬ 
duce  these  properties,  as  it  were,  by  a  positive  a 
priori  construction ;  and  that,  in  order  to  arrive 
with  certainty  at  a  priori  cognition,  he  must  not 
attribute  to  the  object  any  other  properties  than 
those  which  necessarily  followed  from  that 
which  he  had  himself,  in  accordance  with  his  con¬ 
ception,  placed  in  the  object. 

A  much  longer  period  elapsed  before  physics 
entered  on  the  highway  of  science.  For  it  is  only 
about  a  century  and  a  half  since  the  wise  Bacon 
gave  a  new  direction  to  physical  studies,  or 
rather — as  others  were  already  on  the  right  track 
— imparted  fresh  vigour  to  the  pursuit  of  this 
new  direction.  Here,  too,  as  in  the  case  of  mathe¬ 
matics,  we  find  evidence  of  a  rapid  intellectual 
revolution.  In  the  remarks  which  follow  I  shall 
confine  myself  to  the  empirical  side  of  natural 
science. 

When  Galilei  experimented  with  balls  of  a 
definite  weight  on  the  inclined  plane,  when  Tor¬ 
ricelli  caused  the  air  to  sustain  a  weight  which 
he  had  calculated  beforehand  to  be  equal  to  that 
of  a  definite  column  of  water,  or  when  Stahl,  at 
a  later  period,  converted  metals  into  lime,  and 
reconverted  lime  into  metal,  by  the  addition  and 
subtraction  of  certain  elements ; 1  a  light  broke 
upon  all  natural  philosophers.  They  learned  that 
reason  only  perceives  that  which  it  produces 
after  its  own  design;  that  it  must  not  be  content 

1 1  do  not  here  follow  with  exactness  the  history  of 
the  experimental  method,  of  which,  indeed,  the  first 
steps  are  involved  in  some  obscurity. 


to  follow,  as  it  were,  in  the  leading-strings  of 
nature,  but  must  proceed  in  advance  with  prin¬ 
ciples  of  judgement  according  to  unvarying  laws, 
and  compel  nature  to  reply  to  its  questions.  For 
accidental  observations,  made  according  to  no 
preconceived  plan,  cannot  be  united  under  a 
necessary  law.  But  it  is  this  that  reason  seeks  for 
and  requires.  It  is  only  the  principles  of  reason 
which  can  give  to  concordant  phenomena  the 
validity  of  laws,  and  it  is  only  when  experiment 
is  directed  by  these  rational  principles  that  it 
can  have  any  real  utility.  Reason  must  approach 
nature  with  the  view,  indeed,  of  receiving  infor¬ 
mation  from  it,  not,  however,  in  the  character 
of  a  pupil,  who  listens  to  all  that  his  master 
chooses  to  tell  him,  but  in  that  of  a  judge,  who 
compels  the  witnesses  to  reply  to  those  ques¬ 
tions  which  he  himself  thinks  fit  to  propose.  To 
this  single  idea  must  the  revolution  be  ascribed, 
by  which,  after  groping  in  the  dark  for  so  many 
centuries,  natural  science  was  at  length  con¬ 
ducted  into  the  path  of  certain  progress. 

We  come  now  to  metaphysics  y  a  purely  spec¬ 
ulative  science,  which  occupies  a  completely 
isolated  position  and  is  entirely  independent  of 
the  teachings  of  experience.  It  deals  with  mere 
conceptions — not,  like  mathematics,  with  con¬ 
ceptions  applied  to  intuition — and  in  it,  reason 
is  the  pupil  of  itself  alone.  It  is  the  oldest  of  the 
sciences,  and  would  still  survive,  even  if  all  the 
rest  were  swallowed  up  in  the  abyss  of  an  all- 
destroying  barbarism.  But  it  has  not  yet  had  the 
good  fortune  to  attain  to  the  sure  scientific 
method.  This  will  be  apparent,  if  we  apply  the 
tests  which  we  proposed  at  the  outset.  We  find 
that  reason  perpetually  comes  to  a  stand,  when 
it  attempts  to  gain  a  priori  the  perception  even 
of  those  laws  which  the  most  common  experi¬ 
ence  confirms.  We  find  it  compelled  to  retrace 
its  steps  in  innumerable  instances,  and  to  aban¬ 
don  the  path  on  which  it  had  entered,  because 
this  does  not  lead  to  the  desired  result.  We  find, 
too,  that  those  who  are  engaged  in  metaphysi¬ 
cal  pursuits  are  far  from  being  able  to  agree 
among  themselves,  but  that,  on  the  contrary, 
this  science  appears  to  furnish  an  arena  special¬ 
ly  adapted  for  the  display  of  skill  or  the  exercise 
of  strength  in  mock-contests — a  field  in  which 
no  combatant  ever  yet  succeeded  in  gaining  an 
inch  of  ground,  in  which,  at  least,  no  victory 
was  ever  yet  crowned  with  permanent  posses¬ 
sion. 

This  leads  us  to  inquire  why  it  is  that,  in  meta¬ 
physics,  the  sure  path  of  science  has  not  hitherto 
been  found.  Shall  we  suppose  that  it  is  impossi- 


OF  PURE  REASON 


ble  to  discover  it?  Why  then  should  nature  have 
visited  our  reason  with  restless  aspirations  after 
it,  as  if  it  were  one  of  our  weightiest  concerns? 
Nay,  more,  how  little  cause  should  we  have  to 
place  confidence  in  our  reason,  if  it  abandons  us 
in  a  matter  about  which,  most  of  all,  we  desire 
to  know  the  truth — and  not  only  so,  but  even 
allures  us  to  the  pursuit  of  vain  phantoms, 
only  to  betray  us  in  the  end?  Or,  if  the  path 
has  only  hitherto  been  missed,  what  indica¬ 
tions  do  we  possess  to  guide  us  in  a  renewed 
investigation,  and  to  enable  us  to  hope  for 
greater  success  than  has  fallen  to  the  lot  of 
our  predecessors? 

It  appears  to  me  that  the  examples  of  mathe¬ 
matics  and  natural  philosophy,  which,  as  we 
have  seen,  were  brought  into  their  present  con¬ 
dition  by  a  sudden  revolution,  are  sufficiently  re¬ 
markable  to  fix  our  attention  on  the  essential 
circumstances  of  the  change  which  has  proved 
so  advantageous  to  them,  and  to  induce  us  to 
make  the  experiment  of  imitating  them,  so  far 
as  the  analogy  which,  as  rational  sciences,  they 
bear  to  metaphysics  may  permit.  It  has  hither¬ 
to  been  assumed  that  our  cognition  must  con¬ 
form  to  the  objects;  but  all  attempts  to  ascer¬ 
tain  anything  about  these  objects  a  priori,  by 
means  of  conceptions,  and  thus  to  extend  the 
range  of  our  knowledge,  have  been  rendered 
abortive  by  this  assumption.  Let  us  then  make 
the  experiment  whether  we  may  not  be  more 
successful  in  metaphysics,  if  we  assume  that  the 
objects  must  conform  to  our  cognition.  This  ap¬ 
pears,  at  all  events,  to  accord  better  with  the 
possibility  of  our  gaining  the  end  we  have  in 
view,  that  is  to  say,  of  arriving  at  the  cognition 
of  objects  a  priori ,  of  determining  something 
with  respect  to  these  objects,  before  they  are 
given  to  us.  We  here  propose  to  do  just  what 
Copernicus  did  in  attempting  to  explain  the  ce¬ 
lestial  movements.  When  he  found  that  he  could 
make  no  progress  by  assuming  that  all  the  heav¬ 
enly  bodies  revolved  round  the  spectator,  he  re¬ 
versed  the  process,  and  tried  the  experiment  of 
assuming  that  the  spectator  revolved,  while  the 
stars  remained  at  rest.  We  may  make  the  same 
experiment  with  regard  to  the  intuition  of  ob¬ 
jects.  If  the  intuition  must  conform  to  the  na¬ 
ture  of  the  objects,  I  do  not  see  how  we  can 
know  anything  of  them  a  priori .  If,  on  the  other 
hand,  the  object  conforms  to  the  nature  of  our 
faculty  of  intuition,  I  can  then  easily  conceive 
the  possibility  of  such  an  a  priori  knowledge. 
Now  as  I  cannot  rest  in  the  mere  intuitions,  but 
— if  they  are  to  become  cognitions — must  refer 


them,  as  representations,  to  something,  as  ob¬ 
ject,  and  must  determine  the  latter  by  means  of 
the  former,  here  again  there  are  two  courses 
open  to  me.  Either ,  first,  I  may  assume  that  the 
conceptions,  by  which  I  effect  this  determina¬ 
tion,  conform  to  the  object — and  in  this  case  I 
am  reduced  to  the  same  perplexity  as  before; 
or  secondly,  I  may  assume  that  the  objects,  or, 
which  is  the  same  thing,  that  experience,  in 
which  alone  as  given  objects  they  are  cognized, 
conform  to  my  conceptions — and  then  I  am  at 
no  loss  how  to  proceed.  For  experience  itself  is 
a  mode  of  cognition  which  requires  understand¬ 
ing.  Before  objects  are  given  to  me,  that  is,  a 
priori,  I  must  presuppose  in  myself  laws  of  the 
understanding  which  are  expressed  in  concep¬ 
tions  a  priori.  To  these  conceptions,  then,  all  the 
objects  of  experience  must  necessarily  con¬ 
form.  Now  there  are  objects  which  reason 
thinks,  and  that  necessarily,  but  which  cannot 
be  given  in  experience,  or,  at  least,  cannot  be 
given  so  as  reason  thinks  them.  The  attempt 
to  think  these  objects  will  hereafter  furnish 
an  excellent  test  of  the  new  method  of  thought 
which  we  have  adopted,  and  which  is  based 
on  the  principle  that  we  only  cognize  in 
things  a  priori  that  which  we  ourselves  place 
in  them.1 

This  attempt  succeeds  as  well  as  we  could  de¬ 
sire,  and  promises  to  metaphysics,  in  its  first 
part — that  is,  where  it  is  occupied  with  concep¬ 
tions  a  priori,  of  which  the  corresponding  ob¬ 
jects  may  be  given  in  experience — the  certain 
course  of  science.  For  by  this  new  method  we 
are  enabled  perfectly  to  explain  the  possibility 
of  a  priori  cognition,  and,  what  is  more,  to  dem¬ 
onstrate  satisfactorily  the  laws  which  lie  a  priori 
at  the  foundation  of  nature,  as  the  sum  of  the 
objects  of  experience — neither  of  which  was 
possible  according  to  the  procedure  hitherto  fol- 

1  This  method,  accordingly,  which  we  have  borrowed 
from  the  natural  philosopher,  consists  in  seeking  for  the 
elements  of  pure  reason  in  that  which  admits  of  con¬ 
firmation  or  refutation  by  experiment.  Now  the  propo¬ 
sitions  of  pure  reason,  especially  when  they  transcend 
the  limits  of  possible  experience,  do  not  admit  of  our 
making  any  experiment  with  their  objects,  as  in  natural 
science.  Hence,  with  regard  to  those  conceptions  and 
principles  which  we  assume  a  priori ,  our  only  course 
will  be  to  view  them  from  two  different  sides.  We  must 
regard  one  and  the  same  conception,  on  the  one  hand , 
in  relation  to  experience  as  an  object  of  the  senses  and 
of  the  understanding,  on  the  other  hand,  in  relation  to 
reason,  isolated  and  transcending  the  limits  of  experi¬ 
ence,  as  an  object  of  mere  thought.  Now  if  we  find  that, 
when  we  regard  things  from  this  double  point  of  view, 
the  result  is  in  harmony  with  the  principle  of  pure  rea¬ 
son,  but  that,  when  we  regard  them  from  a  single  point 
of  view,  reason  is  involved  in  self-contradiction,  then 
the  experiment  will  establish  the  correctness  of  this  dis¬ 
tinction. 


8 


THE  CRITIQUE 


lowed.  But  from  this  deduction  of  the  faculty  of 
a  priori  cognition  in  the  first  part  of  metaphys¬ 
ics,  we  derive  a  surprising  result,  and  one  which, 
to  all  appearance,  militates  against  the  great  end 
of  metaphysics,  as  treated  in  the  second  part. 
For  we  come  to  the  conclusion  that  our  faculty 
of  cognition  is  unable  to  transcend  the  limits  of 
possible  experience;  and  yet  this  is  precisely 
the  most  essential  object  of  this  science.  The 
estimate  of  our  rational  cognition  a  priori  at 
which  we  arrive  is  that  it  has  only  to  do  with 
phenomena,  and  that  things  in  themselves,  while 
possessing  a  real  existence,  lie  beyond  its  sphere. 
Here  we  are  enabled  to  put  the  justice  of  this 
estimate  to  the  test.  For  that  which  of  necessity 
impels  us  to  transcend  the  limits  of  experience 
and  of  all  phenomena  is  the  unconditioned  y  which 
reason  absolutely  requires  in  things  as  they  are 
in  themselves,  in  order  to  complete  the  series  of 
conditions.  Now,  if  it  appears  that  when,  on  the 
one  hand,  we  assume  that  our  cognition  con¬ 
forms  to  its  objects  as  things  in  themselves,  the 
unconditioned  cannot  he  thought  without  con¬ 
tradiction ,  and  that  when,  on  the  other  hand,  we 
assume  that  our  representation  of  things  as  they 
are  given  to  us,  does  not  conform  to  these  things 
as  they  are  in  themselves,  but  that  these  objects, 
as  phenomena,  conform  to  our  mode  of  repre¬ 
sentation,  the  contradiction  disappears :  we  shall 
then  be  convinced  of  the  truth  of  that  which  we 
began  by  assuming  for  the  sake  of  experiment; 
we  may  look  upon  it  as  established  that  the  un¬ 
conditioned  does  not  lie  in  things  as  we  know 
them,  or  as  they  are  given  to  us,  but  in  things  as 
they  are  in  themselves,  beyond  the  range  of  our 
cognition.1 

But,  after  we  have  thus  denied  the  power  of 
speculative  reason  to  make  any  progress  in  the 
sphere  of  the  supersensible,  it  still  remains  for 
our  consideration  whether  data  do  not  exist  in 
practical  cognition  which  may  enable  us  to  de¬ 
termine  the  transcendent  conception  of  the  un¬ 
conditioned,  to  rise  beyond  the  limits  of  all  pos¬ 
sible  experience  from  a  practiced  point  of  view, 
and  thus  to  satisfy  the  great  ends  of  metaphys¬ 
ics.  Speculative  reason  has  thus,  at  least,  made 
room  for  such  an  extension  of  our  knowledge; 
and,  if  it  must  leave  this  space  vacant,  still  it 

1  This  experiment  of  pure  reason  has  a  great  similar¬ 
ity  to  that  of  the  chemists ,  which  they  term  the  experi¬ 
ment  of  reduction ,  or,  more  usually,  the  synthetic  proc¬ 
ess.  The  analysis  of  the  metaphysician  separates  pure 
cognition  a  priori  into  two  heterogeneous  elements,  viz., 
the  cognition  of  things  as  phenomena,  and  of  things  in 
themselves.  Dialectic  combines  these  again  into  har¬ 
mony  with  the  necessary  rational  idea  of  the  uncondi¬ 
tioned,  and  finds  that  this  harmony  never  results  except 
through  the  above  distinction,  which  is,  therefore,  con¬ 
cluded  to  be  just. 


does  not  rob  us  of  the  liberty  to  fill  it  up,  if  we 
can,  by  means  of  practical  data — nay,  it  even 
challenges  us  to  make  the  attempt.2 

This  attempt  to  introduce  a  complete  revolu¬ 
tion  in  the  procedure  of  metaphysics,  after  the 
example  of  the  geometricians  and  natural  phi¬ 
losophers,  constitutes  the  aim  of  the  Critique  of 
Pure  Speculative  Reason.  It  is  a  treatise  on  the 
method  to  be  followed,  not  a  system  of  the  sci¬ 
ence  itself.  But,  at  the  same  time,  it  marks  out 
and  defines  both  the  external  boundaries  and  the 
internal  structure  of  this  science.  For  pure  spec¬ 
ulative  reason  has  this  peculiarity,  that,  in  choos¬ 
ing  the  various  objects  of  thought,  it  is  able 
to  define  the  limits  of  its  own  faculties,  and  even 
to  give  a  complete  enumeration  of  the  possible 
modes  of  proposing  problems  to  itself,  and  thus 
to  sketch  out  the  entire  system  of  metaphysics. 
For,  on  the  one  hand,  in  cognition  a  priori ,  noth¬ 
ing  must  be  attributed  to  the  objects  but  what 
the  thinking  subject  derives  from  itself;  and,  on 
the  other  hand,  reason  is,  in  regard  to  the  prin¬ 
ciples  of  cognition,  a  perfectly  distinct,  inde¬ 
pendent  unity,  in  which,  as  in  an  organized  body, 
every  member  exists  for  the  sake  of  the  others, 
and  all  for  the  sake  of  each,  so  that  no  principle 
can  be  viewed,  with  safety,  in  one  relationship, 
unless  it  is,  at  the  same  time,  viewed  in  relation 
to  the  total  use  of  pure  reason.  Hence,  too,  meta¬ 
physics  has  this  singular  advantage — an  advan¬ 
tage  which  falls  to  the  lot  of  no  other  science 
which  has  to  do  with  objects — that,  if  once  it  is 
conducted  into  the  sure  path  of  science,  by 
means  of  this  criticism,  it  can  then  take  in  the 
whole  sphere  of  its  cognitions,  and  can  thus 
complete  its  work,  and  leave  it  for  the  use  of 
posterity,  as  a  capital  which  can  never  receive 
fresh  accessions.  For  metaphysics  has  to  deal 
only  with  principles  and  with  the  limitations  of 
its  own  employment  as  determined  by  these 
principles.  To  this  perfection  it  is,  therefore, 
bound,  as  the  fundamental  science,  to  attain, 
and  to  it  the  maxim  may  justly  be  applied: 

2  So  the  central  laws  of  the  movements  of  the  heaven¬ 
ly  bodies  established  the  truth  of  that  which  Copernicus, 
at  first,  assumed  only  as  a  hypothesis,  and,  at  the  same 
time,  brought  to  light  that  invisible  force  (Newtonian 
attraction)  which  holds  the  universe  together.  The  lat¬ 
ter  would  have  remained  forever  undiscovered,  if  Co¬ 
pernicus  had  not  ventured  on  the  experiment — contrary 
to  the  senses,  but  still  just — of  looking  for  the  observed 
movements  not  in  the  heavenly  bodies,  but  in  the  spec¬ 
tator.  In  this  Preface  I  treat  the  new  metaphysical 
method  as  a  hypothesis  with  the  view  of  rendering  ap¬ 
parent  the  first  attempts  at  such  a  change  of  method, 
which  are  always  hypothetical.  But  in  the  Critique  it¬ 
self  it  will  be  demonstrated,  not  hypothetically,  but 
apodeictically,  from  the  nature  of  our  representations 
of  space  and  time,  and  from  the  elementary  conceptions 
of  the  understanding. 


OF  PURE  REASON 


Nil  actum  reputans,  si  quid  superesset 
agendum } 

But,  it  will  be  asked,  what  kind  of  a  treasure 
is  this  that  we  propose  to  bequeath  to  posterity? 
What  is  the  real  value  of  this  system  of  meta¬ 
physics,  purified  by  criticism,  and  thereby  re¬ 
duced  to  a  permanent  condition?  A  cursory  view 
of  the  present  work  will  lead  to  the  supposition 
that  its  use  is  merely  negative,  that  it  only  serves 
to  warn  us  against  venturing,  with  speculative 
reason,  beyond  the  limits  of  experience.  This  is, 
in  fact,  its  primary  use.  But  this,  at  once,  as¬ 
sumes  a  positive  value,  when  we  observe  that 
the  principles  with  which  speculative  reason  en¬ 
deavours  to  transcend  its  limits  lead  inevitably, 
not  to  the  extension ,  but  to  the  contraction  of 
the  use  of  reason,  inasmuch  as  they  threaten  to 
extend  the  limits  of  sensibility,  which  is  their 
proper  sphere,  over  the  entire  realm  of  thought 
and,  thus,  to  supplant  the  pure  (practical)  use 
of  reason.  So  far,  then,  as  this  criticism  is  oc¬ 
cupied  in  confining  speculative  reason  within  its 
proper  bounds,  it  is  only  negative;  but,  inas¬ 
much  as  it  thereby,  at  the  same  time,  removes 
an  obstacle  which  impedes  and  even  threatens 
to  destroy  the  use  of  practical  reason,  it  possess¬ 
es  a  positive  and  very  important  value.  In  order 
to  admit  this,  we  have  only  to  be  convinced  that 
there  is  an  absolutely  necessary  use  of  pure 
reason — the  moral  use — in  which  it  inevitably 
transcends  the  limits  of  sensibility,  without  the 
aid  of  speculation,  requiring  only  to  be  insured 
against  the  effects  of  a  speculation  which  would 
involve  it  in  contradiction  with  itself.  To  deny 
the  positive  advantage  of  the  service  which  this 
criticism  renders  us  would  be  as  absurd  as  to 
maintain  that  the  system  of  police  is  productive 
of  no  positive  benefit,  since  its  main  business  is 
to  prevent  the  violence  which  citizen  has  to  ap¬ 
prehend  from  citizen,  that  so  each  may  pursue 
his  vocation  in  peace  and  security.  That  space 
and  time  are  only  forms  of  sensible  intuition, 
and  hence  are  only  conditions  of  the  existence 
of  things  as  phenomena;  that,  moreover,  we 
have  no  conceptions  of  the  understanding,  and, 
consequently,  no  elements  for  the  cognition  of 
things,  except  in  so  far  as  a  corresponding  intui¬ 
tion  can  be  given  to  these  conceptions;  that,  ac¬ 
cordingly,  we  can  have  no  cognition  of  an  ob¬ 
ject,  as  a  thing  in  itself,  but  only  as  an  object 
of  sensible  intuition,  that  is,  as  phenomenon — 
all  this  is  proved  in  the  analytical  part  of  the 
Critique;  and  from  this  the  limitation  of  all  pos¬ 
sible  speculative  cognition  to  the  mere  objects 

1  [“He  considered  nothing  done,  so  long  as  anything 
remained  to  be  done.”] 


of  experience ,  follows  as  a  necessary  result. 
At  the  same  time,  it  must  be  carefully  borne  in 
mind  that,  while  we  surrender  the  power  of  cog¬ 
nizing,  we  still  reserve  the  power  of  thinking  ob¬ 
jects,  as  things  in  themselves.2  For,  otherwise, 
we  should  require  to  affirm  the  existence  of  an 
appearance,  without  something  that  appears — 
which  would  be  absurd.  Now  let  us  suppose,  for 
a  moment,  that  we  had  not  undertaken  this  crit¬ 
icism  and,  accordingly,  had  not  drawn  the  nec¬ 
essary  distinction  between  things  as  objects  of 
experience  and  things  as  they  are  in  themselves. 
The  principle  of  causality,  and,  by  consequence, 
the  mechanism  of  nature  as  determined  by  cau¬ 
sality,  would  then  have  absolute  validity  in  rela¬ 
tion  to  all  things  as  efficient  causes.  I  should 
then  be  unable  to  assert,  with  regard  to  one  and 
the  same  being,  e.g.,  the  human  soul,  that  its  will 
is  free,  and  yet,  at  the  same  time,  subject  to  nat¬ 
ural  necessity,  that  is,  not  free,  without  falling 
into  a  palpable  contradiction,  for  in  both  prop¬ 
ositions  I  should  take  the  soul  in  the  same  sig¬ 
nification,  as  a  thing  in  general,  as  a  thing  in  it¬ 
self — as,  without  previous  criticism,  I  could  not 
but  take  it.  Suppose  now,  on  the  other  hand, 
that  we  have  undertaken  this  criticism,  and  have 
learnt  that  an  object  may  be  taken  in  two  senses , 
first,  as  a  phenomenon,  secondly,  as  a  thing  in  it¬ 
self ;  and  that,  according  to  the  deduction  of  the 
conceptions  of  the  understanding,  the  principle 
of  causality  has  reference  only  to  things  in  the 
first  sense.  We  then  see  how  it  does  not  involve 
any  contradiction  to  assert,  on  the  one  hand, 
that  the  will,  in  the  phenomenal  sphere — in  vis¬ 
ible  action — is  necessarily  obedient  to  the  law  of 
nature,  and,  in  so  far,  not  free;  and,  on  the  other 
hand,  that,  as  belonging  to  a  thing  in  itself,  it  is 
not  subject  to  that  law,  and,  accordingly,  is  free. 
Now,  it  is  true  that  I  cannot,  by  means  of  spec¬ 
ulative  reason,  and  still  less  by  empirical  obser¬ 
vation,  cognize  my  soul  as  a  thing  in  itself  and 
consequently,  cannot  cognize  liberty  as  the  prop¬ 
erty  of  a  being  to  which  I  ascribe  effects  in  the 
world  of  sense.  For,  to  do  so,  I  must  cognize 
this  being  as  existing,  and  yet  not  in  time,  which 
— since  I  cannot  support  my  conception  by  any 

2  In  order  to  cognize  an  object,  I  must  be  able  to 
prove  its  possibility,  either  from  its  reality  as  attested 
by  experience,  or  a  priori ,  by  means  of  reason.  But  I 
can  think  what  I  please,  provided  only  I  do  not  contra* 
diet  myself;  that  is,  provided  my  conception  is  a  pos¬ 
sible  thought,  though  I  may  be  unable  to  answer  for  the 
existence  of  a  corresponding  object  in  the  sum  of  possi¬ 
bilities.  But  something  more  is  required  before  I  can 
attribute  to  such  a  conception  objective  validity,  that  is 
real  possibility — the  other  possibility  being  merely  logi¬ 
cal.  We  are  not,  however,  confined  to  theoretical  sources 
of  cognition  for  the  means  of  satisfying  this  additional 
requirement,  but  may  derive  them  from  practical 
sources. 


10 


THE  CRITIQUE 


intuition — is  impossible.  At  the  same  time,  while 
I  cannot  cognize,  I  can  quite  well  think  freedom, 
that  is  to  say,  my  representation  of  it  involves 
at  least  no  contradiction,  if  we  bear  in  mind  the 
critical  distinction  of  the  two  modes  of  repre¬ 
sentation  (the  sensible  and  the  intellectual)  and 
the  consequent  limitation  of  the  conceptions  of 
the  pure  understanding  and  of  the  principles 
which  flow  from  them.  Suppose  now  that  moral¬ 
ity  necessarily  presupposed  liberty,  in  the  strict¬ 
est  sense,  as  a  property  of  our  will;  suppose  that 
reason  contained  certain  practical,  original  prin¬ 
ciples  a  priori,  which  were  absolutely  impossible 
without  this  presupposition;  and  suppose,  at  the 
same  time,  that  speculative  reason  had  proved 
that  liberty  was  incapable  of  being  thought  at 
all.  It  would  then  follow  that  the  moral  pre¬ 
supposition  must  give  way  to  the  speculative  af¬ 
firmation,  the  opposite  of  which  involves  an  ob¬ 
vious  contradiction,  and  that  liberty  and,  with  it, 
morality  must  yield  to  the  mechanism  of  na¬ 
ture;  for  the  negation  of  morality  involves  no 
contradiction,  except  on  the  presupposition  of 
liberty.  Now  morality  does  not  require  the 
speculative  cognition  of  liberty;  it  is  enough 
that  I  can  think  it,  that  its  conception  involves 
no  contradiction,  that  it  does  not  interfere  with 
the  mechanism  of  nature.  But  even  this  require¬ 
ment  we  could  not  satisfy,  if  we  had  not  learnt 
the  twofold  sense  in  which  things  may  be  taken; 
and  it  is  only  in  this  way  that  the  doctrine  of 
morality  and  the  doctrine  of  nature  are  confined 
within  their  proper  limits.  For  this  result,  then, 
we  are  indebted  to  a  criticism  which  warns  us 
of  our  unavoidable  ignorance  with  regard  to 
things  in  themselves,  and  establishes  the  neces¬ 
sary  limitation  of  our  theoretical  cognition  to 
mere  phenomena. 

The  positive  value  of  the  critical  principles 
of  pure  reason  in  relation  to  the  conception  of 
God  and  of  the  simple  nature  of  the  soul,  ad¬ 
mits  of  a  similar  exemplification;  but  on  this 
point  I  shall  not  dwell.  I  cannot  even  make  the 
assumption — as  the  practical  interests  of  moral¬ 
ity  require — of  God,  freedom,  and  immortality, 
if  I  do  not  deprive  speculative  reason  of  its  pre¬ 
tensions  to  transcendent  insight.  For  to  arrive 
at  these,  it  must  make  use  of  principles  which, 
in  fact,  extend  only  to  the  objects  of  possible 
experience,  and  which  cannot  be  applied  to 
objects  beyond  this  sphere  without  convert¬ 
ing  them  into  phenomena,  and  thus  rendering 
the  practical  extension  of  pure  reason  im¬ 
possible.  I  must,  therefore,  abolish  knowledge, 
to  make  room  for  belief.  The  dogmatism  of 
metaphysics,  that  is,  the  presumption  that  it 


is  possible  to  advance  in  metaphysics  without 
previous  criticism,  is  the  true  source  of  the  un¬ 
belief  (always  dogmatic)  which  militates  against 
morality. 

Thus,  while  it  may  be  no  very  difficult  task 
to  bequeath  a  legacy  to  posterity,  in  the  shape 
of  a  system  of  metaphysics  constructed  in  ac¬ 
cordance  with  the  Critique  of  Pure  Reason ,  still 
the  value  of  such  a  bequest  is  not  to  be  depre¬ 
ciated.  It  will  render  an  important  service  to 
reason,  by  substituting  the  certainty  of  scien¬ 
tific  method  for  that  random  groping  after  re¬ 
sults  without  the  guidance  of  principles,  which 
has  hitherto  characterized  the  pursuit  of  meta¬ 
physical  studies.  It  will  render  an  important 
service  to  the  inquiring  mind  of  youth,  by  lead¬ 
ing  the  student  to  apply  his  powers  to  the  culti¬ 
vation  of  genuine  science,  instead  of  wasting 
them,  as  at  present,  on  speculations  which  can 
never  lead  to  any  result,  or  on  the  idle  attempt 
to  invent  new  ideas  and  opinions.  But,  above  all, 
it  will  confer  an  inestimable  benefit  on  morality 
and  religion,  by  showing  that  all  the  objections 
urged  against  them  may  be  silenced  for  ever 
by  the  Sacratic  method,  that  is  to  say,  by  prov¬ 
ing  the  ignorance  of  the  objector.  For,  as  the 
world  has  never  been,  and,  no  doubt,  never 
will  be  without  a  system  of  metaphysics  of 
one  kind  or  another,  it  is  the  highest  and  weight¬ 
iest  concern  of  philosophy  to  render  it  power¬ 
less  for  harm,  by  closing  up  the  sources  of 
error. 

This  important  change  in  the  field  of  the  sci¬ 
ences,  this  loss  of  its  fancied  possessions,  to 
which  speculative  reason  must  submit,  does  not 
prove  in  any  way  detrimental  to  the  general 
interests  of  humanity.  The  advantages  which  the 
world  has  derived  from  the  teachings  of  pure 
reason  are  not  at  all  impaired.  The  loss  falls,  in 
its  whole  extent,  on  the  monopoly  of  the  schools, 
but  does  not  in  the  slightest  degree  touch  the 
interests  of  mankind.  I  appeal  to  the  most  ob¬ 
stinate  dogmatist,  whether  the  proof  of  the  con¬ 
tinued  existence  of  the  soul  after  death,  derived 
from  the  simplicity  of  its  substance;  of  the  free¬ 
dom  of  the  will  in  opposition  to  the  general 
mechanism  of  nature,  drawn  from  the  subtle 
but  impotent  distinction  of  subjective  and  ob¬ 
jective  practical  necessity;  or  of  the  existence 
of  God,  deduced  from  the  conception  of  an  ens 
realissimum — the  contingency  of  the  change¬ 
able,  and  the  necessity  of  a  prime  mover,  has 
ever  been  able  to  pass  beyond  the  limits  of  the 
schools,  to  penetrate  the  public  mind,  or  to  ex¬ 
ercise  the  slightest  influence  on  its  convictions. 
It  must  be  admitted  that  this  has  not  been  the 


OF  PURE  REASON 


case  and  that,  owing  to  the  unfitness  of  the  com¬ 
mon  understanding  for  such  subtle  speculations, 
it  can  never  be  expected  to  take  place.  On  the 
contrary,  it  is  plain  that  the  hope  oj  a  future  life 
arises  from  the  feeling,  which  exists  in  the  breast 
of  every  man,  that  the  temporal  is  inadequate  to 
meet  and  satisfy  the  demands  of  his  nature.  In 
like  manner,  it  cannot  be  doubted  that  the  clear 
exhibition  of  duties  in  opposition  to  all  the 
claims  of  inclination,  gives  rise  to  the  conscious¬ 
ness  of  freedom ,  and  that  the  glorious  order, 
beauty,  and  providential  care,  everywhere  dis¬ 
played  in  nature,  give  rise  to  the  belief  in  a  wise 
and  great  Author  of  the  Universe.  Such  is  the 
genesis  of  these  general  convictions  of  mankind, 
so  far  as  they  depend  on  rational  grounds;  and 
this  public  property  not  only  remains  undis¬ 
turbed,  but  is  even  raised  to  greater  importance, 
by  the  doctrine  that  the  schools  have  no  right  to 
arrogate  to  themselves  a  more  profound  insight 
into  a  matter  of  general  human  concernment 
than  that  to  which  the  great  mass  of  men,  ever 
held  by  us  in  the  highest  estimation,  can  without 
difficulty  attain,  and  that  the  schools  should, 
therefore,  confine  themselves  to  the  elaboration 
of  these  universally  comprehensible  and,  from 
a  moral  point  of  view,  amply  satisfactory  proofs. 
The  change,  therefore,  affects  only  the  arrogant 
pretensions  of  the  schools,  which  would  gladly 
retain,  in  their  own  exclusive  possession,  the  key 
to  the  truths  which  they  impart  to  the  public. 

Quod  mecum  nescit,  solus  vult  scire  videri. 

At  the  same  time  it  does  not  deprive  the  specu¬ 
lative  philosopher  of  his  just  title  to  be  the  sole 
depositor  of  a  science  which  benefits  the  public 
without  its  knowledge — I  mean,  the  Critique  of 
Pure  Reason.  This  can  never  become  popular 
and,  indeed,  has  no  occasion  to  be  so;  for  fine¬ 
spun  arguments  in  favour  of  useful  truths  make 
just  as  little  impression  on  the  public  mind  as 
the  equally  subtle  objections  brought  against 
these  truths.  On  the  other  hand,  since  both  in¬ 
evitably  force  themselves  on  every  man  who 
rises  to  the  height  of  speculation,  it  becomes  the 
manifest  duty  of  the  schools  to  enter  upon  a 
thorough  investigation  of  the  rights  of  specu¬ 
lative  reason  and,  thus,  to  prevent  the  scandal 
which  metaphysical  controversies  are  sure,  soon¬ 
er  or  later,  to  cause  even  to  the  masses.  It  is  only 
by  criticism  that  metaphysicians  (and,  as  such, 
theologians  too)  can  be  saved  from  these  con¬ 
troversies  and  from  the  consequent  perversion 
of  their  doctrines.  Criticism  alone  can  strike  a 
blow  at  the  root  of  materialism,  fatalism,  athe¬ 
ism,  free-thinking,  fanaticism,  and  superstition, 


II 

which  are  universally  injurious — as  well  as  of 
idealism  and  scepticism,  which  are  dangerous  to 
the  schools,  but  can  scarcely  pass  over  to  the 
public.  If  governments  think  proper  to  interfere 
with  the  affairs  of  the  learned,  it  would  be  more 
consistent  with  a  wise  regard  for  the  interests  of 
science,  as  well  as  for  those  of  society,  to  favour 
a  criticism  of  this  kind,  by  which  alone  the  la¬ 
bours  of  reason  can  be  established  on  a  firm 
basis,  than  to  support  the  ridiculous  despotism 
of  the  schools,  which  raise  a  loud  cry  of  danger 
to  the  public  over  the  destruction  of  cobwebs,  of 
which  the  public  has  never  taken  any  notice, 
and  the  loss  of  which,  therefore,  it  can  never 
feel. 

This  critical  science  is  not  opposed  to  the  dog¬ 
matic  procedure  of  reason  in  pure  cognition;  for 
pure  cognition  must  always  be  dogmatic,  that  is, 
must  rest  on  strict  demonstration  from  sure 
principles  a  priori — but  to  dogmatism,  that  is, 
to  the  presumption  that  it  is  possible  to  make 
any  progress  with  a  pure  cognition,  derived  from 
(philosophical)  conceptions,  according  to  the 
principles  which  reason  has  long  been  in  the 
habit  of  employing — without  first  inquiring  in 
what  way  and  by  what  right  reason  has  come 
into  the  possession  of  these  principles.  Dogma¬ 
tism  is  thus  the  dogmatic  procedure  of  pure 
reason  without  previous  criticism  of  its  own 
powers,  and  in  opposing  this  procedure,  we  must 
not  be  supposed  to  lend  any  countenance  to  that 
loquacious  shallowness  which  arrogates  to  itself 
the  name  of  popularity,  nor  yet  to  scepticism, 
which  makes  short  work  with  the  whole  science 
of  metaphysics.  On  the  contrary,  our  criticism 
is  the  necessary  preparation  for  a  thoroughly 
scientific  system  of  metaphysics  which  must 
perform  its  task  entirely  a  priori,  to  the  com¬ 
plete  satisfaction  of  speculative  reason,  and 
must,  therefore,  be  treated,  not  popularly,  but 
scholastically.  In  carrying  out  the  plan  which 
the  Critique  prescribes,  that  is,  in  the  future 
system  of  metaphysics,  we  must  have  recourse 
to  the  strict  method  of  the  celebrated  Wolf,  the 
greatest  of  all  dogmatic  philosophers.  He  was 
the  first  to  point  out  the  necessity  of  establish¬ 
ing  fixed  principles,  of  clearly  defining  our  con¬ 
ceptions,  and  of  subjecting  our  demonstrations 
to  the  most  severe  scrutiny,  instead  of  rashly 
jumping  at  conclusions.  The  example  which  he 
set  served  to  awaken  that  spirit  of  profound 
and  thorough  investigation  which  is  not  yet 
extinct  in  Germany.  He  would  have  been  pe¬ 
culiarly  well  fitted  to  give  a  truly  scientific  char¬ 
acter  to  metaphysical  studies,  had  it  occurred  to 
him  to  prepare  the  field  by  a  criticism  of  the 


12 


THE  CRITIQUE 


organum,  that  is,  of  pure  reason  itself.  That  he 
failed  to  perceive  the  necessity  of  such  a  pro¬ 
cedure  must  be  ascribed  to  the  dogmatic  mode 
of  thought  which  characterized  his  age,  and  on 
this  point  the  philosophers  of  his  time,  as  well 
as  of  all  previous  times,  have  nothing  to  re¬ 
proach  each  other  with.  Those  who  reject  at 
once  the  method  of  Wolf,  and  of  the  Critique  of 
Pure  Reason ,  can  have  no  other  aim  but  to 
shake  off  the  fetters  of  science ,  to  change  labour 
into  sport,  certainty  into  opinion,  and  philoso¬ 
phy  into  philodoxy. 

In  this  second  edition ,  I  have  endeavoured,  as 
far  as  possible,  to  remove  the  difficulties  and  ob¬ 
scurity  which,  without  fault  of  mine  perhaps, 
have  given  rise  to  many  misconceptions  even 
among  acute  thinkers.  In  the  propositions  them¬ 
selves,  and  in  the  demonstrations  by  which  they 
are  supported,  as  well  as  in  the  form  and  the  en¬ 
tire  plan  of  the  work,  I  have  found  nothing  to 
alter;  which  must  be  attributed  partly  to  the 
long  examination  to  which  I  had  subjected  the 
whole  before  offering  it  to  the  public  and  partly 
to  the  nature  of  the  case.  For  pure  speculative 
reason  is  an  organic  structure  in  which  there  is 
nothing  isolated  or  independent,  but  every  sin¬ 
gle  part  is  essential  to  all  the  rest;  and  hence, 
the  slightest  imperfection,  whether  defect  or 
positive  error,  could  not  fail  to  betray  itself  in 
use.  I  venture,  further,  to  hope,  that  this  sys¬ 
tem  will  maintain  the  same  unalterable  charac¬ 
ter  for  the  future.  I  am  led  to  entertain  this  con¬ 
fidence,  not  by  vanity,  but  by  the  evidence 
which  the  equality  of  the  result  affords,  when 
we  proceed,  first,  from  the  simplest  elements  up 
to  the  complete  whole  of  pure  reason,  and,  then, 
backwards  from  the  whole  to  each  individual 
part.  We  find  that  the  attempt  to  make  the 
slightest  alteration,  in  any  part,  leads  inevitably 
to  contradictions,  not  merely  in  this  system, 
but  in  human  reason  itself.  At  the  same  time, 
there  is  still  much  room  for  improvement  in  the 
exposition  of  the  doctrines  contained  in  this 
work.  In  the  present  edition,  I  have  endeavoured 
to  remove  misapprehensions  of  the  aesthetical 
part,  especially  with  regard  to  the  conception  of 
time;  to  clear  away  the  obscurity  which  has 
been  found  in  the  deduction  of  the  conceptions 
of  the  understanding;  to  supply  the  supposed 
want  of  sufficient  evidence  in  the  demonstration 
of  the  principles  of  the  pure  understanding;  and, 
lastly,  to  obviate  the  misunderstanding  of  the 
paralogisms  which  immediately  precede  the  ra¬ 
tional  psychology.  Beyond  this  point — the  end 
of  the  second  main  division  of  the  “Transcen¬ 
dental  Dialectic” — I  have  not  extended  my  al¬ 


terations,1  partly  from  want  of  time,  and  partly 
because  I  am  not  aware  that  any  portion  of  the 
remainder  has  given  rise  to  misconceptions 
among  intelligent  and  impartial  critics,  whom  I 

1  The  only  addition,  properly  so  called — and  that 
only  in  the  method  of  proof — which  I  have  made  in  the 
present  edition,  consists  of  a  new  refutation  of  psycho¬ 
logical  idealism,  and  a  strict  demonstration — the  only 
one  possible,  as  I  believe — of  the  objective  reality  of 
external  intuition.  However  harmless  idealism  may  be 
considered — although  in  reality  it  is  not  so — in  regard 
to  the  essential  ends  of  metaphysics,  it  must  still  remain 
a  scandal  to  philosophy  and  to  the  general  human  rea¬ 
son  to  be  obliged  to  assume,  as  an  article  of  mere  be¬ 
lief,  the  existence  of  things  external  to  ourselves  (from 
which,  yet,  we  derive  the  whole  material  of  cognition 
even  for  the  internal  sense),  and  not  to  be  able  to  op¬ 
pose  a  satisfactory  proof  to  any  one  who  may  call  it  in 
question.  As  there  is  some  obscurity  of  expression  in  the 
demonstration  as  it  stands  in  the  text,  I  propose  to  alter 
the  passage  in  question  as  follows:  “But  this  permanent 
cannot  be  an  intuition  in  me.  For  all  the  determining 
grounds  of  my  existence  which  can  be  found  in  me  are 
representations  and,  as  such,  do  themselves  require  a 
permanent,  distinct  from  them,  which  may  determine 
my  existence  in  relation  to  their  changes,  that  is,  my 
existence  in  time,  wherein  they  change.”  It  may,  prob¬ 
ably,  be  urged  in  opposition  to  this  proof  that,  after  all, 
I  am  only  conscious  immediately  of  that  which  is  in 
me,  that  is,  of  my  representation  of  external  things,  and 
that,  consequently,  it  must  always  remain  uncertain 
whether  anything  corresponding  to  this  representation 
does  or  does  not  exist  externally  to  me.  But  I  am  con¬ 
scious,  through  internal  experience ,  of  my  existence  in 
time  (consequently,  also,  of  the  determinability  of  the 
former  in  the  latter),  and  that  is  more  than  the  simple 
consciousness  of  my  representation.  It  is,  in  fact,  the 
same  as  the  empirical  consciousness  of  my  existence, 
which  can  only  be  determined  in  relation  to  something, 
which,  while  connected  with  my  existence,  is  external  to 
me.  This  consciousness  of  my  existence  in  time  is,  there¬ 
fore,  identical  with  the  consciousness  of  a  relation  to 
something  external  to  me,  and  it  is,  therefore,  experi¬ 
ence,  not  fiction,  sense,  not  imagination,  which  insep¬ 
arably  connects  the  external  with  my  internal  sense.  For 
the  external  sense  is,  in  itself,  the  relation  of  intuition 
to  something  real,  external  to  me;  and  the  reality  of 
this  something,  as  opposed  to  the  mere  imagination  of 
it,  rests  solely  on  its  inseparable  connection  with  in¬ 
ternal  experience  as  the  condition  of  its  possibility.  If 
with  the  intellectual  consciousness  of  my  existence,  in 
the  representation:  /  am,  which  accompanies  all  my 
judgements,  and  all  the  operations  of  my  understanding, 
I  could,  at  the  same  time,  connect  a  determination  of 
my  existence  by  intellectual  intuition,  then  the  con¬ 
sciousness  of  a  relation  to  something  external  to  me 
would  not  be  necessary.  But  the  internal  intuition  in 
which  alone  my  existence  can  be  determined,  though 
preceded  by  that  purely  intellectual  consciousness,  is  it¬ 
self  sensible  and  attached  to  the  condition  of  time. 
Hence  this  determination  of  my  existence,  and  conse¬ 
quently  my  internal  experience  itself,  must  depend  on 
something  permanent  which  is  not  in  me,  which  can  be, 
therefore,  only  in  something  external  to  me,  to  which  I 
must  look  upon  myself  as  being  related.  Thus  the  reality 
of  the  external  sense  is  necessarily  connected  with  that 
of  the  internal,  in  order  to  the  possibility  of  experience 
in  general;  that  is,  I  am  just  as  certainly  conscious  that 
there  are  things  external  to  me  related  to  my  sense  as  I 
am  that  I  myself  exist  as  determined  in  time.  But  in 
order  to  ascertain  to  what  given  intuitions  objects,  ex¬ 
ternal  to  me,  really  correspond,  in  other  words,  what  in¬ 
tuitions  belong  to  the  external  sense  and  not  to  imagi¬ 
nation,  I  must  have  recourse,  in  every  particular  case, 
to  those  rules  according  to  which  experience  in  general 
(even  internal  experience)  is  distinguished  from  imagi¬ 
nation,  and  which  are  always  based  on  the  proposition 


OF  PURE  REASON 


do  not  here  mention  with  that  praise  which  is 
their  due,  but  who  will  find  that  their  sug¬ 
gestions  have  been  attended  to  in  the  work 
itself. 

In  attempting  to  render  the  exposition  of  my 
views  as  intelligible  as  possible,  I  have  been 
compelled  to  leave  out  or  abridge  various  pas¬ 
sages  which  were  not  essential  to  the  complete¬ 
ness  of  the  work,  but  which  many  readers  might 
consider  useful  in  other  respects,  and  might  be 
unwilling  to  miss.  This  trifling  loss,  which  could 
not  be  avoided  without  swelling  the  book  be¬ 
yond  due  limits,  may  be  supplied,  at  the  pleas¬ 
ure  of  the  reader,  by  a  comparison  with  the  first 
edition,  and  will,  I  hope,  be  more  than  compen¬ 
sated  for  by  the  greater  clearness  of  the  exposi¬ 
tion  as  it  now  stands. 

I  have  observed,  with  pleasure  and  thankful¬ 
ness,  in  the  pages  of  various  reviews  and  trea¬ 
tises,  that  the  spirit  of  profound  and  thorough 
investigation  is  not  extinct  in  Germany,  though 
it  may  have  been  overborne  and  silenced  for  a 
time  by  the  fashionable  tone  of  a  licence  in 
thinking,  which  gives  itself  the  airs  of  genius, 
and  that  the  difficulties  which  beset  the  paths  of 
criticism  have  not  prevented  energetic  and  acute 
thinkers  from  making  themselves  masters  of  the 
science  of  pure  reason  to  which  these  paths  con¬ 
duct — a  science  which  is  not  popular,  but  scho¬ 
lastic  in  its  character,  and  which  alone  can  hope 
for  a  lasting  existence  or  possess  an  abiding  val¬ 
ue.  To  these  deserving  men,  who  so  happily  com¬ 
bine  profundity  of  view  with  a  talent  for  lucid 
exposition — a  talent  which  I  myself  am  not 
conscious  of  possessing — I  leave  the  task  of  re- 


that  there  really  is  an  external  experience.  We  may  add 
the  remark  that  the  representation  of  something  perma¬ 
nent  in  existence,  is  not  the  same  thing  as  the  perma¬ 
nent  representation;  for  a  representation  may  be  very 
variable  and  changing — as  all  our  representations,  even 
that  of  matter,  are — and  yet  refer  to  something  perma¬ 
nent,  which  must,  therefore,  be  distinct  from  all  my 
representations  and  external  to  me,  the  existence  of 
which  is  necessarily  included  in  the  determination  of  my 
own  existence,  and  with  it  constitutes  one  experience — 
an  experience  which  would  not  even  be  possible  inter¬ 
nally,  if  it  were  not  also  at  the  same  time,  in  part,  ex¬ 
ternal.  To  the  question  How?  we  are  no  more  able  to 
reply,  than  we  are,  in  general,  to  think  the  stationary  in 
time,  the  coexistence  of  which  with  the  variable,  pro¬ 
duces  the  conception  of  change. 


13 

moving  any  obscurity  which  may  still  adhere  to 
the  statement  of  my  doctrines.  For,  in  this  case, 
the  danger  is  not  that  of  being  refuted,  but  of 
being  misunderstood.  For  my  own  part,  I  must 
henceforward  abstain  from  controversy,  al¬ 
though  I  shall  carefully  attend  to  all  sugges¬ 
tions,  whether  from  friends  or  adversaries,  which 
may  be  of  use  in  the  future  elaboration  of  the 
system  of  this  propaedeutic.  As,  during  these  la¬ 
bours,  I  have  advanced  pretty  far  in  years — 
this  month  I  reach  my  sixty-fourth  year — it  will 
be  necessary  for  me  to  economize  time,  if  I  am 
to  carry  out  my  plan  of  elaborating  the  meta¬ 
physics  of  nature  as  well  as  of  morals,  in  con¬ 
firmation  of  the  correctness  of  the  principles 
established  in  this  Critique  of  Pure  Reason ,  both 
speculative  and  practical;  and  I  must,  there¬ 
fore,  leave  the  task  of  clearing  up  the  obscuri¬ 
ties  of  the  present  work — inevitable,  perhaps, 
at  the  outset — as  well  as  the  defence  of  the 
whole,  to  those  deserving  men  who  have  made 
my  system  their  own.  A  philosophical  system 
cannot  come  forward  armed  at  all  points  like  a 
mathematical  treatise,  and  hence  it  may  be  quite 
possible  to  take  objection  to  particular  passages, 
while  the  organic  structure  of  the  system,  con¬ 
sidered  as  a  unity,  has  no  danger  to  apprehend. 
But  few  possess  the  ability,  and  still  fewer  the 
inclination,  to  take  a  comprehensive  view  of  a 
new  system.  By  confining  the  view  to  particular 
passages,  taking  these  out  of  their  connection 
and  comparing  them  with  one  another,  it  is  easy 
to  pick  out  apparent  contradictions,  especially 
in  a  work  written  with  any  freedom  of  style. 
These  contradictions  place  the  work  in  an  un¬ 
favourable  light  in  the  eyes  of  those  who  rely 
on  the  judgement  of  others,  but  are  easily  rec¬ 
onciled  by  those  who  have  mastered  the  idea  of 
the  whole.  If  a  theory  possesses  stability  in  it¬ 
self,  the  action  and  reaction  which  seemed  at 
first  to  threaten  its  existence  serve  only,  in  the 
course  of  time,  to  smooth  down  any  superficial 
roughness  or  inequality,  and — if  men  of  insight, 
impartiality,  and  truly  popular  gifts,  turn  their 
attention  to  it — to  secure  to  it,  in  a  short  time, 
the  requisite  elegance  also. 

Konigsberg,  April  1787. 


INTRODUCTION 


I.  Of  the  difference  between  Pure  and 

Empirical  Knowledge 

That  all  our  knowledge  begins  with  experience 
there  can  be  no  doubt.  For  how  is  it  possible 
that  the  faculty  of  cognition  should  be  awak¬ 
ened  into  exercise  otherwise  than  by  means  of 
objects  which  affect  our  senses,  and  partly  of 
themselves  produce  representations,  partly  rouse 
our  powers  of  understanding  into  activity,  to 
compare,  to  connect,  or  to  separate  these,  and 
so  to  convert  the  raw  material  of  our  sensuous 
impressions  into  a  knowledge  of  objects,  which 
is  called  experience?  In  respect  of  time,  there¬ 
fore,  no  knowledge  of  ours  is  antecedent  to  ex¬ 
perience,  but  begins  with  it. 

But,  though  all  our  knowledge  begins  with  ex¬ 
perience,  it  by  no  means  follows  that  all  arises 
out  of  experience.  For,  on  the  contrary,  it  is 
quite  possible  that  our  empirical  knowledge  is 
a  compound  of  that  which  we  receive  through 
impressions,  and  that  which  the  faculty  of  cog¬ 
nition  supplies  from  itself  (sensuous  impres¬ 
sions  giving  merely  the  occasion ),  an  addition 
which  we  cannot  distinguish  from  the  original 
element  given  by  sense,  till  long  practice  has 
made  us  attentive  to,  and  skilful  in  separating 
it.  It  is,  therefore,  a  question  which  requires 
close  investigation,  and  not  to  be  answered  at 
first  sight,  whether  there  exists  a  knowledge  al¬ 
together  independent  of  experience,  and  even  of 
all  sensuous  impressions?  Knowledge  of  this 
kind  is  called  a  priori,  in  contradistinction  to 
empirical  knowledge,  which  has  its  sources  a 
posteriori,  that  is,  in  experience. 

But  the  expression,  “a  priori ,”  is  not  as  yet 
definite  enough  adequately  to  indicate  the  whole 
meaning  of  the  question  above  started.  For,  in 
speaking  of  knowledge  which  has  its  sources  in 
experience,  we  are  wont  to  say,  that  this  or  that 
may  be  known  a  priori,  because  we  do  not  derive 
this  knowledge  immediately  from  experience, 
but  from  a  general  rule,  which,  however,  we 
have  itself  borrowed  from  experience.  Thus,  if 
a  man  undermined  his  house,  we  say,  “he  might 
know  a  priori  that  it  would  have  fallen that  is, 
he  needed  not  to  have  waited  for  the  experience 
that  it  did  actually  fall.  But  still,  a  priori,  he 
could  not  know  even  this  much.  For,  that  bodies 


are  heavy,  and,  consequently,  that  they  fall 
when  their  supports  are  taken  away,  must  have 
been  known  to  him  previously,  by  means  of  ex¬ 
perience. 

By  the  term  “knowledge  a  priori therefore, 
we  shall  in  the  sequel  understand,  not  such  as  is 
independent  of  this  or  that  kind  of  experience, 
but  such  as  is  absolutely  so  of  all  experience. 
Opposed  to  this  is  empirical  knowledge,  or  that 
which  is  possible  only  a  posteriori,  that  is, 
through  experience.  Knowledge  a  priori  is  either 
pure  or  impure.  Pure  knowledge  a  priori  is  that 
with  which  no  empirical  element  is  mixed  up. 
For  example,  the  proposition,  “Every  change 
has  a  cause,”  is  a  proposition  a  priori,  but  im¬ 
pure,  because  change  is  a  conception  which  can 
only  be  derived  from  experience. 

II.  The  Human  Intellect,  even  in  an  Unphilo- 
sophical  State,  is  in  Possession  of  Certain 
Cognitions  “a  priori ” 

The  question  now  is  as  to  a  criterion,  by  which 
we  may  securely  distinguish  a  pure  from  an  em¬ 
pirical  cognition.  Experience  no  doubt  teaches 
us  that  this  or  that  object  is  constituted  in  such 
and  such  a  manner,  but  not  that  it  could  not 
possibly  exist  otherwise.  Now,  in  the  first  place, 
if  we  have  a  proposition  which  contains  the 
idea  of  necessity  in  its  very  conception,  it  is  a 
judgement  a  priori;  if,  moreover,  it  is  not  de¬ 
rived  from  any  other  proposition,  unless  from 
one  equally  involving  the  idea  of  necessity,  it  is 
absolutely  a  priori.  Secondly,  an  empirical  judge¬ 
ment  never  exhibits  strict  and  absolute,  but  only 
assumed  and  comparative  universality  (by  in¬ 
duction);  therefore,  the  most  we  can  say  is — 
so  far  as  we  have  hitherto  observed,  there  is  no 
exception  to  this  or  that  rule.  If,  on  the  other 
hand,  a  judgement  carries  with  it  strict  and  ab¬ 
solute  universality,  that  is,  admits  of  no  possi¬ 
ble  exception,  it  is  not  derived  from  experience, 
but  is  valid  absolutely  a  priori. 

Empirical  universality  is,  therefore,  only  an 
arbitrary  extension  of  validity,  from  that  which 
may  be  predicated  of  a  proposition  valid  in  most 
cases,  to  that  which  is  asserted  of  a  proposition 
which  holds  good  in  all;  as,  for  example,  in  the 
affirmation,  “All  bodies  are  heavy.”  When,  on 
the  contrary,  strict  universality  characterizes  a 


14 


OF  PURE  REASON 


judgement,  it  necessarily  indicates  another  pe¬ 
culiar  source  of  knowledge,  namely,  a  faculty  of 
cognition  a  priori.  Necessity  and  strict  univer¬ 
sality,  therefore,  are  infallible  tests  for  distin¬ 
guishing  pure  from  empirical  knowledge,  and 
are  inseparably  connected  with  each  other.  But 
as  in  the  use  of  these  criteria  the  empirical  limi¬ 
tation  is  sometimes  more  easily  detected  than 
the  contingency  of  the  judgement,  or  the  unlim¬ 
ited  universality  which  we  attach  to  a  judgement 
is  often  a  more  convincing  proof  than  its  ne¬ 
cessity,  it  may  be  advisable  to  use  the  criteria 
separately,  each  being  by  itself  infallible. 

Now,  that  in  the  sphere  of  human  cognition 
we  have  judgements  which  are  necessary,  and  in 
the  strictest  sense  universal,  consequently  pure 
a  priori ,  it  will  be  an  easy  matter  to  show.  If  we 
desire  an  example  from  the  sciences,  we  need 
only  take  any  proposition  in  mathematics.  If  we 
cast  our  eyes  upon  the  commonest  operations 
of  the  understanding,  the  proposition,  “Every 
change  must  have  a  cause,”  will  amply  serve  our 
purpose.  In  the  latter  case,  indeed,  the  concep¬ 
tion  of  a  cause  so  plainly  involves  the  conception 
of  a  necessity  of  connection  with  an  effect,  and 
of  a  strict  universality  of  the  law,  that  the  very 
notion  of  a  cause  would  entirely  disappear,  were 
we  to  derive  it,  like  Hume,  from  a  frequent  as¬ 
sociation  of  what  happens  with  that  which 
precedes,  and  the  habit  thence  originating  of 
connecting  representations — the  necessity  in¬ 
herent  in  the  judgement  being  therefore  merely 
subjective.  Besides,  without  seeking  for  such  ex¬ 
amples  of  principles  existing  a  priori  in  cogni¬ 
tion,  we  might  easily  show  that  such  principles 
are  the  indispensable  basis  of  the  possibility  of 
experience  itself,  and  consequently  prove  their 
existence  a  priori.  For  whence  could  our  experi¬ 
ence  itself  acquire  certainty,  if  all  the  rules  on 
which  it  depends  were  themselves  empirical, 
and  consequently  fortuitous?  No  one,  therefore, 
can  admit  the  validity  of  the  use  of  such  rules 
as  first  principles.  But,  for  the  present,  we  may 
content  ourselves  with  having  established  the 
fact,  that  we  do  possess  and  exercise  a  faculty 
of  pure  a  priori  cognition;  and,  secondly,  with 
having  pointed  out  the  proper  tests  of  such 
cognition,  namely,  universality  and  necessity. 

Not  only  in  judgements,  however,  but  even 
in  conceptions,  is  an  a  priori  origin  manifest. 
For  example,  if  we  take  away  by  degrees  from 
our  conceptions  of  a  body  all  that  can  be  re¬ 
ferred  to  mere  sensuous  experience — colour, 
hardness  or  softness,  weight,  even  impenetrabil¬ 
ity — the  body  will  then  vanish;  but  the  space 
which  it  occupied  still  remains,  and  this  it  is  ut¬ 


15 

terly  impossible  to  annihilate  in  thought.  Again, 
if  we  take  away,  in  like  manner,  from  our  em¬ 
pirical  conception  of  any  object,  corporeal  or 
incorporeal,  all  properties  which  mere  experi¬ 
ence  has  taught  us  to  connect  with  it,  still  we 
cannot  think  away  those  through  which  we  cogi¬ 
tate  it  as  substance,  or  adhering  to  substance, 
although  our  conception  of  substance  is  more 
determined  than  that  of  an  object.  Compelled, 
therefore,  by  that  necessity  with  which  the  con¬ 
ception  of  substance  forces  itself  upon  us,  we 
must  confess  that  it  has  its  seat  in  our  faculty 
of  cognition  a  priori. 

III.  Philosophy  stands  in  need  of  a  Science 
which  shall  Determine  the  Possibility ,  Prin¬ 
ciples,  and  Extent  of  Human  Knowledge 
i(a  priori ” 

Of  far  more  importance  than  all  that  has  been 
above  said,  is  the  consideration  that  certain  of 
our  cognitions  rise  completely  above  the  sphere 
of  all  possible  experience,  and  by  means  of  con¬ 
ceptions,  to  which  there  exists  in  the  whole  ex¬ 
tent  of  experience  no  corresponding  object,  seem 
to  extend  the  range  of  our  judgements  beyond 
its  bounds.  And  just  in  this  transcendental  or 
supersensible  sphere,  where  experience  affords  us 
neither  instruction  nor  guidance,  lie  the  investi¬ 
gations  of  reason ,  which,  on  account  of  their  im¬ 
portance,  we  consider  far  preferable  to,  and  as 
having  a  far  more  elevated  aim  than,  all  that  the 
understanding  can  achieve  within  the  sphere  of 
sensuous  phenomena.  So  high  a  value  do  we  set 
upon  these  investigations,  that  even  at  the  risk 
of  error,  we  persist  in  following  them  out,  and 
permit  neither  doubt  nor  disregard  nor  indiffer¬ 
ence  to  restrain  us  from  the  pursuit.  These  un¬ 
avoidable  problems  of  mere  pure  reason  are 
God,  freedom  (of  will),  and  immortality.  The 
science  which,  with  all  its  preliminaries,  has  for 
its  especial  object  the  solution  of  these  prob¬ 
lems  is  named  metaphysics — a  science  which  is 
at  the  very  outset  dogmatical,  that  is,  it  confi¬ 
dently  takes  upon. itself  the  execution  of  this 
task  without  any  previous  investigation  of  the 
ability  or  inability  of  reason  for  such  an  under¬ 
taking. 

Now  the  safe  ground  of  experience  being  thus 
abandoned,  it  seems  nevertheless  natural  that 
we  should  hesitate  to  erect  a  building  with  the 
cognitions  we  possess,  without  knowing  whence 
they  come,  and  on  the  strength  of  principles, 
the  origin  of  which  is  undiscovered.  Instead  of 
thus  trying  to  build  without  a  foundation,  it  is 
rather  to  be  expected  that  we  should  long  ago 
have  put  the  question,  how  the  understanding 


THE  CRITIQUE 


16 

can  arrive  at  these  a  priori  cognitions,  and  what 
is  the  extent,  validity,  and  worth  which  they 
may  possess?  We  say,  “This  is  natural  enough,” 
meaning  by  the  word  natural ,  that  which  is  con¬ 
sistent  with  a  just  and  reasonable  way  of  think¬ 
ing;  but  if  we  understand  by  the  term,  that 
which  usually  happens,  nothing  indeed  could 
be  more  natural  and  more  comprehensible  than 
that  this  investigation  should  be  left  long  un¬ 
attempted.  For  one  part  of  our  pure  knowledge, 
the  science  of  mathematics,  has  been  long  firm¬ 
ly  established,  and  thus  leads  us  to  form  flatter¬ 
ing  expectations  with  regard  to  others,  though 
these  may  be  of  quite  a  different  nature.  Be¬ 
sides,  when  we  get  beyond  the  bounds  of  experi¬ 
ence,  we  are  of  course  safe  from  opposition  in 
that  quarter;  and  the  charm  of  widening  the 
range  of  our  knowledge  is  so  great  that,  unless 
we  are  brought  to  a  standstill  by  some  evident 
contradiction,  we  hurry  on  undoubtingly  in  our 
course.  This,  however,  may  be  avoided,  if  we 
are  sufficiently  cautious  in  the  construction  of 
our  fictions,  which  are  not  the  less  fictions  on 
that  account. 

Mathematical  science  affords  us  a  brilliant  ex¬ 
ample,  how  far,  independently  of  all  experience, 
we  may  carry  our  a  priori  knowledge.  It  is  true 
that  the  mathematician  occupies  himself  with 
objects  and  cognitions  only  in  so  far  as  they  can 
be  represented  by  means  of  intuition.  But  this 
circumstance  is  easily  overlooked,  because  the 
said  intuition  can  itself  be  given  a  priori,  and 
therefore  is  hardly  to  be  distinguished  from  a 
mere  pure  conception.  Deceived  by  such  a 
proof  of  the  power  of  reason,  we  can  perceive 
no  limits  to  the  extension  of  our  knowledge.  The 
light  dove  cleaving  in  free  flight  the  thin  air, 
whose  resistance  it  feels,  might  imagine  that  her 
movements  would  be  far  more  free  and  rapid 
in  airless  space.  Just  in  the  same  way  did  Plato, 
abandoning  the  world  of  sense  because  of  the 
narrow  limits  it  sets  to  the  understanding,  ven¬ 
ture  upon  the  wings  of  ideas  beyond  it,  into  the 
void  space  of  pure  intellect.  He  did  not  reflect 
that  he  made  no  real  progress  by  all  his  efforts; 
for  he  met  with  no  resistance  which  might  serve 
him  for  a  support,  as  it  were,  whereon  to  rest, 
and  on  which  he  might  apply  his  powers,  in  or¬ 
der  to  let  the  intellect  acquire  momentum  for  its 
progress.  It  is,  indeed,  the  common  fate  of  hu¬ 
man  reason  in  speculation,  to  finish  the  impos¬ 
ing  edifice  of  thought  as  rapidly  as  possible,  and 
then  for  the  first  time  to  begin  to  examine 
whether  the  foundation  is  a  solid  one  or  no.  Ar¬ 
rived  at  this  point,  all  sorts  of  excuses  are 
sought  after,  in  order  to  console  us  for  its  want 


of  stability,  or  rather,  indeed,  to  enable  us  to 
dispense  altogether  with  so  late  and  dangerous 
an  investigation.  But  what  frees  us  during  the 
process  of  building  from  all  apprehension  or 
suspicion,  and  flatters  us  into  the  belief  of  its 
solidity,  is  this.  A  great  part,  perhaps  the  great¬ 
est  part,  of  the  business  of  our  reason  consists 
in  the  analysation  of  the  conceptions  which  we 
already  possess  of  objects.  By  this  means  we 
gain  a  multitude  of  cognitions,  which  although 
really  nothing  more  than  elucidations  or  expla¬ 
nations  of  that  which  (though  in  a  confused 
manner)  was  already  thought  in  our  concep¬ 
tions,  are,  at  least  in  respect  of  their  form, 
prized  as  new  introspections;  whilst,  so  far  as 
regards  their  matter  or  content,  we  have  really 
made  no  addition  to  our  conceptions,  but  only 
disinvolved  them.  But  as  this  process  does  fur¬ 
nish  a  real  a  priori  knowledge,  which  has  a  sure 
progress  and  useful  results,  reason,  deceived  by 
this,  slips  in,  without  being  itself  aware  of  it, 
assertions  of  a  quite  different  kind;  in  which,  to 
given  conceptions  it  adds  others,  a  priori  in¬ 
deed,  but  entirely  foreign  to  them,  without  our 
knowing  how  it  arrives  at  these,  and,  indeed, 
without  such  a  question  ever  suggesting  itself. 
I  shall  therefore  at  once  proceed  to  examine 
the  difference  between  these  two  modes  of 
knowledge. 

IV.  Of  the  Difference  Between  Analytical  and 
Synthetical  Judgements 

In  all  judgements  wherein  the  relation  of  a 
subject  to  the  predicate  is  cogitated  (I  mention 
affirmative  judgements  only  here;  the  applica¬ 
tion  to  negative  will  be  very  easy),  this  relation 
is  possible  in  two  different  ways.  Either  the 
predicate  B  belongs  to  the  subject  A,  as  some¬ 
what  which  is  contained  (though  covertly)  in 
the  conception  A;  or  the  predicate  B  lies  com¬ 
pletely  out  of  the  conception  A,  although  it 
stands  in  connection  with  it.  In  the  first  in¬ 
stance,  I  term  the  judgement  analytical,  in  the 
second,  synthetical.  Analytical  judgements  (af¬ 
firmative)  are  therefore  those  in  which  the  con¬ 
nection  of  the  predicate  with  the  subject  is 
cogitated  through  identity;  those  in  which  this 
connection  is  cogitated  without  identity,  are 
called  synthetical  judgements.  The  former  may 
be  called  explicative,  the  latter  augmentative 
judgements;  because  the  former  add  in  the  pred¬ 
icate  nothing  to  the  conception  of  the  subject, 
but  only  analyse  it  into  its  constituent  concep¬ 
tions,  which  were  thought  already  in  the  subject, 
although  in  a  confused  manner;  the  latter  add  to 
our  conceptions  of  the  subject  a  predicate  which 


OF  PURE 

was  not  contained  in  it,  and  which  no  analysis 
could  ever  have  discovered  therein.  For  example, 
when  I  say,  “All  bodies  are  extended,”  this  is  an 
analytical  judgement.  For  I  need  not  go  beyond 
the  conception  of  body  in  order  to  find  exten¬ 
sion  connected  with  it,  but  merely  analyse  the 
conception,  that  is,  become  conscious  of  the 
manifold  properties  which  I  think  in  that  con¬ 
ception,  in  order  to  discover  this  predicate  in 
it:  it  is  therefore  an  analytical  judgement.  On 
the  other  hand,  when  I  say,  “All  bodies  are 
heavy,”  the  predicate  is  something  totally  dif¬ 
ferent  from  that  which  I  think  in  the  mere  con¬ 
ception  of  a  body.  By  the  addition  of  such  a 
predicate,  therefore,  it  becomes  a  synthetical 
judgement. 

Judgements  of  experience,  as  such,  are  al¬ 
ways  synthetical.  For  it  would  be  absurd  to 
think  of  grounding  an  analytical  judgement  on 
experience,  because  in  forming  such  a  judge¬ 
ment  I  need  not  go  out  of  the  sphere  of  my 
conceptions,  and  therefore  recourse  to  the  testi¬ 
mony  of  experience  is  quite  unnecessary.  That 
“bodies  are  extended”  is  not  an  empirical  judge¬ 
ment,  but  a  proposition  which  stands  firm  a 
priori.  For  before  addressing  myself  to  experi¬ 
ence,  I  already  have  in  my  conception  all  the 
requisite  conditions  for  the  judgement,  and  I 
have  only  to  extract  the  predicate  from  the  con¬ 
ception,  according  to  the  principle  of  contradic¬ 
tion,  and  thereby  at  the  same  time  become  con¬ 
scious  of  the  necessity  of  the  judgement,  a  ne¬ 
cessity  which  I  could  never  learn  from  experi¬ 
ence.  On  the  other  hand,  though  at  first  I  do  not 
at  all  include  the  predicate  of  weight  in  my  con¬ 
ception  of  body  in  general,  that  conception  still 
indicates  an  object  of  experience,  a  part  of  the 
totality  of  experience,  to  which  I  can  still  add 
other  parts;  and  this  I  do  when  I  recognize  by 
observation  that  bodies  are  heavy.  I  can  cognize 
beforehand  by  analysis  the  conception  of  body 
through  the  characteristics  of  extension,  im¬ 
penetrability,  shape,  etc.,  all  which  are  cogi¬ 
tated  in  this  conception.  But  now  I  extend  my 
knowledge,  and  looking  back  on  experience  from 
which  I  had  derived  this  conception  of  body, 

I  find  weight  at  all  times  connected  with  the 
above  characteristics,  and  therefore  I  syntheti¬ 
cally  add  to  my  conceptions  this  as  a  predicate, 
and  say,  “All  bodies  are  heavy.”  Thus  it  is  ex¬ 
perience  upon  which  rests  the  possibility  of  the 
synthesis  of  the  predicate  of  weight  with  the 
conception  of  body,  because  both  conceptions, 
although  the  one  is  not  contained  in  the  other, 
still  belong  to  one  another  (only  contingently, 
however),  as  parts  of  a  whole,  namely,  of  ex¬ 


REASON  17 

perience,  which  is  itself  a  synthesis  of  intui¬ 
tions. 

But  to  synthetical  judgements  a  priori ,  such 
aid  is  entirely  wanting.  If  I  go  out  of  and  be¬ 
yond  the  conception  A,  in  order  to  recognize 
another  B  as  connected  with  it,  what  foundation 
have  I  to  rest  on,  whereby  to  render  the  synthe¬ 
sis  possible?  I  have  here  no  longer  the  advan¬ 
tage  of  looking  out  in  the  sphere  of  experience 
for  what  I  want.  Let  us  take,  for  example,  the 
proposition,  “Everything  that  happens  has  a 
cause.”  In  the  conception  of  “something  that 
happens”  I  indeed  think  an  existence  which  a 
certain  time  antecedes,  and  from  this  I  can 
derive  analytical  judgements.  But  the  concep¬ 
tion  of  a  cause  lies  quite  out  of  the  above  con¬ 
ception,  and  indicates  something  entirely  dif¬ 
ferent  from  “that  which  happens,”  and  is  con¬ 
sequently  not  contained  in  that  conception.  How 
then  am  I  able  to  assert  concerning  the  general 
conception — “that  which  happens” — something 
entirely  different  from  that  conception,  and  to 
recognize  the  conception  of  cause  although  not 
contained  in  it,  yet  as  belonging  to  it,  and  even 
necessarily?  what  is  here  the  unknown=X,  up¬ 
on  which  the  understanding  rests  when  it  be¬ 
lieves  it  has  found,  out  of  the  conception  A  a  for¬ 
eign  predicate  B,  which  it  nevertheless  considers 
to  be  connected  with  it?  It  cannot  be  experience, 
because  the  principle  adduced  annexes  the  two 
representations,  cause  and  effect,  to  the  repre¬ 
sentation  existence,  not  only  with  universality, 
which  experience  cannot  give,  but  also  with  the 
expression  of  necessity,  therefore  completely  a 
priori  and  from  pure  conceptions.  Upon  such 
synthetical,  that  is  augmentative  propositions, 
depends  the  whole  aim  of  our  speculative  knowl¬ 
edge  a  priori;  for  although  analytical  judge¬ 
ments  are  indeed  highly  important  and  neces¬ 
sary,  they  are  so,  only  to  arrive  at  that  clear¬ 
ness  of  conceptions  which  is  requisite  for  a  sure 
and  extended  synthesis,  and  this  alone  is  a  real 
acquisition. 

V.  In  all  Theoretical  Sciences  of  Reason ,  Syn¬ 
thetical  Judgements  “a  priori”  are  contained 
as  Principles 

1.  Mathematical  judgements  are  always  syn¬ 
thetical.  Hitherto  this  fact,  though  incontestably 
true  and  very  important  in  its  consequences, 
seems  to  have  escaped  the  analysts  of  the  hu¬ 
man  mind,  nay,  to  be  in  complete  opposition 
to  all  their  conjectures.  For  as  it  was  found 
that  mathematical  conclusions  all  proceed  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  principle  of  contradiction  (which 
the  nature  of  every  apodeictic  certainty  re- 


1 8  THE  CRITIQUE 


quires),  people  became  persuaded  that  the  fun¬ 
damental  principles  of  the  science  also  were 
recognized  and  admitted  in  the  same  way.  But 
the  notion  is  fallacious;  for  although  a  syn¬ 
thetical  proposition  can  certainly  be  discerned 
by  means  of  the  principle  of  contradiction,  this 
is  possible  only  when  another  synthetical  propo¬ 
sition  precedes,  from  which  the  latter  is  de¬ 
duced,  but  never  of  itself. 

Before  all,  be  it  observed,  that  proper  mathe¬ 
matical  propositions  are  always  judgements  a 
priori ,  and  not  empirical,  because  they  carry 
along  with  them  the  conception  of  necessity, 
which  cannot  be  given  by  experience.  If  this  be 
demurred  to,  it  matters  not;  I  will  then  limit 
my  assertion  to  pare  mathematics,  the  very 
conception  of  which  implies  that  it  consists 
of  knowledge  altogether  non-empirical  and 
a  priori. 

We  might,  indeed,  at  first  suppose  that  the 
proposition  7  — |—  5  1 2  is  a  merely  analytical 
proposition,  following  (according  to  the  prin¬ 
ciple  of  contradiction)  from  the  conception  of 
a  sum  of  seven  and  five.  But  if  we  regard  it 
more  narrowly,  we  find  that  our  conception  of 
the  sum  of  seven  and  five  contains  nothing  more 
than  the  uniting  of  both  sums  into  one,  where¬ 
by  it  cannot  at  all  be  cogitated  what  this  single 
number  is  which  embraces  both.  The  conception 
of  twelve  is  by  no  means  obtained  by  merely 
cogitating  the  union  of  seven  and  five;  and  we 
may  analyse  our  conception  of  such  a  possible 
sum  as  long  as  we  will,  still  we  shall  never  dis¬ 
cover  in  it  the  notion  of  twelve.  We  must  go 
beyond  these  conceptions,  and  have  recourse 
to  an  intuition  which  corresponds  to  one  of  the 
two — our  five  fingers,  for  example,  or  like  Seg- 
ner  in  his  Arithmetic  five  points,  and  so  by  de¬ 
grees,  add  the  units  contained  in  the  five  given 
in  the  intuition,  to  the  conception  of  seven.  For 
I  first  take  the  number  7,  and,  for  the  concep¬ 
tion  of  5  calling  in  the  aid  of  the  fingers  of  my 
hand  as  objects  of  intuition,  I  add  the  units, 
which  I  before  took  together  to  make  up  the 
number  5,  gradually  now  by  means  of  the  ma¬ 
terial  image  my  hand,  to  the  number  7,  and  by 
this  process,  I  at  length  see  the  number  12  arise. 
That  7  should  be  added  to  5,  I  have  certainly 
cogitated  in  my  conception  of  a  sum=7-j~5, 
but  not  that  this  sum  was  equal  to  12.  Arith¬ 
metical  propositions  are  therefore  always  syn¬ 
thetical,  of  which  we  may  become  more  clearly 
convinced  by  trying  large  numbers.  For  it  will 
thus  become  quite  evident  that,  turn  and  twist 
our  conceptions  as  we  may,  it  is  impossible, 
without  having  recourse  to  intuition,  to  arrive 


at  the  sum  total  or  product  by  means  of  the 
mere  analysis  of  our  conceptions.  Just  as  little 
is  any  principle  of  pure  geometry  analytical.  “A 
straight  line  between  two  points  is  the  shortest/’ 
is  a  synthetical  proposition.  For  my  conception 
of  straight  contains  no  notion  of  quantity ,  but 
is  merely  qualitative.  The  conception  of  the 
shortest  is  therefore  wholly  an  addition,  and  by 
no  analysis  can  it  be  extracted  from  our  concep¬ 
tion  of  a  straight  line.  Intuition  must  therefore 
here  lend  its  aid,  by  means  of  which,  and  thus 
only,  our  synthesis  is  possible. 

Some  few  principles  preposited  by  geometri¬ 
cians  are,  indeed,  really  analytical,  and  depend 
on  the  principle  of  contradiction.  They  serve, 
however,  like  identical  propositions,  as  links  in 
the  chain  of  method,  not  as  principles — for  ex¬ 
ample,  a=a ,  the  whole  is  equal  to  itself,  or 
(a— j— 6)  >  a,  the  whole  is  greater  than  its  part. 
And  yet  even  these  principles  themselves,  though 
they  derive  their  validity  from  pure  concep¬ 
tions,  are  only  admitted  in  mathematics  because 
they  can  be  presented  in  intuition.  What  causes 
us  here  commonly  to  believe  that  the  predicate 
of  such  apodeictic  judgements  is  already  con¬ 
tained  in  our  conception,  and  that  the  judge¬ 
ment  is  therefore  analytical,  is  merely  the  equiv¬ 
ocal  nature  of  the  expression.  We  must  join  in 
thought  a  certain  predicate  to  a  given  concep¬ 
tion,  and  this  necessity  cleaves  already  to  the 
conception.  But  the  question  is,  not  what  we 
must  join  in  thought  to  the  given  conception, 
but  what  we  really  think  therein,  though  only 
obscurely,  and  then  it  becomes  manifest  that 
the  predicate  pertains  to  these  conceptions,  nec¬ 
essarily  indeed,  yet  not  as  thought  in  the  con¬ 
ception  itself,  but  by  virtue  of  an  intuition, 
which  must  be  added  to  the  conception. 

2.  The  science  of  natural  philosophy  (phys¬ 
ics)  contains  in  itself  synthetical  judgements  a 
priori,  as  principles.  I  shall  adduce  two  proposi¬ 
tions.  For  instance,  the  proposition,  “In  all 
changes  of  the  material  world,  the  quantity  of 
matter  remains  unchanged”;  or,  that,  ‘Tn  all 
communication  of  motion,  action  and  reaction 
must  always  be  equal.”  In  both  of  these,  not 
only  is  the  necessity,  and  therefore  their  origin 
a  priori  clear,  but  also  that  they  are  synthetical 
propositions.  For  in  the  conception  of  matter, 
I  do  not  cogitate  its  permanency,  but  merely 
its  presence  in  space,  which  it  fills.  I  therefore 
really  go  out  of  and  beyond  the  conception  of 
matter,  in  order  to  think  on  to  it  something  a 
priori,  which  I  did  not  think  in  it.  The  proposi¬ 
tion  is  therefore  not  analytical,  but  synthetical, 
and  nevertheless  conceived  a  priori ;  and  so  it 


OF  PURE 

is  with  regard  to  the  other  propositions  of  the 
pure  part  of  natural  philosophy. 

3.  As  to  metaphysics,  even  if  we  look  upon  it 
merely  as  an  attempted  science,  yet,  from  the 
nature  of  human  reason,  an  indispensable  one, 
we  find  that  it  must  contain  synthetical  propo¬ 
sitions  a  priori.  It  is  not  merely  the  duty  of 
metaphysics  to  dissect,  and  thereby  analytically 
to  illustrate  the  conceptions  which  we  form 
a  priori  of  things;  but  we  seek  to  widen  the 
range  of  our  a  priori  knowledge.  For  this  pur¬ 
pose,  we  must  avail  ourselves  of  such  principles 
as  add  something  to  the  original  conception — 
something  not  identical  with,  nor  contained  in 
it,  and  by  means  of  synthetical  judgements  a 
priori ,  leave  far  behind  us  the  limits  of  experi¬ 
ence;  for  example,  in  the  proposition,  ‘‘the 
world  must  have  a  beginning,”  and  such  like. 
Thus  metaphysics,  according  to  the  proper  aim 
of  the  science,  consists  merely  of  synthetical 
propositions  a  priori. 

VI.  The  Universal  Problem  of  Pure  Reason 

It  is  extremely  advantageous  to  be  able  to 
bring  a  number  of  investigations  under  the  for¬ 
mula  of  a  single  problem.  For  in  this  manner, 
we  not  only  facilitate  our  own  labour,  inasmuch 
as  we  define  it  clearly  to  ourselves,  but  also 
render  it  more  easy  for  others  to  decide  whether 
we  have  done  justice  to  our  undertaking.  The 
proper  problem  of  pure  reason,  then,  is  con¬ 
tained  in  the  question:  “How  are  synthetical 
judgements  a  priori  possible?” 

That  metaphysical  science  has  hitherto  re¬ 
mained  in  so  vacillating  a  state  of  uncertainty 
and  contradiction,  is  only  to  be  attributed  to 
the  fact  that  this  great  problem,  and  perhaps 
even  the  difference  between  analytical  and  syn¬ 
thetical  judgements,  did  not  sooner  suggest  it¬ 
self  to  philosophers.  Upon  the  solution  of  this 
problem,  or  upon  sufficient  proof  of  the  impos¬ 
sibility  of  synthetical  knowledge  a  priori,  de¬ 
pends  the  existence  or  downfall  of  the  science 
of  metaphysics.  Among  philosophers,  David 
Hume  came  the  nearest  of  all  to  this  problem; 
yet  it  never  acquired  in  his  mind  sufficient  pre¬ 
cision,  nor  did  he  regard  the  question  in  its  uni¬ 
versality.  On  the  contrary,  he  stopped  short  at 
the  synthetical  proposition  of  the  connection  of 
an  effect  with  its  cause  ( principium  causalita- 
tis),  insisting  that  such  proposition  a  priori  was 
impossible.  According  to  his  conclusions,  then, 
all  that  we  term  metaphysical  science  is  a  mere 
delusion,  arising  from  the  fancied  insight  of 
reason  into  that  which  is  in  truth  borrowed 
from  experience,  and  to  which  habit  has  given 


REASON  19 

the  appearance  of  necessity.  Against  this  asser¬ 
tion,  destructive  to  all  pure  philosophy,  he  would 
have  been  guarded,  had  he  had  our  problem 
before  his  eyes  in  its  universality.  For  he  would 
then  have  perceived  that,  according  to  his  own 
argument,  there  likewise  could  not  be  any  pure 
mathematical  science,  which  assuredly  cannot 
exist  without  synthetical  propositions  a  priori — 
an  absurdity  from  which  his  good  understand¬ 
ing  must  have  saved  him. 

In  the  solution  of  the  above  problem  is  at  the 
same  time  comprehended  the  possibility  of  the 
use  of  pure  reason  in  the  foundation  and  con¬ 
struction  of  all  sciences  which  contain  theoreti¬ 
cal  knowledge  a  priori  of  objects,  that  is  to  say, 
the  answer  to  the  following  questions: 

How  is  pure  mathematical  science  possible? 

How  is  pure  natural  science  possible? 

Respecting  these  sciences,  as  they  do  certain¬ 
ly  exist,  it  may  with  propriety  be  asked,  how 
they  are  possible? — for  that  they  must  be  pos¬ 
sible  is  shown  by  the  fact  of  their  really  exist¬ 
ing.1  But  as  to  metaphysics,  the  miserable  prog¬ 
ress  it  has  hitherto  made,  and  the  fact  that  of 
no  one  system  yet  brought  forward,  as  far  as 
regards  its  true  aim,  can  it  be  said  that  this  sci¬ 
ence  really  exists,  leaves  any  one  at  liberty  to 
doubt  with  reason  the  very  possibility  of  its 
existence. 

Yet,  in  a  certain  sense,  this  kind  of  knowledge 
must  unquestionably  be  looked  upon  as  given ; 
in  other  words,  metaphysics  must  be  considered 
as  really  existing,  if  not  as  a  science,  neverthe¬ 
less  as  a  natural  disposition  of  the  human  mind 
( metaphysica  naturalis).  For  human  reason, 
without  any  instigations  imputable  to  the  mere 
vanity  of  great  knowledge,  unceasingly  pro¬ 
gresses,  urged  on  by  its  own  feeling  of  need,  to¬ 
wards  such  questions  as  cannot  be  answered  by 
any  empirical  application  of  reason,  or  princi¬ 
ples  derived  therefrom;  and  so  there  has  ever 
really  existed  in  every  man  some  system  of 
metaphysics.  It  will  always  exist,  so  soon  as 
reason  awakes  to  the  exercise  of  its  power  of 
speculation.  And  now  the  question  arises:  “How 
is  metaphysics,  as  a  natural  disposition,  possi¬ 
ble?”  In  other  words,  how,  from  the  nature  of 
universal  human  reason,  do  those  questions 

1  As  to  the  existence  of  pure  natural  science,  or  phys¬ 
ics,  perhaps  many  may  still  express  doubts.  But  we  have 
only  to  look  at  the  different  propositions  which  are  com¬ 
monly  treated  of  at  the  commencement  of  proper  (em¬ 
pirical)  physical  science — those,  for  example,  relating 
to  the  permanence  of  the  same  quantity  of  matter,  the 
vis  inertiae,  the  equality  of  action  and  reaction,  etc. — 
to  be  soon  convinced  that  they  form  a  science  of  pure 
physics  ( physica  pura,  or  rationalis ),  which  well  de¬ 
serves  to  be  separately  exposed  as  a  special  science,  in 
its  whole  extent,  whether  that  be  great  or  confined. 


20 


THE  CRITIQUE 


arise  which  pure  reason  proposes  to  itself,  and 
which  it  is  impelled  by  its  own  feeling  of  need 
to  answer  as  well  as  it  can? 

But  as  in  all  the  attempts  hitherto  made  to 
answer  the  questions  which  reason  is  prompted 
by  its  very  nature  to  propose  to  itself,  for  ex¬ 
ample,  whether  the  world  had  a  beginning,  or 
has  existed  from  eternity,  it  has  always  met 
with  unavoidable  contradictions,  we  must  not 
rest  satisfied  with  the  mere  natural  disposition 
of  the  mind  to  metaphysics,  that  is,  with  the  ex¬ 
istence  of  the  faculty  of  pure  reason,  whence, 
indeed,  some  sort  of  metaphysical  system  al¬ 
ways  arises;  but  it  must  be  possible  to  arrive  at 
certainty  in  regard  to  the  question  whether  we 
know  or  do  not  know  the  things  of  which  meta¬ 
physics  treats.  We  must  be  able  to  arrive  at  a 
decision  on  the  subjects  of  its  questions,  or  on 
the  ability  or  inability  of  reason  to  form  any 
judgement  respecting  them;  and  therefore 
either  to  extend  with  confidence  the  bounds  of 
our  pure  reason,  or  to  set  strictly  defined  and 
safe  limits  to  its  action.  This  last  question, 
which  arises  out  of  the  above  universal  prob¬ 
lem,  would  properly  run  thus:  “How  is  meta¬ 
physics  possible  as  a  science?” 

Thus,  the  critique  of  reason  leads  at  last,  nat¬ 
urally  and  necessarily,  to  science;  and,  on  the 
other  hand,  the  dogmatical  use  of  reason  with¬ 
out  criticism  leads  to  groundless  assertions, 
against  which  others  equally  specious  can  always 
be  set,  thus  ending  unavoidably  in  scepticism. 

Besides,  this  science  cannot  be  of  great  and 
formidable  prolixity,  because  it  has  not  to  do 
with  objects  of  reason,  the  variety  of  which 
is  inexhaustible,  but  merely  with  Reason  her¬ 
self  and  her  problems;  problems  which  arise 
out  of  her  own  bosom,  and  are  not  proposed  to 
her  by  the  nature  of  outward  things,  but  by  her 
own  nature.  And  when  once  Reason  has  pre¬ 
viously  become  able  completely  to  understand 
her  own  power  in  regard  to  objects  which  she 
meets  with  in  experience,  it  will  be  easy  to  de¬ 
termine  securely  the  extent  and  limits  of  her 
attempted  application  to  objects  beyond  the 
confines  of  experience. 

We  may  and  must,  therefore,  regard  the  at¬ 
tempts  hitherto  made  to  establish  metaphys¬ 
ical  science  dogmatically  as  non-existent.  For 
what  of  analysis,  that  is,  mere  dissection  of  con¬ 
ceptions,  is  contained  in  one  or  other,  is  not  the 
aim  of,  but  only  a  preparation  for  metaphysics 
proper,  which  has  for  its  object  the  extension, 
by  means  of  synthesis,  of  our  a  priori  knowl¬ 
edge.  And  for  this  purpose,  mere  analysis  is  of 
course  useless,  because  it  only  shows  what  is 


contained  in  these  conceptions,  but  not  how  we 
arrive,  a  priori ,  at  them;  and  this  it  is  her  duty 
to  show,  in  order  to  be  able  afterwards  to  de¬ 
termine  their  valid  use  in  regard  to  all  objects 
of  experience,  to  all  knowledge  in  general.  But 
little  self-denial,  indeed,  is  needed  to  give  up 
these  pretensions,  seeing  the  undeniable,  and  in 
the  dogmatic  mode  of  procedure,  inevitable 
contradictions  of  Reason  with  herself,  have  long 
since  ruined  the  reputation  of  every  system  of 
metaphysics  that  has  appeared  up  to  this  time. 
It  will  require  more  firmness  to  remain  un¬ 
deterred  by  difficulty  from  within,  and  opposi¬ 
tion  from  without,  from  endeavouring,  by  a 
method  quite  opposed  to  all  those  hitherto  fol¬ 
lowed,  to  further  the  growth  and  fruitfulness  of 
a  science  indispensable  to  human  reason — a 
science  from  which  every  branch  it  has  borne 
may  be  cut  away,  but  whose  roots  remain  in¬ 
destructible. 

VII.  Idea  and  Division  of  a  Particular  Science , 
under  the  Name  of  a  Critique  of  Pure 
Reason 

From  all  that  has  been  said,  there  results  the 
idea  of  a  particular  science,  which  may  be  called 
the  Critique  of  Pure  Reason.  For  reason  is  the 
faculty  which  furnishes  us  with  the  principles 
of  knowledge  a  priori.  Hence,  pure  reason  is  the 
faculty  which  contains  the  principles  of  cog¬ 
nizing  anything  absolutely  a  priori.  An  organon 
of  pure  reason  would  be  a  compendium  of  those 
principles  according  to  which  alone  all  pure  cog¬ 
nitions  a  priori  can  be  obtained.  The  complete¬ 
ly  extended  application  of  such  an  organon 
would  afford  us  a  system  of  pure  reason.  As 
this,  however,  is  demanding  a  great  deal,  and  it 
is  yet  doubtful  whether  any  extension  of  our 
knowledge  be  here  possible,  or,  if  so,  in  what 
cases;  we  can  regard  a  science  of  the  mere  crit¬ 
icism  of  pure  reason,  its  sources  and  limits,  as 
the  propaedeutic  to  a  system  of  pure  reason. 
Such  a  science  must  not  be  called  a  doctrine , 
but  only  a  critique  of  pure  reason;  and  its  use, 
in  regard  to  speculation,  would  be  only  nega¬ 
tive,  not  to  enlarge  the  bounds  of,  but  to  purify, 
our  reason,  and  to  shield  it  against  error — which 
alone  is  no  little  gain.  I  apply  the  term  transcen¬ 
dental  to  all  knowledge  which  is  not  so  much 
occupied  with  objects  as  with  the  mode  of  our 
cognition  of  these  objects,  so  far  as  this  mode 
of  cognition  is  possible  a  priori.  A  system  of 
such  conceptions  would  be  called  transcendental 
philosophy.  But  this,  again,  is  still  beyond  the 
bounds  of  our  present  essay.  For  as  such  a  sci¬ 
ence  must  contain  a  complete  exposition  not 


OF  PURE  REASON 


21 


only  of  our  synthetical  a  priori ,  but  of  our  ana¬ 
lytical  a  priori  knowledge,  it  is  of  too  wide  a 
range  for  our  present  purpose,  because  we  do 
not  require  to  carry  our  analysis  any  farther 
than  is  necessary  to  understand,  in  their  full  ex¬ 
tent,  the  principles  of  synthesis  a  priori ,  with 
which  alone  we  have  to  do.  This  investigation, 
which  we  cannot  properly  call  a  doctrine,  but 
only  a  transcendental  critique,  because  it  aims 
not  at  the  enlargement,  but  at  the  correction 
and  guidance,  of  our  knowledge,  and  is  to  serve 
as  a  touchstone  of  the  worth  or  worthlessness 
of  all  know’edge  a  priori,  is  the  sole  object  of 
our  present  essay.  Such  a  critique  is  consequent¬ 
ly,  as  far  as  possible,  a  preparation  for  an  orga¬ 
non;  and  if  this  new  organon  should  be  found 
to  fail,  at  least  for  a  canon  of  pure  reason,  ac¬ 
cording  to  which  the  complete  system  of  the 
philosophy  of  pure  reason,  whether  it  extend 
or  limit  the  bounds  of  that  reason,  might  one 
day  be  set  forth  both  analytically  and  synthet¬ 
ically.  For  that  this  is  possible,  nay,  that  such 
a  system  is  not  of  so  great  extent  as  to  preclude 
the  hope  of  its  ever  being  completed,  is  evident. 
For  we  have  not  here  to  do  with  the  nature  of 
outward  objects,  which  is  infinite,  but  solely 
with  the  mind,  which  judges  of  the  nature  of 
objects,  and,  again,  with  the  mind  only  in  re¬ 
spect  of  its  cognition  a  priori.  And  the  object  of 
our  investigations,  as  it  is  not  to  be  sought  with¬ 
out,  but,  altogether  within,  ourselves,  cannot  re¬ 
main  concealed,  and  in  all  probability  is  limited 
enough  to  be  completely  surveyed  and  fairly 
estimated,  according  to  its  worth  or  worthless¬ 
ness.  Still  less  let  the  reader  here  expect  a  cri¬ 
tique  of  books  and  systems  of  pure  reason;  our 
present  object  is  exclusively  a  critique  of  the 
faculty  of  pure  reason  itself.  Only  when  we 
make  this  critique  our  foundation,  do  we  pos¬ 
sess  a  pure  touchstone  for  estimating  the  phil¬ 
osophical  value  of  ancient  and  modern  writings 
on  this  subject;  and  without  this  criterion,  the 
incompetent  historian  or  judge  decides  upon  and 
corrects  the  groundless  assertions  of  others  with 
his  own,  which  have  themselves  just  as  little 
foundation. 

Transcendental  philosophy  is  the  idea  of  a 
science,  for  which  the  Critique  of  Pure  Reason 
must  sketch  the  whole  plan  architectonically, 
that  is,  from  principles,  with  a  full  guarantee 
for  the  validity  and  stability  of  all  the  parts 
which  enter  into  the  building.  It  is  the  system  of 
all  the  principles  of  pure  reason.  If  this  Critique 
itself  does  not  assume  the  title  of  transcenden¬ 
tal  philosophy,  it  is  only  because,  to  be  a  com¬ 
plete  system,  it  ought  to  contain  a  full  analysis 


of  all  human  knowledge  a  priori.  Our  critique 
must,  indeed,  lay  before  us  a  complete  enumera¬ 
tion  of  all  the  radical  conceptions  which  con¬ 
stitute  the  said  pure  knowledge.  But  from  the 
complete  analysis  of  these  conceptions  them¬ 
selves,  as  also  from  a  complete  investigation  of 
those  derived  from  them,  it  abstains  with  rea¬ 
son;  partly  because  it  would  be  deviating  from 
the  end  in  view  to  occupy  itself  with  this  analy¬ 
sis,  since  this  process  is  not  attended  with  the 
difficulty  and  insecurity  to  be  found  in  the  sym 
thesis,  to  which  our  critique  is  entirely  devoted, 
and  partly  because  it  would  be  inconsistent  with 
the  unity  of  our  plan  to  burden  this  essay  with 
the  vindication  of  the  completeness  of  such  an 
analysis  and  deduction,  with  which,  after  all,  we 
have  at  present  nothing  to  do.  This  complete¬ 
ness  of  the  analysis  of  these  radical  concep¬ 
tions,  as  well  as  of  the  deduction  from  the  con¬ 
ceptions  a  priori  which  may  be  given  by  the 
analysis,  we  can,  however,  easily  attain,  pro¬ 
vided  only  that  we  are  in  possession  of  all  these 
radical  conceptions,  which  are  to  serve  as  prin¬ 
ciples  of  the  synthesis,  and  that  in  respect  of 
this  main  purpose  nothing  is  wanting. 

To  the  Critique  of  Pure  Reason,  therefore, 
belongs  all  that  constitutes  transcendental  phi¬ 
losophy;  and  it  is  the  complete  idea  of  transcen¬ 
dental  philosophy,  but  still  not  the  science  it¬ 
self;  because  it  only  proceeds  so  far  with  the 
analysis  as  is  necessary  to  the  power  of  judg¬ 
ing  completely  of  our  synthetical  knowledge  a 
priori. 

The  principal  thing  we  must  attend  to,  in  the 
division  of  the  parts  of  a  science  like  this,  is 
that  no  conceptions  must  enter  it  which  con¬ 
tain  aught  empirical;  in  other  words,  that  the 
knowledge  a  priori  must  be  completely  pure. 
Hence,  although  the  highest  principles  and  fun¬ 
damental  conceptions  of  morality  are  certainly 
cognitions  a  priori,  yet  they  do  not  belong  to 
transcendental  philosophy;  because,  though  they 
certainly  do  not  lay  the  conceptions  of  pain, 
pleasure,  desires,  inclinations,  etc.  (which  are 
all  of  empirical  origin),  at  the  foundation  of  its 
precepts,  yet  still  into  the  conception  of  duty — 
as  an  obstacle  to  be  overcome,  or  as  an  incite¬ 
ment  which  should  not  be  made  into  a  motive — 
these  empirical  conceptions  must  necessarily 
enter,  in  the  construction  of  a  system  of  pure 
morality.  Transcendental  philosophy  is  conse¬ 
quently  a  philosophy  of  the  pure  and  merely 
speculative  reason.  For  all  that  is  practical,  so 
far  as  it  contains  motives,  relates  to  feelings, 
and  these  belong  to  empirical  sources  of  cogni¬ 
tion. 


If  we  wish  to  divide  this  science  from  the 
universal  point  of  view  of  a  science  in  general, 
it  ought  to  comprehend,  first,  a  Doctrine  of  the 
Elements ,  and,  secondly,  a  Doctrine  of  the 
Method  of  pure  reason.  Each  of  these  main  di¬ 
visions  will  have  its  subdivisions,  the  separate 
reasons  for  which  we  cannot  here  particularize. 
Only  so  much  seems  necessary,  by  way  of  in¬ 
troduction  of  premonition,  that  there  are  two 
sources  of  human  knowledge  (which  probably 
spring  from  a  common,  but  to  us  unknown  root), 


namely,  sense  and  understanding.  By  the  for¬ 
mer,  objects  are  given  to  us;  by  the  latter, 
thought.  So  far  as  the  faculty  of  sense  may  con¬ 
tain  representations  a  priori,  which  form  the 
conditions  under  which  objects  are  given,  in  so 
far  it  belongs  to  transcendental  philosophy.  The 
transcendental  doctrine  of  sense  must  form  the 
first  part  of  our  science  of  elements,  because 
the  conditions  under  which  alone  the  objects 
of  human  knowledge  are  given  must  precede 
those  under  which  they  are  thought. 


1 

TRANSCENDENTAL  DOCTRINE 
OF  ELEMENTS 

FIRST  PART.  TRANSCENDENTAL  AESTHETIC 


§  i.  Introductory 

In  whatsoever  mode,  or  by  whatsoever  means, 
our  knowledge  may  relate  to  objects,  it  is  at 
least  quite  clear  that  the  only  manner  in  which 
it  immediately  relates  to  them  is  by  means  of  an 
intuition.  To  this  as  the  indispensable  ground¬ 
work,  all  thought  points.  But  an  intuition  can 
take  place  only  in  so  far  as  the  object  is  given  to 
us.  This,  again,  is  only  possible,  to  man  at  least, 
on  condition  that  the  object  affect  the  mind  in  a 
certain  manner.  The  capacity  for  receiving  rep¬ 
resentations  (receptivity)  through  the  mode  in 
which  we  are  affected  by  objects,  is  called  sensi¬ 
bility.  By  means  of  sensibility,  therefore,  ob¬ 
jects  are  given  to  us,  and  it  alone  furnishes  us 
with  intuitions;  by  the  understanding  they  are 
thought ,  and  from  it  arise  conceptions.  But  all 
thought  must  directly,  or  indirectly,  by  means 
of  certain  signs,  relate  ultimately  to  intuitions; 
consequently,  with  us,  to  sensibility,  because  in 
no  other  way  can  an  object  be  given  to  us. 

The  effect  of  an  object  upon  the  faculty  of 
representation,  so  far  as  we  are  affected  by  the 
said  object,  is  sensation.  That  sort  of  intuition 
which  relates  to  an  object  by  means  of  sensation 
is  called  an  empirical  intuition.  The  undeter¬ 
mined  object  of  an  empirical  intuition  is  called 
phenomenon.  That  which  in  the  phenomenon 
corresponds  to  the  sensation,  I  term  its  matter ; 
but  that  which  effects  that  the  content  of  the 
phenomenon  can  be  arranged  under  certain  re¬ 
lations,  I  call  its  form.  But  that  in  which  our 
sensations  are  merely  arranged,  and  by  which 
they  are  susceptible  of  assuming  a  certain  form, 
cannot  be  itself  sensation  It  is,  then,  the  matter 
of  all  phenomena  that  is  given  to  us  a  posteriori', 
the  form  must  lie  ready  a  priori  for  them  in  the 
mind,  and  consequently  can  be  regarded  sep¬ 
arately  from  all  sensation. 

I  call  all  representations  pure ,  in  the  transcen¬ 
dental  meaning  of  the  word,  wherein  nothing  is 


met  with  that  belongs  to  sensation.  And  accord¬ 
ingly  we  find  existing  in  the  mind  a  priori}  the 
pure  form  of  sensuous  intuitions  in  general,  in 
which  all  the  manifold  content  of  the  phenom¬ 
enal  world  is  arranged  and  viewed  under  certain 
relations.  This  pure  form  of  sensibility  I  shall 
call  pure  intuition.  Thus,  if  I  take  away  from 
our  representation  of  a  body  all  that  the  under¬ 
standing  thinks  as  belonging  to  it,  as  substance, 
force,  divisibility,  etc.,  and  also  whatever  be¬ 
longs  to  sensation,  as  impenetrability,  hardness, 
colour,  etc.;  yet  there  is  still  something  left  us 
from  this  empirical  intuition,  namely,  extension 
and  shape.  These  belong  to  pure  intuition,  which 
exists  a  priori  in  the  mind,  as  a  mere  form  of 
sensibility,  and  without  any  real  object  of  the 
senses  or  any  sensation. 

The  science  of  all  the  principles  of  sensibility 
a  priori ,  I  call  transcendental  aesthetic.1  There 
must,  then,  be  such  a  science  forming  the  first 
part  of  the  transcendental  doctrine  of  elements, 
in  contradistinction  to  that  part  which  contains 
the  principles  of  pure  thought,  and  which  is 
called  transcendental  logic. 

In  the  science  of  transcendental  aesthetic  ac¬ 
cordingly,  we  shall  first  isolate  sensibility  or  the 
sensuous  faculty,  by  separating  from  it  all  that 

1  The  Germans  are  the  only  people  who  at  present  use 
this  word  to  indicate  what  others  call  the  critique  of 
taste.  At  the  foundation  of  this  term  lies  the  disap¬ 
pointed  hope,  which  the  eminent  analyst,  Baumgarten, 
conceived,  of  subjecting  the  criticism  of  the  beautiful  to 
principles  of  reason,  and  so  of  elevating  its  rules  into  a 
science.  But  his  endeavours  were  vain.  For  the  said 
rules  or  criteria  are,  in  respect  to  their  chief  sources, 
merely  empirical,  consequently  never  can  serve  as  de¬ 
terminate  laws  a  priori,  by  which  our  judgement  in  mat¬ 
ters  of  taste  is  to  be  directed.  It  is  rather  our  judge¬ 
ment  which  forms  the  proper  test  as  to  the  correctness 
of  the  principles.  On  this  account  it  is  advisable  to  give 
up  the  use  of  the  term  as  designating  the  critique  of 
taste,  and  to  apply  it  solely  to  that  doctrine,  which  is 
true  science — the  science  of  the  laws  of  sensibility — and 
thus  come  nearer  to  the  language  and  the  sense  of  the 
ancients  in  their  well-known  division  of  the  objects  of 
cognition  into  aiodjjTa  *cu  vo-qra,  or  to  share  it  with 
speculative  philosophy,  and  employ  it  partly  in  a  tran¬ 
scendental,  partly  in  a  psychological  signification. 


23 


THE  CRITIQUE 


24 

is  annexed  to  its  perceptions  by  the  conceptions 
of  understanding,  so  that  nothing  be  left  but 
empirical  intuition.  In  the  next  place  we  shall 
take  away  from  this  intuition  all  that  belongs  to 
sensation,  so  that  nothing  may  remain  but  pure 
intuition,  and  the  mere  form  of  phenomena, 
which  is  all  that  the  sensibility  can  afford  a 
priori.  From  this  investigation  it  will  be  found 
that  there  are  two  pure  forms  of  sensuous  in¬ 
tuition,  as  principles  of  knowledge  a  priori , 
namely,  space  and  time.  To  the  consideration  of 
these  we  shall  now  proceed. 

Section  I.  Of  Space 

§  2.  Metaphysical  Exposition  of  this  Conception 

By  means  of  the  external  sense  (a  property  of 
the  mind),  we  represent  to  ourselves  objects  as 
without  us,  and  these  all  in  space.  Therein  alone 
are  their  shape,  dimensions,  and  relations  to 
each  other  determined  or  determinable.  The  in¬ 
ternal  sense,  by  means  of  which  the  mind  con¬ 
templates  itself  or  its  internal  state,  gives,  in¬ 
deed,  no  intuition  of  the  soul  as  an  object;  yet 
there  is  nevertheless  a  determinate  form,  under 
which  alone  the  contemplation  of  our  internal 
state  is  possible,  so  that  all  which  relates  to  the 
inward  determinations  of  the  mind  is  repre¬ 
sented  in  relations  of  time.  Of  time  we  cannot 
have  any  external  intuition,  any  more  than  we 
can  have  an  internal  intuition  of  space.  What 
then  are  time  and  space?  Are  they  real  exist¬ 
ences?  Or,  are  they  merely  relations  or  deter¬ 
minations  of  things,  such,  however,  as  would 
equally  belong  to  these  things  in  themselves, 
though  they  should  never  become  objects  of  in¬ 
tuition;  or,  are  they  such  as  belong  only  to  the 
form  of  intuition,  and  consequently  to  the  sub¬ 
jective  constitution  of  the  mind,  without  which 
these  predicates  of  time  and  space  could  not  be 
attached  to  any  object?  In  order  to  become  in¬ 
formed  on  these  points,  we  shall  first  give  an 
exposition  of  the  conception  of  space.  By  expo¬ 
sition,  I  mean  the  clear,  though  not  detailed, 
representation  of  that  which  belongs  to  a  con¬ 
ception  ;  and  an  exposition  is  metaphysical  when 
it  contains  that  which  represents  the  conception 
as  given  a  priori. 

1.  Space  is  not  a  conception  which  has  been 
derived  from  outward  experiences.  For,  in  order 
that  certain  sensations  may  relate  to  something 
without  me  (that  is,  to  something  which  occu¬ 
pies  a  different  part  of  space  from  that  in  which 
I  am)  ;  in  like  manner,  in  order  that  I  may  rep¬ 
resent  them  not  merely  as  without,  of,  and  near 
to  each  other,  but  also  in  separate  places,  the 


representation  of  space  must  already  exist  as  a 
foundation.  Consequently,  the  representation  of 
space  cannot  be  borrowed  from  the  relations  of 
external  phenomena  through  experience;  but,  on 
the  contrary,  this  external  experience  is  itself 
only  possible  through  the  said  antecedent  repre¬ 
sentation. 

2.  Space  then  is  a  necessary  representation  a 
priori ,  which  serves  for  the  foundation  of  all  ex¬ 
ternal  intuitions.  We  never  can  imagine  or  make 
a  representation  to  ourselves  of  the  non-exist¬ 
ence  of  space,  though  we  may  easily  enough 
think  that  no  objects  are  found  in  it.  It  must, 
therefore,  be  considered  as  the  condition  of  the 
possibility  of  phenomena,  and  by  no  means  as  a 
determination  dependent  on  them,  and  is  a  rep¬ 
resentation  a  priori ,  which  necessarily  supplies 
the  basis  for  external  phenomena. 

3.  Space  is  no  discursive,  or  as  we  say,  gen¬ 
eral  conception  of  the  relations  of  things,  but  a 
pure  intuition." For,  in  the  first  place,  we  can 
only  represent  to  ourselves  one  space,  and,  when 
we  talk  of  divers  spaces,  we  mean  only  parts  of 
one  and  the  same  space.  Moreover,  these  parts 
cannot  antecede  this  one  all-embracing  space,  as 
the  component  parts  from  which  the  aggregate 
can  be  made  up,  but  can  be  cogitated  only  as 
existing  in  it.  Space  is  essentially  one,  and  multi¬ 
plicity  in  it,  consequently  the  general  notion  of 
spaces,  of  this  or  that  space,  depends  solely  upon 
limitations.  Hence  it  follows  that  an  a  priori  in¬ 
tuition  (which  is  not  empirical)  lies  at  the  root  of 
all  our  conceptions  of  space.  Thus, moreover,  the 
principles  of  geometry — for  example,  that  “in  a 
triangle,  two  sides  together  are  greater  than  the 
third,”  are  never  deduced  from  general  concep¬ 
tions  of  line  and  triangle,  but  from  intuition, 
and  this  a  priori,  with  apodeictic  certainty. 

4.  Space  is  represented  as  an  infinite  given 
quantity.  Now  every  conception  must  indeed  be 
considered  as  a  representation  which  is  contained 
in  an  infinite  multitude  of  different  possible  rep¬ 
resentations,  which,  therefore,  comprises  these 
under  itself ;  but  no  conception,  as  such,  can  be 
so  conceived,  as  if  it  contained  within  itself  an 
infinite  multitude  of  representations.  Neverthe¬ 
less,  space  is  so  conceived  of,  for  all  parts  of 
space  are  equally  capable  of  being  produced  to 
infinity.  Consequently,  the  original  representa¬ 
tion  of  space  is  an  intuition  a  priori,  and  not  a 
conception. 

§  3.  Transcendental  Exposition  of  the 
Conception  of  Space 

By  a  transcendental  exposition,  I  mean  the 
explanation  of  a  conception,  as  a  principle, 


OF  PURE  REASON 


whence  can  be  discerned  the  possibility  of  other 
synthetical  a  priori  cognitions.  For  this  purpose, 
it  is  requisite,  firstly,  that  such  cognitions  do 
really  flow  from  the  given  conception;  and,  sec¬ 
ondly,  that  the  said  cognitions  are  only  possible 
under  the  presupposition  of  a  given  mode  of  ex¬ 
plaining  this  conception. 

Geometry  is  a  science  which  determines  the 
properties  of  space  synthetically,  and  yet  a 
priori .  What,  then,  must  be  our  representation 
of  space,  in  order  that  such  a  cognition  of  it  may 
be  possible?  It  must  be  originally  intuition,  for 
from  a  mere  conception,  no  propositions  can  be 
deduced  which  go  out  beyond  the  conception, 
and  yet  this  happens  in  geometry.  (Introd.  V.) 
But  this  intuition  must  be  found  in  the  mind  a 
priori ,  that  is,  before  any  perception  of  objects, 
consequently  must  be  pure,  not  empirical,  intui¬ 
tion.  For  geometrical  principles  are  always  apo- 
deictic,  that  is,  united  with  the  consciousness  of 
their  necessity,  as:  “Space  has  only  three  di¬ 
mensions.”  But  propositions  of  this  kind  cannot 
be  empirical  judgements,  nor  conclusions  from 
them.  (Introd.  II.)  Now,  how  can  an  external 
intuition  anterior  to  objects  themselves,  and  in 
which  our  conception  of  objects  can  be  deter¬ 
mined  a  priori ,  exist  in  the  human  mind?  Obvi¬ 
ously  not  otherwise  than  in  so  far  as  it  has  its 
seat  in  the  subject  only,  as  the  formal  capacity 
of  the  subject’s  being  affected  by  objects,  and 
thereby  of  obtaining  immediate  representation, 
that  is,  intuition;  consequently,  only  as  the  form 
of  the  external  sense  in  general. 

Thus  it  is  only  by  means  of  our  explanation 
that  the  possibility  of  geometry,  as  a  synthetical 
science  a  priori ,  becomes  comprehensible.  Every 
mode  of  explanation  which  does  not  show  us 
this  possibility,  although  in  appearance  it  may 
be  similar  to  ours,  can  with  the  utmost  certainty 
be  distinguished  from  it  by  these  marks. 

§  4.  Conclusions  from  the  foregoing  Conceptions 

(a)  Space  does  not  represent  any  property  of 
objects  as  things  in  themselves,  nor  does  it  rep¬ 
resent  them  in  their  relations  to  each  other;  in 
other  words,  space  does  not  represent  to  us  any 
determination  of  objects  such  as  attaches  to  the 
objects  themselves,  and  would  remain,  even 
though  all  subjective  conditions  of  the  intuition 
were  abstracted.  For  neither  absolute  nor  rela¬ 
tive  determinations  of  objects  can  be  intuited 
prior  to  the  existence  of  the  things  to  which 
they  belong,  and  therefore  not  a  priori. 

( h )  Space  is  nothing  else  than  the  form  of  all 
phenomena  of  the  external  sense,  that  is,  the 
subjective  condition  of  the  sensibility,  under 


25 

which  alone  external  intuition  is  possible.  Now, 
because  the  receptivity  or  capacity  of  the  sub¬ 
ject  to  be  affected  by  objects  necessarily  ante- 
cedes  all  intuitions  of  these  objects,  it  is  easily 
understood  how  the  form  of  all  phenomena  can 
be  given  in  the  mind  previous  to  all  actual  per¬ 
ceptions,  therefore  a  priori,  and  how  it,  as  a 
pure  intuition,  in  which  all  objects  must  be  de¬ 
termined,  can  contain  principles  of  the  relations 
of  these  objects  prior  to  all  experience. 

It  is  therefore  from  the  human  point  of  view 
only  that  we  can  speak  of  space,  extended  ob¬ 
jects,  etc.  If  we  depart  from  the  subjective  con¬ 
dition,  under  which  alone  we  can  obtain  exter¬ 
nal  intuition,  or,  in  other  words,  by  means  of 
which  wTe  are  affected  by  objects,  the  represen¬ 
tation  of  space  has  no  meaning  whatsoever.  This 
predicate  is  only  applicable  to  things  in  so  far 
as  they  appear  to  us,  that  is,  are  objects  of  sen¬ 
sibility.  The  constant  form  of  this  receptivity, 
which  we  call  sensibility,  is  a  necessary  condi¬ 
tion  of  all  relations  in  which  objects  can  be  in¬ 
tuited  as  existing  without  us,  and  when  abstrac¬ 
tion  of  these  objects  is  made,  is  a  pure  intuition, 
to  which  we  give  the  name  of  space.  It  is  clear 
that  we  cannot  make  the  special  conditions  of 
sensibility  into  conditions  of  the  possibility  of 
things,  but  only  of  the  possibility  of  their  exist¬ 
ence  as  far  as  they  are  phenomena.  And  so  we 
may  correctly  say  that  space  contains  all  which 
can  appear  to  us  externally,  but  not  all  things 
considered  as  things  in  themselves,  be  they  in¬ 
tuited  or  not,  or  by  whatsoever  subject  one  will. 
As  to  the  intuitions  of  other  thinking  beings,  we 
cannot  judge  whether  they  are  or  are  not  bound 
by  the  same  conditions  which  limit  our  own  in¬ 
tuition,  and  which  for  us  are  universally  valid. 
If  we  join  the  limitation  of  a  judgement  to  the 
conception  of  the  subject,  then  the  judgement 
will  possess  unconditioned  validity.  For  exam¬ 
ple,  the  proposition,  “All  objects  are  beside  each 
other  in  space,”  is  valid  only  under  the  limita¬ 
tion  that  these  things  are  taken  as  objects  of 
our  sensuous  intuition.  But  if  I  join  the  condi¬ 
tion  to  the  conception  and  say,  “All  things,  as 
external  phenomena,  are  beside  each  other  in 
space,”  then  the  rule  is  valid  universally,  and 
without  any  limitation.  Our  expositions,  conse¬ 
quently,  teach  the  reality  (i.e.,  the  objective  va¬ 
lidity)  of  space  in  regard  of  all  which  can  be 
presented  to  us  externally  as  object,  and  at  the 
same  time  also  the  ideality  of  space  in  regard  to 
objects  when  they  are  considered  by  means  of 
reason  as  things  in  themselves,  that  is,  without 
reference  to  the  constitution  of  our  sensibility. 
We  maintain,  therefore,  the  empirical  reality  of 


26 


THE  CRITIQUE 


space  in  regard  to  all  possible  external  experi¬ 
ence,  although  we  must  admit  its  transcendental 
ideality ;  in  other  words,  that  it  is  nothing,  so 
soon  as  we  withdraw  the  condition  upon  which 
the  possibility  of  all  experience  depends  and 
look  upon  space  as  something  that  belongs  to 
things  in  themselves. 

But,  with  the  exception  of  space,  there  is  no 
representation,  subjective  and  referring  to  some¬ 
thing  external  to  us,  which  could  be  called  ob¬ 
jective  a  priori.  For  there  are  no  other  subjec¬ 
tive  representations  from  which  we  can  deduce 
synthetical  propositions  a  priori ,  as  we  can  from 
the  intuition  of  space.  (See  §  3.)  Therefore,  to 
speak  accurately,  no  ideality  whatever  belongs 
to  these,  although  they  agree  in  this  respect 
with  the  representation  of  space,  that  they  be¬ 
long  merely  to  the  subjective  nature  of  the  mode 
of  sensuous  perception;  such  a  mode,  for  ex¬ 
ample,  as  that  of  sight,  of  hearing,  and  of  feel¬ 
ing,  by  means  of  the  sensations  of  colour,  sound, 
and  heat,  but  which,  because  they  are  only  sen¬ 
sations  and  not  intuitions,  do  not  of  themselves 
give  us  the  cognition  of  any  object,  least  of  all, 
an  a  priori  cognition.  My  purpose,  in  the  above 
remark,  is  merely  this:  to  guard  any  one  against 
illustrating  the  asserted  ideality  of  space  by  ex¬ 
amples  quite  insufficient,  for  example,  by  colour, 
taste,  etc.;  for  these  must  be  contemplated  not 
as  properties  of  things,  but  only  as  changes  in 
the  subject,  changes  which  may  be  different  in 
different  men.  For,  in  such  a  case,  that  which  is 
originally  a  mere  phenomenon,  a  rose,  for  ex¬ 
ample,  is  taken  by  the  empirical  understanding 
for  a  thing  in  itself,  though  to  every  different 
eye,  in  respect  of  its  colour,  it  may  appear  dif¬ 
ferent.  On  the  contrary,  the  transcendental  con¬ 
ception  of  phenomena  in  space  is  a  critical  ad¬ 
monition,  that,  in  general,  nothing  which  is  in¬ 
tuited  in  space  is  a  thing  in  itself,  and  that  space 
is  not  a  form  which  belongs  as  a  property  to 
things;  but  that  objects  are  quite  unknown  to 
us  in  themselves,  and  what  we  call  outward 
objects,  are  nothing  else  but  mere  representa¬ 
tions  of  our  sensibility,  whose  form  is  space,  but 
whose  real  correlate,  the  thing  in  itself,  is  not 
known  by  means  of  these  representations,  nor 
ever  can  be,  but  respecting  which,  in  experience, 
no  inquiry  is  ever  made. 

Section  II.  Of  Time 

§  5.  Metaphysical  Exposition  of  this  Conception 

1.  Time  is  not  an  empirical  conception.  For 
neither  coexistence  nor  succession  would  be  per¬ 
ceived  by  us,  if  the  representation  of  time  did 


not  exist  as  a  foundation  a  priori.  Without  this 
presupposition  we  could  not  represent  to  our¬ 
selves  that  things  exist  together  at  one  and  the 
same  time,  or  at  different  times,  that  is,  contem¬ 
poraneously,  or  in  succession. 

2.  Time  is  a  necessary  representation,  lying 
at  the  foundation  of  all  our  intuitions.  With  re¬ 
gard  to  phenomena  in  general,  we  cannot  think 
away  time  from  them,  and  represent  them  to 
ourselves  as  out  of  and  unconnected  with  time, 
but  we  can  quite  well  represent  to  ourselves 
time  void  of  phenomena.  Time  is  therefore 
given  a  priori.  In  it  alone  is  all  reality  of  phe¬ 
nomena  possible.  These  may  all  be  annihilated 
in  thought,  but  time  itself,  as  the  universal 
condition  of  their  possibility,  cannot  be  so  an¬ 
nulled. 

3.  On  this  necessity  a  priori  is  also  founded 
the  possibility  of  apodeictic  principles  of  the  re¬ 
lations  of  time,  or  axioms  of  time  in  general, 
such  as:  “Time  has  only  one  dimension,”  “Dif¬ 
ferent  times  are  not  coexistent  but  successive” 
(as  different  spaces  are  not  successive  but  co¬ 
existent).  These  principles  cannot  be  derived 
from  experience,  for  it  would  give  neither  strict 
universality,  nor  apodeictic  certainty.  We  should 
only  be  able  to  say,  “so  common  experience 
teaches  us,”  but  not  “it  must  be  so.”  They  are 
valid  as  rules,  through  which,  in  general,  experi¬ 
ence  is  possible;  and  they  instruct  us  respecting 
experience,  and  not  by  means  of  it. 

4.  Time  is  not  a  discursive,  or  as  it  is  called, 
general  conception,  but  a  pure  form  of  the  sen¬ 
suous  intuition.  Different  times  are  merely  parts 
of  one  and  the  same  time.  But  the  representa¬ 
tion  which  can  only  be  given  by  a  single  object 
is  an  intuition.  Besides,  the  proposition  that  dif¬ 
ferent  times  cannot  be  coexistent  could  not  be 
derived  from  a  general  conception.  For  this 
proposition  is  synthetical,  and  therefore  cannot 
spring  out  of  conceptions  alone.  It  is  therefore 
contained  immediately  in  the  intuition  and  rep¬ 
resentation  of  time. 

5.  The  infinity  of  time  signifies  nothing  more 
than  that  every  determined  quantity  of  time  is 
possible  only  through  limitations  of  one  time 
lying  at  the  foundation.  Consequently,  the  origi¬ 
nal  representation,  time,  must  be  given  as  un¬ 
limited.  But  as  the  determinate  representation 
of  the  parts  of  time  and  of  every  quantity  of  an 
object  can  only  be  obtained  by  limitation,  the 
complete  representation  of  time  must  not  be 
furnished  by  means  of  conceptions,  for  these 
contain  only  partial  representations.  Concep¬ 
tions,  on  the  contrary,  must  have  immediate  in¬ 
tuition  for  their  basis. 


OF  PURE 

§  6.  Transcendental  Exposition  of  the 
Conception  of  Time 

I  may  here  refer  to  what  is  said  above  (§  5, 
3),  where,  for  the  sake  of  brevity,  I  have  placed 
under  the  head  of  metaphysical  exposition,  that 
which  is  properly  transcendental.  Here  I  shall 
add  that  the  conception  of  change,  and  with  it 
the  conception  of  motion,  as  change  of  place,  is 
possible  only  through  and  in  the  representation 
of  time;  that  if  this  representation  were  not  an 
intuition  (internal)  a  priori ,  no  conception,  of 
whatever  kind,  could  render  comprehensible  the 
possibility  of  change,  in  other  words,  of  a  con¬ 
junction  of  contradictorily  opposed  predicates 
in  one  and  the  same  object,  for  example,  the 
presence  of  a  thing  in  a  place  and  the  non¬ 
presence  of  the  same  thing  in  the  same  place.  It 
is  only  in  time  that  it  is  possible  to  meet  with 
two  contradictorily  opposed  determinations  in 
one  thing,  that  is,  after  each  other.  Thus  our 
conception  of  time  explains  the  possibility  of  so 
much  synthetical  knowledge  a  priori ,  as  is  ex¬ 
hibited  in  the  general  doctrine  of  motion,  which 
is  not  a  little  fruitful. 

§  7.  Conclusions  from  the  above  Conceptions 

(a)  Time  is  not  something  which  subsists  of 
itself,  or  which  inheres  in  things  as  an  objective 
determination,  and  therefore  remains,  when  ab¬ 
straction  is  made  of  the  subjective  conditions  of 
the  intuition  of  things.  For  in  the  former  case, 
it  would  be  something  real,  yet  without  present¬ 
ing  to  any  power  of  perception  any  real  object. 

In  the  latter  case,  as  an  order  or  determination 
inherent  in  things  themselves,  it  could  not  be 
antecedent  to  things,  as  their  condition,  nor  dis¬ 
cerned  or  intuited  by  means  of  synthetical  prop¬ 
ositions  a  priori.  But  all  this  is  quite  possible 
when  we  regard  time  as  merely  the  subjective 
condition  under  which  all  our  intuitions  take 
place.  For  in  that  case,  this  form  of  the  inward 
intuition  can  be  represented  prior  to  the  objects, 
and  consequently  a  priori. 

(b)  Time  is  nothing  else  than  the  form  of  the 
internal  sense,  that  is,  of  the  intuitions  of  self 
and  of  our  internal  state.  For  time  cannot  be 
any  determination  of  outward  phenomena.  It 
has  to  do  neither  with  shape  nor  position;  on 
the  contrary,  it  determines  the  relation  of  rep¬ 
resentations  in  our  internal  state.  And  precisely 
because  this  internal  intuition  presents  to  us  no 
shape  or  form,  we  endeavour  to  supply  this  want 
by  analogies,  and  represent  the  course  of  time 
by  a  line  progressing  to  infinity,  the  content  of 
which  constitutes  a  series  which  is  only  of  one 


REASON  27 

dimension;  and  we  conclude  from  the  properties 
of  this  line  as  to  all  the  properties  of  time,  with 
this  single  exception,  that  the  parts  of  the  line 
are  coexistent,  whilst  those  of  time  are  succes¬ 
sive.  From  this  it  is  clear  also  that  the  represen¬ 
tation  of  time  is  itself  an  intuition,  because  all 
its  relations  can  be  expressed  in  an  external  in¬ 
tuition. 

(c)  Time  is  the  formal  condition  a  priori  of 
all  phenomena  whatsoever.  Space,  as  the  pure 
form  of  external  intuition,  is  limited  as  a  condi¬ 
tion  a  priori  to  external  phenomena  alone.  On 
the  other  hand,  because  all  representations, 
whether  they  have  or  have  not  external  things 
for  their  objects,  still  in  themselves,  as  deter¬ 
minations  of  the  mind,  belong  to  our  internal 
state ;  and  because  this  internal  state  is  subject 
to  the  formal  condition  of  the  internal  intui¬ 
tion,  that  is,  to  time — time  is  a  condition  a 
priori  of  all  phenomena  whatsoever — the  imme¬ 
diate  condition  of  all  internal,  and  thereby  the 
mediate  condition  of  all  external  phenomena.  If 
I  can  say  a  priori ,  “All  outward  phenomena  are 
in  space,  and  determined  a  priori  according  to 
the  relations  of  space,”  I  can  also,  from  the 
principle  of  the  internal  sense,  affirm  univer¬ 
sally,  “All  phenomena  in  general,  that  is,  all  ob¬ 
jects  of  the  senses,  are  in  time  and  stand  neces¬ 
sarily  in  relations  of  time.” 

If  we  abstract  our  internal  intuition  of  our¬ 
selves  and  all  external  intuitions,  possible  only 
by  virtue  of  this  internal  intuition  and  presented 
to  us  by  our  faculty  of  representation,  and  con¬ 
sequently  take  objects  as  they  are  in  themselves, 
then  time  is  nothing.  It  is  only  of  objective  va¬ 
lidity  in  regard  to  phenomena,  because  these  are 
things  which  we  regard  as  objects  of  our  senses. 
It  is  no  longer  objective,  if  we  make  abstraction 
of  the  sensuousness  of  our  intuition,  in  other 
words,  of  that  mode  of  representation  which  is 
peculiar  to  us,  and  speak  of  things  in  general. 
Time  is  therefore  merely  a  subjective  condition 
of  our  (human)  intuition  (which  is  always  sen¬ 
suous,  that  is,  so  far  as  we  are  affected  by  ob¬ 
jects),  and  in  itself,  independently  of  the  mind 
or  subject,  is  nothing.  Nevertheless,  in  respect 
of  all  phenomena,  consequently  of  all  things 
which  come  within  the  sphere  of  our  experience, 
it  is  necessarily  objective.  We  cannot  say,  “All 
things  are  in  time,”  because  in  this  conception 
of  things  in  general,  we  abstract  and  make  no 
mention  of  any  sort  of  intuition  of  things.  But 
this  is  the  proper  condition  under  which  time 
belongs  to  our  representation  of  objects.  If  we 
add  the  condition  to  the  conception,  and  say, 
“All  things,  as  phenomena,  that  is,  objects  of 


28 


THE  CRITIQUE 


sensuous  intuition,  are  in  time,”  then  the  propo¬ 
sition  has  its  sound  objective  validity  and  uni¬ 
versality  a  priori. 

What  we  have  now  set  forth  teaches,  there¬ 
fore,  the  empirical  reality  of  time;  that  is,  its 
objective  validity  in  reference  to  all  objects 
which  can  ever  be  presented  to  our  senses.  And 
as  our  intuition  is  always  sensuous,  no  object 
ever  can  be  presented  to  us  in  experience,  which 
does  not  come  under  the  conditions  of  time.  On 
the  other  hand,  we  deny  to  time  all  claim  to  ab¬ 
solute  reality;  that  is,  we  deny  that  it,  without 
having  regard  to  the  form  of  our  sensuous  in¬ 
tuition,  absolutely  inheres  in  things  as  a  condi¬ 
tion  or  property.  Such  properties  as  belong  to 
objects  as  things  in  themselves  never  can  be  pre¬ 
sented  to  us  through  the  medium  of  the  senses. 
Herein  consists,  therefore,  the  transcendental 
ideality  of  time,  according  to  which,  if  we  ab¬ 
stract  the  subjective  conditions  of  sensuous  in¬ 
tuition,  it  is  nothing,  and  cannot  be  reckoned  as 
subsisting  or  inhering  in  objects  as  things  in 
themselves,  independently  of  its  relation  to  our 
intuition.  This  ideality,  like  that  of  space,  is  not 
to  be  proved  or  illustrated  by  fallacious  analo¬ 
gies  with  sensations,  for  this  reason — that  in 
such  arguments  or  illustrations,  we  make  the 
presupposition  that  the  phenomenon,  in  which 
such  and  such  predicates  inhere,  has  objective 
reality,  while  in  this  case  we  can  only  find  such 
an  objective  reality  as  is  itself  empirical,  that  is, 
regards  the  object  as  a  mere  phenomenon.  In 
reference  to  this  subject,  see  the  remark  in  Sec¬ 
tion  I  (pages  25-26). 

§  8.  Elucidation 

Against  this  theory,  which  grants  empirical 
reality  to  time,  but  denies  to  it  absolute  and 
transcendental  reality,  I  have  heard  from  in¬ 
telligent  men  an  objection  so  unanimously  urged 
that  I  conclude  that  it  must  naturally  present 
itself  to  every  reader  to  whom  these  considera¬ 
tions  are  novel.  It  runs  thus :  “Changes  are  real” 
(this  the  continual  change  in  our  own  represen¬ 
tations  demonstrates,  even  though  the  existence 
of  all  external  phenomena,  together  with  their 
changes,  is  denied).  Now,  changes  are  only  pos¬ 
sible  in  time,  and  therefore  time  must  be  some¬ 
thing  real.  But  there  is  no  difficulty  in  answer¬ 
ing  this.  I  grant  the  whole  argument.  Time,  no 
doubt,  is  something  real,  that  is,  it  is  the  real 
form  of  our  internal  intuition.  It  therefore  has 
subjective  reality,  in  reference  to  our  internal 
experience,  that  is,  I  have  really  the  representa¬ 
tion  of  time  and  of  my  determinations  therein. 
Time,  therefore,  is  not  to  be  regarded  as  an  ob¬ 


ject,  but  as  the  mode  of  representation  of  my¬ 
self  as  an  object.  But  if  I  could  intuite  myself, 
or  be  intuited  by  another  being,  without  this 
condition  of  sensibility,  then  those  very  deter¬ 
minations  which  we  now  represent  to  ourselves 
as  changes,  would  present  to  us  a  knowledge  in 
which  the  representation  of  time,  and  conse¬ 
quently  of  change,  would  not  appear.  The  em¬ 
pirical  reality  of  time,  therefore,  remains,  as  the 
condition  of  all  our  experience.  But  absolute 
reality,  according  to  what  has  been  said  above, 
cannot  be  granted  it.  Time  is  nothing  but  the 
form  of  our  internal  intuition.1  If  we  take  away 
from  it  the  special  condition  of  our  sensibility, 
the  conception  of  time  also  vanishes;  and  it  in¬ 
heres  not  in  the  objects  themselves,  but  solely 
in  the  subject  (or  mind)  which  intuites  them. 

But  the  reason  why  this  objection  is  so  unani¬ 
mously  brought  against  our  doctrine  of  time, 
and  that  too  by  disputants  who  cannot  start 
any  intelligible  arguments  against  the  doctrine 
of  the  ideality  of  space,  is  this — they  have  no 
hope  of  demonstrating  apodeictically  the  abso¬ 
lute  reality  of  space,  because  the  doctrine  of 
idealism  is  against  them,  according  to  which  the 
reality  of  external  objects  is  not  capable  of  any 
strict  proof.  On  the  other  hand,  the  reality  of 
the  object  of  our  internal  sense  (that  is,  myself 
and  my  internal  state)  is  clear  immediately 
through  consciousness.  The  former — external 
objects  in  space — might  be  a  mere  delusion,  but 
the  latter — the  object  of  my  internal  perception 
— is  undeniably  real.  They  do  not,  however,  re¬ 
flect  that  both,  without  question  of  their  reality 
as  representations,  belong  only  to  the  genus  phe¬ 
nomenon,  which  has  always  two  aspects,  the 
one,  the  object  considered  as  a  thing  in  itself, 
without  regard  to  the  mode  of  intuiting  it,  and 
the  nature  of  which  remains  for  this  very  reason 
problematical,  the  other,  the  form  of  our  intui¬ 
tion  of  the  object,  which  must  be  sought  not  in 
the  object  as  a  thing  in  itself,  but  in  the  subject 
to  which  it  appears — which  form  of  intuition 
nevertheless  belongs  really  and  necessarily  to 
the  phenomenal  object. 

Time  and  space  are,  therefore,  two  sources  of 
knowledge,  from  which,  a  priori ,  various  syn¬ 
thetical  cognitions  can  be  drawn.  Of  this  we  find 
a  striking  example  in  the  cognitions  of  space 
and  its  relations,  which  form  the  foundation  of 
pure  mathematics.  They  are  the  two  pure  forms 

1 1  can  indeed  say  “my  representations  follow  one  an¬ 
other,  or  are  successive”;  but  this  means  only  that  we 
are  conscious  of  them  as  in  a  succession,  that  is,  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  form  of  the  internal  sense.  Time,  therefore,  is 
not  a  thing  in  itself,  nor  is  it  any  objective  determina¬ 
tion  pertaining  to,  or  inherent  in  things. 


OF  PURE  REASON 


of  all  intuitions,  and  thereby  make  synthetical 
propositions  a  priori  possible.  But  these  sources 
of  knowledge  being  merely  conditions  of  our 
sensibility,  do  therefore,  and  as  such,  strictly 
determine  their  own  range  and  purpose,  in  that 
they  do  not  and  cannot  present  objects  as 
things  in  themselves,  but  are  applicable  to  them 
solely  in  so  far  as  they  are  considered  as  sen¬ 
suous  phenomena.  The  sphere  of  phenomena  is 
the  only  sphere  of  their  validity,  and  if  we  ven¬ 
ture  out  of  this,  no  further  objective  use  can  be 
made  of  them.  For  the  rest,  this  formal  reality 
of  time  and  space  leaves  the  validity  of  our  em¬ 
pirical  knowledge  unshaken;  for  our  certainty 
in  that  respect  is  equally  firm,  whether  these 
forms  necessarily  inhere  in  the  things  them¬ 
selves,  or  only  in  our  intuitions  of  them.  On  the 
other  hand,  those  who  maintain  the  absolute 
reality  of  time  and  space,  whether  as  essentially 
subsisting,  or  only  inhering,  as  modifications,  in 
things,  must  find  themselves  at  utter  variance 
with  the  principles  of  experience  itself.  For,  if 
they  decide  for  the  first  view,  and  make  space 
and  time  into  substances,  this  being  the  side 
taken  by  mathematical  natural  philosophers, 
they  must  admit  two  self-subsisting  nonentities, 
infinite  and  eternal,  which  exist  (yet  without 
there  being  anything  real)  for  the  purpose  of 
containing  in  themselves  everything  that  is  real. 
If  they  adopt  the  second  view  of  inherence, 
which  is  preferred  by  some  metaphysical  nat¬ 
ural  philosophers,  and  regard  space  and  time  as 
relations  (contiguity  in  space  or  succession  in 
time),  abstracted  from  experience,  though  rep¬ 
resented  confusedly  in  this  state  of  separation, 
they  find  themselves  in  that  case  necessitated  to 
deny  the  validity  of  mathematical  doctrines  a 
priori  in  reference  to  real  things  (for  example, 
in  space) — at  all  events  their  apodeictic  cer¬ 
tainty.  For  such  certainty  cannot  be  found  in  an 
a  posteriori  proposition;  and  the  conceptions  a 
priori  of  space  and  time  are,  according  to  this 
opinion,  mere  creations  of  the  imagination,  hav¬ 
ing  their  source  really  in  experience,  inasmuch 
as,  out  of  relations  abstracted  from  experience, 
imagination  has  made  up  something  which  con¬ 
tains,  indeed,  general  statements  of  these  rela¬ 
tions,  yet  of  which  no  application  can  be  made 
without  the  restrictions  attached  thereto  by  na¬ 
ture.  The  former  of  these  parties  gains  this  ad¬ 
vantage,  thatlhey  keep  the  sphere  of  phenom¬ 
ena  free  for  mathematical  science.  On  the  other 
hand,  these  very  conditions  (space  and  time) 
embarrass  them  greatly,  when  the  understand¬ 
ing  endeavours  to  pass  the  limits  of  that  sphere. 
The  latter  has,  indeed,  this  advantage,  that  the 


representations  of  space  and  time  do  not  come 
in  their  way  when  they  wish  to  judge  of  objects, 
not  as  phenomena,  but  merely  in  their  relation 
to  the  understanding.  Devoid,  however,  of  a 
true  and  objectively  valid  a  priori  intuition,  they 
can  neither  furnish  any  basis  for  the  possibility 
of  mathematical  cognitions  a  priori ,  nor  bring 
the  propositions  of  experience  into  necessary 
accordance  with  those  of  mathematics.  In  our 
theory  of  the  true  nature  of  these  two  original 
forms  of  the  sensibility,  both  difficulties  are  sur¬ 
mounted. 

In  conclusion,  that  transcendental  aesthetic 
cannot  contain  any  more  than  these  two  ele¬ 
ments — space  and  time,  is  sufficiently  obvious 
from  the  fact  that  all  other  conceptions  apper¬ 
taining  to  sensibility,  even  that  of  motion, 
which  unites  in  itself  both  elements,  presuppose 
something  empirical.  Motion,  for  example,  pre¬ 
supposes  the  perception  of  something  movable. 
But  space  considered  in  itself  contains  nothing 
movable,  consequently  motion  must  be  some¬ 
thing  which  is  found  in  space  only  through  ex¬ 
perience — in  other  words,  is  an  empirical  datum. 
In  like  manner,  transcendental  aesthetic  cannot 
number  the  conception  of  change  among  its  data 
a  priori ;  for  time  itself  does  not  change,  but 
only  something  which  is  in  time.  To  acquire  the 
conception  of  change,  therefore,  the  perception 
of  some  existing  object  and  of  the  succession  of 
its  determinations,  in  one  word,  experience,  is 
necessary. 

§  9.  General  Remarks  on  Transcendental 
Aesthetic 

I.  In  order  to  prevent  any  misunderstanding, 
it  will  be  requisite,  in  the  first  place,  to  recapitu¬ 
late,  as  clearly  as  possible,  what  our  opinion  is 
with  respect  to  the  fundamental  nature  of  our 
sensuous  cognition  in  general.  We  have  intended, 
then,  to  say  that  all  our  intuition  is  nothing  but 
the  representation  of  phenomena;  that  the 
things  which  we  intuite,  are  not  in  themselves 
the  same  as  our  representations  of  them  in  in¬ 
tuition,  nor  are  their  relations  in  themselves  so 
constituted  as  they  appear  to  us ;  and  that  if  we 
take  away  the  subject,  or  even  only  the  subjec¬ 
tive  constitution  of  our  senses  in  general,  then 
not  only  the  nature  and  relations  of  objects  in 
space  and  time,  but  even  space  and  time  them¬ 
selves  disappear;  and  that  these,  as  phenomena, 
cannot  exist  in  themselves,  but  only  in  us.  What 
may  be  the  nature  of  objects  considered  as 
things  in  themselves  and  without  reference  to 
the  receptivity  of  our  sensibility  is  quite  un¬ 
known  to  us.  We  know  nothing  more  than  our 


30  THE  CRITIQUE 


own  mode  of  perceiving  them,  which  is  peculiar 
to  us,  and  which,  though  not  of  necessity  per¬ 
taining  to  every  animated  being,  is  so  to  the 
whole  human  race.  With  this  alone  we  have  to 
do.  Space  and  time  are  the  pure  forms  thereof ; 
sensation  the  matter.  The  former  alone  can  we 
cognize  a  priori ,  that  is,  antecedent  to  all  actual 
perception;  and  for  this  reason  such  cognition  is 
called  pure  intuition.  The  latter  is  that  in  our 
cognition  which  is  called  cognition  a  posteriori} 
that  is,  empirical  intuition.  The  former  apper¬ 
tain  absolutely  and  necessarily  to  our  sensibil¬ 
ity,  of  whatsoever  kind  our  sensations  may  be; 
the  latter  may  be  of  very  diversified  character. 
Supposing  that  we  should  carry  our  empirical 
intuition  even  to  the  very  highest  degree  of 
clearness,  we  should  not  thereby  advance  one 
step  nearer  to  a  knowledge  of  the  constitution 
of  objects  as  things  in  themselves.  For  we  could 
only,  at  best,  arrive  at  a  complete  cognition  of 
our  own  mode  of  intuition,  that  is,  of  our  sen¬ 
sibility,  and  this  always  under  the  conditions 
originally  attaching  to  the  subject,  namely,  the 
conditions  of  space  and  time;  while  the  ques¬ 
tion:  “What  are  objects  considered  as  things  in 
themselves?”  remains  unanswerable  even  after 
the  most  thorough  examination  of  the  phenom¬ 
enal  world. 

To  say,  then,  that  all  our  sensibility  is  noth¬ 
ing  but  the  confused  representation  of  things 
containing  exclusively  that  which  belongs  to 
them  as  things  in  themselves,  and  this  under  an 
accumulation  of  characteristic  marks  and  par¬ 
tial  representations  which  we  cannot  distinguish 
in  consciousness,  is  a  falsification  of  the  concep¬ 
tion  of  sensibility  and  phenomenization,  which 
renders  our  whole  doctrine  thereof  empty  and 
useless.  The  difference  between  a  confused  and 
a  clear  representation  is  merely  logical  and  has 
nothing  to  do  with  content.  No  doubt  the  con¬ 
ception  of  right,  as  employed  by  a  sound  under¬ 
standing,  contains  all  that  the  most  subtle 
investigation  could  unfold  from  it,  although,  in 
the  ordinary  practical  use  of  the  word,  we  are 
not  conscious  of  the  manifold  representations 
comprised  in  the  conception.  But  we  cannot  for 
this  reason  assert  that  the  ordinary  conception 
is  a  sensuous  one,  containing  a  mere  phenome¬ 
non,  for  right  cannot  appear  as  a  phenomenon; 
but  the  conception  of  it  lies  in  the  understand¬ 
ing,  and  represents  a  property  (the  moral  prop¬ 
erty)  of  actions,  which  belongs  to  them  in  them¬ 
selves.  On  the  other  hand,  the  representation  in 
intuition  of  a  body  contains  nothing  which  could 
belong  to  an  object  considered  as  a  thing  in  it¬ 
self,  but  merely  the  phenomenon  or  appearance 


of  something,  and  the  mode  in  which  we  are  af¬ 
fected  by  that  appearance;  and  this  receptivity 
of  our  faculty  of  cognition  is  called  sensibility, 
and  remains  toto  caelo  different  from  the  cogni¬ 
tion  of  an  object  in  itself,  even  though  we 
should  examine  the  content  of  the  phenomenon 
to  the  very  bottom. 

It  must  be  admitted  that  the  Leibnitz-Wolf- 
ian  philosophy  has  assigned  an  entirely  errone¬ 
ous  point  of  view  to  all  investigations  into  the 
nature  and  origin  of  our  cognitions,  inasmuch  as 
it  regards  the  distinction  between  the  sensuous 
and  the  intellectual  as  merely  logical,  whereas  it 
is  plainly  transcendental,  and  concerns  not 
merely  the  clearness  or  obscurity,  but  the  con¬ 
tent  and  origin  of  both.  For  the  faculty  of  sen¬ 
sibility  not  only  does  not  present  us  with  an  in¬ 
distinct  and  confused  cognition  of  objects  as 
things  in  themselves,  but,  in  fact,  gives  us  no 
knowledge  of  these  at  all.  On  the  contrary,  so 
soon  as  we  abstract  in  thought  our  own  subjec¬ 
tive  nature,  the  object  represented,  with  the 
properties  ascribed  to  it  by  sensuous  intuition, 
entirely  disappears,  because  it  was  only  this 
subjective  nature  that  determined  the  form  of 
the  object  as  a  phenomenon. 

In  phenomena,  we  commonly,  indeed,  distin¬ 
guish  that  which  essentially  belongs  to  the  in¬ 
tuition  of  them,  and  is  valid  for  the  sensuous 
faculty  of  every  human  being  from  that  which 
belongs  to  the  same  intuition  accidentally,  as 
valid  not  for  the  sensuous  faculty  in  general, 
but  for  a  particular  state  or  organization  of  this 
or  that  sense.  Accordingly,  we  are  accustomed 
to  say  that  the  former  is  a  cognition  which  rep¬ 
resents  the  object  itself,  whilst  the  latter  pre¬ 
sents  only  a  particular  appearance  or  phenome¬ 
non  thereof.  This  distinction,  however,  is  only 
empirical.  If  we  stop  here  (as  is  usual),  and  do 
not  regard  the  empirical  intuition  as  itself  a 
mere  phenomenon  (as  we  ought  to  do),  in  which 
nothing  that  can  appertain  to  a  thing  in  itself  is 
to  be  found,  our  transcendental  distinction  is 
lost,  and  we  believe  that  we  cognize  objects  as 
things  in  themselves,  although  in  the  whole  range 
of  the  sensuous  world,  investigate  the  nature  of 
its  objects  as  profoundly  as  we  may,  we  have  to 
do  with  nothing  but  phenomena.  Thus,  we  call 
the  rainbow  a  mere  appearance  of  phenomenon 
in  a  sunny  shower,  and  the  rain,  the  reality  or 
thing  in  itself;  and  this  is  right  enough,  if  we 
understand  the  latter  conception  in  a  merely 
physical  sense,  that  is,  as  that  which  in  univer¬ 
sal  experience,  and  under  whatever  conditions  of 
sensuous  perception,  is  known  in  intuition  to  be 
so  and  so  determined,  and  not  otherwise.  But  if 


OF  PURE  REASON 


we  consider  this  empirical  datum  generally,  and 
inquire,  without  reference  to  its  accordance  with 
all  our  senses,  whether  there  can  be  discovered 
in  it  aught  which  represents  an  object  as  a  thing 
in  itself  (the  raindrops  of  course  are  not  such, 
for  they  are,  as  phenomena,  empirical  objects), 
the  question  of  the  relation  of  the  representa¬ 
tion  to  the  object  is  transcendental;  and  not 
only  are  the  raindrops  mere  phenomena,  but 
even  their  circular  form,  nay,  the  space  itself 
through  which  they  fall,  is  nothing  in  itself,  but 
both  are  mere  modifications  or  fundamental  dis¬ 
positions  of  our  sensuous  intuition,  whilst  the 
transcendental  object  remains  for  us  utterly  un¬ 
known. 

The  second  important  concern  of  our  aesthet¬ 
ic  is  that  it  does  not  obtain  favour  merely  as  a 
plausible  hypothesis,  but  possess  as  undoubted 
a  character  of  certainty  as  can  be  demanded  of 
any  theory  which  is  to  serve  for  an  organon.  In 
order  fully  to  convince  the  reader  of  this  cer¬ 
tainty,  we  shall  select  a  case  which  will  serve  to 
make  its  validity  apparent,  and  also  to  illustrate 
what  has  been  said  in  §  3. 

Suppose,  then,  that  space  and  time  are  in 
themselves  objective,  and  conditions  of  the  pos¬ 
sibility  of  objects  as  things  in  themselves.  In 
the  first  place,  it  is  evident  that  both  present  us 
with  very  many  apodeictic  and  synthetic  prop¬ 
ositions  a  priori,  but  especially  space — and  for 
this  reason  we  shall  prefer  it  for  investigation  at 
present.  As  the  propositions  of  geometry  are 
cognized  synthetically  a  priori,  and  with  apo¬ 
deictic  certainty,  I  inquire:  Whence  do  you  ob¬ 
tain  propositions  of  this  kind,  and  on  what  basis 
does  the  understanding  rest,  in  order  to  arrive 
at  such  absolutely  necessary  and  universally 
valid  truths? 

There  is  no  other  way  than  through  intuitions 
or  conceptions,  as  such ;  and  these  are  given  ei¬ 
ther  a  priori  or  a  posteriori.  The  latter,  namely, 
empirical  conceptions,  together  with  the  empiri¬ 
cal  intuition  on  which  they  are  founded,  cannot 
afford  any  synthetical  proposition,  except  such 
as  is  itself  also  empirical,  that  is,  a  proposition 
of  experience.  But  an  empirical  proposition  can¬ 
not  possess  the  qualities  of  necessity  and  abso¬ 
lute  universality,  which,  nevertheless,  are  the 
characteristics  of  all  geometrical  propositions. 
As  to  the  first  and  only  means  to  arrive  at  such 
cognitions,  namely,  through  mere  conceptions 
or  intuitions  a  priori,  it  is  quite  clear  that  from 
mere  conceptions  no  synthetical  cognitions,  but 
only  analytical  ones,  can  be  obtained.  Take,  for 
example,  the  proposition:  “Two  straight  lines 
cannot  enclose  a  space,  and  with  these  alone  no 


figure  is  possible,”  and  try  to  deduce  it  from  the 
conception  of  a  straight  line  and  the  number 
two;  or  take  the  proposition:  “It  is  possible  to 
construct  a  figure  with  three  straight  lines,”  and 
endeavour,  in  like  manner,  to  deduce  it  from  the 
mere  conception  of  a  straight  line  and  the  num¬ 
ber  three.  All  your  endeavours  are  in  vain,  and 
you  find  yourself  forced  to  have  recourse  to  in¬ 
tuition,  as,  in  fact,  geometry  always  does.  You 
therefore  give  yourself  an  object  in  intuition. 
But  of  what  kind  is  this  intuition?  Is  it  a  pure 
a  priori,  or  is  it  an  empirical  intuition?  If  the 
latter,  then  neither  an  universally  valid,  much 
less  an  apodeictic  proposition  can  arise  from  it, 
for  experience  never  can  give  us  any  such  prop¬ 
osition.  You  must,  therefore,  give  yourself  an 
object  a  priori  in  intuition,  and  upon  that  ground 
your  synthetical  proposition.  Now  if  there  did 
not  exist  within  you  a  faculty  of  intuition  a  pri¬ 
ori;  if  this  subjective  condition  were  not  in  re¬ 
spect  to  its  form  also  the  universal  condition  a 
priori  under  which  alone  the  object  of  this  ex¬ 
ternal  intuition  is  itself  possible;  if  the  object 
(that  is,  the  triangle)  were  something  in  itself, 
without  relation  to  you  the  subject;  how  could 
you  affirm  that  that  which  lies  necessarily  in 
your  subjective  conditions  in  order  to  construct 
a  triangle,  must  also  necessarily  belong  to  the 
triangle  in  itself?  For  to  your  conceptions  of 
three  lines,  you  could  not  add  anything  new 
(that  is,  the  figure) ;  which,  therefore,  must  nec¬ 
essarily  be  found  in  the  object,  because  the  ob¬ 
ject  is  given  before  your  cognition,  and  not  by 
means  of  it.  If,  therefore,  space  (and  time  also) 
were  not  a  mere  form  of  your  intuition,  which 
contains  conditions  a  priori,  under  which  alone 
things  can  become  external  objects  for  you,  and 
without  which  subjective  conditions  the  objects 
are  in  themselves  nothing,  you  could  not  con¬ 
struct  any  synthetical  proposition  whatsoever 
regarding  external  objects.  It  is  therefore  not 
merely  possible  or  probable,  but  indubitably 
certain,  that  space  and  time,  as  the  necessary 
conditions  of  all  our  external  and  internal  expe¬ 
rience,  are  merely  subjective  conditions  of  all 
our  intuitions,  in  relation  to  which  all  objects 
are  therefore  mere  phenomena,  and  not  things 
in  themselves,  presented  to  us  in  this  particular 
manner.  And  for  this  reason,  in  respect  to  the 
form  of  phenomena,  much  may  be  said  a  priori, 
whilst  of  the  thing  in  itself,  which  may  lie  at  the 
foundation  of  these  phenomena,  it  is  impossible 
to  say  anything. 

II.  In  confirmation  of  this  theory  of  the  ideal¬ 
ity  of  the  external  as  well  as  internal  sense, 
consequently  of  all  objects  of  sense,  as  mere 


32  THE  CRITIQUE 


phenomena,  we  may  especially  remark  that  all 
in  our  cognition  that  belongs  to  intuition  con¬ 
tains  nothing  more  than  mere  relations.  (The 
feelings  of  pain  and  pleasure,  and  the  will,  which 
are  not  cognitions,  are  excepted.)  The  relations, 
to  wit,  of  place  in  an  intuition  (extension), 
change  of  place  (motion),  and  laws  according 
to  which  this  change  is  determined  (moving 
forces).  That,  however,  which  is  present  in  this 
or  that  place,  or  any  operation  going  on,  or  re¬ 
sult  taking  place  in  the  things  themselves,  with 
the  exception  of  change  of  place,  is  not  given  to 
us  by  intuition.  Now  by  means  of  mere  rela¬ 
tions,  a  thing  cannot  be  known  in  itself ;  and  it 
may  therefore  be  fairly  concluded,  that,  as 
through  the  external  sense  nothing  but  mere  rep¬ 
resentations  of  relations  are  given  us,  the  said 
external  sense  in  its  representation  can  contain 
only  the  relation  of  the  object  to  the  subject, 
but  not  the  essential  nature  of  the  object  as  a 
thing  in  itself. 

The  same  is  the  case  with  the  internal  intui¬ 
tion,  not  only  because,  in  the  internal  intuition, 
the  representation  of  the  external  senses  consti¬ 
tutes  the  material  with  which  the  mind  is  occu¬ 
pied;  but  because  time,  in  which  we  place,  and 
which  itself  antecedes  the  consciousness  of, 
these  representations  in  experience,  and  which, 
as  the  formal  condition  of  the  mode  according 
to  which  objects  are  placed  in  the  mind,  lies  at 
the  foundation  of  them,  contains  relations  of 
the  successive,  the  coexistent,  and  of  that  which 
always  must  be  coexistent  with  succession,  the 
permanent.  Now  that  which,  as  representation, 
can  antecede  every  exercise  of  thought  (of  an 
object), is  intuition;  and  when  it  contains  noth¬ 
ing  but  relations,  it  is  the  form  of  the  intuition, 
which,  as  it  presents  us  with  no  representation, 
except  in  so  far  as  something  is  placed  in  the 
mind,  can  be  nothing  else  than  the  mode  in 
which  the  mind  is  affected  by  its  own  activity, 
to  wit — its  presenting  to  itself  representations, 
consequently  the  mode  in  which  the  mind  is  af¬ 
fected  by  itself;  that  is,  it  can  be  nothing  but  an 
internal  sense  in  respect  to  its  form.  Everything 
that  is  represented  through  the  medium  of  sense 
is  so  far  phenomenal;  consequently,  we  must  ei¬ 
ther  refuse  altogether  to  admit  an  internal  sense, 
or  the  subject,  which  is  the  object  of  that  sense, 
could  only  be  represented  by  it  as  phenomenon, 
and  not  as  it  would  judge  of  itself,  if  its  intui¬ 
tion  were  pure  spontaneous  activity,  that  is, 
were  intellectual.  The  difficulty  here  lies  wholly 
in  the  question:  How  can  the  subject  have  an 
internal  intuition  of  itself?  But  this  difficulty  is 
common  to  every  theory.  The  consciousness  of 


self  (apperception)  is  the  simple  representation 
of  the  “ego”;  and  if  by  means  of  that  repre¬ 
sentation  alone,  all  the  manifold  representations 
in  the  subject  were  spontaneously  given,  then 
our  internal  intuition  would  be  intellectual.  This 
consciousness  in  man  requires  an  internal  per¬ 
ception  of  the  manifold  representations  which 
are  previously  given  in  the  subject;  and  the 
manner  in  which  these  representations  are  giv¬ 
en  in  the  mind  without  spontaneity,  must,  on 
account  of  this  difference  (the  want  of  sponta¬ 
neity),  be  called  sensibility.  If  the  faculty  of 
self-consciousness  is  to  apprehend  wThat  lies  in 
the  mind,  it  must  affect  that  and  can  in  this  way 
alone  produce  an  intuition  of  self.  But  the  form 
of  this  intuition,  which  lies  in  the  original  con¬ 
stitution  of  the  mind,  determines,  in  the  repre¬ 
sentation  of  time,  the  manner  in  which  the  man¬ 
ifold  representations  are  to  combine  themselves 
in  the  mind;  since  the  subject  intuites  itself, 
not  as  it  would  represent  itself  immediately  and 
spontaneously,  but  according  to  the  manner  in 
which  the  mind  is  internally  affected,  conse¬ 
quently,  as  it  appears,  and  not  as  it  is. 

III.  When  we  say  that  the  intuition  of  ex¬ 
ternal  objects,  and  also  the  self-intuition  of  the 
subject,  represent  both,  objects  and  subject,  in 
space  and  time,  as  they  affect  our  senses,  that 
is,  as  they  appear — this  is  by  no  means  equiva¬ 
lent  to  asserting  that  these  objects  are  mere  il¬ 
lusory  appearances.  For  when  we  speak  of 
things  as  phenomena,  the  objects,  nay,  even  the 
properties  which  we  ascribe  to  them,  are  looked 
upon  as  really  given;  only  that,  in  so  far  as  this 
or  that  property  depends  upon  the  mode  of  in¬ 
tuition  of  the  subject,  in  the  relation  of  the  giv¬ 
en  object  to  the  subject,  the  object  as  phenom¬ 
enon  is  to  be  distinguished  from  the  object  as 
a  thing  in  itself.  Thus  I  do  not  say  that  bodies 
seem  or  appear  to  be  external  to  me,  or  that  my 
soul  seems  merely  to  be  given  in  my  self-con¬ 
sciousness,  although  I  maintain  that  the  proper¬ 
ties  of  space  and  time,  in  conformity  to  which  I 
set  both,  as  the  condition  of  their  existence, 
abide  in  my  mode  of  intuition,  and  not  in  the 
objects  in  themselves.  It  would  be  my  own  fault, 
if  out  of  that  which  I  should  reckon  as  phenom¬ 
enon,  I  made  mere  illusory  appearance.1  But 
this  will  not  happen,  because  of  our  principle  of 

1  The  predicates  of  the  phenomenon  can  be  affixed  to 
the  object  itself  in  relation  to  our  sensuous  faculty;  for 
example,  the  red  colour  or  the  perfume  to  the  rose.  But 
(illusory)  appearance  never  can  be  attributed  as  a  pred¬ 
icate  to  an  object,  for  this  very  reason,  that  it  attrib¬ 
utes  to  this  object  in  itself  that  which  belongs  to  it  only 
in  relation  to  our  sensuous  faculty,  or  to  the  subject  in 
general,  e.g.,  the  two  handles  which  were  formerly  as¬ 
cribed  to  Saturn.  That  which  is  never  to  be  found  in 


OF  PURE 


the  ideality  of  all  sensuous  intuitions.  On  the 
contrary,  if  we  ascribe  objective  reality  to  these 
forms  of  representation,  it  becomes  impossible 
to  avoid  changing  everything  into  mere  appear¬ 
ance.  For  if  we  regard  space  and  time  as  prop¬ 
erties,  which  must  be  found  in  objects  as  things 
in  themselves,  as  sine  quibus  non  of  the  possi¬ 
bility  of  their  existence,  and  reflect  on  the  ab¬ 
surdities  in  which  we  then  find  ourselves  in¬ 
volved,  inasmuch  as  we  are  compelled  to  admit 
the  existence  of  two  infinite  things,  which  are 
nevertheless  not  substances,  nor  anything  really 
inhering  in  substances,  nay,  to  admit  that  they 
are  the  necessary  conditions  of  the  existence  of 
all  things,  and  moreover,  that  they  must  con¬ 
tinue  to  exist,  although  all  existing  things  were 
annihilated — we  cannot  blame  the  good  Berke¬ 
ley  for  degrading  bodies  to  mere  illusory  ap¬ 
pearances.  Nay,  even  our  own  existence,  which 
would  in  this  case  depend  upon  the  self-existent 
reality  of  such  a  mere  nonentity  as  time,  would 
necessarily  be  changed  with  it  into  mere  ap¬ 
pearance — an  absurdity  which  no  one  has  as  yet 
been  guilty  of. 

IV.  In  natural  theology,  where  we  think  of  an 
object — God — which  never  can  be  an  object  of 
intuition  to  us,  and  even  to  himself  can  never  be 
an  object  of  sensuous  intuition,  we  carefully 
avoid  attributing  to  his  intuition  the  conditions 
of  space  and  time — and  intuition  all  his  cogni¬ 
tion  must  be,  and  not  thought,  which  always  in¬ 
cludes  limitation.  But  with  what  right  can  we 
do  this  if  we  make  them  forms  of  objects  as 
things  in  themselves,  and  such,  moreover,  as 
would  continue  to  exist  as  a  priori  conditions  of 
the  existence  of  things,  even  though  the  things 
themselves  were  annihilated?  For  as  conditions 
of  all  existence  in  general,  space  and  time  must 
be  conditions  of  the  existence  of  the  Supreme 
Being  also.  But  if  we  do  not  thus  make  them 

the  object  itself,  but  always  in  the  relation  of  the  object 
to  the  subject,  and  which  moreover  is  inseparable  from 
our  representation  of  the  object,  we  denominate  phe¬ 
nomenon.  Thus  the  predicates  of  space  and  time  are 
I  rightly  attributed  to  objects  of  the  senses  as  such,  and 
in  this  there  is  no  illusion.  On  the  contrary,  if  I  ascribe 
redness  of  the  rose  as  a  thing  in  itself,  or  to  Saturn  his 
handles,  or  extension  to  all  external  objects,  considered 
as  things  in  themselves,  without  regarding  the  deter¬ 
minate  relation  of  these  objects  to  the  subject,  and  with¬ 
out  limiting  my  judgement  to  that  relation — then,  and 
then  only,  arises  illusion. 


REASON  33 

objective  forms  of  all  things,  there  is  no  other 
way  left  than  to  make  them  subjective  forms  of 
our  mode  of  intuition — external  and  internal; 
which  is  called  sensuous,  because  it  is  not  prim¬ 
itive,  that  is,  is  not  such  as  gives  in  itself  the  ex¬ 
istence  of  the  object  of  the  intuition  (a  mode  of 
intuition  which,  so  far  as  we  can  judge,  can  be¬ 
long  only  to  the  Creator),  but  is  dependent  on 
the  existence  of  the  object,  is  possible,  there¬ 
fore,  only  on  condition  that  the  representative 
faculty  of  the  subject  is  affected  by  the  object. 

It  is,  moreover,  not  necessary  that  wre  should 
limit  the  mode  of  intuition  in  space  and  time  to 
the  sensuous  faculty  of  man.  It  may  well  be 
that  all  finite  thinking  beings  must  necessarily 
in  this  respect  agree  with  man  (though  as  to 
this  we  cannot  decide),  but  sensibility  does  not 
on  account  of  this  universality  cease  to  be  sen¬ 
sibility,  for  this  very  reason,  that  it  is  a  deduced 
( intuitus  derivativus) ,  and  not  an  original  (in- 
tuitus  originarius) ,  consequently  not  an  intellec¬ 
tual  intuition,  and  this  intuition,  as  such,  for 
reasons  above  mentioned,  seems  to  belong  sole¬ 
ly  to  the  Supreme  Being,  but  never  to  a  being 
dependent,  quoad  its  existence,  as  well  as  its 
intuition  (which  its  existence  determines  and 
limits  relatively  to  given  objects).  This  latter 
remark,  however,  must  be  taken  only  as  an 
illustration,  and  not  as  any  proof  of  the  truth 
of  our  aesthetical  theory. 

§  io.  Conclusion  of  the  Transcendental 
Aesthetic 

We  have  now  completely  before  us  one  part 
of  the  solution  of  the  grand  general  problem  of 
transcendental  philosophy,  namely,  the  ques¬ 
tion  :  “How  are  synthetical  propositions  a  priori 
possible?”  That  is  to  say,  we  have  shown  that 
we  are  in  possession  of  pure  a  priori  intuitions, 
namely,  space  and  time,  in  which  we  find,  when 
in  a  judgement  a  priori  we  pass  out  beyond  the 
given  conception,  something  which  is  not  dis¬ 
coverable  in  that  conception,  but  is  certainly 
found  a  priori  in  the  intuition  which  corre¬ 
sponds  to  the  conception,  and  can  be  united 
synthetically  with  it.  But  the  judgements  which 
these  pure  intuitions  enable  us  to  make,  never 
reach  farther  than  to  objects  of  the  senses,  and 
are  valid  only  for  objects  of  possible  experience. 


34 


THE  CRITIQUE 


SECOND  PART.  TRANSCENDENTAL  LOGIC 


Introduction.  Idea  of  a  Transcendental 
Logic 

1.  Of  Logic  in  general 

Our  knowledge  springs  from  two  main  sources 
in  the  mind,  the  first  of  which  is  the  faculty  or 
power  of  receiving  representations  (receptivity 
for  impressions) ;  the  second  is  the  power  of 
cognizing  by  means  of  these  representations 
(spontaneity  in  the  production  of  conceptions). 
Through  the  first  an  object  is  given  to  us; 
through  the  second,  it  is,  in  relation  to  the  rep¬ 
resentation  (which  is  a  mere  determination  of 
the  mind),  thought.  Intuition  and  conceptions 
constitute,  therefore,  the  elements  of  all  our 
knowledge,  so  that  neither  conceptions  without 
an  intuition  in  some  way  corresponding  to  them, 
nor  intuition  without  conceptions,  can  afford  us 
a  cognition.  Both  are  either  pure  or  empirical. 
They  are  empirical,  when  sensation  (which  pre¬ 
supposes  the  actual  presence  of  the  object)  is 
contained  in  them ;  and  pure,  when  no  sensation 
is  mixed  with  the  representation.  Sensations  we 
may  call  the  matter  of  sensuous  cognition.  Pure 
intuition  consequently  contains  merely  the  form 
under  which  something  is  intuited,  and  pure  con¬ 
ception  only  the  form  of  the  thought  of  an  object. 
Only  pure  intuitions  and  pure  conceptions  are 
possible  a  priori;  the  empirical  only  a  posteriori. 

We  apply  the  term  sensibility  to  the  receptiv¬ 
ity  of  the  mind  for  impressions,  in  so  far  as  it  is 
in  some  way  affected;  and,  on  the  other  hand, 
we  call  the  faculty  of  spontaneously  producing 
representations,  or  the  spontaneity  of  cognition, 
understanding.  Our  nature  is  so  constituted  that 
intuition  with  us  never  can  be  other  than  sensu¬ 
ous,  that  is,  it  contains  only  the  mode  in  which 
we  are  affected  by  objects.  On  the  other  hand, 
the  faculty  of  thinking  the  object  of  sensuous 
intuition  is  the  understanding.  Neither  of  these 
faculties  has  a  preference  over  the  other.  With¬ 
out  the  sensuous  faculty  no  object  would  be 
given  to  us,  and  without  the  understanding  no 
object  would  be  thought.  Thoughts  without  con¬ 
tent  are  void;  intuitions  without  conceptions, 
blind.  Hence  it  is  as  necessary  for  the  mind  to 
make  its  conceptions  sensuous  (that  is,  to  join 
to  them  the  object  in  intuition),  as  to  make  its 
intuitions  intelligible  (that  is,  to  bring  them  un¬ 
der  conceptions).  Neither  of  these  faculties  can 
exchange  its  proper  function.  Understanding 
cannot  intuite,  and  the  sensuous  faculty  cannot 


think.  In  no  other  way  than  from  the  united  op¬ 
eration  of  both,  can  knowledge  arise.  But  no  one 
ought,  on  this  account,  to  overlook  the  differ¬ 
ence  of  the  elements  contributed  by  each;  we 
have  rather  great  reason  carefully  to  separate 
and  distinguish  them.  We  therefore  distinguish 
the  science  of  the  laws  of  sensibility,  that  is, 
aesthetic,  from  the  science  of  the  laws  of  the 
understanding,  that  is,  logic. 

Now,  logic  in  its  turn  may  be  considered  as 
twofold — namely,  as  logic  of  the  general,  or  of 
the  particular  use  of  the  understanding.  The 
first  contains  the  absolutely  necessary  laws  of 
thought,  without  which  no  use  whatsoever  of 
the  understanding  is  possible,  and  gives  laws 
therefore  to  the  understanding,  without  regard 
to  the  difference  of  objects  on  which  it  may  be 
employed.  The  logic  of  the  particular  use  of  the 
understanding  contains  the  laws  of  correct  think¬ 
ing  upon  a  particular  class  of  objects.  The  for¬ 
mer  may  be  called  elemental  logic — the  latter, 
the  organon  of  this  or  that  particular  science. 
The  latter  is  for  the  most  part  employed  in  the 
schools,  as  a  propaedeutic  to  the  sciences,  al¬ 
though,  indeed,  according  to  the  course  of  hu¬ 
man  reason,  it  is  the  last  thing  we  arrive  at, 
when  the  science  has  been  already  matured,  and 
needs  only  the  finishing  touches  towards  its  cor¬ 
rection  and  completion;  for  our  knowledge  of 
the  objects  of  our  attempted  science  must  be 
tolerably  extensive  and  complete  before  we  can 
indicate  the  laws  by  which  a  science  of  these 
objects  can  be  established. 

General  logic  is  again  either  pure  or  applied. 
In  the  former,  we  abstract  all  the  empirical  con¬ 
ditions  under  which  the  understanding  is  exer¬ 
cised;  for  example,  the  influence  of  the  senses, 
the  play  of  the  fantasy  or  imagination,  the  laws 
of  the  memory,  the  force  of  habit,  of  inclina¬ 
tion,  etc.,  consequently  also,  the  sources  of  prej¬ 
udice — in  a  word,  we  abstract  all  causes  from 
which  particular  cognitions  arise,  because  these 
causes  regard  the  understanding  under  certain 
circumstances  of  its  application,  and,  to  the 
knowledge  of  them  experience  is  required.  Pure 
general  logic  has  to  do.  therefore,  merely  with 
pure  a  priori  principles,  and  is  a  canon  of  under¬ 
standing  and  reason,  but  only  in  respect  of  the 
formal  part  of  their  use,  be  the  content  what  it 
may,  empirical  or  transcendental.  General  logic 
is  called  applied,  when  it  is  directed  to  the  laws 
of  the  use  of  the  understanding,  under  the  sub- 


OF  PURE  REASON 


jective  empirical  conditions  which  psychology 
teaches  us.  It  has  therefore  empirical  principles, 
although,  at  the  same  time,  it  is  in  so  far  gen¬ 
eral,  that  it  applies  to  the  exercise  of  the  under¬ 
standing,  without  regard  to  the  difference  of  ob¬ 
jects.  On  this  account,  moreover,  it  is  neither  a 
canon  of  the  understanding  in  general,  nor  an 
organon  of  a  particular  science,  but  merely  a 
cathartic  of  the  human  understanding. 

In  general  logic,  therefore,  that  part  which 
constitutes  pure  logic  must  be  carefully  distin¬ 
guished  from  that  which  constitutes  applied 
(though  still  general)  logic.  The  former  alone  is 
properly  science,  although  short  and  dry,  as  the 
methodical  exposition  of  an  elemental  doctrine  of 
the  understanding  ought  to  be.  In  this,  therefore, 
logicians  must  always  bear  in  mind  two  rules : 

1.  As  general  logic,  it  makes  abstraction  of  all 
content  of  the  cognition  of  the  understanding, 
and  of  the  difference  of  objects,  and  has  to  do 
with  nothing  but  the  mere  form  of  thought. 

2.  As  pure  logic,  it  has  no  empirical  princi¬ 
ples,  and  consequently  draws  nothing  (contrary 
to  the  common  persuasion)  from  psychology, 
which  therefore  has  no  influence  on  the  canon 
of  the  understanding.  It  is  a  demonstrated  doc¬ 
trine,  and  everything  in  it  must  be  certain  com¬ 
pletely  a  priori. 

What  I  called  applied  logic  (contrary  to  the 
common  acceptation  of  this  term,  according  to 
which  it  should  contain  certain  exercises  for  the 
scholar,  for  which  pure  logic  gives  the  rules),  is 
a  representation  of  the  understanding,  and  of 
the  rules  of  its  necessary  employment  in  con - 
creto,  that  is  to  say,  under  the  accidental  con¬ 
ditions  of  the  subject,  which  may  either  hinder 
or  promote  this  employment,  and  which  are  all 
given  only  empirically.  Thus  applied  logic  treats 
of  attention,  its  impediments  and  consequences, 
of  the  origin  of  error,  of  the  state  of  doubt,  hesi¬ 
tation,  conviction,  etc.,  and  to  it  is  related  pure 
general  logic  in  the  same  way  that  pure  moral¬ 
ity,  which  contains  only  the  necessary  moral 
laws  of  a  free  will,  is  related  to  practical  ethics, 
which  considers  these  laws  under  all  the  impedi¬ 
ments  of  feelings,  inclinations,  and  passions  to 
which  men  are  more  or  less  subjected,  and  which 
never  can  furnish  us  with  a  true  and  demon¬ 
strated  science,  because  it,  as  well  as  applied 
logic,  requires  empirical  and  psychological  prin¬ 
ciples. 

II.  Of  Transcendental  Logic 

General  logic,  as  we  have  seen,  makes  ab¬ 
straction  of  all  content  of  cognition,  that  is,  of 
all  relation  of  cognition  to  its  object,  and  re¬ 


35 

gards  only  the  logical  form  in  the  relation  of 
cognitions  to  each  other,  that  is,  the  form  of 
thought  in  general.  But  as  we  have  both  pure 
and  empirical  intuitions  (as  transcendental  aes¬ 
thetic  proves),  in  like  manner  a  distinction 
might  be  drawn  between  pure  and  empirical 
thought  (of  objects).  In  this  case,  there  would 
exist  a  kind  of  logic,  in  which  we  should  not 
make  abstraction  of  all  content  of  cognition; 
for  that  logic  which  should  comprise  merely  the 
laws  of  pure  thought  (of  an  object),  would  of 
course  exclude  all  those  cognitions  which  were 
of  empirical  content.  This  kind  of  logic  would 
also  examine  the  origin  of  our  cognitions  of  ob¬ 
jects,  so  far  as  that  origin  cannot  be  ascribed  to 
the  objects  themselves;  while,  on  the  contrary, 
general  logic  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  origin 
of  our  cognitions,  but  contemplates  our  repre¬ 
sentations,  be  they  given  primitively  a  priori  in 
ourselves,  or  be  they  only  of  empirical  origin, 
solely  according  to  the  laws  which  the  under¬ 
standing  observes  in  employing  them  in  the 
process  of  thought,  in  relation  to  each  other. 
Consequently,  general  logic  treats  of  the  form 
of  the  understanding  only,  which  can  be  applied 
to  representations,  from  whatever  source  they 
may  have  arisen. 

And  here  I  shall  make  a  remark,  which  the 
reader  must  bear  well  in  mind  in  the  course  of 
the  following  considerations,  to  wit,  that  not  ev¬ 
ery  cognition  a  priori ,  but  only  those  through 
which  we  cognize  that  and  how  certain  repre¬ 
sentations  (intuitions  or  conceptions)  are  ap¬ 
plied  or  are  possible  only  a  priori;  that  is  to  say, 
the  a  priori  possibility  of  cognition  and  the  a 
priori  use  of  it  are  transcendental.  Therefore 
neither  is  space,  nor  any  a  priori  geometrical 
determination  of  space,  a  transcendental  repre¬ 
sentation,  but  only  the  knowledge  that  such  a 
representation  is  not  of  empirical  origin,  and 
the  possibility  of  its  relating  to  objects  of  expe¬ 
rience,  although  itself  a  priori ,  can  be  called 
transcendental.  So  also,  the  application  of  space 
to  objects  in  general  would  be  transcendental; 
but  if  it  be  limited  to  objects  of  sense,  it  is  em¬ 
pirical.  Thus,  the  distinction  of  the  transcen¬ 
dental  and  empirical  belongs  only  to  the  critique 
of  cognitions,  and  does  not  concern  the  relation 
of  these  to  their  object. 

Accordingly,  in  the  expectation  that  there 
may  perhaps  be  conceptions  which  relate  a  pri¬ 
ori  to  objects,  not  as  pure  or  sensuous  intui¬ 
tions,  but  merely  as  acts  of  pure  thought  (which 
are  therefore  conceptions,  but  neither  of  em¬ 
pirical  nor  aesthetical  origin) — in  this  expecta¬ 
tion,  I  say,  we  form  to  ourselves,  by  anticipa- 


36  THE  CRITIQUE 


tion,  the  idea  of  a  science  of  pure  understand¬ 
ing  and  rational  cognition,  by  means  of  which 
we  may  cogitate  objects  entirely  a  priori.  A  sci¬ 
ence  of  this  kind,  which  should  determine  the 
origin,  the  extent,  and  the  objective  validity  of 
such  cognitions,  must  be  called  transcendental 
logic,  because  it  has  not,  like  general  logic,  to  do 
with  the  laws  of  understanding  and  reason  in  re¬ 
lation  to  empirical  as  well  as  pure  rational  cog¬ 
nitions  without  distinction,  but  concerns  itself 
with  these  only  in  an  a  priori  relation  to  objects. 

III.  Of  the  Division  of  General  Logic  into 
Analytic  and  Dialectic 

The  old  question  with  which  people  sought  to 
push  logicians  into  a  corner,  so  that  they  must 
either  have  recourse  to  pitiful  sophisms  or  con¬ 
fess  their  ignorance,  and  consequently  the  van¬ 
ity  of  their  whole  art,  is  this:  “What  is  truth?” 
The  definition  of  the  word  truth,  to  wit,  “the 
accordance  of  the  cognition  with  its  object,”  is 
presupposed  in  the  question;  but  we  desire  to 
be  told,  in  the  answer  to  it,  what  is  the  univer¬ 
sal  and  secure  criterion  of  the  truth  of  every 
cognition. 

To  know  what  questions  we  may  reasonably 
propose  is  in  itself  a  strong  evidence  of  sagacity 
and  intelligence.  For  if  a  question  be  in  itself 
absurd  and  unsusceptible  of  a  rational  answer, 
it  is  attended  with  the  danger — not  to  mention 
the  shame  that  falls  upon  the  person  who  pro¬ 
poses  it — of  seducing  the  unguarded  listener  in¬ 
to  making  absurd  answers,  and  we  are  presented 
with  the  ridiculous  spectacle  of  one  (as  the  an¬ 
cients  said)  “milking  the  he-goat,  and  the  other 
holding  a  sieve.” 

If  truth  consists  in  the  accordance  of  a  cogni¬ 
tion  with  its  object,  this  object  must  be,  ipso 
facto,  distinguished  from  all  others;  for  a  cog¬ 
nition  is  false  if  it  does  not  accord  with  the  ob¬ 
ject  to  which  it  relates,  although  it  contains 
something  which  may  be  affirmed  of  other  ob¬ 
jects.  Now  an  universal  criterion  of  truth  would 
be  that  which  is  valid  for  all  cognitions,  without 
distinction  of  their  objects.  But  it  is  evident 
that  since,  in  the  case  of  such  a  criterion,  we 
make  abstraction  of  all  the  content  of  a  cogni¬ 
tion  (that  is,  of  all  relation  to  its  object),  and 
truth  relates  precisely  to  this  content,  it  must  be 
utterly  absurd  to  ask  for  a  mark  of  the  truth  of 
this  content  of  cognition;  and  that,  accordingly, 
a  sufficient,  and  at  the  same  time  universal,  test 
of  truth  cannot  possibly  be  found.  As  we  have 
already  termed  the  content  of  a  cognition  its 
matter,  we  shall  say:  “Of  the  truth  of  our  cog¬ 
nitions  in  respect  of  their  matter,  no  universal 


test  can  be  demanded,  because  such  a  demand 
is  self-contradictory.” 

On  the  other  hand,  with  regard  to  our  cogni¬ 
tion  in  respect  of  its  mere  form  (excluding  all 
content),  it  is  equally  manifest  that  logic,  in  so 
far  as  it  exhibits  the  universal  and  necessary 
laws  of  the  understanding,  must  in  these  very 
laws  present  us  with  criteria  of  truth.  Whatever 
contradicts  these  rules  is  false,  because  thereby 
the  understanding  is  made  to  contradict  its  own 
universal  laws  of  thought;  that  is,  to  contradict 
itself.  These  criteria,  however,  apply  solely  to 
the  form  of  truth,  that  is,  of  thought  in  general, 
and  in  so  far  they  are  perfectly  accurate,  yet 
not  sufficient.  For  although  a  cognition  may  be 
perfectly  accurate  as  to  logical  form,  that  is, 
not  self-contradictory,  it  is  notwithstanding 
quite  possible  that  it  may  not  stand  in  agree¬ 
ment  with  its  object.  Consequently,  the  merely 
logical  criterion  of  truth,  namely,  the  accord¬ 
ance  of  a  cognition  with  the  universal  and 
formal  laws  of  understanding  and  reason,  is 
nothing  more  than  the  conditio  sine  qua  non ,  or 
negative  condition  of  all  truth.  Farther  than  this 
logic  cannot  go,  and  the  error  which  depends 
not  on  the  form,  but  on  the  content  of  the  cog¬ 
nition,  it  has  no  test  to  discover. 

General  logic,  then,  resolves  the  whole  formal 
business  of  understanding  and  reason  into  its 
elements,  and  exhibits  them  as  principles  of  all 
logical  judging  of  our  cognitions.  This  part  of 
logic  may,  therefore,  be  called  analytic,  and  is 
at  least  the  negative  test  of  truth,  because  all 
cognitions  must  first  of  all  be  estimated  and 
tried  according  to  these  laws  before  we  proceed 
to  investigate  them  in  respect  of  their  content, 
in  order  to  discover  whether  they  contain  posi¬ 
tive  truth  in  regard  to  their  object.  Because, 
however,  the  mere  form  of  a  cognition,  accu¬ 
rately  as  it  may  accord  with  logical  laws,  is  in¬ 
sufficient  to  supply  us  with  material  (objective) 
truth,  no  one,  by  means  of  logic  alone,  can  ven¬ 
ture  to  predicate  anything  of  or  decide  concern¬ 
ing  objects,  unless  he  has  obtained,  independ¬ 
ently  of  logic,  well-grounded  information  about 
them,  in  order  afterwards  to  examine,  accord¬ 
ing  to  logical  laws,  into  the  use  and  connection, 
in  a  cohering  whole,  of  that  information,  or, 
what  is  still  better,  merely  to  test  it  by  them. 
Notwithstanding,  there  lies  so  seductive  a  charm 
in  the  possession  of  a  specious  art  like  this — an 
art  which  gives  to  all  our  cognitions  the  form  of 
the  understanding,  although  with  respect  to  the 
content  thereof  we  may  be  sadly  deficient — that 
general  logic,  which  is  merely  a  canon  of  judge¬ 
ment,  has  been  employed  as  an  organon  for  the 


OF  PURE  REASON 


actual  production,  or  rather  for  the  semblance 
of  production,  of  objective  assertions,  and  has 
thus  been  grossly  misapplied.  Now  general  log¬ 
ic,  in  its  assumed  character  of  organon,  is  called 
dialectic. 

Different  as  are  the  significations  in  which  the 
ancients  used  this  term  for  a  science  or  an  art, 
we  may  safely  infer,  from  their  actual  employ¬ 
ment  of  it,  that  with  them  it  was  nothing  else 
than  a  logic  of  illusion — a  sophistical  art  for 
giving  ignorance,  nay,  even  intentional  sophist¬ 
ries,  the  colouring  of  truth,  in  which  the  thor¬ 
oughness  of  procedure  which  logic  requires  was 
imitated,  and  their  topic  employed  to  cloak  the 
empty  pretensions.  Now  it  may  be  taken  as  a 
safe  and  useful  warning,  that  general  logic,  con¬ 
sidered  as  an  organon,  must  always  be  a  logic  of 
illusion,  that  is,  be  dialectical,  for,  as  it  teaches 
us  nothing  whatever  respecting  the  content  of 
our  cognitions,  but  merely  the  formal  condi¬ 
tions  of  their  accordance  with  the  understand¬ 
ing,  which  do  not  relate  to  and  are  quite  indif¬ 
ferent  in  respect  of  objects,  any  attempt  to  em¬ 
ploy  it  as  an  instrument  (organon)  in  order  to 
extend  and  enlarge  the  range  of  our  knowledge 
must  end  in  mere  prating;  any  one  being  able  to 
maintain  or  oppose,  with  some  appearance  of 
truth,  any  single  assertion  whatever. 

Such  instruction  is  quite  unbecoming  the  dig¬ 
nity  of  philosophy.  For  these  reasons  we  have 
chosen  to  denominate  this  part  of  logic  dialec¬ 
tic ,  in  the  sense  of  a  critique  of  dialectical  illu¬ 
sion,  and  we  wish  the  term  to  be  so  understood 
in  this  place. 

IV.  Of  the  Division  of  Transcendental  Logic 

into  Transcendental  Analytic  and  Dialectic 

In  transcendental  logic  we  isolate  the  under¬ 
standing  (as  in  transcendental  aesthetic  the  sen¬ 
sibility)  and  select  from  our  cognition  merely 
that  part  of  thought  which  has  its  origin  in  the 
understanding  alone.  The  exercise  of  this  pure 
cognition,  however,  depends  upon  this  as  its 
condition,  that  objects  to  which  it  may  be  ap¬ 
plied  be  given  to  us  in  intuition,  for  without  in¬ 
tuition  the  whole  of  our  cognition  is  without  ob¬ 
jects,  and  is  therefore  quite  void.  That  part  of 


37 

transcendental  logic,  then,  which  treats  of  the 
elements  of  pure  cognition  of  the  understand¬ 
ing,  and  of  the  principles  without  which  no  ob¬ 
ject  at  all  can  be  thought,  is  transcendental  ana¬ 
lytic,  and  at  the  same  time  a  logic  of  truth.  For 
no  cognition  can  contradict  it,  without  losing  at 
the  same  time  all  content,  that  is,  losing  all  ref¬ 
erence  to  an  object,  and  therefore  all  truth.  But 
because  we  are  very  easily  seduced  into  employ¬ 
ing  these  pure  cognitions  and  principles  of  the 
understanding  by  themselves,  and  that  even  be¬ 
yond  the  boundaries  of  experience,  which  yet  is 
the  only  source  whence  we  can  obtain  matter 
(objects)  on  which  those  pure  conceptions  may 
be  employed — understanding  runs  the  risk  of 
making,  by  means  of  empty  sophisms,  a  mate¬ 
rial  and  objective  use  of  the  mere  formal  prin¬ 
ciples  of  the  pure  understanding,  and  of  passing 
judgements  on  objects  without  distinction — ob¬ 
jects  which  are  not  given  to  us,  nay,  perhaps 
cannot  be  given  to  us  in  any  way.  Now,  as  it 
ought  properly  to  be  only  a  canon  for  judging 
of  the  empirical  use  of  the  understanding,  this 
kind  of  logic  is  misused  when  we  seek  to  employ 
it  as  an  organon  of  the  universal  and  unlimited 
exercise  of  the  understanding,  and  attempt  with 
the  pure  understanding  alone  to  judge  syntheti¬ 
cally,  affirm,  and  determine  respecting  objects 
in  general.  In  this  case  the  exercise  of  the  pure 
understanding  becomes  dialectical.  The  second 
part  of  our  transcendental  logic  must  therefore 
be  a  critique  of  dialectical  illusion,  and  this  cri¬ 
tique  we  shall  term  transcendental  dialectic — not 
meaning  it  as  an  art  of  producing  dogmatically 
such  illusion  (an  art  which  is  unfortunately  too 
current  among  the  practitioners  of  metaphysical 
juggling),  but  as  a  critique  of  understanding 
and  reason  in  regard  to  their  hyperphysical  use. 
This  critique  will  expose  the  groundless  nature 
of  the  pretensions  of  these  two  faculties,  and 
invalidate  their  claims  to  the  discovery  and 
enlargement  of  our  cognitions  merely  by 
means  of  transcendental  principles,  and  show 
that  the  proper  employment  of  these  faculties 
is  to  test  the  judgements  made  by  the  pure 
understanding,  and  to  guard  it  from  sophistical 
delusion. 


38 


THE  CRITIQUE 


Transcendental  Logic.  First  Division 


Transcendental  Analytic 
§  i 

Transcendental  analytic  is  the  dissection  of 
the  whole  of  our  a  priori  knowledge  into  the  ele¬ 
ments  of  the  pure  cognition  of  the  understand¬ 
ing.  In  order  to  effect  our  purpose,  it  is  neces¬ 
sary:  (i)  That  the  conceptions  be  pure  and  not 
empirical;  (2)  That  they  belong  not  to  intui¬ 
tion  and  sensibility,  but  to  thought  and  under¬ 
standing;  (3)  That  they  be  elementary  concep¬ 
tions,  and  as  such,  quite  different  from  deduced 
or  compound  conceptions;  (4)  That  our  table 
of  these  elementary  conceptions  be  complete, 
and  fill  up  the  whole  sphere  of  the  pure  under¬ 
standing.  Now  this  completeness  of  a  science 
cannot  be  accepted  with  confidence  on  the  guar¬ 
antee  of  a  mere  estimate  of  its  existence  in  an 
aggregate  formed  only  by  means  of  repeated  ex¬ 
periments  and  attempts.  The  completeness  which 
we  require  is  possible  only  by  means  of  an  idea 
of  the  totality  of  the  a  priori  cognition  of  the 
understanding,  and  through  the  thereby  deter¬ 
mined  division  of  the  conceptions  which  form 
the  said  whole ;  consequently,  only  by  means  of 
their  connection  in  a  system.  Pure  understand¬ 
ing  distinguishes  itself  not  merely  from  every¬ 
thing  empirical,  but  also  completely  from  all 
sensibility.  It  is  a  unity  self-subsistent,  self-suf¬ 
ficient,  and  not  to  be  enlarged  by  any  additions 
from  without.  Hence  the  sum  of  its  cognition 
constitutes  a  system  to  be  determined  by  and 
comprised  under  an  idea;  and  the  completeness 
and  articulation  of  this  system  can  at  the  same 
time  serve  as  a  test  of  the  correctness  and  gen¬ 
uineness  of  all  the  parts  of  cognition  that  be¬ 
long  to  it.  The  whole  of  this  part  of  transcen¬ 
dental  logic  consists  of  two  books,  of  which  the 
one  contains  the  conceptions,  and  the  other  the 
principles  of  pure  understanding. 

BOOK  I 

Analytic  of  Conceptions.  §  2 

By  the  term  Analytic  of  Conceptions,  I  do  not 
understand  the  analysis  of  these,  or  the  usual 
process  in  philosophical  investigations  of  dis¬ 
secting  the  conceptions  which  present  them¬ 
selves,  according  to  their  content,  and  so  mak¬ 
ing  them  clear;  but  I  mean  the  hitherto  little 
attempted  dissection  of  the  faculty  of  un¬ 
derstanding  itself,  in  order  to  investigate  the 


possibility  of  conceptions  a  priori,  by  looking 
for  them  in  the  understanding  alone,  as  their 
birthplace,  and  analysing  the  pure  use  of  this  1 
faculty.  For  this  is  the  proper  duty  of  a  tran¬ 
scendental  philosophy;  what  remains  is  the  logi¬ 
cal  treatment  of  the  conceptions  in  philosophy 
in  general.  We  shall  therefore  follow  up  the  pure 
conceptions  even  to  their  germs  and  beginnings 
in  the  human  understanding,  in  which  they 
lie,  until  they  are  developed  on  occasions  pre¬ 
sented  by  experience,  and,  freed  by  the  same 
understanding  from  the  empirical  conditions 
attaching  to  them,  are  set  forth  in  their  un¬ 
alloyed  purity. 

Chapter  I  .Of  the  Tra?isce?idental  Clue  to  the 

Discovery  of  all  Pure  Conceptions  of  the  Un¬ 
derstanding 

Introductory.  §  3 

When  we  call  into  play  a  faculty  of  cognition, 
different  conceptions  manifest  themselves  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  different  circumstances,  and  make 
known  this  faculty,  and  assemble  themselves  into 
a  more  or  less  extensive  collection,  according  to 
the  time  or  penetration  that  has  been  applied  to 
the  consideration  of  them.  Where  this  process, 
conducted  as  it  is  mechanically,  so  to  speak,  will 
end,  cannot  be  determined  with  certainty.  Be¬ 
sides,  the  conceptions  which  we  discover  in  this 
haphazard  manner  present  themselves  by  no 
means  in  order  and  systematic  unity,  but  are  at 
last  coupled  together  only  according  to  resem¬ 
blances  to  each  other,  and  arranged  in  series, 
according  to  the  quantity  of  their  content,  from 
the  simpler  to  the  more  complex — series  which 
are  anything  but  systematic,  though  not  alto¬ 
gether  without  a  certain  kind  of  method  in  their 
construction. 

Transcendental  philosophy  has  the  advantage, 
and  moreover  the  duty,  of  searching  for  its  con¬ 
ceptions  according  to  a  principle;  because  these 
conceptions  spring  pure  and  unmixed  out  of  the 
understanding  as  an  absolute  unity,  and  there¬ 
fore  must  be  connected  with  each  other  accord¬ 
ing  to  one  conception  or  idea.  A  connection  of 
this  kind,  however,  furnishes  us  with  a  ready 
prepared  rule,  by  which  its  proper  place  may  be 
assigned  to  every  pure  conception  of  the  under¬ 
standing,  and  the  completeness  of  the  system  of 
all  be  determined  a  priori — both  which  would 
otherwise  have  been  dependent  on  mere  choice 
or  chance. 


OF  PURE  REASON 


Section  I.  Of  the  Logical  Use  of  the  Under¬ 
standing  in  general.  §  4 

The  understanding  was  defined  above  only 
negatively,  as  a  non-sensuous  faculty  of  cogni¬ 
tion.  Now,  independently  of  sensibility,  we  can¬ 
not  possibly  have  any  intuition;  consequently, 
the  understanding  is  no  faculty  of  intuition.  But 
besides  intuition  there  is  no  other  mode  of  cog¬ 
nition,  except  through  conceptions;  consequent¬ 
ly,  the  cognition  of  every,  at  least  of  every  hu¬ 
man,  understanding  is  a  cognition  through  con¬ 
ceptions — not  intuitive,  but  discursive.  All  in¬ 
tuitions,  as  sensuous,  depend  on  affections;  con¬ 
ceptions,  therefore,  upon  functions.  By  the  word 
function  I  understand  the  unity  of  the  act  of 
arranging  diverse  representations  under  one 
common  representation.  Conceptions,  then,  are 
based  on  the  spontaneity  of  thought,  as  sensu¬ 
ous  intuitions  are  on  the  receptivity  of  impres¬ 
sions.  Now,  the  understanding  cannot  make  any 
other  use  of  these  conceptions  than  to  judge  by 
means  of  them.  As  no  representation,  except  an 
intuition,  relates  immediately  to  its  object,  a 
conception  never  relates  immediately  to  an  ob¬ 
ject,  but  only  to  some  other  representation 
thereof,  be  that  an  intuition  or  itself  a  concep¬ 
tion.  A  judgement,  therefore,  is  the  mediate  cog¬ 
nition  of  an  object,  consequently  the  represen¬ 
tation  of  a  representation  of  it.  In  every  judge¬ 
ment  there  is  a  conception  which  applies  to,  and 
is  valid  for  many  other  conceptions,  and  which 
among  these  comprehends  also  a  given  repre¬ 
sentation,  this  last  being  immediately  connected 
with  an  object.  For  example,  in  the  judgement — 
“All  bodies  are  divisible,”  our  conception  of  di¬ 
visible  applies  to  various  other  conceptions; 
among  these,  however,  it  is  here  particularly  ap¬ 
plied  to  the  conception  of  body,  and  this  con¬ 
ception  of  body  relates  to  certain  phenomena 
which  occur  to  us.  These  objects,  therefore,  are 
mediately  represented  by  the  conception  of  di¬ 
visibility.  All  judgements,  accordingly,  are  func¬ 
tions  of  unity  in  our  representations,  inasmuch 
as,  instead  of  an  immediate,  a  higher  represen¬ 
tation,  which  comprises  this  and  various  others, 
is  used  for  our  cognition  of  the  object,  and 
thereby  many  possible  cognitions  are  collected 
into  one.  But  we  can  reduce  all  acts  of  the  un¬ 
derstanding  to  judgements,  so  that  understand¬ 
ing  may  be  represented  as  the  faculty  of  judg¬ 
ing.  For  it  is,  according  to  what  has  been  said 
above,  a  faculty  of  thought.  Now  thought  is 
cognition  by  means  of  conceptions.  But  concep¬ 
tions,  as  predicates  of  possible  judgements,  re¬ 
late  to  some  representation  of  a  yet  undeter¬ 


39 

mined  object.  Thus  the  conception  of  body  in¬ 
dicates  something — for  example,  metal — which 
can  be  cognized  by  means  of  that  conception. 
It  is  therefore  a  conception,  for  the  reason 
alone  that  other  representations  are  contained 
under  it,  by  means  of  which  it  can  relate  to 
objects.  It  is  therefore  the  predicate  to  a 
possible  judgement;  for  example:  “Every  metal 
is  a  body.”  All  the  functions  of  the  under¬ 
standing  therefore  can  be  discovered,  when 
we  can  completely  exhibit  the  functions  of 
unity  in  judgements.  And  that  this  may  be 
effected  very  easily,  the  following  section  will 
show. 

Section  II.  Of  the  Logical  Function  of  the 
Understanding  in  Judgements.  §  5 

If  we  abstract  all  the  content  of  a  judgement, 
and  consider  only  the  intellectual  form  thereof, 
we  find  that  the  function  of  thought  in  a  judge¬ 
ment  can  be  brought  under  four  heads,  of  which 
each  contains  three  momenta.  These  may  be 
conveniently  represented  in  the  following  table: 

1 

Quantity  of  judgements 
Universal 
Particular 
Singular 

3 

Relation 
Categorical 
Hypothetical 
Disjunctive 

4 

Modality 
Problematical 
Assertorical 
Apodeictical 

As  this  division  appears  to  differ  in  some, 
though  not  essential  points,  from  the  usual  tech¬ 
nique  of  logicians,  the  following  observations, 
for  the  prevention  of  otherwise  possible  mis¬ 
understanding,  will  not  be  without  their  use. 

1.  Logicians  say,  with  justice,  that  in  the  use 
of  judgements  in  syllogisms,  singular  judgements 
may  be  treated  like  universal  ones.  For,  precise¬ 
ly  because  a  singular  judgement  has  no  extent 
at  all,  its  predicate  cannot  refer  to  a  part  of 
that  which  is  contained  in  the  conception  of  the 
subject  and  be  excluded  from  the  rest.  The  pred¬ 
icate  is  valid  for  the  whole  conception  just  as  if 
it  were  a  general  conception,  and  had  extent,  to 
the  whole  of  which  the  predicate  applied.  On  the 


2 

Quality 

Affirmative 

Negative 

Infinite 


THE  CRITIQUE 


40 

other  hand,  let  us  compare  a  singular  with  a 
general  judgement,  merely  as  a  cognition,  in  re¬ 
gard  to  quantity.  The  singular  judgement  relates 
to  the  general  one,  as  unity  to  infinity,  and  is 
therefore  in  itself  essentially  different.  Thus,  if 
we  estimate  a  singular  judgement  ( judicium  sin - 
gulare )  not  merely  according  to  its  intrinsic  va¬ 
lidity  as  a  judgement,  but  also  as  a  cognition  gen¬ 
erally,  according  to  its  quantity  in  comparison 
with  that  of  other  cognitions,  it  is  then  entirely 
different  from  a  general  judgement  ( judicium 
commune ),  and  in  a  complete  table  of  the  mo¬ 
menta  of  thought  deserves  a  separate  place — 
though,  indeed,  this  would  not  be  necessary 
in  a  logic  limited  merely  to  the  consideration 
of  the  use  of  judgements  in  reference  to  each 
other. 

2.  In  like  manner,  in  transcendental  logic,  in¬ 
finite  must  be  distinguished  from  affirmative 
judgements,  although  in  general  logic  they  are 
rightly  enough  classed  under  affirmative.  Gen¬ 
eral  logic  abstracts  all  content  of  the  predicate 
(though  it  be  negative),  and  only  considers 
whether  the  said  predicate  be  affirmed  or  denied 
of  the  subject.  But  transcendental  logic  con¬ 
siders  also  the  worth  or  content  of  this  logical 
affirmation  —  an  affirmation  by  means  of  a 
merely  negative  predicate,  and  inquires  how 
much  the  sum  total  of  our  cognition  gains  by 
this  affirmation.  For  example,  if  I  say  of  the 
soul,  “It  is  not  mortal” — by  this  negative  judge¬ 
ment  I  should  at  least  ward  off  error.  Now,  by 
the  proposition,  “The  soul  is  not  mortal,”  I 
have,  in  respect  of  the  logical  form,  really  af¬ 
firmed,  inasmuch  as  I  thereby  place  the  soul  in 
the  unlimited  sphere  of  immortal  beings.  Now, 
because  of  the  whole  sphere  of  possible  ex¬ 
istences,  the  mortal  occupies  one  part,  and  the 
immortal  the  other,  neither  more  nor  less  is  af¬ 
firmed  by  the  proposition  than  that  the  soul 
is  one  among  the  infinite  multitude  of  things 
which  remain  over,  when  I  take  away  the  whole 
mortal  part.  But  by  this  proceeding  we  accom¬ 
plish  only  this  much,  that  the  infinite  sphere  of 
all  possible  existences  is  in  so  far  limited  that 
the  mortal  is  excluded  from  it,  and  the  soul  is 
placed  in  the  remaining  part  of  the  extent  of 
this  sphere.  But  this  part  remains,  notwith¬ 
standing  this  exception,  infinite,  and  more  and 
more  parts  may  be  taken  away  from  the  whole 
sphere,  without  in  the  slightest  degree  thereby 
augmenting  or  affirmatively  determining  our 
conception  of  the  soul.  These  judgements,  there¬ 
fore,  infinite  in  respect  of  their  logical  extent, 
are,  in  respect  of  the  content  of  their  cognition, 
merely  limitative;  and  are  consequently  entitled 


to  a  place  in  our  transcendental  table  of  all  the 
momenta  of  thought  in  judgements,  because 
the  function  of  the  understanding  exercised  by 
them  may  perhaps  be  of  importance  in  the  field 
of  its  pure  a  priori  cognition. 

3.  All  relations  of  thought  in  judgements  are 
those  (a)  of  the  predicate  to  the  subject;  ( b ) 
of  the  principle  to  its  consequence;  (c)  of  the 
divided  cognition  and  all  the  members  of  the 
division  to  each  other.  In  the  first  of  these  three 
classes,  we  consider  only  two  conceptions;  in 
the  second,  two  judgements;  in  the  third,  sev¬ 
eral  judgements  in  relation  to  each  other.  The 
hypothetical  proposition,  “If  perfect  justice  ex¬ 
ists,  the  obstinately  wicked  are  punished,”  con¬ 
tains  properly  the  relation  to  each  other  of  two 
propositions,  namely,  “Perfect  justice  exists,” 
and  “The  obstinately  wicked  are  punished.” 
Whether  these  propositions  are  in  themselves 
true  is  a  question  not  here  decided.  Nothing  is 
cogitated  by  means  of  this  judgement  except  a 
certain  consequence.  Finally,  the  disjunctive 
judgement  contains  a  relation  of  two  or  more 
propositions  to  each  other — a  relation  not  of 
consequence,  but  of  logical  opposition,  in  so  far 
as  the  sphere  of  the  one  proposition  excludes 
that  of  the  other.  But  it  contains  at  the  same 
time  a  relation  of  community,  in  so  far  as  all 
the  propositions  taken  together  fill  up  the  sphere 
of  the  cognition.  The  disjunctive  judgement 
contains,  therefore,  the  relation  of  the  parts  of 
the  whole  sphere  of  a  cognition,  since  the  sphere 
of  each  part  is  a  complemental  part  of  the 
sphere  of  the  other,  each  contributing  to  form 
the  sum  total  of  the  divided  cognition.  Take, 
for  example,  the  proposition,  “The  world  ex¬ 
ists  either  through  blind  chance,  or  through  in¬ 
ternal  necessity,  or  through  an  external  cause.” 
Each  of  these  propositions  embraces  a  part  of 
the  sphere  of  our  possible  cognition  as  to  the 
existence  of  a  world;  all  of  them  taken  together, 
the  whole  sphere.  To  take  the  cognition  out  of 
one  of  these  spheres,  is  equivalent  to  placing  it 
in  one  of  the  others;  and,  on  the  other  hand, 
to  place  it  in  one  sphere  is  equivalent  to  taking 
it  out  of  the  rest.  There  is,  therefore,  in  a  dis¬ 
junctive  judgement  a  certain  community  of 
cognitions,  which  consists  in  this,  that  they 
mutually  exclude  each  other,  yet  thereby 
determine,  as  a  whole,  the  true  cognition, 
inasmuch  as,  taken  together,  they  make  up  the 
complete  content  of  a  particular  given  cog¬ 
nition.  And  this  is  all  that  I  find  necessary,  for 
the  sake  of  what  follows,  to  remark  in  this 
place. 

4.  The  modality  of  judgements  is  a  quite  pe- 


OF  PURE  REASON 


culiar  function,  with  this  distinguishing  char¬ 
acteristic,  that  it  contributes  nothing  to  the 
content  of  a  judgement  (for  besides  quantity, 
quality,  and  relation,  there  is  nothing  more  that 
constitutes  the  content  of  a  judgement),  but 
concerns  itself  only  with  the  value  of  the  copula 
in  relation  to  thought  in  general.  Problematical 
judgements  are  those  in  which  the  affirmation 
or  negation  is  accepted  as  merely  possible  ( ad 
libitum ).  In  the  assertorical,  we  regard  the 
proposition  as  real  (true);  in  the  apodeictical, 
we  look  on  it  as  necessary.1  Thus  the  two  judge¬ 
ments  ( antecedens  et  consequens) ,  the  relation 
of  which  constitutes  a  hypothetical  judgement, 
likewise  those  (the  members  of  the  division)  in 
whose  reciprocity  the  disjunctive  consists,  are 
only  problematical.  In  the  example  above  given, 
the  proposition,  “There  exists  perfect  justice,” 
is  not  stated  assertorically,  but  as  an  ad  libitum 
judgement,  which  someone  may  choose  to 
adopt,  and  the  consequence  alone  is  assertorical. 
Hence  such  judgements  may  be  obviously  false, 
and  yet,  taken  problematically,  be  conditions  of 
our  cognition  of  the  truth.  Thus  the  proposition, 
“The  world  exists  only  by  blind  chance,”  is  in 
the  disjunctive  judgement  of  problematical  im¬ 
port  only:  that  is  to  say,  one  may  accept  it  for 
the  moment,  and  it  helps  us  (like  the  indication 
of  the  wrong  road  among  all  the  roads  that  one 
can  take)  to  find  out  the  true  proposition.  The 
problematical  proposition  is,  therefore,  that 
which  expresses  only  logical  possibility  (which 
is  not  objective) ;  that  is,  it  expresses  a  free 
choice  to  admit  the  validity  of  such  a  proposi¬ 
tion — a  merely  arbitrary  reception  of  it  into 
the  understanding.  The  assertorical  speaks  of 
logical  reality  or  truth;  as.  for  example,  in  a  hy¬ 
pothetical  syllogism,  the  antecedens  presents 
itself  in  a  problematical  form  in  the  major ,  in 
an  assertorical  form  in  the  minor,  and  it  shows 
that  the  proposition  is  in  harmony  with  the  laws 
of  the  understanding.  The  apodeictical  proposi¬ 
tion  cogitates  the  assertorical  as  determined  by 
these  very  laws  of  the  understanding,  conse¬ 
quently  as  affirming  a  priori,  and  in  this  manner 
it  expresses  logical  necessity.  Now  because  all  is 
here  gradually  incorporated  with  the  under¬ 
standing — inasmuch  as  in  the  first  place  we 
judge  problematically;  then  accept  assertorical¬ 
ly  our  judgement  as  true;  lastly,  affirm  it  as  in¬ 
separably  united  with  the  understanding,  that  is, 
as  necessary  and  apodeictical — we  may  safely 

1  Just  as  if  thought  were  in  the  first  instance  a  func¬ 
tion  of  the  understanding;  in  the  second,  of  judgement; 
in  the  third,  of  reason.  A  remark  which  will  be  ex¬ 
plained  in  the  sequel. 


reckon  these  three  functions  of  modality  as  so 
many  momenta  of  thought. 

Section  III.  Of  the  Pure  Conceptions  of  the 
Understanding,  or  Categories.  §6 

General  logic,  as  has  been  repeatedly  said, 
makes  abstraction  of  all  content  of  cognition, 
and  expects  to  receive  representations  from 
some  other  quarter,  in  order,  by  means  of 
analysis,  to  convert  them  into  conceptions.  On 
the  contrary,  transcendental  logic  has  lying  be¬ 
fore  it  the  manifold  content  of  a  priori  sensi¬ 
bility,  which  transcendental  aesthetic  presents 
to  it  in  order  to  give  matter  to  the  pure  concep¬ 
tions  of  the  understanding,  without  which  tran¬ 
scendental  logic  would  have  no  content,  and  be 
therefore  utterly  void.  Now  space  and  time 
contain  an  infinite  diversity  of  determinations 
of  pure  a  priori  intuition,  but  are  nevertheless 
the  condition  of  the  mind’s  receptivity,  under 
which  alone  it  can  obtain  representations  of  ob¬ 
jects,  and  which,  consequently,  must  always  af¬ 
fect  the  conception  of  these  objects.  But  the 
spontaneity  of  thought  requires  that  this  di¬ 
versity  be  examined  after  a  certain  manner,  re¬ 
ceived  into  the  mind,  and  connected,  in  order 
afterwards  to  form  a  cognition  out  of  it.  This 
process  I  call  synthesis. 

By  the  word  synthesis,  in  its  most  general 
signification,  I  understand  the  process  of  join¬ 
ing  different  representations  to  each  other  and 
of  comprehending  their  diversity  in  one  cogni¬ 
tion.  This  synthesis  is  pure  when  the  diversity 
is  not  given  empirically  but  a  priori  (as  that  in 
space  and  time).  Our  representations  must  be 
given  previously  to  any  analysis  of  them;  and 
no  conceptions  can  arise,  quoad  their  content, 
analytically.  But  the  synthesis  of  a  diversity 
(be  it  given  a  priori  or  empirically)  is  the  first 
requisite  for  the  production  of  a  cognition, 
which  in  its  beginning,  indeed,  may  be  crude 
and  confused,  and  therefore  in  need  of  analysis 
— still,  synthesis  is  that  by  which  alone  the  ele¬ 
ments  of  our  cognitions  are  collected  and  united 
into  a  certain  content,  consequently  it  is  the 
first  thing  on  which  we  must  fix  our  attention, 
if  we  wish  to  investigate  the  origin  of  our  knowl¬ 
edge. 

Synthesis,  generally  speaking,  is,  as  we  shall 
afterwards  see,  the  mere  operation  of  the  imag¬ 
ination — a  blind  but  indispensable  function  of 
the  soul,  without  which  we  should  have  no  cog¬ 
nition  whatever,  but  of  the  working  of  which 
we  are  seldom  even  conscious.  But  to  reduce 
this  synthesis  to  conceptions  is  a  function 
of  the  understanding,  by  means  of  which  we 


42 


THE  CRITIQUE 


attain  to  cognition,  in  the  proper  meaning  of 
the  term. 

Pure  synthesis,  represented  generally,  gives 
us  the  pure  conception  of  the  understanding. 
But  by  this  pure  synthesis,  I  mean  that  which 
rests  upon  a  basis  of  a  priori  synthetical  unity. 
Thus,  our  numeration  (and  this  is  more  ob¬ 
servable  in  large  numbers)  is  a  synthesis  ac¬ 
cording  to  conceptions,  because  it  takes  place 
according  to  a  common  basis  of  unity  (for  ex¬ 
ample,  the  decade).  By  means  of  this  concep¬ 
tion,  therefore,  the  unity  in  the  synthesis  of  the 
manifold  becomes  necessary. 

By  means  of  analysis  different  representa¬ 
tions  are  brought  under  one  conception — an  op¬ 
eration  of  which  general  logic  treats.  On  the 
other  hand,  the  duty  of  transcendental  logic  is 
to  reduce  to  conceptions,  not  representations, 
but  the  pure  synthesis  of  representations.  The 
first  thing  which  must  be  given  to  us  for  the 
sake  of  the  a  priori  cognition  of  all  objects,  is 
the  diversity  of  the  pure  intuition;  the  synthe¬ 
sis  of  this  diversity  by  means  of  the  imagination 
is  the  second;  but  this  gives,  as  yet,  no  cogni¬ 
tion.  The  conceptions  which  give  unity  to  this 
pure  synthesis,  and  which  consist  solely  in  the 
representation  of  this  necessary  synthetical  uni¬ 
ty,  furnish  the  third  requisite  for  the  cognition 
of  an  object,  and  these  conceptions  are  given 
by  the  understanding. 

The  same  function  which  gives  unity  to  the 
different  representation  in  a  judgement,  gives 
also  unity  to  the  mere  synthesis  of  different  rep¬ 
resentations  in  an  intuition;  and  this  unity  we 
call  the  pure  conception  of  the  understanding. 
Thus,  the  same  understanding,  and  by  the  same 
operations,  whereby  in  conceptions,  by  means 
of  analytical  unity,  it  produced  the  logical  form 
of  a  judgement,  introduces,  by  means  of  the 
synthetical  unity  of  the  manifold  in  intuition, 
a  transcendental  content  into  its  representa¬ 
tions,  on  which  account  they  are  called  pure 
conceptions  of  the  understanding,  and  they  ap¬ 
ply  a  priori  to  objects,  a  result  not  within  the 
power  of  general  logic. 

In  this  manner,  there  arise  exactly  so  many 
pure  conceptions  of  the  understanding,  apply¬ 
ing  a  priori  to  objects  of  intuition  in  general, 
as  there  are  logical  functions  in  all  possible 
judgements.  For  there  is  no  other  function  or 
faculty  existing  in  the  understanding  besides 
those  enumerated  in  that  table.  These  concep¬ 
tions  we  shall,  with  Aristotle,  call  categories, 
our  purpose  being  originally  identical  with  his, 
notwithstanding  the  great  difference  in  the  exe¬ 
cution. 


Table  of  the  Categories 


Of  Quantity 
Unity 
Plurality 
Totality 


Of  Quality 
Reality 
Negation 
Limitation 


3 

Of  Relation 

Of  Inherence  and  Subsistence  ( substantia  et 
accidens ) 

Of  Causality  and  Dependence  (cause  and  effect) 
Of  Community  (reciprocity  between  the  agent 
and  patient) 


4 

Of  Modality 

Possibility — Impossibility 
Existence — N  on-existence 
Necessity — Contingence 

This,  then,  is  a  catalogue  of  all  the  originally 
pure  conceptions  of  the  synthesis  which  the 
understanding  contains  a  priori ,  and  these  con¬ 
ceptions  alone  entitle  it  to  be  called  a  pure  un¬ 
derstanding;  inasmuch  as  only  by  them  it  can 
render  the  manifold  of  intuition  conceivable,  in 
other  words,  think  an  object  of  intuition.  This 
division  is  made  systematically  from  a  common 
principle,  namely  the  faculty  of  judgement  (which 
is  just  the  same  as  the  power  of  thought),  and 
has  not  arisen  rhapsodically  from  a  search  at 
haphazard  after  pure  conceptions,  respecting 
the  full  number  of  which  we  never  could  be  cer¬ 
tain,  inasmuch  as  we  employ  induction  alone  in 
our  search,  without  considering  that  in  this  way 
we  can  never  understand  wherefore  precisely 
these  conceptions,  and  none  others,  abide  in 
the  pure  understanding.  It  was  a  design  worthy 
of  an  acute  thinker  like  Aristotle,  to  search  for 
these  fundamental  conceptions.  Destitute,  how¬ 
ever,  of  any  guiding  principle,  he  picked  them 
up  just  as  they  occurred  to  him,  and  at  first 
hunted  out  ten,  which  he  called  categories  ( pre¬ 
dicaments ).  Afterwards  he  believed  that  he  had 
discovered  five  others,  which  were  added  under 
the  name  of  post  predicaments.  But  his  cata¬ 
logue  still  remained  defective.  Besides,  there  are 
to  be  found  among  them  some  of  the  modes  of 
pure  sensibility  (quando,  ubi,  situs ,  also  prius, 
simuV),  and  likewise  an  empirical  conception 
( motus ) — which  can  by  no  means  belong  to 
this  genealogical  register  of  the  pure  under¬ 
standing.  Moreover,  there  are  deduced  con¬ 
ceptions  (actio,  passio)  enumerated  among  the 


OF  PURE 

original  conceptions,  and,  of  the  latter,  some 
are  entirely  wanting. 

With  regard  to  these,  it  is  to  be  remarked, 
that  the  categories,  as  the  true  primitive  con¬ 
ceptions  of  the  pure  understanding,  have  also 
their  pure  deduced  conceptions,  which,  in  a  com¬ 
plete  system  of  transcendental  philosophy,  must 
by  no  means  be  passed  over;  though  in  a  merely 
critical  essay  we  must  be  contented  with  the 
simple  mention  of  the  fact. 

Let  it  be  allowed  me  to  call  these  pure,  but 
deduced  conceptions  of  the  understanding,  the 
predicables  of  the  pure  understanding,  in  con¬ 
tradistinction  to  predicaments.  If  we  are  in  pos¬ 
session  of  the  original  and  primitive,  the  de¬ 
duced  and  subsidiary  conceptions  can  easily  be 
added,  and  the  genealogical  tree  of  the  under¬ 
standing  completely  delineated.  As  my  present 
aim  is  not  to  set  forth  a  complete  system,  but 
merely  the  principles  of  one,  I  reserve  this  task 
for  another  time.  It  may  be  easily  executed  by 
any  one  who  will  refer  to  the  ontological  man¬ 
uals,  and  subordinate  to  the  category  of  cau¬ 
sality,  for  example,  the  predicables  of  force,  ac¬ 
tion,  passion;  to  that  of  community,  those  of 
presence  and  resistance;  to  the  categories  of  mo¬ 
dality,  those  of  origination,  extinction,  change; 
and  so  with  the  rest.  The  categories  combined 
with  the  modes  of  pure  sensibility,  or  with  one 
another,  afford  a  great  number  of  deduced  a 
priori  conceptions;  a  complete  enumeration  of 
which  would  be  a  useful  and  not  unpleasant,  but 
in  this  place  a  perfectly  dispensable,  occupation. 

I  purposely  omit  the  definitions  of  the  cate¬ 
gories  in  this  treatise.  I  shall  analyse  these  con¬ 
ceptions  only  so  far  as  is  necessary  for  the  doc¬ 
trine  of  method,  which  is  to  form  a  part  of  this 
critique.  In  a  system  of  pure  reason,  definitions 
of  them  would  be  with  justice  demanded  of  me, 
but  to  give  them  here  would  only  hide  from  our 
view  the  main  aim  of  our  investigation,  at  the 
same  time  raising  doubts  and  objections,  the 
consideration  of  which,  without  injustice  to  our 
main  purpose,  may  be  very  well  postponed  till 
another  opportunity.  Meanwhile,  it  ought  to  be 
sufficiently  clear,  from  the  little  we  have  already 
said  on  this  subject,  that  the  formation  of  a 
complete  vocabulary  of  pure  conceptions,  ac¬ 
companied  by  all  the  requisite  explanations,  is 
not  only  a  possible,  but  an  easy  undertaking.  The 
compartments  already  exist;  it  is  only  necessary 
to  fill  them  up;  and  a  systematic  topic  like  the 
present,  indicates  with  perfect  precision  the 
proper  place  to  which  each  conception  belongs, 
while  it  readily  points  out  any  that  have  not  yet 
been  filled  up. 


REASON  43 

§7 

Our  table  of  the  categories  suggests  consider¬ 
ations  of  some  importance,  which  may  perhaps 
have  significant  results  in  regard  to  the  scientific 
form  of  all  rational  cognitions.  For,  that  this 
table  is  useful  in  the  theoretical  part  of  philoso¬ 
phy,  nay,  indispensable  for  the  sketching  of  the 
complete  plan  of  a  science,  so  far  as  that  sci¬ 
ence  rests  upon  conceptions  a  priori,  and  for  di¬ 
viding  it  mathematically,  according  to  fixed 
principles,  is  most  manifest  from  the  fact  that 
it  contains  all  the  elementary  conceptions  of 
the  understanding,  nay,  even  the  form  of  a 
system  of  these  in  the  understanding  itself, 
and  consequently  indicates  all  the  momenta, 
and  also  the  internal  arrangement  of  a  project¬ 
ed  speculative  science,  as  I  have  elsewhere 
shown.1  Here  follow  some  of  these  obser¬ 
vations. 

i.  This  table,  which  contains  four  classes  of 
conceptions  of  the  understanding,  may,  in  the 
first  instance,  be  divided  into  two  classes,  the 
first  of  which  relates  to  objects  of  intuition — 
pure  as  well  as  empirical;  the  second,  to  the 
existence  of  these  objects,  either  in  relation  to 
one  another,  or  to  the  understanding. 

The  former  of  these  classes  of  categories  I 
would  entitle  the  mathematical,  and  the  latter 
the  dynamical  categories.  The  former,  as  we  see, 
has  no  correlates;  these  are  only  to  be  found 
in  the  second  class.  This  difference  must  have 
a  ground  in  the  nature  of  the  human  under¬ 
standing. 

n.  The  number  of  the  categories  in  each  class 
is  always  the  same,  namely,  three — a  fact  which 
also  demands  some  consideration,  because  in  all 
other  cases  division  a  priori  through  conceptions 
is  necessarily  dichotomy.  It  is  to  be  added,  that 
the  third  category  in  each  triad  always  arises 
from  the  combination  of  the  second  with  the 
first. 

Thus  totality  is  nothing  else  but  plurality 
contemplated  as  unity;  limitation  is  merely  re¬ 
ality  conjoined  with  negation;  community  is  the 
causality  of  a  substance,  reciprocally  determin¬ 
ing,  and  determined  by  other  substances;  and 
finally,  necessity  is  nothing  but  existence,  which 
is  given  through  the  possibility  itself.  Let  it  not 
be  supposed,  however,  that  the  third  category 
is  merely  a  deduced,  and  not  a  primitive  con¬ 
ception  of  the  pure  understanding.  For  the  con¬ 
junction  of  the  first  and  second,  in  order  to  pro¬ 
duce  the  third  conception,  requires  a  particular 
function  of  the  understanding,  which  is  by  no 

1  In  the  Metaphysical  Principles  of  Natural  Science . 


44  THE  CRITIQUE 


means  identical  with  those  which  are  exercised 
in  the  first  and  second.  Thus,  the  conception  of 
a  number  (which  belongs  to  the  category  of 
totality)  is  not  always  possible,  where  the  con¬ 
ceptions  of  multitude  and  unity  exist  (for  ex¬ 
ample,  in  the  representation  of  the  infinite).  Or, 
if  I  conjoin  the  conception  of  a  cause  with  that 
of  a  substance,  it  does  not  follow  that  the  con¬ 
ception  of  influence ,  that  is,  how  one  substance 
can  be  the  cause  of  something  in  another  sub¬ 
stance,  will  be  understood  from  that.  Thus  it  is 
evident  that  a  particular  act  of  the  understand¬ 
ing  is  here  necessary;  and  so  in  the  other  in¬ 
stances. 

in.  With  respect  to  one  category,  namely, 
that  of  community,  which  is  found  in  the  third 
class,  it  is  not  so  easy  as  with  the  others  to  de¬ 
tect  its  accordance  with  the  form  of  the  disjunc¬ 
tive  judgement  which  corresponds  to  it  in  the 
table  of  the  logical  functions. 

In  order  to  assure  ourselves  of  this  accord¬ 
ance,  we  must  observe  that  in  every  disjunctive 
judgement,  the  sphere  of  the  judgement  (that 
is,  the  complex  of  all  that  is  contained  in  it)  is 
represented  as  a  whole  divided  into  parts;  and, 
since  one  part  cannot  be  contained  in  the  other, 
they  are  cogitated  as  co-ordinated  with,  not  sub¬ 
ordinated  to  each  other,  so  that  they  do  not  de¬ 
termine  each  other  unilaterally,  as  in  a  linear 
series,  but  reciprocally,  as  in  an  aggregate — (if 
one  member  of  the  division  is  posited,  all  the 
rest  are  excluded;  and  conversely). 

Now  a  like  connection  is  cogitated  in  a  whole 
of  things;  for  one  thing  is  not  subordinated,  as 
effect,  to  another  as  cause  of  its  existence,  but, 
on  the  contrary,  is  co-ordinated  contempora¬ 
neously  and  reciprocally,  as  a  cause  in  relation 
to  the  determination  of  the  others  (for  example, 
in  a  body — the  parts  of  which  mutually  attract 
and  repel  each  other).  And  this  is  an  entirely 
different  kind  of  connection  from  that  which  we 
find  in  the  mere  relation  of  the  cause  to  the 
effect  (the  principle  to  the  consequence),  for  in 
such  a  connection  the  consequence  does  not  in 
its  turn  determine  the  principle,  and  therefore 
does  not  constitute,  with  the  latter,  a  whole — 
just  as  the  Creator  does  not  with  the  world 
make  up  a  whole.  The  process  of  understand¬ 
ing  by  which  it  represents  to  itself  the  sphere 
of  a  divided  conception,  is  employed  also  when 
we  think  of  a  thing  as  divisible;  and  in  the  same 
manner  as  the  members  of  the  division  in  the 
former  exclude  one  another,  and  yet  are  con¬ 
nected  in  one  sphere,  so  the  understanding  rep¬ 
resents  to  itself  the  parts  of  the  latter,  as  hav¬ 
ing —  each  of  them  —  an  existence  (as  sub¬ 


stances),  independently  of  the  others,  and  yet 
as  united  in  one  whole. 

§8 

In  the  transcendental  philosophy  of  the  an¬ 
cients  there  exists  one  more  leading  division, 
which  contains  pure  conceptions  of  the  under¬ 
standing,  and  which,  although  not  numbered 
among  the  categories,  ought,  according  to  them, 
as  conceptions  a  priori,  to  be  valid  of  objects. 
But  in  this  case  they  would  augment  the  num¬ 
ber  of  the  categories;  which  cannot  be.  These 
are  set  forth  in  the  proposition,  so  renowned 
among  the  schoolmen — “Quodlibet  ens  est  un- 
um,  verum,  BONUM."  Now,  though  the  infer¬ 
ences  from  this  principle  were  mere  tautological 
propositions,  and  though  it  is  allowed  only  by 
courtesy  to  retain  a  place  in  modern  metaphys¬ 
ics,  yet  a  thought  which  maintained  itself  for 
such  a  length  of  time,  however  empty  it  seems 
to  be,  deserves  an  investigation  of  its  origin, 
and  justifies  the  conjecture  that  it  must  be 
grounded  in  some  law  of  the  understanding, 
which,  as  is  often  the  case,  has  only  been  er¬ 
roneously  interpreted.  These  pretended  tran¬ 
scendental  predicates  are,  in  fact,  nothing  but 
logical  requisites  and  criteria  of  all  cognition  of 
objects,  and  they  employ,  as  the  basis  for  this 
cognition,  the  categories  of  quantity,  namely, 
unity,  plurality,  and  totality.  But  these,  which 
must  be  taken  as  material  conditions,  that  is,  as 
belonging  to  the  possibility  of  things  themselves, 
they  employed  merely  in  a  formal  signification, 
as  belonging  to  the  logical  requisites  of  all  cogni¬ 
tion,  and  yet  most  unguardedly  changed  these 
criteria  of  thought  into  properties  of  objects,  as 
things  in  themselves.  Now,  in  every  cognition 
of  an  object,  there  is  unity  of  conception,  which 
may  be  called  qualitative  unity ,  so  far  as  by  this 
term  we  understand  only  the  unity  in  our  con¬ 
nection  of  the  manifold;  for  example,  unity  of 
the  theme  in  a  play,  an  oration,  or  a  story.  Sec¬ 
ondly,  there  is  truth  in  respect  of  the  deduc¬ 
tions  from  it.  The  more  true  deductions  we 
have  from  a  given  conception,  the  more  cri¬ 
teria  of  its  objective  reality.  This  we  might  call 
the  qualitative  plurality  of  characteristic  marks, 
which  belong  to  a  conception  as  to  a  common 
foundation,  but  are  not  cogitated  as  a  quantity 
in  it.  Thirdly,  there  is  perfection — which  con¬ 
sists  in  this,  that  the  plurality  falls  back  upon 
the  unity  of  the  conception,  and  accords  com¬ 
pletely  with  that  conception  and  with  no  other. 
This  we  may  denominate  qualitative  complete¬ 
ness.  Hence  it  is  evident  that  these  logical  cri¬ 
teria  of  the  possibility  of  cognition  are  merely 


OF  PURE 

the  three  categories  of  quantity  modified  and 
transformed  to  suit  an  unauthorized  manner  of 
applying  them.  That  is  to  say,  the  three  cate¬ 
gories,  in  which  the  unity  in  the  production  of 
the  quantum  must  be  homogeneous  throughout, 
are  transformed  solely  with  a  view  to  the  con¬ 
nection  of  heterogeneous  parts  of  cognition  in 
one  act  of  consciousness,  by  means  of  the  quali¬ 
ty  of  the  cognition,  which  is  the  principle  of 
that  connection.  Thus  the  criterion  of  the  pos¬ 
sibility  of  a  conception  (not  of  its  object)  is  the 
definition  of  it,  in  which  the  unity  of  the  con¬ 
ception,  the  truth  of  all  that  may  be  immediate¬ 
ly  deduced  from  it,  and  finally,  the  complete¬ 
ness  of  what  has  been  thus  deduced,  constitute 
the  requisites  for  the  reproduction  of  the  whole 
conception.  Thus  also,  the  criterion  or  test  of  an 
hypothesis  is  the  intelligibility  of  the  received 
principle  of  explanation,  or  its  unity  (without 
help  from  any  subsidiary  hypothesis) — the  truth 
of  our  deductions  from  it  (consistency  with 
each  other  and  with  experience) — and  lastly, 
the  completeness  of  the  principle  of  the  expla¬ 
nation  of  these  deductions,  which  refer  to  nei¬ 
ther  more  nor  less  than  what  was  admitted  in 
the  hypothesis,  restoring  analytically  and  a  pos¬ 
teriori,  what  was  cogitated  synthetically  and  a 
priori.  By  the  conceptions,  therefore,  of  unity, 
truth,  and  perfection,  we  have  made  no  addi¬ 
tion  to  the  transcendental  table  of  the  catego¬ 
ries,  which  is  complete  without  them.  We  have, 
on  the  contrary,  merely  employed  the  three  cat¬ 
egories  of  quantity,  setting  aside  their  applica¬ 
tion  to  objects  of  experience,  as  general  logical 
laws  of  the  consistency  of  cognition  with  itself. 

Chapter  II.  Of  the  Deduction  of  the  Pure  Con¬ 
ceptions  of  the  Understanding 
Section  I.  Of  the  Principles  of  a  Transcen¬ 
dental  Deduction  in  general.  §  9 

Teachers  of  jurisprudence,  when  speaking  of 
rights  and  claims,  distinguish  in  a  cause  the 
question  of  right  ( quid  juris)  from  the  question 
of  fact  ( quid  facti ),  and  while  they  demand 
proof  of  both,  they  give  to  the  proof  of  the  for¬ 
mer,  which  goes  to  establish  right  or  claim  in 
law,  the  name  of  deduction.  Now  we  make  use 
of  a  great  number  of  empirical  conceptions, 
without  opposition  from  any  one;  and  consider 
ourselves,  even  without  any  attempt  at  deduc¬ 
tion,  justified  in  attaching  to  them  a  sense,  and 
a  supposititious  signification,  because  we  have 
always  experience  at  hand  to  demonstrate  their 
objective  reality.  There  exist  also,  however, 
usurped  conceptions,  such  as  for  tune,  fate,  which 
circulate  with  almost  universal  indulgence,  and 


REASON  45 

yet  are  occasionally  challenged  by  the  question, 
“quid  juris?”  In  such  cases,  we  have  great  dif¬ 
ficulty  in  discovering  any  deduction  for  these 
terms,  inasmuch  as  we  cannot  produce  any  man¬ 
ifest  ground  of  right,  either  from  experience  or 
from  reason,  on  which  the  claim  to  employ  them 
can  be  founded. 

Among  the  many  conceptions,  which  make  up 
the  very  variegated  web  of  human  cognition, 
some  are  destined  for  pure  use  a  priori,  indepen¬ 
dent  of  all  experience;  and  their  title  to  be  so 
employed  always  requires  a  deduction,  inas¬ 
much  as,  to  justify  such  use  of  them,  proofs 
from  experience  are  not  sufficient;  but  it  is  nec¬ 
essary  to  know  how  these  conceptions  can  ap¬ 
ply  to  objects  without  being  derived  from  ex¬ 
perience.  I  term,  therefore,  an  examination  of 
the  manner  in  which  conceptions  can  apply  a 
priori  to  objects,  the  transcendental  deduction 
of  conceptions,  and  I  distinguish  it  from  the 
empirical  deduction,  which  indicates  the  mode 
in  which  a  conception  is  obtained  through  ex¬ 
perience  and  reflection  thereon;  consequently, 
does  not  concern  itself  with  the  right,  but  only 
with  the  fact  of  our  obtaining  conceptions  in 
such  and  such  a  manner.  We  have  already  seen 
that  we  are  in  possession  of  two  perfectly  dif¬ 
ferent  kinds  of  conceptions,  which  nevertheless 
agree  with  each  other  in  this,  that  they  both  ap¬ 
ply  to  objects  completely  a  priori.  These  are 
the  conceptions  of  space  and  time  as  forms  of 
sensibility,  and  the  categories  as  pure  concep¬ 
tions  of  the  understanding.  To  attempt  an  em¬ 
pirical  deduction  of  either  of  these  classes  would 
be  labour  in  vain,  because  the  distinguishing 
characteristic  of  their  nature  consists  in  this, 
that  they  apply  to  their  objects,  without  having 
borrowed  anything  from  experience  towards  the 
representation  of  them.  Consequently,  if  a  de¬ 
duction  of  these  conceptions  is  necessary,  it 
must  always  be  transcendental. 

Meanwhile,  with  respect  to  these  conceptions, 
as  with  respect  to  all  our  cognition,  we  certainly 
may  discover  in  experience,  if  not  the  principle 
of  their  possibility,  yet  the  occasioning  causes 
of  their  production.  It  will  be  found  that  the 
impressions  of  sense  give  the  first  occasion  for 
bringing  into  action  the  whole  faculty  of  cog¬ 
nition,  and  for  the  production  of  experience, 
which  contains  two  very  dissimilar  elements, 
namely,  a  matter  for  cognition,  given  by  the 
senses,  and  a  certain  form  for  the  arrangement 
of  this  matter,  arising  out  of  the  inner  fountain 
of  pure  intuition  and  thought;  and  these,  on  oc¬ 
casion  given  by  sensuous  impressions,  are  called 
into  exercise  and  produce  conceptions.  Such  an 


THE  CRITIQUE 


46 

investigation  into  the  first  efforts  of  our  faculty 
of  cognition  to  mount  from  particular  percep¬ 
tions  to  general  conceptions  is  undoubtedly  of 
great  utility;  and  we  have  to  thank  the  cele¬ 
brated  Locke  for  having  first  opened  the  way  for 
this  inquiry.  But  a  deduction  of  the  pure  a  priori 
conceptions  of  course  never  can  be  made  in  this 
way,  seeing  that,  in  regard  to  their  future  em¬ 
ployment,  which  must  be  entirely  independent 
of  experience,  they  must  have  a  far  different 
certificate  of  birth  to  show  from  that  of  a  de¬ 
scent  from  experience.  This  attempted  physio¬ 
logical  derivation,  which  cannot  properly  be 
called  deduction,  because  it  relates  merely  to  a 
quaestio  facti,  I  shall  entitle  an  explanation  of 
the  possession  of  a  pure  cognition.  It  is  there¬ 
fore  manifest  that  there  can  only  be  a  transcen¬ 
dental  deduction  of  these  conceptions  and  by 
no  means  an  empirical  one;  also,  that  all  at¬ 
tempts  at  an  empirical  deduction,  in  regard  to 
pure  a  priori  conceptions,  are  vain,  and  can  only 
be  made  by  one  who  does  not  understand  the 
altogether  peculiar  nature  of  these  cognitions. 

But  although  it  is  admitted  that  the  only 
possible  deduction  of  pure  a  priori  cognition  is 
a  transcendental  deduction,  it  is  not,  for  that 
reason,  perfectly  manifest  that  such  a  deduction 
is  absolutely  necessary.  We  have  already  traced 
to  their  sources  the  conceptions  of  space  and 
time,  by  means  of  a  transcendental  deduction, 
and  we  have  explained  and  determined  their  ob¬ 
jective  validity  a  priori.  Geometry,  nevertheless, 
advances  steadily  and  securely  in  the  province 
of  pure  a  priori  cognitions,  without  needing  to 
ask  from  philosophy  any  certificate  as  to  the 
pure  and  legitimate  origin  of  its  fundamental 
conception  of  space.  But  the  use  of  the  concep¬ 
tion  in  this  science  extends  only  to  the  external 
world  of  sense,  the  pure  form  of  the  intuition 
of  which  is  space;  and  in  this  world,  therefore, 
all  geometrical  cognition,  because  it  is  founded 
upon  a  priori  intuition,  possesses  immediate 
evidence,  and  the  objects  of  this  cognition  are 
given  a  priori  (as  regards  their  form)  in  intui¬ 
tion  by  and  through  the  cognition  itself.  With 
the  pure  conceptions  of  understanding,  on  the 
contrary,  commences  the  absolute  necessity  of 
seeking  a  transcendental  deduction,  not  only  of 
these  conceptions  themselves,  but  likewise  of 
space,  because,  inasmuch  as  they  make  affirma¬ 
tions  concerning  objects  not  by  means  of  the 
predicates  of  intuition  and  sensibility,  but  of 
pure  thought  a  priori ,  they  apply  to  objects 
without  any  of  the  conditions  of  sensibility.  Be¬ 
sides,  not  being  founded  on  experience,  they  are 
not  presented  with  any  object  in  a  priori  intui¬ 


tion  upon  which,  antecedently  to  experience, 
they  might  base  their  synthesis.  Hence  results, 
not  only  doubt  as  to  the  objective  validity  and 
proper  limits  of  their  use,  but  that  even  our 
conception  of  space  is  rendered  equivocal;  in¬ 
asmuch  as  we  are  very  ready  with  the  aid  of  the 
categories,  to  carry  the  use  of  this  conception 
beyond  the  conditions  of  sensuous  intuition — 
and,  for  this  reason,  we  have  already  found  a 
transcendental  deduction  of  it  needful.  The 
reader,  then,  must  be  quite  convinced  of  the  ab¬ 
solute  necessity  of  a  transcendental  deduction, 
before  taking  a  single  step  in  the  field  of  pure 
reason;  because  otherwise  he  goes  to  work 
blindly,  and  after  he  has  wondered  about  in  all 
directions,  returns  to  the  state  of  utter  igno¬ 
rance  from  which  he  started.  He  ought,  more¬ 
over,  clearly  to  recognize  beforehand  the  un¬ 
avoidable  difficulties  in  his  undertaking,  so  that 
he  may  not  afterwards  complain  of  the  obscu¬ 
rity  in  which  the  subject  itself  is  deeply  in¬ 
volved,  or  become  too  soon  impatient  of  the  ob¬ 
stacles  in  his  path;  because  we  have  a  choice  of 
only  two  things — either  at  once  to  give  up  all 
pretensions  to  knowledge  beyond  the  limits  of 
possible  experience,  or  to  bring  this  critical  in¬ 
vestigation  to  completion. 

We  have  been  able,  with  very  little  trouble, 
to  make  it  comprehensible  how  the  conceptions 
of  space  and  time,  although  a  priori  cognitions, 
must  necessarily  apply  to  external  objects,  and 
render  a  synthetical  cognition  of  these  possible, 
independently  of  all  experience.  For  inasmuch 
as  only  by  means  of  such  pure  form  of  sensibil¬ 
ity  an  object  can  appear  to  us,  that  is,  be  an 
object  of  empirical  intuition,  space  and  time  are 
pure  intuitions,  which  contain  a  priori  the  con¬ 
dition  of  the  possibility  of  objects  as  phenom¬ 
ena,  and  an  a  priori  synthesis  in  these  intuitions 
possesses  objective  validity. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  categories  of  the  un¬ 
derstanding  do  not  represent  the  conditions  un¬ 
der  which  objects  are  given  to  us  in  intuition; 
objects  can  consequently  appear  to  us  without 
necessarily  connecting  themselves  with  these, 
and  consequently  without  any  necessity  binding 
on  the  understanding  to  contain  a  priori  the 
conditions  of  these  objects.  Thus  we  find  our¬ 
selves  involved  in  a  difficulty  which  did  not  pre¬ 
sent  itself  in  the  sphere  of  sensibility,  that  is  to 
say,  we  cannot  discover  how  the  subjective  con¬ 
ditions  oj  thought  can  have  objective  validity , 
in  other  words,  can  become  conditions  of  the 
possibility  of  all  cognition  of  objects;  for  phe¬ 
nomena  may  certainly  be  given  to  us  in  intuition 
without  any  help  from  the  functions  of  the  un- 


OF  PURE 


derstanding.  Let  us  take,  for  example,  the  con¬ 
ception  of  cause ,  which  indicates  a  peculiar  kind 
of  synthesis,  namely,  that  with  something,  A, 
something  entirely  different,  B,  is  connected  ac¬ 
cording  to  a  law.  It  is  not  a  priori  manifest  why 
phenomena  should  contain  anything  of  this  kind 
(we  are  of  course  debarred  from  appealing  for 
proof  to  experience,  for  the  objective  validity 
of  this  conception  must  be  demonstrated  a  pri¬ 
ori),  and  it  hence  remains  doubtful  a  priori , 
whether  such  a  conception  be  not  quite  void 
and  without  any  corresponding  object  among 
phenomena.  For  that  objects  of  sensuous  intui¬ 
tion  must  correspond  to  the  formal  conditions 
of  sensibility  existing  a  priori  in  the  mind  is 
quite  evident,  from  the  fact  that  without  these 
they  could  not  be  objects  for  us;  but  that  they 
must  also  correspond  to  the  conditions  which 
understanding  requires  for  the  synthetical  unity 
of  thought  is  an  assertion,  the  grounds  for 
which  are  not  so  easily  to  be  discovered.  For 
phenomena  might  be  so  constituted  as  not  to 
correspond  to  the  conditions  of  the  unity  of 
thought;  and  all  things  might  lie  in  such  con¬ 
fusion  that,  for  example,  nothing  could  be  met 
with  in  the  sphere  of  phenomena  to  suggest  a 
law  of  synthesis,  and  so  correspond  to  the  con¬ 
ception  of  cause  and  effect;  so  that  this  concep¬ 
tion  would  be  quite  void,  null,  and  without  sig¬ 
nificance.  Phenomena  would  nevertheless  con¬ 
tinue  to  present  objects  to  our  intuition;  for 
mere  intuition  does  not  in  any  respect  stand  in 
need  of  the  functions  of  thought. 

If  we  thought  to  free  ourselves  from  the  la¬ 
bour  of  these  investigations  by  saying:  “Expe¬ 
rience  is  constantly  offering  us  examples  of  the 
relation  of  cause  and  effect  in  phenomena,  and 
presents  us  with  abundant  opportunity  of  ab¬ 
stracting  the  conception  of  cause,  and  so  at  the 
same  time  of  corroborating  the  objective  valid¬ 
ity  of  this  conception”;  we  should  in  this  case  be 
overlooking  the  fact,  that  the  conception  of 
cause  cannot  arise  in  this  way  at  all;  that,  on 
the  contrary,  it  must  either  have  an  a  priori 
basis  in  the  understanding,  or  be  rejected  as  a 
mere  chimera.  For  this  conception  demands  that 
something,  A,  should  be  of  such  a  nature  that 
something  else,  B,  should  follow  from  it  nec¬ 
essarily,  and  according  to  an  absolutely  univer¬ 
sal  law.  We  may  certainly  collect  from  phenom¬ 
ena  a  law,  according  to  which  this  or  that  usual¬ 
ly  happens,  but  the  element  of  necessity  is  not 
to  be  found  in  it.  Hence  it  is  evident  that  to  the 
synthesis  of  cause  and  effect  belongs  a  dignity, 
which  is  utterly  wanting  in  any  empirical  syn¬ 
thesis;  for  it  is  no  mere  mechanical  synthesis, 


REASON  47 

by  means  of  addition,  but  a  dynamical  one;  that 
is  to  say,  the  effect  is  not  to  be  cogitated  as 
merely  annexed  to  the  cause,  but  as  posited  by 
and  through  the  cause,  and  resulting  from  it. 
The  strict  universality  of  this  law  never  can  be 
a  characteristic  of  empirical  laws,  which  obtain 
through  induction  only  a  comparative  univer¬ 
sality,  that  is,  an  extended  range  of  practical 
application.  But  the  pure  conceptions  of  the 
understanding  would  entirely  lose  all  their  pe¬ 
culiar  character,  if  we  treated  them  merely  as 
the  productions  of  experience. 

Transition  to  the  Transcendental  Deduction  of 
the  Categories.  §  io 

There  are  only  two  possible  ways  in  which 
synthetical  representation  and  its  objects  can 
coincide  with  and  relate  necessarily  to  each 
other,  and,  as  it  were,  meet  together.  Either  the 
object  alone  makes  the  representation  possible, 
or  the  representation  alone  makes  the  object 
possible.  In  the  former  case,  the  relation  be¬ 
tween  them  is  only  empirical,  and  an  a  priori 
representation  is  impossible.  And  this  is  the 
case  with  phenomena,  as  regards  that  in  them 
which  is  referable  to  mere  sensation.  In  the 
latter  case — although  representation  alone  (for 
of  its  causality,  by  means  of  the  will,  we  do  not 
here  speak)  does  not  produce  the  object  as  to 
its  existence,  it  must  nevertheless  be  a  priori 
determinative  in  regard  to  the  object,  if  it  is 
only  by  means  of  the  representation  that  we 
can  cognize  anything  as  an  object.  Now  there 
are  only  two  conditions  of  the  possibility  of  a 
cognition  of  objects;  firstly,  intuition ,  by  means 
of  which  the  object,  though  only  as  phenome¬ 
non,  is  given;  secondly,  conception ,  by  means 
of  which  the  object  which  corresponds  to  this 
intuition  is  thought.  But  it  is  evident  from  what 
has  been  said  on  aesthetic  that  the  first  condi¬ 
tion,  under  which  alone  objects  can  be  intuited, 
must  in  fact  exist,  as  a  formal  basis  for  them, 
a  priori  in  the  mind.  With  this  formal  condition 
of  sensibility,  therefore,  all  phenomena  neces¬ 
sarily  correspond,  because  it  is  only  through  it 
that  they  can  be  phenomena  at  all ;  that  is,  can 
be  empirically  intuited  and  given.  Now  the  ques¬ 
tion  is  whether  there  do  not  exist,  a  priori  in  the 
mind,  conceptions  of  understanding  also,  as  con¬ 
ditions  under  which  alone  something,  if  not  in¬ 
tuited,  is  yet  thought  as  object.  If  this  question 
be  answered  in  the  affirmative,  it  follows  that 
all  empirical  cognition  of  objects  is  necessarily 
conformable  to  such  conceptions,  since,  if  they 
are  not  presupposed,  it  is  impossible  that  any¬ 
thing  can  be  an  object  of  experience.  Now  all 


48  THE  CRITIQUE 


experience  contains,  besides  the  intuition  of  the 
senses  through  which  an  object  is  given,  a  con¬ 
ception  also  of  an  object  that  is  given  in  in¬ 
tuition.  Accordingly,  conceptions  of  objects  in 
general  must  lie  as  a  priori  conditions  at  the 
foundation  of  all  empirical  cognition;  and  con¬ 
sequently,  the  objective  validity  of  the  cate¬ 
gories,  as  a  priori  conceptions,  will  rest  upon 
this,  that  experience  (as  far  as  regards  the  form 
of  thought)  is  possible  only  by  their  means. 
For  in  that  case  they  apply  necessarily  and  a 
priori  to  objects  of  experience,  because  only 
through  them  can  an  object  of  experience  be 
thought. 

The  whole  aim  of  the  transcendental  deduc¬ 
tion  of  all  a  priori  conceptions  is  to  show  that 
these  conceptions  are  a  priori  conditions  of  the 
possibility  of  all  experience.  Conceptions  which 
afford  us  the  objective  foundation  of  the  possi¬ 
bility  of  experience  are  for  that  very  reason 
necessary.  But  the  analysis  of  the  experiences 
in  which  they  are  met  with  is  not  deduction, 
but  only  an  illustration  of  them,  because  from 
experience  they  could  never  derive  the  attri¬ 
bute  of  necessity.  Without  their  original  appli¬ 
cability  and  relation  to  all  possible  experience, 
in  which  all  objects  of  cognition  present  them¬ 
selves,  the  relation  of  the  categories  to  objects, 
of  whatever  nature,  would  be  quite  incom¬ 
prehensible. 

The  celebrated  Locke,  for  want  of  due  reflec¬ 
tion  on  these  points,  and  because  he  met  with 
pure  conceptions  of  the  understanding  in  ex¬ 
perience,  sought  also  to  deduce  them  from  ex¬ 
perience,  and  yet  proceeded  so  inconsequently 
as  to  attempt,  with  their  aid,  to  arrive  at  cog¬ 
nitions  which  lie  far  beyond  the  limits  of  all  ex¬ 
perience.  David  Hume  perceived  that,  to  render 
this  possible,  it  was  necessary  that  the  concep¬ 
tions  should  have  an  a  priori  origin.  But  as  he 
could  not  explain  how  it  was  possible  that  con¬ 
ceptions  which  are  not  connected  with  each 
other  in  the  understanding  must  nevertheless  be 
thought  as  necessarily  connected  in  the  object 
— and  it  never  occurred  to  him  that  the  under¬ 
standing  itself  might,  perhaps,  by  means  of  these 
conceptions,  be  the  author  of  the  experience  in 
which  its  objects  were  presented  to  it — he  was 
forced  to  drive  these  conceptions  from  experi¬ 
ence,  that  is,  from  a  subjective  necessity  arising 
from  repeated  association  of  experiences  er¬ 
roneously  considered  to  be  objective — in  one 
word,  from  habit.  But  he  proceeded  with  per¬ 
fect  consequence  and  declared  it  to  be  impossi¬ 
ble,  with  such  conceptions  and  the  principles 
arising  from  them,  to  overstep  the  limits  of  ex¬ 


perience.  The  empirical  derivation,  however, 
which  both  of  these  philosophers  attributed  to 
these  conceptions,  cannot  possibly  be  reconciled 
with  the  fact  that  we  do  possess  scientific  a 
priori  cognitions,  namely,  those  of  pure  mathe¬ 
matics  and  general  physics. 

The  former  of  these  two  celebrated  men 
opened  a  wide  door  to  extravagance — (for  if  rea¬ 
son  has  once  undoubted  right  on  its  side,  it  will 
not  allow  itself  to  be  confined  to  set  limits,  by 
vague  recommendations  of  moderation) ;  the 
latter  gave  himself  up  entirely  to  scepticism — a 
natural  consequence,  after  having  discovered, 
as  he  thought,  that  the  faculty  of  cognition 
was  not  trustworthy.  We  now  intend  to  make 
a  trial  whether  it  be  not  possible  safely  to 
conduct  reason  between  these  two  rocks,  to 
assign  her  determinate  limits,  and  yet  leave 
open  for  her  the  entire  sphere  of  her  legitimate 
activity. 

I  shall  merely  premise  an  explanation  of  what 
the  categories  are.  They  are  conceptions  of  an 
object  in  general,  by  means  of  which  its  intui¬ 
tion  is  contemplated  as  determined  in  relation 
to  one  of  the  logical  functions  of  judgement.  The 
following  will  make  this  plain.  The  function  of 
the  categorical  judgement  is  that  of  the  relation 
of  subject  to  predicate;  for  example,  in  the 
proposition:  “All  bodies  are  divisible.”  But  in 
regard  to  the  merely  logical  use  of  the  under¬ 
standing,  it  still  remains  undetermined  to  which 
of  these  two  conceptions  belongs  the  function 
of  subject  and  to  which  that  of  predicate.  For 
we  could  also  say:  “Some  divisible  is  a  body.” 
But  the  category  of  substance,  when  the  concep¬ 
tion  of  a  body  is  brought  under  it,  determines 
that;  and  its  empirical  intuition  in  experience 
must  be  contemplated  always  as  subject  and 
never  as  mere  predicate.  And  so  with  all  the 
other  categories. 

Section  II.  Transcendental  Deduction  of  the 
pure  Conceptions  of  the  Understanding.  §  1 1 

Of  the  Possibility  of  a  Conjunction  of  the  mani¬ 
fold  representations  given  by  Sense. 

The  manifold  content  in  our  representations 
can  be  given  in  an  intuition  which  is  merely 
sensuous — in  other  words,  is  nothing  but  sus¬ 
ceptibility;  and  the  form  of  this  intuition  can 
exist  a  priori  in  our  faculty  of  representation, 
without  being  anything  else  but  the  mode  in 
which  the  subject  is  affected.  But  the  conjunc¬ 
tion  ( conjunctio )  of  a  manifold  in  intuition 
never  can  be  given  us  by  the  senses;  it  cannot 
therefore  be  contained  in  the  pure  form  of  sen- 


OF  PURE  REASON 


suous  intuition,  for  it  is  a  spontaneous  act  of 
the  faculty  of  representation.  And  as  we  must, 
to  distinguish  it  from  sensibility,  entitle  this 
faculty  understanding ;  so  all  conjunction — 
whether  conscious  or  unconscious,  be  it  of  the 
manifold  in  intuition,  sensuous  or  non-sensuous, 
or  of  several  conceptions — is  an  act  of  the  un¬ 
derstanding.  To  this  act  we  shall  give  the  gen¬ 
eral  appellation  of  synthesis ,  thereby  to  indi¬ 
cate,  at  the  same  time,  that  we  cannot  repre¬ 
sent  anything  as  conjoined  in  the  object  with¬ 
out  having  previously  conjoined  it  ourselves.  Of 
all  mental  notions,  that  of  conjunction  is  the 
only  one  which  cannot  be  given  through  objects, 
but  can  be  originated  only  by  the  subject  itself, 
because  it  is  an  act  of  its  purely  spontaneous 
activity.  The  reader  will  easily  enough  perceive 
that  the  possibility  of  conjunction  must  be 
grounded  in  the  very  nature  of  this  act,  and  that 
it  must  be  equally  valid  for  all  conjunction,  and 
that  analysis,  which  appears  to  be  its  contrary, 
must,  nevertheless,  always  presuppose  it;  for 
where  the  understanding  has  not  previously  con¬ 
joined,  it  cannot  dissect  or  analyse,  because 
only  as  conjoined  by  it,  must  that  which  is  to 
be  analysed  have  been  given  to  our  faculty  of 
representation. 

But  the  conception  of  conjunction  includes, 
besides  the  conception  of  the  manifold  and  of 
the  synthesis  of  it,  that  of  the  unity  of  it  also. 
Conjunction  is  the  representation  of  the  syn¬ 
thetical  unity  of  the  manifold.1  This  idea  of 
unity,  therefore,  cannot  arise  out  of  that  of  con¬ 
junction;  much  rather  does  that  idea,  by  com¬ 
bining  itself  with  the  representation  of  the  man¬ 
ifold,  render  the  conception  of  conjunction  pos¬ 
sible.  This  unity,  which  a  priori  precedes  all  con¬ 
ceptions  of  conjunction,  is  not  the  category  of 
unity  (§  6) ;  for  all  the  categories  are  based  up¬ 
on  logical  functions  of  judgement,  and  in  these 
functions  we  already  have  conjunction,  and  con¬ 
sequently  unity  of  given  conceptions.  It  is  there¬ 
fore  evident  that  the  category  of  unity  presup¬ 
poses  conjunction.  We  must  therefore  look  still 
higher  for  this  unity  (as  qualitative,  §  8),  in 
that,  namely,  which  contains  the  ground  of  the 
unity  of  diverse  conceptions  in  judgements,  the 
ground,  consequently,  of  the  possibility  of  the 
existence  of  the  understanding,  even  in  regard 
to  its  logical  use. 

1  Whether  the  representations  are  in  themselves  iden¬ 
tical,  and  consequently  whether  one  can  be  thought  an¬ 
alytically  by  means  of  and  through  the  other,  is  a  ques¬ 
tion  which  we  need  not  at  present  consider.  Our  con¬ 
sciousness  of  the  one,  when  we  speak  of  the  manifold, 
is  always  distinguishable  from  our  consciousness  of  the 
other;  and  it  is  only  respecting  the  synthesis  of  this 
(possible)  consciousness  that  we  here  treat. 


Of  the  Originally  Synthetical  Unity  of 
Apperception.  §  12 

The  “I  think”  must  accompany  all  my  repre¬ 
sentations,  for  otherwise  something  would  be 
represented  in  me  which  could  not  be  thought; 
in  other  words,  the  representation  would  either 
be  impossible,  or  at  least  be,  in  relation  to  me, 
nothing.  That  representation  which  can  be  giv¬ 
en  previously  to  all  thought  is  called  intuition. 
All  the  diversity  or  manifold  content  of  intui¬ 
tion,  has,  therefore,  a  necessary  relation  to  the 
“I  think,”  in  the  subject  in  which  this  diversity 
is  found.  But  this  representation,  “I  think,”  is 
an  act  of  spontaneity ;  that  is  to  say,  it  cannot 
be  regarded  as  belonging  to  mere  sensibility.  I 
call  it  pure  apperception,  in  order  to  distinguish 
it  from  empirical;  or  primitive  apperception, 
because  it  is  self-consciousness  which,  whilst  it 
gives  birth  to  the  representation"  I  think,”  must 
necessarily  be  capable  of  accompanying  all  our 
representations.  It  is  in  all  acts  of  consciousness 
one  and  the  same,  and  unaccompanied  by  it,  no 
representation  can  exist  for  me.  The  unity  of 
this  apperception  I  call  the  transcendental  unity 
of  self-consciousness,  in  order  to  indicate  the 
possibility  of  a  priori  cognition  arising  from  it. 
For  the  manifold  representations  which  are  giv¬ 
en  in  an  intuition  would  not  all  of  them  be  my 
representations,  if  they  did  not  all  belong  to  one 
self-consciousness,  that  is,  as  my  representa¬ 
tions  (even  although  I  am  not  conscious  of 
them  as  such),  they  must  conform  to  the  condi¬ 
tion  under  which  alone  they  can  exist  together 
in  a  common  self-consciousness,  because  other¬ 
wise  they  would  not  all  without  exception  be¬ 
long  to  me.  From  this  primitive  conjunction 
follow  many  important  results. 

For  example,  this  universal  identity  of  the 
apperception  of  the  manifold  given  in  intuition 
contains  a  synthesis  of  representations  and  is 
possible  only  by  means  of  the  consciousness  of 
this  synthesis.  For  the  empirical  consciousness 
which  accompanies  different  representations  is 
in  itself  fragmentary  and  disunited,  and  with¬ 
out  relation  to  the  identity  of  the  subject.  This 
relation,  then,  does  not  exist  because  I  accom¬ 
pany  every  representation  with  consciousness, 
but  because  I  join  one  representation  to  an¬ 
other,  and  am  conscious  of  the  synthesis  of 
them.  Consequently,  only  because  I  can  con¬ 
nect  a  variety  of  given  representations  in  one 
consciousness,  is  it  possible  that  I  can  represent 
to  myself  the  identity  of  consciousness  in  these 
representations;  in  other  words,  the  analytical 
unity  of  apperception  is  possible  only  under  the 


THE  CRITIQUE 


50 

presupposition  of  a  synthetical  unity.1  The 
thought,  “These  representations  given  in  intui¬ 
tion  belong  all  of  them  to  me,”  is  accordingly 
just  the  same  as,  “I  unite  them  in  one  self-con¬ 
sciousness,  or  can  at  least  so  unite  them”;  and 
although  this  thought  is  not  itself  the  conscious¬ 
ness  of  the  synthesis  of  representations,  it  pre¬ 
supposes  the  possibility  of  it;  that  is  to  say,  for 
the  reason  alone  that  I  can  comprehend  the  va¬ 
riety  of  my  representations  in  one  conscious¬ 
ness,  do  I  call  them  my  representations,  for 
otherwise  I  must  have  as  many-coloured  and 
various  a  self  as  are  the  representations  of  which 
I  am  conscious.  Synthetical  unity  of  the  mani¬ 
fold  in  intuitions,  as  given  a  priori ,  is  there¬ 
fore  the  foundation  of  the  identity  of  appercep¬ 
tion  itself,  which  antecedes  a  priori  all  determi¬ 
nate  thought.  But  the  conjunction  of  representa¬ 
tions  into  a  conception  is  not  to  be  found  in 
objects  themselves,  nor  can  it  be,  as  it  were, 
borrowed  from  them  and  taken  up  into  the  un¬ 
derstanding  by  perception,  but  it  is  on  the  con¬ 
trary  an  operation  of  the  understanding  itself, 
which  is  nothing  more  than  the  faculty  of  con¬ 
joining  a  priori  and  of  bringing  the  variety  of 
given  representations  under  the  unity  of  apper¬ 
ception.  This  principle  is  the  highest  in  all  hu¬ 
man  cognition. 

This  fundamental  principle  of  the  necessary 
unity  of  apperception  is  indeed  an  identical,  and 
therefore  analytical,  proposition;  but  it  nev¬ 
ertheless  explains  the  necessity  for  a  synthesis 
of  the  manifold  given  in  an  intuition,  without 
which  the  identity  of  self-consciousness  would 
be  incogitable.  For  the  ego,  as  a  simple  repre¬ 
sentation,  presents  us  with  no  manifold  con¬ 
tent;  only  in  intuition,  which  is  quite  different 
from  the  representation  ego,  can  it  be  given  us, 
and  by  means  of  conjunction  it  is  cogitated  in 
one  self-consciousness.  An  understanding,  in 
which  all  the  manifold  should  be  given  by 

1  All  general  conceptions — as  such — depend,  for  their 
existence,  on  the  analytical  unity  of  consciousness.  For 
example,  when  I  think  of  red  in  general,  I  thereby  think 
to  myself  a  property  which  (as  a  characteristic  mark) 
can  be  discovered  somewhere,  or  can  be  united  with 
other  representations;  consequently,  it  is  only  by  means 
of  a  forethought  possible  synthetical  unity  that  I  can 
think  to  myself  the  analytical.  A  representation  which 
is  cogitated  as  common  to  different  representations,  is 
regarded  as  belonging  to  such  as,  besides  this  common 
representation,  contain  something  different;  consequent¬ 
ly  it  must  be  previously  thought  in  synthetical  unity 
with  other  although  only  possible  representations,  be¬ 
fore  I  can  think  in  it  the  analytical  unity  of  conscious¬ 
ness  which  makes  it  a  conceptas  communis.  And  thus  the 
synthetical  unity  of  apperception  is  the  highest  point 
with  which  we  must  connect  every  operation  of  the  un¬ 
derstanding,  even  the  whole  of  logic,  and  after  it  our 
transcendental  philosophy;  indeed,  this  faculty  is  the 
understanding  itself. 


means  of  consciousness  itself,  would  be  intui¬ 
tive;  our  understanding  can  only  think  and  must 
look  for  its  intuition  to  sense.  I  am,  therefore, 
conscious  of  my  identical  self,  in  relation  to  all 
the  variety  of  representations  given  to  me  in  an 
intuition,  because  I  call  all  of  them  my  repre¬ 
sentations.  In  other  words,  I  am  conscious  my¬ 
self  of  a  necessary  a  priori  synthesis  of  my 
representations,  which  is  called  the  original 
synthetical  unity  of  apperception,  under  which 
rank  all  the  representations  presented  to  me, 
but  that  only  by  means  of  a  synthesis. 

The  Principle  of  the  Synthetical  Unity  of  Ap¬ 
perception  is  the  highest  Principle  of  all 
exercise  of  the  Understanding.  §  13 

The  supreme  principle  of  the  possibility  of  all 
intuition  in  relation  to  sensibility  was,  accord¬ 
ing  to  our  transcendental  aesthetic,  that  all  the 
manifold  in  intuition  be  subject  to  the  formal 
conditions  of  space  and  time.  The  supreme  prin¬ 
ciple  of  the  possibility  of  it  in  relation  to  the 
understanding  is  that  all  the  manifold  in  it  be 
subject  to  conditions  of  the  originally  syntheti¬ 
cal  unity  or  apperception.2  To  the  former  of 
these  two  principles  are  subject  all  the  various 
representations  of  intuition,  in  so  far  as  they 
are  given  to  us;  to  the  latter,  in  so  far  as  they 
must  be  capable  of  conjunction  in  one  con¬ 
sciousness;  for  without  this  nothing  can  be 
thought  or  cognized,  because  the  given  repre¬ 
sentations  would  not  have  in  common  the  act 
of  the  apperception  “I  think”  and  therefore 
could  not  be  connected  in  one  self-conscious¬ 
ness. 

Understanding  is,  to  speak  generally,  the  fac¬ 
ulty  of  cognitions.  These  consist  in  the  deter¬ 
mined  relation  of  given  representation  to  an 
object.  But  an  object  is  that,  in  the  conception 
of  which  the  manifold  in  a  given  intuition  is 
united.  Now  all  union  of  representations  re¬ 
quires  unity  of  consciousness  in  the  synthesis 
of  them.  Consequently,  it  is  the  unity  of  con¬ 
sciousness  alone  that  constitutes  the  possibility 
of  representations  relating  to  an  object,  and 
therefore  of  their  objective  validity,  and  of  their 

2  Space  and  time,  and  all  portions  thereof,  are  intui¬ 
tions;  consequently  are.  with  a  manifold  for  their  con¬ 
tent.  single  representations.  (See  the  Transcendental 
Aesthetic.)  Consequently,  they  are  not  pure  conceptions, 
by  means  of  which  the  same  consciousness  is  found  in  a 
great  number  of  representations;  but,  on  the  contrary, 
they  are  many  representations  contained  in  one,  the  con¬ 
sciousness  of  which  is,  so  to  speak,  compounded.  The 
unity  of  consciousness  is  nevertheless  synthetical  and. 
therefore,  primitive.  From  this  peculiar  character  of 
consciousness  follow  many  important  consequences.  (See 
§21.) 


OF  PURE 


becoming  cognitions,  and  consequently,  the  pos¬ 
sibility  of  the  existence  of  the  understanding 
itself. 

The  first  pure  cognition  of  understanding, 
then,  upon  which  is  founded  all  its  other  exer¬ 
cise,  and  which  is  at  the  same  time  perfectly 
independent  of  all  conditions  of  mere  sensuous 
intuition,  is  the  principle  of  the  original  syn¬ 
thetical  unity  of  apperception.  Thus  the  mere 
form  of  external  sensuous  intuition,  namely, 
space,  affords  us,  per  se,  no  cognition;  it  merely 
contributes  the  manifold  in  a  priori  intuition  to 
a  possible  cognition.  But,  in  order  to  cognize 
something  in  space  (for  example,  a  line),  I  must 
draw  it,  and  thus  produce  synthetically  a  de¬ 
termined  conjunction  of  the  given  manifold,  so 
that  the  unity  of  this  act  is  at  the  same  time  the 
unity  of  consciousness  (in  the  conception  of  a 
line),  and  by  this  means  alone  is  an  object  (a 
determinate  space)  cognized.  The  synthetical 
unity  of  consciousness  is,  therefore,  an  objec¬ 
tive  condition  of  all  cognition,  which  I  do  not 
merely  require  in  order  to  cognize  an  object,  but 
to  which  every  intuition  must  necessarily  be 
subject,  in  order  to  become  an  object  for  me; 
because  in  any  other  way,  and  without  this  syn¬ 
thesis,  the  manifold  in  intuition  could  not  be 
united  in  one  consciousness. 

This  proposition  is,  as  already  said,  itself  an¬ 
alytical,  although  it  constitutes  the  synthetical 
unity,  the  condition  of  all  thought;  for  it  states 
nothing  more  than  that  all  my  representations 
in  any  given  intuition  must  be  subject  to  the 
condition  which  alone  enables  me  to  connect 
them,  as  my  representation  with  the  identical 
self,  and  so  to  unite  them  synthetically  in  one 
apperception,  by  means  of  the  general  expres- 
sion,  “I  think.” 

But  this  principle  is  not  to  be  regarded  as  a 
principle  for  every  possible  understanding,  but 
only  for  the  understanding  by  means  of  whose 
pure  apperception  in  the  thought  /  am,  no  man¬ 
ifold  content  is  given.  The  understanding  or 
mind  which  contained  the  manifold  in  intuition, 
in  and  through  the  act  itself  of  its  own  self- 
consciousness,  in  other  words,  an  understanding 
by  and  in  the  representation  of  which  the  ob¬ 
jects  of  the  representation  should  at  the  same 
time  exist,  would  not  require  a  special  act  of 
synthesis  of  the  manifold  as  the  condition  of  the 
unity  of  its  consciousness,  an  act  of  which  the 
human  understanding,  which  thinks  only  and 
cannot  intuite,  has  absolute  need.  But  this  prin¬ 
ciple  is  the  first  principle  of  all  the  operations 
of  our  understanding,  so  that  we  cannot  form 


REASON  51 

the  least  conception  of  any  other  possible  un¬ 
derstanding,  either  of  one  such  as  should  be  it¬ 
self  intuition,  or  possess  a  sensuous  intuition, 
but  with  forms  different  from  those  of  space 
and  time. 

What  Objective  Unity  of  Self-consciousness  is. 

§  14 

It  is  by  means  of  the  transcendental  unity  of 
apperception  that  all  the  manifold  given  in  an 
intuition  is  united  into  a  conception  of  the  ob¬ 
ject.  On  this  account  it  is  called  objective,  and 
must  be  distinguished  from  the  subjective  unity 
of  consciousness,  which  is  a  determination  of 
the  internal  sense ,  by  means  of  which  the  said 
manifold  in  intuition  is  given  empirically  to  be 
so  united.  Whether  I  can  be  empirically  con¬ 
scious  of  the  manifold  as  coexistent  or  as 
successive,  depends  upon  circumstances,  or  em¬ 
pirical  conditions.  Hence  the  empirical  unity  of 
consciousness  by  means  of  association  of  repre¬ 
sentations,  itself  relates  to  a  phenomenal  world 
and  is  wholly  contingent.  On  the  contrary,  the 
pure  form  of  intuition  in  time,  merely  as  an  in¬ 
tuition,  which  contains  a  given  manifold,  is  sub¬ 
ject  to  the  original  unity  of  consciousness,  and 
that  solely  by  means  of  the  necessary  relation 
of  the  manifold  in  intuition  to  the  ill  think,” 
consequently  by  means  of  the  pure  synthesis  of 
the  understanding,  which  lies  a  priori  at  the 
foundation  of  all  empirical  synthesis.  The  tran¬ 
scendental  unity  of  apperception  is  alone  objec¬ 
tively  valid ;  the  empirical  which  we  do  not  con¬ 
sider  in  this  essay,  and  which  is  merely  a  unity 
deduced  from  the  former  under  given  condi¬ 
tions  in  concreto,  possesses  only  subjective  va¬ 
lidity.  One  person  connects  the  notion  conveyed 
in  a  word  with  one  thing,  another  with  another 
thing;  and  the  unity  of  consciousness  in  that 
which  is  empirical,  is,  in  relation  to  that  which 
is  given  by  experience,  not  necessarily  and  uni¬ 
versally  valid. 

The  Logical  Form  of  all  Judgements  consists  in 
the  Objective  Unity  of  Apperception  of  the 
Conceptions  contained  therein.  §  15 

I  could  never  satisfy  myself  with  the  defini¬ 
tion  which  logicians  give  of  a  judgement.  It  is, 
according  to  them,  the  representation  of  a  rela¬ 
tion  between  two  conceptions.  I  shall  not  dwell 
here  on  the  faultiness  of  this  definition,  in  that 
it  suits  only  for  categorical  and  not  for  hypo¬ 
thetical  or  disjunctive  judgements,  these  latter 
containing  a  relation  not  of  conceptions  but  of 
judgements  themselves — a  blunder  from  which 


THE  CRITIQUE 


52 

many  evil  results  have  followed.1  It  is  more 
important  for  our  present  purpose  to  observe, 
that  this  definition  does  not  determine  in  what 
the  said  relation  consists. 

But  if  I  investigate  more  closely  the  relation 
of  given  cognitions  in  every  judgement,  and  dis¬ 
tinguish  it,  as  belonging  to  the  understanding, 
from  the  relation  which  is  produced  according 
to  laws  of  the  reproductive  imagination  (which 
has  only  subjective  validity),  I  find  that 
judgement  is  nothing  but  the  mode  of  bringing 
given  cognitions  under  the  objective  unit  of  ap¬ 
perception.  This  is  plain  from  our  use  of  the 
term  of  relation  is  in  judgements,  in  order  to  dis¬ 
tinguish  the  objective  unity  of  given  represen¬ 
tations  from  the  subjective  unity.  For  this  term 
indicates  the  relation  of  these  representations 
to  the  original  apperception,  and  also  their  nec¬ 
essary  unity,  even  although  the  judgement  is  em¬ 
pirical,  therefore  contingent,  as  in  the  judge¬ 
ment  :  “ All  bodies  are  heavy.”  I  do  not  mean  by 
this,  that  these  representations  do  necessarily  be¬ 
long  to  each  other  in  empirical  intuition,  but  that 
by  means  of  the  necessary  unity  of  appreciation 
they  belong  to  each  other  in  the  synthesis  of  in¬ 
tuitions,  that  is  to  say,  they  belong  to  each  other 
according  to  principles  of  the  objective  deter¬ 
mination  of  all  our  representations,  in  so  far  as 
cognition  can  arise  from  them,  these  principles 
being  all  deduced  from  the  main  principle  of 
the  transcendental  unity  of  apperception.  In 
this  way  alone  can  there  arise  from  this  relation 
a  judgement ,  that  is,  a  relation  which  has  objec¬ 
tive  validity,  and  is  perfectly  distinct  from  that 
relation  of  the  very  same  representations  which 
has  only  subjective  validity — a  relation,  to  wit, 
which  is  produced  according  to  laws  of  associa¬ 
tion.  According  to  these  laws,  I  could  only  say: 
“When  I  hold  in  my  hand  or  carry  a  body,  I 
feel  an  impression  of  weight”;  but  I  could  not 
say:  “It,  the  body,  is  heavy”;  for  this  is  tanta¬ 
mount  to  saying  both  these  representations  are 
conjoined  in  the  object,  that  is,  without  distinc¬ 
tion  as  to  the  condition  of  the  subject,  and  do 
not  merely  stand  together  in  my  perception, 
however  frequently  the  perceptive  act  may  be 
repeated. 

1  The  tedious  doctrine  of  the  four  syllogistic  figures 
concerns  only  categorical  syllogisms;  and  although  it  is 
nothing  more  than  an  artifice  by  surreptitiously  intro¬ 
ducing  immediate  conclusions  ( consequentiae  immcdi- 
atae )  among  the  premises  of  a  pure  syllogism,  to  give 
rise  to  an  appearance  of  more  modes  of  drawing  a  con¬ 
clusion  than  that  in  the  first  figure,  the  artifice  would 
not  have  had  much  success,  had  not  its  authors  succeed¬ 
ed  in  bringing  categorical  judgements  into  exclusive  re¬ 
spect,  as  those  to  which  all  others  must  be  referred — 
a  doctrine,  however,  which,  according  to  §5,  is  utterly 
false. 


AU  Sensuous  Intuitions  are  subject  to  the  Cate¬ 
gories ,  as  Conditions  under  which  alone  the 

manifold  Content  of  them  can  be  united  in 
one  Consciousness.  §  16 

The  manifold  content  given  in  a  sensuous  in¬ 
tuition  comes  necessarily  under  the  original  syn¬ 
thetical  unity  of  apperception,  because  there¬ 
by  alone  is  the  unity  of  intuition  possible 
(§  13).  But  that  act  of  the  understanding,  by 
which  the  manifold  content  of  given  represen¬ 
tations  (whether  intuitions  or  conceptions)  is 
brought  under  one  apperception,  is  the  logical 
function  of  judgements  (§  15).  All  the  manifold, 
therefore,  in  so  far  as  it  is  given  in  one  empiri¬ 
cal  intuition,  is  determined  in  relation  to  one  of 
the  logical  functions  of  judgement,  by  means  of 
which  it  is  brought  into  union  in  one  conscious¬ 
ness.  Now  the  categories  are  nothing  else  than 
these  functions  of  judgement, so  far  as  the  mani¬ 
fold  in  a  given  intuition  is  determined  in  relation 
to  them  (§  9).  Consequently,  the  manifold  in  a 
given  intuition  is  necessarily  subject  to  the  cate¬ 
gories  of  the  understanding. 

Observation.  §  17 

The  manifold  in  an  intuition,  which  I  call 
mine,  is  represented  by  means  of  the  synthesis 
of  the  understanding,  as  belonging  to  the  nec¬ 
essary  unity  of  self-consciousness,  and  this  takes 
place  by  means  of  the  category.2  The  category 
indicates  accordingly  that  the  empirical  con¬ 
sciousness  of  a  given  manifold  in  an  intuition  is 
subject  to  a  pure  self-consciousness  a  priori,  in 
the  same  manner  as  an  empirical  intuition  is 
subject  to  a  pure  sensuous  intuition,  which  is 
also  a  priori.  In  the  above  proposition,  then, 
lies  the  beginning  of  a  deduction  of  the  pure  con¬ 
ceptions  of  the  understanding.  Now,  as  the  cate¬ 
gories  have  their  origin  in  the  understanding 
alone,  independently  of  sensibility,  I  must  in 
my  deduction  make  abstraction  of  the  mode  in 
which  the  manifold  of  an  empirical  intuition  is 
given,  in  order  to  fix  my  attention  exclusively 
on  the  unity  which  is  brought  by  the  under¬ 
standing  into  the  intuition  by  means  of  the  cat¬ 
egory.  In  what  follows  (§  22),  it  will  be  shown, 
from  the  mode  in  which  the  empirical  intuition 
is  given  in  the  faculty  of  sensibility,  that  the 
unity  which  belongs  to  it  is  no  other  than  that 
which  the  category  (according  to  §  16)  imposes 
on  the  manifold  in  a  given  intuition,  and  thus, 

2  The  proof  of  this  rests  on  the  represented  unity  of 
intuition ,  by  means  of  which  an  object  is  given,  and 
which  always  includes  in  itself  a  synthesis  of  the  mani¬ 
fold  to  be  intuited,  and  also  the  relation  of  this  latter  to 
unity  of  apperception. 


OF  PURE 

its  a  priori  validity  in  regard  to  all  objects  of 
sense  being  established,  the  purpose  of  our  de¬ 
duction  will  be  fully  attained. 

But  there  is  one  thing  in  the  above  demon¬ 
stration  of  which  I  could  not  make  abstraction, 
namely,  that  the  manifold  to  be  intuited  must 
be  given  previously  to  the  synthesis  of  the  un¬ 
derstanding,  and  independently  of  it.  How  this 
takes  place  remains  here  undetermined.  For  if 
I  cogitate  an  understanding  which  was  itself 
intuitive  (as,  for  example,  a  divine  understand¬ 
ing  which  should  not  represent  given  objects, 
but  by  whose  representation  the  objects  them¬ 
selves  should  be  given  or  produced),  the  cate¬ 
gories  would  possess  no  significance  in  relation 
to  such  a  faculty  of  cognition.  They  are  merely 
rules  for  an  understanding,  whose  whole  power 
consists  in  thought,  that  is,  in  the  act  of  sub¬ 
mitting  the  synthesis  of  the  manifold  which  is 
presented  to  it  in  intuition  from  a  very  different 
quarter,  to  the  unity  of  apperception;  a  faculty, 
therefore,  which  cognizes  nothing  per  se,  but 
only  connects  and  arranges  the  material  of  cog¬ 
nition,  the  intuition,  namely,  which  must  be 
presented  to  it  by  means  of  the  object.  But  to 
show  reasons  for  this  peculiar  character  of  our 
understandings,  that  it  produces  unity  of  apper¬ 
ception  a  priori  only  by  means  of  categories, 
and  a  certain  kind  and  number  thereof,  is  as  im¬ 
possible  as  to  explain  why  we  are  endowed  with 
precisely  so  many  functions  of  judgement  and 
no  more,  or  why  time  and  space  are  the  only 
forms  of  our  intuition. 

In  Cognition ,  its  Application  to  Objects  of  Ex¬ 
perience  is  the  only  legitimate  use  of  the  Cate¬ 
gory.  §  1 8 

To  think  an  object  and  to  cognize  an  object 
are  by  no  means  the  same  thing.  In  cognition 
there  are  two  elements:  firstly,  the  conception, 
whereby  an  object  is  cogitated  (the  category) ; 
and,  secondly,  the  intuition,  whereby  the  object 
is  given.  For  supposing  that  to  the  conception 
a  corresponding  intuition  could  not  be  given,  it 
would  still  be  a  thought  as  regards  its  form,  but 
without  any  object,  and  no  cognition  of  any¬ 
thing  would  be  possible  by  means  of  it,  inas¬ 
much  as,  so  far  as  I  knew,  there  existed  and 
could  exist  nothing  to  which  my  thought  could 
be  applied.  Now  all  intuition  possible  to  us  is 
sensuous;  consequently,  our  thought  of  an  ob¬ 
ject  by  means  of  a  pure  conception  of  the  un¬ 
derstanding,  can  become  cognition  for  us  only 
in  so  far  as  this  conception  is  applied  to  objects 
of  the  senses.  Sensuous  intuition  is  either  pure 
intuition  (space  and  time)  or  empirical  intui- 


REASON  53 

tion — of  that  which  is  immediately  represented 
in  space  and  time  by  means  of  sensation  as  real. 
Through  the  determination  of  pure  intuition  we 
obtain  a  priori  cognitions  of  objects,  as  in  math¬ 
ematics,  but  only  as  regards  their  form  as  phe¬ 
nomena;  whether  there  can  exist  things  which 
must  be  intuited  in  this  form  is  not  thereby  es¬ 
tablished.  All  mathematical  conceptions,  there¬ 
fore,  are  not  per  se  cognition,  except  in  so  far 
as  we  presuppose  that  there  exist  things  which 
can  only  be  represented  conformably  to  the 
form  of  our  pure  sensuous  intuition.  But  things 
in  space  and  time  are  given  only  in  so  far  as 
they  are  perceptions  (representations  accom¬ 
panied  with  sensation),  therefore  only  by  em¬ 
pirical  representation.  Consequently  the  pure 
conceptions  of  the  understanding,  even  when 
they  are  applied  to  intuitions  a  priori  (as  in 
mathematics),  produce  cognition  only  in  so  far 
as  these  (and  therefore  the  conceptions  of  the 
understanding  by  means  of  them)  can  be  ap¬ 
plied  to  empirical  intuitions.  Consequently  the 
categories  do  not,  even  by  means  of  pure  intui¬ 
tion  afford  us  any  cognition  of  things;  they 
can  only  do  so  in  so  far  as  they  can  be  applied 
to  empirical  intuition.  That  is  to  say,  the  cate¬ 
gories  serve  only  to  render  empirical  cognition 
possible.  But  this  is  what  we  call  experience. 
Consequently,  in  cognition,  their  application  to 
objects  of  experience  is  the  only  legitimate  use 
of  the  categories. 

§  19 

The  foregoing  proposition  is  of  the  utmost 
importance,  for  it  determines  the  limits  of  the 
exercise  of  the  pure  conceptions  of  the  under¬ 
standing  in  regard  to  objects,  just  as  transcen¬ 
dental  aesthetic  determined  the  limits  of  the 
exercise  of  the  pure  form  of  our  sensuous  in¬ 
tuition.  Space  and  time,  as  conditions  of  the 
possibility  of  the  presentation  of  objects  to  us, 
are  valid  no  further  than  for  objects  of  sense, 
consequently,  only  for  experience.  Beyond  these 
limits  they  represent  to  us  nothing,  for  they 
belong  only  to  sense,  and  have  no  reality  apart 
from  it.  The  pure  conceptions  of  the  under¬ 
standing  are  free  from  this  limitation,  and  ex¬ 
tend  to  objects  of  intuition  in  general,  be  the 
intuition  like  or  unlike  to  ours,  provided  only 
it  be  sensuous,  and  not  intellectual.  But  this  ex¬ 
tension  of  conceptions  beyond  the  range  of  our 
intuition  is  of  no  advantage;  for  they  are  then 
mere  empty  conceptions  of  objects,  as  to  the 
possibility  or  impossibility  of  the  existence  of 
which  they  furnish  us  with  no  means  of  discov¬ 
ery.  They  are  mere  forms  of  thought,  without 


54  THE  CRITIQUE 


objective  reality,  because  we  have  no  intuition 
to  which  the  synthetical  unity  of  apperception, 
which  alone  the  categories  contain,  could  be  ap¬ 
plied,  for  the  purpose  of  determining  an  object. 
Our  sensuous  and  empirical  intuition  can  alone 
give  them  significance  and  meaning. 

If,  then,  we  suppose  an  object  of  a  non-sen- 
suous  intuition  to  be  given,  we  can  in  that  case 
represent  it  by  all  those  predicates  which  are 
implied  in  the  presupposition  that  nothing  ap¬ 
pertaining  to  sensuous  intuition  belongs  to  it ; 
for  example,  that  it  is  not  extended,  or  in  space; 
that  its  duration  is  not  time;  that  in  it  no  change 
(the  effect  of  the  determinations  in  time)  is  to 
be  met  with,  and  so  on.  But  it  is  no  proper 
knowledge  if  I  merely  indicate  what  the  intui¬ 
tion  of  the  object  is  not,  without  being  able  to 
say  what  is  contained  in  it,  for  I  have  not  shown 
the  possibility  of  an  object  to  which  my  pure 
conception  of  understanding  could  be  applicable, 
because  I  have  not  been  able  to  furnish  any  in¬ 
tuition  corresponding  to  it,  but  am  only  able  to 
say  that  our  intuition  is  not  valid  for  it.  But 
the  most  important  point  is  this,  that  to  a  some¬ 
thing  of  this  kind  not  one  category  can  be  found 
applicable.  Take,  for  example,  the  conception 
of  substance,  that  is,  something  that  can  exist 
as  subject,  but  never  as  mere  predicate;  in  re¬ 
gard  to  this  conception  I  am  quite  ignorant 
whether  there  can  really  be  anything  to  corre¬ 
spond  to  such  a  determination  of  thought,  if 
empirical  intuition  did  not  afford  me  the  occa¬ 
sion  for  its  application.  But  of  this  more  in  the 
sequel. 

Of  the  Application  of  the  Categories  to  Objects 
of  the  Senses  in  general.  §  20 

The  pure  conceptions  of  the  understanding 
apply  to  objects  of  intuition  in  general,  through 
the  understanding  alone,  whether  the  intuition 
be  our  own  or  some  other,  provided  only  it  be 
sensuous,  but  are,  for  this  very  reason,  mere 
forms  of  thought,  by  means  of  which  alone  no 
determined  object  can  be  cognized.  The  syn¬ 
thesis  or  conjunction  of  the  manifold  in  these 
conceptions  relates,  we  have  said,  only  to  the 
unity  of  apperception,  and  is  for  this  reason 
the  ground  of  the  possibility  of  a  priori  cogni¬ 
tion,  in  so  far  as  this  cognition  is  dependent  on 
the  understanding.  This  synthesis  is,  therefore, 
not  merely  transcendental,  but  also  purely  in¬ 
tellectual.  But  because  a  certain  form  of  sen¬ 
suous  intuition  exists  in  the  mind  a  priori  which 
rests  on  the  receptivity  of  the  representative 
faculty  (sensibility),  the  understanding,  as  a 
spontaneity,  is  able  to  determine  the  internal 


sense  by  means  of  the  diversity  of  given  repre¬ 
sentations,  conformably  to  the  synthetical  unity 
of  apperception,  and  thus  to  cogitate  the  syn¬ 
thetical  unity  of  the  apperception  of  the  mani¬ 
fold  of  sensuous  intuition  a  priori ,  as  the  con¬ 
dition  to  which  must  necessarily  be  submitted 
all  objects  of  human  intuition.  And  in  this  man¬ 
ner  the  categories  as  mere  forms  of  thought  re¬ 
ceive  objective  reality,  that  is,  application  to 
objects  which  are  given  to  us  in  intuition,  but 
that  only  as  phenomena,  for  it  is  only  of  phe¬ 
nomena  that  we  are  capable  of  a  priori  intuition. 

This  synthesis  of  the  manifold  of  sensuous 
intuition,  which  is  possible  and  necessary  a 
priori ,  may  be  called  figurative  ( synthesis 
speciosa),  in  contradistinction  to  that  which  is 
cogitated  in  the  mere  category  in  regard  to  the 
manifold  of  an  intuition  in  general,  and  is  called 
connection  or  conjunction  of  the  understanding 
{synthesis  in  telle  ctualis).  Both  are  transcenden¬ 
tal,  not  merely  because  they  themselves  precede 
a  priori  all  experience,  but  also  because  they 
form  the  basis  for  the  possibility  of  other  cog¬ 
nition  a  priori. 

But  the  figurative  synthesis,  when  it  has  re¬ 
lation  only  to  the  originally  synthetical  unity 
of  apperception,  that  is  to  the  transcendental 
unity  cogitated  in  the  categories,  must,  to  be 
distinguished  from  the  purely  intellectual  con¬ 
junction,  be  entitled  the  transcendental  synthe¬ 
sis  of  imagination.  Imagination  is  the  faculty  of 
representing  an  object  even  without  its  pres¬ 
ence  in  intuition.  Now,  as  all  our  intuition  is 
sensuous,  imagination,  by  reason  of  the  sub¬ 
jective  condition  under  which  alone  it  can  give 
a  corresponding  intuition  to  the  conceptions  of 
the  understanding,  belongs  to  sensibility.  But 
in  so  far  as  the  synthesis  of  the  imagination  is 
an  act  of  spontaneity,  which  is  determinative, 
and  not,  like  sense,  merely  determinable,  and 
which  is  consequently  able  to  determine  sense 
a  priori,  according  to  its  form,  conformably  to 
the  unity  of  apperception,  in  so  far  is  the  imag¬ 
ination  a  faculty  of  determining  sensibility  a 
priori,  and  its  synthesis  of  intuitions  according 
to  the  categories  must  be  the  transcendental 
synthesis  of  the  imagination.  It  is  an  operation 
of  the  understanding  on  sensibility,  and  the 
first  application  of  the  understanding  to  objects 
of  possible  intuition,  and  at  the  same  time  the 
basis  for  the  exercise  of  the  other  functions  of 
that  faculty.  As  figurative,  it  is  distinguished 
from  the  merely  intellectual  synthesis,  which  is 
produced  by  the  understanding  alone,  without 
the  aid  of  imagination.  Now,  in  so  far  as  imag¬ 
ination  is  spontaneity,  I  sometimes  call  it  also 


OF  PURE  REASON 


the  productive  imagination,  and  distinguish  it 
from  the  reproductive ,  the  synthesis  of  which 
is  subject  entirely  to  empirical  laws,  those  of  as¬ 
sociation,  namely,  and  which,  therefore,  con¬ 
tributes  nothing  to  the  explanation  of  the  possi¬ 
bility  of  a  priori  cognition,  and  for  this  reason 
belongs  not  to  transcendental  philosophy,  but  to 
psychology. 

We  have  now  arrived  at  the  proper  place  for 
explaining  the  paradox  which  must  have  struck 
every  one  in  our  exposition  of  the  internal  sense 
(§  6),  namely — how  this  sense  represents  us  to 
our  own  consciousness,  only  as  we  appear  to 
ourselves,  not  as  we  are  in  ourselves,  because,  to 
wit,  we  intuite  ourselves  only  as  we  are  inward¬ 
ly  affected.  Now  this  appears  to  be  contradic¬ 
tory,  inasmuch  as  we  thus  stand  in  a  passive  re¬ 
lation  to  ourselves;  and  therefore  in  the  sys¬ 
tems  of  psychology,  the  internal  sense  is  com¬ 
monly  held  to  be  one  with  the  faculty  of  apper¬ 
ception,  while  we,  on  the  contrary,  carefully 
distinguish  them. 

That  which  determines  the  internal  sense  is 
the  understanding,  and  its  original  power  of  con¬ 
joining  the  manifold  of  intuition,  that  is,  of 
bringing  this  under  an  apperception  (upon  which 
rests  the  possibility  of  the  understanding  itself). 
Now,  as  the  human  understanding  is  not  in  it¬ 
self  a  faculty  of  intuition,  and  is  unable  to  ex¬ 
ercise  such  a  power,  in  order  to  conjoin,  as  it 
were,  the  manifold  of  its  own  intuition,  the  syn¬ 
thesis  of  understanding  is,  considered  per  se, 
nothing  but  the  unity  of  action,  of  which,  as 
such,  it  is  self-conscious,  even  apart  from  sensi¬ 
bility,  by  which,  moreover,  it  is  able  to  de¬ 
termine  our  internal  sense  in  respect  of  the 
manifold  which  may  be  presented  to  it  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  form  of  sensuous  intuition.  Thus,  un¬ 
der  the  name  of  a  transcendental  synthesis  of 
imagination,  the  understanding  exercises  an  ac¬ 
tivity  upon  the  passive  subject,  whose  faculty 
it  is;  and  so  we  are  right  in  saying  that  the  in¬ 
ternal  sense  is  affected  thereby.  Apperception 
and  its  synthetical  unity  are  by  no  means  one 
and  the  same  with  the  internal  sense.  The  for¬ 
mer,  as  the  source  of  all  our  synthetical  conjunc¬ 
tion,  applies,  under  the  name  of  the  categories, 
to  the  manifold  of  intuition  in  general,  prior  to 
all  sensuous  intuition  of  objects.  The  internal 
sense,  on  the  contrary,  contains  merely  the 
form  of  intuition,  but  without  any  synthetical 
conjunction  of  the  manifold  therein,  and  con¬ 
sequently  does  not  contain  any  determined  in¬ 
tuition,  which  is  possible  only  through  con¬ 
sciousness  of  the  determination  of  the  mani¬ 


fold  by  the  transcendental  act  of  the  imagina¬ 
tion  (synthetical  influence  of  the  understanding 
on  the  internal  sense),  which  I  have  named  fig¬ 
urative  synthesis. 

This  we  can  indeed  always  perceive  in  our¬ 
selves.  We  cannot  cogitate  a  geometrical  line 
without  drawing  it  in  thought,  nor  a  circle  with¬ 
out  describing  it,  nor  represent  the  three  dimen¬ 
sions  of  space  without  drawing  three  lines  from 
the  same  point  perpendicular  to  one  another.  We 
cannot  even  cogitate  time,  unless,  in  drawing  a 
straight  line  (which  is  to  serve  as  the  external 
figurative  representation  of  time),  we  fix  our 
attention  on  the  act  of  the  synthesis  of  the  man¬ 
ifold,  whereby  we  determine  successively  the 
internal  sense,  and  thus  attend  also  to  the  suc¬ 
cession  of  this  determination.  Motion  as  an  act 
of  the  subject  (not  as  a  determination  of  an 
object),1  consequently  the  synthesis  of  the  man¬ 
ifold  in  space,  if  we  make  abstraction  of  space 
and  attend  merely  to  the  act  by  which  we  de¬ 
termine  the  internal  sense  according  to  its  form, 
is  that  which  produces  the  conception  of  suc¬ 
cession.  The  understanding,  therefore,  does  by 
no  means  find  in  the  internal  sense  any  such 
synthesis  of  the  manifold,  but  produces  it,  in 
that  it  affects  this  sense.  At  the  same  time,  how 

who  think”  is  distinct  from  the  which  in- 
tuites  itself  (other  modes  of  intuition  being 
cogitable  as  at  least  possible),  and  yet  one  and 
the  same  with  this  latter  as  the  same  subject; 
how,  therefore,  I  am  able  to  say:  “I,  as  an  intel¬ 
ligence  and  thinking  subject,  cognize  myself  as 
an  object  thought ,  so  far  as  I  am,  moreover, 
given  to  myself  in  intuition — only,  like  other 
phenomena,  not  as  I  am  in  myself,  and  as  con¬ 
sidered  by  the  understanding,  but  merely  as  I 
appear” — is  a  question  that  has  in  it  neither 
more  nor  less  difficulty  than  the  question — 
“How  can  I  be  an  object  to  myself?”  or  this — 
“How  I  can  be  an  object  of  my  own  intuition 
and  internal  perceptions?”  But  that  such  must 
be  the  fact,  if  we  admit  that  space  is  merely  a 
pure  form  of  the  phenomena  of  external  sense, 
can  be  clearly  proved  by  the  consideration  that 
we  cannot  represent  time,  which  is  not  an  ob¬ 
ject  of  external  intuition,  in  any  other  way 
than  under  the  image  of  a  line,  which  we  draw 
in  thought,  a  mode  of  representation  without 

1  Motion  of  an  object  in  space  does  not  belong  to  a 
pure  science,  consequently  not  to  geometry;  because, 
that  a  thing  is  movable  cannot  be  known  a  priori ,  but 
only  from  experience.  But  motion,  considered  as  the  de¬ 
scription  of  a  space,  is  a  pure  act  of  the  successive  syn¬ 
thesis  of  the  manifold  in  external  intuition  by  means  of 
productive  imagination,  and  belongs  not  only  to  geom¬ 
etry,  but  even  to  transcendental  philosophy. 


56  THE  CRITIQUE 


which  we  could  not  cognize  the  unity  of  its  di¬ 
mension,  and  also  that  we  are  necessitated  to 
take  our  determination  of  periods  of  time,  or 
of  points  of  time,  for  all  our  internal  percep¬ 
tions  from  the  changes  which  we  perceive  in 
outward  things.  It  follows  that  we  must  ar¬ 
range  the  determinations  of  the  internal  sense, 
as  phenomena  in  time,  exactly  in  the  same 
manner  as  we  arrange  those  of  the  external 
senses  in  space.  And  consequently,  if  we  grant, 
respecting  this  latter,  that  by  means  of  them 
we  know  objects  only  in  so  far  as  we  are  affect¬ 
ed  externally,  we  must  also  confess,  with  re¬ 
gard  to  the  internal  sense,  that  by  means  of  it 
we  intuite  ourselves  only  as  we  are  internally 
affected  by  ourselves;  in  other  words,  as  re¬ 
gards  internal  intuition,  we  cognize  our  own 
subject  only  as  phenomenon,  and  not  as  it  is 
in  itself.* 1 

§  21 

On  the  other  hand,  in  the  transcendental  syn¬ 
thesis  of  the  manifold  content  of  representa¬ 
tions,  consequently  in  the  synthetical  unity  of 
apperception,  I  am  conscious  of  myself,  not  as 
I  appear  to  myself,  nor  as  I  am  in  myself,  but 
only  that  “I  am.”  This  representation  is  a 
thought ,  not  an  intuition .  Now,  as  in  order  to 
cognize  ourselves,  in  addition  to  the  act  of 
thinking,  which  subjects  the  manifold  of  every 
possible  intuition  to  the  unity  of  apperception, 
there  is  necessary  a  determinate  mode  of  in¬ 
tuition,  whereby  this  manifold  is  given;  although 
my  own  existence  is  certainly  not  mere  phe¬ 
nomenon  (much  less  mere  illusion),  the  deter¬ 
mination  of  my  existence2  can  only  take  place 
conformably  to  the  form  of  the  internal  sense, 

1 1  do  not  see  why  so  much  difficulty  should  be  found 
in  admitting  that  our  internal  sense  is  affected  by  our¬ 
selves.  Every  act  of  attention  exemplifies  it.  In  such  an 
act  the  understanding  determines  the  internal  sense  by 
the  synthetical  conjunction  which  it  cogitates,  conform¬ 
ably  to  the  internal  intuition  which  corresponds  to  the 
manifold  in  the  synthesis  of  the  understanding.  How 
much  the  mind  is  usually  affected  thereby  every  one  will 
be  able  to  perceive  in  himself. 

2  The  “I  think”  expresses  the  act  of  determining  my 
own  existence.  My  existence  is  thus  already  given  by  the 
act  of  consciousness;  but  the  mode  in  which  I  must  de¬ 
termine  my  existence,  that  is,  the  mode  in  which  I  must 
place  the  manifold  belonging  to  my  existence,  is  not 
thereby  given.  For  this  purpose  intuition  of  self  is  re¬ 
quired,  and  this  intuition  possesses  a  form  given  a  pri¬ 
ori,  namely,  time,  which  is  sensuous,  and  belongs  to  our 
receptivity  of  the  determinable.  Now,  as  I  do  not  pos¬ 
sess  another  intuition  of  self  which  gives  the  determin¬ 
ing  in  me  (of  the  spontaneity  of  which  I  am  conscious), 
prior  to  the  act  of  determination,  in  the  same  manner  as 
time  gives  the  determinable,  it  is  clear  that  I  am  unable 
to  determine  my  own  existence  as  that  of  a  spontaneous 
being,  but  I  am  only  able  to  represent  to  myself  the 
spontaneity  of  my  thought,  that  is,  of  my  determination, 
and  my  existence  remains  ever  determinable  in  a  purely 
sensuous  manner,  that  is  to  say,  like  the  existence  of  a 


according  to  the  particular  mode  in  which  the 
manifold  which  I  conjoin  is  given  in  internal  in¬ 
tuition,  and  I  have  therefore  no  knowledge  of 
myself  as  I  am,  but  merely  as  I  appear  to  my¬ 
self.  The  consciousness  of  self  is  thus  very  far 
from  a  knowledge  of  self,  in  which  I  do  not  use 
the  categories,  whereby  I  cogitate  an  object,  by 
means  of  the  conjunction  of  the  manifold  in 
one  apperception.  In  the  same  way  as  I  require, 
for  the  sake  of  the  cognition  of  an  object  dis¬ 
tinct  from  myself,  not  only  the  thought  of  an 
object  in  general  (in  the  category),  but  also  an 
intuition  by  which  to  determine  that  general  con¬ 
ception,  in  the  same  way  do  I  require,  in  order 
to  the  cognition  of  myself,  not  only  the  con¬ 
sciousness  of  myself  or  the  thought  that  I  think 
myself,  but  in  addition  an  intuition  of  the  mani¬ 
fold  in  myself,  by  which  to  determine  this 
thought.  It  is  true  that  I  exist  as  an  intelligence 
which  is  conscious  only  of  its  faculty  of  con¬ 
junction  or  synthesis,  but  subjected  in  relation 
to  the  manifold  which  this  intelligence  has  to 
conjoin  to  a  limitative  conjunction  called  the 
internal  sense.  My  intelligence  (that  is,  I)  can 
render  that  conjunction  or  synthesis  percepti¬ 
ble  only  according  to  the  relations  of  time, 
which  are  quite  beyond  the  proper  sphere  of  the 
conceptions  of  the  understanding  and  conse¬ 
quently  cognize  itself  in  respect  to  an  intuition 
(which  cannot  possibly  be  intellectual,  nor  giv¬ 
en  by  the  understanding),  only  as  it  appears  to 
itself,  and  not  as  it  would  cognize  itself,  if  its 
intuition  were  intellectual. 

Transcendental  Deduction  of  the  universally 
possible  employment  in  experience  of 
the  Pure  Conceptions  of  the 
Understanding.  §  22 

In  the  metaphysical  deduction,  the  a  priori 
origin  of  the  categories  was  proved  by  their 
complete  accordance  with  the  general  logical 
functions  of  thought;  in  the  transcendental  de¬ 
duction  was  exhibited  the  possibility  of  the  cat¬ 
egories  as  a  priori  cognitions  of  objects  of  an 
intuition  in  general  (§§  16  and  17).  At  present 
we  are  about  to  explain  the  possibility  of  cog¬ 
nizing,  a  priori ,  by  means  of  the  categories,  all 
objects  which  can  possibly  be  presented  to  our 
senses,  not,  indeed,  according  to  the  form  of 
their  intuition,  but  according  to  the  laws  of 
their  conjunction  or  synthesis,  and  thus,  as  it 
were,  of  prescribing  laws  to  nature  and  even  of 
rendering  nature  possible.  For  if  the  categories 


phenomenon.  But  it  is  because  of  this  spontaneity  that 

I  call  myself  an  intelligence. 


OF  PURE  REASON 


were  inadequate  to  this  task,  it  would  not  be 
evident  to  us  why  everything  that  is  presented 
to  our  senses  must  be  subject  to  those  laws 
which  have  an  a  priori  origin  in  the  understand¬ 
ing  itself. 

I  premise  that  by  the  term  synthesis  of  appre¬ 
hension  I  understand  the  combination  of  the 
manifold  in  an  empirical  intuition,  whereby 
perception,  that  is,  empirical  consciousness  of 
the  intuition  (as  phenomenon),  is  possible. 

We  have  a  priori  forms  of  the  external  and 
internal  sensuous  intuition  in  the  representa¬ 
tions  of  space  and  time,  and  to  these  must  the 
synthesis  of  apprehension  of  the  manifold  in 
a  phenomenon  be  always  comformable,  because 
the  synthesis  itself  can  only  take  place  accord¬ 
ing  to  these  forms.  But  space  and  time  are  not 
merely  forms  of  sensuous  intuition,  but  intui¬ 
tions  themselves  (which  contain  a  manifold), 
and  therefore  contain  a  priori  the  determina¬ 
tion  of  the  unity  of  this  manifold.1  (See  the 
Transcendent  Aesthetic.)  Therefore  is  unity  of 
the  synthesis  of  the  manifold  without  or  within 
us,  consequently  also  a  conjunction  to  which 
all  that  is  to  be  represented  as  determined  in 
space  or  time  must  correspond,  given  a  priori 
along  with  (not  in)  these  intuitions,  as  the  con¬ 
dition  of  the  synthesis  of  all  apprehension  of 
them.  But  this  synthetical  unity  can  be  no  other 
than  that  of  the  conjunction  of  the  manifold 
of  a  given  intuition  in  general,  in  a  primitive 
act  of  consciousness,  according  to  the  catego¬ 
ries,  but  applied  to  our  sensuous  intuition.  Con¬ 
sequently  all  synthesis,  whereby  alone  is  even 
perception  possible,  is  subject  to  the  categories. 
And,  as  experience  is  cognition  by  means  of 
conjoined  perceptions,  the  categories  are  con¬ 
ditions  of  the  possibility  of  experience  and  are 
therefore  valid  a  priori  for  all  objects  of  ex¬ 
perience. 

When,  then,  for  example,  I  make  the  empir¬ 
ical  intuition  of  a  house  by  apprehension  of  the 

1  Space  represented  as  an  object  (as  geometry  really 
requires  it  to  be)  contains  more  than  the  mere  form  of 
the  intuition;  namely,  a  combination  of  the  manifold 
given  according  to  the  form  of  sensibility  into  a  repre¬ 
sentation  that  can  be  intuited;  so  that  the  form  of  the 
intuition  gives  us  merely  the  manifold,  but  the  formal 
intuition  gives  unity  of  representation.  In  the  aesthetic, 
I  regarded  this  unity  as  belonging  entirely  to  sensibil¬ 
ity,  for  the  purpose  of  indicating  that  it  antecedes  all 
conceptions,  although  it  presupposes  a  synthesis  which 
does  not  belong  to  sense,  through  which  alone,  however, 
all  our  conceptions  of  space  and  time  are  possible.  For 
as  by  means  of  this  unity  alone  (the  understanding  de¬ 
termining  the  sensibility)  space  and  time  are  given  as 
intuitions,  it  follows  that  the  unity  of  this  intuition  a 
priori  belongs  to  space  and  time,  and  not  to  the  concep¬ 
tion  of  the  understanding  (§20). 


57 

manifold  contained  therein  into  a  perception, 
the  necessary  unity  of  space  and  of  my  exter¬ 
nal  sensuous  intuition  lies  at  the  foundation  of 
this  act,  and  I,  as  it  were,  draw  the  form  of  the 
house  conformably  to  this  synthetical  unity  of 
the  manifold  in  space.  But  this  very  syntheti¬ 
cal  unity  remains,  even  when  I  abstract  the 
form  of  space,  and  has  its  seat  in  the  under¬ 
standing,  and  is  in  fact  the  category  of  the  syn¬ 
thesis  of  the  homogeneous  in  an  intuition;  that 
is  to  say,  the  category  of  quantity,  to  which 
the  aforesaid  synthesis  of  apprehension,  that 
is,  the  perception,  must  be  completely  con¬ 
formable.2 

To  take  another  example,  when  I  perceive 
the  freezing  of  water,  I  apprehend  two  states 
(fluidity  and  solidity),  which,  as  such,  stand 
toward  each  other  mutually  in  a  relation  of 
time.  But  in  the  time,  which  I  place  as  an  in¬ 
ternal  intuition,  at  the  foundation  of  this  phe¬ 
nomenon,  I  represent  to  myself  synthetical  unity 
of  the  manifold,  without  which  the  aforesaid 
relation  could  not  be  given  in  an  intuition  as 
determined  (in  regard  to  the  succession  of  time). 
Now  this  synthetical  unity,  as  the  a  priori  con¬ 
dition  under  which  I  conjoin  the  manifold  of 
an  intuition,  is,  if  I  make  abstraction  of  the 
permanent  form  of  my  internal  intuition  (that 
is  to  say,  of  time),  the  category  of  cause,  by 
means  of  which,  when  applied  to  my  sensibility, 
I  determine  everything  that  occurs  accord¬ 
ing  to  relations  of  time.  Consequently  appre¬ 
hension  in  such  an  event,  and  the  event  itself, 
as  far  as  regards  the  possibility  of  its  per¬ 
ception,  stands  under  the  conception  of  the 
relation  of  cause  and  effect:  and  so  in  all 
other  cases. 

Categories  are  conceptions  which  prescribe 
laws  a  priori  to  phenomena,  consequently  to  na¬ 
ture  as  the  complex  of  all  phenomena  ( natura 
materialiter  spectata).  And  now  the  question 
arises — inasmuch  as  these  categories  are  not 
derived  from  nature,  and  do  not  regulate  them¬ 
selves  according  to  her  as  their  model  (for  in 
that  case  they  would  be  empirical) — how  it  is 
conceivable  that  nature  must  regulate  herself 
according  to  them,  in  other  words,  how  the  cate¬ 
gories  can  determine  a  priori  the  synthesis  of 
the  manifold  of  nature,  and  yet  not  derive  their 

2  In  this  manner  it  is  proved,  that  the  synthesis  of  ap¬ 
prehension,  which  is  empirical,  must  necessarily  be  con¬ 
formable  to  the  synthesis  of  apperception,  which  is  in¬ 
tellectual,  and  contained  a  priori  in  the  category.  It  is 
one  and  the  same  spontaneity  which  at  one  time,  under 
the  name  of  imagination,  at  another  under  that  of  un¬ 
derstanding,  produces  conjunction  in  the  manifold  of 
intuition. 


THE  CRITIQUE 


58 

origin  from  her.  The  following  is  the  solution 
of  this  enigma. 

It  is  not  in  the  least  more  difficult  to  conceive 
how  the  laws  of  the  phenomena  of  nature  must 
harmonize  with  the  understanding  and  with  its 
a  priori  form — that  is,  its  faculty  of  conjoining 
the  manifold — than  it  is  to  understand  how  the 
phenomena  themselves  must  correspond  with 
the  a  priori  form  of  our  sensuous  intuition.  For 
laws  do  not  exist  in  the  phenomena  any  more 
than  the  phenomena  exist  as  things  in  them¬ 
selves.  Laws  do  not  exist  except  by  relation  to 
the  subject  in  which  the  phenomena  inhere,  in 
so  far  as  it  possesses  understanding,  just  as 
phenomena  have  no  existence  except  by  relation 
to  the  same  existing  subject  in  so  far  as  it  has 
senses.  To  things  as  things  in  themselves,  con- 
formability  to  law  must  necessarily  belong  in¬ 
dependently  of  an  understanding  to  cognize 
them.  But  phenomena  are  only  representations 
of  things  which  are  utterly  unknown  in  respect 
to  what  they  are  in  themselves.  But  as  mere 
representations,  they  stand  under  no  law  of  con¬ 
junction  except  that  which  the  conjoining  fac¬ 
ulty  prescribes.  Now  that  which  conjoins  the 
manifold  of  sensuous  intuition  is  imagination, 
a  mental  act  to  which  understanding  contributes 
unity  of  intellectual  synthesis,  and  sensibility, 
manifoldness  of  apprehension.  Now  as  all  pos¬ 
sible  perception  depends  on  the  synthesis  of  ap¬ 
prehension,  and  this  empirical  synthesis  itself 
on  the  transcendental,  consequently  on  the  cat¬ 
egories,  it  is  evident  that  all  possible  percep¬ 
tions,  and  therefore  everything  that  can  attain 
to  empirical  consciousness,  that  is,  all  phenom¬ 
ena  of  nature,  must,  as  regards  their  conjunc¬ 
tion,  be  subject  to  the  categories.  And  nature 
(considered  merely  as  nature  in  general)  is  de¬ 
pendent  on  them  as  the  original  ground  of  her 
necessary  conformability  to  law  (as  natura  for- 
maliter  spectata).  But  the  pure  faculty  (of  the 
understanding)  of  prescribing  laws  a  priori  to 
phenomena  by  means  of  mere  categories,  is  not 
competent  to  enounce  other  or  more  laws  than 
those  on  which  a  nature  in  general,  as  a  con¬ 
formability  to  law  of  phenomena  of  space  and 
time,  depends.  Particular  laws,  inasmuch  as 
they  concern  empirically  determined  phenom¬ 
ena,  cannot  be  entirely  deduced  from  pure  laws, 
although  they  all  stand  under  them.  Experience 
must  be  superadded  in  order  to  know  these  par¬ 
ticular  laws;  but  in  regard  to  experience  in  gen¬ 
eral,  and  everything  that  can  be  cognized  as  an 
object  thereof,  these  a  priori  laws  are  our  only 
rule  and  guide. 


Result  oj  this  Deduction  of  the  Conceptions  of 
the  Understanding.  §  23 

We  cannot  think  any  object  except  by  means 
of  the  categories;  we  cannot  cognize  any  thought 
except  by  means  of  intuitions  corresponding  to  . 
these  conceptions.  Now  all  our  intuitions  are 
sensuous,  and  our  cognition,  in  so  far  as  the  ob-  t 
ject  of  it  is  given,  is  empirical.  But  empirical  c 
cognition  is  experience;  consequently  no  a  pri-  1 
ori  cognition  is  possible  for  us,  except  of  ob¬ 
jects  of  possible  experience.1 

But  this  cognition,  which  is  limited  to  ob¬ 
jects  of  experience,  is  not  for  that  reason  de-  1 
rived  entirely  from  experience,  but — and  this  i 
is  asserted  of  the  pure  intuitions  and  the  pure  1 
conceptions  of  the  understanding — there  are, 
unquestionably,  elements  of  cognition,  which 
exist  in  the  mind  a  priori.  Now  there  are  only 
two  ways  in  which  a  necessary  harmony  of  ex¬ 
perience  with  the  conceptions  of  its  objects  can 
be  cogitated.  Either  experience  makes  these 
conceptions  possible,  or  the  conceptions  make 
experience  possible.  The  former  of  these  state¬ 
ments  will  not  hold  good  with  respect  to  the 
categories  (nor  in  regard  to  pure  sensuous  in¬ 
tuition),  for  they  are  a  priori  conceptions,  and 
therefore  independent  of  experience.  The  asser¬ 
tion  of  an  empirical  origin  would  attribute  to 
them  a  sort  of  generatio  aequivoca.  Consequent¬ 
ly,  nothing  remains  but  to  adopt  the  second  al¬ 
ternative  (which  presents  us  with  a  system,  as 
it  were,  of  the  epigenesis  of  pure  reason),  name¬ 
ly,  that  on  the  part  of  the  understanding  the 
categories  do  contain  the  grounds  of  the  possi¬ 
bility  of  all  experience.  But  with  respect  to  the 
questions  how  they  make  experience  possible, 
and  what  are  the  principles  of  the  possibility 
thereof  with  which  they  present  us  in  their  ap¬ 
plication  to  phenomena,  the  following  section 
on  the  transcendental  exercise  of  the  faculty  of 
judgement  will  inform  the  reader. 

It  is  quite  possible  that  someone  may  pro¬ 
pose  a  species  of  pre formation-system  of  pure 

1  Lest  my  readers  should  stumble  at  this  assertion, 
and  the  conclusions  that  may  be  too  rashly  drawn  from 
it,  I  must  remind  them  that  the  categories  in  the  act  0} 
thought  are  by  no  means  limited  by  the  conditions  of 
our  sensuous  intuition,  but  have  an  unbounded  sphere  of 
action.  It  is  only  the  cognition  of  the  object  of  thought, 
the  determining  of  the  object,  which  requires  intuition. 

In  the  absence  of  intuition,  our  thought  of  an  object 
may  still  have  true  and  useful  consequences  in  regard 
to  the  exercise  of  reason  by  the  subject.  But  as  this  ex¬ 
ercise  of  reason  is  not  always  directed  on  the  determi¬ 
nation  of  the  object,  in  other  words,  on  cognition  there¬ 
of,  but  also  on  the  determination  of  the  subject  and  its 
volition,  I  do  not  intend  to  treat  of  it  in  this  place. 


OF  PURE 

reason — a  middle  way  between  the  two — to  wit, 
that  the  categories  are  neither  innate  and  first 
a  priori  principles  of  cognition,  nor  derived 
from  experience,  but  are  merely  subjective  ap¬ 
titudes  for  thought  implanted  in  us  contempo¬ 
raneously  with  our  existence,  which  were  so  or¬ 
dered  and  disposed  by  our  Creator,  that  their 
exercise  perfectly  harmonizes  with  the  laws  of 
nature  which  regulate  experience.  Now,  not  to 
mention  that  with  such  an  hypothesis  it  is  im¬ 
possible  to  say  at  what  point  we  must  stop  in 
the  employment  of  predetermined  aptitudes, 
the  fact  that  the  categories  would  in  this  case 
entirely  lose  that  character  of  necessity  which 
is  essentially  involved  in  the  very  conception 
of  them,  is  a  conclusive  objection  to  it.  The  con¬ 
ception  of  cause,  for  example,  which  expresses 
the  necessity  of  an  effect  under  a  presupposed 
condition,  would  be  false,  if  it  rested  only  upon 
such  an  arbitrary  subjective  necessity  of  unit¬ 
ing  certain  empirical  representations  according 
to  such  a  rule  of  relation.  I  could  not  then  say 
— ‘‘The  effect  is  connected  with  its  cause  in  the 
object  (that  is,  necessarily),”  but  only,  “I  am 
so  constituted  that  I  can  think  this  representa¬ 
tion  as  so  connected,  and  not  otherwise.”  Now 
this  is  just  what  the  sceptic  wants.  For  in  this 
case,  all  our  knowledge,  depending  on  the  sup¬ 
posed  objective  validity  of  our  judgement,  is 
nothing  but  mere  illusion;  nor  would  there  be 
wanting  people  who  would  deny  any  such  sub¬ 
jective  necessity  in  respect  to  themselves,  though 
they  must  feel  it.  At  all  events,  we  could  not 
dispute  with  any  one  on  that  which  merely  de¬ 
pends  on  the  manner  in  which  his  subject  is  or¬ 
ganized. 

Short  view  of  the  above  Deduction 

The  foregoing  deduction  is  an  exposition  of 
the  pure  conceptions  of  the  understanding  (and 
with  them  of  all  theoretical  a  priori  cognition), 
as  principles  of  the  possibility  of  experience, 
but  of  experience  as  the  determination  of  all 
phenomena  in  space  and  time  in  general — of  ex¬ 
perience,  finally,  from  the  principle  of  the  orig¬ 
inal  synthetical  unity  of  apperception,  as  the 
form  of  the  understanding  in  relation  to  time 
and  space  as  original  forms  of  sensibility. 

I  consider  the  division  by  paragraphs  to  be 
necessary  only  up  to  this  point,  because  we  had 
to  treat  of  the  elementary  conceptions.  As  we 
now  proceed  to  the  exposition  of  the  employ¬ 
ment  of  these,  I  shall  not  designate  the  chap¬ 
ters  in  this  manner  any  further. 


REASON  5p 

BOOK  II 

Analytic  of  Principles 

General  logic  is  constructed  upon  a  plan  which 
coincides  exactly  with  the  division  of  the  higher 
faculties  of  cognition.  These  are,  understand¬ 
ing,  judgement,  and  reason.  This  science,  ac¬ 
cordingly,  treats  in  its  analytic  of  conceptions, 
judgements,  and  conclusions  in  exact  corre¬ 
spondence  with  the  functions  and  order  of  those 
mental  powers  which  we  include  generally  un¬ 
der  the  generic  denomination  of  understanding. 

As  this  merely  formal  logic  makes  abstrac¬ 
tion  of  all  content  of  cognition,  whether  pure 
or  empirical,  and  occupies  itself  with  the  mere 
form  of  thought  (discursive  cognition),  it  must 
contain  in  its  analytic  a  canon  for  reason.  For 
the  form  of  reason  has  its  law,  which,  without 
taking  into  consideration  the  particular  nature 
of  the  cognition  about  which  it  is  employed, 
can  be  discovered  a  priori,  by  the  simple  analy¬ 
sis  of  the  action  of  reason  into  its  momenta. 

Transcendental  logic,  limited  as  it  is  to  a  de¬ 
terminate  content,  that  of  pure  a  priori  cogni¬ 
tions,  to  wit,  cannot  imitate  general  logic  in  this 
division.  For  it  is  evident  that  the  transcenden¬ 
tal  employment  of  reason  is  not  objectively 
valid,  and  therefore  does  not  belong  to  the  logic 
of  truth  (that  is,  to  analytic),  but  as  a  logic  of 
illusion,  occupies  a  particular  department  in  the 
scholastic  system  under  the  name  of  transcen¬ 
dental  dialectic. 

Understanding  and  judgement  accordingly  pos¬ 
sess  in  transcendental  logic  a  canon  of  objec¬ 
tively  valid,  and  therefore  true  exercise,  and  are 
comprehended  in  the  analytical  department  of 
that  logic.  But  reason,  in  her  endeavours  to  ar¬ 
rive  by  a  priori  means  at  some  true  statement 
concerning  objects  and  to  extend  cognition 
beyond  the  bounds  of  possible  experience,  is 
altogether  dialectic,  and  her  illusory  assertions 
cannot  be  constructed  into  a  canon  such  as  an 
analytic  ought  to  contain. 

Accordingly,  the  analytic  of  principles  will  be 
merely  a  canon  for  the  faculty  of  judgement, 
for  the  instruction  of  this  faculty  in  its  appli¬ 
cation  to  phenomena  of  the  pure  conceptions 
of  the  understanding,  which  contain  the  neces¬ 
sary  condition  for  the  establishment  of  a  priori 
laws.  On  this  account,  although  the  subject  of 
the  following  chapters  is  the  especial  principles 
of  understanding,  I  shall  make  use  of  the  term 
Doctrine  of  the  faculty  of  judgement,  in  order 
to  define  more  particularly  my  present  pur¬ 
pose. 


6o 


THE  CRITIQUE 


Introduction.  Of  the  Transcendental 
Faculty  of  Judgement  in  General 

If  understanding  in  general  be  defined  as  the 
faculty  of  laws  or  rules,  the  faculty  of  judge¬ 
ment  may  be  termed  the  faculty  of  subsumption 
under  these  rules;  that  is,  of  distinguishing 
whether  this  or  that  does  or  does  not  stand  un¬ 
der  a  given  rule  ( casus  datae  legis).  General 
logic  contains  no  directions  or  precepts  for  the 
faculty  of  judgement,  nor  can  it  contain  any 
such.  For  as  it  makes  abstraction  of  all  content 
of  cognition ,  no  duty  is  left  for  it,  except  that 
of  exposing  analytically  the  mere  form  of  cog¬ 
nition  in  conceptions,  judgements,  and  conclu¬ 
sions,  and  of  thereby  establishing  formal  rules 
for  all  exercise  of  the  understanding.  Now  if 
this  logic  wished  to  give  some  general  direction 
how  we  should  subsume  under  these  rules,  that 
is.  how  we  should  distinguish  whether  this  or 
that  did  or  did  not  stand  under  them,  this  again 
could  not  be  done  otherwise  than  by  means  of  a 
rule.  But  this  rule,  precisely  because  it  is  a  rule, 
requires  for  itself  direction  from  the  faculty  of 
judgement.  Thus,  it  is  evident  that  the  under¬ 
standing  is  capable  of  being  instructed  by  rules, 
but  that  the  judgement  is  a  peculiar  talent,  which 
does  not,  and  cannot  require  tuition,  but  only 
exercise.  This  faculty  is  therefore  the  specific 
quality  of  the  so-called  mother  wit,  the  want 
of  which  no  scholastic  discipline  can  com¬ 
pensate. 

For  although  education  may  furnish,  and,  as  it 
were,  engraft  upon  a  limited  understanding  rules 
borrowed  from  other  minds,  yet  the  power  of 
employing  these  rules  correctly  must  belong  to 
the  pupil  himself;  and  no  rule  which  we  can 
prescribe  to  him  with  this  purpose  is,  in  the  ab¬ 
sence  or  deficiency  of  this  gift  of  nature,  secure 
from  misuse.1  A  physician  therefore,  a  judge 
or  a  statesman,  may  have  in  his  head  many  ad¬ 
mirable  pathological,  juridical,  or  political  rules, 
in  a  degree  that  may  enable  him  to  be  a  pro¬ 
found  teacher  in  his  particular  science,  and  yet 
in  the  application  of  these  rules  he  may  very 
possibly  blunder — either  because  he  is  wanting 
in  natural  judgement  (though  not  in  understand¬ 
ing)  and,  whilst  he  can  comprehend  the  general 

1  Deficiency  in  judgement  is  properly  that  which  is 
called  stupidity;  and  for  such  a  failing  we  know  no 
remedy.  A  dull  or  narrow-minded  person,  to  whom 
nothing  is  wanting  but  a  proper  degree  of  understand¬ 
ing,  may  be  improved  by  tuition,  even  so  far  as  to  de¬ 
serve  the  epithet  of  learned.  But  as  such  persons  fre¬ 
quently  labour  under  a  deficiency  in  the  faculty  of 
judgement,  it  is  not  uncommon  to  find  men  extremely 
learned  who  in  the  application  of  their  science  betray  to 
a  lamentable  degree  this  irremediable  want. 


in  abstractor  cannot  distinguish  whether  a  par¬ 
ticular  case  in  concreto  ought  to  rank  under  the 
former;  or  because  his  faculty  of  judgement 
has  not  been  sufficiently  exercised  by  examples 
and  real  practice.  Indeed,  the  grand  and  only 
use  of  examples,  is  to  sharpen  the  judgement. 
For  as  regards  the  correctness  and  precision 
of  the  insight  of  the  understanding,  examples 
are  commonly  injurious  rather  than  other¬ 
wise,  because,  as  casus  in  terminis,  they  seldom 
adequately  fulfil  the  conditions  of  the  rule. 
Besides,  they  often  weaken  the  power  of  our 
understanding  to  apprehend  rules  or  laws  in 
their  universality,  independently  of  particular 
circumstances  of  experience;  and  hence,  accus¬ 
tom  us  to  employ  them  more  as  formulae  than 
as  principles.  Examples  are  thus  the  go-cart  of 
the  judgement,  which  he  who  is  naturally  de¬ 
ficient  in  that  faculty  cannot  afford  to  dispense 
with. 

But  although  general  logic  cannot  give  direc¬ 
tions  to  the  faculty  of  judgement,  the  case  is 
very  different  as  regards  transcendental  logic, 
insomuch  that  it  appears  to  be  the  especial  duty 
of  the  latter  to  secure  and  direct,  by  means  of 
determinate  rules,  the  faculty  of  judgement  in 
the  employment  of  the  pure  understanding.  For, 
as  a  doctrine,  that  is,  as  an  endeavour  to  enlarge 
the  sphere  of  the  understanding  in  regard  to 
pure  a  priori  cognitions,  philosophy  is  worse 
than  useless,  since  from  all  the  attempts  hither¬ 
to  made,  little  or  no  ground  has  been  gained. 
But,  as  a  critique,  in  order  to  guard  against  the 
mistakes  of  the  faculty  of  judgement  ( lapsus 
judicii )  in  the  employment  of  the  few  pure  con¬ 
ceptions  of  the  understanding  which  we  possess, 
although  its  use  is  in  this  case  purely  negative, 
philosophy  is  called  upon  to  apply  all  its  acute¬ 
ness  and  penetration. 

But  transcendental  philosophy  has  this  pe¬ 
culiarity,  that  besides  indicating  the  rule,  or 
rather  the  general  condition  for  rules,  which  is 
given  in  the  pure  conception  of  the  understand¬ 
ing,  it  can,  at  the  same  time,  indicate  a  priori 
the  case  to  which  the  rule  must  be  applied.  The 
cause  of  the  superiority  which,  in  this  respect, 
transcendental  philosophy  possesses  above  all 
other  sciences  except  mathematics,  lies  in  this: 
it  treats  of  conceptions  which  must  relate  a 
priori  to  their  objects,  whose  objective  validity 
consequently  cannot  be  demonstrated  a  pos¬ 
teriori ,  and  is,  at  the  same  time,  under  the  obli¬ 
gation  of  presenting  in  general  but  sufficient 
tests,  the  conditions  under  which  objects  can  be 
given  in  harmony  with  those  conceptions;  oth¬ 
erwise  they  would  be  mere  logical  forms,  with- 


OF  PURE  REASON 


out  content,  and  not  pure  conceptions  of  the 
understanding. 

Our  transcendental  doctrine  of  the  faculty  of 
judgement  will  contain  two  chapters.  The  first 
will  treat  of  the  sensuous  condition  under  which 
alone  pure  conceptions  of  the  understanding 
can  be  employed — that  is,  of  the  schematism 
of  the  pure  understanding.  The  second  will  treat 
of  those  synthetical  judgements  which  are  de¬ 
rived  a  priori  from  pure  conceptions  of  the  un¬ 
derstanding  under  those  conditions,  and  which 
lie  a  priori  at  the  foundation  of  all  other  cogni¬ 
tions,  that  is  to  say,  it  will  treat  of  the  princi¬ 
ples  of  the  pure  understanding. 

Transcendental  Doctrine 
of  the  Faculty  of  Judgement 
Or,  Analytic  of  Principles 

Chapter  I.  Of  the  Schematism  of  the  Pure 

Conceptions  of  the  Understanding 

In  all  subsumptions  of  an  object  under  a  con¬ 
ception,  the  representation  of  the  object  must 
be  homogeneous  with  the  conception;  in  other 
words,  the  conception  must  contain  that  which 
is  represented  in  the  object  to  be  subsumed  un¬ 
der  it.  For  this  is  the  meaning  of  the  expression: 
“An  object  is  contained  under  a  conception.” 
Thus  the  empirical  conception  of  a  plate  is 
homogeneous  with  the  pure  geometrical  con¬ 
ception  of  a  circle ,  inasmuch  as  the  roundness 
which  is  cogitated  in  the  former  is  intuited  in 
the  latter. 

But  pure  conceptions  of  the  understanding, 
when  compared  with  empirical  intuitions,  or 
even  with  sensuous  intuitions  in  general,  are 
quite  heterogeneous,  and  never  can  be  discov¬ 
ered  in  any  intuition.  How  then  is  the  subsump¬ 
tion  of  the  latter  under  the  former,  and  conse¬ 
quently  the  application  of  the  categories  to  phe¬ 
nomena,  possible? — For  it  is  impossible  to  say, 
for  example:  “Causality  can  be  intuited  through 
the  senses  and  is  contained  in  the  phenomenon.” 
— This  natural  and  important  question  forms 
the  real  cause  of  the  necessity  of  a  transcen¬ 
dental  doctrine  of  the  faculty  of  judgement, 
with  the  purpose,  to  wit,  of  showing  how  pure 
conceptions  of  the  understanding  can  be  ap¬ 
plied  to  phenomena.  In  all  other  sciences,  where 
the  conceptions  by  which  the  object  is  thought 
in  the  general  are  not  so  different  and  hetero¬ 
geneous  from  those  which  represent  the  object 
in  concreto — as  it  is  given,  it  is  quite  unnec¬ 
essary  to  institute  any  special  inquiries  con¬ 
cerning  the  application  of  the  former  to  the 
latter. 


61 

Now  it  is  quite  clear  that  there  must  be  some 
third  things  which  on  the  one  side  is  homoge¬ 
neous  with  the  category,  and  with  the  phenome¬ 
non  on  the  other,  and  so  makes  the  application 
of  the  former  to  the  latter  possible.  This  medi¬ 
ating  representation  must  be  pure  (without  any 
empirical  content),  and  yet  must  on  the  one 
side  be  intellectual ,  on  the  other  sensuous.  Such 
a  representation  is  the  transcendental  schema. 

The  conception  of  the  understanding  con¬ 
tains  pure  synthetical  unity  of  the  manifold  in 
general.  Time,  as  the  formal  condition  of  the 
manifold  of  the  internal  sense,  consequently  of 
the  conjunction  of  all  representations,  contains 
a  priori  a  manifold  in  the  pure  intuition.  Now 
a  transcendental  determination  of  time  is  so  far 
homogeneous  with  the  category ,  which  consti¬ 
tutes  the  unity  thereof,  that  it  is  universal  and 
rests  upon  a  rule  a  priori.  On  the  other  hand,  it 
is  so  far  homogeneous  with  the  phenomenon, 
inasmuch  as  time  is  contained  in  every  empirical 
representation  of  the  manifold.  Thus  an  appli¬ 
cation  of  the  category  to  phenomena  becomes 
possible,  by  means  of  the  transcendental  de¬ 
termination  of  time,  which,  as  the  schema  of 
the  conceptions  of  the  understanding,  mediates 
the  subsumption  of  the  latter  under  the  former. 

After  what  has  been  proved  in  our  deduction 
of  the  categories,  no  one,  it  is  to  be  hoped,  can 
hesitate  as  to  the  proper  decision  of  the  ques¬ 
tion,  whether  the  employment  of  these  pure 
conceptions  of  the  understanding  ought  to  be 
merely  empirical  or  also  transcendental ;  in  oth¬ 
er  words,  whether  the  categories,  as  conditions 
of  a  possible  experience,  relate  a  priori  solely 
to  phenomena,  or  whether,  as  conditions  of  the 
possibility  of  things  in  general,  their  applica¬ 
tion  can  be  extended  to  objects  as  things  in 
themselves.  For  we  have  there  seen  that  concep¬ 
tions  are  quite  impossible,  and  utterly  without 
signification,  unless  either  to  them,  or  at  least 
to  the  elements  of  which  they  consist,  an  object 
be  given;  and  that,  consequently,  they  cannot 
possibly  apply  to  objects  as  things  in  themselves 
without  regard  to  the  question  whether  and  how 
these  may  be  given  to  us;  and,  further,  that 
the  only  manner  in  which  objects  can  be  given 
to  us  is  by  means  of  the  modification  of  our 
sensibility;  and,  finally,  that  pure  a  priori  con¬ 
ceptions,  in  addition  to  the  function  of  the  un¬ 
derstanding  in  the  category,  must  contain  a  pri¬ 
ori  formal  conditions  of  sensibility  (of  the  in¬ 
ternal  sense,  namely),  which  again  contain  the 
general  condition  under  which  alone  the  cate¬ 
gory  can  be  applied  to  any  object.  This  formal 
and  pure  condition  of  sensibility,  to  which  the 


62 


THE  CRITIQUE 


conception  of  the  understanding  is  restricted  in 
its  employment,  we  shall  name  the  schema  of  the 
conception  of  the  understanding,  and  the  pro¬ 
cedure  of  the  understanding  with  these  sche¬ 
mata  we  shall  call  the  schematism  of  the  pure 
understanding. 

The  schema  is,  in  itself,  always  a  mere  prod¬ 
uct  of  the  imagination.  But,  as  the  synthesis 
of  imagination  has  for  its  aim  no  single  intui¬ 
tion,  but  merely  unity  in  the  determination  of 
sensibility,  the  schema  is  clearly  distinguishable 
from  the  image.  Thus,  if  I  place  five  points  one 
after  another . this  is  an  image  of  the  num¬ 

ber  five.  On  the  other  hand,  if  I  only  think  a 
number  in  general,  which  may  be  either  five  or 
a  hundred,  this  thought  is  rather  the  represen¬ 
tation  of  a  method  of  representing  in  an  image 
a  sum  (e.g.,  a  thousand)  in  conformity  with  a 
conception,  than  the  image  itself,  an  image  which 
I  should  find  some  little  difficulty  in  reviewing, 
and  comparing  with  the  conception.  Now  this 
representation  of  a  general  procedure  of  the 
imagination  to  present  its  image  to  a  concep¬ 
tion,  I  call  the  schema  of  this  conception. 

In  truth,  it  is  not  images  of  objects,  but  sche¬ 
mata,  which  lie  at  the  foundation  of  our  pure 
sensuous  conceptions.  No  image  could  ever  be 
adequate  to  our  conception  of  a  triangle  in  gen¬ 
eral.  For  the  generalness  of  the  conception  it 
never  could  attain  to,  as  this  includes  under  it¬ 
self  all  triangles,  whether  right-angled,  acute- 
angled,  etc.,  whilst  the  image  would  always  be 
limited  to  a  single  part  of  this  sphere.  The  sche¬ 
ma  of  the  triangle  can  exist  nowhere  else  than 
in  thought,  and  it  indicates  a  rule  of  the  syn¬ 
thesis  of  the  imagination  in  regard  to  pure  fig¬ 
ures  in  space.  Still  less  is  an  object  of  experi¬ 
ence,  or  an  image  of  the  object,  ever  adequate 
to  the  empirical  conception.  On  the  contrary, 
the  conception  always  relates  immediately  to 
the  schema  of  the  imagination,  as  a  rule  for  the 
determination  of  our  intuition,  in  conformity 
with  a  certain  general  conception.  The  concep¬ 
tion  of  a  dog  indicates  a  rule,  according  to 
which  my  imagination  can  delineate  the  figure 
of  a  four-footed  animal  in  general,  without  be¬ 
ing  limited  to  any  particular  individual  form 
which  experience  presents  to  me,  or  indeed  to 
any  possible  image  that  I  can  represent  to  my¬ 
self  in  concreto.  This  schematism  of  our  under¬ 
standing  in  regard  to  phenomena  and  their  mere 
form,  is  an  art,  hidden  in  the  depths  of  the  hu¬ 
man  soul,  whose  true  modes  of  action  we  shall 
only  with  difficulty  discover  and  unveil.  Thus 
much  only  can  we  say:  “The  image  is  a  prod¬ 


uct  of  the  empirical  faculty  of  the  productive 
imagination — the  schema  of  sensuous  concep¬ 
tions  (of  figures  in  space,  for  example)  is  a 
product,  and,  as  it  were,  a  monogram  of  the 
pure  imagination  a  priori ,  whereby  and  accord¬ 
ing  to  which  images  first  become  possible,  which, 
however,  can  be  connected  with  the  conception 
only  mediately  by  means  of  the  schema  which 
they  indicate,  and  are  in  themselves  never  fully 
adequate  to  it.”  On  the  other  hand,  the  schema 
of  a  pure  conception  of  the  understanding  is 
something  that  cannot  be  reduced  into  any  im¬ 
age — it  is  nothing  else  than  the  pure  synthesis 
expressed  by  the  category,  conformably  to  a 
rule  of  unity  according  to  conceptions.  It  is 
a  transcendental  product  of  the  imagination,  a 
product  which  concerns  the  determination  of 
the  internal  sense,  according  to  conditions  of 
its  form  (time)  in  respect  to  all  representa¬ 
tions,  in  so  far  as  these  representations  must 
be  conjoined  a  priori  in  one  conception,  con¬ 
formably  to  the  unity  of  apperception. 

Without  entering  upon  a  dry  and  tedious 
analysis  of  the  essential  requisites  of  transcen¬ 
dental  schemata  of  the  pure  conceptions  of  the 
understanding,  we  shall  rather  proceed  at  once 
to  give  an  explanation  of  them  according  to  the 
order  of  the  categories,  and  in  connection  there¬ 
with. 

For  the  external  sense  the  pure  image  of  all 
quantities  ( quantorum )  is  space;  the  pure  im¬ 
age  of  all  objects  of  sense  in  general,  is  time. 
But  the  pure  schema  of  quantity  ( quantitatis ) 
as  a  conception  of  the  understanding,  is  number, 
a  representation  which  comprehends  the  suc¬ 
cessive  addition  of  one  to  one  (homogeneous 
quantities).  Thus,  number  is  nothing  else  than 
the  unity  of  the  synthesis  of  the  manifold  in  a 
homogeneous  intuition,  by  means  of  my  gen¬ 
erating  time  itself  in  my  apprehension  of  the 
intuition. 

Reality,  in  the  pure  conception  of  the  under¬ 
standing,  is  that  which  corresponds  to  a  sen¬ 
sation  in  general;  that,  consequently,  the  con¬ 
ception  of  which  indicates  a  being  (in  time). 
Negation  is  that  the  conception  of  which  repre¬ 
sents  a  not-being  (in  time).  The  opposition  of 
these  two  consists  therefore  in  the  difference  of 
one  and  the  same  time,  as  a  time  filled  or  a 
time  empty.  Now  as  time  is  only  the  form  of  in¬ 
tuition,  consequently  of  objects  as  phenomena, 
that  which  in  objects  corresponds  to  sensation 
is  the  transcendental  matter  of  all  objects  as 
things  in  themselves  ( Sachheit ,  reality).  Now 
every  sensation  has  a  degree  or  quantity  by 


OF  PURE 

which  it  can  fill  time,  that  is  to  say,  the  internal 
sense  in  respect  of  the  representation  of  an  ob¬ 
ject,  more  or  less,  until  it  vanishes  into  noth¬ 
ing  (=  o  =  negatio).  Thus  there  is  a  relation 
and  connection  between  reality  and  negation, 
or  rather  a  transition  from  the  former  to  the 
latter,  which  makes  every  reality  representable 
to  us  as  a  quantum;  and  the  schema  of  a  reality 
as  the  quantity  of  something  in  so  far  as  it  fills 
time,  is  exactly  this  continuous  and  uniform 
generation  of  the  reality  in  time,  as  we  descend 
in  time  from  the  sensation  which  has  a  certain 
degree,  down  to  the  vanishing  thereof,  or  grad¬ 
ually  ascend  from  negation  to  the  quantity 
thereof. 

The  schema  of  substance  is  the  permanence 
of  the  real  in  time;  that  is,  the  representation 
of  it  as  a  substratum  of  the  empirical  determina¬ 
tion  of  time;  a  substratum  which  therefore  re¬ 
mains,  whilst  all  else  changes.  (Time  passes  not, 
but  in  it  passes  the  existence  of  the  changeable. 
To  time,  therefore,  which  is  itself  unchange¬ 
able  and  permanent,  corresponds  that  which  in 
the  phenomenon  is  unchangeable  in  existence, 
that  is,  substance,  and  it  is  only  by  it  that  the 
succession  and  coexistence  of  phenomena  can 
be  determined  in  regard  to  time.) 

The  schema  of  cause  and  of  the  causality  of 
a  thing  is  the  real  which,  when  posited,  is  al¬ 
ways  followed  by  something  else.  It  consists, 
therefore,  in  the  succession  of  the  manifold, 
in  so  far  as  that  succession  is  subjected  to  a 
rule. 

The  schema  of  community  (reciprocity  of 
action  and  reaction),  or  the  reciprocal  causality 
of  substances  in  respect  of  their  accidents,  is 
the  coexistence  of  the  determinations  of  the 
one  with  those  of  the  other,  according  to  a  gen¬ 
eral  rule. 

The  schema  of  possibility  is  the  accordance 
of  the  synthesis  of  different  representations  with 
the  conditions  of  time  in  general  (as,  for  ex¬ 
ample,  opposites  cannot  exist  together  at  the 
same  time  in  the  same  thing,  but  only  after  each 
other),  and  is  therefore  the  determination  of  the 
representation  of  a  thing  at  any  time. 

The  schema  of  reality  is  existence  in  a  deter¬ 
mined  time. 

The  schema  of  necessity  is  the  existence  of  an 
object  in  all  time. 

It  is  clear,  from  all  this,  that  the  schema  of 
the  category  of  quantity  contains  and  represents 
the  generation  (synthesis)  of  time  itself,  in  the 
I  successive  apprehension  of  an  object;  the  sche¬ 
ma  of  quality  the  synthesis  of  sensation  with  the 


REASON  63 

representation  of  time,  or  the  filling  up  of  time; 
the  schema  of  relation  the  relation  of  percep¬ 
tions  to  each  other  in  all  time  (that  is,  according 
to  a  rule  of  the  determination  of  time) :  and  fi¬ 
nally,  the  schema  of  modality  and  its  categories, 
time  itself,  as  the  correlative  of  the  determina¬ 
tion  of  an  object — whether  it  does  belong  to 
time,  and  how.  The  schemata,  therefore,  are  noth¬ 
ing  but  a  priori  determinations  of  time  according 
to  rules,  and  these,  in  regard  to  all  possible  ob¬ 
jects,  following  the  arrangement  of  the  catego¬ 
ries,  relate  to  the  series  in  time,  the  content  in 
time ,  the  order  in  time,  and  finally,  to  the  com¬ 
plex  or  totality  in  time. 

Hence  it  is  apparent  that  the  schematism  of 
the  understanding,  by  means  of  the  transcenden¬ 
tal  synthesis  of  the  imagination,  amounts  to  noth¬ 
ing  else  than  the  unity  of  the  manifold  of  intui¬ 
tion  in  the  internal  sense,  and  thus  indirectly  to 
the  unity  of  apperception,  as  a  function  corre¬ 
sponding  to  the  internal  sense  (a  receptivity). 
Thus,  the  schemata  of  the  pure  conceptions  of 
the  understanding  are  the  true  and  only  condi¬ 
tions  whereby  our  understanding  receives  an  ap¬ 
plication  to  objects,  and  consequently  signifi¬ 
cance.  Finally,  therefore,  the  categories  are  only 
capable  of  empirical  use,  inasmuch  as  they  serve 
merely  to  subject  phenomena  to  the  universal 
rules  of  synthesis,  by  means  of  an  a  priori  neces¬ 
sary  unity  (on  account  of  the  necessary  union  of 
all  consciousness  in  one  original  apperception) ; 
and  so  to  render  them  susceptible  of  a  complete 
connection  in  one  experience.  But  within  this 
whole  of  possible  experience  lie  all  our  cog¬ 
nitions,  and  in  the  universal  relation  to  this  ex¬ 
perience  consists  transcendental  truth,  which 
antecedes  all  empirical  truth,  and  renders  the 
latter  possible. 

It  is,  however,  evident  at  first  sight,  that  al¬ 
though  the  schemata  of  sensibility  are  the  sole 
agents  in  realizing  the  categories,  they  do,  never¬ 
theless,  also  restrict  them,  that  is,  they  limit  the 
categories  by  conditions  which  lie  beyond  the 
sphere  of  understanding — namely,  in  sensibility. 
Hence  the  schema  is  properly  only  the  phenom¬ 
enon,  or  the  sensuous  conception  of  an  object  in 
harmony  with  the  category.  ( Numerus  est  quan - 
titas  phaenomenon — sensatio  realitas  phaenome- 
non;  constans  et  perdurabile  rerum  substantia 
phaenomenon — aeternitas,  necessitas,  phaenom - 
ena ,  etc.)  Now,  if  we  remove  a  restrictive  condi¬ 
tion,  we  thereby  amplify,  it  appears,  the  former¬ 
ly  limited  conception.  In  this  way,  the  categories 
in  their  pure  signification,  free  from  all  condi¬ 
tions  of  sensibility,  ought  to  be  valid  of  things  as 


THE  CRITIQUE 


64 

they  are ,  and  not,  as  the  schemata  represent  them, 
merely  as  they  appear;  and  consequently  the  cate¬ 
gories  must  have  a  significance  far  more  extend¬ 
ed,  and  wholly  independent  of  all  schemata.  In 
truth,  there  does  always  remain  to  the  pure  con¬ 
ceptions  of  the  understanding,  after  abstracting 
every  sensuous  condition,  a  value  and  signifi¬ 
cance,  which  is,  however,  merely  logical.  But  in 
this  case,  no  object  is  given  them,  and  therefore 
they  have  no  meaning  sufficient  to  afford  us  a 
conception  of  an  object.  The  notion  of  substance, 
for  example,  if  we  leave  out  the  sensuous  deter¬ 
mination  of  permanence,  would  mean  nothing 
more  than  a  something  which  can  be  cogitated  as 
subject,  without  the  possibility  of  becoming  a 
predicate  to  anything  else.  Of  this  representation 
I  can  make  nothing,  inasmuch  as  it  does  not  indi¬ 
cate  to  me  what  determinations  the  thing  pos¬ 
sesses  which  must  thus  be  valid  as  premier  sub¬ 
ject.  Consequently,  the  categories,  without  sche¬ 
mata  are  merely  functions  of  the  understanding 
for  the  production  of  conceptions,  but  do  not 
represent  any  object.  This  significance  they  de¬ 
rive  from  sensibility,  which  at  the  same  time 
realizes  the  understanding  and  restricts  it. 

Chapter  II.  System  of  all  Principles  of  the 

Pure  Understanding 

In  the  foregoing  chapter  we  have  merely  con¬ 
sidered  the  general  conditions  under  which  alone 
the  transcendental  faculty  of  judgement  is  jus¬ 
tified  in  using  the  pure  conceptions  of  the  under¬ 
standing  for  synthetical  judgements.  Our  duty 
at  present  is  to  exhibit  in  systematic  connection 
those  judgements  which  the  understanding  really 
produces  a  priori.  For  this  purpose,  our  table  of 
the  categories  will  certainly  afford  us  the  natural 
and  safe  guidance.  For  it  is  precisely  the  cate¬ 
gories  whose  application  to  possible  experience 
must  constitute  all  pure  a  priori  cognition  of  the 
understanding;  and  the  relation  of  which  to  sen¬ 
sibility  will,  on  that  very  account,  present  us 
with  a  complete  and  systematic  catalogue  of  all 
the  transcendental  principles  of  the  use  of  the 
understanding. 

Principles  a  priori  are  so  called,  not  merely 
because  they  contain  in  themselves  the  grounds 
of  other  judgements,  but  also  because  they  them¬ 
selves  are  not  grounded  in  higher  and  more  gen¬ 
eral  cognitions.  This  peculiarity,  however,  does 
not  raise  them  altogether  above  the  need  of  a 
proof.  For  although  there  could  be  found  no  high¬ 
er  cognition,  and  therefore  no  objective  proof, 
and  although  such  a  principle  rather  serves  as 
the  foundation  for  all  cognition  of  the  object, 
this  by  no  means  hinders  us  from  drawing  a 


proof  from  the  subjective  sources  of  the  possi¬ 
bility  of  the  cognition  of  an  object.  Such  a  proof 
is  necessary,  moreover,  because  without  it  the  » 
principle  might  be  liable  to  the  imputation  of 
being  a  mere  gratuitous  assertion. 

In  the  second  place,  we  shall  limit  our  investi¬ 
gations  to  those  principles  which  relate  to  the 
categories.  For  as  to  the  principles  of  transcen¬ 
dental  aesthetic,  according  to  which  space  and 
time  are  the  conditions  of  the  possibility  of 
things  as  phenomena,  as  also  the  restriction  of  1 
these  principles,  namely,  that  they  cannot  be  ap-  c 
plied  to  objects  as  things  in  themselves — these,  j 
of  course,  do  not  fall  within  the  scope  of  our  : 
present  inquiry.  In  like  manner,  the  principles  of  f 
mathematical  science  form  no  part  of  this  sys-  : 
tem,  because  they  are  all  drawn  from  intuition,  J 
and  not  from  the  pure  conception  of  the  under-  i 
standing.  The  possibility  of  these  principles,  how¬ 
ever,  will  necessarily  be  considered  here,  inas¬ 
much  as  they  are  synthetical  judgements  a  pri -  l 
ori}  not  indeed  for  the  purpose  of  proving  their  \ 
accuracy  and  apodeictic  certainty,  which  is  un-  ? 
necessary,  but  merely  to  render  conceivable  and 
deduce  the  possibility  of  such  evident  a  priori 
cognitions.  > 

But  we  shall  have  also  to  speak  of  the  prin¬ 
ciple  of  analytical  judgements,  in  opposition  to 
synthetical  judgements,  which  is  the  proper  sub-  '» 
ject  of  our  inquiries,  because  this  very  opposi-  > 
tion  will  free  the  theory  of  the  latter  from  all  > 
ambiguity,  and  place  it  clearly  before  our  eyes  > 
in  its  true  nature. 

I 

System  of  the  Principles  of  the 
Pure  Understanding 

Section  I.  Of  the  Supreme  Principle  of  all 
Analytical  Judgements 

Whatever  may  be  the  content  of  our  cogni¬ 
tion,  and  in  whatever  manner  our  cognition  may 
be  related  to  its  object,  the  universal,  although 
only  negative  conditions  of  all  our  judgements  is 
that  they  do  not  contradict  themselves;  other¬ 
wise  these  judgements  are  in  themselves  (even 
without  respect  to  the  object)  nothing.  But  al¬ 
though  there  may  exist  no  contraditions  in  our 
judgement,  it  may  nevertheless  connect  concep¬ 
tions  in  such  a  manner  that  they  do  not  corre¬ 
spond  to  the  object,  or  without  any  grounds 
either  a  priori  or  a  posteriori  for  arriving  at 
such  a  judgement,  and  thus,  without  being  self¬ 
contradictory,  a  judgement  may  nevertheless  be 
either  false  or  groundless. 

Now,  the  proposition:  “No  subject  can  have 
a  predicate  that  contradicts  it,”  is  called  the 


OF  PURE  REASON 


principle  of  contradiction ,  and  is  a  universal  but 
purely  negative  criterion  of  all  truth.  But  it 
belongs  to  logic  alone,  because  it  is  valid  of  cog¬ 
nitions,  merely  as  cognitions  and  without  re¬ 
spect  to  their  content,  and  declares  that  the 
contradiction  entirely  nullifies  them.  We  can 
also,  however,  make  a  positive  use  of  this  prin¬ 
ciple,  that  is,  not  merely  to  banish  falsehood 
and  error  (in  so  far  as  it  rests  upon  contradic¬ 
tion),  but  also  for  the  cognition  of  truth.  For  if 
the  judgement  is  analytical ,  be  it  affirmative  or 
negative,  its  truth  must  always  be  recognizable 
by  means  of  the  principle  of  contradiction.  For 
the  contrary  of  that  which  lies  and  is  cogitated 
as  conception  in  the  cognition  of  the  object  will 
be  always  properly  negatived,  but  the  concep¬ 
tion  itself  must  always  be  affirmed  of  the  ob¬ 
ject,  inasmuch  as  the  contrary  thereof  would  be 
in  contradiction  to  the  object. 

We  must  therefore  hold  the  principle  of  con¬ 
tradiction  to  be  the  universal  and  fully  sufficient 
principle  of  all  analytical  cognition.  But  as  a 
sufficient  criterion  of  truth,  it  has  no  further 
utility  or  authority.  For  the  fact  that  no  cogni¬ 
tion  can  be  at  variance  with  this  principle  with¬ 
out  nullifying  itself,  constitutes  this  principle 
the  sine  qua  non ,  but  not  the  determining  ground 
of  the  truth  of  our  cognition.  As  our  business 
at  present  is  properly  with  the  synthetical  part 
of  our  knowledge  only,  we  shall  always  be  on 
our  guard  not  to  transgress  this  inviolable  prin¬ 
ciple;  but  at  the  same  time  not  to  expect  from 
it  any  direct  assistance  in  the  establishment  of 
the  truth  of  any  synthetical  proposition. 

There  exists,  however,  a  formula  of  this  cele¬ 
brated  principle — a  principle  merely  formal  and 
entirely  without  content — which  contains  a  syn¬ 
thesis  that  has  been  inadvertently  and  quite 
unnecessarily  mixed  up  with  it.  It  is  this:  “It  is 
impossible  for  a  thing  to  be  and  not  to  be  at  tne 
same  time.”  Not  to  mention  the  superfluousness 
of  the  addition  of  the  word  impossible  to  indi¬ 
cate  the  apodeictic  certainty,  which  ought  to 
be  self-evident  from  the  proposition  itself,  the 
proposition  is  affected  by  the  condition  of  time, 
and  as  it  were  says:  “A  thing=^4,  which  is 
something=B,  cannot  at  the  same  time  be  non- 
B.”  But  both,  B  as  well  as  non-By  may  quite 
well  exist  in  succession.  For  example,  a  man  who 
is  young  cannot  at  the  same  time  be  old ;  but  the 
same  man  can  very  well  be  at  one  time  young, 
and  at  another  not  young,  that  is,  old.  Now  the 
principle  of  contradiction  as  a  merely  logical 
j  proposition  must  not  by  any  means  limit  its  ap¬ 
plication  merely  to  relations  of  time,  and  con- 
i  sequently  a  formula  like  the  preceding  is  quite 


65 

foreign  to  its  true  purpose.  The  misunderstand¬ 
ing  arises  in  this  way.  We  first  of  all  separate  a 
predicate  of  a  thing  from  the  conception  of  the 
thing,  and  afterwards  connect  with  this  predi¬ 
cate  its  opposite,  and  hence  do  not  establish 
any  contradiction  with  the  subject,  but  only 
with  its  predicate,  which  has  been  conjoined 
with  the  subject  synthetically — a  contradiction, 
moreover,  which  obtains  only  when  the  first  and 
second  predicate  are  affirmed  in  the  same  time. 
If  I  say:  “A  man  who  is  ignorant  is  not  learned,” 
the  condition  “at  the  same  time”  must  be  added, 
for  he  who  is  at  one  time  ignorant,  may  at  an¬ 
other  be  learned.  But  if  I  say:  “No  ignorant 
man  is  a  learned  man,”  the  proposition  is  ana¬ 
lytical,  because  the  characteristic  ignorance  is 
now  a  constituent  part  of  the  conception  of  the 
subject;  and  in  this  case  the  negative  proposi¬ 
tion  is  evident  immediately  from  the  proposi¬ 
tion  of  contradiction,  without  the  necessity  of 
adding  the  condition  “the  the  same  time.”  This 
is  the  reason  why  I  have  altered  the  formula  of 
this  principle — an  alteration  which  shows  very 
clearly  the  nature  of  an  analytical  proposition. 

Section  II.  Of  the  Supreme  Principle  of  all 
Synthetical  Judgements 

The  explanation  of  the  possibility  of  syn¬ 
thetical  judgements  is  a  task  with  which  general 
logic  has  nothing  to  do;  indeed  she  needs  not 
even  be  acquainted  with  its  name.  But  in  tran¬ 
scendental  logic  it  is  the  most  important  matter 
to  be  dealt  with — indeed  the  only  one,  if  the 
question  is  of  the  possibility  of  synthetical 
judgements  a  priori ,  the  conditions  and  extent 
of  their  validity.  For  when  this  question  is 
fully  decided,  it  can  reach  its  aim  with  perfect 
ease,  the  determination,  to  wit,  of  the  extent 
and  limits  of  the  pure  understanding. 

In  an  analytical  judgement  I  do  not  go  beyond 
the  given  conception,  in  order  to  arrive  at  some 
decision  respecting  it.  If  the  judgement  is  af¬ 
firmative,  I  predicate  of  the  conception  only 
that  which  was  already  cogitated  in  it;  if  nega¬ 
tive,  I  merely  exclude  from  the  conception  its 
contrary.  But  in  synthetical  judgements,  I  must 
go  beyond  the  given  conception,  in  order  to 
cogitate,  in  relation  with  it,  something  quite  dif¬ 
ferent  from  that  which  was  cogitated  in  it,  a 
relation  which  is  consequently  never  one  either 
of  identity  or  contradiction,  and  by  means  of 
which  the  truth  or  error  of  the  judgement  can¬ 
not  be  discerned  merely  from  the  judgement 
itself. 

Granted,  then,  that  we  must  go  out  beyond 
a  given  conception,  in  order  to  compare  it  syn- 


66 


THE  CRITIQUE 


thetically  with  another,  a  third  thing  is  neces¬ 
sary,  in  which  alone  the  synthesis  of  two  con¬ 
ceptions  can  originate.  Now  what  is  this  ter - 
tium  quid  that  is  to  be  the  medium  of  all  syn¬ 
thetical  judgements?  It  is  only  a  complex  in 
which  all  our  representations  are  contained,  the 
internal  sense  to  wit,  and  its  form  a  priori ,  time. 

The  synthesis  of  our  representations  rests 
upon  the  imagination;  their  synthetical  unity 
(which  is  requisite  to  a  judgement),  upon  the 
unity  of  apperception.  In  this,  therefore,  is  to 
be  sought  the  possibility  of  synthetical  judge¬ 
ments,  and  as  all  three  contain  the  sources  of  a 
priori  representations,  the  possibility  of  pure 
synthetical  judgements  also;  nay,  they  are  nec¬ 
essary  upon  these  grounds,  if  we  are  to  possess 
a  knowledge  of  objects,  which  rests  solely  upon 
the  synthesis  of  representations. 

If  a  cognition  is  to  have  objective  reality, 
that  is,  to  relate  to  an  object,  and  possess  sense 
and  meaning  in  respect  to  it,  it  is  necessary  that 
the  object  be  given  in  some  way  or  another. 
Without  this,  our  conceptions  are  empty,  and 
we  may  indeed  have  thought  by  means  of  them, 
but  by  such  thinking  we  have  not,  in  fact,  cog¬ 
nized  anything,  we  have  merely  played  with  rep¬ 
resentation.  To  give  an  object,  if  this  expression 
be  understood  in  the  sense  of  “to  present”  the 
object,  not  mediately  but  immediately  in  intui¬ 
tion,  means  nothing  else  than  to  apply  the  rep¬ 
resentation  of  it  to  experience,  be  that  experi¬ 
ence  real  or  only  possible.  Space  and  time  them¬ 
selves,  pure  as  these  conceptions  are  from  all 
that  is  empirical,  and  certain  as  it  is  that  they 
are  represented  fully  a  priori  in  the  mind,  would 
be  completely  without  objective  validity,  and 
without  sense  and  significance,  if  their  neces¬ 
sary  use  in  the  objects  of  experience  were  not 
shown.  Nay,  the  representation  of  them  is  a 
mere  schema,  that  always  relates  to  the  repro¬ 
ductive  imagination,  which  calls  up  the  objects 
of  experience,  without  which  they  have  no 
meaning.  And  so  it  is  with  all  conceptions  with¬ 
out  distinction. 

The  possibility  of  experience  is,  then,  that 
which  gives  objective  reality  to  all  our  a  priori 
cognitions.  Now  experience  depends  upon  the 
synthetical  unity  of  phenomena,  that  is,  upon 
a  synthesis  according  to  conceptions  of  the  ob¬ 
ject  of  phenomena  in  general,  a  synthesis  with¬ 
out  which  experience  never  could  become  knowl¬ 
edge,  but  would  be  merely  a  rhapsody  of  per¬ 
ceptions,  never  fitting  together  into  any  con¬ 
nected  text,  according  to  rules  of  a  thoroughly 
united  (possible)  consciousness,  and  therefore 
never  subjected  to  the  transcendental  and  nec¬ 


essary  unity  of  apperception.  Experience  has  * 
therefore  for  a  foundation,  a  priori  principles  of 
its  form,  that  is  to  say,  general  rules  of  unity  in 
the  synthesis  of  phenomena,  the  objective  real-  * 
ity  of  which  rules,  as  necessary  conditions — even 
of  the  possibility  of  experience — can  always  be 
shown  in  experience.  But  apart  from  this  rela¬ 
tion,  a  priori  synthetical  propositions  are  ab¬ 
solutely  impossible,  because  they  have  no  third 
term,  that  is,  no  pure  object,  in  which  the  syn-  ’ 
thetical  unity  can  exhibit  the  objective  reality  r 
of  its  conceptions.  1 

Although,  then,  respecting  space,  or  the  forms 
which  productive  imagination  describes  therein,  : 
we  do  cognize  much  a  priori  in  synthetical  judge-  1 
ments,  and  are  really  in  no  need  of  experience 
for  this  purpose,  such  knowledge  would  never-  ^ 
theless  amount  to  nothing  but  a  busy  trifling 
with  a  mere  chimera,  were  not  space  to  be  con¬ 
sidered  as  the  condition  of  the  phenomena  which  3 
constitute  the  material  of  external  experience.  1 
Hence  those  pure  synthetical  judgements  do  re¬ 
late,  though  but  mediately,  to  possible  experi-  * 
ence,  or  rather  to  the  possibility  of  experience,  1 
and  upon  that  alone  is  founded  the  objective  ' 
validity  of  their  synthesis.  > 

While  then,  on  the  one  hand,  experience,  as 
empirical  synthesis,  is  the  only  possible  mode 
of  cognition  which  gives  reality  to  all  other  syn-  » 
thesis;  on  the  other  hand,  this  latter  synthesis,  1 
as  cognition  a  priori ,  possesses  truth,  that  is,  ac-  : 
cordance  with  its  object,  only  in  so  far  as  it  ‘ 
contains  nothing  more  than  what  is  necessary  to 
the  synthetical  unity  of  experience. 

Accordingly,  the  supreme  principle  of  all  syn-  1 
thetical  judgements  is:  “Every  object  is  subject  1 
to  the  necessary  conditions  of  the  synthetical  l 
unity  of  the  manifold  of  intuition  in  a  possible  } 
experience.”  1 

A  priori  synthetical  judgements  are  possible 
when  we  apply  the  formal  conditions  of  the  a  i 
priori  intuition,  the  synthesis  of  the  imagina¬ 
tion,  and  the  necessary  unity  of  that  synthesis  j 
in  a  transcendental  apperception,  to  a  possible  [ 
cognition  of  experience,  and  say:  “The  con¬ 
ditions  of  the  possibility  of  experience  in  gen¬ 
eral  are  at  the  same  time  conditions  of  the 
possibility  of  the  objects  of  experience ,  and  1 
have,  for  that  reason,  objective  validity  in  an 
a  priori  synthetical  judgement.” 

Section  III.  Systematic  Representation  of  all  > 
Synthetical  Principles  of  the 

Pure  Understanding  , 

That  principles  exist  at  all  is  to  be  ascribed 
solely  to  the  pure  understanding,  which  is  not  I 


OF  PURE  REASON 


only  the  faculty  of  rules  in  regard  to  that  which 
happens,  but  is  even  the  source  of  principles  ac¬ 
cording  to  which  everything  that  can  be  pre¬ 
sented  to  us  as  an  object  is  necessarily  subject 
to  rules,  because  without  such  rules  we  never 
could  attain  to  cognition  of  an  object.  Even  the 
laws  of  nature,  if  they  are  contemplated  as  prin¬ 
ciples  of  the  empirical  use  of  the  understanding, 
possess  also  a  characteristic  of  necessity,  and 
we  may  therefore  at  least  expect  them  to  be  de¬ 
termined  upon  grounds  which  are  valid  a  priori 
and  antecedent  to  all  experience.  But  all  laws 
of  nature,  without  distinction,  are  subject  to 
higher  principles  of  the  understanding,  inasmuch 
as  the  former  are  merely  applications  of  the 
latter  to  particular  cases  of  experience.  These 
higher  principles  alone  therefore  give  the  con¬ 
ception,  which  contains  the  necessary  condition, 
and,  as  it  were,  the  exponent  of  a  rule;  experi¬ 
ence,  on  the  other  hand,  gives  the  case  which 
comes  under  the  rule. 

There  is  no  danger  of  our  mistaking  merely 
empirical  principles  for  principles  of  the  pure 
understanding,  or  conversely;  for  the  character 
of  necessity,  according  to  conceptions  which 
distinguish  the  latter,  and  the  absence  of  this 
in  every  empirical  proposition,  how  extensively 
valid  soever  it  may  be,  is  a  perfect  safeguard 
against  confounding  them.  There  are,  however, 
pure  principles  a  priori ,  which  nevertheless  I 
should  not  ascribe  to  the  pure  understanding 
— for  this  reason,  that  they  are  not  derived 
from  pure  conceptions,  but  (although  by  the 
mediation  of  the  understanding)  from  pure  in¬ 
tuitions.  But  understanding  is  the  faculty  of  con¬ 
ceptions.  Such  principles  mathematical  science 
possesses,  but  their  application  to  experience, 
consequently  their  objective  validity,  nay  the 
possibility  of  such  a  priori  synthetical  cognitions 
(the  deduction  thereof)  rests  entirely  upon  the 
pure  understanding. 

On  this  account,  I  shall  not  reckon  among  my 
principles  those  of  mathematics;  though  I  shall 
include  those  upon  the  possibility  and  objective 
validity  a  priori ,  of  principles  of  the  mathemat¬ 
ical  science,  which,  consequently,  are  to  be 
looked  upon  as  the  principle  of  these,  and  which 
proceed  from  conceptions  to  intuition,  and  not 
from  intuition  to  conceptions. 

In  the  application  of  the  pure  conceptions  of 
the  understanding  to  possible  experience,  the 
employment  of  their  synthesis  is  either  mathe¬ 
matical  or  dynamical ,  for  it  is  directed  partly 
on  the  intuition  alone,  partly  on  the  existence 
of  a  phenomenon.  But  the  a  priori  conditions  of 
intuition  are  in  relation  to  a  possible  experience 


67 

absolutely  necessary,  those  of  the  existence  of 
objects  of  a  possible  empirical  intuition  are  in 
themselves  contingent.  Hence  the  principles  of 
the  mathematical  use  of  the  categories  will  pos¬ 
sess  a  character  of  absolute  necessity,  that  is, 
will  be  apodeictic;  those,  on  the  other  hand,  of 
the  dynamical  use,  the  character  of  an  a  priori 
necessity  indeed,  but  only  under  the  condition 
of  empirical  thought  in  an  experience,  therefore 
only  mediately  and  indirectly.  Consequently 
they  will  not  possess  that  immediate  evidence 
which  is  peculiar  to  the  former,  although  their 
application  to  experience  does  not,  for  that  rea¬ 
son,  lose  its  truth  and  certitude.  But  of  this 
point  we  shall  be  better  able  to  judge  at  the 
conclusion  of  this  system  of  principles. 

The  table  of  the  categories  is  naturally  our 
guide  to  the  table  of  principles,  because  these 
are  nothing  else  than  rules  for  the  objective  em¬ 
ployment  of  the  former.  Accordingly,  all  prin¬ 
ciples  of  the  pure  understanding  are: 

1 

Axioms 
of  Intuition 

2  3 

Anticipations  Analogies 

of  Perception  of  Experience 

4 

Postulates  of 
Empirical  Thought 
in  general 

These  appellations  I  have  chosen  advisedly, 
in  order  that  we  might  not  lose  sight  of  the  dis¬ 
tinctions  in  respect  of  the  evidence  and  the  em¬ 
ployment  of  these  principles.  It  will,  however, 
soon  appear  that — a  fact  which  concerns  both 
the  evidence  of  these  principles,  and  the  a 
priori  determination  of  phenomena — according 
to  the  categories  of  quantity  and  quality  (if  we 
attend  merely  to  the  form  of  these),  the  prin¬ 
ciples  of  these  categories  are  distinguishable 
from  those  of  the  two  others,  inasmuch  as  the 
former  are  possessed  of  an  intuitive,  but  the 
latter  of  a  merely  discursive,  though  in  both 
instances  a  complete,  certitude.  I  shall  there¬ 
fore  call  the  former  mathematical,  and  the  lat¬ 
ter  dynamical  principles.1  It  must  be  observed, 

1  All  combination  ( conjunctio )  is  either  composition 
( compositio )  or  connection  (nexus).  The  former  is 
the  synthesis  of  a  manifold,  the  parts  of  which  do  not 
necessarily  belong  to  each  other.  For  example,  the  two 
triangles  into  which  a  square  is  divided  by  a  diagonal, 
do  not  necessarily  belong  to  each  other,  and  of  this 
kind  is  the  synthesis  of  the  homogeneous  in  everything 
that  can  be  mathematically  considered.  This  synthesis 
can  be  divided  into  those  of  aggregation  and  coalition, 


68 


THE  CRITIQUE 


however,  that  by  these  terms  I  mean  just  as 
little  in  the  one  case  the  principles  of  mathe¬ 
matics  as  those  of  general  (physical)  dynamics 
in  the  other.  I  have  here  in  view  merely  the 
principles  of  the  pure  understanding,  in  their 
application  to  the  internal  sense  (without  dis¬ 
tinction  of  the  representations  given  therein), 
by  means  of  which  the  sciences  of  mathematics 
and  dynamics  become  possible.  Accordingly,  I 
have  named  these  principles  rather  with  refer¬ 
ence  to  their  application  than  their  content; 
and  I  shall  now  proceed  to  consider  them  in  the 
order  in  which  they  stand  in  the  table. 

1.  Axioms  of  Intuition 

The  principle  of  these  is:  All  Intuitions  are  Ex¬ 
tensive  Quantities. 

proof 

All  phenomena  contain,  as  regards  their  form, 
an  intuition  in  space  and  time,  which  lies  a 
priori  at  the  foundation  of  all  without  excep¬ 
tion.  Phenomena,  therefore,  cannot  be  appre¬ 
hended,  that  is,  received  into  empirical  conscious¬ 
ness  otherwise  than  through  the  synthesis  of 
a  manifold,  through  which  the  representations 
of  a  determinate  space  or  time  are  generated; 
that  is  to  say,  through  the  composition  of  the 
homogeneous  and  the  consciousness  of  the  syn¬ 
thetical  unity  of  this  manifold  (homogeneous). 
Now  the  consciousness  of  a  homogeneous  mani¬ 
fold  in  intuition,  in  so  far  as  thereby  the  repre¬ 
sentation  of  an  object  is  rendered  possible,  is 
the  conception  of  a  quantity  ( quanti ).  Conse¬ 
quently,  even  the  perception  of  an  object  as 
phenomenon  is  possible  only  through  the  same 
synthetical  unity  of  the  manifold  of  the  given 
sensuous  intuition,  through  which  the  unity  of 
the  composition  of  the  homogeneous  manifold 
in  the  conception  of  a  quantity  is  cogitated; 
that  is  to  say,  all  phenomena  are  quantities,  and 
extensive  quantities,  because  as  intuitions  in 
space  or  time  they  must  be  represented  by 
means  of  the  same  synthesis  through  which 
space  and  time  themselves  are  determined. 


the  former  of  which  is  applied  to  extensive,  the  latter  to 
intensive  quantities.  The  second  sort  of  combination 
(nexus)  i$  the  synthesis  of  a  manifold,  in  so  far  as  its 
parts  do  belong  necessarily  to  each  other;  for  example, 
the  accident  to  a  substance,  or  the  effect  to  the  cause. 
Consequently  it  is  a  synthesis  of  that  which  though  het¬ 
erogeneous,  is  represented  as  connected  a  priori.  This 
combination — not  an  arbitrary  one — I  entitle  dynami¬ 
cal  because  it  concerns  the  connection  of  the  existence 
of  the  manifold.  This,  again,  may  be  divided  into  the 
physical  synthesis,  of  the  phenomena  divided  among 
each  other,  and  the  metaphysical  synthesis,  or  the  con¬ 
nection  of  phenomena  a  priori  in  the  faculty  of  cog¬ 
nition. 


An  extensive  quantity  I  call  that  wherein  the 
representation  of  the  parts  renders  possible 
(and  therefore  necessarily  antecedes)  the  rep¬ 
resentation  of  the  whole.  I  cannot  represent  to 
myself  any  line,  however  small,  without  draw¬ 
ing  it  in  thought,  that  is,  without  generating 
from  a  point  all  its  parts  one  after  another,  and 
in  this  way  alone  producing  this  intuition.  Pre¬ 
cisely  the  same  is  the  case  with  every,  even  the 
smallest,  portion  of  time.  I  cogitate  therein  only 
the  successive  progress  from  one  moment  to 
another,  and  hence,  by  means  of  the  different 
portions  of  time  and  the  addition  of  them,  a  de¬ 
terminate  quantity  of  time  is  produced.  As  the 
pure  intuition  in  all  phenomena  is  either  time 
or  space,  so  is  every  phenomenon  in  its  charac¬ 
ter  of  intuition  an  extensive  quantity,  inasmuch 
as  it  can  only  be  cognized  in  our  apprehension 
by  successive  synthesis  (from  part  to  part).  All 
phenomena  are,  accordingly,  to  be  considered 
as  aggregates,  that  is,  as  a  collection  of  previ¬ 
ously  given  parts;  which  is  not  the  case  with 
every  sort  of  quantities,  but  only  with  those 
which  are  represented  and  apprehended  by  us 
as  extensive. 

On  this  successive  synthesis  of  the  productive 
imagination,  in  the  generation  of  figures,  is 
founded  the  mathematics  of  extension,  or  ge¬ 
ometry,  with  its  axioms,  which  express  the  con¬ 
ditions  of  sensuous  intuition  a  priori,  under 
which  alone  the  schema  of  a  pure  conception 
of  external  intuition  can  exist;  for  example, “be¬ 
tween  two  points  only  one  straight  line  is  possi¬ 
ble, ,,atwo  straight  lines  cannot  enclose  a  space,” 
etc.  These  are  the  axioms  which  properly  relate 
only  to  quantities  ( quanta )  as  such. 

But,  as  regards  the  quantity  of  a  thing  ( quan - 
titas),  that  is  to  say,  the  answer  to  the  question: 
“How  large  is  this  or  that  object?”  although,  in 
respect  to  this  question,  we  have  various  propo¬ 
sitions  synthetical  and  immediately  certain  (in- 
demons  trabilia);  we  have,  in  the  proper  sense 
of  the  term,  no  axioms.  For  example,  the  propo¬ 
sitions:  “If  equals  be  added  to  equals,  the 
wholes  are  equal”;  “If  equals  be  taken  from 
equals,  the  remainders  are  equal”;  are  analyti¬ 
cal,  because  I  am  immediately  conscious  of  the 
identity  of  the  production  of  the  one  quantity 
with  the  production  of  the  other;  whereas  axi¬ 
oms  must  be  a  priori  synthetical  propositions. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  self-evident  propositions 
as  to  the  relation  of  numbers,  are  certainly  syn¬ 
thetical  but  not  universal,  like  those  of  geom¬ 
etry,  and  for  this  reason  cannot  be  called  ax¬ 
ioms,  but  numerical  formulae.  That  7  +  5  =  12 
is  not  an  analytical  proposition.  For  neither  in 


OF  PURE 

the  representation  of  seven,  nor  of  five,  nor  of 
the  composition  of  the  two  numbers,  do  I  cogi¬ 
tate  the  number  twelve.  (Whether  I  cogitate 
the  number  in  the  addition  of  both,  is  not  at 
present  the  question;  for  in  the  case  of  an  an¬ 
alytical  proposition,  the  only  point  is  whether 
I  really  cogitate  the  predicate  in  the  represen¬ 
tation  of  the  subject.)  But  although  the  propo¬ 
sition  is  synthetical,  it  is  nevertheless  only  a 
singular  proposition.  In  so  far  as  regard  is  here 
had  merely  to  the  synthesis  of  the  homogeneous 
(the  units),  it  cannot  take  place  except  in  one 
manner,  although  our  use  of  these  numbers  is 
afterwards  general.  If  I  say:  “A  triangle  can  be 
constructed  with  three  lines,  any  two  of  which 
taken  together  are  greater  than  the  third,”  I 
exercise  merely  the  pure  function  of  the  pro¬ 
ductive  imagination,  which  may  draw  the  lines 
longer  or  shorter  and  construct  the  angles  at  its 
pleasure.  On  the  contrary,  the  number  seven  is 
possible  only  in  one  manner,  and  so  is  likewise 
the  number  twelve,  which  results  from  the  syn¬ 
thesis  of  seven  and  five.  Such  propositions,  then, 
cannot  be  termed  axioms  (for  in  that  case  we 
should  have  an  infinity  of  these),  but  numerical 
formulae. 

This  transcendental  principle  of  the  mathe¬ 
matics  of  phenomena  greatly  enlarges  our  a 
priori  cognition.  For  it  is  by  this  principle  alone 
that  pure  mathematics  is  rendered  applicable 
in  all  its  precision  to  objects  of  experience,  and 
without  it  the  validity  of  this  application  would 
not  be  so  self-evident;  on  the  contrary,  contra¬ 
dictions  and  confusions  have  often  arisen  on 
this  very  point.  Phenomena  are  not  things  in 
themselves.  Empirical  intuition  is  possible  only 
through  pure  intuition  (of  space  and  time) ; 
consequently,  what  geometry  affirms  of  the  lat¬ 
ter,  is  indisputably  valid  of  the  former.  All  eva¬ 
sions,  such  as  the  statement  that  objects  of 
sense  do  not  conform  to  the  rules  of  construc¬ 
tion  in  space  (for  example,  to  the  rule  of  the 
infinite  divisibility  of  lines  or  angles),  must  fall 
to  the  ground.  For,  if  these  objections  hold 
good,  we  deny  to  space,  and  with  it  to  all  mathe¬ 
matics,  objective  validity,  and  no  longer  know 
wherefore,  and  how  far,  mathematics  can  be 
applied  to  phenomena.  The  synthesis  of  spaces 
and  times  as  the  essential  form  of  all  intuition, 
is  that  which  renders  possible  the  apprehension 
of  a  phenomenon,  and  therefore  every  external 
experience,  consequently  all  cognition  of  the 
objects  of  experience;  and  whatever  mathemat¬ 
ics  in  its  pure  use  proves  of  the  former,  must 
necessarily  hold  good  of  the  latter.  All  objec¬ 
tions  are  but  the  chicaneries  of  an  ill-instructed 


REASON  69 

reason,  which  erroneously  thinks  to  liberate  the 
objects  of  sense  from  the  formal  conditions  of 
our  sensibility,  and  represents  these,  although 
mere  phenomena,  as  things  in  themselves,  pre¬ 
sented  as  such  to  our  understanding.  But  in  this 
case,  no  a  priori  synthetical  cognition  of  them 
could  be  possible,  consequently  not  through 
pure  conceptions  of  space  and  the  science 
which  determines  these  conceptions,  that  is  to 
say,  geometry,  would  itself  be  impossible. 

2.  Anticipations  of  Perception 

The  principle  of  these  is:  In  all  phenomena  the 

Real ,  that  which  is  an  object  of  sensation ,  has 

Intensive  Quantity ,  that  is,  has  a  Degree. 

PROOF 

Perception  is  empirical  consciousness,  that  is 
to  say,  a  consciousness  which  contains  an  ele¬ 
ment  of  sensation.  Phenomena  as  objects  of 
perception  are  not  pure,  that  is,  merely  formal 
intuitions,  like  space  and  time,  for  they  cannot 
be  perceived  in  themselves.  They  contain,  then, 
over  and  above  the  intuition,  the  materials  for 
an  object  (through  which  is  represented  some¬ 
thing  existing  in  space  or  time),  that  is  to  say, 
they  contain  the  real  of  sensation,  as  a  rep¬ 
resentation  merely  subjective,  which  gives  us 
merely  the  consciousness  that  the  subject  is  af¬ 
fected,  and  which  we  refer  to  some  external  ob¬ 
ject.  Now,  a  gradual  transition  from  empirical 
consciousness  to  pure  consciousness  is  possible, 
inasmuch  as  the  real  in  this  consciousness  en¬ 
tirely  vanishes,  and  there  remains  a  merely 
formal  consciousness  (a  priori)  of  the  manifold 
in  time  and  space;  consequently  there  is  possi¬ 
ble  a  synthesis  also  of  the  production  of  the 
quantity  of  a  sensation  from  its  commencement, 
that  is,  from  the  pure  intuition  =  o  onwards 
up  to  a  certain  quantity  of  the  sensation.  Now 
as  sensation  in  itself  is  not  an  objective  repre¬ 
sentation,  and  in  it  is  to  be  found  neither  the 
intuition  of  space  nor  of  time,  it  cannot  possess 
any  extensive  quantity,  and  yet  there  does  be¬ 
long  to  it  a  quantity  (and  that  by  means  of  its 
apprehension,  in  which  empirical  consciousness 
can  within  a  certain  time  rise  from  nothing  =  o 
up  to  its  given  amount),  consequently  an  in¬ 
tensive  quantity .  And  thus  we  must  ascribe  in¬ 
tensive  quantity,  that  is,  a  degree  of  influence 
on  sense  to  all  objects  of  perception,  in  so  far  as 
this  perception  contains  sensation. 

All  cognition,  by  means  of  which  I  am  en¬ 
abled  to  cognize  and  determine  a  priori  what 
belongs  to  empirical  cognition,  may  be  called  an 
anticipation;  and  without  doubt  this  is  the  sense 


THE  CRITIQUE 


70 

in  which  Epicurus  employed  his  expression 
7 rpoX^is.  But  as  there  is  in  phenomena  some¬ 
thing  which  is  never  cognized  a  priori ,  which  on 
this  account  constitutes  the  proper  difference 
between  pure  and  empirical  cognition,  that  is  to 
say,  sensation  (as  the  matter  of  perception),  it 
follows,  that  sensation  is  just  that  element  in 
cognition  which  cannot  be  at  all  anticipated.  On 
the  other  hand,  we  might  very  well  term  the 
pure  determinations  in  space  and  time,  as  well 
in  regard  to  figure  as  to  quantity,  anticipations 
of  phenomena,  because  they  represent  a  priori 
that  which  may  always  be  given  a  posteriori  in 
experience.  But  suppose  that  in  every  sensation, 
as  sensation  in  general,  without  any  particular 
sensation  being  thought  of,  there  existed  some¬ 
thing  which  could  be  cognized  a  priori ,  this 
would  deserve  to  be  called  anticipation  in  a 
special  sense — special,  because  it  may  seem  sur¬ 
prising  to  forestall  experience,  in  that  which 
concerns  the  matter  of  experience,  and  which 
we  can  only  derive  from  itself.  Yet  such  really 
is  the  case  here. 

Apprehension,  by  means  of  sensation  alone, 
fills  only  one  moment,  that  is,  if  I  do  not  take 
into  consideration  a  succession  of  many  sensa¬ 
tions.  As  that  in  the  phenomenon,  the  appre¬ 
hension  of  which  is  not  a  successive  synthesis 
advancing  from  parts  to  an  entire  representa¬ 
tion,  sensation  has  therefore  no  extensive  quan¬ 
tity;  the  want  of  sensation  in  a  moment  of  time 
would  represent  it  as  empty,  consequently  =  o. 
That  which  in  the  empirical  intuition  corre¬ 
sponds  to  sensation  is  reality  ( realitas  phae- 
nomenon );  that  which  corresponds  to  the  ab¬ 
sence  of  it,  negation  =  0.  Now  every  sensation 
is  capable  of  a  diminution,  so  that  it  can  de¬ 
crease,  and  thus  gradually  disappear.  Therefore, 
between  reality  in  a  phenomenon  and  negation, 
there  exists  a  continuous  concatenation  of  many 
possible  intermediate  sensations,  the  difference 
of  which  from  each  other  is  always  smaller  than 
that  between  the  given  sensation  and  zero,  or 
complete  negation.  That  is  to  say,  the  real  in  a 
phenomenon  has  always  a  quantity,  which  how¬ 
ever  is  not  discoverable  in  apprehension,  inas¬ 
much  as  apprehension  take  place  by  means  of 
mere  sensation  in  one  instant,  and  not  by  the 
successive  synthesis  of  many  sensations,  and 
therefore  does  not  progress  from  parts  to  the 
whole.  Consequently,  it  has  a  quantity,  but  not 
an  extensive  quantity. 

Now  that  quantity  which  is  apprehended  only 
as  unity,  and  in  which  plurality  can  be  repre¬ 
sented  only  by  approximation  to  negation  =  o, 
I  term  intensive  quantity.  Consequently,  real¬ 


ity  in  a  phenomenon  has  intensive  quantity, 
that  is,  a  degree.  If  we  consider  this  reality  as 
cause  (be  it  of  sensation  or  of  another  reality 
in  the  phenomenon,  for  example,  a  change),  we 
call  the  degree  of  reality  in  its  character  of 
cause  a  momentum,  for  example,  the  momen¬ 
tum  of  weight;  and  for  this  reason,  that  the 
degree  only  indicates  that  quantity  the  appre¬ 
hension  of  which  is  not  successive,  but  instan¬ 
taneous.  This,  however,  I  touch  upon  only  in 
passing,  for  with  causality  I  have  at  present 
nothing  to  do. 

Accordingly,  every  sensation,  consequently 
every  reality  in  phenomena,  however  small  it 
may  be,  has  a  degree,  that  is,  an  intensive  quan¬ 
tity,  which  may  always  be  lessened,  and  between 
reality  and  negation  there  exists  a  continuous 
connection  of  possible  realities,  and  possible 
smaller  perceptions.  Every  colour — for  exam¬ 
ple,  red — has  a  degree,  which,  be  it  ever  so 
small,  is  never  the  smallest,  and  so  is  it  always 
with  heat,  the  momentum  of  weight,  etc. 

This  property  of  quantities,  according  to 
which  no  part  of  them  is  the  smallest  possible 
(no  part  simple),  is  called  their  continuity. 
Space  and  time  are  quanta  continua ,  because 
no  part  of  them  can  be  given,  without  enclosing 
it  within  boundaries  (points  and  moments),  con¬ 
sequently,  this  given  part  is  itself  a  space  or  a 
time.  Space,  therefore,  consists  only  of  spaces, 
and  time  of  times.  Points  and  moments  are  only 
boundaries,  that  is,  the  mere  places  or  positions 
of  their  limitation.  But  places  always  presup¬ 
pose  intuitions  which  are  to  limit  or  determine 
them;  and  we  cannot  conceive  either  space  or 
time  composed  of  constituent  parts  which  are 
given  before  space  or  time.  Such  quantities  may 
also  be  called  flowing ,  because  the  synthesis  (of 
the  productive  imagination)  in  the  production 
of  these  quantities  is  a  progression  in  time,  the 
continuity  of  which  we  are  accustomed  to  indi¬ 
cate  by  the  expression  flowing. 

All  phenomena,  then,  are  continuous  quanti¬ 
ties,  in  respect  both  to  intuition  and  mere  per¬ 
ception  (sensation,  and  with  it  reality).  In  the 
former  case  they  are  extensive  quantities;  in 
the  latter,  intensive.  When  the  synthesis  of  the 
manifold  of  a  phenomenon  is  interrupted,  there 
results  merely  an  aggregate  of  several  phenom¬ 
ena,  and  not  properly  a  phenomenon  as  a 
quantity,  which  is  not  produced  by  the  mere 
continuation  of  the  productive  synthesis  of  a 
certain  kind,  but  by  the  repetition  of  a  synthesis 
always  ceasing.  For  example,  if  I  call  thirteen 
dollars  a  sum  or  quantity  of  money,  I  employ 
the  term  quite  correctly,  inasmuch  as  I  under- 


OF  PURE  REASON 


stand  by  thirteen  dollars  the  value  of  a  mark 
in  standard  silver,  which  is,  to  be  sure,  a  con¬ 
tinuous  quantity,  in  which  no  part  is  the  small¬ 
est,  but  every  part  might  constitute  a  piece  of 
money,  which  would  contain  material  for  still 
smaller  pieces.  If,  however,  by  the  words  thir¬ 
teen  dollars  I  understand  so  many  coins  (be 
their  value  in  silver  what  it  may),  it  would  be 
quite  erroneous  to  use  the  expression  a  quantity 
of  dollars;  on  the  contrary,  I  must  call  them 
aggregate,  that  is,  a  number  of  coins.  And  as  in 
every  number  we  must  have  unity  as  the  foun¬ 
dation,  so  a  phenomenon  taken  as  unity  is  a 
quantity,  and  as  such  always  a  continuous  quan¬ 
tity  ( quantum  continuum). 

Now,  seeing  all  phenomena,  whether  consid¬ 
ered  as  extensive  or  intensive,  are  continuous 
quantities,  the  proposition:  “All  change  (transi¬ 
tion  of  a  thing  from  one  state  into  another)  is 
continuous,”  might  be  proved  here  easily,  and 
with  mathematical  evidence,  were  it  not  that 
the  causality  of  a  change  lies  entirely  beyond 
the  bounds  of  a  transcendental  philosophy,  and 
presupposes  empirical  principles.  For  of  the  pos¬ 
sibility  of  a  cause  which  changes  the  condition 
of  things,  that  is,  which  determines  them  to  the 
contrary  to  a  certain  given  state,  the  under¬ 
standing  gives  us  a  priori  no  knowledge;  not 
merely  because  it  has  no  insight  into  the  pos¬ 
sibility  of  it  (for  such  insight  is  absent  in  sev¬ 
eral  a  priori  cognitions),  but  because  the  notion 
of  change  concerns  only  certain  determinations 
of  phenomena,  which  experience  alone  can  ac¬ 
quaint  us  with,  while  their  cause  lies  in  the  un¬ 
changeable.  But  seeing  that  we  have  nothing 
which  we  could  here  employ  but  the  pure  funda¬ 
mental  conceptions  of  all  possible  experience, 
among  which  of  course  nothing  empirical  can  be 
admitted,  we  dare  not,  without  injuring  the 
unity  of  our  system,  anticipate  general  physical 
science,  which  is  built  upon  certain  fundamen¬ 
tal  experiences. 

Nevertheless,  we  are  in  no  want  of  proofs  of 
the  great  influence  which  the  principle  above 
developed  exercises  in  the  anticipation  of  per¬ 
ceptions,  and  even  in  supplying  the  want  of 
them,  so  far  as  to  shield  us  against  the  false 
conclusions  which  otherwise  we  might  rashly 
draw. 

If  all  reality  in  perception  has  a  degree,  be¬ 
tween  which  and  negation  there  is  an  endless  se¬ 
quence  of  ever  smaller  degrees,  and  if,  never¬ 
theless,  every  sense  must  have  a  determinate 
degree  of  receptivity  for  sensations;  no  percep¬ 
tion,  and  consequently  no  experience  is  possi¬ 
ble,  which  can  prove,  either  immediately  or  me¬ 


7i 

diately,  an  entire  absence  of  all  reality  in  a 
phenomenon;  in  other  words,  it  is  impossible 
ever  to  draw  from  experience  a  proof  of  the  ex¬ 
istence  of  empty  space  or  of  empty  time.  For 
in  the  first  place,  an  entire  absence  of  reality  in 
a  sensuous  intuition  cannot  of  course  be  an 
object  of  perception;  secondly,  such  absence 
cannot  be  deduced  from  the  contemplation  of 
any  single  phenomenon,  and  the  difference  of 
the  degrees  in  its  reality;  nor  ought  it  ever  to 
be  admitted  in  explanation  of  any  phenome¬ 
non.  For  if  even  the  complete  intuition  of  a  de¬ 
terminate  space  or  time  is  thoroughly  real,  that 
is,  if  no  part  thereof  is  empty,  yet  because 
every  reality  has  its  degree,  which,  with  the 
extensive  quantity  of  the  phenomenon  un¬ 
changed,  can  diminish  through  endless  gra¬ 
dations  down  to  nothing  (the  void),  there  must 
be  infinitely  graduated  degrees,  with  which  space 
or  time  is  filled,  and  the  intensive  quantity  in 
different  phenomena  may  be  smaller  or  greater, 
although  the  extensive  quantity  of  the  intuition 
remains  equal  and  unaltered. 

We  shall  give  an  example  of  this.  Almost  all 
natural  philosophers,  remarking  a  great  differ¬ 
ence  in  the  quantity  of  the  matter  of  different 
kinds  in  bodies  with  the  same  volume  (partly  on 
account  of  the  momentum  of  gravity  or  weight, 
partly  on  account  of  the  momentum  of  resist¬ 
ance  to  other  bodies  in  motion),  conclude  unan¬ 
imously  that  this  volume  (extensive  quantity  of 
the  phenomenon)  must  be  void  in  all  bodies,  al¬ 
though  in  different  proportion.  But  who  would 
suspect  that  these  for  the  most  part  mathe¬ 
matical  and  mechanical  inquirers  into  nature 
should  ground  this  conclusion  solely  on  a  meta¬ 
physical  hypothesis — a  sort  of  hypothesis  which 
they  profess  to  disparage  and  avoid?  Yet  this 
they  do,  in  assuming  that  the  real  in  space  (I 
must  not  here  call  it  impenetrability  or  weight, 
because  these  are  empirical  conceptions)  is 
always  identical,  and  can  only  be  distinguished 
according  to  its  extensive  quantity,  that  is,  mul¬ 
tiplicity.  Now  to  this  presupposition,  for  which 
they  can  have  no  ground  in  experience,  and 
which  consequently  is  merely  metaphysical,  I 
oppose  a  transcendental  demonstration,  which 
it  is  true  will  not  explain  the  difference  in  the 
filling  up  of  spaces,  but  which  nevertheless 
completely  does  away  with  the  supposed  ne¬ 
cessity  of  the  above-mentioned  presupposition 
that  we  cannot  explain  the  said  difference  other¬ 
wise  than  by  the  hypothesis  of  empty  spaces. 
This  demonstration,  moreover,  has  the  merit  of 
setting  the  understanding  at  liberty  to  conceive 
this  distinction  in  a  different  manner,  if  the  ex- 


72  THE  CRITIQUE 


planation  of  the  fact  requires  any  such  hypothe¬ 
sis.  For  we  perceive  that  although  two  equal 
spaces  may  be  completely  filled  by  matters  alto¬ 
gether  different,  so  that  in  neither  of  them  is 
there  left  a  single  point  wherein  matter  is  not 
present,  nevertheless,  every  reality  has  its  de¬ 
gree  (of  resistance  or  of  weight),  which,  without 
diminution  of  the  extensive  quantity,  can  be¬ 
come  less  and  less  ad  infinitum ,  before  it  passes 
into  nothingness  and  disappears.  Thus  an  expan¬ 
sion  which  fills  a  space — for  example,  caloric, 
or  any  other  reality  in  the  phenomenal  world — 
can  decrease  in  its  degrees  to  infinity,  yet  with¬ 
out  leaving  the  smallest  part  of  the  space  emp¬ 
ty;  on  the  contrary,  filling  it  with  those  lesser 
degrees  as  completely  as  another  phenomenon 
could  with  greater.  My  intention  here  is  by  no 
means  to  maintain  that  this  is  really  the  case 
with  the  difference  of  matters,  in  regard  to  their 
specific  gravity;  I  wish  only  to  prove,  from  a 
principle  of  the  pure  understanding,  that  the 
nature  of  our  perceptions  makes  such  a  mode 
of  explanation  possible,  and  that  it  is  erroneous 
to  regard  the  real  in  a  phenomenon  as  equal 
quoad  its  degree,  and  different  only  quoad  its 
aggregation  and  extensive  quantity,  and  this,  too, 
on  the  pretended  authority  of  an  a  priori  prin¬ 
ciple  of  the  understanding. 

Nevertheless,  this  principle  of  the  anticipa¬ 
tion  of  perception  must  somewhat  startle  an  in¬ 
quirer  whom  initiation  into  transcendental  phi¬ 
losophy  has  rendered  cautious.  We  must  natural¬ 
ly  entertain  some  doubt  whether  or  not  the  un¬ 
derstanding  can  enounce  any  such  synthetical 
proposition  as  that  respecting  the  degree  of  all 
reality  in  phenomena,  and  consequently  the  pos¬ 
sibility  of  the  internal  difference  of  sensation 
itself — abstraction  being  made  of  its  empirical 
quality.  Thus  it  is  a  question  not  unworthy  of 
solution :  “How  the  understanding  can  pronounce 
synthetically  and  a  priori  respecting  phenomena, 
and  thus  anticipate  these,  even  in  that  which  is 
peculiarly  and  merely  empirical,  that,  namely, 
which  concerns  sensation  itself?” 

The  quality  of  sensation  is  in  all  cases  merely 
empirical,  and  cannot  be  represented  a  priori 
(for  example,  colours,  taste,  etc.).  But  the  real 
— that  which  corresponds  to  sensation — in  op¬ 
position  to  negation=o,  only  represents  some¬ 
thing  the  conception  of  which  in  itself  contains 
a  being  (ein  seyn ),  and  signifies  nothing  but 
the  synthesis  in  an  empirical  consciousness. 
That  is  to  say,  the  empirical  consciousness  in 
the  internal  sense  can  be  raised  from  o  to  every 
higher  degree,  so  that  the  very  same  extensive 
quantity  of  intuition,  an  illuminated  surface, 


for  example,  excites  as  great  a  sensation  as  an 
aggregate  of  many  other  surfaces  less  illumi¬ 
nated.  We  can  therefore  make  complete  ab¬ 
straction  of  the  extensive  quantity  of  a  phe¬ 
nomenon,  and  represent  to  ourselves  in  the 
mere  sensation  in  a  certain  momentum,  a  syn¬ 
thesis  of  homogeneous  ascension  from  o  up  to 
the  given  empirical  consciousness.  All  sensa¬ 
tions  therefore  as  such  are  given  only  a  pos¬ 
teriori,  but  this  property  thereof,  namely,  that 
they  have  a  degree,  can  be  known  a  priori.  It  is 
worthy  of  remark,  that  in  respect  to  quantities 
in  general,  we  can  cognize  a  priori  only  a  single 
quality,  namely,  continuity;  but  in  respect  to 
all  quality  (the  real  in  phenomena),  we  cannot 
cognize  a  priori  anything  more  than  the  inten¬ 
sive  quantity  thereof,  namely,  that  they  have  a 
degree.  All  else  is  left  to  experience. 

3.  Analogies  of  Experience 
The  principle  of  these  is:  Experience  is  possible 
only  through  the  representation  of  a  neces¬ 
sary  connection  of  perceptions. 

PROOF 

Experience  is  an  empirical  cognition;  that  is 
to  say,  a  cognition  which  determines  an  object 
by  means  of  perceptions.  It  is  therefore  a  syn¬ 
thesis  of  perceptions,  a  synthesis  which  is  not 
itself  contained  in  perception,  but  which  con¬ 
tains  the  synthetical  unity  of  the  manifold  of 
perception  in  a  consciousness;  and  this  unity 
constitutes  the  essential  of  our  cognition  of  ob¬ 
jects  of  the  senses,  that  is,  of  experience  (not 
merely  of  intuition  or  sensation).  Now  in  ex¬ 
perience  our  perceptions  come  together  contin¬ 
gently,  so  that  no  character  of  necessity  in  their 
connection  appears,  or  can  appear  from  the  per¬ 
ceptions  themselves,  because  apprehension  is 
only  a  placing  together  of  the  manifold  of  em¬ 
pirical  intuition,  and  no  representation  of  a  ne¬ 
cessity  in  the  connected  existence  of  the  phe¬ 
nomena  which  apprehension  brings  together,  is 
to  be  discovered  therein.  But  as  experience  is  a 
cognition  of  objects  by  means  of  perceptions,  it 
follows  that  the  relation  of  the  existence  of  the 
manifold  must  be  represented  in  experience  not 
as  it  is  put  together  in  time,  but  as  it  is  objec¬ 
tively  in  time.  And  as  time  itself  cannot  be  per¬ 
ceived,  the  determination  of  the  existence  of 
objects  in  time  can  only  take  place  by  means  of 
their  connection  in  time  in  general,  consequent¬ 
ly  only  by  means  of  a  priori  connecting  concep¬ 
tions.  Now  as  these  conceptions  always  possess 
the  character  of  necessity,  experience  is  pos- 


OF  PURE  REASON 


sible  only  by  means  of  a  representation  of  the 
necessary  connection  of  perception. 

The  three  modi  of  time  are  permanence ,  suc¬ 
cession,  and  coexistence.  Accordingly,  there  are 
three  rules  of  all  relations  of  time  in  phenom¬ 
ena,  according  to  which  the  existence  of  every 
phenomenon  is  determined  in  respect  of  the 
unity  of  all  time,  and  these  antecede  all  experi¬ 
ence  and  render  it  possible. 

The  general  principle  of  all  three  analogies 
rests  on  the  necessary  unity  of  apperception  in 
relation  to  all  possible  empirical  consciousness 
(perception)  at  every  time ,  consequently,  as 
this  unity  lies  a  priori  at  the  foundation  of  all 
mental  operations,  the  principle  rests  on  the 
synthetical  unity  of  all  phenomena  according  to 
their  relation  in  time.  For  the  original  appercep¬ 
tion  relates  to  our  internal  sense  (the  complex 
of  all  representations),  and  indeed  relates  a 
priori  to  its  form,  that  is  to  say,  the  relation  of 
the  manifold  empirical  consciousness  in  time. 
Now  this  manifold  must  be  combined  in  origi¬ 
nal  apperception  according  to  relations  of  time 
— a  necessity  imposed  by  the  a  priori  transcen¬ 
dental  unity  of  apperception,  to  which  is  sub¬ 
jected  all  that  can  belong  to  my  (i.  e.,  my  own) 
cognition,  and  therefore  all  that  can  become  an 
object  for  me.  This  synthetical  and  a  priori  de¬ 
termined  unity  in  relation  of  perceptions  in 
time  is  therefore  the  rule:  “All  empirical  deter¬ 
minations  of  time  must  be  subject  to  rules  of 
the  general  determination  of  time”;  and  the 
analogies  of  experience,  of  which  we  are  now 
about  to  treat,  must  be  rules  of  this  nature. 

These  principles  have  this  peculiarity,  that 
they  do  not  concern  phenomena,  and  the  syn¬ 
thesis  of  the  empirical  intuition  thereof,  but 
merely  the  existence  of  phenomena  and  their 
relation  to  each  other  in  regard  to  this  existence. 
Now  the  mode  in  which  we  apprehend  a  thing 
in  a  phenomenon  can  be  determined  a  priori  in 
such  a  manner  that  the  rule  of  its  synthesis  can 
give,  that  is  to  say,  can  produce  this  a  priori 
intuition  in  every  empirical  example.  But  the 
existence  of  phenomena  cannot  be  known  a 
priori,  and  although  we  could  arrive  by  this 
path  at  a  conclusion  of  the  fact  of  some  exist¬ 
ence,  we  could  not  cognize  that  existence  de- 
terminately,  that  is  to  say,  we  should  be  inca¬ 
pable  of  anticipating  in  what  respect  the  empiri¬ 
cal  intuition  of  it  would  be  distinguishable  from 
that  of  others. 

The  two  principles  above  mentioned,  which  I 
called  mathematical,  in  consideration  of  the 
fact  of  their  authorizing  the  application  of 
mathematic  phenomena,  relate  to  these  phe- 


73 

nomena  only  in  regard  to  their  possibility,  and 
instruct  us  how  phenomena,  as  far  as  regards 
their  intuition  or  the  real  in  their  perception, 
can  be  generated  according  to  the  rules  of  a 
mathematical  synthesis.  Consequently,  numeri¬ 
cal  quantities,  and  with  them  the  determination 
of  a  phenomenon  as  a  quantity,  can  be  employed 
in  the  one  case  as  well  as  in  the  other.  Thus, 
for  example,  out  of  200,000  illuminations  by 
the  moon,  I  might  compose  and  give  a  priori, 
that  is  construct,  the  degree  of  our  sensations 
of  the  sunlight.  We  may  therefore  entitle  these 
two  principles  constitutive. 

The  case  is  very  different  with  those  prin¬ 
ciples  whose  province  it  is  to  subject  the  exist¬ 
ence  of  phenomena  to  rules  a  priori.  For  as 
existence  does  not  admit  of  being  constructed, 
it  is  clear  that  they  must  only  concern  the  rela¬ 
tions  of  existence  and  be  merely  regulative  prin¬ 
ciples.  In  this  case,  therefore,  neither  axioms 
nor  anticipations  are  to  be  thought  of.  Thus,  if 
a  perception  is  given  us,  in  a  certain  relation  of 
time  to  other  (although  undetermined)  percep¬ 
tions,  we  cannot  then  say  a  priori,  what  and 
how  great  (in  quantity)  the  other  perception 
necessarily  connected  with  the  former  is,  but 
only  how  it  is  connected,  quoad  its  existence,  in 
this  given  modus  of  time.  Analogies  in  philos¬ 
ophy  mean  something  very  different  from  that 
which  they  represent  in  mathematics.  In  the  lat¬ 
ter  they  are  formulae,  which  enounce  the  equal¬ 
ity  of  two  relations  of  quantity,  and  are  always 
constitutive,  so  that  if  two  terms  of  the  propor¬ 
tion  are  given,  the  third  is  also  given,  that  is, 
can  be  constructed  by  the  aid  of  these  formulae. 
But  in  philosophy,  analogy  is  not  the  equality  of 
two  quantitative  but  of  two  qualitative  relations. 
In  this  case,  from  three  given  terms,  I  can  give  a 
priori  and  cognize  the  relation  to  a  fourth  mem¬ 
ber,  but  not  this  fourth  term  itself,  although  I 
certainly  possess  a  rule  to  guide  me  in  the 
search  for  this  fourth  term  in  experience,  and  a 
mark  to  assist  me  in  discovering  it.  An  analogy 
of  experience  is  therefore  only  a  rule  according 
to  which  unity  of  experience  must  arise  out  of 
perceptions  in  respect  to  objects  (phenomena) 
not  as  a  constitutive,  but  merely  as  a  regula¬ 
tive  principle.  The  same  holds  good  also  of  the 
postulates  of  empirical  thought  in  general,  which 
relate  to  the  synthesis  of  mere  intuition  (which 
concerns  the  form  of  phenomena),  the  syn¬ 
thesis  of  perception  (which  concerns  the  mat¬ 
ter  of  phenomena),  and  the  synthesis  of  experi¬ 
ence  (which  concerns  the  relation  of  these 
perceptions).  For  they  are  only  regulative 
principles,  and  clearly  distinguishable  from  the 


THE  CRITIQUE 


74 

mathematical,  which  are  constitutive,  not  in¬ 
deed  in  regard  to  the  certainty  which  both  pos¬ 
sess  a  priori ,  but  in  the  mode  of  evidence  there¬ 
of,  consequently  also  in  the  manner  of  demon¬ 
stration. 

But  what  has  been  observed  of  all  synthetical 
propositions,  and  must  be  particularly  remarked 
in  this  place,  is  this,  that  these  analogies 
possess  significance  and  validity,  not  as  prin¬ 
ciples  of  the  transcendental,  but  only  as  prin¬ 
ciples  of  the  empirical  use  of  the  understanding, 
and  their  truth  can  therefore  be  proved  only  as 
such,  and  that  consequently  the  phenomena 
must  not  be  subjoined  directly  under  the  cate¬ 
gories,  but  only  under  their  schemata.  For  if 
the  objects  to  which  those  principles  must  be 
applied  were  things  in  themselves,  it  would  be 
quite  impossible  to  cognize  aught  concerning 
them  synthetically  a  priori.  But  they  are  noth¬ 
ing  but  phenomena;  a  complete  knowledge  of 
which — a  knowledge  to  which  all  principles  a 
priori  must  at  last  relate — is  the  only  possible 
experience.  It  follows  that  these  principles  can 
have  nothing  else  for  their  aim  than  the  condi¬ 
tions  of  the  unity  of  empirical  cognition  in  the 
synthesis  of  phenomena.  But  this  synthesis  is 
cogitated  only  in  the  schema  of  the  pure  con¬ 
ception  of  the  understanding,  of  whose  unity, 
as  that  of  a  synthesis  in  general,  the  category 
contains  the  function  unrestricted  by  any  sen¬ 
suous  condition.  These  principles  will  therefore 
authorize  us  to  connect  phenomena  according 
to  an  analogy,  with  the  logical  and  universal 
unity  of  conceptions,  and  consequently  to  em¬ 
ploy  the  categories  in  the  principles  themselves; 
but  in  the  application  of  them  to  experience,  we 
shall  use  only  their  schemata,  as  the  key  to 
their  proper  application,  instead  of  the  cate¬ 
gories,  or  rather  the  latter  as  restricting  condi¬ 
tions,  under  the  title  of  “formulae”  of  the 
former. 

A.  First  Analogy 

Principle  of  the  Permanence 
of  Substance 

In  all  changes  of  phenomena ,  substance  is  per¬ 
manent,  and  the  quantum  thereof  in  nature 
is  neither  increased  nor  diminished. 

PROOF 

All  phenomena  exist  in  time,  wherein  alone  as 
substratum,  that  is,  as  the  permanent  form  of 
the  internal  intuition,  coexistence  and  succes¬ 
sion  can  be  represented.  Consequently  time,  in 
which  all  changes  of  phenomena  must  be  cogi¬ 
tated,  remains  and  changes  not,  because  it  is  that 


in  which  succession  and  coexistence  can  be  rep¬ 
resented  only  as  determinations  thereof.  Now, 
time  in  itself  cannot  be  an  object  of  perception. 
It  follows  that  in  objects  of  perception,  that  is, 
in  phenomena,  there  must  be  found  a  substra¬ 
tum  which  represents  time  in  general,  and  in 
which  all  change  or  coexistence  can  be  per¬ 
ceived  by  means  of  the  relation  of  phenomena 
to  it.  But  the  substratum  of  all  reality,  that  is, 
of  all  that  pertains  to  the  existence  of  things,  is 
substance;  all  that  pertains  to  existence  can  be 
cogitated  only  as  a  determination  of  substance. 
Consequently,  the  permanent,  in  relation  to 
which  alone  can  all  relations  of  time  in  phe¬ 
nomena  be  determined,  is  substance  in  the 
world  of  phenomena,  that  is,  the  real  in  phe¬ 
nomena,  that  which,  as  the  substratum  of  all 
change,  remains  ever  the  same.  Accordingly,  as 
this  cannot  change  in  existence,  its  quantity 
in  nature  can  neither  be  increased  nor  di¬ 
minished. 

Our  apprehension  of  the  manifold  in  a  phe¬ 
nomenon  is  always  successive,  is  consequently 
always  changing.  By  it  alone  we  could,  there¬ 
fore,  never  determine  whether  this  manifold,  as 
an  object  of  experience,  is  coexistent  or  suc¬ 
cessive,  unless  it  had  for  a  foundation  some¬ 
thing  fixed  and  permanent ,  of  the  existence  of 
which  all  succession  and  coexistence  are  noth¬ 
ing  but  so  many  modes  ( modi  of  time).  Only 
in  the  permanent,  then,  are  relations  of  time 
possible  (for  simultaneity  and  succession  are  the 
only  relations  in  time) ;  that  is  to  say,  the  per¬ 
manent  is  the  substratum  of  our  empirical 
representation  of  time  itself,  in  which  alone  all 
determination  of  time  is  possible.  Permanence 
is,  in  fact,  just  another  expression  for  time,  as 
the  abiding  correlate  of  all  existence  of  phe¬ 
nomena,  and  of  all  change,  and  of  all  coexist¬ 
ence.  For  change  does  not  affect  time  itself,  but 
only  the  phenomena  in  time  (just  as  coexist¬ 
ence  cannot  be  regarded  as  a  modus  of  time 
itself,  seeing  that  in  time  no  parts  are  coexist¬ 
ent,  but  all  successive).  If  we  were  to  attribute 
succession  to  time  itself,  we  should  be  obliged 
to  cogitate  another  time,  in  which  this  succes¬ 
sion  would  be  possible.  It  is  only  by  means  of 
the  permanent  that  existence  in  different  parts 
of  the  successive  series  of  time  receives  a  quan¬ 
tity,  which  we  entitle  duration.  For  in  mere 
succession,  existence  is  perpetually  vanishing 
and  recommencing,  and  therefore  never  has 
even  the  least  quantity.  Without  the  perma¬ 
nent,  then,  no  relation  in  time  is  possible.  Now, 
time  in  itself  is  not  an  object  of  perception; 
consequently  the  permanent  in  phenomena 


OF  PURE  REASON 


must  be  regarded  as  the  substratum  of  all  de¬ 
termination  of  time,  and  consequently  also  as 
the  condition  of  the  possibility  of  all  synthetical 
unity  of  perceptions,  that  is,  of  experience;  and 
all  existence  and  all  change  in  time  can  only  be 
regarded  as  a  mode  in  the  existence  of  that 
which  abides  unchangeably.  Therefore,  in  all 
phenomena,  the  permanent  is  the  object  in  it¬ 
self,  that  is,  the  substance  (phenomenon) ;  but 
all  that  changes  or  can  change  belongs  only  to 
the  mode  of  the  existence  of  this  substance  or 
substances,  consequently  to  its  determinations. 

I  find  that  in  all  ages  not  only  the  philoso¬ 
pher,  but  even  the  common  understanding,  has 
preposited  this  permanence  as  a  substratum  of 
all  change  in  phenomena;  indeed,  I  am  com¬ 
pelled  to  believe  that  they  will  always  accept 
this  as  an  indubitable  fact.  Only  the  philosopher 
expresses  himself  in  a  more  precise  and  definite 
manner,  when  he  says:  “In  all  changes  in  the 
world,  the  substance  remains,  and  the  accidents 
alone  are  changeable.”  But  of  this  decidedly 
synthetical  proposition,  I  nowhere  meet  with 
even  an  attempt  at  proof ;  nay,  it  very  rarely  has 
the  good  fortune  to  stand,  as  it  deserves  to  do, 
at  the  head  of  the  pure  and  entirely  a  priori 
laws  of  nature.  In  truth,  the  statement  that  sub¬ 
stance  is  permanent,  is  tautological.  For  this 
very  permanence  is  the  ground  on  which  we  ap¬ 
ply  the  category  of  substance  to  the  phenome¬ 
non;  and  we  should  have  been  obliged  to  prove 
that  in  all  phenomena  there  is  something  perma¬ 
nent,  of  the  existence  of  which  the  changeable 
is  nothing  but  a  determination.  But  because  a 
proof  of  this  nature  cannot  be  dogmatical,  that 
is,  cannot  be  drawn  from  conceptions,  inas¬ 
much  as  it  concerns  a  synthetical  proposition 
a  priori,  and  as  philosophers  never  reflected  that 
such  propositions  are  valid  only  in  relation  to 
possible  experience,  and  therefore  cannot  be 
proved  except  by  means  of  a  deduction  of  the 
possibility  of  experience,  it  is  no  wonder  that 
while  it  has  served  as  the  foundation  of  all  ex¬ 
perience  (for  we  feel  the  need  of  it  in  empirical 
cognition),  it  has  never  been  supported  by 
proof. 

A  philosopher  was  asked:  “What  is  the  weight 
of  smoke?”  He  answered:  “Subtract  from  the 
weight  of  the  burnt  wood  the  weight  of  the  re¬ 
maining  ashes,  and  you  will  have  the  weight  of 
the  smoke.”  Thus  he  presumed  it  to  be  incon¬ 
trovertible  that  even  in  fire  the  matter  (sub¬ 
stance)  does  not  perish,  but  that  only  the  form 
of  it  undergoes  a  change.  In  like  manner  was 
the  saying:  “From  nothing  comes  nothing,” 
only  another  inference  from  the  principle  of 


75 

permanence,  or  rather  of  the  ever-abiding  exist¬ 
ence  of  the  true  subject  in  phenomena.  For  if 
that  in  the  phenomenon  which  we  call  sub¬ 
stance  is  to  be  the  proper  substratum  of  all  de¬ 
termination  of  time,  it  follows  that  all  exist¬ 
ence  in  past  as  well  as  in  future  time,  must  be 
determinable  by  means  of  it  alone.  Hence  we  are 
entitled  to  apply  the  term  substance  to  a  phe¬ 
nomenon,  only  because  we  suppose  its  existence 
in  all  time,  a  notion  which  the  word  permanence 
does  not  fully  express,  as  it  seems  rather  to  be 
referable  to  future  time.  However,  the  internal 
necessity  perpetually  to  be,  is  inseparably  con¬ 
nected  with  the  necessity  always  to  have  been, 
and  so  the  expression  may  stand  as  it  is.  “Gigni 
de  nihilo  nihil;  in  nihilum  nil  posse  reverti,”1  are 
two  propositions  which  the  ancients  never  part¬ 
ed,  and  which  people  nowadays  sometimes  mis¬ 
takenly  disjoin,  because  they  imagine  that  the 
propositions  apply  to  objects  as  things  in  them¬ 
selves,  and  that  the  former  might  be  inimical  to 
the  dependence  (even  in  respect  of  its  substance 
also)  of  the  world  upon  a  supreme  cause.  But 
this  apprehension  is  entirely  needless,  for  the 
question  in  this  case  is  only  of  phenomena  in 
the  sphere  of  experience,  the  unity  of  which 
never  could  be  possible,  if  we  admitted  the  pos¬ 
sibility  that  new  things  (in  respect  of  their  sub¬ 
stance)  should  arise.  For  in  that  case,  we  should 
lose  altogether  that  which  alone  can  represent 
the  unity  of  time,  to  wit,  the  identity  of  the  sub¬ 
stratum,  as  that  through  which  alone  all  change 
possesses  complete  and  thorough  unity.  This 
permanence  is,  however,  nothing  but  the  man¬ 
ner  in  which  we  represent  to  ourselves  the  exist¬ 
ence  of  things  in  the  phenomenal  world. 

The  determinations  of  a  substance,  which  are 
only  particular  modes  of  its  existence,  are  called 
accidents.  They  are  always  real,  because  they 
concern  the  existence  of  substance  (negations 
are  only  determinations,  which  express  the  non¬ 
existence  of  something  in  the  substance).  Now, 
if  to  this  real  in  the  substance  we  ascribe  a  par¬ 
ticular  existence  (for  example,  to  motion  as  an 
accident  of  matter),  this  existence  is  called  in¬ 
herence ,  in  contradistinction  to  the  existence  of 
substance,  which  we  call  subsistence.  But  hence 
arise  many  misconceptions,  and  it  would  be  a 
more  accurate  and  just  mode  of  expression  to 
designate  the  accident  only  as  the  mode  in 
which  the  existence  of  a  substance  is  positively 
determined.  Meanwhile,  by  reason  of  the  condi¬ 
tions  of  the  logical  exercise  of  our  understand- 

1  [Persius,  Satirae,  iii. 83-84.  “Nothing  can  be  pro¬ 
duced  from  nothing;  nothing  can  be  returned  into 
nothing.”] 


76  THE  CRITIQUE 


ing,  it  is  impossible  to  avoid  separating,  as  it 
were,  that  which  in  the  existence  of  a  sub¬ 
stance  is  subject  to  change,  whilst  the  sub¬ 
stance  remains,  and  regarding  it  in  relation  to 
that  which  is  properly  permanent  and  radical. 
On  this  account,  this  category  of  substance 
stands  under  the  title  of  relation,  rather  because 
it  is  the  condition  thereof  than  because  it  con¬ 
tains  in  itself  any  relation. 

Now,  upon  this  notion  of  permanence  rests 
the  proper  notion  of  the  conception  change. 
Origin  and  extinction  are  not  changes  of  that 
which  originates  or  becomes  extinct.  Change  is 
but  a  mode  of  existence,  which  follows  on  an¬ 
other  mode  of  existence  of  the  same  object; 
hence  all  that  changes  is  permanent,  and  only 
the  condition  thereof  changes.  Now  since  this 
mutation  affects  only  determinations,  which  can 
have  a  beginning  or  an  end,  we  may  say,  em¬ 
ploying  an  expression  which  seems  somewhat 
paradoxical:  “Only  the  permanent  (substance) 
is  subject  to  change;  the  mutable  suffers  no 
change,  but  rather  alternation ,  that  is,  when  cer¬ 
tain  determinations  cease,  others  begin.” 

Change,  then,  cannot  be  perceived  by  us 
except  in  substances,  and  origin  or  extinction  in 
an  absolute  sense,  that  does  not  concern  merely 
a  determination  of  the  permanent,  cannot  be  a 
possible  perception,  for  it  is  this  very  notion  of 
the  permanent  which  renders  possible  the  repre¬ 
sentation  of  a  transition  from  one  state  into  an¬ 
other,  and  from  non-being  to  being,  which,  con¬ 
sequently,  can  be  empirically  cognized  only  as 
alternating  determinations  of  that  which  is  per¬ 
manent.  Grant  that  a  thing  absolutely  begins 
to  be;  we  must  then  have  a  point  of  time  in 
which  it  was  not.  But  how  and  by  what  can  we 
fix  and  determine  this  point  of  time,  unless  by 
that  which  already  exists?  For  a  void  time — 
preceding — is  not  an  object  of  perception;  but 
if  we  connect  this  beginning  with  objects  which 
existed  previously,  and  which  continue  to  exist 
till  the  object  in  question  begins  to  be,  then  the 
latter  can  only  be  a  determination  of  the  former 
as  the  permanent.  The  same  holds  good  of  the 
notion  of  extinction,  for  this  presupposes  the 
empirical  representation  of  a  time,  in  which  a 
phenomenon  no  longer  exists. 

Substances  (in  the  world  of  phenomena)  are 
the  substratum  of  all  determinations  of  time. 
The  beginning  of  some,  and  the  ceasing  to  be  of 
other  substances,  would  utterly  do  away  with 
the  only  condition  of  the  empirical  unity  of 
time;  and  in  that  case  phenomena  would  relate 
to  two  different  times,  in  which,  side  by  side, 
existence  would  pass;  which  is  absurd.  For  there 


is  only  one  time  in  which  all  different  times 
must  be  placed,  not  as  coexistent,  but  as  suc¬ 
cessive. 

Accordingly,  permanence  is  a  necessary  con¬ 
dition  under  which  alone  phenomena,  as  things 
or  objects,  are  determinable  in  a  possible  ex¬ 
perience.  But  as  regards  the  empirical  criterion 
of  this  necessary  permanence,  and  with  it  of  the 
substantiality  of  phenomena,  we  shall  find  suffi¬ 
cient  opportunity  to  speak  in  the  sequel. 

B.  Second  Analogy 

Principle  of  the  Succession  of  Time 
According  to  the  Law  of  Causality 

All  changes  take  place  according  to  the  law  oj 

the  connection  of  Cause  and  Effect. 

PROOF 

(That  all  phenomena  in  the  succession  of 
time  are  only  changes,  that  is,  a  successive  be¬ 
ing  and  non-being  of  the  determinations  of  sub¬ 
stance,  which  is  permanent;  consequently  that 
a  being  of  substance  itself  which  follows  on  the 
non-being  thereof,  or  a  non-being  of  substance 
which  follows  on  the  being  thereof,  in  other 
words,  that  the  origin  or  extinction  of  sub¬ 
stance  itself,  is  impossible — all  this  has  been 
fully  established  in  treating  of  the  foregoing 
principle.  This  principle  might  have  been  ex¬ 
pressed  as  follows:  “All  alteration  (succession) 
of  phenomena  is  merely  change”;  for  the 
changes  of  substance  are  not  origin  or  extinc¬ 
tion,  because  the  conception  of  change  presup¬ 
poses  the  same  subject  as  existing  with  two 
opposite  determinations,  and  consequently  as 
permanent.  After  this  premonition,  we  shall 
proceed  to  the  proof.) 

I  perceive  that  phenomena  succeed  one  an¬ 
other,  that  is  to  say,  a  state  of  things  exists  at 
one  time,  the  opposite  of  which  existed  in  a 
former  state.  In  this  case,  then,  I  really  connect 
together  two  perceptions  in  time.  Now  connec¬ 
tion  is  not  an  operation  of  mere  sense  and  in¬ 
tuition,  but  is  the  product  of  a  synthetical  fac¬ 
ulty  of  imagination,  which  determines  the  in¬ 
ternal  sense  in  respect  of  a  relation  of  time. 
But  imagination  can  connect  these  two  states  in 
two  ways,  so  that  either  the  one  or  the  other 
may  antecede  in  time;  for  time  in  itself  cannot 
be  an  object  of  perception,  and  what  in  an  ob¬ 
ject  precedes  and  what  follows  cannot  be  em¬ 
pirically  determined  in  relation  to  it.  I  am 
only  conscious,  then,  that  my  imagination  places 
one  state  before,  and  the  other  after;  not  that 
the  one  state  antecedes  the  other  in  the  object. 


OF  PURE  REASON 


In  other  words,  the  objective  relation  of  the 
successive  phenomena  remains  quite  undeter¬ 
mined  by  means  of  mere  perception.  Now  in  or¬ 
der  that  this  relation  may  be  cognized  as  deter¬ 
mined,  the  relation  between  the  two  states  must 
be  so  cogitated  that  it  is  thereby  determined 
as  necessary,  which  of  them  must  be  placed  be¬ 
fore  and  which  after,  and  not  conversely.  But 
the  conception  which  carries  with  it  a  necessity 
of  synthetical  unity,  can  be  none  other  than  a 
pure  conception  of  the  understanding  which 
does  not  lie  in  mere  perception;  and  in  this 
case  it  is  the  conception  of  “the  relation  of 
cause  and  effect,”  the  former  of  which  deter¬ 
mines  the  latter  in  time,  as  its  necessary  conse¬ 
quence,  and  not  as  something  which  might  pos¬ 
sibly  antecede  (or  which  might  in  some  cases 
not  be  perceived  to  follow).  It  follows  that  it  is 
only  because  we  subject  the  sequence  of  phe¬ 
nomena,  and  consequently  all  change,  to  the 
law  of  causality,  that  experience  itself,  that  is, 
empirical  cognition  of  phenomena,  becomes 
possible;  and  consequently,  that  phenomena 
themselves,  as  objects  of  experience,  are  pos¬ 
sible  only  by  virtue  of  this  law. 

Our  apprehension  of  the  manifold  of  phe¬ 
nomena  is  always  successive.  The  representa¬ 
tions  of  parts  succeed  one  another.  Whether 
they  succeed  one  another  in  the  object  also, 
is  a  second  point  for  reflection,  which  was  not 
contained  in  the  former.  Now  we  may  certainly 
give  the  name  of  object  to  everything,  even  to 
every  representation,  so  far  as  we  are  conscious 
thereof;  but  what  this  word  may  mean  in  the 
case  of  phenomena,  not  merely  in  so  far  as  they 
(as  representations)  are  objects,  but  only  in  so 
far  as  they  indicate  an  object,  is  a  question  re¬ 
quiring  deeper  consideration.  In  so  far  as  they, 
regarded  merely  as  representations,  are  at  the 
same  time  objects  of  consciousness,  they  are 
not  to  be  distinguished  from  apprehension,  that 
is,  reception  into  the  synthesis  of  imagination, 
and  we  must  therefore  say:  “The  manifold  of 
phenomena  is  always  produced  successively  in 
the  mind.”  If  phenomena  were  things  in  them¬ 
selves,  no  man  would  be  able  to  conjecture 
from  the  succession  of  our  representations  how 
this  manifold  is  connected  in  the  object;  for  we 
have  to  do  only  with  our  representations.  How 
things  may  be  in  themselves,  without  regard  to 
the  representations  through  which  they  affect 
us,  is  utterly  beyond  the  sphere  of  our  cogni¬ 
tion.  Now  although  phenomena  are  not  things 
in  themselves,  and  are  nevertheless  the  only 
thing  given  to  us  to  be  cognized,  it  is  my  duty 
to  show  what  sort  of  connection  in  time  belongs 


77 

to  the  manifold  in  phenomena  themselves, 
while  the  representation  of  this  manifold  in  ap¬ 
prehension  is  always  successive.  For  example, 
the  apprehension  of  the  manifold  in  the  phe¬ 
nomenon  of  a  house  which  stands  before  me,  is 
successive.  Now  comes  the  question  whether 
the  manifold  of  this  house  is  in  itself  successive 
— which  no  one  will  be  at  all  willing  to  grant. 
But,  so  soon  as  I  raise  my  conception  of  an  ob¬ 
ject  to  the  transcendental  signification  thereof, 
I  find  that  the  house  is  not  a  thing  in  itself,  but 
only  a  phenomenon,  that  is,  a  representation, 
the  transcendental  object  of  which  remains  ut¬ 
terly  unknown.  What  then  am  I  to  understand 
by  the  question:  “How  can  the  manifold  be 
connected  in  the  phenomenon  itself — not  con¬ 
sidered  as  a  thing  in  itself,  but  merely  as  a 
phenomenon?”  Here  that  which  lies  in  my  suc¬ 
cessive  apprehension  is  regarded  as  representa¬ 
tion,  whilst  the  phenomenon  which  is  given  me, 
notwithstanding  that  it  is  nothing  more  than  a 
complex  of  these  representations,  is  regarded  as 
the  object  thereof,  with  which  my  conception, 
drawn  from  the  representations  of  apprehen¬ 
sion,  must  harmonize.  It  is  very  soon  seen  that, 
as  accordance  of  the  cognition  with  its  object 
constitutes  truth,  the  question  now  before  us 
can  only  relate  to  the  formal  conditions  of  em¬ 
pirical  truth;  and  that  the  phenomenon,  in  op¬ 
position  to  the  representations  of  apprehension, 
can  only  be  distinguished  therefrom  as  the  ob¬ 
ject  of  them,  if  it  is  subject  to  a  rule  which 
distinguishes  it  from  every  other  apprehension, 
and  which  renders  necessary  a  mode  of  con¬ 
nection  of  the  manifold.  That  in  the  phenome¬ 
non  which  contains  the  condition  of  this  neces¬ 
sary  rule  of  apprehension,  is  the  object. 

Let  us  now  proceed  to  our  task.  That  some¬ 
thing  happens,  that  is  to  say,  that  something 
or  some  state  exists  which  before  was  not,  can¬ 
not  be  empirically  perceived,  unless  a  phenome¬ 
non  precedes,  which  does  not  contain  in  itself 
this  state.  For  a  reality  which  should  follow 
upon  a  void  time,  in  other  words,  a  beginning, 
which  no  state  of  things  precedes,  can  just  as 
little  be  apprehended  as  the  void  time  itself. 
Every  apprehension  of  an  event  is  therefore 
a  perception  which  follows  upon  another  per¬ 
ception.  But  as  this  is  the  case  with  all  syn¬ 
thesis  of  apprehension,  as  I  have  shown  above 
in  the  example  of  a  house,  my  apprehension  of 
an  event  is  not  yet  sufficiently  distinguished 
from  other  apprehensions.  But  I  remark  also 
that  if  in  a  phenomenon  which  contains  an  oc¬ 
currence,  I  call  the  antecedent  state  of  my  per¬ 
ception,  A,  and  the  following  state,  B,  the  per- 


THE  CRITIQUE 


78 

ception  B  can  only  follow  A  in  apprehension, 
and  the  perception  A  cannot  follow  B,  but  only 
precede  it.  For  example,  I  see  a  ship  float  down 
the  stream  of  a  river.  My  perception  of  its 
place  lower  down  follows  upon  my  perception 
of  its  place  higher  up  the  course  of  the  river, 
and  it  is  impossible  that,  in  the  apprehension  of 
this  phenomenon,  the  vessel  should  be  perceived 
first  below  and  afterwards  higher  up  the  stream. 
Here,  therefore,  the  order  in  the  sequence  of 
perceptions  in  apprehension  is  determined;  and 
by  this  order  apprehension  is  regulated.  In  the 
former  example,  my  perceptions  in  the  appre¬ 
hension  of  a  house  might  begin  at  the  roof  and 
end  at  the  foundation,  or  vice  versa;  or  I 
might  apprehend  the  manifold  in  this  empirical 
intuition,  by  going  from  left  to  right,  and  from 
right  to  left.  Accordingly,  in  the  series  of  these 
perceptions,  there  was  no  determined  order, 
which  necessitated  my  beginning  at  a  certain 
point,  in  order  empirically  to  connect  the  man¬ 
ifold.  But  this  rule  is  always  to  be  met  with 
in  the  perception  of  that  which  happens,  and 
it  makes  the  order  of  the  successive  percep¬ 
tions  in  the  apprehension  of  such  a  phenome¬ 
non  necessary. 

I  must,  therefore,  in  the  present  case,  deduce 
the  subjective  sequence  of  apprehension  from 
the  objective  sequence  of  phenomena,  for 
otherwise  the  former  is  quite  undetermined, 
and  one  phenomenon  is  not  distinguishable 
from  another.  The  former  alone  proves  noth¬ 
ing  as  to  the  connection  of  the  manifold  in  an 
object,  for  it  is  quite  arbitrary.  The  latter  must 
consist  in  the  order  of  the  manifold  in  a  phe¬ 
nomenon,  according  to  which  order  the  appre¬ 
hension  of  one  thing  (that  which  happens)  fol¬ 
lows  that  of  another  thing  (which  precedes), 
in  conformity  with  a  rule.  In  this  way  alone  can 
I  be  authorized  to  say  of  the  phenomenon  it¬ 
self,  and  not  merely  of  my  own  apprehension, 
that  a  certain  order  or  sequence  is  to  be  found 
therein.  That  is,  in  other  words,  I  cannot  ar¬ 
range  my  apprehension  otherwise  than  in  this 
order. 

In  conformity  with  this  rule,  then,  it  is  neces¬ 
sary  that  in  that  which  antecedes  an  event  there 
be  found  the  condition  of  a  rule,  according  to 
which  in  this  event  follows  always  and  necessa¬ 
rily;  but  I  cannot  reverse  this  and  go  back  from 
the  event,  and  determine  (by  apprehension) 
that  which  antecedes  it.  For  no  phenomenon 
goes  back  from  the  succeeding  point  of  time  to 
the  preceding  point,  although  it  does  certainly 
relate  to  a  preceding  point  of  time;  from  a 
given  time,  on  the  other  hand,  there  is  always  a 


necessary  progression  to  the  determined  suc¬ 
ceeding  time.  Therefore,  because  there  certain¬ 
ly  is  something  that  follows,  I  must  of  necessity 
connect  it  with  something  else,  which  antecedes, 
and  upon  which  it  follows,  in  conformity  with 
a  rule,  that  is  necessarily,  so  that  the  event,  as 
conditioned,  affords  certain  indication  of  a  con¬ 
dition,  and  this  condition  determines  the  event. 

Let  us  suppose  that  nothing  precedes  an 
event,  upon  which  this  event  must  follow  in 
conformity  with  a  rule.  All  sequence  of  percep¬ 
tion  would  then  exist  only  in  apprehension,  that 
is  to  say,  would  be  merely  subjective,  and  it 
could  not  thereby  be  objectively  determined 
what  thing  ought  to  precede,  and  what  ought  to 
follow  in  perception.  In  such  a  case,  we  should 
have  nothing  but  a  play  of  representations, 
which  would  possess  no  application  to  any  ob¬ 
ject.  That  is  to  say,  it  would  not  be  possible 
through  perception  to  distinguish  one  phenome¬ 
non  from  another,  as  regards  relations  of  time; 
because  the  succession  in  the  act  of  apprehen¬ 
sion  would  always  be  of  the  same  sort,  and 
therefore  there  would  be  nothing  in  the  phe¬ 
nomenon  to  determine  the  succession,  and  to 
render  a  certain  sequence  objectively  necessary. 
And,  in  this  case,  I  cannot  say  that  two  states 
in  a  phenomenon  follow  one  upon  the  other, 
but  only  that  one  apprehension  follows  upon 
another.  But  this  is  merely  subjective,  and  does 
not  determine  an  object,  and  consequently  can¬ 
not  be  held  to  be  cognition  of  an  object — not 
even  in  the  phenomenal  world. 

Accordingly,  when  we  know  in  experience 
that  something  happens,  we  always  presuppose 
that  something  precedes,  whereupon  it  follows 
in  conformity  with  a  rule.  For  otherwise  I  could 
not  say  of  the  object  that  it  follows;  because 
the  mere  succession  in  my  apprehension,  if  it 
be  not  determined  by  a  rule  in  relation  to  some¬ 
thing  preceding,  does  not  authorize  succession 
in  the  object.  Only,  therefore,  in  reference  to  a 
rule,  according  to  which  phenomena  are  deter¬ 
mined  in  their  sequence,  that  is,  as  they  happen, 
by  the  preceding  state,  can  I  make  my  subjec¬ 
tive  synthesis  (of  apprehension)  objective,  and 
it  is  only  under  this  presupposition  that  even 
the  experience  of  an  event  is  possible. 

No  doubt  it  appears  as  if  this  were  in  thor¬ 
ough  contradition  to  all  the  notions  which  peo¬ 
ple  have  hitherto  entertained  in  regard  to  the 
procedure  of  the  human  understanding.  Ac¬ 
cording  to  these  opinions,  it  is  by  means  of  the 
perception  and  comparison  of  similar  conse¬ 
quences  following  upon  certain  antecedent  phe¬ 
nomena  that  the  understanding  is  led  to  the 


OF  PURE  REASON 


discovery  of  a  rule,  according  to  which  certain 
events  always  follow  certain  phenomena,  and  it 
is  only  by  this  process  that  we  attain  to  the 
conception  of  cause.  Upon  such  a  basis,  it  is 
clear  that  this  conception  must  be  merely  em¬ 
pirical,  and  the  rule  which  it  furnishes  us  with 
— “Everything  that  happens  must  have  a  cause” 
— would  be  just  as  contingent  as  experience  it¬ 
self.  The  universality  and  necessity  of  the  rule 
or  law  would  be  perfectly  spurious  attributes  of 
it.  Indeed,  it  could  not  possess  universal  valid¬ 
ity,  inasmuch  as  it  would  not  in  this  case  be  a 
priori ,  but  founded  on  deduction.  But  the  same 
is  the  case  with  this  law  as  with  other  pure  a 
priori  representations  (e.g.,  space  and  time), 
which  we  can  draw  in  perfect  clearness  and 
completeness  from  experience,  only  because  we 
had  already  placed  them  therein,  and  by  that 
means,  and  by  that  alone,  had  rendered  ex¬ 
perience  possible.  Indeed,  the  logical  clearness 
of  this  representation  of  a  rule,  determining  the 
series  of  events,  is  possible  only  when  we  have 
made  use  thereof  in  experience.  Nevertheless, 
the  recognition  of  this  rule,  as  a  condition  of 
the  synthetical  unity  of  phenomena  in  time,  was 
the  ground  of  experience  itself  and  consequent¬ 
ly  preceded  it  a  priori. 

It  is  now  our  duty  to  show  by  an  example 
that  we  never,  even  in  experience,  attribute  to 
an  object  the  notion  of  succession  or  effect  (of 
an  event — that  is,  the  happening  of  something 
that  did  not  exist  before),  and  distinguish  it 
from  the  subjective  succession  of  apprehension, 
unless  when  a  rule  lies  at  the  foundation,  which 
compels  us  to  observe  this  order  of  perception 
ir  preference  to  any  other,  and  that,  indeed,  it 
is  this  necessity  which  first  renders  possible  the 
representation  of  a  succession  in  the  object. 

We  have  representations  within  us,  of  which 
also  we  can  be  conscious.  But,  however  widely 
extended,  however  accurate  and  thoroughgoing 
this  consciousness  may  be,  these  representations 
are  still  nothing  more  than  representations,  that 
is,  internal  determinations  of  the  mind  in  this 
or  that  relation  of  time.  Now  how  happens  it 
that  to  these  representations  we  should  set  an 
object,  or  that,  in  addition  to  their  subjective 
reality,  as  modifications,  we  should  still  further 
attribute  to  them  a  certain  unknown  objective 
reality?  It  is  clear  that  objective  significancy 
cannot  consist  in  a  relation  to  another  represen¬ 
tation  (of  that  which  we  desire  to  term  object), 
for  in  that  case  the  question  again  arises:  “How 
does  this  other  representation  go  out  of  itself, 
and  obtain  objective  significancy  over  and 
above  the  subjective,  which  is  proper  to  it,  as  a 


79 

determination  of  a  state  of  mind?”  If  we  try  to 
discover  what  sort  of  new  property  the  relation 
to  an  object  gives  to  our  subjective  representa¬ 
tions.  and  what  new  importance  they  thereby 
receive,  we  shall  find  that  this  relation  has  no 
other  effect  than  that  of  rendering  necessary  the 
connection  of  our  representations  in  a  certain 
manner,  and  of  subjecting  them  to  a  rule;  and 
that  conversely,  it  is  only  because  a  certain 
order  is  necessary  in  the  relations  of  time  of  our 
representations,  that  objective  significancy  is 
ascribed  to  them. 

In  the  synthesis  of  phenomena,  the  manifold 
of  our  representations  is  always  successive. 
Now  hereby  is  not  represented  an  object,  for  by 
means  of  this  succession,  which  is  common  to 
all  apprehension,  no  one  thing  is  distinguished 
from  another.  But  so  soon  as  I  perceive  or 
assume  that  in  this  succession  there  is  a  rela¬ 
tion  to  a  state  antecedent,  from  which  the  rep¬ 
resentation  follows  in  accordance  with  a  rule, 
so  soon  do  I  represent  something  as  an  event, 
or  as  a  thing  that  happens;  in  other  words,  I 
cognize  an  object  to  which  I  must  assign  a  cer¬ 
tain  determinate  position  in  time,  which  can¬ 
not  be  altered,  because  of  the  preceding  state 
in  the  object.  When,  therefore,  I  perceive  that 
something  happens,  there  is  contained  in  this 
representation,  in  the  first  place,  the  fact,  that 
something  antecedes;  because  it  is  only  in  rela¬ 
tion  to  this  that  the  phenomenon  obtains  its 
proper  relation  of  time,  in  other  words,  exists 
after  an  antecedent  time,  in  which  it  did  not 
exist.  But  it  can  receive  its  determined  place  in 
time  only  by  the  presupposition  that  something 
existed  in  the  foregoing  state,  upon  which  it 
follows  inevitably  and  always,  that  is,  in  con¬ 
formity  with  a  rule.  From  all  this  it  is  evident 
that,  in  the  first  place,  I  cannot  reverse  the  or¬ 
der  of  succession,  and  make  that  which  happens 
precede  that  upon  which  it  follows;  and  that,  in 
the  second  place,  if  the  antecedent  state  be 
posited,  a  certain  determinate  event  inevitably 
and  necessarily  follows.  Hence  it  follows  that 
there  exists  a  certain  order  in  our  representa¬ 
tions,  whereby  the  present  gives  a  sure  indica¬ 
tion  of  some  previously  existing  state,  as  a 
correlate,  though  still  undetermined,  of  the 
existing  event  which  is  given — a  correlate  which 
itself  relates  to  the  event  as  its  consequence, 
conditions  it,  and  connects  it  necessarily  with 
itself  in  the  series  of  time. 

If  then  it  be  admitted  as  a  necessary  law  of 
sensibility,  and  consequently  a  formal  condition 
of  all  perception,  that  the  preceding  necessarily 
determines  the  succeeding  time  (inasmuch  as  I 


So 


THE  CRITIQUE 


cannot  arrive  at  the  succeeding  except  through 
the  preceding),  it  must  likewise  be  an  indispen¬ 
sable  law  of  empirical  representation  of  the 
series  of  time  that  the  phenomena  of  the  past 
determine  all  phenomena  in  the  succeeding 
time,  and  that  the  latter,  as  events,  cannot  take 
place,  except  in  so  far  as  the  former  determine 
their  existence  in  time,  that  is  to  say,  establish 
it  according  to  a  rule.  For  it  is  of  course  only 
in  phenomena  that  we  can  empirically  cognize 
this  continuity  in  the  connection  of  times. 

For  all  experience  and  for  the  possibility  of 
experience,  understanding  is  indispensable,  and 
the  first  step  which  it  takes  in  this  sphere  is  not 
to  render  the  representation  of  objects  clear, 
but  to  render  the  representation  of  an  object  in 
general,  possible.  It  does  this  by  applying  the 
order  of  time  to  phenomena,  and  their  exist¬ 
ence.  In  other  words,  it  assigns  to  each  phe¬ 
nomenon,  as  a  consequence,  a  place  in  relation 
to  preceding  phenomena,  determined  a  priori 
in  time,  without  which  it  could  not  harmonize 
with  time  itself,  which  determines  a  place  a 
priori  to  all  its  parts.  This  determination  of 
place  cannot  be  derived  from  the  relation  of 
phenomena  to  absolute  time  (for  it  is  not  an 
object  of  perception) ;  but,  on  the  contrary, 
phenomena  must  reciprocally  determine  the 
places  in  time  of  one  another,  and  render  these 
necessary  in  the  order  of  time.  In  other  words, 
whatever  follows  or  happens,  must  follow  in 
conformity  with  a  universal  rule  upon  that 
which  was  contained  in  the  foregoing  state. 
Hence  arises  a  series  of  phenomena,  which,  by 
means  of  the  understanding,  produces  and  ren¬ 
ders  necessary  exactly  the  same  order  and  con¬ 
tinuous  connection  in  the  series  of  our  possible 
perceptions,  as  is  found  a  priori  in  the  form  of 
internal  intuition  (time),  in  which  all  our  per¬ 
ceptions  must  have  place. 

That  something  happens,  then,  is  a  percep¬ 
tion  which  belongs  to  a  possible  experience, 
which  becomes  real  only  because  I  look  upon 
the  phenomenon  as  determined  in  regard  to  its 
place  in  time,  consequently  as  an  object,  which 
can  always  be  found  by  means  of  a  rule  in  the 
connected  series  of  my  perceptions.  But  this 
rule  of  the  determination  of  a  thing  according 
to  succession  in  time  is  as  follows:  “In  what 
precedes  may  be  found  the  condition,  under 
which  an  event  always  (that  is,  necessarily)  fol¬ 
lows.”  From  all  this  it  is  obvious  that  the  prin¬ 
ciple  of  cause  and  effect  is  the  principle  of  pos¬ 
sible  experience,  that  is,  of  objective  cognition 
of  phenomena,  in  regard  to  their  relations  in 
the  succession  of  time. 


The  proof  of  this  fundamental  proposition  i 
rests  entirely  on  the  following  momenta  of 
argument.  To  all  empirical  cognition  belongs 
the  synthesis  of  the  manifold  by  the  imagina¬ 
tion,  a  synthesis  which  is  always  successive,  . 
that  is,  in  which  the  representations  therein  , 
always  follow  one  another.  But  the  order  of  . 
succession  in  imagination  is  not  determined, 
and  the  series  of  successive  representations  may  * 
be  taken  retrogressively  as  well  as  progressive-  l 
ly.  But  if  this  synthesis  is  a  synthesis  of  ap-  i 
prehension  (of  the  manifold  of  a  given  phe¬ 
nomenon),  then  the  order  is  determined  in  the  > 
object,  or,  to  speak  more  accurately,  there  is  > 
therein  an  order  of  successive  synthesis  which 
determines  an  object,  and  according  to  which 
something  necessarily  precedes,  and  when  this 
is  posited,  something  else  necessarily  follows. 
If,  then,  my  perception  is  to  contain  the  cogni¬ 
tion  of  an  event,  that  is,  of  something  which 
really  happens,  it  must  be  an  empirical  judge¬ 
ment,  wherein  we  think  that  the  succession  is 
determined;  that  is,  it  presupposes  another  phe¬ 
nomenon,  upon  which  this  event  follows  neces¬ 
sarily,  or  in  conformity  with  a  rule.  If,  on  the 
contrary,  when  I  posited  the  antecedent,  the 
event  did  not  necessarily  follow,  I  should  be 
obliged  to  consider  it  merely  as  a  subjective 
play  of  my  imagination,  and  if  in  this  I  repre¬ 
sented  to  myself  anything  as  objective,  I  must 
look  upon  it  as  a  mere  dream.  Thus,  the  rela¬ 
tion  of  phenomena  (as  possible  perceptions), 
according  to  which  that  which  happens  is,  as  to 
its  existence,  necessarily  determined  in  time  by 
something  which  antecedes,  in  conformity  with 
a  rule — in  other  words,  the  relation  of  cause 
and  effect — is  the  condition  of  the  objective 
validity  of  our  empirical  judgements  in  regard 
to  the  sequence  of  perceptions,  consequently  of 
their  empirical  truth,  and  therefore  of  experi¬ 
ence.  The  principle  of  the  relation  of  causality 
in  the  succession  of  phenomena  is  therefore 
valid  for  all  objects  of  experience,  because  it 
is  itself  the  ground  of  the  possibility  of  experi¬ 
ence. 

Here,  however,  a  difficulty  arises,  which  must 
be  resolved.  The  principle  of  the  connection  of 
causality  among  phenomena  is  limited  in  our 
formula  to  the  succession  thereof,  although  in 
practice  we  find  that  the  principle  applies  also 
when  the  phenomena  exist  together  in  the  same 
time,  and  that  cause  and  effect  may  be  simul¬ 
taneous.  For  example,  there  is  heat  in  a  room, 
which  does  not  exist  in  the  open  air.  I  look 
about  for  the  cause,  and  find  it  to  be  the  fire. 
Now  the  fire  as  the  cause  is  simultaneous  with 


OF  PURE  REASON 


81 


its  effect,  the  heat  of  the  room.  In  this  case, 
then,  there  is  no  succession  as  regards  time,  be¬ 
tween  cause  and  effect,  but  they  are  simultane¬ 
ous;  and  still  the  law  holds  good.  The  greater 
part  of  operating  causes  in  nature  are  simul¬ 
taneous  with  their  effects,  and  the  succession  in 
time  of  the  latter  is  produced  only  because  the 
cause  cannot  achieve  the  total  of  its  effect  in 
one  moment.  But  at  the  moment  when  the  ef¬ 
fect  first  arises,  it  is  always  simultaneous  with 
the  causality  of  its  cause,  because,  if  the  cause 
had  but  a  moment  before  ceased  to  be,  the 
effect  could  not  have  arisen.  Here  it  must  be 
specially  remembered  that  we  must  consider 
the  order  of  time  and  not  the  lapse  thereof.  The 
relation  remains,  even  though  no  time  has 
elapsed.  The  time  between  the  causality  of  the 
cause  and  its  immediate  effect  may  entirely 
vanish,  and  the  cause  and  effect  be  thus  simul¬ 
taneous,  but  the  relation  of  the  one  to  the  other 
remains  always  determinable  according  to  time. 
If,  for  example,  I  consider  a  leaden  ball,  which 
lies  upon  a  cushion  and  makes  a  hollow  in  it,  as 
a  cause,  then  it  is  simultaneous  with  the  effect. 
But  I  distinguish  the  two  through  the  relation 
of  time  of  the  dynamical  connection  of  both. 
For  if  I  lay  the  ball  upon  the  cushion,  then  the 
hollow  follows  upon  the  before  smooth  surface; 
but  supposing  the  cushion  has,  from  some  cause 
or  another,  a  hollow,  there  does  not  thereupon 
follow  a  leaden  ball. 

Thus,  the  law  of  succession  of  time  is  in  all 
instances  the  only  empirical  criterion  of  effect 
in  relation  to  the  causality  of  the  antecedent 
cause.  The  glass  is  the  cause  of  the  rising  of  the 
water  above  its  horizontal  surface,  although  the 
two  phenomena  are  contemporaneous.  For,  as 
soon  as  I  draw  some  water  with  the  glass  from  a 
larger  vessel,  an  effect  follows  thereupon, 
namely,  the  change  of  the  horizontal  state 
which  the  water  had  in  the  large  vessel  into  a 
concave,  which  it  assumes  in  the  glass. 

This  conception  of  causality  leads  us  to  the 
conception  of  action;  that  of  action,  to  the  con¬ 
ception  of  force;  and  through  it,  to  the  concep¬ 
tion  of  substance.  As  I  do  not  wish  this  critical 
essay,  the  sole  purpose  of  which  is  to  treat  of 
the  sources  of  our  synthetical  cognition  a  priori , 
to  be  crowded  with  analyses  which  merely  ex¬ 
plain,  but  do  not  enlarge  the  sphere  of  our  con¬ 
ceptions,  I  reserve  the  detailed  explanation  of 
the  above  conceptions  for  a  future  system  of 
pure  reason.  Such  an  analysis,  indeed,  executed 
with  great  particularity,  may  already  be  found 
in  well-known  works  on  this  subject.  But  I  can¬ 
not  at  present  refrain  from  making  a  few  re¬ 


marks  on  the  empirical  criterion  of  a  substance, 
in  so  far  as  it  seems  to  be  more  evident  and 
more  easily  recognized  through  the  conception 
of  action  than  through  that  of  the  permanence 
of  a  phenomenon. 

Where  action  (consequently  activity  and 
force)  exists,  substance  also  must  exist,  and  in 
it  alone  must  be  sought  the  seat  of  that  fruit¬ 
ful  source  of  phenomena.  Very  well.  But  if  we 
are  called  upon  to  explain  what  we  mean  by 
substance,  and  wish  to  avoid  the  vice  of  rea¬ 
soning  in  a  circle,  the  answer  is  by  no  means  so 
easy.  How  shall  we  conclude  immediately  from 
the  action  to  the  permanence  of  that  which  acts, 
this  being  nevertheless  an  essential  and  peculiar 
criterion  of  substance  (phenomenon)?  But  after 
what  has  been  said  above,  the  solution  of 
this  question  becomes  easy  enough,  although  by 
the  common  mode  of  procedure — merely  ana¬ 
lysing  our  conceptions — it  would  be  quite  im¬ 
possible.  The  conception  of  action  indicates  the 
relation  of  the  subject  of  causality  to  the  effect. 
Now  because  all  effect  consists  in  that  which 
happens,  therefore  in  the  changeable,  the  last 
subject  thereof  is  the  permanent ,  as  the  sub¬ 
stratum  of  all  that  changes,  that  is,  substance. 
For  according  to  the  principle  of  causality,  ac¬ 
tions  are  always  the  first  ground  of  all  change 
in  phenomena  and,  consequently,  cannot  be  a 
property  of  a  subject  which  itself  changes,  be¬ 
cause  if  this  were  the  case,  other  actions  and 
another  subject  would  be  necessary  to  deter¬ 
mine  this  change.  From  all  this  it  results  that 
action  alone,  as  an  empirical  criterion,  is  a  suf¬ 
ficient  proof  of  the  presence  of  substantiality, 
without  any  necessity  on  my  part  of  endeavour¬ 
ing  to  discover  the  permanence  of  substance  by 
a  comparison.  Besides,  by  this  mode  of  induc¬ 
tion  we  could  not  attain  to  the  completeness 
which  the  magnitude  and  strict  universality  of 
the  conception  requires.  For  that  the  primary 
subject  of  the  causality  of  all  arising  and  pass¬ 
ing  away,  all  origin  and  extinction,  cannot  itself 
(in  the  sphere  of  phenomena)  arise  and  pass 
away,  is  a  sound  and  safe  conclusion,  a  conclu¬ 
sion  which  leads  us  to  the  conception  of  em¬ 
pirical  necessity  and  permanence  in  existence, 
and  consequently  to  the  conception  of  a  sub¬ 
stance  as  phenomenon. 

When  something  happens,  the  mere  fact  of 
the  occurrence,  without  regard  to  that  which 
occurs,  is  an  object  requiring  investigation. 
The  transition  from  the  non-being  of  a  state  in¬ 
to  the  existence  of  it,  supposing  that  this  state 
contains  no  quality  which  previously  existed  in 
the  phenomenon,  is  a  fact  of  itself  demanding 


82 


THE  CRITIQUE 


inquiry.  Such  an  event,  as  has  been  shown  in 
No.  A,  does  not  concern  substance  (for  sub¬ 
stance  does  not  thus  originate),  but  its  condi¬ 
tion  or  state.  It  is  therefore  only  change,  and 
not  origin  from  nothing.  If  this  origin  be  re¬ 
garded  as  the  effect  of  a  foreign  cause,  it  is 
termed  creation,  which  cannot  be  admitted  as 
an  event  among  phenomena,  because  the  very 
possibility  of  it  would  annihilate  the  unity  of 
experience.  If,  however,  I  regard  all  things  not 
as  phenomena,  but  as  things  in  themselves  and 
objects  of  understanding  alone,  they,  although 
substances,  may  be  considered  as  dependent,  in 
respect  of  their  existence,  on  a  foreign  cause. 
But  this  would  require  a  very  different  mean¬ 
ing  in  the  words,  a  meaning  which  could  not 
apply  to  phenomena  as  objects  of  possible 
experience. 

How  a  thing  can  be  changed,  how  it  is  pos¬ 
sible  that  upon  one  state  existing  in  one  point 
of  time,  an  opposite  state  should  follow  in  an¬ 
other  point  of  time — of  this  we  have  not  the 
smallest  conception  a  priori.  There  is  requisite 
for  this  the  knowledge  of  real  powers,  which 
can  only  be  given  empirically;  for  example, 
knowledge  of  moving  forces,  or,  in  other  words, 
of  certain  successive  phenomena  (as  move¬ 
ments)  which  indicate  the  presence  of  such 
forces.  But  the  form  of  every  change,  the  con¬ 
dition  under  which  alone  it  can  take  place  as 
the  coming  into  existence  of  another  state  (be 
the  content  of  the  change,  that  is,  the  state 
which  is  changed,  what  it  may),  and  conse¬ 
quently  the  succession  of  the  states  themselves 
can  very  well  be  considered  a  priori ,  in  rela¬ 
tion  to  the  law  of  causality  and  the  conditions 
of  time.1 

When  a  substance  passes  from  one  state,  a, 
into  another  state,  b,  the  point  of  time  in  which 
the  latter  exists  is  different  from,  and  subse¬ 
quent  to  that  in  which  the  former  existed.  In 
like  manner,  the  second  state,  as  reality  (in  the 
phenomenon),  differs  from  the  first,  in  which 
the  reality  of  the  second  did  not  exist,  as  b 
from  zero.  That  is  to  say,  if  the  state,  b,  differs 
from  the  state,  a ,  only  in  respect  to  quantity, 
the  change  is  a  coming  into  existence  of  b — a, 
which  in  the  former  state  did  not  exist,  and  in 
relation  to  which  that  state  is  =  o. 

Now  the  question  arises  how  a  thing  passes 
from  one  state  =  a,  into  another  state  =  b.  Be¬ 
tween  two  moments  there  is  always  a  certain 

1  It  must  be  remarked  that  I  do  not  speak  of  the 
change  of  certain  relations,  but  of  the  change  of  the 
state.  Thus,  when  a  body  moves  in  a  uniform  manner,  it 
does  not  change  its  state  (of  motion);  but  only  when 
its  motion  increases  or  decreases. 


time,  and  between  two  states  existing  in  these 
moments  there  is  always  a  difference  having  a 
certain  quantity  (for  all  parts  of  phenomena 
are  in  their  turn  quantities).  Consequently, 
every  transition  from  one  state  into  another 
is  always  effected  in  a  time  contained  between 
two  moments,  of  which  the  first  determines  the 
state  which  the  thing  leaves,  and  the  second 
determines  the  state  into  which  the  thing  passes. 
Both  moments,  then,  are  limitations  of  the 
time  of  a  change,  consequently  of  the  inter¬ 
mediate  state  between  both,  and  as  such  they 
belong  to  the  total  of  the  change.  Now  every 
change  has  a  cause,  which  evidences  its  causal¬ 
ity  in  the  whole  time  during  which  the  change 
takes  place.  The  cause,  therefore,  does  not  pro¬ 
duce  the  change  all  at  once  or  in  one  moment, 
but  in  a  time,  so  that,  as  the  time  gradually 
increases  from  the  commencing  instant,  a ,  to 
its  completion  at  b,  in  like  manner  also,  the 
quantity  of  the  reality  (6 — a)  is  generated 
through  the  lesser  degrees  which  are  contained 
between  the  first  and  last.  All  change  is  there¬ 
fore  possible  only  through  a  continuous  action 
of  the  causality,  which,  in  so  far  as  it  is  uni¬ 
form,  we  call  a  momentum.  The  change  does 
not  consist  of  these  momenta,  but  is  generated 
or  produced  by  them  as  their  effect. 

Such  is  the  law  of  the  continuity  of  all 
change,  the  ground  of  which  is  that  neither  time 
itself  nor  any  phenomenon  in  time  consists  of 
parts  which  are  the  smallest  possible,  but  that, 
notwithstanding,  the  state  of  a  thing  passes  in 
the  process  of  a  change  through  all  these  parts, 
as  elements,  to  its  second  state.  There  is  no 
smallest  degree  of  reality  in  a  phenomenon,  just 
as  there  is  no  smallest  degree  in  the  quantity 
of  time;  and  so  the  new  state  of  reality  grows 
up  out  of  the  former  state,  through  all  the  in¬ 
finite  degrees  thereof,  the  differences  of  which 
one  from  another,  taken  all  together,  are  less 
than  the  difference  between  o  and  a. 

It  is  not  our  business  to  inquire  here  into  the 
utility  of  this  principle  in  the  investigation  of 
nature.  But  how  such  a  proposition,  which  ap¬ 
pears  so  greatly  to  extend  our  knowledge  of 
nature,  is  possible  completely  a  priori ,  is  in¬ 
deed  a  question  which  deserves  investigation, 
although  the  first  view  seems  to  demonstrate 
the  truth  and  reality  of  the  principle,  and  the 
question,  how  it  is  possible,  may  be  considered 
superfluous.  For  there  are  so  many  groundless 
pretensions  to  the  enlargement  of  our  knowledge 
by  pure  reason  that  we  must  take  it  as  a  general 
rule  to  be  mistrustful  of  all  such,  and  without  a 
thoroughgoing  and  radical  deduction,  to  believe 


OF  PURE  REASON 


nothing  of  the  sort  even  on  the  clearest  dogmat¬ 
ical  evidence. 

Every  addition  to  our  empirical  knowledge, 
and  every  advance  made  in  the  exercise  of  our 
perception,  is  nothing  more  than  an  extension 
of  the  determination  of  the  internal  sense,  that 
is  to  say,  a  progression  in  time,  be  objects  them¬ 
selves  what  they  may,  phenomena,  or  pure  in¬ 
tuitions.  This  progression  in  time  determines 
everything,  and  is  itself  determined  by  nothing 
else.  That  is  to  say,  the  parts  of  the  progression 
exist  only  in  time,  and  by  means  of  the  syn¬ 
thesis  thereof,  and  are  not  given  antecedently 
to  it.  For  this  reason,  every  transition  in  percep¬ 
tion  to  anything  which  follows  upon  another  in 
time,  is  a  determination  of  time  by  means  of  the 
production  of  this  perception.  And  as  this  de¬ 
termination  of  time  is,  always  and  in  all  its 
parts,  a  quantity,  the  perception  produced  is  to 
be  considered  as  a  quantity  which  proceeds 
through  all  its  degrees — no  one  of  which  is  the 
smallest  possible — from  zero  up  to  its  determined 
degree.  From  this  we  perceive  the  possibility 
of  cognizing  a  priori  a  law  of  changes — a  law, 
however,  which  concerns  their  form  merely.  We 
merely  anticipate  our  own  apprehension,  the 
formal  condition  of  which,  inasmuch  as  it  is  it¬ 
self  to  be  found  in  the  mind  antecedently  to  all 
given  phenomena,  must  certainly  be  capable  of 
being  cognized  a  priori. 

Thus,  as  time  contains  the  sensuous  condition 
a  priori  of  the  possibility  of  a  continuous  pro¬ 
gression  of  that  which  exists  to  that  which  fol¬ 
lows  it,  the  understanding,  by  virtue  of  the  unity 
of  apperception,  contains  the  condition  a  priori 
of  the  possibility  of  a  continuous  determination 
of  the  position  in  time  of  all  phenomena,  and 
this  by  means  of  the  series  of  causes  and  effects, 
the  former  of  which  necessitate  the  sequence  of 
the  latter,  and  thereby  render  universally  and 
for  all  time,  and  by  consequence,  objectively, 
valid  the  empirical  cognition  of  the  relations  of 
time. 

C.  Third  Analogy 

Principle  of  Coexistence,  According 
to  the  Law  of  Reciprocity  or 
Community 

All  substances,  in  so  far  as  they  can  be  perceived 
in  space  at  the  same  time,  exist  in  a  state  of 
complete  reciprocity  of  action. 

PROOF 

Things  are  coexistent,  when  in  empirical  in¬ 
tuition  the  perception  of  the  one  can  follow  up¬ 
on  the  perception  of  the  other,  and  vice  versa — 


83 

which  cannot  occur  in  the  succession  of  phenom¬ 
ena,  as  we  have  shown  in  the  explanation  of  the 
second  principle.  Thus  I  can  perceive  the  moon 
and  then  the  earth,  or  conversely,  first  the  earth 
and  then  the  moon;  and  for  the  reason  that  my 
perceptions  of  these  objects  can  reciprocally  fol¬ 
low  each  other,  I  say,  they  exist  contemporane¬ 
ously.  Now  coexistence  is  the  existence  of  the 
manifold  in  the  same  time.  But  time  itself  is  not 
an  object  of  perception;  and  therefore  we  can¬ 
not  conclude  from  the  fact  that  things  are  placed 
in  the  same  time,  the  other  fact,  that  the  percep¬ 
tion  of  these  things  can  follow  each  other  re¬ 
ciprocally.  The  synthesis  of  the  imagination  in 
apprehension  would  only  present  to  us  each  of 
these  perceptions  as  present  in  the  subject  when 
the  other  is  not  present,  and  contrariwise;  but 
would  not  show  that  the  objects  are  coexistent, 
that  is  to  say,  that,  if  the  one  exists,  the  other 
also  exists  in  the  same  time,  and  that  this  is  nec¬ 
essarily  so,  in  order  that  the  perceptions  may  be 
capable  of  following  each  other  reciprocally.  It 
follows  that  a  conception  of  the  understanding 
or  category  of  the  reciprocal  sequence  of  the 
determinations  of  phenomena  (existing,  as  they 
do,  apart  from  each  other,  and  yet  contempo¬ 
raneously),  is  requisite  to  justify  us  in  saying 
that  the  reciprocal  succession  of  perceptions  has 
its  foundation  in  the  object,  and  to  enable  us  to 
represent  coexistence  as  objective.  But  that  re¬ 
lation  of  substances  in  which  the  one  contains 
determinations  the  ground  of  which  is  in  the 
other  substance,  is  the  relation  of  influence.  And, 
when  this  influence  is  reciprocal,  it  is  the  rela¬ 
tion  of  community  or  reciprocity.  Consequently 
the  coexistence  of  substances  in  space  can¬ 
not  be  cognized  in  experience  otherwise  than 
under  the  precondition  of  their  reciprocal 
action.  This  is  therefore  the  condition  of  the 
possibility  of  things  themselves  as  objects  of 
experience. 

Things  are  coexistent,  in  so  far  as  they  exist 
in  one  and  the  same  time.  But  how  can  we  know 
that  they  exist  in  one  and  the  same  time?  Only 
by  observing  that  the  order  in  the  synthesis  of 
apprehension  of  the  manifold  is  arbitrary  and 
a  matter  of  indifference,  that  is  to  say,  that  it 
can  proceed  from  A,  through  B,  C,  D,  to  E,  or 
contrariwise  from  E  to  A.  For  if  they  were  suc¬ 
cessive  in  time  (and  in  the  order,  let  us  suppose, 
which  begins  with  A),  it  is  quite  impossible  for 
the  apprehension  in  perception  to  begin  with  E 
and  go  backwards  to  A,  inasmuch  as  A  belongs 
to  past  time  and,  therefore,  cannot  be  an  object 
of  apprehension. 

Let  us  assume  that  in  a  number  of  substances 


84  THE  CRITIQUE 


considered  as  phenomena  each  is  completely  iso¬ 
lated,  that  is,  that  no  one  acts  upon  another. 
Then  I  say  that  the  coexistence  of  these  cannot 
be  an  object  of  possible  perception  and  that  the 
existence  of  one  cannot,  by  any  mode  of  empiri¬ 
cal  synthesis,  lead  us  to  the  existence  of  another. 
For  we  imagine  them  in  this  case  to  be  separated 
by  a  completely  void  space,  and  thus  perception, 
which  proceeds  from  the  one  to  the  other  in 
time,  would  indeed  determine  their  existence  by 
means  of  a  following  perception,  but  would  be 
quite  unable  to  distinguish  whether  the  one  phe¬ 
nomenon  follows  objectively  upon  the  first,  or 
is  coexistent  with  it. 

Besides  the  mere  fact  of  existence,  then,  there 
must  be  something  by  means  of  which  A  deter¬ 
mines  the  position  of  B  in  time  and,  conversely, 
B  the  position  of  A;  because  only  under  this  con¬ 
dition  can  substances  be  empirically  represented 
as  existing  contemporaneously.  Now  that  alone 
determines  the  position  of  another  thing  in  time 
which  is  the  cause  of  it  or  of  its  determinations. 
Consequently  every  substance  (inasmuch  as  it 
can  have  succession  predicated  of  it  only  in  re¬ 
spect  of  its  determinations)  must  contain  the 
causality  of  certain  determinations  in  another 
substance,  and  at  the  same  time  the  effects  of 
the  causality  of  the  other  in  itself.  That  is  to 
say,  substances  must  stand  (mediately  or  imme¬ 
diately)  in  dynamical  community  with  each 
other,  if  coexistence  is  to  be  cognized  in  any 
possible  experience.  But,  in  regard  to  objects 
of  experience,  that  is  absolutely  necessary 
without  which  the  experience  of  these  objects 
would  itself  be  impossible.  Consequently  it  is 
absolutely  necessary  that  all  substances  in 
the  world  of  phenomena,  in  so  far  as  they 
are  coexistent,  stand  in  a  relation  of  com¬ 
plete  community  of  reciprocal  action  to  each 
other. 

The  word  community  has  in  our  language1 
two  meanings,  and  contains  the  two  notions  con¬ 
veyed  in  the  Latin  communio  and  commercium. 
We  employ  it  in  this  place  in  the  latter  sense — 
that  of  a  dynamical  community,  without  which 
even  the  community  of  place  ( communio  spatii) 
could  not  be  empirically  cognized.  In  our  experi¬ 
ences  it  is  easy  to  observe  that  it  is  only  the 
continuous  influences  in  all  parts  of  space  that 
can  conduct  our  senses  from  one  object  to  an¬ 
other;  that  the  light  which  plays  between  our 
eyes  and  the  heavenly  bodies  produces  a  mediat¬ 
ing  community  between  them  and  us,  and  there¬ 
by  evidences  their  coexistence  with  us;  that  we 
cannot  empirically  change  our  position  (perceive 

1  German. 


this  change),  unless  the  existence  of  matter 
throughout  the  whole  of  space  rendered  possible 
the  perception  of  the  positions  we  occupy;  and 
that  this  perception  can  prove  the  contempora-  , 
neous  existence  of  these  places  only  through 
their  reciprocal  influence,  and  thereby  also  the 
coexistence  of  even  the  most  remote  objects — 
although  in  this  case  the  proof  is  only  mediate. 
Without  community,  every  perception  (of  a 
phenomenon  in  space)  is  separated  from  every  i 
other  and  isolated,  and  the  chain  of  empirical 
representations,  that  is,  of  experience,  must, 
with  the  appearance  of  a  new  object,  begin  en¬ 
tirely  de  novo ,  without  the  least  connection 
with  preceding  representations,  and  without 
standing  towards  these  even  in  the  relation  of 
time.  My  intention  here  is  by  no  means  to  com¬ 
bat  the  notion  of  empty  space;  for  it  may  exist 
where  our  perceptions  cannot  exist,  inasmuch 
as  they  cannot  reach  thereto,  and  where,  there¬ 
fore,  no  empirical  perception  of  coexistence 
takes  place.  But  in  this  case  it  is  not  an  object 
of  possible  experience. 

The  following  remarks  may  be  useful  in  the 
way  of  explanation.  In  the  mind,  all  phenomena, 
as  contents  of  a  possible  experience,  must  exist 
in  community  ( communio )  of  apperception  or 
consciousness,  and  in  so  far  as  it  is  requisite 
that  objects  be  represented  as  coexistent  and 
connected,  in  so  far  must  they  reciprocally  de¬ 
termine  the  position  in  time  of  each  other  and 
thereby  constitute  a  whole.  If  this  subjective 
community  is  to  rest  upon  an  objective  basis,  or 
to  be  applied  to  substances  as  phenomena,  the 
perception  of  one  substance  must  render  possi¬ 
ble  the  perception  of  another,  and  conversely. 
For  otherwise  succession,  which  is  always  found 
in  perceptions  as  apprehensions,  would  be  predi¬ 
cated  of  external  objects,  and  their  representa¬ 
tion  of  their  coexistence  be  thus  impossible. 
But  this  is  a  reciprocal  influence,  that  is  to  say, 
a  real  community  ( commercium )  of  substances, 
without  which  therefore  the  empirical  relation 
of  coexistence  would  be  a  notion  beyond  the 
reach  of  our  minds.  By  virtue  of  this  commer¬ 
cium,  phenomena,  in  so  far  as  they  are  apart 
from,  and  nevertheless  in  connection  with  each 
other,  constitute  a  compositum  reale.  Such  com¬ 
posite  are  possible  in  many  different  ways.  The 
three  dynamical  relations  then,  from  which  all 
others  spring,  are  those  of  inherence,  conse¬ 
quence,  and  composition. 

These,  then,  are  the  three  analogies  of  ex¬ 
perience.  They  are  nothing  more  than  principles 
of  the  determination  of  the  existence  of  phe- 


OF  PURE  REASON 


nomena  in  time,  according  to  the  three  modi  of 
this  determination;  to  wit,  the  relation  to  time 
itself  as  a  quantity  (the  quantity  of  existence, 
that  is,  duration),  the  relation  in  time  as  a 
series  or  succession,  finally,  the  relation  in  time 
as  the  complex  of  all  existence  (simultaneity). 
This  unity  of  determination  in  regard  to  time 
is  thoroughly  dynamical;  that  is  to  say,  time  is 
not  considered  as  that  in  which  experience  de¬ 
termines  immediately  to  every  existence  its 
position;  for  this  is  impossible,  inasmuch  as 
absolute  time  is  not  an  object  of  perception, 
by  means  of  which  phenomena  can  be  connected 
with  each  other.  On  the  contrary,  the  rule  of  the 
understanding,  through  which  alone  the  exist¬ 
ence  of  phenomena  can  receive  synthetical  unity 
as  regards  relations  of  time,  determines  for 
every  phenomenon  its  position  in  time,  and  con¬ 
sequently  a  priori ,  and  with  validity  for  all  and 
every  time. 

By  nature,  in  the  empirical  sense  of  the  word, 
we  understand  the  totality  of  phenomena  con¬ 
nected,  in  respect  of  their  existence,  according 
to  necessary  rules,  that  is,  laws.  There  are 
therefore  certain  laws  (which  are  moreover  a 
priori)  which  make  nature  possible;  and  all  em¬ 
pirical  laws  can  exist  only  by  means  of  experi¬ 
ence,  and  by  virtue  of  those  primitive  laws 
through  which  experience  itself  becomes  possi¬ 
ble.  The  purpose  of  the  analogies  is  therefore 
to  represent  to  us  the  unity  of  nature  in  the 
connection  of  all  phenomena  under  certain  ex¬ 
ponents,  the  only  business  of  which  is  to  ex¬ 
press  the  relation  of  time  (in  so  far  as  it  con¬ 
tains  all  existence  in  itself)  to  the  unity  of  ap¬ 
perception,  which  can  exist  in  synthesis  only 
according  to  rules.  The  combined  expression  of 
all  is  this:  “All  phenomena  exist  in  one  nature, 
and  must  so  exist,  inasmuch  as  without  this  a 
priori  unity,  no  unity  of  experience,  and  conse¬ 
quently  no  determination  of  objects  in  experi¬ 
ence,  is  possible.” 

As  regards  the  mode  of  proof  which  we  have 
employed  in  treating  of  these  transcendental 
laws  of  nature,  and  the  peculiar  character  of  it, 
we  must  make  one  remark,  which  will  at  the 
same  time  be  important  as  a  guide  in  every  other 
attempt  to  demonstrate  the  truth  of  intellectual 
and  likewise  synthetical  propositions  a  priori . 
Had  we  endeavoured  to  prove  these  analogies 
dogmatically,  that  is,  from  conceptions;  that  is 
to  say,  had  we  employed  this  method  in  attempt¬ 
ing  to  show  that  everything  which  exists,  exists 
only  in  that  which  is  permanent — that  every 
thing  or  event  presupposes  the  existence  of 
something  in  a  preceding  state,  upon  which  it 


85 

follows  in  conformity  with  a  rule — lastly,  that 
in  the  manifold,  which  is  coexistent,  the  states 
coexist  in  connection  with  each  other  accord¬ 
ing  to  a  rule — all  our  labour  would  have  been 
utterly  in  vain.  For  more  conceptions  of  things, 
analyse  them  as  we  may,  cannot  enable  us  to 
conclude  from  the  existence  of  one  object  to 
the  existence  of  another.  What  other  course  was 
left  for  us  to  pursue?  This  only,  to  demonstrate 
the  possibility  of  experience  as  a  cognition  in 
which  at  last  all  objects  must  be  capable  of  be¬ 
ing  presented  to  us,  if  the  representation  of 
them  is  to  possess  any  objective  reality.  Now  in 
this  third,  this  mediating  term,  the  essential 
form  of  which  consists  in  the  synthetical  unity 
of  the  apperception  of  all  phenomena,  we  found 
a  priori  conditions  of  the  universal  and  neces¬ 
sary  determination  as  to  time  of  all  existences 
in  the  world  of  phenomena,  without  which  the 
empirical  determination  thereof  as  to  time  would 
itself  be  impossible,  and  we  also  discovered  rules 
of  synthetical  unity  a  priori ,  by  means  of  which 
we  could  anticipate  experience.  For  want  of 
this  method,  and  from  the  fancy  that  it  was 
possible  to  discover  a  dogmatical  proof  of  the 
synthetical  propositions  which  are  requisite  in 
the  empirical  employment  of  the  understanding, 
has  it  happened  that  a  proof  of  the  principle  of 
sufficient  reason  has  been  so  often  attempted, 
and  always  in  vain.  The  other  two  analogies  no¬ 
body  has  ever  thought  of,  although  they  have 
always  been  silently  employed  by  the  mind,1 
because  the  guiding  thread  furnished  by  the 
categories  was  wanting,  the  guide  which  alone 
can  enable  us  to  discover  every  hiatus,  both  in 
the  system  of  conceptions  and  of  principles. 

4.  The  Postulates  of  Empirical 
Thought 

1.  That  which  agrees  with  the  formal  condi¬ 
tions  (intuition  and  conception)  of  experience, 
is  possible. 

2.  That  which  coheres  with  the  material  con¬ 
ditions  of  experience  (sensation),  is  real. 

3.  That  whose  coherence  with  the  real  is  de- 

1  The  unity  of  the  universe,  in  which  all  phenomena 
must  be  connected,  is  evid^htly  a  mere  consequence  of 
the  tacitly  admitted  principle  of  the  community  of  all 
substances  which  are  coexistent.  For  were  substances 
isolated,  they  could  not  as  parts  constitute  a  whole,  and 
were  their  connection  (reciprocal  action  of  the  mani¬ 
fold)  not  necessary  from  the  very  fact  of  coexistence, 
we  could  not  conclude  from  the  fact  of  the  latter  as  a 
merely  ideal  relation  to  the  former  as  a  real  one.  We 
have,  however,  shown  in  its  place  that  community  is  the 
proper  ground  of  the  possibility  of  an  empirical  cogni¬ 
tion  of  coexistence,  and  that  we  may  therefore  properly 
reason  from  the  latter  to  the  former  as  its  condition. 


86 


THE  CRITIQUE 


termined  according  to  universal  conditions  of 
experience  is  (exists)  necessary. 

Explanation 

The  categories  of  modality  possess  this  pe¬ 
culiarity,  that  they  do  not  in  the  least  determine 
the  object,  or  enlarge  the  conception  to  which 
they  are  annexed  as  predicates,  but  only  express 
its  relation  to  the  faculty  of  cognition.  Though 
my  conception  of  a  thing  is  in  itself  complete,  I 
am  still  entitled  to  ask  whether  the  object  of 
it  is  merely  possible,  or  whether  it  is  also  real, 
or,  if  the  latter,  whether  it  is  also  necessary. 
But  hereby  the  object  itself  is  not  more  defi¬ 
nitely  determined  in  thought,  but  the  question 
is  only  in  what  relation  it,  including  all  its  deter¬ 
minations,  stands  to  the  understanding  and  its 
employment  in  experience,  to  the  empirical  fac¬ 
ulty  of  judgement,  and  to  the  reason  of  its  appli¬ 
cation  to  experience. 

For  this  very  reason,  too,  the  categories  of 
modality  are  nothing  more  than  explanations  of 
the  conceptions  of  possibility,  reality,  and  ne¬ 
cessity,  as  employed  in  experience,  and  at  the 
same  time,  restrictions  of  all  the  categories  to 
empirical  use  alone,  not  authorizing  the  tran¬ 
scendental  employment  of  them.  For  if  they  are 
to  have  something  more  than  a  merely  logical 
significance,  and  to  be  something  more  than 
a  mere  analytical  expression  of  the  form  of 
thought ,  and  to  have  a  relation  to  things  and 
their  possibility,  reality,  or  necessity,  they  must 
concern  possible  experience  and  its  synthetical 
unity,  in  which  alone  objects  of  cognition  can 
be  given. 

The  postulate  of  the  possibility  of  things  re¬ 
quires  also,  that  the  conception  of  the  things 
agree  with  the  formal  conditions  of  our  experi¬ 
ence  in  general.  But  this,  that  is  to  say,  the 
objective  form  of  experience,  contains  all  the 
kinds  of  synthesis  which  are  requisite  for  the 
cognition  of  objects.  A  conception  which  con¬ 
tains  a  synthesis  must  be  regarded  as  empty 
and  without  reference  to  an  object,  if  its  syn¬ 
thesis  does  not  belong  to  experience — either  as 
borrowed  from  it,  and  in  this  case  it  is  called  an 
empirical  conception ,  or  such  as  is  the  ground 
and  a  priori  condition  of  experience  (its  form), 
and  in  this  case  it  is  a  pure  conception ,  a  con¬ 
ception  which  nevertheless  belongs  to  experi¬ 
ence,  inasmuch  as  its  object  can  be  found  in 
this  alone.  For  where  shall  we  find  the  criterion 
or  character  of  the  possibility  of  an  object  which 
is  cogitated  by  means  of  an  a  priori  synthetical 
conception,  if  not  in  the  synthesis  which  con¬ 
stitutes  the  form  of  empirical  cognition  of  ob¬ 


jects?  That  in  such  a  conception  no  contradic-  ; 
tion  exists  is  indeed  a  necessary  logical  condi¬ 
tion,  but  very  far  from  being  sufficient  to  estab-  i 
Iish  the  objective  reality  of  the  conception,  that  " 
is,  the  possibility  of  such  an  object  as  is  thought  p 
in  the  conception.  Thus,  in  the  conception  of  a  r 
figure  which  is  contained  within  two  straight 
lines,  there  is  no  contradiction,  for  the  concep¬ 
tions  of  two  straight  lines  and  of  their  junction 
contain  no  negation  of  a  figure.  The  impossibil¬ 
ity  in  such  a  case  does  not  rest  upon  the  concep¬ 
tion  in  itself,  but  upon  the  construction  of  it  in 
space,  that  is  to  say,  upon  the  conditions  of 
space  and  its  determinations.  But  these  have 
themselves  objective  reality,  that  is,  they  apply 
to  possible  things,  because  they  contain  a  priori 
the  form  of  experience  in  general. 

And  now  we  shall  proceed  to  point  out  the 
extensive  utility  and  influence  of  this  postulate 
of  possibility.  When  I  represent  to  myself  a 
thing  that  is  permanent,  so  that  everything  in 
it  which  changes  belongs  merely  to  its  state  or 
condition,  from  such  a  conception  alone  I  never 
can  cognize  that  such  a  thing  is  possible.  Or, 
if  I  represent  to  myself  something  which  is  so 
constituted  that,  when  it  is  posited,  something 
else  follows  always  and  infallibly,  my  thought 
contains  no  self-contradiction;  but  whether 
such  a  property  as  causality  is  to  be  found  in 
any  possible  thing,  my  thought  alone  affords  no 
means  of  judging.  Finally,  I  can  represent  to 
myself  different  things  (substances)  which  are 
so  constituted  that  the  state  or  condition  of  one 
causes  a  change  in  the  state  of  the  other,  and 
reciprocally;  but  whether  such  a  relation  is  a 
property  of  things  cannot  be  perceived  from 
these  conceptions,  which  contain  a  merely  arbi¬ 
trary  synthesis.  Only  from  the  fact,  therefore, 
that  these  conceptions  express  a  priori  the  rela¬ 
tions  of  perceptions  in  every  experience,  do  we 
know  that  they  possess  objective  reality,  that  is, 
transcendental  truth;  and  that  independent  of 
experience,  though  not  independent  of  all  rela¬ 
tion  to  the  form  of  an  experience  in  general  and 
its  synthetical  unity,  in  which  alone  objects  can 
be  empirically  cognized. 

But  when  we  fashion  to  ourselves  new  con¬ 
ceptions  of  substances,  forces,  action,  and  re¬ 
action,  from  the  material  presented  to  us  by 
perception,  without  following  the  example  of 
experience  in  their  connection,  we  create  mere 
chimeras,  of  the  possibility  of  which  we  cannot 
discover  any  criterion,  because  we  have  not  taken 
experience  for  our  instructress,  though  we  have 
borrowed  the  conceptions  from  her.  Such  ficti¬ 
tious  conceptions  derive  their  character  of  pos- 


OF  PURE  REASON 


sibility  not,  like  the  categories,  a  priori ,  as  con¬ 
ceptions  on  which  all  experience  depends,  but 
only,  a  posteriori,  as  conceptions  given  by 
means  of  experience  itself,  and  their  possibility 
must  either  be  cognized  a  posteriori  and  em¬ 
pirically,  or  it  cannot  be  cognized  at  all.  A  sub¬ 
stance  which  is  permanently  present  in  space, 
yet  without  filling  it  (like  that  tertium  quid 
between  matter  and  the  thinking  subject  which 
some  have  tried  to  introduce  into  metaphysics), 
or  a  peculiar  fundamental  power  of  the  mind 
of  intuiting  the  future  by  anticipation  (instead 
of  merely  inferring  from  past  and  present 
events),  or,  finally,  a  power  of  the  mind  to  place 
itself  in  community  of  thought  with  other  men, 
however  distant  they  may  be — these  are  con¬ 
ceptions  the  possibility  of  which  has  no  ground 
to  rest  upon.  For  they  are  not  based  upon  ex¬ 
perience  and  its  known  laws;  and,  without  ex¬ 
perience,  they  are  a  merely  arbitrary  conjunc¬ 
tion  of  thoughts,  which,  though  containing  no 
internal  contradiction,  has  no  claim  to  objective 
reality,  neither,  consequently,  to  the  possibility 
of  such  an  object  as  is  thought  in  these  concep¬ 
tions.  As  far  as  concerns  reality,  it  is  self-evident 
that  we  cannot  cogitate  such  a  possibility  in 
concrsto  without  the  aid  of  experience ;  because 
reality  is  concerned  only  with  sensation,  as  the 
matter  of  experience,  and  not  with  the  form  of 
thought,  with  which  we  can  no  doubt  indulge 
in  shaping  fancies. 

But  I  pass  by  everything  which  derives  its 
possibility  from  reality  in  experience,  and  I  pur¬ 
pose  treating  here  merely  of  the  possibility  of 
things  by  means  of  a  priori  conceptions.  I  main¬ 
tain,  then,  that  the  possibility  of  things  is  not 
derived  from  such  conceptions  per  se ,  but  only 
when  considered  as  formal  and  objective  condi¬ 
tions  of  an  experience  in  general. 

It  seems,  indeed,  as  if  the  possibility  of  a 
triangle  could  be  cognized  from  the  conception 
of  it  alone  (which  is  certainly  independent  of 
experience);  for  we  can  certainly  give  to  the 
conception  a  corresponding  object  completely 
a  priori,  that  is  to  say,  we  can  construct  it.  But 
as  a  triangle  is  only  the  form  of  an  object,  it 
must  remain  a  mere  product  of  the  imagination, 
and  the  possibility  of  the  existence  of  an  object 
corresponding  to  it  must  remain  doubtful,  un¬ 
less  we  can  discover  some  other  ground,  unless 
we  know  that  the  figure  can  be  cogitated  under 
the  conditions  upon  which  all  objects  of  experi¬ 
ence  rest.  Now,  the  facts  that  space  is  a  formal 
condition  a  priori  of  external  experience,  that 
the  formative  synthesis,  by  which  we  con¬ 
struct  a  triangle  in  imagination,  is  the  very  same 


87 

as  that  we  employ  in  the  apprehension  of  a  phe¬ 
nomenon  for  the  purpose  of  making  an  empiri¬ 
cal  conception  of  it,  are  what  alone  connect  the 
notion  of  the  possibility  of  such  a  thing  with 
the  conception  of  it.  In  the  same  manner,  the 
possibility  of  continuous  quantities,  indeed  of 
quantities  in  general,  for  the  conceptions  of 
them  are  without  exception  synthetical,  is  never 
evident  from  the  conceptions  in  themselves,  but 
only  when  they  are  considered  as  the  formal 
conditions  of  the  determination  of  objects  in 
experience.  And  where,  indeed,  should  we  look 
for  objects  to  correspond  to  our  conceptions,  if 
not  in  experience,  by  which  alone  objects  are 
presented  to  us?  It  is,  however,  true  that  with¬ 
out  antecedent  experience  we  can  cognize  and 
characterize  the  possibility  of  things,  relatively 
to  the  formal  conditions,  under  which  some¬ 
thing  is  determined  in  experience  as  an  object, 
consequently,  completely  a  priori.  But  still  this 
is  possible  only  in  relation  to  experience  and 
within  its  limits. 

The  postulate  concerning  the  cognition  of  the 
reality  of  things  requires  perception,  conse¬ 
quently  conscious  sensation,  not  indeed  imme¬ 
diately,  that  is,  of  the  object  itself,  whose  ex¬ 
istence  is  to  be  cognized,  but  still  that  the  object 
have  some  connection  with  a  real  perception, 
in  accordance  with  the  analogies  of  experience, 
which  exhibit  all  kinds  of  real  connection  in 
experience. 

From  the  mere  conception  of  a  thing  it  is  im¬ 
possible  to  conclude  its  existence.  For,  let  the 
conception  be  ever  so  complete,  and  containing 
a  statement  of  all  the  determinations  of  the 
thing,  the  existence  of  it  has  nothing  to  do  with 
all  this,  but  only  with  the  question  whether 
such  a  thing  is  given,  so  that  the  perception  of 
it  can  in  every  case  precede  the  conception.  For 
the  fact  that  the  conception  of  it  precedes  the 
perception,  merely  indicates  the  possibility  of 
its  existence;  it  is  perception  which  presents 
matter  to  the  conception,  that  is  the  sole  cri¬ 
terion  of  reality.  Prior  to  the  perception  of  the 
thing,  however,  and  therefore  comparatively  a 
priori,  we  are  able  to  cognize  its  existence,  pro¬ 
vided  it  stands  in  connection  with  some  percep¬ 
tions  according  to  the  principles  of  the  empir¬ 
ical  conjunction  of  these,  that  is,  in  conformity 
with  the  analogies  of  perception.  For,  in  this 
case,  the  existence  of  the  supposed  thing  is  con¬ 
nected  with  our  perception  in  a  possible  expe¬ 
rience,  and  we  are  able,  with  the  guidance  of 
these  analogies,  to  reason  in  the  series  of  pos¬ 
sible  perceptions  from  a  thing  which  we  do 
really  perceive  to  the  thing  we  do  not  perceive. 


88 


THE  CRITIQUE 


Thus,  we  cognize  the  existence  of  a  magnetic 
matter  penetrating  all  bodies  from  the  per¬ 
ception  of  the  attraction  of  the  steel-filings  by 
the  magnet,  although  the  constitution  of  our  or¬ 
gans  renders  an  immediate  perception  of  this 
matter  impossible  for  us.  For,  according  to  the 
laws  of  sensibility  and  the  connected  context  of 
our  perceptions,  we  should  in  an  experience 
come  also  on  an  immediate  empirical  intuition 
of  this  matter,  if  our  senses  were  more  acute — 
but  this  obtuseness  has  no  influence  upon  and 
cannot  alter  the  form  of  possible  experience  in 
general.  Our  knowledge  of  the  existence  of 
things  reaches  as  far  as  our  perceptions,  and 
what  may  be  inferred  from  them  according  to 
empirical  laws,  extend.  If  we  do  not  set  out 
from  experience,  or  do  not  proceed  according 
to  the  laws  of  the  empirical  connection  of 
phenomena,  our  pretensions  to  discover  the  ex¬ 
istence  of  a  thing  which  we  do  not  immediately 
perceive  are  vain.  Idealism,  however,  brings  for¬ 
ward  powerful  objections  to  these  rules  for 
proving  existence  mediately.  This  is,  therefore, 
the  proper  place  for  its  refutation. 

REFUTATION  OF  IDEALISM 

Idealism — I  mean  material  idealism — is  the 
theory  which  declares  the  existence  of  objects 
in  space  without  us  to  be  either  (i)  doubtful 
and  indemonstrable,  or  (2)  false  and  impossi¬ 
ble.  The  first  is  the  problematical  idealism  of 
Descartes,  who  admits  the  undoubted  certainty 
of  only  one  empirical  assertion  ( assertio ),  to 
wit,  “I  am.”  The  second  is  the  dogmatical 
idealism  of  Berkeley,  who  maintains  that  space, 
together  with  all  the  objects  of  which  it  is  the 
inseparable  condition,  is  a  thing  which  is  in  it¬ 
self  impossible,  and  that  consequently  the  ob¬ 
jects  in  space  are  mere  products  of  the  imagi¬ 
nation.  The  dogmatical  theory  of  idealism  is 
unavoidable,  if  we  regard  space  as  a  property  of 
things  in  themselves;  for  in  that  case  it  is,  with 
all  to  which  it  serves  as  condition,  a  nonentity. 
But  the  foundation  for  this  kind  of  idealism  we 
have  already  destroyed  in  the  transcendental 
aesthetic.  Problematical  idealism,  which  makes 
no  such  assertion,  but  only  alleges  our  inca¬ 
pacity  to  prove  the  existence  of  anything  be¬ 
sides  ourselves  by  means  of  immediate  experi¬ 
ence,  is  a  theory  rational  and  evidencing  a 
thorough  and  philosophical  mode  of  thinking, 
for  it  observes  the  rule  not  to  form  a  decisive 
judgement  before  sufficient  proof  be  shown.  The 
desired  proof  must  therefore  demonstrate  that 
we  have  experience  of  external  things,  and  not 
mere  fancies.  For  this  purpose,  we  must  prove, 


that  our  internal  and,  to  Descartes,  indubitable 
experience  is  itself  possible  only  under  the  pre¬ 
vious  assumption  of  external  experience. 

Theorem 

The  simple  but  empirically  determined  con - 

sciousness  0 f  my  own  existence  proves  the  ex¬ 
istence  of  external  objects  in  space. 

PROOF 

I  am  conscious  of  my  own  existence  as  deter¬ 
mined  in  time.  All  determination  in  regard  to 
time  presupposes  the  existence  of  something 
permanent  in  perception.  But  this  permanent 
something  cannot  be  something  in  me,  for  the 
very  reason  that  my  existence  in  time  is  itself 
determined  by  this  permanent  something.  It 
follows  that  the  perception  of  this  permanent 
existence  is  possible  only  through  a  thing  with¬ 
out  me  and  not  through  the  mere  representation 
of  a  thing  without  me.  Consequently,  the  de¬ 
termination  of  my  existence  in  time  is  possible 
only  through  the  existence  of  real  things  ex¬ 
ternal  to  me.  Now,  consciousness  in  time  is  nec¬ 
essarily  connected  with  the  consciousness  of  the 
possibility  of  this  determination  in  time.  Hence 
it  follows  that  consciousness  in  time  is  neces¬ 
sarily  connected  also  with  the  existence  of 
things  without  me,  inasmuch  as  the  existence 
of  these  things  is  the  condition  of  determina¬ 
tion  in  time.  That  is  to  say,  the  consciousness 
of  my  own  existence  is  at  the  same  time  an  im¬ 
mediate  consciousness  of  the  existence  of  other 
things  without  me. 

Remark  /.  The  reader  will  observe,  that  in 
the  foregoing  proof  the  game  which  idealism 
plays  is  retorted  upon  itself,  and  with  more 
justice.  It  assumed  that  the  only  immediate 
experience  is  internal  and  that  from  this  we  can 
only  infer  the  existence  of  external  things.  But, 
as  always  happens,  when  we  reason  from  given 
effects  to  determined  causes,  idealism  has  rea¬ 
soned  with  too  much  haste  and  uncertainty,  for 
it  is  quite  possible  that  the  cause  of  our  repre¬ 
sentations  may  lie  in  ourselves,  and  that  we 
ascribe  it  falsely  to  external  things.  But  our 
proof  shows  that  external  experience  is  prop¬ 
erly  immediate,1  that  only  by  virtue  of  it — not, 

1  The  immediate  consciousness  of  the  existence  of  ex¬ 
ternal  things  is,  in  the  preceding  theorem,  not  presup¬ 
posed,  but  proved,  by  the  possibility  of  this  conscious¬ 
ness  understood  by  us  or  not.  The  question  as  to  the 
possibility  of  it  would  stand  thus:  ‘‘Have  we  an  internal 
sense,  but  no  external  sense,  and  is  our  belief  in  exter¬ 
nal  perception  a  mere  delusion?”  But  it  is  evident  that, 
in  order  merely  to  fancy  to  ourselves  anything  as  exter¬ 
nal,  that  is,  to  present  it  to  the  sense  in  intuition  we 
must  already  possess  an  external  sense,  and  must  there- 


OF  PURE  REASON 


indeed,  the  consciousness  of  our  own  existence, 
but  certainly  the  determination  of  our  existence 
in  time,  that  is,  internal  experience — is  possible. 
It  is  true,  that  the  representation  “I  am,”  which 
is  the  expression  of  the  consciousness  which  can 
accompany  all  my  thoughts,  is  that  which  im¬ 
mediately  includes  the  existence  of  a  subject. 
But  in  this  representation  we  cannot  find  any 
knowledge  of  the  subject,  and  therefore  also  no 
empirical  knowledge,  that  is,  experience.  For 
experience  contains,  in  addition  to  the  thought 
of  something  existing,  intuition,  and  in  this  case 
it  must  be  internal  intuition,  that  is,  time,  in 
relation  to  which  the  subject  must  be  deter¬ 
mined.  But  the  existence  of  external  things  is 
absolutely  requisite  for  this  purpose,  so  that  it 
follows  that  internal  experience  is  itself  possi¬ 
ble  only  mediately  and  through  external  experi¬ 
ence. 

Remark  II.  Now  with  this  view  all  empirical 
use  of  our  faculty  of  cognition  in  the  determi¬ 
nation  of  time  is  in  perfect  accordance.  Its 
truth  is  supported  by  the  fact  that  it  is  possible 
to  perceive  a  determination  of  time  only  by 
means  of  a  change  in  external  relations  (mo¬ 
tion)  to  the  permanent  in  space  (for  example, 
we  become  aware  of  the  sun’s  motion  by  ob¬ 
serving  the  changes  of  his  relation  to  the  ob¬ 
jects  of  this  earth).  But  this  is  not  all.  We  find 
that  we  possess  nothing  permanent  that  can 
correspond  and  be  submitted  to  the  conception 
of  a  substance  as  intuition,  except  matter.  This 
idea  of  permanence  is  not  itself  derived  from 
external  experience,  but  is  an  a  priori  necessary 
condition  of  all  determination  of  time,  conse¬ 
quently  also  of  the  internal  sense  in  reference  to 
our  own  existence,  and  that  through  the  exist¬ 
ence  of  external  things.  In  the  representation 
“I,”  the  consciousness  of  myself  is  not  an  in¬ 
tuition,  but  a  merely  intellectual  representation 
produced  by  the  spontaneous  activity  of  a 
thinking  subject.  It  follows,  that  this  “I”  has 
not  any  predicate  of  intuition,  which,  in  its 
character  of  permanence,  could  serve  as  corre¬ 
late  to  the  determination  of  time  in  the  internal 
sense — in  the  same  way  as  impenetrability  is 
the  correlate  of  matter  as  an  empirical  intuition. 

Remark  III.  From  the  fact  that  the  existence 
of  external  things  is  a  necessary  condition  of 
the  possibility  of  a  determined  consciousness  of 
ourselves,  it  does  not  follow  that  every  intuitive 

by  distinguish  immediately  the  mere  receptivity  of  an 
external  intuition  from  the  spontaneity  which  charac¬ 
terizes  every  act  of  imagination.  For  merely  to  imagine 
also  an  external  sense,  would  annihilate  the  faculty  of 
intuition  itself  which  is  to  be  determined  by  the  imagi¬ 
nation. 


89 

representation  of  external  things  involves  the 
existence  of  these  things,  for  their  representa¬ 
tions  may  very  well  be  the  mere  products  of 
the  imagination  (in  dreams  as  well  as  in  mad¬ 
ness);  though,  indeed,  these  are  themselves  cre¬ 
ated  by  the  reproduction  of  previous  external 
perceptions,  which,  as  has  been  shown,  are  pos¬ 
sible  only  through  the  reality  of  external  ob¬ 
jects.  The  sole  aim  of  our  remarks  has,  how¬ 
ever,  been  to  prove  that  internal  experience  in 
general  is  possible  only  through  external  experi¬ 
ence  in  general.  Whether  this  or  that  supposed 
experience  be  purely  imaginary  must  be  dis¬ 
covered  from  its  particular  determinations  and 
by  comparing  these  with  the  criteria  of  all  real 
experience. 

Finally,  as  regards  the  third  postulate,  it 
applies  to  material  necessity  in  existence,  and 
not  to  merely  formal  and  logical  necessity  in 
the  connection  of  conceptions.  Now  as  we  can¬ 
not  cognize  completely  a  priori  the  existence  of 
any  object  of  sense,  though  we  can  do  so  com¬ 
paratively  a  priori,  that  is,  relatively  to  some 
other  previously  given  existence — a  cognition, 
however,  which  can  only  be  of  such  an  existence 
as  must  be  contained  in  the  complex  of  experi¬ 
ence,  of  which  the  previously  given  perception 
is  a  part — the  necessity  of  existence  can  never 
be  cognized  from  conceptions,  but  always,  on 
the  contrary,  from  its  connection  with  that 
which  is  an  object  of  perception.  But  the  only 
existence  cognized,  under  the  condition  of  other 
given  phenomena,  as  necessary,  is  the  existence 
of  effects  from  given  causes  in  conformity  with 
the  laws  of  causality.  It  is  consequently  not  the 
necessity  of  the  existence  of  things  (as  sub¬ 
stances),  but  the  necessity  of  the  state  of  things 
that  we  cognize,  and  that  not  immediately,  but 
by  means  of  the  existence  of  other  states  given 
in  perception,  according  to  empirical  laws  of 
causality.  Hence  it  follows  that  the  criterion  of 
necessity  is  to  be  found  only  in  the  law  of  pos¬ 
sible  experience — that  everything  which  happens 
is  determined  a  priori  in  the  phenomenon  by 
its  cause.  Thus  we  cognize  only  the  necessity  of 
effects  in  nature,  the  causes  of  which  are  given 
us.  Moreover,  the  criterion  of  necessity  in  ex¬ 
istence  possesses  no  application  beyond  the  field 
of  possible  experience,  and  even  in  this  it  is  not 
valid  of  the  existence  of  things  as  substances, 
because  these  can  never  be  considered  as  em¬ 
pirical  effects,  or  as  something  that  happens  and 
has  a  beginning.  Necessity,  therefore,  regards 
only  the  relations  of  phenomena  according  to 
the  dynamical  law  of  causality,  and  the  possi- 


THE  CRITIQUE 


90 

bility  grounded  thereon,  of  reasoning  from 
some  given  existence  (of  a  cause)  a  priori  to 
another  existence  (of  an  effect).  “Everything 
that  happens  is  hypothetically  necessary,”  is  a 
principle  which  subjects  the  changes  that  take 
place  in  the  world  to  a  law,  that  is,  to  a  rule  of 
necessary  existence,  without  which  nature  her¬ 
self  could  not  possibly  exist.  Hence  the  proposi¬ 
tion,  “Nothing  happens  by  blind  chance  (in 
mundo  non  datur  casus)  ”  is  an  a  priori  law  of 
nature.  The  case  is  the  same  with  the  proposi¬ 
tion,  “Necessity  in  nature  is  not  blind,”  that  is, 
it  is  conditioned,  consequently  intelligible  ne¬ 
cessity  (non  datur  jatum).  Both  laws  subject 
the  play  of  change  to  “a  nature  of  things  (as 
phenomena),”  or,  which  is  the  same  thing,  to 
the  unity  of  the  understanding,  and  through  the 
understanding  alone  can  changes  belong  to  an 
experience,  as  the  synthetical  unity  of  phenom¬ 
ena.  Both  belong  to  the  class  of  dynamical  prin¬ 
ciples.  The  former  is  properly  a  consequence  of 
the  principle  of  causality — one  of  the  analogies 
of  experience.  The  latter  belongs  to  the  princi¬ 
ples  of  modality,  which  to  the  determination  of 
causality  adds  the  conception  of  necessity, 
which  is  itself,  however,  subject  to  a  rule  of  the 
understanding.  The  principle  of  continuity  for¬ 
bids  any  leap  in  the  series  of  phenomena  re¬ 
garded  as  changes  (in  mundo  non  datur  saltus) ; 
and  likewise,  in  the  complex  of  all  empirical  in¬ 
tuitions  in  space,  any  break  or  hiatus  between 
two  phenomena  (non  datur  hiatus) — for  we 
can  so  express  the  principle,  that  experience  can 
admit  nothing  which  proves  the  existence  of  a 
vacuum,  or  which  even  admits  it  as  a  part  of 
an  empirical  synthesis.  For,  as  regards  a  vacu¬ 
um  or  void,  which  we  may  cogitate  as  out  and 
beyond  the  field  of  possible  experience  (the 
world),  such  a  question  cannot  come  before 
the  tribunal  of  mere  understanding,  which  de¬ 
cides  only  upon  questions  that  concern  the  em¬ 
ployment  of  given  phenomena  for  the  construc¬ 
tion  of  empirical  cognition.  It  is  rather  a  prob¬ 
lem  for  ideal  reason,  which  passes  beyond  the 
sphere  of  a  possible  experience  and  aims  at 
forming  a  judgement  of  that  which  surrounds 
and  circumscribes  it,  and  the  proper  place  for 
the  consideration  of  it  is  the  transcendental  dia¬ 
lectic.  These  four  propositions,  “In  mundo  non 
datur  hiatus ,  non  datur  saltus ,  non  datur  casus , 
non  datur  jatum”  as  well  as  all  principles  of 
transcendental  origin,  we  could  very  easily  ex¬ 
hibit  in  their  proper  order,  that  is,  in  conform¬ 
ity  with  the  order  of  the  categories,  and  assign 
to  each  its  proper  place.  But  the  already  prac¬ 
tised  reader  will  do  this  for  himself,  or  discover 


the  clue  to  such  an  arrangement.  But  the  com¬ 
bined  result  of  all  is  simply  this,  to  admit  into 
the  empirical  synthesis  nothing  which  might 
cause  a  break  in  or  be  foreign  to  the  under¬ 
standing  and  the  continuous  connection  of  all 
phenomena,  that  is,  the  unity  of  the  conceptions 
of  the  understanding.  For  in  the  understand¬ 
ing  alone  is  the  unity  of  experience,  in  which 
all  perceptions  must  have  their  assigned  place, 
possible. 

Whether  the  field  of  possibility  be  greater 
than  that  of  reality,  and  whether  the  field  of  the 
latter  be  itself  greater  than  that  of  necessity, 
are  interesting  enough  questions,  and  quite  ca¬ 
pable  of  synthentic  solution,  questions,  however, 
which  come  under  the  jurisdiction  of  reason 
alone.  For  they  are  tantamount  to  asking 
whether  all  things  as  phenomena  do  without 
exception  belong  to  the  complex  and  connected 
whole  of  a  single  experience,  of  which  every 
given  perception  is  a  part  which  therefore  can¬ 
not  be  conjoined  with  any  other  phenomena — 
or,  whether  my  perceptions  can  belong  to  more 
than  one  possible  experience?  The  understand¬ 
ing  gives  to  experience,  according  to  the  sub¬ 
jective  and  formal  conditions,  of  sensibility  as 
well  as  of  apperception,  the  rules  which  alone 
make  this  experience  possible.  Other  forms  of 
intuition  besides  those  of  space  and  time,  other 
forms  of  understanding  besides  the  discursive 
forms  of  thought,  or  of  cognition  by  means  of 
conceptions,  we  can  neither  imagine  nor  make 
intelligible  to  ourselves;  and  even  if  we  could, 
they  would  still  not  belong  to  experience,  which 
is  the  only  mode  of  cognition  by  which  objects 
are  presented  to  us.  Whether  other  perceptions 
besides  those  which  belong  to  the  total  of  our 
possible  experience,  and  consequently  whether 
some  other  sphere  of  matter  exists,  the  under¬ 
standing  has  no  power  to  decide,  its  proper  oc¬ 
cupation  being  with  the  synthesis  of  that  which 
is  given.  Moreover,  the  poverty  of  the  usual  ar¬ 
guments  which  go  to  prove  the  existence  of  a 
vast  sphere  of  possibility,  of  which  all  that  is 
real  (every  object  of  experience)  is  but  a  small 
part,  is  very  remarkable.  “All  real  is  possible”; 
from  this  follows  naturally,  according  to  the 
logical  laws  of  conversion,  the  particular  propo¬ 
sition:  “Some  possible  is  real.”  Now  this  seems 
to  be  equivalent  to:  “Much  is  possible  that 
is  not  real.”  No  doubt  it  does  seem  as  if  we 
ought  to  consider  the  sum  of  the  possible  to  be 
greater  than  that  of  the  real,  from  the  fact  that 
something  must  be  added  to  the  former  to  con¬ 
stitute  the  latter.  But  this  notion  of  adding  to 
the  possible  is  absurd.  For  that  which  is  not  in 


OF  PURE 

the  sum  of  the  possible,  and  consequently  re¬ 
quires  to  be  added  to  it,  is  manifestly  impossi¬ 
ble.  In  addition  to  accordance  with  the  formal 
conditions  of  experience,  the  understanding  re¬ 
quires  a  connection  with  some  perception;  but 
that  which  is  connected  with  this  perception  is 
real,  even  although  it  is  not  immediately  per¬ 
ceived.  But  that  another  series  of  phenomena, 
in  complete  coherence  with  that  which  is  given 
in  perception,  consequently  more  than  one  all- 
embracing  experience  is  possible,  is  an  inference 
which  cannot  be  concluded  from  the  data  given 
us  by  experience,  and  still  less  without  any  data 
at  all.  That  which  is  possible  only  under  con¬ 
ditions  which  are  themselves  merely  possible,  is 
not  possible  in  any  respect.  And  yet  we  can  find 
no  more  certain  ground  on  which  to  base  the 
discussion  of  the  question  whether  the  sphere 
of  possibility  is  wider  than  that  of  experience. 

I  have  merely  mentioned  these  questions,  that 
in  treating  of  the  conception  of  the  understand¬ 
ing,  there  might  be  no  omission  of  anything 
that,  in  the  common  opinion,  belongs  to  them. 
In  reality,  however,  the  notion  of  absolute  pos¬ 
sibility  (possibility  which  is  valid  in  every  re¬ 
spect)  is  not  a  mere  conception  of  the  under¬ 
standing,  which  can  be  employed  empirically, 
but  belongs  to  reason  alone,  which  passes  the 
bounds  of  all  empirical  use  of  the  understand¬ 
ing.  We  have,  therefore,  contented  ourselves 
with  a  merely  critical  remark,  leaving  the  sub¬ 
ject  to  be  explained  in  the  sequel. 

Before  concluding  this  fourth  section,  and  at 
the  same  time  the  system  of  all  principles  of 
the  pure  understanding,  it  seems  proper  to  men¬ 
tion  the  reasons  which  induced  me  to  term  the 
principles  of  modality  postulates.  This  expres¬ 
sion  I  do  not  here  use  in  the  sense  which  some 
more  recent  philosophers,  contrary  to  its  mean¬ 
ing  with  mathematicians,  to  whom  the  word 
properly  belongs,  attach  to  it — that  of  a  propo¬ 
sition,  namely,  immediately  certain,  requiring 
neither  deduction  nor  proof.  For  if,  in  the  case 
of  synthetical  propositions,  however  evident  they 
may  be,  we  accord  to  them  without  deduction, 
and  merely  on  the  strength  of  their  own  pre¬ 
tensions,  unqualified  belief,  all  critique  of  the 
understanding  is  entirely  lost;  and,  as  there  is 
no  want  of  bold  pretensions,  which  the  common 
belief  (though  for  the  philosopher  this  is  no 
credential)  does  not  reject,  the  understanding 
lies  exposed  to  every  delusion  and  conceit,  with¬ 
out  the  power  of  refusing  its  assent  to  those 
assertions,  which,  though  illegitimate,  demand 
acceptance  as  veritable  axioms.  When,  there¬ 
fore,  to  the  conception  of  a  thing  an  a  priori 


REASON  91 

determination  is  synthetically  added,  such  a 
proposition  must  obtain,  if  not  a  proof,  at  least 
a  deduction  of  the  legitimacy  of  its  assertion. 

The  principles  of  modality  are,  however,  not 
objectively  synthetical,  for  the  predicates  of 
possibility,  reality,  and  necessity  do  not  in  the 
least  augment  the  conception  of  that  of  which 
they  are  affirmed,  inasmuch  as  they  contribute 
nothing  to  the  representation  of  the  object.  But 
as  they  are,  nevertheless,  always  synthetical, 
they  are  so  merely  subjectively.  That  is  to  say, 
they  have  a  reflective  power,  and  apply  to  the 
conception  of  a  thing,  of  which,  in  other  re¬ 
spects,  they  affirm  nothing,  the  faculty  of  cog¬ 
nition  in  which  the  conception  originates  and 
has  its  seat.  So  that  if  the  conception  merely 
agree  with  the  formal  conditions  of  experience, 
its  object  is  called  possible;  if  it  is  in  connection 
with  perception,  and  determined  thereby,  the 
object  is  real;  if  it  is  determined  according  to 
conceptions  by  means  of  the  connection  of  per¬ 
ceptions,  the  object  is  called  necessary.  The 
principles  of  modality  therefore  predicate  of  a 
conception  nothing  more  than  the  procedure  of 
the  faculty  of  cognition  which  generated  it. 
Now  a  postulate  in  mathematics  is  a  practical 
proposition  which  contains  nothing  but  the  syn¬ 
thesis  by  which  we  present  an  object  to  our¬ 
selves,  and  produce  the  conception  of  it,  for 
example — “With  a  given  line,  to  describe  a 
circle  upon  a  plane,  from  a  given  point”;  and 
such  a  proposition  does  not  admit  of  proof, 
because  the  procedure,  which  it  requires,  is  ex¬ 
actly  that  by  which  alone  it  is  possible  to  gen¬ 
erate  the  conception  of  such  a  figure.  With  the 
same  right,  accordingly,  can  we  postulate  the 
principles  of  modality,  because  they  do  not  aug¬ 
ment1  the  conception  of  a  thing,  but  merely  in¬ 
dicate  the  manner  in  which  it  is  connected  with 
the  faculty  of  cognition. 

GENERAL  REMARK  ON  THE  SYSTEM 
OF  PRINCIPLES 

It  is  very  remarkable  that  we  cannot  perceive 
the  possibility  of  a  thing  from  the  category 
alone,  but  must  always  have  an  intuition,  by 
which  to  make  evident  the  objective  reality  of 
the  pure  conception  of  the  understanding.  Take, 
for  example,  the  categories  of  relation.  How 
(1)  a  thing  can  exist  only  as  a  subject,  and  not 

1  When  I  think  the  reality  of  a  thing,  I  do  really 
think  more  than  the  possibility,  but  not  in  the  thing; 
for  that  can  never  contain  more  in  reality  than  was  con¬ 
tained  in  its  complete  possibility.  But  while  the  notion 
of  possibility  is  merely  the  notion  of  a  position  of  a 
thing  in  relation  to  the  understanding  (its  empirical 
use),  reality  is  the  conjunction  of  the  thing  with  per¬ 
ception. 


THE  CRITIQUE 


92 

as  a  mere  determination  of  other  things,  that  is, 
can  be  substance;  or  how  (2),  because  some¬ 
thing  exists,  some  other  thing  must  exist,  con¬ 
sequently  how  a  thing  can  be  a  cause;  or  how 
(3),  when  several  things  exist,  from  the  fact 
that  one  of  these  things  exists,  some  conse¬ 
quence  to  the  others  follows,  and  reciprocally, 
and  in  this  way  a  community  of  substances  can 
be  possible — are  questions  whose  solution  can¬ 
not  be  obtained  from  mere  conceptions.  The 
very  same  is  the  case  with  the  other  categories; 
for  example,  how  a  thing  can  be  of  the  same 
sort  with  many  others,  that  is,  can  be  a  quantity, 
and  so  on.  So  long  as  we  have  not  intuition  we 
cannot  know  whether  we  do  really  think  an  ob¬ 
ject  by  the  categories,  and  where  an  object  can 
anywhere  be  found  to  cohere  with  them,  and 
thus  the  truth  is  established,  that  the  categories 
are  not  in  themselves  cognitions ,  but  mere  forms 
of  thought  for  the  construction  of  cognitions 
from  given  intuitions.  For  the  same  reason  is  it 
true  that  from  categories  alone  no  synthetical 
proposition  can  be  made.  For  example:  “In 
every  existence  there  is  substance,”  that  is,  some¬ 
thing  that  can  exist  only  as  a  subject  and  not  as 
mere  predicate;  or,  “Everything  is  a  quantity” 
— to  construct  propositions  such  as  these,  we 
require  something  to  enable  us  to  go  out  beyond 
the  given  conception  and  connect  another  with 
it.  For  the  same  reason  the  attempt  to  prove  a 
synthetical  proposition  by  means  of  mere  con¬ 
ceptions,  for  example:  “Everything  that  exists 
contingently  has  a  cause,”  has  never  succeeded. 
We  could  never  get  further  than  proving  that, 
without  this  relation  to  conceptions,  we  could 
not  conceive  the  existence  of  the  contingent, 
that  is,  could  not  a  priori  through  the  under¬ 
standing  cognize  the  existence  of  such  a  thing; 
but  it  does  not  hence  follow  that  this  is 
also  the  condition  of  the  possibility  of  the  thing 
itself  that  is  said  to  be  contingent.  If,  accord¬ 
ingly,  we  look  back  to  our  proof  of  the  prin¬ 
ciple  of  causality,  we  shall  find  that  we  were 
able  to  prove  it  as  valid  only  of  objects  of  pos¬ 
sible  experience,  and,  indeed,  only  as  itself  the 
principle  of  the  possibility  of  experience,  con¬ 
sequently  of  the  cognition  of  an  object  given 
in  empirical  intuition ,  and  not  from  mere  con¬ 
ceptions.  That,  however,  the  proposition:  “Ev¬ 
erything  that  is  contingent  must  have  a  cause,” 
is  evident  to  every  one  merely  from  concep¬ 
tions,  is  not  to  be  denied.  But  in  this  case  the 
conception  of  the  contingent  is  cogitated  as 
involving  not  the  category  of  modality  (as  that 
the  non-existence  of  which  can  be  conceived ), 
but  that  of  relation  (as  that  which  can  exist 


only  as  the  consequence  of  something  else),  and 
so  it  is  really  an  identical  proposition:  “That 
which  can  exist  only  as  a  consequence,  has 
a  cause.”  In  fact,  when  we  have  to  give  ex¬ 
amples  of  contingent  existence,  we  always  re¬ 
fer  to  changes ,  and  not  merely  to  the  possi¬ 
bility  of  conceiving  the  opposite,1  But  change 
is  an  event,  which,  as  such,  is  possible  only 
through  a  cause,  and  considered  per  se  its  non¬ 
existence  is  therefore  possible,  and  we  become 
cognizant  of  its  contingency  from  the  fact 
that  it  can  exist  only  as  the  effect  of  a  cause. 
Hence,  if  a  thing  is  assumed  to  be  contingent, 
it  is  an  analytical  proposition  to  say,  it  has  a 
cause. 

But  it  is  still  more  remarkable  that,  to  un¬ 
derstand  the  possibility  of  things  according  to 
the  categories  and  thus  to  demonstrate  the  ob¬ 
jective  reality  of  the  latter,  we  require  not 
merely  intuitions,  but  external  intuitions.  If, 
for  example,  we  take  the  pure  conceptions  of 
relation,  we  find  that  (1)  for  the  purpose  of 
presenting  to  the  conception  of  substance  some¬ 
thing  permanent  in  intuition  corresponding 
thereto,  and  thus  of  demonstrating  the  objective 
reality  of  this  conception,  we  require  an  intui¬ 
tion  (of  matter)  in  space,  because  space  alone 
is  permanent  and  determines  things  as  such, 
while  time,  and  with  it  all  that  is  in  the  internal 
sense,  is  in  a  state  of  continual  flow;  (2)  in  or¬ 
der  to  represent  change  as  the  intuition  corre¬ 
sponding  to  the  conception  of  causality,  we  re¬ 
quire  the  representation  of  motion  as  change  in 
space;  in  fact,  it  is  through  it  alone  that 
changes,  the  possibility  of  which  no  pure  under¬ 
standing  can  perceive,  are  capable  of  being  in¬ 
tuited.  Change  is  the  connection  of  determina¬ 
tions  contradictorily  opposed  to  each  other  in 
the  existence  of  one  and  the  same  thing.  Now, 
how  it  is  possible  that  out  of  a  given  state  one 
quite  opposite  to  it  in  the  same  thing  should 
follow,  reason  without  an  example  can  not  only 
not  conceive,  but  cannot  even  make  intelligible 
without  intuition;  and  this  intuition  is  the  mo- 

1  We  can  easily  conceive  the  non-existence  of  matter; 
but  the  ancients  did  not  thence  infer  its  contingency. 
But  even  the  alternation  of  the  existence  and  non-exist¬ 
ence  of  a  given  state  in  a  thing,  in  which  all  change 
consists,  by  no  means  proves  the  contingency  of  that 
state — the  ground  of  proof  being  the  reality  of  its  oppo¬ 
site.  For  example,  a  body  is  in  a  state  of  rest  after  mo¬ 
tion,  but  we  cannot  infer  the  contingency  of  the  motion 
from  the  fact  that  the  former  is  the  opposite  of  the  lat¬ 
ter.  For  this  opposite  is  merely  a  logical  and  not  a  real 
opposite  to  the  other.  If  we  wish  to  demonstrate  the 
contingency  of  the  motion,  what  we  ought  to  prove  is 
that,  instead  of  the  motion  which  took  place  in  the  pre¬ 
ceding  point  of  time,  it  was  possible  for  the  body  to 
have  been  then  in  rest,  not,  that  it  is  afterwards  in  rest; 
for,  in  this  case,  both  opposites  are  perfectly  consistent 
with  each  other. 


OF  PURE  REASON 


tion  of  a  point  in  space;  the  existence  of  which 
in  different  spaces  (as  a  consequence  of  op¬ 
posite  determinations)  alone  makes  the  intui¬ 
tion  of  change  possible.  For,  in  order  to  make 
even  internal  change  cognitable,  we  require  to 
represent  time,  as  the  form  of  the  internal  sense, 
figuratively  by  a  line,  and  the  internal  change 
by  the  drawing  of  that  line  (motion),  and  con¬ 
sequently  are  obliged  to  employ  external  intui¬ 
tion  to  be  able  to  represent  the  successive  exist¬ 
ence  of  ourselves  in  different  states.  The  proper 
ground  of  this  fact  is  that  all  change  to  be  per¬ 
ceived  as  change  presupposes  something  perma¬ 
nent  in  intuition,  while  in  the  internal  sense  no 
permanent  intuition  is  to  be  found.  Lastly,  the 
objective  possibility  of  the  category  of  com¬ 
munity  cannot  be  conceived  by  mere  reason, 
and  consequently  its  objective  reality  cannot 
be  demonstrated  without  an  intuition,  and  that 
external  in  space.  For  how  can  we  conceive  the 
possibility  of  community,  that  is,  when  sev¬ 
eral  substances  exist,  that  some  effect  on  the 
existence  of  the  one  follows  from  the  exist¬ 
ence  of  the  other,  and  reciprocally,  and  there¬ 
fore  that,  because  something  exists  in  the  lat¬ 
ter,  something  else  must  exist  in  the  former, 
which  could  not  be  understood  from  its  own 
existence  alone?  For  this  is  the  very  essence  of 
community — which  is  inconceivable  as  a  prop¬ 
erty  of  things  which  are  perfectly  isolated. 
Hence,  Leibnitz,  in  attributing  to  the  sub¬ 
stances  of  the  world — as  cogitated  by  the  un¬ 
derstanding  alone — a  community,  required  the 
mediating  aid  of  a  divinity;  for,  from  their  ex¬ 
istence,  such  a  property  seemed  to  him  with 
justice  inconceivable.  But  we  can  very  easily 
conceive  the  possibility  of  community  (of  sub¬ 
stances  as  phenomena)  if  we  represent  them  to 
ourselves  as  in  space,  consequently  in  external 
intuition.  For  external  intuition  contains  in  it¬ 
self  a  priori  formal  external  relations,  as  the 
conditions  of  the  possibility  of  the  real  rela¬ 
tions  of  action  and  reaction,  and  therefore  of 
the  possibility  of  community.  With  the  same 
ease  can  it  be  demonstrated,  that  the  possibility 
of  things  as  quantities ,  and  consequently  the 
objective  reality  of  the  category  of  quantity , 
can  be  grounded  only  in  external  intuition,  and 
that  by  its  means  alone  is  the  notion  of  quan¬ 
tity  appropriated  by  the  internal  sense.  But  I 
must  avoid  prolixity,  and  leave  the  task  of  il¬ 
lustrating  this  by  examples  to  the  reader’s  own 
reflection. 

The  above  remarks  are  of  the  greatest  impor¬ 
tance,  not  only  for  the  confirmation  of  our 
previous  confutation  of  idealism,  but  still  more 


93 

when  the  subject  of  self-cognition  by  mere  in¬ 
ternal  consciousness  and  the  determination  of 
our  own  nature  without  the  aid  of  external  em¬ 
pirical  intuitions  is  under  discussion,  for  the  in¬ 
dication  of  the  grounds  of  the  possibility  of 
such  a  cognition. 

The  result  of  the  whole  of  this  part  of  the 
analytic  of  principles  is,  therefore:  “All  prin¬ 
ciples  of  the  pure  understanding  are  nothing 
more  than  a  priori  principles  of  the  possibility 
of  experience,  and  to  experience  alone  do  all  a 
priori  synthetical  propositions  apply  and  re¬ 
late”;  indeed,  their  possibility  itself  rests  en¬ 
tirely  on  this  relation. 

Chapter  III.  Of  the  Ground  of  the  Division 

of  all  Objects  into  Phenomena  and  Nou - 

mena. 

We  have  now  not  only  traversed  the  region  of 
the  pure  understanding  and  carefully  surveyed 
every  part  of  it,  but  we  have  also  measured  it, 
and  assigned  to  everything  therein  its  proper 
place.  But  this  land  is  an  island,  and  enclosed 
by  nature  herself  within  unchangeable  limits. 
It  is  the  land  of  truth  (an  attractive  word), 
surrounded  by  a  wide  and  stormy  ocean,  the 
region  of  illusion,  where  many  a  fog-bank,  many 
an  iceberg,  seems  to  the  mariner,  on  his  voy¬ 
age  of  discovery,  a  new  country,  and,  while  con¬ 
stantly  deluding  him  with  vain  hopes,  engages 
him  in  dangerous  adventures,  from  which  he 
never  can  desist,  and  which  yet  he  never  can 
bring  to  a  termination.  But  before  venturing 
upon  this  sea,  in  order  to  explore  it  in  its  whole 
extent,  and  to  arrive  at  a  certainty  whether  any¬ 
thing  is  to  be  discovered  there,  it  will  not  be 
without  advantage  if  we  cast  our  eyes  upon  the 
chart  of  the  land  that  we  are  about  to  leave, 
and  to  ask  ourselves,  firstly,  whether  we  can¬ 
not  rest  perfectly  contented  with  what  it  con¬ 
tains,  or  whether  we  must  not  of  necessity  be 
contented  with  it,  if  we  can  find  nowhere  else 
a  solid  foundation  to  build  upon;  and,  secondly, 
by  what  title  we  possess  this  land  itself,  and 
how  we  hold  it  secure  against  all  hostile  claims? 
Although,  in  the  course  of  our  analytic,  we  have 
already  given  sufficient  answers  to  these  ques¬ 
tions,  yet  a  summary  recapitulation  of  these 
solutions  may  be  useful  in  strengthening  our 
conviction,  by  uniting  in  one  point  the  momenta 
of  the  arguments. 

We  have  seen  that  everything  which  the  un¬ 
derstanding  draws  from  itself,  without  borrow¬ 
ing  from  experience,  it  nevertheless  possesses 
only  for  the  behoof  and  use  of  experience.  The 
principles  of  the  pure  understanding,  whether 


94  THE  CRITIQUE 


constitutive  a  priori  (as  the  mathematical  prin¬ 
ciples),  or  merely  regulative  (as  the  dynam¬ 
ical),  contain  nothing  but  the  pure  schema,  as 
it  were,  of  possible  experience.  For  experience 
possesses  its  unity  from  the  synthetical  unity 
which  the  understanding,  originally  and  from 
itself,  imparts  to  the  synthesis  of  the  imagina¬ 
tion  in  relation  to  apperception,  and  in  a  priori 
relation  to  and  agreement  with  which  phenom¬ 
ena,  as  data  for  a  possible  cognition,  must  stand. 
But  although  these  rules  of  the  understanding 
are  not  only  a  priori  true,  but  the  very  source 
of  all  truth,  that  is,  of  the  accordance  of  our 
cognition  with  objects,  and  on  this  ground,  that 
they  contain  the  basis  of  the  possibility  of  ex¬ 
perience,  as  the  ensemble  of  all  cognition,  it 
seems  to  us  not  enough  to  propound  what  is 
true — we  desire  also  to  be  told  what  we  want 
to  know.  If,  then,  we  learn  nothing  more  by 
this  critical  examination  than  what  we  should 
have  practised  in  the  merely  empirical  use  of 
the  understanding,  without  any  such  subtle  in¬ 
quiry,  the  presumption  is  that  the  advantage 
we  reap  from  it  is  not  worth  the  labour  be¬ 
stowed  upon  it.  It  may  certainly  be  answered 
that  no  rash  curiosity  is  more  prejudicial  to  the 
enlargement  of  our  knowledge  than  that  which 
must  know  beforehand  the  utility  of  this  or  that 
piece  of  information  which  we  seek,  before  we 
have  entered  on  the  needful  investigations,  and 
before  one  could  form  the  least  conception  of  its 
utility,  even  though  it  were  placed  before  our 
eyes.  But  there  is  one  advantage  in  such  tran¬ 
scendental  inquiries  which  can  be  made  compre¬ 
hensible  to  the  dullest  and  most  reluctant  learner 
— this,  namely,  that  the  understanding  which  is 
occupied  merely  with  empirical  exercise,  and 
does  not  reflect  on  the  sources  of  its  own  cog¬ 
nition,  may  exercise  its  functions  very  well  and 
very  successfully,  but  is  quite  unable  to  do  one 
thing,  and  that  of  very  great  importance,  to 
determine,  namely,  the  bounds  that  limit  its  em¬ 
ployment,  and  to  know  what  lies  within  or  with¬ 
out  its  own  sphere.  This  purpose  can  be  ob¬ 
tained  only  by  such  profound  investigations 
as  we  have  instituted.  But  if  it  cannot  dis¬ 
tinguish  whether  certain  questions  lie  within 
its  horizon  or  not,  it  can  never  be  sure  either 
as  to  its  claims  or  possessions,  but  must  lay  its 
account  with  many  humiliating  corrections, 
when  it  transgresses,  as  it  unavoidably  will,  the 
limits  of  its  own  territory,  and  loses  itself  in 
fanciful  opinions  and  blinding  illusions. 

That  the  understanding,  therefore,  cannot 
make  of  its  a  priori  principles,  or  even  of  its 
conceptions,  other  than  an  empirical  use,  is  a 


proposition  which  leads  to  the  most  important 
results.  A  transcendental  use  is  made  of  a  con¬ 
ception  in  a  fundamental  proposition  or  prin¬ 
ciple,  when  it  is  referred  to  things  in  general 
and  considered  as  things  in  themselves ;  an  em¬ 
pirical  use,  when  it  is  referred  merely  to  phe¬ 
nomena,  that  is,  to  objects  of  a  possible  ex¬ 
perience.  That  the  latter  use  of  a  conception  is 
the  only  admissible  one  is  evident  from  the  rea-  f 
sons  following.  For  every  conception  are  requi¬ 
site,  firstly,  the  logical  form  of  a  conception 
(of  thought)  in  general;  and,  secondly,  the 
possibility  of  presenting  to  this  an  object  to 
which  it  may  apply.  Failing  this  latter,  it  has 
no  sense,  and  is  utterly  void  of  content,  al¬ 
though  it  may  contain  the  logical  function  for 
constructing  a  conception  from  certain  data. 
Now,  object  cannot  be  given  to  a  conception 
otherwise  than  by  intuition,  and,  even  if  a  pure 
intuition  antecedent  to  the  object  is  a  priori 
possible,  this  pure  intuition  can  itself  obtain 
objective  validity  only  from  empirical  intuition, 
of  which  it  is  itself  but  the  form.  All  concep¬ 
tions,  therefore,  and  with  them  all  principles, 
however  high  the  degree  of  their  a  priori  pos¬ 
sibility,  relate  to  empirical  intuitions,  that  is, 
to  data  towards  a  possible  experience.  Without 
this  they  possess  no  objective  validity,  but  are 
mere  play  of  imagination  or  of  understanding 
with  images  or  notions.  Let  us  take,  for  ex¬ 
ample,  the  conceptions  of  mathematics,  and 
first  in  its  pure  intuitions.  “Space  has  three  di¬ 
mensions” — “Between  two  points  there  can  be 
only  one  straight  line,”  etc.  Although  all  these 
principles,  and  the  representation  of  the  object 
with  which  this  science  occupies  itself,  are  gen¬ 
erated  in  the  mind  entirely  a  priori,  they  would 
nevertheless  have  no  significance  if  we  were 
not  always  able  to  exhibit  their  significance  in 
and  by  means  of  phenomena  (empirical  ob¬ 
jects).  Hence  it  is  requisite  that  an  abstract 
conception  be  made  sensuous,  that  is,  that  an 
object  corresponding  to  it  in  intuition  be  forth¬ 
coming,  otherwise  the  conception  remains,  as 
we  say,  without  sense,  that  is,  without  mean¬ 
ing.  Mathematics  fulfils  this  requirement  by 
the  construction  of  the  figure,  which  is  a  phe¬ 
nomenon  evident  to  the  senses.  The  same  sci¬ 
ence  finds  support  and  significance  in  number; 
this  in  its  turn  finds  it  in  the  fingers,  or  in 
counters,  or  in  lines  and  points.  The  conception 
itself  is  always  produced  a  priori,  together  with 
the  synthetical  principles  or  formulas  from  such 
conceptions;  but  the  proper  employment  of 
them,  and  their  application  to  objects,  can 
exist  nowhere  but  in  experience,  the  possibility 


OF  PURE  REASON 


of  which,  as  regards  its  form,  they  contain  a 
priori. 

That  this  is  also  the  case  with  all  of  the  cate¬ 
gories  and  the  principles  based  upon  them  is 
evident  from  the  fact  that  we  cannot  render 
intelligible  the  possibility  of  an  object  corre¬ 
sponding  to  them  without  having  recourse  to 
the  conditions  of  sensibility,  consequently,  to 
the  form  of  phenomena,  to  which,  as  their  only 
proper  objects,  their  use  must  therefore  be 
confined,  inasmuch  as,  if  this  condition  is  re¬ 
moved,  all  significance,  that  is,  all  relation  to 
an  object,  disappears,  and  no  example  can  be 
found  to  make  it  comprehensible  what  sort 
of  things  we  ought  to  think  under  such  con¬ 
ceptions. 

The  conception  of  quantity  cannot  be  ex¬ 
plained  except  by  saying  that  it  is  the  deter¬ 
mination  of  a  thing  whereby  it  can  be  cogitated 
how  many  times  one  is  placed  in  it.  But  this 
“how  many  times”  is  based  upon  successive 
repetition,  consequently  upon  time  and  the  syn¬ 
thesis  of  the  homogeneous  therein.  Reality,  in 
contradistinction  to  negation,  can  be  explained 
only  by  cogitating  a  time  which  is  either  filled 
therewith  or  is  void.  If  I  leave  out  the  notion 
of  permanence  (which  is  existence  in  all  time), 
there  remains  in  the  conception  of  substance 
nothing  but  the  logical  notion  of  subject,  a  no¬ 
tion  of  which  I  endeavour  to  realize  by  repre¬ 
senting  to  myself  something  that  can  exist  only 
as  a  subject.  But  not  only  am  I  perfectly  igno¬ 
rant  of  any  conditions  under  which  this  logical 
prerogative  can  belong  to  a  thing,  I  can  make 
nothing  out  of  the  notion,  and  draw  no  inference 
from  it,  because  no  object  to  which  to  apply  the 
conception  is  determined,  and  we  consequently 
do  not  know  whether  it  has  any  meaning  at  all. 
In  like  manner,  if  I  leave  out  the  notion  of  time, 
in  which  something  follows  upon  some  other 
thing  in  conformity  with  a  rule,  I  can  find  noth¬ 
ing  in  the  pure  category,  except  that  there  is  a 
something  of  such  a  sort  that  from  it  a  conclu¬ 
sion  may  be  drawn  as  to  the  existence  of  some 
other  thing.  But  in  this  case  it  would  not  only  be 
impossible  to  distinguish  between  a  cause  and  an 
effect,  but,  as  this  power  to  draw  conclusions 
requires  conditions  of  which  I  am  quite  igno¬ 
rant,  the  conception  is  not  determined  as  to  the 
mode  in  which  it  ought  to  apply  to  an  object. 
The  so-called  principle:  “Everything  that  is  con¬ 
tingent  has  a  cause,”  comes  with  a  gravity  and 
self-assumed  authority  that  seems  to  require  no 
support  from  without.  But,  I  ask,  what  is  meant 
by  contingent?  The  answer  is  that  the  non¬ 
existence  of  which  is  possible.  But  I  should  like 


95 

very  well  to  know  by  what  means  this  possibil¬ 
ity  of  non-existence  is  to  be  cognized,  if  we 
do  not  represent  to  ourselves  a  succession  in 
the  series  of  phenomena,  and  in  this  succession 
an  existence  which  follows  a  non-existence,  or 
conversely,  consequently,  change.  For  to  say, 
that  the  non-existence  of  a  thing  is  not  self¬ 
contradictory  is  a  lame  appeal  to  a  logical  con¬ 
dition,  which  is  no  doubt  a  necessary  condition 
of  the  existence  of  the  conception,  but  is  far 
from  being  sufficient  for  the  real  objective  pos¬ 
sibility  of  non-existence.  I  can  annihilate  in 
thought  every  existing  substance  without  self- 
contradiction,  but  I  cannot  infer  from  this  their 
objective  contingency  in  existence,  that  is  to 
say,  the  possibility  of  their  non-existence  in  it¬ 
self.  As  regards  the  category  of  community,  it 
may  easily  be  inferred  that,  as  the  pure  cate¬ 
gories  of  substance  and  causality  are  incapable 
of  a  definition  and  explanation  sufficient  to  de¬ 
termine  their  object  without  the  aid  of  in¬ 
tuition,  the  category  of  reciprocal  causality  in 
the  relation  of  substances  to  each  other  (com- 
mercium )  is  just  as  little  susceptible  thereof. 
Possibility,  existence,  and  necessity  nobody  has 
ever  yet  been  able  to  explain  without  being 
guilty  of  manifest  tautology,  when  the  defini¬ 
tion  has  been  drawn  entirely  from  the  pure 
understanding.  For  the  substitution  of  the  logi¬ 
cal  possibility  of  the  conception — the  condi¬ 
tion  of  which  is  that  it  be  not  self-contradictory, 
for  the  transcendental  possibility  of  things — 
the  condition  of  which  is  that  there  be  an  ob¬ 
ject  corresponding  to  the  conception,  is  a  trick 
which  can  only  deceive  the  inexperienced.1 

It  follows  incontestably,  that  the  pure  con¬ 
ceptions  of  the  understanding  are  incapable  of 
transcendental ,  and  must  always  be  of  empirical 
use  alone,  and  that  the  principles  of  the  pure 
understanding  relate  only  to  the  general  condi¬ 
tions  of  a  possible  experience,  to  objects  of  the 
senses,  and  never  to  things  in  general,  apart 
from  the  mode  in  which  we  intuite  them. 

Transcendental  analytic  has  accordingly  this 
important  result,  to  wit,  that  the  understanding 
is  competent  to  effect  nothing  a  priori ,  except 
the  anticipation  of  the  form  of  a  possible  ex¬ 
perience  in  general,  and  that,  as  that  which  is 
not  phenomenon  cannot  be  an  object  of  ex- 

1  In  one  word,  to  none  of  these  conceptions  belongs  a 
corresponding  object,  and  consequently  their  real  possi¬ 
bility  cannot  be  demonstrated,  if  we  take  away  sensu¬ 
ous  intuition — the  only  intuition  which  we  possess — 
and  there  then  remains  nothing  but  the  logical  possibil¬ 
ity,  that  is,  the  fact  that  the  conception  or  thought  is 
possible — which,  however,  is  not  the  question;  what  we 
want  to  know  being,  whether  it  relates  to  an  object  and 
thus  possesses  any  meaning. 


THE  CRITIQUE 


96 

perience,  it  can  never  overstep  the  limits  of 
sensibility,  within  which  alone  objects  are  pre¬ 
sented  to  us.  Its  principles  are  merely  prin¬ 
ciples  of  the  exposition  of  phenomena,  and  the 
proud  name  of  an  ontology ,  which  professes 
to  present  synthetical  cognitions  a  priori  of 
things  in  general  in  a  systematic  doctrine,  must 
give  place  to  the  modest  title  of  analytic  of  the 
pure  understanding. 

Thought  is  the  act  of  referring  a  given  in¬ 
tuition  to  an  object.  If  the  mode  of  this  intui¬ 
tion  is  unknown  to  us,  the  object  is  merely  tran¬ 
scendental,  and  the  conception  of  the  under¬ 
standing  is  employed  only  transcendentally,  that 
is,  to  produce  unity  in  the  thought  of  a  manifold 
in  general.  Now  a  pure  category,  in  which  all 
conditions  of  sensuous  intuition — as  the  only  in¬ 
tuition  we  possess — are  abstracted,  does  not  de¬ 
termine  an  object,  but  merely  expresses  the 
thought  of  an  object  in  general,  according  to  dif¬ 
ferent  modes.  Now,  to  employ  a  conception,  the 
function  of  judgement  is  required,  by  which  an 
object  is  subsumed  under  the  conception,  con¬ 
sequently  the  at  least  formal  condition,  under 
which  something  can  be  given  in  intuition.  Fail¬ 
ing  this  condition  of  judgement  (schema),  sub¬ 
sumption  is  impossible;  for  there  is  in  such  a 
case  nothing  given,  which  may  be  subsumed  un¬ 
der  the  conception.  The  merely  transcendental 
use  of  the  categories  is  therefore,  in  fact,  no  use 
at  all  and  has  no  determined,  or  even,  as  regards 
its  form,  determinable  object.  Hence  it  follows 
that  the  pure  category  is  incompetent  to  estab¬ 
lish  a  synthetical  a  priori  principle,  and  that  the 
principles  of  the  pure  understanding  are  only  of 
empirical  and  never  of  transcendental  use,  and 
that  beyond  the  sphere  of  possible  experience 
no  synthetical  a  priori  principles  are  possible. 

It  may  be  advisable,  therefore,  to  express 
ourselves  thus.  The  pure  categories,  apart  from 
the  formal  conditions  of  sensibility,  have  a 
merely  transcendental  meaning ,  but  are  never¬ 
theless  not  of  transcendental  use ,  because  this 
is  in  itself  impossible,  inasmuch  as  all  the  con¬ 
ditions  of  any  employment  or  use  of  them  (in 
judgements)  are  absent,  to  wit,  the  formal  con¬ 
ditions  of  the  subsumption  of  an  object  under 
these  conceptions.  As,  therefore,  in  the  charac¬ 
ter  of  pure  categories,  they  must  be  employed 
empirically,  and  cannot  be  employed  tran¬ 
scendentally,  they  are  of  no  use  at  all.  when 
separated  from  sensibility,  that  is,  they  cannot 
be  applied  to  an  object.  They  are  merely  the 
pure  form  of  the  employment  of  the  under¬ 
standing  in  respect  of  objects  in  general  and 
of  thought,  without  its  being  at  the  same  time 


possible  to  think  or  to  determine  any  object  by 
their  means. 

But  there  lurks  at  the  foundation  of  this  sub¬ 
ject  an  illusion  which  it  is  very  difficult  to  avoid. 
The  categories  are  not  based,  as  regards  their 
origin,  upon  sensibility,  like  the  forms  of  intui¬ 
tion,  space,  and  time;  they  seem,  therefore,  to 
be  capable  of  an  application  beyond  the  sphere 
of  sensuous  objects.  But  this  is  not  the  case. 
They  are  nothing  but  mere  forms  of  thought, 
which  contain  only  the  logical  faculty  of  unit¬ 
ing  a  priori  in  consciousness  the  manifold  given 
in  intuition.  Apart,  then,  from  the  only  intuition 
possible  for  us,  they  have  still  less  meaning  than 
the  pure  sensuous  forms,  space  and  time,  for 
through  them  an  object  is  at  least  given,  while  a 
mode  of  connection  of  the  manifold,  when  the 
intuition  which  alone  gives  the  manifold  is 
wanting,  has  no  meaning  at  all.  At  the  same 
time,  when  we  designate  certain  objects  as  phe¬ 
nomena  or  sensuous  existences,  thus  distinguish¬ 
ing  our  mode  of  intuiting  them  from  their  own 
nature  as  things  in  themselves,  it  is  evident  that 
by  this  very  distinction  we  as  it  were  place  the 
latter,  considered  in  this  their  own  nature,  al¬ 
though  we  do  not  so  intuite  them,  in  opposition 
to  the  former,  or,  on  the  other  hand,  we  do  so 
place  other  possible  things,  which  are  not  ob¬ 
jects  of  our  senses,  but  are  cogitated  by  the 
understanding  alone,  and  call  them  intelligible 
existences  (noumena).  Now  the  question  arises 
whether  the  pure  conceptions  of  our  under¬ 
standing  do  possess  significance  in  respect  of 
these  latter,  and  may  possibly  be  a  mode  of 
cognizing  them. 

But  we  are  met  at  the  very  commencement 
with  an  ambiguity,  which  may  easily  occasion 
great  misapprehension.  The  understanding,  when 
it  terms  an  object  in  a  certain  relation  phe¬ 
nomenon,  at  the  same  time  forms  out  of  this 
relation  a  representation  or  notion  of  an  object 
in  itself ,  and  hence  believes  that  it  can  form 
also  conceptions  of  such  objects.  Now  as  the 
understanding  possesses  no  other  fundamental 
conceptions  besides  the  categories,  it  takes  for 
granted  that  an  object  considered  as  a  thing  in 
itself  must  be  capable  of  being  thought  by 
means  of  these  pure  conceptions,  and  is  thereby 
led  to  hold  the  perfectly  undetermined  con¬ 
ception  of  an  intelligible  existence,  a  something 
out  of  the  sphere  of  our  sensibility,  for  a  de¬ 
terminate  conception  of  an  existence  which  we 
can  cognize  in  some  way  or  other  by  means  of 
the  understanding. 

If,  by  the  term  noumenon,  we  understand  a 
thing  so  far  as  it  is  not  an  object  of  our  sensu- 


OF  PURE  REASON 


ous  intuition ,  thus  making  abstraction  of  our 
mode  of  intuiting  it,  this  is  a  noumenon  in  the 
negative  sense  of  the  word.  But  if  we  understand 
by  it  an  object  oj  a  non-sensuous  intuition ,  we 
in  this  case  assume  a  peculiar  mode  of  intuition, 
an  intellectual  intuition,  to  wit,  which  does  not, 
however,  belong  to  us,  of  the  very  possibility  of 
which  we  have  no  notion — and  this  is  a  noume¬ 
non  in  the  positive  sense. 

The  doctrine  of  sensibility  is  also  the  doc¬ 
trine  of  noumena  in  the  negative  sense,  that  is, 
of  things  which  the  understanding  is  obliged  to 
cogitate  apart  from  any  relation  to  our  mode  of 
intuition,  consequently  not  as  mere  phenomena, 
but  as  things  in  themselves.  But  the  understand¬ 
ing  at  the  same  time  comprehends  that  it  can¬ 
not  employ  its  categories  for  the  consideration 
of  things  in  themselves,  because  these  possess 
significance  only  in  relation  to  the  unity  of  in¬ 
tuitions  in  space  and  time,  and  that  they  are 
competent  to  determine  this  unity  by  means  of 
general  a  priori  connecting  conceptions  only  on 
account  of  the  pure  ideality  of  space  and  time. 
Where  this  unity  of  time  is  not  to  be  met  with, 
as  is  the  case  with  noumena,  the  whole  use,  in¬ 
deed  the  whole  meaning  of  the  categories  is  en¬ 
tirely  lost,  for  even  the  possibility  of  things  to 
correspond  to  the  categories  is  in  this  case  in¬ 
comprehensible.  On  this  point,  I  need  only  refer 
the  reader  to  what  I  have  said  at  the  commence¬ 
ment  of  the  General  Remark  appended  to  the 
foregoing  chapter.  Now,  the  possibility  of  a 
thing  can  never  be  proved  from  the  fact  that 
the  conception  of  it  is  not  self-contradictory, 
but  only  by  means  of  an  intuition  corresponding 
to  the  conception.  If,  therefore,  we  wish  to  ap¬ 
ply  the  categories  to  objects  which  cannot  be 
regarded  as  phenomena,  we  must  have  an  in¬ 
tuition  different  from  the  sensuous,  and  in  this 
case  the  objects  would  be  a  noumena  in  the 
positive  sense  of  the  word.  Now,  as  such  an  in¬ 
tuition,  that  is,  an  intellectual  intuition,  is  no 
part  of  our  faculty  of  cognition,  it  is  absolutely 
impossible  for  the  categories  to  possess  any  ap¬ 
plication  beyond  the  limits  of  experience.  It  may 
be  true  that  there  are  intelligible  existences  to 
which  our  faculty  of  sensuous  intuition  has  no 
relation,  and  cannot  be  applied,  but  our  concep¬ 
tions  of  the  understanding,  as  mere  forms  of 
thought  for  our  sensuous  intuition,  do  not  ex¬ 
tend  to  these.  What,  therefore,  we  call  noume¬ 
non  must  be  understood  by  us  as  such  in  a 
negative  sense. 

If  I  take  away  from  an  empirial  intuition 
all  thought  (by  means  of  the  categories),  there 
remains  no  cognition  of  any  object;  for  by 


97 

means  of  mere  intuition  nothing  is  cogitated, 
and,  from  the  existence  of  such  or  such  an  af¬ 
fection  of  sensibility  in  me,  it  does  not  follow 
that  this  affection  or  representation  has  any  re¬ 
lation  to  an  object  without  me.  But  if  I  take 
away  all  intuition,  there  still  remains  the  form 
of  thought,  that  is,  the  mode  of  determining  an 
object  for  the  manifold  of  a  possible  intuition. 
Thus  the  categories  do  in  some  measure  really 
extend  further  than  sensuous  intuition,  inas¬ 
much  as  they  think  objects  in  general,  without 
regard  to  the  mode  (of  sensibility)  in  which 
these  objects  are  given.  But  they  do  not  for  this 
reason  apply  to  and  determine  a  wider  sphere 
of  objects,  because  we  cannot  assume  that  such 
can  be  given,  without  presupposing  the  possibil¬ 
ity  of  another  than  the  sensuous  mode  of  in¬ 
tuition,  a  supposition  we  are  not  justified  in 
making. 

I  call  a  conception  problematical  which  con¬ 
tains  in  itself  no  contradiction,  and  which  is 
connected  with  other  cognitions  as  a  limitation 
of  given  conceptions,  but  whose  objective  real¬ 
ity  cannot  be  cognized  in  any  manner.  The  con¬ 
ception  of  a  noumenon ,  that  is,  of  a  thing  which 
must  be  cogitated  not  as  an  object  of  sense,  but 
as  a  thing  in  itself  (solely  through  the  pure  un¬ 
derstanding),  is  not  self-contradictory,  for  we 
are  not  entitled  to  maintain  that  sensibility  is  the 
only  possible  mode  of  intuition.  Nay,  further, 
this  conception  is  necessary  to  restrain  sensu¬ 
ous  intuition  within  the  bounds  of  phenomena, 
and  thus  to  limit  the  objective  validity  of  sen¬ 
suous  cognition;  for  things  in  themselves, which 
lie  beyond  its  province,  are  called  noumena  for 
the  very  purpose  of  indicating  that  this  cogni¬ 
tion  does  not  extend  its  application  to  all  that 
the  understanding  thinks.  But,  after  all,  the  pos¬ 
sibility  of  such  noumena  is  quite  incomprehen¬ 
sible,  and  beyond  the  sphere  of  phenomena,  all  is 
for  us  a  mere  void ;  that  is  to  say,  we  possess  an 
understanding  whose  province  does  problemat¬ 
ically  extend  beyond  this  sphere,  but  we  do  not 
possess  an  intuition,  indeed,  not  even  the  con¬ 
ception  of  a  possible  intuition,  by  means  of 
which  objects  beyond  the  region  of  sensibility 
could  be  given  us,  and  in  reference  to  which  the 
understanding  might  be  employed  assertorically . 
The  conception  of  a  noumenon  is  therefore  mere¬ 
ly  a  limitative  conception  and  therefore  only  of 
negative  use.  But  it  is  not  an  arbitrary  or  fic¬ 
titious  notion,  but  is  connected  with  the  limita¬ 
tion  of  sensibility,  without,  however,  being  ca¬ 
pable  of  presenting  us  with  any  positive  datum 
beyond  this  sphere. 

The  division  of  objects  into  phenomena  and 


. 


THE  CRITIQUE 


98 

noumena,  and  of  the  world  into  a  mundus  sen- 
sibilis  and  intelligibilis  is  therefore  quite  inad¬ 
missible  in  a  positive  sense,  although  concep¬ 
tions  do  certainly  admit  of  such  a  division;  for 
the  class  of  noumena  have  no  determinate  ob¬ 
ject  corresponding  to  them,  and  cannot  there¬ 
fore  possess  objective  validity.  If  we  abandon 
the  senses,  how  can  it  be  made  conceivable  that 
the  categories  (which  are  the  only  conceptions 
that  could  serve  as  conceptions  for  noumena) 
have  any  sense  or  meaning  at  all,  inasmuch  as 
something  more  than  the  mere  unity  of  thought, 
namely,  a  possible  intuition,  is  requisite  for 
their  application  to  an  object?  The  conception 
of  a  noumenon,  considered  as  merely  problem¬ 
atical,  is,  however,  not  only  admissible,  but, 
as  a  limitative  conception  of  sensibility,  abso¬ 
lutely  necessary.  But,  in  this  case,  a  noumenon 
is  not  a  particular  intelligible  object  for  our  un¬ 
derstanding;  on  the  contrary,  the  kind  of  under¬ 
standing  to  which  it  could  belong  is  itself  a 
problem,  for  we  cannot  form  the  most  distant 
conception  of  the  possibility  of  an  understand¬ 
ing  which  should  cognize  an  object,  not  dis¬ 
cursively  by  means  of  categories,  but  intuitively 
in  a  non-sensuous  intuition.  Our  understanding 
attains  in  this  way  a  sort  of  negative  extension. 
That  is  to  say,  it  is  not  limited  by,  but  rather 
limits,  sensibility,  by  giving  the  name  of  nou¬ 
mena  to  things,  not  considered  as  phenomena, 
but  as  things  in  themselves.  But  it  at  the  same 
time  prescribes  limits  to  itself,  for  it  confesses 
itself  unable  to  cognize  these  by  means  of  the 
categories,  and  hence  is  compelled  to  cogitate 
them  merely  as  an  unknown  something. 

I  find,  however,  in  the  writings  of  modern 
authors,  an  entirely  different  use  of  the  expres¬ 
sions,  mundus  sensibilis  and  intelligibilis,  which 
quite  departs  from  the  meaning  of  the  ancients 
— an  acceptation  in  which,  indeed,  there  is  to 
be  found  no  difficulty,  but  which  at  the  same 
time  depends  on  mere  verbal  quibbling.  Accord¬ 
ing  to  this  meaning,  some  have  chosen  to  call 
the  complex  of  phenomena,  in  so  far  as  it  is 
intuited,  mundus  sensibilis,  but  in  so  far  as  the 
connection  thereof  is  cogitated  according  to 
general  laws  of  thought,  mundus  intelligibilis. 
Astronomy,  in  so  far  as  we  mean  by  the  word 
the  mere  observation  of  the  starry  heaven,  may 
represent  the  former;  a  system  of  astronomy, 
such  as  the  Copernican  or  Newtonian,  the  lat¬ 
ter.  But  such  twisting  of  words  is  a  mere  so¬ 
phistical  subterfuge,  to  avoid  a  difficult  ques¬ 
tion,  by  modifying  its  meaning  to  suit  our  own 
convenience.  To  be  sure,  understanding  and  rea¬ 
son  are  employed  in  the  cognition  of  phenom¬ 


ena;  but  the  question  is,  whether  these  can  be 
applied  when  the  object  is  not  a  phenomenon — 
and  in  this  sense  we  regard  it  if  it  is  cogitated  as 
given  to  the  understanding  alone,  and  not  to  > 
the  senses.  The  question  therefore  is  whether, 
over  and  above  the  empirical  use  of  the  under-  * 
standing,  a  transcendental  use  is  possible,  which 
applies  to  the  noumenon  as  an  object.  This  j 
question  we  have  answered  in  the  negative. 

When  therefore  we  say,  the  senses  represent 
objects  as  they  appear,  the  understanding  as 
they  are ,  the  latter  statement  must  not  be 
understood  in  a  transcendental,  but  only  in  an 
empirical  signification,  that  is,  as  they  must  be 
represented  in  the  complete  connection  of 
phenomena,  and  not  according  to  what  they  may 
be,  apart  from  their  relation  to  possible  experi¬ 
ence,  consequently  not  as  objects  of  the  pure 
understanding.  For  this  must  ever  remain  un¬ 
known  to  us.  Nay,  it  is  also  quite  unknown  to 
us  whether  any  such  transcendental  or  extraor¬ 
dinary  cognition  is  possible  under  any  circum¬ 
stances,  at  least,  whether  it  is  possible  by  means 
of  our  categories.  Understanding  and  sensibility , 
with  us,  can  determine  objects  only  in  conjunc¬ 
tion.  If  we  separate  them,  we  have  intuitions 
without  conceptions,  or  conceptions  without  in¬ 
tuitions;  in  both  cases,  representations,  which 
we  cannot  apply  to  any  determinate  object. 

If,  after  all  our  inquiries  and  explanations, 
any  one  still  hesitates  to  abandon  the  mere  tran¬ 
scendental  use  of  the  categories,  let  him  attempt 
to  construct  with  them  a  synthetical  proposi¬ 
tion.  It  would,  of  course,  be  unnecessary  for 
this  purpose  to  construct  an  analytical  proposi¬ 
tion,  for  that  does  not  extend  the  sphere  of  the 
understanding,  but,  being  concerned  only  about 
what  is  cogitated  in  the  conception  itself,  it 
leaves  it  quite  undecided  whether  the  concep¬ 
tion  has  any  relation  to  objects,  or  merely  in¬ 
dicates  the  unity  of  thought — complete  abstrac¬ 
tion  being  made  of  the  modi  in  which  an  object 
may  be  given:  in  such  a  proposition,  it  is  suffi¬ 
cient  for  the  understanding  to  know  what  lies 
in  the  conception — to  what  it  applies  is  to  it  in¬ 
different.  The  attempt  must  therefore  be  made 
with  a  synthetical  and  so-called  transcendental 
principle,  for  example:  “Everything  that  exists, 
exists  as  substance,”  or,  “Everything  that  is 
contingent  exists  as  an  effect  of  some  other 
thing,  viz.,  of  its  cause.”  Now  I  ask,  whence  can 
the  understanding  draw  these  synthetical  prop¬ 
ositions,  when  the  conceptions  contained  therein 
do  not  relate  to  possible  experience  but  to 
things  in  themselves  (noumena)?  Where  is  to 
be  found  the  third  term,  which  is  always  requi- 


OF  PURE  REASON 


site  in  a  synthetical  proposition,  which  may 
connect  in  the  same  proposition  conceptions 
which  have  no  logical  (analytical)  connection 
with  each  other?  The  proposition  never  will  be 
demonstrated,  nay,  more,  the  possibility  of  any 
such  pure  assertion  never  can  be  shown,  with¬ 
out  making  reference  to  the  empirical  use  of 
the  understanding,  and  thus,  ipso  facto ,  com¬ 
pletely  renouncing  pure  and  non-sensuous  judge¬ 
ment.  Thus  the  conception  of  pure  and  merely 
intelligible  objects  is  completely  void  of  all 
principles  of  its  application,  because  we  cannot 
imagine  any  mode  in  which  they  might  be 
given,  and  the  problematical  thought  which 
leaves  a  place  open  for  them  serves  only,  like 
a  void  space,  to  limit  the  use  of  empirical  prin¬ 
ciples,  without  containing  at  the  same  time  any 
other  object  of  cognition  beyond  their  sphere. 

APPENDIX 

Of  the  Equivocal  Nature  or  Amphiboly  of  the 
Conceptions  of  Reflection  from  the  Confu¬ 
sion  of  the  Transcendental  with  the  Empiri¬ 
cal  use  of  the  Understanding. 

Reflection  ( reflexio )  is  not  occupied  about 
objects  themselves,  for  the  purpose  of  directly 
obtaining  conceptions  of  them,  but  is  that  state 
of  the  mind  in  which  we  set  ourselves  to  discover 
the  subjective  conditions  under  which  we  obtain 
conceptions.  It  is  the  consciousness  of  the  rela¬ 
tion  of  given  representations  to  the  different 
sources  or  faculties  of  cognition,  by  which  alone 
their  relation  to  each  other  can  be  rightly  de¬ 
termined.  The  first  question  which  occurs  in 
considering  our  representations  is  to  what  fac¬ 
ulty  of  cognition  do  they  belong?  To  the  under¬ 
standing  or  to  the  senses?  Many  judgements 
are  admitted  to  be  true  from  mere  habit  or  in¬ 
clination;  but,  because  reflection  neither  pre¬ 
cedes  nor  follows,  it  is  held  to  be  a  judgement 
that  has  its  origin  in  the  understanding.  All 
judgements  do  not  require  examination,  that  is, 
investigation  into  the  grounds  of  their  truth. 
For,  when  they  are  immediately  certain  (for  ex¬ 
ample:  “Between  two  points  there  can  be  only 
one  straight  line”),  no  better  or  less  mediate 
test  of  their  truth  can  be  found  than  that  which 
they  themselves  contain  and  express.  But  all 
judgement,  nay,  all  comparisons  require  reflec¬ 
tion,  that  is,  a  distinction  of  the  faculty  of  cog¬ 
nition  to  which  the  given  conceptions  belong. 
The  act  whereby  I  compare  my  representations 
with  the  faculty  of  cognition  which  originates 
them,  and  whereby  I  distinguish  whether  they 
are  compared  with  each  other  as  belonging  to 


99 

the  pure  understanding  or  to  sensuous  intuition, 
I  term  transcendental  reflection .  Now,  the  rela¬ 
tions  in  which  conceptions  can  stand  to  each 
other  are  those  of  identity  and  difference,  agree¬ 
ment  and  opposition,  of  the  internal  and  ex¬ 
ternal,  finally,  of  the  determinable  and  the 
determining  (matter  and  form).  The  proper 
determination  of  these  relations  rests  on  the 
question,  to  what  faculty  of  cognition  they  sub¬ 
jectively  belong,  whether  to  sensibility  or  un¬ 
derstanding?  For,  on  the  manner  in  which  we 
solve  this  question  depends  the  manner  in  which 
we  must  cogitate  these  relations. 

Before  constructing  any  objective  judgement, 
we  compare  the  conceptions  that  are  to  be 
placed  in  the  judgement,  and  observe  whether 
there  exists  identity  (of  many  representations 
in  one  conception),  if  a  general  judgement  is  to 
be  constructed,  or  difference,  if  a  particular; 
whether  there  is  agreement  when  affirmative; 
and  opposition  when  negative  judgements  are 
to  be  constructed,  and  so  on.  For  this  reason 
we  ought  to  call  these  conceptions,  conceptions 
of  comparison  ( conceptus  comparationis).  But 
as,  when  the  question  is  not  as  to  the  logical 
form,  but  as  to  the  content  of  conceptions,  that 
is  to  say,  whether  the  things  themselves  are 
identical  or  different,  in  agreement  or  opposi¬ 
tion,  and  so  on,  the  things  can  have  a  twofold 
relation  to  our  faculty  of  cognition,  to  wit,  a 
relation  either  to  sensibility  or  to  the  under¬ 
standing,  and  as  on  this  relation  depends  their 
relation  to  each  other,  transcendental  reflec¬ 
tion,  that  is,  the  relation  of  given  representa¬ 
tions  to  one  or  the  other  faculty  of  cognition, 
can  alone  determine  this  latter  relation.  Thus 
we  shall  not  be  able  to  discover  whether  the 
things  are  identical  or  different,  in  agreement  or 
opposition,  etc.,  from  the  mere  conception  of 
the  things  by  means  of  comparison  ( compara - 
tio),  but  only  by  distinguishing  the  mode  of 
cognition  to  which  they  belong,  in  other  words, 
by  means  of  transcendental  reflection.  We  may, 
therefore,  with  justice  say,  that  logical  reflec¬ 
tion  is  mere  comparison,  for  in  it  no  account  is 
taken  of  the  faculty  of  cognition  to  which  the 
given  conceptions  belong,  and  they  are  conse¬ 
quently,  as  far  as  regards  their  origin,  to  be 
treated  as  homogeneous;  while  transcendental 
reflection  (which  applies  to  the  objects  them¬ 
selves)  contains  the  ground  of  the  possibility  of 
objective  comparison  of  representations  with 
each  other,  and  is  therefore  very  different  from 
the  former,  because  the  faculties  of  cognition 
to  which  they  belong  are  not  even  the  same. 
Transcendental  reflection  is  a  duty  which  no  one 


100 


THE  CRITIQUE 


can  neglect  who  wishes  to  establish  an  a  priori 
judgement  upon  things.  We  shall  now  proceed 
to  fulfil  this  duty,  and  thereby  throw  not  a 
little  light  on  the  question  as  to  the  determina¬ 
tion  of  the  proper  business  of  the  understand¬ 
ing. 

1.  Identity  and  Difference.  When  an  object 
is  presented  to  us  several  times,  but  always  with 
the  same  internal  determinations  ( qualitas  et 
quantitas ),  it,  if  an  object  of  pure  understand¬ 
ing,  is  always  the  same,  not  several  things,  but 
only  one  thing  ( numerica  identitas) ;  but  if  a 
phenomenon,  we  do  not  concern  ourselves  with 
comparing  the  conception  of  the  thing  with  the 
conception  of  some  other,  but,  although  they 
may  be  in  this  respect  perfectly  the  same,  the 
difference  of  place  at  the  same  time  is  a  suffi¬ 
cient  ground  for  asserting  the  numerical  differ¬ 
ence  of  these  objects  (of  sense).  Thus,  in  the 
case  of  two  drops  of  water,  we  may  make  com¬ 
plete  abstraction  of  all  internal  difference  (qual¬ 
ity  and  quantity),  and,  the  fact  that  they  are 
intuited  at  the  same  time  in  different  places,  is 
sufficient  to  justify  us  in  holding  them  to  be 
numerically  different.  Leibnitz  regarded  phe¬ 
nomena  as  things  in  themselves,  consequently 
as  intelligibilia,  that  is,  objects  of  pure  under¬ 
standing  (although,  on  account  of  the  confused 
nature  of  their  representations,  he  gave  them 
the  name  of  phenomena),  and  in  this  case  his 
principle  of  the  indiscernible  ( principium  iden- 
tatis  indiscernibilium)  is  not  to  be  impugned. 
But,  as  phenomena  are  objects  of  sensibility, 
and,  as  the  understanding,  in  respect  of  them, 
must  be  employed  empirically  and  not  purely 
or  transcendentally,  plurality  and  numerical  dif¬ 
ference  are  given  by  space  itself  as  the  con¬ 
dition  of  external  phenomena.  For  one  part  of 
space,  although  it  may  be  perfectly  similar  and 
equal  to  another  part,  is  still  without  it,  and 
for  this  reason  alone  is  different  from  the  lat¬ 
ter,  which  is  added  to  it  in  order  to  make  up  a 
greater  space.  It  follows  that  this  must  hold 
good  of  all  things  that  are  in  the  different  parts 
of  space  at  the  same  time,  however  similar  and 
equal  one  may  be  to  another. 

2.  Agreement  and  Opposition.  When  reality 
is  represented  by  the  pure  understanding  ( reali - 
tas  noumenon ),  opposition  between  realities  is 
incogitable — such  a  relation,  that  is,  that  when 
these  realities  are  connected  in  one  subject,  they 
annihilate  the  effects  of  each  other  and  may  be 
represented  in  the  formula  3 —  3  =  0.  On  the 
other  hand,  the  real  in  a  phenomenon  ( realitas 
phaenomenon )  may  very  well  be  in  mutual  op¬ 
position,  and,  when  united  in  the  same  subject, 


the  one  may  completely  or  in  part  annihilate  the 
effect  or  consequence  oj  the  other;  as  in  the  case 
of  two  moving  forces  in  the  same  straight  line 
drawing  or  impelling  a  point  in  opposite  direc¬ 
tions,  or  in  the  case  of  a  pleasure  counterbalanc¬ 
ing  a  certain  amount  of  pain. 

3.  The  Internal  and  External.  In  an  object 
of  the  pure  understanding,  only  that  is  internal 
which  has  no  relation  (as  regards  its  existence) 
to  anything  different  from  itself.  On  the  other 
hand,  the  internal  determinations  of  a  substan¬ 
tia  phaenomenon  in  space  are  nothing  but  rela¬ 
tions,  and  it  is  itself  nothing  more  than  a  com¬ 
plex  of  mere  relations.  Substance  in  space  we 
are  cognizant  of  only  through  forces  operative 
in  it,  either  drawing  others  towards  itself  (at¬ 
traction),  or  preventing  others  from  forcing 
into  itself  (repulsion  and  impenetrability).  We 
know  no  other  properties  that  make  up  the  con¬ 
ception  of  substance  phenomenal  in  space,  and 
which  we  term  matter.  On  the  other  hand,  as  an 
object  of  the  pure  understanding,  every  sub¬ 
stance  must  have  internal  determination  and 
forces.  But  what  other  internal  attributes  of 
such  an  object  can  I  think  than  those  which  my 
internal  sense  presents  to  me?  That,  to  wit, 
which  in  either  itself  thought ,  or  something  anal¬ 
ogous  to  it.  Hence  Leibnitz,  who  looked  upon 
things  as  noumena,  after  denying  them  every¬ 
thing  like  external  relation,  and  therefore  also 
composition  or  combination,  declared  that  all 
substances,  even  the  component  parts  of  matter, 
were  simple  substances  with  powers  of  repre¬ 
sentation,  in  one  word,  monads. 

4.  Matter  and  Form.  These  two  conceptions 
lie  at  the  foundation  of  all  other  reflection,  so 
inseparably  are  they  connected  with  every  mode 
of  exercising  the  understanding.  The  former  de¬ 
notes  the  determinable  in  general,  the  second  its 
determination,  both  in  a  transcendental  sense,  ab¬ 
straction  being  made  of  every  difference  in  that 
which  is  given,  and  of  the  mode  in  which  it  is  de¬ 
termined.  Logicians  formerly  termed  the  uni¬ 
versal,  matter,  the  specific  difference  of  this  or 
that  part  of  the  universal,  form.  In  a  judgement 
one  may  call  the  given  conceptions  logical  mat¬ 
ter  (for  the  judgement),  the  relation  of  these  to 
each  other  (by  means  of  the  copula),  the  form 
of  the  judgement.  In  an  object,  the  composite 
parts  thereof  ( essentialia )  are  the  matter;  the 
mode  in  which  they  are  connected  in  the  object, 
the  form.  In  respect  to  things  in  general,  un¬ 
limited  reality  was  regarded  as  the  matter  of  all 
possibility,  the  limitation  thereof  (negation)  as 
the  form,  by  which  one  thing  is  distinguished 
from  another  according  to  transcendental  con- 


OF  PURE  REASON 


IOI 


ceptions.  The  understanding  demands  that 
something  be  given  (at  least  in  the  conception), 
in  order  to  be  able  to  determine  it  in  a  certain 
manner.  Hence,  in  a  conception  of  the  pure  un¬ 
derstanding,  the  matter  precedes  the  form,  and 
for  this  reason  Leibnitz  first  assumed  the  ex¬ 
istence  of  things  (monads)  and  of  an  internal 
power  of  representation  in  them,  in  order  to 
found  upon  this  their  external  relation  and  the 
community  of  their  state  (that  is,  of  their  rep¬ 
resentations).  Hence,  with  him,  space  and  time 
were  possible — the  former  through  the  relation 
of  substances,  the  latter  through  the  connec¬ 
tion  of  their  determinations  with  each  other,  as 
causes  and  effects.  And  so  would  it  really  be, 
if  the  pure  understanding  were  capable  of  an 
immediate  application  to  objects,  and  if  space 
and  time  were  determinations  of  things  in  them¬ 
selves.  But  being  merely  sensuous  intuitions,  in 
which  we  determine  all  objects  solely  as  phe¬ 
nomena,  the  form  of  intuition  (as  a  subjective 
property  of  sensibility)  must  antecede  all  matter 
(sensations),  consequently  space  and  time  must 
antecede  all  phenomena  and  all  data  of  experi¬ 
ence,  and  rather  make  experience  itself  possible. 
But  the  intellectual  philosopher  could  not  endure 
that  the  form  should  precede  the  things  them¬ 
selves  and  determine  their  possibility;  an  objec¬ 
tion  perfectly  correct,  if  we  assume  that  we  in- 
tuite  things  as  they  are,  although  with  confused 
representation.  But  as  sensuous  intuition  is  a  pe¬ 
culiar  subjective  condition,  which  is  a  priori 
at  the  foundation  of  all  perception,  and  the 
form  of  which  is  primitive,  the  form  must  be 
given  per  se,  and  so  far  from  matter  (or  the 
things  themselves  which  appear)  lying  at  the 
foundation  of  experience  (as  we  must  conclude, 
if  we  judge  by  mere  conceptions),  the  very  pos¬ 
sibility  of  itself  presupposes,  on  the  contrary,  a 
given  formal  intuition  (space  and  time). 

Remark  on  the  Amphiboly  of  the 
Conceptions  of  Reflection 

Let  me  be  allowed  to  term  the  position  which 
we  assign  to  a  conception  either  in  the  sensibil¬ 
ity  or  in  the  pure  understanding,  the  transcen¬ 
dental  place.  In  this  manner,  the  appointment 
of  the  position  which  must  be  taken  by  each 
conception  according  to  the  difference  in  its  use, 
and  the  directions  for  determining  this  place  to 
all  conceptions  according  to  rules,  would  be  a 
transcendental  topic,  a  doctrine  which  would 
thoroughly  shield  us  from  the  surreptitious  de¬ 
vices  of  the  pure  understanding  and  the  delu¬ 
sions  which  thence  arise,  as  it  would  always  dis¬ 
tinguish  to  what  faculty  of  cognition  each  con¬ 


ception  properly  belonged.  Every  conception, 
every  title,  under  which  many  cognitions  rank 
together,  may  be  called  a  logical  place.  Upon 
this  is  based  the  logical  topic  of  Aristotle,  of 
which  teachers  and  rhetoricians  could  avail 
themselves,  in  order,  under  certain  titles  of 
thought,  to  observe  what  would  best  suit  the 
matter  they  had  to  treat,  and  thus  enable  them¬ 
selves  to  quibble  and  talk  with  fluency  and  an 
appearance  of  profundity. 

Transcendental  topic,  on  the  contrary,  con¬ 
tains  nothing  more  than  the  above-mentioned 
four  titles  of  all  comparison  and  distinction, 
which  differ  from  categories  in  this  respect,  that 
they  do  not  represent  the  object  according  to 
that  which  constitutes  its  conception  (quantity, 
reality),  but  set  forth  merely  the  comparison 
of  representations,  which  precedes  our  concep¬ 
tions  of  things.  But  this  comparison  requires  a 
previous  reflection,  that  is,  a  determination  of 
the  place  to  which  the  representations  of  the 
things  which  are  compared  belong,  whether,  to 
wit,  they  are  cogitated  by  the  pure  understand¬ 
ing,  or  given  by  sensibility. 

Conceptions  may  be  logically  compared  with¬ 
out  the  trouble  of  inquiring  to  what  faculty 
their  objects  belong,  whether  as  noumena,  to 
the  understanding,  or  as  phenomena,  to  sensibil¬ 
ity.  If,  however,  we  wish  to  employ  these  con¬ 
ceptions  in  respect  of  objects,  previous  tran¬ 
scendental  reflection  is  necessary.  Without  this 
reflection  I  should  make  a  very  unsafe  use  of 
these  conceptions,  and  construct  pretended  syn¬ 
thetical  propositions  which  critical  reason  can¬ 
not  acknowledge  and  which  are  based  solely 
upon  a  transcendental  amphiboly,  that  is,  upon 
a  substitution  of  an  object  of  pure  understand¬ 
ing  for  a  phenomenon. 

For  want  of  this  doctrine  of  transcendental 
topic,  and  consequently  deceived  by  the  am¬ 
phiboly  of  the  conceptions  of  reflection,  the 
celebrated  Leibnitz  constructed  an  intellectual 
system  of  the  world ,  or  rather,  believed  himself 
competent  to  cognize  the  internal  nature  of 
things,  by  comparing  all  objects  merely  with 
the  understanding  and  the  abstract  formal  con¬ 
ceptions  of  thought.  Our  table  of  the  concep¬ 
tions  of  reflection  gives  us  the  unexpected  ad¬ 
vantage  of  being  able  to  exhibit  the  distinctive 
peculiarities  of  his  system  in  all  its  parts,  and 
at  the  same  time  of  exposing  the  fundamental 
principle  of  this  peculiar  mode  of  thought,  which 
rested  upon  naught  but  a  misconception.  He 
compared  all  things  with  each  other  merely  by 
means  of  conceptions,  and  naturally  found  no 
other  differences  than  those  by  which  the  un- 


102 


n 

THE  CRITIQUE 


derstanding  distinguishes  its  pure  conceptions 
one  from  another.  The  conditions  of  sensuous 
intuition,  which  contain  in  themselves  their  own 
means  of  distinction,  he  did  not  look  upon  as 
primitive,  because  sensibility  was  to  him  but  a 
confused  mode  of  representation  and  not  any 
particular  source  of  representations.  A  phenom¬ 
enon  was  for  him  the  representation  of  the  thing 
in  itself,  although  distinguished  from  cognition 
by  the  understanding  only  in  respect  of  the  log¬ 
ical  form — the  former  with  its  usual  want  of 
analysis  containing,  according  to  him,  a  certain 
mixture  of  collateral  representations  in  its  con¬ 
ception  of  a  thing,  which  it  is  the  duty  of  the 
understanding  to  separate  and  distinguish.  In 
one  word,  Leibnitz  intellectualized  phenomena, 
just  as  Locke,  in  his  system  of  noogony  (if  I 
may  be  allowed  to  make  use  of  such  expres¬ 
sions),  sensualized  the  conceptions  of  the  un¬ 
derstanding,  that  is  to  say,  declared  them  to  be 
nothing  more  than  empirical  or  abstract  concep¬ 
tions  of  reflection.  Instead  of  seeking  in  the  un¬ 
derstanding  and  sensibility  two  different  sources 
of  representations,  which,  however,  can  present 
us  with  objective  judgements  of  things  only  in 
coiijunction,  each  of  these  great  men  recognized 
but  one  of  these  faculties,  which,  in  their  opin¬ 
ion,  applied  immediately  to  things  in  them¬ 
selves,  the  other  having  no  duty  but  that  of 
confusing  or  arranging  the  representations  of 
the  former. 

Accordingly,  the  objects  of  sense  were  com¬ 
pared  by  Leibnitz  as  things  in  general  merely  in 
the  understanding. 

i  st.  He  compares  them  in  regard  to  their 
identity  or  difference — as  judged  by  the  un¬ 
derstanding.  As,  therefore,  he  considered  mere¬ 
ly  the  conceptions  of  objects,  and  not  their  po¬ 
sition  in  intuition,  in  which  alone  objects  can 
be  given,  and  left  quite  out  of  sight  the  tran¬ 
scendental  locale  of  these  conceptions — wheth¬ 
er,  that  is,  their  object  ought  to  be  classed 
among  phenomena,  or  among  things  in  them¬ 
selves,  it  was  to  be  expected  that  he  should  ex¬ 
tend  the  application  of  the  principle  of  indis- 
cernibles,  which  is  valid  solely  of  conceptions  of 
things  in  general,  to  objects  of  sense  ( mundus 
phaenomenoii) ,  and  that  he  should  believe  that 
he  had  thereby  contributed  in  no  small  degree 
to  extend  our  knowledge  of  nature.  In  truth,  if 
I  cognize  in  all  its  inner  determinations  a  drop 
of  water  as  a  thing  in  itself,  I  cannot  look  upon 
one  drop  as  different  from  another,  if  the  con¬ 
ception  of  the  one  is  completely  identical  with 
that  of  the  other.  But  if  it  is  a  phenomenon  in 
space,  it  has  a  place  not  merely  in  the  under¬ 


standing  (among  conceptions),  but  also  in  sen¬ 
suous  external  intuition  (in  space),  and  in  this 
case,  the  physical  locale  is  a  matter  of  indiffer¬ 
ence  in  regard  to  the  internal  determinations  of  • 
things,  and  one  place,  B,  may  contain  a  thing 
which  is  perfectly  similar  and  equal  to  another 
in  a  place,  A,  just  as  well  as  if  the  two  things 
were  in  every  respect  different  from  each  other. 
Difference  of  place  without  any  other  condi¬ 
tions,  makes  the  plurality  and  distinction  of 
objects  as  phenomena,  not  only  possible  in 
itself,  but  even  necessary.  Consequently,  the 
above  so-called  law  is  not  a  law  of  nature.  It  is 
merely  an  analytical  rule  for  the  comparison 
of  things  by  means  of  mere  conceptions. 

2nd.  The  principle:  “Realities  (as  simple  af¬ 
firmations)  never  logically  contradict  each  oth¬ 
er,”  is  a  proposition  perfectly  true  respecting 
the  relation  of  conceptions,  but,  whether  as  re¬ 
gards  nature,  or  things  in  themselves  (of  which 
we  have  not  the  slightest  conception),  is  with¬ 
out  any  the  least  meaning.  For  real  opposition, 
in  which  A  —  B  is  =  o,  exists  everywhere,  an 
opposition,  that  is,  in  which  one  reality  united 
with  another  in  the  same  subject  annihilates  the 
effects  of  the  other — a  fact  which  is  constantly 
brought  before  our  eyes  by  the  different  antag¬ 
onistic  actions  and  operations  in  nature,  which, 
nevertheless,  as  depending  on  real  forces,  must 
be  called  realitates  phaenomena.  General  me¬ 
chanics  can  even  present  us  with  the  empirical 
condition  of  this  opposition  in  an  a  priori  rule, 
as  it  directs  its  attention  to  the  opposition  in 
the  direction  of  forces — a  condition  of  wrhich 
the  transcendental  conception  of  reality  can 
tell  us  nothing.  Although  M.  Leibnitz  did  not 
announce  this  proposition  with  precisely  the 
pomp  of  a  new  principle,  he  yet  employed  it 
for  the  establishment  of  new  propositions,  and 
his  followers  introduced  it  into  their  Leibnitzio- 
Wolfian  system  of  philosophy.  According  to 
this  principle,  for  example,  all  evils  are  but  con¬ 
sequences  of  the  limited  nature  of  created  be¬ 
ings,  that  is,  negations,  because  these  are  the 
only  opposite  of  reality.  (In  the  mere  concep¬ 
tion  of  a  thing  in  general  this  is  really  the  case, 
but  not  in  things  as  phenomena.)  In  like  man¬ 
ner,  the  upholders  of  this  system  deem  it  not 
only  possible,  but  natural  also,  to  connect  and 
unite  all  reality  in  one  being,  because  they  ac¬ 
knowledge  no  other  sort  of  opposition  than  that 
of  contradiction  (by  which  the  conception  it¬ 
self  of  a  thing  is  annihilated),  and  find  them¬ 
selves  unable  to  conceive  an  opposition  of  re¬ 
ciprocal  destruction,  so  to  speak,  in  which  one 
real  cause  destroys  the  effect  of  another,  and 


OF  PURE  REASON 


the  conditions  of  whose  representation  we  meet 
with  only  in  sensibility. 

3rd.  The  Leibnitzian  monadology  has  really 
no  better  foundation  than  on  this  philosopher’s 
mode  of  falsely  representing  the  difference  of 
the  internal  and  external  solely  in  relation  to 
the  understanding.  Substances,  in  general,  must 
have  something  inward ,  which  is  therefore  free 
from  external  relations,  consequently  from  that 
of  composition  also.  The  simple — that  which 
can  be  represented  by  a  unit — is  therefore  the 
foundation  of  that  which  is  internal  in  things 
in  themselves.  The  internal  state  of  substances 
cannot  therefore  consist  in  place,  shape,  con¬ 
tact,  or  motion,  determinations  which  are  all 
external  relations,  and  we  can  ascribe  to  them 
no  other  than  that  whereby  we  internally  de¬ 
termine  our  faculty  of  sense  itself,  that  is  to 
say,  the  state  of  representation.  Thus,  then, 
were  constructed  the  monads,  which  were  to 
form  the  elements  of  the  universe,  the  active 
force  of  which  consists  in  representation,  the 
effects  of  this  force  being  thus  entirely  confined 
to  themselves. 

For  the  same  reason,  his  view  of  the  possible 
community  of  substances  could  not  represent  it 
but  as  a  predetermined  harmony,  and  by  no 
means  as  a  physical  influence.  For  inasmuch  as 
everything  is  occupied  only  internally,  that  is, 
with  its  own  representations,  the  state  of  the 
representations  of  one  substance  could  not  stand 
in  active  and  living  connection  with  that  of  an¬ 
other,  but  some  third  cause  operating  on  all 
without  exception  was  necessary  to  make  the 
different  states  correspond  with  one  another. 
And  this  did  not  happen  by  means  of  assistance 
applied  in  each  particular  case  ( systema  assis- 
tentiae),  but  through  the  unity  of  the  idea  of  a 
cause  occupied  and  connected  with  all  sub¬ 
stances,  in  which  they  necessarily  receive,  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  Leibnitzian  school,  their  existence 
and  permanence,  consequently  also  reciprocal 
correspondence,  according  to  universal  laws. 

4th.  This  philosopher’s  celebrated  doctrine  of 
space  and  time,  in  which  he  intellectualized 
these  forms  of  sensibility,  originated  in  the 
same  delusion  of  transcendental  reflection.  If  I 
attempt  to  represent  by  the  mere  understand¬ 
ing,  the  external  relations  of  things,  I  can  do  so 
only  by  employing  the  conception  of  their  re¬ 
ciprocal  action,  and  if  I  wish  to  connect  one 
state  of  the  same  thing  with  another  state,  I 
must  avail  myself  of  the  notion  of  the  order  of 
cause  and  effect.  And  thus  Leibnitz  regarded 
space  as  a  certain  order  in  the  community  of 
substances,  and  time  as  the  dynamical  sequence 


103 

of  their  states.  That  which  space  and  time 
possess  proper  to  themselves  and  independent 
of  things,  he  ascribed  to  a  necessary  confusion 
in  our  conceptions  of  them,  whereby  that  which 
is  a  mere  form  of  dynamical  relations  is  held  to 
be  a  self-existent  intuition,  antecedent  even  to 
things  themselves.  Thus  space  and  time  were 
the  intelligible  form  of  the  connection  of  things 
(substances  and  their  states)  in  themselves.  But 
things  were  intelligible  substances  ( substantiae 
noumena).  At  the  same  time,  he  made  these 
conceptions  valid  of  phenomena,  because  he 
did  not  allow  to  sensibility  a  peculiar  mode  of 
intuition,  but  sought  all,  even  the  empirical  rep¬ 
resentation  of  objects,  in  the  understanding, 
and  left  to  sense  naught  but  the  despicable  task 
of  confusing  and  disarranging  the  representa¬ 
tions  of  the  former. 

But  even  if  we  could  frame  any  synthetical 
proposition  concerning  things  in  themselves  by 
means  of  the  pure  understanding  (which  is  im¬ 
possible),  it  could  not  apply  to  phenomena, 
which  do  not  represent  things  in  themselves.  In 
such  a  case  I  should  be  obliged  in  transcendental 
reflection  to  compare  my  conceptions  only  un¬ 
der  the  conditions  of  sensibility,  and  so  space 
and  time  would  not  be  determinations  of  things 
in  themselves,  but  of  phenomena.  What  things 
may  be  in  themselves,  I  know  not  and  need  not 
know,  because  a  thing  is  never  presented  to  me 
otherwise  than  as  a  phenomenon. 

I  must  adopt  the  same  mode  of  procedure 
with  the  other  conceptions  of  reflection.  Matter 
is  substantia  phaenomenon.  That  in  it  which  is 
internal  I  seek  to  discover  in  all  parts  of  space 
which  it  occupies,  and  in  all  the  functions  and 
operations  it  performs,  and  which  are  indeed 
never  anything  but  phenomena  of  the  external 
sense.  I  cannot  therefore  find  anything  that  is 
absolutely,  but  only  what  is  comparatively  in¬ 
ternal,  and  which  itself  consists  of  external  re¬ 
lations.  The  absolutely  internal  in  matter,  and 
as  it  should  be  according  to  the  pure  under¬ 
standing,  is  a  mere  chimera,  for  matter  is  not 
an  object  for  the  pure  understanding.  But  the 
transcendental  object,  which  is  the  foundation 
of  the  phenomenon  which  we  call  matter,  is  a 
mere  nescio  quid,  the  nature  of  which  we  could 
not  understand,  even  though  someone  were 
found  able  to  tell  us.  For  we  can  understand 
nothing  that  does  not  bring  with  it  something 
in  intuition  corresponding  to  the  expressions 
employed.  If,  by  the  complaint  of  being  unable 
to  perceive  the  internal  nature  of  things,  it  is 
meant  that  we  do  not  comprehend  by  the  pure 
understanding  what  the  things  which  appear  to 


THE  CRITIQUE 


104 

us  may  be  in  themselves,  it  is  a  silly  and  un¬ 
reasonable  complaint;  for  those  who  talk  thus 
really  desire  that  we  should  be  able  to  cognize, 
consequently  to  intuite,  things  without  senses, 
and  therefore  wish  that  we  possessed  a  faculty 
of  cognition  perfectly  different  from  the  human 
faculty,  not  merely  in  degree,  but  even  as  re¬ 
gards  intuition  and  the  mode  thereof,  so  that 
thus  we  should  not  be  men,  but  belong  to  a 
class  of  beings,  the  possibility  of  whose  exist¬ 
ence,  much  less  their  nature  and  constitution, 
we  have  no  means  of  cognizing.  By  observation 
and  analysis  of  phenomena  we  penetrate  into 
the  interior  of  nature,  and  no  one  can  say  what 
progress  this  knowledge  may  make  in  time.  But 
those  transcendental  questions  which  pass  be¬ 
yond  the  limits  of  nature,  we  could  never  an¬ 
swer,  even  although  all  nature  were  laid  open 
to  us,  because  we  have  not  the  power  of  observ¬ 
ing  our  own  mind  with  any  other  intuition  than 
that  of  our  internal  sense.  For  herein  lies  the 
mystery  of  the  origin  and  source  of  our  faculty 
of  sensibility.  Its  application  to  an  object,  and 
the  transcendental  ground  of  this  unity  of  sub¬ 
jective  and  objective,  lie  too  deeply  concealed 
for  us,  who  cognize  ourselves  only  through  the 
internal  sense,  consequently  as  phenomena,  to 
be  able  to  discover  in  our  existence  anything 
but  phenomena,  the  non-sensuous  cause  of 
which  we  at  the  same  time  earnestly  desire  to 
penetrate  to. 

The  great  utility  of  this  critique  of  conclu¬ 
sions  arrived  at  by  the  processes  of  mere  reflec¬ 
tion  consists  in  its  clear  demonstration  of  the 
nullity  of  all  conclusions  respecting  objects 
which  are  compared  with  each  other  in  the  un¬ 
derstanding  alone,  while  it  at  the  same  time 
confirms  what  we  particularly  insisted  on,  name¬ 
ly,  that,  although  phenomena  are  not  included 
as  things  in  themselves  among  the  objects  of 
the  pure  understanding,  they  are  nevertheless 
the  only  things  by  which  our  cognition  can 
possess  objective  reality,  that  is  to  say,  which 
give  us  intuitions  to  correspond  with  our  con¬ 
ceptions. 

When  we  reflect  in  a  purely  logical  manner, 
we  do  nothing  more  than  compare  conceptions 
in  our  understanding,  to  discover  whether  both 
have  the  same  content,  whether  they  are  self¬ 
contradictory  or  not,  whether  anything  is  con¬ 
tained  in  either  conception,  which  of  the  two 
is  given,  and  which  is  merely  a  mode  of  think¬ 
ing  that  given.  But  if  I  apply  these  conceptions 
to  an  object  in  general  (in  the  transcendental 
sense),  without  first  determining  whether  it  is 
an  object  of  sensuous  or  intellectual  intuition, 


certain  limitations  present  themselves,  which 
forbid  us  to  pass  beyond  the  conceptions  and 
render  all  empirical  use  of  them  impossible.  And 
thus  these  limitations  prove  that  the  represen¬ 
tation  of  an  object  as  a  thing  in  general  is  not 
only  insufficient ,  but,  without  sensuous  deter¬ 
mination  and  independently  of  empirical  con¬ 
ditions,  selj -contradictory ;  that  we  must  there¬ 
fore  make  abstraction  of  all  objects,  as  in  logic, 
or,  admitting  them,  must  think  them  under  con¬ 
ditions  of  sensuous  intuition;  that,  consequent¬ 
ly,  the  intelligible  requires  an  altogether  pecul¬ 
iar  intuition,  which  we  do  not  possess,  and  in 
the  absence  of  which  it  is  for  us  nothing;  while, 
on  the  other  hand,  phenomena  cannot  be  ob¬ 
jects  in  themselves.  For,  when  I  merely  think 
things  in  general,  the  difference  in  their  external 
relations  cannot  constitute  a  difference  in  the 
things  themselves;  on  the  contrary,  the  former 
presupposes  the  latter,  and  if  the  conception  of 
one  of  two  things  is  not  internally  different 
from  that  of  the  other,  I  am  merely  thinking 
the  same  thing  in  different  relations.  Further, 
by  the  addition  of  one  affirmation  (reality)  to 
the  other,  the  positive  therein  is  really  aug¬ 
mented,  and  nothing  is  abstracted  or  withdrawn 
from  it;  hence  the  real  in  things  cannot  be  in 
contradiction  with  or  opposition  to  itself — and 
so  on. 

The  true  use  of  the  conceptions  of  reflection 
in  the  employment  of  the  understanding  has,  as 
we  have  shown,  been  so  misconceived  by  Leib¬ 
nitz,  one  of  the  most  acute  philosophers  of 
either  ancient  or  modern  times,  that  he  has  been 
misled  into  the  construction  of  a  baseless  sys¬ 
tem  of  intellectual  cognition,  which  professes 
to  determine  its  objects  without  the  interven¬ 
tion  of  the  senses.  For  this  reason,  the  exposi¬ 
tion  of  the  cause  of  the  amphiboly  of  these  con¬ 
ceptions,  as  the  origin  of  these  false  principles, 
is  of  great  utility  in  determining  with  certainty 
the  proper  limits  of  the  understanding. 

It  is  right  to  say  whatever  is  affirmed  or  de¬ 
nied  of  the  whole  of  a  conception  can  be  af¬ 
firmed  or  denied  of  any  part  of  it  ( dictum  de 
omni  et  nullo)\  but  it  would  be  absurd  so  to 
alter  this  logical  proposition  as  to  say  whatever 
is  not  contained  in  a  general  conception  is  like¬ 
wise  not  contained  in  the  particular  conceptions 
which  rank  under  it;  for  the  latter  are  particular 
conceptions,  for  the  very  reason  that  their  con¬ 
tent  is  greater  than  that  which  is  cogitated  in 
the  general  conception.  And  yet  the  whole  in¬ 
tellectual  system  of  Leibnitz  is  based  upon  this 
false  principle,  and  with  it  must  necessarily  fall 


OF  PURE 


to  the  ground,  together  with  all  the  ambiguous 
principles  in  reference  to  the  employment  of 
the  understanding  which  have  thence  originated. 

Leibnitz’s  principle  of  the  identity  of  indis- 
cernibles  or  indistinguishables  is  really  based  on 
the  presupposition  that,  if  in  the  conception  of  a 
thing  a  certain  distinction  is  not  to  be  found,  it 
is  also  not  to  be  met  with  in  things  themselves: 
that,  consequently,  all  things  are  completely 
identical  ( numero  eadem )  which  are  not  dis¬ 
tinguishable  from  each  other  (as  to  quality  or 
quantity)  in  our  conceptions  of  them.  But,  as  in 
the  mere  conception  of  anything  abstraction 
has  been  made  of  many  necessary  conditions 
of  intuition,  that  of  which  abstraction  has  been 
made  is  rashly  held  to  be  non-existent,  and 
nothing  is  attributed  to  the  thing  but  what  is 
contained  in  its  conception. 

The  conception  of  a  cubic  foot  of  space,  how¬ 
ever  I  may  think  it,  is  in  itself  completely  iden¬ 
tical.  But  two  cubic  feet  in  space  are  neverthe¬ 
less  distinct  from  each  other  from  the  sole  fact 
of  their  being  in  different  places  (they  are  nu¬ 
mero  diversa ) ;  and  these  places  are  conditions 
of  intuition,  wherein  the  object  of  this  concep¬ 
tion  is  given,  and  which  do  not  belong  to  the 
conception,  but  to  the  faculty  of  sensibility.  In 
like  manner,  there  is  in  the  conception  of  a 
thing  no  contradiction  when  a  negative  is  not 
connected  with  an  affirmative;  and  merely  af¬ 
firmative  conceptions  cannot,  in  conjunction, 
produce  any  negation.  But  in  sensuous  intuition, 
wherein  reality  (take  for  example,  motion)  is 
given,  we  find  conditions  (opposite  directions) 
— of  which  abstraction  has  been  made  in  the 
conception  of  motion  in  general — which  render 
possible  a  contradiction  or  opposition  (not  in¬ 
deed  of  a  logical  kind) — and  which  from  pure 
positives  produce  zero=o.  We  are  therefore 
not  justified  in  saying  that  all  reality  is  in  per¬ 
fect  agreement  and  harmony,  because  no  con¬ 
tradiction  is  discoverable  among  its  concep¬ 
tions.1  According  to  mere  conceptions,  that 
which  is  internal  is  the  substratum  of  all  rela¬ 
tions  or  external  determinations.  When,  there¬ 
fore,  I  abstract  all  conditions  of  intuition,  and 
confine  myself  solely  to  the  conception  of  a 

1  If  any  one  wishes  here  to  have  recourse  to  the  usual 
subterfuge,  and  to  say,  that  at  least  realitates  noumena 
cannot  be  in  opposition  to  each  other,  it  will  be  requisite 
for  him  to  adduce  an  example  of  this  pure  and  non- 
sensuous  reality,  that  it  may  be  understood  whether  the 
notion  represents  something  or  nothing.  But  an  example 
cannot  be  found  except  in  experience,  which  never  pre¬ 
sents  to  us  anything  more  than  phenomena;  and  thus 
the  proposition  means  nothing  more  than  that  the 
conception  which  contains  only  affirmatives  does  not 
contain  anything  negative — a  proposition  nobody  ever 
doubted. 


REASON  105 

thing  in  general,  I  can  make  abstraction  of  all 
external  relations,  and  there  must  nevertheless 
remain  a  conception  of  that  which  indicates  no 
relation,  but  merely  internal  determinations. 
Now  it  seems  to  follow  that  in  everything  (sub¬ 
stance)  there  is  something  which  is  absolutely 
internal  and  which  antecedes  all  external  deter¬ 
minations,  inasmuch  as  it  renders  them  possi¬ 
ble;  and  that  therefore  this  substratum  is  some¬ 
thing  which  does  not  contain  any  external  rela¬ 
tions  and  is  consequently  simple  (for  corporeal 
things  are  never  anything  but  relations,  at  least 
of  their  parts  external  to  each  other) ;  and,  in¬ 
asmuch  as  we  know  of  no  other  absolutely  in¬ 
ternal  determinations  than  those  of  the  internal 
sense,  this  substratum  is  not  only  simple,  but 
also,  analogously  with  our  internal  sense,  deter¬ 
mined  through  representations ,  that  is  to  say, 
all  things  are  properly  monads,  or  simple  be¬ 
ings  endowed  with  the  power  of  representation. 
Now  all  this  would  be  perfectly  correct,  if  the 
conception  of  a  thing  were  the  only  necessary 
condition  of  the  presentation  of  objects  of  ex¬ 
ternal  intuition.  It  is,  on  the  contrary,  manifest 
that  a  permanent  phenomenon  in  space  (im¬ 
penetrable  extension)  can  contain  mere  rela¬ 
tions,  and  nothing  that  is  absolutely  internal, 
and  yet  be  the  primary  substratum  of  all  ex¬ 
ternal  perception.  By  mere  conceptions  I  can¬ 
not  think  anything  external,  without,  at  the 
same  time,  thinking  something  internal,  for  the 
reason  that  conceptions  of  relations  presuppose 
given  things,  and  without  these  are  impossible. 
But,  as  an  intuition  there  is  something  (that  is, 
space,  which,  with  all  it  contains,  consists  of 
purely  formal,  or,  indeed,  real  relations)  which 
is  not  found  in  the  mere  conception  of  a  thing 
in  general,  and  this  presents  to  us  the  sub¬ 
stratum  which  could  not  be  cognized  through 
conceptions  alone,  I  cannot  say:  because  a  thing 
cannot  be  represented  by  mere  conceptions 
without  something  absolutely  internal,  there  is 
also,  in  the  things  themselves  which  are  con¬ 
tained  under  these  conceptions,  and  in  their  in¬ 
tuition  nothing  external  to  which  something 
absolutely  internal  does  not  serve  as  the  foun¬ 
dation.  For,  when  we  have  made  abstraction  of 
all  the  conditions  of  intuition,  there  certainly 
remains  in  the  mere  conception  nothing  but  the 
internal  in  general,  through  which  alone  the  ex¬ 
ternal  is  possible.  But  this  necessity,  which  is 
grounded  upon  abstraction  alone,  does  not  ob¬ 
tain  in  the  case  of  things  themselves,  in  so  far 
as  they  are  given  in  intuition  with  such  deter¬ 
minations  as  express  mere  relations,  without 
having  anything  internal  as  their  foundation; 


THE  CRITIQUE 


106 

for  they  are  not  things  in  themselves,  but  only 
phenomena.  What  we  cognize  in  matter  is  noth¬ 
ing  but  relations  (what  we  call  its  internal  de¬ 
terminations  are  but  comparatively  internal). 
But  there  are  some  self-subsistent  and  perma¬ 
nent,  through  which  a  determined  object  is 
given.  That  I,  when  abstraction  is  made  of  these 
relations,  have  nothing  more  to  think,  does  not 
destroy  the  conception  of  a  thing  as  phenome¬ 
non,  nor  the  conception  of  an  object  in  ab¬ 
stract,  but  it  does  away  with  the  possibility  of 
an  object  that  is  determinable  according  to  mere 
conceptions,  that  is,  of  a  noumenon.  It  is  cer¬ 
tainly  startling  to  hear  that  a  thing  consists 
solely  of  relations;  but  this  thing  is  simply  a 
phenomenon,  and  cannot  be  cogitated  by  means 
of  the  mere  categories:  it  does  itself  consist  in 
the  mere  relation  of  something  in  general  to  the 
senses.  In  the  same  way,  we  cannot  cogitate 
relations  of  things  in  abstract,  if  we  commence 
with  conceptions  alone,  in  any  other  manner 
than  that  one  is  the  cause  of  determinations 
in  the  other;  for  that  is  itself  the  conception  of 
the  understanding  or  category  of  relation.  But, 
as  in  this  case  we  make  abstraction  of  all  intui¬ 
tion,  we  lose  altogether  the  mode  in  which  the 
manifold  determines  to  each  of  its  parts  its 
place,  that  is,  the  form  of  sensibility  (space) ; 
and  yet  this  mode  antecedes  all  empirical  cau¬ 
sality. 

If  by  intelligible  objects  viz  understand  things 
which  can  be  thought  by  means  of  the  pure 
categories,  without  the  need  of  the  schemata  of 
sensibility,  such  objects  are  impossible.  For  the 
condition  of  the  objective  use  of  all  our  con¬ 
ceptions  of  understanding  is  the  mode  of  our 
sensuous  intuition,  whereby  objects  are  given; 
and,  if  we  make  abstraction  of  the  latter,  the 
former  can  have  no  relation  to  an  object.  And 
even  if  we  should  suppose  a  different  kind  of 
intuition  from  our  own,  still  our  functions  of 
thought  would  have  no  use  or  signification  in 
respect  thereof.  But  if  we  understand  by  the 
term,  objects  of  a  non-sensuous  intuition ,  in 
respect  of  which  our  categories  are  not  valid, 
and  of  which  we  can  accordingly  have  no  knowl¬ 
edge  (neither  intuition  nor  conception),  in  this 
merely  negative  sense  noumena  must  be  ad¬ 
mitted.  For  this  is  no  more  than  saying  that  our 
mode  of  intuition  is  not  applicable  to  all  things, 
but  only  to  objects  of  our  senses,  that  conse¬ 
quently  its  objective  validity  is  limited,  and  that 
room  is  therefore  left  for  another  kind  of  intui¬ 
tion,  and  thus  also  for  things  that  may  be  ob¬ 
jects  of  it.  But  in  this  sense  the  conception  of 
a  noumenon  is  problematical,  that  is  to  say,  it  is 


the  notion  of  a  thing  of  which  we  can  neither 
say  that  it  is  possible,  nor  that  it  is  impossible, 
inasmuch  as  we  do  not  know  of  any  mode  of 
intuition  besides  the  sensuous,  or  of  any  other 
sort  of  conceptions  than  the  categories — a  mode 
of  intuition  and  a  kind  of  conception  neither 
of  which  is  applicable  to  a  non-sensuous  object. 
We  are  on  this  account  incompetent  to  extend 
the  sphere  of  our  objects  of  thought  beyond  the 
conditions  of  our  sensibility,  and  to  assume  the 
existence  of  objects  of  pure  thought,  that  is,  of 
noumena,  inasmuch  as  these  have  no  true  posi¬ 
tive  signification.  For  it  must  be  confessed  of 
the  categories  that  they  are  not  of  themselves 
sufficient  for  the  cognition  of  things  in  them¬ 
selves  and,  without  the  data  of  sensibility,  are 
mere  subjective  forms  of  the  unity  of  the  un¬ 
derstanding.  Thought  is  certainly  not  a  product 
of  the  senses,  and  in  so  far  is  not  limited  by 
them,  but  it  does  not  therefore  follow  that  it 
may  be  employed  purely  and  without  the  inter¬ 
vention  of  sensibility,  for  it  would  then  be  with¬ 
out  reference  to  an  object.  And  we  cannot  call 
a  noumenon  an  object  of  pure  thought;  for  the 
representation  thereof  is  but  the  problematical 
conception  of  an  object  for  a  perfectly  different 
intuition  and  a  perfectly  different  understand¬ 
ing  from  ours,  both  of  which  are  consequently 
themselves  problematical.  The  conception  of  a 
noumenon  is  therefore  not  the  conception  of  an 
object,  but  merely  a  problematical  conception 
inseparably  connected  with  the  limitation  of 
our  sensibility.  That  is  to  say,  this  conception 
contains  the  answer  to  the  question :  “Are  there 
objects  quite  unconnected  with,  and  independ¬ 
ent  of,  our  intuition?” — a  question  to  which 
only  an  indeterminate  answer  can  be  given.  That 
answer  is:  “Inasmuch  as  sensuous  intuition  does 
not  apply  to  all  things  without  distinction,  there 
remains  room  for  other  and  different  objects.” 
The  existence  of  these  problematical  objects  is 
therefore  not  absolutely  denied,  in  the  absence 
of  a  determinate  conception  of  them,  but,  as  no 
category  is  valid  in  respect  of  them,  neither 
must  they  be  admitted  as  objects  for  our  under¬ 
standing. 

Understanding  accordingly  limits  sensibility, 
without  at  the  same  time  enlarging  its  own  field. 
While,  moreover,  it  forbids  sensibility  to  apply 
its  forms  and  modes  to  things  in  themselves 
and  restricts  it  to  the  sphere  of  phenomena,  it 
cogitates  an  object  in  itself,  only,  however,  as 
a  transcendental  object,  which  is  the  cause  of  a 
phenomenon  (consequently  not  itself  a  phenom¬ 
enon),  and  which  cannot  be  thought  either  as  a 
quantity  or  as  reality,  or  as  substance  (because 


OF  PURE  REASON 


these  conceptions  always  require  sensuous 
forms  in  which  to  determine  an  object) — an 
object,  therefore,  of  which  we  are  quite  unable 
to  say  whether  it  can  be  met  with  in  ourselves 
or  out  of  us,  whether  it  would  be  annihilated 
together  with  sensibility,  or,  if  this  were  taken 
away,  would  continue  to  exist.  If  we  wish  to 
call  this  object  a  noumenon,  because  the  rep¬ 
resentation  of  it  is  non-sensuous,  we  are  at  lib¬ 
erty  to  do  so.  But  as  we  can  apply  to  it  none  of 
the  conceptions  of  our  understanding,  the  repre¬ 
sentation  is  for  us  quite  void,  and  is  available 
only  for  the  indication  of  the  limits  of  our  sen¬ 
suous  intuition,  thereby  leaving  at  the  same 
time  an  empty  space,  which  we  are  competent 
to  fill  by  the  aid  neither  of  possible  experience, 
nor  of  the  pure  understanding. 

The  critique  of  the  pure  understanding,  ac¬ 
cordingly,  does  not  permit  us  to  create  for  our¬ 
selves  a  new  field  of  objects  beyond  those 
which  are  presented  to  us  as  phenomena,  and 
to  stray  into  intelligible  worlds;  nay,  it  does 
not  even  allow  us  to  endeavour  to  form  so  much 
as  a  conception  of  them.  The  specious  error 
which  leads  to  this — and  which  is  a  perfectly 
excusable  one — lies  in  the  fact  that  the  employ¬ 
ment  of  the  understanding,  contrary  to  its 
proper  purpose  and  destination,  is  made  tran¬ 
scendental,  and  objects,  that  is,  possible  intui¬ 
tions,  are  made  to  regulate  themselves  accord¬ 
ing  to  conceptions,  instead  of  the  conceptions 
arranging  themselves  according  to  the  intuitions, 
on  which  alone  their  own  objective  validity 
rests.  Now  the  reason  of  this  again  is  that  ap¬ 
perception,  and  with  it  thought,  antecedes  all 
possible  determinate  arrangement  of  represen¬ 
tations.  Accordingly  we  think  something  in  gen¬ 
eral  and  determine  it  on  the  one  hand  sensuous¬ 
ly,  but,  on  the  other,  distinguish  the  general  and 
in  abstracto  represented  object  from  this  par¬ 
ticular  mode  of  intuiting  it.  In  this  case  there 
remains  a  mode  of  determining  the  object  by 
mere  thought,  which  is  really  but  a  logical  form 
without  content,  which,  however,  seems  to  us 
to  be  a  mode  of  the  existence  of  the  object  in 
itself  (noumenon),  without  regard  to  intuition 
which  is  limited  to  our  senses. 

Before  ending  this  transcendental  analytic, 
we  must  make  an  addition,  which,  although  in 
itself  of  no  particular  importance,  seems  to  be 
necessary  to  the  completeness  of  the  system. 
The  highest  conception,  with  which  a  transcen¬ 
dental  philosophy  commonly  begins,  is  the  di¬ 
vision  into  possible  and  impossible.  But  as  all 
division  presupposes  a  divided  conception,  a 


107 

still  higher  one  must  exist,  and  this  is  the  con¬ 
ception  of  an  object  in  general — problemati¬ 
cally  understood  and  without  its  being  decided 
whether  it  is  something  or  nothing.  As  the  cate¬ 
gories  are  the  only  conceptions  which  apply  to 
objects  in  general,  the  distinguishing  of  an  ob¬ 
ject,  whether  it  is  something  or  nothing,  must 
proceed  according  to  the  order  and  direction  of 
the  categories. 

1.  To  the  categories  of  quantity,  that  is,  the 
conceptions  of  all,  many,  and  one,  the  concep¬ 
tion  which  annihilates  all,  that  is,  the  concep¬ 
tion  of  none,  is  opposed.  And  thus  the  object  of 
a  conception,  to  which  no  intuition  can  be 
found  to  correspond,  is=nothing.  That  is,  it  is 
a  conception  without  an  object  ( ens  rationis ), 
like  noumena,  which  cannot  be  considered  pos¬ 
sible  in  the  sphere  of  reality,  though  they  must 
not  therefore  be  held  to  be  impossible — or  like 
certain  new  fundamental  forces  in  matter,  the 
existence  of  which  is  cogitable  without  contra¬ 
diction,  though,  as  examples  from  experience 
are  not  forthcoming,  they  must  not  be  regarded 
as  possible. 

2.  Reality  is  something ;  negation  is  nothing, 
that  is,  a  conception  of  the  absence  of  an  object, 
as  cold,  a  shadow  {nihil  privativum). 

3.  The  mere  form  of  intuition,  without  sub¬ 
stance,  is  in  itself  no  object,  but  the  merely 
formal  condition  of  an  object  (as  phenomenon), 
as  pure  space  and  pure  time.  These  are  certainly 
something,  as  forms  of  intuition,  but  are  not 
themselves  objects  which  are  intuited  ( ens 
imaginarium) . 

4.  The  object  of  a  conception  which  is  self¬ 
contradictory,  is  nothing,  because  the  concep¬ 
tion  is  nothing — is  impossible,  as  a  figure  com¬ 
posed  of  two  straight  lines  {nihil  negativum). 

The  table  of  this  division  of  the  conception 
of  nothing  (the  corresponding  division  of  the 
conception  of  something  does  not  require  special 
description)  must  therefore  be  arranged  as  fol¬ 
lows: 

Nothing 

As 

1 

Empty  Conception 
without  object, 
ens  rationis 

2  3 

Empty  object  of  Empty  intuition 

a  conception,  without  object, 

nihil  privativum  ens  imaginarium 

4 

Empty  object 
without  conception, 
nihil  negativum 


io8  THE  CRITIQUE 


We  see  that  the  ens  rationis  is  distinguished 
from  the  nihil  negativum  or  pure  nothing  by  the 
consideration  that  the  former  must  not  be  reck¬ 
oned  among  possibilities,  because  it  is  a  mere 
fiction  —  though  not  self-contradictory,  while 
the  latter  is  completely  opposed  to  all  possi¬ 
bility,  inasmuch  as  the  conception  annihilates 
itself.  Both,  however,  are  empty  conceptions. 


On  the  other  hand,  the  nihil  privativum  and  ens 
imaginarium  are  empty  data  for  conceptions. 
If  light  be  not  given  to  the  senses,  we  cannot 
represent  to  ourselves  darkness,  and  if  extended 
objects  are  not  perceived,  we  cannot  represent 
space.  Neither  the  negation,  nor  the  mere  form 
of  intuition  can,  without  something  real,  be  an 
object. 


Transcendental  Logic .  Second  Division 


Transcendental  Dialectic 
Introduction 

I.  Of  Transcendental  Illusory  Appearance 
We  termed  dialectic  in  general  a  logic  of  ap¬ 
pearance.  This  does  not  signify  a  doctrine  of 
probability ;  for  probability  is  truth,  only  cog¬ 
nized  upon  insufficient  grounds,  and  though  the 
information  it  gives  us  is  imperfect,  it  is  not 
therefore  deceitful.  Hence  it  must  not  be  sep¬ 
arated  from  the  analytical  part  of  logic.  Still 
less  must  phenomenon  and  appearance  be  held 
to  be  identical.  For  truth  or  illusory  appearance 
does  not  reside  in  the  object,  in  so  far  as  it  is 
intuited,  but  in  the  judgement  upon  the  object, 
in  so  far  as  it  is  thought.  It  is,  therefore,  quite 
correct  to  say  that  the  senses  do  not  err,  not 
because  they  always  judge  correctly,  but  be¬ 
cause  they  do  not  judge  at  all.  Hence  truth  and 
error,  consequently  also,  illusory  appearance  as 
the  cause  of  error,  are  only  to  be  found  in  a 
judgement,  that  is,  in  the  relation  of  an  object 
to  our  understanding.  In  a  cognition  which  com¬ 
pletely  harmonizes  with  the  laws  of  the  under¬ 
standing,  no  error  can  exist.  In  a  representation 
of  the  senses — as  not  containing  any  judgement 
— there  is  also  no  error.  But  no  power  of  nature 
can  of  itself  deviate  from  its  own  laws.  Hence 
neither  the  understanding  per  se  (without  the 
influence  of  another  cause),  nor  the  senses  per 
se,  would  fall  into  error;  the  former  could  not, 
because,  if  it  acts  only  according  to  its  own 
laws,  the  effect  (the  judgement)  must  necessari¬ 
ly  accord  with  these  laws.  But  in  accordance 
with  the  laws  of  the  understanding  consists  the 
formal  element  in  all  truth.  In  the  senses  there 
is  no  judgement — neither  a  true  nor  a  false  one. 
But,  as  we  have  no  source  of  cognition  besides 
these  two,  it  follows  that  error  is  caused  solely 
by  the  unobserved  influence  of  the  sensibility 
upon  the  understanding.  And  thus  it  happens 
that  the  subjective  grounds  of  a  judgement  blend 


and  are  confounded  with  the  objective,  and 
cause  them  to  deviate  from  their  proper  deter¬ 
mination,1  just  as  a  body  in  motion  would  al¬ 
ways  of  itself  proceed  in  a  straight  line,  but  if 
another  impetus  gives  to  it  a  different  direction, 
it  will  then  start  off  into  a  curvilinear  line  of 
motion.  To  distinguish  the  peculiar  action  of 
the  understanding  from  the  power  which  min¬ 
gles  with  it,  it  is  necessary  to  consider  an  er¬ 
roneous  judgement  as  the  diagonal  between  two 
forces,  that  determine  the  judgement  in  two 
different  directions,  which,  as  it  were,  form  an 
angle,  and  to  resolve  this  composite  operation 
into  the  simple  ones  of  the  understanding  and 
the  sensibility.  In  pure  a  priori  judgements  this 
must  be  done  by  means  of  transcendental  re¬ 
flection,  whereby,  as  has  been  already  shown, 
each  representation  has  its  place  appointed  in 
the  corresponding  faculty  of  cognition,  and  con¬ 
sequently  the  influence  of  the  one  faculty  upon 
the  other  is  made  apparent. 

It  is  not  at  present  our  business  to  treat  of 
empirical  illusory  appearance  (for  example,  op¬ 
tical  illusion),  which  occurs  in  the  empirical 
application  of  otherwise  correct  rules  of  the  un¬ 
derstanding,  and  in  which  the  judgement  is  mis¬ 
led  by  the  influence  of  imagination.  Our  pur¬ 
pose  is  to  speak  of  transcendental  illusory  ap¬ 
pearance,  which  influences  principles — that  are 
not  even  applied  to  experience,  for  in  this  case 
we  should  possess  a  sure  test  of  their  correct¬ 
ness — but  which  leads  us,  in  disregard  of  all  the 
warnings  of  criticism,  completely  beyond  the 
empirical  employment  of  the  categories  and  de¬ 
ludes  us  with  the  chimera  of  an  extension  of  the 
sphere  of  the  pure  understanding.  We  shall  term 
those  principles  the  application  of  which  is  con- 

1  Sensibility,  subjected  to  the  understanding,  as  the 
object  upon  which  the  understanding  employs  its  func¬ 
tions,  is  the  source  of  real  cognitions.  But,  in  so  far  as 
it  exercises  an  influence  upon  the  action  of  the  under¬ 
standing  and  determines  it  to  judgement,  sensibility  is 
itself  the  cause  of  error. 


OF  PURE 


fined  entirely  within  the  limits  of  possible  ex¬ 
perience,  immanent ;  those,  on  the  other  hand, 
which  transgress  these  limits,  we  shall  call  tran¬ 
scendent  principles.  But  by  these  latter  I  do  not 
understand  principles  of  the  transcendental  use 
or  misuse  of  the  categories,  which  is  in  reality  a 
mere  fault  of  the  judgement  when  not  under 
due  restraint  from  criticism,  and  therefore  not 
paying  sufficient  attention  to  the  limits  of  the 
sphere  in  which  the  pure  understanding  is  al¬ 
lowed  to  exercise  its  functions;  but  real  princi¬ 
ples  which  exhort  us  to  break  down  all  those 
barriers,  and  to  lay  claim  to  a  perfectly  new 
field  of  cognition,  which  recognizes  no  line  of  de¬ 
marcation.  Thus  transcendental  and  transcend¬ 
ent  are  not  identical  terms.  The  principles  of  the 
pure  understanding,  which  we  have  already  pro¬ 
pounded,  ought  to  be  of  empirical  and  not  of 
transcendental  use,  that  is,  they  are  not  appli¬ 
cable  to  any  object  beyond  the  sphere  of  experi¬ 
ence.  A  principle  which  removes  these  limits, 
nay,  which  authorizes  us  to  overstep  them,  is 
called  transcendent.  If  our  criticism  can  succeed 
in  exposing  the  illusion  in  these  pretended  prin¬ 
ciples,  those  which  are  limited  in  their  employ¬ 
ment  to  the  sphere  of  experience  may  be  called, 
in  opposition  to  the  others,  immanent  principles 
of  the  pure  understanding. 

Logical  illusion*  which  consists  merely  in  the 
imitation  of  the  form  of  reason  (the  illusion 
in  sophistical  syllogisms),  arises  entirely  from 
a  want  of  due  attention  to  logical  rules.  So  soon 
as  the  attention  is  awakened  to  the  case  before 
us,  this  illusion  totally  disappears.  Transcen¬ 
dental  illusion,  on  the  contrary,  does  not  cease 
to  exist,  even  after  it  has  been  exposed,  and  its 
nothingness  clearly  perceived  by  means  of  tran¬ 
scendental  criticism.  Take,  for  example,  the  il¬ 
lusion  in  the  proposition:  “The  world  must  have 
a  beginning  in  time.”  The  cause  of  this  is  as 
follows.  In  our  reason,  subjectively  considered 
as  a  faculty  of  human  cognition,  there  exist 
fundamental  rules  and  maxims  of  its  exercise, 
which  have  completely  the  appearance  of  ob¬ 
jective  principles.  Now  from  this  cause  it  hap¬ 
pens  that  the  subjective  necessity  of  a  certain 
connection  of  our  conceptions,  is  regarded  as 
an  objective  necessity  of  the  determination  of 
things  in  themselves.  This  illusion  it  is  impossi¬ 
ble  to  avoid,  just  as  we  cannot  avoid  perceiving 
that  the  sea  appears  to  be  higher  at  a  distance 
than  it  is  near  the  shore,  because  we  see  the 
former  by  means  of  higher  rays  than  the  latter, 
or,  which  is  a  still  stronger  case,  as  even  the 
astronomer  cannot  prevent  himself  from  seeing 
the  moon  larger  at  its  rising  than  some  time 


REASON  109 

afterwards,  although  he  is  not  deceived  by  this 
illusion. 

Transcendental  dialectic  will  therefore  con¬ 
tent  itself  with  exposing  the  illusory  appearance 
in  transcendental  judgements,  and  guarding  us 
against  it;  but  to  make  it,  as  in  the  case  of 
logical  illusion,  entirely  disappear  and  cease  to 
be  illusion  is  utterly  beyond  its  power.  For  we 
have  here  to  do  with  a  natural  and  unavoidable 
illusion,  which  rests  upon  subjective  principles 
and  imposes  these  upon  us  as  objective,  while 
logical  dialectic,  in  the  detection  of  sophisms, 
has  to  do  merely  with  an  error  in  the  logical 
consequence  of  the  propositions,  or  with  an  ar¬ 
tificially  constructed  illusion,  in  imitation  of  the 
natural  error.  There  is,  therefore,  a  natural  and 
unavoidable  dialectic  of  pure  reason — not  that 
in  which  the  bungler,  from  want  of  the  requisite 
knowledge,  involves  himself,  nor  that  which  the 
sophist  devises  for  the  purpose  of  misleading, 
but  that  which  is  an  inseparable  adjunct  of  hu¬ 
man  reason,  and  which,  even  after  its  illusions 
have  been  exposed,  does  not  cease  to  deceive, 
and  continually  to  lead  reason  into  momentary 
errors,  which  it  becomes  necessary  continually 
to  remove. 

II.  Of  Pure  Reason  as  the  Seat  of  the  Transcen¬ 
dental  Illusory  Appearance 

A.  OF  REASON  IN  GENERAL 

All  our  knowledge  begins  with  sense,  proceeds 
thence  to  understanding,  and  ends  with  reason, 
beyond  which  nothing  higher  can  be  discovered 
in  the  human  mind  for  elaborating  the  matter  of 
intuition  and  subjecting  it  to  the  highest  unity 
of  thought.  At  this  stage  of  our  inquiry  it  is  my 
duty  to  give  an  explanation  of  this,  the  highest 
faculty  of  cognition,  and  I  confess  I  find  myself 
here  in  some  difficulty.  Of  reason,  as  of  the  un¬ 
derstanding,  there  is  a  merely  formal,  that  is, 
logical  use,  in  which  it  makes  abstraction  of  all 
content  of  cognition;  but  there  is  also  a  real 
use,  inasmuch  as  it  contains  in  itself  the  source 
of  certain  conceptions  and  principles,  which  it 
does  not  borrow  either  from  the  senses  or  the 
understanding.  The  former  faculty  has  been 
long  defined  by  logicians  as  the  faculty  of  medi¬ 
ate  conclusion  in  contradistinction  to  immediate 
conclusions  ( consequentiae  immediatae) ;  but 
the  nature  of  the  latter,  which  itself  generates 
conceptions,  is  not  to  be  understood  from  this 
definition.  Now  as  a  division  of  reason  into  a 
logical  and  a  transcendental  faculty  presents 
itself  here,  it  becomes  necessary  to  seek  for  a 
higher  conception  of  this  source  of  cognition 
which  shall  comprehend  both  conceptions.  In 


THE  CRITIQUE 


this  we  may  expect,  according  to  the  analogy  of 
the  conceptions  of  the  understanding,  that  the 
logical  conception  will  give  us  the  key  to  the 
transcendental,  and  that  the  table  of  the  func¬ 
tions  of  the  former  will  present  us  with  the  clue 
to  the  conceptions  of  reason. 

In  the  former  part  of  our  transcendental  logic, 
we  defined  the  understanding  to  be  the  faculty 
of  rules;  reason  may  be  distinguished  from  un¬ 
derstanding  as  the  / acuity  of  principles. 

The  term  principle  is  ambiguous,  and  ‘com¬ 
monly  signifies  merely  a  cognition  that  may  be 
employed  as  a  principle,  although  it  is  not  in 
itself,  and  as  regards  its  proper  origin,  entitled 
to  the  distinction.  Every  general  proposition, 
even  if  derived  from  experience  by  the  process 
of  induction,  may  serve  as  the  major  in  a  syllo¬ 
gism;  but  it  is  not  for  that  reason  a  principle. 
Mathematical  axioms  (for  example,  there  can 
be  only  one  straight  line  between  two  points) 
are  general  a  priori  cognitions,  and  are  there¬ 
fore  rightly  denominated  principles,  relatively 
to  the  cases  which  can  be  subsumed  under  them. 
But  I  cannot  for  this  reason  say  that  I  cognize 
this  property  of  a  straight  line  from  principles 
— I  cognize  it  only  in  pure  intuition. 

Cognition  from  principles,  then,  is  that  cog¬ 
nition  in  which  I  cognize  the  particular  in  the 
general  by  means  of  conceptions.  Thus  every 
syllogism  is  a  form  of  the  deduction  of  a  cogni¬ 
tion  from  a  principle.  For  the  major  always 
gives  a  conception,  through  which  everything 
that  is  subsumed  under  the  condition  thereof  is 
cognized  according  to  a  principle.  Now  as  every 
general  cognition  may  serve  as  the  major  in  a 
syllogism,  and  the  understanding  presents  us 
with  such  general  a  priori  propositions,  they  may 
be  termed  principles,  in  respect  of  their  possible 
use. 

But  if  we  consider  these  principles  of  the 
pure  understanding  in  relation  to  their  origin, 
we  shall  find  them  to  be  anything  rather  than 
cognitions  from  conceptions.  For  they  would 
not  even  be  possible  a  priori,  if  we  could  not 
rely  on  the  assistance  of  pure  intuition  (in  math¬ 
ematics),  or  on  that  of  the  conditions  of  a 
possible  experience.  That  everything  that  hap¬ 
pens  has  a  cause,  cannot  be  concluded  from 
the  general  conception  of  that  which  happens; 
on  the  contrary  the  principle  of  causality  in¬ 
structs  us  as  to  the  mode  of  obtaining  from 
that  which  happens  a  determinate  empirical 
conception. 

Synthetical  cognitions  from  conceptions  the 
understanding  cannot  supply,  and  they  alone 
are  entitled  to  be  called  principles.  At  the  same 


time,  all  general  propositions  may  be  termed 
comparative  principles. 

It  has  been  a  long-cherished  wish — that  (who 
knows  how  late)  may  one  day  be  happily  ac¬ 
complished — that  the  principles  of  the  endless 
variety  of  civil  laws  should  be  investigated  and 
exposed;  for  in  this  way  alone  can  we  find  the 
secret  of  simplifying  legislation.  But  in  this 
case,  laws  are  nothing  more  than  limitations  of 
our  freedom  upon  conditions  under  which  it 
subsists  in  perfect  harmony  with  itself;  they 
consequently  have  for  their  object  that  which  is 
completely  our  own  work,  and  of  which  we 
ourselves  may  be  the  cause  by  means  of  these 
conceptions.  But  how  objects  as  things  in  them¬ 
selves — how  the  nature  of  things  is  subordi¬ 
nated  to  principles  and  is  to  be  determined  ac¬ 
cording  to  conceptions,  is  a  question  which  it 
seems  well  nigh  impossible  to  answer.  Be  this, 
however,  as  it  may — for  on  this  point  our  in¬ 
vestigation  is  yet  to  be  made — it  is  at  least 
manifest  from  what  we  have  said  that  cogni¬ 
tion  from  principles  is  something  very  different 
from  cognition  by  means  of  the  understanding, 
which  may  indeed  precede  other  cognitions  in 
the  form  of  a  principle,  but  in  itself — in  so  far 
as  it  is  synthetical — is  neither  based  upon  mere 
thought,  nor  contains  a  general  proposition 
drawn  from  conceptions  alone. 

The  understanding  may  be  a  faculty  for  the 
production  of  unity  of  phenomena  by  virtue  of 
rules;  the  reason  is  a  faculty  for  the  production 
of  unity  of  rules  (of  the  understanding)  under 
principles.  Reason,  therefore,  never  applies  di¬ 
rectly  to  experience,  or  to  any  sensuous  object; 
its  object  is,  on  the  contrary,  the  understanding, 
to  the  manifold  cognition  of  which  it  gives  a 
unity  a  priori  by  means  of  conceptions — a  unity 
which  may  be  called  rational  unity,  and  which  is 
of  a  nature  very  different  from  that  of  the  unity 
produced  by  the  understanding. 

The  above  is  the  general  conception  of  the 
faculty  of  reason,  in  so  far  as  it  has  been  pos¬ 
sible  to  make  it  comprehensible  in  the  absence 
of  examples.  These  will  be  given  in  the  sequel. 

B.  OF  THE  LOGICAL  USE  OF  REASON 

A  distinction  is  commonly  made  between  that 
which  is  immediately  cognized  and  that  which 
is  inferred  or  concluded.  That  in  a  figure  which 
is  bounded  by  three  straight  lines  there  are 
three  angles,  is  an  immediate  cognition;  but 
that  these  angles  are  together  equal  to  two  right 
angles,  is  an  inference  or  conclusion.  Now,  as 
we  are  constantly  employing  this  mode  of 
thought  and  have  thus  become  quite  accustomed 


Ill 


OF  PURE 

to  it,  we  no  longer  remark  the  above  distinction, 
and,  as  in  the  case  of  the  so-called  deceptions  of 
sense,  consider  as  immediately  perceived,  what 
has  really  been  inferred.  In  every  reasoning  or 
syllogism,  there  is  a  fundamental  proposition, 
afterwards  a  second  drawn  from  it,  and  finally 
the  conclusion,  which  connects  the  truth  in  the 
first  with  the  truth  in  the  second — and  that  in¬ 
fallibly.  If  the  judgement  concluded  is  so  con¬ 
tained  in  the  first  proposition  that  it  can  be  de¬ 
duced  from  it  without  the  meditation  of  a  third 
notion,  the  conclusion  is  called  immediate  (con- 
sequentia  immediata );  I  prefer  the  term  con¬ 
clusion  of  the  understanding.  But  if,  in  addition 
to  the  fundamental  cognition,  a  second  judge¬ 
ment  is  necessary  for  the  production  of  the  con¬ 
clusion,  it  is  called  a  conclusion  of  the  reason. 
In  the  proposition:  All  men  are  mortal,  are  con¬ 
tained  the  propositions:  Some  men  are  mortal, 
Nothing  that  is  not  mortal  is  a  man,  and  these 
are  therefore  immediate  conclusions  from  the 
first.  On  the  other  hand,  the  proposition:  all  the 
learned  are  mortal,  is  not  contained  in  the  main 
proposition  (for  the  conception  of  a  learned 
man  does  not  occur  in  it),  and  it  can  be  deduced 
from  the  main  proposition  only  by  means  of  a 
mediating  judgement. 

In  every  syllogism  I  first  cogitate  a  rule  ( the 
major)  by  means  of  the  understanding .  In  the 
next  place  I  subsume  a  cognition  under  the  con¬ 
dition  of  the  rule  (and  this  is  the  minor)  by 
means  of  the  judgement.  And  finally  I  deter¬ 
mine  my  cognition  by  means  of  the  predicate  of 
the  rule  (this  is  the  conclusio ),  consequently,  I 
determine  it  a  priori  by  means  of  the  reason. 
The  relations,  therefore,  which  the  major  prop¬ 
osition,  as  the  rule,  represents  between  a  cogni¬ 
tion  and  its  condition,  constitute  the  different 
kinds  of  syllogisms.  These  are  just  threefold — 
analogously  with  all  judgements,  in  so  far  as 
they  differ  in  the  mode  of  expressing  the  rela¬ 
tion  of  a  cognition  in  the  understanding — name¬ 
ly,  categorical,  hypothetical,  and  disjunctive. 

When,  as  often  happens,  the  conclusion  is  a 
judgement  which  may  follow  from  other  given 
judgements,  through  which  a  perfectly  different 
object  is  cogitated,  I  endeavour  to  discover  in  the 
understanding  whether  the  assertion  in  this  con¬ 
clusion  does  not  stand  under  certain  conditions 
according  to  a  general  rule.  If  I  find  such  a  con¬ 
dition,  and  if  the  object  mentioned  in  the  con¬ 
clusion  can  be  subsumed  under  the  given  condi¬ 
tion.  then  this  conclusion  follows  from  a  rule 
which  is  also  valid  for  other  objects  of  cogni¬ 
tion.  From  this  we  see  that  reason  endeavours  to 
subject  the  great  variety  of  the  cognitions  of  the 


REASON 

understanding  to  the  smallest  possible  number 
of  principles  (general  conditions),  and  thus  to 
produce  in  it  the  highest  unity. 

C.  OF  THE  PURE  USE  OF  REASON 

Can  we  isolate  reason,  and,  if  so,  is  it  in  this 
case  a  peculiar  source  of  conceptions  and  judge¬ 
ments  which  spring  from  it  alone,  and  through 
which  it  can  be  applied  to  objects;  or  is  it  mere¬ 
ly  a  subordinate  faculty,  whose  duty  it  is  to  give 
a  certain  form  to  given  cognitions — a  form 
which  is  called  logical,  and  through  which  the 
cognitions  of  the  understanding  are  subordi¬ 
nated  to  each  other,  and  lower  rules  to  higher 
(those,  to  wit,  whose  condition  comprises  in  its 
sphere  the  condition  of  the  others),  in  so  far  as 
this  can  be  done  by  comparison?  This  is  the 
question  which  we  have  at  present  to  answer. 
Manifold  variety  of  rules  and  unity  of  prin¬ 
ciples  is  a  requirement  of  reason,  for  the  pur¬ 
pose  of  bringing  the  understanding  into  com¬ 
plete  accordance  with  itself,  just  as  understand¬ 
ing  subjects  the  manifold  content  of  intuition  to 
conceptions,  and  thereby  introduces  connection 
into  it.  But  this  principle  prescribes  no  law  to 
objects,  and  does  not  contain  any  ground  of  the 
possibility  of  cognizing  or  of  determining  them 
as  such,  but  is  merely  a  subjective  law  for  the 
proper  arrangement  of  the  content  of  the  un¬ 
derstanding.  The  purpose  of  this  law  is,  by  a 
comparison  of  the  conceptions  of  the  under¬ 
standing,  to  reduce  them  to  the  smallest  possible 
number,  although,  at  the  same  time,  it  does  not 
justify  us  in  demanding  from  objects  them¬ 
selves  such  a  uniformity  as  might  contribute  to 
the  convenience  and  the  enlargement  of  the 
sphere  of  the  understanding,  or  in  expecting 
that  it  will  itself  thus  receive  from  them  objec¬ 
tive  validity.  In  one  word,  the  question  is:  “does 
reason  in  itself,  that  is,  does  pure  reason  con¬ 
tain  a  priori  synthetical  principles  and  rules,  and 
what  are  those  principles?” 

The  formal  and  logical  procedure  of  reason 
in  syllogisms  gives  us  sufficient  information  in 
regard  to  the  ground  on  which  the  transcenden¬ 
tal  principle  of  reason  in  its  pure  synthetical 
cognition  will  rest. 

i.  Reason,  as  observed  in  the  syllogistic 
process,  is  not  applicable  to  intuitions,  for  the 
purpose  of  subjecting  them  to  rules — for  this 
is  the  province  of  the  understanding  with  its 
categories — but  to  conceptions  and  judgements. 
If  pure  reason  does  apply  to  objects  and  the  in¬ 
tuition  of  them,  it  does  so  not  immediately,  but 
mediately — through  the  understanding  and  its 
judgements,  which  have  a  direct  relation  to  the 


1 1 2 


THE  CRITIQUE 


senses  and  their  intuition,  for  the  purpose  of 
determining  their  objects.  The  unity  of  reason  is 
therefore  not  the  unity  of  a  possible  experience, 
but  is  essentially  different  from  this  unity, 
which  is  that  of  the  understanding.  That  every¬ 
thing  which  happens  has  a  cause,  is  not  a  prin¬ 
ciple  cognized  and  prescribed  by  reason.  This 
principle  makes  the  unity  of  experience  possible 
and  borrows  nothing  from  reason,  which,  with¬ 
out  a  reference  to  possible  experience,  could 
never  have  produced  by  means  of  mere  concep¬ 
tions  any  such  synthetical  unity. 

2.  Reason,  in  its  logical  use,  endeavours  to 
discover  the  general  condition  of  its  judgement 
(the  conclusion),  and  a  syllogism  is  itself  noth¬ 
ing  but  a  judgement  by  means  of  the  subsump¬ 
tion  of  its  condition  under  a  general  rule  (the 
major).  Now  as  this  rule  may  itself  be  subjected 
to  the  same  process  of  reason,  and  thus  the 
condition  of  the  condition  be  sought  (by  means 
of  a  prosyllogism)  as  long  as  the  process  can  be 
continued,  it  is  very  manifest  that  the  peculiar 
principle  of  reason  in  its  logical  use  is  to  find  for 
the  conditioned  cognition  of  the  understanding 
the  unconditioned  whereby  the  unity  of  the 
former  is  completed. 

But  this  logical  maxim  cannot  be  a  principle 
of  pure  reason ,  unless  we  admit  that,  if  the  con¬ 
ditioned  is  given,  the  whole  series  of  conditions 
subordinated  to  one  another — a  series  which  is 
consequently  itself  unconditioned — is  also  giv¬ 
en,  that  is,  contained  in  the  object  and  its  con¬ 
nection. 

But  this  principle  of  pure  reason  is  evidently 
synthetical;  for,  analytically,  the  conditioned 
certainly  relates  to  some  condition,  but  not  to 
the  unconditioned.  From  this  principle  also 
there  must  originate  different  synthetical  prop¬ 
ositions,  of  which  the  pure  understanding  is  per¬ 
fectly  ignorant,  for  it  has  to  do  only  with  ob¬ 
jects  of  a  possible  experience,  the  cognition  and 
synthesis  of  which  is  always  conditioned.  The 
unconditioned,  if  it  does  really  exist,  must  be 
especially  considered  in  regard  to  the  determi¬ 
nations  which  distinguish  it  from  whatever  is 
conditioned,  and  will  thus  afford  us  material  for 
many  a  priori  synthetical  propositions. 

The  principles  resulting  from  this  highest 
principle  of  pure  reason  will,  however,  be  tran¬ 
scendent  in  relation  to  phenomena,  that  is  to 
say,  it  will  be  impossible  to  make  any  adequate 
empirical  use  of  this  principle.  It  is  therefore 
completely  different  from  all  principles  of  the 
understanding,  the  use  made  of  which  is  entirely 
immanent ,  their  object  and  purpose  being  mere¬ 
ly  the  possibility  of  experience.  Now  our  duty  in 


the  transcendental  dialectic  is  as  follows.  To 
discover  whether  the  principle  that  the  series  of 
conditions  (in  the  synthesis  of  phenomena,  or 
of  thought  in  general)  extends  to  the  uncon¬ 
ditioned  is  objectively  true,  or  not;  what  con¬ 
sequences  result  therefrom  affecting  the  empir¬ 
ical  use  of  the  understanding,  or  rather  whether 
there  exists  any  such  objectively  valid  proposi¬ 
tion  of  reason,  and  whether  it  is  not,  on  the  con¬ 
trary,  a  merely  logical  precept  which  directs  us 
to  ascend  perpetually  to  still  higher  conditions, 
to  approach  completeness  in  the  series  of  them, 
and  thus  to  introduce  into  our  cognition  the 
highest  possible  unity  of  reason.  We  must  ascer¬ 
tain,  I  say,  whether  this  requirement  of  reason 
has  not  been  regarded,  by  a  misunderstanding, 
as  a  transcendental  principle  of  pure  reason, 
which  postulates  a  thorough  completeness  in 
the  series  of  conditions  in  objects  themselves. 
We  must  show,  moreover,  the  misconceptions 
and  illusions  that  intrude  into  syllogisms,  the 
major  proposition  of  which  pure  reason  has  sup¬ 
plied — a  proposition  which  has  perhaps  more  of 
the  character  of  a  petitio  than  of  a  postulatum 
— and  that  proceed  from  experience  upwards  to 
its  conditions.  The  solution  of  these  problems 
is  our  task  in  transcendental  dialectic,  which  we 
are  about  to  expose  even  at  its  source,  that 
lies  deep  in  human  reason.  We  shall  divide  it 
into  two  parts,  the  first  of  which  will  treat 
of  the  transcendent  conceptions  of  pure  rea¬ 
son,  the  second  of  transcendent  and  dialectical 
syllogisms. 

BOOK  I 

Of  the  Conceptions  of  Pure 
Reason 

The  conceptions  of  pure  reason — we  do  not 
here  speak  of  the  possibility  of  them — are  not 
obtained  by  reflection,  but  by  inference  or  con¬ 
clusion.  The  conceptions  of  understanding  are 
also  cogitated  a  priori  antecedently  to  experi¬ 
ence,  and  render  it  possible;  but  they  contain 
nothing  but  the  unity  of  reflection  upon  phe¬ 
nomena,  in  so  far  as  these  must  necessarily  be¬ 
long  to  a  possible  empirical  consciousness. 
Through  them  alone  are  cognition  and  the  de¬ 
termination  of  an  object  possible.  It  is  from 
them,  accordingly,  that  we  receive  material  for 
reasoning,  and  antecedently  to  them  we  possess 
no  a  priori  conceptions  of  objects  from  which 
they  might  be  deduced.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
sole  basis  of  their  objective  reality  consists  in 
the  necessity  imposed  on  them,  as  containing 
the  intellectual  form  of  all  experience,  of  re- 


OF  PURE  REASON 


stricting  their  application  and  influence  to  the 
sphere  of  experience. 

But  the  term,  conception  oj  reason,  or  ra¬ 
tional  conception,  itself  indicates  that  it  does 
not  confine  itself  within  the  limits  of  experience, 
because  its  object-matter  is  a  cognition,  of 
which  every  empirical  cognition  is  but  a  part — 
nay,  the  whole  of  possible  experience  may  be 
itself  but  a  part  of  it — a  cognition  to  which  no 
actual  experience  ever  fully  attains,  although  it 
does  always  pertain  to  it.  The  aim  of  rational 
conceptions  is  the  comprehension,  as  that  of  the 
conceptions  of  understanding  is  the  understand¬ 
ing  of  perceptions.  If  they  contain  the  uncon¬ 
ditioned,  they  relate  to  that  to  which  all  ex¬ 
perience  is  subordinate,  but  which  is  never  itself 
an  object  of  experience — that  towards  which 
reason  tends  in  all  its  conclusions  from  experi¬ 
ence,  and  by  the  standard  of  which  it  estimates 
the  degree  of  their  empirical  use,  but  which  is 
never  itself  an  element  in  an  empirical  synthesis. 
If,  notwithstanding,  such  conceptions  possess 
objective  validity,  they  may  be  called  concep- 
tus  ratiocinati  (conceptions  legitimately  con¬ 
cluded)  ;  in  cases  where  they  do  not,  they  have 
been  admitted  on  account  of  having  the  appear¬ 
ance  of  being  correctly  concluded,  and  may  be 
called  conceptus  ratiocinantes  (sophistical  con¬ 
ceptions).  But  as  this  can  only  be  sufficiently 
demonstrated  in  that  part  of  our  treatise  which 
relates  to  the  dialectical  conclusions  of  reason, 
we  shall  omit  any  consideration  of  it  in  this 
place.  As  we  called  the  pure  conceptions  of  the 
understanding  categories,  we  shall  also  distin¬ 
guish  those  of  pure  reason  by  a  new  name  and 
call  them  transcendental  ideas.  These  terms, 
however,  we  must  in  the  first  place  explain  and 
justify. 

Section  I — Oj  Ideas  in  General 

Despite  the  great  wealth  of  words  which  Euro¬ 
pean  languages  possess,  the  thinker  finds  him¬ 
self  often  at  a  loss  for  an  expression  exactly 
suited  to  his  conception,  for  want  of  which  he 
is  unable  to  make  himself  intelligible  either  to 
others  or  to  himself.  To  coin  new  words  is  a 
pretension  to  legislation  in  language  which  is 
seldom  successful;  and,  before  recourse  is  taken 
to  so  desperate  an  expedient,  it  is  advisable  to 
examine  the"  dead  and  learned  languages,  with 
the  hope  and  the  probability  that  we  may  there 
meet  with  some  adequate  expression  of  the  no¬ 
tion  we  have  in  our  minds.  In  this  case,  even 
if  the  original  meaning  of  the  word  has  become 
somewhat  uncertain,  from  carelessness  or  want 
of  caution  on  the  part  of  the  authors  of  it,  it  is 


ii3 

always  better  to  adhere  to  and  confirm  its  prop¬ 
er  meaning — even  although  it  may  be  doubtful 
whether  it  was  formerly  used  in  exactly  this 
sense — than  to  make  our  labour  vain  by  want  of 
sufficient  care  to  render  ourselves  intelligible. 

For  this  reason,  when  it  happens  that  there 
exists  only  a  single  word  to  express  a  certain 
conception,  and  this  word,  in  its  usual  accepta¬ 
tion,  is  thoroughly  adequate  to  the  conception, 
the  accurate  distinction  of  which  from  related 
conceptions  is  of  great  importance,  we  ought 
not  to  employ  the  expression  improvidently,  or, 
for  the  sake  of  variety  and  elegance  of  style, 
use  it  as  a  synonym  for  other  cognate  words.  It 
is  our  duty,  on  the  contrary,  carefully  to  pre¬ 
serve  its  peculiar  signification,  as  otherwise  it 
easily  happens  that  when  the  attention  of  the 
reader  is  no  longer  particularly  attracted  to  the 
expression,  and  it  is  lost  amid  the  multitude  of 
other  words  of  very  different  import,  the 
thought  which  it  conveyed,  and  which  it  alone 
conveyed,  is  lost  with  it. 

Plato  employed  the  expression  idea  in  a  way 
that  plainly  showed  he  meant  by  it  something 
which  is  never  derived  from  the  senses,  but 
which  far  transcends  even  the  conceptions  of 
the  understanding  (with  which  Aristotle  oc¬ 
cupied  himself),  inasmuch  as  in  experience 
nothing  perfectly  corresponding  to  them  could 
be  found.  Ideas  are,  according  to  him,  arche¬ 
types  of  things  themselves,  and  not  merely  keys 
to  possible  experiences,  like  the  categories.  In 
his  view  they  flow  from  the  highest  reason,  by 
which  they  have  been  imparted  to  human  rea¬ 
son,  which,  however,  exists  no  longer  in  its 
original  state,  but  is  obliged  with  great  labour 
to  recall  by  reminiscence — which  is  called  phi¬ 
losophy — the  old  but  now  sadly  obscured  ideas. 
I  will  not  here  enter  upon  any  literary  investiga¬ 
tion  of  the  sense  which  this  sublime  philosopher 
attached  to  this  expression.  I  shall  content  my¬ 
self  with  remarking  that  it  is  nothing  unusual, 
in  common  conversation  as  well  as  in  written 
works,  by  comparing  the  thoughts  which  an 
author  has  delivered  upon  a  subject,  to  under¬ 
stand  him  better  than  he  understood  himself — 
inasmuch  as  he  may  not  have  sufficiently  deter¬ 
mined  his  conception,  and  thus  have  sometimes 
spoken,  nay  even  thought,  in  opposition  to  his 
own  opinions. 

Plato  perceived  very  clearly  that  our  faculty 
of  cognition  has  the  feeling  of  a  much  higher 
vocation  than  that  of  merely  spelling  out  phe¬ 
nomena  according  to  synthetical  unity,  for  the 
purpose  of  being  able  to  read  them  as  experi¬ 
ence,  and  that  our  reason  naturally  raises  itself 


ii4 


THE  CRITIQUE 


to  cognitions  far  too  elevated  to  admit  of  the 
possibility  of  an  object  given  by  experience 
corresponding  to  them — cognitions  which  are 
nevertheless  real,  and  are  not  mere  phantoms 
of  the  brain. 

This  philosopher  found  his  ideas  especially  in 
all  that  is  practical,1  that  is,  which  rests  upon 
freedom,  which  in  its  turn  ranks  under  cogni¬ 
tions  that  are  the  peculiar  product  of  reason. 
He  who  would  derive  from  experience  the  con¬ 
ceptions  of  virtue,  who  would  make  (as  many 
have  really  done)  that,  which  at  best  can  but 
serve  as  an  imperfectly  illustrative  example,  a 
model  for  the  formation  of  a  perfectly  adequate 
idea  on  the  subject,  would  in  fact  transform 
virtue  into  a  nonentity  changeable  according  to 
time  and  circumstance  and  utterly  incapable  of 
being  employed  as  a  rule.  On  the  contrary,  every 
one  is  conscious  that,  when  any  one  is  held  up 
to  him  as  a  model  of  virtue,  he  compares  this 
so-called  model  with  the  true  original  which  he 
possesses  in  his  own  mind  and  values  him  ac¬ 
cording  to  this  standard.  But  this  standard  is 
the  idea  of  virtue,  in  relation  to  which  all  pos¬ 
sible  objects  of  experience  are  indeed  service¬ 
able  as  examples — proofs  of  the  practicability 
in  a  certain  degree  of  that  which  the  conception 
of  virtue  demands — but  certainly  not  as  arche¬ 
types.  That  the  actions  of  man  will  never  be  in 
perfect  accordance  with  all  the  requirements  of 
the  pure  ideas  of  reason,  does  not  prove  the 
thought  to  be  chimerical.  For  only  through  this 
idea  are  all  judgements  as  to  moral  merit  or 
demerit  possible;  it  consequently  lies  at  the 
foundation  of  every  approach  to  moral  perfec¬ 
tion,  however  far  removed  from  it  the  obstacles 
in  human  nature — indeterminable  as  to  degree 
— may  keep  us. 

The  Platonic  Republic  has  become  proverbi¬ 
al  as  an  example — and  a  striking  one — of  imag¬ 
inary  perfection,  such  as  can  exist  only  in  the 
brain  of  the  idle  thinker;  and  Brucker  ridicules 
the  philosopher  for  maintaining  that  a  prince 
can  never  govern  well,  unless  he  is  participant 
in  the  ideas.  But  we  should  do  better  to  follow 
up  this  thought  and,  where  this  admirable  think¬ 
er  leaves  us  without  assistance,  employ  new  ef- 

1  He  certainly  extended  the  application  of  his  concep¬ 
tion  to  speculative  cognitions  also,  provided  they  were 
given  pure  and  completely  a  priori,  nay,  even  to  mathe¬ 
matics,  although  this  science  cannot  possess  an  object 
otherwhere  than  in  possible  experience.  I  cannot  follow 
him  in  this,  and  as  little  can  I  follow  him  in  his  mysti¬ 
cal  deduction  of  these  ideas,  or  in  his  hypostatization  of 
them;  although,  in  truth,  the  elevated  and  exaggerated 
language  which  he  employed  in  describing  them  is  quite 
capable  of  an  interpretation  more  subdued  and  more  in 
accordance  with  fact  and  the  nature  of  things. 


forts  to  place  it  in  clearer  light,  rather  than 
carelessly  fling  it  aside  as  useless,  under  the  very 
miserable  and  pernicious  pretext  of  impracti¬ 
cability.  A  constitution  of  the  greatest  possible 
human  freedom  according  to  laws,  by  which  the 
liberty  of  every  individual  can  consist  with  the 
liberty  of  every  other  (not  of  the  greatest  pos¬ 
sible  happiness,  for  this  follows  necessarily  from 
the  former),  is,  to  say  the  least,  a  necessary 
idea,  which  must  be  placed  at  the  foundation 
not  only  of  the  first  plan  of  the  constitution 
of  a  state,  but  of  all  its  laws.  And,  in  this,  it 
is  not  necessary  at  the  outset  to  take  account  of 
the  obstacles  which  lie  in  our  way — obstacles 
which  perhaps  do  not  necessarily  arise  from  the 
character  of  human  nature,  but  rather  from  the 
previous  neglect  of  true  ideas  in  legislation.  For 
there  is  nothing  more  pernicious  and  more  un¬ 
worthy  of  a  philosopher,  than  the  vulgar  appeal 
to  a  so-called  adverse  experience,  which  indeed 
would  not  have  existed,  if  those  institutions  had 
been  established  at  the  proper  time  and  in  ac¬ 
cordance  with  ideas;  while,  instead  of  this,  con¬ 
ceptions,  crude  for  the  very  reason  that  they 
have  been  drawn  from  experience,  have  marred 
and  frustrated  all  our  better  views  and  inten¬ 
tions.  The  more  legislation  and  government  are 
in  harmony  with  this  idea,  the  more  rare  do 
punishments  become  and  thus  it  is  quite  rea¬ 
sonable  to  maintain,  as  Plato  did,  that  in  a  per¬ 
fect  state  no  punishments  at  all  would  be  neces¬ 
sary.  Now  although  a  perfect  state  may  never 
exist,  the  idea  is  not  on  that  account  the  less 
just,  which  holds  up  this  maximum  as  the  arche¬ 
type  or  standard  of  a  constitution,  in  order  to 
bring  legislative  government  always  nearer  and 
nearer  to  the  greatest  possible  perfection.  For 
at  what  precise  degree  human  nature  must  stop 
in  its  progress,  and  how  wide  must  be  the  chasm 
which  must  necessarily  exist  between  the  idea 
and  its  realization,  are  problems  which  no  one 
can  or  ought  to  determine — and  for  this  rea¬ 
son,  that  it  is  the  destination  of  freedom  to 
overstep  all  assigned  limits  between  itself  and 
the  idea. 

But  not  only  in  that  wherein  human  reason 
is  a  real  causal  agent  and  where  ideas  are  oper¬ 
ative  causes  (of  actions  and  their  objects),  that 
is  to  say,  in  the  region  of  ethics,  but  also  in  re¬ 
gard  to  nature  herself,  Plato  saw  clear  proofs  of 
an  origin  from  ideas.  A  plant,  and  animal,  the 
regular  order  of  nature — probably  also  the  dis¬ 
position  of  the  whole  universe — give  manifest 
evidence  that  they  are  possible  only  by  means 
of  and  according  to  ideas;  that,  indeed,  no  one 
creature,  under  the  individual  conditions  of  its 


L 

% 


k 

i 


OF  PURE  REASON 


existence,  perfectly  harmonizes  with  the  idea 
of  the  most  perfect  of  its  kind — just  as  little  as 
man  with  the  idea  of  humanity,  which  never¬ 
theless  he  bears  in  his  soul  as  the  archetypal 
standard  of  his  actions;  that,  notwithstanding, 
these  ideas  are  in  the  highest  sense  individually, 
unchangeably,  and  completely  determined,  and 
are  the  original  causes  of  things;  and  that  the 
totality  of  connected  objects  in  the  universe  is 
alone  fully  adequate  to  that  idea.  Setting  aside 
the  exaggerations  of  expression  in  the  writings 
of  this  philosopher,  the  mental  power  exhibited 
in  this  ascent  from  the  ectypal  mode  of  regard¬ 
ing  the  physical  world  to  the  architectonic  con¬ 
nection  thereof  according  to  ends,  that  is,  ideas, 
is  an  effort  which  deserves  imitation  and  claims 
respect.  But  as  regards  the  principles  of  ethics, 
of  legislation,  and  of  religion,  spheres  in  which 
ideas  alone  render  experience  possible,  although 
they  never  attain  to  full  expression  therein,  he 
has  vindicated  for  himself  a  position  of  peculiar 
merit,  which  is  not  appreciated  only  because  it 
is  judged  by  the  very  empirical  rules,  the  valid¬ 
ity  of  which  as  principles  is  destroyed  by  ideas. 
For  as  regards  nature,  experience  presents  us 
with  rules  and  is  the  source  of  truth,  but  in  re¬ 
lation  to  ethical  laws  experience  is  the  parent  of 
illusion,  and  it  is  in  the  highest  degree  reprehen¬ 
sible  to  limit  or  to  deduce  the  laws  which  dic¬ 
tate  what  I  ought  to  do,  from  what  is  done. 

We  must,  however,  omit  the  consideration  of 
these  important  subjects,  the  development  of 
which  is  in  reality  the  peculiar  duty  and  dignity 
of  philosophy,  and  confine  ourselves  for  the 
present  to  the  more  humble  but  not  less  useful 
task  of  preparing  a  firm  foundation  for  those 
majestic  edifices  of  moral  science.  For  this 
foundation  has  been  hitherto  insecure  from  the 
many  subterranean  passages  which  reason  in  its 
confident  but  vain  search  for  treasures  has 
made  in  all  directions.  Our  present  duty  is  to 
make  ourselves  perfectly  acquainted  with  the 
transcendental  use  made  of  pure  reason,  its 
principles  and  ideas,  that  we  may  be  able  prop¬ 
erly  to  determine  and  value  its  influence  and 
real  worth.  But  before  bringing  these  intro¬ 
ductory  remarks  to  a  close,  I  beg  those  who 
really  have  philosophy  at  heart — and  their  num¬ 
ber  is  but  small — if  they  shall  find  themselves 
convinced  by  the  considerations  following  as 
well  as  by  those  above,  to  exert  themselves  to 
preserve  to  the  expression  idea  its  original  sig¬ 
nification,  and  to  take  care  that  it  be  not  lost 
among  those  other  expressions  by  which  all  sorts 
of  representations  are  loosely  designated — that 
the  interests  of  science  may  not  thereby  suffer. 


US 

We  are  in  no  want  of  words  to  denominate  ade¬ 
quately  every  mode  of  representation,  without 
the  necessity  of  encroaching  upon  terms  which 
are  proper  to  others.  The  following  is  a  gradu¬ 
ated  list  of  them.  The  genus  is  representation 
in  general  ( representation .  Under  it  stands 
representation  with  consciousness  ( perceptio ). 
A  perception  which  relates  solely  to  the  subject 
as  a  modification  of  its  state,  is  a  sensation  ( sen - 
satio ),  an  objective  perception  is  a  cognition 
( cognitio ).  A  cognition  is  either  an  intuition  or 
a  conception  ( intuitus  vel  conceptus).  The 
former  has  an  immediate  relation  to  the  object 
and  is  singular  and  individual;  the  latter  has 
but  a  mediate  relation,  by  means  of  a  charac¬ 
teristic  mark  which  may  be  common  to  several 
things.  A  conception  is  either  empirical  or  pure. 
A  pure  conception,  in  so  far  as  it  has  its  origin 
in  the  understanding  alone,  and  is  not  the  con¬ 
ception  of  a  pure  sensuous  image,  is  called 
notio.  A  conception  formed  from  notions,  which 
transcends  the  possibility  of  experience,  is  an 
idea ,  or  a  conception  of  reason.  To  one  who  has 
accustomed  himself  to  these  distinctions,  it 
must  be  quite  intolerable  to  hear  the  represen¬ 
tation  of  the  colour  red  called  an  idea.  It  ought 
not  even  to  be  called  a  notion  or  conception  of 
understanding. 

Section  II.  Of  Transcendental  Ideas 

Transcendental  analytic  showed  us  how  the 
mere  logical  form  of  our  cognition  can  contain 
the  origin  of  pure  conceptions  a  priori,  concep¬ 
tions  which  represent  objects  antecedently  to 
all  experience,  or  rather,  indicate  the  synthetical 
unity  which  alone  renders  possible  an  empirical 
cognition  of  objects.  The  form  of  judgements — 
converted  into  a  conception  of  the  synthesis  of 
intuitions — produced  the  categories  which  di¬ 
rect  the  employment  of  the  understanding  in  ex¬ 
perience.  This  consideration  warrants  us  to  ex¬ 
pect  that  the  form  of  syllogisms,  when  applied 
to  synthetical  unity  of  intuitions,  following  the 
rule  of  the  categories,  will  contain  the  origin  of 
particular  a  priori  conceptions,  which  we  may 
call  pure  conceptions  of  reason  or  transcenden¬ 
tal  ideas,  and  which  will  determine  the  use  of 
the  understanding  in  the  totality  of  experience 
according  to  principles. 

The  function  of  reason  in  arguments  consists 
in  the  universality  of  a  cognition  according  to 
conceptions,  and  the  syllogism  itself  is  a  judge¬ 
ment  which  is  determined  a  priori  in  the  whole 
extent  of  its  condition.  The  proposition:  “Cai- 
us  is  mortal,”  is  one  which  may  be  obtained 
from  experience  by  the  aid  of  the  understand- 


n6  THE  CRITIQUE 


ing  alone;  but  my  wish  is  to  find  a  conception 
which  contains  the  condition  under  which  the 
predicate  of  this  judgement  is  given — in  this 
case,  the  conception  of  man — and  after  sub¬ 
suming  under  this  condition,  taken  in  its  whole 
extent  (all  men  are  mortal),  I  determine  ac¬ 
cording  to  it  the  cognition  of  the  object  thought, 
and  say:  “Caius  is  mortal.” 

Hence,  in  the  conclusion  of  a  syllogism  we 
restrict  a  predicate  to  a  certain  object,  after 
having  thought  it  in  the  major  in  its  whole  ex¬ 
tent  under  a  certain  condition.  This  complete 
quantity  of  the  extent  in  relation  to  such  a 
condition  is  called  universality  ( universalitas ). 
To  this  corresponds  totality  ( universitas )  of 
conditions  in  the  synthesis  of  intuitions.  The 
transcendental  conception  of  reason  is  therefore 
nothing  else  than  the  conception  of  the  totality 
of  the  conditions  of  a  given  conditioned.  Now  as 
the  unconditioned  alone  renders  possible  total¬ 
ity  of  conditions,  and,  conversely,  the  totality 
of  conditions  is  itself  always  unconditioned; 
a  pure  rational  conception  in  general  can  be  de¬ 
fined  and  explained  by  means  of  the  conception 
of  the  unconditioned,  in  so  far  as  it  contains  a 
basis  for  the  synthesis  of  the  conditioned. 

To  the  number  of  modes  of  relation  which 
the  understanding  cogitates  by  means  of  the 
categories,  the  number  of  pure  rational  concep¬ 
tions  will  correspond.  We  must  therefore  seek 
for,  first,  an  unconditioned  of  the  categorical 
synthesis  in  a  subject;  secondly,  of  the  hypo¬ 
thetical  synthesis  of  the  members  of  a  series; 
thirdly,  of  the  disjunctive  synthesis  of  parts  in 
a  system. 

There  are  exactly  the  same  number  of  modes 
of  syllogisms,  each  of  which  proceeds  through 
prosyllogisms  to  the  unconditioned — one  to  the 
subject  which  cannot  be  employed  as  predicate, 
another  to  the  presupposition  which  supposes 
nothing  higher  than  itself,  and  the  third  to  an 
aggregate  of  the  members  of  the  complete  di¬ 
vision  of  a  conception.  Hence  the  pure  rational 
conceptions  of  totality  in  the  synthesis  of  con¬ 
ditions  have  a  necessary  foundation  in  the  na¬ 
ture  of  human  reason — at  least  as  modes  of  ele¬ 
vating  the  unity  of  the  understanding  to  the 
unconditioned.  They  may  have  no  valid  appli¬ 
cation,  corresponding  to  their  transcendental 
employment,  in  concreto ,  and  be  thus  of  no 
greater  utility  than  to  direct  the  understanding 
how,  while  extending  them  as  widely  as  possible, 
to  maintain  its  exercise  and  application  in  per¬ 
fect  consistence  and  harmony. 

But,  while  speaking  here  of  the  totality  of 
conditions  and  of  the  unconditioned  as  the  com¬ 


mon  title  of  all  conceptions  of  reason,  we  again 
light  upon  an  expression  which  we  find  it  im¬ 
possible  to  dispense  with,  and  which  neverthe¬ 
less,  owing  to  the  ambiguity  attaching  to  it 
from  long  abuse,  we  cannot  employ  with  safety. 
The  word  absolute  is  one  of  the  few  words 
which,  in  its  original  signification,  was  perfect¬ 
ly  adequate  to  the  conception  it  was  intended 
to  convey — a  conception  which  no  other  word 
in  the  same  language  exactly  suits,  and  the  loss 
— or,  which  is  the  same  thing,  the  incautious 
and  loose  employment — of  which  must  be  fol¬ 
lowed  by  the  loss  of  the  conception  itself.  And, 
as  it  is  a  conception  which  occupies  much  of 
the  attention  of  reason,  its  loss  would  be  great¬ 
ly  to  the  detriment  of  all  transcendental  phi¬ 
losophy.  The  word  absolute  is  at  present  fre¬ 
quently  used  to  denote  that  something  can  be 
predicated  of  a  thing  considered  in  itself  and  in¬ 
trinsically.  In  this  sense  absolutely  possible 
would  signify  that  which  is  possible  in  itself 
{interne) — which  is,  in  fact,  the  least  that  one 
can  predicate  of  an  object.  On  the  other  hand, 
it  is  sometimes  employed  to  indicate  that  a 
thing  is  valid  in  all  respects — for  example,  ab¬ 
solute  sovereignty.  Absolutely  possible  would  in 
this  sense  signify  that  which  is  possible  in  all  re¬ 
lations  and  in  every  respect;  and  this  is  the 
most  that  can  be  predicated  of  the  possibility  of 
a  thing.  Now  these  significations  do  in  truth  fre¬ 
quently  coincide.  Thus,  for  example,  that  which 
is  intrinsically  impossible,  is  also  impossible  in 
all  relations,  that  is,  absolutely  impossible.  But 
in  most  cases  they  differ  from  each  other  toto 
caelo,  and  I  can  by  no  means  conclude  that,  be¬ 
cause  a  thing  is  in  itself  possible,  it  is  also  pos¬ 
sible  in  all  relations,  and  therefore  absolutely. 
Nay,  more,  I  shall  in  the  sequel  show  that  ab¬ 
solute  necessity  does  not  by  any  means  depend 
on  internal  necessity,  and  that,  therefore,  it 
must  not  be  considered  as  synonymous  with  it. 
Of  an  opposite  which  is  intrinsically  impossible, 
we  may  affirm  that  it  is  in  all  respects  impossi¬ 
ble,  and  that,  consequently,  the  thing  itself,  of 
which  this  is  the  opposite,  is  absolutely  neces¬ 
sary;  but  I  cannot  reason  conversely  and  say, 
the  opposite  of  that  which  is  absolutely  neces¬ 
sary  is  intrinsically  impossible,  that  is.  that  the 
absolute  necessity  of  things  is  an  internal  neces¬ 
sity.  For  this  internal  necessity  is  in  certain  cases 
a  mere  empty  word  with  which  the  least  con¬ 
ception  cannot  be  connected,  while  the  concep¬ 
tion  of  the  necessity  of  a  thing  in  all  relations 
possesses  very  peculiar  determinations.  Now  as 
the  loss  of  a  conception  of  great  utility  in  spec¬ 
ulative  science  cannot  be  a  matter  of  indiffer- 


OF  PURE  REASON 


ence  to  the  philosopher,  I  trust  that  the  proper 
determination  and  careful  preservation  of  the 
expression  on  which  the  conception  depends  will 
likewise  be  not  indifferent  to  him. 

In  this  enlarged  signification,  then,  shall  I 
employ  the  word  absolute ,  in  opposition  to  that 
which  is  valid  only  in  some  particular  respect; 
for  the  latter  is  restricted  by  conditions,  the 
former  is  valid  without  any  restriction  what¬ 
ever. 

Now  the  transcendental  conception  of  rea¬ 
son  has  for  its  object  nothing  else  than  absolute 
totality  in  the  synthesis  of  conditions  and  does 
not  rest  satisfied  till  it  has  attained  to  the  ab¬ 
solutely,  that  is,  in  all  respects  and  relations, 
unconditioned.  For  pure  reason  leaves  to  the 
understanding  everything  that  immediately  re¬ 
lates  to  the  object  of  intuition  or  rather  to  their 
synthesis  in  imagination.  The  former  restricts 
itself  to  the  absolute  totality  in  the  employment 
of  the  conceptions  of  the  understanding  and 
aims  at  carrying  out  the  synthetical  unity  which 
is  cogitated  in  the  category,  even  to  the  uncon¬ 
ditioned.  This  unity  may  hence  be  called  the 
rational  unity  of  phenomena,  as  the  other, 
which  the  category  expresses,  may  be  termed 
the  unity  of  the  understanding.  Reason,  there¬ 
fore,  has  an  immediate  relation  to  the  use  of 
the  understanding,  not  indeed  in  so  far  as  the 
latter  contains  the  ground  of  possible  experi¬ 
ence  (for  the  conception  of  the  absolute  totality 
of  conditions  is  not  a  conception  that  can  be 
employed  in  experience,  because  no  experience 
is  unconditioned),  but  solely  for  the  purpose  of 
directing  it  to  a  certain  unity,  of  which  the  un¬ 
derstanding  has  no  conception,  and  the  aim  of 
which  is  to  collect  into  an  absolute  whole  all 
acts  of  the  understanding.  Hence  the  objective 
employment  of  the  pure  conceptions  of  reason 
is  always  transcendent,  while  that  of  the  pure 
conceptions  of  the  understanding  must,  accord¬ 
ing  to  their  nature,  be  always  immanent,  inas¬ 
much  as  they  are  limited  to  possible  experience. 

I  understand  by  idea  a  necessary  conception 
of  reason,  to  which  no  corresponding  object  can 
be  discovered  in  the  world  of  sense.  According¬ 
ly,  the  pure  conceptions  of  reason  at  present 
under  consideration  are  transcendental  ideas. 
They  are  conceptions  of  pure  reason,  for  they 
regard  all  empirical  cognition  as  determined  by 
means  of  an  absolute  totality  of  conditions. 
They  are  not  mere  fictions,  but  natural  and 
necessary  products  of  reason,  and  have  hence  a 
necessary  relation  to  the  whole  sphere  of  the 
exercise  of  the  understanding.  And,  finally,  they 
are  transcendent,  and  overstep  the  limits  of  all 


117 

experiences,  in  which,  consequently,  no  object 
can  ever  be  presented  that  would  be  perfectly 
adequate  to  a  transcendental  idea.  When  we 
use  the  word  idea,  we  say,  as  regards  its  object 
(an  object  of  the  pure  understanding),  a  great 
deal,  but  as  regards  its  subject  (that  is,  in  re¬ 
spect  of  its  reality  under  conditions  of  experi¬ 
ence),  exceedingly  little,  because  the  idea,  as 
the  conception  of  a  maximum,  can  never  be 
completely  and  adequately  presented  in  con- 
creto.  Now,  as  in  the  merely  speculative  em¬ 
ployment  of  reason  the  latter  is  properly  the  sole 
aim,  and  as  in  this  case  the  approximation  to  a 
conception,  which  is  never  attained  in  practice, 
is  the  same  thing  as  if  the  conception  were  non¬ 
existent — it  is  commonly  said  of  the  concep¬ 
tion  of  this  kind,  “it  is  only  an  idea.”  So  we 
might  very  well  say,  “the  absolute  totality  of 
all  phenomena  is  only  an  idea,”  for,  as  we  never 
can  present  an  adequate  representation  of  it,  it 
remains  for  us  a  problem  incapable  of  solu¬ 
tion.  On  the  other  hand,  as  in  the  practical  use 
of  the  understanding  we  have  only  to  do  with 
action  and  practice  according  to  rules,  an  idea 
of  pure  reason  can  always  be  given  really  in 
concreto,  although  only  partially,  nay,  it  is  the 
indispensable  condition  of  all  practical  employ¬ 
ment  of  reason.  The  practice  or  execution  of  the 
idea  is  always  limited  and  defective,  but  never¬ 
theless  within  indeterminable  boundaries,  con¬ 
sequently  always  under  the  influence  of  the  con¬ 
ception  of  an  absolute  perfection.  And  thus  the 
practical  idea  is  always  in  the  highest  degree 
fruitful,  and  in  relation  to  real  actions  indis¬ 
pensably  necessary.  In  the  idea,  pure  reason 
possesses  even  causality  and  the  power  of  pro¬ 
ducing  that  which  its  conception  contains. 
Hence  we  cannot  say  of  wisdom,  in  a  disparag¬ 
ing  way,  “  it  is  only  an  idea.”  For,  for  the  very 
reason  that  it  is  the  idea  of  the  necessary  unity 
of  all  possible  aims,  it  must  be  for  all  practical 
exertions  and  endeavours  the  primitive  condi¬ 
tion  and  rule — a  rule  which,  if  not  constitutive, 
is  at  least  limitative. 

Now,  although  we  must  say  of  the  transcen¬ 
dental  conceptions  of  reason,  uthey  are  only 
ideas,”  we  must  not,  on  this  account,  look  upon 
them  as  superfluous  and  nugatory.  For,  although 
no  object  can  be  determined  by  them,  they  can 
be  of  great  utility,  unobserved  and  at  the  basis 
of  the  edifice  of  the  understanding,  as  the  canon 
for  its  extended  and  self-consistent  exercise — a 
canon  which,  indeed,  does  not  enable  it  to  cog¬ 
nize  more  in  an  object  than  it  would  cognize  by 
the  help  of  its  own  conceptions,  but  which 
guides  it  more  securely  in  its  cognition.  Not  to 


THE  CRITIQUE 


118 

mention  that  they  perhaps  render  possible  a 
transition  from  our  conceptions  of  nature  and 
the  non-ego  to  the  practical  conceptions,  and 
thus  produce  for  even  ethical  ideas  keeping, 
so  to  speak,  and  connection  with  the  speculative 
cognitions  of  reason.  The  explication  of  all  this 
must  be  looked  for  in  the  sequel. 

But  setting  aside,  in  conformity  with  our 
original  purpose,  the  consideration  of  the  prac¬ 
tical  ideas,  we  proceed  to  contemplate  reason  in 
its  speculative  use  alone,  nay,  in  a  still  more  re¬ 
stricted  sphere,  to  wit,  in  the  transcendental 
use;  and  here  must  strike  into  the  same  path 
which  we  followed  in  our  deduction  of  the  cate¬ 
gories.  That  is  to  say,  we  shall  consider  the 
logical  form  of  the  cognition  of  reason,  that  we 
may  see  whether  reason  may  not  be  thereby  a 
source  of  conceptions  which  enables  us  to  re¬ 
gard  objects  in  themselves  as  determined  syn¬ 
thetically  a  priori,  in  relation  to  one  or  other  of 
the  functions  of  reason. 

Reason,  considered  as  the  faculty  of  a  certain 
logical  form  of  cognition,  is  the  faculty  of  con¬ 
clusion,  that  is,  of  mediate  judgement  —  by 
means  of  the  subsumption  of  the  condition  of  a 
possible  judgement  under  the  condition  of  a 
given  judgement.  The  given  judgement  is  the 
general  rule  (major).  The  subsumption  of  the 
condition  of  another  possible  judgement  under 
the  condition  of  the  rule  is  the  minor.  The  ac¬ 
tual  judgement,  which  enounces  the  assertion  of 
the  rule  in  the  subsumed  case,  is  the  conclusion 
{conclusio).  The  rule  predicates  something  gen¬ 
erally  under  a  certain  condition.  The  condition 
of  the  rule  is  satisfied  in  some  particular  case.  It 
follows  that  what  was  valid  in  general  under 
that  condition  must  also  be  considered  as  valid 
in  the  particular  case  which  satisfies  this  condi¬ 
tion.  It  is  very  plain  that  reason  attains  to  a  cog¬ 
nition,  by  means  of  acts  of  the  understanding 
which  constitute  a  series  of  conditions.  When  I 
arrive  at  the  proposition,  “All  bodies  are  change¬ 
able,”  by  beginning  with  the  more  remote  cog¬ 
nition  (in  which  the  conception  of  body  does 
not  appear,  but  which  nevertheless  contains  the 
condition  of  that  conception),  “All  compound  is 
changeable,”  by  proceeding  from  this  to  a  less 
remote  cognition,  which  stands  under  the  condi¬ 
tion  of  the  former,  “Bodies  are  compound,”  and 
hence  to  a  third,  which  at  length  connects  for 
me  the  remote  cognition  (changeable)  with 
the  one  before  me,  “Consequently,  bodies  are 
changeable”  —  I  have  arrived  at  a  cognition 
(conclusion)  through  a  series  of  conditions 
(premisses).  Now  every  series,  whose  exponent 
(of  the  categorical  or  hypothetical  judgement)  is 


given,  can  be  continued;  consequently  the  same 
procedure  of  reason  conducts  us  to  the  ratioci- 
natio  polysyllogistica,  which  is  a  series  of  syl¬ 
logisms,  that  can  be  continued  either  on  the  side 
of  the  conditions  ( per  prosyllo gismos)  or  of  the 
conditioned  ( per  episyllo gismos)  to  an  indefi¬ 
nite  extent. 

But  we  very  soon  perceive  that  the  chain  or 
series  of  prosyllogisms,  that  is,  of  deduced  cog-  , 
nitions  on  the  side  of  the  grounds  or  conditions 
of  a  given  cognition,  in  other  words,  the  ascend¬ 
ing  series  of  syllogisms  must  have  a  very  differ-  v 
ent  relation  to  the  faculty  of  reason  from  that 
of  the  descending  series,  that  is,  the  progressive 
procedure  of  reason  on  the  side  of  the  condi¬ 
tioned  by  means  of  episyllogisms.  For,  as  in  the 
former  case  the  cognition  ( conclusio )  is  given 
only  as  conditioned,  reason  can  attain  to  this  , 
cognition  only  under  the  presupposition  that  all 
the  members  of  the  series  on  the  side  of  the 
conditions  are  given  (totality  in  the  series  of 
premisses),  because  only  under  this  supposition 
is  the  judgement  we  may  be  considering  possible 
a  priori;  while  on  the  side  of  the  conditioned 
or  the  inferences,  only  an  incomplete  and  be¬ 
coming,  and  not  a  presupposed  or  given  series, 
consequently  only  a  potential  progression,  is 
cogitated.  Hence,  when  a  cognition  is  contem¬ 
plated  as  conditioned,  reason  is  compelled  to 
consider  the  series  of  conditions  in  an  ascending 
line  as  completed  and  given  in  their  totality. 
But  if  the  very  same  condition  is  considered  at 
the  same  time  as  the  condition  of  other  cogni¬ 
tions,  which  together  constitute  a  series  of  in¬ 
ferences  or  consequences  in  a  descending  line, 
reason  may  preserve  a  perfect  indifference,  as 
to  how  far  this  progression  may  extend  a  parte 
posteriori,  and  whether  the  totality  of  this 
series  is  possible,  because  it  stands  in  no  need 
of  such  a  series  for  the  purpose  of  arriving  at 
the  conclusion  before  it,  inasmuch  as  this  con¬ 
clusion  is  sufficiently  guaranteed  and  determined 
on  grounds  a  parte  priori.  It  may  be  the  case, 
that  upon  the  side  of  the  conditions  the  series 
of  premisses  has  a  first  or  highest  condition,  or 
it  may  not  possess  this,  and  so  be  a  parte  priori 
unlimited;  but  it  must,  nevertheless,  contain 
totality  of  conditions,  even  admitting  that  we 
never  could  succeed  in  completely  apprehending 
it;  and  the  whole  series  must  be  uncondition¬ 
ally  true,  if  the  conditioned,  which  is  considered 
as  an  inference  resulting  from  it,  is  to  be  held 
as  true.  This  is  a  requirement  of  reason,  which 
announces  its  cognition  as  determined  a  priori 
and  as  necessary,  either  in  itself — and  in  this 
case  it  needs  no  grounds  to  rest  upon — or,  if  it 


OF  PURE 

is  deduced,  as  a  member  of  a  series  of  grounds, 
which  is  itself  unconditionally  true. 

Section  III.  System  of  Transcendental 
Ideas 

We  are  not  at  present  engaged  with  a  logical 
dialectic,  which  makes  complete  abstraction  of 
the  content  of  cognition  and  aims  only  at  un¬ 
veiling  the  illusory  appearance  in  the  form  of 
syllogisms.  Our  subject  is  transcendental  dialec¬ 
tic,  which  must  contain,  completely  a  priori , 
the  origin  of  certain  cognitions  drawn  from 
pure  reason,  and  the  origin  of  certain  deduced 
conceptions,  the  object  of  which  cannot  be 
given  empirically  and  which  therefore  lie  be¬ 
yond  the  sphere  of  the  faculty  of  understand¬ 
ing.  We  have  observed,  from  the  natural  rela¬ 
tion  which  the  transcendental  use  of  our  cog¬ 
nition,  in  syllogisms  as  well  as  in  judgements, 
must  have  to  the  logical,  that  there  are  three 
kinds  of  dialectical  arguments,  corresponding 
to  the  three  modes  of  conclusion,  by  which  rea¬ 
son  attains  to  cognitions  on  principles;  and  that 
in  all  it  is  the  business  of  reason  to  ascend 
from  the  conditioned  synthesis,  beyond  which 
the  understanding  never  proceeds,  to  the  un¬ 
conditioned  which  the  understanding  never  can 
reach. 

Now  the  most  general  relations  which  can 
exist  in  our  representations  are:  ist,  the  rela¬ 
tion  to  the  subject;  2nd,  the  relation  to  objects, 
either  as  phenomena,  or  as  objects  of  thought  in 
general.  If  we  connect  this  subdivision  with  the 
main  division,  all  the  relations  of  our  represen¬ 
tations,  of  which  we  can  form  either  a  concep¬ 
tion  or  an  idea,  are  threefold:  1.  The  relation 
to  the  subject;  2.  The  relation  to  the  manifold 
of  the  object  as  a  phenomenon;  3.  The  relation 
to  all  things  in  general. 

Now  all  pure  conceptions  have  to  do  in  gen¬ 
eral  with  the  synthetical  unity  of  representa¬ 
tions;  conceptions  of  pure  reason  (transcen¬ 
dental  ideas),  on  the  other  hand,  with  the  un¬ 
conditional  synthetical  unity  of  all  conditions. 
It  follows  that  all  transcendental  ideas  arrange 
themselves  in  three  classes,  the  first  of  which 
contains  the  absolute  (unconditioned)  unity  of 
the  thinking  subject ,  the  second  the  absolute 
unity  of  the  series  of  the  conditions  of  a  phe¬ 
nomenon,  the  third  the  absolute  unity  of  the 
condition  of  all  objects  of  thought  in  general. 

The  thinking  subject  is  the  object-matter  of 
Psychology ;  the  sum  total  of  all  phenomena 
(the  world)  is  the  object-matter  of  Cosmology ; 
and  the  thing  which  contains  the  highest  condi¬ 
tion  of  the  possibility  of  all  that  is  cogitable 


REASON  1 19 

(the  being  of  all  beings)  is  the  object-matter  of 
all  Theology.  Thus  pure  reason  presents  us  with 
the  idea  of  a  transcendental  doctrine  of  the  soul 
(psychologia  rationalis ),  of  a  transcendental 
science  of  the  world  ( cosmologia  rationalis), 
and  finally  of  a  transcendental  doctrine  of  God 
( theologia  transcendentalis).  Understanding 
cannot  originate  even  the  outline  of  any  of 
these  sciences,  even  when  connected  with  the 
highest  logical  use  of  reason,  that  is,  all  cogi¬ 
table  syllogisms — for  the  purpose  of  proceed¬ 
ing  from  one  object  (phenomenon)  to  all  oth¬ 
ers,  even  to  the  utmost  limits  of  the  empirical 
synthesis.  They  are,  on  the  contrary,  pure  and 
genuine  products,  or  problems,  of  pure  reason. 

What  modi  of  the  pure  conceptions  of  reason 
these  transcendental  ideas  are  will  be  fully  ex¬ 
posed  in  the  following  chapter.  They  follow  the 
guiding  thread  of  the  categories.  For  pure  rea¬ 
son  never  relates  immediately  to  objects,  but 
to  the  conceptions  of  these  contained  in  the  un¬ 
derstanding.  In  like  manner,  it  will  be  made 
manifest  in  the  detailed  explanation  of  these 
ideas — how  reason,  merely  through  the  syn¬ 
thetical  use  of  the  same  function  which  it  em¬ 
ploys  in  a  categorical  syllogism,  necessarily  at¬ 
tains  to  the  conception  of  the  absolute  unity  of 
the  thinking  subject — how  the  logical  procedure 
in  hypothetical  ideas  necessarily  produces  the 
idea  of  the  absolutely  unconditioned  in  a  series 
of  given  conditions,  and  finally — how  the  mere 
form  of  the  disjunctive  syllogism  involves  the 
highest  conception  of  a  being  of  all  beings:  a 
thought  which  at  first  sight  seems  in  the  highest 
degree  paradoxical. 

An  objective  deduction ,  such  as  we  were  able 
to  present  in  the  case  of  the  categories,  is  im¬ 
possible  as  regards  these  transcendental  ideas. 
For  they  have,  in  truth,  no  relation  to  any  ob¬ 
ject,  in  experience,  for  the  very  reason  that  they 
are  only  ideas.  But  a  subjective  deduction  of 
them  from  the  nature  of  our  reason  is  possible, 
and  has  been  given  in  the  present  chapter. 

It  is  easy  to  perceive  that  the  sole  aim  of 
pure  reason  is  the  absolute  totality  of  the  syn¬ 
thesis  on  the  side  of  the  conditions,  and  that 
it  does  not  concern  itself  with  the  absolute  com¬ 
pleteness  on  the  part  of  the  conditioned.  For  of 
the  former  alone  does  she  stand  in  need,  in 
order  to  preposit  the  whole  series  of  conditions, 
and  thus  present  them  to  the  understanding  a 
priori.  But  if  we  once  have  a  completely  (and 
unconditionally)  given  condition,  there  is  no 
further  necessity,  in  proceeding  with  the  series, 
for  a  conception  of  reason;  for  the  understand¬ 
ing  takes  of  itself  every  step  downward,  from 


120 


THE  CRITIQUE 


the  condition  to  the  conditioned.  Thus  the  tran¬ 
scendental  ideas  are  available  only  for  ascend¬ 
ing  in  the  series  of  conditions,  till  we  reach  the 
unconditioned,  that  is,  principles.  As  regards 
descending  to  the  conditioned,  on  the  other 
hand,  we  find  that  there  is  a  widely  extensive 
logical  use  which  reason  makes  of  the  laws  of 
the  understanding,  but  that  a  transcendental 
use  thereof  is  impossible;  and  that  when  we 
form  an  idea  of  the  absolute  totality  of  such  a 
synthesis,  for  example,  of  the  whole  series  of  all 
future  changes  in  the  world,  this  idea  is  a  mere 
ens  rationis ,  an  arbitrary  fiction  of  thought,  and 
not  a  necessary  presupposition  of  reason.  For 
the  possibility  of  the  conditioned  presupposes 
the  totality  of  its  conditions,  but  not  of  its  con¬ 
sequences.  Consequently,  this  conception  is  not 
a  transcendental  idea — and  it  is  with  these  alone 
that  we  are  at  present  occupied. 

Finally,  it  is  obvious  that  there  exists  among 
the  transcendental  ideas  a  certain  connection 
and  unity,  and  that  pure  reason,  by  means  of 
them,  collects  all  its  cognitions  into  one  system. 
From  the  cognition  of  self  to  the  cognition  of 
the  world,  and  through  these  to  the  supreme 
being,  the  progression  is  so  natural,  that  it  seems 
to  resemble  the  logical  march  of  reason  from 
the  premisses  to  the  conclusion.1  Now  whether 
there  lies  unobserved  at  the  foundation  of  these 
ideas  an  analogy  of  the  same  kind  as  exists  be¬ 
tween  the  logical  and  transcendental  procedure 
of  reason,  is  another  of  those  questions,  the 
answer  to  which  we  must  not  expect  till  we  ar¬ 
rive  at  a  more  advanced  stage  in  our  inquiries. 
In  this  cursory  and  preliminary  view,  we  have, 
meanwhile,  reached  our  aim.  For  we  have  dis¬ 
pelled  the  ambiguity  which  attached  to  the 
transcendental  conceptions  of  reason,  from  their 
being  commonly  mixed  up  with  other  concep¬ 
tions  in  the  systems  of  philosophers,  and  not 

1  The  science  of  Metaphysics  has  for  the  proper  ob¬ 
ject  of  its  inquiries  only  three  grand  ideas:  God,  Free¬ 
dom,  and  Immortality,  and  it  aims  at  showing,  that 
the  second  conception,  conjoined  with  the  first,  must 
lead  to  the  third,  as  a  necessary  conclusion.  All  the 
other  subjects  with  which  it  occupies  itself,  are  merely 
means  for  the  attainment  and  realization  of  these  ideas. 
It  does  not  require  these  ideas  for  the  construction  of  a 
science  of  nature,  but,  on  the  contrary,  for  the  purpose 
of  passing  beyond  the  sphere  of  nature.  A  complete  in¬ 
sight  into  and  comprehension  of  them  would  render 
Theology,  Ethics,  and,  through  the  conjunction  of  both. 
Religion,  solely  dependent  on  the  speculative  faculty  of 
reason.  In  a  systematic  representation  of  these  ideas 
the  above-mentioned  arrangement — the  synthetical  one 
— would  be  the  most  suitable:  but  in  the  investigation 
which  must  necessarily  precede  it,  the  analytical,  which 
reverses  this  arrangement,  would  be  better  adapted  to 
our  purpose,  as  in  it  we  should  proceed  from  that  which 
experience  immediately  presents  to  us — psychology,  to 
cosmology,  and  thence  to  theology. 


properly  distinguished  from  the  conceptions  of 
the  understanding;  we  have  exposed  their  origin  \ 
and,  thereby,  at  the  same  time  their  determi¬ 
nate  number,  and  presented  them  in  a  system¬ 
atic  connection,  and  have  thus  marked  out  and 
enclosed  a  definite  sphere  for  pure  reason. 

a 

Book  II 

Of  the  Dialectical  Procedure  of  r 
Pure  Reason 

i 

It  may  be  said  that  the  object  of  a  merely 
transcendental  idea  is  something  of  which  we 
have  no  conception,  although  the  idea  may  be 
a  necessary  product  of  reason  according  to  its  ; 
original  laws.  For,  in  fact,  a  conception  of  an 
object  that  is  adequate  to  the  idea  given  by 
reason,  is  impossible.  For  such  an  object  must  , 
be  capable  of  being  presented  and  intuited  in  a  , 
possible  experience.  But  we  should  express  our 
meaning  better,  and  with  less  risk  of  being  mis¬ 
understood,  if  we  said  that  we  can  have  no 
knowledge  of  an  object,  which  perfectly  corre¬ 
sponds  to  an  idea,  although  we  may  possess  a 
problematical  conception  thereof. 

Now  the  transcendental  (subjective)  reality 
at  least  of  the  pure  conceptions  of  reason  rests 
upon  the  fact  that  we  are  led  to  such  ideas  by 
a  necessary  procedure  of  reason.  There  must 
therefore  be  syllogisms  which  contain  no  em¬ 
pirical  premisses,  and  by  means  of  which  we 
conclude  from  something  that  we  do  know,  to 
something  of  which  we  do  not  even  possess  a 
conception,  to  which  we,  nevertheless,  by  an 
unavoidable  illusion,  ascribe  objective  reality. 
Such  arguments  are,  as  regards  their  result, 
rather  to  be  termed  sophisms  than  syllogisms, 
although  indeed,  as  regards  their  origin,  they 
are  very  well  entitled  to  the  latter  name,  inas¬ 
much  as  they  are  not  fictions  or  accidental 
products  of  reason,  but  are  necessitated  by  its 
very  nature.  They  are  sophisms,  not  of  men. 
but  of  pure  reason  herself,  from  which  the 
wisest  cannot  free  himself.  After  long  labour 
he  may  be  able  to  guard  against  the  error,  but 
he  can  never  be  thoroughly  rid  of  the  illusion 
which  continually  mocks  and  misleads  him. 

Of  these  dialectical  arguments  there  are  three 
kinds,  corresponding  to  the  number  of  the  ideas 
which  their  conclusions  present.  In  the  argument 
or  syllogism  of  the  first  class ,  I  conclude,  from 
the  transcendental  conception  of  the  subject 
which  contains  no  manifold,  the  absolute  unity 
of  the  subject  itself,  of  which  I  cannot  in  this 
manner  attain  to  a  conception.  This  dialectical 
argument  I  shall  call  the  transcendental  pa - 


OF  PURE  REASON 


1 2 1 


ralogism.  The  second  class  of  sophistical  argu¬ 
ments  is  occupied  with  the  transcendental  con¬ 
ception  of  the  absolute  totality  of  the  series  of 
conditions  for  a  given  phenomenon,  and  I  con¬ 
clude,  from  the  fact  that  I  have  always  a  self¬ 
contradictory  conception  of  the  unconditioned 
synthetical  unity  of  the  series  upon  one  side, 
the  truth  of  the  opposite  unity,  of  which  I  have 
nevertheless  no  conception.  The  condition  of 
reason  in  these  dialectical  arguments,  I  shall 
term  the  antinomy  of  pure  reason.  Finally,  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  third  kind  of  sophistical  argu¬ 
ment,  I  conclude,  from  the  totality  of  the  con¬ 
ditions  of  thinking  objects  in  general,  in  so  far 
as  they  can  be  given,  the  absolute  synthetical 
unity  of  all  conditions  of  the  possibility  of 
things  in  general;  that  is,  from  things  which  I 
do  not  know  in  their  mere  transcendental  con¬ 
ception,  I  conclude  a  being  of  all  beings  which 
I  know  still  less  by  means  of  a  transcendental 
conception,  and  of  whose  unconditioned  neces¬ 
sity  I  can  form  no  conception  whatever.  This 
dialectical  argument  I  shall  call  the  ideal  of 
pure  reason. 

Chapter  I.  Of  the  Paralogisms  of  Pure  Reason 

The  logical  paralogism  consists  in  the  falsity 
of  an  argument  in  respect  of  its  form,  be  the 
content  what  it  may.  But  a  transcendental  pa¬ 
ralogism  has  a  transcendental  foundation,  and 
concludes  falsely,  while  the  form  is  correct  and 
unexceptionable.  In  this  manner  the  paralogism 
has  its  foundation  in  the  nature  of  human  rea¬ 
son,  and  is  the  parent  of  an  unavoidable,  though 
not  insoluble,  mental  illusion. 

We  now  come  to  a  conception  which  was  not 
inserted  in  the  general  list  of  transcendental 
conceptions,  and  yet  must  be  reckoned  with 
them,  but  at  the  same  time  without  in  the  least 
altering,  or  indicating  a  deficiency  in  that  table. 
This  is  the  conception,  or,  if  the  term  is  pre¬ 
ferred,  the  judgement,  “I  think.”  But  it  is  read¬ 
ily  perceived  that  this  thought  is  as  it  were  the 
vehicle  of  all  conceptions  in  general,  and  con¬ 
sequently  of  transcendental  conceptions  also, 
and  that  it  is  therefore  regarded  as  a  transcen¬ 
dental  conception,  although  it  can  have  no  pe¬ 
culiar  claim  to  be  so  ranked,  inasmuch  as  its 
only  use  is  to  indicate  that  all  thought  is  ac¬ 
companied  by  consciousness.  At  the  same  time, 
pure  as  this  conception  is  from  empirical  con¬ 
tent  (impressions  of  the  senses),  it  enables  us 
to  distinguish  two  different  kinds  of  objects. 
“I,”  as  thinking,  am  an  object  of  the  internal 
sense,  and  am  called  soul.  That  which  is  an  ob¬ 
ject  of  the  external  senses  is  called  body.  Thus 


the  expression,  “I,”  as  a  thinking  being,  desig¬ 
nates  the  object-matter  of  psychology,  which 
may  be  called  “the  rational  doctrine  of  the 
soul,”  inasmuch  as  in  this  science  I  desire  to 
know  nothing  of  the  soul  but  what,  independent¬ 
ly  of  all  experience  (which  determines  me  in 
concreto ),  may  be  concluded  from  this  concep¬ 
tion  “I,”  in  so  far  as  it  appears  in  all  thought. 

Now,  the  rational  doctrine  of  the  soul  is 
really  an  undertaking  of  this  kind.  For  if  the 
smallest  empirical  element  of  thought,  if  any 
particular  perception  of  my  internal  state,  were 
to  be  introduced  among  the  grounds  of  cogni¬ 
tion  of  this  science,  it  would  not  be  a  rational, 
but  an  empirical  doctrine  of  the  soul.  We  have 
thus  before  us  a  pretended  science,  raised  upon 
the  single  proposition,  “I  think,”  whose  founda¬ 
tion  or  want  of  foundation  we  may  very  proper¬ 
ly,  and  agreeably  with  the  nature  of  a  transcen¬ 
dental  philosophy,  here  examine.  It  ought  not 
to  be  objected  that  in  this  proposition,  which 
expresses  the  perception  of  one’s  self,  an  in¬ 
ternal  experience  is  asserted,  and  that  conse¬ 
quently  the  rational  doctrine  of  the  soul  which 
is  founded  upon  it,  is  not  pure,  but  partly 
founded  upon  an  empirical  principle.  For  this 
internal  perception  is  nothing  more  than  the 
mere  apperception,  “I  think,”  which  in  fact 
renders  all  transcendental  conceptions  possible, 
in  which  we  say,  “I  think  substance,  cause,  etc.” 
For  internal  experience  in  general  and  its  possi¬ 
bility,  or  perception  in  general,  and  its  relation 
to  other  perceptions,  unless  some  particular  dis¬ 
tinction  or  determination  thereof  is  empirically 
given,  cannot  be  regarded  as  empirical  cogni¬ 
tion,  but  as  cognition  of  the  empirical,  and  be¬ 
longs  to  the  investigation  of  the  possibility  of 
every  experience,  which  is  certainly  transcen¬ 
dental.  The  smallest  object  of  experience  (for 
example,  only  pleasure  or  pain),  that  should 
be  included  in  the  general  representation  of  self- 
consciousness,  would  immediately  change  the 
rational  into  an  empirical  psychology. 

“I  think”  is  therefore  the  only  text  of  rational 
psychology,  from  which  it  must  develop  its 
whole  system.  It  is  manifest  that  this  thought, 
when  applied  to  an  object  (myself),  can  con¬ 
tain  nothing  but  transcendental  predicates  there¬ 
of;  because  the  least  empirical  predicate  would 
destroy  the  purity  of  the  science  and  its  inde¬ 
pendence  of  all  experience. 

But  we  shall  have  to  follow  here  the  guidance 
of  the  categories — only,  as  in  the  present  case 
a  thing,  “I,”  as  thinking  being,  is  at  first  given, 
we  shall — not  indeed  change  the  order  of  the 
categories  as  it  stands  in  the  table — but  begin 


122 


THE  CRITIQUE 


at  the  category  of  substance,  by  which  a  thing 
in  itself  is  represented,  and  proceed  backwards 
through  the  series.  The  topic  of  the  rational 
doctrine  of  the  soul,  from  which  everything  else 
it  may  contain  must  be  deduced,  is  accordingly 
as  follows: 

I  2 

The  Soul  is  Substance  As  regards  its  quality 

it  is  SIMPLE 

3 

As  regards  the  different 
times  in  which  it  exists, 
it  is  numerically  identical, 
that  is  unity,  not  Plurality 

4 

It  is  in  relation  to  possible  objects  in  space1 

From  these  elements  originate  all  the  con¬ 
ceptions  of  pure  psychology,  by  combination 
alone,  without  the  aid  of  any  other  principle. 
This  substance,  merely  as  an  object  of  the  in¬ 
ternal  sense,  gives  the  conception  of  Immateri¬ 
ality;  as  simple  substance,  that  of  Incorruptibil¬ 
ity;  its  identity,  as  intellectual  substance,  gives 
the  conception  of  Personality ;  all  these  three 
together,  Spirituality.  Its  relation  to  objects  in 
space  gives  us  the  conception  of  connection 
( commercium )  with  bodies.  Thus  it  represents 
thinking  substance  as  the  principle  of  life  in 
matter,  that  is,  as  a  soul  ( anima ),  and  as  the 
ground  of  Animality;  and  this,  limited  and  de¬ 
termined  by  the  conception  of  spirituality,  gives 
us  that  of  Immortality. 

Now  to  these  conceptions  relate  four  paralo¬ 
gisms  of  a  transcendental  psychology,  which  is 
falsely  held  to  be  a  science  of  pure  reason, 
touching  the  nature  of  our  thinking  being.  We 
can,  however,  lay  at  the  foundation  of  this 
science  nothing  but  the  simple  and  in  itself 
perfectly  contentless  representation  “I,”  which 
cannot  even  be  called  a  conception,  but  merely 
a  consciousness  which  accompanies  all  concep¬ 
tions.  By  this  “I,”  or  “He,”  or  “It,”  who  or 
which  thinks,  nothing  more  is  represented  than 
a  transcendental  subject  of  thought=x,  which 
is  cognized  only  by  means  of  the  thoughts  that 
are  its  predicates,  and  of  which,  apart  from 

1  The  reader,  who  may  not  so  easily  perceive  the  psy¬ 
chological  sense  of  these  expressions,  taken  here  in  their 
transcendental  abstraction,  and  cannot  guess  why  the 
latter  attribute  of  the  soul  belongs  to  the  category  of  ex¬ 
istence,  will  find  the  expressions  sufficiently  explained 
and  justified  in  the  sequel.  I  have,  moreover,  to  apolo¬ 
gize  for  the  Latin  terms  which  have  been  employed,  in¬ 
stead  of  their  German  synonyms,  contrary  to  the  rules 
of  correct  writing.  But  I  judged  it  better  to  sacrifice 
elegance  to  perspicuity. 


these,  we  cannot  form  the  least  conception. 
Hence  we  are  obliged  to  go  round  this  represen¬ 
tation  in  a  perpetual  circle,  inasmuch  as  we 
must  always  employ  it,  in  order  to  frame  any 
judgement  respecting  it.  And  this  inconvenience 
we  find  it  impossible  to  rid  ourselves  of,  because 
consciousness  in  itself  is  not  so  much  a  repre¬ 
sentation  distinguishing  a  particular  object,  as 
a  form  of  representation  in  general,  in  so  far  as 
it  may  be  termed  cognition;  for  in  and  by  cog¬ 
nition  alone  do  I  think  anything. 

It  must,  however,  appear  extraordinary  at 
first  sight  that  the  condition  under  which  I 
think,  and  which  is  consequently  a  property  of 
my  subject,  should  be  held  to  be  likewise  valid 
for  every  existence  which  thinks,  and  that  we 
can  presume  to  base  upon  a  seemingly  empirical 
proposition  a  judgement  which  is  apodeictic  and 
universal,  to  wit,  that  everything  which  thinks 
is  constituted  as  the  voice  of  my  consciousness 
declares  it  to  be,  that  is,  as  a  self-conscious 
being.  The  cause  of  this  belief  is  to  be  found 
in  the  fact  that  we  necessarily  attribute  to  things 
a  priori  all  the  properties  which  constitute  con¬ 
ditions  under  which  alone  we  can  cogitate  them. 
Now  I  cannot  obtain  the  least  representation  of 
a  thinking  being  by  means  of  external  expe¬ 
rience,  but  solely  through  self-consciousness. 
Such  objects  are  consequently  nothing  more 
than  the  transference  of  this  consciousness  of 
mine  to  other  things  which  can  only  thus  be  rep¬ 
resented  as  thinking  beings.  The  proposition, 
“I  think,”  is,  in  the  present  case,  understood  in 
a  problematical  sense,  not  in  so  far  as  it  con¬ 
tains  a  perception  of  an  existence  (like  the  Car¬ 
tesian  “ Cogito ,  ergo  sum”),2  but  in  regard  to  its 
mere  possibility — for  the  purpose  of  discover¬ 
ing  what  properties  may  be  inferred  from  so 
simple  a  proposition  and  predicated  of  the  sub¬ 
ject  of  it. 

If  at  the  foundation  of  our  pure  rational  cog¬ 
nition  of  thinking  beings  there  lay  more  than 
the  mere  Cogito — if  we  could  likewise  call  in 
aid  observations  on  the  play  of  our  thoughts, 
and  the  thence  derived  natural  laws  of  the 
thinking  self,  there  would  arise  an  empirical 
psychology  which  would  be  a  kind  of  physiology 
of  the  internal  sense  and  might  possibly  be 
capable  of  explaining  the  phenomena  of  that 
sense.  But  it  could  never  be  available  for  dis¬ 
covering  those  properties  which  do  not  belong 
to  possible  experience  (such  as  the  quality  of 
simplicity),  nor  could  it  make  any  apodeictic 
enunciation  on  the  nature  of  thinking  beings: 

2  [“I  think,  therefore  I  am.”] 


OF  PURE  REASON 


it  would  therefore  not  be  a  rational  psychology. 

Now,  as  the  proposition  “I  think”  (in  the 
problematical  sense)  contains  the  form  of  every 
judgement  in  general  and  is  the  constant  ac¬ 
companiment  of  all  the  categories,  it  is  manifest 
that  conclusions  are  drawn  from  it  only  by  a 
transcendental  employment  of  the  understand¬ 
ing.  This  use  of  the  understanding  excludes  all 
empirical  elements;  and  we  cannot,  as  has  been 
shown  above,  have  any  favourable  conception 
beforehand  of  its  procedure.  We  shall  there¬ 
fore  follow  with  a  critical  eye  this  proposition 
through  all  the  predicaments  of  pure  psychol¬ 
ogy;  but  we  shall,  for  brevity’s  sake,  allow  this 
examination  to  proceed  in  an  uninterrupted 
connection. 

Before  entering  on  this  task,  however,  the 
following  general  remark  may  help  to  quicken 
our  attention  to  this  mode  of  argument.  It  is 
not  merely  through  my  thinking  that  I  cognize 
an  object,  but  only  through  my  determining  a 
given  intuition  in  relation  to  the  unity  of  con¬ 
sciousness  in  which  all  thinking  consists.  It 
follows  that  I  cognize  myself,  not  through  my 
being  conscious  of  myself  as  thinking,  but  only 
when  I  am  conscious  of  the  intuition  of  myself 
as  determined  in  relation  to  the  function  of 
thought.  All  the  modi  of  self-consciousness  in 
thought  are  hence  not  conceptions  of  objects 
(conceptions  of  the  understanding — categories) ; 
they  are  mere  logical  functions,  which  do  not 
present  to  thought  an  object  to  be  cognized,  and 
cannot  therefore  present  my  Self  as  an  object. 
Not  the  consciousness  of  the  determining ,  but 
only  that  of  the  determinable  self,  that  is,  of  my 
internal  intuition  (in  so  far  as  the  manifold  con¬ 
tained  in  it  can  be  connected  conformably  with 
the  general  condition  of  the  unity  of  appercep¬ 
tion  in  thought),  is  the  object. 

1.  In  all  judgements  I  am  the  determining 
subject  of  that  relation  which  constitutes  a 
judgement.  But  that  the  I  which  thinks,  must 
be  considered  as  in  thought  always  a  subject , 
and  as  a  thing  which  cannot  be  a  predicate  to 
thought,  is  an  apodeictic  and  identical  propo¬ 
sition.  But  this  proposition  does  not  signify  that 
I,  as  an  object,  am,  for  myself,  a  self -sub  sis  tent 
being  or  substance.  This  latter  statement — an 
ambitious  one — requires  to  be  supported  by 
data  which  are  not  to  be  discovered  in  thought; 
and  are  perhaps  (in  so  far  as  I  consider  the 
thinking  self  merely  as  such)  not  to  be  dis¬ 
covered  in  the  thinking  self  at  all 

2.  That  the  /  or  Ego  of  apperception,  and 
consequently  in  all  thought,  is  singular  or  sim- 


123 

pie,  and  cannot  be  resolved  into  a  plurality  of 
subjects,  and  therefore  indicates  a  logically 
simple  subject — this  is  self-evident  from  the 
very  conception  of  an  Ego,  and  is  consequently 
an  analytical  proposition.  But  this  is  not  tanta¬ 
mount  to  declaring  that  the  thinking  Ego  is  a 
simple  substance — for  this  would  be  a  syntheti¬ 
cal  proposition.  The  conception  of  substance 
always  relates  to  intuitions,  which  with  me  can¬ 
not  be  other  than  sensuous,  and  which  conse¬ 
quently  lie  completely  out  of  the  sphere  of  the 
understanding  and  its  thought:  but  to  this 
sphere  belongs  the  affirmation  that  the  Ego  is 
simple  in  thought.  It  would  indeed  be  surpris¬ 
ing,  if  the  conception  of  “substance,”  which  in 
other  cases  requires  so  much  labour  to  distin¬ 
guish  from  the  other  elements  presented  by 
intuition — so  much  trouble,  too,  to  discover 
whether  it  can  be  simple  (as  in  the  case  of  the 
parts  of  matter) — should  be  presented  immedi¬ 
ately  to  me,  as  if  by  revelation,  in  the  poorest 
mental  representation  of  all. 

3.  The  proposition  of  the  identity  of  my  Self 
amidst  all  the  manifold  representations  of 
which  I  am  conscious,  is  likewise  a  proposition 
lying  in  the  conceptions  themselves,  and  is  con¬ 
sequently  analytical.  But  this  identity  of  the 
subject,  of  which  I  am  conscious  in  all  its  rep¬ 
resentations,  does  not  relate  to  or  concern  the 
intuition  of  the  subject,  by  which  it  is  given  as 
an  object.  This  proposition  cannot  therefore 
enounce  the  identity  of  the  person,  by  which  is 
understood  the  consciousness  of  the  identity  of 
its  own  substance  as  a  thinking  being  in  all 
change  and  variation  of  circumstances.  To  prove 
this,  we  should  require  not  a  mere  analysis  of 
the  proposition,  but  synthetical  judgements 
based  upon  a  given  intuition. 

4.  I  distinguish  my  own  existence,  as  that  of 
a  thinking  being,  from  that  of  other  things  ex¬ 
ternal  to  me — among  which  my  body  also  is 
reckoned.  This  is  also  an  analytical  proposition, 
for  other  things  are  exactly  those  which  I  think 
as  different  or  distinguished  from  myself.  But 
whether  this  consciousness  of  myself  is  possi¬ 
ble  without  things  external  to  me;  and  whether 
therefore  I  can  exist  merely  as  a  thinking  being 
(without  being  man) — cannot  be  known  or  in¬ 
ferred  from  this  proposition. 

Thus  we  have  gained  nothing  as  regards  the 
cognition  of  myself  as  object,  by  the  analysis 
of  the  consciousness  of  my  Self  in  thought.  The 
logical  exposition  of  thought  in  general  is  mis¬ 
taken  for  a  metaphysical  determination  of  the 
object. 


THE  CRITIQUE 


124 

Our  Critique  would  be  an  investigation  utter¬ 
ly  superfluous,  if  there  existed  a  possibility  of 
proving  a  priori,  that  all  thinking  beings  are 
in  themselves  simple  substances,  as  such,  there¬ 
fore,  possess  the  inseparable  attribute  of  per¬ 
sonality,  and  are  conscious  of  their  existence 
apart  from  and  unconnected  with  matter.  For 
we  should  thus  have  taken  a  step  beyond  the 
world  of  sense,  and  have  penetrated  into  the 
sphere  of  noumena ;  and  in  this  case  the  right 
could  not  be  denied  us  of  extending  our  knowl¬ 
edge  in  this  sphere,  of  establishing  ourselves, 
and,  under  a  favouring  star,  appropriating  to 
ourselves  possessions  in  it.  For  the  proposition: 
“Every  thinking  being,  as  such,  is  simple  sub¬ 
stance,”  is  an  a  priori  synthetical  proposition; 
because  in  the  first  place  it  goes  beyond  the 
conception  which  is  the  subject  of  it,  and  adds 
to  the  mere  notion  of  a  thinking  being  the  mode 
of  its  existence,  and  in  the  second  place  annexes 
a  predicate  (that  of  simplicity)  to  the  latter 
conception — a  predicate  which  it  could  not  have 
discovered  in  the  sphere  of  experience.  It  would 
follow  that  a  priori  synthetical  propositions  are 
possible  and  legitimate,  not  only,  as  we  have 
maintained,  in  relation  to  objects  of  possible 
experience,  and  as  principles  of  the  possibility 
of  this  experience  itself,  but  are  applicable  to 
things  in  themselves — an  inference  which  makes 
an  end  of  the  whole  of  this  Critique ,  and  obliges 
us  to  fall  back  on  the  old  mode  of  metaphysi¬ 
cal  procedure.  But  indeed  the  danger  is  not  so 
great,  if  we  look  a  little  closer  into  the  question. 

There  lurks  in  the  procedure  of  rational  psy¬ 
chology  a  paralogism,  which  is  represented  in 
the  following  syllogism: 

That  which  cannot  he  cogitated  otherwise 
than  as  subject,  does  not  exist  otherwise  than  as 
subject,  and  is  therefore  substance. 

A  thinking  being,  considered  merely  as  such, 
cannot  be  cogitated  otherwise  than  as  subject. 

Therefore  it  exists  also  as  such,  that  is,  as 
substance. 

In  the  major  we  speak  of  a  being  that  can  be 
cogitated  generally  and  in  every  relation,  con¬ 
sequently  as  it  may  be  given  in  intuition.  But  in 
the  minor  we  speak  of  the  same  being  only  in 
so  far  as  it  regards  itself  as  subject,  relatively 
to  thought  and  the  unity  of  consciousness,  but 
not  in  relation  to  intuition,  by  which  it  is  pre¬ 
sented  as  an  object  to  thought.  Thus  the  con¬ 
clusion  is  here  arrived  at  by  a  Sophisma  figurae 
dictionis.1 

1  Thought  is  taken  in  the  two  premisses  in  two  totally 
different  senses.  In  the  major  it  is  considered  as  relating 
and  applying  to  objects  in  general,  consequently  to  ob¬ 
jects  of  intuition  also.  In  the  minor,  we  understand  it 


That  this  famous  argument  is  a  mere  paralo¬ 
gism,  will  be  plain  to  any  one  who  will  consider 
the  general  remark  which  precedes  our  exposi¬ 
tion  of  the  principles  of  the  pure  understanding, 
and  the  section  on  noumena.  For  it  was  there 
proved  that  the  conception  of  a  thing,  w’hich 
can  exist  per  se — only  as  a  subject  and  never  as 
a  predicate,  possesses  no  objective  reality;  that 
is  to  say,  we  can  never  know  whether  there  ex¬ 
ists  any  object  to  correspond  to  the  conception; 
consequently,  the  conception  is  nothing  more 
than  a  conception,  and  from  it  we  derive  no 
proper  knowledge.  If  this  conception  is  to  indi¬ 
cate  by  the  term  substance,  an  object  that  can 
be  given,  if  it  is  to  become  a  cognition,  we  must 
have  at  the  foundation  of  the  cognition  a  per¬ 
manent  intuition,  as  the  indispensable  condi¬ 
tion  of  its  objective  reality.  For  through  intui¬ 
tion  alone  can  an  object  be  given.  But  in  in¬ 
ternal  intuition  there  is  nothing  permanent,  for 
the  Ego  is  but  the  consciousness  of  my  thought. 
If  then,  we  appeal  merely  to  thought,  we  cannot 
discover  the  necessary  condition  of  the  appli¬ 
cation  of  the  conception  of  substance — that  is, 
of  a  subject  existing  per  se — to  the  subject  as 
a  thinking  being.  And  thus  the  conception  of  the 
simple  nature  of  substance,  which  is  connected 
with  the  objective  reality  of  this  conception,  is 
shown  to  be  also  invalid,  and  to  be,  in  fact, 
nothing  more  than  the  logical  qualitative  unity 
of  self-consciousness  in  thought;  whilst  we  re¬ 
main  perfectly  ignorant  whether  the  subject  is 
composite  or  not. 

Refutation  of  the  Argument  of  Mendelssohn 
for  the  Substantiality  or  Permanence 
of  the  Sold 

This  acute  philosopher  easily  perceived  the 
insufficiency  of  the  common  argument  which 
attempts  to  prove  that  the  soul — it  being 
granted  that  it  is  a  simple  being — cannot  per¬ 
ish  by  dissolution  or  decomposition;  he  saw’  it 
is  not  impossible  for  it  to  cease  to  be  by  extinc¬ 
tion,  or  disappearance.  He  endeavoured  to  prove 
in  his  Phaedo,  that  the  soul  cannot  be  annihi¬ 
lated,  by  showing  that  a  simple  being  cannot 

as  relating  merely  to  self-consciousness.  In  this  sense, 
we  do  not  cogitate  an  object,  but  merely  the  relation  to 
the  self-consciousness  of  the  subject,  as  the  form  of 
thought.  In  the  former  premiss  we  speak  of  things 
which  cannot  be  cogitated  otherwise  than  as  subjects. 
In  the  second,  we  do  not  speak  of  things ,  but  of  thought 
(all  objects  being  abstracted),  in  which  the  Ego  is  al¬ 
ways  the  subject  of  consciousness.  Hence  the  conclusion 
cannot  be,  “I  cannot  exist  otherwise  than  as  subject”; 
but  only  “I  can,  in  cogitating  my  existence,  employ  my 
Ego  only  as  the  subject  of  the  judgement.”  But  this  is 
an  identical  proposition,  and  throws  no  light  on  the 
mode  of  my  existence. 


OF  PURE  REASON 


cease  to  exist.  Inasmuch  as,  he  said,  a  simple 
existence  cannot  diminish,  nor  gradually  lose 
portions  of  its  being,  and  thus  be  by  degrees 
reduced  to  nothing  (for  it  possesses  no  parts, 
and  therefore  no  multiplicity),  between  the  mo¬ 
ment  in  which  it  is,  and  the  moment  in  which 
it  is  not,  no  time  can  be  discovered — which  is 
impossible.  But  this  philosopher  did  not  con¬ 
sider  that,  granting  the  soul  to  possess  this  sim¬ 
ple  nature,  which  contains  no  parts  external  to 
each  other  and  consequently  no  extensive  quan¬ 
tity,  we  cannot  refuse  to  it  any  less  than  to  any 
other  being,  intensive  quantity,  that  is,  a  degree 
of  reality  in  regard  to  all  its  faculties,  nay,  to 
all  that  constitutes  its  existence.  But  this  degree 
of  reality  can  become  less  and  less  through  an 
infinite  series  of  smaller  degrees.  It  follows, 
therefore,  that  this  supposed  substance — this 
thing,  the  permanence  of  which  is  not  assured 
in  any  other  way,  may,  if  not  by  decomposition, 
by  gradual  loss  ( remissio )  of  its  powers  (con¬ 
sequently  by  elanguescence,  if  I  may  employ 
this  expression),  be  changed  into  nothing.  For 
consciousness  itself  has  always  a  degree,  which 
may  be  lessened.1  Consequently  the  faculty  of 
being  conscious  may  be  diminished;  and  so  with 
all  other  faculties.  The  permanence  of  the  soul, 
therefore,  as  an  object  of  the  internal  sense, 
remains  undemonstrated,  nay,  even  indemon¬ 
strable.  Its  permanence  in  life  is  evident,  per  se, 
inasmuch  as  the  thinking  being  (as  man)  is  to 
itself,  at  the  same  time,  an  object  of  the  external 
senses.  But  this  does  not  authorize  the  rational 
psychologist  to  affirm,  from  mere  conceptions, 
its  permanence  beyond  life.2 

1  Clearness  is  not,  as  logicians  maintain,  the  con¬ 
sciousness  of  a  representation.  For  a  certain  degree  of 
consciousness,  which  may  not,  however,  be  sufficient  for 
recollection,  is  to  be  met  with  in  many  dim  representa¬ 
tions.  For  without  any  consciousness  at  all,  we  should 
not  be  able  to  recognize  any  difference  in  the  obscure 
representations  we  connect;  as  we  really  can  do  with 
many  conceptions,  such  as  those  of  right  and  justice, 
and  those  of  the  musician,  who  strikes  at  once  several 
notes  in  improvising  a  piece  of  music.  But  a  representa¬ 
tion  is  clear,  in  which  our  consciousness  is  sufficient  for 
the  consciousness  of  the  difference  of  this  representation 
from  others.  If  we  are  only  conscious  that  there  is  a 
difference,  but  are  not  conscious  of  the  difference — that 
is,  what  the  difference  is — the  representation  must  be 
termed  obscure.  There  is,  consequently,  an  infinite  series 
of  degrees  of  consciousness  down  to  its  entire  disap¬ 
pearance. 

2  There  are  some  who  think  they  have  done  enough 
to  establish  a  new  possibility  in  the  mode  of  the  exist¬ 
ence  of  souls,  when  they  have  shown  that  there  is  no 
contradiction  in  their  hypotheses  on  this  subject.  Such 
are  those  who  affirm  the  possibility  of  thought — of 
which  they  have  no  other  knowledge  than  what  they  de¬ 
rive  from  its  use  in  connecting  empirical  intuitions  pre¬ 
sented  in  this  our  human  life — after  this  life  has  ceased. 
But  it  is  very  easy  to  embarrass  them  by  the  introduc¬ 
tion  of  counter-possibilities,  which  rest  upon  quite  as 
good  a  foundation.  Such,  for  example,  is  the  possibility 


125 

If,  now,  we  take  the  above  propositions — as 
they  must  be  accepted  as  valid  for  all  thinking 
beings  in  the  system  of  rational  psychology — 
in  synthetical  connection,  and  proceed,  from 
the  category  of  relation,  with  the  proposition: 
“All  thinking  beings  are,  as  such,  substances,” 
backwards  through  the  series,  till  the  circle  is 
completed;  we  come  at  last  to  their  existence, 
of  which,  in  this  system  of  rational  psychology, 
substances  are  held  to  be  conscious,  independ¬ 
ently  of  external  things;  nay,  it  is  asserted  that, 
in  relation  to  the  permanence  which  is  a  nec¬ 
essary  characteristic  of  substance,  they  can  of 
themselves  determine  external  things.  It  follows 
that  idealism — at  least  problematical  idealism, 
is  perfectly  unavoidable  in  this  rationalistic  sys¬ 
tem.  And,  if  the  existence  of  outward  things  is 
not  held  to  be  requisite  to  the  determination  of 
the  existence  of  a  substance  in  time,  the  ex¬ 
istence  of  these  outward  things  at  all,  is  a  gra¬ 
tuitous  assumption  which  remains  without  the 
possibility  of  a  proof. 

of  the  division  of  a  simple  substance  into  several  sub¬ 
stances;  and  conversely,  of  the  coalition  of  several  into 
one  simple  substance.  For,  although  divisibility  presup¬ 
poses  composition,  it  does  not  necessarily  require  a  com¬ 
position  of  substances,  but  only  of  the  degrees  (of  the 
several  faculties)  of  one  and  the  same  substance.  Now 
we  can  cogitate  all  the  powers  and  faculties  of  the  soul 
— even  that  of  consciousness — as  diminished  by  one 
half,  the  substance  still  remaining.  In  the  same  way  we 
can  represent  to  ourselves  without  contradiction,  this 
obliterated  half  as  preserved,  not  in  the  soul,  but  with¬ 
out  it;  and  we  can  believe  that,  as  in  this  case  every¬ 
thing  that  is  real  in  the  soul,  and  has  a  degree — conse¬ 
quently  its  entire  existence — has  been  halved,  a  particu¬ 
lar  substance  would  arise  out  of  the  soul.  For  the  mul¬ 
tiplicity,  which  has  been  divided,  formerly  existed,  but 
not  as  a  multiplicity  of  substances,  but  of  every  reality 
as  the  quantum  of  existence  in  it;  and  the  unity  of  sub¬ 
stance  was  merely  a  mode  of  existence,  which  by  this 
division  alone  has  been  transformed  into  a  plurality  of 
subsistence.  In  the  same  manner  several  simple  sub¬ 
stances  might  coalesce  into  one,  without  anything  being 
lost  except  the  plurality  of  subsistence,  inasmuch  as  the 
one  substance  would  contain  the  degree  of  reality  of  all 
the  former  substances.  Perhaps,  indeed,  the  simple  sub¬ 
stances,  which  appear  under  the  form  of  matter,  might 
(not  indeed  by  a  mechanical  or  chemical  influence  upon 
each  other,  but  by  an  unknown  influence,  of  which  the 
former  would  be  but  the  phenomenal  appearance),  by 
means  of  such  a  dynamical  division  of  the  parent-souls, 
as  intensive  quantities ,  produce  other  souls,  while  the 
former  repaired  the  loss  thus  sustained  with  new  matter 
of  the  same  sort.  I  am  far  from  allowing  any  value  to 
such  chimeras;  and  the  principles  of  our  analytic  have 
clearly  proved  that  no  other  than  an  empirical  use  of 
the  categories — that  of  substance,  for  example — is  pos¬ 
sible.  But  if  the  rationalist  is  bold  enough  to  construct, 
on  the  mere  authority  of  the  faculty  of  thought — with¬ 
out  any  intuition,  whereby  an  object  is  given — a  self- 
subsistent  being,  merely  because  the  unity  of  appercep¬ 
tion  in  thought  cannot  allow  him  to  believe  it  a  com¬ 
posite  being,  instead  of  declaring,  as  he  ought  to  do, 
that  he  is  unable  to  explain  the  possibility  of  a  thinking 
nature;  what  ought  to  hinder  the  materialist,  with  as 
complete  an  independence  of  experience,  to  employ  the 
principle  of  the  rationalist  in  a  directly  opposite  manner 
— still  preserving  the  formal  unity  required  by  his  op¬ 
ponent? 


126 


THE  CRITIQUE 


But  if  we  proceed  analytically — the  “I  think” 
as  a  proposition  containing  in  itself  an  existence 
as  given,  consequently  modality  being  the  prin¬ 
ciple — and  dissect  this  proposition,  in  order  to 
ascertain  its  content,  and  discover  whether  and 
how  this  Ego  determines  its  existence  in  time 
and  space  without  the  aid  of  anything  external; 
the  propositions  of  rationalistic  psychology 
would  not  begin  with  the  conception  of  a  think¬ 
ing  being,  but  with  a  reality,  and  the  properties 
of  a  thinking  being  in  general  would  be  deduced 
from  the  mode  in  which  this  reality  is  cogitated, 
after  everything  empirical  had  been  abstracted; 
as  is  shown  in  the  following  table: 

i 

I  think , 

2  3 

as  Subject ,  as  simple  Subject, 

4 

as  identical  Subject , 
in  every  state  of  my  thought. 

Now,  inasmuch  as  it  is  not  determined  in  this 
second  proposition,  whether  I  can  exist  and  be 
cogitated  only  as  subject,  and  not  also  as  a  pred¬ 
icate  of  another  being,  the  conception  of  a  sub¬ 
ject  is  here  taken  in  a  merely  logical  sense;  and 
it  remains  undetermined,  whether  substance  is 
to  be  cogitated  under  the  conception  or  not. 
But  in  the  third  proposition,  the  absolute  unity 
of  apperception — the  simple  Ego  in  the  repre¬ 
sentation  to  which  all  connection  and  separa¬ 
tion,  which  constitute  thought,  relate,  is  of  itself 
important;  even  although  it  presents  us  with 
no  information  about  the  constitution  or  sub¬ 
sistence  of  the  subject.  Apperception  is  some¬ 
thing  real,  and  the  simplicity  of  its  nature  is 
given  in  the  very  fact  of  its  possibility.  Now  in 
space  there  is  nothing  real  that  is  at  the  same 
time  simple;  for  points,  which  are  the  only  sim¬ 
ple  things  in  space,  are  merely  limits,  but  not 
constituent  parts  of  space.  From  this  follows 
the  impossibility  of  a  definition  on  the  basis  of 
materialism  of  the  constitution  of  my  Ego  as 
a  merely  thinking  subject.  But,  because  my  ex¬ 
istence  is  considered  in  the  first  proposition  as 
given,  for  it  does  not  mean,  “Every  thinking 
being  exists”  (for  this  would  be  predicating  of 
them  absolute  necessity),  but  only,  "I  exist 
thinking”;  the  proposition  is  quite  empirical, 
and  contains  the  determinability  of  my  exist¬ 
ence  merely  in  relation  to  my  representations  in 


time.  But  as  I  require  for  this  purpose  some¬ 
thing  that  is  permanent,  such  as  is  not  given  in 
internal  intuition;  the  mode  of  my  existence, 
whether  as  substance  or  as  accident,  cannot  be 
determined  by  means  of  this  simple  self-con¬ 
sciousness.  Thus,  if  materialism  is  inadequate 
to  explain  the  mode  in  which  I  exist,  spiritual¬ 
ism  is  likewise  as  insufficient;  and  the  conclu¬ 
sion  is  that  we  are  utterly  unable  to  attain  to 
any  knowledge  of  the  constitution  of  the  soul, 
in  so  far  as  relates  to  the  possibility  of  its  ex¬ 
istence  apart  from  external  objects. 

And,  indeed,  how  should  it  be  possible,  mere¬ 
ly  by  the  aid  of  the  unity  of  consciousness — 
which  we  cognize  only  for  the  reason  that  it  is 
indispensable  to  the  possibility  of  experience — 
to  pass  the  bounds  of  experience  (our  existence 
in  this  life) ;  and  to  extend  our  cognition  to  the 
nature  of  all  thinking  beings  by  means  of  the 
empirical — but  in  relation  to  every  sort  of  in¬ 
tuition,  perfectly  undetermined — proposition, 
“I  think”? 

There  does  not  then  exist  any  rational  psy¬ 
chology  as  a  doctrine  furnishing  any  addition 
to  our  knowledge  of  ourselves.  It  is  nothing 
more  than  a  discipline,  which  sets  impassable 
limits  to  speculative  reason  in  this  region  of 
thought,  to  prevent  it,  on  the  one  hand,  from 
throwing  itself  into  the  arms  of  a  soulless  ma¬ 
terialism,  and,  on  the  other,  from  losing  itself  in 
the  mazes  of  a  baseless  spiritualism.  It  teaches 
us  to  consider  this  refusal  of  our  reason  to  give 
any  satisfactory  answer  to  questions  which 
reach  beyond  the  limits  of  this  our  human  life, 
as  a  hint  to  abandon  fruitless  speculation;  and 
to  direct,  to  a  practical  use,  our  knowledge  of 
ourselves — which,  although  applicable  only  to 
objects  of  experience,  receives  its  principles 
from  a  higher  source,  and  regulates  its  proce¬ 
dure  as  if  our  destiny  reached  far  beyond  the 
boundaries  of  experience  and  life. 

From  all  this  it  is  evident  that  rational  psy¬ 
chology  has  its  origin  in  a  mere  misunderstand¬ 
ing.  The  unity  of  consciousness,  which  lies  at  the 
basis  of  the  categories,  is  considered  to  be  an 
intuition  of  the  subject  as  an  object;  and  the 
category  of  substance  is  applied  to  the  intuition. 
But  this  unity  is  nothing  more  than  the  unity 
in  thought ,  by  which  no  object  is  given;  to  which 
therefore  the  category  of  substance — which  al¬ 
ways  presupposes  a  given  intuition — cannot  be 
applied.  Consequently,  the  subject  cannot  be 
cognized.  The  subject  of  the  categories  cannot, 
therefore,  for  the  very  reason  that  it  cogitates 
these,  frame  any  conception  of  itself  as  an  ob- 


OF  PURE 

ject  of  the  categories;  for,  to  cogitate  these,  it 
must  lay  at  the  foundation  its  own  pure  self- 
consciousness — the  very  thing  that  it  wishes  to 
explain  and  describe.  In  like  manner,  the  sub¬ 
ject,  in  which  the  representation  of  time  has  its 
basis,  cannot  determine,  for  this  very  reason, 
its  own  existence  in  time.  Now,  if  the  latter  is 
impossible,  the  former,  as  an  attempt  to  deter¬ 
mine  itself  by  means  of  the  categories  as  a 
thinking  being  in  general,  is  no  less  so.1 

Thus,  then,  appears  the  vanity  of  the  hope  of 
establishing  a  cognition  which  is  to  extend  its 
rule  beyond  the  limits  of  experience — a  cogni¬ 
tion  which  is  one  of  the  highest  interests  of  hu¬ 
manity;  and  thus  is  proved  the  futility  of  the 
attempt  of  speculative  philosophy  in  this  region 
of  thought.  But,  in  this  interest  of  thought,  the 
severity  of  criticism  has  rendered  to  reason  a 
not  unimportant  service,  by  the  demonstration 
of  the  impossibility  of  making  any  dogmatical 
affirmation  concerning  an  object  of  experience 
beyond  the  boundaries  of  experience.  She  has 
thus  fortified  reason  against  all  affirmations  of 
the  contrary.  Now,  this  can  be  accomplished  in 
only  two  ways.  Either  our  proposition  must  be 
proved  apodeictically;  or,  if  this  is  unsuccess¬ 
ful,  the  sources  of  this  inability  must  be  sought 
for,  and,  if  these  are  discovered  to  exist  in  the 
natural  and  necessary  limitation  of  our  reason, 

1  The  “I  think”  is,  as  has  been  already  stated,  an  em¬ 
pirical  proposition,  and  contains  the  proposition,  “I  ex¬ 
ist.”  But  I  cannot  say,  “Everything,  which  thinks,  ex¬ 
ists”;  for  in  this  case  the  property  of  thought  would 
constitute  all  beings  possessing  it,  necessary  beings. 
Hence  my  existence  cannot  be  considered  as  an  infer¬ 
ence  from  the  proposition,  “I  think,”  as  Descartes  main¬ 
tained — because  in  this  case  the  major  premiss,  “Every¬ 
thing,  which  thinks,  exists,”  must  precede — but  the  two 
propositions  are  identical.  The  proposition,  “I  think,” 
expresses  an  undetermined  empirical  intuition,  that  is, 
perception  (proving  consequently  that  sensation,  which 
must  belong  to  sensibility,  lies  at  the  foundation  of  this 
proposition);  but  it  precedes  experience,  whose  prov¬ 
ince  it  is  to  determine  an  object  of  perception  by  means 
of  the  categories  in  relation  to  time;  and  existence  in 
this  proposition  is  not  a  category,  as  it  does  not  apply 
to  an  undetermined  given  object,  but  only  to  one  of 
which  we  have  a  conception,  and  about  which  we  wish 
to  know  whether  it  does  or  does  not  exist,  out  of,  and 
apart  from  this  conception.  An  undetermined  perception 
signifies  here  merely  something  real  that  has  been  given, 
only,  however,  to  thought  in  general — but  not  as  a  phe¬ 
nomenon,  nor  as  a  thing  in  itself  (noumenon),  but  only 
as  something  that  really  exists,  and  is  designated  as 
such  in  the  proposition,  “I  think.”  For  it  must  be  re¬ 
marked  that,  when  I  call  the  proposition,  “I  think,”  an 
empirical  proposition,  I  do  not  thereby  mean  that,  the 
Ego  in  the  proposition  is  an  empirical  representation; 
on  the  contrary,  it  is  purely  intellectual,  because  it  be¬ 
longs  to  thought  in  general.  But  without  some  empiri¬ 
cal  representation,  which  presents  to  the  mind  material 
for  thought,  the  mental  act,  “I  think,”  would  not  take 
place;  and  the  empirical  is  only  the  condition  of  the 
application  or  employment  of  the  pure  intellectual  fac¬ 
ulty. 


REASON  127 

our  opponents  must  submit  to  the  same  law  of 
renunciation  and  refrain  from  advancing  claims 
to  dogmatic  assertion. 

But  the  right,  say  rather  the  necessity  to  ad¬ 
mit  a  future  life,  upon  principles  of  the  practi¬ 
cal  conjoined  with  the  speculative  use  of  reason, 
has  lost  nothing  by  this  renunciation;  for  the 
merely  speculative  proof  has  never  had  any  in¬ 
fluence  upon  the  common  reason  of  men.  It 
stands  upon  the  point  of  a  hair,  so  that  even  the 
schools  have  been  able  to  preserve  it  from 
falling  only  by  incessantly  discussing  it  and 
spinning  it  like  a  top;  and  even  in  their  eyes  it 
has  never  been  able  to  present  any  safe  founda¬ 
tion  for  the  erection  of  a  theory.  The  proofs 
which  have  been  current  among  men,  preserve 
their  value  undiminished;  nay,  rather  gain  in 
clearness  and  unsophisticated  power,  by  the  re¬ 
jection  of  the  dogmatical  assumptions  of  spec¬ 
ulative  reason.  For  reason  is  thus  confined  with¬ 
in  her  own  peculiar  province — the  arrangement 
of  ends  or  aims,  which  is  at  the  same  time  the 
arrangement  of  nature;  and,  as  a  practical  fac¬ 
ulty,  without  limiting  itself  to  the  latter,  it  is 
justified  in  extending  the  former,  and  with  it 
our  own  existence,  beyond  the  boundaries  of  ex¬ 
perience  and  life.  If  we  turn  our  attention  to 
the  analogy  of  the  nature  of  living  beings  in  this 
world,  in  the  consideration  of  which  reason  is 
obliged  to  accept  as  a  principle  that  no  organ, 
no  faculty,  no  appetite  is  useless,  and  that  noth¬ 
ing  is  superfluous,  nothing  disproportionate  to 
its  use,  nothing  unsuited  to  its  end;  but  that,  on 
the  contrary,  everything  is  perfectly  conformed 
to  its  destination  in  life — we  shall  find  that 
man,  who  alone  is  the  final  end  and  aim  of  this 
order,  is  still  the  only  animal  that  seems  to  be 
excepted  from  it.  For  his  natural  gifts  —  not 
merely  as  regards  the  talents  and  motives  that 
may  incite  him  to  employ  them,  but  especially 
the  moral  law  in  him — stretch  so  far  beyond  all 
mere  earthly  utility  and  advantage,  that  he  feels 
himself  bound  to  prize  the  mere  consciousness 
of  probity,  apart  from  all  advantageous  con¬ 
sequences — even  the  shadowy  gift  of  posthu¬ 
mous  fame — above  everything;  and  he  is  con¬ 
scious  of  an  inward  call  to  constitute  himself, 
by  his  conduct  in  this  world — without  regard  to 
mere  sublunary  interests — the  citizen  of  a  bet¬ 
ter.  This  mighty,  irresistible  proof  —  accom¬ 
panied  by  an  ever-increasing  knowledge  of  the 
conformability  to  a  purpose  in  everything  we 
see  around  us,  by  the  conviction  of  the  bound¬ 
less  immensity  of  creation,  by  the  consciousness 
of  a  certain  illimitableness  in  the  possible  ex- 


128 


THE  CRITIQUE 


tension  of  our  knowledge,  and  by  a  desire 
commensurate  therewith — remains  to  humanity, 
even  after  the  theoretical  cognition  of  ourselves 
has  failed  to  establish  the  necessity  of  an  exist¬ 
ence  after  death. 

Conclusion  of  the  Solution  of  the 
Psychological  Paralogism 

The  dialectical  illusion  in  rational  psychology 
arises  from  our  confounding  an  idea  of  rea¬ 
son  (of  a  pure  intelligence)  with  the  conception 
— in  every  respect  undetermined — of  a  thinking 
being  in  general.  I  cogitate  myself  in  behalf  of 
a  possible  experience,  at  the  same  time  making 
abstraction  of  all  actual  experience;  and  infer 
therefrom  that  I  can  be  conscious  of  myself 
apart  from  experience  and  its  empirical  condi¬ 
tions.  I  consequently  confound  the  possible  ab¬ 
straction  of  my  empirically  determined  existence 
with  the  supposed  consciousness  of  a  possible 
separate  existence  of  my  thinking  self;  and  I 
believe  that  I  cognize  what  is  substantial  in 
myself  as  a  transcendental  subject,  when  I  have 
nothing  more  in  thought  than  the  unity  of  con¬ 
sciousness,  which  lies  at  the  basis  of  all  deter¬ 
mination  of  cognition. 

The  task  of  explaining  the  community  of  the 
soul  with  the  body  does  not  properly  belong 
to  the  psychology  of  which  we  are  here  speak¬ 
ing;  because  it  proposes  to  prove  the  person¬ 
ality  of  the  soul  apart  from  this  communion 
(after  death),  and  is  therefore  transcendent  in 
the  proper  sense  of  the  word,  although  occupy¬ 
ing  itself  with  an  object  of  experience — only  in 
so  far,  however,  as  it  ceases  to  be  an  object  of 
experience.  But  a  sufficient  answer  may  be  found 
to  the  question  in  our  system.  The  difficulty 
which  lies  in  the  execution  of  this  task  consists, 
as  is  well  known,  in  the  presupposed  heteroge¬ 
neity  of  the  object  of  the  internal  sense  (the 
soul)  and  the  objects  of  the  external  senses;  in¬ 
asmuch  as  the  formal  condition  of  the  intuition 
of  the  one  is  time,  and  of  that  of  the  other  space 
also.  But  if  we  consider  that  both  kinds  of  ob¬ 
jects  do  not  differ  internally,  but  only  in  so  far 
as  the  one  appears  externally  to  the  other — con¬ 
sequently,  that  what  lies  at  the  basis  of  phe¬ 
nomena,  as  a  thing  in  itself,  may  not  be  hetero¬ 
geneous;  this  difficulty  disappears.  There  then 
remains  no  other  difficulty  than  is  to  be  found  in 
the  question — how  a  community  of  substances 
is  possible;  a  question  which  lies  out  of  the 
region  of  psychology,  and  which  the  reader, 
after  what  in  our  analytic  has  been  said  of  prim¬ 
itive  forces  and  faculties,  will  easily  judge  to 
be  also  beyond  the  region  of  human  cognition. 


General  Remark 

On  the  Transition  from  Rational  Psychology 
to  Cosmology 

The  proposition,  “I  think,”  or,  “I  exist  think¬ 
ing,”  is  an  empirical  proposition.  But  such  a 
proposition  must  be  based  on  empirical  intui¬ 
tion,  and  the  object  cogitated  as  a  phenomenon; 
and  thus  our  theory  appears  to  maintain  that 
the  soul,  even  in  thought,  is  merely  a  phenom¬ 
enon;  and  in  this  way  our  consciousness  itself, 
in  fact,  abuts  upon  nothing. 

Thought,  per  se ,  is  merely  the  purely  spon¬ 
taneous  logical  function  which  operates  to  con¬ 
nect  the  manifold  of  a  possible  intuition;  and 
it  does  not  represent  the  subject  of  conscious¬ 
ness  as  a  phenomenon — for  this  reason  alone, 
that  it  pays  no  attention  to  the  question  whether 
the  mode  of  intuiting  it  is  sensuous  or  intellec¬ 
tual.  I  therefore  do  not  represent  myself  in 
thought  either  as  I  am,  or  as  I  appear  to  myself ; 
I  merely  cogitate  myself  as  an  object  in  gen¬ 
eral,  of  the  mode  of  intuiting  which  I  make 
abstraction.  When  I  represent  myself  as  the 
subject  of  thought,  or  as  the  ground  of  thought, 
these  modes  of  representation  are  not  related  to 
the  categories  of  substance  or  of  cause;  for 
these  are  functions  of  thought  applicable  only 
to  our  sensuous  intuition.  The  application  of 
these  categories  to  the  Ego  would,  however,  be 
necessary,  if  I  wished  to  make  myself  an  object 
of  knowledge.  But  I  wish  to  be  conscious  of 
myself  only  as  thinking;  in  what  mode  my  Self 
is  given  in  intuition,  I  do  not  consider,  and  it 
may  be  that  I,  who  think,  am  a  phenomenon 
— although  not  in  so  far  as  I  am  a  thinking 
being;  but  in  the  consciousness  of  myself  in 
mere  thought  I  am  a  being,  though  this  con¬ 
sciousness  does  not  present  to  me  any  property 
of  this  being  as  material  for  thought. 

But  the  proposition,  “I  think,”  in  so  far  as 
it  declares,  “/  exist  thinking,”  is  not  the  mere 
representation  of  a  logical  function.  It  deter¬ 
mines  the  subject  (which  is  in  this  case  an 
object  also)  in  relation  to  existence;  and  it  can¬ 
not  be  given  without  the  aid  of  the  internal 
sense,  whose  intuition  presents  to  us  an  object, 
not  as  a  thing  in  itself,  but  always  as  a  phe¬ 
nomenon.  In  this  proposition  there  is  therefore 
something  more  to  be  found  than  the  mere  spon¬ 
taneity  of  thought ;  there  is  also  the  receptivity 
of  intuition,  that  is,  my  thought  of  myself  ap¬ 
plied  to  the  empirical  intuition  of  myself.  Now. 
in  this  intuition  the  thinking  self  must  seek  the 
conditions  of  the  employment  of  its  logical  func¬ 
tions  as  categories  of  substance,  cause,  and  so 


OF  PURE  REASON 


forth;  not  merely  for  the  purpose  of  distinguish¬ 
ing  itself  as  an  object  in  itself  by  means  of  the 
representation  “I,”  but  also  for  the  purpose  of 
determining  the  mode  of  its  existence,  that  is, 
of  cognizing  itself  as  noumenon.  But  this  is 
impossible,  for  the  internal  empirical  intuition 
is  sensuous,  and  presents  us  with  nothing  but 
phenomenal  data,  which  do  not  assist  the  object 
of  pure  consciousness  in  its  attempt  to  cognize 
itself  as  a  separate  existence,  but  are  useful  only 
as  contributions  to  experience. 

But,  let  it  be  granted  that  we  could  discover, 
not  in  experience,  but  in  certain  firmly-estab¬ 
lished  a  priori  laws  of  the  use  of  pure  reason — 
laws  relating  to  our  existence,  authority  to  con¬ 
sider  ourselves  as  legislating  a  priori  in  relation 
to  our  own  existence  and  as  determining  this 
existence;  we  should,  on  this  supposition,  find 
ourselves  possessed  of  a  spontaneity,  by  which 
our  actual  existence  would  be  determinable, 
without  the  aid  of  the  conditions  of  empirical 
intuition.  We  should  also  become  aware  that  in 
the  consciousness  of  our  existence  there  was  an 
a  priori  content,  which  would  serve  to  determine 
our  own  existence — an  existence  only  sensuous¬ 
ly  determinable — relatively,  however,  to  a  cer¬ 
tain  internal  faculty  in  relation  to  an  intelli¬ 
gible  world. 

But  this  would  not  give  the  least  help  to  the 
attempts  of  rational  psychology.  For  this  won¬ 
derful  faculty,  which  the  consciousness  of  the 
moral  law  in  me  reveals,  would  present  me  with 
a  principle  of  the  determination  of  my  own 
existence  which  is  purely  intellectual — but  by 
what  predicates?  By  none  other  than  those 
which  are  given  in  sensuous  intuition.  Thus  I 
should  find  myself  in  the  same  position  in  ra¬ 
tional  psychology  which  I  formerly  occupied, 
that  is  to  say,  I  should  find  myself  still  in  need 
of  sensuous  intuitions,  in  order  to  give  signifi¬ 
cance  to  my  conceptions  of  substance  and  cause, 
by  means  of  which  alone  I  can  possess  a  knowl¬ 
edge  of  myself :  but  these  intuitions  can  never 
raise  me  above  the  sphere  of  experience.  I 
should  be  justified,  however,  in  applying  these 
conceptions,  in  regard  to  their  practical  use, 
which  is  always  directed  to  objects  of  experi¬ 
ence — in  conformity  with  their  analogical  sig¬ 
nificance  when  employed  theoretically — to  free¬ 
dom  and  its  subject.  At  the  same  time,  I  should 
understand  by  them  merely  the  logical  func¬ 
tions  of  subject  and  predicate,  of  principle  and 
consequence,  in  conformity  with  which  all  ac¬ 
tions  are  so  determined,  that  they  are  capable 
of  being  explained  along  with  the  laws  of  nature, 
conformably  to  the  categories  of  substance  and 


cause,  although  they  originate  from  a  very  dif¬ 
ferent  principle.  We  have  made  these  observa¬ 
tions  for  the  purpose  of  guarding  against  mis¬ 
understanding,  to  which  the  doctrine  of  our  in¬ 
tuition  of  self  as  a  phenomenon  is  exposed.  We 
shall  have  occasion  to  perceive  their  utility  in 
the  sequel. 

Chapter  II.  The  Antinomy  of  Pure  Reason 

We  showed  in  the  introduction  to  this  part  of 
our  work,  that  all  transcendental  illusion  of 
pure  reason  arose  from  dialectical  arguments, 
the  schema  of  which  logic  gives  us  in  its  three 
formal  species  of  syllogisms — just  as  the  cate¬ 
gories  find  their  logical  schema  in  the  four  func¬ 
tions  of  all  judgements.  The  first  kind  of  these 
sophistical  arguments  related  to  the  uncondi¬ 
tioned  unity  of  the  subjective  conditions  of  all 
representations  in  general  (of  the  subject  or 
soul),  in  correspondence  with  the  categorical 
syllogisms,  the  major  of  which,  as  the  principle, 
enounces  the  relation  of  a  predicate  to  a  sub¬ 
ject.  The  second  kind  of  dialectical  argument 
will  therefore  be  concerned,  following  the  anal¬ 
ogy  with  hypothetical  syllogisms,  with  the  un¬ 
conditioned  unity  of  the  objective  conditions 
in  the  phenomenon;  and,  in  this  way,  the  theme 
of  the  third  kind  to  be  treated  of  in  the  follow¬ 
ing  chapter  will  be  the  unconditioned  unity  of 
the  objective  conditions  of  the  possibility  of 
objects  in  general. 

But  it  is  worthy  of  remark  that  the  tran¬ 
scendental  paralogism  produced  in  the  mind 
only  a  one-third  illusion,  in  regard  to  the  idea 
of  the  subject  of  our  thought;  and  the  concep¬ 
tions  of  reason  gave  no  ground  to  maintain 
the  contrary  proposition.  The  advantage  is 
completely  on  the  side  of  Pneumatism;  although 
this  theory  itself  passes  into  naught,  in  the  cru¬ 
cible  of  pure  reason. 

Very  different  is  the  case  when  we  apply 
reason  to  the  objective  synthesis  of  phenomena. 
Here,  certainly,  reason  establishes,  with  much 
plausibility,  its  principle  of  unconditioned  uni¬ 
ty;  but  it  very  soon  falls  into  such  contradic¬ 
tions  that  it  is  compelled,  in  relation  to  cos¬ 
mology,  to  renounce  its  pretensions. 

For  here  a  new  phenomenon  of  human  rea¬ 
son  meets  us — a  perfectly  natural  antithetic, 
which  does  not  require  to  be  sought  for  by  sub¬ 
tle  sophistry,  but  into  which  reason  of  itself 
unavoidably  falls.  It  is  thereby  preserved,  to  be 
sure,  from  the  slumber  of  a  fancied  conviction 
— which  a  merely  one-sided  illusion  produces; 
but  it  is  at  the  same  time  compelled,  either,  on 
the  one  hand,  to  abandon  itself  to  a  despairing 


THE  CRITIQUE 


130 

scepticism,  or,  on  the  other,  to  assume  a  dog¬ 
matical  confidence  and  obstinate  persistence  in 
certain  assertions,  without  granting  a  fair  hear¬ 
ing  to  the  other  side  of  the  question.  Either  is 
the  death  of  a  sound  philosophy,  although  the 
former  might  perhaps  deserve  the  title  of  the 
euthanasia  of  pure  reason. 

Before  entering  this  region  of  discord  and 
confusion,  which  the  conflict  of  the  laws  of  pure 
reason  (antinomy)  produces,  we  shall  present 
the  reader  with  some  considerations,  in  explana¬ 
tion  and  justification  of  the  method  we  intend 
to  follow  in  our  treatment  of  this  subject.  I 
term  all  transcendental  ideas,  in  so  far  as  they 
relate  to  the  absolute  totality  in  the  synthesis 
of  phenomena,  cosmical  conceptions ;  partly  on 
account  of  this  unconditioned  totality,  on  which 
the  conception  of  the  world-whole  is  based — a 
conception,  which  is  itself  an  idea — partly  be¬ 
cause  they  relate  solely  to  the  synthesis  of  phe¬ 
nomena — the  empirical  synthesis;  while,  on  the 
other  hand,  the  absolute  totality  in  the  synthe¬ 
sis  of  the  conditions  of  all  possible  things  gives 
rise  to  an  ideal  of  pure  reason,  which  is  quite 
distinct  from  the  cosmical  conception,  although 
it  stands  in  relation  with  it.  Hence,  as  the  paral¬ 
ogisms  of  pure  reason  laid  the  foundation  for 
a  dialectical  psychology,  the  antinomy  of  pure 
reason  will  present  us  with  the  transcendental 
principles  of  a  pretended  pure  (rational)  cos¬ 
mology — not,  however,  to  declare  it  valid  and 
to  appropriate  it,  but — as  the  very  term  of  a 
conflict  of  reason  sufficiently  indicates,  to  pre¬ 
sent  it  as  an  idea  which  cannot  be  reconciled 
with  phenomena  and  experience. 

Section  I.  System  of  Cosmological  Ideas 

That  we  may  be  able  to  enumerate  with  system¬ 
atic  precision  these  ideas  according  to  a  princi¬ 
ple,  we  must  remark,  in  the  first  place ,  that  it  is 
from  the  understanding  alone  that  pure  and 
transcendental  conceptions  take  their  origin; 
that  the  reason  does  not  properly  give  birth  to 
any  conception,  but  only  frees  the  conception  of 
the  understanding  from  the  unavoidable  limita¬ 
tion  of  a  possible  experience,  and  thus  endeav¬ 
ours  to  raise  it  above  the  empirical,  though  it 
must  still  be  in  connection  with  it.  This  happens 
from  the  fact  that,  for  a  given  conditioned,  rea¬ 
son  demands  absolute  totality  on  the  side  of  the 
conditions  (to  which  the  understanding  submits 
all  phenomena),  and  thus  makes  of  the  category 
a  transcendental  idea.  This  it  does  that  it  may 
be  able  to  give  absolute  completeness  to  the 
empirical  synthesis,  by  continuing  it  to  the  un¬ 
conditioned  (which  is  not  to  be  found  in  experi¬ 


ence,  but  only  in  the  idea).  Reason  requires  this 
according  to  the  principle:  If  the  conditioned  is 
given  the  whole  of  the  conditions ,  and  conse¬ 
quently  the  absolutely  unconditioned ,  is  also 
given ,  whereby  alone  the  former  was  possible. 
First,  then,  the  transcendental  ideas  are  prop¬ 
erly  nothing  but  categories  elevated  to  the  un¬ 
conditioned;  and  they  may  be  arranged  in  a 
table  according  to  the  titles  of  the  latter.  But, 
secondly,  all  the  categories  are  not  available  for 
this  purpose,  but  only  those  in  which  the  syn¬ 
thesis  constitutes  a  series — of  conditions  sub¬ 
ordinated  to,  not  co-ordinated  with,  each  other. 
Absolute  totality  is  required  of  reason  only  in 
so  far  as  concerns  the  ascending  series  of  the 
conditions  of  a  conditioned;  not,  consequently, 
when  the  question  relates  to  the  descending 
series  of  consequences,  or  to  the  aggregate  of 
the  co-ordinated  conditions  of  these  conse¬ 
quences.  For,  in  relation  to  a  given  conditioned, 
conditions  are  presupposed  and  considered  to 
be  given  along  with  it.  On  the  other  hand,  as  the 
consequences  do  not  render  possible  their  con¬ 
ditions,  but  rather  presuppose  them — in  the 
consideration  of  the  procession  of  consequences 
(or  in  the  descent  from  the  given  condition  to 
the  conditioned),  we  may  be  quite  unconcerned 
whether  the  series  ceases  or  not;  and  their 
totality  is  not  a  necessary  demand  of  reason. 

Thus  we  cogitate — and  necessarily — a  given 
time  completely  elapsed  up  to  a  given  moment, 
although  that  time  is  not  determinable  by  us. 
But  as  regards  time  future,  which  is  not  the 
condition  of  arriving  at  the  present,  in  order  to 
conceive  it;  it  is  quite  indifferent  whether  we 
consider  future  time  as  ceasing  at  some  point, 
or  as  prolonging  itself  to  infinity.  Take,  for  ex¬ 
ample,  the  series  m,  n,  0,  in  which  n  is  given  as 
conditioned  in  relation  to  m ,  but  at  the  same 
time  as  the  condition  of  0,  and  let  the  series 
proceed  upwards  from  the  conditioned  n  to  m 
(/,  k,  i,  etc.),  and  also  downwards  from  the  con¬ 
dition  n  to  the  conditioned  0  (p,  q,  r,  etc.) — I 
must  presuppose  the  former  series,  to  be  able 
to  consider  n  as  given,  and  n  is  according  to  rea¬ 
son  (the  totality  of  conditions)  possible  only 
by  means  of  that  series.  But  its  possibility  does 
not  rest  on  the  following  series  0 ,  p,  q ,  r,  which 
for  this  reason  cannot  be  regarded  as  given,  but 
only  as  capable  of  being  given  ( dabilis ). 

I  shall  term  the  synthesis  of  the  series  on  the 
side  of  the  conditions — from  that  nearest  to  the 
given  phenomenon  up  to  the  more  remote — re¬ 
gressive;  that  which  proceeds  on  the  side  of 
the  conditioned,  from  the  immediate  conse¬ 
quence  to  the  more  remote,  I  shall  call  the  pro- 


OF  PURE 

gressive  synthesis.  The  former  proceeds  in  ante - 
cedentia,  the  latter  in  consequentia.  The  cosmo¬ 
logical  ideas  are  therefore  occupied  with  the 
totality  of  the  regressive  synthesis,  and  proceed 
in  antecedents,  not  in  consequentia.  When  the 
latter  takes  place,  it  is  an  arbitrary  and  not  a 
necessary  problem  of  pure  reason;  for  we  re¬ 
quire,  for  the  complete  understanding  of  what 
is  given  in  a  phenomenon,  not  the  consequences 
which  succeed,  but  the  grounds  or  principles 
which  precede. 

In  order  to  construct  the  table  of  ideas  in 
correspondence  with  the  table  of  categories,  we 
take  first  the  two  primitive  quanta  of  all  our 
intuitions,  time  and  space.  Time  is  in  itself  a 
series  (and  the  formal  condition  of  all  series), 
and  hence,  in  relation  to  a  given  present,  we 
must  distinguish  a  priori  in  it  the  antecedents 
as  conditions  (time  past)  from  the  consequentia 
(time  future).  Consequently,  the  transcendental 
idea  of  the  absolute  totality  of  the  series  of  the 
conditions  of  a  given  conditioned,  relates  mere¬ 
ly  to  all  past  time.  According  to  the  idea  of  rea¬ 
son,  the  whole  past  time,  as  the  condition  of  the 
given  moment,  is  necessarily  cogitated  as  giv¬ 
en.  But,  as  regards  space,  there  exists  in  it  no 
distinction  between  progressus  and  regressus; 
for  it  is  an  aggregate  and  not  a  series — its  parts 
existing  together  at  the  same  time.  I  can  con¬ 
sider  a  given  point  of  time  in  relation  to  past 
time  only  as  conditioned,  because  this  given 
moment  comes  into  existence  only  through  the 
past  time — or  rather  through  the  passing  of  the 
preceding  time.  But  as  the  parts  of  space  are 
not  subordinated,  but  co-ordinated  to  each 
other,  one  part  cannot  be  the  condition  of  the 
possibility  of  the  other;  and  space  is  not  in  it¬ 
self,  like  time,  a  series.  But  the  synthesis  of  the 
manifold  parts  of  space — (the  syntheses  where¬ 
by  we  apprehend  space) — is  nevertheless  suc¬ 
cessive;  it  takes  place,  therefore,  in  time,  and 
contains  a  series.  And  as  in  this  series  of  aggre¬ 
gated  spaces  (for  example,  the  feet  in  a  rood), 
beginning  with  a  given  portion  of  space,  those 
which  continue  to  be  annexed  form  the  condi¬ 
tion  of  the  limits  of  the  former — the  measure¬ 
ment  of  a  space  must  also  be  regarded  as  a  syn¬ 
thesis  of  the  series  of  the  conditions  of  a  given 
conditioned.  It  differs,  however,  in  this  respect 
from  that" of  time,  that  the  side  of  the  condi¬ 
tioned  is  not  in  itself  distinguishable  from  the 
side  of  the  condition;  and,  consequently,  re¬ 
gressus  and  progressus  in  space  seem  to  be 
identical.  But,  inasmuch  as  one  part  of  space 
is  not  given,  but  only  limited,  by  and  through 
another,  we  must  also  consider  every  limited 


REASON  131 

space  as  conditioned,  in  so  far  as  it  presupposes 
some  other  space  as  the  condition  of  its  limi¬ 
tation,  and  so  on.  As  regards  limitation,  there¬ 
fore,  our  procedure  in  space  is  also  a  regressus , 
and  the  transcendental  idea  of  the  absolute  to¬ 
tality  of  the  synthesis  in  a  series  of  conditions 
applies  to  space  also;  and  I  am  entitled  to  de¬ 
mand  the  absolute  totality  of  the  phenomenal 
synthesis  in  space  as  well  as  in  time.  Whether 
my  demand  can  be  satisfied  is  a  question  to  be 
answered  in  the  sequel. 

Secondly ,  the  real  in  space — that  is,  matter 
— is  conditioned.  Its  internal  conditions  are  its 
parts,  and  the  parts  of  parts  its  remote  condi¬ 
tions;  so  that  in  this  case  we  find  a  regressive 
synthesis,  the  absolute  totality  of  which  is  a 
demand  of  reason.  But  this  cannot  be  obtained 
otherwise  than  by  a  complete  division  of  parts, 
whereby  the  real  in  matter  becomes  either 
nothing  or  that  which  is  not  matter,  that  is  to 
say,  the  simple.  Consequently  we  find  here  also 
a  series  of  conditions  and  a  progress  to  the 
unconditioned. 

Thirdly ,  as  regards  the  categories  of  a  real 
relation  between  phenomena,  the  category  of 
substance  and  its  accidents  is  not  suitable  for 
the  formation  of  a  transcendental  idea;  that  is 
to  say,  reason  has  no  ground,  in  regard  to  it,  to 
proceed  regressively  with  conditions.  For  acci¬ 
dents  (in  so  far  as  they  inhere  in  a  substance) 
are  co-ordinated  with  each  other,  and  do  not 
constitute  a  series.  And,  in  relation  to  substance, 
they  are  not  properly  subordinated  to  it,  but  are 
the  mode  of  existence  of  the  substance  itself. 
The  conception  of  the  substantial  might  never¬ 
theless  seem  to  be  an  idea  of  the  transcendental 
reason.  But,  as  this  signifies  nothing  more  than 
the  conception  of  an  object  in  general,  which 
subsists  in  so  far  as  we  cogitate  in  it  merely  a 
transcendental  subject  without  any  predicates; 
and  as  the  question  here  is  of  an  unconditioned 
in  the  series  of  phenomena — it  is  clear  that  the 
substantial  can  form  no  member  thereof.  The 
same  holds  good  of  substances  in  community, 
which  are  mere  aggregates  and  do  not  form  a 
series.  For  they  are  not  subordinated  to  each 
other  as  conditions  of  the  possibility  of  each 
other;  which,  however,  may  be  affirmed  of 
spaces,  the  limits  of  which  are  never  determined 
in  themselves,  but  always  by  some  other  space. 
It  is,  therefore,  only  in  the  category  of  causality 
that  we  can  find  a  series  of  causes  to  a  given  ef¬ 
fect,  and  in  which  we  ascend  from  the  latter,  as 
the  conditioned,  to  the  former  as  the  conditions, 
and  thus  answer  the  question  of  reason. 

Fourthly ,  the  conceptions  of  the  possible, 


THE  CRITIQUE 


132 

the  actual ,  and  the  necessary  do  not  conduct 
us  to  any  series — excepting  only  in  so  far  as  the 
contingent  in  existence  must  always  be  regarded 
as  conditioned,  and  as  indicating,  according  to 
a  law  of  the  understanding,  a  condition,  under 
which  it  is  necessary  to  rise  to  a  higher,  till  in 
the  totality  of  the  series,  reason  arrives  at  un¬ 
conditioned  necessity. 

There  are,  accordingly,  only  four  cosmologi¬ 
cal  ideas,  corresponding  with  the  four  titles  of 
the  categories.  For  we  can  select  only  such  as 
necessarily  furnish  us  with  a  series  in  the  syn¬ 
thesis  of  the  manifold. 

1 

The  absolute  Completeness 
of  the 

Composition 

of  the  given  totality  of  all  phenomena 

2 

The  absolute  Completeness 
of  the 
Division 

of  a  given  totality 
in  a  phenomenon 

3 

The  absolute  Completeness 
of  the 
Origination 
of  a  phenomenon 

4 

The  absolute  Completeness 
of  the  Dependence  of  the  Existence 
of  what  is  changeable  in  a  phenomenon 

We  must  here  remark,  in  the  first  place,  that 
the  idea  of  absolute  totality  relates  to  nothing 
but  the  exposition  of  phenomena,  and  therefore 
not  to  the  pure  conception  of  a  totality  of 
things.  Phenomena  are  here,  therefore,  regarded 
as  given,  and  reason  requires  the  absolute  com¬ 
pleteness  of  the  conditions  of  their  possibility, 
in  so  far  as  these  conditions  constitute  a  series 
— consequently  an  absolutely  (that  is,  in  every 
respect)  complete  synthesis,  whereby  a  phenom¬ 
enon  can  be  explained  according  to  the  laws  of 
the  understanding. 

Secondly,  it  is  properly  the  unconditioned 
alone  that  reason  seeks  in  this  serially  and  re- 
gressively  conducted  synthesis  of  conditions.  It 
wishes,  to  speak  in  another  way,  to  attain  to 
completeness  in  the  series  of  premisses,  so  as  to 
render  it  unnecessary  to  presuppose  others.  This 
unconditioned  is  always  contained  in  the  abso¬ 
lute  totality  of  the  series ,  when  we  endeavour 


to  form  a  representation  of  it  in  thought.  But 
this  absolutely  complete  synthesis  is  itself  but 
an  idea;  for  it  is  impossible,  at  least  before¬ 
hand,  to  know  whether  any  such  synthesis  is 
possible  in  the  case  of  phenomena.  When  we 
represent  all  existence  in  thought  by  means  of 
pure  conceptions  of  the  understanding,  without 
any  conditions  of  sensuous  intuition,  we  may 
say  with  justice  that  for  a  given  conditioned 
the  whole  series  of  conditions  subordinated  to 
each  other  is  also  given;  for  the  former  is  only 
given  through  the  latter.  But  we  find  in  the 
case  of  phenomena  a  particular  limitation  of 
the  mode  in  which  conditions  are  given,  that  is, 
through  the  successive  synthesis  of  the  mani¬ 
fold  of  intuition,  which  must  be  complete  in 
the  regress.  Now  whether  this  completeness  is 
sensuously  possible,  is  a  problem.  But  the  idea 
of  it  lies  in  the  reason — be  it  possible  or  im¬ 
possible  to  connect  with  the  idea  adequate  em¬ 
pirical  conceptions.  Therefore,  as  in  the  abso¬ 
lute  totality  of  the  regressive  synthesis  of  the 
manifold  in  a  phenomenon  (following  the  guid¬ 
ance  of  the  categories,  which  represent  it  as  a 
series  of  conditions  to  a  given  conditioned)  the 
unconditioned  is  necessarily  contained — it  be¬ 
ing  still  left  unascertained  whether  and  how 
this  totality  exists;  reason  sets  out  from  the 
idea  of  totality,  although  its  proper  and  final 
aim  is  the  unconditioned — of  the  whole  series, 
or  of  a  part  thereof. 

This  unconditioned  may  be  cogitated — either 
as  existing  only  in  the  entire  series,  all  the  mem¬ 
bers  of  which  therefore  would  be  without  ex¬ 
ception  conditioned  and  only  the  totality  ab¬ 
solutely  unconditioned — and  in  this  case  the 
regressus  is  called  infinite;  or  the  absolutely  un¬ 
conditioned  is  only  a  part  of  the  series,  to  which 
the  other  members  are  subordinated,  but  which 
is  not  itself  submitted  to  any  other  condition.1 
In  the  former  case  the  series  is  a  parte  priori 
unlimited  (without  beginning),  that  is,  infinite, 
and  nevertheless  completely  given.  But  the  re¬ 
gress  in  it  is  never  completed,  and  can  only  be 
called  potentially  infinite.  In  the  second  case 
there  exists  a  first  in  the  series.  This  first  is 
called,  in  relation  to  past  time,  the  beginning 
of  the  world;  in  relation  to  space,  the  limit  of 
the  world;  in  relation  to  the  parts  of  a  given 

1  The  absolute  totality  of  the  series  of  conditions  to  a 
given  conditioned  is  always  unconditioned;  because  be¬ 
yond  it  there  exist  no  other  conditions,  on  which  it 
might  depend.  But  the  absolute  totality  of  such  a  series 
is  only  an  idea,  or  rather  a  problematical  conception, 
the  possibility  of  which  must  be  investigated — particu¬ 
larly  in  relation  to  the  mode  in  which  the  uncondi¬ 
tioned,  as  the  transcendental  idea  which  is  the  real  sub¬ 
ject  of  inquiry,  may  be  contained  therein. 


OF  PURE 

limited  whole,  the  simple;  in  relation  to  causes, 
absolute  spontaneity  (liberty) ;  and  in  relation 
to  the  existence  of  changeable  things,  absolute 
physical  necessity. 

We  possess  two  expressions,  world  and  na¬ 
ture,  which  are  generally  interchanged.  The  first 
denotes  the  mathematical  total  of  all  phenom¬ 
ena  and  the  totality  of  their  synthesis — in  its 
progress  by  means  of  composition,  as  well  as 
by  division.  And  the  world  is  termed  nature,1 
when  it  is  regarded  as  a  dynamical  whole — 
when  our  attention  is  not  directed  to  the  aggre¬ 
gation  in  space  and  time,  for  the  purpose  of 
cogitating  it  as  a  quantity,  but  to  the  unity  in 
the  existence  of  phenomena.  In  this  case  the 
condition  of  that  which  happens  is  called  a 
cause;  the  unconditioned  causality  of  the  cause 
in  a  phenomenon  is  termed  liberty;  the  condi¬ 
tioned  cause  is  called  in  a  more  limited  sense  a 
natural  cause.  The  conditioned  in  existence  is 
termed  contingent,  and  the  unconditioned  nec¬ 
essary.  The  unconditioned  necessity  of  phenom¬ 
ena  may  be  called  natural  necessity. 

The  ideas  which  we  are  at  present  engaged 
in  discussing  I  have  called  cosmological  ideas; 
partly  because  by  the  term  world  is  understood 
the  entire  content  of  all  phenomena,  and  our 
ideas  are  directed  solely  to  the  unconditioned 
among  phenomena;  partly  also,  because  world, 
in  the  transcendental  sense,  signifies  the  abso¬ 
lute  totality  of  the  content  of  existing  things, 
and  we  are  directing  our  attention  only  to  the 
completeness  of  the  synthesis — although,  prop¬ 
erly,  only  in  regression.  In  regard  to  the  fact 
that  these  ideas  are  all  transcendent,  and,  al¬ 
though  they  do  not  transcend  phenomena  as 
regards  their  mode,  but  are  concerned  solely 
with  the  world  of  sense  (and  not  with  nou- 
mena),  nevertheless  carry  their  synthesis  to  a 
degree  far  above  all  possible  experience — it  still 
seems  to  me  that  we  can,  with  perfect  propriety, 
designate  them  cosmical  conceptions.  As  regards 
the  distinction  between  the  mathematically  and 
the  dynamically  unconditioned  which  is  the  aim 
of  the  regression  of  the  synthesis,  I  should  call 
the  two  former,  in  a  more  limited  signification, 
cosmical  conceptions,  the  remaining  two  tran¬ 
scendent  physical  conceptions.  This  distinction 

1  Nature,  understood  adjective  (  formaliter),  signifies 
the  complex  of  the  determinations  of  a  thing,  connected 
according  to  an  internal  principle  of  causality.  On  the 
other  hand,  we  understand  by  nature,  substantive  ( tna- 
terialiter),  the  sum  total  of  phenomena,  in  so  far  as 
they,  by  virtue  of  an  internal  principle  of  causality,  are 
connected  with  each  other  throughout.  In  the  former 
sense  we  speak  of  the  nature  of  liquid  matter,  of  fire, 
etc.,  and  employ  the  word  only  adjective;  while,  if 
speaking  of  the  objects  of  nature,  we  have  in  our  minds 
the  idea  of  a  subsisting  whole. 


REASON  1 33 

does  not  at  present  seem  to  be  of  particular 
importance,  but  we  shall  afterwards  find  it  to 
be  of  some  value. 

Section  II.  Antithetic  of  Pure  Reason 

Thetic  is  the  term  applied  to  every  collection 
of  dogmatical  propositions.  By  antithetic  I  do 
not  understand  dogmatical  assertions  of  the  op¬ 
posite,  but  the  self-contradiction  of  seemingly 
dogmatical  cognitions  ( thesis  cum  antithesi ),  in 
none  of  which  we  can  discover  any  decided  su¬ 
periority.  Antithetic  is  not,  therefore,  occupied 
with  one-sided  statements,  but  is  engaged  in 
considering  the  contradictory  nature  of  the  gen¬ 
eral  cognitions  of  reason  and  its  causes.  Tran¬ 
scendental  antithetic  is  an  investigation  into  the 
antinomy  of  pure  reason,  its  causes  and  result. 
If  we  employ  our  reason  not  merely  in  the  ap¬ 
plication  of  the  principles  of  the  understanding 
to  objects  of  experience,  but  venture  with  it  be¬ 
yond  these  boundaries,  there  arise  certain  so¬ 
phistical  propositions  or  theorems.  These  asser¬ 
tions  have  the  following  peculiarities:  They  can 
find  neither  confirmation  nor  confutation  in  ex¬ 
perience;  and  each  is  in  itself  not  only  self-con¬ 
sistent,  but  possesses  conditions  of  its  necessity 
in  the  very  nature  of  reason — only  that,  un¬ 
luckily,  there  exist  just  as  valid  and  necessary 
grounds  for  maintaining  the  contrary  propo¬ 
sition. 

The  questions  which  naturally  arise  in  the 
consideration  of  this  dialectic  of  pure  reason, 
are  therefore:  ist.  In  what  propositions  is  pure 
reason  unavoidably  subject  to  an  antinomy? 
2nd.  What  are  the  causes  of  this  antinomy?  3rd. 
Whether  and  in  what  way  can  reason  free  itself 
from  this  self-contradiction? 

A  dialectical  proposition  or  theorem  of  pure 
reason  must,  according  to  what  has  been  said, 
be  distinguishable  from  all  sophistical  proposi¬ 
tions,  by  the  fact  that  it  is  not  an  answer  to  an 
arbitrary  question,  which  may  be  raised  at  the 
mere  pleasure  of  any  person,  but  to  one  which 
human  reason  must  necessarily  encounter  in  its 
progress.  In  the  second  place,  a  dialectical  prop¬ 
osition,  with  its  opposite,  does  not  carry  the  ap¬ 
pearance  of  a  merely  artificial  illusion,  which 
disappears  as  soon  as  it  is  investigated,  but  a 
natural  and  unavoidable  illusion,  which,  even 
when  we  are  no  longer  deceived  by  it,  continues 
to  mock  us  and,  although  rendered  harmless, 
can  never  be  completely  removed. 

This  dialectical  doctrine  will  not  relate  to  the 
unity  of  understanding  in  empirical  conceptions, 
but  to  the  unity  of  reason  in  pure  ideas.  The 
conditions  of  this  doctrine  are — inasmuch  as  it 


THE  CRITIQUE 


must,  as  a  synthesis  according  to  rules,  be  con¬ 
formable  to  the  understanding,  and  at  the  same 
time  as  the  absolute  unity  of  the  synthesis,  to 
the  reason — that,  if  it  is  adequate  to  the  unity 
of  reason,  it  is  too  great  for  the  understanding, 
if  according  with  the  understanding,  it  is  too 
small  for  the  reason.  Hence  arises  a  mutual  op¬ 
position,  which  cannot  be  avoided,  do  what  we 
will. 

These  sophistical  assertions  of  dialectic  open, 
as  it  were,  a  battle-field,  where  that  side  obtains 
the  victory  which  has  been  permitted  to  make 
the  attack,  and  he  is  compelled  to  yield  who  has 
been  unfortunately  obliged  to  stand  on  the 
defensive.  And  hence,  champions  of  ability, 
whether  on  the  right  or  on  the  wrong  side,  are 
certain  to  carry  away  the  crown  of  victory,  if 
they  only  take  care  to  have  the  right  to  make 
the  last  attack,  and  are  not  obliged  to  sustain 
another  onset  from  their  opponent.  We  can  eas¬ 
ily  believe  that  this  arena  has  been  often  tram¬ 
pled  by  the  feet  of  combatants,  that  many  vic¬ 
tories  have  been  obtained  on  both  sides,  but 
that  the  last  victory,  decisive  of  the  affair  be¬ 
tween  the  contending  parties,  was  won  by  him 
who  fought  for  the  right,  only  if  his  adversary 
was  forbidden  to  continue  the  tourney.  As  im¬ 
partial  umpires,  we  must  lay  aside  entirely  the 
consideration  whether  the  combatants  are  fight¬ 
ing  for  the  right  or  for  the  wrong  side,  for  the 
true  or  for  the  false,  and  allow  the  combat  to  be 
first  decided.  Perhaps,  after  they  have  wearied 
more  than  injured  each  other,  they  will  discover 
the  nothingness  of  their  cause  of  quarrel  and 
part  good  friends. 

This  method  of  watching,  or  rather  of  origi¬ 
nating,  a  conflict  of  assertions,  not  for  the  pur¬ 
pose  of  finally  deciding  in  favour  of  either  side, 
but  to  discover  whether  the  object  of  the  strug¬ 
gle  is  not  a  mere  illusion,  which  each  strives  in 
vain  to  reach,  but  which  would  be  no  gain  even 
when  reached — this  procedure,  I  say,  may  be 
termed  the  sceptical  method.  It  is  thoroughly 
distinct  from  scepticism — the  principle  of  a 
technical  and  scientific  ignorance,  which  under¬ 
mines  the  foundations  of  all  knowledge,  in  or¬ 


der,  if  possible,  to  destroy  our  belief  and  confi¬ 
dence  therein.  For  the  sceptical  method  aims  at 
certainty,  by  endeavouring  to  discover  in  a  con¬ 
flict  of  this  kind,  conducted  honestly  and  intelli¬ 
gently  on  both  sides,  the  point  of  misunder¬ 
standing;  just  as  wise  legislators  derive,  from 
the  embarrassment  of  judges  in  lawsuits,  infor¬ 
mation  in  regard  to  the  defective  and  ill-defined 
parts  of  their  statutes.  The  antinomy  which  re¬ 
veals  itself  in  the  application  of  laws,  is  for  our 
limited  wisdom  the  best  criterion  of  legislation. 
For  the  attention  of  reason,  which  in  abstract 
speculation  does  not  easily  become  conscious  of 
its  errors,  is  thus  roused  to  the  momenta  in  the 
determination  of  its  principles. 

But  this  sceptical  method  is  essentially  pe¬ 
culiar  to  transcendental  philosophy,  and  can 
perhaps  be  dispensed  with  in  every  other  field  of 
investigation.  In  mathematics  its  use  would  be 
absurd;  because  in  it  no  false  assertions  can 
long  remain  hidden,  inasmuch  as  its  demonstra¬ 
tions  must  always  proceed  under  the  guidance 
of  pure  intuition,  and  by  means  of  an  always 
evident  synthesis.  In  experimental  philosophy, 
doubt  and  delay  may  be  very  useful;  but  no 
misunderstanding  is  possible,  which  cannot  be 
easily  removed;  and  in  experience  means  of 
solving  the  difficulty  and  putting  an  end  to  the 
dissension  must  at  last  be  found,  whether  sooner 
or  later.  Moral  philosophy  can  always  exhibit  its 
principles,  with  their  practical  consequences,  in 
concreto — at  least  in  possible  experiences,  and 
thus  escape  the  mistakes  and  ambiguities  of 
abstraction.  But  transcendental  propositions, 
which  lay  claim  to  insight  beyond  the  region  of 
possible  experience,  cannot,  on  the  one  hand,  ex¬ 
hibit  their  abstract  synthesis  in  any  a  priori  in¬ 
tuition,  nor,  on  the  other,  expose  a  lurking  error 
by  the  help  of  experience.  Transcendental  rea¬ 
son,  therefore,  presents  us  with  no  other  crite¬ 
rion  than  that  of  an  attempt  to  reconcile  such 
assertions,  and  for  this  purpose  to  permit  a  free 
and  unrestrained  conflict  between  them.  And 
this  we  now  proceed  to  arrange.1 

1  The  antinomies  stand  in  the  order  of  the  four  tran¬ 
scendental  ideas  above  detailed. 


OF  PURE  REASON 


135 


First  Conflict  of  The  Transcendental  Ideas 


Thesis 

The  world  has  a  beginning  in  time,  and  is  also 
limited  in  regard  to  space. 

PROOF 

Granted  that  the  world  has  no  beginning  in 
time;  up  to  every  given  moment  of  time,  an 
eternity  must  have  elapsed,  and  therewith 
passed  away  an  infinite  series  of  successive  con¬ 
ditions  or  states  of  things  in  the  world.  Now 
the  infinity  of  a  series  consists  in  the  fact  that 
it  never  can  be  completed  by  means  of  a  suc¬ 
cessive  synthesis.  It  follows  that  an  infinite  se¬ 
ries  already  elapsed  is  impossible  and  that,  con¬ 
sequently,  a  beginning  of  the  world  is  a  neces¬ 
sary  condition  of  its  existence.  And  this  was  the 
first  thing  to  be  proved. 

As  regards  the  second,  let  us  take  the  oppo¬ 
site  for  granted.  In  this  case,  the  world  must  be 
an  infinite  given  total  of  coexistent  things.  Now 
we  cannot  cogitate  the  dimensions  of  a  quan¬ 
tity,  which  is  not  given  within  certain  limits  of 
an  intuition,1  in  any  other  way  than  by  means 
of  the  synthesis  of  its  parts,  and  the  total  of 
such  a  quantity  only  by  means  of  a  completed 
synthesis,  or  the  repeated  addition  of  unity  to 
itself.  Accordingly,  to  cogitate  the  world,  which 
fills  all  spaces,  as  a  whole,  the  successive  syn¬ 
thesis  of  the  parts  of  an  infinite  world  must  be 
looked  upon  as  completed,  that  is  to  say,  an  in¬ 
finite  time  must  be  regarded  as  having  elapsed 
in  the  enumeration  of  all  co-existing  things; 
which  is  impossible.  For  this  reason  an  infinite 
aggregate  of  actual  things  cannot  be  considered 
as  a  given  whole,  consequently,  not  as  a  con¬ 
temporaneously  given  whole.  The  world  is  con¬ 
sequently,  as  regards  extension  in  space,  not  in¬ 
finite ,  but  enclosed  in  limits.  And  this  was  the 
second  thing  to  be  proved. 


1  We  may  consider  an  undetermined  quantity  as  a 
whole,  when  it  is  enclosed  within  limits,  although  we 
cannot  construct  or  ascertain  its  totality  by  .measure¬ 
ment,  that  is,  by  the  successive  synthesis  of  its  parts. 
For  its  limits  of  themselves  determine  its  completeness 
as  a  whole. 


Antithesis 

The  world  has  no  beginning,  and  no  limits  in 
space,  but  is,  in  relation  both  to  time  and  space, 
infinite. 

PROOF 

For  let  it  be  granted  that  it  has  a  beginning.  A 
beginning  is  an  existence  which  is  preceded  by  a 
time  in  which  the  thing  does  not  exist.  On  the 
above  supposition,  it  follows  that  there  must 
have  been  a  time  in  which  the  world  did  not 
exist,  that  is,  a  void  time.  But  in  a  void  time 
the  origination  of  a  thing  is  impossible ;  because 
no  part  of  any  such  time  contains  a  distinctive 
condition  of  being,  in  preference  to  that  of  non- 
being  (whether  the  supposed  thing  originate  of 
itself,  or  by  means  of  some  other  cause).  Con¬ 
sequently,  many  series  of  things  may  have  a  be¬ 
ginning  in  the  world,  but  the  world  itself  cannot 
have  a  beginning,  and  is,  therefore,  in  relation 
to  past  time,  infinite. 

As  regards  the  second  statement,  let  us  first 
take  the  opposite  for  granted — that  the  world  is 
finite  and  limited  in  space;  it  follows  that  it 
must  exist  in  a  void  space,  which  is  not  limited. 
We  should  therefore  meet  not  only  with  a  rela¬ 
tion  of  things  in  space ,  but  also  a  relation  of 
things  to  space.  Now,  as  the  world  is  an  absolute 
whole,  out  of  and  beyond  which  no  object  of 
intuition,  and  consequently  no  correlate  to 
which  can  be  discovered,  this  relation  of  the 
world  to  a  void  space  is  merely  a  relation  to  no 
object.  But  such  a  relation,  and  consequently 
the  limitation  of  the  world  by  void  space,  is 
nothing.  Consequently,  the  world,  as  regards 
space,  is  not  limited,  that  is,  it  is  infinite  in  re¬ 
gard  to  extension.2 

2  Space  is  merely  the  form  of  external  intuition  (for¬ 
mal  intuition),  and  not  a  real  object  which  can  be  ex¬ 
ternally  perceived.  Space,  prior  to  all  things  which  de¬ 
termine  it  (fill  or  limit  it),  or,  rather,  which  present  an 
empirical  intuition  conformable  to  it,  is,  under  the  title 
of  absolute  space,  nothing  but  the  mere  possibility 
of  external  phenomena,  in  so  far  as  they  either  exist  in 
themselves,  or  can  annex  themselves  to  given  intuitions. 
Empirical  intuition  is  therefore  not  a  composition  of 
phenomena  and  space  (of  perception  and  empty  intui¬ 
tion).  The  one  is  not  the  correlate  of  the  other  in  a 
synthesis,  but  they  are  vitally  connected  in  the  same 
empirical  intuition,  as  matter  and  form.  If  we  wish  to 
set  one  of  these  two  apart  from  the  other — space  from 
phenomena — there  arise  all  sorts  of  empty  determina¬ 
tions  of  external  intuition,  which  are  very  far  from 
being  possible  perceptions.  For  example,  motion  or  rest 
of  the  world  in  an  infinite  empty  space,  or  a  determi¬ 
nation  of  the  mutual  relation  of  both,  cannot  possibly 
be  perceived,  and  is  therefore  merely  the  predicate  of  a 
notional  entity. 


THE  CRITIQUE 


136 


Observations  on  the  First  Antinomy 


On  the  Thesis 

In  bringing  forward  these  conflicting  argu¬ 
ments,  I  have  not  been  on  the  search  for  soph¬ 
isms,  for  the  purpose  of  availing  myself  of  spe¬ 
cial  pleading,  which  takes  advantage  of  the 
carelessness  of  the  opposite  party,  appeals  to  a 
misunderstood  statute,  and  erects  its  unright¬ 
eous  claims  upon  an  unfair  interpretation.  Both 
proofs  originate  fairly  from  the  nature  of  the 
case,  and  the  advantage  presented  by  the  mis¬ 
takes  of  the  dogmatists  of  both  parties  has  been 
completely  set  aside. 

The  thesis  might  also  have  been  unfairly 
demonstrated,  by  the  introduction  of  an  errone¬ 
ous  conception  of  the  infinity  of  a  given  quan¬ 
tity.  A  quantity  is  infinite,  if  a  greater  than  it¬ 
self  cannot  possibly  exist.  The  quantity  is  meas¬ 
ured  by  the  number  of  given  units — which  are 
taken  as  a  standard — contained  in  it.  Now  no 
number  can  be  the  greatest,  because  one  or 
more  units  can  always  be  added.  It  follows  that 
an  infinite  given  quantity,  consequently  an  in¬ 
finite  world  (both  as  regards  time  and  exten¬ 
sion)  is  impossible.  It  is,  therefore,  limited  in 
both  respects.  In  this  manner  I  might  have  con¬ 
ducted  my  proof ;  but  the  conception  given  in  it 
does  not  agree  with  the  true  conception  of  an 
infinite  whole.  In  this  there  is  no  representation 
of  its  quantity,  it  is  not  said  how  large  it  is;  con¬ 
sequently  its  conception  is  not  the  conception 
of  a  maximum.  We  cogitate  in  it  merely  its  rela¬ 
tion  to  an  arbitrarily  assumed  unit,  in  relation 
to  which  it  is  greater  than  any  number.  Now, 
just  as  the  unit  which  is  taken  is  greater  or 
smaller,  the  infinite  will  be  greater  or  smaller; 
but  the  infinity,  which  consists  merely  in  the  re¬ 
lation  to  this  given  unit,  must  remain  always  the 
same,  although  the  absolute  quantity  of  the 
whole  is  not  thereby  cognized. 

The  true  (transcendental)  conception  of  in¬ 
finity  is:  that  the  successive  synthesis  of  unity 
in  the  measurement  of  a  given  quantum  can 
never  be  completed.1  Hence  it  follows,  without 
possibility  of  mistake,  that  an  eternity  of  actual 
successive  states  up  to  a  given  (the  present) 
moment  cannot  have  elapsed,  and  that  the  world 
must  therefore  have  a  beginning. 

In  regard  to  the  second  part  of  the  thesis,  the 
difficulty  as  to  an  infinite  and  yet  elapsed  series 

1  The  quantum  in  this  sense  contains  a  congeries  of 
given  units,  which  is  greater  than  any  number — and 
this  is  the  mathematical  conception  of  the  infinite. 


On  the  Antithesis 

The  proof  in  favour  of  the  infinity  of  the  cos- 
mical  succession  and  the  cosmical  content  is 
based  upon  the  consideration  that,  in  the  oppo¬ 
site  case,  a  void  time  and  a  void  space  must  con¬ 
stitute  the  limits  of  the  world.  Now  I  am  not 
unaware,  that  there  are  some  ways  of  escaping 
this  conclusion.  It  may,  for  example,  be  alleged, 
that  a  limit  to  the  world,  as  regards  both  space 
and  time,  is  quite  possible,  without  at  the  same 
time  holding  the  existence  of  an  absolute  time 
before  the  beginning  of  the  world,  or  an  abso¬ 
lute  space  extending  beyond  the  actual  world — 
which  is  impossible.  I  am  quite  well  satisfied 
with  the  latter  part  of  this  opinion  of  the  philos¬ 
ophers  of  the  Leibnitzian  school.  Space  is  mere¬ 
ly  the  form  of  external  intuition,  but  not  a  real 
object  which  can  itself  be  externally  intuited; 
it  is  not  a  correlate  of  phenomena,  it  is  the  form 
of  phenomena  itself.  Space,  therefore,  cannot  be 
regarded  as  absolutely  and  in  itself  something 
determinative  of  the  existence  of  things,  be¬ 
cause  it  is  not  itself  an  object,  but  only  the  form 
of  possible  objects.  Consequently,  things,  as  phe¬ 
nomena,  determine  space;  that  is  to  say,  they 
render  it  possible  that,  of  all  the  possible  predi¬ 
cates  of  space  (size  and  relation),  certain  may 
belong  to  reality.  But  we  cannot  affirm  the  con¬ 
verse,  that  space,  as  something  self-subsistent. 
can  determine  real  things  in  regard  to  size  or 
shape,  for  it  is  in  itself  not  a  real  thing.  Space 
(filled  or  void)2  may  therefore  be  limited  by 
phenomena,  but  phenomena  cannot  be  limited 
by  an  empty  space  without  them.  This  is  true  of 
time  also.  All  this  being  granted,  it  is  neverthe¬ 
less  indisputable,  that  we  must  assume  these  two 
nonentities,  void  space  without  and  void  time 
before  the  world,  if  we  assume  the  existence  of 
cosmical  limits,  relatively  to  space  or  time. 

For,  as  regards  the  subterfuge  adopted  by 
those  who  endeavour  to  evade  the  consequence 
— that,  if  the  world  is  limited  as  to  space  and 
time,  the  infinite  void  must  determine  the  exist¬ 
ence  of  actual  things  in  regard  to  their  dimen¬ 
sions — it  arises  solely  from  the  fact  that,  instead 
of  a  sensuous  world ,  an  intelligible  world — of 
which  nothing  is  known — is  cogitated;  instead 

2  It  is  evident  that  what  is  meant  here  is,  that  empty 
space,  in  so  far  as  it  is  limited  by  phenomena — space, 
that  is,  within  the  world — does  not  at  least  contradict 
transcendental  principles,  and  may  therefore,  as  regards 
them,  be  admitted,  although  its  possibility  cannot  on 
that  account  be  affirmed. 


OF  PURE  REASON 


137 


Thesis 

disappears;  for  the  manifold  of  a  world  infinite 
in  extension  is  contemporaneously  given.  But,  in 
order  to  cogitate  the  total  of  this  manifold,  as 
we  cannot  have  the  aid  of  limits  constituting  by 
themselves  this  total  in  intuition,  we  are  obliged 
to  give  some  account  of  our  conception,  which 
in  this  case  cannot  proceed  from  the  whole  to 
the  determined  quantity  of  the  parts,  but  must 
demonstrate  the  possibility  of  a  wThole  by  means 
of  a  successive  synthesis  of  the  parts.  But  as 
this  synthesis  must  constitute  a  series  that  can¬ 
not  be  completed,  it  is  impossible  for  us  to  cogi¬ 
tate  prior  to  it,  and  consequently  not  by  means 
of  it,  a  totality.  For  the  conception  of  totality 
itself  is  in  the  present  case  the  representation  of 
a  completed  synthesis  of  the  parts;  and  this 
completion,  and  consequently  its  conception,  is 
impossible. 


Second  Conflict  of  the 
Thesis 

Every  composite  substance  in  the  world  con¬ 
sists  of  simple  parts;  and  there  exists  nothing 
that  is  not  either  itself  simple,  or  composed  of 
simple  parts. 

PROOF 

For,  grant  that  composite  substances  do  not 
consist  of  simple  parts ;  in  this  case,  if  all  com¬ 
bination  or  composition  were  annihilated  in 
thought,  no  composite  part,  and  (as,  by  the  sup¬ 
position,  there  do  not  exist  simple  parts)  no  sim¬ 
ple  part  would  exist.  Consequently,  no  sub¬ 
stance;  consequently,  nothing  would  exist. 
Either,  then,  it  is  impossible  to  annihilate  com¬ 
position  in  thought;  or,  after  such  annihilation, 
there  must  remain  something  that  subsists  with¬ 
out  composition,  that  is,  something  that  is  sim¬ 
ple.  But  in  the  former  case  the  composite  could 
not  itself  consist  of  substances,  because  with 
substances  composition  is  merely  a  contingent 
relation,  apart  from  which  they  must  still  exist 
as  self-subsistent  beings.  Now,  as  this  case  con¬ 
tradicts  the  supposition,  the  second  must  con¬ 
tain  the  truth — that  the  substantial  composite 
in  the  world  consists  of  simple  parts. 

It  follows,  as  an  immediate  inference,  that 
the  things  in  the  world  are  all,  without  excep¬ 
tion,  simple  beings — that  composition  is  merely 
an  external  condition  pertaining  to  them — and 
that,  although  we  never  can  separate  and  iso¬ 
late  the  elementary  substances  from  the  state 


Antithesis 

of  a  real  beginning  (an  existence,  which  is  pre¬ 
ceded  by  a  period  in  which  nothing  exists),  an 
existence  which  presupposes  no  other  condition 
than  that  of  time;  and,  instead  of  limits  of  ex¬ 
tension,  boundaries  of  the  universe.  But  the 
question  relates  to  the  mundns  phaenomenon > 
and  its  quantity;  and  in  this  case  we  cannot 
make  abstraction  of  the  conditions  of  sensibil¬ 
ity,  without  doing  away  with  the  essential  real¬ 
ity  of  this  world  itself.  The  world  of  sense,  if  it 
is  limited,  must  necessarily  lie  in  the  infinite 
void.  If  this,  and  with  it  space  as  the  a  priori 
condition  of  the  possibility  of  phenomena,  is 
left  out  of  view,  the  whole  world  of  sense  dis¬ 
appears.  In  our  problem  is  this  alone  considered 
as  given.  The  mundns  intelligibilis  is  nothing 
but  the  general  conception  of  a  world,  in  which 
abstraction  has  been  made  of  all  conditions  of 
intuition,  and  in  relation  to  which  no  syntheti¬ 
cal  proposition — either  affirmative  or  negative 
— is  possible. 

Transcendental  Ideas 
Antithesis 

No  composite  thing  in  the  world  consists  of 
simple  parts;  and  there  does  not  exist  in  the 
world  any  simple  substance. 

PROOF 

Let  it  be  supposed  that  a  composite  thing  (as 
substance)  consists  of  simple  parts.  Inasmuch 
as  all  external  relation,  consequently  all  compo¬ 
sition  of  substances,  is  possible  only  in  space; 
the  space,  occupied  by  that  which  is  composite, 
must  consist  of  the  same  number  of  parts  as  is 
contained  in  the  composite.  But  space  does  not 
consist  of  simple  parts,  but  of  spaces.  There¬ 
fore,  every  part  of  the  composite  must  occupy 
a  space.  But  the  absolutely  primary  parts  of 
what  is  composite  are  simple.  It  follows  that 
what  is  simple  occupies  a  space.  Now,  as  every¬ 
thing  real  that  occupies  a  space,  contains  a  man¬ 
ifold  the  parts  of  which  are  external  to  each 
other,  and  is  consequently  composite — and  a 
real  composite,  not  of  accidents  (for  these  can¬ 
not  exist  external  to  each  other  apart  from  sub¬ 
stance),  but  of  substances — it  follows  that  the 
simple  must  be  a  substantial  composite,  which 
is  self-contradictory. 

The  second  proposition  of  the  antithesis — 
that  there  exists  in  the  world  nothing  that  is 
simple — is  here  equivalent  to  the  following:  The 
existence  of  the  absolutely  simple  cannot  be 
demonstrated  from  any  experience  or  percep- 


138 


THE  CRITIQUE 


Thesis 

of  composition,  reason  must  cogitate  these  as 
the  primary  subjects  of  all  composition,  and 
consequently,  as  prior  thereto — and  as  simple 
substances. 


Observations  on  the 
Thesis 

When  I  speak  of  a  whole,  which  necessarily 
consists  of  simple  parts,  I  understand  thereby 
only  a  substantial  whole,  as  the  true  composite; 
that  is  to  say,  I  understand  that  contingent 
unity  of  the  manifold  which  is  given  as  per¬ 
fectly  isolated  (at  least  in  thought),  placed  in 
reciprocal  connection,  and  thus  constituted  a 
unity.  Space  ought  not  to  be  called  a  compost- 
turn  but  a  totam,  for  its  parts  are  possible  in 
the  whole,  and  not  the  whole  by  means  of  the 
parts.  It  might  perhaps  be  called  a  compositum 
ideale,  but  not  a  compositum  reale.  But  this  is 
of  no  importance.  As  space  is  not  a  composite 
of  substances  (and  not  even  of  real  accidents), 
if  I  abstract  all  composition  therein — nothing, 
not  even  a  point,  remains;  for  a  point  is  pos¬ 
sible  only  as  the  limit  of  a  space — consequently 
of  a  composite.  Space  and  time,  therefore,  do 
not  consist  of  simple  parts.  That  which  belongs 
only  to  the  condition  or  state  of  a  substance, 
even  although  it  possesses  a  quantity  (motion 


Antithesis 

tion  either  external  or  internal;  and  the  abso¬ 
lutely  simple  is  a  mere  idea,  the  objective  reality 
of  which  cannot  be  demonstrated  in  any  possi¬ 
ble  experience;  it  is  consequently,  in  the  expo¬ 
sition  of  phenomena,  without  application  and 
object.  For,  let  us  take  for  granted  that  an  ob¬ 
ject  may  be  found  in  experience  for  this  tran¬ 
scendental  idea;  the  empirical  intuition  of  such 
an  object  must  then  be  recognized  to  contain 
absolutely  no  manifold  with  its  parts  external  to 
each  other,  and  connected  into  unity.  Now,  as 
we  cannot  reason  from  the  nonconsciousness  of 
such  a  manifold  to  the  impossibility  of  its  exist¬ 
ence  in  the  intuition  of  an  object,  and  as  the 
proof  of  this  impossibility  is  necessary  for  the 
establishment  and  proof  of  absolute  simplicity; 
it  follows  that  this  simplicity  cannot  be  inferred 
from  any  perception  whatever.  As,  therefore,  an 
absolutely  simple  object  cannot  be  given  in  any 
experience,  and  the  world  of  sense  must  be  con¬ 
sidered  as  the  sum  total  of  all  possible  experi¬ 
ences  :  nothing  simple  exists  in  the  world. 

This  second  proposition  in  the  antithesis  has 
a  more  extended  aim  than  the  first.  The  first 
merely  banishes  the  simple  from  the  intuition 
of  the  composite ;  while  the  second  drives  it  en¬ 
tirely  out  of  nature.  Hence  we  were  unable  to 
demonstrate  it  from  the  conception  of  a  given 
object  of  external  intuition  (of  the  composite), 
but  we  were  obliged  to  prove  it  from  the  rela¬ 
tion  of  a  given  object  to  a  possible  experience  in 
general. 

Second  Antinomy 

Antithesis 

Against  the  assertion  of  the  infinite  subdivisi¬ 
bility  of  matter,  whose  ground  of  proof  is  purely 
mathematical,  objections  have  been  alleged  by 
the  Monadists.  These  objections  lay  themselves 
open,  at  first  sight,  to  suspicion,  from  the  fact 
that  they  do  not  recognize  the  clearest  mathe¬ 
matical  proofs  as  propositions  relating  to  the 
constitution  of  space,  in  so  far  as  it  is  reallv  the 
formal  condition  of  the  possibility  of  all  mat¬ 
ter,  but  regard  them  merely  as  inferences  from 
abstract  but  arbitrary  conceptions,  which  can¬ 
not  have  any  application  to  real  things.  Just  as 
if  it  were  possible  to  imagine  another  mode  of 
intuition  than  that  given  in  the  primitive  intui¬ 
tion  of  space ;  and  just  as  if  its  a  priori  determi¬ 
nations  did  not  apply  to  everything,  the  exist¬ 
ence  of  which  is  possible,  from  the  fact  alone 
of  its  filling  space.  If  we  listen  to  them,  we  shall 
find  ourselves  required  to  cogitate,  in  addition 
to  the  mathematical  point,  which  is  simple — not, 
however,  a  part,  but  a  mere  limit  of  space — 


OF  PURE  REASON 


139 


Thesis 

or  change,  for  example),  likewise  does  not  con¬ 
sist  of  simple  parts.  That  is  to  say,  a  certain 
degree  of  change  does  not  originate  from  the 
addition  of  many  simple  changes.  Our  inference 
of  the  simple  from  the  composite  is  valid  only  of 
self-subsisting  things.  But  the  accidents  of  a 
state  are  not  self-subsistent.  The  proof,  then,  for 
the  necessity  of  the  simple,  as  the  component 
part  of  all  that  is  substantial  and  composite, 
may  prove  a  failure,  and  the  whole  case  of  this 
thesis  be  lost,  if  we  carry  the  proposition  too 
far,  and  wish  to  make  it  valid  of  everything  that 
is  composite  without  distinction — as  indeed  has 
really  now  and  then  happened.  Besides,  I  am 
here  speaking  only  of  the  simple,  in  so  far  as  it 
is  necessarily  given  in  the  composite — the  latter 
being  capable  of  solution  into  the  former  as  its 
component  parts.  The  proper  signification  of  the 
word  monas  (as  employed  by  Leibnitz)  ought 
to  relate  to  the  simple,  given  immediately  as 
simple  substance  (for  example,  in  conscious¬ 
ness),  and  not  as  an  element  of  the  composite. 
As  an  element,  the  term  atomus  would  be  more 
appropriate.  And  as  I  wish  to  prove  the  exist¬ 
ence  of  simple  substances,  only  in  relation  to, 
and  as  the  elements  of,  the  composite,  I  might 
term  the  antithesis  of  the  second  Antinomy, 
transcendental  Atomistic.  But  as  this  word  has 
long  been  employed  to  designate  a  particular 
theory  of  corporeal  phenomena  ( moleculae ), 
and  thus  presupposes  a  basis  of  empirical  con¬ 
ceptions,  I  prefer  calling  it  the  dialectical  prin¬ 
ciple  of  Monadology. 


Antithesis 

physical  points,  which  are  indeed  likewise  sim¬ 
ple,  but  possess  the  peculiar  property,  as  parts 
of  space,  of  filling  it  merely  by  their  aggrega¬ 
tion.  I  shall  not  repeat  here  the  common  and 
clear  refutations  of  this  absurdity,  which  are  to 
be  found  everywhere  in  numbers:  every  one 
knows  that  it  is  impossible  to  undermine  the  evi¬ 
dence  of  mathematics  by  mere  discursive  con¬ 
ceptions  ;  I  shall  only  remark  that,  if  in  this  case 
philosophy  endeavours  to  gain  an  advantage 
over  mathematics  by  sophistical  artifices,  it  is 
because  it  forgets  that  the  discussion  relates 
solely  to  phenomena  and  their  conditions.  It  is 
not  sufficient  to  find  the  conception  of  the  sim¬ 
ple  for  the  pure  conception  of  the  composite, 
but  we  must  discover  for  the  intuition  of  the 
composite  (matter),  the  intuition  of  the  simple. 
Now  this,  according  to  the  laws  of  sensibility, 
and  consequently  in  the  case  of  objects  of  sense, 
is  utterly  impossible.  In  the  case  of  a  whole 
composed  of  substances,  which  is  cogitated  sole¬ 
ly  by  the  pure  understanding,  it  may  be  neces¬ 
sary  to  be  in  possession  of  the  simple  before 
composition  is  possible.  But  this  does  not  hold 
good  of  the  Totum  substantiate  phaenomenon , 
which,  as  an  empirical  intuition  in  space,  pos¬ 
sesses  the  necessary  property  of  containing  no 
simple  part,  for  the  very  reason  that  no  part  of 
space  is  simple.  Meanwhile,  the  Monadists  have 
been  subtle  enough  to  escape  from  this  diffi¬ 
culty,  by  presupposing  intuition  and  the  dynam¬ 
ical  relation  of  substances  as  the  condition  of 
the  possibility  of  space,  instead  of  regarding 
space  as  the  condition  of  the  possibility  of  the 
objects  of  external  intuition,  that  is,  of  bodies. 
Now  we  have  a  conception  of  bodies  only  as 
phenomena,  and,  as  such,  they  necessarily  pre¬ 
suppose  space  as  the  condition  of  all  external 
phenomena.  The  evasion  is  therefore  in  vain; 
as,  indeed,  we  have  sufficiently  shown  in  our 
Aesthetic.  If  bodies  were  things  in  themselves , 
the  proof  of  the  Monadists  would  be  unexcep¬ 
tionable. 

The  second  dialectical  assertion  possesses  the 
peculiarity  of  having  opposed  to  it  a  dogmatical 
proposition,  which,  among  all  such  sophistical 
statements,  is  the  only  one  that  undertakes  to 
prove  in  the  case  of  an  object  of  experience, 
that  which  is  properly  a  transcendental  idea — 
the  absolute  simplicity  of  substance.  The  prop¬ 
osition  is  that  the  object  of  the  internal  sense, 
the  thinking  Ego,  is  an  absolute  simple  sub¬ 
stance.  Without  at  present  entering  upon  this 
subject — as  it  has  been  considered  at  length  in 
a  former  chapter — I  shall  merely  remark  that,  if 


THE  CRITIQUE 


Third  Conflict  of  the 
Thesis 

Causality  according  to  the  laws  of  nature,  is 
not  the  only  causality  operating  to  originate  the 
phenomena  of  the  world.  A  causality  of  freedom 
is  also  necessary  to  account  fully  for  these 
phenomena. 

PROOF 

Let  it  be  supposed,  that  there  is  no  other  kind 
of  causality  than  that  according  to  the  laws 
of  nature.  Consequently,  everything  that  hap¬ 
pens  presupposes  a  previous  condition,  which 
it  follows  with  absolute  certainty,  in  conformity 
with  a  rule.  But  this  previous  condition  must 
itself  be  something  that  has  happened  (that 
has  arisen  in  time,  as  it  did  not  exist  before), 
for,  if  it  has  always  been  in  existence,  its  con¬ 
sequence  or  effect  would  not  thus  originate  for 
the  first  time,  but  would  likewise  have  always 
existed.  The  causality,  therefore,  of  a  cause, 
whereby  something  happens,  is  itself  a  thing  that 
has  happened.  Now  this  again  presupposes,  in 
conformity  with  the  law  of  nature,  a  previous 
condition  and  its  causality,  and  this  another 
anterior  to  the  former,  and  so  on.  If,  then, 
everything  happens  solely  in  accordance  with 
the  laws  of  nature,  there  cannot  be  any  real 
first  beginning  of  things,  but  only  a  subaltern 
or  comparative  beginning.  There  cannot,  there¬ 
fore,  be  a  completeness  of  series  on  the  side  of 


Antithesis 

something  is  cogitated  merely  as  an  object, 
without  the  addition  of  any  synthetical  determi¬ 
nation  of  its  intuition — as  happens  in  the  case 
of  the  bare  representation,  / — it  is  certain  that 
no  manifold  and  no  composition  can  be  per¬ 
ceived  in  such  a  representation.  As,  moreover, 
the  predicates  whereby  I  cogitate  this  object 
are  merely  intuitions  of  the  internal  sense,  there 
cannot  be  discovered  in  them  anything  to  prove 
the  existence  of  a  manifold  whose  parts  are  ex¬ 
ternal  to  each  other,  and,  consequently,  nothing 
to  prove  the  existence  of  real  composition.  Con¬ 
sciousness,  therefore,  is  so  constituted  that,  in¬ 
asmuch  as  the  thinking  subject  is  at  the  same 
time  its  own  object,  it  cannot  divide  itself — al¬ 
though  it  can  divide  its  inhering  determinations. 
For  every  object  in  relation  to  itself  is  absolute 
unity.  Nevertheless,  if  the  subject  is  regarded 
externally,  as  an  object  of  intuition,  it  must,  in 
its  character  of  phenomenon,  possess  the  prop¬ 
erty  of  composition.  And  it  must  always  be  re¬ 
garded  in  this  manner,  if  we  wish  to  know 
whether  there  is  or  is  not  contained  in  it  a  mani¬ 
fold  whose  parts  are  external  to  each  other. 

Transcendental  Ideas 

Antithesis 

There  is  no  such  thing  as  freedom,  but 
everything  in  the  world  happens  solely  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  laws  of  nature. 


PROOF 

Granted,  that  there  does  exist  freedom  in  the 
transcendental  sense,  as  a  peculiar  kind  of 
causality,  operating  to  produce  events  in  the 
world — a  faculty,  that  is  to  say,  of  originating 
a  state,  and  consequently  a  series  of  conse¬ 
quences  from  that  state.  In  this  case,  not  only 
the  series  originated  by  this  spontaneity,  but  the 
determination  of  this  spontaneity  itself  to  the 
production  of  the  series,  that  is  to  say,  the 
causality  itself  must  have  an  absolute  com¬ 
mencement,  such  that  nothing  can  precede  to 
determine  this  action  according  to  unvarying 
laws.  But  every  beginning  of  action  presupposes 
in  the  acting  cause  a  state  of  inaction;  and  a  dy¬ 
namically  primal  beginning  of  action  presup¬ 
poses  a  state,  which  has  no  connection — as  re¬ 
gards  causality — with  the  preceding  state  of  the 
cause — which  does  not,  that  is.  in  any  wise  re¬ 
sult  from  it.  Transcendental  freedom  is  there¬ 
fore  opposed  to  the  natural  law  of  cause  and 
effect,  and  such  a  conjunction  of  successive 
states  in  effective  causes  is  destructive  of  the 


OF  PURE  REASON 


PROOF 

the  causes  which  originate  the  one  from  the 
other.  But  the  law  of  nature  is  that  nothing  can 
happen  without  a  sufficient  a  priori  determined 
cause.  The  proposition  therefore — if  all  causali¬ 
ty  is  possible  only  in  accordance  with  the  laws 
of  nature — is,  when  stated  in  this  unlimited  and 
general  manner,  self-contradictory.  It  follows 
that  this  cannot  be  the  only  kind  of  causality. 

From  what  has  been  said,  it  follows  that  a 
causality  must  be  admitted,  by  means  of  which 
something  happens,  without  its  cause  being  de¬ 
termined  according  to  necessary  laws  by  some 
other  cause  preceding.  That  is  to  say,  there 
must  exist  an  absolute  spontaneity  of  cause, 
which  of  itself  originates  a  series  of  phenomena 
which  proceeds  according  to  natural  laws — 
consequently  transcendental  freedom,  without 
which  even  in  the  course  of  nature  the  succes¬ 
sion  of  phenomena  on  the  side  of  causes  is  never 
complete. 


possibility  of  unity  in  experience  and  for  that 
reason  not  to  be  found  in  experience — is  conse¬ 
quently  a  mere  fiction  of  thought. 

We  have,  therefore,  nothing  but  nature  to 
which  we  must  look  for  connection  and  order 
in  cosmical  events.  Freedom — independence  of 
the  laws  of  nature — is  certainly  a  deliverance 
from  restraint,  but  it  is  also  a  relinquishing  of 
the  guidance  of  law  and  rule.  For  it  cannot  be 
alleged  that,  instead  of  the  laws  of  nature,  laws 
of  freedom  may  be  introduced  into  the  causality 
of  the  course  of  nature.  For,  if  freedom  were 
determined  according  to  laws,  it  would  be  no 
longer  freedom,  but  merely  nature.  Nature, 
therefore,  and  transcendental  freedom  are  dis¬ 
tinguishable  as  conformity  to  law  and  lawless¬ 
ness.  The  former  imposes  upon  understanding 
the  difficulty  of  seeking  the  origin  of  events 
ever  higher  and  higher  in  the  series  of  causes, 
inasmuch  as  causality  is  always  conditioned 
thereby;  while  it  compensates  this  labour  by 
the  guarantee  of  a  unity  complete  and  in  con¬ 
formity  with  law.  The  latter,  on  the  contrary, 
holds  out  to  the  understanding  the  promise  of  a 
point  of  rest  in  the  chain  of  causes,  by  con¬ 
ducting  it  to  an  unconditioned  causality,  which 
professes  to  have  the  power  of  spontaneous  orig¬ 
ination,  but  which,  in  its  own  utter  blindness, 
deprives  it  of  the  guidance  of  rules,  by  which 
alone  a  completely  connected  experience  is  pos¬ 
sible. 


Observations  on  the  Third  Antinomy 


On  the  Thesis 

The  transcendental  idea  of  freedom  is  far 
from  constituting  the  entire  content  of  the 
psychological  conception  so  termed,  which  is 
for  the  most  part  empirical.  It  merely  presents 
us  with  the  conception  of  spontaneity  of  action, 
as  the  proper  ground  for  imputing  freedom  to 
the  cause  of  a  certain  class  of  objects.  It  is, 
however,  the  true  stumbling-stone  to  philoso¬ 
phy,  which  meets  with  unconquerable  difficul¬ 
ties  in  the  way  of  its  admitting  this  kind  of 
unconditioned  causality.  That  element  in  the 
question  of  the  freedom  of  the  will,  which  has 
for  so  long  a  time  placed  speculative  reason  in 
such  perplexity,  is  properly  only  transcendental, 
and  concerns  the  question,  whether  there  must 
be  held  to  exist  a  faculty  of  spontaneous  origi¬ 
nation  of  a  series  of  successive  things  or  states. 
How  such  a  faculty  is  possible  is  not  a  necessary 
inquiry;  for  in  the  case  of  natural  causality  it¬ 
self,  we  are  obliged  to  content  ourselves  with 


On  the  Antithesis 

The  assertor  of  the  all-sufficiency  of  nature 
in  regard  to  causality  (transcendental  Physioc¬ 
racy ),  in  opposition  to  the  doctrine  of  free¬ 
dom,  would  defend  his  view  of  the  question 
somewhat  in  the  following  manner.  He  would 
say,  in  answer  to  the  sophistical  arguments  of 
the  opposite  party://  you  do  not  accept  a  math¬ 
ematical  first ,  in  relation  to  time ,  you  have  no 
need  to  seek  a  dynamical  first ,  in  regard  to 
causality.  Who  compelled  you  to  imagine  an 
absolutely  primal  condition  of  the  world,  and 
therewith  an  absolute  beginning  of  the  gradually 
progressing  successions  of  phenomena — and,  as 
some  foundation  for  this  fancy  of  yours,  to  set 
bounds  to  unlimited  nature?  Inasmuch  as  the 
substances  in  the  world  have  always  existed — 
at  least  the  unity  of  experience  renders  such  a 
supposition  quite  necessary — there  is  no  diffi¬ 
culty  in  believing  also,  that  the  changes  in  the 
conditions  of  these  substances  have  always  ex- 


142 


THE  CRITIQUE 


Thesis 

the  a  priori  knowledge  that  such  a  causality 
must  be  presupposed,  although  we  are  quite 
incapable  of  comprehending  how  the  being  of 
one  thing  is  possible  through  the  being  of  an¬ 
other,  but  must  for  this  information  look 
entirely  to  experience.  Now  we  have  demon¬ 
strated  this  necessity  of  a  free  first  beginning  of 
a  series  of  phenomena,  only  in  so  far  as  it  is  re¬ 
quired  for  the  comprehension  of  an  origin  of 
the  world,  all  following  states  being  regarded  as 
a  succession  according  to  laws  of  nature  alone. 
But,  as  there  has  thus  been  proved  the  exist¬ 
ence  of  a  faculty  which  can  of  itself  originate  a 
series  in  time — although  we  are  unable  to  ex¬ 
plain  how  it  can  exist — we  feel  ourselves  au¬ 
thorized  to  admit,  even  in  the  midst  of  the 
natural  course  of  events,  a  beginning,  as  regards 
causality,  of  different  successions  of  phenom¬ 
ena,  and  at  the  same  time  to  attribute  to  all 
substances  a  faculty  of  free  action.  But  we 
ought  in  this  case  not  to  allow  ourselves  to  fall 
into  a  common  misunderstanding,  and  to  sup¬ 
pose  that,  because  a  successive  series  in  the 
world  can  only  have  a  comparatively  first  be¬ 
ginning — another  state  or  condition  of  things 
always  preceding — an  absolutely  first  beginning 
of  a  series  in  the  course  of  nature  is  impossible. 
For  we  are  not  speaking  here  of  an  absolutely 
first  beginning  in  relation  to  time,  but  as  regards 
causality  alone.  When,  for  example,  I,  com¬ 
pletely  of  my  own  free  will,  and  independently 
of  the  necessarily  determinative  influence  of 
natural  causes,  rise  from  my  chair,  there  com¬ 
mences  with  this  event,  including  its  material 
consequences  in  infinitum ,  an  absolutely  new 
series;  although,  in  relation  to  time,  this  event 
is  merely  the  continuation  of  a  preceding  series. 
For  this  resolution  and  act  of  mine  do  not  form 
part  of  the  succession  of  effects  in  nature,  and 
are  not  mere  continuations  of  it;  on  the  con¬ 
trary,  the  determining  causes  of  nature  cease  to 
operate  in  reference  to  this  event,  which  cer¬ 
tainly  succeeds  the  acts  of  nature,  but  does  not 
proceed  from  them.  For  these  reasons,  the  ac¬ 
tion  of  a  free  agent  must  be  termed,  in  regard 
to  causality,  if  not  in  relation  to  time,  an  abso¬ 
lutely  primal  beginning  of  a  series  of  phenom¬ 
ena. 

The  justification  of  this  need  of  reason  to  rest 
upon  a  free  act  as  the  first  beginning  of  the  se¬ 
ries  of  natural  causes  is  evident  from  the  fact, 
that  all  philosophers  of  antiquity  (with  the  ex¬ 
ception  of  the  Epicurean  school)  felt  themselves 
obliged,  when  constructing  a  theory  of  the  mo¬ 
tions  of  the  universe,  to  accept  a  prime  mover , 


Antithesis 

isted;  and,  consequently,  that  a  first  beginning, 
mathematical  or  dynamical,  is  by  no  means  re¬ 
quired.  The  possibility  of  such  an  infinite  der¬ 
ivation,  without  any  initial  member  from 
which  all  the  others  result,  is  certainly  quite  in¬ 
comprehensible.  But,  if  you  are  rash  enough  to 
deny  the  enigmatical  secrets  of  nature  for  this 
reason,  you  will  find  yourselves  obliged  to  deny 
also  the  existence  of  many  fundamental  proper¬ 
ties  of  natural  objects  (such  as  fundamental 
forces),  which  you  can  just  as  little  compre¬ 
hend;  and  even  the  possibility  of  so  simple  a 
conception  as  that  of  change  must  present  to 
you  insuperable  difficulties.  For  if  experience 
did  not  teach  you  that  it  was  real,  you  never 
could  conceive  a  priori  the  possibility  of  this 
ceaseless  sequence  of  being  and  non-being. 

But  if  the  existence  of  a  transcendental  fac¬ 
ulty  of  freedom  is  granted — a  faculty  of  origi¬ 
nating  changes  in  the  world — this  faculty  must 
at  least  exist  out  of  and  apart  from  the  world; 
although  it  is  certainly  a  bold  assumption,  that, 
over  and  above  the  complete  content  of  all 
possible  intuitions,  there  still  exists  an  object 
which  cannot  be  presented  in  any  possible  per¬ 
ception.  But,  to  attribute  to  substances  in  the 
world  itself  such  a  faculty,  is  quite  inadmissible; 
for,  in  this  case;  the  connection  of  phenomena 
reciprocally  determining  and  determined  ac¬ 
cording  to  general  laws,  which  is  termed  nature, 
and  along  with  it  the  criteria  of  empirical  truth, 
which  enable  us  to  distinguish  experience  from 
mere  visionary  dreaming,  would  almost  entirely 
disappear.  In  proximity  with  such  a  lawless 
faculty  of  freedom,  a  system  of  nature  is  hard¬ 
ly  cogitable;  for  the  laws  of  the  latter  would  be 
continually  subject  to  the  intrusive  influences  of 
the  former,  and  the  course  of  phenomena,  which 
would  otherwise  proceed  regularly  and  uniform¬ 
ly,  would  become  thereby  confused  and  discon¬ 
nected. 


OF  PURE  REASON 


143 


Thesis  Antithesis 

that  Is,  a  freely  acting  cause,  which  spontaneous¬ 
ly  and  prior  to  all  other  causes  evolved  this 
series  of  states.  They  always  felt  the  need  of 
going  beyond  mere  nature,  for  the  purpose  of 
making  a  first  beginning  comprehensible. 


Fourth  Conflict  of  the  Transcendental  Ideas 


Thesis 

There  exists  either  in,  or  in  connection  with 
the  world — either  as  a  part  of  it,  or  as  the 
cause  of  it — an  absolutely  necessary  being. 


PROOF 

The  world  of  sense,  as  the  sum  total  of  all 
phenomena,  contains  a  series  of  changes.  For, 
without  such  a  series,  the  mental  representation 
of  the  series  of  time  itself,  as  the  condition  of 
the  possibility  of  the  sensuous  world,  could  not 
be  presented  to  us.1  But  every  change  stands 
under  its  condition,  which  precedes  it  in  time 
and  renders  it  necessary.  Now  the  existence  of  a 
given  condition  presupposes  a  complete  series  of 
conditions  up  to  the  absolutely  unconditioned, 
which  alone  is  absolutely  necessary.  It  fol¬ 
lows  that  something  that  is  absolutely  necessary 
must  exist,  if  change  exists  as  its  consequence. 
But  this  necessary  thing  itself  belongs  to  the 
sensuous  world.  For  suppose  it  to  exist  out  of 
and  apart  from  it,  the  series  of  cosmical  changes 
would  receive  from  it  a  beginning,  and  yet  this 
necessary  cause  would  not  itself  belong  to  the 
world  of  sense.  But  this  is  impossible.  For,  as 
the  beginning  of  a  series  in  time  is  determined 
only  by  that  which  precedes  it  in  time,  the 
supreme  condition  of  the  beginning  of  a  series 
of  changes  must  exist  in  the  time  in  which  this 
series  itself  did  not  exist;  for  a  beginning  sup¬ 
poses  a  time  preceding,  in  which  the  thing  that 
begins  to  be  was  not  in  existence.  The  causality 
of  the  necessary  cause  of  changes,  and  conse¬ 
quently  the  cause  itself,  must  for  these  reasons 
belong  to  time — and  to  phenomena,  time  being 
possible  only  as  the  form  of  phenomena.  Conse¬ 
quently,  it  cannot  be  cogitated  as  separated 
from  the  world  of  sense — the  sum  total  of  all 
phenomena.  There  is,  therefore,  contained  in 
the  world,  something  that  is  absolutely  necessary 
— whether  it  be  the  whole  cosmical  series  itself, 
or  only  a  part  of  it. 

1  Objectively ,  time,  as  the  formal  condition  of  the 
possibility  of  change,  precedes  all  changes;  but  subjec¬ 
tively,  and  in  consciousness,  the  representation  of  time, 
like  every  other,  is  given  solely  by  occasion  of  percep¬ 
tion. 


Antithesis 

An  absolutely  necessary  being  does  not  exist, 
either  in  the  world,  or  out  of  it — as  its  cause. 

PROOF 

Grant  that  either  the  world  itself  is  necessary, 
or  that  there  is  contained  in  it  a  necessary  exist¬ 
ence.  Two  cases  are  possible.  First,  there  must 
either  be  in  the  series  of  cosmical  changes  a  be¬ 
ginning,  which  is  unconditionally  necessary,  and 
therefore  uncaused — which  is  at  variance  with 
the  dynamical  law  of  the  determination  of  all 
phenomena  in  time;  or,  secondly ,  the  series  it¬ 
self  is  without  beginning,  and,  although  contin¬ 
gent  and  conditioned  in  all  its  parts,  is  neverthe¬ 
less  absolutely  necessary  and  unconditioned  as 
a  whole — which  is  self-contradictory.  For  the 
existence  of  an  aggregate  cannot  be  necessary, 
if  no  single  part  of  it  possesses  necessary  exist¬ 
ence. 

Grant,  on  the  other  hand,  that  an  absolutely 
necessary  cause  exists  out  of  and  apart  from  the 
world.  This  cause,  as  the  highest  member  in  the 
series  of  the  causes  of  cosmical  changes,  must 
originate  or  begin2  the  existence  of  the  latter 
and  their  series.  In  this  case  it  must  also  begin 
to  act,  and  its  causality  would  therefore  belong 
to  time,  and  consequently  to  the  sum  total  of 
phenomena,  that  is,  to  the  world.  It  follows 
that  the  cause  cannot  be  out  of  the  world;  which 
is  contradictory  to  the  hypothesis.  Therefore, 
neither  in  the  world,  nor  out  of  it  (but  in  causal 
connection  with  it),  does  there  exist  any 
absolutely  necessary  being. 


2  The  word  begin  is  taken  in  two  senses.  The  first  is 
active — the  cause  being  regarded  as  beginning  a  series 
of  conditions  as  its  effect  (in fit).  The  second  is  passive 
— the  causality  in  the  cause  itself  beginning  to  operate 
(fit).  I  reason  here  from  the  first  to  the  second. 


144 


THE  CRITIQUE 


Observations  on  the  Fourth  Antinomy 


On  the  Thesis 

To  demonstrate  the  existence  of  a  necessary 
being,  I  cannot  be  permitted  in  this  place  to  em¬ 
ploy  any  other  than  the  cosmological  argument, 
which  ascends  from  the  conditioned  in  phenom¬ 
ena  to  the  unconditioned  in  cenception — the 
unconditioned  being  considered  the  necessary 
condition  of  the  absolute  totality  of  the  series. 
The  proof,  from  the  mere  idea  of  a  supreme 
being,  belongs  to  another  principle  of  reason 
and  requires  separate  discussion. 

The  pure  cosmological  proof  demonstrates 
the  existence  of  a  necessary  being,  but  at  the 
same  time  leaves  it  quite  unsettled,  whether 
this  being  is  the  world  itself,  or  quite  distinct 
from  it.  To  establish  the  truth  of  the  latter 
view,  principles  are  requisite,  which  are  not  cos¬ 
mological  and  do  not  proceed  in  the  series  of 
phenomena.  We  should  require  to  introduce  into 
our  proof  conceptions  of  contingent  beings — re¬ 
garded  merely  as  objects  of  the  understanding, 
and  also  a  principle  which  enables  us  to  connect 
these,  by  means  of  mere  conceptions,  with  a 
necessary  being.  But  the  proper  place  for  all 
such  arguments  is  a  transcendent  philosophy, 
which  has  unhappily  not  yet  been  established. 

But,  if  we  begin  our  proof  cosmologically, 
by  laying  at  the  foundation  of  it  the  series  of 
phenomena,  and  the  regress  in  it  according  to 
empirical  laws  of  causality,  we  are  not  at  liberty 
to  break  off  from  this  mode  of  demonstration 
and  to  pass  over  to  something  which  is  not  itself 
a  member  of  the  series.  The  condition  must  be 
taken  in  exactly  the  same  signification  as  the 
relation  of  the  conditioned  to  its  condition  in 
the  series  has  been  taken,  for  the  series  must 
conduct  us  in  an  unbroken  regress  to  this  su¬ 
preme  condition.  But  if  this  relation  is  sensuous, 
and  belongs  to  the  possible  empirical  employ¬ 
ment  of  understanding,  the  supreme  condition 
or  cause  must  close  the  regressive  series  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  laws  of  sensibility  and  consequently, 
must  belong  to  the  series  of  time.  It  follows  that 
this  necessary  existence  must  be  regarded  as  the 
highest  member  of  the  cosmical  series. 

Certain  philosophers  have,  nevertheless,  al¬ 
lowed  themselves  the  liberty  of  making  such 
a  SaltUS  (neraffacns  els  aXAo  76^0$).  From  the 
changes  in  the  world  they  have  concluded  their 
empirical  contingency,  that  is,  their  dependence 
on  empirically-determined  causes,  and  they  thus 
admitted  an  ascending  series  of  empirical  con- 


On  the  Antithesis 

The  difficulties  which  meet  us,  in  our  attempt 
to  rise  through  the  series  of  phenomena  to  the 
existence  of  an  absolutely  necessary  supreme 
cause,  must  not  originate  from  our  inability  to 
establish  the  truth  of  our  mere  conceptions  of 
the  necessary  existence  of  a  thing.  That  is  to 
say,  our  objections  must  not  be  ontological,  but 
must  be  directed  against  the  causal  connection 
with  a  series  of  phenomena  of  a  condition  which 
is  itself  unconditioned.  In  one  word,  they  must 
be  cosmological  and  relate  to  empirical  laws. 
We  must  show  that  the  regress  in  the  series  of 
causes  (in  the  world  of  sense)  cannot  conclude 
with  an  empirically  unconditioned  condition, 
and  that  the  cosmological  argument  from  the 
contingency  of  the  cosmical  state — a  contin¬ 
gency  alleged  to  arise  from  change — does  not 
justify  us  in  accepting  a  first  cause,  that  is,  a 
prime  originator  of  the  cosmical  series. 

The  reader  will  observe  in  this  antinomy  a 
very  remarkable  contrast.  The  very  same 
grounds  of  proof  which  established  in  the  thesis 
the  existence  of  a  supreme  being,  demonstrated 
in  the  antithesis — and  with  equal  strictness — 
the  non-existence  of  such  a  being.  We  found, 
first,  that  a  necessary  being  exists,  because  the 
whole  time  past  contains  the  series  of  all  condi¬ 
tions,  and  with  it,  therefore,  the  unconditioned 
(the  necessary) ;  secondly,  that  there  does  not 
exist  any  necessary  being ,  for  the  same  reason, 
that  the  whole  time  past  contains  the  series  of 
all  conditions — which  are  themselves,  therefore, 
in  the  aggregate,  conditioned.  The  cause  of  this 
seeming  incongruity  is  as  follows.  We  attend, 
in  the  first  argument,  solely  to  the  absolute 
totality  of  the  series  of  conditions,  the  one  of 
which  determines  the  other  in  time,  and  thus  ar¬ 
rive  at  a  necessary  unconditioned.  In  the  second, 
we  consider,  on  the  contrary,  the  contingency 
of  everything  that  is  determined  in  the  series 
of  time — for  every  event  is  preceded  by  a  time, 
in  which  the  condition  itself  must  be  deter¬ 
mined  as  conditioned — and  thus  everything  that 
is  unconditioned  or  absolutely  necessary  disap¬ 
pears.  In  both,  the  mode  of  proof  is  quite  in  ac¬ 
cordance  with  the  common  procedure  of  human 
reason,  which  often  falls  into  discord  with  itself, 
from  considering  an  object  from  two  different 
points  of  view.  Herr  von  Mairan  regarded  the 
controversy  between  two  celebrated  astrono¬ 
mers,  which  arose  from  a  similar  difficulty  as  to 


OF  PURE  REASON 


145 


Thesis 

ditions:  and  in  this  they  are  quite  right.  But  as 
they  could  not  find  in  this  series  any  primal  be¬ 
ginning  or  any  highest  member,  they  passed  sud¬ 
denly  from  the  empirical  conception  of  contin¬ 
gency  to  the  pure  category,  which  presents  us 
with  a  series — not  sensuous,  but  intellectual — 
whose  completeness  does  certainly  rest  upon 
the  existence  of  an  absolutely  necessary  cause. 
Nay,  more,  this  intellectual  series  is  not  tied  to 
any  sensuous  conditions;  and  is  therefore  free 
from  the  condition  of  time,  which  requires  it 
spontaneously  to  begin  its  causality  in  time.  But 
such  a  procedure  is  perfectly  inadmissible,  as 
will  be  made  plain  from  what  follows. 

In  the  pure  sense  of  the  categories,  that  is 
contingent  the  contradictory  opposite  of  which 
is  possible.  Now  we  cannot  reason  from  empiri¬ 
cal  contingency  to  intellectual.  The  opposite  of 
that  which  is  changed — the  opposite  of  its  state 
— is  actual  at  another  time,  and  is  therefore 
possible.  Consequently,  it  is  not  the  contradic¬ 
tory  opposite  of  the  former  state.  To  be  that , 
it  is  necessary  that,  in  the  same  time  in  which 
the  preceding  state  existed,  its  opposite  could 
have  existed  in  its  place;  but  such  a  cognition 
is  not  given  us  in  the  mere  phenomenon  of 
change.  A  body  that  was  in  motion  =  A,  comes 
into  a  state  of  rest  =  non-A.  Now  it  cannot  be 
concluded  from  the  fact  that  a  state  opposite 
to  the  state  A  follows  it,  that  the  contradictory 
opposite  of  A  is  possible;  and  that  A  is  there¬ 
fore  contingent.  To  prove  this,  we  should  re¬ 
quire  to  know  that  the  state  of  rest  could  have 
existed  in  the  very  same  time  in  which  the  mo¬ 
tion  took  place.  Now  we  know  nothing  more 
than  that  the  state  of  rest  was  actual  in  the 
time  that  followed  the  state  of  motion;  con¬ 
sequently,  that  it  was  also  possible.  But  mo¬ 
tion  at  one  time,  and  rest  at  another  time,  are 
not  contradictorily  opposed  to  each  other.  It 
follows  from  what  has  been  said  that  the  suc¬ 
cession  of  opposite  determinations,  that  is, 
change,  does  not  demonstrate  the  fact  of  con¬ 
tingency  as  represented  in  the  conceptions  of 
the  pure  understanding;  and  that  it  cannot, 
therefore,  conduct  us  to  the  fact  of  the  exist¬ 
ence  of  a  necessary  being.  Change  proves  mere¬ 
ly  empirical  contingency,  that  is  to  say,  that  the 
new  state  could  not  have  existed  without  a 
cause,  which  belongs  to  the  preceding  time. 
This  cause — even  although  it  is  regarded  as  ab¬ 
solutely  necessary — must  be  presented  to  us 
in  time,  and  must  belong  to  the  series  of  phe¬ 
nomena. 


Antithesis 

the  choice  of  a  proper  standpoint,  as  a  phenom¬ 
enon  of  sufficient  importance  to  warrant  a 
separate  treatise  on  the  subject.  The  one  con¬ 
cluded:  the  moon  revolves  on  its  own  axis ,  be¬ 
cause  it  constantly  presents  the  same  side  to  the 
earth;  the  other  declared  that  the  moon  does 
not  revolve  on  its  own  axis,  for  the  same  rea¬ 
son.  Both  conclusions  were  perfectly  correct, 
according  to  the  point  of  view  from  which  the 
motions  of  the  moon  were  considered. 


THE  CRITIQUE 


146 

Section  III.  Of  the  Interest  of  Reason  in  these 
Self-contradictions 

We  have  thus  completely  before  us  the  dia¬ 
lectical  procedure  of  the  cosmological  ideas. 
No  possible  experience  can  present  us  with  an 
object  adequate  to  them  in  extent.  Nay,  more, 
reason  itself  cannot  cogitate  them  as  according 
with  the  general  laws  of  experience.  And  yet 
they  are  not  arbitrary  fictions  of  thought.  On 
the  contrary,  reason,  in  its  uninterrupted  prog¬ 
ress  in  the  empirical  synthesis,  is  necessarily 
conducted  to  them,  when  it  endeavours  to  free 
from  all  conditions  and  to  comprehend  in  its 
unconditioned  totality  that  which  can  only  be 
determined  conditionally  in  accordance  with 
the  laws  of  experience.  These  dialectical  proposi¬ 
tions  are  so  many  attempts  to  solve  four  natural 
and  unavoidable  problems  of  reason.  There  are 
neither  more,  nor  can  there  be  less,  than  this 
number,  because  there  are  no  other  series  of 
synthetical  hypotheses,  limiting  a  priori  the 
empirical  synthesis. 

The  brilliant  claims  of  reason  striving  to  ex¬ 
tend  its  dominion  beyond  the  limits  of  experi¬ 
ence,  have  been  represented  above  only  in  dry 
formulae,  which  contain  merely  the  grounds  of 
its  pretensions.  They  have,  besides,  in  conform¬ 
ity  with  the  character  of  a  transcendental  philos¬ 
ophy,  been  freed  from  every  empirical  element; 
although  the  full  splendour  of  the  promises  they 
hold  out,  and  the  anticipations  they  excite, 
manifests  itself  only  when  in  connection  with 
empirical  cognitions.  In  the  application  of  them, 
however,  and  in  the  advancing  enlargement  of 
the  employment  of  reason,  while  struggling  to 
rise  from  the  region  of  experience  and  to  soar 
to  those  sublime  ideas,  philosophy  discovers  a 
value  and  a  dignity,  which,  if  it  could  but  make 
good  its  assertions,  would  raise  it  far  above  all 
other  departments  of  human  knowledge — pro¬ 
fessing,  as  it  does,  to  present  a  sure  foundation 
for  our  highest  hopes  and  the  ultimate  aims  of 
all  the  exertions  of  reason.  The  questions: 
whether  the  world  has  a  beginning  and  a  limit  to 
its  extension  in  space;  whether  there  exists  any¬ 
where,  or  perhaps,  in  my  own  thinking  Self,  an 
indivisible  and  indestructible  unity — or  whether 
nothing  but  what  is  divisible  and  transitory  ex¬ 
ists;  whether  I  am  a  free  agent,  or,  like  other 
beings,  am  bound  in  the  chains  of  nature  and 
fate;  whether,  finally,  there  is  a  supreme  cause 
of  the  world,  or  all  our  thought  and  speculation 
must  end  with  nature  and  the  order  of  external 
things — are  questions  for  the  solution  of  which 
the  mathematician  would  willingly  exchange  his 


whole  science;  for  in  it  there  is  no  satisfaction 
for  the  highest  aspirations  and  most  ardent  de¬ 
sires  of  humanity.  Nay,  it  may  even  be  said 
that  the  true  value  of  mathematics — that  pride 
of  human  reason — consists  in  this:  that  she 
guides  reason  to  the  knowledge  of  nature — in 
her  greater  as  well  as  in  her  less  manifestations 
— in  her  beautiful  order  and  regularity — guides 
her,  moreover,  to  an  insight  into  the  wonderful 
unity  of  the  moving  forces  in  the  operations  of 
nature,  far  beyond  the  expectations  of  a  philoso¬ 
phy  building  only  on  experience;  and  that  she 
thus  encourages  philosophy  to  extend  the  prov¬ 
ince  of  reason  beyond  all  experience,  and  at  the 
same  time  provides  it  with  the  most  excellent 
materials  for  supporting  its  investigations,  in  so 
far  as  their  nature  admits,  by  adequate  and  ac¬ 
cordant  intuitions. 

Unfortunately  for  speculation — but  perhaps 
fortunately  for  the  practical  interests  of  human¬ 
ity — reason,  in  the  midst  of  her  highest  antici¬ 
pations,  finds  herself  hemmed  in  by  a  press  of 
opposite  and  contradictory  conclusions,  from 
which  neither  her  honour  nor  her  safety  will 
permit  her  to  draw  back.  Nor  can  she  regard 
these  conflicting  trains  of  reasoning  with  indif¬ 
ference  as  mere  passages  at  arms,  still  less  can 
she  command  peace;  for  in  the  subject  of  the 
conflict  she  has  a  deep  interest.  There  is  no 
other  course  left  open  to  her  than  to  reflect  with 
herself  upon  the  origin  of  this  disunion  in  rea¬ 
son — whether  it  may  not  arise  from  a  mere 
misunderstanding.  After  such  an  inquiry,  arro¬ 
gant  claims  would  have  to  be  given  up  on  both 
sides;  but  the  sovereignty  of  reason  over  under¬ 
standing  and  sense  would  be  based  upon  a  sure 
foundation. 

We  shall  at  present  defer  this  radical  inquiry 
and,  in  the  meantime,  consider  for  a  little  what 
side  in  the  controversy  we  should  most  willingly 
take,  if  we  were  obliged  to. become  partisans  at 
all.  As,  in  this  case,  we  leave  out  of  sight  alto¬ 
gether  the  logical  criterion  of  truth,  and  merely 
consult  our  own  interest  in  reference  to  the 
question,  these  considerations,  although  inade¬ 
quate  to  settle  the  question  of  right  in  either 
party,  will  enable  us  to  comprehend  how  those 
who  have  taken  part  in  the  struggle,  adopt  the 
one  view  rather  than  the  other — no  special  in¬ 
sight  into  the  subject,  however,  having  influ¬ 
enced  their  choice.  They  will,  at  the  same 
time,  explain  to  us  many  other  things  by  the 
way — for  example,  the  fiery  zeal  on  the  one 
side  and  the  cold  maintenance  of  their  cause 
on  the  other;  why  the  one  party  has  met 
with  the  warmest  approbations,  and  the  other 


OF  PURE 

has  always  been  repulsed  by  irreconcilable 
prejudices. 

There  is  one  thing,  however,  that  determines 
the  proper  point  of  view,  from  which  alone  this 
preliminary  inquiry  can  be  instituted  and  car¬ 
ried  on  with  the  proper  completeness — and  that 
is  the  comparison  of  the  principles  from  which 
both  sides,  thesis  and  antithesis,  proceed.  My 
readers  would  remark  in  the  propositions  of  the 
antithesis  a  complete  uniformity  in  the  mode 
of  thought  and  a  perfect  unity  of  principle.  Its 
principle  was  that  of  pure  empiricism,  not  only 
in  the  explication  of  the  phenomena  in  the 
world,  but  also  in  the  solution  of  the  transcen¬ 
dental  ideas,  even  of  that  of  the  universe  itself. 
The  affirmations  of  the  thesis,  on  the  contrary, 
were  based,  in  addition  to  the  empirical  mode 
of  explanation  employed  in  the  series  of  phe¬ 
nomena,  on  intellectual  propositions;  and  its 
principles  were  in  so  far  not  simple.  I  shall  term 
the  thesis,  in  view  of  its  essential  characteristic, 
the  dogmatism  of  pure  reason. 

On  the  side  of  Dogmatism,  or  of  the  thesis, 
therefore,  in  the  determination  of  the  cosmolog¬ 
ical  ideas,  we  find: 

1.  A  practical  interest,  which  must  be  very 
dear  to  every  right-thinking  man.  That  the  word 
has  a  beginning — that  the  nature  of  my  thinking 
self  is  simple,  and  therefore  indestructible — that 
I  am  a  free  agent,  and  raised  above  the  compul¬ 
sion  of  nature  and  her  laws — and,  finally,  that 
the  entire  order  of  things,  which  form  the  world, 
is  dependent  upon  a  Supreme  Being,  from  whom 
the  whole  receives  unity  and  connection — these 
are  so  many  foundation-stones  of  morality 
and  religion.  The  antithesis  deprives  us  of 
all  these  supports — or,  at  least,  seems  so  to 
deprive  us. 

2.  A  speculative  interest  of  reason  manifests 
itself  on  this  side.  For,  if  we  take  the  transcen¬ 
dental  ideas  and  employ  them  in  the  manner 
which  the  thesis  directs,  we  can  exhibit  com¬ 
pletely  a  priori  the  entire  chain  of  conditions, 
and  understand  the  derivation  of  the  conditioned 
— beginning  from  the  unconditioned.  This  the 
antithesis  does  not  do;  and  for  this  reason  does 
not  meet  with  so  welcome  a  reception.  For  it  can 
give  no  answer  to  our  question  respecting  the 
conditions  of  its  synthesis — except  such  as  must 
be  supplemented  by  another  question,  and  so  on 
to  infinity.  According  to  it,  we  must  rise  from  a 
given  beginning  to  one  still  higher;  every  part 
conducts  us  to  a  still  smaller  one;  every  event  is 
preceded  by  another  event  which  is  its  cause; 
and  the  conditions  of  existence  rest  always  upon 
other  and  still  higher  conditions,  and  find  neither 


REASON  147 

end  nor  basis  in  some  self-subsistent  thing  as 
the  primal  being. 

3.  This  side  has  also  the  advantage  of  popu¬ 
larity;  and  this  constitutes  no  small  part  of  its 
claim  to  favour.  The  common  understanding 
does  not  find  the  least  difficulty  in  the  idea  of 
the  unconditioned  beginning  of  all  synthesis — 
accustomed,  as  it  is,  rather  to  follow  our  conse¬ 
quences  than  to  seek  for  a  proper  basis  for  cog¬ 
nition.  In  the  conception  of  an  absolute  first, 
moreover — the  possibility  of  which  it  does  not 
inquire  into — it  is  highly  gratified  to  find  a 
firmly-established  point  of  departure  for  its 
attempts  at  theory;  while  in  the  restless  and 
continuous  ascent  from  the  conditioned  to  the 
condition,  always  with  one  foot  in  the  air,  it 
can  find  no  satisfaction. 

On  the  side  of  the  antithesis,  or  Empiricism, 
in  the  determination  of  the  cosmological  ideas: 

1.  We  cannot  discover  any  such  practical  in¬ 
terest  arising  from  pure  principles  of  reason  as 
morality  and  religion  present.  On  the  contrary, 
pure  empiricism  seems  to  empty  them  of  all 
their  power  and  influence.  If  there  does  not  exist 
a  Supreme  Being  distinct  from  the  world — if 
the  world  is  without  beginning,  consequently 
without  a  Creator — if  our  wills  are  not  free,  and 
the  soul  is  divisible  and  subject  to  corruption 
just  like  matter — the  ideas  and  principles  of 
morality  lose  all  validity  and  fall  with  the  tran¬ 
scendental  ideas  which  constituted  their  theoret¬ 
ical  support. 

2.  But  empiricism,  in  compensation,  holds  out 
to  reason,  in  its  speculative  interests,  certain  im¬ 
portant  advantages,  far  exceeding  any  that  the 
dogmatist  can  promise  us.  For,  when  employed 
by  the  empiricist,  understanding  is  always  upon 
its  proper  ground  of  investigation — the  field  of 
possible  experience,  the  laws  of  which  it  can  ex¬ 
plore,  and  thus  extend  its  cognition  securely  and 
with  clear  intelligence  without  being  stopped  by 
limits  in  any  direction.  Here  can  it  and  ought  it 
to  find  and  present  to  intuition  its  proper  ob¬ 
ject — not  only  in  itself,  but  in  all  its  relations; 
or,  if  it  employ  conceptions,  upon  this  ground  it 
can  always  present  the  corresponding  images  in 
clear  and  unmistakable  intuitions.  It  is  quite  un¬ 
necessary  for  it  to  renounce  the  guidance  of  na¬ 
ture,  to  attach  itself  to  ideas,  the  objects  of 
which  it  cannot  know;  because,  as  mere  intellec¬ 
tual  entities,  they  cannot  be  presented  in  any 
intuition.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  not  even  per¬ 
mitted  to  abandon  its  proper  occupation,  under 
the  pretence  that  it  has  been  brought  to  a  con¬ 
clusion  (for  it  never  can  be),  and  to  pass  into 
the  region  of  idealizing  reason  and  transcendent 


THE  CRITIQUE 


148 

conceptions,  which  it  is  not  required  to  observe 
and  explore  the  laws  of  nature,  but  merely  to 
think  and  to  imagine — secure  from  being  con¬ 
tradicted  by  facts,  because  they  have  not  been 
called  as  witnesses,  but  passed  by,  or  perhaps 
subordinated  to  the  so-called  higher  interests 
and  considerations  of  pure  reason. 

Hence  the  empiricist  will  never  allow  himself 
to  accept  any  epoch  of  nature  for  the  first — the 
absolutely  primal  state;  he  will  not  believe  that 
there  can  be  limits  to  his  outlook  into  her  wide 
domains,  nor  pass  from  the  objects  of  nature, 
which  he  can  satisfactorily  explain  by  means  of 
observation  and  mathematical  thought — which 
he  can  determine  synthetically  in  intuition,  to 
those  which  neither  sense  nor  imagination  can 
ever  present  in  concreto;  he  will  not  concede  the 
existence  of  a  faculty  in  nature,  operating  in¬ 
dependently  of  the  laws  of  nature — a  conces¬ 
sion  which  would  introduce  uncertainty  into  the 
procedure  of  the  understanding,  which  is  guided 
by  necessary  laws  to  the  observation  of  phenom¬ 
ena;  nor,  finally,  will  he  permit  himself  to  seek 
a  cause  beyond  nature,  inasmuch  as  we  know 
nothing  but  it,  and  from  it  alone  receive  an  ob¬ 
jective  basis  for  all  our  conceptions  and  instruc¬ 
tion  in  the  unvarying  laws  of  things. 

In  truth,  if  the  empirical  philosopher  had  no 
other  purpose  in  the  establishment  of  his  antith¬ 
esis  than  to  check  the  presumption  of  a  reason 
which  mistakes  its  true  destination,  which  boasts 
of  its  insight  and  its  knowledge,  just  where  all 
insight  and  knowledge  cease  to  exist,  and  regards 
that  which  is  valid  only  in  relation  to  a  practical 
interest,  as  an  advancement  of  the  speculative 
interests  of  the  mind  (in  order,  when  it  is  con¬ 
venient  for  itself,  to  break  the  thread  of  our 
physical  investigations,  and,  under  pretence  of 
extending  our  cognition,  connect  them  with 
transcendental  ideas,  by  means  of  which  we  real¬ 
ly  know  only  that  we  know  nothing) — if,  I  say, 
the  empiricist  rested  satisfied  with  this  benefit, 
the  principle  advanced  by  him  would  be  a  max¬ 
im  recommending  moderation  in  the  pretensions 
of  reason  and  modesty  in  its  affirmations,  and  at 
the  same  time  would  direct  us  to  the  right  mode 
of  extending  the  province  of  the  understanding, 
by  the  help  of  the  only  true  teacher,  experience. 
In  obedience  to  this  advice,  intellectual  hypoth¬ 
eses  and  jaith  would  not  be  called  in  aid  of 
our  practical  interests;  nor  should  we  introduce 
them  under  the  pompous  titles  of  science  and 
insight.  For  speculative  cognition  cannot  find  an 
objective  basis  any  other  where  than  in  experi¬ 
ence;  and,  when  we  overstep  its  limits,  our  syn¬ 
thesis,  which  requires  ever  new  cognitions  in¬ 


dependent  of  experience,  has  no  substratum  of 
intuition  upon  which  to  build. 

But  if — as  often  happens — empiricism,  in  re¬ 
lation  to  ideas,  becomes  itself  dogmatic  and 
boldly  denies  that  which  is  above  the  sphere  of 
its  phenomenal  cognition,  it  falls  itself  into  the 
error  of  intemperance — an  error  which  is  here 
all  the  more  reprehensible,  as  thereby  the  prac¬ 
tical  interest  of  reason  receives  an  irreparable 
injury. 

And  this  constitutes  the  opposition  between 
Epicureanism1  and  Platonism. 

Both  Epicurus  and  Plato  assert  more  in  their 
systems  than  they  know.  The  former  encourages 
and  advances  science — although  to  the  preju¬ 
dice  of  the  practical;  the  latter  presents  us  with 
excellent  principles  for  the  investigation  of  the 
practical,  but,  in  relation  to  everything  regarding 
which  we  can  attain  to  speculative  cognition, 
permits  reason  to  append  idealistic  explanations 
of  natural  phenomena,  to  the  great  injury  of 
physical  investigation. 

3.  In  regard  to  the  third  motive  for  the  pre¬ 
liminary  choice  of  a  party  in  this  war  of  asser¬ 
tions,  it  seems  very  extraordinary  that  empiri¬ 
cism  should  be  utterly  unpopular.  We  should  be 
inclined  to  believe  that  the  common  understand¬ 
ing  would  receive  it  with  pleasure — promising  as 
it  does  to  satisfy  it  without  passing  the  bounds 
of  experience  and  its  connected  order;  while 
transcendental  dogmatism  obliges  it  to  rise  to 
conceptions  which  far  surpass  the  intelligence 
and  ability  of  the  most  practised  thinkers.  But 
in  this,  in  truth,  is  to  be  found  its  real  motive. 
For  the  common  understanding  thus  finds  itself 
in  a  situation  where  not  even  the  most  learned 
can  have  the  advantage  of  it.  If  it  understands 
little  or  nothing  about  these  transcendental  con¬ 
ceptions,  no  one  can  boast  of  understanding  any 

1  It  is,  however,  still  a  matter  of  doubt  whether  Epi¬ 
curus  ever  propounded  these  principles  as  directions  for 
the  objective  employment  of  the  understanding.  If.  in¬ 
deed,  they  were  nothing  more  than  maxims  for  the 
speculative  exercise  of  reason,  he  gives  evidence  therein 
of  a  more  genuine  philosophic  spirit  than  any  of  the 
philosophers  of  antiquity.  That,  in  the  explanation  of 
phenomena,  we  must  proceed  as  if  the  field  of  inquiry 
had  neither  limits  in  space  nor  commencement  in  time; 
that  we  must  be  satisfied  with  the  teaching  of  experi¬ 
ence  in  reference  to  the  material  of  which  the  world  is 
composed;  that  we  must  not  look  for  any  other  mode  of 
the  origination  of  events  than  that  which  is  determined 
by  the  unalterable  laws  of  nature;  and  finally,  that  we 
must  not  employ  the  hypothesis  of  a  cause  distinct  from 
the  world  to  account  for  a  phenomenon  or  for  the  world 
itself — are  principles  for  the  extension  of  speculative 
philosophy,  and  the  discovery  of  the  true  sources  of  the 
principles  of  morals,  which,  however  little  conformed 
to  in  the  present  day,  are  undoubtedly  correct.  At  the 
same  time,  any  one  desirous  of  ignoring ,  in  mere  specu¬ 
lation,  these  dogmatical  propositions,  need  not  for  that 
reason  be  accused  of  denying  them. 


OF  PURE  REASON 


more;  and  although  it  may  not  express  itself  in 
so  scholastically  correct  a  manner  as  others,  it 
can  busy  itself  with  reasoning  and  arguments 
without  end,  wandering  among  mere  ideas,  about 
which  one  can  always  be  very  eloquent,  because 
we  know  nothing  about  them;  while,  in  the  ob¬ 
servation  and  investigation  of  nature,  it  would 
be  forced  to  remain  dumb  and  to  confess  its  ut¬ 
ter  ignorance.  Thus  indolence  and  vanity  form 
of  themselves  strong  recommendations  of  these 
principles.  Besides,  although  it  is  a  hard  thing 
for  a  philosopher  to  assume  a  principle,  of  which 
he  can  give  to  himself  no  reasonable  account, 
and  still  more  to  employ  conceptions,  the  ob¬ 
jective  reality  of  which  cannot  be  established, 
nothing  is  more  usual  with  the  common  under¬ 
standing.  It  wants  something  which  will  allow  it 
to  go  to  work  with  confidence.  The  difficulty  of 
even  comprehending  a  supposition  does  not  dis¬ 
quiet  it,  because — not  knowing  what  compre¬ 
hending  means — it  never  even  thinks  of  the  sup¬ 
position  it  may  be  adopting  as  a  principle ;  and 
regards  as  known  that  with  which  it  has  become 
familiar  from  constant  use.  And,  at  last,  all  spec¬ 
ulative  interests  disappear  before  the  practical 
interests  which  it  holds  dear;  and  it  fancies  that 
it  understands  and  knows  what  its  necessities 
and  hopes  incite  it  to  assume  or  to  believe.  Thus 
the  empiricism  of  transcendentally  idealizing 
reason  is  robbed  of  all  popularity;  and,  however 
prejudicial  it  may  be  to  the  highest  practical 
principles,  there  is  no  fear  that  it  will  ever 
pass  the  limits  of  the  schools,  or  acquire  any 
favour  or  influence  in  society  or  with  the  mul¬ 
titude. 

Human  reason  is  by  nature  architectonic. 
That  is  to  say,  it  regards  all  cognitions  as  parts 
of  a  possible  system,  and  hence  accepts  only 
such  principles  as  at  least  do  not  incapacitate  a 
cognition  to  which  we  may  have  attained  from 
being  placed  along  with  others  in  a  general  sys¬ 
tem.  But  the  propositions  of  the  antithesis  are 
of  a  character  which  renders  the  completion  of 
an  edifice  of  cognitions  impossible.  According  to 
these,  beyond  one  state  or  epoch  of  the  world 
there  is  always  to  be  found  one  more  ancient;  in 
every  part  always  other  parts  themselves  divisi¬ 
ble;  preceding  every  event  another,  the  origin 
of  which  must  itself  be  sought  still  higher;  and 
everything  in  existence  is  conditioned,  and  still 
not  dependent  on  an  unconditioned  and  primal 
existence.  As,  therefore,  the  antithesis  will  not 
concede  the  existence  of  a  first  beginning  which 
might  be  available  as  a  foundation,  a  complete 
edifice  of  cognition,  in  the  presence  of  such  hy¬ 
potheses,  is  utterly  impossible.  Thus  the  archi¬ 


tectonic  interest  of  reason,  which  requires  a 
unity — not  empirical,  but  a  priori  and  rational 
— forms  a  natural  recommendation  for  the  as¬ 
sertions  of  the  thesis  in  our  antinomy. 

But  if  any  one  could  free  himself  entirely 
from  all  considerations  of  interest,  and  weigh 
without  partiality  the  assertions  of  reason,  at¬ 
tending  only  to  their  content,  irrespective  of  the 
consequences  which  follow  from  them;  such  a 
person,  on  the  supposition  that  he  knew  no  other 
way  out  of  the  confusion  than  to  settle  the  truth 
of  one  or  other  of  the  conflicting  doctrines, 
would  live  in  a  state  of  continual  hesitation.  To¬ 
day,  he  would  feel  convinced  that  the  human 
will  is  free;  to-morrow,  considering  the  indis¬ 
soluble  chain  of  nature,  he  would  look  on  free¬ 
dom  as  a  mere  illusion  and  declare  nature  to  be 
all-in-all.  But,  if  he  were  called  to  action,  the 
play  of  the  merely  speculative  reason  would  dis¬ 
appear  like  the  shapes  of  a  dream,  and  practical 
interest  would  dictate  his  choice  of  principles. 
But,  as  it  well  befits  a  reflective  and  inquiring 
being  to  devote  certain  periods  of  time  to  the 
examination  of  its  own  reason — to  divest  itself 
of  all  partiality,  and  frankly  to  communicate  its 
observations  for  the  judgement  and  opinion  of 
others;  so  no  one  can  be  blamed  for,  much  less 
prevented  from,  placing  both  parties  on  their 
trial,  with  permission  to  defend  themselves,  free 
from  intimidation,  before  a  sworn  jury  of  equal 
condition  with  themselves — the  condition  of 
weak  and  fallible  men. 

Section  IV.  Of  the  necessity  imposed  upon  Pure 
Reason  of  presenting  a  Solution  of  its 
Transcendental  Problems 

To  avow  an  ability  to  solve  all  problems  and  to 
answer  all  questions  would  be  a  profession  cer¬ 
tain  to  convict  any  philosopher  of  extravagant 
boasting  and  self-conceit,  and  at  once  to  destroy 
the  confidence  that  might  otherwise  have  been 
reposed  in  him.  There  are,  however,  sciences  so 
constituted  that  every  question  arising  within 
their  sphere  must  necessarily  be  capable  of  re¬ 
ceiving  an  answer  from  the  knowledge  already 
possessed,  for  the  answer  must  be  received  from 
the  same  sources  whence  the  question  arose.  In 
such  sciences  it  is  not  allowable  to  excuse  our¬ 
selves  on  the  plea  of  necessary  and  unavoidable 
ignorance;  a  solution  is  absolutely  requisite.  The 
rule  of  right  and  wrong  must  help  us  to  the 
knowledge  of  what  is  right  or  wrong  in  all  pos¬ 
sible  cases;  otherwise,  the  idea  of  obligation  or 
duty  would  be  utterly  null,  for  we  cannot  have 
any  obligation  to  that  which  we  cannot  know. 
On  the  other  hand,  in  our  investigations  of  the 


THE  CRITIQUE 


150 

phenomena  of  nature,  much  must  remain  un¬ 
certain,  and  many  questions  continue  insoluble; 
because  what  we  know  of  nature  is  far  from  be¬ 
ing  sufficient  to  explain  all  the  phenomena  that 
are  presented  to  our  observation.  Now  the  ques¬ 
tion  is:  “Whether  there  is  in  transcendental  phi¬ 
losophy  any  question,  relating  to  an  object  pre¬ 
sented  to  pure  reason,  which  is  unanswerable  by 
this  reason;  and  whether  we  must  regard  the 
subject  of  the  question  as  quite  uncertain,  so  far 
as  our  knowledge  extends,  and  must  give  it  a 
place  among  those  subjects,  of  which  we  have 
just  so  much  conception  as  is  sufficient  to  en¬ 
able  us  to  raise  a  question — faculty  or  materials 
failing  us,  however,  when  we  attempt  an  an¬ 
swer.” 

Now  I  maintain  that,  among  all  speculative 
cognition,  the  peculiarity  of  transcendental  phi¬ 
losophy  is  that  there  is  no  question,  relating  to 
an  object  presented  to  pure  reason,  which  is  in¬ 
soluble  by  this  reason;  and  that  the  profession 
of  unavoidable  ignorance — the  problem  being 
alleged  to  be  beyond  the  reach  of  our  faculties 
— cannot  free  us  from  the  obligation  to  present 
a  complete  and  satisfactory  answer.  For  the 
very  conception  which  enables  us  to  raise  the 
question  must  give  us  the  power  of  answering  it; 
inasmuch  as  the  object,  as  in  the  case  of  right 
and  wrong,  is  not  to  be  discovered  out  of  the 
conception. 

But,  in  transcendental  philosophy,  it  is  only 
the  cosmological  questions  to  which  we  can  de¬ 
mand  a  satisfactory  answer  in  relation  to  the 
constitution  of  their  object;  and  the  philosopher 
is  not  permitted  to  avail  himself  of  the  pretext 
of  necessary  ignorance  and  impenetrable  obscu¬ 
rity.  These  questions  relate  solely  to  the  cosmo¬ 
logical  ideas.  For  the  object  must  be  given  in 
experience,  and  the  question  relates  to  the  ade¬ 
quateness  of  the  object  to  an  idea.  If  the  object 
is  transcendental  and  therefore  itself  unknown; 
if  the  question,  for  example,  is  whether  the  ob¬ 
ject — the  something,  the  phenomenon  of  which 
(internal — in  ourselves)  is  thought — that  is  to 
say,  the  soul,  is  in  itself  a  simple  being;  or 
whether  there  is  a  cause  of  all  things,  which  is 
absolutely  necessary — in  such  cases  we  are  seek¬ 
ing  for  our  idea  an  object,  of  which  we  may 
confess  that  it  is  unknown  to  us,  though  we 
must  not  on  that  account  assert  that  it  is  im¬ 
possible.1  The  cosmological  ideas  alone  possess 

1  The  question,  “What  is  the  constitution  of  a  tran¬ 
scendental  object?”  is  unanswerable — we  are  unable  to 
say  what  it  is;  but  we  can  perceive  that  the  question 
itself  is  nothing;  because  it  does  not  relate  to  any  ob¬ 
ject  that  can  be  presented  to  us.  For  this  reason,  we 
must  consider  all  the  questions  raised  in  transcendental 


the  peculiarity  that  we  can  presuppose  the  ob¬ 
ject  of  them  and  the  empirical  synthesis  requi¬ 
site  for  the  conception  of  that  object  to  be  giv¬ 
en;  and  the  question,  which  arises  from  these 
ideas,  relates  merely  to  the  progress  of  this 
synthesis,  in  so  far  as  it  must  contain  absolute 
totality — which,  however,  is  not  empirical,  as  it 
cannot  be  given  in  any  experience.  Now,  as  the 
question  here  is  solely  in  regard  to  a  thing  as  the 
object  of  a  possible  experience  and  not  as  a 
thing  in  itself,  the  answer  to  the  transcendental 
cosmological  question  need  not  be  sought  out  of 
the  idea,  for  the  question  does  not  regard  an  ob¬ 
ject  in  itself.  The  question  in  relation  to  a  pos¬ 
sible  experience  is  not,  “What  can  be  given  in  an 
experience  in  concreto”  but  “what  is  contained 
in  the  idea,  to  which  the  empirical  synthesis 
must  approximate.”  The  question  must  there¬ 
fore  be  capable  of  solution  from  the  idea  alone. 
For  the  idea  is  a  creation  of  reason  itself,  which 
therefore  cannot  disclaim  the  obligation  to  an¬ 
swer  or  refer  us  to  the  unknown  object. 

It  is  not  so  extraordinary,  as  it  at  first  sight 
appears,  that  a  science  should  demand  and  ex¬ 
pect  satisfactory  answers  to  all  the  questions 
that  may  arise  within  its  own  sphere  ( questiones 
domesticae ),  although,  up  to  a  certain  time, 
these  answers  may  not  have  been  discovered. 
There  are,  in  addition  to  transcendental  philos¬ 
ophy,  only  two  pure  sciences  of  reason;  the  one 
with  a  speculative,  the  other  with  a  practical 
content — pure  mathematics  and  pure  ethics. 
Has  any  one  ever  heard  it  alleged  that,  from  our 
complete  and  necessary  ignorance  of  the  condi¬ 
tions,  it  is  uncertain  what  exact  relation  the  di¬ 
ameter  of  a  circle  bears  to  the  circle  in  rational 
or  irrational  numbers?  By  the  former  the  sum 
cannot  be  given  exactly,  by  the  latter  only  ap¬ 
proximately;  and  therefore  we  decide  that  the 
impossibility  of  a  solution  of  the  question  is 
evident.  Lambert  presented  us  with  a  demon¬ 
stration  of  this.  In  the  general  principles  of 
morals  there  can  be  nothing  uncertain,  for  the 
propositions  are  either  utterly  without  meaning, 
or  must  originate  solely  in  our  rational  concep¬ 
tions.  On  the  other  hand,  there  must  be  in  phys- 


psychology  as  answerable  and  as  really  answered;  for 
they  relate  to  the  transcendental  subject  of  all  internal 
phenomena,  which  is  not  itself  phenomenon  and  conse¬ 
quently  not  given  as  an  object,  in  which,  moreover, 
none  of  the  categories — and  it  is  to  them  that  the  ques¬ 
tion  is  properly  directed — find  any  conditions  of  its  ap¬ 
plication.  Here,  therefore,  is  a  case  where  no  answer  is 
the  only  proper  answer.  For  a  question  regarding  the 
constitution  of  a  something  which  cannot  be  cogitated 
by  any  determined  predicate,  being  completely  beyond 
the  sphere  of  objects  and  experience,  is  perfectly  null 
and  void. 


OF  PURE  REASON 


ical  science  an  infinite  number  of  conjectures, 
which  can  never  become  certainties;  because  the 
phenomena  of  nature  are  not  given  as  objects 
dependent  on  our  conceptions.  The  key  to  the 
solution  of  such  questions  cannot,  therefore,  be 
found  in  our  conceptions,  or  in  pure  thought, 
but  must  lie  without  us  and  for  that  reason  is  in 
many  cases  not  to  be  discovered;  and  conse¬ 
quently  a  satisfactory  explanation  cannot  be  ex¬ 
pected.  The  questions  of  transcendental  analyt¬ 
ic,  which  relate  to  the  deduction  of  our  pure 
cognition,  are  not  to  be  regarded  as  of  the  same 
kind  as  those  mentioned  above;  for  we  are  not 
at  present  treating  of  the  certainty  of  judge¬ 
ments  in  relation  to  the  origin  of  our  concep¬ 
tions,  but  only  of  that  certainty  in  relation  to 
objects. 

We  cannot,  therefore,  escape  the  responsibil¬ 
ity  of  at  least  a  critical  solution  of  the  questions 
of  reason,  by  complaints  of  the  limited  nature 
of  our  faculties,  and  the  seemingly  humble  con¬ 
fession  that  it  is  beyond  the  power  of  our  reason 
to  decide,  whether  the  world  has  existed  from 
all  eternity  or  had  a  beginning — whether  it  is 
infinitely  extended,  or  enclosed  within  certain 
limits — whether  anything  in  the  world  is  simple, 
or  whether  everything  must  be  capable  of  in¬ 
finite  divisibility — whether  freedom  can  origi¬ 
nate  phenomena,  or  whether  everything  is  abso¬ 
lutely  dependent  on  the  laws  and  order  of  na¬ 
ture — and,  finally,  whether  there  exists  a  being 
that  is  completely  unconditioned  and  neces¬ 
sary,  or  whether  the  existence  of  everything 
is  conditioned  and  consequently  dependent  on 
something  external  to  itself,  and  therefore  in  its 
own  nature  contingent.  For  all  these  questions 
relate  to  an  object,  which  can  be  given  no¬ 
where  else  than  in  thought.  This  object  is  the 
absolutely  unconditioned  totality  of  the  synthe¬ 
sis  of  phenomena.  If  the  conceptions  in  our 
minds  do  not  assist  us  to  some  certain  result  in 
regard  to  these  problems,  we  must  not  defend 
ourselves  on  the  plea  that  the  object  itself  re¬ 
mains  hidden  from  and  unknown  to  us.  For  no 
such  thing  or  object  can  be  given — it  is  not  to 
be  found  out  of  the  idea  in  our  minds.  We  must 
seek  the  cause  of  our  failure  in  our  idea  itself, 
which  is  an  insoluble  problem  and  in  regard  to 
which  we  jobstinately  assume  that  there  exists 
a  real  object  corresponding  and  adequate  to  it. 
A  clear  explanation  of  the  dialectic  which  lies 
in  our  conception,  will  very  soon  enable  us  to 
come  to  a  satisfactory  decision  in  regard  to  such 
a  question. 

The  pretext  that  we  are  unable  to  arrive  at 
certainty  in  regard  to  these  problems  may  be 


met  with  this  question,  which  requires  at  least 
a  plain  answer:  “From  what  source  do  the  ideas 
originate,  the  solution  of  which  involves  you  in 
such  difficulties?  Are  you  seeking  for  an  expla¬ 
nation  of  certain  phenomena;  and  do  you  expect 
these  ideas  to  give  you  the  principles  or  the 
rules  of  this  explanation?”  Let  it  be  granted,  that 
all  nature  was  laid  open  before  you;  that  nothing 
was  hid  from  your  senses  and  your  conscious¬ 
ness.  Still,  you  could  not  cognize  in  concreto  the 
object  of  your  ideas  in  any  experience.  For  what 
is  demanded  is  not  only  this  full  and  complete 
intuition,  but  also  a  complete  synthesis  and  the 
consciousness  of  its  absolute  totality;  and  this 
is  not  possible  by  means  of  any  empirical  cog¬ 
nition.  It  follows  that  your  question — your  idea 
— is  by  no  means  necessary  for  the  explanation 
of  any  phenomenon;  and  the  idea  cannot  have 
been  in  any  sense  given  by  the  object  itself.  For 
such  an  object  can  never  be  presented  to  us,  be¬ 
cause  it  cannot  be  given  by  any  possible  expe¬ 
rience.  Whatever  perceptions  you  may  attain  to, 
you  are  still  surrounded  by  conditions — in  space, 
or  in  time — and  you  cannot  discover  anything 
unconditioned;  nor  can  you  decide  whether  this 
unconditioned  is  to  be  placed  in  an  absolute  be¬ 
ginning  of  the  synthesis,  or  in  an  absolute  total¬ 
ity  of  the  series  without  beginning.  A  whole,  in 
the  empirical  signification  of  the  term,  is  always 
merely  comparative.  The  absolute  whole  of 
quantity  (the  universe),  of  division,  of  deriva¬ 
tion,  of  the  condition  of  existence,  with  the  ques¬ 
tion — whether  it  is  to  be  produced  by  finite  or 
infinite  synthesis,  no  possible  experience  can  in¬ 
struct  us  concerning.  You  will  not,  for  example, 
be  able  to  explain  the  phenomena  of  a  body  in 
the  least  degree  better,  whether  you  believe  it 
to  consist  of  simple,  or  of  composite  parts;  for 
a  simple  phenomenon — and  just  as  little  an  infi¬ 
nite  series  of  composition — can  never  be  pre¬ 
sented  to  your  perception.  Phenomena  require 
and  admit  of  explanation,  only  in  so  far  as  the 
conditions  of  that  explanation  are  given  in  per¬ 
ception;  but  the  sum  total  of  that  which  is  giv¬ 
en  in  phenomena,  considered  as  an  absolute 
whole,  is  itself  a  perception — and  we  cannot 
therefore  seek  for  explanations  of  this  whole 
beyond  itself,  in  other  perceptions.  The  expla¬ 
nation  of  this  whole  is  the  proper  object  of  the 
transcendental  problems  of  pure  reason. 

Although,  therefore,  the  solution  of  these 
problems  is  unattainable  through  experience,  we 
must  not  permit  ourselves  to  say  that  it  is  un¬ 
certain  how  the  object  of  our  inquiries  is  con¬ 
stituted.  For  the  object  is  in  our  own  mind  and 
cannot  be  discovered  in  experience;  and  we 


152  THE  CRITIQUE 


have  only  to  take  care  that  our  thoughts  are 
consistent  with  each  other,  and  to  avoid  falling 
into  the  amphiboly  of  regarding  our  idea  as  a 
representation  of  an  object  empirically  given, 
and  therefore  to  be  cognized  according  to  the 
laws  of  experience.  A  dogmatical  solution  is 
therefore  not  only  unsatisfactory  but  impos¬ 
sible.  The  critical  solution,  which  may  be  a 
perfectly  certain  one,  does  not  consider  the 
question  objectively,  but  proceeds  by  inquir¬ 
ing  into  the  basis  of  the  cognition  upon  which 
the  question  rests. 

Section  V.  Sceptical  Exposition  of  the  Cosmo¬ 
logical  Problems  presented  in  the  four  Tran¬ 
scendental  Ideas 

We  should  be  quite  willing  to  desist  from  the 
demand  of  a  dogmatical  answer  to  our  ques¬ 
tions.  if  we  understood  beforehand  that,  be  the 
answer  what  it  may,  it  would  only  serve  to  in¬ 
crease  our  ignorance,  to  throw  us  from  one  in¬ 
comprehensibility  into  another,  from  one  ob¬ 
scurity  into  another  still  greater,  and  perhaps 
lead  us  into  irreconcilable  contradictions.  If  a 
dogmatical  affirmative  or  negative  answer  is  de¬ 
manded,  is  it  at  all  prudent  to  set  aside  the  prob¬ 
able  grounds  of  a  solution  which  lie  before  us 
and  to  take  into  consideration  what  advantage 
we  shall  gain,  if  the  answer  is  to  favour  the  one 
side  or  the  other?  If  it  happens  that  in  both 
cases  the  answer  is  mere  nonsense,  we  have  in 
this  an  irresistible  summons  to  institute  a  critical 
investigation  of  the  question,  for  the  purpose  of 
discovering  whether  it  is  based  on  a  groundless 
presupposition  and  relates  to  an  idea,  the  falsity 
of  which  would  be  more  easily  exposed  in  its  ap¬ 
plication  and  consequences  than  in  the  mere  rep¬ 
resentation  of  its  content.  This  is  the  great  util¬ 
ity  of  the  sceptical  mode  of  treating  the  ques¬ 
tions  addressed  by  pure  reason  to  itself.  By  this 
method  we  easily  rid  ourselves  of  the  confusions 
of  dogmatism,  and  establish  in  its  piace  a  tem¬ 
perate  criticism,  which,  as  a  genuine  cathartic, 
will  successfully  remove  the  presumptuous  no¬ 
tions  of  philosophy  and  their  consequence — the 
vain  pretension  to  universal  science. 

If,  then,  I  could  understand  the  nature  of  a 
cosmological  idea  and  perceive,  before  I  entered 
on  the  discussion  of  the  subject  at  all,  that, 
whatever  side  of  the  question  regarding  the  un¬ 
conditioned  of  the  regressive  synthesis  of  phe¬ 
nomena  it  favoured — it  must  either  be  too  great 
or  too  small  for  every  conception  of  the  under¬ 
standing — I  would  be  able  to  comprehend  how 
the  idea,  which  relates  to  an  object  of  experi¬ 
ence — an  experience  which  must  be  adequate  to 


and  in  accordance  with  a  possible  conception  of 
the  understanding — must  be  completely  void 
and  without  significance,  inasmuch  as  its  object 
is  inadequate,  consider  it  as  we  may.  And  this  is 
actually  the  case  with  all  cosmological  concep¬ 
tions,  which,  for  the  reason  above  mentioned,  in¬ 
volve  reason,  so  long  as  it  remains  attached  to 
them,  in  an  unavoidable  antinomy.  For  suppose: 

First ,  that  the  world  has  no  beginning — in 
this  case  it  is  too  large  for  our  conception;  for 
this  conception,  which  consists  in  a  successive 
regress,  cannot  overtake  the  whole  eternity  that 
has  elapsed.  Grant  that  it  has  a  beginning ,  it  is 
then  too  small  for  the  conception  of  the  under¬ 
standing.  For,  as  a  beginning  presupposes  a  time 
preceding,  it  cannot  be  unconditioned;  and  the 
law  of  the  empirical  employment  of  the  under¬ 
standing  imposes  the  necessity  of  looking  for  a 
higher  condition  of  time;  and  the  world  is, 
therefore,  evidently  too  small  for  this  law. 

The  same  is  the  case  with  the  double  answer 
to  the  question  regarding  the  extent,  in  space,  of 
the  world.  For,  if  it  is  infinite  and  unlimited,  it 
must  be  too  large  for  every  possible  empirical 
conception.  If  it  is  finite  and  limited,  we  have  a 
right  to  ask:  “What  determines  these  limits?” 
Void  space  is  not  a  self-subsistent  correlate  of 
things,  and  cannot  be  a  final  condition — and  still 
less  an  empirical  condition,  forming  a  part  of  a 
possible  experience.  For  how  can  we  have  any 
experience  or  perception  of  an  absolute  void? 
But  the  absolute  totality  of  the  empirical  syn¬ 
thesis  requires  that  the  unconditioned  be  an  em¬ 
pirical  conception.  Consequently,  a  finite  world 
is  too  small  for  our  conception. 

Secondly ,  if  every  phenomenon  (matter)  in 
space  consists  of  an  infinite  number  of  parts ,  the 
regress  of  the  division  is  always  too  great  for  our 
conception;  and  if  the  division  of  space  must 
cease  with  some  member  of  the  division  (the 
simple),  it  is  too  small  for  the  idea  of  the  uncon¬ 
ditioned.  For  the  member  at  which  we  have  dis¬ 
continued  our  division  still  admits  a  regress  to 
many  more  parts  contained  in  the  object. 

Thirdly ,  suppose  that  every  event  in  the  world 
happens  in  accordance  with  the  laws  of  nature; 
the  causality  of  a  cause  must  itself  be  an  event 
and  necessitates  a  regress  to  a  still  higher  cause, 
and  consequently  the  unceasing  prolongation  of 
the  series  of  conditions  a  parte  priori  Operative 
nature  is  therefore  too  large  for  every  concep¬ 
tion  we  can  form  in  the  synthesis  of  cosmical 
events. 

If  we  admit  the  existence  of  spontaneously 
produced  events,  that  is,  of  free  agency,  we  are 
driven,  in  our  search  for  sufficient  reasons,  on  an 


OF  PURE  REASON 


unavoidable  law  of  nature  and  are  compelled  to 
appeal  to  the  empirical  law  of  causality,  and  we 
find  that  any  such  totality  of  connection  in  our 
synthesis  is  too  small  for  our  necessary  empiri¬ 
cal  conception. 

Fourthly ,  if  we  assume  the  existence  of  an 
absolutely  necessary  being — whether  it  be  the 
world  or  something  in  the  world,  or  the  cause 
of  the  world — we  must  place  it  in  a  time  at  an 
infinite  distance  from  any  given  moment;  for, 
otherwise,  it  must  be  dependent  on  some  other 
and  higher  existence.  Such  an  existence  is,  in  this 
case,  too  large  for  our  empirical  conception,  and 
unattainable  by  the  continued  regress  of  any 
synthesis. 

But  if  we  believe  that  everything  in  the  world 
— be  it  condition  or  conditioned — is  contingent; 
every  given  existence  is  too  small  for  our  con¬ 
ception.  For  in  this  case  we  are  compelled  to 
seek  for  some  other  existence  upon  which  the 
former  depends. 

We  have  said  that  in  all  these  cases  the  cos¬ 
mological  idea  is  either  too  great  or  too  small  for 
the  empirical  regress  in  a  synthesis,  and  conse¬ 
quently  for  every  possible  conception  of  the  un¬ 
derstanding.  Why  did  we  not  express  ourselves 
in  a  manner  exactly  the  reverse  of  this  and,  in¬ 
stead  of  accusing  the  cosmological  idea  of  over¬ 
stepping  or  of  falling  short  of  its  true  aim,  pos¬ 
sible  experience,  say  that,  in  the  first  case,  the 
empirical  conception  is  always  too  small  for  the 
idea,  and  in  the  second  too  great,  and  thus  at¬ 
tach  the  blame  of  these  contradictions  to  the 
empirical  regress?  The  reason  is  this.  Possible 
experience  can  alone  give  reality  to  our  concep¬ 
tions;  without  it  a  conception  is  merely  an  idea, 
without  truth  or  relation  to  an  object.  Hence  a 
possible  empirical  conception  must  be  the  stand¬ 
ard  by  which  we  are  to  judge  whether  an  idea 
is  anything  more  than  an  idea  and  fiction  of 
thought,  or  whether  it  relates  to  an  object  in  the 
world.  If  we  say  of  a  thing  that  in  relation  to 
some  other  thing  it  is  too  large  or  too  small,  the 
former  is  considered  as  existing  for  the  sake  of 
the  latter,  and  requiring  to  be  adapted  to  it. 
Among  the  trivial  subjects  of  discussion  in  the  old 
schools  of  dialectics  was  this  question:  “If  a  ball 
cannot  pass  through  a  hole,  shall  we  say  that  the 
ball  is  too  large  or  the  hole  too  small?”  In  this 
case  it  is  indifferent  what  expression  we  employ; 
for  we  do  not  know  which  exists  for  the  sake  of 
the  other.  On  the  other  hand,  we  cannot  say: 
“The  man  is  too  long  for  his  coat”;  but:  “The 
coat  is  too  short  for  the  man.” 

We  are  thus  led  to  the  well-founded  suspicion 
that  the  cosmological  ideas,  and  all  the  conflict¬ 


153 

ing  sophistical  assertions  connected  with  them, 
are  based  upon  a  false  and  fictitious  conception 
of  the  mode  in  which  the  object  of  these  ideas  is 
presented  to  us;  and  this  suspicion  will  probably 
direct  us  how  to  expose  the  illusion  that  has  so 
long  led  us  astray  from  the  truth. 

Section  VI.  Transcendental  Idealism  as  the 
Key  to  the  Solution  of  Pure  Cosmological 
Dialectic 

In  the  transcendental  aesthetic  we  proved  that 
everything  intuited  in  space  and  time,  all  objects 
of  a  possible  experience,  are  nothing  but  phe¬ 
nomena,  that  is,  mere  representations;  and  that 
these,  as  presented  to  us — as  extended  bodies,  or 
as  series  of  changes — have  no  self-subsistent  ex¬ 
istence  apart  from  human  thought.  This  doc¬ 
trine  I  call  Transcendental  Idealism.1  The  real¬ 
ist  in  the  transcendental  sense  regards  these 
modifications  of  our  sensibility,  these  mere 
representations,  as  things  subsisting  in  them¬ 
selves. 

It  would  be  unjust  to  accuse  us  of  holding  the 
long-decried  theory  of  empirical  idealism,  which, 
while  admitting  the  reality  of  space,  denies,  or 
at  least  doubts,  the  existence  of  bodies  extended 
in  it,  and  thus  leaves  us  without  a  sufficient  cri¬ 
terion  of  reality  and  illusion.  The  supporters  of 
this  theory  find  no  difficulty  in  admitting  the  re¬ 
ality  of  the  phenomena  of  the  internal  sense  in 
time;  nay,  they  go  the  length  of  maintaining 
that  this  internal  experience  is  of  itself  a  suffi¬ 
cient  proof  of  the  real  existence  of  its  object  as 
a  thing  in  itself. 

Transcendental  idealism  allows  that  the  ob¬ 
jects  of  external  intuition — as  intuited  in  space, 
and  all  changes  in  time — as  represented  by  the 
internal  sense,  are  real.  For,  as  space  is  the  form 
of  that  intuition  which  we  call  external,  and, 
without  objects  in  space,  no  empirical  represen¬ 
tation  could  be  given  us,  we  can  and  ought  to  re¬ 
gard  extended  bodies  in  it  as  real.  The  case  is 
the  same  with  representations  in  time.  But  time 
and  space,  with  all  phenomena  therein,  are  not 
in  themselves  things.  They  are  nothing  but  rep¬ 
resentations  and  cannot  exist  out  of  and  apart 
from  the  mind.  Nay,  the  sensuous  internal  intu¬ 
ition  of  the  mind  (as  the  object  of  conscious¬ 
ness),  the  determination  of  which  is  represented 
by  the  succession  of  different  states  in  time,  is 
not  the  real,  proper  self,  as  it  exists  in  itself — 
not  the  transcendental  subject — but  only  a  phe- 

1  I  have  elsewhere  termed  this  theory  formal  ideal¬ 
ism,  to  distinguish  it  from  material  idealism,  which 
doubts  or  denies  the  existence  of  external  things.  To 
avoid  ambiguity,  it  seems  advisable  in  many  cases  to 
employ  this  term  instead  of  that  mentioned  in  the  text. 


154  THE  CRITIQUE 


nomenon,  which  is  presented  to  the  sensibility  of 
this,  to  us,  unknown  being.  This  internal  phe¬ 
nomenon  cannot  be  admitted  to  be  a  self-sub¬ 
sisting  thing;  for  its  condition  is  time,  and  time 
cannot  be  the  condition  of  a  thing  in  itself.  But 
the  empirical  truth  of  phenomena  in  space  and 
time  is  guaranteed  beyond  the  possibility  of 
doubt,  and  sufficiently  distinguished  from  the  il¬ 
lusion  of  dreams  or  fancy — although  both  have 
a  proper  and  thorough  connection  in  an  experi¬ 
ence  according  to  empirical  laws.  The  objects  of 
experience  then  are  not  things  in  themselves,  but 
are  given  only  in  experience,  and  have  no  exist¬ 
ence  apart  from  and  independently  of  experi¬ 
ence.  That  there  may  be  inhabitants  in  the 
moon,  although  no  one  has  ever  observed  them, 
must  certainly  be  admitted;  but  this  assertion 
means  only,  that  we  may  in  the  possible  prog¬ 
ress  of  experience  discover  them  at  some  future 
time.  For  that  which  stands  in  connection  with 
a  perception  according  to  the  laws  of  the  prog¬ 
ress  of  experience  is  real.  They  are  therefore 
really  existent,  if  they  stand  in  empirical  con¬ 
nection  with  my  actual  or  real  consciousness,  al¬ 
though  they  are  not  in  themselves  real,  that  is, 
apart  from  the  progress  of  experience. 

There  is  nothing  actually  given — we  can  be 
conscious  of  nothing  as  real,  except  a  perception 
and  the  empirical  progression  from  it  to  other 
possible  perceptions.  For  phenomena,  as  mere 
representations,  are  real  only  in  perception;  and 
perception  is,  in  fact,  nothing  but  the  reality  of 
an  empirical  representation,  that  is,  a  phenom¬ 
enon.  To  call  a  phenomenon  a  real  thing  prior  to 
perception  means  either  that  we  must  meet  with 
this  phenomenon  in  the  progress  of  experience, 
or  it  means  nothing  at  all.  For  I  can  say  only  of 
a  thing  in  itself  that  it  exists  without  relation  to 
the  senses  and  experience.  But  we  are  speaking 
here  merely  of  phenomena  in  space  and  time, 
both  of  which  are  determinations  of  sensibility, 
and  not  of  things  in  themselves.  It  follows  that 
phenomena  are  not  things  in  themselves,  but  are 
mere  representations,  which  if  not  given  in  us — 
in  perception — are  non-existent. 

The  faculty  of  sensuous  intuition  is  properly 
a  receptivity — a  capacity  of  being  affected  in  a 
certain  manner  by  representations,  the  relation 
of  which  to  each  other  is  a  pure  intuition  of 
space  and  time — the  pure  forms  of  sensibility. 
These  representations,  in  so  far  as  they  are  con¬ 
nected  and  determinable  in  this  relation  (in 
space  and  time)  according  to  laws  of  the  unity 
of  experience,  are  called  objects.  The  non-sen- 
suous  cause  of  these  representations  is  complete¬ 
ly  unknown  to  us  and  hence  cannot  be  intuited 


as  an  object.  For  such  an  object  could  not  be 
represented  either  in  space  or  in  time;  and  with¬ 
out  these  conditions  intuition  or  representation 
is  impossible.  We  may,  at  the  same  time,  term 
the  non-sensuous  cause  of  phenomena  the  tran¬ 
scendental  object — but  merely  as  a  mental  cor¬ 
relate  to  sensibility,  considered  as  a  receptivity. 
To  this  transcendental  object  we  may  attribute 
the  whole  connection  and  extent  of  our  possible 
perceptions,  and  say  that  it  is  given  and  exists  in 
itself  prior  to  all  experience.  But  the  phenom¬ 
ena,  corresponding  to  it,  are  not  given  as  things 
in  themselves,  but  in  experience  alone.  For  they 
are  mere  representations,  receiving  from  percep¬ 
tions  alone  significance  and  relation  to  a  real  ob¬ 
ject,  under  the  condition  that  this  or  that  per¬ 
ception — indicating  an  object — is  in  complete 
connection  with  all  others  in  accordance  with 
the  rules  of  the  unity  of  experience.  Thus  we 
can  say:  “The  things  that  really  existed  in  past 
time  are  given  in  the  transcendental  object  of 
experience.”  But  these  are  to  me  real  objects, 
only  in  so  far  as  I  can  represent  to  my  own 
mind,  that  a  regressive  series  of  possible  percep¬ 
tions — following  the  indications  of  history,  or 
the  footsteps  of  cause  and  effect — in  accordance 
with  empirical  laws — that,  in  one  word,  the 
course  of  the  world  conducts  us  to  an  elapsed 
series  of  time  as  the  condition  of  the  present 
time.  This  series  in  past  time  is  represented  as 
real,  not  in  itself,  but  only  in  connection  with  a 
possible  experience.  Thus,  when  I  say  that  cer¬ 
tain  events  occurred  in  past  time,  I  merely  as¬ 
sert  the  possibility  of  prolonging  the  chain  of  ex¬ 
perience,  from  the  present  perception,  upwards 
to  the  conditions  that  determine  it  according  to 
time. 

If  I  represent  to  myself  all  objects  existing  in 
all  space  and  time,  I  do  not  thereby  place  these 
in  space  and  time  prior  to  all  experience;  on  the 
contrary,  such  a  representation  is  nothing  more 
than  the  notion  of  a  possible  experience,  in  its 
absolute  completeness.  In  experience  alone  are 
those  objects,  which  are  nothing  but  represen¬ 
tations,  given.  But,  when  I  say  they  existed  prior 
to  my  experience,  this  means  only  that  I  must 
begin  with  the  perception  present  to  me  and  fol¬ 
low  the  track  indicated  until  I  discover  them 
in  some  part  or  region  of  experience.  The  cause 
of  the  empirical  condition  of  this  progression — 
and  consequently  at  what  member  therein  I 
must  stop,  and  at  what  point  in  the  regress  I  am 
to  find  this  member — is  transcendental,  and 
hence  necessarily  incognizable.  But  with  this  we 
have  not  to  do;  our  concern  is  only  with  the  law 
of  progression  in  experience,  in  which  objects, 


OF  PURE 

that  is,  phenomena,  are  given.  It  is  a  matter  of 
indifference,  whether  I  say,  “I  may  in  the  prog¬ 
ress  of  experience  discover  stars,  at  a  hundred 
times  greater  distance  than  the  most  distant  of 
those  now  visible,”  or,  “Stars  at  this  distance 
may  be  met  in  space,  although  no  one  has,  or 
ever  will  discover  them.”  For,  if  they  are  given 
as  things  in  themselves,  without  any  relation  to 
possible  experience,  they  are  for  me  non-existent, 
consequently,  are  not  objects,  for  they  are 
not  contained  in  the  regressive  series  of  experi¬ 
ence.  But,  if  these  phenomena  must  be  em¬ 
ployed  in  the  construction  or  support  of  the  cos¬ 
mological  idea  of  an  absolute  whole,  and  when 
we  are  discussing  a  question  that  oversteps  the 
limits  of  possible  experience,  the  proper  distinc¬ 
tion  of  the  different  theories  of  the  reality  of 
sensuous  objects  is  of  great  importance,  in  order 
to  avoid  the  illusion  which  must  necessarily  arise 
from  the  misinterpretation  of  our  empirical 
conceptions. 

Section  VII.  Critical  Solution  of  the  Cosmo¬ 
logical  Problem 

The  antinomy  of  pure  reason  is  based  upon  the 
following  dialectical  argument:  “If  that  which 
is  conditioned  is  given,  the  whole  series  of  its 
conditions  is  also  given;  but  sensuous  objects 
are  given  as  conditioned;  consequently  .  .  .” 
This  syllogism,  the  major  of  which  seems  so 
natural  and  evident,  introduces  as  many  cosmo¬ 
logical  ideas  as  there  are  different  kinds  of  con¬ 
ditions  in  the  synthesis  of  phenomena,  in  so  far 
as  these  conditions  constitute  a  series.  These 
ideas  require  absolute  totality  in  the  series,  and 
thus  place  reason  in  inextricable  embarrassment. 
Before  proceeding  to  expose  the  fallacy  in  this 
dialectical  argument,  it  will  be  necessary  to  have 
a  correct  understanding  of  certain  conceptions 
that  appear  in  it. 

In  the  first  place,  the  following  proposition  is 
evident,  and  indubitably  certain:  “If  the  condi¬ 
tioned  is  given,  a  regress  in  the  series  of  all  its 
conditions  is  thereby  imperatively  required  ”  For 
the  very  conception  of  a  conditioned  is  a  con¬ 
ception  of  something  related  to  a  condition,  and, 
if  this  condition  is  itself  conditioned,  to  another 
condition — and  so  on  through  all  the  members 
of  the  series.  This  proposition  is,  therefore,  ana¬ 
lytical  and  has  nothing  to  fear  from  transcen¬ 
dental  criticism.  It  is  a  logical  postulate  of 
reason:  to  pursue,  as  far  as  possible,  the  con¬ 
nection  of  a  conception  with  its  conditions. 

If,  in  the  second  place,  both  the  conditioned 
and  the  condition  are  things  in  themselves,  and 
if  the  former  is  given,  not  only  is  the  regress  to 


REASON  1 55 

the  latter  requisite,  but  the  latter  is  really  given 
with  the  former.  Now,  as  this  is  true  of  all  the 
members  of  the  series,  the  entire  series  of  condi¬ 
tions,  and  with  them  the  unconditioned,  is  at  the 
same  time  given  in  the  very  fact  of  the  condi¬ 
tioned,  the  existence  of  which  is  possible  only  in 
and  through  that  series,  being  given.  In  this  case, 
the  synthesis  of  the  conditioned  with  its  condi¬ 
tion,  is  a  synthesis  of  the  understanding  merely, 
which  represents  things  as  they  are,  without  re¬ 
garding  whether  and  how  we  can  cognize  them. 
But  if  I  have  to  do  with  phenomena,  which,  in 
their  character  of  mere  representations,  are  not 
given,  if  I  do  not  attain  to  a  cognition  of  them 
(in  other  words,  to  themselves,  for  they  are 
nothing  more  than  empirical  cognitions),  I  am 
not  entitled  to  say:  “If  the  conditioned  is  given, 
all  its  conditions  (as  phenomena)  are  also  giv¬ 
en.”  I  cannot,  therefore,  from  the  fact  of  a  con¬ 
ditioned  being  given,  infer  the  absolute  totality 
of  the  series  of  its  conditions.  For  phenomena 
are  nothing  but  an  empirical  synthesis  in  appre¬ 
hension  or  perception,  and  are  therefore  given 
only  in  it.  Now,  in  speaking  of  phenomena,  it 
does  not  follow  that,  if  the  conditioned  is  given, 
the  synthesis  which  constitutes  its  empirical  con¬ 
dition  is  also  thereby  given  and  presupposed; 
such  a  synthesis  can  be  established  only  by  an 
actual  regress  in  the  series  of  conditions.  But  we 
are  entitled  to  say  in  this  case  that  a  regress  to 
the  conditions  of  a  conditioned,  in  other  words, 
that  a  continuous  empirical  synthesis  is  enjoined; 
that,  if  the  conditions  are  not  given,  they  are  at 
least  required;  and  that  we  are  certain  to  discov¬ 
er  the  conditions  in  this  regress. 

We  can  now  see  that  the  major,  in  the  above 
cosmological  syllogism,  takes  the  conditioned  in 
the  transcendental  signification  which  it  has  in 
the  pure  category,  while  the  minor  speaks  of  it 
in  the  empirical  signification  which  it  has  in  the 
category  as  applied  to  phenomena.  There  is, 
therefore,  a  dialectical  fallacy  in  the  syllogism — 
a  sophisma  figurae  dictionis.  But  this  fallacy  is 
not  a  consciously  devised  one,  but  a  perfectly 
natural  illusion  of  the  common  reason  of  man. 
For,  when  a  thing  is  given  as  conditioned,  we 
presuppose  in  the  major  its  conditions  and  their 
series,  unperceived,  as  it  were,  and  unspen;  be¬ 
cause  this  is  nothing  more  than  the  logical  re¬ 
quirement  of  complete  and  satisfactory  premiss¬ 
es  for  a  given  conclusion.  In  this  case,  time  is  al¬ 
together  left  out  in  the  connection  of  the  condi¬ 
tioned  with  the  condition;  they  are  supposed  to 
be  given  in  themselves,  and  contemporaneously. 
It  is,  moreover,  just  as  natural  to  regard  phe¬ 
nomena  (in  the  minor)  as  things  in  themselves 


THE  CRITIQUE 


156 

and  as  objects  presented  to  the  pure  understand¬ 
ing,  as  in  the  major,  in  which  complete  abstrac¬ 
tion  was  made  of  all  conditions  of  intuition.  But 
it  is  under  these  conditions  alone  that  objects 
are  given.  Now  we  overlooked  a  remarkable  dis¬ 
tinction  between  the  conceptions.  The  synthesis 
of  the  conditioned  with  its  condition,  and  the 
complete  series  of  the  latter  (in  the  major)  are 
not  limited  by  time,  and  do  not  contain  the  con¬ 
ception  of  succession.  On  the  contrary,  the  em¬ 
pirical  synthesis  and  the  series  of  conditions  in 
the  phenomenal  world — subsumed  in  the  minor 
— are  necessarily  successive  and  given  in  time 
alone.  It  follows  that  I  cannot  presuppose  in  the 
minor,  as  I  did  in  the  major,  the  absolute  total¬ 
ity  of  the  synthesis  and  of  the  series  therein  rep¬ 
resented;  for  in  the  major  all  the  members  of 
the  series  are  given  as  things  in  themselves — 
without  any  limitations  or  conditions  of  time, 
while  in  the  minor  they  are  possible  only  in  and 
through  a  successive  regress,  which  cannot  exist, 
except  it  be  actually  carried  into  execution  in  the 
world  of  phenomena. 

After  this  proof  of  the  viciousness  of  the  ar¬ 
gument  commonly  employed  in  maintaining  cos¬ 
mological  assertions,  both  parties  may  now  be 
justly  dismissed,  as  advancing  claims  without 
grounds  or  title.  But  the  process  has  not  been 
ended  by  convincing  them  that  one  or  both  were 
in  the  wrong  and  had  maintained  an  assertion 
which  was  without  valid  grounds  of  proof.  Noth¬ 
ing  seems  to  be  clearer  than  that,  if  one  main¬ 
tains:  “The  world  has  a  beginning,”  and  another: 
“The  world  has  no  beginning,”  one  of  the  two 
must  be  right.  But  it  is  likewise  clear  that,  if  the 
evidence  on  both  sides  is  equal,  it  is  impossible 
to  discover  on  what  side  the  truth  lies;  and  the 
controversy  continues,  although  the  parties  have 
been  recommended  to  peace  before  the  tribunal 
of  reason.  There  remains,  then,  no  other  means 
of  settling  the  question  than  to  convince  the  par¬ 
ties,  who  refute  each  other  with  such  conclusive¬ 
ness  and  ability,  that  they  are  disputing  about 
nothing,  and  that  a  transcendental  illusion  has 
been  mocking  them  with  visions  of  reality  where 
there  is  none.  The  mode  of  adjusting  a  dispute 
which  cannot  be  decided  upon  its  own  merits, 
we  shall  now  proceed  to  lay  before  our  readers. 

Zeno  of  Elea,  a  subtle  dialectician,  was  se¬ 
verely  reprimanded  by  Plato  as  a  sophist,  who, 
merely  from  the  base  motive  of  exhibiting  his 
skill  in  discussion,  maintained  and  subverted  the 
same  proposition  by  arguments  as  powerful  and 
convincing  on  the  one  side  as  on  the  other.  He 


maintained,  for  example,  that  God  (who  was 
probably  nothing  more,  in  his  view,  than  the 
world)  is  neither  finite  nor  infinite,  neither  in 
motion  nor  in  rest,  neither  similar  nor  dissimilar 
to  any  other  thing.  It  seemed  to  those  philoso¬ 
phers  who  criticized  his  mode  of  discussion  that 
his  purpose  was  to  deny  completely  both  of  two 
self-contradictory  propositions — which  is  ab¬ 
surd.  But  I  cannot  believe  that  there  is  any -jus¬ 
tice  in  this  accusation.  The  first  of  these  propo¬ 
sitions  I  shall  presently  consider  in  a  more  de¬ 
tailed  manner.  With  regard  to  the  others,  if  by 
the  word  of  God  he  understood  merely  the  Uni¬ 
verse,  his  meaning  must  have  been — that  it  can¬ 
not  be  permanently  present  in  one  place — that 
is,  at  rest — nor  be  capable  of  changing  its  place 
— that  is,  of  moving — because  all  places  are  in 
the  universe,  and  the  universe  itself  is,  therefore, 
in  no  place.  Again,  if  the  universe  contains  in  it¬ 
self  everything  that  exists,  it  cannot  be  similar  or 
dissimilar  to  any  other  thing,  because  there  is,  in 
fact,  no  other  thing  with  which  it  can  be  com¬ 
pared.  If  two  opposite  judgements  presuppose  a 
contingent  impossible,  or  arbitrary  condition, 
both — in  spite  of  their  opposition  (which  is, 
however,  not  properly  or  really  a  contradiction) 
— fall  away;  because  the  condition,  which  en¬ 
sured  the  validity  of  both,  has  itself  disappeared. 

If  we  say:  “Everybody  has  either  a  good  or  a 
bad  smell,”  we  have  omitted  a  third  possible 
judgement — it  has  no  smell  at  all ;  and  thus  both 
conflicting  statements  may  be  false.  If  we  say: 
“It  is  either  good-smelling  or  not  good-smell¬ 
ing  ( vel  suaveolens  vel  non-suaveolens)”  both 
judgements  are  contradictorily  opposed;  and 
the  contradictory  opposite  of  the  former  judge¬ 
ment — some  bodies  are  not  good-smelling — em¬ 
braces  also  those  bodies  which  have  no  smell  at 
all.  In  the  preceding  pair  of  opposed  judgements 
( per  disparate),  the  contingent  condition  of  the 
conception  of  body  (smell)  attached  to  both 
conflicting  statements,  instead  of  having  been 
omitted  in  the  latter,  which  is  consequently  not 
the  contradictory  opposite  of  the  former. 

If,  accordingly,  we  say:  “The  world  is  either 
infinite  in  extension,  or  it  is  not  infinite  ( non  est 
infinities)  ” ;  and  if  the  former  proposition  is  false, 
its  contradictory  opposite — the  world  is  not  in¬ 
finite — must  be  true.  And  thus  I  should  deny 
the  existence  of  an  infinite,  without,  however  af¬ 
firming  the  existence  of  a  finite  world.  But  if 
we  construct  our  proposition  thus:  “The  world 
is  either  infinite  or  finite  (non-infinite),”  both 
statements  may  be  false.  For,  in  this  case,  we 
consider  the  world  as  per  se  determined  in  re- 


OF  PURE 

gard  to  quantity,  and  while,  in  the  one  judge¬ 
ment,  we  deny  its  infinite  and  consequently,  per¬ 
haps,  its  independent  existence;  in  the  other,  we 
append  to  the  world,  regarded  as  a  thing  in  itself, 
a  certain  determination — that  of  finitude;  and 
the  latter  may  be  false  as  well  as  the  former,  if 
the  world  is  not  given  as  a  thing  in  itself,  and 
thus  neither  as  finite  nor  as  infinite  in  quantity. 
This  kind  of  opposition  I  may  be  allowed  to 
term  dialectical;  that  of  contradictories  may  be 
called  analytical  opposition.  Thus  then,  of  two 
dialectically  opposed  judgements  both  may  be 
false,  from  the  fact,  that  the  one  is  not  a  mere 
contradictory  of  the  other,  but  actually  enounces 
more  than  is  requisite  for  a  full  and  complete 
contradiction. 

When  we  regard  the  two  propositions — “The 
world  is  infinite  in  quantity,”  and,  “The  world  is 
finite  in  quantity,”  as  contradictory  opposites, 
we  are  assuming  that  the  world — the  complete 
series  of  phenomena — is  a  thing  in  itself.  For  it 
remains  as  a  permanent  quantity,  whether  I  deny 
the  infinite  or  the  finite  regress  in  the  series  of 
its  phenomena.  But  if  we  dismiss  this  assump¬ 
tion — this  transcendental  illusion — and  deny 
that  it  is  a  thing  in  itself,  the  contradictory  op¬ 
position  is  metamorphosed  into  a  merely  dialec¬ 
tical  one;  and  the  world,  as  not  existing  in  itself 
— independently  of  the  regressive  series  of  my 
representations — exists  in  like  manner  neither 
as  a  whole  which  is  infinite  nor  as  a  whole  which 
is  finite  in  itself.  The  universe  exists  for  me  only 
in  the  empirical  regress  of  the  series  of  phenom¬ 
ena  and  not  per  se.  If,  then,  it  is  always  condi¬ 
tioned,  it  is  never  completely  or  as  a  whole;  and 
it  is,  therefore,  not  an  unconditioned  whole  and 
does  not  exist  as  such,  either  with  an  infinite,  or 
with  a  finite  quantity. 

What  we  have  here  said  of  the  first  cosmolog¬ 
ical  idea — that  of  the  absolute  totality  of  quan¬ 
tity  in  phenomena — applies  also  to  the  others. 
The  series  of  conditions  is  discoverable  only  in 
the  regressive  synthesis  itself,  and  not  in  the 
phenomenon  considered  as  a  thing  in  itself — giv¬ 
en  prior  to  all  regress.  Hence  I  am  compelled  to 
say:  “The  aggregate  of  parts  in  a  given  phenom¬ 
enon  is  in  itself  neither  finite  nor  infinite;  and 
these  parts  are  given  only  in  the  regressive  syn¬ 
thesis  of  decomposition — a  synthesis  which  is 
never  given  in  absolute  completeness,  either  as 
finite,  or  as  infinite.”  The  same  is  the  case  with 
the  series  of  subordinated  causes,  or  of  the  con¬ 
ditioned  up  to  the  unconditioned  and  necessary 
existence,  which  can  never  be  regarded  as  in  it¬ 
self,  and  in  its  totality,  either  as  finite  or  as  in¬ 


REASON  157 

finite ;  because,  as  a  series  of  subordinate  repre¬ 
sentations,  it  subsists  only  in  the  dynamical 
regress  and  cannot  be  regarded  as  existing  pre¬ 
viously  to  this  regress,  or  as  a  self-subsistent 
series  of  things. 

Thus  the  antinomy  of  pure  reason  in  its  cos¬ 
mological  ideas  disappears.  For  the  above  dem¬ 
onstration  has  established  the  fact  that  it  is 
merely  the  product  of  a  dialectical  and  illusory 
opposition,  which  arises  from  the  application  of 
the  idea  of  absolute  totality — admissible  only  as 
a  condition  of  things  in  themselves — to  phenom¬ 
ena,  which  exist  only  in  our  representations,  and 
— when  constituting  a  series — in  a  successive 
regress.  This  antinomy  of  reason  may,  however, 
be  really  profitable  to  our  speculative  interests, 
not  in  the  way  of  contributing  any  dogmatical 
addition,  but  as  presenting  to  us  another  mate¬ 
rial  support  in  our  critical  investigations.  For  it 
furnishes  us  with  an  indirect  proof  of  the  tran¬ 
scendental  ideality  of  phenomena,  if  our  minds 
were  not  completely  satisfied  with  the  direct 
proof  set  forth  in  the  Trancendental  Aesthetic. 
The  proof  would  proceed  in  the  following  dilem¬ 
ma.  If  the  world  is  a  whole  existing  in  itself,  it 
must  be  either  finite  or  infinite.  But  it  is  neither 
finite  nor  infinite— as  has  been  shown,  on  the  one 
side,  by  the  thesis,  on  the  other,  by  the  antith¬ 
esis.  Therefore  the  world — the  content  of  all 
phenomena — is  not  a  whole  existing  in  itself.  It 
follows  that  phenomena  are  nothing,  apart  from 
our  representations.  And  this  is  what  we  mean 
by  transcendental  ideality. 

This  remark  is  of  some  importance.  It  enables 
us  to  see  that  the  proofs  of  the  fourfold  antin¬ 
omy  are  not  mere  sophistries  —  are  not  falla¬ 
cious,  but  grounded  on  the  nature  of  reason,  and 
valid — under  the  supposition  that  phenomena 
are  things  in  themselves.  The  opposition  of  the 
judgements  which  follow  makes  it  evident  that 
a  fallacy  lay  in  the  initial  supposition,  and  thus 
helps  us  to  discover  the  true  constitution  of  ob¬ 
jects  of  sense.  This  transcendental  dialectic  does 
not  favour  scepticism,  although  it  presents  us 
with  a  triumphant  demonstration  of  the  advan¬ 
tages  of  the  sceptical  method,  the  great  utility 
of  which  is  apparent  in  the  antinomy,  where  the 
arguments  of  reason  were  allowed  to  confront 
each  other  in  undiminished  force.  And  although 
the  result  of  these  conflicts  of  reason  is  not  what 
we  expected — although  we  have  obtained  no 
positive  dogmatical  addition  to  metaphysical 
science — we  have  still  reaped  a  great  advantage 
in  the  correction  of  our  judgements  on  these 
subjects  of  thought. 


THE  CRITIQUE 


158 

Section  VIII.  Regulative  Principle  of  Pure 
Reason  in  relation  to  the  Cosmological  Ideas 

The  cosmological  principle  of  totality  could  not 
give  us  any  certain  knowledge  in  regard  to  the 
maximum  in  the  series  of  conditions  in  the 
world  of  sense,  considered  as  a  thing  in  itself. 
The  actual  regress  in  the  series  is  the  only  means 
of  approaching  this  maximum.  This  principle 
of  pure  reason,  therefore,  may  still  be  consid¬ 
ered  as  valid — not  as  an  axiom  enabling  us  to 
cogitate  totality  in  the  object  as  actual,  but  as 
a  problem  for  the  understanding,  which  requires 
it  to  institute  and  to  continue,  in  conformity 
with  the  idea  of  totality  in  the  mind,  the  regress 
in  the  series  of  the  conditions  of  a  given  condi¬ 
tioned.  For  in  the  world  of  sense,  that  is,  in 
space  and  time,  every  condition  which  we  dis¬ 
cover  in  our  investigation  of  phenomena  is  itself 
conditioned;  because  sensuous  objects  are  not 
things  in  themselves  (in  which  case  an  absolute¬ 
ly  unconditioned  might  be  reached  in  the  prog¬ 
ress  of  cognition),  but  are  merely  empirical 
representations,  the  conditions  of  which  must 
always  be  found  in  intuition.  The  principle  of 
reason  is  therefore  properly  a  mere  rule — pre¬ 
scribing  a  regress  in  the  series  of  conditions  for 
given  phenomena,  and  prohibiting  any  pause  or 
rest  on  an  absolutely  unconditioned.  It  is,  there¬ 
fore,  not  a  principle  of  the  possibility  of  experi¬ 
ence  or  of  the  empirical  cognition  of  sensuous 
objects — consequently  not  a  principle  of  the  un¬ 
derstanding;  for  every  experience  is  confined 
within  certain  proper  limits  determined  by  the 
given  intuition.  Still  less  is  it  a  constitutive  prin¬ 
ciple  of  reason  authorizing  us  to  extend  our  con¬ 
ception  of  the  sensuous  world  beyond  all  possible 
experience.  It  is  merely  a  principle  for  the  en¬ 
largement  and  extension  of  experience  as  far  as 
is  possible  for  human  faculties.  It  forbids  us  to 
consider  any  empirical  limits  as  absolute.  It  is, 
hence,  a  principle  of  reason,  which,  as  a  rule , 
dictates  how  we  ought  to  proceed  in  our  empiri¬ 
cal  regress,  but  is  unable  to  anticipate  or  indi¬ 
cate  prior  to  the  empirical  regress  what  is  given 
in  the  object  itself.  I  have  termed  it  for  this  rea¬ 
son  a  regulative  principle  of  reason;  while  the 
principle  of  the  absolute  totality  of  the  series  of 
conditions,  as  existing  in  itself  and  given  in  the 
object,  is  a  constitutive  cosmological  principle. 
This  distinction  will  at  once  demonstrate  the 
falsehood  of  the  constitutive  principle,  and  pre¬ 
vent  us  from  attributing  (by  a  transcendental 
subreptio )  objective  reality  to  an  idea,  which  is 
valid  only  as  a  rule. 

In  order  to  understand  the  proper  meaning  of 


this  rule  of  pure  reason,  we  must  notice  first 
that  it  cannot  tell  us  what  the  object  is,  but  only 
how  the  empirical  regress  is  to  be  proceeded 
with  in  order  to  attain  to  the  complete  concep¬ 
tion  of  the  object.  If  it  gave  us  any  information 
in  respect  to  the  former  statement,  it  would  be 
a  constitutive  principle — a  principle  impossible 
from  the  nature  of  pure  reason.  It  will  not  there¬ 
fore  enable  us  to  establish  any  such  conclusions 
as:  “The  series  of  conditions  for  a  given  condi¬ 
tioned  is  in  itself  finite.”  or,  “It  is  infinite.”  For. 
in  this  case,  we  should  be  cogitating  in  the  mere 
idea  of  absolute  totality,  an  object  which  is  not 
and  cannot  be  given  in  experience;  inasmuch  as 
we  should  be  attributing  a  reality  objective  and 
independent  of  the  empirical  synthesis,  to  a  se¬ 
ries  of  phenomena.  This  idea  of  reason  cannot 
then  be  regarded  as  valid — except  as  a  rule  for 
the  regressive  synthesis  in  the  series  of  condi¬ 
tions,  according  to  which  we  must  proceed  from 
the  conditioned,  through  all  intermediate  and 
subordinate  conditions,  up  to  the  unconditioned; 
although  this  goal  is  unattained  and  unattain¬ 
able.  For  the  absolutely  unconditioned  cannot 
be  discovered  in  the  sphere  of  experience. 

We  now  proceed  to  determine  clearly  our  no¬ 
tion  of  a  synthesis  which  can  never  be  complete. 
There  are  two  terms  commonly  employed  for 
this  purpose.  These  terms  are  regarded  as  ex¬ 
pressions  of  different  and  distinguishable  notions, 
although  the  ground  of  the  distinction  has  never 
been  clearly  exposed.  The  term  employed  by  the 
mathematicians  is  progressus  in  infinitum.  The 
philosophers  prefer  the  expression  progressus  in 
indefinitum.  Without  detaining  the  reader  with 
an  examination  of  the  reasons  for  such  a  distinc¬ 
tion,  or  with  remarks  on  the  right  or  wrong  use 
of  the  terms,  I  shall  endeavour  clearly  to  deter¬ 
mine  these  conceptions,  so  far  as  is  necessary 
for  the  purpose  in  this  Critique. 

We  may,  with  propriety,  say  of  a  straight  line, 
that  it  may  be  produced  to  infinity.  In  this  case 
the  distinction  between  a  progressus  in  infinitum 
and  a  progressus  in  indefinitum  is  a  mere  piece 
of  subtlety.  For,  although  when  we  say,  “Pro¬ 
duce  a  straight  line,”  it  is  more  correct  to  say  in 
indefinitum  than  in  infinitum;  because  the  for¬ 
mer  means,  “Produce  it  as  far  as  you  please,” 
the  second,  “You  must  not  cease  to  produce  it”; 
the  expression  in  infinitum  is,  when  we  are 
speaking  of  the  power  to  do  it,  perfectly  correct, 
for  we  can  always  make  it  longer  if  we  please — 
on  to  infinity.  And  this  remark  holds  good  in  all 
cases,  when  we  speak  of  a  progressus ,  that  is,  an 
advancement  from  the  condition  to  the  condi¬ 
tioned;  this  possible  advancement  always  pro- 


OF  PURE 

ceeds  to  infinity.  We  may  proceed  from  a  given 
pair  in  the  descending  line  of  generation  from 
father  to  son,  and  cogitate  a  never-ending  line 
of  descendants  from  it.  For  in  such  a  case  reason 
does  not  demand  absolute  totality  in  the  series, 
because  it  does  not  presuppose  it  as  a  condition 
and  as  given  {datum),  but  merely  as  condi¬ 
tioned,  and  as  capable  of  being  given  ( dabile ). 

Very  different  is  the  case  with  the  problem: 
“How  far  the  regress,  which  ascends  from  the 
given  conditioned  to  the  conditions,  must  ex¬ 
tend”;  whether  I  can  say:  “It  is  a  regress  in  in - 
finitum,”  or  only  “in  indefinitum” ;  and  whether, 
for  example,  setting  out  from  the  human  beings 
at  present  alive  in  the  world,  I  may  ascend  in 
the  series  of  their  ancestors,  in  infinitum — or 
whether  all  that  can  be  said  is,  that  so  far  as  I 
have  proceeded,  I  have  discovered  no  empirical 
ground  for  considering  the  series  limited,  so  that 
I  am  justified,  and  indeed,  compelled  to  search 
for  ancestors  still  further  back,  although  I  am 
not  obliged  by  the  idea  of  reason  to  presuppose 
them. 

My  answer  to  this  question  is:  “If  the  series 
is  given  in  empirical  intuition  as  a  whole,  the  re¬ 
gress  in  the  series  of  its  internal  conditions  pro¬ 
ceeds  in  infinitum;  but,  if  only  one  member  of 
the  series  is  given,  from  which  the  regress  is  to 
proceed  to  absolute  totality,  the  regress  is  possi¬ 
ble  only  in  indefinitum For  example,  the  divi¬ 
sion  of  a  portion  of  matter  given  within  certain 
limits — of  a  body,  that  is — proceeds  in  infinitum. 
For,  as  the  condition  of  this  whole  is  its  part, 
and  the  condition  of  the  part  a  part  of  the  part, 
and  so  on,  and  as  in  this  regress  of  decomposi¬ 
tion  an  unconditioned  indivisible  member  of  the 
series  of  conditions  is  not  to  be  found;  there  are 
no  reasons  or  grounds  in  experience  for  stopping 
in  the  division,  but,  on  the  contrary,  the  more 
remote  members  of  the  division  are  actually 
and  empirically  given  prior  to  this  division.  That 
is  to  say,  the  division  proceeds  to  infinity.  On 
the  other  hand,  the  series  of  ancestors  of  any 
given  human  being  is  not  given,  in  its  absolute 
totality,  in  any  experience,  and  yet  the  regress 
proceeds  from  every  genealogical  member  of 
this  series  to  one  still  higher,  and  does  not  meet 
with  any  empirical  limit  presenting  an  absolute¬ 
ly  unconditioned  member  of  the  series.  But  as 
the  members  of  such  a  series  are  not  contained 
in  the  empirical  intuition  of  the  whole,  prior  to 
the  regress,  this  regress  does  not  proceed  to  in¬ 
finity,  but  only  in  indefinitum,  that  is,  we  are 
called  upon  to  discover  other  and  higher  mem¬ 
bers,  which  are  themselves  always  conditioned. 

In  neither  case — the  regressus  in  infinitum, 


REASON  159 

nor  the  regressus  in  indefinitum,  is  the  series  of 
conditions  to  be  considered  as  actually  infinite 
in  the  object  itself.  This  might  be  true  of  things 
in  themselves,  but  it  cannot  be  asserted  of  phe¬ 
nomena,  which,  as  conditions  of  each  other,  are 
only  given  in  the  empirical  regress  itself.  Hence, 
the  question  no  longer  is,  “What  is  the  quantity 
of  this  series  of  conditions  in  itself — is  it  finite 
or  infinite?”  for  it  is  nothing  in  itself;  but, 
“How  is  the  empirical  regress  to  be  commenced, 
and  how  far  ought  we  to  proceed  with  it?”  And 
here  a  signal  distinction  in  the  application  of 
this  rule  becomes  apparent.  If  the  whole  is  giv¬ 
en  empirically,  it  is  possible  to  recede  in  the  se¬ 
ries  of  its  internal  conditions  to  infinity.  But  if 
the  whole  is  not  given,  and  can  only  be  given  by 
and  through  the  empirical  regress,  I  can  only 
say:  “It  is  possible  to  infinity ,  to  proceed  to  still 
higher  conditions  in  the  series.”  In  the  first  case, 
I  am  justified  in  asserting  that  more  members 
are  empirically  given  in  the  object  than  I  attain 
to  in  the  regress  (of  decomposition).  In  the  sec¬ 
ond  case,  I  am  justified  only  in  saying,  that  I 
can  always  proceed  further  in  the  regress,  be¬ 
cause  no  member  of  the  series  is  given  as  abso¬ 
lutely  conditioned,  and  thus  a  higher  member  is 
possible,  and  an  inquiry  with  regard  to  it  is 
necessary.  In  the  one  case  it  is  necessary  to  find 
other  members  of  the  series,  in  the  other  it  is 
necessary  to  inquire  for  others,  inasmuch  as 
experience  presents  no  absolute  limitation  of  the 
regress.  For,  either  you  do  not  possess  a  percep¬ 
tion  which  absolutely  limits  your  empirical  re¬ 
gress,  and  in  this  case  the  regress  cannot  be 
regarded  as  complete;  or,  you  do  possess  such 
a  limitative  perception,  in  which  case  it  is  not  a 
part  of  your  series  (for  that  which  limits  must 
be  distinct  from  that  which  is  limited  by  it),  and 
it  is  incumbent  on  you  to  continue  your  regress 
up  to  this  condition,  and  so  on. 

These  remarks  will  be  placed  in  their  proper 
light  by  their  application  in  the  following  sec¬ 
tion. 

Section  IX.  Of  the  Empirical  Use  of  the  Reg¬ 
ulative  Principle  of  Reason  with  regard  to  the 
Cosmological  Ideas 

We  have  shown  that  no  transcendental  use  can 
be  made  either  of  the  conceptions  of  reason  or 
of  understanding.  We  have  shown,  likewise,  that 
the  demand  of  absolute  totality  in  the  series  of 
conditions  in  the  world  of  sense  arises  from  a 
transcendental  employment  of  reason,  resting  on 
the  opinion  that  phenomena  are  to  be  regarded 
as  things  in  themselves.  It  follows  that  we  are 
not  required  to  answer  the  question  respecting 


THE  CRITIQUE 


160 

the  absolute  quantity  of  a  series — whether  it  is 
in  itself  limited  or  unlimited.  We  are  only  called 
upon  to  determine  how  far  we  must  proceed  in 
the  empirical  regress  from  condition  to  condi¬ 
tion,  in  order  to  discover,  in  conformity  with  the 
rule  of  reason,  a  full  and  correct  answer  to  the 
questions  proposed  by  reason  itself. 

This  principle  of  reason  is  hence  valid  only  as 
a  rule  for  the  extension  of  a  possible  experience 
— its  invalidity  as  a  principle  constitutive  of 
phenomena  in  themselves  having  been  sufficient¬ 
ly  demonstrated.  And  thus,  too,  the  antinomial 
conflict  of  reason  with  itself  is  completely  put 
an  end  to;  inasmuch  as  we  have  not  only  pre¬ 
sented  a  critical  solution  of  the  fallacy  lurking 
in  the  opposite  statements  of  reason,  but  have 
shown  the  true  meaning  of  the  ideas  which  gave 
rise  to  these  statements.  The  dialectical  princi¬ 
ple  of  reason  has,  therefore,  been  changed  into 
a  doctrinal  principle.  But  in  fact,  if  this  princi¬ 
ple,  in  the  subjective  signification  which  we 
have  shown  to  be  its  only  true  sense,  may  be 
guaranteed  as  a  principle  of  the  unceasing  ex¬ 
tension  of  the  employment  of  our  understand¬ 
ing,  its  influence  and  value  are  just  as  great  as  if 
it  were  an  axiom  for  the  a  priori  determination 
of  objects.  For  such  an  axiom  could  not  exert  a 
stronger  influence  on  the  extension  and  rectifi¬ 
cation  of  our  knowledge,  otherwise  than  by  pro¬ 
curing  for  the  principles  of  the  understanding 
the  most  widely  expanded  employment  in  the 
field  of  experience. 

I.  Solution  of  the  Cosmological  Idea  of  the  To¬ 
tality  of  the  Composition  of  Phenomena  in  the 
Universe 

Here,  as  well  as  in  the  case  of  the  other  cos¬ 
mological  problems,  the  ground  of  the  regulative 
principle  of  reason  is  the  proposition  that  in  our 
empirical  regress  no  experience  of  an  absolute 
limit ,  and  consequently  no  experience  of  a  con¬ 
dition,  which  is  itself  absolutely  unconditioned , 
is  discoverable.  And  the  truth  of  this  proposi¬ 
tion  itself  rests  upon  the  consideration  that  such 
an  experience  must  represent  to  us  phenomena 
as  limited  by  nothing  or  the  mere  void,  on  which 
our  continued  regress  by  means  of  perception 
must  abut — which  is  impossible. 

Now  this  proposition,  which  declares  that  ev¬ 
ery  condition  atttained  in  the  empirical  regress 
must  itself  be  considered  empirically  condi¬ 
tioned,  contains  the  rule  in  terminis,  which  re¬ 
quires  me,  to  whatever  extent  I  may  have 
proceeded  in  the  ascending  series,  always  to  look 
for  some  higher  member  in  the  series — whether 


this  member  is  to  become  known  to  me  through 
experience,  or  not. 

Nothing  further  is  necessary,  then,  for  the  so¬ 
lution  of  the  first  cosmological  problem,  than  to 
decide,  whether,  in  the  regress  to  the  uncondi¬ 
tioned  quantity  of  the  universe  (as  regards  space 
and  time),  this  never  limited  ascent  ought  to  be 
called  a  regressus  in  infinitum  or  indefinitum. 

The  general  representation  which  we  form  in 
our  minds  of  the  series  of  all  past  states  or  con¬ 
ditions  of  the  world,  or  of  all  the  things  which 
at  present  exist  in  it,  is  itself  nothing  more  than 
a  possible  empirical  regress,  which  is  cogitated 
— although  in  an  undetermined  manner — in  the 
mind,  and  which  gives  rise  to  the  conception  of 
a  series  of  conditions  for  a  given  object.1  Now  I 
have  a  conception  of  the  universe,  but  not  an  in¬ 
tuition — that  is,  not  an  intuition  of  it  as  a  whole. 
Thus  I  cannot  infer  the  magnitude  of  the  re¬ 
gress  from  the  quantity  or  magnitude  of  the 
world,  and  determine  the  former  by  means  of 
the  latter;  on  the  contrary,  I  must  first  of  all 
form  a  conception  of  the  quantity  or  magnitude 
of  the  world  from  the  magnitude  of  the  empiri¬ 
cal  regress.  But  of  this  regress  I  know  nothing 
more  than  that  I  ought  to  proceed  from  every 
given  member  of  the  series  of  conditions  to  one 
still  higher.  But  the  quantity  of  the  universe  is 
not  thereby  determined,  and  we  cannot  affirm 
that  this  regress  proceeds  in  infinitum.  Such  an 
affirmation  would  anticipate  the  members  of  the 
series  which  have  not  yet  been  reached,  and  rep¬ 
resent  the  number  of  them  as  beyond  the  grasp 
of  any  empirical  synthesis;  it  would  consequent¬ 
ly  determine  the  cosmical  quantity  prior  to  the 
regress  (although  only  in  a  negative  manner) — 
which  is  impossible.  For  the  world  is  not  given 
in  its  totality  in  any  intuition:  consequently,  its 
quantity  cannot  be  given  prior  to  the  regress.  It 
follows  that  we  are  unable  to  make  any  declara¬ 
tion  respecting  the  cosmical  quantity  in  itself — 
not  even  that  the  regress  in  it  is  a  regress  in  in¬ 
finitum;  we  must  only  endeavour  to  attain  to  a 
conception  of  the  quantity  of  the  universe,  in 
conformity  with  the  rule  which  determines  the 
empirical  regress  in  it.  But  this  rule  merely  re¬ 
quires  us  never  to  admit  an  absolute  limit  to  our 
series — how  far  soever  we  may  have  proceeded 
in  it,  but  always,  on  the  contrary,  to  subordinate 

1  The  cosmical  series  can  neither  be  greater  nor 
smaller  than  the  possible  empirical  regress,  upon  which 
its  conception  is  based.  And  as  this  regress  cannot  be 
a  determinate  infinite  regress,  still  less  a  determinate 
finite  (absolutely  limited),  it  is  evident  that  we  cannot 
regard  the  world  as  either  finite  or  infinite,  because  the 
regress,  which  gives  us  the  representation  of  the  world, 
is  neither  finite  nor  infinite. 


OF  PURE  REASON 


every  phenomenon  to  some  other  as  its  condi¬ 
tion,  and  consequently  to  proceed  to  this  higher 
phenomenon.  Such  a  regress  is,  therefore,  the 
regressus  in  indefinitum ,  which,  as  not  deter¬ 
mining  a  quantity  in  the  object,  is  clearly  distin¬ 
guishable  from  the  regressus  in  infinitum. 

It  follows  from  what  we  have  said  that  we 
are  not  justified  in  declaring  the  world  to  be  in¬ 
finite  in  space,  or  as  regards  past  time.  For  this 
conception  of  an  infinite  given  quantity  is  em¬ 
pirical;  but  we  cannot  apply  the  conception  of 
an  infinite  quantity  to  the  world  as  an  object  of 
the  senses.  I  cannot  say,  “The  regress  from  a 
given  perception  to  everything  limited  either  in 
space  or  time,  proceeds  in  infinitum  ”  for  this 
presupposes  an  infinite  cosmical  quantity;  nei¬ 
ther  can  I  say,  “It  is  finite  ”  for  an  absolute  lim¬ 
it  is  likewise  impossible  in  experience.  It  follows 
that  I  am  not  entitled  to  make  any  assertion  at 
all  respecting  the  whole  object  of  experience — 
the  world  of  sense;  I  must  limit  my  declarations 
to  the  rule  according  to  which  experience  or  em¬ 
pirical  knowledge  is  to  be  attained. 

To  the  question,  therefore,  respecting  the  cos¬ 
mical  quantity,  the  first  and  negative  answer  is: 
“The  world  has  no  beginning  in  time,  and  no  ab¬ 
solute  limit  in  space.” 

For,  in  the  contrary  case,  it  would  be  limited 
by  a  void  time  on  the  one  hand,  and  by  a  void 
space  on  the  other.  Now,  since  the  world,  as  a 
phenomenon,  cannot  be  thus  limited  in  itself — 
for  a  phenomenon  is  not  a  thing  in  itself;  it 
must  be  possible  for  us  to  have  a  perception  of 
this  limitation  by  a  void  time  and  a  void  space. 
But  such  a  perception — such  an  experience  is 
impossible;  because  it  has  no  content.  Conse¬ 
quently,  an  absolute  cosmical  limit  is  empirical¬ 
ly,  and  therefore  absolutely,  impossible.1 

From  this  follows  the  affirmative  answer: 
“The  regress  in  the  series  of  phenomena — as  a 
determination  of  the  cosmical  quantity,  pro¬ 
ceeds  in  indefinitum”  This  is  equivalent  to  say¬ 
ing:  “The  world  of  sense  has  no  absolute  quan¬ 
tity,  but  the  empirical  regress  (through  which 
alone  the  world  of  sense  is  presented  to  us  on 
the  side  of  its  conditions)  rests  upon  a  rule, 
which  requires  it  to  proceed  from  every  mem- 

1  The  reader  will  remark  that  the  proof  presented 
above  is  very  different  from  the  dogmatical  demonstra¬ 
tion  given  in  the  antithesis  of  the  first  antinomy.  In  that 
demonstration,  it  was  taken  for  granted  that  the  world 
is  a  thing  in  itself — given  in  its  totality  prior  to  all 
regress,  and  a  determined  position  in  space  and  time 
was  denied  to  it — if  it  was  not  considered  as  occupying 
all  time  and  all  space.  Hence  our  conclusion  differed 
from  that  given  above;  for  we  inferred  in  the  antithesis 
the  actual  infinity  of  the  world. 


161 

ber  of  the  series,  as  conditioned,  to  one  still 
more  remote  (whether  through  personal  experi¬ 
ence,  or  by  means  of  history,  or  the  chain  of 
cause  and  effect),  and  not  to  cease  at  any  point 
in  this  extension  of  the  possible  empirical  em¬ 
ployment  of  the  understanding.”  And  this  is  the 
proper  and  only  use  which  reason  can  make  of 
its  principles. 

The  above  rule  does  not  prescribe  an  unceas¬ 
ing  regress  in  one  kind  of  phenomena.  It  does 
not,  for  example,  forbid  us,  in  our  ascent  from 
an  individual  human  being  through  the  line  of 
his  ancestors,  to  expect  that  we  shall  discover  at 
some  point  of  the  regress  a  primeval  pair,  or  to 
admit,  in  the  series  of  heavenly  bodies,  a  sun  at 
the  farthest  possible  distance  from  some  centre. 
All  that  it  demands  is  a  perpetual  progress  from 
phenomena  to  phenomena,  even  although  an  ac¬ 
tual  perception  is  not  presented  by  them  (as  in 
the  case  of  our  perceptions  being  so  weak  as  that 
we  are  unable  to  become  conscious  of  them), 
since  they,  nevertheless,  belong  to  possible  ex¬ 
perience. 

Every  beginning  is  in  time,  and  all  limits  to 
extension  are  in  space.  But  space  and  time  are 
in  the  world  of  sense.  Consequently  phenomena 
in  the  world  are  conditionally  limited,  but  the 
world  itself  is  not  limited,  either  conditionally 
or  unconditionally. 

For  this  reason,  and  because  neither  the  world 
nor  the  cosmical  series  of  conditions  to  a  given 
conditioned  can  be  completely  given ,  our  con¬ 
ception  of  the  cosmical  quantity  is  given  only  in 
and  through  the  regress  and  not  prior  to  it — in  a 
collective  intuition.  But  the  regress  itself  is  real¬ 
ly  nothing  more  than  the  determining  of  the 
cosmical  quantity,  and  cannot  therefore  give  us 
any  determined  conception  of  it — still  less  a  con¬ 
ception  of  a  quantity  which  is,  in  relation  to  a 
certain  standard,  infinite.  The  regress  does  not, 
therefore,  proceed  to  infinity  (an  infinity  giv¬ 
en),  but  only  to  an  indefinite  extent,  for  the  pur¬ 
pose  of  presenting  to  us  a  quantity — realized 
only  in  and  through  the  regress  itself. 

II.  Solution  of  the  Cosmological  Idea  of  the 
Totality  of  the  Division  of  a  Whole  given 
in  Intuition 

When  I  divide  a  whole  which  is  given  in  in¬ 
tuition,  I  proceed  from  a  conditioned  to  its  con¬ 
ditions.  The  division  of  the  parts  of  the  whole 
(subdivisio  or  decompositio)  is  a  regress  in  the 
series  of  these  conditions.  The  absolute  totality 
of  this  series  would  be  actually  attained  and  giv¬ 
en  to  the  mind,  if  the  regress  could  arrive  at 


162 


THE  CRITIQUE 


simple  parts.  But  if  all  the  parts  in  a  continuous 
decomposition  are  themselves  divisible,  the  di¬ 
vision,  that  is  to  say,  the  regress,  proceeds  from 
the  conditioned  to  its  conditions  in  infinitum; 
because  the  conditions  (the  parts)  are  them¬ 
selves  contained  in  the  conditioned,  and,  as  the 
latter  is  given  in  a  limited  intuition,  the  former 
are  all  given  along  with  it.  This  regress  cannot, 
therefore,  be  called  a  regressus  in  indefinitum, 
as  happened  in  the  case  of  the  preceding  cosmo¬ 
logical  idea,  the  regress  in  which  proceeded  from 
the  conditioned  to  the  conditions  not  given  con¬ 
temporaneously  and  along  with  it,  but  discover¬ 
able  only  through  the  empirical  regress.  We  are 
not,  however,  entitled  to  affirm  of  a  whole  of  this 
kind,  which  is  divisible  in  infinitum,  that  it  con¬ 
sists  of  an  infinite  number  of  parts.  For,  al¬ 
though  all  the  parts  are  contained  in  the  in¬ 
tuition  of  the  whole,  the  whole  division  is  not 
contained  therein.  The  division  is  contained  only 
in  the  progressing  decomposition — in  the  regress 
itself,  which  is  the  condition  of  the  possibility 
and  actuality  of  the  series.  Now,  as  this  regress 
is  infinite,  all  the  members  (parts)  to  which  it 
attains  must  be  contained  in  the  given  whole  as 
an  aggregate.  But  the  complete  series  of  division 
is  not  contained  therein.  For  this  series,  being 
infinite  in  succession  and  always  incomplete, 
cannot  represent  an  infinite  number  of  members, 
and  still  less  a  composition  of  these  members  in¬ 
to  a  whole. 

To  apply  this  remark  to  space.  Every  limited 
part  of  space  presented  to  intuition  is  a  whole, 
the  parts  of  which  are  always  spaces — to  what¬ 
ever  extent  subdivided.  Every  limited  space  is 
hence  divisible  to  infinity. 

Let  us  again  apply  the  remark  to  an  external 
phenomenon  enclosed  in  limits,  that  is,  a  body. 
The  divisibility  of  a  body  rests  upon  the  divisi¬ 
bility  of  space,  which  is  the  condition  of  the  pos¬ 
sibility  of  the  body  as  an  extended  whole.  A 
body  is  consequently  divisible  to  infinity,  though 
it  does  not,  for  that  reason,  consist  of  an  infinite 
number  of  parts. 

It  certainly  seems  that,  as  a  body  must  be 
cogitated  as  substance  in  space,  the  law  of  divisi¬ 
bility  would  not  be  applicable  to  it  as  substance. 
For  we  may  and  ought  to  grant,  in  the  case  of 
space,  that  division  or  decomposition,  to  any  ex¬ 
tent,  never  can  utterly  annihilate  composition 
(that  is  to  say,  the  smallest  part  of  space  must 
still  consist  of  spaces) ;  otherwise  space  would 
entirely  cease  to  exist — which  is  impossible.  But, 
the  assertion  on  the  other  hand,  that  when  all 
composition  in  matter  is  annihilated  in  thought, 
nothing  remains,  does  not  seem  to  harmonize 


with  the  conception  of  substance,  which  must  be 
properly  the  subject  of  all  composition  and  must 
remain,  even  after  the  conjunction  of  its  at¬ 
tributes  in  space — which  constituted  a  body — 
is  annihilated  in  thought.  But  this  is  not  the  case 
with  substance  in  the  phenomenal  world,  which 
is  not  a  thing  in  itself  cogitated  by  the  pure  cate¬ 
gory.  Phenomenal  substance  is  not  an  absolute 
subject;  it  is  merely  a  permanent  sensuous  im¬ 
age,  and  nothing  more  than  an  intuition,  in  which 
the  unconditioned  is  not  to  be  found. 

But,  although  this  rule  of  progress  to  infinity 
is  legitimate  and  applicable  to  the  subdivision  of 
a  phenomenon,  as  a  mere  occupation  or  filling  of 
space,  it  is  not  applicable  to  a  whole  consisting 
of  a  number  of  distinct  parts  and  consituting  a 
quantum  discretum — that  is  to  say,  an  organized 
body.  It  cannot  be  admitted  that  every  part  in 
an  organized  whole  is  itself  organized,  and  that, 
in  analysing  it  to  infinity,  we  must  always  meet 
with  organized  parts;  although  we  may  allow 
that  the  parts  of  the  matter  which  we  decom¬ 
pose  in  infinitum,  may  be  organized.  For  the  in¬ 
finity  of  the  division  of  a  phenomenon  in  space 
rests  altogether  on  the  fact  that  the  divisibility 
of  a  phenomenon  is  given  only  in  and  through 
this  infinity,  that  is,  an  undetermined  number  of 
parts  is  given,  while  the  parts  themselves  are 
given  and  determined  only  in  and  through  the 
subdivision;  in  a  word,  the  infinity  of  the  di¬ 
vision  necessarily  presupposes  that  the  whole  is 
not  already  divided  in  se.  Hence  our  division  de¬ 
termines  a  number  of  parts  in  the  whole — a 
number  which  extends  just  as  far  as  the  actual 
regress  in  the  division;  while,  on  the  other  hand, 
the  very  notion  of  a  body  organized  to  infinity 
represents  the  whole  as  already  and  in  itself  di¬ 
vided.  We  expect,  therefore,  to  find  in  it  a  de¬ 
terminate,  but  at  the  same  time,  infinite,  number 
of  parts — which  is  self-contradictory.  For  we 
should  thus  have  a  whole  containing  a  series  of 
members  which  could  not  be  completed  in  any 
regress — which  is  infinite,  and  at  the  same  time 
complete  in  an  organized  composite.  Infinite  di¬ 
visibility  is  applicable  only  to  a  quantum  con¬ 
tinuum,  and  is  based  entirely  on  the  infinite  di¬ 
visibility  of  space.  But  in  a  quantum  discretum 
the  multitude  of  parts  or  units  is  always  de¬ 
termined,  and  hence  always  equal  to  some  num¬ 
ber.  To  what  extent  a  body  may  be  organized, 
experience  alone  can  inform  us;  and  although,  so 
far  as  our  experience  of  this  or  that  body  har-  ex¬ 
tended,  we  may  not  have  discovered  any  inor¬ 
ganic  part,  such  parts  must  exist  in  possible 
experience.  But  how  far  the  transcendental  di¬ 
vision  of  a  phenomenon  must  extend,  we  cannot 


OF  PURE 

know  from  experience — it  is  a  question  which 
experience  cannot  answer;  it  is  answered  only 
by  the  principle  of  reason  which  forbids  us  to 
consider  the  empirical  regress,  in  the  analysis  of 
extended  body,  as  ever  absolutely  complete. 

Concluding  Remark  on  the  Solution  of  the 

Transcendental  Mathematical  Ideas — and 
Introductory  to  the  Solution  of  the 
Dynamical  Ideas 

We  presented  the  antinomy  of  pure  reason  in 
a  tabular  form,  and  we  endeavoured  to  show  the 
ground  of  this  self-contradiction  on  the  part  of 
reason,  and  the  only  means  of  bringing  it  to  a 
conclusion — namely,  by  declaring  both  contra¬ 
dictory  statements  to  be  false.  We  represented 
in  these  antinomies  the  conditions  of  phenomena 
as  belonging  to  the  conditioned  according  to  re¬ 
lations  of  space  and  time — which  is  the  usual 
supposition  of  the  common  understanding.  In 
this  respect,  all  dialectical  representations  of 
totality,  in  the  series  of  conditions  to  a  given 
conditioned,  were  perfectly  homogeneous.  The 
condition  was  always  a  member  of  the  series 
along  with  the  conditioned,  and  thus  the  homo¬ 
geneity  of  the  whole  series  was  assured.  In  this 
case  the  regress  could  never  be  cogitated  as  com¬ 
plete;  or,  if  this  was  the  case,  a  member  really 
conditioned  was  falsely  regarded  as  a  primal 
member,  consequently  as  unconditioned.  In  such 
an  antinomy,  therefore,  we  did  not  consider  the 
object,  that  is,  the  conditioned,  but  the  series  of 
conditions  belonging  to  the  object,  and  the  mag¬ 
nitude  of  that  series.  And  thus  arose  the  difficul¬ 
ty — a  difficulty  not  to  be  settled  by  any  decision 
regarding  the  claims  of  the  two  parties,  but  sim¬ 
ply  by  cutting  the  knot — by  declaring  the  series 
proposed  by  reason  to  be  either  too  long  or  too 
short  for  the  understanding,  which  could  in  nei¬ 
ther  case  make  its  conceptions  adequate  with 
the  ideas. 

But  we  have  overlooked,  up  to  this  point,  an 
essential  difference  existing  between  the  concep¬ 
tions  of  the  understanding  which  reason  endeav¬ 
ours  to  raise  to  the  rank  of  ideas — two  of  these 
indicating  a  mathematical ,  and  two  a  dynamical 
synthesis  of  phenomena.  Hitherto,  it  was  neces¬ 
sary  to  signalize  this  distinction;  for,  just  as  in 
our  general  representation  of  all  transcendental 
ideas,  we  considered  them  under  phenomenal 
conditions,  so,  in  the  two  mathematical  ideas, 
our  discussion  is  concerned  solely  with  an  object 
in  the  world  of  phenomena.  But  as  we  are  now 
about  to  proceed  to  the  consideration  of  the  dy¬ 
namical  conceptions  of  the  understanding,  and 
their  adequateness  with  ideas,  we  must  not  lose 


REASON  163 

sight  of  this  distinction.  We  shall  find  that  it 
opens  up  to  us  an  entirely  new  view  of  the  con¬ 
flict  in  which  reason  is  involved.  For,  while  in  the 
first  two  antinomies,  both  parties  were  dismissed , 
on  the  ground  of  having  advanced  statements 
based  upon  false  hypothesis;  in  the  present 
case  the  hope  appears  of  discovering  a  hypoth¬ 
esis  which  may  be  consistent  with  the  demands 
of  reason,  and,  the  judge  completing  the  state¬ 
ment  of  the  grounds  of  claim,  which  both  parties 
had  left  in  an  unsatisfactory  state,  the  question 
may  be  settled  on  its  own  merits,  not  by  dis¬ 
missing  the  claimants,  but  by  a  comparison  of 
the  arguments  on  both  sides.  If  we  consider 
merely  their  extension ,  and  whether  they  are 
adequate  with  ideas,  the  series  of  conditions 
may  be  regarded  as  all  homogeneous.  But  the 
conception  of  the  understanding  which  lies  at  the 
basis  of  these  ideas,  contains  either  a  synthesis 
of  the  homogeneous  (presupposed  in  every 
quantity — in  its  composition  as  well  as  in  its  di¬ 
vision)  or  of  the  heterogeneous,  which  is  the 
case  in  the  dynamical  synthesis  of  cause  and  ef¬ 
fect,  as  well  as  of  the  necessary  and  the  con¬ 
tingent. 

Thus  it  happens  that  in  the  mathematical 
series  of  phenomena  no  other  than  a  sensuous 
condition  is  admissible — a  condition  which  is  it¬ 
self  a  member  of  the  series;  while  the  dynamical 
series  of  sensuous  conditions  admits  a  heteroge¬ 
neous  condition,  which  is  not  a  member  of  the 
series,  but,  as  purely  intelligible ,  lies  out  of  and 
beyond  it.  And  thus  reason  is  satisfied,  and  an 
unconditioned  placed  at  the  head  of  the  series 
of  phenomena,  without  introducing  confusion 
into  or  discontinuing  it,  contrary  to  the  princi¬ 
ples  of  the  understanding. 

Now,  from  the  fact  that  the  dynamical  ideas 
admit  a  condition  of  phenomena  which  does  not 
form  a  part  of  the  series  of  phenomena,  arises  a 
result  which  we  should  not  have  expected  from 
an  antinomy.  In  former  cases,  the  result  was 
that  both  contradictory  dialectical  statements 
were  declared  to  be  false.  In  the  present  case, 
we  find  the  conditioned  in  the  dynamical  series 
connected  with  an  empirically  unconditioned, 
but  non-sensuous  condition;  and  thus  satisfac¬ 
tion  is  done  to  the  understanding  on  the  one 
hand  and  to  the  reason  on  the  other.1  While, 

1  For  the  understanding  cannot  admit  among  phe¬ 
nomena  a  condition  which  is  itself  empirically  uncondi¬ 
tioned.  But  if  it  is  possible  to  cogitate  an  intelligible 
condition- — one  which  is  not  a  member  of  the  series  of 
phenomena — for  a  conditioned  phenomenon,  without 
breaking  the  series  of  empirical  conditions,  such  a  con¬ 
dition  may  be  admissible  as  empirically  unconditioned , 
and  the  empirical  regress  continue  regular,  unceasing, 
and  intact. 


1 64  THE  CRITIQUE 


moreover,  the  dialectical  arguments  for  uncon¬ 
ditioned  totality  in  mere  phenomena  fall  to  the 
ground,  both  propositions  of  reason  may  be 
shown  to  be  true  in  their  proper  signification. 
This  could  not  happen  in  the  case  of  the  cosmo¬ 
logical  ideas  which  demanded  a  mathematically 
unconditioned  unity;  for  no  condition  could  be 
placed  at  the  head  of  the  series  of  phenomena, 
except  one  which  was  itself  a  phenomenon  and 
consequently  a  member  of  the  series. 

III.  Solution  of  the  Cosmological  Idea  of  the 
Totality  of  the  Deduction  of  Cosmical 
Events  from  their  Causes 

There  are  only  two  modes  of  causality  cog¬ 
itable — the  causality  of  nature  or  of  freedom. 
The  first  is  the  conjunction  of  a  particular  state 
with  another  preceding  it  in  the  world  of  sense, 
the  former  following  the  latter  by  virtue  of  a 
law.  Now,  as  the  causality  of  phenomena  is  sub¬ 
ject  to  conditions  of  time,  and  the  preceding 
state,  if  it  had  always  existed,  could  not  have 
produced  an  effect  which  would  make  its  first 
appearance  at  a  particular  time,  the  causality  of 
a  cause  must  itself  be  an  effect — must  itself 
have  begun  to  be,  and  therefore,  according  to 
the  principle  of  the  understanding,  itself  re¬ 
quires  a  cause. 

We  must  understand,  on  the  contrary,  by  the 
term  freedom,  in  the  cosmological  sense,  a  facul¬ 
ty  of  the  spontaneous  origination  of  a  state;  the 
causality  of  which,  therefore,  is  not  subordi¬ 
nated  to  another  cause  determining  it  in  time. 
Freedom  is  in  this  sense  a  pure  transcendental 
idea,  which,  in  the  first  place,  contains  no  em¬ 
pirical  element;  the  object  of  which,  in  the 
second  place,  cannot  be  given  or  determined  in 
any  experience,  because  it  is  a  universal  law  of 
the  very  possibility  of  experience,  that  every¬ 
thing  which  happens  must  have  a  cause,  that 
consequently  the  causality  of  a  cause,  being  it¬ 
self  something  that  has  happened,  must  also 
have  a  cause.  In  this  view  of  the  case,  the  whole 
field  of  experience,  how  far  soever  it  may  ex¬ 
tend,  contains  nothing  that  is  not  subject  to  the 
laws  of  nature.  But,  as  we  cannot  by  this  means 
attain  to  an  absolute  totality  of  conditions  in 
reference  to  the  series  of  causes  and  effects,  rea¬ 
son  creates  the  idea  of  a  spontaneity,  which  can 
begin  to  act  of  itself,  and  without  any  external 
cause  determining  it  to  action,  according  to  the 
natural  law  of  causality. 

It  is  especially  remarkable  that  the  practical 
conception  of  freedom  is  based  upon  the  tran¬ 
scendental  idea,  and  that  the  question  of  the  pos¬ 
sibility  of  the  former  is  difficult  only  as  it  in¬ 


volves  the  consideration  of  the  truth  of  the  lat¬ 
ter.  Freedom,  in  the  practical  sense,  is  the  inde¬ 
pendence  of  the  will  of  coercion  by  sensuous  im¬ 
pulses.  A  will  is  sensuous,  in  so  far  as  it  is  path¬ 
ologically  affected  (by  sensuous  impulses)  ;  it  is 
termed  animal  ( arbitrium  brutum ),  when  it  is 
pathologically  necessitated.  The  human  will  is 
certainly  an  arbitrium  sensitivum f  not  brutum, 
but  liberum;  because  sensuousness  does  not 
necessitate  its  action,  a  faculty  existing  in  man 
of  self-determination,  independently  of  all  sen¬ 
suous  coercion. 

It  is  plain  that,  if  all  causality  in  the  world  of 
sense  were  natural — and  natural  only — every 
event  would  be  determined  by  another  according 
to  necessary  laws,  and  that,  consequently,  phe¬ 
nomena,  in  so  far  as  they  determine  the  will, 
must  necessitate  every  action  as  a  natural  effect 
from  themselves;  and  thus  all  practical  free¬ 
dom  would  fall  to  the  ground  with  the  tran¬ 
scendental  idea.  For  the  latter  presupposes  that 
although  a  certain  thing  has  not  happened,  it 
ought  to  have  happened,  and  that,  consequently, 
its  phenomenal  cause  was  not  so  powerful  and 
determinative  as  to  exclude  the  causality  of  our 
will — a  causality  capable  of  producing  effects 
independently  of  and  even  in  opposition  to  the 
power  of  natural  causes,  and  capable,  conse¬ 
quently,  of  spontaneously  originating  a  series  of 
events. 

Here,  too,  we  find  it  to  be  the  case,  as  we  gen¬ 
erally  found  in  the  self-contradictions  and  per¬ 
plexities  of  a  reason  which  strives  to  pass  the 
bounds  of  possible  experience,  that  the  problem 
is  properly  not  physiological but  transcenden¬ 
tal.  The  question  of  the  possibility  of  freedom 
does  indeed  concern  psychology;  but,  as  it  rests 
upon  dialectical  arguments  of  pure  reason,  its 
solution  must  engage  the  attention  of  transcen¬ 
dental  philosophy.  Before  attempting  this  solu¬ 
tion,  a  task  which  transcendental  philosophy 
cannot  decline,  it  will  be  advisable  to  make  a 
remark  with  regard  to  its  procedure  in  the  set¬ 
tlement  of  the  question. 

If  phenomena  were  things  in  themselves,  and 
time  and  space  forms  of  the  existence  of  things, 
condition  and  conditioned  would  always  be 
members  of  the  same  series;  and  thus  would 
arise  in  the  present  case  the  antinomy  common 
to  all  transcendental  ideas — that  their  series  is 
either  too  great  or  too  small  for  the  understand¬ 
ing.  The  dynamical  ideas,  which  we  are  about  to 
discuss  in  this  and  the  following  section,  possess 
the  peculiarity  of  relating  to  an  object,  not  con- 

1  [Probably  an  error  of  the  press,  and  that  we  should 
read  psychological .] 


OF  PURE  REASON  165 


sidered  as  a  quantity,  but  as  an  existence ;  and 
thus,  in  the  discussion  of  the  present  question, 
we  may  make  abstraction  of  the  quantity  of  the 
series  of  conditions,  and  consider  merely  the 
dynamical  relation  of  the  condition  to  the  con¬ 
ditioned.  The  question,  then,  suggests  itself, 
whether  freedom  is  possible;  and,  if  it  is,  wheth¬ 
er  it  can  consist  with  the  universality  of  the  nat¬ 
ural  law  of  causality;  and,  consequently,  wheth¬ 
er  we  enounce  a  proper  disjunctive  proposition 
when  we  say:  “Every  effect  must  have  its  origin 
either  in  nature  or  in  freedom,”  or  whether  both 
cannot  exist  together  in  the  same  event  in  differ¬ 
ent  relations.  The  principle  of  an  unbroken  con¬ 
nection  between  all  events  in  the  phenomenal 
world,  in  accordance  with  the  unchangeable  laws 
of  nature,  is  a  well-established  principle  of  tran¬ 
scendental  analytic  which  admits  of  no  exception. 
The  question,  therefore,  is:  “Whether  an  effect, 
determined  according  to  the  laws  of  nature,  can 
at  the  same  time  be  produced  by  a  free  agent,  or 
whether  freedom  and  nature  mutually  exclude 
each  other?”  And  here,  the  common  but  falla¬ 
cious  hypothesis  of  the  absolute  reality  of  phe¬ 
nomena  manifests  its  injurious  influence  in  em¬ 
barrassing  the  procedure  of  reason.  For  if  phe¬ 
nomena  are  things  in  themselves,  freedom  is 
impossible.  In  this  case,  nature  is  the  complete 
and  all-sufficient  cause  of  every  event;  and  con¬ 
dition  and  conditioned,  cause  and  effect  are  con¬ 
tained  in  the  same  series,  and  necessitated  by  the 
same  law.  If,  on  the  contrary,  phenomena  are 
held  to  be,  as  they  are  in  fact,  nothing  more 
than  mere  representations,  connected  with  each 
other  in  accordance  with  empirical  laws,  they 
must  have  a  ground  which  is  not  phenomenal. 
But  the  causality  of  such  an  intelligible  cause  is 
not  determined  or  determinable  by  phenomena; 
although  its  effects,  as  phenomena,  must  be  de¬ 
termined  by  other  phenomenal  existences.  This 
cause  and  its  causality  exist  therefore  out  of  and 
apart  from  the  series  of  phenomena;  while  its 
effects  do  exist  and  are  discoverable  in  the  series 
of  empirical  conditions.  Such  an  effect  may 
therefore  be  considered  to  be  free  in  relation  to 
its  intelligible  cause,  and  necessary  in  relation  to 
the  phenomena  from  which  it  is  a  necessary  con¬ 
sequence — a  distinction  which,  stated  in  this 
perfectly  general  and  abstract  manner,  must  ap¬ 
pear  in  the  highest  degree  subtle  and  obscure. 
The  sequel  will  explain.  It  is  sufficient,  at  pres¬ 
ent,  to  remark  that,  as  the  complete  and  unbrok¬ 
en  connection  of  phenomena  is  an  unalterable 
law  of  nature,  freedom  is  impossible — on  the 
supposition  that  phenomena  are  absolutely  real. 
Hence  those  philosophers  who  adhere  to  the  com¬ 


mon  opinion  on  this  subject  can  never  succeed  in 
reconciling  the  ideas  of  nature  and  freedom. 

Possibility  of  Freedom  in  Harmony  with  the 
Universal  Law  of  Natural  Necessity 

That  element  in  a  sensuous  object  which  is  not 
itself  sensuous,  I  may  be  allowed  to  term  intelli¬ 
gible.  If,  accordingly,  an  object  which  must  be 
regarded  as  a  sensuous  phenomenon  possesses  a 
faculty  which  is  not  an  object  of  sensuous  intui¬ 
tion,  but  by  means  of  which  it  is  capable  of  be¬ 
ing  the  cause  of  phenomena,  the  causality  of  an 
object  or  existence  of  this  kind  may  be  regarded 
from  two  different  points  of  view.  It  may  be 
considered  to  be  intelligible ,  as  regards  its  action 
— the  action  of  a  thing  which  is  a  thing  in  itself, 
and  sensuous,  as  regards  its  effects — the  effects 
of  a  phenomenon  belonging  to  the  sensuous  world. 
We  should  accordingly,  have  to  form  both  an 
empirical  and  an  intellectual  conception  of  the 
causality  of  such  a  faculty  or  power — both,  how¬ 
ever,  having  reference  to  the  same  effect.  This 
twofold  manner  of  cogitating  a  power  residing 
in  a  sensuous  object  does  not  run  counter  to  any 
of  the  conceptions  which  we  ought  to  form  of 
the  world  of  phenomena  or  of  a  possible  experi¬ 
ence.  Phenomena — not  being  things  in  themselves 
— must  have  a  transcendental  object  as  a  founda¬ 
tion,  which  determines  them  as  mere  representa¬ 
tions;  and  there  seems  to  be  no  reason  why  we 
should  not  ascribe  to  this  transcendental  object, 
in  addition  to  the  property  of  self-phenomeniza- 
tion,  a  causality  whose  effects  are  to  be  met  with 
in  the  world  of  phenomena,  although  it  is  not  it¬ 
self  aphenomenon.  Buteveryeffectivecausemust 
possess  a  character,  that  is  to  say,  a  law  of  its 
causality,  without  which  it  would  cease  to  be  a 
cause.  In  the  above  case,  then,  every  sensuous 
object  would  possess  an  empirical  character, 
which  guaranteed  that  its  actions,  as  phenom¬ 
ena,  stand  in  complete  and  harmonious  connec¬ 
tion,  conformably  to  unvarying  natural  laws, 
with  all  other  phenomena,  and  can  be  deduced 
from  these,  as  conditions,  and  that  they  do  thus, 
in  connection  with  these,  constitute  a  series  in 
the  order  of  nature.  This  sensuous  object  must, 
in  the  second  place,  possess  an  intelligible  char¬ 
acter,  which  guarantees  it  to  be  the  cause  of 
those  actions,  as  phenomena,  although  it  is  not 
itself  a  phenomenon  nor  subordinate  to  the  con¬ 
ditions  of  the  world  of  sense.  The  former  may 
be  termed  the  character  of  the  thing  as  a  phe¬ 
nomenon,  the  latter  the  character  of  the  thing 
as  a  thing  in  itself. 

Now  this  active  subject  would,  in  its  character 
of  intelligible  subject,  be  subordinate  to  no  con- 


i66 


THE  CRITIQUE 


ditions  of  time,  for  time  is  only  a  condition  of 
phenomena,  and  not  of  things  in  themselves.  No 
action  would  begin  or  cease  to  be  in  this  subject; 
it  would  consequently  be  free  from  the  law  of 
all  determination  of  time — the  law  of  change, 
namely,  that  everything  which  happens  must 
have  a  cause  in  the  phenomena  of  a  preceding 
state.  In  one  word,  the  causality  of  the  subject, 
in  so  far  as  it  is  intelligible,  would  not  form  part 
of  the  series  of  empirical  conditions  which  de¬ 
termine  and  necessitate  an  event  in  the  world  of 
sense.  Again,  this  intelligible  character  of  a  thing 
cannot  be  immediately  cognized,  because  we  can 
perceive  nothing  but  phenomena,  but  it  must  be 
capable  of  being  cogitated  in  harmony  with  the 
empirical  character;  for  we  always  find  our¬ 
selves  compelled  to  place,  in  thought,  a  tran¬ 
scendental  object  at  the  basis  of  phenomena  al¬ 
though  we  can  never  know  what  this  object  is  in 
itself. 

In  virtue  of  its  empirical  character,  this  sub¬ 
ject  would  at  the  same  time  be  subordinate  to  all 
the  empirical  laws  of  causality,  and,  as  a  phe¬ 
nomenon  and  member  of  the  sensuous  world,  its 
effects  would  have  to  be  accounted  for  by  a  ref¬ 
erence  to  preceding  phenomena.  Eternal  phe¬ 
nomena  must  be  capable  of  influencing  it;  and 
its  actions,  in  accordance  with  natural  laws,  must 
explain  to  us  how  its  empirical  character,  that  is, 
the  law  of  its  causality,  is  to  be  cognized  in  and 
by  means  of  experience.  In  a  word,  all  requisites 
for  a  complete  and  necessary  determination  of 
these  actions  must  be  presented  to  us  by  expe¬ 
rience. 

In  virtue  of  its  intelligible  character,  on  the 
other  hand  (although  we  possess  only  a  general 
conception  of  this  character),  the  subject  must 
be  regarded  as  free  from  all  sensuous  influences, 
and  from  all  phenomenal  determination.  More¬ 
over,  as  nothing  happens  in  this  subject — for  it 
is  a  noumenon ,  and  there  does  not  consequently 
exist  in  it  any  change,  demanding  the  dynamical 
determination  of  time,  and  for  the  same  reason 
no  connection  with  phenomena  as  causes — this 
active  existence  must  in  its  actions  be  free  from 
and  independent  of  natural  necessity,  for  this 
necessity  exists  only  in  the  world  of  phenomena. 
It  would  be  quite  correct  to  say  that  it  originates 
or  begins  its  effects  in  the  world  of  sense  from 
itself ,  although  the  action  productive  of  these 
effects  does  not  begin  in  itself.  We  should  not  be 
in  this  case  affirming  that  these  sensuous  effects 
began  to  exist  of  themselves,  because  they  are 
always  determined  by  prior  empirical  conditions 
— by  virtue  of  the  empirical  character,  which  is 
the  phenomenon  of  the  intelligible  character — 


and  are  possible  only  as  constituting  a  continu¬ 
ation  of  the  series  of  natural  causes.  And  thus 
nature  and  freedom,  each  in  the  complete  and 
absolute  signification  of  these  terms,  can  exist, 
without  contradiction  or  disagreement,  in  the 
same  action. 

Exposition  of  the  Cosmological  Idea  of  Freedom 
in  Harmony  with  the  Universal  Law  of  Natural 
Necessity 

I  have  thought  it  advisable  to  lay  before  the 
reader  at  first  merely  a  sketch  of  the  solution  of 
this  transcendental  problem,  in  order  to  enable 
him  to  form  with  greater  ease  a  clear  conception 
of  the  course  which  reason  must  adopt  in  the  so¬ 
lution.  I  shall  now  proceed  to  exhibit  the  several 
momenta  of  this  solution,  and  to  consider  them 
in  their  order. 

The  natural  law  that  everything  which  hap¬ 
pens  must  have  a  cause,  that  the  causality  of 
this  cause,  that  is,  the  action  of  the  cause  (which 
cannot  always  have  existed,  but  must  be  itself 
an  event,  for  it  precedes  in  time  some  effect 
which  it  has  originated),  must  have  itself  a  phe¬ 
nomenal  cause,  by  which  it  is  determined,  and, 
consequently,  that  all  events  are  empirically  de¬ 
termined  in  an  order  of  nature — this  law,  I  say, 
which  lies  at  the  foundation  of  the  possibility  of 
experience,  and  of  a  connected  system  of  phe¬ 
nomena  or  nature,  is  a  law  of  the  understanding, 
from  which  no  departure,  and  to  which  no  ex¬ 
ception,  can  be  admitted.  For  to  except  even  a 
single  phenomenon  from  its  operation  is  to  ex¬ 
clude  it  from  the  sphere  of  possible  experience 
and  thus  to  admit  it  to  be  a  mere  fiction  of 
thought  or  phantom  of  the  brain. 

Thus  we  are  obliged  to  acknowledge  the  exist¬ 
ence  of  a  chain  of  causes,  in  which,  however,  ab¬ 
solute  totality  cannot  be  found.  But  we  need  not 
detain  ourselves  with  this  question,  for  it  has  al¬ 
ready  been  sufficiently  answered  in  our  discus¬ 
sion  of  the  antinomies  into  which  reason  falls, 
when  it  attempts  to  reach  the  unconditioned  in 
the  series  of  phenomena.  If  we  permit  ourselves 
to  be  deceived  by  the  illusion  of  transcendental 
idealism,  we  shall  find  that  neither  nature  nor 
freedom  exists.  Now  the  question  is:  “Whether, 
admitting  the  existence  of  natural  necessity  in 
the  world  of  phenomena,  it  is  possible  to  consider 
an  effect  as  at  the  same  time  an  effect  of  nature 
and  an  effect  of  freedom — or,  whether  these  two 
modes  of  causality  are  contradictory  and  incom¬ 
patible?” 

No  phenomenal  cause  can  absolutely  and  of 
itself  begin  a  series.  Every  action,  in  so  far  as  it 
is  productive  of  an  event,  is  itself  an  event  or 


OF  PURE  REASON 


occurrence,  and  presupposes  another  preceding 
state,  in  which  its  cause  existed.  Thus  everything 
that  happens  is  but  a  continuation  of  a  series, 
and  an  absolute  beginning  is  impossible  in  the 
sensuous  world.  The  actions  of  natural  causes 
are,  accordingly,  themselves  effects,  and  presup¬ 
pose  causes  preceding  them  in  time.  A  primal  ac¬ 
tion  which  forms  an  absolute  beginning,  is  be¬ 
yond  the  causal  power  of  phenomena. 

Now,  is  it  absolutely  necessary  that,  granting 
that  all  effects  are  phenomena,  the  causality  of 
the  cause  of  these  effects  must  also  be  a  phenom¬ 
enon  and  belong  to  the  empirical  world?  Is  it 
not  rather  possible  that,  although  every  effect  in 
the  phenomenal  world  must  be  connected  with 
an  empirical  cause,  according  to  the  universal 
law  of  nature,  this  empirical  causality  may  be  it¬ 
self  the  effect  of  a  non-empirical  and  intelligible 
causality — its  connection  with  natural  causes  re¬ 
maining  nevertheless  intact?  Such  a  causality 
would  be  considered,  in  reference  to  phenomena, 
as  the  primal  action  of  a  cause,  which  is  in  so 
far,  therefore,  not  phenomenal,  but,  by  reason 
of  this  faculty  or  power,  intelligible;  although 
it  must,  at  the  same  time,  as  a  link  in  the  chain 
of  nature,  be  regarded  as  belonging  to  the  sensu¬ 
ous  world. 

A  belief  in  the  reciprocal  causality  of  phenom¬ 
ena  is  necessary,  if  we  are  required  to  look  for 
and  to  present  the  natural  conditions  of  natural 
events,  that  is  to  say,  their  causes.  This  being 
admitted  as  unexceptionably  valid,  the  require¬ 
ments  of  the  understanding,  which  recognizes 
nothing  but  nature  in  the  region  of  phenomena, 
are  satisfied,  and  our  physical  explanations  of 
physical  phenomena  may  proceed  in  their  regu¬ 
lar  course,  without  hinderance  and  without  op¬ 
position.  But  it  is  no  stumbling-block  in  the  way, 
even  assuming  the  idea  to  be  a  pure  fiction,  to 
admit  that  there  are  some  natural  causes  in  the 
possession  of  a  faculty  which  is  not  empirical, 
but  intelligible,  inasmuch  as  it  is  not  determined 
to  action  by  empirical  conditions,  but  purely  and 
solely  upon  grounds  brought  forward  by  the  un¬ 
derstanding — this  action  being  still,  when  the 
cause  is  phenomenized,  in  perfect  accordance 
with  the  laws  of  empirical  causality.  Thus  the 
acting  subject,  as  a  causal  phenomenon ,  would 
continue  to  preserve  a  complete  connection  with 
nature  and  natural  conditions ;  and  the  phenom¬ 
enon  only  of  the  subject  (with  all  its  phenome¬ 
nal  causality)  would  contain  certain  conditions, 
which,  if  we  ascend  from  the  empirical  to  the 
transcendental  object,  must  necessarily  be  re¬ 
garded  as  intelligible.  For,  if  we  attend,  in  our 
inquiries  with  regard  to  causes  in  the  world  of 


phenomena,  to  the  directions  of  nature  alone,  we 
need  not  trouble  ourselves  about  the  relation  in 
which  the  transcendental  subject,  which  is  com¬ 
pletely  unknown  to  us,  stands  to  these  phenom¬ 
ena  and  their  connection  in  nature.  The  intelli¬ 
gible  ground  of  phenomena  in  this  subject  does 
not  concern  empirical  questions.  It  has  to  do 
only  with  pure  thought;  and,  although  the  ef¬ 
fects  of  this  thought  and  action  of  the  pure 
understanding  are  discoverable  in  phenomena, 
these  phenomena  must  nevertheless  be  capable 
of  a  full  and  complete  explanation,  upon  purely 
physical  grounds  and  in  accordance  with  natural 
laws.  And  in  this  case  we  attend  solely  to  their 
empirical  and  omit  all  consideration  of  their  in¬ 
telligible  character  (which  is  the  transcendental 
cause  of  the  former)  as  completely  unknown, 
except  in  so  far  as  it  is  exhibited  by  the  latter  as 
its  empirical  symbol.  Now  let  us  apply  this  to 
experience.  Man  is  a  phenomenon  of  the  sensu¬ 
ous  world  and,  at  the  same  time,  therefore,  a 
natural  cause,  the  causality  of  which  must  be 
regulated  by  empirical  laws.  As  such,  he  must 
possess  an  empirical  character,  like  all  other  nat¬ 
ural  phenomena.  We  remark  this  empirical  char¬ 
acter  in  his  actions,  which  reveal  the  presence  of 
certain  powers  and  faculties.  If  we  consider  in¬ 
animate  or  merely  animal  nature,  we  can  discov¬ 
er  no  reason  for  ascribing  to  ourselves  any  other 
than  a  faculty  which  is  determined  in  a  purely 
sensuous  manner.  But  man,  to  whom  nature  re¬ 
veals  herself  only  through  sense,  cognizes  him¬ 
self  not  only  by  his  senses,  but  also  through  pure 
apperception;  and  this  in  actions  and  internal 
determinations,  which  he  cannot  regard  as  sen¬ 
suous  impressions.  He  is  thus  to  himself,  on  the 
one  hand,  a  phenomenon,  but  on  the  other  hand, 
in  respect  of  certain  faculties,  a  purely  intelligi¬ 
ble  object — intelligible,  because  its  action  can¬ 
not  be  ascribed  to  sensuous  receptivity.  These 
faculties  are  understanding  and  reason.  The  lat¬ 
ter,  especially,  is  in  a  peculiar  manner  distinct 
from  all  empirically-conditioned  faculties,  for  it 
employs  ideas  alone  in  the  consideration  of  its 
objects,  and  by  means  of  these  determines  the 
understanding,  which  then  proceeds  to  make  an 
empirical  use  of  its  own  conceptions,  which,  like 
the  ideas  of  reason,  are  pure  and  non-empirical. 

That  reason  possesses  the  faculty  of  causality, 
or  that  at  least  we  are  compelled  so  to  represent 
it,  is  evident  from  the  imperatives ,  which  in  the 
sphere  of  the  practical  we  impose  on  many  of 
our  executive  powers.  The  words  I  ought  express 
a  species  of  necessity,  and  imply  a  connection 
with  grounds  which  nature  does  not  and  cannot 
present  to  the  mind  of  man.  Understanding 


THE  CRITIQUE 


1 68 

knows  nothing  in  nature  but  that  which  is,  or  has 
been,  or  will  be.  It  would  be  absurd  to  say  that 
anything  in  nature  ought  to  be  other  than  it  is  in 
the  relations  of  time  in  which  it  stands;  indeed, 
the  ought,  when  we  consider  merely  the  course 
of  nature,  has  neither  application  nor  meaning. 
The  question,  “What  ought  to  happen  in  the 
sphere  of  nature?”  is  just  as  absurd  as  the  ques¬ 
tion,  “What  ought  to  be  the  properties  of  a 
circle?”  All  that  we  are  entitled  to  ask  is,  “What 
takes  place  in  nature?”  or,  in  the  latter  case, 
“What  are  the  properties  of  a  circle?” 

But  the  idea  of  an  ought  or  of  duty  indicates 
a  possible  action,  the  ground  of  which  is  a  pure 
conception;  while  the  ground  of  a  merely  natu¬ 
ral  action  is,  on  the  contrary,  always  a  phenome¬ 
non.  This  action  must  certainly  be  possible  un¬ 
der  physical  conditions,  if  it  is  prescribed  by  the 
moral  imperative  ought;  but  these  physical  or 
natural  conditions  do  not  concern  the  determi¬ 
nation  of  the  will  itself,  they  relate  to  its  effects 
alone,  and  the  consequences  of  the  effect  in  the 
world  of  phenomena.  Whatever  number  of  mo¬ 
tives  nature  may  present  to  my  will,  whatever 
sensuous  impulses — the  moral  ought  it  is  beyond 
their  power  to  produce.  They  may  produce  a  vo¬ 
lition,  which,  so  far  from  being  necessary,  is  al¬ 
ways  conditioned — a  volition  to  which  the  ought 
enunciated  by  reason,  sets  an  aim  and  a  stand¬ 
ard,  gives  permission  or  prohibition.  Be  the  ob¬ 
ject  what  it  may,  purely  sensuous — as  pleasure, 
or  presented  by  pure  reason — as  good,  reason 
will  not  yield  to  grounds  which  have  an  empiri¬ 
cal  origin.  Reason  will  not  follow  the  order  of 
things  presented  by  experience,  but,  with  perfect 
spontaneity,  rearranges  them  according  to  ideas, 
with  which  it  compels  empirical  conditions  to 
agree.  It  declares,  in  the  name  of  these  ideas,  cer¬ 
tain  actions  to  be  necessary  which  nevertheless 
have  not  taken  place  and  which  perhaps  never 
will  take  place;  and  yet  presupposes  that  it  pos¬ 
sesses  the  faculty  of  causality  in  relation  to 
these  actions.  For,  in  the  absence  of  this  suppo¬ 
sition,  it  could  not  expect  its  ideas  to  produce 
certain  effects  in  the  world  of  experience. 

Now,  let  us  stop  here  and  admit  it  to  be  at 
least  possible  that  reason  does  stand  in  a  really 
causal  relation  to  phenomena.  In  this  case  it 
must — pure  reason  as  it  is — exhibit  an  empiri¬ 
cal  character.  For  every  cause  supposes  a  rule, 
according  to  which  certain  phenomena  follow  as 
effects  from  the  cause,  and  every  rule  requires 
uniformity  in  these  effects;  and  this  is  the  prop¬ 
er  ground  of  the  conception  of  a  cause — as  a 
faculty  or  power.  Now  this  conception  (of  a 
cause)  may  be  termed  the  empirical  character 


of  reason;  and  this  character  is  a  permanent 
one,  while  the  effects  produced  appear,  in  con¬ 
formity  with  the  various  conditions  which  ac¬ 
company  and  partly  limit  them,  in  various  forms. 

Thus  the  volition  of  every  man  has  an  empir¬ 
ical  character,  which  is  nothing  more  than  the 
causality  of  his  reason,  in  so  far  as  its  effects  in 
the  phenomenal  world  manifest  the  presence  of 
a  rule,  according  to  which  we  are  enabled  to  ex¬ 
amine,  in  their  several  kinds  and  degrees,  the  ac¬ 
tions  of  this  causality  and  the  rational  grounds 
for  these  actions,  and  in  this  way  to  decide  upon 
the  subjective  principles  of  the  volition.  Now  we 
learn  what  this  empirical  character  is  only  from 
phenomenal  effects,  and  from  the  rule  of  these 
which  is  presented  by  experience ;  and  for  this  rea¬ 
son  all  the  actions  of  man  in  the  world  of  phenom¬ 
ena  are  determined  by  his  empirical  character, 
and  the  co-operative  causes  of  nature.  If,  then, 
we  could  investigate  all  the  phenomena  of  hu¬ 
man  volition  to  their  lowest  foundation  in  the 
mind,  there  would  be  no  action  which  we  could 
not  anticipate  with  certainty,  and  recognize  to 
be  absolutely  necessary  from  its  preceding  con¬ 
ditions.  So  far  as  relates  to  this  empirical  char¬ 
acter,  therefore,  there  can  be  no  freedom;  and  it 
is  only  in  the  light  of  this  character  that  we  can 
consider  the  human  will,  when  we  confine  our¬ 
selves  to  simple  observation  and,  as  is  the  case 
in  anthropology,  institute  a  physiological  inves¬ 
tigation  of  the  motive  causes  of  human  actions. 

But  when  we  consider  the  same  actions  in  re¬ 
lation  to  reason — not  for  the  purpose  of  explain¬ 
ing  their  origin,  that  is,  in  relation  to  speculative 
reason,  but  to  practical  reason,  as  the  producing 
cause  of  these  actions — we  shall  discover  a  rule 
and  an  order  very  different  from  those  of  nature 
and  experience.  For  the  declaration  of  this  men¬ 
tal  faculty  may  be  that  what  has  and  could  not 
but  take  place  in  the  course  of  nature,  ought  not 
to  have  taken  place.  Sometimes,  too,  we  discov¬ 
er,  or  believe  that  we  discover,  that  the  ideas  of 
reason  did  actually  stand  in  a  causal  relation  to 
certain  actions  of  man;  and  that  these  actions 
have  taken  place  because  they  were  determined, 
not  by  empirical  causes,  but  by  the  act  of  the 
will  upon  grounds  of  reason. 

Now,  granting  that  reason  stands  in  a  causal 
relation  to  phenomena;  can  an  action  of  reason 
be  called  free,  when  we  know  that,  sensuously, 
in  its  empirical  character,  it  is  completely  de¬ 
termined  and  absolutely  necessary?  But  this 
empirical  character  is  itself  determined  by  the 
intelligible  character.  The  latter  we  cannot  cog¬ 
nize;  we  can  only  indicate  it  by  means  of  phe¬ 
nomena,  which  enable  us  to  have  an  immediate 


OF  PURE 

cognition  only  of  the  empirical  character.1  An 
action,  then,  in  so  far  as  it  is  to  be  ascribed  to 
an  intelligible  cause,  does  not  result  from  it  in 
accordance  with  empirical  laws.  That  is  to  say, 
not  the  conditions  of  pure  reason,  but  only  their 
effects  in  the  internal  sense,  precede  the  act. 
Pure  reason,  as  a  purely  intelligible  faculty,  is 
not  subject  to  the  conditions  of  time.  The  cau¬ 
sality  of  reason  in  its  intelligible  character  does 
not  begin  to  be;  it  does  not  make  its  appearance 
at  a  certain  time,  for  the  purpose  of  producing 
an  effect.  If  this  were  not  the  case,  the  causality 
of  reason  would  be  subservient  to  the  natural 
law  of  phenomena,  which  determines  them  ac¬ 
cording  to  time,  and  as  a  series  of  causes  and  ef¬ 
fects  in  time ;  it  would  consequently  cease  to  be 
freedom  and  become  a  part  of  nature.  We  are 
therefore  justified  in  saying:  “If  reason  stands 
in  a  causal  relation  to  phenomena,  it  is  a  faculty 
which  originates  the  sensuous  condition  of  an 
empirical  series  of  effects.,,  For  the  condition, 
which  resides  in  the  reason,  is  non-sensuous,  and 
therefore  cannot  be  originated,  or  begin  to  be. 
And  thus  we  find — what  we  could  not  discover 
in  any  empirical  series — a  condition  of  a  succes¬ 
sive  series  of  events  itself  empirically  uncon¬ 
ditioned.  For,  in  the  present  case,  the  condition 
stands  out  of  and  beyond  the  series  of  phe¬ 
nomena — it  is  intelligible,  and  it  consequently 
cannot  be  subjected  to  any  sensuous  condition, 
or  to  any  time-determination  by  a  preceding 
cause. 

But,  in  another  respect,  the  same  cause  be¬ 
longs  also  to  the  series  of  phenomena.  Man  is 
himself  a  phenomenon.  His  will  has  an  empiri¬ 
cal  character,  which  is  the  empirical  cause  of  all 
his  actions.  There  is  no  condition — determining 
man  and  his  volition  in  conformity  with  this 
character — which  does  not  itself  form  part  of 
the  series  of  effects  in  nature,  and  is  subject  to 
their  law — the  law  according  to  which  an  empir¬ 
ically  undetermined  cause  of  an  event  in  time 
cannot  exist.  For  this  reason  no  given  action  can 
have  an  absolute  and  spontaneous  origination, 
all  actions  being  phenomena,  and  belonging  to 
the  world  of  experience.  But  it  cannot  be  said 
of  reason,  that  the  state  in  which  it  determines 
the  will  is  always  preceded  by  some  other  state 
determining  it.  For  reason  is  not  a  phenomenon, 
and  therefore  not  subject  to  sensuous  condi- 

1  The  real  morality  of  actions — their  merit  or  de¬ 
merit,  and  even  that  of  our  own  conduct,  is  completely 
unknown  to  us.  Our  estimates  can  relate  only  to  their 
empirical  character.  How  much  is  the  result  of  the  ac¬ 
tion  of  free  will,  how  much  is  to  be  ascribed  to  nature 
and  to  blameless  error,  or  to  a  happy  constitution  of 
temperament  ( merito  jortunae),  no  one  can  discover, 
nor,  for  this  reason,  determine  with  perfect  justice. 


REASON  169 

tions;  and,  consequently,  even  in  relation  to  its 
causality,  the  sequence  or  conditions  of  time  do 
not  influence  reason,  nor  can  the  dynamical  law 
of  nature,  which  determines  the  sequence  of 
time  according  to  certain  rules,  be  applied  to  it. 

Reason  is  consequently  the  permanent  condi¬ 
tion  of  all  actions  of  the  human  will.  Each  of 
these  is  determined  in  the  empirical  character  of 
the  man,  even  before  it  has  taken  place.  The  in¬ 
telligible  character,  of  which  the  former  is  but 
the  sensuous  schema,  knows  no  before  or  after; 
and  every  action,  irrespective  of  the  time-rela¬ 
tion  in  which  it  stands  with  other  phenomena,  is 
the  immediate  effect  of  the  intelligible  character 
of  pure  reason,  which,  consequently,  enjoys  free¬ 
dom  of  action,  and  is  not  dynamically  deter¬ 
mined  either  by  internal  or  external  preceding 
conditions.  This  freedom  must  not  be  described, 
in  a  merely  negative  manner,  as  independence 
of  empirical  conditions,  for  in  this  case  the  fac¬ 
ulty  of  reason  would  cease  to  be  a  cause  of  phe¬ 
nomena;  but  it  must  be  regarded,  positively,  as 
a  faculty  which  can  spontaneously  originate  a 
series  of  events.  At  the  same  time,  it  must  not 
be  supposed  that  any  beginning  can  take  place 
in  reason;  on  the  contrary,  reason,  as  the  uncon¬ 
ditioned  condition  of  all  action  of  the  will,  ad¬ 
mits  of  no  time-conditions,  although  its  effect 
does  really  begin  in  a  series  of  phenomena — a 
beginning  which  is  not,  however,  absolutely  pri¬ 
mal. 

I  shall  illustrate  this  regulative  principle  of 
reason  by  an  example,  from  its  employment  in 
the  world  of  experience;  proved  it  cannot  be  by 
any  amount  of  experience,  or  by  any  number  of 
facts,  for  such  arguments  cannot  establish  the 
truth  of  transcendental  propositions.  Let  us  take 
a  voluntary  action — for  example,  a  falsehood — 
by  means  of  which  a  man  has  introduced  a  cer¬ 
tain  degree  of  confusion  into  the  social  life  of 
humanity,  which  is  judged  according  to  the  mo¬ 
tives  from  which  it  originated,  and  the  blame  of 
which  and  of  the  evil  consequences  arising  from 
it,  is  imputed  to  the  offender.  We  at  first  pro¬ 
ceed  to  examine  the  empirical  character  of  the 
offence,  and  for  this  purpose  we  endeavour  to 
penetrate  to  the  sources  of  that  character,  such 
as  a  defective  education,  bad  company,  a  shame¬ 
less  and  wicked  disposition,  frivolity,  and  want 
of  reflection — not  forgetting  also  the  occasion¬ 
ing  causes  which  prevailed  at  the  moment  of  the 
transgression.  In  this  the  procedure  is  exactly 
the  same  as  that  pursued  in  the  investigation  of 
the  series  of  causes  which  determine  a  given 
physical  effect.  Now,  although  we  believe  the 
action  to  have  been  determined  by  all  these  cir- 


THE  CRITIQUE 


170 

cumstances,  we  do  not  the  less  blame  the  offend¬ 
er.  We  do  not  blame  him  for  his  unhappy  dispo¬ 
sition,  nor  for  the  circumstances  which  influ¬ 
enced  him,  nay,  not  even  for  his  former  course 
of  life;  for  we  presuppose  that  all  these  consid¬ 
erations  may  be  set  aside,  that  the  series  of  pre¬ 
ceding  conditions  may  be  regarded  as  having 
never  existed,  and  that  the  action  may  be  con¬ 
sidered  as  completely  unconditioned  in  relation 
to  any  state  preceding,  just  as  if  the  agent  com¬ 
menced  with  it  an  entirely  new  series  of  effects. 
Our  blame  of  the  offender  is  grounded  upon  a 
law  of  reason,  which  requires  us  to  regard  this 
faculty  as  a  cause,  which  could  have  and  ought 
to  have  otherwise  determined  the  behaviour  of 
the  culprit,  independently  of  all  empirical  con¬ 
ditions.  This  causality  of  reason  we  do  not  re¬ 
gard  as  a  co-operating  agency,  but  as  complete 
in  itself.  It  matters  not  whether  the  sensuous 
impulses  favoured  or  opposed  the  action  of  this 
causality,  the  offence  is  estimated  according  to 
its  intelligible  character — the  offender  is  decid¬ 
edly  worthy  of  blame,  the  moment  he  utters  a 
falsehood.  It  follows  that  we  regard  reason,  in 
spite  of  the  empirical  conditions  of  the  act,  as 
completely  free,  and  therefore,  as  in  the  present 
case,  culpable. 

The  above  judgement  is  complete  evidence 
that  we  are  accustomed  to  think  that  reason  is 
not  affected  by  sensuous  conditions,  that  in  it  no 
change  takes  place — although  its  phenomena,  in 
other  words,  the  mode  in  which  it  appears  in  its 
effects,  are  subject  to  change — that  in  it  no  pre¬ 
ceding  state  determines  the  following,  and,  con¬ 
sequently,  that  it  does  not  form  a  member  of 
the  series  of  sensuous  conditions  which  necessi¬ 
tate  phenomena  according  to  natural  laws.  Rea¬ 
son  is  present  and  the  same  in  all  human  actions 
and  at  all  times;  but  it  does  not  itself  exist  in 
time,  and  therefore  does  not  enter  upon  any 
state  in  which  it  did  not  formerly  exist.  It  is,  rel¬ 
atively  to  new  states  or  conditions,  determining , 
but  not  determinable.  Hence  we  cannot  ask: 
“Why  did  not  reason  determine  itself  in  a  differ¬ 
ent  manner?”  The  question  ought  to  be  thus 
stated:  “Why  did  not  reason  employ  its  power 
of  causality  to  determine  certain  phenomena  in 
a  different  manner?”  But  this  is  a  question  which 
admits  of  no  answer.  For  a  different  intelligible 
character  would  have  exhibited  a  different  em¬ 
pirical  character;  and,  when  we  say  that,  in  spite 
of  the  course  which  his  whole  former  life  has 
taken,  the  offender  could  have  refrained  from 
uttering  the  falsehood,  this  means  merely  that 
the  act  was  subject  to  the  power  and  authority 
— permissive  or  prohibitive— of  reason.  Now, 


reason  is  not  subject  in  its  causality  to  any  con¬ 
ditions  of  phenomena  or  of  time;  and  a  differ¬ 
ence  in  time  may  produce  a  difference  in  the  re¬ 
lation  of  phenomena  to  each  other — for  these 
are  not  things  and  therefore  not  causes  in  them¬ 
selves — but  it  cannot  produce  any  difference  in 
the  relation  in  which  the  action  stands  to  the  fac¬ 
ulty  of  reason. 

Thus,  then,  in  our  investigation  into  free 
actions  and  the  causal  power  which  produced 
them,  we  arrive  at  an  intelligible  cause,  beyond 
which,  however,  we  cannot  go;  although  we  can 
recognize  that  it  is  free,  that  is,  independent  of 
all  sensuous  conditions,  and  that,  in  this  way,  it 
may  be  the  sensuously  unconditioned  condition 
of  phenomena.  But  for  what  reason  the  intelli¬ 
gible  character  generates  such  and  such  phenom¬ 
ena  and  exhibits  such  and  such  an  empirical 
character  under  certain  circumstances,  it  is  be¬ 
yond  the  power  of  our  reason  to  decide.  The 
question  is  as  much  above  the  power  and  the 
sphere  of  reason  as  the  following  would  be: 
“Why  does  the  transcendental  object  of  our  ex¬ 
ternal  sensuous  intuition  allow  of  no  other  form 
than  that  of  intuition  in  space?”  But  the  prob¬ 
lem,  which  we  were  called  upon  to  solve,  does 
not  require  us  to  entertain  any  such  questions. 
The  problem  was  merely  this — whether  freedom 
and  natural  necessity  can  exist  without  opposi¬ 
tion  in  the  same  action.  To  this  question  we  have 
given  a  sufficient  answer;  for  we  have  shown 
that,  as  the  former  stands  in  a  relation  to  a  dif¬ 
ferent  kind  of  condition  from  those  of  the  lat¬ 
ter,  the  law  of  the  one  does  not  affect  the  law  of 
the  other  and  that,  consequently,  both  can  exist 
together  in  independence  of  and  without  inter¬ 
ference  with  each  other. 

The  reader  must  be  careful  to  remark  that  my 
intention  in  the  above  remarks  has  not  been  to 
prove  the  actual  existence  of  freedom,  as  a  fac¬ 
ulty  in  which  resides  the  cause  of  certain  sensu¬ 
ous  phenomena.  For,  not  to  mention  that  such 
an  argument  would  not  have  a  transcendental 
character,  nor  have  been  limited  to  the  discus¬ 
sion  of  pure  conceptions — all  attempts  at  infer¬ 
ring  from  experience  what  cannot  be  cogitated 
in  accordance  with  its  laws,  must  ever  be  unsuc¬ 
cessful.  Nay,  more,  I  have  not  even  aimed  at 
demonstrating  the  possibility  of  freedom;  for 
this  too  would  have  been  a  vain  endeavour,  inas¬ 
much  as  it  is  beyond  the  power  of  the  mind  to 
cognize  the  possibility  of  a  reality  or  of  a  causal 
power  by  the  aid  of  mere  a  priori  conceptions. 
Freedom  has  been  considered  in  the  foregoing 
remarks  only  as  a  transcendental  idea,  by  means  of 


OF  PURE 

which  reason  aims  at  originating  a  series  of  condi¬ 
tions  in  the  world  of  phenomena  with  the  help 
of  that  which  is  sensuously  unconditioned,  in¬ 
volving  itself,  however,  in  an  antinomy  with  the 
laws  which  itself  prescribes  for  the  conduct  of 
the  understanding.  That  this  antinomy  is  based 
upon  a  mere  illusion,  and  that  nature  and  free¬ 
dom  are  at  least  not  opposed — this  was  the  only 
thing  in  our  power  to  prove,  and  the  question 
which  it  was  our  task  to  solve. 

IV.  Solution  of  the  Cosmological  Idea  of  the 

Totality  of  the  Dependence  of  Phenomenal 
Existences 

In  the  preceding  remarks,  we  considered  the 
changes  in  the  world  of  sense  as  constituting  a 
dynamical  series,  in  which  each  member  is  sub¬ 
ordinated  to  another — as  its  cause.  Our  present 
purpose  is  to  avail  ourselves  of  this  series  of 
states  or  conditions  as  a  guide  to  an  existence 
which  may  be  the  highest  condition  of  all  change¬ 
able  phenomena,  that  is,  to  a  necessary  being. 
Our  endeavour  to  reach,  not  the  unconditioned 
causality,  but  the  unconditioned  existence,  of 
substance.  The  series  before  us  is  therefore  a  se¬ 
ries  of  conceptions, andnotof  intuitions  (in  which 
the  one  intuition  is  the  condition  of  the  other). 

But  it  is  evident  that,  as  all  phenomena  are 
subject  to  change  and  conditioned  in  their  exist¬ 
ence,  the  series  of  dependent  existences  cannot 
embrace  an  unconditioned  member,  the  exist¬ 
ence  of  which  would  be  absolutely  necessary.  It 
follows  that,  if  phenomena  were  things  in  them¬ 
selves,  and — as  an  immediate  consequence  from 
this  supposition — condition  and  conditioned  be¬ 
longed  to  the  same  series  of  phenomena,  the  ex¬ 
istence  of  a  necessary  being,  as  the  condition  of 
the  existence  of  sensuous  phenomena,  would  be 
perfectly  impossible. 

An  important  distinction,  however,  exists  be¬ 
tween  the  dynamical  and  the  mathematical  re¬ 
gress.  The  latter  is  engaged  solely  with  the  com¬ 
bination  of  parts  into  a  whole,  or  with  the  divi¬ 
sion  of  a  whole  into  its  parts;  and  therefore  are 
the  conditions  of  its  series  parts  of  the  series, 
and  to  be  consequently  regarded  as  homogene¬ 
ous,  and  for  this  reason,  as  consisting,  without 
exception,  of  phenomena.  If  the  former  regress, 
on  the  contrary,  the  aim  of  which  is  not  to  es¬ 
tablish  the  possibility  of  an  unconditioned  whole 
consisting  of  given  parts,  or  of  an  unconditioned 
part  of  a  given  whole,  but  to  demonstrate  the 
possibility  of  the  deduction  of  a  certain  state 
from  its  cause,  or  of  the  contingent  existence  of 
substance  from  that  which  exists  necessarily,  it 
is  not  requisite  that  the  condition  should  form 


REASON  1 71 

part  of  an  empirical  series  along  with  the  condi¬ 
tioned. 

In  the  case  of  the  apparent  antinomy  with 
which  we  are  at  present  dealing,  there  exists  a 
way  of  escape  from  the  difficulty;  for  it  is  not 
impossible  that  both  of  the  contradictory  state¬ 
ments  may  be  true  in  different  relations.  All 
sensuous  phenomena  may  be  contingent,  and 
consequently  possess  only  an  empirically  condi¬ 
tioned  existence,  and  yet  there  may  also  exist  a 
non-empirical  condition  of  the  whole  series,  or, 
in  other  words,  a  necessary  being.  For  this  nec¬ 
essary  being,  as  an  intelligible  condition,  would 
not  form  a  member — not  even  the  highest  mem¬ 
ber — of  the  series;  the  whole  world  of  sense 
would  be  left  in  its  empirically  determined  ex¬ 
istence  uninterfered  with  and  uninfluenced.  This 
would  also  form  a  ground  of  distinction  between 
the  modes  of  solution  employed  for  the  third 
and  fourth  antinomies.  For,  while  in  the  consid¬ 
eration  of  freedom  in  the  former  antinomy,  the 
thing  itself — the  cause  ( substantia  phaenome- 
non) — was  regarded  as  belonging  to  the  series  of 
conditions,  and  only  its  causality  to  the  intelligi¬ 
ble  world — we  are  obliged  in  the  present  case  to 
cogitate  this  necessary  being  as  purely  intelligi¬ 
ble  and  as  existing  entirely  apart  from  the  world 
of  sense  (as  an  ens  extramundanum)  ;  for  other¬ 
wise  it  would  be  subject  to  the  phenomenal  law 
of  contingency  and  dependence. 

In  relation  to  the  present  problem,  therefore, 
the  regulative  principle  of  reason  is  that  every¬ 
thing  in  the  sensuous  world  possesses  an  empir¬ 
ically  conditioned  existence — that  no  property 
of  the  sensuous  world  possesses  unconditioned 
necessity — that  we  are  bound  to  expect,  and,  so 
far  as  is  possible,  to  seek  for  the  empirical  con¬ 
dition  of  every  member  in  the  series  of  condi¬ 
tions — and  that  there  is  no  sufficient  reason  to 
justify  us  in  deducing  any  existence  from  a  con¬ 
dition  which  lies  out  of  and  beyond  the  empiri¬ 
cal  series,  or  in  regarding  any  existence  as  inde¬ 
pendent  and  self-subsistent;  although  this  should 
not  prevent  us  from  recognizing  the  possibility 
of  the  whole  series  being  based  upon  a  being 
which  is  intelligible,  and  for  this  reason  free  from 
all  empirical  conditions. 

But  it  has  been  far  from  my  intention,  in 
these  remarks,  to  prove  the  existence  of  this  un¬ 
conditioned  and  necessary  being,  or  even  to  evi¬ 
dence  the  possibility  of  a  purely  intelligible  con¬ 
dition  of  the  existence  of  all  sensuous  phenom¬ 
ena.  As  bounds  were  set  to  reason,  to  prevent  it 
from  leaving  the  guiding  thread  of  empirical 
conditions  and  losing  itself  in  transcendent  the¬ 
ories  which  are  incapable  of  concrete  presenta- 


THE  CRITIQUE 


172 

tion;  so  it  was  my  purpose,  on  the  other  hand, 
to  set  bounds  to  the  law  of  the  purely  empirical 
understanding,  and  to  protest  against  any  at¬ 
tempts  on  its  part  at  deciding  on  the  possibility 
of  things,  or  declaring  the  existence  of  the  intel¬ 
ligible  to  be  impossible,  merely  on  the  ground 
that  it  is  not  available  for  the  explanation  and 
exposition  of  phenomena.  It  has  been  shown,  at 
the  same  time,  that  the  contingency  of  all  the 
phenomena  of  nature  and  their  empirical  condi¬ 
tions  is  quite  consistent  with  the  arbitrary  hy¬ 
pothesis  of  a  necessary,  although  purely  intelli¬ 
gible  condition,  that  no  real  contradiction  exists 
between  them  and  that,  consequently,  both  may 
be  true.  The  existence  of  such  an  absolutely  nec¬ 
essary  being  may  be  impossible;  but  this  can 
never  be  demonstrated  from  the  universal  con¬ 
tingency  and  dependence  of  sensuous  phenome¬ 
na,  nor  from  the  principle  which  forbids  us  to 
discontinue  the  series  at  some  member  of  it,  or 
to  seek  for  its  cause  in  some  sphere  of  existence 
beyond  the  world  of  nature.  Reason  goes  its  way 
in  the  empirical  world,  and  follows,  too,  its  pe¬ 
culiar  path  in  the  sphere  of  the  transcendental. 

The  sensuous  world  contains  nothing  but  phe¬ 
nomena,  which  are  mere  representations,  and  al¬ 
ways  sensuously  conditioned;  things  in  them¬ 
selves  are  not,  and  cannot  be,  objects  to  us.  It  is 
not  to  be  wondered  at,  therefore,  that  we  are  not 
justified  in  leaping  from  some  member  of  an 
empirical  series  beyond  the  world  of  sense,  as  if 
empirical  representations  were  things  in  them¬ 
selves,  existing  apart  from  their  transcendental 
ground  in  the  human  mind,  and  the  cause  of 
whose  existence  may  be  sought  out  of  the  em¬ 
pirical  series.  This  would  certainly  be  the  case 
with  contingent  things;  but  it  cannot  be  with 
mere  representations  of  things,  the  contingency 
of  which  is  itself  merely  a  phenomenon  and  can 
relate  to  no  other  regress  than  that  which  de¬ 
termines  phenomena,  that  is,  the  empirical.  But 
to  cogitate  an  intelligible  ground  of  phenomena, 
as  free,  moreover,  from  the  contingency  of  the 
latter,  conflicts  neither  with  the  unlimited  na¬ 
ture  of  the  empirical  regress,  nor  with  the  com¬ 
plete  contingency  of  phenomena.  And  the  dem¬ 
onstration  of  this  was  the  only  thing  necessary 
for  the  solution  of  this  apparent  antinomy.  For 
if  the  condition  of  every  conditioned — as  re¬ 
gards  its  existence — is  sensuous,  and  for  this  rea¬ 
son  a  part  of  the  same  series,  it  must  be  itself 
conditioned,  as  was  shown  in  the  antithesis  of 
the  fourth  antinomy.  The  embarrassments  into 
which  a  reason,  which  postulates  the  uncondi¬ 
tioned,  necessarily  falls,  must,  therefore,  con¬ 
tinue  to  exist;  or  the  unconditioned  must  be 


placed  in  the  sphere  of  the  intelligible.  In  this 
way,  its  necessity  does  not  require,  nor  does  it 
even  permit,  the  presence  of  an  empirical  con¬ 
dition:  and  it  is,  consequently,  unconditionally 
necessary. 

The  empirical  employment  of  reason  is  not 
affected  by  the  assumption  of  a  purely  intelligible 
being;  it  continues  its  operations  on  the  princi¬ 
ple  of  the  contingency  of  all  phenomena,  pro¬ 
ceeding  from  empirical  conditions  to  still  higher 
and  higher  conditions,  themselves  empirical.  Just 
as  little  does  this  regulative  principle  exclude  the 
assumption  of  an  intelligible  cause,  when  the 
question  regards  merely  the  pure  employment 
of  reason — in  relation  to  ends  or  aims.  For,  in 
this  case,  an  intelligible  cause  signifies  merely 
the  transcendental  and  to  us  unknown  ground  of 
the  possibility  of  sensuous  phenomena,  and  its 
existence,  necessary  and  independent  of  all  sen¬ 
suous  conditions,  is  not  inconsistent  with  the 
contingency  of  phenomena,  or  with  the  unlimit¬ 
ed  possibility  of  regress  which  exists  in  the  se¬ 
ries  of  empirical  conditions. 

Concluding  Remarks  on  the  Antinomy  of  Pure 
Reason 

So  long  as  the  object  of  our  rational  concep¬ 
tions  is  the  totality  of  conditions  in  the  world 
of  phenomena,  and  the  satisfaction,  from  this 
source,  of  the  requirements  of  reason,  so  long 
are  our  ideas  transcendental  and  cosmological. 
But  when  we  set  the  unconditioned — which  is 
the  aim  of  all  our  inquiries — in  a  sphere  which 
lies  out  of  the  world  of  sense  and  possible  ex¬ 
perience,  our  ideas  become  transcendent.  They 
are  then  not  merely  serviceable  towards  the 
completion  of  the  exercise  of  reason  (which  re¬ 
mains  an  idea,  never  executed,  but  always  to  be 
pursued) ;  they  detach  themselves  completely 
from  experience  and  construct  for  themselves 
objects,  the  material  of  which  has  not  been  pre¬ 
sented  by  experience,  and  the  objective  reality 
of  which  is  not  based  upon  the  completion  of 
the  empirical  series,  but  upon  pure  a  priori  con¬ 
ceptions.  The  intelligible  object  of  these  tran¬ 
scendent  ideas  may  be  conceded,  as  a  transcen¬ 
dental  object.  But  we  cannot  cogitate  it  as  a 
thing  determinable  by  certain  distinct  predicates 
relating  to  its  internal  nature,  for  it  has  no  con¬ 
nection  with  empirical  conceptions;  nor  are  we 
justified  in  affirming  the  existence  of  any  such 
object.  It  is,  consequently,  a  mere  product  of 
the  mind  alone.  Of  all  the  cosmological  ideas, 
however,  it  is  that  occasioning  the  fourth  antin¬ 
omy  which  compels  us  to  venture  upon  this  step. 
For  the  existence  of  phenomena,  always  condi- 


OF  PURE  REASON 


tioned  and  never  self-subsistent,  requires  us  to 
look  for  an  object  different  from  phenomena — 
an  intelligible  object,  with  which  all  contingency 
must  cease.  But,  as  we  have  allowed  ourselves 
to  assume  the  existence  of  a  self-subsistent  real¬ 
ity  out  of  the  field  of  experience,  and  are  there¬ 
fore  obliged  to  regard  phenomena  as  merely  a 
contingent  mode  of  representing  intelligible  ob¬ 
jects  employed  by  beings  which  are  themselves 
intelligences — no  other  course  remains  for  us 
than  to  follow  analogy  and  employ  the  same  mode 
in  forming  some  conception  of  intelligible  things, 
of  which  we  have  not  the  least  knowledge,  which 
nature  taught  us  to  use  in  the  formation  of 
empirical  conceptions.  Experience  made  us  ac¬ 
quainted  with  the  contingent.  But  we  are  at  pres¬ 
ent  engaged  in  the  discussion  of  things  which  are 
not  objects  of  experience;  and  must,  therefore, 
deduce  our  knowledge  of  them  from  that  which 
is  necessary  absolutely  and  in  itself,  that  is, 
from  pure  conceptions.  Hence  the  first  step  which 
we  take  out  of  the  world  of  sense  obliges  us  to 
begin  our  system  of  new  cognition  with  the  in¬ 
vestigation  of  a  necessary  being,  and  to  deduce 
from  our  conceptions  of  it  all  our  conceptions 
of  intelligible  things.  This  we  propose  to  attempt 
in  the  following  chapter. 

Chapter  III.  The  Ideal  of  Pure  Reason 

Section  I.  Of  the  Ideal  in  General 

We  have  seen  that  pure  conceptions  do  not  pre¬ 
sent  objects  to  the  mind,  except  under  sensuous 
conditions;  because  the  conditions  of  objective 
reality  do  not  exist  in  these  conceptions,  which 
contain,  in  fact,  nothing  but  the  mere  form  of 
thought.  They  may,  however,  when  applied  to 
phenomena,  be  presented  in  concreto;  for  it  is 
phenomena  that  present  to  them  the  materials 
for  the  formation  of  empirical  conceptions,  which 
are  nothing  more  than  concrete  forms  of  the 
conceptions  of  the  understanding.  But  ideas  are 
still  further  removed  from  objective  reality  than 
categories ;  for  no  phenomenon  can  ever  present 
them  to  the  human  mind  in  concreto.  They  con¬ 
tain  a  certain  perfection,  attainable  by  no  possi¬ 
ble  empirical  cognition ;  and  they  give  to  reason 
a  systematic  unity,  to  which  the  unity  of  experi¬ 
ence  attempts  to  approximate,  but  can  never 
completely  attain. 

But  still  further  removed  than  the  idea  from 
objective  reality  is  the  Ideal by  which  term  I 
understand  the  idea,  not  in  concretoy  but  in  in - 
dividuo — as  an  individual  thing,  determinable 
or  determined  by  the  idea  alone.  The  idea  of  hu¬ 
manity  in  its  complete  perfection  supposes  not 


only  the  advancement  of  all  the  powers  and  fac¬ 
ulties,  which  constitute  our  conception  of  hu¬ 
man  nature,  to  a  complete  attainment  of  their 
final  aims,  but  also  everything  which  is  requisite 
for  the  complete  determination  of  the  idea;  for 
of  all  contradictory  predicates,  only  one  can  con¬ 
form  with  the  idea  of  the  perfect  man.  What  I 
have  termed  an  ideal  was  in  Plato’s  philosophy 
an  idea  of  the  divine  mind — an  individual  object 
present  to  its  pure  intuition,  the  most  perfect  of 
every  kind  of  possible  beings,  and  the  archetype 
of  all  phenomenal  existences. 

Without  rising  to  these  speculative  heights, 
we  are  bound  to  confess  that  human  reason  con¬ 
tains  not  only  ideas,  but  ideals,  which  possess, 
not,  like  those  of  Plato,  creative,  but  certainly 
practical  power — as  regulative  principles,  and 
form  the  basis  of  the  perfectibility  of  certain 
actions.  Moral  conceptions  are  not  perfectly 
pure  conceptions  of  reason,  because  an  empiri¬ 
cal  element — of  pleasure  or  pain — lies  at  the 
foundation  of  them.  In  relation,  however,  to  the 
principle,  whereby  reason  sets  bounds  to  a  free¬ 
dom  which  is  in  itself  without  law,  and  conse¬ 
quently  when  we  attend  merely  to  their  form, 
they  may  be  considered  as  pure  conceptions  of 
reason.  Virtue  and  wisdom  in  their  perfect  pu¬ 
rity  are  ideas.  But  the  wise  man  of  the  Stoics  is 
an  ideal,  that  is  to  say,  a  human  being  existing 
only  in  thought  and  in  complete  conformity  with 
the  idea  of  wisdom.  As  the  idea  provides  a  rule, 
so  the  ideal  serves  as  an  archetype  for  the  per¬ 
fect  and  complete  determination  of  the  copy. 
Thus  the  conduct  of  this  wise  and  divine  man 
serves  us  as  a  standard  of  action,  with  which  we 
may  compare  and  judge  ourselves,  which  may 
help  us  to  reform  ourselves,  although  the  per¬ 
fection  it  demands  can  never  be  attained  by  us. 
Although  we  cannot  concede  objective  reality 
to  these  ideals,  they  are  not  to  be  considered  as 
chimeras;  on  the  contrary,  they  provide  reason 
with  a  standard,  which  enables  it  to  estimate,  by 
comparison,  the  degree  of  incompleteness  in  the 
objects  presented  to  it.  But  to  aim  at  realizing 
the  ideal  in  an  example  in  the  world  of  experi¬ 
ence — to  describe,  for  instance,  the  character  of 
the  perfectly  wise  man  in  a  romance — is  im¬ 
practicable.  Nay  more,  there  is  something  ab¬ 
surd  in  the  attempt;  and  the  result  must  be  lit¬ 
tle  edifying,  as  the  natural  limitations,  which  are 
continually  breaking  in  upon  the  perfection  and 
completeness  of  the  idea,  destroy  the  illusion  in 
the  story  and  throw  an  air  of  suspicion  even  on 
what  is  good  in  the  idea,  which  hence  appears 
fictitious  and  unreal. 

Such  is  the  constitution  of  the  ideal  of  reason, 


THE  CRITIQUE 


174 

which  is  always  based  upon  determinate  concep¬ 
tions,  and  serves  as  a  rule  and  a  model  for  limi¬ 
tation  or  of  criticism.  Very  different  is  the  na¬ 
ture  of  the  ideals  of  the  imagination.  Of  these 
it  is  impossible  to  present  an  intelligible  concep¬ 
tion;  they  are  a  kind  of  monogram ,  drawn  ac¬ 
cording  to  no  determinate  rule,  and  forming 
rather  a  vague  picture — the  production  of  many 
diverse  experiences — than  a  determinate  image. 
Such  are  the  ideals  which  painters  and  physiog¬ 
nomists  profess  to  have  in  their  minds,  and 
which  can  serve  neither  as  a  model  for  produc¬ 
tion  nor  as  a  standard  for  appreciation.  They 
may  be  termed,  though  improperly,  sensuous 
ideals,  as  they  are  declared  to  be  models  of  cer¬ 
tain  possible  empirical  intuitions.  They  cannot, 
however,  furnish  rules  or  standards  for  explana¬ 
tion  or  examination. 

In  its  ideals,  reason  aims  at  complete  and  per¬ 
fect  determination  according  to  a  priori  rules; 
and  hence  it  cogitates  an  object,  which  must 
be  completely  determinable  in  conformity  with 
principles,  although  all  empirical  conditions  are 
absent,  and  the  conception  of  the  object  is  on 
this  account  transcendent. 

Section  II.  Of  the  Transcendental  Ideal  ( Pro - 
totypon  Trancendentale ) 

Every  conception  is,  in  relation  to  that  which  is 
not  contained  in  it.  undetermined  and  subject  to 
the  principle  of  deter minability.  This  principle 
is  that,  of  every  two  contradictorily  opposed 
predicates,  only  one  can  belong  to  a  conception. 
It  is  a  purely  logical  principle,  itself  based  upon 
the  principle  of  contradiction;  inasmuch  as  it 
makes  complete  abstraction  of  the  content  and 
attends  merely  to  the  logical  form  of  the  cogni¬ 
tion. 

But  again,  everything,  as  regards  its  possibil¬ 
ity,  is  also  subject  to  the  principle  of  complete 
determination,  according  to  which  one  of  all  the 
possible  contradictory  predicates  of  things  must 
belong  to  it.  This  principle  is  not  based  merely 
upon  that  of  contradiction;  for,  in  addition  to 
the  relation  between  two  contradictory  predi¬ 
cates,  it  regards  everything  as  standing  in  a  re¬ 
lation  to  the  sum  of  possibilities,  as  the  sum- 
total  of  all  predicates  of  things,  and.  while  pre¬ 
supposing  this  sum  as  an  a  priori  condition,  pre¬ 
sents  to  the  mind  everything  as  receiving  the 
possibility  of  its  individual  existence  from  the 
relation  it  bears  to.  and  the  share  it  possesses  in, 
the  aforesaid  sum  of  possibilities.1  The  princi- 

1  Thus  this  principle  declares  everything  to  possess  a 
relation  to  a  common  correlate — the  sum-total  of  possi¬ 
bility,  which,  if  discovered  to  exist  in  the  idea  of  one 


pie  of  complete  determination  relates  therefore 
to  the  content  and  not  to  the  logical  form.  It  is 
the  principle  of  the  synthesis  of  all  the  predi¬ 
cates  which  are  required  to  constitute  the  com¬ 
plete  conception  of  a  thing,  and  not  a  mere  princi¬ 
ple  of  analytical  representation,  which  enounces 
that  one  of  two  contradictory  predicates  must 
belong  to  a  conception.  It  contains,  moreover, 
a  transcendental  presupposition — that,  namely, 
of  the  material  for  all  possibility ,  which  must 
contain  a  priori  the  data  for  this  or  that  particu¬ 
lar  possibility. 

The  proposition.  Everything  which  exists  is 
completely  determined ,  means  not  only  that  one 
of  every  pair  of  given  contradictory  attributes, 
but  that  one  of  all  possible  attributes,  is  always 
predicable  of  the  thing;  in  it  the  predicates  are 
not  merely  compared  logically  with  each  other, 
but  the  thing  itself  is  transcendentally  com¬ 
pared  with  the  sum-total  of  all  possible  predi¬ 
cates.  The  proposition  is  equivalent  to  saying: 
“To  attain  to  a  complete  knowledge  of  a  thing, 
it  is  necessary  to  possess  a  knowledge  of  every¬ 
thing  that  is  possible,  and  to  determine  it  there¬ 
by  in  a  positive  or  negative  manner.”  The 
conception  of  complete  determination  is  conse¬ 
quently  a  conception  which  cannot  be  presented 
in  its  totality  in  concreto .  and  is  therefore  based 
upon  an  idea,  which  has  its  seat  in  the  reason — 
the  faculty  which  prescribes  to  the  understand¬ 
ing  the  laws  of  its  harmonious  and  perfect  exer¬ 
cise. 

Xow,  although  this  idea  of  the  sum-total  of 
all  possibility,  in  so  far  as  it  forms  the  condition 
of  the  complete  determination  of  everything,  is 
itself  undetermined  in  relation  to  the  predicates 
which  may  constitute  this  sum-total,  and  we 
cogitate  in  it  merely  the  sum-total  of  all  possible 
predicates — we  nevertheless  find,  upon  closer 
examination,  that  this  idea,  as  a  primitive  con¬ 
ception  of  the  mind,  excludes  a  large  number  of 
predicates — those  deduced  and  those  irreconcil¬ 
able  with  others,  and  that  it  is  evolved  as  a  con¬ 
ception  completely  determined  a  priori.  Thus  it 
becomes  the  conception  of  an  individual  object, 
which  is  completely  determined  by  and  through 
the  mere  idea,  and  must  consequently  be  termed 
an  ideal  of  pure  reason. 

When  we  consider  all  possible  predicates,  not 
merely  logically,  but  transcendentally,  that  is  to 

individual  thing,  would  establish  the  affinity  of  all  pos¬ 
sible  things,  from  the  identity  of  the  ground  of  their 
complete  determination.  The  deter  minability  of  every 
conception  is  subordinate  to  the  universality  ( Allge - 
meinheit,  universalitas )  of  the  principle  of  excluded 
middle;  the  determination  of  a  thing  to  the  totality 
( Allheit ,  universitas )  of  all  possible  predicates. 


OF  PURE 

say,  with  reference  to  the  content  which  may  be 
cogitated  as  existing  in  them  a  priori ,  we  shall 
find  that  some  indicate  a  being,  others  merely  a 
non-being.  The  logical  negation  expressed  in  the 
word  not  does  not  properly  belong  to  a  concep¬ 
tion,  but  only  to  the  relation  of  one  conception 
to  another  in  a  judgement,  and  is  consequently 
quite  insufficient  to  present  to  the  mind  the  con¬ 
tent  of  a  conception.  The  expression  not  mortal 
does  not  indicate  that  a  non-being  is  cogitated  in 
the  object;  it  does  not  concern  the  content  at 
all.  A  transcendental  negation,  on  the  contrary, 
indicates  non-being  in  itself,  and  is  opposed  to 
transcendental  affirmation,  the  conception  of 
which  of  itself  expresses  a  being.  Hence  this  af¬ 
firmation  indicates  a  reality,  because  in  and 
through  it  objects  are  considered  to  be  some¬ 
thing — to  be  things;  while  the  opposite  negation, 
on  the  other  hand,  indicates  a  mere  want,  or 
privation,  or  absence,  and,  where  such  negations 
alone  are  attached  to  a  representation,  the  non¬ 
existence  of  anything  corresponding  to  the  rep¬ 
resentation. 

Now  a  negation  cannot  be  cogitated  as  de¬ 
termined,  without  cogitating  at  the  same  time 
the  opposite  affirmation.  The  man  born  blind 
has  not  the  least  notion  of  darkness,  because  he 
has  none  of  light;  the  vagabond  knows  nothing 
of  poverty,  because  he  has  never  known  what  it 
is  to  be  in  comfort;1  the  ignorant  man  has  no 
conception  of  his  ignorance,  because  he  has  no 
conception  of  knowledge.  All  conceptions  of 
negatives  are  accordingly  derived  or  deduced 
conceptions;  and  realities  contain  the  data ,  and, 
so  to  speak,  the  material  or  transcendental  con¬ 
tent  of  the  possibility  and  complete  determina¬ 
tion  of  all  things. 

If,  therefore,  a  transcendental  substratum 
lies  at  the  foundation  of  the  complete  determi¬ 
nation  of  things — a  substratum  which  is  to  form 
the  fund  from  which  all  possible  predicates  of 
things  are  to  be  supplied,  this  substratum  can¬ 
not  be  anything  else  than  the  idea  of  a  sum-total 
of  reality  ( omnitudo  realitatis).  In  this  view, 
negations  are  nothing  but  limitations — a  term 
which  could  not,  with  propriety,  be  applied  to 
them,  if  the  unlimited  (the  all)  did  not  form 
the  true  basis  of  our  conception. 

This  conception  of  a  sum-total  of  reality  is 

1  The  investigations  and  calculations  of  astronomers 
have  taught  us  much  that  is  wonderful;  but  the  most 
important  lesson  we  have  received  from  them  is  the  dis¬ 
covery  of  the  abyss  of  our  ignorance  in  relation  to  the 
universe — an  ignorance  the  magnitude  of  which  reason, 
without  the  information  thus  derived,  could  never  have 
conceived.  This  discovery  of  our  deficiencies  must  pro¬ 
duce  a  great  change  in  the  determination  of  the  aims 
of  human  reason. 


REASON  175 

the  conception  of  a  thing  in  itself ,  regarded  as 
completely  determined;  and  the  conception  of 
an  ens  realissimum  is  the  conception  of  an  in¬ 
dividual  being,  inasmuch  as  it  is  determined  by 
that  predicate  of  all  possible  contradictory  pred¬ 
icates,  which  indicates  and  belongs  to  being.  It 
is,  therefore,  a  transcendental  ideal  which  forms 
the  basis  of  the  complete  determination  of 
everything  that  exists,  and  is  the  highest  ma¬ 
terial  condition  of  its  possibility — a  condition  on 
which  must  rest  the  cogitation  of  all  objects  with 
respect  to  their  content.  Nay,  more,  this  ideal  is 
the  only  proper  ideal  of  which  the  human  mind 
is  capable;  because  in  this  case  alone  a  general 
conception  of  a  thing  is  completely  determined 
by  and  through  itself,  and  cognized  as  the  repre¬ 
sentation  of  an  individuum. 

The  logical  determination  of  a  conception  is 
based  upon  a  disjunctive  syllogism,  the  major  of 
which  contains  the  logical  division  of  the  extent 
of  a  general  conception,  the  minor  limits  this  ex¬ 
tent  to  a  certain  part,  while  the  conclusion  de¬ 
termines  the  conception  by  this  part.  The  gen¬ 
eral  conception  of  a  reality  cannot  be  divided  a 
priori ,  because,  without  the  aid  of  experience, 
we  cannot  know  any  determinate  kinds  of  real¬ 
ity,  standing  under  the  former  as  the  genus.  The 
transcendental  principle  of  the  complete  deter¬ 
mination  of  all  things  is  therefore  merely  the 
representation  of  the  sum-total  of  all  reality;  it 
is  not  a  conception  which  is  the  genus  of  all 
predicates  under  itself ,  but  one  which  compre¬ 
hends  them  all  within  itself.  The  complete  de¬ 
termination  of  a  thing  is  consequently  based  up¬ 
on  the  limitation  of  this  total  of  reality,  so  much 
being  predicated  of  the  thing,  while  all  that  re¬ 
mains  over  is  excluded — a  procedure  which  is  in 
exact  agreement  with  that  of  the  disjunctive 
syllogism  and  the  determination  of  the  objects 
in  the  conclusion  by  one  of  the  members  of  the 
division.  It  follows  that  reason,  in  laying  the 
transcendental  ideal  at  the  foundation  of  its  de¬ 
termination  of  all  possible  things,  takes  a  course 
in  exact  analogy  with  that  which  it  pursues 
in  disjunctive  syllogisms — a  proposition  which 
formed  the  basis  of  the  systematic  division  of 
all  transcendental  ideas,  according  to  which  they 
are  produced  in  complete  parallelism  with  the 
three  modes  of  syllogistic  reasoning  employed 
by  the  human  mind.2 

It  is  self-evident  that  reason,  in  cogitating  the 
necessary  complete  determination  of  things, 
does  not  presuppose  the  existence  of  a  being 
corresponding  to  its  ideal,  but  merely  the  idea 
of  the  ideal — for  the  purpose  of  deducing  from 

2  See  pages  115  and  120. 


176  THE  CRITIQUE 


the  unconditioned  totality  of  complete  determi¬ 
nation,  the  conditioned,  that  is,  the  totality  of 
limited  things.  The  ideal  is  therefore  the  proto¬ 
type  of  all  things,  which,  as  defective  copies 
( ectypa ),  receive  from  it  the  material  of  their 
possibility,  and  approximate  to  it  more  or  less, 
though  it  is  impossible  that  they  can  ever  attain 
to  its  perfection. 

The  possibility  of  things  must  therefore  be 
regarded  as  derived — except  that  of  the  thing 
which  contains  in  itself  all  reality,  which  must 
be  considered  to  be  primitive  and  original.  For 
all  negations — and  they  are  the  only  predicates 
by  means  of  which  all  other  things  can  be  dis¬ 
tinguished  from  the  ens  realissimum — are  mere 
limitations  of  a  greater  and  a  higher — nay,  the 
highest  reality;  and  they  consequently  presup¬ 
pose  this  reality,  and  are,  as  regards  their  con¬ 
tent,  derived  from  it.  The  manifold  nature  of 
things  is  only  an  infinitely  various  mode  of  limit¬ 
ing  the  conception  of  the  highest  reality,  which 
is  their  common  substratum;  just  as  all  figures 
are  possible  only  as  different  modes  of  limiting 
infinite  space.  The  object  of  the  ideal  of  reason 
— an  object  existing  only  in  reason  itself — is 
also  termed  the  primal  being  ( ens  originarium) ; 
as  having  no  existence  superior  to  him,  the  su¬ 
preme  being  ( ens  summnm) ;  and  as  being  the 
condition  of  all  other  beings,  which  rank  under 
it,  the  being  of  all  beings  ( ens  entinm).  But 
none  of  these  terms  indicate  the  objective  rela¬ 
tion  of  an  actually  existing  object  to  other 
things,  but  merely  that  of  an  idea  to  conceptions ; 
and  all  our  investigations  into  this  subject  still 
leave  us  in  perfect  uncertainty  with  regard  to 
the  existence  of  this  being. 

A  primal  being  cannot  be  said  to  consist  of 
many  other  beings  with  an  existence  which  is 
derivative,  for  the  latter  presuppose  the  former, 
and  therefore  cannot  be  constitutive  parts  of  it. 
It  follows  that  the  ideal  of  the  primal  being  must 
be  cogitated  as  simple. 

The  deduction  of  the  possibility  of  all  other 
things  from  this  primal  being  cannot,  strictly 
speaking,  be  considered  as  a  limitation,  or  as  a 
kind  of  division  of  its  reality;  for  this  would  be 
regarding  the  primal  being  as  a  mere  aggregate 
— which  has  been  shown  to  be  impossible,  al¬ 
though  it  was  so  represented  in  our  first  rough 
sketch.  The  highest  reality  must  be  regarded 
rather  as  the  ground  than  as  the  sum-total  of  the 
possibility  of  all  things,  and  the  manifold  nature 
of  things  be  based,  not  upon  the  limitation  of 
the  primal  being  itself,  but  upon  the  complete 
series  of  effects  which  flow  from  it.  And  thus  all 
our  powers  of  sense,  as  well  as  all  phenomenal 


reality,  may  be  with  propriety  regarded  as  be¬ 
longing  to  this  series  of  effects,  while  they  could 
not  have  formed  parts  of  the  idea,  considered  as 
an  aggregate.  Pursuing  this  track,  and  hyposta- 
tizing  this  idea,  we  shall  find  ourselves  authorized 
to  determine  our  notion  of  the  Supreme  Being 
by  means  of  the  mere  conception  of  a  highest 
reality,  as  one,  simple,  all-sufficient,  eternal,  and 
so  on — in  one  word,  to  determine  it  in  its  un¬ 
conditioned  completeness  by  the  aid  of  every 
possible  predicate.  The  conception  of  such  a 
being  is  the  conception  of  God  in  its  transcen¬ 
dental  sense,  and  thus  the  ideal  of  pure  rea¬ 
son  is  the  object-matter  of  a  transcendental 
theology. 

But,  by  such  an  employment  of  the  transcen¬ 
dental  idea,  we  should  be  overstepping  the  limits 
of  its  validity  and  purpose.  For  reason  placed  it, 
as  the  conception  of  all  reality,  at  the  basis  of 
the  complete  determination  of  things,  without 
requiring  that  this  conception  be  regarded  as 
the  conception  of  an  objective  existence.  Such 
an  existence  would  be  purely  fictitious,  and  the 
hypostatizing  of  the  content  of  the  idea  into  an 
ideal,  as  an  individual  being,  is  a  step  perfectly 
unauthorized.  Nay,  more,  we  are  not  even  called 
upon  to  assume  the  possibility  of  such  an  hy¬ 
pothesis,  as  none  of  the  deductions  drawn  from 
such  an  ideal  would  affect  the  complete  deter¬ 
mination  of  things  in  general — for  the  sake  of 
which  alone  is  the  idea  necessary. 

It  is  not  sufficient  to  circumscribe  the  pro¬ 
cedure  and  the  dialectic  of  reason;  we  must  also 
endeavour  to  discover  the  sources  of  this  dialec¬ 
tic,  that  we  may  have  it  in  our  power  to  give  a 
rational  explanation  of  this  illusion,  as  a  phe¬ 
nomenon  of  the  human  mind.  For  the  ideal,  of 
which  we  are  at  present  speaking,  is  based,  not 
upon  an  arbitrary,  but  upon  a  natural,  idea.  The 
question  hence  arises:  How  happens  it  that  rea¬ 
son  regards  the  possibility  of  all  things  as  de¬ 
duced  from  a  single  possibility,  that,  to  wit,  of 
the  highest  reality,  and  presupposes  this  as  exist¬ 
ing  in  an  individual  and  primal  being? 

The  answer  is  ready;  it  is  at  once  presented  by 
the  procedure  of  transcendental  analytic.  The 
possibility  of  sensuous  objects  is  a  relation  of 
these  objects  to  thought,  in  which  something 
(the  empirical  form)  may  be  cogitated  a  priori; 
while  that  which  constitutes  the  matter — the 
reality  of  the  phenomenon  (that  element  which 
corresponds  to  sensation) — must  be  given  from 
without,  as  otherwise  it  could  not  even  be  cog¬ 
itated  by,  nor  could  its  possibility  be  presentable 
to  the  mind.  Now,  a  sensuous  object  is  com¬ 
pletely  determined,  when  it  has  been  compared 


OF  PURE 

with  all  phenomenal  predicates,  and  represented 
by  means  of  these  either  positively  or  negative¬ 
ly.  But,  as  that  which  constitutes  the  thing  it¬ 
self — the  real  in  a  phenomenon,  must  be  given, 
and  that,  in  which  the  real  of  all  phenomena  is 
given,  is  experience,  one,  sole,  and  all-embracing 
— the  material  of  the  possibility  of  all  sensuous 
objects  must  be  presupposed  as  given  in  a  whole, 
and  it  is  upon  the  limitation  of  this  whole  that 
the  possibility  of  all  empirical  objects,  their  dis¬ 
tinction  from  each  other  and  their  complete  de¬ 
termination,  are  based.  Now,  no  other  objects 
are  presented  to  us  besides  sensuous  objects,  and 
these  can  be  given  only  in  connection  with  a 
possible  experience;  it  follows  that  a  thing  is 
not  an  object  to  us,  unless  it  presupposes  the 
whole  or  sum-total  of  empirical  reality  as  the 
condition  of  its  possibility.  Now,  a  natural  il¬ 
lusion  leads  us  to  consider  this  principle,  which 
is  valid  only  of  sensuous  objects,  as  valid  with 
regard  to  things  in  general.  And  thus  we  are  in¬ 
duced  to  hold  the  empirical  principle  of  our  con¬ 
ceptions  of  the  possibility  of  things,  as  phenom¬ 
ena,  by  leaving  out  this  limitative  condition,  to 
be  a  transcendental  principle  of  the  possibility 
of  things  in  general. 

We  proceed  afterwards  to  hypostatize  this 
idea  of  the  sum-total  of  all  reality,  by  changing 
the  distributive  unity  of  the  empirical  exercise 
of  the  understanding  into  the  collective  unity  of 
an  empirical  whole — a  dialectical  illusion,  and 
by  cogitating  this  wThole  or  sum  of  experience  as 
an  individual  thing,  containing  in  itself  all  em¬ 
pirical  reality.  This  individual  thing  or  being  is 
then,  by  means  of  the  above-mentioned  tran¬ 
scendental  subreption,  substituted  for  our  no¬ 
tion  of  a  thing  which  stands  at  the  head  of  the 
possibility  of  all  things,  the  real  conditions  of 
whose  complete  determination  it  presents.1 

Section  III.  Of  the  Arguments  employed  by 
Speculative  Reason  in  Proof  of  the  Existence 
of  a  Supreme  Being 

Notwithstanding  the  pressing  necessity  which 
reason  feels,  to  form  some  presupposition  that 
shall  serve  the  understanding  as  a  proper  basis 
for  the  complete  determination  of  its  concep- 

1  This  ideal  of  the  ens  realissimum — although  merely 
a  mental  representation — is  first  objectivizcd,  that  is, 
has  an  objective  existence  attributed  to  it,  then  hypos- 
tatized,  and  finally,  by  the  natural  progress  of  reason 
to  the  completion  of  unity,  personified ,  as  we  shall  show 
presently.  For  the  regulative  unity  of  experience  is  not 
based  upon  phenomena  themselves,  but  upon  the  con¬ 
nection  of  the  variety  of  phenomena  by  the  understand¬ 
ing  in  a  consciousness ,  and  thus  the  unity  of  the  su¬ 
preme  reality  and  the  complete  determinability  of  all 
things,  seem  to  reside  in  a  supreme  understanding,  and, 
consequently,  in  a  conscious  intelligence. 


REASON  177 

tions,  the  idealistic  and  factitious  nature  of  such 
a  presupposition  is  too  evident  to  allow  reason 
for  a  moment  to  persuade  itself  into  a  belief  of 
the  objective  existence  of  a  mere  creation  of  its 
own  thought.  But  there  are  other  considerations 
which  compel  reason  to  seek  out  some  resting- 
place  in  the  regress  from  the  conditioned  to  the 
unconditioned,  which  is  not  given  as  an  actual 
existence  from  the  mere  conception  of  it,  al¬ 
though  it  alone  can  give  completeness  to  the 
series  of  conditions.  And  this  is  the  natural 
course  of  every  human  reason,  even  of  the  most 
uneducated,  although  the  path  at  first  entered  it 
does  not  always  continue  to  follow.  It  does  not 
begin  from  conceptions,  but  from  common  ex¬ 
perience,  and  requires  a  basis  in  actual  existence. 
But  this  basis  is  insecure,  unless  it  rests  upon 
the  immovable  rock  of  the  absolutely  neces¬ 
sary.  And  this  foundation  is  itself  unworthy  of 
trust,  if  it  leave  under  and  above  it  empty  space, 
if  it  do  not  fill  all,  and  leave  no  room  for  a  why 
or  a  wherefore ,  if  it  be  not,  in  one  word,  infinite 
in  its  reality. 

If  we  admit  the  existence  of  some  one  thing, 
whatever  it  may  be,  we  must  also  admit  that 
there  is  something  which  exists  necessarily .  For 
what  is  contingent  exists  only  under  the  condi¬ 
tion  of  some  other  thing,  which  is  its  cause ;  and 
from  this  we  must  go  on  to  conclude  the  exist¬ 
ence  of  a  cause  which  is  not  contingent,  and 
which  consequently  exists  necessarily  and  un¬ 
conditionally.  Such  is  the  argument  by  which 
reason  justifies  its  advances  towards  a  primal 
being. 

Now  reason  looks  round  for  the  conception 
of  a  being  that  may  be  admitted,  without  incon¬ 
sistency,  to  be  worthy  of  the  attribute  of  abso¬ 
lute  necessity,  not  for  the  purpose  of  inferring 
a  priori,  from  the  conception  of  such  a  being,  its 
objective  existence  (for  if  reason  allowed  itself 
to  take  this  course,  it  would  not  require  a  basis 
in  given  and  actual  existence,  but  merely  the 
support  of  pure  conceptions),  but  for  the  pur¬ 
pose  of  discovering,  among  all  our  conceptions 
of  possible  things,  that  conception  which  pos¬ 
sesses  no  element  inconsistent  with  the  idea  of 
absolute  necessity.  For  that  there  must  be  some 
absolutely  necessary  existence,  it  regards  as  a 
truth  already  established.  Now,  if  it  can  remove 
every  existence  incapable  of  supporting  the  at¬ 
tribute  of  absolute  necessity,  excepting  one — 
this  must  be  the  absolutely  necessary  being, 
whether  its  necessity  is  comprehensible  by  us. 
that  is,  deducible  from  the  conception  of  it 
alone,  or  not. 

Now  that,  the  conception  of  which  contains  a 


178  THE  CRITIQUE 


therefore  to  every  wherefore ,  which  is  not  de¬ 
fective  in  any  respect  whatever,  which  is  all- 
sufficient  as  a  condition,  seems  to  be  the  being 
of  which  we  can  justly  predicate  absolute  neces¬ 
sity — for  this  reason,  that,  possessing  the  con¬ 
ditions  of  all  that  is  possible,  it  does  not  and 
cannot  itself  require  any  condition.  And  thus  it 
satisfies,  in  one  respect  at  least,  the  require¬ 
ments  of  the  conception  of  absolute  necessity. 
In  this  view,  it  is  superior  to  all  other  concep¬ 
tions,  which,  as  deficient  and  incomplete,  do  not 
possess  the  characteristic  of  independence  of  all 
higher  conditions.  It  is  true  that  we  cannot  infer 
from  this  that  what  does  not  contain  in  itself 
the  supreme  and  complete  condition — the  con¬ 
dition  of  all  other  things — must  possess  only  a 
conditioned  existence;  but  as  little  can  we  as¬ 
sert  the  contrary,  for  this  supposed  being  does 
not  possess  the  only  characteristic  which  can 
enable  reason  to  cognize  by  means  of  an  a  priori 
conception  the  unconditioned  and  necessary  na¬ 
ture  of  its  existence. 

The  conception  of  an  ens  realissimum  is  that 
which  best  agrees  with  the  conception  of  an  un¬ 
conditioned  and  necessary  being.  The  former 
conception  does  not  satisfy  all  the  requirements 
of  the  latter;  but  we  have  no  choice,  we  are 
obliged  to  adhere  to  it,  for  we  find  that  we  can¬ 
not  do  without  the  existence  of  a  necessary  be¬ 
ing;  and  even  although  we  admit  it,  we  find  it 
out  of  our  power  to  discover  in  the  whole  sphere 
of  possibility  any  being  that  can  advance  well- 
grounded  claims  to  such  a  distinction. 

The  following  is,  therefore,  the  natural  course 
of  human  reason.  It  begins  by  persuading  itself 
of  the  existence  of  some  necessary  being.  In  this 
being  it  recognizes  the  characteristics  of  uncon¬ 
ditioned  existence.  It  then  seeks  the  conception 
of  that  which  is  independent  of  all  conditions, 
and  finds  it  in  that  which  is  itself  the  sufficient 
condition  of  all  other  things — in  other  words,  in 
that  which  contains  all  reality.  But  the  un¬ 
limited  all  is  an  absolute  unity,  and  is  conceived 
by  the  mind  as  a  being  one  and  supreme;  and 
thus  reason  concludes  that  the  Supreme  Being, 
as  the  primal  basis  of  all  things,  possesses  an  ex¬ 
istence  which  is  absolutely  necessary. 

This  conception  must  be  regarded  as  in  some 
degree  satisfactory,  if  we  admit  the  existence  of 
a  necessary  being,  and  consider  that  there  exists 
a  necessity  for  a  definite  and  final  answer  to 
these  questions.  In  such  a  case,  we  cannot  make 
a  better  choice,  or  rather  we  have  no  choice  at 
all,  but  feel  ourselves  obliged  to  declare  in  fa¬ 
vour  of  the  absolute  unity  of  complete  reality, 
as  the  highest  source  of  the  possibility  of  things. 


But  if  there  exists  no  motive  for  coming  to  a 
definite  conclusion,  and  we  may  leave  the  ques¬ 
tion  unanswered  till  we  have  fully  weighed  both 
sides — in  other  words,  when  we  are  merely 
called  upon  to  decide  how  much  we  happen  to 
know  about  the  question,  and  how  much  we 
merely  flatter  ourselves  that  we  know — the 
above  conclusion  does  not  appear  to  be  so  great 
advantage,  but,  on  the  contrary,  seems  defective 
in  the  grounds  upon  which  it  is  supported. 

For,  admitting  the  truth  of  all  that  has  been 
said,  that,  namely,  the  inference  from  a  given 
existence  (my  own,  for  example)  to  the  exist¬ 
ence  of  an  unconditioned  and  necessary  being 
is  valid  and  unassailable;  that,  in  the  second 
place,  we  must  consider  a  being  which  contains 
all  reality,  and  consequently  all  the  conditions 
of  other  things,  to  be  absolutely  unconditioned; 
and  admitting  too,  that  we  have  thus  discovered 
the  conception  of  a  thing  to  which  may  be  at¬ 
tributed,  without  inconsistency,  absolute  neces¬ 
sity — it  does  not  follow  from  all  this  that  the 
conception  of  a  limited  being,  in  which  the  su¬ 
preme  reality  does  not  reside,  is  therefore  in¬ 
compatible  with  the  idea  of  absolute  necessity. 
For,  although  I  do  not  discover  the  element  of 
the  unconditioned  in  the  conception  of  such  a 
being — an  element  which  is  manifestly  existent 
in  the  sum-total  of  all  conditions — I  am  not  en¬ 
titled  to  conclude  that  its  existence  is  therefore 
conditioned;  just  as  I  am  not  entitled  to  affirm, 
in  a  hypothetical  syllogism,  that  where  a  cer¬ 
tain  condition  does  not  exist  (in  the  present, 
completeness,  as  far  as  pure  conceptions  are 
concerned),  the  conditioned  does  not  exist  ei¬ 
ther.  On  the  contrary,  we  are  free  to  consider  all 
limited  beings  as  likewise  unconditionally  neces¬ 
sary,  although  we  are  unable  to  infer  this  from 
the  general  conception  which  we  have  of  them. 
Thus  conducted,  this  argument  is  incapable  of 
giving  us  the  least  notion  of  the  properties  of  a 
necessary  being,  and  must  be  in  every  respect 
without  result. 

This  argument  continues,  however,  to  possess 
a  weight  and  an  authority,  which,  in  spite  of  its 
objective  insufficiency,  it  has  never  been  di¬ 
vested  of.  For,  granting  that  certain  responsibil¬ 
ities  lie  upon  us,  which,  as  based  on  the  ideas  of 
reason,  deserve  to  be  respected  and  submitted 
to,  although  they  are  incapable  of  a  real  or  prac¬ 
tical  application  to  our  nature,  or,  in  other 
words,  would  be  responsibilities  without  mo¬ 
tives,  except  upon  the  supposition  of  a  Supreme 
Being  to  give  effect  and  influence  to  the  practical 
laws:  in  such  a  case  we  should  be  bound  to  obey 
our  conceptions,  which,  although  objectively  in- 


OF  PURE  REASON 


sufficient,  do,  according  to  the  standard  of  rea¬ 
son,  preponderate  over  and  are  superior  to  any 
claims  that  may  be  advanced  from  any  other 
quarter.  The  equilibrium  of  doubt  would  in  this 
case  be  destroyed  by  a  practical  addition;  in¬ 
deed,  Reason  would  be  compelled  to  condemn 
herself,  if  she  refused  to  comply  with  the  de¬ 
mands  of  the  judgement,  no  superior  to  which 
we  know — however  defective  her  understanding 
of  the  grounds  of  these  demands  might  be. 

This  argument,  although  in  fact  transcen¬ 
dental,  inasmuch  as  it  rests  upon  the  intrinsic 
insufficiency  of  the  contingent,  is  so  simple  and 
natural,  that  the  commonest  understanding  can 
appreciate  its  value.  We  see  things  around  us 
change,  arise,  and  pass  away;  they,  or  their  con¬ 
dition,  must  therefore  have  a  cause.  The  same 
demand  must  again  be  made  of  the  cause  itself 
— as  a  datum  of  experience.  Now  it  is  natural 
that  we  should  place  the  highest  causality  just 
where  we  place  supreme  causality,  in  that  being, 
which  contains  the  conditions  of  all  possible  ef¬ 
fects,  and  the  conception  of  which  is  so  simple 
as  that  of  an  all-embracing  reality.  This  highest 
cause,  then,  we  regard  as  absolutely  necessary, 
because  we  find  it  absolutely  necessary  to  rise  to 
it,  and  do  not  discover  any  reason  for  proceed¬ 
ing  beyond  it.  Thus,  among  all  nations,  through 
the  darkest  polytheism  glimmer  some  faint 
sparks  of  monotheism,  to  which  these  idolaters 
have  been  led,  not  from  reflection  and  profound 
thought,  but  by  the  study  and  natural  progress 
of  the  common  understanding. 

There  are  only  three  modes  of  proving  the  ex¬ 
istence  of  a  Deity,  on  the  grounds  of  speculative 
reason. 

All  the  paths  conducting  to  this  end  begin 
either  from  determinate  experience  and  the  pe¬ 
culiar  constitution  of  the  world  of  sense,  and 
rise,  according  to  the  laws  of  causality,  from  it 
to  the  highest  cause  existing  apart  from  the 
world — or  from  a  purely  indeterminate  experi¬ 
ence,  that  is,  some  empirical  existence — or  ab¬ 
straction  is  made  of  all  experience,  and  the  ex¬ 
istence  of  a  supreme  cause  is  concluded  from  a 
priori  conceptions  alone.  The  first  is  the  physico- 
theological  argument,  the  second  the  cosmolog¬ 
ical,  the  third  the  ontological.  More  there  are 
not,  and  more  there  cannot  be. 

I  shall  show  it  is  as  unsuccessful  on  the  one 
path — the  empirical — as  on  the  other — the  tran¬ 
scendental — and  that  it  stretches  its  wings  in 
vain,  to  soar  beyond  the  world  of  sense  by  the 
mere  might  of  speculative  thought.  As  regards 
the  order  in  which  we  must  discuss  those  argu¬ 
ments,  it  will  be  exactly  the  reverse  of  that  in 


which  reason,  in  the  progress  of  its  develop¬ 
ment,  attains  to  them — the  order  in  which  they 
are  placed  above.  For  it  will  be  made  manifest 
to  the  reader  that,  although  experience  presents 
the  occasion  and  the  starting-point,  it  is  the 
transcendental  idea  of  reason  which  guides  it  in 
its  pilgrimage  and  is  the  goal  of  all  its  struggles. 
I  shall  therefore  begin  with  an  examination  of 
the  transcendental  argument,  and  afterwards  in¬ 
quire  what  additional  strength  has  accrued  to 
this  mode  of  proof  from  the  addition  of  the  em¬ 
pirical  element. 

Section  IV.  Of  the  Impossibility  of  an  Onto¬ 
logical  Proof  of  the  Existence  of  God 

It  is  evident  from  what  has  been  said  that  the 
conception  of  an  absolutely  necessary  being  is 
a  mere  idea,  the  objective  reality  of  which  is  far 
from  being  established  by  the  mere  fact  that  it 
is  a  need  of  reason.  On  the  contrary,  this  idea 
serves  merely  to  indicate  a  certain  unattainable 
perfection,  and  rather  limits  the  operations 
than,  by  the  presentation  of  new  objects,  ex¬ 
tends  the  sphere  of  the  understanding.  But  a 
strange  anomaly  meets  us  at  the  very  threshold ; 
for  the  inference  from  a  given  existence  in  gen¬ 
eral  to  an  absolutely  necessary  existence  seems 
to  be  correct  and  unavoidable,  while  the  condi¬ 
tions  of  the  understanding  refuse  to  aid  us  in 
forming  any  conception  of  such  a  being. 

Philosophers  have  always  talked  of  an  abso¬ 
lutely  necessary  being,  and  have  nevertheless 
declined  to  take  the  trouble  of  conceiving  wheth¬ 
er — and  how — a  being  of  this  nature  is  even 
cogitable,  not  to  mention  that  its  existence  is 
actually  demonstrable.  A  verbal  definition  of 
the  conception  is  certainly  easy  enough:  it  is 
something  the  non-existence  of  which  is  impos¬ 
sible.  But  does  this  definition  throw  any  light 
upon  the  conditions  which  render  it  impossible 
to  cogitate  the  non-existence  of  a  thing — condi¬ 
tions  which  we  wish  to  ascertain,  that  we  may 
discover  whether  we  think  anything  in  the  con¬ 
ception  of  such  a  being  or  not?  For  the  mere 
fact  that  I  throw  away,  by  means  of  the  woid 
unconditioned,  all  the  conditions  which  the  un¬ 
derstanding  habitually  requires  in  order  to  re¬ 
gard  anything  as  necessary,  is  very  far  from 
making  clear  whether  by  means  of  the  concep¬ 
tion  of  the  unconditionally  necessary  I  think  of 
something,  or  really  of  nothing  at  all. 

Nay,  more,  this  chance-conception,  now  be¬ 
come  so  current,  many  have  endeavoured  to  ex¬ 
plain  by  examples  which  seemed  to  render  any 
inquiries  regarding  its  intelligibility  quite  need¬ 
less.  Every  geometrical  proposition — a  triangle 


THE  CRITIQUE 


180 

has  three  angles — it  was  said,  is  absolutely  nec¬ 
essary;  and  thus  people  talked  of  an  object 
which  lay  out  of  the  sphere  of  our  understand¬ 
ing  as  if  it  were  perfectly  plain  what  the  con¬ 
ception  of  such  a  being  meant. 

All  the  examples  adduced  have  been  drawn, 
without  exception,  from  judgements,  and  not 
from  things.  But  the  unconditioned  necessity  of 
a  judgement  does  not  form  the  absolute  neces¬ 
sity  of  a  thing.  On  the  contrary,  the  absolute 
necessity  of  a  judgement  is  only  a  conditioned 
necessity  of  a  thing,  or  of  the  predicate  in  a 
judgement.  The  proposition  above-mentioned 
does  not  enounce  that  three  angles  necessarily 
exist,  but,  upon  condition  that  a  triangle  exists, 
three  angles  must  necessarily  exist — in  it.  And 
thus  this  logical  necessity  has  been  the  source  of 
the  greatest  delusions.  Having  formed  an  a  priori 
conception  of  a  thing,  the  content  of  which  was 
made  to  embrace  existence,  we  believed  our¬ 
selves  safe  in  concluding  that,  because  existence 
belongs  necessarily  to  the  object  of  the  con¬ 
ception  (that  is,  under  the  condition  of  my 
positing  this  thing  as  given),  the  existence  of 
the  thing  is  also  posited  necessarily,  and  that 
it  is  therefore  absolutely  necessary — merely 
because  its  existence  has  been  cogitated  in  the 
conception. 

If,  in  an  identical  judgement,  I  annihilate  the 
predicate  in  thought,  and  retain  the  subject,  a 
contradiction  is  the  result;  and  hence  I  say,  the 
former  belongs  necessarily  to  the  latter.  But  if 
I  suppress  both  subject  and  predicate  in  thought, 
no  contradiction  arises;  for  there  is  nothing  at 
all,  and  therefore  no  means  of  forming  a  con¬ 
tradiction.  To  suppose  the  existence  of  a  tri¬ 
angle  and  not  that  of  its  three  angles,  is  self¬ 
contradictory;  but  to  suppose  the  non-existence 
of  both  triangle  and  angles  is  perfectly  admis¬ 
sible.  And  so  is  it  with  the  conception  of  an  ab¬ 
solutely  necessary  being.  Annihilate  its  exist¬ 
ence  in  thought,  and  you  annihilate  the  thing 
itself  with  all  its  predicates;  how  then  can  there 
be  any  room  for  contradiction?  Externally,  there 
is  nothing  to  give  rise  to  a  contradiction,  for  a 
thing  cannot  be  necessary  externally;  nor  in¬ 
ternally,  for,  by  the  annihilation  or  suppression 
of  the  thing  itself,  its  internal  properties  are 
also  annihilated.  God  is  omnipotent — that  is  a 
necessary  judgement.  His  omnipotence  cannot 
be  denied,  if  the  existence  of  a  Deity  is  posited 
— the  existence,  that  is,  of  an  infinite  being,  the 
two  conceptions  being  identical.  But  when  you 
say,  God  does  not  exist,  neither  omnipotence  nor 
any  other  predicate  is  affirmed;  they  must  all 
disappear  with  the  subject,  and  in  this  judge¬ 


ment  there  cannot  exist  the  least  self-contradic¬ 
tion. 

You  have  thus  seen  that  when  the  predicate 
of  a  judgement  is  annihilated  in  thought  along 
with  the  subject,  no  internal  contradiction  can 
arise,  be  the  predicate  what  it  may.  There  is  no 
possibility  of  evading  the  conclusion — you  find 
yourselves  compelled  to  declare:  There  are  cer¬ 
tain  subjects  which  cannot  be  annihilated  in 
thought.  But  this  is  nothing  more  than  saying: 
There  exist  subjects  which  are  absolutely 
necessary — the  very  hypothesis  which  you  are 
called  upon  to  establish.  For  I  find  myself 
unable  to  form  the  slightest  conception  of  a 
thing  which  when  annihilated  in  thought  with 
all  its  predicates,  leaves  behind  a  contra¬ 
diction;  and  contradiction  is  the  only  cri¬ 
terion  of  impossibility  in  the  sphere  of  pure 
a  priori  conceptions. 

Against  these  general  considerations,  the  jus¬ 
tice  of  which  no  one  can  dispute,  one  argument 
is  adduced,  which  is  regarded  as  furnishing  a 
satisfactory  demonstration  from  the  fact.  It  is 
affirmed  that  there  is  one  and  only  one  concep¬ 
tion,  in  which  the  non-being  or  annihilation  of 
the  object  is  self-contradictory,  and  this  is  the 
conception  of  an  ens  realissimum.  It  possesses, 
you  say,  all  reality,  and  you  feel  yourselves 
justified  in  admitting  the  possibility  of  such  a 
being.  (This  I  am  willing  to  grant  for  the  pres¬ 
ent,  although  the  existence  of  a  conception 
which  is  not  self-contradictory  is  far  from  be¬ 
ing  sufficient  to  prove  the  possibility  of  an  ob¬ 
ject.)1  Now  the  notion  of  all  reality  embraces 
in  it  that  of  existence;  the  notion  of  existence 
lies,  therefore,  in  the  conception  of  this  possi¬ 
ble  thing.  If  this  thing  is  annihilated  in  thought, 
the  internal  possibility  of  the  thing  is  also  an¬ 
nihilated,  which  is  self-contradictory. 

I  answer:  It  is  absurd  to  introduce — under 
whatever  term  disguised — into  the  conception 
of  a  thing,  which  is  to  be  cogitated  solely  in  ref¬ 
erence  to  its  possibility,  the  conception  of  its 
existence.  If  this  is  admitted,  you  will  have  ap¬ 
parently  gained  the  day,  but  in  reality  have 
enounced  nothing  but  a  mere  tautology.  I  ask,  is 
the  proposition,  this  or  that  thing  (which  I  am 

1  A  conception  is  always  possible,  if  it  is  not  self¬ 
contradictory.  This  is  the  logical  criterion  of  possibil¬ 
ity,  distinguishing  the  object  of  such  a  conception  from 
the  nihil  ncgativum.  But  it  may  be,  notwithstanding, 
an  empty  conception,  unless  the  objective  reality  of  this 
synthesis,  but  which  it  is  generated,  is  demonstrated; 
and  a  proof  of  this  kind  must  be  based  upon  principles 
of  possible  experience,  and  not  upon  the  principle  of 
analysis  or  contradiction.  This  remark  may  be  service¬ 
able  as  a  warning  against  concluding,  from  the  possibil¬ 
ity  of  a  conception — which  is  logical — the  possibility  of 
a  thing — which  is  real. 


OF  PURE  REASON 


admitting  to  be  possible)  exists ,  an  analytical  or 
a  synthetical  proposition?  If  the  former,  there 
is  no  addition  made  to  the  subject  of  your 
thought  by  the  affirmation  of  its  existence;  but 
then  the  conception  in  your  minds  is  identical 
with  the  thing  itself,  or  you  have  supposed  the 
existence  of  a  thing  to  be  possible,  and  then  in¬ 
ferred  its  existence  from  its  internal  possibility 
— which  is  but  a  miserable  tautology.  The  word 
reality  in  the  conception  of  the  thing,  and  the 
word  existence  in  the  conception  of  the  predi¬ 
cate,  will  not  help  you  out  of  the  difficulty.  For, 
supposing  you  were  to  term  all  positing  of  a 
thing  reality ,  you  have  thereby  posited  the  thing 
with  all  its  predicates  in  the  conception  of  the 
subject  and  assumed  its  actual  existence,  and 
this  you  merely  repeat  in  the  predicate.  But  if 
you  confess,  as  every  reasonable  person  must, 
that  every  existential  proposition  is  synthetical, 
how  can  it  be  maintained  that  the  predicate  of 
existence  cannot  be  denied  without  contradic¬ 
tion? — a  property  which  is  the  characteristic  of 
analytical  propositions,  alone. 

I  should  have  a  reasonable  hope  of  putting  an 
end  for  ever  to  this  sophistical  mode  of  argu¬ 
mentation,  by  a  strict  definition  of  the  concep¬ 
tion  of  existence,  did  not  my  own  experience 
teach  me  that  the  illusion  arising  from  our  con¬ 
founding  a  logical  with  a  real  predicate  (a  predi¬ 
cate  which  aids  in  the  determination  of  a  thing) 
resists  almost  all  the  endeavours  of  explana¬ 
tion  and  illustration.  A  logical  predicate  may  be 
what  you  please,  even  the  subject  may  be  predi¬ 
cated  of  itself ;  for  logic  pays  no  regard  to  the 
content  of  a  judgement.  But  the  determination 
of  a  conception  is  a  predicate,  which  adds  to  and 
enlarges  the  conception.  It  must  not,  therefore, 
be  contained  in  the  conception. 

Being  is  evidently  not  a  real  predicate,  that 
is,  a  conception  of  something  which  is  added  to 
the  conception  of  some  other  thing.  It  is  merely 
the  positing  of  a  thing,  or  of  certain  determina¬ 
tions  in  it.  Logically,  it  is  merely  the  copula  of 
a  judgement.  The  proposition,  God  is  omnipo¬ 
tent,  contains  two  conceptions,  which  have  a 
certain  object  or  content ;  the  word  is,  is  no  ad¬ 
ditional  predicate — it  merely  indicates  the  re¬ 
lation  of  the  predicate  to  the  subject.  Now,  if  I 
take  the  subject  (God)  with  all  its  predicates 
(omnipotence  being  one),  and  say:  God  is,  or, 
There  is  a  God,  I  add  no  new  predicate  to  the 
conception  of  God,  I  merely  posit  or  affirm  the 
existence  of  the  subject  with  all  its  predicates 
— I  posit  the  object  in  relation  to  my  concep¬ 
tion.  The  content  of  both  is  the  same;  and  there 
is  no  addition  made  to  the  conception,  which 


181 

expresses  merely  the  possibility  of  the  object, 
by  my  cogitating  the  object — in  the  expression, 
it  is — as  absolutely  given  or  existing.  Thus  the 
real  contains  no  more  than  the  possible.  A  hun¬ 
dred  real  dollars  contain  no  more  than  a  hun¬ 
dred  possible  dollars.  For,  as  the  latter  indicate 
the  conception,  and  the  former  the  object,  on 
the  supposition  that  the  content  of  the  former 
was  greater  than  that  of  the  latter,  my  concep¬ 
tion  would  not  be  an  expression  of  the  whole  ob¬ 
ject,  and  would  consequently  be  an  inadequate 
conception  of  it.  But  in  reckoning  my  wealth 
there  may  be  said  to  be  more  in  a  hundred  real 
dollars  than  in  a  hundred  possible  dollars — that 
is,  in  the  mere  conception  of  them.  For  the 
real  object — the  dollars — is  not  analytically 
contained  in  my  conception,  but  forms  a  syn¬ 
thetical  addition  to  my  conception  (which  is 
merely  a  determination  of  my  mental  state), 
although  this  objective  reality — this  existence 
— apart  from  my  conceptions,  does  not  in  the 
least  degree  increase  the  aforesaid  hundred 
dollars. 

By  whatever  and  by  whatever  number  of 
predicates — even  to  the  complete  determination 
of  it — I  may  cogitate  a  thing,  I  do  not  in  the 
least  augment  the  object  of  my  conception  by 
the  addition  of  the  statement:  This  thing  exists. 
Otherwise,  not  exactly  the  same,  but  something 
more  than  what  was  cogitated  in  my  conception, 
would  exist,  and  I  could  not  affirm  that  the  ex¬ 
act  object  of  my  conception  had  real  existence. 
If  I  cogitate  a  thing  as  containing  all  modes  of 
reality  except  one,  the  mode  of  reality  which  is 
absent  is  not  added  to  the  conception  of  the 
thing  by  the  affirmation  that  the  thing  exists; 
on  the  contrary,  the  thing  exists — if  it  exist  at 
all — with  the  same  defect  as  that  cogitated  in 
its  conception;  otherwise  not  that  which  was 
cogitated,  but  something  different,  exists.  Now, 
if  I  cogitate  a  being  as  the  highest  reality,  with¬ 
out  defect  or  imperfection,  the  question  still  re¬ 
mains — whether  this  being  exists  or  not?  For, 
although  no  element  is  wanting  in  the  possible 
real  content  of  my  conception,  there  is  a  defect 
in  its  relation  to  my  mental  state,  that  is,  I  am 
ignorant  whether  the  cognition  of  the  object  in¬ 
dicated  by  the  conception  is  possible  a  posteriori. 
And  here  the  cause  of  the  present  difficulty  be¬ 
comes  apparent.  If  the  question  regarded  an  ob¬ 
ject  of  sense  merely,  it  would  be  impossible  for 
me  to  confound  the  conception  with  the  exist¬ 
ence  of  a  thing.  For  the  conception  merely  en¬ 
ables  me  to  cogitate  an  object  as  according  with 
the  general  conditions  of  experience;  while  the 
existence  of  the  object  permits  me  to  cogitate 


THE  CRITIQUE 


182 

it  as  contained  in  the  sphere  of  actual  experi¬ 
ence.  At  the  same  time,  this  connection  with  the 
world  of  experience  does  not  in  the  least  aug¬ 
ment  the  conception,  although  a  possible  percep¬ 
tion  has  been  added  to  the  experience  of  the 
mind.  But  if  we  cogitate  existence  by  the  pure 
category  alone,  it  is  not  to  be  wondered  at,  that 
we  should  find  ourselves  unable  to  present  any 
criterion  sufficient  to  distinguish  it  from  mere 
possibility. 

Whatever  be  the  content  of  our  conception  of 
an  object,  it  is  necessary  to  go  beyond  it,  if  we 
wish  to  predicate  existence  of  the  object.  In  the 
case  of  sensuous  objects,  this  is  attained  by  their 
connection  according  to  empirical  laws  with 
some  one  of  my  perceptions;  but  there  is  no 
means  of  cognizing  the  existence  of  objects  of 
pure  thought,  because  it  must  be  cognized  com¬ 
pletely  a  priori.  But  all  our  knowledge  of  exist¬ 
ence  (be  it  immediately  by  perception,  or  by  in¬ 
ferences  connecting  some  object  with  a  percep¬ 
tion)  belongs  entirely  to  the  sphere  of  experi¬ 
ence — which  is  in  perfect  unity  with  itself ;  and 
although  an  existence  out  of  this  sphere  cannot 
be  absolutely  declared  to  be  impossible,  it  is  a 
hypothesis  the  truth  of  which  we  have  no  means 
of  ascertaining. 

The  notion  of  a  Supreme  Being  is  in  many  re¬ 
spects  a  highly  useful  idea;  but  for  the  very  rea¬ 
son  that  it  is  an  idea,  it  is  incapable  of  enlarging 
our  cognition  with  regard  to  the  existence  of 
things.  It  is  not  even  sufficient  to  instruct  us  as 
to  the  possibility  of  a  being  which  we  do  not 
know  to  exist.  The  analytical  criterion  of  possi¬ 
bility,  which  consists  in  the  absence  of  contra¬ 
diction  in  propositions,  cannot  be  denied  it.  But 
the  connection  of  real  properties  in  a  thing  is  a 
synthesis  of  the  possibility  of  which  an  a  priori 
judgement  cannot  be  formed,  because  these 
realities  are  not  presented  to  us  specifically; 
and  even  if  this  were  to  happen,  a  judgement 
would  still  be  impossible,  because  the  criterion 
of  the  possibility  of  synthetical  cognitions 
must  be  sought  for  in  the  world  of  experience, 
to  which  the  object  of  an  idea  cannot  be¬ 
long.  And  thus  the  celebrated  Leibnitz  has 
utterly  failed  in  his  attempt  to  establish  upon 
a  priori  grounds  the  possibility  of  this  sublime 
ideal  being. 

The  celebrated  ontological  or  Cartesian  ar¬ 
gument  for  the  existence  of  a  Supreme  Being  is 
therefore  insufficient;  and  we  may  as  well  hope 
to  increase  our  stock  of  knowledge  by  the  aid 
of  mere  ideas,  as  the  merchant  to  augment  his 
wealth  by  the  addition  of  noughts  to  his  cash- 
account. 


Section  V.  Of  the  Impossibility  oj  a  Cosmolog¬ 
ical  Proof  of  the  Existence  of  God 

It  was  by  no  means  a  natural  course  of  proceed¬ 
ing,  but,  on  the  contrary,  an  invention  entirely 
due  to  the  subtlety  of  the  schools,  to  attempt  to 
draw  from  a  mere  idea  a  proof  of  the  existence 
of  an  object  corresponding  to  it.  Such  a  course 
would  never  have  been  pursued,  were  it  not  for 
that  need  of  reason  which  requires  it  to  suppose 
the  existence  of  a  necessary  being  as  a  basis  for 
the  empirical  regress,  and  that,  as  this  necessity 
must  be  unconditioned  and  a  priori ,  reason  is 
bound  to  discover  a  conception  which  shall  sat¬ 
isfy,  if  possible,  this  requirement,  and  enable  us 
to  attain  to  the  a  priori  cognition  of  such  a  be¬ 
ing.  This  conception  was  thought  to  be  found  in 
the  idea  of  an  ens  realissimumy  and  thus  this 
idea  was  employed  for  the  attainment  of  a  better 
defined  knowledge  of  a  necessary  being,  of  the 
existence  of  which  we  were  convinced,  or  per¬ 
suaded,  on  other  grounds.  Thus  reason  was  se¬ 
duced  from  her  natural  course;  and,  instead  of 
concluding  with  the  conception  of  an  ens  realis- 
simum,  an  attempt  was  made  to  begin  with  it, 
for  the  purpose  of  inferring  from  it  that  idea  of 
a  necessary  existence  which  it  was  in  fact  called 
in  to  complete.  Thus  arose  that  unfortunate  on¬ 
tological  argument,  which  neither  satisfies  the 
healthy  common  sense  of  humanity,  nor  sustains 
the  scientific  examination  of  the  philosopher. 

The  cosmological  proof,  which  we  are  about 
to  examine,  retains  the  connection  between  ab¬ 
solute  necessity  and  the  highest  reality;  but,  in¬ 
stead  of  reasoning  from  this  highest  reality  to 
a  necessary  existence,  like  the  preceding  argu¬ 
ment,  it  concludes  from  the  given  unconditioned 
necessity  of  some  being  its  unlimited  reality. 
The  track  it  pursues,  whether  rational  or  sophis¬ 
tical,  is  at  least  natural,  and  not  only  goes  far  to 
persuade  the  common  understanding,  but  shows 
itself  deserving  of  respect  from  the  speculative 
intellect;  while  it  contains,  at  the  same  time,  the 
outlines  of  all  the  arguments  employed  in  natu¬ 
ral  theology — arguments  which  always  have 
been,  and  still  will  be.  in  use  and  authority.  These, 
however  adorned,  and  hid  under  whatever  em¬ 
bellishments  of  rhetoric  and  sentiment,  are  at 
bottom  identical  with  the  arguments  we  are  at 
present  to  discuss.  This  proof,  termed  by  Leib¬ 
nitz  the  argumentum  a  contingently  mundi,  I 
shall  now  lay  before  the  reader,  and  subject  to 
a  strict  examination. 

It  is  framed  in  the  following  manner:  If  some¬ 
thing  exists,  an  absolutely  necessary  being  must 
likewise  exist.  Now  I,  at  least,  exist.  Consequent- 


OF  PURE 

ly,  there  exists  an  absolutely  necessary  being. 
The  minor  contains  an  experience,  the  major 
reasons  from  a  general  experience  to  the  exist¬ 
ence  of  a  necessary  being.1  Thus  this  argument 
really  begins  at  experience,  and  is  not  complete¬ 
ly  a  priori ,  or  ontological.  The  object  of  all  pos¬ 
sible  experience  being  the  world,  it  is  called  the 
cosmological  proof.  It  contains  no  reference  to 
any  peculiar  property  of  sensuous  objects,  by 
which  this  world  of  sense  might  be  distinguished 
from  other  possible  worlds;  and  in  this  respect 
it  differs  from  the  physico-theological  proof, 
which  is  based  upon  the  consideration  of  the  pe¬ 
culiar  constitution  of  our  sensuous  world. 

The  proof  proceeds  thus:  A  necessary  being 
can  be  determined  only  in  one  way,  that  is,  it 
can  be  determined  by  only  one  of  all  possible 
opposed  predicates;  consequently,  it  must  be 
completely  determined  in  and  by  its  conception. 
But  there  is  only  a  single  conception  of  a  thing 
possible,  which  completely  determines  the  thing 
a  priori :  that  is,  the  conception  of  the  ens  real- 
issimum.  It  follows  that  the  conception  of  the 
ens  realissimum  is  the  only  conception  by  and 
in  which  we  can  cogitate  a  necessary  being. 
Consequently,  a  Supreme  Being  necessarily 
exists. 

In  this  cosmological  argument  are  assembled 
so  many  sophistical  propositions  that  specula¬ 
tive  reason  seems  to  have  exerted  in  it  all  her 
dialectical  skill  to  produce  a  transcendental  il¬ 
lusion  of  the  most  extreme  character.  We  shall 
postpone  an  investigation  of  this  argument  for 
the  present,  and  confine  ourselves  to  exposing 
the  stratagem  by  which  it  imposes  upon  us  an 
old  argument  in  a  new  dress,  and  appeals  to  the 
agreement  of  two  witnesses,  the  one  with  the 
credentials  of  pure  reason,  and  the  other  with 
those  of  empiricism;  while,  in  fact,  it  is  only  the 
former  who  has  changed  his  dress  and  voice,  for 
the  purpose  of  passing  himself  off  for  an  addi¬ 
tional  witness.  That  it  may  possess  a  secure 
foundation,  it  bases  its  conclusions  upon  experi¬ 
ence,  and  thus  appears  to  be  completely  distinct 
from  the  ontological  argument,  which  places  its 
confidence  entirely  in  pure  a  priori  conceptions. 
But  this  experience  merely  aids  reason  in  mak¬ 
ing  one  step — to  the  existence  of  a  necessary  be¬ 
ing.  What  the  properties  of  this  being  are  can¬ 
not  be  learned  from  experience;  and  therefore 
reason  abandons  it  altogether,  and  pursues  its 

1  This  inference  is  too  well  known  to  require  more 
detailed  discussion.  It  is  based  upon  the  spurious  tran¬ 
scendental  law  of  causality,  that  everything  which  is 
contingent  has  a  cause,  which,  if  itself  contingent,  must 
also  have  a  cause;  and  so  on,  till  the  series  of  subordi¬ 
nated  causes  must  end  with  an  absolutely  necessary 
cause,  without  which  it  would  not  possess  completeness. 


REASON  183 

inquiries  in  the  sphere  of  pure  conception,  for 
the  purpose  of  discovering  what  the  properties 
of  an  absolutely  necessary  being  ought  to  be, 
that  is,  what  among  all  possible  things  contain 
the  conditions  ( requisita )  of  absolute  necessity. 
Reason  believes  that  it  has  discovered  these  req¬ 
uisites  in  the  conception  of  an  ens  realissimum 
— and  in  it  alone,  and  hence  concludes:  The  ens 
realissimum  is  an  absolutely  necessary  being. 
But  it  is  evident  that  reason  has  here  presup¬ 
posed  that  the  conception  of  an  ens  realissimum 
is  perfectly  adequate  to  the  conception  of  a  be¬ 
ing  of  absolute  necessity,  that  is,  that  we  may 
infer  the  existence  of  the  latter  from  that  of  the 
former — a  proposition  which  formed  the  basis 
of  the  ontological  argument,  and  which  is  now 
employed  in  the  support  of  the  cosmological  ar¬ 
gument,  contrary  to  the  wish  and  professions  of 
its  inventors.  For  the  existence  of  an  absolutely 
necessary  being  is  given  in  conceptions  alone. 
But  if  I  say:  “The  conception  of  the  ens  realis¬ 
simum  is  a  conception  of  this  kind,  and  in  fact 
the  only  conception  which  is  adequate  to  our 
idea  of  a  necessary  being,”  I  am  obliged  to  ad¬ 
mit,  that  the  latter  may  be  inferred  from  the 
former.  Thus  it  is  properly  the  ontological  ar¬ 
gument  which  figures  in  the  cosmological,  and 
constitutes  the  whole  strength  of  the  latter;  while 
the  spurious  basis  of  experience  has  been  of  no 
further  use  than  to  conduct  us  to  the  conception 
of  absolute  necessity,  being  utterly  insufficient 
to  demonstrate  the  presence  of  this  attribute  in 
any  determinate  existence  or  thing.  For  when  we 
propose  to  ourselves  an  aim  of  this  character, 
we  must  abandon  the  sphere  of  experience,  and 
rise  to  that  of  pure  conceptions,  which  we  ex¬ 
amine  with  the  purpose  of  discovering  whether 
any  one  contains  the  conditions  of  the  possibil¬ 
ity  of  an  absolutely  necessary  being.  But  if  the 
possibility  of  such  a  being  is  thus  demonstrated, 
its  existence  is  also  proved;  for  we  may  then 
assert  that,  of  all  possible  beings  there  is  one 
which  possesses  the  attribute  of  necessity — in 
other  words,  this  being  possesses  an  absolutely 
necessary  existence. 

All  illusions  in  an  argument  are  more  easily 
detected  when  they  are  presented  in  the  formal 
manner  employed  by  the  schools,  which  we  now 
proceed  to  do. 

If  the  proposition:  “Every  absolutely  neces¬ 
sary  being  is  likewise  an  ens  realissimum  ”  is 
correct  (and  it  is  this  which  constitutes  the  ner - 
vus  probandi  of  the  cosmological  argument),  it 
must,  like  all  affirmative  judgements,  be  capable 
of  conversion — the  conversio  per  accidens ,  at 
least.  It  follows,  then,  that  some  entia  realissima 


THE  CRITIQUE 


184 

are  absolutely  necessary  beings.  But  no  ens  re- 
alissimum  is  in  any  respect  different  from  anoth¬ 
er,  and  what  is  valid  of  some  is  valid  of  all.  In 
this  present  case,  therefore,  I  may  employ  sim¬ 
ple  conversion,  and  say:  “Every  ens  realissimum 
is  a  necessary  being.”  But  as  this  proposition 
is  determined  a  priori  by  the  conceptions  con¬ 
tained  in  it,  the  mere  conception  of  an  ens  real¬ 
issimum  must  possess  the  additional  attribute 
of  absolute  necessity.  But  this  is  exactly  what 
was  maintained  in  the  ontological  argument,  and 
not  recognized  by  the  cosmological,  although  it 
formed  the  real  ground  of  its  disguised  and  il¬ 
lusory  reasoning. 

Thus  the  second  mode  employed  by  specula¬ 
tive  reason  of  demonstrating  the  existence  of  a 
Supreme  Being,  is  not  only,  like  the  first,  illuso¬ 
ry  and  inadequate,  but  possesses  the  additional 
blemish  of  an  ignoratio  elenchi — professing  to 
conduct  us  by  a  new  road  to  the  desired  goal, 
but  bringing  us  back,  after  a  short  circuit,  to  the 
old  path  which  we  had  deserted  at  its  call. 

I  mentioned  above  that  this  cosmological  ar¬ 
gument  contains  a  perfect  nest  of  dialectical  as¬ 
sumptions,  which  transcendental  criticism  does 
not  find  it  difficult  to  expose  and  to  dissipate.  I 
shall  merely  enumerate  these,  leaving  it  to  the 
reader,  who  must  by  this  time  be  well  practised 
in  such  matters,  to  investigate  the  fallacies  re¬ 
siding  therein. 

The  following  fallacies,  for  example,  are  dis¬ 
coverable  in  this  mode  of  proof:  1.  The  tran¬ 
scendental  principle:  “Everything  that  is  con¬ 
tingent  must  have  a  cause” — a  principle  without 
significance,  except  in  the  sensuous  world.  For 
the  purely  intellectual  conception  of  the  contin¬ 
gent  cannot  produce  any  synthetical  proposition, 
like  that  of  causality,  which  is  itself  without  sig¬ 
nificance  or  distinguishing  characteristic  except 
in  the  phenomenal  world.  But  in  the  present  case 
it  is  employed  to  help  us  beyond  the  limits  of  its 
sphere.  2.  “From  the  impossibility  of  an  infinite 
ascending  series  of  causes  in  the  world  of  sense 
a  first  cause  is  inferred”;  a  conclusion  which  the 
principles  of  the  employment  of  reason  do  not 
justify  even  in  the  sphere  of  experience,  and  still 
less  when  an  attempt  is  made  to  pass  the  limits 
of  this  sphere.  3.  Reason  allows  itself  to  be  sat¬ 
isfied  upon  insufficient  grounds,  with  regard  to 
the  completion  of  this  series.  It  removes  all  con¬ 
ditions  (without  which,  however,  no  conception 
of  Necessity  can  take  place) ;  and,  as  after  this 
it  is  beyond  our  power  to  form  any  other  con¬ 
ceptions,  it  accepts  this  as  a  completion  of  the 
conception  it  wishes  to  form  of  the  series.  4. 
The  logical  possibility  of  a  conception  of  the  to¬ 


tal  of  reality  (the  criterion  of  this  possibility 
being  the  absence  of  contradiction)  is  confound¬ 
ed  with  the  transcendental,  which  requires  a 
principle  of  the  practicability  of  such  a  synthe¬ 
sis — a  principle  which  again  refers  us  to  the 
world  of  experience.  And  so  on. 

The  aim  of  the  cosmological  argument  is  to 
avoid  the  necessity  of  proving  the  existence  of 
a  necessary  being  a  priori  from  mere  conceptions 
— a  proof  which  must  be  ontological,  and  of 
which  we  feel  ourselves  quite  incapable.  With 
this  purpose,  we  reason  from  an  actual  existence 
— an  experience  in  general,  to  an  absolutely  nec¬ 
essary  condition  of  that  existence.  It  is  in  this  case 
unnecessary  to  demonstrate  its  possibility.  For 
after  having  proved  that  it  exists,  the  question 
regardingits  possibility  is  superfluous.  Now,  when 
we  wish  to  define  more  strictly  the  nature  of  this 
necessary  being,  we  do  not  look  out  for  some 
being  the  conception  of  which  would  enable  us 
to  comprehend  the  necessity  of  its  being — for 
if  we  could  do  this,  an  empirical  presupposition 
would  be  unnecessary;  no,  we  try  to  discover 
merely  the  negative  condition  ( conditio  sine  qua 
non),  without  which  a  being  would  not  be  abso¬ 
lutely  necessary.  Now  this  would  be  perfectly 
admissible  in  every  sort  of  reasoning,  from  a 
consequence  to  its  principle;  but  in  the  present 
case  it  unfortunately  happens  that  the  condition 
of  absolute  necessity  can  be  discovered  in  but  a 
single  being,  the  conception  of  which  must  con¬ 
sequently  contain  all  that  is  requisite  for  dem¬ 
onstrating  the  presence  of  absolute  necessity, 
and  thus  entitle  me  to  infer  this  absolute  neces¬ 
sity  a  priori.  That  is,  it  must  be  possible  to  rea¬ 
son  conversely,  and  say:  The  thing,  to  which  the 
conception  of  the  highest  reality  belongs,  is  ab¬ 
solutely  necessary.  But  if  I  cannot  reason  thus 
— and  I  cannot,  unless  I  believe  in  the  sufficien¬ 
cy  of  the  ontological  argument — I  find  insur¬ 
mountable  obstacles  in  my  new  path,  and  am 
really  no  farther  than  the  point  from  which  I 
set  out.  The  conception  of  a  Supreme  Being  sat¬ 
isfies  all  questions  a  priori  regarding  the  internal 
determinations  of  a  thing,  and  is  for  this  reason 
an  ideal  without  equal  or  parallel,  the  general 
conception  of  it  indicating  it  as  at  the  same  time 
an  ens  individuum  among  all  possible  things. 
But  the  conception  does  not  satisfy  the  question 
regarding  its  existence — which  was  the  purpose 
of  all  our  inquiries;  and,  although  the  existence 
of  a  necessary  being  were  admitted,  we  should 
find  it  impossible  to  answer  the  question:  What 
of  all  things  in  the  world  must  be  regarded  as 
such? 

It  is  certainly  allowable  to  admit  the  existence 


OF  PURE 

of  an  all-sufficient  being — a  cause  of  all  possible 
effects — for  the  purpose  of  enabling  reason  to 
introduce  unity  into  its  mode  and  grounds  of 
explanation  with  regard  to  phenomena.  But  to 
assert  that  such  a  being  necessarily  exists ,  is  no 
longer  the  modest  enunciation  of  an  admissible 
hypothesis,  but  the  boldest  declaration  of  an 
apodeictic  certainty;  for  the  cognition  of  that 
which  is  absolutely  necessary  must  itself  possess 
that  character. 

The  aim  of  the  transcendental  ideal  formed 
by  the  mind  is  either  to  discover  a  conception 
which  shall  harmonize  with  the  idea  of  absolute 
necessity,  or  a  conception  which  shall  contain 
that  idea.  If  the  one  is  possible,  so  is  the  other; 
for  reason  recognizes  that  alone  as  absolutely 
necessary  which  is  necessary  from  its  concep¬ 
tion.  But  both  attempts  are  equally  beyond  our 
power — we  find  it  impossible  to  satisfy  the  un¬ 
derstanding  upon  this  point,  and  as  impossible 
to  induce  it  to  remain  at  rest  in  relation  to  this 
incapacity. 

Unconditioned  necessity,  which,  as  the  ulti¬ 
mate  support  and  stay  of  all  existing  things,  is 
an  indispensable  requirement  of  the  mind,  is  an 
abyss  on  the  verge  of  which  human  reason  trem¬ 
bles  in  dismay.  Even  the  idea  of  eternity,  terri¬ 
ble  and  sublime  as  it  is,  as  depicted  by  Haller, 
does  not  produce  upon  the  mental  vision  such  a 
feeling  of  awe  and  terror;  for,  although  it  meas¬ 
ures  the  duration  of  things,  it  does  not  support 
them.  We  cannot  bear,  nor  can  we  rid  ourselves 
of  the  thought  that  a  being,  which  we  regard  as 
the  greatest  of  all  possible  existences,  should  say 
to  himself :  I  am  from  eternity  to  eternity;  be¬ 
side  me  there  is  nothing,  except  that  which  ex¬ 
ists  by  my  will \hut  whence  then  am  /?  Here  all 
sinks  away  from  under  us ;  and  the  greatest,  as 
the  smallest,  perfection,  hovers  without  stay  or 
footing  in  presence  of  the  speculative  reason, 
which  finds  it  as  easy  to  part  with  the  one  as 
with  the  other.  9 

Many  physical  powers,  which  evidence  their 
existence  by  their  effects,  are  perfectly  inscru¬ 
table  in  their  nature;  they  elude  all  our  powers 
of  observation.  The  transcendental  object  which 
forms  the  basis  of  phenomena,  and,  in  connec¬ 
tion  with  it,  the  reason  why  our  sensibility  pos¬ 
sesses  this,  rather  than  that  particular  kind  of 
conditions,  are  and  must  ever  remain  hidden 
from  our  mental  vision;  the  fact  is  there,  the 
reason  of  the  fact  we  cannot  see.  But  an  ideal  of 
pure  reason  cannot  be  termed  mysterious  or  in¬ 
scrutable ,  because  the  only  credential  of  its  real¬ 
ity  is  the  need  of  it  felt  by  reason,  for  the  pur¬ 
pose  of  giving  completeness  to  the  world  of  syn- 


REASON  185 

thetical  unity.  An  ideal  is  not  even  given  as  a 
cogitable  object,  and  therefore  cannot  be  in¬ 
scrutable;  on  the  contrary,  it  must,  as  a  mere 
idea,  be  based  on  the  constitution  of  reason  it¬ 
self,  and  on  this  account  must  be  capable  of  ex¬ 
planation  and  solution.  For  the  very  essence  of 
reason  consists  in  its  ability  to  give  an  account, 
of  all  our  conceptions,  opinions,  and  assertions 
— upon  objective,  or,  when  they  happen  to  be  il¬ 
lusory  and  fallacious,  upon  subjective  grounds. 

Detection  and  Explanation  of  the  Dialectical 

Illusion  in  all  Transcendental  Arguments  for 

the  Existence  of  a  Necessary  Being 

Both  of  the  above  arguments  are  transcen¬ 
dental;  in  other  words,  they  do  not  proceed  up¬ 
on  empirical  principles.  For,  although  the  cos¬ 
mological  argument  professed  to  lay  a  basis  of 
experience  for  its  edifice  of  reasoning,  it  did  not 
ground  its  procedure  upon  the  peculiar  constitu¬ 
tion  of  experience,  but  upon  pure  principles  of 
reason — in  relation  to  an  existence  given  by 
empirical  consciousness;  utterly  abandoning  its 
guidance,  however,  for  the  purpose  of  support¬ 
ing  its  assertions  entirely  upon  pure  conceptions. 
Now  what  is  the  cause,  in  these  transcendental 
arguments,  of  the  dialectical,  but  natural,  illu¬ 
sion,  which  connects  the  conceptions  of  necessi¬ 
ty  and  supreme  reality,  and  hypostatizes  that 
which  cannot  be  anything  but  an  idea?  What  is 
the  cause  of  this  unavoidable  step  on  the  part 
of  reason,  of  admitting  that  some  one  among  all 
existing  things  must  be  necessary,  while  it  falls 
back  from  the  assertion  of  the  existence  of  such 
a  being  as  from  an  abyss?  And  how  does  reason 
proceed  to  explain  this  anomaly  to  itself,  and 
from  the  wavering  condition  of  a  timid  and  re¬ 
luctant  approbation — always  again  withdrawn — 
arrive  at  a  calm  and  settled  insight  into  its  cause? 

It  is  something  very  remarkable  that,  on  the 
supposition  that  something  exists,  I  cannot  avoid 
the  inference  that  something  exists  neces¬ 
sarily.  Upon  this  perfectly  natural — but  not  on 
that  account  reliable — inference  does  the  cos¬ 
mological  argument  rest.  But,  let  me  form  any 
conception  whatever  of  a  thing,  I  find  that  I 
cannot  cogitate  the  existence  of  the  thing  as  ab¬ 
solutely  necessary,  and  that  nothing  prevents 
me — be  the  thing  or  being  what  it  may — from 
cogitating  its  non-existence.  I  may  thus  be 
obliged  to  admit  that  all  existing  things  have  a 
necessary  basis,  while  I  cannot  cogitate  any  sin¬ 
gle  or  individual  thing  as  necessary.  In  other 
words,  I  can  never  complete  the  regress  through 
the  conditions  of  existence,  without  admitting 
the  existence  of  a  necessary  being;  but,  on  the 


186  THE  CRITIQUE 


other  hand,  I  cannot  make  a  commencement 
from  this  being. 

If  I  must  cogitate  something  as  existing  nec¬ 
essarily  as  the  basis  of  existing  things,  and  yet 
am  not  permitted  to  cogitate  any  individual 
thing  as  in  itself  necessary,  the  inevitable  infer¬ 
ence  is  that  necessity  and  contingency  are  not 
properties  of  things  themselves — otherwise  an 
internal  contradiction  would  result;  that  conse¬ 
quently  neither  of  these  principles  are  objective, 
but  merely  subjective  principles  of  reason — the 
one  requiring  us  to  seek  for  a  necessary  ground 
for  everything  that  exists,  that  is,  to  be  satisfied 
with  no  other  explanation  than  that  which  is 
complete  a  priori,  the  other  forbidding  us  ever 
to  hope  for  the  attainment  of  this  completeness, 
that  is,  to  regard  no  member  of  the  empirical 
world  as  unconditioned.  In  this  mode  of  viewing 
them,  both  principles,  in  their  purely  heuristic 
and  regulative  character,  and  as  concerning  mere¬ 
ly  the  formal  interest  of  reason,  are  quite  con¬ 
sistent  with  each  other.  The  one  says:  “You 
must  philosophize  upon  nature/’  as  if  there  ex¬ 
isted  a  necessary  primal  basis  of  all  existing 
things,  solely  for  the  purpose  of  introducing  sys¬ 
tematic  unity  into  your  knowledge,  by  pursuing 
an  idea  of  this  character — a  foundation  which  is 
arbitrarily  admitted  to  be  ultimate;  while  the 
other  warns  you  to  consider  no  individual  de¬ 
termination,  concerning  the  existence  of  things, 
as  such  an  ultimate  foundation,  that  is,  as  abso¬ 
lutely  necessary,  but  to  keep  the  way  always 
open  for  further  progress  in  the  deduction,  and 
to  treat  every  determination  as  determined  by 
some  other.  But  if  all  that  we  perceive  must  be 
regarded  as  conditionally  necessary,  it  is  impos¬ 
sible  that  anything  which  is  empirically  given 
should  be  absolutely  necessary. 

It  follows  from  this  that  you  must  accept  the 
absolutely  necessary  as  out  oj  and  beyond  the 
world,  inasmuch  as  it  is  useful  only  as  a  princi¬ 
ple  of  the  highest  possible  unity  in  experience, 
and  you  cannot  discover  any  such  necessary  ex¬ 
istence  in  the  world y  the  second  rule  requiring 
you  to  regard  all  empirical  causes  of  unity  as 
themselves  deduced. 

The  philosophers  of  antiquity  regarded  all  the 
forms  of  nature  as  contingent;  while  matter  was 
considered  by  them,  in  accordance  with  the 
judgement  of  the  common  reason  of  mankind, 
as  primal  and  necessary.  But  if  they  had  regard¬ 
ed  matter,  not  relatively — as  the  substratum  of 
phenomena,  but  absolutely  and  in  itself — as  an 
independent  existence,  this  idea  of  absolute  ne¬ 
cessity  would  have  immediately  disappeared.  For 
there  is  nothing  absolutely  connecting  reason 


with  such  an  existence;  on  the  contrary,  it  can 
annihilate  it  in  thought,  always  and  without  self- 
contradiction.  But  in  thought  alone  lay  the  idea 
of  absolute  necessity.  A  regulative  principle  must, 
therefore,  have  been  at  the  foundation  of  this 
opinion.  In  fact,  extension  and  impenetrability 
— which  together  constitute  our  conception  of 
matter — form  the  supreme  empirical  principle 
of  the  unity  of  phenomena,  and  this  principle, 
in  so  far  as  it  is  empirically  unconditioned,  pos¬ 
sesses  the  property  of  a  regulative  principle. 
But,  as  every  determination  of  matter  which 
constitutes  what  is  real  in  it — and  consequently 
impenetrability — is  an  effect,  which  must  have 
a  cause,  and  is  for  this  reason  always  derived, 
the  notion  of  matter  cannot  harmonize  with  the 
idea  of  a  necessary  being,  in  its  character  of  the 
principle  of  all  derived  unity.  For  every  one  of 
its  real  properties,  being  derived,  must  be  only 
conditionally  necessary,  and  can  therefore  be 
annihilated  in  thought;  and  thus  the  whole  ex¬ 
istence  of  matter  can  be  so  annihilated  or  sup¬ 
pressed.  If  this  were  not  the  case,  we  should 
have  found  in  the  world  of  phenomena  the  high¬ 
est  ground  or  condition  of  unity — which  is  im¬ 
possible,  according  to  the  second  regulative  prin¬ 
ciple.  It  follows  that  matter,  and,  in  general,  all 
that  forms  part  of  the  world  of  sense,  cannot  be 
a  necessary  primal  being,  nor  even  a  principle 
of  empirical  unity,  but  that  this  being  or  princi¬ 
ple  must  have  its  place  assigned  without  the 
world.  And,  in  this  way,  we  can  proceed  in  per¬ 
fect  confidence  to  deduce  the  phenomena  of  the 
world  and  their  existence  from  other  phenome¬ 
na,  just  as  if  there  existed  no  necessary  being; 
and  we  can  at  the  same  time,  strive  without 
ceasing  towards  the  attainment  of  completeness 
for  our  deduction,  just  as  if  such  a  being — the 
supreme  condition  of  all  existences — were  pre¬ 
supposed  by  the  mind. 

These  remarks  will  have  made  it  evident  to 
the  reader  that  the  ideal  of  the  Supreme  Being, 
far  from  being  an  enouncement  of  the  existence 
of  a  being  in  itself  necessary,  is  nothing  more 
than  a  regulative  principle  of  reason,  requiring 
us  to  regard  all  connection  existing  between  phe¬ 
nomena  as  if  it  had  its  origin  from  an  all-suffi¬ 
cient  necessary  cause,  and  basing  upon  this  the 
rule  of  a  systematic  and  necessary  unity  in  the 
explanation  of  phenomena.  We  cannot,  at  the 
same  time,  avoid  regarding,  by  a  transcendental 
subreptio,  this  formal  principle  as  constitutive, 
and  hypostatizing  this  unity.  Precisely  similar  is 
the  case  with  our  notion  of  space.  Space  is  the 
primal  condition  of  all  forms,  which  are  proper¬ 
ly  just  so  many  different  limitations  of  it;  and 


OF  PURE 

thus,  although  it  is  merely  a  principle  of  sensi¬ 
bility,  we  cannot  help  regarding  it  as  an  abso¬ 
lutely  necessary  and  self-subsistent  thing — as  an 
object  given  a  priori  in  itself.  In  the  same  way, 
it  is  quite  natural  that,  as  the  systematic  unity 
of  nature  cannot  be  established  as  a  principle 
for  the  empirical  employment  of  reason,  unless 
it  is  based  upon  the  idea  of  an  ens  realissimum, 
as  the  supreme  cause,  we  should  regard  this  idea 
as  a  real  object,  and  this  object,  in  its  character 
of  supreme  condition,  as  absolutely  necessary, 
and  that  in  this  way  a  regulative  should  be  trans¬ 
formed  into  a  constitutive  principle.  This  inter¬ 
change  becomes  evident  when  I  regard  this  su¬ 
preme  being,  which,  relatively  to  the  world, 
was  absolutely  (unconditionally)  necessary,  as 
a  thing  per  se.  In  this  case,  I  find  it  impossible 
to  represent  this  necessity  in  or  by  any  concep¬ 
tion,  and  it  exists  merely  in  my  own  mind,  as 
the  formal  condition  of  thought,  but  not  as  a 
material  and  hypostatic  condition  of  existence. 

Section  VI.  Of  the  Impossibility  of  a  Physico- 
Theological  Proof 

If,  then,  neither  a  pure  conception  nor  the  gen¬ 
eral  experience  of  an  existing  being  can  provide 
a  sufficient  basis  for  the  proof  of  the  existence 
of  the  Deity,  we  can  make  the  attempt  by  the 
only  other  mode — that  of  grounding  our  argu¬ 
ment  upon  a  determinate  experience  of  the  phe¬ 
nomena  of  the  present  world,  their  constitution 
and  disposition,  and  discover  whether  we  can 
thus  attain  to  a  sound  conviction  of  the  exist¬ 
ence  of  a  Supreme  Being.  This  argument  we 
shall  term  the  physico-theological  argument.  If 
it  is  shown  to  be  insufficient,  speculative  reason 
cannot  present  us  with  any  satisfactory  proof  of 
the  existence  of  a  being  corresponding  to  our 
transcendental  idea. 

It  is  evident  from  the  remarks  that  have  been 
made  in  the  preceding  sections,  that  an  answer 
to  this  question  will  be  far  from  being  difficult 
or  unconvincing.  For  how  can  any  experience  be 
adequate  with  an  idea?  The  very  essence  of  an 
idea  consists  in  the  fact  that  no  experience  can 
ever  be  discovered  congruent  or  adequate  with 
it.  The  transcendental  idea  of  a  necessary  and 
all-sufficient  being  is  so  immeasurably  great,  so 
high  above  all  that  is  empirical,  which  is  always 
conditioned,  that  we  hope  in  vain  to  find  mate¬ 
rials  in  the  sphere  of  experience  sufficiently  am¬ 
ple  for  our  conception,  and  in  vain  seek  the  un¬ 
conditioned  among  things  that  are  conditioned, 
while  examples,  nay,  even  guidance  is  denied  us 
by  the  laws  of  empirical  synthesis. 

If  rhe  Supreme  Being  forms  a  link  in  the 


REASON  187 

chain  of  empirical  conditions,  it  must  be  a  mem¬ 
ber  of  the  empirical  series,  and,  like  the  lower 
members  which  it  precedes,  have  its  origin  in 
some  higher  member  of  the  series.  If,  on  the 
other  hand,  we  disengage  it  from  the  chain,  and 
cogitate  it  as  an  intelligible  being,  apart  from 
the  series  of  natural  causes — how  shall  reason 
bridge  the  abyss  that  separates  the  latter  from 
the  former?  All  laws  respecting  the  regress 
from  effects  to  causes,  all  synthetical  additions 
to  our  knowledge  relate  solely  to  possible  expe¬ 
rience  and  the  objects  of  the  sensuous  world, 
and,  apart  from  them,  are  without  significance. 

The  world  around  us  opens  before  our  view 
so  magnificent  a  spectacle  of  order,  variety, 
beauty,  and  conformity  to  ends,  that  whether 
we  pursue  our  observations  into  the  infinity  of 
space  in  the  one  direction,  or  into  its  illimitable 
divisions  in  the  other,  whether  we  regard  the 
world  in  its  greatest  or  its  least  manifestations 
— even  after  we  have  attained  to  the  highest 
summit  of  knowledge  which  our  weak  minds  can 
reach,  we  find  that  language  in  the  presence  of 
wonders  so  inconceivable  has  lost  its  force,  and 
number  its  power  to  reckon,  nay,  even  thought 
fails  to  conceive  adequately,  and  our  conception 
of  the  whole  dissolves  into  an  astonishment 
without  power  of  expression — all  the  more  elo¬ 
quent  that  it  is  dumb.  Everywhere  around  us  we 
observe  a  chain  of  causes  and  effects,  of  means 
and  ends,  of  death  and  birth;  and,  as  nothing 
has  entered  of  itself  into  the  condition  in  which 
we  find  it,  we  are  constantly  referred  to  some 
other  thing,  which  itself  suggests  the  same  in¬ 
quiry  regarding  its  cause,  and  thus  the  universe 
must  sink  into  the  abyss  of  nothingness,  unless 
we  admit  that,  besides  this  infinite  chain  of  con¬ 
tingencies,  there  exists  something  that  is  primal 
and  self-subsistent — something  which,  as  the 
cause  of  this  phenomenal  world,  secures  its  con¬ 
tinuance  and  preservation. 

This  highest  cause — what  magnitude  shall  we 
attribute  to  it?  Of  the  content  of  the  world  we 
are  ignorant;  still  less  can  we  estimate  its  mag¬ 
nitude  by  comparison  with  the  sphere  of  the  pos¬ 
sible.  But  this  supreme  cause  being  a  necessity 
of  the  human  mind,  what  is  there  to  prevent  us 
from  attributing  to  it  such  a  degree  of  perfec¬ 
tion  as  to  place  it  above  the  sphere  of  all  that  is 
possible?  This  we  can  easily  do,  although  only 
by  the  aid  of  the  faint  outline  of  an  abstract  con¬ 
ception,  by  representing  this  being  to  ourselves 
as  containing  in  itself,  as  an  individual  substance, 
all  possible  perfection — a  conception  which  sat¬ 
isfies  that  requirement  of  reason  which  demands 
parsimony  in  principles,  which  is  free  from  self- 


i88 


THE  CRITIQUE 


contradiction,  which  even  contributes  to  the  ex¬ 
tension  of  the  employment  of  reason  in  experi¬ 
ence,  by  means  of  the  guidance  afforded  by  this 
idea  to  order  and  system,  and  which  in  no  re¬ 
spect  conflicts  with  any  law  of  experience. 

This  argument  always  deserves  to  be  men¬ 
tioned  with  respect.  It  is  the  oldest,  the  clearest, 
and  that  most  in  conformity  with  the  common 
reason  of  humanity.  It  animates  the  study  of 
nature,  as  it  itself  derives  its  existence  and  draws 
ever  new  strength  from  that  source.  It  intro¬ 
duces  aims  and  ends  into  a  sphere  in  which  our 
observation  could  not  of  itself  have  discovered 
them,  and  extends  our  knowledge  of  nature,  by 
directing  our  attention  to  a  unity,  the  principle 
of  which  lies  beyond  nature.  This  knowledge  of 
nature  again  reacts  upon  this  idea — its  cause; 
and  thus  our  belief  in  a  divine  author  of  the  uni¬ 
verse  rises  to  the  power  of  an  irresistible  convic¬ 
tion. 

For  these  reasons  it  would  be  utterly  hopeless 
to  attempt  to  rob  this  argument  of  the  authority 
it  has  always  enjoyed.  The  mind,  unceasingly  el¬ 
evated  by  these  considerations,  which,  although 
empirical,  are  so  remarkably  powerful,  and  con¬ 
tinually  adding  to  their  force,  will  not  suffer  it¬ 
self  to  be  depressed  by  the  doubts  suggested  by 
subtle  speculation;  it  tears  itself  out  of  this 
state  of  uncertainty,  the  moment  it  casts  a  look 
upon  the  wondrous  forms  of  nature  and  the  maj¬ 
esty  of  the  universe,  and  rises  from  height  to 
height,  from  condition  to  condition,  till  it  has 
elevated  itself  to  the  supreme  and  unconditioned 
author  of  all. 

But  although  we  have  nothing  to  object  to  the 
reasonableness  and  utility  of  this  procedure,  but 
have  rather  to  commend  and  encourage  it,  we 
cannot  approve  of  the  claims  which  this  argu¬ 
ment  advances  to  demonstrative  certainty  and 
to  a  reception  upon  its  own  merits,  apart  from 
favour  or  support  by  other  arguments.  Nor  can 
it  injure  the  cause  of  morality  to  endeavour  to 
lower  the  tone  of  the  arrogant  sophist,  and  to 
teach  him  that  modesty  and  moderation  which 
are  the  properties  of  a  belief  that  brings  calm 
and  content  into  the  mind,  without  prescribing 
to  it  an  unworthy  subjection.  I  maintain,  then, 
that  the  physico-theological  argument  is  insuf¬ 
ficient  of  itself  to  prove  the  existence  of  a  Su¬ 
preme  Being,  that  it  must  entrust  this  to  the  on¬ 
tological  argument — to  which  it  serves  merely 
as  an  introduction,  and  that,  consequently,  this 
argument  contains  the  only  possible  ground  of 
proof  (possessed  by  speculative  reason)  for  the 
existence  of  this  being. 


The  chief  momenta  in  the  physico-theological 
argument  are  as  follow:  i.  We  observe  in  the 
world  manifest  signs  of  an  arrangement  full  of 
purpose,  executed  with  great  wisdom,  and  exist¬ 
ing  in  a  whole  of  a  content  indescribably  vari¬ 
ous,  and  of  an  extent  without  limits.  2.  This  ar¬ 
rangement  of  means  and  ends  is  entirely  foreign 
to  the  things  existing  in  the  world — it  belongs  to 
them  merely  as  a  contingent  attribute;  in  other 
words,  the  nature  of  different  things  could  not 
of  itself,  whatever  means  were  employed,  har¬ 
moniously  tend  towards  certain  purposes,  were 
they  not  chosen  and  directed  for  these  purposes 
by  a  rational  and  disposing  principle,  in  accord¬ 
ance  with  certain  fundamental  ideas.  3.  There 
exists,  therefore,  a  sublime  and  wise  cause  (or 
several),  which  is  not  merely  a  blind,  all-power¬ 
ful  nature,  producing  the  beings  and  events  which 
fill  the  world  in  unconscious  fecundity ,  but  a 
free  and  intelligent  cause  of  the  world.  4.  The 
unity  of  this  cause  may  be  inferred  from  the 
unity  of  the  reciprocal  relation  existing  between 
the  parts  of  the  world,  as  portions  of  an  artistic 
edifice — an  inference  which  all  our  observation 
favours,  and  all  principles  of  analogy  support. 

In  the  above  argument,  it  is  inferred  from  the 
analogy  of  certain  products  of  nature  with  those 
of  human  art,  when  it  compels  Nature  to  bend 
herself  to  its  purposes,  as  in  the  case  of  a  house, 
a  ship,  or  a  watch,  that  the  same  kind  of  causal¬ 
ity — namely,  understanding  and  will — resides  in 
nature.  It  is  also  declared  that  the  internal  pos¬ 
sibility  of  this  freely-acting  nature  (which  is  the 
source  of  all  art,  and  perhaps  also  of  human  rea¬ 
son)  is  derivable  from  another  and  superhuman 
art — a  conclusion  which  would  perhaps  be  found 
incapable  of  standing  the  test  of  subtle  transcen¬ 
dental  criticism.  But  to  neither  of  these  opinions 
shall  we  at  present  object.  We  shall  only  re¬ 
mark  that  it  must  be  confessed  that,  if  we  are 
to  discuss  the  subject  of  cause  at  all,  we  cannot 
proceed  more  securely  than  with  the  guidance  of 
the  analogy  subsisting  between  nature  and  such 
products  of  design — these  being  the  only  prod¬ 
ucts  whose  causes  and  modes  of  organization  are 
completely  known  to  us.  Reason  would  be  unable 
to  satisfy  her  own  requirements,  if  she  passed 
from  a  causality  which  she  does  know,  to  ob¬ 
scure  and  indemonstrable  principles  of  explana¬ 
tion  which  she  does  not  know. 

According  to  the  physico-theological  argu¬ 
ment,  the  connection  and  harmony  existing  in 
the  world  evidence  the  contingency  of  the  form 
merely,  but  not  of  the  matter,  that  is,  of  the 
substance  of  the  world.  To  establish  the  truth  of 


OF  PURE  REASON  180 


the  latter  opinion,  it  would  be  necessary  to  prove 
that  all  things  would  be  in  themselves  incapable 
of  this  harmony  and  order,  unless  they  were, 
even  as  regards  their  substance .  the  product  of  a 
supreme  wisdom.  But  this  would  require  very 
different  grounds  of  proof  from  those  presented 
by  the  analogy  with  human  art.  This  proof  can 
at  most,  therefore,  demonstrate  the  existence  of 
an  architect  of  the  world,  whose  efforts  are  lim¬ 
ited  by  the  capabilities  of  the  material  with 
which  he  works,  but  not  of  a  creator  of  the 
world,  to  whom  all  things  are  subject.  Thus  this 
argument  is  utterly  insufficient  for  the  task  be¬ 
fore  us — a  demonstration  of  the  existence  of  an 
all-sufficient  being.  If  we  wish  to  prove  the  con¬ 
tingency  of  matter,  we  must  have  recourse  to  a 
transcendental  argument,  which  the  physico- 
theological  was  constructed  expressly  to  avoid. 

We  infer,  from  the  order  and  design  visible 
in  the  universe,  as  a  disposition  of  a  thoroughly 
contingent  character,  the  existence  of  a  cause 
proportionate  thereto.  The  conception  of  this 
cause  must  contain  certain  determinate  quali¬ 
ties,  and  it  must  therefore  be  regarded  as  the 
conception  of  a  being  which  possesses  all  power, 
wisdom,  and  so  on,  in  one  word,  all  perfection — 
the  conception,  that  is,  of  an  all-sufficient  being. 
For  the  predicates  of  very  great,  astonishing,  or 
immeasurable  power  and  excellence,  give  us  no 
determinate  conception  of  the  thing,  nor  do  they 
inform  us  what  the  thing  may  be  in  itself.  They 
merely  indicate  the  relation  existing  between  the 
magnitude  of  the  object  and  the  observer,  who 
compares  it  with  himself  and  with  his  own  pow¬ 
er  of  comprehension,  and  are  mere  expressions 
of  praise  and  reverence,  by  which  the  object  is 
either  magnified,  or  the  observing  subject  de¬ 
preciated  in  relation  to  the  object.  Where  we 
have  to  do  with  the  magnitude  (of  the  perfec¬ 
tion)  of  a  thing,  we  can  discover  no  determinate 
conception,  except  that  which  comprehends  all 
possible  perfection  or  completeness,  and  it  is 
only  the  total  ( omnitudo )  of  reality  which  is 
completely  determined  in  and  through  its  con¬ 
ception  alone. 

Now  it  cannot  be  expected  that  any  one  will 
be  bold  enough  to  declare  that  he  has  a  perfect 
insight  into  the  relation  which  the  magnitude  of 
the  world  he  contemplates  bears  (in  its  extent 
as  well  as  in  its  content)  to  omnipotence,  into 
that  of  the  order  and  design  in  the  world  to  the 
highest  wisdom,  and  that  of  the  unity  of  the 
world  to  the  absolute  unity  of  a  Supreme  Being. 
Physico-theology  is  therefore  incapable  of  pre¬ 
senting  a  determinate  conception  of  a  supreme 


cause  of  the  world,  and  is  therefore  insufficient 
as  a  principle  of  theology — a  theology  which  is 
itself  to  be  the  basis  of  religion. 

The  attainment  of  absolute  totality  is  com¬ 
pletely  impossible  on  the  path  of  empiricism. 
And  yet  this  is  the  path  pursued  in  the  physico- 
theological  argument.  What  means  shall  we  em¬ 
ploy  to  bridge  the  abyss? 

After  elevating  ourselves  to  admiration  of  the 
magnitude  of  the  power,  wisdom,  and  other  at¬ 
tributes  of  the  author  of  the  world,  and  finding 
we  can  advance  no  further,  we  leave  the  argu¬ 
ment  on  empirical  grounds,  and  proceed  to  infer 
the  contingency  of  the  world  from  the  order  and 
conformity  to  aims  that  are  observable  in  it. 
From  this  contingency  we  infer,  by  the  help  of 
transcendental  conceptions  alone,  the  existence 
of  something  absolutely  necessary;  and,  still  ad¬ 
vancing,  proceed  from  the  conception  of  the  ab¬ 
solute  necessity  of  the  first  cause  to  the  com¬ 
pletely  determined  or  determining  conception 
thereof — the  conception  of  an  all-embracing  re¬ 
ality.  Thus  the  physico-theological,  failing  in  its 
undertaking,  recurs  in  its  embarrassment  to  the 
cosmological  argument;  and,  as  this  is  merely 
the  ontological  argument  in  disguise,  it  executes 
its  design  solely  by  the  aid  of  pure  reason,  al¬ 
though  it  at  first  professed  to  have  no  connec¬ 
tion  with  this  faculty  and  to  base  its  entire  pro¬ 
cedure  upon  experience  alone. 

The  physico-theologians  have  therefore  no 
reason  to  regard  with  such  contempt  the  tran¬ 
scendental  mode  of  argument,  and  to  look  down 
upon  it,  with  the  conceit  of  clear-sighted  observ¬ 
ers  of  nature,  as  the  brain-cobweb  of  obscure 
speculatists.  For,  if  they  reflect  upon  and  exam¬ 
ine  their  own  arguments,  they  will  find  that, 
after  following  for  some  time  the  path  of  nature 
and  experience,  and  discovering  themselves  no 
nearer  their  object,  they  suddenly  leave  this 
path  and  pass  into  the  region  of  pure  possibility, 
where  they  hope  to  reach  upon  the  wings  of 
ideas  what  had  eluded  all  their  empirical  inves¬ 
tigations.  Gaining,  as  they  think,  a  firm  footing 
after  this  immense  leap,  they  extend  their  de¬ 
terminate  conception — into  the  possession  of 
which  they  have  come,  they  know  not  how — 
over  the  whole  sphere  of  creation,  and  explain 
their  ideal,  which  is  entirely  a  product  of  pure 
reason,  by  illustrations  drawn  from  experience 
— though  in  a  degree  miserably  unworthy  of  the 
grandeur  of  the  object,  while  they  refuse  to  ac¬ 
knowledge  that  they  have  arrived  at  this  cogni¬ 
tion  or  hypothesis  by  a  very  different  road  from 
that  of  experience. 


THE  CRITIQUE 


Thus  the  physico-theological  is  based  upon 
the  cosmological,  and  this  upon  the  ontological 
proof  of  the  existence  of  a  Supreme  Being;  and 
as  besides  these  three  there  is  no  other  path 
open  to  speculative  reason,  the  ontological  proof, 
on  the  ground  of  pure  conceptions  of  reason,  is 
the  only  possible  one,  if  any  proof  of  a  proposi¬ 
tion  so  far  transcending  the  empirical  exercise 
of  the  understanding  is  possible  at  all. 

Section  VII.  Critique  of  all  Theology  based 
upon  Speculative  Principles  of  Reason 

If  by  the  term  theology  I  understand  the  cogni¬ 
tion  of  a  primal  being,  that  cognition  is  based 
either  upon  reason  alone  ( theologia  rationalist 
or  upon  revelation  ( theologia  revelata).  The  for¬ 
mer  cogitates  its  object  either  by  means  of  pure 
transcendental  conceptions,  as  an  ens  originari- 
um ,  realissimum ,  ens  entium,  and  is  termed  tran¬ 
scendental  theology ;  or,  by  means  of  a  concep¬ 
tion  derived  from  the  nature  of  our  own  mind, 
as  a  supreme  intelligence,  and  must  then  be  en¬ 
titled  natural  theology.  The  person  who  believes 
in  a  transcendental  theology  alone,  is  termed  a 
deist]  he  who  acknowledges  the  possibility  of  a 
natural  theology  also,  a  theist.  The  former  ad¬ 
mits  that  we  can  cognize  by  pure  reason  alone 
the  existence  of  a  Supreme  Being,  but  at  the 
same  time  maintains  that  our  conception  of  this 
being  is  purely  transcendental,  and  that  all  we 
can  say  of  it  is  that  it  possesses  all  reality,  with¬ 
out  being  able  to  define  it  more  closely.  The  sec¬ 
ond  asserts  that  reason  is  capable  of  presenting 
us,  from  the  analogy  with  nature,  with  a  more 
definite  conception  of  this  being,  and  that  its 
operations,  as  the  cause  of  all  things,  are  the  re¬ 
sults  of  intelligence  and  free  will.  The  former 
regards  the  Supreme  Being  as  the  cause  of  the 
world — whether  by  the  necessity  of  his  nature, 
or  as  a  free  agent,  is  left  undetermined;  the  lat¬ 
ter  considers  this  being  as  the  author  of  the  world. 

Transcendental  theology  aims  either  at  infer¬ 
ring  the  existence  of  a  Supreme  Being  from  a 
general  experience,  without  any  closer  reference 
to  the  world  to  which  this  experience  belongs, 
and  in  this  case  it  is  called  cosmotheology ;  or  it 
endeavours  to  cognize  the  existence  of  such  a 
being,  through  mere  conceptions,  without  the  aid 
of  experience,  and  is  then  termed  ontotheology. 

Natural  theology  infers  the  attributes  and  the 
existence  of  an  author  of  the  world,  from  the 
constitution  of,  the  order  and  unity  observable 
in,  the  world,  in  which  two  modes  of  causality 
must  be  admitted  to  exist — those  of  nature  and 
freedom.  Thus  it  rises  from  this  world  to  a  su¬ 
preme  intelligence,  either  as  the  principle  of  all 


natural,  or  of  all  moral  order  and  perfection.  In 
the  former  case  it  is  termed  physico-theology,  in 
the  latter,  ethical  or  moral- theology.1 

As  we  are  wont  to  understand  by  the  term  God 
not  merely  an  eternal  nature,  the  operations  of 
which  are  insensate  and  blind,  but  a  Supreme 
Being,  who  is  the  free  and  intelligent  author  of 
all  things,  and  as  it  is  this  latter  view  alone  that 
can  be  of  interest  to  humanity,  we  might,  in 
strict  rigour,  deny  to  the  deist  any  belief  in  God 
at  all,  and  regard  him  merely  as  a  maintainer  of 
the  existence  of  a  primal  being  or  thing — the  su¬ 
preme  cause  of  all  other  things.  But,  as  no  one 
ought  to  be  blamed,  merely  because  he  does  not 
feel  himself  justified  in  maintaining  a  certain 
opinion,  as  if  he  altogether  denied  its  truth  and 
asserted  the  opposite,  it  is  more  correct — as  it  is 
less  harsh — to  say,  the  deist  believes  in  a  God, 
the  theist  in  a  living  God  ( summa  intelligent^) . 
We  shall  now  proceed  to  investigate  the  sources 
of  all  these  attempts  of  reason  to  establish  the 
existence  of  a  Supreme  Being. 

It  may  be  sufficient  in  this  place  to  define  the¬ 
oretical  knowledge  or  cognition  as  knowledge  of 
that  which  is,  and  practical  knowledge  as  knowl¬ 
edge  of  that  which  ought  to  be.  In  this  view,  the 
theoretical  employment  of  reason  is  that  by  which 
I  cognize  a  priori  (as  necessary)  that  something 
is,  while  the  practical  is  that  by  which  I  cognize 
a  priori  what  ought  to  happen.  Now,  if  it  is  an 
indubitably  certain,  though  at  the  same  time  an 
entirely  conditioned  truth,  that  something  is,  or 
ought  to  happen,  either  a  certain  determinate 
condition  of  this  truth  is  absolutely  necessary, 
or  such  a  condition  may  be  arbitrarily  presup¬ 
posed.  In  the  former  case  the  condition  is  postu¬ 
lated  ( per  thesin),  in  the  latter  supposed  (per 
hypothesin) .  There  are  certain  practical  laws — 
those  of  morality — which  are  absolutely  neces¬ 
sary.  Now,  if  these  laws  necessarily  presuppose 
the  existence  of  some  being,  as  the  condition  of 
the  possibility  of  their  obligatory  power,  this  be¬ 
ing  must  be  postulated,  because  the  conditioned, 
from  which  we  reason  to  this  determinate  con¬ 
dition,  is  itself  cognized  a  priori  as  absolutely 
necessary.  We  shall  at  some  future  time  show 
that  the  moral  laws  not  merely  presuppose  the 
existence  of  a  Supreme  Being,  but  also,  as  them¬ 
selves  absolutely  necessary  in  a  different  rela¬ 
tion,  demand  or  postulate  it — although  only 
from  a  practical  point  of  view.  The  discussion 
of  this  argument  we  postpone  for  the  present. 

i  Not  theological  ethics;  for  this  science  contains  ethi¬ 
cal  laws,  which  presuppose  the  existence  of  a  Supreme 
Governor  of  the  world;  while  moral-theology,  on  the 
contrary,  is  the  expression  of  a  conviction  of  the  exist¬ 
ence  of  a  Supreme  Being,  founded  upon  ethical  laws. 


OF  PURE 

When  the  question  relates  merely  to  that  which 
is,  not  to  that  which  ought  to  be,  the  conditioned 
which  is  presented  in  experience  is  always  cogi¬ 
tated  as  contingent.  For  this  reason  its  condition 
cannot  be  regarded  as  absolutely  necessary,  but 
merely  as  relatively  necessary,  or  rather  as  need¬ 
ful;  the  condition  is  in  itself  and  a  priori  a  mere 
arbitrary  presupposition  in  aid  of  the  cognition, 
by  reason,  of  the  conditioned.  If,  then,  we  are 
to  possess  a  theoretical  cognition  of  the  absolute 
necessity  of  a  thing,  we  cannot  attain  to  this 
cognition  otherwise  than  a  priori  by  means  of 
conceptions;  while  it  is  impossible  in  this  way 
to  cognize  the  existence  of  a  cause  which 
bears  any  relation  to  an  existence  given  in 
experience. 

Theoretical  cognition  is  speculative  when  it 
relates  to  an  object  or  certain  conceptions  of  an 
object  which  is  not  given  and  cannot  be  discov¬ 
ered  by  means  of  experience.  It  is  opposed  to 
the  cognition  of  nature ,  which  concerns  only 
those  objects  or  predicates  which  can  be  pre¬ 
sented  in  a  possible  experience. 

The  principle  that  everything  which  happens 
(the  empirically  contingent)  must  have  a  cause, 
is  a  principle  of  the  cognition  of  nature,  but  not 
of  speculative  cognition.  For,  if  we  change  it  in¬ 
to  an  abstract  principle,  and  deprive  it  of  its 
reference  to  experience  and  the  empirical,  we 
shall  find  that  it  cannot  with  justice  be  regarded 
any  longer  as  a  synthetical  proposition,  and  that 
it  is  impossible  to  discover  any  mode  of  transi¬ 
tion  from  that  which  exists  to  something  entire¬ 
ly  different  —  termed  cause.  Nay,  more,  the 
conception  of  a  cause — as  likewise  that  of  the 
contingent — loses,  in  this  speculative  mode  of 
employing  it,  all  significance,  for  its  objective 
reality  and  meaning  are  comprehensible  from 
experience  alone. 

When  from  the  existence  of  the  universe  and 
the  things  in  it  the  existence  of  a  cause  of  the 
universe  is  inferred,  reason  is  proceeding  not  in 
the  natural,  but  in  the  speculative  method.  For 
the  principle  of  the  former  enounces,  not  that 
things  themselves  or  substances,  but  only  that 
which  happens  or  their  states — as  empirically 
contingent,  have  a  cause:  the  assertion  that  the 
existence  of  substance  itself  is  contingent  is  not 
justified  by  experience,  it  is  the  assertion  of  a 
reason  employing  its  principles  in  a  speculative 
manner.  If,  again,  I  infer  from  the  form  of  the 
universe,  from  the  way  in  which  all  things  are 
connected  and  act  and  react  upon  each  other, 
the  existence  of  a  cause  entirely  distinct  from 
the  universe — this  would  again  be  a  judgement 
of  purely  speculative  reason;  because  the  object 


REASON  iqi 

in  this  case — the  cause — can  never  be  an  object 
of  possible  experience.  In  both  these  cases  the 
principle  of  causality,  which  is  valid  only  in  the 
field  of  experience — useless  and  even  meaning¬ 
less  beyond  this  region,  would  be  diverted  from 
its  proper  destination. 

Now  I  maintain  that  all  attempts  of  reason  to 
establish  a  theology  by  the  aid  of  speculation 
alone  are  fruitless,  that  the  principles  of  reason 
as  applied  to  nature  do  not  conduct  us  to  any 
theological  truths,  and,  consequently,  that  a  ra¬ 
tional  theology  can  have  no  existence,  unless  it 
is  founded  upon  the  laws  of  morality.  For  all 
synthetical  principles  of  the  understanding  are 
valid  only  as  immanent  in  experience;  while  the 
cognition  of  a  Supreme  Being  necessitates  their 
being  employed  transcendentally,  and  of  this  the 
understanding  is  quite  incapable.  If  the  empiri¬ 
cal  law  of  causality  is  to  conduct  us  to  a  Supreme 
Being,  this  being  must  belong  to  the  chain  of 
empirical  objects — in  which  case  it  would  be, 
like  all  phenomena,  itself  conditioned.  If  the 
possibility  of  passing  the  limits  of  experience  be 
admitted,  by  means  of  the  dynamical  law  of  the 
relation  of  an  effect  to  its  cause,  what  kind  of 
conception  shall  we  obtain  by  this  procedure? 
Certainly  not  the  conception  of  a  Supreme  Be¬ 
ing,  because  experience  never  presents  us  with 
the  greatest  of  all  possible  effects,  and  it  is  only 
an  effect  of  this  character  that  could  witness  to 
the  existence  of  a  corresponding  cause.  If,  for 
the  purpose  of  fully  satisfying  the  requirements 
of  Reason,  we  recognize  her  right  to  assert  the 
existence  of  a  perfect  and  absolutely  necessary 
being,  this  can  be  admitted  only  from  favour, 
and  cannot  be  regarded  as  the  result  or  irre¬ 
sistible  demonstration.  The  physico-theological 
proof  may  add  weight  to  others — if  other  proofs 
there  are — by  connecting  speculation  with  ex¬ 
perience;  but  in  itself  it  rather  prepares  the 
mind  for  theological  cognition,  and  gives  it  a 
right  and  natural  direction,  than  establishes  a 
sure  foundation  for  theology. 

It  is  now  perfectly  evident  that  transcenden¬ 
tal  questions  admit  only  of  transcendental  an¬ 
swers — those  presented  a  priori  by  pure  concep¬ 
tions  without  the  least  empirical  admixture.  But 
the  question  in  the  present  case  is  evidently  syn¬ 
thetical — it  aims  at  the  extension  of  our  cogni¬ 
tion  beyond  the  bounds  of  experience — it  re¬ 
quires  an  assurance  respecting  the  existence  of 
a  being  corresponding  with  the  idea  in  our  minds, 
to  which  no  experience  can  ever  be  adequate. 
Now  it  has  been  abundantly  proved  that  all  a 
priori  synthetical  cognition  is  possible  only  as 
the  expression  of  the  formal  conditions  of  a  pos- 


THE  CRITIQUE 


192 

sible  experience;  and  that  the  validity  of  all 
principles  depends  upon  their  immanence  in  the 
field  of  experience,  that  is,  their  relation  to  ob¬ 
jects  of  empirical  cognition  or  phenomena.  Thus 
all  transcendental  procedure  in  reference  to  spec¬ 
ulative  theology  is  without  result. 

If  any  one  prefers  doubting  the  conclusive¬ 
ness  of  the  proofs  of  our  analytic  to  losing  the 
persuasion  of  the  validity  of  these  old  and  time- 
honoured  arguments,  he  at  least  cannot  decline 
answering  the  question — how  he  can  pass  the 
limits  of  all  possible  experience  by  the  help  of 
mere  ideas.  If  he  talks  of  new  arguments,  or  of 
improvements  upon  old  arguments,  I  request 
him  to  spare  me.  There  is  certainly  no  great 
choice  in  this  sphere  of  discussion,  as  all  specu¬ 
lative  arguments  must  at  last  look  for  support 
to  the  ontological,  and  I  have,  therefore,  very 
little  to  fear  from  the  argumentative  fecundity 
of  the  dogmatical  defenders  of  a  non-sensuous 
reason.  Without  looking  upon  myself  as  a  re¬ 
markably  combative  person,  I  shall  not  decline 
the  challenge  to  detect  the  fallacy  and  destroy 
the  pretensions  of  every  attempt  of  speculative 
theology.  And  yet  the  hope  of  better  fortune 
never  deserts  those  who  are  accustomed  to  the 
dogmatical  mode  of  procedure.  I  shall,  there¬ 
fore,  restrict  myself  to  the  simple  and  equitable 
demand  that  such  reasoners  will  demonstrate, 
from  the  nature  of  the  human  mind  as  well  as 
from  that  of  the  other  sources  of  knowledge, 
how  we  are  to  proceed  to  extend  our  cognition 
completely  a  priori ,  and  to  carry  it  to  that  point 
where  experience  abandons  us,  and  no  means  ex¬ 
ist  of  guaranteeing  the  objective  reality  of  our 
conceptions.  In  whatever  way  the  understanding 
may  have  attained  to  a  conception,  the  existence 
of  the  object  of  the  conception  cannot  be  dis¬ 
covered  in  it  by  analysis,  because  the  cognition 
of  the  existence  of  the  object  depends  upon  the 
object’s  being  posited  and  given  in  itself  apart 
jrom  the  conception.  But  it  is  utterly  impossible 
to  go  beyond  our  conception,  without  the  aid  of 
experience — which  presents  to  the  mind  nothing 
but  phenomena,  or  to  attain  by  the  help  of  mere 
conceptions  to  a  conviction  of  the  existence  of 
new  kinds  of  objects  or  supernatural  beings. 

But  although  pure  speculative  reason  is  far 
from  sufficient  to  demonstrate  the  existence  of 
a  Supreme  Being,  it  is  of  the  highest  utility  in 
correcting  our  conception  of  this  being — on  the 
supposition  that  we  can  attain  to  the  cognition 
of  it  by  some  other  means — in  making  it  con¬ 
sistent  with  itself  and  with  all  other  conceptions 
of  intelligible  objects,  clearing  it  from  all  that 
is  incompatible  with  the  conception  of  an  ens 


summum ,  and  eliminating  from  it  all  limitations 
or  admixtures  of  empirical  elements. 

Transcendental  theology  is  still  therefore,  not¬ 
withstanding  its  objective  insufficiency,  of  im¬ 
portance  in  a  negative  respect;  it  is  useful  as  a 
test  of  the  procedure  of  reason  when  engaged 
with  pure  ideas,  no  other  than  a  transcendental 
standard  being  in  this  case  admissible.  For  if, 
from  a  practical  point  of  view,  the  hypothesis 
of  a  Supreme  and  All-sufficient  Being  is  to  main¬ 
tain  its  validity  without  opposition,  it  must  be 
of  the  highest  importance  to  define  this  concep¬ 
tion  in  a  correct  and  rigorous  manner — as  the 
transcendental  conception  of  a  necessary  being, 
to  eliminate  all  phenomenal  elements  (anthro¬ 
pomorphism  in  its  most  extended  signification), 
and  at  the  same  time  to  overflow  all  contradic¬ 
tory  assertions — be  they  atheistic ,  deistic,  or  an¬ 
thropomorphic.  This  is  of  course  very  easy;  as 
the  same  arguments  which  demonstrated  the  in¬ 
ability  of  human  reason  to  affirm  the  existence 
of  a  Supreme  Being  must  be  alike  sufficient  to 
prove  the  invalidity  of  its  denial.  For  it  is  im¬ 
possible  to  gain  from  the  pure  speculation  of 
reason  demonstration  that  there  exists  no  Su¬ 
preme  Being,  as  the  ground  of  all  that  exists,  or 
that  this  being  possesses  none  of  those  proper¬ 
ties  which  we  regard  as  analogical  with  the  dy¬ 
namical  qualities  of  a  thinking  being,  or  that,  as 
the  anthropomorphists  would  have  us  believe, 
it  is  subject  to  all  the  limitations  which  sensibil¬ 
ity  imposes  upon  those  intelligences  which  exist 
in  the  world  of  experience. 

A  Supreme  Being  is,  therefore,  for  the  spec¬ 
ulative  reason,  a  mere  ideal,  though  a  faultless 
one — a  conception  which  perfects  and  crowns 
the  system  of  human  cognition,  but  the  objec¬ 
tive  reality  of  which  can  neither  be  proved  nor 
disproved  by  pure  reason.  If  this  defect  is  ever 
supplied  by  a  moral  theology,  the  problematic 
transcendental  theology  which  has  preceded,  will 
have  been  at  least  serviceable  as  demonstrating 
the  mental  necessity  existing  for  the  conception, 
by  the  complete  determination  of  it  which  it  has 
furnished,  and  the  ceaseless  testing  of  the  con¬ 
clusions  of  a  reason  often  deceived  by  sense,  and 
not  always  in  harmony  with  its  own  ideas.  The 
attributes  of  necessity,  infinitude,  unity,  exist¬ 
ence  apart  from  the  world  (and  not  as  a  world- 
soul),  eternity  (free  from  conditions  of  time), 
omnipresence  (free  from  conditions  of  space), 
omnipotence,  and  others,  are  pure  transcenden¬ 
tal  predicates;  and  thus  the  accurate  conception 
of  a  Supreme  Being,  which  every  theology  re¬ 
quires,  is  furnished  by  transcendental  theology 
alone. 


OF  PURE  REASON 


APPENDIX 

Of  the  Regulative  Employment  of  the  Ideas  of 
Pure  Reason 

The  result  of  all  the  dialectical  attempts  of  pure 
reason  not  only  confirms  the  truth  of  what  we 
have  already  proved  in  our  Transcendental  Ana¬ 
lytic,  namely,  that  all  inferences  which  would 
lead  us  beyond  the  limits  of  experience  are  fal¬ 
lacious  and  groundless,  but  it  at  the  same  time 
teaches  us  this  important  lesson,  that  human 
reason  has  a  natural  inclination  to  overstep  these 
limits,  and  that  transcendental  ideas  are  as  much 
the  natural  property  of  the  reason  as  categories 
are  of  the  understanding.  There  exists  this  dif¬ 
ference,  however,  that  while  the  categories  nev¬ 
er  mislead  us,  outward  objects  being  always  in 
perfect  harmony  therewith,  ideas  are  the  par¬ 
ents  of  irresistible  illusions,  the  severest  and 
most  subtle  criticism  being  required  to  save  us 
from  the  fallacies  which  they  induce. 

Whatever  is  grounded  in  the  nature  of  our 
powers  will  be  found  to  be  in  harmony  with  the 
final  purpose  and  proper  employment  of  these 
powers,  when  once  we  have  discovered  their 
true  direction  and  aim.  We  are  entitled  to  sup¬ 
pose,  therefore,  that  there  exists  a  mode  of  em¬ 
ploying  transcendental  ideas  which  is  proper  and 
immanent;  although,  when  we  mistake  their 
meaning,  and  regard  them  as  conceptions  of  ac¬ 
tual  things,  their  mode  of  application  is  tran¬ 
scendent  and  delusive.  For  it  is  not  the  idea 
itself,  but  only  the  employment  of  the  idea  in 
relation  to  possible  experience,  that  is  transcend¬ 
ent  or  immanent.  An  idea  is  employed  tran- 
scendently,  when  it  is  applied  to  an  object  false¬ 
ly  believed  to  be  adequate  with  and  to  corre¬ 
spond  to  it;  immanently,  when  it  is  applied  sole¬ 
ly  to  the  employment  of  the  understanding  in 
the  sphere  of  experience.  Thus  all  errors  of  sub - 
reptio — of  misapplication,  are  to  be  ascribed  to 
defects  of  judgement,  and  not  to  understanding 
or  reason. 

Reason  never  has  an  immediate  relation  to 
an  object;  it  relates  immediately  to  the  under¬ 
standing  alone.  It  is  only  through  the  under¬ 
standing  that  it  can  be  employed  in  the  field  of 
experience.  It  does  not  form  conceptions  of  ob¬ 
jects,  it  merely  arranges  them  and  gives  to  them 
that  unity  which  they  are  capable  of  possessing 
when  the  sphere  of  their  application  has  been 
extended  as  widely  as  possible.  Reason  avails  it¬ 
self  of  the  conception  of  the  understanding  for 
the  sole  purpose  of  producing  totality  in  the  dif¬ 
ferent  series.  This  totality  the  understanding 


193 

does  not  concern  itself  with;  its  only  occupation 
is  the  connection  of  experiences,  by  which  series 
of  conditions  in  accordance  with  conceptions  are 
established.  The  object  of  reason  is,  therefore, 
the  understanding  and  its  proper  destination.  As 
the  latter  brings  unity  into  the  diversity  of  ob¬ 
jects  by  means  of  its  conceptions,  so  the  former 
brings  unity  into  the  diversity  of  conceptions  by 
means  of  ideas;  as  it  sets  the  final  aim  of  a  col¬ 
lective  unity  to  the  operations  of  the  under¬ 
standing,  which  without  this  occupies  itself  with 
a  distributive  unity  alone. 

I  accordingly  maintain  that  transcendental 
ideas  can  never  be  employed  as  constitutive 
ideas,  that  they  cannot  be  conceptions  of  objects, 
and  that,  when  thus  considered,  they  assume  a 
fallacious  and  dialectical  character.  But,  on  the 
other  hand,  they  are  capable  of  an  admirable 
and  indispensably  necessary  application  to  ob¬ 
jects — as  regulative  ideas,  directing  the  under¬ 
standing  to  a  certain  aim,  the  guiding  lines  to¬ 
wards  which  all  its  laws  follow,  and  in  which 
they  all  meet  in  one  point.  This  point — though  a 
mere  idea  ( focus  imaginarius) ,  that  is,  not  a 
point  from  which  the  conceptions  of  the  under¬ 
standing  do  really  proceed,  for  it  lies  beyond  the 
sphere  of  possible  experience — serves,  notwith¬ 
standing,  to  give  to  these  conceptions  the  great¬ 
est  possible  unity  combined  with  the  greatest 
possible  extension.  Hence  arises  the  natural  illu¬ 
sion  which  induces  us  to  believe  that  these  lines 
proceed  from  an  object  which  lies  out  of  the 
sphere  of  empirical  cognition,  just  as  objects  re¬ 
flected  in  a  mirror  appear  to  be  behind  it.  But 
this  illusion — which  we  may  hinder  from  impos¬ 
ing  upon  us — is  necessary  and  unavoidable,  if 
we  desire  to  see,  not  only  those  objects  which 
lie  before  us,  but  those  which  are  at  a  great  dis¬ 
tance  behind  us ;  that  is  to  say,  when,  in  the  pres¬ 
ent  case,  we  direct  the  aims  of  the  understanding, 
beyond  every  given  experience,  towards  an  ex¬ 
tension  as  great  as  can  possibly  be  attained. 

If  we  review  our  cognitions  in  their  entire  ex¬ 
tent,  we  shall  find  that  the  peculiar  business  of 
reason  is  to  arrange  them  into  a  system ,  that  is 
to  say,  to  give  them  connection  according  to  a 
principle.  This  unity  presupposes  an  idea — the 
idea  of  the  form  of  a  whole  (of  cognition),  pre¬ 
ceding  the  determinate  cognition  of  the  parts, 
and  containing  the  conditions  which  determine 
a  priori  to  every  part  its  place  and  relation  to 
the  other  parts  of  the  whole  system.  This  idea, 
accordingly,  demands  complete  unity  in  the  cog¬ 
nition  of  the  understanding — not  the  unity  of  a 
contingent  aggregate,  but  that  of  a  system  con¬ 
nected  according  to  necessary  laws.  It  cannot  be 


194  THE  CRITIQUE 


affirmed  with  propriety  that  this  idea  is  a  con¬ 
ception  of  an  object;  it  is  merely  a  conception 
of  the  complete  unity  of  the  conceptions  of  ob¬ 
jects,  in  so  far  as  this  unity  is  available  to  the 
understanding  as  a  rule.  Such  conceptions  of 
reason  are  not  derived  from  nature;  on  the  con¬ 
trary,  we  employ  them  for  the  interrogation  and 
investigation  of  nature,  and  regard  our  cognition 
as  defective  so  long  as  it  is  not  adequate  to 
them.  We  admit  that  such  a  thing  as  pure  earth , 
pure  water ,  or  pure  air,  is  not  to  be  discovered. 
And  yet  we  require  these  conceptions  (which 
have  their  origin  in  the  reason,  so  far  as  regards 
their  absolute  purity  and  completeness)  for  the 
purpose  of  determining  the  share  which  each  of 
these  natural  causes  has  in  every  phenomenon. 
Thus  the  different  kinds  of  matter  are  all  referred 
to  earths,  as  mere  weight;  to  salts  and  inflam¬ 
mable  bodies,  as  pure  force;  and  finally,  to  wa¬ 
ter  and  air,  as  the  vehicula  of  the  former,  or  the 
machines  employed  by  them  in  their  operations 
— for  the  purpose  of  explaining  the  chemical  ac¬ 
tion  and  reaction  of  bodies  in  accordance  with 
the  idea  of  a  mechanism.  For,  although  not  ac¬ 
tually  so  expressed,  the  influence  of  such  ideas 
of  reason  is  very  observable  in  the  procedure  of 
natural  philosophers. 

If  reason  is  the  faculty  of  deducing  the  par¬ 
ticular  from  the  general,  and  if  the  general  be 
certain  in  se  and  given,  it  is  only  necessary  that 
the  judgement  should  subsume  the  particular 
under  the  general,  the  particular  being  thus  nec¬ 
essarily  determined.  I  shall  term  this  the  demon¬ 
strative  or  apodeictic  employment  of  reason.  If, 
however,  the  general  is  admitted  as  problemat¬ 
ical  only,  and  is  a  mere  idea,  the  particular  case 
is  certain,  but  the  universality  of  the  rule  which 
applies  to  this  particular  case  remains  a  problem. 
Several  particular  cases,  the  certainty  of  which 
is  beyond  doubt,  are  then  taken  and  examined, 
for  the  purpose  of  discovering  whether  the  rule 
is  applicable  to  them;  and  if  it  appears  that  all 
the  particular  cases  which  can  be  collected  fol¬ 
low  from  the  rule,  its  universality  is  inferred, 
and  at  the  same  time,  all  the  causes  which  have 
not,  or  cannot  be  presented  to  our  observation, 
are  concluded  to  be  of  the  same  character  with 
those  which  we  have  observed.  This  I  shall  term 
the  hypothetical  employment  of  the  reason. 

The  hypothetical  exercise  of  reason  by  the 
aid  of  ideas  employed  as  problematical  concep¬ 
tions  is  properly  not  constitutive.  That  is  to  say, 
if  we  consider  the  subject  strictly,  the  truth  of 
the  rule,  which  has  been  employed  as  an  hypoth¬ 
esis,  does  not  follow  from  the  use  that  is  made 
of  it  by  reason.  For  how  can  we  know  all  the 


possible  cases  that  may  arise?  some  of  which 
may,  however,  prove  exceptions  to  the  univer¬ 
sality  of  the  rule.  This  employment  of  reason  is 
merely  regulative,  and  its  sole  aim  is  the  intro¬ 
duction  of  unity  into  the  aggregate  of  our  par¬ 
ticular  cognitions,  and  thereby  the  approximat¬ 
ing  of  the  rule  to  universality. 

The  object  of  the  hypothetical  employment 
of  reason  is  therefore  the  systematic  unity  of 
cognitions;  and  this  unity  is  the  criterion  of  the 
truth  of  a  rule.  On  the  other  hand,  this  system¬ 
atic  unity — as  a  mere  idea — is  in  fact  merely 
a  unity  projected,  not  to  be  regarded  as  given, 
but  only  in  the  light  of  a  problem — a  problem 
which  serves,  however,  as  a  principle  for  the 
various  and  particular  exercise  of  the  under¬ 
standing  in  experience,  directs  it  with  regard  to 
those  cases  which  are  not  presented  to  our  ob¬ 
servation,  and  introduces  harmony  and  consist¬ 
ency  into  all  its  operations. 

All  that  we  can  be  certain  of  from  the  above 
considerations  is  that  this  systematic  unity  is  a 
logical  principle,  whose  aim  is  to  assist  the  un¬ 
derstanding,  where  it  cannot  of  itself  attain  to 
rules,  by  means  of  ideas,  to  bring  all  these  vari¬ 
ous  rules  under  one  principle,  and  thus  to  ensure 
the  most  complete  consistency  and  connection 
that  can  be  attained.  But  the  assertion  that  ob¬ 
jects  and  the  understanding  by  which  they  are 
cognized  are  so  constituted  as  to  be  determined 
to  systematic  unity,  that  this  may  be  postulated 
a  priori,  without  any  reference  to  the  interest  of 
reason,  and  that  we  are  justified  in  declaring  all 
possible  cognitions — empirical  and  others — to 
possess  systematic  unity,  and  to  be  subject  to 
general  principles  from  which,  notwithstanding 
their  various  character,  they  are  all  derivable — 
such  an  assertion  can  be  founded  only  upon  a 
transcendental  principle  of  reason,  which  would 
render  this  systematic  unity  not  subjectively 
and  logically — in  its  character  of  a  method,  but 
objectively  necessary. 

We  shall  illustrate  this  by  an  example.  The 
conceptions  of  the  understanding  make  us  ac¬ 
quainted,  among  many  other  kinds  of  unity, 
with  that  of  the  causality  of  a  substance,  which 
is  termed  power.  The  different  phenomenal 
manifestations  of  the  same  substance  appear  at 
first  view  to  be  so  very  dissimilar  that  we  are  in¬ 
clined  to  assume  the  existence  of  just  as  many 
different  powers  as  there  are  different  effects — 
as,  in  the  case  of  the  human  mind,  we  have  feel¬ 
ing,  consciousness,  imagnination,  memory,  wit, 
analysis,  pleasure,  desire  and  so  on.  Now  we  are 
required  by  a  logical  maxim  to  reduce  these  dif¬ 
ferences  to  as  small  a  number  as  possible,  by 


OF  PURE 

comparing  them  and  discovering  the  hidden 
identity  which  exists.  We  must  inquire,  for  ex¬ 
ample,  whether  or  not  imagination  (connected 
with  consciousness),  memory,  wit,  and  analysis 
are  not  merely  different  forms  of  understanding 
and  reason.  The  idea  of  a  fundamental  power , 
the  existence  of  which  no  effort  of  logic  can  as¬ 
sure  us  of,  is  the  problem  to  be  solved,  for  the 
systematic  representation  of  the  existing  variety 
of  powers.  The  logical  principle  of  reason  re¬ 
quires  us  to  produce  as  great  a  unity  as  is  possi¬ 
ble  in  the  system  of  our  cognitions;  and  the 
more  the  phenomena  of  this  and  the  other  pow¬ 
er  are  found  to  be  identical,  the  more  probable 
does  it  become,  that  they  are  nothing  but  differ¬ 
ent  manifestations  of  one  and  the  same  power, 
which  may  be  called,  relatively  speaking,  a  fun¬ 
damental  power.  And  so  with  other  cases. 

These  relatively  fundamental  powers  must 
again  be  compared  with  each  other,  to  discover, 
if  possible,  the  one  radical  and  absolutely  funda¬ 
mental  power  of  which  they  are  but  the  mani¬ 
festations.  But  this  unity  is  purely  hypothetical. 

It  is  not  maintained,  that  this  unity  does  really 
exist,  but  that  we  must,  in  the  interest  of  rea¬ 
son,  that  is,  for  the  establishment  of  principles 
for  the  various  rules  presented  by  experience, 
try  to  discover  and  introduce  it,  so  far  as  is 
practicable,  into  the  sphere  of  our  cognitions. 

But  the  transcendental  employment  of  the 
understanding  would  lead  us  to  believe  that  this 
idea  of  a  fundamental  power  is  not  problemati¬ 
cal,  but  that  it  possesses  objective  reality,  and 
thus  the  systematic  unity  of  the  various  powers 
or  forces  in  a  substance  is  demanded  by  the  un¬ 
derstanding  and  erected  into  an  apodeictic  or 
necessary  principle.  For,  without  having  at¬ 
tempted  to  discover  the  unity  of  the  various 
powers  existing  in  nature,  nay,  even  after  all  our 
attempts  have  failed,  we  notwithstanding  pre¬ 
suppose  that  it  does  exist,  and  may  be,  sooner 
or  later,  discovered.  And  this  reason  does,  not 
only,  as  in  the  case  above  adduced,  with  regard 
to  the  unity  of  substance,  but  where  many  sub¬ 
stances,  although  all  to  a  certain  extent  homo¬ 
geneous,  are  discoverable,  as  in  the  case  of  mat¬ 
ter  in  general.  Here  also  does  reason  presuppose 
the  existence  of  the  systematic  unity  of  various 
powers — inasmuch  as  particular  laws  of  nature 
are  subordinate  to  general  laws;  and  parsimony 
in  principles  is  not  merely  an  economical  princi¬ 
ple  of  reason,  but  an  essential  law  of  nature. 

We  cannot  understand,  in  fact,  how  a  logical 
principle  of  unity  can  of  right  exist,  unless  we 
presuppose  a  transcendental  principle,  by  which 
such  a  systematic  unity — as  a  property  of  ob¬ 


REASON  195 

jects  themselves — is  regarded  as  necessary  a 
priori.  For  with  what  right  can  reason,  in  its 
logical  exercise,  require  us  to  regard  the  variety 
of  forces  which  nature  displays,  as  in  effect  a 
disguised  unity,  and  to  deduce  them  from  one 
fundamental  force  or  power,  when  she  is  free 
to  admit  that  it  is  just  as  possible  that  all  forces 
should  be  different  in  kind,  and  that  a  systematic 
unity  is  not  conformable  to  the  design  of  na¬ 
ture?  In  this  view  of  the  case,  reason  would  be 
proceeding  in  direct  opposition  to  her  own  des¬ 
tination,  by  setting  as  an  aim  an  idea  which  en¬ 
tirely  conflicts  with  the  procedure  and  arrange¬ 
ment  of  nature.  Neither  can  we  assert  that 
reason  has  previously  inferred  this  unity  from 
the  contingent  nature  of  phenomena.  For  the 
law  of  reason  which  requires  us  to  seek  for  this 
unity  is  a  necessary  law,  inasmuch  as  without  it 
we  should  not  possess  a  faculty  of  reason,  nor 
without  reason  a  consistent  and  self-accordant 
mode  of  employing  the  understanding,  nor,  in 
the  absence  of  this,  any  proper  and  sufficient 
criterion  of  empirical  truth.  In  relation  to  this 
criterion,  therefore,  we  must  suppose  the  idea  of 
the  systematic  unity  of  nature  to  possess  objec¬ 
tive  validity  and  necessity. 

We  find  this  transcendental  presupposition 
lurking  in  different  forms  in  the  principles  of 
philosophers,  although  they  have  neither  rec¬ 
ognized  it  nor  confessed  to  themselves  its  pres¬ 
ence.  That  the  diversities  of  individual  things  do 
not  exclude  identity  of  species,  that  the  various 
species  must  be  considered  as  merely  different 
determinations  of  a  few  genera ,  and  these  again 
as  divisions  of  still  higher  races,  and  so  on — that, 
accordingly,  a  certain  systematic  unity  of  all 
possible  empirical  conceptions,  in  so  far  as  they 
can  be  deduced  from  higher  and  more  general 
conceptions,  must  be  sought  for,  is  a  scholastic 
maxim  or  logical  principle,  without  which  rea¬ 
son  could  not  be  employed  by  us.  For  we  can 
infer  the  particular  from  the  general,  only  in  so 
far  as  general  properties  of  things  constitute  the 
foundation  upon  which  the  particular  rest. 

That  the  same  unity  exists  in  nature  is  pre¬ 
supposed  by  philosophers  in  the  well-known 
scholastic  maxim,  which  forbids  us  unnecessari¬ 
ly  to  augment  the  number  of  entities  or  princi¬ 
ples  ( entia  praeter  necessitatem  non  esse  multi- 
plicanda).  This  maxim  asserts  that  nature  her¬ 
self  assists  in  the  establishment  of  this  unity  of 
reason,  and  that  the  seemingly  infinite  diversity 
of  phenomena  should  not  deter  us  from  the  ex¬ 
pectation  of  discovering  beneath  this  diversity  a 
unity  of  fundamental  properties,  of  which  the 
aforesaid  variety  is  but  a  more  or  less  deter- 


THE  CRITIQUE 


196 

mined  form.  This  unity,  although  a  mere  idea, 
has  been  always  pursued  with  so  much  zeal,  that 
thinkers  have  found  it  necessary  rather  to  mod¬ 
erate  the  desire  than  to  encourage  it.  It  was  con¬ 
sidered  a  great  step  when  chemists  were  able  to 
reduce  all  salts  to  two  main  genera — acids  and 
alkalis;  and  they  regard  this  difference  as  itself 
a  mere  variety,  or  different  manifestation  of  one 
and  the  same  fundamental  material.  The  differ¬ 
ent  kinds  of  earths  (stones  and  even  metals) 
chemists  have  endeavoured  to  reduce  to  three, 
and  afterwards  to  two;  but  still,  not  content 
with  this  advance,  they  cannot  but  think  that  be¬ 
hind  these  diversities  there  lurks  but  one  genus 
— nay,  that  even  salts  and  earths  have  a  com¬ 
mon  principle.  It  might  be  conjectured  that  this 
is  merely  an  economical  plan  of  reason,  for  the 
purpose  of  sparing  itself  trouble,  and  an  at¬ 
tempt  of  a  purely  hypothetical  character,  which, 
when  successful,  gives  an  appearance  of  proba¬ 
bility  to  the  principle  of  explanation  employed 
by  the  reason.  But  a  selfish  purpose  of  this  kind 
is  easily  to  be  distinguished  from  the  idea,  ac¬ 
cording  to  which  every  one  presupposes  that 
this  unity  is  in  accordance  with  the  laws  of  na¬ 
ture,  and  that  reason  does  not  in  this  case  re¬ 
quest :,  but  requires,  although  we  are  quite  unable 
to  determine  the  proper  limits  of  this  unity. 

If  the  diversity  existing  in  phenomena — a  di¬ 
versity  not  of  form  (for  in  this  they  may  be 
similar)  but  of  content — were  so  great  that  the 
subtlest  human  reason  could  never  by  compari¬ 
son  discover  in  them  the  least  similarity  (which 
is  not  impossible),  in  this  case  the  logical  law 
of  genera  would  be  without  foundation,  the  con¬ 
ception  of  a  genus,  nay,  all  general  conceptions 
would  be  impossible,  and  the  faculty  of  the  un¬ 
derstanding,  the  exercise  of  which  is  restricted 
to  the  world  of  conceptions,  could  not  exist.  The 
logical  principle  of  genera,  accordingly,  if  it  is 
to  be  applied  to  nature  (by  which  I  mean  ob¬ 
jects  presented  to  our  senses),  presupposes  a 
transcendental  principle.  In  accordance  with 
this  principle,  homogeneity  is  necessarily  pre¬ 
supposed  in  the  variety  of  phenomena  (al¬ 
though  we  are  unable  to  determine  a  priori  the 
degree  of  this  homogeneity),  because  without 
it  no  empirical  conceptions,  and  consequently 
no  experience,  would  be  possible. 

The  logical  principle  of  genera,  which  de¬ 
mands  identity  in  phenomena,  is  balanced  by 
another  principle — that  of  species ,  which  re¬ 
quires  variety  and  diversity  in  things,  notwith¬ 
standing  their  accordance  in  the  same  genus, 
and  directs  the  understanding  to  attend  to  the 
one  no  less  than  to  the  other.  This  principle  (of 


the  faculty  of  distinction)  acts  as  a  check  upon 
the  levity  of  the  former  (the  faculty  of  wit); 
and  reason  exhibits  in  this  respect  a  double  and 
conflicting  interest — on  the  one  hand,  the  inter¬ 
est  in  the  extent  (the  interest  of  generality)  in 
relation  to  genera;  on  the  other,  that  of  the  con¬ 
tent  (the  interest  of  individuality)  in  relation 
to  the  variety  of  species.  In  the  former  case,  the 
understanding  cogitates  more  under  its  concep¬ 
tions,  in  the  latter  it  cogitates  more  in  them. 
This  distinction  manifests  itself  likewise  in  the 
habits  of  thought  peculiar  to  natural  philoso¬ 
phers,  some  of  whom — the  remarkably  specula¬ 
tive  heads — may  be  said  to  be  hostile  to  heter¬ 
ogeneity  in  phenomena,  and  have  their  eyes  al¬ 
ways  fixed  on  the  unity  of  genera,  while  others 
— with  a  strong  empirical  tendency — aim  un¬ 
ceasingly  at  the  analysis  of  phenomena,  and  al¬ 
most  destroy  in  us  the  hope  of  ever  being  able 
to  estimate  the  character  of  these  according  to 
general  principles. 

The  latter  mode  of  thought  is  evidently  based 
upon  a  logical  principle,  the  aim  of  which  is  the 
systematic  completeness  of  all  cognitions.  This 
principle  authorizes  me,  beginning  at  the  genus, 
to  descend  to  the  various  and  diverse  contained 
under  it;  and  in  this  way  extension,  as  in  the 
former  case  unity,  is  assured  to  the  system.  For 
if  we  merely  examine  the  sphere  of  the  concep¬ 
tion  which  indicates  a  genus,  we  cannot  discover 
how  far  it  is  possible  to  proceed  in  the  division 
of  that  sphere;  just  as  it  is  impossible,  from  the 
consideration  of  the  space  occupied  by  matter, 
to  determine  how  far  we  can  proceed  in  the  di¬ 
vision  of  it.  Hence  every  genus  must  contain 
different  species ,  and  these  again  different  sub¬ 
species;  and  as  each  of  the  latter  must  itself 
contain  a  sphere  (must  be  of  a  certain  extent, 
as  a  conceptus  communis) ,  reason  demands  that 
no  species  or  sub-species  is  to  be  considered  as 
the  lowest  possible.  For  a  species  or  sub-species, 
being  always  a  conception,  which  contains  only 
what  is  common  to  a  number  of  different  things, 
does  not  completely  determine  any  individual 
thing,  or  relate  immediately  to  it,  and  must  con¬ 
sequently  contain  other  conceptions,  that  is, 
other  sub-species  under  it.  This  law  of  specifica¬ 
tion  may  be  thus  expressed:  Entium  varietates 
non  tern  ere  sunt  minuendae. 

But  it  is  easy  to  see  that  this  logical  law 
would  likewise  be  without  sense  or  application, 
were  it  not  based  upon  a  transcendental  law  of 
specification ,  which  certainly  does  not  require 
that  the  differences  existing  in  phenomena  should 
be  infinite  in  number,  for  the  logical  princi¬ 
ple,  which  merely  maintains  the  indeterminate - 


OF  PURE  REASON 


ness  of  the  logical  sphere  of  a  conception,  in  re¬ 
lation  to  its  possible  division,  does  not  authorize 
this  statement;  while  it  does  impose  upon  the 
understanding  the  duty  of  searching  for  sub¬ 
species  to  every  species,  and  minor  differences 
in  every  difference.  For,  were  there  no  lower 
conceptions,  neither  could  there  be  any  higher. 
Now  the  understanding  cognizes  only  by  means 
of  conceptions;  consequently,  how  far  soever  it 
may  proceed  in  division,  never  by  mere  intui¬ 
tion,  but  always  by  lower  and  lower  conceptions. 
The  cognition  of  phenomena  in  their  complete 
determination  (which  is  possible  only  by  means 
of  the  understanding)  requires  an  unceasingly 
continued  specification  of  conceptions,  and  a 
progression  to  ever  smaller  differences,  of  which 
abstraction  had  been  made  in  the  conception  of 
the  species,  and  still  more  in  that  of  the  genus. 

This  law  of  specification  cannot  be  deduced 
from  experience;  it  can  never  present  us  with  a 
principle  of  so  universal  an  application.  Em¬ 
pirical  specification  very  soon  stops  in  its  dis¬ 
tinction  of  diversities,  and  requires  the  guidance 
of  the  transcendental  law,  as  a  principle  of  the 
reason — a  law  which  imposes  on  us  the  neces¬ 
sity  of  never  ceasing  in  our  search  for  differ¬ 
ences,  even  although  these  may  not  present 
themselves  to  the  senses.  That  absorbent  earths 
are  of  different  kinds  could  only  be  discovered 
by  obeying  the  anticipatory  law  of  reason,  which 
imposes  upon  the  understanding  the  task  of  dis¬ 
covering  the  differences  existing  between  these 
earths,  and  supposes  that  nature  is  richer  in  sub¬ 
stances  than  our  senses  would  indicate.  The  fac¬ 
ulty  of  the  understanding  belongs  to  us  just  as 
much  under  the  presupposition  of  differences  in 
the  objects  of  nature,  as  under  the  condition 
that  these  objects  are  homogeneous,  because  we 
could  not  possess  conceptions,  nor  make  any  use 
of  our  understanding,  were  not  the  phenomena 
included  under  these  conceptions  in  some  re¬ 
spects  dissimilar,  as  well  as  similar,  in  their 
character. 

Reason  thus  prepares  the  sphere  of  the  un¬ 
derstanding  for  the  operations  of  this  faculty: 
i.  By  the  principle  of  the  homogeneity  of  the 
diverse  in  higher  genera;  2.  By  the  principle  of 
the  variety  of  the  homogeneous  in  lower  species; 
and,  to  complete  the  systematic  unity,  it  adds, 
3.  A  law  of  the  affinity  of  all  conceptions  which 
prescribes  a  continuous  transition  from  one 
species  to  every  other  by  the  gradual  increase  of 
diversity.  We  may  term  these  the  principles  of 
the  homogeneity ,  the  specification ,  and  the  con¬ 
tinuity  of  forms.  The  latter  results  from  the 
union  of  the  two  former,  inasmuch  as  we  re¬ 


IQ7 

gard  the  systematic  connection  as  complete  in 
thought,  in  the  ascent  to  higher  genera,  as  well 
as  in  the  descent  to  lower  species.  For  all  diver¬ 
sities  must  be  related  to  each  other,  as  they  all 
spring  from  one  highest  genus,  descending 
through  the  different  gradations  of  a  more  and 
more  extended  determination. 

We  may  illustrate  the  systematic  unity  pro¬ 
duced  by  the  three  logical  principles  in  the  fol¬ 
lowing  manner.  Every  conception  may  be  re¬ 
garded  as  a  point,  which,  as  the  standpoint  of  a 
spectator,  has  a  certain  horizon,  which  may  be 
said  to  enclose  a  number  of  things  that  may  be 
viewed,  so  to  speak,  from  that  centre.  Within 
this  horizon  there  must  be  an  infinite  number  of 
other  points,  each  of  which  has  its  own  horizon, 
smaller  and  more  circumscribed;  in  other  words, 
every  species  contains  sub-species,  according  to 
the  principle  of  specification,  and  the  logical 
horizon  consists  of  smaller  horizons  (sub¬ 
species),  but  not  of  points  (individuals),  which 
possess  no  extent.  But  different  horizons  or  gen¬ 
era,  which  include  under  them  so  many  concep¬ 
tions,  may  have  one  common  horizon,  from 
which,  as  from  a  mid-point,  they  may  be  sur¬ 
veyed;  and  we  may  proceed  thus,  till  we  arrive 
at  the  highest  genus,  or  universal  and  true  hori¬ 
zon,  which  is  determined  by  the  highest  concep¬ 
tion,  and  which  contains  under  itself  all  differ¬ 
ences  and  varieties,  as  genera,  species,  and  sub¬ 
species. 

To  this  highest  standpoint  I  am  conducted  by 
the  law  of  homogeneity,  as  to  all  lower  and 
more  variously-determined  conceptions  by  the 
law  of  specification.  Now  as  in  this  way  there 
exists  no  void  in  the  whole  extent  of  all  possi¬ 
ble  conceptions,  and  as  out  of  the  sphere  of 
these  the  mind  can  discover  nothing,  there 
arises  from  the  presupposition  of  the  universal 
horizon  above  mentioned,  and  its  complete  di¬ 
vision,  the  principle:  Non  datur  vacuum  jor- 
marum.  This  principle  asserts  that  there  are  not 
different  primitive  and  highest  genera,  which 
stand  isolated,  so  to  speak,  from  each  other,  but 
all  the  various  genera  are  mere  divisions  and 
limitations  of  one  highest  and  universal  genus; 
and  hence  follows  immediately  the  principle: 
Datur  continuum  jormarum.  This  principle  in¬ 
dicates  that  all  differences  of  species  limit  each 
other,  and  do  not  admit  of  transition  from  one 
to  another  by  a  saltus,  but  only  through  smaller 
degrees  of  the  difference  between  the  one  species 
and  the  other.  In  one  word,  there  are  no  species 
or  sub-species  which  (in  the  view  of  reason)  are 
the  nearest  possible  to  each  other;  intermediate 
species  or  sub-species  being  always  possible,  the 


THE  CRITIQUE 


198 

difference  of  which  from  each  of  the  former  is 
always  smaller  than  the  difference  existing  be¬ 
tween  these. 

The  first  law,  therefore,  directs  us  to  avoid 
the  notion  that  there  exist  different  primal  gen¬ 
era,  and  enounces  the  fact  of  perfect  homogene¬ 
ity;  the  second  imposes  a  check  upon  this  tend¬ 
ency  to  unity  and  prescribes  the  distinction  of 
sub-species,  before  proceeding  to  apply  our  gen¬ 
eral  conceptions  to  individuals.  The  third  unites 
both  the  former,  by  enouncing  the  fact  of  homo¬ 
geneity  as  existing  even  in  the  most  various  di¬ 
versity,  by  means  of  the  gradual  transition  from 
one  species  to  another.  Thus  it  indicates  a  re¬ 
lationship  between  the  different  branches  or 
species,  in  so  far  as  they  all  spring  from  the 
same  stem. 

But  this  logical  law  of  the  continuum  specier- 
um  ( jormarum  logicarum )  presupposes  a  tran¬ 
scendental  principle  ( lex  continui  in  natura ), 
without  which  the  understanding  might  be  led 
into  error,  by  following  the  guidance  of  the 
former,  and  thus  perhaps  pursuing  a  path  con¬ 
trary  to  that  prescribed  by  nature.  This  law 
must,  consequently,  be  based  upon  pure  tran¬ 
scendental,  and  not  upon  empirical,  considera¬ 
tions.  For,  in  the  latter  case,  it  would  come  later 
than  the  system;  whereas  it  is  really  itself  the 
parent  of  all  that  is  systematic  in  our  cognition 
of  nature.  These  principles  are  not  mere  hypoth¬ 
eses  employed  for  the  purpose  of  experiment¬ 
ing  upon  nature;  although  when  any  such  con¬ 
nection  is  discovered,  it  forms  a  solid  ground  for 
regarding  the  hypothetical  unity  as  valid  in  the 
sphere  of  nature — and  thus  they  are  in  this  re¬ 
spect  not  without  their  use.  But  we  go  farther, 
and  maintain  that  it  is  manifest  that  these  prin¬ 
ciples  of  parsimony  in  fundamental  causes,  vari¬ 
ety  in  effects,  and  affinity  in  phenomena,  are  in 
accordance  both  with  reason  and  nature,  and 
that  they  are  not  mere  methods  or  plans  devised 
for  the  purpose  of  assisting  us  in  our  observa¬ 
tion  of  the  external  world. 

But  it  is  plain  that  this  continuity  of  forms  is 
a  mere  idea,  to  which  no  adequate  object  can  be 
discovered  in  experience.  And  this  for  two  rea¬ 
sons.  First,  because  the  species  in  nature  are 
really  divided,  and  hence  form  quanta  discreta; 
and,  if  the  gradual  progression  through  their  af¬ 
finity  were  continuous,  the  intermediate  mem¬ 
bers  lying  between  two  given  species  must  be 
infinite  in  number,  which  is  impossible.  Second¬ 
ly,  because  we  cannot  make  any  determinate 
empirical  use  of  this  law,  inasmuch  as  it  does 
not  present  us  with  any  criterion  of  affinity 
which  could  aid  us  in  determining  how  far  we 


ought  to  pursue  the  graduation  of  differences:  it 
merely  contains  a  general  indication  that  it  is 
our  duty  to  seek  for  and,  if  possible,  to  discover 
them. 

When  we  arrange  these  principles  of  sys¬ 
tematic  unity  in  the  order  conformable  to  their 
employment  in  experience,  they  will  stand  thus: 
Variety,  Affinity ,  Unity,  each  of  them,  as  ideas, 
being  taken  in  the  highest  degree  of  their  com¬ 
pleteness.  Reason  presupposes  the  existence  of 
cognitions  of  the  understanding,  which  have  a 
direct  relation  to  experience,  and  aims  at  the 
ideal  unity  of  these  cognitions — a  unity  which 
far  transcends  all  experience  or  empirical  no¬ 
tions.  The  affinity  of  the  diverse,  notwithstand¬ 
ing  the  differences  existing  between  its  parts, 
has  a  relation  to  things,  but  a  still  closer  one  to 
the  mere  properties  and  powers  of  things.  For 
example,  imperfect  experience  may  represent 
the  orbits  of  the  planets  as  circular.  But  we  dis¬ 
cover  variations  from  this  course,  and  we  pro¬ 
ceed  to  suppose  that  the  planets  revolve  in  a 
path  which,  if  not  a  circle,  is  of  a  character  very 
similar  to  it.  That  is  to  say,  the  movements  of 
those  planets  which  do  not  form  a  circle  will  ap¬ 
proximate  more  or  less  to  the  properties  of  a 
circle,  and  probably  form  an  ellipse.  The  paths 
of  comets  exhibit  still  greater  variations,  for,  so 
far  as  our  observation  extends,  they  do  not  re¬ 
turn  upon  their  own  course  in  a  circle  or  ellipse. 
But  we  proceed  to  the  conjecture  that  comets 
describe  a  parabola,  a  figure  which  is  closely  al¬ 
lied  to  the  ellipse.  In  fact,  a  parabola  is  merely 
an  ellipse,  with  its  longer  axis  produced  to  an 
indefinite  extent.  Thus  these  principles  conduct 
us  to  a  unity  in  the  genera  of  the  forms  of  these 
orbits,  and,  proceeding  farther,  to  a  unity  as  re¬ 
gards  the  cause  of  the  motions  of  the  heavenly 
bodies — that  is,  gravitation.  But  we  go  on  ex¬ 
tending  our  conquests  over  nature,  and  endeav¬ 
our  to  explain  all  seeming  deviations  from  these 
rules,  and  even  make  additions  to  our  system 
which  no  experience  can  ever  substantiate — for 
example,  the  theory,  in  affinity  with  that  of 
ellipses,  of  hyperbolic  paths  of  comets,  pursuing 
which,  these  bodies  leave  our  solar  system  and, 
passing  from  sun  to  sun,  unite  the  most  distant 
parts  of  the  infinite  universe,  which  is  held  to¬ 
gether  by  the  same  moving  power. 

The  most  remarkable  circumstance  connected 
with  these  principles  is  that  they  seem  to  be 
transcendental,  and,  although  only  containing 
ideas  for  the  guidance  of  the  empirical  exercise 
of  reason,  and  although  this  empirical  employ¬ 
ment  stands  to  these  ideas  in  an  asymptotic  re¬ 
lation  alone  (to  use  a  mathematical  term),  that 


OF  PURE 

is,  continually  approximate,  without  ever  being 
able  to  attain  to  them,  they  possess,  notwith¬ 
standing,  as  a  priori  synthetical  propositions,  ob¬ 
jective  though  undetermined  validity,  and  are 
available  as  rules  for  possible  experience.  In 
the  elaboration  of  our  experience,  they  may  also 
be  employed  with  great  advantage,  as  heuristic1 
principles.  A  transcendental  deduction  of  them 
cannot  be  made;  such  a  deduction  being  always 
impossible  in  the  case  of  ideas,  as  has  been  al¬ 
ready  shown. 

We  distinguished,  in  the  Transcendental  Ana¬ 
lytic,  the  dynamical  principles  of  the  under¬ 
standing,  which  are  regulative  principles  of  in¬ 
tuition ,  from  the  mathematical,  which  are  con¬ 
stitutive  principles  of  intuition.  These  dynam¬ 
ical  laws  are,  however,  constitutive  in  relation 
to  experience ,  inasmuch  as  they  render  the  con¬ 
ceptions  without  which  experience  could  not 
exist  possible  a  priori.  But  the  principles  of  pure 
reason  cannot  be  constitutive  even  in  regard  to 
empirical  conceptions ,  because  no  sensuous 
schema  corresponding  to  them  can  be  discov¬ 
ered,  and  they  cannot  therefore  have  an  ob¬ 
ject  in  concreto.  Now,  if  I  grant  that  they  can¬ 
not  be  employed  in  the  sphere  of  experience,  as 
constitutive  principles,  how  shall  I  secure  for 
them  employment  and  objective  validity  as  reg¬ 
ulative  principles,  and  in  what  way  can  they  be 
so  employed? 

The  understanding  is  the  object  of  reason,  as 
sensibility  is  the  object  of  the  understanding. 
The  production  of  systematic  unity  in  all  the 
empirical  operations  of  the  understanding  is  the 
proper  occupation  of  reason;  just  as  it  is  the 
business  of  the  understanding  to  connect  the 
various  content  of  phenomena  by  means  of  con¬ 
ceptions,  and  subject  them  to  empirical  laws. 
But  the  operations  of  the  understanding  are, 
without  the  schemata  of  sensibility,  undeter¬ 
mined;  and,  in  the  same  manner,  the  unity  of 
reason  is  perfectly  undetermined  as  regards  the 
conditions  under  which,  and  the  extent  to  which, 
the  understanding  ought  to  carry  the  systematic 
connection  of  its  conceptions.  But,  although  it 
is  impossible  to  discover  in  intuition  a  schema 
for  the  complete  systematic  unity  of  all  the  con¬ 
ceptions  of  the  understanding,  there  must  be 
some  analogon  of  this  schema.  This  analogon  is 
the  idea  of  the  maximum  of  the  division  and  the 
connection  of  our  cognition  in  one  principle.  For 
we  may  have  a  determinate  notion  of  a  maxi¬ 
mum  and  an  absolutely  perfect,  all  the  restric¬ 
tive  conditions  which  are  connected  with  an  in¬ 
determinate  and  various  content  having  been 

1  From  the  Greek  evpioKco. 


REASON  199 

abstracted.  Thus  the  idea  of  reason  is  analogous 
with  a  sensuous  schema,  with  this  difference, 
that  the  application  of  the  categories  to  the 
schema  of  reason  does  not  present  a  cognition  of 
any  object  (as  is  the  case  with  the  application 
of  the  categories  to  sensuous  schemata),  but 
merely  provides  us  with  a  rule  or  principle  for 
the  systematic  unity  of  the  exercise  of  the  un¬ 
derstanding.  Now,  as  every  principle  which  im¬ 
poses  upon  the  exercise  of  the  understanding  a 
priori  compliance  with  the  rule  of  systematic 
unity  also  relates,  although  only  in  an  indirect 
manner,  to  an  object  of  experience,  the  princi¬ 
ples  of  pure  reason  will  also  possess  objective 
reality  and  validity  in  relation  to  experience. 
But  they  will  not  aim  at  determining  our  knowl¬ 
edge  in  regard  to  any  empirical  object;  they  will 
merely  indicate  the  procedure,  following  which 
the  empirical  and  determinate  exercise  of  the 
understanding  may  be  in  complete  harmony  and 
connection  with  itself — a  result  which  is  pro¬ 
duced  by  its  being  brought  into  harmony  with 
the  principle  of  systematic  unity,  so  far  as  that 
is  possible,  and  deduced  from  it. 

I  term  all  subjective  principles,  which  are  not 
derived  from  observation  of  the  constitution  of 
an  object,  but  from  the  interest  which  Reason 
has  in  producing  a  certain  completeness  in  her 
cognition  of  that  object,  maxims  of  reason.  Thus 
there  are  maxims  of  speculative  reason,  which 
are  based  solely  upon  its  speculative  interest, 
although  they  appear  to  be  objective  prin¬ 
ciples. 

When  principles  which  are  really  regulative 
are  regarded  as  constitutive,  and  employed  as 
objective  principles,  contradictions  must  arise; 
but  if  they  are  considered  as  mere  maxims,  there 
is  no  room  for  contradictions  of  any  kind,  as 
they  then  merely  indicate  the  different  interests 
of  reason,  which  occasion  differences  in  the  mode 
of  thought.  In  effect,  Reason  has  only  one  single 
interest,  and  the  seeming  contradiction  existing 
between  her  maxims  merely  indicates  a  differ¬ 
ence  in,  and  a  reciprocal  limitation  of,  the  meth¬ 
ods  by  which  this  interest  is  satisfied. 

This  reasoner  has  at  heart  the  interest  of  di¬ 
versity  —  in  accordance  with  the  principle  of 
specification;  another,  the  interest  of  unity — in 
accordance  with  the  principle  of  aggregation. 
Each  believes  that  his  judgement  rests  upon  a 
thorough  insight  into  the  subject  he  is  examin¬ 
ing,  and  yet  it  has  been  influenced  solely  by  a 
greater  or  less  degree  of  adherence  to  some  one 
of  the  two  principles,  neither  of  which  are  ob¬ 
jective,  but  originate  solely  from  the  interest  of 
reason,  and  on  this  account  to  be  termed  max - 


200 


THE  CRITIQUE 


ims  rather  than  principles.  When  I  observe  in¬ 
telligent  men  disputing  about  the  distinctive 
characteristics  of  men,  animals,  or  plants,  and 
even  of  minerals,  those  on  the  one  side  assuming 
the  existence  of  certain  national  characteristics, 
certain  well-defined  and  hereditary  distinctions 
of  family,  race,  and  so  on,  while  the  other  side 
maintain  that  nature  has  endowed  all  races  of 
men  with  the  same  faculties  and  dispositions, 
and  that  all  differences  are  but  the  result  of  ex¬ 
ternal  and  accidental  circumstances — I  have  on¬ 
ly  to  consider  for  a  moment  the  real  nature  of 
the  subject  of  discussion,  to  arrive  at  the  con¬ 
clusion  that  it  is  a  subject  far  too  deep  for  us  to 
judge  of,  and  that  there  is  little  probability  of 
either  party  being  able  to  speak  from  a  perfect 
insight  into  and  understanding  of  the  nature  of 
the  subject  itself.  Both  have,  in  reality,  been 
struggling  for  the  twofold  interest  of  reason; 
the  one  maintaining  the  one  interest,  the  other 
the  other.  But  this  difference  between  the  max¬ 
ims  of  diversity  and  unity  may  easily  be  recon¬ 
ciled  and  adjusted;  although,  so  long  as  they  are 
regarded  as  objective  principles,  they  must  oc¬ 
casion  not  only  contradictions  and  polemic,  but 
place  hinderances  in  the  way  of  the  advance¬ 
ment  of  truth,  until  some  means  is  discovered 
of  reconciling  these  conflicting  interests,  and 
bringing  reason  into  union  and  harmony  with 
itself. 

The  same  is  the  case  with  the  so-called  law 
discovered  by  Leibnitz,1  and  supported  with  re¬ 
markable  ability  by  Bonnet2 — the  law  of  the 
continuous  gradation  of  created  beings,  which  is 
nothing  more  than  an  inference  from  the  princi¬ 
ple  of  affinity;  for  observation  and  study  of  the 
order  of  nature  could  never  present  it  to  the 
mind  as  an  objective  truth.  The  steps  of  this  lad¬ 
der,  as  they  appear  in  experience,  are  too  far 
apart  from  each  other,  and  the  so-called  petty 
differences  between  different  kinds  of  animals 
are  in  nature  commonly  so  wide  separations  that 
no  confidence  can  be  placed  in  such  views  (par¬ 
ticularly  when  we  reflect  on  the  great  variety  of 
things,  and  the  ease  with  which  we  can  discover 
resemblances),  and  no  faith  in  the  laws  which 
are  said  to  express  the  aims  and  purposes  of  na¬ 
ture.  On  the  other  hand,  the  method  of  investi¬ 
gating  the  order  of  nature  in  the  light  of  this 
principle,  and  the  maxim  which  requires  us  to 
regard  this  order — it  being  still  undetermined 
how  far  it  extends — as  really  existing  in  nature, 
is  beyond  doubt  a  legitimate  and  excellent  prin¬ 
ciple  of  reason — a  principle  which  extends  far- 

1  Leibnitz,  Nouveaux  Essais,  iii.  6. 

2  Bonnet,  Betrachtungen  iiber  die  Natur,  pages  29-85. 


ther  than  any  experience  or  observation  of  ours 
and  which,  without  giving  us  any  positive  knowl¬ 
edge  of  anything  in  the  region  of  experience, 
guides  us  to  the  goal  of  systematic  unity. 

Oj  the  Ultimate  End  oj  the  Natural  Dialectic 
oj  Human  Reason 

The  ideas  of  pure  reason  cannot  be,  of  them¬ 
selves  and  in  their  own  nature,  dialectical;  it  is 
from  their  misemployment  alone  that  fallacies 
and  illusions  arise.  For  they  originate  in  the  na¬ 
ture  of  reason  itself,  and  it  is  impossible  that 
this  supreme  tribunal  for  all  the  rights  and  claims 
of  speculation  should  be  itself  undeserving  of 
confidence  and  promotive  of  error.  It  is  to  be 
expected,  therefore,  that  these  ideas  have  a  gen¬ 
uine  and  legitimate  aim.  It  is  true,  the  mob  of 
sophists  raise  against  reason  the  cry  of  inconsist¬ 
ency  and  contradiction,  and  affect  to  despise  the 
government  of  that  faculty,  because  they  cannot 
understand  its  constitution,  while  it  is  to  its  ben¬ 
eficial  influences  alone  that  they  owe  the  posi¬ 
tion  and  the  intelligence  which  enable  them  to 
criticize  and  to  blame  its  procedure. 

We  cannot  employ  an  a  priori  conception  with 
certainty,  until  we  have  made  a  transcendental 
deduction  therefore.  The  ideas  of  pure  reason  do 
not  admit  of  the  same  kind  of  deduction  as  the 
categories.  But  if  they  are  to  possess  the  least 
objective  validity,  and  to  represent  anything  but 
mere  creations  of  thought  ( entia  rationis  ratio- 
cinantis ),  a  deduction  of  them  must  be  possible. 
This  deduction  will  complete  the  critical  task 
imposed  upon  pure  reason ;  and  it  is  to  this  part 
of  our  labours  that  we  now  proceed. 

There  is  a  great  difference  between  a  thing’s 
being  presented  to  the  mind  as  an  object  in  an 
absolute  sense ,  or  merely  as  an  ideal  object.  In 
the  former  case  I  employ  my  conceptions  to  de¬ 
termine  the  object;  in  the  latter  case  nothing  is 
present  to  the  mind  but  a  mere  schema,  which 
does  not  relate  directly  to  an  object,  not  even 
in  a  hypothetical  sense,  but  which  is  useful  only 
for  the  purpose  of  representing  other  objects  to 
the  mind,  in  a  mediate  and  indirect  manner,  by 
means  of  their  relation  to  the  idea  in  the  intel¬ 
lect.  Thus  I  say  the  conception  of  a  supreme  in¬ 
telligence  is  a  mere  idea;  that  is  to  say,  its  ob¬ 
jective  reality  does  not  consist  in  the  fact  that 
it  has  an  immediate  relation  to  an  object  (for 
in  this  sense  we  have  no  means  of  establishing 
its  objective  validity),  it  is  merely  a  schema  con¬ 
structed  according  to  the  necessary  conditions 
of  the  unity  of  reason — the  schema  of  a  thing 
in  general,  which  is  useful  towards  the  produc¬ 
tion  of  the  highest  degree  of  systematic  unity 


OF  PURE  REASON 


in  the  empirical  exercise  of  reason,  in  which  we 
deduce  this  or  that  object  of  experience  from  the 
imaginary  object  of  this  idea,  as  the  ground  or 
cause  of  the  said  object  of  experience.  In  this 
way,  the  idea  is  properly  a  heuristic,  and  not  an 
ostensive,  conception;  it  does  not  give  us  any 
information  respecting  the  constitution  of  an  ob¬ 
ject,  it  merely  indicates  how,  under  the  guidance 
of  the  idea,  we  ought  to  investigate  the  consti¬ 
tution  and  the  relations  of  objects  in  the  world 
of  experience.  Now,  if  it  can  be  shown  that  the 
three  kinds  of  transcendental  ideas  (psycholog¬ 
ical,  cosmological,  and  theological),  although  not 
relating  directly  to  any  object  nor  determining 
it,  do  nevertheless,  on  the  supposition  of  the  ex¬ 
istence  of  an  ideal  object ,  produce  systematic 
unity  in  the  laws  of  the  empirical  employment 
of  the  reason,  and  extend  our  empirical  cogni¬ 
tion,  without  ever  being  inconsistent  or  in  op¬ 
position  with  it — it  must  be  a  necessary  maxim 
of  reason  to  regulate  its  procedure  according  to 
these  ideas.  And  this  forms  the  transcendental 
deduction  of  all  speculative  ideas,  not  as  consti¬ 
tutive  principles  of  the  extension  of  our  cogni¬ 
tion  beyond  the  limits  of  our  experience,  but  as 
regulative  principles  of  the  systematic  unity  of 
empirical  cognition,  which  is  by  the  aid  of  these 
ideas  arranged  and  emended  within  its  own 
proper  limits,  to  an  extent  unattainable  by  the 
operation  of  the  principles  of  the  understanding 
alone. 

I  shall  make  this  plainer.  Guided  by  the  prin¬ 
ciples  involved  in  these  ideas,  we  must,  in  the 
first  place,  so  connect  all  the  phenomena,  ac¬ 
tions,  and  feelings  of  the  mind,  as  if  it  were  a 
simple  substance,  which,  endowed  with  person¬ 
al  identity,  possesses  a  permanent  existence  (in 
this  life  at  least),  while  its  states,  among  which 
those  of  the  body  are  to  be  included  as  external 
conditions,  are  in  continual  change.  Secondly , 
in  cosmology,  we  must  investigate  the  conditions 
of  all  natural  phenomena,  internal  as  well  as  ex¬ 
ternal,  as  if  they  belonged  to  a  chain  infinite  and 
without  any  prime  or  supreme  member,  while 
we  do  not,  on  this  account,  deny  the  existence 
of  intelligible  grounds  of  these  phenomena,  al¬ 
though  we  never  employ  them  to  explain  phe¬ 
nomena,  for  the  simple  reason  that  they  are  not 
objects  of  our  cognition.  Thirdly ,  in  the  sphere 
of  theology,  we  must  regard  the  whole  system 
of  possible  experience  as  forming  an  absolute, 
but  dependent  and  sensuously-conditioned  uni¬ 
ty,  and  at  the  same  time  as  based  upon  a  sole, 
supreme,  and  all-sufficient  ground  existing  apart 
from  the  world  itself — a  ground  which  is  a  self- 
subsistent,  primeval  and  creative  reason,  in  re¬ 


lation  to  which  we  so  employ  our  reason  in  the 
field  of  experience,  as  if  all  objects  drew  their 
origin  from  that  archetype  of  all  reason.  In  other 
words,  we  ought  not  to  deduce  the  internal  phe¬ 
nomena  of  the  mind  from  a  simple  thinking  sub¬ 
stance,  but  deduce  them  from  each  other  under 
the  guidance  of  the  regulative  idea  of  a  simple 
being;  we  ought  not  to  deduce  the  phenomena, 
order,  and  unity  of  the  universe  from  a  supreme 
intelligence,  but  merely  draw  from  this  idea  of 
a  supremely  wise  cause  the  rules  which  must 
guide  reason  in  its  connection  of  causes  and  ef¬ 
fects. 

Now  there  is  nothing  to  hinder  us  from  admit¬ 
ting  these  ideas  to  possess  an  objective  and  hy¬ 
perbolic  existence,  except  the  cosmological  ideas, 
which  lead  reason  into  an  antinomy:  the  psycho¬ 
logical  and  theological  ideas  are  not  antinomial. 
They  contain  no  contradiction;  and  how,  then, 
can  any  one  dispute  their  objective  reality,  since 
he  who  denies  it  knows  as  little  about  their  pos¬ 
sibility  as  we  who  affirm?  And  yet,  when  we  wish 
to  admit  the  existence  of  a  thing,  it  is  not  suffi¬ 
cient  to  convince  ourselves  that  there  is  no  posi¬ 
tive  obstacle  in  the  way;  for  it  cannot  be  allow¬ 
able  to  regard  mere  creations  of  thought,  which 
transcend,  though  they  do  not  contradict,  all  our 
conceptions,  as  real  and  determinate  objects, 
solely  upon  the  authority  of  a  speculative  rea¬ 
son  striving  to  compass  its  own  aims.  They  can¬ 
not,  therefore,  be  admitted  to  be  real  in  them¬ 
selves;  they  can  only  possess  a  comparative 
reality — that  of  a  schema  of  the  regulative  prin¬ 
ciple  of  the  systematic  unity  of  all  cognition. 
They  are  to  be  regarded  not  as  actual  things,  but 
as  in  some  measure  analogous  to  them.  We  ab¬ 
stract  from  the  object  of  the  idea  all  the  condi¬ 
tions  which  limit  the  exercise  of  our  understand¬ 
ing,  but  which,  on  the  other  hand,  are  the  sole 
conditions  of  our  possessing  a  determinate  con¬ 
ception  of  any  given  thing.  And  thus  we  cogitate 
a  something,  of  the  real  nature  of  which  we 
have  not  the  least  conception,  but  which  we  rep¬ 
resent  to  ourselves  as  standing  in  a  relation  to 
the  whole  system  of  phenomena,  analogous  to 
that  in  which  phenomena  stand  to  each  other. 

By  admitting  these  ideal  beings,  we  do  not 
really  extend  our  cognitions  beyond  the  objects 
of  possible  experience;  we  extend  merely  the 
empirical  unity  of  our  experience,  by  the  aid  of 
systematic  unity,  the  schema  of  which  is  fur¬ 
nished  by  the  idea,  which  is  therefore  valid — 
not  as  a  constitutive,  but  as  a  regulative  princi¬ 
ple.  For  although  we  posit  a  thing  corresponding 
to  the  idea — a  something,  an  actual  existence — 
we  do  not  on  that  account  aim  at  the  extension 


202 


THE  CRITIQUE 


of  our  cognition  by  means  of  transcendent  con¬ 
ceptions.  This  existence  is  purely  ideal,  and  not 
objective;  it  is  the  mere  expression  of  the  sys¬ 
tematic  unity  which  is  to  be  the  guide  of  reason 
in  the  field  of  experience.  There  are  no  attempts 
made  at  deciding  what  the  ground  of  this  unity 
may  be,  or  what  the  real  nature  of  this  imagi¬ 
nary  being. 

Thus  the  transcendental  and  only  determinate 
conception  of  God,  which  is  presented  to  us  by 
speculative  reason,  is  in  the  strictest  sense  deis - 
tic.  In  other  words,  reason  does  not  assure  us  of 
the  objective  validity  of  the  conception;  it  mere¬ 
ly  gives  us  the  idea  of  something,  on  which  the 
supreme  and  necessary  unity  of  all  experience  is 
based.  This  something  we  cannot,  following  the 
analogy  of  a  real  substance,  cogitate  otherwise 
than  as  the  cause  of  all  things  operating  in  ac¬ 
cordance  with  rational  laws,  if  we  regard  it  as 
an  individual  object;  although  we  should  rest 
contented  with  the  idea  alone  as  a  regulative 
principle  of  reason,  and  make  no  attempt  at 
completing  the  sum  of  the  conditions  imposed 
by  thought.  This  attempt  is,  indeed,  inconsistent 
with  the  grand  aim  of  complete  systematic  uni¬ 
ty  in  the  sphere  of  cognition — a  unity  to  which 
no  bounds  are  set  by  reason. 

Hence  it  happens  that,  admitting  a  divine  be¬ 
ing,  I  can  have  no  conception  of  the  internal  pos¬ 
sibility  of  its  perfection,  or  of  the  necessity  of 
its  existence.  The  only  advantage  of  this  admis¬ 
sion  is  that  it  enables  me  to  answer  all  other  ques¬ 
tions  relating  to  the  contingent,  and  to  give  rea¬ 
son  the  most  complete  satisfaction  as  regards 
the  unity  which  it  aims  at  attaining  in  the  world 
of  experience.  But  I  cannot  satisfy  reason  with 
regard  to  this  hypothesis  itself ;  and  this  proves 
that  it  is  not  its  intelligence  and  insight  into  the 
subject,  but  its  speculative  interest  alone  which 
induces  it  to  proceed  from  a  point  lying  far  be¬ 
yond  the  sphere  of  our  cognition,  for  the  pur¬ 
pose  of  being  able  to  consider  all  objects  as 
parts  of  a  systematic  whole. 

Here  a  distinction  presents  itself,  in  regard  to 
the  way  in  which  we  may  cogitate  a  presuppo¬ 
sition — a  distinction  which  is  somewhat  subtle, 
but  of  great  importance  in  transcendental  phi¬ 
losophy.  I  may  have  sufficient  grounds  to  admit 
something,  or  the  existence  of  something,  in  a 
relative  point  of  view  ( suppositio  relativa) ,  with¬ 
out  being  justified  in  admitting  it  in  an  absolute 
sense  ( suppositio  absoluta).  This  distinction  is 
undoubtedly  requisite,  in  the  case  of  a  regulative 
principle,  the  necessity  of  which  we  recognize, 
though  we  are  ignorant  of  the  source  and  cause 
of  that  necessity,  and  which  we  assume  to  be 


based  upon  some  ultimate  ground,  for  the  pur¬ 
pose  of  being  able  to  cogitate  the  universality  of 
the  principle  in  a  more  determinate  way.  For  ex¬ 
ample,  I  cogitate  the  existence  of  a  being  cor¬ 
responding  to  a  pure  transcendental  idea.  But  I 
cannot  admit  that  this  being  exists  absolutely 
and  in  itself,  because  all  of  the  conceptions  by 
which  I  can  cogitate  an  object  in  a  determinate 
manner  fall  short  of  assuring  me  of  its  exist¬ 
ence;  nay,  the  conditions  of  the  objective  valid¬ 
ity  of  my  conceptions  are  excluded  by  the  idea 
— by  the  very  fact  of  its  being  an  idea.  The  con¬ 
ceptions  of  reality,  substance,  causality,  nay, 
even  that  of  necessity  in  existence,  have  no  sig¬ 
nificance  out  of  the  sphere  of  empirical  cognition, 
and  cannot,  beyond  that  sphere,  determine  any 
object.  They  may,  accordingly,  be  employed  to 
explain  the  possibility  of  things  in  the  world  of 
sense,  but  they  are  utterly  inadequate  to  explain 
the  possibility  of  the  universe  itself  considered 
as  a  whole;  because  in  this  case  the  ground  of  ex¬ 
planation  must  lie  out  of  and  beyond  the  world, 
and  cannot,  therefore,  be  an  object  of  possible 
experience.  Now,  I  may  admit  the  existence  of  an 
incomprehensible  being  of  this  nature — the  ob¬ 
ject  of  a  mere  idea,  relatively  to  the  world  of 
sense ;  although  I  have  no  ground  to  admit  its  ex¬ 
istence  absolutely  and  in  itself.  For  if  anidea  (that 
of  a  systematic  and  complete  unity,  of  which  I 
shall  presently  speak  more  particularly)  lies  at 
the  foundation  of  the  most  extended  empirical 
employment  of  reason,  and  if  this  idea  cannot 
be  adequately  represented  in  concreto ,  although 
it  is  indispensably  necessary  for  the  approxima¬ 
tion  of  empirical  unity  to  the  highest  possible 
degree — I  am  not  only  authorized,  but  compelled, 
to  realize  this*  idea,  that  is,  to  posit  a  real  ob¬ 
ject  corresponding  thereto.  But  I  cannot  pro¬ 
fess  to  know  this  object;  it  is  to  me  merely  a 
something,  to  which,  as  the  ground  of  systemat¬ 
ic  unity  in  cognition,  I  attribute  such  properties 
as  are  analogous  to  the  conceptions  employed  by 
the  understanding  in  the  sphere  of  experience. 
Following  the  analogy  of  the  notions  of  reality, 
substance,  causality,  and  necessity,  I  cogitate  a 
being,  which  possesses  all  these  attributes  in  the 
highest  degree;  and,  as  this  idea  is  the  offspring 
of  my  reason  alone,  I  cogitate  this  being  as  self - 
subsistent  reason ,  and  as  the  cause  of  the  uni¬ 
verse  operating  by  means  of  ideas  of  the  great¬ 
est  possible  harmony  and  unity.  Thus  I  abstract 
all  conditions  that  would  limit  my  idea,  solely 
for  the  purpose  of  rendering  systematic  unity 
possible  in  the  world  of  empirical  diversity,  and 
thus  securing  the  widest  possible  extension  for 
the  exercise  of  reason  in  that  sphere.  This  I  am 


OF  PURE  REASON 


enabled  to  do,  by  regarding  all  connections  and 
relations  in  the  world  of  sense,  as  if  they  were 
the  dispositions  of  a  supreme  reason,  of  which 
our  reason  is  but  a  faint  image.  I  then  proceed 
to  cogitate  this  Supreme  Being  by  conceptions 
which  have,  properly,  no  meaning  or  application, 
except  in  the  world  of  sense.  But  as  I  am  au¬ 
thorized  to  employ  the  transcendental  hypothe¬ 
sis  of  such  a  being  in  a  relative  respect  alone, 
that  is,  as  the  substratum  of  the  greatest  possi¬ 
ble  unity  in  experience — I  may  attribute  to  a 
being  which  I  regard  as  distinct  from  the  world, 
such  properties  as  belong  solely  to  the  sphere  of 
sense  and  experience.  For  I  do  not  desire,  and 
am  not  justified  in  desiring,  to  cognize  this  ob¬ 
ject  of  my  idea,  as  it  exists  in  itself ;  for  I  pos¬ 
sess  no  conceptions  sufficient  for  this  task,  those 
of  reality,  substance,  causality,  nay,  even  that 
of  necessity  in  existence,  losing  all  significance, 
and  becoming  merely  the  signs  of  conceptions, 
without  content  and  without  applicability,  when 
I  attempt  to  carry  them  beyond  the  limits  of  the 
world  of  sense.  I  cogitate  merely  the  relation  of 
a  perfectly  unknown  being  to  the  greatest  pos¬ 
sible  systematic  unity  of  experience,  solely  for 
the  purpose  of  employing  it  as  the  schema  of 
the  regulative  principle  which  directs  reason  in 
its  empirical  exercise. 

It  is  evident,  at  the  first  view,  that  we  cannot 
presuppose  the  reality  of  this  transcendental  ob¬ 
ject,  by  means  of  the  conceptions  of  reality, 
substance,  causality,  and  so  on,  because  these 
conceptions  cannot  be  applied  to  anything  that 
is  distinct  from  the  world  of  sense.  Thus  the 
supposition  of  a  Supreme  Being  or  cause  is  pure¬ 
ly  relative;  it  is  cogitated  only  in  behalf  of  the 
systematic  unity  of  experience;  such  a  being  is 
but  a  something,  of  whose  existence  in  itself  we 
have  not  the  least  conception.  Thus,  too,  it  be¬ 
comes  sufficiently  manifest  why  we  required  the 
idea  of  a  necessary  being  in  relation  to  objects 
given  by  sense,  although  we  can  never  have  the 
least  conception  of  this  being,  or  of  its  absolute 
necessity. 

And  now  we  can  clearly  perceive  the  result  of 
our  transcendental  dialectic,  and  the  proper  aim 
of  the  ideas  of  pure  reason — which  become  dia¬ 
lectical  solely  from  misunderstanding  and  incon¬ 
siderateness.  Pure  reason  is,  in  fact,  occupied 
with  itself,  and  not  with  any  object.  Objects  are 
not  presented  to  it  to  be  embraced  in  the  unity 
of  an  empirical  conception;  it  is  only  the  cogni¬ 
tions  of  the  understanding  that  are  presented  to 
it,  for  the  purpose  of  receiving  the  unity  of  a  ra¬ 
tional  conception,  that  is,  of  being  connected  ac¬ 
cording  to  a  principle.  The  unity  of  reason  is  the 


unity  of  system;  and  this  systematic  unity  is  not 
an  objective  principle,  extending  its  dominion 
over  objects,  but  a  subjective  maxim,  extending 
its  authority  over  the  empirical  cognition  of  ob¬ 
jects.  The  systematic  connection  which  reason 
gives  to  the  empirical  employment  of  the  under¬ 
standing  not  only  advances  the  extension  of  that 
employment,  but  ensures  its  correctness,  and 
thus  the  principle  of  a  systematic  unity  of  this 
nature  is  also  objective,  although  only  in  an  in¬ 
definite  respect  ( principium  vagum).  It  is  not, 
however,  a  constitutive  principle,  determining 
an  object  to  which  it  directly  relates;  it  is  mere¬ 
ly  a  regulative  principle  or  maxim,  advancing 
and  strengthening  the  empirical  exercise  of  rea¬ 
son,  by  the  opening  up  of  new  paths  of  which 
the  understanding  is  ignorant,  while  it  never  con¬ 
flicts  with  the  laws  of  its  exercise  in  the  sphere 
of  experience. 

But  reason  cannot  cogitate  this  systematic 
unity,  without  at  the  same  time  cogitating  an 
object  of  the  idea — an  object  that  cannot  be  pre¬ 
sented  in  any  experience,  which  contains  no  con¬ 
crete  example  of  a  complete  systematic  unity. 
This  being  ( ens  rationis  ratio cinatae)  is  there¬ 
fore  a  mere  idea  and  is  not  assumed  to  be  a  thing 
which  is  real  absolutely  and  in  itself.  On  the  con¬ 
trary,  it  forms  merely  the  problematical  founda¬ 
tion  of  the  connection  which  the  mind  introduces 
among  the  phenomena  of  the  sensuous  world. 
We  look  upon  this  connection,  in  the  light  of  the 
above-mentioned  idea,  as  if  it  drew  its  origin 
from  the  supposed  being  which  corresponds  to 
the  idea.  And  yet  all  we  aim  at  is  the  possession 
of  this  idea  as  a  secure  foundation  for  the  sys¬ 
tematic  unity  of  experience — a  unity  indispen¬ 
sable  to  reason,  advantageous  to  the  understand¬ 
ing,  and  promotive  of  the  interests  of  empirical 
cognition. 

We  mistake  the  true  meaning  of  this  idea  when 
we  regard  it  as  an  enouncement,  or  even  as  a  hy¬ 
pothetical  declaration  of  the  existence  of  a  real 
thing,  which  we  are  to  regard  as  the  origin  or 
ground  of  a  systematic  constitution  of  the  uni¬ 
verse.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  left  completely  un¬ 
determined  what  the  nature  or  properties  of  this 
so-called  ground  may  be.  The  idea  is  merely  to 
be  adopted  as  a  point  of  view,  from  which  this 
unity,  so  essential  to  reason  and  so  beneficial  to 
the  understanding,  may  be  regarded  as  radiat¬ 
ing.  In  one  word,  this  transcendental  thing  is 
merely  the  schema  of  a  regulative  principle,  by 
means  of  which  Reason,  so  far  as  in  her  lies,  ex¬ 
tends  the  dominion  of  systematic  unity  over  the 
whole  sphere  of  experience. 

The  first  object  of  an  idea  of  this  kind  is  the 


THE  CRITIQUE 


ego,  considered  merely  as  a  thinking  nature  or 
soul.  If  I  wish  to  investigate  the  properties  of  a 
thinking  being,  I  must  interrogate  experience. 
But  I  find  that  I  can  apply  none  of  the  catego¬ 
ries  to  this  object,  the  schema  of  these  catego¬ 
ries,  which  is  the  condition  of  their  application, 
being  given  only  in  sensuous  intuition.  But  I 
cannot  thus  attain  to  the  cognition  of  a  system¬ 
atic  unity  of  all  the  phenomena  of  the  internal 
sense.  Instead,  therefore,  of  an  empirical  con¬ 
ception  of  what  the  soul  really  is,  reason  takes 
the  conception  of  the  empirical  unity  of  all 
thought,  and,  by  cogitating  this  unity  as  uncon¬ 
ditioned  and  primitive,  constructs  the  rational 
conception  or  idea  of  a  simple  substance  which 
is  in  itself  unchangeable,  possessing  personal 
identity,  and  in  connection  with  other  real  things 
external  to  it;  in  one  word,  it  constructs  the  idea 
of  a  simple  self-subsistent  intelligence.  But  the 
real  aim  of  reason  in  this  procedure  is  the  attain¬ 
ment  of  principles  of  systematic  unity  for  the 
explanation  of  the  phenomena  of  the  soul.  That 
is,  reason  desires  to  be  able  to  represent  all  the 
determinations  of  the  internal  sense  as  existing 
in  one  subject,  all  powers  as  deduced  from  one 
fundamental  power,  all  changes  as  mere  varie¬ 
ties  in  the  condition  of  a  being  which  is  perma¬ 
nent  and  always  the  same,  and  all  phenomena  in 
space  as  entirely  different  in  their  nature  from 
the  procedure  of  thought.  Essential  simplicity 
(with  the  other  attributes  predicated  of  the  ego) 
is  regarded  as  the  mere  schema  of  this  regula¬ 
tive  principle;  it  is  not  assumed  that  it  is  the 
actual  ground  of  the  properties  of  the  soul.  For 
these  properties  may  rest  upon  quite  different 
grounds,  of  which  we  are  completely  ignorant; 
just  as  the  above  predicates  could  not  give  us 
any  knowledge  of  the  soul  as  it  is  in  itself,  even 
if  we  regarded  them  as  valid  in  respect  of  it,  in¬ 
asmuch  as  they  constitute  a  mere  idea,  which 
cannot  be  represented  in  concreto.  Nothing  but 
good  can  result  from  a  psychological  idea  of  this 
kind,  if  we  only  take  proper  care  not  to  consider 
it  as  more  than  an  idea;  that  is,  if  we  regard  it 
as  valid  merely  in  relation  to  the  employment  of 
reason,  in  the  sphere  of  the  phenomena  of  the 
soul.  Under  the  guidance  of  this  idea,  or  princi¬ 
ple,  no  empirical  laws  of  corporeal  phenomena 
are  called  in  to  explain  that  which  is  a  phenom¬ 
enon  of  the  internal  sense  alone;  no  windy  hy¬ 
potheses  of  the  generation,  annihilation,  and  pal¬ 
ingenesis  of  souls  are  admitted.  Thus  the  con¬ 
sideration  of  this  object  of  the  internal  sense  is 
kept  pure,  and  unmixed  with  heterogeneous  ele¬ 
ments;  while  the  investigation  of  reason  aims  at 
reducing  all  the  grounds  of  explanation  employed 


in  this  sphere  of  knowledge  to  a  single  principle. 
All  this  is  best  effected,  nay,  cannot  be  effected 
otherwise  than  by  means  of  such  a  schema,  which 
requires  us  to  regard  this  ideal  thing  as  an  actu¬ 
al  existence.  The  psychological  idea  is,  there¬ 
fore,  meaningless  and  inapplicable,  except  as  the 
schema  of  a  regulative  conception.  For,  if  I  ask 
whether  the  soul  is  not  really  of  a  spiritual  na¬ 
ture — it  is  a  question  which  has  no  meaning. 
From  such  a  conception  has  been  abstracted, 
not  merely  all  corporeal  nature,  but  all  nature, 
that  is,  all  the  predicates  of  a  possible  experi¬ 
ence;  and  consequently,  all  the  conditions  which 
enable  us  to  cogitate  an  object  to  this  concep¬ 
tion  have  disappeared.  But,  if  these  conditions 
are  absent,  it  is  evident  that  the  conception  is 
meaningless. 

The  second  regulative  idea  of  speculative  rea¬ 
son  is  the  conception  of  the  universe.  For  na¬ 
ture  is  properly  the  only  object  presented  to  us. 
in  regard  to  which  reason  requires  regulative 
principles.  Nature  is  twofold — thinking  and  cor¬ 
poreal  nature.  To  cogitate  the  latter  in  regard  to 
its  internal  possibility,  that  is,  to  determine  the 
application  of  the  categories  to  it,  no  idea  is  re¬ 
quired — no  representation  which  transcends  ex¬ 
perience.  In  this  sphere,  therefore,  an  idea  is 
impossible,  sensuous  intuition  being  our  only 
guide;  while,  in  the  sphere  of  psychology,  we  re¬ 
quire  the  fundamental  idea  (I),  which  contains  a 
priori  a  certain  form  of  thought,  namely,  the  unity 
of  the  ego.  Pure  reason  has,  therefore,  nothing 
left  but  nature  in  general,  and  the  completeness 
of  conditions  in  nature  in  accordance  with  some 
principle.  The  absolute  totality  of  the  series  of 
these  conditions  is  an  idea,  which  can  never  be 
fully  realized  in  the  empirical  exercise  of  rea¬ 
son,  while  it  is  serviceable  as  a  rule  for  the  pro¬ 
cedure  of  reason  in  relation  to  that  totality.  It 
requires  us,  in  the  explanation  of  given  phenom¬ 
ena  (in  the  regress  or  ascent  in  the  series),  to 
proceed  as  if  the  series  were  infinite  in  itself, 
that  is,  were  prolonged  in  indefinitum ;  while  on 
the  other  hand,  where  reason  is  regarded  as  it¬ 
self  the  determining  cause  (in  the  region  of 
freedom),  we  are  required  to  proceed  as  if  we 
had  not  before  us  an  object  of  sense,  but  of  the 
pure  understanding.  In  this  latter  case,  the  con¬ 
ditions  do  not  exist  in  the  series  of  phenomena, 
but  may  be  placed  quite  out  of  and  beyond  it. 
and  the  series  of  conditions  may  be  regarded  as 
if  it  had  an  absolute  beginning  from  an  intelligi¬ 
ble  cause.  All  this  proves  that  the  cosmological 
ideas  are  nothing  but  regulative  principles,  and 
not  constitutive;  and  that  their  aim  is  not  to  re¬ 
alize  an  actual  totality  in  such  series.  The  full 


OF  PURE 

discussion  of  this  subject  will  be  found  in  its 
proper  place  in  the  chapter  on  the  antinomy  of 
pure  reason. 

The  third  idea  of  pure  reason,  containing  the 
hypothesis  of  a  being  which  is  valid  merely  as  a 
relative  hypothesis,  is  that  of  the  one  and  all- 
sufficient  cause  of  all  cosmological  series,  in  oth¬ 
er  words,  the  idea  of  God.  We  have  not  the 
slightest  ground  absolutely  to  admit  the  exist¬ 
ence  of  an  object  corresponding  to  this  idea;  for 
what  can  empower  or  authorize  us  to  affirm  the 
existence  of  a  being  of  the  highest  perfection — 
a  being  whose  existence  is  absolutely  necessary 
— merely  because  we  possess  the  conception  of 
such  a  being?  The  answer  is:  It  is  the  existence 
of  the  world  which  renders  this  hypothesis  nec¬ 
essary.  But  this  answer  makes  it  perfectly  evi¬ 
dent  that  the  idea  of  this  being,  like  all  other 
speculative  ideas,  is  essentially  nothing  more 
than  a  demand  upon  reason  that  it  shall  regulate 
the  connection  which  it  and  its  subordinate  fac¬ 
ulties  introduce  into  the  phenomena  of  the  world 
by  principles  of  systematic  unity  and,  conse¬ 
quently,  that  it  shall  regard  all  phenomena  as 
originating  from  one  all-embracing  being, 
as  the  supreme  and  all-sufficient  cause.  From 
this  it  is  plain  that  the  only  aim  of  reason 
in  this  procedure  is  the  establishment  of  its 
own  formal  rule  for  the  extension  of  its  do¬ 
minion  in  the  world  of  experience;  that  it  does 
not  aim  at  an  extension  of  its  cognition  beyond 
the  limits  of  experience;  and  that,  consequently, 
this  idea  does  not  contain  any  constitutive 
principle. 

The  highest  formal  unity,  which  is  based  up¬ 
on  ideas  alone,  is  the  unity  of  all  things — a  uni¬ 
ty  in  accordance  with  an  aim  or  purpose;  and 
the  speculative  interest  of  reason  renders  it  nec¬ 
essary  to  regard  all  order  in  the  world  as  if  it 
originated  from  the  intention  and  design  of  a 
supreme  reason.  This  principle  unfolds  to  the 
view  of  reason  in  the  sphere  of  experience  new 
and  enlarged  prospects,  and  invites  it  to  con¬ 
nect  the  phenomena  of  the  world  according  to 
teleological  laws,  and  in  this  way  to  attain  to  the 
highest  possible  degree  of  systematic  unity.  The 
hypothesis  of  a  supreme  intelligence,  as  the  sole 
cause  of  the  universe — an  intelligence  which  has 
for  us  no  more  than  an  ideal  existence — is  ac¬ 
cordingly  always  of  the  greatest  service  to  rea¬ 
son.  Thus,  if  we  presuppose,  in  relation  to  the 
figure  of  the  earth  (which  is  round,  but  some¬ 
what  flattened  at  the  poles),1  or  that  of  moun¬ 
tains  or  seas,  wise  designs  on  the  part  of  an  au- 

1  The  advantages  which  a  circular  form,  in  the  case 
of  the  earth,  has  over  every  other,  are  well  known.  But 


REASON  205 

thor  of  the  universe,  we  cannot  fail  to  make,  by 
the  light  of  this  supposition,  a  great  number  of 
interesting  discoveries.  If  we  keep  to  this  hy¬ 
pothesis,  as  a  principle  which  is  purely  regulative, 
even  error  cannot  be  very  detrimental.  For,  in 
this  case,  error  can  have  no  more  serious  con¬ 
sequences  than  that,  where  we  expected  to  dis¬ 
cover  a  teleological  connection  ( nexus  finalis ), 
only  a  mechanical  or  physical  connection  ap¬ 
pears.  In  such  a  case,  we  merely  fail  to  find  the 
additional  form  of  unity  we  expected,  but  we 
do  not  lose  the  rational  unity  which  the  mind 
requires  in  its  procedure  in  experience.  But  even 
a  miscarriage  of  this  sort  cannot  affect  the  law 
in  its  general  and  teleological  relations.  For  al¬ 
though  we  may  convict  an  anatomist  of  an  er¬ 
ror,  when  he  connects  the  limb  of  some  animal 
with  a  certain  purpose,  it  is  quite  impossible  to 
prove  in  a  single  case  that  any  arrangement  of 
nature,  be  it  what  it  may,  is  entirely  without  aim 
or  design.  And  thus  medical  physiology,  by  the 
aid  of  a  principle  presented  to  it  by  pure  reason, 
extends  its  very  limited  empirical  knowledge  of 
the  purposes  of  the  different  parts  of  an  organ¬ 
ized  body  so  far  that  it  may  be  asserted  with 
the  utmost  confidence,  and  with  the  approbation 
of  all  reflecting  men,  that  every  organ  or  bodily 
part  of  an  animal  has  its  use  and  answers  a  cer¬ 
tain  design.  Now,  this  is  a  supposition  which,  if 
regarded  as  of  a  constitutive  character,  goes 
much  farther  than  any  experience  or  observa¬ 
tion  of  ours  can  justify.  Hence  it  is  evident  that 
it  is  nothing  more  than  a  regulative  principle  of 
reason,  which  aims  at  the  highest  degree  of  sys¬ 
tematic  unity,  by  the  aid  of  the  idea  of  a  cau¬ 
sality  according  to  design  in  a  supreme  cause — 
a  cause  which  it  regards  as  the  highest  intelli¬ 
gence. 

If,  however,  we  neglect  this  restriction  of  the 
idea  to  a  purely  regulative  influence,  reason  is 
betrayed  into  numerous  errors.  For  it  has  then 
left  the  ground  of  experience,  in  which  alone  are 
to  be  found  the  criteria  of  truth,  and  has  ven¬ 
tured  into  the  region  of  the  incomprehensible 
and  unsearchable,  on  the  heignts  of  which  it 
loses  its  power  and  collectedness,  because  it  has 

few  are  aware  that  the  slight  flattening  at  the  poles, 
which  gives  it  the  figure  of  a  spheroid,  is  the  only  cause 
which  prevents  the  elevations  of  continents  or  even  of 
mountains,  perhaps  thrown  up  by  some  internal  convul¬ 
sion,  from  continually  altering  the  position  of  the  axis 
of  the  earth — and  that  to  some  considerable  degree  in 
a  short  time.  The  great  protuberance  of  the  earth  under 
the  Equator  serves  to  overbalance  the  impetus  of  all 
other  masses  of  earth,  and  thus  to  preserve  the  axis  of 
the  earth,  so  far  as  we  can  observe,  in  its  present  posi¬ 
tion.  And  yet  this  wise  arrangement  has  been  unthink¬ 
ingly  explained  from  the  equilibrium  of  the  formerly 
fluid  mass. 


THE  CRITIQUE 


206 

completely  severed  its  connection  with  experi¬ 
ence. 

The  first  error  which  arises  from  our  employ¬ 
ing  the  idea  of  a  Supreme  Being  as  a  constitu¬ 
tive  (in  repugnance  to  the  very  nature  of  an 
idea),  and  not  as  a  regulative  principle,  is  the 
error  of  inactive  reason  ( ignava  ratio).1  We 
may  so  term  every  principle  which  requires  us 
to  regard  our  investigations  of  nature  as  abso¬ 
lutely  complete,  and  allows  reason  to  cease  its 
inquiries,  as  if  it  had  fully  executed  its  task. 
Thus  the  psychological  idea  of  the  ego,  when 
employed  as  a  constitutive  principle  for  the  ex¬ 
planation  of  the  phenomena  of  the  soul,  and  for 
the  extension  of  our  knowledge  regarding  this 
subject  beyond  the  limits  of  experience — even 
to  the  condition  of  the  soul  after  death — is  con¬ 
venient  enough  for  the  purposes  of  pure  reason, 
but  detrimental  and  even  ruinous  to  its  interests 
in  the  sphere  of  nature  and  experience.  The  dog¬ 
matizing  spiritualist  explains  the  unchanging 
unity  of  our  personality  through  all  changes  of 
condition  from  the  unity  of  a  thinking  substance, 
the  interest  which  we  take  in  things  and  events 
that  can  happen  only  after  our  death,  from  a 
consciousness  of  the  immaterial  nature  of  our 
thinking  subject,  and  so  on.  Thus  he  dispenses 
with  all  empirical  investigations  into  the  cause 
of  these  internal  phenomena,  and  with  all  possi¬ 
ble  explanations  of  them  upon  purely  natural 
grounds;  while,  at  the  dictation  of  a  transcend¬ 
ent  reason,  he  passes  by  the  immanent  sources 
of  cognition  in  experience,  greatly  to  his  own 
ease  and  convenience,  but  to  the  sacrifice  of  all 
genuine  insight  and  intelligence.  These  prejudi¬ 
cial  consequences  become  still  more  evident,  in 
the  case  of  the  dogmatical  treatment  of  our  idea 
of  a  Supreme  Intelligence,  and  the  theological 
system  of  nature  (physico-theology)  which  is 
falsely  based  upon  it.  For,  in  this  case,  the  aims 
which  we  observe  in  nature,  and  often  those 
which  we  merely  fancy  to  exist,  make  the  in¬ 
vestigation  of  causes  a  very  easy  task,  by  di¬ 
recting  us  to  refer  such  and  such  phenomena 
immediately  to  the  unsearchable  will  and  coun¬ 
sel  of  the  Supreme  Wisdom,  while  we  ought  to 
investigate  their  causes  in  the  general  laws  of 
the  mechanism  of  matter.  We  are  thus  recom¬ 
mended  to  consider  the  labour  of  reason  as  end¬ 
ed,  when  we  have  merely  dispensed  with  its  em- 

1  This  was  the  term  applied  by  the  old  dialecticians 
to  a  sophistical  argument,  which  ran  thus:  If  it  is  your 
fate  to  die  of  this  disease,  you  will  die,  whether  you  em¬ 
ploy  a  physician  or  not.  Cicero  says  that  this  mode  of 
reasoning  has  received  this  appellation,  because,  if  fol¬ 
lowed,  it  puts  an  end  to  the  employment  of  reason  in  the 
affairs  of  life.  For  a  similar  reason,  I  have  applied  this 
designation  to  the  sophistical  argument  of  pure  reason. 


ployment,  which  is  guided  surely  and  safely  only 
by  the  order  of  nature  and  the  series  of  changes 
in  the  world — which  are  arranged  according  tc 
immanent  and  general  laws.  This  error  may  be 
avoided,  if  we  do  not  merely  consider  from  the 
view-point  of  final  aims  certain  parts  of  nature, 
such  as  the  division  and  structure  of  a  continent, 
the  constitution  and  direction  of  certain  moun¬ 
tain-chains,  or  even  the  organization  existing  in 
the  vegetable  and  animal  kingdoms,  but  look 
upon  this  systematic  unity  of  nature  in  a  per¬ 
fectly  general  way,  in  relation  to  the  idea  of  a 
Supreme  Intelligence.  If  we  pursue  this  advice, 
we  lay  as  a  foundation  for  all  investigation  the 
conformity  to  aims  of  all  phenomena  of  nature 
in  accordance  with  universal  laws,  for  which  no 
particular  arrangement  of  nature  is  exempt,  but 
only  cognized  by  us  with  more  or  less  difficulty; 
and  we  possess  a  regulative  principle  of  the  sys¬ 
tematic  unity  of  a  teleological  connection,  which 
we  do  not  attempt  to  anticipate  or  predetermine. 
All  that  we  do,  and  ought  to  do,  is  to  follow  out 
the  physico-mechanical  connection  in  nature  ac¬ 
cording  to  general  laws,  with  the  hope  of  discov¬ 
ering,  sooner  or  later,  the  teleological  connec¬ 
tion  also.  Thus,  and  thus  only,  can  the  principle 
of  final  unity  aid  in  the  extension  of  the  em¬ 
ployment  of  reason  in  the  sphere  of  experience, 
without  being  in  any  case  detrimental  to  its 
interests. 

The  second  error  which  arises  from  the  mis¬ 
conception  of  the  principle  of  systematic  unity  is 
that  of  perverted  reason  ( perversa  ratio ,  vorepov 
7 rporepov  rationis).  The  idea  of  systematic 
unity  is  available  as  a  regulative  principle  in  the 
connection  of  phenomena  according  to  general 
natural  laws;  and,  how  far  soever  we  have  to 
travel  upon  the  path  of  experience  to  discover 
some  fact  or  event,  this  idea  requires  us  to  be¬ 
lieve  that  we  have  approached  all  the  more  near¬ 
ly  to  the  completion  of  its  use  in  the  sphere  of 
nature,  although  that  completion  can  never  be 
attained.  But  this  error  reverses  the  procedure 
of  reason.  We  begin  by  hypostatizing  the  prin¬ 
ciple  of  systematic  unity,  and  by  giving  an  an¬ 
thropomorphic  determination  to  the  conception 
of  a  Supreme  Intelligence,  and  then  proceed 
forcibly  to  impose  aims  upon  nature.  Thus  not 
only  does  teleology,  which  ought  to  aid  in  the 
completion  of  unity  in  accordance  with  general 
laws,  operate  to  the  destruction  of  its  influence, 
but  it  hinders  reason  from  attaining  its  proper 
aim,  that  is,  the  proof,  upon  natural  grounds,  of 
the  existence  of  a  supreme  intelligent  cause.  For, 
if  we  cannot  presuppose  supreme  finality  in  na¬ 
ture  a  priori,  that  is,  as  essentially  belonging  to 


OF  PURE  REASON 


nature,  how  can  we  be  directed  to  endeavour  to 
discover  this  unity  and,  rising  gradually  through 
its  different  degrees,  to  approach  the  supreme 
perfection  of  an  author  of  all — a  perfection 
which  is  absolutely  necessary,  and  therefore  cog¬ 
nizable  a  priori ?  The  regulative  principle  directs 
us  to  presuppose  systematic  unity  absolutely 
and,  consequently,  as  following  from  the  essen¬ 
tial  nature  of  things — but  only  as  a  unity  of  na¬ 
ture,  not  merely  cognized  empirically,  but  pre¬ 
supposed  a  priori ,  although  only  in  an  indeter¬ 
minate  manner.  But  if  I  insist  on  basing  nature 
upon  the  foundation  of  a  supreme  ordaining  Be¬ 
ing,  the  unity  of  nature  is  in  effect  lost.  For,  in 
this  case,  it  is  quite  foreign  and  unessential  to 
the  nature  of  things,  and  cannot  be  cognized 
from  the  general  laws  of  nature.  And  thus  arises 
a  vicious  circular  argument,  what  ought  to  have 
been  proved  having  been  presupposed. 

To  take  the  regulative  principle  of  systematic 
unity  in  nature  for  a  constitutive  principle,  and 
to  hypostatize  and  make  a  cause  out  of  that 
which  is  properly  the  ideal  ground  of  the  con¬ 
sistent  and  harmonious  exercise  of  reason,  in¬ 
volves  reason  in  inextricable  embarrassments. 
The  investigation  of  nature  pursues  its  own 
path  under  the  guidance  of  the  chain  of  natural 
causes,  in  accordance  with  the  general  laws  of  na¬ 
ture,  and  ever  follows  the  light  of  the  idea  of 
an  author  of  the  universe — not  for  the  purpose 
of  deducing  the  finality,  which  it  constantly  pur¬ 
sues,  from  this  Supreme  Being,  but  to  attain  to 
the  cognition  of  his  existence  from  the  finality 
which  it  seeks  in  the  existence  of  the  phenomena 
of  nature,  and,  if  possible,  in  that  of  all  things — 
to  cognize  this  being,  consequently,  as  absolute¬ 
ly  necessary.  Whether  this  latter  purpose  suc¬ 
ceed  or  not,  the  idea  is  and  must  always  be  a 
true  one,  and  its  employment,  when  merely  reg¬ 
ulative,  must  always  be  accompanied  by  truth¬ 
ful  and  beneficial  results. 

Complete  unity,  in  conformity  with  aims,  con¬ 
stitutes  absolute  perfection.  But  if  we  do  not 
find  this  unity  in  the  nature  of  the  things  which 
go  to  constitute  the  world  of  experience,  that  is, 
of  objective  cognition,  consequently  in  the  uni¬ 
versal  and  necessary  laws  of  nature,  how  can  we 
infer  from  this  unity  the  idea  of  the  supreme 
and  absolutely  necessary  perfection  of  a  primal 
being,  which  is  the  origin  of  all  causality?  The 
greatest  systematic  unity,  and  consequently  tel¬ 
eological  unity,  constitutes  the  very  foundation 
of  the  possibility  of  the  most  extended  employ¬ 
ment  of  human  reason.  The  idea  of  unity  is 
therefore  essentially  and  indissolubly  connected 
with  the  nature  of  our  reason.  This  idea  is  a 


legislative  one ;  and  hence  it  is  very  natural  that 
we  should  assume  the  existence  of  a  legislative 
reason  corresponding  to  it,  from  which  the  sys¬ 
tematic  unity  of  nature — the  object  of  the  oper¬ 
ations  of  reason — must  be  derived. 

In  the  course  of  our  discussion  of  the  antin¬ 
omies,  we  stated  that  it  is  always  possible  to 
answer  all  the  questions  which  pure  reason  may 
raise;  and  that  the  plea  of  the  limited  nature  of 
our  cognition,  which  is  unavoidable  and  proper 
in  many  questions  regarding  natural  phenomena, 
cannot  in  this  case  be  admitted,  because  the 
questions  raised  do  not  relate  to  the  nature  of 
things,  but  are  necessarily  originated  by  the  na¬ 
ture  of  reason  itself,  and  relate  to  its  own  in¬ 
ternal  constitution.  We  can  now  establish  this 
assertion,  which  at  first  sight  appeared  so  rash, 
in  relation  to  the  two  questions  in  which 
reason  takes  the  greatest  interest,  and  thus 
complete  our  discussion  of  the  dialectic  of 
pure  reason. 

If,  then,  the  question  is  asked,  in  relation  to 
transcendental  theology,1  first ,  whether  there  is 
anything  distinct  from  the  world,  which  contains 
the  ground  of  cosmical  order  and  connection  ac¬ 
cording  to  general  laws?  The  answer  is:  Certain¬ 
ly.  For  the  w^orld  is  a  sum  of  phenomena;  there 
must,  therefore,  be  some  transcendental  basis 
of  these  phenomena,  that  is,  a  basis  cogitable  by 
the  pure  understanding  alone.  If,  secondly ,  the 
question  is  asked  whether  this  being  is  substance, 
whether  it  is  of  the  greatest  reality,  whether  it 
is  necessary,  and  so  forth?  I  answer  that  this 
question  is  utterly  without  meaning.  For  all  the 
categories  which  aid  me  in  forming  a  conception 
of  an  object  cannot  be  employed  except  in  the 
world  of  sense,  and  are  without  meaning  when 
not  applied  to  objects  of  actual  or  possible  ex¬ 
perience.  Out  of  this  sphere,  they  are  not  prop¬ 
erly  conceptions,  but  the  mere  marks  or  indices 
of  conceptions,  which  we  may  admit,  although 
they  cannot,  without  the  help  of  experience, 
help  us  to  understand  any  subject  or  thing.  If, 
thirdly ,  the  question  is  whether  we  may  not  cog¬ 
itate  this  being,  which  is  distinct  from  the  world, 
in  analogy  with  the  objects  of  experience?  The 
answer  is:  Undoubtedly ,  but  only  as  an  ideal,  and 
not  as  a  real  object.  That  is,  we  must  cogitate  it 
only  as  an  unknown  substratum  of  the  system¬ 
atic  unity,  order,  and  finality  of  the  world — a 

1  After  what  has  been  said  of  the  psychological  idea 
of  the  ego  and  its  proper  employment  as  a  regulative 
principle  of  the  operations  of  reason,  I  need  not  enter 
into  details  regarding  the  transcendental  illusion  by 
which  the  systematic  unity  of  all  the  various  phenom¬ 
ena  of  the  internal  sense  is  hypostatized.  The  procedure 
is  in  this  case  very  similar  to  that  which  has  been  dis¬ 
cussed  in  our  remarks  on  the  theological  ideal. 


208 


THE  CRITIQUE 


unity  which  reason  must  employ  as  the  regulative 
principle  of  its  investigation  of  nature.  Nay, 
more,  we  may  admit  into  the  idea  certain  an¬ 
thropomorphic  elements,  which  are  promotive 
of  the  interests  of  this  regulative  principle.  For 
it  is  no  more  than  an  idea,  which  does  not  relate 
directly  to  a  being  distinct  from  the  world,  but 
to  the  regulative  principle  of  the  systematic 
unity  of  the  world,  by  means,  however,  of  a 
schema  of  this  unity — the  schema  of  a  Supreme 
Intelligence,  who  is  the  wisely-designing  author 
of  the  universe.  What  this  basis  of  cosmical  uni¬ 
ty  may  be  in  itself,  we  know  not — we  cannot 
discover  from  the  idea;  we  merely  know  how 
we  ought  to  employ  the  idea  of  this  unity,  in  re¬ 
lation  to  the  systematic  operation  of  reason  in 
the  sphere  of  experience. 

But,  it  will  be  asked  again,  can  we  on  these 
grounds,  admit  the  existence  of  a  wise  and  om¬ 
nipotent  author  of  the  world?  Without  doubt; 
and  not  only  so,  but  we  must  assume  the  exist¬ 
ence  of  such  a  being.  But  do  we  thus  extend  the 
limits  of  our  knowledge  beyond  the  field  of  pos¬ 
sible  experience?  By  no  means.  For  we  have 
merely  presupposed  a  something,  of  which  we 
have  no  conception,  which  we  do  not  know  as  it 
is  in  itself;  but,  in  relation  to  the  systematic  dis¬ 
position  of  the  universe,  which  we  must  presup¬ 
pose  in  all  our  observation  of  nature,  we  have 
cogitated  this  unknown  being  in  analogy  with 
an  intelligent  existence  (an  empirical  concep¬ 
tion),  that  is  to  say,  we  have  endowed  it  with 
those  attributes,  which,  judging  from  the  nature 
of  our  own  reason,  may  contain  the  ground  of 
such  a  systematic  unity.  This  idea  is  therefore 
valid  only  relatively  to  the  employment  in  ex¬ 
perience  of  our  reason.  But  if  we  attribute  to  it 
absolute  and  objective  validity,  we  overlook  the 
fact  that  it  is  merely  an  ideal  being  that  we  cog¬ 
itate;  and,  by  setting  out  from  a  basis  which  is 
not  determinable  by  considerations  drawn  from 
experience,  we  place  ourselves  in  a  position  which 
incapacitates  us  from  applying  this  principle  to 
the  empirical  employment  of  reason. 

But,  it  will  be  asked  further,  can  I  make  any 
use  of  this  conception  and  hypothesis  in  my  in¬ 
vestigations  into  the  world  and  nature?  Yes ,  for 
this  very  purpose  was  the  idea  established  by 
reason  as  a  fundamental  basis.  But  may  I  re¬ 
gard  certain  arrangements,  which  seemed  to  have 
been  made  in  conformity  with  some  fixed  aim, 
as  the  arrangements  of  design,  and  look  upon 
them  as  proceeding  from  the  divine  will,  with 
the  intervention,  however,  of  certain  other  par¬ 
ticular  arrangements  disposed  to  that  end?  Yes, 
you  may  do  so;  but  at  the  same  time  you  must 


regard  it  as  indifferent,  whether  it  is  asserted 
that  divine  wisdom  has  disposed  all  things  in 
conformity  with  his  highest  aims,  or  that  the 
idea  of  supreme  wisdom  is  a  regulative  princi¬ 
ple  in  the  investigation  of  nature,  and  at  the 
same  time  a  principle  of  the  systematic  unity 
of  nature  according  to  general  laws,  even  in  those 
cases  where  we  are  unable  to  discover  that  uni¬ 
ty.  In  other  words,  it  must  be  perfectly  indiffer¬ 
ent  to  you  whether  you  say,  when  you  have  dis¬ 
covered  this  unity:  God  has  wisely  willed  it  so; 
or:  Nature  has  wisely  arranged  this.  For  it  was 
nothing  but  the  systematic  unity,  which  reason 
requires  as  a  basis  for  the  investigation  of  na¬ 
ture,  that  justified  you  in  accepting  the  idea  of 
a  supreme  intelligence  as  a  schema  for  a  regula¬ 
tive  principle;  and,  the  farther  you  advance  in 
the  discovery  of  design  and  finality,  the  more 
certain  the  validity  of  your  idea.  But,  as  the 
whole  aim  of  this  regulative  principle  was  the 
discovery  of  a  necessary  and  systematic  unity 
in  nature,  we  have,  in  so  far  as  we  attain  this,  to 
attribute  our  success  to  the  idea  of  a  Supreme 
Being;  while,  at  the  same  time,  we  cannot,  with¬ 
out  involving  ourselves  in  contradictions,  over¬ 
look  the  general  laws  of  nature,  as  it  was  in  ref¬ 
erence  to  them  alone  that  this  idea  was  employed. 
We  cannot,  I  say,  overlook  the  general  laws  of 
nature,  and  regard  this  conformity  to  aims  ob¬ 
servable  in  nature  as  contingent  or  hyperphysi¬ 
cal  in  its  origin;  inasmuch  as  there  is  no  ground 
which  can  justify  us  in  the  admission  of  a  be¬ 
ing  with  such  properties  distinct  from  and  above 
nature.  All  that  we  are  authorized  to  assert  is 
that  this  idea  may  be  employed  as  a  principle, 
and  that  the  properties  of  the  being  which  is  as¬ 
sumed  to  correspond  to  it  may  be  regarded  as 
systematically  connected  in  analogy  with  the 
causal  determination  of  phenomena. 

For  the  same  reasons  we  are  justified  in  in¬ 
troducing  into  the  idea  of  the  supreme  cause 
other  anthropomorphic  elements  (for  without 
these  we  could  not  predicate  anything  of  it); 
we  may  regard  it  as  allowable  to  cogitate  this 
cause  as  a  being  with  understanding,  the  feelings 
of  pleasure  and  displeasure,  and  faculties  of  de¬ 
sire  and  will  corresponding  to  these.  At  the  same 
time,  we  may  attribute  to  this  being  infinite  per¬ 
fection — a  perfection  which  necessarily  tran¬ 
scends  that  which  our  knowledge  of  the  order 
and  design  in  the  world  authorize  us  to  predicate 
of  it.  For  the  regulative  law  of  systematic  unity 
requires  us  to  study  nature  on  the  supposition 
that  systematic  and  final  unity  in  infinitum  is 
everywhere  discoverable,  even  in  the  highest  di¬ 
versity.  For,  although  we  may  discover  little  of 


OF  PURE 

this  cosmical  perfection,  it  belongs  to  the  legis¬ 
lative  prerogative  of  reason  to  require  us  always 
to  seek  for  and  to  expect  it;  while  it  must  al¬ 
ways  be  beneficial  to  institute  all  inquiries  into 
nature  in  accordance  with  this  principle.  But  it 
is  evident  that,  by  this  idea  of  a  supreme  au¬ 
thor  of  all,  which  I  place  as  the  foundation  of 
all  inquiries  into  nature,  I  do  not  mean  to  as¬ 
sert  the  existence  of  such  a  being,  or  that  I  have 
any  knowledge  of  its  existence;  and,  consequent¬ 
ly,  I  do  not  really  deduce  anything  from  the  ex¬ 
istence  of  this  being,  but  merely  from  its  idea, 
that  is  to  say,  from  the  nature  of  things  in  this 
world,  in  accordance  with  this  idea.  A  certain 
dim  consciousness  of  the  true  use  of  this  idea 
seems  to  have  dictated  to  the  philosophers  of 
all  times  the  moderate  language  used  by  them 
regarding  the  cause  of  the  world.  We  find  them 
employing  the  expressions  wisdom  and  care  of 
nature ,  and  divine  wisdomy  as  synonymous — 
nay,  in  purely  speculative  discussions,  prefer¬ 
ring  the  former,  because  it  does  not  carry  the 
appearance  of  greater  pretensions  than  such  as 
we  are  entitled  to  make,  and  at  the  same  time 
directs  reason  to  its  proper  field  of  action — na¬ 
ture  and  her  phenomena. 

Thus,  pure  reason,  which  at  first  seemed  to 
promise  us  nothing  less  than  the  extension  of 
our  cognition  beyond  the  limits  of  experience, 
is  found,  when  thoroughly  examined,  to  contain 
nothing  but  regulative  principles,  the  virtue  and 
function  of  which  is  to  introduce  into  our  cog¬ 
nition  a  higher  degree  of  unity  than  the  under¬ 
standing  could  of  itself.  These  principles,  by 
placing  the  goal  of  all  our  struggles  at  so  great  a 
distance,  realize  for  us  the  most  thorough  con¬ 
nection  between  the  different  parts  of  our  cog¬ 
nition,  and  the  highest  degree  of  systematic  uni¬ 
ty.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  if  misunderstood 
and  employed  as  constitutive  principles  of 
transcendent  cognition,  they  become  the  par¬ 
ents  of  illusions  and  contradictions,  while  pre¬ 
tending  to  introduce  us  to  new  regions  of 
knowledge. 

Thus  all  human  cognition  begins  with  intui¬ 
tions,  proceeds  from  thence  to  conceptions,  and 
ends  with  ideas.  Although  it  possesses,  in  rela- 


REASON  209 

tion  to  all  three  elements,  a  priori  sources  of 
cognition,  which  seemed  to  transcend  the  limits 
of  all  experience,  a  thoroughgoing  criticism  dem¬ 
onstrates  that  speculative  reason  can  never,  by 
the  aid  of  these  elements,  pass  the  bounds  of 
possible  experience,  and  that  the  proper  desti¬ 
nation  of  this  highest  faculty  of  cognition  is  to 
employ  all  methods,  and  all  the  principles  of 
these  methods,  for  the  purpose  of  penetrating 
into  the  innermost  secrets  of  nature,  by  the  aid 
of  the  principles  of  unity  (among  all  kinds  of 
which  teleological  unity  is  the  highest),  while 
it  ought  not  to  attempt  to  soar  above  the  sphere 
of  experience,  beyond  which  there  lies  nought 
for  us  but  the  void  inane.  The  critical  examina¬ 
tion,  in  our  Transcendental  Analytic,  of  all  the 
propositions  which  professed  to  extend  cogni¬ 
tion  beyond  the  sphere  of  experience,  complete¬ 
ly  demonstrated  that  they  can  only  conduct  us 
to  a  possible  experience.  If  we  were  not  distrust¬ 
ful  even  of  the  clearest  abstract  theorems,  if  we 
were  not  allured  by  specious  and  inviting  pros¬ 
pects  to  escape  from  the  constraining  power  of 
their  evidence,  we  might  spare  ourselves  the 
laborious  examination  of  all  the  dialectical  ar¬ 
guments  which  a  transcendent  reason  adduces 
in  support  of  its  pretensions;  for  we  should  know 
with  the  most  complete  certainty  that,  however 
honest  such  professions  might  be,  they  are  null 
and  valueless,  because  they  relate  to  a  kind  of 
knowledge  to  which  no  man  can  by  any  possi¬ 
bility  attain.  But,  as  there  is  no  end  to  discus¬ 
sion,  if  we  cannot  discover  the  true  cause  of  the 
illusions  by  which  even  the  wisest  are  deceived, 
and  as  the  analysis  of  all  our  transcendent  cog¬ 
nition  into  its  elements  is  of  itself  of  no  slight 
value  as  a  psychological  study,  while  it  is  a  duty 
incumbent  on  every  philosopher — it  was  found 
necessary  to  investigate  the  dialectical  proce¬ 
dure  of  reason  in  its  primary  sources.  And  as  the 
inferences  of  which  this  dialectic  is  the  parent 
are  not  only  deceitful,  but  naturally  possess  a 
profound  interest  for  humanity,  it  was  advis¬ 
able  at  the  same  time,  to  give  a  full  account  of 
the  momenta  of  this  dialectical  procedure,  and 
to  deposit  it  in  the  archives  of  human  reason,  as 
a  warning  to  all  future  metaphysicians  to  avoid 
these  causes  of  speculative  error. 


JI 

TRANSCENDENTAL  DOCTRINE 
OF  METHOD 


If  we  regard  the  sum  of  the  cognition  of  pure 
speculative  reason  as  an  edifice,  the  idea  of 
which,  at  least,  exists  in  the  human  mind,  it  may 
be  said  that  we  have  in  the  Transcendental  Doc¬ 
trine  of  Elements  examined  the  materials  and 
determined  to  what  edifice  these  belong,  and 
what  its  height  and  stability.  We  have  found,  in¬ 
deed,  that,  although  we  had  purposed  to  build 
for  ourselves  a  tower  which  should  reach  to 
Heaven,  the  supply  of  materials  sufficed  merely 
for  a  habitation,  which  was  spacious  enough  for 
all  terrestrial  purposes,  and  high  enough  to  en¬ 
able  us  to  survey  the  level  plain  of  experience, 
but  that  the  bold  undertaking  designed  neces¬ 
sarily  failed  for  want  of  materials — not  to  men¬ 
tion  the  confusion  of  tongues,  which  gave  rise 
to  endless  disputes  among  the  labourers  on  the 
plan  of  the  edifice,  and  at  last  scattered  them 
over  all  the  world,  each  to  erect  a  separate  build¬ 
ing  for  himself,  according  to  his  own  plans  and 
his  own  inclinations.  Our  present  task  relates  not 
to  the  materials,  but  to  the  plan  of  an  edifice; 
and,  as  we  have  had  sufficient  warning  not  to 
venture  blindly  upon  a  design  which  may  be 
found  to  transcend  our  natural  powers,  while,  at 
the  same  time,  we  cannot  give  up  the  intention 
of  erecting  a  secure  abode  for  the  mind,  we  must 
proportion  our  design  to  the  material  which  is 
presented  to  us,  and  which  is,  at  the  same  time, 
sufficient  for  all  our  wants. 

I  understand,  then,  by  the  transcendental  doc¬ 
trine  of  method,  the  determination  of  the  formal 
conditions  of  a  complete  system  of  pure  reason. 
We  shall  accordingly  have  to  treat  of  the  disci¬ 
pline,  the  canon,  the  architectonic,  and,  finally, 
the  history  of  pure  reason.  This  part  of  our 
Critique  will  accomplish,  from  the  transcen¬ 
dental  point  of  view,  what  has  been  usually  at¬ 
tempted,  but  miserably  executed,  under  the 
name  of  practical  logic.  It  has  been  badly  ex¬ 
ecuted,  I  say,  because  general  logic,  not  being 
limited  to  any  particular  kind  of  cognition  (not 
even  to  the  pure  cognition  of  the  understand¬ 
ing)  nor  to  any  particular  objects,  it  cannot, 
without  borrowing  from  other  sciences,  do  more 


than  present  merely  the  titles  or  signs  of  possi¬ 
ble  methods  and  the  technical  expressions,  which 
are  employed  in  the  systematic  parts  of  all 
sciences;  and  thus  the  pupil  is  made  acquainted 
with  names,  the  meaning  and  application  of 
which  he  is  to  learn  only  at  some  future  time. 

Chapter  I.  The  Discipline  of  Pure  Reason 

Negative  judgements — those  which  are  so  not 
merely  as  regards  their  logical  form,  but  in  re¬ 
spect  of  their  content — are  not  commonly  held 
in  especial  respect.  They  are,  on  the  contrary, 
regarded  as  jealous  enemies  of  our  insatiable  de¬ 
sire  for  knowledge;  and  it  almost  requires  an 
apology  to  induce  us  to  tolerate,  much  less  to 
prize  and  to  respect  them. 

All  propositions,  indeed,  may  be  logically  ex¬ 
pressed  in  a  negative  form;  but,  in  relation  to 
the  content  of  our  cognition,  the  peculiar  prov¬ 
ince  of  negative  judgements  is  solely  to  prevent 
error.  For  this  reason,  too,  negative  proposi¬ 
tions,  which  are  framed  for  the  purpose  of  cor¬ 
recting  false  cognitions  where  error  is  absolutely 
impossible,  are  undoubtedly  true,  but  inane  and 
senseless;  that  is,  they  are  in  reality  purposeless 
and,  for  this  reason,  often  very  ridiculous.  Such 
is  the  proposition  of  the  schoolman  that  Alex¬ 
ander  could  not  have  subdued  any  countries 
without  an  army. 

But  where  the  limits  of  our  possible  cognition 
are  very  much  contracted,  the  attraction  to  new 
fields  of  knowledge  great,  the  illusions  to  which 
the  mind  is  subject  of  the  most  deceptive  char¬ 
acter,  and  the  evil  consequences  of  error  of  no 
inconsiderable  magnitude — the  negative  element 
in  knowledge,  which  is  useful  only  to  guard  us 
against  error,  is  of  far  more  importance  than 
much  of  that  positive  instruction  which  makes 
additions  to  the  sum  of  our  knowledge.  The  re¬ 
straint  which  is  employed  to  repress,  and  finally 
to  extirpate  the  constant  inclination  to  depart 
from  certain  rules,  is  termed  discipline.  It  is  dis¬ 
tinguished  from  culture,  which  aims  at  the  for¬ 
mation  of  a  certain  degree  of  skill,  without  at¬ 
tempting  to  repress  or  to  destroy  any  other 


210 


OF  PURE  REASON 


mental  power,  already  existing.  In  the  cultiva¬ 
tion  of  a  talent,  which  has  given  evidence  of  an 
impulse  towards  self-development,  discipline 
takes  a  negative,1  culture  and  doctrine  a  posi¬ 
tive,  part. 

That  natural  dispositions  and  talents  (such  as 
imagination  and  wit),  which  ask  a  free  and  un¬ 
limited  development,  require  in  many  respects 
the  corrective  influence  of  discipline,  every  one 
will  readily  grant.  But  it  may  well  appear 
strange  that  reason,  whose  proper  duty  it  is  to 
prescribe  rules  of  discipline  to  all  the  other  pow¬ 
ers  of  the  mind,  should  itself  require  this  correc¬ 
tive.  It  has,  in  fact,  hitherto  escaped  this  humil¬ 
iation,  only  because,  in  presence  of  its  magnifi¬ 
cent  pretensions  and  high  position,  no  one  could 
readily  suspect  it  to  be  capable  of  substituting 
fancies  for  conceptions,  and  words  for  things. 

Reason,  when  employed  in  the  field  of  experi¬ 
ence,  does  not  stand  in  need  of  criticism,  be¬ 
cause  its  principles  are  subjected  to  the  con¬ 
tinual  test  of  empirical  observations.  Nor  is  crit¬ 
icism  requisite  in  the  sphere  of  mathematics, 
where  the  conceptions  of  reason  must  always  be 
presented  in  concreto  in  pure  intuition,  and 
baseless  or  arbitrary  assertions  are  discovered 
without  difficulty.  But  where  reason  is  not  held 
in  a  plain  track  by  the  influence  of  empirical  or 
of  pure  intuition,  that  is,  when  it  is  employed  in 
the  transcendental  sphere  of  pure  conceptions, 
it  stands  in  great  need  of  discipline,  to  restrain 
its  propensity  to  overstep  the  limits  of  possible 
experience  and  to  keep  it  from  wandering  into 
error.  In  fact,  the  utility  of  the  philosophy  of 
pure  reason  is  entirely  of  this  negative  character. 
Particular  errors  may  be  corrected  by  particular 
animadversions,  and  the  causes  of  these  errors 
may  be  eradicated  by  criticism.  But  where  we 
find,  as  in  the  case  of  pure  reason,  a  complete 
system  of  illusions  and  fallacies,  closely  con¬ 
nected  with  each  other  and  depending  upon 
grand  general  principles,  there  seems  to  be  re¬ 
quired  a  peculiar  and  negative  code  of  mental 
legislation,  which,  under  the  denomination  of  a 
discipline,  and  founded  upon  the  nature  of  rea¬ 
son  and  the  objects  of  its  exercise,  shall  consti¬ 
tute  a  system  of  thorough  examination  and  test¬ 
ing,  which  no  fallacy  will  be  able  to  withstand 

1 1  am  well  aware  that,  in  the  language  of  the  schools, 
the  term  discipline  is  usually  employed  as  synonymous 
with  instruction.  But  there  are  so  many  cases  in  which 
it  is  necessary  to  distinguish  the  notion  of  the  former, 
as  a  course  of  corrective  training,  from  that  of  the  lat¬ 
ter,  as  the  communication  of  knowledge,  and  the  nature 
of  things  itself  demands  the  appropriation  of  the.  most 
suitable  expressions  for  this  distinction,  that  it  is  my 
desire  that  the  former  terms  should  never  be  employed 
in  any  other  than  a  negative  signification. 


2 1 1 

or  escape  from,  under  whatever  disguise  or  con¬ 
cealment  it  may  lurk. 

But  the  reader  must  remark  that,  in  this  the 
second  division  of  our  transcendental  Critique 
the  discipline  of  pure  reason  is  not  directed  to 
the  content,  but  to  the  method  of  the  cognition 
of  pure  reason.  The  former  task  has  been  com¬ 
pleted  in  the  doctrine  of  elements.  But  there  is 
so  much  similarity  in  the  mode  of  employing  the 
faculty  of  reason,  whatever  be  the  object  to 
which  it  is  applied,  while,  at  the  same  time,  its 
employment  in  the  transcendental  sphere  is  so 
essentially  different  in  kind  from  every  other, 
that,  without  the  warning  negative  influence  of 
a  discipline  specially  directed  to  that  end,  the 
errors  are  unavoidable  which  spring  from  the 
unskilful  employment  of  the  methods  which  are 
originated  by  reason  but  which  are  out  of  place 
in  this  sphere. 

Section  I.  The  Discipline  of  Pure  Reason  in 
the  Sphere  of  Dogmatism 

The  science  of  mathematics  presents  the  most 
brilliant  example  of  the  extension  of  the  sphere 
of  pure  reason  without  the  aid  of  experience. 
Examples  are  always  contagious ;  and  they  exert 
an  especial  influence  on  the  same  faculty,  which 
naturally  flatters  itself  that  it  will  have  the 
same  good  fortune  in  other  case  as  fell  to  its  lot 
in  one  fortunate  instance.  Hence  pure  reason 
hopes  to  be  able  to  extend  its  empire  in  the 
transcendental  sphere  with  equal  success  and 
security,  especially  when  it  applies  the  same 
method  which  was  attended  with  such  brilliant 
results  in  the  science  of  mathematics.  It  is, 
therefore,  of  the  highest  importance  for  us  to 
know  whether  the  method  of  arriving  at  demon¬ 
strative  certainty,  which  is  termed  mathemati¬ 
cal,  be  identical  with  that  by  which  we  endeav¬ 
our  to  attain  the  same  degree  of  certainty  in 
philosophy,  and  which  is  termed  in  that  science 
dogmatical. 

Philosophical  cognition  is  the  cognition  of 
reason  by  means  of  conceptions ;  mathematical 
cognition  is  cognition  by  means  of  the  construc¬ 
tion  of  conceptions.  The  construction  of  a  con¬ 
ception  is  the  presentation  a  priori  of  the  intui¬ 
tion  which  corresponds  to  the  conception.  For 
this  purpose  a  non-empirical  intuition  is  requi¬ 
site,  which,  as  an  intuition,  is  an  individual  ob¬ 
ject;  while,  as  the  construction  of  a  conception 
(a  general  representation),  it  must  be  seen  to 
be  universally  valid  for  all  the  possible  intui¬ 
tions  which  rank  under  that  conception.  Thus  I 
construct  a  triangle,  by  the  presentation  of  the 
object  which  corresponds  to  this  conception, 


THE  CRITIQUE 


212 

either  by  mere  imagination,  in  pure  intuition,  or 
upon  paper,  in  empirical  intuition,  in  both  cases 
completely  a  priori ,  without  borrowing  the  type 
of  that  figure  from  any  experience.  The  indi¬ 
vidual  figure  drawn  upon  paper  is  empirical; 
but  it  serves,  notwithstanding,  to  indicate  the 
conception,  even  in  its  universality,  because  in 
this  empirical  intuition  we  keep  our  eye  merely 
on  the  act  of  the  construction  of  the  conception, 
and  pay  no  attention  to  the  various  modes  of 
determining  it,  for  example,  its  size,  the  length 
of  its  sides,  the  size  of  its  angles,  these  not  in 
the  least  affecting  the  essential  character  of  the 
conception. 

Philosophical  cognition,  accordingly,  regards 
the  particular  only  in  the  general;  mathematical 
the  general  in  the  particular,  nay,  in  the  indi¬ 
vidual.  This  is  done,  however,  entirely  a  priori 
and  by  means  of  pure  reason,  so  that,  as  this  in¬ 
dividual  figure  is  determined  under  certain  uni¬ 
versal  conditions  of  construction,  the  object  of 
the  conception,  to  which  this  individual  figure 
corresponds  as  its  schema,  must  be  cogitated  as 
universally  determined. 

The  essential  difference  of  these  two  modes 
of  cognition  consists,  therefore,  in  this  formal 
quality;  it  does  not  regard  the  difference  of  the 
matter  or  objects  of  both.  Those  thinkers  who 
aim  at  distinguishing  philosophy  from  mathe¬ 
matics  by  asserting  that  the  former  has  to  do 
with  quality  merely,  and  the  latter  with  quan¬ 
tity ,  have  mistaken  the  effect  for  the  cause.  The 
reason  why  mathematical  cognition  can  relate 
only  to  quantity  is  to  be  found  in  its  form  alone. 
For  it  is  the  conception  of  quantities  only  that 
is  capable  of  being  constructed,  that  is,  pre¬ 
sented  a  priori  in  intuition;  while  qualities  can¬ 
not  be  given  in  any  other  than  an  empirical  in¬ 
tuition.  Hence  the  cognition  of  qualities  by  rea¬ 
son  is  possible  only  through  conceptions.  No 
one  can  find  an  intuition  which  shall  correspond 
to  the  conception  of  reality,  except  in  experi¬ 
ence;  it  cannot  be  presented  to  the  mind  a  priori 
and  antecedently  to  the  empirical  consciousness 
of  a  reality.  We  can  form  an  intuition,  by  means 
of  the  mere  conception  of  it,  of  a  cone,  without 
the  aid  of  experience;  but  the  colour  of  the 
cone  we  cannot  know  except  from  experience. 
I  cannot  present  an  intuition  of  a  cause,  except 
in  an  example  which  experience  offers  to  me. 
Besides,  philosophy,  as  well  as  mathematics, 
treats  of  quantities;  as,  for  example,  of  totality, 
infinity,  and  so  on.  Mathematics,  too,  treats  of 
the  difference  of  lines  and  surfaces — as  spaces 
of  different  quality,  of  the  continuity  of  exten¬ 
sion — as  a  quality  thereof.  But,  although  in 


such  cases  they  have  a  common  object,  the 
mode  in  which  reason  considers  that  object  is 
very  different  in  philosophy  from  what  it  is  in 
mathematics.  The  former  confines  itself  to  the 
general  conceptions;  the  latter  can  do  nothing 
with  a  mere  conception,  it  hastens  to  intuition. 
In  this  intuition  it  regards  the  conception  in  con- 
creto,  not  empirically,  but  in  an  a  priori  intui¬ 
tion,  which  it  has  constructed;  and  in  which,  all 
the  results  which  follow  from  the  general  con¬ 
ditions  of  the  construction  of  the  conception 
are  in  all  cases  valid  for  the  object  of  the  con¬ 
structed  conception. 

Suppose  that  the  conception  of  a  triangle  is 
given  to  a  philosopher  and  that  he  is  required 
to  discover,  by  the  philosophical  method,  what 
relation  the  sum  of  its  angles  bears  to  a  right 
angle.  He  has  nothing  before  him  but  the  con¬ 
ception  of  a  figure  enclosed  within  three  right 
lines,  and,  consequently,  with  the  same  number 
of  angles.  He  may  analyse  the  conception  of  a 
right  line,  of  an  angle,  or  of  the  number  three  as 
long  as  he  pleases,  but  he  will  not  discover  any 
properties  not  contained  in  these  conceptions. 
But,  if  this  question  is  proposed  to  a  geometri¬ 
cian,  he  at  once  begins  by  constructing  a  tri¬ 
angle.  He  knows  that  two  right  angles  are  equal 
to  the  sum  of  all  the  contiguous  angles  which 
proceed  from  one  point  in  a  straight  line;  and 
he  goes  on  to  produce  one  side  of  his  triangle, 
thus  forming  two  adjacent  angles  which  are  to¬ 
gether  equal  to  two  right  angles.  He  then  di¬ 
vides  the  exterior  of  these  angles,  by  drawing  a 
line  parallel  with  the  opposite  side  of  the  tri¬ 
angle,  and  immediately  perceives  that  he  has 
thus  got  an  exterior  adjacent  angle  which  is 
equal  to  the  interior.  Proceeding  in  this  way, 
through  a  chain  of  inferences,  and  always  on 
the  ground  of  intuition,  he  arrives  at  a  clear  and 
universally  valid  solution  of  the  question. 

But  mathematics  does  not  confine  itself  to 
the  construction  of  quantities  ( quanta ),  as  in 
the  case  of  geometry;  it  occupies  itself  with 
pure  quantity  also  ( quantitas ),  as  in  the  case  o* 
algebra,  where  complete  abstraction  is  made  of 
the  properties  of  the  object  indicated  by  the 
conception  of  quantity.  In  algebra,  a  certain 
method  of  notation  by  signs  is  adopted,  and 
these  indicate  the  different  possible  construc¬ 
tions  of  quantities,  the  extraction  of  roots,  and 
so  on.  After  having  thus  denoted  the  general 
conception  of  quantities,  according  to  their 
different  relations,  the  different  operations  by 
which  quantity  or  number  is  increased  or  di¬ 
minished  are  presented  in  intuition  in  accord¬ 
ance  with  general  rules.  Thus,  when  one  quan- 


OF  PURE  REASON 


tity  is  to  be  divided  by  another,  the  signs  which 
denote  both  are  placed  in  the  form  peculiar  to 
the  operation  of  division;  and  thus  algebra,  by 
means  of  a  symbolical  construction  of  quantity, 
just  as  geometry,  with  its  ostensive  or  geomet¬ 
rical  construction  (a  construction  of  the  objects 
themselves),  arrives  at  results  which  discursive 
cognition  cannot  hope  to  reach  by  the  aid  of 
mere  conceptions. 

Now,  what  is  the  cause  of  this  difference  in 
the  fortune  of  the  philosopher  and  the  mathe¬ 
matician,  the  former  of  whom  follows  the  path 
of  conceptions,  while  the  latter  pursues  that  of 
intuitions,  which  he  represents,  a  priori ,  in  cor¬ 
respondence  with  his  conceptions?  The  cause  is 
evident  from  what  has  been  already  demon¬ 
strated  in  the  introduction  to  this  Critique.  We 
do  not,  in  the  present  case,  want  to  discover 
analytical  propositions,  which  may  be  produced 
merely  by  analysing  our  conceptions — for  in 
this  the  philosopher  would  have  the  advantage 
over  his  rival;  we  aim  at  the  discovery  of  syn¬ 
thetical  propositions — such  synthetical  proposi¬ 
tions,  moreover,  as  can  be  cognized  a  priori.  I 
must  not  confine  myself  to  that  which  I  actual¬ 
ly  cogitate  in  my  conception  of  a  triangle,  for 
this  is  nothing  more  than  the  mere  definition;  I 
must  try  to  go  beyond  that,  and  to  arrive  at 
properties  which  are  not  contained  in,  although 
they  belong  to,  the  conception.  Now,  this  is  im¬ 
possible,  unless  I  determine  the  object  present 
to  my  mind  according  to  the  conditions,  either 
of  empirical,  or  of  pure,  intuition.  In  the  former 
case,  I  should  have  an  empirical  proposition  (ar¬ 
rived  at  by  actual  measurement  of  the  angles  of 
the  triangle),  which  would  possess  neither  uni¬ 
versality  nor  necessity;  but  that  would  be  of 
no  value.  In  the  latter,  I  proceed  by  geometrical 
construction,  by  means  of  which  I  collect,  in  a 
pure  intuition,  just  as  I  would  in  an  empirical 
intuition,  all  the  various  properties  which  be¬ 
long  to  the  schema  of  a  triangle  in  general,  and 
consequently  to  its  conception,  and  thus  con¬ 
struct  synthetical  propositions  which  possess 
the  attribute  of  universality. 

It  would  be  vain  to  philosophize  upon  the  tri¬ 
angle,  that  is,  to  reflect  on  it  discursively;  I 
should  get  no  further  than  the  definition  with 
which  I  had  been  obliged  to  set  out.  There  are 
certainly  transcendental  synthetical  propositions 
which  are  framed  by  means  of  pure  conceptions, 
and  which  form  the  peculiar  distinction  of  phi¬ 
losophy;  but  these  do  not  relate  to  any  particu¬ 
lar  thing,  but  to  a  thing  in  general,  and  enounce 
the  conditions  under  which  the  perception  of  it 
may  become  a  part  of  possible  experience.  But 


the  science  of  mathematics  has  nothing  to  do 
with  such  questions,  nor  with  the  question  of 
existence  in  any  fashion;  it  is  concerned  merely 
with  the  properties  of  objects  in  themselves,  on¬ 
ly  in  so  far  as  these  are  connected  with  the  con¬ 
ception  of  the  objects. 

In  the  above  example,  we  have  merely  attempt¬ 
ed  to  show  the  great  difference  which  exists  be¬ 
tween  the  discursive  employment  of  reason  in 
the  sphere  of  conceptions,  and  its  intuitive  ex¬ 
ercise  by  means  of  the  construction  of  concep¬ 
tions.  The  question  naturally  arises:  What  is 
the  cause  which  necessitates  this  twofold  ex¬ 
ercise  of  reason,  and  how  are  we  to  discover 
whether  it  is  the  philosophical  or  the  mathemat¬ 
ical  method  which  reason  is  pursuing  in  an  ar¬ 
gument? 

All  our  knowledge  relates,  finally,  to  possible 
intuitions,  for  it  is  these  alone  that  present  ob¬ 
jects  to  the  mind.  An  a  priori  or  non-empirical 
conception  contains  either  a  pure  intuition — 
and  in  this  case  it  can  be  constructed;  or  it  con¬ 
tains  nothing  but  the  synthesis  of  possible  in¬ 
tuitions,  which  are  not  given  a  priori.  In  this  lat¬ 
ter  case,  it  may  help  us  to  form  synthetical  a 
priori  judgements,  but  only  in  the  discursive 
method,  by  conceptions,  not  in  the  intuitive,  by 
means  of  the  construction  of  conceptions. 

The  only  a  priori  intuition  is  that  of  the  pure 
form  of  phenomena — space  and  time.  A  concep¬ 
tion  of  space  and  time  as  quanta  may  be  pre¬ 
sented  a  priori  in  intuition,  that  is,  constructed, 
either  alone  with  their  quality  (figure),  or  as 
pure  quantity  (the  mere  synthesis  of  the  homo¬ 
geneous),  by  means  of  number.  But  the  matter 
of  phenomena,  by  which  things  are  given  in  space 
and  time,  can  be  presented  only  in  perception, 
a  posteriori.  The  only  conception  which  repre¬ 
sents  a  priori  this  empirical  content  of  phenom¬ 
ena  is  the  conception  of  a  thing  in  general;  and 
the  a  priori  synthetical  cognition  of  this  con¬ 
ception  can  give  us  nothing  more  than  the  rule 
for  the  synthesis  of  that  which  may  be  contained 
in  the  corresponding  a  posteriori  perception;  it 
is  utterly  inadequate  to  present  an  a  priori  intu¬ 
ition  of  the  real  object,  which  must  necessarily 
be  empirical. 

Synthetical  propositions,  which  relate  to  things 
in  general,  an  a  priori  intuition  of  which  is  im¬ 
possible,  are  transcendental.  For  this  reason  tran¬ 
scendental  propositions  cannot  be  framed  by 
means  of  the  construction  of  conceptions;  they 
are  a  priori ,  and  based  entirely  on  conceptions 
themselves.  They  contain  merely  the  rule,  by 
which  we  are  to  seek  in  the  world  of  perception 
or  experience  the  synthetical  unity  of  that  which 


THE  CRITIQUE 


214 

cannot  be  intuited  a  priori.  But  they  are  incom¬ 
petent  to  present  any  of  the  conceptions  which 
appear  in  them  in  an  a  priori  intuition;  these 
can  be  given  only  a  posteriori,  in  experience, 
which,  however,  is  itself  possible  only  through 
these  synthetical  principles. 

If  we  are  to  form  a  synthetical  judgement  re¬ 
garding  a  conception,  we  must  go  beyond  it,  to 
the  intuition  in  which  it  is  given.  If  we  keep  to 
what  is  contained  in  the  conception,  the  judge¬ 
ment  is  merely  analytical — it  is  merely  an  ex¬ 
planation  of  what  we  have  cogitated  in  the  con¬ 
ception.  But  I  can  pass  from  the  conception  to 
the  pure  or  empirical  intuition  which  corresponds 
to  it.  I  can  proceed  to  examine  my  conception 
in  concreto,  and  to  cognize,  either  a  priori  or 
a  posteriori,  what  I  find  in  the  object  of  the 
conception.  The  former — a  priori  cognition — is 
rational-mathematical  cognition  by  means  of  the 
construction  of  the  conception;  the  latter — a 
posteriori  cognition — is  purely  empirical  cogni¬ 
tion,  which  does  not  possess  the  attributes  of 
necessity  and  universality.  Thus  I  may  analyse 
the  conception  I  have  of  gold;  but  I  gain  no 
new  information  from  this  analysis,  I  merely 
enumerate  the  different  properties  which  I  had 
connected  with  the  notion  indicated  by  the  word. 
My  knowledge  has  gained  in  logical  clearness 
and  arrangement,  but  no  addition  has  been  made 
to  it.  But  if  I  take  the  matter  which  is  indicated 
by  this  name,  and  submit  it  to  the  examination 
of  my  senses,  I  am  enabled  to  form  several  syn¬ 
thetical — although  still  empirical — propositions. 
The  mathematical  conception  of  a  triangle  I 
should  construct,  that  is,  present  a  priori  in  in¬ 
tuition,  and  in  this  way  attain  to  rational-syn¬ 
thetical  cognition.  But  when  the  transcendental 
conception  of  reality,  or  substance,  or  power  is 
presented  to  my  mind,  I  find  that  it  does  not  re¬ 
late  to  or  indicate  either  an  empirical  or  pure 
intuition,  but  that  it  indicates  merely  the  syn¬ 
thesis  of  empirical  intuitions,  which  cannot  of 
course  be  given  a  priori.  The  synthesis  in  such 
a  conception  cannot  proceed  a  priori — without 
the  aid  of  experience — to  the  intuition  which 
corresponds  to  the  conception;  and,  for  this  rea¬ 
son,  none  of  these  conceptions  can  produce  a 
determinative  synthetical  proposition,  they  can 
never  present  more  than  a  principle  of  the  syn¬ 
thesis1  of  possible  empirical  intuitions.  A  tran- 

1  In  the  case  of  the  conception  of  cause,  I  do  really 
go  beyond  the  empirical  conception  of  an  event — but 
not  to  the  intuition  which  presents  this  conception  in 
concreto,  but  only  to  the  time-conditions,  which  may  be 
found  in  experience  to  correspond  to  the  conception. 
My  procedure  is,  therefore,  strictly  according  to  con¬ 
ceptions;  I  cannot  in  a  case  of  this  kind  employ  the 


scendental  proposition  is,  therefore,  a  syntheti¬ 
cal  cognition  of  reason  by  means  of  pure  con¬ 
ceptions  and  the  discursive  method,  and  it  ren¬ 
ders  possible  all  synthetical  unity  in  empirical 
cognition,  though  it  cannot  present  us  with  any 
intuition  a  priori. 

There  is  thus  a  twofold  exercise  of  reason. 
Both  modes  have  the  properties  of  universality 
and  an  a  priori  origin  in  common,  but  are,  in 
their  procedure,  of  widely  different  character. 
The  reason  of  this  is  that  in  the  world  of  phe¬ 
nomena,  in  which  alone  objects  are  presented  to 
our  minds,  there  are  two  main  elements — the 
form  of  intuition  (space  and  time),  which  can 
be  cognized  and  determined  completely  a  priori y 
and  the  matter  or  content — that  which  is  pre¬ 
sented  in  space  and  time,  and  which,  consequent¬ 
ly,  contains  a  something — an  existence  corre¬ 
sponding  to  our  powers  of  sensation.  As  regards 
the  latter,  which  can  never  be  given  in  a  deter¬ 
minate  mode  except  by  experience,  there  are  no 
a  priori  notions  which  relate  to  it,  except  the 
undetermined  conceptions  of  the  synthesis  of 
possible  sensations,  in  so  far  as  these  belong  (in 
a  possible  experience)  to  the  unity  of  conscious¬ 
ness.  As  regards  the  former,  we  can  determine 
our  conceptions  a  priori  in  intuition,  inasmuch 
as  we  are  ourselves  the  creators  of  the  objects 
of  the  conceptions  in  space  and  time — these  ob¬ 
jects  being  regarded  simply  as  quanta.  In  the 
one  case,  reason  proceeds  according  to  concep¬ 
tions  and  can  do  nothing  more  than  subject  phe¬ 
nomena  to  these — which  can  only  be  determined 
empirically,  that  is,  a  posteriori — in  conformity, 
however,  with  those  conceptions  as  the  rules  of 
all  empirical  synthesis.  In  the  other  case,  rea¬ 
son  proceeds  by  the  construction  of  conceptions; 
and,  as  these  conceptions  relate  to  an  a  priori 
intuition,  they  may  be  given  and  determined  in 
pure  intuition  a  priori,  and  without  the  aid  of 
empirical  data.  The  examination  and  consider¬ 
ation  of  everything  that  exists  in  space  or  time 
— whether  it  is  a  quantum  or  not,  in  how  far  the 
particular  something  (which  fills  space  or  time) 
is  a  primary  substratum,  or  a  mere  determina¬ 
tion  of  some  other  existence,  whether  it  relates 
to  anything  else — either  as  cause  or  effect,  wheth¬ 
er  its  existence  is  isolated  or  in  reciprocal  con¬ 
nection  with  and  dependence  upon  others,  the 
possibility  of  this  existence,  its  reality  and  ne¬ 
cessity  or  their  opposites — all  these  form  part  of 
the  cognition  of  reason  on  the  ground  of  concep- 

construction  of  conceptions,  because  the  conception  is 
merely  a  rule  for  the  synthesis  of  perceptions,  which 
are  not  pure  intuitions,  and  which,  therefore,  cannot  be 
given  a  priori. 


OF  PURE  REASON 


tions,  and  this  cognition  is  termed  philosophical. 
But  to  determine  a  priori  an  intuition  in  space 
(its  figure),  to  divide  time  into  periods,  or  mere¬ 
ly  to  cognize  the  quantity  of  an  intuition  in 
space  and  time,  and  to  determine  it  by  number 
— all  this  is  an  operation  of  reason  by  means  of 
the  construction  of  conceptions,  and  is  called 
mathematical. 

The  success  which  attends  the  efforts  of  rea¬ 
son  in  the  sphere  of  mathematics  naturally  fos¬ 
ters  the  expectation  that  the  same  good  fortune 
will  be  its  lot,  if  it  applies  the  mathematical 
method  in  other  regions  of  mental  endeavour 
besides  that  of  quantities.  Its  success  is  thus 
great,  because  it  can  support  all  its  conceptions 
by  a  priori  intuitions  and,  in  this  way,  make  it¬ 
self  a  master,  as  it  were,  over  nature ;  while  pure 
philosophy,  with  its  a  priori  discursive  concep¬ 
tions,  bungles  about  in  the  world  of  nature,  and 
cannot  accredit  or  show  any  a  priori  evidence 
of  the  reality  of  these  conceptions.  Masters  in 
the  science  of  mathematics  are  confident  of  the 
success  of  this  method;  indeed,  it  is  a  common 
persuasion  that  it  is  capable  of  being  applied 
to  any  subject  of  human  thought.  They  have 
hardly  ever  reflected  or  philosophized  on  their 
favourite  science — a  task  of  great  difficulty; 
and  the  specific  difference  between  the  two  modes 
of  employing  the  faculty  of  reason  has  never 
entered  their  thoughts.  Rules  current  in  the  field 
of  common  experience,  and  which  common  sense 
stamps  everywhere  with  its  approval,  are  re¬ 
garded  by  them  as  axiomatic.  From  what  source 
the  conceptions  of  space  and  time,  with  which 
(as  the  only  primitive  quanta)  they  have  to 
deal,  enter  their  minds,  is  a  question  which  they 
do  not  trouble  themselves  to  answer;  and  they 
think  it  just  as  unnecessary  to  examine  into  the 
origin  of  the  pure  conceptions  of  the  under¬ 
standing  and  the  extent  of  their  validity.  All 
they  have  to  do  with  them  is  to  employ  them. 
In  all  this  they  are  perfectly  right,  if  they  do  not 
overstep  the  limits  of  the  sphere  of  nature.  But 
they  pass,  unconsciously,  from  the  world  of  sense 
to  the  insecure  ground  of  pure  transcendental 
conceptions  ( instabilis  tellus,  innahilis  unda ), 
where  they  can  neither  stand  nor  swim,  and 
where  the  tracks  of  their  footsteps  are  obliter¬ 
ated  by  time;  while  the  march  of  mathematics 
is  pursued  on  a  broad  and  magnificent  highway, 
which  the  latest  posterity  shall  frequent  with¬ 
out  fear  of  danger  or  impediment. 

As  we  have  taken  upon  us  the  task  of  deter¬ 
mining,  clearly  and  certainly,  the  limits  of  pure 
reason  in  the  sphere  of  transcendentalism,  and 
as  the  efforts  of  reason  in  this  direction  are  per¬ 


215 

sisted  in,  even  after  the  plainest  and  most  ex¬ 
pressive  warnings,  hope  still  beckoning  us  past 
the  limits  of  experience  into  the  splendours  of 
the  intellectual  world — it  becomes  necessary  to 
cut  away  the  last  anchor  of  this  fallacious  and 
fantastic  hope.  We  shall,  accordingly,  show  that 
the  mathematical  method  is  unattended  in  the 
sphere  of  philosophy  by  the  least  advantage — 
except,  perhaps,  that  it  more  plainly  exhibits  its 
own  inadequacy — that  geometry  and  philoso¬ 
phy  are  two  quite  different  things,  although 
they  go  hand  in  hand  in  the  field  of  natural  sci¬ 
ence,  and,  consequently,  that  the  procedure  of 
the  one  can  never  be  imitated  by  the  other. 

The  evidence  of  mathematics  rests  upon  defi¬ 
nitions,  axioms,  and  demonstrations.  I  shall  be 
satisfied  with  showing  that  none  of  these  forms 
can  be  employed  or  imitated  in  philosophy  in 
the  sense  in  which  they  are  understood  by  math¬ 
ematicians;  and  that  the  geometrician,  if  he  em¬ 
ploys  his  method  in  philosophy,  will  succeed 
only  in  building  card-castles,  while  the  employ¬ 
ment  of  the  philosophical  method  in  mathemat¬ 
ics  can  result  in  nothing  but  mere  verbiage.  The 
essential  business  of  philosophy,  indeed,  is  to 
mark  out  the  limits  of  the  science;  and  even  the 
mathematician,  unless  his  talent  is  naturally  cir¬ 
cumscribed  and  limited  to  this  particular  de¬ 
partment  of  knowledge,  cannot  turn  a  deaf  ear 
to  the  warnings  of  philosophy,  or  set  himself 
above  its  direction. 

1.  Of  Definitions.  A  definition  is,  as  the  term 
itself  indicates,  the  representation,  upon  pri¬ 
mary  grounds,  of  the  complete  conception  of  a 
thing  within  its  own  limits.1  Accordingly,  an 
empirical  conception  cannot  be  defined,  it  can 
only  be  explained.  For,  as  there  are  in  such  a 
conception  only  a  certain  number  of  marks  or 
signs,  which  denote  a  certain  class  of  sensuous 
objects,  we  can  never  be  sure  that  we  do  not 
cogitate  under  the  word  which  indicates  the 
same  object,  at  one  time  a  greater,  at  another 
a  smaller  number  of  signs.  Thus,  one  person 
may  cogitate  in  his  conception  of  gold,  in  addi¬ 
tion  to  its  properties  of  weight,  colour,  malle¬ 
ability,  that  of  resisting  rust,  while  another  per¬ 
son  may  be  ignorant  of  this  quality.  We  employ 
certain  signs  only  so  long  as  we  require  them 

1  The  definition  must  describe  the  conception  com¬ 
pletely,  that  is,  omit  none  of  the  marks  or  signs  of 
which  it  is  composed;  within  its  own  limits,  that  is,  it 
must  be  precise,  and  enumerate  no  more  signs  than  be¬ 
long  to  the  conception;  and  on  primary  grounds,  that 
is  to  say,  the  limitations  of  the  bounds  of  the  concep¬ 
tion  must  not  be  deduced  from  other  conceptions,  as  in 
this  case  a  proof  would  be  necessary,  and  the  so-called 
definition  would  be  incapable  of  taking  its  place  at  the 
head  of  all  the  judgements  we  have  to  form  regarding 
an  object. 


216 


THE  CRITIQUE 


for  the  sake  of  distinction;  new  observations 
abstract  some  and  add  new  ones,  so  that  an  em¬ 
pirical  conception  never  remains  within  per¬ 
manent  limits.  It  is,  in  fact,  useless  to  define  a 
conception  of  this  kind.  If,  for  example,  we  are 
speaking  of  water  and  its  properties,  we  do  not 
stop  at  what  we  actually  think  by  the  word  wa¬ 
ter,  but  proceed  to  observation  and  experiment; 
and  the  word,  with  the  few  signs  attached  to  it, 
is  more  properly  a  designation  than  a  concep¬ 
tion  of  the  thing.  A  definition  in  this  case  would 
evidently  be  nothing  more  than  a  determination 
of  the  word.  In  the  second  place,  no  a  priori  con¬ 
ception,  such  as  those  of  substance,  cause,  right, 
fitness,  and  so  on,  can  be  defined.  For  I  can  nev¬ 
er  be  sure,  that  the  clear  representation  of  a 
given  conception  (which  is  given  in  a  confused 
state)  has  been  fully  developed,  until  I  know 
that  the  representation  is  adequate  with  its  ob¬ 
ject.  But,  inasmuch  as  the  conception,  as  it  is 
presented  to  the  mind,  may  contain  a  number 
of  obscure  representations,  which  we  do  not  ob¬ 
serve  in  our  analysis,  although  we  employ  them 
in  our  application  of  the  conception,  I  can  nev¬ 
er  be  sure  that  my  analysis  is  complete,  while 
examples  may  make  this  probable,  although  they 
can  never  demonstrate  the  fact,  instead  of  the 
word  definition,  I  should  rather  employ  the  term 
exposition — a  more  modest  expression,  which 
the  critic  may  accept  without  surrendering  his 
doubts  as  to  the  completeness  of  the  analysis  of 
any  such  conception.  As,  therefore,  neither  em¬ 
pirical  nor  a  priori  conceptions  are  capable  of 
definition,  we  have  to  see  whether  the  only  oth¬ 
er  kind  of  conceptions — arbitrary  conceptions 
— can  be  subjected  to  this  mental  operation. 
Such  a  conception  can  always  be  defined;  for  I 
must  know  thoroughly  what  I  wished  to  cogitate 
in  it,  as  it  was  I  who  created  it.  and  it  was  not 
given  to  my  mind  either  by  the  nature  of  my 
understanding  or  by  experience.  At  the  same 
time,  I  cannot  say  that,  by  such  a  definition,  I 
have  defined  a  real  object.  If  the  conception  is 
based  upon  empirical  conditions,  if,  for  example, 
I  have  a  conception  of  a  clock  for  a  ship,  this 
arbitrary  conception  does  not  assure  me  of  the 
existence  or  even  of  the  possibility  of  the  ob¬ 
ject.  My  definition  of  such  a  conception  would 
with  more  propriety  be  termed  a  declaration  of 
a  project  than  a  definition  of  an  object.  There 
are  no  other  conceptions  which  can  bear  defi¬ 
nition,  except  those  which  contain  an  arbitrary 
synthesis,  which  can  be  constructed  a  priori. 
Consequently,  the  science  of  mathematics  alone 
possesses  definitions.  For  the  object  here  thought 
is  presented  a  priori  in  intuition;  and  thus  it 


can  never  contain  more  or  less  than  the  concep¬ 
tion,  because  the  conception  of  the  object  has 
been  given  by  the  definition  —  and  primarily, 
that  is,  without  deriving  the  definition  from  any 
other  source.  Philosophical  definitions  are,  there¬ 
fore,  merely  expositions  of  given  conceptions, 
while  mathematical  definitions  are  constructions 
of  conceptions  originally  formed  by  the  mind  it¬ 
self;  the  former  are  produced  by  analysis,  the 
completeness  of  which  is  never  demonstratively 
certain,  the  latter  by  a  synthesis.  In  a  mathe¬ 
matical  definition  the  conception  is  formed,  in 
a  philosophical  definition  it  is  only  explained. 
From  this  it  follows: 

( a )  That  we  must  not  imitate,  in  philosophy, 
the  mathematical  usage  of  commencing  with 
definitions — except  by  way  of  hypothesis  or 
experiment.  For,  as  all  so-called  philosophical 
definitions  are  merely  analyses  of  given  concep¬ 
tions,  these  conceptions,  although  only  in  a  con¬ 
fused  form,  must  precede  the  analysis;  and  the 
incomplete  exposition  must  precede  the  com¬ 
plete,  so  that  we  may  be  able  to  draw  certain 
inferences  from  the  characteristics  which  an  in¬ 
complete  analysis  has  enabled  us  to  discover, 
before  we  attain  to  the  complete  exposition  or 
definition  of  the  conception.  In  one  word,  a  full 
and  clear  definition  ought,  in  philosophy,  rather 
to  form  the  conclusion  than  the  commencement 
of  our  labours.1  In  mathematics,  on  the  con¬ 
trary,  we  cannot  have  a  conception  prior  to  the 
definition ;  it  is  the  definition  which  gives  us  the 
conception,  and  it  must  for  this  reason  form 
the  commencement  of  every  chain  of  mathe¬ 
matical  reasoning. 

( b )  Mathematical  definitions  cannot  be  er¬ 
roneous.  For  the  conception  is  given  only  in  and 
through  the  definition,  and  thus  it  contains  only 
what  has  been  cogitated  in  the  definition.  But 
although  a  definition  cannot  be  incorrect,  as  re¬ 
gards  its  content,  an  error  may  sometimes,  al¬ 
though  seldom,  creep  into  the  form.  This  error 
consists  in  a  want  of  precision.  Thus  the  com¬ 
mon  definition  of  a  circle — that  it  is  a  curved 
line,  every  point  in  which  is  equally  distant 
from  another  point  called  the  centre — is  faulty, 

1  Philosophy  abounds  in  faulty  definitions,  especially 
such  as  contain  some  of  the  elements  requisite  to  form 
a  complete  definition.  If  a  conception  could  not  be  em¬ 
ployed  in  reasoning  before  it  had  been  defined,  it  would 
fare  ill  with  all  philosophical  thought.  But,  as  incom¬ 
pletely  defined  conceptions  may  always  be  employed 
without  detriment  to  truth,  so  far  as  our  analysis  of  the 
elements  contained  in  them  proceeds,  imperfect  defini¬ 
tions,  that  is,  propositions  which  are  properly  not  def¬ 
initions,  but  merely  approximations  thereto,  may  be 
used  with  great  advantage.  In  mathematics,  definition 
belongs  ad  esse,  in  philosophy  ad  melius  esse.  It  is  a 
difficult  task  to  construct  a  proper  definition.  Jurists  are 
still  without  a  complete  definition  of  the  idea  of  right. 


OF  PURE  REASON 


from  the  fact  that  the  determination  indicated 
by  the  word  curved  is  superfluous.  For  there 
ought  to  be  a  particular  theorem,  which  may  be 
easily  proved  from  the  definition,  to  the  effect 
that  every  line,  which  has  all  its  points  at  equal 
distances  from  another  point,  must  be  a  curved 
line — that  is,  that  not  even  the  smallest  part  of 
it  can  be  straight.  Analytical  definitions,  on  the 
other  hand,  may  be  erroneous  in  many  respects, 
either  by  the  introduction  of  signs  which  do  not 
actually  exist  in  the  conception,  or  by  wanting 
in  that  completeness  which  forms  the  essential 
of  a  definition.  In  the  latter  case,  the  definition 
is  necessarily  defective,  because  we  can  never 
be  fully  certain  of  the  completeness  of  our  anal¬ 
ysis.  For  these  reasons,  the  method  of  definition 
employed  in  mathematics  cannot  be  imitated  in 
philosophy. 

2.  0/  Axioms .  These,  in  so  far  as  they  are 
immediately  certain,  are  a  priori  synthetical  prin¬ 
ciples.  Now,  one  conception  cannot  be  connected 
synthetically  and  yet  immediately  with  another; 
because,  if  we  wish  to  proceed  out  of  and  beyond 
a  conception,  a  third  mediating  cognition  is  nec¬ 
essary.  And,  as  philosophy  is  a  cognition  of 
reason  by  the  aid  of  conceptions  alone,  there 
is  to  be  found  in  it  no  principle  which  deserves 
to  be  called  an  axiom.  Mathematics,  on  the  oth¬ 
er  hand,  may  possess  axioms,  because  it  can  al¬ 
ways  connect  the  predicates  of  an  object  a  pri¬ 
on ,  and  without  any  mediating  term,  by  means 
of  the  construction  of  conceptions  in  intuition. 
Such  is  the  case  with  the  proposition:  Three 
points  can  always  lie  in  a  plane.  On  the  other 
hand,  no  synthetical  principle  which  is  based 
upon  conceptions,  can  ever  be  immediately  cer¬ 
tain  (for  example,  the  proposition:  Everything 
that  happens  has  a  cause),  because  I  require  a 
mediating  term  to  connect  the  two  conceptions 
of  event  and  cause — namely,  the  condition  of 
time-determination  in  an  experience,  and  I  can¬ 
not  cognize  any  such  principle  immediately  and 
from  conceptions  alone.  Discursive  principles 
are,  accordingly,  very  different  from  intuitive 
principles  or  axioms.  The  former  always  require 
deduction,  which  in  the  case  of  the  latter  may 
be  altogether  dispensed  with.  Axioms  are,  for 
this  reason,  always  self-evident,  while  philosoph¬ 
ical  principles,  whatever  may  be  the  degree  of 
certainty  they  possess,  cannot  lay  any  claim  to 
such  a  distinction.  No  synthetical  proposition  of 
pure  transcendental  reason  can  be  so  evident,  as 
is  often  rashly  enough  declared,  as  the  state¬ 
ment,  twice  two  are  jour.  It  is  true  that  in  the 
Analytic  I  introduced  into  the  list  of  principles 
of  the  pure  understanding,  certain  axioms  of  in¬ 


tuition;  but  the  principle  there  discussed  was 
not  itself  an  axiom,  but  served  merely  to  pre¬ 
sent  the  principle  of  the  possibility  of  axioms  in 
general,  while  it  was  really  nothing  more  than 
a  principle  based  upon  conceptions.  For  it  is  one 
part  of  the  duty  of  transcendental  philosophy 
to  establish  the  possibility  of  mathematics  it¬ 
self.  Philosophy  possesses,  then,  no  axioms,  and 
has  no  right  to  impose  its  a  priori  principles 
upon  thought,  until  it  has  established  their 
authority  and  validity  by  a  thoroughgoing 
deduction. 

3.  Of  Demonstrations.  Only  an  apodeictic 
proof,  based  upon  intuition,  can  be  termed  a 
demonstration.  Experience  teaches  us  what  is, 
but  it  cannot  convince  us  that  it  might  not  have 
been  otherwise.  Hence  a  proof  upon  empirical 
grounds  cannot  be  apodeictic.  A  priori  concep¬ 
tions,  in  discursive  cognition,  can  never  produce 
intuitive  certainty  or  evidence,  however  certain 
the  judgement  they  present  may  be.  Mathemat¬ 
ics  alone,  therefore,  contains  demonstrations, 
because  it  does  not  deduce  its  cognition  from 
conceptions,  but  from  the  construction  of  con¬ 
ceptions,  that  is,  from  intuition,  which  can  be 
given  a  priori  in  accordance  with  conceptions. 
The  method  of  algebra,  in  equations,  from  which 
the  correct  answer  is  deduced  by  reduction,  is  a 
kind  of  construction — not  geometrical,  but  by 
symbols — in  which  all  conceptions,  especially 
those  of  the  relations  of  quantities,  are  repre¬ 
sented  in  intuition  by  signs;  and  thus  the  con¬ 
clusions  in  that  science  are  secured  from  errors 
by  the  fact  that  every  proof  is  submitted  to  ocu¬ 
lar  evidence.  Philosophical  cognition  does  not 
possess  this  advantage,  it  being  required  to  con¬ 
sider  the  general  always  in  abstracto  (by  means 
of  conceptions),  while  mathematics  can  always 
consider  it  in  concreto  (in  an  individual  intui¬ 
tion),  and  at  the  same  time  by  means  of  a  priori 
representation,  whereby  all  errors  are  rendered 
manifest  to  the  senses.  The  former — discursive 
proofs — ought  to  be  termed  acroamatic  proofs , 
rather  than  demonstrations,  as  only  words  are 
employed  in  them,  while  demonstrations  proper, 
as  the  term  itself  indicates,  always  require  a 
reference  to  the  intuition  of  the  object. 

It  follows  from  all  these  considerations  that 
it  is  not  consonant  with  the  nature  of  philoso¬ 
phy,  especially  in  the  sphere  of  pure  reason,  to 
employ  the  dogmatical  method,  and  to  adorn 
itself  with  the  titles  and  insignia  of  mathemati¬ 
cal  science.  It  does  not  belong  to  that  order,  and 
can  only  hope  for  a  fraternal  union  with  that 
science.  Its  attempts  at  mathematical  evidence 
are  vain  pretensions,  which  can  only  keep  it 


218 


THE  CRITIQUE 


back  from  its  true  aim,  which  is  to  detect  the 
illusory  procedure  of  reason  when  transgressing 
its  proper  limits,  and  by  fully  explaining  and 
analysing  our  conceptions,  to  conduct  us  from 
the  dim  regions  of  speculation  to  the  clear  re¬ 
gion  of  modest  self-knowledge.  Reason  must  not, 
therefore,  in  its  transcendental  endeavours,  look 
forward  with  such  confidence,  as  if  the  path  it 
is  pursuing  led  straight  to  its  aim,  nor  reckon 
with  such  security  upon  its  premisses,  as  to  con¬ 
sider  it  unnecessary  to  take  a  step  back,  or  to 
keep  a  strict  watch  for  errors,  which,  overlooked 
in  the  principles,  may  be  detected  in  the  argu¬ 
ments  themselves — in  which  case  it  may  be  req¬ 
uisite  either  to  determine  these  principles  with 
greater  strictness,  or  to  change  them  entirely. 

I  divide  all  apodeictic  propositions,  whether 
demonstrable  or  immediately  certain,  into  dog¬ 
mata  and  mathemata.  A  direct  synthetical  prop¬ 
osition,  based  on  conceptions,  is  a  dogma;  a 
proposition  of  the  same  kind,  based  on  the  con¬ 
struction  of  conceptions,  is  a  mathema.  Analyt¬ 
ical  judgements  do  not  teach  us  any  more  about 
an  object  than  what  was  contained  in  the  con¬ 
ception  we  had  of  it;  because  they  do  not  ex¬ 
tend  our  cognition  beyond  our  conception  of  an 
object,  they  merely  elucidate  the  conception. 
They  cannot  therefore  be  with  propriety  termed 
dogmas.  Of  the  two  kinds  of  a  priori  synthetical 
propositions  above  mentioned,  only  those  which 
are  employed  in  philosophy  can,  according  to 
the  general  mode  of  speech,  bear  this  name; 
those  of  arithmetic  or  geometry  would  not  be 
rightly  so  denominated.  Thus  the  customary 
mode  of  speaking  confirms  the  explanation  given 
above,  and  the  conclusion  arrived  at,  that  only 
those  judgements  which  are  based  upon  concep¬ 
tions,  not  on  the  construction  of  conceptions, 
can  be  termed  dogmatical. 

Thus,  pure  reason,  in  the  sphere  of  specula¬ 
tion,  does  not  contain  a  single  direct  synthetical 
judgement  based  upon  conceptions.  By  means 
of  ideas,  it  is,  as  we  have  shown,  incapable  of 
producing  synthetical  judgements,  which  are  ob¬ 
jectively  valid;  by  means  of  the  conceptions  of 
the  understanding,  it  establishes  certain  indu¬ 
bitable  principles,  not,  however,  directly  on  the 
basis  of  conceptions,  but  only  indirectly  by  means 
of  the  relation  of  these  conceptions  to  some¬ 
thing  of  a  purely  contingent  nature,  namely, 
possible  experience.  When  experience  is  presup¬ 
posed,  these  principles  are  apodeictically  cer¬ 
tain,  but  in  themselves,  and  directly,  they  can¬ 
not  even  be  cognized  a  priori.  Thus  the  given 
conceptions  of  cause  and  event  will  not  be  suf¬ 
ficient  for  the  demonstration  of  the  proposition: 


Every  event  has  a  cause.  For  this  reason,  it  is 
not  a  dogma;  although  from  another  point  of 
view,  that  of  experience,  it  is  capable  of  being 
proved  to  demonstration.  The  proper  term  for 
such  a  proposition  is  principle ,  and  not  theorem 
(although  it  does  require  to  be  proved),  because 
it  possesses  the  remarkable  peculiarity  of  being 
the  condition  of  the  possibility  of  its  own  ground 
of  proof,  that  is,  experience,  and  of  forming  a 
necessary  presupposition  in  all  empirical  obser¬ 
vation. 

If  then,  in  the  speculative  sphere  of  pure  rea¬ 
son,  no  dogmata  are  to  be  found;  all  dogmatical 
methods,  whether  borrowed  from  mathematics, 
or  invented  by  philosophical  thinkers,  are  alike 
inappropriate  and  inefficient.  They  only  serve 
to  conceal  errors  and  fallacies,  and  to  deceive 
philosophy,  whose  duty  it  is  to  see  that  reason 
pursues  a  safe  and  straight  path.  A  philosophi¬ 
cal  method  may,  however,  be  systematical.  For 
our  reason  is,  subjectively  considered,  itself  a 
system,  and,  in  the  sphere  of  mere  conceptions, 
a  system  of  investigation  according  to  princi¬ 
ples  of  unity,  the  material  being  supplied  by  ex¬ 
perience  alone.  But  this  is  not  the  proper  place 
for  discussing  the  peculiar  method  of  transcen¬ 
dental  philosophy,  as  our  present  task  is  simply 
to  examine  whether  our  faculties  are  capable  of 
erecting  an  edifice  on  the  basis  of  pure  reason, 
and  how  far  they  may  proceed  with  the  materi¬ 
als  at  their  command. 

Section  II.  The  Discipline  of  Pure  Reason  in 
Polemics 

Reason  must  be  subject,  in  all  its  operations, 
to  criticism,  which  must  always  be  permitted 
to  exercise  its  functions  without  restraint;  oth¬ 
erwise  its  interests  are  imperilled  and  its  influ¬ 
ence  obnoxious  to  suspicion.  There  is  nothing, 
however  useful,  however  sacred  it  may  be,  that 
can  claim  exemption  from  the  searching  exam¬ 
ination  of  this  supreme  tribunal,  which  has  no 
respect  of  persons.  The  very  existence  of  reason 
depends  upon  this  freedom;  for  the  voice  of 
reason  is  not  that  of  a  dictatorial  and  despotic 
power,  it  is  rather  like  the  vote  of  the  citizens 
of  a  free  state,  every  member  of  which  must 
have  the  privilege  of  giving  free  expression  to 
his  doubts,  and  possess  even  the  right  of  veto. 

But  while  reason  can  never  decline  to  submit 
itself  to  the  tribunal  of  criticism,  it  has  not  al¬ 
ways  cause  to  dread  the  judgement  of  this  court. 
Pure  reason,  however,  when  engaged  in  the 
sphere  of  dogmatism,  is  not  so  thoroughly  con¬ 
scious  of  a  strict  observance  of  its  highest  laws, 
as  to  appear  before  a  higher  judicial  reason  with 


OF  PURE 

perfect  confidence.  On  the  contrary,  it  must  re¬ 
nounce  its  magnificent  dogmatical  pretensions 
in  philosophy. 

Very  different  is  the  case  when  it  has  to  de¬ 
fend  itself,  not  before  a  judge,  but  against  an 
equal.  If  dogmatical  assertions  are  advanced  on 
the  negative  side,  in  opposition  to  those  made 
by  reason  on  the  positive  side,  its  justification 
/car’  cu'dponrovis  complete,  although  the  proof  of 
its  propositions  is  /car’  aXrjdeLav  unsatisfactory. 

By  the  polemic  of  pure  reason  I  mean  the  de¬ 
fence  of  its  propositions  made  by  reason,  in  op¬ 
position  to  the  dogmatical  counter-propositions 
advanced  by  other  parties.  The  question  here  is 
not  whether  its  own  statements  may  not  also  be 
false;  it  merely  regards  the  fact  that  reason 
proves  that  the  opposite  cannot  be  established 
with  demonstrative  certainty,  nor  even  asserted 
with  a  higher  degree  of  probability.  Reason  does 
not  hold  her  possessions  upon  sufferance;  for, 
although  she  cannot  show  a  perfectly  satisfac¬ 
tory  title  to  them,  no  one  can  prove  that  she  is 
not  the  rightful  possessor. 

It  is  a  melancholy  reflection  that  reason,  in  its 
highest  exercise,  falls  into  an  antithetic;  and 
that  the  supreme  tribunal  for  the  settlement  of 
differences  should  not  be  at  union  with  itself.  It 
is  true  that  we  had  to  discuss  the  question  of  an 
apparent  antithetic,  but  we  found  that  it  was 
based  upon  a  misconception.  In  conformity 
with  the  common  prejudice,  phenomena  were 
regarded  as  things  in  themselves,  and  thus  an 
absolute  completeness  in  their  synthesis  was  re¬ 
quired  in  the  one  mode  or  in  the  other  (it  was 
shown  to  be  impossible  in  both) ;  a  demand  en¬ 
tirely  out  of  place  in  regard  to  phenomena. 
There  was,  then,  no  real  self-contradiction  of 
reason  in  the  propositions:  The  series  of  phe¬ 
nomena  given  in  themselves  has  an  absolutely 
first  beginning;  and:  This  series  is  absolutely 
and  in  itself  without  beginning.  The  two  prop¬ 
ositions  are  perfectly  consistent  with  each  other, 
because  phenomena  as  phenomena  are  in  them¬ 
selves  nothing,  and  consequently  the  hypothesis 
that  they  are  things  in  themselves  must  lead  to 
self-contradictory  inferences. 

But  there  are  cases  in  which  a  similar  misun¬ 
derstanding  cannot  be  provided  against,  and  the 
dispute  must  remain  unsettled.  Take,  for  ex¬ 
ample,  the  theistic  proposition:  There  is  a  Su¬ 
preme  Being;  and  on  the  other  hand,  the  athe¬ 
istic  counter-statement:  There  exists  no  Su¬ 
preme  Being;  or.  in  psychology:  Everything 
that  thinks  possesses  the  attribute  of  absolute 
and  permanent  unity,  which  is  utterly  different 
from  the  transitory  unity  of  material  phenom¬ 


REASON  219 

ena;  and  the  counter-proposition:  The  soul  is 
not  an  immaterial  unity,  and  its  nature  is  tran¬ 
sitory,  like  that  of  phenomena.  The  objects  of 
these  questions  contain  no  heterogeneous  or 
contradictory  elements,  for  they  relate  to  things 
in  themselves ,  and  not  to  phenomena.  There 
would  arise,  indeed,  a  real  contradiction,  if  rea¬ 
son  came  forward  with  a  statement  on  the  nega¬ 
tive  side  of  these  questions  alone.  As  regards  the 
criticism  to  which  the  grounds  of  proof  on  the 
affirmative  side  must  be  subjected,  it  may  be 
freely  admitted,  without  necessitating  the  sur¬ 
render  of  the  affirmative  propositions,  which 
have,  at  least,  the  interest  of  reason  in  their 
favour — an  advantage  which  the  opposite  party 
cannot  lay  claim  to. 

I  cannot  agree  with  the  opinion  of  several  ad¬ 
mirable  thinkers — Sulzer  among  the  rest — that, 
in  spite  of  the  weakness  of  the  arguments  hith¬ 
erto  in  use,  we  may  hope,  one  day,  to  see  suffi¬ 
cient  demonstrations  of  the  two  cardinal  propo¬ 
sitions  of  pure  reason — the  existence  of  a  Su¬ 
preme  Being,  and  the  immortality  of  the  soul. 
I  am  certain,  on  the  contrary,  that  this  will 
never  be  the  case.  For  on  what  ground  can  rea¬ 
son  base  such  synthetical  propositions,  which 
do  not  relate  to  the  objects  of  experience  and 
their  internal  possibility?  But  it  is  also  demon¬ 
stratively  certain  that  no  one  will  ever  be  able 
to  maintain  the  contrary  with  the  least  show  of 
probability.  For,  as  he  can  attempt  such  a  proof 
solely  upon  the  basis  of  pure  reason,  he  is  bound 
to  prove  that  a  Supreme  Being,  and  a  thinking 
subject  in  the  character  of  a  pure  intelligence, 
are  impossible.  But  where  will  he  find  the 
knowledge  which  can  enable  him  to  enounce 
synthetical  judgements  in  regard  to  things  which 
transcend  the  region  of  experience?  We  may, 
therefore,  rest  assured  that  the  opposite  never 
will  be  demonstrated.  We  need  not,  then,  have 
recourse  to  scholastic  arguments;  we  may  al¬ 
ways  admit  the  truth  of  those  propositions 
which  are  consistent  with  the  speculative  inter¬ 
ests  of  reason  in  the  sphere  of  experience,  and 
form,  moreover,  the  only  means  of  uniting  the 
speculative  with  the  practical  interest.  Our  op¬ 
ponent,  who  must  not  be  considered  here  as  a 
critic  solely,  we  can  be  ready  to  meet  with  a 
non  liquet  which  cannot  fail  to  disconcert  him; 
while  we  cannot  deny  his  right  to  a  similar  re¬ 
tort,  as  we  have  on  our  side  the  advantage  of 
the  support  of  the  subjective  maxim  of  reason, 
and  can  therefore  look  upon  all  his  sophistical 
arguments  with  calm  indifference. 

From  this  point  of  view,  there  is  properly  no 
antithetic  of  pure  reason.  For  the  only  arena 


220 


THE  CRITIQUE 


for  such  a  struggle  would  be  upon  the  field  of 
pure  theology  and  psychology;  but  on  this 
ground  there  can  appear  no  combatant  whom 
we  need  to  fear.  Ridicule  and  boasting  can  be 
his  only  weapons;  and  these  may  be  laughed  at, 
as  mere  child’s  play.  This  consideration  restores 
to  Reason  her  courage;  for  what  source  of  con¬ 
fidence  could  be  found,  if  she,  whose  vocation 
it  is  to  destroy  error,  were  at  variance  with  her¬ 
self  and  without  any  reasonable  hope  of  ever 
reaching  a  state  of  permanent  repose? 

Everything  in  nature  is  good  for  some  pur¬ 
pose.  Even  poisons  are  serviceable;  they  de¬ 
stroy  the  evil  effects  of  other  poisons  generated 
in  our  system,  and  must  always  find  a  place  in 
every  complete  pharmacopoeia.  The  objections 
raised  against  the  fallacies  and  sophistries  of 
speculative  reason,  are  objections  given  by  the 
nature  of  this  reason  itself,  and  must  therefore 
have  a  destination  and  purpose  which  can  only 
be  for  the  good  of  humanity.  For  what  purpose 
has  Providence  raised  many  objects,  in  which 
we  have  the  deepest  interest,  so  far  above  us, 
that  we  vainly  try  to  cognize  them  with  certain¬ 
ty,  and  our  powers  of  mental  vision  are  rather 
excited  than  satisfied  by  the  glimpses  we  may 
chance  to  seize?  It  is  very  doubtful  whether  it 
is  for  our  benefit  to  advance  bold  affirmations 
regarding  subjects  involved  in  such  obscurity; 
perhaps  it  would  even  be  detrimental  to  our  best 
interests.  But  it  is  undoubtedly  always  beneficial 
to  leave  the  investigating,  as  well  as  the  critical 
reason,  in  perfect  freedom,  and  permit  it  to  take 
charge  of  its  own  interests,  which  are  advanced 
as  much  by  its  limitation,  as  by  its  extension  of 
its  views,  and  which  always  suffer  by  the  inter¬ 
ference  of  foreign  powers  forcing  it,  against  its 
natural  tendencies,  to  bend  to  certain  precon¬ 
ceived  designs. 

Allow  your  opponent  to  say  what  he  thinks 
reasonable,  and  combat  him  only  with  the  weap¬ 
ons  of  reason.  Have  no  anxiety  for  the  prac¬ 
tical  interests  of  humanity — these  are  never  im¬ 
perilled  in  a  purely  speculative  dispute.  Such  a 
dispute  serves  merely  to  disclose  the  antinomy 
of  reason,  which,  as  it  has  its  source  in  the  nature 
of  reason,  ought  to  be  thoroughly  investigated. 
Reason  is  benefited  by  the  examination  of  a  sub¬ 
ject  on  both  sides,  and  its  judgements  are  cor¬ 
rected  by  being  limited.  It  is  not  the  matter  that 
may  give  occasion  to  dispute,  but  the  manner. 
For  it  is  perfectly  permissible  to  employ,  in  the 
presence  of  reason,  the  language  of  a  firmly- 
rooted  faith ,  even  after  we  have  been  obliged 
to  renounce  all  pretensions  to  knowledge. 

If  we  were  to  ask  the  dispassionate  David 


Hume — a  philosopher  endowed,  in  a  degree  that 
few  are,  with  a  well-balanced  judgement:  What 
motive  induced  you  to  spend  so  much  labour 
and  thought  in  undermining  the  consoling  and 
beneficial  persuasion  that  reason  is  capable  of 
assuring  us  of  the  existence,  and  presenting  us 
with  a  determinate  conception  of  a  Supreme 
Being? — his  answer  would  be:  Nothing  but  the 
desire  of  teaching  reason  to  know  its  own  pow¬ 
ers  better,  and,  at  the  same  time,  a  dislike  of 
the  procedure  by  which  that  faculty  was  com¬ 
pelled  to  support  foregone  conclusions,  and  pre¬ 
vented  from  confessing  the  internal  weaknesses 
which  it  cannot  but  feel  when  it  enters  upon  a 
rigid  self-examination.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  we 
were  to  ask  Priestley — a  philosopher  who  had 
no  taste  for  transcendental  speculation,  but  was 
entirely  devoted  to  the  principles  of  empiri¬ 
cism — what  his  motives  were  for  overturning 
those  two  main  pillars  of  religion — the  doctrines 
of  the  freedom  of  the  will  and  the  immortality 
of  the  soul  (in  his  view  the  hope  of  a  future  life 
is  but  the  expectation  of  the  miracle  of  resur¬ 
rection) — this  philosopher,  himself  a  zealous 
and  pious  teacher  of  religion,  could  give  no  oth¬ 
er  answer  than  this:  I  acted  in  the  interest  of 
reason,  which  always  suffers,  when  certain  ob¬ 
jects  are  explained  and  judged  by  a  reference  to 
other  supposed  laws  than  those  of  material  na¬ 
ture — the  only  laws  which  we  know  in  a  de¬ 
terminate  manner.  It  would  be  unfair  to  decry 
the  latter  philosopher,  who  endeavoured  to  har¬ 
monize  his  paradoxical  opinions  with  the  inter¬ 
ests  of  religion,  and  to  undervalue  an  honest  and 
reflecting  man,  because  he  finds  himself  at  a  loss 
the  moment  he  has  left  the  field  of  natural  sci¬ 
ence.  The  same  grace  must  be  accorded  to 
Hume,  a  man  not  less  well-disposed,  and  quite 
as  blameless  in  his  moral  character,  and  who 
pushed  his  abstract  speculations  to  an  extreme 
length,  because,  as  he  rightly  believed,  the  ob¬ 
ject  of  them  lies  entirely  beyond  the  bounds  of 
natural  science,  and  within  the  sphere  of  pure 
ideas. 

What  is  to  be  done  to  provide  against  the  dan¬ 
ger  which  seems  in  the  present  case  to  menace 
the  best  interests  of  humanity?  The  course  to 
be  pursued  in  reference  to  this  subject  is  a  per¬ 
fectly  plain  and  natural  one.  Let  each  thinker 
pursue  his  own  path;  if  he  shows  talent,  if  he 
gives  evidence  of  profound  thought,  in  one  word, 
if  he  shows  that  he  possesses  the  power  of  rea¬ 
soning — reason  is  always  the  gainer.  If  you  have 
recourse  to  other  means,  if  you  attempt  to  co¬ 
erce  reason,  if  you  raise  the  cry  of  treason  to 
humanity,  if  you  excite  the  feelings  of  the  crowd. 


OF  PURE  REASON 


which  can  neither  understand  nor  sympathize 
with  such  subtle  speculations — you  will  only 
make  yourselves  ridiculous.  For  the  questiondoes 
not  concern  the  advantage  or  disadvantage  which 
we  are  expected  to  reap  from  such  inquiries; 
the  question  is  merely  how  far  reason  can  ad¬ 
vance  in  the  field  of  speculation,  apart  from 
all  kinds  of  interest,  and  whether  we  may  de¬ 
pend  upon  the  exertions  of  speculative  reason, 
or  must  renounce  all  reliance  on  it.  Instead  of 
joining  the  combatants,  it  is  your  part  to  be  a 
tranquil  spectator  of  the  struggle — a  laborious 
struggle  for  the  parties  engaged,  but  attended, 
in  its  progress  as  well  as  in  its  result,  with  the 
most  advantageous  consequences  for  the  inter¬ 
ests  of  thought  and  knowledge.  It  is  absurd  to 
expect  to  be  enlightened  by  Reason,  and  at  the 
same  time  to  prescribe  to  her  what  side  of  the 
question  she  must  adopt.  Moreover,  reason  is 
sufficiently  held  in  check  by  its  own  power,  the 
limits  imposed  on  it  by  its  own  nature  are  suffi¬ 
cient;  it  is  unnecessary  for  you  to  place  over  it 
additional  guards,  as  if  its  power  were  danger¬ 
ous  to  the  constitution  of  the  intellectual  state. 
In  the  dialectic  of  reason  there  is  no  victory 
gained  which  need  in  the  least  disturb  your 
tranquillity. 

The  strife  of  dialectic  is  a  necessity  of  reason, 
and  we  cannot  but  wish  that  it  had  been  con¬ 
ducted  long  ere  this  with  that  perfect  freedom 
which  ought  to  be  its  essential  condition.  In  this 
case,  we  should  have  had  at  an  earlier  period  a 
matured  and  profound  criticism,  which  must 
have  put  an  end  to  all  dialectical  disputes,  by 
exposing  the  illusions  and  prejudices  in  which 
they  originated. 

There  is  in  human  nature  an  unworthy 
propensity — a  propensity  which,  like  every¬ 
thing  that  springs  from  nature,  must  in  its 
final  purpose  be  conducive  to  the  good  of  hu¬ 
manity — to  conceal  our  real  sentiments,  and  to 
give  expression  only  to  certain  received  opin¬ 
ions,  which  are  regarded  as  at  once  safe  and  pro¬ 
motive  of  the  common  good.  It  is  true,  this  tend¬ 
ency,  not  only  to  conceal  our  real  sentiments, 
but  to  profess  those  which  may  gain  us  favour 
in  the  eyes  of  society,  has  not  only  civilized,  but, 
in  a  certain  measure,  moralized  us;  as  no  one  can 
break  through  the  outward  covering  of  respect¬ 
ability,  honour,  and  morality,  and  thus  the  seem- 
ingly-good  examples  which  we  see  around  us  form 
an  excellent  school  for  moral  improvement,  so 
long  as  our  belief  in  their  genuineness  remains 
unshaken.  But  this  disposition  10  represent  our¬ 
selves  as  better  than  we  are,  and  to  utter  opin¬ 
ions  which  are  not  our  own,  can  be  nothing  more 


221 

than  a  kind  of  provisionary  arrangement  of  na¬ 
ture  to  lead  us  from  the  rudeness  of  an  uncivi¬ 
lized  state,  and  to  teach  us  how  to  assume  at 
least  the  appearance  and  manner  of  the  good  we 
see.  But  when  true  principles  have  been  devel¬ 
oped,  and  have  obtained  a  sure  foundation  in 
our  habit  of  thought,  this  conventionalism  must 
be  attacked  with  earnest  vigour,  otherwise  it 
corrupts  the  heart,  and  checks  the  growth  of 
good  dispositions  with  the  mischievous  weed  of 
fair  appearances. 

I  am  sorry  to  remark  the  same  tendency  to 
misrepresentation  and  hypocrisy  in  the  sphere 
of  speculative  discussion,  where  there  is  less 
temptation  to  restrain  the  free  expression  of 
thought.  For  what  can  be  more  prejudicial  to 
the  interests  of  intelligence  than  to  falsify  our 
real  sentiments,  to  conceal  the  doubts  which  we 
feel  in  regard  to  our  statements,  or  to  maintain 
the  validity  of  grounds  of  proof  which  we  well 
know  to  be  insufficient?  So  long  as  mere  person¬ 
al  vanity  is  the  source  of  these  unworthy  arti¬ 
fices — and  this  is  generally  the  case  in  specula¬ 
tive  discussions,  which  are  mostly  destitute  of 
practical  interest,  and  are  incapable  of  complete 
demonstration — the  vanity  of  the  opposite  par¬ 
ty  exaggerates  as  much  on  the  other  side;  and 
thus  the  result  is  the  same,  although  it  is  not 
brought  about  so  soon  as  if  the  dispute  had  been 
conducted  in  a  sincere  and  upright  spirit.  But 
where  the  mass  entertains  the  notion  that  the 
aim  of  certain  subtle  speculators  is  nothing  less 
than  to  shake  the  very  foundations  of  public 
welfare  and  morality — it  seems  not  only  pru¬ 
dent,  but  even  praiseworthy,  to  maintain  the 
good  cause  by  illusory  arguments,  rather  than  to 
give  to  our  supposed  opponents  the  advantage  of 
lowering  our  declarations  to  the  moderate  tone 
of  a  merely  practical  conviction,  and  of  com¬ 
pelling  us  to  confess  our  inability  to  attain  to 
apodeictic  certainty  in  speculative  subjects.  But 
we  ought  to  reflect  that  there  is  nothing  in  the 
world  more  fatal  to  the  maintenance  of  a  good 
cause  than  deceit,  misrepresentation,  and  false¬ 
hood.  That  the  strictest  laws  of  honesty  should 
be  observed  in  the  discussion  of  a  purely  specu¬ 
lative  subject  is  the  least  requirement  that  can 
be  made.  If  we  could  reckon  with  security  even 
upon  so  little,  the  conflict  of  speculative  reason 
regarding  the  important  questions  of  God,  im¬ 
mortality,  and  freedom,  would  have  been  either 
decided  long  ago,  or  would  very  soon  be  brought 
to  a  conclusion.  But,  in  general,  the  uprightness 
of  the  defence  stands  in  an  inverse  ratio  to 
the  goodness  of  the  cause;  and  perhaps  more 
honesty  and  fairness  are  shown  by  those 


222 


THE  CRITIQUE 


who  deny  than  by  those  who  uphold  these 
doctrines. 

I  shall  persuade  myself,  then,  that  I  have 
readers  who  do  not  wish  to  see  a  righteous  cause 
defended  by  unfair  arguments.  Such  will  now 
recognize  the  fact  that,  according  to  the  princi¬ 
ples  of  this  Critique,  if  we  consider  not  what  is, 
but  what  ought  to  be  the  case,  there  can  be  real¬ 
ly  no  polemic  of  pure  reason.  For  how  can  two 
persons  dispute  about  a  thing,  the  reality  of 
which  neither  can  present  in  actual  or  even  in 
possible  experience?  Each  adopts  the  plan  of 
meditating  on  his  idea  for  the  purpose  of  draw¬ 
ing  from  the  idea,  if  he  can,  what  is  more  than 
the  idea ,  that  is,  the  reality  of  the  object  which 
it  indicates.  How  shall  they  settle  the  dispute, 
since  neither  is  able  to  make  his  assertions  di¬ 
rectly  comprehensible  and  certain,  but  must  re¬ 
strict  himself  to  attacking  and  confuting  those 
of  his  opponent?  All  statements  enounced  by 
pure  reason  transcend  the  conditions  of  possible 
experience,  beyond  the  sphere  of  which  we  can 
discover  no  criterion  of  truth,  while  they  are  at 
the  same  time  framed  in  accordance  with  the 
laws  of  the  understanding,  which  are  applicable 
only  to  experience;  and  thus  it  is  the  fate  of  all 
such  speculative  discussions  that  while  the  one 
party  attacks  the  weaker  side  of  his  opponent, 
he  infallibly  lays  open  his  own  weaknesses. 

The  critique  of  pure  reason  may  be  regarded 
as  the  highest  tribunal  for  all  speculative  dis¬ 
putes;  for  it  is  not  involved  in  these  disputes, 
which  have  an  immediate /elation  to  certain  ob¬ 
jects  and  not  to  the  laws  of  the  mind,  but  is  in¬ 
stituted  for  the  purpose  of  determining  the 
rights  and  limits  of  reason. 

Without  the  control  of  criticism,  reason  is,  as 
it  were,  in  a  state  of  nature,  and  can  only  estab¬ 
lish  its  claims  and  assertions  by  war.  Criticism, 
on  the  contrary,  deciding  all  questions  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  fundamental  laws  of  its  own  institu¬ 
tion,  secures  to  us  the  peace  of  law  and  order, 
and  enables  us  to  discuss  all  differences  in  the 
more  tranquil  manner  of  a  legal  process.  In  the 
former  case,  disputes  are  ended  by  victory,  which 
both  sides  may  claim  and  which  is  followed  by 
a  hollow  armistice;  in  the  latter,  by  a  sentence, 
which,  as  it  strikes  at  the  root  of  all  speculative 
differences,  ensures  to  all  concerned  a  lasting 
peace.  The  endless  disputes  of  a  dogmatizing 
reason  compel  us  to  look  for  some  mode  of  ar¬ 
riving  at  a  settled  decision  by  a  critical  investi¬ 
gation  of  reason  itself ;  just  as  Hobbes  maintains 
that  the  state  of  nature  is  a  state  of  injustice 
and  violence,  and  that  we  must  leave  it  and  sub¬ 
mit  ourselves  to  the  constraint  of  law,  which  in¬ 


deed  limits  individual  freedom,  but  only  that  it 
may  consist  with  the  freedom  of  others  and  with 
the  common  good  of  all. 

This  freedom  will,  among  other  things,  per¬ 
mit  of  our  openly  stating  the  difficulties  and 
doubts  which  we  are  ourselves  unable  to  solve, 
without  being  decried  on  that  account  as  turbu¬ 
lent  and  dangerous  citizens.  This  privilege  forms 
part  of  the  native  rights  of  human  reason,  which 
recognizes  no  other  judge  than  the  universal  rea¬ 
son  of  humanity;  and  as  this  reason  is  the  source 
of  all  progress  and  improvement,  such  a  privi¬ 
lege  is  to  be  held  sacred  and  inviolable.  It  is  un¬ 
wise,  moreover,  to  denounce  as  dangerous  any 
bold  assertions  against,  or  rash  attacks  upon,  an 
opinion  which  is  held  by  the  largest  and  most 
moral  class  of  the  community;  for  that  would 
be  giving  them  an  importance  which  they  do  not 
deserve.  When  I  hear  that  the  freedom  of  the 
will,  the  hope  of  a  future  life,  and  the  existence 
of  God  have  been  overthrown  by  the  arguments 
of  some  able  writer,  I  feel  a  strong  desire  to  read 
his  book;  for  I  expect  that  he  will  add  to  my 
knowledge  and  impart  greater  clearness  and  dis¬ 
tinctness  to  my  views  by  the  argumentative 
power  shown  in  his  writings.  But  I  am  perfectly 
certain,  even  before  I  have  opened  the  book, 
that  he  has  not  succeeded  in  a  single  point,  not 
because  I  believe  I  am  in  possession  of  irrefut¬ 
able  demonstrations  of  these  important  propo¬ 
sitions,  but  because  this  transcendental  critique, 
which  has  disclosed  to  me  the  power  and  the 
limits  of  pure  reason,  has  fully  convinced  me 
that,  as  it  is  insufficient  to  establish  the  affirma¬ 
tive,  it  is  as  powerless,  and  even  more  so,  to  as¬ 
sure  us  of  the  truth  of  the  negative  answer  to 
these  questions.  From  what  source  does  this 
free-thinker  derive  his  knowledge  that  there  is, 
for  example,  no  Supreme  Being?  This  proposi¬ 
tion  lies  out  of  the  field  of  possible  experience, 
and,  therefore,  beyond  the  limits  of  human  cog¬ 
nition.  But  I  would  not  read  at  all  the  answer 
which  the  dogmatical  maintainer  of  the  good 
cause  makes  to  his  opponent,  because  I  know 
well  beforehand,  that  he  will  merely  attack  the 
fallacious  grounds  of  his  adversary,  without  be¬ 
ing  able  to  establish  his  own  assertions.  Besides, 
a  new  illusory  argument,  in  the  construction  of 
which  talent  and  acuteness  are  shown,  is  sug¬ 
gestive  of  new  ideas  and  new  trains  of  reasoning, 
and  in  this  respect  the  old  and  everyday  sophis¬ 
tries  are  quite  useless.  Again,  the  dogmatical  op¬ 
ponent  of  religion  gives  employment  to  criticism, 
and  enables  us  to  test  and  correct  its  principles, 
while  there  is  no  occasion  for  anxiety  in  regard 
to  the  influence  and  results  of  his  reasoning. 


OF  PURE  REASON 


But,  it  will  be  said,  must  we  not  warn  the 
youth  entrusted  to  academical  care  against  such 
writings,  must  we  not  preserve  them  from  the 
knowledge  of  these  dangerous  assertions,  until 
their  judgement  is  ripened,  or  rather  until  the 
doctrines  which  we  wish  to  inculcate  are  so  firm¬ 
ly  rooted  in  their  minds  as  to  withstand  all  at¬ 
tempts  at  instilling  the  contrary  dogmas,  from 
whatever  quarter  they  may  come? 

If  we  are  to  confine  ourselves  to  the  dogmat¬ 
ical  procedure  in  the  sphere  of  pure  reason,  and 
find  ourselves  unable  to  settle  such  disputes 
otherwise  than  by  becoming  a  party  in  them, 
and  setting  counter-assertions  against  the  state¬ 
ments  advanced  by  our  opponents,  there  is  cer¬ 
tainly  no  plan  more  advisable  for  the  moment , 
but,  at  the  same  time,  none  more  absurd  and  in¬ 
efficient  for  the  futurey  than  this  retaining  of 
the  youthful  mind  under  guardianship  for  a 
time,  and  thus  preserving  it — for  so  long  at  least 
— from  seduction  into  error.  But  when,  at  a  lat¬ 
er  period,  either  curiosity,  or  the  prevalent  fash¬ 
ion  of  thought  places  such  writings  in  their  hands, 
will  the  so-called  convictions  of  their  youth  stand 
firm?  The  young  thinker,  who  has  in  his  ar¬ 
moury  none  but  dogmatical  weapons  with  which 
to  resist  the  attacks  of  his  opponent,  and  who 
cannot  detect  the  latent  dialectic  which  lies  in  his 
own  opinions  as  well  as  in  those  of  the  opposite 
party,  sees  the  advance  of  illusory  arguments 
and  grounds  of  proof  which  have  the  advantage 
of  novelty,  against  as  illusory  grounds  of  proof 
destitute  of  this  advantage,  and  which,  perhaps, 
excite  the  suspicion  that  the  natural  credulity  of 
his  youth  has  been  abused  by  his  instructors.  He 
thinks  he  can  find  no  better  means  of  showing 
that  he  has  outgrown  the  discipline  of  his  minor¬ 
ity  than  by  despising  those  well-meant  warnings, 
and,  knowing  no  system  of  thought  but  that  of 
dogmatism,  he  drinks  deep  draughts  of  the  poi¬ 
son  that  is  to  sap  the  principles  in  which  his 
early  years  were  trained. 

Exactly  the  opposite  of  the  system  here  rec¬ 
ommended  ought  to  be  pursued  in  academical 
instruction.  This  can  only  be  effected,  however, 
by  a  thorough  training  in  the  critical  investiga¬ 
tion  of  pure  reason.  For,  in  order  to  bring  the 
principles  of  this  critique  into  exercise  as  soon 
as  possible,  and  to  demonstrate  their  perfect  suf¬ 
ficiency,  even  in  the  presence  of  the  highest  de¬ 
gree  of  dialectical  illusion,  the  student  ought  to 
examine  the  assertions  made  on  both  sides  of 
speculative  questions  step  by  step,  and  to  test 
them  by  these  principles.  It  cannot  be  a  difficult 
task  for  him  to  show  the  fallacies  inherent  in 
these  propositions,  and  thus  he  begins  early  to 


feel  his  own  power  of  securing  himself  against 
the  influence  of  such  sophistical  arguments,  which 
must  finally  lose,  for  him,  all  their  illusory  pow¬ 
er.  And,  although  the  same  blows  which  over¬ 
turn  the  edifice  of  his  opponent  are  as  fatal  to 
his  own  speculative  structures,  if  such  he  has 
wished  to  rear;  he  need  not  feel  any  sorrow  in 
regard  to  this  seeming  misfortune,  as  he  has  now 
before  him  a  fair  prospect  into  the  practical  re¬ 
gion  in  which  he  may  reasonably  hope  to  find  a 
more  secure  foundation  for  a  rational  system. 

There  is,  accordingly,  no  proper  polemic  in 
the  sphere  of  pure  reason.  Both  parties  beat  the 
air  and  fight  with  their  own  shadows,  as  they 
pass  beyond  the  limits  of  nature,  and  can  find 
no  tangible  point  of  attack — no  firm  footing  for 
their  dogmatical  conflict.  Fight  as  vigorously  as 
they  may,  the  shadows  which  they  hew  down, 
immediately  start  up  again,  like  the  heroes  in 
Walhalla,  and  renew  the  bloodless  and  unceas¬ 
ing  contest. 

But  neither  can  we  admit  that  there  is  any 
proper  sceptical  employment  of  pure  reason, 
such  as  might  be  based  upon  the  principle  of 
neutrality  in  all  speculative  disputes.  To  excite 
reason  against  itself,  to  place  weapons  in  the 
hands  of  the  party  on  the  one  side  as  well  as  in 
those  of  the  other,  and  to  remain  an  undisturbed 
and  sarcastic  spectator  of  the  fierce  struggle 
that  ensues,  seems,  from  the  dogmatical  point  of 
view,  to  be  a  part  fitting  only  a  malevolent  dis¬ 
position.  But,  when  the  sophist  evidences  an  in¬ 
vincible  obstinacy  and  blindness,  and  a  pride 
which  no  criticism  can  moderate,  there  is  no 
other  practicable  course  than  to  oppose  to  this 
pride  and  obstinacy  similar  feelings  and  preten¬ 
sions  on  the  other  side,  equally  well  or  ill  found¬ 
ed,  so  that  reason,  staggered  by  the  reflections 
thus  forced  upon  it,  finds  it  necessary  to  mod¬ 
erate  its  confidence  in  such  pretensions  and  to 
listen  to  the  advice  of  criticism.  But  we  cannot 
stop  at  these  doubts,  much  less  regard  the  con¬ 
viction  of  our  ignorance,  not  only  as  a  cure  for 
the  conceit  natural  to  dogmatism,  but  as  the 
settlement  of  the  disputes  in  which  reason  is  in¬ 
volved  with  itself.  On  the  contrary,  scepticism 
is  merely  a  means  of  awakening  reason  from  its 
dogmatic  dreams  and  exciting  it  to  a  more  care¬ 
ful  investigation  into  its  own  powers  and  preten¬ 
sions.  But,  as  scepticism  appears  to  be  the  short¬ 
est  road  to  a  permanent  peace  in  the  domain  of 
philosophy,  and  as  it  is  the  track  pursued  by  the 
many  who  aim  at  giving  a  philosophical  colour¬ 
ing  to  their  contemptuous  dislike  of  all  inquiries 
of  this  kind,  I  think  it  necessary  to  present  to 
my  readers  this  mode  of  thought  in  its  true  light. 


224 


THE  CRITIQUE 


Scepticism  not  a  Permanent  State  for  Human 
Reason 

The  consciousness  of  ignorance — unless  this 
ignorance  is  recognized  to  be  absolutely  neces¬ 
sary — ought,  instead  of  forming  the  conclusion 
of  my  inquiries,  to  be  the  strongest  motive  to 
the  pursuit  of  them.  All  ignorance  is  either  ig¬ 
norance  of  things  or  of  the  limits  of  knowledge. 
If  my  ignorance  is  accidental  and  not  necessary, 
it  must  incite  me,  in  the  first  case,  to  a  dogmat¬ 
ical  inquiry  regarding  the  objects  of  which  I  am 
ignorant;  in  the  second,  to  a  critical  investiga¬ 
tion  into  the  bounds  of  all  possible  knowledge. 
But  that  my  ignorance  is  absolutely  necessary 
and  unavoidable,  and  that  it  consequently  ab¬ 
solves  from  the  duty  of  all  further  investigation, 
is  a  fact  which  cannot  be  made  out  upon  empir¬ 
ical  grounds — from  observation — but  upon  crit¬ 
ical  grounds  alone,  that  is,  by  a  thoroughgoing 
investigation  into  the  primary  sources  of  cogni¬ 
tion.  It  follows  that  the  determination  of  the 
bounds  of  reason  can  be  made  only  on  a  priori 
grounds;  while  the  empirical  limitation  of  rea¬ 
son,  which  is  merely  an  indeterminate  cognition 
of  an  ignorance  that  can  never  be  completely 
removed,  can  take  place  only  a  posteriori.  In 
other  words,  our  empirical  knowledge  is  limited 
by  that  which  yet  remains  for  us  to  know.  The 
former  cognition  of  our  ignorance,  which  is  pos¬ 
sible  only  on  a  rational  basis,  is  a  science;  the 
latter  is  merely  a  perception,  and  we  cannot  say 
how  far  the  inferences  drawn  from  it  may  ex¬ 
tend.  If  I  regard  the  earth,  as  it  really  appears 
to  my  senses,  as  a  flat  surface,  I  am  ignorant 
how  far  this  surface  extends.  But  experience 
teaches  me  that,  how  far  soever  I  go,  I  always 
see  before  me  a  space  in  which  I  can  proceed 
farther ;  and  thus  I  know  the  limits — merely  vis¬ 
ual — of  my  actual  knowledge  of  the  earth,  al¬ 
though  I  am  ignorant  of  the  limits  of  the  earth 
itself.  But  if  I  have  got  so  far  as  to  know  that 
the  earth  is  a  sphere,  and  that  its  surface  is 
spherical,  I  can  cognize  a  priori  and  determine 
upon  principles,  from  my  knowledge  of  a  small 
part  of  this  surface — say  to  the  extent  of  a  de¬ 
gree — the  diameter  and  circumference  of  the 
earth;  and  although  I  am  ignorant  of  the  ob¬ 
jects  which  this  surface  contains,  I  have  a  per¬ 
fect  knowledge  of  its  limits  and  extent. 

The  sum  of  all  the  possible  objects  of  our 
cognition  seems  to  us  to  be  a  level  surface,  with 
an  apparent  horizon — that  which  forms  the  lim¬ 
it  of  its  extent,  and  which  has  been  termed  by 
us  the  idea  of  unconditioned  totality.  To  reach 
this  limit  by  empirical  means  is  impossible,  and 


all  attempts  to  determine  it  a  priori  according 
to  a  principle,  are  alike  in  vain.  But  all  the 
questions  raised  by  pure  reason  relate  to  that 
which  lies  beyond  this  horizon,  or,  at  least,  in 
its  boundary  line. 

The  celebrated  David  Hume  was  one  of  those 
geographers  of  human  reason  who  believe  that 
they  have  given  a  sufficient  answer  to  all  such 
questions  by  declaring  them  to  lie  beyond  the 
horizon  of  our  knowledge — a  horizon  which,  how¬ 
ever,  Hume  was  unable  to  determine.  His  atten¬ 
tion  especially  was  directed  to  the  principle  of 
causality;  and  he  remarked  with  perfect  justice 
that  the  truth  of  this  principle,  and  even  the  ob¬ 
jective  validity  of  the  conception  of  a  cause,  was 
not  commonly  based  upon  clear  insight,  that  is, 
upon  a  priori  cognition.  Hence  he  concluded  that 
this  law  does  not  derive  its  authority  from  its 
universality  and  necessity,  but  merely  from  its 
general  applicability  in  the  course  of  experience, 
and  a  kind  of  subjective  necessity  thence  aris¬ 
ing,  which  he  termed  habit.  From  the  inability 
of  reason  to  establish  this  principle  as  a  neces¬ 
sary  law  for  the  acquisition  of  all  experience,  he 
inferred  the  nullity  of  all  the  attempts  of  reason 
to  pass  the  region  of  the  empirical. 

This  procedure  of  subjecting  the  facta  of  rea¬ 
son  to  examination,  and,  if  necessary,  to  disap¬ 
proval,  may  be  termed  the  censura  of  reason. 
This  censura  must  inevitably  lead  us  to  doubts 
regarding  all  transcendent  employment  of  prin¬ 
ciples.  But  this  is  only  the  second  step  in  our  in¬ 
quiry.  The  first  step  in  regard  to  the  subjects 
of  pure  reason,  and  which  marks  the  infancy  of 
that  faculty,  is  that  of  dogmatism.  The  second, 
which  we  have  just  mentioned,  is  that  of  scep¬ 
ticism,  and  it  gives  evidence  that  our  judgement 
has  been  improved  by  experience.  But  a  third 
step  is  necessary — indicative  of  the  maturity 
and  manhood  of  the  judgement,  which  now  lays 
a  firm  foundation  upon  universal  and  necessary 
principles.  This  is  the  period  of  criticism,  in 
which  we  do  not  examine  the  facta  of  reason, 
but  reason  itself,  in  the  whole  extent  of  its  pow¬ 
ers,  and  in  regard  to  its  capability  of  a  priori 
cognition;  and  thus  we  determine  not  merely 
the  empirical  and  ever-shifting  bounds  of  our 
knowledge,  but  its  necessary  and  eternal  limits. 
We  demonstrate  from  indubitable  principles,  not 
merely  our  ignorance  in  respect  to  this  or  that 
subject,  but  in  regard  to  all  possible  questions 
of  a  certain  class.  Thus  scepticism  is  a  resting- 
place  for  reason,  in  which  it  may  reflect  on  its 
dogmatical  wanderings  and  gain  some  knowl¬ 
edge  of  the  region  in  which  it  happens  to  be,  that 
it  may  pursue  its  way  with  greater  certainty; 


OF  PURE  REASON 


but  it  cannot  be  its  permanent  dwelling-place. 
It  must  take  up  its  abode  only  in  the  region  of 
complete  certitude,  whether  this  relates  to  the 
cognition  of  objects  themselves,  or  to  the  limits 
which  bound  all  our  cognition. 

Reason  is  not  to  be  considered  as  an  indefi¬ 
nitely  extended  plane,  of  the  bounds  of  which  we 
have  only  a  general  knowledge ;  it  ought  rather 
to  be  compared  to  a  sphere,  the  radius  of  which 
may  be  found  from  the  curvature  of  its  surface 
— that  is,  the  nature  of  a  priori  synthetical  prop¬ 
ositions — and,  consequently,  its  circumference 
and  extent.  Beyond  the  sphere  of  experience 
there  are  no  objects  which  it  can  cognize;  nay, 
even  questions  regarding  such  supposititious  ob¬ 
jects  relate  only  to  the  subjective  principles  of 
a  complete  determination  of  the  relations  which 
exist  between  the  understanding-conceptions 
which  lie  within  this  sphere. 

We  are  actually  in  possession  of  a  priori  syn¬ 
thetical  cognitions,  as  is  proved  by  the  existence 
of  the  principles  of  the  understanding,  which 
anticipate  experience.  If  any  one  cannot  com¬ 
prehend  the  possibility  of  these  principles,  he 
may  have  some  reason  to  doubt  whether  they 
are  really  a  priori;  but  he  cannot  on  this  account 
declare  them  to  be  impossible,  and  affirm  the 
nullity  of  the  steps  which  reason  may  have  tak¬ 
en  under  their  guidance.  He  can  only  say:  If  we 
perceived  their  origin  and  their  authenticity,  we 
should  be  able  to  determine  the  extent  and  lim¬ 
its  of  reason;  but,  till  we  can  do  this,  all  propo¬ 
sitions  regarding  the  latter  are  mere  random 
assertions.  In  this  view,  the  doubt  respecting  all 
dogmatical  philosophy,  which  proceeds  without 
the  guidance  of  criticism,  is  well  grounded;  but 
we  cannot  therefore  deny  to  reason  the  ability 
to  construct  a  sound  philosophy,  when  the  way 
has  been  prepared  by  a  thorough  critical  inves¬ 
tigation.  All  the  conceptions  produced,  and  all 
the  questions  raised,  by  pure  reason,  do  not  lie 
in  the  sphere  of  experience,  but  in  that  of  reason 
itself,  and  hence  they  must  be  solved,  and  shown 
to  be  either  valid  or  inadmissible,  by  that  facul¬ 
ty.  We  have  no  right  to  decline  the  solution  of 
such  problems,  on  the  ground  that  the  solution 
can  be  discovered  only  from  the  nature  of  things, 
and  under  pretence  of  the  limitation  of  human 
faculties,  for  reason  is  the  sole  creator  of  all 
these  ideas,  and  is  therefore  bound  either  to  es¬ 
tablish  their  validity  or  to  expose  their  illusory 
nature. 

The  polemic  of  scepticism  is  properly  directed 
against  the  dogmatist,  who  erects  a  system  of 
philosophy  without  having  examined  the  funda¬ 
mental  objective  principles  on  which  it  is  based, 


225 

for  the  purpose  of  evidencing  the  futility  of  his 
designs,  and  thus  bringing  him  to  a  knowledge  of 
his  own  powers.  But,  in  itself,  scepticism  does 
not  give  us  any  certain  information  in  regard 
to  the  bounds  of  our  knowledge.  All  unsuccess¬ 
ful  dogmatical  attempts  of  reason  are  facta,  which 
it  is  always  useful  to  submit  to  the  censure  of 
the  sceptic.  But  this  cannot  help  us  to  any  deci¬ 
sion  regarding  the  expectations  which  reason 
cherishes  of  better  success  in  future  endeavours; 
the  investigations  of  scepticism  cannot,  there¬ 
fore,  settle  the  dispute  regarding  the  rights  and 
powers  of  human  reason. 

Hume  is  perhaps  the  ablest  and  most  ingen¬ 
ious  of  all  sceptical  philosophers,  and  his  writ¬ 
ings  have,  undoubtedly,  exerted  the  most  pow¬ 
erful  influence  in  awakening  reason  to  a  thorough 
investigation  into  its  own  powers.  It  will,  there¬ 
fore,  well  repay  our  labours  to  consider  for  a 
little  the  course  of  reasoning  which  he  followed 
and  the  errors  into  which  he  strayed,  although 
setting  out  on  the  path  of  truth  and  certitude. 

Hume  was  probably  aware,  although  he  never 
clearly  developed  the  notion,  that  we  proceed  in 
judgements  of  a  certain  class  beyond  our  con¬ 
ception  of  the  object.  I  have  termed  this  kind 
of  judgement  synthetical.  As  regard  the  manner 
in  which  I  pass  beyond  my  conception  by  the 
aid  of  experience,  no  doubts  can  be  entertained. 
Experience  is  itself  a  synthesis  of  perceptions; 
and  it  employs  perceptions  to  increment  the  con¬ 
ception,  which  I  obtain  by  means  of  another 
perception.  But  we  feel  persuaded  that  we  are 
able  to  proceed  beyond  a  conception,  and  to  ex¬ 
tend  our  cognition  a  priori.  We  attempt  this  in 
two  ways — either,  through  the  pure  understand¬ 
ing,  in  relation  to  that  which  may  become  an 
object  of  experience,  or,  through  pure  reason,  in 
relation  to  such  properties  of  things,  or  of  the 
existence  of  things,  as  can  never  be  presented  in 
any  experience.  This  sceptical  philosopher  did 
not  distinguish  these  two  kinds  of  judgements, 
as  he  ought  to  have  done,  but  regarded  this  aug¬ 
mentation  of  conceptions,  and,  if  we  may  so  ex¬ 
press  ourselves,  the  spontaneous  generation  of 
understanding  and  reason,  independently  of  the 
impregnation  of  experience,  as  altogether  im¬ 
possible.  The  so-called  a  priori  principles  of  these 
faculties  he  consequently  held  to  be  invalid  and 
imaginary,  and  regarded  them  as  nothing  but 
subjective  habits  of  thought  originating  in  ex¬ 
perience,  and  therefore  purely  empirical  and 
contingent  rules,  to  which  we  attribute  a  spuri¬ 
ous  necessity  and  universality.  In  support  of 
this  strange  assertion,  he  referred  us  to  the  gen¬ 
erally  acknowledged  principle  of  the  relation  be- 


226 


THE  CRITIQUE 


tween  cause  and  effect.  No  faculty  of  the  mind 
can  conduct  us  from  the  conception  of  a  thing 
to  the  existence  of  something  else;  and  hence  he 
believed  he  could  infer  that,  without  experience, 
we  possess  no  source  from  which  we  can  aug¬ 
ment  a  conception,  and  no  ground  sufficient  to 
justify  us  in  framing  a  judgement  that  is  to  ex¬ 
tend  our  cognition  a  priori.  That  the  light  of  the 
sun,  which  shines  upon  a  piece  of  wax,  at  the 
same  time  melts  it,  while  it  hardens  clay,  no 
power  of  the  understanding  could  infer  from  the 
conceptions  which  we  previously  possessed  of 
these  substances;  much  less  is  there  any  a  priori 
law  that  could  conduct  us  to  such  a  conclusion, 
which  experience  alone  can  certify.  On  the  oth¬ 
er  hand,  we  have  seen  in  our  discussion  of  tran¬ 
scendental  logic,  that,  although  we  can  never 
proceed  immediately  beyond  the  content  of  the 
conception  which  is  given  us,  we  can  always  cog¬ 
nize  completely  a  priori — in  relation,  however, 
to  a  third  term,  namely,  possible  experience — 
the  law  of  its  connection  with  other  things.  For 
example,  if  I  observe  that  a  piece  of  wax  melts, 
I  can  cognize  a  priori  that  there  must  have  been 
something  (the  sun’s  heat)  preceding,  which 
this  effect  follows  according  to  a  fixed  law;  al¬ 
though,  without  the  aid  of  experience,  I  could 
not  cognize  a  priori  and  in  a  determinate  man¬ 
ner  either  the  cause  from  the  effect,  or  the  ef¬ 
fect  from  the  cause.  Hume  was,  therefore,  wrong 
in  inferring,  from  the  contingency  of  the  deter¬ 
mination  according  to  law ,  the  contingency  of 
the  law  itself ;  and  the  passing  beyond  the  con¬ 
ception  of  a  thing  to  possible  experience  (which 
is  an  a  priori  proceeding,  constituting  the  objec¬ 
tive  reality  of  the  conception),  he  confounded 
with  our  synthesis  of  objects  in  actual  experi¬ 
ence,  which  is  always,  of  course,  empirical.  Thus, 
too,  he  regarded  the  principle  of  affinity,  which 
has  its  seat  in  the  understanding  and  indicates 
a  necessary  connection,  as  a  mere  rule  of  as¬ 
sociation,  lying  in  the  imitative  faculty  of  imag¬ 
ination,  which  can  present  only  contingent,  and 
not  objective  connections. 

The  sceptical  errors  of  this  remarkably  acute 
thinker  arose  principally  from  a  defect,  which 
was  common  to  him  with  the  dogmatists,  name¬ 
ly,  that  he  had  never  made  a  systematic  review 
of  all  the  different  kinds  of  a  priori  synthesis 
performed  by  the  understanding.  Had  he  done 
so,  he  would  have  found,  to  take  one  example 
among  many,  that  the  principle  of  permanence 
was  of  this  character,  and  that  it,  as  well  as  the 
principle  of  causality,  anticipates  experience.  In 
this  way  he  might  have  been  able  to  describe 
the  determinate  limits  of  the  a  priori  operations 


of  understanding  and  reason.  But  he  merely  de¬ 
clared  the  understanding  to  be  limited,  instead 
of  showing  what  its  limits  were;  he  created  a 
general  mistrust  in  the  power  of  our  faculties, 
without  giving  us  any  determinate  knowledge 
of  the  bounds  of  our  necessary  and  unavoidable 
ignorance;  he  examined  and  condemned  some 
of  the  principles  of  the  understanding,  without 
investigating  all  its  powers  with  the  complete¬ 
ness  necessary  to  criticism.  He  denies,  with 
truth,  certain  powers  to  the  understanding,  but 
he  goes  further,  and  declares  it  to  be  utterly  in¬ 
adequate  to  the  a  priori  extension  of  knowledge, 
although  he  has  not  fully  examined  all  the  pow 
ers  which  reside  in  the  faculty;  and  thus  the 
fate  which  always  overtakes  scepticism  meets 
him  too.  That  is  to  say,  his  own  declarations  are 
doubted,  for  his  objections  were  based  upon 
facta,  which  are  contingent,  and  not  upon  prin¬ 
ciples,  which  can  alone  demonstrate  the  neces¬ 
sary  invalidity  of  all  dogmatical  assertions. 

As  Hume  makes  no  distinction  between  the 
well-grounded  claims  of  the  understanding  and 
the  dialectical  pretensions  of  reason,  against 
which,  however,  his  attacks  are  mainly  directed, 
reason  does  not  feel  itself  shut  out  from  all  at¬ 
tempts  at  the  extension  of  a  priori  cognition,  and 
hence  it  refuses,  in  spite  of  a  few  checks  in  this 
or  that  quarter,  to  relinquish  such  efforts.  For 
one  naturally  arms  oneself  to  resist  an  attack, 
and  becomes  more  obstinate  in  the  resolve  to 
establish  the  claims  he  has  advanced.  But  a  com¬ 
plete  review  of  the  powers  of  reason,  and  the 
conviction  thence  arising  that  we  are  in  posses¬ 
sion  of  a  limited  field  of  action,  while  we  must 
admit  the  vanity  of  higher  claims,  puts  an  end 
to  all  doubt  and  dispute,  and  induces  reason  to 
rest  satisfied  with  the  undisturbed  possession  of 
its  limited  domain. 

To  the  uncritical  dogmatist,  who  has  not  sur¬ 
veyed  the  sphere  of  his  understanding,  nor  de¬ 
termined,  in  accordance  with  principles,  the  lim¬ 
its  of  possible  cognition,  who,  consequently,  is 
ignorant  of  his  own  powers,  and  believes  he  will 
discover  them  by  the  attempts  he  makes  in  the 
field  of  cognition,  these  attacks  of  scepticism 
are  not  only  dangerous,  but  destructive.  For  if 
there  is  one  proposition  in  his  chain  of  reason¬ 
ing  which  he  cannot  prove,  or  the  fallacy  in  which 
he  cannot  evolve  in  accordance  with  a  principle, 
suspicion  falls  on  all  his  statements,  however 
plausible  they  may  appear. 

And  thus  scepticism,  the  bane  of  dogmatical 
philosophy,  conducts  us  to  a  sound  investigation 
into  the  understanding  and  the  reason.  When  we 
are  thus  far  advanced,  we  need  fear  no  further 


OF  PURE 

attacks;  for  the  limits  of  our  domain  are  clear¬ 
ly  marked  out,  and  we  can  make  no  claims  nor 
become  involved  in  any  disputes  regarding  the 
region  that  lies  beyond  these  limits.  Thus  the 
sceptical  procedure  in  philosophy  does  not  pre¬ 
sent  any  solution  of  the  problems  of  reason,  but 
it  forms  an  excellent  exercise  for  its  powers, 
awakening  its  circumspection,  and  indicating  the 
means  whereby  it  may  most  fully  establish  its 
claims  to  its  legitimate  possessions. 

Section  III.  The  Discipline  of  Pure  Reason  in 
Hypothesis 

This  critique  of  reason  has  now  taught  us  that 
all  its  efforts  to  extend  the  bounds  of  knowledge, 
by  means  of  pure  speculation,  are  utterly  fruit¬ 
less.  So  much  the  wider  field,  it  may  appear,  lies 
open  to  hypothesis;  as,  where  we  cannot  know 
with  certainty,  we  are  at  liberty  to  make  guesses 
and  to  form  suppositions. 

Imagination  may  be  allowed,  under  the  strict 
surveillance  of  reason,  to  invent  suppositions; 
but,  these  must  be  based  on  something  that  is 
perfectly  certain — and  that  is  the  possibility  of 
the  object.  If  we  are  well  assured  upon  this 
point,  it  is  allowable  to  have  recourse  to  sup¬ 
position  in  regard  to  the  reality  of  the  object; 
but  this  supposition  must,  unless  it  is  utterly 
groundless,  be  connected,  as  its  ground  of  ex¬ 
planation,  with  that  which  is  really  given  and 
absolutely  certain.  Such  a  supposition  is  termed 
a  hypothesis. 

It  is  beyond  our  power  to  form  the  least  con¬ 
ception  a  priori  of  the  possibility  of  dynamical 
connection  in  phenomena;  and  the  category  of 
the  pure  understanding  will  not  enable  us  to  ex¬ 
cogitate  any  such  connection,  but  merely  helps 
us  to  understand  it,  when  we  meet  with  it  in  ex¬ 
perience.  For  this  reason  we  cannot,  in  accord¬ 
ance  with  the  categories,  imagine  or  invent  any 
object  or  any  property  of  an  object  not  given, 
or  that  may  not  be  given  in  experience,  and  em¬ 
ploy  it  in  a  hypothesis;  otherwise,  we  should  be 
basing  our  chain  of  reasoning  upon  mere  chi¬ 
merical  fancies,  and  not  upon  conceptions  of 
things.  Thus,  we  have  no  right  to  assume  the 
existence  of  new  powers,  not  existing  in  nature 
— for  example,  an  understanding  with  a  non- 
sensuous  intuition,  a  force  of  attraction  without 
contact,  or  some  new  kind  of  substances  occu¬ 
pying  space,  and  yet  without  the  property  of 
impenetrability — and,  consequently,  we  cannot 
assume  that  there  is  any  other  kind  of  commu¬ 
nity  among  substances  than  that  observable  in 
experience,  any  kind  of  presence  than  that  in 
space,  or  any  kind  of  duration  than  that  in  time. 


REASON  227 

In  one  word,  the  conditions  of  possible  experi¬ 
ence  are  for  reason  the  only  conditions  of  the 
possibility  of  things;  reason  cannot  venture  to 
form,  independently  of  these  conditions,  any 
conceptions  of  things,  because  such  conceptions, 
although  not  self-contradictory,  are  without  ob¬ 
ject  and  without  application. 

The  conceptions  of  reason  are,  as  we  have  al¬ 
ready  shown,  mere  ideas,  and  do  not  relate  to 
any  object  in  any  kind  of  experience.  At  the 
same  time,  they  do  not  indicate  imaginary  or 
possible  objects.  They  are  purely  problemati¬ 
cal  in  their  nature  and,  as  aids  to  the  heuristic 
exercise  of  the  faculties,  form  the  basis  of  the 
regulative  principles  for  the  systematic  employ¬ 
ment  of  the  understanding  in  the  field  of  experi¬ 
ence.  If  we  leave  this  ground  of  experience,  they 
become  mere  fictions  of  thought,  the  possibility 
of  which  is  quite  indemonstrable ;  and  they  can¬ 
not,  consequently,  be  employed  as  hypotheses 
in  the  explanation  of  real  phenomena.  It  is  quite 
admissible  to  cogitate  the  soul  as  simple,  for  the 
purpose  of  enabling  ourselves  to  employ  the 
idea  of  a  perfect  and  necessary  unity  of  all  the 
faculties  of  the  mind  as  the  principle  of  all  our 
inquiries  into  its  internal  phenomena,  although 
we  cannot  cognize  this  unity  in  concreto.  But  to 
assume  that  the  soul  is  a  simple  substance  (a 
transcendental  conception)  would  be  enouncing 
a  proposition  which  is  not  only  indemonstrable 
— as  many  physical  hypotheses  are — but  a  prop¬ 
osition  which  is  purely  arbitrary,  and  in  the 
highest  degree  rash.  The  simple  is  never  present¬ 
ed  in  experience;  and,  if  by  substance  is  here 
meant  the  permanent  object  of  sensuous  intu¬ 
ition,  the  possibility  of  a  simple  phenomenon 
is  perfectly  inconceivable.  Reason  affords  no 
good  grounds  for  admitting  the  existence  of  in¬ 
telligible  beings,  or  of  intelligible  properties  of 
sensuous  things,  although — as  we  have  no  con¬ 
ception  either  of  their  possibility  or  of  their  im¬ 
possibility — it  will  always  be  out  of  our  power 
to  affirm  dogmatically  that  they  do  not  exist.  In 
the  explanation  of  given  phenomena,  no  other 
things  and  no  other  grounds  of  explanation  can 
be  employed  than  those  which  stand  in  connec¬ 
tion  with  the  given  phenomena  according  to  the 
known  laws  of  experience.  A  transcendental  hy¬ 
pothesis,  in  which  a  mere  idea  of  reason  is  em¬ 
ployed  to  explain  the  phenomena  of  nature, 
would  not  give  us  any  better  insight  into  a  phe¬ 
nomenon,  as  we  should  be  trying  to  explain  what 
we  do  not  sufficiently  understand  from  known 
empirical  principles,  by  what  we  do  not  under¬ 
stand  at  all.  The  principles  of  such  a  hypothesis 
might  conduce  to  the  satisfaction  of  reason,  but 


228 


THE  CRITIQUE 


it  would  not  assist  the  understanding  in  its  ap¬ 
plication  to  objects.  Order  and  conformity  to 
aims  in  the  sphere  of  nature  must  be  themselves 
explained  upon  natural  grounds  and  according 
to  natural  laws;  and  the  wildest  hypotheses,  if 
they  are  only  physical,  are  here  more  admissible 
than  a  hyperphysical  hypothesis,  such  as  that  of 
a  divine  author.  For  such  a  hypothesis  would  in¬ 
troduce  the  principle  of  ignava  ratio,  which  re¬ 
quires  us  to  give  up  the  search  for  causes  that 
might  be  discovered  in  the  course  of  experience 
and  to  rest  satisfied  with  a  mere  idea.  As  regards 
the  absolute  totality  of  the  grounds  of  explana¬ 
tion  in  the  series  of  these  causes,  this  can  be  no 
hindrance  to  the  understanding  in  the  case  of 
phenomena;  because,  as  they  are  to  us  nothing 
more  than  phenomena,  we  have  no  right  to  look 
for  anything  like  completeness  in  the  synthesis 
of  the  series  of  their  conditions. 

Transcendental  hypotheses  are  therefore  in¬ 
admissible;  and  we  cannot  use  the  liberty  of 
employing,  in  the  absence  of  physical,  hyper¬ 
physical  grounds  of  explanation.  And  this  for 
two  reasons;  first,  because  such  hypotheses  do 
not  advance  reason,  but  rather  stop  it  in  its 
progress;  secondly,  because  this  licence  would 
render  fruitless  all  its  exertions  in  its  own  prop¬ 
er  sphere,  which  is  that  of  experience.  For,  when 
the  explanation  of  natural  phenomena  happens 
to  be  difficult,  we  have  constantly  at  hand  a 
transcendental  ground  of  explanation,  which 
lifts  us  above  the  necessity  of  investigating  na¬ 
ture;  and  our  inquiries  are  brought  to  a  close, 
not  because  we  have  obtained  all  the  requisite 
knowledge,  but  because  we  abut  upon  a  princi¬ 
ple  which  is  incomprehensible  and  which,  in¬ 
deed,  is  so  far  back  in  the  track  of  thought  as 
to  contain  the  conception  of  the  absolutely  pri¬ 
mal  being. 

The  next  requisite  for  the  admissibility  of  a 
hypothesis  is  its  sufficiency.  That  is,  it  must  de¬ 
termine  a  priori  the  consequences  which  are  giv¬ 
en  in  experience  and  which  are  supposed  to  fol¬ 
low  from  the  hypothesis  itself.  If  we  require  to 
employ  auxiliary  hypotheses,  the  suspicion  nat¬ 
urally  arises  that  they  are  mere  fictions;  be¬ 
cause  the  necessity  for  each  of  them  requires 
the  same  justification  as  in  the  case  of  the  orig¬ 
inal  hypothesis,  and  thus  their  testimony  is  in¬ 
valid.  If  we  suppose  the  existence  of  an  infinite¬ 
ly  perfect  cause,  we  possess  sufficient  grounds 
for  the  explanation  of  the  conformity  to  aims, 
the  order  and  the  greatness  which  we  observe  in 
the  universe;  but  we  find  ourselves  obliged, 
when  we  observe  the  evil  in  the  world  and  the 
exceptions  to  these  laws,  to  employ  new  hypoth¬ 


eses  in  support  of  the  original  one.  We  employ 
the  idea  of  the  simple  nature  of  the  human  soul 
as  the  foundation  of  all  the  theories  we  may 
form  of  its  phenomena;  but  when  we  meet  with 
difficulties  in  our  way,  when  we  observe  in  the 
soul  phenomena  similar  to  the  changes  which 
take  place  in  matter,  we  require  to  call  in  new 
auxiliary  hypotheses.  These  may,  indeed,  not 
be  false,  but  we  do  not  know  them  to  be  true, 
because  the  only  witness  to  their  certitude  is  the 
hypothesis  which  they  themselves  have  been 
called  in  to  explain. 

We  are  not  discussing  the  above-mentioned 
assertions  regarding  the  immaterial  unity  of  the 
soul  and  the  existence  of  a  Supreme  Being  as 
dogmata,  which  certain  philosophers  profess  to 
demonstrate  a  priori,  but  purely  as  hypotheses. 
In  the  former  case,  the  dogmatist  must  take  care 
that  his  arguments  possess  the  apodeictic  cer¬ 
tainty  of  a  demonstration.  For  the  assertion 
that  the  reality  of  such  ideas  is  probable  is  as 
absurd  as  a  proof  of  the  probability  of  a  propo¬ 
sition  in  geometry.  Pure  abstract  reason,  apart 
from  all  experience,  can  either  cognize  nothing 
at  all;  and  hence  the  judgements  it  enounces  are 
never  mere  opinions,  they  are  either  apodeictic 
certainties,  or  declarations  that  nothing  can  be 
known  on  the  subject.  Opinions  and  probable 
judgements  on  the  nature  of  things  can  only  be 
employed  to  explain  given  phenomena,  or  they 
may  relate  to  the  effect,  in  accordance  with  em¬ 
pirical  laws,  of  an  actually  existing  cause.  In 
other  words,  we  must  restrict  the  sphere  of 
opinion  to  the  world  of  experience  and  nature. 
Beyond  this  region  opinion  is  mere  invention; 
unless  we  are  groping  about  for  the  truth  on  a 
path  not  yet  fully  known,  and  have  some  hopes 
of  stumbling  upon  it  by  chance. 

But,  although  hypotheses  are  inadmissible  in 
answers  to  the  questions  of  pure  speculative  rea¬ 
son,  they  may  be  employed  in  the  defence  of 
these  answers.  That  is  to  say,  hypotheses  are 
admissible  in  polemic,  but  not  in  the  sphere  of 
dogmatism.  By  the  defence  of  statements  of 
this  character,  I  do  not  mean  an  attempt  at  dis¬ 
covering  new  grounds  for  their  support,  but 
merely  the  refutation  of  the  arguments  of  op¬ 
ponents.  All  a  priori  synthetical  propositions 
possess  the  peculiarity  that,  although  the  phi¬ 
losopher  who  maintains  the  reality  of  the  ideas 
contained  in  the  proposition  is  not  in  possession 
of  sufficient  knowledge  to  establish  the  certainty 
of  his  statements,  his  opponent  is  as  little  able 
to  prove  the  truth  of  the  opposite.  This  equality 
of  fortune  does  not  allow  the  one  party  to  be 
superior  to  the  other  in  the  sphere  of  specula- 


OF  PURE  REASON 


tive  cognition;  and  it  is  this  sphere,  according¬ 
ly,  that  is  the  proper  arena  of  these  endless  spec¬ 
ulative  conflicts.  But  we  shall  afterwards  show 
that,  in  relation  to  its  practical  exercise ,  Reason 
has  the  right  of  admitting  what,  in  the  field  of 
pure  speculation,  she  would  not  be  justified 
in  supposing,  except  upon  perfectly  sufficient 
grounds;  because  all  such  suppositions  destroy 
the  necessary  completeness  of  speculation — a 
condition  which  the  practical  reason,  however, 
does  not  consider  to  be  requisite.  In  this  sphere, 
therefore,  Reason  is  mistress  of  a  possession, 
her  title  to  which  she  does  not  require  to  prove 
— which,  in  fact,  she  could  not  do.  The  burden 
of  proof  accordingly  rests  upon  the  opponent. 
But  as  he  has  just  as  little  knowledge  regarding 
the  subject  discussed,  and  is  as  little  able  to 
prove  the  non-existence  of  the  object  of  an  idea, 
as  the  philosopher  on  the  other  side  is  to  dem¬ 
onstrate  its  reality,  it  is  evident  that  there  is  an 
advantage  on  the  side  of  the  philosopher  who 
maintains  his  proposition  as  a  practically  neces¬ 
sary  supposition  ( melior  est  conditio  possident¬ 
is ).1  For  he  is  at  liberty  to  employ,  in  self-de¬ 
fence,  the  same  weapons  as  his  opponent  makes 
use  of  in  attacking  him;  that  is,  he  has  a  right  to 
use  hypotheses  not  for  the  purpose  of  support¬ 
ing  the  arguments  in  favour  of  his  own  proposi¬ 
tions,  but  to  show  that  his  opponent  knows  no 
more  than  himself  regarding  the  subject  under 
discussion  and  cannot  boast  of  any  speculative 
advantage. 

Hypotheses  are,  therefore,  admissible  in  the 
sphere  of  pure  reason  only  as  weapons  for  self- 
defence,  and  not  as  supports  to  dogmatical  as¬ 
sertions.  But  the  opposing  party  we  must  al¬ 
ways  seek  for  in  ourselves.  For  speculative  rea¬ 
son  is,  in  the  sphere  of  transcendentalism,  dia¬ 
lectical  in  its  own  nature.  The  difficulties  and 
objections  we  have  to  fear  lie  in  ourselves.  They 
aie  like  old  but  never  superannuated  claims; 
and  we  must  seek  them  out,  and  settle  them  once 
and  for  ever,  if  we  are  to  expect  a  permanent 
peace.  External  tranquillity  is  hollow  and  unreal. 
The  root  of  these  contradictions,  which  lies  in 
the  nature  of  human  reason,  must  be  destroyed; 
and  this  can  only  be  done  by  giving  it,  in  the 
first  instance,  freedom  to  grow,  nay,  by  nourish¬ 
ing  it,  that  it  may  send  out  shoots,  and  thus  be¬ 
tray  its  own  existence.  It  is  our  duty,  therefore, 
to  try  to  discover  new  objections,  to  put  wea¬ 
pons  in  the  hands  of  our  opponent,  and  to  grant 
him  the  most  favourable  position  in  the  arena 
that  he  can  wish.  We  have  nothing  to  fear  from 

1  [“The  condition  of  the  party  in  possession,  or  the 
defendant,  is  the  better  of  the  two.”] 


22  9 

these  concessions;  on  the  contrary,  we  may 
rather  hope  that  we  shall  thus  make  ourselves 
master  of  a  possession  which  no  one  will  ever 
venture  to  dispute. 

The  thinker  requires,  to  be  fully  equipped, 
the  hypotheses  of  pure  reason,  which,  although 
but  leaden  weapons  (for  they  have  not  been 
steeled  in  the  armoury  of  experience),  are  as 
useful  as  any  that  can  be  employed  by  his  op¬ 
ponents.  If,  accordingly,  we  have  assumed,  from 
a  non-speculative  point  of  view,  the  immaterial 
nature  of  the  soul,  and  are  met  by  the  objection 
that  experience  seems  to  prove  that  the  growth 
and  decay  of  our  mental  faculties  are  mere 
modifications  of  the  sensuous  organism — we  can 
weaken  the  force  of  this  objection  by  the  as¬ 
sumption  that  the  body  is  nothing  but  the  fun¬ 
damental  phenomenon,  to  which,  as  a  necessary 
condition,  all  sensibility,  and  consequently  all 
thought,  relates  in  the  present  state  of  our  exist¬ 
ence;  and  that  the  separation  of  soul  and  body 
forms  the  conclusion  of  the  sensuous  exercise 
of  our  power  of  cognition  and  the  beginning  of 
the  intellectual.  The  body  would,  in  this  view 
of  the  question,  be  regarded,  not  as  the  cause 
of  thought,  but  merely  as  its  restrictive  condi¬ 
tion,  as  promotive  of  the  sensuous  and  animal, 
but  as  a  hindrance  to  the  pure  and  spiritual 
life;  and  the  dependence  of  the  animal  life  on 
the  constitution  of  the  body,  would  not  prove 
that  the  whole  life  of  man  was  also  dependent 
on  the  state  of  the  organism.  We  might  go  still 
farther,  and  discover  new  objections,  or  carry 
out  to  their  extreme  consequences  those  which 
have  already  been  adduced. 

Generation,  in  the  human  race  as  well  as 
among  the  irrational  animals,  depends  on  so 
many  accidents — of  occasion,  of  proper  suste¬ 
nance,  of  the  laws  enacted  by  the  government 
of  a  country,  of  vice  even,  that  it  is  difficult  to 
believe  in  the  eternal  existence  of  a  being  whose 
life  has  begun  under  circumstances  so  mean  and 
trivial,  and  so  entirely  dependent  upon  our  own 
control.  As  regards  the  continuance  of  the  ex¬ 
istence  of  the  whole  race,  we  need  have  no  dif¬ 
ficulties,  for  accident  in  single  cases  is  subject 
to  general  laws;  but,  in  the  case  of  each  individ¬ 
ual,  it  would  seem  as  if  we  could  hardly  expect 
so  wonderful  an  effect  from  causes  so  insignifi¬ 
cant.  But,  in  answer  to  these  objections,  we  may 
adduce  the  transcendental  hypothesis  that  all 
life  is  properly  intelligible,  and  not  subject  to 
changes  of  time,  and  that  it  neither  began  in 
birth,  nor  will  end  in  death.  We  may  assume 
that  this  life  is  nothing  more  than  a  sensuous 
representation  of  pure  spiritual  life;  that  the 


THE  CRITIQUE 


230 

whole  world  of  sense  is  but  an  image,  hovering 
before  the  faculty  of  cognition  which  we  exer¬ 
cise  in  this  sphere,  and  with  no  more  objective 
reality  than  a  dream;  and  that  if  we  could  intu- 
ite  ourselves  and  other  things  as  they  really  are, 
we  should  see  ourselves  in  a  world  of  spiritual 
natures,  our  connection  with  which  did  not  be¬ 
gin  at  our  birth  and  will  not  cease  with  the  de¬ 
struction  of  the  body.  And  so  on. 

We  cannot  be  said  to  know  what  has  been 
above  asserted,  nor  do  we  seriously  maintain  the 
truth  of  these  assertions;  and  the  notions  there¬ 
in  indicated  are  not  even  ideas  of  reason,  they 
are  purely  fictitious  conceptions.  But  this  hy¬ 
pothetical  procedure  is  in  perfect  conformity 
with  the  laws  of  reason.  Our  opponent  mistakes 
the  absence  of  empirical  conditions  for  a  proof 
of  the  complete  impossibility  of  all  that  we  have 
asserted;  and  we  have  to  show  him  that  he  has 
not  exhausted  the  whole  sphere  of  possibility 
and  that  he  can  as  little  compass  that  sphere  by 
the  laws  of  experience  and  nature,  as  we  can  lay 
a  secure  foundation  for  the  operations  of  reason 
beyond  the  region  of  experience.  Such  hypothet¬ 
ical  defences  against  the  pretensions  of  an  op¬ 
ponent  must  not  be  regarded  as  declarations  of 
opinion.  The  philosopher  abandons  them,  so 
soon  as  the  opposite  party  renounces  its  dog¬ 
matical  conceit.  To  maintain  a  simply  negative 
position  in  relation  to  propositions  which  rest  on 
an  insecure  foundation,  well  befits  the  modera¬ 
tion  of  a  true  philosopher;  but  to  uphold  the 
objections  urged  against  an  opponent  as  proofs 
of  the  opposite  statement  is  a  proceeding  just 
as  unwarrantable  and  arrogant  as  it  is  to  attack 
the  position  of  a  philosopher  who  advances 
affirmative  propositions  regarding  such  a  sub¬ 
ject. 

It  is  evident,  therefore,  that  hypotheses,  in 
the  speculative  sphere,  are  valid,  not  as  inde¬ 
pendent  propositions,  but  only  relatively  to  op¬ 
posite  transcendent  assumptions.  For,  to  make 
the  principles  of  possible  experience  conditions 
of  the  possibility  of  things  in  general  is  just  as 
transcendent  a  procedure  as  to  maintain  the  ob¬ 
jective  reality  of  ideas  which  can  be  applied  to 
no  objects  except  such  as  lie  without  the  limits 
of  possible  experience.  The  judgements  enounced 
by  pure  reason  must  be  necessary,  or  they  must 
not  be  enounced  at  all.  Reason  cannot  trouble 
herself  with  opinions.  But  the  hypotheses  we 
have  been  discussing  are  merely  problematical 
judgements,  which  can  neither  be  confuted  nor 
proved;  while,  therefore,  they  are  not  personal 
opinions,  they  are  indispensable  as  answers  to 
objections  which  are  liable  to  be  raised.  But  we 


must  take  care  to  confine  them  to  this  function, 
and  guard  against  any  assumption  on  their  part 
of  absolute  validity,  a  proceeding  which  would 
involve  reason  in  inextricable  difficulties  and 
contradictions. 

Section  IV.  The  Discipline  oj  Pure  Reason  in 
Relation  to  Proofs 

It  is  a  peculiarity,  which  distinguishes  the  proofs 
of  transcendental  synthetical  propositions  from 
those  of  all  other  a  priori  synthetical  cognitions, 
that  reason,  in  the  case  of  the  former,  does  not 
apply  its  conceptions  directly  to  an  object,  but 
is  first  obliged  to  prove,  a  priori,  the  objective 
validity  of  these  conceptions  and  the  possibility 
of  their  syntheses.  This  is  not  merely  a  pruden¬ 
tial  rule,  it  is  essential  to  the  very  possibility  of 
the  proof  of  a  transcendental  proposition.  If  I 
am  required  to  pass,  a  priori ,  beyond  the  con¬ 
ception  of  an  object,  I  find  that  it  is  utterly 
impossible  without  the  guidance  of  something 
which  is  not  contained  in  the  conception.  In 
mathematics,  it  is  a  priori  intuition  that  guides 
my  synthesis;  and,  in  this  case,  all  our  conclu¬ 
sions  may  be  drawn  immediately  from  pure  in¬ 
tuition.  In  transcendental  cognition,  so  long  as 
we  are  dealing  only  with  conceptions  of  the  un¬ 
derstanding,  we  are  guided  by  possible  experi¬ 
ence.  That  is  to  say,  a  proof  in  the  sphere  of 
transcendental  cognition  does  not  show  that  the 
given  conception  (that  of  an  event,  for  exam¬ 
ple)  leads  directly  to  another  conception  (that 
of  a  cause) — for  this  would  be  a  saltus  which 
nothing  can  justify;  but  it  shows  that  experi¬ 
ence  itself,  and  consequently  the  object  of  ex¬ 
perience,  is  impossible  without  the  connection 
indicated  by  these  conceptions.  It  follows  that 
such  a  proof  must  demonstrate  the  possibility 
of  arriving,  synthetically  and  a  priori ,  at  a  cer¬ 
tain  knowledge  of  things,  which  was  not  con¬ 
tained  in  our  conceptions  of  these  things.  Unless 
we  pay  particular  attention  to  this  requirement, 
our  proofs,  instead  of  pursuing  the  straight  path 
indicated  by  reason,  follow  the  tortuous  road  of 
mere  subjective  association.  The  illusory  con¬ 
viction,  which  rests  upon  subjective  causes  of 
association,  and  which  is  considered  as  resulting 
from  the  perception  of  a  real  and  objective  nat¬ 
ural  affinity,  is  always  open  to  doubt  and  sus¬ 
picion.  For  this  reason,  all  the  attempts  which 
have  been  made  to  prove  the  principle  of  suf¬ 
ficient  reason,  have,  according  to  the  universal 
admission  of  philosophers,  been  quite  unsuc¬ 
cessful;  and,  before  the  appearance  of  tran¬ 
scendental  criticism,  it  was  considered  better, 
as  this  principle  could  not  be  abandoned,  to  ap- 


OF  PURE 

peal  boldly  to  the  common  sense  of  mankind 
(a  proceeding  which  always  proves  that  the 
problem,  which  reason  ought  to  solve,  is  one  in 
which  philosophers  find  great  difficulties),  rath¬ 
er  than  attempt  to  discover  new  dogmatical 
proofs. 

But,  if  the  proposition  to  be  proved  is  a  prop¬ 
osition  of  pure  reason,  and  if  I  aim  at  passing 
beyond  my  empirical  conceptions  by  the  aid  of 
mere  ideas,  it  is  necessary  that  the  proof  should 
first  show  that  such  a  step  in  synthesis  is  possi¬ 
ble  (which  it  is  not),  before  it  proceeds  to  prove 
the  truth  of  the  proposition  itself.  The  so-called 
proof  of  the  simple  nature  of  the  soul  from  the 
unity  of  apperception,  is  a  very  plausible  one. 
But  it  contains  no  answer  to  the  objection,  that, 
as  the  notion  of  absolute  simplicity  is  not  a 
conception  which  is  directly  applicable  to  a  per¬ 
ception,  but  is  an  idea  which  must  be  inferred — 
if  at  all — from  observation,  it  is  by  no  means 
evident  how  the  mere  fact  of  consciousness, 
which  is  contained  in  all  thought,  although  in  so 
far  a  simple  representation,  can  conduct  me  to 
the  consciousness  and  cognition  of  a  thing  which 
is  purely  a  thinking  substance.  When  I  repre¬ 
sent  to  my  mind  the  power  of  my  body  as  in 
motion,  my  body  in  this  thought  is  so  far  abso¬ 
lute  unity,  and  my  representation  of  it  is  a  sim¬ 
ple  one;  and  hence  I  can  indicate  this  represen¬ 
tation  by  the  motion  of  a  point,  because  I  have 
made  abstraction  of  the  size  or  volume  of  the 
body.  But  I  cannot  hence  infer  that,  given  mere¬ 
ly  the  moving  power  of  a  body,  the  body  may 
be  cogitated  as  simple  substance,  merely  be¬ 
cause  the  representation  in  my  mind  takes  no 
account  of  its  content  in  space,  and  is  conse¬ 
quently  simple.  The  simple,  in  abstraction,  is 
very  different  from  the  objectively  simple;  and 
hence  the  Ego,  which  is  simple  in  the  first  sense, 
may,  in  the  second  sense,  as  indicating  the  soul 
itself,  be  a  very  complex  conception,  with  a  very 
various  content.  Thus  it  is  evident  that  in  all 
such  arguments  there  lurks  a  paralogism.  We 
guess  (for  without  some  such  surmise  our  sus¬ 
picion  would  not  be  excited  in  reference  to  a 
proof  of  this  character)  at  the  presence  of  the 
paralogism,  by  keeping  ever  before  us  a  criteri¬ 
on  of  the  possibility  of  those  synthetical  propo¬ 
sitions  which  aim  at  proving  more  than  experi¬ 
ence  can  teach  us.  This  criterion  is  obtained 
from  the  observation  that  such  proofs  do  not 
lead  us  directly  from  the  subject  of  the  propo¬ 
sition  to  be  proved  to  the  required  predicate, 
but  find  it  necessary  to  presuppose  the  possibil¬ 
ity  of  extending  our  cognition  a  priori  by  means 
of  ideas.  We  must,  accordingly,  always  use  the 


REASON  231 

greatest  caution;  we  require,  before  attempting 
any  proof,  to  consider  how  it  is  possible  to  ex¬ 
tend  the  sphere  of  cognition  by  the  operations 
of  pure  reason,  and  from  what  source  we  are  to 
derive  knowledge,  which  is  not  obtained  from 
the  analysis  of  conceptions,  nor  relates,  by  an¬ 
ticipation,  to  possible  experience.  We  shall  thus 
spare  ourselves  much  severe  and  fruitless  la¬ 
bour,  by  not  expecting  from  reason  what  is  be¬ 
yond  its  power,  or  rather  by  subjecting  it  to 
discipline,  and  teaching  it  to  moderate  its  ve¬ 
hement  desires  for  the  extension  of  the  sphere 
of  cognition. 

The  first  rule  for  our  guidance  is,  therefore, 
not  to  attempt  a  transcendental  proof,  before 
we  have  considered  from  what  source  we  are  to 
derive  the  principles  upon  which  the  proof  is  to 
be  based,  and  what  right  we  have  to  expect  that 
our  conclusions  from  these  principles  will  be 
veracious.  If  they  are  principles  of  the  under¬ 
standing,  it  is  vain  to  expect  that  we  should  at¬ 
tain  by  their  means  to  ideas  of  pure  reason;  for 
these  principles  are  valid  only  in  regard  to  ob¬ 
jects  of  possible  experience.  If  they  are  princi¬ 
ples  of  pure  reason,  our  labour  is  alike  in  vain. 
For  the  principles  of  reason,  if  employed  as  ob¬ 
jective,  are  without  exception  dialectical  and 
possess  no  validity  or  truth,  except  as  regulative 
principles  of  the  systematic  employment  of  rea¬ 
son  in  experience.  But  when  such  delusive  proofs 
are  presented  to  us,  it  is  our  duty  to  meet  them 
with  the  non  liquet  of  a  matured  judgement; 
and,  although  we  are  unable  to  expose  the  par¬ 
ticular  sophism  upon  which  the  proof  is  based, 
we  have  a  right  to  demand  a  deduction  of  the 
principles  employed  in  it;  and,  if  these  princi¬ 
ples  have  their  origin  in  pure  reason  alone,  such 
a  deduction  is  absolutely  impossible.  And  thus 
it  is  unnecessary  that  we  should  trouble  our¬ 
selves  with  the  exposure  and  confutation  of  ev¬ 
ery  sophistical  illusion ;  we  may,  at  once,  bring  all 
dialectic,  which  is  inexhaustible  in  the  produc¬ 
tion  of  fallacies,  before  the  bar  of  critical  rea¬ 
son,  which  tests  the  principles  upon  which  all 
dialectical  procedure  is  based.  The  second  pe¬ 
culiarity  of  transcendental  proof  is  that  a  tran¬ 
scendental  proposition  cannot  rest  upon  more 
than  a  single  proof.  If  I  am  drawing  conclusions, 
not  from  conceptions,  but  from  intuition  cor¬ 
responding  to  a  conception,  be  it  pure  intuition, 
as  in  mathematics,  or  empirical,  as  in  natural 
science,  the  intuition  which  forms  the  basis  of 
my  inferences  presents  me  with  materials  for 
many  synthetical  propositions,  which  I  can  con¬ 
nect  in  various  modes,  while,  as  it  is  allowable 
to  proceed  from  different  points  in  the  inten- 


THE  CRITIQUE 


232 

tion,  I  can  arrive  by  different  paths  at  the  same 
proposition. 

But  every  transcendental  proposition  sets  out 
from  a  conception,  and  posits  the  synthetical 
condition  of  the  possibility  of  an  object  accord¬ 
ing  to  this  conception.  There  must,  therefore, 
be  but  one  ground  of  proof,  because  it  is  the 
conception  alone  which  determines  the  object; 
and  thus  the  proof  cannot  contain  anything 
more  than  the  determination  of  the  object  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  conception.  In  our  Transcenden¬ 
tal  Analytic,  for  example,  we  inferred  the  prin¬ 
ciple:  Every  event  has  a  cause,  from  the  only 
condition  of  the  objective  possibility  of  our  con¬ 
ception  of  an  event.  This  is  that  an  event  cannot 
be  determined  in  time,  and  consequently  can¬ 
not  form  a  part  of  experience,  unless  it  stands 
under  this  dynamical  law.  This  is  the  only  pos¬ 
sible  ground  of  proof;  for  our  conception  of  an 
event  possesses  objective  validity,  that  is,  is  a 
true  conception,  only  because  the  law  of  cau¬ 
sality  determines  an  object  to  which  it  can  refer. 
Other  arguments  in  support  of  this  principle 
have  been  attempted — such  as  that  from  the 
contingent  nature  of  a  phenomenon;  but  when 
this  argument  is  considered,  we  can  discover  no 
criterion  of  contingency,  except  the  fact  of  an 
event — of  something  happening ,  that  is  to  say, 
the  existence  which  is  preceded  by  the  non¬ 
existence  of  an  object,  and  thus  we  fall  back  on 
the  very  thing  to  be  proved.  If  the  proposition: 
“Every  thinking  being  is  simple,”  is  to  be  proved, 
we  keep  to  the  conception  of  the  ego,  which  is 
simple,  and  to  which  all  thought  has  a  relation. 
The  same  is  the  case  with  the  transcendental 
proof  of  the  existence  of  a  Deity,  which  is  based 
solely  upon  the  harmony  and  reciprocal  fitness 
of  the  conceptions  of  an  ens  realissimum  and  a 
necessary  being,  and  cannot  be  attempted  in  any 
other  manner. 

This  caution  serves  to  simplify  very  much  the 
criticism  of  all  propositions  of  reason.  When 
reason  employs  conceptions  alone,  only  one 
proof  of  its  thesis  is  possible,  if  any.  When, 
therefore,  the  dogmatist  advances  with  ten  ar¬ 
guments  in  favour  of  a  proposition,  we  may  be 
sure  that  not  one  of  them  is  conclusive.  For  if 
he  possessed  one  which  proved  the  proposition 
he  brings  forward  to  demonstration — as  must 
always  be  the  case  with  the  propositions  of  pure 
reason — what  need  is  there  for  any  more?  His 
intention  can  only  be  similar  to  that  of  the  ad¬ 
vocate  who  had  different  arguments  for  differ¬ 
ent  judges;  thus  availing  himself  of  the  weak¬ 
ness  of  those  who  examine  his  arguments,  who, 
without  going  into  any  profound  investigation, 


adopt  the  view  of  the  case  which  seems  most 
probable  at  first  sight  and  decide  according  to  it. 

The  third  rule  for  the  guidance  of  pure  rea¬ 
son  in  the  conduct  of  a  proof  is  that  all  tran¬ 
scendental  proofs  must  never  be  apagogic  or  in¬ 
direct,  but  always  ostensive  or  direct.  The  direct 
or  ostensive  proof  not  only  establishes  the  truth 
of  the  proposition  to  be  proved,  but  exposes  the 
grounds  of  its  truth;  the  apagogic,  on  the  other 
hand,  may  assure  us  of  the  truth  of  the  proposi¬ 
tion,  but  it  cannot  enable  us  to  comprehend  the 
grounds  of  its  possibility.  The  latter  is,  accord¬ 
ingly,  rather  an  auxiliary  to  an  argument,  than 
a  strictly  philosophical  and  rational  mode  of 
procedure.  In  one  respect,  however,  they  have 
an  advantage  over  direct  proofs,  from  the  fact 
that  the  mode  of  arguing  by  contradiction, 
which  they  employ,  renders  our  understanding 
of  the  question  more  clear,  and  approximates 
the  proof  to  the  certainty  of  an  intuitional  dem¬ 
onstration. 

The  true  reason  why  indirect  proofs  are  em¬ 
ployed  in  different  sciences  is  this.  When  the 
grounds  upon  which  we  seek  to  base  a  cognition 
are  too  various  or  too  profound,  we  try  whether 
or  not  we  may  not  discover  the  truth  of  our  cog¬ 
nition  from  its  consequences.  The  modus  ponens 
of  reasoning  from  the  truth  of  its  inferences  to 
the  truth  of  a  proposition  would  be  admissible 
if  all  the  inferences  that  can  be  drawn  from  it 
are  known  to  be  true;  for  in  this  case  there  can 
be  only  one  possible  ground  for  these  inferences, 
and  that  is  the  true  one.  But  this  is  a  quite  im¬ 
practicable  procedure,  as  it  surpasses  all  our 
powers  to  discover  all  the  possible  inferences 
that  can  be  drawn  from  a  proposition.  But  this 
mode  of  reasoning  is  employed,  under  favour, 
when  we  wish  to  prove  the  truth  of  an  hypoth¬ 
esis;  in  which  case  we  admit  the  truth  of  the 
conclusion — which  is  supported  by  analogy — 
that,  if  all  the  inferences  we  have  drawn  and  ex¬ 
amined  agree  with  the  proposition  assumed,  all 
other  possible  inferences  will  also  agree  with  it. 
But,  in  this  way,  an  hypothesis  can  never  be 
established  as  a  demonstrated  truth.  The  modus 
tollens  of  reasoning  from  known  inferences  to 
the  unknown  proposition,  is  not  only  a  rigorous, 
but  a  very  easy  mode  of  proof.  For,  if  it  can  be 
shown  that  but  one  inference  from  a  proposi¬ 
tion  is  false,  then  the  proposition  must  itself  be 
false.  Instead,  then,  of  examining,  in  an  osten¬ 
sive  argument,  the  whole  series  of  the  grounds 
on  which  the  truth  of  a  proposition  rests,  we 
need  only  take  the  opposite  of  this  proposition, 
and  if  one  inference  from  it  be  false,  then  must 
the  opposite  be  itself  false;  and,  consequently, 


OF  PURE 

the  proposition  which  we  wished  to  prove  must 
be  true. 

The  apagogic  method  of  proof  is  admissible 
only  in  those  sciences  where  it  is  impossible  to 
mistake  a  subjective  representation  for  an  ob¬ 
jective  cognition.  Where  this  is  possible,  it  is 
plain  that  the  opposite  of  a  given  proposition 
may  contradict  merely  the  subjective  conditions 
of  thought,  and  not  the  objective  cognition;  or 
it  may  happen  that  both  propositions  contradict 
each  other  only  under  a  subjective  condition, 
which  is  incorrectly  considered  to  be  objective, 
and,  as  the  condition  is  itself  false,  both  propo¬ 
sitions  may  be  false,  and  it  will,  consequently, 
be  impossible  to  conclude  the  truth  of  the  one 
from  the  falseness  of  the  other. 

In  mathematics  such  subreptions  are  impos¬ 
sible;  and  it  is  in  this  science,  accordingly,  that 
the  indirect  mode  of  proof  has  its  true  place.  In 
the  science  of  nature,  where  all  assertion  is 
based  upon  empirical  intuition,  such  subrep¬ 
tions  may  be  guarded  against  by  the  repeated 
comparison  of  observations;  but  this  mode  of 
proof  is  of  little  value  in  this  sphere  of  knowl¬ 
edge.  But  the  transcendental  efforts  of  pure  rea¬ 
son  are  all  made  in  the  sphere  of  the  subjective, 
which  is  the  real  medium  of  all  dialectical  illu¬ 
sion;  and  thus  reason  endeavours,  in  its  prem¬ 
isses,  to  impose  upon  us  subjective  represen¬ 
tations  for  objective  cognitions.  In  the  transcen¬ 
dental  sphere  of  pure  reason,  then,  and  in  the 
case  of  synthetical  propositions,  it  is  inadmissi¬ 
ble  to  support  a  statement  by  disproving  the 
counter-statement.  For  only  two  cases  are  pos¬ 
sible;  either,  the  counter-statement  is  nothing 
but  the  enouncement  of  the  inconsistency  of  the 
opposite  opinion  with  the  subjective  conditions 
of  reason,  which  does  not  affect  the  real  case 
(for  example,  we  cannot  comprehend  the  un¬ 
conditioned  necessity  of  the  existence  of  a  be¬ 
ing,  and  hence  every  speculative  proof  of  the 
existence  of  such  a  being  must  be  opposed  on 
subjective  grounds,  while  the  possibility  of  this 
being  in  itself  cannot  with  justice  be  denied) ; 
or,  both  propositions,  being  dialectical  in  their 
nature,  are  based  upon  an  impossible  concep¬ 
tion.  In  this  latter  case  the  rule  applies:  non  en- 
tis  nulla  sunt  predicata;  that  is  to  say,  what  we 
affirm  and  what  we  deny,  respecting  such  an  ob¬ 
ject,  are  equally  untrue,  and  the  apagogic  mode 
of  arriving  at  the  truth  is  in  this  case  impossible. 
If,  for  example,  we  presuppose  that  the  world  of 
sense  is  given  in  itself  in  its  totality,  it  is  false, 
either  that  it  is  infinite,  or  that  it  is  finite  and 
limited  in  space.  Both  are  false,  because  the  hy¬ 
pothesis  is  false.  For  the  notion  of  phenomena 


REASON  233 

(as  mere  representations)  which  are  given  in 
themselves  (as  objects)  is  self-contradictory; 
and  the  infinitude  of  this  imaginary  whole  would, 
indeed,  be  unconditioned,  but  would  be  incon¬ 
sistent  (as  everything  in  the  phenomenal  world 
is  conditioned)  with  the  unconditioned  deter¬ 
mination  and  finitude  of  quantities  which  is 
presupposed  in  our  conception. 

The  apagogic  mode  of  proof  is  the  true  source 
of  those  illusions  which  have  always  had  so 
strong  an  attraction  for  the  admirers  of  dogmat¬ 
ical  philosophy.  It  may  be  compared  to  a  cham¬ 
pion  who  maintains  the  honour  and  claims  of 
the  party  he  has  adopted  by  offering  battle  to 
all  who  doubt  the  validity  of  these  claims  and 
the  purity  of  that  honour;  while  nothing  can  be 
proved  in  this  way,  except  the  respective  strength 
of  the  combatants,  and  the  advantage,  in  this 
respect,  is  always  on  the  side  of  the  attacking 
party.  Spectators,  observing  that  each  party  is 
alternately  conqueror  and  conquered,  are  led  to 
regard  the  subject  of  dispute  as  beyond  the  pow¬ 
er  of  man  to  decide  upon.  But  such  an  opinion 
cannot  be  justified;  and  it  is  sufficient  to  apply 
to  these  reasoners  the  remark: 

Non  defensoribus  istis 
Tempus  eget. 

Each  must  try  to  establish  his  assertions  by 
a  transcendental  deduction  of  the  grounds  of 
proof  employed  in  his  argument,  and  thus  en¬ 
able  us  to  see  in  what  way  the  claims  of  reason 
may  be  supported.  If  an  opponent  bases  his  as¬ 
sertions  upon  subjective  grounds,  he  may  be 
refuted  with  ease;  not,  however  to  the  advan¬ 
tage  of  the  dogmatist,  who  likewise  depends  up¬ 
on  subjective  sources  of  cognition  and  is  in  like 
manner  driven  into  a  corner  by  his  opponent. 
But,  if  parties  employ  the  direct  method  of  pro¬ 
cedure,  they  will  soon  discover  the  difficulty, 
nay,  the  impossibility  of  proving  their  asser¬ 
tions,  and  will  be  forced  to  appeal  to  prescrip¬ 
tion  and  precedence;  or  they  will,  by  the  help  of 
criticism,  discover  with  ease  the  dogmatical  il¬ 
lusions  by  which  they  had  been  mocked,  and 
compel  reason  to  renounce  its  exaggerated  pre¬ 
tensions  to  speculative  insight  and  to  confine  it¬ 
self  within  the  limits  of  its  proper  sphere — that 
of  practical  principles. 

Chapter  II.  The  Canon  of  Pure  Reason 

It  is  a  humiliating  consideration  for  human  rea¬ 
son  that  it  is  incompetent  to  discover  truth  by 
means  of  pure  speculation,  but,  on  the  contrary, 
stands  in  need  of  discipline  to  check  its  devia¬ 
tions  from  the  straight  path  and  to  expose  the 
illusions  which  it  originates.  But,  on  the  other 


THE  CRITIQUE 


234 

hand,  this  consideration  ought  to  elevate  and  to 
give  it  confidence,  for  this  discipline  is  exercised 
by  itself  alone,  and  it  is  subject  to  the  censure 
of  no  other  power.  The  bounds,  moreover,  which 
it  is  forced  to  set  to  its  speculative  exercise, 
form  likewise  a  check  upon  the  fallacious  pre¬ 
tensions  of  opponents;  and  thus  what  remains 
of  its  possessions,  after  these  exaggerated  claims 
have  been  disallowed,  is  secure  from  attack  or 
usurpation.  The  greatest,  and  perhaps  the  only, 
use  of  all  philosophy  of  pure  reason  is,  accord¬ 
ingly,  of  a  purely  negative  character.  It  is  not 
an  organon  for  the  extension,  but  a  discipline 
for  the  determination,  of  the  limits  of  its  ex¬ 
ercise;  and  without  laying  claim  to  the  discov¬ 
ery  of  new  truth,  it  has  the  modest  merit  of 
guarding  against  error. 

At  the  same  time,  there  must  be  some  source 
of  positive  cognitions  which  belong  to  the  do¬ 
main  of  pure  reason  and  which  become  the 
causes  of  error  only  from  our  mistaking  their 
true  character,  while  they  form  the  goal  towards 
which  reason  continually  strives.  How  else  can 
we  account  for  the  inextinguishable  desire  in  the 
human  mind  to  find  a  firm  footing  in  some  re¬ 
gion  beyond  the  limits  of  the  world  of  experi¬ 
ence?  It  hopes  to  attain  to  the  possession  of  a 
knowledge  in  which  it  has  the  deepest  interest. 
It  enters  upon  the  path  of  pure  speculation;  but 
in  vain.  We  have  some  reason,  however,  to  ex¬ 
pect  that,  in  the  only  other  way  that  lies  open 
to  it — the  path  of  practical  reason — it  may  meet 
with  better  success. 

I  understand  by  a  canon  a  list  of  the  a  priori 
principles  of  the  proper  employment  of  certain 
faculties  of  cognition.  Thus  general  logic,  in  its 
analytical  department,  is  a  formal  canon  for 
the  faculties  of  understanding  and  reason.  In 
the  same  way,  Transcendental  Analytic  was  seen 
to  be  a  canon  of  the  pure  understanding;  for  it 
alone  is  competent  to  enounce  true  a  priori  syn¬ 
thetical  cognitions.  But,  when  no  proper  em¬ 
ployment  of  a  faculty  of  cognition  is  possible, 
no  canon  can  exist.  But  the  synthetical  cognition 
of  pure  speculative  reason  is,  as  has  been  shown, 
completely  impossible.  There  cannot,  therefore, 
exist  any  canon  for  the  speculative  exercise  of 
this  faculty — for  its  speculative  exercise  is  en¬ 
tirely  dialectical;  and,  consequently,  transcen¬ 
dental  logic,  in  this  respect,  is  merely  a  disci¬ 
pline,  and  not  a  canon.  If,  then,  there  is  any 
proper  mode  of  employing  the  faculty  of  pure 
reason — in  which  case  there  must  be  a  canon  for 
this  faculty — this  canon  will  relate,  not  to  the 
speculative,  but  to  the  practical  use  of  reason. 
This  canon  we  now  proceed  to  investigate. 


Section  I.  Of  the  Ultimate  End  of  the  Pure 
Use  of  Reason 

There  exists  in  the  faculty  of  reason  a  natural 
desire  to  venture  beyond  the  field  of  experience, 
to  attempt  to  reach  the  utmost  bounds  of  all 
cognition  by  the  help  of  ideas  alone,  and  not  to 
rest  satisfied  until  it  has  fulfilled  its  course  and 
raised  the  sum  of  its  cognitions  into  a  self- 
subsistent  systematic  whole.  Is  the  motive  for 
this  endeavour  to  be  found  in  its  speculative, 
or  in  its  practical  interests  alone? 

Setting  aside,  at  present,  the  results  of  the  la¬ 
bours  of  pure  reason  in  its  speculative  exercise, 
I  shall  merely  inquire  regarding  the  problems 
the  solution  of  which  forms  its  ultimate  aim, 
whether  reached  or  not,  and  in  relation  to  which 
all  other  aims  are  but  partial  and  intermediate. 
These  highest  aims  must,  from  the  nature  of 
reason,  possess  complete  unity;  otherwise  the 
highest  interest  of  humanity  could  not  be  suc¬ 
cessfully  promoted. 

The  transcendental  speculation  of  reason  re¬ 
lates  to  three  things:  the  freedom  of  the  will, 
the  immortality  of  the  soul,  and  the  existence  of 
God.  The  speculative  interest  which  reason  has 
in  those  questions  is  very  small;  and,  for  its 
sake  alone,  we  should  not  undertake  the  labour 
of  transcendental  investigation — a  labour  full 
of  toil  and  ceaseless  struggle.  We  should  be  loth 
to  undertake  this  labour,  because  the  discover¬ 
ies  we  might  make  would  not  be  of  the  smallest 
use  in  the  sphere  of  concrete  or  physical  investi¬ 
gation.  We  may  find  out  that  the  will  is  free, 
but  this  knowledge  only  relates  to  the  intelligi¬ 
ble  cause  of  our  volition.  As  regards  the  phenom¬ 
ena  or  expressions  of  this  will,  that  is,  our 
actions,  we  are  bound,  in  obedience  to  an  in¬ 
violable  maxim,  without  which  reason  cannot  be 
employed  in  the  sphere  of  experience,  to  explain 
these  in  the  same  way  as  we  explain  all  the  oth¬ 
er  phenomena  of  nature,  that  is  to  say,  accord¬ 
ing  to  its  unchangeable  laws.  We  may  have  dis¬ 
covered  the  spirituality  and  immortality  of  the 
soul,  but  we  cannot  employ  this  knowledge  to 
explain  the  phenomena  of  this  life,  nor  the  pe¬ 
culiar  nature  of  the  future,  because  our  concep¬ 
tion  of  an  incorporeal  nature  is  purely  negative 
and  does  not  add  anything  to  our  knowledge, 
and  the  only  inferences  to  be  drawn  from  it  are 
purely  fictitious.  If,  again,  we  prove  the  exist¬ 
ence  of  a  supreme  intelligence,  we  should  be  able 
from  it  to  make  the  conformity  to  aims  existing 
in  the  arrangement  of  the  world  comprehensible ; 
but  we  should  not  be  justified  in  deducing  from 
it  any  particular  arrangement  or  disposition,  or 


OF  PURE 

inferring  any  where  it  is  not  perceived.  For  it  is 
a  necessary  rule  of  the  speculative  use  of  reason 
that  we  must  not  overlook  natural  causes,  or  re¬ 
fuse  to  listen  to  the  teaching  of  experience,  for 
the  sake  of  deducing  what  we  know  and  perceive 
from  something  that  transcends  all  our  knowl¬ 
edge.  In  one  word,  these  three  propositions  are, 
for  the  speculative  reason,  always  transcendent, 
and  cannot  be  employed  as  immanent  principles 
in  relation  to  the  objects  of  experience;  they 
are,  consequently,  of  no  use  to  us  in  this  sphere, 
being  but  the  valueless  results  of  the  severe  but 
unprofitable  efforts  of  reason. 

If,  then,  the  actual  cognition  of  these  three 
cardinal  propositions  is  perfectly  useless,  while 
Reason  uses  her  utmost  endeavours  to  induce  us. 
to  admit  them,  it  is  plain  that  their  real  value 
and  importance  relate  to  our  practical ,  and  not 
to  our  speculative  interest. 

I  term  all  that  is  possible  through  free  will, 
practical.  But  if  the  conditions  of  the  exercise 
of  free  volition  are  empirical,  reason  can  have 
only  a  regulative,  and  not  a  constitutive,  influ¬ 
ence  upon  it,  and  is  serviceable  merely  for  the 
introduction  of  unity  into  its  empirical  laws.  In 
the  moral  philosophy  of  prudence,  for  example, 
the  sole  business  of  reason  is  to  bring  about  a 
union  of  all  the  ends,  which  are  aimed  at  by  our 
inclinations,  into  one  ultimate  end — that  of  hap¬ 
piness — and  to  show  the  agreement  which  should 
exist  among  the  means  of  attaining  that  end.  In 
this  sphere,  accordingly,  reason  cannot  present 
to  us  any  other  than  pragmatical  laws  of  free 
action,  for  our  guidance  towards  the  aims  set  up 
by  the  senses,  and  is  incompetent  to  give  us  laws 
which  are  pure  and  determined  completely  a  pri¬ 
ori.  On  the  other  hand,  pure  practical  laws,  the 
ends  of  which  have  been  given  by  reason  entire¬ 
ly  a  priori ,  and  which  are  not  empirically  condi¬ 
tioned,  but  are,  on  the  contrary,  absolutely  im¬ 
perative  in  their  nature,  would  be  products  of 
pure  reason.  Such  are  the  moral  laws;  and  these 
alone  belong  to  the  sphere  of  the  practical  ex¬ 
ercise  of  reason,  and  admit  of  a  canon. 

All  the  powers  of  reason,  in  the  sphere  of 
what  may  be  termed  pure  philosophy,  are,  in 
fact,  directed  to  the  three  above-mentioned  prob¬ 
lems  alone.  These  again  have  a  still  higher  end 
— the  answer  to  the  question,  what  we  ought  to 
do,  if  the  will  is  free,  if  there  is  a  God  and  a  fu¬ 
ture  world.  Now,  as  this  problem  relates  to  our 
conduct,  in  reference  to  the  highest  aim  of  hu¬ 
manity,  it  is  evident  that  the  ultimate  intention 
of  nature,  in  the  constitution  of  our  reason,  has 
been  directed  to  the  moral  alone. 

We  must  take  care,  however,  in  turning  our 


REASON  235 

attention  to  an  object  which  is  foreign1  to  the 
sphere  of  transcendental  philosophy,  not  to  in¬ 
jure  the  unity  of  our  system  by  digressions,  nor, 
on  the  other  hand,  to  fail  in  clearness,  by  saying 
too  little  on  the  new  subject  of  discussion.  I 
hope  to  avoid  both  extremes,  by  keeping  as  close 
as  possible  to  the  transcendental,  and  excluding 
all  psychological,  that  is,  empirical,  elements. 

I  have  to  remark,  in  the  first  place,  that  at 
present  I  treat  of  the  conception  of  freedom 
in  the  practical  sense  only,  and  set  aside  the  cor¬ 
responding  transcendental  conception,  which  can¬ 
not  be  employed  as  a  ground  of  explanation  in 
the  phenomenal  world,  but  is  itself  a  problem 
for  pure  reason.  A  will  is  purely  animal  ( arbitri - 
um  hrutum)  when  it  is  determined  by  sensuous 
impulses  or  instincts  only,  that  is,  when  it  is  de¬ 
termined  in  a  pathological  manner.  A  will,  which 
can  be  determined  independently  of  sensuous 
impulses,  consequently  by  motives  presented  by 
reason  alone,  is  called  a  free  will  ( arbitrium  lib¬ 
erum)  ;  and  everything  which  is  connected  with 
this  free  will,  either  as  principle  or  consequence, 
is  termed  practical.  The  existence  of  practical 
freedom  can  be  proved  from  experience  alone. 
For  the  human  will  is  not  determined  by  that 
alone  which  immediately  affects  the  senses;  on 
the  contrary,  we  have  the  power,  by  calling  up 
the  notion  of  what  is  useful  or  hurtful  in  a  more 
distant  relation,  of  overcoming  the  immediate 
impressions  on  our  sensuous  faculty  of  desire. 
But  these  considerations  of  what  is  desirable  in 
relation  to  our  whole  state,  that  is,  is  in  the  end 
good  and  useful,  are  based  entirely  upon  reason. 
This  faculty,  accordingly,  enounces  laws,  which 
are  imperative  or  objective  laws  of  freedom  and 
which  tell  us  what  ought  to  take  place,  thus  dis¬ 
tinguishing  themselves  from  the  laws  of  nature, 
which  relate  to  that  which  does  take  place.  The 
laws  of  freedom  or  of  free  will  are  hence  termed 
practical  laws. 

Whether  reason  is  not  itself,  in  the  actual  de¬ 
livery  of  these  laws,  determined  in  its  turn  by 
other  influences,  and  whether  the  action  which, 
in  relation  to  sensuous  impulses,  we  call  free, 
may  not,  in  relation  to  higher  and  more  remote 
operative  causes,  really  form  a  part  of  nature — 
these  are  questions  which  do  not  here  concern 
us.  They  are  purely  speculative  questions;  and 

1  All  practical  conceptions  relate  to  objects  of  pleas¬ 
ure  and  pain,  and  consequently — in  an  indirect  manner, 
at  least — to  objects  of  feeling.  But  as  feeling  is  not  a 
faculty  of  representation,  but  lies  out  of  the  sphere  of 
our  powers  of  cognition,  the  elements  of  our  judge¬ 
ments,  in  so  far  as  they  relate  to  pleasure  or  pain,  that 
is,  the  elements  of  our  practical  judgements,  do  not  be¬ 
long  to  transcendental  philosophy,  which  has  to  do  with 
pure  a  priori  cognitions  alone. 


THE  CRITIQUE 


236 

all  we  have  to  do,  in  the  practical  sphere,  is  to 
inquire  into  the  rule  of  conduct  which  reason 
has  to  present.  Experience  demonstrates  to  us 
the  existence  of  practical  freedom  as  one  of  the 
causes  which  exist  in  nature,  that  is,  it  shows  the 
causal  power  of  reason  in  the  determination  of 
the  will.  The  idea  of  transcendental  freedom, 
on  the  contrary,  requires  that  reason — in  rela¬ 
tion  to  its  causal  power  of  commencing  a  series 
of  phenomena — should  be  independent  of  all 
sensuous  determining  causes;  and  thus  it  seems 
to  be  in  opposition  to  the  law  of  nature  and  to 
all  possible  experience.  It  therefore  remains  a 
problem  for  the  human  mind.  But  this  problem 
does  not  concern  reason  in  its  practical  use;  and 
we  have,  therefore,  in  a  canon  of  pure  reason, 
to  do  with  only  two  questions,  which  relate  to 
the  practical  interest  of  pure  reason:  Is  there  a 
God?  and,  Is  there  a  future  life?  The  question 
of  transcendental  freedom  is  purely  speculative, 
and  we  may  therefore  set  it  entirely  aside  when 
we  come  to  treat  of  practical  reason.  Besides, 
we  have  already  discussed  this  subject  in  the  an¬ 
tinomy  of  pure  reason. 

Section  II.  Of  the  Ideal  of  the  Summum 
Bonum  as  a  Determining  Ground  of  the 
Ultimate  End  of  Pure  Reason 

Reason  conducted  us,  in  its  speculative  use, 
through  the  field  of  experience  and,  as  it  can 
never  find  complete  satisfaction  in  that  sphere, 
from  thence  to  speculative  ideas — which,  how¬ 
ever,  in  the  end  brought  us  back  again  to  experi¬ 
ence,  and  thus  fulfilled  the  purpose  of  reason,  in 
a  manner  which,  though  useful,  was  not  at  all 
in  accordance  with  our  expectations.  It  now  re¬ 
mains  for  us  to  consider  whether  pure  reason 
can  be  employed  in  a  practical  sphere,  and  wheth¬ 
er  it  will  here  conduct  us  to  those  ideas  which 
attain  the  highest  ends  of  pure  reason,  as  we 
have  just  stated  them.  We  shall  thus  ascertain 
whether,  from  the  point  of  view  of  its  practical 
interest,  reason  may  not  be  able  to  supply  us 
with  that  which,  on  the  speculative  side,  it  whol¬ 
ly  denies  us. 

The  whole  interest  of  reason,  speculative  as 
well  as  practical,  is  centred  in  the  three  follow¬ 
ing  questions: 

1.  What  can  I  know? 

2.  What  ought  I  to  do? 

3.  What  may  I  hope? 

The  first  question  is  purely  speculative.  We 
have,  as  I  flatter  myself,  exhausted  all  the  re¬ 
plies  of  which  it  is  susceptible,  and  have  at  last 
found  the  reply  with  which  reason  must  content 


itself,  and  with  which  it  ought  to  be  content,  so 
long  as  it  pays  no  regard  to  the  practical.  But 
from  the  two  great  ends  to  the  attainment  of 
which  all  these  efforts  of  pure  reason  were  in 
fact  directed,  we  remain  just  as  far  removed  as 
if  we  had  consulted  our  ease  and  declined  the 
task  at  the  outset.  So  far,  then,  as  knowledge  is 
concerned,  thus  much,  at  least,  is  established, 
that,  in  regard  to  those  two  problems,  it  lies  be¬ 
yond  our  reach. 

The  second  question  is  purely  practical.  As 
such  it  may  indeed  fall  within  the  province  of 
pure  reason,  but  still  it  is  not  transcendental, 
but  moral,  and  consequently  cannot  in  itself 
form  the  subject  of  our  criticism. 

The  third  question:  If  I  act  as  I  ought  to  do, 
what  may  I  then  hope? — is  at  once  practical  and 
theoretical.  The  practical  forms  a  clue  to  the 
answer  of  the  theoretical,  and — in  its  highest 
form — speculative  question.  For  all  hoping  has 
happiness  for  its  object  and  stands  in  precisely 
the  same  relation  to  the  practical  and  the  law 
of  morality  as  knowing  to  the  theoretical  cogni¬ 
tion  of  things  and  the  law  of  nature.  The  former 
arrives  finally  at  the  conclusion  that  something 
is  (which  determines  the  ultimate  end),  because 
something  ought  to  take  place;  the  latter,  that 
something  is  (which  operates  as  the  highest 
cause),  because  something  does  take  place. 

Happiness  is  the  satisfaction  of  all  our  de¬ 
sires;  extensive,  in  regard  to  their  multiplicity; 
intensive,  in  regard  to  their  degree;  and  proten- 
sive,  in  regard  to  their  duration.  The  practical 
law  based  on  the  motive  of  happiness  I  term  a 
pragmatical  law  (or  prudential  rule) ;  but  that 
law,  assuming  such  to  exist,  which  has  no  other 
motive  than  the  worthiness  of  being  happy,  I 
term  a  moral  or  ethical  law.  The  first  tells  us 
what  we  have  to  do,  if  we  wish  to  become  pos¬ 
sessed  of  happiness;  the  second  dictates  how  we 
ought  to  act,  in  order  to  deserve  happiness.  The 
first  is  based  upon  empirical  principles;  for  it  is 
only  by  experience  that  I  can  learn  either  what 
inclinations  exist  which  desire  satisfaction,  or 
what  are  the  natural  means  of  satisfying  them. 
The  second  takes  no  account  of  our  desires  or 
the  means  of  satisfying  them,  and  regards  only 
the  freedom  of  a  rational  being,  and  the  neces¬ 
sary  conditions  under  which  alone  this  freedom 
can  harmonize  with  the  distribution  of  happiness 
according  to  principles.  This  second  law  may 
therefore  rest  upon  mere  ideas  of  pure  reason, 
and  may  be  cognized  a  priori. 

I  assume  that  there  are  pure  moral  laws  which 
determine,  entirely  a  priori  (without  regard  to 
empirical  motives,  that  is,  to  happiness),  the 


OF  PURE 

conduct  of  a  rational  being,  or  in  other  words, 
to  use  which  it  makes  of  its  freedom,  and  that 
these  laws  are  absolutely  imperative  (not  mere¬ 
ly  hypothetically,  on  the  supposition  of  other 
empirical  ends),  and  therefore  in  all  respects 
necessary.  I  am  warranted  in  assuming  this,  not 
only  by  the  arguments  of  the  most  enlightened 
moralists,  but  by  the  moral  judgement  of  every 
man  who  will  make  the  attempt  to  form  a  dis¬ 
tinct  conception  of  such  a  law. 

Pure  reason,  then,  contains,  not  indeed  in  its 
speculative,  but  in  its  practical,  or,  more  strict¬ 
ly,  its  moral  use,  principles  of  the  possibility  of 
experiencef  of  such  actions,  namely,  as,  in  ac¬ 
cordance  with  ethical  precepts,  might  be  met 
with  in  the  history  of  man.  For  since  reason 
commands  that  such  actions  should  take  place, 
it  must  be  possible  for  them  to  take  place;  and 
hence  a  particular  kind  of  systematic  unity — 
the  moral — must  be  possible.  We  have  found,  it 
is  true,  that  the  systematic  unity  of  nature  could 
not  be  established  according  to  speculative  prin¬ 
ciples  of  reason,  because,  while  reason  possesses 
a  causal  power  in  relation  to  freedom,  it  has 
none  in  relation  to  the  whole  sphere  of  nature; 
and,  while  moral  principles  of  reason  can  pro¬ 
duce  free  actions,  they  cannot  produce  natural 
laws.  It  is,  then,  in  its  practical,  but  especially  in 
its  moral  use,  that  the  principles  of  pure  reason 
possess  objective  reality. 

I  call  the  world  a  moral  world,  in  so  far  as  it 
may  be  in  accordance  with  all  the  ethical  laws 
— which,  by  virtue  of  the  freedom  of  reason¬ 
able  beings,  it  can  be,  and  according  to  the  nec¬ 
essary  laws  of  morality  it  ought  to  be.  But  this 
world  must  be  conceived  only  as  an  intelligible 
world,  inasmuch  as  abstraction  is  therein  made 
of  all  conditions  (ends),  and  even  of  all  impedi¬ 
ments  to  morality  (the  weakness  or  pravity  of 
human  nature).  So  far,  then,  it  is  a  mere  idea — 
though  still  a  practical  idea — which  may  have, 
and  ought  to  have,  an  influence  on  the  world  of 
sense,  so  as  to  bring  it  as  far  as  possible  into 
conformity  with  itself.  The  idea  of  a  moral 
world  has,  therefore,  objective  reality,  not  as 
referring  to  an  object  of  intelligible  intuition — 
for  of  such  an  object  we  can  form  no  concep¬ 
tion  whatever — but  to  the  world  of  sense — con¬ 
ceived,  however,  as  an  object  of  pure  reason  in 
its  practical  use — and  to  a  corpus  mysticum  of 
rational  beings  in  it,  in  so  far  as  the  liberum  ar- 
bitrium  of  the  individual  is  placed,  under  and  by 
virtue  of  moral  laws,  in  complete  systematic 
unity  both  with  itself  and  with  the  freedom  of 
all  others. 

That  is  the  answer  to  the  first  of  the  two  ques- 


REASON  237 

tions  of  pure  reason  which  relate  to  its  practical 
interest :  Do  that  which  will  render  thee  worthy 
of  happiness.  The  second  question  is  this:  If  I 
conduct  myself  so  as  not  to  be  unworthy  of  hap¬ 
piness,  may  I  hope  thereby  to  obtain  happiness? 
In  order  to  arrive  at  the  solution  of  this  ques¬ 
tion,  we  must  inquire  whether  the  principles  of 
pure  reason,  which  prescribe  a  priori  the  law, 
necessarily  also  connect  this  hope  with  it. 

I  say,  then,  that  just  as  the  moral  principles 
are  necessary  according  to  reason  in  its  practi¬ 
cal  use,  so  it  is  equally  necessary  according  to 
reason  in  its  theoretical  use  to  assume  that  every 
one  has  ground  to  hope  for  happiness  in  the 
measure  in  which  he  has  made  himself  worthy 
of  it  in  his  conduct,  and  that  therefore  the  sys¬ 
tem  of  morality  is  inseparably  (though  only  in 
the  idea  of  pure  reason)  connected  with  that  of 
happiness. 

Now  in  an  intelligible,  that  is,  in  the  moral 
world,  in  the  conception  of  which  we  make  ab¬ 
straction  of  all  the  impediments  to  morality 
(sensuous  desires),  such  a  system  of  happiness, 
connected  with  and  proportioned  to  morality, 
may  be  conceived  as  necessary,  because  freedom 
of  volition — partly  incited,  and  partly  restrained 
by  moral  laws — would  be  itself  the  cause  of 
general  happiness;  and  thus  rational  beings,  un¬ 
der  the  guidance  of  such  principles,  would  be 
themselves  the  authors  both  of  their  own  endur¬ 
ing  welfare  and  that  of  others.  But  such  a  sys¬ 
tem  of  self-rewarding  morality  is  only  an  idea, 
the  carrying  out  of  which  depends  upon  the  con¬ 
dition  that  every  one  acts  as  he  ought;  in  other 
words,  that  all  actions  of  reasonable  beings  be 
such  as  they  would  be  if  they  sprung  from  a  Su¬ 
preme  Will,  comprehending  in,  or  under,  itself 
all  particular  wills.  But  since  the  moral  law  is 
binding  on  each  individual  in  the  use  of  his  free¬ 
dom  of  volition,  even  if  others  should  not  act 
in  conformity  with  this  law,  neither  the  nature 
of  things,  nor  the  causality  of  actions  and  their 
relation  to  morality,  determine  how  the  conse¬ 
quences  of  these  actions  will  be  related  to  hap¬ 
piness;  and  the  necessary  connection  of  the  hope 
of  happiness  with  the  unceasing  endeavour  to 
become  worthy  of  happiness,  cannot  be  cognized 
by  reason,  if  we  take  nature  alone  for  our  guide. 
This  connection  can  be  hoped  for  only  on  the 
assumption  that  the  cause  of  nature  is  a  su¬ 
preme  reason,  which  governs  according  to  moral 
laws. 

I  term  the  idea  of  an  intelligence  in  which  the 
morally  most  perfect  will,  united  with  supreme 
blessedness,  is  the  cause  of  all  happiness  in  the 
world,  so  far  as  happiness  stands  in  strict  rela. 


238  THE  CRITIQUE 


tion  13  morality  (as  the  worthiness  of  being  hap¬ 
py),  the  Ideal  of  the  Supreme  Good.  It  is  only, 
then,  in  the  ideal  of  the  supreme  original  good, 
that  pure  reason  can  find  the  ground  of  the  prac¬ 
tically  necessary  connection  of  both  elements  of 
the  highest  derivative  good,  and  accordingly  of 
an  intelligible,  that  is,  moral  world.  Now  since 
we  are  necessitated  by  reason  to  conceive  our¬ 
selves  as  belonging  to  such  a  world,  while  the 
senses  present  to  us  nothing  but  a  world  of  phe¬ 
nomena,  we  must  assume  the  former  as  a  con¬ 
sequence  of  our  conduct  in  the  world  of  sense 
(since  the  world  of  sense  gives  us  no  hint  of  it), 
and  therefore  as  future  in  relation  to  us.  Thus 
God  and  a  future  life  are  two  hypotheses  which, 
according  to  the  principles  of  pure  reason,  are 
inseparable  from  the  obligation  which  this  rea¬ 
son  imposes  upon  us. 

Morality  per  se  constitutes  a  system.  But  we 
can  form  no  system  of  happiness,  except  in  so 
far  as  it  is  dispensed  in  strict  proportion  to  mor¬ 
ality.  But  this  is  only  possible  in  the  intelligible 
world,  under  a  wise  author  and  ruler.  Such  a  rul¬ 
er,  together  with  life  in  such  a  world,  which  we 
must  look  upon  as  future,  reason  finds  itself 
compelled  to  assume;  or  it  must  regard  the  mor¬ 
al  laws  as  idle  dreams,  since  the  necessary  con¬ 
sequence  which  this  same  reason  connects  with 
them  must,  without  this  hypothesis,  fall  to  the 
ground.  Hence  also  the  moral  laws  are  univer¬ 
sally  regarded  as  commands ,  which  they  could 
not  be  did  they  not  connect  a  priori  adequate 
consequences  with  their  dictates,  and  thus  carry 
with  them  promises  and  threats.  But  this,  again, 
they  could  not  do,  did  they  not  reside  in  a  nec¬ 
essary  being,  as  the  Supreme  Good,  which  alone 
can  render  such  a  teleological  unity  possible. 

Leibnitz  termed  the  world,  when  viewed  in  re¬ 
lation  to  the  rational  beings  which  it  contains, 
and  the  moral  relations  in  which  they  stand  to 
each  other,  under  the  government  of  the  Su¬ 
preme  Good,  the  kingdom  of  Grace ,  and  dis¬ 
tinguished  it  from  the  kingdom  of  Nature,  in 
which  these  rational  beings  live,  under  moral 
laws,  indeed,  but  expect  no  other  consequences 
from  their  actions  than  such  as  follow  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  course  of  nature  in  the  world  of  sense. 
To  view  ourselves,  therefore,  as  in  the  kingdom 
of  grace,  in  which  all  happiness  awaits  us,  ex¬ 
cept  in  so  far  as  we  ourselves  limit  our  partici¬ 
pation  in  it  by  actions  which  render  us  unworthy 
of  happiness,  is  a  practically  necessary  idea  of 
reason. 

Practical  laws,  in  so  far  as  they  are  subjective 
grounds  of  actions,  that  is,  subjective  principles, 
are  termed  maxims.  The  judgements  of  moral¬ 


ity,  in  its  purity  and  ultimate  results,  are  framed 
according  to  ideas ;  the  observance  of  its  laws, 
according  to  maxims. 

The  whole  course  of  our  life  must  be  subject 
to  moral  maxims;  but  this  is  impossible,  unless 
with  the  moral  law,  which  is  a  mere  idea,  reason 
connects  an  efficient  cause  which  ordains  to  all 
conduct  which  is  in  conformity  with  the  moral 
law  an  issue  either  in  this  or  in  another  life, 
which  is  in  exact  conformity  with  our  highest 
aims.  Thus,  without  a  God  and  without  a  world, 
invisible  to  us  now,  but  hoped  for,  the  glorious 
ideas  of  morality  are,  indeed,  objects  of  appro¬ 
bation  and  of  admiration,  but  cannot  be  the 
springs  of  purpose  and  action.  For  they  do  not 
satisfy  all  the  aims  which  are  natural  to  every 
rational  being,  and  which  are  determined  a  pri¬ 
ori  by  pure  reason  itself,  and  necessary. 

Happiness  alone  is,  in  the  view  of  reason,  far 
from  being  the  complete  good.  Reason  does  not 
approve  of  it  (however  much  inclination  may 
desire  it),  except  as  united  with  desert.  On  the 
other  hand,  morality  alone,  and  with  it,  mere 
desert,  is  likewise  far  from  being  the  complete 
good.  To  make  it  complete,  he  who  conducts 
himself  in  a  manner  not  unworthy  of  happiness, 
must  be  able  to  hope  for  the  possession  of  hap¬ 
piness.  Even  reason,  unbiased  by  private  ends, 
or  interested  considerations,  cannot  judge  oth¬ 
erwise,  if  it  puts  itself  in  the  place  of  a  being 
whose  business  it  is  to  dispense  all  happiness  to 
others.  For  in  the  practical  idea  both  points  are 
essentially  combined,  though  in  such  a  way  that 
participation  in  happiness  is  rendered  possible 
by  the  moral  disposition,  as  its  condition,  and 
not  conversely,  the  moral  disposition  by  the 
prospect  of  happiness.  For  a  disposition  which 
should  require  the  prospect  of  happiness  as  its 
necessary  condition  would  not  be  moral,  and 
hence  also  would  not  be  worthy  of  complete 
happiness — a  happiness  which,  in  the  view  of 
reason,  recognizes  no  limitation  but  such  as 
arises  from  our  own  immoral  conduct. 

Happiness,  therefore,  in  exact  proportion  with 
the  morality  of  rational  beings  (whereby  they 
are  made  worthy  of  happiness),  constitutes 
alone  the  supreme  good  of  a  world  into  which 
we  absolutely  must  transport  ourselves  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  commands  of  pure  but  practical  rea¬ 
son.  This  world  is,  it  is  true,  only  an  intelligible 
world;  for  of  such  a  systematic  unity  of  ends  as 
it  requires,  the  world  of  sense  gives  us  no  hint. 
Its  reality  can  be  based  on  nothing  else  but  the 
hypothesis  of  a  supreme  original  good.  In  it  in¬ 
dependent  reason,  equipped  with  all  the  suffi¬ 
ciency  of  a  supreme  cause,  founds,  maintains, 


OF  PURE 

and  fulfils  the  universal  order  of  things,  with 
the  most  perfect  teleological  harmony,  however 
much  this  order  may  be  hidden  from  us  in  the 
world  of  sense. 

This  moral  theology  has  the  peculiar  advan¬ 
tage,  in  contrast  with  speculative  theology,  of 
leading  inevitably  to  the  conception  of  a  sole , 
perject,  and  rational  First  Cause,  whereof  spec¬ 
ulative  theology  does  not  give  us  any  indication 
on  objective  grounds,  far  less  any  convincing 
evidence.  For  we  find  neither  in  transcendental 
nor  in  natural  theology,  however  far  reason  may 
lead  us  in  these,  any  ground  to  warrant  us  in  as¬ 
suming  the  existence  of  one  only  Being,  which 
stands  at  the  head  of  all  natural  causes,  and  on 
which  these  are  entirely  dependent.  On  the  oth¬ 
er  hand,  if  we  take  our  stand  on  moral  unity  as 
a  necessary  law  of  the  universe,  and  from  this 
point  of  view  consider  what  is  necessary  to  give 
this  law  adequate  efficiency  and,  for  us,  obliga¬ 
tory  force,  we  must  come  to  the  conclusion  that 
there  is  one  only  supreme  will,  which  compre¬ 
hends  all  these  laws  in  itself.  For  how,  under 
different  wills,  should  we  find  complete  unity 
of  ends?  This  will  must  be  omnipotent,  that  all 
nature  and  its  relation  to  morality  in  the  world 
may  be  subject  to  it;  omniscient,  that  it  may 
have  knowledge  of  the  most  secret  feelings  and 
their  moral  worth ;  omnipresent,  that  it  may  be 
at  hand  to  supply  every  necessity  to  which  the 
highest  weal  of  the  world  may  give  rise;  eternal, 
that  this  harmony  of  nature  and  liberty  may 
never  fail;  and  so  on. 

But  this  systematic  unity  of  ends  in  this  world 
of  intelligences — which,  as  mere  nature,  is  only 
a  world  of  sense,  but,  as  a  system  of  freedom  of 
volition,  may  be  termed  an  intelligible,  that  is, 
moral  world  ( regnum  gratiae ) — leads  inevitably 
also  to  the  teleological  unity  of  all  things  which 
constitute  this  great  whole,  according  to  uni¬ 
versal  natural  laws — just  as  the  unity  of  the  for¬ 
mer  is  according  to  universal  and  necessary  mor¬ 
al  laws — and  unites  the  practical  with  the  spec¬ 
ulative  reason.  The  world  must  be  represented 
as  having  originated  from  an  idea,  if  it  is  to  har¬ 
monize  with  that  use  of  reason  without  which 
we  cannot  even  consider  ourselves  as  worthy  of 
reason — namely,  the  moral  use,  which  rests  en¬ 
tirely  on  the  idea  of  the  supreme  good.  Hence 
the  investigation  of  nature  receives  a  teleologi¬ 
cal  direction,  and  becomes,  in  its  widest  exten¬ 
sion,  physico-theology.  But  this,  taking  its  rise 
in  moral  order  as  a  unity  founded  on  the  essence 
of  freedom,  and  not  accidentally  instituted  by 
external  commands,  establishes  the  teleological 
view  of  nature  on  grounds  which  must  be  insep- 


REASON  239 

arably  connected  with  the  internal  possibility  of 
things.  This  gives  rise  to  a  transcendental  the - 
ology}  which  takes  the  ideal  of  the  highest  on¬ 
tological  perfection  as  a  principle  of  systematic 
unity;  and  this  principle  connects  all  things  ac¬ 
cording  to  universal  and  necessary  natural  laws, 
because  all  things  have  their  origin  in  the  abso¬ 
lute  necessity  of  the  one  only  Primal  Being. 

What  use  can  we  make  of  our  understanding/ 
even  in  respect  of  experience,  if  we  do  not  pro¬ 
pose  ends  to  ourselves?  But  the  highest  ends  are 
those  of  morality,  and  it  is  only  pure  reason 
that  can  give  us  the  knowledge  of  these.  Though 
supplied  with  these,  and  putting  ourselves  un¬ 
der  their  guidance,  we  can  make  no  teleological 
use  of  the  knowledge  of  nature,  as  regards  cog¬ 
nition,  unless  nature  itself  has  established  teleo¬ 
logical  unity.  For  without  this  unity  we  should 
not  even  possess  reason,  because  we  should  have 
no  school  for  reason,  and  no  cultivation  through 
objects  which  afford  the  materials  for  its  con¬ 
ceptions.  But  teleological  unity  is  a  necessary 
unity,  and  founded  on  the  essence  of  the  indi¬ 
vidual  will  itself.  Hence  this  will,  which  is  the 
condition  of  the  application  of  this  unity  in 
concreto,  must  be  so  likewise.  In  this  way  the 
transcendental  enlargement  of  our  rational  cog¬ 
nition  would  be,  not  the  cause,  but  merely  the 
effect  of  the  practical  teleology  which  pure 
reason  imposes  upon  us. 

Hence,  also,  we  find  in  the  history  of  human 
reason  that,  before  the  moral  conceptions  were 
sufficiently  purified  and  determined,  and  before 
men  had  attained  to  a  perception  of  the  system¬ 
atic  unity  of  ends  according  to  these  conceptions 
and  from  necessary  principles,  the  knowledge  of 
nature,  and  even  a  considerable  amount  of  in¬ 
tellectual  culture  in  many  other  sciences,  could 
produce  only  rude  and  vague  conceptions  of  the 
Deity,  sometimes  even  admitting  of  an  astonish¬ 
ing  indifference  with  regard  to  this  question  al¬ 
together.  But  the  more  enlarged  treatment  of 
moral  ideas,  which  was  rendered  necessary  by 
the  extreme  pure  moral  law  of  our  religion, 
awakened  the  interest,  and  thereby  quickened 
the  perceptions  of  reason  in  relation  to  this  ob¬ 
ject.  In  this  way,  and  without  the  help  either  of 
an  extended  acquaintance  with  nature,  or  of  a 
reliable  transcendental  insight  (for  these  have 
been  wanting  in  all  ages),  a  conception  of  the 
Divine  Being  was  arrived  at,  which  we  now  hold 
to  be  the  correct  one,  not  because  speculative 
reason  convinces  us  of  its  correctness,  but  be¬ 
cause  it  accords  with  the  moral  principles  of  rea¬ 
son.  Thus  it  is  to  pure  reason,  but  only  in  its 
practical  use,  that  we  must  ascribe  the  merit  of 


240  THE  CRITIQUE 


having  connected  with  our  highest  interest  a 
cognition,  of  which  mere  speculation  was  able 
only  to  form  a  conjecture,  but  the  validity  of 
which  it  was  unable  to  establish — and  of  having 
thereby  rendered  it,  not  indeed  a  demonstrated 
dogma,  but  a  hypothesis  absolutely  necessary 
to  the  essential  ends  of  reason. 

But  if  practical  reason  has  reached  this  ele¬ 
vation,  and  has  attained  to  the  conception  of  a 
sole  Primal  Being  as  the  supreme  good,  it  must 
not,  therefore,  imagine  that  it  has  transcended 
the  empirical  conditions  of  its  application,  and 
risen  to  the  immediate  cognition  of  new  objects; 
it  must  not  presume  to  start  from  the  concep¬ 
tion  which  it  has  gained,  and  to  deduce  from  it 
the  moral  laws  themselves.  For  it  was  these  very 
laws,  the  internal  practical  necessity  of  which 
led  us  to  the  hypothesis  of  an  independent  cause, 
or  of  a  wise  ruler  of  the  universe,  who  should 
give  them  effect.  Hence  we  are  not  entitled  to 
regard  them  as  accidental  and  derived  from  the 
mere  will  of  the  ruler,  especially  as  we  have  no 
conception  of  such  a  will,  except  as  formed  in 
accordance  with  these  laws.  So  far,  then,  as 
practical  reason  has  the  right  to  conduct  us,  we 
shall  not  look  upon  actions  as  binding  on  us,  be¬ 
cause  they  are  the  commands  of  God,  but  we 
shall  regard  them  as  divine  commands,  because 
we  are  internally  bound  by  them.  We  shall  study 
freedom  under  the  teleological  unity  which  ac¬ 
cords  with  principles  of  reason;  we  shall  look 
upon  ourselves  as  acting  in  conformity  with  the 
divine  will  only  in  so  far  as  we  hold  sacred  the 
moral  law  which  reason  teaches  us  from  the  na¬ 
ture  of  actions  themselves,  and  we  shall  believe 
that  we  can  obey  that  will  only  by  promoting 
the  weal  of  the  universe  in  ourselves  and  in  oth¬ 
ers.  Moral  theology  is,  therefore,  only  of  im¬ 
manent  use.  It  teaches  us  to  fulfil  our  destiny 
here  in  the  world,  by  placing  ourselves  in  har¬ 
mony  with  the  general  system  of  ends,  and  warns 
us  against  the  fanaticism,  nay,  the  crime  of  de¬ 
priving  reason  of  its  legislative  authority  in  the 
moral  conduct  of  life,  for  the  purpose  of  direct¬ 
ly  connecting  this  authority  with  the  idea  of  the 
Supreme  Being.  For  this  would  be,  not  an  im¬ 
manent,  but  a  transcendent  use  of  moral  theol¬ 
ogy,  and,  like  the  transcendent  use  of  mere  spec¬ 
ulation,  would  inevitably  pervert  and  frustrate 
the  ultimate  ends  of  reason. 

Section  III.  Of  Opinion ,  Knowledge ,  and  Belief 

The  holding  of  a  thing  to  be  true  is  a  phenom¬ 
enon  in  our  understanding  which  may  rest  on 
objective  grounds,  but  requires,  also,  subjective 
causes  in  the  mind  of  the  person  judging.  If  a 


judgement  is  valid  for  every  rational  being,  then 
its  ground  is  objectively  sufficient,  and  it  is 
termed  a  conviction.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  it 
has  its  ground  in  the  particular  character  of  the 
subject,  it  is  termed  a  persuasion. 

Persuasion  is  a  mere  illusion,  the  ground  of 
the  judgement,  which  lies  solely  in  the  subject, 
being  regarded  as  objective.  Hence  a  judgement 
of  this  kind  has  only  private  validity — is  only 
valid  for  the  individual  who  judges,  and  the 
holding  of  a  thing  to  be  true  in  this  way  cannot  be 
communicated.  But  truth  depends  upon  agree¬ 
ment  with  the  object,  and  consequently  the 
judgements  of  all  understandings,  if  true,  must 
be  in  agreement  with  each  other  ( consentientia 
uni  tertio  consentiunt  inter  se).  Conviction  may, 
therefore,  be  distinguished,  from  an  external 
point  of  view,  from  persuasion,  by  the  possibil¬ 
ity  of  communicating  it  and  by  showing  its 
validity  for  the  reason  of  every  man;  for  in  this 
case  the  presumption,  at  least,  arises  that  the 
agreement  of  all  judgements  with  each  other,  in 
spite  of  the  different  characters  of  individuals, 
rests  upon  the  common  ground  of  the  agreement 
of  each  with  the  object,  and  thus  the  correctness 
of  the  judgement  is  established. 

Persuasion,  accordingly,  cannot  be  subjective¬ 
ly  distinguished  from  conviction,  that  is,  so  long 
as  the  subject  views  its  judgement  simply  as  a 
phenomenon  of  its  own  mind.  But  if  we  inquire 
whether  the  grounds  of  our  judgement,  which 
are  valid  for  us,  produce  the  same  effect  on  the 
reason  of  others  as  on  our  own,  we  have  then  the 
means,  though  only  subjective  means,  not,  in¬ 
deed,  of  producing  conviction,  but  of  detecting 
the  merely  private  validity  of  the  judgement;  in 
other  words,  of  discovering  that  there  is  in  it  the 
element  of  mere  persuasion. 

If  we  can,  in  addition  to  this,  develop  the  sub¬ 
jective  causes  of  the  judgement,  which  we  have 
taken  for  its  objective  grounds,  and  thus  explain 
the  deceptive  judgement  as  a  phenomenon  in 
our  mind,  apart  altogether  from  the  objective 
character  of  the  object,  we  can  then  expose  the 
illusion  and  need  be  no  longer  deceived  by  it,  al¬ 
though,  if  its  subjective  cause  lies  in  our  nature, 
we  cannot  hope  altogether  to  escape  its  influence. 

I  can  only  maintain ,  that  is,  affirm  as  neces¬ 
sarily  valid  for  every  one,  that  which  produces 
conviction.  Persuasion  I  may  keep  for  myself, 
if  it  is  agreeable  to  me;  but  I  cannot,  and  ought 
not,  to  attempt  to  impose  it  as  binding  upon 
others. 

Holding  for  true ,  or  the  subjective  validity  of 
a  judgement  in  relation  to  conviction  (which  is, 
at  the  same  time,  objectively  valid),  has  the 


OF  PURE  REASON 


three  following  degrees:  opinion ,  belief,  and 
knowledge.  Opinion  is  a  consciously  insufficient 
judgement,  subjectively  as  well  as  objectively. 
Belief  is  subjectively  sufficient,  but  is  recognized 
as  being  objectively  insufficient.  Knowledge  is 
both  subjectively  and  objectively  sufficient.  Sub¬ 
jective  sufficiency  is  termed  conviction  (for  my¬ 
self)  ;  objective  sufficiency  is  termed  certainty 
(for  all).  I  need  not  dwell  longer  on  the  explana¬ 
tion  of  such  simple  conceptions. 

I  must  never  venture  to  be  of  opinion,  with¬ 
out  knowing  something,  at  least,  by  which  my 
judgement,  in  itself  merely  problematical,  is 
brought  into  connection  with  the  truth — which 
connection,  although  not  perfect,  is  still  some¬ 
thing  more  than  an  arbitrary  fiction.  Moreover, 
the  law  of  such  a  connection  must  be  certain. 
For  if,  in  relation  to  this  law,  I  have  nothing 
more  than  opinion,  my  judgement  is  but  a  play 
of  the  imagination,  without  the  least  relation  to 
truth.  In  the  judgements  of  pure  reason,  opin¬ 
ion  has  no  place.  For,  as  they  do  not  rest  on 
empirical  grounds  and  as  the  sphere  of  pure  rea¬ 
son  is  that  of  necessary  truth  and  a  priori  cogni¬ 
tion,  the  principle  of  connection  in  it  requires 
universality  and  necessity,  and  consequently 
perfect  certainty — otherwise  we  should  have  no 
guide  to  the  truth  at  all.  Hence  it  is  absurd  to 
have  an  opinion  in  pure  mathematics;  we  must 
know,  or  abstain  from  forming  a  judgement  al¬ 
together.  The  case  is  the  same  with  the  maxims 
of  morality.  For  we  must  not  hazard  an  action 
on  the  mere  opinion  that  it  is  allowed,  but  we 
must  know  it  to  be  so. 

In  the  transcendental  sphere  of  reason,  on  the 
other  hand,  the  term  opinion  is  too  weak,  while 
the  word  knowledge  is  too  strong.  From  the  mere¬ 
ly  speculative  point  of  view,  therefore,  we  can¬ 
not  form  a  judgement  at  all.  For  the  subjective 
grounds  of  a  judgement,  such  as  produce  belief, 
cannot  be  admitted  in  speculative  inquiries,  in¬ 
asmuch  as  they  cannot  stand  without  empirical 
support  and  are  incapable  of  being  communi¬ 
cated  to  others  in  equal  measure. 

But  it  is  only  from  the  practical  point  of  view 
that  a  theoretically  insufficient  judgement  can 
be  termed  belief.  Now  the  practical  reference  is 
either  to  skill  or  to  morality;  to  the  former, 
when  the  end  proposed  is  arbitrary  and  acciden¬ 
tal,  to  the  latter,  when  it  is  absolutely  necessary. 

If  we  propose  to  ourselves  any  end  whatever, 
the  conditions  of  its  attainment  are  hypotheti¬ 
cally  necessary.  The  necessity  is  subjectively,  but 
still  only  comparatively,  sufficient,  if  I  am  ac¬ 
quainted  with  no  other  conditions  under  which 
the  end  can  be  attained.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is 


sufficient,  absolutely  and  for  every  one,  if  I 
know  for  certain  that  no  one  can  be  acquainted 
with  any  other  conditions  under  which  the  at¬ 
tainment  of  the  proposed  end  would  be  possible. 
In  the  former  case  my  supposition — my  judge¬ 
ment  with  regard  to  certain  conditions — is  a 
merely  accidental  belief ;  in  the  latter  it  is  a  nec¬ 
essary  belief.  The  physician  must  pursue  some 
course  in  the  case  of  a  patient  who  is  in  danger, 
but  is  ignorant  of  the  nature  of  the  disease.  He 
observes  the  symptoms,  and  concludes,  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  best  of  his  judgement,  that  it  is  a  case 
of  phthisis.  His  belief  is,  even  in  his  own  judge¬ 
ment,  only  contingent:  another  man  might,  per¬ 
haps  come  nearer  the  truth.  Such  a  belief,  con¬ 
tingent  indeed,  but  still  forming  the  ground  of 
the  actual  use  of  means  for  the  attainment  of 
certain  ends,  I  term  pragmatical  belief. 

The  usual  test,  whether  that  which  any  one 
maintains  is  merely  his  persuasion,  or  his  sub¬ 
jective  conviction  at  least,  that  is,  his  firm  be¬ 
lief,  is  a  bet.  It  frequently  happens  that  a  man 
delivers  his  opinions  with  so  much  boldness  and 
assurance,  that  he  appears  to  be  under  no  appre¬ 
hension  as  to  the  possibility  of  his  being  in  er¬ 
ror.  The  offer  of  a  bet  startles  him,  and  makes 
him  pause.  Sometimes  it  turns  out  that  his  per¬ 
suasion  may  be  valued  at  a  ducat,  but  not  at  ten. 
For  he  does  not  hesitate,  perhaps,  to  venture  a 
ducat,  but  if  it  is  proposed  to  stake  ten,  he  im¬ 
mediately  becomes  aware  of  the  possibility  of 
his  being  mistaken — a  possibility  which  has  hith¬ 
erto  escaped  his  observation.  If  we  imagine  to 
ourselves  that  we  have  to  stake  the  happiness  of 
our  whole  life  on  the  truth  of  any  proposition, 
our  judgement  drops  its  air  of  triumph,  we  take 
the  alarm,  and  discover  the  actual  strength  of 
our  belief.  Thus  pragmatical  belief  has  degrees, 
varying  in  proportion  to  the  interests  at  stake. 

Now,  in  cases  where  we  cannot  enter  upon 
any  course  of  action  in  reference  to  some  object, 
and  where,  accordingly,  our  judgement  is  purely 
theoretical,  we  can  still  represent  to  ourselves, 
in  thought,  the  possibility  of  a  course  of  action, 
for  which  we  suppose  that  we  have  sufficient 
grounds,  if  any  means  existed  of  ascertaining  the 
truth  of  the  matter.  Thus  we  find  in  purely  the¬ 
oretical  judgements  an  analogon  of  practical 
judgements,  to  which  the  word  belief  may  prop¬ 
erly  be  applied,  and  which  we  may  term  doc¬ 
trinal  belief.  I  should  not  hesitate  to  stake  my 
all  on  the  truth  of  the  proposition  —  if  there 
were  any  possibility  of  bringing  it  to  the  test  of 
experience — that,  at  least,  some  one  of  the  plan¬ 
ets,  which  we  see,  is  inhabited.  Hence  I  say  that 
I  have  not  merely  the  opinion,  but  the  strong 


THE  CRITIQUE 


242 

belief,  on  the  correctness  of  which  I  would  stake 
even  many  of  the  advantages  of  life,  that  there 
are  inhabitants  in  other  worlds. 

Now  we  must  admit  that  the  doctrine  of  the 
existence  of  God  belongs  to  doctrinal  belief. 
For,  although  in  respect  to  the  theoretical  cog¬ 
nition  of  the  universe  I  do  not  require  to  form 
any  theory  which  necessarily  involves  this  idea, 
as  the  condition  of  my  explanation  of  the  phe¬ 
nomena  which  the  universe  presents,  but,  on  the 
contrary,  am  rather  bound  so  to  use  my  reason 
as  if  everything  were  mere  nature,  still  teleolog¬ 
ical  unity  is  so  important  a  condition  of  the  ap¬ 
plication  of  my  reason  to  nature,  that  it  is  im¬ 
possible  for  me  to  ignore  it — especially  since,  in 
addition  to  these  considerations,  abundant  ex¬ 
amples  of  it  are  supplied  by  experience.  But  the 
sole  condition,  so  far  as  my  knowledge  extends, 
under  which  this  unity  can  be  my  guide  in  the 
investigation  of  nature,  is  the  assumption  that 
a  supreme  intelligence  has  ordered  all  things  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  wisest  ends.  Consequently,  the 
hypothesis  of  a  wise  author  of  the  universe  is 
necessary  for  my  guidance  in  the  investigation 
of  nature — is  the  condition  under  which  alone 
I  can  fulfil  an  end  which  is  contingent  indeed, 
but  by  no  means  unimportant.  Moreover,  since 
the  result  of  my  attempts  so  frequently  confirms 
the  utility  of  this  assumption,  and  since  nothing 
decisive  can  be  adduced  against  it,  it  follows 
that  it  would  be  saying  far  too  little  to  term  my 
judgement,  in  this  case,  a  mere  opinion,  and 
that,  even  in  this  theoretical  connection,  I  may 
assert  that  I  firmly  believe  in  God.  Still,  if  we 
use  words  strictly,  this  must  not  be  called  a 
practical,  but  a  doctrinal  belief,  which  the  the¬ 
ology  of  nature  (physico-theology)  must  also 
produce  in  my  mind.  In  the  wisdom  of  a  Su¬ 
preme  Being,  and  in  the  shortness  of  life,  so  in¬ 
adequate  to  the  development  of  the  glorious 
powers  of  human  nature,  we  may  find  equally 
sufficient  grounds  for  a  doctrinal  belief  in  the 
future  life  of  the  human  soul. 

The  expression  of  belief  is,  in  such  cases,  an 
expression  of  modesty  from  the  objective  point 
of  view,  but,  at  the  same  time,  of  firm  confi¬ 
dence,  from  the  subjective.  If  I  should  venture 
to  term  this  merely  theoretical  judgement  even 
so  much  as  a  hypothesis  which  I  am  entitled  to 
assume;  a  more  complete  conception,  with  re¬ 
gard  to  another  world  and  to  the  cause  of  the 
world,  might  then  be  justly  required  of  me  than 
I  am.  in  reality,  able  to  give.  For,  if  I  assume 
anything,  even  as  a  mere  hypothesis,  I  must,  at 
least,  know  so  much  of  the  properties  of  such  a 
being  as  will  enable  me,  not  to  form  the  concep¬ 


tion ,  but  to  imagine  the  existence  of  it.  But  the 
word  belief  refers  only  to  the  guidance  which  an 
idea  gives  me,  and  to  its  subjective  influence  on 
the  conduct  of  my  reason,  which  forces  me  to 
hold  it  fast,  though  I  may  not  be  in  a  position 
to  give  a  speculative  account  of  it. 

But  mere  doctrinal  belief  is,  to  some  extent, 
wanting  in  stability.  We  often  quit  our  hold  of 
it,  in  consequence  of  the  difficulties  which  occur 
in  speculation,  though  in  the  end  we  inevitably 
return  to  it  again. 

It  is  quite  otherwise  with  moral  belief.  For  in 
this  sphere  action  is  absolutely  necessary,  that 
is,  I  must  act  in  obedience  to  the  moral  law  in 
all  points.  The  end  is  here  incontrovertibly  es¬ 
tablished,  and  there  is  only  one  condition  possi¬ 
ble,  according  to  the  best  of  my  perception,  un¬ 
der  which  this  end  can  harmonize  with  all  other 
ends,  and  so  have  practical  validity — namely, 
the  existence  of  a  God  and  of  a  future  world.  I 
know  also,  to  a  certainty,  that  no  one  can  be  ac¬ 
quainted  with  any  other  conditions  which  con¬ 
duct  to  the  same  unity  of  ends  under  the  moral 
law.  But  since  the  moral  precept  is,  at  the  same 
time,  my  maxim  (as  reason  requires  that  it 
should  be),  I  am  irresistibly  constrained  to  be¬ 
lieve  in  the  existence  of  God  and  in  a  future 
life;  and  I  am  sure  that  nothing  can  make  me 
waver  in  this  belief,  since  I  should  thereby 
overthrow  my  moral  maxims,  the  renunciation 
of  which  would  render  me  hateful  in  my  own 
eyes. 

Thus,  while  all  the  ambitious  attempts  of  rea¬ 
son  to  penetrate  beyond  the  limits  of  experience 
end  in  disappointment,  there  is  still  enough  left 
to  satisfy  us  in  a  practical  point  of  view.  No  one, 
it  is  true,  will  be  able  to  boast  that  he  knows 
that  there  is  a  God  and  a  future  life;  for,  if  he 
knows  this,  he  is  just  the  man  whom  I  have  long 
wished  to  find.  All  knowledge,  regarding  an  ob¬ 
ject  of  mere  reason,  can  be  communicated;  and 
I  should  thus  be  enabled  to  hope  that  my  own 
knowledge  would  receive  this  wonderful  exten¬ 
sion,  through  the  instrumentality  of  his  instruc¬ 
tion.  No,  my  conviction  is  not  logical ,  but  moral 
certainty ;  and  since  it  rests  on  subjective  grounds 
(of  the  moral  sentiment),  I  must  not  even  say: 
It  is  morally  certain  that  there  is  a  God,  etc., 
but:  I  am  morally  certain,  that  is,  my  belief  in 
God  and  in  another  world  is  so  interwoven  with 
my  moral  nature  that  I  am  under  as  little  ap¬ 
prehension  of  having  the  former  tom  from  me 
as  of  losing  the  latter. 

The  only  point  in  this  argument  that  may  ap¬ 
pear  open  to  suspicion  is  that  this  rational  be¬ 
lief  presupposes  the  existence  of  moral  senti- 


OF  PURE 

meats.  If  we  give  up  this  assumption,  and  take 
a  man  who  is  entirely  indifferent  with  regard  to 
moral  laws,  the  question  which  reason  proposes, 
becomes  then  merely  a  problem  for  speculation 
and  may,  indeed,  be  supported  by  strong  grounds 
from  analogy,  but  not  by  such  as  will  compel 
the  most  obstinate  scepticism  to  give  way.1  But 
in  these  questions  no  man  is  free  from  all  inter¬ 
est.  For  though  the  want  of  good  sentiments 
may  place  him  beyond  the  influence  of  moral  in¬ 
terests,  still  even  in  this  case  enough  may  be  left 
to  make  him  fear  the  existence  of  God  and  a  fu¬ 
ture  life.  For  he  cannot  pretend  to  any  certainty 
of  the  non-existence  of  God  and  of  a  future  life, 
unless — since  it  could  only  be  proved  by  mere 
reason,  and  therefore  apodeictically — he  is  pre¬ 
pared  to  establish  the  impossibility  of  both, 
which  certainly  no  reasonable  man  would  under¬ 
take  to  do.  This  would  be  a  negative  belief, 
which  could  not,  indeed,  produce  morality  and 
good  sentiments,  but  still  could  produce  an  anal- 
ogon  of  these,  by  operating  as  a  powerful  re¬ 
straint  on  the  outbreak  of  evil  dispositions. 

But,  it  will  be  said,  is  this  all  that  pure  reason 
can  effect,  in  opening  up  prospects  beyond  the 
limits  of  experience?  Nothing  more  than  two 
articles  of  belief?  Common  sense  could  have 
done  as  much  as  this,  without  taking  the  philos¬ 
ophers  to  counsel  in  the  matter! 

I  shall  not  here  eulogize  philosophy  for  the 
benefits  which  the  laborious  efforts  of  its  criti¬ 
cism  have  conferred  on  human  reason — even 
granting  that  its  merit  should  turn  out  in  the 
end  to  be  only  negative — for  on  this  point  some¬ 
thing  more  will  be  said  in  the  next  section.  But, 

I  ask,  do  you  require  that  that  knowledge  which 
concerns  all  men,  should  transcend  the  common 
understanding,  and  should  only  be  revealed  to 
you  by  philosophers?  The  very  circumstance 
which  has  called  forth  your  censure,  is  the  best 
confirmation  of  the  correctness  of  our  previous 
assertions,  since  it  discloses,  what  could  not 
have  been  foreseen,  that  Nature  is  not  charge¬ 
able  with  any  partial  distribution  of  her  gifts  in 
those  matters  which  concern  all  men  without 
distinction  and  that,  in  respect  to  the  essential 
ends  of  human  nature,  we  cannot  advance  fur¬ 
ther  with  the  help  of  the  highest  philosophy, 

1  The  human  mind  (as,  I  believe,  every  rational  be¬ 
ing  must  of  necessity  do)  takes  a  natural  interest  in 
morality,  although  this  interest  is  not  undivided,  and 
may  not  be  practically  in  preponderance.  If  you 
strengthen  and  increase  it,  you  will  find  the  reason  be¬ 
come  docile,  more  enlightened,  and  more  capable  of 
uniting  the  speculative  interest  with  the  practical.  But 
if  you  do  not  take  care  at  the  outset,  or  at  least  mid¬ 
way,  to  make  men  good,  you  will  never  force  them  into 
an  honest  belief. 


REASON  243 

than  under  the  guidance  which  nature  has 
vouchsafed  to  the  meanest  understanding. 

Chapter  III.  The  Architectonic  of  Pure  Reason 

By  the  term  architectonic  I  mean  the  art  of  con¬ 
structing  a  system.  Without  systematic  unity, 
our  knowledge  cannot  become  science;  it  will 
be  an  aggregate,  and  not  a  system.  Thus  archi¬ 
tectonic  is  the  doctrine  of  the  scientific  in  cog¬ 
nition,  and  therefore  necessarily  forms  part  of 
our  methodology. 

Reason  cannot  permit  our  knowledge  to  re¬ 
main  in  an  unconnected  and  rhapsodistic  state, 
but  requires  that  the  sum  of  our  cognitions 
should  constitute  a  system.  It  is  thus  alone  that 
they  can  advance  the  ends  of  reason.  By  a  jyj- 
tem  I  mean  the  unity  of  various  cognitions  un¬ 
der  one  idea.  This  idea  is  the  conception — given 
by  reason — of  the  form  of  a  wrhole,  in  so  far  as 
the  conception  determines  a  priori  not  only  the 
limits  of  its  content,  but  the  place  wliich  each 
of  its  parts  is  to  occupy.  The  scientific  idea  con¬ 
tains,  therefore,  the  end  and  the  form  of  the 
whole  which  is  in  accordance  with  that  end.  The 
unity  of  the  end,  to  wliich  all  the  parts  of  the 
system  relate,  and  through  which  all  have  a  re¬ 
lation  to  each  other,  communicates  unity  to  the 
whole  system,  so  that  the  absence  of  any  part 
can  be  immediately  detected  from  our  knowl¬ 
edge  of  the  rest;  and  it  determines  a  priori  the 
limits  of  the  system,  thus  excluding  all  contin¬ 
gent  or  arbitrary  additions.  The  whole  is  thus 
an  organism  ( articulatio ),  and  not  an  aggregate 
( coacervatio ) ;  it  may  grow  from  within  (per 
intussusceptionem) ,  but  it  cannot  increase  by 
external  additions  (per  appositionem).  It  is, 
thus,  like  an  animal  body,  the  growth  of  which 
does  not  add  any  limb,  but,  without  changing 
their  proportions,  makes  each  in  its  sphere  strong¬ 
er  and  more  active. 

We  require,  for  the  execution  of  the  idea  of 
a  system,  a  schema ,  that  is,  a  content  and  an  ar¬ 
rangement  of  parts  determined  a  priori  by  the 
principle  which  the  aim  of  the  system  prescribes. 
A  schema  which  is  not  projected  in  accordance 
with  an  idea,  that  is,  from  the  standpoint  of  the 
highest  aim  of  reason,  but  merely  empirically, 
in  accordance  with  accidental  aims  and  purposes 
(the  number  of  which  cannot  be  predetermined) , 
can  give  us  nothing  more  than  technical  unity. 
But  the  schema  which  is  originated  from  an  idea 
(in  which  case  reason  presents  us  with  aims  a 
priori ,  and  does  not  look  for  them  to  experience), 
forms  the  basis  of  architectonical  unity.  A  sci¬ 
ence,  in  the  proper  acceptation  of  that  term, 
cannot  be  formed  technically,  that  is,  from  ob- 


244  THE  CRITIQUE 


servation  of  the  similarity  existing  between  dif¬ 
ferent  objects,  and  the  purely  contingent  use  we 
make  of  our  knowledge  in  concreto  with  refer¬ 
ence  to  all  kinds  of  arbitrary  external  aims;  its 
constitution  must  be  framed  on  architectonical 
principles,  that  is,  its  parts  must  be  shown  to 
possess  an  essential  affinity,  and  be  capable  of 
being  deduced  from  one  supreme  and  internal 
aim  or  end,  which  forms  the  condition  of  the 
possibility  of  the  scientific  whole.  The  schema 
of  a  science  must  give  a  priori  the  plan  of  it 
{mono gramma) ,  and  the  division  of  the  whole 
into  parts,  in  conformity  with  the  idea  of  the 
science;  and  it  must  also  distinguish  this  whole 
from  all  others,  according  to  certain  understood 
principles. 

No  one  will  attempt  to  construct  a  science, 
unless  he  have  some  idea  to  rest  on  as  a  proper 
basis.  But,  in  the  elaboration  of  the  science,  he 
finds  that  the  schema,  nay,  even  the  definition 
which  he  at  first  gave  of  the  science,  rarely  cor¬ 
responds  with  his  idea;  for  this  idea  lies,  like  a 
germ,  in  our  reason,  its  parts  undeveloped  and 
hid  even  from  microscopical  observation.  For 
this  reason,  we  ought  to  explain  and  define  sci¬ 
ences,  not  according  to  the  description  which 
the  originator  gives  of  them,  but  according  to 
the  idea  which  we  find  based  in  reason  itself, 
and  which  is  suggested  by  the  natural  unity  of 
the  parts  of  the  science  already  accumulated. 
For  it  will  often  be  found  that  the  originator  of 
a  science  and  even  his  latest  successors  remain 
attached  to  an  erroneous  idea,  which  they  can¬ 
not  render  clear  to  themselves,  and  that  they 
thus  fail  in  determining  the  true  content,  the  ar¬ 
ticulation  or  systematic  unity,  and  the  limits  of 
their  science. 

It  is  unfortunate  that,  only  after  having  oc¬ 
cupied  ourselves  for  a  long  time  in  the  collec¬ 
tion  of  materials,  under  the  guidance  of  an  idea 
which  lies  undeveloped  in  the  mind,  but  not  ac¬ 
cording  to  any  definite  plan  of  arrangement — 
nay,  only  after  we  have  spent  much  time  and 
labour  in  the  technical  disposition  of  our  mate¬ 
rials,  does  it  become  possible  to  view  the  idea  of 
a  science  in  a  clear  light,  and  to  project,  accord¬ 
ing  to  architectonical  principles,  a  plan  of  the 
whole,  in  accordance  with  the  aims  of  reason. 
Systems  seem,  like  certain  worms,  to  be  formed 
by  a  kind  of  generatio  aequivoca — by  the  mere 
confluence  of  conceptions,  and  to  gain  complete¬ 
ness  only  with  the  progress  of  time.  But  the 
schema  or  germ  of  all  lies  in  reason;  and  thus  is 
not  only  every  system  organized  according  to  its 
own  idea,  but  all  are  united  into  one  grand  system 
of  human  knowledge,  of  which  they  form  mem¬ 


bers.  For  this  reason,  it  is  possible  to  frame  an 
architectonic  of  all  human  cognition,  the  forma¬ 
tion  of  which,  at  the  present  time,  considering 
the  immense  materials  collected  or  to  be  found 
in  the  ruins  of  old  systems,  would  not  indeed  be 
very  difficult.  Our  purpose  at  present  is  merely 
to  sketch  the  plan  of  the  architectonic  of  all  cog¬ 
nition  given  by  pure  reason;  and  w*  begin  from 
the  point  where  the  main  root  of  human  knowl¬ 
edge  divides  into  two,  one  of  which  is  reason . 
By  reason  I  understand  here  the  whole  higher 
faculty  of  cognition,  the  rational  being  placed  in 
contradistinction  to  the  empirical. 

If  I  make  complete  abstraction  of  the  con¬ 
tent  of  cognition,  objectively  considered,  all 
cognition  is,  from  a  subjective  point  of  view, 
either  historical  or  rational.  Historical  cognition 
is  cognitio  ex  datis ,  rational,  cognitio  ex  princi- 
piis.  Whatever  may  be  the  original  source  of  a 
cognition,  it  is,  in  relation  to  the  person  who 
possesses  it,  merely  historical,  if  he  knows  only 
what  has  been  given  him  from  another  quarter, 
whether  that  knowledge  was  communicated  by 
direct  experience  or  by  instruction.  Thus  the 
person  who  has  learned  a  system  of  philosophy 
— say  the  Wolfian — although  he  has  a  perfect 
knowledge  of  all  the  principles,  definitions,  and 
arguments  in  that  philosophy,  as  well  as  of  the 
divisions  that  have  been  made  of  the  system, 
possesses  really  no  more  than  an  historical  knowl¬ 
edge  of  the  Wolfian  system;  he  knows  only  what 
has  been  told  him,  his  judgements  are  only  those 
which  he  has  received  from  his  teachers.  Dis¬ 
pute  the  validity  of  a  definition,  and  he  is  com¬ 
pletely  at  a  loss  to  find  another.  He  has  formed 
his  mind  on  another’s;  but  the  imitative  faculty 
is  not  the  productive.  His  knowledge  has  not 
been  drawn  from  reason;  and  although,  objec¬ 
tively  considered,  it  is  rational  knowledge,  sub¬ 
jectively,  it  is  merely  historical.  He  has  learned 
this  or  that  philosophy  and  is  merely  a  plaster- 
cast  of  a  living  man.  Rational  cognitions  which 
are  objective,  that  is,  which  have  their  source 
in  reason,  can  be  so  termed  from  a  subjective 
point  of  view,  only  when  they  have  been  drawn 
by  the  individual  himself  from  the  sources  of 
reason,  that  is,  from  principles;  and  it  is  in  this 
way  alone  that  criticism,  or  even  the  rejection 
of  what  has  been  already  learned,  can  spring  up 
in  the  mind. 

All  rational  cognition  is,  again,  based  either 
on  conceptions,  or  on  the  construction  of  con¬ 
ceptions.  The  former  is  termed  philosophical , 
the  latter  mathematical.  I  have  already  shown 
the  essential  difference  of  these  two  methods  of 
cognition  in  the  first  chapter.  A  cognition  may 


OF  PURE  REASON 


be  objectively  philosophical  and  subjectively 
historical — as  is  the  case  with  the  majority  of 
scholars  and  those  who  cannot  look  beyond  the 
limits  of  their  system,  and  who  remain  in  a 
state  of  pupilage  all  their  lives.  But  it  is  remark¬ 
able  that  mathematical  knowledge,  when  com¬ 
mitted  to  memory,  is  valid,  from  the  subjective 
point  of  view,  as  rational  knowledge  also,  and 
that  the  same  distinction  cannot  be  drawn  here 
as  in  the  case  of  philosophical  cognition.  The 
reason  is  that  the  only  way  of  arriving  at  this 
knowledge  is  through  the  essential  principles  of 
reason,  and  thus  it  is  always  certain  and  indis¬ 
putable;  because  reason  is  employed  in  concreto 
— but  at  the  same  time  a  priori — that  is,  in  pure 
and,  therefore,  infallible  intuition;  and  thus  all 
causes  of  illusion  and  error  are  excluded.  Of  all 
the  a  priori  sciences  of  reason,  therefore,  math¬ 
ematics  alone  can  be  learned.  Philosophy — un¬ 
less  it  be  in  an  historical  manner — cannot  be 
learned;  we  can  at  most  learn  to  philosophize. 

Philosophy  is  the  system  of  all  philosophical 
cognition.  We  must  use  this  term  in  an  objective 
sense,  if  we  understand  by  it  the  archetype  of 
all  attempts  at  philosophizing,  and  the  standard 
by  which  all  subjective  philosophies  are  to  be 
judged.  In  this  sense,  philosophy  is  merely  the 
idea  of  a  possible  science,  which  does  not  exist 
in  concreto ,  but  to  which  we  endeavour  in  vari¬ 
ous  ways  to  approximate,  until  we  have  discov¬ 
ered  the  right  path  to  pursue — a  path  over¬ 
grown  by  the  errors  and  illusions  of  sense — and 
the  image  we  have  hitherto  tried  in  vain  to  shape 
has  become  a  perfect  copy  of  the  great  proto¬ 
type.  Until  that  time,  we  cannot  learn  philoso¬ 
phy — it  does  not  exist;  if  it  does,  where  is  it, 
who  possesses  it,  and  how  shall  we  know  it?  We 
can  only  learn  to  philosophize;  in  other  words, 
we  can  only  exercise  our  powers  of  reasoning  in 
accordance  with  general  principles,  retaining  at 
the  same  time,  the  right  of  investigating  the 
sources  of  these  principles,  of  testing,  and  even 
of  rejecting  them. 

Until  then,  our  conception  of  philosophy  is 
only  a  scholastic  conception — a  conception,  that 
is,  of  a  system  of  cognition  which  we  are  trying 
to  elaborate  into  a  science;  all  that  we  at  pres¬ 
ent  know  being  the  systematic  unity  of  this  cog¬ 
nition,  and  consequently  the  logical  complete¬ 
ness  of  the  cognition  for  the  desired  end.  But 
there  is  also  a  cosmical  conception  ( conceptus 
cosmicus)  of  philosophy,  which  has  always 
formed  the  true  basis  of  this  term,  especially 
when  philosophy  was  personified  and  presented 
to  us  in  the  ideal  of  a  philosopher.  In  this  view, 
philosophy  is  the  science  of  the  relation  of  all 


245 

cognition  to  the  ultimate  and  essential  aims  of 
human  reason  (teleologia  rationis  humanae), 
and  the  philosopher  is  not  merely  an  artist — 
who  occupies  himself  with  conceptions — but  a 
lawgiver,  legislating  for  human  reason.  In  this 
sense  of  the  word,  it  would  be  in  the  highest  de¬ 
gree  arrogant  to  assume  the  title  of  philosopher, 
and  to  pretend  that  we  had  reached  the  per¬ 
fection  of  the  prototype  which  lies  in  the  idea 
alone. 

The  mathematician,  the  natural  philosopher, 
and  the  logician — how  far  soever  the  first  may 
have  advanced  in  rational,  and  the  two  latter  in 
philosophical  knowledge — are  merely  artists,  en¬ 
gaged  in  the  arrangement  and  formation  of  con¬ 
ceptions;  they  cannot  be  termed  philosophers. 
Above  them  all,  there  is  the  ideal  teacher,  who 
employs  them  as  instruments  for  the  advance¬ 
ment  of  the  essential  aims  of  human  reason. 
Him  alone  can  we  call  philosopher;  but  he  no¬ 
where  exists.  But  the  idea  of  his  legislative 
power  resides  in  the  mind  of  every  man,  and  it 
alone  teaches  us  what  kind  of  systematic  unity 
philosophy  demands  in  view  of  the  ultimate 
aims  of  reason.  This  idea  is,  therefore,  a  cosmi¬ 
cal  conception.1 

In  view  of  the  complete  systematic  unity  of 
reason,  there  can  only  be  one  ultimate  end  of  all 
the  operations  of  the  mind.  To  this  all  other 
aims  are  subordinate,  and  nothing  more  than 
means  for  its  attainment.  This  ultimate  end  is 
the  destination  of  man,  and  the  philosophy  which 
relates  to  it  is  termed  moral  philosophy.  The 
superior  position  occupied  by  moral  philosophy, 
above  all  other  spheres  for  the  operations  of 
reason,  sufficiently  indicates  the  reason  why  the 
ancients  always  included  the  idea — and  in  an 
especial  manner — of  moralist  in  that  of  philoso¬ 
pher.  Even  at  the  present  day,  we  call  a  man 
who  appears  to  have  the  power  of  self-govern¬ 
ment,  even  although  his  knowledge  may  be  very 
limited,  by  the  name  of  philosopher. 

The  legislation  of  human  reason,  or  philoso¬ 
phy,  has  two  objects — nature  and  freedom — 
and  thus  contains  not  only  the  laws  of  nature, 
but  also  those  of  ethics,  at  first  in  two  separate 
systems,  which,  finally,  merge  into  one  grand 
philosophical  system  of  cognition.  The  philoso¬ 
phy  of  nature  relates  to  that  which  is ,  that  of 
ethics  to  that  which  ought  to  be. 

But  all  philosophy  is  either  cognition  on  the 
basis  of  pure  reason,  or  the  cognition  of  reason 

1  By  a  cosmical  conception,  I  mean  one  in  which  all 
men  necessarily  take  an  interest;  the  aim  of  a  science 
must  accordingly  be  determined  according  to  scholastic 
conceptions,  if  it  is  regarded  merely  as  a  means  to  cer¬ 
tain  arbitrarily  proposed  ends. 


THE  CRITIQUE 


246 

on  the  basis  of  empirical  principles.  The  former 
is  termed  pure ,  the  latter  empirical  philosophy. 

The  philosophy  of  pure  reason  is  either  pro¬ 
paedeutic ,  that  is,  an  inquiry  into  the  powers  of 
reason  in  regard  to  pure  a  priori  cognition,  and 
is  termed  critical  philosophy ;  or  it  is,  secondly, 
the  system  of  pure  reason — a  science  containing 
the  systematic  presentation  of  the  whole  body 
of  philosophical  knowledge,  true  as  well  as  illu¬ 
sory,  given  by  pure  reason — and  is  called  meta¬ 
physic.  This  name  may,  however,  be  also  given 
to  the  whole  system  of  pure  philosophy,  critical 
philosophy  included,  and  may  designate  the  in¬ 
vestigation  into  the  sources  or  possibility  of  a 
priori  cognition,  as  well  as  the  presentation  of 
the  a  priori  cognitions  which  form  a  system  of 
pure  philosophy — excluding,  at  the  same  time, 
all  empirical  and  mathematical  elements. 

Metaphysic  is  divided  into  that  of  the  spec¬ 
ulative  and  that  of  the  practical  use  of  pure  rea¬ 
son,  and  is,  accordingly,  either  the  metaphysic 
of  nature ,  or  the  metaphysic  of  ethics.  The  for¬ 
mer  contains  all  the  pure  rational  principles — 
based  upon  conceptions  alone  (and  thus  exclud¬ 
ing  mathematics) — of  all  theoretical  cognition ; 
the  latter,  the  principles  which  determine  and 
necessitate  a  priori  all  action.  Now  moral  phi¬ 
losophy  alone  contains  a  code  of  laws — for  the 
regulation  of  our  actions — which  are  deduced 
from  principles  entirely  a  priori.  Hence  the  met¬ 
aphysic  of  ethics  is  the  only  pure  moral  philoso¬ 
phy,  as  it  is  not  based  upon  anthropological  or 
other  empirical  considerations.  The  metaphysic 
of  speculative  reason  is  what  is  commonly  called 
metaphysic  in  the  more  limited  sense.  But  as 
pure  moral  philosophy  properly  forms  a  part  of 
this  system  of  cognition,  we  must  allow  it  to  re¬ 
tain  the  name  of  metaphysic,  although  it  is  not 
requisite  that  we  should  insist  on  so  terming  it 
in  our  present  discussion. 

It  is  of  the  highest  importance  to  separate 
those  cognitions  which  differ  from  others  both 
in  kind  and  in  origin,  and  to  take  great  care  that 
they  are  not  confounded  with  those  with  which 
they  are  generally  found  connected.  What  the 
chemist  does  in  the  analysis  of  substances,  what 
the  mathematician  in  pure  mathematics,  is,  in 
a  still  higher  degree,  the  duty  of  the  philosopher, 
that  the  value  of  each  different  kind  of  cogni¬ 
tion,  and  the  part  it  takes  in  the  operations  of 
the  mind,  may  be  clearly  defined.  Human  rea¬ 
son  has  never  wanted  a  metaphysic  of  some 
kind,  since  it  attained  the  power  of  thought,  or 
rather  of  reflection;  but  it  has  never  been  able 
to  keep  this  sphere  of  thought  and  cognition 
pure  from  all  admixture  of  foreign  elements. 


The  idea  of  a  science  of  this  kind  is  as  old  as 
speculation  itself;  and  what  mind  does  not  spec¬ 
ulate — either  in  the  scholastic  or  in  the  popular 
fashion?  At  the  same  time,  it  must  be  admitted 
that  even  thinkers  by  profession  have  been  un¬ 
able  clearly  to  explain  the  distinction  between 
the  two  elements  of  our  cognition — the  one 
completely  a  priori ,  the  other  a  posteriori ;  and 
hence  the  proper  definition  of  a  peculiar  kind  of 
cognition,  and  with  it  the  just  idea  of  a  science 
which  has  so  long  and  so  deeply  engaged  the  at¬ 
tention  of  the  human  mind,  has  never  been 
established.  When  it  was  said:  “Metaphysic  is 
the  science  of  the  first  principles  of  human  cog¬ 
nition,”  this  definition  did  not  signalize  a  pecu¬ 
liarity  in  kind,  but  only  a  difference  in  degree; 
these  first  principles  were  thus  declared  to  be 
more  general  than  others,  but  no  criterion  of 
distinction  from  empirical  principles  was  given. 
Of  these  some  are  more  general,  and  therefore 
higher,  than  others;  and — as  we  cannot  distin¬ 
guish  what  is  completely  a  priori  from  that 
which  is  known  to  be  a  posteriori — where  shall 
we  draw  the  line  which  is  to  separate  the  higher 
and  so-called  first  principles,  from  the  lower 
and  subordinate  principles  of  cognition?  What 
would  be  said  if  we  were  asked  to  be  satisfied 
with  a  division  of  the  epochs  of  the  world  into 
the  earlier  centuries  and  those  following  them? 
“Does  the  fifth,  or  the  tenth  century  belong  to 
the  earlier  centuries?”  it  would  be  asked.  In  the 
same  way  I  ask:  Does  the  conception  of  exten¬ 
sion  belong  to  metaphysics?  You  answer,  “Yes.” 
Well,  that  of  body  too?  “Yes.”  And  that  of  a 
fluid  body?  You  stop,  you  are  unprepared  to 
admit  this;  for  if  you  do,  everything  will  belong 
to  metaphysics.  From  this  it  is  evident  that  the 
mere  degree  of  subordination — of  the  particu¬ 
lar  to  the  general — cannot  determine  the  limits 
of  a  science;  and  that,  in  the  present  case,  we 
must  expect  to  find  a  difference  in  the  concep¬ 
tions  of  metaphysics  both  in  kind  and  in  origin. 
The  fundamental  idea  of  metaphysics  was  ob¬ 
scured  on  another  side  by  the  fact  that  this  kind 
of  a  priori  cognition  showed  a  certain  similarity 
in  character  with  the  science  of  mathematics. 
Both  have  the  property  in  common  of  possess¬ 
ing  an  a  priori  origin;  but,  in  the  one.  our  knowl¬ 
edge  is  based  upon  conceptions,  in  the  other,  on 
the  construction  of  conceptions.  Thus  a  decided 
dissimilarity  between  philosophical  and  mathe¬ 
matical  cognition  comes  out — a  dissimilarity 
which  was  always  felt,  but  which  could  not  be 
made  distinct  for  want  of  an  insight  into  the 
criteria  of  the  difference.  And  thus  it  happened 
that,  as  philosophers  themselves  failed  in  the 


OF  PURE 

proper  development  of  the  idea  of  their  science, 
the  elaboration  of  the  science  could  not  proceed 
with  a  definite  aim,  or  under  trustworthy  guid¬ 
ance.  Thus,  too,  philosophers,  ignorant  of  the 
path  they  ought  to  pursue  and  always  disputing 
with  each  other  regarding  the  discoveries  which 
each  asserted  he  had  made,  brought  their  sci¬ 
ence  into  disrepute  with  the  rest  of  the  world, 
and  finally,  even  among  themselves. 

All  pure  a  priori  cognition  forms,  therefore, 
in  view  of  the  peculiar  faculty  which  originates 
it,  a  peculiar  and  distinct  unity;  and  metaphys¬ 
ic  is  the  term  applied  to  the  philosophy  which 
attempts  to  represent  that  cognition  in  this  sys¬ 
tematic  unity.  The  speculative  part  of  meta¬ 
physic,  which  has  especially  appropriated  this 
appellation — that  which  we  have  called  the  met¬ 
aphysic  of  nature — and  which  considers  every¬ 
thing,  as  it  is  (not  as  it  ought  to  be),  by  means 
of  a  priori  conceptions,  is  divided  in  the  follow¬ 
ing  manner. 

Metaphysic,  in  the  more  limited  acceptation 
of  the  term,  consists  of  two  parts — transcen¬ 
dental  philosophy  and  the  physiology  of  pure 
reason.  The  former  presents  the  system  of  all 
the  conceptions  and  principles  belonging  to  the 
understanding  and  the  reason,  and  which  relate 
to  objects  in  general,  but  not  to  any  particular 
given  objects  ( Ontologia );  the  latter  has  nature 
for  its  subject-matter,  that  is,  the  sum  of  given 
objects — whether  given  to  the  senses,  or,  if  we 
will,  to  some  other  kind  of  intuition — and  is  ac¬ 
cordingly  physiology ,  although  only  rationalis. 
But  the  use  of  the  faculty  of  reason  in  this  ra¬ 
tional  mode  of  regarding  nature  is  either  physi¬ 
cal  or  hyperphysical,  or,  more  properly  speaking, 
immanent  or  transcendent.  The  former  relates 
to  nature,  in  so  far  as  our  knowledge  regarding 
it  may  be  applied  in  experience  (in  concreto) ; 
the  latter  to  that  connection  of  the  objects 
of  experience,  which  transcends  all  experience. 
Transcendent  physiology  has,  again,  an  internal 
and  an  external  connection  with  its  object,  both, 
however,  transcending  possible  experience;  the 
former  is  the  physiology  of  nature  as  a  whole, 
or  transcendental  cognition  of  the  world,  the 
latter  of  the  connection  of  the  whole  of  nature 
with  a  being  above  nature,  or  transcendental 
cognition  of  God. 

Immanent  physiology,  on  the  contrary,  con¬ 
siders  nature  as  the  sum  of  all  sensuous  objects, 
consequently,  as  it  is  presented  to  us — but  still 
according  to  a  priori  conditions,  for  it  is  under 
these  alone  that  nature  can  be  presented  to  our 
minds  at  all.  The  objects  of  immanent  physiol¬ 
ogy  are  of  two  kinds:  i.  Those  of  the  external 


REASON  247 

senses,  or  corporeal  nature;  2.  The  object  of  the 
internal  sense,  the  soul,  or,  in  accordance  with 
our  fundamental  conceptions  of  it,  thinking  na¬ 
ture.  The  metaphysics  of  corporeal  nature  is 
called  physics;  but,  as  it  must  contain  only  the 
principles  of  an  a  priori  cognition  of  nature,  we 
must  term  it  rational  physics.  The  metaphysics 
of  thinking  nature  is  called  psychology ,  and  for 
the  same  reason  is  to  be  regarded  as  merely  the 
rational  cognition  of  the  soul. 

Thus  the  whole  system  of  metaphysics  con¬ 
sists  of  four  principal  parts:  I.  Ontology;  2.  Ra¬ 
tional  physiology ;  3.  Rational  cosmology;  and 
4.  Rational  theology.  The  second  part — that  of 
the  rational  doctrine  of  nature — may  be  subdi¬ 
vided  into  two,  physica  rationalis1  and  psycho¬ 
logist  rationalis. 

The  fundamental  idea  of  a  philosophy  of  pure 
reason  of  necessity  dictates  this  division;  it  is, 
therefore,  architect onical — in  accordance  with 
the  highest  aims  of  reason,  and  not  merely  tech¬ 
nical,  or  according  to  certain  accidentally-ob¬ 
served  similarities  existing  between  the  different 
parts  of  the  whole  science.  For  this  reason,  also, 
is  the  division  immutable  and  of  legislative  au¬ 
thority.  But  the  reader  may  observe  in  it  a  few 
points  to  which  he  ought  to  demur,  and  which 
may  weaken  his  conviction  of  its  truth  and  le¬ 
gitimacy. 

In  the  first  place,  how  can  I  desire  an  a  priori 
cognition  or  metaphysic  of  objects,  in  so  far  as 
they  are  given  a  posteriori?  and  how  is  it  possi¬ 
ble  to  cognize  the  nature  of  things  according  to 
a  priori  principles,  and  to  attain  to  a  rational 
physiology?  The  answer  is  this.  We  take  from 
experience  nothing  more  than  is  requisite  to  pre¬ 
sent  us  with  an  object  (in  general)  of  the  exter¬ 
nal  or  of  the  internal  sense;  in  the  former  case, 
by  the  mere  conception  of  matter  (impenetrable 
and  inanimate  extension),  in  the  latter,  by  the 
conception  of  a  thinking  being — given  in  the  in¬ 
ternal  empirical  representation,  I  think.  As  to 
the  rest,  we  must  not  employ  in  our  metaphysic 
of  these  objects  any  empirical  principles  (which 
add  to  the  content  of  our  conceptions  by  means 
of  experience),  for  the  purpose  of  forming  by 

1  It  must  not  be  supposed  that  I  mean  by  this  appel¬ 
lation  what  is  generally  called  physica  gcncralis,  and 
which  is  rather  mathematics  than  a  philosophy  of  na¬ 
ture.  For  the  metaphysic  of  nature  is  completely  differ¬ 
ent  from  mathematics,  nor  is  it  so  rich  in  results,  al¬ 
though  it  is  of  great  importance  as  a  critical  test  of  the 
application  of  pure  understanding-cognition  to  nature. 
For  want  of  its  guidance,  even  mathematicians,  adopt¬ 
ing  certain  common  notions — which  are,  in  fact,  meta¬ 
physical — have  unconsciously  crowded  their  theories  of 
nature  with  hypotheses,  the  fallacy  of  which  becomes 
evident  upon  the  application  of  the  principles  of  this 
metaphysic,  without  detriment,  however,  to  the  employ¬ 
ment  of  mathematics  in  this  sphere  of  cognition. 


248  THE  CRITIQUE 


their  help  any  judgements  respecting  these  ob¬ 
jects. 

Secondly,  what  place  shall  we  assign  to  em¬ 
pirical  psychology,  which  has  always  been  con¬ 
sidered  a  part  of  metaphysics,  and  from  which 
in  our  time  such  important  philosophical  results 
have  been  expected,  after  the  hope  of  construct¬ 
ing  an  a  priori  system  of  knowledge  had  been 
abandoned?  I  answer:  It  must  be  placed  by  the 
side  of  empirical  physics  or  physics  proper;  that 
is,  must  be  regarded  as  forming  a  part  of  applied 
philosophy,  the  a  priori  principles  of  which  are 
contained  in  pure  philosophy,  which  is  therefore 
connected,  although  it  must  not  be  confounded, 
with  psychology.  Empirical  psychology  must 
therefore  be  banished  from  the  sphere  of  meta¬ 
physics,  and  is  indeed  excluded  by  the  very  idea 
of  that  science.  In  conformity,  however,  with 
scholastic  usage,  we  must  permit  it  to  occupy  a 
place  in  metaphysics — but  only  as  an  appendix 
to  it.  We  adopt  this  course  from  motives  of 
economy;  as  psychology  is  not  as  yet  full  enough 
to  occupy  our  attention  as  an  independent  study, 
while  it  is,  at  the  same  time,  of  too  great  im¬ 
portance  to  be  entirely  excluded  or  placed  where 
it  has  still  less  affinity  than  it  has  with  the  sub¬ 
ject  of  metaphysics.  It  is  a  stranger  who  has 
been  long  a  guest;  and  we  make  it  welcome  to 
stay,  until  it  can  take  up  a  more  suitable  abode 
in  a  complete  system  of  anthropology — the  pend¬ 
ant  to  empirical  physics. 

The  above  is  the  general  idea  of  metaphysics, 
which,  as  more  was  expected  from  it  than  could 
be  looked  for  with  justice,  and  as  these  pleasant 
expectations  were  unfortunately  never  realized, 
fell  into  general  disrepute.  Our  Critique  must 
have  fully  convinced  the  reader  that,  although 
metaphysics  cannot  form  the  foundation  of  re¬ 
ligion,  it  must  always  be  one  of  its  most  impor¬ 
tant  bulwarks,  and  that  human  reason,  which 
naturally  pursues  a  dialectical  course,  cannot  do 
without  this  science,  which  checks  its  tendencies 
towards  dialectic  and,  by  elevating  reason  to  a 
scientific  and  clear  self-knowledge,  prevents  the 
ravages  which  a  lawless  speculative  reason  would 
infallibly  commit  in  the  sphere  of  morals  as  well 
as  in  that  of  religion.  We  may  be  sure,  therefore, 
whatever  contempt  may  be  thrown  upon  meta¬ 
physics  by  those  who  judge  a  science  not  by  its 
own  nature,  but  according  to  the  accidental  ef¬ 
fects  it  may  have  produced,  that  it  can  never 
be  completely  abandoned,  that  we  must  always 
return  to  it  as  to  a  beloved  one  who  has  been  for 
a  time  estranged,  because  the  questions  with 
which  it  is  engaged  relate  to  the  highest  aims  of 
humanity,  and  reason  must  always  labour  either 


to  attain  to  settled  views  in  regard  to  these,  or 
to  destroy  those  which  others  have  already  es¬ 
tablished. 

Metaphysic,  therefore — that  of  nature,  as 
well  as  that  of  ethics,  but  in  an  especial  manner 
the  criticism  which  forms  the  propaedeutic  to  all 
the  operations  of  reason — forms  properly  that 
department  of  knowledge  which  may  be  termed, 
in  the  truest  sense  of  the  word,  philosophy.  The 
path  which  it  pursues  is  that  of  science,  which, 
when  it  has  once  been  discovered,  is  never  lost, 
and  never  misleads.  Mathematics,  natural  sci¬ 
ence,  the  common  experience  of  men,  have  a 
high  value  as  means,  for  the  most  part,  to  acci¬ 
dental  ends — but  at  last  also,  to  those  which 
are  necessary  and  essential  to  the  existence 
of  humanity.  But  to  guide  them  to  this  high 
goal,  they  require  the  aid  of  rational  cogni¬ 
tion  on  the  basis  of  pure  conceptions,  which, 
be  it  termed  as  it  may,  is  properly  nothing  but 
metaphysics. 

For  the  same  reason,  metaphysics  forms  like¬ 
wise  the  completion  of  the  culture  of  human 
reason.  In  this  respect,  it  is  indispensable,  set¬ 
ting  aside  altogether  the  influence  which  it  ex¬ 
erts  as  a  science.  For  its  subject-matter  is  the 
elements  and  highest  maxims  of  reason,  which 
form  the  basis  of  the  possibility  of  some  sci¬ 
ences  and  of  the  use  of  all.  That,  as  a  purely 
speculative  science,  it  is  more  useful  in  prevent¬ 
ing  error  than  in  the  extension  of  knowledge, 
does  not  detract  from  its  value;  on  the  contrary, 
the  supreme  office  of  censor  which  it  occupies 
assures  to  it  the  highest  authority  and  impor¬ 
tance.  This  office  it  administers  for  the  purpose 
of  securing  order,  harmony,  and  well-being  to 
science,  and  of  directing  its  noble  and  fruitful 
labours  to  the  highest  possible  aim — the  happi¬ 
ness  of  all  mankind. 

Chapter  IV.  The  History  of  Pure  Reason 

This  title  is  placed  here  merely  for  the  purpose 
of  designating  a  division  of  the  system  of  pure 
reason  of  which  I  do  not  intend  to  treat  at  pres¬ 
ent.  I  shall  content  myself  with  casting  a  curso¬ 
ry  glance,  from  a  purely  transcendental  point  of 
view — that  of  the  nature  of  pure  reason — on  the 
labours  of  philosophers  up  to  the  present  time. 
They  have  aimed  at  erecting  an  edifice  of  phi¬ 
losophy;  but  to  my  eye  this  edifice  appears  to 
be  in  a  very  ruinous  condition. 

It  is  very  remarkable,  although  naturally  it 
could  not  have  been  otherwise,  that,  in  the  in¬ 
fancy  of  philosophy,  the  study  of  the  nature 
of  God  and  the  constitution  of  a  future  world 
formed  the  commencement,  rather  than  the  con- 


OF  PURE 

elusion,  as  we  should  have  it,  of  the  speculative 
efforts  of  the  human  mind.  However  rude  the 
religious  conceptions  generated  by  the  remains 
of  the  old  manners  and  customs  of  a  less  culti¬ 
vated  time,  the  intelligent  classes  were  not  there¬ 
by  prevented  from  devoting  themselves  to  free 
inquiry  into  the  existence  and  nature  of  God; 
and  they  easily  saw  that  there  could  be  no  surer 
way  of  pleasing  the  invisible  ruler  of  the  world, 
and  of  attaining  to  happiness  in  another  world 
at  least,  than  a  good  and  honest  course  of  life 
in  this.  Thus  theology  and  morals  formed  the 
two  chief  motives,  or  rather  the  points  of  at¬ 
traction  in  all  abstract  inquiries.  But  it  was  the 
former  that  especially  occupied  the  attention  of 
speculative  reason,  and  which  afterwards  be¬ 
came  so  celebrated  under  the  name  of  meta¬ 
physics. 

I  shall  not  at  present  indicate  the  periods  of 
time  at  which  the  greatest  changes  in  metaphys¬ 
ics  took  place,  but  shall  merely  give  a  hasty 
sketch  of  the  different  ideas  which  occasioned 
the  most  important  revolutions  in  this  sphere 
of  thought.  There  are  three  different  ends  in 
relation  to  which  these  revolutions  have  taken 
place. 

1.  In  relation  to  the  object  of  the  cognition  of 
reason,  philosophers  may  be  divided  into  sensu¬ 
alists  and  in  telle  dualists.  Epicurus  may  be  re¬ 
garded  as  the  head  of  the  former,  Plato  of  the 
latter.  The  distinction  here  signalized,  subtle  as 
it  is,  dates  from  the  earliest  times,  and  was  long 
maintained.  The  former  asserted  that  reality  re¬ 
sides  in  sensuous  objects  alone,  and  that  every¬ 
thing  else  is  merely  imaginary;  the  latter,  that 
the  senses  are  the  parents  of  illusion  and  that 
truth  is  to  be  found  in  the  understanding  alone. 
The  former  did  not  deny  to  the  conceptions  of 
the  understanding  a  certain  kind  of  reality;  but 
with  them  it  was  merely  logical ,  with  the  others 
it  was  mystical.  The  former  admitted  intellectu¬ 
al  conceptions,  but  declared  that  sensuous  ob¬ 
jects  alone  possessed  real  existence.  The  latter 
maintained  that  all  real  objects  were  intelligible, 
and  believed  that  the  pure  understanding  pos¬ 
sessed  a  faculty  of  intuition  apart  from  sense, 
which,  in  their  opinion,  served  only  to  confuse 
the  ideas  of  the  understanding. 

2.  In  relation  to  the  origin  of  the  pure  cogni¬ 
tions  of  reason,  we  find  one  school  maintaining 
that  they  are  derived  entirely  from  experience, 
and  another  that  they  have  their  origin  in  reason 
alone.  Aristotle  may  be  regarded  as  the  head  of 
the  empiricists ,  and  Plato  of  the  noologists. 
Locke,  the  follower  of  Aristotle  in  modern  times, 
and  Leibnitz  of  Plato  (although  he  cannot  be 


REASON  249 

said  to  have  imitated  him  in  his  mysticism), 
have  not  been  able  to  bring  this  question  to  a 
settled  conclusion.  The  procedure  of  Epicurus 
in  his  sensual  system,  in  which  he  always  re¬ 
stricted  his  conclusions  to  the  sphere  of  experi¬ 
ence,  was  much  more  consequent  than  that  of 
Aristotle  and  Locke.  The  latter  especially,  after 
having  derived  all  the  conceptions  and  principles 
of  the  mind  from  experience,  goes  so  far,  in  the 
employment  of  these  conceptions  and  principles, 
as  to  maintain  that  we  can  prove  the  existence 
of  God  and  the  immortality  of  the  soul — both 
of  them  objects  lying  beyond  the  limits  of  pos¬ 
sible  experience — with  the  same  force  of  dem¬ 
onstration  as  any  mathematical  proposition. 

3.  In  relation  to  method.  Method  is  procedure 
according  to  principles.  We  may  divide  the 
methods  at  present  employed  in  the  field  of  in¬ 
quiry  into  the  naturalistic  and  the  scientific.  The 
naturalist  of  pure  reason  lays  it  down  as  his  prin¬ 
ciple  that  common  reason,  without  the  aid  of 
science — which  he  calls  sound  reason,  or  com¬ 
mon  sense — can  give  a  more  satisfactory  answer 
to  the  most  important  questions  of  metaphysics 
than  speculation  is  able  to  do.  He  must  main¬ 
tain,  therefore,  that  we  can  determine  the  con¬ 
tent  and  circumference  of  the  moon  more  cer¬ 
tainly  by  the  naked  eye,  than  by  the  aid  of 
mathematical  reasoning.  But  this  system  is  mere 
misology  reduced  to  principles;  and,  what  is  the 
most  absurd  thing  in  this  doctrine,  the  neglect 
of  all  scientific  means  is  paraded  as  a  peculiar 
method  of  extending  our  cognition.  As  regards 
those  who  are  naturalists  because  they  know  no 
better,  they  are  certainly  not  to  be  blamed.  They 
follow  common  sense,  without  parading  their 
ignorance  as  a  method  which  is  to  teach  us  the 
wonderful  secret,  how  we  are  to  find  the  truth 
which  lies  at  the  bottom  of  the  well  of  Democ¬ 
ritus. 

Quod  sapio  satis  est  mihi,  non  ego  euro 
Esse  quod  Arcesilas  aerumnosique  Solones.  Persius1 

is  their  motto,  under  which  they  may  lead  a 
pleasant  and  praiseworthy  life,  without  troubling 
themselves  with  science  or  troubling  science 
with  them. 

As  regards  those  who  wish  to  pursue  a  scien¬ 
tific  method,  they  have  now  the  choice  of  fol¬ 
lowing  either  the  dogmatical  or  the  sceptical , 
while  they  are  bound  never  to  desert  the  system¬ 
atic  mode  of  procedure.  When  I  mention,  in  re¬ 
lation  to  the  former,  the  celebrated  Wolf,  and 
as  regards  the  latter,  David  Hume,  I  may  leave, 

1  [ Satirae ,  iii.  78-79.  “What  I  know  is  enough  for 
me;  I  don’t  care  to  be  what  Arcesilas  was,  and  the 
wretched  Solons.”] 


THE  CRITIQUE  OF  PURE  REASON 


250 

in  accordance  with  my  present  intention,  all  oth¬ 
ers  unnamed.  The  critical  path  alone  is  still 
open.  If  my  reader  has  been  kind  and  patient 
enough  to  accompany  me  on  this  hitherto  untrav¬ 
elled  route,  he  can  now  judge  whether,  if  he  and 
others  will  contribute  their  exertions  towards 
making  this  narrow  footpath  a  high  road  of 


thought,  that  which  many  centuries  have  failed 
to  accomplish  may  not  be  executed  before  the 
close  of  the  present — namely,  to  bring  Reason 
to  perfect  contentment  in  regard  to  that  which 
has  always,  but  without  permanent  results,  oc¬ 
cupied  her  powers  and  engaged  her  ardent  de¬ 
sire  for  knowledge. 


CONTENTS 


FUNDAMENTAL  PRINCIPLES  OF  THE 
METAPHYSIC  OF  MORALS 


Preface  253 

FIRST  SECTION 

Transition  from  the  common  Rational  Knowledge  of  Mo¬ 
rality  to  the  Philosophical  256 


SECOND  SECTION 

Transition  from  Popular  Moral  Philosophy  to  the  Meta¬ 
physic  of  Morals  262 

Autonomy  of  the  Will  as  the  Supreme  Principle  of  Morality  277 
Heteronomy  of  the  Will  as  the  Source  of  all  Spurious  Principles 
of  Morality  277 

Classification  of  all  Principles  of  Morality  which  can  be  founded 
on  the  Conception  of  Heteronomy  277 


THIRD  SECTION 

Transition  from  the  Metaphysic  of  Morals  to  the  Critique 


of  Pure  Practical  Reason  279 

The  Concept  of  Freedom  is  the  Key  that  explains  the  Autonomy 
of  the  Will  279 

Freedom  must  be  presupposed  as  a  Property  of  the  Will  of 
all  Rational  Beings  280 

Of  the  Interest  attaching  to  the  Ideas  of  Morality  280 

How  is  a  Categorical  Imperative  Possible?  282 

Of  the  Extreme  Limits  of  all  Practical  Philosophy  283 

Concluding  Remark  287 


251 


. 


* 


PREFACE 


Ancient  Greek  philosophy  was  divided  into 
three  sciences:  physics,  ethics,  and  logic.  This 
division  is  perfectly  suitable  to  the  nature  of  the 
thing;  and  the  only  improvement  that  can  be 
made  in  it  is  to  add  the  principle  on  which  it  is 
based,  so  that  we  may  both  satisfy  ourselves  of 
its  completeness,  and  also  be  able  to  determine 
correctly  the  necessary  subdivisions. 

All  rational  knowledge  is  either  material  or 
formal:  the  former  considers  some  object,  the 
latter  is  concerned  only  with  the  form  of  the  un¬ 
derstanding  and  of  the  reason  itself,  and  with 
the  universal  laws  of  thought  in  general  without 
distinction  of  its  objects.  Formal  philosophy  is 
called  logic .  Material  philosophy,  however,  has 
to  do  with  determinate  objects  and  the  laws  to 
which  they  are  subject,  is  again  twofold;  for 
these  laws  are  either  laws  of  nature  or  of  free¬ 
dom.  The  science  of  the  former  is  physics,  that 
of  the  latter,  ethics;  they  are  also  called  natural 
philosophy  and  moral  philosophy  respectively. 

Logic  cannot  have  any  empirical  part;  that  is, 
a  part  in  which  the  universal  and  necessary  laws 
of  thought  should  rest  on  grounds  taken  from 
experience;  otherwise  it  would  not  be  logic,  i.e., 
a  canon  for  the  understanding  or  the  reason,  val¬ 
id  for  all  thought,  and  capable  of  demonstration. 
Natural  and  moral  philosophy,  on  the  contrary, 
can  each  have  their  empirical  part,  since  the  for¬ 
mer  has  to  determine  the  laws  of  nature  as  an 
object  of  experience ;  the  latter  the  laws  of  the 
human  will,  so  far  as  it  is  affected  by  nature: 
the  former,  however,  being  laws  according  to 
which  everything  does  happen;  the  latter,  laws 
according  to  which  everything  ought  to  happen. 
Ethics,  however,  must  also  consider  the  condi¬ 
tions  under  which  what  ought  to  happen  fre¬ 
quently  does  not. 

We  may  call  all  philosophy  empirical,  so  far 
as  it  is  based  on  grounds  of  experience:  on  the 
other  hand,  that  which  delivers  its  doctrines 
from  a  priori  principles  alone  we  may  call  pure 
philosophy.  When  the  latter  is  merely  formal  it 
is  logic;  if  it  is  restricted  to  definite  objects  of 
the  understanding  it  is  metaphysic . 

In  this  way  there  arises  the  idea  of  a  twofold 
metaphysic — a  metaphysic  of  nature  and  a  met¬ 
aphysic  of  morals.  Physics  will  thus  have  an  em¬ 


pirical  and  also  a  rational  part.  It  is  the  same 
with  Ethics;  but  here  the  empirical  part  might 
have  the  special  name  of  practical  anthropology , 
the  name  morality  being  appropriated  to  the  ra¬ 
tional  part. 

All  trades,  arts,  and  handiworks  have  gained 
by  division  of  labour,  namely,  when,  instead  of 
one  man  doing  everything,  each  confines  him¬ 
self  to  a  certain  kind  of  work  distinct  from  oth¬ 
ers  in  the  treatment  it  requires,  so  as  to  be  able 
to  perform  it  with  greater  facility  and  in  the 
greatest  perfection.  Where  the  different  kinds  of 
work  are  not  distinguished  and  divided,  where 
everyone  is  a  jack-of-all-trades,  there  manufac¬ 
tures  remain  still  in  the  greatest  barbarism.  It 
might  deserve  to  be  considered  whether  pure 
philosophy  in  all  its  parts  does  not  require  a 
man  specially  devoted  to  it,  and  whether  it  would 
not  be  better  for  the  whole  business  of  science 
if  those  who,  to  please  the  tastes  of  the  public, 
are  wont  to  blend  the  rational  and  empirical  el¬ 
ements  together,  mixed  in  all  sorts  of  proportions 
unknown  to  themselves,  and  who  call  themselves 
independent  thinkers,  giving  the  name  of  minute 
philosophers  to  those  who  apply  themselves  to 
the  rational  part  only — if  these,  I  say,  were 
warned  not  to  carry  on  two  employments  togeth¬ 
er  which  differ  widely  in  the  treatment  they  de¬ 
mand,  for  each  of  which  perhaps  a  special  talent 
is  required,  and  the  combination  of  which  in  one 
person  only  produces  bunglers.  But  I  only  ask 
here  whether  the  nature  of  science  does  not  re¬ 
quire  that  we  should  always  carefully  separate 
the  empirical  from  the  rational  part,  and  prefix 
to  Physics  proper  (or  empirical  physics)  a  met¬ 
aphysic  of  nature,  and  to  practical  anthropol¬ 
ogy  a  metaphysic  of  morals,  which  must  be  care¬ 
fully  cleared  of  everything  empirical,  so  that  we 
may  know  how  much  can  be  accomplished  by 
pure  reason  in  both  cases,  and  from  what  sources 
it  draws  this  its  a  priori  teaching,  and  that  wheth¬ 
er  the  latter  inquiry  is  conducted  by  all  moral¬ 
ists  (whose  name  is  legion),  or  only  by  some 
who  feel  a  calling  thereto. 

As  my  concern  here  is  with  moral  philosophy, 
I  limit  the  question  suggested  to  this:  Whether  it 
is  not  of  the  utmost  necessity  to  construct  a  pure 
moral  philosophy,  perfectly  cleared  of  every- 

2  S3 


254  FUNDAMENTAL 

thing  which  is  only  empirical  and  which  be¬ 
longs  to  anthropology?  for  that  such  a  philoso¬ 
phy  must  be  possible  is  evident  from  the  com¬ 
mon  idea  of  duty  and  of  the  moral  laws.  Every¬ 
one  must  admit  that  if  a  law  is  to  have  moral 
force,  i.e.,  to  be  the  basis  of  an  obligation,  it  must 
carry  with  it  absolute  necessity;  that,  for  exam¬ 
ple,  the  precept,  “Thou  shalt  not  lie,”  is  not  val¬ 
id  for  men  alone,  as  if  other  rational  beings  had 
no  need  to  observe  it;  and  so  with  all  the  other 
moral  laws  properly  so  called;  that,  therefore, 
the  basis  of  obligation  must  not  be  sought  in  the 
nature  of  man,  or  in  the  circumstances  in  the 
world  in  which  he  is  placed,  but  a  priori  simply 
in  the  conception  of  pure  reason;  and  although 
any  other  precept  which  is  founded  on  principles 
of  mere  experience  may  be  in  certain  respects 
universal,  yet  in  as  far  as  it  rests  even  in  the 
least  degree  on  an  empirical  basis,  perhaps  only 
as  to  a  motive,  such  a  precept,  while  it  may  be 
a  practical  rule,  can  never  be  called  a  moral  law. 

Thus  not  only  are  moral  laws  with  their  prin¬ 
ciples  essentially  distinguished  from  every  oth¬ 
er  kind  of  practical  knowledge  in  which  there  is 
anything  empirical,  but  all  moral  philosophy  rests 
wholly  on  its  pure  part.  When  applied  to  man, 
it  does  not  borrow  the  least  thing  from  the  knowl¬ 
edge  of  man  himself  (anthropology),  but  gives 
laws  a  priori  to  him  as  a  rational  being.  No  doubt 
these  laws  require  a  judgement  sharpened  by 
experience,  in  order  on  the  one  hand  to  distin¬ 
guish  in  what  cases  they  are  applicable,  and  on 
the  other  to  procure  for  them  access  to  the  will 
of  the  man  and  effectual  influence  on  conduct; 
since  man  is  acted  on  by  so  many  inclinations 
that,  though  capable  of  the  idea  of  a  practical 
pure  reason,  he  is  not  so  easily  able  to  make  it 
effective  in  concreto  in  his  life. 

A  metaphysic  of  morals  is  therefore  indispen¬ 
sably  necessary,  not  merely  for  speculative  rea¬ 
sons,  in  order  to  investigate  the  sources  of  the 
practical  principles  which  are  to  be  found  a  pri¬ 
ori  in  our  reason,  but  also  because  morals  them¬ 
selves  are  liable  to  all  sorts  of  corruption,  as 
long  as  we  are  without  that  clue  and  supreme 
canon  by  which  to  estimate  them  correctly.  For 
in  order  that  an  action  should  be  morally  good, 
it  is  not  enough  that  it  conform  to  the  moral 
law,  but  it  must  also  be  done  for  the  sake  of  the 
law,  otherwise  that  conformity  is  only  very  con¬ 
tingent  and  uncertain;  since  a  principle  which 
is  not  moral,  although  it  may  now  and  then  pro¬ 
duce  actions  conformable  to  the  law,  will  also 
often  produce  actions  which  contradict  it.  Now 
it  is  only  a  pure  philosophy  that  we  can  look  for 
the  moral  law  in  its  purity  and  genuineness  (and, 


PRINCIPLES  OF 

in  a  practical  matter,  this  is  of  the  utmost  con¬ 
sequence)  :  we  must,  therefore,  begin  with  pure 
philosophy  (metaphysic),  and  without  it  there 
cannot  be  any  moral  philosophy  at  all.  That 
which  mingles  these  pure  principles  with  the  em¬ 
pirical  does  not  deserve  the  name  of  philosophy 
(for  what  distinguishes  philosophy  from  com¬ 
mon  rational  knowledge  is  that  it  treats  in  sep¬ 
arate  sciences  what  the  latter  only  comprehends 
confusedly) ;  much  less  does  it  deserve  that  of 
moral  philosophy,  since  by  this  confusion  it 
even  spoils  the  purity  of  morals  themselves,  and 
counteracts  its  own  end. 

Let  it  not  be  thought,  however,  that  what  is 
here  demanded  is  already  extant  in  the  propae¬ 
deutic  prefixed  by  the  celebrated  Wolf  to  his 
moral  philosophy,  namely,  his  so-called  general 
practical  philosophy,  and  that,  therefore,  we 
have  not  to  strike  into  an  entirely  new  field.  Just 
because  it  was  to  be  a  general  practical  philoso¬ 
phy,  it  has  not  taken  into  consideration  a  will  of 
any  particular  kind — say  one  which  should  be 
determined  solely  from  a  priori  principles  with¬ 
out  any  empirical  motives,  and  which  we  might 
call  a  pure  will,  but  volition  in  general,  with  all 
the  actions  and  conditions  which  belong  to  it  in 
this  general  signification.  By  this  it  is  distin¬ 
guished  from  a  metaphysic  of  morals,  just  as 
general  logic,  which  treats  of  the  acts  and  can¬ 
ons  of  thought  in  general ,  is  distinguished  from 
transcendental  philosophy,  which  treats  of  the 
particular  acts  and  canons  of  pure  thought,  i.e., 
that  whose  cognitions  are  altogether  a  priori. 
For  the  metaphysic  of  morals  has  to  examine  the 
idea  and  the  principles  of  a  possible  pure  will, 
and  not  the  acts  and  conditions  of  human  voli¬ 
tion  generally,  which  for  the  most  part  are  drawn 
from  psychology.  It  is  true  that  moral  laws  and 
duty  are  spoken  of  in  the  general  moral  philoso¬ 
phy  (contrary  indeed  to  all  fitness).  But  this  is 
no  objection,  for  in  this  respect  also  the  authors 
of  that  science  remain  true  to  their  idea  of  it; 
they  do  not  distinguish  the  motives  which  are 
prescribed  as  such  by  reason  alone  altogether  a 
priori,  and  which  are  properly  moral,  from  the 
empirical  motives  which  the  understanding  raises 
to  general  conceptions  merely  by  comparison  of 
experiences;  but,  without  noticing  the  difference 
of  their  sources,  and  looking  on  them  all  as  ho¬ 
mogeneous,  they  consider  only  their  greater  or 
less  amount.  It  is  in  this  way  they  frame  their 
notion  of  obligation,  which,  though  anything  but 
moral,  is  all  that  can  be  attained  in  a  philosophy 
which  passes  no  judgement  at  all  on  the  origin 
of  all  possible  practical  concepts,  whether  they 
are  a  priori,  or  only  a  posteriori. 


THE  METAPHYSIC  OF  MORALS 


Intending  to  publish  hereafter  a  metaphysic 
of  morals,  I  issue  in  the  first  instance  these  fun¬ 
damental  principles.  Indeed  there  is  properly  no 
other  foundation  for  it  than  the  critical  exam¬ 
ination  of  a  pure  practical  reason ;  just  as  that 
of  metaphysics  is  the  critical  examination  of  the 
pure  speculative  reason,  already  published.  But 
in  the  first  place  the  former  is  not  so  absolutely 
necessary  as  the  latter,  because  in  moral  con¬ 
cerns  human  reason  can  easily  be  brought  to  a 
high  degree  of  correctness  and  completeness, 
even  in  the  commonest  understanding,  while  on 
the  contrary  in  its  theoretic  but  pure  use  it  is 
wholly  dialectical ;  and  in  the  second  place  if  the 
critique  of  a  pure  practical  reason  is  to  be  com¬ 
plete,  it  must  be  possible  at  the  same  time  to 
show  its  identity  with  the  speculative  reason  in 
a  common  principle,  for  it  can  ultimately  be  on¬ 
ly  one  and  the  same  reason  which  has  to  be  dis¬ 
tinguished  merely  in  its  application.  I  could  not, 
however,  bring  it  to  such  completeness  here, 
without  introducing  considerations  of  a  wholly 
different  kind,  which  would  be  perplexing  to  the 
reader.  On  this  account  I  have  adopted  the  title 
of  Fundamental  Principles  of  the  Metaphysic 
of  Morals  instead  of  that  of  a  Critical  Exami¬ 
nation  of  the  pure  practical  reason. 

But  in  the  third  place,  since  a  metaphysic  of 
morals,  in  spite  of  the  discouraging  title,  is  yet 
capable  of  being  presented  in  popular  form,  and 
one  adapted  to  the  common  understanding,  I 
find  it  useful  to  separate  from  it  this  prelimi¬ 
nary  treatise  on  its  fundamental  principles,  in 
order  that  I  may  not  hereafter  have  need  to 
introduce  these  necessarily  subtle  discussions 
into  a  book  of  a  more  simple  character. 


The  present  treatise  is,  however,  nothing  more 
than  the  investigation  and  establishment  of  the 
supreme  principle  of  morality,  and  this  alone 
constitutes  a  study  complete  in  itself  and  one 
which  ought  to  be  kept  apart  from  every  other 
moral  investigation.  No  doubt  my  conclusions 
on  this  weighty  question,  which  has  hitherto 
been  very  unsatisfactorily  examined,  would  re¬ 
ceive  much  light  from  the  application  of  the 
same  principle  to  the  whole  system,  and  would 
be  greatly  confirmed  by  the  adequacy  which  it 
exhibits  throughout;  but  I  must  forego  this  ad¬ 
vantage,  which  indeed  would  be  after  all  more 
gratifying  than  useful,  since  the  easy  applicabil¬ 
ity  of  a  principle  and  its  apparent  adequacy  give 
no  very  certain  proof  of  its  soundness,  but  rath¬ 
er  inspire  a  certain  partiality,  which  prevents  us 
from  examining  and  estimating  it  strictly  in  it¬ 
self  and  without  regard  to  consequences. 

I  have  adopted  in  this  work  the  method  which 
I  think  most  suitable,  proceeding  analytically 
from  common  knowledge  to  the  determination 
of  its  ultimate  principle,  and  again  descending 
synthetically  from  the  examination  of  this  prin¬ 
ciple  and  its  sources  to  the  common  knowledge 
in  which  we  find  it  employed.  The  division  will, 
therefore,  be  as  follows: 

1  First  section.  Transition  from  the  common 

rational  knowledge  of  morality  to  the  phil¬ 
osophical. 

2  Second  section.  Transition  from  popular 

moral  philosophy  to  the  metaphysic  of 
morals. 

3  Third  section.  Final  step  from  the  meta¬ 

physic  of  morals  to  the  critique  of  the  pure 
practical  reason. 


FIRST  SECTION 


TRANSITION  FROM  THE  COMMON  RATIONAL  KNOWLEDGE 
OF  MORALITY  TO  THE  PHILOSOPHICAL 


Nothing  can  possibly  be  conceived  in  the  world, 
or  even  out  of  it,  which  can  be  called  good,  with¬ 
out  qualification,  except  a  good  will.  Intelligence, 
wit,  judgement,  and  the  other  talents  of  the 
mind,  however  they  may  be  named,  or  courage, 
resolution,  perseverance,  as  qualities  of  temper¬ 
ament,  are  undoubtedly  good  and  desirable  in 
many  respects;  but  these  gifts  of  nature  may 
also  become  extremely  bad  and  mischievous  if 
the  will  which  is  to  make  use  of  them,  and  which, 
therefore,  constitutes  what  is  called  character , 
is  not  good.  It  is  the  same  with  the  gifts  of  for¬ 
tune.  Power,  riches,  honour,  even  health,  and 
the  general  well-being  and  contentment  with 
one’s  condition  which  is  called  happiness ,  inspire 
pride,  and  often  presumption,  if  there  is  not  a 
good  will  to  correct  the  influence  of  these  on  the 
mind,  and  with  this  also  to  rectify  the  whole 
principle  of  acting  and  adapt  it  to  its  end.  The 
sight  of  a  being  who  is  not  adorned  with  a 
single  feature  of  a  pure  and  good  will,  en¬ 
joying  unbroken  prosperity,  can  never  give 
pleasure  to  an  impartial  rational  spectator. 
Thus  a  good  will  appears  to  constitute  the 
indispensable  condition  even  of  being  worthy 
of  happiness. 

There  are  even  some  qualities  which  are  of 
service  to  this  good  will  itself  and  may  facilitate 
its  action,  yet  which  have  no  intrinsic  uncondi¬ 
tional  value,  but  always  presuppose  a  good  will, 
and  this  qualifies  the  esteem  that  we  justly  have 
for  them  and  does  not  permit  us  to  regard  them 
as  absolutely  good.  Moderation  in  the  affections 
and  passions,  self-control,  and  calm  deliberation 
are  not  only  good  in  many  respects,  but  even 
seem  to  constitute  part  of  the  intrinsic  worth  of 
the  person;  but  they  are  far  from  deserving  to 
be  called  good  without  qualification,  although 
they  have  been  so  unconditionally  praised  by 
the  ancients.  For  without  the  principles  of  a 
good  will,  they  may  become  extremely  bad,  and 
the  coolness  of  a  villain  not  only  makes  him  far 
more  dangerous,  but  also  directly  makes  him 
more  abominable  in  our  eyes  than  he  would  have 
been  without  it. 


A  good  will  is  good  not  because  of  what  it 
performs  or  effects,  not  by  its  aptness  for  the 
attainment  of  some  proposed  end,  but  simply  by 
virtue  of  the  volition;  that  is,  it  is  good  in  itself, 
and  considered  by  itself  is  to  be  esteemed  much 
higher  than  all  that  can  be  brought  about  by  it 
in  favour  of  any  inclination,  nay  even  of  the  sum 
total  of  all  inclinations.  Even  if  it  should  happen 
that,  owing  to  special  disfavour  of  fortune,  or 
the  niggardly  provision  of  a  step-motherly  na¬ 
ture,  this  will  should  wholly  lack  power  to  ac¬ 
complish  its  purpose,  if  with  its  greatest  efforts 
it  should  yet  achieve  nothing,  and  there  should 
remain  only  the  good  will  (not,  to  be  sure,  a 
mere  wish,  but  the  summoning  of  all  means  in 
our  power),  then,  like  a  jewel,  it  would  still 
shine  by  its  own  light,  as  a  thing  which  has  its 
whole  value  in  itself.  Its  usefulness  or  fruitful¬ 
ness  can  neither  add  nor  take  away  anything 
from  this  value.  It  would  be,  as  it  were,  only  the 
setting  to  enable  us  to  handle  it  the  more  con¬ 
veniently  in  common  commerce,  or  to  attract 
to  it  the  attention  of  those  who  are  not  yet  con¬ 
noisseurs,  but  not  to  recommend  it  to  true  con¬ 
noisseurs,  or  to  determine  its  value. 

There  is,  however,  something  so  strange  in 
this  idea  of  the  absolute  value  of  the  mere  will, 
in  which  no  account  is  taken  of  its  utility,  that 
notwithstanding  the  thorough  assent  of  even 
common  reason  to  the  idea,  yet  a  suspicion  must 
arise  that  it  may  perhaps  really  be  the  product 
of  mere  high-flown  fancy,  and  that  we  may  have 
misunderstood  the  purpose  of  nature  in  assign¬ 
ing  reason  as  the  governor  of  our  will.  There¬ 
fore  we  will  examine  this  idea  from  this  point 
of  view. 

In  the  physical  constitution  of  an  organized 
being,  that  is,  a  being  adapted  suitably  to  the 
purposes  of  life,  we  assume  it  as  a  fundamental 
principle  that  no  organ  for  any  purpose  will  be 
found  but  what  is  also  the  fittest  and  best  adapt¬ 
ed  for  that  purpose.  Now  in  a  being  which  has 
reason  and  a  will,  if  the  proper  object  of  nature 
were  its  conservation,  its  welfare,  in  a  word,  its 
happiness,  then  nature  would  have  hit  upon  a 


THE  METAPHYSIC  OF  MORALS 


very  bad  arrangement  in  selecting  the  reason  of 
the  creature  to  carry  out  this  purpose.  For  all 
the  actions  which  the  creature  has  to  perform 
with  a  view  to  this  purpose,  and  the  whole  rule 
of  its  conduct,  would  be  far  more  surely  pre¬ 
scribed  to  it  by  instinct,  and  that  end  would 
have  been  attained  thereby  much  more  certain¬ 
ly  than  it  ever  can  be  by  reason.  Should  reason 
have  been  communicated  to  this  favoured  crea¬ 
ture  over  and  above,  it  must  only  have  served  it 
to  contemplate  the  happy  constitution  of  its  na¬ 
ture,  to  admire  it,  to  congratulate  itself  there¬ 
on,  and  to  feel  thankful  for  it  to  the  beneficent 
cause,  but  not  that  it  should  subject  its  desires 
to  that  weak  and  delusive  guidance  and  meddle 
bunglingly  with  the  purpose  of  nature.  In  a  word, 
nature  would  have  taken  care  that  reason  should 
not  break  forth  into  practical  exercise ,  nor  have 
the  presumption,  with  its  weak  insight,  to  think 
out  for  itself  the  plan  of  happiness,  and  of  the 
means  of  attaining  it.  Nature  would  not  only 
have  taken  on  herself  the  choice  of  the  ends,  but 
also  of  the  means,  and  with  wise  foresight  would 
have  entrusted  both  to  instinct. 

And,  in  fact,  we  find  that  the  more  a  cultivat¬ 
ed  reason  applies  itself  with  deliberate  purpose 
to  the  enjoyment  of  life  and  happiness,  so  much 
the  more  does  the  man  fail  of  true  satisfaction. 
And  from  this  circumstance  there  arises  in  many, 
if  they  are  candid  enough  to  confess  it,  a  cer¬ 
tain  degree  of  misology,  that  is,  hatred  of  rea¬ 
son,  especially  in  the  case  of  those  who  are  most 
experienced  in  the  use  of  it,  because  after  cal¬ 
culating  all  the  advantages  they  derive,  I  do  not 
say  from  the  invention  of  all  the  arts  of  com¬ 
mon  luxury,  but  even  from  the  sciences  (which 
seem  to  them  to  be  after  all  only  a  luxury  of  the 
understanding),  they  find  that  they  have,  in 
fact,  only  brought  more  trouble  on  their  shoul¬ 
ders,  rather  than  gained  in  happiness;  and  they 
end  by  envying,  rather  than  despising,  the  more 
common  stamp  of  men  who  keep  closer  to  the 
guidance  of  mere  instinct  and  do  not  allow  their 
reason  much  influence  on  their  conduct.  And 
this  we  must  admit,  that  the  judgement  of  those 
who  would  very  much  lower  the  lofty  eulogies 
of  the  advantages  which  reason  gives  us  in  re¬ 
gard  to  the  happiness  and  satisfaction  of  life,  or 
who  would  even  reduce  them  below  zero,  is  by 
no  means  morose  or  ungrateful  to  the  goodness 
with  which  the  world  is  governed,  but  that  there 
lies  at  the  root  of  these  judgements  the  idea  that 
our  existence  has  a  different  and  far  nobler  end, 
for  which,  and  not  for  happiness,  reason  is  prop¬ 
erly  intended,  and  which  must,  therefore,  be  re¬ 
garded  as  the  supreme  condition  to  which  the 


2  57 

private  ends  of  man  must,  for  the  most  part,  be 
postponed. 

For  as  reason  is  not  competent  to  guide  the 
will  with  certainty  in  regard  to  its  objects  and 
the  satisfaction  of  all  our  wants  (which  it  to 
some  extent  even  multiplies),  this  being  an  end 
to  which  an  implanted  instinct  would  have  led 
with  much  greater  certainty;  and  since,  never¬ 
theless,  reason  is  imparted  to  us  as  a  practical 
faculty,  i.e.,  as  one  which  is  to  have  influence  on 
the  will,  therefore,  admitting  that  nature  gener¬ 
ally  in  the  distribution  of  her  capacities  has 
adapted  the  means  to  the  end,  its  true  destination 
must  be  to  produce  a  will ,  not  merely  good  as  a 
means  to  something  else,  but  good  in  itself ,  for 
which  reason  was  absolutely  necessary.  This  will 
then,  though  not  indeed  the  sole  and  complete 
good,  must  be  the  supreme  good  and  the  condi¬ 
tion  of  every  other,  even  of  the  desire  of  happi¬ 
ness.  Under  these  circumstances,  there  is  noth¬ 
ing  inconsistent  with  the  wisdom  of  nature  in 
the  fact  that  the  cultivation  of  the  reason,  which 
is  requisite  for  the  first  and  unconditional  pur¬ 
pose,  does  in  many  ways  interfere,  at  least  in 
this  life,  with  the  attainment  of  the  second, 
which  is  always  conditional,  namely,  happiness. 
Nay,  it  may  even  reduce  it  to  nothing,  without 
nature  thereby  failing  of  her  purpose.  For  rea¬ 
son  recognizes  the  establishment  of  a  good  will 
as  its  highest  practical  destination,  and  in  attain¬ 
ing  this  purpose  is  capable  only  of  a  satisfaction 
of  its  own  proper  kind,  namely  that  from  the 
attainment  of  an  end,  which  end  again  is  deter¬ 
mined  by  reason  only,  notwithstanding  that  this 
may  involve  many  a  disappointment  to  the  ends 
of  inclination. 

We  have  then  to  develop  the  notion  of  a  will 
which  deserves  to  be  highly  esteemed  for  itself 
and  is  good  without  a  view  to  anything  further, 
a  notion  which  exists  already  in  the  sound  natu¬ 
ral  understanding,  requiring  rather  to  be  cleared 
up  than  to  be  taught,  and  which  in  estimating 
the  value  of  our  actions  always  takes  the  first 
place  and  constitutes  the  condition  of  all  the 
rest.  In  order  to  do  this,  we  will  take  the  notion 
of  duty,  which  includes  that  of  a  good  will,  al¬ 
though  implying  certain  subjective  restrictions 
and  hindrances.  These,  however,  far  from  con¬ 
cealing  it,  or  rendering  it  unrecognizable,  rather 
bring  it  out  by  contrast  and  make  it  shine  forth 
so  much  the  brighter. 

I  omit  here  all  actions  which  are  already  rec¬ 
ognized  as  inconsistent  with  duty,  although  they 
may  be  useful  for  this  or  that  purpose,  for  with 
these  the  question  whether  they  are  done  from 
duty  cannot  arise  at  all,  since  they  even  conflict 


258  FUNDAMENTAL 

with  it.  I  also  set  aside  those  actions  which  real¬ 
ly  conform  to  duty,  but  to  which  men  have  no 
direct  inclination,  performing  them  because  they 
are  impelled  thereto  by  some  other  inclination. 
For  in  this  case  we  can  readily  distinguish  wheth¬ 
er  the  action  which  agrees  with  duty  is  done 
from  duty ,  or  from  a  selfish  view.  It  is  much 
harder  to  make  this  distinction  when  the  action 
accords  with  duty  and  the  subject  has  besides  a 
direct  inclination  to  it.  For  example,  it  is  always 
a  matter  of  duty  that  a  dealer  should  not  over¬ 
charge  an  inexperienced  purchaser;  and  wherev¬ 
er  there  is  much  commerce  the  prudent  trades¬ 
man  does  not  overcharge,  but  keeps  a  fixed  price 
for  everyone,  so  that  a  child  buys  of  him  as  well 
as  any  other.  Men  are  thus  honestly  served;  but 
this  is  not  enough  to  make  us  believe  that  the 
tradesman  has  so  acted  from  duty  and  from 
principles  of  honesty:  his  own  advantage  re¬ 
quired  it;  it  is  out  of  the  question  in  this  case 
to  suppose  that  he  might  besides  have  a  direct 
inclination  in  favour  of  the  buyers,  so  that,  as 
it  were,  from  love  he  should  give  no  advantage 
to  one  over  another.  Accordingly  the  action  was 
done  neither  from  duty  nor  from  direct  inclin¬ 
ation,  but  merely  with  a  selfish  view. 

On  the  other  hand,  it  is  a  duty  to  maintain 
one’s  life;  and,  in  addition,  everyone  has  also  a 
direct  inclination  to  do  so.  But  on  this  account 
the  often  anxious  care  which  most  men  take  for 
it  has  no  intrinsic  worth,  and  their  maxim  has  no 
moral  import.  They  preserve  their  life  as  duty 
requires ,  no  doubt,  but  not  because  duty  re¬ 
quires.  On  the  other  hand,  if  adversity  and  hope¬ 
less  sorrow  have  completely  taken  away  the  rel¬ 
ish  for  life;  if  the  unfortunate  one,  strong  in 
mind,  indignant  at  his  fate  rather  than  despond¬ 
ing  or  dejected,  wishes  for  death,  and  yet  pre¬ 
serves  his  life  without  loving  it — not  from  in¬ 
clination  or  fear,  but  from  duty — then  his  max¬ 
im  has  a  moral  worth. 

To  be  beneficent  when  we  can  is  a  duty;  and 
besides  this,  there  are  many  minds  so  sympa¬ 
thetically  constituted  that,  without  any  other 
motive  of  vanity  or  self-interest,  they  find  a 
pleasure  in  spreading  joy  around  them  and  can 
take  delight  in  the  satisfaction  of  others  so  far 
as  it  is  their  own  work.  But  I  maintain  that  in 
such  a  case  an  action  of  this  kind,  however  prop¬ 
er,  however  amiable  it  may  be,  has  nevertheless 
no  true  moral  worth,  but  is  on  a  level  with  oth¬ 
er  inclinations,  e.g.,  the  inclination  to  honour, 
which,  if  it  is  happily  directed  to  that  which  is 
in  fact  of  public  utility  and  accordant  with  duty 
and  consequently  honourable,  deserves  praise 
and  encouragement,  but  not  esteem.  For  the 


PRINCIPLES  OF 

maxim  lacks  the  moral  import,  namely,  that 
such  actions  be  done  from  duty,  not  from  incli¬ 
nation.  Put  the  case  that  the  mind  of  that  phi¬ 
lanthropist  were  clouded  by  sorrow  of  his  own, 
extinguishing  all  sympathy  with  the  lot  of  oth¬ 
ers,  and  that,  while  he  still  has  the  power  to 
benefit  others  in  distress,  he  is  not  touched  by 
their  trouble  because  he  is  absorbed  with  his 
own;  and  now  suppose  that  he  tears  himself  out 
of  this  dead  insensibility,  and  performs  the  ac¬ 
tion  without  any  inclination  to  it,  but  simply 
from  duty,  then  first  has  his  action  its  genuine 
moral  worth.  Further  still;  if  nature  has  put  lit¬ 
tle  sympathy  in  the  heart  of  this  or  that  man; 
if  he,  supposed  to  be  an  upright  man,  is  by  tem¬ 
perament  cold  and  indifferent  to  the  sufferings 
of  others,  perhaps  because  in  respect  of  his  own 
he  is  provided  with  the  special  gift  of  patience 
and  fortitude  and  supposes,  or  even  requires, 
that  others  should  have  the  same — and  such  a 
man  would  certainly  not  be  the  meanest  product 
of  nature — but  if  nature  had  not  specially  framed 
him  for  a  philanthropist,  would  he  not  still  find 
in  himself  a  source  from  whence  to  give  himself 
a  far  higher  worth  than  that  of  a  good-natured 
temperament  could  be?  Unquestionably.  It  is 
just  in  this  that  the  moral  worth  of  the  charac¬ 
ter  is  brought  out  which  is  incomparably  the 
highest  of  all,  namely,  that  he  is  beneficent,  not 
from  inclination,  but  from  duty. 

To  secure  one’s  own  happiness  is  a  duty,  at 
least  indirectly;  for  discontent  with  one’s  con¬ 
dition,  under  a  pressure  of  many  anxieties  and 
amidst  unsatisfied  wants,  might  easily  become  a 
great  temptation  to  transgression  of  duty.  But 
here  again,  without  looking  to  duty,  all  men 
have  already  the  strongest  and  most  intimate  in¬ 
clination  to  happiness,  because  it  is  just  in  this 
idea  that  all  inclinations  are  combined  in  one 
total.  But  the  precept  of  happiness  is  often  of 
such  a  sort  that  it  greatly  interferes  with  some 
inclinations,  and  yet  a  man  cannot  form  any 
definite  and  certain  conception  of  the  sum  of 
satisfaction  of  all  of  them  which  is  called  hap¬ 
piness.  It  is  not  then  to  be  wondered  at  that  a 
single  inclination,  definite  both  as  to  what  it 
promises  and  as  to  the  time  within  which  it  can 
be  gratified,  is  often  able  to  overcome  such  a 
fluctuating  idea,  and  that  a  gouty  patient,  for 
instance,  can  choose  to  enjoy  what  he  likes,  and 
to  suffer  what  he  may,  since,  according  to  his 
calculation,  on  this  occasion  at  least,  he  has  not 
sacrificed  the  enjoyment  of  the  present  moment 
to  a  possibly  mistaken  expectation  of  a  happi¬ 
ness  which  is  supposed  to  be  found  in  health. 
But  even  in  this  case,  if  the  general  desire  for 


THE  METAPHYSIC  OF  MORALS 


happiness  did  not  influence  his  will,  and  suppos¬ 
ing  that  in  his  particular  case  health  was  not  a 
necessary  element  in  this  calculation,  there  yet 
remains  in  this,  as  in  all  other  cases,  this  law, 
namely,  that  he  should  promote  his  happiness 
not  from  inclination  but  from  duty,  and  by 
this  would  his  conduct  first  acquire  true  moral 
worth. 

It  is  in  this  manner,  undoubtedly,  that  we  are 
to  understand  those  passages  of  Scripture  also 
in  which  we  are  commanded  to  love  our  neigh¬ 
bour,  even  our  enemy.  For  love,  as  an  affection, 
cannot  be  commanded,  but  beneficence  for  du¬ 
ty’s  sake  may;  even  though  we  are  not  impelled 
to  it  by  any  inclination — nay,  are  even  repelled 
by  a  natural  and  unconquerable  aversion.  This 
is  practical  love  and  not  pathological — a  love 
which  is  seated  in  the  will,  and  not  in  the  pro¬ 
pensions  of  sense — in  principles  of  action  and 
not  of  tender  sympathy;  and  it  is  this  love  alone 
which  can  be  commanded. 

The  second  proposition  is:  That  an  action 
done  from  duty  derives  its  moral  worth,  not 
from  the  purpose  which  is  to  be  attained  by  it, 
but  from  the  maxim  by  which  it  is  determined, 
and  therefore  does  not  depend  on  the  realization 
of  the  object  of  the  action,  but  merely  on  the 
principle  of  volition  by  which  the  action  has 
taken  place,  without  regard  to  any  object  of  de¬ 
sire.  It  is  clear  from  what  precedes  that  the  pur¬ 
poses  which  we  may  have  in  view  in  our  actions, 
or  their  effects  regarded  as  ends  and  springs  of 
the  will,  cannot  give  to  actions  any  uncondition¬ 
al  or  moral  worth.  In  what,  then,  can  their  worth 
lie,  if  it  is  not  to  consist  in  the  will  and  in  ref¬ 
erence  to  its  expected  effect?  It  cannot  lie  any¬ 
where  but  in  the  principle  of  the  will  without  re¬ 
gard  to  the  ends  which  can  be  attained  by  the 
action.  For  the  will  stands  between  its  a  priori 
principle,  which  is  formal,  and  its  a  posteriori 
spring,  which  is  material,  as  between  two  roads, 
and  as  it  must  be  determined  by  something,  it 
follows  that  it  must  be  determined  by  the  for¬ 
mal  principle  of  volition  when  an  action  is  done 
from  duty,  in  which  case  every  material  princi¬ 
ple  has  been  withdrawn  from  it. 

The  third  proposition,  which  is  a  consequence 
of  the  two  preceding,  I  would  express  thus: 
Duty  is  the  necessity  of  acting  from  respect  for 
the  law .  I  may  have  inclination  for  an  object  as 
the  effect  of  my  proposed  action,  but  I  cannot 
have  respect  for  it,  just  for  this  reason,  that  it 
is  an  effect  and  not  an  energy  of  will.  Similarly, 
I  cannot  have  respect  for  inclination,  whether 
my  own  or  another’s;  I  can  at  most,  if  my  own, 
approve  it;  if  another’s,  sometimes  even  love  it; 


259 

i.e.,  look  on  it  as  favourable  to  my  own  interest. 
It  is  only  what  is  connected  with  my  will  as  a 
principle,  by  no  means  as  an  effect — what  does 
not  subserve  my  inclination,  but  overpowers  it, 
or  at  least  in  case  of  choice  excludes  it  from  its 
calculation — in  other  words,  simply  the  law  of 
itself,  which  can  be  an  object  of  respect,  and 
hence  a  command.  Now  an  action  done  from  du¬ 
ty  must  wholly  exclude  the  influence  of  inclina¬ 
tion  and  with  it  every  object  of  the  will,  so  that 
nothing  remains  which  can  determine  the  will 
except  objectively  the  law ,  and  subjectively  pure 
respect  for  this  practical  law,  and  consequently 
the  maxim1  that  I  should  follow  this  law  even 
to  the  thwarting  of  all  my  inclinations. 

Thus  the  moral  worth  of  an  action  does  not 
lie  in  the  effect  expected  from  it,  nor  in  any 
principle  of  action  which  requires  to  borrow  its 
motive  from  this  expected  effect.  For  all  these 
effects — agreeableness  of  one’s  condition  and 
even  the  promotion  of  the  happiness  of  others 
— could  have  been  also  brought  about  by  other 
causes,  so  that  for  this  there  would  have  been  no 
need  of  the  will  of  a  rational  being;  whereas  it 
is  in  this  alone  that  the  supreme  and  uncondi¬ 
tional  good  can  be  found.  The  pre-eminent  good 
which  we  call  moral  can  therefore  consist  in 
nothing  else  than  the  conception  of  law  in  itself, 
which  certainly  is  only  possible  in  a  rational  be¬ 
ing ,  in  so  far  as  this  conception,  and  not  the  ex¬ 
pected  effect,  determines  the  will.  This  is  a  good 
which  is  already  present  in  the  person  who  acts 
accordingly,  and  we  have  not  to  wait  for  it  to 
appear  first  in  the  result.2 

1  A  maxim  is  the  subjective  principle  of  volition.  The 
objective  principle  (i.e.,  that  which  would  also  serve 
subjectively  as  a  practical  principle  to  all  rational  be¬ 
ings  if  reason  had  full  power  over  the  faculty  of  desire) 
is  the  practical  law. 

2  It  might  be  here  objected  to  me  that  I  take  refuge 
behind  the  word  respect  in  an  obscure  feeling,  instead 
of  giving  a  distinct  solution  of  the  question  by  a  con¬ 
cept  of  the  reason.  But  although  respect  is  a  feeling,  it 
is  not  a  feeling  received  through  influence,  but  is  self- 
wrought  by  a  rational  concept,  and,  therefore,  is  specif¬ 
ically  distinct  from  all  feelings  of  the  former  kind, 
which  may  be  referred  either  to  inclination  or  fear 
What  I  recognise  immediately  as  a  law  for  me,  I  recog¬ 
nise  with  respect.  This  merely  signifies  the  conscious¬ 
ness  that  my  will  is  subordinate  to  a  law,  without  the 
intervention  of  other  influences  on  my  sense.  The  im¬ 
mediate  determination  of  the  will  by  the  law,  and  the 
consciousness  of  this,  is  called  respect ,  so  that  this  is  re¬ 
garded  as  an  effect  of  the  law  on  the  subject,  and  not  as 
the  cause  of  it.  Respect  is  properly  the  conception  of  a 
worth  which  thwarts  my  self-love.  Accordingly  it  is 
something  which  is  considered  neither  as  an  object  of 
inclination  nor  of  fear,  although  it  has  something  analo¬ 
gous  to  both.  The  object  of  respect  is  the  law  only,  and 
that  the  law  which  we  impose  on  ourselves  and  yet  rec¬ 
ognise  as  necessary  in  itself.  As  a  law,  we  are  subjected 
to  it  without  consulting  self-love;  as  imposed  by  us  on 
ourselves,  it  is  a  result  of  our  will.  In  the  former  aspect 
it  has  an  analogy  to  fear,  in  the  latter  to  inclination. 
Respect  for  a  person  is  properly  only  respect  for  the  law 


260 


FUNDAMENTAL 

But  what  sort  of  law  can  that  be,  the  concep¬ 
tion  of  which  must  determine  the  will,  even 
without  paying  any  regard  to  the  effect  expected 
from  it,  in  order  that  this  will  may  be  called 
good  absolutely  and  without  qualification?  As  I 
have  deprived  the  will  of  every  impulse  which 
could  arise  to  it  from  obedience  to  any  law, 
there  remains  nothing  but  the  universal  con¬ 
formity  of  its  actions  to  law  in  general,  which 
alone  is  to  serve  the  will  as  a  principle,  i.e.,  I  am 
never  to  act  otherwise  than  so  that  I  could  also 
will  that  my  maxim  should  become  a  universal 
law.  Here,  now,  it  is  the  simple  conformity  to 
law  in  general,  without  assuming  any  particular 
law  applicable  to  certain  actions,  that  serves 
the  will  as  its  principle  and  must  so  serve  it,  if 
duty  is  not  to  be  a  vain  delusion  and  a  chimer¬ 
ical  notion.  The  common  reason  of  men  in  its 
practical  judgements  perfectly  coincides  with 
this  and  always  has  in  view  the  principle  here 
suggested.  Let  the  question  be,  for  example: 
May  I  when  in  distress  make  a  promise  with  the 
intention  not  to  keep  it?  I  readily  distinguish 
here  between  the  two  significations  which  the 
question  may  have:  Whether  it  is  prudent,  or 
whether  it  is  right,  to  make  a  false  promise? 
The  former  may  undoubtedly  often  be  the  case. 

I  see  clearly  indeed  that  it  is  not  enough  to 
extricate  myself  from  a  present  difficulty  by 
means  of  this  subterfuge,  but  it  must  be  well 
considered  whether  there  may  not  hereafter 
spring  from  this  lie  much  greater  inconvenience 
than  that  from  which  I  now  free  myself,  and  as, 
with  all  my  supposed  cunning ,  the  consequences 
cannot  be  so  easily  foreseen  but  that  credit  once 
lost  may  be  much  more  injurious  to  me  than 
any  mischief  which  I  seek  to  avoid  at  present, 
it  should  be  considered  whether  it  would  not  be 
more  prudent  to  act  herein  according  to  a  uni¬ 
versal  maxim  and  to  make  it  a  habit  to  promise 
nothing  except  with  the  intention  of  keeping  it. 
But  it  is  soon  clear  to  me  that  such  a  maxim  will 
still  only  be  based  on  the  fear  of  consequences. 
Now  it  is  a  wholly  different  thing  to  be  truthful 
from  duty  and  to  be  so  from  apprehension  of 
injurious  consequences.  In  the  first  case,  the 
very  notion  of  the  action  already  implies  a  law 
for  me;  in  the  second  case,  I  must  first  look 
about  elsewhere  to  see  what  results  may  be  com¬ 
bined  with  it  which  would  affect  myself.  For  to 


(of  honesty,  etc.)  of  which  he  gives  us  an  example. 
Since  we  also  look  on  the  improvement  of  our  talents  as 
a  duty,  we  consider  that  we  see  in  a  person  of  talents, 
as  it  were,  the  example  oj  a  law  (viz.,  to  become  like 
him  in  this  by  exercise),  and  this  constitutes  our  re¬ 
spect.  All  so-called  moral  interest  consists  simply  in  re¬ 
spect  for  the  law. 


PRINCIPLES  OF 

deviate  from  the  principle  of  duty  is  beyond  all 
doubt  wicked;  but  to  be  unfaithful  to  my  max¬ 
im  of  prudence  may  often  be  very  advantageous 
to  me,  although  to  abide  by  it  is  certainly  safer. 
The  shortest  way,  however,  and  an  unerring 
one,  to  discover  the  answer  to  this  question 
whether  a  lying  promise  is  consistent  with  duty, 
is  to  ask  myself,  “Should  I  be  content  that  my 
maxim  (to  extricate  myself  from  difficulty  by 
a  false  promise)  should  hold  good  as  a  universal 
law,  for  myself  as  well  as  for  others?  and 
should  I  be  able  to  say  to  myself,  “Every  one 
may  make  a  deceitful  promise  when  he  finds 
himself  in  a  difficulty  from  which  he  cannot 
otherwise  extricate  himself?”  Then  I  presently 
become  aware  that  while  I  can  will  the  lie,  I  can 
by  no  means  will  that  lying  should  be  a  univer¬ 
sal  law.  For  with  such  a  law  there  would  be  no 
promises  at  all,  since  it  would  be  in  vain  to  al¬ 
lege  my  intention  in  regard  to  my  future  actions 
to  those  who  would  not  believe  this  allegation, 
or  if  they  over  hastily  did  so  would  pay  me  back 
in  my  own  coin.  Hence  my  maxim,  as  soon  as  it 
should  be  made  a  universal  law,  would  neces¬ 
sarily  destroy  itself. 

I  do  not,  therefore,  need  any  far-reaching 
penetration  to  discern  what  I  have  to  do  in  or¬ 
der  that  my  will  may  be  morally  good.  Inex¬ 
perienced  in  the  course  of  the  world,  incapable 
of  being  prepared  for  all  its  contingencies,  I 
only  ask  myself:  Canst  thou  also  will  that  thy 
maxim  should  be  a  universal  law?  If  not,  then 
it  must  be  rejected,  and  that  not  because  of  a 
disadvantage  accruing  from  it  to  myself  or  even 
to  others,  but  because  it  cannot  enter  as  a  prin¬ 
ciple  into  a  possible  universal  legislation,  and 
reason  extorts  from  me  immediate  respect  for 
such  legislation.  I  do  not  indeed  as  yet  discern 
on  what  this  respect  is  based  (this  the  philoso¬ 
pher  may  inquire),  but  at  least  I  understand 
this,  that  it  is  an  estimation  of  the  worth  which 
far  outweighs  all  worth  of  what  is  recommended 
by  inclination,  and  that  the  necessity  of  acting 
from  pure  respect  for  the  practical  law  is  what 
constitutes  duty,  to  which  every  other  motive 
must  give  place,  because  it  is  the  condition  of  a 
will  being  good  in  itself ,  and  the  worth  of  such 
a  will  is  above  everything. 

Thus,  then,  without  quitting  the  moral  knowl¬ 
edge  of  common  human  reason,  we  have  ar¬ 
rived  at  its  principle.  And  although,  no  doubt, 
common  men  do  not  conceive  it  in  such  an  ab¬ 
stract  and  universal  form,  yet  they  always  have 
it  really  before  their  eyes  and  use  it  as  the 
standard  of  their  decision.  Here  it  would  be 
easy  to  show  how,  with  this  compass  in  hand, 


26i 


THE  METAPHYSIC  OF  MORALS 


men  are  well  able  to  distinguish,  in  every  case 
that  occurs,  what  is  good,  what  bad,  conform¬ 
ably  to  duty  or  inconsistent  with  it,  if,  without 
in  the  least  teaching  them  anything  new,  we 
only,  like  Socrates,  direct  their  attention  to  the 
principle  they  themselves  employ;  and  that, 
therefore,  we  do  not  need  science  and  philoso¬ 
phy  to  know  what  we  should  do  to  be  honest 
and  good,  yea,  even  wise  and  virtuous.  Indeed 
we  might  well  have  conjectured  beforehand  that 
the  knowledge  of  what  every  man  is  bound  to 
do,  and  therefore  also  to  know,  would  be  within 
the  reach  of  every  man,  even  the  commonest. 
Here  we  cannot  forbear  admiration  when  we  see 
how  great  an  advantage  the  practical  judgement 
has  over  the  theoretical  in  the  common  under¬ 
standing  of  men.  In  the  latter,  if  common  rea¬ 
son  ventures  to  depart  from  the  laws  of  experi¬ 
ence  and  from  the  perceptions  of  the  senses,  it 
falls  into  mere  inconceivabilities  and  self-con¬ 
tradictions,  at  least  into  a  chaos  of  uncertainty, 
obscurity,  and  instability.  But  in  the  practical 
sphere  it  is  just  when  the  common  understand¬ 
ing  excludes  all  sensible  springs  from  practical 
laws  that  its  power  of  judgement  begins  to  show 
itself  to  advantage.  It  then  becomes  even  sub¬ 
tle,  whether  it  be  that  it  chicanes  with  its  own 
conscience  or  with  other  claims  respecting  what 
is  to  be  called  right,  or  whether  it  desires  for  its 
own  instruction  to  determine  honestly  the  worth 
of  actions;  and,  in  the  latter  case,  it  may  even 
have  as  good  a  hope  of  hitting  the  mark  as  any 
philosopher  whatever  can  promise  himself.  Nay, 
it  is  almost  more  sure  of  doing  so,  because  the 
philosopher  cannot  have  any  other  principle, 
while  he  may  easily  perplex  his  judgement  by  a 
multitude  of  considerations  foreign  to  the  mat¬ 
ter,  and  so  turn  aside  from  the  right  way.  Would 
it  not  therefore  be  wiser  in  moral  concerns  to 
acquiesce  in  the  judgement  of  common  reason, 
or  at  most  only  to  call  in  philosophy  for  the 
purpose  of  rendering  the  system  of  morals  more 
complete  and  intelligible,  and  its  rules  more  con¬ 
venient  for  use  (especially  for  disputation),  but 
not  so  as  to  draw  off  the  common  understanding 
from  its  happy  simplicity,  or  to  bring  it  by 
means  of  philosophy  into  a  new  path  of  inquiry 
and  instruction? 


Innocence  is  indeed  a  glorious  thing;  only,  on 
the  other  hand,  it  is  very  sad  that  it  cannot  well 
maintain  itself  and  is  easily  seduced.  On  this  ac¬ 
count  even  wisdom — which  otherwise  consists 
more  in  conduct  than  in  knowledge — yet  has 
need  of  science,  not  in  order  to  learn  from  it, 
but  to  secure  for  its  precepts  admission  and 
permanence.  Against  all  the  commands  of  duty 
which  reason  represents  to  man  as  so  deserving 
of  respect,  he  feels  in  himself  a  powerful  coun¬ 
terpoise  in  his  wants  and  inclinations,  the  entire 
satisfaction  of  which  he  sums  up  under  the 
name  of  happiness.  Now  reason  issues  its  com¬ 
mands  unyieldingly,  without  promising  anything 
to  the  inclinations,  and,  as  it  were,  with  disre¬ 
gard  and  contempt  for  these  claims,  which  are 
so  impetuous,  and  at  the  same  time  so  plausible, 
and  which  will  not  allow  themselves  to  be  sup¬ 
pressed  by  any  command.  Hence  there  arises  a 
natural  dialectic,  i.e.,  a  disposition,  to  argue 
against  these  strict  laws  of  duty  and  to  question 
their  validity,  or  at  least  their  purity  and  strict¬ 
ness;  and,  if  possible,  to  make  them  more  ac¬ 
cordant  with  our  wishes  and  inclinations,  that  is 
to  say,  to  corrupt  them  at  their  very  source,  and 
entirely  to  destroy  their  worth — a  thing  which 
even  common  practical  reason  cannot  ultimately 
call  good. 

Thus  is  the  common  reason  of  man  compelled 
to  go  out  of  its  sphere,  and  to  take  a  step  into 
the  field  of  a  practical  philosophy,  not  to  satisfy 
any  speculative  want  (which  never  occurs  to  it 
as  long  as  it  is  content  to  be  mere  sound  rea¬ 
son),  but  even  on  practical  grounds,  in  order  to 
attain  in  it  information  and  clear  instruction  re¬ 
specting  the  source  of  its  principle,  and  the  cor¬ 
rect  determination  of  it  in  opposition  to  the 
maxims  which  are  based  on  wants  and  inclina¬ 
tions,  so  that  it  may  escape  from  the  perplexity 
of  opposite  claims  and  not  run  the  risk  of  losing 
all  genuine  moral  principles  through  the  equiv¬ 
ocation  into  which  it  easily  falls.  Thus,  when 
practical  reason  cultivates  itself,  there  insensi¬ 
bly  arises  in  it  a  dialetic  which  forces  it  to  seek 
aid  in  philosophy,  just  as  happens  to  it  in  its 
theoretic  use;  and  in  this  case,  therefore,  as  well 
as  in  the  other,  it  will  find  rest  nowhere  but  in 
a  thorough  critical  examination  of  our  reason. 


SECOND  SECTION 


TRANSITION  FROM  POPULAR  MORAL  PHILOSOPHY 
TO  THE  METAPHYSIC  OF  MORALS 


If  we  have  hitherto  drawn  our  notion  of  duty 
from  the  common  use  of  our  practical  reason,  it 
is  by  no  means  to  be  inferred  that  we  have 
treated  it  as  an  empirical  notion.  On  the  con¬ 
trary,  if  we  attend  to  the  experience  of  men’s 
conduct,  we  meet  frequent  and,  as  we  ourselves 
allow,  just  complaints  that  one  cannot  find  a 
single  certain  example  of  the  disposition  to  act 
from  pure  duty.  Although  many  things  are  done 
in  conformity  with  what  duty  prescribes,  it  is 
nevertheless  always  doubtful  whether  they  are 
done  strictly  from  duty,  so  as  to  have  a  moral 
worth.  Hence  there  have  at  all  times  been  phi¬ 
losophers  who  have  altogether  denied  that  this 
disposition  actually  exists  at  all  in  human  ac¬ 
tions,  and  have  ascribed  everything  to  a  more  or 
less  refined  self-love.  Not  that  they  have  on  that 
account  questioned  the  soundness  of  the  con¬ 
ception  of  morality;  on  the  contrary,  they  spoke 
with  sincere  regret  of  the  frailty  and  corruption 
of  human  nature,  which,  though  noble  enough 
to  take  as  its  rule  an  idea  so  worthy  of  respect, 
is  yet  too  weak  to  follow  it  and  employs 
reason,  which  ought  to  give  it  the  law  only 
for  the  purpose  of  providing  for  the  interest 
of  the  inclinations,  whether  singly  or  at  the 
best  in  the  greatest  possible  harmony  with  one 
another. 

In  fact,  it  is  absolutely  impossible  to  make 
out  by  experience  with  complete  certainty  a 
single  case  in  which  the  maxim  of  an  action, 
however  right  in  itself,  rested  simply  on  moral 
grounds  and  on  the  conception  of  duty.  Some¬ 
times  it  happens  that  with  the  sharpest  self-ex¬ 
amination  we  can  find  nothing  beside  the  moral 
principle  of  duty  which  could  have  been  power¬ 
ful  enough  to  move  us  to  this  or  that  action  and 
to  so  great  a  sacrifice;  yet  we  cannot  from  this 
infer  with  certainty  that  it  was  not  really  some 
secret  impulse  of  self-love,  under  the  false  ap¬ 
pearance  of  duty,  that  was  the  actual  determin¬ 
ing  cause  of  the  will.  We  like  them  to  flatter 
ourselves  by  falsely  taking  credit  for  a  more 
noble  motive;  whereas  in  fact  we  can  never, 
even  by  the  strictest  examination,  get  complete¬ 


ly  behind  the  secret  springs  of  action;  since, 
when  the  question  is  of  moral  worth,  it  is  not 
with  the  actions  which  we  see  that  we  are  con¬ 
cerned,  but  with  those  inward  principles  of  them 
which  we  do  not  see. 

Moreover,  we  cannot  better  serve  the  wishes 
of  those  who  ridicule  all  morality  as  a  mere 
chimera  of  human  imagination  overstepping  it¬ 
self  from  vanity,  than  by  conceding  to  them  that 
notions  of  duty  must  be  drawn  only  from  ex¬ 
perience  (as  from  indolence,  people  are  ready 
to  think  is  also  the  case  with  all  other  notions) ; 
for  this  is  to  prepare  for  them  a  certain  triumph. 
I  am  willing  to  admit  out  of  love  of  humanity 
that  even  most  of  our  actions  are  correct,  but  if 
we  look  closer  at  them  we  everywhere  come  up¬ 
on  the  dear  self  which  is  always  prominent,  and 
it  is  this  they  have  in  view  and  not  the  strict 
command  of  duty  which  would  often  require 
self-denial.  Without  being  an  enemy  of  virtue, 
a  cool  observer,  one  that  does  not  mistake  the 
wish  for  good,  however  lively,  for  its  reality, 
may  sometimes  doubt  whether  true  virtue  is  ac¬ 
tually  found  anywhere  in  the  world,  and  this 
especially  as  years  increase  and  the  judgement 
is  partly  made  wiser  by  experience  and  partly, 
also,  more  acute  in  observation.  This  being  so, 
nothing  can  secure  us  from  falling  away  alto¬ 
gether  from  our  ideas  of  duty,  or  maintain  in 
the  soul  a  well-grounded  respect  for  its  law,  but 
the  clear  conviction  that  although  there  should 
never  have  been  actions  which  really  sprang 
from  such  pure  sources,  yet  whether  this  or  that 
takes  place  is  not  at  all  the  question;  but  that 
reason  of  itself,  independent  on  all  experience, 
ordains  what  ought  to  take  place,  that  accord¬ 
ingly  actions  of  which  perhaps  the  world  has 
hitherto  never  given  an  example,  the  feasibility 
even  of  which  might  be  very  much  doubted  by 
one  who  founds  everything  on  experience,  are 
nevertheless  inflexibly  commanded  by  reason; 
that,  e.g.,  even  though  there  might  never  yet 
have  been  a  sincere  friend,  yet  not  a  whit  the 
less  is  pure  sincerity  in  friendship  required  of 
every  man,  because,  prior  to  all  experience,  this 


THE  METAPHYSIC  OF  MORALS  263 


duty  is  involved  as  duty  in  the  idea  of  a  reason 
determining  the  will  by  a  priori  principles. 

When  we  add  further  that,  unless  we  deny 
that  the  notion  of  morality  has  any  truth  or 
reference  to  any  possible  object,  we  must  admit 
that  its  law  must  be  valid,  not  merely  for  men 
but  for  all  rational  creatures  generally ,  not  mere¬ 
ly  under  certain  contingent  conditions  or  with 
exceptions  but  with  absolute  necessity ,  then  it 
is  clear  that  no  experience  could  enable  us  to  in¬ 
fer  even  the  possibility  of  such  apodeictic  laws. 
For  with  what  right  could  we  bring  into  un¬ 
bounded  respect  as  a  universal  precept  for  every 
rational  nature  that  which  perhaps  holds  only 
under  the  contingent  conditions  of  humanity? 
Or  how  could  laws  of  the  determination  of  our 
will  be  regarded  as  laws  of  the  determination  of 
the  will  of  rational  beings  generally,  and  for  us 
only  as  such,  if  they  were  merely  empirical  and 
did  not  take  their  origin  wholly  a  priori  from 
pure  but  practical  reason? 

Nor  could  anything  be  more  fatal  to  morality 
than  that  we  should  wish  to  derive  it  from  ex¬ 
amples.  For  every  example  of  it  that  is  set  be¬ 
fore  me  must  be  first  itself  tested  by  principles 
of  morality,  whether  it  is  worthy  to  serve  as  an 
original  example,  i.e.,  as  a  pattern;  but  by  no 
means  can  it  authoritatively  furnish  the  concep¬ 
tion  of  morality.  Even  the  Holy  One  of  the 
Gospels  must  first  be  compared  with  our  ideal 
of  moral  perfection  before  we  can  recognise 
Him  as  such ;  and  so  He  says  of  Himself,  “Why 
call  ye  Me  (whom  you  see)  good;  none  is  good 
(the  model  of  good)  but  God  only  (whom  ye 
do  not  see)?”  But  whence  have  we  the  concep¬ 
tion  of  God  as  the  supreme  good?  Simply  from 
the  idea  of  moral  perfection,  which  reason 
frames  a  priori  and  connects  inseparably  with 
the  notion  of  a  free  will.  Imitation  finds  no 
place  at  all  in  morality,  and  examples  serve  only 
for  encouragement,  i.e.,  they  put  beyond  doubt 
the  feasibility  of  what  the  law  commands,  they 
make  visible  that  which  the  practical  rule  ex¬ 
presses  more  generally,  but  they  can  never  au¬ 
thorize  us  to  set  aside  the  true  original  which 
lies  in  reason  and  to  guide  ourselves  by  ex¬ 
amples. 

If  then  there  is  no  genuine  supreme  principle 
of  morality  but  what  must  rest  simply  on  pure 
reason,  independent  of  all  experience,  I  think  it 
is  not  necessary  even  to  put  the  question  wheth¬ 
er  it  is  good  to  exhibit  these  concepts  in  their 
generality  (in  abstracto)  as  they  are  established 
a  priori  along  with  the  principles  belonging  to 
them,  if  our  knowledge  is  to  be  distinguished 
from  the  vulgar  and  to  be  called  philosophical. 


In  our  times  indeed  this  might  perhaps  be  neces¬ 
sary;  for  if  we  collected  votes  whether  pure  ra¬ 
tional  knowledge  separated  from  everything 
empirical,  that  is  to  say,  metaphysic  of  morals, 
or  whether  popular  practical  philosophy  is  to  be 
preferred,  it  is  easy  to  guess  which  side  would 
preponderate. 

This  descending  to  popular  notions  is  certain¬ 
ly  very  commendable,  if  the  ascent  to  the  prin¬ 
ciples  of  pure  reason  has  first  taken  place  and 
been  satisfactorily  accomplished.  This  implies 
that  we  first  found  ethics  on  metaphysics,  and 
then,  when  it  is  firmly  established,  procure  a 
hearing  for  it  by  giving  it  a  popular  character. 
But  it  is  quite  absurd  to  try  to  be  popular  in  the 
first  inquiry,  on  which  the  soundness  of  the  prin¬ 
ciples  depends.  It  is  not  only  that  this  proceed¬ 
ing  can  never  lay  claim  to  the  very  rare  merit 
of  a  true  philosophical  popularity ,  since  there  is 
no  art  in  being  intelligible  if  one  renounces  all 
thoroughness  of  insight;  but  also  it  produces  a 
disgusting  medley  of  compiled  observations  and 
half-reasoned  principles.  Shallow  pates  enjoy 
this  because  it  can  be  used  for  every-day  chat, 
but  the  sagacious  find  in  it  only  confusion,  and 
being  unsatisfied  and  unable  to  help  themselves, 
they  turn  away  their  eyes,  while  philosophers, 
who  see  quite  well  through  this  delusion,  are  lit¬ 
tle  listened  to  when  they  call  men  off  for  a  time 
from  this  pretended  popularity,  in  order  that 
they  might  be  rightfully  popular  after  they  have 
attained  a  definite  insight. 

We  need  only  look  at  the  attempts  of  moral¬ 
ists  in  that  favourite  fashion,  and  we  shall  find 
at  one  time  the  special  constitution  of  human 
nature  (including,  however,  the  idea  of  a  ra¬ 
tional  nature  generally),  at  one  time  perfection, 
at  another  happiness,  here  moral  sense,  there 
fear  of  God.  a  little  of  this,  and  a  little  of  that, 
in  marvellous  mixture,  without  its  occurring  to 
them  to  ask  whether  the  principles  of  morality 
are  to  be  sought  in  the  knowledge  of  human  na¬ 
ture  at  all  (which  we  can  have  only  from  ex¬ 
perience);  or,  if  this  is  not  so,  if  these  princi¬ 
ples  are  to  be  found  altogether  a  priori,  free  from 
everything  empirical,  in  pure  rational  concepts 
only  and  nowhere  else,  not  even  in  the  smallest 
degree;  then  rather  to  adopt  the  method  of 
making  this  a  separate  inquiry,  as  pure  practical 
philosophy,  or  (if  one  may  use  a  name  so  de¬ 
cried)  as  metaphysic  of  morals,1  to  bring  it  by 

1  Just  as  pure  mathematics  are  distinguished  from 
applied,  pure  logic  from  applied,  so  if  we  choose  we 
may  also  distinguish  pure  philosophy  of  morals  (meta¬ 
physic)  from  applied  (viz.,  applied  to  human  nature). 
By  this  designation  we  are  also  at  once  reminded  that 
moral  principles  are  not  based  on  properties  of  human 


FUNDAMENTAL  PRINCIPLES  OF 


264 

itself  to  completeness,  and  to  require  the  pub¬ 
lic,  which  wishes  for  popular  treatment,  to  await 
the  issue  of  this  undertaking. 

Such  a  metaphysic  of  morals,  completely  iso¬ 
lated,  not  mixed  with  any  anthropology,  theol¬ 
ogy,  physics,  or  hyperphysics,  and  still  less  with 
occult  qualities  (which  we  might  call  hypo- 
physical ),  is  not  only  an  indispensable  substra¬ 
tum  of  all  sound  theoretical  knowledge  of  duties, 
but  is  at  the  same  time  a  desideratum  of  the 
highest  importance  to  the  actual  fulfilment  of 
their  precepts.  For  the  pure  conception  of  duty, 
unmixed  with  any  foreign  addition  of  empirical 
attractions,  and,  in  a  word,  the  conception  of 
the  moral  law,  exercises  on  the  human  heart,  by 
way  of  reason  alone  (which  first  becomes  aware 
with  this  that  it  can  of  itself  be  practical),  an 
influence  so  much  more  powerful  than  all  other 
springs* 1  which  may  be  derived  from  the  field 
of  experience,  that,  in  the  consciousness  of  its 
worth,  it  despises  the  latter,  and  can  by  degrees 
become  their  master;  whereas  a  mixed  ethics, 
compounded  partly  of  motives  drawn  from  feel¬ 
ings  and  inclinations,  and  partly  also  of  concep¬ 
tions  of  reason,  must  make  the  mind  waver  be¬ 
tween  motives  which  cannot  be  brought  under 
any  principle,  which  lead  to  good  only  by  mere 
accident  and  very  often  also  to  evil. 

From  what  has  been  said,  it  is  clear  that  all 
moral  conceptions  have  their  seat  and  origin 
completely  a  priori  in  the  reason,  and  that, 
moreover,  in  the  commonest  reason  just  as  truly 
as  in  that  which  is  in  the  highest  degree  specu¬ 
lative;  that  they  cannot  be  obtained  by  abstrac¬ 
tion  from  any  empirical,  and  therefore  merely 
contingent,  knowledge;  that  it  is  just  this  purity 
of  their  origin  that  makes  them  worthy  to  serve 


nature,  but  must  subsist  a  priori  of  themselves,  while 
from  such  principles  practical  rules  must  be  capable  of 
being  deduced  for  every  rational  nature,  and  according¬ 
ly  for  that  of  man. 

1  I  have  a  letter  from  the  late  excellent  Sulzer,  in 
which  he  asks  me  what  can  be  the  reason  that  moral  in¬ 
struction,  although  containing  much  that  is  convincing 
for  the  reason,  yet  accomplishes  so  little?  My  answer 
was  postponed  in  order  that  I  might  make  it  complete. 
But  it  is  simply  this:  that  the  teachers  themselves  have 
not  got  their  own  notions  clear,  and  when  they  endeav¬ 
our  to  make  up  for  this  by  raking  up  motives  of  moral 
goodness  from  every  quarter,  trying  to  make  their 
physic  right  strong,  they  spoil  it.  For  the  commonest 
understanding  shows  that  if  we  imagine,  on  the  one 
hand,  an  act  of  honesty  done  with  steadfast  mind,  apart 
from  every  view  to  advantage  of  any  kind  in  this  world 
or  another,  and  even  under  the  greatest  temptations  of 
necessity  or  allurement,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  a  sim¬ 
ilar  act  which  was  affected,  in  however  low  a  degree,  by 
a  foreign  motive,  the  former  leaves  far  behind  and 
eclipses  the  second;  it  elevates  the  soul  and  inspires  the 
wish  to  be  able  to  act  in  like  manner  oneself.  Even 
moderately  young  children  feel  this  impression,  and  one 
should  never  represent  duties  to  them  in  any  other  light. 


as  our  supreme  practical  principle,  and  that  just 
in  proportion  as  we  add  anything  empirical,  we 
detract  from  their  genuine  influence  and  from 
the  absolute  value  of  actions;  that  it  is  not  only 
of  the  greatest  necessity,  in  a  purely  speculative 
point  of  view,  but  is  also  of  the  greatest  prac¬ 
tical  importance,  to  derive  these  notions  and 
laws  from  pure  reason,  to  present  them  pure 
and  unmixed,  and  even  to  determine  the  com¬ 
pass  of  this  practical  or  pure  rational  knowledge, 
i.e.,  to  determine  the  whole  faculty  of  pure 
practical  reason;  and,  in  doing  so,  we  must  not 
make  its  principles  dependent  on  the  particular 
nature  of  human  reason,  though  in  speculative 
philosophy  this  may  be  permitted,  or  may  even 
at  times  be  necessary;  but  since  moral  laws 
ought  to  hold  good  for  every  rational  creature, 
we  must  derive  them  from  the  general  concept 
of  a  rational  being.  In  this  way,  although  for  its 
application  to  man  morality  has  need  of  anthro¬ 
pology,  yet,  in  the  first  instance,  we  must  treat 
it  independently  as  pure  philosophy,  i.e.,  as  met¬ 
aphysic,  complete  in  itself  (a  thing  which  in 
such  distinct  branches  of  science  is  easily  done) ; 
knowing  well  that  unless  we  are  in  possession 
of  this,  it  would  not  only  be  vain  to  determine 
the  moral  element  of  duty  in  right  actions  for 
purposes  of  speculative  criticism,  but  it  would 
be  impossible  to  base  morals  on  their  genuine 
principles,  even  for  common  practical  purposes, 
especially  of  moral  instruction,  so  as  to  produce 
pure  moral  dispositions,  and  to  engraft  them  on 
men’s  minds  to  the  promotion  of  the  greatest 
possible  good  in  the  world. 

But  in  order  that  in  this  study  we  may  not 
merely  advance  by  the  natural  steps  from  the 
common  moral  judgement  (in  this  case  very 
worthy  of  respect)  to  the  philosophical,  as  has 
been  already  done,  but  also  from  a  popular  phi¬ 
losophy,  which  goes  no  further  than  it  can  reach 
by  groping  with  the  help  of  examples,  to  meta¬ 
physic  (which  does  allow  itself  to  be  checked 
by  anything  empirical  and,  as  it  must  measure 
the  whole  extent  of  this  kind  of  rational  knowl¬ 
edge,  goes  as  far  as  ideal  conceptions,  where 
even  examples  fail  us),  we  must  follow  and 
clearly  describe  the  practical  faculty  of  reason, 
from  the  general  rules  of  its  determination  to 
the  point  where  the  notion  of  duty  springs 
from  it. 

Everything  in  nature  works  according  to  laws. 
Rational  beings  alone  have  the  faculty  of  act¬ 
ing  according  to  the  conception  of  laws,  that  is 
according  to  principles,  i.e.,  have  a  will.  Since 
the  deduction  of  actions  from  principles  re¬ 
quires  reason,  the  will  is  nothing  but  practical 


THE  METAPHYSIC  OF  MORALS  265 


reason.  If  reason  infallibly  determines  the  will, 
then  the  actions  of  such  a  being  which  are  recog¬ 
nised  as  objectively  necessary  are  subjectively 
necessary  also,  i.e.,  the  will  is  a  faculty  to 
choose  that  only  which  reason  independent  of 
inclination  recognises  as  practically  necessary, 
i.e.,  as  good.  But  if  reason  of  itself  does  not  suf¬ 
ficiently  determine  the  will,  if  the  latter  is  sub¬ 
ject  also  to  subjective  conditions  (particular 
impulses)  which  do  not  always  coincide  with  the 
objective  conditions;  in  a  word,  if  the  will  does 
not  in  itself  completely  accord  with  reason 
(which  is  actually  the  case  with  men),  then  the 
actions  which  objectively  are  recognised  as  nec¬ 
essary  are  subjectively  contingent,  and  the  de¬ 
termination  of  such  a  will  according  to  objec¬ 
tive  laws  is  obligation,  that  is  to  say,  the  rela¬ 
tion  of  the  objective  laws  to  a  will  that  is  not 
thoroughly  good  is  conceived  as  the  determina¬ 
tion  of  the  will  of  a  rational  being  by  principles 
of  reason,  but  which  the  will  from  its  nature 
does  not  of  necessity  follow. 

The  conception  of  an  objective  principle,  in 
so  far  as  it  is  obligatory  for  a  will,  is  called  a 
command  (of  reason),  and  the  formula  of  the 
command  is  called  an  imperative . 

All  imperatives  are  expressed  by  the  word 
ought  [or  shall],  and  thereby  indicate  the  rela¬ 
tion  of  an  objective  law  of  reason  to  a  will, 
which  from  its  subjective  constitution  is  not 
necessarily  determined  by  it  (an  obligation). 
They  say  that  something  would  be  good  to  do 
or  to  forbear,  but  they  say  it  to  a  will  which 
does  not  always  do  a  thing  because  it  is  con¬ 
ceived  to  be  good  to  do  it.  That  is  practically 
good,  however,  which  determines  the  will  by 
means  of  the  conceptions  of  reason,  and  con¬ 
sequently  not  from  subjective  causes,  but  ob¬ 
jectively,  that  is  on  principles  which  are  valid 
for  every  rational  being  as  such.  It  is  distin¬ 
guished  from  the  pleasant,  as  that  which  influ¬ 
ences  the  will  only  by  means  of  sensation  from 
merely  subjective  causes,  valid  only  for  the 
sense  of  this  or  that  one,  and  not  as  a  principle 
of  reason,  which  holds  for  every  one.1 

1  The  dependence  of  the  desires  on  sensations  is  called 
inclination,  and  this  accordingly  always  indicates  a 
want.  The  dependence  of  a  contingently  determinable 
will  on  principles  of  reason  is  called  an  interest.  This, 
therefore,  is  found  only  in  the  case  of  a  dependent  will 
which  does  not  always  of  itself  conform  to  reason;  in 
the  Divine  will  we  cannot  conceive  any  interest.  But  the 
human  will  can  also  take  an  interest  in  a  thing  with¬ 
out  therefore  acting  from,  interest.  The  former  signifies 
the  practical  interest  in  the  action,  the  latter  the  patho¬ 
logical  in  the  object  of  the  action.  The  former  indicates 
only  dependence  of  the  will  on  principles  of  reason  in 
themselves;  the  second,  dependence  on  principles  of  rea¬ 
son  for  the  sake  of  inclination,  reason  supplying  only 
the  practical  rules  how  the  requirement  of  the  inclina- 


A  perfectly  good  will  would  therefore  be 
equally  subject  to  objective  laws  (viz.,  laws  of 
good),  but  could  not  be  conceived  as  obliged 
thereby  to  act  lawfully,  because  of  itself  from 
its  subjective  constitution  it  can  only  be  deter¬ 
mined  by  the  conception  of  good.  Therefore  no 
imperatives  hold  for  the  Divine  will,  or  in  gen¬ 
eral  for  a  holy  will;  ought  is  here  out  of  place, 
because  the  volition  is  already  of  itself  neces¬ 
sarily  in  unison  with  the  law.  Therefore  impera¬ 
tives  are  only  formulas  to  express  the  relation  of 
objective  laws  of  all  volition  to  the  subjective 
imperfection  of  the  will  of  this  or  that  rational 
being,  e.g.,  the  human  will. 

Now  all  imperatives  command  either  hypo¬ 
thetically  or  categorically.  The  former  represent 
the  practical  necessity  of  a  possible  action  as 
means  to  something  else  that  is  willed  (or  at 
least  which  one  might  possibly  will).  The  cate¬ 
gorical  imperative  would  be  that  which  repre¬ 
sented  an  action  as  necessary  of  itself  without 
reference  to  another  end,  i.e.,  as  objectively 
necessary. 

Since  every  practical  law  represents  a  possi¬ 
ble  action  as  good  and,  on  this  account,  for  a 
subject  who  is  practically  determinable  by 
reason,  necessary,  all  imperatives  are  formulae 
determining  an  action  which  is  necessary  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  principle  of  a  will  good  in  some 
respects.  If  now  the  action  is  good  only  as  a 
means  to  something  else,  then  the  imperative  is 
hypothetical;  if  it  is  conceived  as  good  in  itself 
and  consequently  as  being  necessarily  the  prin¬ 
ciple  of  a  will  which  of  itself  conforms  to 
reason,  then  it  is  categorical . 

Thus  the  imperative  declares  what  action  pos¬ 
sible  by  me  would  be  good  and  presents  the  prac¬ 
tical  rule  in  relation  to  a  will  which  does  not 
forthwith  perform  an  action  simply  because  it 
is  good,  whether  because  the  subject  does  not 
always  know  that  it  is  good,  or  because, 
even  if  it  know  this,  yet  its  maxims  might  be 
opposed  to  the  objective  principles  of  practical 
reason. 

Accordingly  the  hypothetical  imperative  only 
says  that  the  action  is  good  for  some  purpose, 
possible  or  actual.  In  the  first  case  it  is  a  prob¬ 
lematical,  in  the  second  an  assertorial  practical 
principle.  The  categorical  imperative  which  de¬ 
clares  an  action  to  be  objectively  necessary  in 
itself  without  reference  to  any  purpose,  i.e., 

tion  may  be  satisfied.  In  the  first  case  the  action  in¬ 
terests  me;  in  the  second  the  object  of  the  action  (be¬ 
cause  it  is  pleasant  to  me).  We  have  seen  in  the  first 
section  that  in  an  action  done  from  duty  we  must  look 
not  to  the  interest  in  the  object,  but  only  to  that  in  the 
action  itself,  and  in  its  rational  principle  (viz.,  the  law). 


266 


FUNDAMENTAL 

without  any  other  end,  is  valid  as  an  apodeictic 
(practical)  principle. 

Whatever  is  possible  only  by  the  power  of 
some  rational  being  may  also  be  conceived  as  a 
possible  purpose  of  some  will;  and  therefore  the 
principles  of  action  as  regards  the  means  neces¬ 
sary  to  attain  some  possible  purpose  are  in  fact 
infinitely  numerous.  All  sciences  have  a  prac¬ 
tical  part,  consisting  of  problems  expressing  that 
some  end  is  possible  for  us  and  of  imperatives 
directing  how  it  may  be  attained.  These  may, 
therefore,  be  called  in  general  imperatives  of 
skill.  Here  there  is  no  question  whether  the  end 
is  rational  and  good,  but  only  what  one  must  do 
in  order  to  attain  it.  The  precepts  for  the  physi¬ 
cian  to  make  his  patient  thoroughly  healthy, 
and  for  a  poisoner  to  ensure  certain  death,  are 
of  equal  value  in  this  respect,  that  each  serves 
to  effect  its  purpose  perfectly.  Since  in  early 
youth  it  cannot  be  known  what  ends  are  likely 
to  occur  to  us  in  the  course  of  life,  parents  seek 
to  have  their  children  taught  a  great  many 
things ,  and  provide  for  their  skill  in  the  use 
of  means  for  all  sorts  of  arbitrary  ends,  of  none 
of  which  can  they  determine  whether  it  may 
not  perhaps  hereafter  be  an  object  to  their 
pupil,  but  which  it  is  at  all  events  possible  that 
he  might  aim  at;  and  this  anxiety  is  so  great 
that  they  commonly  neglect  to  form  and  cor¬ 
rect  their  judgement  on  the  value  of  the  things 
which  may  be  chosen  as  ends. 

There  is  one  end,  however,  which  may  be  as¬ 
sumed  to  be  actually  such  to  all  rational  beings 
(so  far  as  imperatives  apply  to  them,  viz.,  as  de¬ 
pendent  beings),  and,  therefore,  one  purpose 
which  they  not  merely  may  have,  but  which  we 
may  with  certainty  assume  that  they  all  actual¬ 
ly  have  by  a  natural  necessity,  and  this  is  hap¬ 
piness.  The  hypothetical  imperative  which  ex¬ 
presses  the  practical  necessity  of  an  action  as 
means  to  the  advancement  of  happiness  is  as- 
sertorial.  We  are  not  to  present  it  as  necessary 
for  an  uncertain  and  merely  possible  purpose, 
but  for  a  purpose  which  we  may  presuppose 
with  certainty  and  a  priori  in  every  man,  be¬ 
cause  it  belongs  to  his  being.  Now  skill  in  the 
choice  of  means  to  his  own  greatest  well-being 
may  be  called  prudence ,x  in  the  narrowest  sense. 
And  thus  the  imperative  which  refers  to  the 

i  The  word  prudence  is  taken  in  two  senses:  in  the 
one  it  may  bear  the  name  of  knowledge  of  the  world ,  in 
the  other  that  of  private  prudence.  The  former  is  a 
man’s  ability  to  influence  others  so  as  to  use  them  for 
his  own  purposes.  The  latter  is  the  sagacity  to  combine 
all  these  purposes  for  his  own  lasting  benefit.  This  lat¬ 
ter  is  properly  that  to  which  the  value  even  of  the  for¬ 
mer  is  reduced,  and  when  a  man  is  prudent  in  the  for¬ 
mer  sense,  but  not  in  the  latter,  we  might  better  say  of 


PRINCIPLES  OF 

choice  of  means  to  one’s  own  happiness,  i.e., 
the  precept  of  prudence,  is  still  always  hypo¬ 
thetical ;  the  action  is  not  commanded  absolute¬ 
ly,  but  only  as  means  to  another  purpose. 

Finally,  there  is  an  imperative  which  com¬ 
mands  a  certain  conduct  immediately,  without 
having  as  its  condition  any  other  purpose  to  be 
attained  by  it.  This  imperative  is  categorical. 
It  concerns  not  the  matter  of  the  action,  or 
its  intended  result,  but  its  form  and  the  prin¬ 
ciple  of  which  it  is  itself  a  result;  and  what  is 
essentially  good  in  it  consists  in  the  mental 
disposition,  let  the  consequence  be  what  it 
may.  This  imperative  may  be  called  that  of 
morality. 

There  is  a  marked  distinction  also  between 
the  volitions  on  these  three  sorts  of  principles 
in  the  dissimilarity  of  the  obligation  of  the  will. 
In  order  to  mark  this  difference  more  clearly,  I 
think  they  would  be  most  suitably  named  in 
their  order  if  we  said  they  are  either  rules  of 
skill,  or  counsels  of  prudence,  or  commands 
(laws)  of  morality.  For  it  is  law  only  that  in¬ 
volves  the  conception  of  an  unconditional  and 
objective  necessity,  which  is  consequently  uni¬ 
versally  valid;  and  commands  are  laws  which 
must  be  obeyed,  that  is,  must  be  followed,  even 
in  opposition  to  inclination.  Counsels,  indeed, 
involve  necessity,  but  one  which  can  only  hold 
under  a  contingent  subjective  condition,  viz., 
they  depend  on  whether  this  or  that  man  reck¬ 
ons  this  or  that  as  part  of  his  happiness;  the 
categorical  imperative,  on  the  contrary,  is  not 
limited  by  any  condition,  and  as  being  absolute¬ 
ly,  although  practically,  necessary,  may  be  quite 
properly  called  a  command.  We  might  also  call 
the  first  kind  of  imperatives  technical  (belong¬ 
ing  to  art),  the  second  pragmatic 2  (to  welfare), 
the  third  moral  (belonging  to  free  conduct  gen¬ 
erally,  that  is,  to  morals). 

Now  arises  the  question,  how  are  all  these 
imperatives  possible?  This  question  does  not 
seek  to  know  how  we  can  conceive  the  accom¬ 
plishment  of  the  action  which  the  imperative 
ordains,  but  merely  how  we  can  conceive  the 
obligation  of  the  will  which  the  imperative  ex¬ 
presses.  No  special  explanation  is  needed  to 


him  that  he  is  clever  and  cunning,  but,  on  the  whole, 
imprudent. 

2  It  seems  to  me  that  the  proper  signification  of  the 
word  pragmatic  may  be  most  accurately  defined  in  this 
way.  For  sanctions  are  called  pragmatic  which  flow 
properly  not  from  the  law  of  the  states  as  necessary  en¬ 
actments,  but  from  precaution  for  the  general  welfare. 
A  history  is  composed  pragmatically  when  it  teaches 
prudence ,  i.e.,  instructs  the  world  how  it  can  provide  for 
its  interests  better,  or  at  least  as  well  as,  the  men  of 
former  time. 


THE  METAPHYSIC  OF  MORALS 


show  how  an  imperative  of  skill  is  possible. 
Whoever  wills  the  end,  wills  also  (so  far  as  rea¬ 
son  decides  his  conduct)  the  means  in  his  power 
which  are  indispensably  necessary  thereto.  This 
proposition  is,  as  regards  the  volition,  analyti¬ 
cal;  for,  in  willing  an  object  as  my  effect,  there 
is  already  thought  the  causality  of  myself  as  an 
acting  cause,  .that  is  to  say,  the  use  of  the 
means;  and  the  imperative  educes  from  the  con¬ 
ception  of  volition  of  an  end  the  conception  of 
actions  necessary  to  this  end.  Synthetical  prop¬ 
ositions  must  no  doubt  be  employed  in  defining 
the  means  to  a  proposed  end;  but  they  do  not 
concern  the  principle,  the  act  of  the  will,  but 
the  object  and  its  realization.  E.g.,  that  in  or¬ 
der  to  bisect  a  line  on  an  unerring  principle 
I  must  draw  from  its  extremities  two  intersect¬ 
ing  arcs;  this  no  doubt  is  taught  by  math¬ 
ematics  only  in  synthetical  propositions;  but  if 
I  know  that  it  is  only  by  this  process  that  the 
intended  operation  can  be  performed,  then  to 
say  that,  if  I  fully  will  the  operation,  I  also  will 
the  action  required  for  it,  is  an  analytical  prop¬ 
osition;  for  it  is  one  and  the  same  thing  to  con¬ 
ceive  something  as  an  effect  which  I  can  pro¬ 
duce  in  a  certain  way,  and  to  conceive  myself 
as  acting  in  this  way. 

If  it  were  only  equally  easy  to  give  a  definite 
conception  of  happiness,  the  imperatives  of 
prudence  would  correspond  exactly  with  those 
of  skill,  and  would  likewise  be  analytical.  For 
in  this  case  as  in  that,  it  could  be  said:  “Who¬ 
ever  wills  the  end,  wills  also  (according  to  the 
dictate  of  reason  necessarily)  the  indispensable 
means  thereto  which  are  in  his  power.”  But,  un¬ 
fortunately,  the  notion  of  happiness  is  so  in¬ 
definite  that  although  every  man  wishes  to  at¬ 
tain  it,  yet  he  never  can  say  definitely  and  con¬ 
sistently  what  it  is  that  he  really  wishes  and 
wills.  The  reason  of  this  is  that  all  the  elements 
which  belong  to  the  notion  of  happiness  are  al¬ 
together  empirical,  i.e.,  they  must  be  borrowed 
from  experience,  and  nevertheless  the  idea  of 
happiness  requires  an  absolute  whole,  a  maxi¬ 
mum  of  welfare  in  my  present  and  all  future 
circumstances.  Now  it  is  impossible  that  the 
most  clear-sighted  and  at  the  same  time  most 
powerful  being  (supposed  finite)  should  frame 
to  himself  a  definite  conception  of  what  he 
really  wills  in  this.  Does  he  will  riches,  how 
much  anxiety,  envy,  and  snares  might  he  not 
thereby  draw  upon  his  shoulders?  Does  he  will 
knowledge  and  discernment,  perhaps  it  might 
prove  to  be  only  an  eye  so  much  the  sharper  to 
show  him  so  much  the  more  fearfully  the  evils 
that  are  now  concealed  from  him,  and  that  can¬ 


267 

not  be  avoided,  or  to  impose  more  wants  on  his 
desires,  which  already  give  him  concern  enough. 
Would  he  have  long  life?  who  guarantees  to  him 
that  it  would  not  be  a  long  misery?  would  he 
at  least  have  health?  how  often  has  uneasiness 
of  the  body  restrained  from  excesses  into  which 
perfect  health  would  have  allowed  one  to  fall? 
and  so  on.  In  short,  he  is  unable,  on  any  prin¬ 
ciple,  to  determine  with  certainty  what  would 
make  him  truly  happy;  because  to  do  so  he 
would  need  to  be  omniscient.  We  cannot  there¬ 
fore  act  on  any  definite  principles  to  secure 
happiness,  but  only  on  empirical  counsels,  e.g. 
of  regimen,  frugality,  courtesy,  reserve,  etc., 
which  experience  teaches  do,  on  the  average, 
most  promote  well-being.  Hence  it  follows  that 
the  imperatives  of  prudence  do  not,  strictly 
speaking,  command  at  all,  that  is,  they  cannot 
present  actions  objectively  as  practically  nec¬ 
essary;  that  they  are  rather  to  be  regarded  as 
counsels  ( consilia )  than  precepts  ( praecepta )  of 
reason,  that  the  problem  to  determine  certainly 
and  universally  what  action  would  promote  the 
happiness  of  a  rational  being  is  completely  in¬ 
soluble,  and  consequently  no  imperative  re¬ 
specting  it  is  possible  which  should,  in  the  strict 
sense,  command  to  do  what  makes  happy;  be¬ 
cause  happiness  is  not  an  ideal  of  reason  but  of 
imagination,  resting  solely  on  empirical  grounds, 
and  it  is  vain  to  expect  that  these  should  define 
an  action  by  which  one  could  attain  the  totality 
of  a  series  of  consequences  which  is  really  end¬ 
less.  This  imperative  of  prudence  would  how¬ 
ever  be  an  analytical  proposition  if  we  assume 
that  the  means  to  happiness  could  be  certainly 
assigned;  for  it  is  distinguished  from  the  im¬ 
perative  of  skill  only  by  this,  that  in  the  latter 
the  end  is  merely  possible,  in  the  former  it  is 
given;  as  however  both  only  ordain  the  means 
to  that  which  we  suppose  to  be  willed  as  an  end, 
it  follows  that  the  imperative  which  ordains  the 
willing  of  the  means  to  him  who  wills  the  end  is 
in  both  cases  analytical.  Thus  there  is  no  diffi¬ 
culty  in  regard  to  the  possibility  of  an  impera¬ 
tive  of  this  kind  either. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  question  how  the 
imperative  of  morality  is  possible,  is  un¬ 
doubtedly  one,  the  only  one,  demanding  a  solu¬ 
tion,  as  this  is  not  at  all  hypothetical,  and  the 
objective  necessity  which  it  presents  cannot 
rest  on  any  hypothesis,  as  is  the  case  with  the 
hypothetical  imperatives.  Only  here  we  must 
never  leave  out  of  consideration  that  we  cannot 
make  out  by  any  example ,  in  other  words  em¬ 
pirically,  whether  there  is  such  an  imperative 
at  all,  but  it  is  rather  to  be  feared  that  all  those 


268 


FUNDAMENTAL  PRINCIPLES  OF 


which  seem  to  be  categorical  may  yet  be  at  bot¬ 
tom  hypothetical.  For  instance,  when  the  pre¬ 
cept  is:  ‘‘Thou  shalt  not  promise  deceitfully”; 
and  it  is  assumed  that  the  necessity  of  this  is 
not  a  mere  counsel  to  avoid  some  other  evil,  so 
that  it  should  mean:  “Thou  shalt  not  make  a 
lying  promise,  lest  if  it  become  known  thou 
shouldst  destroy  thy  credit,”  but  that  an  action 
of  this  kind  must  be  regarded  as  evil  in  itself, 
so  that  the  imperative  of  the  prohibition  is 
categorical;  then  we  cannot  show  with  certainty 
in  any  example  that  the  will  was  determined 
merely  by  the  law,  without  any  other  spring  of 
action,  although  it  may  appear  to  be  so.  For  it 
is  always  possible  that  fear  of  disgrace,  perhaps 
also  obscure  dread  of  other  dangers,  may  have 
a  secret  influence  on  the  will.  Who  can  prove 
by  experience  the  non-existence  of  a  cause  when 
all  that  experience  tells  us  is  that  we  do  not 
perceive  it?  But  in  such  a  case  the  so-called 
moral  imperative,  which  as  such  appears  to  be 
categorical  and  unconditional,  would  in  reality 
be  only  a  pragmatic  precept,  drawing  our  atten¬ 
tion  to  our  own  interests  and  merely  teaching 
us  to  take  these  into  consideration. 

We  shall  therefore  have  to  investigate  a 
priori  the  possibility  of  a  categorical  impera¬ 
tive,  as  we  have  not  in  this  case  the  advantage 
of  its  reality  being  given  in  experience,  so  that 
[the  elucidation  of]  its  possibility  should  be 
requisite  only  for  its  explanation,  not  for  its 
establishment.  In  the  meantime  it  may  be  dis¬ 
cerned  beforehand  that  the  categorical  impera¬ 
tive  alone  has  the  purport  of  a  practical  law; 
all  the  rest  may  indeed  be  called  principles  of 
the  will  but  not  laws,  since  whatever  is  only 
necessary  for  the  attainment  of  some  arbitrary 
purpose  may  be  considered  as  in  itself  contin¬ 
gent,  and  we  can  at  any  time  be  free  from  the 
precept  if  we  give  up  the  purpose;  on  the  con¬ 
trary,  the  unconditional  command  leaves  the 
will  no  liberty  to  choose  the  opposite;  conse¬ 
quently  it  alone  carries  with  it  that  necessity 
which  we  require  in  a  law. 

Secondly,  in  the  case  of  this  categorical  im¬ 
perative  or  law  of  morality,  the  difficulty  (of 
discerning  its  possibility)  is  a  very  profound 
one.  It  is  an  a  priori  synthetical  practical  propo¬ 
sition;1  and  as  there  is  so  much  difficulty  in  dis- 

i  I  connect  the  act  with  the  will  without  presupposing 
any  condition  resulting  from  any  inclination,  but  a 
priori,  and  therefore  necessarily  (though  only  objec¬ 
tively,  i.e.,  assuming  the  idea  of  a  reason  possessing  full 
power  over  all  subjective  motives).  This  is  accordingly 
a  practical  proposition  which  does  not  deduce  the  willing 
of  an  action  by  mere  analysis  from  another  already  pre¬ 
supposed  (for  we  have  not  such  a  perfect  will),  but  con¬ 


cerning  the  possibility  of  speculative  proposi¬ 
tions  of  this  kind,  it  may  readily  be  supposed 
that  the  difficulty  will  be  no  less  with  the  prac¬ 
tical. 

In  this  problem  we  will  first  inquire  whether 
the  mere  conception  of  a  categorical  imperative 
may  not  perhaps  supply  us  also  with  the  for¬ 
mula  of  it,  containing  the  proposition  which 
alone  can  be  a  categorical  imperative;  for  even 
if  we  know  the  tenor  of  such  an  absolute  com¬ 
mand,  yet  how  it  is  possible  will  require  further 
special  and  laborious  study,  which  we  postpone 
to  the  last  section. 

When  I  conceive  a  hypothetical  imperative, 
in  general  I  do  not  know  beforehand  what  it 
will  contain  until  I  am  given  the  condition.  But 
when  I  conceive  a  categorical  imperative,  I 
know  at  once  what  it  contains.  For  as  the  im¬ 
perative  contains  besides  the  law  only  the  ne¬ 
cessity  that  the  maxims2  shall  conform  to  this 
law,  while  the  law  contains  no  conditions  re¬ 
stricting  it,  there  remains  nothing  but  the  gen¬ 
eral  statement  that  the  maxim  of  the  action 
should  conform  to  a  universal  law,  and  it  is  this 
conformity  alone  that  the  imperative  properly 
represents  as  necessary. 

There  is  therefore  but  one  categorical  im¬ 
perative.  namely,  this:  Act  only  on  that  maxim 
whereby  thou  canst  at  the  same  time  will  that 
it  should  become  a  universal  law. 

Now  if  all  imperatives  of  duty  can  be  de¬ 
duced  from  this  one  imperative  as  from  their 
principle,  then,  although  it  should  remain  un¬ 
decided  what  is  called  duty  is  not  merely  a  vain 
notion,  yet  at  least  we  shall  be  able  to  show 
what  we  understand  by  it  and  what  this  notion 
means. 

Since  the  universality  of  the  law  according  to 
which  effects  are  produced  constitutes  what  is 
properly  called  nature  in  the  most  general  sense 
(as  to  form),  that  is  the  existence  of  things  so 
far  as  it  is  determined  by  general  laws,  the 
imperative  of  duty  may  be  expressed  thus:  Act 
as  if  the  maxim  of  thy  action  were  to  become 
by  thy  will  a  universal  law  of  nature. 

We  will  now  enumerate  a  few  duties,  adopt¬ 
ing  the  usual  division  of  them  into  duties  to 


nects  it  immediately  with  the  conception  of  the  will  of 
a  rational  being,  as  something  not  contained  in  it. 

2  A  maxim  is  a  subjective  principle  of  action,  and 
must  be  distinguished  from  the  objective  principle, 
namely,  practical  law.  The  former  contains  the  practical 
rule  set  by  reason  according  to  the  conditions  of  the 
subject  (often  its  ignorance  or  its  inclinations),  so  that 
it  is  the  principle  on  which  the  subject  acts;  but  the  law 
is  the  objective  principle  valid  for  every  rational  being, 
and  is  the  principle  on  which  it  ought  to  act  that  is  an 
imperative. 


THE  METAPHYSIC  OF  MORALS  269 


ourselves  and  to  others,  and  into  perfect  and 
imperfect  duties.1 

1.  A  man  reduced  to  despair  by  a  series  of 
misfortunes  feels  wearied  of  life,  but  is  still  so 
far  in  possession  of  his  reason  that  he  can  ask 
himself  whether  it  would  not  be  contrary  to  his 
duty  to  himself  to  take  his  own  life.  Now  he  in¬ 
quires  whether  the  maxim  of  his  action  could 
become  a  universal  law  of  nature.  His  maxim 
is:  “From  self-love  I  adopt  it  as  a  principle  to 
shorten  my  life  when  its  longer  duration  is 
likely  to  bring  more  evil  than  satisfaction.”  It 
is  asked  then  simply  whether  this  principle 
founded  on  self-love  can  become  a  universal 
law  of  nature.  Now  we  see  at  once  that  a  system 
of  nature  of  which  it  should  be  a  law  to  destroy 
life  by  means  of  the  very  feeling  whose  special 
nature  it  is  to  impel  to  the  improvement  of  life 
would  contradict  itself  and,  therefore,  could 
not  exist  as  a  system  of  nature;  hence  that 
maxim  cannot  possibly  exist  as  a  universal  law 
of  nature  and,  consequently,  would  be  wholly 
inconsistent  with  the  supreme  principle  of  all 
duty. 

2.  Another  finds  himself  forced  by  necessity 
to  borrow  money.  He  knows  that  he  will  not  be 
able  to  repay  it,  but  sees  also  that  nothing  will 
be  lent  to  him  unless  he  promises  stoutly  to 
repay  it  in  a  definite  time.  He  desires  to  make 
this  promise,  but  he  has  still  so  much  con¬ 
science  as  to  ask  himself:  “Is  it  not  unlawful 
and  inconsistent  with  duty  to  get  out  of  a  diffi¬ 
culty  in  this  way?”  Suppose  however  that  he 
resolves  to  do  so:  then  the  maxim  of  his  action 
would  be  expressed  thus:  “When  I  think  myself 
in  want  of  money,  I  will  borrow  money  and 
promise  to  repay  it,  although  I  know  that  I 
never  can  do  so.”  Now  this  principle  of  self- 
love  or  of  one’s  own  advantage  may  perhaps  be 
consistent  with  my  whole  future  welfare;  but 
the  question  now  is,  “Is  it  right?”  I  change 
then  the  suggestion  of  self-love  into  a  universal 
law,  and  state  the  question  thus:  “How  would 
it  be  if  my  maxim  were  a  universal  law?”  Then 
I  see  at  once  that  it  could  never  hold  as  a  uni¬ 
versal  law  of  nature,  but  would  necessarily 
contradict  itself.  For  supposing  it  to  be  a  uni¬ 
versal  law  that  everyone  when  he  thinks  himself 

1  It  must  be  noted  here  that  I  reserve  the  division  of 
duties  for  a  future  metaphysic  of  morals;  so  that  I  give 
it  here  only  as  an  arbitrary  one  (in  order  to  arrange  my 
examples).  For  the  rest,  I  understand  by  a  perfect  duty 
one  that  admits  no  exception  in  favour  of  inclination, 
and  then  I  have  not  merely  external  but  also  internal 
perfect  duties.  This  is  contrary  to  the  use  of  the  word 
adopted  in  the  schools;  but  I  do  not  intend  to  justify  it 
here,  as  it  is  all  one  for  my  purpose  whether  it  is  ad¬ 
mitted  or  not. 


in  a  difficulty  should  be  able  to  promise  what¬ 
ever  he  pleases,  with  the  purpose  of  not  keeping 
his  promise,  the  promise  itself  would  become 
impossible,  as  well  as  the  end  that  one  might 
have  in  view  in  it,  since  no  one  would  consider 
that  anything  was  promised  to  him,  but  would 
ridicule  all  such  statements  as  vain  pretences. 

3.  A  third  finds  in  himself  a  talent  which 
with  the  help  of  some  culture  might  make  him 
a  useful  man  in  many  respects.  But  he  finds 
himself  in  comfortable  circumstances  and  pre¬ 
fers  to  indulge  in  pleasure  rather  than  to  take 
pains  in  enlarging  and  improving  his  happy 
natural  capacities.  He  asks,  however,  whether 
his  maxim  of  neglect  of  his  natural  gifts,  be¬ 
sides  agreeing  with  his  inclination  to  indulgence, 
agrees  also  with  what  is  called  duty.  He  sees 
then  that  a  system  of  nature  could  indeed  sub¬ 
sist  with  such  a  universal  law  although  men 
(like  the  South  Sea  islanders)  should  let  their 
talents  rest  and  resolve  to  devote  their  lives 
merely  to  idleness,  amusement,  and  propaga¬ 
tion  of  their  species — in  a  word,  to  enjoyment; 
but  he  cannot  possibly  will  that  this  should  be 
a  universal  law  of  nature,  or  be  implanted  in  us 
as  such  by  a  natural  instinct.  For,  as  a  rational 
being,  he  necessarily  wills  that  his  faculties  be 
developed,  since  they  serve  him  and  have  been 
given  him,  for  all  sorts  of  possible  purposes. 

4.  A  fourth,  who  is  in  prosperity,  while  he 
sees  that  others  have  to  contend  with  great 
wretchedness  and  that  he  could  help  them, 
thinks:  “What  concern  is  it  of  mine?  Let  every¬ 
one  be  as  happy  as  Heaven  pleases,  or  as  he  can 
make  himself ;  I  will  take  nothing  from  him  nor 
even  envy  him,  only  I  do  not  wish  to  contribute 
anything  to  his  welfare  or  to  his  assistance  in 
distress!”  Now  no  doubt  if  such  a  mode  of 
thinking  were  a  universal  law,  the  human  race 
might  very  well  subsist,  and  doubtless  even 
better  than  in  a  state  in  which  everyone  talks  of 
sympathy  and  good-will,  or  even  takes  care 
occasionally  to  put  it  into  practice,  but,  on  the 
other  side,  also  cheats  when  he  can,  betrays  the 
rights  of  men,  or  otherwise  violates  them.  But 
although  it  is  possible  that  a  universal  law  of 
nature  might  exist  in  accordance  with  that  max¬ 
im,  it  is  impossible  to  will  that  such  a  principle 
should  have  the  universal  validity  of  a  law  of 
nature.  For  a  will  which  resolved  this  would 
contradict  itself,  inasmuch  as  many  cases  might 
occur  in  which  one  would  have  need  of  the  love 
and  sympathy  of  others,  and  in  which,  by  such 
a  law  of  nature,  sprung  from  his  own  will,  he 
would  deprive  himself  of  all  hope  of  the  aid 
he  desires. 


FUNDAMENTAL  PRINCIPLES  OF 


270 

These  are  a  few  of  the  many  actual  duties,  or 
at  least  what  we  regard  as  such,  which  obvious¬ 
ly  fall  into  two  classes  on  the  one  principle  that 
we  have  laid  down.  We  must  be  able  to  will  that 
a  maxim  of  our  action  should  be  a  universal 
law.  This  is  the  canon  of  the  moral  appreciation 
of  the  action  generally.  Some  actions  are  of 
such  a  character  that  their  maxim  cannot  with¬ 
out  contradiction  be  even  conceived  as  a  uni¬ 
versal  law  of  nature,  far  from  it  being  possible 
that  we  should  will  that  it  should  be  so.  In 
others  this  intrinsic  impossibility  is  not  found, 
but  still  it  is  impossible  to  will  that  their  maxim 
should  be  raised  to  the  universality  of  a  law  of 
nature,  since  such  a  will  would  contradict  itself 
It  is  easily  seen  that  the  former  violate  strict 
or  rigorous  (inflexible)  duty;  the  latter  only 
laxer  (meritorious)  duty.  Thus  it  has  been  com¬ 
pletely  shown  how  all  duties  depend  as  regards 
the  nature  of  the  obligation  (not  the  object  of 
the  action)  on  the  same  principle. 

If  now  we  attend  to  ourselves  on  occasion  of 
any  transgression  of  duty,  we  shall  find  that  we 
in  fact  do  not  will  that  our  maxim  should  be  a 
universal  law,  for  that  is  impossible  for  us;  on 
the  contrary,  we  will  that  the  opposite  should 
remain  a  universal  law,  only  we  assume  the  lib¬ 
erty  of  making  an  exception  in  our  own  favour 
or  (just  for  this  time  only)  in  favour  of  our 
inclination.  Consequently  if  we  considered  all 
cases  from  one  and  the  same  point  of  view, 
namely,  that  of  reason,  we  should  find  a  con¬ 
tradiction  in  our  own  will,  namely,  that  a  cer¬ 
tain  principle  should  be  objectively  necessary 
as  a  universal  law,  and  yet  subjectively  should 
not  be  universal,  but  admit  of  exceptions.  As 
however  we  at  one  moment  regard  our  action 
from  the  point  of  view  of  a  will  wholly  con¬ 
formed  to  reason,  and  then  again  look  at  the 
same  action  from  the  point  of  view  of  a  will 
affected  by  inclination,  there  is  not  really  any 
contradiction,  but  an  antagonism  of  inclination 
to  the  precept  of  reason,  whereby  the  univer¬ 
sality  of  the  principle  is  changed  into  a  mere 
generality,  so  that  the  practical  principle  of 
reason  shall  meet  the  maxim  half  way.  Now, 
although  this  cannot  be  justified  in  our  own  im¬ 
partial  judgement,  yet  it  proves  that  we  do 
really  recognise  the  validity  of  the  categorical 
imperative  and  (with  all  respect  for  it)  only 
allow  ourselves  a  few  exceptions,  which  we 
think  unimportant  and  forced  from  us. 

We  have  thus  established  at  least  this  much, 
that  if  duty  is  a  conception  which  is  to  have  any 
import  and  real  legislative  authority  for  our  ac¬ 
tions,  it  can  only  be  expressed  in  categorical  and 


not  at  all  in  hypothetical  imperatives.  We  have 
also,  which  is  of  great  importance,  exhibited 
clearly  and  definitely  for  every  practical  appli¬ 
cation  the  content  of  the  categorical  imperative, 
which  must  contain  the  principle  of  all  duty 
if  there  is  such  a  thing  at  all.  We  have  not  yet, 
however,  advanced  so  far  as  to  prove  a  priori 
that  there  actually  is  such  an  imperative,  that 
there  is  a  practical  law  which  commands  ab¬ 
solutely  of  itself  and  without  any  other  impulse, 
and  that  the  following  of  this  law  is  duty. 

With  the  view  of  attaining  to  this,  it  is  of 
extreme  importance  to  remember  that  we  must 
not  allow  ourselves  to  think  of  deducing  the 
reality  of  this  principle  from  the  particular 
attributes  of  human  nature.  For  duty  is  to  be 
a  practical,  unconditional  necessity  of  action; 
it  must  therefore  hold  for  all  rational  beings 
(to  whom  an  imperative  can  apply  at  all),  and 
for  this  reason  only  be  also  a  law  for  all  human 
wills.  On  the  contrary,  whatever  is  deduced 
from  the  particular  natural  characteristics  of 
humanity,  from  certain  feelings  and  propen¬ 
sions,  nay,  even,  if  possible,  from  any  particular 
tendency  proper  to  human  reason,  and  which 
need  not  necessarily  hold  for  the  will  of  every 
rational  being;  this  may  indeed  supply  us  with 
a  maxim,  but  not  with  a  law;  with  a  subjective 
principle  on  which  we  may  have  a  propension 
and  inclination  to  act,  but  not  with  an  objective 
principle  on  which  we  should  be  enjoined  to  act, 
even  though  all  our  propensions,  inclinations, 
and  natural  dispositions  were  opposed  to  it.  In 
fact,  the  sublimity  and  intrinsic  dignity  of  the 
command  in  duty  are  so  much  the  more  evident, 
the  less  the  subjective  impulses  favour  it  and  the 
more  they  oppose  it,  without  being  able  in  the 
slightest  degree  to  weaken  the  obligation  of  the 
law  or  to  diminish  its  validity. 

Here  then  we  see  philosophy  brought  to  a 
critical  position,  since  it  has  to  be  firmly  fixed, 
notwithstanding  that  it  has  nothing  to  support 
it  in  heaven  or  earth.  Here  it  must  show  its 
purity  as  absolute  director  of  its  own  laws,  not 
the  herald  of  those  which  are  whispered  to  it 
by  an  implanted  sense  or  who  knows  what  tu¬ 
telary  nature.  Although  these  may  be  better 
than  nothing,  yet  they  can  never  afford  prin¬ 
ciples  dictated  by  reason,  which  must  have  their 
source  wholly  a  priori  and  thence  their  com¬ 
manding  authority,  expecting  everything  from 
the  supremacy  of  the  law  and  the  due  respect 
for  it,  nothing  from  inclination,  or  else  con¬ 
demning  the  man  to  self-contempt  and  inward 
abhorrence. 

Thus  every  empirical  element  is  not  only 


THE  METAPHYSIC  OF  MORALS 


quite  incapable  of  being  an  aid  to  the  principle 
of  morality,  but  is  even  highly  prejudicial  to 
the  purity  of  morals,  for  the  proper  and  inesti¬ 
mable  worth  of  an  absolutely  good  will  consists 
just  in  this,  that  the  principle  of  action  is  free 
from  all  influence  of  contingent  grounds,  which 
alone  experience  can  furnish.  We  cannot  too 
much  or  too  often  repeat  our  warning  against 
this  lax  and  even  mean  habit  of  thought  which 
seeks  for  its  principle  amongst  empirical  mo¬ 
tives  and  laws;  for  human  reason  in  its  weari¬ 
ness  is  glad  to  rest  on  this  pillow,  and  in  a 
dream  of  sweet  illusions  (in  which,  instead  of 
Juno,  it  embraces  a  cloud)  it  substitutes  for 
morality  a  bastard  patched  up  from  limbs  of 
various  derivation,  which  looks  like  anything 
one  chooses  to  see  in  it,  only  not  like  virtue 
to  one  who  has  once  beheld  her  in  her  true 
form.1 

The  question  then  is  this:  “Is  it  a  necessary 
law  for  all  rational  beings  that  they  should  al¬ 
ways  judge  of  their  actions  by  maxims  of  which 
they  can  themselves  will  that  they  should  serve 
as  universal  laws?”  If  it  is  so,  then  it  must  be 
connected  (altogether  a  priori )  with  the  very 
conception  of  the  will  of  a  rational  being  gen¬ 
erally.  But  in  order  to  discover  this  connexion 
we  must,  however  reluctantly,  take  a  step  into 
metaphysic,  although  into  a  domain  of  it  which 
is  distinct  from  speculative  philosophy,  namely, 
the  metaphysic  of  morals.  In  a  practical  phi¬ 
losophy,  where  it  is  not  the  reasons  of  what 
happens  that  we  have  to  ascertain,  but  the  laws 
of  what  ought  to  happen,  even  although  it  never 
does,  i.e.,  objective  practical  laws,  there  it  is  not 
necessary  to  inquire  into  the  reasons  why  any¬ 
thing  pleases  or  displeases,  how  the  pleasure  of 
mere  sensation  differs  from  taste,  and  whether 
the  latter  is  distinct  from  a  general  satisfaction 
of  reason;  on  what  the  feeling  of  pleasure  or 
pain  rests,  and  how  from  it  desires  and  inclina¬ 
tions  arise,  and  from  these  again  maxims  by  the 
co-operation  of  reason:  for  all  this  belongs  to 
an  empirical  psychology,  which  would  consti¬ 
tute  the  second  part  of  physics,  if  we  regard 
physics  as  the  philosophy  of  nature,  so  far  as  it 
is  based  on  empirical  laws.  But  here  we  are  con¬ 
cerned  with  objective  practical  laws  and,  con¬ 
sequently,  wjth  the  relation  of  the  will  to  itself 
so  far  as  it  is  determined  by  reason  alone,  in 

1  To  behold  virtue  in  her  proper  form  is  nothing  else 
but  to  contemplate  morality  stripped  of  all  admixture  of 
sensible  things  and  of  every  spurious  ornament  of  re¬ 
ward  or  self-love.  How  much  she  then  eclipses  every¬ 
thing  else  that  appears  charming  to  the  affections,  every 
one  may  readily  perceive  with  the  least  exertion  of  his 
reason,  if  it  be  not  wholly  spoiled  for  abstraction. 


271 

which  case  whatever  has  reference  to  anything 
empirical  is  necessarily  excluded;  since  if  reason 
of  itself  alone  determines  the  conduct  (and  it 
is  the  possibility  of  this  that  we  are  now  in¬ 
vestigating),  it  must  necessarily  do  so  a  priori. 

The  will  is  conceived  as  a  faculty  of  deter¬ 
mining  oneself  to  action  in  accordance  with  the 
conception  of  certain  laws.  And  such  a  faculty 
can  be  found  only  in  rational  beings.  Now  that 
which  serves  the  will  as  the  objective  ground 
of  its  self-determination  is  the  end ,  and,  if  this 
is  assigned  by  reason  alone,  it  must  hold  for  all 
rational  beings.  On  the  other  hand,  that  which 
merely  contains  the  ground  of  possibility  of  the 
action  of  which  the  effect  is  the  end,  this  is 
called  the  means.  The  subjective  ground  of  the 
desire  is  the  spring ,  the  objective  ground  of  the 
volition  is  the  motive ;  hence  the  distinction  be¬ 
tween  subjective  ends  which  rest  on  springs, 
and  objective  ends  which  depend  on  motives 
valid  for  every  rational  being.  Practical  prin¬ 
ciples  are  formal  when  they  abstract  from  all 
subjective  ends;  they  are  material  when  they 
assume  these,  and  therefore  particular  springs 
of  action.  The  ends  which  a  rational  being  pro¬ 
poses  to  himself  at  pleasure  as  effects  of  his 
actions  (material  ends)  are  all  only  relative, 
for  it  is  only  their  relation  to  the  particular  de¬ 
sires  of  the  subject  that  gives  them  their  worth, 
which  therefore  cannot  furnish  principles  uni¬ 
versal  and  necessary  for  all  rational  beings  and 
for  every  volition,  that  is  to  say  practical  laws. 
Hence  all  these  relative  ends  can  give  rise  only 
to  hypothetical  imperatives. 

Supposing,  however,  that  there  were  some¬ 
thing  whose  existence  has  in  itself  an  absolute 
worth,  something  which,  being  an  end  in  itself, 
could  be  a  source  of  definite  laws;  then  in  this 
and  this  alone  would  lie  the  source  of  a  possible 
categorical  imperative,  i.e.,  a  practical  law. 

Now  I  say:  man  and  generally  any  rational 
being  exists  as  an  end  in  himself,  not  merely  as 
a  means  to  be  arbitrarily  used  by  this  or  that 
will,  but  in  all  his  actions,  whether  they  concern 
himself  or  other  rational  beings,  must  be  al¬ 
ways  regarded  at  the  same  time  as  an  end.  All 
objects  of  the  inclinations  have  only  a  condi¬ 
tional  worth,  for  if  the  inclinations  and  the 
wants  founded  on  them  did  not  exist,  then  their 
object  would  be  without  value.  But  the  inclina¬ 
tions,  themselves  being  sources  of  want,  are 
so  far  from  having  an  absolute  worth  for  which 
they  should  be  desired  that  on  the  contrary  it 
must  be  the  universal  wish  of  every  rational 
being  to  be  wholly  free  from  them.  Thus  the 
worth  of  any  object  which  is  to  be  acquired  by 


FUNDAMENTAL  PRINCIPLES  OF 


272 

our  action  is  always  conditional.  Beings  whose 
existence  depends  not  on  our  will  but  on  na¬ 
ture’s,  have  nevertheless,  if  they  are  irrational 
beings,  only  a  relative  value  as  means,  and  are 
therefore  called  things;  rational  beings,  on  the 
contrary,  are  called  persons ,  because  their  very 
nature  points  them  out  as  ends  in  themselves, 
that  is  as  something  which  must  not  be  used 
merely  as  means,  and  so  far  therefore  restricts 
freedom  of  action  (and  is  an  object  of  respect). 
These,  therefore,  are  not  merely  subjective  ends 
whose  existence  has  a  worth  for  us  as  an  effect 
of  our  action,  but  objective  ends ,  that  is,  things 
whose  existence  is  an  end  in  itself;  an  end 
moreover  for  which  no  other  can  be  substituted, 
which  they  should  subserve  merely  as  means, 
for  otherwise  nothing  whatever  would  possess 
absolute  worth;  but  if  all  worth  were  condi¬ 
tioned  and  therefore  contingent,  then  there 
would  be  no  supreme  practical  principle  of 
reason  whatever. 

If  then  there  is  a  supreme  practical  principle 
or,  in  respect  of  the  human  will,  a  categorical 
imperative,  it  must  be  one  which,  being  drawn 
from  the  conception  of  that  which  is  necessarily 
an  end  for  everyone  because  it  is  an  end  in  it¬ 
self,  constitutes  an  objective  principle  of  will, 
and  can  therefore  serve  as  a  universal  practical 
law.  The  foundation  of  this  principle  is:  ra¬ 
tional  nature  exists  as  an  end  in  itself.  Man 
necessarily  conceives  his  own  existence  as  being 
so;  so  far  then  this  is  a  subjective  principle  of 
human  actions.  But  every  other  rational  being 
regards  its  existence  similarly,  just  on  the  same 
rational  principle  that  holds  for  me:1  so  that  it 
is  at  the  same  time  an  objective  principle,  from 
which  as  a  supreme  practical  law  all  laws  of  the 
will  must  be  capable  of  being  deduced.  Acording- 
ly  the  practical  imperative  will  be  as  follows:  So 
act  as  to  treat  humanity ,  whether  in  thine  own 
person  or  in  that  of  any  other ,  in  every  case  as 
an  end  withal ,  never  as  means  only.  We  will 
now  inquire  whether  this  can  be  practically 
carried  out. 

To  abide  by  the  previous  examples: 

Firstly ,  under  the  head  of  necessary  duty  to 
oneself:  He  who  contemplates  suicide  should 
ask  himself  whether  his  action  can  be  consistent 
with  the  idea  of  humanity  as  an  end  in  itself. 
If  he  destroys  himself  in  order  to  escape  from 
painful  circumstances,  he  uses  a  person  merely 
as  a  mean  to  maintain  a  tolerable  condition  up 
to  the  end  of  life.  But  a  man  is  not  a  thing, 

1  This  proposition  is  here  stated  as  a  postulate. 
The  ground  of  it  will  be  found  in  the  concluding 
section. 


that  is  to  say,  something  which  can  be  used 
merely  as  means,  but  must  in  all  his  actions  be 
always  considered  as  an  end  in  himself.  I  can¬ 
not,  therefore,  dispose  in  any  way  of  a  man  in 
my  own  person  so  as  to  mutilate  him,  to  damage 
or  kill  him.  (It  belongs  to  ethics  proper  to  de¬ 
fine  this  principle  more  precisely,  so  as  to  avoid 
all  misunderstanding,  e.  g.,  as  to  the  amputation 
of  the  limbs  in  order  to  preserve  myself,  as  to 
exposing  my  life  to  danger  with  a  view  to  pre¬ 
serve  it,  etc.  This  question  is  therefore  omitted 
here.) 

Secondly,  as  regards  necessary  duties,  or  those 
of  strict  obligation,  towards  others:  He  who  is 
thinking  of  making  a  lying  promise  to  others 
will  see  at  once  that  he  would  be  using  another 
man  merely  as  a  mean ,  without  the  latter  con¬ 
taining  at  the  same  time  the  end  in  himself.  For 
he  whom  I  propose  by  such  a  promise  to  use  for 
my  own  purposes  cannot  possibly  assent  to  my 
mode  of  acting  towards  him  and,  therefore, 
cannot  himself  contain  the  end  of  this  action. 
This  violation  of  the  principle  of  humanity  in 
other  men  is  more  obvious  if  we  take  in  ex¬ 
amples  of  attacks  on  the  freedom  and  property 
of  others.  For  then  it  is  clear  that  he  who  trans¬ 
gresses  the  rights  of  men  intends  to  use  the 
person  of  others  merely  as  a  means,  without 
considering  that  as  rational  beings  they  ought 
always  to  be  esteemed  also  as  ends,  that 
is,  as  beings  who  must  be  capable  of  con¬ 
taining  in  themselves  the  end  of  the  very 
same  action.2 

Thirdly ,  as  regards  contingent  (meritorious) 
duties  to  oneself:  It  is  not  enough  that  the  ac¬ 
tion  does  not  violate  humanity  in  our  own  per¬ 
son  as  an  end  in  itself,  it  must  also  harmonize 
with  it.  Now  there  are  in  humanity  capacities 
of  greater  perfection,  which  belong  to  the  end 
that  nature  has  in  view  in  regard  to  humanity 
in  ourselves  as  the  subject:  to  neglect  these 
might  perhaps  be  consistent  with  the  mainte¬ 
nance  of  humanity  as  an  end  in  itself,  but  not 
with  the  advancement  of  this  end. 

Fourthly ,  as  regards  meritorious  duties  to¬ 
wards  others:  The  natural  end  which  all  men 
have  is  their  own  happiness.  Now  humanity 

2  Let  it  not  be  thought  that  the  common  “ quod  tibi 
non  vis  fieri,  etc.”  could  serve  here  as  the  rule  or  prin¬ 
ciple.  For  it  is  only  a  deduction  from  the  former,  though 
with  several  limitations;  it  cannot  be  a  universal  law, 
for  it  does  not  contain  the  principle  of  duties  to  one¬ 
self.  nor  of  the  duties  of  benevolence  to  others  (for 
many  a  one  would  gladly  consent  that  others  should  not 
benefit  him.,  provided  only  that  he  might  be  excused 
from  showing  benevolence  to  them),  nor  finally  that  of 
duties  of  strict  obligation  to  one  another,  for  on  this 
principle  the  criminal  might  argue  against  the  judge 
who  punishes  him,  and  so  on. 


THE  METAPHYSIC  OF  MORALS 


might  indeed  subsist,  although  no  one  should 
contribute  anything  to  the  happiness  of  others, 
provided  he  did  not  intentionally  withdraw  any¬ 
thing  from  it;  but  after  all  this  would  only 
harmonize  negatively  not  positively  with  hu¬ 
manity  as  an  end  in  itself,  if  every  one  does  not 
also  endeavour,  as  far  as  in  him  lies,  to  forward 
the  ends  of  others.  For  the  ends  of  any  subject 
which  is  an  end  in  himself  ought  as  far  as  possi¬ 
ble  to  be  my  ends  also,  if  that  conception  is  to 
have  its  full  effect  with  me. 

This  principle,  that  humanity  and  generally 
every  rational  nature  is  an  end  in  itself  (which 
is  the  supreme  limiting  condition  of  every  man’s 
freedom  of  action),  is  not  borrowed  from  ex¬ 
perience,  firstly ,  because  it  is  universal,  apply¬ 
ing  as  it  does  to  all  rational  beings  whatever, 
and  experience  is  not  capable  of  determining 
anything  about  them;  secondly ,  because  it  does 
not  present  humanity  as  an  end  to  men  (sub¬ 
jectively),  that  is  as  an  object  which  men  do 
of  themselves  actually  adopt  as  an  end;  but 
as  an  objective  end,  which  must  as  a  law  con¬ 
stitute  the  supreme  limiting  condition  of  all  our 
subjective  ends,  let  them  be  what  we  will;  it 
must  therefore  spring  from  pure  reason.  In  fact 
the  objective  principle  of  all  practical  legisla¬ 
tion  lies  (according  to  the  first  principle)  in  the 
rule  and  its  form  of  universality  which  makes 
it  capable  of  being  a  law  (say,  e.  g.,  a  law  of 
nature) ;  but  the  subjective  principle  is  in  the 
end;  now  by  the  second  principle  the  subject  of 
all  ends  is  each  rational  being,  inasmuch  as  it  is 
an  end  in  itself.  Hence  follows  the  third  prac¬ 
tical  principle  of  the  will,  which  is  the  ultimate 
condition  of  its  harmony  with  universal  prac¬ 
tical  reason,  viz.:  the  idea  of  the  will  of  every 
rational  being  as  a  universally  legislative  will. 

On  this  principle  all  maxims  are  rejected 
which  are  inconsistent  with  the  will  being  itself 
universal  legislator.  Thus  the  will  is  not  subject 
simply  to  the  law,  but  so  subject  that  it  must 
be  regarded  as  itself  giving  the  law  and,  on  this 
ground  only,  subject  to  the  law  (of  which  it  can 
regard  itself  as  the  author). 

In  the  previous  imperatives,  namely,  that 
based  on  the  conception  of  the  conformity  of 
actions  to  general  laws,  as  in  a  physical  system 
of  nature ,  and  that  based  on  the  universal  pre¬ 
rogative  of  rational  beings  as  ends  in  them¬ 
selves — these  imperatives,  just  because  they 
were  conceived  as  categorical,  excluded  from 
any  share  in  their  authority  all  admixture  of 
any  interest  as  a  spring  of  action;  they  were, 
however,  only  assumed  to  be  categorical,  be¬ 
cause  such  an  assumption  was  necessary  to  ex¬ 


plain  the  conception  of  duty.  But  we  could  not 
prove  independently  that  there  are  practical 
propositions  which  command  categorically,  nor 
can  it  be  proved  in  this  section;  one  thing,  how¬ 
ever,  could  be  done,  namely,  to  indicate  in  the 
imperative  itself,  by  some  determinate  expres¬ 
sion,  that  in  the  case  of  volition  from  duty  all 
interest  is  renounced,  which  is  the  specific  cri¬ 
terion  of  categorical  as  distinguished  from  hy¬ 
pothetical  imperatives.  This  is  done  in  the  pres¬ 
ent  (third)  formula  of  the  principle,  namely, 
in  the  idea  of  the  will  of  every  rational  being 
as  a  universally  legislating  will. 

For  although  a  will  which  is  subject  to  laws 
may  be  attached  to  this  law  by  means  of  an 
interest,  yet  a  will  which  is  itself  a  supreme 
lawgiver  so  far  as  it  is  such  cannot  possibly  de¬ 
pend  on  any  interest,  since  a  will  so  dependent 
would  itself  still  need  another  law  restricting 
the  interest  of  its  self-love  by  the  condition 
that  it  should  be  valid  as  universal  law. 

Thus  the  principle  that  every  human  will  is 
a  will  which  in  all  its  maxims  gives  universal 
laws,1  provided  it  be  otherwise  justified,  would 
be  very  well  adapted  to  be  the  categorical  im¬ 
perative,  in  this  respect,  namely,  that  just  be¬ 
cause  of  the  idea  of  universal  legislation  it  is 
not  based  on  any  interest,  and  therefore  it  alone 
among  all  possible  imperatives  can  be  uncon¬ 
ditional.  Or  still  better,  converting  the  proposi¬ 
tion,  if  there  is  a  categorical  imperative  (i.  e., 
a  law  for  the  will  of  every  rational  being),  it 
can  only  command  that  everything  be  done 
from  maxims  of  one’s  will  regarded  as  a  will 
which  could  at  the  same  time  will  that  it  should 
itself  give  universal  laws,  for  in  that  case  only 
the  practical  principle  and  the  imperative  which 
it  obeys  are  unconditional,  since  they  cannot  be 
based  on  any  interest. 

Looking  back  now  on  all  previous  attempts 
to  discover  the  principle  of  morality,  we  need 
not  wonder  why  they  all  failed.  It  was  seen  that 
man  was  bound  to  laws  by  duty,  but  it  was  not 
observed  that  the  laws  to  which  he  is  subject 
are  only  those  of  his  own  giving ,  though  at  the 
same  time  they  are  universal ,  and  that  he  is 
only  bound  to  act  in  conformity  with  his  own 
will;  a  will,  however,  which  is  designed  by  na¬ 
ture  to  give  universal  laws.  For  when  one  has 
conceived  man  only  as  subject  to  a  law  (no 
matter  what),  then  this  law  required  some  in¬ 
terest,  either  by  way  of  attraction  or  constraint, 

1 1  may  be  excused  from  adducing  examples  to 
elucidate  this  principle,  as  those  which  have  already 
been  used  to  elucidate  the  categorical  imperative 
and  its  formula  would  all  serve  for  the  like  purpose 
here. 


FUNDAMENTAL  PRINCIPLES  OF 


274 

since  it  did  not  originate  as  a  law  from  his  own 
will,  but  this  will  was  according  to  a  law  obliged 
by  something  else  to  act  in  a  certain  manner. 
Now  by  this  necessary  consequence  all  the  la¬ 
bour  spent  in  finding  a  supreme  principle  of 
duty  was  irrevocably  lost.  For  men  never  elic¬ 
ited  duty,  but  only  a  necessity  of  acting  from 
a  certain  interest.  Whether  this  interest  was 
private  or  otherwise,  in  any  case  the  imperative 
must  be  conditional  and  could  not  by  any 
means  be  capable  of  being  a  moral  command. 
I  will  therefore  call  this  the  principle  of  auton¬ 
omy  of  the  will,  in  contrast  with  every  other 
which  I  accordingly  reckon  as  heteronomy.1 

The  conception  of  the  will  of  every  rational 
being  as  one  which  must  consider  itself  as  giving 
in  all  the  maxims  of  its  will  universal  laws,  so 
as  to  judge  itself  and  its  actions  from  this  point 
of  view — this  conception  leads  to  another  which 
depends  on  it  and  is  very  fruitful,  namely  that 
of  a  kingdom  of  ends. 

By  a  kingdom  I  understand  the  union  of  dif¬ 
ferent  rational  beings  in  a  system  by  common 
laws.  Now  since  it  is  by  laws  that  ends  are  de¬ 
termined  as  regards  their  universal  validity, 
hence,  if  we  abstract  from  the  personal  differ¬ 
ences  of  rational  beings  and  likewise  from  all 
the  content  of  their  private  ends,  we  shall  be 
able  to  conceive  all  ends  combined  in  a  sys¬ 
tematic  whole  (including  both  rational  beings  as 
ends  in  themselves,  and  also  the  special  ends 
which  each  may  propose  to  himself),  that  is 
to  say,  we  can  conceive  a  kingdom  of  ends, 
which  on  the  preceding  principles  is  possible. 

For  all  rational  beings  come  under  the  law 
that  each  of  them  must  treat  itself  and  all 
others  never  merely  as  means,  but  in  every 
case  at  the  same  time  as  ends  in  themselves. 
Hence  results  a  systematic  union  of  rational 
being  by  common  objective  laws,  i.  e.,  a  king¬ 
dom  which  may  be  called  a  kingdom  of  ends, 
since  what  these  laws  have  in  view  is  just  the 
relation  of  these  beings  to  one  another  as  ends 
and  means.  It  is  certainly  only  an  ideal. 

A  rational  being  belongs  as  a  member  to  the 
kingdom  of  ends  when,  although  giving  uni¬ 
versal  laws  in  it,  he  is  also  himself  subject  to 
these  laws.  He  belongs  to  it  as  sovereign  when, 
while  giving  laws,  he  is  not  subject  to  the  will 
of  any  other. 

A  rational  being  must  always  regard  himself 
as  giving  laws  either  as  member  or  as  sovereign 
in  a  kingdom  of  ends  which  is  rendered  possible 
by  the  freedom  of  will.  He  cannot,  however, 
maintain  the  latter  position  merely  by  the  max- 

1  fCf.  Critique  of  Practical  Reason,  p.  328.] 


ims  of  his  will,  but  only  in  case  he  is  a  complete¬ 
ly  independent  being  without  wants  and  with 
unrestricted  power  adequate  to  his  will. 

Morality  consists  then  in  the  reference  of  all 
action  to  the  legislation  which  alone  can  render 
a  kingdom  of  ends  possible.  This  legislation 
must  be  capable  of  existing  in  every  rational  be¬ 
ing  and  of  emanating  from  his  will,  so  that  the 
principle  of  this  will  is  never  to  act  on  any  max¬ 
im  which  could  not  without  contradiction  be 
also  a  universal  law  and,  accordingly,  always  so 
to  act  that  the  will  could  at  the  same  time  re¬ 
gard  itself  as  giving  in  its  maxims  universal 
laws.  If  now  the  maxims  of  rational  beings  are 
not  by  their  own  nature  coincident  with  this  ob¬ 
jective  principle,  then  the  necessity  of  acting  on 
it  is  called  practical  necessitation ,  i.e.,  duty. 
Duty  does  not  apply  to  the  sovereign  in  the 
kingdom  of  ends,  but  it  does  to  every  member 
of  it  and  to  all  in  the  same  degree. 

The  practical  necessity  of  acting  on  this  prin¬ 
ciple,  i.e.,  duty,  does  not  rest  at  all  on  feelings, 
impulses,  or  inclinations,  but  solely  on  the  re¬ 
lation  of  rational  beings  to  one  another,  a  rela¬ 
tion  in  which  the  will  of  a  rational  being  must 
always  be  regarded  as  legislative ,  since  other¬ 
wise  it  could  not  be  conceived  as  an  end  in  itself. 
Reason  then  refers  every  maxim  of  the  will, 
regarding  it  as  legislating  universally,  to  every 
other  will  and  also  to  every  action  towards  one¬ 
self  ;  and  this  not  on  account  of  any  other  prac¬ 
tical  motive  or  any  future  advantage,  but  from 
the  idea  of  the  dignity  of  a  rational  being,  obey¬ 
ing  no  law  but  that  which  he  himself  also  gives. 

In  the  kingdom  of  ends  everything  has  either 
value  or  dignity.  Whatever  has  a  value  can  be 
replaced  by  something  else  which  is  equivalent; 
whatever,  on  the  other  hand,  is  above  all  value, 
and  therefore  admits  of  no  equivalent,  has  a 
dignity. 

Whatever  has  reference  to  the  general  incli¬ 
nations  and  wants  of  mankind  has  a  market 
value;  whatever,  without  presupposing  a  want, 
corresponds  to  a  certain  taste,  that  is  to  a  satis¬ 
faction  in  the  mere  purposeless  play  of  our  fac¬ 
ulties,  has  a  fancy  value;  but  that  which  con¬ 
stitutes  the  condition  under  which  alone  any¬ 
thing  can  be  an  end  in  itself,  this  has  not  merely 
a  relative  worth,  i.e.,  value,  but  an  intrinsic 
worth,  that  is,  dignity. 

Now  morality  is  the  condition  under  which 
alone  a  rational  being  can  be  an  end  in  himself, 
since  by  this  alone  is  it  possible  that  he  should 
be  a  legislating  member  in  the  kingdom  of  ends. 
Thus  morality,  and  humanity  as  capable  of  it,  is 
that  which  alone  has  dignity.  Skill  and  diligence 


THE  METAPHYSIC  OF  MORALS 


in  labour  have  a  market  value;  wit,  lively  im¬ 
agination,  and  humour,  have  fancy  value;  on 
the  other  hand,  fidelity  to  promises,  benevo¬ 
lence  from  principle  (not  from  instinct),  have 
an  intrinsic  worth.  Neither  nature  nor  art  con¬ 
tains  anything  which  in  default  of  these  it  could 
put  in  their  place,  for  their  worth  consists  not 
in  the  effects  which  spring  from  them,  not  in 
the  use  and  advantage  which  they  secure,  but  in 
the  disposition  of  mind,  that  is,  the  maxims  of 
the  will  which  are  ready  to  manifest  themselves 
in  such  actions,  even  though  they  should  not 
have  the  desired  effect.  These  actions  also  need 
no  recommendation  from  any  subjective  taste 
or  sentiment,  that  they  may  be  looked  on  with 
immediate  favour  and  satisfaction:  they  need 
no  immediate  propension  or  feeling  for  them; 
they  exhibit  the  will  that  performs  them  as  an 
object  of  an  immediate  respect,  and  nothing  but 
reason  is  required  to  impose  them  on  the  will; 
not  to  flatter  it  into  them,  which,  in  the  case  of 
duties,  would  be  a  contradiction.  This  estima¬ 
tion  therefore  shows  that  the  worth  of  such  a 
disposition  is  dignity,  and  places  it  infinitely 
above  all  value,  with  which  it  cannot  for  a 
moment  be  brought  into  comparison  or  com¬ 
petition  without  as  it  were  violating  its 
sanctity. 

What  then  is  it  which  justifies  virtue  or  the 
morally  good  disposition,  in  making  such  lofty 
claims?  It  is  nothing  less  than  the  privilege  it 
secures  to  the  rational  being  of  participating  in 
the  giving  of  universal  laws,  by  which  it  quali¬ 
fies  him  to  be  a  member  of  a  possible  kingdom 
of  ends,  a  privilege  to  which  he  was  already 
destined  by  his  own  nature  as  being  an  end  in 
himself  and,  on  that  account,  legislating  in  the 
kingdom  of  ends;  free  as  regards  all  laws  of 
physical  nature,  and  obeying  those  only  which 
he  himself  gives,  and  by  which  his  maxims  can 
belong  to  a  system  of  universal  law,  to  which 
at  the  same  time  he  submits  himself.  For  noth¬ 
ing  has  any  worth  except  what  the  law  assigns 
it.  Now  the  legislation  itself  which  assigns  the 
worth  of  everything  must  for  that  very  reason 
possess  dignity,  that  is  an  unconditional  incom¬ 
parable  worth ;  and  the  word  respect  alone  sup¬ 
plies  a  becoming  expression  for  the  esteem 
which  a  rational  being  must  have  for  it.  Au¬ 
tonomy  then  is  the  basis  of  the  dignity  of  hu¬ 
man  and  of  every  rational  nature. 

The  three  modes  of  presenting  the  principle 
of  morality  that  have  been  adduced  are  at  bot¬ 
tom  only  so  many  formulae  of  the  very  same 
law,  and  each  of  itself  involves  the  other  two. 
There  is,  however,  a  difference  in  them,  but  it 


is  rather  subjectively  than  objectively  practical, 
intended  namely  to  bring  an  idea  of  the  reason 
nearer  to  intuition  (by  means  of  a  certain  anal¬ 
ogy)  and  thereby  nearer  to  feeling.  All  maxims, 
in  fact,  have: 

1.  A  form,  consisting  in  universality;  and  in 
this  view  the  formula  of  the  moral  imperative 
is  expressed  thus,  that  the  maxims  must  be  so 
chosen  as  if  they  were  to  serve  as  universal  laws 
of  nature. 

2.  A  matter,  namely,  an  end,  and  here  the 
formula  says  that  the  rational  being,  as  it  is  an 
end  by  its  own  nature  and  therefore  an  end  in 
itself,  must  in  every  maxim  serve  as  the  condi¬ 
tion  limiting  all  merely  relative  and  arbitrary 
ends. 

3.  A  complete  characterization  of  all  maxims 
by  means  of  that  formula,  namely,  that  all  max¬ 
ims  ought  by  their  own  legislation  to  harmonize 
with  a  possible  kingdom  of  ends  as  with  a  king¬ 
dom  of  nature1.  There  is  a  progress  here  in  the 
order  of  the  categories  of  unity  of  the  form  of 
the  will  (its  universality),  plurality  of  the  mat¬ 
ter  (the  objects,  i.e.,  the  ends),  and  totality  of 
the  system  of  these.  In  forming  our  moral 
judgement  of  actions,  it  is  better  to  proceed  al¬ 
ways  on  the  strict  method  and  start  from  the 
general  formula  of  the  categorical  imperative: 
Act  according  to  a  maxim  which  can  at  the  same 
time  make  itself  a  universal  law.  If,  however, 
we  wish  to  gain  an  entrance  for  the  moral  law, 
it  is  very  useful  to  bring  one  and  the  same  ac¬ 
tion  under  the  three  specified  conceptions,  and 
thereby  as  far  as  possible  to  bring  it  nearer  to 
intuition. 

We  can  now  end  where  we  started  at  the  be¬ 
ginning,  namely,  with  the  conception  of  a  will 
unconditionally  good.  That  will  is  absolutely 
good  which  cannot  be  evil — in  other  words, 
whose  maxim,  if  made  a  universal  law,  could 
never  contradict  itself.  This  principle,  then,  is 
its  supreme  law:  “Act  always  on  such  a  maxim 
as  thou  canst  at  the  same  time  will  to  be  a  uni¬ 
versal  law”;  this  is  the  sole  condition  under 
which  a  will  can  never  contradict  itself;  and 
such  an  imperative  is  categorical.  Since  the  va¬ 
lidity  of  the  will  as  a  universal  law  for  possible 
actions  is  analogous  to  the  universal  connexion 
of  the  existence  of  things  by  general  laws,  which 
is  the  formal  notion  of  nature  in  general,  the 
categorical  imperative  can  also  be  expressed 

1  Teleology  considers  nature  as  a  kingdom  of  ends; 
ethics  regards  a  possible  kingdom  of  ends  as  a  kingdom 
of  nature.  In  the  first  case,  the  kingdom  of  ends  is  a 
theoretical  idea,  adopted  to  explain  what  actually  is.  In 
the  latter  it  is  a  practical  idea,  adopted  to  bring  about 
that  which  is  not  yet,  but  which  can  be  realized  by  our 
conduct,  namely,  if  it  conforms  to  this  idea. 


276  FUNDAMENTAL 

thus:  Act  on  maxims  which  can  at  the  same 
time  have  for  their  object  themselves  as  uni¬ 
versal  laws  of  nature.  Such  then  is  the  formula 
of  an  absolutely  good  will. 

Rational  nature  is  distinguished  from  the  rest 
of  nature  by  this,  that  it  sets  before  itself  an 
end.  This  end  would  be  the  matter  of  every  good 
will.  But  since  in  the  idea  of  a  will  that  is  ab¬ 
solutely  good  without  being  limited  by  any  con¬ 
dition  (of  attaining  this  or  that  end)  we  must 
abstract  wholly  from  every  end  to  be  effected 
(since  this  would  make  every  will  only  relative¬ 
ly  good),  it  follows  that  in  this  case  the  end 
must  be  conceived,  not  as  an  end  to  be  effected, 
but  as  an  independently  existing  end.  Conse¬ 
quently  it  is  conceived  only  negatively,  i.e.,  as 
that  which  we  must  never  act  against  and  which, 
therefore,  must  never  be  regarded  merely  as 
means,  but  must  in  every  volition  be  esteemed 
as  an  end  likewise.  Now  this  end  can  be  nothing 
but  the  subject  of  all  possible  ends,  since  this  is 
also  the  subject  of  a  possible  absolutely  good 
will;  for  such  a  will  cannot  without  contradic¬ 
tion  be  postponed  to  any  other  object.  The  prin¬ 
ciple:  “So  act  in  regard  to  every  rational  being 
(thyself  and  others),  that  he  may  always  have 
place  in  thy  maxim  as  an  end  in  himself,”  is  ac¬ 
cordingly  essentially  identical  with  this  other: 
“Act  upon  a  maxim  which,  at  the  same  time, 
involves  its  own  universal  validity  for  every  ra¬ 
tional  being.”  For  that  in  using  means  for  every 
end  I  should  limit  my  maxim  by  the  condition 
of  its  holding  good  as  a  law  for  every  subject, 
this  comes  to  the  same  thing  as  that  the  funda¬ 
mental  principle  of  all  maxims  of  action  must 
be  that  the  subject  of  all  ends,  i.e.,  the  rational 
being  himself,  be  never  employed  merely  as 
means,  but  as  the  supreme  condition  restricting 
the  use  of  all  means,  that  is  in  every  case  as  an 
end  likewise. 

It  follows  incontestably  that,  to  whatever 
laws  any  rational  being  may  be  subject,  he  be¬ 
ing  an  end  in  himself  must  be  able  to  regard 
himself  as  also  legislating  universally  in  respect 
of  these  same  laws,  since  it  is  just  this  fitness 
of  his  maxims  for  universal  legislation  that  dis¬ 
tinguishes  him  as  an  end  in  himself;  also  it  fol¬ 
lows  that  this  implies  his  dignity  (prerogative) 
above  all  mere  physical  beings,  that  he  must  al¬ 
ways  take  his  maxims  from  the  point  of  view 
which  regards  himself  and,  likewise,  every  other 
rational  being  as  law-giving  beings  (on  which 
account  they  are  called  persons).  In  this  way 
a  world  of  rational  beings  ( mundus  intelligi- 
bilis)  is  possible  as  a  kingdom  of  ends,  and  this 
by  virtue  of  the  legislation  proper  to  all  persons 


PRINCIPLES  OF 

as  members.  Therefore  every  rational  being 
must  so  act  as  if  he  were  by  his  maxims  in  every 
case  a  legislating  member  in  the  universal  king¬ 
dom  of  ends.  The  formal  principle  of  these 
maxims  is:  “So  act  as  if  thy  maxim  were  to 
serve  likewise  as  the  universal  law  (of  all  ra¬ 
tional  beings).”  A  kingdom  of  ends  is  thus  only 
possible  on  the  analogy  of  a  kingdom  of  nature, 
the  former  however  only  by  maxims,  that  is 
self-imposed  rules,  the  latter  only  by  the  laws  of 
efficient  causes  acting  under  necessitation  from 
without.  Nevertheless,  although  the  system  of 
nature  is  looked  upon  as  a  machine,  yet  so  far 
as  it  has  reference  to  rational  beings  as  its  ends, 
it  is  given  on  this  account  the  name  of  a  king¬ 
dom  of  nature.  Now  such  a  kingdom  of  ends 
would  be  actually  realized  by  means  of  maxims 
conforming  to  the  canon  which  the  categorical 
imperative  prescribes  to  all  rational  beings,  if 
they  were  universally  followed.  But  although  a 
rational  being,  even  if  he  punctually  follows  this 
maxim  himself,  cannot  reckon  upon  all  others 
being  therefore  true  to  the  same,  nor  expect 
that  the  kingdom  of  nature  and  its  orderly  ar¬ 
rangements  shall  be  in  harmony  with  him  as  a 
fitting  member,  so  as  to  form  a  kingdom  of  ends 
to  which  he  himself  contributes,  that  is  to  say, 
that  it  shall  favour  his  expectation  of  happiness, 
still  that  law:  “Act  according  to  the  maxims  of 
a  member  of  a  merely  possible  kingdom  of  ends 
legislating  in  it  universally,”  remains  in  its  full 
force,  inasmuch  as  it  commands  categorically. 
And  it  is  just  in  this  that  the  paradox  lies;  that 
the  mere  dignity  of  man  as  a  rational  creature, 
without  any  other  end  or  advantage  to  be  at¬ 
tained  thereby,  in  other  words,  respect  for  a 
mere  idea,  should  yet  serve  as  an  inflexible  pre¬ 
cept  of  the  will,  and  that  it  is  precisely  in  this 
independence  of  the  maxim  on  all  such  springs 
of  action  that  its  sublimity  consists;  and  it  is 
this  that  makes  every  rational  subject  worthy 
to  be  a  legislative  member  in  the  kingdom  of 
ends:  for  otherwise  he  would  have  to  be  con¬ 
ceived  only  as  subject  to  the  physical  law  of  his 
wants.  And  although  we  should  suppose  the 
kingdom  of  nature  and  the  kingdom  of  ends 
to  be  united  under  one  sovereign,  so  that  the 
latter  kingdom  thereby  ceased  to  be  a  mere  idea 
and  acquired  true  reality,  then  it  would  no 
doubt  gain  the  accession  of  a  strong  spring,  but 
by  no  means  any  increase  of  its  intrinsic  worth. 
For  this  sole  absolute  lawgiver  must,  notwith¬ 
standing  this,  be  always  conceived  as  estimating 
the  worth  of  rational  beings  only  by  their  dis¬ 
interested  behaviour,  as  prescribed  to  them¬ 
selves  from  that  idea  [the  dignity  of  man]  alone. 


THE  METAPHYSIC  OF  MORALS 


The  essence  of  things  is  not  altered  by  their  ex¬ 
ternal  relations,  and  that  which,  abstracting 
from  these,  alone  constitutes  the  absolute  worth 
of  man,  is  also  that  by  which  he  must  be  judged, 
whoever  the  judge  may  be,  and  even  by  the 
Supreme  Being.  Morality ,  then,  is  the  relation 
of  actions  to  the  autonomy  of  the  will,  that  is, 
to  the  potential  universal  legislation  by  its  max¬ 
ims.  An  action  that  is  consistent  with  the  au¬ 
tonomy  of  the  will  is  permitted;  one  that  does 
not  agree  therewith  is  forbidden.  A  will  whose 
maxims  necessarily  coincide  with  the  laws  of 
autonomy  is  a  holy  will,  good  absolutely.  The 
dependence  of  a  will  not  absolutely  good  on  the 
principle  of  autonomy  (moral  necessitation)  is 
obligation.  This,  then,  cannot  be  applied  to  a 
holy  being.  The  objective  necessity  of  actions 
from  obligation  is  called  duty. 

From  what  has  just  been  said,  it  is  easy  to  see 
how  it  happens  that,  although  the  conception  of 
duty  implies  subjection  to  the  law,  we  yet  as¬ 
cribe  a  certain  dignity  and  sublimity  to  the  per¬ 
son  who  fulfils  all  his  duties.  There  is  not,  in¬ 
deed,  any  sublimity  in  him,  so  far  as  he  is  sub¬ 
ject  to  the  moral  law;  but  inasmuch  as  in  regard 
to  that  very  law  he  is  likewise  a  legislator ,  and 
on  that  account  alone  subject  to  it,  he  has  sub¬ 
limity.  We  have  also  shown  above  that  neither 
fear  nor  inclination,  but  simply  respect  for  the 
law,  is  the  spring  which  can  give  actions  a  moral 
worth.  Our  own  will,  so  far  as  we  suppose  it  to 
act  only  under  the  condition  that  its  maxims  are 
potentially  universal  laws,  this  ideal  will  which 
is  possible  to  us  is  the  proper  object  of  respect; 
and  the  dignity  of  humanity  consists  just  in  this 
capacity  of  being  universally  legislative,  though 
with  the  condition  that  it  is  itself  subject  to  this 
same  legislation. 

The  Autonomy  of  the  Will  as  the  Supreme 
Principle  of  Morality 

Autonomy  of  the  will  is  that  property  of  it 
by  which  it  is  a  law  to  itself  (independently  of 
any  property  of  the  objects  of  volition).  The 
principle  of  autonomy  then  is:  “Always  so  to 
choose  that  the  same  volition  shall  comprehend 
the  maxims  of  our  choice  as  a  universal  law.” 
We  cannot  prove  that  this  practical  rule  is  an 
imperative,  i.e.,  that  the  will  of  every  rational 
being  is  necessarily  bound  to  it  as  a  condition, 
by  a  mere  analysis  of  the  conceptions  which  oc¬ 
cur  in  it,  since  it  is  a  synthetical  proposition; 
we  must  advance  beyond  the  cognition  of  the 
objects  to  a  critical  examination  of  the  subject, 
that  is,  of  the  pure  practical  reason,  for  this 
synthetic  proposition  which  commands  apodeic- 


tically  must  be  capable  of  being  cognized  wholly 
a  priori.  This  matter,  however,  does  not  belong 
to  the  present  section.  But  that  the  principle  of 
autonomy  in  question  is  the  sole  principle  of 
morals  can  be  readily  shown  by  mere  analysis 
of  the  conceptions  of  morality.  For  by  this 
analysis  we  find  that  its  principle  must  be  a 
categorical  imperative  and  that  what  this  com¬ 
mands  is  neither  more  nor  less  than  this  very 
autonomy. 

Heteronomy  of  the  Will  as  the  Source  of  all 
spurious  Principles  of  Morality 

If  the  will  seeks  the  law  which  is  to  determine 
it  anywhere  else  than  in  the  fitness  of  its  max¬ 
ims  to  be  universal  laws  of  its  own  dictation, 
consequently  if  it  goes  out  of  itself  and  seeks 
this  law  in  the  character  of  any  of  its  objects, 
there  always  results  heteronomy.  The  will  in 
that  case  does  not  give  itself  the  law,  but  it  is 
given  by  the  object  through  its  relation  to  the 
will.  This  relation,  whether  it  rests  on  inclina¬ 
tion  or  on  conceptions  of  reason,  only  admits  of 
hypothetical  imperatives:  “I  ought  to  do  some¬ 
thing  because  I  wish  for  something  else.”  On 
the  contrary,  the  moral,  and  therefore  categori¬ 
cal,  imperative  says:  “I  ought  to  do  so  and  so, 
even  though  I  should  not  wish  for  anything 
else.”  E.g.,  the  former  says:  “I  ought  not  to  lie, 
if  I  would  retain  my  reputation”;  the  latter 
says:  “I  ought  not  to  lie,  although  it  should  not 
bring  me  the  least  discredit.”  The  latter  there¬ 
fore  must  so  far  abstract  from  all  objects  that 
they  shall  have  no  influence  on  the  will,  in  order 
that  practical  reason  (will)  may  not  be  re¬ 
stricted  to  administering  an  interest  not  belong¬ 
ing  to  it,  but  may  simply  show  its  own  com¬ 
manding  authority  as  the  supreme  legislation. 
Thus,  e.g.,  I  ought  to  endeavour  to  promote  the 
happiness  of  others,  not  as  if  its  realization 
involved  any  concern  of  mine  (whether  by 
immediate  inclination  or  by  any  satisfaction 
indirectly  gained  through  reason),  but  simply 
because  a  maxim  which  excludes  it  cannot  be 
comprehended  as  a  universal  law  in  one  and 
the  same  volition. 

Classification  of  all  Principles  of  Morality 
which  can  be  founded  on  the  Con¬ 
ception  of  Heteronomy 

Here  as  elsewhere  human  reason  in  its  pure 
use,  so  long  as  it  was  not  critically  examined, 
has  first  tried  all  possible  wrong  ways  before  it 
succeeded  in  finding  the  one  true  way. 

All  principles  which  can  be  taken  from  this 
point  of  view  are  either  empirical  or  rational 


FUNDAMENTAL  PRINCIPLES  OF 


278 

The  former,  drawn  from  the  principle  of  happi¬ 
ness,  are  built  on  physical  or  moral  feelings; 
the  latter,  drawn  from  the  principle  of  perfec¬ 
tion,  are  built  either  on  the  rational  conception 
of  perfection  as  a  possible  effect,  or  on  that  of 
an  independent  perfection  (the  will  of  God)  as 
the  determining  cause  of  our  will. 

Empirical  principles  are  wholly  incapable  of 
serving  as  a  foundation  for  moral  laws.  For  the 
universality  with  which  these  should  hold  for 
all  rational  beings  without  distinction,  the  un¬ 
conditional  practical  necessity  which  is  thereby 
imposed  on  them,  is  lost  when  their  foundation 
is  taken  from  the  particular  constitution  of  hu¬ 
man  nature,  or  the  accidental  circumstances  in 
which  it  is  placed.  The  principle  of  private  hap¬ 
piness,  however,  is  the  most  objectionable,  not 
merely  because  it  is  false,  and  experience  con¬ 
tradicts  the  supposition  that  prosperity  is  al¬ 
ways  proportioned  to  good  conduct,  nor  yet 
merely  because  it  contributes  nothing  to  the  es¬ 
tablishment  of  morality — since  it  is  quite  a  dif¬ 
ferent  thing  to  make  a  prosperous  man  and  a 
good  man,  or  to  make  one  prudent  and  sharp- 
sighted  for  his  own  interests  and  to  make  him 
virtuous — but  because  the  springs  it  provides 
for  morality  are  such  as  rather  undermine  it 
and  destroy  its  sublimity,  since  they  put  the 
motives  to  virtue  and  to  vice  in  the  same  class 
and  only  teach  us  to  make  a  better  calculation, 
the  specific  difference  between  virtue  and  vice 
being  entirely  extinguished.  On  the  other  hand, 
as  to  moral  feeling,  this  supposed  special  sense,1 
the  appeal  to  it  is  indeed  superficial  when  those 
who  cannot  think  believe  that  feeling  will  help 
them  out,  even  in  what  concerns  general  laws: 
and  besides,  feelings,  which  naturally  differ  in¬ 
finitely  in  degree,  cannot  furnish  a  uniform 
standard  of  good  and  evil,  nor  has  anyone  a 
right  to  form  judgements  for  others  by  his  own 
feelings:  nevertheless  this  moral  feeling  is  near¬ 
er  to  morality  and  its  dignity  in  this  respect, 
that  it  pays  virtue  the  honour  of  ascribing  to 
her  immediately  the  satisfaction  and  esteem  we 
have  for  her  and  does  not,  as  it  were,  tell  her 
to  her  face  that  we  are  not  attached  to  her  by 
her  beauty  but  by  profit. 

Amongst  the  rational  principles  of  morality, 
the  ontological  conception  of  perfection,  not¬ 
withstanding  its  defects,  is  better  than  the  theo- 

1  I  class  the  principle  of  moral  feeling  under  that  of 
happiness,  because  every  empirical  interest  promises  to 
contribute  to  our  well-being  by  the  agreeableness  that  a 
thing  affords,  whether  it  be  immediately  and  without  a 
view  to  profit,  or  whether  profit  be  regarded.  We  must 
likewise,  with  Hutcheson,  class  the  principle  of  sym¬ 
pathy  with  the  happiness  of  others  under  his  assumed 
moral  sense. 


logical  conception  which  derives  morality  from 
a  Divine  absolutely  perfect  will.  The  former  is, 
no  doubt,  empty  and  indefinite  and  consequent¬ 
ly  useless  for  finding  in  the  boundless  field  of 
possible  reality  the  greatest  amount  suitable  for 
us;  moreover,  in  attempting  to  distinguish  spe¬ 
cifically  the  reality  of  w'hich  we  are  now  speak¬ 
ing  from  every  other,  it  inevitably  tends  to  turn 
in  a  circle  and  cannot  avoid  tacitly  presuppos¬ 
ing  the  morality  which  it  is  to  explain;  it  is 
nevertheless  preferable  to  the  theological  view, 
first,  because  we  have  no  intuition  of  the  divine 
perfection  and  can  only  deduce  it  from  our  own 
conceptions,  the  most  important  of  which  is 
that  of  morality,  and  our  explanation  would 
thus  be  involved  in  a  gross  circle;  and,  in  the 
next  place,  if  we  avoid  this,  the  only  notion  of 
the  Divine  will  remaining  to  us  is  a  conception 
made  up  of  the  attributes  of  desire  of  glory 
and  dominion,  combined  with  the  awful  concep¬ 
tions  of  might  and  vengeance,  and  any  system 
of  morals  erected  on  this  foundation  would  be 
directly  opposed  to  morality. 

However,  if  I  had  to  choose  between  the 
notion  of  the  moral  sense  and  that  of  perfection 
in  general  (two  systems  which  at  least  do  not 
weaken  morality,  although  they  are  totally  in¬ 
capable  of  serving  as  its  foundation),  then  I 
should  decide  for  the  latter,  because  it  at  least 
withdraws  the  decision  of  the  question  from  the 
sensibility  and  brings  it  to  the  court  of  pure  rea¬ 
son;  and  although  even  here  it  decides  nothing, 
it  at  all  events  preserves  the  indefinite  idea  (of 
a  will  good  in  itself)  free  from  corruption,  until 
it  shall  be  more  precisely  defined. 

For  the  rest  I  think  I  may  be  excused  here 
from  a  detailed  refutation  of  all  these  doc¬ 
trines;  that  would  only  be  superfluous  labour, 
since  it  is  so  easy,  and  is  probably  so  well  seen 
even  by  those  whose  office  requires  them  to  de¬ 
cide  for  one  of  these  theories  (because  their 
hearers  would  not  tolerate  suspension  of  judge¬ 
ment).  But  what  interests  us  more  here  is  to 
know  that  the  prime  foundation  of  morality 
laid  down  by  all  these  principles  is  nothing  but 
heteronomy  of  the  will,  and  for  this  reason 
they  must  necessarily  miss  their  aim. 

In  every  case  where  an  object  of  the  will  has 
to  be  supposed,  in  order  that  the  rule  may  be 
prescribed  which  is  to  determine  the  will,  there 
the  rule  is  simply  heteronomy;  the  imperative 
is  conditional,  namely,  if  or  because  one  wishes 
for  this  object,  one  should  act  so  and  so:  hence 
it  can  never  command  morally,  that  is,  cate¬ 
gorically.  Whether  the  object  determines  the 
will  by  means  of  inclination,  as  in  the  principle 


THE  METAPHYSIC  OF  MORALS 


of  private  happiness,  or  by  means  of  reason 
directed  to  objects  of  our  possible  volition  gen¬ 
erally,  as  in  the  principle  of  perfection,  in  either 
case  the  will  never  determines  itself  immedi¬ 
ately  by  the  conception  of  the  action,  but  only 
by  the  influence  which  the  foreseen  effect  of  the 
action  has  on  the  will ;  I  ought  to  do  something , 
on  this  account ,  because  I  wish  for  something 
else;  and  here  there  must  be  yet  another  law 
assumed  in  me  as  its  subject,  by  which  I  neces¬ 
sarily  will  this  other  thing,  and  this  law  again 
requires  an  imperative  to  restrict  this  maxim. 
For  the  influence  which  the  conception  of  an 
object  within  the  reach  of  our  faculties  can 
exercise  on  the  will  of  the  subject,  in  conse¬ 
quence  of  its  natural  properties,  depends  on  the 
nature  of  the  subject,  either  the  sensibility  (in¬ 
clination  and  taste),  or  the  understanding  and 
reason,  the  employment  of  which  is  by  the  pe¬ 
culiar  constitution  of  their  nature  attended  with 
satisfaction.  It  follows  that  the  law  would  be, 
properly  speaking,  given  by  nature,  and,  as 
such,  it  must  be  known  and  proved  by  experi¬ 
ence  and  would  consequently  be  contingent  and 
therefore  incapable  of  being  an  apodeictic  prac¬ 
tical  rule,  such  as  the  moral  rule  must  be.  Not 
only  so,  but  it  is  inevitably  only  heteronomy ; 
the  will  does  not  give  itself  the  law,  but  is  given 
by  a  foreign  impulse  by  means  of  a  particular 
natural  constitution  of  the  subject  adapted  to 
receive  it.  An  absolutely  good  will,  then,  the 
principle  of  which  must  be  a  categorical  im¬ 
perative,  will  be  indeterminate  as  regards  all 


objects  and  will  contain  merely  the  form  of 
volition  generally,  and  that  as  autonomy,  that  is 
to  say,  the  capability  of  the  maxims  of  every 
good  will  to  make  themselves  a  universal  law,  is 
itself  the  only  law  which  the  will  of  every  ra¬ 
tional  being  imposes  on  itself,  without  needing 
to  assume  any  spring  or  interest  as  a  foundation. 

How  such  a  synthetical  practical  a  priori 
proposition  is  possible ,  and  why  it  is  necessary, 
is  a  problem  whose  solution  does  not  lie  within 
the  bounds  of  the  metaphysic  of  morals;  and 
we  have  not  here  affirmed  its  truth,  much  less 
professed  to  have  a  proof  of  it  in  our  power. 
We  simply  showed  by  the  development  of  the 
universally  received  notion  of  morality  that  an 
autonomy  of  the  will  is  inevitably  connected 
with  it,  or  rather  is  its  foundation.  Whoever 
then  holds  morality  to  be  anything  real,  and  not 
a  chimerical  idea  without  any  truth,  must  like¬ 
wise  admit  the  principle  of  it  that  is  here  as¬ 
signed.  This  section  then,  like  the  first,  was 
merely  analytical.  Now  to  prove  that  morality 
is  no  creation  of  the  brain,  which  it  cannot  be 
if  the  categorical  imperative  and  with  it  the 
autonomy  of  the  will  is  true,  and  as  an  a  priori 
principle  absolutely  necessary,  this  supposes  the 
possibility  of  a  synthetic  use  of  pure  practical 
reason,  which  however  we  cannot  venture  on 
without  first  giving  a  critical  examination  of 
this  faculty  of  reason.  In  the  concluding  section 
we  shall  give  the  principal  outlines  of  this  criti¬ 
cal  examination  as  far  as  is  sufficient  for  our 
purpose. 


THIRD  SECTION 


TRANSITION  FROM  THE  METAPHYSIC  OF  MORALS  TO 
THE  CRITIQUE  OF  PURE  PRACTICAL  REASON 

The  Concept  of  Freedom  is  the  Key 


The  will  is  a  kind  of  causality  belonging  to  liv¬ 
ing  beings  in  so  far  as  they  are  rational,  and 
freedom  would  be  this  property  of  such  causal¬ 
ity  that  it  can  be  efficient,  independently  of 
foreign  causes  determining  it;  just  as  physical 
necessity  is  the  property  that  the  causality  of 
all  irrational  beings  has  of  being  determined 
to  activity  by  the  influence  of  foreign  causes. 

The  preceding  definition  of  freedom  is  nega¬ 
tive  and  therefore  unfruitful  for  the  discovery 
of  its  essence,  but  it  leads  to  a  positive  concep¬ 
tion  which  is  so  much  the  more  full  and  fruitful. 


that  explains  the  Autonomy  of  the  Will 

Since  the  conception  of  causality  involves  that 
of  laws,  according  to  which,  by  something  that 
we  call  cause,  something  else,  namely  the  effect, 
must  be  produced;  hence,  although  freedom  is 
not  a  property  of  the  will  depending  on  physical 
laws,  yet  it  is  not  for  that  reason  lawless;  on 
the  contrary  it  must  be  a  causality  acting  ac¬ 
cording  to  immutable  laws,  but  of  a  peculiar 
kind;  otherwise  a  free  will  would  be  an  absurd¬ 
ity.  Physical  necessity  is  a  heteronomy  of  the 
efficient  causes,  for  every  effect  is  possible  only 
according  to  this  law,  that  something  else  de- 


28o 


FUNDAMENTAL 

termines  the  efficient  cause  to  exert  its  causal¬ 
ity.  What  else  then  can  freedom  of  the  will  be 
but  autonomy,  that  is,  the  property  of  the  will 
to  be  a  law  to  itself?  But  the  proposition:  “The 
will  is  in  every  action  a  law  to  itself,”  only  ex¬ 
presses  the  principle:  “To  act  on  no  other  max¬ 
im  than  that  which  can  also  have  as  an  object 
itself  as  a  universal  law.”  Now  this  is  precisely 
the  formula  of  the  categorical  imperative  and 
is  the  principle  of  morality,  so  that  a  free  will 
and  a  will  subject  to  moral  laws  are  one  and 
the  same. 

On  the  hypothesis,  then,  of  freedom  of  the 
will,  morality  together  with  its  principle  follows 
from  it  by  mere  analysis  of  the  conception. 
However,  the  latter  is  a  synthetic  proposition; 
viz.,  an  absolutely  good  will  is  that  whose  max¬ 
im  can  always  include  itself  regarded  as  a  uni¬ 
versal  law;  for  this  property  of  its  maxim  can 
never  be  discovered  by  analysing  the  concep¬ 
tion  of  an  absolutely  good  will.  Now  such  syn¬ 
thetic  propositions  are  only  possible  in  this  way: 
that  the  two  cognitions  are  connected  together 
by  their  union  with  a  third  in  which  they  are 
both  to  be  found.  The  positive  concept  of  free¬ 
dom  furnishes  this  third  cognition,  which  can¬ 
not,  as  with  physical  causes,  be  the  nature  of  the 
sensible  world  (in  the  concept  of  which  we  find 
conjoined  the  concept  of  something  in  relation 
as  cause  to  something  else  as  effect).  We  cannot 
now  at  once  show  what  this  third  is  to  which 
freedom  points  us  and  of  which  we  have  an  idea 
a  priori ,  nor  can  we  make  intelligible  how  the 
concept  of  freedom  is  shown  to  be  legitimate 
from  principles  of  pure  practical  reason  and 
with  it  the  possibility  of  a  categorical  impera¬ 
tive;  but  some  further  preparation  is  required. 

Freedom  must  be  presupposed  as  a  Property  of 
the  Will  of  all  Rational  Beings 

It  is  not  enough  to  predicate  freedom  of  our 
own  will,  from  whatever  reason,  if  we  have  not 
sufficient  grounds  for  predicating  the  same  of 
all  rational  beings.  For  as  morality  serves  as  a 
law  for  us  only  because  we  are  rational  beings , 
it  must  also  hold  for  all  rational  beings;  and  as 
it  must  be  deduced  simply  from  the  property  of 
freedom,  it  must  be  shown  that  freedom  also 
is  a  property  of  all  rational  beings.  It  is  not 
enough,  then,  to  prove  it  from  certain  supposed 
experiences  of  human  nature  (which  indeed  is 
quite  impossible,  and  it  can  only  be  shown  a 
priori ),  but  we  must  show  that  it  belongs  to  the 
activity  of  all  rational  beings  endowed  with  a 
will.  Now  I  say  every  being  that  cannot  act  ex¬ 
cept  under  the  idea  of  freedom  is  just  for  that 


PRINCIPLES  OF 

reason  in  a  practical  point  of  view  really  free, 
that  is  to  say,  all  laws  which  are  inseparably 
connected  with  freedom  have  the  same  force 
for  him  as  if  his  will  had  been  shown  to  be  free 
in  itself  by  a  proof  theoretically  conclusive.1 
Now  I  affirm  that  we  must  attribute  to  every  ra¬ 
tional  being  which  has  a  will  that  it  has  also  the 
idea  of  freedom  and  acts  entirely  under  this  idea. 
For  in  such  a  being  we  conceive  a  reason  that 
is  practical,  that  is,  has  causality  in  reference  to 
its  objects.  Now  we  cannot  possibly  conceive  a 
reason  consciously  receiving  a  bias  from  any 
other  quarter  with  respect  to  its  judgements,  for 
then  the  subject  would  ascribe  the  determina¬ 
tion  of  its  judgement  not  to  its  own  reason,  but 
to  an  impulse.  It  must  regard  itself  as  the  au¬ 
thor  of  its  principles  independent  of  foreign  in¬ 
fluences.  Consequently  as  practical  reason  or  as 
the  will  of  a  rational  being  it  must  regard  itself 
as  free,  that  is  to  say,  the  will  of  such  a  being 
cannot  be  a  will  of  its  own  except  under  the 
idea  of  freedom.  This  idea  must  therefore  in  a 
practical  point  of  view  be  ascribed  to  every  ra¬ 
tional  being. 

Of  the  Interest  attaching  to  the  Ideas 
of  Morality 

We  have  finally  reduced  the  definite  concep¬ 
tion  of  morality  to  the  idea  of  freedom.  This 
latter,  however,  we  could  not  prove  to  be  actu¬ 
ally  a  property  of  ourselves  or  of  human  na¬ 
ture;  only  we  saw  that  it  must  be  presupposed 
if  we  would  conceive  a  being  as  rational  and 
conscious  of  its  causality  in  respect  of  its  ac¬ 
tions,  i.e.,  as  endowed  with  a  will;  and  so  we 
find  that  on  just  the  same  grounds  we  must  as¬ 
cribe  to  every  being  endowed  with  reason  and 
will  this  attribute  of  determining  itself  to  action 
under  the  idea  of  its  freedom. 

Now  it  resulted  also  from  the  presupposition 
of  these  ideas  that  we  became  aware  of  a  law 
that  the  subjective  principles  of  action,  i.e., 
maxims,  must  always  be  so  assumed  that  they 
can  also  hold  as  objective,  that  is,  universal 
principles,  and  so  serve  as  universal  laws  of  our 
own  dictation.  But  why  then  should  I  subject 
myself  to  this  principle  and  that  simply  as  a 
rational  being,  thus  also  subjecting  to  it  all  oth- 

1  I  adopt  this  method  of  assuming  freedom  merely  as 
an  idea  which  rational  beings  suppose  in  their  actions, 
in  order  to  avoid  the  necessity  of  proving  it  in  its  the¬ 
oretical  aspect  also.  The  former  is  sufficient  for  my  pur¬ 
pose;  for  even  though  the  speculative  proof  should  not 
be  made  out,  yet  a  being  that  cannot  act  except  with  the 
idea  of  freedom  is  bound  by  the  same  laws  that  would 
oblige  a  being  who  was  actually  free.  Thus  we  can 
escape  here  from  the  onus  which  presses  on  the  theory. 


THE  METAPHYSIC  OF  MORALS 


er  being  endowed  with  reason?  I  will  allow  that 
no  interest  urges  me  to  this,  for  that  would  not 
give  a  categorical  imperative,  but  I  must  take 
an  interest  in  it  and  discern  how  this  comes  to 
pass ;  for  this “I  ought”  is  properly  an  “I  would,” 
valid  for  every  rational  being,  provided  only 
that  reason  determined  his  actions  without  any 
hindrance.  But  for  beings  that  are  in  addition 
affected  as  we  are  by  springs  of  a  different  kind, 
namely,  sensibility,  and  in  whose  case  that  is 
not  always  done  which  reason  alone  would  do, 
for  these  that  necessity  is  expressed  only  as  an 
“ought,”  and  the  subjective  necessity  is  differ¬ 
ent  from  the  objective. 

It  seems  then  as  if  the  moral  law,  that  is,  the 
principle  of  autonomy  of  the  will,  were  properly 
speaking  only  presupposed  in  the  idea  of  free¬ 
dom,  and  as  if  we  could  not  prove  its  reality  and 
objective  necessity  independently.  In  that  case 
we  should  still  have  gained  something  consider¬ 
able  by  at  least  determining  the  true  principle 
more  exactly  than  had  previously  been  done; 
but  as  regards  its  validity  and  the  practical  ne¬ 
cessity  of  subjecting  oneself  to  it,  we  should 
not  have  advanced  a  step.  For  if  we  were  asked 
why  the  universal  validity  of  our  maxim  as  a 
law  must  be  the  condition  restricting  our  ac¬ 
tions,  and  on  what  we  ground  the  worth  which 
we  assign  to  this  manner  of  acting — a  worth  so 
great  that  there  cannot  be  any  higher  interest; 
and  if  we  were  asked  further  how  it  happens 
that  it  is  by  this  alone  a  man  believes  he  feels 
his  own  personal  worth,  in  comparison  with 
which  that  of  an  agreeable  or  disagreeable  con¬ 
dition  is  to  be  regarded  as  nothing,  to  these 
questions  we  could  give  no  satisfactory  answer. 

We  find  indeed  sometimes  that  we  can  take 
an  interest  in  a  personal  quality  which  does  not 
involve  any  interest  of  external  condition,  pro¬ 
vided  this  quality  makes  us  capable  of  partici¬ 
pating  in  the  condition  in  case  reason  were  to 
effect  the  allotment;  that  is  to  say,  the  mere  be¬ 
ing  worthy  of  happiness  can  interest  of  itself 
even  without  the  motive  of  participating  in  this 
happiness.  This  judgement,  however,  is  in  fact 
only  the  effect  of  the  importance  of  the  moral 
law  which  we  before  presupposed  (when  by  the 
idea  of  freedom  we  detach  ourselves  from  every 
empirical  interest);  but  that  we  ought  to  de¬ 
tach  ourselves  from  these  interests,  i.e.,  to  con¬ 
sider  ourselves  as  free  in  action  and  yet  as  sub¬ 
ject  to  certain  laws,  so  as  to  find  a  worth  simply 
in  our  own  person  which  can  compensate  us  for 
the  loss  of  everything  that  gives  worth  to  our 
condition;  this  we  are  not  yet  able  to  discern  in 
this  way,  nor  do  we  see  how  it  is  possible  so  to 


281 

act — in  other  words,  whence  the  moral  law  de¬ 
rives  its  obligation. 

It  must  be  freely  admitted  that  there  is  a  sort 
of  circle  here  from  which  it  seems  impossible 
to  escape.  In  the  order  of  efficient  causes  we 
assume  ourselves  free,  in  order  that  in  the  order 
of  ends  we  may  conceive  ourselves  as  subject 
to  moral  laws:  and  we  afterwards  conceive  our¬ 
selves  as  subject  to  these  laws,  because  we  have 
attributed  to  ourselves  freedom  of  will:  for 
freedom  and  self-legislation  of  will  are  both  au¬ 
tonomy  and,  therefore,  are  reciprocal  concep¬ 
tions,  and  for  this  very  reason  one  must  not  be 
used  to  explain  the  other  or  give  the  reason  of 
it,  but  at  most  only  logical  purposes  to  reduce 
apparently  different  notions  of  the  same  object 
to  one  single  concept  (as  we  reduce  different 
fractions  of  the  same  value  to  the  lowest  terms). 

One  resource  remains  to  us,  namely,  to  in¬ 
quire  whether  we  do  not  occupy  different  points 
of  view  when  by  means  of  freedom  we  think 
ourselves  as  causes  efficient  a  priori,  and  when 
we  form  our  conception  of  ourselves  from  our 
actions  as  effects  which  we  see  before  our 
eyes. 

It  is  a  remark  which  needs  no  subtle  reflec¬ 
tion  to  make,  but  which  we  may  assume  that 
even  the  commonest  understanding  can  make, 
although  it  be  after  its  fashion  by  an  obscure 
discernment  of  judgement  which  it  calls  feeling , 
that  all  the  “ideas”  that  come  to  us  involunta¬ 
rily  (as  those  of  the  senses)  do  not  enable  us  to 
know  objects  otherwise  than  as  they  affect  us; 
so  that  what  they  may  be  in  themselves  remains 
unknown  to  us,  and  consequently  that  as  re¬ 
gards  “ideas”  of  this  kind  even  with  the  closest 
attention  and  clearness  that  the  understanding 
can  apply  to  them,  we  can  by  them  only  attain 
to  the  knowledge  of  appearances,  never  to  that 
of  things  in  themselves.  As  soon  as  this  distinc¬ 
tion  has  once  been  made  (perhaps  merely  in 
consequence  of  the  difference  observed  between 
the  ideas  given  us  from  without,  and  in  which 
we  are  passive,  and  those  that  we  produce  sim¬ 
ply  from  ourselves,  and  in  which  we  show  our 
own  activity),  then  it  follows  of  itself  that  we 
must  admit  and  assume  behind  the  appearance 
something  else  that  is  not  an  appearance,  name¬ 
ly,  the  things  in  themselves;  although  we  must 
admit  that  as  they  can  never  be  known  to  us  ex¬ 
cept  as  they  affect  us,  we  can  come  no  nearer  to 
them,  nor  can  we  ever  know  what  they  are  in 
themselves.  This  must  furnish  a  distinction, 
however  crude,  between  a  world  of  sense  and 
the  world  of  understanding ,  of  which  the  for¬ 
mer  may  be  different  according  to  the  difference 


282 


FUNDAMENTAL 

of  the  sensuous  impressions  in  various  observ¬ 
ers,  while  the  second  which  is  its  basis  always 
remains  the  same.  Even  as  to  himself,  a  man 
cannot  pretend  to  know  what  he  is  in  himself 
from  the  knowledge  he  has  by  internal  sensa¬ 
tion.  For  as  he  does  not  as  it  were  create  him¬ 
self,  and  does  not  come  by  the  conception  of 
himself  a  priori  but  empirically,  it  naturally 
follows  that  he  can  obtain  his  knowledge  even 
of  himself  only  by  the  inner  sense  and,  conse¬ 
quently,  only  through  the  appearances  of  his  na¬ 
ture  and  the  way  in  which  his  consciousness  is 
affected.  At  the  same  time  beyond  these  charac¬ 
teristics  of  his  own  subject,  made  up  of  mere 
appearances,  he  must  necessarily  suppose  some¬ 
thing  else  as  their  basis,  namely,  his  ego ,  what¬ 
ever  its  characteristics  in  itself  may  be.  Thus  in 
respect  to  mere  perception  and  receptivity  of 
sensations  he  must  reckon  himself  as  belonging 
to  the  world  of  sense;  but  in  respect  of  what¬ 
ever  there  may  be  of  pure  activity  in  him  (that 
which  reaches  consciousness  immediately  and 
not  through  affecting  the  senses),  he  must  reck¬ 
on  himself  as  belonging  to  the  intellectual  world, 
of  which,  however,  he  has  no  further  knowledge. 
To  such  a  conclusion  the  reflecting  man  must 
come  with  respect  to  all  the  things  which  can  be 
presented  to  him:  it  is  probably  to  be  met  with 
even  in  persons  of  the  commonest  understand¬ 
ing,  who,  as  is  well  known,  are  very  much  in¬ 
clined  to  suppose  behind  the  objects  of  the 
senses  something  else  invisible  and  acting  of 
itself.  They  spoil  it,  however,  by  presently  sen¬ 
sualizing  this  invisible  again;  that  is  to  say, 
wanting  to  make  it  an  object  of  intuition,  so 
that  they  do  not  become  a  whit  the  wiser. 

Now  man  really  finds  in  himself  a  faculty  by 
which  he  distinguishes  himself  from  everything 
else,  even  from  himself  as  affected  by  objects, 
and  that  is  reason.  This  being  pure  spontaneity 
is  even  elevated  above  the  understanding.  For 
although  the  latter  is  a  spontaneity  and  does 
not,  like  sense,  merely  contain  intuitions  that 
arise  when  we  are  affected  by  things  (and  are 
therefore  passive),  yet  it  cannot  produce  from 
its  activity  any  other  conceptions  than  those 
which  merely  serve  to  bring  the  intuitions  of 
sense  under  rules  and,  thereby,  to  unite  them 
in  one  consciousness,  and  without  this  use  of  the 
sensibility  it  could  not  think  at  all;  whereas,  on 
the  contrary,  reason  shows  so  pure  a  spontaneity 
in  the  case  of  what  I  call  ideas  [ideal  concep¬ 
tions]  that  it  thereby  far  transcends  everything 
that  the  sensibility  can  give  it,  and  exhibits  its 
most  important  function  in  distinguishing  the 
world  of  sense  from  that  of  understanding,  and 


PRINCIPLES  OF 

thereby  prescribing  the  limits  of  the  under¬ 
standing  itself. 

For  this  reason  a  rational  being  must  regard 
himself  qua  intelligence  (not  from  the  side  of 
his  lower  faculties)  as  belonging  not  to  the  world 
of  sense,  but  to  that  of  understanding;  hence 
he  has  two  points  of  view  from  which  he  can 
regard  himself,  and  recognise  laws  of  the  exer¬ 
cise  of  his  faculties,  and  consequently  of  all  his 
actions:  first ,  so  far  as  he  belongs  to  the  world 
of  sense,  he  finds  himself  subject  to  laws  of 
nature  (heteronomy) ;  secondly ,  as  belonging  to 
the  intelligible  world,  under  laws  which  being 
independent  of  nature  have  their  foundation 
not  in  experience  but  in  reason  alone. 

As  a  rational  being,  and  consequently  belong¬ 
ing  to  the  intelligible  world,  man  can  never  con¬ 
ceive  the  causality  of  his  own  will  otherwise 
than  on  condition  of  the  idea  of  freedom,  for 
independence  of  the  determinate  causes  of  the 
sensible  world  (an  independence  which  reason 
must  always  ascribe  to  itself)  is  freedom.  Now 
the  idea  of  freedom  is  inseparably  connected 
with  the  conception  of  autonomy ,  and  this  again 
with  the  universal  principle  of  morality  which 
is  ideally  the  foundation  of  all  actions  of  ra¬ 
tional  beings,  just  as  the  law  of  nature  is  of  all 
phenomena. 

Now  the  suspicion  is  removed  which  we  raised 
above,  that  there  was  a  latent  circle  involved  in 
our  reasoning  from  freedom  to  autonomy,  and 
from  this  to  the  moral  law,  viz.:  that  we  laid 
down  the  idea  of  freedom  because  of  the  moral 
law  only  that  we  might  afterwards  in  turn  infer 
the  latter  from  freedom,  and  that  consequently 
we  could  assign  no  reason  at  all  for  this  law,  but 
could  only  [present]  it  as  a  petitio  principii 
which  well  disposed  minds  would  gladly  concede 
to  us,  but  which  we  could  never  put  forward  as 
a  provable  proposition.  For  now  we  see  that, 
when  we  conceive  ourselves  as  free,  we  transfer 
ourselves  into  the  world  of  understanding  as 
members  of  it  and  recognise  the  autonomy  of 
the  will  with  its  consequence,  morality;  where¬ 
as,  if  we  conceive  ourselves  as  under  obligation, 
we  consider  ourselves  as  belonging  to  the  world 
of  sense  and  at  the  same  time  to  the  world  of 
understanding. 

How  is  a  Categorical  Imperative  Possible ? 

Every  rational  being  reckons  himself  qua  in¬ 
telligence  as  belonging  to  the  world  of  under¬ 
standing,  and  it  is  simply  as  an  efficient  cause 
belonging  to  that  world  that  he  calls  his  causal¬ 
ity  a  will.  On  the  other  side  he  is  also  conscious 
of  himself  as  a  part  of  the  world  of  sense  in 


THE  METAPHYSIC  OF  MORALS 


which  his  actions,  which  are  mere  appearances 
[phenomena]  of  that  causality,  are  displayed; 
we  cannot,  however,  discern  how  they  are  pos¬ 
sible  from  this  causality  which  we  do  not  know; 
but  instead  of  that,  these  actions  as  belonging 
to  the  sensible  world  must  be  viewed  as  deter¬ 
mined  by  other  phenomena,  namely,  desires  and 
inclinations.  If  therefore  I  were  only  a  member 
of  the  world  of  understanding,  then  all  my  ac¬ 
tions  would  perfectly  conform  to  the  principle 
of  autonomy  of  the  pure  will;  if  I  were  only  a 
part  of  the  world  of  sense,  they  would  neces¬ 
sarily  be  assumed  to  conform  wholly  to  the 
natural  law  of  desires  and  inclinations,  in  other 
words,  to  the  heteronomy  of  nature.  (The  for¬ 
mer  would  rest  on  morality  as  the  supreme  prin¬ 
ciple,  the  latter  on  happiness.)  Since,  however, 
the  world  of  understanding  contains  the  foun¬ 
dation  of  the  world  of  sense ,  and  consequently 
of  its  laws  also ,  and  accordingly  gives  the  law 
to  my  will  (which  belongs  wholly  to  the  world 
of  understanding)  directly,  and  must  be  con¬ 
ceived  as  doing  so,  it  follows  that,  although  on 
the  one  side  I  must  regard  myself  as  a  being  be¬ 
longing  to  the  world  of  sense,  yet  on  the  other 
side  I  must  recognize  myself  as  subject  as  an 
intelligence  to  the  law  of  the  world  of  under¬ 
standing,  i.e.,  to  reason,  which  contains  this  law 
in  the  idea  of  freedom,  and  therefore  as  subject 
to  the  autonomy  of  the  will:  consequently  I 
must  regard  the  laws  of  the  world  of  under¬ 
standing  as  imperatives  for  me  and  the  actions 
which  conform  to  them  as  duties. 

And  thus  what  makes  categorical  imperatives 
possible  is  this,  that  the  idea  of  freedom  makes 
me  a  member  of  an  intelligible  world,  in  con¬ 
sequence  of  which,  if  I  were  nothing  else,  all 
my  actions  would  always  conform  to  the  auton¬ 
omy  of  the  will ;  but  as  I  at  the  same  time  in- 
tuite  myself  as  a  member  of  the  world  of  sense, 
they  ought  so  to  conform,  and  this  categorical 
“ought”  implies  a  synthetic  a  priori  proposition, 
inasmuch  as  besides  my  will  as  affected  by  sen¬ 
sible  desires  there  is  added  further  the  idea  of 
the  same  will  but  as  belonging  to  the  world  of 
the  understanding,  pure  and  practical  of  itself, 
which  contains  the  supreme  condition  according 
to  reason  of  the  former  will;  precisely  as  to  the 
intuitions  of  sense  there  are  added  concepts  of 
the  understanding  which  of  themselves  signify 
nothing  but  regular  form  in  general  and  in  this 
way  synthetic  a  priori  propositions  become  pos¬ 
sible,  on  which  all  knowledge  of  physical  nature 
rests. 

The  practical  use  of  common  human  reason 
confirms  this  reasoning.  There  is  no  one,  not 


even  the  most  consummate  villain,  provided  on¬ 
ly  that  he  is  otherwise  accustomed  to  the  use  of 
reason,  who,  when  we  set  before  him  examples 
of  honesty  of  purpose,  of  steadfastness  in  fol¬ 
lowing  good  maxims,  of  sympathy  and  general 
benevolence  (even  combined  with  great  sacri¬ 
fices  of  advantages  and  comfort),  does  not  wish 
that  he  might  also  possess  these  qualities.  Only 
on  account  of  his  inclinations  and  impulses  he 
cannot  attain  this  in  himself,  but  at  the  same 
time  he  wishes  to  be  free  from  such  inclinations 
which  are  burdensome  to  himself.  He  proves  by 
this  that  he  transfers  himself  in  thought  with  a 
will  free  from  the  impulses  of  the  sensibility 
into  an  order  of  things  wholly  different  from 
that  of  his  desires  in  the  field  of  the  sensibility; 
since  he  cannot  expect  to  obtain  by  that  wish 
any  gratification  of  his  desires,  nor  any  position 
which  would  satisfy  any  of  his  actual  or  sup- 
posable  inclinations  (for  this  would  destroy  the 
pre-eminence  of  the  very  idea  which  wrests  that 
wish  from  him) :  he  can  only  expect  a  greater 
intrinsic  worth  of  his  own  person.  This  better 
person,  however,  he  imagines  himself  to  be  when 
he  transfers  himself  to  the  point  of  view  of  a 
member  of  the  world  of  the  understanding,  to 
which  he  is  involuntarily  forced  by  the  idea  of 
freedom,  i.e.,  of  independence  on  determining 
causes  of  the  world  of  sense;  and  from  this 
point  of  view  he  is  conscious  of  a  good  will, 
which  by  his  own  confession  constitutes  the  law 
for  the  bad  will  that  he  possesses  as  a  member 
of  the  world  of  sense — a  law  whose  authority 
he  recognizes  while  transgressing  it.  What  he 
morally  “ought”  is  then  what  he  necessarily 
“would,”  as  a  member  of  the  world  of  the  un¬ 
derstanding,  and  is  conceived  by  him  as  an 
“ought”  only  inasmuch  as  he  likewise  considers 
himself  as  a  member  of  the  world  of  sense. 

Of  the  Extreme  Limits  o f  all  Practical 
Philosophy. 

All  men  attribute  to  themselves  freedom  of 
will.  Hence  come  all  judgements  upon  actions  as 
being  such  as  ought  to  have  been  done,  although 
they  have  not  been  done.  However,  this  free¬ 
dom  is  not  a  conception  of  experience,  nor  can 
it  be  so,  since  it  still  remains,  even  though  ex¬ 
perience  shows  the  contrary  of  what  on  suppo¬ 
sition  of  freedom  are  conceived  as  its  necessary 
consequences.  On  the  other  side  it  is  equally 
necessary  that  everything  that  takes  place  should 
be  fixedly  determined  according  to  laws  of  na¬ 
ture.  This  necessity  of  nature  is  likewise  not  an 
empirical  conception,  just  for  this  reason,  that 
it  involves  the  motion  of  necessity  and  conse- 


284  FUNDAMENTAL 

quently  of  a  priori  cognition.  But  this  concep¬ 
tion  of  a  system  of  nature  is  confirmed  by  ex¬ 
perience;  and  it  must  even  be  inevitably  pre¬ 
supposed  if  experience  itself  is  to  be  possible, 
that  is,  a  connected  knowledge  of  the  objects  of 
sense  resting  on  general  laws.  Therefore  free¬ 
dom  is  only  an  idea  of  reason,  and  its  objective 
reality  in  itself  is  doubtful;  while  nature  is  a 
concept  of  the  understanding  which  proves,  and 
must  necessarily  prove,  its  reality  in  examples 
of  experience. 

There  arises  from  this  a  dialectic  of  reason, 
since  the  freedom  attributed  to  the  will  appears 
to  contradict  the  necessity  of  nature,  and  placed 
between  these  two  ways  reason  for  speculative 
purposes  finds  the  road  of  physical  necessity 
much  more  beaten  and  more  appropriate  than 
that  of  freedom;  yet  for  practical  purposes  the 
narrow  footpath  of  freedom  is  the  only  one  on 
which  it  is  possible  to  make  use  of  reason  in  our 
conduct;  hence  it  is  just  as  impossible  for  the 
subtlest  philosophy  as  for  the  commonest  rea¬ 
son  of  men  to  argue  away  freedom.  Philosophy 
must  then  assume  that  no  real  contradiction 
will  be  found  between  freedom  and  physical 
necessity  of  the  same  human  actions,  for  it  can¬ 
not  give  up  the  conception  of  nature  any  more 
than  that  of  freedom. 

Nevertheless,  even  though  we  should  never 
be  able  to  comprehend  how  freedom  is  possible, 
we  must  at  least  remove  this  apparent  con¬ 
tradiction  in  a  convincing  manner.  For  if  the 
thought  of  freedom  contradicts  either  itself  or 
nature,  which  is  equally  necessary,  it  must  in 
competition  with  physical  necessity  be  entirely 
given  up. 

It  would,  however,  be  impossible  to  escape 
this  contradiction  if  the  thinking  subject, 
which  seems  to  itself  free,  conceived  itself  in 
the  same  sense  or  in  the  very  same  relation 
when  it  calls  itself  free  as  when  in  respect  of  the 
same  action  it  assumes  itself  to  be  subject  to 
the  law  of  nature.  Hence  it  is  an  indispensable 
problem  of  speculative  philosophy  to  show  that 
its  illusion  respecting  the  contradiction  rests  on 
this,  that  we  think  of  man  in  a  different  sense 
and  relation  when  we  call  him  free  and  when  we 
regard  him  as  subject  to  the  laws  of  nature  as 
being  part  and  parcel  of  nature.  It  must  there¬ 
fore  show  that  not  only  can  both  these  very 
well  co-exist,  but  that  both  must  be  thought  as 
necessarily  united  in  the  same  subject,  since 
otherwise  no  reason  could  be  given  why  we 
should  burden  reason  with  an  idea  which,  though 
it  may  possibly  without  contradiction  be  recon¬ 
ciled  with  another  that  is  sufficiently  established, 


PRINCIPLES  OF 

yet  entangles  us  in  a  perplexity  which  sorely 
embarrasses  reason  in  its  theoretic  employment. 
This  duty,  however,  belongs  only  to  speculative 
philosophy.  The  philosopher  then  has  no  option 
whether  he  will  remove  the  apparent  contradic¬ 
tion  or  leave  it  untouched;  for  in  the  latter  case 
the  theory  respecting  this  would  be  bonum  va- 
cans,  into  the  possession  of  which  the  fatalist 
would  have  a  right  to  enter  and  chase  all  moral¬ 
ity  out  of  its  supposed  domain  as  occupying  it 
without  title. 

We  cannot  however  as  yet  say  that  we  are 
touching  the  bounds  of  practical  philosophy. 
For  the  settlement  of  that  controversy  does  not 
belong  to  it;  it  only  demands  from  speculative 
reason  that  it  should  put  an  end  to  the  discord 
in  which  it  entangles  itself  in  theoretical  ques¬ 
tions.  so  that  practical  reason  may  have  rest 
and  security  from  external  attacks  which  might 
make  the  ground  debatable  on  which  it  desires 
to  build. 

The  claims  to  freedom  of  will  made  even  by 
common  reason  are  founded  on  the  conscious¬ 
ness  and  the  admitted  supposition  that  reason 
is  independent  of  merely  subjectively  deter¬ 
mined  causes  which  together  constitute  what  be¬ 
longs  to  sensation  only  and  which  consequently 
come  under  the  general  designation  of  sensibil¬ 
ity.  Man  considering  himself  in  this  way  as  an 
intelligence  places  himself  thereby  in  a  different 
order  of  things  and  in  a  relation  to  determining 
grounds  of  a  wholly  different  kind  when  on  the 
one  hand  he  thinks  of  himself  as  an  intelligence 
endowed  with  a  will,  and  consequently  with 
causality,  and  when  on  the  other  he  perceives 
himself  as  a  phenomenon  in  the  world  of  sense 
(as  he  really  is  also),  and  affirms  that  his  causal¬ 
ity  is  subject  to  external  determination  accord¬ 
ing  to  laws  of  nature.  Now  he  soon  becomes 
aware  that  both  can  hold  good,  nay,  must  hold 
good  at  the  same  time.  For  there  is  not  the 
smallest  contradiction  in  saying  that  a  thing  in 
appearance  (belonging  to  the  world  of  sense)  is 
subject  to  certain  laws,  of  which  the  very  same 
as  a  thing  or  being  in  itself  is  independent,  and 
that  he  must  conceive  and  think  of  himself  in 
this  twofold  way,  rests  as  to  the  first  on  the 
consciousness  of  himself  as  an  object  affected 
through  the  senses,  and  as  to  the  second  on  the 
consciousness  of  himself  as  an  intelligence,  i.e., 
as  independent  on  sensible  impressions  in  the 
employment  of  his  reason  (in  other  words  as 
belonging  to  the  world  of  understanding). 

Hence  it  comes  to  pass  that  man  claims  the 
possession  of  a  will  which  takes  no  account  of 
anything  that  comes  under  the  head  of  desires 


THE  METAPHYSIC  OF  MORALS 


and  inclinations  and,  on  the  contrary,  conceives 
actions  as  possible  to  him,  nay,  even  as  neces¬ 
sary  which  can  only  be  done  by  disregarding  all 
desires  and  sensible  inclinations.  The  causality 
of  such  actions  lies  in  him  as  an  intelligence 
and  in  the  laws  of  effects  and  actions  [which 
depend]  on  the  principles  of  an  intelligible 
world,  of  which  indeed  he  knows  nothing  more 
than  that  in  it  pure  reason  alone  independent 
of  sensibility  gives  the  law;  moreover  since  it  is 
only  in  that  world,  as  an  intelligence,  that  he  is 
his  proper  self  (being  as  man  only  the  appear¬ 
ance  of  himself),  those  laws  apply  to  him  di¬ 
rectly  and  categorically,  so  that  the  incitements 
of  inclinations  and  appetites  (in  other  words  the 
whole  nature  of  the  world  of  sense)  cannot  im¬ 
pair  the  laws  of  his  volition  as  an  intelligence. 
Nay,  he  does  not  even  hold  himself  responsible 
for  the  former  or  ascribe  them  to  his  proper 
self,  i.e.,  his  will:  he  only  ascribes  to  his  will  any 
indulgence  which  he  might  yield  them  if  he 
allowed  them  to  influence  his  maxims  to  the 
prejudice  of  the  rational  laws  of  the  will. 

When  practical  reason  thinks  itself  into  a 
world  of  understanding,  it  does  not  thereby  tran¬ 
scend  its  own  limits,  as  it  would  if  it  tried  to  enter 
it  by  intuition  or  sensation.  The  former  is  only  a 
negative  thought  in  respect  of  the  world  of  sense, 
which  does  not  give  any  laws  to  reason  in  deter¬ 
mining  the  will  and  is  positive  only  in  this  single 
point  that  this  freedom  as  a  negative  character¬ 
istic  is  at  the  same  time  conjoined  with  a  (posi¬ 
tive)  faculty  and  even  with  a  causality  of  rea¬ 
son,  which  we  designate  a  will,  namely  a  faculty 
of  so  acting  that  the  principle  of  the  actions 
shall  conform  to  the  essential  character  of  a 
rational  motive,  i.e.,  the  condition  that  the  max¬ 
im  have  universal  validity  as  a  law.  But  were  it 
to  borrow  an  object  of  will,  that  is,  a  motive, 
from  the  world  of  understanding,  then  it  would 
overstep  its  bounds  and  pretend  to  be  acquaint¬ 
ed  with  something  of  which  it  knows  nothing. 
The  conception  of  a  world  of  the  understanding 
is  then  only  a  point  of  view  which  reason  finds 
itself  compelled  to  take  outside  the  appearances 
in  order  to  conceive  itself  as  practical,  which 
would  not  be  possible  if  the  influences  of  the 
sensibility  had  a  determining  power  on  man,  but 
which  is  necessary  unless  he  is  to  be  denied  the 
consciousness  of  himself  as  an  intelligence  and, 
consequently,  as  a  rational  cause,  energizing  by 
reason,  that  is,  operating  freely.  This  thought 
certainly  involves  the  idea  of  an  order  and  a 
system  of  laws  different  from  that  of  the  mech¬ 
anism  of  nature  which  belongs  to  the  sensible 
world;  and  it  makes  the  conception  of  an  in¬ 


285 

telligible  world  necessary  (that  is  to  say,  the 
whole  system  of  rational  beings  as  things  in 
themselves).  But  it  does  not  in  the  least  au¬ 
thorize  us  to  think  of  it  further  than  as  to  its 
formal  condition  only,  that  is,  the  universality 
of  the  maxims  of  the  will  as  laws,  and  conse¬ 
quently  the  autonomy  of  the  latter,  which  alone 
is  consistent  with  its  freedom;  whereas,  on  the 
contrary,  all  laws  that  refer  to  a  definite  object 
give  heteronomy,  which  only  belongs  to  laws  of 
nature  and  can  only  apply  to  the  sensible  world. 

But  reason  would  overstep  all  its  bounds  if  it 
undertook  to  explain  how  pure  reason  can  be 
practical,  which  would  be  exactly  the  same 
problem  as  to  explain  how  freedom  is  possible. 

For  we  can  explain  nothing  but  that  which  we 
can  reduce  to  laws,  the  object  of  which  can  be 
given  in  some  possible  experience.  But  freedom 
is  a  mere  idea ,  the  objective  reality  of  which 
can  in  no  wise  be  shown  according  to  laws  of 
nature,  and  consequently  not  in  any  possible 
experience;  and  for  this  reason  it  can  never  be 
comprehended  or  understood,  because  we  can¬ 
not  support  it  by  any  sort  of  example  or  analogy. 
It  holds  good  only  as  a  necessary  hypothesis  of 
reason  in  a  being  that  believes  itself  conscious 
of  a  will,  that  is,  of  a  faculty  distinct  from 
mere  desire  (namely,  a  faculty  of  determining 
itself  to  action  as  an  intelligence,  in  other  words, 
by  laws  of  reason  independently  on  natural  in¬ 
stincts).  Now  where  determination  according  to 
laws  of  nature  ceases,  there  all  explanation 
ceases  also,  and  nothing  remains  but  defence , 
i.e.,  the  removal  of  the  objections  of  those  who 
pretend  to  have  seen  deeper  into  the  nature  of 
things,  and  thereupon  boldly  declare  freedom 
impossible.  We  can  only  point  out  to  them  that 
the  supposed  contradiction  that  they  have  dis¬ 
covered  in  it  arises  only  from  this,  that  in  order 
to  be  able  to  apply  the  law  of  nature  to  human 
actions,  they  must  necessarily  consider  man  as 
an  appearance:  then  when  we  demand  of  them 
that  they  should  also  think  of  him  qua  intelli¬ 
gence  as  a  thing  in  itself,  they  still  persist  in 
considering  him  in  this  respect  also  as  an  ap¬ 
pearance.  In  this  view  it  would  no  doubt  be  a 
contradiction  to  suppose  the  causality  of  the 
same  subject  (that  is,  his  will)  to  be  withdrawn 
from  all  the  natural  laws  of  the  sensible  world. 
But  this  contradiction  disappears,  if  they  would 
only  bethink  themselves  and  admit,  as  is  reason¬ 
able,  that  behind  the  appearances  there  must 
also  lie  at  their  root  (although  hidden)  the 
things  in  themselves,  and  that  we  cannot  expect 
the  laws  of  these  to  be  the  same  as  those  that 
govern  their  appearances. 


286 


FUNDAMENTAL  PRINCIPLES  OF 


The  subjective  impossibility  of  explaining  the 
freedom  of  the  will  is  identical  with  the  impos¬ 
sibility  of  discovering  and  explaining  an  inter¬ 
est1  which  man  can  take  in  the  moral  law.  Nev¬ 
ertheless  he  does  actually  take  an  interest  in  it, 
the  basis  of  which  in  us  we  call  the  moral  feel¬ 
ing,  which  some  have  falsely  assigned  as  the 
standard  of  our  moral  judgement,  whereas  it 
must  rather  be  viewed  as  the  subjective  effect 
that  the  law  exercises  on  the  will,  the  objective 
principle  of  which  is  furnished  by  reason  alone. 

In  order  indeed  that  a  rational  being  who  is 
also  affected  through  the  senses  should  will  what 
reason  alone  directs  such  beings  that  they  ought 
to  will,  it  is  no  doubt  requisite  that  reason 
should  have  a  power  to  infuse  a  feeling  of  pleas¬ 
ure  or  satisfaction  in  the  fulfilment  of  duty, 
that  is  to  say,  that  it  should  have  a  causality  by 
which  it  determines  the  sensibility  according  to 
its  own  principles.  But  it  is  quite  impossible  to 
discern,  i.e.,  to  make  it  intelligible  a  priori ,  how 
a  mere  thought,  which  itself  contains  nothing 
sensible,  can  itself  produce  a  sensation  of  pleas¬ 
ure  or  pain;  for  this  is  a  particular  kind  of 
causality  of  which  as  of  every  other  causality 
we  can  determine  nothing  whatever  a  priori; 
we  must  only  consult  experience  about  it.  But 
as  this  cannot  supply  us  with  any  relation 
of  cause  and  effect  except  between  two  ob¬ 
jects  of  experience,  whereas  in  this  case,  al¬ 
though  indeed  the  effect  produced  lies  within 
experience,  yet  the  cause  is  supposed  to  be  pure 
reason  acting  through  mere  ideas  which  offer 
no  object  to  experience,  it  follows  that  for  us 
men  it  is  quite  impossible  to  explain  how  and 
why  the  universality  of  the  maxim  as  a  law , 
that  is,  morality,  interests.  This  only  is  certain, 
that  it  is  not  because  it  interests  us  that  it  has 
validity  for  us  (for  that  would  be  heteronomy 
and  dependence  of  practical  reason  on  sensibil¬ 
ity,  namely,  on  a  feeling  as  its  principle,  in 
which  case  it  could  never  give  moral  laws),  but 
that  it  interests  us  because  it  is  valid  for  us  as 
men,  inasmuch  as  it  had  its  source  in  our  will 

l  Interest  is  that  by  which  reason  becomes  practical, 
i.e.,  a  cause  determining  the  will.  Hence  we  say  of  ra¬ 
tional  beings  only  that  they  take  an  interest  in  a  thing; 
irrational  beings  only  feel  sensual  appetites.  Reason 
takes  a  direct  interest  in  action  then  only  when  the  uni¬ 
versal  validity  of  its  maxims  is  alone  sufficient  to  de¬ 
termine  the  will.  Such  an  interest  alone  is  pure.  But  if  it 
can  determine  the  will  only  by  means  of  another  object 
of  desire  or  on  the  suggestion  of  a  particular  feeling  of 
the  subject,  then  reason  takes  only  an  indirect  interest 
in  the  action,  and,  as  reason  by  itself  without  experi¬ 
ence  cannot  discover  either  objects  of  the  will  or  a  spe¬ 
cial  feeling  actuating  it,  this  latter  interest  would  only 
be  empirical  and  not  a  pure  rational  interest.  The  logi¬ 
cal  interest  of  reason  (namely,  to  extend  its  insight)  is 
never  direct,  but  presupposes  purposes  for  which  reason 
is  employed. 


as  intelligences,  in  other  words,  in  our  proper 
self,  and  what  belongs  to  mere  appearance  is 
necessarily  subordinated  by  reason  to  the  na¬ 
ture  of  the  thing  in  itself. 

The  question  then,  “How  a  categorical  im¬ 
perative  is  possible,”  can  be  answered  to  this 
extent,  that  we  can  assign  the  only  hypothesis 
on  which  it  is  possible,  namely,  the  idea  of  free¬ 
dom;  and  we  can  also  discern  the  necessity  of 
this  hypothesis,  and  this  is  sufficient  for  the 
practical  exercise  of  reason,  that  is,  for  the  con¬ 
viction  of  the  validity  of  this  imperative,  and 
hence  of  the  moral  law;  but  how  this  hypothesis 
itself  is  possible  can  never  be  discerned  by  any 
human  reason.  On  the  hypothesis,  however,  that 
the  will  of  an  intelligence  is  free,  its  autonomy, 
as  the  essential  formal  condition  of  its  determi¬ 
nation,  is  a  necessary  consequence.  Moreover, 
this  freedom  of  will  is  not  merely  quite  possible 
as  a  hypothesis  (not  involving  any  contradic¬ 
tion  to  the  principle  of  physical  necessity  in  the 
connexion  of  the  phenomena  of  the  sensible 
world)  as  speculative  philosophy  can  show: 
but  further,  a  rational  being  who  is  conscious  of 
causality  through  reason,  that  is  to  say,  of  a  will 
(distinct  from  desires),  must  of  necessity  make 
it  practically,  that  is,  in  idea,  the  condition  of 
all  his  voluntary  actions.  But  to  explain  how 
pure  reason  can  be  of  itself  practical  without 
the  aid  of  any  spring  of  action  that  could  be  de¬ 
rived  from  any  other  source,  i.e.,  how  the  mere 
principle  of  the  universal  validity  of  all  its  max¬ 
ims  as  laws  (which  would  certainly  be  the  form 
of  a  pure  practical  reason)  can  of  itself  supply 
a  spring,  without  any  matter  (object)  of  the  will 
in  which  one  could  antecedently  take  any  inter¬ 
est;  and  how  it  can  produce  an  interest  which 
would  be  called  purely  moral;  or  in  other  words, 
how  pure  reason  can  be  practical — to  explain 
this  is  beyond  the  power  of  human  reason,  and 
all  the  labour  and  pains  of  seeking  an  explana¬ 
tion  of  it  are  lost. 

It  is  just  the  same  as  if  I  sought  to  find  out 
how  freedom  itself  is  possible  as  the  causality 
of  a  will.  For  then  I  quit  the  ground  of  philo¬ 
sophical  explanation,  and  I  have  no  other  to  go 
upon.  I  might  indeed  revel  in  the  world  of  in¬ 
telligences  which  still  remains  to  me,  but  al¬ 
though  I  have  an  idea  of  it  which  is  well  found¬ 
ed,  yet  I  have  not  the  least  knowledge  of  it,  nor 
can  I  ever  attain  to  such  knowledge  with  all  the 
efforts  of  my  natural  faculty  of  reason.  It  sig¬ 
nifies  only  a  something  that  remains  over  when 
I  have  eliminated  everything  belonging  to  the 
world  of  sense  from  the  actuating  principles  of 
my  will,  serving  merely  to  keep  in  bounds  the 


287 


THE  METAPHYSIC  OF  MORALS 


principle  of  motives  taken  from  the  field  of  sen¬ 
sibility;  fixing  its  limits  and  showing  that  it  does 
not  contain  all  in  all  within  itself,  but  that  there 
is  more  beyond  it;  but  this  something  more  I 
know  no  further.  Of  pure  reason  which  frames 
this  ideal,  there  remains  after  the  abstraction 
of  all  matter,  i.e.,  knowledge  of  objects,  nothing 
but  the  form,  namely,  the  practical  law  of  the 
universality  of  the  maxims,  and  in  conformity 
with  this  conception  of  reason  in  reference  to  a 
pure  world  of  understanding  as  a  possible  effi¬ 
cient  cause,  that  is  a  cause  determining  the  will. 
There  must  here  be  a  total  absence  of  springs; 
unless  this  idea  of  an  intelligible  world  is  itself 
the  spring,  or  that  in  which  reason  primarily 
takes  an  interest;  but  to  make  this  intelligible 
is  precisely  the  problem  that  we  cannot  solve. 

Here  now  is  the  extreme  limit  of  all  moral 
inquiry,  and  it  is  of  great  importance  to  deter¬ 
mine  it  even  on  this  account,  in  order  that  rea¬ 
son  may  not  on  the  one  hand,  to  the  prejudice 
of  morals,  seek  about  in  the  world  of  sense  for 
the  supreme  motive  and  an  interest  comprehen¬ 
sible  but  empirical;  and  on  the  other  hand,  that 
it  may  not  impotently  flap  its  wings  without  be¬ 
ing  able  to  move  in  the  (for  it)  empty  space 
of  transcendent  concepts  which  we  call  the  in¬ 
telligible  world,  and  so  lose  itself  amidst  chi¬ 
meras.  For  the  rest,  the  idea  of  a  pure  world  of 
understanding  as  a  system  of  all  intelligences, 
and  to  which  we  ourselves  as  rational  beings  be¬ 
long  (although  we  are  likewise  on  the  other  side 
members  of  the  sensible  world),  this  remains 
always  a  useful  and  legitimate  idea  for  the  pur¬ 
poses  of  rational  belief,  although  all  knowledge 
stops  at  its  threshold,  useful,  namely,  to  pro¬ 
duce  in  us  a  lively  interest  in  the  moral  law  by 
means  of  the  noble  ideal  of  a  universal  kingdom 
of  ends  in  themselves  (rational  beings),  to  which 
we  can  belong  as  members  then  only  when  we 
carefully  conduct  ourselves  according  to  the  max¬ 
ims  of  freedom  as  if  they  were  laws  of  nature. 


Concluding  Remark 

The  speculative  employment  of  reason  with 
respect  to  nature  leads  to  the  absolute  necessity 
of  some  supreme  cause  of  the  world:  the  prac¬ 
tical  employment  of  reason  with  a  view  to  free¬ 
dom  leads  also  to  absolute  necessity,  but  only 
0}  the  laws  of  the  actions  of  a  rational  being 
as  such.  Now  it  is  an  essential  principle  of  rea¬ 
son,  however  employed,  to  push  its  knowledge 
to  a  consciousness  of  its  necessity  (without 
which  it  would  not  be  rational  knowledge).  It 
is,  however,  an  equally  essential  restriction  of 
the  same  reason  that  it  can  neither  discern  the 
necessity  of  what  is  or  what  happens,  nor  of 
what  ought  to  happen,  unless  a  condition  is  sup¬ 
posed  on  which  it  is  or  happens  or  ought  to  hap¬ 
pen.  In  this  way,  however,  by  the  constant 
inquiry  for  the  condition,  the  satisfaction  of 
reason  is  only  further  and  further  postponed. 
Hence  it  unceasingly  seeks  the  unconditionally 
necessary  and  finds  itself  forced  to  assume  it, 
although  without  any  means  of  making  it  com¬ 
prehensible  to  itself,  happy  enough  if  only  it 
can  discover  a  conception  which  agrees  with  this 
assumption.  It  is  therefore  no  fault  in  our  de¬ 
duction  of  the  supreme  principle  of  morality, 
but  an  objection  that  should  be  made  to  human 
reason  in  general,  that  it  cannot  enable  us  to 
conceive  the  absolute  necessity  of  an  uncondi¬ 
tional  practical  law  (such  as  the  categorical  im¬ 
perative  must  be).  It  cannot  be  blamed  for  re¬ 
fusing  to  explain  this  necessity  by  a  condition, 
that  is  to  say,  by  means  of  some  interest  as¬ 
sumed  as  a  basis,  since  the  law  would  then  cease 
to  be  a  supreme  law  of  reason.  And  thus  while 
we  do  not  comprehend  the  practical  uncondi¬ 
tional  necessity  of  the  moral  imperative,  we  yet 
comprehend  its  incomprehensibility ,  and  this  is 
all  that  can  be  fairly  demanded  of  a  philosophy 
which  strives  to  carry  its  principles  up  to  the 
very  limit  of  human  reason. 


•V  rf» 


CONTENTS 

CRITIQUE  OF  PRACTICAL  REASON 


Preface  291 

Introduction,  Of  the  Idea  of  a  Critique  of  Practical  Reason  296 

PART  I.  ELEMENTS  OF  PURE  PRACTICAL  REASON 
BOOK  I.  THE  ANALYTIC  OF  PURE  PRACTICAL  REASON 
Chapter  I.  Of  the  Principles  of  Pure  Practical  Reason  297 

1.  Of  the  Deduction  of  the  Fundamental  Principles  of  Pure  Prac¬ 
tical  Reason  307 

11.  Of  the  Right  that  Pure  Reason  in  its  Practical  Use  has  to  an 
Extension  which  is  not  possible  to  it  in  its  Speculative  Use  31 1 
Chapter  II.  Of  the  Concept  of  an  Object  of  Pure  Practical 
Reason  314 

Of  the  Typic  of  the  Pure  Practical  Judgement  319 

Chapter  III.  Of  the  Motives  of  Pure  Practical  Reason  321 
Critical  Examination  of  the  Analytic  of  Pure  Practical  Reason  329 
BOOK  II.  DIALECTIC  OF  PURE  PRACTICAL  REASON 
Chapter  I.  Of  a  Dialectic  of  Pure  Practical  Reason  Generally 

337 

Chapter  II.  Of  the  Dialectic  of  Pure  Reason  in  defining  the 
Conception  of  the  “Summum  Bonum”  338 

I.  Antinomy  of  Practical  Reason  340 

II.  Critical  Solution  of  the  Antinomy  of  Practical  Reason  340 

III.  Of  the  Primacy  of  Pure  Practical  Reason  in  its  Union  with 

the  Speculative  Reason  343 

IV.  The  Immortality  of  the  Soul  as  a  Postulate  of  Pure  Practi¬ 
cal  Reason  344 

V.  The  Existence  of  God  as  a  Postulate  of  Pure  Practical 
Reason  344 

VI.  Of  the  Postulates  of  Pure  Practical  Reason  generally  348 

VII.  How  is  it  possible  to  conceive  an  Extension  of  Pure  Reason 
in  a  Practical  point  of  view ,  without  its  Knowledge  as  Specu¬ 
lative  being  enlarged  at  the  same  time?  349 

VIII.  Of  Belief  from  a  Requirement  of  Pure  Reason  353 

IX.  Of  the  Wise  Adaptation  of  Man’s  Cognitive  Faculties  to  his 
Practical  Destination  354 


PART  II. 

Methodology  of  Pure  Practical  Reason 
Conclusion 


356 

360 


289 


' 


PREFACE 


This  work  is  called  the  Critique  of  Practical 
Reason ,  not  of  the  pure  practical  reason,  al¬ 
though  its  parallelism  with  the  speculative  cri¬ 
tique  would  seem  to  require  the  latter  term.  The 
reason  of  this  appears  sufficiently  from  the 
treatise  itself.  Its  business  is  to  show  that  there 
is  pure  practical  reason ,  and  for  this  purpose  it 
criticizes  the  entire  practical  faculty  of  reason. 
If  it  succeeds  in  this,  it  has  no  need  to  criticize 
the  pure  faculty  itself  in  order  to  see  whether 
reason  in  making  such  a  claim  does  not  pre¬ 
sumptuously  overstep  itself  (as  is  the  case  with 
the  speculative  reason).  For  if,  as  pure  reason, 
it  is  actually  practical,  it  proves  its  own  reality 
and  that  of  its  concepts  by  fact,  and  all  disputa¬ 
tion  against  the  possibility  of  its  being  real  is 
futile. 

With  this  faculty,  transcendental  freedom  is 
also  established;  freedom,  namely,  in  that  ab¬ 
solute  sense  in  which  speculative  reason  re¬ 
quired  it  in  its  use  of  the  concept  of  causality 
in  order  to  escape  the  antinomy  into  which  it 
inevitably  falls,  when  in  the  chain  of  cause 
and  effect  it  tries  to  think  the  unconditioned. 
Speculative  reason  could  only  exhibit  this  con¬ 
cept  (of  freedom)  problematically  as  not  im¬ 
possible  to  thought,  without  assuring  it  any  ob¬ 
jective  reality,  and  merely  lest  the  supposed  im¬ 
possibility  of  what  it  must  at  least  allow  to  be 
thinkable  should  endanger  its  very  being  and 
plunge  it  into  an  abyss  of  scepticism. 

Inasmuch  as  the  reality  of  the  concept  of 
freedom  is  proved  by  an  apodeictic  law  of  prac¬ 
tical  reason,  it  is  the  keystone  of  the  whole 
system  of  pure  reason,  even  the  speculative,  and 
all  other  concepts  (those  of  God  and  immortal¬ 
ity)  which,  as  being  mere  ideas,  remain  in  it  un¬ 
supported,  now  attach  themselves  to  this  con¬ 
cept,  and  by  it  obtain  consistence  and  objective 
reality;  that  is  to  say,  their  possibility  is  proved 
by  the  fact  that  freedom  actually  exists,  for  this 
idea  is  revealed  by  the  moral  law. 

Freedom,  however,  is  the  only  one  of  all  the 
ideas  of  the  speculative  reason  of  which  we 
know  the  possibility  a  priori  (without,  however, 
understanding  it),  because  it  is  the  condition 
of  the  moral  law  which  we  know.1  The  ideas  of 

1  Lest  any  one  should  imagine  that  he  finds  an  incon- 


God  and  immortality ,  however,  are  not  condi¬ 
tions  of  the  moral  law,  but  only  conditions  of 
the  necessary  object  of  a  will  determined  by  this 
law;  that  is  to  say,  conditions  of  the  practical 
use  of  our  pure  reason.  Hence,  with  respect  to 
these  ideas,  we  cannot  affirm  that  we  know  and 
understand ,  I  will  not  say  the  actuality,  but 
even  the  possibility  of  them.  However  they  are 
the  conditions  of  the  application  of  the  morally 
determined  will  to  its  object,  which  is  given  to 
it  a  priori,  viz.,  the  summum  bonum.  Conse¬ 
quently  in  this  practical  point  of  view  their 
possibility  must  be  assumed,  although  we  can¬ 
not  theoretically  know  and  understand  it.  To 
justify  this  assumption  it  is  sufficient,  in  a 
practical  point  of  view,  that  they  contain  no 
intrinsic  impossibility  (contradiction).  Here 
we  have  what,  as  far  as  speculative  reason  is 
concerned,  is  a  merely  subjective  principle  of 
assent,  which,  however,  is  objectively  valid 
for  a  reason  equally  pure  but  practical,  and 
this  principle,  by  means  of  the  concept  of 
freedom,  assures  objective  reality  and  author¬ 
ity  to  the  ideas  of  God  and  immortality.  Nay, 
there  is  a  subjective  necessity  (a  need  of  pure 
reason)  to  assume  them.  Nevertheless  the  theo¬ 
retical  knowledge  of  reason  is  not  hereby  en¬ 
larged,  but  only  the  possibility  is  given,  which 
heretofore  was  merely  a  problem  and  now  be¬ 
comes  assertion,  and  thus  the  practical  use  of 
reason  is  connected  with  the  elements  of  theo¬ 
retical  reason.  And  this  need  is  not  a  merely 
hypothetical  one  for  the  arbitrary  purposes  of 
speculation,  that  we  must  assume  something  if 
we  wish  in  speculation  to  carry  reason  to  its 
utmost  limits,  but  it  is  a  need  which  has  the 
force  of  law  to  assume  something  without  which 
that  cannot  be  which  we  must  inevitably  set 
before  us  as  the  aim  of  our  action. 


sistency  here  when  I  call  freedom  the  condition  of  the 
moral  law,  and  hereafter  maintain  in  the  treatise  itself 
that  the  moral  law  is  the  condition  under  which  we  can 
first  become  conscious  of  freedom,  I  will  merely  remark 
that  freedom  is  the  ratio  essendi  of  the  moral  law,  while 
the  moral  law  is  the  ratio  cognosccndi  of  freedom.  For 
had  not  the  moral  law  been  previously  distinctly  thought 
in  our  reason,  we  should  never  consider  ourselves  justi¬ 
fied  in  assuming  such  a  thing  as  freedom,  although  it 
be  not  contradictory.  But  were  there  no  freedom  it 
would  be  impossible  to  trace  the  moral  law  in  ourselves 
at  all. 


2Q2  PREFACE  TO 

It  would  certainly  be  more  satisfactory  to  our 
speculative  reason  if  it  could  solve  these  prob¬ 
lems  for  itself  without  this  circuit  and  preserve 
the  solution  for  practical  use  as  a  thing  to  be 
referred  to,  but  in  fact  our  faculty  of  specula¬ 
tion  is  not  so  well  provided.  Those  who  boast 
of  such  high  knowledge  ought  not  to  keep  it 
back,  but  to  exhibit  it  publicly  that  it  may  be 
tested  and  appreciated.  They  want  to  prove: 
very  good,  let  them  prove;  and  the  critical  phi¬ 
losophy  lays  its  arms  at  their  feet  as  the  victors. 
Quid  statis?  Nolint.  Atqui  licet  esse  beatis.  As 
they  then  do  not  in  fact  choose  to  do  so,  prob¬ 
ably  because  they  cannot,  we  must  take  up 
these  arms  again  in  order  to  seek  in  the  mortal 
use  of  reason,  and  to  base  on  this,  the  notions  of 
God ,  freedom,  and  immortality ,  the  possibility 
of  which  speculation  cannot  adequately  prove. 

Here  first  is  explained  the  enigma  of  the  criti¬ 
cal  philosophy,  viz.:  how  we  deny  objective 
reality  to  the  supersensible  use  of  the  cate¬ 
gories  in  speculation  and  yet  admit  this  reality 
with  respect  to  the  objects  of  pure  practical 
reason.  This  must  at  first  seem  inconsistent  as 
long  as  this  practical  use  is  only  nominally 
known.  But  when,  by  a  thorough  analysis  of  it, 
one  becomes  aware  that  the  reality  spoken  of 
does  not  imply  any  theoretical  determination  of 
the  categories  and  extension  of  our  knowledge 
to  the  supersensible;  but  that  what  is  meant  is 
that  in  this  respect  an  object  belongs  to  them, 
because  either  they  are  contained  in  the  neces¬ 
sary  determination  of  the  will  a  priori,  or  are 
inseparably  connected  with  its  object;  then  this 
inconsistency  disappears,  because  the  use  we 
make  of  these  concepts  is  different  from  what 
speculative  reason  requires.  On  the  other  hand, 
there  now  appears  an  unexpected  and  very  sat¬ 
isfactory  proof  of  the  consistency  of  the  specu¬ 
lative  critical  philosophy.  For  whereas  it  in¬ 
sisted  that  the  objects  of  experience  as  such,  in¬ 
cluding  our  own  subject,  have  only  the  value 
of  phenomena,  while  at  the  same  time  things  in 
themselves  must  be  supposed  as  their  basis,  so 
that  not  everything  supersensible  was  to  be  re¬ 
garded  as  a  fiction  and  its  concept  as  empty;  so 
now  practical  reason  itself,  without  any  concert 
with  the  speculative,  assures  reality  to  a  super¬ 
sensible  object  of  the  category  of  causality,  viz., 
freedom,  although  (as  becomes  a  practical  con¬ 
cept)  only  for  practical  use;  and  this  establishes 
on  the  evidence  of  a  fact  that  which  in  the  for¬ 
mer  case  could  only  be  conceived.  By  this  the 
strange  but  certain  doctrine  of  the  speculative 
critical  philosophy,  that  the  thinking  subject  is 
to  itself  in  internal  intuition  only  a  phenom- 


CRITIQUE  OF 

enon,  obtains  in  the  critical  examination  of  the 
practical  reason  its  full  confirmation,  and  that 
so  thoroughly  that  we  should  be  compelled  to 
adopt  this  doctrine,  even  if  the  former  had  never 
proved  it  at  all.1 

By  this  also  I  can  understand  why  the  most 
considerable  objections  which  I  have  as  yet  met 
with  against  the  Critique  turn  about  these  two 
points,  namely,  on  the  one  side,  the  objective 
reality  of  the  categories  as  applied  to  noumena, 
which  is  in  the  theoretical  department  of  knowl¬ 
edge  denied,  in  the  practical  affirmed;  and  on 
the  other  side,  the  paradoxical  demand  to  regard 
oneself  qua  subject  of  freedom  as  a  noumenon. 
and  at  the  same  time  from  the  point  of  view  of 
physical  nature  as  a  phenomenon  in  one’s  own 
empirical  consciousness;  for  as  long  as  one  has 
formed  no  definite  notions  of  morality  and 
freedom,  one  could  not  conjecture  on  the  one 
side  what  was  intended  to  be  the  noumenon,  the 
basis  of  the  alleged  phenomenon,  and  on  the 
other  side  it  seemed  doubtful  whether  it  was  at 
all  possible  to  form  any  notion  of  it,  seeing  that 
we  had  previously  assigned  all  the  notions  of 
the  pure  understanding  in  its  theoretical  use  ex¬ 
clusively  to  phenomena.  Nothing  but  a  detailed 
criticism  of  the  practical  reason  can  remove  all 
this  misapprehension  and  set  in  a  clear  light 
the  consistency  which  constitutes  its  greatest 
merit. 

So  much  by  way  of  justification  of  the  pro¬ 
ceeding  by  which,  in  this  work,  the  notions  and 
principles  of  pure  speculative  reason  which 
have  already  undergone  their  special  critical  ex¬ 
amination  are,  now  and  then,  again  subjected  to 
examination.  This  would  not  in  other  cases  be 
in  accordance  with  the  systematic  process  by 
which  a  science  is  established,  since  matters 
which  have  been  decided  ought  only  to  be  cited 
and  not  again  discussed.  In  this  case,  however, 
it  was  not  only  allowable  but  necessary,  because 
reason  is  here  considered  in  transition  to  a  dif¬ 
ferent  use  of  these  concepts  from  what  it  had 
made  of  them  before.  Such  a  transition  neces¬ 
sitates  a  comparison  of  the  old  and  the  new 
usage,  in  order  to  distinguish  well  the  new  path 
from  the  old  one  and,  at  the  same  time,  to 
allow  their  connection  to  be  observed.  Accord¬ 
ingly  considerations  of  this  kind,  including  those 
which  are  once  more  directed  to  the  concept  of 

1  The  union  of  causality  as  freedom  with  causality  as 
rational  mechanism,  the  former  established  by  the  moral 
law,  the  latter  by  the  law  of  nature  in  the  same  sub¬ 
ject,  namely,  man,  is  impossible,  unless  we  conceive  him 
with  reference  to  the  former  as  a  being  in  himself,  and 
with  reference  to  the  latter  as  a  phenomenon — the  for¬ 
mer  in  pure  consciousness,  the  latter  in  empirical  con¬ 
sciousness.  Otherwise  reason  inevitably  contradicts  itself. 


PRACTICAL  REASON 


freedom  in  the  practical  use  of  the  pure  reason, 
must  not  be  regarded  as  an  interpolation  serv¬ 
ing  only  to  fill  up  the  gaps  in  the  critical  system 
of  speculative  reason  (for  this  is  for  its  own 
purpose  complete),  or  like  the  props  and  but¬ 
tresses  which  in  a  hastily  constructed  building 
are  often  added  afterwards;  but  as  true  mem¬ 
bers  which  make  the  connexion  of  the  system 
plain,  and  show  us  concepts,  here  presented  as 
real,  which  there  could  only  be  presented  prob¬ 
lematically.  This  remark  applies  especially  to 
the  concept  of  freedom,  respecting  which  one 
cannot  but  observe  with  surprise  that  so  many 
boast  of  being  able  to  understand  it  quite  well 
and  to  explain  its  possibility,  while  they  regard 
it  only  psychologically,  whereas  if  they  had 
studied  it  in  a  transcendental  point  of  view, 
they  must  have  recognized  that  it  is  not  only 
indispensable  as  a  problematical  concept,  in  the 
complete  use  of  speculative  reason,  but  also 
quite  incomprehensible ;  and  if  they  afterwards 
came  to  consider  its  practical  use,  they  must 
needs  have  come  to  the  very  mode  of  determin¬ 
ing  the  principles  of  this,  to  which  they  are 
now  so  loth  to  assent.  The  concept  of  freedom 
is  the  stone  of  stumbling  for  all  empiricists, 
but  at  the  same  time  the  key  to  the  loftiest 
practical  principles  for  critical  moralists,  who 
perceive  by  its  means  that  they  must  nec¬ 
essarily  proceed  by  a  rational  method.  For  this 
reason  I  beg  the  reader  not  to  pass  lightly  over 
what  is  said  of  this  concept  at  the  end  of  the 
Analytic. 

I  must  leave  it  to  those  who  are  acquainted 
with  works  of  this  kind  to  judge  whether  such 
a  system  as  that  of  the  practical  reason,  which 
is  here  developed  from  the  critical  examination 
of  it,  has  cost  much  or  little  trouble,  especially 
in  seeking  not  to  miss  the  true  point  of  view 
from  which  the  whole  can  be  rightly  sketched. 
It  presupposes,  indeed,  the  Fundamental  Prin¬ 
ciples  of  the  Metaphysic  of  Morals ,  but  only 
in  so  far  as  this  gives  a  preliminary  acquaint¬ 
ance  with  the  principle  of  duty,  and  assigns  and 
justifies  a  definite  formula  thereof;  in  other  re¬ 
spects  it  is  independent.1  It  results  from  the 

1  A  reviewer  who  wanted  to  find  some  fault  with  this 
work  has  hit  the  truth  better,  perhaps,  than  he  thought, 
when  he  says  that  no  new  principle  of  morality  is  set 
forth  in  it,  but  only  a  new  formula.  But  who  would 
think  of  introducing  a  new  principle  of  all  morality  and 
making  himself  as  it  were  the  first  discoverer  of  it,  just 
as  if  all  the  world  before  him  were  ignorant  what  duty 
was  or  had  been  in  thorough-going  error?  But  whoever 
knows  of  what  importance  to  a  mathematician  a  for¬ 
mula  is,  which  defines  accurately  what  is  to  be  done  to 
work  a  problem,  will  not  think  that  a  formula  is  insig¬ 
nificant  and  useless  which  does  the  same  for  all  duty  in 
general. 


nature  of  this  practical  faculty  itself  that  the 
complete  classification  of  all  practical  sciences 
cannot  be  added,  as  in  the  critique  of  the  specu¬ 
lative  reason.  For  it  is  not  possible  to  define  duties 
specially,  as  human  duties,  with  a  view  to  their 
classification,  until  the  subject  of  this  definition 
(viz.,  man)  is  known  according  to  his  actual 
nature,  at  least  so  far  as  is  necessary  with  re¬ 
spect  to  duty;  this,  however,  does  not  belong  to 
a  critical  examination  of  the  practical  reason, 
the  business  of  which  is  only  to  assign  in  a 
complete  manner  the  principles  of  its  possibil¬ 
ity,  extent,  and  limits,  without  special  reference 
to  human  nature.  The  classification  then  be¬ 
longs  to  the  system  of  science,  not  to  the  system 
of  criticism. 

In  the  second  part  of  the  Analytic  I  have 
given,  as  I  trust,  a  sufficient  answer  to  the  ob¬ 
jection  of  a  truth-loving  and  acute  critic2  of 
the  Fundamental  Principles  of  the  Metaphysic 
of  Morals — a  critic  always  worthy  of  respect — 
the  objection,  namely,  that  the  notion  of  good 
was  not  established  before  the  moral  princi¬ 
ple ,  as  he  thinks  it  ought  to  have  been.3  I  have 

2  [See  Kant’s  “Das  mag  in  der  Theorie  richtig  seyn 
etc.  Werke,  vol.  vii,  p.  182.] 

3  It  might  also  have  been  objected  to  me  that  I  have 
not  first  defined  the  notion  of  the  faculty  of  desire ,  or  of 
the  feeling  of  pleasure ,  although  this  reproach  would  be 
unfair,  because  this  definition  might  reasonably  be  pre¬ 
supposed  as  given  in  psychology.  However,  the  defini¬ 
tion  there  given  might  be  such  as  to  found  the  deter¬ 
mination  of  the  faculty  of  desire  on  the  feeling  of  pleas¬ 
ure  (as  is  commonly  done),  and  thus  the  supreme  prin¬ 
ciple  of  practical  philosophy  would  be  necessarily  made 
empirical ,  which,  however,  remains  to  be  proved  and  in 
this  critique  is  altogether  refuted.  It  will,  therefore,  give 
this  definition  here  in  such  a  manner  as  it  ought  to  be 
given,  in  order  to  leave  this  contested  point  open  at  the 
beginning,  as  it  should  be.  Life  is  the  faculty  a  being 
has  of  acting  according  to  laws  of  the  faculty  of  desire. 
The  faculty  of  Desire  is  the  being’s  faculty  of  becom¬ 
ing  by  means  of  its  ideas  the  cause  of  the  actual  exist¬ 
ence  of  the  objects  of  these  ideas.  Pleasure  is  the  idea 
of  the  agreement  of  the  object,  or  the  action  with  the 
subjective  conditions  of  life,  i.e.,  with  the  faculty  of 
causality  of  an  idea  in  respect  of  the  actuality  of  its  ob¬ 
ject  (or  with  the  determination  of  the  forces  of  the  sub¬ 
ject  to  action  which  produces  it).  I  have  no  further  need 
for  the  purposes  of  this  critique  of  notions  borrowed 
from  psychology;  the  critique  itself  supplies  the  rest.  It 
is  easily  seen  that  the  question  whether  the  faculty  of 
desire  is  always  based  on  pleasure,  or  whether  under 
certain  conditions  pleasure  only  follows  the  determina¬ 
tion  of  desire,  is  by  this  definition  left  undecided,  for 
it  is  composed  only  of  terms  belonging  to  the  pure  un¬ 
derstanding,  i.e.,  of  categories  which  contain  nothing 
empirical.  Such  precaution  is  very  desirable  in  all  phi¬ 
losophy  and  yet  is  often  neglected;  namely,  not  to  pre¬ 
judge  questions  by  adventuring  definitions  before  the 
notion  has  been  completely  analysed,  which  is  often 
very  late.  It  may  be  observed  through  the  whole  course 
of  the  critical  philosophy  (of  the  theoretical  as  well  as 
the  practical  reason)  that  frequent  opportunity  offers  of 
supplying  defects  in  the  old  dogmatic  method  of  phi¬ 
losophy,  and  of  correcting  errors  which  are  not  observed 
until  we  make  such  rational  use  of  these  notions  view¬ 
ing  them  as  a  whole . 


2Q4  PREFACE  TO 

also  had  regard  to  many  of  the  objections  which 
have  reached  me  from  men  who  show  that  they 
have  at  heart  the  discovery  of  the  truth,  and  I 
shall  continue  to  do  so  (for  those  who  have  only 
their  old  system  before  their  eyes,  and  who  have 
already  settled  what  is  to  be  approved  or  dis¬ 
approved,  do  not  desire  any  explanation  which 
might  stand  in  the  way  of  their  own  private 
opinion.) 

When  we  have  to  study  a  particular  faculty 
of  the  human  mind  in  its  sources,  its  content, 
and  its  limits;  then  from  the  nature  of  human 
knowledge  we  must  begin  with  its  parts ,  with 
an  accurate  and  complete  exposition  of  them; 
complete,  namely,  so  far  as  is  possible  in  the 
present  state  of  our  knowledge  of  its  elements. 
But  there  is  another  thing  to  be  attended  to 
which  is  of  a  more  philosophical  and  architec¬ 
tonic  character,  namely,  to  grasp  correctly  the 
idea  of  the  whole ,  and  from  thence  to  get  a  view 
of  all  those  parts  as  mutually  related  by  the  aid 
of  pure  reason,  and  by  means  of  their  derivation 
from  the  concept  of  the  whole.  This  is  only  pos¬ 
sible  through  the  most  intimate  acquaintance 
with  the  system;  and  those  who  find  the  first 
inquiry  too  troublesome,  and  do  not  think  it 
worth  their  while  to  attain  such  an  acquaintance, 
cannot  reach  the  second  stage,  namely,  the  gen¬ 
eral  view,  which  is  a  synthetical  return  to  that 
which  had  previously  been  given  analytically. 
It  is  no  wonder  then  if  they  find  inconsistencies 
everywhere,  although  the  gaps  which  these  in¬ 
dicate  are  not  in  the  system  itself,  but  in  their 
own  incoherent  train  of  thought. 

I  have  no  fear,  as  regards  this  treatise,  of  the 
reproach  that  I  wish  to  introduce  a  new  lan¬ 
guage ,  since  the  sort  of  knowledge  here  in  ques¬ 
tion  has  itself  somewhat  of  an  everyday  char¬ 
acter.  Nor  even  in  the  case  of  the  former  cri¬ 
tique  could  this  reproach  occur  to  anyone  who 
had  thought  it  through  and  not  merely  turned 
over  the  leaves.  To  invent  new  words  where  the 
language  has  no  lack  of  expressions  for  given 
notions  is  a  childish  effort  to  distinguish  oneself 
from  the  crowd,  if  not  by  new  and  true  thoughts, 
yet  by  new  patches  on  the  old  garment.  If, 
therefore,  the  readers  of  that  work  know  any 
more  familiar  expressions  which  are  as  suitable 
to  the  thought  as  those  seem  to  me  to  be,  or  if 
they  think  they  can  show  the  futility  of  these 
thoughts  themselves  and  hence  that  of  the  ex¬ 
pression,  they  would,  in  the  first  case,  very  much 
oblige  me,  for  I  only  desire  to  be  understood: 
and,  in  the  second  case,  they  would  deserve  well 
of  philosophy.  But,  as  long  as  these  thoughts 
stand,  I  very  much  doubt  that  suitable  and  yet 


CRITIQUE  OF 

more  common  expressions  for  them  can  be 
found.1 

In  this  manner,  then,  the  a  priori  principles 
of  two  faculties  of  the  mind,  the  faculty  of 
cognition  and  that  of  desire,  would  be  found 
and  determined  as  to  the  conditions,  extent,  and 
limits  of  their  use,  and  thus  a  sure  foundation 
be  paid  for  a  scientific  system  of  philosophy, 
both  theoretic  and  practical. 

Nothing  worse  could  happen  to  these  labours 
than  that  anyone  should  make  the  unexpected 
discovery  that  there  neither  is,  nor  can  be,  any 
a  priori  knowledge  at  all.  But  there  is  no  danger 
of  this.  This  would  be  the  same  thing  as  if  one 
sought  to  prove  by  reason  that  there  is  no  rea¬ 
son.  For  we  only  say  that  we  know  something 
by  reason,  when  we  are  conscious  that  we  could 
have  known  it,  even  if  it  had  not  been  given  to 
us  in  experience;  hence  rational  knowledge  and 

1  I  am  more  afraid  in  the  present  treatise  of  occa¬ 
sional  misconception  in  respect  of  some  expressions 
which  I  have  chosen  with  the  greatest  care  in  order  that 
the  notion  to  which  they  point  may  not  be  missed. 
Thus,  in  the  table  of  categories  of  the  practical  reason 
under  the  title  of  Modality ,  the  permitted ,  and  forbid¬ 
den  (in  a  practical  objective  point  of  view,  possible  and 
impossible)  have  almost  the  same  meaning  in  common 
language  as  the  next  category,  duty  and  contrary  to 
duty.  Here,  however,  the  former  means  what  coincides 
with,  or  contradicts,  a  merely  possible  practical  precept 
(for  example,  the  solution  of  all  problems  of  geometry 
and  mechanics);  the  latter ,  what  is  similarly  related  to 
a  law  actually  present  in  the  reason;  and  this  distinc¬ 
tion  is  not  quite  foreign  even  to  common  language,  al¬ 
though  somewhat  unusual.  For  example,  it  is  forbidden 
to  an  orator,  as  such,  to  forge  new  words  or  construc¬ 
tions;  in  a  certain  degree  this  is  permitted  to  a  poet;  in 
neither  case  is  there  any  question  of  duty.  For  if  any¬ 
one  chooses  to  forfeit  his  reputation  as  an  orator,  no 
one  can  prevent  him.  We  have  here  only  to  do  with  the 
distinction  of  imperatives  into  problematical ,  asserto- 
rial,  and  apodeictic.  Similarly  in  the  note  in  which  I  have 
compared  the  moral  ideas  of  practical  perfection  in  dif¬ 
ferent  philosophical  schools,  I  have  distinguished  the 
idea  of  wisdom  from  that  of  holiness ,  although  I  have 
stated  that  essentially  and  objectively  they  are  the  same. 
But  in  that  place  I  understand  by  the  former  only  that 
wisdom  to  which  man  (the  Stoic)  lays  claim;  therefore 
I  take  it  subjectively  as  an  attribute  alleged  to  belong  to 
man.  (Perhaps  the  expression  virtue,  with  which  also 
the  Stoic  made  great  show,  would  better  mark  the  char¬ 
acteristic  of  his  school.)  The  expression  of  a  postulate 
of  pure  practical  reason  might  give  most  occasion  to 
misapprehension  in  case  the  reader  confounded  it  with 
the  signification  of  the  postulates  in  pure  mathematics, 
which  carry  apodeictic  certainty  with  them.  These,  how¬ 
ever,  postulate  the  possibility  of  an  action,  the  object  of 
which  has  been  previously  recognized  a  priori  in  theory 
as  possible,  and  that  with  perfect  certainty.  But  the  for¬ 
mer  postulates  the  possibility  of  an  object  itself  (God 
and  the  immortality  of  the  soul)  from  apodeictic  practi¬ 
cal  laws,  and  therefore  only  for  the  purposes  of  a  practi¬ 
cal  reason.  This  certainty  of  the  postulated  possibility 
then  is  not  at  all  theoretic,  and  consequently  not  apo¬ 
deictic;  that  is  to  say,  it  is  not  a  known  necessity  as  re¬ 
gards  the  object,  but  a  necessary  supposition  as  regards 
the  subject,  necessary  for  the  obedience  to  its  objective 
but  practical  laws.  It  is,  therefore,  merely  a  necessary 
hypothesis.  I  could  find  no  better  expression  for  this  ra¬ 
tional  necessity,  which  is  subjective,  but  yet  true  and 
unconditional. 


PRACTICAL  REASON 


knowledge  a  priori  are  one  and  the  same.  It  is 
a  clear  contradiction  to  try  to  extract  neces¬ 
sity  from  a  principle  of  experience  (ex  pumice 
aquam),  and  to  try  by  this  to  give  a  judgement 
true  universality  (without  which  there  is  no  ra¬ 
tional  inference,  not  even  inference  from  anal¬ 
ogy,  which  is  at  least  a  presumed  universality 
and  objective  necessity).  To  substitute  subjec¬ 
tive  necessity,  that  is,  custom,  for  objective, 
which  exists  only  in  a  priori  judgements,  is  to 
deny  to  reason  the  power  of  judging  about  the 
object,  i.e.,  of  knowing  it,  and  what  belongs  to 
it.  It  implies,  for  example,  that  we  must  not  say 
of  something  which  often  or  always  follows  a 
certain  antecedent  state  that  we  can  conclude 
from  this  to  that  (for  this  would  imply  objective 
necessity  and  the  notion  of  an  a  priori  connex¬ 
ion),  but  only  that  we  may  expect  similar  cases 
(just  as  animals  do),  that  is, that  we  reject  the  no¬ 
tion  of  cause  altogether  as  false  and  a  mere  delu¬ 
sion.  As  to  attempting  to  remedy  this  want  of 
objective  and  consequently  universal  validity  by 
saying  that  we  can  see  no  ground  for  attributing 
any  other  sort  of  knowledge  to  other  rational 
beings,  if  this  reasoning  were  valid,  our  igno¬ 
rance  would  do  more  for  the  enlargement  of  our 
knowledge  than  all  our  meditation.  For,  then, 
on  this  very  ground  that  we  have  no  knowledge 
of  any  other  rational  beings  besides  man,  we 
should  have  a  right  to  suppose  them  to  be  of 
the  same  nature  as  we  know  ourselves  to  be: 
that  is,  we  should  really  know  them.  I  omit  to 
mention  that  universal  assent  does  not  prove 
the  objective  validity  of  a  judgement  (i.e.,  its 
validity  as  a  cognition),  and  although  this  uni¬ 
versal  assent  should  accidentally  happen,  it 
could  furnish  no  proof  of  agreement  with  the 
object;  on  the  contrary,  it  is  the  objective  va¬ 
lidity  which  alone  constitutes  the  basis  of  a  nec¬ 
essary  universal  consent. 

Hume  would  be  quite  satisfied  with  this  sys¬ 
tem  of  universal  empiricism,  for,  as  is  well 
known,  he  desired  nothing  more  than  that,  in¬ 
stead  of  ascribing  any  objective  meaning  to  the 
necessity  in  the  concept  of  cause,  a  merely  sub¬ 
jective  one  should  be  assumed,  viz.,  custom,  in 


order  to  deny  that  reason  could  judge  about 
God,  freedom,  and  immortality;  and  if  once  his 
principles  were  granted,  he  was  certainly  well 
able  to  deduce  his  conclusions  therefrom,  with 
all  logical  coherence.  But  even  Hume  did  not 
make  his  empiricism  so  universal  as  to  include 
mathematics.  He  holds  the  principles  of  mathe¬ 
matics  to  be  analytical;  and  if  his  were  correct, 
they  would  certainly  be  apodeictic  also:  but  we 
could  not  infer  from  this  that  reason  has  the 
faculty  of  forming  apodeictic  judgements  in 
philosophy  also — that  is  to  say,  those  which  are 
synthetical  judgements,  like  the  judgement  of 
causality.  But  if  we  adopt  a  universal  empiri¬ 
cism,  then  mathematics  will  be  included. 

Now  if  this  science  is  in  contradiction  with 
a  reason  that  admits  only  empirical  principles, 
as  it  inevitably  is  in  the  antinomy  in  which 
mathematics  prove  the  infinite  divisibility  of 
space,  which  empiricism  cannot  admit;  then  the 
greatest  possible  evidence  of  demonstration  is 
in  manifest  contradiction  with  the  alleged  con¬ 
clusions  from  experience,  and  we  are  driven  to 
ask,  like  Cheselden’s  blind  patient,  “Which  de¬ 
ceives  me,  sight  or  touch?”  (for  empiricism  is 
based  on  a  necessity  felt ,  rationalism  on  a  ne¬ 
cessity  seen).  And  thus  universal  empiricism 
reveals  itself  as  absolute  scepticism.  It  is  er¬ 
roneous  to  attribute  this  in  such  an  unqualified 
sense  to  Hume,1  since  he  left  at  least  one  cer¬ 
tain  touchstone  (which  can  only  be  found  in  a 
priori  principles),  although  experience  consists 
not  only  of  feelings,  but  also  of  judgements. 

However,  as  in  this  philosophical  and  critical 
age  such  empiricism  can  scarcely  be  serious,  and 
it  is  probably  put  forward  only  as  an  intellectual 
exercise  and  for  the  purpose  of  putting  in  a 
clearer  light,  by  contrast,  the  necessity  of  ra¬ 
tional  a  priori  principles,  we  can  only  be  grate¬ 
ful  to  those  who  employ  themselves  in  this  oth¬ 
erwise  uninstructive  labour. 

1  Names  that  designate  the  followers  of  a  sect  have 
always  been  accompanied  with  much  injustice:  just  as 
if  one  said,  “N  is  an  Idealist.”  For  although  he  not  only 
admits,  but  even  insists,  that  our  ideas  of  external 
things  have  actual  objects  of  external  things  correspond¬ 
ing  to  them,  yet  he  holds  that  the  form  of  the  intuition 
does  not  depend  on  them  but  on  the  human  mind. 


INTRODUCTION 


Of  the  Idea  of  a  Critique  of  Practical  Reason 


The  theoretical  use  of  reason  was  concerned 
with  objects  of  the  cognitive  faculty  only,  and 
a  critical  examination  of  it  with  reference  to 
this  use  applied  properly  only  to  the  pure  fac¬ 
ulty  of  cognition;  because  this  raised  the  suspi¬ 
cion,  which  was  afterwards  confirmed,  that  it 
might  easily  pass  beyond  its  limits,  and  be  lost 
among  unattainable  objects,  or  even  contradic¬ 
tory  notions.  It  is  quite  different  with  the  prac¬ 
tical  use  of  reason.  In  this,  reason  is  concerned 
with  the  grounds  of  determination  of  the  will, 
which  is  a  faculty  either  to  produce  objects 
corresponding  to  ideas,  or  to  determine  our¬ 
selves  to  the  effecting  of  such  objects  (whether 
the  physical  power  is  sufficient  or  not) ;  that  is, 
to  determine  our  causality.  For  here,  reason  can 
at  least  attain  so  far  as  to  determine  the  will, 
and  has  always  objective  reality  in  so  far  as  it 
is  the  volition  only  that  is  in  question.  The  first 
question  here  then  is  whether  pure  reason  of 
itself  alone  suffices  to  determine  the  will,  or 
whether  it  can  be  a  ground  of  determination 
only  as  dependent  on  empirical  conditions.  Now, 
here  there  comes  in  a  notion  of  causality  justi¬ 
fied  by  the  critique  of  the  pure  reason,  although 
not  capable  of  being  presented  empirically,  viz., 
that  of  freedom;  and  if  we  can  now  discover 
means  of  proving  that  this  property  does  in 
fact  belong  to  the  human  will  (and  so  to  the 
will  of  all  rational  beings),  then  it  will  not  only 
be  shown  that  pure  reason  can  be  practical,  but 
that  it  alone,  and  not  reason  empirically  lim¬ 
ited,  is  indubitably  practical;  consequently,  we 
shall  have  to  make  a  critical  examination,  not 
of  pure  practical  reason,  but  only  of  practical 
reason  generally.  For  when  once  pure  reason  is 
shown  to  exist,  it  needs  no  critical  examination. 
For  reason  itself  contains  the  standard  for  the 
critical  examination  of  every  use  of  it.  The 
critique,  then,  of  practical  reason  generally  is 
bound  to  prevent  the  empirically  conditioned 


reason  from  claiming  exclusively  to  furnish  the 
ground  of  determination  of  the  will.  If  it  is 
proved  that  there  is  a  [practical]  reason,  its  em¬ 
ployment  is  alone  immanent;  the  empirically 
conditioned  use,  which  claims  supremacy,  is  on 
the  contrary  transcendent  and  expresses  itself 
in  demands  and  precepts  which  go  quite  beyond 
its  sphere.  This  is  just  the  opposite  of  what 
might  be  said  of  pure  reason  in  its  speculative 
employment. 

However,  as  it  is  still  pure  reason,  the  knowl¬ 
edge  of  which  is  here  the  foundation  of  its  prac¬ 
tical  employment,  the  general  outline  of  the 
classification  of  a  critique  of  practical  reason 
must  be  arranged  in  accordance  with  that  of 
the  speculative.  We  must,  then,  have  the  Ele¬ 
ments  and  the  Methodology  of  it;  and  in  the 
former  an  Analytic  as  the  rule  of  truth,  and  a 
Dialectic  as  the  exposition  and  dissolution  of 
the  illusion  in  the  judgements  of  practical  rea¬ 
son.  But  the  order  in  the  subdivision  of  the 
Analytic  will  be  the  reverse  of  that  in  the  cri¬ 
tique  of  the  pure  speculative  reason.  For,  in  the 
present  case,  we  shall  commence  with  the  prin¬ 
ciples  and  proceed  to  the  concepts,  and  only 
then,  if  possible,  to  the  senses;  whereas  in  the 
case  of  the  speculative  reason  we  began  with 
the  senses  and  had  to  end  with  the  principles. 
The  reason  of  this  lies  again  in  this:  that  now 
we  have  to  do  with  a  will,  and  have  to  consider 
reason,  not  in  its  relation  to  objects,  but  to  this 
will  and  its  causality.  We  must,  then,  begin  with 
the  principles  of  a  causality  not  empirically  con¬ 
ditioned,  after  which  the  attempt  can  be  made 
to  establish  our  notions  of  the  determining 
grounds  of  such  a  will,  of  their  application  to 
objects,  and  finally  to  the  subject  and  its  sense 
faculty.  We  necessarily  begin  with  the  law  of 
causality  from  freedom,  that  is,  with  a  pure 
practical  principle,  and  this  determines  the  ob¬ 
jects  to  which  alone  it  can  be  applied. 


296 


FIRST  PART 


ELEMENTS  OF  PURE  PRACTICAL  REASON 
Book  I.  The  Analytic  of  Pure  Practical  Reason 


Chapter  I  .Of  the  Principles  of  Pure  Practical 

Reason 

§  I.  Definition 

Practical  principles  are  propositions  which 
contain  a  general  determination  of  the  will,  hav¬ 
ing  under  it  several  practical  rules.  They  are 
subjective,  or  maxims ,  when  the  condition  is 
regarded  by  the  subject  as  valid  only  for  his 
own  will,  but  are  objective,  or  practical  laws , 
when  the  condition  is  recognized  as  objective, 
that  is,  valid  for  the  will  of  every  rational  being. 

REMARK 

Supposing  that  pure  reason  contains  in  itself 
a  practical  motive,  that  is,  one  adequate  to  de¬ 
termine  the  will,  then  there  are  practical  laws; 
otherwise  all  practical  principles  will  be  mere 
maxims.  In  case  the  will  of  a  rational  being  is 
pathologically  affected,  there  may  occur  a  con¬ 
flict  of  the  .maxims  with  the  practical  laws  rec¬ 
ognized  by  itself.  For  example,  one  may  make  it 
his  maxim  to  let  no  injury  pass  unrevenged,  and 
yet  he  may  see  that  this  is  not  a  practical  law, 
but  only  his  own  maxim;  that,  on  the  contrary, 
regarded  as  being  in  one  and  the  same  maxim 
a  rule  for  the  will  of  every  rational  being,  it 
must  contradict  itself.  In  natural  philosophy 
the  principles  of  what  happens,  e.g.,  the  prin¬ 
ciple  of  equality  of  action  and  reaction  in  the 
communication  of  motion)  are  at  the  same  time 
laws  of  nature;  for  the  use  of  reason  there  is 
theoretical  and  determined  by  the  nature  of  the 
object.  In  practical  philosophy,  i.e.,  that  which 
has  to  do  only  with  the  grounds  of  determina¬ 
tion  of  the  will,  the  principles  which  a  man 
makes  for  himself  are  not  laws  by  which  one  is 
inevitably  bound;  because  reason  in  practical 
matters  has  to  do  with  the  subject,  namely, 
with  the  faculty  of  desire,  the  special  character 
of  which  may  occasion  variety  in  the  rule.  The 
practical  rule  is  always  a  product  of  reason,  be¬ 
cause  it  prescribes  action  as  a  means  to  the  ef¬ 
fect.  But  in  the  case  of  a  being  with  whom  rea¬ 
son  does  not  of  itself  determine  the  will,  this 
rule  is  an  imperative,  i.e.,  a  rule  characterized 
by  “shall,”  which  expresses  the  objective  neces- 


sitation  of  the  action  and  signifies  that,  if  rea¬ 
son  completely  determined  the  will,  the  action 
would  inevitably  take  place  according  to  this 
rule.  Imperatives,  therefore,  are  objectively  val¬ 
id,  and  are  quite  distinct  from  maxims,  which 
are  subjective  principles.  The  former  either  de¬ 
termine  the  conditions  of  the  causality  of  the 
rational  being  as  an  efficient  cause,  i.e.,  merely 
in  reference  to  the  effect  and  the  means  of 
attaining  it;  or  they  determine  the  will  only, 
whether  it  is  adequate  to  the  effect  or  not.  The 
former  would  be  hypothetical  imperatives,  and 
contain  mere  precepts  of  skill;  the  latter,  on  the 
contrary,  would  be  categorical,  and  would  alone 
be  practical  laws.  Thus  maxims  are  principles, 
but  not  imperatives.  Imperatives  themselves, 
however,  when  they  are  conditional  (i.e.,  do  not 
determine  the  will  simply  as  will,  but  only  in 
respect  to  a  desired  effect,  that  is,  when  they 
are  hypothetical  imperatives),  are  practical  pre¬ 
cepts  but  not  laws.  Laws  must  be  sufficient  to 
determine  the  will  as  will,  even  before  I  ask 
whether  I  have  power  sufficient  for  a  desired 
effect,  or  the  means  necessary  to  produce  it; 
hence  they  are  categorical:  otherwise  they  are 
not  laws  at  all,  because  the  necessity  is  wanting, 
which,  if  it  is  to  be  practical,  must  be  independ¬ 
ent  of  conditions  which  are  pathological  and  are 
therefore  only  contingently  connected  with  the 
will.  Tell  a  man,  for  example,  that  he  must  be 
industrious  and  thrifty  in  youth,  in  order  that 
he  may  not  want  in  old  age;  this  is  a  correct 
and  important  practical  precept  of  the  will.  But 
it  is  easy  to  see  that  in  this  case  the  will  is  di¬ 
rected  to  something  else  which  it  is  presupposed 
that  it  desires;  and  as  to  this  desire,  we  must 
leave  it  to  the  actor  himself  whether  he  looks 
forward  to  other  resources  than  those  of  his 
own  acquisition,  or  does  not  expect  to  be  old,  or 
thinks  that  in  case  of  future  necessity  he  will  be 
able  to  make  shift  with  little.  Reason,  from 
which  alone  can  spring  a  rule  involving  ne¬ 
cessity,  does,  indeed,  give  necessity  to  this 
precept  (else  it  would  not  be  an  imperative), 
but  this  is  a  necessity  dependent  on  subjec- 


CRITIQUE  OF 


298 

tive  conditions,  and  cannot  be  supposed  in 
the  same  degree  in  all  subjects.  But  that  rea¬ 
son  may  give  laws  it  is  necessary  that  it  should 
only  need  to  presuppose  itself ,  because  rules 
are  objectively  and  universally  valid  only 
when  they  hold  without  any  contingent  subjec¬ 
tive  conditions,  which  distinguish  one  rational 
being  from  another.  Now  tell  a  man  that  he 
should  never  make  a  deceitful  promise,  this  is  a 
rule  which  only  concerns  his  will,  whether  the 
purposes  he  may  have  can  be  attained  thereby 
or  not;  it  is  the  volition  only  which  is  to  be  de¬ 
termined  a  priori  by  that  rule.  If  now  it  is  found 
that  this  rule  is  practically  right,  then  it  is  a 
law,  because  it  is  a  categorical  imperative.  Thus, 
practical  laws  refer  to  the  will  only,  without 
considering  what  is  attained  by  its  causality, 
and  we  may  disregard  this  latter  (as  belonging 
to  the  world  of  sense)  in  order  to  have  them 
quite  pure. 

§  II.  Theorem  I 

All  practical  principles  which  presuppose  an 
object  (matter)  of  the  faculty  of  desire  as  the 
ground  of  determination  of  the  will  are  empiri¬ 
cal  and  can  furnish  no  practical  laws. 

By  the  matter  of  the  faculty  of  desire  I  mean 
an  object  the  realization  of  which  is  desired. 
Now,  if  the  desire  for  this  object  precedes  the 
practical  rule  and  is  the  condition  of  our  making 
it  a  principle,  then  I  say  {in  the  first  place )  this 
principle  is  in  that  case  wholly  empirical,  for 
then  what  determines  the  choice  is  the  idea  of 
an  object  and  that  relation  of  this  idea  to  the 
subject  by  which  its  faculty  of  desire  is  deter¬ 
mined  to  its  realization.  Such  a  relation  to  the 
subject  is  called  the  pleasure  in  the  realization 
of  an  object.  This,  then,  must  be  presupposed 
as  a  condition  of  the  possibility  of  determina¬ 
tion  of  the  will.  But  it  is  impossible  to  know 
a  priori  of  any  idea  of  an  object  whether  it  will 
be  connected  with  pleasure  or  pain,  or  be  indif¬ 
ferent.  In  such  cases,  therefore,  the  determining 
principle  of  the  choice  must  be  empirical  and, 
therefore,  also  the  practical  material  principle 
which  presupposes  it  as  a  condition. 

In  the  second  place ,  since  susceptibility  to  a 
pleasure  or  pain  can  be  known  only  empirically 
and  cannot  hold  in  the  same  degree  for  all  ra¬ 
tional  beings,  a  principle  which  is  based  on  this 
subjective  condition  may  serve  indeed  as  a  max¬ 
im  for  the  subject  which  possesses  this  suscep¬ 
tibility,  but  not  as  a  law  even  to  him  (because 
it  is  wanting  in  objective  necessity,  which  must 
be  recognized  a  priori );  it  follows,  therefore, 


that  such  a  principle  can  never  furnish  a  practi¬ 
cal  law. 

§  III.  Theorem  II 

All  material  practical  principles  as  such  are 
of  one  and  the  same  kind  and  come  under  the 
general  principle  of  self-love  or  private  happi¬ 
ness. 

Pleasure  arising  from  the  idea  of  the  exist¬ 
ence  of  a  thing,  in  so  far  as  it  is  to  determine 
the  desire  of  this  thing,  is  founded  on  the  sus¬ 
ceptibility  of  the  subject,  since  it  depends  on  the 
presence  of  an  object;  hence  it  belongs  to  sense 
(feeling),  and  not  to  understanding,  which  ex¬ 
presses  a  relation  of  the  idea  to  an  object  ac¬ 
cording  to  concepts,  not  to  the  subject  accord¬ 
ing  to  feelings.  It  is,  then,  practical  only  in  so 
far  as  the  faculty  of  desire  is  determined  by  the 
sensation  of  agreeableness  which  the  subject  ex¬ 
pects  from  the  actual  existence  of  the  object. 
Now,  a  rational  being’s  consciousness  of  the 
pleasantness  of  life  uninterruptedly  accom¬ 
panying  his  whole  existence  is  happiness;  and 
the  principle  which  makes  this  the  supreme 
ground  of  determination  of  the  will  is  the  prin¬ 
ciple  of  self-love.  All  material  principles,  then, 
which  place  the  determining  ground  of  the  will 
in  the  pleasure  or  pain  to  be  received  from  the 
existence  of  any  object  are  all  of  the  same  kind, 
inasmuch  as  they  all  belong  to  the  principle  of 
self-love  or  private  happiness. 

COROLLARY 

All  material  practical  rules  place  the  deter¬ 
mining  principle  of  the  will  in  the  lower  desires; 
and  if  there  were  no  purely  formal  laws  of  the 
will  adequate  to  determine  it,  then  we  could  not 
admit  any  higher  desire  at  all. 

remark  1 

It  is  surprising  that  men,  otherwise  acute,  can 
think  it  possible  to  distinguish  between  higher 
and  lower  desires ,  according  as  the  ideas  which 
are  connected  with  the  feeling  of  pleasure  have 
their  origin  in  the  senses  or  in  the  understand¬ 
ing;  for  when  we  inquire  what  are  the  determin¬ 
ing  grounds  of  desire,  and  place  them  in  some 
expected  pleasantness,  it  is  of  no  consequence 
whence  the  idea  of  this  pleasing  object  is  de¬ 
rived,  but  only  how  much  it  pleases.  Whether  an 
idea  has  its  seat  and  source  in  the  understanding 
or  not,  if  it  can  only  determine  the  choice  by 
presupposing  a  feeling  of  pleasure  in  the  sub¬ 
ject,  it  follows  that  its  capability  of  determin¬ 
ing  the  choice  depends  altogether  on  the  nature 
of  the  inner  sense,  namely,  that  this  can  be  agree¬ 
ably  affected  by  it.  However  dissimilar  ideas 


PRACTICAL  REASON 


of  objects  may  be,  though  they  be  ideas  of  the 
understanding,  or  even  of  the  reason  in  contrast 
to  ideas  of  sense,  yet  the  feeling  of  pleasure,  by 
means  of  which  they  constitute  the  determining 
principle  of  the  will  (the  expected  satisfaction 
which  impels  the  activity  to  the  production  of 
the  object),  is  of  one  and  the  same  kind,  not 
only  inasmuch  as  it  can  only  be  known  empiri¬ 
cally,  but  also  inasmuch  as  it  affects  one  and 
the  same  vital  force  which  manifests  itself  in 
the  faculty  of  desire,  and  in  this  respect  can 
only  differ  in  degree  from  every  other  ground 
of  determination.  Otherwise,  how  could  we  com¬ 
pare  in  respect  of  magnitude  two  principles  of 
determination,  the  ideas  of  which  depend  upon 
different  faculties,  so  as  to  prefer  that  which 
affects  the  faculty  of  desire  in  the  highest  de¬ 
gree.  The  same  man  may  return  unread  an  in¬ 
structive  book  which  he  cannot  again  obtain,  in 
order  not  to  miss  a  hunt;  he  may  depart  in  the 
midst  of  a  fine  speech,  in  order  not  to  be  late 
for  dinner;  he  may  leave  a  rational  conversa¬ 
tion,  such  as  he  otherwise  values  highly,  to  take 
his  place  at  the  gaming-table ;  he  may  even  re¬ 
pulse  a  poor  man  whom  he  at  other  times  takes 
pleasure  in  benefiting,  because  he  has  only  just 
enough  money  in  his  pocket  to  pay  for  his  ad¬ 
mission  to  the  theatre.  If  the  determination  of 
his  will  rests  on  the  feeling  of  the  agreeableness 
or  disagreeableness  that  he  expects  from  any 
cause,  it  is’ all  the  same  to  him  by  what  sort  of 
ideas  he  will  be  affected.  The  only  thing  that 
concerns  him,  in  order  to  decide  his  choice,  is, 
how  great,  how  long  continued,  how  easily  ob¬ 
tained,  and  how  often  repeated,  this  agreeable¬ 
ness  is.  Just  as  to  the  man  who  wants  money  to 
spend,  it  is  all  the  same  whether  the  gold  was 
dug  out  of  the  mountain  or  washed  out  of  the 
sand,  provided  it  is  everywhere  accepted  at  the 
same  value;  so  the  man  who  cares  only  for  the 
enjoyment  of  life  does  not  ask  whether  the 
ideas  are  of  the  understanding  or  the  senses, 
but  only  how  much  and  how  great  pleasure  they 
will  give  for  the  longest  time.  It  is  only  those 
that  would  gladly  deny  to  pure  reason  the  power 
of  determining  the  will,  without  the  presupposi¬ 
tion  of  any  feeling,  who  could  deviate  so  far 
from  their  own  exposition  as  to  describe  as  quite 
heterogeneous  what  they  have  themselves  previ¬ 
ously  brought  under  one  and  the  same  principle. 
Thus,  for  example,  it  is  observed  that  we  can 
find  pleasure  in  the  mere  exercise  of  power,  in 
the  consciousness  of  our  strength  of  mind  in 
overcoming  obstacles  which  are  opposed  to  our 
designs,  in  the  culture  of  our  mental  talents, 


etc.;  and  we  justly  call  these  more  refined  pleas¬ 
ures  and  enjoyments,  because  they  are  more  in 
our  power  than  others;  they  do  not  wear  out, 
but  rather  increase  the  capacity  for  further  en¬ 
joyment  of  them,  and  while  they  delight  they 
at  the  same  time  cultivate.  But  to  say  on  this 
account  that  they  determine  the  will  in  a  differ¬ 
ent  way  and  not  through  sense,  whereas  the 
possibility  of  the  pleasure  presupposes  a  feeling 
for  it  implanted  in  us,  which  is  the  first  condi¬ 
tion  of  this  satisfaction;  this  is  just  as  when 
ignorant  persons  that  like  to  dabble  in  meta¬ 
physics  imagine  matter  so  subtle,  so  super- 
subtle  that  they  almost  make  themselves  giddy 
with  it,  and  then  think  that  in  this  way  they 
have  conceived  it  as  a  spiritual  and  yet  extended 
being.  If  with  Epicurus  we  make  virtue  deter¬ 
mine  the  will  only  by  means  of  the  pleasure  it 
promises,  we  cannot  afterwards  blame  him  for 
holding  that  this  pleasure  is  of  the  same  kind  as 
those  of  the  coarsest  senses.  For  we  have  no 
reason  whatever  to  charge  him  with  holding  that 
the  ideas  by  which  this  feeling  is  excited  in  us 
belong  merely  to  the  bodily  senses.  As  far  as 
can  be  conjectured,  he  sought  the  source  of 
many  of  them  in  the  use  of  the  higher  cognitive 
faculty,  but  this  did  not  prevent  him.  and  could 
not  prevent  him,  from  holding  on  the  principle 
above  stated,  that  the  pleasure  itself  which  those 
intellectual  ideas  give  us,  and  by  which  alone 
they  can  determine  the  will,  is  just  of  the  same 
kind.  Consistency  is  the  highest  obligation  of  a 
philosopher,  and  yet  the  most  rarely  found.  The 
ancient  Greek  schools  give  us  more  examples 
of  it  than  we  find  in  our  syncretistic  age,  in 
which  a  certain  shallow  and  dishonest  system  of 
compromise  of  contradictory  principles  is  de¬ 
vised,  because  it  commends  itself  better  to  a 
public  which  is  content  to  know  something  of 
everything  and  nothing  thoroughly,  so  as  to 
please  every  party. 

The  principle  of  private  happiness,  however 
much  understanding  and  reason  may  be  used  in 
it,  cannot  contain  any  other  determining  prin¬ 
ciples  for  the  will  than  those  which  belong  to 
the  lower  desires;  and  either  there  are  no  [high¬ 
er]  desires  at  all,  or  pure  reason  must  of  itself 
alone  be  practical;  that  is,  it  must  be  able  to 
determine  the  will  by  the  mere  form  of  the 
practical  rule  without  supposing  any  feeling, 
and  consequently  without  any  idea  of  the  pleas¬ 
ant  or  unpleasant,  which  is  the  matter  of  the 
desire,  and  which  is  always  an  empirical  condi¬ 
tion  of  the  principles.  Then  only,  when  reason 
of  itself  determines  the  will  (not  as  the  servant 


CRITIQUE  OF 


300 

of  the  inclination),  it  is  really  a  higher  desire  to 
which  that  which  is  pathologically  determined 
is  subordinate,  and  is  really,  and  even  specifical¬ 
ly,  distinct  from  the  latter,  so  that  even  the 
slightest  admixture  of  the  motives  of  the  latter 
impairs  its  strength  and  superiority;  just  as  in  a 
mathematical  demonstration  the  least  empirical 
condition  would  degrade  and  destroy  its  force 
and  value.  Reason,  with  its  practical  law,  de¬ 
termines  the  will  immediately,  not  by  means  of 
an  intervening  feeling  of  pleasure  or  pain,  not 
even  of  pleasure  in  the  law  itself,  and  it  is  only 
because  it  can,  as  pure  reason,  be  practical,  that 
it  is  possible  for  it  to  be  legislative. 

REMARK  II 

To  be  happy  is  necessarily  the  wish  of  every 
finite  rational  being,  and  this,  therefore,  is  in¬ 
evitably  a  determining  principle  of  its  faculty 
of  desire.  For  we  are  not  in  possession  originally 
of  satisfaction  with  our  whole  existence — a  bliss 
which  would  imply  a  consciousness  of  our  own 
independent  self-sufficiency — this  is  a  problem 
imposed  upon  us  by  our  own  finite  nature,  be¬ 
cause  we  have  wants  and  these  wants  regard  the 
matter  of  our  desires,  that  is,  something  that  is 
relative  to  a  subjective  feeling  of  pleasure  or 
pain,  which  determines  what  we  need  in  order 
to  be  satisfied  with  our  condition.  But  just  be¬ 
cause  this  material  principle  of  determination 
can  only  be  empirically  known  by  the  subject, 
it  is  impossible  to  regard  this  problem  as  a 
law;  for  a  law  being  objective  must  contain  the 
very  same  principle  of  determination  of  the  will 
in  all  cases  and  for  all  rational  beings.  For,  al¬ 
though  the  notion  of  happiness  is  in  every  case 
the  foundation  of  practical  relation  of  the  ob¬ 
jects  to  the  desires,  yet  it  is  only  a  general  name 
for  the  subjective  determining  principles,  and 
determines  nothing  specifically;  whereas  this  is 
what  alone  we  are  concerned  with  in  this  prac¬ 
tical  problem,  which  cannot  be  solved  at  all 
without  such  specific  determination.  For  it  is 
every  man’s  own  special  feeling  of  pleasure  and 
pain  that  decides  in  what  he  is  to  place  his  hap¬ 
piness,  and  even  in  the  same  subject  this  will 
vary  with  the  difference  of  his  wants  according 
as  this  feeling  changes,  and  thus  a  law  which  is 
subjectively  necessary  (as  a  law  of  nature)  is 
objectively  a  very  contingent  practical  princi¬ 
ple,  which  can  and  must  be  very  different  in 
different  subjects  and  therefore  can  never  fur¬ 
nish  a  law;  since,  in  the  desire  for  happiness  it 
is  not  the  form  (of  conformity  to  law)  that  is 
decisive,  but  simply  the  matter,  namely,  wheth¬ 
er  I  am  to  expect  pleasure  in  following  the  law, 
and  how  much.  Principles  of  self-love  may,  in¬ 


deed,  contain  universal  precepts  of  skill  (how 
to  find  means  to  accomplish  one’s  purpose),  but 
in  that  case  they  are  merely  theoretical  prin¬ 
ciples;1  as,  for  example,  how  he  who  would  like 
to  eat  bread  should  contrive  a  mill ;  but  practi¬ 
cal  precepts  founded  on  them  can  never  be  uni¬ 
versal,  for  the  determining  principle  of  the  de¬ 
sire  is  based  on  the  feeling  of  pleasure  and  pain, 
which  can  never  be  supposed  to  be  universally 
directed  to  the  same  objects. 

Even  supposing,  however,  that  all  finite  ra¬ 
tional  beings  were  thoroughly  agreed  as  to  what 
were  the  objects  of  their  feelings  of  pleasure 
and  pain,  and  also  as  to  the  means  which  they 
must  employ  to  attain  the  one  and  avoid  the 
other;  still,  they  could  by  no  means  set  up  the 
principle  of  self-love  as  a  practical  law,  for  this 
unanimity  itself  would  be  only  contingent.  The 
principle  of  determination  would  still  be  only 
subjectively  valid  and  merely  empirical,  and 
would  not  possess  the  necessity  which  is  con¬ 
ceived  in  every  law,  namely,  an  objective  ne¬ 
cessity  arising  from  a  priori  grounds;  unless, 
indeed,  we  hold  this  necessity  to  be  not  at  all 
practical,  but  merely  physical,  viz.,  that  our 
action  is  as  inevitably  determined  by  our  incli¬ 
nation,  as  yawning  when  we  see  others  yawn.  It 
would  be  better  to  maintain  that  there  are  no 
practical  laws  at  all,  but  only  counsels  for  the 
service  of  our  desires,  than  to  raise  merely  sub¬ 
jective  principles  to  the  rank  of  practical  laws, 
which  have  objective  necessity,  and  not  merely 
subjective,  and  which  must  be  known  by  reason 
a  priori ,  not  by  experience  (however  empirical¬ 
ly  universal  this  may  be).  Even  the  rules  of  cor¬ 
responding  phenomena  are  only  called  laws  of 
nature  (e.g.,  the  mechanical  laws),  when  we 
either  know  them  really  a  priori,  or  (as  in  the 
case  of  chemical  laws)  suppose  that  they  would 
be  known  a  priori  from  objective  grounds  if  our 
insight  reached  further.  But  in  the  case  of  mere¬ 
ly  subjective  practical  principles,  it  is  expressly 
made  a  condition  that  they  rest,  not  on  objec¬ 
tive,  but  on  subjective  conditions  of  choice,  and 
hence  that  they  must  always  be  represented  as 
mere  maxims,  never  as  practical  laws.  This  sec¬ 
ond  remark  seems  at  first  sight  to  be  mere  ver¬ 
bal  refinement,  but  it  defines  the  terms  of  the 
most  important  distinction  which  can  come  into 
consideration  in  practical  investigations. 

1  Propositions  which  in  mathematics  or  physics  are 
called  practical  ought  properly  to  be  called  technical. 
For  they  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  determination  of 
the  will;  they  only  point  out  how  a  certain  effect  is  to 
be  produced  and  are,  therefore,  just  as  theoretical  as 
any  propositions  which  express  the  connection  of  a 
cause  with  an  effect.  Now  whoever  chooses  the  effect 
must  also  choose  the  cause. 


PRACTICAL  REASON 


§  IV.  Theorem  III 

A  rational  being  cannot  regard  his  maxims  as 
practical  universal  laws,  unless  he  conceives 
them  as  principles  which  determine  the  will,  not 
by  their  matter,  but  by  their  form  only. 

By  the  matter  of  a  practical  principle  I  mean 
the  object  of  the  will.  This  object  is  either  the 
determining  ground  of  the  will  or  it  is  not.  In 
the  former  case  the  rule  of  the  will  is  subjected 
to  an  empirical  condition  (viz.,  the  relation  of 
the  determining  idea  to  the  feeling  of  pleasure 
and  pain),  consequently  it  can  not  be  a  practical 
law.  Now,  when  we  abstract  from  a  law  all  mat¬ 
ter,  i.e.,  every  object  of  the  will  (as  a  determin¬ 
ing  principle),  nothing  is  left  but  the  mere  form 
of  a  universal  legislation.  Therefore,  either  a 
rational  being  cannot  conceive  his  subjective 
practical  principles,  that  is,  his  maxims,  as  be¬ 
ing  at  the  same  time  universal  laws,  or  he  must 
suppose  that  their  mere  form,  by  which  they 
are  fitted  for  universal  legislation,  is  alone  what 
makes  them  practical  laws. 

REMARK 

The  commonest  understanding  can  distinguish 
without  instruction  what  form  of  maxim  is 
adapted  for  universal  legislation,  and  what  is 
not.  Suppose,  for  example,  that  I  have  made  it 
my  maxim  to  increase  my  fortune  by  every  safe 
means.  Now,  I  have  a  deposit  in  my  hands,  the 
owner  of  which  is  dead  and  has  left  no  writing 
about  it.  This  is  just  the  case  for  my  maxim.  I 
desire  then  to  know  whether  that  maxim  can 
also  hold  good  as  a  universal  practical  law.  I 
apply  it,  therefore,  to  the  present  case,  and  ask 
whether  it  could  take  the  form  of  a  law,  and 
consequently  whether  I  can  by  my  maxim  at  the 
same  time  give  such  a  law  as  this,  that  everyone 
may  deny  a  deposit  of  which  no  one  can  pro¬ 
duce  a  proof.  I  at  once  become  aware  that  such 
a  principle,  viewed  as  a  law,  would  annihilate 
itself,  because  the  result  would  be  that  there 
would  be  no  deposits.  A  practical  law  which  I 
recognise  as  such  must  be  qualified  for  univer¬ 
sal  legislation;  this  is  an  identical  proposition 
and,  therefore,  self-evident.  Now,  if  I  say  that 
my  will  is  subject  to  a  practical  law,  I  cannot 
adduce  my  inclination  (e.  g.,  in  the  present  case 
my  avarice)  as  a  principle  of  determination 
fitted  to  be  a  universal  practical  law;  for  this  is 
so  far  from  being  fitted  for  a  universal  legisla¬ 
tion  that,  if  put  in  the  form  of  a  universal  law, 
it  would  destroy  itself. 

It  is,  therefore,  surprising  that  intelligent 
men  could  have  thought  of  calling  the  desire 
of  happiness  a  universal  practical  law  on  the 


301 

ground  that  the  desire  is  universal,  and,  there¬ 
fore,  also  the  maxim  by  which  everyone  makes 
this  desire  determine  his  will.  For  whereas  in 
other  cases  a  universal  law  of  nature  makes 
everything  harmonious;  here,  on  the  contrary, 
if  we  attribute  to  the  maxim  the  universality  of 
a  law,  the  extreme  opposite  of  harmony  will 
follow,  the  greatest  opposition  and  the  complete 
destruction  of  the  maxim  itself  and  its  purpose. 
For,  in  that  case,  the  will  of  all  has  not  one  and 
the  same  object,  but  everyone  has  his  own  (his 
private  welfare),  which  may  accidentally  ac¬ 
cord  with  the  purposes  of  others  which  are 
equally  selfish,  but  it  is  far  from  sufficing  for  a 
law;  because  the  occasional  exceptions  which 
one  is  permitted  to  make  are  endless,  and  can¬ 
not  be  definitely  embraced  in  one  universal  rule. 
In  this  manner,  then,  results  a  harmony  like  that 
which  a  certain  satirical  poem  depicts  as  exist¬ 
ing  between  a  married  couple  bent  on  going  to 
ruin,  “0,  marvellous  harmony,  what  he  wishes, 
she  wishes  also”;  or  like  what  is  said  of  the 
pledge  of  Francis  I  to  the  Emperor  Charles  V, 
“What  my  brother  Charles  wishes  that  I  wish 
also”  (viz.,  Milan).  Empirical  principles  of  de¬ 
termination  are  not  fit  for  any  universal  exter¬ 
nal  legislation,  but  just  as  little  for  internal;  for 
each  man  makes  his  own  subject  the  foundation 
of  his  inclination,  and  in  the  same  subject  some¬ 
times  one  inclination,  sometimes  another,  has 
the  preponderance.  To  discover  a  law  which 
would  govern  them  all  under  this  condition, 
namely,  bringing  them  all  into  harmony,  is 
quite  impossible. 

§V.  Problem  I 

Supposing  that  the  mere  legislative  form  of 
maxims  is  alone  the  sufficient  determining  prin¬ 
ciple  of  a  will,  to  find  the  nature  of  the  will 
which  can  be  determined  by  it  alone. 

Since  the  bare  form  of  the  law  can  only  be 
conceived  by  reason,  and  is,  therefore,  not  an 
object  of  the  senses,  and  consequently  does  not 
belong  to  the  class  of  phenomena,  it  follows 
that  the  idea  of  it,  which  determines  the  will,  is 
distinct  from  all  the  principles  that  determine 
events  in  nature  according  to  the  law  of  causal¬ 
ity,  because  in  their  case  the  determining  prin¬ 
ciples  must  themselves  be  phenomena.  Now,  if 
no  other  determining  principle  can  serve  as  a 
law  for  the  will  except  that  universal  legislative 
form,  such  a  will  must  be  conceived  as  quite  in¬ 
dependent  of  the  natural  law  of  phenomena  in 
their  mutual  relation,  namely,  the  law  of  causal¬ 
ity;  such  independence  is  called  freedom  in  the 
strictest,  that  is,  in  the  transcendental,  sense; 


CRITIQUE  OF 


302 

consequently,  a  will  which  can  have  its  law  in 
nothing  but  the  mere  legislative  form  of  the 
maxim  is  a  free  will. 

§VL  Problem  II 

Supposing  that  a  will  is  free,  to  find  the  law 
which  alone  is  competent  to  determine  it  nec¬ 
essarily. 

Since  the  matter  of  the  practical  law,  i.e.,  an 
object  of  the  maxim,  can  never  be  given  other¬ 
wise  than  empirically,  and  the  free  will  is  inde¬ 
pendent  on  empirical  conditions  (that  is,  condi¬ 
tions  belonging  to  the  world  of  sense)  and  yet 
is  determinable,  consequently  a  free  will  must 
find  its  principle  of  determination  in  the  law, 
and  yet  independently  of  the  matter  of  the  law. 
But,  besides  the  matter  of  the  law,  nothing  is 
contained  in  it  except  the  legislative  form.  It  is 
the  legislative  form.  then,  contained  in  the  max¬ 
im,  which  can  alone  constitute  a  principle  of 
determination  of  the  [free]  will. 

REMARK 

Thus  freedom  and  an  unconditional  practical 
law  reciprocally  imply  each  other.  Now  I  do  not 
ask  here  whether  they  are  in  fact  distinct,  or 
whether  an  unconditioned  law  is  not  rather 
merely  the  consciousness  of  a  pure  practical 
reason  and  the  latter  identical  with  the  positive 
concept  of  freedom;  I  only  ask,  whence  begins 
our  knowledge  of  the  unconditionally  practical, 
whether  it  is  from  freedom  or  from  the  practi¬ 
cal  law?  Now  it  cannot  begin  from  freedom, 
for  of  this  we  cannot  be  immediately  conscious, 
since  the  first  concept  of  it  is  negative;  nor  can 
we  infer  it  from  experience,  for  experience  gives 
us  the  knowledge  only  of  the  law  of  phenomena, 
and  hence  of  the  mechanism  of  nature,  the  di¬ 
rect  opposite  of  freedom.  It  is  therefore  the 
moral  law,  of  which  we  become  directly  con¬ 
scious  (as  soon  as  we  trace  for  ourselves  max¬ 
ims  of  the  will),  that  first  presents  itself  to  us, 
and  leads  directly  to  the  concept  of  freedom, 
inasmuch  as  reason  presents  it  as  a  principle  of 
determination  not  to  be  outweighed  by  any  sen¬ 
sible  conditions,  nay,  wholly  independent  of 
them.  But  how  is  the  consciousness  of  that 
moral  law  possible?  We  can  become  conscious  of 
pure  practical  laws  just  as  we  are  conscious  of 
pure  theoretical  principles,  by  attending  to  the 
necessity  with  which  reason  prescribes  them 
and  to  the  elimination  of  all  empirical  condi¬ 
tions,  which  it  directs.  The  concept  of  a  pure 
will  arises  out  of  the  former,  as  that  of  a  pure 
understanding  arises  out  of  the  latter.  That  this 
is  the  true  subordination  of  our  concepts,  and 
that  it  is  morality  that  first  discovers  to  us  the 


notion  of  freedom,  hence  that  it  is  practical  rea¬ 
son  which,  with  this  concept,  first  proposes  to 
speculative  reason  the  most  insoluble  problem, 
thereby  placing  it  in  the  greatest  perplexity,  is 
evident  from  the  following  consideration:  Since 
nothing  in  phenomena  can  be  explained  by  the 
concept  of  freedom,  but  the  mechanism  of  na¬ 
ture  must  constitute  the  only  clue;  moreover, 
when  pure  reason  tries  to  ascend  in  the  series  of 
causes  to  the  unconditioned,  it  falls  into  an  an¬ 
tinomy  which  is  entangled  in  incomprehensibil¬ 
ities  on  the  one  side  as  much  as  the  other; 
whilst  the  latter  (namely,  mechanism)  is  at 
least  useful  in  the  explanation  of  phenomena, 
therefore  no  one  would  ever  have  been  so  rash 
as  to  introduce  freedom  into  science,  had  not 
the  moral  law,  and  with  it  practical  reason, 
come  in  and  forced  this  notion  upon  us.  Experi¬ 
ence.  however,  confirms  this  order  of  notions. 
Suppose  some  one  asserts  of  his  lustful  appetite 
that,  when  the  desired  object  and  the  opportu* 
nity  are  present,  it  is  quite  irresistible.  [Ask 
him] — if  a  gallows  were  erected  before  the 
house  where  he  finds  this  opportunity,  in  order 
that  he  should  be  hanged  thereon  immediately 
after  the  gratification  of  his  lust,  whether  he 
could  not  then  control  his  passion;  we  need  not 
be  long  in  doubt  what  he  would  reply.  Ask  him. 
however — if  his  sovereign  ordered  him,  on  pain 
of  the  same  immediate  execution,  to  bear  false 
witness  against  an  honourable  man,  whom  the 
prince  might  wish  to  destroy  under  a  plau¬ 
sible  pretext,  would  he  consider  it  possible  in 
that  case  to  overcome  his  love  of  life,  however 
great  it  may  be.  He  would  perhaps  not  venture 
to  affirm  whether  he  would  do  so  or  not,  but  he 
must  unhesitatingly  admit  that  it  is  possible  to 
do  so.  He  judges,  therefore,  that  he  can  do  a 
certain  thing  because  he  is  conscious  that  he 
ought,  and  he  recognizes  that  he  is  free — a  fact 
which  but  for  the  moral  law  he  would  never  have 
known. 

§  VII.  Fundamental  Law’  of  the  Pure 
Practical  Reason 

Act  so  that  the  maxim  of  thy  will  can  always 
at  the  same  time  hold  good  as  a  principle  of 
universal  legislation. 

REMARK 

Pure  geometry  has  postulates  which  are  prac¬ 
tical  propositions,  but  contain  nothing  further 
than  the  assumption  that  we  can  do  something 
if  it  is  required  that  we  should  do  it,  and  these 
are  the  only  geometrical  propositions  that  con¬ 
cern  actual  existence.  They  are,  then,  practical 
rules  under  a  problematical  condition  of  the 


PRACTICAL  REASON  303 


will;  but  here  the  rule  says:  We  absolutely  must 
proceed  in  a  certain  manner.  The  practical  rule 
is,  therefore,  unconditional,  and  hence  it  is  con¬ 
ceived  a  priori  as  a  categorically  practical  prop¬ 
osition  by  which  the  will  is  objectively  deter¬ 
mined  absolutely  and  immediately  (by  the  prac¬ 
tical  rule  itself,  which  thus  is  in  this  case  a 
law) ;  for  pure  reason  practical  of  itself  is  here 
directly  legislative.  The  will  is  thought  as  inde¬ 
pendent  on  empirical  conditions,  and,  therefore, 
as  pure  will  determined  by  the  mere  form  of 
the  law ,  and  this  principle  of  determination  is 
regarded  as  the  supreme  condition  of  all  max¬ 
ims.  The  thing  is  strange  enough,  and  has  no 
parallel  in  all  the  rest  of  our  practical  knowl¬ 
edge.  For  the  a  priori  thought  of  a  possible 
universal  legislation  which  is  therefore  merely 
problematical,  is  unconditionally  commanded  as 
a  law  without  borrowing  anything  from  experi¬ 
ence  or  from  any  external  will.  This,  however, 
is  not  a  precept  to  do  something  by  which  some 
desired  effect  can  be  attained  (for  then  the  will 
would  depend  on  physical  conditions),  but  a 
rule  that  determines  the  will  a  priori  only  so  far 
as  regards  the  forms  of  its  maxims;  and  thus  it 
is  at  least  not  impossible  to  conceive  that  a  law, 
which  only  applies  to  the  subjective  form  of 
principles,  yet  serves  as  a  principle  of  determi¬ 
nation  by  means  of  the  objective  form  of  law 
in  general.  We  may  call  the  consciousness  of 
this  fundamental  law  a  fact  of  reason,  because 
we  cannot  reason  it  out  from  antecedent  data  of 
reason,  e.  g.,  the  consciousness  of  freedom  (for 
this  is  not  antecedently  given),  but  it  forces 
itself  on  us  as  a  synthetic  a  priori  proposition, 
which  is  not  based  on  any  intuition,  either  pure 
or  empirical.  It  would,  indeed,  be  analytical  if 
the  freedom  of  the  will  were  presupposed,  but 
to  presuppose  freedom  as  a  positive  concept 
would  require  an  intellectual  intuition,  which 
cannot  here  be  assumed;  however,  when  we  re¬ 
gard  this  law  as  given,  it  must  be  observed,  in 
order  not  to  fall  into  any  misconception,  that  it 
is  not  an  empirical  fact,  but  the  sole  fact  of  the 
pure  reason,  which  thereby  announces  itself  as 
originally  legislative  (sic  volo ,  sic  jubeoj. 

COROLLARY 

Pure  reason  is  practical  of  itself  alone  and 
gives  (to  man)  a  universal  law  which  we  call 
the  moral  law. 

REMARK 

The  fact  just  mentioned  is  undeniable.  It  is 
only  necessary  to  analyse  the  judgement  that 
men  pass  on  the  lawfulness  of  their  actions,  in 
order  to  find  that,  whatever  inclination  may  say 
to  the  contrary,  reason,  incorruptible  and  self- 


constrained,  always  confronts  the  maxim  of  the 
will  in  any  action  with  the  pure  will,  that  is, 
with  itself,  considering  itself  as  a  priori  prac¬ 
tical.  Now  this  principle  of  morality,  just  on  ac¬ 
count  of  the  universality  of  the  legislation  which 
makes  it  the  formal  supreme  determining  prin¬ 
ciple  of  the  will,  without  regard  to  any  subjec¬ 
tive  differences,  is  declared  by  the  reason  to  be 
a  law  for  all  rational  beings,  in  so  far  as  they 
have  a  will,  that  is,  a  power  to  determine  their 
causality  by  the  conception  of  rules;  and,  there¬ 
fore,  so  far  as  they  are  capable  of  acting  ac¬ 
cording  to  principles,  and  consequently  also  ac¬ 
cording  to  practical  a  priori  principles  (for  these 
alone  have  the  necessity  that  reason  requires  in 
a  principle).  It  is,  therefore,  not  limited  to  men 
only,  but  applies  to  all  finite  beings  that  possess 
reason  and  will;  nay,  it  even  includes  the  In¬ 
finite  Being  as  the  supreme  intelligence.  In  the 
former  case,  however,  the  law  has  the  form  of 
an  imperative,  because  in  them,  as  rational  be¬ 
ings,  we  can  suppose  a  pure  will,  but  being  crea¬ 
tures  affected  with  wants  and  physical  motives, 
not  a  holy  will,  that  is,  one  which  would  be  in¬ 
capable  of  any  maxim  conflicting  with  the  moral 
law.  In  their  case,  therefore,  the  moral  law  is  an 
imperative ,  which  commands  categorically,  be¬ 
cause  the  law  is  unconditioned;  the  relation  of 
such  a  will  to  this  law  is  dependence  under  the 
name  of  obligation ,  which  implies  a  constraint 
to  an  action,  though  only  by  reason  and  its  ob¬ 
jective  law;  and  this  action  is  called  duty ,  be¬ 
cause  an  elective  will,  subject  to  pathologi¬ 
cal  affections  (though  not  determined  by  them, 
and,  therefore,  still  free),  implies  a  wish  that 
arises  from  subjective  causes  and.  therefore, 
may  often  be  opposed  to  the  pure  objective  de¬ 
termining  principle;  whence  it  requires  the  mor¬ 
al  constraint  of  a  resistance  of  the  practical  rea¬ 
son,  which  may  be  called  an  internal,  but  intel¬ 
lectual,  compulsion.  In  the  supreme  intelligence 
the  elective  will  is  rightly  conceived  as  incapa¬ 
ble  of  any  maxim  which  could  not  at  the  same 
time  be  objectively  a  law;  and  the  notion  of 
holiness ,  which  on  that  account  belongs  to  it, 
places  it,  not  indeed  above  all  practical  laws, 
but  above  all  practically  restrictive  laws,  and 
consequently  above  obligation  and  duty.  This 
holiness  of  will  is,  however,  a  practical  idea, 
which  must  necessarily  serve  as  a  type  to  which 
finite  rational  beings  can  only  approximate  in¬ 
definitely,  and  which  the  pure  moral  law,  which 
is  itself  on  this  account  called  holy,  constantly 
and  rightly  holds  before  their  eyes.  The  utmost 
that  finite  practical  reason  can  effect  is  to  be 
certain  of  this  indefinite  progress  of  one’s  max- 


CRITIQUE  OF 


304 

ims  and  of  their  steady  disposition  to  advance. 
This  is  virtue,  and  virtue,  at  least  as  a  naturally 
acquired  faculty,  can  never  be  perfect,  because 
assurance  in  such  a  case  never  becomes  apodeic- 
tic  certainty  and,  when  it  only  amounts  to  per¬ 
suasion,  is  very  dangerous. 

§VIII.  Theorem  IV 

The  autonomy  of  the  will  is  the  sole  principle 
of  all  moral  laws  and  of  all  duties  which  con¬ 
form  to  them;  on  the  other  hand,  heteronomy 
of  the  elective  will  not  only  cannot  be  the  basis 
of  any  obligation,  but  is,  on  the  contrary,  op¬ 
posed  to  the  principle  thereof  and  to  the  moral¬ 
ity  of  the  will. 

In  fact  the  sole  principle  of  morality  consists 
in  the  independence  on  all  matter  of  the  law 
(namely,  a  desired  object),  and  in  the  determi¬ 
nation  of  the  elective  will  by  the  mere  universal 
legislative  form  of  which  its  maxim  must  be 
capable.  Now  this  independence  is  freedom  in 
the  negative  sense,  and  this  self -legislation  of 
the  pure,  and  therefore  practical,  reason  is  free¬ 
dom  in  the  positive  sense.  Thus  the  moral  law 
expresses  nothing  else  than  the  autonomy  of  the 
pure  practical  reason;  that  is,  freedom;  and 
this  is  itself  the  formal  condition  of  all  maxims, 
and  on  this  condition  only  can  they  agree  with 
the  supreme  practical  law.  If  therefore  the  mat¬ 
ter  of  the  volition,  which  can  be  nothing  else 
than  the  object  of  a  desire  that  is  connected 
with  the  law,  enters  into  the  practical  law,  as 
the  condition  of  its  possibility ,  there  results 
heteronomy  of  the  elective  will,  namely,  de¬ 
pendence  on  the  physical  law  that  we  should 
follow  some  impulse  or  inclination.  In  that  case 
the  will  does  not  give  itself  the  law,  but  only  the 
precept  how  rationally  to  follow  pathological 
law;  and  the  maxim  which,  in  such  a  case,  never 
contains  the  universally  legislative  form,  not 
only  produces  no  obligation,  but  is  itself  op¬ 
posed  to  the  principle  of  a  pure  practical  reason 
and,  therefore,  also  to  the  moral  disposition, 
even  though  the  resulting  action  may  be  con¬ 
formable  to  the  law. 

REMARK 

Hence  a  practical  precept,  which  contains  a 
material  (and  therefore  empirical)  condition, 
must  never  be  reckoned  a  practical  law.  For  the 
law  of  the  pure  will,  which  is  free,  brings  the 
will  into  a  sphere  quite  different  from  the  em¬ 
pirical  ;  and  as  the  necessity  involved  in  the  law 
is  not  a  physical  necessity,  it  can  only  consist 
in  the  formal  conditions  of  the  possibility  of  a 
law  in  general.  All  the  matter  of  practical  rules 
rests  on  subjective  conditions,  which  give  them 


only  a  conditional  universality  (in  case  I  desire 
this  or  that,  what  I  must  do  in  order  to  obtain 
it),  and  they  all  turn  on  the  principle  of  private 
happiness.  Now,  it  is  indeed  undeniable  that 
every  volition  must  have  an  object,  and  there¬ 
fore  a  matter;  but  it  does  not  follow  that  this 
is  the  determining  principle  and  the  condition 
of  the  maxim;  for,  if  it  is  so,  then  this  cannot 
be  exhibited  in  a  universally  legislative  form, 
since  in  that  case  the  expectation  of  the  exist¬ 
ence  of  the  object  would  be  the  determining 
cause  of  the  choice,  and  the  volition  must  pre¬ 
suppose  the  dependence  of  the  faculty  of  desire 
on  the  existence  of  something;  but  this  de¬ 
pendence  can  only  be  sought  in  empirical  condi¬ 
tions  and,  therefore,  can  never  furnish  a  foun¬ 
dation  for  a  necessary  and  universal  rule.  Thus, 
the  happiness  of  others  may  be  the  object  of 
the  will  of  a  rational  being.  But  if  it  were  the 
determining  principle  of  the  maxim,  we  must 
assume  that  we  find  not  only  a  rational  satisfac¬ 
tion  in  the  welfare  of  others,  but  also  a  want 
such  as  the  sympathetic  disposition  in  some 
men  occasions.  But  I  cannot  assume  the  exist¬ 
ence  of  this  want  in  every  rational  being  (not 
at  all  in  God).  The  matter,  then,  of  the  maxim 
may  remain,  but  it  must  not  be  the  condition  of 
it,  else  the  maxim  could  not  be  fit  for  a  law. 
Hence,  the  mere  form  of  law,  which  limits  the 
matter,  must  also  be  a  reason  for  adding  this 
matter  to  the  will,  not  for  presupposing  it.  For 
example,  let  the  matter  be  my  own  happiness. 
This  (rule),  if  I  attribute  it  to  everyone  (as,  in 
fact,  I  may,  in  the  case  of  every  finite  being), 
can  become  an  objective  practical  law  only  if  I 
include  the  happiness  of  others.  Therefore,  the 
law  that  we  should  promote  the  happiness  of 
others  does  not  arise  from  the  assumption  that 
this  is  an  object  of  everyone’s  choice,  but  mere¬ 
ly  from  this,  that  the  form  of  universality 
which  reason  requires  as  the  condition  of  giving 
to  a  maxim  of  self-love  the  objective  validity  of 
a  law  is  the  principle  that  determines  the  will. 
Therefore  it  was  not  the  object  (the  happiness 
of  others)  that  determined  the  pure  will,  but 
it  was  the  form  of  law  only,  by  which  I  re¬ 
stricted  my  maxim,  founded  on  inclination,  so 
as  to  give  it  the  universality  of  a  law,  and  thus 
to  adapt  it  to  the  practical  reason;  and  it  is 
this  restriction  alone,  and  not  the  addition  of  an 
external  spring,  that  can  give  rise  to  the  notion 
of  the  obligation  to  extend  the  maxim  of  my 
self-love  to  the  happiness  of  others. 

REMARK  II 

The  direct  opposite  of  the  principle  of  moral¬ 
ity  is,  when  the  principle  of  private  happiness  is 


PRACTICAL  REASON 


made  the  determining  principle  of  the  will,  and 
with  this  is  to  be  reckoned,  as  I  have  shown 
above,  everything  that  places  the  determining 
principle  which  is  to  serve  as  a  law,  anywhere 
but  in  the  legislative  form  of  the  maxim.  This 
contradiction,  however,  is  not  merely  logical, 
like  that  which  would  arise  between  rules  em¬ 
pirically  conditioned,  if  they  were  raised  to 
the  rank  of  necessary  principles  of  cognition, 
but  is  practical,  and  would  ruin  morality  alto¬ 
gether  were  not  the  voice  of  reason  in  reference 
to  the  will  so  clear,  so  irrepressible,  so  distinct¬ 
ly  audible,  even  to  the  commonest  men.  It  can 
only,  indeed,  be  maintained  in  the  perplexing 
speculations  of  the  schools,  which  are  bold 
enough  to  shut  their  ears  against  that  heavenly 
voice,  in  order  to  support  a  theory  that  costs 
no  trouble. 

Suppose  that  an  acquaintance  whom  you  oth¬ 
erwise  liked  were  to  attempt  to  justify  himself 
to  you  for  having  borne  false  witness,  first  by 
alleging  the,  in  his  view,  sacred  duty  of  consult¬ 
ing  his  own  happiness;  then  by  enumerating  the 
advantages  which  he  had  gained  thereby,  point¬ 
ing  out  the  prudence  he  had  shown  in  securing 
himself  against  detection,  even  by  yourself,  to 
whom  he  now  reveals  the  secret,  only  in  order 
that  he  may  be  able  to  deny  it  at  any  time; 
and  suppose  he  were  then  to  affirm,  in  all  seri¬ 
ousness,  that  he  has  fulfilled  a  true  human 
duty;  you  would  either  laugh  in  his  face,  or 
shrink  back  from  him  with  disgust;  and  yet,  if  a 
man  has  regulated  his  principles  of  action  solely 
with  a  view  to  his  own  advantage,  you  would 
have  nothing  whatever  to  object  against  this 
mode  of  proceeding.  Or  suppose  some  one  rec¬ 
ommends  you  a  man  as  steward,  as  a  man  to 
whom  you  can  blindly  trust  all  your  affairs; 
and,  in  order  to  inspire  you  with  confidence, 
extols  him  as  a  prudent  man  who  thoroughly 
understands  his  own  interest,  and  is  so  indefati- 
gably  active  that  he  lets  slip  no  opportunity 
of  advancing  it;  lastly,  lest  you  should  be  afraid 
of  finding  a  vulgar  selfishness  in  him,  praises 
the  good  taste  with  which  he  lives;  not  seeking 
his  pleasure  in  money-making,  or  in  coarse  wan¬ 
tonness,  but  in  the  enlargement  of  his  knowledge, 
in  instructive  intercourse  with  a  select  circle, 
and  even  in  relieving  the  needy;  while  as  to 
the  means  (which,  of  course,  derive  all  their 
value  from  the  end),  he  is  not  particular,  and 
is  ready  to  use  other  people’s  money  for  the 
purpose  as  if  it  were  his  own,  provided  only  he 
knows  that  he  can  do  so  safely,  and  without  dis¬ 
covery;  you  would  either  believe  that  the  rec- 
ommender  was  mocking  you,  or  that  he  had  lost 


his  senses.  So  sharply  and  clearly  marked  are 
the  boundaries  of  morality  and  self-love  that 
even  the  commonest  eye  cannot  fail  to  distin¬ 
guish  whether  a  thing  belongs  to  the  one  or  the 
other.  The  few  remarks  that  follow’  may  appear 
superfluous  where  the  truth  is  so  plain,  but  at 
least  they  may  serve  to  give  a  little  more  dis¬ 
tinctness  to  the  judgement  of  common  sense. 

The  principle  of  happiness  may,  indeed,  fur¬ 
nish  maxims,  but  never  such  as  would  be  com¬ 
petent  to  be  laws  of  the  will,  even  if  universal 
happiness  were  made  the  object.  For  since  the 
knowledge  of  this  rests  on  mere  empirical  data, 
since  every  man’s  judgement  on  it  depends 
very  much  on  his  particular  point  of  view,  which 
is  itself  moreover  very  variable,  it  can  supply 
only  general  rules,  not  universal ;  that  is,  it  can 
give  rules  which  on  the  average  will  most  fre¬ 
quently  fit,  but  not  rules  which  must  hold  good 
always  and  necessarily;  hence,  no  practical  laws 
can  be  founded  on  it.  Just  because  in  this  case 
an  object  of  choice  is  the  foundation  of  the  rule 
and  must  therefore  precede  it,  the  rule  can  refer 
to  nothing  but  what  is  [felt],  and  therefore  it 
refers  to  experience  and  is  founded  on  it,  and 
then  the  variety  of  judgement  must  be  endless. 
This  principle,  therefore,  does  not  prescribe  the 
same  practical  rules  to  all  rational  beings,  al¬ 
though  the  rules  are  all  included  under  a  com¬ 
mon  title,  namely,  that  of  happiness.  The  moral 
law,  however,  is  conceived  as  objectively  neces¬ 
sary,  only  because  it  holds  for  everyone  that  has 
reason  and  will. 

The  maxim  of  self-love  (prudence)  only  ad¬ 
vises ;  the  law  of  morality  commands.  Now  there 
is  a  great  difference  between  that  which  we  are 
advised  to  do  and  that  to  which  we  are  obliged. 

The  commonest  intelligence  can  easily  and 
without  hesitation  see  what,  on  the  principle  of 
autonomy  of  the  will,  requires  to  be  done;  but 
on  supposition  of  heteronomy  of  the  will,  it  is 
hard  and  requires  knowledge  of  the  world  to  see 
what  is  to  be  done.  That  is  to  say,  what  duty  is, 
is  plain  of  itself  to  everyone;  but  what  is  to 
bring  true  durable  advantage,  such  as  will  ex¬ 
tend  to  the  whole  of  one’s  existence,  is  always 
veiled  in  impenetrable  obscurity;  and  much  pru¬ 
dence  is  required  to  adapt  the  practical  rule 
founded  on  it  to  the  ends  of  life,  even  tolerably, 
by  making  proper  exceptions.  But  the  moral  law 
commands  the  most  punctual  obedience  from 
everyone;  it  must,  therefore,  not  be  so  difficult 
to  judge  what  it  requires  to  be  done,  that  the 
commonest  unpractised  understanding,  even 
without  worldly  prudence,  should  fail  to  apply 
it  rightly. 


CRITIQUE  OF 


306 

It  is  always  in  everyone’s  power  to  satisfy  the 
categorical  command  of  morality;  whereas  it  is 
seldom  possible,  and  by  no  means  so  to  every¬ 
one,  to  satisfy  the  empirically  conditioned  pre¬ 
cept  of  happiness,  even  with  regard  to  a  single 
purpose.  The  reason  is  that  in  the  former  case 
there  is  question  only  of  the  maxim,  which  must 
be  genuine  and  pure;  but  in  the  latter  case  there 
is  question  also  of  one’s  capacity  and  physical 
power  to  realize  a  desired  object.  A  command 
that  everyone  should  try  to  make  himself  happy 
would  be  foolish,  for  one  never  commands  any¬ 
one  to  do  what  he  of  himself  infallibly  wishes 
to  do.  We  must  only  command  the  means,  or 
rather  supply  them,  since  he  cannot  do  every¬ 
thing  that  he  wishes.  But  to  command  morality 
under  the  name  of  duty  is  quite  rational ;  for,  in 
the  first  place,  not  everyone  is  willing  to  obey 
its  precepts  if  they  oppose  his  inclinations;  and 
as  to  the  means  of  obeying  this  law,  these  need 
not  in  this  case  be  taught,  for  in  this  respect 
whatever  he  wishes  to  do  he  can  do. 

He  who  has  lost  at  play  may  be  vexed  at 
himself  and  his  folly,  but  if  he  is  conscious  of 
having  cheated  at  play  (although  he  has  gained 
thereby),  he  must  despise  himself  as  soon  as  he 
compares  himself  with  the  moral  law.  This  must, 
therefore,  be  something  different  from  the  prin¬ 
ciple  of  private  happiness.  For  a  man  must  have 
a  different  criterion  when  he  is  compelled  to  say 
to  himself:  “I  am  a  worthless  fellow,  though  I 
have  filled  my  purse”;  and  when  he  approves 
himself,  and  says:  “I  am  a  prudent  man,  for  I 
have  enriched  my  treasure.” 

Finally,  there  is  something  further  in  the  idea 
of  our  practical  reason,  which  accompanies  the 
transgression  of  a  moral  law — namely,  its  ill 
desert .  Now  the  notion  of  punishment,  as  such, 
cannot  be  united  with  that  of  becoming  a  par¬ 
taker  of  happiness;  for  although  he  who  inflicts 
the  punishment  may  at  the  same  time  have  the 
benevolent  purpose  of  directing  this  punish¬ 
ment  to  this  end,  yet  it  must  first  be  justified  in 
itself  as  punishment,  i.e.,  as  mere  harm,  so  that 
if  it  stopped  there,  and  the  person  punished 
could  get  no  glimpse  of  kindness  hidden  behind 
this  harshness,  he  must  yet  admit  that  justice 
was  done  him,  and  that  his  reward  was  perfectly 
suitable  to  his  conduct.  In  every  punishment,  as 
such,  there  must  first  be  justice,  and  this  con¬ 
stitutes  the  essence  of  the  notion.  Benevolence 
may,  indeed,  be  united  with  it,  but  the  man 
who  has  deserved  punishment  has  not  the  least 
reason  to  reckon  upon  this.  Punishment,  then, 
is  a  physical  evil,  which,  though  it  be  not  con¬ 
nected  with  moral  evil  as  a  natural  consequence, 


ought  to  be  connected  with  it  as  a  consequence 
by  the  principles  of  a  moral  legislation.  Now,  if 
every  crime,  even  without  regarding  the  physi¬ 
cal  consequence  with  respect  to  the  actor,  is  in 
itself  punishable,  that  is,  forfeits  happiness  (at 
least  partially),  it  is  obviously  absurd  to  say 
that  the  crime  consisted  just  in  this,  that  he  has 
drawn  punishment  on  himself,  thereby  injuring 
his  private  happiness  (which,  on  the  principle 
of  self-love,  must  be  the  proper  notion  of  all 
crime).  According  to  this  view,  the  punishment 
would  be  the  reason  for  calling  anything  a  crime, 
and  justice  would,  on  the  contrary,  consist  in 
omitting  all  punishment,  and  even  preventing 
that  which  naturally  follows;  for,  if  this  were 
done,  there  would  no  longer  be  any  evil  in  the 
action,  since  the  harm  which  otherwise  followed 
it,  and  on  account  of  which  alone  the  action  was 
called  evil,  would  now  be  prevented.  To  look, 
however,  on  all  rewards  and  punishments  as 
merely  the  machinery  in  the  hand  of  a  higher 
power,  which  is  to  serve  only  to  set  rational 
creatures  striving  after  their  final  end  (happi¬ 
ness),  this  is  to  reduce  the  will  to  a  mechanism 
destructive  of  freedom;  this  is  so  evident  that 
it  need  not  detain  us. 

More  refined,  though  equally  false,  is  the 
theory  of  those  who  suppose  a  certain  special 
moral  sense,  which  sense  and  not  reason  deter¬ 
mines  the  moral  law,  and  in  consequence  of 
which  the  consciousness  of  virtue  is  supposed 
to  be  directly  connected  with  contentment  and 
pleasure ;  that  of  vice,  with  mental  dissatisfaction 
and  pain;  thus  reducing  the  whole  to  the  desire 
of  private  happiness.  Without  repeating  what 
has  been  said  above,  I  will  here  only  remark  the 
fallacy  they  fall  into.  In  order  to  imagine  the 
vicious  man  as  tormented  with  mental  dissatis¬ 
faction  by  the  consciousness  of  his  transgres¬ 
sions,  they  must  first  represent  him  as  in  the 
main  basis  of  his  character,  at  least  in  some 
degree,  morally  good;  just  as  he  who  is  pleased 
with  the  consciousness  of  right  conduct  must  be 
conceived  as  already  virtuous.  The  notion  of 
morality  and  duty  must,  therefore,  have  pre¬ 
ceded  any  regard  to  this  satisfaction,  and  can¬ 
not  be  derived  from  it.  A  man  must  first  ap¬ 
preciate  the  importance  of  what  we  call  duty , 
the  authority  of  the  moral  law,  and  the  immedi¬ 
ate  dignity  which  the  following  of  it  gives  to 
the  person  in  his  own  eyes,  in  order  to  feel  that 
satisfaction  in  the  consciousness  of  his  conform¬ 
ity  to  it  and  the  bitter  remorse  that  accompanies 
the  consciousness  of  its  transgression.  It  is, 
therefore,  impossible  to  feel  this  satisfaction  or 
dissatisfaction  prior  to  the  knowledge  of  obliga- 


PRACTICAL  REASON 


307 


tion,  or  to  make  it  the  basis  of  the  latter.  A  man 
must  be  at  least  half  honest  in  order  even  to  be 
able  to  form  a  conception  of  these  feelings.  I 
do  not  deny  that  as  the  human  will  is,  by  virtue 
of  liberty,  capable  of  being  immediately  deter¬ 
mined  by  the  moral  law,  so  frequent  practice  in 
accordance  with  this  principle  of  determination 
can,  at  least,  produce  subjectively  a  feeling  of 
satisfaction;  on  the  contrary,  it  is  a  duty  to 
establish  and  to  cultivate  this,  which  alone  de¬ 
serves  to  be  called  properly  the  moral  feeling; 
but  the  notion  of  duty  cannot  be  derived  from 
it,  else  we  should  have  to  suppose  a  feeling  for 
the  law  as  such,  and  thus  make  that  an  object 
of  sensation  which  can  only  be  thought  by  the 
reason;  and  this,  if  it  is  not  to  be  a  flat  contra¬ 
diction,  would  destroy  all  notion  of  duty  and 
put  in  its  place  a  mere  mechanical  play  of  re¬ 
fined  inclinations  sometimes  contending  with 
the  coarser. 

If  now  we  compare  our  formal  supreme  prin¬ 
ciple  of  pure  practical  reason  (that  of  autonomy 
of  the  will)  with  all  previous  material  principles 
of  morality,  we  can  exhibit  them  all  in  a  table 
in  which  all  possible  cases  are  exhausted,  except 
the  one  formal  principle;  and  thus  we  can  show 
visibly  that  it  is  vain  to  look  for  any  other  prin¬ 
ciple  than  that  now  proposed.  In  fact  all  possi¬ 
ble  principles  of  determination  of  the  will  are 
either  merely  subjective ,  and  therefore  empiri¬ 
cal,  or  are  also  objective  and  rational;  and  both 
are  either  external  or  internal. 

Practical  Material  Principles  of  Determination 

taken  as  the  Foundation  of  Morality,  are: 

SUBJECTIVE 


EXTERNAL 

Education 
( Montaigne ) 

The  civil 
Constitution 
( Mandeville ) 


INTERNAL 

Physical  feeling 
( Epicurus ) 
Moral  feeling 
( Hutcheson ) 


OBJECTIVE 


INTERNAL  EXTERNAL 

Perfection  Will  of  God 

(Wolf  and  the  ( Crusius  and  other 

Stoics)  theological  M oralists ) 


Those  of  the  upper  table  are  all  empirical  and 
evidently  incapable  of  furnishing  the  universal 
principle  of  morality;  but  those  in  the  lower 
table  are  based  on  reason  (for  perfection  as  a 
quality  of  things,  and  the  highest  perfection 
conceived  as  substance,  that  is,  God,  can  only  be 
thought  by  means  of  rational  concepts).  But 
the  former  notion,  namely,  that  of  perfection, 
may  either  be  taken  in  a  theoretic  signification, 


and  then  it  means  nothing  but  the  completeness 
of  each  thing  in  its  own  kind  (transcendental), 
or  that  of  a  thing  merely  as  a  thing  (metaphysi¬ 
cal)  ;  and  with  that  we  are  not  concerned  here. 
But  the  notion  of  perfection  in  a  practical  sense 
is  the  fitness  or  sufficiency  of  a  thing  for  all 
sorts  of  purposes.  This  perfection,  as  a  quality 
of  man  and  consequently  internal,  is  nothing  but 
talent  and,  what  strengthens  or  completes  this, 
skill.  Supreme  perfection  conceived  as  sub¬ 
stance,  that  is  God,  and  consequently  external 
(considered  practically),  is  the  sufficiency  of 
this  being  for  all  ends.  Ends  then  must  first  be 
given,  relatively  to  which  only  can  the  notion 
of  perfection  (whether  internal  in  ourselves  or 
external  in  God)  be  the  determining  principle 
of  the  will.  But  an  end — being  an  object  which 
must  precede  the  determination  of  the  will  by  a 
practical  rule  and  contain  the  ground  of  the  pos¬ 
sibility  of  this  determination,  and  therefore 
contain  also  the  matter  of  the  will,  taken  as  its 
determining  principle — such  an  end  is  always 
empirical  and,  therefore,  may  serve  for  the  Epi¬ 
curean  principle  of  the  happiness  theory,  but 
not  for  the  pure  rational  principle  of  morality 
and  duty.  Thus,  talents  and  the  improvement 
of  them,  because  they  contribute  to  the  advan¬ 
tages  of  life;  or  the  will  of  God,  if  agreement 
with  it  be  taken  as  the  object  of  the  will,  with¬ 
out  any  antecedent  independent  practical  prin¬ 
ciple,  can  be  motives  only  by  reason  of  the  hap¬ 
piness  expected  therefrom.  Hence  it  follows, 
first,  that  all  the  principles  here  stated  are  ma¬ 
terial;  secondly,  that  they  include  all  possible 
material  principles;  and,  finally,  the  conclusion, 
that  since  material  principles  are  quite  incapa¬ 
ble  of  furnishing  the  supreme  moral  law  (as  has 
been  shown) ,  the  formal  practical  principle  of  the 
pure  reason  (according  to  which  the  mere  form 
of  a  universal  legislation  must  constitute  the 
supreme  and  immediate  determining  principle 
of  the  will)  is  the  only  one  possible  which 
is  adequate  to  furnish  categorical  imperatives, 
that  is,  practical  laws  (which  make  actions  a 
duty),  and  in  general  to  serve  as  the  principle 
of  morality,  both  in  criticizing  conduct  and  also 
in  its  application  to  the  human  will  to  deter¬ 
mine  it. 

I.  Of  the  Deduction  of  the  Fundamental 
Principles  of  Pure  Practical  Reason 

This  Analytic  shows  that  pure  reason  can  be 
practical,  that  is,  can  of  itself  determine  the 
will  independently  of  anything  empirical;  and 
this  it  proves  by  a  fact  in  which  pure  reason  in 
us  proves  itself  actually  practical,  namely,  the 


308  CRITIQUE  OF 


autonomy  shown  in  the  fundamental  principle 
of  morality,  by  which  reason  determines  the 
will  to  action. 

It  shows  at  the  same  time  that  this  fact  is 
inseparably  connected  with  the  consciousness 
of  freedom  of  the  will,  nay,  is  identical  with  it; 
and  by  this  the  will  of  a  rational  being,  although 
as  belonging  to  the  world  of  sense  it  recognizes 
itself  as  necessarily  subject  to  the  laws  of  cau¬ 
salitylike  other  efficient  causes;  yet,  at  the  same 
time,  on  another  side,  namely,  as  a  being  in  it¬ 
self,  is  conscious  of  existing  in  and  being  deter¬ 
mined  by  an  intelligible  order  of  things;  con¬ 
scious  not  by  virtue  of  a  special  intuition  of 
itself,  but  by  virtue  of  certain  dynamical  laws 
which  determine  its  causality  in  the  sensible 
world;  for  it  has  been  elsewhere  proved  that  if 
freedom  is  predicated  of  us,  it  transports  us  into 
an  intelligible  order  of  things. 

Now,  if  we  compare  with  this  the  analytical 
part  of  the  critique  of  pure  speculative  reason, 
we  shall  see  a  remarkable  contrast.  There  it  was 
not  fundamental  principles,  but  pure,  sensible 
intuition  (space  and  time),  that  was  the  first 
datum  that  made  a  priori  knowledge  possible, 
though  only  of  objects  of  the  senses.  Syntheti¬ 
cal  principles  could  not  be  derived  from  mere 
concepts  without  intuition;  on  the  contrary, 
they  could  only  exist  with  reference  to  this  in¬ 
tuition,  and  therefore  to  objects  of  possible  ex¬ 
perience,  since  it  is  the  concepts  of  the  under¬ 
standing,  united  with  this  intuition,  which  alone 
make  that  knowledge  possible  which  we  call  ex¬ 
perience.  Beyond  objects  of  experience,  and 
therefore  with  regard  to  things  as  noumena,  all 
positive  knowledge  was  rightly  disclaimed  for 
speculative  reason.  This  reason,  however,  went 
so  far  as  to  establish  with  certainty  the  concept 
of  noumena;  that  is,  the  possibility,  nay,  the 
necessity,  of  thinking  them;  for  example,  it 
showed  against  all  objections  that  the  supposi¬ 
tion  of  freedom,  negatively  considered,  was 
quite  consistent  with  those  principles  and  limi¬ 
tations  of  pure  theoretic  reason.  But  it  could 
not  give  us  any  definite  enlargement  of  our 
knowledge  with  respect  to  such  objects,  but,  on 
the  contrary,  cut  off  all  view  of  them  alto¬ 
gether. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  moral  law,  although  it 
gives  no  view ,  yet  gives  us  a  fact  absolutely  in¬ 
explicable  from  any  data  of  the  sensible  world, 
and  the  whole  compass  of  our  theoretical  use  of 
reason,  a  fact  which  points  to  a  pure  world  of  the 
understanding,  nay,  even  defines  it  positively 
and  enables  us  to  know  something  of  it,  namely, 
a  law. 


This  law  (as  far  as  rational  beings  are  con¬ 
cerned)  gives  to  the  world  of  sense,  which  is  a 
sensible  system  of  nature,  the  form  of  a  world 
of  the  understanding,  that  is,  of  a  supersensible 
system  of  nature ,  without  interfering  with  its 
mechanism.  Now,  a  system  of  nature,  in  the 
most  general  sense,  is  the  existence  of  things 
under  laws.  The  sensible  nature  of  rational  be¬ 
ings  in  general  is  their  existence  under  laws  em¬ 
pirically  conditioned,  which,  from  the  point  of 
view  of  reason,  is  heteronomy.  The  supersensi¬ 
ble  nature  of  the  same  beings,  on  the  other  hand, 
is  their  existence  according  to  laws  which  are 
independent  of  every  empirical  condition  and, 
therefore,  belong  to  the  autonomy  of  pure  rea¬ 
son.  And,  since  the  laws  by  which  the  existence 
of  things  depends  on  cognition  are  practical,  su¬ 
persensible  nature,  so  far  as  we  can  form  any 
notion  of  it,  is  nothing  else  than  a  system  of  na¬ 
ture  under  the  autonomy  of  pure  practical  rea¬ 
son.  Now,  the  law  of  this  autonomy  is  the  moral 
law,  which,  therefore,  is  the  fundamental  law  of 
a  supersensible  nature,  and  of  a  pure  world  of 
understanding,  whose  counterpart  must  exist  in 
the  world  of  sense,  but  without  interfering  with 
its  laws.  We  might  call  the  former  the  arche¬ 
typal  world  ( natura  archetypa) ,  which  we  only 
know  in  the  reason;  and  the  latter  the  ectypal 
world  ( natura  ectypa ),  because  it  contains  the 
possible  effect  of  the  idea  of  the  former  which 
is  the  determining  principle  of  the  will.  For  the 
moral  law,  in  fact,  transfers  us  ideally  into  a 
system  in  which  pure  reason,  if  it  were  accom¬ 
panied  with  adequate  physical  power,  would 
produce  the  summum  bonum ,  and  it  determines 
our  will  to  give  the  sensible  world  the  form  of  a 
system  of  rational  beings. 

The  least  attention  to  oneself  proves  that  this 
idea  really  serves  as  the  model  for  the  deter¬ 
minations  of  our  will. 

When  the  maxim  which  I  am  disposed  to  fol¬ 
low  in  giving  testimony  is  tested  by  the  practi¬ 
cal  reason,  I  always  consider  what  it  would  be 
if  it  were  to  hold  as  a  universal  law  of  nature. 
It  is  manifest  that  in  this  view  it  would  oblige 
everyone  to  speak  the  truth.  For  it  cannot  hold 
as  a  universal  law  of  nature  that  statements 
should  be  allowed  to  have  the  force  of  proof 
and  yet  to  be  purposely  untrue.  Similarly,  the 
maxim  which  I  adopt  with  respect  to  disposing 
freely  of  my  life  is  at  once  determined,  when  I 
ask  myself  what  it  should  be,  in  order  that  a 
system,  of  which  it  is  the  law,  should  maintain 
itself.  It  is  obvious  that  in  such  a  system  no 
one  could  arbitrarily  put  an  end  to  his  own  life, 
for  such  an  arrangement  would  not  be  a  perma- 


PRACTICAL  REASON 


nent  order  of  things.  And  so  in  all  similar  cases. 
Now,  in  nature,  as  it  actually  is  an  object  of  ex¬ 
perience,  the  free  will  is  not  of  itself  determined 
to  maxims  which  could  of  themselves  be  the 
foundation  of  a  natural  system  of  universal 
laws,  or  which  could  even  be  adapted  to  a  sys¬ 
tem  so  constituted ;  on  the  contrary,  its  maxims 
are  private  inclinations  which  constitute,  indeed, 
a  natural  whole  in  conformity  with  pathological 
(physical)  laws,  but  could  not  form  part  of  a 
system  of  nature,  which  would  only  be  possible 
through  our  will  acting  in  accordance  with  pure 
practical  laws.  Yet  we  are,  through  reason,  con¬ 
scious  of  a  law  to  which  all  our  maxims  are  sub¬ 
ject,  as  though  a  natural  order  must  be  origi¬ 
nated  from  our  will.  This  law,  therefore,  must 
be  the  idea  of  a  natural  system  not  given  in  ex¬ 
perience,  and  yet  possible  through  freedom;  a 
system,  therefore,  which  is  supersensible,  and 
to  which  we  give  objective  reality,  at  least  in  a 
practical  point  of  view,  since  we  look  on  it  as  an 
object  of  our  will  as  pure  rational  beings. 

Hence  the  distinction  between  the  laws  of  a 
natural  system  to  which  the  will  is  subject,  and 
of  a  natural  system  which  is  subject  to  a  will 
(as  far  as  its  relation  to  its  free  actions  is  con¬ 
cerned),  rests  on  this,  that  in  the  former  the 
objects  must  be  causes  of  the  ideas  which  de¬ 
termine  the  will;  whereas  in  the  latter  the  will 
is  the  cause  of  the  objects;  so  that  its  causality 
has  its  determining  principle  solely  in  the  pure 
faculty  of  reason,  which  may  therefore  be  called 
a  pure  practical  reason. 

There  are  therefore  two  very  distinct  prob¬ 
lems:  how,  on  the  one  side,  pure  reason  can 
cognise  objects  a  priori,  and  how  on  the  other 
side  it  can  be  an  immediate  determining  prin¬ 
ciple  of  the  will,  that  is,  of  the  causality  of  the 
rational  being  with  respect  to  the  reality  of  ob¬ 
jects  (through  the  mere  thought  of  the  uni¬ 
versal  validity  of  its  own  maxims  as  laws). 

The  former,  which  belongs  to  the  critique  of 
the  pure  speculative  reason,  requires  a  previous 
explanation,  how  intuitions  without  which  no 
object  can  be  given,  and,  therefore,  none  known 
synthetically,  are  possible  a  priori;  and  its  solu¬ 
tion  turns  out  to  be  that  these  are  all  only  sensi¬ 
ble  and,  therefore,  do  not  render  possible  any 
speculative^  knowledge  which  goes  further  than 
possible  experience  reaches;  and  that  therefore 
all  the  principles  of  that  pure  speculative  reason 
avail  only  to  make  experience  possible;  either 
experience  of  given  objects  or  of  those  that  may 
be  given  ad  infinitum,  but  never  are  completely 
given. 

The  latter,  which  belongs  to  the  critique  of 


practical  reason,  requires  no  explanation  how 
the  objects  of  the  faculty  of  desire  are  possible, 
for  that  being  a  problem  of  the  theoretical 
knowledge  of  nature  is  left  to  the  critique  of  the 
speculative  reason,  but  only  how  reason  can  de¬ 
termine  the  maxims  of  the  will;  whether  this 
takes  place  only  by  means  of  empirical  ideas  as 
principles  of  determination,  or  whether  pure 
reason  can  be  practical  and  be  the  law  of  a  pos¬ 
sible  order  of  nature,  which  is  not  empirically 
knowable.  The  possibility  of  such  a  supersensi¬ 
ble  system  of  nature,  the  conception  of  which 
can  also  be  the  ground  of  its  reality  through  our 
own  free  will,  does  not  require  any  a  priori  in¬ 
tuition  (of  an  intelligible  world)  which,  being 
in  this  case  supersensible,  would  be  impossible 
for  us.  For  the  question  is  only  as  to  the  de¬ 
termining  principle  of  volition  in  its  maxims, 
namely,  whether  it  is  empirical,  or  is  a  concep¬ 
tion  of  the  pure  reason  (having  the  legal  char¬ 
acter  belonging  to  it  in  general),  and  how  it  can 
be  the  latter.  It  is  left  to  the  theoretic  principles 
of  reason  to  decide  whether  the  causality  of  the 
will  suffices  for  the  realization  of  the  objects  or 
not,  this  being  an  inquiry  into  the  possibility  of 
the  objects  of  the  volition.  Intuition  of  these 
objects  is  therefore  of  no  importance  to  the 
practical  problem.  We  are  here  concerned  only 
with  the  determination  of  the  will  and  the  de¬ 
termining  principles  of  its  maxims  as  a  free  will, 
not  at  all  with  the  result.  For,  provided  only 
that  the  will  conforms  to  the  law  of  pure  rea¬ 
son,  then  let  its  power  in  execution  be  what  it 
may,  whether  according  to  these  maxims  of  leg¬ 
islation  of  a  possible  system  of  nature  any  such 
system  really  results  or  not,  this  is  no  concern 
of  the  critique,  which  only  inquires  whether, 
and  in  what  way,  pure  reason  can  be  practical, 
that  is  directly  determine  the  will. 

In  this  inquiry  criticism  may  and  must  begin 
with  pure  practical  laws  and  their  reality.  But 
instead  of  intuition  it  takes  as  their  foundation 
the  conception  of  their  existence  in  the  intelligi¬ 
ble  world,  namely,  the  concept  of  freedom.  For 
this  concept  has  no  other  meaning,  and  these 
laws  are  only  possible  in  relation  to  freedom  of 
the  will;  but  freedom  being  supposed,  they  are 
necessary;  or  conversely  freedom  is  necessary 
because  those  laws  are  necessary,  being  practi¬ 
cal  postulates.  It  cannot  be  further  explained 
how  this  consciousness  of  the  moral  law,  or, 
what  is  the  same  thing,  of  freedom,  is  possible; 
but  that  it  is  admissible  is  well  established  in  the 
theoretical  critique. 

The  exposition  of  the  supreme  principle  of 
practical  reason  is  now  finished;  that  is  to  say, 


3io  CRITIQUE  OF 


it  has  been  shown  first,  what  it  contains,  that 
it  subsists  for  itself  quite  a  priori  and  independ¬ 
ent  of  empirical  principles;  and  next  in  what  it 
is  distinguished  from  all  other  practical  princi¬ 
ples.  With  the  deduction ,  that  is,  the  justifica¬ 
tion  of  its  objective  and  universal  validity,  and 
the  discernment  of  the  possibility  of  such  a 
synthetical  proposition  a  priori ,  we  cannot  ex¬ 
pect  to  succeed  so  well  as  in  the  case  of  the 
principles  of  pure  theoretical  reason.  For  these 
referred  to  objects  of  possible  experience, 
namely,  to  phenomena,  and  we  could  prove  that 
these  phenomena  could  be  known  as  objects  of 
experience  only  by  being  brought  under  the 
categories  in  accordance  with  these  laws;  and 
consequently  that  all  possible  experience  must 
conform  to  these  laws.  But  I  could  not  proceed 
in  this  way  with  the  deduction  of  the  moral  law. 
For  this  does  not  concern  the  knowledge  of  the 
properties  of  objects,  which  may  be  given  to 
the  reason  from  some  other  source;  but  a  knowl¬ 
edge  which  can  itself  be  the  ground  of  the  ex¬ 
istence  of  the  objects,  and  by  which  reason  in 
a  rational  being  has  causality,  i.e.,  pure  reason, 
which  can  be  regarded  as  a  faculty  immediately 
determining  the  will. 

Now  all  our  human  insight  is  at  an  end  as 
soon  as  w?e  have  arrived  at  fundamental  powers 
or  faculties,  for  the  possibility  of  these  cannot 
be  understood  by  any  means,  and  just  as  little 
should  it  be  arbitrarily  invented  and  assumed. 
Therefore,  in  the  theoretic  use  of  reason,  it  is 
experience  alone  that  can  justify  us  in  assum¬ 
ing  them.  But  this  expedient  of  adducing  em¬ 
pirical  proofs,  instead  of  a  deduction  from  a 
priori  sources  of  knowledge,  is  denied  us  here 
in  respect  to  the  pure  practical  faculty  of  reason. 
For  whatever  requires  to  draw  the  proof  of  its 
reality  from  experience  must  depend  for  the 
grounds  of  its  possibility  on  principles  of  expe¬ 
rience;  and  pure,  yet  practical,  reason  by  its 
very  notion  cannot  be  regarded  as  such.  Further, 
the  moral  law  is  given  as  a  fact  of  pure  reason 
of  which  we  are  a  priori  conscious,  and  which  is 
apodeictically  certain,  though  it  be  granted  that 
in  experience  no  example  of  its  exact  fulfilment 
can  be  found.  Hence,  the  objective  reality  of 
the  moral  law  cannot  be  proved  by  any  deduc¬ 
tion  by  any  efforts  of  theoretical  reason,  wheth¬ 
er  speculative  or  empirically  supported,  and 
therefore,  even  if  we  renounced  its  apodeictic 
certainty,  it  could  not  be  proved  a  posteriori 
by  experience,  and  yet  it  is  firmly  established 
of  itself. 

But  instead  of  this  vainly  sought  deduction 
of  the  moral  principle,  something  else  is  found 


which  was  quite  unexpected,  namely,  that  this 
moral  principle  serves  conversely  as  the  prin¬ 
ciple  of  the  deduction  of  an  inscrutable  faculty 
which  no  experience  could  prove,  but  of  which 
speculative  reason  was  compelled  at  least  to 
assume  the  possibility  (in  order  to  find  amongst 
its  cosmological  ideas  the  unconditioned  in  the 
chain  of  causality,  so  as  not  to  contradict  itself) 
— I  mean  the  faculty  of  freedom.  The  moral  law, 
which  itself  does  not  require  a  justification, 
proves  not  merely  the  possibility  of  freedom, 
but  that  it  really  belongs  to  beings  who  recog¬ 
nize  this  law  as  binding  on  themselves.  The 
moral  law  is  in  fact  a  law  of  the  causality  of 
free  agents  and,  therefore,  of  the  possibility  of 
a  supersensible  system  of  nature,  just  as  the 
metaphysical  law  of  events  in  the  world  of  sense 
was  a  law  of  causality  of  the  sensible  system  of 
nature;  and  it  therefore  determines  what  specu¬ 
lative  philosophy  was  compelled  to  leave  unde¬ 
termined,  namely,  the  law  for  a  causality,  the 
concept  of  which  in  the  latter  was  only  nega¬ 
tive;  and  therefore  for  the  first  time  gives  this 
concept  objective  reality. 

This  sort  of  credential  of  the  moral  law,  viz., 
that  it  is  set  forth  as  a  principle  of  the  deduc¬ 
tion  of  freedom,  which  is  a  causality  of  pure 
reason,  is  a  sufficient  substitute  for  all  a  priori 
justification,  since  theoretic  reason  was  com¬ 
pelled  to  assume  at  least  the  possibility  of  free¬ 
dom,  in  order  to  satisfy  a  want  of  its  own.  For 
the  moral  law  proves  its  reality,  so  as  even  to 
satisfy  the  critique  of  the  speculative  reason, 
by  the  fact  that  it  adds  a  positive  definition  to 
a  causality  previously  conceived  only  negative¬ 
ly,  the  possibility  of  which  was  incomprehensi¬ 
ble  to  speculative  reason,  which  yet  was  com¬ 
pelled  to  suppose  it.  For  it  adds  the  notion  of  a 
reason  that  directly  determines  the  will  (by 
imposing  on  its  maxims  the  condition  of  a  uni¬ 
versal  legislative  form);  and  thus  it  is  able  for 
the  first  time  to  give  objective,  though  only 
practical,  reality  to  reason,  which  always  be¬ 
came  transcendent  when  it  sought  to  proceed 
speculatively  with  its  ideas.  It  thus  changes  the 
transcendent  use  of  reason  into  an  immanent1 
use  (so  that  reason  is  itself,  by  means  of  ideas, 
an  efficient  cause  in  the  field  of  experience). 

The  determination  of  the  causality  of  beings 
in  the  world  of  sense,  as  such,  can  never  be  un¬ 
conditioned;  and  yet  for  every  series  of  condi¬ 
tions  there  must  be  something  unconditioned, 
and  therefore  there  must  be  a  causality  which 
is  determined  wholly  by  itself.  Hence,  the  idea 
of  freedom  as  a  faculty  of  absolute  spontaneity 

1  [Cf.  Critique  of  Pure  Reason,  p.  112.] 


PRACTICAL  REASON 


was  not  found  to  be  a  want,  but,  as  far  as  its 
possibility  is  concerned ,  an  analytic  principle 
of  pure  speculative  reason.  But  as  it  is  absolute¬ 
ly  impossible  to  find  in  experience  any  example 
in  accordance  with  this  idea,  because  amongst 
the  causes  of  things  as  phenomena  it  would  be 
impossible  to  meet  with  any  absolutely  uncon¬ 
ditioned  determination  of  causality,  we  were 
only  able  to  defend  our  supposition  that  a  freely 
acting  cause  might  be  a  being  in  the  world  of 
sense,  in  so  far  as  it  is  considered  in  the  other 
point  of  view  as  a  noumenon ,  showing  that  there 
is  no  contradiction  in  regarding  all  its  actions 
as  subject  to  physical  conditions  so  far  as  they 
are  phenomena,  and  yet  regarding  its  causality 
as  physically  unconditioned,  in  so  far  as  the 
acting  being  belongs  to  the  world  of  understand¬ 
ing,  and  in  thus  making  the  concept  of  freedom 
the  regulative  principle  of  reason.  By  this  prin¬ 
ciple  I  do  not  indeed  learn  what  the  object  is 
to  which  that  sort  of  causality  is  attributed; 
but  I  remove  the  difficulty,  for,  on  the  one  side, 
in  the  explanation  of  events  in  the  world,  and 
consequently  also  of  the  actions  of  rational  be¬ 
ings,  I  leave  to  the  mechanism  of  physical  ne¬ 
cessity  the  right  of  ascending  from  conditioned 
to  condition  ad  infinitum,  while  on  the  other 
side  I  keep  open  for  speculative  reason  the  place 
which  for  it  is  vacant,  namely,  the  intelligible, 
in  order  to  transfer  the  unconditioned  thither. 
But  I  was  not  able  to  verify  this  supposition ; 
that  is,  to  change  it  into  the  knowledge  of  a  be¬ 
ing  so  acting,  not  even  into  the  knowledge  of  the 
possibility  of  such  a  being.  This  vacant  place  is 
now  filled  by  pure  practical  reason  with  a  defi¬ 
nite  law  of  causality  in  an  intelligible  world 
(causality  with  freedom),  namely,  the  moral 
law.  Speculative  reason  does  not  hereby  gain 
anything  as  regards  its  insight,  but  only  as  re¬ 
gards  the  certainty  of  its  problematical  notion 
of  freedom,  which  here  obtains  objective  real¬ 
ity,  which,  though  only  practical,  is  nevertheless 
undoubted.  Even  the  notion  of  causality — the 
application,  and  consequently  the  signification, 
of  which  holds  properly  only  in  relation  to  phe¬ 
nomena,  so  as  to  connect  them  into  experiences 
(as  is  shown  by  the  Critique  of  Pure  Reason ) 
— is  not  so  enlarged  as  to  extend  its  use  beyond 
these  limits.  For  if  reason  sought  to  do  this,  it 
would  have  to  show  how  the  logical  relation  of 
principle  and  consequence  can  be  used  syntheti¬ 
cally  in  a  different  sort  of  intuition  from  the 
sensible;  that  is  how  a  causa  noumenon  is  possi¬ 
ble.  This  it  can  never  do;  and,  as  practical  rea¬ 
son,  it  does  not  even  concern  itself  with  it,  since 
it  only  places  the  determining  principle  of  cau¬ 


3ii 

sality  of  man  as  a  sensible  creature  (which  is 
given)  in  pure  reason  (which  is  therefore  called 
practical) ;  and  therefore  it  employs  the  notion 
of  cause,  not  in  order  to  know  objects,  but  to 
determine  causality  in  relation  to  objects  in 
general.  It  can  abstract  altogether  from  the  ap¬ 
plication  of  this  notion  to  objects  with  a  view 
to  theoretical  knowledge  (since  this  concept  is 
always  found  a  priori  in  the  understanding, 
even  independently  of  any  intuition).  Reason, 
then,  employs  it  only  for  a  practical  purpose, 
and  hence  we  can  transfer  the  determining  prin¬ 
ciple  of  the  will  into  the  intelligible  order  of 
things,  admitting,  at  the  same  time,  that  we  can¬ 
not  understand  how  the  notion  of  cause  can  de¬ 
termine  the  knowledge  of  these  things.  But  rea¬ 
son  must  cognise  causality  with  respect  to  the 
actions  of  the  will  in  the  sensible  world  in  a 
definite  manner;  otherwise,  practical  reason 
could  not  really  produce  any  action.  But  as  to 
the  notion  which  it  forms  of  its  own  causality 
as  noumenon,  it  need  not  determine  it  theoret¬ 
ically  with  a  view  to  the  cognition  of  its  super¬ 
sensible  existence,  so  as  to  give  it  significance  in 
this  way.  For  it  acquires  significance  apart  from 
this,  though  only  for  practical  use,  namely, 
through  the  moral  law.  Theoretically  viewed,  it 
remains  always  a  pure  a  priori  concept  of  the 
understanding,  which  can  be  applied  to  objects 
whether  they  have  been  given  sensibly  or  not, 
although  in  the  latter  case  it  has  no  definite  the¬ 
oretical  significance  or  application,  but  is  only 
a  formal,  though  essential,  conception  of  the 
understanding  relating  to  an  object  in  general. 
The  significance  which  reason  gives  it  through 
the  moral  law  is  merely  practical,  inasmuch  as 
the  idea  of  the  law  of  causality  (of  the  will)  has 
self  causality,  or  is  its  determining  principle. 

II.  Of  the  Right  that  Pure  Reason  in  its  Prac¬ 
tical  use  has  to  an  Extension  which  is  not 
possible  to  it  in  its  Speculative  Use. 

We  have  in  the  moral  principle  set  forth  a 
law  of  causality,  the  determining  principle  of 
which  is  set  above  all  the  conditions  of  the  sen¬ 
sible  world;  we  have  it  conceived  how  the  will, 
as  belonging  to  the  intelligible  world,  is  deter¬ 
minable,  and  therefore  we  have  its  subject  (man) 
not  merely  conceived  as  belonging  to  a  world  of 
pure  understanding,  and  in  this  respect  un¬ 
known  (which  the  critique  of  speculative  rea¬ 
son  enabled  us  to  do),  but  also  defined  as  re¬ 
gards  his  causality  by  means  of  a  law  which 
cannot  be  reduced  to  any  physical  law  of  the 
sensible  world;  and  therefore  our  knowledge  is 
extended  beyond  the  limits  of  that  world,  a 


312 


CRITIQUE  OF 


pretension  which  the  Critique  of  Pure  Reason 
declared  to  be  futile  in  all  speculation.  Now, 
how  is  the  practical  use  of  pure  reason  here  to 
be  reconciled  with  the  theoretical,  as  to  the  de¬ 
termination  of  the  limits  of  its  faculty? 

David  Hume,  of  whom  we  may  say  that  he 
commenced  the  assault  on  the  claims  of  pure 
reason,  which  made  a  thorough  investigation  of 
it  necessary,  argued  thus:  The  notion  of  cause 
is  a  notion  that  involves  the  necessity  of  the 
connexion  of  the  existence  of  different  things 
(and  that,  in  so  far  as  they  are  different),  so 
that,  given  A,  I  know  that  something  quite  dis¬ 
tinct  therefrom,  namely  B,  must  necessarily 
also  exist.  Now  necessity  can  be  attributed  to 
a  connection,  only  in  so  far  as  it  is  known  a 
priori ,  for  experience  would  only  enable  us  to 
know  of  such  a  connection  that  it  exists,  not 
that  it  necessarily  exists.  Now,  it  is  impossible, 
says  he,  to  know  a  priori  and  as  necessary  the 
connection  between  one  thing  and  another  (or 
between  one  attribute  and  another  quite  dis¬ 
tinct)  when  they  have  not  been  given  in  experi¬ 
ence.  Therefore  the  notion  of  a  cause  is  ficti¬ 
tious  and  delusive  and,  to  speak  in  the  mildest 
way,  is  an  illusion,  only  excusable  inasmuch  as 
the  custom  (a  subjective  necessity)  of  perceiv¬ 
ing  certain  things,  or  their  attributes  as  often 
associated  in  existence  along  with  or  in  suc¬ 
cession  to  one  another,  is  insensibly  taken  for 
an  objective  necessity  of  supposing  such  a  con¬ 
nection  in  the  objects  themselves;  and  thus  the 
notion  of  a  cause  has  been  acquired  surrepti¬ 
tiously  and  not  legitimately;  nay,  it  can  never 
be  so  acquired  or  authenticated,  since  it  de¬ 
mands  a  connection  in  itself  vain,  chimerical, 
and  untenable  in  presence  of  reason,  and  to 
which  no  object  can  ever  correspond.  In  this 
way  was  empiricism  first  introduced  as  the  sole 
source  of  principles,  as  far  as  all  knowledge  of 
the  existence  of  things  is  concerned  (mathe¬ 
matics  therefore  remaining  excepted) ;  and  with 
empiricism  the  most  thorough  scepticism,  even 
with  regard  to  the  whole  science  of  nature (  as 
philosophy).  For  on  such  principles  we  can 
never  conclude  from  given  attributes  of  things 
as  existing  to  a  consequence  (for  this  would 
require  the  notion  of  cause,  which  involves  the 
necessity  of  such  a  connection);  we  can  only, 
guided  by  imagination,  expect  similar  cases — an 
expectation  which  is  never  certain,  however 
often  it  has  been  fulfilled.  Of  no  event  could  we 
say:  a  certain  thing  must  have  preceded  it,  on 
which  it  necessarily  followed;  that  is,  it  must 
have  a  cause;  and  therefore,  however  frequent 
the  cases  we  have  known  in  which  there  was 


such  an  antecedent,  so  that  a  rule  could  be  de¬ 
rived  from  them,  yet  we  never  could  suppose  it 
as  always  and  necessarily  so  happening;  we 
should,  therefore,  be  obliged  to  leave  its  share 
to  blind  chance,  with  which  all  use  of  reason 
comes  to  an  end;  and  this  firmly  establishes 
scepticism  in  reference  to  arguments  ascending 
from  effects  to  causes  and  makes  it  impregnable. 

Mathematics  escaped  well,  so  far,  because 
Hume  thought  that  its  propositions  were  analyt¬ 
ical;  that  is,  proceeded  from  one  property  to 
another,  by  virtue  of  identity  and,  consequently, 
according  to  the  principle  of  contradiction.  This, 
however,  is  not  the  case,  since,  on  the  contrary, 
they  are  synthetical;  and  although  geometry, 
for  example,  has  not  to  do  with  the  existence  of 
things,  but  only  with  their  a  priori  properties  in 
a  possible  intuition,  yet  it  proceeds  just  as  in  the 
case  of  the  causal  notion,  from  one  property 
(A)  to  another  wholly  distinct  (B),  as  neces¬ 
sarily  connected  with  the  former.  Nevertheless, 
mathematical  science,  so  highly  vaunted  for  its 
apodeictic  certainty,  must  at  last  fall  under  this 
empiricism  for  the  same  reason  for  which  Hume 
put  custom  in  the  place  of  objective  necessity 
in  the  notion  of  cause  and,  in  spite  of  all  its 
pride,  must  consent  to  lower  its  bold  pretension 
of  claiming  assent  a  priori  and  depend  for  as¬ 
sent  to  the  universality  of  its  propositions  on 
the  kindness  of  observers,  who,  when  called  as 
witnesses,  would  surely  not  hesitate  to  admit 
that  what  the  geometer  propounds  as  a  theorem 
they  have  always  perceived  to  be  the  fact,  and, 
consequently,  although  it  be  not  necessarily 
true,  yet  they  would  permit  us  to  expect  it  to 
be  true  in  the  future.  In  this  manner  Hume’s 
empiricism  leads  inevitably  to  scepticism,  even 
with  regard  to  mathematics,  and  consequently 
in  every  scientific  theoretical  use  of  reason  (for 
this  belongs  either  to  philosophy  or  mathemat¬ 
ics).  Whether  with  such  a  terrible  overthrow  of 
the  chief  branches  of  knowledge,  common  rea¬ 
son  will  escape  better,  and  will  not  rather  be¬ 
come  irrecoverably  involved  in  this  destruction 
of  all  knowledge,  so  that  from  the  same  prin¬ 
ciples  a  universal  scepticism  should  follow  (af¬ 
fecting,  indeed,  only  the  learned),  this  I  will 
leave  everyone  to  judge  for  himself. 

As  regards  my  own  labours  in  the  critical  ex¬ 
amination  of  pure  reason,  which  were  occa¬ 
sioned  by  Hume’s  sceptical  teaching,  but  went 
much  further  and  embraced  the  whole  field  of 
pure  theoretical  reason  in  its  synthetic  use  and, 
consequently,  the  field  of  what  is  called  meta¬ 
physics  in  general;  I  proceeded  in  the  following 
manner  with  respect  to  the  doubts  raised  by 


PRACTICAL  REASON 


the  Scottish  philosopher  touching  the  notion  of 
causality.  If  Hume  took  the  objects  of  experi¬ 
ence  for  things  in  themselves  (as  is  almost  al¬ 
ways  done),  he  was  quite  right  in  declaring  the 
notion  of  cause  to  be  a  deception  and  false  illu¬ 
sion;  for  as  to  things  in  themselves,  and  their 
attributes  as  such,  it  is  impossible  to  see  why 
because  A  is  given,  B,  which  is  different,  must 
necessarily  be  also  given,  and  therefore  he  could 
by  no  means  admit  such  an  a  priori  knowledge 
of  things  in  themselves.  Still  less  could  this 
acute  writer  allow  an  empirical  origin  of  this 
concept,  since  this  is  directly  contradictory  to 
the  necessity  of  connection  which  constitutes  the 
essence  of  the  notion  of  causality;  hence  the 
notion  was  proscribed,  and  in  its  place  was  put 
custom  in  the  observation  of  the  course  of  per¬ 
ceptions. 

It  resulted,  however,  from  my  inquiries,  that 
the  objects  with  which  we  have  to  do  in  experi¬ 
ence  are  by  no  means  things  in  themselves,  but 
merely  phenomena;  and  that  although  in  the 
case  of  things  in  themselves  it  is  impossible  to 
see  how,  if  A  is  supposed,  it  should  be  contra¬ 
dictory  that  B,  which  is  quite  different  from  A, 
should  not  also  be  supposed  (i.e.,  to  see  the 
necessity  of  the  connection  between  A  as  cause 
and  B  as  effect) ;  yet  it  can  very  well  be  con¬ 
ceived  that,  as  phenomena,  they  may  be  neces¬ 
sarily  connected  in  one  experience  in  a  certain 
way  (e. g.,  with  regard  to  time-relations);  so 
that  they  could  not  be  separated  without  con¬ 
tradicting  that  connection,  by  means  of  which 
this  experience  is  possible  in  which  they  are 
objects  and  in  which  alone  they  are  cognisable 
by  us.  And  so  it  was  found  to  be  in  fact;  so 
that  I  was  able  not  only  to  prove  the  objective 
reality  of  the  concept  of  cause  in  regard  to 
objects  of  experience,  but  also  to  deduce  it 
as  an  a  priori  concept  by  reason  of  the  ne- 
necessity  of  the  connection  it  implied;  that  is, 
to  show  the  possibility  of  its  origin  from  pure 
understanding  without  any  empirical  sources; 
and  thus,  after  removing  the  source  of  empiri¬ 
cism,  I  was  able  also  to  overthrow  the  inevitable 
consequence  of  this,  namely,  scepticism,  first 
with  regard  to  physical  science,  and  then  with 
regard  to  mathematics  (in  which  empiricism 
has  just  the  same  grounds),  both  being  sciences 
which  have  reference  to  objects  of  possible  ex¬ 
perience;  herewith  overthrowing  the  thorough 
doubt  of  whatever  theoretic  reason  professes  to 
discern. 

But  how  is  it  with  the  application  of  this 
category  of  causality  (and  all  the  others;  for 
without  them  there  can  be  no  knowledge  of 


anything  existing)  to  things  which  are  not  ob¬ 
jects  of  possible  experience,  but  lie  beyond  its 
bounds?  For  I  was  able  to  deduce  the  objective 
reality  of  these  concepts  only  with  regard  to 
objects  of  possible  experience.  But  even  this 
very  fact,  that  I  have  saved  them,  only  in  case 
I  have  proved  that  objects  may  by  means  of 
them  be  thought,  though  not  determined  a  pri¬ 
ori;  this  it  is  that  gives  them  a  place  in  the  pure 
understanding,  by  which  they  are  referred  to 
objects  in  general  (sensible  or  not  sensible).  If 
anything  is  still  wanting,  it  is  that  which  is  the 
condition  of  the  application  of  these  categories, 
and  especially  that  of  causality,  to  objects, 
namely,  intuition;  for  where  this  is  not  given, 
the  application  with  a  view  to  theoretic  knowl¬ 
edge  of  the  object ,  as  a  noumenon,  is  impossible 
and,  therefore,  if  anyone  ventures  on  it,  is  (as 
in  the  Critique  of  Pure  Reason)  absolutely  for¬ 
bidden.  Still,  the  objective  reality  of  the  con¬ 
cept  (of  causality)  remains,  and  it  can  be  used 
even  of  noumena,  but  without  our  being  able 
in  the  least  to  define  the  concept  theoretically 
so  as  to  produce  knowledge.  For  that  this  con¬ 
cept,  even  in  reference  to  an  object,  contains 
nothing  impossible,  was  shown  by  this,  that, 
even  while  applied  to  objects  of  sense,  its  seat 
was  certainly  fixed  in  the  pure  understanding; 
and  although,  when  referred  to  things  in  them¬ 
selves  (which  cannot  be  objects  of  experience), 
it  is  not  capable  of  being  determined  so  as  to 
represent  a  definite  object  for  the  purpose  of 
theoretic  knowledge;  yet  for  any  other  purpose 
(for  instance,  a  practical)  it  might  be  capable 
of  being  determined  so  as  to  have  such  applica¬ 
tion.  This  could  not  be  the  case  if,  as  Hume 
maintained,  this  concept  of  causality  contained 
something  absolutely  impossible  to  be  thought. 

In  order  now  to  discover  this  condition  of  the 
application  of  the  said  concept  to  noumena,  we 
need  only  recall  why  we  are  not  content  with 
its  application  to  objects  of  experience,  but  de¬ 
sire  also  to  apply  it  to  things  in  themselves.  It 
will  appear,  then,  that  it  is  not  a  theoretic  but  a 
practical  purpose  that  makes  this  a  necessity. 
In  speculation,  even  if  we  were  successful  in  it, 
we  should  not  really  gain  anything  in  the  knowl¬ 
edge  of  nature,  or  generally  with  regard  to  such 
objects  as  are  given,  but  we  should  make  a  wide 
step  from  the  sensibly  conditioned  (in  which  we 
have  already  enough  to  do  to  maintain  ourselves, 
and  to  follow  carefully  the  chain  of  causes)  to 
the  supersensible,  in  order  to  complete  our 
knowledge  of  principles  and  to  fix  its  limits; 
whereas  there  always  remains  an  infinite  chasm 
unfilled  between  those  limits  and  what  we  know; 


CRITIQUE  OF 


and  we  should  have  hearkened  to  a  vain  curi¬ 
osity  rather  than  a  solid  desire  of  knowledge. 

But,  besides  the  relation  in  which  the  under¬ 
standing  stands  to  objects  (in  theoretical  knowl¬ 
edge),  it  has  also  a  relation  to  the  faculty  of 
desire,  which  is  therefore  called  the  will,  and 
the  pure  will,  inasmuch  as  pure  understanding 
(in  this  case  called  reason)  is  practical  through 
the  mere  conception  of  a  law.  The  objective 
reality  of  a  pure  will,  or,  what  is  the  same  thing, 
of  a  pure  practical  reason,  is  given  in  the  moral 
law  a  priori ,  as  it  were,  by  a  fact,  for  so  we  may 
name  a  determination  of  the  will  which  is  in¬ 
evitable,  although  it  does  not  rest  on  empirical 
principles.  Now,  in  the  notion  of  a  will  the  no¬ 
tion  of  causality  is  already  contained,  and  hence 
the  notion  of  a  pure  will  contains  that  of  a  cau¬ 
sality  accompanied  with  freedom,  that  is,  one 
which  is  not  determinable  by  physical  laws,  and 
consequently  is  not  capable  of  any  empirical  in¬ 
tuition  in  proof  of  its  reality,  but,  nevertheless, 
completely  justifies  its  objective  reality  a  pri¬ 
ori  in  the  pure  practical  law;  not,  indeed  (as  is 
easily  seen)  for  the  purposes  of  the  theoretical, 
but  of  the  practical  use  of  reason.  Now  the  no¬ 
tion  of  a  being  that  has  free  will  is  the  notion  of 
a  causa  noumenon ,  and  that  this  notion  involves 
no  contradiction,  we  are  already  assured  by  the 
fact — that  inasmuch  as  the  concept  of  cause  has 
arisen  wholly  from  pure  understanding,  and  has 
its  objective  reality  assured  by  the  deduction, 
as  it  is  moreover  in  its  origin  independent  of 
any  sensible  conditions,  it  is,  therefore,  not  re¬ 
stricted  to  phenomena  (unless  we  wanted  to 
make  a  definite  theoretic  use  of  it),  but  can  be 
applied  equally  to  things  that  are  objects  of  the 
pure  understanding.  But,  since  this  application 
cannot  rest  on  any  intuition  (for  intuition  can 
only  be  sensible),  therefore,  causa  noumenon , 
as  regards  the  theoretic  use  of  reason,  although 
a  possible  and  thinkable,  is  yet  an  empty  no¬ 
tion.  Now,  I  do  not  desire  by  means  of  this  to 
understand  theoretically  the  nature  of  a  being, 
in  so  jar  as  it  has  a  pure  will;  it  is  enough  for 
me  to  have  thereby  designated  it  as  such,  and 
hence  to  combine  the  notion  of  causality  with 
that  of  freedom  (and  what  is  inseparable  from 
it,  the  moral  law,  as  its  determining  principle). 
Now,  this  right  I  certainly  have  by  virtue  of 
the  pure,  not-empirical  origin  of  the  notion  of 
cause,  since  I  do  not  consider  myself  entitled 
to  make  any  use  of  it  except  in  reference  to  the 
moral  law  which  determines  its  reality,  that  is, 
only  a  practical  use. 

If,  with  Hume,  I  had  denied  to  the  notion  of 
causality  all  objective  reality  in  its  [theoretic] 


use,  not  merely  with  regard  to  things  in  them¬ 
selves  (the  supersensible),  but  also  with  regard 
to  the  objects  of  the  senses,  it  would  have  lost 
all  significance,  and  being  a  theoretically  impos¬ 
sible  notion  would  have  been  declared  to  be 
quite  useless;  and  since  what  is  nothing  cannot 
be  made  any  use  of,  the  practical  use  of  a  con¬ 
cept  theoretically  null  would  have  been  absurd. 
But,  as  it  is,  the  concept  of  a  causality  free  from 
empirical  conditions,  although  empty,  i.  e.,  with¬ 
out  any  appropriate  intuition),  is  yet  theoret¬ 
ically  possible,  and  refers  to  an  indeterminate 
object;  but  in  compensation  significance  is  giv¬ 
en  to  it  in  the  moral  law  and  consequently  in  a 
practical  sense.  I  have,  indeed,  no  intuition 
which  should  determine  its  objective  theoretic 
reality,  but  not  the  less  it  has  a  real  application, 
which  is  exhibited  in  concreto  in  intentions  or 
maxims;  that  is,  it  has  a  practical  reality  which 
can  be  specified,  and  this  is  sufficient  to  justify 
it  even  with  a  view  to  noumena. 

Now,  this  objective  reality  of  a  pure  concept 
of  the  understanding  in  the  sphere  of  the  super¬ 
sensible,  once  brought  in,  gives  an  objective  re¬ 
ality  also  to  all  the  other  categories,  although 
only  so  far  as  they  stand  in  necessary  connexion 
with  the  determining  principle  of  the  will  (the 
moral  law) ;  a  reality  only  of  practical  applica¬ 
tion,  which  has  not  the  least  effect  in  enlarging 
our  theoretical  knowledge  of  these  objects,  or 
the  discernment  of  their  nature  by  pure  reason. 
So  we  shall  find  also  in  the  sequel  that  these 
categories  refer  only  to  beings  as  intelligences , 
and  in  them  only  to  the  relation  of  reason  to  the 
will;  consequently,  always  only  to  the  practical, 
and  beyond  this  cannot  pretend  to  any  knowl¬ 
edge  of  these  beings;  and  whatever  other  prop¬ 
erties  belonging  to  the  theoretical  representa¬ 
tion  of  supersensible  things  may  be  brought  into 
connexion  with  these  categories,  this  is  not  to  be 
reckoned  as  knowledge,  but  only  as  a  right  (in 
a  practical  point  of  view,  however,  it  is  a  ne¬ 
cessity)  to  admit  and  assume  such  beings,  even 
in  the  case  where  we  [conceive]  supersensible 
beings  (e.g.,  God)  according  to  analogy,  that  is, 
a  purely  rational  relation,  of  which  we  make  a 
practical  use  with  reference  to  what  is  sensible; 
and  thus  the  application  to  the  supersensible 
solely  in  a  practical  point  of  view  does  not  give 
pure  theoretic  reason  the  least  encouragement 
to  run  riot  into  the  transcendent. 

Chapter  II.  Of  the  Concept  of  an  Object  of 
Pure  Practical  Reason 

By  a  concept  of  the  practical  reason  I  under¬ 
stand  the  idea  of  an  object  as  an  effect  possible 


PRACTICAL  REASON 


to  be  produced  through  freedom.  To  be  an  ob¬ 
ject  of  practical  knowledge,  as  such,  signifies, 
therefore,  only  the  relation  of  the  will  to  the 
action  by  which  the  object  or  its  opposite  would 
be  realized;  and  to  decide  whether  something 
is  an  object  of  pure  practical  reason  or  not  is 
only  to  discern  the  possibility  or  impossibility 
of  willing  the  action  by  which,  if  we  had  the  re¬ 
quired  power  (about  which  experience  must  de¬ 
cide),  a  certain  object  would  be  realized.  If  the 
object  be  taken  as  the  determining  principle  of 
our  desire,  it  must  first  be  known  whether  it  is 
physically  possible  by  the  free  use  of  our  pow¬ 
ers,  before  we  decide  whether  it  is  an  object  of 
practical  reason  or  not.  On  the  other  hand,  if 
the  law  can  be  considered  a  priori  as  the  deter¬ 
mining  principle  of  the  action,  and  the  latter 
therefore  as  determined  by  pure  practical  rea¬ 
son,  the  judgement  whether  a  thing  is  an  object 
of  pure  practical  reason  or  not  does  not  depend 
at  all  on  the  comparison  with  our  physical  pow¬ 
er;  and  the  question  is  only  whether  we  should 
will  an  action  that  is  directed  to  the  existence 
of  an  object,  if  the  object  were  in  our  power; 
hence  the  previous  question  is  only  as  the  moral 
possibility  of  the  action,  for  in  this  case  it  is  not 
the  object,  but  the  law  of  the  will,  that  is  the 
determining  principle  of  the  action.  The  only 
objects  of  practical  reason  are  therefore  those 
of  good  and  evil.  For  by  the  former  is  meant 
an  object  necessarily  desired  according  to  a 
principle  of  reason;  by  the  latter  one  neces¬ 
sarily  shunned,  also  according  to  a  principle  of 
reason. 

If  the  notion  of  good  is  not  to  be  derived 
from  an  antecedent  practical  law,  but,  on  the 
contrary,  is  to  serve  as  its  foundation,  it  can 
only  be  the  notion  of  something  whose  existence 
promises  pleasure,  and  thus  determines  the  cau¬ 
sality  of  the  subject  to  produce  it,  that  is  to  say, 
determines  the  faculty  of  desire.  Now,  since 
it  is  impossible  to  discern  a  priori  what  idea  will 
be  accompanied  with  pleasure  and  what  with 
painy  it  will  depend  on  experience  alone  to  find 
out  what  is  primarily  good  or  evil.  The  property 
of  the  subject,  with  reference  to  which  alone 
this  experiment  can  be  made,  is  the  feeling  of 
pleasure  and  pain,  a  receptivity  belonging  to  the 
internal  sense ;  thus  that  only  would  be  primari¬ 
ly  good  with  which  the  sensation  of  pleasure  is 
immediately  connected,  and  that  simply  evil 
which  immediately  excites  pain.  Since,  however, 
this  is  opposed  even  to  the  usage  of  language, 
which  distinguishes  the  pleasant  from  the  good, 
the  unpleasant  from  the  evil,  and  requires  that 
good  and  evil  shall  always  be  judged  by  reason, 


and,  therefore,  by  concepts  which  can  be  com¬ 
municated  to  everyone,  and  not  by  mere  sen¬ 
sation,  which  is  limited  to  individual  [subjects] 
and  their  susceptibility;  and,  since  neverthe¬ 
less,  pleasure  or  pain  cannot  be  connected  with 
any  idea  of  an  object  a  priori ,  the  philosopher 
who  thought  himself  obliged  to  make  a  feeling 
of  pleasure  the  foundation  of  his  practical  judge¬ 
ments  would  call  that  good  T^hich  is  a  means  to 
the  pleasant,  and  evil ,  what  is  a  cause  of  un¬ 
pleasantness  and  pain;  for  the  judgement  on 
the  relation  of  means  to  ends  certainly  belongs 
to  reason.  But,  although  reason  is  alone  capa¬ 
ble  of  discerning  the  connexion  of  means  with 
their  ends  (so  that  the  will  might  even  be  de¬ 
fined  as  the  faculty  of  ends,  since  these  are 
always  determining  principles  of  the  desires), 
yet  the  practical  maxims  which  would  follow 
from  the  aforesaid  principle  of  the  good  being 
merely  a  means,  would  never  contain  as  the 
object  of  the  will  anything  good  in  itself,  but 
only  something  good  for  something;  the  good 
would  always  be  merely  the  useful,  and  that  for 
which  it  is  useful  must  always  lie  outside  the 
will,  in  sensation.  Now  if  this  as  a  pleasant  sen¬ 
sation  were  to  be  distinguished  from  the  notion 
of  good,  then  there  would  be  nothing  primarily 
good  at  all,  but  the  good  would  have  to  be 
sought  only  in  the  means  to  something  else, 
namely,  some  pleasantness. 

It  is  an  old  formula  of  the  schools:  Nihil  ap- 
petimus  nisi  sub  ratione  boni;  Nihil  aversamur 
nisi  sub  ratione  mali,  and  it  is  used  often  cor¬ 
rectly,  but  often  also  in  a  manner  injurious  to 
philosophy,  because  the  expressions  boni  and 
mali  are  ambiguous,  owing  to  the  poverty  of 
language,  in  consequence  of  which  they  admit  a 
double  sense,  and,  therefore,  inevitably  bring 
the  practical  laws  into  ambiguity;  and  philoso¬ 
phy,  which  in  employing  them  becomes  aware 
of  the  different  meanings  in  the  same  word,  but 
can  find  no  special  expressions  for  them,  is 
driven  to  subtile  distinctions  about  which  there 
is  subsequently  no  unanimity,  because  the  dis¬ 
tinction  could  not  be  directly  marked  by  any 
suitable  expression.1 

The  German  language  has  the  good  fortune 
to  possess  expressions  which  do  not  allow  this 

1  Besides  this,  the  expression  sub  ratione  boni  is  also 
ambiguous.  For  it  may  mean:  “We  represent  something 
to  ourselves  as  good,  when  and  because  we  desire  (will) 
it”;  or  “We  desire  something  because  we  represent  it  to 
ourselves  as  good  ”  so  that  either  the  desire  determines 
the  notion  of  the  object  as  a  good,  or  the  notion  of  good 
determines  the  desire  (the  will) ;  so  that  in  the  first  case 
sub  ratione  boni  would  mean,  “We  will  something  under 
the  idea  of  the  good”;  in  the  second,  “In  consequence 
of  this  idea,”  which,  as  determining  the  volition,  must 
precede  it. 


316  CRITIQUE  OF 


difference  to  be  overlooked.  It  possesses  two 
very  distinct  concepts  and  especially  distinct 
expressions  for  that  which  the  Latins  express 
by  a  single  word,  bonum.  For  bonum  it  has  das 
Gute  [good],  and  das  Wohl  [well,  weal],  for 
malum  das  Bose  [evil],  and  das  Vbel  [ill,  bad], 
or  das  W eh  [woe].  So  that  we  express  two  quite 
distinct  judgements  when  we  consider  in  an  ac¬ 
tion  the  good  and  evil  of  it,  or  our  weal  and  woe 
(ill).  Hence  it  already  follows  that  the  above 
quoted  psychological  proposition  is  at  least  very 
doubtful  if  it  is  translated:  “We  desire  nothing 
except  with  a  view  to  our  weal  or  woe” ;  on  the 
other  hand,  if  we  render  it  thus:  “Under  the  di¬ 
rection  of  reason  we  desire  nothing  except  so  far 
as  we  esteem  it  good  or  evil,,,  it  is  indubitably 
certain  and  at  the  same  time  quite  clearly  ex¬ 
pressed. 

Well  or  ill  always  implies  only  a  reference  to 
our  condition,  as  pleasant  or  unpleasant,  as  one 
of  pleasure  or  pain,  and  if  we  desire  or  avoid  an 
object  on  this  account,  it  is  only  so  far  as  it  is 
referred  to  our  sensibility  and  to  the  feeling  of 
pleasure  or  pain  that  it  produces.  But  good  or 
evil  always  implies  a  reference  to  the  will,  as 
determined  by  the  law  of  reason,  to  make  some¬ 
thing  its  object;  for  it  is  never  determined  di¬ 
rectly  by  the  object  and  the  idea  of  it,  but  is  a 
faculty  of  taking  a  rule  of  reason  for  the  motive 
of  an  action  (by  which  an  object  may  be  re¬ 
alized).  Good  and  evil  therefore  are  properly 
referred  to  actions,  not  to  the  sensations  of  the 
person,  and  if  anything  is  to  be  good  or  evil  ab¬ 
solutely  (i.  e.,  in  every  respect  and  without  any 
further  condition),  or  is  to  be  so  esteemed,  it 
can  only  be  the  manner  of  acting,  the  maxim  of 
the  will,  and  consequently  the  acting  person 
himself  as  a  good  or  evil  man  that  can  be  so 
called,  and  not  a  thing. 

However,  then,  men  may  laugh  at  the  Stoic, 
who  in  the  severest  paroxysms  of  gout  cried 
out:  “Pain,  however  thou  tormentest  me,  I 
will  never  admit  that  thou  art  an  evil  ( kakov , 
malum)”:  he  was  right.  A  bad  thing  it  certainly 
was,  and  his  cry  betrayed  that;  but  that  any  evil 
attached  to  him  thereby,  this  he  had  no  reason 
whatever  to  admit,  for  pain  did  not  in  the  least 
diminish  the  worth  of  his  person,  but  only  that 
of  his  condition.  If  he  had  been  conscious  of  a 
single  lie,  it  would  have  lowered  his  pride,  but 
pain  served  only  to  raise  it,  when  he  was  con¬ 
scious  that  he  had  not  deserved  it  by  any  un¬ 
righteous  action  by  which  he  had  rendered  him¬ 
self  worthy  of  punishment. 

What  we  call  good  must  be  an  object  of  de¬ 
sire  in  the  judgement  of  every  rational  man,  and 


evil  an  object  of  aversion  in  the  eyes  of  every¬ 
one;  therefore,  in  addition  to  sense,  this  judge¬ 
ment  requires  reason.  So  it  is  with  truthfulness, 
as  opposed  to  lying;  so  with  justice,  as  opposed 
to  violence,  &c.  But  we  may  call  a  thing  a  bad 
[or  ill]  thing,  which  yet  everyone  must  at  the 
same  time  acknowledge  to  be  good,  sometimes 
directly,  sometimes  indirectly.  The  man  who 
submits  to  a  surgical  operation  feels  it  no  doubt 
as  a  bad  thing,  but  by  their  reason  he  and  every¬ 
one  acknowledge  it  to  be  good.  If  a  man  who  de¬ 
lights  in  annoying  and  vexing  peaceable  people 
at  last  receives  a  right  good  beating,  this  is  no 
doubt  a  bad  thing;  but  everyone  approves  it  and 
regards  it  as  a  good  thing,  even  though  nothing 
else  resulted  from  it;  nay,  even  the  man  who 
receives  it  must  in  his  reason  acknowledge  that 
he  has  met  justice,  because  he  sees  the  propor¬ 
tion  between  good  conduct  and  good  fortune, 
which  reason  inevitably  places  before  him,  here 
put  into  practice. 

No  doubt  our  weal  and  woe  are  of  very  great 
importance  in  the  estimation  of  our  practical 
reason,  and  as  far  as  our  nature  as  sensible 
beings  is  concerned,  our  happiness  is  the  only 
thing  of  consequence,  provided  it  is  estimated 
as  reason  especially  requires,  not  by  the  transi¬ 
tory  sensation,  but  by  the  influence  that  this  has 
on  our  whole  existence,  and  on  our  satisfaction 
therewith;  but  it  is  not  absolutely  the  only 
thing  of  consequence.  Man  is  a  being  who,  as 
belonging  to  the  world  of  sense,  has  wants,  and 
so  far  his  reason  has  an  office  which  it  cannot 
refuse,  namely,  to  attend  to  the  interest  of  his 
sensible  nature,  and  to  form  practical  maxims, 
even  with  a  view  to  the  happiness  of  this 
life,  and  if  possible  even  to  that  of  a  future. 
But  he  is  not  so  completely  an  animal  as  to  be 
indifferent  to  what  reason  says  on  its  own  ac¬ 
count,  and  to  use  it  merely  as  an  instrument  for 
the  satisfaction  of  his  wants  as  a  sensible  being. 
For  the  possession  of  reason  would  not  raise  his 
worth  above  that  of  the  brutes,  if  it  is  to  serve 
him  only  for  the  same  purpose  that  instinct 
serves  in  them;  it  would  in  that  case  be  only  a 
particular  method  which  nature  had  employed 
to  equip  man  for  the  same  ends  for  which  it  has 
qualified  brutes,  without  qualifying  him  for  any 
higher  purpose.  No  doubt  once  this  arrangement 
of  nature  has  been  made  for  him  he  requires 
reason  in  order  to  take  into  consideration  his 
weal  and  woe,  but  besides  this  he  possesses  it 
for  a  higher  purpose  also,  namely,  not  only  to 
take  into  consideration  what  is  good  or  evil  in 
itself,  about  which  only  pure  reason,  uninflu¬ 
enced  by  any  sensible  interest,  can  judge,  but 


PRACTICAL  REASON 


also  to  distinguish  this  estimate  thoroughly  from 
the  former  and  to  make  it  the  supreme  condi¬ 
tion  thereof. 

In  estimating  what  is  good  or  evil  in  itself,  as 
distinguished  from  what  can  be  so  called  only 
relatively,  the  following  points  are  to  be  consid¬ 
ered.  Either  a  rational  principle  is  already  con¬ 
ceived,  as  of  itself  the  determining  principle  of 
the  will,  without  regard  to  possible  objects  of 
desire  (and  therefore  by  the  more  legislative 
form  of  the  maxim),  and  in  that  case  that  prin¬ 
ciple  is  a  practical  a  priori  law,  and  pure  reason 
is  supposed  to  be  practical  of  itself.  The  law  in 
that  case  determines  the  will  directly;  the  ac¬ 
tion  conformed  to  it  is  good  in  itself;  a  will 
whose  maxim  always  conforms  to  this  law  is 
good  absolutely  in  every  respect  and  is  the  su¬ 
preme  condition  of  all  good.  Or  the  maxim  of 
the  will  is  consequent  on  a  determining  principle 
of  desire  which  presupposes  an  object  of  pleas¬ 
ure  or  pain,  something  therefore  that  pleases  or 
displeases,  and  the  maxim  of  reason  that  we 
should  pursue  the  former  and  avoid  the  latter 
determines  our  actions  as  good  relatively  to  our 
inclination,  that  is,  good  indirectly,  i.e.,  relative¬ 
ly  to  a  different  end  to  which  they  are  means), 
and  in  that  case  these  maxims  can  never  be 
called  laws,  but  may  be  called  rational  practical 
precepts.  The  end  itself,  the  pleasure  that  we 
seek,  is  in  the  latter  case  not  a  good  but  a  wel¬ 
fare;  not  a  concept  of  reason,  but  an  empirical 
concept  of  an  object  of  sensation;  but  the  use  of 
the  means  thereto,  that  is,  the  action,  is  never¬ 
theless  called  good  (because  rational  delibera¬ 
tion  is  required  for  it),  not  however,  good  abso¬ 
lutely,  but  only  relatively  to  our  sensuous  na¬ 
ture,  with  regard  to  its  feelings  of  pleasure  and 
displeasure ;  but  the  will  whose  maxim  is  affected 
thereby  is  not  a  pure  will ;  this  is  directed  only 
to  that  in  which  pure  reason  by  itself  can  be 
practical. 

This  is  the  proper  place  to  explain  the  paradox 
of  method  in  a  critique  of  practical  reason, 
namely,  that  the  concept  of  good  and  evil  must 
not  be  determined  before  the  moral  law  ( of 
which  it  seems  as  if  it  must  be  the  foundation) , 
but  only  after  it  and  by  means  of  it.  In  fact,  even 
if  we  did  not  know  that  the  principle  of  mor¬ 
ality  is  a  pure  a  priori  law  determining  the  will, 
yet,  that  we  may  not  assume  principles  quite 
gratuitously,  we  must,  at  least  at  first,  leave  it 
undecided ,  whether  the  will  has  merely  empiri¬ 
cal  principles  of  determination,  or  whether  it  has 
not  also  pure  a  priori  principles;  for  it  is  con¬ 
trary  to  all  rules  of  philosophical  method  to  as¬ 
sume  as  decided  that  which  is  the  very  point  in 


question.  Supposing  that  we  wished  to  begin 
with  the  concept  of  good,  in  order  to  deduce 
from  it  the  laws  of  the  will,  then  this  concept  of 
an  object  (as  a  good)  would  at  the  same  time  as¬ 
sign  to  us  this  object  as  the  sole  determining 
principle  of  the  will.  Now,  since  this  concept  had 
not  any  practical  a  priori  law  for  its  standard, 
the  criterion  of  good  or  evil  could  not  be  placed 
in  anything  but  the  agreement  of  the  object  with 
our  feeling  of  pleasure  or  pain;  and  the  use  of 
reason  could  only  consist  in  determining  in  the 
first  place  this  pleasure  or  pain  in  connexion  with 
all  the  sensations  of  my  existence,  and  in  the  sec¬ 
ond  place  the  means  of  securing  to  myself  the 
object  of  the  pleasure.  Now,  as  experience  alone 
can  decide  what  conforms  to  the  feeling  of  pleas¬ 
ure,  and  by  hypothesis  the  practical  law  is  to  be 
based  on  this  as  a  condition,  it  follows  that  the 
possibility  of  a  priori  practical  laws  would  be  at 
once  excluded,  because  it  was  imagined  to  be 
necessary  first  of  all  to  find  an  object  the  con¬ 
cept  of  which,  as  a  good,  should  constitute  the 
universal  though  empirical  principle  of  determi¬ 
nation  of  the  will.  But  what  it  was  necessary  to 
inquire  first  of  all  was  whether  there  is  not  an  a 
priori  determining  principle  of  the  will  (and  this 
could  never  be  found  anywhere  but  in  a  pure 
practical  law,  in  so  far  as  this  law  prescribes  to 
maxims  merely  their  form  without  regard  to  an 
object).  Since,  however,  we  laid  the  foundation 
of  all  practical  law  in  an  object  determined  by 
our  conceptions  of  good  and  evil,  whereas  with¬ 
out  a  previous  law  that  object  could  not  be  con¬ 
ceived  by  empirical  concepts,  we  have  deprived 
ourselves  beforehand  of  the  possibility  of  even 
conceiving  a  pure  practical  law.  On  the  other 
hand,  if  we  had  first  investigated  the  latter  ana¬ 
lytically,  we  should  have  found  that  it  is  not  the 
concept  of  good  as  an  object  that  determines  the 
moral  law  and  makes  it  possible,  but  that,  on  the 
contrary,  it  is  the  moral  law  that  first  determines 
the  concept  of  good  and  makes  it  possible,  so  far 
as  it  deserves  the  name  of  good  absolutely. 

This  remark,  which  only  concerns  the  method 
of  ultimate  ethical  inquiries,  is  of  importance.  It 
explains  at  once  the  occasion  of  all  the  mistakes 
of  philosophers  with  respect  to  the  supreme  prin¬ 
ciple  of  morals.  For  they  sought  for  an  object  of 
the  will  which  they  could  make  the  matter  and 
principle  of  a  law  (which  consequently  could 
not  determine  the  will  directly,  but  by  means  of 
that  object  referred  to  the  feeling  of  pleasure  or 
pain;  whereas  they  ought  first  to  have  searched 
for  a  law  that  would  determine  the  will  a  priori 
and  directly,  and  afterwards  determine  the  ob¬ 
ject  in  accordance  with  the  will).  Now,  whether 


CRITIQUE  OF 


318 

they  placed  this  object  of  pleasure,  which  was 
to  supply  the  supreme  conception  of  goodness, 
in  happiness,  in  perfection,  in  moral  [feeling], 
or  in  the  will  of  God,  their  principle  in  every 
case  implied  heteronomy,  and  they  must  inevit¬ 
ably  come  upon  empirical  conditions  of  a  moral 
law,  since  their  object,  which  was  to  be  the  im¬ 
mediate  principle  of  the  will,  could  not  be  called 
good  or  bad  except  in  its  immediate  relation  to 
feeling,  which  is  always  empirical.  It  is  only  a 
formal  law — that  is,  one  which  prescribes  to  rea¬ 
son  nothing  more  than  the  form  of  its  universal 
legislation  as  the  supreme  condition  of  its  max¬ 
ims — that  can  be  a  priori  a  determining  princi¬ 
ple  of  practical  reason.  The  ancients  avowed  this 
error  without  concealment  by  directing  all  their 
moral  inquiries  to  the  determination  of  the  no¬ 
tion  of  the  summum  bonum,  which  they  intend¬ 
ed  afterwards  to  make  the  determining  principle 
of  the  will  in  the  moral  law;  whereas  it  is  only 
far  later,  when  the  moral  law  has  been  first  es¬ 
tablished  for  itself,  and  shown  to  be  the  direct 
determining  principle  of  the  will,  that  this  ob¬ 
ject  can  be  presented  to  the  will,  whose  form  is 
now  determined  a  priori;  and  this  we  shall  un¬ 
dertake  in  the  Dialectic  of  the  pure  practical 
reason.  The  moderns,  with  whom  the  question 
of  the  summum  bonum  has  gone  out  of  fashion, 
or  at  least  seems  to  have  become  a  secondary 
matter,  hide  the  same  error  under  vague  (ex¬ 
pressions  as  in  many  other  cases).  It  shows  it¬ 
self,  nevertheless,  in  their  systems,  as  it  always 
produces  heteronomy  of  practical  reason;  and 
from  this  can  never  be  derived  a  moral  law  giv¬ 
ing  universal  commands. 

Now,  since  the  notions  of  good  and  evil,  as 
consequences  of  the  a  priori  determination  of 
the  will,  imply  also  a  pure  practical  principle, 
and  therefore  a  causality  of  pure  reason;  hence 
they  do  not  originally  refer  to  objects  (so  as  to 
be,  for  instance,  special  modes  of  the  synthetic 
unity  of  the  manifold  of  given  intuitions  in  one 
consciousness) 1  like  the  pure  concepts  of  the  un¬ 
derstanding  or  categories  of  reason  in  its  theo¬ 
retic  employment;  on  the  contrary,  they  presup¬ 
pose  that  objects  are  given;  but  they  are  all 
modes  (modi)  of  a  single  category,  namely,  that 
of  causality,  the  determining  principle  of  which 
consists  in  the  rational  conception  of  a  law,  which 
as  a  law  of  freedom  reason  gives  to  itself,  there¬ 
by  a  priori  proving  itself  practical.  However,  as 
the  actions  on  the  one  side  come  under  a  law 
which  is  not  a  physical  law,  but  a  law  of  free- 

1  [See  the  Critique  of  Pure  Reason,  p.  52.] 


dom,  and  consequently  belong  to  the  conduct  of 
beings  in  the  world  of  intelligence,  yet  on  the 
other  side  as  events  in  the  world  of  sense  they 
belong  to  phenomena;  hence  the  determinations 
of  a  practical  reason  are  only  possible  in  refer¬ 
ence  to  the  latter  and,  therefore,  in  accordance 
with  the  categories  of  the  understanding;  not  in¬ 
deed  with  a  view  to  any  theoretic  employment 
of  it,  i.e.,  so  as  to  bring  the  manifold  of  (sensi¬ 
ble)  intuition  under  one  consciousness  a  priori; 
but  only  to  subject  the  manifold  of  desires  to 
the  unity  of  consciousness  of  a  practical  reason, 
giving  it  commands  in  the  moral  law,  i.e.,  to  a 
pure  will  a  priori . 

These  categories  of  freedom — for  so  we 
choose  to  call  them  in  contrast  to  those  theoretic 
categories  which  are  categories  of  physical  na¬ 
ture — have  an  obvious  advantage  over  the  lat¬ 
ter,  inasmuch  as  the  latter  are  only  forms  of 
thought  which  designate  objects  in  an  indefinite 
manner  by  means  of  universal  concept  of  ev¬ 
ery  possible  intuition;  the  former,  on  the  con¬ 
trary,  refer  to  the  determination  of  a  free  elec - 
tive  will  (to  which  indeed  no  exactly  correspond¬ 
ing  intuition  can  be  assigned,  but  which  has  as 
its  foundation  a  pure  practical  a  priori  law,  which 
is  not  the  case  with  any  concepts  belonging  to 
the  theoretic  use  of  our  cognitive  faculties); 
hence,  instead  of  the  form  of  intuition  (space 
and  time),  which  does  not  lie  in  reason  itself, 
but  has  to  be  drawn  from  another  source,  name¬ 
ly,  the  sensibility,  these  being  elementary  prac¬ 
tical  concepts  have  as  their  foundation  the  form 
of  a  pure  will ,  which  is  given  in  reason  and, 
therefore,  in  the  thinking  faculty  itself.  From 
this  it  happens  that  as  all  precepts  of  pure  prac¬ 
tical  reason  have  to  do  only  with  the  determina¬ 
tion  of  the  will,  not  with  the  physical  conditions 
(of  practical  ability)  of  the  execution  of  oneys 
purpose ,  the  practical  a  priori  principles  in  re¬ 
lation  to  the  supreme  principle  of  freedom  are 
at  once  cognitions,  and  have  not  to  wait  for  in¬ 
tuitions  in  order  to  acquire  significance,  and  that 
for  this  remarkable  reason,  because  they  them¬ 
selves  produce  the  reality  of  that  to  which  they 
refer  (the  intention  of  the  will),  which  is  not 
the  case  with  theoretical  concepts.  Only  we  must 
be  careful  to  observe  that  these  categories  only 
apply  to  the  practical  reason;  and  thus  they  pro¬ 
ceed  in  order  from  those  which  are  as  yet  sub¬ 
ject  to  sensible  conditions  and  morally  indeter¬ 
minate  to  those  which  are  free  from  sensible 
conditions  and  determined  merely  by  the  moral 
law. 


PRACTICAL  REASON 


3i9 


Table  of  the  Categories  of  Freedom  relatively 
to  the  Notions  of  Good  and  Evil 

I.  Quantity 

Subjective,  according  to  maxims  ( practical  opin¬ 
ions  of  the  individual ) 

Objective,  according  to  principles  ( precepts ) 

A  priori  both  objective  and  subjective  principles 
of  freedom  (laws) 

II.  Quality 

Practical  rules  of  action  (prceceptivce) 

Practical  rules  of  ommission  (prohibitivce) 
Practical  rules  of  exceptions  ( exceptivoe) 

III.  Relation 

To  personality 

To  the  condition  of  the  person 
Reciprocal,  of  one  person  to  the  condition  of  the 
others 

IV.  Modality 

The  Permitted  and  the  Forbidden 
Duty  and  the  contrary  to  duty 
Perfect  and  imperfect  duty 

It  will  at  once  be  observed  that  in  this  table 
freedom  is  considered  as  a  sort  of  causality  not 
subject  to  empirical  principles  of  determination, 
in  regard  to  actions  possible  by  it,  which  are 
phenomena  in  the  world  of  sense,  and  that  con¬ 
sequently  it  is  referred  to  the  categories  which 
concern  its  physical  possibility,  whilst  yet  each 
category  is  taken  so  universally  that  the  deter¬ 
mining  principle  of  that  causality  can  be  placed 
outside  the  world  of  sense  in  freedom  as  a  prop¬ 
erty  of  a  being  in  the  world  of  intelligence;  and 
finally  the  categories  of  modality  introduce  the 
transition  from  practical  principles  generally  to 
those  of  morality,  but  only  problematically. 
These  can  be  established  dogmatically  only  by 
the  moral  law. 

I  add  nothing  further  here  in  explanation  of 
the  present  table,  since  it  is  intelligible  enough 
of  itself.  A  division  of  this  kind  based  on  prin¬ 
ciples  is  very  useful  in  any  science,  both  for  the 
sake  of  thoroughness  and  intelligibility.  Thus, 
for  instance,  we  know  from  the  preceding  table 
and  its  first  number  what  we  must  begin  from 
in  practical  inquiries;  namely,  from  the  maxims 
which  every  one  founds  on  his  own  inclinations; 
the  precepts  which  hold  for  a  species  of  rational 
beings  so  far  as  they  agree  in  certain  inclina¬ 
tions;  and  finally  the  law  which  holds  for  all 
without  regard  to  their  inclinations,  etc.  In  this 
way  we  survey  the  whole  plan  of  what  has  to  be 
done,  every  question  of  practical  philosophy 
that  has  to  be  answered,  and  also  the  order  that 
is  to  be  followed. 


Of  the  Typic  of  the  Pure  Practical  Judgement 

It  is  the  notions  of  good  and  evil  that  first 
determine  an  object  of  the  will.  They  them¬ 
selves,  however,  are  subject  to  a  practical  rule 
of  reason  which,  if  it  is  pure  reason,  determines 
the  will  a  priori  relatively  to  its  object.  Now, 
whether  an  action  which  is  possible  to  us  in  the 
world  of  sense,  comes  under  the  rule  or  not,  is 
a  question  to  be  decided  by  the  practical  judge¬ 
ment,  by  which  what  is  said  in  the  rule  uni¬ 
versally  (in  abstracto)  is  applied  to  an  action  in 
concreto.  But  since  a  practical  rule  of  pure  rea¬ 
son  in  the  first  place  as  practical  concerns  the 
existence  of  an  object,  and  in  the  second  place 
as  a  practical  rule  of  pure  reason  implies  neces¬ 
sity  as  regards  the  existence  of  the  action  and, 
therefore,  is  a  practical  law,  not  a  physical  law 
depending  on  empirical  principles  of  determina¬ 
tion,  but  a  law  of  freedom  by  which  the  will  is 
to  be  determined  independently  on  anything 
empirical  (merely  by  the  conception  of  a  law 
and  its  form),  whereas  all  instances  that  can 
occur  of  possible  actions  can  only  be  empirical, 
that  is,  belong  to  the  experience  of  physical  na¬ 
ture;  hence,  it  seems  absurd  to  expect  to  find 
in  the  world  of  sense  a  case  which,  while  as  such 
it  depends  only  on  the  law  of  nature,  yet  admits 
of  the  application  to  it  of  a  law  of  freedom,  and 
to  which  we  can  apply  the  supersensible  idea  of 
the  morally  good  which  is  to  be  exhibited  in  it 
in  concreto.  Thus,  the  judgement  of  the  pure 
practical  reason  is  subject  to  the  same  difficul¬ 
ties  as  that  of  the  pure  theoretical  reason.  The 
latter,  however,  had  means  at  hand  of  escaping 
from  these  difficulties,  because,  in  regard  to  the 
theoretical  employment,  intuitions  were  required 
to  which  pure  concepts  of  the  understanding 
could  be  applied,  and  such  intuitions  (though 
only  of  objects  of  the  senses)  can  be  given  a  pri¬ 
ori  and,  therefore,  as  far  as  regards  the  union  of 
the  manifold  in  them,  conforming  to  the  pure  a 
priori  concepts  of  the  understanding  as  sche¬ 
mata.  On  the  other  hand,  the  morally  good  is 
something  whose  object  is  supersensible;  for 
which,  therefore,  nothing  corresponding  can  be 
found  in  any  sensible  intuition.  Judgement  de¬ 
pending  on  laws  of  pure  practical  reason  seems, 
therefore,  to  be  subject  to  special  difficulties 
arising  from  this,  that  a  law  of  freedom  is  to  be 
applied  to  actions,  which  are  events  taking  place 
in  the  world  of  sense,  and  which,  so  far,  belong 
to  physical  nature. 

But  here  again  is  opened  a  favourable  pros¬ 
pect  for  the  pure  practical  judgement.  When  I 
subsume  under  a  pure  practical  law  an  action 


CRITIQUE  OF 


320 

possible  to  me  in  the  world  of  sense,  I  am  not 
concerned  with  the  possibility  of  the  action  as 
an  event  in  the  world  of  sense.  This  is  a  matter 
that  belongs  to  the  decision  of  reason  in  its  the¬ 
oretic  use  according  to  the  law  of  causality, 
which  is  a  pure  concept  of  the  understanding, 
for  which  reason  has  a  schema  in  the  sensible 
intuition.  Physical  causality,  or  the  condition 
under  which  it  takes  place,  belongs  to  the  physi¬ 
cal  concepts,  the  schema  of  which  is  sketched 
by  transcendental  imagination.  Here,  however, 
we  have  to  do,  not  with  the  schema  of  a  case 
that  occurs  according  to  laws,  but  with  the 
schema  of  a  law  itself  (if  the  word  is  allowable 
here),  since  the  fact  that  the  will  (not  the  ac¬ 
tion  relatively  to  its  effect)  is  determined  by  the 
law  alone  without  any  other  principle,  connects 
the  notion  of  causality  with  quite  different  con¬ 
ditions  from  those  which  constitute  physical 
connection. 

The  physical  law  being  a  law  to  which  the  ob¬ 
jects  of  sensible  intuition,  as  such,  are  subject, 
must  have  a  schema  corresponding  to  it — that 
is,  a  general  procedure  of  the  imagination  (by 
which  it  exhibits  a  priori  to  the  senses  the  pure 
concept  of  the  understanding  which  the  law  de¬ 
termines).  But  the  law  of  freedom  (that  is,  of  a 
causality  not  subject  to  sensible  conditions), 
and  consequently  the  concept  of  the  uncondi¬ 
tionally  good,  cannot  have  any  intuition,  nor 
consequently  any  schema  supplied  to  it  for  the 
purpose  of  its  application  in  concreto.  Conse¬ 
quently  the  moral  law  has  no  faculty  but  the 
understanding  to  aid  its  application  to  physical 
objects  (not  the  imagination);  and  the  under¬ 
standing  for  the  purposes  of  the  judgement  can 
provide  for  an  idea  of  the  reason,  not  a  schema 
of  the  sensibility,  but  a  law,  though  only  as  to 
its  form  as  law;  such  a  law,  however,  as  can  be 
exhibited  in  concreto  in  objects  of  the  senses, 
and  therefore  a  law  of  nature.  We  can  therefore 
call  this  law  the  type  of  the  moral  law. 

The  rule  of  the  judgement  according  to  laws 
of  pure  practical  reason  is  this:  ask  yourself 
whether,  if  the  action  you  propose  were  to  take 
place  by  a  law  of  the  system  of  nature  of  which 
you  were  yourself  a  part,  you  could  regard  it  as 
possible  by  your  own  will.  Everyone  does,  in 
fact,  decide  by  this  rule  whether  actions  are 
morally  good  or  evil.  Thus,  people  say:  “If 
everyone  permitted  himself  to  deceive,  when  he 
thought  it  to  his  advantage;  or  thought  himself 
justified  in  shortening  his  life  as  soon  as  he  was 
thoroughly  weary  of  it;  or  looked  with  perfect 
indifference  on  the  necessity  of  others;  and  if 
you  belonged  to  such  an  order  of  things,  would 


you  do  so  with  the  assent  of  your  own  will?” 
Now  everyone  knows  well  that  if  he  secretly 
allows  himself  to  deceive,  it  does  not  follow 
that  everyone  else  does  so;  or  if,  unobserved, 
he  is  destitute  of  compassion,  others  would  not 
necessarily  be  so  to  him;  hence,  this  compari¬ 
son  of  the  maxim  of  his  actions  with  a  universal 
law  of  nature  is  not  the  determining  principle 
of  his  will.  Such  a  law  is,  nevertheless,  a  type  of 
the  estimation  of  the  maxim  on  moral  principles. 
If  the  maxim  of  the  action  is  not  such  as  to 
stand  the  test  of  the  form  of  a  universal  law  of 
nature,  then  it  is  morally  impossible.  This  is  the 
judgement  even  of  common  sense;  for  its  ordi¬ 
nary  judgements,  even  those  of  experience,  are 
always  based  on  the  law  of  nature.  It  has  it 
therefore  always  at  hand,  only  that  in  cases 
where  causality  from  freedom  is  to  be  criticised, 
it  makes  that  law  of  nature  only  the  type  of  a 
law  of  freedom ,  because,  without  something 
which  it  could  use  as  an  example  in  a  case  of  ex¬ 
perience,  it  could  not  give  the  law  of  a  pure 
practical  reason  its  proper  use  in  practice. 

It  is  therefore  allowable  to  use  the  system  of 
the  world  of  sense  as  the  type  of  a  supersensible 
system  of  things ,  provided  I  do  not  transfer  to 
the  latter  the  intuitions,  and  what  depends  on 
them,  but  merely  apply  to  it  the  form  of  law  in 
general  (the  notion  of  which  occurs  even  in  the 
commonest  use  of  reason,  but  cannot  be  defi¬ 
nitely  known  a  priori  for  any  other  purpose  than 
the  pure  practical  use  of  reason) ;  for  laws,  as 
such,  are  so  far  identical,  no  matter  from  what 
they  derive  their  determining  principles. 

Further,  since  of  all  the  supersensible  ab¬ 
solutely  nothing  [is  known]  except  freedom 
(through  the  moral  law),  and  this  only  so  far 
as  it  is  inseparably  implied  in  that  law,  and 
moreover  all  supersensible  objects  to  which  rea¬ 
son  might  lead  us,  following  the  guidance  of 
that  law,  have  still  no  reality  for  us,  except  for 
the  purpose  of  that  law,  and  for  the  use  of  mere 
practical  reason;  and  as  reason  is  authorized 
and  even  compelled  to  use  physical  nature  (in 
its  pure  form  as  an  object  of  the  understanding) 
as  the  type  of  the  judgement;  hence,  the  pres¬ 
ent  remark  will  serve  to  guard  against  reckon¬ 
ing  amongst  concepts  themselves  that  which  be¬ 
longs  only  to  the  typic  of  concepts.  This,  name¬ 
ly,  as  a  typic  of  the  judgement,  guards  against 
the  empiricism  of  practical  reason,  which  founds 
the  practical  notions  of  good  and  evil  merely  on 
experienced  consequences  (so-called  happiness). 
No  doubt  happiness  and  the  infinite  advantages 
which  would  result  from  a  will  determined  by 
self-love,  if  this  will  at  the  same  time  erected 


PRACTICAL  REASON 


itself  into  a  universal  law  of  nature,  may  cer¬ 
tainly  serve  as  a  perfectly  suitable  type  of  the 
morally  good,  but  it  is  not  identical  with  it.  The 
same  typic  guards  also  against  the  mysticism 
of  practical  reason,  which  turns  what  served 
only  as  a  symbol  into  a  schema,  that  is,  proposes 
to  provide  for  the  moral  concepts  actual  intui¬ 
tions,  which,  however,  are  not  sensible  (intui¬ 
tions  of  an  invisible  Kingdom  of  God),  and  thus 
plunges  into  the  transcendent.  What  is  befitting 
the  use  of  the  moral  concepts  is  only  the  ra¬ 
tionalism  of  the  judgement,  which  takes  from 
the  sensible  system  of  nature  only  what  pure 
reason  can  also  conceive  of  itself,  that  is,  con¬ 
formity  to  law,  and  transfers  into  the  super¬ 
sensible  nothing  but  what  can  conversely  be  ac¬ 
tually  exhibited  by  actions  in  the  world  of  sense 
according  to  the  formal  rule  of  a  law  of  nature. 
However,  the  caution  against  empiricism  of 
practical  reason  is  much  more  important;  for 
mysticism  is  quite  reconcilable  with  the  purity 
and  sublimity  of  the  moral  law,  and,  besides,  it 
is  not  very  natural  or  agreeable  to  common 
habits  of  thought  to  strain  one’s  imagination  to 
supersensible  intuitions;  and  hence  the  danger 
on  this  side  is  not  so  general.  Empiricism,  on 
the  contrary,  cuts  up  at  the  roots  the  morality 
of  intentions  (in  which,  and  not  in  actions  only, 
consists  the  high  worth  that  men  can  and  ought 
to  give  to  themselves),  and  substitutes  for  duty 
something  quite  different,  namely,  an  empirical 
interest,  with  which  the  inclinations  generally 
are  secretly  leagued;  and  empiricism,  more¬ 
over,  being  on  this  account  allied  with  all  the 
inclinations  which  (no  matter  what  fashion  they 
put  on)  degrade  humanity  when  they  are  raised 
to  the  dignity  of  a  supreme  practical  principle; 
and  as  these,  nevertheless,  are  so  favourable 
to  everyone’s  feelings,  it  is  for  that  reason  much 
more  dangerous  than  mysticism,  which  can 
never  constitute  a  lasting  condition  of  any  great 
number  of  persons. 

Chapter  III.  Of  the  Motives  of  Pure 
Practical  Reason 

What  is  essential  in  the  moral  worth  of  actions 
is  that  the  moral  law  should  directly  determine 
the  will.  If  the  determination  of  the  will  takes 
place  in  conformity  indeed  to  the  moral  law, 
but  only  by  means  of  a  feeling,  no  matter  of 
what  kind,  which  has  to  be  presupposed  in  order 
that  the  law  may  be  sufficient  to  determine  the 
will,  and  therefore  not  for  the  sake  of  the  law, 
then  the  action  will  possess  legality,  but  not 
morality.  Now,  if  we  understand  by  motive 
( elater  animi)  the  subjective  ground  of  deter¬ 


mination  of  the  will  of  a  being  whose  reason 
does  not  necessarily  conform  to  the  objective 
law,  by  virtue  of  its  own  nature,  then  it  will  fol¬ 
low,  first,  that  not  motives  can  be  attributed  to 
the  Divine  will,  and  that  the  motives  of  the  hu¬ 
man  will  (as  well  as  that  of  every  created  ra¬ 
tional  being)  can  never  be  anything  else  than 
the  moral  law,  and  consequently  that  the  ob¬ 
jective  principle  of  determination  must  always 
and  alone  be  also  the  subjectively  sufficient  de¬ 
termining  principle  of  the  action,  if  this  is  not 
merely  to  fulfil  the  letter  of  the  law,  without 
containing  its  spirit.1 

Since,  then,  for  the  purpose  of  giving  the 
moral  law  influence  over  the  will,  we  must  not 
seek  for  any  other  motives  that  might  enable 
us  to  dispense  with  the  motive  of  the  law  itself, 
because  that  would  produce  mere  hypocrisy, 
without  consistency;  and  it  is  even  dangerous 
to  allow  other  motives  (for  instance,  that  of  in¬ 
terest)  even  to  co-operate  along  with  the  moral 
law;  hence  nothing  is  left  us  but  to  determine 
carefully  in  what  way  the  moral  law  becomes  a 
motive,  and  what  effect  this  has  upon  the  fac¬ 
ulty  of  desire.  For  as  to  the  question  how  a  law 
can  be  directly  and  of  itself  a  determining  prin¬ 
ciple  of  the  will  (which  is  the  essence  of  moral¬ 
ity),  this  is,  for  human  reason,  an  insoluble 
problem  and  identical  with  the  question:  how 
a  free  will  is  possible.  Therefore  what  we  have 
to  show  a  priori  is  not  why  the  moral  law  in 
itself  supplies  a  motive,  but  what  effect  it,  as 
such,  produces  (or,  more  correctly  speaking, 
must  produce)  on  the  mind. 

The  essential  point  in  every  determination  of 
the  will  by  the  moral  law  is  that  being  a  free 
will  it  is  determined  simply  by  the  moral  law, 
not  only  without  the  co-operation  of  sensible 
impulses,  but  even  to  the  rejection  of  all  such, 
and  to  the  checking  of  all  inclinations  so  far  as 
they  might  be  opposed  to  that  law.  So  far,  then, 
the  effect  of  the  moral  law  as  a  motive  is  only 
negative,  and  this  motive  can  be  known  a  priori 
to  be  such.  For  all  inclination  and  every  sensible 
impulse  is  founded  on  feeling,  and  the  negative 
effect  produced  on  feeling  (by  the  check  on 
the  inclinations)  is  itself  feeling;  consequently, 
we  can  see  a  priori  that  the  moral  law,  as  a  de¬ 
termining  principle  of  the  will,  must  by  thwart¬ 
ing  all  our  inclinations  produce  a  feeling  which 
may  be  called  pain;  and  in  this  we  have  the  first, 
perhaps  the  only,  instance  in  which  we  are  able 
from  a  priori  considerations  to  determine  the 

1  We  may  say  of  every  action  that  conforms  to  the 
law,  but  is  not  done  for  the  sake  of  the  law,  that 
it  is  morally  good  in  the  letter,  not  in  the  spirit  (the 
intention). 


CRITIQUE  OF 


1  elation  of  a  cognition  (in  this  case  of  pure 
practical  reason)  to  the  feeling  of  pleasure  or 
displeasure.  All  the  inclinations  together  (which 
can  be  reduced  to  a  tolerable  system,  in  which 
case  their  satisfaction  is  called  happiness )  con¬ 
stitute  self-regard  ( solipsismus ).  This  is  either 
the  self-love  that  consists  in  an  excessive  fond¬ 
ness  for  oneself  ( philautia ),  or  satisfaction  with 
oneself  ( arrogantia ).  The  former  is  called  par¬ 
ticularly  selfishness;  the  latter  self-conceit. 
Pure  practical  reason  only  checks  selfishness, 
looking  on  it  as  natural  and  active  in  us  even 
prior  to  the  moral  law,  so  far  as  to  limit  it  to 
the  condition  of  agreement  with  this  law,  and 
then  it  is  called  rational  self-love.  But  self-con¬ 
ceit  reason  strikes  down  altogether,  since  all 
claims  to  self-esteem  which  precede  agreement 
with  the  moral  law  are  vain  and  unjustifiable, 
for  the  certainty  of  a  state  of  mind  that  co¬ 
incides  with  this  law  is  the  first  condition  of 
personal  worth  (as  we  shall  presently  show  more 
clearly),  and  prior  to  this  conformity  any  pre¬ 
tension  to  worth  is  false  and  unlawful.  Now  the 
propensity  to  self-esteem  is  one  of  the  inclina¬ 
tions  which  the  moral  law  checks,  inasmuch  as 
that  esteem  rests  only  on  morality.  Therefore 
the  moral  law  breaks  down  self-conceit.  But  as 
this  law  is  something  positive  in  itself,  namely, 
the  form  of  an  intellectual  causality,  that  is,  of 
freedom,  it  must  be  an  object  of  respect;  for, 
by  opposing  the  subjective  antagonism  of  the 
inclinations,  it  weakens  self-conceit;  and  since 
it  even  breaks  down ,  that  is,  humiliates,  this 
conceit,  it  is  an  object  of  the  highest  respect 
and,  consequently,  is  the  foundation  of  a  posi¬ 
tive  feeling  which  is  not  of  empirical  origin,  but 
is  known  a  priori.  Therefore  respect  for  the 
moral  law  is  a  feeling  which  is  produced  by  an 
intellectual  cause,  and  this  feeling  is  the  only 
one  that  we  know  quite  a  priori  and  the  neces¬ 
sity  of  which  we  can  perceive. 

In  the  preceding  chapter  we  have  seen  that 
everything  that  presents  itself  as  an  object  of 
the  will  prior  to  the  moral  law  is  by  that  law 
itself,  which  is  the  supreme  condition  of  prac¬ 
tical  reason,  excluded  from  the  determining 
principles  of  the  will  which  we  have  called  the 
unconditionally  good;  and  that  the  mere  prac¬ 
tical  form  which  consists  in  the  adaptation  of 
the  maxims  to  universal  legislation  first  deter¬ 
mines  what  is  good  in  itself  and  absolutely,  and 
is  the  basis  of  the  maxims  of  a  pure  will,  which 
alone  is  good  in  every  respect.  However,  we 
find  that  our  nature  as  sensible  beings  is  such 
that  the  matter  of  desire  (objects  of  inclination, 
whether  of  hope  or  fear)  first  presents  itself 


to  us;  and  our  pathologically  affected  self,  al¬ 
though  it  is  in  its  maxims  quite  unfit  for  uni¬ 
versal  legislation;  yet,  just  as  if  it  constituted 
our  entire  self,  strives  to  put  its  pretensions 
forward  first,  and  to  have  them  acknowledged 
as  the  first  and  original.  This  propensity  to 
make  ourselves  in  the  subjective  determining 
principles  of  our  choice  serve  as  the  objective 
determining  principle  of  the  will  generally  may 
be  called  self-love;  and  if  this  pretends  to  be 
legislative  as  an  unconditional  practical  princi¬ 
ple  it  may  be  called  self-co?iceit.  Now  the  moral 
law,  which  alone  is  truly  objective  (namely,  in 
every  respect),  entirely  excludes  the  influence 
of  self-love  on  the  supreme  practical  principle, 
and  indefinitely  checks  the  self-conceit  that 
prescribes  the  subjective  conditions  of  the  for¬ 
mer  as  laws.  Now  whatever  checks  our  self-con¬ 
ceit  in  our  own  judgement  humiliates;  therefore 
the  moral  law  inevitably  humbles  every  man 
when  he  compares  with  it  the  physical  propen¬ 
sities  of  his  nature.  That,  the  idea  of  which  as 
a  determming  principle  of  our  will  humbles  us 
in  our  self-consciousness,  awakes  respect  for 
itself,  so  far  as  it  is  itself  positive  and  a  deter¬ 
mining  principle.  Therefore  the  moral  law  is 
even  subjectively  a  cause  of  respect.  Now  since 
everything  that  enters  into  self-love  belongs  to 
inclination,  and  all  inclination  rests  on  feelings, 
and  consequently  whatever  checks  all  the  feel¬ 
ings  together  in  self-love  has  necessarily,  by  this 
very  circumstance,  an  influence  on  feeling; 
hence  we  comprehend  how  it  is  possible  to  per¬ 
ceive  a  priori  that  the  moral  law  can  produce  an 
effect  on  feeling,  in  that  it  excludes  the  inclina¬ 
tions  and  the  propensity  to  make  them  the  su¬ 
preme  practical  condition,  i.  e.,  self-love,  from 
all  participation  in  the  supreme  legislation.  This 
effect  is  on  one  side  merely  negative ,  but  on  the 
other  side,  relatively  to  the  restricting  principle 
of  pure  practical  reason,  it  is  positive.  No  spe¬ 
cial  kind  of  feeling  need  be  assumed  for  this 
under  the  name  of  a  practical  or  moral  feeling 
as  antecedent  to  the  moral  law  and  serving  as 
its  foundation. 

The  negative  effect  on  feeling  (unpleasant¬ 
ness)  is  pathological ,  like  every  influence  on 
feeling  and  like  every  feeling  generally.  But  as 
an  effect  of  the  consciousness  of  the  moral  law, 
and  consequently  in  relation  to  a  supersensible 
cause,  namely,  the  subject  of  pure  practical 
reason  which  is  the  supreme  lawgiver,  this  feel¬ 
ing  of  a  rational  being  affected  by  inclinations 
is  called  humiliation  (intellectual  self-deprecia¬ 
tion)  ;  but  with  reference  to  the  positive  source 
of  this  humiliation,  the  law,  it  is  respect  for  it. 


PRACTICAL  REASON 


There  is  indeed  no  feeling  for  this  law;  but  in¬ 
asmuch  as  it  removes  the  resistance  out  of  the 
way,  this  removal  of  an  obstacle  is,  in  the  judge¬ 
ment  of  reason,  esteemed  equivalent  to  a  posi¬ 
tive  help  to  its  causality.  Therefore  this  feeling 
may  also  be  called  a  feeling  of  respect  for  the 
moral  law,  and  for  both  reasons  together  a 
moral  feeling. 

While  the  moral  law,  therefore,  is  a  formal 
determining  principle  of  action  by  practical 
pure  reason,  and  is  moreover  a  material  though 
only  objective  determining  principle  of  the  ob¬ 
jects  of  action  as  called  good  and  evil,  it  is  also 
a  subjective  determining  principle,  that  is,  a 
motive  to  this  action,  inasmuch  as  it  has  influ¬ 
ence  on  the  morality  of  the  subject  and  pro¬ 
duces  a  feeling  conducive  to  the  influence  of  the 
law  on  the  will.  There  is  here  in  the  subject  no 
antecedent  feeling  tending  to  morality.  For  this 
is  impossible,  since  every  feeling  is  sensible,  and 
the  motive  of  moral  intention  must  be  free  from 
all  sensible  conditions.  On  the  contrary,  while 
the  sensible  feeling  which  is  at  the  bottom  of 
all  our  inclinations  is  the  condition  of  that  im¬ 
pression  which  we  call  respect ,  the  cause  that 
determines  it  lies  in  the  pure  practical  reason; 
and  this  impression  therefore,  on  account  of  its 
origin,  must  be  called,  not  a  pathological  but 
a  practical  effect.  For  by  the  fact  that  the  con¬ 
ception  of  the  moral  law  deprives  self-love  of 
its  influence,  and  self-conceit  of  its  illusion,  it 
lessens  the  obstacle  to  pure  practical  reason  and 
produces  the  conception  of  the  superiority  of 
its  objective  law  to  the  impulses  of  the  sensi¬ 
bility;  and  thus,  by  removing  the  counterpoise, 
it  gives  relatively  greater  weight  to  the  law  in 
the  judgement  of  reason  (in  the  case  of  a  will 
affected  by  the  aforesaid  impulses).  Thus  the 
respect  for  the  law  is  not  a  motive  to  morality, 
but  is  morality  itself  subjectively  considered  as 
a  motive,  inasmuch  as  pure  practical  reason, 
by  rejecting  all  the  rival  pretensions  of  self- 
love,  gives  authority  to  the  law,  which  now 
alone  has  influence.  Now  it  is  to  be  observed 
that  as  respect  is  an  effect  on  feeling,  and  there¬ 
fore  on  the  sensibility,  of  a  rational  being,  it 
presupposes  this  sensibility,  and  therefore  also 
the  finiteness  of  such  beings  on  whom  the  moral 
law  imposes  respect;  and  that  respect  for  the 
law  cannot  be  attributed  to  a  supreme  being, 
or  to  any  being  free  from  all  sensibility,  in 
whom,  therefore,  this  sensibility  cannot  be  an 
obstacle  to  practical  reason. 

This  feeling  (which  we  call  the  moral  feeling) 
is  therefore  produced  simply  by  reason.  It  does 
not  serve  for  the  estimation  of  actions  nor  for 


323 

the  foundation  of  the  objective  moral  law  it¬ 
self,  but  merely  as  a  motive  to  make  this  of 
itself  a  maxim.  But  what  name  could  we  more 
suitably  apply  to  this  singular  feeling  which 
cannot  be  compared  to  any  pathological  feel¬ 
ing?  It  is  of  such  a  peculiar  kind  that  it  seems 
to  be  at  the  disposal  of  reason  only,  and  that 
pure  practical  reason. 

Respect  applies  always  to  persons  only — not 
to  things.  The  latter  may  arouse  inclination, 
and  if  they  are  animals  (e.  g.,  horses,  dogs,  etc.), 
even  love  or  fear ,  like  the  sea,  a  volcano,  a  beast 
of  prey;  but  never  respect.  Something  that 
comes  nearer  to  this  feeling  is  admiration ,  and 
this,  as  an  affection,  astonishment,  can  apply 
to  things  also,  e.g.,  lofty  mountains,  the  mag¬ 
nitude,  number,  and  distance  of  the  heavenly 
bodies,  the  strength  and  swiftness  of  many  ani¬ 
mals,  etc.  But  all  this  is  not  respect.  A  man  also 
may  be  an  object  to  me  of  love,  fear,  or  admira¬ 
tion,  even  to  astonishment,  and  yet  not  be  an 
object  of  respect.  His  jocose  humour,  his  cour¬ 
age  and  strength,  his  power  from  the  rank  he 
has  amongst  others,  may  inspire  me  with  senti¬ 
ments  of  this  kind,  but  still  inner  respect  for 
him  is  wanting.  Fontenelle  says,  “I  bow  before 
a  great  man,  but  my  mind  does  not  bow.”  I 
would  add,  before  an  humble  plain  man,  in 
whom  I  perceive  uprightness  of  character  in  a 
higher  degree  than  I  am  conscious  of  in  myself, 
my  mind  bows  whether  I  choose  it  or  not,  and 
though  I  bear  my  head  never  so  high  that  he 
may  not  forget  my  superior  rank.  Why  is  this? 
Because  his  example  exhibits  to  me  a  law  that 
humbles  my  self-conceit  when  I  compare  it  with 
my  conduct:  a  law,  the  practicability  of  obedi¬ 
ence  to  which  I  see  proved  by  fact  before  my 
eyes.  Now,  I  may  even  be  conscious  of  a  like 
degree  of  uprightness,  and  yet  the  respect  re¬ 
mains.  For  since  in  man  all  good  is  defective, 
the  law  made  visible  by  an  example  still  hum¬ 
bles  my  pride,  my  standard  being  furnished  by 
a  man  whose  imperfections,  whatever  they  may 
be,  are  not  known  to  me  as  my  own  are,  and 
who  therefore  appears  to  me  in  a  more  favour¬ 
able  light.  Respect  is  a  tribute  which  we  cannot 
refuse  to  merit,  whether  we  will  or  not;  we  may 
indeed  outwardly  withhold  it,  but  we  cannot 
help  feeling  it  inwardly. 

Respect  is  so  far  from  being  a  feeling  of 
pleasure  that  we  only  reluctantly  give  way  to 
it  as  regards  a  man.  We  try  to  find  out  some¬ 
thing  that  may  lighten  the  burden  of  it,  some 
fault  to  compensate  us  for  the  humiliation  which 
such  an  example  causes.  Even  the  dead  are  not 
always  secure  from  this  criticism,  especially  if 


CRITIQUE  OF 


their  example  appears  inimitable.  Even  the  mor¬ 
al  law  itself  in  its  solemn  majesty  is  exposed  to 
this  endeavour  to  save  oneself  from  yielding  it 
respect.  Can  it  be  thought  that  it  is  for  any 
other  reason  that  we  are  so  ready  to  reduce  it 
to  the  level  of  our  familiar  inclination  or  that 
it  is  for  any  other  reason  that  we  all  take  such 
trouble  to  make  it  out  to  be  the  chosen  precept 
of  our  own  interest  well  understood,  but  that  we 
want  to  be  free  from  the  deterrent  respect 
which  shows  us  our  own  unworthiness  with  such 
severity?  Nevertheless,  on  the  other  hand,  so 
little  is  there  pain  in  it  that  if  once  one  has  laid 
aside  self-conceit  and  allowed  practical  influ¬ 
ence  to  that  respect,  he  can  never  be  satisfied 
with  contemplating  the  majesty  of  this  law,  and 
the  soul  believes  itself  elevated  in  proportion 
as  it  sees  the  holy  law  elevated  above  it  and  its 
frail  nature.  No  doubt  great  talents  and  activity 
proportioned  to  them  may  also  occasion  respect 
or  an  analogous  feeling.  It  is  very  proper  to 
yield  it  to  them,  and  then  it  appears  as  if  this 
sentiment  were  the  same  thing  as  admiration. 
But  if  we  look  closer  we  shall  observe  that  it  is 
always  uncertain  how  much  of  the  ability  is  due 
to  native  talent,  and  how  much  to  diligence  in 
cultivating  it.  Reason  represents  it  to  us  as 
probably  the  fruit  of  cultivation,  and  therefore 
as  meritorious,  and  this  notably  reduces  our 
self-conceit,  and  either  casts  a  reproach  on  us 
or  urges  us  to  follow  such  an  example  in  the  way 
that  is  suitable  to  us.  This  respect,  then,  which 
we  show  to  such  a  person  (properly  speaking, 
to  the  law  that  his  example  exhibits)  is  not  mere 
admiration;  and  this  is  confirmed  also  by  the 
fact  that  when  the  common  run  of  admirers 
think  they  have  learned  from  any  source  the 
badness  of  such  a  man’s  character  (for  instance 
Voltaire’s)  they  give  up  all  respect  for  him; 
whereas  the  true  scholar  still  feels  it  at  least 
with  regard  to  his  talents,  because  he  is  himself 
engaged  in  a  business  and  a  vocation  which 
make  imitation  of  such  a  man  in  some  degree 
a  law. 

Respect  for  the  moral  law  is,  therefore,  the 
only  and  the  undoubted  moral  motive,  and  this 
feeling  is  directed  to  no  object,  except  on  the 
ground  of  this  law.  The  moral  law  first  deter¬ 
mines  the  will  objectively  and  directly  in  the 
judgement  of  reason;  and  freedom,  whose  cau¬ 
sality  can  be  determined  only  by  the  law,  con¬ 
sists  just  in  this,  that  it  restricts  all  inclinations, 
and  consequently  self-esteem,  by  the  condition 
of  obedience  to  its  pure  law.  This  restriction 
now  has  an  effect  on  feeling,  and  produces  the 
impression  of  displeasure  which  can  be  known 


a  priori  from  the  moral  law.  Since  it  is  so  far 
only  a  negative  effect  which,  arising  from  the 
influence  of  pure  practical  reason,  checks  the 
activity  of  the  subject,  so  far  as  it  is  determined 
by  inclinations,  and  hence  checks  the  opinion 
of  his  personal  worth  (which,  in  the  absence  of 
agreement  with  the  moral  law,  is  reduced  to 
nothing) ;  hence,  the  effect  of  this  law  on  feeling 
is  merely  humiliation.  We  can,  therefore,  per¬ 
ceive  this  a  priori,  but  cannot  know  by  it  the 
force  of  the  pure  practical  law  as  a  motive,  but 
only  the  resistance  to  motives  of  the  sensibility. 
But  since  the  same  law  is  objectively,  that  is, 
in  the  conception  of  pure  reason,  an  immediate 
principle  of  determination  of  the  will,  and  con¬ 
sequently  this  humiliation  takes  place  only  rela¬ 
tively  to  the  purity  of  the  law;  hence,  the  lower¬ 
ing  of  the  pretensions  of  moral  self-esteem,  that 
is,  humiliation  on  the  sensible  side,  is  an  eleva¬ 
tion  of  the  moral,  i.e.,  practical,  esteem  for  the 
law  itself  on  the  intellectual  side;  in  a  word,  it 
is  respect  for  the  law,  and  therefore,  as  its  cause 
is  intellectual,  a  positive  feeling  which  can  be 
known  a  priori.  For  whatever  diminishes  the 
obstacles  to  an  activity  furthers  this  activity 
itself.  Now  the  recognition  of  the  moral  law  is 
the  consciousness  of  an  activity  of  practical 
reason  from  objective  principles,  which  only 
fails  to  reveal  its  effect  in  actions  because  sub¬ 
jective  (pathological)  causes  hinder  it.  Respect 
for  the  moral  law  then  must  be  regarded  as  a 
positive,  though  indirect,  effect  of  it  on  feeling, 
inasmuch  as  this  respect  weakens  the  imped¬ 
ing  influence  of  inclinations  by  humiliating  self¬ 
esteem;  and  hence  also  as  a  subjective  principle 
of  activity,  that  is,  as  a  motive  to  obedience  to 
the  law,  and  as  a  principle  of  the  maxims  of  a 
life  conformable  to  it.  From  the  notion  of  a 
motive  arises  that  of  an  interest ,  which  can 
never  be  attributed  to  any  being  unless  it  pos¬ 
sesses  reason,  and  which  signifies  a  motive  of 
the  will  in  so  far  as  it  is  conceived  by  the  reason. 
Since  in  a  morally  good  will  the  law  itself  must 
be  the  motive,  the  moral  interest  is  a  pure  in¬ 
terest  of  practical  reason  alone,  independent  of 
sense.  On  the  notion  of  an  interest  is  based  that 
of  a  maxim.  This,  therefore,  is  morally  good 
only  in  case  it  rests  simply  on  the  interest  taken 
in  obedience  to  the  law.  All  three  notions,  how¬ 
ever,  that  of  a  motive ,  of  an  interest,  and  of  a 
maxim,  can  be  applied  only  to  finite  beings.  For 
they  all  suppose  a  limitation  of  the  nature  of 
the  being,  in  that  the  subjective  character  of 
his  choice  does  not  of  itself  agree  with  the  ob¬ 
jective  law  of  a  practical  reason;  they  suppose 
that  the  being  requires  to  be  impelled  to  action 


PRACTICAL  REASON 


by  something,  because  an  internal  obstacle  op¬ 
poses  itself.  Therefore  they  cannot  be  applied 
to  the  Divine  will. 

There  is  something  so  singular  in  the  un¬ 
bounded  esteem  for  the  pure  moral  law,  apart 
from  all  advantage,  as  it  is  presented  for  our 
obedience  by  practical  reason,  the  voice  of 
which  makes  even  the  boldest  sinner  tremble 
and  compels  him  to  hide  himself  from  it,  that 
we  cannot  wonder  if  we  find  this  influence  of  a 
mere  intellectual  idea  on  the  feelings  quite  in¬ 
comprehensible  to  speculative  reason  and  have 
to  be  satisfied  with  seeing  so  much  of  this  a 
priori  that  such  a  feeling  is  inseparably  con¬ 
nected  with  the  conception  of  the  moral  law  in 
every  finite  rational  being.  If  this  feeling  of  re¬ 
spect  were  pathological,  and  therefore  were  a 
feeling  of  pleasure  based  on  the  inner  sense ,  it 
would  be  in  vain  to  try  to  discover  a  connection 
of  it  with  any  idea  a  priori.  But  [it]  is  a  feel¬ 
ing  that  applies  merely  to  what  is  practical,  and 
depends  on  the  conception  of  a  law,  simply  as 
to  its  form,  not  on  account  of  any  object,  and 
therefore  cannot  be  reckoned  either  as  pleasure 
or  pain,  and  yet  produces  an  interest  in  obedi¬ 
ence  to  the  law,  which  we  call  the  moral  inter¬ 
est ,  just  as  the  capacity  of  taking  such  an  inter¬ 
est  in  the  law  (or  respect  for  the  moral  law  it¬ 
self)  is  properly  the  moral  jeeling. 

The  consciousness  of  a  free  submission  of  the 
will  to  the  law,  yet  combined  with  an  inevitable 
constraint  put  upon  all  inclinations,  though  only 
by  our  own  reason,  is  respect  for  the  law.  The 
law  that  demands  this  respect  and  inspires  it  is 
clearly  no  other  than  the  moral  (for  no  other 
precludes  all  inclinations  from  exercising  any 
direct  influence  on  the  will).  An  action  which  is 
objectively  practical  according  to  this  law,  to 
the  exclusion  of  every  determining  principle  of 
inclination,  is  duty ,  and  this  by  reason  of  that 
exclusion  includes  in  its  concept  practical  ob¬ 
ligation,  that  is,  a  determination  to  actions, 
however  reluctantly  they  may  be  done.  The 
feeling  that  arises  from  the  consciousness  of 
this  obligation  is  not  pathological,  as  would  be 
a  feeling  produced  by  an  object  of  the  senses, 
but  practical  only,  that  is,  it  is  made  possible 
by  a  preceding  (objective)  determination  of  the 
will  and  a  causality  of  the  reason.  As  submission 
to  the  law,  therefore,  that  is,  as  a  command 
(announcing  constraint  for  the  sensibly  affected 
subject),  it  contains  in  it  no  pleasure,  but  on 
the  contrary,  so  far,  pain  in  the  action.  On  the 
other  hand,  however,  as  this  constraint  is  exer¬ 
cised  merely  by  the  legislation  of  our  own 
reason,  it  also  contains  something  elevating ,  and 


325 

this  subjective  effect  on  feeling,  inasmuch  as 
pure  practical  reason  is  the  sole  cause  of  it,  may 
be  called  in  this  respect  self -approbation,  since 
we  recognize  ourselves  as  determined  thereto 
solely  by  the  law  without  any  interest,  and  are 
now  conscious  of  a  quite  different  interest  sub¬ 
jectively  produced  thereby,  and  which  is  purely 
practical  and  jree;  and  our  taking  this  interest 
in  an  action  of  duty  is  not  suggested  by  any  in¬ 
clination,  but  is  commanded  and  actually 
brought  about  by  reason  through  the  practical 
law;  whence  this  feeling  obtains  a  special  name, 
that  of  respect. 

The  notion  of  duty,  therefore,  requires  in  the 
action,  objectively,  agreement  with  the  law, 
and,  subjectively  in  its  maxim,  that  respect  for 
the  law  shall  be  the  sole  mode  in  which  the  will 
is  determined  thereby.  And  on  this  rests  the  dis¬ 
tinction  between  the  consciousness  of  having 
acted  according  to  duty  and  from  duty,  that  is, 
from  respect  for  the  law.  The  former  ( legality ) 
is  possible  even  if  inclinations  have  been  the 
determining  principles  of  the  will;  but  the  latter 
(morality),  moral  worth,  can  be  placed  only  in 
this,  that  the  action  is  done  from  duty,  that  is, 
simply  for  the  sake  of  the  law.1 

It  is  of  the  greatest  importance  to  attend  with 
the  utmost  exactness  in  all  moral  judgements  to 
the  subjective  principle  of  all  maxims,  that  all 
the  morality  of  actions  may  be  placed  in  the 
necessity  of  acting  from  duty  and  from  respect 
for  the  law,  not  from  love  and  inclination  for 
that  which  the  actions  are  to  produce.  For  men 
and  all  created  rational  beings  moral  necessity 
is  constraint,  that  is  obligation,  and  every  action 
based  on  it  is  to  be  conceived  as  a  duty,  not  as  a 
proceeding  previously  pleasing,  or  likely  to  be 
pleasing  to  us  of  our  own  accord.  As  if  indeed 
we  could  ever  bring  it  about  that  without  re¬ 
spect  for  the  law,  which  implies  fear,  or  at  least 
apprehension  of  transgression,  we  of  ourselves, 
like  the  independent  Deity,  could  ever  come 
into  possession  of  holiness  of  will  by  the  co¬ 
incidence  of  our  will  with  the  pure  moral  law 
becoming  as  it  were  part  of  our  nature,  never 
to  be  shaken  (in  which  case  the  law  would  cease 
to  be  a  command  for  us,  as  we  could  never  be 
tempted  to  be  untrue  to  it). 

1  If  we  examine  accurately  the  notion  of  respect  for 
persons  as  it  has  been  already  laid  down,  we  shall  per¬ 
ceive  that  it  always  rests  on  the  consciousness  of  a  duty 
which  an  example  shows  us,  and  that  respect,  there¬ 
fore.  can  never  have  any  but  a  moral  ground,  and  that 
it  is  very  good  and  even,  in  a  psychological  point  of 
view,  very  useful  for  the  knowledge  of  mankind,  that 
whenever  we  use  this  expression  we  should  attend  to 
this  secret  and  marvellous,  yet  often  recurring,  re¬ 
gard  which  men  in  their  judgement  pay  to  the  moral 
law. 


CRITIQUE  OF 


The  moral  law  is  in  fact  for  the  will  of  a  per¬ 
fect  being  a  law  of  holiness,  but  for  the  will  of 
every  finite  rational  being  a  law  of  duty,  of 
moral  constraint,  and  of  the  determination  of 
its  actions  by  respect  for  this  law  and  reverence 
for  its  duty.  No  other  subjective  principle  must 
be  assumed  as  a  motive,  else  while  the  action 
might  chance  to  be  such  as  the  law  prescribes, 
yet,  as  does  not  proceed  from  duty,  the  inten¬ 
tion,  which  is  the  thing  properly  in  question  in 
this  legislation,  is  not  moral. 

It  is  a  very  beautiful  thing  to  do  good  to  men 
from  love  to  them  and  from  sympathetic  good 
will,  or  to  be  just  from  love  of  order;  but  this  is 
not  yet  the  true  moral  maxim  of  our  conduct 
which  is  suitable  to  our  position  amongst  ra¬ 
tional  beings  as  men,  when  we  pretend  with 
fanciful  pride  to  set  ourselves  above  the  thought 
of  duty,  like  volunteers,  and,  as  if  we  were  in¬ 
dependent  on  the  command,  to  want  to  do  of 
our  own  good  pleasure  what  we  think  we  need 
no  command  to  do.  We  stand  under  a  discipline 
of  reason  and  in  all  our  maxims  must  not  forget 
our  subjection  to  it,  nor  withdraw  anything 
therefrom,  or  by  an  egotistic  presumption  di¬ 
minish  aught  of  the  authority  of  the  law  (al¬ 
though  our  own  reason  gives  it)  so  as  to  set  the 
determining  principle  of  our  will,  even  though 
the  law  be  conformed  to,  anywhere  else  but  in 
the  law  itself  and  in  respect  for  this  law.  Duty 
and  obligation  are  the  only  names  that  we  must 
give  to  our  relation  to  the  moral  law.  We  are  in¬ 
deed  legislative  members  of  a  moral  kingdom 
rendered  possible  by  freedom,  and  presented  to 
us  by  reason  as  an  object  of  respect;  but  yet  we 
are  subjects  in  it,  not  the  sovereign,  and  to  mis¬ 
take  our  inferior  position  as  creatures,  and  pre¬ 
sumptuously  to  reject  the  authority  of  the  mor¬ 
al  law,  is  already  to  revolt  from  it  in  spirit,  even 
though  the  letter  of  it  is  fulfilled. 

With  this  agrees  very  well  the  possibility  of 
such  a  command  as:  Love  God  above  every¬ 
thing ,  and  thy  neighbour  as  thy  self.1  For  as  a 
command  it  requires  respect  for  a  law  which 
commands  love  and  does  not  leave  it  to  our 
own  arbitrary  choice  to  make  this  our  principle. 
Love  to  God,  however,  considered  as  an  inclina¬ 
tion  (pathological  love),  is  impossible,  for  He 
is  not  an  object  of  the  senses.  The  same  affec¬ 
tion  towards  men  is  possible  no  doubt,  but  can¬ 
not  be  commanded,  for  it  is  not  in  the  power  of 
any  man  to  love  anyone  at  command;  therefore 

1  This  law  is  in  striking  contrast  with  the  princi¬ 
ple  of  private  happiness  which  some  make  the  su¬ 
preme  principle  of  morality.  This  would  be  expressed 
thus:  Love  thyself  above  everything,  and  God  and 
thy  neighbour  for  thine  own  sake. 


it  is  only  practical  love  that  is  meant  in  that 
pith  of  all  laws.  To  love  God  means,  in  this 
sense,  to  like  to  do  His  commandments;  to  love 
one’s  neighbour  means  to  like  to  practise  all 
duties  towards  kim.  But  the  command  that 
makes  this  a  rule  cannot  command  us  to  have 
this  disposition  in  actions  conformed  to  duty, 
but  only  to  endeavour  after  it.  For  a  command 
to  like  to  do  a  thing  is  in  itself  contradictory, 
because  if  we  already  know  of  ourselves  what 
we  are  bound  to  do,  and  if  further  we  are  con¬ 
scious  of  liking  to  do  it,  a  command  would  be 
quite  needless;  and  if  we  do  it  not  willingly,  but 
only  out  of  respect  for  the  law,  a  command  that 
makes  this  respect  the  motive  of  our  maxim 
would  directly  counteract  the  disposition  com¬ 
manded.  That  law  of  all  laws,  therefore,  like  all 
the  moral  precepts  of  the  Gospel,  exhibits  the 
moral  disposition  in  all  its  perfection,  in  which, 
viewed  as  an  ideal  of  holiness,  it  is  not  attain¬ 
able  by  any  creature,  but  yet  is  the  pattern 
which  we  should  strive  to  approach,  and  in  an 
uninterrupted  but  infinite  progress  become  like 
to.  In  fact,  if  a  rational  creature  could  ever 
reach  this  point,  that  he  thoroughly  likes  to  do 
all  moral  laws,  this  would  mean  that  there  does 
not  exist  in  him  even  the  possibility  of  a  desire 
that  would  tempt  him  to  deviate  from  them; 
for  to  overcome  such  a  desire  always  costs  the 
subject  some  sacrifice  and  therefore  requires 
self-compulsion,  that  is,  inward  constraint  to 
something  that  one  does  not  quite  like  to  do; 
and  no  creature  can  ever  reach  this  stage  of 
moral  disposition.  For,  being  a  creature,  and 
therefore  always  dependent  with  respect  to 
what  he  requires  for  complete  satisfaction,  he 
can  never  be  quite  free  from  desires  and  incli¬ 
nations,  and  as  these  rest  on  physical  causes, 
they  can  never  of  themselves  coincide  with  the 
moral  law,  the  sources  of  which  are  quite  dif¬ 
ferent;  and  therefore  they  make  it  necessary  to 
found  the  mental  disposition  of  one’s  maxims 
on  moral  obligation,  not  on  ready  inclination, 
but  on  respect,  which  demands  obedience  to  the 
law,  even  though  one  may  not  like  it;  not  on 
love,  which  apprehends  no  inward  reluctance 
of  the  will  towards  the  law.  Nevertheless,  this 
latter,  namely,  love  to  the  law  (which  would 
then  cease  to  be  a  command,  and  then  morality, 
which  would  have  passed  subjectively  into  holi¬ 
ness,  would  cease  to  be  virtue)  must  be  the  con¬ 
stant  though  unattainable  goal  of  his  endeav¬ 
ours.  For  in  the  case  of  what  we  highly  esteem, 
but  yet  (on  account  of  the  consciousness  of  our 
weakness)  dread,  the  increased  facility  of  satis¬ 
fying  it  changes  the  most  reverential  awe  into 


PRACTICAL  REASON 


inclination,  and  respect  into  love;  at  least  this 
would  be  the  perfection  of  a  disposition  devoted 
to  the  law,  if  it  were  possible  for  a  creature  to 
attain  it. 

This  reflection  is  intended  not  so  much  to 
clear  up  the  evangelical  command  just  cited,  in 
order  to  prevent  religious  fanaticism  in  regard 
to  love  of  God,  but  to  define  accurately  the 
moral  disposition  with  regard  directly  to  our 
duties  towards  men,  and  to  check,  or  if  possible 
prevent,  a  merely  moral  fanaticism  which  in¬ 
fects  many  persons.  The  stage  of  morality  on 
which  man  (and,  as  far  as  we  can  see,  every 
rational  creature)  stands  is  respect  for  the  moral 
law.  The  disposition  that  he  ought  to  have  in 
obeying  this  is  to  obey  it  from  duty,  not  from 
spontaneous  inclination,  or  from  an  endeavour 
taken  up  from  liking  and  unbidden;  and  this 
proper  moral  condition  in  which  he  can  always 
be  is  virtue,  that  is,  moral  disposition  militant, 
and  not  holiness  in  the  fancied  possession  of  a 
perfect  purity  of  the  disposition  of  the  will.  It 
is  nothing  but  moral  fanaticism  and  exaggerated 
self-conceit  that  is  infused  into  the  mind  by  ex¬ 
hortation  to  actions  as  noble,  sublime,  and  mag¬ 
nanimous,  by  which  men  are  led  into  the  delu¬ 
sion  that  it  is  not  duty,  that  is,  respect  for  the 
law,  whose  yoke  (an  easy  yoke  indeed,  because 
reason  itself  imposes  it  on  us)  they  must  bear, 
whether  they  like  it  or  not,  that  constitutes  the 
determining  principle  of  their  actions,  and 
which  always  humbles  them  while  they  obey  it; 
fancying  that  those  actions  are  expected  from 
them,  not  from  duty,  but  as  pure  merit.  For  not 
only  would  they,  in  imitating  such  deeds  from 
such  a  principle,  not  have  fulfilled  the  spirit  of 
the  law  in  the  least,  which  consists  not  in  the 
legality  of  the  action  (without  regard  to  prin¬ 
ciple),  but  in  the  subjection  of  the  mind  to  the 
law;  not  only  do  they  make  the  motives  patho¬ 
logical  (seated  in  sympathy  or  self-love),  not 
moral  (in  the  law),  but  they  produce  in  this 
way  a  vain,  high-flying,  fantastic  way  of  think¬ 
ing,  flattering  themselves  with  a  spontaneous 
goodness  of  heart  that  needs  neither  spur  nor 
bridle,  for  which  no  command  is  needed,  and 
thereby  forgetting  their  obligation,  which  they 
ought  to  think  of  rather  than  merit.  Indeed  ac¬ 
tions  of  others  which  are  done  with  great  sacri¬ 
fice,  and  merely  for  the  sake  of  duty,  may  be 
praised  as  noble  and  sublime,  but  only  so  far 
as  there  are  traces  which  suggest  that  they  were 
done  wholly  out  of  respect  for  duty  and  not 
from  excited  feelings.  If  these,  however,  are  set 
before  anyone  as  examples  to  be  imitated,  re¬ 
spect  for  duty  (which  is  the  only  true  moral 


327 

feeling)  must  be  employed  as  the  motive — this 
severe  holy  precept  which  never  allows  our  vain 
self-love  to  dally  with  pathological  impulses 
(however  analogous  they  may  be  to  morality), 
and  to  take  a  pride  in  meritorious  worth.  Now 
if  we  search  we  shall  find  for  all  actions  that  are 
worthy  of  praise  a  law  of  duty  which  com¬ 
mands,  and  does  not  leave  us  to  choose  what  may 
be  agreeable  to  our  inclinations.  This  is  the  only 
way  of  representing  things  that  can  give  a  moral 
training  to  the  soul,  because  it  alone  is  capable 
of  solid  and  accurately  defined  principles. 

If  fanaticism  in  its  most  general  sense  is  a 
deliberate  overstepping  of  the  limits  of  human 
reason,  then  moral  fanaticism  is  such  an  over¬ 
stepping  of  the  bounds  that  practical  pure  rea¬ 
son  sets  to  mankind,  in  that  it  forbids  us  to 
place  the  subjective  determining  principle  of 
correct  actions,  that  is,  their  moral  motive,  in 
anything  but  the  law  itself,  or  to  place  the  dis¬ 
position  which  is  thereby  brought  into  the  max¬ 
ims  in  anything  but  respect  for  this  law,  and 
hence  commands  us  to  take  as  the  supreme  vital 
principle  of  all  morality  in  men  the  thought  of 
duty,  which  strikes  down  all  arrogance  as  well 
as  vain  self-love. 

If  this  is  so,  it  is  not  only  writers  of  romance 
or  sentimental  educators  (although  they  may 
be  zealous  opponents  of  sentimentalism),  but 
sometimes  even  philosophers,  nay,  even  the  se¬ 
verest  of  all,  the  Stoics,  that  have  brought  in 
moral  fanaticism  instead  of  a  sober  but  wise 
moral  discipline,  although  the  fanaticism  of  the 
latter  was  more  heroic,  that  of  the  former  of  an 
insipid,  effeminate  character;  and  we  may,  with¬ 
out  hypocrisy,  say  of  the  moral  teaching  of  the 
Gospel,  that  it  first,  by  the  purity  of  its  moral 
principle,  and  at  the  same  time  by  its  suitability 
to  the  limitations  of  finite  beings,  brought  all 
the  good  conduct  of  men  under  the  discipline 
of  a  duty  plainly  set  before  their  eyes,  which 
does  not  permit  them  to  indulge  in  dreams  of 
imaginary  moral  perfections;  and  that  it  also 
set  the  bounds  of  humility  (that  is,  self-knowl¬ 
edge)  to  self-conceit  as  well  as  to  self-love,  both 
which  are  ready  to  mistake  their  limits. 

Duty!  Thou  sublime  and  mighty  name  that 
dost  embrace  nothing  charming  or  insinuating, 
but  requirest  submission,  and  yet  seekest  not  to 
move  the  will  by  threatening  aught  that  would 
arouse  natural  aversion  or  terror,  but  merely 
holdest  forth  a  law  which  of  itself  finds  en¬ 
trance  into  the  mind,  and  yet  gains  reluctant 
reverence  (though  not  always  obedience),  a  law 
before  which  all  inclinations  are  dumb,  even 
though  they  secretly  counter-work  it;  what  ori- 


328  CRITIQUE  OF 


gin  is  there  worthy  of  thee,  and  where  is  to  be 
found  the  root  of  thy  noble  descent  which 
proudly  rejects  all  kindred  with  the  inclina¬ 
tions;  a  root  to  be  derived  from  which  is  the  in¬ 
dispensable  condition  of  the  only  worth  which 
men  can  give  themselves? 

It  can  be  nothing  less  than  a  power  which  ele¬ 
vates  man  above  himself  (as  a  part  of  the  world 
of  sense),  a  power  which  connects  him  with  an 
order  of  things  that  only  the  understanding  can 
conceive,  with  a  world  which  at  the  same  time 
commands  the  whole  sensible  world,  and  with  it 
the  empirically  determinable  existence  of  man 
in  time,  as  well  as  the  sum  total  of  all  ends 
(which  totality  alone  suits  such  unconditional 
practical  laws  as  the  moral).  This  power  is  noth¬ 
ing  but  personality,  that  is,  freedom  and  inde¬ 
pendence  on  the  mechanism  of  nature,  yet,  re¬ 
garded  also  as  a  faculty  of  a  being  which  is  sub¬ 
ject  to  special  laws,  namely,  pure  practical  laws 
given  by  its  own  reason;  so  that  the  person  as 
belonging  to  the  sensible  world  is  subject  to  his 
own  personality  as  belonging  to  the  intelligible 
[supersensible]  world.  It  is  then  not  to  be  won¬ 
dered  at  that  man,  as  belonging  to  both  worlds, 
must  regard  his  own  nature  in  reference  to  its 
second  and  highest  characteristic  only  with  rev¬ 
erence,  and  its  laws  with  the  highest  respect. 

On  this  origin  are  founded  many  expressions 
which  designate  the  worth  of  objects  according 
to  moral  ideas.  The  moral  law  is  holy  (invio¬ 
lable).  Man  is  indeed  unholy  enough,  but  he 
must  regard  humanity  in  his  own  person  as  holy. 
In  all  creation  every  thing  one  chooses  and  over 
which  one  has  any  power,  may  be  used  merely 
as  means;  man  alone,  and  with  him  every  ra¬ 
tional  creature,  is  an  end  in  himself .  By  virtue 
of  the  autonomy  of  his  freedom  he  is  the  sub¬ 
ject  of  the  moral  law,  which  is  holy.  Just  for 
this  reason  every  will,  even  every  person’s  own 
individual  will,  in  relation  to  itself,  is  restricted 
to  the  condition  of  agreement  with  the  autono¬ 
my  of  the  rational  being,  that  is  to  say,  that  it  is 
not  to  be  subject  to  any  purpose  which  cannot 
accord  with  a  law  which  might  arise  from  the 
will  of  the  passive  subject  himself;  the  latter 
is,  therefore,  never  to  be  employed  merely  as 
means,  but  as  itself  also,  concurrently,  an  end. 
We  justly  attribute  this  condition  even  to  the 
Divine  will,  with  regard  to  the  rational  beings 
in  the  world,  which  are  His  creatures,  since  it 
rests  on  their  personality ,  by  which  alone  they 
are  ends  in  themselves. 

This  respect-inspiring  idea  of  personality 
which  sets  before  our  eyes  the  sublimity  of  our 
nature  (in  its  higher  aspect),  while  at  the  same 


time  it  shows  us  the  want  of  accord  of  our  con¬ 
duct  with  it  and  thereby  strikes  down  self-con¬ 
ceit,  is  even  natural  to  the  commonest  reason 
and  easily  observed.  Has  not  every  even  mod¬ 
erately  honourable  man  sometimes  found  that, 
where  by  an  otherwise  inoffensive  lie  he  might 
either  have  withdrawn  himself  from  an  unpleas¬ 
ant  business,  or  even  have  procured  some  ad¬ 
vantages  for  a  loved  and  well-deserving  friend, 
he  has  avoided  it  solely  lest  he  should  despise 
himself  secretly  in  his  own  eyes?  When  an  up¬ 
right  man  is  in  the  greatest  distress,  which  he 
might  have  avoided  if  he  could  only  have  dis¬ 
regarded  duty,  is  he  not  sustained  by  the  con¬ 
sciousness  that  he  has  maintained  humanity  in 
its  proper  dignity  in  his  own  person  and  hon¬ 
oured  it,  that  he  has  no  reason  to  be  ashamed 
of  himself  in  his  own  sight,  or  to  dread  the  in¬ 
ward  glance  of  self-examination?  This  consola¬ 
tion  is  not  happiness,  it  is  not  even  the  smallest 
part  of  it,  for  no  one  would  wish  to  have  occa¬ 
sion  for  it,  or  would,  perhaps,  even  desire  a  life 
in  such  circumstances.  But  he  lives,  and  he  can¬ 
not  endure  that  he  should  be  in  his  own  eyes  un¬ 
worthy  of  life.  This  inward  peace  is  therefore 
merely  negative  as  regards  what  can  make  life 
pleasant;  it  is,  in  fact,  only  the  escaping  the 
danger  of  sinking  in  personal  worth,  after  every¬ 
thing  else  that  is  valuable  has  been  lost.  It  is 
the  effect  of  a  respect  for  something  quite  dif¬ 
ferent  from  life,  something  in  comparison  and 
contrast  with  which  life  with  all  its  enjoyment 
has  no  value.  He  still  lives  only  because  it  is  his 
duty,  not  because  he  finds  anything  pleasant  in 
life. 

Such  is  the  nature  of  the  true  motive  of  pure 
practical  reason;  it  is  no  other  than  the  pure 
moral  law  itself,  inasmuch  as  it  makes  us  con¬ 
scious  of  the  sublimity  of  our  own  supersensible 
existence  and  subjectively  produces  respect  for 
their  higher  nature  in  men  who  are  also  con¬ 
scious  of  their  sensible  existence  and  of  the  con¬ 
sequent  dependence  of  their  pathologically  very 
susceptible  nature.  Now  with  this  motive  may 
be  combined  so  many  charms  and  satisfactions 
of  life  that  even  on  this  account  alone  the  most 
prudent  choice  of  a  rational  Epicurean  reflect¬ 
ing  on  the  greatest  advantage  of  life  would  de¬ 
clare  itself  on  the  side  of  moral  conduct,  and  it 
may  even  be  advisable  to  join  this  prospect  of 
a  cheerful  enjoyment  of  life  with  that  supreme 
motive  which  is  already  sufficient  of  itself;  but 
only  as  a  counterpoise  to  the  attractions  which 
vice  does  not  fail  to  exhibit  on  the  opposite  side, 
and  not  so  as,  even  in  the  smallest  degree,  to 
place  in  this  the  proper  moving  power  when 


PRACTICAL  REASON 


duty  is  in  question.  For  that  would  be  just  the 
same  as  to  wish  to  taint  the  purity  of  the  moral 
disposition  in  its  source.  The  majesty  of  duty 
has  nothing  to  do  with  enjoyment  of  life;  it  has 
its  special  law  and  its  special  tribunal,  and 
though  the  two  should  be  never  so  well  shaken 
together  to  be  given  well  mixed,  like  medicine, 
to  the  sick  soul,  yet  they  will  soon  separate  of 
themselves;  and  if  they  do  not,  the  former  will 
not  act;  and  although  physical  life  might  gain 
somewhat  in  force,  the  moral  life  would  fade 
away  irrecoverably. 

Critical  Examination  of  the  Analytic  of  Pure 
Practical  Reason 

By  the  critical  examination  of  a  science,  or 
of  a  portion  of  it,  which  constitutes  a  system  by 
itself,  I  understand  the  inquiry  and  proof  why 
it  must  have  this  and  no  other  systematic  form, 
when  we  compare  it  with  another  system  which 
is  based  on  a  similar  faculty  of  knowledge.  Now 
practical  and  speculative  reason  are  based  on 
the  same  faculty,  so  far  as  both  are  pure  reason. 
Therefore  the  difference  in  their  systematic 
form  must  be  determined  by  the  comparison  of 
both,  and  the  ground  of  this  must  be  assigned. 

The  Analytic  of  pure  theoretic  reason  had  to 
do  with  the  knowledge  of  such  objects  as  may 
have  been  given  to  the  understanding,  and  was 
obliged  therefore  to  begin  from  intuition  and 
consequently  (as  this  is  always  sensible)  from 
sensibility;  and  only  after  that  could  advance 
to  concepts  (of  the  objects  of  this  intuition), 
and  could  only  end  with  principles  after  both 
these  had  preceded.  On  the  contrary,  since  prac¬ 
tical  reason  has  not  to  do  with  objects  so  as  to 
know  them,  but  with  its  own  faculty  of  realizing 
them  (in  accordance  with  the  knowledge  of 
them),  that  is,  with  a  will  which  is  a  causality, 
inasmuch  as  reason  contains  its  determining 
principle;  since,  consequently,  it  has  not  to  fur¬ 
nish  an  object  of  intuition,  but  as  practical  rea¬ 
son  has  to  furnish  only  a  law  (because  the  no¬ 
tion  of  causality  always  implies  the  reference  to 
a  law  which  determines  the  existence  of  the 
many  in  relation  to  one  another) ;  hence  a 
critical  examination  of  the  Analytic  of  reason, 
if  this  is  to  be  practical  reason  (and  this  is  prop¬ 
erly  the  problem),  must  begin  with  the  possibil¬ 
ity  of  practical  principles  a  priori.  Only  after 
that  can  it  proceed  to  concepts  of  the  objects 
of  a  practical  reason,  namely,  those  of  ab¬ 
solute  good  and  evil,  in  order  to  assign  them 
in  accordance  with  those  principles  (for  prior 
to  those  principles  they  cannot  possibly  be  giv¬ 
en  as  good  and  evil  by  any  faculty  of  knowl¬ 


329 

edge),  and  only  then  could  the  section  be  con¬ 
cluded  with  the  last  chapter,  that,  namely, 
which  treats  of  the  relation  of  the  pure  practi¬ 
cal  reason  to  the  sensibility  and  of  its  necessary 
influence  thereon,  which  is  a  priori  cognisable, 
that  is,  of  the  moral  sentiment.  Thus  the  Ana¬ 
lytic  of  the  practical  pure  reason  has  the  whole 
extent  of  the  conditions  of  its  use  in  common 
with  the  theoretical,  but  in  reverse  order.  The 
Analytic  of  pure  theoretic  reason  was  divided 
into  transcendental  Aesthetic  and  transcenden¬ 
tal  Logic,  that  of  the  practical  reversely  into 
Logic  and  Aesthetic  of  pure  practical  reason  (if 
I  may,  for  the  sake  of  analogy  merely,  use  these 
designations,  which  are  not  quite  suitable).  This 
logic  again  was  there  divided  into  the  Analytic 
of  concepts  and  that  of  principles:  here  into 
that  of  principles  and  concepts.  The  Aesthetic 
also  had  in  the  former  case  two  parts,  on  ac¬ 
count  of  the  two  kinds  of  sensible  intuition; 
here  the  sensibility  is  not  considered  as  a  ca¬ 
pacity  of  intuition  at  all,  but  merely  as  feeling 
(which  can  be  a  subjective  ground  of  desire), 
and  in  regard  to  it  pure  practical  reason  admits 
no  further  division. 

It  is  also  easy  to  see  the  reason  why  this  di¬ 
vision  into  two  parts  with  its  subdivision  was 
not  actually  adopted  here  (as  one  might  have 
been  induced  to  attempt  by  the  example  of  the 
former  critique).  For  since  it  is  pure  reason 
that  is  here  considered  in  its  practical  use,  and 
consequently  as  proceeding  from  a  priori  prin¬ 
ciples,  and  not  from  empirical  principles  of  de¬ 
termination,  hence  the  division  of  the  analytic 
of  pure  practical  reason  must  resemble  that  of 
a  syllogism;  namely,  proceeding  from  the  uni¬ 
versal  in  the  major  premiss  (the  moral  princi¬ 
ple),  through  a  minor  premiss  containing  a  sub¬ 
sumption  of  possible  actions  (as  good  or  evil) 
under  the  former,  to  the  conclusion ,  namely, 
the  subjective  determination  of  the  will  (an  in¬ 
terest  in  the  possible  practical  good,  and  in  the 
maxim  founded  on  it).  He  who  has  been  able 
to  convince  himself  of  the  truth  of  the  positions 
occurring  in  the  Analytic  will  take  pleasure  in 
such  comparisons;  for  they  justly  suggest  the 
expectation  that  we  may  perhaps  some  day  be 
able  to  discern  the  unity  of  the  whole  faculty 
of  reason  (theoretical  as  well  as  practical)  and 
be  able  to  derive  all  from  one  principle,  which 
is  what  human  reason  inevitably  demands,  as  it 
finds  complete  satisfaction  only  in  a  perfectly 
systematic  unity  of  its  knowledge. 

If  now  we  consider  also  the  contents  of  the 
knowledge  that  we  can  have  of  a  pure  practical 
reason,  and  by  means  of  it,  as  shown  by  the 


CRITIQUE  OF 


Analytic,  we  find,  along  with  a  remarkable  anal¬ 
ogy  between  it  and  the  theoretical,  no  less  re¬ 
markable  differences.  As  regards  the  theoretical, 
the  faculty  of  a  pure  rational  cognition  a  priori 
could  be  easily  and  evidently  proved  by  exam¬ 
ples  from  sciences  (in  which,  as  they  put  their 
principles  to  the  test  in  so  many  ways  by  me¬ 
thodical  use,  there  is  not  so  much  reason  as  in 
common  knowledge  to  fear  a  secret  mixture  of 
empirical  principles  of  cognition).  But,  that 
pure  reason  without  the  admixture  of  any  em¬ 
pirical  principle  is  practical  of  itself,  this  could 
only  be  shown  from  the  commonest  practical 
use  of  reason,  by  verifying  the  fact,  that  every 
man’s  natural  reason  acknowledges  the  supreme 
practical  principle  as  the  supreme  law  of  his 
will — a  law  completely  a  priori  and  not  depend¬ 
ing  on  any  sensible  data.  It  was  necessary  first 
to  establish  and  verify  the  purity  of  its  origin, 
even  in  the  judgement  of  this  common  reason , 
before  science  could  take  it  in  hand  to  make 
use  of  it,  as  a  fact,  that  is,  prior  to  all  disputa¬ 
tion  about  its  possibility,  and  all  the  conse¬ 
quences  that  may  be  drawn  from  it.  But  this 
circumstance  may  be  readily  explained  from 
what  has  just  been  said;  because  practical  pure 
reason  must  necessarily  begin  with  principles, 
which  therefore  must  be  the  first  data,  the  foun¬ 
dation  of  all  science,  and  cannot  be  derived 
from  it.  It  was  possible  to  effect  this  verification 
of  moral  principles  as  principles  of  a  pure  rea¬ 
son  quite  well,  and  with  sufficient  certainty,  by 
a  single  appeal  to  the  judgement  of  common 
sense,  for  this  reason,  that  anything  empirical 
which  might  slip  into  our  maxims  as  a  deter¬ 
mining  principle  of  the  will  can  be  detected  at 
once  by  the  feeling  of  pleasure  or  pain  which 
necessarily  attaches  to  it  as  exciting  desire; 
whereas  pure  practical  reason  positively  refuses 
to  admit  this  feeling  into  its  principle  as  a  con¬ 
dition.  The  heterogeneity  of  the  determining 
principles  (the  empirical  and  rational)  is  clearly 
detected  by  this  resistance  of  a  practically  legis¬ 
lating  reason  against  every  admixture  of  incli¬ 
nation,  and  by  a  peculiar  kind  of  sentiment , 
which,  however,  does  not  precede  the  legislation 
of  the  practical  reason,  but,  on  the  contrary,  is 
produced  by  this  as  a  constraint,  namely,  by  the 
feeling  of  a  respect  such  as  no  man  has  for  in¬ 
clinations  of  whatever  kind  but  for  the  law 
only;  and  it  is  detected  in  so  marked  and  promi¬ 
nent  a  manner  that  even  the  most  uninstructed 
cannot  fail  to  see  at  once  in  an  example  pre¬ 
sented  to  him,  that  empirical  principles  of  voli¬ 
tion  may  indeed  urge  him  to  follow  their  attrac¬ 
tions,  but  that  he  can  never  be  expected  to  obey 


anything  but  the  pure  practical  law  of  reason 
alone. 

The  distinction  between  the  doctrine  of  hap - 
piness  and  the  doctrine  of  morality,  in  the  for¬ 
mer  of  which  empirical  principles  constitute 
the  entire  foundation,  while  in  the  second  they 
do  not  form  the  smallest  part  of  it,  is  the  first 
and  most  important  office  of  the  Analytic  of 
pure  practical  reason;  and  it  must  proceed  in  it 
with  as  much  exactness  and,  so  to  speak,  scru¬ 
pulousness ,  as  any  geometer  in  his  work.  The 
philosopher,  however,  has  greater  difficulties 
to  contend  with  here  (as  always  in  rational  cog¬ 
nition  by  means  of  concepts  merely  without 
construction),  because  he  cannot  take  any  in¬ 
tuition  as  a  foundation  (for  a  pure  noumenon). 
He  has,  however,  this  advantage  that,  like  the 
chemist,  he  can  at  any  time  make  an  experi¬ 
ment  with  every  man’s  practical  reason  for  the 
purpose  of  distinguishing  the  moral  (pure) 
principle  of  determination  from  the  empirical; 
namely,  by  adding  the  moral  law  (as  a  deter¬ 
mining  principle)  to  the  empirically  affected 
will  (e.  g.,  that  of  the  man  who  would  be  ready 
to  lie  because  he  can  gain  something  thereby). 
It  is  as  if  the  analyst  added  alkali  to  a  solution 
of  lime  in  hydrochloric  acid,  the  acid  at  once 
forsakes  the  lime,  combines  with  the  alkali,  and 
the  lime  is  precipitated.  Just  in  the  same  way, 
if  to  a  man  who  is  otherwise  honest  (or  who  for 
this  occasion  places  himself  only  in  thought  in 
the  position  of  an  honest  man),  we  present  the 
moral  law  by  which  he  recognises  the  worthless¬ 
ness  of  the  liar,  his  practical  reason  (in  form¬ 
ing  a  judgement  of  what  ought  to  be  done)  at 
once  forsakes  the  advantage,  combines  with 
that  which  maintains  in  him  respect  for  his  own 
person  (truthfulness),  and  the  advantage  after 
it  has  been  separated  and  washed  from  every 
particle  of  reason  (which  is  altogether  on  the 
side  of  duty)  is  easily  weighed  by  everyone,  so 
that  it  can  enter  into  combination  with  reason 
in  other  cases,  only  not  where  it  could  be  op¬ 
posed  to  the  moral  law,  which  reason  never  for¬ 
sakes,  but  most  closely  unites  itself  with. 

But  it  does  not  follow  that  this  distinction 
between  the  principle  of  happiness  and  that  of 
morality  is  an  opposition  between  them,  and 
pure  practical  reason  does  not  require  that  we 
should  renounce  all  claim  to  happiness,  but  only 
that  the  moment  duty  is  in  question  we  should 
take  no  account  of  happiness.  It  may  even  in 
certain  respects  be  a  duty  to  provide  for  hap¬ 
piness;  partly,  because  (including  skill,  wealth, 
riches)  it  contains  means  for  the  fulfilment  of 
our  duty;  partly,  because  the  absence  of  it  (e.g., 


PRACTICAL  REASON 


poverty)  implies  temptations  to  transgress  our 
duty.  But  it  can  never  be  an  immediate  duty 
to  promote  our  happiness,  still  less  can  it  be  the 
principle  of  all  duty.  Now,  as  all  determining 
principles  of  the  will,  except  the  law  of  pure 
practical  reason  alone  (the  moral  law),  are  all 
empirical  and,  therefore,  as  such,  belong  to  the 
principle  of  happiness,  they  must  all  be  kept 
apart  from  the  supreme  principle  of  morality 
and  never  be  incorporated  with  it  as  a  con¬ 
dition;  since  this  would  be  to  destroy  all 
moral  worth  just  as  much  as  any  empirical 
admixture  with  geometrical  principles  would 
destroy  the  certainty  of  mathematical  evi¬ 
dence,  which  in  Plato’s  opinion  is  the  most 
excellent  thing  in  mathematics,  even  surpassing 
their  utility. 

Instead,  however,  of  the  deduction  of  the 
supreme  principle  of  pure  practical  reason,  that 
is,  the  explanation  of  the  possibility  of  such  a 
knowledge  a  priori ,  the  utmost  we  were  able  to 
do  was  to  show  that  if  we  saw  the  possibility 
of  the  freedom  of  an  efficient  cause,  we  should 
also  see  not  merely  the  possibility,  but  even  the 
necessity,  of  the  moral  law  as  the  supreme  prac¬ 
tical  law  of  rational  beings,  to  whom  we  attrib¬ 
ute  freedom  of  causality  of  their  will;  because 
both  concepts  are  so  inseparably  united  that 
we  might  define  practical  freedom  as  independ¬ 
ence  of  the  will  on  anything  but  the  moral  law. 
But  we  cannot  perceive  the  possibility  of  the 
freedom  of  an  efficient  cause,  especially  in  the 
world  of  sense;  we  are  fortunate  if  only  we  can 
be  sufficiently  assured  that  there  is  no  proof  of 
its  impossibility,  and  are  now,  by  the  moral  law 
which  postulates  it,  compelled  and  therefore 
authorized  to  assume  it.  However,  there  are  still 
many  who  think  that  they  can  explain  this  free¬ 
dom  on  empirical  principles,  like  any  other 
physical  faculty,  and  treat  it  as  a  psychological 
property,  the  explanation  of  which  only  re¬ 
quires  a  more  exact  study  of  the  nature  of  the 
soul  and  of  the  motives  of  the  will,  and  not  as 
a  transcendental  predicate  of  the  causality  of  a 
being  that  belongs  to  the  world  of  sense  (which 
is  really  the  point).  They  thus  deprive  us  of  the 
grand  revelation  which  we  obtain  through  prac¬ 
tical  reason  by  means  of  the  moral  law,  the  rev¬ 
elation,  namely,  of  a  supersensible  world  by  the 
realization  of  the  otherwise  transcendent  con¬ 
cept  of  freedom,  and  by  this  deprive  us  also  of 
the  moral  law  itself,  which  admits  no  empirical 
principle  of  determination.  Therefore  it  will  be 
necessary  to  add  something  here  as  a  protection 
against  this  delusion  and  to  exhibit  empiricism 
in  its  naked  superficiality. 


33i 

The  notion  of  causality  as  physical  necessity , 
in  opposition  to  the  same  notion  as  freedom, 
concerns  only  the  existence  of  things  so  far  as 
it  is  determinable  in  time,  and,  consequently,  as 
phenomena,  in  opposition  to  their  causality  as 
things  in  themselves.  Now  if  we  take  the  attri¬ 
butes  of  existence  of  things  in  time  for  attri¬ 
butes  of  things  in  themselves  (which  is  the  com¬ 
mon  view),  then  it  is  impossible  to  reconcile 
the  necessity  of  the  causal  relation  with  free¬ 
dom;  they  are  contradictory.  For  from  the 
former  it  follows  that  every  event,  and  con¬ 
sequently  every  action  that  takes  place  at  a 
certain  point  of  time,  is  a  necessary  result  of 
what  existed  in  time  preceding.  Now  as  time 
past  is  no  longer  in  my  power,  hence  every  ac¬ 
tion  that  I  perform  must  be  the  necessary  result 
of  certain  determining  grounds  which  are  not 
in  my  power ,  that  is,  at  the  moment  in  which 
I  am  acting  I  am  never  free.  Nay,  even  if  I 
assume  that  my  whole  existence  is  independent 
on  any  foreign  cause  (for  instance,  God),  so 
that  the  determining  principles  of  my  causality, 
and  even  of  my  whole  existence,  were  not  out¬ 
side  myself,  yet  this  would  not  in  the  least 
transform  that  physical  necessity  into  freedom. 
For  at  every  moment  of  time  I  am  still  under 
the  necessity  of  being  determined  to  action  by 
that  which  is  not  in  my  power ,  and  the  series  of 
events  infinite  a  parte  priori,  which  I  only  con¬ 
tinue  according  to  a  pre-determined  order  and 
could  never  begin  of  myself,  would  be  a  con¬ 
tinuous  physical  chain,  and  therefore  my  cau¬ 
sality  would  never  be  freedom. 

If,  then,  we  would  attribute  freedom  to  a 
being  whose  existence  is  determined  in  time, 
we  cannot  except  him  from  the  law  of  neces¬ 
sity  as  to  all  events  in  his  existence  and,  con¬ 
sequently,  as  to  his  actions  also;  for  that  would 
be  to  hand  him  over  to  blind  chance.  Now  as 
this  law  inevitably  applies  to  all  the  causality 
of  things,  so  far  as  their  existence  is  deter¬ 
minable  in  time,  it  follows  that  if  this  were 
the  mode  in  which  we  had  also  to  conceive  the 
existence  of  these  things  in  themselves,  freedom 
must  be  rejected  as  a  vain  and  impossible  con¬ 
ception.  Consequently,  if  we  would  still  save  it, 
no  other  way  remains  but  to  consider  that  the 
existence  of  a  thing,  so  far  as  it  is  determinable 
in  time,  and  therefore  its  causality,  according 
to  the  law  of  physical  necessity,  belong  to  ap¬ 
pearance,  and  to  attribute  freedom  to  the  same 
being  as  a  thing  in  itself.  This  is  certainly  in¬ 
evitable,  if  we  would  retain  both  these  contra¬ 
dictory  concepts  together;  but  in  application, 
when  we  try  to  explain  their  combination  in 


CRITIQUE  OF 


one  and  the  same  action,  great  difficulties  pre¬ 
sent  themselves  which  seem  to  render  such  a 
combination  impracticable. 

When  I  say  of  a  man  who  commits  a  theft 
that,  by  the  law  of  causality,  this  deed  is  a 
necessary  result  of  the  determining  causes  in 
preceding  time,  then  it  was  impossible  that  it 
could  not  have  happened ;  how  then  can  the 
judgement,  according  to  the  moral  law,  make 
any  change,  and  suppose  that  it  could  have  been 
omitted,  because  the  law  says  that  it  ought  to 
have  been  omitted;  that  is,  how  can  a  man  be 
called  quite  free  at  the  same  moment,  and  with 
respect  to  the  same  action  in  which  he  is  subject 
to  an  inevitable  physical  necessity?  Some  try 
to  evade  this  by  saying  that  the  causes  that  de¬ 
termine  his  causality  are  of  such  a  kind  as  to 
agree  with  a  comparative  notion  of  freedom. 
According  to  this,  that  is  sometimes  called  a 
free  effect,  the  determining  physical  cause  of 
which  lies  within  the  acting  thing  itself,  e.  g., 
that  which  a  projectile  performs  when  it  is  in 
free  motion,  in  which  case  we  use  the  word 
freedom ,  because  while  it  is  in  flight  it  is  not 
urged  by  anything  external;  or  as  we  call  the 
motion  of  a  clock  a  free  motion ,  because  it 
moves  its  hands  itself,  which  therefore  do  not 
require  to  be  pushed  by  external  force;  so  al¬ 
though  the  actions  of  man  are  necessarily  de¬ 
termined  by  causes  which  precede  in  time,  we 
yet  call  them  free ,  because  these  causes  are 
ideas  produced  by  our  own  faculties,  whereby 
desires  are  evoked  on  occasion  of  circumstances, 
and  hence  actions  are  wrought  according  to  our 
own  pleasure.  This  is  a  wretched  subterfuge 
with  which  some  persons  still  let  themselves  be 
put  off,  and  so  think  they  have  solved,  with  a 
petty  word-jugglery,  that  difficult  problem,  at 
the  solution  of  which  centuries  have  laboured 
in  vain,  and  which  can  therefore  scarcely  be 
found  so  completely  on  the  surface.  In  fact,  in 
the  question  about  the  freedom  which  must  be 
the  foundation  of  all  moral  laws  and  the  conse¬ 
quent  responsibility,  it  does  not  matter  whether 
the  principles  which  necessarily  determine  cau¬ 
sality  by  a  physical  law  reside  within  the  sub¬ 
ject  or  without  him,  or  in  the  former  case 
whether  these  principles  are  instinctive  or  are 
conceived  by  reason,  if,  as  is  admitted  by  these 
men  themselves,  these  determining  ideas  have 
the  ground  of  their  existence  in  time  and  in  the 
antecedent  state ,  and  this  again  in  an  anteced¬ 
ent.  etc.  Then  it  matters  not  that  these  are  in¬ 
ternal;  it  matters  not  that  they  have  a  psycho¬ 
logical  and  not  a  mechanical  causality,  that  is, 
produce  actions  by  means  of  ideas  and  not  by 


bodily  movements;  they  are  still  determining 
principles  of  the  causality  of  a  being  whose  ex¬ 
istence  is  determinable  in  time,  and  therefore 
under  the  necessitation  of  conditions  of  past 
time,  which  therefore,  when  the  subject  has  to 
act,  are  no  longer  in  his  power.  This  may  imply 
psychological  freedom  (if  we  choose  to  apply 
this  term  to  a  merely  internal  chain  of  ideas  in 
the  mind).,  but  it  involves  physical  necessity 
and,  therefore,  leaves  no  room  for  transcen¬ 
dental  freedom y  which  must  be  conceived  as 
independence  on  everything  empirical,  and,  con¬ 
sequently,  on  nature  generally,  whether  it  is  an 
object  of  the  internal  sense  considered  in  time 
only,  or  of  the  external  in  time  and  space.  With¬ 
out  this  freedom  (in  the  latter  and  true  sense), 
which  alone  is  practical  a  priori,  no  moral  law 
and  no  moral  imputation  are  possible.  Just  for 
this  reason  the  necessity  of  events  in  time,  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  physical  law  of  causality,  may 
be  called  the  mechanism  of  nature,  although 
we  do  not  mean  by  this  that  things  which  are 
subject  to  it  must  be  really  material  machines. 
We  look  here  only  to  the  necessity  of  the  con¬ 
nection  of  events  in  a  time-series  as  it  is  devel¬ 
oped  according  to  the  physical  law,  whether  the 
subject  in  which  this  development  takes  place 
is  called  automaton  materiale  when  the  me¬ 
chanical  being  is  moved  by  matter,  or  with 
Leibnitz  spirituale  when  it  is  impelled  by  ideas; 
and  if  the  freedom  of  our  will  were  no  other 
than  the  latter  (say  the  psychological  and  com¬ 
parative,  not  also  transcendental,  that  is,  ab¬ 
solute),  then  it  would  at  bottom  be  nothing 
better  than  the  freedom  of  a  turnspit,  which, 
when  once  it  is  wound  up,  accomplishes  its  mo¬ 
tions  of  itself. 

Now,  in  order  to  remove  in  the  supposed  case 
the  apparent  contradiction  between  freedom 
and  the  mechanism  of  nature  in  one  and  the 
same  action,  we  must  remember  what  was  said 
in  the  Critique  of  Pure  Reason,  or  what  follows 
therefrom;  viz.,  that  the  necessity  of  nature, 
which  cannot  co-exist  with  the  freedom  of  the 
subject,  appertains  only  to  the  attributes  of  the 
thing  that  is  subject  to  time-conditions,  conse¬ 
quently  only  to  those  of  the  acting  subject  as  a 
phenomenon;  that  therefore  in  this  respect  the 
determining  principles  of  every  action  of  the 
same  reside  in  what  belongs  to  past  time  and  is 
no  longer  in  his  power  (in  which  must  be  in¬ 
cluded  his  own  past  actions  and  the  character 
that  these  may  determine  for  him  in  his  own 
eyes  as  a  phenomenon).  But  the  very  same  sub¬ 
ject.  being  on  the  other  side  conscious  of  him¬ 
self  as  a  thing  in  himself,  considers  his  existence 


PRACTICAL  REASON 


also  in  so  far  as  it  is  not  subject  to  time-condi¬ 
tions,  and  regards  himself  as  only  determinable 
by  laws  which  he  gives  himself  through  reason; 
and  in  this  his  existence  nothing  is  antecedent 
to  the  determination  of  his  will,  but  every 
action,  and  in  general  every  modification  of 
his  existence,  varying  according  to  his  internal 
sense,  even  the  whole  series  of  his  existence  as 
a  sensible  being  is  in  the  consciousness  of  his 
supersensible  existence  nothing  but  the  result, 
and  never  to  be  regarded  as  the  determining 
principle,  of  his  causality  as  a  noumenon.  In 
this  view  now  the  rational  being  can  justly  say 
of  every  unlawful  action  that  he  performs,  that 
he  could  very  well  have  left  it  undone;  although 
as  appearance  it  is  sufficiently  determined  in  the 
past,  and  in  this  respect  is  absolutely  necessary; 
for  it,  with  all  the  past  which  determines  it, 
belongs  to  the  one  single  phenomenon  of  his 
character  which  he  makes  for  himself,  in  conse¬ 
quence  of  which  he  imputes  the  causality  of 
those  appearances  to  himself  as  a  cause  inde¬ 
pendent  of  sensibility. 

With  this  agree  perfectly  the  judicial  sen¬ 
tences  of  that  wonderful  faculty  in  us  which  we 
call  conscience.1  A  man  may  use  as  much  art  as 
he  likes  in  order  to  paint  to  himself  an  unlawful 
act,  that  he  remembers,  as  an  unintentional  er¬ 
ror,  a  mere  oversight,  such  as  one  can  never 
altogether  avoid,  and  therefore  as  something  in 
which  he  was  carried  away  by  the  stream  of 
physical  necessity,  and  thus  to  make  himself 
out  innocent,  yet  he  finds  that  the  advocate 
who  speaks  in  his  favour  can  by  no  means 
silence  the  accuser  within,  if  only  he  is  con¬ 
scious  that  at  the  time  when  he  did  this  wrong 
he  was  in  his  senses,  that  is,  in  possession  of  his 
freedom;  and,  nevertheless,  he  accounts  for  his 
error  from  some  bad  habits,  which  by  gradual 
neglect  of  attention  he  has  allowed  to  grow  up¬ 
on  him  to  such  a  degree  that  he  can  regard  his 
error  as  its  natural  consequence,  although  this 
cannot  protect  him  from  the  blame  and  re¬ 
proach  which  he  casts  upon  himself.  This  is  also 
the  ground  of  repentance  for  a  long  past  action 
at  every  recollection  of  it;  a  painful  feeling 
produced  by  the  moral  sentiment,  and  which  is 
practically  void  in  so  far  as  it  cannot  serve  to 
undo  what  has  been  done.  (Hence  Priestley,  as 
a  true  and  consistent  fatalist ,  declares  it  absurd, 
and  he  deserves  to  be  commended  for  this  can¬ 
dour  more  than  those  who,  while  they  maintain 
the  mechanism  of  the  will  in  fact,  and  its  free¬ 
dom  in  words  only,  yet  wish  it  to  be  thought 
that  they  include  it  in  their  system  of  compro- 

1[See  Note  on  Conscience,  p.  379.] 


mise,  although  they  do  not  explain  the  possibil¬ 
ity  of  such  moral  imputation.)  But  the  pain  is 
quite  legitimate,  because  when  the  law  of  our 
intelligible  [supersensible]  existence  (the  moral 
law)  is  in  question,  reason  recognizes  no  distinc¬ 
tion  of  time,  and  only  asks  whether  the  event 
belongs  to  me,  as  my  act,  and  then  always  mor¬ 
ally  connects  the  same  feeling  with  it,  whether 
it  has  happened  just  now  or  long  ago.  For  in 
reference  to  the  supersensible  consciousness  of 
its  existence  (i.  e.,  freedom)  the  life  of  sense  is 
but  a  single  phenomenon,  which,  inasmuch  as  it 
contains  merely  manifestations  of  the  mental 
disposition  with  regard  to  the  moral  law  (i.  e., 
of  the  character),  must  be  judged  not  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  physical  necessity  that  belongs  to  it 
as  phenomenon,  but  according  to  the  absolute 
spontaneity  of  freedom.  It  may  therefore  be  ad¬ 
mitted  that,  if  it  were  possible  to  have  so  pro¬ 
found  an  insight  into  a  man’s  mental  character 
as  shown  by  internal  as  well  as  external  actions 
as  to  know  all  its  motives,  even  the  smallest, 
and  likewise  all  the  external  occasions  that 
can  influence  them,  we  could  calculate  a  man’s 
conduct  for  the  future  with  as  great  certainty 
as  a  lunar  or  solar  eclipse;  and  nevertheless  we 
may  maintain  that  the  man  is  free.  In  fact,  if 
we  were  capable  of  a  further  glance,  namely,  an 
intellectual  intuition  of  the  same  subject  (which 
indeed  is  not  granted  to  us,  and  instead  of  it 
we  have  only  the  rational  concept),  then  we 
should  perceive  that  this  whole  chain  of  appear¬ 
ances  in  regard  to  all  that  concerns  the  moral 
laws  depenus  on  the  spontaneity  of  the  subject 
as  a  thing  in  itself,  of  the  determination  of 
which  no  physical  explanation  can  be  given.  In 
default  of  this  intuition,  the  moral  law  assures 
us  of  this  distinction  between  the  relation  of  our 
actions  as  appearance  to  our  sensible  nature, 
and  the  relation  of  this  sensible  nature  to  the 
supersensible  substratum  in  us.  In  this  view, 
which  is  natural  to  our  reason,  though  inexpli¬ 
cable,  we  can  also  justify  some  judgements  which 
we  passed  with  all  conscientiousness,  and  which 
yet  at  first  sight  seem  quite  opposed  to  all  equi¬ 
ty.  There  are  cases  in  which  men,  even  with  the 
same  education  which  has  been  profitable  to 
others,  yet  show  such  early  depravity,  and  so 
continue  to  progress  in  it  to  years  of  manhood, 
that  they  are  thought  to  be  born  villains,  and 
their  character  altogether  incapable  of  improve¬ 
ment;  and  nevertheless  they  are  judged  for 
what  they  do  or  leave  undone,  they  are  re¬ 
proached  for  their  faults  as  guilty;  nay,  they 
themselves  (the  children)  regard  these  re¬ 
proaches  as  well  founded,  exactly  as  if  in  spite 


CRITIQUE  OF 


of  the  hopeless  natural  quality  of  mind  ascribed 
to  them,  they  remained  just  as  responsible  as 
any  other  man.  This  could  not  happen  if  we  did 
not  suppose  that  whatever  springs  from  a  man’s 
choice  (as  every  action  intentionally  performed 
undoubtedly  does)  has  as  its  foundation  a  free 
causality,  which  from  early  youth  expresses  its 
character  in  its  manifestations  (i.  e.,  actions). 
These,  on  account  of  the  uniformity  of  conduct, 
exhibit  a  natural  connection,  which  however  does 
not  make  the  vicious  quality  of  the  will  neces¬ 
sary,  but  on  the  contrary,  is  the  consequence  of 
the  evil  principles  voluntarily  adopted  and  un¬ 
changeable,  which  only  make  it  so  much  the 
more  culpable  and  deserving  of  punishment. 
There  still  remains  a  difficulty  in  the  combina¬ 
tion  of  freedom  with  the  mechanism  of  nature 
in  a  being  belonging  to  the  world  of  sense;  a 
difficulty  which,  even  after  all  the  foregoing  is 
admitted,  threatens  freedom  with  complete  de¬ 
struction.  But  with  this  danger  there  is  also  a 
circumstance  that  offers  hope  of  an  issue  still 
favourable  to  freedom;  namely,  that  the  same 
difficulty  presses  much  more  strongly  (in  fact 
as  we  shall  presently  see,  presses  only)  on  the 
system  that  holds  the  existence  determinable  in 
time  and  space  to  be  the  existence  of  things  in 
themselves;  it  does  not  therefore  oblige  us  to 
give  up  our  capital  supposition  of  the  ideality 
of  time  as  a  mere  form  of  sensible  intuition,  and 
consequently  as  a  mere  manner  of  representa¬ 
tion  which  is  proper  to  the  subject  as  belonging 
to  the  world  of  sense;  and  therefore  it  only 
requires  that  this  view  be  reconciled  with  this 
idea. 

The  difficulty  is  as  follows:  Even  if  it  is  ad¬ 
mitted  that  the  supersensible  subject  can  be 
free  with  respect  to  a  given  action,  although,  as 
a  subject  also  belonging  to  the  world  of  sense, 
he  is  under  mechanical  conditions  with  respect 
to  the  same  action,  still,  as  soon  as  we  allow  that 
God  as  universal  first  cause  is  also  the  cause  of 
the  existence  oj  substance  (a  proposition  which 
can  never  be  given  up  without  at  the  same  time 
giving  up  the  notion  of  God  as  the  Being  of  all 
beings,  and  therewith  giving  up  his  all  suffi¬ 
ciency,  on  which  everything  in  theology  de¬ 
pends),  it  seems  as  if  we  must  admit  that  a 
man’s  actions  have  their  determining  principle 
in  something  which  is  wholly  out  oj  his  power 
— namely,  in  the  causality  of  a  Supreme  Being 
distinct  from  himself  and  on  whom  his  own 
existence  and  the  whole  determination  of  his 
causality  are  absolutely  dependent.  In  point  of 
fact,  if  a  man’s  actions  as  belonging  to  his 
modifications  in  time  were  not  merely  modifica¬ 


tions  of  him  as  appearance,  but  as  a  thing  in 
itself,  freedom  could  not  be  saved.  Man  would 
be  a  marionette  or  an  automaton,  like  Vaucan- 
son’s,  prepared  and  wound  up  by  the  Supreme 
Artist.  Self-consciousness  would  indeed  make 
him  a  thinking  automaton;  but  the  conscious¬ 
ness  of  his  own  spontaneity  would  be  mere  de¬ 
lusion  if  this  were  mistaken  for  freedom,  and 
it  would  deserve  this  name  only  in  a  compara¬ 
tive  sense,  since,  although  the  proximate  deter¬ 
mining  causes  of  its  motion  and  a  long  series  of 
their  determining  causes  are  internal,  yet  the 
last  and  highest  is  found  in  a  foreign  hand. 
Therefore  I  do  not  see  how  those  who  still  insist 
on  regarding  time  and  space  as  attributes  be¬ 
longing  to  the  existence  of  things  in  themselves, 
can  avoid  admitting  the  fatality  of  actions;  or 
if  (like  the  otherwise  acute  Mendelssohn)  they 
allow  them  to  be  conditions  necessarily  belong¬ 
ing  to  the  existence  of  finite  and  derived  beings, 
but  not  to  that  of  the  infinite  Supreme  Being, 
I  do  not  see  on  what  ground  they  can  justify 
such  a  distinction,  or,  indeed,  how  they  can 
avoid  the  contradiction  that  meets  them,  when 
they  hold  that  existence  in  time  is  an  attribute 
necessarily  belonging  to  finite  things  in  them¬ 
selves,  whereas  God  is  the  cause  of  this  exist¬ 
ence,  but  cannot  be  the  cause  of  time  (or  space) 
itself  (since  this  must  be  presupposed  as  a  nec¬ 
essary  a  priori  condition  of  the  existence  of 
things);  and  consequently  as  regards  the  ex¬ 
istence  of  these  things.  His  causality  must  be 
subject  to  conditions  and  even  to  the  condition 
of  time;  and  this  would  inevitably  bring  in 
everything  contradictory  to  the  notions  of  His 
infinity  and  independence.  On  the  other  hand,  it 
is  quite  easy  for  us  to  draw  the  distinction  be¬ 
tween  the  attribute  of  the  divine  existence  of 
being  independent  on  all  time-conditions,  and 
that  of  a  being  of  the  world  of  sense,  the  dis¬ 
tinction  being  that  between  the  existence  oj  a 
being  in  itselj  and  that  of  a  thing  in  appearance. 
Hence,  if  this  ideality  of  time  and  space  is 
not  adopted,  nothing  remains  but  Spinozism, 
in  which  space  and  time  are  essential  attributes 
of  the  Supreme  Being  Himself,  and  the  things 
dependent  on  Him  (ourselves,  therefore,  in¬ 
cluded)  are  not  substances,  but  merely  acci¬ 
dents  inhering  in  Him;  since,  if  these  things  as 
His  effects  exist  in  time  only,  this  being  the 
condition  of  their  existence  in  themselves,  then 
the  actions  of  these  beings  must  be  simply  His 
actions  which  He  performs  in  some  place  and 
time.  Thus,  Spinozism,  in  spite  of  the  absurdity 
of  its  fundamental  idea,  argues  more  consist¬ 
ently  than  the  creation  theory  can,  when  beings 


PRACTICAL  REASON 


assumed  to  be  substances,  and  beings  in  them¬ 
selves  existing  in  time ,  are  regarded  as  effects 
of  a  Supreme  Cause,  and  yet  as  not  [belonging] 
to  Him  and  His  action,  but  as  separate  sub¬ 
stances. 

The  above-mentioned  difficulty  is  resolved 
briefly  and  clearly  as  follows:  If  existence  in 
time  is  a  mere  sensible  mode  of  representation 
belonging  to  thinking  beings  in  the  world  and 
consequently  does  not  apply  to  them  as  things 
in  themselves,  then  the  creation  of  these  beings 
is  a  creation  of  things  in  themselves,  since  the 
notion  of  creation  does  not  belong  to  the  sensi¬ 
ble  form  of  representation  of  existence  or  to 
causality,  but  can  only  be  referred  to  noumena. 
Consequently,  when  I  say  of  beings  in  the 
world  of  sense  that  they  are  created,  I  so  far 
regard  them  as  noumena.  As  it  would  be  a  con¬ 
tradiction,  therefore,  to  say  that  God  is  a  crea¬ 
tor  of  appearances,  so  also  it  is  a  contradiction 
to  say  that  as  creator  He  is  the  cause  of  actions 
in  the  world  of  sense,  and  therefore  as  appear¬ 
ances,  although  He  is  the  cause  of  the  existence 
of  the  acting  beings  (which  are  noumena).  If 
now  it  is  possible  to  affirm  freedom  in  spite  of 
the  natural  mechanism  of  actions  as  appear¬ 
ances  (by  regarding  existence  in  time  as  some¬ 
thing  that  belongs  only  to  appearances,  not  to 
things  in  themselves),  then  the  circumstance 
that  the  acting  beings  are  creatures  cannot  make 
the  slightest  difference,  since  creation  concerns 
their  supersensible  and  not  their  sensible  exist¬ 
ence,  and,  therefore,  cannot  be  regarded  as  the 
determining  principle  of  the  appearances.  It 
would  be  quite  different  if  the  beings  in  the 
world  as  things  in  themselves  existed  in  time , 
since  in  that  case  the  creator  of  substance 
would  be  at  the  same  time  the  author  of  the 
whole  mechanism  of  this  substance. 

Of  so  great  importance  is  the  separation  of 
time  (as  well  as  space)  from  the  existence  of 
things  in  themselves  which  was  effected  in  the 
Critique  of  the  Pure  Speculative  Reason. 

It  may  be  said  that  the  solution  here  pro¬ 
posed  involves  great  difficulty  in  itself  and  is 
scarcely  susceptible  of  a  lucid  exposition.  But 
is  any  other  solution  that  has  been  attempted, 
or  that  may  be  attempted,  easier  and  more  in¬ 
telligible?  Rather  might  we  say  that  the  dog¬ 
matic  teachers  of  metaphysics  have  shown  more 
shrewdness  than  candour  in  keeping  this  diffi¬ 
cult  point  out  of  sight  as  much  as  possible,  in 
the  hope  that  if  they  said  nothing  about  it, 
probably  no  one  would  think  of  it.  If  science  is 
to  be  advanced,  all  difficulties  must  be  laid  open, 
and  we  must  even  search  for  those  that  are 


335 

hidden,  for  every  difficulty  calls  forth  a  remedy, 
which  cannot  be  discovered  without  science 
gaining  either  in  extent  or  in  exactness;  and 
thus  even  obstacles  become  means  of  increasing 
the  thoroughness  of  science.  On  the  other  hand, 
if  the  difficulties  are  intentionally  concealed,  or 
merely  removed  by  palliatives,  then  sooner  or 
later  they  burst  out  into  incurable  mischiefs, 
which  bring  science  to  ruin  in  an  absolute 
scepticism. 

Since  it  is,  properly  speaking,  the  notion  of 
freedom  alone  amongst  all  the  ideas  of  pure 
speculative  reason  that  so  greatly  enlarges  our 
knowledge  in  the  sphere  of  the  supersensible, 
though  only  of  our  practical  knowledge,  I  ask 
myself  why  it  exclusively  possesses  so  great  fer¬ 
tility ,  whereas  the  others  only  designate  the  va¬ 
cant  space  for  possible  beings  of  the  pure  under¬ 
standing,  but  are  unable  by  any  means  to  define 
the  concept  of  them.  I  presently  find  that  as  I 
cannot  think  anything  without  a  category,  I 
must  first  look  for  a  category  for  the  rational 
idea  of  freedom  with  which  I  am  now  con¬ 
cerned;  and  this  is  the  category  of  causality; 
and  although  freedom,  a  concept  of  the  reason, 
being  a  transcendent  concept,  cannot  have  any 
intuition  corresponding  to  it,  yet  the  concept 
of  the  understanding — for  the  synthesis  of 
which  the  former 1  demands  the  unconditioned 
— (namely,  the  concept  of  causality)  must  have 
a  sensible  intuition  given,  by  which  first  its  ob¬ 
jective  reality  is  assured.  Now,  the  categories 
are  all  divided  into  two  classes — the  mathe¬ 
matical,  which  concern  the  unity  of  synthesis 
in  the  conception  of  objects,  and  the  dynamical , 
which  refer  to  the  unity  of  synthesis  in  the  con¬ 
ception  of  the  existence  of  objects.  The  former 
(those  of  magnitude  and  quality)  always  con¬ 
tain  a  synthesis  of  the  homogeneous,  and  it  is 
not  possible  to  find  in  this  the  unconditioned 
antecedent  to  what  is  given  in  sensible  intuition 
as  conditioned  in  space  and  time,  as  this  would 
itself  have  to  belong  to  space  and  time,  and 
therefore  be  again  still  conditioned.  Whence  it 
resulted  in  the  Dialectic  of  Pure  Theoretic  Rea¬ 
son  that  the  opposite  methods  of  attaining  the 
unconditioned  and  the  totality  of  the  conditions 
were  both  wrong.  The  categories  of  the  second 
class  (those  of  causality  and  of  the  necessity  of 
a  thing)  did  not  require  this  homogeneity  (of 
the  conditioned  and  the  condition  in  synthesis), 
since  here  what  we  have  to  explain  is  not  how 
the  intuition  is  compounded  from  a  manifold 
in  it,  but  only  how  the  existence  of  the  condi- 

1  [Cf.  Critique  of  Pure  Reason,  p.  177.] 


CRITIQUE  OF 


tioned  object  corresponding  to  it  is  added  to 
the  existence  of  the  condition  (added,  namely, 
in  the  understanding  as  connected  therewith) ; 
and  in  that  case  it  was  allowable  to  suppose  in 
the  supersensible  world  the  unconditioned  ante¬ 
cedent  to  the  altogether  conditioned  in  the 
world  of  sense  (both  as  regards  the  causal  con¬ 
nection  and  the  contingent  existence  of  things 
themselves),  although  this  unconditioned  re¬ 
mained  indeterminate,  and  to  make  the  synthesis 
transcendent.  Hence,  it  was  found  in  the  Dia¬ 
lectic  of  the  Pure  Speculative  Reason  that  the 
two  apparently  opposite  methods  of  obtaining 
for  the  conditioned  the  unconditioned  were  not 
really  contradictory,  e.  g.,  in  the  synthesis  of 
causality  to  conceive  for  the  conditioned  in  the 
series  of  causes  and  effects  of  the  sensible  world, 
a  causality  which  has  no  sensible  condition,  and 
that  the  same  action  which,  as  belonging  to  the 
world  of  sense,  is  always  sensibly  conditioned, 
that  is,  mechanically  necessary,  yet  at  the  same 
time  may  be  derived  from  a  causality  not  sensi¬ 
bly  conditioned — being  the  causality  of  the  act¬ 
ing  being  as  belonging  to  the  supersensible  world 
— and  may  consequently  be  conceived  as  free. 
Now,  the  only  point  in  question  was  to  change 
this  ??iay  be  into  is;  that  is,  that  we  should  be 
able  to  show  in  an  actual  case,  as  it  were  by  a 
fact,  that  certain  actions  imply  such  a  causality 
(namely,  the  intellectual,  sensibly  uncondi¬ 
tioned),  whether  they  are  actual  or  only  com¬ 
manded,  that  is,  objectively  necessary  in  a  prac¬ 
tical  sense.  We  could  not  hope  to  find  this  con¬ 
nections  in  actions  actually  given  in  experience 
as  events  of  the  sensible  world,  since  causality 
with  freedom  must  always  be  sought  outside 
the  world  of  sense  in  the  world  of  intelligence. 
But  things  of  sense  are  the  only  things  offered 
to  our  perception  and  observation.  Hence,  noth¬ 
ing  remained  but  to  find  an  incontestable  objec¬ 
tive  principle  of  causality  which  excludes  all 
sensible  conditions:  that  is,  a  principle  in  which 
reason  does  not  appeal  further  to  something 
else  as  a  determining  ground  of  its  causality, 
but  contains  this  determining  ground  itself  by 
means  of  that  principle,  and  in  which  therefore 
it  is  itself  as  pure  reason  practical.  Now,  this 
principle  had  not  to  be  searched  for  or  discov¬ 
ered;  it  had  long  been  in  the  reason  of  all  men, 
and  incorporated  in  their  nature,  and  is  the 
principle  of  morality.  Therefore,  that  uncondi¬ 
tioned  causality,  with  the  faculty  of  it,  namely, 
freedom,  is  no  longer  merely  indefinitely  and 
problematically  thought  (this  speculative  rea¬ 
son  could  prove  to  be  feasible),  but  is  even 
as  regards  the  law  of  its  causality  definitely  and 


assertorially  known;  and  with  it  the  fact  that 
a  being  (I  myself),  belonging  to  the  world  of 
sense,  belongs  also  to  the  supersensible  world, 
this  is  also  positively  known ,  and  thus  the  real¬ 
ity  of  the  supersensible  world  is  established  and 
in  practical  respects  definitely  given,  and  this 
definiteness,  which  for  theoretical  purposes 
would  be  transcendent,  is  for  practical  purposes 
immanent.  We  could  not,  however,  make  a  sim¬ 
ilar  step  as  regards  the  second  dynamical  idea, 
namely,  that  of  a  necessary  being.  We  could  not 
rise  to  it  from  the  sensible  world  without  the 
aid  of  the  first  dynamical  idea.  For  if  we  at¬ 
tempted  to  do  so,  we  should  have  ventured  to 
leave  at  a  bound  all  that  is  given  to  us,  and  to 
leap  to  that  of  which  nothing  is  given  us  that 
can  help  us  to  effect  the  connection  of  such  a 
supersensible  being  with  the  world  of  sense 
(since  the  necessary  being  would  have  to  be 
known  as  given  outside  ourselves).  On  the  other 
hand,  it  is  now  obvious  that  this  connection  is 
quite  possible  in  relation  to  our  own  subject,  in¬ 
asmuch  as  I  know  myself  to  be  on  the  one  side 
as  an  intelligible  [supersensible]  being  deter¬ 
mined  by  the  moral  law  (by  means  of  freedom), 
and  on  the  other  side  as  acting  in  the  world  of 
sense.  It  is  the  concept  of  freedom  alone  that 
enables  us  to  find  the  unconditioned  and  in¬ 
telligible  for  the  conditioned  and  sensible  with¬ 
out  going  out  of  ourselves.  For  it  is  our  own 
reason  that  by  means  of  the  supreme  and  un¬ 
conditional  practical  law  knows  that  itself  and 
the  being  that  is  conscious  of  this  law  (our  own 
person)  belong  to  the  pure  world  of  under¬ 
standing,  and  moreover  defines  the  manner  in 
which,  as  such,  it  can  be  active.  In  this  way 
it  can  be  understood  why  in  the  whole  faculty 
of  reason  it  is  the  practical  reason  only  that  can 
help  us  to  pass  beyond  the  world  of  sense  and 
give  us  knowledge  of  a  supersensible  order  and 
connection,  which,  however,  for  this  very  reason 
cannot  be  extended  further  than  is  necessary 
for  pure  practical  purposes. 

Let  me  be  permitted  on  this  occasion  to  make 
one  more  remark,  namely,  that  every  step  that 
we  make  with  pure  reason,  even  in  the  prac¬ 
tical  sphere  where  no  attention  is  paid  to  subtle 
speculation,  nevertheless  accords  with  all  the 
material  points  of  the  Critique  of  the  Theo¬ 
retical  Reason  as  closely  and  directly  as  if  each 
step  had  been  thought  out  with  deliberate  pur¬ 
pose  to  establish  this  confirmation.  Such  a  thor¬ 
ough  agreement,  wholly  unsought  for  and  quite 
obvious  (as  anyone  can  convince  himself,  if  he 
will  only  carry  moral  inquiries  up  to  their  prin¬ 
ciples),  between  the  most  important  proposi- 


PRACTICAL  REASON 


tion  of  practical  reason  and  the  often  seemingly 
too  subtle  and  needless  remarks  of  the  Critique 
of  the  Speculative  Reason,  occasions  surprise 
and  astonishment,  and  confirms  the  maxim  al¬ 
ready  recognized  and  praised  by  others,  namely, 
that  in  every  scientific  inquiry  we  should  pur¬ 
sue  our  way  steadily  with  all  possible  exactness 
and  frankness,  without  caring  for  any  objec¬ 
tions  that  may  be  raised  from  outside  its  sphere, 
but,  as  far  as  we  can,  to  carry  out  our  inquiry 
truthfully  and  completely  by  itself.  Frequent 
observation  has  convinced  me  that,  when  such 
researches  are  concluded,  that  which  in  one 


337 

part  of  them  appeared  to  me  very  questionable, 
considered  in  relation  to  other  extraneous  doc¬ 
trines,  when  I  left  this  doubtfulness  out  of  sight 
for  a  time  and  only  attended  to  the  business  in 
hand  until  it  was  completed,  at  last  was  un¬ 
expectedly  found  to  agree  perfectly  with  what 
had  been  discovered  separately  without  the 
least  regard  to  those  doctrines,  and  without 
any  partiality  or  prejudice  for  them.  Authors 
would  save  themselves  many  errors  and  much 
labour  lost  (because  spent  on  a  delusion)  if  they 
could  only  resolve  to  go  to  work  with  more 
frankness. 


Book  II.  Dialectic  of  Pure  Practical  Reason 


Chapter  I.  Of  a  Dialectic  of  Pure  Practical 
Reason  Generally 

Pure  reason  always  has  its  dialetic,  whether  it 
is  considered  in  its  speculative  or  its  practical 
employment;  for  it  requires  the  absolute  total¬ 
ity  of  the  conditions  of  what  is  given  condi¬ 
tioned,  and  this  can  only  be  found  in  things  in 
themselves.  But  as  all  conceptions  of  things  in 
themselves  must  be  referred  to  intuitions,  and 
with  us  men  these  can  never  be  other  than  sen¬ 
sible  and  hence  can  never  enable  us  to  know 
objects  as  things  in  themselves  but  only  as 
appearances,  and  since  the  unconditioned  can 
never  be  found  in  this  chain  of  appearances 
which  consists  only  of  conditioned  and  condi¬ 
tions;  thus  from  applying  this  rational  idea  of 
the  totality  of  the  conditions  (in  other  words 
of  the  unconditioned)  to  appearances,  there 
arises  an  inevitable  illusion,  as  if  these  latter 
were  things  in  themselves  (for  in  the  absence  of 
a  warning  critique  they  are  always  regarded  as 
such).  This  illusion  would  never  be  noticed  as 
delusive  if  it  did  not  betray  itself  by  a  conflict 
of  reason  with  itself,  when  it  applies  to  appear¬ 
ances  its  fundamental  principle  of  presupposing 
the  unconditioned  to  everything  conditioned. 
By  this,  however,  reason  is  compelled  to  trace 
this  illusion  to  its  source,  and  search  how  it  can 
be  removed,  and  this  can  only  be  done  by  a 
complete  critical  examination  of  the  whole  pure 
faculty  of  reason;  so  that  the  antinomy  of  the 
pure  reason  which  is  manifest  in  its  dialectic 
is  in  fact  the  most  beneficial  error  into  which 
human  reason  could  ever  have  fallen,  since  it 
at  last  drives  us  to  search  for  the  key  to  escape 
from  this  labyrinth;  and  when  this  key  is  found, 
it  further  discovers  that  which  we  did  not  seek 


but  yet  had  need  of,  namely,  a  view  into  a 
higher  and  an  immutable  order  of  things,  in 
which  we  even  now  are,  and  in  which  we  are 
thereby  enabled  by  definite  precepts  to  continue 
to  live  according  to  the  highest  dictates  of 
reason. 

It  may  be  seen  in  detail  in  the  Critique  of 
Pure  Reason  how  in  its  speculative  employment 
this  natural  dialectic  is  to  be  solved,  and  how 
the  error  which  arises  from  a  very  natural  illu¬ 
sion  may  be  guarded  against.  But  reason  in  its 
practical  use  is  not  a  whit  better  off.  As  pure 
practical  reason,  it  likewise  seeks  to  find  the 
unconditioned  for  the  practically  conditioned 
(which  rests  on  inclinations  and  natural  wants), 
and  this  is  not  as  the  determining  principle  of 
the  will,  but  even  when  this  is  given  (in  the 
moral  law)  it  seeks  the  unconditioned  totality 
of  the  object  of  pure  practical  reason  under  the 
name  of  the  summum  bonum. 

To  define  this  idea  practically,  i.e.,  sufficiently 
for  the  maxims  of  our  rational  conduct,  is  the 
business  of  practical  wisdom,  and  this  again  as  a 
science  is  philosophy,  in  the  sense  in  which  the 
word  was  understood  by  the  ancients,  with 
whom  it  meant  instruction  in  the  conception  in 
which  the  summum  bonum  was  to  be  placed,  and 
the  conduct  by  which  it  was  to  be  obtained.  It 
would  be  well  to  leave  this  word  in  its  ancient 
signification  as  a  doctrine  of  the  summum  bo¬ 
num,  so  far  as  reason  endeavours  to  make  this 
into  a  science.  For  on  the  one  hand  the  restric¬ 
tion  annexed  would  suit  the  Greek  expression 
(which  signifies  the  love  of  wisdom ),  and  yet  at 
the  same  time  would  be  sufficient  to  embrace  un¬ 
der  the  name  of  philosophy  the  love  of  science : 
that  is  to  say,  of  all  speculative  rational 
knowledge,  so  far  as  it  is  serviceable  to  reason, 


CRITIQUE  OF 


both  for  that  conception  and  also  for  the  practi¬ 
cal  principle  determining  our  conduct,  without 
letting  out  of  sight  the  main  end,  on  account  of 
which  alone  it  can  be  called  a  doctrine  of  practi¬ 
cal  wisdom.  On  the  other  hand,  it  would  be  no 
harm  to  deter  the  self-conceit  of  one  who  ven¬ 
tures  to  claim  the  title  of  philosopher  by  hold¬ 
ing  before  him  in  the  very  definition  a  standard 
of  self-estimation  which  would  very  much  lower 
his  pretensions.  For  a  teacher  of  wisdom  would 
mean  something  more  than  a  scholar  who  has 
not  come  so  far  as  to  guide  himself,  much  less 
to  guide  others,  with  certain  expectation  of  at¬ 
taining  so  high  an  end:  it  would  mean  a  master 
in  the  knowledge  of  wisdom ,  which  implies  more 
than  a  modest  man  would  claim  for  himself. 
Thus  philosophy  as  well  as  wisdom  would  al¬ 
ways  remain  an  ideal,  which  objectively  is  pre¬ 
sented  complete  in  reason  alone,  while  subjec¬ 
tively  for  the  person  it  is  only  the  goal  of  his 
unceasing  endeavours;  and  no  one  would  be  jus¬ 
tified  in  professing  to  be  in  possession  of  it  so  as 
to  assume  the  name  of  philosopher  who  could 
not  also  show  its  infallible  effects  in  his  own  per¬ 
son  as  an  example  (in  his  self-mastery  and  the 
unquestioned  interest  that  he  takes  pre-eminent¬ 
ly  in  the  general  good),  and  this  the  ancients 
also  required  as  a  condition  of  deserving  that 
honourable  title. 

We  have  another  preliminary  remark  to  make 
respecting  the  dialectic  of  the  pure  practical 
reason,  on  the  point  of  the  definition  of  the  sum- 
mum  bonum  (a  successful  solution  of  which 
dialectic  would  lead  us  to  expect,  as  in  case 
of  that  of  the  theoretical  reason,  the  most  bene¬ 
ficial  effects,  inasmuch  as  the  self-contradic¬ 
tions  of  pure  practical  reason  honestly  stated, 
and  not  concealed,  force  us  to  undertake  a  com¬ 
plete  critique  of  this  faculty). 

The  moral  law  is  the  sole  determining  prin¬ 
ciple  of  a  pure  will.  But  since  this  is  merely 
formal  (viz.,  as  prescribing  only  the  form  of  the 
maxim  as  universally  legislative),  it  abstracts 
as  a  determining  principle  from  all  matter — 
that  is  to  say,  from  every  object  of  volition. 
Hence,  though  the  summum  bonum  may  be  the 
whole  object  of  a  pure  practical  reason,  i.e.,  a 
pure  will,  yet  it  is  not  on  that  account  to  be  re¬ 
garded  as  its  determining  principle;  and  the 
moral  law  alone  must  be  regarded  as  the  prin¬ 
ciple  on  which  that  and  its  realization  or  pro¬ 
motion  are  aimed  at.  This  remark  is  important 
in  so  delicate  a  case  as  the  determination  of 
moral  principles,  where  the  slightest  misinter¬ 
pretation  perverts  men’s  minds.  For  it  will  have 
been  seen  from  the  Analytic  that,  if  we  assume 


any  object  under  the  name  of  a  good  as  a  de¬ 
termining  principle  of  the  will  prior  to  the  moral 
law  and  then  deduce  from  it  the  supreme  practi¬ 
cal  principle,  this  would  always  introduce  het- 
eronomy  and  crush  out  the  moral  principle. 

It  is,  however,  evident  that  if  the  notion  of 
the  summum  bonum  includes  that  of  the  moral 
law  as  its  supreme  condition,  then  the  summum 
bonum  would  not  merely  be  an  object ,  but  the 
notion  of  it  and  the  conception  of  its  existence 
as  possible  by  our  own  practical  reason  would 
likewise  be  the  determinmg  principle  of  the 
will,  since  in  that  case  the  will  is  in  fact  deter¬ 
mined  by  the  moral  law  which  is  already  includ¬ 
ed  in  this  conception,  and  by  no  other  object, 
as  the  principle  of  autonomy  requires.  This  or¬ 
der  of  the  conceptions  of  determination  of  the 
will  must  not  be  lost  sight  of,  as  otherwise  we 
should  misunderstand  ourselves  and  think  we 
had  fallen  into  a  contradiction,  while  everything 
remains  in  perfect  harmony. 

Chapter  II.  Of  the  Dialectic  of  Pure  Reason 
in  defining  the  Conception  of 
the  u  Summum  Bonum” 

The  conception  of  the  summum  itself  con¬ 
tains  an  ambiguity  which  might  occasion  need¬ 
less  disputes  if  we  did  not  attend  to  it.  The 
summum  may  mean  either  the  supreme  ( supre - 
mum)  or  the  perfect  ( consummatum ).  The 
former  is  that  condition  which  is  itself  uncon¬ 
ditioned,  i.e.,  is  not  subordinate  to  any  other 
( originarium ) ;  the  second  is  that  whole  which 
is  not  a  part  of  a  greater  whole  of  the  same 
kind  ( perfectissimum ).  It  has  been  shown  in 
the  Analytic  that  virtue  (as  worthiness  to  be 
happy)  is  the  supreme  condition  of  all  that  can 
appear  to  us  desirable,  and  consequently  of  all 
our  pursuit  of  happiness,  and  is  therefore  the 
supreme  good.  But  it  does  not  follow  that  it  is 
the  whole  and  perfect  good  as  the  object  of  the 
desires  of  rational  finite  beings;  for  this  re¬ 
quires  happiness  also,  and  that  not  merely  in  the 
partial  eyes  of  the  person  who  makes  himself 
an  end,  but  even  in  the  judgement  of  an  impar¬ 
tial  reason,  which  regards  persons  in  general  as 
ends  in  themselves.  For  to  need  happiness,  to 
deserve  it,  and  yet  at  the  same  time  not  to  par¬ 
ticipate  in  it,  cannot  be  consistent  with  the  per¬ 
fect  volition  of  a  rational  being  possessed  at  the 
same  time  of  all  power,  if,  for  the  sake  of  ex¬ 
periment,  we  conceive  such  a  being.  Now  inas¬ 
much  as  virtue  and  happiness  together  consti¬ 
tute  the  possession  of  the  summum  bonum  in  a 
person,  and  the  distribution  of  happiness  in  ex¬ 
act  proportion  to  morality  (which  is  the  worth 


PRACTICAL  REASON 


of  the  person,  and  his  worthiness  to  be  happy) 
constitutes  the  summum  bonum  of  a  possible 
world;  hence  this  summum  bonum  expresses 
the  whole,  the  perfect  good,  in  which,  however, 
virtue  as  the  condition  is  always  the  supreme 
good,  since  it  has  no  condition  above  it;  where¬ 
as  happiness,  while  it  is  pleasant  to  the  possessor 
of  it,  is  not  of  itself  absolutely  and  in  all  re¬ 
spects  good,  but  always  presupposes  morally 
right  behaviour  as  its  condition. 

When  two  elements  are  necessarily  united  in 
one  concept,  they  must  be  connected  as  reason 
and  consequence,  and  this  either  so  that  their 
unity  is  considered  as  analytical  (logical  con¬ 
nection),  or  as  synthetical  (real  connection) — 
the  former  following  the  law  of  identity,  the 
latter  that  of  causality.  The  connection  of  vir¬ 
tue  and  happiness  may  therefore  be  understood 
in  two  ways:  either  the  endeavour  to  be  virtu¬ 
ous  and  the  rational  pursuit  of  happiness  are 
not  two  distinct  actions,  but  absolutely  identi¬ 
cal,  in  which  case  no  maxim  need  be  made  the 
principle  of  the  former,  other  than  what  serves 
for  the  latter;  or  the  connection  consists  in  this, 
that  virtue  produces  happiness  as  something 
distinct  from  the  consciousness  of  virtue,  as  a 
cause  produces  an  effect. 

The  ancient  Greek  schools  were,  properly 
speaking,  only  two,  and  in  determining  the  con¬ 
ception  of  the  summum  bonum  these  followed 
in  fact  one  and  the  same  method,  inasmuch  as 
they  did  not  allow  virtue  and  happiness  to  be 
regarded  as  two  distinct  elements  of  the  sum¬ 
mum  bonum ,  and  consequently  sought  the  unity 
of  the  principle  by  the  rule  of  identity;  but  they 
differed  as  to  which  of  the  two  was  to  be  taken 
as  the  fundamental  notion.  The  Epicurean  said: 
“To  be  conscious  that  one’s  maxims  lead  to  hap¬ 
piness  is  virtue”;  the  Stoic  said:  “To  be  con¬ 
scious  of  one’s  virtue  is  happiness.”  With  the 
former,  Prudence  was  equivalent  to  morality; 
with  the  latter,  who  chose  a  higher  designation 
for  virtue,  morality  alone  was  true  wisdom. 

While  we  must  admire  the  men  who  in  such 
early  times  tried  all  imaginable  ways  of  extend¬ 
ing  the  domain  of  philosophy,  we  must  at  the 
same  time  lament  that  their  acuteness  was  un¬ 
fortunately  misapplied  in  trying  to  trace  out 
identity  between  two  extremely  heterogeneous 
notions,  those  of  happiness  and  virtue.  But  it 
agrees  with  the  dialectical  spirit  of  their  times 
(and  subtle  minds  are  even  now  sometimes  mis¬ 
led  in  the  same  way)  to  get  rid  of  irreconcilable 
differences  in  principle  by  seeking  to  change 
them  into  a  mere  contest  about  words,  and  thus 
apparently  working  out  the  identity  of  the  no- 


339 

tion  under  different  names,  and  this  usually 
occurs  in  cases  where  the  combination  of  het¬ 
erogeneous  principles  lies  so  deep  or  so  high, 
or  would  require  so  complete  a  transforma¬ 
tion  of  the  doctrines  assumed  in  the  rest  of 
the  philosophical  system,  that  men  are  afraid 
to  penetrate  deeply  into  the  real  difference  and 
prefer  treating  it  as  a  difference  in  questions 
of  form. 

While  both  schools  sought  to  trace  out  the 
identity  of  the  practical  principles  of  virtue  and 
happiness,  they  were  not  agreed  as  to  the  way 
in  which  they  tried  to  force  this  identity,  but 
were  separated  infinitely  from  one  another,  the 
one  placing  its  principle  on  the  side  of  sense, 
the  other  on  that  of  reason;  the  one  in  the  con¬ 
sciousness  of  sensible  wants,  the  other  in  the 
independence  of  practical  reason  on  all  sensible 
grounds  of  determination.  According  to  the 
Epicurean,  the  notion  of  virtue  was  already  in¬ 
volved  in  the  maxim:  “To  promote  one’s  own 
happiness”;  according  to  the  Stoics,  on  the 
other  hand,  the  feeling  of  happiness  was  already 
contained  in  the  consciousness  of  virtue.  Now 
whatever  is  contained  in  another  notion  is  iden¬ 
tical  with  part  of  the  containing  notion,  but 
not  with  the  whole,  and  moreover  two  wholes 
may  be  specifically  distinct,  although  they  con¬ 
sist  of  the  same  parts;  namely  if  the  parts  are 
united  into  a  whole  in  totally  different  ways. 
The  Stoic  maintained  that  the  virtue  was  the 
whole  summum  bonum,  and  happiness  only  the 
consciousness  of  possessing  it,  as  making  part 
of  the  state  of  the  subject.  The  Epicurean  main¬ 
tained  that  happiness  was  the  whole  summum 
bonum,  and  virtue  only  the  form  of  the  maxim 
for  its  pursuit;  viz.,  the  rational  use  of  the 
means  for  attaining  it. 

Now  it  is  clear  from  the  Analytic  that  the 
maxims  of  virtue  and  those  of  private  happiness 
are  quite  heterogeneous  as  to  their  supreme 
practical  principle,  and,  although  they  belong  to 
one  summum  bonum  which  together  they  make 
possible,  yet  they  are  so  far  from  coinciding 
that  they  restrict  and  check  one  another  very 
much  in  the  same  subject.  Thus  the  question: 
uHow  is  the  summum  bonum  practically  pos¬ 
sible?”  still  remains  an  unsolved  problem,  not¬ 
withstanding  all  the  attempts  at  coalition  that 
have  hitherto  been  made.  The  Analytic  has,  how¬ 
ever,  shown  what  it  is  that  makes  the  problem 
difficult  to  solve;  namely,  that  happiness  and 
morality  are  two  specifically  distinct  elements 
of  the  summum  bonum  and,  therefore,  their 
combination  cannot  be  analytically  cognised 
(as  if  the  man  that  seeks  his  own  happiness 


CRITIQUE  OF 


should  find  by  mere  analysis  of  his  conception 
that  in  so  acting  he  is  virtuous,  or  as  if  the  man 
that  follows  virtue  should  in  the  consciousness 
of  such  conduct  find  that  he  is  already  happy 
ipso  facto),  but  must  be  a  synthesis  of  concepts. 
Now  since  this  combination  is  recognised  as  a 
priori ,  and  therefore  as  practically  necessary, 
and  consequently  not  as  derived  from  expe¬ 
rience,  so  that  the  possibility  of  the  summum 
bonnm  does  not  rest  on  any  empirical  principle, 
it  follows  that  the  deduction  [legitimation]  of 
this  concept  must  be  transcendental.  It  is  a 
priori  (morally)  necessary  to  produce  the  sum- 
mum  bonum  by  freedom  of  will:  therefore  the 
condition  of  its  possibility  must  rest  solely  on 
a  priori  principles  of  cognition. 

I.  The  Antinomy  of  Practical  Reason 

In  the  summum  bonum  which  is  practical  for 
us,  i.e.,  to  be  realized  by  our  will,  virtue  and 
happiness  are  thought  as  necessarily  combined, 
so  that  the  one  cannot  be  assumed  by  pure  prac¬ 
tical  reason  without  the  other  also  being  at¬ 
tached  to  it.  Now  this  combination  (like  every 
other)  is  either  analytical  or  synthetical.  It  has 
been  shown  that  it  cannot  be  analytical;  it  must 
then  be  synthetical  and,  more  particularly,  must 
be  conceived  as  the  connection  of  cause  and  ef¬ 
fect,  since  it  concerns  a  practical  good,  i.e.,  one 
that  is  possible  by  means  of  action;  consequent¬ 
ly  either  the  desire  of  happiness  must  be  the 
motive  to  maxims  of  virtue,  or  the  maxim  of 
virtue  must  be  the  efficient  cause  of  happiness. 
The  first  is  absolutely  impossible,  because  (as 
was  proved  in  the  Analytic)  maxims  which 
place  the  determining  principle  of  the  will  in 
the  desire  of  personal  happiness  are  not  moral 
at  all,  and  no  virtue  can  be  founded  on  them. 
But  the  second  is  also  impossible ,  because  the 
practical  connection  of  causes  and  effects  in  the 
world,  as  the  result  of  the  determination  of  the 
will,  does  not  depend  upon  the  moral  disposi¬ 
tions  of  the  will,  but  on  the  knowledge  of  the 
laws  of  nature  and  the  physical  power  to  use 
them  for  one’s  purposes;  consequently  we  can¬ 
not  expect  in  the  world  by  the  most  punctil¬ 
ious  observance  of  the  moral  laws  any  neces¬ 
sary  connection  of  happiness  with  virtue  ade¬ 
quate  to  the  summum  bonum.  Now,  as  the  pro¬ 
motion  of  this  summum  bonum}  the  conception 
of  which  contains  this  connection,  is  a  priori 
a  necessary  object  of  our  will  and  inseparably 
attached  to  the  moral  law,  the  impossibility 
of  the  former  must  prove  the  falsity  of  the 
latter.  If  then  the  supreme  good  is  not  possible 
by  practical  rules,  then  the  moral  law  also 


which  commands  us  to  promote  it  is  directed 
to  vain  imaginary  ends  and  must  consequently 
be  false. 

II.  Critical  Solution  of  the  Antinomy  of 
Practical  Reason 

The  antinomy  of  pure  speculative  reason  ex¬ 
hibits  a  similar  conflict  between  freedom  and 
physical  necessity  in  the  causality  of  events  in 
the  world.  It  was  solved  by  showing  that  there  is 
no  real  contradiction  when  the  events  and  even 
the  world  in  which  they  occur  are  regarded  (as 
they  ought  to  be)  merely  as  appearances;  since 
one  and  the  same  acting  being,  as  an  appear¬ 
ance  (even  to  his  own  inner  sense),  has  a  causal¬ 
ity  in  the  world  of  sense  that  always  conforms 
to  the  mechanism  of  nature,  but  with  respect 
to  the  same  events,  so  far  as  the  acting  person 
regards  himself  at  the  same  time  as  a  noumenon 
(as  pure  intelligence  in  an  existence  not  depend¬ 
ent  on  the  condition  of  time),  he  can  contain 
a  principle  by  which  that  causality  acting  ac¬ 
cording  to  laws  of  nature  is  determined,  but 
which  is  itself  free  from  all  laws  of  nature. 

It  is  just  the  same  with  the  foregoing  antin¬ 
omy  of  pure  practical  reason.  The  first  of  the 
two  propositions,  “That  the  endeavour  after 
happiness  produces  a  virtuous  mind,”  is  abso¬ 
lutely  false ;  but  the  second,  “That  a  virtuous 
mind  necessarily  produces  happiness,”  is  not 
absolutely  false,  but  only  in  so  far  as  virtue  is 
considered  as  a  form  of  causality  in  the  sensible 
world,  and  consequently  only  if  I  suppose  ex¬ 
istence  in  it  to  be  the  only  sort  of  existence  of 
a  rational  being;  it  is  then  only  conditionally 
false.  But  as  I  am  not  only  justified  in  think¬ 
ing  that  I  exist  also  as  a  noumenon  in  a  world 
of  the  understanding,  but  even  have  in  the 
moral  law  a  purely  intellectual  determining  prin¬ 
ciple  of  my  causality  (in  the  sensible  world), 
it  is  not  impossible  that  morality  of  mind  should 
have  a  connection  as  cause  with  happiness  (as 
an  effect  in  the  sensible  world)  if  not  imme¬ 
diate  yet  mediate  (viz.,  through  an  intelligent 
author  of  nature),  and  moreover  necessary; 
while  in  a  system  of  nature  which  is  merely  an 
object  of  the  senses,  this  combination  could 
never  occur  except  contingently  and,  therefore, 
could  not  suffice  for  the  summum  bonum. 

Thus,  notwithstanding  this  seeming  conflict 
of  practical  reason  with  itself,  the  summum 
bonum ,  which  is  the  necessary  supreme  end  of 
a  will  morally  determined,  is  a  true  object  there¬ 
of;  for  it  is  practically  possible,  and  the  max¬ 
ims  of  the  will  which  as  regards  their  matter 
refer  to  it  have  objective  reality,  which  at  first 


PRACTICAL  REASON 


was  threatened  by  the  antinomy  that  appeared 
in  the  connection  of  morality  with  happiness  by 
a  general  law;  but  this  was  merely  from  a  mis¬ 
conception,  because  the  relation  between  ap¬ 
pearances  was  taken  for  a  relation  of  the  things 
in  themselves  to  these  appearances. 

When  we  find  ourselves  obliged  to  go  so  far, 
namely,  to  the  connection  with  an  intelligible 
world,  to  find  the  possibility  of  the  summum 
bonum,  which  reason  points  out  to  all  rational 
beings  as  the  goal  of  all  their  moral  wishes,  it 
must  seem  strange  that,  nevertheless,  the  philos¬ 
ophers  both  of  ancient  and  modern  times  have 
been  able  to  find  happiness  in  accurate  propor¬ 
tion  to  virtue  even  in  this  life  (in  the  sensible 
world),  or  have  persuaded  themselves  that  they 
were  conscious  thereof.  For  Epicurus  as  well 
as  the  Stoics  extolled  above  everything  the  hap¬ 
piness  that  springs  from  the  consciousness  of 
living  virtuously;  and  the  former  was  not  so 
base  in  his  practical  precepts  as  one  might  infer 
from  the  principles  of  his  theory,  which  he  used 
for  explanation  and  not  for  action,  or  as  they 
were  interpreted  by  many  who  were  misled  by 
his  using  the  term  pleasure  for  contentment ;  on 
the  contrary,  he  reckoned  the  most  disinterested 
practice  of  good  amongst  the  ways  of  enjoying 
the  most  intimate  delight,  and  his  scheme  of 
pleasure  (by  which  he  meant  constant  cheerful¬ 
ness  of  mind)  included  the  moderation  and 
control  of  the  inclinations,  such  as  the  strictest 
moral  philosopher  might  require.  He  differed 
from  the  Stoics  chiefly  in  making  this  pleasure 
the  motive,  which  they  very  rightly  refused  to 
do.  For,  on  the  one  hand,  the  virtuous  Epicurus, 
like  many  well-intentioned  men  of  this  day  who 
do  not  reflect  deeply  enough  on  their  principles, 
fell  into  the  error  of  presupposing  the  virtuous 
disposition  in  the  persons  for  whom  he  wished 
to  provide  the  springs  to  virtue  (and  indeed  the 
upright  man  cannot  be  happy  if  he  is  not  first 
conscious  of  his  uprightness;  since  with  such  a 
character  the  reproach  that  his  habit  of  thought 
would  oblige  him  to  make  against  himself  in 
case  of  transgression  and  his  moral  self-con¬ 
demnation  would  rob  him  of  all  enjoyment  of 
the  pleasantness  which  his  condition  might 
otherwise  contain).  But  the  question  is:  How  is 
such  a  disposition  possible  in  the  first  instance, 
and  such  a  habit  of  thought  in  estimating  the 
worth  of  one’s  existence,  since  prior  to  it  there 
can  be  in  the  subject  no  feeling  at  all  for  moral 
worth?  If  a  man  is  virtuous  without  being  con¬ 
scious  of  his  integrity  in  every  action,  he  will 
certainly  not  enjoy  life,  however  favourable 
fortune  may  be  to  him  in  its  physical  circum¬ 


34i 

stances;  but  can  we  make  him  virtuous  in  the 
first  instance,  in  other  words,  before  he  esteems 
the  moral  worth  of  his  existence  so  highly,  by 
praising  to  him  the  peace  of  mind  that  would 
result  from  the  consciousness  of  an  integrity 
for  which  he  has  no  sense? 

On  the  other  hand,  however,  there  is  here  an 
occasion  of  a  vitium  subreptionis,  and  as  it  were 
of  an  optical  illusion,  in  the  self-consciousness 
of  what  one  does  as  distinguished  from  what 
one  feels — an  illusion  which  even  the  most  ex¬ 
perienced  cannot  altogether  avoid.  The  moral 
disposition  of  mind  is  necessarily  combined 
with  a  consciousness  that  the  will  is  determined 
directly  by  the  law .  Now  the  consciousness  of  a 
determination  of  the  faculty  of  desire  is  always 
the  source  of  a  satisfaction  in  the  resulting  ac¬ 
tion;  but  this  pleasure,  this  satisfaction  in  one¬ 
self,  is  not  the  determining  principle  of  the  ac¬ 
tion;  on  the  contrary,  the  determination  of  the 
will  directly  by  reason  is  the  source  of  the  feel¬ 
ing  of  pleasure,  and  this  remains  a  pure  practi¬ 
cal  not  sensible  determination  of  the  faculty  of 
desire.  Now  as  this  determination  has  exactly 
the  same  effect  within  in  impelling  to  activity, 
that  a  feeling  of  the  pleasure  to  be  expected 
from  the  desired  action  would  have  had,  we 
easily  look  on  what  we  ourselves  do  as  some¬ 
thing  which  we  merely  passively  feel,  and  take 
the  moral  spring  for  a  sensible  impulse,  just  as 
it  happens  in  the  so-called  illusion  of  the  senses 
(in  this  case  the  inner  sense).  It  is  a  sublime 
thing  in  human  nature  to  be  determined  to  ac¬ 
tions  immediately  by  a  purely  rational  law;  sub¬ 
lime  even  is  the  illusion  that  regards  the  sub¬ 
jective  side  of  this  capacity  of  intellectual  de¬ 
termination  as  something  sensible  and  the  ef¬ 
fect  of  a  special  sensible  feeling  (for  an  intel¬ 
lectual  feeling  would  be  a  contradiction).  It  is 
also  of  great  importance  to  attend  to  this  prop¬ 
erty  of  our  personality  and  as  much  as  possible 
to  cultivate  the  effect  of  reason  on  this  feeling. 
But  we  must  beware  lest  by  falsely  extolling 
this  moral  determining  principle  as  a  spring, 
making  its  source  lie  in  particular  feelings  of 
pleasure  (which  are  in  fact  only  results),  we  de¬ 
grade  and  disfigure  the  true  genuine  spring,  the 
law  itself,  by  putting  as  it  were  a  false  foil  upon 
it.  Respect,  not  pleasure  or  enjoyment  of  hap¬ 
piness,  is  something  for  which  it  is  not  possible 
that  reason  should  have  any  antecedent  feeling 
as  its  foundation  (for  this  would  always  be  sen¬ 
sible  and  pathological);  and  consciousness  of 
immediate  obligation  of  the  will  by  the  law  is 
by  no  means  analogous  to  the  feeling  of  pleas¬ 
ure,  although  in  relation  to  the  faculty  of  desire 


CRITIQUE  OF 


it  produces  the  same  effect,  but  from  different 
sources:  it  is  only  by  this  mode  of  conception, 
however,  that  we  can  attain  what  we  are  seek¬ 
ing,  namely,  that  actions  be  done  not  merely  in 
accordance  with  duty  (as  a  result  of  pleasant 
feelings),  but  from  duty,  which  must  be  the 
true  end  of  all  moral  cultivation. 

Have  we  not,  however,  a  word  which  does  not 
express  enjoyment,  as  happiness  does,  but  indi¬ 
cates  a  satisfaction  in  one’s  existence,  an  ana¬ 
logue  of  the  happiness  which  must  necessarily 
accompany  the  consciousness  of  virtue?  Yes! 
this  word  is  self  -contentment  which  in  its  prop¬ 
er  signification  always  designates  only  a  nega¬ 
tive  satisfaction  in  one’s  existence,  in  which  one 
is  conscious  of  needing  nothing.  Freedom  and 
the  consciousness  of  it  as  a  faculty  of  following 
the  moral  law  with  unyielding  resolution  is  inde¬ 
pendence  oj  inclinations,  at  least  as  motives  de¬ 
termining  (though  not  as  affecting)  our  desire, 
and  so  far  as  I  am  conscious  of  this  freedom  in 
following  my  moral  maxims,  it  is  the  only 
source  of  an  unaltered  contentment  which  is 
necessarily  connected  with  it  and  rests  on  no 
special  feeling.  This  may  be  called  intellectual 
contentment.  The  sensible  contentment  (im¬ 
properly  so-called)  which  rests  on  the  satisfac¬ 
tion  of  the  inclinations,  however  delicate  they 
may  be  imagined  to  be,  can  never  be  adequate 
to  the  conception  of  it.  For  the  inclinations 
change,  they  grow  with  the  indulgence  shown 
them,  and  always  leave  behind  a  still  greater 
void  than  we  had  thought  to  fill.  Hence  they 
are  always  burdensome  to  a  rational  being,  and, 
although  he  cannot  lay  them  aside,  they  wrest 
from  him  the  wish  to  be  rid  of  them.  Even  an 
inclination  to  what  is  right  (e.g.,  to  beneficence), 
though  it  may  much  facilitate  the  efficacy  of  the 
moral  maxims,  cannot  produce  any.  For  in  these 
all  must  be  directed  to  the  conception  of  the 
law  as  a  determining  principle,  if  the  action  is 
to  contain  morality  and  not  merely  legality.  In¬ 
clination  is  blind  and  slavish,  whether  it  be  of  a 
good  sort  or  not,  and,  when  morality  is  in  ques¬ 
tion,  reason  must  not  play  the  part  merely  of 
guardian  to  inclination,  but  disregarding  it  alto¬ 
gether  must  attend  simply  to  its  own  interest 
as  pure  practical  reason.  This  very  feeling  of 
compassion  and  tender  sympathy,  if  it  precedes 
the  deliberation  on  the  question  of  duty  and  be¬ 
comes  a  determining  principle,  is  even  annoying 
to  right  thinking  persons,  brings  their  deliberate 
maxims  into  confusion,  and  makes  them  wish  to 
be  delivered  from  it  and  to  be  subject  to  law- 
giving  reason  alone. 

From  this  we  can  understand  how  the  con¬ 


sciousness  of  this  faculty  of  a  pure  practical 
reason  produces  by  action  (virtue)  a  conscious¬ 
ness  of  mastery  over  one’s  inclinations,  and 
therefore  of  independence  of  them,  and  conse¬ 
quently  also  of  the  discontent  that  always  ac¬ 
companies  them,  and  thus  a  negative  satisfac¬ 
tion  with  one’s  state,  i.e.,  contentment,  which 
is  primarily  contentment  with  one’s  own  per¬ 
son.  Freedom  itself  becomes  in  this  way  (name¬ 
ly,  indirectly)  capable  of  an  enjoyment  which 
cannot  be  called  happiness,  because  it  does  not 
depend  on  the  positive  concurrence  of  a  feeling, 
nor  is  it,  strictly  speaking,  bliss,  since  it  does 
not  include  complete  independence  of  inclina¬ 
tions  and  wants,  but  it  resembles  bliss  in  so  far 
as  the  determination  of  one’s  will  at  least  can 
hold  itself  free  from  their  influence;  and  thus, 
at  least  in  its  origin,  this  enjoyment  is  analo¬ 
gous  to  the  self-sufficiency  which  we  can  ascribe 
only  to  the  Supreme  Being. 

From  this  solution  of  the  antinomy  of  practi¬ 
cal  pure  reason,  it  follows  that  in  practical  prin¬ 
ciples  we  may  at  least  conceive  as  possible  a 
natural  and  necessary  connection  between  the 
consciousness  of  morality  and  the  expectation 
of  a  proportionate  happiness  as  its  result,  though 
it  does  not  follow  that  we  can  know  or  perceive 
this  connection;  that,  on  the  other  hand,  prin¬ 
ciples  of  the  pursuit  of  happiness  cannot  pos¬ 
sibly  produce  morality;  that,  therefore,  moral¬ 
ity  is  the  supreme  good  (as  the  first  condition 
of  the  summum  bonum ),  while  happiness  con¬ 
stitutes  its  second  element,  but  only  in  such  a 
way  that  it  is  the  morally  conditioned,  but  nec¬ 
essary  consequence  of  the  former.  Only  with 
this  subordination  is  the  summum  bonum  the 
whole  object  of  pure  practical  reason,  which 
must  necessarily  conceive  it  as  possible,  since  it 
commands  us  to  contribute  to  the  utmost  of  our 
power  to  its  realization.  But  since  the  possibil¬ 
ity  of  such  connection  of  the  conditioned  with 
its  condition  belongs  wholly  to  the  supersensual 
relation  of  things  and  cannot  be  given  according 
to  the  laws  of  the  world  of  sense,  although  the 
practical  consequences  of  the  idea  belong  to  the 
world  of  sense,  namely,  the  actions  that  aim  at 
realizing  the  summum  bonum;  we  will  there¬ 
fore  endeavour  to  set  forth  the  grounds  of  that 
possibility,  first,  in  respect  of  what  is  imme¬ 
diately  in  our  power,  and  then,  secondly,  in  that 
which  is  not  in  our  power,  but  which  reason 
presents  to  us  as  the  supplement  of  our  im¬ 
potence,  for  the  realization  of  the  summum 
bonum  (which  by  practical  principles  is 
necessary). 


PRACTICAL  REASON 


III.  Of  the  Primacy  of  Pure  Practical  Reason 
in  its  Union  with  the  Speculative  Reason 

By  primacy  between  two  or  more  things  con¬ 
nected  by  reason,  I  understand  the  prerogative, 
belonging  to  one,  of  being  the  first  determining 
principle  in  the  connection  with  all  the  rest.  In  a 
narrower  practical  sense  it  means  the  preroga¬ 
tive  of  the  interest  of  one  in  so  far  as  the  inter¬ 
est  of  the  other  is  subordinated  to  it,  while  it  is 
not  postponed  to  any  other.  To  every  faculty  of 
the  mind  we  can  attribute  an  interest,  that  is,  a 
principle,  that  contains  the  condition  on  which 
alone  the  former  is  called  into  exercise.  Reason, 
as  the  faculty  of  principles,  determines  the  in¬ 
terest  of  all  the  powers  of  the  mind  and  is  deter¬ 
mined  by  its  own.  The  interest  of  its  speculative 
employment  consists  in  the  cognition  of  the  ob¬ 
ject  pushed  to  the  highest  a  priori  principles: 
that  of  its  practical  employment,  in  the  deter¬ 
mination  of  the  will  in  respect  of  the  final  and 
complete  end.  As  to  what  is  necessary  for  the 
possibility  of  any  employment  of  reason  at  all, 
namely,  that  its  principles  and  affirmations 
should  not  contradict  one  another,  this  consti¬ 
tutes  no  part  of  its  interest,  but  is  the  condition 
of  having  reason  at  all;  it  is  only  its  develop¬ 
ment,  not  mere  consistency  with  itself,  that  is 
reckoned  as  its  interest. 

If  practical  reason  could  not  assume  or  think 
as  given  anything  further  than  what  speculative 
reason  of  itself  could  offer  it  from  its  own  in¬ 
sight,  the  latter  would  have  the  primacy.  But 
supposing  that  it  had  of  itself  original  a  priori 
principles  with  which  certain  theoretical  posi¬ 
tions  were  inseparably  connected,  while  these 
were  withdrawn  from  any  possible  insight  of 
speculative  reason  (which,  however,  they  must 
not  contradict);  then  the  question  is:  Which 
interest  is  the  superior  (not  which  must  give 
way,  for  they  are  not  necessarily  conflicting), 
whether  speculative  reason,  which  knows  noth¬ 
ing  of  all  that  the  practical  offers  for  its  ac¬ 
ceptance,  should  take  up  these  propositions  and 
(although  they  transcend  it)  try  to  unite  them 
with  its  own  concepts  as  a  foreign  possession 
handed  over  to  it,  or  whether  it  is  justified  in 
obstinately  following  its  own  separate  interest 
and,  according  to  the  canonic  of  Epicurus,  re¬ 
jecting  as  vain  subtlety  everything  that  cannot 
accredit  its  objective  reality  by  manifest  exam¬ 
ples  to  be  shown  in  experience,  even  though  it 
should  be  never  so  much  interwoven  with  the 
interest  of  the  practical  (pure)  use  of  reason, 
and  in  itself  not  contradictory  to  the  theoretical, 
merely  because  it  infringes  on  the  interest  of 


343 

the  speculative  reason  to  this  extent,  that  it  re¬ 
moves  the  bounds  which  this  latter  had  set  to 
itself,  and  gives  it  up  to  every  nonsense  or  de¬ 
lusion  of  imagination? 

In  fact,  so  far  as  practical  reason  is  taken  as 
dependent  on  pathological  conditions,  that  is,  as 
merely  regulating  the  inclinations  under  the 
sensible  principle  of  happiness,  we  could  not  re¬ 
quire  speculative  reason  to  take  its  principles 
from  such  a  source.  Mohammed’s  paradise,  or 
the  absorption  into  the  Deity  of  the  theosophists 
and  mystics  would  press  their  monstrosities  on 
the  reason  according  to  the  taste  of  each,  and 
one  might  as  well  have  no  reason  as  surrender 
it  in  such  fashion  to  all  sorts  of  dreams.  But  if 
pure  reason  of  itself  can  be  practical  and  is  ac¬ 
tually  so,  as  the  consciousness  of  the  moral  law 
proves,  then  it  is  still  only  one  and  the  same 
reason  which,  whether  in  a  theoretical  or  a  prac¬ 
tical  point  of  view,  judges  according  to  a  priori 
principles;  and  then  it  is  clear  that  although  it 
is  in  the  first  point  of  view  incompetent  to  es¬ 
tablish  certain  propositions  positively,  which, 
however,  do  not  contradict  it,  then,  as  soon  as 
these  propositions  are  inseparably  attached  to 
the  practical  interest  of  pure  reason,  it  must  ac¬ 
cept  them,  though  it  be  as  something  offered  to 
it  from  a  foreign  source,  something  that  has  not 
grown  on  its  own  ground,  but  yet  is  sufficiently 
authenticated;  and  it  must  try  to  compare  and 
connect  them  with  everything  that  it  has  in  its 
power  as  speculative  reason.  It  must  remember, 
however,  that  these  are  not  additions  to  its  in¬ 
sight,  but  yet  are  extensions  of  its  employment 
in  another,  namely,  a  practical  aspect;  and  this 
is  not  in  the  least  opposed  to  its  interest,  which 
consists  in  the  restriction  of  wild  speculation. 

Thus,  when  pure  speculative  and  pure  prac¬ 
tical  reason  are  combined  in  one  cognition,  the 
latter  has  the  primacy ,  provided,  namely,  that 
this  combination  is  not  contingent  and  arbi¬ 
trary,  but  founded  a  priori  on  reason  itself  and 
therefore  necessary.  For  without  this  subordina¬ 
tion  there  would  arise  a  conflict  of  reason  with 
itself;  since,  if  they  were  merely  co-ordinate, 
the  former  would  close  its  boundaries  strictly 
and  admit  nothing  from  the  latter  into  its  do¬ 
main,  while  the  latter  would  extend  its  bounds 
over  everything  and  when  its  needs  required 
would  seek  to  embrace  the  former  within  them. 
Nor  could  we  reverse  the  order  and  require  pure 
practical  reason  to  be  subordinate  to  the  specu¬ 
lative,  since  all  interest  is  ultimately  practical, 
and  even  that  of  speculative  reason  is  condition¬ 
al,  and  it  is  only  in  the  practical  employment 
of  reason  that  it  is  complete. 


CRITIQUE  OF 


IV.  The  Immortality  oj  the  Soul  as  a  Postulate 
of  Pure  Practical  Reason 

The  realization  of  the  summum  bonum  in  the 
world  is  the  necessary  object  of  a  will  determi¬ 
nable  by  the  moral  law.  But  in  this  will  the  per¬ 
fect  accordance  of  the  mind  with  the  moral  law 
is  the  supreme  condition  of  the  summum  bo¬ 
num.  This  then  must  be  possible,  as  well  as  its 
object,  since  it  is  contained  in  the  command 
to  promote  the  latter.  Now,  the  perfect  accord¬ 
ance  of  the  will  with  the  moral  law  is  holiness , 
a  perfection  of  which  no  rational  being  of  the 
sensible  world  is  capable  at  any  moment  of  his 
existence.  Since,  nevertheless,  it  is  required  as 
practically  necessary,  it  can  only  be  found  in  a 
progress  in  infinitum  towards  that  perfect  ac¬ 
cordance,  and  on  the  principles  of  pure  practi¬ 
cal  reason  it  is  necessary  to  assume  such  a  prac¬ 
tical  progress  as  the  real  object  of  our  will. 

Now,  this  endless  progress  is  only  possible 
on  the  supposition  of  an  endless  duration  of  the 
existence  and  personality  of  the  same  rational 
being  (which  is  called  the  immortality  of  the 
soul).  The  summum  bonum ,  then,  practically  is 
only  possible  on  the  supposition  of  the  immor¬ 
tality  of  the  soul ;  consequently  this  immortal¬ 
ity,  being  inseparably  connected  with  the  moral 
law,  is  a  postulate  of  pure  practical  reason  (by 
which  I  mean  a  theoretical  proposition,  not  de¬ 
monstrable  as  such,  but  which  is  an  inseparable 
result  of  an  unconditional  a  priori  practical 
law.1 

This  principle  of  the  moral  destination  of  our 
nature,  namely,  that  it  is  only  in  an  endless  prog¬ 
ress  that  we  can  attain  perfect  accordance  with 
the  moral  law,  is  of  the  greatest  use,  not  merely 
for  the  present  purpose  of  supplementing  the 
impotence  of  speculative  reason,  but  also  with 
respect  to  religion.  In  default  of  it,  either  the 
moral  law  is  quite  degraded  from  its  holiness, 
being  made  out  to  be  indidgent  and  conformable 
to  our  convenience,  or  else  men  strain  their  no¬ 
tions  of  their  vocation  and  their  expectation  to 
an  unattainable  goal,  hoping  to  acquire  com¬ 
plete  holiness  of  will,  and  so  they  lose  them¬ 
selves  in  fanatical  theosophic  dreams,  which 
wholly  contradict  self-knowledge.  In  both  cases 
the  unceasing  effort  to  obey  punctually  and 
thoroughly  a  strict  and  inflexible  command  of 
reason,  which  yet  is  not  ideal  but  real,  is  only 
hindered.  For  a  rational  but  finite  being,  the 
only  thing  possible  is  an  endless  progress  from 
the  lower  to  higher  degrees  of  moral  perfec¬ 
tion.  The  Infinite  Being,  to  whom  the  condi- 

1  [See  Preface,  p.  294,  note.] 


tion  of  time  is  nothing,  sees  in  this  to  us  endless 
succession  a  whole  of  accordance  with  the  moral 
law;  and  the  holiness  which  his  command  inex¬ 
orably  requires,  in  order  to  be  true  to  his  jus¬ 
tice  in  the  share  which  He  assigns  to  each  in  the 
summum  bonum ,  is  to  be  found  in  a  single  in¬ 
tellectual  intuition  of  the  whole  existence  of 
rational  beings.  All  that  can  be  expected  of  the 
creature  in  respect  of  the  hope  of  this  participa¬ 
tion  would  be  the  consciousness  of  his  tried 
character,  by  which  from  the  progress  he  has 
hitherto  made  from  the  worse  to  the  morally 
better,  and  the  immutability  of  purpose  which 
has  thus  become  known  to  him,  he  may  hope 
for  a  further  unbroken  continuance  of  the  same, 
however  long  his  existence  may  last,  even  be¬ 
yond  this  life,2  and  thus  he  may  hope,  not  in¬ 
deed  here,  nor  in  any  imaginable  point  of  his 
future  existence,  but  only  in  the  endlessness  of 
his  duration  (which  God  alone  can  survey)  to 
be  perfectly  adequate  to  his  will  (without  indul¬ 
gence  or  excuse,  which  do  not  harmonize  with 
justice). 

V.  The  Existence  of  God  as  a  Postulate  of  Pure 
Practical  Reason 

In  the  foregoing  analysis  the  moral  law  led  to 
a  practical  problem  which  is  prescribed  by  pure 
reason  alone,  without  the  aid  of  any  sensible 
motives,  namely,  that  of  the  necessary  com¬ 
pleteness  of  the  first  and  principle  element  of 
the  summum  bonum,  viz.,  morality;  and,  as  this 
can  be  perfectly  solved  only  in  eternity,  to  the 
postulate  of  immortality.  The  same  law  must 
also  lead  us  to  affirm  the  possibility  of  the  sec¬ 
ond  element  of  the  summum  bonum,  viz.,  hap¬ 
piness  proportioned  to  that  morality,  and  this 
on  grounds  as  disinterested  as  before,  and  solely 

2  It  seems,  nevertheless,  impossible  for  a  creature  to 
have  the  conviction  of  his  unwavering  firmness  of  mind 
in  the  progress  towards  goodness.  On  this  account  the 
Christian  religion  makes  it  come  only  from  the  same 
Spirit  that  works  sanctification,  that  is,  this  firm  pur¬ 
pose,  and  with  it  the  consciousness  of  steadfastness  in 
the  moral  progress.  But  naturally  one  who  is  conscious 
that  he  has  persevered  through  a  long  portion  of  his  life 
up  to  the  end  in  the  progress  to  the  better,  and  this 
from  genuine  moral  motives,  may  well  have  the  com¬ 
forting  hope,  though  not  the  certainty,  that  even  in  an 
existence  prolonged  beyond  this  life  he  will  continue 
steadfast  in  these  principles;  and  although  he  is  never 
justified  here  in  his  own  eyes,  nor  can  ever  hope  to  be 
so  in  the  increased  perfection  of  his  nature,  to  which  he 
looks  forward,  together  with  an  increase  of  duties,  nev¬ 
ertheless  in  this  progress  which,  though  it  is  directed  to 
a  goal  infinitely  remote,  yet  is  in  God’s  sight  regarded 
as  equivalent  to  possession,  he  may  have  a  prospect  of 
a  blessed  future;  for  this  is  the  word  that  reason  em¬ 
ploys  to  designate  perfect  well-being  independent  of  all 
contingent  causes  of  the  world,  and  which,  like  holiness, 
is  an  idea  that  can  be  contained  only  in  an  endless  prog¬ 
ress  and  its  totality,  and  consequently  is  never  fully 
attained  by  a  creature. 


PRACTICAL  REASON 


from  impartial  reason;  that  is,  it  must  lead  to 
the  supposition  of  the  existence  of  a  cause  ade¬ 
quate  to  this  effect;  in  other  words,  it  must  pos¬ 
tulate  the  existence  oj  God ,  as  the  necessary 
condition  of  the  possibility  of  the  summum 
bonum  (an  object  of  the  will  which  is  neces¬ 
sarily  connected  with  the  moral  legislation  of 
pure  reason).  We  proceed  to  exhibit  this  con¬ 
nection  in  a  convincing  manner. 

Happiness  is  the  condition  of  a  rational  being 
in  the  world  with  whom  everything  goes  accord¬ 
ing  to  his  wish  and  will;  it  rests,  therefore,  on 
the  harmony  of  physical  nature  with  his  whole 
end  and  likewise  with  the  essential  determining 
principle  of  his  will.  Now  the  moral  law  as  a  law 
of  freedom  commands  by  determining  princi¬ 
ples,  which  ought  to  be  quite  independent  of 
nature  and  of  its  harmony  with  our  faculty  of 
desire  (as  springs).  But  the  acting  rational  be¬ 
ing  in  the  world  is  not  the  cause  of  the  world 
and  of  nature  itself.  There  is  not  the  least 
ground,  therefore,  in  the  moral  law  for  a  neces¬ 
sary  connection  between  morality  and  propor¬ 
tionate  happiness  in  a  being  that  belongs  to  the 
world  as  part  of  it,  and  therefore  dependent  on 
it,  and  which  for  that  reason  cannot  by  his  will 
be  a  cause  of  this  nature,  nor  by  his  own  power 
make  it  thoroughly  harmonize,  as  far  as  his  hap¬ 
piness  is  concerned,  with  his  practical  principles. 
Nevertheless,  in  the  practical  problem  of  pure 
reason,  i.e.,  the  necessary  pursuit  of  the  sum- 
mum  bonum ,  such  a  connection  is  postulated  as 
necessary:  we  ought  to  endeavour  to  promote 
the  summum  bonum ,  which,  therefore,  must  be 
possible.  Accordingly,  the  existence  of  a  cause 
of  all  nature,  distinct  from  nature  itself  and  con¬ 
taining  the  principle  of  this  connection,  namely, 
of  the  exact  harmony  of  happiness  with  mo¬ 
rality,  is  also  postulated.  Now  this  supreme  cause 
must  contain  the  principle  of  the  harmony  of 
nature,  not  merely  with  a  law  of  the  will  of 
rational  beings,  but  with  the  conception  of  this 
law,  in  so  far  as  they  make  it  the  supreme  deter¬ 
mining  principle  oj  the  will,  and  consequently 
not  merely  with  the  form  of  morals,  but  with 
their  morality  as  their  motive,  that  is,  with  their 
moral  character.  Therefore,  the  summum  bonum 
is  possible  in  the  world  only  on  the  supposition 
of  a  Supreme  Being  having  a  causality  corre¬ 
sponding  to  moral  character.  Now  a  being  that 
is  capable  of  acting  on  the  conception  of  laws 
is  an  intelligence  (a  rational  being),  and  the 
causality  of  such  a  being  according  to  this  con¬ 
ception  of  laws  is  his  will;  therefore  the  su¬ 
preme  cause  of  nature,  which  must  be  presup¬ 
posed  as  a  condition  of  the  summum  bonum 


345 

is  a  being  which  is  the  cause  of  nature  by  intel¬ 
ligence  and  will,  consequently  its  author,  that 
is  God.  It  follows  that  the  postulate  of  the  pos¬ 
sibility  of  the  highest  derived  good  (the  best 
world)  is  likewise  the  postulate  of  the  reality 
of  a  highest  original  good,  that  is  to  say,  of  the 
existence  of  God.  Now  it  was  seen  to  be  a  duty 
for  us  to  promote  the  summum  bonum;  conse¬ 
quently  it  is  not  merely  allowable,  but  it  is  a 
necessity  connected  with  duty  as  a  requisite, 
that  we  should  presuppose  the  possibility  of  this 
summum  bonum;  and  as  this  is  possible  only 
on  condition  of  the  existence  of  God,  it  insepar¬ 
ably  connects  the  supposition  of  this  with  duty; 
that  is,  it  is  morally  necessary  to  assume  the 
existence  of  God. 

It  must  be  remarked  here  that  this  moral 
necessity  is  subjective,  that  is,  it  is  a  want,  and 
not  objective,  that  is,  itself  a  duty,  for  there 
cannot  be  a  duty  to  suppose  the  existence  of 
anything  (since  this  concerns  only  the  theoreti¬ 
cal  employment  of  reason).  Moreover,  it  is  not 
meant  by  this  that  it  is  necessary  to  suppose 
the  existence  of  God  as  a  basis  oj  all  obligation 
in  general  (for  this  rests,  as  has  been  sufficient¬ 
ly  proved,  simply  on  the  autonomy  of  reason 
itself).  What  belongs  to  duty  here  is  only  the 
endeavour  to  realize  and  promote  the  summum 
bonum  in  the  world,  the  possibility  of  which 
can  therefore  be  postulated;  and  as  our  reason 
finds  it  not  conceivable  except  on  the  supposition 
of  a  supreme  intelligence,  the  admission  of  this 
existence  is  therefore  connected  with  the  con¬ 
sciousness  of  our  duty,  although  the  admission 
itself  belongs  to  the  domain  of  speculative  rea¬ 
son.  Considered  in  respect  of  this  alone,  as  a 
principle  of  explanation,  it  may  be  called  a 
hypothesis,  but  in  reference  to  the  intelligibility 
of  an  object  given  us  by  the  moral  law  (the 
summum  bonum),  and  consequently  of  a  re¬ 
quirement  for  practical  purposes,  it  may  be 
called  jaith,  that  is  to  say  a  pure  rational  faith, 
since  pure  reason  (both  in  its  theoretical  and 
practical  use)  is  the  sole  source  from  which  it 
springs. 

From  this  deduction  it  is  now  intelligible  why 
the  Greek  schools  could  never  attain  the  solu¬ 
tion  of  their  problem  of  the  practical  possibility 
of  the  summum  bonum,  because  they  made  the 
rule  of  the  use  which  the  will  of  man  makes  of 
his  freedom  the  sole  and  sufficient  ground  of 
this  possibility,  thinking  that  they  had  no  need 
for  that  purpose  of  the  existence  of  God.  No 
doubt  they  were  so  far  right  that  they  establish¬ 
ed  the  principle  of  morals  of  itself  independent¬ 
ly  of  this  postulate,  from  the  relation  of  reason 


CRITIQUE  OF 


only  to  the  will,  and  consequently  made  it  the 
supreme  practical  condition  of  the  summum 
bonum;  but  it  was  not  therefore  the  whole  con¬ 
dition  of  its  possibility.  The  Epicureans  had  in¬ 
deed  assumed  as  the  supreme  principle  of  mo¬ 
rality  a  wholly  false  one,  namely  that  of  happi¬ 
ness,  and  had  substituted  for  a  law  a  maxim  of 
arbitrary  choice  according  to  every  man’s  in¬ 
clination;  they  proceeded,  however,  consistent¬ 
ly  enough  in  this,  that  they  degraded  their  sum- 
mum  bonum  likewise,  just  in  proportion  to  the 
meanness  of  their  fundamental  principle,  and 
looked  for  no  greater  happiness  than  can  be  at¬ 
tained  by  human  prudence  (including  temper¬ 
ance  and  moderation  of  the  inclinations),  and 
this  as  we  know  would  be  scanty  enough  and 
would  be  very  different  according  to  circum¬ 
stances;  not  to  mention  the  exceptions  that  their 
maxims  must  perpetually  admit  and  which 
make  them  incapable  of  being  laws.  The  Stoics, 
on  the  contrary,  had  chosen  their  supreme  prac¬ 
tical  principle  quite  rightly,  making  virtue  the 
condition  of  the  summum  bonum;  but  when 
they  represented  the  degree  of  virtue  required 
by  its  pure  law  as  fully  attainable  in  this  life, 
they  not  only  strained  the  moral  powers  of  the 
man  whom  they  called  the  wise  beyond  all  the 
limits  of  his  nature,  and  assumed  a  thing  that 
contradicts  all  our  knowledge  of  men,  but  also 
and  principally  they  would  not  allow  the  second 
element  of  the  summum  bonum,  namely,  happi¬ 
ness,  to  be  properly  a  special  object  of  human 
desire,  but  made  their  wise  man ,  like  a  divinity 
in  his  consciousness  of  the  excellence  of  his  per¬ 
son,  wholly  independent  of  nature  (as  regards 
his  own  contentment) ;  they  exposed  him  indeed 
to  the  evils  of  life,  but  made  him  not  subject  to 
them  (at  the  same  time  representing  him  also 
as  free  from  moral  evil).  They  thus,  in  fact,  left 
out  the  second  element  of  the  summum  bonum , 
namely,  personal  happiness,  placing  it  solely  in 
action  and  satisfaction  with  one’s  own  personal 
worth,  thus  including  it  in  the  consciousness  of 
being  morally  minded,  in  which  they  might  have 
been  sufficiently  refuted  by  the  voice  of  their 
own  nature. 

The  doctrine  of  Christianity,1  even  if  we  do 
not  yet  consider  it  as  a  religious  doctrine,  gives, 

1  It  is  commonly  held  that  the  Christian  precept  of 
morality  has  no  advantage  in  respect  of  purity  over  the 
moral  conceptions  of  the  Stoics;  the  distinction  between 
them  is,  however,  very  obvious.  The  Stoic  system  made 
the  consciousness  of  strength  of  mind  the  pivot  on  which 
all  moral  dispositions  should  turn:  and  although  its 
disciples  spoke  of  duties  and  even  defined  them  very 
well,  yet  they  placed  the  spring  and  proper  determining 
principle  of  the  will  in  an  elevation  of  the  mind  above 
the  lower  springs  of  the  senses,  which  owe  their  power 


touching  this  point,  a  conception  of  the  sum¬ 
mum  bonum  (the  kingdom  of  God),  which 
alone  satisfies  the  strictest  demand  of  practical 
reason.  The  moral  law  is  holy  (unyielding)  and 
demands  holiness  of  morals,  although  all  the 
moral  perfection  to  which  man  can  attain  is  still 
only  virtue,  that  is,  a  rightful  disposition  arising 
from  respect  for  the  law,  implying  conscious¬ 
ness  of  a  constant  propensity  to  transgression,  or 
at  least  a  want  of  purity,  that  is,  a  mixture  of 
many  spurious  (not  moral)  motives  of  obedi¬ 
ence  to  the  law,  consequently  a  self-esteem 
combined  with  humility.  In  respect,  then,  of  the 
holiness  which  the  Christian  law  requires,  this 
leaves  the  creature  nothing  but  a  progress  in  in¬ 
finitum,  but  for  that  very  reason  it  justifies  him 
in  hoping  for  an  endless  duration  of  his  ex¬ 
istence.  The  worth  of  a  character  perfectly  ac¬ 
cordant  with  the  moral  law  is  infinite,  since  the 
only  restriction  on  all  possible  happiness  in  the 
judgement  of  a  wise  and  all  powerful  distributor 
of  it  is  the  absence  of  conformity  of  rational 
beings  to  their  duty.  But  the  moral  law  of  itself 
does  not  promise  any  happiness,  for  according 
to  our  conceptions  of  an  order  of  nature  in  gen¬ 
eral,  this  is  not  necessarily  connected  with  obe¬ 
dience  to  the  law.  Now  Christian  morality  sup¬ 
plies  this  defect  (of  the  second  indispensable 
element  of  the  summum  bonum)  by  represent- 

only  to  weakness  of  mind.  With  them,  therefore,  virtue 
was  a  sort  of  heroism  in  the  wise  man  who,  raising  him¬ 
self  above  the  animal  nature  of  man,  is  sufficient  for 
himself,  and,  while  he  prescribes  duties  to  others,  is 
himself  raised  above  them,  and  is  not  subject  to  any 
temptation  to  transgress  the  moral  law.  All  this,  how¬ 
ever,  they  could  not  have  done  if  they  had  conceived 
this  law  in  all  its  purity  and  strictness,  as  the  precept 
of  the  Gospel  does.  When  I  give  the  name  idea  to  a  per¬ 
fection  to  which  nothing  adequate  can  be  given  in  ex¬ 
perience,  it  does  not  follow  that  the  moral  ideas  are 
something  transcendent,  that  is  something  of  which  we 
could  not  even  determine  the  concept  adequately,  or  of 
which  it  is  uncertain  whether  there  is  any  object  corre¬ 
sponding  to  it  at  all,  as  is  the  case  with  the  ideas  of 
speculative  reason;  on  the  contrary,  being  types  of 
practical  perfection,  they  serve  as  the  indispensable  rule 
of  conduct  and  likewise  as  the  standard  oj  comparison. 
Now  if  I  consider  Christian  morals  on  their  philosophi¬ 
cal  side,  then  compared  with  the  ideas  of  the  Greek 
schools,  they  would  appear  as  follows:  the  ideas  of  the 
Cynics,  the  Epicureans,  the  Stoics,  and  the  Christians 
are:  simplicity  oj  nature,  prudence,  wisdom,  and  holi¬ 
ness.  In  respect  of  the  way  of  attaining  them,  the  Greek 
schools  were  distinguished  from  one  another  thus,  that 
the  Cynics  only  required  common  sense,  the  others  the 
path  of  science,  but  both  found  the  mere  use  oj  natural 
powers  sufficient  for  the  purpose.  Christian  morality, 
because  its  precept  is  framed  (as  a  moral  precept  must 
be)  so  pure  and  unyielding,  takes  from  man  all  confi¬ 
dence  that  he  can  be  fully  adequate  to  it,  at  least  in  this 
life,  but  again  sets  it  up  by  enabling  us  to  hope  that  if 
we  act  as  well  as  it  is  in  our  power  to  do,  then  what  is 
not  in  our  power  will  come  in  to  our  aid  from  another 
source,  whether  we  know  how  this  may  be  or  not.  Aris¬ 
totle  and  Plato  differed  only  as  to  the  origin  of  our 
moral  conceptions. 


PRACTICAL  REASON 


ing  the  world  in  which  rational  beings  devote 
themselves  with  all  their  soul  to  the  moral  law, 
as  a  kingdom  of  God,  in  which  nature  and  moral¬ 
ity  are  brought  into  a  harmony  foreign  to  each 
of  itself,  by  a  holy  Author  who  makes  the  de¬ 
rived  summum  bonum  possible.  Holiness  of  life 
is  prescribed  to  them  as  a  rule  even  in  this  life, 
while  the  welfare  proportioned  to  it,  namely, 
bliss ,  is  represented  as  attainable  only  in  an  eter¬ 
nity;  because  the  former  must  always  be  the  . 
pattern  of  their  conduct  in  every  state,  and 
progress  towards  it  is  already  possible  and  nec¬ 
essary  in  this  life;  while  the  latter ,  under  the 
name  of  happiness,  cannot  be  attained  at  all 
in  this  world  (so  far  as  our  own  power  is  con¬ 
cerned),  and  therefore  is  made  simply  an  object 
of  hope.  Nevertheless,  the  Christian  principle 
of  morality  itself  is  not  theological  (so  as  to  be 
heteronomy),  but  is  autonomy  of  pure  practical 
reason,  since  it  does  not  make  the  knowledge  of 
God  and  His  will  the  foundation  of  these  laws, 
but  only  of  the  attainment  of  the  summum 
bonum,  on  condition  of  following  these  laws, 
and  it  does  not  even  place  the  proper  spring  of 
this  obedience  in  the  desired  results,  but  solely 
in  the  conception  of  duty,  as  that  of  which  the 
faithful  observance  alone  constitutes  the  wor¬ 
thiness  to  obtain  those  happy  consequences. 

In  this  manner,  the  moral  laws  lead  through 
the  conception  of  the  summum  bonum  as  the 
object  and  final  end  of  pure  practical  reason  to 
religion,  that  is,  to  the  recognition  of  all  duties 
as  divine  commands,  not  as  sanctions,  that  is 
to  say,  arbitrary  ordinances  of  a  foreign  will  and 
contingent  in  themselves,  but  as  essential  laws 
of  every  free  will  in  itself,  which,  nevertheless, 
must  be  regarded  as  commands  of  the  Supreme 
Being,  because  it  is  only  from  a  morally  perfect 
(holy  and  good)  and  at  the  same  time  all-pow¬ 
erful  will,  and  consequently  only  through  har¬ 
mony  with  this  will,  that  we  can  hope  to  attain 
the  summum  bonum  which  the  moral  law  makes 
it  our  duty  to  take  as  the  object  of  our  endeav¬ 
ours.  Here  again,  then,  all  remains  disinterested 
and  founded  merely  on  duty;  neither  fear  nor 
hope  being  made  the  fundamental  springs, 
which  if  taken  as  principles  would  destroy  the 
whole  moral  worth  of  actions.  The  moral  law 
commands  me  to  make  the  highest  possible  good 
in  a  world  the  ultimate  object  of  all  my  con¬ 
duct.  But  I  cannot  hope  to  effect  this  otherwise 
than  by  the  harmony  of  my  will  with  that  of  a 
holy  and  good  Author  of  the  world;  and  al¬ 
though  the  conception  of  the  summum  bonum 
as  a  whole,  in  which  the  greatest  happiness  is 


conceived  as  combined  in  the  most  exact  pro¬ 
portion  with  the  highest  degree  of  moral  perfec¬ 
tion  (possible  in  creatures),  includes  my  own 
happiness,  yet  it  is  not  this  that  is  the  deter¬ 
mining  principle  of  the  will  which  is  enjoined 
to  promote  the  summum  bonum,  but  the  moral 
law,  which,  on  the  contrary,  limits  by  strict  con¬ 
ditions  my  unbounded  desire  of  happiness. 

Hence  also  morality  is  not  properly  the  doc¬ 
trine  how  we  should  make  ourselves  happy,  but 
how  we  should  become  worthy  of  happiness.  It 
is  only  when  religion  is  added  that  there  also 
comes  in  the  hope  of  participating  some  day  in 
happiness  in  proportion  as  we  have  endeavoured 
to  be  not  unworthy  of  it. 

A  man  is  worthy  to  possess  a  thing  or  a  state 
when  his  possession  of  it  is  in  harmony  with  the 
summum  bonum.  We  can  now  easily  see  that 
all  worthiness  depends  on  moral  conduct,  since 
in  the  conception  of  the  summum  bonum  this 
constitutes  the  condition  of  the  rest  (which  be¬ 
longs  to  one’s  state),  namely,  the  participation 
of  happiness.  Now  it  follows  from  this  that 
morality  should  never  be  treated  as  a  doctrine 
of  happiness,  that  is,  an  instruction  how  to  be¬ 
come  happy;  for  it  has  to  do  simply  with  the 
rational  condition  ( conditio  sine  qua  non)  of 
happiness,  not  with  the  means  of  attaining  it. 
But  when  morality  has  been  completely  ex¬ 
pounded  (which  merely  imposes  duties  instead 
of  providing  rules  for  selfish  desires),  then  first, 
after  the  moral  desire  to  promote  the  summum 
bonum  (to  bring  the  kingdom  of  God  to  us)  has 
been  awakened,  a  desire  founded  on  a  law,  and 
which  could  not  previously  arise  in  any  selfish 
mind,  and  when  for  the  behoof  of  this  desire 
the  step  to  religion  has  been  taken,  then  this 
ethical  doctrine  may  be  also  called  a  doctrine  of 
happiness  because  the  hope  of  happiness  first 
begins  with  religion  only. 

We  can  also  see  from  this  that,  when  we  ask 
what  is  God's  ultimate  end  in  creating  the 
world,  we  must  not  name  the  happiness  of  the 
rational  beings  in  it,  but  the  summum  bonum, 
which  adds  a  further  condition  to  that  wish  of 
such  beings,  namely,  the  condition  of  being 
worthy  of  happiness,  that  is,  the  morality  of 
these  same  rational  beings,  a  condition  which 
alone  contains  the  rule  by  which  only  they  can 
hope  to  share  in  the  former  at  the  hand  of  a 
wise  Author.  For  as  wisdom,  theoretically  con¬ 
sidered,  signifies  the  knowledge  of  the  summum 
bonum  and,  practically,  the  accordance  of  the 
will  with  the  summum  bonum ,  we  cannot  at¬ 
tribute  to  a  supreme  independent  wisdom  an 


348  CRITIQUE  OF 


end  based  merely  on  goodness.  For  we  cannot 
conceive  the  action  of  this  goodness  (in  respect 
of  the  happiness  of  rational  beings)  as  suitable 
to  the  highest  original  good,  except  under  the 
restrictive  conditions  of  harmony  with  the  holi¬ 
ness1  of  his  will.  Therefore,  those  who  placed 
the  end  of  creation  in  the  glory  of  God  (pro¬ 
vided  that  this  is  not  conceived  anthropomor- 
phically  as  a  desire  to  be  praised)  have  perhaps 
hit  upon  the  best  expression.  For  nothing  glori¬ 
fies  God  more  than  that  which  is  the  most  es¬ 
timable  thing  in  the  world,  respect  for  his  com¬ 
mand,  the  observance  of  the  holy  duty  that  his 
law  imposes  on  us,  when  there  is  added  thereto 
his  glorious  plan  of  crowning  such  a  beautiful 
order  of  things  with  corresponding  happiness. 
If  the  latter  (to  speak  humanly)  makes  Him 
worthy  of  love,  by  the  jormer  He  is  an  object 
of  adoration.  Even  men  can  never  acquire  re¬ 
spect  by  benevolence  alone,  though  they  may 
gain  love,  so  that  the  greatest  beneficence  only 
procures  them  honour  when  it  is  regulated  by 
worthiness. 

That  in  the  order  of  ends,  man  (and  with  him 
every  rational  being)  is  an  end  in  himself ,  that 
is,  that  he  can  never  be  used  merely  as  a  means 
by  any  (not  even  by  God)  without  being  at  the 
same  time  an  end  also  himself,  that  therefore 
humanity  in  our  person  must  be  holy  to  our¬ 
selves,  this  follows  now  of  itself  because  he  is 
the  subject  of  the  moral  law ,  in  other  words, 
of  that  which  is  holy  in  itself,  and  on  account  of 
which  and  in  agreement  with  which  alone  can 
anything  be  termed  holy.  For  this  moral  law  is 
founded  on  the  autonomy  of  his  will,  as  a  free 
will  which  by  its  universal  laws  must  necessarily 
be  able  to  agree  with  that  to  which  it  is  to  sub¬ 
mit  itself. 

VI.  Of  the  Postulates  of  Pure  Practical  Reason 
Generally 

They  all  proceed  from  the  principle  of  moral¬ 
ity,  which  is  not  a  postulate  but  a  law,  by  which 

1  In  order  to  make  these  characteristics  of  these  con¬ 
ceptions  clear,  I  add  the  remark  that  whilst  we  ascribe 
to  God  various  attributes,  the  quality  of  which  we  also 
find  applicable  to  creatures,  only  that  in  Him  they  are 
raised  to  the  highest  degree,  e.  g.,  power,  knowledge, 
presence,  goodness,  etc.,  under  the  designations  of  omni¬ 
potence,  omniscience,  omnipresence,  etc.,  there  are  three 
that  are  ascribed  to  God  exclusively,  and  yet  without 
the  addition  ot  greatness,  and  which  are  all  moral.  He  is 
the  only  holy,  the  only  blessed,  the  only  wise,  because 
these  conceptions  already  imply  the  absence  of  limita¬ 
tion.  In  the  order  of  these  attributes  He  is  also  the  holy 
lawgiver  (and  creator),  the  good  governor  (and  pre¬ 
server)  and  the  just  judge,  three  attributes  which  in¬ 
clude  everything  by  which  God  is  the  object  ot  religion, 
and  in  conformity  with  which  the  metaphysical  perfec¬ 
tions  are  added  of  themselves  in  the  reason. 


reason  determines  the  will  directly,  which  will, 
because  it  is  so  determined  as  a  pure  will,  re¬ 
quires  these  necessary  conditions  of  obedience 
to  its  precept.  These  postulates  are  not  theo¬ 
retical  dogmas  but,  suppositions  practically  nec¬ 
essary;  while  then  they  do  [not]  extend  our 
speculative  knowledge,  they  give  objective  re¬ 
ality  to  the  ideas  of  speculative  reason  in  gen¬ 
eral  (by  means  of  their  reference  to  what  is 
practical),  and  give  it  a  right  to  concepts,  the 
possibility  even  of  which  it  could  not  otherwise 
venture  to  affirm. 

These  postulates  are  those  of  immortality , 
freedom  positively  considered  (as  the  causality 
of  a  being  so  far  as  he  belongs  to  the  intelligi¬ 
ble  world),  and  the  existence  of  God.  The  first 
results  from  the  practically  necessary  condition 
of  a  duration  adequate  to  the  complete  fulfil¬ 
ment  of  the  moral  law;  the  second  from  the 
necessary  supposition  of  independence  of  the 
sensible  world,  and  of  the  faculty  of  determin¬ 
ing  one’s  will  according  to  the  law  of  an  intelli¬ 
gible  world,  that  is,  of  freedom;  the  third  from 
the  necessary  condition  of  the  existence  of  the 
summum  bonum  in  such  an  intelligible  world, 
by  the  supposition  of  the  supreme  independent 
good,  that  is,  the  existence  of  God. 

Thus  the  fact  that  respect  for  the  moral  law 
necessarily  makes  the  summum  bonum  an  ob¬ 
ject  of  our  endeavours,  and  the  supposition 
thence  resulting  of  its  objective  reality,  lead 
through  the  postulates  of  practical  reason  to 
conceptions  which  speculative  reason  might  in¬ 
deed  present  as  problems,  but  could  never  solve. 
Thus  it  leads:  i.  To  that  one  in  the  solution  of 
which  the  latter  could  do  nothing  but  commit 
paralogisms  (namely,  that  of  immortality),  be¬ 
cause  it  could  not  lay  hold  of  the  character  of 
permanence,  by  which  to  complete  the  psycho¬ 
logical  conception  of  an  ultimate  subject  neces¬ 
sarily  ascribed  to  the  soul  in  self-consciousness, 
so  as  to  make  it  the  real  conception  of  a  sub¬ 
stance,  a  character  which  practical  reason  fur¬ 
nishes  by  the  postulate  of  a  duration  required 
for  accordance  with  the  moral  law  in  the  sum¬ 
mum  bonum ,  which  is  the  whole  end  of  practical 
reason.  2.  It  leads  to  that  of  which  speculative 
reason  contained  nothing  but  antinomy ,  the  so¬ 
lution  of  which  it  could  only  found  on  a  notion 
problematically  conceivable  indeed,  but  whose 
objective  reality  it  could  not  prove  or  deter¬ 
mine,  namely,  the  cosmological  idea  of  an  in¬ 
telligible  world  and  the  consciousness  of  our 
existence  in  it,  by  means  of  the  postulate  of 
freedom  (the  reality  of  which  it  lays  down  by 
virtue  of  the  moral  law),  and  with  it  likewise 


PRACTICAL  REASON 


the  law  of  an  intelligible  world,  to  which  specu¬ 
lative  reason  could  only  point,  but  could  not 
define  its  conception.  3.  What  speculative  rea¬ 
son  was  able  to  think,  but  was  obliged  to  leave 
undetermined  as  a  mere  transcendental  ideal , 
viz.,  the  theological  conception  of  the  first  Being, 
to  this  it  gives  significance  (in  a  practical  view, 
that  is,  as  a  condition  of  the  possibility  of  the 
object  of  a  will  determined  by  that  law),  namely, 
as  the  supreme  principle  of  the  summum  honum 
in  an  intelligible  world,  by  means  of  moral 
legislation  in  it  invested  with  sovereign  power. 

Is  our  knowledge,  however,  actually  extended 
in  this  way  by  pure  practical  reason,  and  is  that 
immanent  in  practical  reason  which  for  the 
speculative  was  only  transcendent?  Certainly, 
but  only  in  a  practical  point  of  view.  For  we  do 
not  thereby  take  knowledge  of  the  nature  of 
our  souls,  nor  of  the  intelligible  world,  nor  of 
the  Supreme  Being,  with  respect  to  what  they 
are  in  themselves,  but  we  have  merely  com¬ 
bined  the  conceptions  of  them  in  the  practical 
concept  of  the  summum  bonum  as  the  object 
of  our  will,  and  this  altogether  a  priori ,  but  only 
by  means  of  the  moral  law,  and  merely  in  refer¬ 
ence  to  it,  in  respect  of  the  object  which  it 
commands.  But  how  freedom  is  possible,  and 
how  we  are  to  conceive  this  kind  of  causality 
theoretically  and  positively,  is  not  thereby  dis¬ 
covered;  but  only  that  there  is  such  a  causality 
is  postulated  by  the  moral  law  and  in  its  be¬ 
hoof.  It  is  the  same  with  the  remaining  ideas, 
the  possibility  of  which  no  human  intelligence 
will  ever  fathom,  but  the  truth  of  which,  on  the 
other  hand,  no  sophistry  will  ever  wrest  from 
the  conviction  even  of  the  commonest  man. 

VII.  How  is  it  possible  to  conceive  an  Extension 
of  Pure  Reason  in  a  Practical  point  of  view, 

without  its  Knowledge  as  Speculative  being 
enlarged  at  the  same  time? 

In  order  not  to  be  too  abstract,  we  will  an¬ 
swer  this  question  at  once  in  its  application  to 
the  present  case.  In  order  to  extend  a  pure  cog¬ 
nition  practically ,  there  must  be  an  a  priori 
purpose  given,  that  is,  an  end  as  object  (of  the 
will),  which  independently  of  all  theological 
principle  is  presented  as  practically  necessary 
by  an  imperative  which  determines  the  will  di¬ 
rectly  (a  categorical  imperative),  and  in  this 
case  that  is  the  summum  bonum.  This,  however, 
is  not  possible  without  presupposing  three  the¬ 
oretical  conceptions  (for  which,  because  they 
are  mere  conceptions  of  pure  reason,  no  corre¬ 
sponding  intuition  can  be  found,  nor  conse¬ 
quently  by  the  path  of  theory  any  objective  re¬ 


349 

ality) ;  namely,  freedom,  immortality,  and  God. 
Thus  by  the  practical  law  which  commands  the 
existence  of  the  highest  good  possible  in  a 
world,  the  possibility  of  those  objects  of  pure 
speculative  reason  is  postulated,  and  the  objec¬ 
tive  reality  which  the  latter  could  not  assure 
them.  By  this  the  theoretical  knowledge  of  pure 
reason  does  indeed  obtain  an  accession;  but  it 
consists  only  in  this,  that  those  concepts  which 
otherwise  it  had  to  look  upon  as  problematical 
(merely  thinkable)  concepts,  are  now  shown 
assertorially  to  be  such  as  actually  have  objects; 
because  practical  reason  indispensably  requires 
their  existence  for  the  possibility  of  its  object, 
the  summum  bonum,  which  practically  is  ab¬ 
solutely  necessary,  and  this  justifies  theoretical 
reason  in  assuming  them.  But  this  extension  of 
theoretical  reason  is  no  extension  of  speculative, 
that  is,  we  cannot  make  any  positive  use  of  it  in 
a  theoretical  point  of  view.  For  as  nothing  is 
accomplished  in  this  by  practical  reason,  fur¬ 
ther  than  that  these  concepts  are  real  and  actu¬ 
ally  have  their  (possible)  objects,  and  nothing 
in  the  way  of  intuition  of  them  is  given  thereby 
(which  indeed  could  not  be  demanded),  hence 
the  admission  of  this  reality  does  not  render  any 
synthetical  proposition  possible.  Consequently, 
this  discovery  does  not  in  the  least  help  us  to 
extend  this  knowledge  of  ours  in  a  speculative 
point  of  view,  although  it  does  in  respect  of 
the  practical  employment  of  pure  reason.  The 
above  three  ideas  of  speculative  reason  are  still 
in  themselves  not  cognitions;  they  are  however 
(transcendent)  thoughts,  in  which  there  is  noth¬ 
ing  impossible.  Now,  by  help  of  an  apodeictic 
practical  law,  being  necessary  conditions  of  that 
which  it  commands  to  be  made  an  object,  they 
acquire  objective  reality;  that  is,  we  learn  from 
it  that  they  have  objects,  without  being  able  to 
point  out  how  the  conception  of  them  is  related 
to  an  object,  and  this,  too,  is  still  not  a  cogni¬ 
tion  of  these  objects;  for  we  cannot  thereby 
form  any  synthetical  judgement  about  them, 
nor  determine  their  application  theoretically; 
consequently,  we  can  make  no  theoretical  ra¬ 
tional  use  of  them  at  all,  in  which  use  all  specu¬ 
lative  knowledge  of  reason  consists.  Neverthe¬ 
less,  the  theoretical  knowledge,  not  indeed  of 
these  objects,  but  of  reason  generally,  is  so  far 
enlarged  by  this,  that  by  the  practical  postulates 
objects  were  given  to  those  ideas,  a  merely 
problematical  thought  having  by  this  means 
first  acquired  objective  reality.  There  is  there¬ 
fore  no  extension  of  the  knowledge  of  given 
supersensible  objects,  but  an  extension  of  theo¬ 
retical  reason  and  of  its  knowledge  in  respect 


CRITIQUE  OF 


of  the  supersensible  generally;  inasmuch  as  it  is 
compelled  to  admit  that  there  are  such  objects , 
although  it  is  not  able  to  define  them  more 
closely,  so  as  itself  to  extend  this  knowledge  of 
the  objects  (which  have  now  been  given  it  on 
practical  grounds,  and  only  for  practical  use). 
For  this  accession}  then,  pure  theoretical  rea¬ 
son,  for  which  all  those  ideas  are  transcendent 
and  without  object,  has  simply  to  thank  its 
practical  faculty.  In  this  they  become  immanent 
and  constitutive ,  being  the  source  of  the  possi¬ 
bility  of  realizing  the  necessary  object  of  pure 
practical  reason  (the  summum  bonum) ;  where¬ 
as  apart  from  this  they  are  transcendent,  and 
merely  regulative  principles  of  speculative  rea¬ 
son,  which  do  not  require  it  to  assume  a  new 
object  beyond  experience,  but  only  to  bring  its 
use  in  experience  nearer  to  completeness.  But 
when  once  reason  is  in  possession  of  this  acces¬ 
sion,  it  will  go  to  work  with  these  ideas  as  spec¬ 
ulative  reason  (properly  only  to  assure  the  cer¬ 
tainty  of  its  practical  use)  in  a  negative  man¬ 
ner:  that  is,  not  extending  but  clearing  up  its 
knowledge  so  as  on  one  side  to  keep  off  an¬ 
thropomorphism,  as  the  source  of  superstition, 
or  seeming  extension  of  these  conceptions  by 
supposed  experience;  and  on  the  other  side  fa¬ 
naticism,  which  promises  the  same  by  means 
of  supersensible  intuition  or  feelings  of  the  like 
kind.  All  these  are  hindrances  to  the  practical 
use  of  pure  reason,  so  that  the  removal  of  them 
may  certainly  be  considered  an  extension  of  our 
knowledge  in  a  practical  point  of  view,  without 
contradicting  the  admission  that  for  speculative 
purposes  reason  has  not  in  the  least  gained  by 
this. 

Every  employment  of  reason  in  respect  of  an 
object  requires  pure  concepts  of  the  under¬ 
standing  (categories) ,  without  which  no  object 
can  be  conceived.  These  can  be  applied  to  the 
theoretical  employment  of  reason,  i.  e.,  to  that 
kind  of  knowledge,  only  in  case  an  intuition 
(which  is  always  sensible)  is  taken  as  a  basis, 
and  therefore  merely  in  order  to  conceive  by 
means  of  them  an  object  of  possible  experience. 
Now  here  what  have  to  be  thought  by  means 
of  the  categories  in  order  to  be  known  are  ideas 
of  reason,  which  cannot  be  given  in  any  experi¬ 
ence.  Only  we  are  not  here  concerned  with  the 
theoretical  knowledge  of  the  objects  of  these 
ideas,  but  only  with  this,  whether  they  have  ob¬ 
jects  at  all.  This  reality  is  supplied  by  pure  prac¬ 
tical  reason,  and  theoretical  reason  has  nothing 
further  to  do  in  this  but  to  think  those  objects 
by  means  of  categories.  This,  as  we  have  else¬ 
where  clearly  shown,  can  be  done  well  enough 


without  needing  any  intuition  (either  sensible 
or  supersensible)  because  the  categories  have 
their  seat  and  origin  in  the  pure  understanding, 
simply  as  the  faculty  of  thought,  before  and  in¬ 
dependently  of  any  intuition,  and  they  always 
only  signify  an  object  in  general,  no  matter  in 
what  way  it  may  be  given  to  us.  Now  when  the 
categories  are  to  be  applied  to  these  ideas,  it  is 
not  possible  to  give  them  any  object  in  intui¬ 
tion;  but  that  such  an  object  actually  exists,  and 
consequently  that  the  category  as  a  mere  form 
of  thought  is  here  not  empty  but  has  signifi¬ 
cance,  this  is  sufficiently  assured  them  by  an 
object  which  practical  reason  presents  beyond 
doubt  in  the  concept  of  the  summum  bonum, 
the  reality  of  the  conceptions  which  are  re¬ 
quired  for  the  possibility  of  the  summum  bo¬ 
num;  without,  however,  effecting  by  this  acces¬ 
sion  the  least  extension  of  our  knowledge  on 
theoretical  principles. 

When  these  ideas  of  God,  of  an  intelligible 
world  (the  kingdom  of  God),  and  of  immor¬ 
tality  are  further  determined  by  predicates 
taken  from  our  own  nature,  we  must  not  regard 
this  determination  as  a  sensualizing  of  those 
pure  rational  ideas  (anthropomorphism),  nor  as 
a  transcendent  knowledge  of  supersensible  ob¬ 
jects;  for  these  predicates  are  no  others  than 
understanding  and  will,  considered  too  in  the 
relation  to  each  other  in  which  they  must  be 
conceived  in  the  moral  law,  and  therefore,  only 
so  far  as  a  pure  practical  use  is  made  of  them. 
As  to  all  the  rest  that  belongs  to  these  concep¬ 
tions  psychologically,  that  is,  so  far  as  we  ob¬ 
serve  these  faculties  of  ours  empirically  in  their 
exercise  (e.  g.,  that  the  understanding  of  man 
is  discursive,  and  its  notions  therefore  not  intui¬ 
tions  but  thoughts,  that  these  follow  one  an¬ 
other  in  time,  that  his  will  has  its  satisfaction 
always  dependent  on  the  existence  of  its  object, 
etc.,  which  cannot  be  the  case  in  the  Supreme 
Being),  from  all  this  we  abstract  in  that  case, 
and  then  there  remains  of  the  notions  by  which 
we  conceive  a  pure  intelligence  nothing  more 
than  just  what  is  required  for  the  possibility  of 
conceiving  a  moral  law.  There  is  then  a  knowl¬ 
edge  of  God  indeed,  but  only  for  practical  pur¬ 
poses,  and,  if  we  attempt  to  extend  it  to  a  the¬ 
oretical  knowledge,  we  find  an  understanding 
that  has  intuitions ,  not  thoughts,  a  will  that  is 
directed  to  objects  on  the  existence  of  which 
its  satisfaction  does  not  in  the  least  depend  (not 
to  mention  the  transcendental  predicates,  as, 
for  example,  a  magnitude  of  existence,  that  is 
duration,  which,  however,  is  not  in  time,  the 


PRACTICAL  REASON 


only  possible  means  we  have  of  conceiving  ex¬ 
istence  as  magnitude).  Now  these  are  all  attri¬ 
butes  of  which  we  can  form  no  conception  that 
would  help  to  the  knowledge  of  the  object,  and 
we  learn  from  this  that  they  can  never  be  used 
for  a  theory  of  supersensible  beings,  so  that  on 
this  side  they  are  quite  incapable  of  being  the 
foundation  of  a  speculative  knowledge,  and 
their  use  is  limited  simply  to  the  practice  of  the 
moral  law. 

This  last  is  so  obvious,  and  can  be  proved 
so  clearly  by  fact,  that  we  may  confidently 
challenge  all  pretended  natural  theologians  (a 
singular  name)1  to  specify  (over  and  above  the 
merely  ontological  predicates)  one  single  attri¬ 
bute,  whether  of  the  understanding  or  of  the 
will,  determining  this  object  of  theirs,  of  which 
we  could  not  show  incontrovertibly  that,  if  we 
abstract  from  it  everything  anthropomorphic, 
nothing  would  remain  to  us  but  the  mere  word, 
without  our  being  able  to  connect  with  it  the 
smallest  notion  by  which  we  could  hope  for  an 
extension  of  theoretical  knowledge.  But  as  to 
the  practical,  there  still  remains  to  us  of  the 
attributes  of  understanding  and  will  the  con¬ 
ception  of  a  relation  to  which  objective  reality 
is  given  by  the  practical  law  (which  determines 
a  priori  precisely  this  relation  of  the  under¬ 
standing  to  the  will).  When  once  this  is  done, 
then  reality  is  given  to  the  conception  of  the 
object  of  a  will  morally  determined  (the  con¬ 
ception  of  the  summum  bonum ),  and  with  it  to 
the  conditions  of  its  possibility,  the  ideas  of 
God,  freedom,  and  immortality,  but  always 
only  relatively  to  the  practice  of  the  moral  law 
(and  not  for  any  speculative  purpose). 

According  to  these  remarks  it  is  now  easy  to 
find  the  answer  to  the  weighty  question  wheth¬ 
er  the  notion  of  God  is  one  belonging  to  physics 
(and  therefore  also  to  metaphysics,  which  con¬ 
tains  the  pure  a  priori  principles  of  the  former 
in  their  universal  import)  or  to  morals.  If  we 
have  recourse  to  God  as  the  Author  of  all 
things,  in  order  to  explain  the  arrangements  of 
nature  or  its  changes,  this  is  at  least  not  a  physi¬ 
cal  explanation,  and  is  a  complete  confession 

1  Learning  is  properly  only  the  whole  content  of  the 
historical  sciences.  Consequently  it  is  only  the  teacher 
of  revealed  theology  that  can  be  called  a  learned  theo¬ 
logian.  If,  however,  we  choose  to  call  a  man  learned  who 
is  in  possession  of  the  rational  sciences  (mathematics 
and  philosophy),  although  even  this  would  be  contrary 
to  the  signification  of  the  word  (which  always  counts  as 
learning  only  that  which  one  must  be  “learned”  and 
which,  therefore,  he  cannot  discover  of  himself  by  rea¬ 
son),  even  in  that  case  the  philosopher  would  make  too 
poor  a  figure  with  his  knowledge  of  God  as  a  positive 
science  to  let  himself  be  called  on  that  account  a  learned 
man. 


351 

that  our  philosophy  has  come  to  an  end,  since 
we  are  obliged  to  assume  something  of  which 
in  itself  we  have  otherwise  no  conception,  in 
order  to  be  able  to  frame  a  conception  of  the 
possibility  of  what  we  see  before  our  eyes. 
Metaphysics,  however,  cannot  enable  us  to  at¬ 
tain  by  certain  inference  from  the  knowledge  of 
this  world  to  the  conception  of  God  and  to  the 
proof  of  His  existence,  for  this  reason,  that  in 
order  to  say  that  this  world  could  be  produced 
only  by  a  God  (according  to  the  conception  im¬ 
plied  by  this  word)  we  should  know  this  world 
as  the  most  perfect  whole  possible;  and  for  this 
purpose  should  also  know  all  possible  worlds 
(in  order  to  be  able  to  compare  them  with 
this) ;  in  other  words,  we  should  be  omniscient. 
It  is  absolutely  impossible,  however,  to  know 
the  existence  of  this  Being  from  mere  concepts, 
because  every  existential  proposition,  that  is, 
every  proposition  that  affirms  the  existence  of 
a  being  of  which  I  frame  a  concept,  is  a  syn¬ 
thetic  proposition,  that  is,  one  by  which  I  go 
beyond  that  conception  and  affirm  of  it  more 
than  was  thought  in  the  conception  itself ;  name¬ 
ly,  that  this  concept  in  the  understanding  has  an 
object  corresponding  to  it  outside  the  under¬ 
standing ,  and  this  it  is  obviously  impossible  to 
elicit  by  any  reasoning.  There  remains,  there¬ 
fore,  only  one  single  process  possible  for  reason 
to  attain  this  knowledge,  namely,  to  start  from 
the  supreme  principle  of  its  pure  practical  use 
(which  in  every  case  is  directed  simply  to  the 
existence  of  something  as  a  consequence  of 
reason)  and  thus  determine  its  object.  Then  its 
inevitable  problem,  namely,  the  necessary  di¬ 
rection  of  the  will  to  the  summum  bonum , 
discovers  to  us  not  only  the  necessity  of  assum¬ 
ing  such  a  First  Being  in  reference  to  the  possi¬ 
bility  of  this  good  in  the  world,  but,  what  is 
most  remarkable,  something  which  reason  in  its 
progress  on  the  path  of  physical  nature  alto¬ 
gether  failed  to  find,  namely,  an  accurately  de¬ 
fined  conception  of  this  First  Being.  As  we  can 
know  only  a  small  part  of  this  world,  and  can 
still  less  compare  it  with  all  possible  worlds,  we 
may  indeed  from  its  order,  design,  and  great¬ 
ness,  infer  a  wise,  good,  powerful,  etc.,  Author 
of  it,  but  not  that  He  is  all-wise,  all-good,  all- 
powerful,  etc.  It  may  indeed  very  well  be  granted 
that  we  should  be  justified  in  supplying  this  in¬ 
evitable  defect  by  a  legitimate  and  reasonable 
hypothesis;  namely,  that  when  wisdom,  good¬ 
ness,  etc.,  are  displayed  in  all  the  parts  that  offer 
themselves  to  our  nearer  knowledge,  it  is  just 
the  same  in  all  the  rest,  and  that  it  would  there¬ 
fore  be  reasonable  to  ascribe  all  possible  per- 


CRITIQUE  OF 


fections  to  the  Author  of  the  world,  but  these 
are  not  strict  logical  inferences  in  which  we  can 
pride  ourselves  on  our  insight,  but  only  per¬ 
mitted  conclusions  in  which  we  may  be  indulged 
and  which  require  further  recommendation  be¬ 
fore  we  can  make  use  of  them.  On  the  path  of 
empirical  inquiry  then  (physics),  the  concep¬ 
tion  of  God  remains  always  a  conception  of  the 
perfection  of  the  First  Being  not  accurately 
enough  determined  to  be  held  adequate  to  the 
conception  of  Deity.  (With  metaphysic  in  its 
transcendental  part  nothing  whatever  can  be 
accomplished.) 

When  I  now  try  to  test  this  conception  by 
reference  to  the  object  of  practical  reason,  I 
find  that  the  moral  principle  admits  as  possible 
only  the  conception  of  an  Author  of  the  world 
possessed  of  the  highest  perfection.  He  must  be 
omniscient ,  in  order  to  know  my  conduct  up  to 
the  inmost  root  of  my  mental  state  in  all  possi¬ 
ble  cases  and  into  all  future  time;  omnipotent, 
in  order  to  allot  to  it  its  fitting  consequences; 
similarly  He  must  be  omnipresent ,  eternal ,  etc. 
Thus  the  moral  law,  by  means  of  the  conception 
of  the  summum  bonum  as  the  object  of  a  pure 
practical  reason,  determines  the  concept  of  the 
First  Being  as  the  Supreme  Being;  a  thing 
which  the  physical  (and  in  its  higher  develop¬ 
ment  the  metaphysical),  in  other  words,  the 
whole  speculative  course  of  reason,  was  unable 
to  effect.  The  conception  of  God,  then,  is  one 
that  belongs  originally  not  to  physics,  i.  e.,  to 
speculative  reason,  but  to  morals.  The  same 
may  be  said  of  the  other  conceptions  of  reason 
of  which  we  have  treated  above  as  postulates 
of  it  in  its  practical  use. 

In  the  history  of  Grecian  philosophy  we  find 
no  distinct  traces  of  a  pure  rational  theology 
earlier  than  Anaxagoras;  but  this  is  not  because 
the  older  philosophers  had  not  intelligence  or 
penetration  enough  to  raise  themselves  to  it  by 
the  path  of  speculation,  at  least  with  the  aid  of 
a  thoroughly  reasonable  hypothesis.  What  could 
have  been  easier,  what  more  natural,  than  the 
thought  which  of  itself  occurs  to  everyone,  to 
assume  instead  of  several  causes  of  the  world, 
instead  of  an  indeterminate  degree  of  perfec¬ 
tion,  a  single  rational  cause  having  all  perfec¬ 
tion?  But  the  evils  in  the  world  seemed  to  them 
to  be  much  too  serious  objections  to  allow  them 
to  feel  themselves  justified  in  such  a  hypothesis. 
They  showed  intelligence  and  penetration  then 
in  this  very  point,  that  they  did  not  allow  them¬ 
selves  to  adopt  it,  but  on  the  contrary'  looked 
about  amongst  natural  causes  to  see  if  they 
could  not  find  in  them  the  qualities  and  power 


required  for  a  First  Being.  But  when  this  acute 
people  had  advanced  so  far  in  their  investiga¬ 
tions  of  nature  as  to  treat  even  moral  questions 
philosophically,  on  which  other  nations  had 
never  done  anything  but  talk,  then  first  they 
found  a  new  and  practical  want,  which  did  not 
fail  to  give  definiteness  to  their  conception  of 
the  First  Being:  and  in  this  the  speculative 
reason  played  the  part  of  spectator,  or  at  best 
had  the  merit  of  embellishing  a  conception  that 
had  not  grown  on  its  own  ground,  and  of  apply¬ 
ing  a  series  of  confirmations  from  the  study  of 
nature  now  brought  forward  for  the  first  time, 
not  indeed  to  strengthen  the  authority  of  this 
conception  (which  was  already  established), 
but  rather  to  make  a  show  with  a  supposed  dis¬ 
covery  of  theoretical  reason. 

From  these  remarks,  the  reader  of  the  Cri¬ 
tique  of  Pure  Speculative  Reason  will  be  thor¬ 
oughly  convinced  how  highly  necessary  that  la¬ 
borious  deduction  of  the  categories  was,  and 
how  fruitful  for  theology  and  morals.  For  if,  on 
the  one  hand,  we  place  them  in  pure  under¬ 
standing,  it  is  by  this  deduction  alone  that  we 
can  be  prevented  from  regarding  them,  with 
Plato,  as  innate,  and  founding  on  them  extrava¬ 
gant  pretensions  to  theories  of  the  supersensi¬ 
ble,  to  which  we  can  see  no  end,  and  by  which 
we  should  make  theology  a  magic  lantern  of 
chimeras;  on  the  other  hand,  if  we  regard  them 
as  acquired,  this  deduction  saves  us  from  re¬ 
stricting,  with  Epicurus,  all  and  every  use  of 
them,  even  for  practical  purposes,  to  the  ob¬ 
jects  and  motives  of  the  senses.  But  now  that 
the  Critique  has  shown  by  that  deduction,  first , 
that  they  are  not  of  empirical  origin,  but  have 
their  seat  and  source  a  priori  in  the  pure  under¬ 
standing;  secondly,  that  as  they  refer  to  objects 
in  general  independently  of  the  intuition  of 
them,  hence,  although  they  cannot  effect  the¬ 
oretical  knowledge ,  except  in  application  to  em¬ 
pirical  objects,  yet  when  applied  to  an  object 
given  by  pure  practical  reason  they  enable  us  to 
conceive  the  supersensible  definitely,  only  so 
far,  however,  as  it  is  defined  by  such  predicates 
as  are  necessarily  connected  with  the  pure  prac¬ 
tical  purpose  given  a  priori  and  with  its  possi¬ 
bility.  The  speculative  restriction  of  pure  reason 
and  its  practical  extension  bring  it  into  that  re¬ 
lation  of  equality  in  which  reason  in  general  can 
be  employed  suitably  to  its  end,  and  this  exam¬ 
ple  proves  better  than  any  other  that  the  path 
to  wisdom ,  if  it  is  to  be  made  sure  and  not  to 
be  impassable  or  misleading,  must  with  us  men 
inevitably  pass  through  science;  but  it  is  not 


PRACTICAL  REASON 


till  this  is  complete  that  we  can  be  convinced 
that  it  leads  to  this  goal. 

VIII.  Of  Belief  from  a  Requirement  of  Pure 
Reason 

A  want  or  requirement  of  pure  reason  in  its 
speculative  use  leads  only  to  a  hypothesis;  that 
of  pure  practical  reason  to  a  postulate ;  for  in 
the  former  case  I  ascend  from  the  result  as  high 
as  I  please  in  the  series  of  causes,  not  in  order 
to  give  objective  reality  to  the  result  (e.  g.,  the 
causal  connection  of  things  and  changes  in  the 
world),  but  in  order  thoroughly  to  satisfy  my 
inquiring  reason  in  respect  of  it.  Thus  I  see  be¬ 
fore  me  order  and  design  in  nature,  and  need 
not  resort  to  speculation  to  assure  myself  of 
their  reality ,  but  to  explain  them  I  have  to  pre¬ 
suppose  a  Deity  as  their  cause;  and  then  since 
the  inference  from  an  effect  to  a  definite  cause 
is  always  uncertain  and  doubtful,  especially  to 
a  cause  so  precise  and  so  perfectly  defined  as 
we  have  to  conceive  in  God,  hence  the  highest 
degree  of  certainty  to  which  this  pre-supposi¬ 
tion  can  be  brought  is  that  it  is  the  most  rational 
opinion  for  us  men.1  On  the  other  hand,  a  re¬ 
quirement  of  pure  practical  reason  is  based  on 
a  duty,  that  of  making  something  (the  summum 
bonum)  the  object  of  my  will  so  as  to  promote 
it  with  all  my  powers ;  in  which  case  I  must  sup¬ 
pose  its  possibility  and,  consequently,  also  the 
conditions  necessary  thereto,  namely,  God,  free¬ 
dom,  and  immortality;  since  I  cannot  prove 
these  by  my  speculative  reason,  although  nei¬ 
ther  can  I  refute  them.  This  duty  is  founded  on 
something  that  is  indeed  quite  independent  of 
these  suppositions  and  is  of  itself  apodeictically 
certain,  namely,  the  moral  law;  and  so  far  it 
needs  no  further  support  by  theoretical  views 
as  to  the  inner  constitution  of  things,  the  secret 
final  aim  of  the  order  of  the  world,  or  a  presid¬ 
ing  ruler  thereof,  in  order  to  bind  me  in  the 
most  perfect  manner  to  act  in  unconditional 
conformity  to  the  law.  But  the  subjective  effect 
of  this  law,  namely,  the  mental  disposition  con¬ 
formed  to  it  and  made  necessary  by  it,  to  pro¬ 
mote  the  practically  possible  summum  bonum, 

1  But  even  here  we  should  not  be  able  to  allege  a  re¬ 
quirement  of  reason ,  if  we  had  not  before  our  eyes  a 
problematical,  but  yet  inevitable,  conception  of  reason, 
namely,  that  of  an  absolutely  necessary  being.  This  con¬ 
ception  now  seeks  to  be  defined,  and  this,  in  addition  to 
the  tendency  to  extend  itself,  is  the  objective  ground  of 
a  requirement  of  speculative  reason,  namely,  to  have  a 
more  precise  definition  of  the  conception  of  a  necessary 
being  which  is  to  serve  as  the  first  cause  of  other  be¬ 
ings,  so  as  to  make  these  latter  knowable  by  some 
means.  Without  such  antecedent  necessary  problems 
there  are  no  requirements — at  least  not  of  pure  reason 
— the  rest  are  requirements  of  inclination. 


353 

this  pre-supposes  at  least  that  the  latter  is  pos¬ 
sible,  for  it  would  be  practically  impossible  to 
strive  after  the  object  of  a  conception  which  at 
bottom  was  empty  and  had  no  object.  Now  the 
above-mentioned  postulates  concern  only  the 
physical  or  metaphysical  conditions  of  the  pos¬ 
sibility  of  the  summum  bonum;  in  a  word, 
those  which  lie  in  the  nature  of  things;  not, 
however,  for  the  sake  of  an  arbitrary  specula¬ 
tive  purpose,  but  of  a  practically  necessary  end 
of  a  pure  rational  will,  which  in  this  case  does 
not  choose,  but  obeys  an  inexorable  command 
of  reason,  the  foundation  of  which  is  objective, 
in  the  constitution  of  things  as  they  must  be 
universally  judged  by  pure  reason,  and  is  not 
based  on  inclination;  for  we  are  in  nowise  justi¬ 
fied  in  assuming,  on  account  of  what  we  wish 
on  merely  subjective  grounds,  that  the  means 
thereto  are  possible  or  that  its  object  is  real. 
This,  then,  is  an  absolutely  necessary  require¬ 
ment,  and  what  it  pre-supposes  is  not  merely 
justified  as  an  allowable  hypothesis,  but  as  a 
postulate  in  a  practical  point  of  view;  and 
admitting  that  the  pure  moral  law  inexorably 
binds  every  man  as  a  command  (not  as  a  rule 
of  prudence),  the  righteous  man  may  say:  “I 
will  that  there  be  a  God,  that  my  existence  in 
this  world  be  also  an  existence  outside  the  chain 
of  physical  causes  and  in  a  pure  world  of  the 
understanding,  and  lastly,  that  my  duration  be 
endless;  I  firmly  abide  by  this,  and  will  not  let 
this  faith  be  taken  from  me;  for  in  this  instance 
alone  my  interest,  because  I  must  not  relax  any¬ 
thing  of  it,  inevitably  determines  my  judgement, 
without  regarding  sophistries,  however  unable 
I  may  be  to  answer  them  or  to  oppose  them 
with  others  more  plausible.”2 

2  In  the  Deutsches  Museum,  February,  1787,  there  is 
a  dissertation  by  a  very  subtle  and  clear-headed  man, 
the  late  Wizenmann,  whose  early  death  is  to  be  lamented, 
in  which  he  disputes  the  right  to  argue  from  a  want  to 
the  objective  reality  of  its  object,  and  illustrates  the 
point  by  the  example  of  a  man  in  love,  who  having 
fooled  himself  into  an  idea  of  beauty,  which  is  merely  a 
chimera  of  his  own  brain,  would  fain  conclude  that  such 
an  object  really  exists  somewhere.  I  quite  agree  with 
him  in  this,  in  all  cases  where  the  want  is  founded  on 
inclination,  which  cannot  necessarily  postulate  the  exist¬ 
ence  of  its  object  even  for  the  man  that  is  affected  by 
it,  much  less  can  it  contain  a  demand  valid  for  every¬ 
one,  and  therefore  it  is  merely  a  subjective  ground  of 
the  wish.  But  in  the  present  case  we  have  a  want  of 
reason  springing  from  an  objective  determining  princi¬ 
ple  of  the  will,  namely,  the  moral  law,  which  necessar¬ 
ily  binds  every  rational  being,  and  therefore  justifies 
him  in  assuming  a  priori  in  nature  the  conditions  proper 
for  it,  and  makes  the  latter  inseparable  from  the  com¬ 
plete  practical  use  of  reason.  It  is  a  duty  to  realize  the 
summum  bonum  to  the  utmost  of  our  power,  therefore 
it  must  be  possible,  consequently  it  is  unavoidable  for 
every  rational  being  in  the  world  to  assume  what  is 
necessary  for  its  objective  possibility.  The  assumption 
is  as  necessary  as  the  moral  law,  in  connection  with 
which  alone  it  is  valid. 


CRITIQUE  OF 


In  order  to  prevent  misconception  in  the  use 
of  a  notion  as  yet  so  unusual  as  that  of  a  faith 
of  pure  practical  reason,  let  me  be  permitted  to 
add  one  more  remark.  It  might  almost  seem  as 
if  this  rational  faith  were  here  announced  as 
itself  a  command ,  namely,  that  we  should  as¬ 
sume  the  summum  bonum  as  possible.  But  a 
faith  that  is  commanded  is  nonsense.  Let  the 
preceding  analysis,  however,  be  remembered  of 
what  is  required  to  be  supposed  in  the  concep¬ 
tion  of  the  summum  bonum ,  and  it  will  be  seen 
that  it  cannot  be  commanded  to  assume  this 
possibility,  and  no  practical  disposition  of  mind 
is  required  to  admit  it;  but  that  speculative 
reason  must  concede  it  without  being  asked,  for 
no  one  can  affirm  that  it  is  impossible  in  itself 
that  rational  beings  in  the  world  should  at  the 
same  time  be  worthy  of  happiness  in  conformity 
with  the  moral  law  and  also  possess  this  happi¬ 
ness  proportionately.  Now  in  respect  of  the  first 
element  of  the  summum  bonum ,  namely,  that 
which  concerns  morality,  the  moral  law  gives 
merely  a  command,  and  to  doubt  the  possibility 
of  that  element  would  be  the  same  as  to  call  in 
question  the  moral  law  itself.  But  as  regards  the 
second  element  of  that  object,  namely,  happi¬ 
ness  perfectly  proportioned  to  that  worthiness, 
it  is  true  that  there  is  no  need  of  a  command  to 
admit  its  possibility  in  general,  for  theoretical 
reason  has  nothing  to  say  against  it;  but  the 
manner  in  which  we  have  to  conceive  this  har¬ 
mony  of  the  laws  of  nature  with  those  of  free¬ 
dom  has  in  it  something  in  respect  of  which 
we  have  a  choice ,  because  theoretical  reason  de¬ 
cides  nothing  with  apodeictic  certainty  about  it, 
and  in  respect  of  this  there  may  be  a  moral  in¬ 
terest  which  turns  the  scale. 

I  had  said  above  that  in  a  mere  course  of  na¬ 
ture  in  the  world  an  accurate  correspondence 
between  happiness  and  moral  worth  is  not  to  be 
expected  and  must  be  regarded  as  impossible, 
and  that  therefore  the  possibility  of  the  sum¬ 
mum  bonum  cannot  be  admitted  from  this  side 
except  on  the  supposition  of  a  moral  Author  of 
the  world.  I  purposely  reserved  the  restriction 
of  this  judgement  to  the  subjective  conditions 
of  our  reason,  in  order  not  to  make  use  of  it 
until  the  manner  of  this  belief  should  be  defined 
more  precisely.  The  fact  is  that  the  impossibil¬ 
ity  referred  to  is  merely  subjective ,  that  is,  our 
reason  finds  it  impossible  jor  it  to  render  con¬ 
ceivable  in  the  way  of  a  mere  course  of  nature 
a  connection  so  exactly  proportioned  and  so 
thoroughly  adapted  to  an  end,  between  two  sets 
of  events  happening  according  to  such  distinct 
laws;  although,  as  with  everything  else  in  na¬ 


ture  that  is  adapted  to  an  end,  it  cannot  prove, 
that  is,  show  by  sufficient  objective  reason,  that 
it  is  not  possible  by  universal  laws  of  nature. 

Now,  however,  a  deciding  principle  of  a  dif¬ 
ferent  kind  comes  into  play  to  turn  the  scale 
in  this  uncertainty  of  speculative  reason.  The 
command  to  promote  the  summum  bonum  is 
established  on  an  objective  basis  (in  practical 
reason) ;  the  possibility  of  the  same  in  general 
is  likewise  established  on  an  objective  basis  (in 
theoretical  reason,  which  has  nothing  to  say 
against  it).  But  reason  cannot  decide  objec¬ 
tively  in  what  way  we  are  to  conceive  this  pos¬ 
sibility;  whether  by  universal  laws  of  nature 
without  a  wise  Author  presiding  over  nature,  or 
only  on  supposition  of  such  an  Author.  Now 
here  there  comes  in  a  subjective  condition  of 
reason,  the  only  way  theoretically  possible  for 
it,  of  conceiving  the  exact  harmony  of  the  king¬ 
dom  of  nature  with  the  kingdom  of  morals, 
which  is  the  condition  of  the  possibility  of  the 
summum  bonum;  and  at  the  same  time  the  only 
one  conducive  to  morality  (which  depends  on 
an  objective  law  of  reason).  Now  since  the  pro¬ 
motion  of  this  summum  bonum,  and  therefore 
the  supposition  of  its  possibility,  are  objective¬ 
ly  necessary  (though  only  as  a  result  of  practi¬ 
cal  reason),  while  at  the  same  time  the  manner 
in  which  we  would  conceive  it  rests  with  our 
own  choice,  and  in  this  choice  a  free  interest  of 
pure  practical  reason  decides  for  the  assump¬ 
tion  of  a  wise  Author  of  the  world;  it  is  clear 
that  the  principle  that  herein  determines  our 
judgement,  though  as  a  want  it  is  subjective ,  yet 
at  the  same  time  being  the  means  of  promoting 
what  is  objectively  (practically)  necessary,  is 
the  foundation  of  a  maxim  of  belief  in  a  moral 
point  of  view,  that  is.  a  faith  of  pure  practical 
reason.  This,  then,  is  not  commanded,  but  being 
a  voluntary  determination  of  our  judgement, 
conducive  to  the  moral  (commanded)  purpose, 
and  moreover  harmonizing  with  the  theoretical 
requirement  of  reason,  to  assume  that  existence 
and  to  make  it  the  foundation  of  our  further 
employment  of  reason,  it  has  itself  sprung  from 
the  moral  disposition  of  mind;  it  may  therefore 
at  times  waver  even  in  the  well-disposed,  but 
can  never  be  reduced  to  unbelief. 

IX.  Of  the  Wise  Adaptation  of  Man’s  Cognitive 
Faculties  to  his  Practical  Destination 

If  human  nature  is  destined  to  endeavour 
after  the  summum  bonum ,  we  must  suppose 
also  that  the  measure  of  its  cognitive  faculties, 
and  particularly  their  relation  to  one  another,  is 
suitable  to  this  end.  Now  the  Critique  of  Pure 


PRACTICAL  REASON 


Speculative  Reason  proves  that  this  is  incapable 
of  solving  satisfactorily  the  most  weighty  prob¬ 
lems  that  are  proposed  to  it,  although  it  does 
not  ignore  the  natural  and  important  hints  re¬ 
ceived  from  the  same  reason,  nor  the  great  steps 
that  it  can  make  to  approach  to  this  great  goal 
that  is  set  before  it,  which,  however,  it  can 
never  reach  of  itself,  even  with  the  help  of 
the  greatest  knowledge  of  nature.  Nature  then 
seems  here  to  have  provided  us  only  in  a  step¬ 
motherly  fashion  with  the  faculty  required  for 
our  end. 

Suppose,  now,  that  in  this  matter  nature  had 
conformed  to  our  wish  and  had  given  us  that 
capacity  of  discernment  or  that  enlightenment 
which  we  would  gladly  possess,  or  which  some 
imagine  they  actually  possess,  what  would  in  all 
probability  be  the  consequence?  Unless  our 
whole  nature  were  at  the  same  time  changed, 
our  inclinations,  which  always  have  the  first 
word,  would  first  of  all  demand  their  own  satis¬ 
faction,  and,  joined  with  rational  reflection,  the 
greatest  possible  and  most  lasting  satisfaction, 
under  the  name  of  happiness;  the  moral  law 
would  afterwards  speak,  in  order  to  keep  them 
within  their  proper  bounds,  and  even  to  subject 
them  all  to  a  higher  end,  which  has  no  regard  to 
inclination.  But  instead  of  the  conflict  that  the 
moral  disposition  has  now  to  carry  on  with  the 
inclinations,  in  which,  though  after  some  de¬ 
feats,  moral  strength  of  mind  may  be  gradually 
acquired,  God  and  eternity  with  their  awful 
majesty  would  stand  unceasingly  before  our 
eyes  (for  what  we  can  prove  perfectly  is  to  us 
as  certain  as  that  of  which  we  are  assured  by 
the  sight  of  our  eyes).  Transgression  of  the 
law,  would,  no  doubt,  be  avoided;  what  is  com¬ 
manded  would  be  done ;  but  the  mental  disposi¬ 
tion ,  from  which  actions  ought  to  proceed,  can¬ 


355 

not  be  infused  by  any  command,  and  in  this 
case  the  spur  of  action  is  ever  active  and  ex¬ 
ternal,  so  that  reason  has  no  need  to  exert  itself 
in  order  to  gather  strength  to  resist  the  inclina¬ 
tions  by  a  lively  representation  of  the  dignity  of 
the  law:  hence  most  of  the  actions  that  con¬ 
formed  to  the  law  would  be  done  from  fear,  a 
few  only  from  hope,  and  none  at  all  from  duty, 
and  the  moral  worth  of  actions,  on  which  alone 
in  the  eyes  of  supreme  wisdom  the  worth  of  the 
person  and  even  that  of  the  world  depends, 
would  cease  to  exist.  As  long  as  the  nature  of 
man  remains  what  it  is,  his  conduct  would  thus 
be  changed  into  mere  mechanism,  in  which,  as 
in  a  puppet-show,  everything  would  gesticulate 
well,  but  there  would  be  no  life  in  the  figures. 
Now,  when  it  is  quite  otherwise  with  us,  when 
with  all  the  effort  of  our  reason  we  have  only  a 
very  obscure  and  doubtful  view  into  the  future, 
when  the  Governor  of  the  world  allows  us  only 
to  conjecture  his  existence  and  his  majesty,  not 
to  behold  them  or  prove  them  clearly;  and  on 
the  other  hand,  the  moral  law  within  us,  without 
promising  or  threatening  anything  with  certain¬ 
ty,  demands  of  us  disinterested  respect;  and 
only  when  this  respect  has  become  active  and 
dominant,  does  it  allow  us  by  means  of  it  a  pros¬ 
pect  into  the  world  of  the  supersensible,  and 
then  only  with  weak  glances:  all  this  being  so, 
there  is  room  for  true  moral  disposition,  imme¬ 
diately  devoted  to  the  law,  and  a  rational  crea¬ 
ture  can  become  worthy  of  sharing  in  the  sum- 
mum  bonum  that  corresponds  to  the  worth  of 
his  person  and  not  merely  to  his  actions.  Thus 
what  the  study  of  nature  and  of  man  teaches  us 
sufficiently  elsewhere  may  well  be  true  here 
also;  that  the  unsearchable  wisdom  by  which 
we  exist  is  not  less  worthy  of  admiration  in  what 
it  has  denied  than  in  what  it  has  granted. 


SECOND  PART 

Methodology  of  Pure  Practical  Reason 


By  the  methodology  of  pure  practical  reason  we 
are  not  to  understand  the  mode  of  proceeding 
with  pure  practical  principles  (whether  in  study 
or  in  exposition),  with  a  view  to  a  scientific 
knowledge  of  them,  which  alone  is  what  is  prop¬ 
erly  called  method  elsewhere  in  theoretical  phi¬ 
losophy  (for  popular  knowledge  requires  a  man¬ 
ner ,  science  a  method,  i.  e.,  a  process  according 
to  principles  oj  reason  by  which  alone  the  man¬ 
ifold  of  any  branch  of  knowledge  can  become  a 
system).  On  the  contrary,  by  this  methodology 
is  understood  the  mode  in  which  we  can  give 
the  laws  of  pure  practical  reason  access  to  the 
human  mind  and  influence  on  its  maxims,  that  is, 
by  which  we  can  make  the  objectively  practical 
reason  subjectively  practical  also. 

Now  it  is  clear  enough  that  those  determin¬ 
ing  principles  of  the  will  which  alone  make  max¬ 
ims  properly  moral  and  give  them  a  moral 
worth,  namely,  the  direct  conception  of  the  law 
and  the  objective  necessity  of  obeying  it  as  our 
duty,  must  be  regarded  as  the  proper  springs  of 
actions,  since  otherwise  legality  of  actions  might 
be  produced,  but  not  morality  of  character.  But 
it  is  not  so  clear;  on  the  contrary,  it  must  at 
first  sight  seem  to  every  one  very  improbable 
that  even  subjectively  that  exhibition  of  pure 
virtue  can  have  more  power  over  the  human 
mind,  and  supply  a  far  stronger  spring  even  for 
effecting  that  legality  of  actions,  and  can  pro¬ 
duce  more  powerful  resolutions  to  prefer  the 
law,  from  pure  respect  for  it,  to  every  other 
consideration,  than  all  the  deceptive  allure¬ 
ments  of  pleasure  or  of  all  that  may  be  reck¬ 
oned  as  happiness,  or  even  than  all  threatenings 
of  pain  and  misfortune.  Nevertheless,  this  is 
actually  the  case,  and  if  human  nature  were  not 
so  constituted,  no  mode  of  presenting  the  law 
by  roundabout  ways  and  indirect  recommenda¬ 
tions  would  ever  produce  morality  of  character. 
All  would  be  simple  hypocrisy;  the  law  would 
be  hated,  or  at  least  despised,  while  it  was  fol¬ 
lowed  for  the  sake  of  one’s  own  advantage.  The 
letter  of  the  law  (legality)  would  be  found  in 
our  actions,  but  not  the  spirit  of  it  in  our  minds 
(morality) ;  and  as  with  all  our  efforts  we  could 
not  quite  free  ourselves  from  reason  in  our 


judgement,  we  must  inevitably  appear  in  our 
own  eyes  worthless,  depraved  men,  even  though 
we  should  seek  to  compensate  ourselves  for  this 
mortification  before  the  inner  tribunal,  by  en¬ 
joying  the  pleasure  that  a  supposed  natural  or 
divine  law  might  be  imagined  to  have  connected 
with  it  a  sort  of  police  machinery,  regulating 
its  operations  by  what  wTas  done  without  trou¬ 
bling  itself  about  the  motives  for  doing  it. 

It  cannot  indeed  be  denied  that  in  order  to 
bring  an  uncultivated  or  degraded  mind  into  the 
track  of  moral  goodness  some  preparatory  guid¬ 
ance  is  necessary,  to  attract  it  by  a  view  of  its 
own  advantage,  or  to  alarm  it  by  fear  of  loss; 
but  as  soon  as  this  mechanical  work,  these  lead¬ 
ing-strings  have  produced  some  effect,  then  wTe 
must  bring  before  the  mind  the  pure  moral 
motive,  w'hich,  not  only  because  it  is  the  only 
one  that  can  be  the  foundation  of  a  character 
(a  practically  consistent  habit  of  mind  with  un¬ 
changeable  maxims),  but  also  because  it  teaches 
a  man  to  feel  his  owm  dignity,  gives  the  mind  a 
power  unexpected  even  by  himself,  to  tear  him¬ 
self  from  all  sensible  attachments  so  far  as  they 
would  fain  have  the  rule,  and  to  find  a  rich  com¬ 
pensation  for  the  sacrifice  he  offers,  in  the  inde¬ 
pendence  of  his  rational  nature  and  the  great¬ 
ness  of  soul  to  which  he  sees  that  he  is  destined. 
We  will  therefore  show,  by  such  observations  as 
every  one  can  make,  that  this  property  of  our 
minds,  this  receptivity  for  a  pure  moral  interest, 
and  consequently  the  moving  force  of  the  pure 
conception  of  virtue,  when  it  is  properly  applied 
to  the  human  heart,  is  the  most  powerful  spring 
and,  when  a  continued  and  punctual  observance 
of  moral  maxims  is  in  question,  the  only  spring 
of  good  conduct.  It  must,  however,  be  remem¬ 
bered  that  if  these  observations  only  prove  the 
reality  of  such  a  feeling,  but  do  not  show  any 
moral  improvement  brought  about  by  it,  this  is 
no  argument  against  the  only  method  that  exists 
of  making  the  objectively  practical  law's  of  pure 
reason  subjectively  practical,  through  the  mere 
force  of  the  conception  of  duty;  nor  does  it 
prove  that  this  method  is  a  vain  delusion.  For  as 
it  has  never  yet  come  into  vogue,  experience  can 
say  nothing  of  its  results;  one  can  only  ask  for 


PRACTICAL  REASON 


proofs  of  the  receptivity  for  such  springs,  and 
these  I  will  now  briefly  present,  and  then  sketch 
the  method  of  founding  and  cultivating  genuine 
moral  dispositions. 

When  we  attend  to  the  course  of  conversa¬ 
tion  in  mixed  companies,  consisting  not  merely 
of  learned  persons  and  subtle  reasoners,  but  also 
of  men  of  business  or  of  women,  we  observe 
that,  besides  story-telling  and  jesting,  another 
kind  of  entertainment  finds  a  place  in  them, 
namely,  argument;  for  stories,  if  they  are  to 
have  novelty  and  interest,  are  soon  exhausted, 
and  jesting  is  likely  to  become  insipid.  Now  of 
all  argument  there  is  none  in  which  persons  are 
more  ready  to  join  who  find  any  other  subtle 
discussion  tedious,  none  that  brings  more  liveli¬ 
ness  into  the  company,  than  that  which  con¬ 
cerns  the  moral  worth  of  this  or  that  action  by 
which  the  character  of  some  person  is  to  be  made 
out.  Persons,  to  whom  in  other  cases  anything 
subtle  and  speculative  in  theoretical  questions 
is  dry  and  irksome,  presently  join  in  when  the 
question  is  to  make  out  the  moral  import  of  a 
good  or  bad  action  that  has  been  related,  and 
they  display  an  exactness,  a  refinement,  a  sub¬ 
tlety,  in  excogitating  everything  that  can  lessen 
the  purity  of  purpose,  and  consequently  the  de¬ 
gree  of  virtue  in  it,  which  we  do  not  expect  from 
them  in  any  other  kind  of  speculation.  In  these 
criticisms,  persons  who  are  passing  judgement 
on  others  often  reveal  their  own  character: 
some,  in  exercising  their  judicial  office,  espe¬ 
cially  upon  the  dead,  seem  inclined  chiefly  to  de¬ 
fend  the  goodness  that  is  related  of  this  or  that 
deed  against  all  injurious  charges  of  insincerity, 
and  ultimately  to  defend  the  whole  moral  worth 
of  the  person  against  the  reproach  of  dissimu¬ 
lation  and  secret  wickedness;  others,  on  the 
contrary,  turn  their  thoughts  more  upon  attack¬ 
ing  this  worth  by  accusation  and  fault  finding. 
We  cannot  always,  however,  attribute  to  these 
latter  the  intention  of  arguing  away  virtue  al¬ 
together  out  of  all  human  examples  in  order  to 
make  it  an  empty  name;  often,  on  the  contrary, 
it  is  only  well-meant  strictness  in  determining 
the  true  moral  import  of  actions  according  to 
an  uncompromising  law.  Comparison  with  such 
a  law,  instead  of  with  examples,  lowers  self-con¬ 
ceit  in  moral  matters  very  much,  and  not  mere¬ 
ly  teaches  humility,  but  makes  every  one  feel  it 
when  he  examines  himself  closely.  Nevertheless, 
we  can  for  the  most  part  observe,  in  those  who 
defend  the  purity  of  purpose  in  giving  examples, 
that  where  there  is  the  presumption  of  upright¬ 
ness  they  are  anxious  to  remove  even  the  least 
spot,  lest,  if  all  examples  had  their  truthfulness 


357 

disputed,  and  if  the  purity  of  all  human  virtue 
were  denied,  it  might  in  the  end  be  regarded  as 
a  mere  phantom,  and  so  all  effort  to  attain  it  be 
made  light  of  as  vain  affectation  and  delusive 
conceit. 

I  do  not  know  why  the  educators  of  youth 
have  not  long  since  made  use  of  this  propensity 
of  reason  to  enter  with  pleasure  upon  the  most 
subtle  examination  of  the  practical  questions 
that  are  thrown  up ;  and  why  they  have  not,  after 
first  laying  the  foundation  of  a  purely  moral 
catechism,  searched  through  the  biographies  of 
ancient  and  modem  times  with  the  view  of  hav¬ 
ing  at  hand  instances  of  the  duties  laid  down, 
in  which,  especially  by  comparison  of  similar 
actions  under  different  circumstances,  they 
might  exercise  the  critical  judgement  of  their 
scholars  in  remarking  their  greater  or  less  moral 
significance.  This  is  a  thing  in  which  they  would 
find  that  even  early  youth,  which  is  still  unripe 
for  speculation  of  other  kinds,  would  soon  be¬ 
come  very  acute  and  not  a  little  interested,  be¬ 
cause  it  feels  the  progress  of  its  faculty  of  judge¬ 
ment;  and,  whac  is  most  important,  they  could 
hope  with  confidence  that  the  frequent  practice 
of  knowing  and  approving  good  conduct  in  all 
its  purity,  and  on  the  other  hand  of  remarking 
with  regret  or  contempt  the  least  deviation  from 
it,  although  it  may  be  pursued  only  as  a  sport  in 
which  children  may  compete  with  one  another, 
yet  will  leave  a  lasting  impression  of  esteem 
on  the  one  hand  and  disgust  on  the  other;  and 
so,  by  the  mere  habit  of  looking  on  such  actions 
as  deserving  approval  or  blame,  a  good  founda¬ 
tion  would  be  laid  for  uprightness  in  the  future 
course  of  life.  Only  I  wish  they  would  spare 
them  the  example  of  so-called  noble  (super- 
meritorious)  actions,  in  which  our  sentimental 
books  so  much  abound,  and  would  refer  all  to 
duty  merely,  and  to  the  worth  that  a  man  can 
and  must  give  himself  in  his  own  eyes  by  the 
consciousness  of  not  having  transgressed  it, 
since  whatever  runs  up  into  empty  wishes  and 
longings  after  inaccessible  perfection  produces 
mere  heroes  of  romance,  who,  while  they  pique 
themselves  on  their  feeling  for  transcendent 
greatness,  release  themselves  in  return  from  the 
observance  of  common  and  every-day  obliga¬ 
tions,  which  then  seem  to  them  petty  and  insig¬ 
nificant.1 

1  It  is  quite  proper  to  extol  actions  that  display  a 
great,  unselfish,  sympathizing  mind  or  humanity.  But,  in 
this  case,  we  must  fix  attention  not  so  much  on  the  ele¬ 
vation  of  soul ,  which  is  very  fleeting  and  transitory,  as 
on  the  subjection  of  the  heart  to  duty ,  from  which  a 
more  enduring  impression  may  be  expected,  because  this 
implies  principle  (whereas  the  former  only  implies  ebul¬ 
litions).  One  need  only  reflect  a  little  and  he  will  al- 


CRITIQUE  OF 


But  if  it  is  asked:  “What,  then,  is  really  pure 
morality,  by  which  as  a  touchstone  we  must 
test  the  moral  significance  of  every  action;' 
then  I  must  admit  that  it  is  only  philosophers 
that  can  make  the  decision  of  this  question 
doubtful,  for  to  common  sense  it  has  been  de¬ 
cided  long  ago,  not  indeed  by  abstract  general 
formulae,  but  by  habitual  use,  like  the  distinc¬ 
tion  between  the  right  and  left  hand.  We  will 
then  point  out  the  criterion  of  pure  virtue  in  an 
example  first,  and,  imagining  that  it  is  set  before 
a  boy,  of  say  ten  years  old.  for  his  judgement, 
we  will  see  whether  he  would  necessarily  judge 
so  of  himself  without  being  guided  by  his  teach¬ 
er.  Tell  him  the  history  of  an  honest  man  whom 
men  want  to  persuade  to  join  the  calumniators 
of  an  innocent  and  powerless  person  (say  Anne 
Boleyn,  accused  by  Henry  VIII  of  England). 
He  is  offered  advantages,  great  gifts,  or  high 
rank;  he  rejects  them.  This  will  excite  mere 
approbation  and  applause  in  the  mind  of  the 
hearer.  Now  begins  the  threatening  of  loss. 
Amongst  these  traducers  are  his  best  friends, 
who  now  renounce  his  friendship;  near  kinsfolk, 
who  threaten  to  disinherit  him  (he  being  with¬ 
out  fortune);  powerful  persons,  who  can  perse¬ 
cute  and  harass  him  in  all  places  and  circum¬ 
stances;  a  prince,  who  threatens  him  with  loss 
of  freedom,  yea,  loss  of  life.  Then  to  fill  the 
measure  of  suffering,  and  that  he  may  feel  the 
pain  that  only  the  morally  good  heart  can  feel 
very  deeply,  let  us  conceive  his  family  threaten¬ 
ed  with  extreme  distress  and  want,  entreating 
him  to  yield;  conceive  himself,  though  upright, 
yet  with  feelings  not  hard  or  insensible  either 
to  compassion  or  to  his  own  distress;  conceive 
him,  I  say,  at  the  moment  when  he  wishes  that 
he  had  never  lived  to  see  the  day  that  exposed 
him  to  such  unutterable  anguish,  yet  remaining 
true  to  his  uprightness  of  purpose,  without  wav¬ 
ering  or  even  doubting;  then  will  my  youthful 
hearer  be  raised  gradually  from  mere  approval 
to  admiration,  from  that  to  amazement,  and 
finally  to  the  greatest  veneration,  and  a  lively 
wish  that  he  himself  could  be  such  a  man 
(though  certainly  not  in  such  circumstances). 
Yet  virtue  is  here  worth  so  much  only  because 
it  costs  so  much,  not  because  it  brings  any  profit. 
All  the  admiration,  and  even  the  endeavour  to 
resemble  this  character,  rest  wholly  on  the  pu- 

ways  find  a  debt  that  he  has  by  some  means  incurred 
towards  the  human  race  (even  if  it  were  only  this,  that, 
by  the  inequality  of  men  in  the  civil  constitution,  he 
enjoys  advantages  on  account  of  which  others  must  be 
the  more  in  want),  which  will  prevent  the  thought  of 
duty  from  being  repressed  by  the  self-complacent  imag¬ 
ination  of  merit. 


rity  of  the  moral  principle,  which  can  only  be 
strikingly  shown  by  removing  from  the  springs 
of  action  everything  that  men  may  regard  as 
part  of  happiness.  Morality,  then,  must  have 
the  more  power  over  the  human  heart  the  more 
purely  it  is  exhibited.  Whence  it  follows  that, 
if  the  law  of  morality  and  the  image  of  holiness 
and  virtue  are  to  exercise  any  influence  at  all 
on  our  souls,  they  can  do  so  only  so  far  as  they 
are  laid  to  heart  in  their  purity  as  motives,  un¬ 
mixed  with  any  view  to  prosperity,  for  it  is  in 
suffering  that  they  display  themselves  most 
nobly.  Now  that  whose  removal  strengthens  the 
effect  of  a  moving  force  must  have  been  a  hin¬ 
drance,  consequently  every  admixture  of  mo¬ 
tives  taken  from  our  own  happiness  is  a  hin¬ 
drance  to  the  influence  of  the  moral  law  on  the 
heart.  I  affirm  further  that  even  in  that  admired 
action,  if  the  motive  from  which  it  was  done 
was  a  high  regard  for  duty,  then  it  is  just  this 
respect  for  the  law  that  has  the  greatest  influ¬ 
ence  on  the  mind  of  the  spectator,  not  any  pre¬ 
tension  to  a  supposed  inward  greatness  of  mind 
or  noble  meritorious  sentiments;  consequently 
duty,  not  merit,  must  have  not  only  the  most 
definite,  but,  when  it  is  represented  in  the  true 
light  of  its  inviolability,  the  most  penetrating, 
influence  on  the  mind. 

It  is  more  necessary  than  ever  to  direct  atten¬ 
tion  to  this  method  in  our  times,  when  men  hope 
to  produce  more  effect  on  the  mind  with  soft, 
tender  feelings,  or  high-flown,  puffing-up  pre¬ 
tensions,  which  rather  wither  the  heart  than 
strengthen  it,  than  by  a  plain  and  earnest  repre¬ 
sentation  of  duty,  which  is  more  suited  to  hu¬ 
man  imperfection  and  to  progress  in  goodness. 
To  set  before  children,  as  a  pattern,  actions 
that  are  called  noble,  magnanimous,  meritori¬ 
ous,  with  the  notion  of  captivating  them  by  in¬ 
fusing  enthusiasm  for  such  actions,  is  to  defeat 
our  end.  For  as  they  are  still  so  backward  in  the 
observance  of  the  commonest  duty,  and  even  in 
the  correct  estimation  of  it,  this  means  simply 
to  make  them  fantastical  romancers  betimes. 
But,  even  with  the  instructed  and  experienced 
part  of  mankind,  this  supposed  spring  has,  if 
not  an  injurious,  at  least  no  genuine,  moral  ef¬ 
fect  on  the  heart,  which,  however,  is  what  it 
was  desired  to  produce. 

All  feelings ,  especially  those  that  are  to  pro¬ 
duce  unwonted  exertions,  must  accomplish  their 
effect  at  the  moment  they  are  at  their  height 
and  before  the  calm  down;  otherwise  they  effect 
nothing;  for  as  there  was  nothing  to  strengthen 
the  heart,  but  only  to  excite  it,  it  naturally  re¬ 
turns  to  its  normal  moderate  tone  and,  thus, 


PRACTICAL  REASON 


falls  back  into  its  previous  languor.  Principles 
must  be  built  on  conceptions;  on  any  other  ba¬ 
sis  there  can  only  be  paroxysms,  which  can  give 
the  person  no  moral  worth,  nay,  not  even  con¬ 
fidence  in  himself,  without  which  the  highest 
good  in  man,  consciousness  of  the  morality  of 
his  mind  and  character,  cannot  exist.  Now  if 
these  conceptions  are  to  become  subjectively 
practical,  we  must  not  rest  satisfied  with  admir¬ 
ing  the  objective  law  of  morality,  and  esteeming 
it  highly  in  reference  to  humanity,  but  we  must 
consider  the  conception  of  it  in  relation  to  man 
as  an  individual,  and  then  this  law  appears  in  a 
form  indeed  that  is  highly  deserving  of  respect, 
but  not  so  pleasant  as  if  it  belonged  to  the  ele¬ 
ment  to  which  he  is  naturally  accustomed;  but 
on  the  contrary  as  often  compelling  him  to  quit 
this  element,  not  without  self-denial,  and  to  be¬ 
take  himself  to  a  higher,  in  which  he  can  only 
maintain  himself  with  trouble  and  with  unceas¬ 
ing  apprehension  of  a  relapse.  In  a  word,  the 
moral  law  demands  obedience,  from  duty  not 
from  predilection,  which  cannot  and  ought  not 
to  be  presupposed  at  all. 

Let  us  now  see,  in  an  example,  whether  the 
conception  of  an  action,  as  a  noble  and  magnan¬ 
imous  one,  has  more  subjective  moving  power 
than  if  the  action  is  conceived  merely  as  duty 
in  relation  to  the  solemn  law  of  morality.  The 
action  by  which  a  man  endeavours  at  the  great¬ 
est  peril  of  life  to  rescue  people  from  shipwreck, 
at  last  losing  his  life  in  the  attempt,  is  reckoned 
on  one  side  as  duty,  but  on  the  other  and  for  the 
most  part  as  a  meritorious  action,  but  our  es¬ 
teem  for  it  is  much  weakened  by  the  notion  of 
duty  to  himself  which  seems  in  this  case  to  be 
somewhat  infringed.  More  decisive  is  the  mag¬ 
nanimous  sacrifice  of  life  for  the  safety  of  one’s 
country;  and  yet  there  still  remains  some 
scruple  whether  it  is  a  perfect  duty  to  devote 
one’s  self  to  this  purpose  spontaneously  and  un¬ 
bidden,  and  the  action  has  not  in  itself  the  full 
force  of  a  pattern  and  impulse  to  imitation.  But 
if  an  indispensable  duty  be  in  question,  the 
transgression  of  which  violates  the  moral  law 
itself,  and  without  regard  to  the  welfare  of  man¬ 
kind,  and  as  it  were  tramples  on  its  holiness 
(such  as  are  usually  called  duties  to  God,  be¬ 
cause  in  Him  we  conceive  the  ideal  of  holiness 
in  substance),  then  we  give  our  most  perfect 
esteem  to  the  pursuit  of  it  at  the  sacrifice  of  all 
that  can  have  any  value  for  the  dearest  inclina¬ 
tions,  and  we  find  our  soul  strengthened  and 
elevated  by  such  an  example,  when  we  convince 
ourselves  by  contemplation  of  it  that  human 
nature  is  capable  of  so  great  an  elevation  above 


359 

every  motive  that  nature  can  oppose  to  it.  Juve¬ 
nal  describes  such  an  example  in  a  climax  which 
makes  the  reader  feel  vividly  the  force  of  the 
spring  that  is  contained  in  the  pure  law  of  duty, 
as  duty: 

Esto  bonus  miles ,  tutor  bonus ,  arbiter  idem 
Integer;  ambiguoe  si  quando  citabere  testis 
Incertceque  rei,  Phalaris  licet  imperet  ut  sis 
Falsusy  et  admoto  dictet  periuria  tauro , 

Summum  crede  nefas  animam  prceferre  pudori, 

Et  propter  vitam  vivendi  perdere  causas.1 

When  we  can  bring  any  flattering  thought  of 
merit  into  our  action,  then  the  motive  is  already 
somewhat  alloyed  with  self-love  and  has  there¬ 
fore  some  assistance  from  the  side  of  the  sensi¬ 
bility.  But  to  postpone  everything  to  the  holi¬ 
ness  of  duty  alone,  and  to  be  conscious  that  we 
can  because  our  own  reason  recognises  this  as 
its  command  and  says  that  we  ought  to  do  it, 
this  is,  as  it  were,  to  raise  ourselves  altogether 
above  the  world  of  sense,  and  there  is  insepa¬ 
rably  involved  in  the  same  a  consciousness  of 
the  law,  as  a  spring  of  a  faculty  that  controls 
the  sensibility;  and  although  this  is  not  always 
attended  with  effect,  yet  frequent  engagement 
with  this  spring,  and  the  at  first  minor  attempts 
at  using  it,  give  hope  that  this  effect  may  be 
wrought,  and  that  by  degrees  the  greatest,  and 
that  a  purely  moral  interest  in  it  may  be  pro¬ 
duced  in  us. 

The  method  then  takes  the  following  course. 
At  first  we  are  only  concerned  to  make  the 
judging  of  actions  by  moral  laws  a  natural  em¬ 
ployment  accompanying  all  our  own  free  ac¬ 
tions,  as  well  as  the  observation  of  those  of  oth¬ 
ers,  and  to  make  it  as  it  were  a  habit,  and  to 
sharpen  this  judgement,  asking  first  whether 
the  action  conforms  objectively  to  the  moral 
lawf  and  to  what  law;  and  we  distinguish  the 
law  that  merely  furnishes  a  principle  of  obliga¬ 
tion  from  that  which  is  really  obligatory  ( leges 
obligandi  a  legibus  obligantibus) ;  as,  for  in¬ 
stance,  the  law  of  what  men’s  wants  require  from 
me,  as  contrasted  with  that  which  their  rights 
demand,  the  latter  of  which  prescribes  essen¬ 
tial,  the  former  only  non-essential  duties;  and 
thus  we  teach  how  to  distinguish  different  kinds 
of  duties  which  meet  in  the  same  action.  The 
other  point  to  which  attention  must  be  directed 

1  [Juvenal,  Satirae,  viii.  79-84.  “Be  you  a  good  sol¬ 
dier,  a  faithful  tutor,  an  uncorrupted  umpire  also;  if 
you  are  summoned  as  a  witness  in  a  doubtful  and  un¬ 
certain  thing,  though  Phalaris  should  command  that 
you  should  be  false,  and  should  dictate  perjuries  with 
the  bull  brought  to  you,  believe  it  the  highest  impiety 
to  prefer  life  to  reputation,  and  for  the  sake  of  life,  to 
lose  the  causes  of  living.”] 


36o  CRITIQUE  OF 


is  the  question  whether  the  action  was  also  (sub¬ 
jectively)  done  for  the  sake  of  the  moral  law, 
so  that  it  not  only  is  morally  correct  as  a  deed, 
but  also,  by  the  maxim  from  which  it  is  done, 
has  moral  worth  as  a  disposition.  Now  there  is 
no  doubt  that  this  practice,  and  the  resulting 
culture  of  our  reason  in  judging  merely  of  the 
practical,  must  gradually  produce  a  certain  in¬ 
terest  even  in  the  law  of  reason,  and  consequent¬ 
ly  in  morally  good  actions.  For  we  ultimately 
take  a  liking  for  a  thing,  the  contemplation  of 
which  makes  us  feel  that  the  use  of  our  cogni¬ 
tive  faculties  is  extended;  and  this  extension  is 
especially  furthered  by  that  in  which  we  find 
moral  correctness,  since  it  is  only  in  such  an 
order  of  things  that  reason,  with  its  faculty  of 
determining  a  priori  on  principle  what  ought  to 
be  done,  can  find  satisfaction.  An  observer  of 
nature  takes  liking  at  last  to  objects  that  at  first 
offended  his  senses,  when  he  discovers  in  them 
the  great  adaptation  of  their  organization  to  de¬ 
sign,  so  that  his  reason  finds  food  in  its  contem¬ 
plation.  So  Leibnitz  spared  an  insect  that  he  had 
carefully  examined  with  the  microscope,  and 
replaced  it  on  its  leaf,  because  he  had  found 
himself  instructed  by  the  view  of  it  and  had,  as 
it  were,  received  a  benefit  from  it. 

But  this  employment  of  the  faculty  of  judge¬ 
ment,  which  makes  us  feel  our  own  cognitive 
powers,  is  not  yet  the  interest  in  actions  and  in 
their  morality  itself.  It  merely  causes  us  to  take 
pleasure  in  engaging  in  such  criticism,  and  it 
gives  to  virtue  or  the  disposition  that  conforms 
to  moral  laws  a  form  of  beauty,  which  is  ad¬ 
mired.  but  not  on  that  account  sought  after 
( laudatur  et  alget) ;  as  everything  the  contem¬ 
plation  of  which  produces  a  consciousness  of  the 
harmony  of  our  powers  of  conception,  and  in 
which  we  feel  the  whole  of  our  faculty  of 
knowledge  (understanding  and  imagination) 
strengthened,  produces  a  satisfaction,  which 
may  also  be  communicated  to  others,  while  nev¬ 
ertheless  the  existence  of  the  object  remains  in¬ 
different  to  us,  being  only  regarded  as  the  oc¬ 
casion  of  our  becoming  aware  of  the  capacities 
in  us  which  are  elevated  above  mere  animal 
nature.  Now,  however,  the  second  exercise 
comes  in,  the  living  exhibition  of  morality  of 
character  by  examples,  in  which  attention  is 
directed  to  purity  of  will,  first  only  as  a  nega¬ 
tive  perfection,  in  so  far  as  in  an  action  done 
from  duty  no  motives  of  inclination  have  any 
influence  in  determining  it.  By  this  the  pupil’s 
attention  is  fixed  upon  the  consciousness  of  his 
freedom ,  and  although  this  renunciation  at  first 
excites  a  feeling  of  pain,  nevertheless,  by  its 


withdrawing  the  pupil  from  the  constraint  of 
even  real  wants,  there  is  proclaimed  to  him  at 
the  same  time  a  deliverance  from  the  manifold 
dissatisfaction  in  which  all  these  wants  entangle 
him,  and  the  mind  is  made  capable  of  receiving 
the  sensation  of  satisfaction  from  other  sources. 
The  heart  is  freed  and  lightened  of  a  burden 
that  always  secretly  presses  on  it,  when  in¬ 
stances  of  pure  moral  resolutions  reveal  to  the 
man  an  inner  faculty  of  which  otherwise  he  has 
no  right  knowledge,  the  inward  freedom  to  re¬ 
lease  himself  from  the  boisterous  importunity 
of  inclinations,  to  such  a  degree  that  none  of 
them,  not  even  the  dearest,  shall  have  any  in¬ 
fluence  on  a  resolution,  for  which  we  are  now 
to  employ  our  reason.  Suppose  a  case  where 
I  alone  know  that  the  wrong  is  on  my  side,  and 
although  a  free  confession  of  it  and  the  offer  of 
satisfaction  are  so  strongly  opposed  by  vanity, 
selfishness,  and  even  an  otherwise  not  illegiti¬ 
mate  antipathy  to  the  man  whose  rights  are  im¬ 
paired  by  me,  I  am  nevertheless  able  to  discard 
all  these  considerations;  in  this  there  is  implied 
a  consciousness  of  independence  on  inclinations 
and  circumstances,  and  of  the  possibility  of  be¬ 
ing  sufficient  for  myself,  which  is  salutary  to 
me  in  general  for  other  purposes  also.  And  now 
the  law  of  duty,  in  consequence  of  the  positive 
worth  which  obedience  to  it  makes  us  feel,  finds 
easier  access  through  the  respect  for  ourselves 
in  the  consciousness  of  our  freedom.  When  this 
is  well  established,  when  a  man  dreads  nothing 
more  than  to  find  himself,  on  self-examination, 
worthless  and  contemptible  in  his  own  eyes, 
then  every  good  moral  disposition  can  be  graft¬ 
ed  on  it,  because  this  is  the  best,  nay,  the  only 
guard  that  can  keep  off  from  the  mind  the  pres¬ 
sure  of  ignoble  and  corrupting  motives. 

I  have  only  intended  to  point  out  the  most 
general  maxims  of  the  methodology  of  moral 
cultivation  and  exercise.  As  the  manifold  variety 
of  duties  requires  special  rules  for  each  kind, 
and  this  would  be  a  prolix  affair,  I  shall  be  read¬ 
ily  excused  if  in  a  work  like  this,  which  is  only 
preliminary,  I  content  myself  with  these  out¬ 
lines. 

Conclusion 

Two  things  fill  the  mind  with  ever  new  and 
increasing  admiration  and  awe,  the  oftener  and 
the  more  steadily  we  reflect  on  them:  the  starry 
heavens  above  and  the  moral  law  within.  I  have 
not  to  search  for  them  and  conjecture  them  as 
though  they  were  veiled  in  darkness  or  were  in 
the  transcendent  region  beyond  my  horizon;  I 
see  them  before  me  and  connect  them  directly 


PRACTICAL  REASON 


with  the  consciousness  of  my  existence.  The  for¬ 
mer  begins  from  the  place  I  occupy  in  the  ex¬ 
ternal  world  of  sense,  and  enlarges  my  con¬ 
nection  therein  to  an  unbounded  extent  with 
worlds  upon  worlds  and  systems  of  systems, 
and  moreover  into  limitless  times  of  their  per¬ 
iodic  motion,  its  beginning  and  continuance. 
The  second  begins  from  my  invisible  self,  my 
personality,  and  exhibits  me  in  a  world  which 
has  true  infinity,  but  which  is  traceable  only  by 
the  understanding,  and  with  which  I  discern 
that  I  am  not  in  a  merely  contingent  but  in  a 
universal  and  necessary  connection,  as  I  am  also 
thereby  with  all  those  visible  worlds.  The  for¬ 
mer  view  of  a  countless  multitude  of  worlds  an¬ 
nihilates  as  it  were  my  importance  as  an  animal 
creature ,  which  after  it  has  been  for  a  short 
time  provided  with  vital  power,  one  knows  not 
how,  must  again  give  back  the  matter  of  which 
it  was  formed  to  the  planet  it  inhabits  (a  mere 
speck  in  the  universe).  The  second,  on  the  con¬ 
trary,  infinitely  elevates  my  worth  as  an  intelli¬ 
gence  by  my  personality,  in  which  the  moral 
law  reveals  to  me  a  life  independent  of  animal¬ 
ity  and  even  of  the  whole  sensible  world,  at 
least  so  far  as  may  be  inferred  from  the  desti¬ 
nation  assigned  to  my  existence  by  this  law,  a 
destination  not  restricted  to  conditions  and  lim¬ 
its  of  this  life,  but  reaching  into  the  infinite. 

But  though  admiration  and  respect  may  ex¬ 
cite  to  inquiry,  they  cannot  supply  the  want  of 
it.  What,  then,  is  to  be  done  in  order  to  enter 
on  this  in  a  useful  manner  and  one  adapted  to 
the  loftiness  of  the  subject?  Examples  may 
serve  in  this  as  a  warning  and  also  for  imitation. 
The  contemplation  of  the  world  began  from  the 
noblest  spectacle  that  the  human  senses  present 
to  us,  and  that  our  understanding  can  bear  to 
follow  in  their  vast  reach;  and  it  ended — in  as¬ 
trology.  Morality  began  with  the  noblest  attri¬ 
bute  of  human  nature,  the  development  and 
cultivation  of  which  give  a  prospect  of  infinite 
utility;  and  ended — in  fanaticism  or  supersti¬ 
tion.  So  it  is  with  all  crude  attempts  where  the 
principal  part  of  the  business  depends  on  the 
use  of  reason,  a  use  which  does  not  come  of  it¬ 
self,  like  the  use  of  the  feet,  by  frequent  exercise, 
especially  when  attributes  are  in  question  which 
cannot  be  directly  exhibited  in  common  experi¬ 


361 

ence.  But  after  the  maxim  had  come  into  vogue, 
though  late,  to  examine  carefully  beforehand 
all  the  steps  that  reason  purposes  to  take,  and 
not  to  let  it  proceed  otherwise  than  in  the  track 
of  a  previously  well  considered  method,  then 
the  study  of  the  structure  of  the  universe  took 
quite  a  different  direction,  and  thereby  attained 
an  incomparably  happier  result.  The  fall  of 
a  stone,  the  motion  of  a  sling,  resolved  into  their 
elements  and  the  forces  that  are  manifested  in 
them,  and  treated  mathematically,  produced  at 
last  that  clear  and  henceforward  unchangeable 
insight  into  the  system  of  the  world  which,  as 
observation  is  continued,  may  hope  always  to 
extend  itself,  but  need  never  fear  to  be  com¬ 
pelled  to  retreat. 

This  example  may  suggest  to  us  to  enter  on 
the  same  path  in  treating  of  the  moral  capacities 
of  our  nature,  and  may  give  us  hope  of  a  like 
good  result.  We  have  at  hand  the  instances  of  the 
moral  judgement  of  reason.  By  analysing  these 
into  their  elementary  conceptions,  and  in  default 
of  mathematics  adopting  a  process  similar  to  that 
of  chemistry ,  the  separation  of  the  empirical 
from  the  rational  elements  that  may  be  found 
in  them,  by  repeated  experiments  on  common 
sense,  we  may  exhibit  both  pure,  and  learn  with 
certainty  what  each  part  can  accomplish  of  it¬ 
self,  so  as  to  prevent  on  the  one  hand  the  errors 
of  a  still  crude  untrained  judgement,  and  on 
the  other  hand  (what  is  far  more  necessary) 
the  extravagances  oj  genius,  by  which,  as  by  the 
adepts  of  the  philosopher’s  stone,  without  any 
methodical  study  or  knowledge  of  nature,  vi¬ 
sionary  treasures  are  promised  and  the  true  are 
thrown  away.  In  one  word,  science  (critically 
undertaken  and  methodically  directed)  is  the 
narrow  gate  that  leads  to  the  true  doctrine  oj 
practical  wisdom,  if  we  understand  by  this  not 
merely  what  one  ought  to  do,  but  what  ought 
to  serve  teachers  as  a  guide  to  construct  well 
and  clearly  the  road  to  wisdom  which  everyone 
should  travel,  and  to  secure  others  from  going 
astray.  Philosophy  must  always  continue  to  be 
the  guardian  of  this  science;  and  although  the 
public  does  not  take  any  interest  in  its  subtle 
investigations,  it  must  take  an  interest  in  the 
resulting  doctrines,  which  such  an  examination 
first  puts  in  a  clear  light. 


I 


CONTENTS 

PREFACE  AND  INTRODUCTION 
TO  THE  METAPHYSICAL  ELEMENTS 
OF  ETHICS 


Preface,  365  Introduction,  366 
Note  on  Conscience,  379 


363 


PREFACE 

TO  THE  METAPHYSICAL  ELEMENTS 
OF  ETHICS 


If  there  exists  on  any  subject  a  philosophy 
(that  is,  a  system  of  rational  knowledge  based 
on  concepts),  then  there  must  also  be  for  this 
philosophy  a  system  of  pure  rational  concepts, 
independent  of  any  condition  of  intuition,  in 
other  words,  a  metaphysic.  It  may  be  asked 
whether  metaphysical  elements  are  required  also 
for  every  practical  philosophy,  which  is  the  doc¬ 
trine  of  duties,  and  therefore  also  for  Ethics, 
in  order  to  be  able  to  present  it  as  a  true  science 
(systematically),  not  merely  as  an  aggregate  of 
separate  doctrines  (fragmentarily).  As  regards 
pure  jurisprudence,  no  one  will  question  this 
requirement;  for  it  concerns  only  what  is  for¬ 
mal  in  the  elective  will,  which  has  to  be  limited 
in  its  external  relations  according  to  laws  of 
freedom;  without  regarding  any  end  which  is 
the  matter  of  this  will.  Here,  therefore,  deon¬ 
tology  is  a  mere  scientific  doctrine  ( doctrina 
scientiae).1 

Now  in  this  philosophy  (of  ethics)  it  seems 
contrary  to  the  idea  of  it  that  we  should  go 
back  to  metaphysical  elements  in  order  to  make 
the  notion  of  duty  purified  from  everything  em¬ 
pirical  (from  every  feeling)  a  motive  of  action. 
For  what  sort  of  notion  can  we  form  of  the 
mighty  power  and  herculean  strength  which 
would  be  sufficient  to  overcome  the  vice-breed¬ 
ing  inclinations,  if  Virtue  is  to  borrow  her  “arms 
from  the  armoury  of  metaphysics,”  which  is 
a  matter  of  speculation  that  only  few  men  can 

1  One  who  is  acquainted  with  practical  philosophy  is 
not,  therefore,  a  practical  philosopher.  The  latter  is  he 
who  makes  the  rational  end  the  principle  of  his  actions, 
while  at  the  same  time  he  joins  with  this  the  necessary 
knowledge  which,  as  it  aims  at  action,  must  not  be  spun 
out  into  the  most  subtile  threads  of  metaphysic,  unless 
a  legal  duty  is  in  question;  in  which  case  meum  and 
tuum  must  be  accurately  determined  in  the  balance  of 
justice,  on  the  principle  of  equality  of  action  and  re¬ 
action,  which  requires  something  like  mathematical  pro¬ 
portion,  but  not  in  the  case  of  a  mere  ethical  duty.  For 
in  this  case  the  question  is  not  only  to  know  what  it  is 
a  duty  to  do  (a  thing  which  on  account  of  the  ends  that 
all  men  naturally  have  can  be  easily  decided),  but  the 
chief  point  is  the  inner  principle  of  the  will,  namely, 
that  the  consciousness  of  this  duty  be  also  the  spring  of 
action,  in  order  that  we  may  be  able  to  say  of  the  man 
who  joins  to  his  knowledge  this  principle  of  wisdom 
that  he  is  a  practical  philosopher. 


handle?  Hence  all  ethical  teaching  in  lecture- 
rooms,  pulpits,  and  popular  books,  when  it  is 
decked  out  with  fragments  of  metaphysics,  be¬ 
comes  ridiculous.  But  it  is  not,  therefore,  use¬ 
less,  much  less  ridiculous,  to  trace  in  metaphys¬ 
ics  the  first  principles  of  ethics;  for  it  is  only  as 
a  philosopher  that  anyone  can  reach  the  first 
principles  of  this  conception  of  duty,  otherwise 
we  could  not  look  for  either  certainty  or  purity 
in  the  ethical  teaching.  To  rely  for  this  reason 
on  a  certain  feeling  which,  on  account  of  the 
effect  expected  from  it,  is  called  moral,  may, 
perhaps,  even  satisfy  the  popular  teacher,  pro¬ 
vided  he  desires  as  the  criterion  of  a  moral  duty 
to  consider  the  problem:  “If  everyone  in  every 
case  made  your  maxim  the  universal  law,  how 
could  this  law  be  consistent  with  itself?”  But  if 
it  were  merely  feeling  that  made  it  our  duty  to 
take  this  principle  as  a  criterion,  then  this  would 
not  be  dictated  by  reason,  but  only  adopted  in¬ 
stinctively  and  therefore  blindly. 

But  in  fact,  whatever  men  imagine,  no  moral 
principle  is  based  on  any  feeling,  but  such  a 
principle  is  really  nothing  else  than  an  obscurely 
conceived  metaphysic  which  inheres  in  every 
man’s  reasoning  faculty;  as  the  teacher  will 
easily  find  who  tries  to  catechize  his  pupils  in 
the  Socratic  method  about  the  imperative  of 
duty  and  its  application  to  the  moral  judgement 
of  his  actions.  The  mode  of  stating  it  need  not 
be  always  metaphysical,  and  the  language  need 
not  necessarily  be  scholastic,  unless  the  pupil  is 
to  be  trained  to  be  a  philosopher.  But  the  thought 
must  go  back  to  the  elements  of  metaphysics, 
without  which  we  cannot  expect  any  certainty 
or  purity,  or  even  motive  power  in  ethics. 

If  we  deviate  from  this  principle  and  begin 
from  pathological,  or  purely  sensitive,  or  even 
moral  feeling  (from  what  is  subjectively  prac¬ 
tical  instead  of  what  is  objective),  that  is,  from 
the  matter  of  the  will,  the  end,  not  from  its 
form  that  is  the  law,  in  order  from  thence  to 
determine  duties;  then,  certainly,  there  are  no 
metaphysical  elements  of  ethics,  for  feeling  by 
whatever  it  may  be  excited  is  always  physical. 


366  METAPHYSICAL  ELEMENTS 


But  then  ethical  teaching,  whether  in  schools, 
or  lecture-rooms,  etc.,  is  corrupted  in  its  source. 
For  it  is  not  a  matter  of  indifference  by  what 
motives  or  means  one  is  led  to  a  good  purpose 
(the  obedience  to  duty).  However  disgusting, 
then,  metaphysics  may  appear  to  those  pretend¬ 
ed  philosophers  who  dogmatize  oracularly ,  or 
even  brilliantly,  about  the  doctrine  of  duty,  it 
is,  nevertheless,  an  indispensable  duty  for  those 
who  oppose  it  to  go  back  to  its  principles  even 
in  ethics,  and  to  begin  by  going  to  school  on  its 
benches. 

We  may  fairly  wonder  how,  after  all  previous 
explanations  of  the  principles  of  duty,  so  far  as 
it  is  derived  from  pure  reason,  it  was  still  pos¬ 
sible  to  reduce  it  again  to  a  doctrine  of  happi¬ 
ness;  in  such  a  way,  however,  that  a  certain 
moral  happiness  not  resting  on  empirical  causes 
was  ultimately  arrived  at,  a  self-contradictory 
nonentity.  In  fact,  when  the  thinking  man  has 
conquered  the  temptations  to  vice,  and  is  con¬ 
scious  of  having  done  his  (often  hard)  duty,  he 
finds  himself  in  a  state  of  peace  and  satisfaction 
which  may  well  be  called  happiness ,  in  which 
virtue  is  her  own  reward.  Now,  says  the  eudae- 
monist,  this  delight,  this  happiness,  is  the  real 
motive  of  his  acting  virtuously.  The  notion  of 
duty,  says  he,  does  not  immediately  determine 
his  will;  it  is  only  by  means  oj  the  happiness  in 
prospect  that  he  is  moved  to  his  duty.  Now,  on 
the  other  hand,  since  he  can  promise  himself 
this  reward  of  virtue  only  from  the  conscious¬ 
ness  of  having  done  his  duty,  it  is  clear  that  the 
latter  must  have  preceded:  that  is,  he  must  feel 
himself  bound  to  do  his  duty  before  he  thinks, 
and  without  thinking,  that  happiness  will  be  the 
consequence  of  obedience  to  duty.  He  is  thus 
involved  in  a  circle  in  his  assignment  of  cause 
and  effect.  He  can  only  hope  to  be  happy  if  he 
is  conscious  of  his  obedience  to  duty:  and  he 
can  only  be  moved  to  obedience  to  duty  if  he 
foresees  that  he  will  thereby  become  happy.  But 
in  this  reasoning  there  is  also  a  co?itradiction. 
For,  on  the  one  side,  he  must  obey  his  duty, 
without  asking  what  effect  this  will  have  on  his 
happiness,  consequently,  from  a  moral  princi¬ 
ple;  on  the  other  side,  he  can  only  recognize 
something  as  his  duty  when  he  can  reckon  on 
happiness  which  will  accrue  to  him  thereby,  and 
consequently  on  a  pathological  principle,  which 
is  the  direct  opposite  of  the  former. 

I  have  in  another  place  (the  Berlin  Monats- 
schrift J),  reduced,  as  I  believe,  to  the  simplest 

i  [The  essay  referred  to  is  that  “On  the  Radical 
Evil  in  Human  Nature.”] 


expressions  the  distinction  between  pathological 
and  moral  pleasure.  The  pleasure,  namely, 
which  must  precede  the  obedience  to  the  law  in 
order  that  one  may  act  according  to  the  law  is 
pathological ,  and  the  process  follows  the  physi¬ 
cal  order  of  nature;  that  which  must  be  preced¬ 
ed  by  the  law  in  order  that  it  may  be  felt  is  in 
the  moral  order.  If  this  distinction  is  not  ob¬ 
served;  if  eudaemonism  (the  principle  of  happi¬ 
ness)  is  adopted  as  the  principle  instead  of 
eleuthero?iomy  (the  principle  of  freedom  of  the 
inner  legislation),  the  consequence  is  the  eu¬ 
thanasia  (quiet  death)  of  all  morality. 

The  cause  of  these  mistakes  is  no  other  than 
the  following:  Those  who  are  accustomed  only 
to  physiological  explanations  will  not  admit  into 
their  heads  the  categorical  imperative  from 
which  these  laws  dictatorially  proceed,  notwith¬ 
standing  that  they  feel  themselves  irresistibly 
forced  by  it.  Dissatisfied  at  not  being  able  to 
explain  what  lies  wholly  beyond  that  sphere, 
namely,  freedom  of  the  elective  will,  elevating 
as  is  this  privilege,  that  man  has  of  being  capa¬ 
ble  of  such  an  idea.  They  are  stirred  up  by  the 
proud  claims  of  speculative  reason,  which  feels 
its  power  so  strongly  in  the  fields,  just  as  if  they 
were  allies  leagued  in  defence  of  the  omnipo¬ 
tence  of  theoretical  reason  and  roused  by  a  gen¬ 
eral  call  to  arms  to  resist  that  idea;  and  thus 
they  are  at  present,  and  perhaps  for  a  long  time 
to  come,  though  ultimately  in  vain,  to  attack 
the  moral  concept  of  freedom  and  if  possible 
render  it  doubtful. 

INTRODUCTION  to  the  Metaphysical 
Elements  of  Ethics 

Ethics  in  ancient  times  signified  moral  philoso¬ 
phy  ( philosophia  moralis)  generally,  which  was 
also  called  the  doctrine  of  duties.  Subsequently 
it  was  found  advisable  to  confine  this  name  to 
a  part  of  moral  philosophy,  namely,  to  the  doc¬ 
trine  of  duties  which  are  not  subject  to  external 
laws  (for  which  in  German  the  name  Tugen - 
dlehre  was  found  suitable).  Thus  the  system  of 
general  deontology  is  divided  into  that  of  juris¬ 
prudence  (jurisprude?itia) ,  which  is  capable  of 
external  laws,  and  of  ethics,  which  is  not  thus 
capable,  and  we  may  let  this  division  stand. 

I.  Exposition  of  the  Conception  of  Ethics 

The  notion  of  duty  is  in  itself  already  the  no¬ 
tion  of  a  constraint  of  the  free  elective  will  by 
the  law;  whether  this  constraint  be  an  exteryial 
one  or  be  self -constraint.  The  moral  imperative, 
by  its  categorical  (the  unconditional  ought )  an- 


OF  ETHICS 


nounces  this  constraint,  which  therefore  does 
not  apply  to  all  rational  beings  (for  there  may 
also  be  holy  beings),  but  applies  to  men  as  ra¬ 
tional  physical  beings  who  are  unholy  enough  to 
be  seduced  by  pleasure  to  the  transgression  of 
the  moral  law,  although  they  themselves  recog¬ 
nize  its  authority;  and  when  they  do  obey  it,  to 
obey  it  unwillingly  (with  resistance  of  their  in¬ 
clination)  ;  and  it  is  in  this  that  the  constraint 
properly  consists.1  Now,  as  man  is  a  free 
(moral)  being,  the  notion  of  duty  can  contain 
only  self -constraint  (by  the  idea  of  the  law  it¬ 
self),  when  we  look  to  the  internal  determina¬ 
tion  of  the  will  (the  spring),  for  thus  only  is  it 
possible  to  combine  that  constraint  (even  if  it 
were  external)  with  the  freedom  of  the  elective 
will.  The  notion  of  duty  then  must  be  an  ethical 
one. 

The  impulses  of  nature,  then,  contain  hin¬ 
drances  to  the  fulfilment  of  duty  in  the  mind  of 
man,  and  resisting  forces,  some  of  them  power¬ 
ful;  and  he  must  judge  himself  able  to  combat 
these  and  to  conquer  them  by  means  of  reason, 
not  in  the  future,  but  in  the  present,  simulta¬ 
neously  with  the  thought;  he  must  judge  that  he 
can  do  what  the  law  unconditionally  commands 
that  he  ought. 

Now  the  power  and  resolved  purpose  to  resist 
a  strong  but  unjust  opponent  is  called  fortitude 
( fortitudo ),  and  when  concerned  with  the  oppo¬ 
nent  of  the  moral  character  within  us,  it  is  vir¬ 
tue  ( virtus ,  fortitudo  moralis).  Accordingly, 
general  deontology,  in  that  part  which  brings 
not  external,  but  internal,  freedom  under  laws 
is  the  doctrine  of  virtue. 

Jurisprudence  had  to  do  only  with  the  formal 
condition  of  external  freedom  (the  condition 
of  consistency  with  itself,  if  its  maxim  became 
a  universal  law),  that  is,  with  law.  Ethics,  on 
the  contrary,  supplies  us  with  a  matter  (an  ob¬ 
ject  of  the  free  elective  will),  an  end  of  pure 
reason  which  is  at  the  same  time  conceived  as 
an  objectively  necessary  end,  i.e.,  as  duty  for 

1  Man,  however,  as  at  the  same  time  a  moral  being, 
when  he  considers  himself  objectively,  which  he  is  quali¬ 
fied  to  do  by  his  pure  practical  reason,  (i.e.,  according 
to  humanity  in  his  own  person),  finds  himself  holy 
enough  to  transgress  the  law  only  unwillingly ;  for  there 
is  no  man  so  depraved  who  in  this  transgression  would 
not  feel  a  resistance  and  an  abhorrence  of  himself,  so 
that  he  must  put  a  force  on  himself.  It  is  impossible  to 
explain  the  phenomenon  that  at  this  parting  of  the  ways 
(where  the  beautiful  fable  places  Hercules  between  vir¬ 
tue  and  sensuality)  man  shows  more  propensity  to  obey 
inclination  than  the  law.  For,  we  can  only  explain  what 
happens  by  tracing  it  to  a  cause  according  to  physical 
laws;  but  then  we  should  not  be  able  to  conceive  the 
elective  will  as  free.  Xow  this  mutually  opposed  self¬ 
constraint  and  the  inevitability  of  it  makes  us  recognize 
the  incomprehensible  property  of  freedom. 


367 

all  men.  For,  as  the  sensible  inclinations  mislead 
us  to  ends  (which  are  the  matter  of  the  elec¬ 
tive  will)  that  may  contradict  duty,  the  legis¬ 
lating  reason  cannot  otherwise  guard  against 
their  influence  than  by  an  opposite  moral  end, 
which  therefore  must  be  given  a  priori  inde¬ 
pendently  on  inclination. 

An  end  is  an  object  of  the  elective  will  (of  a 
rational  being)  by  the  idea  of  which  this  will  is 
determined  to  an  action  for  the  production  of 
this  object.  Now  I  may  be  forced  by  others  to 
actions  which  are  directed  to  an  end  as  means, 
but  I  cannot  be  forced  to  have  an  end;  I  can 
only  make  something  an  end  to  myself.  If,  how¬ 
ever,  I  am  also  bound  to  make  something  which 
lies  in  the  notions  of  practical  reason  an  end  to 
myself,  and  therefore  besides  the  formal  deter¬ 
mining  principle  of  the  elective  will  (as  con¬ 
tained  in  law)  to  have  also  a  material  principle, 
an  end  which  can  be  opposed  to  the  end  derived 
from  sensible  impulses;  then  this  gives  the  no¬ 
tion  of  an  end  which  is  in  itself  a  duty.  The  doc¬ 
trine  of  this  cannot  belong  to  jurisprudence, 
but  to  ethics,  since  this  alone  includes  in  its 
conception  self-constraint  according  to  moral 
laws. 

For  this  reason,  ethics  may  also  be  defined 
as  the  system  of  the  ends  of  the  pure  practical 
reason.  The  two  parts  of  moral  philosophy  are 
distinguished  as  treating  resepectively  of  ends 
and  of  duties  of  constraint.  That  ethics  contains 
duties  to  the  observance  of  which  one  cannot  be 
(physically)  forced  by  others,  is  merely  the 
consequence  of  this,  that  it  is  a  doctrine  of  ends, 
since  to  be  forced  to  have  ends  or  to  set  them 
before  one’s  self  is  a  contradiction. 

Now  that  ethics  is  a  doctrine  of  virtue  {doc- 
trina  officiorum  virtutis)  follows  from  the  defi¬ 
nition  of  virtue  given  above  compared  with 
the  obligation,  the  peculiarity  of  which  has  just 
been  shown.  There  is  in  fact  no  other  determi¬ 
nation  of  the  elective  will,  except  that  to  an  end, 
which  in  the  very  notion  of  it  implies  that  I 
cannot  even  physically  be  forced  to  it  by  the 
elective  will  of  others.  Another  may  indeed 
force  me  to  do  something  which  is  not  my  end 
(but  only  means  to  the  end  of  another),  but  he 
cannot  force  me  to  make  it  my  own  end,  and 
yet  I  can  have  no  end  except  of  my  own  mak¬ 
ing.  The  latter  supposition  would  be  a  con¬ 
tradiction — an  act  of  freedom  which  yet  at  the 
same  time  would  not  be  free.  But  there  is  no 
contradiction  in  setting  before  one’s  self  an  end 
which  is  also  a  duty:  for  in  this  case  I  constrain 
myself,  and  this  is  quite  consistent  with  free- 


METAPHYSICAL  ELEMENTS 


368 

dom.1  But  how  is  such  an  end  possible?  That 
is  now  the  question.  For  the  possibility  of  the 
notion  of  the  thing  (viz.,  that  it  is  not  self-con¬ 
tradictory)  is  not  enough  to  prove  the  possibil¬ 
ity  of  the  thing  itself  (the  objective  reality  of 
the  notion). 

II.  Exposition  of  the  Notion  of  an  End 
which  is  also  a  Duty 

We  can  conceive  the  relation  of  end  to  duty 
in  two  ways;  either  starting  from  the  end  to 
find  the  maxim  of  the  dutiful  actions;  or  con¬ 
versely,  setting  out  from  this  to  find  the  end 
which  is  also  duty.  Jurisprudence  proceeds  in 
the  former  way.  It  is  left  to  everyone’s  free 
elective  will  what  end  he  will  choose  for  his  ac¬ 
tion.  But  its  maxim  is  determined  a  priori ; 
namely,  that  the  freedom  of  the  agent  must  be 
consistent  with  the  freedom  of  every  other  ac¬ 
cording  to  a  universal  law. 

Ethics,  however,  proceeds  in  the  opposite 
way.  It  cannot  start  from  the  ends  which  the 
man  may  propose  to  himself,  and  hence  give  di¬ 
rections  as  to  the  maxims  he  should  adopt,  that 
is,  as  to  his  duty;  for  that  would  be  to  take  em¬ 
pirical  principles  of  maxims,  and  these  could 
not  give  any  notion  of  duty;  since  this,  the  cat¬ 
egorical  ought ,  has  its  root  in  pure  reason  alone. 
Indeed,  if  the  maxims  were  to  be  adopted  in  ac¬ 
cordance  with  those  ends  (which  are  all  selfish), 
we  could  not  properly  speak  of  the  notion  of 
duty  at  all.  Hence  in  ethics  the  notion  of  duty 
must  lead  to  ends,  and  must  on  moral  principles 
give  the  foundation  of  maxims  with  respect  to 
the  ends  which  we  ought  to  propose  to  ourselves. 

Setting  aside  the  question  what  sort  of  end 
that  is  which  is  in  itself  a  duty,  and  how  such 
an  end  is  possible,  it  is  here  only  necessary  to 
show  that  a  duty  of  this  kind  is  called  a  duty  of 
virtue ,  and  why  it  is  so  called. 

To  every  duty  corresponds  a  right  of  action 
( facultas  moralis  gcneratim),  but  all  duties  do 
not  imply  a  corresponding  right  ( facultas  juri- 
dica)  of  another  to  compel  any  one,  but  only 
the  duties  called  legal  duties.  Similarly  to  all 
ethical  obligation  corresponds  the  notion  of  vir¬ 
tue,  but  it  does  not  follow  that  all  ethical  duties 

1  The  less  a  man  can  be  physically  forced,  and  the 
more  he  can  be  morally  forced  (by  the  mere  idea  of 
duty),  so  much  the  freer  he  is.  The  man,  for  example, 
who  is  of  sufficiently  firm  resolution  and  strong  mind 
not  to  give  up  an  enjoyment  which  he  has  resolved  on, 
however  much  loss  is  shown  as  resulting  therefrom,  and 
who  yet  desists  from  his  purpose  unhesitatingly,  though 
very  reluctantly,  when  he  finds  that  it  would  cause  him 
to  neglect  an  official  duty  or  a  sick  father;  this  man 
proves  his  freedom  in  the  highest  degree  by  this  very 
thing,  that  he  cannot  resist  the  voice  of  duty. 


are  duties  of  virtue.  Those,  in  fact,  are  not  so 
which  do  not  concern  so  much  a  certain  end 
(matter,  object  of  the  elective  will),  but  merely 
that  which  is  formal  in  the  moral  determination 
of  the  will  (e.g.,  that  the  dutiful  action  must 
also  be  done  from  duty).  It  is  only  an  end  which 
is  also  duty  that  can  be  called  a  duty  of  virtue. 
Hence  there  are  several  of  the  latter  kind  (and 
thus  there  are  distinct  virtues) ;  on  the  con¬ 
trary,  there  is  only  one  duty  of  the  former 
kind,  but  it  is  one  which  is  valid  for  all  actions 
(only  one  virtuous  disposition). 

The  duty  of  virtue  is  essentially  distin¬ 
guished  from  the  duty  of  justice  in  this  respect; 
that  it  is  morally  possible  to  be  externally  com¬ 
pelled  to  the  latter,  whereas  the  former  rests  on 
free  self-constraint  only.  For  finite  holy  beings 
(which  cannot  even  be  tempted  to  the  violation 
of  duty)  there  is  no  doctrine  of  virtue,  but  only 
moral  philosophy,  the  latter  being  an  autonomy 
of  practical  reason,  whereas  the  former  is  also 
an  autocracy  of  it.  That  is,  it  includes  a  con¬ 
sciousness — not  indeed  immediately  perceived, 
but  rightly  concluded,  from  the  moral  categori¬ 
cal  imperative — of  the  power  to  become  master 
of  one’s  inclinations  which  resist  the  law;  so 
that  human  morality  in  its  highest  stage  can  yet 
be  nothing  more  than  virtue;  even  if  it  were 
quite  pure  (perfectly  free  from  the  influence  of 
a  spring  foreign  to  duty),  a  state  which  is  poeti¬ 
cally  personified  under  the  name  of  the  wise 
man  (as  an  ideal  to  which  one  should  continu¬ 
ally  approximate). 

Virtue,  however,  is  not  to  be  defined  and  es¬ 
teemed  merely  as  habit)  and  (as  it  is  expressed 
in  the  prize  essay  of  Cochius)  as  a  long  custom 
acquired  by  practice  of  morally  good  actions. 
For,  if  this  is  not  an  effect  of  well-resolved  and 
firm  principles  ever  more  and  more  purified, 
then,  like  any  other  mechanical  arrangement 
brought  about  by  technical  practical  reason,  it 
is  neither  armed  for  all  circumstances  nor  ade¬ 
quately  secured  against  the  change  that  may 
be  wrought  by  new  allurements. 

REMARK 

To  virtue  =  +  a  is  opposed  as  its  logical  con¬ 
tradictory  ( contradictorie  oppositum)  the  neg¬ 
ative  lack  of  virtue  (moral  weakness)  =  o;  but 
vice  =  —  a  is  its  contrary  ( contrarie  s.  realiter 
oppositum ) ;  and  it  is  not  merely  a  needless 
question  but  an  offensive  one  to  ask  whether 
great  crimes  do  not  perhaps  demand  more 
strength  of  mind  than  great  virtues.  For  by 
strength  of  mind  we  understand  the  strength  of 
purpose  of  a  man,  as  a  being  endowed  with  free- 


OF  ETHICS 


dom,  and  consequently  so  far  as  he  is  master  of 
himself  (in  his  senses)  and  therefore  in  a 
healthy  condition  of  mind.  But  great  crimes  are 
paroxysm^,  the  very  sight  of  which  makes  the 
man  of  healthy  mind  shudder.  The  question 
would  therefore  be  something  like  this:  whether 
a  man  in  a  fit  of  madness  can  have  more  physi¬ 
cal  strength  than  if  he  is  in  his  senses;  and  we 
may  admit  this,  without  on  that  account  ascrib¬ 
ing  to  him  more  strength  of  mind,  if  by  mind 
we  understand  the  vital  principle  of  man  in  the 
free  use  of  his  powers.  For  since  those  crimes 
have  their  ground  merely  in  the  power  of  the 
inclinations  that  weaken  reason,  which  does  not 
prove  strength  of  mind,  this  question  would  be 
nearly  the  same  as  the  question  whether  a  man 
in  a  fit  of  illness  can  show  more  strength  than 
in  a  healthy  condition;  and  this  may  be  directly 
denied,  since  the  want  of  health,  which  consists 
in  the  proper  balance  of  all  the  bodily  forces  of 
the  man,  is  a  weakness  in  the  system  of  these 
forces,  by  which  system  alone  we  can  estimate 
absolute  health. 

III.  Of  the  Reason  for  conceiving  an  End 
which  is  also  a  Duty 

An  end  is  an  object  of  the  free  elective  will, 
the  idea  of  which  determines  this  will  to  an  ac¬ 
tion  by  which  the  object  is  produced.  Accord¬ 
ingly  every  action  has  its  end,  and  as  no  one 
can  have  an  end  without  himself  making  the  ob¬ 
ject  of  his  elective  will  his  end,  hence  to  have 
some  end  of  actions  is  an  act  of  the  freedom 
of  the  agent,  not  an  affect  of  physical  nature. 
Now,  since  this  act  which  determines  an  end  is 
a  practical  principle  which  commands  not  the 
means  (therefore  not  conditionally)  but  the 
end  itself  (therefore  unconditionally),  hence  it 
is  a  categorical  imperative  of  pure  practical  rea¬ 
son  and  one,  therefore,  which  combines  a  con¬ 
cept  of  duty  with  that  of  an  end  in  general. 

Now  there  must  be  such  an  end  and  a  categor¬ 
ical  imperative  corresponding  to  it.  For  since 
there  are  free  actions,  there  must  also  be  ends 
to  which  as  an  object  those  actions  are  directed. 
Amongst  these  ends  there  must  also  be  some 
which  are  at  the  same  time  (that  is,  by  their 
very  notion)  duties.  For  if  there  were  none 
such,  then  since  no  actions  can  be  without  an 
end,  all  ends  which  practical  reason  might  have 
would  be  valid  only  as  means  to  other  ends,  and 
a  categorical  imperative  would  be  impossible;  a 
supposition  which  destroys  all  moral  philosophy. 

Here,  therefore,  we  treat  not  of  ends  which 
man  actually  makes  to  himself  in  accordance 


369 

with  the  sensible  impulses  of  his  nature,  but  of 
objects  of  the  free  elective  will  under  its  own 
laws — objects  which  he  ought  to  make  his  end. 
We  may  call  the  former  technical  (subjective), 
properly  pragmatical,  including  the  rules  of  pru¬ 
dence  in  the  choice  of  its  ends;  but  the  latter 
we  must  call  the  moral  (objective)  doctrine  of 
ends.  This  distinction  is,  however,  superfluous 
here,  since  moral  philosophy  already  by  its  very 
notion  is  clearly  separated  from  the  doctrine  of 
physical  nature  (in  the  present  instance,  anthro¬ 
pology).  The  latter  resting  on  empirical  princi¬ 
ples,  whereas  the  moral  doctrine  of  ends  which 
treats  of  duties  rests  on  principles  given  a  priori 
in  pure  practical  reason. 

IV.  What  are  the  Ends  which  are  also  Duties ? 

They  are:  A.  Our  own  Perfection,  B. 
Happiness  of  Others. 

We  cannot  invert  these  and  make  on  one  side 
our  own  happiness,  and  on  the  other  the  per¬ 
fection  of  others,  ends  which  should  be  in  them¬ 
selves  duties  for  the  same  person. 

For  one's  own  happiness  is,  no  doubt,  an  end 
that  all  men  have  (by  virtue  of  the  impulse  of 
their  nature),  but  this  end  cannot  without  con¬ 
tradiction  be  regarded  as  a  duty.  What  a  man 
of  himself  inevitably  wills  does  not  come  under 
the  notion  of  duty ,  for  this  is  a  constraint  to  an 
end  reluctantly  adopted.  It  is,  therefore,  a  con¬ 
tradiction  to  say  that  a  man  is  in  duty  bound 
to  advance  his  own  happiness  with  all  his  power. 

It  is  likewise  a  contradiction  to  make  the 
perfection  of  another  my  end,  and  to  regard 
myself  as  in  duty  bound  to  promote  it.  For  it  is 
just  in  this  that  the  perfection  of  another  man 
as  a  person  consists,  namely,  that  he  is  able  of 
himself  to  set  before  him  his  own  end  according 
to  his  own  notions  of  duty;  and  it  is  a  contra¬ 
diction  to  require  (to  make  it  a  duty  for  me) 
that  I  should  do  something  which  no  other  but 
himself  can  do. 

V.  Explanation  of  these  two  Notions 
A.  Our  own  Perfection 

The  word  perfection  is  liable  to  many  miscon¬ 
ceptions.  It  is  sometimes  understood  as  a  no¬ 
tion  belonging  to  transcendental  philosophy; 
viz.,  the  notion  of  the  totality  of  the  manifold 
which  taken  together  constitutes  a  thing ;  some¬ 
times,  again,  it  is  understood  as  belonging  to 
teleology ,  so  that  it  signifies  the  correspondence 
of  the  properties  of  a  thing  to  an  end.  Per¬ 
fection  in  the  former  sense  might  be  called 
quantitative  (material),  in  the  latter  qualitative 


METAPHYSICAL  ELEMENTS 


(formal)  perfection.  The  former  can  be  one 
only,  for  the  whole  of  what  belongs  to  the  one 
thing  is  one.  But  of  the  latter  there  may  be  sev¬ 
eral  in  one  thing;  and  it  is  of  the  latter  property 
that  we  here  treat. 

When  it  is  said  of  the  perfection  that  be¬ 
longs  to  man  generally  (properly  speaking,  to 
humanity),  that  it  is  in  itself  a  duty  to  make 
this  our  end,  it  must  be  placed  in  that  which 
may  be  the  effect  of  one’s  deed,  not  in  that 
which  is  merely  an  endowment  for  which  we 
have  to  thank  nature;  for  otherwise  it  would 
not  be  duty.  Consequently,  it  can  be  nothing 
else  than  the  cultivation  of  one's  power  (or  nat¬ 
ural  capacity)  and  also  of  one’s  will  (moral 
disposition)  to  satisfy  the  requirement  of  duty 
in  general.  The  supreme  element  in  the  former 
(the  power)  is  the  understanding,  it  being  the 
faculty  of  concepts,  and,  therefore,  also  of  those 
concepts  which  refer  to  duty.  First  it  is  his 
duty  to  labour  to  raise  himself  out  of  the  rude¬ 
ness  of  his  nature,  out  of  his  animal  nature 
more  and  more  to  humanity,  by  which  alone  he 
is  capable  of  setting  before  him  ends  to  supply 
the  defects  of  his  ignorance  by  instruction,  and 
to  correct  his  errors;  he  is  not  merely  coun¬ 
selled  to  do  this  by  reason  as  technically  practi¬ 
cal.  with  a  view  to  his  purposes  of  other  kinds 
(as  art),  but  reason,  as  morally  practical,  abso¬ 
lutely  commands  him  to  do  it,  and  makes  this 
end  his  duty,  in  order  that  he  may  be  worthy  of 
the  humanity  that  dwells  in  him.  Secondly,  to 
carry  the  cultivation  of  his  will  up  to  the  purest 
virtuous  disposition,  that,  namely,  in  which  the 
law  is  also  the  spring  of  his  dutiful  actions,  and 
to  obey  it  from  duty,  for  this  is  internal  morally 
practical  perfection.  This  is  called  the  moral 
sense  (as  it  were  a  special  sense,  sensus  mor - 
alis ),  because  it  is  a  feeling  of  the  effect  which 
the  legislative  will  within  himself  exercises  on 
the  faculty  of  acting  accordingly.  This  is,  in¬ 
deed,  often  misused  fanatically,  as  though  (like 
the  genius  of  Socrates)  it  preceded  reason,  or 
even  could  dispense  with  judgement  of  reason; 
but  still  it  is  a  moral  perfection,  making  every 
special  end,  which  is  also  a  duty,  one’s  own  end. 

B.  Happiness  of  Others 

It  is  inevitable  for  human  nature  that  a  man 
should  wish  and  seek  for  happiness,  that  is,  sat¬ 
isfaction  with  his  condition,  with  certainty  of 
the  continuance  of  this  satisfaction.  But  for  this 
very  reason  it  is  not  an  end  that  is  also  a  duty. 
Some  writers  still  make  a  distinction  between 
moral  and  physical  happiness  (the  former  con¬ 
sisting  in  satisfaction  with  one’s  person  and 


moral  behaviour,  that  is,  with  what  one  does ; 
the  other  in  satisfaction  with  that  which  nature 
confers,  consequently  with  what  one  enjoys  as 
a  foreign  gift).  Without  at  present  censuring 
the  misuse  of  the  word  (which  even  involves  a 
contradiction),  it  must  be  observed  that  the 
feeling  of  the  former  belongs  solely  to  the  pre¬ 
ceding  head,  namely,  perfection.  For  he  who  is 
to  feel  himself  happy  in  the  mere  consciousness 
of  his  uprightness  already  possesses  that  per¬ 
fection  which  in  the  previous  section  was  de¬ 
fined  as  that  end  which  is  also  duty. 

If  happiness,  then,  is  in  question,  which  it  is 
to  be  my  duty  to  promote  as  my  end,  it  must  be 
the  happiness  of  other  men  whose  (permitted) 
end  I  hereby  make  also  mine .  It  still  remains 
left  to  themselves  to  decide  what  they  shall 
reckon  as  belonging  to  their  happiness;  only 
that  it  is  in  my  power  to  decline  many  things 
which  they  so  reckon,  but  which  I  do  not  so  re¬ 
gard,  supposing  that  they  have  no  right  to  de¬ 
mand  it  from  me  as  their  own.  A  plausible  ob¬ 
jection  often  advanced  against  the  division  of 
duties  above  adopted  consists  in  setting  over 
against  that  end  a  supposed  obligation  to  study 
my  ow?i  (physical)  happiness,  and  thus  making 
this,  which  is  my  natural  and  merely  subjective 
end,  my  duty  (and  objective  end).  This  re¬ 
quires  to  be  cleared  up. 

Adversity,  pain,  and  want  are  great  tempta¬ 
tions  to  transgression  of  one’s  duty;  according¬ 
ly  it  would  seem  that  strength,  health,  a  com¬ 
petence,  and  welfare  generally,  which  are  op¬ 
posed  to  that  influence,  may  also  be  regarded 
as  ends  that  are  also  duties;  that  is,  that  it  is  a 
duty  to  promote  our  own  happiness  not  merely 
to  make  that  of  others  our  end.  But  in  that  case 
the  end  is  not  happiness  but  the  morality  of  the 
agent;  and  happiness  is  only  the  means  of  re¬ 
moving  the  hindrances  to  morality;  permitted 
means,  since  no  one  has  a  right  to  demand  from 
me  the  sacrifice  of  my  not  immoral  ends.  It  is 
not  directly  a  duty  to  seek  a  competence  for  one’s 
self;  but  indirectly  it  may  be  so;  namely,  in  or¬ 
der  to  guard  against  poverty  which  is  a  great 
temptation  to  vice.  But  then  it  is  not  my  happi¬ 
ness  but  my  morality,  to  maintain  which  in  its 
integrity  is  at  once  my  end  and  my  duty. 

VI.  Ethics  does  not  supply  Laws  for  Actions 
( which  is  done  by  Jurisprudence) ,  but 
only  for  the  Maxims  of  Action 

The  notion  of  duty  stands  in  immediate  rela¬ 
tion  to  a  law  (even  though  I  abstract  from  ev¬ 
ery  end  which  is  the  matter  of  the  law);  as  is 
shown  by  the  formal  principle  of  duty  in  the 


OF  ETHICS 


categorical  imperative:  “Act  so  that  the  maxims 
of  thy  action  might  become  a  universal  law.” 
But  in  ethics  this  is  conceived  as  the  law  of  thy 
own  will,  not  of  will  in  general,  which  might  be 
that  of  others;  for  in  the  latter  case  it  would 
give  rise  to  a  judicial  duty  which  does  not  be¬ 
long  to  the  domain  of  ethics.  In  ethics,  maxims 
are  regarded  as  those  subjective  laws  which 
merely  have  the  specific  character  of  universal 
legislation,  which  is  only  a  negative  principle 
(not  to  contradict  a  law  in  general).  How,  then, 
can  there  be  further  a  law  for  the  maxims  of 
actions? 

It  is  the  notion  of  an  end  which  is  also  a  duty, 
a  notion  peculiar  to  ethics,  that  alone  is  the 
foundation  of  a  law  for  the  maxims  of  actions; 
by  making  the  subjective  end  (that  which  every 
one  has)  subordinate  to  the  objective  end  (that 
which  every  one  ought  to  make  his  own).  The 
imperative:  “Thou  shalt  make  this  or  that  thy 
end  (e.  g.,  the  happiness  of  others)”  applies  to 
the  matter  of  the  elective  will  (an  object).  Now 
since  no  free  action  is  possible,  without  the 
agent  having  in  view  in  it  some  end  (as  matter 
of  his  elective  will),  it  follows  that,  if  there  is 
an  end  which  is  also  a  duty,  the  maxims  of  ac¬ 
tions  which  are  means  to  ends  must  contain  only 
the  condition  of  fitness  for  a  possible  universal 
legislation:  on  the  other  hand,  the  end  which 
is  also  a  duty  can  make  it  a  law  that  we  should 
have  such  a  maxim,  whilst  for  the  maxim  itself 
the  possibility  of  agreeing  with  a  universal  leg¬ 
islation  is  sufficient. 

For  maxims  of  actions  may  be  arbitrary ,  and 
are  only  limited  by  the  condition  of  fitness  for 
a  universal  legislation,  which  is  the  formal  prin¬ 
ciple  of  actions.  But  a  law  abolishes  the  arbi¬ 
trary  character  of  actions,  and  is  by  this  dis¬ 
tinguished  from  recommendation  (in  which  one 
only  desires  to  know  the  best  means  to  an  end). 

VII.  Ethical  Duties  are  of  indeterminate , 
Juridical  Duties  of  strict ,  Obligation 

This  proposition  is  a  consequence  of  the  fore¬ 
going;  for  if  the  law  can  only  command  the 
maxim  of  the  actions,  not  the  actions  them¬ 
selves,  this  is  a  sign  that  it  leaves  in  the  observ¬ 
ance  of  it  a  latitude  ( latitudo )  for  the  elective 
will;  that  is,  it  cannot  definitely  assign  how  and 
how  much  we  should  do  by  the  action  towards 
the  end  which  is  also  duty.  But  by  an  indeter¬ 
minate  duty  is  not  meant  a  permission  to  make 
exceptions  from  the  maxim  of  the  actions,  but 
only  the  permission  to  limit  one  maxim  of  duty 
by  another  (e.  g.,  the  general  love  of  our  neigh¬ 
bour  by  the  love  of  parents) ;  and  this  in  fact 


37i 

enlarges  the  field  for  the  practice  of  virtue.  The 
more  indeterminate  the  duty,  and  the  more  im¬ 
perfect  accordingly  the  obligation  of  the  man 
to  the  action,  and  the  closer  he  nevertheless 
brings  this  maxim  of  obedience  thereto  (in  his 
own  mind)  to  the  strict  duty  (of  justice),  so 
much  the  more  perfect  is  his  virtuous  action. 

Hence  it  is  only  imperfect  duties  that  are 
duties  of  virtue.  The  fulfilment  of  them  is  merit 
( meritum )  =  +  a;  but  their  transgression  is 
not  necessarily  demerit  ( demeritum )  =  —  a, 
but  only  moral  unworth  =  0,  unless  the  agent 
made  it  a  principle  not  to  conform  to  those 
duties.  The  strength  of  purpose  in  the  former 
case  is  alone  properly  called  virtue  [ Tugend~] 
( virtus ) ;  the  weakness  in  the  latter  case  is  not 
vice  ( vitium ),  but  rather  only  lack  of  virtue 
[Untugend ],  a  want  of  moral  strength  ( defec - 
tus  moralis).  (As  the  word  Tugend  is  derived 
from  taugen  [to  be  good  for  something],  Untu¬ 
gend  by  its  etymology  signifies  good  for  noth¬ 
ing.)  Every  action  contrary  to  duty  is  called 
transgression  (peccatum) .  Deliberate  transgres¬ 
sion  which  has  become  a  principle  is  what  prop¬ 
erly  constitutes  what  is  called  vice  {vitium). 

Although  the  conformity  of  actions  to  jus¬ 
tice  (i.e.,  to  be  an  upright  man)  is  nothing  mer¬ 
itorious,  yet  the  conformity  of  the  maxim  of 
such  actions  regarded  as  duties,  that  is,  rever¬ 
ence  for  justice  is  meritorious.  For  by  this  the 
man  makes  the  right  of  humanity  or  of  men  his 
own  end,  and  thereby  enlarges  his  notion  of 
duty  beyond  that  of  indebtedness  {officium 
debiti ),  since  although  another  man  by  virtue 
of  his  rights  can  demand  that  my  actions  shall 
conform  to  the  law,  he  cannot  demand  that  the 
law  shall  also  contain  the  spring  of  these  actions. 
The  same  thing  is  true  of  the  general  ethical 
command,  “Act  dutifully  from  a  sense  of  duty.” 
To  fix  this  disposition  firmly  in  one’s  mind  and 
to  quicken  it  is,  as  in  the  former  case,  meritori¬ 
ous,  because  it  goes  beyond  the  law  of  duty  in 
actions  and  makes  the  law  in  itself  the  spring. 

But  just  for  this  reason,  those  duties  also  must 
be  reckoned  as  of  indeterminate  obligation,  in 
respect  of  which  there  exists  a  subjective  prin¬ 
ciple  which  ethically  rewards  them;  or  to  bring 
them  as  near  as  possible  to  the  notion  of  a  strict 
obligation,  a  principle  of  susceptibility  of  this 
reward  according  to  the  law  of  virtue;  namely, 
a  moral  pleasure  which  goes  beyond  mere  satis¬ 
faction  with  oneself  (which  may  be  merely  neg¬ 
ative),  and  of  which  it  is  proudly  said  that  in 
this  consciousness  virtue  is  its  own  reward. 

When  this  merit  is  a  merit  of  the  man  in  re¬ 
spect  of  other  men  of  promoting  their  natural 


METAPHYSICAL  ELEMENTS 


ends,  which  are  recognized  as  such  by  all  men 
(making  their  happiness  his  own),  we  might 
call  it  the  sweet  merit ,  the  consciousness  of 
which  creates  a  moral  enjoyment  in  which  men 
are  by  sympathy  inclined  to  revel;  whereas  the 
bitter  merit  of  promoting  the  true  welfare  of 
other  men,  even  though  they  should  not  recog¬ 
nize  it  as  such  (in  the  case  of  the  unthankful 
and  ungrateful),  has  commonly  no  such  reac¬ 
tion,  but  only  produces  a  satisfaction  with  one’s 
self,  although  in  the  latter  case  this  would  be 
even  greater. 

VIII.  Exposition  of  the  Duties  of  Virtue 
as  Intermediate  Duties 

(i)  Our  own  Perfection  as  an  end  which 
is  also  a  duty 

(a)  Physical  perfection;  that  is,  cultivation 
of  all  our  faculties  generally  for  the  promotion 
of  the  ends  set  before  us  by  reason.  That  this  is 
a  duty,  and  therefore  an  end  in  itself,  and  that 
the  effort  to  effect  this  even  without  regard  to 
the  advantage  that  it  secures  us,  is  based,  not 
on  a  conditional  (pragmatic),  but  an  uncondi¬ 
tional  (moral)  imperative,  may  be  seen  from 
the  following  consideration.  The  power  of  pro¬ 
posing  to  ourselves  an  end  is  the  characteristic 
of  humanity  (as  distinguished  from  the  brutes). 
With  the  end  of  humanity  in  our  own  person  is 
therefore  combined  the  rational  will,  and  conse¬ 
quently  the  duty  of  deserving  well  of  humanity 
by  culture  generally,  by  acquiring  or  advanc¬ 
ing  the  power  to  carry  out  all  sorts  of  possible 
ends,  so  far  as  this  power  is  to  be  found  in  man; 
that  is,  it  is  a  duty  to  cultivate  the  crude  capac¬ 
ities  of  our  nature,  since  it  is  by  that  cultiva¬ 
tion  that  the  animal  is  raised  to  man,  therefore 
it  is  a  duty  in  itself. 

This  duty,  however,  is  merely  ethical,  that 
is,  of  indeterminate  obligation.  No  principle  of 
reason  prescribes  how  far  one  must  go  in  this 
effort  (in  enlarging  or  correcting  his  faculty  of 
understanding,  that  is,  in  acquisition  of  knowl¬ 
edge  or  technical  capacity);  and  besides  the 
difference  in  the  circumstances  into  which  men 
may  come  makes  the  choice  of  the  kind  of  em¬ 
ployment  for  which  he  should  cultivate  his  tal¬ 
ent  very  arbitrary.  Here,  therefore,  there  is  no 
law  of  reason  for  actions,  but  only  for  the  max¬ 
im  of  actions,  viz.:  “Cultivate  thy  faculties  of 
mind  and  body  so  as  to  be  effective  for  all  ends 
that  may  come  in  thy  way,  uncertain  which  of 
them  may  become  thy  own.” 

( b )  Cultivation  of  Morality  in  ourselves.  The 
greatest  moral  perfection  of  man  is  to  do  his 


duty,  and  that  from  duty  (that  the  law  be  not 
only  the  rule  but  also  the  spring  of  his  actions). 
Now  at  first  sight  this  seems  to  be  a  strict  obli¬ 
gation,  and  as  if  the  principle  of  duty  command¬ 
ed  not  merely  the  legality  of  every  action,  but 
also  the  morality ,  i.e.,  the  mental  disposition, 
with  the  exactness  and  strictness  of  a  law;  but  in 
fact  the  law  commands  even  here  only  the  maxim 
of  the  action,  namely,  that  we  should  seek  the 
ground  of  obligation,  not  in  the  sensible  impulses 
(advantage  or  disadvantage),  but  wholly  in  the 
law;  so  that  the  action  itself  is  not  commanded. 
For  it  is  not  possible  to  man  to  see  so  far  into 
the  depth  of  his  own  heart  that  he  could  ever  be 
thoroughly  certain  of  the  purity  of  his  moral 
purpose  and  the  sincerity  of  his  mind  even  in 
one  single  action,  although  he  has  no  doubt  about 
the  legality  of  it.  Nay,  often  the  weakness  which 
deters  a  man  from  the  risk  of  a  crime  is  regard¬ 
ed  by  him  as  virtue  (which  gives  the  notion  of 
strength) .  And  how  many  there  are  who  may  have 
led  a  long  blameless  life,  who  are  only  fortunate 
in  having  escaped  so  many  temptations.  How 
much  of  the  element  of  pure  morality  in  their 
mental  disposition  may  have  belonged  to  each 
deed  remains  hidden  even  from  themselves. 

Accordingly,  this  duty  to  estimate  the  worth 
of  one’s  actions  not  merely  by  their  legality,  but 
also  by  their  morality  (mental  disposition) ?  is 
only  of  indeterminate  obligation;  the  law  does 
not  command  this  internal  action  in  the  human 
mind  itself,  but  only  the  maxim  of  the  action, 
namely,  that  we  should  strive  with  all  our  power 
that  for  all  dutiful  actions  the  thought  of  duty 
should  be  of  itself  an  adequate  spring. 

(2)  Happiness  of  Others  as  an  end  which  is 
also  a  duty 

(a)  Physical  Welfare.  Benevolent  wishes  may 
be  unlimited,  for  they  do  not  imply  doing  any¬ 
thing.  But  the  case  is  more  difficult  with  benevo¬ 
lent  action,  especially  when  this  is  to  be  done, 
not  from  friendly  inclination  (love)  to  others, 
but  from  duty,  at  the  expense  of  the  sacrifice 
and  mortification  of  many  of  our  appetites.That 
this  beneficence  is  a  duty  results  from  this:  that 
since  our  self-love  cannot  be  separated  from  the 
need  to  be  loved  by  others  (to  obtain  help  from 
them  in  case  of  necessity),  we  therefore  make 
ourselves  an  end  for  others;  and  this  maxim  can 
never  be  obligatory  except  by  having  the  specific 
character  of  a  universal  law,  and  consequently 
by  means  of  a  will  that  we  should  also  make 
others  our  ends.  Hence  the  happiness  of  others 
is  an  end  that  is  also  a  duty. 

I  am  only  bound  then  to  sacrifice  to  others  a 


OF  ETHICS 


part  of  my  welfare  without  hope  of  recompense; 
because  it  is  my  duty,  and  it  is  impossible  to  as¬ 
sign  definite  limits  how  far  that  may  go.  Much 
depends  on  what  would  be  the  true  want  of  each 
according  to  his  own  feelings,  and  it  must  be  left 
to  each  to  determine  this  for  himself.  For  that 
one  should  sacrifice  his  own  happiness,  his  true 
wants,  in  order  to  promote  that  of  others,  would 
be  a  self-contradictory  maxim  if  made  a  univer¬ 
sal  law.  This  duty,  therefore,  is  only  indetermi¬ 
nate;  it  has  a  certain  latitude  within  which  one 
may  do  more  or  less  without  our  being  able  to 
assign  its  limits  definitely.  The  law  holds  only 
for  the  maxims,  not  for  definite  actions. 

(b)  Moral  well-being  of  others  ( salus  moralis) 
also  belongs  to  the  happiness  of  others,  which  it 
is  our  duty  to  promote,  but  only  a  negative  duty. 
The  pain  that  a  man  feels  from  remorse  of  con¬ 
science,  although  its  origin  is  moral,  is  yet  in  its 
operation  physical,  like  grief,  fear,  and  every 
other  diseased  condition.  To  take  care  that  he 
should  not  be  deservedly  smitten  by  this  inward 
reproach  is  not  indeed  my  duty  but  his  business ; 
nevertheless,  it  is  my  duty  to  do  nothing  which 
by  the  nature  of  man  might  seduce  him  to  that 
for  which  his  conscience  may  hereafter  torment 
him,  that  is,  it  is  my  duty  not  to  give  him  occa¬ 
sion  oj  stumbling.  But  there  are  no  definite  limits 
within  which  this  care  for  the  moral  satisfaction 
of  others  must  be  kept;  therefore  it  involves 
only  an  indeterminate  obligation. 

IX.  What  is  a  Duty  of  Virtue? 

Virtue  is  the  strength  of  the  man’s  maxim  in 
his  obedience  to  duty.  All  strength  is  known  only 
by  the  obstacles  that  it  can  overcome;  and  in  the 
case  of  virtue  the  obstacles  are  the  natural  in¬ 
clinations  which  may  come  into  conflict  with  the 
moral  purpose;  and  as  it  is  the  man  who  him¬ 
self  puts  these  obstacles  in  the  way  of  his  max¬ 
ims,  hence  virtue  is  not  merely  a  self-constraint 
(for  that  might  be  an  effort  of  one  inclination  to 
constrain  another),  but  is  also  a  constraint  ac¬ 
cording  to  a  principle  of  inward  freedom,  and 
therefore  by  the  mere  idea  of  duty,  according  to 
its  formal  law. 

All  duties  involve  a  notion  of  necessitation  by 
the  law,  and  ethical  duties  involve  a  necessita¬ 
tion  for  which  only  an  internal  legislation  is  pos¬ 
sible;  juridical  duties,  on  the  other  hand,  one 
for  which  external  legislation  also  is  possible. 
Both,  therefore,  include  the  notion  of  constraint, 
either  self-constraint  or  constraint  by  others. 
The  moral  power  of  the  former  is  virtue,  and 
the  action  springing  from  such  a  disposition 


373 

(from  reverence  for  the  law)  may  be  called  a 
virtuous  action  (ethical),  although  the  law  ex¬ 
presses  a  juridical  duty.  For  it  is  the  doctrine  of 
virtue  that  commands  us  to  regard  the  rights  of 
men  as  holy. 

But  it  does  not  follow  that  everything  the  do¬ 
ing  of  which  is  virtue,  is,  properly  speaking,  a 
duty  of  virtue.  The  former  may  concern  merely 
the  form  of  the  maxims;  the  latter  applies  to  the 
matter  of  them,  namely,  to  an  end  which  is  also 
conceived  as  duty.  Now,  as  the  ethical  obliga¬ 
tion  to  ends,  of  which  there  may  be  many,  is 
only  indeterminate,  because  it  contains  only  a 
law  for  the  maxim  of  actions,  and  the  end  is  the 
matter  (object)  of  elective  will;  hence  there  are 
many  duties,  differing  according  to  the  difference 
of  lawful  ends,  which  may  be  called  duties  of 
virtue  {officia  honestatis) ,  just  because  they  are 
subject  only  to  free  self-constraint,  not  to  the 
constraint  of  other  men,  and  determine  the  end 
which  is  also  a  duty. 

Virtue,  being  a  coincidence  of  the  rational 
will,  with  every  duty  firmly  settled  in  the  char¬ 
acter,  is,  like  everything  formal,  only  one  and 
the  same.  But,  as  regards  the  end  of  actions, 
which  is  also  duty,  that  is,  as  regards  the  matter 
which  one  ought  to  make  an  end,  there  may  be 
several  virtues;  and  as  the  obligation  to  its  max¬ 
im  is  called  a  duty  of  virtue,  it  follows  that  there 
are  also  several  duties  of  virtue. 

The  supreme  principle  of  ethics  (the  doctrine 
of  virtue)  is :  “Act  on  a  maxim,  the  ends  of  which 
are  such  as  it  might  be  a  universal  law  for  every¬ 
one  to  have.”  On  this  principle  a  man  is  an  end 
to  himself  as  well  as  others,  and  it  is  not  enough 
that  he  is  not  permitted  to  use  either  himself  or 
others  merely  as  means  (which  would  imply  that 
he  might  be  indifferent  to  them),  but  it  is  in  it¬ 
self  a  duty  of  every  man  to  make  mankind  in 
general  his  end. 

The  principle  of  ethics  being  a  categorical  im¬ 
perative  does  not  admit  of  proof,  but  it  admits 
of  a  justification  from  principles  of  pure  practi¬ 
cal  reason.  Whatever  in  relation  to  mankind,  to 
oneself,  and  others,  can  be  an  end,  that  is  an  end 
for  pure  practical  reason:  for  this  is  a  faculty  of 
assigning  ends  in  general;  and  to  be  indifferent 
to  them,  that  is,  to  take  no  interest  in  them,  is  a 
contradiction;  since  in  that  case  it  would  not  de¬ 
termine  the  maxims  of  actions  (which  always 
involve  an  end),  and  consequently  would  cease 
to  be  practical  reasons.  Pure  reason,  however, 
cannot  command  any  ends  a  priori ,  except  so  far 
as  it  declares  the  same  to  be  also  a  duty,  which 
duty  is  then  called  a  duty  of  virtue. 


374 


METAPHYSICAL  ELEMENTS 


X.  The  Supreme  Principle  of  Jurisprudence  was 
Analytical;  that  of  Ethics  is  Synthetical 

That  external  constraint,  so  far  as  it  with¬ 
stands  that  which  hinders  the  external  freedom 
that  agrees  with  general  laws  (as  an  obstacle  of 
the  obstacle  thereto) ,  can  be  consistent  with  ends 
generally,  is  clear  on  the  principle  of  contradic¬ 
tion,  and  I  need  not  go  beyond  the  notion  of 
freedom  in  order  to  see  it,  let  the  end  which 
each  may  be  what  he  will.  Accordingly,  the  su¬ 
preme  principle  of  jurisprudence  is  an  analytical 
principle.1  On  the  contrary  the  principle  of 
ethics  goes  beyond  the  notion  of  external  free¬ 
dom  and,  by  general  laws,  connects  further  with 
it  an  end  which  it  makes  a  duty .  This  principle, 
therefore,  is  synthetic.  The  possibility  of  it  is 
contained  in  the  deduction  (§  ix). 

This  enlargement  of  the  notion  of  duty  be¬ 
yond  that  of  external  freedom  and  of  its  limita¬ 
tion  by  the  merely  formal  condition  of  its  con¬ 
stant  harmony;  this,  I  say,  in  which,  instead  of 
constraint  from  without,  there  is  set  up  freedom 
within ,  the  power  of  self-constraint,  and  that  not 
by  the  help  of  other  inclinations,  but  by  pure 
practical  reason  (which  scorns  all  such  help), 
consists  in  this  fact,  which  raises  it  above  juridi¬ 
cal  duty;  that  by  it  ends  are  proposed  from 
which  jurisprudence  altogether  abstracts.  In  the 
case  of  the  moral  imperative,  and  the  supposi¬ 
tion  of  freedom  which  it  necessarily  involves, 
the  law,  the  power  (to  fulfil  it)  and  the  rational 
will  that  determines  the  maxim,  constitute  all 
the  elements  that  form  the  notion  of  juridical 
duty.  But  in  the  imperative,  which  commands 
the  duty  of  virtue,  there  is  added,  besides  the 
notion  of  self-constraint,  that  of  an  end;  not  one 
that  we  have,  but  that  we  ought  to  have,  which, 
therefore,  pure  practical  reason  has  in  itself, 
whose  highest,  unconditional  end  (which,  how¬ 
ever,  continues  to  be  duty)  consists  in  this:  that 
virtue  is  its  own  end  and,  by  deserving  well  of 
men,  is  also  its  own  reward.  Herein  it  shines  so 
brightly  as  an  ideal  to  human  perceptions,  it 
seems  to  cast  in  the  shade  even  holiness  itself, 
which  is  never  tempted  to  transgression.2  This, 
however,  is  an  illusion  arising  from  the  fact  that 
as  we  have  no  measure  for  the  degree  of  strength, 
except  the  greatness  of  the  obstacles  which 
might  have  been  overcome  (which  in  our  case 
are  the  inclinations),  we  are  led  to  mistake  the 
subjective  conditions  of  estimation  of  a  magni- 

1  [Cf.  Science  of  Right,  p.  398.] 

2  So  that  one  might  vary  two  well-known  lines  of 
Haller  thus: 

With  all  his  failings,  man  is  still 

Better  than  angels  void  of  will. 


tude  for  the  objective  conditions  of  the  magni¬ 
tude  itself.  But  when  compared  with  human 
ends,  all  of  which  have  their  obstacles  to  be 
overcome,  it  is  true  that  the  worth  of  virtue  it¬ 
self,  which  is  its  own  end,  far  outweighs  the 
worth  of  all  the  utility  and  all  the  empirical  ends 
and  advantages  which  it  may  have  as  conse¬ 
quences. 

We  may,  indeed,  say  that  man  is  obliged  to 
virtue  (as  a  moral  strength).  For  although  the 
power  ( facultas )  to  overcome  all  imposing  sensi¬ 
ble  impulses  by  virtue  of  his  freedom  can  and 
must  be  presupposed,  yet  this  power  regarded  as 
strength  ( robur )  is  something  that  must  be  ac¬ 
quired  by  the  moral  spring  (the  idea  of  the  law) 
being  elevated  by  contemplation  of  the  dignity 
of  the  pure  law  of  reason  in  us,  and  at  the  same 
time  also  by  exercise. 

XI.  According  to  the  preceding  Principles,  the 
Scheme  of  Duties  of  Virtue  may  be  thus 
exhibited 

The  Material  Element  of  the  Duty  of  Virtue 


M y  Own  End, 

Sj  which  is  also  my 
t!  Duty 
> 

'o  (My  own  Perfec- 
>>  tion ) 

3 

Q  3 

—  The  Law  which  is 
£  also  Spring 


The  End  of  Others, 
the  promotion  of  « 
which  is  also  my  t. 


Duty  > 

(The  Happiness  o 

of  Others)  >> 

3 

4  e 


The  End  which  is  75 
also  Spring  | 

On  which  the 
Legality 


c  On  which  the 
""  Morality 

of  every  free  determination  of  will  rests 


The  Formal  Element  of  the  Duty  of  Virtue 

XII.  Preliminary  Notions  of  the  Susceptibility 
of  the  Mind  for  Notions  of  Duty  generally 
These  are  such  moral  qualities  as,  when  a  man 
does  not  possess  them,  he  is  not  bound  to  acquire 
them.  They  are:  the  moral  feeling,  conscience , 
love  of  one's  neighbour,  and  respect  for  our¬ 
selves  (self-esteem).  There  is  no  obligation  to 
have  these,  since  they  are  subjective  conditions 
of  susceptibility  for  the  notion  of  duty,  not 
objective  conditions  of  morality.  They  are  all 
sensitive  and  antecedent,  but  natural  capacities 
of  mind  (pr cedis positio)  to  be  affected  by  notions 
of  duty;  capacities  which  it  cannot  be  regarded 
as  a  duty  to  have,  but  which  every  man  has,  and 
by  virtue  of  which  he  can  be  brought  under  obli¬ 
gation.  The  consciousness  of  them  is  not  of 
empirical  origin,  but  can  only  follow  on  that  of  a 
moral  law,  as  an  effect  of  the  same  on  the  mind. 


OF  ETHICS 


A.  The  Moral  Feeling 

This  is  the  susceptibility  for  pleasure  or  dis¬ 
pleasure,  merely  from  the  consciousness  of  the 
agreement  or  disagreement  of  our  action  with 
the  law  of  duty.  Now,  every  determination  of 
the  elective  will  proceeds  from  the  idea  of  the 
possible  action  through  the  feeling  of  pleasure 
or  displeasure  in  taking  an  interest  in  it  or  its 
effect  to  the  deed;  and  here  the  sensitive  state 
(the  affection  of  the  internal  sense)  is  either  a 
pathological  or  a  moral  feeling.  The  former  is 
the  feeling  that  precedes  the  idea  of  the  law,  the 
latter  that  which  may  follow  it. 

Now  it  cannot  be  a  duty  to  have  a  moral  feel¬ 
ing,  or  to  acquire  it;  for  all  consciousness  of  ob¬ 
ligation  supposes  this  feeling  in  order  that  one 
may  become  conscious  of  the  necessitation  that 
lies  in  the  notion  of  duty;  but  every  man  (as  a 
moral  being)  has  it  originally  in  himself;  the 
obligation,  then,  can  only  extend  to  the  cultiva¬ 
tion  of  it  and  the  strengthening  of  it  even  by 
admiration  of  its  inscrutable  origin;  and  this  is 
effected  by  showing  how  it  is  just,  by  the  mere 
conception  of  reason,  that  it  is  excited  most 
strongly,  in  its  own  purity  and  apart  from  every 
pathological  stimulus;  and  it  is  improper  to  call 
this  feeling  a  moral  sense;  for  the  word  sense 
generally  means  a  theoretical  power  of  percep¬ 
tion  directed  to  an  object;  whereas  the  moral 
feeling  (like  pleasure  and  displeasure  in  general) 
is  something  merely  subjective,  which  supplies 
no  knowledge.  No  man  is  wholly  destitute  of 
moral  feeling,  for  if  he  were  totally  unsuscepti¬ 
ble  of  this  sensation  he  would  be  morally  dead; 
and,  to  speak  in  the  language  of  physicians,  if 
the  moral  vital  force  could  no  longer  produce 
any  effect  on  this  feeling,  then  his  humanity 
would  be  dissolved  (as  it  were  by  chemical  laws) 
into  mere  animality  and  be  irrevocably  con¬ 
founded  with  the  mass  of  other  physical  beings. 
But  we  have  no  special  sense  for  (moral)  good 
and  evil  any  more  than  for  truth ,  although  such 
expressions  are  often  used;  but  we  have  a  sus¬ 
ceptibility  of  the  free  elective  will  for  being 
moved  by  pure  practical  reason  and  its  law;  and 
it  is  this  that  we  call  the  moral  feeling. 

B.  Of  Conscience 

Similarly,  conscience  is  not  a  thing  to  be  ac¬ 
quired,  and  it  is  not  a  duty  to  acquire  it;  but 
every  man,  as  a  moral  being,  has  it  originally 
within  him.  To  be  bound  to  have  a  conscience 
would  be  as  much  as  to  say  to  be  under  a  duty 
to  recognize  duties.  For  conscience  is  practical 
reason  which,  in  every  case  of  law,  holds  before 


375 

a  man  his  duty  for  acquittal  or  condemnation; 
consequently  it  does  not  refer  to  an  object,  but 
only  to  the  subject  (affecting  the  moral  feeling 
by  its  own  act) ;  so  that  it  is  an  inevitable  fact, 
not  an  obligation  and  duty.  When,  therefore,  it 
is  said,  “This  man  has  no  conscience,’’  what  is 
meant  is  that  he  pays  no  heed  to  its  dictates.  For 
if  he  really  had  none,  he  would  not  take  credit 
to  himself  for  anything  done  according  to  duty, 
nor  reproach  himself  with  violation  of  duty,  and 
therefore  he  would  be  unable  even  to  conceive 
the  duty  of  having  a  conscience. 

I  pass  by  the  manifold  subdivisions  of  con¬ 
science,  and  only  observe  what  follows  from 
what  has  just  been  said,  namely,  that  there  is  no 
such  thing  as  an  erring  conscience.  No  doubt  it 
is  possible  sometimes  to  err  in  the  objective 
judgement  whether  something  is  a  duty  or  not; 
but  I  cannot  err  in  the  subjective  whether  I 
have  compared  it  with  my  practical  (here  judi¬ 
cially  acting)  reason  for  the  purpose  of  that 
judgement:  for  if  I  erred  I  would  not  have  exer¬ 
cised  practical  judgement  at  all,  and  in  that  case 
there  is  neither  truth  nor  error.  Unconscientious¬ 
ness  is  not  want  of  conscience,  but  the  propen¬ 
sity  not  to  heed  its  judgement.  But  when  a  man 
is  conscious  of  having  acted  according  to  his  con¬ 
science,  then,  as  far  as  regards  guilt  or  inno¬ 
cence,  nothing  more  can  be  required  of  him, 
only  he  is  bound  to  enlighten  his  understanding 
as  to  what  is  duty  or  not;  but  when  it  comes  or 
has  come  to  action,  then  conscience  speaks  in¬ 
voluntarily  and  inevitably.  To  act  conscientious¬ 
ly  can,  therefore,  not  be  a  duty,  since  otherwise 
it  would  be  necessary  to  have  a  second  con¬ 
science,  in  order  to  be  conscious  of  the  act  of 
the  first. 

The  duty  here  is  only  to  cultivate  our  con¬ 
science,  to  quicken  our  attention  to  the  voice  of 
the  internal  judge,  and  to  use  all  means  to  secure 
obedience  to  it,  and  is  thus  our  indirect  duty.1 

C.  Of  Love  to  Men 

Love  is  a  matter  of  feeling ,  not  of  will  or  voli¬ 
tion,  and  I  cannot  love  because  I  will  to  do  so, 
still  less  because  I  ought  (I  cannot  be  necessi¬ 
tated  to  love);  hence  there  is  no  such  thing  as 
a  duty  to  love.  Benevolence ,  however  ( amor 
benevolentice ),  as  a  mode  of  action,  may  be  sub¬ 
ject  to  a  law  of  duty.  Disinterested  benevolence 
is  often  called  (though  very  improperly)  love; 
even  where  the  happiness  of  the  other  is  not 
concerned,  but  the  complete  and  free  surrender 
of  all  one’s  own  ends  to  the  ends  of  another 
(even  a  superhuman)  being,  love  is  spoken  of  as 
1[Cf.  Note  on  Conscience,  p.  379-1 


376  METAPHYSICAL  ELEMENTS 


being  also  our  duty.  But  all  duty  is  necessitation 
or  constraint,  although  it  may  be  self-constraint 
according  to  a  law.  But  what  is  done  from  con¬ 
straint  is  not  done  from  love. 

It  is  a  duty  to  do  good  to  other  men  according 
to  our  power,  whether  we  love  them  or  not,  and 
this  duty  loses  nothing  of  its  weight,  although 
we  must  make  the  sad  remark  that  our  species, 
alas!  is  not  such  as  to  be  found  particularly 
worthy  of  love  when  we  know  it  more  closely. 
Hatred  of  men ,  however,  is  always  hateful:  even 
though  without  any  active  hostility  it  consists 
only  in  complete  aversion  from  mankind  (the 
solitary  misanthropy).  For  benevolence  still  re¬ 
mains  a  duty  even  towards  the  manhater,  whom 
one  cannot  love,  but  to  whom  we  can  show  kind¬ 
ness. 

To  hate  vice  in  men  is  neither  duty  nor  against 
duty,  but  a  mere  feeling  of  horror  of  vice,  the 
will  having  no  influence  on  the  feeling  nor  the 
feeling  on  the  will.  Beneficence  is  a  duty.  He 
who  often  practises  this,  and  sees  his  beneficent 
purpose  succeed,  comes  at  last  really  to  love  him 
whom  he  has  benefited.  When,  therefore,  it  is 
said:  “Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself,” 
this  does  not  mean,  “Thou  shalt  first  of  all  love, 
and  by  means  of  this  love  (in  the  next  place) 
do  him  good”;  but:  “Do  good  to  thy  neighbour, 
and  this  beneficence  will  produce  in  thee  the 
love  of  men  (as  a  settled  habit  of  inclination  to 
beneficence).” 

The  love  of  complacency  ( amor  complacen- 
tice)  would  therefore  alone  be  direct.  This  is  a 
pleasure  immediately  connected  with  the  idea 
of  the  existence  of  an  object,  and  to  have  a  duty 
to  this,  that  is,  to  be  necessitated  to  find  pleas¬ 
ure  in  a  thing,  is  a  contradiction. 

D.  Of  Respect 

Respect  ( reverentia )  is  likewise  something 
merely  subjective;  a  feeling  of  a  peculiar  kind 
not  a  judgement  about  an  object  which  it  would 
be  a  duty  to  effect  or  to  advance.  For  if  consid¬ 
ered  as  duty  it  could  only  be  conceived  as  such 
by  means  of  the  respect  which  we  have  for  it.  To 
have  a  duty  to  this,  therefore,  would  be  as  much 
as  to  say  to  be  bound  in  duty  to  have  a  duty. 
When,  therefore,  it  is  said:  “Man  has  a  duty  of 
self-esteem  ”  this  is  improperly  stated,  and  we 
ought  rather  to  say:  “The  law  within  him  inevi¬ 
tably  forces  from  him  respect  for  his  own  being, 
and  this  feeling  (which  is  of  a  peculiar  kind)  is  a 
basis  of  certain  duties,  that  is,  of  certain  actions 
which  may  be  consistent  with  his  duty  to  him¬ 
self.”  But  we  cannot  say  that  he  has  a  duty  of 


respect  for  himself;  for  he  must  have  respect 
for  the  law  within  himself,  in  order  to  be  able 
to  conceive  duty  at  all. 

XIII.  General  Principles  of  the  Metaphysics  of 
Morals  in  the  treatment  of  Pure  Ethics 

First.  A  duty  can  have  only  a  single  ground 
of  obligation;  and  if  two  or  more  proofs  of  it  are 
adduced,  this  is  a  certain  mark  that  either  no 
valid  proof  has  yet  been  given,  or  that  there  are 
several  distinct  duties  which  have  been  regard¬ 
ed  as  one. 

For  all  moral  proofs,  being  philosophical,  can 
only  be  drawn  by  means  of  rational  knowledge 
from  concepts ,  not  like  mathematics,  through  the 
construction  of  concepts.  The  latter  science  ad¬ 
mits  a  variety  of  proofs  of  one  and  the  same 
theorem;  because  in  intuition  a  priori  there  may 
be  several  properties  of  an  object,  all  of  which 
lead  back  to  the  very  same  principle.  If,  for  in¬ 
stance,  to  prove  the  duty  of  veracity,  an  argu¬ 
ment  is  drawn  first  from  the  harm  that  a  lie 
causes  to  other  men;  another  from  the  worth¬ 
lessness  of  a  liar  and  the  violation  of  his  own 
self-respect,  what  is  proved  in  the  former  argu¬ 
ment  is  a  duty  of  benevolence,  not  of  veracity, 
that  is  to  say,  not  the  duty  which  required  to  be 
proved,  but  a  different  one.  Now,  if,  in  giving  a 
variety  of  proofs  for  one  and  the  same  theorem, 
we  flatter  ourselves  that  the  multitude  of  rea¬ 
sons  will  compensate  the  lack  of  weight  in  each 
taken  separately,  this  is  a  very  unphilosophical 
resource,  since  it  betrays  trickery  and  dishon¬ 
esty;  for  several  insufficient  proofs  placed  be¬ 
side  o?ie  another  do  not  produce  certainty,  nor 
even  probability.  They  should  advance  as  reason 
and  consequence  in  a  series ,  up  to  the  sufficient 
reason,  and  it  is  only  in  this  way  that  they  can 
have  the  force  of  proof.  Yet  the  former  is  the 
usual  device  of  the  rhetorician. 

Secondly.  The  difference  between  virtue  and 
vice  cannot  be  sought  in  the  degree  in  which 
certain  maxims  are  followed,  but  only  in  the 
specific  quality  of  the  maxims  (their  relation  to 
the  law).  In  other  words,  the  vaunted  principle 
of  Aristotle,  that  virtue  is  the  mean  between 
two  vices,  is  false.1  For  instance,  suppose  that 

1  The  common  classical  formulae  of  ethics — medio 
tutissimus  ibis;  omne  mimium  vertitur  in  vitium;  est 
modus  in  rebus,  etc.,  medium  tenuere  beati;  virtus  est 
medium  vitiorum  et  utrinque  rcductum — [“You  will  go 
most  safely  in  the  middle”  (Virgil);  “Every  excess  de¬ 
velops  into  a  vice”;  “There  is  a  mean  in  all  things,  etc.” 
(Horace);  ‘  Happy  they  who  steadily  pursue  a  middle 
course”;  “Virtue  is  the  mean  between  two  vices  and 
equally  removed  from  either”  (Horace).] — contain  a 
poor  sort  of  wisdom,  which  has  no  definite  principles; 
for  this  mean  between  two  extremes,  who  will  assign  it 


OF  ETHICS 


good  management  is  given  as  the  mean  between 
two  vices,  prodigality  and  avarice;  then  its  ori¬ 
gin  as  a  virtue  can  neither  be  defined  as  the 
gradual  diminution  of  the  former  vice  (by  sav¬ 
ing),  nor  as  the  increase  of  the  expenses  of  the 
miserly.  These  vices,  in  fact,  cannot  be  viewed 
as  if  they,  proceeding  as  it  were  in  opposite 
directions,  met  together  in  good  management; 
but  each  of  them  has  its  own  maxim,  which 
necessarily  contradicts  that  of  the  other. 

For  the  same  reason,  no  vice  can  be  defined 
as  an  excess  in  the  practice  of  certain  actions 
beyond  what  is  proper  (e.g.,  Prodigalitas  est  ex - 
cessus  in  consumendis  opibus ) ;  or,  as  a  less 
exercise  of  them  than  is  fitting  ( Avaritia  est  de¬ 
lectus,  etc.).  For  since  in  this  way  the  degree  is 
left  quite  undefined,  and  the  question  whether 
conduct  accords  with  duty  or  not,  turns  wholly 
on  this,  such  an  account  is  of  no  use  as  a  defini¬ 
tion. 

Thirdly.  Ethical  virtue  must  not  be  estimated 
by  the  power  we  attribute  to  man  of  fulfilling 
the  law ;  but,  conversely,  the  moral  power  must  be 
estimated  by  the  law,  which  commands  categor¬ 
ically;  not,  therefore,  by  the  empirical  knowl¬ 
edge  that  we  have  of  men  as  they  are,  but  by 
the  rational  knowledge  how,  according  to  the 
ideas  of  humanity,  they  ought  to  be.  These  three 
maxims  of  the  scientific  treatment  of  ethics  are 
opposed  to  the  older  apophthegms: 

1.  There  is  only  one  virtue  and  only  one  vice. 

2.  Virtue  is  the  observance  of  the  mean  path 
between  two  opposite  vices. 

3.  Virtue  (like  prudence)  must  be  learned 
from  experience. 

XIV.  Of  Virtue  in  General 

Virtue  signifies  a  moral  strength  of  will.  But 
this  does  not  exhaust  the  notion;  for  such 
strength  might  also  belong  to  a  holy  (super¬ 
human)  being,  in  whom  no  opposing  impulse 
counteracts  the  law  of  his  rational  will;  who 
therefore  willingly  does  everything  in  accord¬ 
ance  with  the  law.  Virtue  then  is  the  moral 
strength  of  a  man's  will  in  his  obedience  to  duty; 
and  this  is  a  moral  necessitation  by  his  own  law 
giving  reason,  inasmuch  as  this  constitutes  itself 
a  power  executing  the  law.  It  is  not  itself  a  duty, 

for  me?  Avarice  (as  a  vice)  is  not  distinguished  from 
frugality  (as  a  virtue)  by  merely  being  the  latter 
pushed  too  far;  but  has  a  quite  different  principle 
(maxim),  namely  placing  the  end  of  economy  not  in  the 
enjoyment  of  one’s  means,  but  in  the  mere  possession  of 
them,  renouncing  enjoyment;  just  as  the  vice  of  prodi¬ 
gality  is  not  to  be  sought  in  the  excessive  enjoyment  of 
one’s  means,  but  in  the  bad  maxim  which  makes  the  use 
of  them,  without  regard  to  their  maintenance,  the  sole 
end. 


377 

nor  is  it  a  duty  to  possess  it  (otherwise  we 
should  be  in  duty  bound  to  have  a  duty),  but  it 
commands,  and  accompanies  its  command  with 
a  moral  constraint  (one  possible  by  laws  of  inter¬ 
nal  freedom).  But  since  this  should  be  irresist¬ 
ible,  strength  is  requisite,  and  the  degree  of  this 
strength  can  be  estimated  only  by  the  magni¬ 
tude  of  the  hindrances  which  man  creates  for 
himself,  by  his  inclinations.  Vices,  the  brood  of 
unlawful  dispositions,  are  the  monsters  that  he 
has  to  combat;  wherefore  this  moral  strength 
as  fortitude  ( fortitudo  moralis)  constitutes  the 
greatest  and  only  true  martial  glory  of  man;  it 
is  also  called  the  true  wisdom ,  namely,  the  prac¬ 
tical,  because  it  makes  the  ultimate  end  of  the 
existence  of  man  on  earth  its  own  end.  Its  pos¬ 
session  alone  makes  man  free,  healthy,  rich,  a 
king,  etc.,  nor  can  either  chance  or  fate  deprive 
him  of  this,  since  he  possesses  himself,  and  the 
virtuous  cannot  lose  his  virtue. 

All  the  encomiums  bestowed  on  the  ideal  of 
humanity  in  its  moral  perfection  can  lose  noth¬ 
ing  of  their  practical  reality  by  the  examples  of 
what  men  now  are,  have  been,  or  will  probably 
be  hereafter;  anthropology  which  proceeds  from 
mere  empirical  knowledge  cannot  impair  an- 
throponomy  which  is  erected  by  the  uncondi¬ 
tionally  legislating  reason;  and  although  virtue 
may  now  and  then  be  called  meritorious  (in  re¬ 
lation  to  men,  not  to  the  law),  and  be  worthy  of 
reward,  yet  in  itself,  as  it  is  its  own  end,  so  also 
it  must  be  regarded  as  its  own  reward. 

Virtue  considered  in  its  complete  perfection 
is,  therefore,  regarded  not  as  if  man  possessed 
virtue,  but  as  if  virtue  possessed  the  man,  since 
in  the  former  case  it  would  appear  as  though  he 
had  still  had  the  choice  (for  which  he  would 
then  require  another  virtue,  in  order  to  select 
virtue  from  all  other  wares  offered  to  him).  To 
conceive  a  plurality  of  virtues  (as  we  unavoid¬ 
ably  must)  is  nothing  else  but  to  conceive  vari¬ 
ous  moral  objects  to  which  the  (rational)  will  is 
led  by  the  single  principle  of  virtue;  and  it  is  the 
same  with  the  opposite  vices.  The  expression 
which  personifies  both  is  a  contrivance  for  af¬ 
fecting  the  sensibility,  pointing,  however,  to  a 
moral  sense.  Hence  it  follows  that  an  aesthetic 
of  morals  is  not  a  part,  but  a  subjective  exposi¬ 
tion  of  the  Metaphysic  of  Morals;  in  which  the 
emotions  that  accompany  the  necessitating 
force  of  the  moral  law  make  the  efficiency  of 
that  force  to  be  felt;  for  example:  disgust,  hor¬ 
ror,  etc.,  which  gives  a  sensible  form  to  the 
moral  aversion  in  order  to  gain  the  precedence 
from  the  merely  sensible  incitement. 


METAPHYSICAL  ELEMENTS 


XV.  Oj  the  Principle  on  which  Ethics  is 
separated  from  Jurisprudence 

This  separation  on  which  the  subdivision  of 
moral  philosophy  in  general  rests,  is  founded  on 
this:  that  the  notion  of  freedom,  which  is  com¬ 
mon  to  both,  makes  it  necessary  to  divide  duties 
into  those  of  external  and  those  of  internal  free¬ 
dom:  the  latter  of  which  alone  are  ethical. 
Hence  this  internal  freedom  which  is  the  condi¬ 
tion  of  all  ethical  duty  must  be  discussed  as  a 
preliminary  (discursus  prcelimwaris),  just  as 
above  the  doctrine  of  conscience  was  discussed 
as  the  condition  of  all  duty. 

REMARKS 

Oj  the  Doctrine  of  Virtue  on  the  Principle  of 
Internal  Freedom 

Habit  ( habitus )  is  a  facility  of  action  and  a 
subjective  perfection  of  the  elective  will.  But 
not  every  such  facility  is  a  free  habit  ( habitus 
libertatis );  for  if  it  is  custom  ( assuetudo ),  that 
is,  a  uniformity  of  action  which,  by  frequent  rep¬ 
etition.  has  become  a  necessity,  then  it  is  not 
a  habit  proceeding  from  freedom,  and  therefore 
not  a  moral  habit.  Virtue  therefore  cannot  be 
defined  as  a  habit  of  free  law-abiding  actions, 
unless  indeed  we  add  “determining  itself  in  its 
action  by  the  idea  of  the  law”;  and  then  this 
habit  is  not  a  property  of  the  elective  will,  but 
of  the  rational  will,  which  is  a  faculty  that  in 
adopting  a  rule  also  declares  it  to  be  a  universal 
law,  and  it  is  only  such  a  habit  that  can  be  reck¬ 
oned  as  virtue.  Two  things  are  required  for  in¬ 
ternal  freedom:  to  be  master  of  oneself  in  a 
given  case  (animus  sui  compos)  and  to  have  com- 
mand  over  oneself  ( imperium  in  semetipsum) , 
that  is  to  subdue  his  emotions  and  to  govern  his 
passions.  With  these  conditions,  the  character 
( indoles )  is  noble  ( erecta ) ;  in  the  opposite  case, 
it  is  ignoble  ( indoles  abjecta  serva). 

XVI.  Virtue  requires ,  first  of  all,  Command 
over  Oneself 

Emotions  and  passions  are  essentially  distinct ; 
the  former  belong  to  feeling  in  so  far  as  this 
coming  before  reflection  makes  it  more  difficult 
or  even  impossible.  Hence  emotion  is  called 
hasty  (animus  prceceps).  And  reason  declares 
through  the  notion  of  virtue  that  a  man  should 
collect  himself ;  but  this  weakness  in  the  life  of 
one’s  understanding,  joined  with  the  strength  of 
a  mental  excitement,  is  only  a  lack  of  virtue 
( Untugend ),  and  as  it  were  a  weak  and  childish 
thing,  which  may  very  well  consist  with  the  best 
will,  and  has  further  this  one  good  thing  in  it, 


that  this  storm  soon  subsides.  A  propensity  to 
emotion  (e.  g.,  resentment)  is  therefore  not  so 
closely  related  to  vice  as  passion  is.  Passion,  on 
the  other  hand,  is  the  sensible  appetite  grown 
into  a  permanent  inclination  (e.  g..  hatred  in 
contrast  to  resentment).  The  calmness  with 
which  one  indulges  it  leaves  room  for  reflection 
and  allows  the  mind  to  frame  principles  thereon 
for  itself;  and  thus  when  the  inclination  falls 
upon  what  contradicts  the  law,  to  brood  on  it,  to 
allow  it  to  root  itself  deeply,  and  thereby  to 
take  up  evil  (as  of  set  purpose)  into  one’s  max¬ 
im;  and  this  is  then  specifically  evil,  that  is.  it 
is  a  true  vice. 

Virtue,  therefore,  in  so  far  as  it  is  based  on 
internal  freedom,  contains  a  positive  command 
for  man,  namely,  that  he  should  bring  all  his 
powers  and  inclinations  under  his  rule  (that  of 
reason);  and  this  is  a  positive  precept  of  com¬ 
mand  over  himself  which  is  additional  to  the 
prohibition,  namely,  that  he  should  not  allow 
himself  to  be  governed  by  his  feelings  and  in¬ 
clinations  (the  duty  of  apathy)',  since,  unless 
reason  takes  the  reins  of  government  into  its 
own  hands,  the  feelings  and  inclinations  play 
the  master  over  the  man. 

XVII.  Virtue  necessarily  presupposes  Apathy 
(considered  as  Strength) 

This  word  (apathy)  has  come  into  bad  re¬ 
pute,  just  as  if  it  meant  want  oj  feeling,  and 
therefore  subjective  indifference  with  respect 
to  the  objects  of  the  elective  will;  it  is  supposed 
to  be  a  weakness.  This  misconception  may  be 
avoided  by  giving  the  name  moral  apathy  to 
that  want  of  emotion  which  is  to  be  distin¬ 
guished  from  indifference.  In  the  former,  the 
feelings  arising  from  sensible  impressions  lose 
their  influence  on  the  moral  feeling  only  because 
the  respect  for  the  law  is  more  powerful  than 
all  of  them  together.  It  is  only  the  apparent 
strength  of  a  fever  patient  that  makes  even  the 
lively  sympathy  with  good  rise  to  an  emotion, 
or  rather  degenerate  into  it.  Such  an  emotion 
is  called  enthusiasm,  and  it  is  with  reference 
to  this  that  wre  are  to  explain  the  moderation 
w’hich  is  usually  recommended  in  virtuous  prac¬ 
tices: 

Insani  sapiens  nomen  ferat,  cequus  uniqui 

Ultra  quam  satis  est  virtutem  si  petat  ipsam.1 

For  otherwise  it  is  absurd  to  imagine  that  one 
could  be  too  wise  or  too  virtuous.  The  emotion 

1  Horace.  [“Let  the  wise  man  bear  the  name  of  fool, 
and  the  just  of  unjust,  if  he  pursue  virtue  herself  be¬ 
yond  the  proper  bounds.”] 


OF  ETHICS 


379 


always  belongs  to  the  sensibility,  no  matter  by 
what  sort  of  object  it  may  be  excited.  The  true 
strength  of  virtue  is  the  mind  at  rest ,  with  a 
firm,  deliberate  resolution  to  bring  its  law  into 
practice.  That  is  the  state  of  health  in  the  moral 
life;  on  the  contrary,  the  emotion,  even  when  it 
is  excited  by  the  idea  of  the  good,  is  a  momen¬ 
tary  glitter  which  leaves  exhaustion  after  it.  We 
may  apply  the  term  fantastically  virtuous  to 
the  man  who  will  admit  nothing  to  be  indifferent 
in  respect  of  morality  ( adiaphora ),  and  who 
strews  all  his  steps  with  duties,  as  with  traps, 
and  will  not  allow  it  to  be  indifferent  whether  a 
man  eats  fish  or  flesh,  drink  beer  or  wine,  when 
both  agree  with  him;  a  micrology  which,  if 
adopted  into  the  doctrine  of  virtue,  would  make 
its  rule  a  tyranny. 

REMARK 


Virtue  is  always  in  progress,  and  yet  always 
begins  from  the  beginning.  The  former  follows 
from  the  fact  that,  objectively  considered,  it  is 
an  ideal  and  unattainable,  and  yet  it  is  a  duty 
constantly  to  approximate  to  it.  The  second  is 
founded  subjectively  on  the  nature  of  man 
which  is  affected  by  inclinations,  under  the  in¬ 
fluence  of  which  virtue,  with  its  maxims  adopted 
once  for  all,  can  never  settle  in  a  position  of 
rest;  but,  if  it  is  not  rising,  inevitably  falls;  be¬ 
cause  moral  maxims  cannot,  like  technical,  be 
based  on  custom  (for  this  belongs  to  the  physi¬ 
cal  character  of  the  determination  of  will) ;  but 
even  if  the  practice  of  them  become  a  custom, 
the  agent  would  thereby  lose  the  freedom  in  the 
choice  of  his  maxims,  which  freedom  is  the 
character  of  an  action  done  from  duty. 


ON  CONSCIENCE1 

The  consciousness  of  an  internal  tribunal  in 
man  (before  which  “his  thoughts  accuse  or  ex¬ 
cuse  one  another”)  is  Conscience. 

Every  man  has  a  conscience,  and  finds  him¬ 
self  observed  by  an  inward  judge  which  threat¬ 
ens  and  keeps  him  in  awe  (reverence  combined 
with  fear);  and  this  power  which  watches  over 
the  laws  within  him  is  not  something  which  he 
himself  (arbitrarily)  makes,  but  it  is  incorpo¬ 
rated  in  his  being.  It  follows  him  like  his  shadow, 


when  he  thinks  to  escape.  He  may  indeed  stupe¬ 
fy  himself  with  pleasures  and  distractions,  but 
cannot  avoid  now  and  then  coming  to  himself 
or  awaking,  and  then  he  at  once  perceives  its 
awful  voice.  In  his  utmost  depravity,  he  may, 
indeed,  pay  no  attention  to  it,  but  he  cannot 
avoid  hearing  it. 

Now  this  original  intellectual  and  (as  a  con¬ 
ception  of  duty)  moral  capacity,  called  con¬ 
science,  has  this  peculiarity  in  it,  that  although 
its  business  is  a  business  of  man  with  himself, 
yet  he  finds  himself  compelled  by  his  reason  to 
transact  it  as  if  at  the  command  of  another  per¬ 
son.  For  the  transaction  here  is  the  conduct  of  a 
trial  {causa)  before  a  tribunal.  But  that  he  who 
is  accused  by  his  conscience  should  be  conceived 
as  one  and  the  same  person  with  the  judge  is  an 
absurd  conception  of  a  judicial  court;  for  then 
the  complainant  would  always  lose  his  case. 
Therefore,  in  all  duties  the  conscience  of  the 
man  must  regard  another  than  himself  as  the 
judge  of  his  actions,  if  it  is  to  avoid  self-contra¬ 
diction.  Now  this  other  may  be  an  actual  or  a 
merely  ideal  person  which  reason  frames  to  it¬ 
self.2  Such  an  idealized  person  (the  authorized 
judge  of  conscience)  must  be  one  who  knows 
the  heart;  for  the  tribunal  is  set  up  in  the  in¬ 
ward  part  of  man;  at  the  same  time  he  must 
also  be  all-obliging,  that  is,  must  be  or  be  con¬ 
ceived  as  a  person  in  respect  of  whom  all  duties 
are  to  be  regarded  as  his  commands;  since  con¬ 
science  is  the  inward  judge  of  all  free  actions. 
Now,  since  such  a  moral  being  must  at  the  same 
time  possess  all  power  (in  heaven  and  earth), 
since  otherwise  he  could  not  give  his  commands 
their  proper  effect  (which  the  office  of  judge 
necessarily  requires),  and  since  such  a  moral 
being  possessing  power  over  all  is  called  God, 
hence  conscience  must  be  conceived  as  the  sub¬ 
jective  principle  of  a  responsibility  for  one’s 
deeds  before  God;  nay,  this  latter  concept  is 
contained  (though  it  be  only  obscurely)  in 
every  moral  self-consciousness. 

xNot  part  of  original  text.  From  Tugendlehre.p.  2Q3&. 

2  [In  a  foot-note,  Kant  explains  this  double  per¬ 
sonality  of  a  man  as  both  the  accuser  and  the  judge, 
by  reference  to  the  homo  noumenon  and  its  specific 
difference  from  the  rationally  endowed  homo  sensi- 
bilis .] 


CONTENTS 

GENERAL  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE 
METAPHYSIC  OF  MORALS 


General  Divisions  of  the  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  383 
Introduction  to  the  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  385 


381 


GENERAL  DIVISIONS  OF 
THE  METAPHYSIC  OF  MORALS 


I.  DIVISION  OF  THE  METAPHYSIC  OF  MORALS 
AS  A  SYSTEM  OF  DUTIES  GENERALLY 


i.  All  duties  are  either  duties  of  right,  that 
is,  juridical  duties  ( officia  juris ),  or  duties  of 
virtue,  that  is,  ethical  duties  ( officia  virtutis 
s.  ethica ).  Juridical  duties  are  such  as  may 
be  promulgated  by  external  legislation;  ethical 
duties  are  those  for  which  such  legislation  is 
not  possible.  The  reason  why  the  latter  can¬ 
not  be  properly  made  the  subject  of  external 
legislation  is  because  they  relate  to  an  end  or 
final  purpose,  which  is  itself,  at  the  same  time, 
embraced  in  these  duties,  and  which  it  is  a  duty 
for  the  individual  to  have  as  such.  But  no  ex¬ 
ternal  legislation  can  cause  any  one  to  adopt 
a  particular  intention,  or  to  propose  to  himself 
a  certain  purpose;  for  this  depends  upon  an  in¬ 
ternal  condition  or  act  of  the  mind  itself.  How¬ 
ever,  external  actions  conducive  to  such  a  men¬ 
tal  condition  may  be  commanded,  without  its 
being  implied  that  the  individual  will  of  neces¬ 
sity  make  them  an  end  to  himself. 

But  why,  then,  it  may  be  asked,  is  the  science 
of  morals,  or  moral  philosophy,  commonly  en¬ 


titled — especially  by  Cicero — the  science  of 
duty  and  not  also  the  science  of  right ,  since 
duties  and  rights  refer  to  each  other?  The  rea¬ 
son  is  this.  We  know  our  own  freedom — from 
which  all  moral  laws  and  consequently  all  rights 
as  well  as  all  duties  arise — only  through  the 
moral  imperative,  which  is  an  immediate  injunc¬ 
tion  of  duty;  whereas  the  conception  of  right  as 
a  ground  of  putting  others  under  obligation  has 
afterwards  to  be  developed  out  of  it. 

2.  In  the  doctrine  of  duty,  man  may  and 
ought  to  be  represented  in  accordance  with  the 
nature  of  his  faculty  of  freedom,  which  is  en¬ 
tirely  supra-sensible.  He  is,  therefore,  to  be 
represented  purely  according  to  his  humanity 
as  a  personality  independent  of  physical  de¬ 
terminations  ( homo  noumenon ),  in  distinction 
from  the  same  person  as  a  man  modified  with 
these  determinations  ( homo  phenomenon). 
Hence  the  conceptions  of  right  and  end  when 
referred  to  duty,  in  view  of  this  twofold  qual¬ 
ity,  give  the  following  division: 


DIVISION  OF  THE  METAPHYSIC  OF  MORALS  ACCORDING  TO  THE 
OBJECTIVE  RELATION  OF  THE  LAW  OF  DUTY 


I.  Juridical 
Duties 


Oneself 
to  or 
Others 


I.  The  Right  of  Humanity 

in  our  own  person  (juridical  duties  towards 
oneself) 

II.  The  Right  of  Mankind 

in  others  (juridical  duties  towards  others) 


Perfect 

Duty 


II.  Ethical 
Duties 


Oneself 
to  or 
Others 


III.  The  End  of  Humanity 

in  our  person  (ethical  duties  towards  oneself) 


IV.  The  End  of  Mankind 

in  others  (ethical  duties  towards  others) 


I  mperfect 
Duty 


II.  DIVISION  OF  THE  METAPHYSIC  OF  MORALS  ACCORDING 
TO  RELATIONS  OF  OBLIGATION 

As  the  subjects  between  whom  a  relation  of  in  various  juridical  relations  to  each  other,  an- 
right  and  duty  is  apprehended — whether  it  ac-  other  division  may  be  proposed  from  this  point 
tually  exists  or  not — admit  of  being  conceived  of  view,  as  follows: 


383 


384 


DIVISION  POSSIBLE  ACCORDING  TO  THE  SUBJECTIVE  RELATION 
OF  THOSE  WHO  BIND  UNDER  OBLIGATIONS,  AND  THOSE 
WHO  ARE  BOUND  UNDER  OBLIGATIONS 


The  juridical  relation  of  man  to 

beings  who  have  neither  right  nor  duty : 

Vacat.  There  is  no  such  relation, 
for  such  beings  are  irrational,  and  they 
neither  put  us  under  obligation,  nor 
can  we  be  put  under  obligation  by  them 

3- 

The  juridical  relation  of  man  to 

beings  who  have  only  duties  and  no 
rights: 

Vacat.  There  is  no  such  relation,  for 
such  beings  would  be  men  without  ju¬ 
ridical  personality,  as  slaves  of  bonds¬ 
men. 

A  real  relation  between  right  and  duty  is 
therefore  found,  in  this  scheme,  only  in  No.  2. 
The  reason  why  such  is  not  likewise  found  in 
No.  4  is  because  it  would  constitute  a  transcend - 
ent  duty,  that  is,  one  to  which  no  corresponding 
subject  can  be  given  that  is  external  and  capable 
of  imposing  obligation.  Consequently  the  rela¬ 
tion  from  the  theoretical  point  of  view  is  here 
merely  ideal;  that  is,  it  is  a  relation  to  an  ob- 


2. 

The  juridical  relation  of  man  to 
beings  who  have  both  rights  and  duties: 

Adest.  There  is  such  a  relation,  for  it 
is  the  relation  of  men  to  men. 


4. 

The  juridical  relation  of  man  to  a 
being  who  has  only  rights  and  no  duties 
(God): 

Vacat.  There  is  no  such  relation  in 
mere  philosophy,  because  such  a  being 
is  not  an  object  of  possible  experience. 


ject  of  thought  which  we  form  for  ourselves. 
But  the  conception  of  this  object  is  not  entirely 
empty.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  a  fruitful  concep¬ 
tion  in  relation  to  ourselves  and  the  maxims  of 
our  inner  morality,  and  therefore  in  relation  to 
practice  generally.  And  it  is  in  this  bearing  that 
all  the  duty  involved  and  practicable  for  us  in 
such  a  merely  ideal  relation  lies. 


III.  DIVISION  OF  THE  METAPHYSIC  OF  MORALS 
AS  A  SYSTEM  OF  DUTIES  GENERALLY 


According  to  the  constituent  principles  and  the  method  of  the  system 


I.  Principles 


I.  Duties  of  Right 


I  I.  Private  Right 
I II.  Public  Right 


II.  Duties  of  Virtue ,  etc.  And  so  on,  including 
all  that  refers  not  only  to  the  materials, 
but  also  to  the  architectonic  form  of  a 
scientific  system  of  morals,  when  the  meta¬ 
physical  investigation  of  the  elements  has 
completely  traced  out  the  universal  princi¬ 
ples  constituting  the  whole. 


II.  Method 


I.  Didactics 
II.  Ascetics 


GENERAL  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE 
METAPHYSIC  OF  MORALS 


I.  THE  RELATION  OF  THE  FACULTIES  OF  THE 
HUMAN  MIND  TO  THE  MORAL  LAWS 


The  activ.e  j acuity  oj  the  human  mind,  as 
the  faculty  of  desire  in  its  widest  sense,  is  the 
power  which  man  has,  through  his  mental  rep¬ 
resentations,  of  becoming  the  cause  of  objects 
corresponding  to  these  representations.  The  ca¬ 
pacity  of  a  being  to  act  in  conformity  with  his 
own  representations  is  what  constitutes  the  life 
of  such  a  being. 

It  is  to  be  observed,  first,  that  with  desire  or 
aversion  there  is  always  connected  pleasure  or 
pain,  the  susceptibility  for  which  is  called  feel¬ 
ing.  But  the  converse  does  not  always  hold;  for 
there  may  be  a  pleasure  connected,  not  with  the 
desire  of  an  object,  but  with  a  mere  mental 
representation,  it  being  indifferent  whether  an 
object  corresponding  to  the  representation  exist 
or  not.  And  second,  the  pleasure  or  pain  con¬ 
nected  with  the  object  of  desire  does  not  always 
precede  the  activity  of  desire;  nor  can  it  be 
regarded  in  every  case  as  the  cause,  but  it  may 
as  well  be  the  effect  of  that  activity.  The  ca¬ 
pacity  of  experiencing  pleasure  or  pain  on  the 
occasion  of  a  mental  representation  is  called 
“feeling,”  because  pleasure  and  pain  contain 
only  what  is  subjective  in  the  relations  of  our 
mental  activity.  They  do  not  involve  any  rela¬ 
tion  to  an  object  that  could  possibly  furnish  a 
knowledge  of  it  as  such;  they  cannot  even  give 
us  a  knowledge  of  our  own  mental  state.  For 
even  sensations,1  considered  apart  from  the 

1  The  sensibility  as  the  faculty  of  sense  may  be  de¬ 
fined  by  reference  to  the  subjective  nature  of  our  repre¬ 
sentations  generally.  It  is  the  understanding  that  first 
refers  the  subjective  representations  to  an  object;  it 
alone  thinks  anything  by  means  of  these  representa¬ 
tions.  Now,  the  subjective  nature  of  our  representations 
might  be  of  such  a  kind  that  they  could  be  related  to 
objects  so  as  to  furnish  knowledge  of  them,  either  in  re¬ 
gard  to  their  form  or  matter — in  the  former  relation  by 
pure  perception ,  in  the  latter  by  sensation  proper.  In  this 
case,  the  sense-faculty,  as  the  capacity  for  receiving  ob¬ 
jective  representations,  would  be  properly  called  sense- 
perception.  But  mere  mental  representation  from  its 
subjective  nature  cannot,  in  fact,  become  a  constituent 
of  objective  knowledge,  because  it  contains  merely  the 
relation  of  the  representations  to  the  subject,  and  in¬ 
cludes  nothing  that  can  be  used  for  attaining  a  knowl¬ 
edge  of  the  object.  In  this  case,  then,  this  receptivity  of 
the  mind  for  subjective  representations  is  called  jeeling. 


qualities  which  attach  to  them  on  account  of  the 
modifications  of  the  subject — as,  for  instance, 
in  reference  to  red,  sweet,  and  such  like — are 
referred  as  constituent  elements  of  knowledge 
to  objects,  whereas  pleasure  or  pain  felt  in  con¬ 
nection  with  what  is  red  or  sweet  express  ab¬ 
solutely  nothing  that  is  in  the  object,  but  mere¬ 
ly  a  relation  to  the  subject.  And  for  the  reason 
just  stated,  pleasure  and  pain  considered  in 
themselves  cannot  be  more  precisely  defined. 
All  that  can  be  further  done  with  regard  to 
them  is  merely  to  point  out  what  consequences 
they  may  have  in  certain  relations,  in  order  to 
make  the  knowledge  of  them  available  prac¬ 
tically. 

The  pleasure  which  is  necessarily  connected 
with  the  activity  of  desire,  when  the  represen¬ 
tation  of  the  object  desired  affects  the  capacity 
of  feeling,  may  be  called  practical  pleasure.  And 
this  designation  is  applicable  whether  the  pleas¬ 
ure  is  the  cause  or  the  effect  of  the  desire.  On 
the  other  hand,  that  pleasure  which  is  not  nec¬ 
essarily  connected  with  the  desire  of  an  object, 
and  which,  therefore,  is  not  a  pleasure  in  the 
existence  of  the  object,  but  is  merely  attached 
to  a  mental  representation  alone,  may  be  called 
inactive  complacency,  or  mere  contemplative 
pleasure.  The  feeling  of  this  latter  kind  of  pleas¬ 
ure  is  what  is  called  taste.  Hence,  in  a  system 
of  practical  philosophy,  the  contemplative  pleas¬ 
ure  of  taste  will  not  be  discussed  as  an  essential 
constituent  conception,  but  need  only  be  re¬ 
ferred  to  incidentally  or  episodically.  But  as  re¬ 
gards  practical  pleasure,  it  is  otherwise.  For  the 
determination  of  the  activity  of  the  faculty  of 
desire  or  appetency,  which  is  necessarily  pre¬ 
ceded  by  this  pleasure  as  its  cause,  is  what  prop¬ 
erly  constitutes  desire  in  the  strict  sense  of  the 
term.  Habitual  desire,  again,  constitutes  incli¬ 
nation;  and  the  connection  of  pleasure  with  the 

It  includes  the  effect  of  the  representations,  whether 
sensible  or  intellectual,  upon  the  subject;  and  it  belongs 
to  the  sensibility,  although  the  representation  itself  may 
belong  to  the  understanding  or  the  reason. 


38s 


INTRODUCTION 


activity  of  desire,  in  so  far  as  this  connection 
is  judged  by  the  understanding  to  be  valid  ac¬ 
cording  to  a  general  rule  holding  good  at  least 
for  the  individual,  is  what  is  called  interest. 
Hence,  in  such  a  case,  the  practical  pleasure  is 
an  interest  of  the  inclination  of  the  individual. 
On  the  other  hand,  if  the  pleasure  can  only  fol¬ 
low  a  preceding  determination  of  the  faculty 
of  desire,  it  is  an  intellectual  pleasure ,  and  the 
interest  in  the  object  must  be  called  a  rational 
interest;  for  were  the  interest  sensuous,  and 
not  based  only  upon  pure  principles  of  reason, 
sensation  would  necessarily  be  conjoined  with 
the  pleasure,  and  would  thus  determine  the  ac¬ 
tivity  of  the  desire.  Where  an  entirely  pure  in¬ 
terest  of  reason  must  be  assumed,  it  is  not  le¬ 
gitimate  to  introduce  into  it  an  interest  of  in¬ 
clination  surreptitiously.  However,  in  order  to 
conform  so  far  with  the  common  phraseology, 
we  may  allow  the  application  of  the  term  “in¬ 
clination”  even  to  that  which  can  only  be  the 
object  of  an  “intellectual”  pleasure  in  the  sense 
of  a  habitual  desire  arising  from  a  pure  interest 
of  reason.  But  such  inclination  would  have  to 
be  viewed,  not  as  the  cause,  but  as  the  effect  of 
the  rational  interest;  and  we  might  call  it  the 
non-sensuous  or  rational  inclination  ( propensio 
intellectualis).  Further,  concupiscence  is  to  be 
distinguished  from  the  activity  of  desire  itself, 
as  a  stimulus  or  incitement  to  its  determination. 
It  is  always  a  sensuous  state  of  the  mind,  which 
does  not  itself  attain  to  the  definiteness  of  an 
act  of  the  power  of  desire. 

The  activity  of  the  faculty  of  desire  may 
proceed  in  accordance  with  conceptions;  and  in 
so  far  as  the  principle  thus  determining  it  to 
action  is  found  in  the  mind,  and  not  in  its  ob¬ 
ject,  it  constitutes  a  power  of  acting  or  not  acting 
according  to  liking.  In  so  far  as  the  activity  is  ac¬ 
companied  with  the  consciousness  of  the  power 
of  the  action  to  produce  the  object,  it  forms 
an  act  of  choice;  if  this  consciousness  is  not 
conjoined  with  it,  the  activity  is  called  a  wish. 
The  faculty  of  desire,  in  so  far  as  its  inner  prin¬ 
ciple  of  determination  as  the  ground  of  its  liking 
or  predilection  lies  in  the  reason  of  the  subject, 
constitutes  the  will.  The  will  is  therefore  the 
faculty  of  active  desire  or  appetency,  viewed 
not  so  much  in  relation  to  the  action — which  is 
the  relation  of  the  act  of  choice — as  rather  in 
relation  to  the  principle  that  determines  the 
power  of  choice  to  the  action.  It  has,  in  itself, 
properly  no  special  principle  of  determination, 
but  in  so  far  as  it  may  determine  the  voluntary 
act  of  choice,  it  is  the  practical  reason  itself. 

Under  the  will,  taken  generally,  may  be  in¬ 


cluded  the  volitional  act  of  choice ,  and  also  the 
mere  act  of  wish ,  in  so  far  as  reason  may  deter¬ 
mine  the  faculty  of  desire  in  its  activity.  The 
act  of  choice  that  can  be  determined  by  pure 
reason  constitutes  the  act  of  free-will.  That  act 
which  is  determinable  only  by  inclination  as  a 
sensuous  impulse  or  stimulus  would  be  irra¬ 
tional  brute  choice  ( arbitrium  hrutum).  The 
human  act  of  choice,  however,  as  human,  is 
in  fact  affected  by  such  impulses  or  stimuli, 
but  is  not  determined  by  them;  and  it  is,  there¬ 
fore,  not  pure  in  itself  when  taken  apart  from 
the  acquired  habit  of  determination  by  reason. 
But  it  may  be  determined  to  action  by  the  pure 
will.  The  freedom  of  the  act  of  volitional 
choice  is  its  independence  of  being  determined 
by  sensuous  impulses  or  stimuli.  This  forms 
the  negative  conception  of  the  free-will.  The 
positive  conception  of  freedom  is  given  by  the 
fact  that  the  will  is  the  capability  of  pure  rea¬ 
son  to  be  practical  of  itself.  But  this  is  not  pos¬ 
sible  otherwise  than  by  the  maxim  of  every 
action  being  subjected  to  the  condition  of  being 
practicable  as  a  universal  law.  Applied  as  pure 
reason  to  the  act  of  choice,  and  considered  apart 
from  its  objects,  it  may  be  regarded  as  the 
faculty  of  principles;  and,  in  this  connection, 
it  is  the  source  of  practical  principles.  Hence  it 
is  to  be  viewed  as  a  lawgiving  faculty.  But  as 
the  material  upon  which  to  construct  a  law  is 
not  furnished  to  it,  it  can  only  make  the  form 
of  the  maxim  of  the  act  of  will,  in  so  far  as  it 
is  available  as  a  universal  law,  the  supreme  law 
and  determining  principle  of  the  will.  And  as 
the  maxims,  or  rules  of  human  action  derived 
from  subjective  causes,  do  not  of  themselves 
necessarily  agree  with  those  that  are  objective 
and  universal,  reason  can  only  prescribe  this  su¬ 
preme  law  as  an  absolute  imperative  of  prohi¬ 
bition  or  command. 

The  laws  of  freedom,  as  distinguished  from 
the  laws  of  nature,  are  moral  laws.  So  far  as 
they  refer  only  to  external  actions  and  their 
lawfulness,  they  are  called  juridical;  but  if  they 
also  require  that,  as  laws,  they  shall  themselves 
be  the  determining  principles  of  our  actions, 
they  are  ethical.  The  agreement  of  an  action 
with  juridical  laws  is  its  legality;  the  agreement 
of  an  action  with  ethical  laws  is  its  morality. 
The  freedom  to  which  the  former  laws  refer, 
can  only  be  freedom  in  external  practice;  but 
the  freedom  to  which  the  latter  laws  refer  is 
freedom  in  the  internal  as  well  as  the  external 
exercise  of  the  activity  of  the  will  in  so  far  as 
it  is  determined  by  laws  of  reason.  So,  in  theo¬ 
retical  philosophy,  it  is  said  that  only  the  ob- 


TO  THE  METAPHYSIC  OF  MORALS 


jects  of  the  external  senses  are  in  space,  but  all 
the  objects  both  of  internal  and  external  sense 
are  in  time:  because  the  representations  of 
both,  as  being  representations,  so  far  belong  all 
to  the  internal  sense.  In  like  manner,  whether 
freedom  is  viewed  in  reference  to  the  external 


387 

or  the  internal  action  of  the  will,  its  laws,  as 
pure  practical  laws  of  reason  for  the  free  ac¬ 
tivity  of  the  will  generally,  must  at  the  same 
time  be  inner  principles  for  its  determination, 
although  they  may  not  always  be  considered  in 
this  relation. 


II.  THE  IDEA  AND  NECESSITY  OF  A 
METAPHYSIC  OF  MORALS 


It  has  been  shown  in  The  Metaphysical  Prin¬ 
ciples  of  the  Science  of  Nature  that  there  must 
be  principles  a  priori  for  the  natural  science 
that  has  to  deal  with  the  objects  of  the  external 
senses.  And  it  was  further  shown  that  it  is  pos¬ 
sible,  and  even  necessary,  to  formulate  a  system 
of  these  principles  under  the  name  of  a  “meta¬ 
physical  science  of  nature,”  as  a  preliminary  to 
experimental  physics  regarded  as  natural  science 
applied  to  particular  objects  of  experience.  But 
this  latter  science,  if  care  be  taken  to  keep  its 
generalizations  free  from  error,  may  accept 
many  propositions  as  universal  on  the  evidence 
of  experience,  although  if  the  term  “universal” 
be  taken  in  its  strict  sense,  these  would  neces¬ 
sarily  have  to  be  deduced  by  the  metaphysical 
science  from  principles  a  priori.  Thus  Newton 
accepted  the  principle  of  the  equality  of  action 
and  reaction  as  established  by  experience,  and 
yet  he  extended  it  as  a  universal  law  over  the 
whole  of  material  nature.  The  chemists  go  even 
farther,  grounding  their  most  general  laws  re¬ 
garding  the  combination  and  decomposition  of 
the  materials  of  bodies  wholly  upon  experience; 
and  yet  they  trust  so  completely  to  the  univer¬ 
sality  and  necessity  of  those  laws  that  they 
have  no  anxiety  as  to  any  error  being  found  in 
propositions  founded  upon  experiments  con¬ 
ducted  in  accordance  with  them. 

But  it  is  otherwise  with  moral  laws.  These, 
in  contradistinction  to  natural  laws,  are  only 
valid  as  laws,  in  so  far  as  they  can  be  rationally 
established  a  priori  and  comprehended  as  nec¬ 
essary.  In  fact,  conceptions  and  judgements  re¬ 
garding  ourselves  and  our  conduct  have  no 
moral  significance,  if  they  contain  only  what 
may  be  learned  from  experience;  and  when  any 
one  is.  so  to  speak,  misled  into  making  a  moral 
principle  out  of  anything  derived  from  this  lat¬ 
ter  source,  he  is  already  in  danger  of  falling  into 
the  coarsest  and  most  fatal  errors. 

If  the  philosophy  of  morals  were  nothing 
more  than  a  theory  of  happiness  ( eudaemon - 
ism),  it  would  be  absurd  to  search  after  prin¬ 


ciples  a  priori  as  a  foundation  for  it.  For  how¬ 
ever  plausible  it  may  sound  to  say  that  reason, 
even  prior  to  experience,  can  comprehend  by 
what  means  we  may  attain  to  a  lasting  enjoy¬ 
ment  of  the  real  pleasures  of  life,  yet  all  that  is 
taught  on  this  subject  a  priori  is  either  tauto¬ 
logical,  or  is  assumed  wholly  without  founda¬ 
tion.  It  is  only  experience  that  can  show  what 
will  bring  us  enjoyment.  The  natural  impulses 
directed  towards  nourishment,  the  sexual  in¬ 
stinct,  or  the  tendency  to  rest  and  motion,  as 
well  as  the  higher  desires  of  honour,  the  acquisi¬ 
tion  of  knowledge,  and  such  like,  as  developed 
with  our  natural  capacities,  are  alone  capable  of 
showing  in  what  those  enjoyments  are  to  be 
found.  And,  further,  the  knowledge  thus  ac¬ 
quired  is  available  for  each  individual  merely 
in  his  own  way;  and  it  is  only  thus  he  can  learn 
the  means  by  which  he  has  to  seek  those  enjoy¬ 
ments.  All  specious  rationalizing  a  priori ,  in  this 
connection,  is  nothing  at  bottom  but  carrying 
facts  of  experience  up  to  generalizations  by  in¬ 
duction  ( secundum  principia  generalia  non  uni - 
versalia) ;  and  the  generality  thus  attained  is  still 
so  limited  that  numberless  exceptions  must  be 
allowed  to  every  individual  in  order  that  he  may 
adapt  the  choice  of  his  mode  of  life  to  his 
own  particular  inclinations  and  his  capacity  for 
pleasure.  And,  after  all,  the  individual  has  really 
to  acquire  his  prudence  at  the  cost  of  his  own 
suffering  or  that  of  his  neighbors. 

But  it  is  quite  otherwise  with  the  principles 
of  morality.  They  lay  down  commands  for  ev¬ 
ery  one  without  regard  to  his  particular  inclina¬ 
tions,  and  merely  because  and  so  far  as  he  is 
free,  and  has  a  practical  reason.  Instruction  in 
the  laws  of  morality  is  not  drawn  from  obser¬ 
vation  of  oneself  or  of  our  animal  nature,  nor 
from  perception  of  the  course  of  the  world  in 
regard  to  what  happens,  or  how  men  act.1  But 
reason  commands  how  we  ought  to  act,  even  al- 

1  This  holds  notwithstanding  the  fact  that  the  term 
“morals,”  in  Latin  mores,  and  in  German  sitten , 
signifies  originally  only  manners  or  mode  of  life. 


INTRODUCTION 


388 

though  no  example  of  such  action  were  to  be 
found;  nor  does  reason  give  any  regard  to  the 
advantage  which  may  accrue  to  us  by  so  acting, 
and  which  experience  could  alone  actually  show. 
For,  although  reason  allows  us  to  seek  what  is 
for  our  advantage  in  every  possible  way,  and 
although,  founding  upon  the  evidence  of  experi¬ 
ence,  it  may  further  promise  that  greater  ad¬ 
vantages  will  probably  follow  on  the  average 
from  the  observance  of  her  commands  than 
from  their  transgression,  especially  if  prudence 
guides  the  conduct,  yet  the  authority  of  her  pre¬ 
cepts  as  commands  does  not  rest  on  such  consid¬ 
erations.  They  are  used  by  reason  only  as  coun¬ 
sels,  and  by  way  of  a  counterpoise  against  se¬ 
ductions  to  an  opposite  course,  when  adjusting 
beforehand  the  equilibrium  of  a  partial  balance 
in  the  sphere  of  practical  judgement,  in  order 
thereby  to  secure  the  decision  of  this  judge¬ 
ment,  according  to  the  due  weight  of  the  a  pri¬ 
ori  principles  of  a  pure  practical  reason. 

Metaphysics  designates  any  system  of  knowl¬ 
edge  a  priori  that  consists  of  pure  conceptions. 
Accordingly,  a  practical  philosophy  not  having 
nature,  but  the  freedom  of  the  will  for  its  ob¬ 
ject,  will  presuppose  and  require  a  metaphysic 
of  morals.  It  is  even  a  duty  to  have  such  a  meta¬ 
physic;  and  every  man  does,  indeed,  possess  it 
in  himself,  although  commonly  but  in  an  ob¬ 
scure  way.  For  how  could  any  one  believe  that 
he  has  a  source  of  universal  law  in  himself, 
without  principles  a  priori ?  And  just  as  in  a 
metaphysics  of  nature  there  must  be  principles 
regulating  the  application  of  the  universal  su¬ 
preme  principles  of  nature  to  objects  of  experi¬ 
ence,  so  there  cannot  but  be  such  principles  in 
the  metaphysic  of  morals;  and  we  will  often 
have  to  deal  objectively  with  the  particular  na¬ 
ture  of  man  as  known  only  by  experience,  in 
order  to  show  in  it  the  consequences  of  these 
universal  moral  principles.  But  this  mode  of 
dealing  with  these  principles  in  their  particular 
applications  will  in  no  way  detract  from  their 
rational  purity,  or  throw  doubt  on  their  a  priori 
origin.  In  other  words,  this  amounts  to  saying 
that  a  metaphysic  of  morals  cannot  be  founded 
on  anthropology  as  the  empirical  science  of 
man,  but  may  be  applied  to  it. 

The  counterpart  of  a  metaphysic  of  morals, 
and  the  other  member  of  the  division  of  prac¬ 
tical  philosophy,  would  be  a  moral  anthropol¬ 
ogy,  as  the  empirical  science  of  the  moral  nature 


of  man.  This  science  would  contain  only  the 
subjective  conditions  that  hinder  or  favor  the 
realization  in  practice  of  the  universal  moral 
laws  in  human  nature,  with  the  means  of  propa¬ 
gating,  spreading,  and  strengthening  the  moral 
principles — as  by  the  education  of  the  young 
and  the  instruction  of  the  people — and  all  other 
such  doctrines  and  precepts  founded  upon  expe¬ 
rience  and  indispensable  in  themselves,  although 
they  must  neither  precede  the  metaphysical  in¬ 
vestigation  of  the  principles  of  reason,  nor  be 
mixed  up  with  it.  For,  by  doing  so,  there  would 
be  a  great  danger  of  laying  down  false,  or  at 
least  very  flexible  moral  laws,  which  would  hold 
forth  as  unattainable  what  is  not  attached  only 
because  the  law  has  not  been  comprehended  and 
presented  in  its  purity,  in  which  also  its  strength 
consists.  Or,  otherwise,  spurious  and  mixed  mo¬ 
tives  might  be  adopted  instead  of  what  is  dutiful 
and  good  in  itself ;  and  these  would  furnish  no 
certain  moral  principles  either  for  the  guidance 
of  the  judgement  or  for  the  discipline  of  the 
heart  in  the  practice  of  duty.  It  is  only  by  pure 
reason,  therefore,  that  duty  can  and  must  be 
prescribed. 

The  higher  division  of  philosophy,  under 
which  the  division  just  mentioned  stands,  is  into 
theoretical  philosophy  and  practical  philosophy. 
Practical  philosophy  is  just  moral  philosophy 
in  its  widest  sense,  as  has  been  explained  else¬ 
where.1  All  that  is  practicable  and  possible,  ac¬ 
cording  to  natural  laws,  is  the  special  subject  of 
the  activity  of  art,  and  its  precepts  and  rules  en¬ 
tirely  depend  on  the  theory  of  nature.  It  is  only 
what  is  practicable  according  to  laws  of  free¬ 
dom  that  can  have  principles  independent  of 
theory,  for  there  is  no  theory  in  relation  to  what 
passes  beyond  the  determinations  of  nature. 
Philosophy  therefore  cannot  embrace  under  its 
practical  division  a  technical  theory,  but  only 
a  morally  practical  doctrine.  But  if  the  dexter¬ 
ity  of  the  will  in  acting  according  to  laws  of 
freedom,  in  contradistinction  to  nature,  were  to 
be  also  called  an  art ,  it  would  necessarily  indi¬ 
cate  an  art  which  would  make  a  system  of  free¬ 
dom  possible  like  the  system  of  nature.  This 
would  truly  be  a  Divine  art,  if  we  were  in  a 
position  by  means  of  it  to  realize  completely 
what  reason  prescribes  to  us,  and  to  put  the  idea 
into  practice. 

1  In  the  Critique  oj  Judgement  (1790). 


TO  THE  METAPHYSIC  OF  MORALS 


389 


III.  THE  DIVISION  OF  A  METAPHYSIC  OF  MORALS 


All  legislation ,  whether  relating  to  internal  or 
external  action,  and  whether  prescribed  a  pri¬ 
ori  by  mere  reason  or  laid  down  by  the  will  of 
another,  involves  two  elements:  First,  a  law 
which  represents  the  action  that  ought  to  hap¬ 
pen  as  necessary  objectively,  thus  making  the 
action  a  duty;  second,  a  motive  which  connects 
the  principle  determining  the  will  to  this  action 
with  the  mental  representation  of  the  law  sub¬ 
jectively,  so  that  the  law  makes  duty  the  motive 
of  the  action.  By  the  first  element,  the  action 
is  represented  as  a  duty,  in  accordance  with  the 
mere  theoretical  knowledge  of  the  possibility  of 
determining  the  activity  of  the  will  by  practical 
rules.  By  the  second  element,  the  obligation  so 
to  act  is  connected  in  the  subject  with  a  deter¬ 
mining  principle  of  the  will  as  such.  All  legisla¬ 
tion,  therefore,  may  be  differentiated  by  refer¬ 
ence  to  its  motive-principle.1  The  legislation 
which  makes  an  action  a  duty,  and  this  duty  at 
the  same  time  a  motive,  is  ethical.  That  legis¬ 
lation  which  does  not  include  the  motive-prin¬ 
ciple  in  the  law,  and  consequently  admits  anoth¬ 
er  motive  than  the  idea  of  duty  itself,  is  juridi¬ 
cal.  In  respect  of  the  latter,  it  is  evident  that  the 
motives  distinct  from  the  idea  of  duty,  to  which 
it  may  refer,  must  be  drawn  from  the  subjec¬ 
tive  (pathological)  influences  of  inclination  and 
of  aversion,  determining  the  voluntary  activity, 
and  especially  from  the  latter;  because  it  is  a 
legislation  which  has  to  be  compulsory,  and  not 
merely  a  mode  of  attracting  or  persuading.  The 
agreement  or  non-agreement  of  an  action  with 
the  law,  without  reference  to  its  motive,  is  its 
legality;  and  that  character  of  the  action  in 
which  the  idea  of  duty  arising  from  the  law  at 
the  same  time  forms  the  motive  of  the  action, 
is  its  morality. 

Duties  specially  in  accord  with  a  juridical 
legislation  can  only  be  external  duties.  For  this 
mode  of  legislation  does  not  require  that  the 
idea  of  the  duty,  which  is  internal,  shall  be  of 
itself  the  determining  principle  of  the  act  of 
will ;  and  as  it  requires  a  motive  suitable  to  the 
nature  of  its  laws,  it  can  only  connect  what  is 
external  with  the  law.  Ethical  legislation,  on  the 
other  hand,  makes  internal  actions  also  duties, 
but  not  to  the  exclusion  of  the  external,  for  it 
embraces  everything  which  is  of  the  nature  of 

1  This  ground  of  division  will  apply,  although  the 
action  which  it  makes  a  duty  may  coincide  with  an¬ 
other  action  that  may  be  otherwise  looked  at  from 
another  point  of  view.  For  instance,  actions  may  in 
all  cases  be  classified  as  external. 


duty.  And  just  because  ethical  legislation  in¬ 
cludes  within  its  law  the  internal  motive  of  the 
action  as  contained  in  the  idea  of  duty,  it  in¬ 
volves  a  characteristic  which  cannot  at  all  enter 
into  the  legislation  that  is  external.  Hence,  ethi¬ 
cal  legislation  cannot  as  such  be  external,  not 
even  when  proceeding  from  a  Divine  will,  al¬ 
though  it  may  receive  duties  which  rest  on  an 
external  legislation  as  duties ,  into  the  position 
of  motives,  within  its  own  legislation. 

From  what  has  been  said,  it  is  evident  that 
all  duties,  merely  because  they  are  duties,  be¬ 
long  to  ethics;  and  yet  the  legislation  upon 
which  they  are  founded  is  not  on  that  account 
in  all  cases  contained  in  ethics.  On  the  contrary, 
the  law  of  many  of  them  lies  outside  of  ethics. 
Thus  ethics  commands  that  I  must  fulfil  a 
promise  entered  into  by  contract,  although  the 
other  party  might  not  be  able  to  compel  me  to 
do  so.  It  adopts  the  law  ( pacta  sunt  servanda) 
and  the  duty  corresponding  to  it,  from  jurispru¬ 
dence  or  the  science  of  right,  by  which  they  are 
established.  It  is  not  in  ethics,  therefore,  but  in 
jurisprudence,  that  the  principle  of  the  legisla¬ 
tion  lies,  that  “promises  made  and  accepted 
must  be  kept.”  Accordingly,  ethics  specially 
teaches  that  if  the  motive-principle  of  external 
compulsion  which  juridical  legislation  connects 
with  a  duty  is  even  let  go,  the  idea  of  duty 
alone  is  sufficient  of  itself  as  a  motive.  For  were 
it  not  so,  and  were  the  legislation  itself  not 
juridical,  and  consequently  the  duty  arising 
from  it  not  specially  a  duty  of  right  as  distin¬ 
guished  from  a  duty  of  virtue,  then  fidelity  in 
the  performance  of  acts,  to  which  the  individual 
may  be  bound  by  the  terms  of  a  contract,  would 
have  to  be  classified  with  acts  of  benevolence 
and  the  obligation  that  underlies  them,  which 
cannot  be  correct.  To  keep  one’s  promise  is  not 
properly  a  duty  of  virtue,  but  a  duty  of  right, 
and  the  performance  of  it  can  be  enforced  by 
external  compulsion.  But  to  keep  one’s  promise, 
even  when  no  compulsion  can  be  applied  to  en¬ 
force  it,  is,  at  the  same  time,  a  virtuous  action, 
and  a  proof  of  virtue.  Jurisprudence  as  the 
science  of  right,  and  ethics  as  the  science  of  vir¬ 
tue,  are  therefore  distinguished  not  so  much  by 
their  different  duties,  as  rather  by  the  difference 
of  the  legislation  which  connects  the  one  or  the 
other  kind  of  motive  with  their  laws. 

Ethical  legislation  is  that  which  cannot  be 
external,  although  the  duties  it  prescribes  may 
be  external  as  well  as  internal.  Juridical  legis¬ 
lation  is  that  which  may  also  be  external.  Thus 


INTRODUCTION 


it  is  an  external  duty  to  keep  a  promise  entered 
into  by  contract;  but  the  injunction  to  do  this 
merely  because  it  is  a  duty,  without  regard  to 
any  other  motive,  belongs  exclusively  to  the 
internal  legislation.  It  does  not  belong  thus  to 
the  ethical  sphere  as  being  a  particular  kind  of 
duty  or  a  particular  mode  of  action  to  which 
we  are  bound — for  it  is  an  external  duty  in 
ethics  as  well  as  in  jurisprudence — but  it  is  be¬ 
cause  the  legislation  in  the  case  referred  to  is 
internal,  and  cannot  have  an  external  lawgiver, 
that  the  obligation  is  reckoned  as  belonging  to 
ethics.  For  the  same  reason,  the  duties  of  be¬ 
nevolence,  although  they  are  external  duties  as 
obligations  to  external  actions,  are,  in  like  man¬ 
ner,  reckoned  as  belonging  to  ethics,  because 
they  can  only  be  enjoined  by  legislation  that  is 
internal.  Ethics  has  no  doubt  its  own  peculiar 
duties — such  as  those  towards  oneself — but  it 
has  also  duties  in  common  with  jurisprudence, 
only  not  under  the  same  mode  of  obligation.  In 
short,  the  peculiarity  of  ethical  legislation  is  to 
enjoin  the  performance  of  certain  actions  mere¬ 
ly  because  they  are  duties,  and  to  make  the  prin¬ 
ciple  of  duty  itself — whatever  be  its  source  or 


occasion — the  sole  sufficing  motive  of  the  ac¬ 
tivity  of  the  will.  Thus,  then,  there  are  many 
ethical  duties  that  are  directly  such;  and  the 
inner  legislation  also  makes  the  others — all  and 
each  of  them — indirectly  ethical. 

The  deduction  of  the  division  of  a  system  is 
the  proof  of  its  completeness  as  well  as  of  its 
continuity,  so  that  there  may  be  a  logical  tran¬ 
sition  from  the  general  conception  divided  to 
the  members  of  the  division,  and  through  the 
whole  series  of  the  subdivisions  without  any 
break  or  leap  in  the  arrangement  ( divisio  per 
saltum).  Such  a  division  is  one  of  the  most  diffi¬ 
cult  conditions  for  the  architect  of  a  system 
to  fulfil.  There  is  even  some  doubt  as  to  what 
is  the  highest  conception  that  is  primarily  di¬ 
vided  into  right  and  wrong  ( aut  fas  aut  nefas ). 
It  is  assuredly  the  conception  of  the  activity  of 
the  free-will  in  general.  In  like  manner,  the  ex¬ 
pounders  of  ontology  start  from  something 
and  nothing ,  without  perceiving  that  these 
are  already  members  of  a  division  for  which 
the  highest  divided  conception  is  awanting,  and 
which  can  be  no  other  than  that  of  thing  in 
general. 


IV.  GENERAL  PRELIMINARY  CONCEPTIONS  DEFINED  AND  EXPLAINED 

(Philosophia  practica  universalis) 


The  conception  of  freedom  is  a  conception  of 
pure  reason.  It  is  therefore  transcendent  in  so 
far  as  regards  theoretical  philosophy;  for  it  is  a 
conception  for  which  no  corresponding  instance 
or  example  can  be  found  or  supplied  in  any  pos¬ 
sible  experience.  Accordingly  freedom  is  not 
presented  as  an  object  of  any  theoretical  knowl¬ 
edge  that  is  possible  for  us.  It  is  in  no  respect 
a  constitutive,  but  only  a  regulative  conception; 
and  it  can  be  accepted  by  the  speculative  reason 
as  at  most  a  merely  negative  principle.  In  the 
practical  sphere  of  reason,  however,  the  reality 
of  freedom  may  be  demonstrated  by  certain 
practical  principles  which,  as  laws,  prove  a  cau¬ 
sality  of  the  pure  reason  in  the  process  of  de¬ 
termining  the  activity  of  the  will  that  is  inde¬ 
pendent  of  all  empirical  and  sensible  conditions. 
And  thus  there  is  established  the  fact  of  a  pure 
will  existing  in  us  as  the  source  of  all  moral 
conceptions  and  laws. 

On  this  positive  conception  of  freedom  in 
the  practical  relation  certain  unconditional 
practical  laws  are  founded,  and  they  specially 
constitute  moral  laws.  In  relation  to  us  as  hu¬ 
man  beings,  with  an  activity  of  will  modified 
by  sensible  influences  so  as  not  to  be  conform¬ 


able  to  the  pure  will,  but  as  often  contrary  to  it, 
these  laws  appear  as  imperatives  commanding 
or  prohibiting  certain  actions;  and  as  such  they 
are  categorical  or  unconditional  imperatives. 
Their  categorical  and  unconditional  character 
distinguishes  them  from  the  technical  impera¬ 
tives  which  express  the  prescriptions  of  art,  and 
which  always  command  only  conditionally.  Ac¬ 
cording  to  these  categorical  imperatives,  certain 
actions  are  allowed  or  disallowed  as  being  mor¬ 
ally  possible  or  impossible;  and  certain  of  them 
or  their  opposites  are  morally  necessary  and 
obligatory.  Hence,  in  reference  to  such  actions, 
there  arises  the  conception  of  a  duty  whose  ob¬ 
servance  or  transgression  is  accompanied  with 
a  pleasure  or  pain  of  a  peculiar  kind,  known  as 
moral  feeling.  We  do  not,  however,  take  the 
moral  feelings  or  sentiments  into  account  in 
considering  the  practical  laws  of  reason.  For 
they  do  not  form  the  foundation  or  principle  of 
practical  laws  of  reason,  but  only  the  subjective 
effects  that  arise  in  the  mind  on  the  occasion 
of  our  voluntary  activity  being  determined  by 
these  laws.  And  while  they  neither  add  to  nor 
take  from  the  objective  validity  or  influence  of 
the  moral  laws  in  the  judgement  of  reason,  such 


TO  THE  METAPHYSIC  OF  MORALS 


sentiments  may  vary  according  to  the  differ¬ 
ences  of  the  individuals  who  experience  them. 

The  following  conceptions  are  common  to 
jurisprudence  and  ethics  as  the  two  main  divi¬ 
sions  of  the  metaphysic  of  morals. 

Obligation  is  the  necessity  of  a  free  action 
when  viewed  in  relation  to  a  categorical  impera¬ 
tive  of  reason.  An  imperative  is  a  practical  rule 
by  which  an  action,  otherwise  contingent  in  it¬ 
self,  is  made  necessary.  It  is  distinguished  from 
a  practical  law  in  that  such  a  law,  while  like¬ 
wise  representing  the  action  as  necessary,  does 
not  consider  whether  it  is  internally  necessary 
as  involved  in  the  nature  of  the  agent — say  as  a 
holy  being — or  is  contingent  to  him,  as  in  the 
case  of  man  as  we  find  him;  for  where  the  first 
condition  holds  good,  there  is  in  fact  no  impera¬ 
tive.  Hence  an  imperative  is  a  rule  which  not 
only  represents  but  makes  a  subjectively  con¬ 
tingent  action  necessary;  and  it,  accordingly, 
represents  the  subject  as  being  (morally)  ne¬ 
cessitated  to  act  in  accordance  with  this  rule.  A 
categorical  or  unconditional  imperative  is  one 
which  does  not  represent  the  action  in  any  way 
mediately  through  the  conception  of  an  end  that 
is  to  be  attained  by  it;  but  it  presents  the  action 
to  the  mind  as  objectively  necessary  by  the 
mere  representation  of  its  form  as  an  action, 
and  thus  makes  it  necessary.  Such  imperatives 
cannot  be  put  forward  by  any  other  practical 
science  than  that  which  prescribes  obligations, 
and  it  is  only  the  science  of  morals  that  does 
this.  All  other  imperatives  are  technical ,  and 
they  are  altogether  conditional.  The  ground  of 
the  possibility  of  categorical  imperatives  lies 
in  the  fact  that  they  refer  to  no  determination 
of  the  activity  of  the  will  by  which  a  purpose 
might  be  assigned  to  it,  but  solely  to  its  freedom. 

Every  action  is  allowed  ( licitum )  which  is  not 
contrary  to  obligation;  and  this  freedom  not  be¬ 
ing  limited  by  an  opposing  imperative,  consti¬ 
tutes  a  moral  right  as  a  warrant  or  title  of  action 
( facultas  moralis).  From  this  it  is  at  once  evi¬ 
dent  what  actions  are  disallowed  or  illicit  (il- 
licita). 

Duty  is  the  designation  of  any  action  to 
which  anyone  is  bound  by  an  obligation.  It  is 
therefore  the  subject-matter  of  all  obligation. 
Duty  as  regards  the  action  concerned  may  be 
one  and  the  same,  and  yet  we  may  be  bound  to 
it  in  various  ways. 

The  categorical  imperative,  as  expressing  an 
obligation  in  respect  to  certain  actions,  is  a 
morally  practical  law.  But  because  obligation  in¬ 
volves  not  merely  practical  necessity  expressed 
in  a  law  as  such,  but  also  actual  necessitation, 


39* 

the  categorical  imperative  is  a  law  either  of 
command  or  prohibition,  according  as  the  doing 
or  not  doing  of  an  action  is  represented  as  a 
duty.  An  action  which  is  neither  commanded 
nor  forbidden  is  merely  allowed ,  because  there 
is  no  law7  restricting  freedom,  nor  any  duty  in 
respect  of  it.  Such  an  action  is  said  to  be  mor¬ 
ally  indifferent  ( indifferens ,  adiaphoron,  res 
merae  facultatis).  It  may  be  asked  whether 
there  are  such  morally  indifferent  actions;  and 
if  there  are,  whether  in  addition  to  the  precep¬ 
tive  and  prohibitive  law  ( lex  praeceptiva  et  pro- 
hibitiva ,  lex  mandati  et  vetiti ),  there  is  also 
required  a  permissive  law  ( lex  permissiva) ,  in 
order  that  one  may  be  free  in  such  relations  to 
act,  or  to  forbear  from  acting,  at  his  pleasure? 
If  it  were  so,  the  moral  right  in  question  would 
not,  in  all  cases,  refer  to  actions  that  are  indif¬ 
ferent  in  themselves  ( adiaphora )  ;  for  no  special 
law  would  be  required  to  establish  such  a  right, 
considered  according  to  moral  laws. 

An  action  is  called  an  act — or  moral  deed — 
in  so  far  as  it  is  subject  to  laws  of  obligation, 
and  consequently  in  so  far  as  the  subject  of  it 
is  regarded  with  reference  to  the  freedom  of 
his  choice  in  the  exercise  of  his  will.  The  agent 
— as  the  actor  or  doer  of  the  deed — is  regarded 
as,  through  the  act,  the  author  of  its  effect;  and 
this  effect,  along  with  the  action  itself,  may  be 
imputed  to  him,  if  he  previously  knew  the  law 
in  virtue  of  which  an  obligation  rested  upon  him. 

A  person  is  a  subject  who  is  capable  of  having 
his  actions  imputed  to  him.  Moral  personality 
is,  therefore,  nothing  but  the  freedom  of  a  ra¬ 
tional  being  under  moral  laws;  and  it  is  to  be 
distinguished  from  psychological  freedom  as 
the  mere  faculty  by  which  we  become  conscious 
of  ourselves  in  different  states  of  the  identity  of 
our  existence.  Hence  it  follows  that  a  person  is 
properly  subject  to  no  other  laws  than  those  he 
lays  dowrn  for  himself,  either  alone  or  in  con¬ 
junction  with  others. 

A  thing  is  what  is  incapable  of  being  the  sub¬ 
ject  of  imputation.  Every  object  of  the  free  ac¬ 
tivity  of  the  will,  which  is  itself  void  of  free¬ 
dom,  is  therefore  called  a  thing  ( res  corpore - 
alis). 

Right  or  wrong  applies,  as  a  general  quality, 
to  an  act  ( rectum  aut  minus  rectum ),  in  so  far 
as  it  is  in  accordance  with  duty  or  contrary  to 
duty  ( factum  licitum  aut  illicitum ),  no  matter 
what  may  be  the  subject  or  origin  of  the  duty 
itself.  An  act  that  is  contrary  to  duty  is  called 
a  transgression  ( reatus ). 

An  unintentional  transgression  of  a  duty, 
which  is,  nevertheless,  imputable  to  a  person, 


INTRODUCTION 


is  called  a  mere  fault  {culpa).  An  intentional 
transgression — that  is,  an  act  accompanied  with 
the  consciousness  that  it  is  a  transgression — 
constitutes  a  crime  (dolus). 

Whatever  is  juridically  in  accordance  with 
external  laws  is  said  to  be  just  (jus,  instum) ; 
and  whatever  is  not  juridically  in  accordance 
with  external  laws  is  unjust  (unjustum). 

A  collision  of  duties  or  obligations  ( collisio 
officiorum  s.  obligationum)  would  be  the  result 
of  such  a  relation  between  them  that  the  one 
would  annul  the  other,  in  whole  or  in  part.  Duty 
and  obligation,  however,  are  conceptions  which 
express  the  objective  practical  necessity  of  cer¬ 
tain  actions,  and  two  opposite  rules  cannot  be 
objective  and  necessary  at  the  same  time;  for  if 
it  is  a  duty  to  act  according  to  one  of  them,  it 
is  not  only  no  duty  to  act  according  to  an  op¬ 
posite  rule,  but  to  do  so  would  even  be  contrary 
to  duty.  Hence  a  collision  of  duties  and  obliga¬ 
tions  is  entirely  inconceivable  (obligationes 
non  colliduntur) .  There  may,  however,  be  two 
grounds  of  obligation  (rationes  obligandi ),  con¬ 
nected  with  an  individual  under  a  rule  pre¬ 
scribed  for  himself,  and  yet  neither  the  one  nor 
the  other  may  be  sufficient  to  constitute  an  ac¬ 
tual  obligation  (rationes  obligandi  non  obligan- 
tes)\  and  in  that  case  the  one  of  them  is  not  a 
duty.  If  two  such  grounds  of  obligation  are  ac¬ 
tually  in  collision  with  each  other,  practical  phi¬ 
losophy  does  not  say  that  the  stronger  obligation 
is  to  keep  the  upper  hand  (fortior  obligatio 
vincit),  but  that  the  stronger  ground  of  obli¬ 
gation  is  to  maintain  its  place  (fortior  obligandi 
ratio  vincit). 

Obligatory  Laws  for  which  an  external  legis¬ 
lation  is  possible  are  called  generafiy  external 
laws.  Those  external  laws,  the  obligatoriness  of 
which  can  be  recognised  by  reason  a  priori  even 
without  an  external  legislation,  are  called  natu¬ 
ral  laws.  Those  laws,  again,  which  are  not  oblig¬ 
atory  without  actual  external  legislation,  are 
called  positive  laws.  An  external  legislation, 
containing  pure  natural  laws,  is  therefore  con¬ 
ceivable;  but  in  that  case  a  previous  natural  law 
must  be  presupposed  to  establish  the  authority 
of  the  lawgiver  by  the  right  to  subject  others  to 
obligation  through  his  own  act  of  will. 

The  principle  which  makes  a  certain  action  a 
duty  is  a  practical  law.  The  rule  of  the  agent  or 
actor,  which  he  forms  as  a  principle  for  himself 
on  subjective  grounds,  is  called  his  maxim. 
Hence,  even  when  the  law  is  one  and  invariable, 
the  maxims  of  the  agent  may  yet  be  very  dif¬ 
ferent. 

The  categorical  imperative  only  expresses 


generally  what  constitutes  obligation.  It  may  be 
rendered  by  the  following  formula:  “Act  ac¬ 
cording  to  a  maxim  which  can  be  adopted  at  the 
same  time  as  a  universal  law.”  Actions  must 
therefore  be  considered,  in  the  first  place,  ac¬ 
cording  to  their  subjective  principle;  but  wheth¬ 
er  this  principle  is  also  valid  objectively  can 
only  be  known  by  the  criterion  of  the  categori¬ 
cal  imperative.  For  reason  brings  the  principle 
or  maxim  of  any  action  to  the  test,  by  calling 
upon  the  agent  to  think  of  himself  in  connection 
with  it  as  at  the  same  time  laying  down  a  uni¬ 
versal  law,  and  to  consider  whether  his  action 
is  so  qualified  as  to  be  fit  for  entering  into  such 
a  universal  legislation. 

The  simplicity  of  this  law,  in  comparison  wiili 
the  great  and  manifold  consequences  which  may 
be  drawn  from  it,  as  well  as  its  commanding 
authority  and  supremacy  without  the  accom¬ 
paniment  of  any  visible  motive  or  sanction,  must 
certainly  at  first  appear  very  surprising.  And  we 
may  well  wonder  at  the  power  of  our  reason  to 
determine  the  activity  of  the  will  by  the  mere 
idea  of  the  qualification  of  a  maxim  for  the  uni¬ 
versality  of  a  practical  law,  especially  when  we 
are  taught  thereby  that  this  practical  moral  law 
first  reveals  a  property  of  the  will  which  the 
speculative  reason  would  never  have  come  up¬ 
on  either  by  principles  a  priori ,  or  from  any  ex¬ 
perience  whatever;  and  even  if  it  had  ascertained 
the  fact,  it  could  never  have  theoretically  es¬ 
tablished  its  possibility.  This  practical  law,  how¬ 
ever,  not  only  discovers  the  fact  of  that  proper¬ 
ty  of  the  will,  which  is  freedom,  but  irrefutably 
establishes  it.  Hence  it  will  be  less  surprising  to 
find  that  the  moral  laws  are  undemonstrable, 
and  yet  apodeictic,  like  the  mathematical  postu¬ 
lates;  and  that  they,  at  the  same  time,  open  up 
before  us  a  whole  field  of  practical  knowledge, 
from  which  reason,  on  its  theoretical  side,  must 
find  itself  entirely  excluded  with  its  speculative 
idea  of  freedom  and  all  such  ideas  of  the  super¬ 
sensible  generally. 

The  conformity  of  an  action  to  the  law  of 
duty  constitutes  its  legality ;  the  conformity  of 
the  maxim  of  the  action  with  the  law  constitutes 
its  morality.  A  maxim  is  thus  a  subjective  prin¬ 
ciple  of  action,  which  the  individual  makes  a 
rule  for  himself  as  to  how  in  fact  he  will  act. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  principle  of  duty  is 
what  reason  absolutely,  and  therefore  objective¬ 
ly  and  universally,  lays  down  in  the  form  of  a 
command  to  the  individual,  as  to  how  he  ought 
to  act. 

The  supreme  principle  of  the  science  of 
morals  accordingly  is  this:  “Act  according  to  a 


TO  THE  METAPHYSIC  OF  MORALS 


maxim  which  can  likewise  be  valid  as  a  univer¬ 
sal  law.”  Every  maxim  which  is  not  qualified 
according  to  this  condition  is  contrary  to  Mo¬ 
rality. 

Laws  arise  from  the  will,  viewed  generally  as 
practical  reason;  maxims  spring  from  the  activ¬ 
ity  of  the  will  in  the  process  of  choice.  The  lat¬ 
ter  in  man  is  what  constitutes  free-will.  The  will 
which  refers  to  nothing  else  than  mere  law  can 
neither  be  called  free  nor  not  free,  because  it 
does  not  relate  to  actions  immediately,  but  to 
the  giving  of  a  law  for  the  maxim  of  actions;  it 
is  therefore  the  practical  reason  itself.  Hence 
as  a  faculty,  it  is  absolutely  necessary  in  itself, 
and  is  not  subject  to  any  external  necessitation. 
It  is,  therefore,  only  the  act  of  choice  in  the 
voluntary  process  that  can  be  called  free. 

The  freedom  of  the  act  of  will,  however,  is 
not  to  be  defined  as  a  liberty  of  indifference 
( libertas  indifferentae) ,  that,  is,  as  a  capacity  of 
choosing  to  act  for  or  against  the  law.  The  vol¬ 
untary  process,  indeed,  viewed  as  a  phenomenal 
appearance,  gives  many  examples  of  this  choos¬ 
ing  in  experience;  and  some  have  accordingly 
so  defined  the  free-will.  For  freedom,  as  it  is 
first  made  knowable  by  the  moral  law,  is  known 
only  as  a  negative  property  in  us,  as  constituted 
by  the  fact  of  not  being  necessitated  to  act  by 
sensible  principles  of  determination.  Regarded 
as  a  noumenal  reality,  however,  in  reference  to 
man  as  a  pure  rational  intelligence,  the  act  of 
the  will  cannot  be  at  all  theoretically  exhibited ; 
nor  can  it  therefore  be  explained  how  this  power 
can  act  necessitatingly  in  relation  to  the  sensible 
activity  in  the  process  of  choice,  or  consequent¬ 
ly  in  what  the  positive  quality  of  freedom  con¬ 
sists.  Only  thus  much  we  can  see  into  and 
comprehend,  that  although  man,  as  a  being  be¬ 
longing  to  the  world  of  sense ,  exhibits — as  expe¬ 
rience  shows — a  capacity  of  choosing  not  only 
conformably  to  the  law  but  also  contrary  to  it, 
his  freedom  as  a  rational  being  belonging  to  the 
world  of  intelligence  cannot  be  defined  by  ref¬ 
erence  merely  to  sensible  appearances.  For  sen¬ 
sible  phenomena  cannot  make  a  super-sensible 
object — such  as  free-will  is — intelligible;  nor 
can  freedom  ever  be  placed  in  the  mere  fact  that 
the  rational  subject  can  make  a  choice  in  con¬ 
flict  with  his  own  law-giving  reason,  although 
experience  may  prove  that  it  happens  often 
enough^  notwithstanding  our  inability  to  con¬ 
ceive  how  it  is  possible.  For  it  is  one  thing  to 
admit  a  proposition  as  based  on  experience,  and 
another  thing  to  make  it  the  defining  principle 
and  the  universal  differentiating  mark  of  the 
act  of  free-will,  in  its  distinction  from  the  arbi- 


393 

trium  brutum  s.  servum;  because  the  empirical 
proposition  does  not  assert  that  any  particular 
characteristic  necessarily  belongs  to  the  con¬ 
ception  in  question,  but  this  is  requisite  in  the 
process  of  definition.  Freedom  in  relation  to  the 
internal  legislation  of  reason  can  alone  be  prop¬ 
erly  called  a  power;  the  possibility  of  diverging 
from  the  law  thus  given  is  an  incapacity  or  want 
of  power.  How  then  can  the  former  be  defined 
by  the  latter?  It  could  only  be  by  a  definition 
which  would  add  to  the  practical  conception  of 
the  free-will,  its  exercise  as  shown  by  expe¬ 
rience;  but  this  would  be  a  hybrid  definition 
which  would  exhibit  the  conception  in  a  false 
light. 

A  morally  practical  law  is  a  proposition  which 
contains  a  categorical  imperative  or  command. 
He  who  commands  by  a  law  ( imperans )  is  the 
lawgiver  or  legislator.  He  is  the  author  of  the 
obligation  that  accompanies  the  law,  but  he  is 
not  always  the  author  of  the  law  itself.  In  the 
latter  case,  the  law  would  be  positive,  contin¬ 
gent,  and  arbitrary.  The  law  which  is  imposed 
upon  us  a  priori  and  unconditionally  by  our  own 
reason  may  also  be  expressed  as  proceeding  from 
the  will  of  a  supreme  lawgiver  or  the  Divine  will. 
Such  a  will  as  supreme  can  consequently  have 
only  rights  and  not  duties;  and  it  only  indicates 
the  idea  of  a  moral  being  whose  will  is  law  for 
all,  without  conceiving  of  him  as  the  author  of 
that  will. 

Imputation ,  in  the  moral  sense,  is  the  judge¬ 
ment  by  which  anyone  is  declared  to  be  the 
author  or  free  cause  of  an  action  which  is  then 
regarded  as  his  moral  fact  or  deed,  and  is  sub¬ 
jected  to  law.  When  the  judgement  likewise  lays 
down  the  juridical  consequences  of  the  deed,  it 
is  judicial  or  valid  ( imputatio  judiciaria  s.  val- 
ida ) ;  otherwise  it  would  be  only  adjudicative  or 
declaratory  {imputatio  dijudicatoria) .  That  per¬ 
son — individual  or  collective — who  is  invested 
with  the  right  to  impute  actions  judicially,  is 
called  a  judge  or  a  court  {judex  s.  forum). 

When  any  one  does,  in  conformity  with  duty, 
more  than  he  can  be  compelled  to  do  by  the 
law,  it  is  said  to  be  meritorious  {meritum). 
What  is  done  only  in  exact  conformity  with  the 
law,  is  what  is  due  {debitum).  And  when  less  is 
done  than  can  be  demanded  to  be  done  by  the 
law,  the  result  is  moral  demerit  { demeritum ) 
or  culpability. 

The  juridical  effect  or  consequence  of  a  cul¬ 
pable  act  of  demerit  is  punishment  (paena) ; 
that  of  a  meritorious  act  is  reward  {praemium) , 
assuming  that  this  reward  was  promised  in 
the  law  and  that  it  formed  the  motive  of  the 


394 

action.  The  coincidence  or  exact  conformity  of 
conduct  to  what  is  due  has  no  juridical  effect. 
Benevolent  remuneration  ( remuneratio  s.  re - 
pensio  benefica )  has  no  place  in  juridical  rela¬ 
tions. 

The  good  or  bad  consequences  arising  from 
the  performance  of  an  obligated  action — as  also 
the  consequences  arising  from  failing  to  per¬ 
form  a  meritorious  action — cannot  be  imputed 
to  the  agent  ( modus  irnputationis  tollens).  The 
good  consequences  of  a  meritorious  action — as 
also  the  bad  consequences  of  a  wrongful  action 
— may  be  imputed  to  the  agent  ( modus  imputa¬ 
tions  poneus). 

The  degree  of  the  imputability  of  actions  is 
to  be  reckoned  according  to  the  magnitude  of 


the  hindrances  or  obstacles  which  it  has  been 
necessary  for  them  to  overcome.  The  greater 
the  natural  hindrances  in  the  sphere  of  sense, 
and  the  less  the  moral  hindrance  of  duty,  so 
much  the  more  is  a  good  deed  imputed  as  meri¬ 
torious.  This  may  be  seen  by  considering  such 
examples  as  rescuing  a  man  who  is  an  entire 
stranger  from  great  distress,  and  at  very  con¬ 
siderable  sacrifice.  Conversely,  the  less  the  nat¬ 
ural  hindrance,  and  the  greater  the  hindrance 
on  the  ground  of  duty,  so  much  the  more  is  a 
transgression  imputable  as  culpable.  Hence  the 
state  of  mind  of  the  agent  or  doer  of  a  deed 
makes  a  difference  in  imputing  its  consequences, 
according  as  he  did  it  in  passion  or  performed 
it  with  coolness  and  deliberation. 


CONTENTS 


THE  SCIENCE  OF  RIGHT 


Introduction  to  the  Science  of  Right 
General  Definitions  and  Divisions 


A.  What  the  Science  of  Right  is  397 

B.  What  is  Right?  397 

C.  Universal  Principle  of  Right  398 

D.  Right  is  Conjoined  with  the  Title  or  Author¬ 
ity  to  Compel  398 

E.  Strict  Right  may  be  also  Represented  as  the 

Possibility  of  a  Universal  Reciprocal  Com¬ 
pulsion  in  harmony  with  the  Freedom  of  All 
according  to  Universal  Laws  398 

F.  Supplementary  Remarks  on  Equivocal  Right 

(Jus  Aequivocum)  399 

1.  Equity  399 

11.  The  Right  of  Necessity  400 

Division  of  the  Science  of  Right 

A.  General  Division  of  the  Duties  of  Right 

(Juridical  Duties)  400 

B.  Universal  Division  of  Rights 

I.  Natural  Right  and  Positive  Right  401 

II.  Innate  Right  and  Acquired  Right  401 


C.  Methodical  Division  of  the  Science  of  Right 

402 

T he  Science  of  Right 
First  Part.  Private  Right 

The  System  of  Those  Laws  which  Require  no 
External  Promulgation 
The  Principles  of  the  External  Mine  and 
Thine  Generally 

Chap.  I.  Of  the  Mode  of  Having  Anything  Ex¬ 
ternal  as  One's  Own 

1.  The  Meaning  of  ‘‘Mine"  in  Right  (Meum 

Juris)  403 

2.  Juridical  Postulate  of  the  Practical 

Reason  403 

3.  Possession  and  Ownership  404 

4.  Exposition  of  the  Conception  of  the  External 

Mine  and  Thine  404 

5.  Definition  of  the  Conception  of  the  External 

Mine  and  Thine  404 

6.  Deduction  of  the  Conception  of  a  Purely 

Juridical  Possession  of  an  External  Object 
(Possessio  Noumenon)  405 

7.  Application  of  the  Principle  of  the  Possibil¬ 

ity  of  an  External  Mine  and  Thine  to  Objects 
of  Experience  407 

8.  To  Have  Anything  External  as  One’s  Own 

395 


is  only  Possible  in  a  Juridical  or  Civil  State 
of  Society  under  the  Regulation  of  a  Public 
Legislative  Power  408 

9.  There  May,  However,  Be  an  External  Mine 

and  Thine  Found  as  a  Fact  in  the  State  of 
Nature,  but  it  is  only  Provisory  408 

Chap.  II.  The  Mode  of  Acquiring  Anything 
External 

10.  The  General  Principle  of  External  Acqui¬ 
sition  409 

Division  of  the  Subject  of  the  Acquisition  of 
the  External  Mine  and  Thine  410 

Sect.  i.  Principles  of  Real  Right  410 

11.  What  is  a  Real  Right?  410 

12.  The  First  Acquisition  of  a  Thing  can  only 

be  that  of  the  Soil  41 1 

13.  Every  Part  of  the  Soil  may  be  Originally 
Acquired;  and  the  Principle  of  the  Possi¬ 
bility  of  such  Acquisition  is  the  Original 
Community  of  the  Soil  Generally  41 1 

14.  The  Juridical  Act  of  this  Original  Acquisi¬ 
tion  is  Occupancy  412 

15.  It  is  Only  within  a  Civil  Constitution  that 

Anything  can  be  Acquired  Peremptorily, 
whereas  in  the  State  of  Nature  Acquisition 
can  only  be  Provisory  412 

16.  Exposition  of  the  Conception  of  a  Primary 

Acquisition  of  the  Soil  414 

17.  Deduction  of  the  Conception  of  the  Original 

Primary  Acquisition  414 

Property  415 

Sect.  ii.  Principles  of  Personal  Right 

18.  Nature  and  Acquisition  of  Personal  Right 

416 

19.  Acquisition  by  Contract  416 

20.  What  is  Acquired  by  Contract?  417 

21.  Acceptance  and  Delivery  417 

Sect.  hi.  Principles  of  Personal  Right  that  is 

Real  in  Kind  (Jus  Realiter  Personate) 

22.  Nature  of  Personal  Right  of  a  Real  Kind 

418 

23.  What  is  Acquired  in  the  Household?  418 

The  Rights  of  the  Family  as  a  Domestic  Society 

Title  i.  Conjugal  Right  (Husband  and  Wife) 

24.  The  Natural  Basis  of  Marriage  419 

25.  The  Rational  Right  of  Marriage  419 

26.  Monogamy  and  Equality  in  Marriage  419 


CONTENTS 


396 

27.  Fulfilment  of  the  Contract  of  Marriage  420 
Title  ii.  Parental  Right  (Parent  and  Child) 

28.  The  Relation  of  Parent  and  Child  420 

29.  The  Rights  of  the  Parent  421 

Title  iii.  Household  Right  (Master  and 

Servant 

30.  Relation  and  Right  of  the  Master  of  a 

Household  421 

Systematic  Division  of  all  the  Rights  Capable 
of  Being  Acquired  by  Contract 

31.  Divisions  of  Contracts:  Juridical  Concep¬ 
tions  of  Money  and  a  Book  422 

Illustration  of  Relations  of  Contract  by  the 
Conceptions  of  M oney  and  a  Book 

I.  What  is  Money?  423 

II.  What  is  a  Book?  425 

The  Unauthorised  Publishing  of  Books  is 
Contrary  to  the  Principles  of  Right,  and 
is  Rightly  Prohibited  425 

Confusion  of  Personal  and  Real  Right  426 
Episodical  Section.  The  Ideal  Acquisition  of 
External  Objects  of  the  Will 

32.  The  Nature  and  Modes  of  Ideal  Acquisition 

426 

33.  I.  Acquisition  by  Usucapion  (Acquisitio 

per  Usucapionem)  426 

34.  II.  Acquisition  by  Inheritance  (Acquisitio 

haereditatis)  427 

35.  III.  The  Continuing  Right  of  a  Good  Name 

after  Death  (Bona  Fama  Dejuncti)  428 
Chap.  III.  Acquisition  Conditioned  by  the 
Sentence  of  a  Public  Judicatory 

36.  How  and  What  Acquisition  is  Subjectively 

Conditioned  by  the  Principle  of  a  Public 
Court  429 

37.  I.  The  Contract  of  Donation  (Pactum 

Donationis)  429 

38.  II.  The  Contract  of  Loan  (Commodatum) 

43° 

39.  III.  The  Revindication  of  what  has  been 

Lost  (Vindicatio)  431 

40.  IV.  Acquisition  of  Security  by  the  Taking 

of  an  Oath  (Cautio  Juratoria)  432 
Transition  from  Mine  and  Thine  in  the  State  of 
Nature  to  the  Mine  and  Thine  in  the  Juridical 
State  Generally 

41.  Public  Justice  as  Related  to  the  Natural  and 

Civil  State  433 

42.  The  Postulate  of  Public  Right  434 

Part  II.  Public  Right 

The  System  of  Those  Laws  Which  Require 
Public  Promulgation 
The  Principles  of  Right  in  Civil  Society 

43.  Definition  and  Division  of  Public  Right  435 
I.  Right  of  the  State  and  Constitutional 

Law  (Jus  Civitatis) 


44.  Origin  of  the  Civil  Union  and  Public  Right 

435 

45.  The  Form  of  the  State  and  its  Three  Powers 

43b 

46.  The  Legislative  Power  and  the  Members  of 

the  State  436 

47.  Dignities  in  the  State  and  the  Original  Con¬ 
tract  437 

48.  Mutual  Relations  and  Characteristics  of  the 

Three  Powers  437 

49.  Distinct  Functions  of  the  Three  Powers. 

Autonomy  of  the  State  438 

Constitutional  and  Juridical  Consequences  aris¬ 
ing  from  the  Nature  of  the  Civil  Union 

A.  Right  of  the  Supreme  Power;  Treason; 
Dethronement;  Revolution;  Reform 

439 

B.  Land  Rights.  Secular  and  Church  Lands. 

Rights  of  Taxation;  Finance;  Police;  In¬ 
spection  441 

C.  Relief  of  the  Poor.  Foundling  Hospitals.  The 

Church  443 

D.  The  Right  of  Assigning  Offices  and  Digni¬ 
ties  in  the  State  444 

E.  The  Right  of  Punishing  and  Pardoning 

I.  The  Right  of  Punishing  446 

II.  The  Right  of  Pardoning  449 

50.  Juridical  Relations  of  the  Citizen  to  his 
Country  and  to  Other  Countries.  Emigra¬ 
tion;  Immigration;  Banishment;  Exile 

449 

51.  The  Three  Forms  of  the  State.  Autocracy; 

Aristocracy;  Democracy  450 

52.  Historical  Origin  and  Changes.  A  Pure 
Republic.  Representative  Government 

450 

II.  The  Right  of  Nations  and  International 
Law  (Jus  Gentium) 

53.  Nature  and  Division  of  the  Right  of  Nations 

452 

54.  Elements  of  the  Right  of  Nations  452 

55.  Right  of  Going  to  War  as  related  to  the 

Subjects  of  the  State  452 

56.  Right  of  Going  to  War  in  relation  to  Hostile 

States  453 

57.  Right  during  War  454 

58.  Right  after  War  454 

59.  The  Rights  of  Peace  455 

60.  Right  as  against  an  Unjust  Enemy  455 

61.  Perpetual  Peace  and  a  Permanent  Congress 

of  Nations  455 

III.  The  Universal  Right  of  Mankind  (Jus 
Cosmopoliticum  ) 

62.  Nature  and  Conditions  of  Cosmopolitical 

Right  45b 

CONCLUSION  457 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE 
SCIENCE  OF  RIGHT 

GENERAL  DEFINITIONS  AND  DIVISIONS 


A.  What  the  Science  of  Right  is 

The  Science  of  Right  has  for  its  object  the 
principles  of  all  the  laws  which  it  is  possible  to 
promulgate  by  external  legislation.  Where  there 
is  such  a  legislation,  it  becomes,  in  actual  appli¬ 
cation  to  it,  a  system  of  positive  right  and  law ; 
and  he  who  is  versed  in  the  knowledge  of  this 
system  is  called  a  jurist  or  jurisconsult  ( juris - 
consultusj.  A  practical  jurisconsult  ( jurisperi - 
tus ),  or  a  professional  lawyer,  is  one  who  is 
skilled  in  the  knowledge  of  positive  external 
laws,  and  who  can  apply  them  to  cases  that 
may  occur  in  experience.  Such  practical  knowl¬ 
edge  of  positive  right,  and  law,  may  be  regard¬ 
ed  as  belonging  to  jurisprudence  ( jurispruden¬ 
ts )  in  the  original  sense  of  the  term.  But  the 
theoretical  knowledge  of  right  and  law  in  prin¬ 
ciple,  as  distinguished  from  positive  laws  and 
empirical  cases,  belongs  to  the  pure  science  of 
right  (juris s cientia) .  The  science  of  right  thus 
designates  the  philosophical  and  systematic 
knowledge  of  the  principles  of  natural  right. 
And  it  is  from  this  science  that  the  immutable 
principles  of  all  positive  legislation  must  be  de¬ 
rived  by  practical  jurists  and  lawgivers. 

B.  What  is  Right? 

This  question  may  be  said  to  be  about  as  em¬ 
barrassing  to  the  jurist  as  the  well-known  ques¬ 
tion,  “What  is  truth?”  is  to  the  logician.  It  is 
all  the  more  so,  if,  on  reflection,  he  strives  to 
avoid  tautology  in  his  reply  and  recognise  the 
fact  that  a  reference  to  what  holds  true  merely 
of  the  laws  of  some  one  country  at  a  particular 
time  is  not  a  solution  of  the  general  problem 
thus  proposed.  It  is  quite  easy  to  state  what  may 
be  right  in  particular  cases  (quid  sit  juris),  as 
being  what  the  laws  of  a  certain  place  and  of  a 
certain  time  say  or  may  have  said ;  but  it  is  much 
more  difficult  to  determine  whether  what  they 
have  enacted  is  right  in  itself,  and  to  lay  down  a 
universal  criterion  by  which  right  and  wrong 


in  general,  and  what  is  just  and  unjust,  may  be 
recognised.  All  this  may  remain  entirely  hidden 
even  from  the  practical  jurist  until  he  abandon 
his  empirical  principles  for  a  time  and  search 
in  the  pure  reason  for  the  sources  of  such  judge¬ 
ments,  in  order  to  lay  a  real  foundation  for  ac¬ 
tual  positive  legislation.  In  this  search,  his  em¬ 
pirical  laws  may,  indeed,  furnish  him  with  ex¬ 
cellent  guidance;  but  a  merely  empirical  system 
that  is  void  of  rational  principles  is,  like  the 
wooden  head  in  the  fable  of  Phaedrus,  fine 
enough  in  appearance,  but  unfortunately  it 
wants  brain. 

i.  The  conception  of  right — as  referring  to  a 
corresponding  obligation  which  is  the  moral  as¬ 
pect  of  it — in  the  first  place,  has  regard  only  to 
the  external  and  practical  relation  of  one  person 
to  another,  in  so  far  as  they  can  have  influence 
upon  each  other,  immediately  or  mediately,  by 
their  actions  as  facts.  2.  In  the  second  place, 
the  conception  of  right  does  not  indicate  the  re¬ 
lation  of  the  action  of  an  individual  to  the  wish 
or  the  mere  desire  of  another,  as  in  acts  of  be¬ 
nevolence  or  of  unkindness,  but  only  the  rela¬ 
tion  of  his  free  action  to  the  freedom  of  action 
of  the  other.  3.  And,  in  the  third  place,  in  this 
reciprocal  relation  of  voluntary  actions,  the  con¬ 
ception  of  right  does  not  take  into  consideration 
the  matter  of  the  act  of  will  in  so  far  as  the  end 
which  any  one  may  have  in  view  in  willing  it 
is  concerned.  In  other  words,  it  is  not  asked  in  a 
question  of  right  whether  any  one  on  buying 
goods  for  his  own  business  realizes  a  profit  by 
the  transaction  or  not;  but  only  the  form  of  the 
transaction  is  taken  into  account,  in  consider¬ 
ing  the  relation  of  the  mutual  acts  of  will.  Acts 
of  will  or  voluntary  choice  are  thus  regarded 
only  in  so  far  as  they  are  free ,  and  as  to  wheth¬ 
er  the  action  of  one  can  harmonize  with  the 
freedom  of  another,  according  to  a  universal 
law. 

Right,  therefore,  comprehends  the  whole  of 
the  conditions  under  which  the  voluntary  ac¬ 
tions  of  any  one  person  can  be  harmonized  in 

397 


398  THE  SCIENCE 


reality  with  the  voluntary  actions  of  every  oth¬ 
er  person,  according  to  a  universal  law  of  free¬ 
dom. 

C.  Universal  Principle  of  Right 

“Every  action  is  right  which  in  itself,  or  in 
the  maxim  on  which  it  proceeds,  is  such  that  it 
can  coexist  along  with  the  freedom  of  the  will 
of  each  and  all  in  action,  according  to  a  univer¬ 
sal  law.” 

If,  then,  my  action  or  my  condition  general¬ 
ly  can  coexist  with  the  freedom  of  every  other, 
according  to  a  universal  law,  any  one  does  me  a 
wrong  who  hinders  me  in  the  performance  of 
this  action,  or  in  the  maintenance  of  this  condi¬ 
tion.  For  such  a  hindrance  or  obstruction  can¬ 
not  coexist  with  freedom  according  to  univer¬ 
sal  laws. 

It  follows  also  that  it  cannot  be  demanded 
as  a  matter  of  right,  that  this  universal  princi¬ 
ple  of  all  maxims  shall  itself  be  adopted  as  my 
maxim,  that  is,  that  I  shall  make  it  the  maxim 
of  my  actions.  For  any  one  may  be  free,  al¬ 
though  his  freedom  is  entirely  indifferent  to  me, 
or  even  if  I  wished  in  my  heart  to  infringe  it, 
so  long  as  I  do  not  actually  violate  that  free¬ 
dom  by  my  external  action.  Ethics,  however, 
as  distinguished  from  jurisprudence,  imposes 
upon  me  the  obligation  to  make  the  fulfilment 
of  right  a  maxim  of  my  conduct. 

The  universal  law  of  right  may  then  be  ex¬ 
pressed  thus:  “Act  externally  in  such  a  manner 
that  the  free  exercise  of  thy  will  may  be  able 
to  coexist  with  the  freedom  of  all  others,  ac¬ 
cording  to  a  universal  law.”  This  is  undoubtedly 
a  law  which  imposes  obligation  upon  me;  but  it 
does  not  at  all  imply  and  still  less  command  that 
I  ought ,  merely  on  account  of  this  obligation,  to 
limit  my  freedom  to  these  very  conditions.  Rea¬ 
son  in  this  connection  says  only  that  it  is  re¬ 
stricted  thus  far  by  its  idea,  and  may  be  likewise 
thus  limited  in  fact  by  others;  and  it  lays  this 
down  as  a  postulate  which  is  not  capable  of  fur¬ 
ther  proof.  As  the  object  in  view  is  not  to  teach 
virtue,  but  to  explain  what  right  is,  thus  far  the 
law  of  right,  as  thus  laid  down,  may  not  and 
should  not  be  represented  as  a  motive-principle 
of  action. 

D.  Right  is  Conjoined  with  the  Title  or 
Authority  to  Compel 

The  resistance  which  is  opposed  to  any  hin¬ 
drance  of  an  effect  is  in  reality  a  furtherance 
of  this  effect  and  is  in  accordance  with  its  ac¬ 
complishment.  Now,  everything  that  is  wrong  is 


a  hindrance  of  freedom,  according  to  universal 
laws;  and  compulsion  or  constraint  of  any  kind 
is  a  hindrance  or  resistance  made  to  freedom. 
Consequently,  if  a  certain  exercise  of  freedom  is 
itself  a  hindrance  of  the  freedom  that  is  accord¬ 
ing  to  universal  laws,  it  is  wrong;  and  the  com¬ 
pulsion  of  constraint  which  is  opposed  to  it  is 
right,  as  being  a  hindering  of  a  hindrance  of 
freedom ,  and  as  being  in  accord  with  the  free¬ 
dom  which  exists  in  accordance  with  univer¬ 
sal  laws.  Hence,  according  to  the  logical  princi¬ 
ple  of  contradiction,  all  right  is  accompanied 
with  an  implied  title  or  warrant  to  bring  com¬ 
pulsion  to  bear  on  any  one  who  may  violate  it 
in  fact. 

E.  Strict  Right  may  be  also  Represented  as  the 

Possibility  of  a  Universal  Reciprocal  Com¬ 
pulsion  in  harmony  with  the  Freedom 
of  All  according  to  Universal  Laws 

This  proposition  means  the  right  is  not  to  be 
regarded  as  composed  of  two  different  elements 
— obligation  according  to  a  law,  and  a  title  on 
the  part  of  one  who  has  bound  another  by  his 
own  free  choice  to  compel  him  to  perform.  But 
it  imports  that  the  conception  of  right  may  be 
viewed  as  consisting  immediately  in  the  possi¬ 
bility  of  a  universal  reciprocal  compulsion,  in 
harmony  with  the  freedom  of  all.  As  right  in 
general  has  for  its  object  only  what  is  external 
in  actions,  strict  right,  as  that  with  which  noth¬ 
ing  ethical  is  intermingled,  requires  no  other 
motives  of  action  than  those  that  are  merely  ex¬ 
ternal;  for  it  is  then  pure  right  and  is  unmixed 
with  any  prescriptions  of  virtue.  A  strict  right, 
then,  in  the  exact  sense  of  the  term,  is  that 
which  alone  can  be  called  wholly  external.  Now 
such  right  is  founded,  no  doubt,  upon  the  con¬ 
sciousness  of  the  obligation  of  every  individual 
according  to  the  law;  but  if  it  is  to  be  pure  as 
such,  it  neither  may  nor  should  refer  to  this 
consciousness  as  a  motive  by  which  to  deter¬ 
mine  the  free  act  of  the  will.  For  this  purpose, 
however,  it  founds  upon  the  principle  of  the 
possibility  of  an  external  compulsion,  such  as 
may  coexist  with  the  freedom  of  every  one  ac¬ 
cording  to  universal  laws.  Accordingly,  then, 
where  it  is  said  that  a  creditor  has  a  right  to  de¬ 
mand  from  a  debtor  the  payment  of  his  debt, 
this  does  not  mean  merely  that  he  can  bring 
him  to  feel  in  his  mind  that  reason  obliges  him 
to  do  this;  but  it  means  that  he  can  apply  an 
external  compulsion  to  force  any  such  one  so 
to  pay,  and  that  this  compulsion  is  quite  con¬ 
sistent  with  the  freedom  of  all,  including  the 
parties  in  question,  according  to  a  universal  law. 


OF  RIGHT 


Right  and  the  title  to  compel,  thus  indicate  the 
same  thing. 

The  law  of  right,  as  thus  enunciated,  is  repre¬ 
sented  as  a  reciprocal  compulsion  necessarily  in 
accordance  with  the  freedom  of  every  one,  un¬ 
der  the  principle  of  a  universal  freedom.  It  is 
thus,  as  it  were,  a  representative  construction 
of  the  conception  of  right,  by  exhibiting  it  in  a 
pure  intuitive  perception  a  priori ,  after  the  anal¬ 
ogy  of  the  possibility  of  the  free  motions  of 
bodies  under  the  physical  law  of  the  equality 
of  action  and  reaction.  Now,  as  in  pure  mathe¬ 
matics,  we  cannot  deduce  the  properties  of  its 
objects  immediately  from  a  mere  abstract  con¬ 
ception,  but  can  only  discover  them  by  figura¬ 
tive  construction  or  representation  of  its  con¬ 
ceptions;  so  it  is  in  like  manner  with  the  prin¬ 
ciple  of  right.  It  is  not  so  much  the  mere  for¬ 
mal  conception  of  right,  but  rather  that  of  a  uni¬ 
versal  and  equal  reciprocal  compulsion  as  har¬ 
monizing  with  it,  and  reduced  under  general 
laws,  that  makes  representation  of  that  concep¬ 
tion  possible.  But  just  as  those  conceptions  pre¬ 
sented  in  dynamics  are  founded  upon  a  merely 
formal  representation  of  pure  mathematics  as 
presented  in  geometry,  reason  has  taken  care 
also  to  provide  the  understanding  as  far  as  pos¬ 
sible  with  intuitive  presentations  a  priori  in  be¬ 
hoof  of  a  construction  of  the  conception  of 
right.  The  right  in  geometrical  lines  ( rectum ) 
is  opposed,  as  the  straight,  to  that  which  is 
curved  and  to  that  which  is  oblique.  In  the  first 
opposition,  there  is  involved  an  inner  quality 
of  the  lines  of  such  a  nature  that  there  is  only 
one  straight  or  right  line  possible  between  two 
given  points.  In  the  second  case,  again,  the  posi¬ 
tions  of  two  intersecting  or  meeting  lines  are  of 
such  a  nature  that  there  can  likewise  be  only 
one  line  called  the  perpendicular,  which  is  not 
more  inclined  to  the  one  side  than  the  other,  and 
it  divides  space  on  either  side  into  two  equal 
parts.  After  the  manner  of  this  analogy,  the 
science  of  right  aims  at  determining  what  every 
one  shall  have  as  his  own  with  mathematical 
exactness;  but  this  is  not  to  be  expected  in  the 
ethical  science  of  virtue,  as  it  cannot  but  allow 
a  certain  latitude  for  exceptions.  But,  without 
passing  into  the  sphere  of  ethics,  there  are  two 
cases — known  as  the  equivocal  right  of  equity 
and  necessity — which  claim  a  juridical  decision, 
yet  for  which  no  one  can  be  found  to  give  such 
a  decision,  and  which,  as  regards  their  relation 
to  rights,  belong,  as  it  were,  to  the  “Intermun- 
dia ”  of  Epicurus.  These  we  must  at  the  outset 
take  apart  from  the  special  exposition  of  the 


399 

science  of  right,  to  which  we  are  now  about  to 
advance;  and  we  may  consider  them  now  by 
way  of  supplement  to  these  introductory  ex¬ 
planations,  in  order  that  their  uncertain  condi¬ 
tions  may  not  exert  a  disturbing  influence  on 
the  fixed  principles  of  the  proper  doctrine  of 
right. 

F.  Supplementary  Remarks  on  Equivocal  Right 
(Jus  aequivocum) 

With  every  right,  in  the  strict  acceptation 
( jus  strictum ),  there  is  conjoined  a  right  to 
compel.  But  it  is  possible  to  think  of  other  rights 
of  a  wider  kind  ( jus  latum)  in  which  the  title 
to  compel  cannot  be  determined  by  any  law. 
Now  there  are  two  real  or  supposed  rights  of 
this  kind — equity  and  the  right  of  necessity. 
The  first  alleges  a  right  that  is  without  compul¬ 
sion;  the  second  adopts  a  compulsion  that  is 
without  right.  This  equivocalness,  however,  can 
be  easily  shown  to  rest  on  the  peculiar  fact  that 
there  are  cases  of  doubtful  right,  for  the  de¬ 
cision  of  which  no  judge  can  be  appointed. 

i.  Equity 

Equity  (aequitas),  regarded  objectively,  does 
not  properly  constitute  a  claim  upon  the  moral 
duty  of  benevolence  or  beneficence  on  the  part 
of  others;  but  whoever  insists  upon  anything 
on  the  ground  of  equity,  founds  upon  his  right 
to  the  same.  In  this  case,  however,  the  condi¬ 
tions  are  awanting  that  are  requisite  for  the 
function  of  a  judge  in  order  that  he  might  de¬ 
termine  what  or  what  kind  of  satisfaction  can 
be  done  to  this  claim.  When  one  of  the  partners 
of  a  mercantile  company,  formed  under  the  con¬ 
dition  of  equal  profits,  has,  however,  done  more 
than  the  other  members,  and  in  consequence 
has  also  lost  more,  it  is  in  accordance  with  eq¬ 
uity  that  he  should  demand  from  the  company 
more  than  merely  an  equal  share  of  advantage 
with  the  rest.  But,  in  relation  to  strict  right — 
if  we  think  of  a  judge  considering  his  case — he 
can  furnish  no  definite  data  to  establish  how 
much  more  belongs  to  him  by  the  contract;  and 
in  case  of  an  action  at  law,  such  a  demand 
would  be  rejected.  A  domestic  servant,  again, 
who  might  be  paid  his  wages  due  to  the  end  of 
his  year  of  service  in  a  coinage  that  became  de¬ 
preciated  within  that  period,  so  that  it  would 
not  be  of  the  same  value  to  him  as  it  was  when 
he  entered  on  his  engagement,  cannot  claim  by 
right  to  be  kept  from  loss  on  account  of  the  un¬ 
equal  value  of  the  money  if  he  receives  the  due 
amount  of  it.  He  can  only  make  an  appeal  on 
the  ground  of  equity, — a  dumb  goddess  who 


THE  SCIENCE 


400 

cannot  claim  a  hearing  of  right, — because  there 
was  nothing  bearing  on  this  point  in  the  con¬ 
tract  of  service,  and  a  judge  cannot  give  a  de¬ 
cree  on  the  basis  of  vague  or  indefinite  condi¬ 
tions. 

Hence  it  follows,  that  a  court  of  equity,  for 
the  decision  of  disputed  questions  of  right, 
would  involve  a  contradiction.  It  is  only  where 
his  own  proper  rights  are  concerned,  and  in  mat¬ 
ters  in  which  he  can  decide,  that  a  judge  may  or 
ought  to  give  a  hearing  to  equity.  Thus,  if  the 
Crown  is  supplicated  to  give  an  indemnity  to 
certain  persons  for  loss  or  injury  sustained  in 
its  service,  it  may  undertake  the  burden  of  do¬ 
ing  so,  although,  according  to  strict  right,  the 
claim  might  be  rejected  on  the  ground  of  the 
pretext  that  the  parties  in  question  undertook 
the  performance  of  the  service  occasioning  the 
loss,  at  their  own  risk. 

The  dictum  of  equity  may  be  put  thus:  “The 
strictest  right  is  the  greatest  wrong”  (summum 
jus  summa  injuria).  But  this  evil  cannot  be  ob¬ 
viated  by  the  forms  of  right,  although  it  relates 
to  a  matter  of  right;  for  the  grievance  that  it 
gives  rise  to  can  only  be  put  before  a  “court  of 
conscience”  ( jorum  poli ),  whereas  every  ques¬ 
tion  of  right  must  be  taken  before  a  civil  court 
( forum  soli). 

n.  The  Right  of  Necessity 

The  so-called  right  of  necessity  ( jus  neces¬ 
sitatis)  is  the  supposed  right  or  title,  in  case  of 
the  danger  of  losing  my  own  life,  to  take  away 
the  life  of  another  who  has,  in  fact,  done  me  no 
harm.  It  is  evident  that,  viewed  as  a  doctrine  of 
right,  this  must  involve  a  contradiction,  For 
this  is  not  the  case  of  a  wrongful  aggressor  mak¬ 
ing  an  unjust  assault  upon  my  life,  and  whom 
I  anticipate  by  depriving  him  of  his  own  ( jus 
inculpatae  tutelae );  nor  consequently  is  it  a 
question  merely  of  the  recommendation  of  mod¬ 
eration  which  belongs  to  ethics  as  the  doctrine 
of  virtue,  and  not  to  jurisprudence  as  the  doc¬ 
trine  of  right.  It  is  a  question  of  the  allowable¬ 
ness  of  using  violence  against  one  who  has  used 
none  against  me. 


It  is  clear  that  the  assertion  of  such  a  right 
is  not  to  be  understood  objectively  as  being  in 
accordance  with  what  a  law  would  prescribe,  but 
merely  subjectively,  as  proceeding  on  the  as¬ 
sumption  of  how  a  sentence  would  be  pro¬ 
nounced  by  a  court  in  the  case.  There  can,  in 
fact,  be  no  criminal  law  assigning  the  penalty  of 
death  to  a  man  who,  when  shipwrecked  and 
struggling  in  extreme  danger  for  his  life,  and  in 
order  to  save  it,  may  thrust  another  from  a 
plank  on  which  he  had  saved  himself.  For  the 
punishment  threatened  by  the  law  could  not 
possibly  have  greater  power  than  the  fear  of 
the  loss  of  life  in  the  case  in  question.  Such  a 
penal  law  would  thus  fail  altogether  to  exercise 
its  intended  effect;  for  the  threat  of  an  evil 
which  is  still  uncertain — such  as  death  by  a  ju¬ 
dicial  sentence — could  not  overcome  the  fear  of 
an  evil  which  is  certain ,  as  drowning  is  in  such 
circumstances.  An  act  of  violent  self-preserva¬ 
tion,  then,  ought  not  to  be  considered  as  alto¬ 
gether  beyond  condemnation  ( inculpabile ) ;  it  is 
only  to  be  adjudged  as  exempt  from  punishment 
( impunibile ).  Yet  this  subjective  condition  of 
impunity,  by  a  strange  confusion  of  ideas,  has 
been  regarded  by  jurists  as  equivalent  to  objec¬ 
tive  lawfulness. 

The  dictum  of  the  right  of  necessity  is  put 
in  these  terms:  “Necessity  has  no  law”  ( Neces - 
sitas  non  habet  legem).  And  yet  there  cannot 
be  a  necessity  that  could  make  what  is  wrong 
lawful. 

It  is  apparent,  then,  that  in  judgements  re¬ 
lating  both  to  “equity”  and  “the  right  of  neces¬ 
sity,”  the  equivocations  involved  arise  from  an 
interchange  of  the  objective  and  subjective 
grounds  that  enter  into  the  application  of  the 
principles  of  right,  when  viewed  respectively 
by  reason  or  by  a  judicial  tribunal.  What  one 
may  have  good  grounds  for  recognising  as  right, 
in  itself,  may  not  find  confirmation  in  a  court 
of  justice;  and  what  he  must  consider  to  be 
wrong,  in  itself,  may  obtain  recognition  in  such 
a  court.  And  the  reason  of  this  is  that  the  con¬ 
ception  of  right  is  not  taken  in  the  two  cases  in 
one  and  the  same  sense. 


DIVISION  OF  THE  SCIENCE  OF  RIGHT 


A.  General  Division  of  the  Duties  of  Right 
(Juridical  Duties) 

In  this  division  we  may  very  conveniently  fol¬ 
low  Ulpian,  if  his  three  formulae  are  taken  in 
a  general  sense,  which  may  not  have  been  quite 


clearly  in  his  mind,  but  which  they  are  capable 
of  being  developed  into  or  of  receiving.  They 
are  the  following: 

1.  Honeste  vive.  “Live  rightly.”  Juridical  rec¬ 
titude,  or  honour  ( honestas  juridica ),  consists 


OF  RIGHT 


401 


in  maintaining  one’s  own  worth  as  a  man  in  rela¬ 
tion  to  others.  This  duty  may  be  rendered  by 
the  proposition:  “Do  not  make  thyself  a  mere 
means  for  the  use  of  others,  but  be  to  them 
likewise  an  end.”  This  duty  will  be  explained 
in  the  next  formula  as  an  obligation  arising  out 
of  the  right  of  humanity  in  our  own  person 
(1 lex  justi). 

2.  Neminem  laede.  “Do  wrong  to  no  one.” 
This  formula  may  be  rendered  so  as  to  mean: 
“Do  no  wrong  to  any  one,  even  if  thou  shouldst 
be  under  the  necessity,  in  observing  this  duty,  to 
cease  from  all  connection  with  others  and  to 
avoid  all  society”  ( lex  juridica). 

3.  Suum  cuique  tribue.  “Assign  to  every  one 
what  is  his  own.”  This  may  be  rendered,  “En¬ 
ter,  if  wrong  cannot  be  avoided,  into  a  society 
with  others  in  which  every  one  may  have  secured 
to  him  what  is  his  own.”  If  this  formula  were 
to  be  simply  translated,  “Give  every  one  his 
own,”  it  would  express  an  absurdity,  for  we 
cannot  give  any  one  what  he  already  has.  If  it 
is  to  have  a  definite  meaning,  it  must  therefore 
run  thus:  “Enter  into  a  state  in  which  every 
one  can  have  what  is  his  own  secured  against 
the  action  of  every  other”  ( lex  justitiae). 

These  three  classical  formulae,  at  the  same 
time,  represent  principles  which  suggest  a  divi¬ 
sion  of  the  system  of  juridical  duties  into  inter¬ 
nal  duties,  external  duties,  and  those  connect¬ 
ing  duties  which  contain  the  latter  as  deduced 
from  the  principle  of  the  former  by  subsumption. 

B.  Universal  Division  of  Rights 

I.  Natural  Right  and  Positive  Right.  The 
system  of  rights,  viewed  as  a  scientific  system 
of  doctrines,  is  divided  into  natural  right  and 
positive  right.  Natural  right  rests  upon  pure 
rational  principles  a  priori;  positive  or  statutory 
right  is  what  proceeds  from  the  will  of  a  legis¬ 
lator. 

II.  Innate  Right  and  Acquired  Right.  The 
system  of  rights  may  again  be  regarded  in  refer¬ 
ence  to  the  implied  powers  of  dealing  morally 
with  others  as  bound  by  obligations,  that  is,  as 
furnishing  a  legal  title  of  action  in  relation  to 
them.  Thus  viewed,  the  system  is  divided  into 
innate  right  and  acquired  right.  Innate  right  is 
that  right  which  belongs  to  every  one  by  nature, 
independent  of  all  juridical  acts  of  experience. 
Acquired  right  is  that  right  which  is  founded  up¬ 
on  such  juridical  acts. 

Innate  right  may  also  be  called  the  “internal 
mine  and  thine”  (meum  vel  tuum  internum ) ; 
for  external  right  must  always  be  acquired. 


There  is  only  one  Innate  Right, 
the  Birthright  of  Freedom 

Freedom  is  independence  of  the  compulsory 
will  of  another;  and  in  so  far  as  it  can  coexist 
with  the  freedom  of  all  according  to  a  universal 
law,  it  is  the  one  sole  original,  inborn  right  be¬ 
longing  to  every  man  in  virtue  of  his  humanity. 
There  is,  indeed,  an  innate  equality  belonging 
to  every  man  which  consists  in  his  right  to  be 
independent  of  being  bound  by  others  to  any¬ 
thing  more  than  that  to  which  he  may  also  re¬ 
ciprocally  bind  them.  It  is,  consequently,  the 
inborn  quality  of  every  man  in  virtue  of  which 
he  ought  to  be  his  own  master  by  right  ( sui 
juris).  There  is,  also,  the  natural  quality  of  just¬ 
ness  attributable  to  a  man  as  naturally  of  unim¬ 
peachable  right  ( justi ),  because  he  has  done  no 
wrong  to  any  one  prior  to  his  own  juridical  ac¬ 
tions.  And,  further,  there  is  also  the  innate  right 
of  common  action  on  the  part  of  every  man,  so 
that  he  may  do  towards  others  what  does  not 
infringe  their  rights  or  take  away  anything  that 
is  theirs  unless  they  are  willing  to  appropriate 
it;  such  as  merely  to  communicate  thought,  to 
narrate  anything,  or  to  promise  something 
whether  truly  and  honestly,  or  untruly  and  dis¬ 
honestly  ( veriloquim  aut  falsiloquim) ,  for  it 
rests  entirely  upon  these  others  whether  they 
will  believe  or  trust  in  it  or  not.1  But  all  these 
rights  or  titles  are  already  included  in  the  prin¬ 
ciple  of  innate  freedom,  and  are  nut  really  dis¬ 
tinguished  from  it,  even  as  dividing  members 
under  a  higher  species  of  right. 

The  reason  why  such  a  division  into  separate 
rights  has  been  introduced  into  the  system  of 
natural  right,  viewed  as  including  all  that  is  in¬ 
nate,  was  not  without  a  purpose.  Its  object  was 
to  enable  proof  to  be  more  readily  put  forward 
in  case  of  any  controversy  arising  about  an  ac¬ 
quired  right,  and  questions  emerging  either  with 
reference  to  a  fact  that  might  be  in  doubt,  or,  if 

1  It  is  customary  to  designate  every  untruth  that  is 
spoken  intentionally  as  such,  although  it  may  be  in  a 
frivolous  manner,  a  lie,  or  falsehood  (mendacium),  be¬ 
cause  it  may  do  harm,  at  least  in  so  far  as  any  one  who 
repeats  it  in  good  faith  may  be  made  a  laughing-stock 
of  to  others  on  account  of  his  easy  credulity.  But  in  the 
juridical  sense,  only  that  untruth  is  called  a  lie  which 
immediately  infringes  the  right  of  another,  such  as  a 
false  allegation  of  a  contract  having  been  concluded, 
when  the  allegation  is  put  forward  in  order  to  deprive 
some  one  of  what  is  his  ( falsiloquim  dolosum).  This 
distinction  of  conceptions  so  closely  allied  is  not  with¬ 
out  foundation;  because  on  the  occasion  of  a  simple 
statement  of  one’s  thoughts,  it  is  always  free  for  anoth¬ 
er  to  take  them  as  he  may;  and  yet  the  resulting  re¬ 
pute,  that  such  a  one  is  a  man  whose  word  cannot  be 
trusted,  comes  so  close  to  the  opprobrium  of  directly 
calling  him  a  liar,  that  the  boundary-line  separating 
what,  in  such  a  case,  belongs  to  jurisprudence,  and  what 
is  special  to  ethics,  can  hardly  be  otherwise  drawn. 


402 

that  were  established,  in  reference  to  a  right 
under  dispute.  For  the  party  repudiating  an  ob¬ 
ligation,  and  on  whom  the  burden  of  proof 
( onus  probandi)  might  be  incumbent,  could 
thus  methodically  refer  to  his  innate  right  of 
freedom  as  specified  under  various  relations  in 
detail,  and  could  therefore  found  upon  them 
equally  as  different  titles  of  right. 

In  the  relation  of  innate  right,  and  conse¬ 
quently  of  the  internal  mine  and  thine ,  there  is 
therefore  not  rights,  but  only  one  right.  And, 
accordingly,  this  highest  division  of  rights  into 
innate  and  acquired,  which  evidently  consists 
of  two  members  extremely  unequal  in  their  con¬ 
tents  is  properly  placed  in  the  introduction;  and 
the  subdivisions  of  the  science  of  right  may  be 
referred  in  detail  to  the  external  mine  and  thine. 


C.  Methodical  Division  of  the  Science  of  Right 
The  highest  division  of  the  system  of  natural 
right  should  not  be — as  it  is  frequently  put — 
into  “ natural  right”  and  “ social  right,”  but  into 
natural  right  and  civil  right.  The  first  consti¬ 
tutes  private  right;  the  second,  public  right.  For 
it  is  not  the  “social  state”  but  the  “civil  state” 
that  is  opposed  to  the  “state  of  nature”;  for  in 
the  “state  of  nature”  there  may  well  be  society 
of  some  kind,  but  there  is  no  “civil”  society, 
as  an  institution  securing  the  mine  and  thine  by 
public  laws.  It  is  thus  that  right,  viewed  under 
reference  to  the  state  of  nature,  is  specially 
called  private  right.  The  whole  of  the  principles 
of  right  will  therefore  fall  to  be  expounded  under 
the  two  subdivisions  of  private  right  and  public 
right. 


THE  SCIENCE  OF  RIGHT 


FIRST  PART.  PRIVATE  RIGHT 

The  System  of  Those  Laws  which  Require  no  External  Promulgation. 
The  Principles  of  the  External  Mine  and  Thine  Generally 


Chapter  I.  Of  the  Mode  of  Having  Any¬ 
thing  External  as  One’s  Own 

i.  The  Meaning  of  “Mine”  in  Right 
(Meum  Juris) 

Anything  is  “mine”  by  right ,  or  is  rightfully 
mine,  when  I  am  so  connected  with  it,  that  if 
any  other  person  should  make  use  of  it  without 
my  consent,  he  would  do  me  a  lesion  or  injury. 
The  subjective  condition  of  the  use  of  anything 
is  possession  of  it. 

An  external  thing,  however  as  such  could 
only  be  mine,  if  I  may  assume  it  to  be  possible 
that  I  can  be  wronged  by  the  use  which  another 
might  make  of  it  when  it  is  not  actually  in  my 
possession.  Hence  it  would  be  a  contradiction 
to  have  anything  external  as  one’s  own,  were 
not  the  conception  of  possession  capable  of  two 
different  meanings,  as  sensible  possession  that 
is  perceivable  by  the  senses,  and  rational  pos¬ 
session  that  is  perceivable  only  by  the  intellect. 
By  the  former  is  to  be  understood  a  physical 
possession,  and  by  the  latter,  a  purely  juridical 
possession  of  the  same  object. 

The  description  of  an  object  as  “external  to 
me”  may  signify  either  that  it  is  merely  “differ¬ 
ent  and  distinct  from  me  as  a  subject,”  or  that 
it  is  also  “a  thing  placed  outside  of  me,  and  to 
be  found  elsewhere  in  space  or  time.”  Taken  in 
the  first  sense,  the  term  possession  signifies  ra¬ 
tional  possession;  and,  in  the  second  sense,  it 
must  mean  empirical  possession.  A  rational  or 
intelligible  possession,  if  such  be  possible,  is 
possession  viewed  apart  from  physical  holding 
or  detention  ( detentio ). 

2.  Juridical  Postulate  of  the  Practical  Reason 

It  is  possible  to  have  any  external  object  of 
my  will  as  mine.  In  other  words,  a  maxim  to 
this  effect — were  it  to  become  law — that  any 
object  on  which  the  will  can  be  exerted  must 
remain  objectively  in  itself  without  an  owner , 


as  res  nullius ,  is  contrary  to  the  principle  of 
right. 

For  an  object  of  any  act  of  my  will,  is  some¬ 
thing  that  it  would  be  physically  within  my 
power  to  use.  Now,  suppose  there  were  things 
that  by  right  should  absolutely  not  be  in  our 
power,  or,  in  other  words,  that  it  would  be  wrong 
or  inconsistent  with  the  freedom  of  all,  accord¬ 
ing  to  universal  law,  to  make  use  of  them.  On 
this  supposition,  freedom  would  so  far  be  de¬ 
priving  itself  of  the  use  of  its  voluntary  activity, 
in  thus  putting  useable  objects  out  of  all  possi¬ 
bility  of  use.  In  practical  relations,  this  would 
be  to  annihilate  them,  by  making  them  res  nul¬ 
lius,  notwithstanding  the  fact  that  acts  of  will  in 
relation  to  such  things  would  formally  harmo¬ 
nize,  in  the  actual  use  of  them,  with  the  external 
freedom  of  all  according  to  universal  laws.  Now 
the  pure  practical  reason  lays  down  only  formal 
laws  as  principles  to  regulate  the  exercise  of  the 
will;  and  therefore  abstracts  from  the  matter  of 
the  act  of  will,  as  regards  the  other  qualities  of 
the  object,  which  is  considered  only  in  so  far 
as  it  is  an  object  of  the  activity  of  the  will. 
Hence  the  practical  reason  cannot  contain,  in 
reference  to  such  an  object,  an  absolute  prohi¬ 
bition  of  its  use,  because  this  would  involve  a 
contradiction  of  external  freedom  with  itself. 
An  object  of  my  free  will,  however,  is  one  which 
I  have  the  physical  capability  of  making  some 
use  of  at  will,  since  its  use  stands  in  my  power 
(in  potentia).  This  is  to  be  distinguished  from 
having  the  object  brought  under  my  disposal 
(in  potestatem  meam  reductum ),  which  sup¬ 
poses  not  a  capability  merely,  but  also  a  partic¬ 
ular  act  of  the  free-will.  But  in  order  to  consider 
something  merely  as  an  object  of  my  will  as 
such,  it  is  sufficient  to  be  conscious  that  I  have 
it  in  my  power.  It  is  therefore  an  assumption 
a  priori  of  the  practical  reason  to  regard  and 
treat  every  object  within  the  range  of  my  free 
exercise  of  will  as  objectively  a  possible  mine 
or  thine. 


403 


THE  SCIENCE 


This  postulate  may  be  called  “a  permissive 
law”  of  the  practical  reason,  as  giving  us  a  spe¬ 
cial  title  which  we  could  not  evolve  out  of  the 
mere  conceptions  of  right  generally.  And  this 
title  constitutes  the  right  to  impose  upon  all 
others  an  obligation,  not  otherwise  laid  upon 
them,  to  abstain  from  the  use  of  certain  objects 
of  our  free  choice,  because  we  have  already 
taken  them  into  our  possession.  Reason  wills 
that  this  shall  be  recognised  as  a  valid  principle, 
and  it  does  so  as  practical  reason;  and  it  is 
enabled  by  means  of  this  postulate  a  priori  to 
enlarge  its  range  of  activity  in  practice. 

3.  Possession  and  Ownership 

Any  one  who  would  assert  the  right  to  a  thing 
as  his  must  be  in  possession  of  it  as  an  object. 
Were  he  not  its  actual  possessor  or  owner,  he 
could  not  be  wronged  or  injured  by  the  use 
which  another  might  make  of  it  without  his  con¬ 
sent.  For,  should  anything  external  to  him,  and 
in  no  way  connected  with  him  by  right,  affect 
this  object,  it  could  not  affect  himself  as  a  sub¬ 
ject.  nor  do  him  any  wrong,  unless  he  stood  in 
a  relation  of  ownership  to  it. 

4.  Exposition  of  the  Conception  of  the 
External  Mine  and  Thine 

There  can  only  be  three  external  objects  of 
my  will  in  the  activity  of  choice: 

(1)  A  corporeal  thing  external  to  me; 

(2)  The  free-will  of  another  in  the  perform¬ 
ance  of  a  particular  act  ( praestatio ) ; 

(3)  The  state  of  another  in  relation  to  my¬ 
self. 

These  correspond  to  the  categories  of  sub¬ 
stance ,  causality ,  and  reciprocity;  and  they  form 
the  practical  relations  between  me  and  external 
objects,  according  to  the  laws  of  freedom. 

A.  I  can  only  call  a  corporeal  thing  or  an  ob¬ 
ject  in  space  “mine,”  when,  even  although  not 
in  physical  possession  of  it ,  I  am  able  to  assert 
that  I  am  in  possession  of  it  in  another  real  non¬ 
physical  sense.  Thus,  I  am  not  entitled  to  call 
an  apple  mine  merely  because  I  hold  it  in  my 
hand  or  possess  it  physically;  but  only  when 
I  am  entitled  to  say,  “I  possess  it,  although  I 
have  laid  it  out  of  my  hand,  and  wherever  it 
may  lie.”  In  like  manner,  I  am  not  entitled  to 
say  of  the  ground,  on  which  I  may  have  laid 
myself  down,  that  therefore  it  is  mine;  but  only 
when  I  can  rightly  assert  that  it  still  remains  in 
my  possession,  although  I  may  have  left  the 


spot.  For  any  one  who,  in  the  former  appear¬ 
ances  of  empirical  possession,  might  wrench  the 
apple  out  of  my  hand,  or  drag  me  away  from 
my  resting-place,  would,  indeed,  injure  me  in 
respect  of  the  inner  “mine”  of  freedom,  but  not 
in  respect  of  the  external  “mine,”  unless  I  could 
assert  that  I  was  in  the  possession  of  the  object, 
even  when  not  actually  holding  it  physically. 
And  if  I  could  not  do  this,  neither  could  I  call 
the  apple  or  the  spot  mine. 

B.  I  cannot  call  the  performance  of  some¬ 
thing  by  the  action  of  the  will  of  another 
“mine,”  if  I  can  only  say  “it  has  come  into  my 
possession  at  the  same  time  with  a  promise” 
( pactum  re  initum) ;  but  only  if  I  am  able  to 
assert  “I  am  in  possession  of  the  will  of  the 
other,  so  as  to  determine  him  to  the  perform¬ 
ance  of  a  particular  act,  although  the  time  for 
the  performance  of  it  has  not  yet  come.”  In  the 
latter  case,  the  promise  belongs  to  the  nature  of 
things  actually  held  as  possessed,  and  as  an  ac¬ 
tive  obligation  I  can  reckon  it  mine;  and  this 
holds  good  not  only  if  I  have  the  thing  prom¬ 
ised — as  in  the  first  case — already  in  my  pos¬ 
session,  but  even  although  I  do  not  yet  possess 
it  in  fact.  Hence,  I  must  be  able  to  regard  my¬ 
self  in  thought  as  independent  of  that  empirical 
form  of  possession  that  is  limited  by  the  condi¬ 
tion  of  time  and  as  being,  nevertheless,  in  pos¬ 
session  of  the  object. 

C.  I  cannot  call  a  wife,  a  child,  a  domestic, 
or,  generally,  any  other  person  “mine”  merely 
because  I  command  them  at  present  as  belong¬ 
ing  to  my  household,  or  because  I  have  them 
under  control,  and  in  my  power  and  possession. 
But  I  can  call  them  mine,  if,  although  they  may 
have  withdrawn  themselves  from  my  control 
and  I  do  not  therefore  possess  them  empirically, 
I  can  still  say  “I  possess  them  by  my  mere  will, 
provided  they  exist  anywhere  in  space  or  time; 
and,  consequently,  my  possession  of  them  is 
purely  juridical .”  They  belong,  in  fact,  to  my 
possessions,  only  when  and  so  far  as  I  can  as¬ 
sert  this  as  a  matter  of  right. 

5.  Definition  of  the  Conception  of  the 
External  Mine  and  Thine 

Definitions  are  nominal  or  real.  A  nominal 
definition  is  sufficient  merely  to  distinguish  the 
object  defined  from  all  other  objects,  and  it 
springs  out  of  a  complete  and  definite  exposi¬ 
tion  of  its  conception.  A  real  definition  further 
suffices  for  a  deduction  of  the  conception  de¬ 
fined,  so  as  to  furnish  a  knowledge  of  the  reality 
of  the  object.  The  nominal  definition  of  the 
external  “mine”  would  thus  be:  “The  external 


OF  RIGHT 


mine  is  anything  outside  of  myself,  such  that 
any  hindrance  of  my  use  of  it  at  will  would  be 
doing  me  an  injury  or  wrong  as  an  infringement 
of  that  freedom  of  mine  which  may  coexist 
with  the  freedom  of  all  others  according  to  a 
universal  law.”  The  real  definition  of  this  con¬ 
ception  may  be  put  thus:  “The  external  mine  is 
anything  outside  of  myself,  such  that  any  pre¬ 
vention  of  my  use  of  it  would  be  a  wrong,  al¬ 
though  I  may  not  he  in  possession  of  it  so  as 
to  be  actually  holding  it  as  an  object.”  I  must 
be  in  some  kind  of  possession  of  an  external  ob¬ 
ject,  if  the  object  is  to  be  regarded  as  mine; 
for,  otherwise,  anyone  interfering  with  this  ob¬ 
ject  would  not,  in  doing  so,  affect  me;  nor,  con¬ 
sequently,  would  he  thereby  do  me  any  wrong. 
Hence,  according  to  §  4,  a  rational  possession 
(possessio  noumenon )  must  be  assumed  as  pos¬ 
sible,  if  there  is  to  be  rightly  an  external  mine 
and  thine.  Empirical  possession  is  thus  only 
phenomenal  possession  or  holding  (detention) 
of  the  object  in  the  sphere  of  sensible  appear¬ 
ance  ( possessio  phenomenon ),  although  the  ob¬ 
ject  which  I  possess  is  not  regarded  in  this  prac¬ 
tical  relation  as  itself  a  phenomenon — accord¬ 
ing  to  the  exposition  of  the  Transcendental  An¬ 
alytic  in  the  Critique  of  Pure  Reason — but  as 
a  thing  in  itself.  For  in  the  Critique  of  Pure 
Reason  the  interest  of  reason  turns  upon  the 
theoretical  knowledge  of  the  nature  of  things 
and  how  far  reason  can  go  in  such  knowledge. 
But  here  reason  has  to  deal  with  the  practical 
determination  of  the  action  of  the  will  accord¬ 
ing  to  laws  of  freedom,  whether  the  object  is 
perceivable  through  the  senses  or  merely  think¬ 
able  by  the  pure  understanding.  And  right,  as 
under  consideration,  is  a  pure  practical  concep¬ 
tion  of  the  reason  in  relation  to  the  exercise  of 
the  will  under  laws  of  freedom. 

And,  hence,  it  is  not  quite  correct  to  speak  of 
“possessing”  a  right  to  this  or  that  object,  but 
it  should  rather  be  said  that  an  object  is  pos¬ 
sessed  in  a  purely  juridical  way;  for  a  right  is 
itself  the  rational  possession  of  an  object,  and 
to  “possess  a  possession,”  would  be  an  expres¬ 
sion  without  meaning. 

6.  Deduction  of  the  Conception  of  a  Purely 

Juridical  Possession  of  an  External  Object 
(Possessio  Noumenon) 

The  question,  “How  is  an  external  mine  and 
thine  possible?”  resolves  itself  into  this  other 
question:  “How  is  a  merely  juridical  or  rational 
possession  possible?”  And  this  second  question 
resolves  itself  again  into  a  third:  “How  is  a  syn¬ 
thetic  proposition  in  right  possible  a  priori ?” 


405 

All  propositions  of  right — as  juridical  propo¬ 
sitions — are  propositions  a  priori,  for  they  are 
practical  laws  of  reason  ( dictamina  rationis). 
But  the  juridical  proposition  a  priori  respecting 
empirical  possession  is  analytical;  for  it  says 
nothing  more  than  what  follows  by  the  princi¬ 
ple  of  contradiction,  from  the  conception  of 
such  possession;  namely,  that  if  I  am  the  holder 
of  a  thing  in  the  way  of  being  physically  con¬ 
nected  with  it,  any  one  interfering  with  it  with¬ 
out  my  consent — as,  for  instance,  in  wrenching 
an  apple  out  of  my  hand — affects  and  detracts 
from  my  freedom  as  that  which  is  internally 
mine;  and  consequently  the  maxim  of  his  ac¬ 
tion  is  in  direct  contradiction  to  the  axiom  of 
right.  The  proposition  expressing  the  principle 
of  an  empirical  rightful  possession  does  not 
therefore  go  beyond  the  right  of  a  person  in  ref¬ 
erence  to  himself. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  proposition  expressing 
the  possibility  of  the  possession  of  a  thing  ex¬ 
ternal  to  me,  after  abstraction  of  all  the  con¬ 
ditions  of  empirical  possession  in  space  and  time 
— consequently  presenting  the  assumption  of 
the  possibility  of  a  possessio  noumenon — goes 
beyond  these  limiting  conditions;  and  because 
this  proposition  asserts  a  possession  even  with¬ 
out  physical  holding,  as  necessary  to  the  concep¬ 
tion  of  the  external  mine  and  thine,  it  is  syn¬ 
thetical.  And  thus  it  becomes  a  problem  for 
reason  to  show  how  such  a  proposition,  extend¬ 
ing  its  range  beyond  the  conception  of  empiri¬ 
cal  possession,  is  possible  a  priori. 

In  this  manner,  for  instance,  the  act  of  tak¬ 
ing  possession  of  a  particular  portion  of  the  soil 
is  a  mode  exercising  the  private  free-will  with¬ 
out  being  an  act  of  usurpation.  The  possessor 
founds  upon  the  innate  right  of  common  pos¬ 
session  of  the  surface  of  the  earth,  and  upon  the 
universal  will  corresponding  a  priori  to  it,  which 
allows  a  private  possession  of  the  soil;  because 
what  are  mere  things  would  be  otherwise  made 
in  themselves  and  by  a  law  into  unappropriable 
objects.  Thus  a  first  appropriator  acquires  orig¬ 
inally  by  primary  possession  a  particular  por¬ 
tion  of  the  ground;  and  by  right  {jure)  he  re¬ 
sists  every  other  person  who  would  hinder  him 
in  the  private  use  of  it,  although,  while  the 
“state  of  nature”  continues,  this  cannot  be  done 
by  juridical  means  (de  jure),  because  a  public 
law  does  not  yet  exist. 

And  although  a  piece  of  ground  should  be  re¬ 
garded  as  free,  or  declared  to  be  such,  so  as  to 
be  for  the  public  use  of  all  without  distinction, 
yet  it  cannot  be  said  that  it  is  thus  free  by  na¬ 
ture  and  originally  so,  prior  to  any  juridical 


THE  SCIENCE 


406 

act.  For  there  would  be  a  real  relation  already 
incorporated  in  such  a  piece  of  ground  by  the 
very  fact  that  the  possession  of  it  was  denied 
to  any  particular  individual;  and  as  this  public 
freedom  of  the  ground  would  be  a  prohibition 
of  it  to  every  particular  individual,  this  presup¬ 
poses  a  common  possession  of  it  which  cannot 
take  effect  without  a  contract.  A  piece  of 
ground,  however,  which  can  only  become  public¬ 
ly  free  by  contract,  must  actually  be  in  the  pos¬ 
session  of  all  those  associated  together,  who 
mutually  interdict  or  suspend  each  other,  from 
any  particular  or  private  use  of  it. 

This  original  community  of  the  soil  and  of  the 
things  upon  it  ( communio  fundi  originaria),  is  an 
idea  which  has  objective  and  practical  juridical 
reality  and  is  entirely  different  from  the  idea  of 
a  primitive  community  of  things,  which  is  a  fic¬ 
tion.  For  the  latter  would  have  had  to  be  found¬ 
ed  as  a  form  of  society,  and  must  have  taken  its 
rise  from  a  contract  by  which  all  renounced  the 
right  of  private  possession,  so  that  by  uniting 
the  property  owned  by  each  into  a  whole,  it  was 
thus  transformed  into  a  common  possession. 
But  had  such  an  event  taken  place,  history  must 
have  presented  some  evidence  of  it.  To  regard 
such  a  procedure  as  the  original  mode  of  taking 
possession,  and  to  hold  that  the  particular  pos¬ 
sessions  of  every  individual  may  and  ought  to 
be  grounded  upon  it,  is  evidently  a  contradic¬ 
tion. 

Possession  ( possessio )  is  to  be  distinguished 
from  habitation  as  mere  residence  ( sedes ) ;  and 
the  act  of  taking  possession  of  the  soil  in  the  in¬ 
tention  of  acquiring  it  once  for  all,  is  also  to  be 
distinguished  from  settlement  or  domicile  ( inco - 
latus),  which  is  a  continuous  private  possession 
of  a  place  that  is  dependent  on  the  presence  of 
the  individual  upon  it.  We  have  not  here  to  deal 
with  the  question  of  domiciliary  settlement,  as 
that  is  a  secondary  juridical  act  which  may  fol¬ 
low  upon  possession,  or  may  not  occur  at  all; 
for  as  such  it  could  not  involve  an  original  pos¬ 
session,  but  only  a  secondary  possession  derived 
from  the  consent  of  others. 

Simple  physical  possession,  or  holding  of  the 
soil,  involves  already  certain  relations  of  right 
to  the  thing,  although  it  is  certainly  not  suffi¬ 
cient  to  enable  me  to  regard  it  as  mine.  Relative 
to  others,  so  far  as  they  know,  it  appears  as  a 
first  possession  in  harmony  with  the  law  of  ex¬ 
ternal  freedom;  and,  at  the  same  time,  it  is  em¬ 
braced  in  the  universal  original  possession  which 
contains  a  priori  the  fundamental  principle  of 
the  possibility  of  a  private  possession.  Hence  to 


disturb  the  first  occupier  or  holder  of  a  portion 
of  the  soil  in  his  use  of  it  is  a  lesion  or  wrong 
done  to  him.  The  first  taking  of  possession  has 
therefore  a  title  of  right  ( titulus  possessions)  in 
its  favour,  which  is  simply  the  principle  of  the 
original  common  possession;  and  the  saying  that 
“It  is  well  for  those  who  are  in  possession” 
( beati  possidentes ),  when  one  is  not  bound  to 
authenticate  his  possession,  is  a  principle  of 
natural  right  that  establishes  the  juridical  act  of 
taking  possession,  as  a  ground  of  acquisition 
upon  which  every  first  possessor  may  found. 

It  has  been  shown  in  the  Critique  of  Pure 
Reason  that  in  theoretical  principles  a  priori ,  an 
intuitional  perception  a  priori  must  be  supplied 
in  connection  with  any  given  conception;  and, 
consequently,  were  it  a  question  of  a  purely 
theoretical  principle,  something  would  have  to 
be  added  to  the  conception  of  the  possession 
of  an  object  to  make  it  real.  But  in  respect  of 
the  practical  principle  under  consideration,  the 
procedure  is  just  the  converse  of  the  theoretical 
process;  so  that  all  the  conditions  of  perception 
which  form  the  foundation  of  empirical  posses¬ 
sion  must  be  abstracted  or  taken  away  in  order 
to  extend  the  range  of  the  juridical  conception 
beyond  the  empirical  sphere,  and  in  order  to  be 
able  to  apply  the  postulate,  that  every  external 
object  of  the  free  activity  of  my  will,  so  far  as 
I  have  it  in  my  power,  although  not  in  the  pos¬ 
session  of  it,  may  be  reckoned  as  juridically 
mine. 

The  possibility  of  such  a  possession,  with  con¬ 
sequent  deduction  of  the  conception  of  a  non- 
empirical  possession,  is  founded  upon  the  juridi¬ 
cal  postulate  of  the  practical  reason,  that  “It  is 
a  juridical  duty  so  to  act  towards  others  that 
what  is  external  and  useable  may  come  into  the 
possession  or  become  the  property  of  some  one.” 
And  this  postulate  is  conjoined  with  the  exposi¬ 
tion  of  the  conception  that  what  is  externally 
one’s  own  is  founded  upon  a  possession,  that  is 
not  physical.  The  possibility  of  such  a  posses¬ 
sion,  thus  conceived,  cannot,  however,  be  proved 
or  comprehended  in  itself,  because  it  is  a  ra¬ 
tional  conception  for  which  no  empirical  percep¬ 
tion  can  be  furnished;  but  it  follows  as  an  im¬ 
mediate  consequence  from  the  postulate  that 
has  been  enunciated.  For,  if  it  is  necessary  to  act 
according  to  that  juridical  principle,  the  rational 
or  intelligible  condition  of  a  purely  juridical 
possession  must  also  be  possible.  It  need  aston¬ 
ish  no  one,  then,  that  the  theoretical  aspect  of 
the  principles  of  the  external  mine  and  thine  is 
lost  from  view  in  the  rational  sphere  of  pure  in¬ 
telligence  and  presents  no  extension  of  knowl- 


OF  RIGHT 


edge;  for  the  conception  of  freedom  upon  which 
they  rest  does  not  admit  of  any  theoretical  de¬ 
duction  of  its  possibility,  and  it  can  only  be  in¬ 
ferred  from  the  practical  law  of  reason,  called 
the  categorical  imperative,  viewed  as  a  fact. 

7.  Application  of  the  Principle  of  the  Possibility 

of  an  External  Mine  and  Thine  to  Objects  of 

Experience 

The  conception  of  a  purely  juridical  posses¬ 
sion  is  not  an  empirical  conception  dependent  on 
conditions  of  space  and  time,  and  yet  it  has 
practical  reality.  As  such  it  must  be  applicable  to 
objects  of  experience,  the  knowledge  of  which  is 
independent  of  the  conditions  of  space  and  time. 
The  rational  process  by  which  the  conception  of 
right  is  brought  into  relation  to  such  objects  so 
as  to  constitute  a  possible  external  mine  and 
thine,  is  as  follows.  The  conception  of  right,  be¬ 
ing  contained  merely  in  reason,  cannot  be  imme¬ 
diately  applied  to  objects  of  experience,  so  as  to 
give  the  conception  of  an  empirical  possession , 
but  must  be  applied  directly  to  the  mediating 
conception,  in  the  understanding,  of  possession 
in  general;  so  that,  instead  of  physical  holding 
( detentio )  as  an  empirical  representation  of  pos¬ 
session,  the  formal  conception  or  thought  of 
having ,  abstracted  from  all  conditions  of  space 
and  time,  is  conceived  by  the  mind,  and  only  as 
implying  that  an  object  is  in  my  power  and  at 
my  disposal  (in  poiestate  mea  positum  esse).  In 
this  relation,  the  term  external  does  not  signify 
existence  in  another  place  than  where  I  am,  nor 
my  resolution  and  acceptance  at  another  time 
than  the  moment  in  which  I  have  the  offer  of  a 
thing:  it  signifies  only  an  object  different  from 
or  other  than  myself.  Now  the  practical  reason 
by  its  law  of  right  wills,  that  I  shall  think  the 
mine  and  thine  in  application  to  objects,  not  ac¬ 
cording  to  sensible  conditions,  but  apart  from 
these  and  from  the  possession  they  indicate; 
because  they  refer  to  determinations  of  the  ac¬ 
tivity  of  the  will  that  are  in  accordance  with  the 
laws  of  freedom.  For  it  is  only  a  conception  of 
the  understanding  that  can  be  brought  under  the 
rational  conception  of  right.  I  may  therefore  say 
that  I  possess  a  field,  although  it  is  in  quite  a 
different  place  from  that  on  which  I  actually 
find  myself.  For  the  question  here  is  not  con¬ 
cerning  an  intellectual  relation  to  the  object,  but 
I  have  the  thing  practically  in  my  power  and  at 
my  disposal,  which  is  a  conception  of  possession 
realized  by  the  understanding  and  independent 
of  relations  of  space;  and  it  is  mine ,  because  my 
will,  in  determining  itself  to  any  particular  use 
of  it,  is  not  in  conflict  with  the  law  of  external 


407 

freedom.  Now  it  is  just  in  abstraction  from 
physical  possession  of  the  object  of  my  free-will 
in  the  sphere  of  sense,  that  the  practical  reason 
wills  that  a  rational  possession  of  it  shall  be 
thought,  according  to  intellectual  conceptions 
which  are  not  empirical,  but  contain  a  priori 
the  conditions  of  rational  possession.  Hence  it 
is  in  this  fact,  that  we  found  the  ground  of  the 
validity  of  such  a  rational  conception  of  posses¬ 
sion  ( possessio  noumenon)  as  a  principle  of  a 
universally  valid  legislation.  For  such  a  legisla¬ 
tion  is  implied  and  contained  in  the  expression, 
“This  external  object  is  mine ,”  because  an  obli¬ 
gation  is  thereby  imposed  upon  all  others  in  re¬ 
spect  of  it,  who  would  otherwise  not  have  been 
obliged  to  abstain  from  the  use  of  this  object. 

The  mode,  then,  of  having  something  external 
to  myself  as  mine,  consists  in  a  specially  juridi¬ 
cal  connection  of  the  will  of  the  subject  with 
that  object,  independently  of  the  empirical  rela¬ 
tions  to  it  in  space  and  in  time,  and  in  accord¬ 
ance  with  the  conception  of  a  rational  posses¬ 
sion.  A  particular  spot  on  the  earth  is  not  exter¬ 
nally  mine  because  I  occupy  it  with  my  body; 
for  the  question  here  discussed  refers  only  to 
my  external  freedom,  and  consequently  it  af¬ 
fects  only  the  possession  of  myself,  which  is  not 
a  thing  external  to  me,  and  therefore  only  in¬ 
volves  an  internal  right.  But  if  I  continue  to  be 
in  possession  of  the  spot,  although  I  have  taken 
myself  away  from  it  and  gone  to  another  place, 
only  under  that  condition  is  my  external  right 
concerned  in  connection  with  it.  And  to  make 
the  continuous  possession  of  this  spot  by  my 
person  a  condition  of  having  it  as  mine,  must 
either  be  to  assert  that  it  is  not  possible  at  all  to 
have  anything  external  as  one’s  own,  which  is 
contrary  to  the  postulate  in  §  2,  or  to  require,  in 
order  that  this  external  possession  may  be  pos¬ 
sible,  that  I  shall  be  in  two  places  at  the  same 
time.  But  this  amounts  to  saying  that  I  must  be 
in  a  place  and  also  not  in  it,  which  is  contradic¬ 
tory  and  absurb. 

This  position  may  be  applied  to  the  case  in 
which  I  have  accepted  a  promise;  for  my  having 
and  possession  in  respect  of  what  has  been  prom¬ 
ised  become  established  on  the  ground  of  exter¬ 
nal  right.  This  right  is  not  to  be  annulled  by  the 
fact  that  the  promiser  having  said  at  one  time, 
“This  thing  shall  be  yours,”  again  at  a  subse¬ 
quent  time  says,  “My  will  now  is  that  the  thing 
shall  not  be  yours.”  In  such  relations  of  rational 
right,  the  conditions  hold  just  the  same  as  if  the 
promiser  had,  without  any  interval  of  time  be¬ 
tween  them,  made  the  two  declarations  of  his 
will,  “This  shall  be  yours,”  and  also  “This  shall 


THE  SCIENCE 


408 

not  be  yours”;  which  manifestly  contradicts  it¬ 
self. 

The  same  thing  holds,  in  like  manner,  of  the 
conception  of  the  juridical  possession  of  a  per¬ 
son  as  belonging  to  the  Having  of  a  subject, 
whether  it  be  a  wife,  a  child,  or  a  servant.  The 
relations  of  right  involved  in  a  household,  and 
the  reciprocal  possession  of  all  its  members,  are 
not  annulled  by  the  capability  of  separating 
from  each  other  in  space;  because  it  is  by  juridi¬ 
cal  relations  that  they  are  connected,  and  the 
external  mine  and  thine,  as  in  the  former  cases, 
rests  entirely  upon  the  assumption  of  the  possi¬ 
bility  of  a  purely  rational  possession,  without 
the  accompaniment  of  physical  detention  or 
holding  of  the  object. 

Reason  is  forced  to  a  critique  of  its  juridically 
practical  function  in  special  reference  to  the 
conception  of  the  external  mine  and  thine,  by 
the  antinomy  of  the  propositions  enunciated  re¬ 
garding  the  possibility  of  such  a  form  of  pos¬ 
session.  For  these  give  rise  to  an  inevitable 
dialectic,  in  which  a  thesis  and  an  antithesis  set 
up  equal  claims  to  the  validity  of  two  conflicting 
conditions.  Reason  is  thus  compelled,  in  its 
practical  function  in  relation  to  right — as  it  was 
in  its  theoretical  function — to  make  a  distinc¬ 
tion  between  possession  as  a  phenomenal  appear¬ 
ance  presented  to  the  senses,  and  that  possession 
which  is  rational  and  thinkable  only  by  the  un¬ 
derstanding. 

Thesis. — The  thesis,  in  this  case,  is:  “It  is 
possible  to  have  something  external  as  mine,  al¬ 
though  I  am  not  in  possession  of  it.” 

Antithesis. — The  antithesis  is:  “It  is  not  pos¬ 
sible  to  have  anything  external  as  mine,  if  I  am 
not  in  possession  of  it.” 

Solution. — The  solution  is:  “Both  Proposi¬ 
tions  are  true”;  the  former  when  I  mean  em¬ 
pirical  possession  ( possessio  phaenomenon,  the 
latter  when  I  understand  by  the  same  term,  a 
purely  rational  possession  (possessio  noumenon) . 

But  the  possibility  of  a  rational  possession, 
and  consequently  of  an  external  mine  and  thine, 
cannot  be  comprehended  by  direct  insight,  but 
must  be  deduced  from  the  practical  reason.  And 
in  this  relation  it  is  specially  noteworthy  that 
the  practical  reason  without  intuitional  percep¬ 
tions,  and  even  without  requiring  such  an  ele¬ 
ment  a  priori,  can  extend  its  range  by  the  mere 
elimination  of  empirical  conditions,  as  justified 
by  the  law  of  freedom,  and  can  thus  establish 
synthetical  propositions  a  priori.  The  proof  of 
this  in  the  practical  connection,  as  will  be  shown 
afterwards,  can  be  adduced  in  an  analytical 
manner. 


S.To  Have  Anything  External  as  One's  Own  is 
only  Possible  in  a  Juridical  or  Civil  State  of 
Society  under  the  Regulation  of  a  Public 
Legislative  Power 

If,  by  word  or  deed.  I  declare  my  will  that 
some  external  thing  shall  be  mine,  I  make  a 
declaration  that  every  other  person  is  obliged 
to  abstain  from  the  use  of  this  object  of  my 
exercise  of  will;  and  this  imposes  an  obligation 
which  no  one  would  be  under,  without  such  a 
juridical  act  on  my  part.  But  the  assumption  of 
this  act  at  the  same  time  involves  the  admission 
that  I  am  obliged  reciprocally  to  observe  a  simi¬ 
lar  abstention  towards  every  other  in  respect  of 
what  is  externally  theirs;  for  the  obligation  in 
question  arises  from  a  universal  rule  regulating 
the  external  juridical  relations.  Hence  I  am  not 
obliged  to  let  alone  what  another  person  declares 
to  be  externally  his,  unless  every  other  person 
likewise  secures  me  by  a  guarantee  that  he  will 
act  in  relation  to  what  is  mine,  upon  the  same 
principle.  This  guarantee  of  reciprocal  and  mu¬ 
tual  abstention  from  what  belongs  to  others  does 
not  require  a  special  juridical  act  for  its  estab¬ 
lishment,  but  is  already  involved  in  the  concep¬ 
tion  of  an  external  obligation  of  right,  on  ac¬ 
count  of  the  universality  and  consequently  the 
reciprocity  of  the  obligatoriness  arising  from  a 
universal  Rule.  Now  a  single  will,  in  relation  to 
an  external  and  consequently  contingent  posses¬ 
sion,  cannot  serve  as  a  compulsory  law  for  all, 
because  that  would  be  to  do  violence  to  the  free¬ 
dom  which  is  in  accordance  with  universal  laws. 
Therefore  it  is  only  a  will  that  binds  every  one, 
and  as  such  a  common,  collective,  and  authorita¬ 
tive  will,  that  can  furnish  a  guarantee  of  security 
to  all.  But  the  state  of  men  under  a  universal, 
external,  and  public  legislation,  conjoined  with 
authority  and  power,  is  called  the  civil  state. 
There  can  therefore  be  an  external  mine  and 
thine  only  in  the  civil  state  of  society. 

Consequence. — It  follows,  as  a  corollary,  that, 
if  it  is  juridically  possible  to  have  an  external 
object  as  one’s  own,  the  individual  subject  of 
possession  must  be  allowed  to  compel  or  con¬ 
strain  every  person  with  whom  a  dispute  as  to 
the  mine  or  thine  of  such  a  possession  may  arise, 
to  enter  along  with  himself  into  the  relations  of 
a  civil  constitution. 

9.  There  May ,  However,  Be  an  External  Mine 
and  Thine  Found  as  a  Fact  in  the  State  of 
Nature,  but  it  is  only  Provisory 

Natural  right  in  the  state  of  a  civil  constitu¬ 
tion  means  the  forms  of  right  which  may  be 


OF  RIGHT 


deduced  from  principles  a  priori  as  the  condi¬ 
tions  of  such  a  constitution.  It  is  therefore  not 
to  be  infringed  by  the  statutory  laws  of  such  a 
constitution;  and  accordingly  the  juridical  prin¬ 
ciple  remains  in  force,  that,  “Whoever  proceeds 
upon  a  maxim  by  which  it  becomes  impossible 
for  me  to  have  an  object  of  the  exercise  of  my 
will  as  mine,  does  me  a  lesion  or  injury.”  For  a 
civil  constitution  is  only  the  juridical  condition 
under  which  every  one  has  what  is  his  own 
merely  secured  to  him,  as  distinguished  from 
its  being  specially  assigned  and  determined  to 
him.  All  guarantee,  therefore,  assumes  that 
everyone  to  whom  a  thing  is  secured  is  already 
in  possession  of  it  as  his  own.  Hence,  prior  to  the 
civil  constitution — or  apart  from  it — an  external 
mine  and  thine  must  be  assumed  as  possible,  and 
along  with  it  a  right  to  compel  everyone  with 
whom  we  could  come  into  any  kind  of  inter¬ 
course  to  enter  with  us  into  a  constitution  in 
which  what  is  mine  or  thine  can  be  secured. 
There  may  thus  be  a  possession  in  expectation 
or  in  preparation  for  such  a  state  of  security,  as 
can  only  be  established  on  the  law  of  the  com¬ 
mon  will;  and  as  it  is  therefore  in  accordance 
with  the  possibility  of  such  a  state,  it  constitutes 
a  provisory  or  temporary  juridical  possession; 
whereas  that  possession  which  is  found  in  reality 
in  the  civil  state  of  society  will  be  a  peremptory 
or  guaranteed  possession.  Prior  to  entering  into 
this  state,  for  which  he  is  naturally  prepared, 
the  individual  rightfully  resists  those  who  will 
not  adapt  themselves  to  it,  and  who  would  dis¬ 
turb  him  in  his  provisory  possession;  because, 
if  the  will  of  all  except  himself  were  imposing 
upon  him  an  obligation  to  withdraw  from  a  cer¬ 
tain  possession,  it  would  still  be  only  a  one-sided 
or  unilateral  will,  and  consequently  it  would  have 
just  as  little  legal  title — which  can  be  properly 
based  only  on  the  universalized  will — to  contest 
a  claim  of  right  as  he  would  have  to  assert  it. 
Yet  he  has  the  advantage  on  his  side,  of  being  in 
accord  with  the  conditions  requisite  to  the  in¬ 
troduction  and  institution  of  a  civil  form  of 
society.  In  a  word,  the  mode  in  which  anything 
external  may  be  held  as  one’s  own  in  the  state 
of  nature ,  is  just  physical  possession  with  a  pre¬ 
sumption  of  right  thus  far  in  its  favour,  that  by 
union  of  the  wills  of  all  in  a  public  legislation  it 
will  be  made  juridical;  and  in  this  expectation  it 
holds  comparatively ,  as  a  kind  of  potential  ju¬ 
ridical  possession. 

This  prerogative  of  right,  as  arising  from  the 
fact  of  empirical  possession,  is  in  accordance 
with  the  formula:  “It  is  well  for  those  who  are 
in  possession”  ( Beati  possidentes).  It  does  not 


409 

consist  in  the  fact  that,  because  the  possessor 
has  the  presumption  of  being  a  rightful  man ,  it 
is  unnecessary  for  him  to  bring  forward  proof 
that  he  possesses  a  certain  thing  rightfully,  for 
this  position  applies  only  to  a  case  of  disputed 
right.  But  it  is  because  it  accords  with  the  pos¬ 
tulate  of  the  practical  reason,  that  everyone  is 
invested  with  the  faculty  of  having  as  his  own 
any  external  object  upon  which  he  has  exerted 
his  will;  and,  consequently,  all  actual  possession 
is  a  state  whose  rightfulness  is  established  upon 
that  postulate  by  an  anterior  act  of  will.  And 
such  an  act,  if  there  be  no  prior  possession  of 
the  same  object  by  another  opposed  to  it,  does, 
therefore,  provisionally  justify  and  entitle  me, 
according  to  the  law  of  external  freedom,  to  re¬ 
strain  anyone  who  refuses  to  enter  with  me  into 
a  state  of  public  legal  freedom  from  all  preten¬ 
sion  to  the  use  of  such  an  object.  For  such  a 
procedure  is  requisite,  in  conformity  with  the 
postulate  of  reason,  in  order  to  subject  to  my 
proper  use  a  thing  which  would  otherwise  be 
practically  annihilated,  as  regards  all  proper  use 
of  it. 

Chapter  II.  The  Mode  of  Acquiring  Any¬ 
thing  External 

10.  The  General  Principle  of  External 
Acquisition 

I  acquire  a  thing  when  I  act  ( efficio )  so  that  it 
becomes  mine.  An  external  thing  is  originally 
mine  when  it  is  mine  even  without  the  interven¬ 
tion  of  a  juridical  act.  An  acquisition  is  original 
and  primary  when  it  is  not  derived  from  what 
another  had  already  made  his  own. 

There  is  nothing  external  that  is  as  such  origi¬ 
nally  mine;  but  anything  external  may  be  origi¬ 
nally  acquired  when  it  is  an  object  that  no  other 
person  has  yet  made  his.  A  state  in  which  the 
mine  and  thine  are  in  common  cannot  be  con¬ 
ceived  as  having  been  at  any  time  original.  Such 
a  state  of  things  would  have  to  be  acquired  by 
an  external  juridical  act,  although  there  may  be 
an  original  and  common  possession  of  an  exter¬ 
nal  object.  Even  if  we  think  hypothetically  of  a 
state  in  which  the  mine  and  thine  would  be 
originally  in  common  as  a  communio  mei  et  tui 
originaria,  it  would  still  have  to  be  distinguished 
from  a  primeval  communion  ( communio  pri- 
maeva)  with  things  in  common,  sometimes  sup¬ 
posed  to  be  founded  in  the  first  period  of  the 
relations  of  right  among  men,  and  which  could 
not  be  regarded  as  based  upon  principles  like 
the  former,  but  only  upon  history.  Even  under 
that  condition  the  historic  communio,  as  a  sup- 


THE  SCIENCE 


posed  primeval  community,  would  always  have 
to  be  viewed  as  acquired  and  derivative  (com- 
munio  derivativa). 

The  principle  of  external  acquisition,  then, 
may  be  expressed  thus:  “Whatever  I  bring  under 
my  power  according  to  the  law  of  external  free¬ 
dom,  of  which  as  an  object  of  my  free  activity 
of  will  I  have  the  capability  of  making  use  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  postulate  of  the  practical  reason, 
and  which  I  will  to  become  mine  in  conformity 
with  the  idea  of  a  possible  united  common  will, 
is  mine.” 

The  practical  elements  (momenta  attendenda) 
constitutive  of  the  process  of  original  acquisi¬ 
tion  are: 

1.  Prehension  or  seizure  of  an  object  which 
belongs  to  no  one;  for,  if  it  belonged  already  to 
some  one,  the  act  would  conflict  with  the  free¬ 
dom  of  others,  that  is,  according  to  universal 
laws.  This  is  the  taking  possession  of  an  object 
of  my  free  activity  of  will  in  space  and  time;  the 
possession,  therefore,  into  which  I  thus  put  my¬ 
self  is  sensible  or  physical  possession  (possessio 
phenomenon ); 

2.  Declaration  of  the  possession  of  this  object 
by  formal  designation  and  the  act  of  my  free¬ 
will  in  interdicting  every  other  person  from  us¬ 
ing  it  as  his; 

3.  Appropriation,  as  the  act,  in  idea,  of  an  ex¬ 
ternally  legislative  common  will,  by  which  all 
and  each  are  obliged  to  respect  and  act  in  con¬ 
formity  with  my  act  of  will. 

The  validity  of  the  last  element  in  the  proc¬ 
ess  of  acquisition,  as  that  on  which  the  conclu¬ 
sion  that  “the  external  object  is  mine”  rests,  is 
what  makes  the  possession  valid  as  a  purely  ra¬ 
tional  and  juridical  possession  (possessio  nou- 
menon).  It  is  founded  upon  the  fact  that,  as  all 


these  acts  are  juridical ,  they  consequently  pro¬ 
ceed  from  the  practical  reason,  and  therefore, 
in  the  question  as  to  what  is  right,  abstraction 
may  be  made  of  the  empirical  conditions  in¬ 
volved,  and  the  conclusion,  “the  external  object 
is  mine,”  thus  becomes  a  correct  inference  from 
the  external  fact  of  sensible  possession  to  the 
internal  right  of  rational  possession. 

The  original  primary  acquisition  of  an  exter¬ 
nal  object  of  the  action  of  the  will,  is  called  oc¬ 
cupancy.  It  can  only  take  place  in  reference  to 
substances  or  corporeal  things.  Now  when  this 
occupation  of  an  external  object  does  take  place, 
the  act  presupposes,  as  a  condition  of  such  em¬ 
pirical  possession,  its  priority  in  time  before  the 
act  of  any  other  who  may  also  be  willing  to  enter 
upon  occupation  of  it.  Hence  the  legal  maxim: 
“ qui  prior  tempore,  potior  jure!1 II. III.  Such  occupa¬ 
tion  as  original  or  primary  is,  further,  the  effect 
only  of  a  single  or  unilateral  will;  for  were  a 
bilateral  or  twofold  will  requisite  for  it,  it  would 
be  derived  from  a  contract  of  two  or  more  per¬ 
sons  with  each  other,  and  consequently  it  would 
be  based  upon  what  another  or  others  had  al¬ 
ready  made  their  own.  It  is  not  easy  to  see  how 
such  an  act  of  free-will  as  this  w7ould  be  could 
really  form  a  foundation  for  every  one  having 
his  own.  However,  the  first  acquisition  of  a  thing 
is  on  that  account  not  quite  exactly  the  same  as 
the  original  acquisition  of  it.  For  the  acquisition 
of  a  public  juridical  state  by  union  of  the  wills 
of  all  in  a  universal  legislation  would  be  such  an 
original  acquisition,  seeing  thafno  other  of  the 
kind  could  precede  it,  and  yet  it  would  be  de¬ 
rived  from  the  particular  wills  of  all  the  individ¬ 
uals,  and  consequently  become  all-sided  or  omni¬ 
lateral;  for  a  properly  primary  acquisition  can 
onlyproceed  from  an  individual  or  unilateral  will. 


Division  of  the  Subject  of  the  Acquisition  of  the 
External  Mine  and  Thine 


I.  In  respect  of  the  matter  of  object  of  acqui¬ 
sition.  I  acquire  either  a  corporeal  thing  (sub¬ 
stance),  or  the  performance  of  something  by 
another  (causality),  or  this  other  as  a  person  in 
respect  of  his  state,  so  far  as  I  have  a  right  to 
dispose  of  the  same  (in  a  relation  of  reciprocity 
with  him). 

II.  In  respect  of  the  form  or  mode  of  acquisi¬ 
tion,  it  is  either  a  real  right  (jus  reale), ox  a  per¬ 
sonal  right  (jus  personate ),  or  a  real-personal 
right  (jus  realiter  personate ),  to  the  possession 
although  not  to  the  use,  of  another  person  as  if 
he  w?ere  a  thing. 

III.  In  respect  of  the  ground  of  right  or  the 


title  (titulus)  of  acquisition — which,  properly,  is 
not  a  particular  member  of  the  division  of  rights, 
but  rather  a  constituent  element  of  the  mode  of 
exercising  them — anything  external  is  acquired 
by  a  certain  free  exercise  of  will  that  is  either 
unilateral,  as  the  act  of  a  single  will  (facto),  or 
bilateral,  as  the  act  of  two  wills  ( pacto ),  or  om¬ 
nilateral,  as  the  act  of  all  the  wills  of  a  com¬ 
munity  together  (lege). 

Section  I.  Principles  of  Real  Right 
11.  What  is  a  Real  Right? 

The  usual  definition  of  real  right,  or  “right  in 
a  thing”  (jus  reale,  jus  in  re),  is  that  “it  is  a  right 


OF  RIGHT 


as  against  every  possessor  of  it”  This  is  a  cor¬ 
rect  nominal  definition.  But  what  is  it  that  en¬ 
titles  me  to  claim  an  external  object  from  any 
one  who  may  appear  as  its  possessor,  and  to 
compel  him,  per  vindicationem ,  to  put  me  again, 
in  place  of  himself,  into  possession  of  it?  Is  this 
external  juridical  relation  of  my  will  a  kind  of 
immediate  relation  to  an  external  thing?  If  so, 
whoever  might  think  of  his  right  as  referring  not 
immediately  to  persons  but  to  things  would  have 
to  represent  it,  although  only  in  an  obscure  way, 
somewhat  thus.  A  right  on  one  side  has  always  a 
duty  corresponding  to  it  on  the  other,  so  that  an 
external  thing,  although  away  from  the  hands 
of  its  first  possessor,  continues  to  be  still  con¬ 
nected  with  him  by  a  continuing  obligation;  and 
thus  it  refuses  to  fall  under  the  claim  of  any 
other  possessor,  because  it  is  already  bound  to 
another.  In  this  way  my  right,  viewed  as  a  kind 
of  good  genius  accompanying  a  thing  and  pre¬ 
serving  it  from  all  external  attack,  would  refer  an 
alien  possessor  always  to  me!  It  is,  howTever, 
absurb  to  think  of  an  obligation  of  persons  to¬ 
wards  things,  and  conversely;  although  it  may 
be  allowed  in  any  particular  case  to  represent 
the  juridical  relation  by  a  sensible  image  of  this 
kind,  and  to  express  it  in  this  way. 

The  real  definition  would  run  thus:  “Right  in 
a  thing  is  a  right  to  the  private  use  of  a  thing,  of 
which  I  am  in  possession — original  or  derivative 
— in  common  with  all  others/’  For  this  is  the 
one  condition  under  which  it  is  alone  possible 
that  I  can  exclude  every  other  possessor  from 
the  private  use  of  the  thing  (jus  contra  quern- 
libet  hu jus  rei  possessorem).  For.  except  by  pre¬ 
supposing  such  a  common  collective  possession, 
it  cannot  be  conceived  how.  when  I  am  not  in 
actual  possession  of  a  thing,  I  could  be  injured 
or  wronged  by  others  who  are  in  possession  of  it 
and  use  it.  By  an  individual  act  of  my  own  will 
I  cannot  oblige  any  other  person  to  abstain  from 
the  use  of  a  thing  in  respect  of  which  he  would 
otherwise  be  under  no  obligation;  and,  accord¬ 
ingly,  such  an  obligation  can  only  arise  from  the 
collective  will  of  all  united  in  a  relation  of  com¬ 
mon  possession.  Otherwise,  I  would  have  to 
think  of  a  right  in  a  thing,  as  if  the  thing  has  an 
obligation  towards  me,  and  as  if  the  right  as 
against  every  possessor  of  it  had  to  be  derived 
from  this  obligation  in  the  thing,  which  is  an 
absurb  way  of  representing  the  subject. 

Further,  by  the  term  real  right  ( jus  reale )  is 
meant  not  only  the  right  in  a  thing  (jus  in  re), 
but  also  the  constitutive  principle  of  all  the  law’s 
which  relate  to  the  real  mine  and  thine.  It  is, 
however,  evident  that  a  man  entirely  alone  upon 


411 

the  earth  could  properly  neither  have  nor  ac¬ 
quire  any  external  thing  as  his  own;  because,  be¬ 
tween  him  as  a  person  and  all  external  things  as 
material  objects,  there  could  be  no  relations  of 
obligation.  There  is  therefore,  literally,  no  direct 
right  in  a  thing,  but  only  that  right  is  to  be 
properly  called  “real”  which  belongs  to  any  one 
as  constituted  against  a  person,  w’ho  is  in  com¬ 
mon  possession  of  things  with  all  others  in  the 
civil  state  of  society. 

12.  The  First  Acquisition  of  a  Thing 
can  only  be  that  of  the  Soil 

By  the  soil  is  understood  all  habitable  Land. 
In  relation  to  everything  that  is  moveable  upon 
it,  it  is  to  be  regarded  as  a  substance,  and  the 
mode  of  the  existence  of  the  moveables  is 
viewed  as  an  inherence  in  it.  And  just  as,  in  the 
theoretical  acceptance,  accidents  cannot  exist 
apart  from  their  substances,  so,  in  the  practical 
relation,  moveables  upon  the  soil  cannot  be  re¬ 
garded  as  belonging  to  any  one  unless  he  is 
supposed  to  have  been  previously  in  juridical 
possession  of  the  soil,  so  that  it  is  thus  consid¬ 
ered  to  be  his. 

For,  let  it  be  supposed  that  the  soil  belongs  to 
no  one.  Then  I  w’ould  be  entitled  to  remove 
every  moveable  thing  found  upon  it  from  its 
place,  even  to  total  loss  of  it,  in  order  to  occupy 
that  place,  without  infringing  thereby  on  the 
freedom  of  any  other;  there  being,  by  the  hy¬ 
pothesis,  no  possessor  of  it  at  all.  But  everything 
that  can  be  destroyed,  such  as  a  tree,  a  house, 
and  such  like — as  regards  its  matter  at  least — is 
moveable;  and  if  we  call  a  thing  which  cannot 
be  moved  without  destruction  of  its  form  an 
immoveable ,  the  mine  and  thine  in  it  is  not  un¬ 
derstood  as  applying  to  its  substance,  but  to 
that  which  is  adherent  to  it  and  which  does  not 
essentially  constitute  the  thing  itself. 

13.  Every  Part  of  the  Soil  may  be  Originally 
Acquired;  and  the  Principle  of  the  Possibility 
of  such  Acquisition  is  the  Original  Commu¬ 
nity  of  the  Soil  Generally 

The  first  clause  of  this  proposition  is  founded 
upon  the  postulate  of  the  practical  reason  (§  2) ; 
the  second  is  established  by  the  following  proof. 

All  men  are  originally  and  before  any  juridi¬ 
cal  act  of  will  in  rightful  possession  of  the  soil: 
that  is,  they  have  a  right  to  be  wherever  nature 
or  chance  has  placed  them  without  their  will. 
Possession  ( possessio ),  which  is  to  be  distin¬ 
guished  from  residential  settlement  (sedes)  as  a 
voluntary,  acquired,  and  permanent  possession, 
becomes  common  possession,  on  account  of  the 


THE  SCIENCE 


connection  with  each  other  of  all  the  places  on 
the  surface  of  the  earth  as  a  globe.  lor,  had  the 
surface  of  the  earth  been  an  infinite  plain,  men 
could  have  been  so  dispersed  upon  it  that  they 
might  not  have  come  into  any  necessary  com¬ 
munion  with  each  other,  and  a  state  of  social 
community  would  not  have  been  a  necessary 
consequence  of  their  existence  upon  the  earth. 
Now  that  possession  proper  to  all  men  upon  the 
earth,  which  is  prior  to  all  their  particular  jurid¬ 
ical  acts,  constitutes  an  original  possession  in 
common  ( communio  possessions  originaria). 
The  conception  of  such  an  original,  common 
possession  of  things  is  not  derived  from  experi¬ 
ence,  nor  is  it  dependent  on  conditions  of  time, 
as  is  the  case  with  the  imaginary  and  indemon¬ 
strable  fiction  of  a  primaeval  community  of  pos¬ 
session  in  actual  history.  Hence  it  is  a  practical 
conception  of  reason,  involving  in  itself  the  only 
principle  according  to  which  men  may  use  the 
place  they  happen  to  occupy  on  the  surface  of 
the  earth,  in  accordance  with  laws  of  right. 

14.  The  Juridical  Act  of  this  Original 
Acquisition  is  Occupancy 

The  act  of  taking  possession  ( apprehensio ),  as 
being  at  its  beginning  the  physical  appropriation 
of  a  corporeal  thing  in  space  ( possessions  physi- 
cae),  can  accord  with  the  law  of  the  external 
freedom  of  all,  under  no  other  condition  than 
that  of  its  priority  \ n  respect  of  time.  In  this  rela¬ 
tion  it  must  have  the  characteristic  of  a  first  act 
in  the  way  of  taking  possession,  as  a  free  exercise 
of  will.  The  activity  of  will,  however,  as  deter¬ 
mining  that  the  thing — in  this  case  a  definite 
separate  place  on  the  surface  of  the  earth — 
shall  be  mine,  being  an  act  of  appropriation,  can¬ 
not  be  otherwise  in  the  case  of  original  acquisi¬ 
tion  than  individual  or  unilateral  ( voluntas  uni- 
later  alis  s.  propria).  Now,  occupancy  is  the  ac¬ 
quisition  of  an  external  object  by  an  individual 
act  of  will.  The  original  acquisition  of  such  an 
object  as  a  limited  portion  of  the  soil  can  there¬ 
fore  only  be  accomplished  by  an  act  of  occupa¬ 
tion. 

The  possibility  of  this  mode  of  acquisition 
cannot  be  intuitively  apprehended  by  pure  rea¬ 
son  in  any  way,  nor  established  by  its  principles, 
but  is  an  immediate  consequence  from  the  pos¬ 
tulate  of  the  practical  reason.  The  will  as  prac¬ 
tical  reason,  however,  cannot  justify  external 
acquisition  otherwise  than  only  in  so  far  as  it  is 
itself  included  in  an  absolutely  authoritative 
will,  with  which  it  is  united  by  implication;  or, 
in  other  words,  only  in  so  far  as  it  is  contained 
within  a  union  of  the  wills  of  all  who  come  into 


practical  relation  with  each  other.  For  an  indi¬ 
vidual,  unilateral  will — and  the  same  applies  to  a 
dual  or  other  particular  will — cannot  impose  on 
all  an  obligation  which  is  contingent  in  itself. 
This  requires  an  omnilateral  or  universal  will, 
which  is  not  contingent,  but  a  priori ,  and  which 
is  therefore  necessarily  united  and  legislative. 
Only  in  accordance  with  such  a  principle  can 
there  be  agreement  of  the  active  free-will  of 
each  individual  with  the  freedom  of  all,  and 
consequently  rights  in  general,  or  even  the  possi¬ 
bility  of  an  external  mine  and  thine. 

15.  It  is  Only  within  a  Civil  Constitution  that 

Anything  can  be  Acquired  Peremptorily , 

whereas  in  the  State  of  Nature  Acquisition 

can  only  be  Provisory 

A  civil  constitution  is  objectively  necessary 
as  a  duty,  although  subjectively  its  reality  is 
contingent.  Hence,  there  is  connected  with  it  a 
real  natural  law  of  right,  to  which  all  external 
acquisition  is  subjected. 

The  empirical  title  of  acquisition  has  been 
showrn  to  be  constituted  by  the  taking  physical 
possession  ( apprehensio  physica)  as  founded 
upon  an  original  community  of  right  in  all  to  the 
soil.  And  because  a  possession  in  the  phenomenal 
sphere  of  sense  can  only  be  subordinated  to  that 
possession  which  is  in  accordance  with  rational 
conceptions  of  right,  there  must  correspond  to 
this  physical  act  of  possession  a  rational  mode 
of  taking  possession  by  elimination  of  all  the 
empirical  conditions  in  space  and  time.  This 
rational  form  of  possession  establishes  the  prop¬ 
osition  that  “whatever  I  bring  under  my  powder 
in  accordance  w’ith  laws  of  external  freedom, 
and  will  that  it  shall  be  mine,  becomes  mine.” 

The  rational  title  of  acquisition  can  therefore 
only  lie  originally  in  the  idea  of  the  will  of  all 
united  implicitly,  or  necessarily  to  be  united, 
which  is  here  tacitly  assumed  as  an  indispensable 
condition  ( conditio  sine  qua  non).  For  by  a  sin¬ 
gle  will  there  cannot  be  imposed  upon  others  an 
obligation  by  which  they  w’ould  not  have  been 
otherwise  bound.  But  the  fact  formed  by  wills 
actually  and  universally  united  in  a  legislation 
constitutes  the  civil  state  of  society.  Hence,  it 
is  only  in  conformity  with  the  idea  of  a  civil 
state  of  society,  or  in  reference  to  it  and  its  reali¬ 
zation,  that  anything  external  can  be  acquired. 
Before  such  a  state  is  realized,  and  in  anticipa¬ 
tion  of  it,  acquisition,  which  would  otherwise  be 
derived,  is  consequently  only  provisory.  The 
acquisition  which  is  pere?nptory  finds  place  only 
in  the  civil  state. 

Nevertheless,  such  provisory  acquisition  is 


OF  RIGHT 


real  acquisition.  For,  according  to  the  postulate 
of  the  juridically  practical  reason,  the  possibil¬ 
ity  of  acquisition  in  whatever  state  men  may 
happen  to  be  living  beside  one  another,  and 
therefore  in  the  state  of  nature  as  well,  is  a  prin¬ 
ciple  of  private  right.  And  in  accordance  with 
this  principle,  every  one  is  justified  or  entitled 
to  exercise  that  compulsion  by  which  it  alone 
becomes  possible  to  pass  out  of  the  state  of  na¬ 
ture  and  to  enter  into  that  state  of  civil  society 
which  alone  can  make  all  acquisition  peremp¬ 
tory. 

It  is  a  question  as  to  how  far  the  right  of  tak¬ 
ing  possession  of  the  soil  extends.  The  answer  is, 
So  far  as  the  capability  of  having  it  under  one’s 
power  extends;  that  is,  just  as  far  as  he  who 
wills  to  appropriate  it  can  defend  it,  as  if  the 
soil  were  to  say:  “If  you  cannot  protect  me, 
neither  can  you  command  me.”  In  this  way  the 
controversy  about  what  constitutes  a  jree  or 
closed  sea  must  be  decided.  Thus,  within  the 
range  of  a  cannon-shot  no  one  has  a  right  to 
intrude  on  the  coast  of  a  country  that  already 
belongs  to  a  certain  state,  in  order  to  fish  or 
gather  amber  on  the  shore,  or  such  like.  Further, 
the  question  is  put,  “Is  cultivation  of  the  soil, 
by  building,  agriculture,  drainage,  etc.,  neces¬ 
sary  in  order  to  its  acquisition?”  No.  For,  as 
these  processes  as  forms  of  specification  are 
only  accidents,  they  do  not  constitute  objects  of 
immediate  possession  and  can  only  belong  to  the 
subject  in  so  far  as  the  substance  of  them  has 
been  already  recognized  as  his.  When  it  is  a 
question  of  the  first  acquisition  of  a  thing,  the 
cultivation  or  modification  of  it  by  labour  forms 
nothing  more  than  an  external  sign  of  the  fact 
that  it  has  been  taken  into  possession,  and  this 
can  be  indicated  by  many  other  signs  that  cost 
less  trouble.  Again:  “May  any  one  be  hindered 
in  the  act  of  taking  possession,  so  that  neither 
one  nor  other  of  two  competitors  shall  acquire 
the  right  of  priority,  and  the  soil  in  consequence 
may  remain  for  all  time  free  as  belonging  to  no 
one?”  Not  at  all.  Such  a  hindrance  cannot  be 
allowed  to  take  place,  because  the  second  of  the 
two,  in  order  to  be  enabled  to  do  this,  would 
himself  have  to  be  upon  some  neighbouring  soil, 
where  he  also,  in  this  manner,  could  be  hindered 
from  being,  and  such  absolute  hindering  would 
involve  a  contradiction.  It  would,  however,  be 
quite  consistent  with  the  right  of  occupation,  in 
the  case  of  a  certain  intervening  piece  of  the 
soil,  to  let  it  lie  unused  as  a  neutral  ground  for 
the  separation  of  two  neighbouring  states;  but 
under  such  a  condition,  that  ground  would  actu¬ 


4i3 

ally  belong  to  them  both  in  common,  and  would 
not  be  without  an  owner  (res  nullius ),  just 
because  it  would  be  used  by  both  in  order  to 
form  a  separation  between  them.  Again:  “May 
one  have  a  thing  as  his,  on  a  soil  of  which  no  one 
has  appropriated  any  part  as  his  own?”  Yes.  In 
Mongolia,  for  example,  any  one  may  let  lie  what¬ 
ever  baggage  he  has,  or  bring  back  the  horse  that 
has  run  away  from  him  into  his  possession  as 
his  own,  because  the  whole  soil  belongs  to  the 
people  generally,  and  the  use  of  it  accordingly 
belongs  to  every  individual.  But  that  any  one 
can  have  a  moveable  thing  on  the  soil  of  another 
as  his  own  is  only  possible  by  contract.  Finally, 
there  is  the  question:  “May  one  of  two  neigh¬ 
bouring  nations  or  tribes  resist  another  when 
attempting  to  impose  upon  them  a  certain  mode 
of  using  a  particular  soil;  as,  for  instance,  a 
tribe  of  hunters  making  such  an  attempt  in  rela¬ 
tion  to  a  pastoral  people,  or  the  latter  to  agricul¬ 
turists  and  such  like?”  Certainly.  For  the  mode 
in  which  such  peoples  or  tribes  may  settle  them¬ 
selves  upon  the  surface  of  the  earth,  provided 
they  keep  within  their  own  boundaries,  is  a  mat¬ 
ter  of  mere  pleasure  and  choice  on  their  own 
part  (res  merae  jacultatis). 

As  a  further  question,  it  may  be  asked  wheth¬ 
er,  when  neither  nature  nor  chance,  but  merely 
our  own  will,  brings  us  into  the  neighbourhood 
of  a  people  that  gives  no  promise  of  a  prospect 
of  entering  into  civil  union  with  us,  we  are  to 
be  considered  entitled  in  any  case  to  proceed 
with  force  in  the  intention  of  founding  such 
a  union,  and  bringing  into  a  juridical  state  such 
men  as  the  savage  American  Indians,  the  Hot¬ 
tentots,  and  the  New  Hollanders;  or — and  the 
case  is  not  much  better — whether  we  may  es¬ 
tablish  colonies  by  deceptive  purchase,  and  so 
become  owners  of  their  soil,  and,  in  general, 
without  regard  to  their  first  possession,  make 
use  at  will  of  our  superiority  in  relation  to  them? 
Further,  may  it  not  be  held  that  Nature  herself, 
as  abhorring  a  vacuum,  seems  to  demand  such 
a  procedure,  and  that  large  regions  in  other  con¬ 
tinents,  that  are  now  magnificently  peopled, 
would  otherwise  have  remained  unpossessed  by 
civilized  inhabitants  and  might  have  for  ever  re¬ 
mained  thus,  so  that  the  end  of  creation  would 
have  so  far  been  frustrated?  It  is  almost  un¬ 
necessary  to  answer;  for  it  is  easy  to  see  through 
all  this  flimsy  veil  of  injustice,  which  just  amounts 
to  the  Jesuitism  of  making  a  good  end  justify 
any  means.  This  mode  of  acquiring  the  soil  is, 
therefore,  to  be  repudiated. 

The  indefiniteness  of  external  acquirable  ob¬ 
jects  in  respect  of  their  quantity,  as  well  as 


THE  SCIENCE 


their  quality,  makes  the  problem  of  the  sole  pri¬ 
mary  external  acquisition  of  them  one  of  the 
most  difficult  to  solve.  There  must,  however,  be 
some  one  first  acquisition  of  an  external  object; 
for  every  Acquisition  cannot  be  derivative. 
Hence,  the  problem  is  not  to  be  given  up  as  in¬ 
soluble  or  in  itself  as  impossible.  If  it  is  solved 
by  reference  to  the  original  contract,  unless  this 
contract  is  extended  so  as  to  include  the  whole 
human  race,  acquisition  under  it  would  still  re¬ 
main  but  provisional. 

1 6.  Exposition  of  the  Conception  of  a  Primary 
Acquisition  of  the  Soil 

All  men  are  originally  in  a  common  collective 
possession  of  the  soil  of  the  whole  earth  ( com - 
munio  fundi  originaria) ,  and  they  have  natural¬ 
ly  each  a  will  to  use  it  ( lex  justi).  But  on  account 
of  the  opposition  of  the  free  will  of  one  to  that 
of  the  other  in  the  sphere  of  action,  which  is 
inevitable  by  nature,  all  use  of  the  soil  would  be 
prevented  did  not  every  will  contain  at  the  same 
time  a  law  for  the  regulation  of  the  relation  of 
all  wills  in  action,  according  to  which  a  particu¬ 
lar  possession  can  be  determined  to  every  one 
upon  the  common  soil.  This  is  the  juridical  law 
(lex  juridica).  But  the  distributive  law  of  the 
mine  and  thine,  as  applicable  to  each  individual 
on  the  soil,  according  to  the  axiom  of  external 
freedom,  cannot  proceed  otherwise  than  from  a 
primarily  united  will  a  priori — which  does  not 
presuppose  any  juridical  act  as  requisite  for  this 
union.  This  Law  can  only  take  form  in  the  civil 
state  (lex  justitiae  distributivaej\  as  it  is  in  this 
state  alone  that  the  united  common  will  deter¬ 
mines  what  is  right,  what  is  rightful,  and  what 
is  the  constitution  of  Right.  In  reference  to  this 
state,  however — and  prior  to  its  establishment 
and  in  view  of  it — it  is  provisorily  a  duty  for 
every  one  to  proceed  according  to  the  law  of 
external  acquisition;  and  accordingly  it  is  a  ju¬ 
ridical  procedure  on  the  part  of  the  will  to  lay 
every  one  under  obligation  to  recognise  the  act 
of  possessing  and  appropriating,  although  it  be 
only  unilaterally.  Hence  a  provisory  acquisition 
of  the  soil,  with  all  its  juridical  consequences,  is 
possible  in  the  state  of  nature. 

Such  an  acquisition,  however,  requires  and 
also  obtains  the  favour  of  a  permissive  law  ( lex 
pcrmissiva),  in  respect  of  the  determination  of 
the  limits  of  juridically  possible  possession.  For 
it  precedes  the  juridical  state,  and  as  merely  in¬ 
troductory  to  it  is  not  yet  peremptory;  and  this 
favour  does  not  extend  farther  than  the  date  of 
the  consent  of  the  other  co-operators  in  the  es¬ 


tablishment  of  the  civil  state.  But  if  they  are 
opposed  to  entering  into  the  civil  state,  as  long 
as  this  opposition  lasts  it  carries  all  the  effect  of 
a  guaranteed  juridical  acquisition  with  it,  be¬ 
cause  the  advance  from  the  state  of  nature  to 
the  civil  state  is  founded  upon  a  duty. 

17.  Deduction  of  the  Conception  of  the 
Original  Primary  Acquisition 

We  have  found  the  title  of  acquisition  in  a 
universal  original  community  of  the  soil,  under 
the  conditions  of  an  external  acquisition  in 
space;  and  the  mode  of  acquisition  is  contained 
in  the  empirical  fact  of  taking  possession (appre- 
hensio),  conjoined  with  the  will  to  have  an  exter¬ 
nal  object  as  one’s  own.  It  is  further  necessary 
to  unfold,  from  the  principles  of  the  pure  jurid¬ 
ically  practical  reason  involved  in  the  concep¬ 
tion,  the  juridical  acquisition  proper  of  an  ob¬ 
ject — that  is,  the  external  mine  and  thine  that 
follows  from  the  two  previous  conditions,  as 
rational  possession  (possessio  noumenon). 

The  juridical  conception  of  the  external  mine 
and  thine,  so  far  as  it  involves  the  category  of 
substance,  cannot  by  “that  which  is  external  to 
me”  mean  merely  “in  a  place  other  than  that  in 
which  I  am”;  for  it  is  a  rational  conception.  As 
under  the  conceptions  of  the  reason  only  intel¬ 
lectual  conceptions  can  be  embraced,  the  expres¬ 
sion  in  question  can  only  signify  “something 
that  is  different  and  distinct  from  me”  according 
to  the  idea  of  a  non-empirical  possession  through, 
as  it  were,  a  continuous  activity  in  taking  posses¬ 
sion  of  an  external  object;  and  it  involves  only 
the  notion  of  having  something  in  my  power , 
which  indicates  the  connection  of  an  object  with 
myself,  as  a  subjective  condition  of  the  possi¬ 
bility  of  making  use  of  it.  This  forms  a  purely 
intellectual  conception  of  the  understanding. 
Now  we  can  leave  out  or  abstract  from  the  sen¬ 
sible  conditions  of  possession,  as  relations  of  a 
person  to  objects  which  have  no  obligation.  This 
process  of  elimination  just  gives  the  rational 
relation  of  a  person  to  persons ;  and  it  is  such 
that  he  can  bind  them  all  by  an  obligation  in 
reference  to  the  use  of  things  through  his  act  of 
will,  so  far  as  it  is  conformable  to  the  axiom  of 
freedom,  the  postulate  of  right,  and  the  univer¬ 
sal  legislation  of  the  common  will,  conceived  as 
united  a  priori.  This  is  therefore  the  rational 
intelligible  possession  of  things  as  by  pure  right, 
although  they  are  objects  of  sense. 

It  is  evident  that  the  first  modification,  limi¬ 
tation,  or  transformation  generally,  of  a  portion 


OF  RIGHT 


of  the  soil  cannot  of  itself  furnish  a  title  to  its 
acquisition,  since  possession  of  an  accident  does 
not  form  a  ground  for  legal  possession  of  the 
substance.  Rather,  conversely,  the  inference  as 
to  the  mine  and  thine  must  be  drawn  from  own¬ 
ership  of  the  substance  according  to  the  rule: 
Accessarium  sequitur  snum  principale.  Hence 
one  who  has  spent  labour  on  a  piece  of  ground 
that  was  not  already  his  own,  has  lost  his  effort 
and  work  to  the  former  owner.  This  position  is 
so  evident  of  itself  that  the  old  opinion  to  the 
opposite  effect,  that  is  still  spread  far  and  wide, 
can  hardly  be  ascribed  to  any  other  than  the 
prevailing  illusion  which  unconsciously  leads  to 
the  personification  of  things;  and,  then,  as  if 
they  could  be  bound  under  an  obligation  by  the 
labour  bestowed  upon  them  to  be  at  the  service 
of  the  person  who  does  the  labour,  to  regard 
them  as  his  by  immediate  right.  Otherwise  it  is 
probable  that  the  natural  question — already  dis¬ 
cussed — would  not  have  been  passed  over  with 
so  light  a  tread,  namely:  “How  is  a  right  in  a 
thing  possible?”  For,  right  as  against  every  pos¬ 
sible  possessor  of  a  thing  means  only  the  claim 
of  a  particular  will  to  the  use  of  an  object  so  far 
as  it  may  be  included  in  the  all-comprehending 
universal  will,  and  can  be  thought  as  in  har¬ 
mony  with  its  law. 

As  regards  bodies  situated  upon  a  piece  of 
ground  which  is  already  mine,  if  they  otherwise 
belong  to  no  other  person,  they  belong  to  me 
without  my  requiring  any  particular  juridical 
act  for  the  purpose  of  this  acquisition;  they  are 
mine  not  facto ,  but  lege.  For  they  may  be  re¬ 
garded  as  accidents  inhering  in  the  substance  of 
the  soil,  and  they  are  thus  mine  jure  rei  meae.  To 
this  category  also  belongs  everything  which  is  so 
connected  with  anything  of  mine  that  it  cannot 
be  separated  from  what  is  mine  without  altering 
it  substantially.  Examples  of  this  are  gilding  on 
an  object,  mixture  of  a  material  belonging  to  me 
with  other  things,  alluvial  deposit,  or  even  alter¬ 
ation  of  the  adjoining  bed  of  a  stream  or  river 
in  my  favour  so  as  to  produce  an  increase  of  my 
land,  etc.  By  the  same  principles,  the  question 
must  also  be  decided  as  to  whether  the  acquir¬ 
able  soil  may  extend  farther  than  the  existing 
land,  so  as  even  to  include  part  of  the  bed  of  the 
sea,  with  the  right  to  fish  on  my  own  shores,  to 
gather  amber  and  such  like.  So  far  as  I  have  the 
mechanical  capability  from  my  own  site ,  as  the 
place  I  occupy,  to  secure  my  soil  from  the  at¬ 
tack  of  others — and,  therefore,  as  far  as  cannon 
can  carry  from  the  shore — all  is  included  in  my 
possession ,  and  the  sea  is  thus  far  closed  (mare 


4i5 

clausum).  But  as  there  is  no  sitq  for  occupation 
upon  the  wide  sea  itself,  possible  possession  can¬ 
not  be  extended  so  far,  and  the  open  sea  is  free 
( mare  liberum).  But  in  the  case  of  men,  or  things 
that  belong  to  them,  becoming  stranded  on  the 
shore,  since  the  fact  is  not  voluntary,  it  cannot 
be  regarded  by  the  owner  of  the  shore  as  giving 
him  a  right  of  acquisition.  For  shipwreck  is  not 
an  act  of  will,  nor  is  its  result  a  lesion  to  him; 
and  things  which  may  have  come  thus  upon  his 
soil,  as  still  belonging  to  some  one.  are  not  to 
be  treated  as  being  without  an  owner  or  res 
nullius.  On  the  other  hand,  a  river,  so  far  as  pos¬ 
session  of  the  bank  reaches,  may  be  originally 
acquired,  like  any  other  piece  of  ground,  under 
the  above  restrictions,  by  one  who  is  in  posses¬ 
sion  of  both  its  banks. 

Property 

An  external  object,  which,  in  respect  of  its 
substance  can  be  claimed  by  some  one  as  his 
own,  is  called  the  property  (dominium)  of  that 
person  to  whom  all  the  rights  in  it  as  a  thing 
belong — like  the  accidents  inhering  in  a  sub¬ 
stance — and  which,  therefore,  he  as  the  proprie¬ 
tor  (dominus)  can  dispose  of  at  will  (jus  dis- 
ponendi  de  re  sua).  But  from  this  it  follows  at 
once  that  such  an  object  can  only  be  a  corporeal 
thing  towards  which  there  is  no  direct  personal 
obligation.  Hence  a  man  may  be  his  own  master 
(sui  juris)  but  not  the  proprietor  of  himself  (sui 
dominus ),  so  as  to  be  able  to  dispose  of  himself 
at  will,  to  say  nothing  of  the  possibility  of  such  a 
relation  to  other  men ;  because  he  is  responsible 
to  humanity  in  his  own  person.  This  point,  how¬ 
ever,  as  belonging  to  the  right  of  humanity  as 
such,  rather  than  to  that  of  individual  men, 
would  not  be  discussed  at  its  proper  place  here, 
but  is  only  mentioned  incidentally  for  the  better 
elucidation  of  what  has  just  been  said.  It  may 
be  further  observed  that  there  may  be  two  full 
proprietors  of  one  and  the  same  thing,  without 
there  being  a  mine  and  thine  in  common,  but 
only  in  so  far  as  they  are  common  possessors  of 
what  belongs  only  to  one  of  them  as  his  own.  In 
such  a  case  the  whole  possession,  without  the 
use  of  the  thing,  belongs  to  one  only  of  the  co¬ 
proprietors  (condomini)  ;  while  to  the  others  be¬ 
longs  all  the  use  of  the  thing  along  with  its  pos¬ 
session.  The  former  as  the  direct  proprietor 
(dominus  directus) ,  therefore,  restricts  the  latter 
as  the  proprietor  in  use  (dominus  utilis)  to  the 
condition  of  a  certain  continuous  performance, 
with  reference  to  the  thing  itself,  without  limit¬ 
ing  him  in  the  use  of  it. 


416 


THE  SCIENCE 


Section”  II.  Principles  of  Personal  Right 

1 8.  Nature  and  Acquisition  of  Personal  Right 

The  possession  of  the  active  free-will  of  an¬ 
other  person,  as  the  power  to  determine  it  by 
my  will  to  a  certain  action,  according  to  laws  of 
freedom,  is  a  form  of  right  relating  to  the  ex¬ 
ternal  mine  and  thine,  as  affected  by  the  cau¬ 
sality  of  another.  It  is  possible  to  have  several 
such  rights  in  reference  to  the  same  person  or 
to  different  persons.  The  principle  of  the  sys¬ 
tem  of  laws,  according  to  which  I  can  be  in  such 
possession,  is  that  of  personal  right,  and  there 
is  only  one  such  principle. 

The  acquisition  of  a  personal  right  can  never 
be  primary  or  arbitrary;  for  such  a  mode  of  ac¬ 
quiring  it  would  not  be  in  accordance  with  the 
principle  of  the  harmony  of  the  freedom  of  my 
will  with  the  freedom  of  every  other,  and  it 
would  therefore  be  wrong.  Nor  can  such  a  right 
be  acquired  by  means  of  any  unjust  act  of  an¬ 
other  ( facto  injusti  alterius ),  as  being  itself 
contrary  to  right;  for  if  such  a  wrong  as  it  im¬ 
plies  were  perpetrated  on  me,  and  I  could  de¬ 
mand  satisfaction  from  the  other,  in  accordance 
with  right,  yet  in  such  a  case  I  would  only  be 
entitled  to  maintain  undiminished  what  was 
mine,  and  not  to  acquire  anything  more  than 
what  I  formerly  had. 

Acquisition  by  means  of  the  action  of  anoth¬ 
er,  to  which  I  determine  his  will  according  to 
laws  of  right,  is  therefore  always  derived  from 
what  that  other  has  as  his  own.  This  derivation, 
as  a  juridical  act,  cannot  be  effected  by  a  mere 
negative  relinquishment  or  renunciation  of  what 
is  his  ( per  derelictionetn  aut  renunciationemj ; 
because  such  a  negative  act  would  only  amount 
to  a  cessation  of  his  right,  and  not  to  the 
acquirement  of  a  right  on  the  part  of  another. 
It  is  therefore  only  by  positive  transference 
( translatio ),  or  conveyance,  that  a  personal 
right  can  be  acquired;  and  this  is  only  possible 
by  means  of  a  common  will,  through  which  ob¬ 
jects  come  into  the  power  of  one  or  other,  so 
that  as  one  renounces  a  particular  thing  which 
he  holds  under  the  common  right,  the  same  ob¬ 
ject  when  accepted  by  another,  in  consequence 
of  a  positive  act  of  will,  becomes  his.  Such 
transference  of  the  property  of  one  to  another 
is  termed  its  alienation.  The  act  of  the  united 
wills  of  two  persons,  by  which  what  belonged  to 
one  passes  to  the  other,  constitutes  contract. 

iq.  Acquisition  by  Co?itract 

In  every  contract  there  are  four  juridical  acts 
of  will  involved ;  two  of  them  being  preparatory 


acts ,  and  two  of  them  constitutive  acts.  The  two 
preparatory'  acts,  as  forms  of  treating  in  the 
transaction,  are  offer  ( oblatio )  and  approval 
( approbatio ) ;  the  two  constitutive  acts,  as  the 
forms  of  concluding  the  transaction,  are  prom¬ 
ise  (promissum)  and  acceptance  ( acceptatio ). 
For  an  offer  cannot  constitute  a  promise  before 
it  can  be  judged  that  the  thing  offered  ( obla - 
turn)  is  something  that  is  agreeable  to  the  party 
to  whom  it  is  offered,  and  this  much  is  shown 
by  the  first  two  declarations;  but  by  them  alone 
there  is  nothing  as  yet  acquired. 

Further,  it  is  neither  by  the  particular  will 
of  the  promiser  nor  that  of  the  acceptor  that 
the  property  of  the  former  passes  over  to  the 
latter.  This  is  effected  only  by  the  combined 
or  united  wills  of  both,  and  consequently  so 
far  only  as  the  will  of  both  is  declared  at  the 
same  time  or  simultaneously.  Now,  such  simul¬ 
taneousness  is  impossible  by  empirical  acts  of 
declaration,  which  can  only  follow  each  other 
in  time  and  are  never  actually  simultaneous. 
For  if  I  have  promised,  and  another  person  is 
now  merely  willing  to  accept,  during  the  interval 
before  actual  acceptance,  however  short  it  may 
be,  I  may  retract  my  offer,  because  I  am  thus 
far  still  free;  and,  on  the  other  side,  the  accep¬ 
tor,  for  the  same  reason,  may  likewise  hold  him¬ 
self  not  to  be  bound,  up  till  the  moment  of  ac¬ 
ceptance,  by  his  counter-declaration  following 
upon  the  promise.  The  external  formalities  or 
solemnities  ( solemnia )  on  the  conclusion  of  a 
contract — such  as  shaking  hands  or  breaking  a 
straw  ( stipula )  laid  hold  of  by  two  persons — 
and  all  the  various  modes  of  confirming  the 
declarations  on  either  side,  prove  in  fact  the 
embarrassment  of  the  contracting  parties  as  to 
how  and  in  what  way  they  may  represent  decla¬ 
rations,  which  are  always  successive ,  as  existing 
simultaneously  at  the  same  moment ;  and  these 
forms  fail  to  do  this.  They  are,  by  their  very 
nature,  acts  necessarily  following  each  other  in 
time,  so  that  when  the  one  act  is,  the  other 
either  is  not  yet  or  is  no  longer. 

It  is  only  the  philosophical  transcendental  de¬ 
duction  of  the  conception  of  acquisition  by  con¬ 
tract  that  can  remove  all  these  difficulties.  In  a 
juridical  external  relation,  my  taking  possession 
of  the  free-will  of  another,  as  the  cause  that 
determined  it  to  a  certain  act,  is  conceived  at 
first  empirically  by  means  of  the  declaration 
and  counter-declaration  of  the  free-will  of  each 
of  us  in  time,  as  the  sensible  conditions  of  tak¬ 
ing  possession;  and  the  two  juridical  acts  must 
necessarily  be  regarded  as  following  one  another 
in  time.  But  because  this  relation,  viewed  as 


OF  RIGHT 


juridical,  is  purely  rational  in  itself,  the  will  as 
a  law-giving  faculty  of  reason  represents  this 
possession  as  intelligible  or  rational  ( possessio 
noumenon ),  in  accordance  with  conceptions  of 
freedom  and  under  abstraction  of  those  empiri¬ 
cal  conditions.  And  now,  the  two  acts  of  prom¬ 
ise  and  acceptance  are  not  regarded  as  follow¬ 
ing  one  another  in  time,  but,  in  the  manner  of 
a  pactum  re  initum,  as  proceeding  from  a  com¬ 
mon  will,  which  is  expressed  by  the  term  “at  the 
same  time,”  or  “simultaneous,”  and  the  object 
promised  ( promissum )  is  represented,  under 
elimination  of  empirical  conditions,  as  acquired 
according  to  the  law  of  the  pure  practical  reason. 

That  this  is  the  true  and  only  possible  deduc¬ 
tion  of  the  idea  of  acquisition  by  contract  is 
sufficiently  attested  by  the  laborious  yet  always 
futile  striving  of  writers  on  jurisprudence — 
such  as  Moses  Mendelssohn  in  his  Jerusalem — 
to  adduce  a  proof  of  its  rational  possibility.  The 
question  is  put  thus:  “Why  ought  I  to  keep  my 
Promise?”  For  it  is  assumed  as  understood  by 
all  that  I  ought  to  do  so.  It  is,  however,  abso¬ 
lutely  impossible  to  give  any  further  proof  of 
the  categorical  imperative  implied;  just  as  it  is 
impossible  for  the  geometrician  to  prove  by  ra¬ 
tional  syllogisms  that  in  order  to  construct  a 
triangle  I  must  take  three  lines — so  far  an  ana¬ 
lytical  proposition — of  which  three  lines  any  two 
together  must  be  greater  than  the  third — a  syn¬ 
thetical  proposition,  and  like  the  former  a  priori. 
It  is  a  postulate  of  the  pure  reason  that  we 
ought  to  abstract  from  all  the  sensible  condi¬ 
tions  of  space  and  time  in  reference  to  the  con¬ 
ception  of  right;  and  the  theory  of  the  possi¬ 
bility  of  such  abstraction  from  these  conditions, 
without  taking  away  the  reality  of  the  posses¬ 
sion,  just  constitutes  the  transcendental  deduc¬ 
tion  of  the  conception  of  acquisition  by  con¬ 
tract.  It  is  quite  akin  to  what  was  presented 
under  the  last  title,  as  the  theory  of  acquisition 
by  occupation  of  the  external  object. 

20.  What  is  Acquired  by  Contract? 

But  what  is  that,  designated  as  external, 
which  I  acquire  by  contract?  As  it  is  only  the 
causality  of  the  active  will  of  another,  in  respect 
of  the  performance  of  something  promised  to 
me,  I  do  not  immediately  acquire  thereby  an 
external  thing,  but  an  act  of  the  will  in  question, 
whereby  a  thing  is  brought  under  my  power  so 
that  I  make  it  mine.  By  the  contract,  therefore, 
I  acquire  the  promise  of  another,  as  distin¬ 
guished  from  the  thing  promised;  and  yet  some¬ 
thing  is  thereby  added  to  my  having  and  posses¬ 


4i7 

sion.  I  have  become  the  richer  in  possession 
( locupletior )  by  the  acquisition  of  an  active 
obligation  that  I  can  bring  to  bear  upon  the 
freedom  and  capability  of  another.  This  my 
right ,  however,  is  only  a  personal  right,  valid 
only  to  the  effect  of  acting  upon  a  particular 
physical  person  and  specially  upon  the  causality 
of  his  will,  so  that  he  shall  perform  something 
for  me.  It  is  not  a  real  right  upon  that  moral 
person ,  which  is  identified  with  the  idea  of  the 
united  will  of  all  viewed  a  priori,  and  through 
which  alone  I  can  acquire  a  right  valid  against 
every  possessor  of  the  thing.  For,  it  is  in  this 
that  all  right  in  a  thing  consists. 

The  transfer  or  transmission  of  what  is  mine 
to  another  by  contract,  takes  place  according  to 
the  law  of  continuity  {lex  continui).  Possession 
of  the  object  is  not  interrupted  for  a  moment 
during  this  act;  for,  otherwise,  I  would  acquire 
an  object  in  this  state  as  a  thing  that  had  no 
possessor,  and  it  would  thus  be  acquired  origi¬ 
nally,  which  is  contrary  to  the  idea  of  a  con¬ 
tract.  This  continuity,  however,  implies  that  it 
is  not  the  particular  will  of  either  the  promiser 
or  the  acceptor,  but  their  united  will  in  common, 
that  transfers  what  is  mine  to  another.  And 
hence  it  is  not  accomplished  in  such  a  manner 
that  the  promiser  first  relinquishes  {derelin- 
quit)  his  possession  for  the  benefit  of  another, 
or  renounces  his  right  (renunciat) ,  and  there¬ 
upon  the  other  at  the  same  time  enters  upon  it; 
or  conversely.  The  transfer  ( translatio )  is  there¬ 
fore  an  act  in  which  the  object  belongs  for  a 
moment  at  the  same  time  to  both,  just  as  in  the 
parabolic  path  of  a  projectile  the  object  on 
reaching  its  highest  point  may  be  regarded  for  a 
moment  as  at  the  same  time  both  rising  and  fall¬ 
ing,  and  as  thus  passing  in  fact  from  the  ascend¬ 
ing  to  the  falling  motion. 

21.  Acceptance  and  Delivery 

A  thing  is  not  acquired  in  a  case  of  contract 
by  the  acceptance  ( acceptatio )  of  the  promise, 
but  only  by  the  delivery  {traditio)  of  the  ob¬ 
ject  promised.  For  all  promise  is  relative  to 
performance ;  and  if  what  was  promised  is  a 
thing,  the  performance  cannot  be  executed  oth¬ 
erwise  than  by  an  act  whereby  the  acceptor  is 
put  by  the  promiser  into  possession  of  the 
thing;  and  this  is  delivery.  Before  the  delivery 
and  the  reception  of  the  thing,  the  performance 
of  the  act  required  has  not  yet  taken  place;  the 
thing  has  not  yet  passed  from  the  one  person  to 
the  other  and,  consequently,  has  not  been  ac¬ 
quired  by  that  other.  Hence  the  right  arising 


THE  SCIENCE 


from  a  contract  is  only  a  personal  right;  and  it 
only  becomes  a  real  right  by  delivery. 

A  contract  upon  which  delivery  immediately 
follows  ( pactum  re  initum)  excludes  any  inter¬ 
val  of  time  between  its  conclusion  and  its  exe¬ 
cution;  and  as  such  it  requires  no  further  par¬ 
ticular  act  in  the  future  by  which  one  person 
may  transfer  to  another  what  is  his.  But  if  there 
is  a  time — definite  or  indefinite — agreed  upon 
between  them  for  the  delivery,  the  question 
then  arises  whether  the  thing  has  already  before 
that  time  become  the  acceptor’s  by  the  con¬ 
tract,  so  that  his  right  is  a  right  in  the  thing;  or 
whether  a  further  special  contract  regarding  the 
delivery  alone  must  be  entered  upon,  so  that 
the  right  that  is  acquired  by  mere  acceptance 
is  only  a  personal  right,  and  thus  it  does  not  be¬ 
come  a  right  in  the  thing  until  delivery?  That 
the  relation  must  be  determined  according  to 
the  latter  alternative  will  be  clear  from  what 
follows. 

Suppose  I  conclude  a  contract  about  a  thing 
that  I  wish  to  acquire — such  as  a  horse — and 
that  I  take  it  immediately  into  my  stable,  or 
otherwise  into  my  possession;  then  it  is  mine 
(vi  pacti  re  initi),  and  my  right  is  a  right  in  the 
thing.  But  if  I  leave  it  in  the  hands  of  the  seller 
without  arranging  with  him  specially  in  whose 
physical  possession  or  holding  ( detentio )  this 
thing  shall  be  before  my  taking  possession  of  it 
( apprehensio ),  and  consequently,  before  the  ac¬ 
tual  change  of  possession,  the  horse  is  not  yet 
mine;  and  the  right  which  I  acquire  is  only  a 
right  against  a  particular  person — namely,  the 
seller  of  the  horse — to  be  put  into  possession  of 
the  object  ( poscendi  traditionem)  as  the  sub¬ 
jective  condition  of  any  use  of  it  at  my  will. 
My  right  is  thus  only  a  personal  right  to  demand 
from  the  seller  the  performance  of  his  promise 
( praestatio )  to  put  me  into  possession  of  the 
thing.  Now,  if  the  contract  does  not  contain  the 
condition  of  delivery  at  the  same  time — as  a 
pactum  re  initum — and  consequently  an  inter¬ 
val  of  time  intervenes  between  the  conclusion 
of  the  contract  and  the  taking  possession  of  the 
object  of  acquisition,  I  cannot  obtain  possession 
of  it  during  this  interval  otherwise  than  by  ex¬ 
ercising  the  particular  juridical  activity  called 
a  possessory  act  ( actum  possessorium ),  which 
constitutes  a  special  contract.  This  act  consists 
in  my  saying,  “I  will  send  to  fetch  the  horse,” 
to  which  the  seller  has  to  agree.  For  it  is  not 
self-evident  or  universally  reasonable  that  any 


one  will  take  a  thing  destined  for  the  use  of  an¬ 
other  into  his  charge  at  his  own  risk.  On  the 
contrary,  a  special  contract  is  necessary  for  this 
arrangement,  according  to  which  the  alienator 
of  a  thing  continues  to  be  its  owner  during  a 
certain  definite  time,  and  must  bear  the  risk  of 
whatever  may  happen  to  it;  while  the  acquirer 
can  only  be  regarded  by  the  seller  as  the  owner 
when  he  has  delayed  to  enter  into  possession 
beyond  the  date  at  which  he  agreed  to  take  de¬ 
livery.  Prior  to  the  possessory  act,  therefore,  all 
that  is  acquired  by  the  contract  is  only  a  per¬ 
sonal  right;  and  the  acceptor  can  acquire  an  ex¬ 
ternal  thing  only  by  delivery. 

Section  III.  Principles  of  Personal  Right  that 

is  Real  in  Kind.  (Jus  Realiter  Personale) 

22.  Nature  of  Personal  Right  of  a  Real  Kind 

Personal  right  of  a  real  kind  is  the  right  to 
the  possession  of  an  external  object  as  a  thing, 
and  to  the  use  of  it  as  a  person.  The  mine  and 
thine  embraced  under  this  right  relate  specially 
to  the  family  and  household;  and  the  relations 
involved  are  those  of  free  beings  in  reciprocal 
real  interaction  with  each  other.  Through  their 
relations  and  influence  as  persons  upon  one  an¬ 
other,  in  accordance  with  the  principle  of  ex¬ 
ternal  freedom  as  the  cause  of  it,  they  form  a 
society  composed  as  a  whole  of  members  stand¬ 
ing  in  community  with  each  other  as  persons; 
and  this  constitutes  the  household.  The  mode  in 
which  this  social  status  is  acquired  by  individ¬ 
uals,  and  the  functions  which  prevail  within  it, 
proceed  neither  by  arbitrary  individual  action 
(facto),  nor  by  mere  contract  ( pacto ),  but  by 
law  (lege).  And  this  law  as  being  not  only  a 
right,  but  also  as  constituting  possession  in  ref¬ 
erence  to  a  person,  is  a  right  rising  above  all 
mere  real  and  personal  right.  It  must,  in  fact, 
form  the  right  of  humanity  in  our  own  person; 
and,  as  such,  it  has  as  its  consequence  a  natural 
permissive  law,  by  the  favour  of  which  such  ac¬ 
quisition  becomes  possible  to  us. 

23.  What  is  Acquired  in  the  Household? 

The  acquisition  that  is  founded  upon  this  law 
is,  as  regards  its  objects,  threefold.  The  man 
acquires  a  wife;  the  husband  and  wife  acquire 
children,  constituting  a  family;  and  the  family 
acquire  domestics.  All  these  objects,  while  ac¬ 
quirable,  are  inalienable;  and  the  right  of  pos¬ 
session  in  these  objects  is  the  most  strictly  per - 
sonal  of  all  rights . 


OF  RIGHT 


419 


The  Rights  of  the  Family  as  a  Domestic  Society 


Title  I.  Conjugal  Right.  ( Husband  and  Wife ) 

24.  The  Natural  Basis  of  Marriage 

The  domestic  relations  are  founded  on  mar¬ 
riage,  and  marriage  is  founded  upon  the  natural 
reciprocity  or  intercommunity  ( commercium ) 
of  the  sexes.1  This  natural  union  of  the  sexes 
proceeds  according  to  the  mere  animal  nature 
{yaga  libido,  venus  vulgivaga,  fornicatio ),  or 
according  to  the  law.  The  latter  is  marriage 
{matrimoniumj ,  which  is  the  union  of  two  per¬ 
sons  of  different  sex  for  life-long  reciprocal  pos¬ 
session  of  their  sexual  faculties.  The  end  of  pro¬ 
ducing  and  educating  children  may  be  regarded 
as  always  the  end  of  nature  in  implanting  mu¬ 
tual  desire  and  inclination  in  the  sexes;  but  it  is 
not  necessary  for  the  rightfulness  of  marriage 
that  those  who  marry  should  set  this  before 
themselves  as  the  end  of  their  union,  otherwise 
the  marriage  would  be  dissolved  of  itself  when 
the  production  of  children  ceased. 

And  even  assuming  that  enjoyment  in  the  re¬ 
ciprocal  use  of  the  sexual  endowments  is  an  end 
of  marriage,  yet  the  contract  of  marriage  is  not 
on  that  account  a  matter  of  arbitrary  will,  but 
is  a  contract  necessary  in  its  nature  by  the  law 
of  humanity.  In  other  words,  if  a  man  and  a 
woman  have  the  will  to  enter  on  reciprocal  en¬ 
joyment  in  accordance  with  their  sexual  nature, 
they  must  necessarily  marry  each  other;  and 
this  necessity  is  in  accordance  with  the  juridical 
laws  of  pure  reason. 

25.  The  Rational  Right  of  Marriage 

For,  this  natural  commercium — as  a  usus 
membrorum  sexualium  alterius — is  an  enjoy¬ 
ment  for  which  the  one  person  is  given  up  to  the 
other.  In  this  relation  the  human  individual 
makes  himself  a  res ,  which  is  contrary  to  the 
right  of  humanity  in  his  own  person.  This,  how¬ 
ever,  is  only  possible  under  the  one  condition, 
that  as  the  one  person  is  acquired  by  the  other 
as  a  res,  that  same  person  also  equally  acquires 
the  other  reciprocally,  and  thus  regains  and  re¬ 
establishes  the  rational  personality.  The  acqui- 

1  Commercium  sexuale  est  usus  membrorum  et  Sacul- 
tatum  sexualium  alterius.  This  “usus”  is  either  natu¬ 
ral,  by  which  human  beings  may  reproduce  their  own 
kind,  or  unnatural,  which,  again,  refers  either  to  a  per¬ 
son  of  the  same  sex  or  to  an  animal  of  another  species 
than  man.  These  transgressions  of  all  law,  as  crimina 
carnis  contra  naturam,  are  even  “not  to  be  named”; 
and,  as  wrongs  against  all  humanity  in  the  person,  they 
cannot  be  saved,  by  any  limitation  or  exception  what¬ 
ever,  from  entire  reprobation. 


sition  of  a  part  of  the  human  organism  being, 
on  account  of  its  unity,  at  the  same  time  the 
acquisition  of  the  whole  person,  it  follows  that 
the  surrender  and  acceptation  of,  or  by,  one  sex 
in  relation  to  the  other,  is  not  only  permissible 
under  the  condition  of  marriage,  but  is  further 
only  really  possible  under  that  condition.  But 
the  personal  right  thus  acquired  is,  at  the  same 
time,  real  in  kind;  and  this  characteristic  of  it 
is  established  by  the  fact  that  if  one  of  the  mar¬ 
ried  persons  run  away  or  enter  into  the  posses¬ 
sion  of  another,  the  other  is  entitled,  at  any 
time,  and  incontestably,  to  bring  such  a  one 
back  to  the  former  relation,  as  if  that  person 
were  a  thing. 

26.  Monogamy  and  Equality  in  Marriage 

For  the  same  reasons,  the  relation  of  the 
married  persons  to  each  other  is  a  relation  of 
equality  as  regards  the  mutual  possession  of 
their  persons,  as  well  as  of  their  goods.  Conse¬ 
quently  marriage  is  only  truly  realized  in  mo¬ 
nogamy;  for  in  the  relation  of  polygamy  the 
person  who  is  given  away  on  the  one  side,  gains 
only  a  part  of  the  one  to  whom  that  person  is 
given  up,  and  therefore  becomes  a  mere  res. 
But  in  respect  of  their  goods,  they  have  sever¬ 
ally  the  right  to  renounce  the  use  of  any  part  of 
them,  although  only  by  a  special  contract. 

From  the  principle  thus  stated,  it  also  follows 
that  concubinage  is  as  little  capable  of  being 
brought  under  a  contract  of  right  as  the  hiring 
of  a  person  on  any  one  occasion,  in  the  way 
of  a  pactum  fornicationis.  For,  as  regards  such 
a  contract  as  this  latter  relation  would  imply, 
it  must  be  admitted  by  all  that  any  one  who 
might  enter  into  it  could  not  be  legally  held  to 
the  fulfilment  of  their  promise  if  they  wished  to 
resile  from  it.  And  as  regards  the  former,  a 
contract  of  concubinage  would  also  fall  as  a 
pactum  turpe;  because  as  a  contract  of  the  hire 
(locatio,  conductio ),  of  a  part  for  the  use  of 
another,  on  account  of  the  inseparable  unity  of 
the  members  of  a  person,  any  one  entering  into 
such  a  contract  would  be  actually  surrendering 
as  a  res  to  the  arbitrary  will  of  another.  Hence 
any  party  may  annul  a  contract  like  this  if  en¬ 
tered  into  with  any  other,  at  any  time  and  at 
pleasure;  and  that  other  would  have  no  ground, 
in  the  circumstances,  to  complain  of  a  lesion  of 
his  right.  The  same  holds  likewise  of  a  mor¬ 
ganatic  or  “left-hand”  marriage,  contracted  in 


THE  SCIENCE 


order  to  turn  the  inequality  in  the  social  status 
of  the  two  parties  to  advantage  in  the  way  of 
establishing  the  social  supremacy  of  the  one 
over  the  other;  for,  in  fact,  such  a  relation  is 
not  really  different  from  concubinage,  according 
to  the  principles  of  natural  right,  and  therefore 
does  not  constitute  a  real  marriage.  Hence  the 
question  may  be  raised  as  to  whether  it  is  not 
contrary  to  the  equality  of  married  persons 
when  the  law  says  in  any  way  of  the  husband 
in  relation  to  the  wife,  “he  shall  be  thy  master,” 
so  that  he  is  represented  as  the  one  who  com¬ 
mands,  and  she  is  the  one  who  obeys.  This,  how¬ 
ever,  cannot  be  regarded  as  contrary  to  the 
natural  equality  of  a  human  pair,  if  such  legal 
supremacy  is  based  only  upon  the  natural  su¬ 
periority  of  the  faculties  of  the  husband  com¬ 
pared  with  the  wife,  in  the  effectuation  of  the 
common  interest  of  the  household,  and  if  the 
right  to  command  is  based  merely  upon  this 
fact.  For  this  right  may  thus  be  deduced  from 
the  very  duty  of  unity  and  equality  in  relation 
to  the  end  involved. 

27.  Fulfilment  of  the  Contract  of  Marriage 

The  contract  of  marriage  is  completed  only 
by  conjugal  cohabitation.  A  contract  of  two 
persons  of  different  sex,  with  the  secret  under¬ 
standing  either  to  abstain  from  conjugal  co¬ 
habitation  or  with  the  consciousness  on  either 
side  of  incapacity  for  it,  is  a  simulated  contract; 
it  does  not  constitute  a  marriage,  and  it  may  be 
dissolved  by  either  of  the  parties  at  will.  But  if 
the  incapacity  only  arises  after  marriage,  the 
right  of  the  contract  is  not  annulled  or  dimin¬ 
ished  by  a  contingency  that  cannot  be  legally 
blamed. 

The  acquisition  of  a  spouse,  either  as  a  hus¬ 
band  or  as  a  wife,  is  therefore  not  constituted 
facto — that  is,  by  cohabitation — without  a  pre¬ 
ceding  contract;  nor  even  pacto — by  a  mere 
contract  of  marriage,  without  subsequent  co¬ 
habitation;  but  only  lege ,  that  is,  as  a  juridical 
consequence  of  the  obligation  that  is  formed  by 
two  persons  entering  into  a  sexual  union  solely 
on  the  basis  of  a  reciprocal  possession  of  each 
other,  which  possession  at  the  same  time  is  only 
effected  in  reality  by  the  reciprocal  usus  facid- 
tatum  sexualium  alterius. 

Title  II.  Parental  Right.  ( Parent  and  Child) 
28.  The  Relation  of  Parent  and  Child 

From  the  duty  of  man  towards  himself — that 
is,  towards  the  humanity  in  his  own  person — 
there  thus  arises  a  personal  right  on  the  part  of 
the  members  of  the  opposite  sexes,  as  persons, 


to  acquire  one  another  really  and  reciprocally 
by  marriage.  In  like  manner,  from  the  fact  of 
procreation  in  the  union  thus  constituted,  there 
follows  the  duty  of  preserving  and  rearing  chil¬ 
dren  as  the  products  of  this  union.  Accord¬ 
ingly,  children,  as  persons,  have,  at  the  same 
time,  an  original  congenital  right — distinguished 
from  mere  hereditary  right — to  be  reared  by  the 
care  of  their  parents  till  they  are  capable  of 
maintaining  themselves;  and  this  provision  be¬ 
comes  immediately  theirs  by  law,  without  any 
particular  juridical  act  being  required  to  de¬ 
termine  it. 

For  what  is  thus  produced  is  a  person ,  and  it 
is  impossible  to  think  of  a  being  endowed  with 
personal  freedom  as  produced  merely  by  a  phys¬ 
ical  process.  And  hence,  in  the  practical  relation , 
it  is  quite  a  correct  and  even  a  necessary  idea 
to  regard  the  act  of  generation  as  a  process  by 
which  a  person  is  brought  without  his  consent 
into  the  world  and  placed  in  it  by  the  respon¬ 
sible  free  will  of  others.  This  act,  therefore,  at¬ 
taches  an  obligation  to  the  parents  to  make  their 
children — as  far  as  their  power  goes — contented 
with  the  condition  thus  acquired.  Hence  parents 
cannot  regard  their  child  as,  in  a  manner,  a 
thing  of  their  own  making;  for  a  being  endowed 
with  freedom  cannot  be  so  regarded.  Nor,  con¬ 
sequently,  have  they  a  right  to  destroy  it  as  if 
it  were  their  own  property,  or  even  to  leave  it 
to  chance;  because  they  have  brought  a  being 
into  the  world  who  becomes  in  fact  a  citizen  of 
the  world,  and  they  have  placed  that  being  in  a 
state  which  they  cannot  be  left  to  treat  with  in¬ 
difference,  even  according  to  the  natural  concep¬ 
tions  of  right. 

We  cannot  even  conceive  how  it  is  possible 
that  God  can  create  free  beings;  for  it  appears 
as  if  all  their  future  actions,  being  predeter¬ 
mined  by  that  first  act,  would  be  contained  in 
the  chain  of  natural  necessity,  and  that,  there¬ 
fore,  they  could  not  be  free.  But  as  men  we  are 
free  in  fact,  as  is  proved  by  the  categorical  im¬ 
perative  in  the  moral  and  practical  relation  as 
an  authoritative  decision  of  reason;  yet  reason 
cannot  make  the  possibility  of  such  a  relation 
of  cause  to  effect  conceivable  from  the  theo¬ 
retical  point  of  view,  because  they  are  both 
suprasensible.  All  that  can  be  demanded  of  rea¬ 
son  under  these  conditions  would  merely  be  to 
prove  that  there  is  no  contradiction  involved  in 
the  conception  of  a  creation  of  free  beings;  and 
this  may  be  done  by  showing  that  contradiction 
only  arises  when,  along  with  the  category  of 
causality,  the  condition  of  time  is  transferred 


OF  RIGHT 


to  the  relation  of  suprasensible  things.  This  con¬ 
dition.  as  implying  that  the  cause  of  an  effect 
must  precede  the  effect  as  its  reason,  is  inevita¬ 
ble  in  thinking  the  relation  of  objects  of  sense 
to  one  another;  and  if  this  conception  of  cau¬ 
sality  were  to  have  objective  reality  given  to  it 
in  the  theoretical  bearing,  it  would  also  have  to 
be  referred  to  the  suprasensible  sphere.  But  the 
contradiction  vanishes  when  the  pure  category, 
apart  from  any  sensible  conditions,  is  applied 
from  the  moral  and  practical  point  of  view,  and 
consequently  as  in  a  non-sensible  relation  to  the 
conception  of  creation. 

The  philosophical  jurist  will  not  regard  this 
investigation,  when  thus  carried  back  even  to 
the  ultimate  principles  of  the  transcendental 
philosophy,  as  an  unnecessary  subtlety  in  a  met¬ 
aphysic  of  morals,  or  as  losing  itself  in  aimless 
obscurity,  when  he  takes  into  consideration  the 
difficulty  of  doing  justice  in  this  inquiry  to  the 
ultimate  relations  of  the  principles  of  right. 

29.  The  Rights  of  the  Parent 

From  the  duty  thus  indicated,  there  further 
necessarily  arises  the  right  of  the  parents  to  the 
management  and  training  of  the  child,  so  long 
as  it  is  itself  incapable  of  making  proper  use  of 
its  body  as  an  organism,  and  of  its  mind  as  an 
understanding.  This  involves  its  nourishment 
and  the  care  of  its  education.  This  includes,  in 
general,  the  function  of  forming  and  developing 
it  practically ,  that  it  may  be  able  in  the  future 
to  maintain  and  advance  itself,  and  also  its  mor¬ 
al  culture  and  development,  the  guilt  of  neglect¬ 
ing  it  falling  upon  the  parents.  All  this  training 
is  to  be  continued  till  the  child  reaches  the  pe¬ 
riod  of  emancipation  (emancipatio) ,  as  the  age 
of  practicable  self-support.  The  parents  then 
virtually  renounce  the  parental  right  to  com¬ 
mand,  as  well  as  all  claim  to  repayment  for  their 
previous  care  and  trouble;  for  which  care  and 
trouble,  after  the  process  of  education  is  com¬ 
plete,  they  can  only  appeal  to  the  children,  by 
way  of  any  claim,  on  the  ground  of  the  obliga¬ 
tion  of  gratitude  as  a  duty  of  virtue. 

From  the  fact  of  personality  in  the  children, 
it  further  follows  that  they  can  never  be  regard¬ 
ed  as  the  property  of  the  parents,  but  only  as 
belonging  to  them  by  way  of  being  in  their  pos¬ 
session, ,  like  other  things  that  are  held  apart 
from  the  possession  of  all  others  and  that  can 
be  brought  back  even  against  the  will  of  the  sub¬ 
jects.  Hence  the  right  of  the  parents  is  not  a 
purely  real  right,  and  it  is  not  alienable  (jus 
personalissimum) .  But  neither  is  it  a  merely 
personal  right;  it  is  a  personal  right  of  a  real 


421 

kind,  that  is,  a  personal  right  that  is  constituted 
and  exercised  after  the  manner  of  a  real  right- 

It  is  therefore  evident  that  the  title  of  a  per¬ 
sonal  right  of  a  real  kind  must  necessarily  be 
added,  in  the  science  of  right,  to  the  titles  of 
real  right  and  personal  right,  the  division  of 
rights  into  these  two  being  not  complete.  For, 
if  the  right  of  the  parents  to  the  children  were 
treated  as  if  it  were  merely  a  real  right  to  a  part 
of  what  belongs  to  their  house,  they  could  not 
found  only  upon  the  duty  of  the  children  to  re¬ 
turn  to  them  in  claiming  them  when  they  run 
away,  but  they  would  be  then  entitled  to  seize 
them  and  :mpound  them  like  things  or  runaway 
cattle. 

Title  III  Household  Right.  (Master  and  Serv¬ 
ant) 

30.  Relation  and  Right  of  the  Master 
of  a  Household 

The  children  of  the  house,  who,  along  with 
the  parents,  constitute  a  family,  attain  majority, 
and  become  masters  of  themselves  (majoren- 
nes,  sui  juris),  even  without  a  contract  of  re¬ 
lease  from  their  previous  state  of  dependence, 
by  their  actually  attaining  to  the  capability  of 
self-maintenance.  This  attainment  arises,  on  the 
one  hand,  as  a  state  of  natural  majority,  with 
the  advance  of  years  in  the  general  course  of 
nature;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  it  takes  form, 
as  a  state  in  accordance  with  their  own  natural 
condition.  They  thus  acquire  the  right  of  being 
their  own  masters,  without  the  interposition  of 
any  special  juridical  act,  and  therefore  merely 
by  law  (lege) ;  and  they  owe  their  parents  noth¬ 
ing  by  way  of  legal  debt  for  their  education, 
just  as  the  parents,  on  their  side,  are  now  re¬ 
leased  from  their  obligations  to  the  children  in 
the  same  way.  Parents  and  children  thus  gain 
or  regain  their  natural  freedom;  and  the  domes¬ 
tic  society,  which  was  necessary  according  to 
the  law  of  right,  is  thus  naturally  dissolved. 

Both  parties,  however,  may  resolve  to  con¬ 
tinue  the  household,  but  under  another  mode  of 
obligation.  It  may  assume  the  form  of  a  relation 
between  the  head  of  the  house,  as  its  master, 
and  the  other  members  as  domestic  servants, 
male  or  female;  and  the  connection  between 
them  in  this  new  regulated  domestic  economy 
(societas  herilis)  may  be  determined  by  con¬ 
tract.  The  master  of  the  house,  actually  or  vir¬ 
tually,  enters  into  contract  with  the  children, 
now  become  major  and  masters  of  themselves; 
or,  if  there  be  no  children  in  the  family,  with 
other  free  persons  constituting  the  membership 
of  the  household;  and  thus  there  is  established 


THE  SCIENCE 


a  domestic  relationship  not  founded  on  social 
equality,  but  such  that  one  commands  as  mas¬ 
ter,  and  another  obeys  as  servant  ( imperantis  et 
subject i  domes tici). 

The  domestics  or  servants  may  then  be  re¬ 
garded  by  the  master  of  the  household  as  thus 
far  his.  As  regards  the  form  or  mode  of  his  pos¬ 
session  of  them,  they  belong  to  him  as  if  by  a 
real  right;  for  if  any  of  them  run  away,  he  is 
entitled  to  bring  them  again  under  his  power  by 
a  unilateral  act  of  his  will.  But  as  regards  the 
matter  of  his  right,  or  the  use  he  is  entitled  to 
make  of  such  persons  as  his  domestics,  he  is 
not  entitled  to  conduct  himself  towards  them 
as  if  he  was  their  proprietor  or  owner  ( dominus 
servi) ;  because  they  are  only  subjected  to  his 
power  by  contract,  and  by  a  contract  under  cer¬ 
tain  definite  restrictions.  For  a  contract  by 
which  the  one  party  renounced  his  whole  free¬ 
dom  for  the  advantage  of  the  other,  ceasing 
thereby  to  be  a  person  and  consequently  having 
no  duty  even  to  observe  a  contract,  is  self¬ 
contradictory,  and  is  therefore  of  itself  null 
and  void.  The  question  as  to  the  right  of  prop¬ 
erty  in  relation  to  one  who  has  lost  his  legal 
personality  by  a  crime  does  not  concern  us 
here. 

This  contract,  then,  of  the  master  of  a  house¬ 
hold  with  his  domestics,  cannot  be  of  such  a 
nature  that  the  use  of  them  could  ever  rightly 
become  an  abuse  of  them;  and  the  judgement 
as  to  what  constitutes  use  or  abuse  in  such  cir¬ 


cumstances  is  not  left  merely  to  the  master,  but 
is  also  competent  to  the  servants,  who  ought 
never  to  be  held  in  bondage  or  bodily  servitude 
as  slaves  or  serfs.  Such  a  contract  cannot,  there¬ 
fore,  be  concluded  for  life,  but  in  all  cases  only 
for  a  definite  period,  within  which  one  party 
may  intimate  to  the  other  a  termination  of  their 
connection.  Children,  however,  including  even 
the  children  of  one  who  has  become  enslaved 
owing  to  a  crime,  are  always  free.  For  every 
man  is  born  free,  because  he  has  at  birth  as  yet 
broken  no  law;  and  even  the  cost  of  his  educa¬ 
tion  till  his  maturity  cannot  be  reckoned  as  a 
debt  which  he  is  bound  to  pay.  Even  a  slave,  if 
it  were  in  his  power,  would  be  bound  to  educate 
his  children  without  being  entitled  to  count  and 
reckon  with  them  for  the  cost;  and  in  view  of 
his  own  incapacity  for  discharging  this  func¬ 
tion,  the  possessor  of  a  slave,  therefore,  enters 
upon  the  obligation  which  he  has  rendered  the 
slave  himself  unable  to  fulfil. 

Here,  again,  as  under  the  first  two  titles,  it  is 
clear  that  there  is  a  personal  right  of  a  real  kind, 
in  the  relation  of  the  master  of  a  house  to  his 
domestics.  For  he  can  legally  demand  them  as 
belonging  to  what  is  externally  his,  from  any 
other  possessor  of  them;  and  he  is  entitled  to 
fetch  them  back  to  his  house,  even  before  the 
reasons  that  may  have  led  them  to  run  away, 
and  their  particular  right  in  the  circumstances, 
have  been  juridically  investigated. 


Systematic  Division  of  all  the  Rights  Capable  of 
Being  Acquired  by  Contract 


31.  Division  oj  Contracts.  Juridical  Conceptions 
oj  Money  and  a  Book 

It  is  reasonable  to  demand  that  a  metaphysi¬ 
cal  science  of  right  shall  completely  and  defi¬ 
nitely  determine  the  members  of  a  logical  divi¬ 
sion  of  its  conceptions  a  priori,  and  thus  estab¬ 
lish  them  in  a  genuine  system.  All  empirical  di¬ 
vision,  on  the  other  hand,  is  merely  fragmen¬ 
tary  partition ,  and  it  leaves  us  in  uncertainty 
as  to  whether  there  may  not  be  more  members 
still  required  to  complete  the  whole  sphere  of 
the  divided  conception.  A  division  that  is  made 
according  to  a  principle  a  priori  may  be  called, 
in  contrast  to  all  empirical  partitions,  a  dog¬ 
matic  division. 

Every  contract,  regarded  in  itself  objectively, 
consists  of  two  juridical  acts:  the  promise  and 
its  acceptance.  Acquisition  by  the  latter,  unless 
it  be  a  pactum  re  initum  which  requires  deliv¬ 


ery,  is  not  a  part,  but  the  juridically  necessary 
consequence  of  the  contract.  Considered  again 
subjectively,  or  as  to  whether  the  acquisition , 
which  ought  to  happen  as  a  necessary  conse¬ 
quence  according  to  reason,  will  also  follow,  in 
fact,  as  a  physical  consequence,  it  is  evident  that 
I  have  no  security  or  guarantee  that  this  will 
happen  by  the  mere  acceptance  of  a  promise. 
There  is,  therefore,  something  externally  re¬ 
quired  connected  with  the  mode  of  the  con¬ 
tract,  in  reference  to  the  certainty  of  acquisition 
by  it;  and  this  can  only  be  some  element  com¬ 
pleting  and  determining  the  means  necessary 
to  the  attainment  of  acquisition  as  realizing  the 
purpose  of  the  contract.  And  in  his  connection 
and  behoof,  three  persons  are  required  to  inter¬ 
vene— the  promiser,  the  acceptor,  and  the  cau¬ 
tioner  or  surety.  The  importance  of  the  cau¬ 
tioner  is  evident;  but  by  his  intervention  and 
his  special  contract  with  the  promiser,  the  ac- 


OF  RIGHT 


ceptor  gains  nothing  in  respect  of  the  object 
but  the  means  of  compulsion  that  enable  him 
to  obtain  what  is  his  own. 

According  to  these  rational  principles  of  logi¬ 
cal  division,  there  are  properly  only  three  pure 
and  simple  modes  of  contract.  There  are,  how¬ 
ever,  innumerable  mixed  and  empirical  modes, 
adding  statutory  and  conventional  forms  to  the 
principles  of  mine  and  thine  that  are  in  accord¬ 
ance  with  rational  laws.  But  they  lie  outside  of 
the  circle  of  the  metaphysical  science  of  right, 
whose  rational  modes  of  contract  can  alone  be 
indicated  here. 

All  contracts  are  founded  upon  a  purpose  of 
acquisition,  and  are  either: 

A.  Gratuitous  contracts,  with  unilateral  acqui¬ 
sition;  or 

B.  Onerous  contracts,  with  reciprocal  acquisi¬ 
tion;  or 

C.  Cautionary  contracts,  with  no  acquisition, 
but  only  guarantee  of  what  has  been  already 
acquired.  These  contracts  may  be  gratuitous 
on  the  one  side,  and  yet,  at  the  same  time, 
onerous  on  the  other. 

A.  The  gratuitous  contracts  ( pacta  gratuita) 
are: 

1.  Depositation  ( depositum ),  involving  the 
preservation  of  some  valuable  deposited  in 
trust; 

2.  Commodate  ( commodatum )  a  loan  of 
the  use  of  a  thing; 

3.  Donation  {donatio),  a  free  gift. 

B.  The  onerous  contracts  are  contracts  either 
of  permutation  or  of  hiring. 

I.  Contracts  of  permutation  or  reciprocal  ex¬ 
change  {permutatio  late  sic  dicta): 

1.  Barter,  or  strictly  real  exchange  {per¬ 
mutatio  stricte  sic  dicta).  Goods  exchanged 
for  goods. 

2.  Purchase  and  sale  {emptio  venditio). 
Goods  exchanged  for  money. 

3.  Loan  {mutuum).  Loan  of  a  fungible 
under  condition  of  its  being  returned  in 
kind:  corn  for  corn,  or  money  for  money. 

II.  Contracts  of  letting  and  hiring  {locatio 
conductio) : 

1.  Letting  of  a  thing  on  hire  to  another  per¬ 
son  who  is  to  make  use  of  it  {locatio  rei). 
If  the  thing  can  only  be  restored  in  specie, 
it  may  be  the  subject  of  an  onerous  con¬ 
tract  combining  the  consideration  of  inter¬ 
est  with  it  {pactum  usurarium) . 

2.  Letting  of  work  on  hire  {locatio  operae). 
Consent  to  the  use  of  my  powers  by  an¬ 
other  for  a  certain  price  {merces).  The 


4  23 

worker  under  this  contract  is  a  hired  serv¬ 
ant  {mercenarius). 

3.  Mandate  {mandatum).  The  contract  of 
mandate  is  an  engagement  to  perform  or 
execute  a  certain  business  in  place  and  in 
name  of  another  person.  If  the  action  is 
merely  done  in  the  place  of  another,  but 
not,  at  the  same  time,  in  his  name,  it  is  per¬ 
formance  without  commission  {gestio  ne - 
gotii );  but  if  it  is  rightfully  performed 
in  name  of  the  other,  it  constitutes  mandate, 
which  as  a  contract  of  procuration  is  an 
onerous  contract  {mandatum  onerosum). 

C.  The  cautionary  contracts  {cautiones)  are: 

1.  Pledge  {pignus).  Caution  by  a  moveable 
deposited  as  security. 

2.  Suretyship  {fide jus sio) .  Caution  for  the 
fulfilment  of  the  promise  of  another. 

3.  Personal  security  {praestatio  obsidis). 
Guarantee  of  personal  performance. 

This  list  of  all  modes  in  which  the  prop¬ 
erty  of  one  person  may  be  transferred  or  con¬ 
veyed  to  another  includes  conceptions  of  certain 
objects  or  instruments  required  for  such  trans¬ 
ference  {translatio) .  These  appear  to  be  en¬ 
tirely  empirical,  and  it  may  therefore  seem 
questionable  whether  they  are  entitled  to  a  place 
in  a  metaphysical  science  of  right.  For,  in  such 
a  science,  the  divisions  must  be  made  according 
to  principles  a  priori;  and  hence  the  matter  of 
the  juridical  relation,  which  may  be  convention¬ 
al,  ought  to  be  left  out  of  account,  and  only  its 
form  should  be  taken  into  consideration. 

Such  conceptions  may  be  illustrated  by  tak¬ 
ing  the  instance  of  money ,  in  contradistinction 
from  all  other  exchangeable  things  as  wares  and 
merchandise;  or  by  the  case  of  a  book.  And  con¬ 
sidering  these  as  illustrative  examples  in  this 
connection,  it  will  be  shown  that  the  conception 
of  money  as  the  greatest  and  most  useable  of 
all  the  means  of  human  intercommunication 
through  things,  in  the  way  of  purchase  and  sale 
in  commerce,  as  well  as  that  of  books  as  the 
greatest  means  of  carrying  on  the  interchange 
of  thought,  resolve  themselves  into  relations 
that  are  purely  intellectual  and  rational.  And 
hence  it  will  be  made  evident  that  such  concep¬ 
tions  do  not  really  detract  from  the  purity  of 
the  given  scheme  of  pure  rational  contracts,  by 
empirical  admixture. 

Illustration  of  Relations  of  Contract  by  the  Con¬ 
ceptions  of  Money  and  a  Book 
I.  What  is  Money? 

Money  is  a  thing  which  can  only  be  made  use 
of,  by  being  alienated  or  exchanged.  This  is  a 


THE  SCIENCE 


good  nominal  definition,  as  given  by  Achenwall ; 
and  it  is  sufficient  to  distinguish  objects  of  the 
will  uf  this  kind  from  all  other  objects.  But  it 
gives  us  no  information  regarding  the  rational 
possibility  of  such  a  thing  as  money  is.  Yet  we 
see  thus  much  by  the  definition:  (i)  that  the 
alienation  in  this  mode  of  human  intercommu¬ 
nication  and  exchange  is  not  viewed  as  a  gift, 
but  is  intended  as  a  mode  of  reciprocal  acquisi¬ 
tion  by  an  onerous  contract;  and  (2)  that  it  is 
regarded  as  a  mere  means  of  carrying  on  com¬ 
merce, ,  universally  adopted  by  the  people,  but 
having  no  value  as  such  of  itself,  in  contrast  to 
other  things  as  mercantile  goods  or  wares  which 
have  a  particular  value  in  relation  to  special 
wants  existing  among  the  people.  It  therefore 
represents  all  exchangeable  things. 

A  bushel  of  corn  has  the  greatest  direct  value 
as  a  means  of  satisfying  human  wants.  Cattle 
may  be  fed  by  it;  and  these  again  are  subservi¬ 
ent  to  our  nourishment  and  locomotion,  and 
they  even  labour  in  our  stead.  Thus,  by  means 
of  corn,  men  are  multiplied  and  supported,  who 
not  only  act  again  in  reproducing  such  natural 
products,  but  also  by  other  artificial  products 
they  can  come  to  the  relief  of  all  our  proper 
wants  Thus  are  men  enabled  to  build  dwellings, 
to  prepare  clothing,  and  to  supply  all  the  ingen¬ 
ious  comforts  and  enjoyments  which  make  up 
the  products  of  industry.  On  the  other  hand, 
the  value  of  money  is  only  indirect.  It  cannot 
be  itself  enjoyed,  nor  be  used  directly  for  en¬ 
joyment;  it  is,  however,  a  means  towards  this, 
and  of  all  outward  things  it  is  of  the  highest 
utility. 

We  may  found  a  real  definition  of  money 
provisionally  upon  these  considerations.  It  may 
thus  be  defined  as  the  universal  means  0)  car¬ 
rying  on  the  industry  of  men  in  exchanging  in¬ 
tercommunications  with  each  other.  Hence  na¬ 
tional  wealth,  in  so  far  as  it  can  be  acquired  by 
means  of  money,  is  properly  only  the  sum  of 
the  industry  or  applied  labour  with  which  men 
pay  each  other,  and  which  is  represented  by  the 
money  in  circulation  among  the  people. 

The  thing  which  is  to  be  called  money  must, 
therefore,  have  cost  as  much  industry  to  pro¬ 
duce  it,  or  even  to  put  it  into  the  hands  of  oth¬ 
ers,  as  may  be  equivalent  to  the  industry  or 
labour  required  for  the  acquisition  of  the  goods 
or  wares  or  merchandise,  as  natural  or  artificial 
products,  for  which  it  is  exchanged.  For  if  it 
were  easier  to  procure  the  material  which  is 
called  money  than  the  goods  that  are  required, 
there  would  be  more  money  in  the  market  than 


goods  to  be  sold;  and  because  the  seller  would 
then  have  to  expend  more  labour  upon  his  goods 
than  the  buyer  on  the  equivalent,  the  money 
coming  in  to  him  more  rapidly,  the  labour  ap¬ 
plied  to  the  preparation  of  goods  and  indus¬ 
try  generally,  with  the  industrial  productivity 
which  is  the  source  of  the  public  wealth,  would 
at  the  same  time  dwindle  and  be  cut  down. 
Hence  bank  notes  and  assignations  are  not  to 
be  regarded  as  money,  although  they  may  take 
its  place  by  way  of  representing  it  for  a  time; 
because  it  costs  almost  no  labour  to  prepare 
them,  and  their  value  is  based  merely  upon  the 
opinion  prevailing  as  to  the  further  continuance 
of  the  previous  possibility  of  changing  them  in¬ 
to  ready  money.  But  on  its  being  in  any  way 
found  out  that  there  is  not  ready  money  in  suf¬ 
ficient  quantity  for  easy  and  safe  conversion  of 
such  notes  or  assignations,  the  opinion  gives 
way,  and  a  fall  in  their  value  becomes  inevitable. 
Thus  the  industrial  labour  of  those  who  work 
the  gold  and  silver  mines  in  Peru  and  Mexico 
— especially  on  account  of  the  frequent  failures 
in  the  application  of  fruitless  efforts  to  discover 
new  veins  of  these  precious  metals — is  prob¬ 
ably  even  greater  than  what  is  expended  in  the 
manufacture  of  goods  in  Europe.  Hence  such 
mining  labour,  as  unrewarded  in  the  circum¬ 
stances,  would  be  abandoned  of  itself,  and  the 
countries  mentioned  would  in  consequence  soon 
sink  into  poverty,  did  not  the  industry  of 
Europe,  stimulated  in  turn  by  these  very  metals, 
proportionally  expand  at  the  same  time  so  as 
constantly  to  keep  up  the  zeal  of  the  miners  in 
their  work  by  the  articles  of  luxury  thereby  of¬ 
fered  to  them.  It  is  thus  that  the  concurrence 
of  industry  with  industry,  and  of  labour  with 
labour,  is  always  maintained. 

But  how  is  it  possible  that  what  at  the  be¬ 
ginning  constituted  only  goods  or  wares,  at  length 
became  money?  This  has  happened  wherever 
a  sovereign  as  great  and  powerful  consumer 
of  a  particular  substance,  which  he  at  first 
used  merely  for  the  adornment  and  decoration 
of  his  servants  and  court,  has  enforced  the 
tribute  of  his  subjects  in  this  kind  of  material. 
Thus  it  may  have  been  gold,  or  silver,  or  cop¬ 
per,  or  a  species  of  beautiful  shells  called  cow¬ 
ries,  or  even  a  sort  of  mat  called  makutes,  as  in 
Congo;  or  ingots  of  iron,  as  in  Senegal;  or  Ne¬ 
gro  slaves,  as  on  the  Guinea  Coast.  When  the 
ruler  of  the  country  demanded  such  things  as 
imposts,  those  whose  labour  had  to  be  put  in 
motion  to  procure  them  were  also  paid  by  means 
of  them,  according  to  certain  regulations  of 


OF  RIGHT 


425 


commerce  then  established,  as  in  a  market  or 
exchange.  As  it  appears  to  me,  it  is  only  thus 
that  a  particular  species  of  goods  came  to  be 
made  a  legal  means  of  carrying  on  the  indus¬ 
trial  labour  of  the  subjects  in  their  commerce 
with  each  other,  and  thereby  forming  the  medi¬ 
um  of  the  national  wealth.  And  thus  it  practi¬ 
cally  became  money. 

The  rational  conception  of  money,  under 
which  the  empirical  conception  is  embraced,  is 
therefore  that  of  a  thing  which,  in  the  course 
of  the  public  permutation  or  exchange  of  pos¬ 
sessions  ( permutatio  publica ),  determines  the 
price  of  all  the  other  things  that  form  products 
or  goods — under  which  term  even  the  sciences 
are  included,  in  so  far  as  they  are  not  taught 
gratis  to  others.  The  quantity  of  it  among  a  peo¬ 
ple  constitutes  their  wealth  ( opulentia ).  For 
price  ( pretium )  is  the  public  judgement  about 
the  value  of  a  thing,  in  relation  to  the  propor¬ 
tionate  abundance  of  what  forms  the  universal 
representative  means  in  circulation  for  carrying 
on  the  reciprocal  interchange  of  the  products 
of  industry  or  labour.1  The  precious  metals, 
when  they  are  not  merely  weighed  but  also 
stamped  or  provided  with  a  sign  indicating  how 
much  they  are  worth,  form  legal  money,  and 
are  called  coin. 

According  to  Adam  Smith:  “Money  has  be¬ 
come,  in  all  civilized  nations,  the  universal  in¬ 
strument  of  commerce,  by  the  intervention  of 
which  goods  of  all  kinds  are  bought  and  sold 
or  exchanged  for  one  another.”  This  definition 
expands  the  empirical  conception  of  money  to 
the  rational  idea  of  it,  by  taking  regard  only  to 
the  implied  form  of  the  reciprocal  performances 
in  the  onerous  contracts,  and  thus  abstracting 
from  their  matter.  It  is  thus  conformable  to  the 
conception  of  right  in  the  permutation  and  ex¬ 
change  of  the  mine  and  thine  generally  (com- 
mutatio  late  sic  dicta).  The  definition,  there¬ 
fore,  accords  with  the  representation  in  the 
above  synopsis  of  a  dogmatic  division  of  con¬ 
tracts  a  priori ,  and  consequently  with  the  meta¬ 
physical  principle  of  right  in  general. 

1  Hence  where  commerce  is  extensive  neither  gold  nor 
copper  is  specially  used  as  money,  but  only  as  consti¬ 
tuting  wares;  because  there  is  too  little  of  the  first  and 
too  much  of  the  second  for  them  to  be  easily  brought 
into  circulation,  so  as  at  once  to  have  the  former  in 
such  small  pieces  as  are  necessary  in  payment  for  partic¬ 
ular  goods  and  not  to  have  the  latter  in  great  quantity 
in  case  of  the  smallest  acquisitions.  Hence  silver — more 
or  less  alloyed  with  copper — is  taken  as  the  proper  ma¬ 
terial  of  money  and  the  measure  of  the  calculation  of  all 
prices  in  the  great  commercial  intercommunications  of 
the  world;  and  the  other  metals — and  still  more  non- 
metallic  substances — can  only  take  its  place  in  the  case 
of  a  people  of  limited  commerce. 


II.  What  is  a  Book? 

A  book  is  a  writing  which  contains  a  discourse 
addressed  by  some  one  to  the  public,  through 
visible  signs  of  speech.  It  is  a  matter  of  indiffer¬ 
ence  to  the  present  considerations  whether  it  is 
written  by  a  pen  or  imprinted  by  types,  and  on 
few  or  many  pages.  He  who  speaks  to  the  pub¬ 
lic  in  his  own  name  is  the  author.  He  who  ad¬ 
dresses  the  writing  to  the  public  in  the  name  of 
the  author  is  the  publisher.  When  a  publisher 
does  this  with  the  permission  or  authority  of 
the  author,  the  act  is  in  accordance  with  right, 
and  he  is  the  rightful  publisher;  but  if  this  is 
done  without  such  permission  or  authority,  the 
act  is  contrary  to  right,  and  the  publisher  is  a 
counterfeiter  or  unlawful  publisher.  The  whole 
of  a  set  of  copies  of  the  original  document  is 
called  an  edition. 

The  Unauthorized  Publishing  of  Books  is  Con¬ 
trary  to  the  Principles  of  Right,  and  is  Right¬ 
ly  Prohibited 

A  writing  is  not  an  immediate  direct  presen¬ 
tation  of  a  conception,  as  is  the  case,  for  in¬ 
stance,  with  an  engraving  that  exhibits  a  por¬ 
trait,  or  a  bust  or  cast  by  a  sculptor.  It  is  a  dis¬ 
course  addressed  in  a  particular  form  to  the  pub¬ 
lic;  and  the  author  may  be  said  to  speak  public¬ 
ly  by  means  of  his  publisher.  The  publisher, 
again,  speaks  by  the  aid  of  the  printer  as  his 
workman  ( operarius ),  yet  not  in  his  own  name, 
for  otherwise  he  would  be  the  author,  but  in 
the  name  of  the  author;  and  he  is  only  entitled 
to  do  so  in  virtue  of  a  mandate  given  him  to 
that  effect  by  the  author.  Now  the  unauthorized 
printer  and  publisher  speaks  by  an  assumed 
authority  in  his  publication;  in  the  name  in¬ 
deed  of  the  author,  but  without  a  mandate  to 
that  effect  (gerit  se  mandatarium  absque  man- 
dato).  Consequently  such  an  unauthorized  pub¬ 
lication  is  a  wrong  committed  upon  the  author¬ 
ized  and  only  lawful  publisher,  as  it  amounts 
to  a  pilfering  of  the  profits  which  the  latter  was 
entitled  and  able  to  draw  from  the  use  of  his 
proper  right  ( furtum  usus).  Unauthorized  print¬ 
ing  and  publication  of  books  is,  therefore,  for¬ 
bidden — as  an  act  of  counterfeit  and  piracy — 
on  the  ground  of  right. 

There  seems,  however,  to  be  an  impression 
that  there  is  a  sort  of  common  right  to  print 
and  publish  books;  but  the  slightest  reflection 
must  convince  any  one  that  this  would  be  a 
great  injustice.  The  reason  of  it  is  found  simply 
in  the  fact  that  a  book,  regarded  from  one  point 
of  view,  is  an  external  product  of  mechanical 


426  THE  SCIENCE 


art  ( opus  mechanicum),  that  can  be  imitated 
by  any  one  who  may  be  in  rightful  possession 
of  a  copy;  and  it  is  therefore  his  by  a  real  right. 

But.  from  another  point  of  view,  a  book  is  not 
merely  an  external  thing,  but  is  a  discourse  of 
the  publisher  to  the  public,  and  he  is  only  en¬ 
titled  to  do  this  publicly  under  the  mandate  of 
the  author  ( praestatio  operae);  and  this  con¬ 
stitutes  a  personal  right.  The  error  underlying 
the  impression  referred  to,  therefore,  arises 
from  an  interchange  and  confusion  of  these  two 
kinds  of  right  in  relation  to  books. 

Confusion  of  Personal  Right  and  Real  Right 

The  confusion  of  personal  right  with  real 
right  may  be  likewise  shown  by  reference  to  a 
difference  of  view  in  connection  with  another 
contract,  falling  under  the  head  of  contracts 
of  hiring  (B  n.  i),  namely,  the  contract  of  lease 
( jus  incolatus).  The  question  is  raised  as  to 
whether  a  proprietor  when  he  has  sold  a  house 
or  a  piece  of  ground  held  on  lease,  before  the 
expiry  of  the  period  of  lease,  was  bound  to  add 
the  condition  of  the  continuance  of  the  lease  to 
the  contract  of  purchase;  or  whether  it  should 
be  held  that  “purchase  breaks  hire,”  of  course 
under  reservation  of  a  period  of  warning  deter¬ 
mined  by  the  nature  of  the  subject  in  use.  In 
the  former  view,  a  house  or  farm  would  be  re¬ 
garded  as  having  a  burden  lying  upon  it,  consti¬ 
tuting  a  real  right  acquired  in  it  by  the  lessee; 
and  this  might  well  enough  be  carried  out  by  a 
clause  merely  indorsing  or  ingrossing  the  con¬ 
tract  of  lease  in  the  deed  of  sale.  But  as  it  would 
no  longer  then  be  a  simple  lease;  another  con¬ 
tract  would  properly  be  required  to  be  con¬ 
joined,  a  matter  which  few  lessors  would  be  dis¬ 
posed  to  grant.  The  proposition,  then,  that  “Pur¬ 
chase  breaks  hire”  holds  in  principle;  for  the 
full  right  in  a  thing  as  a  property  overbears  all 
personal  right,  which  is  inconsistent  with  it.  But 
there  remains  a  right  of  action  to  the  lessee,  on 
the  ground  of  a  personal  right  for  indemnifica¬ 
tion  on  account  of  any  loss  arising  from  break¬ 
ing  of  the  contract. 

Episodical  Section.  The  Ideal  Acquisition  of 

External  Objects  of  the  Will 
32.  The  Nature  and  Modes  of  Ideal  Acquisition 

I  call  that  mode  of  acquisition  ideal  which 
involves  no  causality  in  time,  and  which  is 
founded  upon  a  mere  idea  of  pure  reason.  It  is 
nevertheless  actual ,  and  not  merely  imaginary 
acquisition;  and  it  is  not  called  real  only  be¬ 
cause  the  act  of  acquisition  is  not  empirical. 
This  character  of  the  act  arises  from  the  pecu¬ 


liarity  that  the  person  acquiring  acquires  from 
another  who  either  is  not  yet ,  and  who  can  only 
be  regarded  as  a  possible  being,  or  who  is  just 
ceasing  to  be,  or  who  no  longer  is.  Hence  such 
a  mode  of  attaining  to  possession  is  to  be  re¬ 
garded  as  a  mere  practical  idea  of  reason. 

There  are  three  modes  of  ideal  acquisition: 

I.  Acquisition  by  usucapion; 

II.  Acquisition  by  inheritance  or  succession; 

III.  Acquisition  by  undying  merit  (meritum 
immortale),  or  the  claim  by  right  to  a  good 
name  at  death. 

These  three  modes  of  acquisition  can,  as  a 
matter  of  fact,  only  have  effect  in  a  public  jurid¬ 
ical  state  of  existence,  but  they  are  not  found¬ 
ed  merely  upon  the  civil  constitution  or  upon 
arbitrary  statutes;  they  are  already  contained 
a  priori  in  the  conception  of  the  state  of  nature, 
and  are  thus  necessarily  conceivable  prior  to 
their  empirical  manifestation.  The  laws  regard¬ 
ing  them  in  the  civil  constitution  ought  to  be 
regulated  by  that  rational  conception. 

33. — 1.  Acquisition  by  Usucapion.  (Acquisitio 

per  Usucapionem) 

I  may  acquire  the  property  of  another  merely 
by  long  possession  and  use  of  it  ( usucapio ).  Such 
property  is  not  acquired,  because  I  may  legiti¬ 
mately  presume  that  his  consent  is  given  to  this 
effect  ( per  consensum  praesumptum) ;  nor  be¬ 
cause  I  can  assume  that,  as  he  does  not  oppose 
my  acquisition  of  it,  he  has  relinquished  or  aban¬ 
doned  it  as  his  ( rem  derelictam) .  But  I  acquire 
it  thus  because,  even  if  there  were  any  one  ac¬ 
tually  raising  a  claim  to  this  property  as  its 
true  owner,  I  may  exclude  him  on  the  ground 
of  my  long  possession  of  it,  ignore  his  previous 
existence,  and  proceed  as  if  he  existed  during 
the  time  of  my  possession  as  a  mere  abstraction, 
although  I  may  have  been  subsequently  ap¬ 
prized  of  his  reality  as  well  as  of  his  claim.  This 
mode  of  acquisition  is  not  quite  correctly  des¬ 
ignated  acquisition  by  prescription  ( per  prae- 
scriptionem );  for  the  exclusion  of  all  other 
claimants  is  to  be  regarded  as  only  the  conse¬ 
quence  of  the  usucapion;  and  the  process  of 
acquisition  must  have  gone  before  the  right  of 
exclusion.  The  rational  possibility  of  such  a 
mode  of  acquisition  has  now  to  be  proved. 

Any  one  who  does  not  exercise  a  continuous 
possessory  activity  ( actus  possessorius )  in  re¬ 
lation  to  a  thing  as  his  is  regarded  with  good 
right  as  one  who  does  not  at  all  exist  as  its  pos¬ 
sessor.  For  he  cannot  complain  of  lesion  so  long 
as  he  does  not  qualify  himself  with  a  title  as  its 
possessor.  And  even  if  he  should  afterwards  lay 


OF  RIGHT 


claim  to  the  thing  when  another  has  already 
taken  possession  of  it,  he  only  says  he  was  once 
on  a  time  owner  of  it,  but  not  that  he  is  so  still, 
or  that  his  possession  has  continued  without  in¬ 
terruption  as  a  juridical  fact.  It  can,  therefore, 
only  be  a  juridical  process  of  possession,  that 
has  been  maintained  without  interruption  and 
is  proveable  by  documentary  fact,  that  any  one 
can  secure  for  himself  what  is  his  own  after 
ceasing  for  a  long  time  to  make  use  of  it. 

For,  suppose  that  the  neglect  to  exercise  this 
possessory  activity  had  not  the  effect  of  ena¬ 
bling  another  to  found  upon  his  hitherto  lawful, 
undisputed  and  bona  fide  possession,  and  irrefra¬ 
gable  right  to  continue  in  its  possession  so  that 
he  may  regard  the  thing  that  is  thus  in  his  pos¬ 
session  as  acquired  by  him.  Then  no  acquisition 
would  ever  become  peremptory  and  secured, 
but  all  acquisition  would  only  be  provisory 
and  temporary.  This  is  evident  on  the  ground 
that  there  are  no  historical  records  available  to 
carry  the  investigation  of  a  title  back  to  the 
first  possessor  and  his  act  of  acquisition.  The 
presumption  upon  which  acquisition  by  usu¬ 
capion  is  founded  is,  therefore,  not  merely  its 
conformity  to  right  as  allowed  and  just,  but  also 
the  presumption  of  its  being  right  ( praesumtio 
juris  et  de  jure),  and  its  being  assumed  to  be  in 
accordance  with  compulsory  laws  ( suppositio 
legalis).  Anyone  who  has  neglected  to  embody 
his  possessory  act  in  a  documentary  title  has 
lost  his  claim  to  the  right  of  being  possessor  for 
the  time;  and  the  length  of  the  period  of  his 
neglecting  to  do  so — which  need  not  necessarily 
be  particularly  defined — can  be  referred  to  only 
as  establishing  the  certainty  of  this  neglect.  And 
it  would  contradict  the  postulate  of  the  juridi¬ 
cally  practical  reason  to  maintain  that  one  hith¬ 
erto  unknown  as  a  possessor,  and  whose  posses¬ 
sory  activity  has  at  least  been  interrupted, 
whether  by  or  without  fault  of  his  own,  could 
always  at  any  time  re-acquire  a  property;  for 
this  would  be  to  make  all  ownership  uncertain 
( dominia  rerum  incerta  facere). 

But  if  he  is  a  member  of  the  commonwealth 
or  civil  union,  the  state  may  maintain  his  pos¬ 
session  for  him  vicariously,  although  it  may  be 
interrupted  as  private  possession;  and  in  that 
case  the  actual  possessor  will  not  be  able  to 
prove  a  title  of  acquisition  even  from  a  first  oc¬ 
cupation,  nor  to  found  upon  a  title  of  usucapion. 
But,  in  the  state  of  nature,  usucapion  is  univer¬ 
sally  a  rightful  ground  of  holding,  not  properly 
as  a  juridical  mode  of  requiring  a  thing,  but  as 
a  ground  for  maintaining  oneself  in  possession 
of  it  where  there  are  no  juridical  acts.  A  release 


427 

from  juridical  claims  is  commonly  also  called 
acquisition.  The  prescriptive  title  of  the  older 
possessor,  therefore,  belongs  to  the  sphere  of 
natural  right  ( est  juris  naturae). 

34. — 11.  Acquisition  by  Inheritance.  (Acquisitio 

haereditatis) 

Inheritance  is  constituted  by  the  transfer 
( translatio )  of  the  property  or  goods  of  one  who 
is  dying  to  a  survivor,  through  the  consent  of 
the  will  of  both.  The  acquisition  of  the  heir  who 
takes  the  estate  (haeredis  instituti)  and  the  re¬ 
linquishment  of  the  testator  who  leaves  it,  be¬ 
ing  the  acts  that  constitute  the  exchange  of  the 
mine  and  thine,  take  place  in  the  same  moment 
of  time — in  articulo  mortis — and  just  when 
the  testator  ceases  to  be.  There  is  therefore  no 
special  act  of  transfer  ( translatio )  in  the  empir¬ 
ical  sense;  for  that  would  involve  two  succes¬ 
sive  acts,  by  which  the  one  would  first  divest 
himself  of  his  possession,  and  the  other  would 
thereupon  enter  into  it.  Inheritance  as  consti¬ 
tuted  by  a  simultaneous  double  act  is,  therefore, 
an  ideal  mode  of  acquisition.  Inheritance  is  in¬ 
conceivable  in  the  state  of  nature  without  a 
testamentary  disposition  ( dispositio  ultimae  vol¬ 
untatis)  ;  and  the  question  arises  as  to  whether 
this  mode  of  acquisition  is  to  be  regarded  as  a 
contract  of  succession ,  or  a  unilateral  act  insti¬ 
tuting  an  heir  by  a  will  ( testamentum ).  The  de¬ 
termination  of  this  question  depends  on  the 
further  question,  whether  and  how,  in  the  very 
same  moment  in  which  one  individual  ceases  to 
be,  there  can  be  a  transition  of  his  property  to 
another  person.  Hence  the  problem,  as  to  how 
a  mode  of  acquisition  by  inheritance  is  possible , 
must  be  investigated  independently  of  the  va¬ 
rious  possible  forms  in  which  it  is  practically 
carried  out,  and  which  can  have  place  only  in 
a  commonwealth. 

“It  is  possible  to  acquire  by  being  instituted 
or  appointed  heir  in  a  testamentary  disposi¬ 
tion.’’  For  the  testator  Caius  promises  and  de¬ 
clares  in  his  last  will  to  Titius,  who  knows  noth¬ 
ing  of  this  promise,  to  transfer  to  him  his  es¬ 
tate  in  case  of  death,  but  thus  continuing  as  long 
as  he  lives  sole  owner  of  it.  Now  by  a  mere  uni¬ 
lateral  act  of  will,  nothing  can  in  fact  be  trans¬ 
mitted  to  another  person,  as  in  addition  to  the 
promise  of  the  one  party  there  is  required  ac¬ 
ceptance  ( acceptatio )  on  the  part  of  the  other, 
and  a  simultaneous  bilateral  act  of  will  ( volun¬ 
tas  simultanea)  which,  however,  is  here  awant- 
ing.  So  long  as  Caius  lives,  Titius  cannot  ex¬ 
pressly  accept  in  order  to  enter  on  acquisition, 
because  Caius  has  only  promised  in  case  of 


THE  SCIENCE 


428 

death;  otherwise  the  property  would  be  for  a 
moment  at  least  in  common  possession,  which 
is  not  the  will  of  the  testator.  However,  Titius 
acquires  tacitly  a  special  right  to  the  inherit¬ 
ance  as  a  real  right.  This  is  constituted  by  the 
sole  and  exclusive  right  to  accept  the  estate  (jus 
in  re  jacente ),  which  is  therefore  called  at  that 
point  of  time  a  haereditas  jacens.  Now  as  every 
man — because  he  must  always  gain  and  never 
lose  by  it — necessarily,  although  tacitly,  accepts 
such  a  right,  and  as  Titius  after  the  death  of 
Caius  is  in  this  position,  he  may  acquire  the  suc¬ 
cession  as  heir  by  acceptance  of  the  promise. 
And  the  estate  is  not  in  the  meantime  entirely 
without  an  owner  (res  nullius))  but  is  only  in 
abeyance  or  vacant  (vacua) ;  because  he  has 
exclusively  the  right  of  choice  as  to  whether  he 
will  actually  make  the  estate  bequeathed  to  him 
his  own  or  not. 

Hence  testaments  are  valid  according  to  mere 
natural  right  (sunt  juris  naturae ).  This  assertion 
however,  is  to  be  understood  in  the  sense  that 
they  are  capable  and  worthy  of  being  introduced 
and  sanctioned  in  the  civil  state,  whenever  it 
is  instituted.  For  it  is  only  the  common  will  in 
the  civil  state  that  maintains  the  possession  of 
the  inheritance  or  succession,  while  it  hangs  be¬ 
tween  acceptance  or  rejection  and  specially  be¬ 
longs  to  no  particular  individual. 

35. — hi.  The  Continuing  Right  of  a  Good  Name 

after  Death.  (Bona  fama  Defuncti) 

It  would  be  absurd  to  think  that  a  dead  per¬ 
son  could  possess  anything  after  his  death,  when 
he  no  longer  exists  in  the  eye  of  the  law,  if  the 
matter  in  question  were  a  mere  thing.  But  a 
good  name  is  a  congenital  and  external,  although 
merely  ideal,  possession,  which  attaches  insep¬ 
arably  to  the  individual  as  a  person.  Now  we 
can  and  must  abstract  here  from  all  considera¬ 
tion  as  to  whether  the  persons  cease  to  be  after 
death  or  still  continue  as  such  to  exist;  because, 
in  considering  their  juridical  relation  to  others, 
we  regard  persons  merely  according  to  their  hu¬ 
manity  and  as  rational  beings  (homo  noume- 
non).  Hence  any  attempt  to  bring  the  reputa¬ 
tion  or  good  name  of  a  person  into  evil  and  false 
repute  after  death,  is  always  questionable,  even 
although  a  well-founded  charge  may  be  allowed 
— for  to  that  extent  the  brocard  “De  mortuis 
nil  nisi  bene”1  is  wrong.  Yet  to  spread  charges 
against  one  who  is  absent  and  cannot  defend 
himself,  shows  at  least  a  want  of  magnanimity. 

By  a  blameless  life  and  a  death  that  worthily 

1  [“Let  nothing  be  said  of  the  dead  but  what  is  fa¬ 
vourable.”] 


ends  it,  it  is  admitted  that  a  man  may  acquire  a 
(negatively)  good  reputation  constituting  some¬ 
thing  that  is  his  own,  even  when  he  no  longer 
exists  in  the  world  of  sense  as  a  visible  person 
(homo  phaenomenon) .  It  is  further  held  that 
his  survivors  and  successors — whether  relatives 
or  strangers — are  entitled  to  defend  his  good 
name  as  a  matter  of  right,  on  the  ground  that 
unproved  accusations  subject  them  all  to  the 
danger  of  similar  treatment  after  death.  Now 
that  a  man  when  dead  can  yet  acquire  such  a 
right  is  a  peculiar  and,  nevertheless,  an  undeni¬ 
able  manifestation  in  fact,  of  the  a  priori  law- 
giving  reason  thus  extending  its  law  of  com¬ 
mand  or  prohibition  beyond  the  limits  of  the 
present  life.  If  some  one  then  spreads  a  charge 
regarding  a  dead  person  that  would  have  dis¬ 
honoured  him  when  living,  or  even  made  him 
despicable,  any  one  who  can  adduce  a  proof 
that  this  accusation  is  intentionally  false  and 
untrue  may  publicly  declare  him  who  thus 
brings  the  dead  person  into  ill  repute  to  be  a 
calumniator,  and  affix  dishonour  to  him  in  turn. 
This  would  not  be  allowable  unless  it  were  legit¬ 
imate  to  assume  that  the  dead  person  was  in¬ 
jured  by  the  accusation,  although  he  is  dead, 
and  that  a  certain  just  satisfaction  was  done 
to  him  by  an  apology,  although  he  no  longer 
sensibly  exists.  A  title  to  act  the  part  of  the  vin¬ 
dicator  of  the  dead  person  does  not  require  to 
be  established;  for  every  one  necessarily  claims 
this  of  himself,  not  merely  as  a  duty  of  virtue 
regarded  ethically,  but  as  a  right  belonging  to 
him  in  virtue  of  his  humanity.  Nor  does  the  vin¬ 
dicator  require  to  show  any  special  personal 
damage,  accruing  to  him  as  a  friend  or  relative, 
from  a  stain  on  the  character  of  the  deceased, 
to  justify  him  in  proceeding  to  censure  it.  That 
such  a  form  of  ideal  acquisition,  and  even  a 
right  in  an  individual  after  death  against  sur¬ 
vivors,  is  thus  actually  founded,  cannot,  there¬ 
fore,  be  disputed,  although  the  possibility  of 
such  a  right  is  not  capable  of  logical  deduction. 

There  is  no  ground  for  drawing  visionary  in¬ 
ferences  from  what  has  just  been  stated,  to  the 
presentiment  of  a  future  life  and  invisible  rela¬ 
tions  to  departed  souls.  For  the  considerations 
connected  with  this  right  turn  on  nothing  more 
than  the  purely  moral  and  juridical  relation 
which  subsists  among  men,  even  in  the  present 
life,  as  rational  beings.  Abstraction  is,  however, 
made  from  all  that  belongs  physically  to  their 
existence  in  space  and  time;  that  is,  men  are 
considered  logically  apart  from  these  physical 
concomitants  of  their  nature,  not  as  to  their 


OF  RIGHT 


state  when  actually  deprived  of  them,  but  only 
in  so  far  as  being  spirits  they  are  in  a  condition 
that  might  realize  the  injury  done  them  by  ca¬ 
lumniators.  Any  one  who  may  falsely  say  some¬ 
thing  against  me  a  hundred  years  hence  injures 
me  even  now.  For  in  the  pure  juridical  relation, 
which  is  entirely  rational  and  surprasensible, 
abstraction  is  made  from  the  physical  condi¬ 
tions  of  time,  and  the  calumniator  is  as  cul¬ 
pable  as  if  he  had  committed  the  offence  in  my 
lifetime ;  only  this  will  not  be  tried  by  a  criminal 
process,  but  he  will  only  be  punished  with  that 
loss  of  honour  he  would  have  caused  to  another, 
and  this  is  inflicted  upon  him  by  public  opinion 
according  to  the  lex  talionis.  Even  a  plagiarism 
from  a  dead  author,  although  it  does  not  tar¬ 
nish  the  honour  of  the  deceased,  but  only  de¬ 
prives  him  of  a  part  of  his  property,  is  yet  prop¬ 
erly  regarded  as  a  lesion  of  his  human  right. 

Chapter  III.  Acquisition  Conditioned  by 

the  Sentence  of  a  Public  Judicatory 

36.  How  and  What  Acquisition  is  Subjectively 

Conditioned  by  the  Principle  of  a  Public 

Court. 

Natural  right,  understood  simply  as  that 
right  which  is  not  statutory,  and  which  is  know- 
able  purely  a  priori ,  by  every  man’s  reason,  will 
include  distributive  justice  as  well  as  commu¬ 
tative  justice.  It  is  manifest  that  the  latter,  as 
constituting  the  justice  that  is  valid  between 
persons  in  their  reciprocal  relations  of  inter¬ 
course  with  one  another,  must  belong  to  natu¬ 
ral  right.  But  this  holds  also  of  distributive  jus¬ 
tice,  in  so  far  as  it  can  be  known  a  priori;  and 
decisions  or  sentences  regarding  it  must  be  reg¬ 
ulated  by  the  law  of  natural  right. 

The  moral  person  who  presides  in  the  sphere 
of  justice  and  administers  it  is  called  the  Court 
of  Justice,  and,  as  engaged  in  the  process  of  of¬ 
ficial  duty,  the  judicatory;  the  sentence  deliv¬ 
ered  in  a  case,  is  the  judgement  {judicium).  All 
this  is  to  be  here  viewed  a  priori ,  according  to 
the  rational  conditions  of  right,  without  taking 
into  consideration  how  su.h  a  constitution  is  to 
be  actually  established  or  organized,  for  which 
particular  statutes,  and  consequently  empirical 
principles,  are  requisite. 

The  question,  then,  in  this  connection,  is  not 
merely  “What  is  right  in  itself?”  in  the  sense 
in  which  every  man  must  determine  it  by  the 
judgement  of  reason;  but  “What  is  right  as  ap¬ 
plied  to  this  case?”  that  is,  “What  is  right  and 
just  as  viewed  by  a  court?”  The  rational  and 
the  judicial  points  of  view  are  therefore  to  be 


429 

distinguished ;  and  there  are  four  cases  in  which 
the  two  forms  of  judgement  have  a  different 
and  opposite  issue.  And  yet  they  may  co-exist 
with  each  other,  because  they  are  delivered 
from  two  different,  yet  respectively  true,  points 
of  view:  the  one  from  regard  to  private  right, 
the  other  from  the  idea  of  public  right.  They 
are:  I.  The  contract  of  donation  {pactum  dona¬ 
tions)  ;  II.  The  contract  of  loan  ( commoda - 
turn);  III.  The  action  of  real  revindication 
{vindicatio) ;  and  IV.  Guarantee  by  oath  { jur - 
amentum). 

It  is  a  common  error  on  the  part  of  the  jurist 
to  fall  here  into  the  fallacy  of  begging  the  ques¬ 
tion  by  a  tacit  assumption  {vitium  subreptionis) . 
This  is  done  by  assuming  as  objective  and  abso¬ 
lute  the  juridical  principle  which  a  public  court 
of  justice  is  entitled  and  even  bound  to  adopt 
in  its  own  behoof,  and  only  from  the  subjective 
purpose  of  qualifying  itself  to  decide  and  judge 
upon  all  the  rights  pertaining  to  individuals.  It 
is  therefore  of  no  small  importance  to  make 
this  specific  difference  intelligible,  and  to  draw 
attention  to  it. 

3  7. — 1.  The  Contract  of  Donation.  (Pactum 

Donationis) 

The  contract  of  donation  signifies  the  gratu¬ 
itous  alienation  {gratis)  of  a  thing  or  right  that 
is  mine.  It  involves  a  relation  between  me  as 
the  donor  ( donans ),  and  another  person  as  the 
donatory  {donatarius) ,  in  accordance  with  the 
principle  of  private  right,  by  which  what  is 
mine  is  transferred  to  the  latter,  on  his  accept¬ 
ance  of  it,  as  a  gift  {donum).  However,  it  is  not 
to  be  presumed  that  I  have  voluntarily  bound 
myself  thereby  so  as  to  be  compelled  to  keep 
my  promise,  and  that  I  have  thus  given  away 
my  freedom  gratuitously,  and,  as  it  were,  to 
that  extent  thrown  myself  away.  Nemo  suum 
jactare  praesumitur .  But  this  is  what  would  hap¬ 
pen,  under  such  circumstances,  according  to  the 
principle  of  right  in  the  civil  state;  for  in  this 
sphere  the  donatory  can  compel  me,  under  cer¬ 
tain  conditions,  to  perform  my  promise.  If,  then, 
the  case  comes  before  a  court,  according  to  the 
conditions  of  public  right,  it  must  either  be  pre¬ 
sumed  that  the  donor  has  consented  to  such 
compulsion,  or  the  court  would  give  no  regard, 
in  the  sentence,  to  the  consideration  as  to  wheth¬ 
er  he  intended  to  reserve  the  right  to  resile  from 
his  promise  or  not;  but  would  only  refer  to 
what  is  certain,  namely,  the  condition  of  the 
promise  and  the  acceptance  of  the  donatory. 
Although  the  promiser,  therefore,  thought — as 


THE  SCIENCE 


may  easily  be  supposed — that  he  could  not  be 
bound  by  his  promise  in  any  case,  if  he  ‘‘rued” 
it  before  it  was  actually  carried  out,  yet  the 
court  assumes  that  he  ought  expressly  to  have 
reserved  this  condition  if  such  was  his  mind; 
and  if  he  did  not  make  such  an  express  reserva¬ 
tion,  it  will  be  held  that  he  can  be  compelled  to 
implement  his  promise.  And  this  principle  is  as¬ 
sumed  by  the  court,  because  the  administration 
of  justice  would  otherwise  be  endlessly  impeded, 
or  even  made  entirely  impossible. 

38. — 11.  The  Contract  of  Loan.  (Commodatum) 

In  the  contract  of  commodate-loan  ( commo¬ 
datum )  I  give  some  one  the  gratuitous  use  of 
something  that  is  mine.  If  it  is  a  thing  that  is 
given  on  loan,  the  contracting  parties  agree  that 
the  borrower  will  restore  the  very  same  thing 
to  the  power  of  the  lender.  But  the  receiver  of 
the  loan  ( commodatarius )  cannot,  at  the  same 
time,  assume  that  the  owner  of  the  thing  lent 
( commodans )  will  take  upon  himself  all  risk 
(casus)  of  any  possible  loss  of  it,  or  of  its  use¬ 
ful  quality,  that  may  arise  from  having  given 
it  into  the  possession  of  the  receiver.  For  it  is 
not  to  be  understood  of  itself  that  the  owner, 
besides  the  use  of  the  thing,  which  he  has  grant¬ 
ed  to  the  receiver,  and  the  detriment  that  is  in¬ 
separable  from  such  use,  also  gives  a  guarantee 
or  warrandice  against  all  damage  that  may  arise 
from  such  use.  On  the  contrary,  a  special  acces¬ 
sory  contract  would  have  to  be  entered  into  for 
this  purpose.  The  only  question,  then,  that  can 
be  raised  is  this:  “Is  it  incumbent  on  the  lender 
or  the  borrower  to  add  expressly  the  condition 
of  undertaking  the  risk  that  may  accrue  to  the 
thing  lent;  or ,  if  this  is  not  done,  which  of  the 
parties  is  to  be  presumed  to  have  consented  and 
agreed  to  guarantee  the  property  of  the  lender, 
up  to  restoration  of  the  very  same  thing  or  its 
equivalent?”  Certainly  not  the  lender;  because 
it  cannot  be  presumed  that  he  has  gratuitously 
agreed  to  give  more  than  the  mere  use  of  the 
thing,  so  that  he  cannot  be  supposed  to  have  also 
undertaken  the  risk  of  loss  of  his  property.  But 
this  may  be  assumed  on  the  side  of  the  borrow¬ 
er;  because  he  thereby  undertakes  and  performs 
nothing  more  than  what  is  implied  in  the  con¬ 
tract. 

For  example,  I  enter  a  house,  when  overtaken 
by  a  shower  of  rain,  and  ask  the  loan  of  a  cloak. 
But  through  accidental  contact  with  colouring 
matter,  it  becomes  entirely  spoiled  while  in  my 
possession;  or  on  entering  another  house,  I  lay 
it  aside  and  it  is  stolen.  Under  such  circum¬ 
stances,  everybody  would  think  it  absurd  for 


me  to  assert  that  I  had  no  further  concern  with 
the  cloak  but  to  return  it  as  it  was,  or,  in  the 
latter  case,  only  to  mention  the  fact  of  the 
theft;  and  that,  in  any  case,  anything  more  re¬ 
quired  would  be  but  an  act  of  courtesy  in  ex¬ 
pressing  sympathy  with  the  owner  on  account 
of  his  loss,  seeing  he  can  claim  nothing  on  the 
ground  of  right.  It  would  be  otherwise,  however, 
if,  on  asking  the  use  of  an  article,  I  discharged 
myself  beforehand  from  all  responsibility,  in 
case  of  its  coming  to  grief  while  in  my  hands, 
on  the  ground  of  my  being  poor  and  unable  to 
compensate  any  incidental  loss.  No  one  could 
find  such  a  condition  superfluous  or  ludicrous, 
unless  the  borrower  were,  in  fact,  known  to  be 
a  well-to-do  and  well-disposed  man;  because  in 
such  a  case  it  would  almost  be  an  insult  not  to 
act  on  the  presumption  of  generous  compensa¬ 
tion  for  any  loss  sustained. 

Now  by  the  very  nature  of  this  contract,  the 
possible  damage  (casus)  which  the  thing  lent 
may  undergo  cannot  be  exactly  determined  in 
any  agreement.  Commodate  is  therefore  an  un¬ 
certain  contract  (pactum  incertum),  because  the 
consent  can  only  be  so  far  presumed.  The  judge¬ 
ment,  in  any  case,  deciding  upon  whom  the 
incidence  of  any  loss  must  fall,  cannot  there¬ 
fore  be  determined  from  the  conditions  of  the 
contract  in  itself,  but  only  by  the  principle  of 
the  court  before  which  it  comes,  and  which  can 
only  consider  what  is  certain  in  the  contract; 
and  the  only  thing  certain  is  always  the  fact  as 
to  the  possession  of  the  thing  as  property.  Hence 
the  judgement  passed  in  the  state  of  nature  will 
be  different  from  that  given  by  a  court  of  jus¬ 
tice  in  the  civil  state.  The  judgement  from  the 
standpoint  of  natural  right  will  be  determined 
by  regard  to  the  inner  rational  quality  of  the 
thing,  and  will  run  thus:  “Loss  arising  from 
damage  accruing  to  a  thing  lent  falls  upon 
the  borrower”  (casum  sentit  commodatarius) ; 
whereas  the  sentence  of  a  court  of  justice  in  the 
civil  state  will  run  thus:  “The  loss  falls  upon 
the  lender”  (casum  sentit  dominus).  The  latter 
judgement  turns  out  differently  from  the  former 
as  the  sentence  of  the  mere  sound  reason,  be¬ 
cause  a  public  judge  cannot  found  upon  pre¬ 
sumptions  as  to  what  either  party  may  have 
thought;  and  thus  the  one  who  has  not  obtained 
release  from  all  loss  in  the  thing,  by  a  special 
accessory  contract,  must  bear  the  loss.  Hence 
the  difference  between  the  judgement  as  the 
court  must  deliver  it  and  the  form  in  which 
each  individual  is  entitled  to  hold  it  for  himself, 
by  his  private  reason,  is  a  matter  of  importance, 


OF  RIGHT 


and  is  not  to  be  overlooked  in  the  consideration 
of  juridical  judgements. 

39. — nx.  The  Revindication  oj  what  has  been 

Lost.  (Vindicatio) 

It  is  clear  from  what  has  been  already  said 
that  a  thing  of  mine  which  continues  to  exist  re¬ 
mains  mine,  although  I  may  not  be  in  continu¬ 
ous  occupation  of  it;  and  that  it  does  not  cease 
to  be  mine  without  a  juridical  act  of  dereliction 
or  alienation.  Further,  it  is  evident  that  a  right 
in  this  thing  ( jus  reale )  belongs  in  consequence 
to  me  ( jus  personate ),  against  every  holder  of  it, 
and  not  merely  against  some  particular  person. 
But  the  question  now  arises  as  to  whether  this 
right  must  be  regarded  by  every  other  person  as 
a  continuous  right  of  property  per  se}  if  I  have 
not  in  any  way  renounced  it,  although  the  thing 
is  in  the  possession  of  another. 

A  thing  may  be  lost  (res  amissa)  and  thus 
come  into  other  hands  in  an  honourable  bona 
fide  way  as  a  supposed  “find”;  or  it  may  come 
to  me  by  formal  transfer  on  the  part  of  one 
who  is  in  possession  of  it,  and  who  professes  to 
be  its  owner,  although  he  is  not  so.  Taking  the 
latter  case,  the  question  arises  whether,  since  I 
cannot  acquire  a  thing  from  one  who  is  not  its 
owner  (a  non  domino ),  I  am  excluded  by  the 
fact  from  all  right  in  the  thing  itself,  and  have 
merely  a  personal  right  against  a  wrongful  pos¬ 
sessor?  This  is  manifestly  so,  if  the  acquisition 
is  judged  purely  according  to  its  inner  justifying 
grounds  and  viewed  according  to  the  state  of 
nature,  and  not  according  to  the  convenience  of 
a  court  of  justice. 

For  everything  alienable  must  be  capable  of 
being  acquired  by  anyone.  The  rightfulness  of 
acquisition,  however,  rests  entirely  upon  the 
form  in  accordance  with  which  what  is  in  pos¬ 
session  of  another,  is  transferred  to  me  and  ac¬ 
cepted  by  me.  In  other  words,  rightful  acquisi¬ 
tion  depends  upon  the  formality  of  the  juridical 
act  of  commutation  or  interchange  between  the 
possessor  of  the  thing  and  the  acquirer  of  it, 
without  its  being  required  to  ask  how  the  former 
came  by  it;  because  this  would  itself  be  an  in¬ 
jury,  on  the  ground  that:  Quilibet  praesumitur 
bonus.  Now  suppose  it  turned  out  that  the  said 
possessor  was  not  the  real  owner,  I  cannot  admit 
that  the  real  owner  is  entitled  to  hold  me  di¬ 
rectly  responsible,  or  so  entitled  with  regard  to 
any  one  who  might  be  holding  the  thing.  For  I 
have  myself  taken  nothing  away  from  him, 
when,  for  example,  I  bought  his  horse  according 
to  the  law  (titulo  empti  venditi )  when  it  was 
offered  for  sale  in  the  public  market.  The  title 


43i 

of  acquisition  is  therefore  unimpeachable  on  my 
side;  and  as  buyer  I  am  not  bound,  nor  even 
have  I  the  right,  to  investigate  the  title  of  the 
seller;  for  this  process  of  investigation  would 
have  to  go  on  in  an  ascending  series  ad  infinitum . 
Hence  on  such  grounds  I  ought  to  be  regarded, 
in  virtue  of  a  regular  and  formal  purchase,  as 
not  merely  the  putative ,  but  the  real  owner  of 
the  horse. 

But  against  this  position,  there  immediately 
start  up  the  following  juridical  principles.  Any 
acquisition  derived  from  one  who  is  not  the 
owner  of  the  thing  in  question  is  null  and  void. 
I  cannot  derive  from  another  anything  more 
than  what  he  himself  rightfully  has;  and  al¬ 
though  as  regards  the  form  of  the  acquisition — 
the  modus  acquirendi — I  may  proceed  in  ac¬ 
cordance  with  all  the  conditions  of  right  when  I 
deal  in  a  stolen  horse  exposed  for  sale  in  the 
market,  yet  a  real  title  warranting  the  acquisi¬ 
tion  was  awanting;  for  the  horse  was  not  really 
the  property  of  the  seller  in  question.  However 
I  may  be  a  bona  fide  possessor  of  a  thing  under 
such  conditions,  I  am  still  only  a  putative  own¬ 
er,  and  the  real  owner  has  the  right  oj  vindica¬ 
tion  against  me  (rem  suam  vindicandi). 

Now,  it  may  be  again  asked,  what  is  right  and 
just  in  itself  regarding  the  acquisition  of  exter¬ 
nal  things  among  men  in  their  intercourse  with 
one  another — viewed  in  the  state  of  nature — 
according  to  the  principles  of  commutative  jus¬ 
tice?  And  it  must  be  admitted  in  this  connec¬ 
tion  that  whoever  has  a  purpose  of  acquiring 
anything  must  regard  it  as  absolutely  necessary 
to  investigate  whether  the  thing  which  he  wishes 
to  acquire  does  not  already  belong  to  another 
person.  For  although  he  may  carefully  observe 
the  formal  conditions  required  for  appropriating 
what  may  belong  to  the  property  of  another,  as 
in  buying  a  horse  according  to  the  usual  terms 
in  a  market,  yet  he  can,  at  the  most,  acquire 
only  a  personal  right  in  relation  to  a  thing  (jus 
ad  rem )  so  long  as  it  is  still  unknown  to  him 
whether  another  than  the  seller  may  not  be  the 
real  owner.  Hence,  if  some  other  person  were  to 
come  forward  and  prove  by  documentary  evi¬ 
dence  a  prior  right  of  property  in  the  thing, 
nothing  would  remain  for  the  putative  new 
owner  but  the  advantage  which  he  has  drawn  as 
a  bona  fide  possessor  of  it  up  to  that  moment. 
Now  it  is  frequently  impossible  to  discover  the 
absolutely  first  original  owner  of  a  thing  in  the 
series  of  putative  owners,  who  derive  their 
right  from  one  another.  Hence  no  mere  ex¬ 
change  of  external  things,  however  well  it  may 
agree  with  the  formal  conditions  of  commuta- 


THE  SCIENCE 


tive  justice,  can  ever  guarantee  an  absolutely 
certain  acquisition. 

Here,  however,  the  juridically  law-giving  rea¬ 
son  comes  in  again  with  the  principle  of  distribu¬ 
tive  justice;  and  it  adopts  as  a  criterion  of  the 
rightfulness  of  possession,  not  what  is  in  itself 
in  reference  to  the  private  will  of  each  individ¬ 
ual  in  the  state  of  nature,  but  only  the  consid¬ 
eration  of  how  it  would  be  adjudged  by  a  court 
of  justice  in  a  civil  state,  constituted  by  the 
united  will  of  all.  In  this  connection,  fulfilment 
of  the  formal  conditions  of  acquisition,  that  in 
themselves  only  establish  a  personal  right,  is 
postulated  as  sufficient;  and  they  stand  as  an 
equivalent  for  the  material  conditions  which 
properly  establish  the  derivation  of  property 
from  a  prior  putative  owner,  to  the  extent  of 
making  what  is  in  itself  only  a  personal  right, 
valid  before  a  court,  as  a  real  right.  Thus  the 
horse  which  I  bought  when  exposed  for  sale  in 
the  public  market,  under  conditions  regulated 
by  the  municipal  law,  becomes  my  property  if 
all  the  conditions  of  purchase  and  sale  have  been 
exactly  observed  in  the  transaction;  but  always 
under  the  reservation  that  the  real  owner  con¬ 
tinues  to  have  the  right  of  a  claim  against  the 
seller,  on  the  ground  of  his  prior  unalienated 
possession.  My  otherwise  personal  right  is  thus 
transmuted  into  a  real  right,  according  to  which 
I  may  take  and  vindicate  the  object  as  mine 
wherever  I  may  find  it,  without  being  respon¬ 
sible  for  the  way  in  which  the  Seller  had  come 
into  possession  of  it. 

It  is  therefore  only  in  behoof  of  the  require¬ 
ments  of  juridical  decision  in  a  court  {in  favor- 
em  justitae  distributivae)  that  the  right  in  re¬ 
spect  of  a  thing  is  regarded,  not  as  personal, 
which  it  is  in  itself,  but  as  real,  because  it  can 
thus  be  most  easily  and  certainly  adjudged;  and 
it  is  thus  accepted  and  dealt  with  according  to 
a  pure  principle  a  priori.  Upon  this  principle, 
various  statutory  laws  come  to  be  founded 
which  specially  aim  at  laying  down  the  condi¬ 
tions  under  which  alone  a  mode  of  acquisition 
shall  be  legitimate,  so  that  the  judge  may  be 
able  to  assign  every  one  his  own  as  easily  and 
certainly  as  possible.  Thus,  in  the  brocard,  “Pur¬ 
chase  breaks  hire,”  what  by  the  nature  of  the 
subject  is  a  real  right — namely  the  hire — is 
taken  to  hold  as  a  merely  personal  right;  and, 
conversely,  as  in  the  case  referred  to  above, 
what  is  in  itself  merely  a  personal  right  is  held 
to  be  valid  as  a  real  right.  And  this  is  done  only 
when  the  question  arises  as  to  the  principles  by 
which  a  court  of  justice  in  the  civil  state  is  to  be 


guided,  in  order  to  proceed  with  all  possible 
safety  in  delivering  judgement  on  the  rights  of 
individuals. 

40 — iv.  Acquisition  of  Security  by  the  Taking 

of  an  Oath.  (Cautio  Juratoria) 

Only  one  ground  can  be  assigned  on  which 
it  could  be  held  that  men  are  bound  in  the  jurid¬ 
ical  relation  to  believe  and  to  confess  that  there 
are  gods,  or  that  there  is  a  God.  It  is  that  they 
may  be  able  to  swear  an  oath ;  and  that  thus  by 
the  fear  of  an  all-seeing  Supreme  Power,  whose 
revenge  they  must  solemnly  invoke  upon  them¬ 
selves  in  case  their  utterance  should  be  false, 
they  may  be  constrained  to  be  truthful  in  state¬ 
ment  and  faithful  in  promising.  It  is  not  moral¬ 
ity  but  merely  blind  superstition  that  is  reckon¬ 
ed  upon  in  this  process;  for  it  is  evident  it  im¬ 
plies  that  no  certainty  is  to  be  expected  from  a 
mere  solemn  declaration  in  matters  of  right  be¬ 
fore  a  court,  although  the  duty  of  truthfulness 
must  have  always  appeared  self-evident  to  all, 
in  a  matter  which  concerns  the  holiest  that  can 
be  among  men — namely,  the  right  of  man.  Hence 
recourse  has  been  had  to  a  motive  founded  on 
mere  myths  and  fables  as  imaginary  guarantees. 
Thus  among  the  Rejangs,  a  heathen  people  in 
Sumatra,  it  is  the  custom — according  to  the  tes¬ 
timony  of  Marsden — to  swear  by  the  bones  of 
their  dead  relatives,  although  they  have  no 
belief  in  a  life  after  death.  In  like  manner  the 
negroes  of  Guinea  swear  by  their  fetish ,  a  bird’s 
feather,  which  they  imprecate  under  the  belief 
that  it  will  break  their  neck.  And  so  in  other 
cases.  The  belief  underlying  these  oaths  is  that 
an  invisible  power — whether  it  has  understand¬ 
ing  or  not — by  its  very  nature  possesses  magical 
power  that  can  be  put  into  action  by  such  invo¬ 
cations.  Such  a  belief — which  is  commonly 
called  religion,  but  which  ought  to  be  called  su¬ 
perstition — is,  however,  indispensable  for  the 
administration  of  justice;  because,  without  re¬ 
ferring  to  it,  a  court  of  justice  would  not  have 
adequate  means  to  ascertain  facts  otherwise 
kept  secret,  and  to  determine  rights.  A  law  mak¬ 
ing  an  oath  obligatory  is  therefore  only  given  in 
behoof  of  the  judicial  authority. 

But  then  the  question  arises  as  to  what  the 
obligation  could  be  founded  upon  that  would 
bind  any  one  in  a  court  of  justice  to  accept  the 
oath  of  another  person  as  a  right  and  valid  proof 
of  the  truth  of  his  statements  which  are  to  put 
an  end  to  all  dispute.  In  other  words,  what 
obliges  me  juridically  to  believe  that  another 
person  when  taking  an  oath  has  any  religion  at 
all,  so  that  I  should  subordinate  or  entrust  my 


OF  RIGHT 


right  to  his  oath?  And,  on  like  grounds,  con¬ 
versely,  can  I  be  bound  at  all  to  take  an  oath? 
It  is  evident  that  both  these  questions  point  to 
what  is  in  itself  morally  wrong. 

But  in  relation  to  a  court  of  justice — and 
generally  in  the  civil  state — if  it  be  assumed 
there  are  no  other  means  of  getting  to  the  truth 
in  certain  cases  than  by  an  oath,  it  must  be 
adopted.  In  regard  to  religion,  under  the  suppo¬ 
sition  that  every  one  has  it,  it  may  be  utilized 
as  a  necessary  means  (in  causu  necessitatis ),  in 
behoof  of  the  legitimate  procedure  of  a  court 
of  justice.  The  court  uses  this  form  of  spiritual 
compulsion  ( tortura  spiritualis)  as  an  available 
means,  in  conformity  with  the  superstitious  pro¬ 
pensity  of  mankind,  for  the  ascertainment  of 
what  is  concealed;  and  therefore  holds  itself 
justified  in  so  doing.  The  legislative  power,  how¬ 
ever,  is  fundamentally  wrong  in  assigning  this 
authority  to  the  judicial  power,  because  even  in 
the  civil  state  any  compulsion  with  regard  to 
the  taking  of  oaths  is  contrary  to  the  inalienable 
freedom  of  man. 

Official  oaths,  which  are  usually  promissory, 
being  taken  on  entering  upon  an  office,  to  the 
effect  that  the  individual  has  sincere  intention 
to  administer  his  functions  dutifully,  might  well 
be  changed  into  assertory  oaths,  to  be  taken  at 
the  end  of  a  year  or  more  of  actual  administra¬ 
tion,  the  official  swearing  to  the  faithfulness  of 
his  discharge  of  duty  during  that  time.  This 
would  bring  the  conscience  more  into  action 
than  the  promissory  oath,  which  always  gives 
room  for  the  internal  pretext  that,  with  the  best 
intention,  the  difficulties  that  arose  during  the 
administration  of  the  official  function  were  not 
foreseen.  And,  further,  violations  of  duty,  under 
the  prospect  of  their  being  summed  up  by  fu¬ 
ture  censors,  would  give  rise  to  more  anxiety  as 
to  censure  than  when  they  are  merely  repre¬ 
sented,  one  after  the  other,  and  forgotten. 

As  regards  an  oath  taken  concerning  a  matter 
of  belief  ( de  credulitate ),  it  is  evident  that  no 
such  oath  can  be  demanded  by  a  court,  i.  For, 
first ,  it  contains  in  itself  a  contradiction.  Such 
belief,  as  intermediate  between  opinion  and 
knowledge,  is  a  thing  on  which  one  might  ven¬ 
ture  to  lay  a  wager  but  not  to  swear  an  oath.  2. 
And,  second,  the  judge  who  imposes  an  oath  of 
belief,  in  order  to  ascertain  anything  pertinent 
to  his  own  purpose  or  even  to  the  common  good, 
commits  a  great  offence  against  the  conscien¬ 
tiousness  of  the  party  taking  such  an  oath.  This 
he  does  in  regard  both  to  the  levity  of  mind, 
which  he  thereby  helps  to  engender,  and  to  the 


433 

stings  of  conscience  which  a  man  must  feel  who 
to-day  regards  a  subject  from  a  certain  point 
of  view,  but  who  will  very  probably  to-morrow 
find  it  quite  improbable  from  another  point  of 
view.  Any  one,  therefore,  who  is  compelled  to 
take  such  an  oath,  is  subjected  to  an  injury. 

Transition  jrom  theMineand  Thine  in  the  State 

of  Nature  to  the  Mine  and  Thine  in  the  Jurid¬ 
ical  State  Generally 

41.  Public  Justice  as  Related  to  the  Natural 
and  the  Civil  State 

The  juridical  state  is  that  relation  of  men  to 
one  another  which  contains  the  conditions  under 
which  it  is  alone  possible  for  every  one  to  obtain 
the  right  that  is  his  due.  The  formal  principle  of 
the  possibility  of  actually  participating  in  such 
right,  viewed  in  accordance  with  the  idea  of  a 
universally  legislative  will,  is  public  justice.  Pub¬ 
lic  justice  may  be  considered  in  relation  either 
to  the  possibility,  or  actuality,  or  necessity  of 
the  possession  of  objects — regarded  as  the  mat¬ 
ter  of  the  activity  of  the  will — according  to 
laws.  It  may  thus  be  divided  into  protective 
justice  ( justitia  testatrix ),  commutative  justice 
(justitia  commutativa),  and  distributive  justice 
( justitia  distributive) ,  in  the  first  mode  of  jus¬ 
tice,  the  law  declares  merely  what  relation  is  in¬ 
ternally  right  in  respect  of  form  ( lex  justi) ;  in 
the  second,  it  declares  what  is  likewise  exter¬ 
nally  in  accord  with  a  law  in  respect  of  the  ob¬ 
ject,  and  what  possession  is  rightful  ( lex  jurid - 
ica) ;  and  in  the  third,  it  declares  what  is  right, 
and  what  is  just ,  and  to  what  extent,  by  the 
judgement  of  a  court  in  any  particular  case  com¬ 
ing  under  the  given  law.  In  this  latter  relation, 
the  public  court  is  called  the  justice  of  the  coun¬ 
try;  and  the  question  whether  there  actually  is 
or  is  not  such  an  administration  of  public  jus¬ 
tice  may  be  regarded  as  the  most  important  of 
all  juridical  interests. 

The  non-juridical  state  is  that  condition  of 
society  in  which  there  is  no  distributive  justice. 
It  is  commonly  called  the  natural  state  {status 
naturalis ),  or  the  state  of  nature.  It  is  not  the 
social  state,  as  Achenwall  puts  it,  for  this  may 
be  in  itself  an  artificial  state  {status  artificialis) , 
that  is  to  be  contradistinguished  from  the  “nat¬ 
ural”  state.  The  opposite  of  the  state  of  nature 
is  the  civil  state  {status  civilis)  as  the  condition 
of  a  society  standing  under  a  distributive  jus¬ 
tice.  In  the  state  of  nature,  there  may  even  be 
juridical  forms  of  society — such  as  marriage, 
parental  authority,  the  household,  and  such  like. 
For  none  of  these,  however,  does  any  law  a  pri¬ 
ori  lay  it  down  as  an  incumbent  obligation: 


THE  SCIENCE 


434 

“Thou  shall  enter  into  this  state.”  But  it  may  be 
said  of  the  juridical  state  that:  “All  men  who 
may  even  involuntarily  come  into  relations  of 
right  with  one  another  ought  to  enter  into  this 
state.” 

The  natural  or  non-juridical  social  state  may 
be  viewed  as  the  sphere  of  private  right,  and  the 
civil  state  may  be  specially  regarded  as  the 
sphere  of  public  right.  The  latter  state  contains 
no  more  and  no  other  duties  of  men  towards 
each  other  than  what  may  be  conceived  in  con¬ 
nection  with  the  former  state;  the  matter  of 
private  right  is,  in  short,  the  very  same  in  both. 
The  laws  of  the  civil  state,  therefore,  only  turn 
upon  the  juridical  form  of  the  coexistence  of 
men  under  a  common  constitution;  and,  in  this 
respect,  these  laws  must  necessarily  be  regarded 
and  conceived  as  public  laws. 

The  civil  union  ( unio  civilis)  cannot,  in  the 
strict  sense,  be  properly  called  a  society;  for 
there  is  no  sociality  in  common  between  the 
ruler  ( imperans )  and  the  subject  ( subditus )  un¬ 
der  a  civil  constitution.  They  are  not  co-ordi¬ 
nated  as  associates  in  a  society  with  each  other, 
but  the  one  is  subordinated  to  the  other.  Those 
who  may  be  co-ordinated  with  one  another  must 
consider  themselves  as  mutually  equal,  in  so  far 
as  they  stand  under  common  laws.  The  civil 
union  may  therefore  be  regarded  not  so  much 
as  being,  but  rather  as  making  a  society. 

42.  The  Postulate  of  Public  Right 

From  the  conditions  of  private  right  in  the 
natural  state,  there  arises  the  postulate  of  pub¬ 
lic  right.  It  may  be  thus  expressed:  “In  the  re¬ 
lation  of  unavoidable  coexistence  with  others, 
thou  shalt  pass  from  the  state  of  nature  into 
a  juridical  union  constituted  under  the  con¬ 
dition  of  a  distributive  justice.”  The  principle 
of  this  postulate  may  be  unfolded  analyti¬ 
cally  from  the  conception  of  right  in  the  external 
relation,  contradistinguished  from  mere  might 
as  violence. 

No  one  is  under  obligation  to  abstain  from  in¬ 
terfering  with  the  possession  of  others,  unless 
they  give  him  a  reciprocal  guarantee  for  the  ob¬ 
servance  of  a  similar  abstention  from  interfer¬ 


ence  with  his  possession.  Nor  does  he  require  to 
wait  for  proof  by  experience  of  the  need  of  this 
guarantee,  in  view  of  the  antagonistic  disposi¬ 
tion  of  others.  He  is  therefore  under  no  obliga¬ 
tion  to  wait  till  he  acquires  practical  prudence 
at  his  own  cost;  for  he  can  perceive  in  himself 
evidence  of  the  natural  inclination  of  men  to 
play  the  master  over  others,  and  to  disregard 
the  claims  of  the  right  of  others,  when  they  feel 
themselves  their  superiors  by  might  or  fraud. 
And  thus  it  is  not  necessary  to  wait  for  the 
melancholy  experience  of  actual  hostility;  the 
individual  is  from  the  first  entitled  to  exercise 
a  rightful  compulsion  towards  those  who  al¬ 
ready  threaten  him  by  their  very  nature.  Quili- 
bet  praesumitur  malus}  donee  securitatem  de - 
derit  oppositi. 

So  long  as  the  intention  to  live  and  continue 
in  this  state  of  externally  lawless  freedom  pre¬ 
vails,  men  may  be  said  to  do  no  wrong  or  injus¬ 
tice  at  all  to  one  another ,  even  when  they  wage 
war  against  each  other.  For  what  seems  compe¬ 
tent  as  good  for  the  one  is  equally  valid  for  the 
other,  as  if  it  were  so  by  mutual  agreement.  Uti 
partes  de  jure  suo  disponunt ,  ita  jus  est.  But 
generally  they  must  be  considered  as  being  in 
the  highest  state  of  wrong,  as  being  and  willing 
to  be  in  a  condition  which  is  not  juridical,  and  in 
which,  therefore,  no  one  can  be  secured  against 
violence,  in  the  possession  of  his  own. 

The  distinction  between  what  is  only  formally 
and  what  is  also  materially  wrong,  and  unjust, 
finds  frequent  application  in  the  science  of  right. 
An  enemy  who,  on  occupying  a  besieged  for¬ 
tress,  instead  of  honourably  fulfilling  the  condi¬ 
tions  of  a  capitulation,  maltreats  the  garrison  on 
marching  out,  or  otherwise  violates  the  agree¬ 
ment,  cannot  complain  of  injury  or  wrong  if  on 
another  occasion  the  same  treatment  is  inflicted 
upon  themselves.  But,  in  fact,  all  such  actions 
fundamentally  involve  the  commission  of  wrong 
and  injustice,  in  the  highest  degree;  because 
they  take  all  validity  away  from  the  conception 
of  right,  and  give  up  everything,  as  it  were  by 
law  itself,  to  savage  violence,  and  thus  over¬ 
throw  the  rights  of  men  generally. 


OF  RIGHT 


435 

SECOND  PART.  PUBLIC  RIGHT 

The  System  of  Those  Laws  which  Require  Public  Promulgation. 

The  Principles  of  Right  in  Civil  Society 


43.  Definition  and  Division  of  Public  Right 

Public  right  embraces  the  whole  of  the  laws 
that  require  to  be  universally  promulgated  in 
order  to  produce  a  juridical  state  of  society.  It 
is  therefore  a  system  of  those  laws  that  are 
requisite  for  a  people  as  a  multitude  of  men 
forming  a  nation,  or  for  a  number  of  nations, 
in  their  relations  to  each  other.  Men  and  na¬ 
tions,  on  account  of  their  mutual  influence  on  one 
another,  require  a  juridical  constitution  uniting 
them  under  one  will,  in  order  that  they  may  par¬ 
ticipate  in  what  is  right.  This  relation  of  the 
individuals  of  a  nation  to  each  other  constitutes 
the  civil  union  in  the  social  state;  and,  viewed 
as  a  whole  in  relation  to  its  constituent  mem¬ 
bers,  it  forms  the  political  state  ( civitas ). 

1.  The  state,  as  constituted  by  the  common 
interest  of  all  to  live  in  a  juridical  union,  is 
called,  in  view  of  its  form,  the  commonwealth 
or  the  republic  in  the  wider  sense  of  the  term 
( res  publica  latius  sic  dicta).  The  principles  of 
right  in  this  sphere  thus  constitute  the  first  de¬ 
partment  of  public  right  as  the  right  of  the 
state  ( jus  civitatis )  or  national  right.  2.  The 
state,  again,  viewed  in  relation  to  other  peoples, 
is  called  a  power  ( potentia ),  whence  arises  the 
idea  of  potentates.  Viewed  in  relation  to  the 
supposed  hereditary  unity  of  the  people  com¬ 
posing  it,  the  state  constitutes  a  nation  (gens). 
Under  the  general  conception  of  public  right, 
in  addition  to  the  right  of  the  individual  state, 
there  thus  arises  another  department  of  right, 
constituting  the  right  of  nations  (jus  gentium) 
or  international  right.  3.  Further,  as  the  surface 
of  the  earth  is  not  unlimited  in  extent,  but  is  cir¬ 
cumscribed  into  a  unity,  national  right  and  in¬ 
ternational  right  necessarily  culminate  in  the 
idea  of  a  universal  right  of  mankind,  which  may 
be  called  Cosmo  political  Right  (jus  cosmopoliti¬ 
sm).  And  national,  international,  and  cosmo- 
political  right  are  so  interconnected,  that,  if  any 
one  of  these  three  possible  forms  of  the  juridical 
relation  fails  to  embody  the  essential  principles 
that  ought  to  regulate  external  freedom  by  law, 
the  structure  of  legislation  reared  by  the  others 
will  also  be  undermined,  and  the  whole  system 
would  at  last  fall  to  pieces. 


I.  Right  of  the  State  and  Constitutional 
Law.  (Jus  Civitatis) 

44.  Origin  of  the  Civil  Union  and  Public  Right 
It  is  not  from  any  experience  prior  to  the 
appearance  of  an  external  authoritative  legisla¬ 
tion  that  we  learn  of  the  maxim  of  natural  vio¬ 
lence  among  men  and  their  evil  tendency  to  en¬ 
gage  in  war  with  each  other.  Nor  is  it  assumed 
here  that  it  is  merely  some  particular  historical 
condition  or  fact,  that  makes  public  legislative 
constraint  necessary;  for  however  well-disposed 
or  favourable  to  right  men  may  be  considered 
to  be  of  themselves,  the  rational  idea  of  a  state 
of  society  not  yet  regulated  by  right,  must  be 
taken  as  our  starting-point.  This  idea  implies 
that  before  a  legal  state  of  society  can  be  pub¬ 
licly  established,  individual  men,  nations,  and 
states,  can  never  be  safe  against  violence  from 
each  other;  and  this  is  evident  from  the  consid¬ 
eration  that  every  one  of  his  own  will  naturally 
does  what  seems  good  and  right  in  his  own  eyes , 
entirely  independent  of  the  opinion  of  others. 
Hence,  unless  the  institution  of  right  is  to  be  re¬ 
nounced,  the  first  thing  incumbent  on  men  is  to 
accept  the  principle  that  it  is  necessary  to  leave 
the  state  of  nature,  in  which  every  one  follows 
his  own  inclinations,  and  to  form  a  union  of  all 
those  who  cannot  avoid  coming  into  reciprocal 
communication,  and  thus  subject  themselves  in 
common  to  the  external  restraint  of  public  com¬ 
pulsory  laws.  Men  thus  enter  into  a  civil  union, 
in  which  every  one  has  it  determined  by  law 
what  shall  be  recognized  as  his;  and  this  is  se¬ 
cured  to  him  by  a  competent  external  power  dis¬ 
tinct  from  his  own  individuality.  Such  is  the  pri¬ 
mary  obligation,  on  the  part  of  all  men,  to  enter 
into  the  relations  of  a  civil  state  of  society. 

The  natural  condition  of  mankind  need  not, 
on  this  ground,  be  represented  as  a  state  of  abso¬ 
lute  injustice ,  as  if  there  could  have  been  no 
other  relation  originally  among  men  but  what 
was  merely  determined  by  force.  But  this  natu¬ 
ral  condition  must  be  regarded,  if  it  ever  existed, 
as  a  state  of  society  that  was  void  of  regulation 
by  right  (status  justitiae  vacuus ),  so  that  if  a 
matter  of  right  came  to  be  in  dispute  (jus  con - 
troversum)  y  no  competent  judge  was  found  tu 


436  THE  SCIENCE 


give  an  authorized  legal  decision  upon  it.  It  is 
therefore  reasonable  that  any  one  should  con¬ 
strain  another  by  force,  to  pass  from  such  a  non- 
juridical  state  of  life  and  enter  within  the  juris¬ 
diction  of  a  civil  state  of  society.  For,  although 
on  the  basis  of  the  ideas  of  right  held  by  indi¬ 
viduals  as  such,  external  things  may  be  acquired 
by  occupancy  or  contract,  yet  such  acquisition  is 
only  provisory  so  long  as  it  has  not  yet  obtained 
the  sanction  of  a  public  law.  Till  this  sanction  is 
reached,  the  condition  of  possession  is  not  deter¬ 
mined  by  any  public  distributive  justice,  nor  is 
it  secured  by  any  power  exercising  public  right. 

If  men  were  not  disposed  to  recognize  any  ac¬ 
quisition  at  all  as  rightful — even  in  a  provisional 
way — prior  to  entering  into  the  civil  state,  this 
state  of  society  would  itself  be  impossible.  For 
the  laws  regarding  the  mine  and  thine  in  the 
state  of  nature,  contain  formally  the  very  same 
thing  as  they  prescribe  in  the  civil  state,  when  it 
is  viewed  merely  according  to  rational  concep¬ 
tions:  only  that  in  the  forms  of  the  civil  state 
the  conditions  are  laid  down  under  which  the 
formal  prescriptions  of  the  state  of  nature  at¬ 
tain  realization  conformable  to  distributive  jus¬ 
tice.  Were  there,  then,  not  even  provisionally, 
an  external  meum  and  tuum  in  the  state  of  na¬ 
ture,  neither  would  there  be  any  juridical  duties 
in  relation  to  them;  and,  consequently,  there 
would  be  no  obligation  to  pass  out  of  that  state 
into  another. 

45.  The  Form  of  the  State  and  its  Three  Powers 

A  state  (civitas)  is  the  union  of  a  number  of 
men  under  juridical  laws.  These  laws,  as  such, 
are  to  be  regarded  as  necessary  a  priori — that  is, 
as  following  of  themselves  from  the  conceptions 
of  external  right  generally — and  not  as  merely 
established  by  statute.  The  form  of  the  state  is 
thus  involved  in  the  idea  of  the  state,  viewed  as 
it  ought  to  be  according  to  pure  principles  of 
right;  and  this  ideal  form  furnishes  the  normal 
criterion  of  every  real  union  that  constitutes  a 
commonwealth. 

Every  state  contains  in  itself  three  powers, 
the  universal  united  will  of  the  people  being  thus 
personified  in  a  political  triad.  These  are  the  leg¬ 
islative  power ,  the  executive  power ,  and  the  ju¬ 
diciary  power. — 1.  The  legislative  power  of  the 
sovereignty  in  the  state  is  embodied  in  the  per¬ 
son  of  the  lawgiver;  2.  the  executive  power  is 
embodied  in  the  person  of  the  ruler  who  admin¬ 
isters  the  Law;  and  3.  the  judiciary  power,  em¬ 
bodied  in  the  person  of  the  judge,  is  the  function 
of  assigning  every  one  what  is  his  own,  accord¬ 


ing  to  the  law  (potestas  legislatoria,  rectoria,  et 
judiciaria).  These  three  powers  may  be  com¬ 
pared  to  the  three  propositions  in  a  practical 
syllogism:  the  major  as  the  sumption  laying 
down  the  universal  law  of  a  will,  the  minor  pre¬ 
senting  the  command  applicable  to  an  action  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  law  as  the  principle  of  the  sub¬ 
sumption,  and  the  conclusion  containing  the 
sentence,  or  judgement  of  right,  in  the  particu¬ 
lar  case  under  consideration. 

46.  The  Legislative  Power  and  the  Members 
of  the  State 

The  legislative  power,  viewed  in  its  rational 
principle,  can  only  belong  to  the  united  will  of 
the  people.  For,  as  all  right  ought  to  proceed 
from  this  power,  it  is  necessary  that  its  laws 
should  be  unable  to  do  wrong  to  any  one  what¬ 
ever.  Now,  if  any  one  individual  determines  any¬ 
thing  in  the  state  in  contradistinction  to  an¬ 
other,  it  is  always  possible  that  he  may  perpe¬ 
trate  a  wrong  on  that  other;  but  this  is  never 
possible  when  all  determine  and  decree  what  is 
to  be  Law  to  themselves.  Volenti  non  fit  injuria. 
Hence  it  is  only  the  united  and  consenting  will 
of  all  the  people — in  so  far  as  each  of  them  de¬ 
termines  the  same  thing  about  all,  and  all  deter¬ 
mine  the  same  thing  about  each — that  ought  to 
have  the  power  of  enacting  law  in  the  state. 

The  members  of  a  civil  society  thus  united 
for  the  purpose  of  legislation,  and  thereby  con¬ 
stituting  a  state,  are  called  its  citizens;  and 
there  are  three  juridical  attributes  that  insepa¬ 
rably  belong  to  them  by  right.  These  are: — 1. 
constitutional  freedom,  as  the  right  of  every 
citizen  to  have  to  obey  no  other  law  than  that  to 
which  he  has  given  his  consent  or  approval;  2. 
civil  equality,  as  the  right  of  the  citizen  to  recog¬ 
nise  no  one  as  a  superior  among  the  people  in 
relation  to  himself,  except  in  so  far  as  such  a 
one  is  as  subject  to  his  moral  power  to  impose 
obligations,  as  that  other  has  power  to  impose 
obligations  upon  him;  and  3.  political  independ¬ 
ence,  as  the  right  to  owe  his  existence  and  con¬ 
tinuance  in  society  not  to  the  arbitrary  will  of 
another,  but  to  his  own  rights  and  powers  as  a 
member  of  the  commonwealth,  and,  consequent¬ 
ly,  the  possession  of  a  civil  personality,  which 
cannot  be  represented  by  any  other  than  him¬ 
self. 

The  capability  of  voting  by  possession  of  the 
suffrage  properly  constitutes  the  political  quali¬ 
fication  of  a  citizen  as  a  member  of  the  state. 
But  this,  again,  presupposes  the  independence  or 
self-sufficiency  of  the  individual  citizen  among 


OF  RIGHT 


the  people,  as  one  who  is  not  a  mere  incidental 
part  of  the  commonwealth,  but  a  member  of  it 
acting  of  his  own  will  in  community  with  others. 
The  last  of  the  three  qualities  involved  neces¬ 
sarily  constitutes  the  distinction  between  active 
and  passive  citizenship;  although  the  latter  con¬ 
ception  appears  to  stand  in  contradiction  to  the 
definition  of  a  citizen  as  such.  The  following 
examples  may  serve  to  remove  this  difficulty. 
The  apprentice  of  a  merchant  or  tradesman,  a 
servant  who  is  not  in  the  employ  of  the  state,  a 
minor  ( naturaliter  vel  civiliter),  all  women,  and, 
generally,  every  one  who  is  compelled  to  main¬ 
tain  himself  not  according  to  his  own  industry, 
but  as  it  is  arranged  by  others  (the  state  ex¬ 
cepted),  are  without  civil  personality,  and  their 
existence  is  only,  as  it  were,  incidentally  includ¬ 
ed  in  the  state.  The  woodcutter  whom  I  employ 
on  my  estate;  the  smith  in  India  who  carries  his 
hammer,  anvil,  and  bellows  into  the  houses 
where  he  is  engaged  to  work  in  iron,  as  distin¬ 
guished  from  the  European  carpenter  or  smith, 
who  can  offer  the  independent  products  of  his 
labour  as  wares  for  public  sale;  the  resident 
tutor  as  distinguished  from  the  schoolmaster; 
the  ploughman  as  distinguished  from  the  farmer 
and  such  like,  illustrate  the  distinction  in  ques¬ 
tion.  In  all  these  cases,  the  former  members  of 
the  contrast  are  distinguished  from  the  latter  by 
being  mere  subsidiaries  of  the  commonwealth 
and  not  active  independent  members  of  it,  be¬ 
cause  they  are  of  necessity  commanded  and  pro¬ 
tected  by  others,  and  consequently  possess  no 
political  self-sufficiency  in  themselves.  Such  de¬ 
pendence  on  the  will  of  others  and  the  conse¬ 
quent  inequality  are,  however,  not  inconsistent 
with  the  freedom  and  equality  of  the  individuals 
as  men  helping  to  constitute  the  people.  Much 
rather  is  it  the  case  that  it  is  only  under  such 
conditions  that  a  people  can  become  a  state  and 
enter  into  a  civil  constitution.  But  all  are  not 
equally  qualified  to  exercise  the  right  of  suffrage 
under  the  constitution,  and  to  be  full  citizens  of 
the  state,  and  not  mere  passive  subjects  under 
its  protection.  For,  although  they  are  entitled 
to  demand  to  be  treated  by  all  the  other  citizens 
according  to  laws  of  natural  freedom  and  equal¬ 
ity,  as  passive  parts  of  the  state,  it  does  not  fol¬ 
low  that  they  ought  themselves  to  have  the  right 
to  deal  with  the  state  as  active  members  of  it, 
to  reorganize  it,  or  to  take  action  by  way  of 
introducing  certain  laws.  All  they  have  a  right  in 
their  circumstances  to  claim  may  be  no  more 
than  that  whatever  be  the  mode  in  which  the 
positive  laws  are  enacted,  these  laws  must  not 
be  contrary  to  the  natural  laws  that  demand  the 


437 

freedom  of  all  the  people  and  the  equality  that 
is  conformable  thereto;  and  it  must  therefore 
be  made  possible  for  them  to  raise  themselves 
from  this  passive  condition  in  the  state  to  the 
condition  of  active  citizenship. 

47.  Dignities  in  the  State  and  the  Original 
Contract 

All  these  three  powers  in  the  state  are  digni¬ 
ties;  and,  as  necessarily  arising  out  of  the  idea 
of  the  state  and  essential  generally  to  the  foun¬ 
dation  of  its  constitution,  they  are  to  be  regard¬ 
ed  as  political  dignities.  They  imply  the  relation 
between  a  universal  sovereign  as  head  of  the 
state — which  according  to  the  laws  of  freedom 
can  be  none  other  than  the  people  itself  united 
into  a  nation — and  the  mass  of  the  individuals 
of  the  nation  as  subjects.  The  former  member 
of  the  relation  is  the  ruling  power,  whose  func¬ 
tion  is  to  govern  (imperans) ;  the  latter  is  the 
ruled  constituents  of  the  state,  whose  function 
is  to  obey  ( subditi ). 

The  act  by  which  a  people  is  represented  as 
constituting  itself  into  a  state,  is  termed  the 
original  contract.  This  is  properly  only  an  out¬ 
ward  mode  of  representing  the  idea  by  which 
the  rightfulness  of  the  process  of  organizing  the 
constitution  may  be  made  conceivable.  Accord¬ 
ing  to  this  representation,  all  and  each  of  the 
people  give  up  their  external  freedom  in  order 
to  receive  it  immediately  again  as  members  of  a 
commonwealth.  The  commonwealth  is  the  peo¬ 
ple  viewed  as  united  altogether  into  a  state.  And 
thus  it  is  not  to  be  said  that  the  individual  in 
the  state  has  sacrificed  a  part  of  his  inborn  ex¬ 
ternal  freedom  for  a  particular  purpose;  but  he 
has  abandoned  his  wild  lawless  freedom  wholly, 
in  order  to  find  all  his  proper  freedom  again  en¬ 
tire  and  undiminished,  but  in  the  form  of  a 
regulated  order  of  dependence,  that  is,  in  a  civil 
state  regulated  by  laws  of  right.  This  relation  of 
dependence  thus  arises  out  of  his  own  regulative 
law  giving  will. 

48.  Mutual  Relations  and  Characteristics  of  the 
Three  Powers 

The  three  powers  in  the  state,  as  regards  their 
relations  to  each  other,  are,  therefore:  (1)  co¬ 
ordinate  with  one  another  as  so  many  moral  per¬ 
sons,  and  the  one  is  thus  the  complement  of  the 
other  in  the  way  of  completing  the  constitution 
of  the  state;  (2)  they  are  likewise  subordinate 
to  one  another,  so  that  the  one  cannot  at  the 
same  time  usurp  the  function  of  the  other  by 
whose  side  it  moves,  each  having  its  own  prin¬ 
ciple  and  maintaining  its  authority  in  a  particu- 


THE  SCIENCE 


438 

lar  person,  but  under  the  condition  of  the  will 
of  a  superior;  and  further,  (3)  by  the  union  of 
both  these  relations,  they  assign  distributive^ 
to  every  subject  in  the  state  his  own  rights. 

Considered  as  to  their  respective  dignity,  the 
three  powers  may  be  thus  described.  The  will  of 
the  sovereign  legislator,  in  respect  of  what  con¬ 
stitutes  the  external  mine  and  thine,  is  to  be  re¬ 
garded  as  irreprehensible ;  the  executive  func¬ 
tion  of  the  supreme  ruler  is  to  be  regarded  as 
irresistible;  and  the  judicial  sentence  of  the 
supreme  judge  is  to  be  regarded  as  irreversible, 
being  beyond  appeal. 

49.  Distinct  Functions  of  the  Three  Powers . 

Autonomy  of  the  State 

1.  The  executive  power  belongs  to  the  gover¬ 
nor  or  regent  of  the  state,  whether  it  assumes 
the  form  of  a  moral  or  individual  person,  as  the 
king  or  prince  {rex,  princeps).  This  executive 
authority,  as  the  supreme  agent  of  the  state,  ap¬ 
points  the  magistrates,  and  prescribes  the  rules 
to  the  people,  in  accordance  with  which  indi¬ 
viduals  may  acquire  anything  or  maintain  what 
is  their  own  conformably  to  the  law,  each  case 
being  brought  under  its  application.  Regarded  as 
a  moral  person,  this  executive  authority  consti¬ 
tutes  the  government.  The  orders  issued  by  the 
government  to  the  people  and  the  magistrates, 
as  well  as  to  the  higher  ministerial  administra¬ 
tors  of  the  state  ( gubernatio ),  are  rescripts  or 
decrees,  and  not  laws;  for  they  terminate  in  the 
decision  of  particular  cases,  and  are  given  forth 
as  unchangeable.  A  government  acting  as  an 
executive,  and  at  the  same  time  laying  down  the 
law  as  the  legislative  power,  would  be  a  despotic 
government,  and  would  have  to  be  contradis¬ 
tinguished  from  a  patriotic  government.  A  pa¬ 
triotic  government,  again,  is  to  be  distinguished 
from  a  paternal  government  {regimen  paternale) 
which  is  the  most  despotic  government  of  all, 
the  citizens  being  dealt  with  by  it  as  mere  chil¬ 
dren.  A  patriotic  government,  however,  is  one  in 
which  the  state,  while  dealing  with  the  subjects 
as  if  they  were  members  of  a  family,  still  treats 
them  likewise  as  citizens,  and  according  to  laws 
that  recognize  their  independence,  each  individ¬ 
ual  possessing  himself  and  not  being  dependent 
on  the  absolute  will  of  another  beside  him  or 
above  him. 

2.  The  legislative  authority  ought  not  at  the 
same  time  to  be  the  executive  or  governor;  for 
the  governor,  as  administrator,  should  stand  un¬ 
der  the  authority  of  the  law.  and  is  bound  by  it 
under  the  supreme  control  of  the  legislator.  The 
legislative  authority  may  therefore  deprive  the 


governor  of  his  power,  depose  him,  or  reform 
his  administration,  but  not  punish  him.  This  is 
the  proper  and  only  meaning  of  the  common 
saying  in  England,  “The  King — as  the  supreme 
executive  power — can  do  no  wrong.”  For  any 
such  application  of  punishment  would  necessa¬ 
rily  be  an  act  of  that  very  executive  power  to 
which  the  supreme  right  to  compel  according  to 
law  pertains,  and  which  would  itself  be  thus  sub¬ 
jected  to  coercion;  which  is  self-contradictory. 

3.  Further,  neither  the  legislative  power  nor 
the  executive  power  ought  to  exercise  the  judi¬ 
cial  function,  but  only  appoint  judges  as  magis¬ 
trates.  It  is  the  people  who  ought  to  judge  them¬ 
selves.  through  those  of  the  citizens  who  are 
elected  by  free  choice  as  their  representatives 
for  this  purpose,  and  even  specially  for  every 
process  or  cause.  For  the  judicial  sentence  is  a 
special  act  of  public  distributive  justice  per¬ 
formed  by  a  judge  or  court  as  a  constitutional 
administrator  of  the  law.  to  a  subject  as  one  of 
the  people.  Such  an  act  is  not  invested  inher¬ 
ently  with  the  power  to  determine  and  assign  to 
any  one  what  is  his.  Every  individual  among 
the  people  being  merely  passive  in  this  relation 
to  the  supreme  power,  either  the  executive  or 
the  legislative  authority  might  do  him  wrong  in 
their  determinations  in  cases  of  dispute  regard¬ 
ing  the  property  of  individuals.  It  would  not  be 
the  people  themselves  who  thus  determined,  or 
who  pronounced  the  judgements  of  “guilty”  or 
“not  guilty”  regarding  their  fellow-citizens.  For 
it  is  to  the  determination  of  this  issue  in  a  cause 
that  the  court  has  to  apply  the  law;  and  it  is  by 
means  of  the  executive  authority,  that  the  judge 
holds  power  to  assign  to  every  one  his  own. 
Hence  it  is  only  the  people  that  properly  can 
judge  in  a  cause — although  indirectly — by  rep¬ 
resentatives  elected  and  deputed  by  themselves, 
as  in  a  jury.  It  would  even  be  beneath  the  dig¬ 
nity  of  the  sovereign  head  of  the  state  to  play 
the  judge;  for  this  would  be  to  put  himself  into 
a  position  in  which  it  would  be  possible  to  do 
wrong,  and  thus  to  subject  himself  to  the  de¬ 
mand  for  an  appeal  to  a  still  higher  power  {a 
rege  male  informato  ad  regem  melius  inf orman - 
dumj. 

It  is  by  the  co-operation  of  these  three  powers 
— the  legislative,  the  executive,  and  the  judicial 
— that  the  state  realizes  its  autonomy.  This 
autonomy  consists  in  its  organizing,  forming, 
and  maintaining  itself  in  accordance  with  the 
laws  of  freedom.  In  their  union  the  welfare  of 
the  state  is  realized.  Salus  reipublicae  suprema 
lex.1  By  this  is  not  to  be  understood  merely  the 

1  [‘‘The  health  of  the  state  is  the  highest  law.”] 


OF  RIGHT 


individual  well-being  and  happiness  of  the  citi¬ 
zens  of  the  state;  for — as  Rousseau  asserts — 
this  end  may  perhaps  be  more  agreeably  and 
more  desirably  attained  in  the  state  of  nature, 
or  even  under  a  despotic  government.  But  the 
welfare  of  the  state,  as  its  own  highest  good, 
signifies  that  condition  in  which  the  greatest 
harmony  is  attained  between  its  constitution 
and  the  principles  of  right — a  condition  of  the 
state  which  reason  by  a  categorical  imperative 
makes  it  obligatory  upon  us  to  strive  after. 

Constitutional  and  Juridical  Consequences  aris¬ 
ing  from  the  Nature  of  the  Civil  Union 

A.  Right  of  the  Supreme  Power;  Treason; 

Dethronement;  Revolution ;  Reform 

The  origin  of  the  supreme  power  is  practically 
inscrutable  by  the  people  who  are  placed  under 
itSs  authority.  In  other  words,  the  subject  need 
not  reason  too  curiously  in  regard  to  its  origin 
in  the  practical  relation,  as  if  the  right  of  the 
obedience  due  to  it  were  to  be  doubted  ( jus  con - 
troversum).  For  as  the  people,  in  order  to  be 
able  to  abjudicate  with  a  title  of  right  regarding 
the  supreme  power  in  the  state,  must  be  regard¬ 
ed  as  already  united  under  one  common  legisla¬ 
tive  will,  it  cannot  judge  otherwise  than  as  the 
present  supreme  head  of  the  state  (summus  im- 
perans)  wills.  The  question  has  been  raised  as  to 
whether  an'actual  contract  of  subjection  ( pac¬ 
tum  subjectionis  civilis)  originally  preceded  the 
civil  government  as  a  fact;  or  whether  the  pow¬ 
er  arose  first,  and  the  law  only  followed  after¬ 
wards,  or  may  have  followed  in  this  order.  But 
such  questions,  as  regards  the  people  already 
actually  living  under  the  civil  law,  are  either  en¬ 
tirely  aimless,  or  even  fraught  with  subtle  dan¬ 
ger  to  the  state.  For,  should  the  subject,  after 
having  dug  down  to  the  ultimate  origin  of  the 
state,  rise  in  opposition  to  the  present  ruling  au¬ 
thority,  he  would  expose  himself  as  a  citizen, 
according  to  the  law  and  with  full  right,  to  be 
punished,  destroyed,  or  outlawed.  A  law  which 
is  so  holy  and  inviolable  that  it  is  practically  a 
crime  even  to  cast  doubt  upon  it,  or  to  suspend 
its  operation  for  a  moment,  is  represented  of  it¬ 
self  as  necessarily  derived  from  some  supreme, 
unblameable  lawgiver.  And  this  is  the  meaning 
of  the  maxim,  “All  authority  is  from  God”, 
which  proposition  does  not  express  the  historical 
foundation  of  the  civil  constitution,  but  an  ideal 
principle  of  the  practical  reason.  It  may  be 
otherwise  rendered  thus:  “It  is  a  duty  to  obey 
the  law  of  the  existing  legislative  power,  be  its 
origin  what  it  may.” 


439 

Hence  it  follows,  that  the  supreme  power  in 
the  state  has  only  rights,  and  no  (compulsory) 
duties  towards  the  subject.  Further,  if  the  ruler 
or  regent,  as  the  organ  of  the  supreme  power, 
proceeds  in  violation  of  the  laws,  as  in  imposing 
taxes,  recruiting  soldiers,  and  so  on,  contrary  to 
the  law  of  equality  in  the  distribution  of  the 
political  burdens,  the  subject  may  oppose  com¬ 
plaints  and  objections  ( gravamina )  to  this  injus¬ 
tice,  but  not  active  resistance. 

There  cannot  even  be  an  Article  contained  in 
the  political  constitution  that  would  make  it 
possible  for  a  power  in  the  state,  in  case  of  the 
transgression  of  the  constitutional  laws  by  the 
supreme  authority,  to  resist  or  even  to  restrict 
it  in  so  doing.  For,  whoever  would  restrict  the 
supreme  power  of  the  state  must  have  more,  or 
at  least  equal,  power  as  compared  with  the  pow¬ 
er  that  is  so  restricted;  and  if  competent  to  com¬ 
mand  the  subjects  to  resist,  such  a  one  would 
also  have  to  be  able  to  protect  them,  and  if  he  is 
to  be  considered  capable  of  judging  what  is  right 
in  every  case,  he  may  also  publicly  order  resist¬ 
ance.  But  such  a  one,  and  not  the  actual  author¬ 
ity,  would  then  be  the  supreme  power;  which  is 
contradictory.  The  supreme  sovereign  power, 
then,  in  proceeding  by  a  minister  who  is  at  the 
same  time  the  ruler  of  the  state,  consequently 
becomes  despotic;  and  the  expedient  of  giving 
the  people  to  imagine — when  they  have  properly 
only  legislative  influence — that  they  act  by  their 
deputies  by  way  of  limiting  the  sovereign  au¬ 
thority,  cannot  so  mask  and  disguise  the  actual 
despotism  of  such  a  government  that  it  will  not 
appear  in  the  measures  and  means  adopted  by 
the  minister  to  carry  out  his  function.  The  peo¬ 
ple,  while  represented  by  their  deputies  in  par¬ 
liament,  under  such  conditions,  may  have  in 
these  warrantors  of  their  freedom  and  rights, 
persons  who  are  keenly  interested  on  their  own 
account  and  their  families,  and  who  look  to  such 
a  minister  for  the  benefit  of  his  influence  in  the 
army,  navy,  and  public  offices.  And  hence,  in¬ 
stead  of  offering  resistance  to  the  undue  preten¬ 
sions  of  the  government — whose  public  declara¬ 
tions  ought  to  carry  a  prior  accord  on  the  part  of 
the  people,  which,  however,  cannot  be  allowed 
in  peace,  they  are  rather  always  ready  to 
play  into  the  hands  of  the  government.  Hence 
the  so-called  limited  political  constitution,  as  a 
constitution  of  the  internal  rights  of  the  state, 
is  an  unreality;  and  instead  of  being  consistent 
with  right,  it  is  only  a  principle  of  expediency. 
And  its  aim  is  not  so  much  to  throw  all  possible 
obstacles  in  the  way  of  a  powerful  violator  of 
popular  rights  by  his  arbitrary  influence  upon 


THE  SCIENCE 


the  government,  as  rather  to  cloak  it  over  under 
the  illusion  of  a  right  of  opposition  conceded  to 
the  people. 

Resistance  on  the  part  of  the  people  to  the 
supreme  legislative  power  of  the  state  is  in  no 
case  legitimate;  for  it  is  only  by  submission  to 
the  universal  legislative  will,  that  a  condition  of 
law  and  order  is  possible.  Hence  there  is  no 
right  of  sedition,  and  still  less  of  rebellion,  be¬ 
longing  to  the  people.  And  least  of  all,  when  the 
supreme  power  is  embodied  in  an  individual 
monarch,  is  there  any  justification,  under  the 
pretext  of  his  abuse  of  power,  for  seizing  his  per¬ 
son  or  taking  away  his  life  ( monarchomachis - 
mus  sub  specie  tyrannicidii) .  The  slightest  at¬ 
tempt  of  this  kind  is  high  treason  ( proditio  emi- 
nens) ;  and  a  traitor  of  this  sort  who  aims  at  the 
overthrow  of  his  country  may  be  punished,  as  a 
political  parricide,  even  with  death.  It  is  the 
duty  of  the  people  to  bear  any  abuse  of  the  su¬ 
preme  power,  even  then  though  it  should  be  con¬ 
sidered  to  be  unbearable.  And  the  reason  is  that 
any  resistance  of  the  highest  legislative  author¬ 
ity  can  never  but  be  contrary  to  the  law,  and 
must  even  be  regarded  as  tending  to  destroy  the 
whole  legal  constitution.  In  order  to  be  entitled 
to  offer  such  resistance,  a  public  law  would  be 
required  to  permit  it.  But  the  supreme  legisla¬ 
tion  would  by  such  a  law  cease  to  be  supreme, 
and  the  people  as  subjects  would  be  made  sov¬ 
ereign  over  that  to  which  they  are  subject; 
which  is  a  contradiction.  And  the  contradiction 
becomes  more  apparent  when  the  question  is 
put:  “Who  is  to  be  the  judge  in  a  controversy 
between  the  people  and  the  sovereign?”  For  the 
people  and  the  sovereign  are  to  be  constitution¬ 
ally  or  juridically  regarded  as  two  different 
moral  persons;  but  the  question  shows  that  the 
people  would  then  have  to  be  the  judge  in  their 
own  cause. 

The  dethronement  of  a  monarch  may  be  also 
conceived  as  a  voluntary  abdication  of  the 
crown,  and  a  resignation  of  his  power  into  the 
hands  of  the  people;  or  it  might  be  a  deliberate 
surrender  of  these  without  any  assault  on  the 
royal  person,  in  order  that  the  monarch  may  be 
relegated  into  private  life.  But,  however  it  hap¬ 
pen,  forcible  compulsion  of  it,  on  the  part  of  the 
people,  cannot  be  justified  under  the  pretext  of 
a  right  of  necessity  ( casus  necessitatis) ;  and 
least  of  all  can  the  slightest  right  be  shown  for 
punishing  the  sovereign  on  the  ground  of  pre¬ 
vious  maladministration.  For  all  that  has  been 
already  done  in  the  quality  of  a  sovereign  must 
be  regarded  as  done  outwardly  by  right;  and, 


considered  as  the  source  of  the  laws,  the  sover¬ 
eign  himself  can  do  no  wrong.  Of  all  the  abomi¬ 
nations  in  the  overthrow  of  a  state  by  revolution, 
even  the  murder  or  assassination  of  the  monarch 
is  not  the  worst.  For  that  may  be  done  by  the 
people  out  of  fear,  lest,  if  he  is  allowed  to  live, 
he  may  again  acquire  power  and  inflict  punish¬ 
ment  upon  them;  and  so  it  may  be  done,  not  as 
an  act  of  punitive  justice,  but  merely  from  re¬ 
gard  to  self-preservation.  It  is  the  formal  execu¬ 
tion  of  a  monarch  that  horrifies  a  soul  filled  with 
ideas  of  human  right;  and  this  feeling  occurs 
again  and  again  as  often  as  the  mind  realizes  the 
scenes  that  terminated  the  fate  of  Charles  I  or 
Louis  XVI.  Now  how  is  this  feeling  to  be  ex¬ 
plained?  It  is  not  a  mere  aesthetic  feeling,  arising 
from  the  working  of  the  imagination,  nor  from 
sympathy,  produced  by  fancying  ourselves  in 
the  place  of  the  sufferer.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  a 
moral  feeling  arising  from  the  entire  subversion 
of  all  our  notions  of  right.  Regicide,  in  short,  is 
regarded  as  a  crime  which  always  remains  such 
and  can  never  be  expiated  ( crimen  immortale , 
inexpiabile) ;  and  it  appears  to  resemble  that  sin 
which  the  theologians  declare  can  neither  be  for¬ 
given  in  this  world  nor  in  the  next.  The  explana¬ 
tion  of  this  phenomenon  in  the  human  mind  ap¬ 
pears  to  be  furnished  by  the  following  reflec¬ 
tions  upon  it;  and  they  even  shed  some  light 
upon  the  principles  of  political  right. 

Every  transgression  of  a  law  only  can  and 
must  be  explained  as  arising  from  a  maxim  of 
the  transgressor  making  such  wrong-doing  his 
rule  of  action;  for  were  it  not  committed  by  him 
as  a  free  being,  it  could  not  be  imputed  to  him. 
But  it  is  absolutely  impossible  to  explain  how 
any  rational  individual  forms  such  a  maxim 
against  the  clear  prohibition  of  the  law-giving 
reason;  for  it  is  only  events  which  happen  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  mechanical  laws  of  nature  that 
are  capable  of  explanation.  Now  a  transgressor 
or  criminal  may  commit  his  wrong-doing  either 
according  to  the  maxim  of  a  rule  supposed  to  be 
valid  objectively  and  universally,  or  only  as  an 
exception  from  the  rule  by  dispensing  with  its 
obligation  for  the  occasion.  In  the  latter  case, 
he  only  diverges  from  the  law,  although  inten¬ 
tionally.  He  may,  at  the  same  time,  abhor  his 
own  transgression,  and  without  formally  re¬ 
nouncing  his  obedience  to  the  law  only  wish  to 
avoid  it.  In  the  former  case,  however,  he  rejects 
the  authority  of  the  law  itself,  the  validity  of 
which,  however,  he  cannot  repudiate  before  his 
own  reason,  even  while  he  makes  it  his  rule  to 
act  against  it.  His  maxim  is,  therefore,  not  mere¬ 
ly  defective  as  being  negatively  contrary  to  the 


OF  RIGHT 


law,  but  it  is  even  positively  illegal,  as  being 
diametrically  contrary  and  in  hostile  opposition 
to  it.  So  far  as  we  can  see  into  and  understand 
the  relation,  it  would  appear  as  if  it  were  im¬ 
possible  for  men  to  commit  wrongs  and  crimes 
of  a  wholly  useless  form  of  wickedness,  and  yet 
the  idea  of  such  extreme  perversity  cannot  be 
overlooked  in  a  system  of  moral  philosophy. 

There  is  thus  a  feeling  of  horror  at  the 
thought  of  the  formal  execution  of  a  monarch 
by  his  people.  And  the  reason  it  is  that,  where¬ 
as  an  act  of  assassination  must  be  considered 
as  only  an  exception  from  the  rule  which  has 
been  constituted  a  maxim,  such  an  execution 
must  be  regarded  as  a  complete  perversion  of 
the  principles  that  should  regulate  the  relation 
between  a  sovereign  and  his  people.  For  it 
makes  the  people,  who  owe  their  constitutional 
existence  to  the  legislation  that  issued  from  the 
sovereign,  to  be  the  ruler  over  him.  Hence  mere 
violence  is  thus  elevated  with  bold  brow,  and 
as  it  were  by  principle,  above  the  holiest  right; 
and.  appearing  like  an  abyss  to  swallow  up 
everything  without  recall,  it  seems  like  suicide 
committed  by  the  state  upon  itself  and  a  crime 
that  is  capable  of  no  atonement.  There  is  there¬ 
fore  reason  to  assume  that  the  consent  that  is 
accorded  to  such  executions  is  not  really  based 
upon  a  supposed  principle  of  right,  but  only 
springs  from  fear  of  the  vengeance  that  would 
be  taken  upon  the  people  were  the  same  power 
to  revive  again  in  the  state.  And  hence  it  may 
be  held  that  the  formalities  accompanying  them 
have  only  been  put  forward  in  order  to  give 
these  deeds  a  look  of  punishment  from  the  ac¬ 
companiment  of  a  judicial  process ,  such  as 
could  not  go  along  with  a  mere  murder  or  assas¬ 
sination.  But  such  a  cloaking  of  the  deed  en¬ 
tirely  fails  of  its  purpose,  because  this  preten¬ 
sion  on  the  part  of  the  people  is  even  worse  than 
murder  itself,  as  it  implies  a  principle  which 
would  necessarily  make  the  restoration  of  a 
state,  when  once  overthrown,  an  impossibility. 

An  alteration  of  the  still  defective  constitu¬ 
tion  of  the  state  may  sometimes  be  quite  neces¬ 
sary.  But  all  such  changes  ought  only  to  proceed 
from  the  sovereign  power  in  the  way  of  reform , 
and  are  not  to  be  brought  about  by  the  people 
in  the  way  of  revolution;  and  when  they  take 
place,  they  should  only  effect  the  executive , 
and  not  the  legislative ,  power.  A  political  con¬ 
stitution  which  is  so  modified  that  the  people 
by  their  representatives  in  parliament  can  legal¬ 
ly  resist  the  executive  power,  and  its  represen¬ 
tative  minister,  is  called  a  limited  constitution. 
Yet  even  under  such  a  constitution  there  is  no 


441 

right  of  active  resistance,  as  by  an  arbitrary 
combination  of  the  people  to  coerce  the  govern¬ 
ment  into  a  certain  active  procedure;  for  this 
would  be  to  assume  to  perform  an  act  of  the 
executive  itself.  All  that  can  rightly  be  allowed, 
is  only  a  negative  resistance,  amounting  to  an 
act  of  refusal  on  the  part  of  the  people  to  con¬ 
cede  all  the  demands  which  the  executive  may 
deem  it  necessary  to  make  in  behoof  of  the 
political  administration.  And  if  this  right  were 
never  exercised,  it  would  be  a  sure  sign  that 
the  people  were  corrupted,  their  representatives 
venal,  the  supreme  head  of  the  government  des¬ 
potic,  and  his  ministers  practically  betrayers  of 
the  people. 

Further,  when  on  the  success  of  a  revolution 
a  new  constitution  has  been  founded,  the  unlaw¬ 
fulness  of  its  beginning  and  of  its  institution 
cannot  release  the  subjects  from  the  obligation 
of  adapting  themselves,  as  good  citizens,  to  the 
new  order  of  things;  and  they  are  not  entitled 
to  refuse  honourably  to  obey  the  authority  that 
has  thus  attained  the  power  in  the  state.  A  de¬ 
throned  monarch,  who  has  survived  such  a  rev¬ 
olution,  is  not  to  be  called  to  account  on  the 
ground  of  his  former  administration;  and  still 
less  may  he  be  punished  for  it,  when  withdraw¬ 
ing  into  the  private  life  of  a  citizen  he  prefers  his 
own  quiet  and  the  peace  of  the  state  to  the  un¬ 
certainty  of  exile,  with  the  intention  of  main¬ 
taining  his  claims  for  restoration  at  all  hazards, 
and  pushing  these  either  by  secret  counter-rev¬ 
olution  or  by  the  assistance  of  other  powers. 
However,  if  he  prefers  to  follow  the  latter 
course,  his  rights  remain,  because  the  rebellion 
that  drove  him  from  his  position  was  inherently 
unjust.  But  the  question  then  emerges  as  to 
whether  other  powers  have  the  right  to  form 
themselves  into  an  alliance  in  behalf  of  such  a 
dethroned  monarch  merely  in  order  not  to  leave 
the  crime  committed  by  the  people  unavenged, 
or  to  do  away  with  it  as  a  scandal  to  all  the 
states;  and  whether  they  are  therefore  justified 
and  called  upon  to  restore  by  force  to  another 
state  a  formerly  existing  constitution  that  has 
been  removed  by  a  revolution.  The  discussion 
of  this  question,  however,  does  not  belong  to 
this  department  of  public  right,  but  to  the  fol¬ 
lowing  section,  concerning  the  right  of  nations. 

B.  Land  Rights.  Secular  and  Church  Lands. 

Rights  of  Taxation;  Finance;  Police; 

Inspection 

Is  the  sovereign,  viewed  as  embodying  the 
legislative  power,  to  be  regarded  as  the  supreme 
proprietor  of  the  soil,  or  only  as  the  highest 


THE  SCIENCE 


442 

ruler  of  the  people  by  the  laws?  As  the  soil  is 
the  supreme  condition  under  which  it  is  alone 
possible  to  have  external  things  as  one’s  own, 
its  possible  possession  and  use  constitute  the 
first  acquirable  basis  of  external  right.  Hence 
it  is  that  all  such  rights  must  be  derived  from 
the  sovereign  as  overlord  and  paramount  su¬ 
perior  of  the  soil,  or,  as  it  may  be  better  put, 
as  the  supreme  proprietor  of  the  land  ( dominus 
territorii).  The  people,  as  forming  the  mass  of 
the  subjects,  belong  to  the  sovereign  as  a  peo¬ 
ple;  not  in  the  sense  of  his  being  their  propri¬ 
etor  in  the  way  of  real  right,  but  as  their  su¬ 
preme  commander  or  chief  in  the  way  of  per¬ 
sonal  right.  This  supreme  proprietorship,  how¬ 
ever,  is  only  an  idea  of  the  civil  constitution, 
objectified  to  represent,  in  accordance  with  ju¬ 
ridical  conceptions,  the  necessary  union  of  the 
private  property  of  all  the  people  under  a  pub¬ 
lic  universal  possessor.  The  relation  is  so  repre¬ 
sented  in  order  that  it  may  form  a  basis  for  the 
determination  of  particular  rights  in  property. 
It  does  not  proceed,  therefore,  upon  the  prin¬ 
ciple  of  mere  aggregation ,  which  advances  em¬ 
pirically  from  the  parts  to  the  whole,  but  from 
the  necessary  formal  principle  of  a  division  of 
the  soil  according  to  conceptions  of  right.  In 
accordance  with  this  principle,  the  supreme 
universal  proprietor  cannot  have  any  private 
property  in  any  part  of  the  soil;  for  otherwise 
he  would  make  himself  a  private  person.  Private 
property  in  the  soil  belongs  only  to  the  people, 
taken  distributively  and  not  collectively;  from 
which  condition,  however,  a  nomadic  people 
must  be  excepted  as  having  no  private  property 
at  all  in  the  soil.  The  supreme  proprietor  ac¬ 
cordingly  ought  not  to  hold  private  estates , 
either  for  private  use  or  for  the  support  of  the 
court.  For,  as  it  would  depend  upon  his  own 
pleasure  how  far  these  should  extend,  the  state 
would  be  in  danger  of  seeing  all  property  in  the 
land  taken  into  the  hands  of  the  government, 
and  all  the  subjects  treated  as  bondsmen  of  the 
soil  ( glebae  adscripti).  As  possessors  only  of 
what  was  the  private  property  of  another,  they 
might  thus  be  deprived  of  all  freedom  and  re¬ 
garded  as  serfs  or  slaves.  Of  the  supreme  pro¬ 
prietor  of  the  land,  it  may  be  said  that  he  pos¬ 
sesses  nothing  as  his  own,  except  himself ;  for  if 
he  possessed  things  in  the  state  alongside  of 
others,  dispute  and  litigation  would  be  possible 
with  these  others  regarding  those  things,  and 
there  would  be  no  independent  judge  to  settle 
the  cause.  But  it  may  also  be  said  that  he  pos¬ 
sesses  everything;  for  he  has  the  supreme  right 
of  sovereignty  over  the  whole  people,  to  whom 


all  external  things  severally  (divisim)  belong; 
and  as  such  he  assigns  distributively  to  every 
one  what  is  to  be  his. 

Hence  there  cannot  be  any  corporation  in  the 
state,  nor  any  class  or  order,  that  as  proprietors 
can  transmit  the  land  for  a  sole  exclusive  use  to 
the  following  generations  for  all  time  (ad  infi¬ 
nitum ),  according  to  certain  fixed  statutes.  The 
state  may  annul  and  abrogate  all  such  statutes 
at  any  time,  only  under  the  condition  of  indem¬ 
nifying  survivors  for  their  interests.  The  order 
of  knights ,  constituting  the  nobility  regarded  as 
a  mere  rank  or  class  of  specially  titled  individ¬ 
uals,  as  well  as  the  order  of  the  clergy,  called 
the  church,  are  both  subject  to  this  relation. 
They  can  never  be  entitled  by  any  hereditary 
privileges  with  which  they  may  be  favoured,  to 
acquire  an  absolute  property  in  the  soil  trans¬ 
missible  to  their  successors.  They  can  only  ac¬ 
quire  the  use  of  such  property  for  the  time  be¬ 
ing.  If  public  opinion  has  ceased,  on  account  of 
other  arrangements,  to  impel  the  state  to  pro¬ 
tect  itself  from  negligence  in  the  national  de¬ 
fence  by  appeal  to  the  military  honour  of  the 
knightly  order,  the  estates  granted  on  that  con¬ 
dition  may  be  recalled.  And,  in  like  manner,  the 
church  lands  or  spiritualities  may  be  reclaimed 
by  the  state  without  scruple,  if  public  opinion 
has  ceased  to  impel  the  members  of  the  state 
to  maintain  masses  for  the  souls  of  the  dead, 
prayers  for  the  living,  and  a  multitude  of  clergy, 
as  means  to  protect  themselves  from  eternal 
fire.  But  in  both  cases,  the  condition  of  indem¬ 
nifying  existing  interests  must  be  observed. 
Those  who  in  this  connection  fall  under  the 
movement  of  reform  are  not  entitled  to  com¬ 
plain  that  their  property  is  taken  from  them; 
for  the  foundation  of  their  previous  possession 
lay  only  in  the  opinion  of  the  people,  and  it  can 
be  valid  only  so  long  as  this  opinion  lasts.  As 
soon  as  this  public  opinion  in  favour  of  such  in¬ 
stitutions  dies  out,  or  is  even  extinguished  in 
the  judgement  of  those  who  have  the  greatest 
claim  by  their  acknowledged  merit  to  lead  and 
represent  it,  the  putative  proprietorship  in  ques¬ 
tion  must  cease,  as  if  by  a  public  appeal  made 
regarding  it  to  the  state  (a  rege  male  injormato 
ad  regem  melius  informandum). 

On  this  primarily  acquired  supreme  propri¬ 
etorship  in  the  land  rests  the  right  of  the  sov¬ 
ereign,  as  universal  proprietor  of  the  country, 
to  assess  the  private  proprietors  of  the  soil, 
and  to  demand  taxes,  excise,  and  dues,  or  the 
performance  of  service  to  the  state  such  as  may 
be  required  in  war.  But  this  is  to  be  done  so 
that  it  is  actually  the  people  that  assess  them- 


OF  RIGHT 


selves,  this  being  the  only  mode  of  proceeding 
according  to  laws  of  right.  This  may  be  effected 
through  the  medium  of  the  body  of  deputies 
who  represent  the  people.  It  is  also  permissible, 
in  circumstances  in  which  the  state  is  in  immi¬ 
nent  danger,  to  proceed  by  a  forced  loan,  as  a 
right  vested  in  the  sovereign,  although  this  may 
be  a  divergence  from  the  existing  law. 

Upon  this  principle  is  also  founded  the  right 
of  administering  the  national  economy,  includ¬ 
ing  the  finance  and  the  police.  The  police  has 
specially  to  care  for  the  public  safety ,  conven¬ 
ience ,  and  decency.  As  regards  the  last  of  these 
— the  feeling  or  negative  taste  for  public  pro¬ 
priety — it  is  important  that  it  be  not  deadened 
by  such  influences  as  begging,  disorderly  noises, 
offensive  smells,  public  prostitution  ( Venus  vul - 
givaga ),  or  other  offences  against  the  moral 
sense,  as  it  greatly  facilitates  the  government 
in  the  task  of  regulating  the  life  of  the  people 
by  law. 

For  the  preservation  of  the  state  there  fur¬ 
ther  belongs  to  it  a  right  of  inspection  ( jus  in¬ 
spections ),  which  entitles  the  public  authority 
to  see  that  no  secret  society,  political  or  reli¬ 
gious,  exists  among  the  people  that  can  exert  a 
prejudicial  influence  upon  the  public  weal.  Ac¬ 
cordingly,  when  it  is  required  by  the  police,  no 
such  secret  society  may  refuse  to  lay  open  its 
constitution.  But  the  visitation  and  search  of 
private  houses  by  the  police  can  only  be  justi¬ 
fied  in  a  case  of  necessity;  and  in  every  particu¬ 
lar  instance,  it  must  be  authorized  by  a  higher 
authority. 

C.  Relief  of  the  Poor.  Foundling  Hospitals. 

The  Church 

The  sovereign,  as  undertaker  of  the  duty  of 
the  people,  has  the  right  to  tax  them  for  pur¬ 
poses  essentially  connected  with  their  own  pres¬ 
ervation.  Such  are,  in  particular,  the  relief  of 
the  poor,  foundling  asylums,  and  ecclesiastical 
establishments,  otherwise  designated  charitable 
or  pious  foundations. 

i.  The  people  have  in  fact  united  themselves 
by  their  common  will  into  a  society,  which  has 
to  be  perpetually  maintained;  and  for  this  pur¬ 
pose  they  have  subjected  themselves  to  the  in¬ 
ternal  power  of  the  state,  in  order  to  preserve 
the  members  of  this  society  even  when  they  are 
not  able  to  support  themselves.  By  the  funda¬ 
mental  principle  of  the  state,  the  government  is 
justified  and  entitled  to  compel  those  who  are 
able,  to  furnish  the  means  necessary  to  preserve 
those  who  are  not  themselves  capable  of  pro¬ 
viding  for  the  most  necessary  wants  of  nature. 


443 

For  the  existence  of  persons  with  property  in 
the  state  implies  their  submission  under  it  for 
protection  and  the  provision  by  the  state  of 
what  is  necessary  for  their  existence;  and  ac¬ 
cordingly  the  state  founds  a  right  upon  an  ob¬ 
ligation  on  their  part  to  contribute  of  their 
means  for  the  preservation  of  their  fellow- 
citizens.  This  may  be  carried  out  by  taxing  the 
property  or  the  commercial  industry  of  the 
citizens,  or  by  establishing  funds  and  drawing 
interest  from  them,  not  for  the  wants  of  the 
state  as  such,  which  is  rich,  but  for  those  of 
the  people.  And  this  is  not  to  be  done  merely 
by  voluntary  contributions,  but  by  compulsory 
exactions  as  state-burdens,  for  we  are  here  con¬ 
sidering  only  the  right  of  the  state  in  relation 
to  the  people.  Among  the  voluntary  modes  of 
raising  such  contributions,  lotteries  ought  not 
to  be  allowed,  because  they  increase  the  num¬ 
ber  of  those  who  are  poor,  and  involve  danger 
to  the  public  property.  It  may  be  asked  whether 
the  relief  of  the  poor  ought  to  be  administered 
out  of  current  contributions ,  so  that  every  age 
should  maintain  its  own  poor;  or  whether  this 
were  better  done  by  means  of  permanent  funds 
and  charitable  institutions,  such  as  widows’ 
homes,  hospitals,  etc.?  And  if  the  former  meth¬ 
od  is  the  better,  it  may  also  be  considered 
whether  the  means  necessary  are  to  be  raised  by 
a  legal  assessment  rather  than  by  begging,  which 
is  generally  nigh  akin  to  robbing.  The  former 
method  must  in  reality  be  regarded  as  the  only 
one  that  is  conformable  to  the  right  of  the  state, 
which  cannot  withdraw  its  connection  from  any 
one  who  has  to  live.  For  a  legal  current  pro¬ 
vision  does  not  make  the  profession  of  poverty 
a  means  of  gain  for  the  indolent,  as  is  to  be 
feared  is  the  case  with  pious  foundations  when 
they  grow  with  the  number  of  the  poor;  nor  can 
it  be  charged  with  being  an  unjust  or  unright¬ 
eous  burden  imposed  by  the  government  on  the 
people. 

2.  The  state  has  also  a  right  to  impose  upon 
the  people  the  duty  of  preserving  children  ex¬ 
posed  from  want  or  shame,  and  who  would  oth¬ 
erwise  perish;  for  it  cannot  knowingly  allow  this 
increase  of  its  power  to  be  destroyed,  however 
unwelcome  in  some  respects  it  may  be.  But  it  is 
a  difficult  question  to  determine  how  this  may 
most  justly  be  carried  out.  It  might  be  consid¬ 
ered  whether  it  would  not  be  right  to  exact  con¬ 
tributions  for  this  purpose  from  the  unmarried 
persons  of  both  sexes  who  are  possessed  of 
means,  as  being  in  part  responsible  for  the  evil; 
and  further,  whether  the  end  in  view  would  be 
best  carried  out  by  foundling  hospitals,  or  in 


THE  SCIENCE 


what  other  way  consistent  with  right.  But  this  is 
a  problem  of  which  no  solution  has  yet  been 
offered  that  does  not  in  some  measure  offend 
against  right  or  morality. 

3.  The  church  is  here  regarded  as  an  ecclesi¬ 
astical  establishment  merely,  and  as  such  it 
must  be  carefully  distinguished  from  religion, 
which  as  an  internal  mode  of  feeling  lies  wholly 
beyond  the  sphere  of  the  action  of  the  civil 
power.  Viewed  as  an  institution  for  public  wor¬ 
ship  founded  for  the  people — to  whose  opinion 
or  conviction  it  owes  its  origin — the  church  es¬ 
tablishment  responds  to  a  real  want  in  the  state. 
This  is  the  need  felt  by  the  people  to  regard 
themselves  as  also  subjects  of  a  Supreme  In¬ 
visible  Power  to  which  they  must  pay  homage, 
and  which  may  often  be  brought  into  a  very  un¬ 
desirable  collision  with  the  civil  power.  The 
state  has  therefore  a  right  in  this  relation;  but 
it  is  not  to  be  regarded  as  the  right  of  constitu¬ 
tional  legislation  in  the  church,  so  as  to  organize 
it  as  may  seem  most  advantageous  for  itself,  or 
to  prescribe  and  command  its  faith  and  ritual 
forms  of  worship  ( ritus );  for  all  this  must  be 
left  entirely  to  the  teachers  and  rulers  which 
the  church  has  chosen  for  itself.  The  function 
of  the  state  in  this  connection,  only  includes  the 
negative  right  of  regulating  the  influence  of  these 
public  teachers  upon  the  visible  political  com¬ 
monwealth,  that  it  may  not  be  prejudicial  to  the 
public  peace  and  tranquillity.  Consequently  the 
state  has  to  take  measures,  on  occasion  of  any 
internal  conflict  in  the  church,  or  on  occasion  of 
any  collision  of  the  several  churches  with  each 
other,  that  civil  concord  is  not  endangered;  and 
this  right  falls  within  the  province  of  the  police. 
It  is  beneath  the  dignity  of  the  supreme  power 
to  interpose  in  determining  what  particular  faith 
the  church  shall  profess,  or  to  decree  that  a  cer¬ 
tain  faith  shall  be  unalterably  held,  and  that  the 
church  may  not  reform  itself.  For  in  doing  so, 
the  supreme  power  would  be  mixing  itself  up 
in  a  scholastic  wrangle,  on  a  footing  of  equality 
with  its  subjects;  the  monarch  would  be  making 
himself  a  priest;  and  the  churchmen  might  even 
reproach  the  supreme  power  with  understanding 
nothing  about  matters  of  faith.  Especially  would 
this  hold  in  respect  of  any  prohibition  of  in¬ 
ternal  reform  in  the  church;  for  what  the  people 
as  a  whole  cannot  determine  upon  for  them¬ 
selves  cannot  be  determined  for  the  people  by 
the  legislator.  But  no  people  can  ever  rationally 
determine  that  they  will  never  advance  farther 
in  their  insight  into  matters  of  faith,  or  resolve 
that  they  will  never  reform  the  institutions  of 
the  church;  because  this  would  be  opposed  to 


the  humanity  in  their  own  persons  and  to  their 
highest  rights.  And  therefore  the  supreme  power 
cannot  of  itself  resolve  and  decree  in  these  mat¬ 
ters  for  the  people.  As  regards  the  cost  of  main¬ 
taining  the  ecclesiastical  establishment,  for  sim¬ 
ilar  reasons  this  must  be  derived  not  from  the 
public  funds  of  the  state,  but  from  the  section 
of  the  people  who  profess  the  particular  faith  of 
the  church;  and  thus  only  ought  it  to  fall  as  a 
burden  on  the  community. 

D.  The  Right  of  Assigning  Offices  and  Dignities 
in  the  State 

The  right  of  the  supreme  authority  in  the 
state  also  includes: 

1.  The  distribution  of  offices ,  as  public  and 
paid  employments; 

2.  The  conferring  of  dignities,  as  unpaid  dis¬ 
tinctions  of  rank,  founded  merely  on  honour, 
but  establishing  a  gradation  of  higher  and  lower 
orders  in  the  political  scale;  the  latter,  although 
free  in  themselves,  being  under  obligation  de¬ 
termined  by  the  public  law  to  obey  the  former 
so  far  as  they  are  also  entitled  to  command; 

3.  Besides  these  relatively  beneficent  rights, 
the  supreme  power  in  the  state  is  also  invested 
with  the  right  of  administering  punishment. 

As  regards  civil  offices,  the  question  arises  as 
to  whether  the  sovereign  has  the  right,  after  be¬ 
stowing  an  office  on  an  individual,  to  take  it 
again  away  at  his  mere  pleasure,  without  any 
crime  having  been  committed  by  the  holder  of 
the  office.  I  say,  “No”  For  what  the  united  will 
of  the  people  would  never  resolve,  regarding 
their  civil  officers,  cannot  (constitutionally)  be 
determined  by  the  sovereign  regarding  them. 
The  people  have  to  bear  the  cost  incurred  by 
the  appointment  of  an  official,  and  undoubtedly 
it  must  be  their  will  that  any  one  in  office  should 
be  completely  competent  for  its  duties.  But 
such  competency  can  only  be  acquired  by  a  long 
preparation  and  training,  and  this  process 
would  necessarily  occupy  the  time  that  would 
be  required  for  acquiring  the  means  of  support 
by  a  different  occupation.  Arbitrary  and  fre¬ 
quent  changes  would  therefore,  as  a  rule,  have 
the  effect  of  filling  offices  with  functionaries  who 
have  not  acquired  the  skill  required  for  their 
duties,  and  whose  judgements  had  not  attained 
maturity  by  practice.  All  this  is  contrary  to  the 
purpose  of  the  state.  And  besides  it  is  requisite 
in  the  interest  of  the  people  that  it  should  be 
possible  for  every  individual  to  rise  from  a 
lower  office  to  the  higher  offices,  as  these  latter 
would  otherwise  fall  into  incompetent  hands, 
and  that  competent  officials  generally  should 


OF  RIGHT 


have  some  guarantee  of  life-long  provision. 

Civil  dignities  include  not  only  such  as  are 
connected  with  a  public  office,  but  also  those 
which  make  the  possessors  of  them,  without  any 
accompanying  services  to  the  state,  members  of 
a  higher  class  or  rank.  The  latter  constitute  the 
nobility ,  whose  members  are  distinguished  from 
the  common  citizens  who  form  the  mass  of  the 
people.  The  rank  of  the  nobility  is  inherited  by 
male  descendants;  and  these  again  communi¬ 
cate  it  to  wives  who  are  not  nobly  born.  Female 
descendants  of  noble  families,  however,  do  not 
communicate  their  rank  to  husbands  who  are 
not  of  noble  birth,  but  they  descend  themselves 
into  the  common  civil  status  of  the  people.  This 
being  so,  the  question  then  emerges  as  to  wheth¬ 
er  the  sovereign  has  the  right  to  found  a  heredi¬ 
tary  rank  and  class,  intermediate  between  him¬ 
self  and  the  other  citizens?  The  import  of  this 
question  does  not  turn  on  whether  it  is  con¬ 
formable  to  the  prudence  of  the  sovereign,  from 
regard  to  his  own  and  the  people’s  interests,  to 
have  such  an  institution;  but  whether  it  is  in 
accordance  with  the  right  of  the  people  that 
they  should  have  a  class  of  persons  above  them, 
who,  while  being  subjects  like  themselves,  are 
yet  born  as  their  commanders,  or  at  least  as 
privileged  superiors?  The  answer  to  this  ques¬ 
tion,  as  in  previous  instances,  is  to  be  derived 
from  the  principle  that  “what  the  people,  as 
constituting  the  whole  mass  of  the  subjects, 
could  not  determine  regarding  themselves  and 
their  associated  citizens,  cannot  be  constitu¬ 
tionally  determined  by  the  sovereign  regarding 
the  people.’’  Now  a  hereditary  nobility  is  a 
rank  which  takes  precedence  of  merit  and  is 
hoped  for  without  any  good  reason — a  thing  of 
the  imagination  without  genuine  reality.  For  if 
an  ancestor  had  merit,  he  could  not  transmit  it 
to  his  posterity,  but  they  must  always  acquire  it 
for  themselves.  Nature  has  in  fact  not  so  ar¬ 
ranged  that  the  talent  and  will  which  give  rise 
to  merit  in  the  state,  are  hereditary.  And  be¬ 
cause  it  cannot  be  supposed  of  any  individual 
that  he  will  throw  away  his  freedom,  it  is  im¬ 
possible  that  the  common  will  of  all  the  people 
should  agree  to  such  a  groundless  prerogative, 
and  hence  the  sovereign  cannot  make  it  valid. 
It  may  happen,  however,  that  such  an  anomaly 
as  that  of  subjects  who  would  be  more  than 
citizens,  in  the  manner  of  born  officials,  or  he¬ 
reditary  professors,  has  slipped  into  the  mecha¬ 
nism  of  government  in  olden  times,  as  in  the 
case  of  the  feudal  system,  which  was  almost  en¬ 
tirely  organized  with  reference  to  war.  Under 
such  circumstances,  the  state  cannot  deal  oth¬ 


445 

erwise  with  this  error  of  a  wrongly  instituted 
rank  in  its  midst,  than  by  the  remedy  of  a  grad¬ 
ual  extinction  through  hereditary  positions  be¬ 
ing  left  unfilled  as  they  fall  vacant.  The  state 
has  therefore  the  right  provisorily  to  let  a  dig¬ 
nity  in  title  continue,  until  the  public  opinion 
matures  on  the  subject.  And  this  will  thus  pass 
from  the  threefold  division  into  sovereign, 
nobles,  and  people,  to  the  twofold  and  only  nat¬ 
ural  division  into  sovereign  and  people. 

No  individual  in  the  state  can  indeed  be  en¬ 
tirely  without  dignity;  for  he  has  at  least  that 
of  being  a  citizen,  except  when  he  has  lost  his 
civil  status  by  a  crime.  As  a  criminal  he  is  still 
maintained  in  life,  but  he  is  made  the  mere  in¬ 
strument  of  the  will  of  another,  whether  it  be 
the  state  or  a  particular  citizen.  In  the  latter 
position,  in  which  he  could  only  be  placed  by  a 
juridical  judgement,  he  would  practically  be¬ 
come  a  slave,  and  would  belong  as  property 
{dominium)  to  another,  who  would  be  not  mere¬ 
ly  his  master  ( herus )  but  his  owner  {dominus). 
Such  an  owner  would  be  entitled  to  exchange  or 
alienate  him  as  a  thing,  to  use  him  at  will  except 
for  shameful  purposes,  and  to  dispose  of  his 
powers ,  but  not  of  his  life  and  members.  No 
one  can  bind  himself  to  such  a  condition  of  de¬ 
pendence,  as  he  would  thereby  cease  to  be  a 
person,  and  it  is  only  as  a  person  that  he  can 
make  a  contract.  It  may,  however,  appear  that 
one  man  may  bind  himself  to  another  by  a  con¬ 
tract  of  hire,  to  discharge  a  certain  service  that 
is  permissible  in  its  kind,  but  is  left  entirely 
undetermined  as  regards  its  measure  or  amount; 
and  that  as  receiving  wages  or  board  or  protec¬ 
tion  in  return,  he  thus  becomes  only  a  servant 
subject  to  the  will  of  a  master  ( subditus )  and 
not  a  slave  ( servus ).  But  this  is  an  illusion.  For 
if  masters  are  entitled  to  use  the  powers  of  such 
subjects  at  will,  they  may  exhaust  these  powers 
— as  has  been  done  in  the  case  of  Negroes  in  the 
Sugar  Island — and  they  may  thus  reduce  their 
servants  to  despair  and  death.  But  this  would 
imply  that  they  had  actually  given  themselves 
away  to  their  masters  as  property;  which,  in  the 
case  of  persons,  is  impossible.  A  person  can, 
therefore,  only  contract  to  perform  work  that 
is  defined  both  in  quality  and  quantity,  either 
as  a  day-labourer  or  as  a  domiciled  subject.  In 
the  latter  case  he  may  enter  into  a  contract  of 
lease  for  the  use  of  the  land  of  a  superior,  giv¬ 
ing  a  definite  rent  or  annual  return  for  its  utili¬ 
zation  by  himself,  or  he  may  contract  for  his 
service  as  a  labourer  upon  the  land.  But  he  does 
not  thereby  make  himself  a  slave,  or  a  bonds¬ 
man,  or  a  serf  attached  to  the  soil  {glebae  ad- 


THE  SCIENCE 


scriptus ),  as  he  would  thus  divest  himself  of 
his  personality;  he  can  only  enter  into  a  tem¬ 
porary  or  at  most  a  heritable  lease.  And  even  if 
by  committing  a  crime  he  has  personally  become 
subjected  to  another,  this  subject-condition 
does  not  become  hereditary;  for  he  has  only 
brought  it  upon  himself  by  his  own  wrongdoing. 
Neither  can  one  who  has  been  begotten  by  a 
slave  be  claimed  as  property  on  the  ground  of 
the  cost  of  his  rearing,  because  such  rearing  is 
an  absolute  duty  naturally  incumbent  upon  pa¬ 
rents;  and  in  case  the  parents  be  slaves,  it  de¬ 
volves  upon  their  masters  or  owners,  who,  in 
undertaking  the  possession  of  such  subjects, 
have  also  made  themselves  responsible  for  the 
performance  of  their  duties. 

E.  The  Right  of  Punishing  and  of  Pardoning 
i.  The  Right  of  Punishing 

The  right  of  administering  punishment  is  the 
right  of  the  sovereign  as  the  supreme  power  to 
inflict  pain  upon  a  subject  on  account  of  a  crime 
committed  by  him.  The  head  of  the  state  can¬ 
not  therefore  be  punished;  but  his  supremacy 
may  be  withdrawn  from  him.  Any  transgression 
of  the  public  law  which  makes  him  who  com¬ 
mits  it  incapable  of  being  a  citizen,  constitutes 
a  crime ,  either  simply  as  a  private  crime 
{crimen),  or  also  as  a  public  crime  ( crimen 
publicum).  Private  crimes  are  dealt  with  by  a 
civil  court;  public  crimes  by  a  criminal  court. 
Embezzlement  or  speculation  of  money  or  goods 
entrusted  in  trade,  fraud  in  purchase  or  sale,  if 
done  before  the  eyes  of  the  party  who  suffers, 
are  private  crimes.  On  the  other  hand,  coining 
false  money  or  forging  bills  of  exchange,  theft, 
robbery,  etc.,  are  public  crimes,  because  the 
commonwealth,  and  not  merely  some  particular 
individual,  is  endangered  thereby.  Such  crimes 
may  be  divided  into  those  of  a  base  character 
( indolis  abjectae)  and  those  of  a  violent  char¬ 
acter  {indolis  violentiae). 

Judicial  or  juridical  punishment  {poena  fo- 
rensis)  is  to  be  distinguished  from  natural  pun¬ 
ishment  {poena  naturalis ),  in  which  crime  as 
vice  punishes  itself,  and  does  not  as  such  come 
within  the  cognizance  of  the  legislator.  Juridical 
punishment  can  never  be  administered  merely 
as  a  means  for  promoting  another  good  either 
with  regard  to  the  criminal  himself  or  to  civil 
society,  but  must  in  all  cases  be  imposed  only 
because  the  individual  on  whom  it  is  inflicted 
has  committed  a  crime.  For  one  man  ought 
never  to  be  dealt  with  merely  as  a  means  sub¬ 
servient  to  the  purpose  of  another,  nor  be  mixed 
up  with  the  subjects  of  real  right.  Against  such 


treatment  his  inborn  personality  has  a  right  to 
protect  him,  even  although  he  may  be  con¬ 
demned  to  lose  his  civil  personality.  He  must 
first  be  found  guilty  and  punishable ,  before 
there  can  be  any  thought  of  drawing  from  his 
punishment  any  benefit  for  himself  or  his  fel¬ 
low-citizens.  The  penal  law  is  a  categorical  im¬ 
perative;  and  woe  to  him  who  creeps  through 
the  serpent-windings  of  utilitarianism  to  dis¬ 
cover  some  advantage  that  may  discharge  him 
from  the  justice  of  punishment,  or  even  from 
the  due  measure  of  it,  according  to  the  Pharisaic 
maxim:  “It  is  better  that  one  man  should  die 
than  that  the  whole  people  should  perish.”  For 
if  justice  and  righteousness  perish,  human  life 
would  no  longer  have  any  value  in*  the  world. 
What,  then,  is  to  be  said  of  such  a  proposal  as 
to  keep  a  criminal  alive  who  has  been  con¬ 
demned  to  death,  on  his  being  given  to  under¬ 
stand  that,  if  he  agreed  to  certain  dangerous 
experiments  being  performed  upon  him,  he 
would  be  allowed  to  survive  if  he  came  happily 
through  them?  It  is  argued  that  physicians 
might  thus  obtain  new  information  that  would 
be  of  value  to  the  commonweal.  But  a  court  of 
justice  would  repudiate  with  scorn  any  pro¬ 
posal  of  this  kind  if  made  to  it  by  the  medical 
faculty;  for  justice  would  cease  to  be  justice, 
if  it  were  bartered  away  for  any  consideration 
whatever. 

But  what  is  the  mode  and  measure  of  punish¬ 
ment  which  public  justice  takes  as  its  principle 
and  standard?  It  is  just  the  principle  of  equal¬ 
ity,  by  which  the  pointer  of  the  scale  of  justice 
is  made  to  incline  no  more  to  the  one  side  than 
the  other.  It  may  be  rendered  by  saying  that  the 
undeserved  evil  which  any  one  commits  on  an¬ 
other  is  to  be  regarded  as  perpetrated  on  him¬ 
self.  Hence  it  may  be  said:  “If  you  slander  an¬ 
other,  you  slander  yourself;  if  you  steal  from 
another,  you  steal  from  yourself;  if  you  strike 
another,  you  strike  yourself;  if  you  kill  another, 
you  kill  yourself.”  This  is  the  right  of  retalia¬ 
tion  {jus  talionis);  and,  properly  understood, 
it  is  the  only  principle  which  in  regulating  a 
public  court,  as  distinguished  from  mere  private 
judgement,  can  definitely  assign  both  the  quality 
and  the  quantity  of  a  just  penalty.  All  other 
standards  are  wavering  and  uncertain;  and  on 
account  of  other  considerations  involved  in 
them,  they  contain  no  principle  conformable  to 
the  sentence  of  pure  and  strict  justice.  It  may 
appear,  however,  that  difference  of  social  status 
would  not  admit  the  application  of  the  principle 
of  retaliation,  which  is  that  of  “like  with  like.” 
But  although  the  application  may  not  in  all 


OF  RIGHT 


cases  be  possible  according  to  the  letter,  yet  as 
regards  the  effect  it  may  always  be  attained  in 
practice,  by  due  regard  being  given  to  the  dis¬ 
position  and  sentiment  of  the  parties  in  the 
higher  social  sphere.  Thus  a  pecuniary  penalty 
on  account  of  a  verbal  injury  may  have  no  di¬ 
rect  proportion  to  the  injustice  of  slander;  for 
one  who  is  wealthy  may  be  able  to  indulge  him¬ 
self  in  this  offence  for  his  own  gratification.  Yet 
the  attack  committed  on  the  honour  of  the 
party  aggrieved  may  have  its  equivalent  in  the 
pain  inflicted  upon  the  pride  of  the  aggressor, 
especially  if  he  is  condemned  by  the  judgement 
of  the  court,  not  only  to  retract  and  apologize, 
but  to  submit  to  some  meaner  ordeal,  as  kissing 
the  hand  of  the  injured  person.  In  like  manner, 
if  a  man  of  the  highest  rank  has  violently  as¬ 
saulted  an  innocent  citizen  of  the  lower  orders, 
he  may  be  condemned  not  only  to  apologize  but 
to  undergo  a  solitary  and  painful  imprisonment, 
whereby,  in  addition  to  the  discomfort  endured, 
the  vanity  of  the  offender  would  be  painfully 
affected,  and  the  very  shame  of  his  position 
would  constitute  an  adequate  retaliation  after 
the  principle  of  “like  with  like.”  But  how  then 
would  we  render  the  statement:  “If  you  steal 
from  another,  you  steal  from  yourself?”  In  this 
way,  that  whoever  steals  anything  makes  the 
property  of  all  insecure;  he  therefore  robs  him¬ 
self  of  all  security  in  property,  according  to  the 
right  of  retaliation.  Such  a  one  has  nothing,  and 
can  acquire  nothing,  but  he  has  the  will  to  live; 
and  this  is  only  possible  by  others  supporting 
him.  But  as  the  state  should  not  do  this  gratui¬ 
tously,  he  must  for  this  purpose  yield  his  pow¬ 
ers  to  the  state  to  be  used  in  penal  labour;  and 
thus  he  falls  for  a  time,  or  it  may  be  for  life,  into 
a  condition  of  slavery.  But  whoever  has  com¬ 
mitted  murder,  must  die.  There  is,  in  this  case, 
no  juridical  substitute  or  surrogate,  that  can  be 
given  or  taken  for  the  satisfaction  of  justice. 
There  is  no  likeness  or  proportion  between  life, 
however  painful,  and  death;  and  therefore  there 
is  no  equality  between  the  crime  of  murder  and 
the  retaliation  of  it  but  what  is  judicially  ac¬ 
complished  by  the  execution  of  the  criminal.  His 
death,  however,  must  be  kept  free  from  all  mal¬ 
treatment  that  would  make  the  humanity  suffer¬ 
ing  in  his  person  loathsome  or  abominable.  Even 
if  a  civil  society  resolved  to  dissolve  itself  with 
the  consent  of  all  its  members — as  might  be 
supposed  in  the  case  of  a  people  inhabiting  an 
island  resolving  to  separate  and  scatter  them¬ 
selves  throughout  the  whole  world — the  last 
murderer  lying  in  the  prison  ought  to  be  exe¬ 
cuted  before  the  resolution  w?as  carried  out.  This 


447 

ought  to  be  done  in  order  that  every  one  may 
realize  the  desert  of  his  deeds,  and  that  blood- 
guiltiness  may  not  remain  upon  the  people;  for 
otherwise  they  might  all  be  regarded  as  partici¬ 
pators  in  the  murder  as  a  public  violation  of 
justice. 

The  equalization  of  punishment  with  crime 
is  therefore  only  possible  by  the  cognition  of 
the  judge  extending  even  to  the  penalty  of  death, 
according  to  the  right  of  retaliation.  This  is 
manifest  from  the  fact  that  it  is  only  thus  that 
a  sentence  can  be  pronounced  over  all  criminals 
proportionate  to  their  internal  wickedness ;  as 
may  be  seen  by  considering  the  case  when  the 
punishment  of  death  has  to  be  inflicted,  not  on 
account  of  a  murder,  but  on  account  of  a  polit¬ 
ical  crime  that  can  only  be  punished  capitally. 
A  hypothetical  case,  founded  on  history,  will  il¬ 
lustrate  this.  In  the  last  Scottish  rebellion  there 
were  various  participators  in  it — such  as  Bal- 
merino  and  others — who  believed  that  in  taking 
part  in  the  rebellion  they  were  only  discharging 
their  duty  to  the  house  of  Stuart;  but  there 
were  also  others  who  were  animated  only  by 
private  motives  and  interests.  Now,  suppose 
that  the  judgement  of  the  supreme  court  re¬ 
garding  them  had  been  this:  that  every  one 
should  have  liberty  to  choose  between  the  pun¬ 
ishment  of  death  or  penal  servitude  for  life.  In 
view  of  such  an  alternative,  I  say  that  the  man 
of  honour  would  choose  death,  and  the  knave 
would  choose  servitude.  This  would  be  the  effect 
of  their  human  nature  as  it  is;  for  the  honour¬ 
able  man  values  his  honour  more  highly  than 
even  life  itself,  whereas  a  knave  regards  a  life, 
although  covered  with  shame,  as  better  in  his 
eyes  than  not  to  be.1  The  former  is,  without 
gainsaying,  less  guilty  than  the  other;  and  they 
can  only  be  proportionately  punished  by  death 
being  inflicted  equally  upon  them  both;  yet  to 
the  one  it  is  a  mild  punishment  when  his  nobler 
temperament  is  taken  into  account,  whereas  it 
is  a  hard  punishment  to  the  other  in  view  of  his 
baser  temperament.  But,  on  the  other  hand, 
were  they  all  equally  condemned  to  penal  servi¬ 
tude  for  life,  the  honourable  man  would  be  too 
severely  punished,  while  the  other,  on  account 
of  his  baseness  of  nature,  would  be  too  mildly 
punished.  In  the  judgement  to  be  pronounced 
over  a  number  of  criminals  united  in  such  a 
conspiracy,  the  best  equalizer  of  punishment 
and  crime  in  the  form  of  public  justice  is  death. 
And  besides  all  this,  it  has  never  been  heard  of 
that  a  criminal  condemned  to  death  on  account 

i  Animam  praeferre  pudori,  Juvenal.  [ Satirae ,  viii. 
83.  “To  prefer  life  to  reputation.”] 


THE  SCIENCE 


448 

of  a  murder  has  complained  that  the  sentence 
inflicted  on  him  more  than  was  right  and  just; 
and  any  one  would  treat  him  with  scorn  if  he 
expressed  himself  to  this  effect  against  it.  Other¬ 
wise  it  would  be  necessary  to  admit  that,  al¬ 
though  wrong  and  injustice  are  not  done  to  the 
criminal  by  the  law,  yet  the  legislative  power  is 
not  entitled  to  administer  this  mode  of  punish¬ 
ment;  and  if  it  did  so,  it  would  be  in  contradic¬ 
tion  with  itself. 

However  many  they  may  be  who  have  com¬ 
mitted  a  murder,  or  have  even  commanded  it, 
or  acted  as  art  and  part  in  it,  they  ought  all  to 
suffer  death;  for  so  justice  wills  it,  in  accord¬ 
ance  with  the  idea  of  the  juridical  power,  as 
founded  on  the  universal  laws  of  reason.  But 
the  number  of  the  accomplices  ( correi )  in  such 
a  deed  might  happen  to  be  so  great  that  the 
state,  in  resolving  to  be  without  such  criminals, 
would  be  in  danger  of  soon  also  being  deprived 
of  subjects.  But  it  will  not  thus  dissolve  itself, 
neither  must  it  return  to  the  much  worse  con¬ 
dition  of  nature,  in  which  there  would  be  no 
external  justice.  Nor,  above  all,  should  it  deaden 
the  sensibilities  of  the  people  by  the  spectacle 
of  justice  being  exhibited  in  the  mere  carnage  of 
a  slaughtering  bench.  In  such  circumstances  the 
sovereign  must  always  be  allowed  to  have  it  in 
his  power  to  take  the  part  of  the  judge  upon 
himself  as  a  case  of  necessity — and  to  deliver  a 
judgement  which,  instead  of  the  penalty  of 
death,  shall  assign  some  other  punishment  to 
the  criminals  and  thereby  preserve  a  multitude 
of  the  people.  The  penalty  of  deportation  is 
relevant  in  this  connection.  Such  a  form  of 
judgement  cannot  be  carried  out  according  to  a 
public  law,  but  only  by  an  authoritative  act 
of  the  royal  prerogative,  and  it  may  only  be 
applied  as  an  act  of  grace  in  individual  cases. 

Against  these  doctrines,  the  Marquis  Bec- 
caria  has  given  forth  a  different  view.  Moved 
by  the  compassionate  sentimentality  of  a  hu¬ 
mane  feeling,  he  has  asserted  that  all  capital 
punishment  is  wrong  in  itself  and  unjust.  He  has 
put  forward  this  view  on  the  ground  that  the 
penalty  of  death  could  not  be  contained  in  the 
original  civil  contract;  for,  in  that  case,  every 
one  of  the  people  would  have  had  to  consent  to 
lose  his  life  if  he  murdered  any  of  his  fellow- 
citizens.  But,  it  is  argued,  such  a  consent  is  im¬ 
possible,  because  no  one  can  thus  dispose  of  his 
own  life.  All  this  is  mere  sophistry  and  perver¬ 
sion  of  right.  No  one  undergoes  punishment  be¬ 
cause  he  has  willed  to  be  punished,  but  because 
he  has  willed  a  punishable  action;  for  it  is  in 
fact  no  punishment  when  any  one  experiences 


what  he  wills,  and  it  is  impossible  for  any  one  to 
will  to  be  punished.  To  say,  “I  will  to  be  pun¬ 
ished,  if  I  murder  any  one,”  can  mean  nothing 
more  than,  “I  submit  myself  along  with  all  the 
other  citizens  to  the  laws”;  and  if  there  are 
any  criminals  among  the  people,  these  laws  will 
include  penal  laws.  The  individual  who,  as  a  co¬ 
legislator,  enacts  penal  law  cannot  possibly  be 
the  same  person  who,  as  a  subject,  is  punished 
according  to  the  law;  for,  qua  criminal,  he  can¬ 
not  possibly  be  regarded  as  having  a  voice  in  the 
legislation,  the  legislator  being  rationally  viewed 
as  just  and  holy.  If  any  one,  then,  enact  a  penal 
law  against  himself  as  a  criminal,  it  must  be  the 
pure  juridically  law-giving  reason  ( homo  nou- 
rnenon ),  which  subjects  him  as  one  capable  of 
crime,  and  consequently  as  another  person 
(homo  phenomenon ),  along  with  all  the  others 
in  the  civil  union,  to  this  penal  law.  In  other 
words,  it  is  not  the  people  taken  distributively, 
but  the  tribunal  of  public  justice,  as  distinct 
from  the  criminal,  that  prescribes  capital  pun¬ 
ishment;  and  it  is  not  to  be  viewed  as  if  the 
social  contract  contained  the  promise  of  all  the 
individuals  to  allow  themselves  to  be  punished, 
thus  disposing  of  themselves  and  their  lives.  For 
if  the  right  to  punish  must  be  grounded  upon 
a  promise  of  the  wTrongdoer,  w’hereby  he  is  to  be 
regarded  as  being  willing  to  be  punished,  it 
ought  also  to  be  left  to  him  to  find  himself  de¬ 
serving  of  the  punishment;  and  the  criminal 
would  thus  be  his  own  judge.  The  chief  error 
(irponov  \pev5os)  of  this  sophistry  consists  in 
regarding  the  judgement  of  the  criminal  him¬ 
self,  necessarily  determined  by  his  reason,  that 
he  is  under  obligation  to  undergo  the  loss  of  his 
life,  as  a  judgement  that  must  be  grounded  on 
a  resolution  of  his  will  to  take  it  away  himself; 
and  thus  the  execution  of  the  right  in  question 
is  represented  as  united  in  one  and  the  same 
person  with  the  adjudication  of  the  right. 

There  are,  however,  tw’o  crimes  worthy  of 
death,  in  respect  of  which  it  still  remains  doubt¬ 
ful  whether  the  legislature  have  the  right  to 
deal  with  them  capitally.  It  is  the  sentiment  of 
honour  that  induces  their  perpetration.  The 
one  originates  in  a  regard  for  womanly  honour, 
the  other  in  a  regard  for  military  honour;  and 
in  both  cases  there  is  a  genuine  feeling  of  hon¬ 
our  incumbent  on  the  individuals  as  a  duty.  The 
former  is  the  crime  of  maternal  infanticide  ( in - 
janticidium  maternale) ;  the  latter  is  the  crime 
of  killing  a  fellow-soldier  in  a  duel  ( commili - 
tonicidium).  Now  legislation  cannot  take  away 
the  shame  of  an  illegitimate  birth,  nor  wipe  off 
the  stain  attaching  from  a  suspicion  of  coward- 


OF  RIGHT 


ice,  to  an  officer  who  does  not  resist  an  act  that 
would  bring  him  into  contempt,  by  an  effort  of 
his  own  that  is  superior  to  the  fear  of  death. 
Hence  it  appears  that,  in  such  circumstances, 
the  individuals  concerned  are  remitted  to  the 
state  of  nature;  and  their  acts  in  both  cases 
must  be  called  homicide ,  and  not  murder ,  which 
involves  evil  intent  ( homicidium  dolosum).  In 
all  instances  the  acts  are  undoubtedly  punish¬ 
able;  but  they  cannot  be  punished  by  the  su¬ 
preme  power  with  death.  An  illegitimate  child 
comes  into  the  world  outside  of  the  law  which 
properly  regulates  marriage,  and  it  is  thus  bom 
beyond  the  pale  or  constitutional  protection  of 
the  law.  Such  a  child  is  introduced,  as  it  were, 
like  prohibited  goods,  into  the  commonwealth, 
and  as  it  has  no  legal  right  to  existence  in 
this  way,  its  destruction  might  also  be  ignored; 
nor  can  the  shame  of  the  mother,  when  her  un¬ 
married  confinement  is  known,  be  removed  by 
any  legal  ordinance.  A  subordinate  officer,  again, 
on  whom  an  insult  is  inflicted,  sees  himself  com¬ 
pelled  by  the  public  opinion  of  his  associates  to 
obtain  satisfaction;  and,  as  in  the  state  of  na¬ 
ture,  the  punishment  of  the  offender  can  only  be 
effected  by  a  duel,  in  which  his  own  life  is  ex¬ 
posed  to  danger,  and  not  by  means  of  the  law  in 
a  court  of  justice.  The  duel  is  therefore  adopted 
as  the  means  of  demonstrating  his  courage  as 
that  characteristic  upon  which  the  honour  of 
his  profession  essentially  rests ;  and  this  is  done 
even  if  it  should  issue  in  the  killing  of  his  ad¬ 
versary.  But  as  such  a  result  takes  place  pub¬ 
licly  and  under  the  consent  of  both  parties,  al¬ 
though  it  may  be  done  unwillingly,  it  cannot 
properly  be  called  murder  ( homicidium  dolo¬ 
sum).  What  then  is  the  right  in  both  cases 
as  relating  to  criminal  justice?  Penal  justice  is 
here  in  fact  brought  into  great  straits,  having 
apparently  either  to  declare  the  notion  of  hon¬ 
our,  which  is  certainly  no  mere  fancy  here,  to 
be  nothing  in  the  eye  of  the  law,  or  to  exempt 
the  crime  from  its  due  punishment;  and  thus  it 
would  become  either  remiss  or  cruel.  The  knot 
thus  tied  is  to  be  resolved  in  the  following  way. 
The  categorical  imperative  of  penal  justice,  that 
the  killing  of  any  person  contrary  to  the  law 
must  be  punished  with  death,  remains  in  force; 
but  the  legislation  itself  and  the  civil  constitu¬ 
tion  generally,  so  long  as  they  are  still  barbarous 
and  incomplete,  are  at  fault.  And  this  is  the  rea¬ 
son  why  the  subjective  motive-principles  of  hon¬ 
our  among  the  people  do  not  coincide  with  the 
standards  which  are  objectively  conformable 
to  another  purpose;  so  that  the  public  justice 
issuing  from  the  state  becomes  injustice  rela¬ 


449 

tively  to  that  which  is  upheld  among  the  people 
themselves. 

II.  The  Right  of  Pardoning 

The  right  of  pardoning  ( jus  aggratiandi ), 
viewed  in  relation  to  the  criminal,  is  the  right 
of  mitigating  or  entirely  remitting  his  punish¬ 
ment.  On  the  side  of  the  sovereign  this  is  the 
most  delicate  of  all  rights,  as  it  may  be  exercised 
so  as  to  set  forth  the  splendour  of  his  dignity, 
and  yet  so  as  to  do  a  great  wrong  by  it.  It  ought 
not  to  be  exercised  in  application  to  the  crimes 
of  the  subjects  against  each  other;  for  exemp¬ 
tion  from  punishment  ( impunitas  criminis ) 
would  be  the  greatest  wrong  that  could  be  done 
to  them.  It  is  only  an  occasion  of  some  form 
of  treason  ( crimen  laesae  majestatis ),  as  a  lesion 
against  himself,  that  the  sovereign  should  make 
use  of  this  right.  And  it  should  not  be  exercised 
even  in  this  connection,  if  the  safety  of  the  peo¬ 
ple  would  be  endangered  by  remitting  such 
punishment.  This  right  is  the  only  one  which 
properly  deserves  the  name  of  a  “right  of  ma¬ 
jesty.” 

50.  Juridical  Relations  of  the  Citizen  to  his 

Country  and  to  Other  Countries.  Emigration; 

Immigration  ;  Banishment ;  Exile 

The  land  or  territory  whose  inhabitants — in 
virtue  of  its  political  constitution  and  without 
the  necessary  intervention  of  a  special  juridical 
act — are,  by  birth,  fellow-citizens  of  one  and 
the  same  commonwealth,  is  called  their  coun¬ 
try  or  fatherland.  A  foreign  country  is  one  in 
which  they  would  not  possess  this  condition,  but 
would  be  living  abroad.  If  a  country  abroad 
form  part  of  the  territory  under  the  same  gov¬ 
ernment  as  at  home,  it  constitutes  a  province , 
according  to  the  Roman  usage  of  the  term.  It 
does  not  constitute  an  incorporated  portion  of 
the  empire  ( imperii )  so  as  to  be  the  abode  of 
equal  fellow-citizens,  but  is  only  a  possession  of 
the  government,  like  a  lower  house ;  and  it  must 
therefore  honour  the  domain  of  the  ruling  state 
as  the  “mother  country”  ( regio  domino). 

1.  A  subject,  even  regarded  as  a  citizen,  has 
the  right  of  emigration;  for  the  state  cannot  re¬ 
tain  him  as  if  he  were  its  property.  But  he  may 
only  carry  away  with  him  his  moveables  as  dis¬ 
tinguished  from  his  fixed  possessions.  However, 
he  is  entitled  to  sell  his  immovable  property, 
and  take  the  value  of  it  in  money  with  him. 

2.  The  supreme  power,  as  master  of  the  coun¬ 
try,  has  the  right  to  favour  immigration  and  the 
settlement  of  strangers  and  colonists.  This  will 
hold  even  although  the  natives  of  the  country 


THE  SCIENCE 


450 

may  be  unfavourably  disposed  to  it,  if  their  pri¬ 
vate  property  in  the  soil  is  not  diminished  or  in¬ 
terfered  with. 

3.  In  the  case  of  a  subject  who  has  commit¬ 
ted  a  crime  that  renders  all  society  of  his  fel¬ 
low-citizens  with  him  prejudicial  to  the  state, 
the  supreme  power  has  also  the  right  of  inflict¬ 
ing  banishment  to  a  country  abroad.  By  such 
deportation,  he  does  not  acquire  any  share  in 
the  rights  of  citizens  of  the  territory  to  which 
he  is  banished. 

4.  The  supreme  power  has  also  the  right  of 
imposing  exile  generally  ( jus  exilii),  by  which 
a  citizen  is  sent  abroad  into  the  wide  world  as 
the  “out-land.”  And  because  the  supreme 
authority  thus  withdraws  all  legal  protection 
from  the  citizen,  this  amounts  to  making  him 
an  “outlaw”  within  the  territory  of  his  own 
country. 

51.  The  Three  Forms  of  the  State. 

Autocracy ;  Aristocracy ;  Democracy 

The  three  powers  in  the  state,  involved  in  the 
conception  of  a  public  government  generally 
{res  publica  latius  dicta),  are  only  so  many  re¬ 
lations  of  the  united  will  of  the  people  which 
emanates  from  the  a  priori  reason;  and  viewed 
as  such  it  is  the  objective  practical  realiza¬ 
tion  of  the  pure  idea  of  a  supreme  head  of  the 
state.  This  supreme  head  is  the  sovereign;  but 
conceived  only  as  a  representation  of  the  whole 
people,  the  idea  still  requires  physical  embodi¬ 
ment  in  a  person,  who  may  exhibit  the  supreme 
power  of  the  state  and  bring  the  idea  actively 
to  bear  upon  the  popular  will.  The  relation  of 
the  supreme  powTer  to  the  people  is  conceivable 
in  three  different  forms:  either  one  in  the  state 
rules  over  all;  or  some,  united  in  relation  of 
equality  with  each  other,  rule  over  all  the  oth¬ 
ers;  or  all  together  rule  over  each  and  all  in¬ 
dividually,  including  themselves.  The  form  of 
the  state  is  therefore  either  autocratic,  or  aris¬ 
tocratic,  or  democratic.  The  expression  mo¬ 
narchic  is  not  so  suitable  as  autocratic  for  the 
conception  here  intended;  for  a  monarch  is  one 
who  has  the  highest  power,  an  autocrat  is  one 
who  has  all  power,  so  that  this  latter  is  the  sov¬ 
ereign,  whereas  the  former  merely  represents 
the  sovereignty. 

It  is  evident  that  an  autocracy  is  the  simplest 
form  of  government  in  the  state,  being  consti¬ 
tuted  by  the  relation  of  one,  as  king,  to  the  peo¬ 
ple,  so  that  there  is  one  only  who  is  the  lawgiv¬ 
er.  An  aristocracy,  as  a  form  of  government,  is, 
however,  compounded  of  the  union  of  two  re¬ 
lations:  that  of  the  nobles  in  relation  to  one  an¬ 


other  as  the  lawgivers,  thereby  constituting  the 
sovereignty,  and  that  of  this  sovereign  power 
to  the  people.  A  democracy,  again,  is  the  most 
complex  of  all  the  forms  of  the  state,  for  it  has 
to  begin  by  uniting  the  will  of  all  so  as  to  form 
a  people;  and  then  it  has  to  appoint  a  sovereign 
over  this  common  union,  which  sovereign  is  no 
other  than  the  united  will  itself.  The  considera¬ 
tion  of  the  ways  in  which  these  forms  are  adul¬ 
terated  by  the  intrusion  of  violent  and  illegiti¬ 
mate  usurpers  of  power,  as  in  oligarchy  and 
ochlocracy,  as  well  as  the  discussion  of  the  so- 
called  mixed  constitutions,  may  be  passed  over 
here  as  not  essential,  and  as  leading  into  too 
much  detail. 

As  regards  the  administration  of  right  in  the 
state,  it  may  be  said  that  the  simplest  mode  is 
also  the  best;  but  as  regards  its  bearing  on  right 
itself,  it  is  also  the  most  dangerous  for  the  peo¬ 
ple,  in  view  of  the  despotism  to  which  simplic¬ 
ity  of  administration  so  naturally  gives  rise.  It 
is  undoubtedly  a  rational  maxim  to  aim  at  sim¬ 
plification  in  the  machinery  which  is  to  unite 
the  people  under  compulsory  laws,  and  this 
would  be  secured  were  all  the  people  to  be  pas¬ 
sive  and  to  obey  only  one  person  over  them; 
but  the  method  would  not  give  subjects  who 
were  also  citizens  of  the  state.  It  is  sometimes 
said  that  the  people  should  be  satisfied  with  the 
reflection  that  monarchy,  regarded  as  an  autoc¬ 
racy,  is  the  best  political  constitution,  if  the 
monarch  is  good,  that  is,  if  he  has  the  judgement 
as  well  as  the  will  to  do  right.  But  this  is  a  mere 
evasion  and  belongs  to  the  common  class  of  wise 
tautological  phrases.  It  only  amounts  to  saying 
that  “the  best  constitution  is  that  by  which  the 
supreme  administrator  of  the  state  is  made  the 
best  ruler”;  that  is,  that  the  best  constitution 
is  the  best ! 

52.  Historical  Origin  and  Changes. 

A  Pure  Republic.  Representative  Government 

It  is  vain  to  inquire  into  the  historical  origin 
of  the  political  mechanism;  for  it  is  no  longer 
possible  to  discover  historically  the  point  of  time 
at  which  civil  society  took  its  beginning.  Sav¬ 
ages  do  not  draw  up  a  documentary  record  of 
their  having  submitted  themselves  to  law;  and 
it  may  be  inferred  from  the  nature  of  uncivil¬ 
ized  men  that  they  must  have  set  out  from  a 
state  of  violence.  To  prosecute  such  an  inquiry 
in  the  intention  of  finding  a  pretext  for  altering 
the  existing  constitution  by  violence  is  no  less 
than  penal.  For  such  a  mode  of  alteration  would 
amount  to  revolution,  that  could  only  be  car¬ 
ried  out  by  an  insurrection  of  the  people,  and 


OF  RIGHT 


not  by  constitutional  modes  of  legislation.  But 
insurrection  against  an  already  existing  consti¬ 
tution,  is  an  overthrow  of  all  civil  and  juridical 
relations,  and  of  right  generally;  and  hence  it 
is  not  a  mere  alteration  of  the  civil  constitution, 
but  a  dissolution  of  it.  It  would  thus  form  a 
mode  of  transition  to  a  better  constitution 
by  palingenesis  and  not  by  mere  metamorpho¬ 
sis;  and  it  would  require  a  new  social  contract, 
upon  which  the  former  original  contract,  as 
then  annulled,  would  have  no  influence. 

It  must,  however,  be  possible  for  the  sover¬ 
eign  to  change  the  existing  constitution,  if  it  is 
not  actually  consistent  with  the  idea  of  the  orig¬ 
inal  contract.  In  doing  so  it  is  essential  to  give 
existence  to  that  form  of  government  which  will 
properly  constitute  the  people  into  a  state.  Such 
a  change  cannot  be  made  by  the  state  deliber¬ 
ately  altering  its  constitution  from  one  of  the 
three  forms  to  one  of  the  other  two.  For  exam¬ 
ple,  political  changes  should  not  be  carried  out 
by  the  aristocrats  combining  to  subject  them¬ 
selves  to  an  autocracy,  or  resolving  to  fuse  all 
into  a  democracy,  or  conversely;  as  if  it  de¬ 
pended  on  the  arbitrary  choice  and  liking  of  the 
sovereign  what  constitution  he  may  impose  on 
the  people.  For,  even  if  as  sovereign  he  resolved 
to  alter  the  constitution  into  a  democracy,  he 
might  be  doing  wrong  to  the  people,  because 
they  might  hold  such  a  constitution  in  abhor¬ 
rence,  and  regard  either  of  the  other  two  as 
more  suitable  to  them  in  the  circumstances. 

The  forms  of  the  state  are  only  the  letter 
( littera )  of  the  original  constitution  in  the  civil 
union;  and  they  may  therefore  remain  so  long 
as  they  are  considered,  from  ancient  and  long 
habit  (and  therefore  only  subjectively),  to  be 
necessary  to  the  machinery  of  the  political  con¬ 
stitution.  But  the  spirit  of  that  original  con¬ 
tract  ( anima  pacti  originarii)  contains  and  im¬ 
poses  the  obligation  on  the  constituting  power 
to  make  the  mode  of  the  government  conform¬ 
able  to  its  idea;  and,  if  this  cannot  be  effected 
at  once,  to  change  it  gradually  and  continuous¬ 
ly  till  it  harmonize  in  its  working  with  the  only 
rightful  constitution,  which  is  that  of  a  pure 
republic .  Thus  the  old  empirical  and  statutory 
forms,  which  serve  only  to  effect  the  political 
subjection  of  the  people,  will  be  resolved  into 
the  original  and  rational  forms  which  alone  take 
freedom  as  their  principle,  and  even  as  the  con¬ 
dition  of  all  compulsion  and  constraint.  Compul¬ 
sion  is  in  fact  requisite  for  the  realization  of  a 
juridical  constitution,  according  to  the  proper 
idea  of  the  state;  and  it  will  lead  at  last  to  the 
realization  of  that  idea,  even  according  to  the 


45i 

letter.  This  is  the  only  epduring  political  con¬ 
stitution,  as  in  it  the  law  is  itself  sovereign,  and 
is  no  longer  attached  to  a  particular  person.  This 
is  the  ultimate  end  of  all  public  right,  and  the 
state  in  which  every  citizen  can  have  what  is 
his  own  peremptorily  assigned  to  him.  But  so 
long  as  the  form  of  the  state  has  to  be  repre¬ 
sented,  according  to  the  letter,  by  many  differ¬ 
ent  moral  persons  invested  with  the  supreme 
power,  there  can  only  be  a  provisory  internal 
right,  and  not  an  absolutely  juridical  state  of 
civil  society. 

Every  true  republic  is  and  can  only  be  consti¬ 
tuted  by  a  representative  system  of  the  people. 
Such  a  representative  system  is  instituted  in 
name  of  the  people,  and  is  constituted  by  all  the 
citizens  being  united  together,  in  order,  by 
means  of  their  deputies,  to  protect  and  secure 
their  rights.  But  as  soon  as  a  supreme  head  of 
the  state  in  person — be  it  as  king,  or  nobility, 
or  the  whole  body  of  the  people  in  a  democratic 
union — becomes  also  representative,  the  united 
people  then  does  not  merely  represent  the 
sovereignty,  but  they  are  themselves  sovereign. 
It  is  in  the  people  that  the  supreme  power  orig¬ 
inally  resides,  and  it  is  accordingly  from  this 
power  that  all  the  rights  of  individual  citizens 
as  mere  subjects,  and  especially  as  officials  of 
the  state,  must  be  derived.  When  the  sovereign¬ 
ty  of  the  people  themselves  is  thus  realized,  the 
republic  is  established;  and  it  is  no  longer  nec¬ 
essary  to  give  up  the  reins  of  government  into 
the  hands  of  those  by  whom  they  have  been 
hitherto  held,  especially  as  they  might  again 
destroy  all  the  new  institutions  by  their  arbi¬ 
trary  and  absolute  will. 

It  was  therefore  a  great  error  in  judgement 
on  the  part  of  a  powerful  ruler  in  our  time,  when 
he  tried  to  extricate  himself  from  the  embarrass¬ 
ment  arising  from  great  public  debts,  by  trans¬ 
ferring  this  burden  to  the  people,  and  leaving 
them  to  undertake  and  distribute  them  among 
themselves  as  they  might  best  think  fit.  It  thus 
became  natural  that  the  legislative  power,  not 
only  in  respect  of  the  taxation  of  the  subjects, 
but  in  respect  of  the  government,  should  come 
into  the  hands  of  the  people.  It  was  requisite 
that  they  should  be  able  to  prevent  the  incur¬ 
ring  of  new  debts  by  extravagance  or  war;  and 
in  consequence,  the  supreme  power  of  the  mon¬ 
arch  entirely  disappeared,  not  by  being  merely 
suspended,  but  by  passing  over  in  fact  to  the 
people,  to  whose  legislative  will  the  property  of 
every  subject  thus  became  subjected.  Nor  can 
it  be  said  that  a  tacit  and  yet  obligatory  prom- 


THE  SCIENCE 


452 

ise  must  be  assumed  as  having,  under  such 
circumstances,  been  given  by  the  national  as¬ 
sembly,  not  to  constitute  themselves  into  a  sov¬ 
ereignty,  but  only  to  administer  the  affairs  of 
the  sovereign  for  the  time,  and  after  this  was 
done  to  deliver  the  reins  of  the  government 
again  into  the  monarch’s  hands.  Such  a  supposed 
contract  would  be  null  and  void.  The  right  of 
the  supreme  legislation  in  the  commonwealth 
is  not  an  alienable  right,  but  is  the  most  person¬ 
al  of  all  rights.  Whoever  possesses  it  can  only 
dispose  by  the  collective  will  of  the  people,  in 
respect  of  the  people;  he  cannot  dispose  in  re¬ 
spect  of  the  collective  will  itself,  which  is  the 
ultimate  foundation  of  all  public  contracts.  A 
contract,  by  which  the  people  would  be  bound 
to  give  back  their  authority  again,  would  not 
be  consistent  with  their  position  as  a  legislative 
power,  and  yet  it  would  be  made  binding  upon 
the  people;  which,  on  the  principle  that  “No 
one  can  serve  two  masters,”  is  a  contradiction. 

II.  The  Right  of  Nations  and  Inter¬ 
national  Law.  (Jus  Gentium) 

53.  Nature  and  Division  oj  the  Right  of  Nations 

The  individuals,  who  make  up  a  people,  may 
be  regarded  as  natives  of  the  country  sprung  by 
natural  descent  from  a  common  ancestry  (con- 
geniti ),  although  this  may  not  hold  entirely  true 
in  detail.  Again,  they  may  be  viewed  according 
to  the  intellectual  and  juridical  relation,  as  born 
of  a  common  political  mother,  the  republic,  so 
that  they  constitute,  as  it  were,  a  public  fam¬ 
ily  or  nation  (gens,  natioj  whose  members  are 
all  related  to  each  other  as  citizens  of  the  state. 
As  members  of  a  state,  they  do  not  mix  with 
those  who  live  beside  them  in  the  state  of  na¬ 
ture,  considering  such  to  be  ignoble.  Yet  these 
savages,  on  account  of  the  lawless  freedom  they 
have  chosen,  regard  themselves  as  superior  to 
civilized  peoples;  and  they  constitute  tribes 
and  even  races,  but  not  states.  The  public  right 
of  states  (jus  publicum  civitatum) ,  in  their  re¬ 
lations  to  one  another,  is  what  we  have  to  con¬ 
sider  under  the  designation  of  the  “right  of  na¬ 
tions.”  Wherever  a  state,  viewed  as  a  moral  per¬ 
son,  acts  in  relation  to  another  existing  in  the 
condition  of  natural  freedom,  and  consequently 
in  a  state  of  continual  war,  such  right  takes  it 
rise. 

The  right  of  nations  in  relation  to  the  state 
of  war  may  be  divided  into:  1.  the  right  of  going 
to  war;  2.  right  during  war;  and  3.  right  after 
war,  the  object  of  which  is  to  constrain  the  na¬ 
tions  mutually  to  pass  from  this  state  of  war 
and  to  found  a  common  constitution  establish¬ 


ing  perpetual  peace.  The  difference  between  the 
right  of  individual  men  or  families  as  related 
to  each  other  in  the  state  of  nature,  and  the 
right  of  the  nations  among  themselves,  consists 
in  this,  that  in  the  right  of  nations  we  have  to 
consider  not  merely  a  relation  of  one  state  to 
another  as  a  whole,  but  also  the  relation  of  the 
individual  persons  in  one  state  to  the  individuals 
of  another  state,  as  well  as  to  that  state  as  a 
whole.  This  difference,  however,  between  the 
right  of  nations  and  the  right  of  individuals  in 
the  mere  state  of  nature,  requires  to  be  deter¬ 
mined  by  elements  which  can  easily  be  deduced 
from  the  conception  of  the  latter. 

54.  Elements  of  the  Right  of  Nations 

The  elements  of  the  right  of  nations  are  as 
follows: 

1.  States,  viewed  as  nations,  in  their  exter¬ 
nal  relations  to  one  another — like  lawless  sav¬ 
ages — are  naturally  in  a  non-juridical  condition; 

2.  This  natural  condition  is  a  state  of  war  in 
which  the  right  of  the  stronger  prevails;  and  al¬ 
though  it  may  not  in  fact  be  always  found  as  a 
state  of  actual  war  and  incessant  hostility,  and 
although  no  real  wrong  is  done  to  any  one  there¬ 
in,  yet  the  condition  is  wrong  in  itself  in  the 
highest  degree,  and  the  nations  which  form 
states  contiguous  to  each  other  are  bound  mu¬ 
tually  to  pass  out  of  it; 

3.  An  alliance  of  nations,  in  accordance  with 
the  idea  of  an  original  social  contract,  is  neces¬ 
sary  to  protect  each  other  against  external  ag¬ 
gression  and  attack,  but  not  involving  interfer¬ 
ence  with  their  several  internal  difficulties  and 
disputes; 

4.  This  mutual  connection  by  alliance  must 
dispense  with  a  distinct  sovereign  power,  such 
as  is  set  up  in  the  civil  constitution;  it  can  only 
take  the  form  of  a  federation,  which  as  such 
may  be  revoked  on  any  occasion,  and  must  con¬ 
sequently  be  renewed  from  time  to  time. 

This  is  therefore  a  right  which  comes  in  as  an 
accessory  (in  subsidium )  of  another  original 
right,  in  order  to  prevent  the  nations  from  fall¬ 
ing  from  right  and  lapsing  into  the  state  of  ac¬ 
tual  war  with  each  other.  It  thus  issues  in  the 
idea  of  a  foedus  amphictyonum. 

55.  Right  of  Going  to  War  as  related 
to  the  Subjects  of  the  State 

We  have  then  to  consider,  in  the  first  place, 
the  original  right  of  free  states  to  go  to  war 
with  each  other  as  being  still  in  a  state  of  na¬ 
ture,  but  as  exercising  this  right  in  order  to  es¬ 
tablish  some  condition  of  society  approaching 


OF  RIGHT 


the  juridical  state.  And,  first  of  all,  the  ques¬ 
tion  arises  as  to  what  right  the  state  has  in  rela¬ 
tion  to  its  own  subjects ,  to  use  them  in  order 
to  make  war  against  other  states,  to  employ 
their  property  and  even  their  lives  for  this  pur¬ 
pose,  or  at  least  to  expose  them  to  hazard  and 
danger;  and  all  this  in  such  a  way  that  it  does 
not  depend  upon  their  own  personal  judgement 
whether  they  will  march  into  the  field  of  war 
or  not,  but  the  supreme  command  of  the  sov¬ 
ereign  claims  to  settle  and  dispose  of  them  thus. 

This  right  appears  capable  of  being  easily  es¬ 
tablished.  It  may  be  grounded  upon  the  right 
which  every  one  has  to  do  with  what  is  his  own 
as  he  will.  Whatever  one  has  made  substantially 
for  himself,  he  holds  as  his  incontestable  prop¬ 
erty.  The  following,  then,  is  such  a  deduction 
as  a  mere  jurist  would  put  forward. 

There  are  various  natural  products  in  a  coun¬ 
try  which,  as  regards  the  number  and  quantity 
in  which  they  exist,  must  be  considered  as  spe¬ 
cially  produced  ( artefacta )  by  the  work  of  the 
state;  for  the  country  would  not  yield  them  to 
such  extent  were  it  not  under  the  constitution  of 
the  state  and  its  regular  administrative  govern¬ 
ment,  or  if  the  inhabitants  were  still  living  in 
the  state  of  nature.  Sheep,  cattle,  domestic  fowl 
— the  most  useful  of  their  kind — swine,  and 
such  like,  would  either  be  used  up  as  necessary 
food  or  destroyed  by  beasts  of  prey  in  the  dis¬ 
trict  in  which  I  live,  so  that  they  would  entirely 
disappear,  or  be  found  in  very  scant  supplies, 
were  it  not  for  the  government  securing  to  the 
inhabitants  their  acquisitions  and  property.  This 
holds  likewise  of  the  population  itself,  as  we 
see  in  the  case  of  the  American  deserts;  and 
even  were  the  greatest  industry  applied  in  those 
regions — which  is  not  yet  done — there  might  be 
but  a  scanty  population.  The  inhabitants  of  any 
country  would  be  but  sparsely  sown  here  and 
there  were  it  not  for  the  protection  of  govern¬ 
ment;  because  without  it  they  could  not  spread 
themselves  with  their  households  upon  a  terri¬ 
tory  which  was  always  in  danger  of  being  devas¬ 
tated  by  enemies  or  by  wild  beasts  of  prey;  and 
further,  so  great  a  multitude  of  men  as  now  live 
in  any  one  country  could  not  otherwise  obtain 
sufficient  means  of  support.  Hence,  as  it  can 
be  said  of  vegetable  growths,  such  as  potatoes, 
as  well  as  of  domesticated  animals,  that  because 
the  abundance  in  which  they  are  found  is  a 
product  of  human  labour,  they  may  be  used,  de¬ 
stroyed,  and  consumed  by  man ;  so  it  seems  that 
it  may  be  said  of  the  sovereign,  as  the  supreme 
power  in  the  state,  that  he  has  the  right  to  lead 
his  subjects,  as  being  for  the  most  part  produc¬ 


453 

tions  of  his  own,  to  war,  as  if  it  were  to  the 
chase,  and  even  to  march  them  to  the  field  of 
battle,  as  if  it  were  on  a  pleasure  excursion. 

This  principle  of  right  may  be  supposed  to 
float  dimly  before  the  mind  of  the  monarch, 
and  it  certainly  holds  true  at  least  of  the  lower 
animals  which  may  become  the  property  of  man. 
But  such  a  principle  will  not  at  all  apply  to  men, 
especially  when  viewed  as  citizens  who  must  be 
regarded  as  members  of  the  state,  with  a  share 
in  the  legislation,  and  not  merely  as  means  for 
others  but  as  ends  in  themselves.  As  such  they 
must  give  their  free  consent,  through  their  rep¬ 
resentatives,  not  only  to  the  carrying  on  of 
war  generally,  but  to  every  separate  declara¬ 
tion  of  war;  and  it  is  only  under  this  limiting 
condition  that  the  state  has  a  right  to  demand 
their  services  in  undertakings  so  full  of  danger. 

We  would  therefore  deduce  this  right  rather 
from  the  duty  of  the  sovereign  to  the  people 
than  conversely.  Under  this  relation,  the  people 
must  be  regarded  as  having  given  their  sanction ; 
and,  having  the  right  of  voting,  they  may  be 
considered,  although  thus  passive  in  reference 
to  themselves  individually,  to  be  active  in  so  far 
as  they  represent  the  sovereignty  itself. 

56.  Right  of  Going  to  War  in  relation 
to  Hostile  States 

Viewed  as  in  the  state  of  nature,  the  right  of 
nations  to  go  to  war  and  to  carry  on  hostilities 
is  the  legitimate  way  by  which  they  prosecute 
their  rights  by  their  own  power  when  they  re¬ 
gard  themselves  as  injured;  and  this  is  done  be¬ 
cause  in  that  state  the  method  of  a  juridical 
process,  although  the  only  one  proper  to  settle 
such  disputes,  cannot  be  adopted. 

The  threatening  of  war  is  to  be  distinguished 
from  the  active  injury  of  a  first  aggression, 
which  again  is  distinguished  from  the  general 
outbreak  of  hostilities.  A  threat  or  menace  may 
be  given  by  the  active  preparation  of  arma¬ 
ments ,  upon  which  a  right  of  prevention  ( jus 
praeventionis)  is  founded  on  the  other  side,  or 
merely  by  the  formidable  increase  of  the  pow¬ 
er  of  another  state  ( potestas  tremenda)  by  ac¬ 
quisition  of  territory.  Lesion  of  a  less  powerful 
country  may  be  involved  merely  in  the  condi¬ 
tion  of  a  more  powerful  neighbour  prior  to  any 
action  at  all;  and  in  the  state  of  nature  an  at¬ 
tack  under  such  circumstances  would  be  war¬ 
rantable.  This  international  relation  is  the  foun¬ 
dation  of  the  right  of  equilibrium,  or  of  the 
“balance  of  power,”  among  all  the  states  that 
are  in  active  contiguity  to  each  other. 

The  right  to  go  to  war  is  constituted  by  any 


THE  SCIENCE 


454 

overt  act  of  injury.  This  includes  any  arbitrary 
retaliation  or  act  of  reprisal  { retorsio )  as  a  sat¬ 
isfaction  taken  by  one  people  for  an  offence 
committed  by  another,  without  any  attempt  be¬ 
ing  made  to  obtain  reparation  in  a  peaceful  way. 
Such  an  act  of  retaliation  would  be  similar  in 
kind  to  an  outbreak  of  hostilities  without  a  pre¬ 
vious  declaration  of  war.  For  if  there  is  to  be 
any  right  at  all  during  the  state  of  war,  some¬ 
thing  analogous  to  a  contract  must  be  assumed, 
involving  acceptance  on  the  side  of  the  declara¬ 
tion  on  the  other,  and  amounting  to  the  fact 
that  they  both  will  to  seek  their  right  in  this  way. 

57.  Right  during  War 

The  determination  of  what  constitutes  right 
in  war,  is  the  most  difficult  problem  of  the  right 
of  nations  and  international  law.  It  is  very  dif¬ 
ficult  even  to  form  a  conception  of  such  a  right, 
or  to  think  of  any  law  in  this  lawless  state  with¬ 
out  falling  into  a  contradiction.  Inter  arma  si¬ 
lent  leges.1  It  must  then  be  just  the  right  to 
carry  on  war  according  to  such  principles  as 
render  it  always  still  possible  to  pass  out  of  that 
natural  condition  of  the  states  in  their  external 
relations  to  each  other,  and  to  enter  into  a  con¬ 
dition  of  right. 

No  war  of  independent  states  against  each 
other  can  rightly  be  a  war  of  punishment  {hel¬ 
ium  punitivum).  For  punishment  is  only  in  place 
under  the  relation  of  a  superior  ( imperantis ) 
to  a  subject  ( suhditum )  ;  and  this  is  not  the  re¬ 
lation  of  the  states  to  one  another.  Neither  can 
an  international  war  be  “a  war  of  extermina¬ 
tion’’  {helium  internicinum) ,  nor  even  “a  war 
of  subjugation”  {helium  suhjugatorium );  for 
this  would  issue  in  the  moral  extinction  of  a 
state  by  its  people  being  either  fused  into  one 
mass  with  the  conquering  state,  or  being  reduced 
to  slavery.  Not  that  this  necessary  means  of 
attaining  to  a  condition  of  peace  is  itself  con¬ 
tradictory  to  the  right  of  a  state;  but  because 
the  idea  of  the  right  of  nations  includes  merely 
the  conception  of  an  antagonism  that  is  in  ac¬ 
cordance  with  principles  of  external  freedom, 
in  order  that  the  state  may  maintain  what  is 
properly  its  own,  but  not  that  it  may  acquire  a 
condition  which,  from  the  aggrandizement  of 
its  power,  might  become  threatening  to  other 
states. 

Defensive  measures  and  means  of  all  kinds 
are  allowable  to  a  state  that  is  forced  to  war, 
except  such  as  by  their  use  would  make  the  sub¬ 
jects  using  them  unfit  to  be  citizens;  for  the 

1  [“In  the  midst  of  arms  the  laws  are  silent.” 
Cicero. J 


state  would  thus  make  itself  unfit  to  be  regard¬ 
ed  as  a  person  capable  of  participating  in  equal 
rights  in  the  international  relations  according 
to  the  right  of  nations.  Among  these  forbidden 
means  are  to  be  reckoned  the  appointment  of 
subjects  to  act  as  spies,  or  engaging  subjects  or 
even  strangers  to  act  as  assassins,  or  poisoners 
(in  which  class  might  well  be  included  the  so- 
called  sharpshooters  who  lurk  in  ambush  for  in¬ 
dividuals),  or  even  employing  agents  to  spread 
false  news.  In  a  word,  it  is  forbidden  to  use  any 
such  malignant  and  perfidious  means  as  would 
destroy  the  confidence  which  would  be  requi¬ 
site  to  establish  a  lasting  peace  thereafter. 

It  is  permissible  in  war  to  impose  exactions 
and  contributions  upon  a  conquered  enemy;  but 
it  is  not  legitimate  to  plunder  the  people  in  the 
way  of  forcibly  depriving  individuals  of  their 
property.  For  this  would  be  robbery,  seeing  it 
was  not  the  conquered  people  but  the  state  un¬ 
der  whose  government  they  were  placed  that 
carried  on  the  war  by  means  of  them.  All  exac¬ 
tions  should  be  raised  by  regular  requisition , 
and  receipts  ought  to  be  given  for  them,  in  or¬ 
der  that  when  peace  is  restored  the  burden  im¬ 
posed  on  the  country  or  the  province  may  be 
proportionately  borne. 

58.  Right  after  War 

The  right  that  follows  after  war,  begins  at 
the  moment  of  the  treaty  of  peace  and  refers 
to  the  consequences  of  the  war.  The  conqueror 
lays  down  the  conditions  under  which  he  will 
agree  with  the  conquered  power  to  form  the 
conclusion  of  peace.  Treaties  are  drawn  up; 
not  indeed  according  to  any  right  that  it  per¬ 
tains  to  him  to  protect,  on  account  of  an  alleged 
lesion  by  his  opponent,  but  as  taking  this  ques¬ 
tion  upon  himself,  he  bases  the  right  to  decide 
it  upon  his  own  power.  Hence  the  conqueror 
may  not  demand  restitution  of  the  cost  of  the 
war;  because  he  would  then  have  to  declare 
the  war  of  his  opponent  to  be  unjust.  And  even 
although  he  should  adopt  such  an  argument,  he 
is  not  entitled  to  apply  it;  because  he  would 
have  to  declare  the  war  to  be  punitive,  and  he 
would  thus  in  turn  inflict  an  injury.  To  this  right 
belongs  also  the  exchange  of  prisoners,  which 
is  to  be  carried  out  without  ransom  and  with¬ 
out  regard  to  equality  of  numbers. 

Neither  the  conquered  state  nor  its  subjects 
lose  their  political  liberty  by  conquest  of  the 
country,  so  as  that  the  former  should  be  de¬ 
graded  to  a  colony,  or  the  latter  to  slaves;  for 
otherwise  it  would  have  been  a  penal  war,  which 
is  contradictory  in  itself.  A  colony  or  a  prov- 


OF  RIGHT 


ince  is  constituted  by  a  people  which  has  its 
own  constitution,  legislation,  and  territory, 
where  persons  belonging  to  another  state  are 
merely  strangers,  but  which  is  nevertheless  sub¬ 
ject  to  the  supreme  executive  power  of  another 
state.  This  other  state  is  called  the  mother-coun¬ 
try,  It  is  ruled  as  a  daughter,  but  has  at  the  same 
time  its  own  form  of  government,  as  in  a  sep¬ 
arate  parliament  under  the  presidency  of  a 
viceroy  ( civitas  hybrida).  Such  was  Athens  in 
relation  to  different  islands;  and  such  is  at  pres¬ 
ent  (1796)  the  relation  of  Great  Britain  to 
Ireland. 

Still  less  can  slavery  be  deduced  as  a  rightful 
institution,  from  the  conquest  of  a  people  in 
war;  for  this  would  assume  that  the  war  was  of 
a  punitive  nature.  And  least  of  all  can  a  basis 
be  found  in  war  for  a  hereditary  slavery,  which 
is  absurd  in  itself,  since  guilt  cannot  be  in¬ 
herited  from  the  criminality  of  another. 

Further,  that  an  amnesty  is  involved  in  the 
conclusion  of  a  treaty  of  peace  is  already  im¬ 
plied  in  the  very  idea  of  a  peace. 

59.  The  Rights  of  Peace 

The  rights  of  peace  are: 

1.  The  right  to  be  in  peace  when  war  is  in 
the  neighbourhood,  or  the  right  of  neutrality. 

2.  The  right  to  have  peace  secured  so  that 
it  may  continue  when  it  has  been  concluded, 
that  is,  the  right  of  guarantee. 

3.  The  right  of  the  several  states  to  enter  in¬ 
to  a  mutual  alliance,  so  as  to  defend  themselves 
in  common  against  all  external  or  even  internal 
attacks.  This  right  of  federation,  however,  does 
not  extend  to  the  formation  of  any  league  for 
external  aggression  or  internal  aggrandizement. 

60.  Right  as  against  an  Unjust  Enemy 

The  right  of  a  state  against  an  unjust  enemy 
has  no  limits,  at  least  in  respect  of  quality  as 
distinguished  from  quantity  or  degree.  In  other 
words,  the  injured  state  may  use — not,  indeed 
any  means,  but  yet — all  those  means  that  are 
permissible  and  in  reasonable  measure  in  so  far 
as  they  are  in  its  power,  in  order  to  assert  its 
right  to  what  is  its  own.  But  what  then  is  an 
unjust  enemy  according  to  the  conceptions  of 
the  right  of  nations,  when,  as  holds  generally 
of  the  state  of  nature,  every  state  is  judge  in 
its  own  cause?  It  is  one  whose  publicly  ex¬ 
pressed  will,  whether  in  word  or  deed,  betrays  a 
maxim  which,  if  it  were  taken  as  a  universal 
rule,  would  make  a  state  of  peace  among  the 
nations  impossible,  and  would  necessarily  per¬ 
petuate  the  state  of  nature.  Such  is  the  violation 


455 

of  public  treaties,  with  regard  to  which  it  may 
be  assumed  that  any  such  violation  concerns  all 
nations  by  threatening  their  freedom,  and  that 
they  are  thus  summoned  to  unite  against  such 
a  wrong  and  to  take  away  the  power  of  commit¬ 
ting  it.  But  this  does  not  include  the  right  to 
partition  and  appropriate  the  country ,  so  as  to 
make  a  state  as  it  were  disappear  from  the 
earth;  for  this  would  be  an  injustice  to  the  peo¬ 
ple  of  that  state,  who  cannot  lose  their  original 
right  to  unite  into  a  commonwealth,  and  to 
adopt  such  a  new  constitution  as  by  its  nature 
would  be  unfavourable  to  the  inclination  for 
war. 

Further,  it  may  be  said  that  the  expression 
“an  unjust  enemy  in  the  state  of  nature”  is 
pleonastic;  for  the  state  of  nature  is  itself  a 
state  of  injustice.  A  just  enemy  would  be  one 
to  whom  I  would  do  wrong  in  offering  resist¬ 
ance;  but  such  a  one  would  really  not  be  my 
enemy. 

61.  Perpetual  Peace  and  a  Permanent 
Congress  of  Nations 

The  natural  state  of  nations  as  well  as  of  in¬ 
dividual  men  is  a  state  which  it  is  a  duty  to  pass 
out  of,  in  order  to  enter  into  a  legal  state. 
Hence,  before  this  transition  occurs,  all  the 
right  of  nations  and  all  the  external  property 
of  states  acquirable  or  maintainable  by  war  are 
merely  provisory;  and  they  can  only  become 
peremptory  in  a  universal  union  of  states  anal¬ 
ogous  to  that  by  which  a  nation  becomes  a 
state.  It  is  thus  only  that  a  real  state  of  peace 
could  be  established.  But  with  the  too  great  ex¬ 
tension  of  such  a  union  of  states  over  vast  re¬ 
gions,  any  government  of  it,  and  consequently 
the  protection  of  its  individual  members,  must 
at  last  become  impossible;  and  thus  a  multitude 
of  such  corporations  would  again  bring  round 
a  state  of  war.  Hence  the  perpetual  peace,  which 
is  the  ultimate  end  of  all  the  right  of  nations, 
becomes  in  fact  an  impracticable  idea.  The  po¬ 
litical  principles,  however,  which  aim  at  such  an 
end,  and  which  enjoin  the  formation  of  such 
unions  among  the  states  as  may  promote  a  con¬ 
tinuous  approximation  to  a  perpetual  peace,  are 
not  impracticable;  they  are  as  practicable  as 
this  approximation  itself,  which  is  a  practical 
problem  involving  a  duty,  and  founded  upon 
the  right  of  individual  men  and  states. 

Such  a  union  of  states,  in  order  to  maintain 
peace,  may  be  called  a  permanent  congress  of 
nations;  and  it  is  free  to  every  neighbouring 
state  to  join  in  it.  A  union  of  this  kind,  so  far 
at  least  as  regards  the  formalities  of  the  right 


THE  SCIENCE 


of  nations  in  respect  of  the  preservation  of 
peace,  was  presented  in  the  first  half  of  this  cen¬ 
tury,  in  the  Assembly  of  the  States-General  at 
the  Hague.  In  this  Assembly  most  of  the  Euro¬ 
pean  courts,  and  even  the  smallest  republics, 
brought  forward  their  complaints  about  the  hos¬ 
tilities  which  were  carried  on  by  the  one  against 
the  other.  Thus  the  whole  of  Europe  appeared 
like  a  single  federated  state,  accepted  as  um¬ 
pire  by  the  several  nations  in  their  public  dif¬ 
ferences.  But  in  place  of  this  agreement,  the 
right  of  nations  afterwards  survived  only  in 
books;  it  disappeared  from  the  cabinets,  or,  after 
force  had  been  already  used,  it  was  relegated 
in  the  form  of  theoretical  deductions  to  the 
obscurity  of  archives. 

By  such  a  congress  is  here  meant  only  a  vol¬ 
untary  combination  of  different  states  that 
would  be  dissoluble  at  any  time,  and  not  such 
a  union  as  is  embodied  in  the  United  States  of 
America,  founded  upon  a  political  constitution, 
and  therefore  indissoluble.  It  is  only  by  a  con¬ 
gress  of  this  kind  that  the  idea  of  a  public  right 
of  nations  can  be  established,  and  that  the  set¬ 
tlement  of  their  differences  by  the  mode  of  a 
civil  process,  and  not  by  the  barbarous  means 
of  war,  can  be  realized. 

III.  The  Universal  Right  of  Mankind. 

(Jus  Cosmopoliticum) 

62.  Nature  and  Conditions  oj 
Cosmopolitical  Right 

The  rational  idea  of  a  universal,  peaceful ,  if 
not  yet  friendly,  union  of  all  the  nations  upon 
the  earth  that  may  come  into  active  relations 
with  each  other,  is  a  juridical  principle,  as  dis¬ 
tinguished  from  philanthropic  or  ethical  prin¬ 
ciples.  Nature  has  enclosed  them  altogether 
within  definite  boundaries,  in  virtue  of  the 
spherical  form  of  their  abode  as  a  globus  ter- 
raqueus;  and  the  possession  of  the  soil  upon 
which  an  inhabitant  of  the  earth  may  live  can 
only  be  regarded  as  possession  of  a  part  of  a 
limited  whole  and,  consequently,  as  a  part  to 
which  every  one  has  originally  a  right.  Hence 
all  nations  originally  hold  a  community  of  the 
soil,  but  not  a  juridical  community  of  possession 
(communio),  nor  consequently  of  the  use  or 
proprietorship  of  the  soil,  but  only  of  a  possible 
physical  intercourse  ( commercium )  by  means 
of  it.  In  other  words,  they  are  placed  in  such 
thoroughgoing  relations  of  each  to  all  the  rest 
that  they  may  claim  to  enter  into  intercourse 
with  one  another,  and  they  have  a  right  to  make 


an  attempt  in  this  direction,  while  a  foreign  na¬ 
tion  would  not  be  entitled  to  treat  them  on  this 
account  as  enemies.  This  right,  in  so  far  as  it 
relates  to  a  possible  union  of  all  nations,  in  re¬ 
spect  of  certain  laws  universally  regulating  their 
intercourse  with  each  other,  may  be  called 
“cosmopolitical  right”  ( jus  cosmopoliticum) . 

It  may  appear  that  seas  put  nations  out  of  all 
communion  with  each  other.  But  this  is  not  so; 
for  by  means  of  commerce,  seas  form  the  hap¬ 
piest  natural  provision  for  their  intercourse. 
And  the  more  there  are  of  neighbouring  coast- 
lands,  as  in  the  case  of  the  Mediterranean  Sea, 
this  intercourse  becomes  the  more  animated. 
And  hence  communications  with  such  lands,  es¬ 
pecially  where  there  are  settlements  upon  them 
connected  with  the  mother  countries  giving  oc¬ 
casion  for  such  communications,  bring  it  about 
that  evil  and  violence  committed  in  one  place 
of  our  globe  are  felt  in  all.  Such  possible  abuse 
cannot,  however,  annul  the  right  of  man  as  a 
citizen  of  the  world  to  attempt  to  enter  into 
communion  with  all  others,  and  for  this  purpose 
to  visit  all  the  regions  of  the  earth,  although 
this  does  not  constitute  a  right  of  settlement 
upon  the  territory  of  another  people  ( jus  in- 
colatus ),  for  which  a  special  contract  is  re¬ 
quired. 

But  the  question  is  raised  as  to  whether,  in 
the  case  of  newly  discovered  countries,  a  peo¬ 
ple  may  claim  the  right  to  settle  ( accolatus ), 
and  to  occupy  possessions  in  the  neighbourhood 
of  another  people  that  has  already  settled  in 
that  region;  and  to  do  this  without  their  con¬ 
sent. 

Such  a  right  is  indubitable,  if  the  new  settle¬ 
ment  takes  place  at  such  a  distance  from  the 
seat  of  the  former  that  neither  would  restrict 
or  injure  the  other  in  the  use  of  their  territory. 
But  in  the  case  of  nomadic  peoples,  or  tribes  of 
shepherds  and  hunters  (such  as  the  Hottentots, 
the  Tungusi,  and  most  of  the  American  In¬ 
dians),  whose  support  is  derived  from  wide  des¬ 
ert  tracts,  such  occupation  should  never  take 
place  by  force,  but  only  by  contract;  and  any 
such  contract  ought  never  to  take  advantage  of 
the  ignorance  of  the  original  dwellers  in  regard 
to  the  cession  of  their  lands.  Yet  it  is  commonly 
alleged  that  such  acts  of  violent  appropriation 
may  be  justified  as  subserving  the  general  good 
of  the  world.  It  appears  as  if  sufficiently  justi¬ 
fying  grounds  were  furnished  for  them,  partly 
by  reference  to  the  civilization  of  barbarous 
peoples  (as  by  a  pretext  of  this  kind  even 
Busching  tries  to  excuse  the  bloody  introduc- 


OF  RIGHT 


tion  of  the  Christian  religion  into  Germany), 
and  partly  by  founding  upon  the  necessity  of 
purging  one’s  own  country  from  depraved  crim¬ 
inals,  and  the  hope  of  their  improvement  or 
that  of  their  posterity,  in  another  continent  like 
New  Holland.  But  all  these  alleged  good  pur¬ 
poses  cannot  wash  out  the  stain  of  injustice  in 
the  means  employed  to  attain  them.  It  may  be 
objected  that,  had  such  scrupulousness  about 
making  a  beginning  in  founding  a  legal  state 
with  force  been  always  maintained,  the  whole 
earth  would  still  have  been  in  a  state  of  lawless¬ 
ness.  But  such  an  objection  would  as  little  an¬ 
nul  the  conditions  of  right  in  question  as  the  pre¬ 
text  of  the  political  revolutionaries  that,  when 
a  constitution  has  become  degenerate,  it  be¬ 
longs  to  the  people  to  transform  it  by  force. 
This  would  amount  generally  to  being  unjust 
once  and  for  all,  in  order  thereafter  to  found 
justice  the  more  surely,  and  to  make  it  flourish. 

Conclusion 

If  one  cannot  prove  that  a  thing  is,  he  may 
try  to  prove  that  it  is  not.  And  if  he  succeeds 
in  doing  neither  (as  often  occurs),  he  may  still 
ask  whether  it  is  in  his  interest  to  accept  one 
or  other  of  the  alternatives  hypothetically,  from 
the  theoretical  or  the  practical  point  of  view. 
In  other  words,  a  hypothesis  may  be  accepted 
either  in  order  to  explain  a  certain  phenomenon 
(as  in  astronomy  to  account  for  the  retrogres¬ 
sion  and  stationariness  of  the  planets),  or  in 
order  to  attain  a  certain  end,  which  again  may 
be  either  pragmatic ,  as  belonging  merely  to  the 
sphere  of  art,  or  moral ,  as  involving  a  purpose 
which  it  is  a  duty  to  adopt  as  a  maxim  of  ac¬ 
tion.  Now  it  is  evident  that  the  assumption 
( suppositio )  of  the  practicability  of  such  an 
end,  though  presented  merely  as  a  theoretical 
and  problematical  judgement,  may  be  regarded 
as  constituting  a  duty;  and  hence  it  is  so  re¬ 
garded  in  this  case.  For  although  there  may  be 
no  positive  obligation  to  believe  in  such  an  end, 
yet  even  if  there  were  not  the  least  theoretical 
probability  of  action  being  carried  out  in  ac¬ 
cordance  with  it,  so  long  as  its  impossibility 
cannot  be  demonstrated,  there  still  remains  a 
duty  incumbent  upon  us  with  regard  to  it. 

Now,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  the  morally  practi¬ 
cal  reason  utters  within  us  its  irrevocable  veto: 
There  shall  be  no  war.  So  there  ought  to  be 
no  war,  neither  between  me  and  you  in  the  con¬ 
dition  of  nature,  nor  between  us  as  members  of 
states  which,  although  internally  in  a  condition 
of  law,  are  still  externally  in  their  relation  to 


457 

each  other  in  a  condition  of  lawlessness;  for 
this  is  not  the  way  by  which  any  one  should 
prosecute  his  right.  Hence  the  question  no  long¬ 
er  is  as  to  whether  perpetual  peace  is  a  real 
thing  or  not  a  real  thing,  or  as  to  whether  we 
may  not  be  deceiving  ourselves  wThen  we  adopt 
the  former  alternative,  but  we  must  act  on  the 
supposition  of  its  being  real.  We  must  work  for 
what  may  perhaps  not  be  realized,  and  establish 
that  constitution  which  yet  seems  best  adapted 
to  bring  it  about  (mayhap  republicanism  in  all 
states,  together  and  separately).  And  thus  we 
may  put  an  end  to  the  evil  of  wars,  which  have 
been  the  chief  interest  of  the  internal  arrange¬ 
ments  of  all  the  states  without  exception.  And 
although  the  realization  of  this  purpose  may 
always  remain  but  a  pious  wish,  yet  we  do  cer¬ 
tainly  not  deceive  ourselves  in  adopting  the 
maxim  of  action  that  will  guide  us  in  working 
incessantly  for  it;  for  it  is  a  duty  to  do  this.  To 
suppose  that  the  moral  law  within  us  is  itself 
deceptive,  would  be  sufficient  to  excite  the  hor¬ 
rible  wish  rather  to  be  deprived  of  all  reason 
than  to  live  under  such  deception,  and  even  to 
see  oneself,  according  to  such  principles,  de¬ 
graded  like  the  lower  animals  to  the  level  of 
the  mechanical  play  of  nature. 

It  may  be  said  that  the  universal  and  lasting 
establishment  of  peace  constitutes  not  merely 
a  part,  but  the  whole  final  purpose  and  end  of 
the  science  of  right  as  viewed  within  the  limits 
of  reason.  The  state  of  peace  is  the  only  condi¬ 
tion  of  the  mine  and  thine  that  is  secured  and 
guaranteed  by  laws  in  the  relationship  of  men 
living  in  numbers  contiguous  to  each  other,  and 
who  are  thus  combined  in  a  constitution  whose 
rule  is  derived  not  from  the  mere  experience  of 
those  who  have  found  it  the  best  as  a  normal 
guide  for  others,  but  which  must  be  taken  by 
the  reason  a  priori  from  the  ideal  of  a  juridical 
union  of  men  under  public  laws  generally.  For 
all  particular  examples  or  instances,  being  able 
only  to  furnish  illustration  but  not  proof,  are 
deceptive,  and  at  all  events  require  a  meta¬ 
physic  to  establish  them  by  its  necessary  prin¬ 
ciples.  And  this  is  conceded  indirectly  even  by 
those  who  turn  metaphysics  into  ridicule,  when 
they  say,  as  they  often  do:  “The  best  constitu¬ 
tion  is  that  in  which  not  men  but  laws  exercise 
the  power.”  For  what  can  be  more  metaphysi¬ 
cally  sublime  in  its  own  way  than  this  very  idea 
of  theirs,  w’hich  according  to  their  own  asser¬ 
tion  has,  notwithstanding,  the  most  objective 
reality?  This  may  be  easily  shown  by  reference 
to  actual  instances.  And  it  is  this  very  idea 


45» 

which  alone  can  be  carried  out  practically,  if  it 
is  not  forced  on  in  a  revolutionary  and  sudden 
way  by  violent  overthrow  of  the  existing  defec¬ 
tive  constitution;  for  this  would  produce  for 
the  time  the  momentary  annihilation  of  the 


whole  juridical  state  of  society.  But  if  the  idea 
is  carried  forward  by  gradual  reform  and  in  ac¬ 
cordance  with  fixed  principles,  it  may  lead  by  a 
continuous  approximation  to  the  highest  politi¬ 
cal  good,  and  to  perpetual  peace. 


CONTENTS 


THE  CRITIQUE  OF  JUDGEMENT 


Preface  to  the  First  Edition,  1790  461 

Introduction 

I.  Division  of  Philosophy  463 

II.  The  Realm  of  Philosophy  in  General  464 

III.  The  Critique  of  Judgement  as  a  Means  of 

Connecting  the  two  parts  of  Philosophy  in  a 
whole  465 

IV.  Judgement  as  a  Faculty  by  which  Laws  are 

prescribed  a  priori  467 

V.  Principle  of  formal  finality  of  Nature  is  a 
transcendental  Principle  of  Judgement .  467 

VI.  The  Association  of  Feeling  of  Pleasure  with 
the  Concept  of  Finality  of  Nature  470 

VII.  The  Aesthetic  Representation  of  the  Finality 
of  Nature  47 1 

VIII.  The  Logical  Representation  of  the  Finality 
of  Nature  473 

IX.  Joinder  of  the  Legislations  of  Understanding 
and  Reason  by  means  of  Judgement  474 
First  Part 

Critique  of  Aesthetic  Judgement 
Section  I.  Analytic  of  Aesthetic  Judgement 
Book  I.  Analytic  of  the  Beautiful 
First  Moment.  Of  the  Judgement  of  Taste:  Mo¬ 
ment  of  Quality 

1.  The  judgement  of  taste  is  aesthetic  476 

2.  The  delight  which  determines  the  judgement  of 

taste  is  independent  of  all  interest  476 

3.  Delight  in  the  agreeable  is  coupled  with  in¬ 
terest  477 

4.  Delight  in  the  good  is  coupled  with  inter¬ 
est  478 

5.  Comparison  of  the  three  specifically  different 

kinds  of  delight  479 

Definition  of  the  Beautiful  derived  from  the  First 
Moment  479 

Second  Moment.  Of  the  Judgement  of  Taste: 
Moment  of  Quantity 

6.  The  beautiful  is  that  which,  apart  from  con¬ 

cepts,  is  represented  as  the  object  of  a  univer¬ 
sal  delight  479 

7.  Comparison  of  the  beautiful  with  the  agree¬ 

able  and  the  good  by  means  of  the  above  char¬ 
acteristic  480 

8.  In  a  judgement  of  taste  the  universality  of  de¬ 
light  is  only  represented  as  subjective  480 

9.  Investigation  of  the  question  of  the  relative 
priority  in  a  judgement  of  taste  of  the  feeling 
of  pleasure  and  the  estimating  of  the  object  482 

Definition  of  the  Beautiful  drawn  from  the  Second 
Moment  483 

Third  Moment.  Of  Judgements  of  Taste:  Mo¬ 
ment  of  the  relation  of  the  Ends  brought  under 
Review  in  such  Judgements 

10.  Finality  in  general  483 

11.  The  sole  foundation  of  the  judgement  of  taste 


is  the  form  of  finality  of  an  object  (or  mode 
of  representing  it)  484 

12.  The  judgement  of  taste  rests  upon  a  priori 

grounds  484 

13.  The  pure  judgement  of  taste  is  independent  of 

charm  and  emotion  485 

14.  Exemplification  485 

15.  The  judgement  of  taste  is  entirely  independent 

of  the  concept  of  perfection  486 

16.  A  judgement  of  taste  by  which  an  object  is  de¬ 

scribed  as  beautiful,  under  the  condition  of  a 
definite  concept,  is  not  pure  488 

17.  The  Ideal  of  beauty  489 

Definition  of  the  Beautiful  derived  from  this  Third 

Moment  491 

Fourth  Moment.  Of  the  Judgement  of  Taste: 
Moment  of  the  Modality  of  the  Delight  in  the 
Object 

18.  Nature  of  the  modality  in  a  judgement  of 

taste  491 

19.  The  subjective  necessity  attributed  to  a  judge¬ 
ment  of  taste  is  conditioned  492 

20.  The  condition  of  the  necessity  advanced  by  a 

judgement  of  taste  is  the  idea  of  a  common 
sense  492 

21.  Have  we  reason  for  presupposing  a  common 

sense  ?  492 

22.  The  necessity  of  the  universal  assent  that  is 

thought  in  a  judgement  of  taste,  is  a  sub¬ 
jective  necessity  which,  under  the  presuppo¬ 
sition  of  a  common  sense,  is  represented  as 
objective  492 

Definition  of  the  Beautiful  drawn  from  the  Fourth 
Moment  493 

General  Remark  upon  the  First  Section  of  the 
Analytic  493 

Book  II.  Analytic  of  the  Sublime 

23.  Transition  from  the  faculty  of  estimating  the 
beautiful  to  that  of  estimating  the  sublime  495 

24.  Subdivision  of  an  investigation  of  the  feeling 

of  the  sublime  496 

A.  The  Mathematically  Sublime 

25.  Definition  of  the  term  “sublime”  497 

26.  The  estimation  of  the  magnitude  of 
natural  things  requisite  for  the  idea  of 

the  sublime  498 

27.  Quality  of  the  delight  in  our  estimate  of  the 

sublime  501 

B.  The  Dynamically  Sublime  in  Nature 

28.  Nature  as  Might  502 

20.  Modality  of  the  judgement  on  the  sublime  in 

nature  505 

General  Remark  upon  the  Exposition  of  Aes¬ 
thetic  Reflective  Judgements  506 

Deduction  of  Pure  Aesthetic  Judgements 
30.  The  deduction  of  aesthetic  judgements  upon 


459 


46o  contents 

objects  of  nature  must  not  be  directed  to  what  65.  Things  considered  as  physical  ends  are  organ- 


vve  call  sublime  in  nature,  but  only  to  the 
beautiful  Si  2 

31.  Of  the  method  of  the  deduction  of  judgements 

of  taste  5 1 2 

32.  First  peculiarity  of  judgement  of  taste.  513 

33.  Second  peculiarity  of  judgement  of  taste  514 

34.  An  objective  principle  of  taste  is  not  possi- 

ble  5i5 

35.  The  principle  of  taste  is  the  subjective  principle 

of  the  general  power  of  judgement  515 

36.  The  problem  of  a  deduction  of  judgements  of 

taste  S1^ 

37.  What  exactly  it  is  that  is  asserted  a  priori  of 

an  object  in  a  judgement  of  taste  5l6 

38.  Deduction  of  judgements  of  taste  517 

Remark  51 7 

39.  The  communicability  of  a  sensation  518 

40.  Taste  as  a  kind  of  sensus  communis  518 

41.  The  empirical  interest  in  the  beautiful  520 

42.  The  intellectual  interest  in  the  beautiful  521 

43.  Art  in  general  523 

44.  Fine  art  S24 

45.  Fine  art  is  an  art,  so  far  as  it  has  at  the  same 

time  the  appearance  of  being  nature  525 

46.  Fine  art  is  the  art  of  genius  525 

47.  Elucidation  and  confirmation  of  the  above  ex¬ 
planation  of  genius  526 

48.  The  relation  of  genius  to  taste  527 

49.  The  faculties  of  the  mind  which  constitute 

genius  528 

The  combination  of  taste  and  genius  in  prod¬ 
ucts  of  fine  art  53 1 

The  division  of  the  fine  arts  532 

The  combination  of  the  fine  arts  in  one  and 
the  same  product  534 

Comparative  estimate  of  the  aesthetic  worth 
of  the  fine  arts  535 

Remark  537 

Suction  II.  Dialectic  of  Aesthetic  Judgement 


50 

51. 

52. 

53- 

54- 


55. 

56. 
57- 


58. 


540 

Representation  of  the  antinomy  of  taste  540 

Solution  of  the  antinomy  of  taste  540 

Remark  1.  542 

Remark  2 .  543 

The  idealism  of  the  finality  alike  of  nature  and 
of  art,  as  the  unique  principle  of  the  aesthetic 


544 

546 

548 


550 


judgement 

59.  Beauty  as  the  symbol  of  morality 

60.  Appendix:  The  methodology  of  taste 

Second  Part 

Critique  of  Teleological  Judgement 

61.  Objective  finality  in  nature, 
f  Introduction] 

First  Division:  Analytic  of  Teleological 
Judgement 

62.  Purely  formal,  as  distinguished  from  material, 

objective  finality  551 

63.  Relative,  as  distinguished  from  intrinsic,  final¬ 
ity  of  nature  553 

64.  The  distinctive  character  of  things  considered 

as  physical  ends  555 


isms  556 

66.  The  principle  on  which  the  intrinsic  finality  in 

organisms  is  estimated  558 

67.  The  principle  on  which  nature  in  general  is  es¬ 
timated  teleologically  as  a  system  of  ends  359 

68.  The  principle  of  teleology  considered  as  an  in¬ 
herent  principle  of  natural  science  560 

Second  Division:  Dialectic  of  Teleological 
Judgement 

69.  Nature  of  an  antinomy  of  judgement  362 

70.  Exposition  of  this  antinomy  562 

71.  Introduction  to  the  solution  of  the  above  anti¬ 
nomy  564 

72.  The  various  kinds  of  systems  dealing  with  the 

finality  of  nature  564 

73.  None  of  the  above  systems  does  what  it  pro¬ 
fesses  to  do  566 

74.  The  impossibility  of  treating  the  concept  of  a 

technic  of  nature  dogmatically  springs  from 
the  inexplicability  of  a  physical  end  567 

75.  The  conception  of  an  objective  finality  of  na¬ 

ture  is  a  critical  principle  of  reason  for  the  use 
of  the  reflective  judgement  568 

76.  Remark  370 

77.  The  peculiarity  of  human  understanding  that 

makes  the  conception  of  a  physical  end  pos¬ 
sible  for  us  572 

78.  The  union  of  the  principle  of  the  universal 

mechanism  of  matter  with  the  teleological 
principle  in  the  technic  of  nature  575 

Appendix:  Theory  of  the  Method  of  Applying  the 
Teleological  Judgement 

79.  Whether  teleology  must  be  treated  as  a  branch 

of  natural  science  578 

80.  The  necessary  subordination  of  the  principle 

of  mechanism  to  the  teleological  principle  in 
the  explanation  of  a  thing  regarded  as  a  physi¬ 
cal  end  578 

81.  The  association  of  mechanism  with  the  teleo¬ 

logical  principle  which  we  apply  to  the  explana¬ 
tion  of  a  physical  end  considered  as  a  product 
of  nature  581 

82.  The  teleological  system  in  the  extrinsic  rela¬ 
tions  of  organisms  582 

83.  The  ultimate  end  of  nature  as  a  teleological 

system  584 

84.  The  final  end  of  the  existence  of  a  world,  that 

is,  of  creation  itself  587 

85.  Physico-Theology  588 

86.  Ethico-Theology  591 

Remark  593 

87.  The  moral  proof  of  the  existence  of  God  593 

88.  Limitation  of  the  validity  of  the  moral 

proof  596 

Remark  599 

89.  The  use  of  the  moral  argument  599 

90.  The  type  of  assurance  in  a  teleological  proof 

of  the  existence  of  God  600 

91.  The  type  of  assurance  produced  by  a  practical 

faith  603 

General  Remark  on  Teleology  607 


PREFACE  TO  THE  FIRST  EDITION  1790 


The  faculty  of  knowledge  from  a  priori  prin¬ 
ciples  may  be  called  pure  reason ,  and  the  gen¬ 
eral  investigation  into  its  possibility  and  bounds 
the  Critique  of  Pure  Reason.  This  is  permissible 
although  “pure  reason,”  as  was  the  case  with 
the  same  use  of  terms  in  our  first  work,  is  only 
intended  to  denote  reason  in  its  theoretical  em¬ 
ployment,  and  although  there  is  no  desire  to 
bring  under  review  its  faculty  as  practical  rea¬ 
son  and  its  special  principles  as  such.  That  Cri¬ 
tique  is,  then,  an  investigation  addressed  simply 
to  our  faculty  of  knowing  things  a  priori.  Hence 
it  makes  our  cognitive  faculties  its  sole  concern, 
to  the  exclusion  of  the  feeling  of  pleasure  or 
displeasure  and  the  faculty  of  desire;  and 
among  the  cognitive  faculties  it  confines  its  at¬ 
tention  to  understanding  and  its  a  priori  prin¬ 
ciples,  to  the  exclusion  of  judgement  and  rea¬ 
son ,  (faculties  that  also  belong  to  theoretical 
cognition,)  because  it  turns  out  in  the  sequel 
that  there  is  no  cognitive  faculty  other  than 
understanding  capable  of  affording  constitutive 
a  priori  principles  of  knowledge.  Accordingly 
the  critique  which  sifts  these  faculties  one  and 
all,  so  as  to  try  the  possible  claims  of  each  of 
the  other  faculties  to  a  share  in  the  clear  pos¬ 
session  of  knowledge  from  roots  of  its  own,  re¬ 
tains  nothing  but  what  understanding  prescribes 
a  priori  as  a  law  for  nature  as  the  complex  of 
phenomena — the  form  of  these  being  similarly 
furnished  a  priori.  All  other  pure  concepts  it 
relegates  to  the  rank  of  ideas,1  which  for  our 
faculty  of  theoretical  cognition  are  transcend¬ 
ent;  though  they  are  not  without  their  use  nor 
redundant,  but  discharge  certain  functions  as 
regulative  principles.2  For  these  concepts  serve 
partly  to  restrain  the  officious  pretentions  of 
understanding,  which,  presuming  on  its  ability  to 
supply  a  priori  the  conditions  of  the  possibility 
of  all  things  which  it  is  capable  of  knowing,  be¬ 

1  [The  word  is  defined  on  pp.  489,  542.  See  Critique 
of  Pure  Reason ,  pp.  113—118:  “I  understand  by  idea  a 
necessary  conception  of  reason,  to  which  no  correspond¬ 
ing  object  can  be  discovered  in  the  world  of  sense.” 
(Ibid.,  p.  1 1 7.)  “They  contain  a  certain  perfection,  at¬ 
tainable  by  no  possible  empirical  cognition;  and  they 
give  to  reason  a  systematic  unity,  to  which  the  unity  of 
experience  attempts  to  approximate,  but  can  never  com¬ 
pletely  attain.”  (Ibid.,  p.  173O] 

2  [Cf.  Critique  of  Pure  Reason ,  pp.  193-200.] 


haves  as  if  it  had  thus  determined  these  bounds 
as  those  of  the  possibility  of  all  things  generally, 
and  partly  also  to  lead  understanding,  in  its 
study  of  nature,  according  to  a  principle  of  com¬ 
pleteness,  unattainable  as  this  remains  for  it,  and 
so  to  promote  the  ultimate  aim  of  all  knowledge. 

Properly,  therefore,  it  was  understanding — 
which,  so  far  as  it  contains  constitutive  a  priori 
cognitive  principles,  has  its  special  realm,  and 
one,  moreover,  in  our  faculty  of  knowledge — 
that  the  Critique,  called  in  a  general  way  that 
of  pure  reason  was  intended  to  establish  in  se¬ 
cure  but  particular  possession  against  all  other 
competitors.  In  the  same  way  reason ,  which 
contains  constitutive  a  priori  principles  solely 
in  respect  of  the  faculty  of  desire ,  gets  its  hold¬ 
ing  assigned  to  it  by  The  Critique  of  Practical 
Reason. 

But  now  comes  judgement ,  which  in  the  or¬ 
der  of  our  cognitive  faculties  forms  a  middle 
term  between  understanding  and  reason.  Has  it 
also  got  independent  a  priori  principles?  If  so, 
are  they  constitutive,  or  are  they  merely  regula¬ 
tive,  thus  indicating  no  special  realm?  And  do 
they  give  a  rule  a  priori  to  the  feeling  of  pleas¬ 
ure  and  displeasure,  as  the  middle  term  be¬ 
tween  the  faculties  of  cognition  and  desire,  just 
as  understanding  prescribes  laws  a  priori  for  the 
former  and  reason  for  the  latter?  This  is  the 
topic  to  which  the  present  Critique  is  devoted. 

A  critique  of  pure  reason,  i.e.,  of  our  faculty 
of  judging  on  a  priori  principles,  would  be  in¬ 
complete  if  the  critical  examination  of  judge¬ 
ment,  which  is  a  faculty  of  knowledge,  and  as 
such  lays  claim  to  independent  principles,  were 
not  dealt  with  separately.  Still,  however,  its 
principles  cannot,  in  a  system  of  pure  philoso¬ 
phy,  form  a  separate  constituent  part  interme¬ 
diate  between  the  theoretical  and  practical  divi¬ 
sions,  but  may  when  needful  be  annexed  to  one 
or  other  as  occasion  requires.  For  if  such  a  sys¬ 
tem  is  some  day  worked  out  under  the  general 
name  of  metaphysic — and  its  full  and  com¬ 
plete  execution  is  both  possible  and  of  the  ut¬ 
most  importance  for  the  employment  of  reason 
in  all  departments  of  its  activity — the  critical 
examination  of  the  ground  for  this  edifice  must 
have  been  previously  carried  down  to  the  very 


PREFACE 


462 

depths  of  the  foundations  of  the  faculty  of 
principles  independent  of  experience,  lest  in 
some  quarter  it  might  give  way,  and  sinking,  in¬ 
evitably  bring  with  it  the  ruin  of  all. 

We  may  readily  gather,  however,  from  the 
nature  of  the  faculty  of  judgement  (whose  cor¬ 
rect  employment  is  so  necessary  and  universal¬ 
ly  requisite  that  it  is  just  this  faculty  that  is 
intended  when  we  speak  of  sound  understand¬ 
ing)  that  the  discovery  of  a  peculiar  principle 
belonging  to  it — and  some  such  it  must  contain 
in  itself  a  priori ,  for  otherwise  it  would  not  be 
a  cognitive  faculty  the  distinctive  character  of 
which  is  obvious  to  the  most  commonplace  crit¬ 
icism — must  be  a  task  involving  considerable 
difficulties.  For  this  principle  is  one  which  must 
not  be  derived  from  a  priori  concepts,  seeing 
that  these  are  the  property  of  understanding, 
and  judgement  is  only  directed  to  their  applica¬ 
tion.  It  has,  therefore,  itself  to  furnish  a  con¬ 
cept,  and  one  from  which,  properly,  we  get  no 
cognition  of  a  thing,  but  which  it  can  itself  em¬ 
ploy  as  a  rule  only — but  not  as  an  objective 
rule  to  which  it  can  adapt  its  judgement,  be¬ 
cause,  for  that,  another  faculty  of  judgement 
would  again  be  required  to  enable  us  to  decide 
whether  the  case  was  one  for  the  application  of 
the  rule  or  not.1 

It  is  chiefly  in  those  estimates  that  are  called 
aesthetic ,  and  which  relate  to  the  beautiful  and 
sublime,  whether  of  nature  or  of  art,  that  one 
meets  vith  the  above  difficulty  about  a  princi¬ 
ple  (be  it  subjective  or  objective).  And  yet  the 
critical  search  for  a  principle  of  judgement  in 
their  case  is  the  most  important  item  in  a  cri¬ 
tique  of  this  faculty.  For,  although  they  do  not 
of  themselves  contribute  a  whit  to  the  knowl¬ 
edge  of  things,  they  still  belong  wholly  to  the 
faculty  of  knowledge,  and  evidence  an  immedi¬ 
ate  bearing  of  this  faculty  upon  the  feeling  of 
pleasure  or  displeasure  according  to  some  a 
priori  principle,  and  do  so  without  confusing 
this  principle  with  what  is  capable  of  being  a 
determining  ground  of  the  faculty  of  desire,  for 
the  latter  has  its  principles  a  priori  in  concepts 
of  reason.  Logical  estimates  of  nature,  however, 
stand  on  a  different  footing.  They  deal  with 
cases  in  which  experience  presents  a  conformity 
to  law  in  things,  which  the  understanding’s  gen¬ 
eral  concept  of  the  sensible  is  no  longer  ade¬ 
quate  to  render  intelligible  or  explicable,  and  in 
which  judgement  may  have  recourse  to  itself 
for  a  principle  of  the  reference  of  the  natural 

1  [See  Kant’s  general  remarks  on  judgement  in  the 
Critique  of  Pure  Reason,  pp.  60-61.] 


thing  to  the  unknowable  supersensible  and,  in¬ 
deed,  must  employ  some  such  principle,  though 
with  a  regard  only  to  itself  and  the  knowledge 
of  nature.  For  in  these  cases  the  application  of 
such  an  a  priori  principle  for  the  cognition  of 
what  is  in  the  world  is  both  possible  and  neces¬ 
sary,  and  withal  opens  out  prospects  which  are 
profitable  for  practical  reason.  But  here  there 
is  no  immediate  reference  to  the  feeling  of 
pleasure  or  displeasure.  But  this  is  precisely  the 
riddle  in  the  principle  of  judgement  that  neces¬ 
sitates  a  separate  division  for  this  faculty  in 
the  critique — for  there  was  nothing  to  prevent 
the  formation  of  logical  estimates  according  to 
concepts  (from  which  no  immediate  conclusion 
can  ever  be  drawn  to  the  feeling  of  pleasure  or 
displeasure)  having  been  treated,  with  a  critical 
statement  of  its  limitations,  in  an  appendage  to 
the  theoretical  part  of  philosophy. 

The  present  investigation  of  taste,  as  a  faculty 
of  aesthetic  judgement,  not  being  undertaken 
with  a  view  to  the  formation  or  culture  of  taste 
(which  will  pursue  its  course  in  the  future,  as  in 
the  past,  independently  of  such  inquiries),  but 
being  merely  directed  to  its  transcendental  as¬ 
pects,  I  feel  assured  of  its  indulgent  criticism  in 
respect  of  any  shortcomings  on  that  score.  But 
in  all  that  is  relevant  to  the  transcendental  as¬ 
pect  it  must  be  prepared  to  stand  the  test  of 
the  most  rigorous  examination.  Yet  even  here  I 
venture  to  hope  that  the  difficulty  of  unravelling 
a  problem  so  involved  in  its  nature  may  serve  as 
an  excuse  for  a  certain  amount  of  hardly  avoid¬ 
able  obscurity  in  its  solution,  provided  that  the 
accuracy  of  our  statement  of  the  principle  is 
proved  with  all  requisite  clearness.  I  admit  that 
the  mode  of  deriving  the  phenomena  of  judge¬ 
ment  from  that  principle  has  not  all  the  lucidity 
that  is  rightly  demanded  elsewhere,  where  the 
subject  is  cognition  by  concepts,  and  that  I  be¬ 
lieve  I  have  in  fact  attained  in  the  second  part 
of  this  work. 

With  this,  then,  I  bring  my  entire  critical  un¬ 
dertaking  to  a  close.  I  shall  hasten  to  the  doctri¬ 
nal  part,  in  order,  as  far  as  possible,  to  snatch 
from  my  advancing  years  what  time  may  yet 
be  favourable  to  the  task.  It  is  obvious  that  no 
separate  division  of  doctrine  is  reserved  for  the 
faculty  of  judgement,  seeing  that,  with  judge¬ 
ment,  critique  takes  the  place  of  theory;  but, 
following  the  division  of  philosophy  into  theo¬ 
retical  and  practical,  and  of  pure  philosophy 
in  the  same  way,  the  whole  ground  will  be 
covered  by  the  metaphysics  of  nature  and 
of  morals. 


INTRODUCTION 


I.  Division  of  Philosophy 

Philosophy  may  be  said  to  contain  the  princi¬ 
ples  of  the  rational  cognition  that  concepts  af¬ 
ford  us  of  things  (not  merely,  as  with  logic,  the 
principles  of  the  form  of  thought  in  general  irre¬ 
spective  of  the  objects),  and,  thus  interpreted, 
the  course,  usually  adopted,  of  dividing  it  into 
theoretical  and  practical  is  perfectly  sound.  But 
this  makes  imperative  a  specific  distinction  on 
the  part  of  the  concepts  by  which  the  principles 
of  this  rational  cognition  get  their  object  as¬ 
signed  to  them,  for  if  the  concepts  are  not  dis¬ 
tinct  they  fail  to  justify  a  division,  which  always 
presupposes  that  the  principles  belonging  to  the 
rational  cognition  of  the  several  parts  of  the  sci¬ 
ence  in  question  are  themselves  mutually  exclu¬ 
sive. 

Now  there  are  but  two  kinds  of  concepts,  and 
these  yield  a  corresponding  number  of  distinct 
principles  of  the  possibility  of  their  objects.  The 
concepts  referred  to  are  those  of  nature  and 
that  of  freedom.  By  the  first  of  these,  a  theoreti¬ 
cal  cognition  from  a  priori  principles  becomes 
possible.  In  respect  of  such  cognition,  however, 
the  second,  by  its  very  concept,  imports  no 
more  than  a  negative  principle  (that  of  simple 
antithesis),  while  for  the  determination  of  the 
will,  on  the  other  hand,  it  establishes  fundamen¬ 
tal  principles  which  enlarge  the  scope  of  its  ac¬ 
tivity,  and  which  on  that  account  are  called  prac¬ 
tical.  Hence  the  division  of  philosophy  falls 
properly  into  two  parts,  quite  distinct  in  their 
principles — a  theoretical,  as  philosophy  of  na¬ 
ture,  and  a  practical,  as  philosophy  of  morals 
(for  this  is  what  the  practical  legislation  of  rea¬ 
son  by  the  concept  of  freedom  is  called).  Hith¬ 
erto,  however,  in  the  application  of  these  expres¬ 
sions  to  the  division  of  the  different  principles, 
and  with  them  to  the  division  of  philosophy,  a 
gross  misuse  of  the  terms  has  prevailed ;  for  what 
is  practical  according  to  concepts  of  nature  has 
been  taken  as  identical  with  what  is  practical 
according  to  the  concept  of  freedom,  with  the 
result  that  a  division  has  been  made  under  these 
heads  of  theoretical  and  practical,  by  which,  in 
effect,  there  has  been  no  division  at  all  (seeing 
that  both  parts  might  have  similar  principles). 

The  will — for  this  is  what  is  said — is  the  fac¬ 


ulty  of  desire  and,  as  such,  is  just  one  of  the 
many  natural  causes  in  the  world,  the  one,  name¬ 
ly,  which  acts  by  concepts;  and  whatever  is  rep¬ 
resented  as  possible  (or  necessary)  through  the 
efficacy  of  will  is  called  practically  possible  (or 
necessary ):  the  intention  being  to  distinguish 
its  possibility  (or  necessity)  from  the  physical 
possibility  or  necessity  of  an  effect  the  causality 
of  whose  cause  is  not  determined  to  its  produc¬ 
tion  by  concepts  (but  rather,  as  with  lifeless 
matter,  by  mechanism,  and,  as  with  the  lower 
animals,  by  instinct).  Now,  the  question  in  re¬ 
spect  of  the  practical  faculty:  whether,  that  is 
to  say,  the  concept,  by  which  the  causality  of 
the  will  gets  its  rule,  is  a  concept  of  nature  or  of 
freedom,  is  here  left  quite  open. 

The  latter  distinction,  however,  is  essential. 
For,  let  the  concept  determining  the  causality  be 
a  concept  of  nature,  and  then  the  principles  are 
technically -practical ;  but,  let  it  be  a  concept  of 
freedom,  and  they  are  morally-practical.  Now, 
in  the  division  of  a  rational  science  the  differ¬ 
ence  between  objects  that  require  different  prin¬ 
ciples  for  their  cognition  is  the  difference  on 
which  everything  turns.  Hence  technically-prac- 
tical  principles  belong  to  theoretical  philosophy 
(natural  science),  whereas  those  morally-prac¬ 
tical  alone  form  the  second  part,  that  is,  prac- 
ical  philosophy  (ethical  science). 

All  technically-practical  rules  (i.e.,  those  of 
art  and  skill  generally,  or  even  of  prudence,  as 
a  skill1  in  exercising  an  influence  over  men  and 
their  wills)  must,  so  far  as  their  principles  rest 
upon  concepts,  be  reckoned  only  as  corollaries 
to  theoretical  philosophy.  For  they  only  touch 
the  possibility  of  things  according  to  concepts 
of  nature,  and  this  embraces,  not  alone  the 
means  discoverable  in  nature  for  the  purpose, 
but  even  the  will  itself  (as  a  faculty  of  desire, 
and  consequently  a  natural  faculty),  so  far  as  it 
is  determinable  on  these  rules  by  natural  mo¬ 
tives.  Still  these  practical  rules  are  not  called 
laws  (like  physical  laws),  but  only  precepts. 
This  is  due  to  the  fact  that  the  will  does  not 
stand  simply  under  the  natural  concept,  but  also 
under  the  concept  of  freedom.  In  the  latter  con¬ 
nection  its  principles  are  called  laws,  and  these 

1  [Cf.  Fundamental  Principles  of  the  Metaphysic  of 
Morals,  p.  266;  also  Critique  of  Pure  Reason,  235.) 


464  THE  CRITIQUE 


principles,  with  the  addition  of  what  follows 
from  them,  alone  constitute  the  second  or  prac¬ 
tical  part  of  philosophy. 

The  solution  of  the  problems  of  pure  geom¬ 
etry  is  not  allocated  to  a  special  part  of  that 
science,  nor  does  the  art  of  land-surveying  merit 
the  name  of  practical,  in  contradistinction  to 
pure,  as  a  second  part  of  the  general  science  of 
geometry,  and  with  equally  little,  or  perhaps  less, 
right  can  the  mechanical  or  chemical  art  of  ex¬ 
periment  or  of  observation  be  ranked  as  a  prac¬ 
tical  part  of  the  science  of  nature,  or,  in  fine, 
domestic,  agricultural,  or  political  economy,  the 
art  of  social  intercourse,  the  principles  of  dietet¬ 
ics,  or  even  general  instruction  as  to  the  attain¬ 
ment  of  happiness,  or  as  much  as  the  control  of 
the  inclinations  or  the  restraining  of  the  affec¬ 
tions  with  a  view  thereto,  be  denominated  prac¬ 
tical  philosophy — not  to  mention  forming  these 
latter  in  a  second  part  of  philosophy  in  general. 
For,  between  them  all,  the  above  contain  noth¬ 
ing  more  than  rules  of  skill,  which  are  thus  only 
technically  practical — the  skill  being  directed  to 
producing  an  effect  which  is  possible  according 
to  natural  concepts  of  causes  and  effects.  As 
these  concepts  belong  to  theoretical  philosophy, 
they  are  subject  to  those  precepts  as  mere  corol¬ 
laries  of  theoretical  philosophy  (i.e.,  as  corolla¬ 
ries  of  natural  science),  and  so  cannot  claim  any 
place  in  any  special  philosophy  called  practical. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  morally  practical  pre¬ 
cepts,  which  are  founded  entirely  on  the  concept 
of  freedom,  to  the  complete  exclusion  of  grounds 
taken  from  nature  for  the  determination  of  the 
will,  form  quite  a  special  kind  of  precepts. 
These,  too,  like  the  rules  obeyed  by  nature,  are, 
without  qualification,  called  laws — though  they 
do  not,  like  the  latter,  rest  on  sensible  conditions, 
but  upon  a  supersensible  principle — and  they 
must  needs  have  a  separate  part  of  philosophy 
allotted  to  them  as  their  own,  corresponding  to 
the  theoretical  part,  and  termed  practical  phi¬ 
losophy. 

Hence  it  is  evident  that  a  complex  of  practical 
precepts  furnished  by  philosophy  does  not  form 
a  special  part  of  philosophy,  co-ordinate  with 
the  theoretical,  by  reason  of  its  precepts  being 
practical — for  that  they  might  be,  notwithstand¬ 
ing  that  their  principles  were  derived  wholly 
from  the  theoretical  knowledge  of  nature  (as 
technically-practical  rules).  But  an  adequate 
reason  only  exists  where  their  principle,  being 
in  no  way  borrowed  from  the  concept  of  nature, 
which  is  always  sensibly  conditioned,  rests  con¬ 
sequently  on  the  supersensible,  which  the  con¬ 
cept  of  freedom  alone  makes  cognizable  by 


means  of  its  formal  laws,  and  where,  therefore, 
they  are  morally-practical,  i.e.,  not  merely  pre¬ 
cepts  and  rules  in  this  or  that  interest,  but  laws 
independent  of  all  antecedent  reference  to  ends 
or  aims. 

II.  The  Realm  of  Philosophy  in  General 

The  employment  of  our  faculty  of  cognition 
from  principles,  and  with  it  philosophy,  is  coex¬ 
tensive  with  the  applicability  of  a  priori  con¬ 
cepts. 

Now  a  division  of  the  complex  of  all  the  ob¬ 
jects  to  which  those  concepts  are  referred  for 
the  purpose,  where  possible,  of  compassing  their 
knowledge,  may  be  made  according  to  the  varied 
competence  or  incompetence  of  our  faculty  in 
that  connection. 

Concepts,  so  far  as  they  are  referred  to  ob¬ 
jects  apart  from  the  question  of  whether  knowl¬ 
edge  of  them  is  possible  or  not,  have  their  field, 
which  is  determined  simply  by  the  relation  in 
which  their  object  stands  to  our  faculty  of  cog¬ 
nition  in  general.  The  part  of  this  field  in  which 
knowledge  is  possible  for  us  is  a  territory  (ter- 
ritorium)  for  these  concepts  and  the  requisite 
cognitive  faculty.  The  part  of  the  territory  over 
which  they  exercise  legislative  authority  is  the 
realm  ( ditio )  of  these  concepts,  and  their  appro¬ 
priate  cognitive  faculty.  Empirical  concepts 
have,  therefore,  their  territory,  doubtless,  in  na¬ 
ture  as  the  complex  of  all  sensible  objects,  but 
they  have  no  realm  (only  a  dwelling-place, 
domicilium) ,  for,  although  they  are  formed  ac¬ 
cording  to  law,  they  are  not  themselves  legisla¬ 
tive,  but  the  rules  founded  on  them  are  empiri¬ 
cal  and,  consequently,  contingent. 

Our  entire  faculty  of  cognition  has  two  realms, 
that  of  natural  concepts  and  that  of  the  concept 
of  freedom,  for  through  both  it  prescribes  laws 
a  priori.  In  accordance  with  this  distinction, 
then,  philosophy  is  divisible  into  theoretical  and 
practical.  But  the  territory  upon  which  its  realm 
is  established,  and  over  which  it  exercises  its 
legislative  authority,  is  still  always  confined  to 
the  complex  of  the  objects  of  all  possible  experi¬ 
ence,  taken  as  no  more  than  mere  phenomena, 
for  otherwise  legislation  by  the  understanding 
in  respect  of  them  is  unthinkable. 

The  function  of  prescribing  laws  by  means  of 
concepts  of  nature  is  discharged  by  understand¬ 
ing  and  is  theoretical.  That  of  prescribing  laws 
by  means  of  the  concept  of  freedom  is  dis¬ 
charged  by  reason  and  is  merely  practical.  It  is 
only  in  the  practical  sphere  that  reason  can  pre¬ 
scribe  laws;  in  respect  of  theoretical  knowledge 
(of  nature)  it  can  only  (as  by  the  understanding 


OF  JUDGEMENT  465 


advised  in  the  law)  deduce  from  given  laws  their 
logical  consequences,  which  still  always  remain 
restricted  to  nature.  But  we  cannot  reverse  this 
and  say  that  where  rules  are  practical  reason  is 
then  and  there  legislative,  since  the  rules  might 
be  technically  practical. 

Understanding  and  reason,  therefore,  have 
two  distinct  jurisdictions  over  one  and  the  same 
territory  of  experience.  But  neither  can  interfere 
with  the  other.  For  the  concept  of  freedom  just 
as  little  disturbs  the  legislation  of  nature,  as  the 
concept  of  nature  influences  legislation  through 
the  concept  of  freedom.  That  it  is  possible  for 
us  at  least  to  think  without  contradiction  of 
both  these  jurisdictions,  and  their  appropriate 
faculties,  as  co-existing  in  the  same  subject,  was 
shown  by  the  Critique  of  Pure  Reason,  since  it 
disposed  of  the  objections  on  the  other  side  by 
detecting  their  dialectical  illusion. 

Still,  how  does  it  happen  that  these  two  dif¬ 
ferent  realms  do  not  form  one  realm,  seeing  that, 
while  they  do  not  limit  each  other  in  their  legis¬ 
lation,  they  continually  do  so  in  their  effects  in 
the  sensible  world?  The  explanation  lies  in  the 
fact  that  the  concept  of  nature  represents  its 
objects  in  intuition  doubtless,  yet  not  as  things- 
in-themselves,  but  as  mere  phenomena,  whereas 
the  concept  of  freedom  represents  in  its  object 
what  is  no  doubt  a  thing-in-itself,  but  it  does  not 
make  it  intuitable,  and  further  that  neither  the 
one  nor  the  other  is  capable,  therefore,  of  fur¬ 
nishing  a  theoretical  cognition  of  its  object  (or 
even  of  the  thinking  subject)  as  a  thing-in-itself, 
or,  as  this  would  be,  of  the  supersensible — the 
idea  of  which  has  certainly  to  be  introduced  as 
the  basis  of  the  possibility  of  all  those  objects 
of  experience,  although  it  cannot  itself  ever  be 
elevated  or  extended  into  a  cognition. 

Our  entire  cognitive  faculty  is,  therefore,  pre¬ 
sented  with  an  unbounded,  but,  also,  inaccessible 
field — the  field  of  the  supersensible — in  which 
we  seek  in  vain  for  a  territory,  and  on  which, 
therefore,  we  can  have  no  realm  for  theoretical 
cognition,  be  it  for  concepts  of  understanding  or 
of  reason.  This  field  we  must  indeed  occupy  with 
ideas  in  the  interest  as  well  of  the  theoretical  as 
the  practical  employment  of  reason,  but,  in  con¬ 
nection  with  the  laws  arising  from  the  concept  of 
freedom,  we  cannot  procure  for  these  ideas  any 
but  practical  reality,  which,  accordingly,  fails  to 
advance  our  theoretical  cognition  one  step  to¬ 
wards  the  supersensible. 

Albeit,  then,  between  the  realm  of  the  natural 
concept,  as  the  sensible,  and  the  realm  of  the 
concept  of  freedom,  as  the  supersensible,  there 
is  a  great  gulf  fixed,  so  that  it  is  not  possible  to 


pass  from  the  former  to  the  latter  (by  means  of 
the  theoretical  employment  of  reason),  just  as 
if  they  were  so  many  separate  worlds,  the  first 
of  which  is  powerless  to  exercise  influence  on 
the  second:  still  the  latter  is  meant  to  influence 
the  former — that  is  to  say,  the  concept  of  free¬ 
dom  is  meant  to  actualize  in  the  sensible  world 
the  end  proposed  by  its  laws;  and  nature  must 
consequently  also  be  capable  of  being  regarded 
in  such  a  way  that  in  the  conformity  to  law  of 
its  form  it  at  least  harmonizes  with  the  possibil¬ 
ity  of  the  ends  to  be  effectuated  in  it  according 
to  the  laws  of  freedom.  There  must,  therefore, 
be  a  ground  of  the  unity  of  the  supersensible 
that  lies  at  the  basis  of  nature,  with  what  the 
concept  of  freedom  contains  in  a  practical  way, 
and  although  the  concept  of  this  ground  neither 
theoretically  nor  practically  attains  to  a  knowl¬ 
edge  of  it,  and  so  has  no  peculiar  realm  of  its 
own,  still  it  renders  possible  the  transition  from 
the  mode  of  thought  according  to  the  principles 
of  the  one  to  that  according  to  the  principles  of 
the  other.1 

III.  The  Critique  of  Judgement  as  a  means  of 
connecting  the  two  parts  of  Philosophy 
in  a  whole 

The  critique  which  deals  with  what  our  cogni¬ 
tive  faculties  are  capable  of  yielding  a  priori  has 
properly  speaking  no  realm  in  respect  of  ob¬ 
jects;  for  it  is  not  a  doctrine,  its  sole  business 
being  to  investigate  whether,  having  regard  to 
the  general  bearings  of  our  faculties,  a  doctrine 
is  possible  by  their  means,  and  if  so,  how.  Its 
field  extends  to  all  their  pretentions,  with  a  view 
to  confining  them  within  their  legitimate  bounds. 
But  what  is  shut  out  of  the  division  of  philoso¬ 
phy  may  still  be  admitted  as  a  principal  part 
into  the  general  critique  of  our  faculty  of  pure 
cognition,  in  the  event,  namely,  of  its  containing 
principles  which  are  not  in  themselves  available 
either  for  theoretical  or  practical  employment. 

Concepts  of  nature  contain  the  ground  of  all 
theoretical  cognition  a  priori  and  rest,  as  we  saw, 
upon  the  legislative  authority  of  understanding. 
The  concept  of  freedom  contains  the  ground  of 
all  sensuously  unconditioned  practical  precepts 
a  priori,  and  rests  upon  that  of  reason.  Both 

1  [Cf.  p.  473,  et  seq .;  also  Critique  of  Pure  Reason, 
pp.  236-37.  This  problem  is  discussed  in  the  Critique 
of  Practical  Reason  under  the  heading  “Of  the  Typic  of 
the  Pure  Practical  Judgement,”  p.  319,  et  seq.;  “It 
seems  absurd  to  expect  to  find  in  the  world  of  sense  a 
case  which,  while  as  such  it  depends  only  on  the  law  of 
nature,  yet  admits  of  the  application  to  it  of  a  law  of 
freedom,  and  to  which  we  can  apply  the  supersensible 
idea  of  the  morally  good  which  is  to  be  exhibited  in 
concreto .”] 


466  THE  CRITIQUE 


faculties,  therefore,  besides  their  application  in 
point  of  logical  form  to  principles  of  whatever 
origin,  have,  in  addition,  their  own  peculiar 
jurisdiction  in  the  matter  of  their  content,  and 
so,  there  being  no  further  (a  priori )  jurisdiction 
above  them,  the  division  of  philosophy  into 
theoretical  and  practical  is  justified. 

But  there  is  still  further  in  the  family  of  our 
higher  cognitive  faculties  a  middle  term  between 
understanding  and  reason.  This  is  judgement, 
of  which  we  may  reasonably  presume  by  anal¬ 
ogy  that  it  may  likewise  contain,  if  not  a  special 
authority  to  prescribe  laws,  still  a  principle  pe¬ 
culiar  to  itself  upon  which  laws  are  sought, 
although  one  merely  subjective  a  priori.  This 
principle,  even  if  it  has  no  field  of  objects  appro¬ 
priate  to  it  as  its  realm,  may  still  have  some 
territory  or  other  with  a  certain  character,  for 
which  just  this  very  principle  alone  may  be 
valid. 

But  in  addition  to  the  above  considerations 
there  is  yet  (to  judge  by  analogy)  a  further 
ground,  upon  which  judgement  may  be  brought 
into  line  with  another  arrangement  of  our  pow¬ 
ers  of  representation,  and  one  that  appears  to 
be  of  even  greater  importance  than  that  of  its 
kinship  with  the  family  of  cognitive  faculties. 
For  all  faculties  of  the  soul,  or  capacities,  are  re¬ 
ducible  to  three,  which  do  not  admit  of  any  fur¬ 
ther  derivation  from  a  common  ground:  the 
faculty  of  knowledge,  the  feeling  of  pleasure  or 
displeasure ,  and  the  faculty  of  desire.1  For  the 

1  Where  one  has  reason  to  suppose  that  a  relation  sub¬ 
sists  between  concepts  that  are  used  as  empirical  princi¬ 
ples  and  the  faculty  of  pure  cognition  a  priori ,  it  is 
worth  while  attempting,  in  consideration  of  this  connec¬ 
tion,  to  give  them  a  transcendental  definition — a  defini¬ 
tion,  that  is,  by  pure  categories,  so  far  as  these  by  them¬ 
selves  adequately  indicate  the  distinction  of  the  concept 
in  question  from  others.  This  course  follows  that  of  the 
mathematician,  who  leaves  the  empirical  data  of  his 
problem  indeterminate,  and  only  brings  their  relation  in 
pure  synthesis  under  the  concepts  of  pure  arithmetic, 
and  thus  generalizes  his  solution. — I  have  been  taken 
to  task  for  adopting  a  similar  procedure  ( Critique  of 
Practical  Reason,  Preface,  p.  291)  and  fault  had  been 
found  with  my  definition  of  the  faculty  of  desire  as  a 
faculty  which  by  means  of  its  representations  is  the 
cause  of  the  actuality  of  the  objects  of  those  representa¬ 
tions:  for  mere  wishes  would  still  be  desires,  and  yet  in 
their  case  every  one  is  ready  to  abandon  all  claim  to  be¬ 
ing  able  by  means  of  them  alone  to  call  their  object  into 
existence. — But  this  proves  no  more  than  the  presence 
of  desires  in  man  by  which  he  is  in  contradiction  with 
himself.  For  in  such  a  case  he  seeks  the  production  of 
the  object  by  means  of  his  representation  alone,  without 
any  hope  of  its  being  effectual,  since  he  is  conscious 
that  his  mechanical  powers  (if  I  may  so  call  those  which 
are  not  psychological),  which  would  have  to  be  deter¬ 
mined  by  that  representation,  are  either  unequal  to  the 
task  of  realizing  the  object  (by  the  intervention  of 
means,  therefore)  or  else  are  addressed  to  what  is  cjuite 
impossible,  as,  for  example,  to  undo  the  past  (O  mi  hi 
praeteritos.etc.)  or,  to  be  able  to  annihilate  the  interval 
that,  with  intolerable  delay,  divides  us  from  the  wished- 


faculty  of  cognition  understanding  alone  is  leg-  j 
islative,  if  (as  must  be  the  case  where  it  is  con-  * 
sidered  on  its  own  account  free  of  confusion 
with  the  faculty  of  desire)  this  faculty,  as  that 
of  theoretical  cognition,  is  referred  to  nature,  in 
respect  of  which  alone  (as  phenomenon)  it  is 
possible  for  us  to  prescribe  laws  by  means  of 
a  priori  concepts  of  nature,  which  are  properly 
pure  concepts  of  understanding.  For  the  faculty 
of  desire,  as  a  higher  faculty  operating  under 
the  concept  of  freedom,  only  reason  (in  which 
alone  this  concept  has  a  place)  prescribes  laws 
a  priori.  Now  between  the  faculties  of  knowl-  \ 
edge  and  desire  stands  the  feeling  of  pleasure, 
just  as  judgement  is  intermediate  between  un¬ 
derstanding  and  reason.  Hence  we  may,  provi¬ 
sionally  at  least,  assume  that  judgement  likewise 
contains  an  a  priori  principle  of  its  own,  and 
that,  since  pleasure  or  displeasure  is  necessarily 
combined  with  the  faculty  of  desire  (be  it  ante¬ 
cedent  to  its  principle,  as  with  the  lower  desires, 
or,  as  with  the  higher,  only  supervening  upon  its 
determination  by  the  moral  law),  it  will  effect  a 
transition  from  the  faculty  of  pure  knowledge, 
i.e.,  from  the  realm  of  concepts  of  nature,  to 
that  of  the  concept  of  freedorr^  just  as  in  its 
logical  employment  it  makes  possible  the  transi¬ 
tion  from  understanding  to  reason. 

Hence,  despite  the  fact  of  philosophy  being 
only  divisible  into  two  principal  parts,  the  theo¬ 
retical  and  the  practical,  and  despite  the  fact  of 
all  that  we  may  have  to  say  of  the  special  prin¬ 
ciples  of  judgement  having  to  be  assigned  to  its 
theoretical  part,  i.e.,  to  rational  cognition  ac¬ 


tor  moment. — Now,  conscious  as  we  are  in  such  fantas¬ 
tic  desires  of  the  inefficiency  of  our  representations  (or 
even  of  their  futility),  as  causes  of  their  objects,  there 
is  still  involved  in  every  wish  a  reference  of  the  same 
as  cause,  and  therefore  the  representation  of  its  cau¬ 
sality,  and  this  is  especially  discernible  where  the  wish, 
as  longing,  is  an  affection.  For  such  affections,  since 
they  dilate  the  heart  and  render  it  inert  and  thus  ex¬ 
haust  its  powers,  show  that  a  strain  is  kept  on  being  ex¬ 
erted  and  re-exerted  on  these  powers  by  the  representa¬ 
tions,  but  that  the  mind  is  allowed  continually  to  re¬ 
lapse  and  get  languid  upon  recognition  of  the  impossi¬ 
bility  before  it.  Even  prayers  for  the  aversion  of  great, 
and,  so  far  as  we  can  see,  inevitable  evils,  and  many 
superstitious  means  for  attaining  ends  impossible  of  at¬ 
tainment  by  natural  means,  prove  the  causal  reference 
of  representations  to  their  objects — a  causality  which 
not  even  the  consciousness  of  inefficiency  for  producing 
the  effect  can  deter  from  straining  towards  it.  But  why 
our  nature  should  be  furnished  with  a  propensity  to 
consciously  vain  desires  is  a  teleological  problem  of  an¬ 
thropology.  It  would  seem  that  were  we  not  to  be  deter¬ 
mined  to  the  exertion  of  our  power  before  we  had  as¬ 
sured  ourselves  of  the  efficiency  of  our  faculty  for  pro¬ 
ducing  an  object,  our  power  would  remain  to  a  large 
extent  unused.  For  as  a  rule  we  only  first  learn  to  know 
our  powers  by  making  trial  of  them.  This  deceit  of  vain 
desires  is  therefore  only  the  result  of  a  beneficent  dispo¬ 
sition  in  our  nature. 


OF  JUDGEMENT 


cording  to  concepts  of  nature:  still  the  Critique 
of  Pure  Reason ,  which  must  settle  this  whole 
question  before  the  above  system  is  taken  in 
hand,  so  as  to  substantiate  its  possibility,  con¬ 
sists  of  three  parts:  the  Critique  of  pure  under¬ 
standing,  of  pure  judgement,  and  of  pure  rea¬ 
son,  which  faculties  are  called  pure  on  the  ground 
of  their  being  legislative  a  priori. 

IV.  Judgement  as  a  Faculty  by  which  Laws  are 
prescribed  a  priori 

Judgement  in  general  is  the  faculty  of  think¬ 
ing  the  particular  as  contained  under  the  univer¬ 
sal.  If  the  universal  (the  rule,  principle,  or  law) 
is  given,  then  the  judgement  which  subsumes 
the  particular  under  it  is  determinant.  This  is  so 
even  where  such  a  judgement  is  transcendental 
and,  as  such,  provides  the  conditions  a  priori  in 
conformity  with  which  alone  subsumption  under 
that  universal  can  be  effected.  If,  however,  only 
the  particular  is  given  and  the  universal  has  to 
be  found  for  it,  then  the  judgement  is  simply 
reflective. 

The  determinant  judgement  determines  under 
universal  transcendental  laws  furnished  by  un¬ 
derstanding  and  is  subsumptive  only;  the  law 
is  marked  out  for  it  a  priori ,  and  it  has  no  need 
to  devise  a  law  for  its  own  guidance  to  enable  it 
to  subordinate  the  particular  in  nature  to  the 
universal.  But  there  are  such  manifold  forms 
of  nature,  so  many  modifications,  as  it  were,  of 
the  universal  transcendental  concepts  of  nature, 
left  undetermined  by  the  laws  furnished  by  pure 
understanding  a  priori  as  above  mentioned,  and 
for  the  reason  that  these  laws  only  touch  the 
general  possibility  of  a  nature  (as  an  object  of 
sense),  that  there  must  needs  also  be  laws  in  this 
behalf.  These  laws,  being  empirical,  may  be  con¬ 
tingent  as  far  as  the  light  of  our  understanding 
goes,  but  still,  if  they  are  to  be  called  laws  (as 
the  concept  of  a  nature  requires),  they  must  be 
regarded  as  necessary  on  a  principle,  unknown 
though  it  be  to  us,  of  the  unity  of  the  manifold. 
The  reflective  judgement  which  is  compelled  to 
ascend  from  the  particular  in  nature  to  the  uni¬ 
versal  stands,  therefore,  in  need  of  a  principle. 
This  principle  it  cannot  borrow  from  experience, 
because  what  it  has  to  do  is  to  establish  just  the 
unity  of  all  empirical  principles  under  higher, 
though  likewise  empirical,  principles,  and  thence 
the  possibility  of  the  systematic  subordination 
of  higher  and  lower.  Such  a  transcendental  prin¬ 
ciple,  therefore,  the  reflective  judgement  can 
only  give  as  a  law  from  and  to  itself.  It  cannot 
derive  it  from  any  other  quarter  (as  it  would 
then  be  a  determinant  judgement).  Nor  can  it 


467 

prescribe  it  to  nature,  for  reflection  on  the  laws 
of  nature  adjusts  itself  to  nature,  and  not  nature 
to  the  conditions  according  to  which  we  strive 
to  obtain  a  concept  of  it — a  concept  that  is  quite 
contingent  in  respect  of  these  conditions. 

Now  the  principle  sought  can  only  be  this:  as 
universal  laws  of  nature  have  their  ground  in 
our  understanding,  which  prescribes  them  to 
nature  (though  only  according  to  the  universal 
concept  of  it  as  nature),  particular  empirical 
laws  must  be  regarded,  in  respect  of  that  which 
is  left  undetermined  in  them  by  these  universal 
laws,  according  to  a  unity  such  as  they  would 
have  if  an  understanding  (though  it  be  not  ours) 
had  supplied  them  for  the  benefit  of  our  cogni¬ 
tive  faculties,  so  as  to  render  possible  a  system 
of  experience  according  to  particular  natural 
laws.  This  is  not  to  be  taken  as  implying  that 
such  an  understanding  must  be  actually  assum¬ 
ed  (for  it  is  only  the  reflective  judgement  which 
avails  itself  of  this  idea  as  a  principle  for  the 
purpose  of  reflection  and  not  for  determining 
anything) ;  but  this  faculty  rather  gives  by  this 
means  a  law  to  itself  alone  and  not  to  nature. 

Now  the  concept  of  an  object,  so  far  as  it  con¬ 
tains  at  the  same  time  the  ground  of  the  actual¬ 
ity  of  this  object,  is  called  its  end ,  and  the  agree¬ 
ment  of  a  thing  with  that  constitution  of  things 
which  is  only  possible  according  to  ends,  is  called 
the  finality  of  its  form.  Accordingly  the  prin¬ 
ciple  of  judgement,  in  respect  of  the  form  of  the 
things  of  nature  under  empirical  laws  generally, 
is  the  finality  of  nature  in  its  multiplicity.  In 
other  words,  by  this  concept  nature  is  represent¬ 
ed  as  if  an  understanding  contained  the  ground 
of  the  unity  of  the  manifold  of  its  empirical 
laws. 

The  finality  of  nature  is,  therefore,  a  particu¬ 
lar  a  priori  concept,  which  has  its  origin  solely 
in  the  reflective  judgement.  For  we  cannot  as¬ 
cribe  to  the  products  of  nature  anything  like  a 
reference  of  nature  in  them  to  ends,  but  we  can 
only  make  use  of  this  concept  to  reflect  upon 
them  in  respect  of  the  nexus  of  phenomena  in 
nature — a  nexus  given  according  to  empirical 
laws.  Furthermore,  this  concept  is  entirely  dif¬ 
ferent  from  practical  finality  (in  human  art  or 
even  morals),  though  it  is  doubtless  thought 
after  this  analogy. 

V.  The  Principle  of  the  formal  finality  of  Nature 

is  a  transcendental  Principle  of  Judgement 

A  transcendental  principle  is  one  through 
which  we  represent  a  priori  the  universal  condi¬ 
tion  under  which  alone  things  can  become  ob¬ 
jects  of  our  cognition  generally.  A  principle,  on 


468  THE  CRITIQUE 


the  other  hand,  is  called  metaphysical  where  it 
represents  a  priori  the  condition  under  which 
alone  objects  whose  concept  has  to  be  given 
empirically  may  become  further  determined  a 
priori.  Thus  the  principle  of  the  cognition  of 
bodies  as  substances,  and  as  changeable  sub¬ 
stances,  is  transcendental  where  the  statement  is 
that  their  change  must  have  a  cause:  but  it  is 
metaphysical  where  it  asserts  that  their  change 
must  have  an  external  cause.  For,  in  the  first 
case,  bodies  need  only  be  thought  through  onto¬ 
logical  predicates  (pure  concepts  of  understand¬ 
ing)  e.g.,  as  substance,  to  enable  the  proposition 
to  be  cognized  a  priori ;  whereas,  in  the  second 
case,  the  empirical  concept  of  a  body  (as  a  mov¬ 
able  thing  in  space)  must  be  introduced  to  sup¬ 
port  the  proposition,  although,  once  this  is  done, 
it  may  be  seen  quite  a  priori  that  the  latter  pred¬ 
icate  (movement  only  by  means  of  an  external 
cause)  applies  to  body.  In  this  way,  as  I  shall 
show  presently,  the  principle  of  the  finality  of 
nature  (in  the  multiplicity  of  its  empirical  laws) 
is  a  transcendental  principle.  For  the  concept  of 
objects,  regarded  as  standing  under  this  princi¬ 
ple,  is  only  the  pure  concept  of  objects  of  possi¬ 
ble  empirical  cognition  generally,  and  involves 
nothing  empirical.  On  the  other  hand,  the  prin¬ 
ciple  of  practical  finality,  implied  in  the  idea  of 
the  determination  of  a  free  will,  would  be  a 
metaphysical  principle,  because  the  concept  of 
a  faculty  of  desire,  as  will,  has  to  be  given  em¬ 
pirically,  i.e.,  is  not  included  among  transcen¬ 
dental  predicates.  But  both  these  principles  are, 
none  the  less,  not  empirical,  but  a  priori  princi¬ 
ples;  because  no  further  experience  is  required 
for  the  synthesis  of  the  predicate  with  the  em¬ 
pirical  concept  of  the  subject  of  their  judge¬ 
ments,  but  it  may  be  apprehended  quite  a  priori. 

That  the  concept  of  a  finality  of  nature  be¬ 
longs  to  transcendental  principles  is  abundantly 
evident  from  the  maxims  of  judgement  upon 
which  we  rely  a  priori  in  the  investigation  of  na¬ 
ture,  and  which  yet  have  to  do  with  no  more 
than  the  possibility  of  experience,  and  conse¬ 
quently  of  the  knowledge  of  nature — but  of  na¬ 
ture  not  merely  in  a  general  way,  but  as  deter¬ 
mined  by  a  manifold  of  particular  laws.  These 
maxims  crop  up  frequently  enough  in  the  course 
of  this  science,  though  only  in  a  scattered  way. 
They  are  aphorisms  of  metaphysical  wisdom, 
making  their  appearance  in  a  number  of  rules 
the  necessity  of  which  cannot  be  demonstrated 
from  concepts.  “Nature  takes  the  shortest  way 
( lex  parsimoniae) ;  yet  it  makes  no  leap,  either  in 
the  sequence  of  its  changes,  or  in  the  juxtaposi¬ 
tion  of  specifically  different  forms  (lex  continui 


in  natura ) ;  its  vast  variety  in  empirical  laws  is 
for  all  that,  unity  under  a  few  principles  (prin- 
cipia  praeter  necessitatem  non  sunt  multiplican- 
da and  so  forth. 

If  we  propose  to  assign  the  origin  of  these  ele¬ 
mentary  rules,  and  attempt  to  do  so  on  psycho¬ 
logical  lines,  we  go  straight  in  the  teeth  of  their 
sense.  For  they  tell  us,  not  what  happens,  i.e., 
according  to  what  rule  our  powers  of  judgement 
actually  discharge  their  functions,  and  how  we 
judge,  but  how  we  ought  to  judge;  and  we  can¬ 
not  get  this  logical  objective  necessity  where  the 
principles  are  merely  empirical.  Hence  the  final¬ 
ity  of  nature  for  our  cognitive  faculties  and  their 
employment,  which  manifestly  radiates  from 
them,  is  a  transcendental  principle  of  judge¬ 
ments,  and  so  needs  also  a  transcendental  deduc¬ 
tion,  by  means  of  which  the  ground  for  this 
mode  of  judging  must  be  traced  to  the  a  priori 
sources  of  knowledge. 

Now,  looking  at  the  grounds  of  the  possibility 
of  an  experience,  the  first  thing,  of  course,  that 
meets  us  is  something  necessary — namely,  the 
universal  laws  apart  from  which  nature  in  gen¬ 
eral  (as  an  object  of  sense)  cannot  be  thought. 
These  rest  on  the  categories,  applied  to  the  for¬ 
mal  conditions  of  all  intuition  possible  for  us, 
so  far  as  it  is  also  given  a  priori.  Under  these 
laws,  judgement  is  determinant;  for  it  has  noth¬ 
ing  else  to  do  than  to  subsume  under  given  laws. 
For  instance,  understanding  says:  all  change 
has  its  cause  (universal  law  of  nature);  tran¬ 
scendental  judgement  has  nothing  further  to  do 
than  to  furnish  a  priori  the  condition  of  sub¬ 
sumption  under  the  concept  of  understanding 
placed  before  it:  this  we  get  in  the  succession  of 
the  determinations  of  one  and  the  same  thing. 
Now  for  nature  in  general,  as  an  object  of  possi¬ 
ble  experience,  that  law  is  cognized  as  absolutely 
necessary.  But  besides  this  formal  time-condi¬ 
tion,  the  objects  of  empirical  cognition  are  de¬ 
termined,  or,  so  far  as  we  can  judge  a  priori, 
are  determinable,  in  divers  ways,  so  that  specif¬ 
ically  differentiated  natures,  over  and  above  what 
they  have  in  common  as  things  of  nature  in  gen¬ 
eral,  are  further  capable  of  being  causes  in  an  in¬ 
finite  variety  of  ways;  and  each  of  these  modes 
must,  on  the  concept  of  a  cause  in  general,  have 
its  rule,  which  is  a  law,  and,  consequently,  im¬ 
ports  necessity:  although  owing  to  the  constitu¬ 
tion  and  limitations  of  our  faculties  of  cognition 
we  may  entirely  fail  to  see  this  necessity.  Ac¬ 
cordingly,  in  respect  of  nature’s  merely  empiri¬ 
cal  laws,  we  must  think  in  nature  a  possibility  of 
an  endless  multiplicity  of  empirical  laws,  which 
yet  are  contingent  so  far  as  our  insight  goes,  i.e.. 


OF  JUDGEMENT  469 


cannot  be  cognize*/  a  priori.  In  respect  of  these 
we  estimate  the  unity  of  nature  according  to 
empirical  laws,  and  the  possibility  of  the  unity 
of  experience,  as  a  system  according  to  empirical 
laws,  to  be  contingent.  But,  now,  such  a  unity  is 
one  which  must  be  necessarily  presupposed  and 
assumed,  as  otherwise  we  should  not  have  a 
thoroughgoing  connection  of  empirical  cognition 
in  a  whole  of  experience.  For  the  universal  laws 
of  nature,  while  providing,  certainly,  for  such  a 
connection  among  things  generically,  as  things 
of  nature  in  general,  do  not  do  so  for  them  spe¬ 
cifically  as  such  particular  things  of  nature. 
Hence  judgement  is  compelled,  for  its  own  guid¬ 
ance,  to  adopt  it  as  an  a  priori  principle,  that 
what  is  for  human  insight  contingent  in  the  par¬ 
ticular  (empirical)  laws  of  nature  contains  nev¬ 
ertheless  unity  of  law  in  the  synthesis  of  its 
manifold  in  an  intrinsically  possible  experience 
— unfathomable,  though  still  thinkable,  as  such 
unity  may,  no  doubt,  be  for  us.  Consequently, 
as  the  unity  of  law  in  a  synthesis,  which  is  cog¬ 
nized  by  us  in  obedience  to  a  necessary  aim  (a 
need  of  understanding),  though  recognized  at 
the  same  time  as  contingent,  is  represented  as  a 
finality  of  objects  (here  of  nature),  so  judge¬ 
ment,  which,  in  respect  of  things  under  possible 
(yet  to  be  discovered)  empirical  laws,  is  merely 
reflective,  must  regard  nature  in  respect  of  the 
latter  according  to  a  principle  of  finality  for  our 
cognitive  faculty,  which  then  finds  expression  in 
the  above  maxims  of  judgement.  Now  this  tran¬ 
scendental  concept  of  a  finality  of  nature  is 
neither  a  concept  of  nature  nor  of  freedom, 
since  it  attributes  nothing  at  all  to  the  object, 
i.e.,  to  nature,  but  only  represents  the  unique 
mode  in  which  we  must  proceed  in  our  reflection 
upon  the  objects  of  nature  with  a  view  to  getting 
a  thoroughly  interconnected  whole  of  experi¬ 
ence,  and  so  is  a  subjective  principle,  i.e.,  maxim, 
of  judgement.  For  this  reason,  too,  just  as  if  it 
were  a  lucky  chance  that  favoured  us,  we  are  re¬ 
joiced  (properly  speaking,  relieved  of  a  want) 
where  we  meet  with  such  systematic  unity  under 
merely  empirical  laws:  although  we  must  neces¬ 
sarily  assume  the  presence  of  such  a  unity,  apart 
from  any  ability  on  our  part  to  apprehend  or 
prove  its  existence. 

In  order  to  convince  ourselves  of  the  correct¬ 
ness  of  this  deduction  of  the  concept  before  us, 
and  the  necessity  of  assuming  it  as  a  transcen¬ 
dental  principle  of  cognition,  let  us  just  bethink 
ourselves  of  the  magnitude  of  the  task.  We  have 
to  form  a  connected  experience  from  given  per¬ 
ceptions  of  a  nature  containing  a  maybe  endless 
multiplicity  of  empirical  laws,  and  this  problem 


has  its  seat  a  priori  in  our  understanding.  This 
understanding  is  no  doubt  a  priori  in  possession 
of  universal  laws  of  nature,  apart  from  which 
nature  would  be  incapable  of  being  an  object  of 
experience  at  all.  But  over  and  above  this  it 
needs  a  certain  order  of  nature  in  its  particular 
rules  which  are  only  capable  of  being  brought 
to  its  knowledge  empirically,  and  which,  so  far 
as  it  is  concerned  are  contingent.  These  rules, 
without  which  we  would  have  no  means  of  ad¬ 
vance  from  the  universal  analogy  of  a  possible 
experience  in  general  to  a  particular,  must  be 
regarded  by  understanding  as  laws,  i.e.,  as  neces¬ 
sary — for  otherwise  they  would  not  form  an  or¬ 
der  of  nature — though  it  be  unable  to  cognize  or 
ever  get  an  insight  into  their  necessity.  Albeit, 
then,  it  can  determine  nothing  a  priori  in  respect 
of  these  (objects),  it  must,  in  pursuit  of  such 
empirical  so-called  laws,  lay  at  the  basis  of  all 
reflection  upon  them  an  a  priori  principle,  to  the 
effect,  namely,  that  a  cognizable  order  of  nature 
is  possible  according  to  them.  A  principle  of  this 
kind  is  expressed  in  the  following  propositions. 
There  is  in  nature  a  subordination  of  genera  and 
species  comprehensible  by  us:  Each  of  these 
genera  again  approximates  to  the  others  on  a 
common  principle,  so  that  a  transition  may  be 
possible  from  one  to  the  other,  and  thereby  to  a 
higher  genus:  While  it  seems  at  the  outset  un¬ 
avoidable  for  our  understanding  to  assume  for 
the  specific  variety  of  natural  operations  a  like 
number  of  various  kinds  of  causality,  yet  these 
may  all  be  reduced  to  a  small  number  of  princi¬ 
ples,  the  quest  for  which  is  our  business;  and  so 
forth.  This  adaptation  of  nature  to  our  cognitive 
faculties  is  presupposed  a  priori  by  judgement 
on  behalf  of  its  reflection  upon  it  according  to 
empirical  laws.  But  understanding  all  the  while 
recognizes  it  objectively  as  contingent,  and  it  is 
merely  judgement  that  attributes  it  to  nature  as 
transcendental  finality,  i.e.,  a  finality  in  respect 
of  the  subject’s  faculty  of  cognition.  For,  were 
it  not  for  this  presupposition,  we  should  have  no 
order  of  nature  in  accordance  with  empirical 
laws,  and,  consequently,  no  guiding-thread  for 
an  experience  that  has  to  be  brought  to  bear 
upon  these  in  all  their  variety,  or  for  an  investi¬ 
gation  of  them. 

For  it  is  quite  conceivable  that,  despite  all  the 
uniformity  of  the  things  of  nature  according  to 
universal  laws,  without  which  we  would  not 
have  the  form  of  general  empirical  knowledge  at 
all,  the  specific  variety  of  the  empirical  laws  of 
nature,  with  their  effects,  might  still  be  so  great 
as  to  make  it  impossible  for  our  understanding 
to  discover  in  nature  an  intelligible  order,  to 


THE  CRITIQUE 


divide  its  products  into  genera  and  species  so  as 
to  avail  ourselves  of  the  principles  of  explana¬ 
tion  and  comprehension  of  one  for  explaining 
and  interpreting  another,  and  out  of  material 
coming  to  hand  in  such  confusion  (properly 
speaking  only  infinitely  multiform  and  ill- 
adapted  to  our  power  of  apprehension)  to  make 
a  consistent  context  of  experience. 

Thus  judgement,  also,  is  equipped  with  an  a 
priori  principle  for  the  possibility  of  nature,  but 
only  in  a  subjective  respect.  By  means  of  this  it 
prescribes  a  law,  not  to  nature  (as  autonomy), 
but  to  itself  (as  heautonomy),  to  guide  its  re¬ 
flection  upon  nature.  This  law  may  be  called  the 
law  of  the  specification  of  nature  in  respect  of 
its  empirical  laws.  It  is  not  one  cognized  a  pri¬ 
ori  in  nature,  but  judgement  adopts  it  in  the  in¬ 
terests  of  a  natural  order,  cognizable  by  our  un¬ 
derstanding,  in  the  division  which  it  makes  of 
nature’s  universal  laws  when  it  seeks  to  subor¬ 
dinate  to  them  a  variety  of  particular  laws.  So 
when  it  is  said  that  nature  specifies  its  univer¬ 
sal  laws  on  a  principle  of  finality  for  our  cogni¬ 
tive  faculties,  i.e.,  of  suitability  for  the  human 
understanding  and  its  necessary  function  of 
finding  the  universal  for  the  particular  presented 
to  it  by  perception,  and  again  for  varieties 
(which  are,  of  course,  common  for  each  species) 
connection  in  the  unity  of  principle,  we  do  not 
thereby  either  prescribe  a  law  to  nature,  or  learn 
one  from  it  by  observation — although  the  prin¬ 
ciple  in  question  may  be  confirmed  by  this 
means.  For  it  is  not  a  principle  of  the  determi¬ 
nant  but  merely  of  the  reflective  judgement.  All 
that  is  intended  is  that,  no  matter  what  is  the 
order  and  disposition  of  nature  in  respect  of  its 
universal  laws,  we  must  investigate  its  empirical 
laws  throughout  on  that  principle  and  the  max¬ 
ims  founded  thereon,  because  only  so  far  as  that 
principle  applies  can  we  make  any  headway  in 
the  employment  of  our  understanding  in  experi¬ 
ence,  or  gain  knowledge. 

VI.  The  Association  of  the  Feeling  of  Pleasure 

with  the  Concept  of  the  Finality  of  Nature 

The  conceived  harmony  of  nature  in  the 
manifold  of  its  particular  laws  with  our  need  of 
finding  universality  of  principles  for  it  must,  so 
far  as  our  insight  goes,  be  deemed  contingent, 
but  withal  indispensable  for  the  requirements  of 
our  understanding,  and,  consequently,  a  finality 
by  which  nature  is  in  accord  with  our  aim,  but 
only  so  far  as  this  is  directed  to  knowledge.  The 
universal  laws  of  understanding,  which  are 
equally  laws  of  nature,  are,  although  arising 
from  spontaneity,  just  as  necessary  for  nature 


as  the  laws  of  motion  applicable  to  matter.  Their 
origin  does  not  presuppose  any  regard  to  our 
cognitive  faculties,  seeing  that  it  is  only  by  their 
means  that  we  first  come  by  any  conception  of 
the  meaning  of  a  knowledge  of  things  (of  na¬ 
ture),  and  they  of  necessity  apply  to  nature  as 
object  of  our  cognition  in  general.  But  it  is  con¬ 
tingent,  so  far  as  we  can  see,  that  the  order  of 
nature  in  its  particular  laws,  with  their  wealth  of 
at  least  possible  variety  and  heterogeneity  tran¬ 
scending  all  our  powers  of  comprehension, 
should  still  in  actual  fact  be  commensurate  with 
these  powers.  To  find  out  this  order  is  an  under¬ 
taking  on  the  part  of  our  understanding,  which 
pursues  it  with  a  regard  to  a  necessary  end  of  its 
own,  that,  namely,  of  introducing  into  nature 
unity  of  principle.  This  end  must,  then,  be  at¬ 
tributed  to  nature  by  judgement,  since  no  law 
can  be  here  prescribed  to  it  by  understanding. 

The  attainment  of  every  aim  is  coupled  with 
a  feeling  of  pleasure.  Now  where  such  attain¬ 
ment  has  for  its  condition  a  representation  a  pri¬ 
ori — as  here  a  principle  for  the  reflective  judge¬ 
ment  in  general — the  feeling  of  pleasure  also  is 
determined  by  a  ground  which  is  a  priori  and 
valid  for  all  men :  and  that,  too,  merely  by  virtue 
of  the  reference  of  the  object  to  our  faculty  of 
cognition.  As  the  concept  of  finality  here  takes 
no  cognizance  whatever  of  the  faculty  of  desire, 
it  differs  entirely  from  all  practical  finality  of 
nature. 

As  a  matter  of  fact,  we  do  not,  and  cannot, 
find  in  ourselves  the  slightest  effect  on  the  feel¬ 
ing  of  pleasure  from  the  coincidence  of  percep¬ 
tions  with  the  laws  in  accordance  with  the  uni¬ 
versal  concepts  of  nature  (the  categories),  since 
in  their  case  understanding  necessarily  follows 
the  bent  of  its  own  nature  without  ulterior  aim. 
But,  while  this  is  so,  the  discovery,  on  the  other 
hand,  that  two  or  more  empirical  heterogeneous 
laws  of  nature  are  allied  under  one  principle  that 
embraces  them  both,  is  the  ground  of  a  very 
appreciable  pleasure,  often  even  of  admiration, 
and  such,  too,  as  does  not  wear  off  even  though 
we  are  already  familiar  enough  with  its  object. 
It  is  true  that  we  no  longer  notice  any  decided 
pleasure  in  the  comprehensibility  of  nature,  or 
in  the  unity  of  its  divisions  into  genera  and  spe¬ 
cies,  without  which  the  empirical  concepts,  that 
afford  us  our  knowledge  of  nature  in  its  particu¬ 
lar  laws,  would  not  be  possible.  Still  it  is  certain 
that  the  pleasure  appeared  in  due  course,  and 
only  by  reason  of  the  most  ordinary  experience 
being  impossible  without  it,  has  it  become 
gradually  fused  with  simple  cognition,  and  no 
longer  arrests  particular  attention.  Something, 


OF  JUDGEMENT  471 


then,  that  makes  us  attentive  in  our  estimate  of 
nature  to  its  finality  for  our  understanding — an 
endeavour  to  bring,  where  possible,  its  hetero¬ 
geneous  laws  under  higher,  though  still  always 
empirical,  laws — is  required,  in  order  that,  on 
meeting  with  success,  pleasure  may  be  felt  in 
this  their  accord  with  our  cognitive  faculty, 
which  accord  is  regarded  by  us  as  purely  contin¬ 
gent.  As  against  this,  a  representation  of  nature 
would  be  altogether  displeasing  to  us,  were  we  to 
be  forewarned  by  it  that,  on  the  least  investiga¬ 
tion  carried  beyond  the  commonest  experience, 
we  should  come  in  contact  with  such  a  hetero¬ 
geneity  of  its  laws  as  would  make  the  union  of 
its  particular  laws  under  universal  empirical 
laws  impossible  for  our  understanding.  For  this 
would  conflict  with  the  principle  of  the  subjec¬ 
tively  final  specification  of  nature  in  its  genera, 
and  with  our  own  reflective  judgement  in  respect 
thereof. 

Yet  this  presupposition  of  judgement  is  so  in¬ 
determinate  on  the  question  of  the  extent  of  the 
prevalence  of  that  ideal  finality  of  nature  for 
our  cognitive  faculties,  that  if  we  are  told  that 
a  more  searching  or  enlarged  knowledge  of  na¬ 
ture,  derived  from  observation,  must  eventually 
bring  us  into  contact  with  a  multiplicity  of  laws 
that  no  human  understanding  could  reduce  to  a 
principle,  we  can  reconcile  ourselves  to  the 
thought.  But  still  we  listen  more  gladly  to  oth¬ 
ers  who  hold  out  to  us  the  hope  that  the  more 
intimately  we  come  to  know  the  secrets  of  na¬ 
ture,  or  the  better  we  are  able  to  compare  it  with 
external  members  as  yet  unknown  to  us,  the 
more  simple  shall  we  find  it  in  its  principles,  and 
the  further  our  experience  advances  the  more 
harmonious  shall  we  find  it  in  the  apparent  het¬ 
erogeneity  of  its  empirical  laws.  For  our  judge¬ 
ment  makes  it  imperative  upon  us  to  proceed  on 
the  principle  of  the  conformity  of  nature  to  our 
faculty  of  cognition,  so  far  as  that  principle  ex¬ 
tends,  without  deciding — for  the  rule  is  not  giv¬ 
en  to  us  by  a  determinant  judgement — whether 
bounds  are  anywhere  set  to  it  or  not.  For,  while 
in  respect  of  the  rational  employment  of  our 
cognitive  faculty,  bounds  may  be  definitely  de¬ 
termined,  in  the  empirical  field  no  such  deter¬ 
mination  of  bounds  is  possible. 

VII.  The  Aesthetic  Representation  of  the 
Finality  of  Nature 

That  which  is  purely  subjective  in  the  repre¬ 
sentation  of  an  object,  i.e.,  what  constitutes  its 
reference  to  the  subject,  not  to  the  object,  is  its 
aesthetic  quality.  On  the  other  hand,  that  which 
in  such  a  representation  serves,  or  is  available, 


for  the  determination  of  the  object  (for  the  pur¬ 
pose  of  knowledge),  is  its  logical  validity.  In  the 
cognition  of  an  object  of  sense,  both  sides  are 
presented  conjointly.  In  the  sense-representa¬ 
tion  of  external  things,  the  quality  of  space  in 
which  we  intuite  them  is  the  merely  subjective 
side  of  my  representation  of  them  (by  which 
what  the  things  are  in  themselves  as  objects  is 
left  quite  open),  and  it  is  on  account  of  that  ref¬ 
erence  that  the  object  in  being  intuited  in  space 
is  also  thought  merely  as  phenomenon.  But 
despite  its  purely  subjective  quality,  space  is 
still  a  constituent  of  the  knowledge  of  things  as 
phenomena.  Sensation  (here  external)  also 
agrees  in  expressing  a  merely  subjective  side  of 
our  representations  of  external  things,  but  one 
which  is  properly  their  matter  (through  which 
we  are  given  something  with  real  existence),  just 
as  space  is  the  mere  a  priori  form  of  the  possi¬ 
bility  of  their  intuition ;  and  so  sensation  is,  none 
the  less,  also  employed  in  the  cognition  of  exter¬ 
nal  objects. 

But  that  subjective  side  of  a  representation 
which  is  incapable  of  becoming  an  element  of 
cognition ,  is  the  pleasure  or  displeasure  connect¬ 
ed  with  it;1  for  through  it  I  cognize  nothing  in 
the  object  of  the  representation,  although  it  may 
easily  be  the  result  of  the  operation  of  some  cog¬ 
nition  or  other.  Now  the  finality  of  a  thing,  so 
far  as  represented  in  our  perception  of  it,  is  in 
no  way  a  quality  of  the  object  itself  (for  a  qual¬ 
ity  of  this  kind  is  not  one  that  can  be  perceived), 
although  it  may  be  inferred  from  a  cognition  of 
things.  In  the  finality,  therefore,  which  is  prior 
to  the  cognition  of  an  object,  and  which,  even 
apart  from  any  desire  to  make  use  of  the  repre¬ 
sentation  of  it  for  the  purpose  of  a  cognition,  is 
yet  immediately  connected  with  it,  we  have  the 
subjective  quality  belonging  to  it  that  is  inca¬ 
pable  of  becoming  a  constituent  of  knowledge. 
Hence  we  only  apply  the  term  final  to  the  object 
on  account  of  its  representation  being  immedi¬ 
ately  coupled  with  the  feeling  of  pleasure:  and 
this  representation  itself  is  an  aesthetic  repre¬ 
sentation  of  the  finality.  The  only  question  is 
whether  such  a  representation  of  finality  exists 
at  all. 

If  pleasure  is  connected  with  the  mere  appre¬ 
hension  ( apprehensio )  of  the  form  of  an  object 
of  intuition,  apart  from  any  reference  it  may 
have  to  a  concept  for  the  purpose  of  a  definite 
cognition,  this  does  not  make  the  representation 

1  [Cf.  Critique  of  Pure  Reason,  p.  32:  “All  in  our 
cognition  that  belongs  to  intuition  contains  nothing 
more  than  mere  relations.  The  feelings  of  pain  and 
pleasure,  and  the  will  are  not  cognitions,  are  excepted.” 
Also  see  ibid.,  p.  235.] 


THE  CRITIQUE 


referable  to  the  object,  but  solely  to  the  subject. 
In  such  a  case,  the  pleasure  can  express  nothing 
but  the  conformity  of  the  object  to  the  cogni¬ 
tive  faculties  brought  into  play  in  the  reflective 
judgement,  and  so  far  as  they  are  in  play,  and 
hence  merely  a  subjective  formal  finality  of  the 
object  For  that  apprehension  of  forms  in  the 
imagination  can  never  take  place  without  the 
reflective  judgement,  even  when  it  has  no  inten¬ 
tion  of  so  doing,  comparing  them  at  least  with 
its  faculty  of  referring  intuitions  to  concepts.  If, 
now,  in  this  comparison,  imagination  (as  the 
faculty  of  intuitions  a  priori)  is  undesignedly 
brought  into  accord  with  understanding  (as  the 
faculty  of  concepts),  by  means  of  a  given  repre¬ 
sentation,  and  a  feeling  of  pleasure  is  thereby 
aroused,  then  the  object  must  be  regarded  as 
final  for  the  reflective  judgement.  A  judgement 
of  this  kind  is  an  aesthetic  judgement  upon  the 
finality  of  the  object,  which  does  not  depend 
upon  any  present  concept  of  the  object,  and 
does  not  provide  one.  When  the  form  of  an  ob¬ 
ject  (as  opposed  to  the  matter  of  its  represen¬ 
tation,  as  sensation)  is,  in  the  mere  act  of  re¬ 
flecting  upon  it,  without  regard  to  any  concept 
to  be  obtained  from  it,  estimated  as  the  ground 
of  a  pleasure  in  the  representation  of  such  an 
object,  then  this  pleasure  is  also  judged  to  be 
combined  necessarily  with  the  representation  of 
it,  and  so  not  merely  for  the  subject  apprehend¬ 
ing  this  form,  but  for  all  in  general  who  pass 
judgement.  The  object  is  then  called  beautiful; 
and  the  faculty  of  judging  by  means  of  such  a 
pleasure  (and  so  also  with  universal  validity)  is 
called  taste.  For  since  the  ground  of  the  pleasure 
is  made  to  reside  merely  in  the  form  of  the  ob¬ 
ject  for  reflection  generally,  consequently  not  in 
any  sensation  of  the  object,  and  without  any 
reference,  either,  to  any  concept  that  might  have 
something  or  other  in  view,  it  is  with  the  con¬ 
formity  to  law  in  the  empirical  employment  of 
judgement  generally  (unity  of  imagination  and 
understanding)  in  the  subject,  and  with  this 
alone,  that  the  representation  of  the  object  in 
reflection,  the  conditions  of  which  are  univer¬ 
sally  valid  a  priori ,  accords.  And,  as  this  accord¬ 
ance  of  the  object  with  the  faculties  of  the  sub¬ 
ject  is  contingent,  it  gives  rise  to  a  representa¬ 
tion  of  a  finality  on  the  part  of  the  object  in  re¬ 
spect  of  the  cognitive  faculties  of  the  subject. 

Here,  now,  is  a  pleasure  which — as  is  the  case 
with  all  pleasure  or  displeasure  that  is  not 
brought  about  through  the  agency  of  the  con¬ 
cept  of  freedom  (i.e.,  through  the  antecedent 
determination  of  the  higher  faculty  of  desire  by 
means  of  pure  reason) — no  concepts  could  ever 


enable  us  to  regard  as  necessarily  connected  \ 
with  the  representation  of  an  object.  It  must  f 
always  be  only  through  reflective  perception 
that  it  is  cognized  as  conjoined  with  this  rep¬ 
resentation.  As  with  all  empirical  judgements, 
it  is,  consequently,  unable  to  announce  objective 
necessity  or  lay  claim  to  a  priori  validity.  But,  - 
then,  the  judgement  of  taste  in  fact  only  lays 
claim,  like  every  other  empirical  judgement,  to  > 
be  valid  for  every  one,  and,  despite  its  inner  t 
contingency  this  is  always  possible.  The  only 
point  that  is  strange  or  out  of  the  way  about  it 
is  that  it  is  not  an  empirical  concept,  but  a  feel-  ] 
ing  of  pleasure  (and  so  not  a  concept  at  all), 
that  is  yet  exacted  from  every  one  by  the  judge-  i 
ment  of  taste,  just  as  if  it  were  a  predicate 
united  to  the  cognition  of  the  object,  and 
that  is  meant  to  be  conjoined  with  its  rep-  i 
resentation. 

A  singular  empirical  judgement,  as  for  exam¬ 
ple,  the  judgement  of  one  who  perceives  a  mov¬ 
able  drop  of  water  in  a  rock-crystal,  rightly 
looks  to  every  one  finding  the  fact  as  stated, 
since  the  judgement  has  been  formed  according 
to  the  universal  conditions  of  the  determinant 
judgement  under  the  laws  of  a  possible  experi¬ 
ence  generally.  In  the  same  way,  one  who  feels 
pleasure  in  simple  reflection  on  the  form  of  an 
object,  without  having  any  concept  in  mind, 
rightly  lays  claim  to  the  agreement  of  every  one, 
although  this  judgement  is  empirical  and  a  sin¬ 
gular  judgement.  For  the  ground  of  this  pleasure 
is  found  in  the  universal,  though  subjective, 
condition  of  reflective  judgements,  namely  the 
final  harmony  of  an  object  (be  it  a  product  of 
nature  or  of  art)  with  the  mutual  relation  of  the 
faculties  of  cognition  (imagination  and  under¬ 
standing),  which  are  requisite  for  every  empiri¬ 
cal  cognition.  The  pleasure  in  judgements  of 
taste  is,  therefore,  dependent  doubtless  on  an 
empirical  representation,  and  cannot  be  united 
a  priori  to  any  concept  (one  cannot  determine 
a  priori  what  object  will  be  in  accordance  with 
taste  or  not — one  must  find  out  the  object  that 
is  so) ;  but  then  it  is  only  made  the  determining 
ground  of  this  judgement  by  virtue  of  our  con¬ 
sciousness  of  its  resting  simply  upon  reflection 
and  the  universal,  though  only  subjective,  con¬ 
ditions  of  the  harmony  of  that  reflection  with 
the  knowledge  of  objects  generally,  for  which 
the  form  of  the  object  is  final. 

This  is  why  judgements  of  taste  are  subjected 
to  a  critique  in  respect  of  their  possibility.  For 
their  possibility  presupposes  an  a  priori  prin¬ 
ciple,  although  that  principle  is  neither  a  cog¬ 
nitive  principle  for  understanding  nor  a  prac- 


OF  JUDGEMENT 


tical  principle  for  the  will,  and  is  thus  in  no  way 
determinant  a  priori. 

Susceptibility  to  pleasure  arising  from  reflec¬ 
tion  on  the  forms  of  things  (whether  of  nature 
or  of  art)  betokens,  however,  not  only  a  finality 
on  the  part  of  objects  in  their  relation  to  the 
reflective  judgement  in  the  subject,  in  accord¬ 
ance  with  the  concept  of  nature,  but  also,  con¬ 
versely,  a  finality  on  the  part  of  the  subject, 
answering  to  the  concept  of  freedom,  in  respect 
of  the  form,  or  even  formlessness  of  objects. 
The  result  is  that  the  aesthetic  judgement  refers 
not  merely,  as  a  judgement  of  taste,  to  the 
beautiful,  but  also,  as  springing  from  a  higher 
intellectual  feeling,  to  the  sublime.  Hence  the 
above-mentioned  Critique  of  Aesthetic  Judge¬ 
ment  must  be  divided  on  these  lines  into  two 
main  parts. 

VIII.  The  Logical  Representation  of  the 
Finality  of  Nature 

There  are  two  ways  in  which  finality  may  be 
'  represented  in  an  object  given  in  experience.  It 
may  be  made  to  turn  on  what  is  purely  subjec¬ 
tive.  In  this  case  the  object  is  considered  in 
respect  of  its  form  as  present  in  apprehension 
( apprehensio )  prior  to  any  concept;1  and  the 
harmony  of  this  form  with  the  cognitive  facul¬ 
ties,  promoting  the  combination  of  the  intuition 
with  concepts  for  cognition  generally,  is  repre¬ 
sented  as  a  finality  of  the  form  of  the  object. 
Or,  on  the  other  hand,  the  representation  of 
finality  may  be  made  to  turn  on  what  is  objec¬ 
tive,  in  which  case  it  is  represented  as  the  har¬ 
mony  of  the  form  of  the  object  with  the  possi¬ 
bility  of  the  thing  itself  according  to  an  ante¬ 
cedent  concept  of  it  containing  the  ground  of 
this  form.  We  have  seen  that  the  representation 
of  the  former  kind  of  finality  rests  on  the  pleas¬ 
ure  immediately  felt  in  mere  reflection  on  the 
form  of  the  object.  But  that  of  the  latter  kind 
of  finality,  as  it  refers  the  form  of  the  object, 
not  to  the  subject’s  cognitive  faculties  engaged 
in  its  apprehension,  but  to  a  definite  cognition 
of  the  object  under  a  given  concept,  has  noth¬ 
ing  to  do  with  a  feeling  of  pleasure  in  things, 
but  only  understanding  and  its  estimate  of  them. 
Where  the  concept  of  an  object  is  given,  the 
function  of  judgement,  in  its  employment  of 
that  concept  for  cognition,  consists  in  presenta¬ 
tion  ( exhibitio ),  i.  e.,  in  placing  beside  the  con- 
j  cept  an  intuition  corresponding  to  it.  Here  it 
may  be  that  our  own  imagination  is  the  agent 
employed,  as  in  the  case  of  art,  where  we  realize 
a  preconceived  concept  of  an  object  which  we 

1  [Cf.  Critique  of  Pure  Reason,  pp.  41,  42,  86,  87.] 


set  before  ourselves  as  an  end.  Or  the  agent 
may  be  nature  in  its  technic  (as  in  the  case  of 
organic  bodies),  when  we  read  into  it  our  own 
concept  of  an  end  to  assist  our  estimate  of  its 
product.  In  this  case  what  is  represented  is  not 
a  mere  finality  of  nature  in  the  form  of  the 
thing,  but  this  very  product  as  a  natural  end. 
Although  our  concept  that  nature,  in  its  em¬ 
pirical  laws,  is  subjectively  final  in  its  forms  is 
in  no  way  a  concept  of  the  object,  but  only  a 
principle  of  judgement  for  providing  itself  with 
concepts  in  the  vast  multiplicity  of  nature,  so 
that  it  may  be  able  to  take  its  bearings,  yet,  on 
the  analogy  of  an  end,  as  it  were  a  regard  to 
our  cognitive  faculties  is  here  attributed  to  na¬ 
ture.  Natural  beauty  may,  therefore,  be  looked 
on  as  the  presentation  of  the  concept  of  formal, 
i.  e.,  merely  subjective,  finality  and  natural  ends 
as  the  presentation  of  the  concept  of  a  real,  i.e., 
objective,  finality.  The  former  of  these  we  esti¬ 
mate  by  taste  (aesthetically  by  means  of  the 
feeling  of  pleasure),  the  latter  by  understanding 
and  reason  (logically  according  to  concepts). 

On  these  considerations  is  based  the  division 
of  the  Critique  of  Judgement  into  that  of  the 
aesthetic  and  the  teleological  judgement.  By  the 
first  is  meant  the  faculty  of  estimating  formal 
finality  (otherwise  called  subjective)  by  the 
feeling  of  pleasure  or  displeasure,  by  the  sec¬ 
ond,  the  faculty  of  estimating  the  real  finality 
(objective)  of  nature  by  understanding  and 
reason. 

In  a  Critique  of  Judgement  the  part  dealing 
with  aesthetic  judgement  is  essentially  relevant, 
as  it  alone  contains  a  principle  introduced  by 
judgement  completely  a  priori  as  the  basis  of  its 
reflection  upon  nature.  This  is  the  principle  of 
nature’s  formal  finality  for  our  cognitive  facul¬ 
ties  in  its  particular  (empirical)  laws — a  prin¬ 
ciple  without  which  understanding  could  not 
feel  itself  at  home  in  nature:  whereas  no  reason 
is  assignable  a  priori,  nor  is  so  much  as  the 
possibility  of  one  apparent  from  the  concept  of 
nature  as  an  object  of  experience,  whether  in  its 
universal  or  in  its  particular  aspects,  why  there 
should  be  objective  ends  of  nature,  i.  e.,  things 
only  possible  as  natural  ends.  But  it  is  only 
judgement  that,  without  being  itself  possessed 
a  priori  of  a  principle  in  that  behalf,  in  actually 
occurring  cases  (of  certain  products)  contains 
the  rule  for  making  use  of  the  concept  of  ends 
in  the  interest  of  reason,  after  that  the  above 
transcendental  principle  has  already  prepared 
understanding  to  apply  to  nature  the  concept 
of  an  end  (at  least  in  respect  of  its  form). 

But  the  transcendental  principle  by  which  a 


THE  CRITIQUE 


finality  of  nature  in  its  subjective  reference  to 
our  cognitive  faculties,  is  represented  in  the 
form  of  a  thing  as  a  principle  of  its  estimation, 
leaves  quite  undetermined  the  question  of 
where  and  in  what  cases  we  have  to  make  our 
estimate  of  the  object  as  a  product  according 
to  a  principle  of  finality,  instead  of  simply  ac¬ 
cording  to  universal  laws  of  nature.  It  resigns  to 
the  aesthetic  judgement  the  task  of  deciding 
the  conformity  of  this  product  (in  its  form)  to 
our  cognitive  faculties  as  a  question  of  taste  (a 
matter  which  the  aesthetic  judgement  decides, 
not  by  any  harmony  with  concepts,  but  by  feel¬ 
ing).  On  the  other  hand,  judgement  as  teleolog¬ 
ically  employed  assigns  the  determinate  condi¬ 
tions  under  which  something  (e.  g.,  an  organized 
body)  is  to  be  estimated  after  the  idea  of  an 
end  of  nature.  But  it  can  adduce  no  principle 
from  the  concept  of  nature,  as  an  object  of  ex¬ 
perience,  to  give  it  its  authority  to  ascribe  a 
priori  to  nature  a  reference  to  ends,  or  even  only 
indeterminately  to  assume  them  from  actual  ex¬ 
perience  in  the  case  of  such  products.  The  rea¬ 
son  of  this  is  that,  in  order  to  be  able  merely  em¬ 
pirically  to  cognize  objective  finality  in  a  cer¬ 
tain  object,  many  particular  experiences  must 
be  collected  and  reviewed  under  the  unity  of 
their  principle.  Aesthetic  judgement  is,  there¬ 
fore,  a  special  faculty  of  estimating  according 
to  a  rule,  but  not  according  to  concepts.  The 
teleological  is  not  a  special  faculty,  but  only 
general  reflective  judgement  proceeding,  as  it 
always  does  in  theoretical  cognition,  according 
to  concepts,  but  in  respect  of  certain  objects 
of  nature,  following  special  principles — those, 
namely,  of  a  judgement  that  is  merely  reflective 
and  does  not  determine  objects.  Hence,  as  re¬ 
gards  its  application,  it  belongs  to  the  theoreti¬ 
cal  part  of  philosophy,  and  on  account  of  its 
special  principles,  which  are  not  determinant, 
as  principles  belonging  to  doctrine  have  to  be, 
it  must  also  form  a  special  part  of  the  Critique. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  aesthetic  judgement  con¬ 
tributes  nothing  to  the  cognition  of  its  objects. 
Hence  it  must  only  be  allocated  to  the  Critique 
of  the  judging  subject  and  of  its  faculties  of 
knowledge  so  far  as  these  are  capable  of  pos¬ 
sessing  a  priori  principles,  be  their  use  (theo¬ 
retical  or  practical)  otherwise  what  it  may — a 
Critique  which  is  the  propaedeutic  of  all  phi¬ 
losophy. 

IX.  Joinder  of  the  Legislations  of  Understand - 
ing  and  Reason  by  means  of  Judgement 

Understanding  prescribes  laws  a  priori  for 
nature  as  an  object  of  sense,  so  that  we  may 


have  a  theoretical  knowledge  of  it  in  a  possible 
experience.  Reason  prescribes  laws  a  priori  for 
freedom  and  its  peculiar  causality  as  the  super¬ 
sensible  in  the  subject,  so  that  we  may  have  a 
purely  practical  knowledge.  The  realm  of  the 
concept  of  nature  under  the  one  legislation,  and 
that  of  the  concept  of  freedom  under  the  other, 
are  completely  cut  off  from  all  reciprocal  influ¬ 
ence,  that  they  might  severally  (each  according 
to  its  own  principles)  exert  upon  the  other,  by 
the  broad  gulf  that  divides  the  supersensible 
from  phenomena.  The  concept  of  freedom  de¬ 
termines  nothing  in  respect  of  the  theoretical 
cognition  of  nature;  and  the  concept  of  nature 
likewise  nothing  in  respect  of  the  practical  laws 
of  freedom.  To  that  extent,  then,  it  is  not  pos¬ 
sible  to  throw  a  bridge  from  the  one  realm  to 
the  other.  Yet  although  the  determining  grounds 
of  causality  according  to  the  concept  of  free¬ 
dom  (and  the  practical  rule  that  this  contains) 
have  no  place  in  nature,  and  the  sensible  cannot 
determine  the  supersensible  in  the  subject;  still 
the  converse  is  possible  (not,  it  is  true,  in  re¬ 
spect  of  the  knowledge  of  nature,  but  of  the 
consequences  arising  from  the  supersensible  and 
bearing  on  the  sensible).  So  much  indeed  is  im¬ 
plied  in  the  concept  of  a  causality  by  freedom, 
the  operation  of  which,  in  conformity  with  the 
formal  laws  of  freedom,  is  to  take  effect  in  the 
word.  The  word  cause ,  however,  in  its  appli¬ 
cation  to  the  supersensible  only  signifies  the 
ground  that  determines  the  causality  of  things 
of  nature  to  an  effect  in  conformity  with  their 
appropriate  natural  laws,  but  at  the  same  time 
also  in  unison  with  the  formal  principle  of  the 
laws  of  reason — a  ground  which,  while  its  pos¬ 
sibility  is  impenetrable,  may  still  be  completely 
cleared  of  the  charge  of  contradiction  that  it  is 
alleged  to  involve.1  The  effect  in  accordance 
with  the  concept  of  freedom  is  the  final  end 
which  (or  the  manifestation  of  which  in  the 
sensible  world)  is  to  exist,  and  this  presupposes 

1  One  of  the  various  supposed  contradictions  in  this 
complete  distinction  of  the  causality  of  nature  from  that 
through  freedom  is  expressed  in  the  objection  that  when 
I  speak  of  hindrances  opposed  by  nature  to  causality 
according  to  laws  of  freedom  (moral  laws)  or  of  assist¬ 
ance  lent  to  it  by  nature,  I  am  all  the  time  admitting  an 
influence  of  the  former  upon  the  latter.  But  the  misin¬ 
terpretation  is  easily  avoided,  if  attention  is  only  paid 
to  the  meaning  of  the  statement.  The  resistance  or  fur¬ 
therance  is  not  between  nature  and  freedom,  but  be¬ 
tween  the  former  as  phenomenon  and  the  effects  of  the 
latter  as  phenomena  in  the  world  of  sense.  Even  the 
causality  of  freedom  (of  pure  and  practical  reason)  is 
the  causality  of  a  natural  cause  subordinated  to  freedom 
(a  causality  of  the  subject  regarded  as  man,  and  conse¬ 
quently  as  a  phenomenon),  and  one,  the  ground  of 
whose  determination  is  contained  in  the  intelligible,  that 
is  thought  under  freedom,  in  a  manner  that  is  not  further 
or  otherwise  explicable  (just  as  in  the  case  of  that  intel¬ 
ligible  that  forms  the  supersensible  substrate  of  nature.) 


OF  JUDGEMENT 


475 


the  condition  of  the  possibility  of  that  end  in 
nature  (i.  e.,  in  the  nature  of  the  subject  as  a 
being  of  the  sensible  world,  namely,  as  man). 
It  is  so  presupposed  a  priori,  and  without  regard 
to  the  practical,  by  judgement.  This  faculty, 
with  its  concept  of  a  finality  of  nature,  provides 
us  with  the  mediating  concept  between  concepts 
of  nature  and  the  concept  of  freedom — a  con¬ 
cept  that  makes  possible  the  transition  from  the 
pure  theoretical  [legislation  of  understanding] 
to  the  pure  practical  [legislation  of  reason]  and 
from  conformity  to  law  in  accordance  with  the 
former  to  final  ends  according  to  the  latter. 
For  through  that  concept  we  cognize  the  possi¬ 
bility  of  the  final  end  that  can  only  be  actualized 
in  nature  and  in  harmony  with  its  laws. 

Understanding,  by  the  possibility  of  its  sup¬ 
plying  a  priori  laws  for  nature,  furnishes  a  proof 
of  the  fact  that  nature  is  -cognized  by  us  only 
as  phenomenon,  and  in  so  doing  points  to  its 
having  a  supersensible  substrate;  but  this  sub¬ 
strate  it  leaves  quite  undetermined.  Judgement 
by  the  a  priori  principle  of  its  estimation  of 
nature  according  to  its  possible  particular  laws 
provides  this  supersensible  substrate  (within  as 
well  as  without  us)  with  determinability  through 
the  intellectual  faculty.  But  reason  gives  deter¬ 
mination  to  the  same  a  priori  by  its  practical 
law.  Thus  judgement  makes  possible  the  tran¬ 
sition  from  the  realm  of  the  concept  of  nature 
to  that  of  the  concept  of  freedom. 

In  respect  of  the  faculties  of  the  soul  gener¬ 
ally,  regarded  as  higher  faculties,  i.  e.,  as  fac¬ 
ulties  containing  an  autonomy,  understanding  is 
the  one  that  contains  the  constitutive  a  priori 
principles  for  the  faculty  of  cognition  (the  the¬ 
oretical  knowledge  of  nature).  The  feeling  of 
pleasure  and  displeasure  is  provided  for  by  the 
judgement  in  its  independence  from  concepts 
and  from  sensations  that  refer  to  the  determi¬ 
nation  of  the  faculty  of  desire  and  would  thus 
be  capable  of  being  immediately  practical.  For 
the  faculty  of  desire  there  is  reason,  which  is 


practical  without  mediation  of  any  pleasure  of 
whatsoever  origin,  and  which  determines  for  it, 
as  a  higher  faculty,  the  final  end  that  is  at¬ 
tended  at  the  same  time  with  pure  intellectual 
delight  in  the  object.  Judgement’s  concept  of  a 
finality  of  nature  falls,  besides,  under  the  head 
of  natural  concepts,  but  only  as  a  regulative 
principle  of  the  cognitive  faculties — although 
the  aesthetic  judgement  on  certain  objects  (of 
nature  or  of  art)  which  occasions  that  concept, 
is  a  constitutive  principle  in  respect  of  the  feel¬ 
ing  of  pleasure  or  displeasure.  The  spontaneity 
in  the  play  of  the  cognitive  faculties  whose  har¬ 
monious  accord  contains  the  ground  of  this 
pleasure,  makes  the  concept  in  question,  in  its 
consequences,  a  suitable  mediating  link  con¬ 
necting  the  realm  of  the  concept  of  nature  with 
that  of  the  concept  of  freedom,  as  this  accord 
at  the  same  time  promotes  the  sensibility  of 
the  mind  for  moral  feeling.1  The  following  table 
may  facilitate  the  review  of  all  the  above  fac¬ 
ulties  in  their  systematic  unity.2 


List  of  Mental  Facidties 
Cognitive  faculties 
Feeling  of  pleasure 
and  displeasure 
Faculty  of  desire 

A  priori  Principles 
Conformity  to  law 
Finality 
Final  End 


Cognitive  Faculties 
Understanding 
Judgement 
Reason 


Application 

Nature 

Art 

Freedom 


1  [Cf.  p.  548.] 

2  It  has  been  thought  somewhat  suspicious  that  my  di¬ 
visions  in  pure  philosophy  should  almost  always  come 
out  threefold.  But  it  is  due  to  the  nature  of  the  case.  If 
a  division  is  to  be  a  priori  it  must  be  either  analytic,  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  law  of  contradiction — and  then  it  is  al¬ 
ways  twofold  ( quodlibet  ens  est  aut  A  aut  non  A ) — or 
else  it  is  synthetic.  If  it  is  to  be  derived  in  the  latter  case 
from  a  priori  concepts  (not,  as  in  mathematics,  from 
the  a  priori  intuition  corresponding  to  the  concept), 
then,  to  meet  the  requirements  of  synthetic  unity  in  gen¬ 
eral,  namely  (1)  a  condition,  (2)  a  conditioned,  (3) 
the  concept  arising  from  the  union  of  the  conditioned 
with  its  condition,  the  division  must  of  necessity  be  tri- 
chotomous. 


FIRST  PART 

CRITIQUE  OF  AESTHETIC  JUDGEMENT 

SECTION  I.  ANALYTIC  OF  AESTHETIC  JUDGEMENT 
Book  I.  Analytic  oj  the  Beautiful 


First  Moment.  Of  the  Judgement  of 

Taste:1  Moment  of  Quality 

§  I.  The  judgement  of  taste  is  aesthetic 

If  we  wish  to  discern  whether  anything  is  beau¬ 
tiful  or  not,  vve  do  not  refer  the  representation 
of  it  to  the  object  by  means  of  understanding 
with  a  view  to  cognition,  but  by  means  of  the 
imagination2  (acting  perhaps  in  conjunction 
with  understanding)  we  refer  the  representation 
to  the  subject  and  its  feeling  of  pleasure  or  dis¬ 
pleasure.  The  judgement  of  taste,  therefore,  is 
not  a  cognitive  judgement,  and  so  not  logical, 
but  is  aesthetic — which  means  that  it  is  one 
whose  determining  ground  cannot  be  other  than 
subjective.  Every  reference  of  representations 
is  capable  of  being  objective,  even  that  of  sen¬ 
sations  (in  which  case  it  signifies  the  real  in  an 
empirical  representation).  The  one  exception  to 
this  is  the  feeling  of  pleasure  or  displeasure. 
This  denotes  nothing  in  the  object,  but  is  a 
feeling  which  the  subject  has  of  itself  and  of 
the  manner  in  which  it  is  affected  by  the  repre¬ 
sentation. 

To  apprehend  a  regular  and  appropriate 
building  with  one’s  cognitive  faculties,  be  the 
mode  of  representation  clear  or  confused,  is 
quite  a  different  thing  from  being  conscious  of 
this  representation  with  an  accompanying  sen¬ 
sation  of  delight.  Here  the  representation  is  re¬ 
ferred  wholly  to  the  subject,  and  what  is  more 
to  its  feeling  of  life3 — under  the  name  of  the 
feeling  of  pleasure  or  displeasure — and  this 

1  The  definition  of  taste  here  relied  upon  is  that  it  is 
the  faculty  of  estimating  the  beautiful.  But  the  discov¬ 
ery  of  what  is  required  for  calling  an  object  beautiful 
must  be  reserved  for  the  analysis  of  judgements  of  taste. 
In  my  search  for  the  moments  to  which  attention  is  paid 
by  this  judgement  in  its  reflection,  I  have  followed  the 
guidance  of  the  logical  functions  of  judging  (for  a 
judgement  of  taste  always  involves  a  reference  to  under¬ 
standing).  I  have  brought  the  moment  of  quality  first 
under  review,  because  this  is  what  the  aesthetic  judge¬ 
ment  on  the  beautiful  looks  to  in  the  first  instance. 

2  [Cf.  p.  493- J 

3  [Cf.  p.  495-] 


forms  the  basis  of  a  quite  separate  faculty  of 
discriminating  and  estimating,  that  contributes 
nothing  to  knowledge.  All  it  does  is  to  compare 
the  given  representation  in  the  subject  with  the 
entire  faculty  of  representations  of  which  the 
mind  is  conscious  in  the  feeling  of  its  state. 
Given  representations  in  a  judgement  may  be 
empirical,  and  so  aesthetic;  but  the  judgement 
which  is  pronounced  by  their  means  is  logical, 
provided  it  refers  them  to  the  object.  Converse¬ 
ly,  be  the  given  representations  even  rational, 
but  referred  in  a  judgement  solely  to  the  sub¬ 
ject  (to  its  feeling),  they  are  always  to  that 
extent  aesthetic. 

§2.  The  delight  which  determines  the  judge¬ 
ment  oj  taste  is  independent  of  all  interest 

The  delight  which  we  connect  with  the  repre¬ 
sentation  of  the  real  existence  of  an  object  is 
called  interest.  Such  a  delight,  therefore,  always 
involves  a  reference  to  the  faculty  of  desire, 
either  as  its  determining  ground,  or  else  as  nec¬ 
essarily  implicated  with  its  determining  ground. 
Now,  where  the  question  is  whether  something 
is  beautiful,  we  do  not  want  to  know,  whether 
we,  or  any  one  else,  are,  or  even  could  be,  con¬ 
cerned  in  the  real  existence  of  the  thing,  but 
rather  what  estimate  we  form  of  it  on  mere  con¬ 
templation  (intuition  or  reflection).  If  any  one 
asks  me  whether  I  consider  that  the  palace  I 
see  before  me  is  beautiful,  I  may,  perhaps,  reply 
that  I  do  not  care  for  things  of  that  sort  that 
are  merely  made  to  be  gaped  at.  Or  I  may  reply 
in  the  same  strain  as  that  Iroquois  sachem  who 
said  that  nothing  in  Paris  pleased  him  better 
than  the  eating-houses.  I  may  even  go  a  step 
further  and  inveigh  with  the  vigour  of  a  Rous¬ 
seau  against  the  vanity  of  the  great  who  spend 
the  sweat  of  the  people  on  such  superfluous 
things.  Or,  in  fine,  I  may  quite  easily  persuade 
myself  that  if  I  found  myself  on  an  uninhabited 
island,  without  hope  of  ever  again  coming 
among  men,  and  could  conjure  such  a  palace 


OF  AESTHETIC  JUDGEMENT 


into  existence  by  a  mere  wish,  I  should  still  not 
trouble  to  do  so,  so  long  as  I  had  a  hut  there 
that  was  comfortable  enough  for  me.  All  this 
may  be  admitted  and  approved;  only  it  is  not 
the  point  now  at  issue.  All  one  wants  to  know  is 
whether  the  mere  representation  of  the  object  is 
to  my  liking,  no  matter  how  indifferent  I  may  be 
to  the  real  existence  of  the  object  of  this  repre¬ 
sentation.  It  is  quite  plain  that  in  order  to  say 
that  the  object  is  beautiful,  and  to  show  that  I 
have  taste,  everything  turns  on  the  meaning 
which  I  can  give  to  this  representation,  and  not 
on  any  factor  which  makes  me  dependent  on  the 
real  existence  of  the  object.  Every  one  must  al¬ 
low  that  a  judgement  on  the  beautiful  which  is 
tinged  with  the  slightest  interest,  is  very  partial 
and  not  a  pure  judgement  of  taste.1  One  must 
not  be  in  the  least  prepossessed  in  favour  of  the 
real  existence  of  the  thing,  but  must  preserve 
complete  indifference  in  this  respect,  in  order  to 
play  the  part  of  judge  in  matters  of  taste. 

This  proposition,  which  is  of  the  utmost  im¬ 
portance,  cannot  be  better  explained  than  by 
contrasting  the  pure  disinterested2  delight  which 
appears  in  the  judgement  of  taste  with  that 
allied  to  an  interest — especially  if  we  can  also 
assure  ourselves  that  there  are  no  other  kinds 
of  interest  beyond  those  presently  to  be  men¬ 
tioned. 

§  3.  Delight  in  the  agreeable  is  coupled  with 
interest 

That  is  agreeable  which  the  senses  find  pleas¬ 
ing  in  sensation.  This  at  once  affords  a  conven¬ 
ient  opportunity  for  condemning  and  directing 
particular  attention  to  a  prevalent  confusion  of 
the  double  meaning  of  which  the  word  sensation 
is  capable.  All  delight  (as  is  said  or  thought)  is 
itself  sensation  (of  a  pleasure).  Consequently 
everything  that  pleases,  and  for  the  very  reason 
that  it  pleases,  is  agreeable — and  according  to 
its  different  degrees,  or  its  relations  to  other 
agreeable  sensations,  is  attractive,  charming, 
delicious,  enjoyable,  etc.  But  if  this  is  conceded, 
then  impressions  of  sense,  which  determine  in¬ 
clination,  or  principles  of  reason,  which  deter¬ 
mine  the  will,  or  mere  contemplated  forms  of 
intuition,  which  determine  judgement,  are  all  on 

1  [Cf.  pp.  485,  520.] 

2  A  judgement  upon  an  object  of  our  delight  may  be 
wholly  disinterested  but  withal  very  interesting  *  i.e.,  it 
relies  on  no  interest,  but  it  produces  one.  Of  this  kind 
are  all  pure  moral  judgements.  But,  of  themselves  judge¬ 
ments  of  taste  do  not  even  set  up  any  interest  whatso¬ 
ever.  Only  in  society  is  it  interesting  to  have  taste — a 
point  which  will  be  explained  in  the  sequel. 

*  [Cf.  pp.  520,  et  seq.;  522,  et  seq.  Also  Cf.  Funda¬ 
mental  Principles  of  the  Metaphysic  of  Morals ,  p.  265.] 


a  par  in  everything  relevant  to  their  effect  upon 
the  feeling  of  pleasure,  for  this  would  be  agree¬ 
ableness  in  the  sensation  of  one’s  state;  and 
since,  in  the  last  resort,  all  the  elaborate  work 
of  our  faculties  must  issue  in  and  unite  in  the 
practical  as  its  goal,  we  could  credit  our  facul¬ 
ties  with  no  other  appreciation  of  things  and 
the  worth  of  things,  than  that  consisting  in  the 
gratification  which  they  promise.  How  this  is 
attained  is  in  the  end  immaterial;  and,  as  the 
choice  of  the  means  is  here  the  only  thing  that 
can  make  a  difference,  men  might  indeed  blame 
one  another  for  folly  or  imprudence,  but 
never  for  baseness  or  wickedness;  for  they  are 
all,  each  according  to  his  own  way  of  looking  at 
things,  pursuing  one  goal,  which  for  each  is  the 
gratification  in  question. 

When  a  modification  of  the  feeling  of  pleas¬ 
ure  or  displeasure  is  termed  sensation,  this  ex¬ 
pression  is  given  quite  a  different  meaning  to 
that  which  it  bears  when  I  call  the  representa¬ 
tion  of  a  thing  (through  sense  as  a  receptivity 
pertaining  to  the  faculty  of  knowledge)  sensa¬ 
tion.  For  in  the  latter  case  the  representation  is 
referred  to  the  object,  but  in  the  former  it  is 
referred  solely  to  the  subject  and  is  not  avail¬ 
able  for  any  cognition,  not  even  for  that  by 
which  the  subject  cognizes  itself. 

Now  in  the  above  definition  the  word  sensa¬ 
tion  is  used  to  denote  an  objective  representa¬ 
tion  of  sense;  and,  to  avoid  continually  running 
the  risk  of  misinterpretation,  we  shall  call  that 
which  must  always  remain  purely  subjective, 
and  is  absolutely  incapable  of  forming  a  repre¬ 
sentation  of  an  object,  by  the  familiar  name  of 
feeling .3  The  green  colour  of  the  meadows  be¬ 
longs  to  objective  sensation,  as  the  perception 
of  an  object  of  sense;  but  its  agreeableness  to 
subjective  sensation,  by  which  no  object  is  rep¬ 
resented;  i.e.,  to  feeling,  through  which  the  ob¬ 
ject  is  regarded  as  an  object  of  delight  (which 
involves  no  cognition  of  the  object). 

Now,  that  a  judgement  on  an  object  by  which 
its  agreeableness  is  affirmed,  expresses  an  inter¬ 
est  in  it,  is  evident  from  the  fact  that  through 
sensation  it  provokes  a  desire  for  similar  ob¬ 
jects,  consequently  the  delight  presupposes,  not 
the  simple  judgement  about  it,  but  the  bearing 
its  real  existence  has  upon  my  state  so  far  as 
affected  by  such  an  object.  Hence  we  do  not 
merely  say  of  the  agreeable  that  it  pleases ,  but 
that  it  gratifies.  I  do  not  accord  it  a  simple  ap¬ 
proval,  but  inclination  is  aroused  by  it,  and 
where  agreeableness  is  of  the  liveliest  type  a 

3  [Cf.  footnote  in  the  first  section  of  the  Introduction 
to  the  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  p.  385.] 


78  THE  CRITIQUE 


judgement  on  the  character  of  the  object  is 
so  entirely  out  of  place  that  those  who  are  al¬ 
ways  intent  only  on  enjoyment  (for  that  is  the 
word  used  to  denote  intensity  of  gratification) 
would  fain  dispense  with  all  judgement. 

§4.  Delight  in  the  good  is  coupled  with 
interest 

That  is  good  which  by  means  of  reason  com¬ 
mends  itself  by  its  mere  concept.  We  call  that 
good  for  something  (useful)  which  only  pleases 
as  a  means;  but  that  which  pleases  on  its  own 
account  we  call  good  in  itself.  In  both  cases  the 
concept  of  an  end  is  implied,  and  conse¬ 
quently  the  relation  of  reason  to  (at  least 
possible)  willing,  and  thus  a  delight  in  the 
existence  of  an  object  or  action,  i.e..  some  in¬ 
terest  or  other. 

To  deem  something  good.  I  must  always  know 
what  sort  of  a  thing  the  object  is  intended  to  be, 
i.e..  I  must  have  a  concept  of  it.  That  is  not 
necessary  to  enable  me  to  see  beauty  in  a  thing. 
Flowers,  free  patterns,  lines  aimlessly  inter¬ 
twining — technically  termed  foliage — have  no 
signification,  depend  upon  no  definite  concept, 
and  yet  please.  Delight  in  the  beautiful  must 
depend  upon  the  reflection  on  an  object  pre¬ 
cursory  to  some  (not  definitely  determined) 
concept.  It  is  thus  also  differentiated  from  the 
agreeable,  which  rests  entirely  upon  sensation. 

In  many  cases,  no  doubt,  the  agreeable  and 
the  good  seem  convertible  terms.  Thus  it  is 
commonly  said  that  all  (especially  lasting)  grat¬ 
ification  is  of  itself  good;  which  is  almost  equiv¬ 
alent  to  saying  that  to  be  permanently  agreeable 
and  to  be  good  are  identical.  But  it  is  readily 
apparent  that  this  is  merely  a  vicious  confusion 
of  words,  for  the  concepts  appropriate  to  these 
expressions  are  far  from  interchangeable.  The 
agreeable,  which,  as  such,  represents  the  object 
solely  in  relation  to  sense,  must  in  the  first  in¬ 
stance  be  brought  under  principles  of  reason 
through  the  concept  of  an  end,  to  be,  as  an  ob¬ 
ject  of  will,  called  good.  But  that  the  reference 
to  delight  is  wholly  different  where  what  grati¬ 
fies  is  at  the  same  time  called  good ,  is  evident 
from  the  fact  that  with  the  good  the  question 
always  is  whether  it  is  mediately  or  immediately 
good,  i.  e.,  useful  or  good  in  itself;  whereas  with 
the  agreeable  this  point  can  never  arise,  since 
the  word  always  means  what  pleases  immedi¬ 
ately — and  it  is  just  the  same  with  what  I  call 
beautiful. 

Even  in  everyday  parlance,  a  distinction  is 
drawn  between  the  agreeable  and  the  good.  We 
do  not  scruple  to  say  of  a  dish  that  stimulates 


the  palate  with  spices  and  other  condiments  that 
it  is  agreeable — owning  all  the  while  that  it  is 
not  good:  because,  while  it  immediately  satisfies 
the  senses,  it  is  mediately  displeasing,  i.  e.,  in 
the  eye  of  reason  that  looks  ahead  to  the  con¬ 
sequences.  Even  in  our  estimate  of  health,  this 
same  distinction  may  be  traced.  To  all  that  pos¬ 
sess  it,  it  is  immediately  agreeable — at  least 
negatively,  i.  e.,  as  remoteness  of  all  bodily 
pains.  But,  if  we  are  to  say  that  it  is  good,  we 
must  further  apply  to  reason  to  direct  it  to  ends, 
that  is,  we  must  regard  it  as  a  state  that  puts 
us  in  a  congenial  mood  for  all  we  have  to  do. 
Finally,  in  respect  of  happiness  every  one  be¬ 
lieves  that  the  greatest  aggregate  of  the  pleas¬ 
ures  of  life,  taking  duration  as  well  as  number 
into  account,  merits  the  name  of  a  true,  nay 
even  of  the  highest,  good.  But  reason  sets  its 
face  against  this  too.  Agreeableness  is  enjoy¬ 
ment.  But  if  this  is  all  that  we  are  bent  on,  it 
would  be  foolish  to  be  scrupulous  about  the 
means  that  procure  it  for  us — whether  it  be  ob¬ 
tained  passively  by  the  bounty  of  nature  or  ac¬ 
tively  and  by  the  work  of  our  own  hands.  But 
that  there  is  any  intrinsic  worth  in  the  real  ex¬ 
istence  of  a  man  who  merely  lives  for  enjoy¬ 
ment,  however  busy  he  may  be  in  this  respect, 
even  when  in  so  doing  he  serves  others — all 
equally  with  himself  intent  only  on  enjoyment 
— as  an  excellent  means  to  that  one  end,  and 
does  so,  moreover,  because  through  sympathy 
he  shares  all  their  gratifications — this  is  a  view 
to  which  reason  will  never  let  itself  be  brought 
round.  Only  by  what  a  man  does  heedless  of 
enjoyment,  in  complete  freedom,  and  independ¬ 
ently  of  what  he  can  procure  passively  from 
the  hand  of  nature,  does  he  give  to  his  existence, 
as  the  real  existence  of  a  person,  an  absolute 
worth.  Happiness,  with  all  its  plethora  of  pleas¬ 
ures,  is  far  from  being  an  unconditioned  good.1 

But,  despite  all  this  difference  between  the 
agreeable  and  the  good,  they  both  agree  in  be¬ 
ing  invariably  coupled  with  an  interest  in  their 
object.  This  is  true,  not  alone  of  the  agreeable, 
§  3,  and  of  the  mediately  good,  i.  e.,  the  useful, 
which  pleases  as  a  means  to  some  pleasure,  but 
also  of  that  which  is  good  absolutely  and  from 
every  point  of  view,  namely  the  moral  good 
which  carries  with  it  the  highest  interest.  For 
the  good  is  the  object  of  will,  i.  e.,  of  a  ration¬ 
ally  determined  faculty  of  desire).  But  to  will 

1  An  obligation  to  enjoyment  is  a  patent  absurdity. 
And  the  same,  then,  must  also  be  said  of  a  supposed 
obligation  to  actions  that  have  merely  enjoyment  for 
their  aim,  no  matter  how  spiritually  this  enjoyment  may 
be  refined  in  thought  (or  embellished),  and  even  if  it  be 
a  mystical,  so-called  heavenly,  enjoyment. 


OF  AESTHETIC 

something,  and  to  take  a  delight  in  its  existence, 
i.e.,  to  take  an  interest  in  it,  are  identical. 

§  5.  Comparison  of  the  three  specifically 
different  kinds  of  delight 

Both  the  agreeable  and  the  good  involve  a 
reference  to  the  faculty  of  desire,  and  are  thus 
attended,  the  former  with  a  delight  pathologi¬ 
cally  conditioned  (by  stimuli),  the  latter  with  a 
pure  practical  delight.  Such  delight  is  deter¬ 
mined  not  merely  by  the  representation  of  the 
object,  but  also  by  the  represented  bond  of 
connection  between  the  subject  and  the  real  ex¬ 
istence  of  the  object.  It  is  not  merely  the  ob¬ 
ject,  but  also  its  real  existence,  that  pleases.  On 
the  other  hand,  the  judgement  of  taste  is  simply 
contemplative ,  i.  e.,  it  is  a  judgement  which  is 
indifferent  as  to  the  existence  of  an  object,  and 
only  decides  how  its  character  stands  with  the 
feeling  of  pleasure  and  displeasure.  But  not 
even  is  this  contemplation  itself  directed  to  con¬ 
cepts;  for  the  judgement  of  taste  is  not  a  cog¬ 
nitive  judgement  (neither  a  theoretical  one  nor 
a  practical),  and  hence,  also,  is  not  grounded  on 
concepts,  nor  yet  intentionally  directed  to  them. 

The  agreeable,  the  beautiful,  and  the  good 
thus  denote  three  different  relations  of  represen¬ 
tations  to  the  feeling  of  pleasure  and  displeas¬ 
ure,  as  a  feeling  in  respect  of  which  we  distin¬ 
guish  different  objects  or  modes  of  representa¬ 
tion.  Also,  the  corresponding  expressions  which 
indicate  our  satisfaction  in  them  are  different. 
The  agreeable  is  what  gratifies  a  man;  the 
beautiful  what  simply  pleases  him;  the  good 
what  is  esteemed  ( approved ),  i.e.,  that  on  which 
he  sets  an  objective  worth.  Agreeableness  is  a 
significant  factor  even  with  irrational  animals; 
beauty  has  purport  and  significance  only  for 
human  beings,  i.e.,  for  beings  at  once  animal  and 
rational  (but  not  merely  for  them  as  rational 
— intelligent  beings — but  only  for  them  as  at 
once  animal  and  rational);  whereas  the  good  is 
good  for  every  rational  being  in  general — a 
proposition  which  can  only  receive  its  complete 
justification  and  explanation  in  the  sequel.  Of 
all  these  three  kinds  of  delight,  that  of  taste  in 
the  beautiful  may  be  said  to  be  the  one  and  only 
disinterested  and  free  delight;  for,  with  it,  no 
interest,  whether  of  sense  or  reason,  extorts  ap¬ 
proval.  And  so  we  may  say  that  delight,  in  the 
three  cases  mentioned,  is  related  to  inclination , 
to  favour ,  or  to  respect.  For  favour  is  the  only 
free  liking.  An  object  of  inclination,  and  one 
which  a  law  of  reason  imposes  upon  our  desire, 
leaves  us  no  freedom  to  turn  anything  into  an 
object  of  pleasure.  All  interest  presupposes  a 


JUDGEMENT  479 

want,  or  calls  one  forth;  and,  being  a  ground 
determining  approval,  deprives  the  judgement 
on  the  object  of  its  freedom. 

So  far  as  the  interest  of  inclination  in  the  case 
of  the  agreeable  goes,  every  one  says  “Hunger 
is  the  best  sauce;  and  people  with  a  healthy 
appetite  relish  everything,  so  long  as  it  is  some¬ 
thing  they  can  eat.”  Such  delight,  consequently, 
gives  no  indication  of  taste  having  anything  to 
say  to  the  choice.  Only  when  men  have  got  all 
they  want  can  we  tell  who  among  the  crowd 
has  taste  or  not.  Similarly  there  may  be  correct 
habits  (conduct)  without  virtue,  politeness 
without  good-will,  propriety  without  honour, 
etc.  For  where  the  moral  law  dictates,  there  is, 
objectively,  no  room  left  for  free  choice  as  to 
what  one  has  to  do;  and  to  show  taste  in  the 
way  one  carries  out  these  dictates,  or  in  esti¬ 
mating  the  way  others  do  so,  is  a  totally  differ¬ 
ent  matter  from  displaying  the  moral  frame  of 
one’s  mind.  For  the  latter  involves  a  command 
and  produces  a  need  of  something,  whereas 
moral  taste  only  plays  with  the  objects  of  de¬ 
light  without  devoting  itself  sincerely  to  any. 

Definition  of  the  Beautiful  derived  from  the 
First  Moment 

Taste  is  the  faculty  of  estimating  an  object 
or  a  mode  of  representation  by  means  of  a  de¬ 
light  or  aversion  apart  from  any  interest.  The 
object  of  such  a  delight  is  called  beautiful. 

Second  Moment.  Of  the  Judgement  of 
Taste:  Moment  of  Quantity 

§  6.  The  beautiful  is  that  which ,  apart  from  con - 
cepts ,  is  represented  as  the  Object  of  a  uni¬ 
versal  delight. 

This  definition  of  the  beautiful  is  deducible 
from  the  foregoing  definition  of  it  as  an  object 
of  delight  apart  from  any  interest.  For  where 
any  one  is  conscious  that  his  delight  in  an  object 
is  with  him  independent  of  interest,  it  is  inevi¬ 
table  that  he  should  look  on  the  object  as  one 
containing  a  ground  of  delight  for  all  men.  For, 
since  the  delight  is  not  based  on  any  inclination 
of  the  subject  (or  on  any  other  deliberate  in¬ 
terest),  but  the  subject  feels  himself  completely 
free  in  respect  of  the  liking  which  he  accords  to 
the  object,  he  can  find  as  reason  for  his  delight 
no  personal  conditions  to  which  his  own  subjec¬ 
tive  self  might  alone  be  party.  Hence  he  must 
regard  it  as  resting  on  what  he  may  also  pre¬ 
suppose  in  every  other  person;  and  therefore 
he  must  believe  that  he  has  reason  for  demand¬ 
ing  a  similar  delight  from  every  one.  Accord- 


THE  CRITIQUE 


ingly  he  will  speak  of  the  beautiful  as  if  beauty 
were  a  quality  of  the  object  and  the  judgement 
logical  (forming  a  cognition  of  the  object  by 
concepts  of  it);  although  it  is  only  aesthetic, 
and  contains  merely  a  reference  of  the  represen¬ 
tation  of  the  object  to  the  subject;  because  it 
still  bears  this  resemblance  to  the  logical  judge¬ 
ment,  that  it  may  be  presupposed  to  be  valid 
for  all  men.  But  this  universality  cannot  spring 
from  concepts.  For  from  concepts  there  is  no 
transition  to  the  feeling  of  pleasure  or  displeas¬ 
ure  (save  in  the  case  of  pure  practical  laws, 
which,  however,  carry  an  interest  with  them; 
and  such  an  interest  does  not  attach  to  the  pure 
judgement  of  taste).  The  result  is  that  the 
judgement  of  taste,  with  its  attendant  con¬ 
sciousness  of  detachment  from  all  interest,  must 
involve  a  claim  to  validity  for  all  men,  and 
must  do  so  apart  from  universality  attached  to 
objects,  i.  e.,  there  must  be  coupled  with  it  a 
claim  to  subjective  universality. 

§  7.  Comparison  of  the  beautiful  with  the  agree - 

able  ayui  the  good  by  means  of  the  above 

characteristic 

As  regards  the  agreeable ,  every  one  concedes 
that  his  judgement,  which  he  bases  on  a  private 
feeling,  and  in  which  he  declares  that  an  object 
pleases  him,  is  restricted  merely  to  himself  per¬ 
sonally.  Thus  he  does  not  take  it  amiss  if,  when 
he  says  that  Canary-wine  is  agreeable,  another 
corrects  the  expression  and  reminds  him  that  he 
ought  to  say:  “It  is  agreeable  to  me”  This  ap¬ 
plies  not  only  to  the  taste  of  the  tongue,  the 
palate,  and  the  throat,  but  to  what  may  with 
any  one  be  agreeable  to  eye  or  ear.  A  violet 
colour  is  to  one  soft  and  lovely:  to  another  dull 
and  faded.  One  man  likes  the  tone  of  wind 
instruments,  another  prefers  that  of  string  in¬ 
struments.  To  quarrel  over  such  points  with  the 
idea  of  condemning  another’s  judgement  as  in¬ 
correct  when  it  differs  from  our  own,  as  if  the 
opposition  between  the  two  judgements  were 
logical,  would  be  folly.  With  the  agreeable, 
therefore,  the  axiom  holds  good:  Every  one  has 
his  own  taste  (that  of  sense). 

The  beautiful  stands  on  quite  a  different  foot¬ 
ing.  It  would,  on  the  contrary,  be  ridiculous  if 
any  one  who  plumed  himself  on  his  taste  were 
to  think  of  justifying  himself  by  saying:  “This 
object  (the  building  we  see,  the  dress  that  per¬ 
son  has  on,  the  concert  we  hear,  the  poem  sub¬ 
mitted  to  our  criticism)  is  beautiful  for  me” 
For  if  it  merely  pleases  him,  he  must  not  call  it 
beautiful .  Many  things  may  for  him  possess 
charm  and  agreeableness — no  one  cares  about 


that;  but  when  he  puts  a  thing  on  a  pedestal 
and  calls  it  beautiful,  he  demands  the  same 
delight  from  others.  He  judges  not  merely  for 
himself,  but  for  all  men,  and  then  speaks  of 
beauty  as  if  it  were  a  property  of  things.  Thus 
he  says  the  thing  is  beautiful;  and  it  is  not  as 
if  he  counted  on  others  agreeing  in  his  judge¬ 
ment  of  liking  owing  to  his  having  found  them 
in  such  agreement  on  a  number  of  occasions, 
but  he  demands  this  agreement  of  them.  He 
blames  them  if  they  judge  differently,  and  de¬ 
nies  them  taste,  which  he  still  requires  of  them 
as  something  they  ought  to  have;  and  to  this 
extent  it  is  not  open  to  men  to  say:  “Every  one 
has  his  own  taste.”  This  would  be  equivalent 
to  saying  that  there  is  no  such  thing  at  all  as 
taste,  i.  e.,  no  aesthetic  judgement  capable  of 
making  a  rightful  claim  upon  the  assent  of  all 
men. 

Yet  even  in  the  case  of  the  agreeable,  we  find 
that  the  estimates  men  form  do  betray  a  prev¬ 
alent  agreement  among  them,  which  leads  to 
our  crediting  some  with  taste  and  denying  it  to 
others,  and  that,  too,  not  as  an  organic  sense 
but  as  a  critical  faculty  in  respect  of  the  agree¬ 
able  generally.  So  of  one  who  knows  how  to  en¬ 
tertain  his  guests  with  pleasures  (of  enjoyment 
through  all  the  senses)  in  such  a  way  that  one 
and  all  are  pleased,  we  say  that  he  has  taste. 
But  the  universality  here  is  only  understood  in 
a  comparative  sense;  and  the  rules  that  apply 
are,  like  all  empirical  rules,  general  only,  not 
universal,  the  latter  being  what  the  judgement 
of  taste  upon  the  beautiful  deals  or  claims  to 
deal  in.  It  is  a  judgement  in  respect  of  sociabil¬ 
ity  so  far  as  resting  on  empirical  rules.  In  re¬ 
spect  of  the  good,  it  is  true  that  judgements 
also  rightly  assert  a  claim  to  validity  for  every 
one;  but  the  good  is  only  represented  as  an  ob¬ 
ject  of  universal  delight  by  means  of  a  concept, 
which  is  the  case  neither  with  the  agreeable  nor 
the  beautiful. 

§  8.  In  a  judgement  of  taste  the  universality  of 
delight  is  only  represented  as  subjective 

This  particular  form  of  the  universality  of 
an  aesthetic  judgement,  which  is  to  be  met  in 
a  judgement  of  taste,  is  a  significant  feature, 
not  for  the  logician  certainly,  but  for  the  tran¬ 
scendental  philosopher.  It  calls  for  no  small  ef¬ 
fort  on  his  part  to  discover  its  origin,  but  in  re¬ 
turn  it  brings  to  light  a  property  of  our  cogni¬ 
tive  faculty  which,  without  this  analysis,  would 
have  remained  unknown. 

First,  one  must  get  firmly  into  one’s  mind 
that  by  the  judgement  of  taste  (upon  the  beau- 


OF  AESTHETIC  JUDGEMENT 


tiful)  the  delight  in  an  object  is  imputed  to 
every  one ,  yet  without  being  founded  on  a  con¬ 
cept  (for  then  it  would  be  the  good),  and  that 
this  claim  to  universality  is  such  an  essential 
factor  of  a  judgement  by  which  we  describe 
anything  as  beautiful f  that  were  it  not  for  its 
being  present  to  the  mind  it  would  never  enter 
into  any  one’s  head  to  use  this  expression,  but 
everything  that  pleased  without  a  concept  would 
be  ranked  as  agreeable.  For  in  respect  of  the 
agreeable,  every  one  is  allowed  to  have  his  own 
opinion,  and  no  one  insists  upon  others  agreeing 
with  his  judgement  of  taste,  which  is  what  is 
invariably  done  in  the  judgement  of  taste  about 
beauty.  The  first  of  these  I  may  call  the  taste 
of  sense ,  the  second,  the  taste  of  reflection ;  the 
first  laying  down  judgements  merely  private, 
the  second,  on  the  other  hand,  judgements  os¬ 
tensibly  of  general  validity  (public),  but  both 
alike  being  aesthetic  (not  practical)  judgements 
about  an  object  merely  in  respect  of  the  bear¬ 
ings  of  its  representation  on  the  feeling  of  pleas¬ 
ure  or  displeasure.  Now  it  does  seem  strange 
that  while  with  the  taste  of  sense  it  is  not  alone 
experience  that  shows  that  its  judgement  (of 
pleasure  or  displeasure  in  something)  is  not  uni¬ 
versally  valid,  but  every  one  willingly  refrains 
from  imputing  this  agreement  to  others  (de¬ 
spite  the  frequent  actual  prevalence  of  a  con¬ 
siderable  consensus  of  general  opinion  even  in 
these  judgements),  the  taste  of  reflection,  which, 
as  experience  teaches,  has  often  enough  to  put 
up  with  a  rude  dismissal  of  its  claims  to  uni¬ 
versal  validity  of  its  judgement  (upon  the  beau¬ 
tiful),  can  (as  it  actually  does)  find  it  possible 
for  all  that  to  formulate  judgements  capable  of 
demanding  this  agreement  in  its  universality. 
Such  agreement  it  does  in  fact  require  from 
every  one  for  each  of  its  judgements  of  taste — 
the  persons  who  pass  these  judgements  not 
quarreling  over  the  possibility  of  such  a  claim, 
but  only  failing  in  particular  cases  to  come  to 
terms  as  to  the  correct  application  of  this 
faculty. 

First  of  all  we  have  here  to  note  that  a  uni¬ 
versality  which  does  not  rest  upon  concepts  of 
the  object  (even  though  these  are  only  empiri¬ 
cal)  is  in  no  way  logical,  but  aesthetic,  i.  e.,  does 
not  involve  any  objective  quantity  of  the  judge¬ 
ment,  but  only  one  that  is  subjective.  For  this 
universality  I  use  the  expression  general  valid¬ 
ity ,  which  denotes  the  validity  of  the  reference 
of  a  representation,  not  to  the  cognitive  facul¬ 
ties,  but  to  the  feeling  of  pleasure  or  displeasure 
for  every  subject.  (The  same  expression,  how¬ 
ever,  may  also  be  employed  for  the  logical  quan¬ 


481 

tity  of  the  judgement,  provided  we  add  objec¬ 
tive  universal  validity,  to  distinguish  it  from 
the  merely  subjective  validity  which  is  always 
aesthetic.) 

Now  a  judgement  that  has  objective  universal 
validity  has  always  got  the  subjective  also,  i.e., 
if  the  judgement  is  valid  for  everything  which 
is  contained  under  a  given  concept,  it  is  valid 
also  for  all  who  represent  an  object  by  means  of 
this  concept.  But  from  a  subjective  universal 
validity ,  i.  e.,  the  aesthetic,  that  does  not  rest  on 
any  concept,  no  conclusion  can  be  drawn  to  the 
logical;  because  judgements  of  that  kind  have 
no  bearing  upon  the  object.  But  for  this  very 
reason  the  aesthetic  universality  attributed  to 
a  judgement  must  also  be  of  a  special  kind,  see¬ 
ing  that  it  does  not  join  the  predicate  of  beauty 
to  the  concept  of  the  object  taken  in  its  entire 
logical  sphere,  and  yet  does  extend  this  predi¬ 
cate  over  the  whole  sphere  of  judging  subjects. 

In  their  logical  quantity,  all  judgements  of 
taste  are  singular  judgements.1  For,  since  I  must 
present  the  object  immediately  to  my  feeling 
of  pleasure  or  displeasure,  and  that,  too,  with¬ 
out  the  aid  of  concepts,  such  judgements  cannot 
have  the  quantity  of  judgements  with  objective 
general  validity.  Yet  by  taking  the  singular  rep¬ 
resentation  of  the  object  of  the  judgement  of 
taste,  and  by  comparison  converting  it  into  a 
concept  according  to  the  conditions  determining 
that  judgement,  we  can  arrive  at  a  logically  uni¬ 
versal  judgement.  For  instance,  by  a  judge¬ 
ment  of  the  taste  I  describe  the  rose  at  which  I 
am  looking  as  beautiful.  The  judgement,  on  the 
other  hand,  resulting  from  the  comparison  of  a 
number  of  singular  representations:  “Roses  in 
general  are  beautiful,”2  is  no  longer  pronounced 
as  a  purely  aesthetic  judgement,  but  as  a  logical 
judgement  founded  on  one  that  is  aesthetic. 
Now  the  judgement,  “The  rose  is  agreeable”  (to 
smell)  is  also,  no  doubt,  an  aesthetic  and  singu¬ 
lar  judgement,  but  then  it  is  not  one  of  taste 
but  of  sense.  For  it  has  this  point  of  difference 
from  a  judgement  of  taste,  that  the  latter  im¬ 
ports  an  aesthetic  quantity  of  universality,  i.  e., 
of  validity  for  everyone  which  is  not  to  be  met 
with  in  a  judgement  upon  the  agreeable.  It  is 
only  judgements  upon  the  good  which,  while 
also  determining  the  delight  in  an  object,  possess 
logical  and  not  mere  aesthetic  universality;  for 
it  is  as  involving  a  cognition  of  the  object  that 
they  are  valid  of  it,  and  on  that  account  valid 
for  everyone. 

In  forming  an  estimate  of  objects  merely 

1  [Cf.  p.  51s.] 

2  [Cf.  p.  485,  p.  486,  and  p.  515.] 


THE  CRITIQUE 


from  concepts,  all  representation  of  beauty  goes 
by  the  board.  There  can,  therefore,  be  no  rule 
according  to  which  any  one  is  to  be  compelled 
to  recognize  anything  as  beautiful.  Whether  a 
dress,  a  house,  or  a  flower  is  beautiful  is  a  mat¬ 
ter  upon  which  one  declines  to  allow  one’s  judge¬ 
ment  to  be  swayed  by  any  reasons  or  principles. 
We  want  to  get  a  look  at  the  object  with  our 
own  eyes,  just  as  if  our  delight  depended  on 
sensation.1  And  yet,  if  upon  so  doing,  we  call 
the  object  beautiful,  we  believe  ourselves  to  be 
speaking  with  a  universal  voice,  and  lay  claim  to 
the  concurrence  of  everyone,  whereas  no  pri¬ 
vate  sensation  would  be  decisive  except  for  the 
observer  alone  and  his  liking. 

Here,  now,  we  may  perceive  that  nothing  is 
postulated  in  the  judgement  of  taste  but  such 
a  universal  voice  in  respect  of  delight  that  it  is 
not  mediated  by  concepts;  consequently,  only 
the  possibility  of  an  aesthetic  judgement  capa¬ 
ble  of  being  at  the  same  time  deemed  valid  for 
everyone.  The  judgement  of  taste  itself  does  not 
postulate  the  agreement  of  everyone  (for  it  is 
only  competent  for  a  logically  universal  judge¬ 
ment  to  do  this,  in  that  it  is  able  to  bring  for¬ 
ward  reasons) ;  it  only  imputes  this  agreement 
to  everyone,  as  an  instance  of  the  rule  in  respect 
of  which  it  looks  for  confirmation,  not  from 
concepts,  but  from  the  concurrence  of  others. 
The  universal  voice  is,  therefore,  only  an  idea — 
resting  upon  grounds  the  investigation  of  which 
is  here  postponed.  It  may  be  a  matter  of  uncer¬ 
tainty  whether  a  person  who  thinks  he  is  laying 
down  a  judgement  of  taste  is,  in  fact,  judging 
in  conformity  with  that  idea;  but  that  this  idea 
is  what  is  contemplated  in  his  judgement,  and 
that,  consequently,  it  is  meant  to  be  a  judge¬ 
ment  of  taste,  is  proclaimed  by  his  use  of  the 
expression  “beauty.”  For  himself  he  can  be  cer¬ 
tain  on  the  point  from  his  mere  consciousness  of 
the  separation  of  everything  belonging  to  the 
agreeable  and  the  good  from  the  delight  remain¬ 
ing  to  him;  and  this  is  all  for  which  he  promises 
himself  the  agreement  of  everyone — a  claim 
which,  under  these  conditions,  he  would  also  be 
warranted  in  making,  were  it  not  that  he  fre¬ 
quently  sinned  against  them,  and  thus  passed  an 
erroneous  judgement  of  taste. 

§  9.  Investigation  of  the  question  of  the  relative 

priority  in  a  judgement  of  taste  of  the  feeling 

of  pleasure  and  the  estimating  of  the  object 

The  solution  of  this  problem  is  the  key  to 
the  Critique  of  taste,  and  so  is  worthy  of  all 
attention. 

1  [Cf.  p.  514.] 


Were  the  pleasure  in  a  given  object  to  be  the 
antecedent,  and  were  the  universal  communica¬ 
bility  of  this  pleasure  to  be  all  that  the  judge¬ 
ment  of  taste  is  meant  to  allow  to  the  represen¬ 
tation  of  the  object,  such  a  sequence  would  be 
self-contradictory.  For  a  pleasure  of  that  kind 
would  be  nothing  but  the  feeling  of  mere  agree¬ 
ableness  to  the  senses,  and  so,  from  its  very 
nature,  would  possess  no  more  than  private  va¬ 
lidity,  seeing  that  it  would  be  immediately  de¬ 
pendent  on  the  representation  through  which 
the  object  is  given. 

Hence  it  is  the  universal  capacity  for  being 
communicated  incident  to  the  mental  state  in 
the  given  representation  which,  as  the  subjective 
condition  of  the  judgement  of  taste,  must  be, 
fundamental,  with  the  pleasure  in  the  object  as 
its  consequent.2  Nothing,  however,  is  capable 
of  being  universally  communicated  but  cogni¬ 
tion  and  representation  so  far  as  appurtenant 
to  cognition.  For  it  is  only  as  thus  appurtenant 
that  the  representation  is  objective,  and  it  is 
this  alone  that  gives  it  a  universal  point  of  ref¬ 
erence  with  which  the  power  of  representation 
of  every  one  is  obliged  to  harmonize.  If,  then, 
the  determining  ground  of  the  judgement  as  to 
this  universal  communicability  of  the  represen¬ 
tation  is  to  be  merely  subjective,  that  is  to  say, 
to  be  conceived  independently  of  any  concept 
of  the  object,  it  can  be  nothing  else  than  the 
mental  state  that  presents  itself  in  the  mutual 
relation  of  the  powers  of  representation  so  far 
as  they  refer  a  given  representation  to  cognition 
in  general. 

The  cognitive  powers  brought  into  play  by 
this  representation  are  here  engaged  in  a  free 
play,  since  no  definite  concept  restricts  them  to 
a  particular  rule  of  cognition.  Hence  the  mental 
state  in  this  representation  must  be  one  of  a 
feeling  of  the  free  play  of  the  powers  of  repre¬ 
sentation  in  a  given  representation  for  a  cogni¬ 
tion  in  general.  Now  a  representation,  whereby 
an  object  is  given,  involves,  in  order  that  it  may 
become  a  source  of  cognition  at  all,  imagination 
for  bringing  together  the  manifold  of  intuition, 
and  understanding  for  the  unity  of  the  concept 
uniting  the  representations.  This  state  of  free 
play  of  the  cognitive  faculties  attending  a  rep¬ 
resentation  by  which  an  object  is  given  must 
admit  of  universal  communication:  because 
cognition,  as  a  definition  of  the  object  with 
which  given  representations  (in  any  subject 
whatever)  are  to  accord,  is  the  one  and  only 
representation  which  is  valid  for  everyone. 

As  the  subjective  universal  communicability 

2  [Cf.  §  3  7»] 


OF  AESTHETIC 

of  the  mode  of  representation  in  a  judgement 
of  taste  is  to  subsist  apart  from  the  presuppo¬ 
sition  of  any  definite  concept,  it  can  be  nothing 
else  than  the  mental  state  present  in  the  free 
play  of  imagination  and  understanding  (so  far 
as  these  are  in  mutual  accord,  as  is  requisite 
for  cognition  in  general) ;  for  we  are  conscious 
that  this  subjective  relation  suitable  for  a  cogni¬ 
tion  in  general  must  be  just  as  valid  for  every 
one,  and  consequently  as  universally  communi¬ 
cable,  as  is  any  indeterminate  cognition,  which 
always  rests  upon  that  relation  as  its  subjective 
condition. 

Now  this  purely  subjective  (aesthetic)  esti¬ 
mating  of  the  object,  or  of  the  representation 
through  which  it  is  given,  is  antecedent  to  the 
pleasure  in  it,  and  is  the  basis  of  this  pleasure 
in  the  harmony  of  the  cognitive  faculties.  Again, 
the  above-described  universality  of  the  subjec¬ 
tive  conditions  of  estimating  objects  forms  the 
sole  foundation  of  this  universal  subjective  val¬ 
idity  of  the  delight  which  we  connect  with  the 
representation  of  the  object  that  we  call  beau¬ 
tiful. 

That  an  ability  to  communicate  one’s  mental 
state,  even  though  it  be  only  in  respect  of  our 
cognitive  faculties,  is  attended  with  a  pleasure, 
is  a  fact  which  might  easily  be  demonstrated 
from  the  natural  propensity  of  mankind  to  so¬ 
cial  life,  i.e.,  empirically  and  psychologically. 
But  what  we  have  here  in  view  calls  for  some¬ 
thing  more  than  this.  In  a  judgement  of  taste, 
the  pleasure  felt  by  us  is  exacted  from  every  one 
else  as  necessary,  just  as  if,  when  we  call  some¬ 
thing  beautiful,  beauty  was  to  be  regarded  as  a 
quality  of  the  object  forming  part  of  its  inherent 
determination  according  to  concepts;  although 
beauty  is  for  itself,  apart  from  any  reference  to 
the  feeling  of  the  subject,  nothing.  But  the  dis¬ 
cussion  of  this  question  must  be  reserved  until 
we  have  answered  the  further  one  of  whether, 
and  how,  aesthetic  judgements  are  possible  a 
priori. 

At  present  we  are  exercised  with  the  lesser 
question  of  the  way  in  which  we  become  con¬ 
scious,  in  a  judgement  of  taste,  of  a  reciprocal 
subjective  common  accord  of  the  powers  of  cog¬ 
nition.  Is  it  aesthetically  by  sensation  and  our 
merfc  internal  sense?  Or  is  it  intellectually  by 
consciousness  of  our  intentional  activity  in 
bringing  these  powers  into  play? 

Now  if  the  given  representation  occasioning 
the  judgement  of  taste  were  a  concept  which 
united  understanding  and  imagination  in  the 
estimate  of  the  object  so  as  to  give  a  cogni¬ 
tion  of  the  object,  the  consciousness  of  this 


JUDGEMENT  483 

relation  would  be  intellectual  (as  in  the  objec¬ 
tive  schematism  of  judgement  dealt  with  in 
the  Critique).  But,  then,  in  that  case  the  judge¬ 
ment  would  not  be  laid  down  with  respect  to 
pleasure  and  displeasure,  and  so  would  not  be 
a  judgement  of  taste.  But,  now,  the  judge¬ 
ment  of  taste  determines  the  object,  independ¬ 
ently  of  concepts,  in  respect  of  delight  and  of 
the  predicate  of  beauty.  There  is,  therefore,  no 
other  way  for  the  subjective  unity  of  the  re¬ 
lation  in  question  to  make  itself  known  than 
by  sensation.  The  quickening  of  both  facul¬ 
ties  (imagination  and  understanding)  to  an  in¬ 
definite,  but  yet,  thanks  to  the  given  representa¬ 
tion,  harmonious  activity,  such  as  belongs  to 
cognition  generally,  is  the  sensation  whose  uni¬ 
versal  communicability  is  postulated  by  the 
judgement  of  taste.  An  objective  relation  can, 
of  course,  only  be  thought,  yet  in  so  far  as,  in  re¬ 
spect  of  its  conditions,  it  is  subjective,  it  may 
be  felt  in  its  effect  upon  the  mind,  and,  in  the 
case  of  a  relation  (like  that  of  the  powers  of 
representation  to  a  faculty  of  cognition  general¬ 
ly)  which  does  not  rest  on  any  concept,  no  oth¬ 
er  consciousness  of  it  is  possible  beyond  that 
through  sensation  of  its  effect  upon  the  mind — 
an  effect  consisting  in  the  more  facile  play  of 
both  mental  powers  (imagination  and  under¬ 
standing)  as  quickened  by  their  mutual  accord. 
A  representation  which  is  singular  and  independ¬ 
ent  of  comparison  with  other  representations, 
and,  being  such,  yet  accords  with  the  conditions 
of  the  universality  that  is  the  general  concern 
of  understanding,  is  one  that  brings  the  cogni¬ 
tive  faculties  into  that  proportionate  accord 
which  we  require  for  all  cognition  and  which  we 
therefore  deem  valid  for  every  one  who  is  so 
constituted  as  to  judge  by  means  of  understand¬ 
ing  and  sense  conjointly  (i.e.,  for  every  man). 

Definition  of  the  Beautiful  drawn  from 
the  Second  Moment 

The  beautiful  is  that  which,  apart  from  a  con¬ 
cept,  pleases  universally. 

Third  Moment.  Of  Judgements  of  Taste: 
Moment  of  the  relation  of  the  Ends 
brought  under  Review  in  such  Judge¬ 
ments 

§  10.  Finality  in  general 
Let  us  define  the  meaning  of  “an  end”  in 
transcendental  terms  (i.e.,  without  presuppos¬ 
ing  anything  empirical,  such  as  the  feeling  of 
pleasure).  An  end  is  the  object  of  a  concept  so 
far  as  this  concept  is  regarded  as  the  cause  of 
the  object  (the  real  ground  of  its  possibility); 


THE  CRITIQUE 


and  the  causality  of  a  concept  in  respect  of  its 
object  is  finality  (forma  finalis).  Where,  then, 
not  the  cognition  of  an  object  merely,  but  the 
object  itself  (its  form  or  real  existence)  as  an 
effect,  is  thought  to  be  possible  only  through  a 
concept  of  it,  there  we  imagine  an  end.  The  rep¬ 
resentation  of  the  effect  is  here  the  determining 
ground  of  its  cause  and  takes  the  lead  of  it.  The 
consciousness  of  the  causality  of  a  representa¬ 
tion  in  respect  of  the  state  of  the  subject  as  one 
tending  to  preserve  a  continuance  of  that  state, 
may  here  be  said  to  denote  in  a  general  way  what 
is  called  pleasure;  whereas  displeasure  is  that 
representation  which  contains  the  ground  for 
converting  the  state  of  the  representations  into 
their  opposite  (for  hindering  or  removing  them).1 

The  faculty  of  desire,  so  far  as  determinable 
only  through  concepts,  i.e.,  so  as  to  act  in  con¬ 
formity  with  the  representation  of  an  end,  would 
be  the  will.2  But  an  object,  or  state  of  mind,  or 
even  an  action  may,  although  its  possibility  does 
not  necessarily  presuppose  the  representation 
of  an  end,  be  called  final  simply  on  account  of 
its  possibility  being  only  explicable  and  intelligi¬ 
ble  for  us  by  virtue  of  an  assumption  on  our 
part  of  fundamental  causality  according  to  ends, 
i.e.,  a  will  that  would  have  so  ordained  it  accord¬ 
ing  to  a  certain  represented  rule.  Finality,  there¬ 
fore,  may  exist  apart  from  an  end,  in  so  far  as 
we  do  not  locate  the  causes  of  this  form  in  a  will, 
but  yet  are  able  to  render  the  explanation  of  its 
possibility  intelligible  to  ourselves  only  by  de¬ 
riving  it  from  a  will.  Now  we  are  not  always 
obliged  to  look  with  the  eye  of  reason  into  what 
we  observe  (i.e.,  to  consider  it  in  its  possibility). 
So  we  may  at  least  observe  a  finality  of  form, 
and  trace  it  in  objects — though  by  reflection 
only — without  resting  it  on  an  end  (as  the  ma¬ 
terial  of  the  nexus  finalis). 

§n.  The  sole  foundation  of  the  judgement  of 

taste  is  the  form  of  finality  of  an  object 

(or  mode  of  representing  it) 

Whenever  an  end  is  regarded  as  a  source  of 
delight,  it  always  imports  an  interest  as  deter¬ 
mining  ground  of  the  judgement  on  the  object 
of  pleasure.  Hence  the  judgement  of  taste  can¬ 
not  rest  on  any  subjective  end  as  its  ground.  But 
neither  can  any  representation  of  an  objective 
end,  i.e.,  of  the  possibility  of  the  object  itself 
on  principles  of  final  connection,  determine  the 
judgement  of  taste,  and,  consequently,  neither 
can  any  concept  of  the  good.  For  the  judgement 

1  [Cf.  P.  4S5.] 

2  [Cf.  Introduction  to  the  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  sect, 
i..  PP.  385-3S7.] 


of  taste  is  an  aesthetic  and  not  a  cognitive  judge¬ 
ment,  and  so  does  not  deal  with  any  concept  of 
the  nature  or  of  the  internal  or  external  possibil¬ 
ity,  by  this  or  that  cause,  of  the  object,  but  sim¬ 
ply  with  the  relative  bearing  of  the  representa¬ 
tive  powers  so  far  as  determined  by  a  represen¬ 
tation. 

Now  this  relation,  present  when  an  object  is 
characterized  as  beautiful,  is  coupled  with  the 
feeling  of  pleasure.  This  pleasure  is  by  the  judge¬ 
ment  of  taste  pronounced  valid  for  every  one; 
hence  an  agreeableness  attending  the  represen¬ 
tation  is  just  as  incapable  of  containing  the  de¬ 
termining  ground  of  the  judgement  as  the  repre¬ 
sentation  of  the  perfection  of  the  object  or  the 
concept  of  the  good.  We  are  thus  left  with  the 
subjective  finality  in  the  representation  of  an 
object,  exclusive  of  any  end  (objective  or  sub¬ 
jective) — consequently  the  bare  form  of  final¬ 
ity  in  the  representation  whereby  an  object  is 
given  to  us,  so  far  as  we  are  conscious  of  it — 
as  that  which  is  alone  capable  of  constituting  the 
delight  which,  apart  from  any  concept,  we  esti¬ 
mate  as  universally  communicable,  and  so  of 
forming  the  determining  ground  of  the  judge¬ 
ment  of  taste. 

§12.  The  judgement  of  taste  rests  upon  a  priori 
grounds 

To  determine  a  priori  the  connection  of  the 
feeling  of  pleasure  or  displeasure  as  an  effect, 
with  some  representation  or  other  (sensation  or 
concept)  as  its  cause,  is  utterly  impossible;  for 
that  would  be  a  causal  relation  which  (with  ob¬ 
jects  of  experience)  is  always  one  that  can  only 
be  cognized  a  posteriori  and  with  the  help  of  ex¬ 
perience.  True,  in  the  Critique  of  Practical  Rea¬ 
son  we  did  actually  derive  a  priori  from  univer¬ 
sal  moral  concepts  the  feeling  of  respect  (as  a 
particular  and  peculiar  modification  of  this  feel¬ 
ing  which  does  not  strictly  answer  either  to  the 
pleasure  or  displeasure  which  we  receive  from 
empirical  objects).  But  there  we  were  further 
able  to  cross  the  border  of  experience  and  call 
in  aid  a  causality  resting  on  a  supersensible  at¬ 
tribute  of  the  subject,  namely  that  of  freedom. 
But  even  there  it  was  not  this  feeling  exactly 
that  we  deduced  from  the  idea  of  the  moral  as 
cause,  but  from  this  was  derived  simply  the  de¬ 
termination  of  the  will.  But  the  mental  state 
present  in  the  determination  of  the  will  by  any 
means  is  at  once  in  itself  a  feeling  of  pleasure 
and  identical  with  it,  and  so  does  not  issue  from 
it  as  an  effect.  Such  an  effect  must  only  be  as¬ 
sumed  where  the  concept  of  the  moral  as  a  good 
precedes  the  determination  of  the  will  by  the 


OF  AESTHETIC 

law;  for  in  that  case  it  would  be  futile  to  derive 
the  pleasure  combined  with  the  concept  from 
this  concept  as  a  mere  cognition. 

Now  the  pleasure  in  aesthetic  judgements 
stands  on  a  similar  footing:  only  that  here  it  is 
merely  contemplative  and  does  not  bring  about 
an  interest  in  the  object;  whereas  in  the  moral 
judgement  it  is  practical.  The  consciousness  of 
mere  formal  finality  in  the  play  of  the  cognitive 
faculties  of  the  subject  attending  a  representa¬ 
tion  whereby  an  object  is  given,  is  the  pleasure 
itself,  because  it  involves  a  determining  ground 
of  the  subject’s  activity  in  respect  of  the  quick¬ 
ening  of  its  cognitive  powers,  and  thus  an  inter¬ 
nal  causality  (which  is  final)  in  respect  of  cogni¬ 
tion  generally,  but  without  being  limited  to  a 
definite  cognition,  and  consequently  a  mere  form 
of  the  subjective  finality  of  a  representation  in 
an  aesthetic  judgement.  This  pleasure  is  also  in 
no  way  practical,  neither  resembling  that  form 
the  pathological  ground  of  agreeableness  nor 
that  from  the  intellectual  ground  of  the  repre¬ 
sented  good.  But  still  it  involves  an  inherent 
causality,  that,  namely,  of  preserving  a  continu¬ 
ance  of  the  state  of  the  representation  itself 
and  the  active  engagement  of  the  cognitive  pow¬ 
ers  without  ulterior  aim.  We  dwell  on  the  con¬ 
templation  of  the  beautiful  because  this  contem¬ 
plation  strengthens  and  reproduces  itself.  The 
case  is  analogous  (but  analogous  only)  to  the 
way  we  linger  on  a  charm  in  the  representation 
of  an  object  which  keeps  arresting  the  attention, 
the  mind  all  the  while  remaining  passive. 

§  13.  The  pure  judgement  of  taste  is  independ¬ 
ent  of  charm  and  emotion 

Every  interest  vitiates  the  judgement  of  taste 
and  robs  it  of  its  impartiality.  This  is  especially 
so  where,  instead  of,  like  the  interest  of  reason, 
making  finality  take  the  lead  of  the  feeling  of 
pleasure,  it  grounds  it  upon  this  feeling — which 
is  what  always  happens  in  aesthetic  judgements 
upon  anything  so  far  as  it  gratifies  or  pains. 
Hence  judgements  so  influenced  can  either  lay 
no  claim  at  all  to  a  universally  valid  delight,  or 
else  must  abate  their  claim  in  proportion  as  sen¬ 
sations  of  the  kind  in  question  enter  into  the  de¬ 
termining  grounds  of  taste.  Taste  that  requires 
an  added  element  of  charm  and  emotion  for  its 
delight,  not  to  speak  of  adopting  this  as  the 
measure  of  its  approval,  has  not  yet  emerged 
from  barbarism. 

And  yet  charms  are  frequently  not  alone 
ranked  with  beauty  (which  ought  properly  to  be 
a  question  merely  of  the  form)  as  supplemen¬ 
tary  to  the  aesthetic  universal  delight,  but  they 


JUDGEMENT  485 

have  been  accredited  as  intrinsic  beauties,  and 
consequently  the  matter  of  delight  passed  off  for 
the  form.  This  is  a  misconception  which,  like 
many  others  that  have  still  an  underlying  ele¬ 
ment  of  truth,  may  be  removed  by  a  careful 
definition  of  these  concepts. 

A  judgement  of  taste  which  is  uninfluenced 
by  charm  or  emotion  (though  these  may  be  as¬ 
sociated1  with  the  delight  in  the  beautiful),  and 
whose  determining  ground,  therefore,  is  simply 
finality  of  form,  is  a  pure  judgement  of  taste. 

§  14.  Exemplification 

Aesthetic,  just  like  theoretical  (logical) 
judgements,  are  divisible  into  empirical  and 
pure.  The  first  are  those  by  which  agreeableness 
or  disagreeableness,  the  second  those  by  which 
beauty  is  predicated  of  an  object  or  its  mode  of 
representation.  The  former  are  judgements  of 
sense  (material  aesthetic  judgements),  the  latter 
(as  formal)  alone  judgements  of  taste  proper. 

A  judgement  of  taste,  therefore,  is  only  pure 
so  far  as  its  determining  ground  is  tainted  with 
no  merely  empirical  delight.  But  such  a  taint  is 
always  present  where  charm  or  emotion  have  a 
share  in  the  judgement  by-which  something  is  to 
be  described  as  beautiful. 

Here  now  there  is  a  recrudescence  of  a  num¬ 
ber  of  specious  pleas  that  go  the  length  of  put¬ 
ting  forward  the  case  that  charm  is  not  merely  a 
necessary  ingredient  of  beauty,  but  is  even  of 
itself  sufficient  to  merit  the  name  of  beautiful. 
A  mere  colour,  such  as  the  green  of  a  plot  of 
grass,  or  a  mere  tone  (as  distinguished  from 
sound  or  noise),  like  that  of  a  violin,  is  described 
by  most  people  as  in  itself  beautiful,  notwith¬ 
standing  the  fact  that  both  seem  to  depend 
merely  on  the  matter  of  the  representations — 
in  other  words,  simply  on  sensation — which  only 
entitles  them  to  be  called  agreeable.  But  it  will 
at  the  same  time  be  observed  that  sensations  of 
colour  as  well  as  of  tone  are  only  entitled  to  be 
immediately  regarded  as  beautiful  where,  in 
either  case,  they  are  pure.  This  is  a  determina¬ 
tion  which  at  once  goes  to  their  form,  and  it  is 
the  only  one  which  these  representations  possess 
that  admits  with  certainty  of  being  universally 
communicated.  For  it  is  not  to  be  assumed  that 
even  the  quality  of  the  sensations  agrees  in  all 
subjects,  and  we  can  hardly  take  it  for  granted 
that  the  agreeableness  of  a  colour,  or  of  the 
tone  of  a  musical  instrument,  which  we  judge  to 
be  preferable  to  that  of  another,  is  given  a  like 
preference  in  the  estimate  of  every  one. 

Assuming  with  Euler  that  colours  are  isoch- 

1  [Cf.  pp.  486,  495.] 


THE  CRITIQUE 


ronous  vibrations  ( pulsus )  of  the  aether,  as 
tones  are  of  the  air  set  in  vibration  by  sound, 
and.  what  is  most  important,  that  the  mind  not 
alone  perceives  by  sense  their  effect  in  stimulat¬ 
ing  the  organs,  but  also,  by  reflection,  the  regu¬ 
lar  play  of  the  impressions  (and  consequently 
the  form  in  which  different  representations  are 
united) — which  I,  still,  in  no  way  doubt — then 
colour  and  tone  would  not  be  mere  sensations. 
They  would  be  nothing  short  of  formal  deter¬ 
minations  of  the  unity  of  a  manifold  of  sensa¬ 
tions,  and  in  that  case  could  even  be  ranked  as 
intrinsic  beauties. 

But  the  purity  of  a  simple  mode  of  sensation 
means  that  its  uniformity  is  not  disturbed  or 
broken  by  any  foreign  sensation.  It  belongs 
merely  to  the  form;  for  abstraction  may  there 
be  made  from  the  quality  of  the  mode  of  such 
sensation  (what  colour  or  tone,  if  any,  it  repre¬ 
sents).  For  this  reason,  all  simple  colours  are 
regarded  as  beautiful  so  far  as  pure.  Composite 
colours  have  not  this  advantage,  because,  not 
being  simple,  there  is  no  standard  for  estimat¬ 
ing  whether  they  should  be  called  pure  or  im¬ 
pure. 

But  as  for  the  beauty  ascribed  to  the  object 
on  account  of  its  form,  and  the  supposition  that 
it  is  capable  of  being  enhanced  by  charm,  this  is 
a  common  error  and  one  very  prejudicial  to  gen¬ 
uine,  uncorrupted,  sincere  taste.  Nevertheless 
charms  may  be  added  to  beauty  to  lend  to  the 
mind,  beyond  a  bare  delight,  an  adventitious  in¬ 
terest  in  the  representation  of  the  object,  and 
thus  to  advocate  taste  and  its  cultivation.  This 
applies  especially  where  taste  is  as  yet  crude 
and  untrained.  But  they  are  positively  subver¬ 
sive  of  the  judgement  of  taste,  if  allowed  to  ob¬ 
trude  themselves  as  grounds  of  estimating  beau¬ 
ty.  For  so  far  are  they  from  contributing  to 
beauty  that  it  is  only  where  taste  is  still  weak 
and  untrained  that,  like  aliens,  they  are  admit¬ 
ted  as  a  favour,  and  only  on  terms  that  they  do 
not  violate  that  beautiful  form. 

In  painting,  sculpture,  and  in  fact  in  all  the 
formative  arts,  in  architecture  and  horticulture, 
so  far  as  fine  arts,  the  design  is  what  is  essential. 
Here  it  is  not  what  gratifies  in  sensation  but 
merely  what  pleases  by  its  form,  that  is  the  fun¬ 
damental  prerequisite  for  taste.  The  colours 
which  give  brilliancy  to  the  sketch  are  part  of 
the  charm.  They  may  no  doubt,  in  their  own 
way,  enliven  the  object  for  sensation,  but  make 
it  really  worth  looking  at  and  beautiful  they 
cannot.  Indeed,  more  often  than  not  the  require¬ 
ments  of  the  beautiful  form  restrict  them  to  a 
very  narrow  compass,  and,  even  where  charm  is 


admitted,  it  is  only  this  form  that  gives  them  a 
place  of  honour. 

All  form  of  objects  of  sense  (both  of  external 
and  also,  mediately,  of  internal  sense)  is  either 
figure  or  play.  In  the  latter  case  it  is  either  play 
of  figures  (in  space:  mimic  and  dance),  or  mere 
play  of  sensations  (in  time).  The  charm  of  col¬ 
ours,  or  of  the  agreeable  tones  of  instruments, 
may  be  added:  but  the  design  in  the  former  and 
the  composition  in  the  latter  constitute  the 
proper  object  of  the  pure  judgement  of  taste.  To 
say  that  the  purity  alike  of  colours  and  of  tones, 
or  their  variety  and  contrast,  seem  to  contribute 
to  beauty,  is  by  no  means  to  imply  that,  because 
in  themselves  agreeable,  they  therefore  yield  an 
addition  to  the  delight  in  the  form  and  one  on  a 
par  with  it.  The  real  meaning  rather  is  that  they 
make  this  form  more  clearly,  definitely,  and 
completely  intuitable,  and  besides  stimulate  the 
representation  by  their  charm,  as  they  excite 
and  sustain  the  attention  directed  to  the  object 
itself. 

Even  what  is  called  ornamentation  ( parerga ), 
i.e.,  what  is  only  an  adjunct  and  not  an  intrinsic 
constituent  in  the  complete  representation  of  the 
object,  in  augmenting  the  delight  of  taste  does 
so  only  by  means  of  its  form.  Thus  it  is  with  the 
frames  of  pictures  or  the  drapery  on  statues,  or 
the  colonnades  of  palaces.  But  if  the  ornamenta¬ 
tion  does  not  itself  enter  into  the  composition  of 
the  beautiful  form — if  it  is  introduced  like  a 
gold  frame  merely  to  win  approval  for  the  pic¬ 
ture  by  means  of  its  charm — it  is  then  called 
finery  and  takes  away  from  the  genuine  beauty. 

Emotion — a  sensation  where  an  agreeable  feel¬ 
ing  is  produced  merely  by  means  of  a  momen¬ 
tary  check  followed  by  a  more  powerful  out¬ 
pouring  of  the  vital  force — is  quite  foreign  to 
beauty.  Sublimity  (with  which  the  feeling  of 
emotion  is  connected)  requires,  however,  a  dif¬ 
ferent  standard  of  estimation  from  that  relied 
upon  by  taste.  A  pure  judgement  of  taste  has, 
then,  for  its  determining  ground  neither  charm 
nor  emotion,  in  a  word,  no  sensation  as  matter 
of  the  aesthetic  judgement. 

§  15.  The  judgement  of  taste  is  entirely 

independent  of  the  concept  of  perfection 

Objective  finality  can  only  be  cognized  by 
means  of  a  reference  of  the  manifold  to  a  defi¬ 
nite  end,  and  hence  only  through  a  concept.  This 
alone  makes  it  clear  that  the  beautiful,  which  is 
estimated  on  the  ground  of  a  mere  formal  final¬ 
ity,  i.e.,  a  finality  apart  from  an  end,  is  wholly 
independent  of  the  representation  of  the  good. 
For  the  latter  presupposes  an  objective  finality, 


OF  AESTHETIC  JUDGEMENT 


i.e.,  the  reference  of  the  object  to  a  definite  end. 

Objective  finality  is  either  external,  i.e.,  the 
utility,  or  internal,  i.  e.,  the  perfection ,  of  the 
object.  That  the  delight  in  an  object  on  ac¬ 
count  of  which  we  call  it  beautiful  is  inca¬ 
pable  of  resting  on  the  representation  of  its 
utility,  is  abundantly  evident  from  the  two  pre¬ 
ceding  articles;  for  in  that  case,  it  would  not 
be  an  immediate  delight  in  the  object,  which  lat¬ 
ter  is  the  essential  condition  of  the  judgement 
upon  beauty.  But  in  an  objective,  internal  final¬ 
ity,  i.e.,  perfection,  we  have  what  is  more  akin 
to  the  predicate  of  beauty,  and  so  this  has  been 
held  even  by  philosophers  of  reputation  to  be 
convertible  with  beauty,  though  subject  to  the 
qualification:  where  it  is  thought  in  a  confused 
way.1  In  a  critique  of  taste  it  is  of  the  utmost 
importance  to  decide  whether  beauty  is  really 
reducible  to  the  concept  of  perfection. 

For  estimating  objective  finality  we  always 
require  the  concept  of  an  end,  and,  where  such 
finality  has  to  be,  not  an  external  one  (utility), 
but  an  internal  one,  the  concept  of  an  internal 
end  containing  the  ground  of  the  internal  possi¬ 
bility  of  the  object.  Now  an  end  is  in  general 
that,  the  concept  of  which  may  be  regarded  as 
the  ground  of  the  possibility  of  the  object  itself. 
So  in  order  to  represent  an  objective  finality  in 
a  thing  we  must  first  have  a  concept  of  what  sort 
of  a  thing  it  is  to  be.  The  agreement  of  the  mani¬ 
fold  in  a  thing  with  this  concept  (which  supplies 
the  rule  of  its  synthesis)  is  the  qualitative  per¬ 
fection  of  the  thing.  Quantitative  perfection  is 
entirely  distinct  from  this.  It  consists  in  the 
completeness  of  anything  after  its  kind,  and  is 
a  mere  concept  of  quantity  (of  totality).  In  its 
case  the  question  of  what  the  thing  is  to  be  is 
regarded  as  definitely  disposed  of,  and  we  only 
ask  whether  it  is  possessed  of  all  the  requisites 
that  go  to  make  it  such.  What  is  formal  in  the 
representation  of  a  thing,  i.e.,  the  agreement  of 
its  manifold  with  a  unity  (i.e.,  irrespective  of 
what  it  is  to  be),  does  not,  of  itself,  afford  us  any 
cognition  whatsoever  of  objective  finality.  For 
since  abstraction  is  made  from  this  unity  as  end 
(what  the  thing  is  to  be),  nothing  is  left  but  the 
subjective  finality  of  the  representations  in  the 
mind  of  the  subject  intuiting.  This  gives  a  cer¬ 
tain  finality  of  the  representative  state  of  the 
subject,  in  which  the  subject  feels  itself  quite 
at  home  in  its  effort  to  grasp  a  given  form  in  the 
imagination,  but  no  perfection  of  any  object, 
the  latter  not  being  here  thought  through  any 
concept.  For  instance,  if  in  a  forest  I  light  upon 
a  plot  of  grass,  round  which  trees  stand  in  a  cir- 

1  [Cf.  Critique  of  Pure  Reason,  pp.  29-31.] 


487 

cle,  and  if  I  do  not  then  form  any  representation 
of  an  end,  as  that  it  is  meant  to  be  used,  say,  for 
country  dances,  then  not  the  least  hint  of  a  con¬ 
cept  of  perfection  is  given  by  the  mere  form. 
To  suppose  a  formal  objective  finality  that  is 
yet  devoid  of  an  end,  i.e.,  the  mere  form  of  a 
perfection  (apart  from  any  matter  or  concept  of 
that  to  which  the  agreement  relates,  even  though 
there  was  the  mere  general  idea  of  a  conformity 
to  law)  is  a  veritable  contradiction. 

Now  the  judgement  of  taste  is  an  aesthetic 
judgement,  i.e.,  one  resting  on  subjective  grounds. 
No  concept  can  be  its  determining  ground,  and 
hence  not  one  of  a  definite  end.  Beauty,  there¬ 
fore,  as  a  formal  subjective  finality,  involves  no 
thought  whatsoever  of  a  perfection  of  the  ob¬ 
ject,  as  a  would-be  formal  finality  which  yet,  for 
all  that,  is  objective:  and  the  distinction  be¬ 
tween  the  concepts  of  the  beautiful  and  the 
good,  which  represents  both  as  differing  only  in 
their  logical  form,  the  first  being  merely  a  con¬ 
fused,  the  second  a  clearly  defined,  concept  of 
perfection,  while  otherwise  alike  in  content  and 
origin,  all  goes  for  nothing:  for  then  there  would 
be  no  specific  difference  between  them,  but  the 
judgement  of  taste  would  be  just  as  much  a 
cognitive  judgement  as  one  by  which  something 
is  described  as  good — just  as  the  man  in  the 
street,  when  he  says  that  deceit  is  wrong,  bases 
his  judgement  on  confused,  but  the  philosopher 
on  clear  grounds,  while  both  appeal  in  reality  to 
identical  principles  of  reason.  But  I  have  al¬ 
ready  stated  that  an  aesthetic  judgement  is  quite 
unique,  and  affords  absolutely  no  (not  even  a 
confused)  knowledge  of  the  object.  It  is  only 
through  a  logical  judgement  that  we  get  knowl¬ 
edge.  The  aesthetic  judgement,  on  the  other 
hand,  refers  the  representation,  by  which  an  ob¬ 
ject  is  given,  solely  to  the  subject,  and  brings  to 
our  notice  no  quality  of  the  object,  but  only  the 
final  form  in  the  determination  of  the  powers  of 
representation  engaged  upon  it.  The  judgement 
is  called  aesthetic  for  the  very  reason  that  its 
determining  ground  cannot  be  a  concept,  but  is 
rather  the  feeling  (of  the  internal  sense)  of  the 
concert  in  the  play  of  the  mental  powers  as  a 
thing  only  capable  of  being  felt.  If,  on  the  other 
hand,  confused  concepts,  and  the  objective 
judgement  based  on  them,  are  going  to  be  called 
aesthetic ,  we  shall  find  ourselves  with  an  under¬ 
standing  judging  by  sense,  or  a  sense  represent¬ 
ing  its  objects  by  concepts — a  mere  choice  of 
contradictions.  The  faculty  of  concepts,  be  they 
confused  or  be  they  clear,  is  understanding;  and 
although  understanding  has  (as  in  all  judge¬ 
ments)  its  role  in  the  judgement  of  taste,  as  an 


THE  CRITIQUE 


aesthetic  judgement,  its  role  there  is  not  that  of 
a  faculty  for  cognizing  an  object,  but  of  a  facul¬ 
ty  for  determining  that  judgement  and  its  repre¬ 
sentation  (without  a  concept)  according  to  its 
relation  to  the  subject  and  its  internal  feeling, 
and  for  doing  so  in  so  far  as  that  judgement  is 
possible  according  to  a  universal  rule. 

§  1 6.  A  judgement  of  taste  by  which  an  object 

is  described  as  beautiful ,  under  the  condition 

of  a  definite  concept,  is  not  pure 

There  are  two  kinds  of  beauty:  free  beauty 
( pulchritudo  vaga ),  or  beauty  which  is  merely 
dependent  ( pulchritudo  adhaerens).  The  first 
presupposes  no  concept  of  what  the  object 
should  be;  the  second  does  presuppose  such  a 
concept  and,  with  it,  an  answering  perfection  of 
the  object.  Those  of  the  first  kind  are  said  to  be 
(self-subsisting)  beauties  of  this  thing  or  that 
thing;  the  other  kind  of  beauty,  being  attached 
to  a  concept  (conditioned  beauty),  is  ascribed 
to  objects  which  come  under  the  concept  of  a 
particular  end. 

Flowers  are  free  beauties  of  nature.  Hardly 
anyone  but  a  botanist  knows  the  true  nature  of 
a  flower,  and  even  he,  while  recognizing  in  the 
flower  the  reproductive  organ  of  the  plant,  pays 
no  attention  to  this  natural  end  when  using  his 
taste  to  judge  of  its  beauty.  Hence  no  perfection 
of  any  kind — no  internal  finality,  as  something 
to  which  the  arrangement  of  the  manifold  is  re¬ 
lated — underlies  this  judgement.  Many  birds 
(the  parrot,  the  humming-bird,  the  bird  of  para¬ 
dise),  and  a  number  of  Crustacea,  are  self-sub¬ 
sisting  beauties  which  are  not  appurtenant  to 
any  object  defined  with  respect  to  its  end,  but 
please  freely  and  on  their  own  account.  So  de¬ 
signs  a  la  grecque ,  foliage  for  framework  or  on 
wall-papers,  etc.,  have  no  intrinsic  meaning; 
they  represent  nothing — no  object  under  a  defi¬ 
nite  concept — and  are  free  beauties.1  We  may 
also  rank  in  the  same  class  what  in  music  are 
called  fantasias  (without  a  theme),  and,  indeed, 
all  music  that  is  not  set  to  words. 

In  the  estimate  of  a  free  beauty  (according  to 
mere  form)  we  have  the  pure  judgement  of  taste. 
No  concept  is  here  presupposed  of  any  end 
for  which  the  manifold  should  serve  the  given 
object,  and  which  the  latter,  therefore,  should 
represent — an  incumbrance  which  would  only 
restrict  the  freedom  of  the  imagination  that,  as 
it  were,  is  at  play  in  the  contemplation  of  the 
outward  form. 

But  the  beauty  of  man  (including  under  this 
head  that  of  a  man,  woman,  or  child),  the  beau- 

i  [Cf.  p.  478,  et  jeg.] 


ty  of  a  horse,  or  of  a  building  (such  as  a  church, 
palace,  arsenal,  or  summer-house),  presupposes 
a  concept  of  the  end  that  defines  what  the  thing 
has  to  be,  and  consequently  a  concept  of  its 
perfection;  and  is  therefore  merely  appendant 
beauty.  Now,  just  as  it  is  a  clog  on  the  purity  of 
the  judgement  of  taste  to  have  the  agreeable  (of 
sensation)  joined  with  beauty  to  which  properly 
only  the  form  is  relevant,  so  to  combine  the 
good  with  beauty  (the  good,  namely,  of  the 
manifold  to  the  thing  itself  according  to  its  end) 
mars  its  purity. 

Much  might  be  added  to  a  building  that  would 
immediately  please  the  eye,  were  it  not  intended 
for  a  church.  A  figure  might  be  beautified  with 
all  manner  of  flourishes  and  light  but  regular 
lines,  as  is  done  by  the  New  Zealanders  with 
their  tattooing,  were  we  dealing  with  anything 
but  the  figure  of  a  human  being.  And  here  is  one 
whose  rugged  features  might  be  softened  and 
given  a  more  pleasing  aspect,  only  he  has  got  to 
be  a  man,  or  is,  perhaps,  a  warrior  that  has  to 
have  a  warlike  appearance. 

Now  the  delight  in  the  manifold  of  a  thing, 
in  reference  to  the  internal  end  that  determines 
its  possibility,  is  a  delight  based  on  a  concept, 
whereas  delight  in  the  beautiful  is  such  as  does 
not  presuppose  any  concept,  but  is  immediately 
coupled  with  the  representation  through  which 
the  object  is  given  (not  through  which  it  is 
thought).  If,  now,  the  judgement  of  taste  in  re¬ 
spect  of  the  latter  delight  is  made  dependent  up¬ 
on  the  end  involved  in  the  former  delight  as  a 
judgement  of  reason,  and  is  thus  placed  under  a 
restriction,  then  it  is  no  longer  a  free  and  pure 
judgement  of  taste. 

Taste,  it  is  true,  stands  to  gain  by  this  com¬ 
bination  of  intellectual  delight  with  the  aesthet¬ 
ic.  For  it  becomes  fixed,  and,  while  not  univer¬ 
sal,  it  enables  rules  to  be  prescribed  for  it  in  re¬ 
spect  of  certain  definite  final  objects.  But  these 
rules  are  then  not  rules  of  taste,  but  merely  rules 
for  establishing  a  union  of  taste  with  reason,  i.e., 
of  the  beautiful  with  the  good — rules  by  which 
the  former  becomes  available  as  an  intentional 
instrument  in  respect  of  the  latter,  for  the  pur¬ 
pose  of  bringing  that  temper  of  the  mind  which 
is  self-sustaining  and  of  subjective  universal  va¬ 
lidity  to  the  support  and  maintenance  of  that 
mode  of  thought  which,  while  possessing  objec¬ 
tive  universal  validity,  can  only  be  preserved  by 
a  resolute  effort.  But,  strictly  speaking,  perfec¬ 
tion  neither  gains  by  beauty,  nor  beauty  by  per¬ 
fection.  The  truth  is  rather  this,  when  we  com¬ 
pare  the  representation  through  which  an  object 
is  given  to  us  with  the  object  (in  respect  of  what 


OF  AESTHETIC  JUDGEMENT 


it  is  meant  to  be)  by  means  of  a  concept,  we  can¬ 
not  help  reviewing  it  also  in  respect  of  the  sen¬ 
sation  in  the  subject.  Hence  there  results  a  gain 
to  the  entire  faculty  of  our  representative  pow¬ 
er  when  harmony  prevails  between  both  states 
of  mind. 

In  respect  of  an  object  with  a  definite  internal 
end,  a  judgement  of  taste  would  only  be  pure 
where  the  person  judging  either  has  no  concept 
of  this  end,  or  else  makes  abstraction  from  it  in 
his  judgement.  But  in  cases  like  this,  although 
such  a  person  should  lay  down  a  correct  judge¬ 
ment  of  taste,  since  he  would  be  estimating  the 
object  as  a  free  beauty,  he  would  still  be  found 
fault  with  by  another  who  saw  nothing  in  its 
beauty  but  a  dependent  quality  (i.e.,  who  looked 
to  the  end  of  the  object)  and  would  be  accused 
by  him  of  false  taste,  though  both  would,  in 
their  own  way,  be  judging  correctly:  the  one  ac¬ 
cording  to  what  he  had  present  to  his  senses,  the 
other  according  to  what  was  present  in  his 
thoughts.  This  distinction  enables  us  to  settle 
many  disputes  about  beauty  on  the  part  of  crit¬ 
ics;  for  we  may  show  them  how  one  side  is  deal¬ 
ing  with  free  beauty,  and  the  other  with  that 
which  is  dependent:  the  former  passing  a  pure 
judgement  of  taste,  the  latter  one  that  is  applied 
intentionally. 

§  17.  The  Ideal  of  beauty 

There  can  be  no  objective  rule  of  taste  by 
which  what  is  beautiful  may  be  defined  by 
means  of  concepts.  For  every  judgement  from 
that  source  is  aesthetic,  i.e.,  its  determining 
ground  is  the  feeling  of  the  subject,  and  not  any 
concept  of  an  object.  It  is  only  throwing  away 
labour  to  look  for  a  principle  of  taste  that  af¬ 
fords  a  universal  criterion  of  the  beautiful  by 
definite  concepts;  because  what  is  sought  is  a 
thing  impossible  and  inherently  contradictory. 
But  in  the  universal  communicability  of  the 
sensation  (of  delight  or  aversion) — a  communi¬ 
cability,  too,  that  exists  apart  from  any  concept 
— in  the  accord,  so  far  as  possible,  of  all  ages 
and  nations  as  to  this  feeling  in  the  representa¬ 
tion  of  certain  objects,  we  have  the  empirical 
criterion,  weak  indeed  and  scarce  sufficient  to 
raise  a  presumption,  of  the  derivation  of  a  taste, 
thus  confirmed  by  examples,  from  grounds  deep- 
seated  and  shared  alike  by  all  men,  underlying 
their  agreement  in  estimating  the  forms  under 
which  objects  are  given  to  them. 

For  this  reason  some  products  of  taste  are 
looked  on  as  exemplary — not  meaning  thereby 
that  by  imitating  others  taste  may  be  acquired. 
For  taste  must  be  an  original  faculty;  whereas 


489 

one  who  imitates  a  model,  while  showing  skill 
commensurate  with  his  success,  only  displays 
taste  as  himself  a  critic  of  this  model.1  Hence  it 
follows  that  the  highest  model,  the  archetype  of 
taste,  is  a  mere  idea,  which  each  person  must 
beget  in  his  own  consciousness,  and  according 
to  which  he  must  form  his  estimate  of  every¬ 
thing  that  is  an  object  of  taste,  or  that  is  an  ex¬ 
ample  of  critical  taste,  and  even  of  universal 
taste  itself.  Properly  speaking,  an  idea  signifies 
a  concept  of  reason,  and  an  ideal  the  representa¬ 
tion  of  an  individual  existence  as  adequate  to  an 
idea.  Hence  this  archetype  of  taste — which  rests, 
indeed,  upon  reason’s  indeterminate  idea  of  a 
maximum,  but  is  not,  however,  capable  of  being 
represented  by  means  of  concepts,  but  only  in 
an  individual  presentation — may  more  appropri¬ 
ately  be  called  the  ideal  of  the  beautiful.  While 
not  having  this  ideal  in  our  possession,  we  still 
strive  to  beget  it  within  us.  But  it  is  bound  to  be 
merely  an  ideal  of  the  imagination,  seeing  that 
it  rests,  not  upon  concepts,  but  upon  the  pres¬ 
entation — the  faculty  of  presentation  being  the 
imagination.  Now,  how  do  we  arrive  at  such  an 
ideal  of  beauty?  Is  it  a  priori  or  empirically? 
Further,  what  species  of  the  beautiful  admits 
of  an  ideal? 

First  of  all,  we  do  well  to  observe  that  the 
beauty  for  which  an  ideal  has  to  be  sought  can¬ 
not  be  a  beauty  that  is  free  and  at  large ,  but 
must  be  one  fixed  by  a  concept  of  objective  fi¬ 
nality.2  Hence  it  cannot  belong  to  the  object  of 
an  altogether  pure  judgement  of  taste,  but  must 
attach  to  one  that  is  partly  intellectual.  In  other 
words,  where  an  ideal  is  to  have  place  among 
the  grounds  upon  which  any  estimate  is  formed, 
then  beneath  grounds  of  that  kind  there  must 
lie  some  idea  of  reason  according  to  determinate 
concepts,  by  which  the  end  underlying  the  in¬ 
ternal  possibility  of  the  object  is  determined  a 
priori.  An  ideal  of  beautiful  flowers,  of  a  beau¬ 
tiful  suite  of  furniture,  or  of  a  beautiful  view, 
is  unthinkable.  But,  it  may  also  be  impossible  to 
represent  an  ideal  of  a  beauty  dependent  on  def¬ 
inite  ends,  e.g.,  a  beautiful  residence,  a  beautiful 
tree,  a  beautiful  garden,  etc.,  presumably  be¬ 
cause  their  ends  are  not  sufficiently  defined  and 
fixed  by  their  concept,  with  the  result  that  their 

1  Models  of  taste  with  respect  to  the  arts  of  speech 
must  be  composed  in  a  dead  and  learned  language;  the 
first,  to  prevent  their  having  to  suffer  the  changes  that 
inevitably  overtake  living  ones,  making  dignified  ex¬ 
pressions  become  degraded,  common  ones  antiquated, 
and  ones  newly  coined  after  a  short  currency  obsolete: 
the  second  to  ensure  its  having  a  grammar  that  is  not 
subject  to  the  caprices  of  fashion,  but  has  fixed  rules  of 
its  own. 

2  [Cf.  §  16.] 


THE  CRITIQUE 


finality  is  nearly  as  free  as  with  beauty  that  is 
quite  at  large.  Only  what  has  in  itself  the  end  of 
its  real  existence — only  man  that  is  able  himself 
to  determine  his  ends  by  reason,  or,  where  he 
has  to  derive  them  from  external  perception, 
can  still  compare  them  with  essential  and  uni¬ 
versal  ends,  and  then  further  pronounce  aesthet¬ 
ically  upon  their  accord  with  such  ends,  only  he, 
among  all  objects  in  the  world,  admits,  there¬ 
fore,  of  an  ideal  of  beauty ,  just  as  humanity  in 
his  person,  as  intelligence,  alone  admits  of  the 
ideal  of  perfection. 

Two  factors  are  here  involved.  First,  there  is 
the  aesthetic  normal  idea,  which  is  an  individual 
intuition  (of  the  imagination).  This  represents 
the  norm  by  which  we  judge  of  a  man  as  a  mem¬ 
ber  of  a  particular  animal  species.  Secondly, 
there  is  the  rational  idea.  This  deals  with  the 
ends  of  humanity  so  far  as  capable  of  sensuous 
representation,  and  converts  them  into  a  prin¬ 
ciple  for  estimating  his  outward  form,  through 
which  these  ends  are  revealed  in  their  phenom¬ 
enal  effect.  The  normal  idea  must  draw  from  ex¬ 
perience  the  constituents  which  it  requires  for 
the  form  of  an  animal  of  a  particular  kind.  But 
the  greatest  finality  in  the  construction  of  this 
form — that  which  would  serve  as  a  universal 
norm  for  forming  an  estimate  of  each  individual 
of  the  species  in  question — the  image  that,  as  it 
were,  forms  an  intentional  basis  underlying  the 
technic  of  nature,  to  which  no  separate  individ¬ 
ual.  but  only  the  race  as  a  whole,  is  adequate, 
has  its  seat  merely  in  the  idea  of  the  judging 
subject.  Yet  it  is,  with  all  its  proportions,  an 
aesthetic  idea,  and,  as  such,  capable  of  being 
fully  presented  in  concreto  in  a  model  image. 
Now,  how  is  this  effected?  In  order  to  render 
the  process  to  some  extent  intelligible  (for 
who  can  wrest  nature’s  whole  secret  from 
her?),  let  us  attempt  a  psychological  expla¬ 
nation. 

It  is  of  note  that  the  imagination,  in  a  manner 
quite  incomprehensible  to  us,  is  able  on  occa¬ 
sion,  even  after  a  long  lapse  of  time,  not  alone 
to  recall  the  signs  for  concepts,  but  also  to  re¬ 
produce  the  image  and  shape  of  an  object  out 
of  a  countless  number  of  others  of  a  different, 
or  even  of  the  very  same,  kind.  And,  further,  if 
the  mind  is  engaged  upon  comparisons,  we  may 
well  suppose  that  it  can  in  actual  fact,  though 
the  process  is  unconscious,  superimpose  as  it 
were  one  image  upon  another,  and  from  the  co¬ 
incidence  of  a  number  of  the  same  kind  arrive 
at  a  mean  contour  which  serves  as  a  common 
standard  for  all.  Say,  for  instance,  a  person  has 
seen  a  thousand  full-grown  men.  Now  if  he 


wishes  to  judge  normal  size  determined  upon  a 
comparative  estimate,  then  imagination  (to  my 
mind)  allows  a  great  number  of  these  images 
(perhaps  the  whole  thousand)  to  fall  one  upon 
the  other,  and,  if  I  may  be  allowed  to  extend  to 
the  case  the  analogy  of  optical  presentation,  in 
the  space  where  they  come  most  together,  and 
within  the  contour  where  the  place  is  illuminat¬ 
ed  by  the  greatest  concentration  of  colour,  one 
gets  a  perception  of  the  average  size ,  which  alike 
in  height  and  breadth  is  equally  removed  from 
the  extreme  limits  of  the  greatest  and  smallest 
statures;  and  this  is  the  stature  of  a  beautiful 
man.  (The  same  result  could  be  obtained  in  a 
mechanical  way,  by  taking  the  measures  of  all 
the  thousand,  and  adding  together  their  heights, 
and  their  breadths  [and  thicknesses],  and  divid¬ 
ing  the  sum  in  each  case  by  a  thousand.)  But 
the  power  of  imagination  does  all  this  by  means 
of  a  dynamical  effect  upon  the  organ  of  internal 
sense,  arising  from  the  frequent  apprehension  of 
such  forms.  If,  again,  for  our  average  man  we 
seek  on  similar  lines  for  the  average  head,  and 
for  this  the  average  nose,  and  so  on,  then  we  get 
the  figure  that  underlies  the  normal  idea  of  a 
beautiful  man  in  the  country  where  the  compar¬ 
ison  is  instituted.  For  this  reason  a  Negro  must 
necessarily  (under  these  empirical  conditions) 
have  a  different  normal  idea  of  the  beauty  of 
forms  from  what  a  white  man  has,  and  the  Chi¬ 
naman  one  different  from  the  European.  And  the 
process  would  be  just  the  same  with  the  model 
of  a  beautiful  horse  or  dog  (of  a  particular 
breed).  This  normal  idea  is  not  derived  from 
proportions  taken  from  experience  as  definite 
rules:1  rather  is  it  according  to  this  idea  that 
rules  for  forming  estimates  first  become  pos¬ 
sible.  It  is  an  intermediate  between  all  singular 
intuitions  of  individuals,  with  their  manifold  va¬ 
riations — a  floating  image  for  the  whole  genus, 
which  nature  has  set  as  an  archetype  under¬ 
lying  those  of  her  products  that  belong  to  the 
same  species,  but  which  in  no  single  case  she 

1  [Cf.  p.  489.  A  partial  anticipation  of  this  section  is 
contained  in  the  Critique  of  Pure  Reason ,  p.  173-4. 
“Such  is  the  constitution  of  the  ideal  of  reason,  which  is 
always  based  upon  determinate  conceptions,  and  serves 
as  a  rule  and  a  model  for  imitation  or  for  criticism 
Very  different  is  the  nature  of  the  ideals  of  the  imagina¬ 
tion.  Of  these  it  is  impossible  to  present  an  intelligible 
conception;  they  are  a  kind  of  monogram,  drawn  ac¬ 
cording  to  no  determinate  rule,  and  forming  rather  a 
vague  picture — the  production  of  many  diverse  experi¬ 
ences — than  a  determinate  image.  Such  are  the  ideals 
which  painters  and  physiognomists  profess  to  have  in 
their  minds,  and  which  can  serve  neither  as  a  model  for 
production  nor  as  a  standard  for  appreciation.  They  may 
be  termed,  though  improperly,  sensuous  ideals ,  as  they 
are  declared  to  be  models  of  certain  possible  empirical 
intuitions.  They  cannot,  however,  furnish  rules  or  stand¬ 
ards  for  explanation  or  examination.”] 


OF  AESTHETIC  JUDGEMENT  491 


seems  to  have  completely  attained.  But  the  nor¬ 
mal  idea  is  far  from  giving  the  complete  arche¬ 
type  of  beauty  in  the  genus.  It  only  gives  the 
form  that  constitutes  the  indispensable  condi¬ 
tion  of  all  beauty,  and,  consequently,  only  cor¬ 
rectness  in  the  presentation  of  the  genus.  It  is, 
as  the  famous  “Doryphorus”  of  Polycletus  was 
called,  the  rule  (and  Myron’s  “Cow”  might  be 
similarly  employed  for  its  kind).  It  cannot,  for 
that  very  reason,  contain  anything  specifically 
characteristic;  for  otherwise  it  would  not  be  the 
normal  idea  for  the  genus.  Further,  it  is  not  by 
beauty  that  its  presentation  pleases,  but  merely 
because  it  does  not  contradict  any  of  the  condi¬ 
tions  under  which  alone  a  thing  belonging  to  this 
genus  can  be  beautiful.  The  presentation  is 
merely  academically  correct.1 

But  the  ideal  of  the  beautiful  is  still  some¬ 
thing  different  from  its  normal  idea.  For  reasons 
already  stated  it  is  only  to  be  sought  in  the  hu¬ 
man  figure.  Here  the  ideal  consists  in  the  ex¬ 
pression  of  the  moral ,  apart  from  which  the  ob¬ 
ject  would  not  please  at  once  universally  and 
positively  (not  merely  negatively  in  a  presenta¬ 
tion  academically  correct).  The  visible  expres¬ 
sion  of  moral  ideas2  that  govern  men  inwardly 
can,  of  course,  only  be  drawn  from  experience; 
but  their  combination  with  all  that  our  reason 
connects  with  the  morally  good  in  the  idea 
of  the  highest  finality  —  benevolence,  purity, 
strength,  or  equanimity,  etc. — may  be  made,  as 
it  were,  visible  in  bodily  manifestation  (as  ef¬ 
fect  of  what  is  internal),  and  this  embodiment 
involves  a  union  of  pure  ideas  of  reason  and 
great  imaginative  power,  in  one  who  would  even 
form  an  estimate  of  it,  not  to  speak  of  being  the 
author  of  its  presentation.  The  correctness  of 
such  an  ideal  of  beauty  is  evidenced  by  its  not 
permitting  any  sensuous  charm  to  mingle  with 
the  delight  in  its  object,  in  which  it  still  allows 
us  to  take  a  great  interest.  This  fact  in  turn 
shows  that  an  estimate  formed  according  to 

1  It  will  be  found  that  a  perfectly  regular  face — one 
that  a  painter  might  fix  his  eye  on  for  a  model — ordi¬ 
narily  conveys  nothing.  This  is  because  it  is  devoid  of 
anything  characteristic,  and  so  the  idea  of  the  race  is 
expressed  in  it  rather  than  the  specific  qualities  of  a  per¬ 
son.  The  exaggeration  of  what  is  characteristic  in  this 
way,  i.e.,  exaggeration  violating  the  normal  idea  (the 
finality  of  the  race),  is  called  caricature.  Also  experi¬ 
ence  shows  that  these  quite  regular  faces  indicate  as  a 
rule  internally  only  a  mediocre  type  of  man;  presuma¬ 
bly — if  one  may  assume  that  nature  in  its  external  form 
expresses  the  proportions  of  the  internal — because,  where 
none  of  the  mental  qualities  exceed  the  proportion  req¬ 
uisite  to  constitute  a  man  free  from  faults,  nothing  can 
be  expected  in  the  way  of  what  is  called  genius ,  in 
which  nature  seems  to  make  a  departure  from  its  wonted 
relations  of  the  mental  powers  in  favour  of  some  special 
one.  [Cf.  p.  527,  et  seq .] 

2  [Cf.  p.  549-] 


such  a  standard  can  never  be  purely  aesthetic, 
and  that  one  formed  according  to  an  ideal  of 
beauty  cannot  be  a  simple  judgement  of  taste. 

Definition  of  the  Beautiful  derived  from 
this  Third  Moment 

Beauty  is  the  form  of  finality  in  an  object,  so 
far  as  perceived  in  it  apart  from  the  representa¬ 
tion  of  an  end.3 

Fourth  Moment.  Of  the  Judgement  of 

Taste:  Moment  of  the  Modality  of  the 
Delight  in  the  Object 

§  18.  Nature  of  the  modality  in  a  judgement 
of  taste 

I  may  assert  in  the  case  of  every  representa¬ 
tion  that  the  synthesis  of  a  pleasure  with  the 
representation  (as  a  cognition)  is  at  least  possi¬ 
ble.  Of  what  I  call  agreeable  I  assert  that  it  ac¬ 
tually  causes  pleasure  in  me.  But  what  we  have 
in  mind  in  the  case  of  the  beautiful  is  a  neces¬ 
sary  reference  on  its  part  to  delight.  However, 
this  necessity  is  of  a  special  kind.  It  is  not  a 
theoretical  objective  necessity — such  as  would 
let  us  cognize  a  priori  that  every  one  will  feel 
this  delight  in  the  object  that  is  called  beautiful 
by  me.  Nor  yet  is  it  a  practical  necessity,  in 
which  case,  thanks  to  concepts  of  a  pure  rational 
will  in  which  free  agents  are  supplied  with  a 
rule,  this  delight  is  the  necessary  consequence  of 
an  objective  law,  and  simply  means  that  one 
ought  absolutely  (without  ulterior  object)  to 
act  in  a  certain  way.  Rather,  being  such  a  neces¬ 
sity  as  is  thought  in  an  aesthetic  judgement,  it 
can  only  be  termed  exemplary.  In  other  words 
it  is  a  necessity  of  the  assent  of  all  to  a  judge¬ 
ment  regarded  as  exemplifying  a  universal  rule 
incapable  of  formulation.  Since  an  aesthetic 
judgement  is  not  an  objective  or  cognitive  judge¬ 
ment,  this  necessity  is  not  derivable  from  defi¬ 
nite  concepts,  and  so  is  not  apodeictic.  Much  less 
is  it  inferable  from  universality  of  experience 

3  As  telling  against  this  explanation,  the  instance  may 
be  adduced  that  there  are  things  in  which  we  see  a  form 
suggesting  adaptation  to  an  end,*  without  any  end  be¬ 
ing  cognized  in  them — as,  for  example,  the  stone  imple¬ 
ments  frequently  obtained  from  sepulchral  tumuli  and 
supplied  with  a  hole,  as  if  for  [inserting]  a  handle;  and 
although  these  by  their  shape  manifestly  indicate  a 
finality,  the  end  of  which  is  unknown,  they  are  not  on 
that  accpunt  described  as  beautiful.  But  the  very  fact  of 
their  being  regarded  as  art-products  involves  an  imme¬ 
diate  recognition  that  their  shape  is  attributed  to  some 
purpose  or  other  and  to  a  definite  end.  For  this  reason 
there  is  no  immediate  delight  whatever  in  their  contem¬ 
plation.  A  flower,  on  the  other  hand,  such  as  a  tulip,  is 
regarded  as  beautiful,  because  we  meet  with  a  certain 
finality  in  its  perception,  which,  in  our  estimate  of  it,  is 
not  referred  to  any  end  whatever. 

*  [Cf.  p.  523,  et  seq.] 


THE  CRITIQUE 


(of  a  thoroughgoing  agreement  of  judgements 
about  the  beauty  of  a  certain  object).  For,  apart 
from  the  fact  that  experience  would  hardly  fur¬ 
nish  evidences  sufficiently  numerous  for  this 
purpose,  empirical  judgements  do  not  afford  any 
foundation  for  a  concept  of  the  necessity  of 
these  judgements. 

§  19.  The  subjective  necessity  attributed  to  a 
judgement  of  taste  is  conditioned 

The  judgement  of  taste  exacts  agreement 
from  every  one;  and  a  person  who  describes 
something  as  beautiful  insists  that  every  one 
ought  to  give  the  object  in  question  his  approval 
and  follow  suit  in  describing  it  as  beautiful.  The 
ought  in  aesthetic  judgements,  therefore,  de¬ 
spite  an  accordance  with  all  the  requisite  data 
for  passing  judgement,  is  still  only  pronounced 
conditionally.  We  are  suitors  for  agreement 
from  every  one  else,  because  we  are  fortified 
with  a  ground  common  to  all.  Further,  we  would 
be  able  to  count  on  this  agreement,  provided  we 
were  always  assured  of  the  correct  subsumption 
of  the  case  under  that  ground  as  the  rule  of  ap¬ 
proval. 

§  20.  The  condition  of  the  necessity  advanced 
by  a  judgement  of  taste  is  the  idea  of  a 
common  sense 

Were  judgements  of  taste  (like  cognitive 
judgements)  in  possession  of  a  definite  objec¬ 
tive  principle,  then  one  who  in  his  judgement 
followed  such  a  principle  would  claim  uncondi¬ 
tioned  necessity  for  it.  Again,  were  they  devoid 
of  any  principle,  as  are  those  of  the  mere  taste 
of  sense,  then  no  thought  of  any  necessity  on 
their  part  would  enter  one’s  head.  Therefore 
they  must  have  a  subjective  principle,  and  one 
which  determines  what  pleases  or  displeases,  by 
means  of  feeling  only  and  not  through  concepts, 
but  yet  with  universal  validity.  Such  a  principle, 
however,  could  only  be  regarded  as  a  common 
sense.  This  differs  essentially  from  common  un¬ 
derstanding,  which  is  also  sometimes  called  com¬ 
mon  sense  (sensus  communis) :  for  the  judge¬ 
ment  of  the  latter  is  not  one  by  feeling,  but  al¬ 
ways  one  by  concepts,  though  usually  only  in 
the  shape  of  obscurely  represented  principles. 

The  judgement  of  taste,  therefore,  depends 
on  our  presupposing  the  existence  of  a  common 
sense.  (But  this  is  not  to  be  taken  to  mean  some 
external  sense,  but  the  effect  arising  from  the 
free  play  of  our  powers  of  cognition.)  Only  un¬ 
der  the  presupposition,  I  repeat,  of  such  a  com¬ 
mon  sense,  are  we  able  to  lay  down  a  judgement 
of  taste. 


§  21.  Have  we  reason  for  presupposing  a 
common  sense? 

Cognitions  and  judgements  must,  together 
with  their  attendant  conviction,1  admit  of  being 
universally  communicated;  for  otherwise  a  cor¬ 
respondence  with  the  object  would  not  be  due 
to  them.  They  would  be  a  conglomerate  consti¬ 
tuting  a  mere  subjective  play  of  the  powers  of 
representation,  just  as  scepticism  would  have  it. 
But  if  cognitions  are  to  admit  of  communica¬ 
tion,  then  our  mental  state,  i.e.,  the  way  the  cog¬ 
nitive  powers  are  attuned  for  cognition  general¬ 
ly,  and,  in  fact,  the  relative  proportion  suitable 
for  a  representation  (by  which  an  object  is  giv¬ 
en  to  us)  from  which  cognition  is  to  result,  must 
also  admit  of  being  universally  communicated, 
as,  without  this,  which  is  the  subjective  condi¬ 
tion  of  the  act  of  knowing,  knowledge,  as  an  ef¬ 
fect,  would  not  arise.  And  this  is  always  what 
actually  happens  where  a  given  object,  through 
the  intervention  of  sense,  sets  the  imagination  at 
work  in  arranging  the  manifold,  and  the  imagi¬ 
nation,  in  turn,  the  understanding  in  giving  to 
this  arrangement  the  unity  of  concepts.  But  this 
disposition  of  the  cognitive  powers  has  a  relative 
proportion  differing  with  the  diversity  of  the  ob¬ 
jects  that  are  given.  However,  there  must  be  one 
in  which  this  internal  ratio  suitable  for  quicken¬ 
ing  (one  faculty  by  the  other)  is  best  adapted 
for  both  mental  powers  in  respect  of  cognition 
(of  given  objects)  generally;  and  this  disposi¬ 
tion  can  only  be  determined  through  feeling 
(and  not  by  concepts).  Since,  now  this  disposi¬ 
tion  itself  must  admit  of  being  universally  com¬ 
municated,  and  hence  also  the  feeling  of  it  (in 
the  case  of  a  given  representation),  while  again, 
the  universal  communicability  of  a  feeling  pre¬ 
supposes  a  common  sense:  it  follows  that  our 
assumption  of  it  is  well  founded.  And  here,  too, 
we  do  not  have  to  take  our  stand  on  psychologi¬ 
cal  observations,  but  we  assume  a  common  sense 
as  the  necessary  condition  of  the  universal  com¬ 
municability  of  our  knowledge,  which  is  presup¬ 
posed  in  every  logic  and  every  principle  of 
knowledge  that  is  not  one  of  scepticism. 

§22.  The  necessity  of  the  universal  assent  that 
is  thought  in  a  judgement  of  taste ,  is  a  sub¬ 
jective  necessity  which ,  under  the  presuppo¬ 
sition  of  a  common  sense,  is  represented  as 
objective 

In  all  judgements  by  which  we  describe  any¬ 
thing  as  beautiful,  we  tolerate  no  one  else  being 
of  a  different  opinion,  and  in  taking  up  this  posi¬ 
tion  we  do  not  rest  our  judgement  upon  con- 
1  [Cf.  Critique  of  Pure  Reason,  pp.  240-43.] 


OF  AESTHETIC  JUDGEMENT 


cepts,  but  only  on  our  feeling.  Accordingly  we  in¬ 
troduce  this  fundamental  feeling  not  as  a  private 
feeling,  but  as  a  public  sense.  Now,  for  this  pur¬ 
pose,  experience  cannot  be  made  the  ground  of 
this  common  sense,  for  the  latter  is  invoked  to 
justify  judgements  containing  an  “ought.”  The 
assertion  is  not  that  every  one  will  fall  in  with 
our  judgement,  but  rather  that  every  one  ought 
to  agree  with  it.  Here  I  put  forward  my  judge¬ 
ment  of  taste  as  an  example  of  the  judgement 
of  common  sense,  and  attribute  to  it  on  that  ac¬ 
count  exemplary  validity.  Hence  common  sense 
is  a  mere  ideal  norm.  With  this  as  presupposi¬ 
tion,  a  judgement  that  accords  with  it,  as  well 
as  the  delight  in  an  object  expressed  in  that 
judgement,  is  rightly  converted  into  a  rule  for 
everyone.  For  the  principle,  while  it  is  only  sub¬ 
jective,  being  yet  assumed  as  subjectively  uni¬ 
versal  (a  necessary  idea  for  everyone),  could, 
in  what  concerns  the  consensus  of  different  judg¬ 
ing  subjects,  demand  universal  assent  like  an 
objective  principle,  provided  we  were  assured 
of  our  subsumption  under  it  being  correct. 

This  indeterminate  norm  of  a  common  sense 
is,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  presupposed  by  us;  as  is 
shown  by  our  presuming  to  lay  down  judge¬ 
ments  of  taste.  But  does  such  a  common  sense1 
in  fact  exist  as  a  constitutive  principle  of  the 
possibility  of  experience,  or  is  it  formed  for  us  as 
a  regulative  principle  by  a  still  higher  principle 
of  reason,  that  for  higher  ends  first  seeks  to  be¬ 
get  in  us  a  common  sense?  Is  taste,  in  other 
words,  a  natural  and  original  faculty,  or  is  it 
only  the  idea  of  one  that  is  artificial  and  to  be 
acquired  by  us,  so  that  a  judgement  of  taste, 
with  its  demand  for  universal  assent,  is  but  a 
requirement  of  reason  for  generating  such  a  con- 
sensus,  and  does  the  “ought,”  i.  e.,  the  objective 
necessity  of  the  coincidence  of  the  feeling  of  all 
with  the  particular  feeling  of  each,  only  betoken 
the  possibility  of  arriving  at  some  sort  of  una¬ 
nimity  in  these  matters,  and  the  judgement  of 
taste  only  adduce  an  example  of  the  application 
of  this  principle?  These  are  questions  which  as 
yet  we  are  neither  willing  nor  in  a  position  to  in¬ 
vestigate.  For  the  present  we  have  only  to  re¬ 
solve  the  faculty  of  taste  into  its  elements,  and 
to  unite  these  ultimately  in  the  idea  of  a  com¬ 
mon  sense. 

Definition  of  the  Beautiful  drawn  from  the 
Fourth  Moment 

The  beautiful  is  that  which,  apart  from  a  con¬ 
cept,  is  cognized  as  object  of  a  necessary  delight. 

1  [Cf.  §40;  also  pp.  482,  505,  et  seq.;  543,  et  seq .; 
549.] 


493 

General  Remark  on  the  First  Section 
of  the  Analytic 

The  result  to  be  extracted  from  the  foregoing 
analysis  is  in  effect  this:  That  everything  runs 
up  into  the  concept  of  taste  as  a  critical  faculty 
by  which  an  object  is  estimated  in  reference  to 
the  free  conformity  to  law  of  the  imagination. 
If,  now,  imagination  must  in  the  judgement  of 
taste  be  regarded  in  its  freedom,  then,  to  begin 
with,  it  is  not  taken  as  reproductive,  as  in  its 
subjection  to  the  laws  of  association,  but  as  pro¬ 
ductive  and  exerting  an  activity  of  its  own  (as 
originator  of  arbitrary  forms  of  possible  intui¬ 
tions).2  And  although  in  the  apprehension  of  a 
given  object  of  sense  it  is  tied  down  to  a  definite 
form  of  this  object  and,  to  that  extent,  does  not 
enjoy  free  play  (as  it  does  in  poetry),3  still  it  is 
easy  to  conceive  that  the  object  may  supply 
ready-made  to  the  imagination  just  such  a  form 
of  the  arrangement  of  the  manifold  as  the  imag¬ 
ination,  if  it  were  left  to  itself,  would  freely 
protect  in  harmony  with  the  general  conformity 
to  law  of  the  understanding.  But  that  the  im¬ 
agination  should  be  both  free  and  of  itself  con¬ 
formable  to  law ,  i.  e.,  carry  autonomy  with  it,  is 
a  contradiction.  The  understanding  alone  gives 
the  law.  Where,  however,  the  imagination  is 
compelled  to  follow  a  course  laid  down  by  a 
definite  law,  then  what  the  form  of  the  product 
is  to  be  is  determined  by  concepts;  but,  in  that 
case,  as  already  shown,  the  delight  is  not  delight 
in  the  beautiful,  but  in  the  good  (in  perfection, 
though  it  be  no  more  than  formal  perfection), 
and  the  judgement  is  not  one  due  to  taste. 
Hence  it  is  only  a  conformity  to  law  without 
a  law,  and  a  subjective  harmonizing  of  the  im¬ 
agination  and  the  understanding  without  an  ob¬ 
jective  one — which  latter  would  mean  that  the 
representation  was  referred  to  a  definite  con¬ 
cept  of  the  object — that  can  consist  with  the 
free  conformity  to  law  of  the  understanding 
(which  has  also  been  called  finality  apart  from 
an  end)  and  with  the  specific  character  of  a 
judgement  of  taste. 

Now  geometrically  regular  figures,  a  circle,  a 
square,  a  cube,  and  the  like,  are  commonly 
brought  forward  by  critics  of  taste  as  the  most 
simple  and  unquestionable  examples  of  beauty. 
And  yet  the  very  reason  why  they  are  called 
regular,  is  because  the  only  way  of  representing 
them  is  by  looking  on  them  as  mere  presenta¬ 
tions  of  a  determinate  concept  by  which  the 
figure  has  its  rule  (according  to  which  alone  it 

2  [Cf.  p.  528,  et  seq.] 

3  [Cf.  pp.  528;  530,  et  seq.;  533,  et  seq.] 


THE  CRITIQUE 


is  possible)  prescribed  for  it.  One  or  other  of 
these  two  views  must,  therefore,  be  wrong: 
either  the  verdict  of  the  critics  that  attributes 
beauty  to  such  figures,  or  else  our  own,  which 
makes  finality  apart  from  any  concept  neces¬ 
sary  for  beauty. 

One  would  scarce  think  it  necessary  for  a  man 
to  have  taste  to  take  more  delight  in  a  circle 
than  in  a  scrawled  outline,  in  an  equilateral  and 
equiangular  quadrilateral  than  in  one  that  is  all 
lop-sided,  and,  as  it  were,  deformed.  The  re¬ 
quirements  of  common  understanding  ensure 
such  a  preference  without  the  least  demand 
upon  taste.  Where  some  purpose  is  perceived, 
as,  for  instance,  that  of  forming  an  estimate  of 
the  area  of  a  plot  of  land,  or  rendering  intelligi¬ 
ble  the  relation  of  divided  parts  to  one  another 
and  to  the  whole,  then  regular  figures,  and  those 
of  the  simplest  kind,  are  needed ;  and  the  delight 
does  not  rest  immediately  upon  the  way  the  fig¬ 
ure  strikes  the  eye,  but  upon  its  serviceability 
for  all  manner  of  possible  purposes.  A  room 
with  the  walls  making  oblique  angles,  a  plot  laid 
out  in  a  garden  in  a  similar  way,  even  any  viola¬ 
tion  of  symmetry,  as  well  in  the  figure  of  ani¬ 
mals  (e.  g.,  being  one-eyed)  as  in  that  of  build¬ 
ings,  or  of  flower-beds,  is  displeasing  because  of 
its  perversity  of  form,  not  alone  in  a  practical 
way  in  respect  of  some  definite  use  to  which  the 
thing  may  be  put,  but  for  an  estimate  that  looks 
to  all  manner  of  possible  purposes.  With  the 
judgement  of  taste  the  case  is  different.  For, 
when  it  is  pure,  it  combines  delight  or  aversion 
immediately  with  the  bare  contemplation  of  the 
object  irrespective  of  its  use  or  of  any  end. 

The  regularity  that  conduces  to  the  concept 
of  an  object  is,  in  fact,  the  indispensable  con¬ 
dition  ( conditio  sine  qua  non)  of  grasping  the 
object  as  a  single  representation  and  giving  to 
the  manifold  its  determinate  form.  This  deter¬ 
mination  is  an  end  in  respect  of  knowledge ;  and 
in  this  connection  it  is  invariably  coupled  with 
delight  (such  as  attends  the  accomplishment  of 
any,  even  problematical,  purpose).  Here,  how¬ 
ever,  we  have  merely  the  value  set  upon  the 
solution  that  satisfies  the  problem,  and  not  a 
free  and  indeterminately  final  entertainment  of 
the  mental  powers  with  what  is  called  beautiful. 
In  the  latter  case,  understanding  is  at  the  service 
of  imagination,  in  the  former,  this  relation  is 
reversed. 

With  a  thing  that  owes  its  possibility  to  a 
purpose,  a  building,  or  even  an  animal,  its  regu¬ 
larity,  which  consists  in  symmetry,  must  express 
the  unity  of  the  intuition  accompanying  the  con¬ 
cept  of  its  end,  and  belongs  with  it  to  cognition. 


But  where  all  that  is  intended  is  the  mainte¬ 
nance  of  a  free  play  of  the  powers  of  represen¬ 
tation  (subject,  however,  to  the  condition  that 
there  is  to  be  nothing  for  understanding  to  take 
exception  to),  in  ornamental  gardens,  in  the  dec¬ 
oration  of  rooms,  in  all  kinds  of  furniture  that 
shows  good  taste,  etc.,  regularity  in  the  shape  of 
constraint  is  to  be  avoided  as  far  as  possible. 
Thus  English  taste  in  gardens,  and  fantastic 
taste  in  furniture,  push  the  freedom  of  imagina¬ 
tion  to  the  verge  of  what  is  grotesque — the  idea 
being  that  in  this  divorce  from  all  constraint  of 
rules  the  precise  instance  is  being  afforded  where 
taste  can  exhibit  its  perfection  in  projects  of  the 
imagination  to  the  fullest  extent. 

All  stiff  regularity  (such  as  borders  on  mathe¬ 
matical  regularity)  is  inherently  repugnant  to 
taste,  in  that  the  contemplation  of  it  affords  us 
no  lasting  entertainment.  Indeed,  where  it  has 
neither  cognition  nor  some  definite  practical 
end  expressly  in  view,  we  get  heartily  tired  of 
it.  On  the  other  hand,  anything  that  gives  the 
imagination  scope  for  unstudied  and  final  play 
is  always  fresh  to  us.  We  do  not  grow  to  hate 
the  very  sight  of  it.  Marsden ,  in  his  description 
of  Sumatra,  observes  that  the  free  beauties  of 
nature  so  surround  the  beholder  on  all  sides 
that  they  cease  to  have  much  attraction  for 
him.1  On  the  other  hand  he  found  a  pepper 
garden  full  of  charm,  on  coming  across  it  in 
mid-forest  with  its  rows  of  parallel  stakes  on 
which  the  plant  twines  itself.  From  all  this  he 
infers  that  wild,  and  in  its  appearance  quite  ir¬ 
regular  beauty,  is  only  pleasing  as  a  change  to 
one  whose  eyes  have  become  surfeited  with  reg¬ 
ular  beauty.  But  he  need  only  have  made  the 
experiment  of  passing  one  day  in  his  pepper  gar¬ 
den  to  realize  that  once  the  regularity  has  en¬ 
abled  the  understanding  to  put  itself  in  accord 
with  the  order  that  is  the  constant  requirement, 
instead  of  the  object  diverting  him  any  longer, 
it  imposes  an  irksome  constraint  upon  the  im¬ 
agination:  whereas  nature  subject  to  no  con¬ 
straint  of  artificial  rules,  and  lavish,  as  it  there 
is,  in  its  luxuriant  variety  can  supply  constant 
food  for  his  taste.  Even  a  bird’s  song,  which  we 
can  reduce  to  no  musical  rule,  seems  to  have 
more  freedom  in  it,  and  thus  to  be  richer  for 
taste,  than  the  human  voice  singing  in  accord¬ 
ance  with  all  the  rules  that  the  art  of  music 
prescribes;  for  we  grow  tired  much  sooner  of 
frequent  and  lengthy  repetitions  of  the  latter. 
Yet  here  most  likely  our  sympathy  with  the 
mirth  of  a  dear  little  creature  is  confused  with 

1  [The  History  of  Sumatra,  by  W.  Marsden  (London, 
1783),  P.  1  r3.] 


OF  AESTHETIC  JUDGEMENT 


the  beauty  of  its  song,  for  if  exactly  imitated 
by  man  (as  has  been  sometimes  done  with  the 
notes  of  the  nightingale)1  it  would  strike  our 
ear  as  wholly  destitute  of  taste. 

Further,  beautiful  objects  have  to  be  distin¬ 
guished  from  beautiful  views  of  objects  (where 
the  distance  often  prevents  a  clear  perception).2 
In  the  latter  case,  taste  appears  to  fasten,  not  so 
much  on  what  the  imagination  grasps  in  this 


field,  as  on  the  incentive  it  receives  to  indulge 
in  poetic  fiction,  i.  e.,  in  the  peculiar  fancies  with 
which  the  mind  entertains  itself  as  it  is  being 
continually  stirred  by  the  variety  that  strikes 
the  eye.  It  is  just  as  when  we  watch  the  chang¬ 
ing  shapes  of  the  fire  or  of  a  rippling  brook: 
neither  of  which  are  things  of  beauty,  but  they 
convey  a  charm  to  the  imagination,  because  they 
sustain  its  free  play. 


Book  II.  Analytic  of  the  Sublime 


§  23.  Transition  from  the  faculty  of  estimating 
the  beautiful  to  that  of  estimating  the  sublime 

The  beautiful  and  the  sublime  agree  on  the 
point  of  pleasing  on  their  own  account.  Further 
they  agree  in  not  presupposing  either  a  judge¬ 
ment  of  sense  or  one  logically  determinant,  but 
one  of  reflection.  Hence  it  follows  that  the  de¬ 
light  does  not  depend  upon  a  sensation,  as  with 
the  agreeable,  nor  upon  a  definite  concept,  as 
does  the  delight  in  the  good,  although  it  has,  for 
all  that,  an  indeterminate  reference  to  concepts. 
Consequently  the  delight  is  connected  with  the 
mere  presentation  or  faculty  of  presentation, 
and  is  thus  taken  to  express  the  accord,  in  a 
given  intuition,  of  the  faculty  of  presentation, 
or  the  imagination,  with  the  faculty  of  concepts 
that  belongs  to  understanding  or  reason,  in  the 
sense  of  the  former  assisting  the  latter.  Hence 
both  kinds  of  judgements  are  singular ,  and 
yet  such  as  profess  to  be  universally  valid  in 
respect  of  every  subject,  despite  the  fact  that 
their  claims  are  directed  merely  to  the  feeling 
of  pleasure  and  not  to  any  knowledge  of  the 
object. 

There  are,  however,  also  important  and  strik¬ 
ing  differences  between  the  two.  The  beautiful 
in  nature  is  a  question  of  the  form  of  the  object, 
and  this  consists  in  limitation,  whereas  the  sub¬ 
lime  is  to  be  found  in  an  object  even  devoid  of 
form,  so  far  as  it  immediately  involves,  or  else 
by  its  presence  provokes  a  representation  of 
limitlessness ,  yet  with  a  superadded  thought  of 
its  totality.  Accordingly,  the  beautiful  seems  to 
be  regarded  as  a  presentation  of  an  indetermi¬ 
nate  concept  of  understanding,  the  sublime  as 
a  presentation  of  an  indeterminate  concept  of 
reason.  Hence  the  delight  is  in  the  former  case 
coupled  with  the  representation  of  quality,  but 
in  this  case  with  that  of  quantity .  Moreover, 
the  former  delight  is  very  different  from  the 
latter  in  kind.  For  the  beautiful  is  directly  at- 

1  [Cf.  p.  523,  et  seq.] 

2  [Cf.  p.  533.] 


tended  with  a  feeling  of  the  furtherance  of  life, 
and  is  thus  compatible  with  charms  and  a  play¬ 
ful  imagination.  On  the  other  hand,  the  feeling 
of  the  sublime  is  a  pleasure  that  only  arises  in¬ 
directly,  being  brought  about  by  the  feeling  of 
a  momentary  check  to  the  vital  forces  followed 
at  once  by  a  discharge  all  the  more  powerful, 
and  so  it  is  an  emotion  that  seems  to  be  no  sport, 
but  dead  earnest  in  the  affairs  of  the  imagina¬ 
tion.  Hence  charms  are  repugnant  to  it;  and, 
since  the  mind  is  not  simply  attracted  by  the 
object,  but  is  also  alternately  repelled  thereby, 
the  delight  in  the  sublime  does  not  so  much  in¬ 
volve  positive  pleasure  as  admiration  or  respect, 
i.  e.,  merits  the  name  of  a  negative  pleasure. 

But  the  most  important  and  vital  distinction 
between  the  sublime  and  the  beautiful  is  cer¬ 
tainly  this:  that  if,  as  is  allowable,  we  here  con¬ 
fine  our  attention  in  the  first  instance  to  the 
sublime  in  objects  of  nature  (that  of  art  being 
always  restricted  by  the  conditions  of  an  agree¬ 
ment  with  nature),  we  observe  that  whereas 
natural  beauty  (such  as  is  self-subsisting)  con¬ 
veys  a  finality  in  its  form  making  the  object  ap¬ 
pear,  as  it  were,  preadapted  to  our  power  of 
judgement,  so  that  it  thus  forms  of  itself  an  ob¬ 
ject  of  our  delight,  that  which,  without  our  in¬ 
dulging  in  any  refinements  of  thought,  but,  sim¬ 
ply  in  our  apprehension  of  it,  excites  the  feeling 
of  the  sublime,  may  appear,  indeed,  in  point  of 
form  to  contravene  the  ends  of  our  power  of 
judgement,  to  be  ill-adapted  to  our  faculty  of 
presentation,  and  to  be,  as  it  were,  an  outrage 
on  the  imagination,  and  yet  it  is  judged  all  the 
more  sublime  on  that  account. 

From  this  it  may  be  seen  at  once  that  we  ex¬ 
press  ourselves  on  the  whole  inaccurately  if  we 
term  any  object  of  nature  sublime,  although  we 
may  with  perfect  propriety  call  many  such  ob¬ 
jects  beautiful.  For  how  can  that  which  is  ap¬ 
prehended  as  inherently  contra-final  be  noted 
with  an  expression  of  approval?  All  that  we  can 
say  is  that  the  object  lends  itself  to  the  presen¬ 
tation  of  a  sublimity  discoverable  in  the  mind. 


THE  CRITIQUE 


For  the  sublime,  in  the  strict  sense  of  the  word, 
cannot  be  contained  in  any  sensuous  form,  but 
rather  concerns  ideas  of  reason,  which,  although 
no  adequate  presentation  of  them  is  possible, 
may  be  excited  and  called  into  the  mind  by  that 
very  inadequacy  itself  which  does  admit  of  sen¬ 
suous  presentation.  Thus  the  broad  ocean  agi¬ 
tated  by  storms  cannot  be  called  sublime.  Its 
aspect  is  horrible,  and  one  must  have  stored 
one’s  mind  in  advance  with  a  rich  stock  of  ideas, 
if  such  an  intuition  is  to  raise  it  to  the  pitch  of 
a  feeling  which  is  itself  sublime — sublime  be¬ 
cause  the  mind  has  been  incited  to  abandon 
sensibility  and  employ  itself  upon  ideas  involv¬ 
ing  higher  finality. 

Self-subsisting  natural  beauty  reveals  to  us  a 
technic  of  nature  which  shows  it  in  the  light  of 
a  system  ordered  in  accordance  with  laws  the 
principle  of  which  is  not  to  be  found  within  the 
range  of  our  entire  faculty  of  understanding.1 
This  principle  is  that  of  a  finality  relative  to  the 
employment  of  judgement  in  respect  of  phe¬ 
nomena  which  have  thus  to  be  assigned,  not 
merely  to  nature  regarded  as  aimless  mecha¬ 
nism.  but  also  to  nature  regarded  after  the 
analogy  of  art.  Hence  it  gives  a  veritable  exten¬ 
sion,  not,  of  course,  to  our  knowledge  of  objects 
of  nature,  but  to  our  conception  of  nature  itself 
— nature  as  mere  mechanism  being  enlarged  to 
the  conception  of  nature  as  art — an  extension 
inviting  profound  inquiries  as  to  the  possibility 
of  such  a  form.  But  in  what  we  are  wont  to  call 
sublime  in  nature  there  is  such  an  absence  of 
anything  leading  to  particular  objective  prin¬ 
ciples  and  corresponding  forms  of  nature  that 
it  is  rather  in  its  chaos,  or  in  its  wildest  and  most 
irregular  disorder  and  desolation,  provided  it 
gives  signs  of  magnitude  and  power,  that  nature 
chiefly  excites  the  ideas  of  the  sublime.  Hence 
we  see  that  the  concept  of  the  sublime  in  nature 
is  far  less  important  and  rich  in  consequences 
than  that  of  its  beauty.  It  gives  on  the  whole  no 
indication  of  anything  final  in  nature  itself,  but 
only  in  the  possible  employment  of  our  intui¬ 
tions  of  it  in  inducing  a  feeling  in  our  own  selves 
of  a  finality  quite  independent  of  nature.  For 
the  beautiful  in  nature  we  must  seek  a  ground 
external  to  ourselves,  but  for  the  sublime  one 
merely  in  ourselves  and  the  attitude  of  mind 
that  introduces  sublimity  into  the  representa¬ 
tion  of  nature.  This  is  a  very  needful  prelimi¬ 
nary  remark.  It  entirely  separates  the  ideas  of 
the  sublime  from  that  of  a  finality  of  nature , 

1  [This  may  be  compared  with  the  first  paragraph  of 
the  Introduction  to  the  Critique  oj  Teleological  Judge¬ 
ment;  p.  550,  below.  Cf.  pp.  487,  512,  et  scq 516,  et 
seq.;  518,  et  seq.;  531.] 


and  makes  the  theory  of  the  sublime  a  mere  ap¬ 
pendage  to  the  aesthetic  estimate  of  the  finality 
of  nature,  because  it  does  not  give  a  represen¬ 
tation  of  any  particular  form  in  nature,  but  in¬ 
volves  no  more  than  the  development  of  a  final 
employment  by  the  imagination  of  its  own  rep¬ 
resentation. 

§  24.  Subdivision  oj  an  investigation  of  the  feel - 
ing  of  the  sublime 

In  the  division  of  the  moments  of  an  aesthetic 
estimate  of  objects  in  respect  of  the  feeling  of 
the  sublime,  the  course  of  the  Analytic  will  be 
able  to  follow  the  same  principle  as  in  the  an¬ 
alysis  of  judgements  of  taste.  For,  the  judge¬ 
ment  being  one  of  the  aesthetic  reflective  judge¬ 
ment,  the  delight  in  the  sublime,  just  like  that 
in  the  beautiful,  must  in  its  quantity  be  shown 
to  be  universally  valid,  in  its  quality  independ¬ 
ent  of  interest,  in  its  relation  subjective  finality, 
and  the  latter,  in  its  modality ,  necessary.  Hence 
the  method  here  will  not  depart  from  the  lines 
followed  in  the  preceding  section:  unless  some¬ 
thing  is  made  of  the  point  that  there,  where  the 
aesthetic  judgement  bore  on  the  form  of  the 
object,  we  began  with  the  investigation  of  its 
quality,  whereas  here,  considering  the  formless¬ 
ness  that  may  belong  to  what  we  call  sublime, 
we  begin  with  that  of  its  quantity,  as  first  mo¬ 
ment  of  the  aesthetic  judgement  on  the  sublime 
— a  divergence  of  method  the  reason  for  which 
is  evident  from  §  23. 

But  the  analysis  of  the  sublime  obliges  a  di¬ 
vision  not  required  by  that  of  the  beautiful, 
namely  one  into  the  mathematically  and  the 
dynamically  sublime. 

For  the  feeling  of  sublime  involves  as  its 
characteristic  feature  a  mental  movement  com¬ 
bined  with  the  estimate  of  the  object,  whereas 
taste  in  respect  of  the  beautiful  presupposes 
that  the  mind  is  in  restful  contemplation,  and 
preserves  it  in  this  state.  But  this  movement  has 
to  be  estimated  as  subjectively  final  (since  the 
sublime  pleases).  Hence  it  is  referred  through 
the  imagination  either  to  the  faculty  of  cogni¬ 
tion  or  to  that  of  desire;  but  to  whichever  fac¬ 
ulty  the  reference  is  made,  the  finality  of  the 
given  representation  is  estimated  only  in  respect 
of  these  faculties  (apart  from  end  or  interest). 
Accordingly  the  first  is  attributed  to  the  object 
as  a  mathematical ,  the  second  as  a  dynamical, 
affection  of  the  imagination.  Hence  we  get  the 
above  double  mode  of  representing  an  object 
as  sublime.2 

2  [Cf.  p.  507.  Also  Cf.  Critique  of  Pure  Reason,  pp, 
43,  67.] 


OF  AESTHETIC 

A.  The  Mathematically  Sublime 

§  25.  Definition  of  the  term  “sublime” 

Sublime  is  the  name  given  to  what  is  absolute¬ 
ly  great.  But  to  be  great  and  to  be  a  magnitude 
are  entirely  different  concepts  ( magnitudo  and 
quantitas).  In  the  same  way,  to  assert  without 
qualification  ( simpliciter )  that  something  is 
great  is  quite  a  different  thing  from  saying  that 
it  is  absolutely  great  ( absolute ,  non  comparative 
magnum).  The  latter  is  what  is  beyond  all  com¬ 
parison  great.  What,  then,  is  the  meaning  of  the 
assertion  that  anything  is  great,  or  small,  or  of 
medium  size?  What  is  indicated  is  not  a  pure 
concept  of  understanding,  still  less  an  intuition 
of  sense;  and  just  as  little  is  it  a  concept  of 
reason,  for  it  does  not  import  any  principle  of 
cognition.  It  must,  therefore,  be  a  concept  of 
judgement,  or  have  its  source  in  one,  and  must 
introduce  as  basis  of  the  judgement  a  subjective 
finality  of  the  representation  with  reference  to 
the  power  of  judgement.  Given  a  multiplicity  of 
the  homogeneous  together  constituting  one 
thing,  and  we  may  at  once  cognize  from  the 
thing  itself  that  it  is  a  magnitude  {quantum). 
No  comparison  with  other  things  is  required. 
But  to  determine  how  great  it  is  always  requires 
something  else,  which  itself  has  magnitude,  for 
its  measure.  Now,  since  in  the  estimate  of  mag¬ 
nitude  we  have  to  take  into  account  not  merely 
the  multiplicity  (number  of  units)  but  also  the 
magnitude  of  the  unit  (the  measure),  and  since 
the  magnitude  of  this  unit  in  turn  always  re¬ 
quires  something  else  as  its  measure  and  as  the 
standard  of  its  comparison,  and  so  on,  we  see 
that  the  computation  of  the  magnitude  of  phe¬ 
nomena  is,  in  all  cases,  utterly  incapable  of 
affording  us  any  absolute  concept  of  a  magni¬ 
tude,  and  can,  instead,  only  afford  one  that  is 
always  based  on  comparison. 

If,  now,  I  assert  without  qualification  that 
anything  is  great,  it  would  seem  that  I  have 
nothing  in  the  way  of  a  comparison  present  to 
my  mind,  or  at  least  nothing  involving  an  ob¬ 
jective  measure,  for  no  attempt  is  thus  made  to 
determine  how  great  the  object  is.  But,  despite 
the  standard  of  comparison  being  merely  sub¬ 
jective,  the  claim  of  the  judgement  is  none  the 
less  one  to  universal  agreement;  the  judge¬ 
ments:  “That  man  is  beautiful”  and  “He  is  tall” 
do  not  purport  to  speak  only  for  the  judging 
subject,  but,  like  theoretical  judgements,  they 
demand  the  assent  of  everyone. 

Now  in  a  judgement  that  without  qualifica¬ 
tion  describes  anything  as  great,  it  is  not  merely 
meant  that  the  object  has  a  magnitude,  but 


JUDGEMENT  497 

greatness  is  ascribed  to  it  pre-eminently  among 
many  other  objects  of  a  like  kind,  yet  without 
the  extent  of  this  pre-eminence  being  deter¬ 
mined.  Hence  a  standard  is  certainly  laid  at  the 
basis  of  the  judgement,  which  standard  is  pre¬ 
supposed  to  be  one  that  can  be  taken  as  the 
same  for  every  one,  but  which  is  available  only 
for  an  aesthetic  estimate  of  the  greatness,  and 
not  for  one  that  is  logical  (mathematically  de¬ 
termined),  for  the  standard  is  a  merely  subjec¬ 
tive  one  underlying  the  reflective  judgement 
upon  the  greatness.  Furthermore,  this  standard 
may  be  empirical,  as,  let  us  say,  the  average  size 
of  the  men  known  to  us,  of  animals  of  a  certain 
kind,  of  trees,  of  houses,  of  mountains,  and  so 
forth.  Or  it  may  be  a  standard  given  a  priori , 
which  by  reason  of  the  imperfections  of  the 
judging  subject  is  restricted  to  subjective  condi¬ 
tions  of  presentation  in  concreto;  as,  in  the 
practical  sphere,  the  greatness  of  a  particular 
virtue,1  or  of  public  liberty  and  justice  in  a 
country;  or,  in  the  theoretical  sphere,  the  great¬ 
ness  of  the  accuracy  or  inaccuracy  of  an  experi¬ 
ment  or  measurement,  etc. 

Here,  now,  it  is  of  note  that,  although  we 
have  no  interest  whatever  in  the  object,  i.  e.,  its 
real  existence  may  be  a  matter  of  no  concern 
to  us,  still  its  mere  greatness,  regarded  even  as 
devoid  of  form,  is  able  to  convey  a  universally 
communicable  delight  and  so  involve  the  con¬ 
sciousness  of  a  subjective  finality  in  the  employ¬ 
ment  of  our  cognitive  faculties,  but  not,  be  it 
remembered,  a  delight  in  the  object,  for  the 
latter  may  be  formless,  but,  in  contradistinc¬ 
tion  to  what  is  the  case  with  the  beautiful,  where 
the  reflective  judgement  finds  itself  set  to  a  key 
that  is  final  in  respect  of  cognition  generally,  a 
delight  in  an  extension  affecting  the  imagination 
itself. 

If  (subject  as  above)  we  say  of  an  object, 
without  qualification,  that  it  is  great,  this  is  not 
a  mathematically  determinant,  but  a  mere  re¬ 
flective  judgement  upon  its  representation, 
which  is  subjectively  final  for  a  particular  em¬ 
ployment  of  our  cognitive  faculties  in  the  esti¬ 
mation  of  magnitude,  and  we  then  always  couple 
with  the  representation  a  kind  of  respect,  just 
as  we  do  a  kind  of  contempt  with  what  we  call 
absolutely  small.  Moreover,  the  estimate  of 
things  as  great  or  small  extends  to  everything, 
even  to  all  their  qualities.  Thus  we  call  even 
their  beauty  great  or  small.  The  reason  of  this 
is  to  be  found  in  the  fact  that  we  have  only  got 
to  present  a  thing  in  intuition,  as  the  precept  of 
judgement  directs  (consequently  to  represent  it 

1  [Cf.  p.497,  etseq.'\ 


THE  CRITIQUE 


aesthetically),  for  it  to  be  in  its  entirety  a  phe¬ 
nomenon,  and  hence  a  quantum. 

If,  however,  we  call  anything  not  alone  great, 
but,  without  qualification,  absolutely,  and  in  ev¬ 
ery  respect  (beyond  all  comparison)  great,  that 
is  to  say,  sublime ,  we  soon  perceive  that  for  this 
it  is  not  permissible  to  seek  an  appropriate 
standard  outside  itself,  but  merely  in  itself.  It 
is  a  greatness  comparable  to  itself  alone.  Hence 
it  comes  that  the  sublime  is  not  to  be  looked  for 
in  the  things  of  nature,  but  only  in  our  own 
ideas.  But  it  must  be  left  to  the  deduction  to 
show  in  which  of  them  it  resides. 

The  above  definition  may  also  be  expressed 
in  this  way:  that  is  sublime  in  comparison  with 
which  all  else  is  small.  Here  we  readily  see  that 
nothing  can  be  given  in  nature,  no  matter  how 
great  we  may  judge  it  to  be,  which,  regarded  in 
some  other  relation,  may  not  be  degraded  to  the 
level  of  the  infinitely  little,  and  nothing  so  small 
which  in  comparison  with  some  still  smaller 
standard  may  not  for  our  imagination  be  en¬ 
larged  to  the  greatness  of  a  world.  Telescopes 
have  put  within  our  reach  an  abundance  of  ma¬ 
terial  to  go  upon  in  making  the  first  observation, 
and  microscopes  the  same  in  making  the  second. 
Nothing,  therefore,  which  can  be  an  object  of 
the  senses  is  to  be  termed  sublime  when  treated 
on  this  footing.  But  precisely  because  there  is  a 
striving  in  our  imagination  towards  progress  ad 
infinitum ,  while  reason  demands  absolute  total¬ 
ity,  as  a  real  idea,  that  same  inability  on  the 
part  of  our  faculty  for  the  estimation  of  the 
magnitude  of  things  of  the  world  of  sense  to  at¬ 
tain  to  this  idea,  is  the  awakening  of  a  feeling 
of  a  supersensible  faculty  within  us;  and  it  is 
the  use  to  which  judgement  naturally  puts  par¬ 
ticular  objects  on  behalf  of  this  latter  feeling, 
and  not  the  object  of  sense,  that  is  absolutely 
great,  and  every  other  contrasted  employment 
small.  Consequently  it  is  the  disposition  of  soul 
evoked  by  a  particular  representation  engaging 
ihe  attention  of  the  reflective  judgement,  and 
not  the  object,  that  is  to  be  called  sublime. 

The  foregoing  formulae  defining  the  sublime 
may,  therefore,  be  supplemented  by  yet  anoth¬ 
er:  The  sublime  is  that ,  the  mere  capacity  of 
thinking  which  evidences  a  faculty  of  mind 
transcending  every  standard  of  sense. 

§  26.  The  estimation  of  the  magnitude  of  natu¬ 
ral  things  requisite  for  the  idea  of  the  sublime 

The  estimation  of  magnitude  by  means  of 
concepts  of  number  (or  their  signs  in  algebra) 
is  mathematical,  but  that  in  mere  intuition  (by 
the  eye)  is  aesthetic.  Now  we  can  only  get  defi¬ 


nite  concepts  of  how  great  anything  is  by  having 
recourse  to  numbers  (or,  at  any  rate,  by  get¬ 
ting  approximate  measurements  by  means  of 
numerical  series  progressing  ad  infinitum ),  the 
unit  being  the  measure;  and  to  this  extent  all 
logical  estimation  of  magnitude  is  mathemati¬ 
cal.  But,  as  the  magnitude  of  the  measure  has 
to  be  assumed  as  a  known  quantity,  if,  to  form 
an  estimate  of  this,  we  must  again  have  recourse 
to  numbers  involving  another  standard  for  their 
unit,  and  consequently  must  again  proceed 
mathematically,  we  can  never  arrive  at  a  first 
or  fundamental  measure,  and  so  cannot  get  any 
definite  concept  of  a  given  magnitude.  The  es¬ 
timation  of  the  magnitude  of  the  fundamental 
measure  must,  therefore,  consist  merely  in  the 
immediate  grasp  which  we  can  get  of  it  in  intui¬ 
tion,  and  the  use  to  which  our  imagination  can 
put  this  in  presenting  the  numerical  concepts: 
i.  e.,  all  estimation  of  the  magnitude  of  objects 
of  nature  is  in  the  last  resort  aesthetic  (i.e.,  sub¬ 
jectively  and  not  objectively  determined). 

Now  for  the  mathematical  estimation  of  mag¬ 
nitude  there  is,  of  course,  no  greatest  possible 
(for  the  power  of  numbers  extends  to  infinity), 
but  for  the  aesthetic  estimation  there  certainly 
is  and  of  it  I  say  that  where  it  is  considered  an 
absolute  measure  beyond  which  no  greater  is 
possible  subjectively  (i.e.,  for  the  judging  sub¬ 
ject),  it  then  conveys  the  idea  of  the  sublime 
and  calls  forth  that  emotion  which  no  mathe¬ 
matical  estimation  of  magnitudes  by  numbers 
can  evoke  (unless  in  so  far  as  the  fundamental 
aesthetic  measure  is  kept  vividly  present  to  the 
imagination):  because  the  latter  presents  only 
the  relative  magnitude  due  to  comparison  with 
others  of  a  like  kind,  whereas  the  former  pre¬ 
sents  magnitude  absolutely,  so  far  as  the  mind 
can  grasp  it  in  an  intuition. 

To  take  in  a  quantum  intuitively  in  the  imag¬ 
ination  so  as  to  be  able  to  use  it  as  a  measure, 
or  unit  for  estimating  magnitude  by  numbers, 
involves  two  operations  of  this  faculty:  appre¬ 
hension  (apprehensio)  and  comprehension  (com- 
prehensio  aesthetica).  Apprehension  presents  no 
difficulty:  for  this  process  can  be  carried  on  ad 
infinitum;  but  with  the  advance  of  apprehen¬ 
sion  comprehension  becomes  more  difficult  at 
every  step  and  soon  attains  its  maximum,  and 
this  is  the  aesthetically  greatest  fundamental 
measure  for  the  estimation  of  magnitude.  For 
if  the  apprehension  has  reached  a  point  beyond 
which  the  representations  of  sensuous  intuition 
in  the  case  of  the  parts  first  apprehended  begin 
to  disappear  from  the  imagination  as  this  ad¬ 
vances  to  the  apprehension  of  yet  others,  as 


OF  AESTHETIC 


much,  then,  is  lost  at  one  end  as  is  gained  at 
the  other,  and  for  comprehension  we  get  a  max¬ 
imum  which  the  imagination  cannot  exceed. 

This  explains  Savary’s  observations  in  his  ac¬ 
count  of  Egypt,1  that  in  order  to  get  the  full 
emotional  effect  of  the  size  of  the  Pyramids  we 
must  avoid  coming  too  near  just  as  much  as  re¬ 
maining  too  far  away.  For  in  the  latter  case  the 
representation  of  the  apprehended  parts  (the 
tiers  of  stones)  is  but  obscure,  and  produces 
no  effect  upon  the  aesthetic  judgement  of  the 
Subject.  In  the  former,  however,  it  takes  the 
eye  some  time  to  complete  the  apprehension 
from  the  base  to  the  summit;  but  in  this  inter¬ 
val  the  first  tiers  always  in  part  disappear  be¬ 
fore  the  imagination  has  taken  in  the  last,  and 
so  the  comprehension  is  never  complete.  The 
same  explanation  may  also  sufficiently  account 
for  the  bewilderment,  or  sort  of  perplexity, 
which,  as  is  said,  seizes  the  visitor  on  first  en¬ 
tering  St.  Peter’s  in  Rome.  For  here  a  feeling 
comes  home  to  him  of  the  inadequacy  of  his 
imagination  for  presenting  the  idea  of  a  whole 
within  which  that  imagination  attains  its  maxi¬ 
mum,  and,  in  its  fruitless  efforts  to  extend  this 
limit,  recoils  upon  itself,  but  in  so  doing  suc¬ 
cumbs  to  an  emotional  delight. 

At  present  I  am  not  disposed  to  deal  with 
the  ground  of  this  delight,  connected,  as  it  is, 
with  a  representation  in  which  we  would  least 
of  all  look  for  it — a  representation,  namely,  that 
lets  us  see  its  own  inadequacy,  and  consequent¬ 
ly  its  subjective  want  of  finality  for  our  judge¬ 
ment  in  the  estimation  of  magnitude — but  con¬ 
fine  myself  to  the  remark  that  if  the  aesthetic 
judgement  is  to  be  pure  ( unmixed  with  any  tel¬ 
eological  judgement  which,  as  such,  belongs  to 
reason),  and  if  we  are  to  give  a  suitable  example 
of  it  for  the  Critique  of  aesthetic  judgement,  we 
must  not  point  to  the  sublime  in  works  of  art, 
e.g.,  buildings,  statues  and  the  like,  where  a  hu¬ 
man  end  determines  the  form  as  well  as  the 
magnitude,  nor  yet  in  things  of  nature,  that  in 
their  very  concept  import  a  definite  end,  e.g., 
animals  of  a  recognized  natural  order,  but  in 
rude  nature  merely  as  involving  magnitude  (and 
only  in  this  so  far  as  it  does  not  convey  any 
charm  or  any  emotion  arising  from  actual  dan¬ 
ger).  For,  in  a  representation  of  this  kind,  na¬ 
ture  contains  nothing  monstrous  (nor  what  is 
either  magnificent  or  horrible) — the  magnitude 
apprehended  may  be  increased  to  any  extent 
provided  imagination  is  able  to  grasp  it  all  in 
one  whole.  An  object  is  monstrous  where  by  its 
size  it  defeats  the  end  that  forms  its  concept. 

1  [ Lettres  sur  VEgypte,  1787.] 


JUDGEMENT  499 

The  colossal  is  the  mere  presentation  of  a  con¬ 
cept  which  is  almost  too  great  for  presentation, 
i.e.,  borders  on  the  relatively  monstrous;  for 
the  end  to  be  attained  by  the  presentation  of  a 
concept  is  made  harder  to  realize  by  the  intui¬ 
tion  of  the  object  being  almost  too  great  for  our 
faculty  of  apprehension.  A  pure  judgement  up¬ 
on  the  sublime  must,  however,  have  no  end  be¬ 
longing  to  the  object  as  its  determining  ground, 
if  it  is  to  be  aesthetic  and  not  to  be  tainted  with 
any  judgement  of  understanding  or  reason. 

Since  whatever  is  to  be  a  source  of  pleasure, 
apart  from  interest,  to  the  merely  reflective 
judgement  must  involve  in  its  representation 
subjective,  and,  as  such,  universally  valid  fi¬ 
nality — though  here,  however,  no  finality  of  the 
form  of  the  object  underlies  our  estimate  of  it 
(as  it  does  in  the  case  of  the  beautiful) — the 
question  arises:  What  is  the  subjective  finality, 
and  what  enables  it  to  be  prescribed  as  a  norm 
so  as  to  yield  a  ground  for  universally  valid  de¬ 
light  in  the  mere  estimation  of  magnitude,  and 
that,  too,  in  a  case  where  it  is  pushed  to  the 
point  at  which  our  faculty  of  imagination  breaks 
down  in  presenting  the  concept  of  a  magnitude, 
and  proves  unequal  to  its  task? 

In  the  successive  aggregation  of  units  requi¬ 
site  for  the  representation  of  magnitudes,  the 
imagination  of  itself  advances  ad  infinitum  with¬ 
out  let  or  hindrance — understanding,  however, 
conducting  it  by  means  of  concepts  of  number 
for  which  the  former  must  supply  the  schema. 
This  procedure  belongs  to  the  logical  estimation 
of  magnitude,  and,  as  such,  is  doubtless  some¬ 
thing  objectively  final  according  to  the  concept 
of  an  end  (as  all  measurement  is),  but  it  is  not 
anything  which  for  the  aesthetic  judgement  is 
final  or  pleasing.  Further,  in  this  intentional  fi¬ 
nality  there  is  nothing  compelling  us  to  tax  the 
utmost  powers  of  the  imagination,  and  drive  it 
as  far  as  ever  it  can  reach  in  its  presentations,  so 
as  to  enlarge  the  size  of  the  measure,  and  thus 
make  the  single  intuition  holding  the  many  in 
one  (the  comprehension )  as  great  as  possible. 
For,  in  the  estimation  of  magnitude  by  the  un¬ 
derstanding  (arithmetic),  we  get  just  as  far, 
whether  the  comprehension  of  the  units  is  pushed 
to  the  number  10  (as  in  the  decimal  scale) 
or  only  to  4  (as  in  the  quaternary) ;  the  fur¬ 
ther  production  of  magnitude  being  carried  out 
by  the  succesive  aggregation  of  units,  or,  if  the 
quantum  is  given  in  intuition,  by  apprehension, 
merely  progressively  (not  comprehensively), 
according  to  an  adopted  principle  of  progres¬ 
sion.  In  this  mathematical  estimation  of  magni- 


THE  CRITIQUE 


tude,  understanding  is  as  well  served  and  as  sat¬ 
isfied  whether  imagination  selects  for  the  unit 
a  magnitude  which  one  can  take  in  at  a  glance, 
e.g.,  a  foot,  or  a  perch,  or  else  a  German  mile, 
or  even  the  earth’s  diameter,  the  apprehension 
of  which  is  indeed  possible,  but  not  its  compre¬ 
hension  in  an  intuition  of  the  imagination  (i.e., 
it  is  not  possible  by  means  of  a  comprehensio 
aesthctica ,  thought  quite  so  by  means  of  a  com¬ 
prehensio  logica  in  a  numerical  concept).  In 
each  case  the  logical  estimation  of  magnitude 
advances  ad  infinitum  with  nothing  to  stop  it. 

The  mind,  however,  hearkens  now  to  the 
voice  of  reason,  which  for  all  given  magnitudes 
— even  for  those  which  can  never  be  completely 
apprehended,  though  (in  sensuous  representa¬ 
tion)  estimated  as  completely  given — requires 
totality,  and  consequently  comprehension  in  one 
intuition,  and  which  calls  for  a  presentation 
answering  to  all  the  above  members  of  a  pro¬ 
gressively  increasing  numerical  series,  and  does 
not  exempt  even  the  infinite  (space  and  time 
past)1  from  this  requirement,  but  rather  ren¬ 
ders  it  inevitable  for  us  to  regard  this  infinite 
(in  the  judgement  of  common  reason)  as  com¬ 
pletely  given  (i.e.,  given  in  its  totality). 

But  the  infinite  is  absolutely  (not  merely 
comparatively)  great.  In  comparison  with  this 
all  else  (in  the  way  of  magnitudes  of  the  same 
order)  is  small.  But  the  point  of  capital  impor¬ 
tance  is  that  the  mere  ability  even  to  think  it 
as  a  whole  indicates  a  faculty  of  mind  tran¬ 
scending  every  standard  of  sense.  For  the  latter 
would  entail  a  comprehension  yielding  as  unit 
a  standard  bearing  to  the  infinite  ratio  express¬ 
ible  in  numbers,  which  is  impossible.  Still  the 
mere  ability  even  to  think  the  given  infinite 
without  contradiction,  is  something  that  re¬ 
quires  the  presence  in  the  human  mind  of  a  fac¬ 
ulty  that  is  itself  supersensible.  For  it  is  only 
through  this  faculty  and  its  idea  of  a  noumenon, 
which  latter,  while  not  itself  admitting  of  any 
intuition,  is  yet  introduced  as  substrate  under¬ 
lying  the  intuition  of  the  world  as  mere  phe¬ 
nomenon,  that  the  infinite  of  the  world  of  sense, 
in  the  pure  intellectual  estimation  of  magni¬ 
tude,  is  completely  comprehended  under  a  con¬ 
cept,  although  in  the  mathematical  estimation 
by  means  of  numerical  concepts  it  can  never  be 
completely  thought.  Even  a  faculty  enabling 
the  infinite  of  supersensible  intuition  to  be  re¬ 
garded  as  given  (in  its  intelligible  substrate), 
transcends  every  standard  of  sensibility  and  is 
great  beyond  all  comparison  even  with  the  fac¬ 
ulty  of  mathematical  estimation:  not,  of  course, 

1  [Cf.  Critique  of  Pure  Reason,  pp.  130-1.] 


from  a  theoretical  point  of  view  that  looks  to 
the  interests  of  our  faculty  of  knowledge,  but  as 
a  broadening  of  the  mind  that  from  another 
(the  practical)  point  of  view  feels  itself  em¬ 
powered  to  pass  beyond  the  narrow  confines  of 
sensibility. 

Nature,  therefore,  is  sublime  in  such  of  its 
phenomena  as  in  their  intuition  convey  the  idea 
of  their  infinity.  But  this  can  only  occur  through 
the  inadequacy  of  even  the  greatest  effort  of 
our  imagination  in  the  estimation  of  the  magni¬ 
tude  of  an  object.  But,  now,  in  the  case  of  the 
mathematical  estimation  of  magnitude,  imag¬ 
ination  is  quite  competent  to  supply  a  measure 
equal  to  the  requirements  of  any  object.  For 
the  numerical  concepts  of  the  understanding 
can  by  progressive  synthesis  make  any  measure 
adequate  to  any  given  magnitude.  Hence  it  must 
be  the  aesthetic  estimation  of  magnitude  in  which 
we  get  at  once  a  feeling  of  the  effort  towards  a 
comprehension  that  exceeds  the  faculty  of  im¬ 
agination  for  mentally  grasping  the  progressive 
apprehension  in  a  whole  of  intuition,  and,  with 
it,  a  perception  of  the  inadequacy  of  this  facul¬ 
ty,  which  has  no  bounds  to  its  progress,  for  tak¬ 
ing  in  and  using  for  the  estimation  of  magni¬ 
tude  a  fundamental  measure  that  understand¬ 
ing  could  turn  to  account  without  the  least 
trouble.  Now  the  proper  unchangeable  funda¬ 
mental  measure  of  nature  is  its  absolute  whole, 
which,  with  it,  regarded  as  a  phenomenon,  means 
infinity  comprehended.  But,  since  this  funda¬ 
mental  measure  is  a  self-contradictory  concept 
(owing  to  the  impossibility  of  the  absolute  to¬ 
tality  of  an  endless  progression),  it  follows  that 
where  the  size  of  a  natural  object  is  such  that 
the  imagination  spends  its  whole  .  faculty  of 
comprehension  upon  it  in  vain,  it  must  carry 
our  concept  of  nature  to  a  supersensible  sub¬ 
strate  (underlying  both  nature  and  our  faculty 
of  thought)  which  is  great  beyond  every  stand¬ 
ard  of  sense.  Thus,  instead  of  the  object,  it  is 
rather  the  cast  of  the  mind  in  appreciating  it 
that  we  have  to  estimate  as  sublime. 

Therefore,  just  as  the  aesthetic  judgement  in 
its  estimate  of  the  beautiful  refers  the  imagina¬ 
tion  in  its  free  play  to  the  understanding ,  to 
bring  out  its  agreement  with  the  concepts  of 
the  latter  in  general  (apart  from  their  determi¬ 
nation)  :  so  in  its  estimate  of  a  thing  as  sublime 
it  refers  that  faculty  to  reason  to  bring  out  its 
subjective  accord  with  ideas  of  reason  (inde¬ 
terminately  indicated),  i.e.,  to  induce  a  temper 
of  mind  conformable  to  that  which  the  influ¬ 
ence  of  definite  (practical)  ideas  would  produce 
upon  feeling,  and  in  common  accord  with  it. 


OF  AESTHETIC 

This  makes  it  evident  that  true  sublimity  must 
be  sought  only  in  the  mind  of  the  judging  sub¬ 
ject,  and  not  in  the  object  of  nature  that  oc¬ 
casions  this  attitude  by  the  estimate  formed  of 
it.  Who  would  apply  the  term  “sublime”  even 
to  shapeless  mountain  masses  towering  one 
above  the  other  in  wild  disorder,  with  their 
pyramids  of  ice,  or  to  the  dark  tempestuous 
ocean,  or  such  like  things?  But  in  the  contem¬ 
plation  of  them,  without  any  regard  to  their 
form,  the  mind  abandons  itself  to  the  imagina¬ 
tion  and  to  a  reason  placed,  though  quite  apart 
from  any  definite  end,  in  conjunction  therewith, 
and  merely  broadening  its  view,  and  it  feels  it¬ 
self  elevated  in  its  own  estimate  of  itself  on 
finding  all  the  might  of  imagination  still  unequal 
to  its  ideas. 

We  get  examples  of  the  mathematically  sub¬ 
lime  of  nature  in  mere  intuition  in  all  those  in¬ 
stances  where  our  imagination  is  afforded,  not 
so  much  a  greater  numerical  concept  as  a  large 
unit  as  measure  (for  shortening  the  numerical 
series).  A  tree  judged  by  the  height  of  man 
gives,  at  all  events,  a  standard  for  a  mountain; 
and,  supposing  this  is,  say,  a  mile  high,  it  can 
serve  as  unit  for  the  number  expressing  the 
earth’s  diameter,  so  as  to  make  it  intuitable; 
similarly  the  earth’s  diameter  for  the  known 
planetary  system;  this  again  for  the  system  of 
the  Milky  Way;  and  the  immeasurable  host  of 
such  systems,  which  go  by  the  name  of  nebulae , 
and  most  likely  in  turn  themselves  form  such  a 
system,  holds  out  no  prospect  of  a  limit.  Now 
in  the  aesthetic  estimate  of  such  an  immeasur¬ 
able  whole,  the  sublime  does  not  lie  so  much  in 
the  greatness  of  the  number,  as  in  the  fact  that 
in  our  onward  advance  we  always  arrive  at  pro¬ 
portionately  greater  units.  The  systematic  divi¬ 
sion  of  the  cosmos  conduces  to  this  result.  For 
it  represents  all  that  is  great  in  nature  as  in  turn 
becoming  little;  or,  to  be  more  exact,  it  repre¬ 
sents  our  imagination  in  all  its  boundlessness, 
and  with  it  nature,  as  sinking  into  insignificance 
before  the  ideas  of  reason,  once  their  adequate 
presentation  is  attempted. 

§  27.  Quality  of  the  delight  in  our  estimate  of 
the  sublime 

The  feeling  of  our  incapacity  to  attain  to  an 
idea  that  is  a  law  for  us,  is  respect.1  Now  the 
idea  of  the  comprehension  of  any  phenomenon 
whatever,  that  may  be  given  us,  in  a  whole  of 
intuition,  is  an  idea  imposed  upon  us  by  a  law 
of  reason,  which  recognizes  no  definite,  univer- 

1  [Cf.  Critique  of  Practical  Reason,  p.  323,  et  seq .] 


JUDGEMENT  501 

sally  valid  and  unchangeable  measure  except 
the  absolute  whole.  But  our  imagination,  even 
when  taxing  itself  to  the  uttermost  on  the  score 
of  this  required  comprehension  of  a  given  object 
in  a  whole  of  intuition  (and  so  with  a  view  to 
the  presentation  of  the  idea  of  reason),  betrays 
its  limits  and  its  inadequacy,  but  still,  at  the 
same  time,  its  proper  vocation  of  making  itself 
adequate  to  the  same  as  law.  Therefore  the 
feeling  of  the  sublime  in  nature  is  respect  for 
our  own  vocation,  which  we  attribute  to  an  ob¬ 
ject  of  nature  by  a  certain  subreption  (substi¬ 
tution  of  a  respect  for  the  object  in  place  of  one 
for  the  idea  of  humanity  in  our  own  self — the 
subject) ;  and  this  feeling  renders,  as  it  were, 
intuitable  the  supremacy  of  our  cognitive  fac¬ 
ulties  on  the  rational  side  over  the  greatest  fac¬ 
ulty  of  sensibility. 

The  feeling  of  the  sublime  is,  therefore,  at 
once  a  feeling  of  displeasure,  arising  from  the 
inadequacy  of  imagination  in  the  aesthetic  es¬ 
timation  of  magnitude  to  attain  to  its  estima¬ 
tion  by  reason,  and  a  simultaneously  awakened 
pleasure,  arising  from  this  very  judgement  of 
the  inadequacy  of  the  greatest  faculty  of  sense 
being  in  accord  with  ideas  of  reason,  so  far  as 
the  effort  to  attain  to  these  is  for  us  a  law.  It  is, 
in  other  words,  for  us  a  law  (of  reason),  which 
goes  to  make  us  what  we  are,  that  we  should 
esteem  as  small  in  comparison  with  ideas  of  rea¬ 
son  everything  which  for  us  is  great  in  nature 
as  an  object  of  sense;  and  that  which  makes  us 
alive  to  the  feeling  of  this  supersensible  side  of 
our  being  harmonizes  with  that  law.  Now  the 
greatest  effort  of  the  imagination  in  the  pres¬ 
entation  of  the  unit  for  the  estimation  of  mag¬ 
nitude  involves  in  itself  a  reference  to  some¬ 
thing  absolutely  great ,  consequently  a  reference 
also  to  the  law  of  reason  that  this  alone  is  to  be 
adopted  as  the  supreme  measure  of  what  is 
great.  Therefore  the  inner  perception  of  the  in¬ 
adequacy  of  every  standard  of  sense  to  serve 
for  the  rational  estimation  of  magnitude  is  a 
coming  into  accord  with  reason’s  laws,  and  a 
displeasure  that  makes  us  alive  to  the  feeling 
of  the  supersensible  side  of  our  being,  according 
to  which  it  is  final,  and  consequently  a  pleasure, 
to  find  every  standard  of  sensibility  falling  short 
of  the  ideas  of  reason. 

The  mind  feels  itself  set  in  motion  in  the  rep¬ 
resentation  of  the  sublime  in  nature;  whereas 
in  the  aesthetic  judgement  upon  what  is  beauti¬ 
ful  therein  it  is  in  restful  contemplation.  This 
movement,  especially  in  its  inception,  may  be 
compared  with  vibration,  i.e.,  with  a  rapidly  al¬ 
ternating  repulsion  and  attraction  produced  by 


THE  CRITIQUE 


one  and  the  same  object.1  The  point  of  excess 
for  the  imagination  (towards  which  it  is  driven 
in  the  apprehension  of  the  intuition)  is  like  an 
abyss  in  which  it  fears  to  lose  itself,  yet  again 
for  the  rational  idea  of  the  supersensible  it  is 
not  excessive,  but  conformable  to  law,  and  di¬ 
rected  to  drawing  out  such  an  effort  on  the  part 
of  the  imagination:  and  so  in  turn  as  much  a 
source  of  attraction  as  it  was  repellent  to  mere 
sensibility.  But  the  judgement  itself  all  the 
while  steadfastly  preserves  its  aesthetic  charac¬ 
ter,  because  it  represents,  without  being  ground¬ 
ed  on  any  definite  concept  of  the  object,  merely 
the  subjective  play  of  the  mental  powers  (im¬ 
agination  and  reason)  as  harmonious  by  virtue 
of  their  very  contrast.  For  just  as  in  the  esti¬ 
mate  of  the  beautiful  imagination  and  under¬ 
standing  by  their  concert  generate  subjective 
finality  of  the  mental  faculties,  so  imagination 
and  reason  do  so  here  by  their  conflict — that  is 
to  say  they  induce  a  feeling  of  our  possessing 
a  pure  and  self-sufficient  reason,  or  a  faculty 
for  the  estimation  of  magnitude,  whose  pre¬ 
eminence  can  only  be  made  intuitively  evident 
by  the  inadequacy  of  that  faculty  which  in  the 
presentation  of  magnitudes  (of  objects  of  sense) 
is  itself  unbounded. 

Measurement  of  a  space  (as  apprehension) 
is  at  the  same  time  a  description  of  it,  and  so 
an  objective  movement  in  the  imagination  and 
a  progression.  On  the  other  hand,  the  compre¬ 
hension  of  the  manifold  in  the  unity,  not  of 
thought,  but  of  intuition,  and  consequently  the 
comprehension  of  the  successively  apprehended 
parts  at  one  glance,  is  a  retrogression  that  re¬ 
moves  the  time-condition  in  the  progression  of 
the  imagination,  and  renders  coexistence  intuit- 
able.  Therefore,  since  the  time-series  is  a  con¬ 
dition  of  the  internal  sense  and  of  an  intuition, 
it  is  a  subjective  movement  of  the  imagination 
by  which  it  does  violence  to  the  internal  sense 
— a  violence  which  must  be  proportionately 
more  striking  the  greater  the  quantum  which 
the  imagination  comprehends  in  one  intuition. 
The  effort,  therefore,  to  receive  in  a  single  intui¬ 
tion  a  measure  for  magnitudes  which  it  takes  an 
appreciable  time  to  apprehend,  is  a  mode  of  rep¬ 
resentation  which,  subjectively  considered,  is 
contra-final,  but  objectively,  is  requisite  for  the 
estimation  of  magnitude,  and  is  consequently 
final.  Here  the  very  same  violence  that  is 
wrought  on  the  subject  through  the  imagination 
is  estimated  as  final  for  the  whole  province  of 
the  mind. 

1  [Cf.  p.  537,  et  seq.;  p.  509,  et  seq .] 


The  quality  of  the  feeling  of  the  sublime  con¬ 
sists  in  its  being,  in  respect  of  the  faculty  of 
forming  aesthetic  estimates,  a  feeling  of  dis¬ 
pleasure  at  an  object,  which  yet,  at  the  same 
time,  is  represented  as  being  final — a  represen¬ 
tation  which  derives  its  possibility  from  the  fact 
that  the  subject’s  very  incapacity  betrays  the 
consciousness  of  an  unlimited  faculty  of  the 
same  subject,  and  that  the  mind  can  only  form 
an  aesthetic  estimate  of  the  latter  faculty  by 
means  of  that  incapacity. 

In  the  case  of  the  logical  estimation  of  mag¬ 
nitude,  the  impossibility  of  ever  arriving  at  ab¬ 
solute  totality  by  the  progressive  measurement 
of  things  of  the  sensible  world  in  time  and  space 
was  cognized  as  an  objective  impossibility,  i.  e., 
one  of  thinking  the  infinite  as  given,  and  not  as 
simply  subjective,  i.e.,  an  incapacity  for  grasp¬ 
ing  it;  for  nothing  turns  there  on  the  amount  of 
the  comprehension  in  one  intuition,  as  measure, 
but  everything  depends  on  a  numerical  concept. 
But  in  an  aesthetic  estimation  of  magnitude  the 
numerical  concept  must  drop  out  of  count  or 
undergo  a  change.  The  only  thing  that  is  final 
for  such  estimation  is  the  comprehension  on 
the  part  of  imagination  in  respect  of  the  unit 
of  measure  (the  concept  of  a  law  of  the  succes¬ 
sive  production  of  the  concept  of  magnitude 
being  consequently  avoided).  If,  now,  a  mag¬ 
nitude  begins  to  tax  the  utmost  stretch  of  our 
faculty  of  comprehension  in  an  intuition,  and 
still  numerical  magnitudes — in  respect  of  which 
we  are  conscious  of  the  boundlessness  of  our 
faculty — call  upon  the  imagination  for  aesthetic 
comprehension  in  a  greater  unit,  the  mind  then 
gets  a  feeling  of  being  aesthetically  confined 
within  bounds.  Nevertheless,  with  a  view  to 
the  extension  of  imagination  necessary  for  ade¬ 
quacy  with  what  is  unbounded  in  our  faculty  of 
reason,  namely  the  idea  of  the  absolute  whole, 
the  attendant  displeasure,  and,  consequently, 
the  want  of  finality  in  our  faculty  of  imagina¬ 
tion,  is  still  represented  as  final  for  ideas  of  rea¬ 
son  and  their  animation.  But  in  this  very  way 
the  aesthetic  judgement  itself  is  subjectively 
final  for  reason  as  source  of  ideas,  i.e.,  of  such 
an  intellectual  comprehension  as  makes  all  aes¬ 
thetic  comprehension  small,  and  the  object  is 
received  as  sublime  with  a  pleasure  that  is  only 
possible  through  the  mediation  of  a  displeasure. 

B.  The  Dynamically  Sublime  in  Nature 

§  28.  Nature  as  Might 

Might  is  a  power  which  is  superior  to  great 
hindrances.  It  is  termed  dominion  if  it  is  also 


OF  AESTHETIC 

superior  to  the  resistance  of  that  which  itself 
possesses  might.  Nature,  considered  in  an  aes¬ 
thetic  judgement  as  might  that  has  no  dominion 
over  us,  is  dynamically  sublime. 

If  we  are  to  estimate  nature  as  dynamically 
sublime,  it  must  be  represented  as  a  source  of 
fear  (though  the  converse,  that  every  object 
that  is  a  source  of  fear,  in  our  aesthetic  judge¬ 
ment,  sublime,  does  not  hold).  For  in  forming 
an  aesthetic  estimate  (no  concept  being  present) 
the  superiority  to  hindrances  can  only  be  esti¬ 
mated  according  to  the  greatness  of  the  resist¬ 
ance.  Now  that  which  we  strive  to  resist  is  an 
evil,  and,  if  we  do  not  find  our  powers  commen¬ 
surate  to  the  task,  an  object  of  fear.  Hence  the 
aesthetic  judgement  can  only  deem  nature  a 
might,  and  so  dynamically  sublime,  in  so  far  as 
it  is  looked  upon  as  an  object  of  fear. 

But  we  may  look  upon  an  object  as  fearful , 
and  yet  not  be  afraid  of  it,  if,  that  is,  our  esti¬ 
mate  takes  the  form  of  our  simply  picturing  to 
ourselves  the  case  of  our  wishing  to  offer  some 
resistance  to  it  and  recognizing  that  all  such 
resistance  would  be  quite  futile.  So  the  right¬ 
eous  man  fears  God  without  being  afraid  of 
Him,  because  he  regards  the  case  of  his  wishing 
to  resist  God  and  His  commandments  as  one 
which  need  cause  him  no  anxiety.  But  in  every 
such  case,  regarded  by  him  as  not  intrinsically 
impossible,  he  cognizes  Him  as  One  to  be  feared. 

One  who  is  in  a  state  of  fear  can  no  more  play 
the  part  of  a  judge  of  the  sublime  of  nature 
than  one  captivated  by  inclination  and  appetite 
can  of  the  beautiful.  He  flees  from  the  sight  of 
an  object  filling  him  with  dread;  and  it  is  im¬ 
possible  to  take  delight  in  terror  that  is  seriously 
entertained.  Hence  the  agreeableness  arising 
from  the  cessation  of  an  uneasiness  is  a  state 
of  joy.  But  this,  depending  upon  deliverance 
from  a  danger,  is  a  rejoicing  accompanied  with 
a  resolve  never  again  to  put  oneself  in  the  way 
of  the  danger:  in  fact  we  do  not  like  bringing 
back  to  mind  how  we  felt  on  that  occasion — 
not  to  speak  of  going  in  search  of  an  opportun¬ 
ity  for  experiencing  it  again. 

Bold,  overhanging,  and,  as  it  were,  threaten¬ 
ing  rocks,  thunderclouds  piled  up  the  vault  of 
heaven,  borne  along  with  flashes  and  peals,  vol¬ 
canoes  in  all  their  violence  of  destruction,  hur¬ 
ricanes  leaving  desolation  in  their  track,  the 
boundless  ocean  rising  with  rebellious  force,  the 
high  waterfall  of  some  mighty  river,  and  the 
like,  make  our  power  of  resistance  of  trifling 
moment  in  comparison  with  their  might.  But, 
provided  our  own  position  is  secure,  their  aspect 
is  all  the  more  attractive  for  its  fearfulness;  and 


JUDGEMENT  503 

we  readily  call  these  objects  sublime,  because 
they  raise  the  forces  of  the  soul  above  the  height 
of  vulgar  commonplace,  and  discover  within  us 
a  power  of  resistance  of  quite  another  kind, 
which  gives  us  courage  to  be  able  to  measure 
ourselves  against  the  seeming  omnipotence  of 
nature. 

In  the  immeasurableness  of  nature  and  the 
incompetence  of  our  faculty  for  adopting  a 
standard  proportionate  to  the  aesthetic  estima¬ 
tion  of  the  magnitude  of  its  realmf  we  found 
our  own  limitation.  But  with  this  we  also  found 
in  our  rational  faculty  another  non-sensuous 
standard,  one  which  has  that  infinity  itself  un¬ 
der  it  as  a  unit,  and  in  comparison  with  which 
everything  in  nature  is  small,  and  so  found  in 
our  minds  a  pre-eminence  over  nature  even  in 
it  immeasurability.  Now  in  just  the  same  way 
the  irresistibility  of  the  might  of  nature  forces 
upon  us  the  recognition  of  our  physical  helpless¬ 
ness  as  beings  of  nature,  but  at  the  same  time 
reveals  a  faculty  of  estimating  ourselves  as  in¬ 
dependent  of  nature,  and  discovers  a  pre-emi¬ 
nence  above  nature  that  is  the  foundation  of  a 
self-preservation  of  quite  another  kind  from 
that  which  may  be  assailed  and  brought  into 
danger  by  external  nature.  This  saves  humanity 
in  our  own  person  from  humiliation,  even 
though  as  mortal  men  we  have  to  submit  to  ex¬ 
ternal  violence.  In  this  way,  external  nature  is 
not  estimated  in  our  aesthetic  judgement  as  sub¬ 
lime  so  far  as  exciting  fear,  but  rather  because 
it  challenges  our  power  (one  not  of  nature)  to 
regard  as  small  those  things  of  which  we  are 
wont  to  be  solicitous  (worldly  goods, 'health, 
and  life),  and  hence  to  regard  its  might  (to 
which  in  these  matters  we  are  no  doubt  subject) 
as  exercising  over  us  and  our  personality  no 
such  rude  dominion  that  we  should  bow  down 
before  it,  once  the  question  becomes  one  of  our 
highest  principles  and  of  our  asserting  or  for¬ 
saking  them.  Therefore  nature  is  here  called 
sublime  merely  because  it  raises  the  imagina¬ 
tion  to  a  presentation  of  those  cases  in  which 
the  mind  can  make  itself  sensible  of  the  appro¬ 
priate  sublimity  of  the  sphere  of  its  own  being, 
even  above  nature. 

This  estimation  of  ourselves  loses  nothing  by 
the  fact  that  we  must  see  ourselves  safe  in  order 
to  feel  this  soul-stirring  delight — a  fact  from 
which  it  might  be  plausibly  argued  that,  as  there 
is  no  seriousness  in  the  danger,  so  there  is  just 
as  little  seriousness  in  the  sublimity  of  our  fac¬ 
ulty  of  soul.  For  here  the  delight  only  concerns 
the  province  of  our  faculty  disclosed  in  such  a 
case,  so  far  as  this  faculty  has  its  root  in  our 


THE  CRITIQUE 


nature;  notwithstanding  that  its  development 
and  exercise  is  left  to  ourselves  and  remains 
an  obligation.  Here  indeed  there  is  truth — no 
matter  how  conscious  a  man,  when  he  stretches 
his  reflection  so  far  abroad,  may  be  of  his  actual 
present  helplessness. 

This  principle  has,  doubtless,  the  appearance 
of  being  too  far-fetched  and  subtle,  and  so  of 
lying  beyond  the  reach  of  an  aesthetic  judge¬ 
ment.  But  observation  of  men  proves  the  re¬ 
verse,  and  that  it  may  be  the  foundation  of  the 
commonest  judgements,  although  one  is  not  al¬ 
ways  conscious  of  its  presence.  For  what  is  it 
that,  even  to  the  savage,  is  the  object  of  the 
greatest  admiration?  It  is  a  man  who  is  un¬ 
daunted,  who  knows  no  fear,  and  who,  therefore, 
does  not  give  way  to  danger,  but  sets  manfully 
to  work  with  full  deliberation.  Even  where  civ¬ 
ilization  has  reached  a  high  pitch,  there  remains 
this  special  reverence  for  the  soldier;  only  that 
there  is  then  further  required  of  him  that  he 
should  also  exhibit  all  the  virtues  of  peace1 — 
gentleness,  sympathy,  and  even  becoming 
thought  for  his  own  person;  and  for  the  reason 
that  in  this  we  recognize  that  his  mind  is  above 
the  threats  of  danger.2  And  so,  comparing  the 
statesman  and  the  general,  men  may  argue  as 
they  please  as  to  the  pre-eminent  respect  which 
is  due  to  either  above  the  other;  but  the  verdict 
of  the  aesthetic  judgement  is  for  the  latter.  War 
itself,  provided  it  is  conducted  with  order  and 
a  sacred  respect  for  the  rights  of  civilians,  has 
something  sublime  about  it,  and  gives  nations 
that  carry  it  on  in  such  a  manner  a  stamp  of 
mind  only  the  more  sublime  the  more  numerous 
the  dangers  to  which  they  are  exposed,  and 
which  they  are  able  to  meet  with  fortitude.  On 
the  other  hand,  a  prolonged  peace  favours  the 
predominance  of  a  mere  commercial  spirit,  and 
with  it  a  debasing  self-interest,  cowardice,  and 
effeminacy,  and  tends  to  degrade  the  character 
of  the  nation. 

So  far  as  sublimity  is  predicated  of  might, 
this  solution  of  the  concept  of  it  appears  at  vari¬ 
ance  with  the  fact  that  we  are  wont  to  represent 
God  in  the  tempest,  the  storm,  the  earthquake, 
and  the  like,  as  presenting  Himself  in  His  wrath, 
but  at  the  same  time  also  in  His  sublimity,  and 
yet  here  it  would  be  alike  folly  and  presumption 
to  imagine  a  pre-eminence  of  our  minds  over 
the  operations  and,  as  it  appears,  even  over  the 
direction  of  such  might.  Here,  instead  of  a  feel¬ 
ing  of  the  sublimity  of  our  own  nature,  submis- 

1  [Cf.  King  Henry’s  address  before  Harfteur;  Shake¬ 
speare,  King  Henry  V,  Act  III,  Scene  i.] 

2  TCf.  Aristotle’s  remarks  on  Courage,  in  the  Ethics, 
III,  6,  et  seq.] 


sion,  prostration,  and  a  feeling  of  utter  helpless-  : 
ness  seem  more  to  constitute  the  attitude  of  i 
mind  befitting  the  manifestation  of  such  an  ob¬ 
ject,  and  to  be  that  also  more  customarily  asso¬ 
ciated  with  the  idea  of  it  on  the  occasion  of  a  > 
natural  phenomenon  of  this  kind.  In  religion,  as  i 
a  rule,  prostration,  adoration  with  bowed  head,  > 
coupled  with  contrite,  timorous  posture  and 
voice,  seems  to  be  the  only  becoming  demeanour 
in  presence  of  the  Godhead,  and  accordingly 
most  nations  have  assumed  and  still  observe  it. 
Yet  this  cast  of  mind  is  far  from  being  intrin¬ 
sically  and  necessarily  involved  in  the  idea  of 
the  sublimity  of  a  religion  and  of  its  object.  The 
man  that  is  actually  in  a  state  of  fear,  finding 
in  himself  good  reason  to  be  so,  because  he  is 
conscious  of  offending  with  his  evil  disposition 
against  a  might  directed  by  a  will  at  once  irre¬ 
sistible  and  just,  is  far  from  being  in  the  frame 
of  mind  for  admiring  divine  greatness,  for  which 
a  temper  of  calm  reflection  and  a  quite  free 
judgement  are  required.  Only  when  he  becomes 
conscious  of  having  a  disposition  that  is  upright 
and  acceptable  to  God,  do  those  operations  of 
might  serve  to  stir  within  him  the  idea  of  the 
sublimity  of  this  Being,  so  far  as  he  recognizes 
the  existence  in  himself  of  a  sublimity  of  dispo¬ 
sition  consonant  with  His  will,  and  is  thus  raised 
above  the  dread  of  such  operations  of  nature, 
in  which  he  no  longer  sees  God  pouring  forth 
the  vials  of  the  wrath.  Even  humility,  taking 
the  form  of  an  uncompromising  judgement  upon 
his  shortcomings,  which,  with  consciousness  of 
good  intentions,  might  readily  be  glossed  over 
on  the  ground  of  the  frailty  of  human  nature, 
is  a  sublime  temper  of  the  mind  voluntarily  to 
undergo  the  pain  of  remorse  as  a  means  of  more 
and  more  effectually  eradicating  its  cause.  In 
this  way  religion  is  intrinsically  distinguished 
from  superstition,  which  latter  rears  in  the  mind, 
not  reverence  for  the  sublime,  but  dread  and 
apprehension  of  the  all-powerful  Being  to  whose 
will  terror-stricken  man  sees  himself  subjected, 
yet  without  according  Him  due  honour.  From 
this  nothing  can  arise  but  grace-begging  and 
vain  adulation,  instead  of  a  religion  consisting 
in  a  good  life. 

Sublimity,  therefore,  does  not  reside  in  any 
of  the  things  of  nature,  but  only  in  our  own 
mind,  in  so  far  as  we  may  become  conscious  of 
our  superiority  over  nature  within,  and  thus  also 
over  nature  without  us  (as  exerting  influence 
upon  us).  Everything  that  provokes  this  feeling 
in  us,  including  the  might  of  nature  which  chal¬ 
lenges  our  strength,  is  then,  though  improperly, 
called  sublime,  and  it  is  only  under  presupposi- 


OF  AESTHETIC 

tion  of  this  idea  within  us,  and  in  relation  to  it, 
that  we  are  capable  of  attaining  to  the  idea  of 
the  sublimity  of  that  Being  which  inspires  deep 
respect  in  us,  not  by  the  mere  display  of  its 
might  in  nature,  but  more  by  the  faculty  which 
is  planted  in  us  of  estimating  that  might  with¬ 
out  fear,  and  of  regarding  our  estate  as  exalted 
above  it. 

§  29.  Modality  of  the  judgement  on  the  sublime 
in  nature 

Beautiful  nature  contains  countless  things 
as  to  which  we  at  once  take  every  one  as  in  their 
judgement  concurring  with  our  own,  and  as  to 
which  we  may  further  expect  this  concurrence 
without  facts  finding  us  far  astray.  But  in  re¬ 
spect  of  our  judgement  upon  the  sublime  in  na¬ 
ture,  we  cannot  so  easily  vouch  for  ready  ac¬ 
ceptance  by  others.  For  a  far  higher  degree  of 
culture.1  not  merely  of  the  aesthetic  judgement, 
but  also  of  the  faculties  of  cognition  which  lie 
at  its  basis,  seems  to  be  requisite  to  enable  us 
to  lay  down  a  judgement  upon  this  high  distinc¬ 
tion  of  natural  objects. 

The  proper  mental  mood  for  a  feeling  of  the 
sublime  postulates  the  mind's  susceptibility  for 
ideas,  since  it  is  precisely  in  the  failure  of  nature 
to  attain  to  these — and  consequently  only  under 
presupposition  of  this  susceptibility  and  of  the 
straining  of  the  imagination  to  use  nature  as  a 
schema  for  ideas — that  there  is  something  for¬ 
bidding  to  sensibility,  but  which,  for  all  that,  has 
an  attraction  for  us,  arising  from  the  fact  of  its 
being  a  dominion  which  reason  exercises  over 
sensibility  with  a  view  to  extending  it  to  the 
requirements  of  its  own  realm  (the  practical) 
and  letting  it  look  out  beyond  itself  into  the  in¬ 
finite,  which  for  it  is  an  abyss.  In  fact,  without 
the  development  of  moral  ideas,  that  which, 
thanks  to  preparatory  culture,  we  call  sublime, 
merely  strikes  the  untutored  man  as  terrifying. 
He  will  see  in  the  evidences  which  the  ravages 
of  nature  give  of  her  dominion,  and  in  the  vast 
scale  of  her  might,  compared  with  which  his  own 
is  diminished  to  insignificance,  only  the  misery, 
peril,  and  distress  that  would  compass  the  man 
who  was  thrown  to  its  mercy.  So  the  simple- 
minded,  and,  for  the  most  part,  intelligent, 
Savoyard  peasant,  (as  Herr  von  Sassure  re¬ 
lates),  unhesitatingly  called  all  lovers  of  snow- 
mountains  fools .  And  who  can  tell  whether  he 
would  have  been  so  wide  of  the  mark,  if  that 
student  of  nature  had  taken  the  risk  of  the  dan¬ 
gers  to  which  he  exposed  himself  merely,  as 
most  travellers  do,  for  a  fad,  or  so  as  some  day 

1  [Cf.  p.  518,  et  seq.~\ 


JUDGEMENT  505 

to  be  able  to  give  a  thrilling  account  of  his  ad¬ 
ventures?  But  the  mind  of  Sassure  was  bent  on 
the  instruction  of  mankind,  and  soul-stirring 
sensations  that  excellent  man  indeed  had,  and 
the  reader  of  his  travels  got  them  thrown  into 
the  bargain. 

But  the  fact  that  culture  is  requisite  for  the 
judgement  upon  the  sublime  in  nature  (more 
than  for  that  upon  the  beautiful)  does  not  in¬ 
volve  its  being  an  original  product  of  culture 
and  something  introduced  in  a  more  or  less  con¬ 
ventional  way  into  society.2  Rather  is  it  in  hu¬ 
man  nature  that  its  foundations  are  laid,  and, 
in  fact,  in  that  which,  at  once  with  common  un¬ 
derstanding,  we  may  expect  every  one  to  possess 
and  may  require  of  him,  namely,  a  native  capac¬ 
ity  for  the  feeling  for  (practical)  ideas,  i.e., 
for  moral  feeling. 

This,  now.  is  the  foundation  of  the  necessity 
of  that  agreement  between  other  men's  judge¬ 
ments  upon  the  sublime  and  our  own,  which  we 
make  our  own  imply.  For  just  as  we  taunt  a 
man  who  is  quite  inappreciative  when  forming 
an  estimate  of  an  object  of  nature  in  which  we 
see  beauty,  with  want  of  taste ,  so  we  say  of  a 
man  who  remains  unaffected  in  the  presence  of 
what  we  consider  sublime,  that  he  has  no  feel¬ 
ing.3  But  we  demand  both  taste  and  feeling  of 
every  man.  and,  granted  some  degree  of  culture, 
we  give  him  credit  for  both.  Still,  we  do  so  with 
this  difference:  that,  in  the  case  of  the  former, 
since  judgement  there  refers  the  imagination 
merely  to  the  understanding,  as  the  faculty  of 
concepts,  we  make  the  requirement  as  a  matter 
of  course,  whereas  in  the  case  of  the  latter,  since 
here  the  judgement  refers  the  imagination  to 
reason,  as  a  faculty  of  ideas,  we  do  so  only  un¬ 
der  a  subjective  presupposition  (which,  how¬ 
ever.  we  believe  we  are  warranted  in  making), 
namely,  that  of  the  moral  feeling  in  man.  And, 
on  this  assumption,  we  attribute  necessity  to 
the  latter  aesthetic  judgement  also. 

In  this  modality  of  aesthetic  judgements, 
namely,  their  assumed  necessity,  lies  what  is  for 
the  Critique  of  Judgement  a  moment  of  capital 
importance.  For  this  is  exactly  what  makes  an 
a  priori  principle  apparent  in  their  case,  and  lifts 
them  out  of  the  sphere  of  empirical  psychology, 
in  which  otherwise  they  would  remain  buried 
amid  the  feelings  of  gratification  and  pain  (only 
with  the  senseless  epithet  of  finer  feeling),  so 
as  to  place  them,  and,  thanks  to  them,  to  place 
the  faculty  of  judgement  itself,  in  the  class  of 
judgements  of  which  the  basis  of  an  a  priori 

2  [Cf.  p.  493.] 

3  [Cf.  pp.  523;  549,  et  seq .] 


THE  CRITIQUE 


506 

principle  is  the  distinguishing  feature,  and,  thus 
distinguished,  to  introduce  them  into  transcen¬ 
dental  philosophy. 

General  Remark  upon  the  Exposition  of 
Aesthetic  Reflective  Judgements 

In  relation  to  the  feeling  of  pleasure  an  object 
is  to  be  counted  either  as  agreeable ,  or  beautiful , 
or  sublime ,  or  good  (absolutely),  (incundum, 
pulchrum,  sublime ,  honestum). 

As  the  motive  of  desires  the  agreeable  is  in¬ 
variably  of  one  and  the  same  kind,  no  matter 
what  its  source  or  how  specifically  different  the 
representation  (of  sense  and  sensation  objec¬ 
tively  considered).  Hence  in  estimating  its  in¬ 
fluence  upon  the  mind,  the  multitude  of  its 
charms  (simultaneous  or  successive)  is  alone 
revelant,  and  so  only,  as  it  were,  the  mass  of  the 
agreeable  sensation,  and  it  is  only  by  the  quan¬ 
tity ,  therefore,  that  this  can  be  made  intelligible. 
Further  it  in  no  way  conduces  to  our  culture, 
but  belongs  only  to  mere  enjoyment.  The  beau¬ 
tiful .  on  the  other  hand,  requires  the  represen¬ 
tation  of  a  certain  quality  of  the  object,  that 
permits  also  of  being  understood  and  reduced 
to  concepts  (although  in  the  aesthetic  judgement 
it  is  not  so  reduced),  and  it  cultivates,  as  it  in¬ 
structs  us  to  attend  to  finality  in  the  feeling  of 
pleasure.  The  sublime  consists  merely  in  the 
relation  exhibited  by  the  estimate  of  the  serv¬ 
iceability  of  the  sensible  in  the  representation 
of  nature  for  a  possible  supersensible  employ¬ 
ment.  The  absolutely  good ,  estimated  subjec¬ 
tively  according  to  the  feeling  it  inspires  (the 
object  of  the  moral  feeling),  as  the  determin- 
ability  of  the  powers  of  the  subject  by  means 
of  the  representation  of  an  absolutely  necessi¬ 
tating  law,  is  principally  distinguished  by  the 
modality  of  a  necessity  resting  upon  concepts 
a  priori ,  and  involving  not  a  mere  claim,  but  a 
command  upon  every  one  to  assent,  and  belongs 
intrinsically  not  to  the  aesthetic,  but  to  the  pure 
intellectual  judgement.  Further,  it  is  not  as¬ 
cribed  to  nature  but  to  freedom,  and  that  in  a 
determinant  and  not  a  merely  reflective  judge¬ 
ment.  But  the  deter minability  of  the  subject 
by  means  of  this  idea,  and,  what  is  more,  that 
of  a  subject  which  can  be  sensible,  in  the  way 
of  a  modification  of  its  state,  to  hindrances  on 
the  part  of  sensibility,  while,  at  the  same  time, 
it  can  by  surmounting  them  feel  superiority 
over  them — a  determinability,  in  other  words, 
as  moral  feeling — is  still  so  allied  to  aesthetic 
judgement  and  its  formal  conditions  as  to  be 
capable  of  being  pressed  into  the  service  of  the 
aesthetic  representation  of  the  conformity  to 


law  of  action  from  duty,  i.e.,  of  the  representa-  t 
tion  of  this  as  sublime,  or  even  as  beautiful,  t 
without  forfeiting  its  purity — an  impossible  re¬ 
sult  were  one  to  make  it  naturally  bound  up 
with  the  feeling  of  the  agreeable. 

The  net  result  to  be  extracted  from  the  ex¬ 
position  so  far  given  of  both  kinds  of  aesthetic  > 
judgements  may  be  summed  up  in  the  following 
brief  definitions: 

The  beautiful  is  what  pleases  in  the  mere  esti¬ 
mate  formed  of  it  (consequently  not  by  inter¬ 
vention  of  any  feeling  of  sense  in  accordance 
with  a  concept  of  the  understanding).  From  this 
it  follows  at  once  that  it  must  please  apart  from 
all  interest. 

The  sublime  is  what  pleases  immediately  by 
reason  of  its  opposition  to  the  interest  of  sense. 

Both,  as  definitions  of  aesthetic  universally 
valid  estimates,  have  reference  to  subjective 
grounds.  In  the  one  case  the  reference  is  to 
grounds  of  sensibility,  in  so  far  as  these  are  final 
on  behalf  of  the  contemplative  understanding, 
in  the  other  case  in  so  far  as,  in  their  opposition 
to  sensibility,  they  are,  on  the  contrary,  final  in 
reference  to  the  ends  of  practical  reason.  Both, 
however,  as  united  in  the  same  subject,  are  final 
in  reference  to  the  moral  feeling.  The  beautiful 
prepares  us  to  love  something,  even  nature, 
apart  from  any  interest:  the  sublime  to  esteem 
something  highly  even  in  opposition  to  our 
(sensible)  interest. 

The  sublime  may  be  described  in  this  way: 

It  is  an  object  (of  nature)  the  representation 
of  which  determines  the  mind  to  regard  the  ele¬ 
vation  of  nature  beyond  our  reach  as  equivalent 
to  a  presentation  of  ideas. 

In  a  literal  sense  and  according  to  their  logi¬ 
cal  import,  ideas  cannot  be  presented.  But  if  we 
enlarge  our  empirical  faculty  of  representation 
(mathematical  or  dynamical)  with  a  view  to 
the  intuition  of  nature,  reason  inevitably  steps 
forward,  as  the  faculty  concerned  with  the  in¬ 
dependence  of  the  absolute  totality,  and  calls 
forth  the  effort  of  the  mind,  unavailing  though 
it  be,  to  make  representation  of  sense  adequate 
to  this  totality.  This  effort,  and  the  feeling  of 
the  unattainability  of  the  idea  by  means  of  im¬ 
agination,  is  itself  a  presentation  of  the  subjec¬ 
tive  finality  of  our  mind  in  the  employment  of 
the  imagination  in  the  interests  of  the  mind’s 
supersensible  province,  and  compels  us  subjec¬ 
tively  to  think  nature  itself  in  its  totality  as  a 
presentation  of  something  supersensible,  with¬ 
out  our  being  able  to  effectuate  this  presenta¬ 
tion  objectively. 

For  we  readily  see  that  nature  in  space  and 


OF  AESTHETIC 

time  falls  entirely  short  of  the  unconditioned, 
consequently  also  of  the  absolutely  great,  which 
still  the  commonest  reason  demands.  And  by 
this  we  are  also  reminded  that  we  have  only  to 
do  with  nature  as  phenomenon,  and  that  this 
itself  must  be  regarded  as  the  mere  presentation 
of  a  nature-in-itself  (which  exists  in  the  idea 
of  reason).  But  this  idea  of  the  supersensible, 
which  no  doubt  we  cannot  further  determine — 
so  that  we  cannot  cognize  nature  as  its  presen¬ 
tation,  but  only  think  it  as  such — is  awakened 
in  us  by  an  object  the  aesthetic  estimating  of 
which  strains  the  imagination  to  its  utmost, 
whether  in  respect  of  its  extension  (mathemat¬ 
ical),  or  of  its  might  over  the  mind  (dynamical). 
For  it  is  founded  upon  the  feeling  of  a  sphere 
of  the  mind  which  altogether  exceeds  the  realm 
of  nature  (i.e.,  upon  the  moral  feeling),  with 
regard  to  which  the  representation  of  the  object 
is  estimated  as  subjectively  final. 

As  a  matter  of  fact,  a  feeling  for  the  sublime 
in  nature  is  hardly  thinkable  unless  in  associa¬ 
tion  with  an  attitude  of  mind  resembling  the 
moral.  And  though,  like  that  feeling,  the  imme¬ 
diate  pleasure  in  the  beautiful  in  nature  pre¬ 
supposes  and  cultivates  a  certain  liberality  of 
thought,  i.e.,  makes  our  delight  independent  of 
any  mere  enjoyment  of  sense,  still  it  represents 
freedom  rather  as  in  play  than  as  exercising  a 
law-ordained  junction ,  which  is  the  genuine 
characteristic  of  human  morality,  where  reason 
has  to  impose  its  dominion  upon  sensibility. 
There  is,  however,  this  qualification,  that  in  the 
aesthetic  judgement  upon  the  sublime  this  do¬ 
minion  is  represented  as  exercised  through  the 
imagination  itself  as  an  instrument  of  reason. 

Thus,  too,  delight  in  the  sublime  in  nature 
is  only  negative  (whereas  that  in  the  beautiful 
is  positive ):  that  is  to  say,  it  is  a  feeling  of 
imagination  by  its  own  act  depriving  itself  of 
its  freedom  by  receiving  a  final  determination 
in  accordance  with  a  law  other  than  that  of  its 
empirical  employment.  In  this  way  it  gains  an 
extension  and  a  might  greater  than  that  which 
it  sacrifices.  But  the  ground  of  this  is  concealed 
from  it,  and  in  its  place  it  feels  the  sacrifice  or 
deprivation,  as  well  as  its  cause,  to  which  it  is 
subjected.  The  astonishment  amounting  almost 
to  terror,  the  awe  and  thrill  of  devout  feeling, 
that  takes  hold  of  one  when  gazing  upon  the 
prospect  of  mountains  ascending  to  heaven, 
deep  ravines  and  torrents  raging  there,  deep- 
shadowed  solitudes  that  invite  to  brooding  mel¬ 
ancholy,  and  the  like — all  this,  when  we  are 
assured  of  our  own  safety,  is  not  actual  fear. 
Rather  is  it  an  attempt  to  gain  access  to  it 


JUDGEMENT  507 

through  imagination,  for  the  purpose  of  feeling 
the  might  of  this  faculty  in  combining  the  move¬ 
ment  of  the  mind  thereby  aroused  with  its  se¬ 
renity,  and  of  thus  being  superior  to  internal 
and,  therefore,  to  external,  nature,  so  far  as  the 
latter  can  have  any  bearing  upon  our  feeling  of 
well-being.  For  the  imagination,  in  accordance 
with  laws  of  association,  makes  our  state  of  con¬ 
tentment  dependent  upon  physical  conditions. 
But  acting  in  accordance  with  principles  of 
the  schematism  of  judgement  (consequently  so 
far  as  it  is  subordinated  to  freedom),  it  is  at  the 
same  time  an  instrument  of  reason  and  its  ideas. 
But  in  this  capacity  it  is  a  might  enabling  us  to 
assert  our  independence  as  against  the  influences 
of  nature,  to  degrade  what  is  great  in  respect  of 
the  latter  to  the  level  of  what  is  little,  and  thus 
to  locate  the  absolutely  great  only  in  the  proper 
estate  of  the  subject.  This  reflection  of  aesthetic 
judgement  by  which  it  raises  itself  to  the  point 
of  adequacy  with  reason,  though  without  any 
determinate  concept  of  reason,  is  still  a  repre¬ 
sentation  of  the  object  as  subjectively  final,  by 
virtue  even  of  the  objective  inadequacy  of  the 
imagination  in  its  greatest  extension  for  meeting 
the  demands  of  reason  (as  the  faculty  of  ideas). 

Here  we  have  to  attend  generally  to  what  has 
been  already  adverted  to,  that  in  the  transcen¬ 
dental  aesthetic  of  judgement  there  must  be  no 
question  of  anything  but  pure  aesthetic  judge¬ 
ments.  Consequently  examples  are  not  to  be 
selected  from  such  beautiful  or  sublime  objects 
as  presuppose  the  concept  of  an  end.  Fur  then 
the  finality  would  be  either  teleological,  or  based 
upon  mere  sensations  of  an  object  (gratification 
or  pain)  and  so,  in  the  first  case,  not  aesthetic, 
and,  in  the  second,  not  merely  formal.  So,  if 
we  call  the  sight  of  the  starry  heaven  sublime , 
we  must  not  found  our  estimate  of  it  upon  any 
concepts  of  worlds  inhabited  by  rational  beings, 
with  the  bright  spots,  which  we  see  filling  the 
space  above  us,  as  their  suns  moving  in  orbits 
prescribed  for  them  with  the  wisest  regard  to 
ends.  But  we  must  take  it,  just  as  it  strikes  the 
eye,  as  a  broad  and  all-embracing  canopy:  and 
it  is  merely  under  such  a  representation  that  we 
may  posit  the  sublimity  which  the  pure  aesthetic 
judgement  attributes  to  this  object.  Similarly, 
as  to  the  prospect  of  the  ocean,  we  are  not  to 
regard  it  as  we,  with  our  minds  stored  with 
knowledge  on  a  variety  of  matters  (which,  how¬ 
ever,  is  not  contained  in  the  immediate  intui¬ 
tion),  are  wont  to  represent  it  in  thought ,  as, 
let  us  say,  a  spacious  realm  of  aquatic  creatures, 
or  as  the  mighty  reservoirs  from  which  are 
drawn  the  vapours  that  fill  the  air  with  clouds 


THE  CRITIQUE 


of  moisture  for  the  good  of  the  land,  or  yet  as 
an  element  which  no  doubt  divides  continent 
from  continent,  but  at  the  same  time  affords 
the  means  of  the  greatest  commercial  inter¬ 
course  between  them — for  in  this  way  we  get 
nothing  beyond  teleological  judgements.  Instead 
of  this  we  must  be  able  to  see  sublimity  in  the 
ocean,  regarding  it,  as  the  poets  do,  according 
to  what  the  impression  upon  the  eye  reveals, 
as,  let  us  say,  in  its  calm,  a  clear  mirror  of  water 
bounded  only  by  the  heavens,  or,  be  it  disturbed, 
as  threatening  to  overwhelm  and  engulf  every¬ 
thing.  The  same  is  to  be  said  of  the  sublime  and 
beautiful  in  the  human  form.  Here,  for  deter¬ 
mining  grounds  of  the  judgement,  we  must  not 
have  recourse  to  concepts  of  ends  subserved 
by  all  its  limbs  and  members,  or  allow  their 
accordance  with  these  ends  to  influence  our  aes¬ 
thetic  judgement  (in  such  case  no  longer  pure), 
although  it  is  certainly  also  a  necessary  condi¬ 
tion  of  aesthetic  delight  that  they  should  not 
conflict  with  these  ends.  Aesthetic  finality  is  the 
conformity  to  law  of  judgement  in  its  freedom. 
The  delight  in  the  object  depends  upon  the  ref¬ 
erence  which  we  seek  to  give  to  the  imagination, 
subject  to  the  proviso  that  it  is  to  entertain  the 
mind  in  a  free  activity.  If,  on  the  other  hand, 
something  else — be  it  sensation  or  concept  of 
the  understanding — determines  the  judgement, 
it  is  then  conformable  to  law,  no  doubt,  but  not 
an  act  of  free  judgement. 

Hence  to  speak  of  intellectual  beauty  or  sub¬ 
limity  is  to  use  expressions  which,  in  the  first 
place,  are  not  quitecorrect.  For  these  are  aesthet¬ 
ic  modes  of  representation  which  would  be  en¬ 
tirely  foreign  to  us  were  we  merely  pure  intelli¬ 
gences  (or  if  we  even  put  ourselves  in  thought  in 
the  position  of  such).  Secondly ,  although  both, 
as  objects  of  an  intellectual  (moral)  delight,  are 
compatible  with  aesthetic  delight  to  the  extent 
of  not  resting  upon  any  interest,  still,  on  the 
other  hand,  there  is  a  difficulty  in  the  way  of 
their  alliance  with  such  delight,  since  their  func¬ 
tion  is  to  produce  an  interest,  and,  on  the  as¬ 
sumption  that  the  presentation  has  to  accord 
with  delight  in  the  aesthetic  estimate,  this  inter¬ 
est  could  only  be  effected  by  means  of  an  inter¬ 
est  of  sense  combined  with  it  in  the  presenta¬ 
tion.  But  in  this  way  the  intellectual  finality 
would  be  violated  and  rendered  impure. 

The  object  of  a  pure  and  unconditioned  intel¬ 
lectual  delight  is  the  moral  law  in  the  might 
which  it  exerts  in  us  over  all  antecedent  motives 
of  the  mind.  Now,  since  it  is  only  through  sacri¬ 
fices  that  this  might  makes  itself  known  to  us 
aesthetically  (and  this  involves  a  deprivation  of 


something — though  in  the  interest  of  inner  free¬ 
dom — whilst  in  turn  it  reveals  in  us  an  unfath¬ 
omable  depth  of  this  supersensible  faculty,  the 
consequences  of  which  extend  beyond  reach  of 
the  eye  of  sense),  it  follows  that  the  delight, 
looked  at  from  the  aesthetic  side  (in  reference 
to  sensibility)  is  negative,  i.e.,  opposed  to  this 
interest,  but  from  the  intellectual  side,  positive 
and  bound  up  with  an  interest.  Hence  it  follows 
that  the  intellectual  and  intrinsically  final 
(moral)  good,  estimated  aesthetically,  instead  of 
being  represented  as  beautiful,  must  rather  be 
represented  as  sublime,  with  the  result  that  it 
arouses  more  a  feeling  of  respect  (which  dis¬ 
dains  charm)  than  of  love  or  of  the  heart  being 
drawn  towards  it — for  human  nature  does  not 
of  its  own  proper  motion  accord  with  the  good, 
but  only  by  virtue  of  the  dominion  which  reason 
exercises  over  sensibility.  Conversely,  that,  too, 
which  we  call  sublime  in  external  nature,  or  even 
internal  nature  (e.g.,  certain  affections)  is  only 
represented  as  a  might  of  the  mind  enabling  it 
to  overcome  this  or  that  hindrance  of  sensibility 
by  means  of  moral  principles,  and  it  is  from  this 
that  it  derives  its  interest. 

I  must  dwell  a  while  on  the  latter  point.  The 
idea  of  the  good  to  which  affection  is  superadded 
is  enthusiasm.  This  state  of  mind  appears  to  be 
sublime :  so  much  so  that  there  is  a  common  say¬ 
ing  that  nothing  great  can  be  achieved  without 
it.  But  now  every  affection1  is  blind  either  as  to 
the  choice  of  its  end,  or,  supposing  this  has  been 
furnished  by  reason,  in  the  way  it  is  effected — 
for  it  is  that  mental  movement  whereby  the  ex¬ 
ercise  of  free  deliberation  upon  fundamental 
principles,  with  a  view  to  determining  oneself 
accordingly,  is  rendered  impossible.  On  this  ac¬ 
count  it  cannot  merit  any  delight  on  the  part  of 
reason.  Yet,  from  an  aesthetic  point  of  view,  en¬ 
thusiasm  is  sublime,  because  it  is  an  effort  of 
one’s  powers  called  forth  by  ideas  which  give  to 
the  mind  an  impetus  of  far  stronger  and  more 
enduring  efficacy  than  the  stimulus  afforded  by 
sensible  representations.  But  (as  seems  strange) 
even  freedom  from  affection  (apatheia,phlegma 
in  significatu  bono)  in  a  mind  that  strenuously 
follows  its  unswerving  principles  is  sublime,  and 

1  There  is  a  specific  distinction  between  affections  and 
passions.  Aftections  are  related  merely  to  feeling;  pas¬ 
sions  belong  to  the  faculty  of  desire,  and  are  inclinations 
that  hinder  or  render  impossible  all  determinability  of 
the  elective  will  by  principles.  Affections  are  impetuous 
and  irresponsible;  passions  are  abiding  and  deliberate. 
Thus  resentment,  in  the  form  of  anger,  is  an  affection; 
but  in  the  form  of  hatred  (vindictiveness)  it  is  a  pas¬ 
sion.  Under  no  circumstances  can  the  latter  be  called 
sublime;  for,  while  the  freedom  of  the  mind  is,  no 
doubt,  impeded  in  the  case  of  affection,  in  passion  it  is 
abrogated. 


OF  AESTHETIC 

that,  too,  in  a  manner  vastly  superior,  because 
it  has  at  the  same  time  the  delight  of  pure  rea¬ 
son  on  its  side.  Such  a  stamp  of  mind  is  alone 
called  noble.  This  expression,  however,  comes 
in  time  to  be  applied  to  things — such  as  build¬ 
ings,  a  garment,  literary  style,  the  carriage  of 
one’s  person,  and  the  like — provided  they  do  not 
so  much  excite  astonishment  (the  affection  at¬ 
tending  the  representation  of  novelty  exceeding 
expectation)  as  admiration  (an  astonishment 
which  does  not  cease  when  the  novelty  wears 
off) — and  this  obtains  where  ideas  undesignedly 
and  artlessly  accord  in  their  presentation  with 
aesthetic  delight. 

Every  affection  of  the  strenuous  type  (such, 
that  is,  as  excites  the  consciousness  of  our  pow¬ 
er  of  overcoming  every  resistance  [ animus 
strenuus] )  is  aesthetically  sublime,  e.g.,  anger, 
even  desperation  (the  rage  of  forlorn  hope  but 
not  faint-hearted  despair).  On  the  other  hand, 
affection  of  the  languid  type  (which  converts 
the  very  effort  of  resistance  into  an  object  of  dis¬ 
pleasure  [ animus  languidus ]  has  nothing  noble 
about  it,  though  it  may  take  its  rank  as  possess¬ 
ing  beauty  of  the  sensuous  order.  Hence  the 
emotions  capable  of  attaining  the  strength  of  an 
affection  are  very  diverse.  We  have  spirited,  and 
we  have  tender  emotions.  When  the  strength  of 
the  latter  reaches  that  of  an  affection  they  can 
be  turned  to  no  account.  The  propensity  to  in¬ 
dulge  in  them  is  sentimentality.  A  sympathetic 
grief  that  refuses  to  be  consoled,  or  one  that  has 
to  do  with  imaginary  misfortune  to  which  we 
deliberately  give  way  so  far  as  to  allow  our 
fancy  to  delude  us  into  thinking  it  actual  fact, 
indicates  and  goes  to  make  a  tender,  but  at  the 
same  time  weak,  soul,  which  shows  a  beautiful 
side,  and  may  no  doubt  be  called  fanciful,  but 
never  enthusiastic.  Romances,  maudlin  dramas, 
shallow  homilies,  which  trifle  with  so-called 
(though  falsely  so)  noble  sentiments,  but  in  fact 
make  the  heart  enervated,  insensitive  to  the 
stern  precepts  of  duty,  and  incapable  of  respect 
for  the  worth  of  humanity  in  our  own  person 
and  the  rights  of  men  (which  is  something  quite 
other  than  their  happiness),  and  in  general  in¬ 
capable  of  all  firm  principles;  even  a  religious 
discourse  which  recommends  a  cringing  and  ab¬ 
ject  grace-begging  and  favour-seeking,  abandon¬ 
ing  all  reliance  on  our  own  ability  to  resist  the 
evil  within  us,  in  place  of  the  vigorous  resolution 
to  try  to  get  the  better  of  our  inclinations  by 
means  of  those  powers  which,  miserable  sinners 
though  we  be,  are  still  left  to  us;  that  false  hu¬ 
mility  by  which  self-abasement,  whining  hypo¬ 
critical  repentance  and  a  merely  passive  frame 


JUDGEMENT  509 

of  mind  are  set  down  as  the  method  by  which 
alone  we  can  become  acceptable  to  the  Supreme 
Being — these  have  neither  lot  nor  fellowship 
with  what  may  be  reckoned  to  belong  to  beauty, 
not  to  speak  of  sublimity,  of  mental  tempera¬ 
ment. 

But  even  impetuous  movements  of  the  mind 
— be  they  allied  under  the  name  of  edification 
with  ideas  of  religion,  or,  as  pertaining  merely  to 
culture,  with  ideas  involving  a  social  interest — 
no  matter  what  tension  of  the  imagination  they 
may  produce,  can  in  no  way  lay  claim  to  the 
honour  of  a  sublime  presentation,  if  they  do  not 
leave  behind  them  a  temper  of  mind  which, 
though  it  be  only  indirectly,  has  an  influence 
upon  the  consciousness  of  the  mind’s  strength 
and  resoluteness  in  respect  of  that  which  car¬ 
ries  with  it  pure  intellectual  finality  (the  super¬ 
sensible).  For,  in  the  absence  of  this,  all  these 
emotions  belong  only  to  motion,  which  we  wel¬ 
come  in  the  interests  of  good  health.  The  agree¬ 
able  lassitude  that  follows  upon  being  stirred  up 
in  that  way  by  the  play  of  the  affections,  is  a 
fruition  of  the  state  of  well-being  arising  from 
the  restoration  of  the  equilibrium  of  the  various 
vital  forces  within  us.  This,  in  the  last  resort, 
comes  to  no  more  than  what  the  Eastern  volup¬ 
tuaries  find  so  soothing  when  they  get  their 
bodies  massaged,  and  all  their  muscles  and  joints 
softly  pressed  and  bent ;  only  that  in  the  first  case 
the  principle  that  occasions  the  movement  is 
chiefly  internal,  whereas  here  it  is  entirely  ex¬ 
ternal.  Thus,  many  a  man  believes  himself  edi¬ 
fied  by  a  sermon  in  which  there  is  no  establish¬ 
ment  of  anything  (no  system  of  good  maxims) ; 
or  thinks  himself  improved  by  a  tragedy,  when 
he  is  merely  glad  at  having  got  well  rid  of  the 
feeling  of  being  bored.  Thus  the  sublime  must  in 
every  case  have  reference  to  our  way  of  think¬ 
ing,  i.e.,  to  maxims  directed  to  giving  the  intel¬ 
lectual  side  of  our  nature  and  the  ideas  of  reason 
supremacy  over  sensibility. 

We  have  no  reason  to  fear  that  the  feeling  of 
the  sublime  will  suffer  from  an  abstract  mode  of 
presentation  like  this,  which  is  altogether  nega¬ 
tive  as  to  what  is  sensuous.  For  though  the  im¬ 
agination,  no  doubt,  finds  nothing  beyond  the 
sensible  world  to  which  it  can  lay  hold,  still  this 
thrusting  aside  of  the  sensible  barriers  gives  it  a 
feeling  of  being  unbounded;  and  that  removal  is 
thus  a  presentation  of  the  infinite.  As  such  it 
can  never  be  anything  more  than  a  negative 
presentation — but  still  it  expands  the  soul.  Per¬ 
haps  there  is  no  more  sublime  passage  in  the 
Jewish  Law  than  the  commandment:  “Thou 
shalt  not  make  unto  thee  any  graven  image,  or 


THE  CRITIQUE 


any  likeness  of  any  thing  that  is  in  heaven  or  on 
earth,  or  under  the  earth,  etc.”  This  command¬ 
ment  can  alone  explain  the  enthusiasm  which 
the  Jewish  people,  in  their  moral  period,  felt  for 
their  religion  when  comparing  themselves  with 
others,  or  the  pride  inspired  by  Mohammedan¬ 
ism.  The  very  same  holds  good  of  our  represen¬ 
tation  of  the  moral  law  and  of  our  native  capac¬ 
ity  for  morality.  The  fear  that,  if  we  divest  this 
representation  of  everything  that  can  commend 
it  to  the  senses,  it  will  thereupon  be  attended 
only  with  a  cold  and  lifeless  approbation  and  not 
with  any  moving  force  or  emotion,  is  wholly  un¬ 
warranted.  The  very  reverse  is  the  truth.  For 
when  nothing  any  longer  meets  the  eye  of  sense, 
and  the  unmistakable  and  ineffaceable  idea  of 
morality  is  left  in  possession  of  the  field,  there 
would  be  need  rather  of  tempering  the  ardour  of 
an  unbounded  imagination  to  prevent  it  rising  to 
enthusiasm,  than  of  seeking  to  lend  these  ideas 
the  aid  of  images  and  childish  devices  for  fear 
of  their  being  wanting  in  potency.  For  this  rea¬ 
son,  governments  have  gladly  let  religion  be 
fully  equipped  with  these  accessories,  seeking  in 
this  way  to  relieve  their  subjects  of  the  exertion, 
but  to  deprive  them,  at  the  same  time,  of  the 
ability,  required  for  expanding  their  spiritual 
powers  beyond  the  limits  arbitrarily  laid  down 
for  them,  and  which  facilitate  their  being  treat¬ 
ed  as  though  they  were  merely  passive. 

This  pure,  elevating,  merely  negative  presen¬ 
tation  of  morality  involves,  on  the  other  hand, 
no  fear  of  fanaticism ,  which  is  a  delusion  that 
would  will  some  vision  beyond  all  the  bounds  of 
sensibility;  i.e.,  would  dream  according  to  prin¬ 
ciples  (rational  raving).  The  safeguard  is  the 
purely  negative  character  of  the  presentation. 
For  the  inscrutability  of  the  idea  of  freedom 
precludes  all  positive  presentation.  The  moral 
law,  however,  is  a  sufficient  and  original  source 
of  determination  within  us:  so  it  does  not  for  a 
moment  permit  us  to  cast  about  for  a  ground  of 
determination  external  to  itself.  If  enthusiasm  is 
comparable  to  delirium ,  fanaticism  may  be  com¬ 
pared  to  mania.  Of  these,  the  latter  is  least  of  all 
compatible  with  the  sublime,  for  it  is  profound¬ 
ly  ridiculous.  In  enthusiasm,  as  an  affection,  the 
imagination  is  unbridled;  in  fanaticism,  as  a 
deep-seated,  brooding  passion,  it  is  anomalous. 
The  first  is  a  transitory  accident  to  which  the 
healthiest  understanding  is  liable  to  become  at 
times  the  victim;  the  second  is  an  undermining 
disease. 

Simplicity  (artless  finality)  is,  as  it  were,  the 
style  adopted  by  nature  in  the  sublime.  It  is  also 
that  of  morality.  The  latter  is  a  second  (super¬ 


sensible)  nature,  whose  laws  alone  we  know, 
without  being  able  to  attain  to  an  intuition  of 
the  supersensible  faculty  within  us — that  which 
contains  the  ground  of  this  legislation. 

One  further  remark.  The  delight  in  the  sub¬ 
lime,  no  less  than  in  the  beautiful,  by  reason  of 
its  universal  communicability  not  alone  is  plain¬ 
ly  distinguished  from  other  aesthetic  judgements, 
but  also  from  this  same  property  acquires  an  in¬ 
terest  in  society  (in  which  it  admits  of  such 
communication).  Yet,  despite  this,  we  have  to 
note  the  fact  that  isolation  from  all  society  is 
looked  upon  as  something  sublime,  provided  it 
rests  upon  ideas  which  disregard  all  sensible  in¬ 
terest.  To  be  self-sufficing,  and  so  not  to  stand  in 
need  of  society,  yet  without  being  unsociable, 
i.e.,  without  shunning  it,  is  something  approach¬ 
ing  the  sublime — a  remark  applicable  to  all  su¬ 
periority  to  wants.  On  the  other  hand,  to  shun 
our  fellow  men  from  misanthropy,  because  of 
enmity  towards  them,  or  from  anthropophobia, 
because  we  imagine  the  hand  of  every  man  is 
against  us,  is  partly  odious,  partly  contemptible. 
There  is,  however,  a  misanthropy  (most  improp¬ 
erly  so  called),  the  tendency  towards  which  is  to 
be  found  with  advancing  years  in  many  right- 
minded  men,  that,  as  far  as  good  will  goes,  is  no 
doubt,  philanthropic  enough,  but  as  the  result 
of  long  and  sad  experience,  is  widely  removed 
from  delight  in  mankind.  We  see  evidences  of 
this  in  the  propensity  to  recluseness,  in  the  fan¬ 
ciful  desire  for  a  retired  country  seat,  or  else 
(with  the  young)  in  the  dream  of  the  happiness 
of  being  able  to  spend  one’s  life  with  a  little 
family  on  an  island  unknown  to  the  rest  of  the 
world — material  of  which  novelists  or  writers 
of  Robinsonades  know  how  to  make  such  good 
use.  Falsehood,  ingratitude,  injustice,  the  pueril¬ 
ity  of  the  ends  which  we  ourselves  look  upon  as 
great  and  momentous,  and  to  compass  which 
man  inflicts  upon  his  brother  man  all  imaginable 
evils — these  all  so  contradict  the  idea  of  what 
men  might  be  if  they  only  would,  and  are  so  at 
variance  with  our  active  wish  to  see  them  better, 
that,  to  avoid  hating  where  we  cannot  love,  it 
seems  but  a  slight  sacrifice  to  forego  all  the  joys 
of  fellowship  with  our  kind.  This  sadness,  which 
is  not  directed  to  the  evils  which  fate  brings 
down  upon  others  (a  sadness  which  springs  from 
sympathy),  but  to  those  which  they  inflict  upon 
themselves  (one  which  is  based  on  antipathy  in 
questions  of  principle),  is  sublime  because  it  is 
founded  on  ideas,  whereas  that  springing  from 
sympathy  can  only  be  accounted  beautiful.  Sas- 
sure,  who  was  no  less  ingenious  than  profound, 
in  the  description  of  his  Alpine  travels  remarks 


OF  AESTHETIC  JUDGEMENT 


of  Bonhomme,  one  of  the  Savoy  mountains: 
“There  reigns  there  a  certain  insipid  sadness  .” 
He  recognized,  therefore,  that,  besides  this,  there 
is  an  interesting  sadness,  such  as  is  inspired  by 
the  sight  of  some  desolate  place  into  which  men 
might  fain  withdraw  themselves  so  as  to  hear  no 
more  of  the  world  without,  and  be  no  longer 
versed  in  its  affairs,  a  place,  however,  which 
must  yet  not  be  so  altogether  inhospitable  as 
only  to  afford  a  most  miserable  retreat  for  a 
human  being.  I  only  make  this  observation  as  a 
reminder  that  even  melancholy,  (but  not  dispir¬ 
ited  sadness),  may  take  its  place  among  the  vig¬ 
orous  affections,  provided  it  has  its  root  in  moral 
ideas.  If,  however,  it  is  grounded  upon  sym¬ 
pathy,  and,  as  such,  is  lovable,  it  belongs  only  to 
the  languid  affections.  And  this  serves  to  call  at¬ 
tention  to  the  mental  temperament  which  in  the 
first  case  alone  is  sublime. 

The  transcendental  exposition  of  aesthetic 
judgements  now  brought  to  a  close  may  be  com¬ 
pared  with  the  physiological,  as  worked  out  by 
Burke  and  many  acute  men  among  us,  so  that 
we  may  see  where  a  merely  empirical  exposition 
of  the  sublime  and  beautiful  would  bring  us. 
Burke,1  who  deserves  to  be  called  the  foremost 
author  in  this  method  of  treatment,  deduces,  on 
these  lines,  “that  the  feeling  of  the  sublime  is 
grounded  on  the  impulse  towards  self-preserva¬ 
tion  and  on  fear ,  i.e.,  on  a  pain,  which,  since  it 
does  not  go  the  length  of  disordering  the  bodily 
parts,  calls  forth  movements  which,  as  they 
clear  the  vessels,  whether  fine  or  gross,  of  a  dan¬ 
gerous  and  troublesome  encumbrance,  are  ca¬ 
pable  of  producing  delight;  not  pleasure  but  a 
sort  of  delightful  horror,  a  sort  of  tranquil¬ 
lity  tinged  with  terror.”  The  beautiful,  which 
he  grounds  on  love  (from  which,  still,  he  would 
have  desire  kept  separate),  he  reduces  to 
“the  relaxing,  slackening,  and  enervating  of 
the  fibres  of  the  body,  and  consequently  a 
softening,  a  dissolving,  a  languor,  and  a  fainting, 
dying,  and  melting  away  for  pleasure.”  And  this 
explanation  he  supports,  not  alone  by  instances 
in  which  the  feeling  of  the  beautiful  as  well  as  of 
the  sublime  is  capable  of  being  excited  in  us  by 
the  imagination  in  conjunction  with  the  under¬ 
standing,  but  even  by  instances  when  it  is  in  con¬ 
junction  with  sensations.  As  psychological  ob¬ 
servations,  these  analyses  of  our  mental  phe¬ 
nomena  are  extremely  fine,  and  supply  a  wealth 
of  material  for  the  favourite  investigations  of 

1  See  p.  223  of  the  German  translation  of  his  work: 
Philosophical  Investigations  as  to  the  Origin  of  our 
Conceptions  of  the  Beautiful  and  Sublime.  Riga,  pub¬ 
lished  by  Hartknock,  1773. 


511 

empirical  anthropology.  But,  besides  that,  there 
is  no  denying  the  fact  that  all  representations 
within  us,  no  matter  whether  they  are  objective¬ 
ly  merely  sensible  or  wholly  intellectual,  are  still 
subjectively  associable  with  gratification  or  pain, 
however  imperceptible  either  of  these  may  be. 
(For  these  representations  one  and  all  have  an 
influence  on  the  feeling  of  life,  and  none  of  them, 
so  far  as  it  is  a  modification  of  the  subject,  can 
be  indifferent.)  We  must  even  admit  that,  as 
Epicurus  maintained,  gratification  and  pain 
though  proceeding  from  the  imagination  or  even 
from  representations  of  the  understanding,  are 
always  in  the  last  resort  corporeal,  since  apart 
from  any  feeling  of  the  bodily  organ  life  would 
be  merely  a  consciousness  of  one’s  existence, 
and  could  not  include  any  feeling  of  well-being 
or  the  reverse,  i.e.,  of  the  furtherance  or  hin¬ 
drance  of  the  vital  forces.  For,  of  itself  alone, 
the  mind  is  all  life  (the  life-principle  itself),  and 
hindrance  or  furtherance  has  to  be  sought  out¬ 
side  it,  and  yet  in  the  man  himself  consequently 
in  the  connection  with  his  body. 

But  if  we  attribute  the  delight  in  the  object 
wholly  and  entirely  to  the  gratification  which  it 
affords  through  charm  or  emotion,  then  we  must 
not  exact  from  any  one  else  agreement  with  the 
aesthetic  judgement  passed  by  us.  For,  in  such 
matters  each  person  rightly  consults  his  own 
personal  feeling  alone.  But  in  that  case  there  is  an 
end  of  all  censorship  of  taste — unless  the  exam¬ 
ple  afforded  by  others  as  the  result  of  a  contin¬ 
gent  coincidence  of  their  judgements  is  to  be 
held  over  us  as  commanding  our  assent.  But  this 
principle  we  would  presumably  resent,  and  ap¬ 
peal  to  our  natural  right  of  submitting  a  judge¬ 
ment  to  our  own  sense,  where  it  rests  upon  the 
immediate  feeling  of  personal  well-being,  in¬ 
stead  of  submitting  it  to  that  of  others. 

Hence  if  the  import  of  the  judgement  of  taste, 
where  we  appraise  it  as  a  judgement  entitled  to 
require  the  concurrence  of  every  one,  cannot  be 
egoistic ,  but  must  necessarily,  from  its  inner  na¬ 
ture,  be  allowed  a  pluralistic  validity,  i.e.,  on  ac¬ 
count  of  what  taste  itself  is,  and  not  on  account 
of  the  examples  which  others  give  of  their  taste, 
then  it  must  found  upon  some  a  priori  principle 
(be  it  subjective  or  objective),  and  no  amount 
of  prying  into  the  empirical  laws  of  the  changes 
that  go  on  within  the  mind  can  succeed  in  estab¬ 
lishing  such  a  principle.  For  these  laws  only 
yield  a  knowledge  of  how  we  do  judge,  but  they 
do  not  give  us  a  command  as  to  how  we  ought  to 
judge,  and,  what  is  more,  such  a  command  as  is 
unconditioned — and  commands  of  this  kind  are 
presupposed  by  judgements  of  taste,  inasmuch 


512  THE  CRITIQUE 


as  they  require  delight  to  be  taken  as  immedi¬ 
ately  connected  with  a  representation.  Accord¬ 
ingly,  though  the  empirical  exposition  of  aes¬ 
thetic  judgements  may  be  a  first  step  towards 
accumulating  the  material  for  a  higher  investi¬ 
gation,  yet  a  transcendental  examination  of  this 
faculty  is  possible,  and  forms  an  essential  part 
of  the  Critique  of  Taste.  For,  were  not  taste  in 
possession  of  a  priori  principles,  it  could  not  pos¬ 
sibly  sit  in  judgement  upon  the  judgements  of 
others  and  pass  sentence  of  commendation  or 
condemnation  upon  them,  with  even  the  least 
semblance  of  authority. 

The  remaining  part  of  the  Analytic  of  the 
aesthetic  judgement  contains  first  of  all  the: 

Deduction  of  Pure  Aesthetic  Judgements 

§  30.  The  deduction  of  aesthetic  judgements 

upon  objects  of  nature  must  not  be  directed 

to  what  we  call  sublime  in  nature,  but  only  to 

the  beautiful 

The  claim  of  an  aesthetic  judgement  to  uni¬ 
versal  validity  for  every  subject,  being  a  judge¬ 
ment  which  must  rely  on  some  a  priori  principle, 
stands  in  need  of  a  deduction  (i.e.,  a  derivation 
of  its  title).  Further,  where  the  delight  or  aver¬ 
sion  turns  on  the  form  of  the  object  this  has  to 
be  something  over  and  above  the  exposition  of 
the  judgement.  Such  is  the  case  with  judgements 
of  taste  upon  the  beautiful  in  nature.  For  there 
the  finality  has  its  foundation  in  the  object  and 
its  outward  form — although  it  does  not  signify 
the  reference  of  this  to  other  objects  according 
to  concepts  (for  the  purpose  of  cognitive  judge¬ 
ments),  but  is  merely  concerned  in  general  with 
the  apprehension  of  this  form  so  far  as  it  proves 
accordant  in  the  mind  with  the  faculty  of  con¬ 
cepts  as  well  as  with  that  of  their  presentation 
(which  is  identical  with  that  of  apprehension). 
With  regard  to  the  beautiful  in  nature,  there¬ 
fore,  we  may  start  a  number  of  questions  touch¬ 
ing  the  cause  of  this  finality  of  their  forms:  e.g., 
how  we  are  to  explain  why  nature  has  scattered 
beauty  abroad  with  so  lavish  a  hand,  even  in  the 
depth  of  the  ocean  where  it  can  but  seldom  be 
reached  by  the  eye  of  man — for  which  alone  it 
is  final? 

But  the  sublime  in  nature — if  we  pass  upon  it 
a  pure  aesthetic  judgement  unmixed  with  con¬ 
cepts  of  perfection,  as  objective  finality,  which 
would  make  the  judgement  teleological — may 
be  regarded  as  completely  wanting  in  form  or 
figure,  and  none  the  less  be  looked  upon  as  an 
object  of  pure  delight,  and  indicate  a  subjective 
finality  of  the  given  representation.  So,  now,  the 


question  suggests  itself,  whether  in  addition  to 
the  exposition  of  what  is  thought  in  an  aesthetic 
judgement  of  this  kind,  we  may  be  called  upon 
to  give  a  deduction  of  its  claim  to  some  (subjec¬ 
tive)  a  priori  principle. 

This  we  may  meet  with  the  reply  that  the  sub¬ 
lime  in  nature  is  improperly  so  called,  and  that 
sublimity  should,  in  strictness,  be  attributed 
merely  to  the  attitude  of  thought,  or,  rather, 
to  that  which  serves  as  basis  for  this  in  human 
nature.  The  apprehension  of  an  object  otherwise 
formless  and  in  conflict  with  ends  supplies  the 
mere  occasion1  for  our  coming  to  a  conscious¬ 
ness  of  this  basis;  and  the  object  is  in  this  way 
put  to  a  subjectively-final  use,  but  it  is  not  esti¬ 
mated  as  subjectively-final  on  its  own  account 
and  because  of  its  form.  (It  is,  as  it  were,  a  spe¬ 
cies  finalis  accepta,  non  data.)  Consequently  the 
exposition  we  gave  of  judgements  upon  the  sub¬ 
lime  in  nature  was  at  the  same  time  their  deduc¬ 
tion.  For,  in  our  analysis  of  the  reflection  on  the 
part  of  judgement  in  this  case,  we  found  that  in 
such  judgements  there  is  a  final  relation  of  the 
cognitive  faculties,  which  has  to  be  laid  a  priori 
at  the  basis  of  the  faculty  of  ends  (the  will),  and 
which  is  therefore  itself  a  priori  final.  This,  then, 
at  once  involves  the  deduction,  i.e.,  the  justifica¬ 
tion  of  the  claim  of  such  a  judgement  to  univer- 
sally-necessary  validity. 

Hence  we  may  confine  our  search  to  one  for 
the  deduction  of  judgements  of  taste,  i.e.,  of 
judgements  upon  the  beauty  of  things  of  nature, 
and  this  will  satisfactorily  dispose  of  the  prob¬ 
lem  for  the  entire  aesthetic  faculty  of  judge¬ 
ment. 

§  31.  Of  the  method  of  the  deduction  of 
judgements  of  taste 

The  obligation  to  furnish  a  deduction,  i.e.,  a 
guarantee  of  the  legitimacy  of  judgements  of  a 
particular  kind,  only  arises  where  the  judgement 
lays  claim  to  necessity.  This  is  the  case  even 
where  it  requires  subjective  universality,  i.e., 
the  concurrence  of  every  one,  albeit  the  judge¬ 
ment  is  not  a  cognitive  judgement,  but  only  one 
of  pleasure  or  displeasure  in  a  given  object,  i.e., 
an  assumption  of  a  subjective  finality  that  has 
a  thoroughgoing  validity  for  every  one,  and 
which,  since  the  judgement  is  one  of  taste,  is 
not  to  be  grounded  upon  any  concept  of  the 
thing. 

Now.  in  the  latter  case,  we  are  not  dealing 
with  a  judgement  of  cognition — neither  with  a 
theoretical  one  based  on  the  concept  of  a  na¬ 
ture  in  general,  supplied  by  understanding,  nor 

![Cf.P.  518.] 


OF  AESTHETIC 


with  a  (pure)  practical  one  based  on  the  idea  of 
freedom ,  as  given  a  priori  by  reason — and  so  we 
are  not  called  upon  to  justify  a  priori  the  valid¬ 
ity  of  a  judgement  which  represents  either  what 
a  thing  is,  or  that  there  is  something  which  I 
ought  to  do  in  order  to  produce  it.  Consequent¬ 
ly,  if  for  judgement  generally  we  demonstrate 
the  universal  validity  of  a  singular  judgement 
expressing  the  subjective  finality  of  an  empirical 
representation  of  the  form  of  an  object,  we  shall 
do  all  that  is  needed  to  explain  how  it  is  possible 
that  something  can  please  in  the  mere  formation 
of  an  estimate  of  it  (without  sensation  or  con¬ 
cept),  and  how,  just  as  the  estimate  of  an  object 
for  the  sake  of  a  cognition  generally  has  univer¬ 
sal  rules,  the  delight  of  any  one  person  may  be 
pronounced  as  a  rule  for  every  other. 

Now  if  this  universal  validity  is  not  to  be 
based  on  a  collection  of  votes  and  interrogation 
of  others  as  to  what  sort  of  sensations  they  ex¬ 
perience,  but  is  to  rest,  as  it  were,  upon  an  au¬ 
tonomy  of  the  subject  passing  judgement  on  the 
feeling  of  pleasure  (in  the  given  representa¬ 
tion),  i.e.,  upon  his  own  taste,  and  yet  is  also  not 
to  be  derived  from  concepts;  then  it  follows 
that  such  a  judgement — and  such  the  judgement 
of  taste  in  fact  is — has  a  double  and  also  logical 
peculiarity.  For,  first ,  it  has  universal  validity  a 
priori,  yet  without  having  a  logical  universality 
according  to  concepts,  but  only  the  universality 
of  a  singular  judgement.  Secondly ,  it  has  a  ne¬ 
cessity  (which  must  invariably  rest  upon  a  pri¬ 
ori  grounds),  but  one  which  depends  upon  no  a 
priori  proofs  by  the  representation  of  which  it 
would  be  competent  to  enforce  the  assent  which 
the  judgement  of  taste  demands  of  every  one. 

The  solution  of  these  logical  peculiarities, 
which  distinguish  a  judgement  of  taste  from  all 
cognitive  judgements,  will  of  itself  suffice  for  a 
deduction  of  this  strange  faculty,  provided  we 
abstract  at  the  outset  from  all  content  of  the 
judgement,  viz.,  from  the  feeling  of  pleasure, 
and  merely  compare  the  aesthetic  form  with  the 
form  of  objective  judgements  as  prescribed  by 
logic.1  We  shall  first  try,  with  the  help  of  exam¬ 
ples,  to  illustrate  and  bring  out  these  character¬ 
istic  properties  of  taste. 

§32.  First  peculiarity  of  the  judgement 
of  taste 

The  judgement  of  taste  determines  its  object 
in  respect  of  delight  (as  a  thing  of  beauty)  with 
a  claim  to  the  agreement  of  every  one,  just  as  if 
it  were  objective. 

To  say:  “This  flower  is  beautiful,”  is  tanta- 

1  [Cf.  p.476.] 


JUDGEMENT  513 

mount  to  repeating  its  own  proper  claim  to  the 
delight  of  everyone.  The  agreeableness  of  its 
smell  gives  it  no  claim  at  all.  One  man  revels  in 
it,  but  it  gives  another  a  headache.  Now  what 
else  are  we  to  suppose  from  this  than  that  its 
beauty  is  to  be  taken  for  a  property  of  the  flower 
itself2  which  does  not  adapt  itself  to  the  diver¬ 
sity  of  heads  and  the  individual  senses  of  the 
multitude,  but  to  which  they  must  adapt  them¬ 
selves,  if  they  are  going  to  pass  judgement  upon 
it.  And  yet  this  is  not  the  way  the  matter  stands. 
For  the  judgement  of  taste  consists  precisely  in 
a  thing  being  called  beautiful  solely  in  respect  of 
that  quality  in  which  it  adapts  itself  to  our  mode 
of  taking  it  in. 

Besides,  every  judgement  which  is  to  show 
the  taste  of  the  individual,  is  required  to  be  an 
independent  judgement  of  the  individual  him¬ 
self.  There  must  be  no  need  of  groping  about 
among  other  people’s  judgements  and  getting 
previous  instruction  from  their  delight  in  or 
aversion  to  the  same  object.  Consequently  his 
judgement  should  be  given  out  a  priori,  and  not 
as  an  imitation  relying  on  the  general  pleasure  a 
thing  gives  as  a  matter  of  fact.  One  would  think, 
however,  that  a  judgement  a  priori  must  involve 
a  concept  of  the  object  for  the  cognition  of 
which  it  contains  the  principle.  But  the  judge¬ 
ment  of  taste  is  not  founded  on  concepts,  and  is 
in  no  way  a  cognition,  but  only  an  aesthetic 
judgement. 

Hence  it  is  that  a  youthful  poet  refuses  to  al¬ 
low  himself  to  be  dissuaded  from  the  conviction 
that  his  poem  is  beautiful,  either  by  the  judge¬ 
ment  of  the  public  or  of  his  friends.  And  even  if 
he  lends  them  an  ear,  he  does  so,  not  because  he 
has  now  come  to  a  different  judgement,  but  be¬ 
cause,  though  the  whole  public,  at  least  so  far 
as  his  work  is  concerned,  should  have  false  taste, 
he  still,  in  his  desire  for  recognition,  finds  good 
reason  to  accommodate  himself  to  the  popular 
error  (even  against  his  own  judgement).  It  is 
only  in  aftertime,  when  his  judgement  has  been 
sharpened  by  exercise,  that  of  his  own  free  will 
and  accord  he  deserts  his  former  judgements — 
behaving  in  just  the  same  way  as  with  those  of 
his  judgements  which  depend  wholly  upon  rea¬ 
son.  Taste  lays  claim  simply  to  autonomy.  To 
make  the  judgements  of  others  the  determining 
ground  of  one’s  own  would  be  heteronomy. 

The  fact  that  we  recommend  the  works  of  the 
ancients  as  models,  and  rightly  too,  and  call 
their  authors  classical,  as  constituting  a  sort  of 
nobility  among  writers  that  leads  the  way  and 
thereby  gives  laws  to  the  people,  seems  to  indi- 

2  [Cf.  pp.  480,  544.] 


THE  CRITIQUE 


cate  a  posteriori  sources  of  taste  and  to  contra¬ 
dict  the  autonomy  of  taste  in  each  individual, 
But  we  might  just  as  well  say  that  the  ancient 
mathematicians,  who,  to  this  day,  are  looked 
upon  as  the  almost  indispensable  models  of  per¬ 
fect  thoroughness  and  elegance  in  synthetic 
methods,  prove  that  reason  also  is  on  our  part 
only  imitative,  and  that  it  is  incompetent  with 
the  deepest  intuition  to  produce  of  itself  rigor¬ 
ous  proofs  by  means  of  the  construction  of  con¬ 
cepts.  There  is  no  employment  of  our  powers,  no 
matter  how  free,  not  even  of  reason  itself 
(which  must  create  all  its  judgements  from  the 
common  a  priori  source),  which,  if  each  indi¬ 
vidual  had  always  to  start  afresh  with  the  crude 
equipment  of  his  natural  state,  would  not  get  it¬ 
self  involved  in  blundering  attempts,  did  not 
those  of  others  lie  before  it  as  a  warning.  Not 
that  predecessors  make  those  who  follow  in  their 
steps  mere  imitators,  but  by  their  methods  they 
set  others  upon  the  track  of  seeking  in  them¬ 
selves  for  the  principles,  and  so  of  adopting 
their  own,  often  better,  course.  Even  in  religion 
— where  undoubtedly  every  one  has  to  derive 
his  rule  of  conduct  from  himself,  seeing  that  he 
himself  remains  responsible  for  it  and,  when  he 
goes  wrong,  cannot  shift  the  blame  upon  others 
as  teachers  or  leaders — general  precepts  learned 
at  the  feet  either  of  priests  or  philosophers,  or 
even  drawn  from  ones’  own  resources,  are  never 
so  efficacious  as  an  example  of  virtue  or  holi¬ 
ness,  which,  historically  portrayed,  does  not  dis¬ 
pense  with  the  autonomy  of  virtue  drawn  from 
the  spontaneous  and  original  idea  of  morality  (a 
priori ),  or  convert  this  into  a  mechanical  process 
of  imitation.  Following  which  has  reference  to  a 
precedent,  and  not  imitation,  is  the  proper  ex¬ 
pression  for  all  influence  which  the  products  of 
an  exemplary  author  may  exert  upon  others — 
and  this  means  no  more  than  going  to  the  same 
sources  for  a  creative  work  as  those  to  which 
he  went  for  his  creations,  and  learning  from 
one’s  predecessor  no  more  than  the  mode  of 
availing  oneself  of  such  sources.  Taste,  just  be¬ 
cause  its  judgement  cannot  be  determined  by 
concepts  or  precepts,  is  among  all  faculties  and 
talents  the  very  one  that  stands  most  in  need 
of  examples  of  what  has  in  the  course  of  culture 
maintained  itself  longest  in  esteem.  Thus  it 
avoids  an  early  lapse  into  crudity  and  a  return 
to  the  rudeness  of  its  earliest  efforts. 

§33.  Second  peculiarity  of  the  judgement 
of  taste 

Proofs  are  of  no  avail  whatever  for  determin¬ 
ing  the  judgement  of  taste,  and  in  this  connec¬ 


tion  matters  stand  just  as  they  would  were  that 
judgement  simply  subjective. 

li  any  one  does  not  think  a  building,  view,  or 
poem  beautiful,  then,  in  the  first  place,  he  re-  t 
fuses,  so  far  as  his  inmost  conviction  goes,  to  4 
allow  approval  to  be  wrung  from  him  by  a  hun¬ 
dred  voices  all  lauding  it  to  the  skies.  Of  course 
he  may  affect  to  be  pleased  with  it,  so  as  not  to 
be  considered  as  wanting  in  taste.  He  may  even  *, 
begin  to  harbour  doubts  as  to  whether  he  has  j 
formed  his  taste  upon  an  acquaintance  with  a 
sufficient  number  of  objects  of  a  particular  kind 
(just  as  one  who  in  the  distance  recognizes,  as  \ 
he  believes,  something  as  a  wood  which  every  [ 
one  else  regards  as  a  town,  becomes  doubtful  of  f 
the  judgement  of  his  own  eyesight).  But,  for  all  T 
that,  he  clearly  perceives  that  the  approval  of  , 
others  affords  no  valid  proof,  available  for  the 
estimate  of  beauty.  He  recognizes  that  others,  , 
perchance,  may  see  and  observe  for  him,  and  , 
that  what  many  have  seen  in  one  and  the  same 
way  may,  for  the  purpose  of  a  theoretical,  and 
therefore  logical,  judgement,  serve  as  an  ade¬ 
quate  ground  of  proof  for  him,  albeit  he  believes 
he  saw  otherwise,  but  that  what  has  pleased  oth-  f 
ers  can  never  serve  him  as  the  ground  of  an  , 
aesthetic  judgement.  The  judgement  of  others, 
where  unfavourable  to  ours,  may,  no  doubt, 
rightly  make  us  suspicious  in  respect  of  our  own, 
but  convince  us  that  it  is  wrong  it  never  can. 
Hence  there  is  no  empirical  ground  of  proof  that 
can  coerce  any  one’s  judgement  of  taste.  { 

I n  the  second  place,  a  proof  a  priori  according  , 
to  definite  rules  is  still  less  capable  of  determin-  ; 
ing  the  judgement  as  to  beauty.  If  any  one  reads  j 
me  his  poem,  or  brings  me  to  a  play,  which,  all  , 
said  and  done,  fails  to  commend  itself  to  my 
taste,  then  let  him  adduce  Batteux  or  Lessing,  or 
still  older  and  more  famous  critics  of  taste,  with 
all  the  host  of  rules  laid  down  by  them,  as  a  t 
proof  of  the  beauty  of  his  poem;  let  certain  pas¬ 
sages  particularly  displeasing  to  me  accord  com¬ 
pletely  with  the  rules  of  beauty  (as  set  out  by 
these  critics  and  universally  recognized) :  I  stop  f 
my  ears:  I  do  not  want  to  hear  any  reasons  or 
any  arguing  about  the  matter.  I  would  prefer  to 
suppose  that  those  rules  of  the  critics  were  at 
fault,  or  at  least  have  no  application,  than  to 
allow  my  judgement  to  be  determined  by  a  pri¬ 
ori  proofs.  I  take  my  stand  on  the  ground  that 
my  judgement  is  to  be  one  of  taste,  and  not  one 
of  understanding  or  reason. 

This  would  appear  to  be  one  of  the  chief  rea¬ 
sons  why  this  faculty  of  aesthetic  judgement 
has  been  given  the  name  of  taste.  For  a  man 
may  recount  to  me  all  the  ingredients  of  a  dish, 


OF  AESTHETIC  JUDGEMENT 


and  observe  of  each  and  every  one  of  them  that 
it  is  just  what  I  like,  and,  in  addition,  rightly 
r  commend  the  wholesomeness  of  the  food;  yet  I 
am  deaf  to  all  these  arguments.  I  try  the  dish 
1  with  my  own  tongue  and  palate,  and  I  pass 
judgement  according  to  their  verdict  (not  ac- 
!  cording  to  universal  principles). 

As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  judgement  of  taste 
1  is  invariably  laid  down  as  a  singular  judgement 
5  upon  the  object.  The  understanding  can,  from 
1  the  comparison  of  the  object,  in  point  of  delight, 
with  the  judgements  of  others,  form  a  universal 
judgement,  e.g.:  “All  tulips  are  beautiful.” 
But  that  judgement  is  then  not  one  of  taste, 
but  is  a  logical  judgement  which  converts  the 
reference  of  an  object  to  our  taste  into  a  predi¬ 
cate  belonging  to  things  of  a  certain  kind.  But  it 
is  only  the  judgement  whereby  I  regard  an  indi¬ 
vidual  given  tulip  as  beautiful,  i.e.,  regard  my 
delight  in  it  as  of  universal  validity,  that  is  a 
judgement  of  taste.  Its  peculiarity,  however, 
consists  in  the  fact,  that,  although  it  has  merely 
subjective  validity,  still  it  extends  its  claims  to 
all  subjects,  as  unreservedly  as  it  would  if  it 
were  an  objective  judgement,  resting  on  grounds 
of  cognition  and  capable  of  being  proved  to 
demonstration. 

§  34.  An  objective  principle  of  taste 
is  not  possible 

A  principle  of  taste  would  mean  a  funda¬ 
mental  premiss  under  the  condition  of  which 
one  might  subsume  the  concept  of  an  object, 
and  then,  by  a  syllogism,  draw  the  inference  that 
it  is  beautiful.  That,  however,  is  absolutely  im¬ 
possible.  For  I  must  feel  the  pleasure  immedi¬ 
ately  in  the  representation  of  the  object,  and  I 
cannot  be  talked  into  it  by  any  grounds  of  proof. 
Thus  although  critics,  as  Hume  says,  are  able  to 
reason  more  plausibly  than  cooks,  they  must 
still  share  the  same  fate.  For  the  determining 
ground  of  their  judgement  they  are  not  able  to 
look  to  the  force  of  demonstrations,  but  only  to 
the  reflection  of  the  subject  upon  his  own  state 
(of  pleasure  or  displeasure),  to  the  exclusion  of 
precepts  and  rules. 

There  is,  however,  a  matter  upon  which  it  is 
competent  for  critics  to  exercise  their  subtlety, 
and  upon  which  they  ought  to  do  so,  so  long  as 
it  tends  to  the  rectification  and  extension  of  our 
judgements  of  taste.  But  that  matter  is  not  one 
of  exhibiting  the  determining  ground  of  aesthetic 
judgements  of  this  kind  in  a  universally  appli¬ 
cable  formula — which  is  impossible.  Rather  is 
I  it  the  investigation  of  the  faculties  of  cognition 
and  their  function  in  these  judgements,  and  the 


5i5 

illustration,  by  the  analysis  of  examples,  of  their 
mutual  subjective  finality,  the  form  of  which  in 
a  given  representation  has  been  shown  above  to 
constitute  the  beauty  of  their  object.  Hence 
with  regard  to  the  representation  whereby  an 
object  is  given,  the  critique  of  taste  itself  is  only 
subjective;  viz.,  it  is  the  art  or  science  of  re¬ 
ducing  the  mutual  relation  of  the  understanding 
and  the  imagination  in  the  given  representation 
(without  reference  to  antecedent  sensation  or 
concept),  consequently  their  accordance  or  dis¬ 
cordance,  to  rules,  and  of  determining  them 
with  regard  to  their  conditions.  It  is  art  if  it  only 
illustrates  this  by  examples;  it  is  science  if  it  de¬ 
duces  the  possibility  of  such  an  estimate  from 
the  nature  of  these  faculties  as  faculties  of 
knowledge  in  general.  It  is  only  with  the  latter, 
as  trancendental  critique,  that  we  have  here  any 
concern.  Its  proper  scope  is  the  development 
and  justification  of  the  subjective  principle  of 
taste,  as  an  a  priori  principle  of  judgement.  As 
an  art,  critique  merely  looks  to  the  physiological 
(here  psychological)  and,  consequently,  empiri¬ 
cal  rules,  according  to  which  in  actual  fact  taste 
proceeds  (passing  by  the  question  of  their  pos¬ 
sibility)  and  seeks  to  apply  them  in  estimating 
its  objects.  The  latter  critique  criticizes  the 
products  of  fine  art,  just  as  the  former  does  the 
faculty  of  estimating  them. 

§35.  The  principle  of  taste  is  the  subjective 
principle  of  the  general  power  of  judgement 

<  The  judgement  of  taste  is  differentiated  from 
iogical  judgement  by  the  fact  that,  whereas  the 
latter  subsumes  a  representation  under  a  con¬ 
cept  of  the  object,  the  judgement  of  taste  does 
not  subsume  under  a  concept  at  all — for,  if  it 
did,  necessary  and  universal  approval  would  be 
capable  of  being  enforced  by  proofs.  And  yet 
it  does  bear  this  resemblance  to  the  logical 
judgement,  that  it  asserts  a  universality  and 
necessity,  not,  however,  according  to  concepts 
of  the  object,  but  a  universality  and  necessity 
that  are,  consequently,  merely  subjective.  Now 
the  concepts  in  a  judgement  constitute  its  con¬ 
tent  (what  belongs  to  the  cognition  of  the  ob¬ 
ject).  But  the  judgement  of  taste  is  not  deter¬ 
minable  by  means  of  concepts.  Hence  it  can 
only  have  its  ground  in  the  subjective  formal 
condition  of  a  judgement  in  general.  The  sub¬ 
jective  condition  of  all  judgements  is  the  judg¬ 
ing  faculty  itself,  or  judgement.  Employed  in 
respect  of  a  representation  whereby  an  object 
is  given,  this  requires  the  harmonious  accord¬ 
ance  of  two  powers  of  representation.  These 
are:  the  imagination  (for  the  intuition  and  the 


THE  CRITIQUE 


5i6 

arrangement  of  the  manifold  of  intuition),  and 
the  understanding  (for  the  concept  as  a  repre¬ 
sentation  of  the  unity  of  this  arrangement). 
Now,  since  no  concept  of  the  object  underlies 
the  judgement  here,  it  can  consist  only  in  the 
subsumption  of  the  imagination  itself  (in  the 
case  of  a  representation  whereby  an  object  is 
given)  under  the  conditions  enabling  the  under¬ 
standing  in  general  to  advance  from  the  intui¬ 
tion  to  concepts.  That  is  to  say,  since  the  free¬ 
dom  of  the  imagination  consists  precisely  in  the 
fact  that  it  schematizes  without  a  concept,  the 
judgement  of  taste  must  found  upon  a  mere  sen¬ 
sation  of  the  mutually  quickening  activity  of  the 
imagination  in  its  freedom ,  and  of  the  under¬ 
standing  with  its  conformity  to  law.  It  must 
therefore  rest  upon  a  feeling  that  allows  the  ob¬ 
ject  to  be  estimated  by  the  finality  of  the  repre¬ 
sentation  (by  which  an  object  is  given)  for  the 
furtherance  of  the  cognitive  faculties  in  their 
free  play.  Taste,  then,  as  a  subjective  power  of 
judgement,  contains  a  principle  of  subsumption, 
not  of  intuitions  under  concepts ,  but  of  the 
faculty  of  intuitions  or  presentations,  i.e.,  of  the 
imagination,  under  the  faculty  of  concepts,  i.e., 
the  understanding,  so  far  as  the  former  in  its 
freedom  accords  with  the  latter  in  its  conform¬ 
ity  to  law.1 

For  the  discovery  of  this  title  by  means  of  a 
deduction  of  judgements  of  taste,  we  can  only 
avail  ourselves  of  the  guidance  of  the  formal 
peculiarities  of  judgements  of  this  kind,  and 
consequently  the  mere  consideration  of  their 
logical  form. 

§  36.  The  problem  of  a  deduction  of 
judgements  of  taste 

To  form  a  cognitive  judgement  we  may  imme¬ 
diately  connect  with  the  perception  of  an  object 
the  concept  of  an  object  in  general,  the  empirical 
predicates  of  which  are  contained  in  that  per¬ 
ception.  In  this  way,  a  judgement  of  experience 
is  produced.  Now  this  judgement  rests  on  the 
foundation  of  a  priori  concepts  of  the  synthet¬ 
ical  unity  of  the  manifold  of  intuition,  enabling 
it  to  be  thought  as  the  determination  of  an  ob¬ 
ject,  These  concepts  (the  categories)  call  for  a 
deduction,  and  such  was  supplied  in  the  Critique 
of  Pure  Reason.  That  deduction  enabled  us  to 
solve  the  problem:  How  are  synthetical  a  priori 
cognitive  judgements  possible?  This  problem 
had,  accordingly,  to  do  with  the  a  priori  princi¬ 
ples  of  pure  understanding  and  its  theoretical 
judgements. 

But  we  may  also  immediately  connect  with  a 

1  [Cf.  pp.  471,  476,  495,  512.] 


perception  a  feeling  of  pleasure  (or  displeasure) 
and  a  delight  attending  the  representation  of  the 
object  and  serving  it  instead  of  a  predicate.  In 
this  way  there  arises  a  judgement  which  is  aes¬ 
thetic  and  not  cognitive.  Now,  if  such  a  judge¬ 
ment  is  not  merely  one  of  sensation,  but  a  for¬ 
mal  judgement  of  reflection  that  exacts  this 
delight  from  everyone  as  necessary,  something 
must  lie  at  its  basis  as  its  a  priori  principle. 
This  principle  may,  indeed,  be  a  mere  subjective 
one  (supposing  an  objective  one  should  be  im¬ 
possible  for  judgements  of  this  kind),  but,  even 
as  such,  it  requires  a  deduction  to  make  it  intel¬ 
ligible  how  an  aesthetic  judgement  can  lay  claim 
to  necessity.  That,  now,  is  what  lies  at  the  bot¬ 
tom  of  the  problem  upon  which  we  are  at  pres¬ 
ent  engaged,  i.e.:  How  are  judgements  of  taste 
possible?  This  problem,  therefore,  is  concerned 
with  the  a  priori  principles  of  pure  judgement  in 
aesthetic  judgements,  i.e.,  not  those  in  which  (as 
in  theoretical  judgements)  it  has  merely  to  sub¬ 
sume  under  objective  concepts  of  understand¬ 
ing,  and  in  which  it  comes  under  a  law,  but  rath¬ 
er  those  in  which  it  is  itself,  subjectively,  object 
as  well  as  law. 

We  may  also  put  the  problem  in  this  way: 
How  a  judgement  possible  which,  going  mere¬ 
ly  upon  the  individual’s  own  feeling  of  pleasure 
in  an  object  independent  of  the  concept  of  it, 
estimates  this  as  a  pleasure  attached  to  the  rep¬ 
resentation  of  the  same  object  in  every  other  in¬ 
dividual ,  and  does  so  a  priori ,  i.e.,  without  being 
allowed  to  wait  and  see  if  other  people  will  be  of 
the  same  mind? 

It  is  easy  to  see  that  judgements  of  taste  are 
synthetic,  for  they  go  beyond  the  concept  and 
even  the  intuition  of  the  object,  and  join  as 
predicate  to  that  intuition  something  which  is 
not  even  a  cognition  at  all,  namely,  the  feeling 
of  pleasure  (or  displeasure).  But,  although  the 
predicate  (the  personal  pleasure  that  is  con¬ 
nected  with  the  representation)  is  empirical,  still 
we  need  not  go  further  than  what  is  involved 
in  the  expressions  of  their  claim  to  see  that, 
so  far  as  concerns  the  agreement  required  of 
everyone ,  they  are  a  priori  judgements,  or  mean 
to  pass  for  such.  This  problem  of  the  Critique 
of  Judgement,  therefore,  is  part  of  the  general 
problem  of  transcendental  philosophy:  How  are 
synthetic  a  priori  judgements  possible? 

§  37.  II  hat  exactly  it  is  that  is  asserted  a  priori 
of  an  object  in  a  judgement  of  taste 

1  he  immediate  synthesis  of  the  representa¬ 
tion  of  an  object  with  pleasure  can  only  be  a 
matter  of  internal  perception,  and,  were  noth- 


OF  AESTHETIC 

ing  more  than  this  sought  to  be  indicated,  would 
only  yield  a  mere  empirical  judgement.  For  with 
no  representation  can  I  a  priori  connect  a  deter¬ 
minate  feeling  (of  pleasure  or  displeasure)  ex¬ 
cept  where  I  rely  upon  the  basis  of  an  a  priori 
principle  in  reason  determining  the  will.  The 
truth  is  that  the  pleasure  (in  the  moral  feeling) 
is  the  consequence  of  the  determination  of  the 
will  by  the  principle.  It  cannot,  therefore,  be 
compared  with  the  pleasure  in  taste.  For  it  re¬ 
quires  a  determinate  concept  of  a  law:  whereas 
the  pleasure  in  taste  has  to  be  connected  imme¬ 
diately  with  the  sample  estimate  prior  to  any 
concept.  For  the  same  reason,  also,  all  judge¬ 
ments  of  taste  are  singular  judgements,  for  they 
unite  their  predicate  of  delight,  not  to  a  con¬ 
cept,  but  to  a  given  singular  empirical  represen¬ 
tation. 

Hence,  in  a  judgement  of  taste,  what  is  repre¬ 
sented  a  priori  as  a  universal  rule  for  the  judge¬ 
ment  and  as  valid  for  everyone,  is  not  the  pleas¬ 
ure  but  the  universal  validity  of  this  pleasure 
perceived,  as  it  is,  to  be  combined  in  the  mind 
with  the  mere  estimate  of  an  object.1  A  judge¬ 
ment  to  the  effect  that  it  is  with  pleasure  that  I 
perceive  and  estimate  some  object  is  an  empiri¬ 
cal  judgement.  But  if  it  asserts  that  I  think  the 
object  beautiful,  i.e.,  that  I  may  attribute  that 
delight  to  everyone  as  necessary,  it  is  then  an 
a  priori  judgement. 

§  38.  Deduction  oj  judgements 
oj  taste 

Admitting  that  in  a  pure  judgement  of  taste 
the  delight  in  the  object  is  connected  with  the 
mere  estimate  of  its  form,  then  what  we  feel  to 
be  associated  in  the  mind  with  the  representa¬ 
tion  of  the  object  is  nothing  else  than  its  subjec¬ 
tive  finality  for  judgement.  Since,  now,  in  re¬ 
spect  of  the  formal  rules  of  estimating,  apart 
from  all  matter  (whether  sensation  or  concept), 
judgement  can  only  be  directed  to  the  subjec¬ 
tive  conditions  of  its  employment  in  general 
(which  is  not  restricted  to  the  particular  mode 
of  sense  nor  to  a  particular  concept  of  the  un¬ 
derstanding),  and  so  can  only  be  directed  to  that 
subjective  factor  which  we  may  presuppose  in 
all  men  (as  requisite  for  a  possible  experience 
generally),  it  follows  that  the  accordance  of  a 
representation  with  these  conditions  of  the 
judgement  must  admit  of  being  assumed  valid  a 
priori  for  every  one.  In  other  words,  we  are 
warranted  in  exacting  from  every  one  the  pleas¬ 
ure  or  subjective  finality  of  the  representation 
in  respect  of  the  relation  of  the  cognitive  facul- 

1  [Cf.  p.  482,  et  seqf] 


JUDGEMENT  517 

ties  engaged  in  the  estimate  of  a  sensible  object 
in  general.2 

Remark 

What  makes  this  deduction  so  easy  is  that  it 
is  spared  the  necessity  of  having  to  justify  the 
objective  reality  of  a  concept.  For  beauty  is  not 
a  concept  of  the  object,  and  the  judgement  of 
taste  is  not  a  cognitive  judgement.  All  that  it 
holds  out  for  is  that  we  are  justified  in  presup¬ 
posing  that  the  same  subjective  conditions  of 
judgement  which  we  find  in  ourselves  are  uni¬ 
versally  present  in  every  man,  and  further  that 
we  have  rightly  subsumed  the  given  object  un¬ 
der  these  conditions.  The  latter,  no  doubt,  has 
to  face  unavoidable  difficulties  which  do  not  af¬ 
fect  the  logical  judgement.  (For  there  the  sub¬ 
sumption  is  under  concepts;  whereas  in  the 
aesthetic  judgement  it  is  under  a  mere  sensible 
relation  of  the  imagination  and  understanding 
mutually  harmonizing  with  one  another  in  the 
represented  form  of  the  object,  in  which  case  the 
subsumption  may  easily  prove  fallacious.)  But 
this  in  no  way  detracts  from  the  legitimacy  of 
the  claim  of  the  judgement  to  count  upon  uni¬ 
versal  agreement — a  claim  which  amounts  to  no 
more  than  this:  the  correctness  of  the  principle 
of  judging  validly  for  every  one  upon  subjective 
grounds.  For  as  to  the  difficulty  and  uncertainty 
concerning  the  correctness  of  the  subsumption 
under  that  principle,  it  no  more  casts  a  doubt 
upon  the  legitimacy  of  the  claim  to  this  validity 
on  the  part  of  an  aesthetic  judgement  generally, 
or,  therefore,  upon  the  principle  itself,  than  the 
mistakes  (though  not  so  often  or  easily  in¬ 
curred),  to  which  the  subsumption  of  the  logical 
judgement  under  its  principle  is  similarly  liable, 
can  render  the  latter  principle,  which  is  objec¬ 
tive,  open  to  doubt.  But  if  the  question  were: 
How  is  it  possible  to  assume  a  priori  that  nature 
is  a  complex  of  objects  of  taste?  the  problem 
would  then  have  reference  to  teleology,  because 
it  would  have  to  be  regarded  as  an  end  of  na- 

2  In  order  to  be  justified  in  claiming  universal  agree¬ 
ment  for  an  aesthetic  judgement  merely  resting  on  sub¬ 
jective  grounds,  it  is  sufficient  to  assume:  (1)  that  the 
subjective  conditions  of  this  faculty  of  aesthetic  judge¬ 
ment  are  identical  with  all  men  in  what  concerns  the  re¬ 
lation  of  the  cognitive  faculties,  there  brought  into  ac¬ 
tion,  with  a  view  to  a  cognition  in  general.  This  must  be 
true,  as  otherwise  men  would  be  incapable  of  communi¬ 
cating  their  representations  or  even  their  knowledge; 
(2)  that  the  judgement  has  paid  regard  merely  to  this 
relation  (consequently  merely  to  the  formal  condition 
of  the  faculty  of  judgement),  and  is  pure,  i.e..  is  free 
from  confusion  either  with  concepts  of  the  object  or  sen¬ 
sations  as  determining  grounds.  If  any  mistake  is  made 
in  this  latter  point,  this  only  touches  the  incorrect  ap¬ 
plication  to  a  particular  case  of  the  right  which  a  law 
gives  us,  and  does  not  do  away  with  the  right  generally. 


518  THE  CRITIQUE 


ture  belonging  essentially  to  its  concept  that  it 
should  exhibit  forms  that  are  final  for  our  judge¬ 
ment.  But  the  correctness  of  this  assumption 
may  still  be  seriously  questioned,  while  the  ac¬ 
tual  existence  of  beauties  of  nature  is  patent  to 
experience. 

§  3Q.  The  communicability  oj  a  sensation 

Sensation,  as  the  real  in  perception,  where 
referred  to  knowledge,  is  called  organic  sensa¬ 
tion  and  its  specific  quality  may  be  represented 
as  completely  communicable  to  others  in  a  like 
mode,  provided  we  assume  that  every  one  has  a 
like  sense  to  our  own.  This,  however,  is  an  abso¬ 
lutely  inadmissible  presupposition  in  the  case 
of  an  organic  sensation.  Thus  a  person  who  is 
without  a  sense  of  smell  cannot  have  a  sensation 
of  this  kind  communicated  to  him,  and,  even  if 
he  does  not  suffer  from  this  deficiency,  we  still 
cannot  be  certain  that  he  gets  precisely  the  same 
sensation  from  a  flower  that  we  get  from  it.  But 
still  more  divergent  must  we  consider  men  to  be 
in  respect  of  the  agreeableness  or  disagreeable¬ 
ness  derived  from  the  sensation  of  one  and  the 
same  object  of  sense,  and  it  is  absolutely  out  of 
the  question  to  require  that  pleasure  in  such  ob¬ 
jects  should  be  acknowledged  by  every  one. 
Pleasure  of  this  kind,  since  it  enters  into  the 
mind  through  sense — our  role,  therefore,  being  a 
passive  one — may  be  called  the  pleasure  of  en¬ 
joyment. 

On  the  other  hand,  delight  in  an  action  on  the 
score  of  its  moral  character  is  not  a  pleasure  of 
enjoyment,  but  one  of  self-asserting  activity 
and  in  this  coming  up  to  the  idea  of  what  it  is 
meant  to  be.  But  this  feeling,  which  is  called  the 
moral  feeling ,  requires  concepts  and  is  the  pres¬ 
entation  of  a  finality,  not  free,  but  according  to 
law.  It.  therefore,  admits  of  communication 
only  through  the  instrumentality  of  reason  and, 
if  the  pleasure  is  to  be  of  the  same  kind  for 
everyone,  by  means  of  very  determinate  prac¬ 
tical  concepts  of  reason. 

The  pleasure  in  the  sublime  in  nature,  as  one 
of  rationalizing  contemplation,  lays  claim  also 
to  universal  participation,  but  still  it  presup¬ 
poses  another  feeling,  that,  namely,  of  our  su¬ 
persensible  sphere,  which  feeling,  however  ob¬ 
scure  it  may  be,  has  a  moral  foundation.  But 
there  is  absolutely  no  authority  for  my  presup¬ 
posing  that  others  will  pay  attention  to  this  and 
take  a  delight  in  beholding  the  uncouth  dimen¬ 
sions  of  nature  (one  that  in  truth  cannot  be 
ascribed  to  its  aspect,  which  is  terrifying  rather 
than  otherwise).  Nevertheless,  having  regard  to 
the  fact  that  attention  ought  to  be  paid  upon 


every  appropriate  occasion  to  this  moral  birth¬ 
right,  we  may  still  demand  that  delight  from 
everyone;  but  we  can  do  so  only  through  the 
moral  law,  which,  in  its  turn,  rests  upon  con¬ 
cepts  of  reason. 

The  pleasure  in  the  beautiful  is,  on  the  other 
hand,  neither  a  pleasure  of  enjoyment  nor  of  an 
activity  according  to  law,  nor  yet  one  of  a  ra¬ 
tionalizing  contemplation  according  to  ideas, 
but  rather  of  mere  reflection.  Without  any  guid¬ 
ing-line  of  end  or  principle,  this  pleasure  attends 
the  ordinary  apprehension  of  an  object  by 
means  of  the  imagination,  as  the  faculty  of  in¬ 
tuition,  but  with  a  reference  to  the  understand¬ 
ing  as  faculty  of  concepts,  and  through  the 
operation  of  a  process  of  judgement  which  has 
also  to  be  invoked  in  order  to  obtain  the  com¬ 
monest  experience.  In  the  latter  case,  however, 
its  functions  are  directed  to  perceiving  an  em¬ 
pirical  objective  concept,  whereas  in  the  former 
(in  the  aesthetic  mode  of  estimating)  merely  to 
perceiving  the  adequacy  of  the  representation 
for  engaging  both  faculties  of  knowledge  in  their 
freedom  in  an  harmonious  (subjectively  final) 
employment,  i.e.,  to  feeling  with  pleasure  the 
subjective  bearings  of  the  representation.  This 
pleasure  must  of  necessity  depend  for  every  one 
upon  the  same  conditions,  seeing  that  they  are 
the  subjective  conditions  of  the  possibility  of  a 
cognition  in  general,  and  the  proportion  of  these 
cognitive  faculties  which  is  requisite  for  taste 
is  requisite  also  for  ordinary  sound  understand¬ 
ing,  the  presence  of  which  we  are  entitled  to  pre¬ 
suppose  in  every  one.  And,  for  this  reason  also, 
one  who  judges  with  taste  (provided  he  does  not 
make  a  mistake  as  to  this  consciousness,  and 
does  not  take  the  matter  for  the  form,  or  charm 
for  beauty)  can  impute  the  subjective  finality, 
i.e.,  his  delight  in  the  object,  to  everyone  else 
and  suppose  his  feeling  universally  communi¬ 
cable,  and  that,  too,  without  the  mediation  of 
concepts. 

§  40.  Taste  as  a  kind  of  sensus  communis 

The  name  of  sense  is  often  given  to  judge¬ 
ment  where  what  attracts  attention  is  not  so 
much  its  reflective  act  as  merely  its  result.  So  we 
speak  of  a  sense  of  truth,  of  a  sense  of  propriety, 
or  of  justice,  etc.  And  yet,  of  course,  we  know, 
or  at  least  ought  well  enough  to  know,  that  a 
sense  cannot  be  the  true  abode  of  these  concepts, 
not  to  speak  of  its  being  competent,  even  in  the 
slightest  degree,  to  pronounce  universal  rules. 
On  the  contrary,  we  recognize  that  a  representa¬ 
tion  of  this  kind,  be  it  of  truth,  propriety,  beau¬ 
ty,  or  justice,  could  never  enter  our  thoughts 


OF  AESTHETIC 

were  we  not  able  to  raise  ourselves  above  the 
level  of  the  senses  to  that  of  higher  faculties  of 
cognition.  Common  human  understanding  which 
as  mere  sound  (not  yet  cultivated)  understand¬ 
ing,  is  looked  upon  as  the  least  we  can  expect 
from  any  one  claiming  the  name  of  man,  has 
therefore  the  doubtful  honour  of  having  the 
name  of  common  sense  ( sensus  communis)  be¬ 
stowed  upon  it;  and  bestowed,  too,  in  an  accep¬ 
tation  of  the  word  common  (not  merely  in  our 
own  language,  where  it  actually  has  a  double 
meaning,  but  also  in  many  others)  which  makes 
it  amount  to  what  is  vulgar — what  is  every¬ 
where  to  be  met  with — a  quality  which  by  no 
means  confers  credit  or  distinction  upon  its 
possessor. 

However,  by  the  name  sensus  communis  is  to 
be  understood  the  idea  of  a  public  sense,  i.  e., 
a  critical  faculty  which  in  its  reflective  act  takes 
account  (a  priori)  of  the  mode  of  representation 
of  everyone  else,  in  order,  as  it  were ,  to  weigh 
its  judgement  with  the  collective  reason  of  man¬ 
kind,  and  thereby  avoid  the  illusion  arising  from 
subjective  and  personal  conditions  which  could 
readily  be  taken  for  objective,  an  illusion  that 
would  exert  a  prejudicial  influence  upon  its 
judgement.  This  is  accomplished  by  weighing 
the  judgement,  not  so  much  with  actual,  as  rath¬ 
er  with  the  merely  possible,  judgements  of  oth¬ 
ers,  and  by  putting  ourselves  in  the  position  of 
everyone  else,  as  the  result  of  a  mere  abstrac¬ 
tion  from  the  limitations  which  contingently 
affect  our  own  estimate.  This,  in  turn,  is  effected 
by  so  far  as  possible  letting  go  the  element  of 
matter,  i.  e.,  sensation,  in  our  general  state  of 
representative  activity,  and  confining  attention 
to  the  formal  peculiarities  of  our  representation 
or  general  state  of  representative  activity.  Now 
it  may  seem  that  this  operation  of  reflection  is 
too  artificial  to  be  attributed  to  the  faculty 
which  we  call  common  sense.  But  this  is  an  ap¬ 
pearance  due  only  to  its  expression  in  abstract 
formulae.  In  itself  nothing  is  more  natural  than 
to  abstract  from  charm  and  emotion  where  one 
is  looking  for  a  judgement  intended  to  serve  as 
a  universal  rule. 

While  the  following  maxims  of  common  hu¬ 
man  understanding  do  not  properly  come  in 
here  as  constituent  parts  of  the  critique  of  taste, 
they  may  still  serve  to  elucidate  its  fundamental 
propositions.  They  are  these:  (i)  to  think  for 
oneself;  (2)  to  think  from  the  standpoint  of 
everyone  else;  (3)  always  to  think  consistently. 
The  first  is  the  maxim  of  unprejudiced  thought, 
the  second  that  of  enlarged  thought,  the  third 
that  of  consistent  thought.  The  first  is  the  max¬ 


JUDGEMENT  519 

im  of  a  never  -passive  reason.  To  be  given  to 
such  passivity,  consequently  to  heteronomy  of 
reason,  is  called  prejudice;  and  the  greatest  of 
all  prejudices  is  that  of  fancying  nature  not  to 
be  subject  to  rules  which  the  understanding  by 
virtue  of  its  own  essential  laws  lays  at  its  basis, 
i.  e.,  superstition.  Emancipation  from  supersti¬ 
tion  is  called  enlightenment ,ml  for  although 
this  term  applies  also  to  emancipation  from 
prejudices  generally,  still  superstition  deserves 
pre-eminently  (in  sensu  eminenti)  to  be  called 
a  prejudice.  For  the  condition  of  blindness  into 
which  superstition  puts  one,  which  is  as  much 
as  demands  from  one  as  an  obligation,  makes 
the  need  of  being  led  by  others,  and  consequent¬ 
ly  the  passive  state  of  the  reason,  pre-eminently 
conspicuous.  As  to  the  second  maxim  belonging 
to  our  habits  of  thought,  we  have  quite  got  into 
the  way  of  calling  a  man  narrow  (narrow,  as 
opposed  to  being  of  enlarged  mind)  whose  tal¬ 
ents  fall  short  of  what  is  required  for  employ¬ 
ment  upon  work  of  any  magnitude  (especially 
that  involving  intensity).  But  the  question  here 
is  not  one  of  the  faculty  of  cognition,  but  of  the 
mental  habit  of  making  a  final  use  of  it.  This, 
however  small  the  range  and  degree  to  which 
man’s  natural  endowments  extend,  still  indicates 
a  man  of  enlarged  mind:  if  he  detaches  himself 
from  the  subjective  personal  conditions  of  his 
judgement,  which  cramp  the  minds  of  so  many 
others,  and  reflects  upon  his  own  judgement 
from  a  universal  standpoint  (which  he  can  only 
determine  by  shifting  his  ground  to  the  stand¬ 
point  of  others).  The  third  maxim — that,  name¬ 
ly,  of  consistent  thought — is  the  hardest  of  at¬ 
tainment,  and  is  only  attainable  by  the  union  of 
both  the  former,  and  after  constant  attention  to 
them  has  made  one  at  home  in  their  observance. 
We  may  say:  The  first  of  these  is  the  maxim  of 
understanding,  the  second  that  of  judgement, 
the  third  of  that  reason. 

I  resume  the  thread  of  the  discussion  inter¬ 
rupted  by  the  above  digression,  and  I  say  that 
taste  can  with  more  justice  be  called  a  sensus 
communis  than  can  sound  understanding;  and 
that  the  aesthetic,  rather  than  the  intellectual, 

1  We  readily  see  that  enlightenment,  while  easy,  no 
doubt,  in  thesi,  in  hypothesi  is  difficult  and  slow  of  real¬ 
ization.  For  not  to  be  passive  with  one’s  reason,  but  al¬ 
ways  to  be  self-legislative,  is  doubtless  quite  an  easy 
matter  for  a  man  who  only  desires  to  be  adapted  to  his 
essential  end,  and  does  not  seek  to  know  what  is  beyond 
his  understanding.  But  as  the  tendency  in  the  latter  di¬ 
rection  is  hardly  avoidable,  and  others  are  always  com¬ 
ing  and  promising  with  full  assurance  that  they  are 
able  to  satisfy  one’s  curiosity,  it  must  be  very  difficult 
to  preserve  or  restore  in  the  mind  (and  particularly  in 
the  public  mind)  that  merely  negative  attitude  (which 
constitutes  enlightenment  proper). 


THE  CRITIQUE 


judgement  can  bear  the  name  of  a  public  sense,1 
i.  e.,  taking  it  that  we  are  prepared  to  use  the 
word  sense  of  an  effect  that  mere  reflection  has 
upon  the  mind;  for  then  by  sense  we  mean  the 
feeling  of  pleasure.  We  might  even  define  taste 
as  the  faculty  of  estimating  what  makes  our 
feeling  in  a  given  representation  universally 
communicable  without  the  mediation  of  a  con¬ 
cept. 

The  aptitude  of  men  for  communicating  their 
thoughts  requires,  also,  a  relation  between  the 
imagination  and  the  understanding,  in  order  to 
connect  intuitions  with  concepts,  and  concepts, 
in  turn,  with  intuitions,  which  both  unite  in  cog¬ 
nition.  But  there  the  agreement  of  both  mental 
powers  is  according  to  law ,  and  under  the  con¬ 
straint  of  definite  concepts.  Only  when  the  im¬ 
agination  in  its  freedom  stirs  the  understanding, 
and  the  understanding  apart  from  concepts  puts 
the  imagination  into  regular  play,  does  the  rep¬ 
resentation  communicate  itself  not  as  thought, 
but  as  an  internal  feeling  of  a  final  state  of  the 
mind. 

Taste  is,  therefore,  the  faculty  of  forming  an 
a  priori  estimate  of  the  communicability  of  the 
feeling  that,  without  the  mediation  of  a  con¬ 
cept.  are  connected  with  a  given  representation. 

Supposing,  now,  that  we  could  assume  that 
the  mere  universal  communicability  of  our  feel¬ 
ing  must  of  itself  carry  with  it  an  interest  for 
us  (an  assumption,  however,  which  we  are  not 
entitled  to  draw  as  a  conclusion  from  the  char¬ 
acter  of  a  merely  reflective  judgement),  we 
should  then  be  in  a  position  to  explain  how  the 
feeling  in  the  judgement  of  taste  comes  to  be  ex¬ 
acted  from  everyone  as  a  sort  of  duty. 

§41.  The  empirical  interest  in  the  beautiful 2 

Abundant  proof  has  been  given  above  to 
show  that  the  judgement  of  taste  by  which 
something  is  declared  beautiful  must  have  no 
interest  as  its  determining  ground.  But  it  does 
not  follow  from  this  that,  after  it  has  once  been 
posited  as  a  pure  aesthetic  judgement,  an  inter¬ 
est  cannot  then  enter  into  combination  with  it. 
This  combination,  however,  can  never  be  any¬ 
thing  but  indirect.  Taste  must,  that  is  to  say, 
first  of  all  be  represented  in  conjunction  with 
something  else,  if  the  delight  attending  the  mere 
reflection  upon  an  object  is  to  admit  of  having 
further  conjoined  with  it  a  pleasure  in  the  real 
existence  of  the  object  (as  that  wherein  all  in¬ 
terest  consists).  For  the  saying,  a  posse  ad  esse 

1  Taste  may  be  designated  a  scnsus  communis  acs - 
thcticus .  common  human  understanding  a  scnsus  com¬ 
munis  logicus. 

2  [Cf.  p.  510,  et  seq.] 


non  valet  consequential  which  is  applied  to 
cognitive  judgements,  holds  good  here  in  the 
case  of  aesthetic  judgements.  Now  this  “some¬ 
thing  else”  may  be  something  empirical,  such  as 
an  inclination  proper  to  the  nature  of  human 
beings,  or  it  may  be  something  intellectual,  as  a 
property  of  the  will  whereby  it  admits  of  ra¬ 
tional  determination  a  priori.  Both  of  these  in¬ 
volve  a  delight  in  the  existence  of  the  object, 
and  so  can  lay  the  foundation  for  an  interest  in 
what  has  already  pleased  of  itself  and  without 
regard  to  any  interest  whatsoever. 

The  empirical  interest  in  the  beautiful  exists 
only  in  society.  And  if  we  admit  that  the  im¬ 
pulse  to  society  is  natural  to  mankind,  and  that 
the  suitability  for  and  the  propensity  towards 
it,  i.e.,  sociability ,  is  a  property  essential  to  the 
requirements  of  man  as  a  creature  intended  for 
society,  and  one,  therefore,  that  belongs  to  hu¬ 
manity ,  it  is  inevitable  that  we  should  also  look 
upon  taste  in  the  light  of  a  faculty  for  estimat¬ 
ing  whatever  enables  us  to  communicate  even 
our  feeling  to  every  one  else,  and  hence  as  a 
means  of  promoting  that  upon  which  the  natural 
inclination  of  everyone  is  set. 

With  no  one  to  take  into  account  but  himself, 
a  man  abandoned  on  a  desert  island  would  not 
adorn  either  himself  or  his  hut,  nor  would  he 
look  for  flowers,  and  still  less  plant  them,  with 
the  object  of  providing  himself  with  personal 
adornments.  Only  in  society  does  it  occur  to 
him  to  be  not  merely  a  man,  but  a  man  refined 
after  the  manner  of  his  kind  (the  beginning  of 
civilization) — for  that  is  the  estimate  formed 
of  one  who  has  the  bent  and  turn  for  commu¬ 
nicating  his  pleasure  to  others,  and  who  is  not 
quite  satisfied  with  an  object  unless  his  feeling 
of  delight  in  it  can  be  shared  in  communion  with 
others.  Further,  a  regard  to  universal  communi¬ 
cability  is  a  thing  which  every  one  expects  and 
requires  from  every  one  else,  just  as  if  it  were 
part  of  an  original  compact  dictated  by  human¬ 
ity  itself.  And  thus,  no  doubt,  at  first  only 
charms,  e.  g.,  colours  for  painting  oneself  (rou- 
cou  among  the  Caribs  and  cinnabar  among  the 
Iroquois),  or  flowers,  sea-shells,  beautifully  col¬ 
oured  feathers,  then,  in  the  course  of  time,  also 
beautiful  forms  (as  in  canoes,  wearing-apparel, 
etc.)  which  convey  no  gratification,  i.  e.,  delight 
of  enjoyment,  become  of  moment  in  society  and 
attract  a  considerable  interest.  Eventually,  when 
civilization  has  reached  its  height  it  makes  this 
work  of  communication  almost  the  main  busi¬ 
ness  of  refined  inclination,  and  the  entire  value 
of  sensations  is  placed  in  the  degree  to  which 

3  [“From  possibility  to  actuality.”] 


OF  AESTHETIC 

they  permit  of  universal  communication.  At  this 
stage,  then,  even  where  the  pleasure  which  each 
one  has  in  an  object  is  but  insignificant  and 
possesses  of  itself  no  conspicuous  interest,  still 
the  idea  of  its  universal  communicability  almost 
indefinitely  augments  its  value. 

This  interest,  indirectly  attached  to  the  beau¬ 
tiful  by  the  inclination  towards  society,  and, 
consequently,  empirical,  is,  however,  of  no  im¬ 
portance  for  us  here.  For  that  to  which  we  have 
alone  to  look  is  what  can  have  a  bearing  a  priori , 
even  though  indirect,  upon  the  judgement  of 
taste.  For,  if  even  in  this  form  an  associated  in¬ 
terest  should  betray  itself,  taste  would  then  re¬ 
veal  a  transition  on  the  part  of  our  critical  fac¬ 
ulty  from  the  enjoyment  of  sense  to  the  moral 
feeling.1  This  would  not  merely  mean  that  we 
should  be  supplied  with  a  more  effectual  guide 
for  the  final  employment  of  taste,  but  taste 
would  further  be  presented  as  a  link  in  the 
chain  of  the  human  faculties  a  priori  upon  which 
all  legislation  must  depend.  This  much  may  cer¬ 
tainly  be  said  of  the  empirical  interest  in  objects 
of  taste,  and  in  taste  itself,  that  as  taste  thus 
pays  homage  to  inclination,  however  refined, 
such  interest  will  nevertheless  readily  fuse  also 
with  all  inclinations  and  passions,  which  in  so¬ 
ciety  attain  to  their  greatest  variety  and  highest 
degree,  and  the  interest  in  the  beautiful,  if  this 
is  made  its  ground,  can  but  afford  a  very  am¬ 
biguous  transition  from  the  agreeable  to  the 
good.  We  have  reason,  however,  to  inquire 
whether  this  transition  may  not  still  in  some 
way  be  furthered  by  means  of  taste  when  taken 
in  its  purity. 

§42.  The  intellectual  interest  in  the  beautiful 

It  has  been  with  the  best  intentions  that  those 
who  love  to  see  in  the  ultimate  end  of  humanity, 
namely  the  morally  good,  the  goal  of  all  activi¬ 
ties  to  which  men  are  impelled  by  the  inner  bent 
of  their  nature,  have  regarded  it  as  a  mark  of  a 
good  moral  character  to  take  an  interest  in  the 
beautiful  generally.  But  they  have,  not  without 
reason,  been  contradicted,  by  others,  who  ap¬ 
peal  to  the  fact  of  experience,  that  virtuosi 
in  matters  of  taste,  being  not  alone  often,  but 
one  might  say  as  a  general  rule,  vain,  capricious, 
and  addicted  to  injurious  passions,  could  per¬ 
haps  more  rarely  than  others  lay  claim  to  any 
pre-eminent  attachment  to  moral  principles. 
And  so  it  would  seem,  not  only  that  the  feeling 
for  the  beautiful  is  specifically  different  from 
the  moral  feeling  (which  as  a  matter  of  fact  is 
the  case),  but  also  that  the  interest  which  we 

1  [Cf.  p.  548-] 


JUDGEMENT  521 

may  combine  with  it  will  hardly  consort  with 
the  moral,  and  certainly  not  on  grounds  of  inner 
affinity. 

Now  I  willingly  admit  that  the  interest  in  the 
beautiful  of  art  (including  under  this  heading 
the  artificial  use  of  natural  beauties  for  personal 
adornment,  and  so  from  vanity)  gives  no  evi¬ 
dence  at  all  of  a  habit  of  mind  attached  to  the 
morally  good,  or  even  inclined  that  way.  But,  on 
the  other  hand,  I  do  maintain  that  to  take  an 
immediate  interest  in  the  beauty  of  nature  (not 
merely  to  have  taste  in  estimating  it)  is  always 
a  mark  of  a  good  soul;  and  that,  where  this  in¬ 
terest  is  habitual,  it  is  at  least  indicative  of  a 
temper  of  mind  favourable  to  the  moral  feeling 
that  it  should  readily  associate  itself  with  the 
contemplation  of  nature.  It  must,  however,  be 
borne  in  mind  that  I  mean  to  refer  strictly  to 
the  beautiful  forms  of  nature,  and  to  put  to  one 
side  the  charms  which  she  is  wont  so  lavishly  to 
combine  with  them;  because,  though  the  inter¬ 
est  in  these  is  no  doubt  immediate,  it  is  never¬ 
theless  empirical. 

One  who  alone  (and  without  any  intention  of 
communicating  his  observations  to  others)  re¬ 
gards  the  beautiful  form  of  a  wild  flower,  a  bird, 
an  insect,  or  the  like,  out  of  admiration  and  love 
of  them,  and  being  loath  to  let  them  escape  him 
in  nature,  even  at  the  risk  of  some  misadventure 
to  himself — so  far  from  there  being  any  pros¬ 
pect  of  advantage  to  him — such  a  one  takes  an 
immediate,  and  in  fact  intellectual,  interest  in 
the  beauty  of  nature.  This  means  that  he  is  not 
alone  pleased  with  nature’s  product  in  respect 
of  its  form,  but  is  also  pleased  at  its  existence, 
and  is  so  without  any  charm  of  sense  having  a 
share  in  the  matter,  or  without  his  associating 
with  it  any  end  whatsoever. 

In  this  connection,  however,  it  is  of  note  that 
were  we  to  play  a  trick  on  our  lover  of  the  beau¬ 
tiful,  and  plant  in  the  ground  artificial  flowers 
(which  can  be  made  so  as  to  look  just  like  natu¬ 
ral  ones),  and  perch  artfully  carved  birds  on  the 
branches  of  trees,  and  he  were  to  find  out  how 
he  had  been  taken  in,  the  immediate  interest 
which  these  things  previously  had  for  him 
would  at  once  vanish — though,  perhaps,  a  dif¬ 
ferent  interest  might  intervene  in  its  stead, 
that,  namely,  of  vanity  in  decorating  his  room 
with  them  for  the  eyes  of  others.  The  fact  is 
that  our  intuition  and  reflection  must  have  as 
their  concomitant  the  thought  that  the  beauty 
in  question  is  nature’s  handiwork;  and  this  is 
the  sole  basis  of  the  immediate  interest  that  is 
taken  in  it.  Failing  this,  we  are  either  left  with 
a  bare  judgement  of  taste  void  of  all  interest 


THE  CRITIQUE 


whatever,  or  else  only  with  one  that  is  combined 
with  an  interest  that  is  mediate,  involving, 
namely,  a  reference  to  society;  which  latter  af¬ 
fords  no  reliable  indication  of  morally  good 
habits  of  thought. 

The  superiority  which  natural  beauty  has 
over  that  of  art,  even  where  it  is  excelled  by 
the  latter  in  point  of  form,  in  yet  being  alone 
able  to  awaken  an  immediate  interest,  accords 
with  the  refined  and  well-grounded  habits  of 
thought  of  all  men  who  have  cultivated  their 
moral  feeling.  If  a  man  with  taste  enough  to 
judge  of  works  of  fine  art  with  the  greatest  cor¬ 
rectness  and  refinement  readily  quits  the  room 
in  which  he  meets  with  those  beauties  that  min¬ 
ister  to  vanity  or,  at  least,  social  joys,  and  be¬ 
takes  himself  to  the  beautiful  in  nature,  so  that 
he  may  there  find  as  it  were  a  feast  for  his  soul 
in  a  train  of  thought  which  he  can  never  com¬ 
pletely  evolve,  we  will  then  regard  this  his 
choice  even  with  veneration,  and  give  him  credit 
for  a  beautiful  soul,  to  which  no  connoisseur 
or  art  collector  can  lay  claim  on  the  score  of  the 
interest  which  his  objects  have  for  him.  Here, 
now,  are  two  kinds  of  objects  which  in  the 
judgement  of  mere  taste  could  scarcely  contend 
with  one  another  for  a  superiority.  What  then, 
is  the  distinction  that  makes  us  hold  them  in 
such  different  esteem? 

We  have  a  faculty  of  judgement  which  is 
merely  aesthetic — a  faculty  of  judging  of  forms 
without  the  aid  of  concepts,  and  of  finding,  in 
the  mere  estimate  of  them,  a  delight  that  we  at 
the  same  time  make  into  a  rule  for  every  one, 
without  this  judgement  being  founded  on  an  in¬ 
terest,  or  yet  producing  one.  On  the  other  hand, 
we  have  also  a  faculty  of  intellectual  judgement 
for  the  mere  forms  of  practical  maxims  (so  far 
as  they  are  of  themselves  qualified  for  universal 
legislation) — a  faculty  of  determining  an  a 
priori  delight,  which  we  make  into  a  law  for 
everyone,  without  our  judgement  being  founded 
on  any  interest,  though  here  it  produces  one. 
The  pleasure  or  displeasure  in  the  former  judge¬ 
ment  is  called  that  of  taste;  the  latter  is  called 
that  of  the  moral  feeling. 

But,  now,  reason  is  further  interested  in  ideas 
(for  which  in  our  moral  feeling  it  brings  about 
an  immediate  interest),  having  also  objective 
reality.1  That  is  to  say,  it  is  of  interest  to  rea¬ 
son  that  nature  should  at  least  show  a  trace  or 
give  a  hint  that  it  contains  in  itself  some  ground 
or  other2  for  assuming  a  uniform  accordance 
of  its  products  with  our  wholly  disinterested 

1  [Cf.  pp.  517,  528,  546;  also  p.  496.] 

2  [Cf.  p.  548.] 


delight  (a  delight  which  we  cognize  a  priori  as  in 
a  law  for  every  one  without  being  able  to  ground  d: 
it  upon  proofs).  That  being  so,  reason  must  n 
take  an  interest  in  every  manifestation  on  the  % 
part  of  nature  of  some  such  accordance.  Hence  il 
the  mind  cannot  reflect  on  the  beauty  of  nature 
without  at  the  same  time  finding  its  interest  en-  i 
gaged.  But  this  interest  is  akin  to  the  moral.  i 

One,  then,  who  takes  such  an  interest  in  the  : 

beautiful  in  nature  can  only  do  so  in  so  far  i 

as  he  has  previously  set  his  interest  deep  in  the  i 

foundations  of  the  morally  good.  On  these  1 
grounds  we  have  reason  for  presuming  the  pres¬ 
ence  of  at  least  the  germ  of  a  good  moral  dis¬ 
position  in  the  case  of  a  man  to  whom  the 
beauty  of  nature  is  a  matter  of  immediate  in¬ 
terest. 

It  will  be  said  that  this  interpretation  of 
aesthetic  judgements  on  the  basis  of  kinship 
with  our  moral  feeling  has  far  too  studied  an 
appearance  to  be  accepted  as  the  true  construc¬ 
tion  of  the  cypher  in  which  nature  speaks  to  us 
figuratively  in  its  beautiful  forms.  But,  first  of 
all,  this  immediate  interest  in  the  beauty  of  na¬ 
ture  is  not  in  fact  common.  It  is  peculiar  to  those 
whose  habits  of  thought  are  already  trained 
to  the  good  or  else  are  eminently  susceptible 
of  such  training;  and  under  the  circumstances 
the  analogy3  in  which  the  pure  judgement  of 
taste  that,  without  relying  upon  any  interest, 
gives  us  a  feeling  of  delight,  and  at  the  same 
time  represents  it  a  priori  as  proper  to  mankind 
in  general,  stands  to  the  moral  judgement  that 
does  just  the  same  from  concepts,  is  one  which, 
without  any  clear,  subtle,  and  deliberate  reflec¬ 
tion,  conduces  to  a  like  immediate  interest  be¬ 
ing  taken  in  the  objects  of  the  former  judge¬ 
ment  as  in  those  of  the  latter — with  this  one 
difference,  that  the  interest  in  the  first  case  is 
free,  while  in  the  latter  it  is  one  founded  on  ob¬ 
jective  laws.  In  addition  to  this,  there  is  our  ad¬ 
miration  of  Nature,  which  in  her  beautiful  prod¬ 
ucts  displays  herself  as  art,  not  as  mere  matter 
of  chance,  but,  as  it  were,  designedly,  according 
to  a  law-directed  arrangement,  and  as  finality 
apart  from  any  end.  As  we  never  meet  with 
such  an  end  outside  ourselves,  we  naturally 
look  for  it  in  ourselves,  and,  in  fact,  in  that 
which  constitutes  the  ultimate  end  of  our  ex¬ 
istence — the  moral  side  of  our  being.  (The  in¬ 
quiry  into  the  ground  of  the  possibility  of  such 
a  natural  finality  will,  however,  first  come  un¬ 
der  discussion  in  the  Teleology.) 

The  fact  that  the  delight  in  beautiful  art  does 
not,  in  the  pure  judgement  of  taste,  involve  an 

3  [Cf.  pp.  547,  548.] 


OF  AESTHETIC  JUDGEMENT 


immediate  interest,  as  does  that  in  beautiful 
nature,  may  be  readily  explained.  For  the  for¬ 
mer  is  either  such  an  imitation  of  the  latter  as 
goes  the  length  of  deceiving  us,  in  which  case 
it  acts  upon  us  in  the  character  of  a  natural 
beauty,  which  we  take  it  to  be;  or  else  it  is  an 
intentional  art  obviously  directed  to  our  delight. 
In  the  latter  case,  however,  the  delight  in  the 
product  would,  it  is  true,  be  brought  about  im¬ 
mediately  by  taste,  but  there  would  be  nothing 
but  a  mediate  interest  in  the  cause  that  lay  be¬ 
neath — an  interest,  namely,  in  an  art  only 
capable  of  interesting  by  its  end,  and  never  in 
itself.  It  will,  perhaps,  be  said  that  this  is  also 
the  case  where  an  object  of  nature  only  inter¬ 
ests  by  its  beauty  so  far  as  a  moral  idea  is 
brought  into  partnership  therewith.  But  it  is  not 
the  object  that  is  of  immediate  interest,  but 
rather  the  inherent  character  of  the  beauty 
qualifying  it  for  such  a  partnership — a  charac¬ 
ter,  therefore,  that  belongs  to  the  very  essence 
of  beauty. 

The  charms  in  natural  beauty,1  which  are 
to  be  found  blended,  as  it  were,  so  frequently 
with  beauty  of  form,  belong  either  to  the  modi¬ 
fications  of  light  (in  colouring)  or  of  sound  (in 
tones).  For  these  are  the  only  sensations  which 
permit  not  merely  of  a  feeling  of  the  senses, 
but  also  of  reflection  upon  the  form  of  these 
modifications  of  sense,  and  so  embody  as  it 
were  a  language  in  which  nature  speaks  to  us 
and  which  has  the  semblance  of  a  higher  mean¬ 
ing.  Thus  the  white  colour  of  the  lily  seems  to 
dispose  the  mind  to  ideas  of  innocence,  and  the 
other  seven  colours,  following  the  series  from 
the  red  to  the  violet,  similarly  to  ideas  of  (i) 
sublimity,  (2)  courage,  (3)  candour,  (4)  ami¬ 
ability,  (5)  modesty,  (6)  constancy,  (7)  ten¬ 
derness.  The  bird’s  song  tells  of  joyousness  and 
contentment  with  its  existence.  At  least  so  we 
interpret  nature — whether  such  be  its  purpose 
or  not.  But  it  is  the  indispensable  requisite  of 
the  interest  which  we  here  take  in  beauty,  that 
the  beauty  should  be  that  of  nature,  and  it  van¬ 
ishes  completely  as  soon  as  we  are  conscious 
of  having  been  deceived,  and  that  it  is  only  the 
work  of  art — so  completely  that  even  taste  can 
then  no  longer  find  in  it  anything  beautiful  nor 
sight  anything  attractive.  What  do  poets  set 
more  store  on  than  the  nightingale’s  bewitching 
and  beautiful  note,  in  a  lonely  thicket  on  a  still 
summer  evening  by  the  soft  light  of  the  moon? 
And  yet  we  have  instances  of  how,  where  no 
such  songster  was  to  be  found,  a  jovial  host  has 
played  a  trick  on  the  guests  with  him  on  a  visit 

1  [Cf.  p.  521,  et  seqS\ 


523 

to  enjoy  the  country  air,  and  has  done  so  to 
their  huge  satisfaction,  by  hiding  in  a  thicket 
a  rogue  of  a  youth  who  (with  a  reed  or  rush  in 
his  mouth)  knew  how  to  reproduce  this  note  so 
as  to  hit  off  nature  to  perfection.  But  the  in¬ 
stant  one  realizes  that  it  is  all  a  fraud  no  one 
will  long  endure  listening  to  this  song  that  be¬ 
fore  was  regarded  as  so  attractive.  And  it  is 
just  the  same  with  the  song  of  any  other  bird. 
It  must  be  nature,  or  be  mistaken  by  us  for 
nature,  to  enable  us  to  take  an  immediate  inter¬ 
est  in  the  beautiful  as  such;  and  this  is  all  the 
more  so  if  we  can  even  call  upon  others  to  take 
a  similar  interest.  And  such  a  demand  we  do  in 
fact  make,  since  we  regard  as  coarse  and  low 
the  habits  of  thought  of  those  who  have  no 
feeling  for  beautiful  nature  (for  this  is  the 
word  we  use  for  susceptibility  to  an  interest  in 
the  contemplation  of  beautiful  nature),  and 
who  devote  themselves  to  the  mere  enjoyments 
of  sense  found  in  eating  and  drinking. 

§  43.  Art  in  general 

(1.)  Art  is  distinguished  from  nature  as  mak¬ 
ing  ( jacere )  is  from  acting  or  operating  in  gen¬ 
eral  ( agere ),  and  the  product  or  the  result  of 
the  former  is  distinguished  from  that  of  the 
latter  as  work  {opus)  from  operation  {effectus). 

By  right  it  is  only  production  through  free¬ 
dom,  i.e.,  through  an  act  of  will  that  places 
reason  at  the  basis  of  its  action,  that  should  be 
termed  art.  For,  although  we  are  pleased  to  call 
what  bees  produce  (their  regularly  constituted 
cells)  a  work  of  art,  we  only  do  so  on  the 
strength  of  an  analogy  with  art;  that  is  to  say, 
as  soon  as  we  call  to  mind  that  no  rational  delib¬ 
eration  forms  the  basis  of  their  labour,  we  say 
at  once  that  it  is  a  product  of  their  nature  (of 
instinct),  and  it  is  only  to  their  Creator  that 
we  ascribe  it  as  art. 

If,  as  sometimes  happens,  in  a  search  through 
a  bog,  we  light  on  a  piece  of  hewn  wood,  we  do 
not  say  it  is  a  product  of  nature  but  of  art.  Its 
producing  cause  had  an  end  in  view  to  which 
the  object  owes  its  form.  Apart  from  such 
cases,  we  recognize  an  art  in  everything  formed 
in  such  a  way  that  its  actuality  must  have  been 
preceded  by  a  representation  of  the  thing  in  its 
cause  (as  even  in  the  case  of  the  bees),  although 
the  effect  could  not  have  been  thought  by  the 
cause.  But  where  anything  is  called  absolutely 
a  work  of  art,  to  distinguish  it  from  a  natural 
product,  then  some  work  of  man  is  always 
understood. 

(2.)  Art ,  as  human  skill,  is  distinguished  also 
from  science  (as  ability  from  knowledge) ,  as  a 


THE  CRITIQUE 


practical  from  a  theoretical  faculty,  as  technic 
from  theory  (as  the  art  of  surveying  from 
geometry).  For  this  reason,  also,  what  one  can 
do  the  moment  one  only  knows  what  is  to  be 
done,  hence  without  anything  more  than  suffi¬ 
cient  knowledge  of  the  desired  result,  is  not 
called  art.  To  art  that  alone  belongs  for  which 
the  possession  of  the  most  complete  knowledge 
does  not  involve  one’s  having  then  and  there 
the  skill  to  do  it.  Camper1  describes  very 
exactly  how  the  best  shoe  must  be  made,  but 
he,  doubtless,  was  not  able  to  turn  one  out 
himself.2 

(3.)  Art  is  further  distinguished  from  handi¬ 
craft.  The  first  is  called  free ,  the  other  may  be 
called  industrial  art .  We  look  on  the  former  as 
something  which  could  only  prove  final  (be  a 
success)  as  play,  i.e.,  an  occupation  which  is 
agreeable  on  its  own  account;  but  on  the  second 
as  labour,  i.e.,  a  business,  which  on  its  own 
account  is  disagreeable  (drudgery),  and  is  only 
attractive  by  means  of  what  it  results  in  (e.g., 
the  pay),  and  which  is  consequently  capable  of 
being  a  compulsory  imposition.  Whether  in  the 
list  of  arts  and  crafts  we  are  to  rank  watch¬ 
makers  as  artists,  and  smiths  on  the  contrary 
as  craftsmen,  requires  a  standpoint  different 
from  that  here  adopted — one,  that  is  to  say, 
taking  account  of  the  proposition  of  the  talents 
which  the  business  undertaken  in  either  case 
must  necessarily  involve.  Whether,  also,  among 
the  so-called  seven  free  arts  some  may  not  have 
been  included  which  should  be  reckoned  as 
sciences,  and  many,  too,  that  resemble  handi¬ 
craft,  is  a  matter  I  will  not  discuss  here.  It  is 
not  amiss,  however,  to  remind  the  reader  of 
this:  that  in  all  free  arts  something  of  a  com¬ 
pulsory  character  is  still  required,  or,  as  it  is 
called,  a  mechanism ,  without  which  the  soul, 
which  in  art  must  be  free ,  and  which  alone  gives 
life  to  the  work,  would  be  bodyless  and  evanes¬ 
cent  (e.g.,  in  the  poetic  art  there  must  be  cor¬ 
rectness  and  wealth  of  language,  likewise  pros¬ 
ody  and  metre).  For  not  a  few  leaders  of  a 
newer  school3  believe  that  the  best  way  to  pro¬ 
mote  a  free  art  is  to  sweep  away  all  restraint 
and  convert  it  from  labour  into  mere  play. 

1  [Peter  Camper  (1722-89),  a  Dutch  physician  and 
scientist,  and  author  of  anatomical  and  medical  works.] 

2  In  my  part  of  the  country,  if  you  set  a  common 
man  a  problem  like  that  of  Columbus  and  his  e^K.  he 
says,  “There  is  no  art  in  that,  it  is  only  science”:  i.e.. 
you  can  do  it  if  you  know  how;  and  he  says  just  the 
same  of  all  the  would-be  arts  of  jugglers.  To  that  of  the 
tight-rope  dancer,  on  the  other  hand,  he  has  not  the 
least  compunction  in  giving  the  name  of  art. 

3  [Cf.  pp.  525;  526,  et  scq.;  531,  et  seq.;  538,  et 
seq.  J 


§  44.  Fine  art 

There  is  no  science  of  the  beautiful,  but  only 
a  critique.  Nor,  again,  is  there  an  elegant 
( schone )  science,  but  only  a  fine  ( schone )  art. 
For  a  science  of  the  beautiful  would  have  to 
determine  scientifically,  i.e.,  by  means  of  proofs, 
whether  a  thing  was  to  be  considered  beautiful 
or  not;  and  the  judgement  upon  beauty,  conse¬ 
quently,  would,  if  belonging  to  science,  fail  to 
be  a  judgement  of  taste.  As  for  a  beautiful 
science — a  science  which,  as  such,  is  to  be  beau¬ 
tiful,  is  a  nonentity.  For  if,  treating  it  as  a 
science,  we  were  to  ask  for  reasons  and  proofs, 
we  would  be  put  off  with  elegant  phrases  ( bons 
mots).  What  has  given  rise  to  the  current  ex¬ 
pression  elegant  sciences  is,  doubtless,  no  more 
than  this,  that  common  observation  has,  quite 
accurately,  noted  the  fact  that  for  fine  art,  in 
the  fulness  of  its  perfection,  a  large  store  of 
science  is  required,  as,  for  example,  knowledge 
of  ancient  languages,  acquaintance  with  classi¬ 
cal  authors,  history,  antiquarian  learning,  etc. 
Hence  these  historical  sciences,  owing  to  the 
fact  that  they  form  the  necessary  preparation 
and  groundwork  for  fine  art,  and  partly  also 
owing  to  the  fact  that  they  are  taken  to  com¬ 
prise  even  the  knowledge  of  the  products  of 
fine  art  (rhetoric  and  poetry),  have  by  a  con¬ 
fusion  of  words,  actually  got  the  name  of  ele¬ 
gant  sciences. 

Where  art,  merely  seeking  to  actualize  a  pos¬ 
sible  object  to  the  cognition  of  which  it  is  ade¬ 
quate,  does  whatever  acts  are  required  for  that 
purpose,  then  it  is  mechanical.  But  should  the 
feeling  of  pleasure  be  what  it  has  immediately 
in  view,  it  is  then  termed  aesthetic  art.  As  such 
it  may  be  either  agreeable  or  fine  art.  The  de¬ 
scription  “agreeable  art”  applies  where  the  end 
of  the  art  is  that  the  pleasure  should  accompany 
the  representations  considered  as  mere  sensa¬ 
tions,  the  description  “fine  art”  where  it  is  to 
accompany  them  considered  as  modes  of  cog¬ 
nition . 

Agreeable  arts  are  those  which  have  mere 
enjoyment  for  their  object.  Such  are  all  the 
charms  that  can  gratify  a  dinner  party:  enter¬ 
taining  narrative,  the  art  of  starting  the  whole 
table  in  unrestrained  and  sprightly  conversa¬ 
tion,  or  with  jest  and  laughter  inducing  a  cer¬ 
tain  air  of  gaiety.  Here,  as  the  saying  goes, 
there  may  be  much  loose  talk  over  the  glasses, 
without  a  person  wishing  to  be  brought  to  book 
for  all  he  utters,  because  it  is  only  given  out  for 
the  entertainment  of  the  moment,  and  not  as  a 
lasting  matter  to  be  made  the  subject  of  reflec- 


OF  AESTHETIC 

tion  or  repetition.  (Of  the  same  sort  is  also  the 
art  of  arranging  the  table  for  enjoyment,  or,  at 
large  banquets,  the  music  of  the  orchestra — a 
quaint  idea  intended  to  act  on  the  mind  merely 
as  an  agreeable  noise  fostering  a  genial  spirit, 
which,  without  any  one  paying  the  smallest  at¬ 
tention  to  the  composition,  promotes  the  free 
flow  of  conversation  between  guest  and  guest.) 

In  addition  must  be  included  play  of  every  kind 
which  is  attended  with  no  further  interest  than 
that  of  making  the  time  pass  by  unheeded. 

Fine  art,  on  the  other  hand,  is  a  mode  of 
representation  which  is  intrinsically  final,  and 
which,  although  devoid  of  an  end,  has  the  effect 
of  advancing  the  culture  of  the  mental  powers 
in  the  interests  of  social  communication. 

The  universal  communicability  of  a  pleasure 
involves  in  its  very  concept  that  the  pleasure  is 
not  one  of  enjoyment  arising  out  of  mere  sen¬ 
sation,  but  must  be  one  of  reflection.  Hence 
aesthetic  art,  as  art  which  is  beautiful,  is  one 
having  for  its  standard  the  reflective  judgement 
and  not  organic  sensation. 

§  45.  Fine  art  is  an  art,  so  jar  as  it  has  at  the 

same  time  the  appearance  of  being  nature 

A  product  of  fine  art  must  be  recognized  to 
be  art  and  not  nature.  Nevertheless  the  finality 
in  its  form  must  appear  just  as  free  from  the 
constraint  of  arbitrary  rules  as  if  it  were  a 
product  of  mere  nature.  Upon  this  feeling  of 
freedom  in  the  play  of  our  cognitive  faculties 
— which  play  has  at  the  same  time  to  be  final — 
rests  that  pleasure  which  alone  is  universally 
communicable  without  being  based  on  concepts. 
Nature  proved  beautiful  when  it  wore  the  ap¬ 
pearance  of  art;  and  art  can  only  be  termed 
beautiful,  where  we  are  conscious  of  its  being 
art,  while  yet  it  has  the  appearance  of  nature. 

For,  whether  we  are  dealing  with  beauty  of 
nature  or  beauty  of  art,  we  may  make  the  uni¬ 
versal  statement:  That  is  beautiful  which 
pleases  in  the  mere  estimate  of  it  (not  in  sen¬ 
sation  or  by  means  of  a  concept).  Now  art  has 
always  got  a  definite  intention  of  producing 
something.1  Were  this  “something,”  however, 
to  be  mere  sensation  (something  merely  sub¬ 
jective),  intended  to  be  accompanied  with 
pleasure,  then  such  product  would,  in  our  esti¬ 
mation  of  it,  only  please  through  the  agency  of 
the  feeling  of  the  senses.  On  the  other  hand, 
were  the  intention  one  directed  to  the  produc¬ 
tion  of  a  definite  object,  then,  supposing  this 
were  attained  by  art,,  the  object  would  only 

1  [Cf.  pp.  526,  527,  528,  530,  532,  et  seq.;  546,  et 
seq.;  549,  et  seq .] 


JUDGEMENT  525 

please  by  means  of  a  concept.  But  in  both  cases 
the  art  would  please,  not  in  the  mere  estimate 
of  it,  i.e.,  not  as  fine  art,  but  rather  as  mechan¬ 
ical  art. 

Hence  the  finality  in  the  product  of  fine  art, 
intentional  though  it  be,  must  not  have  the  ap¬ 
pearance  of  being  intentional;  i.e.,  fine  art  must 
be  clothed  with  the  aspect  of  nature,  although 
we  recognize  it  to  be  art.  But  the  way  in  which 
a  product  of  art  seems  like  nature  is  by  the 
presence  of  perfect  exactness  in  the  agreement 
with  rules  prescribing  how  alone  the  product 
can  be  what  it  is  intended  to  be,  but  with  an 
absence  of  laboured  effect  (without  academic 
form  betraying  itself),  i.e.,  without  a  trace  ap¬ 
pearing  of  the  artist  having  always  had  the 
rule  present  to  him  and  of  its  having  fettered 
his  mental  powers. 

§  46.  Fine  art  is  the  art  of  genius 

Genius  is  the  talent  (natural  endowment) 
which  gives  the  rule  to  art.  Since  talent,  as  an 
innate  productive  faculty  of  the  artist,  belongs 
itself  to  nature,  we  may  put  it  this  way:  Genius 
is  the  innate  mental  aptitude  ( ingenium ) 
through  which  nature  gives  the  rule  to  art. 

Whatever  may  be  the  merits  of  this  defini¬ 
tion,  and  whether  it  is  merely  arbitrary,  or 
whether  it  is  adequate  or  not  to  the  concept 
usually  associated  with  the  word  genius  (a  point 
which  the  following  sections  have  to  clear  up), 
it  may  still  be  shown  at  the  outset  that,  accord¬ 
ing  to  this  acceptation  of  the  word,  fine  arts 
must  necessarily  be  regarded  as  arts  of  genius. 

For  every  art  presupposes  rules  which  are 
laid  down  as  the  foundation  which  first  enables 
a  product,  if  it  is  to  be  called  one  of  art,  to  be 
represented  as  possible.  The  concept  of  fine 
art,  however,  does  not  permit  of  the  judgement 
upon  the  beauty  of  its  product  being  derived 
from  any  rule  that  has  a  concept  for  its  deter¬ 
mining  ground,  and  that  depends,  consequently, 
on  a  concept  of  the  way  in  which  the  product 
is  possible.  Consequently  fine  art  cannot  of  its 
own  self  excogitate  the  rule  according  to  which 
it  is  to  effectuate  its  product.  But  since,  for  all 
that,  a  product  can  never  be  called  art  unless 
there  is  a  preceding  rule,  it  follows  that  nature 
in  the  individual  (and  by  virtue  of  the  harmony 
of  his  faculties)  must  give  the  rule  to  art,  i.e., 
fine  art  is  only  possible  as  a  product  of  genius. 

From  this  it  may  be  seen  that  genius  (1)  is  a 
talent  for  producing  that  for  which  no  definite 
rule  can  be  given,2  and  not  an  aptitude  in  the 
way  of  cleverness  for  what  can  be  learned  ac- 

2  [Cf.  pp.  530,  543,  et  seq.] 


526  THE  CRITIQUE 


cording  to  some  rule;  and  that  consequently 
originality  must  be  its  primary  property.  (2) 
Since  there  may  also  be  original  nonsense,  its 
products  must  at  the  same  time  be  models,  i.e., 
be  exemplary;  and,  consequently,  though  not 
themselves  derived  from  imitation,  they  must 
serve  that  purpose  for  others,  i.e.,  as  a  standard 
or  rule  of  estimating.  (3)  It  cannot  indicate 
scientifically  how  it  brings  about  its  product, 
but  rather  gives  the  rule  as  nature.  Hence, 
where  an  author  owes  a  product  to  his  genius, 
he  does  not  himself  know  how  the  ideas  for  it 
have  entered  into  his  head,  nor  has  he  it  in  his 
power  to  invent  the  like  at  pleasure,  or  methodi¬ 
cally,  and  communicate  the  same  to  others  in 
such  precepts  as  would  put  them  in  a  position 
to  produce  similar  products.  (Hence,  presum¬ 
ably,  our  word  Genie  is  derived  from  genius , 
as  the  peculiar  guardian  and  guiding  spirit  given 
to  a  man  at  his  birth,  by  the  inspiration  of 
which  those  original  ideas  were  obtained.)  (4) 
Nature  prescribes  the  rule  through  genius  not 
to  science  but  to  art,  and  this  also  only  in  so 
far  as  it  is  to  be  fine  art.1 

§  47.  Elucidation  and  confirmation  of  the 
above  explanation  of  genius 

Every  one  is  agreed  on  the  point  of  the  com¬ 
plete  opposition  between  genius  and  the  spirit 
of  imitation.  Now  since  learning  is  nothing  but 
imitation,  the  greatest  ability,  or  aptness  as  a 
pupil  (capacity),  is  still,  as  such,  not  equivalent 
to  genius.  Even  though  a  man  weaves  his  own 
thoughts  or  fancies,  instead  of  merely  taking 
in  what  others  have  thought,  and  even  though 
he  go  so  far  as  to  bring  fresh  gains  to  art  and 
science,  this  does  not  afford  a  valid  reason  for 
calling  such  a  man  of  brains ,  and  often  great 
brains,  a  genius ,  in  contradistinction  to  one  who 
goes  by  the  name  of  shallow-pate ,  because  he 
can  never  do  more  than  merely  learn  and  follow 
a  lead.  For  what  is  accomplished  in  this  way 
is  something  that  could  have  been  learned. 
Hence  it  all  lies  in  the  natural  path  of  investi¬ 
gation  and  reflection  according  to  rules,  and  so 
is  not  specifically  distinguishable  from  what 
may  be  acquired  as  the  result  of  industry 
backed  up  by  imitation.  So  all  that  Newton  has 
set  forth  in  his  immortal  work  on  the  Princi¬ 
ples  of  Natural  Philosophy  may  well  be 
learned,  however  great  a  mind  it  took  to  find 
it  all  out,  but  we  cannot  learn  to  write  in  a  true 
poetic  vein,  no  matter  how  complete  all  the  pre¬ 
cepts  of  the  poetic  art  may  be,  or  however  ex¬ 
cellent  its  models.  The  reason  is  that  all  the 

1  [Cf.  pp.  490,  527.] 


steps  that  Newton  had  to  take  from  the  first 
elements  of  geometry  to  his  greatest  and  most 
profound  discoveries  were  such  as  he  could 
make  intuitively  evident  and  plain  to  follow, 
not  only  for  himself  but  for  every  one  else.  On 
the  other  hand,  no  Homer  or  Wieland  can  show 
how  his  ideas,  so  rich  at  once  in  fancy  and  in 
thought,  enter  and  assemble  themselves  in  his 
brain,  for  the  good  reason  that  he  does  not  him¬ 
self  know,  and  so  cannot  teach  others.  In  mat¬ 
ters  of  science,  therefore,  the  greatest  inventor 
differs  only  in  degree  from  the  most  laborious 
imitator  and  apprentice,  whereas  he  differs 
specifically  from  one  endowed  by  nature  for 
fine  art.  No  disparagement,  however,  of  those 
great  men,  to  whom  the  human  race  is  so  deeply 
indebted,  is  involved  in  this  comparison  of 
them  with  those  who  on  the  score  of  their  talent 
for  fine  art  are  the  elect  of  nature.  The  talent 
for  science  is  formed  for  the  continued  ad¬ 
vances  of  greater  perfection  in  knowledge,  with 
all  its  dependent  practical  advantages,  as  also 
for  imparting  the  same  to  others.  Hence  scien¬ 
tists  can  boast  a  ground  of  considerable  superi¬ 
ority  over  those  who  merit  the  honour  of  being 
called  geniuses,  since  genius  reaches  a  point  at 
which  art  must  make  a  halt,  as  there  is  a  limit 
imposed  upon  it  which  it  cannot  transcend. 
This  limit  has  in  all  probability  been  long  since 
attained.  In  addition,  such  skill  cannot  be  com¬ 
municated,  but  requires  to  be  bestowed  directly 
from  the  hand  of  nature  upon  each  individual, 
and  so  with  him  it  dies,  awaiting  the  day  when 
nature  once  again  endows  another  in  the  same 
way — one  who  needs  no  more  than  an  example 
to  set  the  talent  of  which  he  is  conscious  at 
work  on  similar  lines. 

Seeing,  then,  that  the  natural  endowment  of 
art  (as  fine  art)  must  furnish  the  rule,  what 
kind  of  rule  must  this  be?  It  cannot  be  one  set 
down  in  a  formula  and  serving  as  a  precept — for 
then  the  judgement  upon  the  beautiful  would 
be  determinable  according  to  concepts.  Rather 
must  the  rule  be  gathered  from  the  perform¬ 
ance,2  i.e.,  from  the  product,  which  others  may 
use  to  put  their  own  talent  to  the  test,  so  as  to 
let  it  serve  as  a  model,  not  for  imitation ,  but  for 
following.  The  possibility  of  this  is  difficult  to 
explain.  The  artist’s  ideas  arouse  like  ideas  on 
the  part  of  his  pupil,  presuming  nature  to  have 
visited  him  with  a  like  proportion  of  the  mental 
powers.  For  this  reason,  the  models  of  fine  art 
are  the  only  means  of  handing  down  this  art 
to  posterity.  This  is  something  which  cannot 
be  done  by  mere  descriptions  (especially  not  in 

2  [Cf.  p.  548,  et  seq. ] 


OF  AESTHETIC 

the  line  of  the  arts  of  speech),  and  in  these  arts, 
furthermore,  only  those  models  can  become 
classical  of  which  the  ancient,  dead  languages, 
preserved  as  learned,  are  the  medium. 

Despite  the  marked  difference  that  distin¬ 
guishes  mechanical  art,  as  an  art  merely  de¬ 
pending  upon  industry  and  learning,  from  fine 
art,  as  that  of  genius,  there  is  still  no  fine  art 
in  which  something  mechanical,  capable  of  be¬ 
ing  at  once  comprehended  and  followed  in  obe¬ 
dience  to  rules,  and  consequently  something 
academic ,  does  not  constitute  the  essential  con¬ 
dition  of  the  art.  For  the  thought  of  something 
as  end  must  be  present,  or  else  its  product  would 
not  be  ascribed  to  an  art  at  all,  but  would  be 
a  mere  product  of  chance.  But  the  effectuation 
of  an  end  necessitates  determinate  rules  which 
we  cannot  venture  to  dispense  with.  Now,  see¬ 
ing  that  originality  of  talent  is  one  (though 
not  the  sole)  essential  factor  that  goes  to  make 
up  the  character  of  genius,  shallow  minds  fancy 
that  the  best  evidence  they  can  give  of  their 
being  full-blown  geniuses  is  by  emancipating 
themselves  from  all  academic  constraint  of  rules, 
in  the  belief  that  one  cuts  a  finer  figure  on  the 
back  of  an  ill-tempered  than  of  a  trained  horse. 
Genius  can  do  no  more  than  furnish  rich  mate¬ 
rial  for  products  of  fine  art;  its  elaboration  and 
its  form  require  a  talent  academically  trained, 
so  that  it  may  be  employed  in  such  a  way  as  to 
stand  the  test  of  judgement.  But,  for  a  person 
to  hold  forth  and  pass  sentence  like  a  genius  in 
matters  that  fall  to  the  province  of  the  most 
patient  rational  investigation,  is  ridiculous  in 
the  extreme.1  One  is  at  a  loss  to  know  whether 
to  laugh  more  at  the  impostor  who  envelops 
himself  in  such  a  cloud — in  which  we  are  given 
fuller  scope  to  our  imagination  at  the  expense 
of  all  use  of  our  critical  faculty — or  at  the 
simple-minded  public  which  imagines  that  its 
inability  clearly  to  cognize  and  comprehend  this 
masterpiece  of  penetration  is  due  to  its  being 
invaded  by  new  truths  en  masse,  in  comparison 
with  which,  detail,  due  to  carefully  weighed  ex¬ 
position  and  an  academic  examination  of  root- 
principles,  seems  to  it  only  the  work  of  a  tyro. 

§  48.  The  relation  of  genius  to  taste 

For  estimating  beautiful  objects,  as  such, 
what  is  required  is  taste ;  but  for  fine  art,  i.e.,  the 
production  of  such  objects,  one  needs  genius.2 

1  [In  the  Critique  of  Practical  Reason,  p.  361,  Kant 
spoke  of  “the  extravagances  of  genius,  by  which,  as  by 
the  adepts  of  the  philosopher’s  stone,  without  any  me¬ 
thodical  study  or  knowledge  of  nature,  visionary  treas¬ 
ures  are  promised  and  the  true  are  thrown  away.”] 

2  [Cf.  pp.  491,  548.] 


JUDGEMENT  527 

If  we  consider  genius  as  the  talent  for  fine 
art  (which  the  proper  signification  of  the  word 
imports),  and  if  we  would  analyse  it  from  this 
point  of  view  into  the  faculties  which  must  con¬ 
cur  to  constitute  such  a  talent,  it  is  imperative 
at  the  outset  accurately  to  determine  the  differ¬ 
ence  between  beauty  of  nature,  which  it  only 
requires  taste  to  estimate,  and  beauty  of  art, 
which  requires  genius  for  its  possibility  (a  pos¬ 
sibility  to  which  regard  must  also  be  paid  in 
estimating  such  an  object). 

A  beauty  of  nature  is  a  beautiful  thing; 
beauty  of  art  is  a  beautiful  representation  of  a 
thing. 

To  enable  me  to  estimate  a  beauty  of  nature, 
as  such,  I  do  not  need  to  be  previously  pos¬ 
sessed  of  a  concept  of  what  sort  of  a  thing  the 
object  is  intended  to  be,  i.e.,  I  am  not  obliged 
to  know  its  material  finality  (the  end),  but, 
rather,  in  forming  an  estimate  of  it  apart  from 
any  knowledge  of  the  end,  the  mere  form 
pleases  on  its  own  account.  If.  however,  the 
object  is  presented  as  a  product  of  art,  and  is 
as  such  to  be  declared  beautiful,  then,  seeing 
that  art  always  presupposes  an  end  in  the  cause 
(and  its  causality),  a  concept  of  what  the  thing 
is  intended  to  be  must  first  of  all  be  laid  at  its 
basis.  And,  since  the  agreement  of  the  manifold 
in  a  thing  with  an  inner  character  belonging  to 
it  as  its  end  constitutes  the  perfection  of  the 
thing,  it  follows  that  in  estimating  beauty  of 
art  the  perfection  of  the  thing  must  be  also 
taken  into  account — a  matter  which  in  estimat¬ 
ing  a  beauty  of  nature,  as  beautiful,  is  quite  ir- 
revelant.  It  is  true  that  in  forming  an  estimate, 
especially  of  animate  objects  of  nature,  e.g.,  of 
a  man  or  a  horse,  objective  finality  is  also  com¬ 
monly  taken  into  account  with  a  view  to  judge¬ 
ment  upon  their  beauty;  but  then  the  judge¬ 
ment  also  ceases  to  be  purely  aesthetic,  i.e.,  a 
mere  judgement  of  taste.  Nature  is  no  longer 
estimated  as  it  appears  like  art,  but  rather  in  so 
far  as  it  actually  is  art,  though  superhuman  art; 
and  the  teleological  judgement  serves  as  a  basis 
and  condition  of  the  aesthetic,  and  one  which  the 
latter  must  regard.  In  such  a  case,  where  one 
says,  for  example,  “That  is  a  beautiful  woman/’ 
what  one  in  fact  thinks  is  only  this,  that  in  her 
form  nature  excellently  portrays  the  ends  pres¬ 
ent  in  the  female  figure.  For  one  has  to  extend 
one’s  view  beyond  the  mere  form  to  a  concept, 
to  enable  the  object  to  be  thought  in  such  man¬ 
ner  by  means  of  an  aesthetic  judgement  logically 
conditioned. 

Where  fine  art  evidences  its  superiority  is  in 
the  beautiful  descriptions  it  gives  of  things  that 


528  THE  CRITIQUE 


in  nature  would  be  ugly  or  displeasing.1  The 
Furies,  diseases,  devastations  of  war,  and  the 
like,  can  (as  evils)  be  very  beautifully  described, 
nay  even  represented  in  pictures.  One  kind  of  ug¬ 
liness  alone  is  incapable  of  being  represented 
conformably  to  nature  without  destroying  all 
aesthetic  delight,  and  consequently  artistic  beau¬ 
ty,  namely,  that  which  excites  disgust.  For,  as  in 
this  strange  sensation,  which  depends  purely  on 
the  imagination,  the  object  is  represented  as  in¬ 
sisting,  as  it  were,  upon  our  enjoying  it,  while  we 
still  set  our  face  against  it,  the  artificial  repre¬ 
sentation  of  the  object  is  no  longer  distinguish¬ 
able  from  the  nature  of  the  object  itself  in  our 
sensation,  and  so  it  cannot  possibly  be  regarded 
as  beautiful.  The  art  of  sculpture,  again,  since 
in  its  products  art  is  almost  confused  with 
nature,  has  excluded  from  its  creations  the 
direct  representation  of  ugly  objects,  and,  in¬ 
stead,  only  sanctions,  for  example,  the  repre¬ 
sentation  of  death  (in  a  beautiful  genius),  or 
of  the  warlike  spirit  (in  Mars),  by  means  of  an 
allegory,  or  attributes  which  wear  a  pleasant 
guise,  and  so  only  indirectly,  through  an  inter¬ 
pretation  on  the  part  of  reason,  and  not  for 
the  pure  aesthetic  judgement. 

So  much  for  the  beautiful  representation  of 
an  object,  which  is  properly  only  the  form  of 
the  presentation  of  a  concept  and  the  means 
by  which  the  latter  is  universally  communi¬ 
cated.  To  give  this  form,  however,  to  the  prod¬ 
uct  of  fine  art,  taste  merely  is  required.  By 
this  the  artist,  having  practised  and  corrected 
his  taste  by  a  variety  of  examples  from  nature 
or  art,  controls  his  work  and,  after  many,  and 
often  laborious,  attempts  to  satisfy  taste,  finds 
the  form  which  commends  itself  to  him.  Hence 
this  form  is  not,  as  it  were,  a  matter  of  inspira¬ 
tion,  or  of  a  free  swing  of  the  mental  powers, 
but  rather  of  a  slow  and  even  painful  process 
of  improvement,  directed  to  making  the  form 
adequate  to  his  thought  without  prejudice  to 
the  freedom  in  the  play  of  those  powers. 

Taste  is,  however,  merely  a  critical,  not  a 
productive  faculty;  and  what  conforms  to  it  is 
not,  merely  on  that  account,  a  work  of  fine  art. 
It  may  belong  to  useful  and  mechanical  art,  or 
even  to  science,  as  a  product  following  definite 
rules  which  are  capable  of  being  learned  and 
which  must  be  closely  followed.  But  the  pleas¬ 
ing  form  imparted  to  the  work  is  only  the 
vehicle  of  communication  and  a  mode,  as  it 
were,  of  execution,  in  respect  of  which  one  re¬ 
mains  to  a  certain  extent  free,  notwithstanding 
being  otherwise  tied  down  to  a  definite  end.  So 

1  [Cf.  Aristotle’s  Poetics,  iv;  and  Rhetoric ,  I,  xi.] 


we  demand  that  table  appointments,  or  even  a 
moral  dissertation,  and,  indeed,  a  sermon,  must 
bear  this  form  of  fine  art,  yet  without  its  ap¬ 
pearing  studied.  But  one  would  not  call  them 
on  this  account  works  of  fine  art.  A  poem,  a 
musical  composition,  a  picture-gallery,  and  so 
forth,  would,  however,  be  placed  under  this 
head;  and  so  in  a  would-be  work  of  fine  art 
we  may  frequently  recognize  genius  without 
taste,  and  in  another  taste  without  genius. 

§  49.  The  faculties  of  the  mind  which 
constitute  genius 

Of  certain  products  which  are  expected, 
partly  at  least,  to  stand  on  the  footing  of  fine 
art,  we  say  they  are  soulless;  and  this,  although 
we  find  nothing  to  censure  in  them  as  far  as 
taste  goes.  A  poem  may  be  very  pretty  and 
elegant,  but  is  soulless.  A  narrative  has  pre¬ 
cision  and  method,  but  is  soulless.  A  speech  on 
some  festive  occasion  may  be  good  in  substance 
and  ornate  withal,  but  may  be  soulless.  Conver¬ 
sation  frequently  is  not  devoid  of  entertain¬ 
ment,  but  yet  soulless.  Even  of  a  woman  we 
may  well  say,  she  is  pretty,  affable,  and  refined, 
but  soulless.  Now  what  do  we  here  mean  by 
“soul”? 

Soul  ( Geist )  in  an  aesthetical  sense,  signifies 
the  animating  principle  in  the  mind.  But  that 
whereby  this  principle  animates  the  psychic  sub¬ 
stance  ( Seele ) —  the  material  which  it  employs 
for  that  purpose — is  that  which  sets  the  mental 
powers  into  a  swing  that  is  final,  i.e.,  into 
a  play  which  is  self-maintaining  and  which 
strengthens  those  powers  for  such  activity.2 

Now  my  proposition  is  that  this  principle  is 
nothing  else  than  the  faculty  of  presenting 
aesthetic  ideas.  But,  by  an  aesthetic  idea  I  mean 
that  representation  of  the  imagination  which 
induces  much  thought,  yet  without  the  possibil¬ 
ity  of  any  definite  thought  whatever,  i.e.,  con¬ 
cept,  being  adequate  to  it,  and  which  language, 
consequently,  can  never  get  quite  on  level 
terms  with  or  render  completely  intelligible.  It 
is  easily  seen,  that  an  aesthetic  idea  is  the  coun¬ 
terpart  (pendant)  of  a  rational  idea,  which, 
conversely,  is  a  concept,  to  which  no  intuition 
(representation  of  the  imagination)  can  be 
adequate. 

The  imagination  (as  a  productive  faculty  of 
cognition)  is  a  powerful  agent  for  creating,  as 
it  were,  a  second  nature  out  of  the  material 
supplied  to  it  by  actual  nature.  It  affords  us 
entertainment  where  experience  proves  too 
commonplace;  and  we  even  use  it  to  remodel 

2  [Cf.  pp.  4S3,  484.] 


OF  AESTHETIC  JUDGEMENT 


529 


experience,  always  following,  no  doubt,  laws 
that  are  based  on  analogy,  but  still  also  follow¬ 
ing  principles  which  have  a  higher  seat  in  reason 
(and  which  are  every  whit  as  natural  to  us  as 
those  followed  by  the  understanding  in  laying 
hold  of  empirical  nature).  By  this  means  we 
get  a  sense  of  our  freedom  from  the  law  of  as¬ 
sociation1  (which  attaches  to  the  empirical  em¬ 
ployment  of  the  imagination),  with  the  result 
that  the  material  can  be  borrowed  by  us  from 
nature  in  accordance  with  that  law,  but  be 
worked  up  by  us  into  something  else — namely, 
what  surpasses  nature. 

Such  representations  of  the  imagination  may 
be  termed  ideas.  This  is  partly  because  they  at 
least  strain  after  something  lying  out  beyond 
the  confines  of  experience,  and  so  seek  to  ap¬ 
proximate  to  a  presentation  of  rational  concepts 
(i.e.,  intellectual  ideas),  thus  giving  to  these 
concepts  the  semblance  of  an  objective  reality. 
But,  on  the  other  hand,  there  is  this  most  im¬ 
portant  reason,  that  no  concept  can  be  wholly 
adequate  to  them  as  internal  intuitions.  The 
poet  essays  the  task  of  interpreting  to  sense 
the  rational  ideas  of  invisible  beings,  the  king¬ 
dom  of  the  blessed,  hell,  eternity,  creation,  etc. 
Or,  again,  as  to  things  of  which  examples  occur 
in  experience,  e.g.,  death,  envy,  and  all  vices, 
as  also  love,  fame,  and  the  like,  transgressing 
the  limits  of  experience  he  attempts  with  the 
aid  of  an  imagination  which  emulates  the  dis¬ 
play  of  reason  in  its  attainment  of  a  maximum, 
to  body  them  forth  to  sense  with  a  complete¬ 
ness  of  which  nature  affords  no  parallel;  and  it 
is  in  fact  precisely  in  the  poetic  art  that  the 
faculty  of  aesthetic  ideas  can  show  itself  to  full 
advantage.  This  faculty,  however,  regarded 
solely  on  its  own  account,  is  properly  no  more 
than  a  talent  (of  the  imagination).2 

If,  now,  we  attach  to  a  concept  a  represen¬ 
tation  of  the  imagination  belonging  to  its  pres¬ 
entation,  but  inducing  solely  on  its  own  ac¬ 
count  such  a  wealth  of  thought  as  would  never 
admit  of  comprehension  in  a  definite  concept, 
and,  as  a  consequence,  giving  aesthetically  an 
unbounded  expansion  to  the  concept  itself,  then 
the  imagination  here  displays  a  creative  activity, 
and  it  puts  the  faculty  of  intellectual  ideas 
(reason)  into  motion — a  motion,  at  the  instance 
of  a  representation,  towards  an  extension  of 
thought,  that,  while  germane,  no  doubt,  to  the 
concept  of  the  object,  exceeds  what  can  be  laid 
hold  of  in  that  representation  or  clearly  ex¬ 
pressed. 

1  [Cf.  p.  493. J 

2  [Cf.  pp.  525,  530.] 


Those  forms  which  do  not  constitute  the  pres¬ 
entation  of  a  given  concept  itself,  but  which, 
as  secondary  representations  of  the  imagina¬ 
tion,  express  the  derivatives  connected  with  it, 
and  its  kinship  with  other  concepts,  are  called 
(aesthetic)  attributes  of  an  object,  the  concept 
of  which,  as  an  idea  of  reason,  cannot  be  ade¬ 
quately  presented.  In  this  way  Jupiter’s  eagle, 
with  the  lightning  in  its  claws,  is  an  attribute 
of  the  mighty  king  of  heaven,  and  the  peacock 
of  its  stately  queen.  They  do  not,  like  logical 
(aesthetic)  attributes  of  an  object,  the  concept 
of  the  sublimity  and  majesty  of  creation,  but 
rather  something  else — something  that  gives 
the  imagination  an  incentive  to  spread  its  flight 
over  a  whole  host  of  kindred  representations 
that  provoke  more  thought  than  admits  of  ex¬ 
pression  in  a  concept  determined  by  words. 
They  furnish  an  aesthetic  idea ,  which  serves  the 
above  rational  idea  as  a  substitute  for  logical 
presentation,3  but  with  the  proper  function, 
however,  of  animating  the  mind  by  opening 
out  for  it  a  prospect  into  a  field  of  kindred  rep¬ 
resentations  stretching  beyond  its  ken.  But  it 
is  not  alone  in  the  arts  of  painting  or  sculpture, 
where  the  name  of  attribute  is  customarily  em¬ 
ployed,  that  fine  art  acts  in  this  way;  poetry 
and  rhetoric  also  drive  the  soul  that  animates 
their  work  wholly  from  the  aesthetic  attributes 
of  the  objects — attributes  which  go  hand  in 
hand  with  the  logical,  and  give  the  imagination 
an  impetus  to  bring  more  thought  into  play 
in  the  matter,  though  in  an  undeveloped  man¬ 
ner,  than  allows  of  being  brought  within  the 
embrace  of  a  concept,  or,  therefore,  of  being 
definitely  formulated  in  language.  For  the  sake 
of  brevity  I  must  confine  myself  to  a  few  ex¬ 
amples  only.  When  the  great  king  expresses 
himself  in  one  of  his  poems  by  saying: 

Oui,  finissons  sans  trouble,  et  mourons 
sans  regrets , 

En  laissant  VUnivers  comble  de  nos 
bienjaits. 

Ainsi  VAstre  du  jour ,  au  bout  de  sa 
carriere, 

Repand  sur  Vhorizon  une  douce  lu- 
miere , 

Et  les  dernier s  rayons  qu’il  darde  dans 
les  airs 

Sont  les  derniers  soupirs  quyil  donne 
a  VUnivers; 

he  kindles  in  this  way  his  rational  idea  of  a  cos¬ 
mopolitan  sentiment  even  at  the  close  of  life, 
with  the  help  of  an  attribute  which  the  imagi¬ 
nation  (in  remembering  all  the  pleasures  of  a 
3  [Cf.  p.  506. j 


THE  CRITIQUE 


fair  summer’s  day  that  is  over  and  gone — a 
memory  of  which  pleasures  is  suggested  by  a 
serene  evening)  annexes  to  that  representation, 
and  which  stirs  up  a  crowd  of  sensations  and 
secondary  representations  for  which  no  expres¬ 
sion  can  be  found.  On  the  other  hand,  even  an 
intellectual  concept  may  serve,  conversely,  as 
attribute  for  a  representation  of  sense,  and  so 
animate  the  latter  with  the  idea  of  the  super¬ 
sensible;  but  only  by  the  aesthetic  factor  sub¬ 
jectively  attaching  to  the  consciousness  of  the 
supersensible  being  employed  for  the  purpose. 
So,  for  example,  a  certain  poet  says  in  his  de¬ 
scription  of  a  beautiful  morning:  “The  sun 
arose,  as  out  of  virtue  rises  peace.”  The  con¬ 
sciousness  of  virtue,  even  where  we  put  our¬ 
selves  only  in  thought  in  the  position  of  a  vir¬ 
tuous  man,  diffuses  in  the  mind  a  multitude  of 
sublime  and  tranquillizing  feelings,  and  gives 
a  boundless  outlook  into  a  happy  future,  such 
as  no  expression  within  the  compass  of  a  defi¬ 
nite  concept  completely  attains.1 

In  a  word,  the  aesthetic  idea  is  a  representa¬ 
tion  of  the  imagination,  annexed  to  a  given  con¬ 
cept.  with  which,  in  the  free  employment  of 
imagination,  such  a  multiplicity  of  partial  rep¬ 
resentations  are  bound  up,  that  no  expression 
indicating  a  definite  concept  can  be  found  for  it 
— one  which  on  that  account  allows  a  concept 
to  be  supplemented  in  thought  by  much  that  is 
indefinable  in  words,  and  the  feeling  of  which 
quickens  the  cognitive  faculties,  and  with  lan¬ 
guage,  as  a  mere  thing  of  the  letter,  binds  up  the 
spirit  (soul)  also. 

The  mental  powers  whose  union  in  a  certain 
relation  constitutes  genius  are  imagination  and 
understanding.  Now,  since  the  imagination,  in 
its  employment  on  behalf  of  cognition,  is  sub¬ 
jected  to  the  constraint  of  the  understanding 
and  the  restriction  of  having  to  be  conformable 
to  the  concept  belonging  thereto,  whereas  aes¬ 
thetically  it  is  free  to  furnish  of  its  own  accord, 
over  and  above  that  agreement  with  the  con¬ 
cept,  a  wealth  of  undeveloped  material  for  the 
understanding,  to  which  the  latter  paid  no  re¬ 
gard  in  its  concept,  but  which  it  can  make  use 

1  Perhaps  there  has  never  been  a  more  sublime  utter¬ 
ance,  or  a  thought  more  sublimely  expressed,  than  the 
well-known  inscription  upon  the  Temple  of  Isis  (Moth¬ 
er  Nature):  “I  am  all  that  is,  and  that  was,  and  that 
shall  be,  and  no  mortal  hath  raised  the  veil  from  before 
my  lace.”  Segncr*  made  use  of  this  idea  in  a  suggestive 
vignette  on  the  frontispiece  of  his  Natural  Philosophy, 
in  order  to  inspire  his  pupil  at  the  threshold  of  that 
temple  into  which  he  was  about  to  lead  him,  with  such 
a  holy  awe  as  would  dispose  his  mind  to  serious  atten¬ 
tion. 

*  [Johann  Andreas  V.  Segner,  1704-1777,  Professor 
of  Physics  and  Mathematics  at  the  University  of 
Gottingen.] 


of,  not  so  much  objectively  for  cognition,  as 
subjectively  for  quickening  the  cognitive  facul¬ 
ties,  and  hence  also  indirectly  for  cognitions,  it 
may  be  seen  that  genius  properly  consists  in 
the  happy  relation,  which  science  cannot  teach 
nor  industry  learn,  enabling  one  to  find  out 
ideas  for  a  given  concept,  and,  besides,  to  hit 
upon  the  expression  for  them — the  expression 
by  means  of  which  the  subjective  mental  condi¬ 
tion  induced  by  the  ideas  as  the  concomitant 
of  a  concept  may  be  communicated  to  others. 
This  latter  talent  is  properly  that  which  is 
termed  soul.  For  to  get  an  expression  for  what 
is  indefinable  in  the  mental  state  accompanying 
a  particular  representation  and  to  make  it  uni¬ 
versally  communicable — be  the  expression  in 
language  or  painting  or  statuary — is  a  thing 
requiring  a  faculty  for  laying  hold  of  the  rapid 
and  transient  play  of  the  imagination,  and  for 
unifying  it  in  a  concept  (which  for  that  very 
reason  is  original,  and  reveals  a  new  rule  which 
could  not  have  been  inferred  from  any  pre¬ 
ceding  principles  or  examples)  that  admits 
of  communication  without  any  constraint  of 
rules. 

If,  after  this  analysis,  we  cast  a  glance  back 
upon  the  above  definition  of  what  is  called 
genius ,  we  find:  First,  that  it  is  a  talent  for  art 
— not  one  for  science,  in  which  clearly  known 
rules  must  take  the  lead  and  determine  the  pro¬ 
cedure.  Secondly ,  being  a  talent  in  the  line  of  art, 
it  presupposes  a  definite  concept  of  the  prod¬ 
uct — as  its  end.  Hence  it  presupposes  under¬ 
standing,  but,  in  addition,  a  representation,  in¬ 
definite  though  it  be,  of  the  material,  i.e.,  of  the 
intuition,  required  for  the  presentation  of  that 
concept,  and  so  a  relation  of  the  imagination 
to  the  understanding.  Thirdly,  it  displays  itself, 
not  so  much  in  the  working  out  of  the  projected 
end  in  the  presentation  of  a  definite  concept, 
as  rather  in  the  portrayal,  or  expression  of  aes¬ 
thetic  ideas  containing  a  wealth  of  material  for 
effecting  that  intention.  Consequently  the  im¬ 
agination  is  represented  by  it  in  its  freedom 
from  all  guidance  of  rules,  but  still  as  final  for 
the  presentation  of  the  given  concept.  Fourthly, 
and  lastly,  the  unsought  and  undesigned  subjec¬ 
tive  finality  in  the  free  harmonizing  of  the  im¬ 
agination  with  the  understanding’s  conformity 
to  law  presupposes  a  proportion  and  accord  be¬ 
tween  these  faculties  such  as  cannot  be  brought 
about  by  any  observance  of  rules,  whether  of 
science  or  mechanical  imitation,  but  can  only 
be  produced  by  the  nature  of  the  individual. 

Genius,  according  to  these  presuppositions, 


OF  AESTHETIC 

is  the  exemplary  originality  of  the  natural  en¬ 
dowments  of  an  individual  in  the  free  employ¬ 
ment  of  his  cognitive  faculties.  On  this  showing, 
the  product  of  a  genius  (in  respect  of  so  much 
in  this  product  as  is  attributable  to  genius,  and 
not  to  possible  learning  or  academic  instruc¬ 
tion)  is  an  example,  not  for  imitation  (for  that 
would  mean  the  loss  of  the  element  of  genius, 
and  just  the  very  soul  of  the  work),  but  to  be 
followed  by  another  genius — one  whom  it 
arouses  to  a  sense  of  his  own  originality  in 
putting  freedom  from  the  constraint  of  rules 
so  into  force  in  his  art  that  for  art  itself  a  new 
rule  is  won1 — which  is  what  shows  a  talent  to 
be  exemplary.  Yet,  since  the  genius  is  one  of 
nature’s  elect — a  type  that  must  be  regarded 
as  but  a  rare  phenomenon — for  other  clever 
minds  his  example  gives  rise  to  a  school,  that 
is  to  say  a  methodical  instruction  according  to 
rules,  collected,  so  far  as  the  circumstances  ad¬ 
mit,  from  such  products  of  genius  and  their 
peculiarities.  And,  to  that  extent,  fine  art  is  for 
such  persons  a  matter  of  imitation,  for  which 
nature,  through  the  medium  of  a  genius,  gave 
the  rule. 

But  this  imitation  becomes  aping  when  the 
pupil  copies  everything  down  to  the  deformi¬ 
ties  which  the  genius  only  of  necessity  suf¬ 
fered  to  remain,  because  they  could  hardly  be 
removed  without  loss  of  force  to  the  idea. 
This  courage  has  merit  only  in  the  case  of  a 
genius.  A  certain  boldness  of  expression  and,  in 
general,  many  a  deviation  from  the  common 
rule  becomes  him  well,  but  in  no  sense  is  it  a 
thing  worthy  of  imitation.  On  the  contrary  it 
remains  all  through  intrinsically  a  blemish, 
which  one  is  bound  to  try  to  remove,  but  for 
which  the  genius  is,  as  it  were,  allowed  to  plead 
a  privilege,  on  the  ground  that  a  scrupulous 
carefulness  would  spoil  what  is  inimitable  in 
the  impetuous  ardour  of  his  soul.  Mannerism 
is  another  kind  of  aping — an  aping  of  peculiarity 
(originality)  in  general,  for  the  sake  of  remov¬ 
ing  oneself  as  far  as  possible  from  imitators, 
while  the  talent  requisite  to  enable  one  to  be 
at  the  same  time  exemplary  is  absent.  There 
are,  in  fact,  two  modes  (modi)  in  general  of 
arranging  one’s  thoughts  for  utterance.  The 
one  is  called  a  manner  ( modus  aestheticus) ,  the 
other  a  method  (modus  logicus).  The  distinc¬ 
tion  between  them  is  this:  the  former  possesses 
no  standard  other  than  the  feeling  of  unity  in 
the  presentation,  whereas  the  latter  here  follows 
definite  principles.  As  a  consequence,  the  for¬ 
mer  is  alone  admissible  for  fine  art.  It  is  only, 

1  [Cf.  p.  530.] 


JUDGEMENT  53* 

however,  where  the  manner  of  carrying  the 
idea  into  execution  in  a  product  of  art  is  aimed 
at  singularity,  instead  of  being  made  appropri¬ 
ate  to  the  idea,  that  mannerism  is  properly  as¬ 
cribed  to  such  a  product  The  ostentatious 
( precieux ),  forced,  and  affected  styles,  intended 
to  mark  one  out  from  the  common  herd  (though 
soul  is  wanting),  resemble  the  behaviour  of  a 
man  who,  as  we  say,  hears  himself  talk,  or  who 
stands  and  moves  about  as  if  he  were  on  a 
stage  to  be  gaped  at — action  which  invariably 
betrays  a  tyro. 

§  50.  The  combination  of  taste  and  genius 
in  products  of  fine  art 

To  ask  whether  more  stress  should  be  laid  in 
matters  of  fine  art  upon  the  presence  of  genius 
or  upon  that  of  taste,  is  equivalent  to  asking 
whether  more  turns  upon  imagination  or  upon 
judgement.  Now,  imagination  rather  entitles 
an  art  to  be  called  an  inspired  (geistreiche) 
than  a  fine  art.  It  is  only  in  respect  of  judge¬ 
ment  that  the  name  of  fine  art  is  deserved. 
Hence  it  follows  that  judgement,  being  the  in¬ 
dispensable  condition  (conditio  sine  qua  non), 
is  at  least  what  one  must  look  to  as  of  capital 
importance  in  forming  an  estimate  of  art  as 
fine  art.  So  far  as  beauty  is  concerned,  to  be 
fertile  and  original  in  ideas  is  not  such  an  im¬ 
perative  requirement  as  it  is  that  the  imagina¬ 
tion  in  its  freedom  should  be  in  accordance  with 
the  understanding’s  conformity  to  law.  For,  in 
lawless  freedom,  imagination,  with  all  its  wealth, 
produces  nothing  but  nonsense;  the  power  of 
judgement,  on  the  other  hand,  is  the  faculty 
that  makes  it  consonant  with  understanding. 

Taste,  like  judgement  in  general,  is  the  disci¬ 
pline  (or  corrective)  of  genius.  It  severely 
clips  its  wings,  and  makes  it  orderly  or  polished; 
but  at  the  same  time  it  gives  it  guidance  direct¬ 
ing  and  controlling  its  flight,  so  that  it  may  pre¬ 
serve  its  character  of  finality.  It  introduces  a 
clearness  and  order  into  the  plenitude  of 
thought,  and  in  so  doing  gives  stability  to  the 
ideas,  and  qualifies  them  at  once  for  permanent 
and  universal  approval,  for  being  followed  by 
others,  and  for  a  continually  progressive  cul¬ 
ture.  And  so,  where  the  interests  of  both  these 
qualities  clash  in  a  product,  and  there  has  to  be 
a  sacrifice  of  something,  then  it  should  rather 
be  on  the  side  of  genius;  and  judgement,  which 
in  matters  of  fine  art  bases  its  decision  on  its 
own  proper  principles,  will  more  readily  endure 
an  abatement  of  the  freedom  and  wealth  of  the 
imagination  than  that  the  understanding  should 
be  compromised. 


THE  CRITIQUE 


The  requisites  for  fine  art  are,  therefore, 
imagination ,  understanding .  soul ,  and  taste.1 

§  51.  The  division  oj  the  fine  arts 

Beauty  (whether  it  be  of  nature  or  of  art)2 
may  in  general  be  termed  the  expression  of 
aesthetic  ideas.  But  the  provision  must  be  added 
that  with  beauty  of  art  this  idea  must  be  excited 
through  the  medium  of  a  concept  of  the  object, 
whereas  with  beauty  of  nature  the  bare  reflec¬ 
tion  upon  a  given  intuition,  apart  from  any  con¬ 
cept  of  what  the  object  is  intended  to  be,  is  suf¬ 
ficient  for  awakening  and  communicating  the 
idea  of  which  that  object  is  regarded  as  the 
expression. 

Accordingly,  if  we  wish  to  make  a  division  of 
the  fine  arts,  we  can  choose  for  that  purpose, 
tentatively  at  least,  no  more  convenient  principle 
than  the  analogy  which  art  bears  to  the  mode  of 
expression  of  which  men  avail  themselves  in 
speech  with  a  view  to  communicating  themselves 
to  one  another  as  completely  as  possible,  i.e., 
not  merely  in  respect  of  their  concepts  but  in 
respect  of  their  sensations  also.3  Such  expres¬ 
sion  consists  in  word ,  gesture ,  and  tone  (articu¬ 
lation,  gesticulation,  and  modulation).  It  is  the 
combination  of  these  three  modes  of  expression 
which  alone  constitutes  a  complete  communica¬ 
tion  of  the  speaker.  For  thought,  intuition,  and 
sensation  are  in  this  way  conveyed  to  others 
simultaneously  and  in  conjunction. 

Hence  there  are  only  three  kinds  of  fine  art: 
the  art  of  speech ,  formative  art,  and  the  art  of 
the  play  of  sensations  (as  external  sense  im¬ 
pressions).  This  division  might  also  be  arranged 
as  a  dichotomy,  so  that  fine  art  would  be  divided 
into  that  of  the  expression  of  thoughts  or  intui¬ 
tions,  the  latter  being  subdivided  according  to 
the  distinction  between  the  form  and  the  mat¬ 
ter  (sensation).  It  would,  however,  in  that  case 
appear  too  abstract,  and  less  in  line  with  pop¬ 
ular  conceptions. 

(1)  The  arts  of  speech  are  rhetoric  and 
poetry.  Rhetoric  is  the  art  of  transacting  a  se¬ 
rious  business  of  the  understanding  as  if  it  were 
a  free  play  of  the  imagination;  poetry  that  of 
conducting  a  free  play  of  the  imagination  as  if 

1  The  first  three  faculties  are  first  brought  into  union 
by  means  of  the  fourth.  Hume,  in  his  history,  informs 
the  English  that  although  they  are  second  in  their 
works  to  no  other  people  in  the  world  in  respect  of  the 
evidences  they  afford  of  the  three  first  qualities  sepa¬ 
rately  considered,  still  in  what  unites  them  they  must 
yield  to  their  neighbours,  the  French. 

2  [Cf.  p.  543.  ct  scq.] 

3  The  reader  is  not  to  consider  this  scheme  for  a  pos¬ 
sible  division  of  the  fine  arts  as  a  deliberate  theory.  It 
is  only  one  of  the  various  attempts  that  can  and  ought 
to  be  made. 


it  were  a  serious  business  of  the  understanding. 

Thus  the  orator  announces  a  serious  business, 
and  for  the  purpose  of  entertaining  his  audience 
conducts  it  as  if  it  were  a  mere  play  with  ideas. 
The  poet  promises  merely  an  entertaining  play 
with  ideas,  and  yet  for  the  understanding  there 
enures  as  much  as  if  the  promotion  of  its  busi¬ 
ness  had  been  his  one  intention.  The  combina¬ 
tion  and  harmony  of  the  two  faculties  of  cog¬ 
nition,  sensibility  and  understanding,  which, 
though  doubtless  indispensable  to  one  another, 
do  not  readily  permit  of  being  united  without 
compulsion  and  reciprocal  abatement,  must 
have  the  appearance  of  being  undesigned  and  a 
spontaneous  occurrence — otherwise  it  is  not  fine 
art.  For  this  reason,  what  is  studied  and  laboured 
must  be  here  avoided.4  For  fine  art  must  be 
free  art  in  a  double  sense:  i.e.,  not  alone  in  a 
sense  opposed  to  contract  work,  as  not  being  a 
work  the  magnitude  of  which  may  be  estimated, 
exacted,  or  paid  for,  according  to  a  definite 
standard,  but  free  also  in  the  sense  that,  while 
the  mind,  no  doubt,  occupies  itself,  still  it  does 
so  without  ulterior  regard  to  any  other  end,  and 
yet  with  a  feeling  of  satisfaction  and  stimula¬ 
tion  (independent  of  reward). 

The  orator,  therefore,  gives  something  which 
he  does  not  promise,  viz.,  an  entertaining  play 
of  the  imagination.  On  the  other  hand,  there  is 
something  in  which  he  fails  to  come  up  to  his 
promise,  and  a  thing,  too,  which  is  his  avowed 
business,  namely,  the  engagement  of  the  under¬ 
standing  to  some  end.  The  poet’s  promise,  on 
the  contrary,  is  a  modest  one,  and  a  mere  play 
with  ideas  is  all  he  holds  out  to  us,  but  he  ac¬ 
complishes  something  worthy  of  being  made  a 
serious  business,  namely,  the  using  of  play  to 
provide  food  for  the  understanding,  and  the  giv¬ 
ing  of  life  to  its  concepts  by  means  of  the  imagi¬ 
nation.  Hence  the  orator  in  reality  performs  less 
than  he  promises,  the  poet  more. 

(2)  The  formative  arts,  or  those  for  the  ex¬ 
pression  of  ideas  in  sensuous  intuition  (not  by 
means  of  representations  of  mere  imagination 
that  are  excited  by  words)  are  arts  either  of 
sensuous  truth  or  of  sensuous  semblance.  The 
first  is  called  plastic  art,  the  second  painting. 
Both  use  figures  in  space  for  the  expression  of 
ideas:  the  former  makes  figures  discernible  to 
two  senses,  sight  and  touch  (though,-  so  far  as 
the  latter  sense  is  concerned,  without  regard  to 
beauty),  the  latter  makes  them  so  to  the  former 
sense  alone.  The  aesthetic  idea  (archetype,  origi¬ 
nal)  is  the  fundamental  basis  of  both  in  the 
imagination;  but  the  figure  which  constitutes  its 

4  [Cf.  p..  525.] 


OF  AESTHETIC 

expression  (the  ectype,  the  copy)  is  given  either 
in  its  bodily  extension  (the  way  the  object  itself 
exists)  or  else  in  accordance  with  the  picture 
which  it  forms  of  itself  in  the  eye  (according  to 
its  appearance  when  projected  on  a  flat  sur¬ 
face).  Or,  whatever  the  archetype  is,  either  the 
reference  to  an  actual  end  or  only  the  semblance 
of  one  may  be  imposed  upon  reflection  as  its 
condition. 

To  plastic  art,  as  the  first  kind  of  formative 
fine  art,  belong  sculpture  and  architecture.  The 
first  is  that  which  presents  concepts  of  things 
corporeally,  as  they  might  exist  in  nature 
(though  as  fine  art  it  directs  its  attention  to  aes¬ 
thetic  finality).  The  second  is  the  art  of  pre¬ 
senting  concepts  of  things  which  are  possible 
only  through  art ,  and  the  determining  ground 
of  whose  torm  is  not  nature  but  an  arbitrary 
end — and  of  presenting  them  both  with  a  view 
to  this  purpose  and  yet,  at  the  same  time,  with 
aesthetic  finality.  In  architecture  the  chief  point 
is  a  certain  use  of  the  artistic  object  to  which, 
as  the  condition,  the  aesthetic  ideas  are  limited. 
In  sculpture  the  mere  expression  of  aesthetic 
ideas  is  the  main  intention.  Thus  statues  of 
men,  gods,  animals,  etc.,  belong  to  sculpture; 
but  temples,  splendid  buildings  for  public  con¬ 
course,  or  even  dwelling-houses,  triumphal 
arches,  columns,  mausoleums,  etc.,  erected  as 
monuments,  belong  to  architecture,  and  in  fact 
all  household  furniture  (the  work  of  cabinet¬ 
makers,  and  so  forth — things  meant  to  be  used) 
may  be  added  to  the  list,  on  the  ground  that 
adaptation  of  the  product  to  a  particular  use  is 
the  essential  element  in  a  work  of  architecture. 
On  the  other  hand,  a  mere  piece  of  sculpture , 
made  simply  to  be  looked  at  and  intended  to 
please  on  its  own  account,  is,  as  a  corporeal 
presentation,  a  mere  imitation  of  nature,  though 
one  in  which  regard  is  paid  to  aesthetic  ideas, 
and  in  which,  therefore,  sensuous  truth  should 
not  go  the  length  of  losing  the  appearance  of 
being  an  art  and  a  product  of  the  elective  will. 

Painting ,  as  the  second  kind  of  formative  art, 
which  presents  the  sensuous  semblance  in  artful 
combination  with  ideas,  I  would  divide  into 
that  of  the  beautiful  portrayal  of  naturey  and 
that  of  the  beautiful  arrangement  of  its  prod¬ 
ucts.  The  first  is  painting  proper ,  the  second 
landscape  gardening.  For  the  first  gives  only  the 
semblance  of  bodily  extension;  whereas  the  sec¬ 
ond,  giving  this,  no  doubt,  according  to  its  truth, 
gives  only  the  semblance  of  utility  and  em¬ 
ployment  for  ends  other  than  the  play  of  the 
imagination  in  the  contemplation  of  its  forms.1 

1  It  seems  strange  that  landscape  gardening  may  be 


JUDGEMENT  533 

The  latter  consists  in  no  more  than  decking  out 
the  ground  with  the  same  manifold  variety 
(grasses,  flowers,  shrubs,  and  trees,  and  even 
water,  hills,  and  dales)  as  that  with  which  na¬ 
ture  presents  it  to  our  view,  only  arranged  dif¬ 
ferently  and  in  obedience  to  certain  ideas.  The 
beautiful  arrangement  of  corporeal  things,  how¬ 
ever,  is  also  a  thing  for  the  eye  only,  just  like 
painting — the  sense  of  touch  can  form  no  in- 
tuitable  representation  of  such  a  form.  In  addi¬ 
tion  I  would  place  under  the  head  of  painting,  in 
the  wide  sense,  the  decoration  of  rooms  by 
means  of  hangings,  ornamental  accessories,  and 
all  beautiful  furniture  the  sole  function  of 
which  is  to  be  looked  at;  and  in  the  same  way 
the  art  of  tasteful  dressing  (with  rings,  snuff¬ 
boxes,  etc.).  For  a  parterre  of  various  flowers,  a 
room  with  a  variety  of  ornaments  (including 
even  the  ladies’  attire),  go  to  make  at  a  festal 
gathering  a  sort  of  picture  which,  like  pictures 
in  the  true  sense  of  the  word  (those  which  are 
not  intended  to  teach  history  or  natural  sci¬ 
ence),  has  no  business  beyond  appealing  to  the 
eye,  in  order  to  entertain  the  imagination  in  free 
play  with  ideas,  and  to  engage  actively  the  aes¬ 
thetic  judgement  independently  of  any  definite 
end.  No  matter  how  heterogeneous,  on  the  me¬ 
chanical  side,  may  be  the  craft  involved  in  all 
this  decoration,  and  no  matter  what  a  variety  of 
artists  may  be  required,  still  the  judgement  of 
taste,  so  far  as  it  is  one  upon  what  is  beautiful 
in  this  art,  is  determined  in  one  and  the  same 
way:  namely,  as  a  judgement  only  upon  the 
forms  (without  regard  to  any  end)  as  they  pre¬ 
sent  themselves  to  the  eye,  singly  or  in  combi¬ 
nation,  according  to  their  effect  upon  the  imagi¬ 
nation.  The  justification,  however,  of  bringing 
formative  art  (by  analogy)  under  a  common 
head  with  gesture  in  a  speech,  lies  in  the  fact 
that  through  these  figures  the  soul  of  the  artists 
furnishes  a  bodily  expression  for  the  substance 
and  character  of  his  thought,  and  makes  the 

regarded  as  a  kind  of  painting,  notwithstanding  that  it 
presents  its  forms  corporeally.  But,  as  it  takes  its  forms 
bodily  from  nature  (the  trees,  shrubs,  grasses,  and  flow¬ 
ers  taken,  originally  at  least,  from  wood  and  field)  it 
is  to  that  extent  not  an  art  such  as,  let  us  say,  plastic 
art.  Further,  the  arrangement  which  it  makes  is  not 
conditioned  by  any  concept  of  the  object  or  of  its  end 
(as  is  the  case  in  sculpture),  but  by  the  mere  free  play 
of  the  imagination  in  the  act  of  contemplation.  Hence 
it  bears  a  degree  of  resemblance  to  simple  aesthetic 
painting  that  has  no  definite  theme  (but  by  means  of 
light  and  shade  makes  a  pleasing  composition  of  atmos¬ 
phere,  land,  and  water.)*  Throughout,  the  reader  is  to 
weigh  the  above  only  as  an  effort  to  connect  the  fine 
arts  under  a  principle,  which,  in  the  present  instance, 
is  intended  to  be  that  of  the  expression  of  aesthetic  ideas 
(following  the  analogy  of  a  language),  and  not  as  a 
positive  and  deliberate  derivation  of  the  connection. 

*  [Cf.  p.  488.] 


THE  CRITIQUE 


thing  itself  speak,  as  it  were,  in  mimic  language 
— a  very  common  play  of  our  fancy,  that  attrib¬ 
utes  to  lifeless  things  a  soul  suitable  to  their 
form,  and  that  uses  them  as  its  mouthpiece. 

(3)  The  art  of  the  beautiful  play  of  sensa¬ 
tions  (sensations  that  arise  from  external  stim¬ 
ulation),  which  is  a  play  of  sensations  that  has 
nevertheless  to  permit  of  universal  communica¬ 
tion,  can  only  be  concerned  with  the  proportion 
of  the  different  degrees  of  tension  in  the  sense  to 
which  the  sensation  belongs,  i.e.,  with  its  tone. 
In  this  comprehensive  sense  of  the  word,  it  may 
be  divided  into  the  artificial  play  of  sensations 
of  hearing  and  of  sight,  consequently  into  music 
and  the  art  of  colour .  It  is  of  note  that  these  two 
senses,  over  and  above  such  susceptibility  for 
impressions  as  is  required  to  obtain  concepts  of 
external  objects  by  means  of  these  impressions, 
also  admit  of  a  peculiar  associated  sensation  of 
which  we  cannot  well  determine  whether  it  is 
based  on  sense  or  reflection;  and  that  this  sen¬ 
sibility  may  at  times  be  wanting,  although  the 
sense,  in  other  respects,  and  in  what  concerns  its 
employment  for  the  cognition  of  objects,  is  by 
no  means  deficient  but  particularly  keen.  In  other 
words,  we  cannot  confidently  assert  whether  a 
colour  or  a  tone  (sound)  is  merely  an  agreeable 
sensation,  or  whether  they  are  in  themselves  a 
beautiful  play  of  sensations,  and  in  being  esti¬ 
mated  aesthetically,  convey,  as  such,  a  delight  in 
their  form.  If  we  consider  the  velocity  of  the 
vibrations  of  light,  or,  in  the  second  case,  of  the 
air,  which  in  all  probability  far  outstrips  any 
capacity  on  our  part  for  forming  an  immediate 
estimate  in  perception  of  the  time  interval  be¬ 
tween  them,  we  should  be  led  to  believe  that  it 
is  only  the  effect  of  those  vibrating  movements 
upon  the  elastic  parts  of  our  body,  that  can  be 
evident  to  sense,  but  that  the  time-interval  be¬ 
tween  them  is  not  noticed  nor  involved  in  our 
estimate,  and  that,  consequently,  all  that  enters 
into  combination  with  colours  and  tones  is  agree¬ 
ableness,  and  not  beauty,  of  their  composition. 
But,  let  us  consider,  on  the  other  hand,  first ,  the 
mathematical  character  both  of  the  proportion 
of  those  vibrations  in  music,  and  of  our  judge¬ 
ment  upon  it.  and,  as  is  reasonable,  form  an  esti¬ 
mate  of  colour  contrasts  on  the  analogy  of  the 
latter.  Secondly ,  let  us  consult  the  instances, 
albeit  rare,  of  men  who.  with  the  best  of  sight, 
have  failed  to  distinguish  colours,  and,  with  the 
sharpest  hearing,  to  distinguish  tones,  while  for 
men  who  have  this  ability  the  perception  of  an 
altered  quality  (not  merely  of  the  degree  of  the 
sensation)  in  the  case  of  the  different  intensities 
in  the  scale  of  colours  or  tones  is  definite,  as  is 


also  the  number  of  those  which  may  be  intelligi¬ 
bly  distinguished.  Bearing  all  this  in  mind,  we 
may  feel  compelled  to  look  upon  the  sensations 
afforded  by  both,  not  as  mere  sense-impressions, 
but  as  the  effect  of  an  estimate  of  form  in  the 
play  of  a  number  of  sensations.  The  difference 
which  the  one  opinion  or  the  other  occasions  in 
the  estimate  of  the  basis  of  music  would,  how¬ 
ever,  only  give  rise  to  this  much  change  in  its 
definition,  that  either  it  is  to  be  interpreted,  as 
we  have  done,  as  the  beautiful  play  of  sensa¬ 
tions  (through  hearing),  or  else  as  one  of  agree¬ 
able  sensations.  According  to  the  former  inter¬ 
pretation,  alone,  would  music  be  represented 
out  and  out  as  a  fine  art,  whereas  according  to 
the  latter  it  would  be  represented  as  (in  part  at 
least)  an  agreeable  art. 

§  52.  The  combination  of  the  fine  arts  in  one 
and  the  same  product 

Rhetoric  may  in  a  drama  be  combined  with 
a  pictorial  presentation  as  well  of  its  subjects  as 
of  objects;  as  may  poetry  with  music  in  a  song; 
and  this  again  with  a  pictorial  (theatrical)  pres¬ 
entation  in  an  opera;  and  so  may  the  play  of 
sensations  in  a  piece  of  music  with  the  play  of 
figures  in  a  dance ,  and  so  on.  Even  the  presenta¬ 
tion  of  the  sublime,  so  far  as  it  belongs  to  fine 
art,  may  be  brought  into  union  with  beauty  in  a 
tragedy  in  verse ,  a  didactic  poem  or  an  oratorio , 
and  in  this  combination  fine  art  is  even  more 
artistic.  Whether  it  is  also  more  beautiful  (hav¬ 
ing  regard  to  the  multiplicity  of  different  kinds 
of  delight  which  cross  one  another)  may  in  some 
of  these  instances  be  doubted.  Still  in  all  fine  art 
the  essential  element  consists  in  the  form  which 
is  final  for  observation  and  for  estimating.  Here 
the  pleasure  is  at  the  same  time  culture,  and 
disposes  the  soul  to  ideas,  making  it  thus  sus¬ 
ceptible  of  such  pleasure  and  entertainment  in 
greater  abundance.  The  matter  of  sensation 
(charm  or  emotion)  is  not  essential.  Here  the 
aim  is  merely  enjoyment,  which  leaves  noth¬ 
ing  behind  it  in  the  idea,  and  renders  the  soul 
dull,  the  object  in  the  course  of  time  distaste¬ 
ful,  and  the  mind  dissatisfied  with  itself  and 
ill-humoured,  owing  to  a  consciousness  that 
in  the  judgement  of  reason  its  disposition  is 
perverse. 

Where  fine  arts  are  not,  either  proximately  or 
remotely,  brought  into  combination  with  moral 
ideas,  which  alone  are  attended  with  a  self- 
sufficing  delight,  the  above  is  the  fate  that  ulti¬ 
mately  awaits  them.  They  then  only  serve  for  a 
diversion,  of  which  one  continually  feels  an 
increasing  need  in  proportion  as  one  has  availed 


OF  AESTHETIC 

oneself  of  it  as  a  means  of  dispelling  the  discon¬ 
tent  of  one’s  mind,  with  the  result  that  one 
makes  oneself  ever  more  and  more  unprofitable 
and  dissatisfied  with  oneself.  With  a  view  to  the 
purpose  first  named,  the  beauties  of  nature  are 
in  general  the  most  beneficial,  if  one  is  early 
habituated  to  observe,  estimate,  and  admire 
them. 

§  53.  Comparative  estimate  of  the  aesthetic 
worth  of  the  fine  arts 

Poetry  (which  owres  its  origin  almost  entirely 
to  genius  and  is  least  willing  to  be  led  by  pre¬ 
cepts  or  example)  holds  the  first  rank  among  all 
the  arts.  It  expands  the  mind  by  giving  freedom 
to  the  imagination  and  by  offering,  from  among 
the  boundless  multiplicity  of  possible  forms  ac¬ 
cordant  with  a  given  concept,  to  whose  bounds 
it  is  restricted,  that  one  which  couples  with  the 
presentation  of  the  concept  a  wealth  of  thought 
to  which  no  verbal  expression  is  completely  ade¬ 
quate,  and  by  thus  rising  aesthetically  to  ideas. 

It  invigorates  the  mind  by  letting  it  feel  its  fac¬ 
ulty — free,  spontaneous,  and  independent  of 
determination  by  nature — of  regarding  and  esti¬ 
mating  nature  as  phenomenon  in  the  light  of 
aspects  which  nature  of  itself  does  not  afford  us 
in  experience,  either  for  sense  or  understanding, 
and  of  employing  it  accordingly  in  behalf  of, 
and  as  a  sort  of  schema  for,  the  supersensible.  It 
plays  with  semblance,  which  it  produces  at  will, 
but  not  as  an  instrument  of  deception;  for  its 
avowed  pursuit  is  merely  one  of  play,  which, 
however,  understanding  may  turn  to  good 
account  and  employ  for  its  own  purpose.  Rhet¬ 
oric,  so  far  as  this  is  taken  to  mean  the  art  of 
persuasion,  i.e.,  the  art  of  deluding  by  means  of 
a  fair  semblance  (as  ars  oratoria ),  and  not 
merely  excellence  of  speech  (eloquence  and 
style),  is  a  dialectic,  which  borrows  from  poetry 
only  so  much  as  is  necessary  to  win  over  men’s 
minds  to  the  side  of  the  speaker  before  they 
have  weighed  the  matter,  and  to  rob  their  ver¬ 
dict  of  its  freedom.  Hence  it  can  be  recom¬ 
mended  neither  for  the  bar  nor  the  pulpit.  For 
where  civil  laws,  the  right  of  individual  persons, 
or  the  permanent  instruction  and  determination 
of  men’s  minds  to  a  correct  knowledge  and  a 
conscientious  observance  of  their  duty  is  at 
stake,  then  it  is  below  the  dignity  of  an  under¬ 
taking  of  such  moment  to  exhibit  even  a  trace  of 
the  exuberance  of  wit  and  imagination,  and,  still 
more,  of  the  art  of  talking  men  round  and  preju¬ 
dicing  them  in  favour  of  any  one.  For  although 
such  art  is  capable  of  being  at  times  directed  to 
ends  intrinsically  legitimate  and  praiseworthy, 


JUDGEMENT  535 

still  it  becomes  reprehensible  on  account  of  the 
subjective  injury  done  in  this  w7ay  to  maxims 
and  sentiments,  even  where  objectively  the  ac¬ 
tion  may  be  lawful.  For  it  is  not  enough  to  do 
what  is  right,  but  we  should  practise  it  solely  on 
the  ground  of  its  being  right.  Further,  the  sim¬ 
ple  lucid  concept  of  human  concerns  of  this 
kind,  backed  up  with  lively  illustrations  of  it, 
exerts  of  itself,  in  the  absence  of  any  offence 
against  the  rules  of  euphony  of  speech  or  of  pro¬ 
priety  in  the  expression  of  ideas  of  reason  (all 
which  together  make  up  excellence  of  speech), 
a  sufficient  influence  upon  human  minds  to  obvi¬ 
ate  the  necessity  of  having  recourse  here  to  the 
machinery  of  persuasion,  which,  being  equally 
available  for  the  purpose  of  putting  a  fine  gloss 
or  a  cloak  upon  vice  and  error,  fails  to  rid  one 
completely  of  the  lurking  suspicion  that  one  is 
being  artfully  hoodwinked.  In  poetry  everything 
is  straight  and  above  board.  It  shows  its  hand: 
it  desires  to  carry  on  a  mere  entertaining  play 
with  the  imagination,  and  one  consonant,  in 
respect  of  form,  with  the  laws  of  understand¬ 
ing,  and  it  does  not  seek  to  steal  upon  and 
ensnare  the  understanding  with  a  sensuous 
presentation.1 

After  poetry,  if  we  take  charm  and  mental 
stimulation  into  account ,  I  would  give  the  next 
place  to  that  art  which  comes  nearer  to  it  than 
to  any  other  art  of  speech,  and  admits  of  very 
natural  union  with  it,  namely  the  art  of  tone. 
For  though  it  speaks  by  means  of  mere  sensa¬ 
tions  without  concepts,  and  so  does  not,  like 
poetry,  leave  behind  it  any  food  for  reflection, 
still  it  moves  the  mind  more  diversely,  and, 
although  with  transient,  still  with  intenser  effect. 
It  is  certainly,  however,  more  a  matter  of  en¬ 
joyment  than  of  culture — the  play  of  thought 

1 1  must  confess  to  the  pure  delight  which  I  have  ever 
been  afforded  by  a  beautiful  poem;  whereas  the  reading 
of  the  best  speech  of  a  Roman  forensic  orator,  a  modern 
parliamentary  debater,  or  a  preacher,  has  invariably 
been  mingled  with  an  unpleasant  sense  of  disapproval 
of  an  insidious  art  that  knows  how,  in  matters  of  mo¬ 
ment,  to  move  men  like  machines  to  a  judgement  that 
must  lose  all  its  weight  with  them  upon  calm  reflec¬ 
tion.  Force  and  elegance  of  speech  (which  together 
constitute  rhetoric)  belong  to  fine  art;  but  oratory  (ars 
oratoria),  being  the  art  of  playing  for  one’s  own  pur¬ 
pose  upon  the  weaknesses  of  men  (let  this  purpose  be 
ever  so  good  in  intention  or  even  in  fact)  merits  no  re¬ 
spect  whatever.  Besides,  both  at  Athens  and  at  Rome, 
it  only  attained  its  greatest  height  at  a  time  when  the 
state  was  hastening  to  its  decay,  and  genuine  patriotic 
sentiment  was  a  thing  of  the  past.  One  who  sees  the 
issue  clearly,  and  who  has  a  command  of  language  in  its 
wealth  and  its  purity,  and  who  is  possessed  of  an  imagi¬ 
nation  that  is  fertile  and  effective  in  presenting  his 
ideas,  and  whose  heart,  withal,  turns  with  lively  sym¬ 
pathy  to  what  is  truly  good — he  is  the  vir  bonus  dicendi 
peritus,  the  orator  without  art,  but  of  great  impressive¬ 
ness,  as  Cicero  would  have  him,  though  he  may  not  him¬ 
self  always  have  remained  faithful  to  this  ideal. 


536  THE  CRITIQUE 


incidentally  excited  by  it  being  merely  the  effect 
of  a  more  or  less  mechanical  association — and  it 
possesses  less  worth  in  the  eyes  of  reason  than 
any  other  of  the  fine  arts.  Hence,  like  all  enjoy¬ 
ment,  it  calls  for  constant  change,  and  does 
not  stand  frequent  repetition  without  inducing 
weariness.  Its  charm,  which  admits  of  such  uni¬ 
versal  communication,  appears  to  rest  on  the 
following  facts.  Every  expression  in  language 
has  an  associated  tone  suited  to  its  sense.  This 
tone  indicates,  more  or  less,  a  mode  in  which  the 
speaker  is  affected,  and  in  turn  evokes  it  in  the 
hearer  also,  in  whom  conversely  it  then  also 
excites  the  idea  which  in  language  is  expressed 
with  such  a  tone.  Further,  just  as  modulation 
is,  as  it  were,  a  universal  language  of  sensations 
intelligible  to  every  man,  so  the  art  of  tone 
wields  the  full  force  of  this  language  wholly  on 
its  own  account,  namely,  as  a  language  of  the 
affections,  and  in  this  way,  according  to  the  law 
of  association,  universally  communicates  the 
aesthetic  ideas  that  are  naturally  combined 
therewith.  But,  further,  inasmuch  as  those  aes¬ 
thetic  ideas  are  not  concepts  or  determinate 
thoughts,  the  form  of  the  arrangement  of  these 
sensations  (harmony  and  melody),  taking  the 
place  of  the  form  of  a  language,  only  serves  the 
purpose  of  giving  an  expression  to  the  aesthetic 
idea  of  an  integral  whole  of  an  unutterable 
wealth  of  thought  that  fills  the  measure  of  a 
certain  theme  forming  the  dominant  affection  in 
the  piece.  This  purpose  is  effectuated  by  means 
of  a  proposition  in  the  accord  of  the  sensations 
(an  accord  which  may  be  brought  mathemati¬ 
cally  under  certain  rules,  since  it  rests,  in  the 
case  of  tones,  upon  the  numerical  relation  of  the 
vibrations  of  the  air  in  the  same  time,  so  far  as 
there  is  a  combination  of  the  tones  simultane¬ 
ously  or  in  succession).  Although  this  mathe¬ 
matical  form  is  not  represented  by  means  of 
determinate  concepts,  to  it  alone  belongs  the 
delight  which  the  mere  reflection  upon  such  a 
number  of  concomitant  or  consecutive  sensa¬ 
tions  couples  with  this  their  play,  as  the  univer¬ 
sally  valid  condition  of  its  beauty,  and  it  is  with 
reference  to  it  alone  that  taste  can  lay  claim  to 
a  right  to  anticipate  the  judgement  of  every 
man. 

But  mathematics,  certainly,  does  not  play  the 
smallest  part  in  the  charm  and  movement  of  the 
mind  produced  by  music.  Rather  is  it  only  the 
indispensable  condition  ( conditio  sine  qua  non) 
of  that  proportion  of  the  combining  as  well  as 
changing  impressions  which  makes  it  possible  to 
grasp  them  all  in  one  and  prevent  them  from 
destroying  one  another,  and  to  let  them,  rather, 


conspire  towards  the  production  of  a  continuous 
movement  and  quickening  of  the  mind  by  affec¬ 
tions  that  are  in  unison  with  it,  and  thus  towards 
a  serene  self-enjoyment. 

If,  on  the  other  hand,  we  estimate  the  worth 
of  the  fine  arts  by  the  culture  they  supply  to  the 
mind,  and  adopt  for  our  standard  the  expansion 
of  the  faculties  whose  confluence,  in  judgement, 
is  necessary  for  cognition,  music,  then,  since  it 
plays  merely  with  sensations,  has  the  lowest 
place  among  the  fine  arts — just  as  it  has  perhaps 
the  highest  among  those  valued  at  the  same 
time  for  their  agreeableness.  Looked  at  in  this 
light,  it  is  far  excelled  by  the  formative  arts. 
For,  in  putting  the  imagination  into  a  play  which 
is  at  once  free  and  adapted  to  the  understand¬ 
ing,  they  all  the  while  carry  on  a  serious  busi¬ 
ness,  since  they  execute  a  product  which  serves 
the  concepts  of  understanding  as  a  vehicle,  per¬ 
manent  and  appealing  to  us  on  its  own  account, 
for  effectuating  their  union  with  sensibility,  and 
thus  for  promoting,  as  it  were,  the  urbanity  of 
the  higher  powers  of  cognition.  The  two  kinds 
of  art  pursue  completely  different  courses.  Music 
advances  from  sensations  to  indefinite  ideas: 
formative  art  from  definite  ideas  to  sensations. 
The  latter  gives  a  lasting  impression,  the  former 
one  that  is  only  fleeting.  The  former  sensations 
imagination  can  recall  and  agreeably  entertain 
itself  with,  while  the  latter  either  vanish  en¬ 
tirely,  or  else,  if  involuntarily  repeated  by  the 
imagination,  are  more  annoying  to  us  than  agree¬ 
able.  Over  and  above  all  this,  music  has  a  certain 
lack  of  urbanity  about  it.  For  owing  chiefly  to 
the  character  of  its  instruments,  it  scatters  its 
influence  abroad  to  an  uncalled-for  extent 
(through  the  neighbourhood),  and  thus,  as  it 
were,  becomes  obtrusive  and  deprives  others, 
outside  the  musical  circle,  of  their  freedom. 
This  is  a  thing  that  the  arts  that  address  them¬ 
selves  to  the  eye  do  not  do,  for  if  one  is  not  dis¬ 
posed  to  give  admittance  to  their  impressions, 
one  has  only  to  look  the  other  way.  The  case  is 
almost  on  a  par  with  the  practice  of  regaling 
oneself  with  a  perfume  that  exhales  its  odours 
far  and  wide.  The  man  who  pulls  his  perfumed 
handkerchief  from  his  pocket  gives  a  treat  to  all 
around  whether  they  like  it  or  not,  and  compels 
them,  if  they  want  to  breathe  at  all,  to  be  parties 
to  the  enjoyment,  and  so  the  habit  has  gone  out 
of  fashion.1 

1  Those  who  have  recommended  the  singing  of  hymns 
at  family  prayers  have  forgotten  the  amount  of  annoy¬ 
ance  which  they  give  to  the  general  public  by  such  noisy 
(and,  as  a  rule,  for  that  very  reason,  Pharisaical)  wor¬ 
ship,  for  they  compel  their  neighbours  either  to  join  in 
the  singing  or  else  abandon  their  meditations. 


OF  AESTHETIC 

Among  the  formative  arts  I  would  give  the 
palm  to  painting :  partly  because  it  is  the  art 
of  design  and,  as  such,  the  groundwork  of  all 
the  other  formative  arts;  partly  because  it  can 
penetrate  much  further  into  the  region  of  ideas, 
and  in  conformity  with  them  give  a  greater  ex¬ 
tension  to  the  field  of  intuition  than  it  is  open 
to  the  others  to  do. 

§  54.  Remark 

As  we  have  often  shown,  an  essential  distinc¬ 
tion  lies  between  what  pleases  simply  in  the 
estimate  formed  of  it  and  what  gratifies  (pleases 
in  sensation).  The  latter  is  something  which, 
unlike  the  former,  we  cannot  demand  from 
every  one.  Gratification  (no  matter  whether  its 
cause  has  its  seat  even  in  ideas)  appears  always 
to  consist  in  a  feeling  of  the  furtherance  of  the 
entire  life  of  the  man.  and  hence,  also  of  his 
bodily  well-being,  i.e.,  his  health.  And  so,  per¬ 
haps,  Epicurus  was  not  wide  of  the  mark  when 
he  said  that  at  bottom  all  gratification  is  bodily 
sensation,  and  only  misunderstood  himself  in 
ranking  intellectual  and  even  practical  delight 
under  the  head  of  gratification.  Bearing  in  mind 
the  latter  distinction,  it  is  readily  explicable  how 
even  the  gratification  a  person  feels  is  capable 
of  displeasing  him  (as  the  joy  of  a  necessitous 
but  good-natured  individual  on  being  made  the 
heir  of  an  affectionate  but  penurious  father), 
or  how  deep  pain  may  still  give  pleasure  to  the 
sufferer  (as  the  sorrow  of  a  widow  over  the 
death  of  her  deserving  husband),  or  how  there 
may  be  pleasure  over  and  above  gratification 
(as  in  scientific  pursuits),  or  how  a  pain  (as,  for 
example,  hatred,  envy,  and  desire  for  revenge) 
may  in  addition  be  a  source  of  displeasure.  Here 
the  delight  or  aversion  depends  upon  reason, 
and  is  one  with  approbation  or  disapprobation. 
Gratification  and  pain,  on  the  other  hand,  can 
only  depend  upon  feeling,  or  upon  the  prospect 
of  a  possible  well-being  or  the  reverse  (irrespec¬ 
tive  of  source). 

The  changing  free  play  of  sensations  (which 
do  not  follow  any  preconceived  plan)  is  always  a 
source  of  gratification,  because  it  promotes  the 
feeling  of  health;  and  it  is  immaterial  whether 
or  not  we  experience  delight  in  the  object  of  this 
play  or  even  in  the  gratification  itself  when  esti¬ 
mated  in  the  light  of  reason.  Also  this  gratifica¬ 
tion  may  amount  to  an  affection,  although  we 
take  no  interest  in  the  object  itself,  or  none,  at 
least,  proportionate  to  the  degree  of  the  affec¬ 
tion.  We  may  divide  the  above  play  into  that  of 
games  of  chance  (Glucks piel) ,  harmony  ( Ton- 
spiel ),  and  wit  (Ge dank ens piel) .The  first  stands 


JUDGEMENT  537 

in  need  of  an  interest ,  be  it  of  vanity  or  self- 
seeking,  but  one  which  falls  far  short  of  that 
centered  in  the  adopted  mode  of  procurement. 
All  that  the  second  requires  is  the  change  of 
sensations,  each  of  which  has  its  bearing  on 
affection,  though  without  attaining  to  the  degree 
of  an  affection,  and  excites  aesthetic  ideas.  The 
third  springs  merely  from  the  change  of  the 
representations  in  the  judgement,  which,  while 
unproductive  of  any  thought  conveying  an  in¬ 
terest,  yet  enlivens  the  mind. 

What  a  fund  of  gratification  must  be  afforded 
by  play,  without  our  having  to  fall  back  upon 
any  consideration  of  interest,  is  a  matter  to 
which  all  our  evening  parties  bear  witness — 
for  without  play  they  hardly  ever  escape  falling 
flat.  But  the  affections  of  hope,  fear,  joy,  anger, 
and  derision  here  engage  in  play,  as  every  mo¬ 
ment  they  change  their  parts  and  are  so  lively 
that,  as  by  an  internal  motion,  the  whole  vital 
function  of  the  body  seems  to  be  furthered  by 
the  process — as  is  proved  by  a  vivacity  of  the 
mind  produced — although  no  one  comes  by  any¬ 
thing  in  the  way  of  profit  or  instruction.  But  as 
the  play  of  chance  is  not  one  that  is  beautiful, 
we  will  here  lay  it  aside.  Music,  on  the  contrary, 
and  what  provokes  laughter  are  two  kinds  of 
play  with  aesthetic  ideas,  or  even  with  represen¬ 
tations  of  the  understanding,  by  which,  all  said 
and  done,  nothing  is  thought.  By  mere  force  of 
change  they  yet  are  able  to  afford  lively  grati¬ 
fication.  This  furnishes  pretty  clear  evidence 
that  the  quickening  effect  of  both  is  physical, 
despite  its  being  excited  by  ideas  of  the  mind, 
and  that  the  feeling  of  health,  arising  from  a 
movement  of  the  intestines  answering  to  that 
play,  makes  up  that  entire  gratification  of  an 
animated  gathering  upon  the  spirit  and  refine¬ 
ment  of  which  we  set  such  store.  Not  any  esti¬ 
mate  of  harmony  in  tones  or  flashes  of  wit, 
which,  with  its  beauty,  serves  only  as  a  neces¬ 
sary  vehicle,  but  rather  the  stimulated  vital 
functions  of  the  body,  the  affection  stirring  the 
intestines  and  the  diaphragm,  and,  in  a  word, 
the  feeling  of  health  (of  which  we  are  only  sen¬ 
sible  upon  some  such  provocation)  are  what 
constitute  the  gratification  we  experience  at 
being  able  to  reach  the  body  through  the  soul 
and  use  the  latter  as  the  physician  of  the  former. 

In  music,  the  course  of  this  play  is  from 
bodily  sensation  to  aesthetic  ideas  (which  are 
the  objects  for  the  affections),  and  then  from 
these  back  again,  but  with  gathered  strength,  to 
the  body.  In  jest  (which  just  as  much  as  the 
former  deserves  to  be  ranked  rather  as  an  agree¬ 
able  than  a  fine  art)  the  play  sets  out  from 


THE  CRITIQUE 


thoughts  which  collectively,  so  far  as  seeking 
sensuous  expression,  engage  the  activity  of  the 
body.  In  this  presentation  the  understanding, 
missing  what  it  expected,  suddenly  lets  go  its 
hold,  with  the  result  that  the  effect  of  this 
slackening  is  felt  in  the  body  by  the  oscillation 
of  the  organs.  This  favours  the  restoration  of 
the  equilibrium  of  the  latter,  and  exerts  a  bene¬ 
ficial  influence  upon  the  health. 

Something  absurd  (something  in  which,  there¬ 
fore,  the  understanding  can  of  itself  find  no  de¬ 
light)  must  be  present  in  whatever  is  to  raise 
a  hearty  convulsive  laugh.  Laughter  is  an  affec¬ 
tion  arising  from  a  strained  expectation  being 
suddenly  reduced  to  nothing .  This  very  reduc¬ 
tion,  at  which  certainly  understanding  cannot 
rejoice,  is  still  indirectly  a  source  of  very  lively 
enjoyment  for  a  moment.  Its  cause  must  conse¬ 
quently  lie  in  the  influence  of  the  representation 
upon  the  body  and  the  reciprocal  effect  of  this 
upon  the  mind.  This,  moreover,  cannot  depend 
upon  the  representation  being  objectively  an 
object  of  gratification  (for  how  can  we  derive 
gratification  from  a  disappointment?)  but  must 
rest  solely  upon  the  fact  that  the  reduction  is  a 
mere  play  of  representations,  and,  as  such,  pro¬ 
duces  an  equilibrium  of  the  vital  forces  of  the 
body. 

Suppose  that  some  one  tells  the  following 
story:  An  Indian  at  an  Englishman’s  table  in 
Surat  saw  a  bottle  of  ale  opened,  and  all  the 
beer  turned  into  froth  and  flowing  out.  The  re¬ 
peated  exclamations  of  the  Indian  showed  his 
great  astonishment.  “Well,  what  is  so  wonder¬ 
ful  in  that?”  asked  the  Englishman.  “Oh,  I’m 
not  surprised  myself,”  said  the  Indian,  “at  its 
getting  out,  but  at  how  you  ever  managed  to  get 
it  all  in.”  At  this  we  laugh,  and  it  gives  us  hearty 
pleasure.  This  is  not  because  we  think  ourselves, 
maybe,  more  quick-witted  than  this  ignorant 
Indian,  or  because  our  understanding  here 
brings  to  our  notice  any  other  ground  of  delight. 
It  is  rather  that  the  bubble  of  our  expectation 
was  extended  to  the  full  and  suddenly  went  off 
into  nothing.  Or,  again,  take  the  case  of  the  heir 
of  a  wealthy  relative  being  minded  to  make 
preparations  for  having  the  funeral  obsequies 
on  a  most  imposing  scale,  but  complaining  that 
things  would  not  go  right  for  him,  because  (as 
he  said)  “the  more  money  I  give  my  mourners 
to  look  sad,  the  more  pleased  they  look.”  At  this 
we  laugh  outright,  and  the  reason  lies  in  the  fact 
that  we  had  an  expectation  which  is  suddenly 
reduced  to  nothing.  We  must  be  careful  to  ob¬ 
serve  that  the  reduction  is  not  one  into  the  posi¬ 
tive  contrary  of  an  expected  object — for  that  is 


always  something,  and  may  frequently  pain  us 
—but  must  be  a  reduction  to  nothing.  For 
where  a  person  arouses  great  expectation  by 
recounting  some  tale,  and  at  the  close  its  un¬ 
truth  becomes  at  once  apparent  to  us,  we  are 
displeased  at  it.  So  it  is,  for  instance,  with  the 
tale  of  people  whose  hair  from  excess  of  grief 
is  said  to  have  turned  white  in  a  single  night.  On 
the  other  hand,  if  a  wag,  wishing  to  cap  the 
story,  tells  with  the  utmost  circumstantiality  of 
a  merchant’s  grief,  who,  on  his  return  journey 
from  India  to  Europe  with  all  his  wealth  in 
merchandise,  was  obliged  by  stress  of  storm 
to  throw  everything  overboard,  and  grieved  to 
such  an  extent  that  in  the  selfsame  night  his  wig 
turned  grey,  we  laugh  and  enjoy  the  tale.  This 
is  because  we  keep  for  a  time  playing  on  our 
own  mistake  about  an  object  otherwise  indiffer¬ 
ent  to  us,  or  rather  on  the  idea  we  ourselves 
were  following  out,  and,  beating  it  to  and  fro. 
just  as  if  it  were  a  ball  eluding  our  grasp,  when 
all  we  intend  to  do  is  just  to  get  it  into  our  hands 
and  hold  it  tight.  Here  our  gratification  is  not 
excited  by  a  knave  or  a  fool  getting  a  rebuff: 
for,  even  on  its  own  account,  the  latter  tale  told 
with  an  air  of  seriousness  w'ould  of  itself  be 
enough  to  set  a  whole  table  into  roars  of  laugh¬ 
ter;  and  the  other  matter  would  ordinarily  not 
be  worth  a  moment’s  thought. 

It  is  observable  that  in  all  such  cases  the  joke 
must  have  something  in  it  capable  of  momen¬ 
tarily  deceiving  us.  Hence,  when  the  semblance 
vanishes  into  nothing,  the  mind  looks  back  in 
order  to  try  it  over  again,  and  thus  by  a  rapidly 
succeeding  tension  and  relaxation  it  is  jerked  to 
and  fro  and  put  in  oscillation.  As  the  snapping 
of  what  wras,  as  it  were,  tightening  up  the  string 
takes  place  suddenly  (not  by  a  gradual  loosen¬ 
ing),  the  oscillation  must  bring  about  a  mental 
movement  and  a  sympathetic  internal  move¬ 
ment  of  the  body.  This  continues  involuntarily 
and  produces  fatigue,  but  in  so  doing  it  also  af¬ 
fords  recreation  (the  effects  of  a  motion  con¬ 
ducive  to  health). 

For  supposing  we  assume  that  some  move¬ 
ment  in  the  bodily  organs  is  associated  sym¬ 
pathetically  w’ith  all  our  thoughts,  it  is  readily 
intelligible  how  the  sudden  act  above  referred 
to,  of  shifting  the  mind  now  to  one  standpoint 
and  now  to  the  other,  to  enable  it  to  contem¬ 
plate  its  object,  may  involve  a  corresponding 
and  reciprocal  straining  and  slackening  of  the 
elastic  parts  of  our  intestines,  which  communi¬ 
cates  itself  to  the  diaphragm  (and  resembles 
that  felt  by  ticklish  people),  in  the  course  of 
which  the  lungs  expel  the  air  with  rapidly  sue- 


OF  AESTHETIC  JUDGEMENT 


ceeding  interruptions,  resulting  in  a  movement 
conducive  to  health.  This  alone,  and  not  what 
goes  on  in  the  mind,  is  the  proper  cause  of  the 
gratification  in  a  thought  that  at  bottom  repre¬ 
sents  nothing.  Voltaire1  said  that  heaven  has 
given  us  two  things  to  compensate  us  for  the 
many  miseries  of  life,  hope  and  sleep.  He  might 
have  added  laughter  to  the  list — if  only  the 
means  of  exciting  it  in  men  of  intelligence  were 
as  ready  to  hand,  and  the  wit  or  originality 
of  humour  which  it  requires  were  not  just 
as  rare  as  the  talent  is  common  for  inventing 
stuff  that  splits  the  head ,  as  mystic  specula¬ 
tors  do,  or  that  breaks  your  neck ,  as  the  genius 
does,  or  that  harrows  the  heart  as  sentimental 
novelists  do  (aye,  and  moralists  of  the  same 
type). 

We  may,  therefore  as  I  conceive,  make  Epi¬ 
curus  a  present  of  the  point  that  all  gratifica¬ 
tion,  even  when  occasioned  by  concepts  that 
evoke  aesthetic  ideas,  is  animal ,  i.e.,  bodily  sen¬ 
sation.  For  from  this  admission  the  spiritual 
feeling  of  respect  for  moral  ideas,  which  is  not 
one  of  gratification,  but  a  self-esteem  (an  es¬ 
teem  for  humanity  within  us)  that  raises  us 
above  the  need  of  gratification,  suffers  not  a 
whit — no  nor  even  the  less  noble  feeling  of 
taste. 

In  naivete  we  meet  with  a  joint  product  of 
both  the  above.  Naivete  is  the  breaking  forth  of 
the  ingenuousness  originally  natural  to  human¬ 
ity,  in  opposition  to  the  art  of  disguising  one¬ 
self  that  has  become  a  second  nature.  We  laugh 
at  the  simplicity  that  is  as  yet  a  stranger  to  dis¬ 
simulation,  but  we  rejoice  the  while  over  the 
simplicity  of  nature  that  thwarts  that  art.  We 
await  the  commonplace  manner  of  artificial 
utterance,  thoughtfully  addressed  to  a  fair  show, 
and  lo!  nature  stands  before  us  in  unsullied  in¬ 
nocence — nature  that  we  were  quite  unprepared 
to  meet,  and  that  he  who  laid  it  bare  had  also 
no  intention  of  revealing.  That  the  outward 
appearance,  fair  but  false,  that  usually  assumes 
such  importance  in  our  judgement,  is  here,  at  a 
stroke,  turned  to  a  nullity,  that,  as  it  were,  the 
rogue  in  us  is  nakedly  exposed,  calls  forth  the 
movement  of  the  mind,  in  two  successive  and 
opposite  directions,  agitating  the  body  at  the 

1  |  Henriade,  chant  7.] 


539 

same  time  with  wholesome  motion.  But  that 
something  infinitely  better  than  any  accepted 
code  of  manners,  namely  purity  of  mind  (or  at 
least  a  vestige  of  such  purity),  has  not  become 
wholly  extinct  in  human  nature,  infuses  serious¬ 
ness  and  reverence  into  this  play  of  judgement. 
But  since  it  is  only  a  manifestation  that  ob¬ 
trudes  itself  for  a  moment,  and  the  veil  of  a  dis¬ 
sembling  art  is  soon  drawn  over  it  again,  there 
enters  into  the  above  feelings  a  touch  of  pity. 
This  is  an  emotion  of  tenderness,  playful  in  its 
way,  that  thus  readily  admits  of  combination 
with  this  sort  of  genial  laughter.  And,  in  fact, 
this  emotion  is  as  a  rule  associated  with  it,  and, 
at  the  same  time,  is  wont  to  make  amends  to 
the  person  who  provides  such  food  for  our  mer¬ 
riment  for  his  embarrassment  at  not  being  wise 
after  the  manner  of  men.  For  that  reason  an  art 
of  being  naif  is  a  contradiction.  But  it  is  quite 
possible  to  give  a  representation  of  naivete  in  a 
fictitious  personage,  and,  rare  as  the  art  is,  it  is 
a  fine  art.  With  this  naivete  we  must  not  con¬ 
fuse  homely  simplicity,  which  only  avoids  spoil¬ 
ing  nature  by  artificiality,  because  it  has  no  no¬ 
tion  of  the  conventions  of  good  society. 

The  humorous  manner  may  also  be  ranked  as 
a  thing  which  in  its  enlivening  influence  is  clearly 
allied  to  the  gratification  provoked  by  laughter. 
It  belongs  to  originality  of  mind  ( des  Geistes ), 
though  not  to  the  talent  for  fine  art.  Humour, 
in  a  good  sense,  means  the  talent  for  being  able 
to  put  oneself  at  will  into  a  certain  frame  of 
mind  in  which  everything  is  estimated  on  lines 
that  go  quite  off  the  beaten  track  (a  topsy-turvy 
view  of  things),  and  yet  on  lines  that  follow  cer¬ 
tain  principles,  rational  in  the  case  of  such  a 
mental  temperament.  A  person  with  whom  such 
variations  are  not  a  matter  of  choice  is  said  to 
have  humours;  but  if  a  person  can  assume  them 
voluntarily  and  of  set  purpose  (on  behalf  of  a 
lively  presentation  drawn  from  a  ludicrous  con¬ 
trast),  he  and  his  way  of  speaking  are  termed 
humorous.  This  manner  belongs,  however,  to 
agreeable  rather  than  to  fine  art,  because  the 
object  of  the  latter  must  always  have  an  evi¬ 
dent  intrinsic  worth  about  it,  and  thus  demands 
a  certain  seriousness  in  its  presentation,  as  taste 
does  in  estimating  it.2 

2  [Cf.  pp.  534,  536.] 


SECTION  II.  DIALECTIC  OF  AESTHETIC  JUDGEMENT 


§55 

For  a  power  of  judgement  to  be  dialectical  it 
must  first  of  all  be  rationalizing;  that  is  to  say, 
its  judgements  must  lay  claim  to  universality,1 
and  do  so  a  priori ,  for  it  is  in  the  antithesis  of 
such  judgements  that  dialectic  consists.  Hence 
there  is  nothing  dialectical  in  the  irreconcilabil¬ 
ity  of  aesthetic  judgements  of  sense  (upon  the 
agreeable  and  disagreeable).  And  in  so  far  as 
each  person  appeals  merely  to  his  own  private 
taste,  even  the  conflict  of  judgements  of  taste 
does  not  form  a  dialectic  of  taste — for  no  one  is 
proposing  to  make  his  own  judgement  into  a 
universal  rule.  Hence  the  only  concept  left  to  us 
of  a  dialectic  affecting  taste  is  one  of  a  dialectic 
of  the  critique  of  taste  (not  of  taste  itself)  in 
respect  of  its  principles :  for,  on  the  question  of 
the  ground  of  the  possibility  of  judgements  of 
taste  in  general,  mutually  conflicting  concepts 
naturally  and  unavoidably  make  their  appear¬ 
ance.  The  transcendental  critique  of  taste  will, 
therefore,  only  include  a  part  capable  of  bearing 
the  name  of  a  dialectic  of  the  aesthetic  judge¬ 
ment  if  we  find  an  antinomy  of  the  principles  of 
this  faculty  which  throws  doubt  upon  its  con¬ 
formity  to  law,  and  hence  also  upon  its  inner 
possibility. 

§  56.  Representation  of  the  antinomy  of  taste 

The  first  commonplace  of  taste  is  contained 
in  the  proposition  under  cover  of  which  every 
one  devoid  of  taste  thinks  to  shelter  himself 
from  reproach:  every  one  has  his  own  taste. 
This  is  only  another  way  of  saying  that  the  de¬ 
termining  ground  of  this  judgement  is  merely 
subjective  (gratification  or  pain),  and  that  the 
judgement  has  no  right  to  the  necessary  agree¬ 
ment  of  others. 

Its  second  commonplace,  to  which  even  those 
resort  who  concede  the  right  of  the  judgement 
of  taste  to  pronounce  with  validity  for  every 
one,  is:  there  is  no  disputing  about  taste.  This 
amounts  to  saying  that,  even  though  the  deter- 

1  Any  judgement  which  sets  up  to  be  universal  may  be 
termed  a  rationalizing  judgement  ( indicium  ratiocin- 
ans);  for  so  far  as  universal  it  may  serve  as  the  major 
premiss  of  a  syllogism.  On  the  other  hand,  only  a  judge¬ 
ment  which  is  thought  as  the  conclusion  of  a  syllogism, 
and,  therefore,  as  having  an  a  priori  foundation,  can  be 
called  rational  (indicium  ratiocinatum ) . 


mining  ground  of  a  judgement  of  taste  be  objec¬ 
tive,  it  is  not  reducible  to  definite  concepts,  so 
that  in  respect  of  the  judgement  itself  no  deci¬ 
sion  can  be  reached  by  proofs,  although  it  is 
quite  open  to  us  to  contend  upon  the  matter, 
and  to  contend  with  right.  For  though  conten¬ 
tion  and  dispute  have  this  point  in  common,  that 
they  aim  at  bringing  judgements  into  accord¬ 
ance  out  of  and  by  means  of  their  mutual  oppo¬ 
sition;  yet  they  differ  in  the  latter  hoping  to 
effect  this  from  definite  concepts,  as  grounds  of 
proof,  and,  consequently,  adopting  objective 
concepts  as  grounds  of  the  judgement.  But 
where  this  is  considered  impracticable,  dispute 
is  regarded  as  alike  out  of  the  question. 

Between  these  two  commonplaces  an  inter¬ 
mediate  proposition  is  readily  seen  to  be  miss¬ 
ing.  It  is  one  which  has  certainly  not  become 
proverbial,  but  yet  it  is  at  the  back  of  every 
one’s  mind.  It  is  that  there  may  be  contention 
about  taste  (although  not  a  dispute).  This 
proposition,  however,  involves  the  contrary  of 
the  first  one.  For  in  a  manner  in  which  conten¬ 
tion  is  to  be  allowed,  there  must  be  a  hope  of 
coming  to  terms.  Hence  one  must  be  able  to 
reckon  on  grounds  of  judgement  that  possess 
more  than  private  validity  and  are  thus  not 
merely  subjective.  And  yet  the  above  principle 
( Every  one  has  his  own  taste)  is  directly  op¬ 
posed  to  this. 

The  principle  of  taste,  therefore,  exhibits  the 
following  antinomy: 

1.  Thesis.  The  judgement  of  taste  is  not  based 
upon  concepts;  for,  if  it  were,  it  would  be  open 
to  dispute  (decision  by  means  of  proofs). 

2.  Antithesis.  The  judgement  of  taste  is  based 
on  concepts;  for  otherwise,  despite  diversity  of 
judgement,  there  could  be  no  room  even  for 
contention  in  the  matter  (a  claim  to  the  neces¬ 
sary  agreement  of  others  with  this  judgement). 

§  57.  Solution  of  the  antinomy  of  taste 

There  is  no  possibility  of  removing  the  con¬ 
flict  of  the  above  principles,  which  underlie 
every  judgement  of  taste  (and  which  are  only 
the  two  peculiarities  of  the  judgement  of  taste 
previously  set  out  in  the  Analytic)  except  by 
showing  that  the  concept  to  which  the  object  is 
made  to  refer  in  a  judgement  of  this  kind  is  not 
taken  in  the  same  sense  in  both  maxims  of  the 


540 


OF  AESTHETIC 

aesthetic  judgement;  that  this  double  sense,  or 
point  of  view,  in  our  estimate,  is  necessary  for 
our  power  of  transcendental  judgement;  and 
that  nevertheless  the  false  appearance  arising 
from  the  confusion  of  one  with  the  other  is  a 
natural  illusion,  and  so  unavoidable. 

The  judgement  of  taste  must  have  reference 
to  some  concept  or  other,  as  otherwise  it  would 
be  absolutely  impossible  for  it  to  lay  claim  to 
necessary  validity  for  every  one.  Yet  it  need 
not  on  that  account  be  provable  from  a  concept. 
For  a  concept  may  be  either  determinable,  or 
else  at  once  intrinsically  undetermined  and  in¬ 
determinable.  A  concept  of  the  understanding, 
which  is  determinable  by  means  of  predicates 
borrowed  from  sensible  intuition  and  capable  of 
corresponding  to  it,  is  of  the  first  kind.  But  of 
the  second  kind  is  the  transcendental  rational 
concept  of  the  supersensible,  which  lies  at  the 
basis  of  all  that  sensible  intuition  and  is,  there¬ 
fore,  incapable  of  being  further  determined 
theoretically. 

Now  the  judgement  of  taste  applies  to  ob¬ 
jects  of  sense,  but  not  so  as  to  determine  a  con¬ 
cept  of  them  for  the  understanding;  for  it  is  not 
a  cognitive  judgement.  Hence  it  is  a  singular 
representation  of  intuition  referable  to  the  feel¬ 
ing  of  pleasure,  and,  as  such,  only  a  private 
judgement.  And  to  that  extent  it  would  be  lim¬ 
ited  in  its  validity  to  the  individual  judging:  the 
object  is  for  me  an  object  of  delight,  for  others 
it  may  be  otherwise;  every  one  to  his  taste. 

For  all  that,  the  judgement  of  taste  contains 
beyond  doubt  an  enlarged  reference  on  the  part 
of  the  representation  of  the  object  (and  at  the 
same  time  on  the  part  of  the  subject  also), 
which  lays  the  foundation  of  an  extension  of 
judgements  of  this  kind  to  necessity  for  every 
one.  This  must  of  necessity  be  founded  upon 
some  concept  or  other,  but  such  a  concept  as 
does  not  admit  of  being  determined  by  intui¬ 
tion,  and  affords  no  knowledge  of  anything. 
Hence,  too,  it  is  a  concept  which  does  not  afford 
any  proof  of  the  judgement  of  taste.  But  the 
mere  pure  rational  concept  of  the  supersensible 
lying  at  the  basis  of  the  object  (and  of  the 
judging  subject  for  that  matter)  as  object  of 
sense,  and  thus  as  phenomenon,  is  just  such  a 
concept.  For  unless  such  a  point  of  view  were 
adopted  there  would  be  no  means  of  saving  the 
claim  of  the  judgement  of  taste  to  universal 
validity.  And  if  the  concept  forming  the  re¬ 
quired  basis  were  a  concept  of  understanding, 
though  a  mere  confused  one,  as,  let  us  say,  of 
perfection,  answering  to  which  the  sensible  in¬ 
tuition  of  the  beautiful  might  be  adduced,  then 


JUDGEMENT  541 

it  would  be  at  least  intrinsically  possible  to 
found  the  judgement  of  taste  upon  proofs, 
which  contradicts  the  thesis. 

All  contradiction  disappears,  however,  if  I 
say:  The  judgement  of  taste  does  depend  upon 
a  concept  (of  a  general  ground  of  the  subjective 
finality  of  nature  for  the  power  of  judgement), 
but  one  from  which  nothing  can  be  cognized  in 
respect  of  the  object,  and  nothing  proved,  be¬ 
cause  it  is  in  itself  indeterminable  and  useless 
for  knowledge.  Yet,  by  means  of  this  very  con¬ 
cept,  it  acquires  at  the  same  time  validity  for 
every  one  (but  with  each  individual,  no  doubt, 
as  a  singular  judgement  immediately  accom¬ 
panying  his  intuition) :  because  its  determining 
ground  lies,  perhaps,  in  the  concept  of  what  may 
be  regarded  as  the  supersensible  substrate  of 
humanity. 

The  solution  of  an  antinomy  turns  solely  on 
the  possibility  of  two  apparently  conflicting 
propositions  not  being  in  fact  contradictory,  but 
rather  being  capable  of  consisting  together,  al¬ 
though  the  explanation  of  the  possibility  of 
their  concept  transcends  our  faculties  of  cogni¬ 
tion.  That  this  illusion  is  also  natural  and  for 
human  reason  unavoidable,  as  well  as  why  it  is 
so,  and  remains  so,  although  upon  the  solution 
of  the  apparent  contradiction  it  no  longer  mis¬ 
leads  us,  may  be  made  intelligible  from  the 
above  considerations. 

For  the  concept,  which  the  universal  validity 
of  a  judgement  must  have  for  its  basis,  is  taken 
in  the  same  sense  in  both  the  conflicting  judge¬ 
ments,  yet  two  opposite  predicates  are  asserted 
of  it.  The  thesis  should  therefore  read:  The 
judgement  of  taste  is  not  based  on  determinate 
concepts;  but  the  antithesis:  The  judgement  of 
taste  does  rest  upon  a  concept,  although  an 
indeterminate  one  (that,  namely,  of  the  super¬ 
sensible  substrate  of  phenomena);  and  then 
there  would  be  no  conflict  between  them. 

Beyond  removing  this  conflict  between  the 
claims  and  counter-claims  of  taste  we  can  do 
nothing.  To  supply  a  determinate  objective 
principle  of  taste  in  accordance  with  which  its 
judgements  might  be  derived,  tested,  and 
proved,  is  an  absolute  impossibility,  for  then 
it  would  not  be  a  judgement  of  taste.  The  sub¬ 
jective  principle — that  is  to  say,  the  indeter¬ 
minate  idea  of  the  supersensible  within  us — can 
only  be  indicated  as  the  unique  key  to  the  riddle 
of  this  faculty,  itself  concealed  from  us  in  its 
sources ;  and  there  is  no  means  of  making  it  any 
more  intelligible. 

The  antinomy  here  exhibited  and  resolved 
rests  upon  the  proper  concept  of  taste  as  a 


THE  CRITIQUE 


merely  reflective  aesthetic  judgement,  and  the 
two  seemingly  conflicting  principles  are  recon¬ 
ciled  on  the  ground  that  they  may  both  be  true, 
and  this  is  sufficient.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  ow¬ 
ing  to  the  fact  that  the  representation  lying  at 
the  basis  of  the  judgement  of  taste  is  singular, 
the  determining  ground  of  taste  is  taken,  as  by 
some  it  is,  to  be  agreeableness,  or,  as  others, 
looking  to  its  universal  validity,  would  have  it, 
the  principle  of  perfection,  and  if  the  definition 
of  taste  is  framed  accordingly,  the  result  is  an 
antinomy  which  is  absolutely  irresolvable  un¬ 
less  we  show  the  falsity  of  both  propositions 
as  contraries  (not  as  simple  contradictories). 
This  would  force  the  conclusion  that  the  con¬ 
cept  upon  which  each  is  founded  is  self-contra¬ 
dictory.  Thus  it  is  evident  that  the  removal  of 
the  antinomy  of  the  aesthetic  judgement  pur¬ 
sues  a  course  similar  to  that  followed  by  the 
Critique  in  the  solution  of  the  antinomies  of 
pure  theoretical  reason;  and  that  the  antin¬ 
omies,  both  here  and  in  the  Critique  of  Practi¬ 
cal  Reason,  compel  us,  whether  we  like  it  or  not, 
to  look  beyond  the  horizon  of  the  sensible,  and 
to  seek  in  the  supersensible  the  point  of  union 
of  all  our  faculties  a  prori:  for  we  are  left  with 
no  other  expedient  to  bring  reason  into  harmony 
with  itself. 

Remark  i 

We  find  such  frequent  occasion  in  transcen¬ 
dental  philosophy  for  distinguishing  ideas  from 
concepts  of  the  understanding  that  it  may  be  of 
use  to  introduce  technical  terms  answering  to 
the  distinction  between  them.  I  think  that  no 
objection  will  be  raised  to  my  proposing  some. 
Ideas,  in  the  most  comprehensive  sense  of  the 
word,  are  representations  referred  to  an  object 
according  to  a  certain  principle  (subjective  or 
objective),  in  so  far  as  they  can  still  never  be¬ 
come  a  cognition  of  it.  They  are  either  referred 
to  an  intuition,  in  accordance  with  a  merely 
subjective  principle  of  the  harmony  of  the  cog¬ 
nitive  faculties  (imagination  and  understand¬ 
ing),  and  are  then  called  aesthetic;  or  else  they 
are  referred  to  a  concept  according  to  an  objec¬ 
tive  principle  and  yet  are  incapable  of  ever 
furnishing  a  cognition  of  the  object,  and  are 
called  rational  ideas.  In  the  latter  case,  the  con¬ 
cept  is  a  transcendent  concept,  and,  as  such, 
differs  from  a  concept  of  understanding,  for 
which  an  adequately  answering  experience  may 
always  be  supplied,  and  which,  on  that  account, 
is  called  immanent. 

An  aesthetic  idea  cannot  become  a  cognition, 
because  it  is  an  intuition  (of  the  imagination) 


for  which  an  adequate  concept  can  never  be 
found.  A  rational  idea  can  never  become  a  cog¬ 
nition,  because  it  involves  a  concept  (of  the 
supersensible),  for  which  a  commensurate  in¬ 
tuition  can  never  be  given. 

Now  the  aesthetic  idea  might,  I  think,  be 
called  an  inexponible  representation  of  the  im¬ 
agination,  the  rational  idea,  on  the  other  hand, 
an  indemonstrable  concept  of  reason.  The  pro¬ 
duction  of  both  is  presupposed  to  be  not  alto¬ 
gether  groundless,  but  rather  (following  the 
above  explanation  of  an  idea  in  general)  to  take 
place  in  obedience  to  certain  principles  of  the 
cognitive  faculties  to  which  they  belong  (sub¬ 
jective  principles  in  the  case  of  the  former  and 
objective  in  that  of  the  latter). 

Concepts  of  the  understanding  must,  as  such, 
always  be  demonstrable  (if,  as  in  anatomy,  dem¬ 
onstration  is  understood  in  the  sense  merely 
of  presentation ).  In  other  words,  the  object 
answering  to  such  concepts  must  always  be 
capable  of  being  given  an  intuition  (pure  or 
empirical);  for  only  in  this  way  can  they  be¬ 
come  cognitions.  The  concept  of  magnitude 
may  be  given  a  priori  in  the  intuition  of  space, 
e.g.,  of  the  right  line,  etc.;  the  concept  of  cause 
in  impenetrability,  in  the  impact  of  bodies,  etc. 
Consequently  both  may  be  verified  by  means 
of  an  empirical  intuition,  i.e.,  the  thought  of 
them  may  be  indicated  (demonstrated,  exhib¬ 
ited)  in  an  example;  and  this  it  must  be  pos¬ 
sible  to  do:  for  otherwise  there  would  be  no 
certainty  of  the  thought  not  being  empty,  i.e., 
having  no  object. 

In  logic  the  expressions  demonstrable  or  in¬ 
demonstrable  are  ordinarily  employed  only  in 
respect  of  propositions.  A  better  designation 
would  be  to  call  the  former  propositions  only 
mediately,  and  the  latter,  propositions  immedi¬ 
ately,  certain.  For  pure  philosophy,  too,  has 
propositions  of  both  these  kinds — meaning 
thereby  true  propositions  which  are  in  the  one 
case  capable,  and  in  the  other  incapable,  of 
proof.  But,  in  its  character  of  philosophy,  while 
it  can,  no  doubt,  prove  on  a  priori  grounds,  it 
cannot  demonstrate — unless  we  wish  to  give 
the  complete  go-by  to  the  meaning  of  the  word 
which  makes  demonstrate  ( ostendere ,  exhibere ) 
equivalent  to  giving  an  accompanying  presen¬ 
tation  of  the  concept  in  intuition  (be  it  in  a 
proof  or  in  a  definition).  Where  the  intuition 
is  a  priori  this  is  called  its  construction,  but 
when  even  the  intuition  is  empirical,  we  have 
still  got  the  illustration  of  the  object,  by  which 
means  objective  reality  is  assured  to  the  con¬ 
cept.  Thus  an  anatomist  is  said  to  demonstrate 


OF  AESTHETIC 

the  human  eye  when  he  renders  the  concept, 
of  which  he  has  previously  given  a  discursive 
exposition,  intuitable  by  means  of  the  dissec¬ 
tion  of  that  organ. 

It  follows  from  the  above  that  the  rational 
concept  of  the  supersensible  substrate  of  all 
phenomena  generally,  or  even  of  that  which 
must  be  laid  at  the  basis  of  our  elective  will  in 
respect  of  moral  laws,  i.e.,  the  rational  concept 
of  transcendental  freedom,  is  at  once  specifically 
an  indemonstrable  concept,  and  a  rational  idea, 
whereas  virtue  is  so  in  a  measure.  For  nothing 
can  be  given  which  in  itself  qualitatively  answers 
in  experience  to  the  rational  concept  of  the  for¬ 
mer,  while  in  the  case  of  virtue  no  empirical 
product  of  the  above  causality  attains  the  de¬ 
gree  that  the  rational  idea  prescribes  as  the  rule. 

Just  as  the  imagination,  in  the  case  of  a 
rational  idea,  fails  with  its  intuitions  to  attain 
to  the  given  concept,  so  understanding,  in  the 
case  of  an  aesthetic  idea,  fails  with  its  concepts 
ever  to  attain  to  the  completeness  of  the  inter¬ 
nal  intuition  which  imagination  conjoins  with 
a  given  representation.  Now  since  the  reduction 
of  a  representation  of  the  imagination  to  con¬ 
cepts  is  equivalent  to  giving  its  exponents,  the 
aesthetic  idea  may  be  called  on  inexponible  rep¬ 
resentation  of  the  imagination  (in  its  free  play). 

I  shall  have  an  opportunity  hereafter  of  dealing 
more  fully  with  ideas  of  this  kind.  At  present 
I  confine  myself  to  the  remark,  that  both  kinds 
of  ideas,  aesthetic  ideas  as  well  as  rational,  are 
bound  to  have  their  principles,  and  that  the 
seat  of  these  principles  must  in  both  cases  be 
reason — the  latter  depending  upon  the  objec¬ 
tive,  the  former  upon  the  subjective,  principles 
of  its  employment. 

Consonantly  with  this,  genius  may  also  be 
defined  as  the  faculty  of  aesthetic  ideas .  This 
serves  at  the  same  time  to  point  out  the  reason 
why  it  is  nature  (the  nature  of  the  individual) 
and  not  a  set  purpose,  that  in  products  of  genius 
gives  the  rule  to  art  (as  the  production  of 
the  beautiful).  For  the  beautiful  must  not  be 
estimated  according  to  concepts,  but  by  the 
final  mode  in  which  the  imagination  is  attuned 
so  as  to  accord  with  the  faculty  of  concepts 
generally;  and  so  rule  and  precept  are  incapable 
of  serving  as  the  requisite  subjective  standard 
for  that  aesthetic  and  unconditioned  finality  in 
fine  art  which  has  to  make  a  warranted  claim 
to  being  bound  to  please  every  one.  Rather  must 
such  a  standard  be  sought  in  the  element  of 
mere  nature  in  the  subject,  which  cannot  be 
comprehended  under  rules  or  concepts,  that  is 
to  say,  the  supersensible  substrate  of  all  the 


JUDGEMENT  543 

subject’s  faculties  (unattainable  by  any  concept 
of  understanding),  and  consequently  in  that 
which  forms  the  point  of  reference  for  the 
harmonious  accord  of  all  our  faculties  of  cog¬ 
nition — the  production  of  which  accord  is  the 
ultimate  end  set  by  the  intelligible  basis  of  our 
nature.  Thus  alone  is  it  possible  for  a  subjective 
and  yet  universally  valid  principle  a  priori  to 
lie  at  the  basis  of  that  finality  for  which  no 
objective  principle  can  be  prescribed. 

Remark  2 

The  following  important  observation  here 
naturally  presents  itself:  There  are  three  kinds 
of  antinomies  of  pure  reason,  which,  however, 
all  agree  in  forcing  reason  to  abandon  the  oth¬ 
erwise  very  natural  assumption  which  takes 
the  objects  of  sense  for  things-in-themselves, 
and  to  regard  them,  instead,  merely  as  phenom¬ 
ena,  and  to  lay  at  their  basis  an  intelligible  sub¬ 
strate  (something  supersensible,  the  concept  of 
which  is  only  an  idea  and  affords  no  proper 
knowledge).  Apart  from  some  such  antinomy, 
reason  could  never  bring  itself  to  take  such  a 
step  as  to  adopt  a  principle  so  severely  restrict¬ 
ing  the  field  of  its  speculation,  and  to  submit 
to  sacrifices  involving  the  complete  dissipation 
of  so  many  otherwise  brilliant  hopes.  For  even 
now  that  it  is  recompensed  for  this  loss  by  the 
prospect  of  a  proportionately  wider  scope  of 
action  from  a  practical  point  of  view,  it  is  not 
without  a  pang  of  regret  that  it  appears  to  part 
company  with  those  hopes,  and  to  break  away 
from  the  old  ties. 

The  reason  for  there  being  three  kinds  of 
antinomies  is  to  be  found  in  the  fact  that  there 
are  three  faculties  of  cognition,  understanding, 
judgement,  and  reason,  each  of  which,  being 
a  higher  faculty  of  cognition,  must  have  its 
a  priori  principles.  For,  so  far  as  reason  passes 
judgement  upon  these  principles  themselves 
and  their  employment,  it  inexorably  requires 
the  unconditioned  for  the  given  conditioned  in 
respect  of  them  all.  This  can  never  be  found 
unless  the  sensible,  instead  of  being  regarded 
as  inherently  appurtenant  to  things-in-them¬ 
selves,  is  treated  as  a  mere  phenomenon,  and, 
as  such,  being  made  to  rest  upon  something 
supersensible  (the  intelligible  substrate  of  ex¬ 
ternal  and  internal  nature)  as  the  thing-in-itself. 
There  is  then  (1)  for  the  cognitive  faculty  an 
antinomy  of  reason  in  respect  of  the  theoreti¬ 
cal  employment  of  understanding  carried  to  the 
point  of  the  unconditioned;  (2)  for  the  feeling 
of  pleasure  and  displeasure  an  antinomy  of  rea¬ 
son  in  respect  of  the  aesthetic  employment  of 


THE  CRITIQUE 


judgement;  (3)  for  the  faculty  of  desire  an 
antinomy  in  respect  of  the  practical  employ¬ 
ment  of  self-legislative  reason.  For  all  these 
faculties  have  their  fundamental  a  priori  prin¬ 
ciples,  and,  following  an  imperative  demand  of 
reason,  must  be  able  to  judge  and  to  determine 
their  object  unconditionally  in  accordance  with 
these  principles. 

As  to  two  of  the  antinomies  of  these  higher 
cognitive  faculties,  those,  namely,  of  their 
theoretical  and  of  their  practical  employment, 
we  have  already  shown  elsewhere  both  that 
they  are  inevitable ,  if  no  cognisance  is  taken  in 
such  judgements  of  a  supersensible  substrate 
of  the  given  objects  as  phenomena,  and,  on  the 
other  hand,  that  they  can  be  solved  the  moment 
this  is  done.  Now,  as  to  the  antinomy  incident 
to  the  employment  of  judgement  in  conformity 
with  the  demand  of  reason,  and  the  solution  of 
it  here  given,  we  may  say  that  to  avoid  facing 
it  there  are  but  the  following  alternatives.  It  is 
open  to  us  to  deny  that  any  a  priori  principle 
lies  at  the  basis  of  the  aesthetic  judgement  of 
taste,  with  the  result  that  all  claim  to  the  neces¬ 
sity  of  a  universal  consensus  of  opinion  is  an 
idle  and  empty  delusion,  and  that  a  judgement 
of  taste  only  deserves  to  be  considered  to  this 
extent  correct,  that  it  so  happens  that  a  number 
share  the  same  opinion,  and  even  this,  not,  in 
truth,  because  an  a  priori  principle  is  presumed 
to  lie  at  the  back  of  this  agreement,  but  rather 
(as  with  the  taste  of  the  palate)  because  of  the 
contingently  resembling  organization  of  the  in¬ 
dividuals.  Or  else ,  in  the  alternative,  we  should 
have  to  suppose  that  the  judgement  of  taste  is 
in  fact  a  disguised  judgement  of  reason  on  the 
perfection  discovered  in  a  thing  and  the  refer¬ 
ence  of  the  manifold  in  it  to  an  end,  and  that 
it  is  consequently  only  called  aesthetic  on  ac¬ 
count  of  the  confusion  that  here  besets  our  re¬ 
flection,  although  fundamentally  it  is  teleolog¬ 
ical.  In  this  latter  case  the  solution  of  the  an¬ 
tinomy  with  the  assistance  of  transcendental 
ideas  might  be  declared  otiose  and  nugatory, 
and  the  above  laws  of  taste  thus  reconciled  with 
the  objects  of  sense,  not  as  mere  phenomena, 
but  even  as  things-in-themselves.  How  unsatis¬ 
factory  both  of  those  alternatives  alike  are  as 
a  means  of  escape  has  been  shown  in  several 
places  in  our  exposition  of  judgements  of  taste. 

If,  however,  our  deduction  is  at  least  credited 
with  having  been  worked  out  on  correct  lines, 
even  though  it  may  not  have  been  sufficiently 
clear  in  all  its  details,  three  ideas  then  stand 
out  in  evidence.  Firstly ,  there  is  the  supersen¬ 
sible  in  general,  without  further  determination, 


as  substrate  of  nature;  secondly,  this  same 
supersensible  as  principle  of  the  subjective 
finality  of  nature  for  our  cognitive  faculties; 
thirdly ,  the  same  supersensible  again,  as  prin¬ 
ciple  of  the  ends  of  freedom,  and  principle  of 
the  common  accord  of  these  ends  with  freedom 
in  the  moral  sphere. 

§  58.  The  idealism  of  the  finality  alike  of  nature 
and  of  art ,  as  the  unique  principle 
of  the  aesthetic  judgement 

The  principle  of  taste  may,  to  begin  with, 
be  placed  on  either  of  two  footings.  For  taste 
may  be  said  invariably  to  judge  on  empirical 
grounds  of  determination  and  such,  therefore, 
as  are  only  given  a  posteriori  through  sense,  or 
else  it  may  be  allowed  to  judge  on  an  a  priori 
ground.  The  former  would  be  the  empiricism 
of  the  critique  of  taste,  the  latter  its  rationalism. 
The  first  would  obliterate  the  distinction  that 
marks  off  the  object  of  our  delight  from  the 
agreeable;  the  second,  supposing  the  judgement 
rested  upon  determinate  concepts,  would  oblit¬ 
erate  its  distinction  from  the  good.  In  this  way 
beauty  would  have  its  locus  standi  in  the  world 
completely  denied,  and  nothing  but  the  dignity 
of  a  separate  name,  betokening,  maybe,  a  cer¬ 
tain  blend  of  both  the  above-named  kinds  of 
delight,  would  be  left  in  its  stead.  But  we  have 
shown  the  existence  of  grounds  of  delight  which 
are  a  priori,  and  which  therefore,  can  consist 
with  the  principle  of  rationalism,  and  which 
are  yet  incapable  of  being  grasped  by  definite 
concepts. 

As  against  the  above,  we  may  say  that  the 
rationalism  of  the  principle  of  taste  may  take 
the  form  either  of  the  realism  of  finality  or  of 
its  idealism.  Now,  as  a  judgement  of  taste  is 
not  a  cognitive  judgement,  and  as  beauty  is  not 
a  property  of  the  object  considered  in  its  own 
account,  the  rationalism  of  the  principle  of 
taste  can  never  be  placed  in  the  fact  that  the 
finality  in  this  judgement  is  regarded  in  thought 
as  objective.  In  other  words,  the  judgement  is 
not  directed  theoretically,  nor,  therefore,  logi¬ 
cally,  either  (no  matter  if  only  in  a  confused 
estimate),  to  the  perfection  of  the  object,  but 
only  aesthetically  to  the  harmonizing  of  its  rep¬ 
resentation  in  the  imagination  with  the  essential 
principles  of  judgement  generally  in  the  sub¬ 
ject.  For  this  reason  the  judgement  of  taste, 
and  the  distinction  between  its  realism  and  its 
idealism,  can  only,  even  on  the  principle  of 
rationalism,  depend  upon  its  subjective  finality 
interpreted  in  one  or  other  of  two  ways.  Either 
such  subjective  finality  is,  in  the  first  case,  a  har- 


OF  AESTHETIC  JUDGEMENT  545 


mony  with  our  judgement  pursued  as  an  actual 
(intentional)  end  of  nature  (or  of  art),  or  else, 
in  the  second  case,  it  is  only  a  supervening  final 
harmony  with  the  needs  of  our  faculty  of  judge¬ 
ment  in  its  relation  to  nature  and  the  forms 
which  nature  produces  in  accordance  with  par¬ 
ticular  laws,  and  one  that  is  independent  of  an 
end,  spontaneous  and  contingent. 

The  beautiful  forms  displayed  in  the  organic 
world  all  plead  eloquently  on  the  side  of  the 
realism  of  the  aesthetic  finality  of  nature  in 
support  of  the  plausible  assumption  that  be¬ 
neath  the  production  of  the  beautiful  there 
must  lie  a  preconceived  idea  in  the  producing 
cause — that  is  to  say  an  end  acting  in  the  inter¬ 
est  of  our  imagination.  Flowers,  blossoms,  even 
the  shapes  of  plants  as  a  whole,  the  elegance 
of  animal  formations  of  all  kinds,  unnecessary 
for  the  discharge  of  any  function  on  their  part, 
but  chosen  as  it  were  with  an  eye  to  our  taste; 
and,  beyond  all  else,  the  variety  and  harmony 
in  the  array  of  colours  (in  the  pheasant,  in 
Crustacea,  in  insects,  down  even  to  the  meanest 
flowers),  so  pleasing  and  charming  to  the  eyes, 
but  which,  inasmuch  as  they  touch  the  bare 
surface,  and  do  not  even  here  in  any  way  affect 
the  structure,  of  these  creatures — a  matter 
which  might  have  a  necessary  bearing  on  their 
internal  ends — seem  to  be  planned  entirely  with 
a  view  to  outward  appearance:  all  these  lend 
great  weight  to  the  mode  of  explanation  which 
assumes  actual  ends  of  nature  in  favour  of  our 
aesthetic  judgement. 

On  the  other  hand,  not  alone  does  reason, 
with  its  maxims  enjoining  upon  us  in  all  cases 
to  avoid,  as  far  as  possible,  any  unnecessary 
multiplication  of  principles,  set  itself  against 
this  assumption,  but  we  have  nature  in  its  free 
formations  displaying  on  all  sides  extensive 
mechanical  proclivity  to  producing  forms  seem¬ 
ingly  made,  as  it  were,  for  the  aesthetic  employ¬ 
ment  of  our  judgement,  without  affording  the 
least  support  to  the  supposition  of  a  need  for 
anything  over  and  above  its  mechanism,  as 
mere  nature,  to  enable  them  to  be  final  for  our 
judgement  apart  from  their  being  grounded 
upon  any  idea.  The  above  expression,  “jree 
formations ”  of  nature,  is,  however,  here  used 
to  denote  such  as  are  originally  set  up  in  a  fluid 
at  rest  where  the  volatilization  or  separation  of 
some  constituent  (sometimes  merely  of  caloric) 
leaves  the  residue  on  solidification  to  assume 
a  definite  shape  or  structure  (figure  or  texture) 
which  differs  with  specific  differences  of  the 
matter,  but  for  the  same  matter  is  invariable. 
Here,  however,  it  is  taken  for  granted  that,  as 


the  true  meaning  of  a  fluid  requires,  the  matter 
in  the  fluid  is  completely  dissolved  and  not  a 
mere  admixture  of  solid  particles  simply  held 
there  in  suspension. 

The  formation,  then,  takes  place  by  a  concur - 
sion7  i.e.,  by  a  sudden  solidification — not  by  a 
gradual  transition  from  the  fluid  to  the  solid 
state,  but,  as  it  were,  by  a  leap.  This  transition 
is  termed  crystallization.  Freezing  water  offers 
the  most  familiar  instance  of  a  formation  of 
this  kind.  There  the  process  begins  by  straight 
threads  of  ice  forming.  These  unite  at  angles 
of  6o°,  whilst  others  similarly  attach  them¬ 
selves  to  them  at  every  point  until  the  whole 
has  turned  into  ice.  But  while  this  is  going  on, 
the  water  between  the  threads  of  ice  does  not 
keep  getting  gradually  more  viscous,  but  re¬ 
mains  as  thoroughly  fluid  as  it  would  be  at  a 
much  higher  temperature,  although  it  is  per¬ 
fectly  ice-cold.  The  matter  that  frees  itself — 
that  makes  its  sudden  escape  at  the  moment  of 
solidification — is  a  considerable  quantum  of 
caloric.  As  this  was  merely  required  to  preserve 
fluidity,  its  disappearance  leaves  the  existing 
ice  not  a  whit  colder  than  the  water  which  but 
a  moment  before  was  there  as  fluid. 

There  are  many  salts  and  also  stones  of  a 
crystalline  figure  which  owe  their  origin  in  like 
manner  to  some  earthly  substance  being  dis¬ 
solved  in  water  under  the  influence  of  agencies 
little  understood.  The  drusy  configurations  of 
many  minerals,  of  the  cubical  sulphide  of  lead, 
of  the  red  silver  ore,  etc.,  are  presumably  also 
similarly  formed  in  water,  and  by  the  concur- 
sion  of  their  particles,  on  their  being  forced 
by  some  cause  or  other  to  relinquish  this  vehicle 
and  to  unite  among  themselves  in  definite  ex¬ 
ternal  shapes. 

But,  further,  all  substances  rendered  fluid  by 
heat,  which  have  become  solid  as  the  result  of 
cooling,  give,  when  broken,  internal  evidences 
of  a  definite  texture,  thus  suggesting  the  infer¬ 
ence  that  only  for  the  interference  of  their  own 
weight  or  the  disturbance  of  the  air,  the  ex¬ 
terior  would  also  have  exhibited  their  proper 
specific  shape.  This  has  been  observed  in  the 
case  of  some  metals  where  the  exterior  of  a 
molten  mass  has  hardened,  but  the  interior  re¬ 
mained  fluid,  and  then,  owing  to  the  withdrawal 
of  the  still  fluid  portion  in  the  interior,  there 
has  been  an  undisturbed  concursion  of  the  re¬ 
maining  parts  on  the  inside.  A  number  of  such 
mineral  crystallizations,  such  as  spars ,  hema¬ 
tite ,  aragonite,  frequently  present  extremely 
beautiful  shapes  such  as  it  might  take  art  all  its 
time  to  devise;  and  the  halo  in  the  grotto  of 


546  THE  CRITIQUE 


Antiparos  is  merely  the  work  of  water  perco¬ 
lating  through  strata  of  gypsum. 

The  fluid  state  is,  to  all  appearance,  on  the 
whole  older  than  the  solid,  and  plants  as  well 
as  animal  bodies  are  built  up  out  of  fluid  nutri¬ 
tive  substance,  so  far  as  this  takes  form  undis¬ 
turbed— in  the  case  of  the  latter,  admittedly, 
in  obedience,  primarily,  to  a  certain  original 
bent  of  nature  directed  to  ends  (which,  as  will 
be  shown  in  Part  II,  must  not  be  judged  aes¬ 
thetically,  but  teleologically  by  the  principle  of 
realism);  but  still  all  the  while,  perhaps,  also 
following  the  universal  law  of  the  affinity  of 
substances  in  the  way  they  shoot  together  and 
form  in  freedom.  In  the  same  way,  again,  where 
an  atmosphere,  which  is  a  composite  of  differ¬ 
ent  kinds  of  gas,  is  charged  with  watery  fluids, 
and  these  separate  from  it  owing  to  a  reduction 
of  the  temperature,  they  produce  snow-figures 
of  shapes  differing  with  the  actual  composition 
of  the  atmosphere.  These  are  frequently  of  very 
artistic  appearance  and  of  extreme  beauty.  So 
without  at  all  derogating  from  the  teleological 
principle  by  which  an  organization  is  judged, 
it  is  readily  conceivable  how  with  beauty  of 
flowers,  of  the  plumage  of  birds,  of  Crustacea, 
both  as  to  their  shape  and  their  colour,  we  have 
only  what  may  be  ascribed  to  nature  and  its 
capacity  for  originating  in  free  activity  aestheti¬ 
cally  final  forms,  independently  of  any  particu¬ 
lar  guiding  ends,  according  to  chemical  laws, 
by  means  of  the  chemical  integration  of  the 
substance  requisite  for  the  organization. 

But  what  shows  plainly  that  the  principle  of 
the  ideality  of  the  finality  in  the  beauty  of 
nature  is  the  one  upon  which  we  ourselves  in¬ 
variably  take  our  stand  in  our  aesthetic  judge¬ 
ments,  forbidding  us  to  have  recourse  to  any 
realism  of  a  natural  end  in  favour  of  our  faculty 
of  representation  as  a  principle  of  explanation, 
is  that  in  our  general  estimate  of  beauty  we 
seek  its  standard  a  priori  in  ourselves,  and,  that 
the  aesthetic  faculty  is  itself  legislative  in  re¬ 
spect  of  the  judgement  whether  anything  is 
beautiful  or  not.  This  could  not  be  so  on  the 
assumption  of  a  realism  of  the  finality  of 
nature;  because  in  that  case  we  should  have 
to  go  to  nature  for  instruction  as  to  what  we 
should  deem  beautiful,  and  the  judgement  of 
taste  would  be  subject  to  empirical  principles. 
For  in  such  an  estimate  the  question  does  not 
turn  on  what  nature  is,  or  even  on  what  it  is 
for  us  in  the  way  of  an  end,  but  on  how  we 
receive  it.  For  nature  to  have  fashioned  its 
forms  for  our  delight  would  inevitably  imply 
an  objective  finality  on  the  part  of  nature,  in¬ 


stead  of  a  subjective  finality  resting  on  the 
play  of  imagination  in  its  freedom,  where  it  is 
we  who  receive  nature  with  favour,  and  not 
nature  that  does  us  a  favour.  That  nature  af¬ 
fords  us  an  opportunity  for  perceiving  the 
inner  finality  in  the  relation  of  our  mental 
powers  engaged  in  the  estimate  of  certain  of  its 
products,  and,  indeed,  such  a  finality  as  arising 
from  a  supersensible  basis  is  to  be  pronounced 
necessary  and  of  universal  validity,  is  a  prop¬ 
erty  of  nature  which  cannot  belong  to  it  as  its 
end,  or  rather,  cannot  be  estimated  by  us  to 
be  such  an  end.  For  otherwise  the  judgement 
that  would  be  determined  by  reference  to  such 
an  end  would  found  upon  heteronomy,  instead 
of  founding  upon  autonomy  and  being  free,  as 
befits  a  judgement  of  taste. 

The  principle  of  the  idealism  of  finality  is 
still  more  clearly  apparent  in  fine  art.  For  the 
point  that  sensations  do  not  enable  us  to  adopt 
an  aesthetic  realism  of  finality  (which  would 
make  art  merely  agreeable  instead  of  beautiful) 
is  one  which  it  enjoys  in  common  with  beautiful 
nature.  But  the  further  point  that  the  delight 
arising  from  aesthetic  ideas  must  not  be  made 
dependent  upon  the  successful  attainment  of 
determinate  ends  (as  an  art  mechanically 
directed  to  results),  and  that,  consequently, 
even  in  the  case  of  the  rationalism  of  the  prin¬ 
ciple,  an  ideality  of  the  ends  and  not  their 
reality  is  fundamental,  is  brought  home  to  us 
by  the  fact  that  fine  art,  as  such,  must  not  be 
regarded  as  a  product  of  understanding  and 
science,  but  of  genius,  and  must,  therefore,  de¬ 
rive  its  rule  from  aesthetic  ideas,  which  are 
essentially  different  from  rational  ideas  of  deter¬ 
minate  ends. 

Just  as  the  ideality  of  objects  of  sense  as 
phenomena  is  the  only  way  of  explaining  the 
possibility  of  their  forms  admitting  of  a  priori 
determination,  so,  also,  the  idealism  of  the 
finality  in  estimating  the  beautiful  in  nature 
and  in  art  is  the  only  hypothesis  upon  which 
a  critique  can  explain  the  possibility  of  a  judge¬ 
ment  of  taste  that  demands  a  priori  validity  for 
every  one  (yet  without  basing  the  finality  rep¬ 
resented  in  the  object  upon  concepts). 

§  59.  Beauty  as  the  symbol  of  morality 

Intuitions  are  always  required  to  verify  the 
reality  of  our  concepts.  If  the  concepts  are  em¬ 
pirical,  the  intuitions  are  called  examples:  if 
they  are  pure  concepts  of  the  understanding, 
the  intuitions  go  by  the  name  of  schemata.  But 
to  call  for  a  verification  of  the  objective  reality 
of  rational  concepts,  i.e.,  of  ideas,  and,  what  is 


OF  AESTHETIC  JUDGEMENT 


more,  on  behalf  of  the  theoretical  cognition  of 
such  a  reality,  is  to  demand  an  impossibility, 
because  absolutely  no  intuition  adequate  to 
them  can  be  given. 

All  hypotyposis  (presentation,  subjectio  sub 
adspectum)  as  a  rendering  in  terms  of  sense,  is 
twofold.  Either  it  is  schematic ,  as  where  the 
intuition  corresponding  to  a  concept  compre¬ 
hended  by  the  understanding  is  given  a  priori , 
or  else  it  is  symbolic,  as  where  the  concept  is 
one  which  only  reason  can  think,  and  to  which 
no  sensible  intuition  can  be  adequate.  In  the 
latter  case  the  concept  is  supplied  with  an  intui¬ 
tion  such  that  the  procedure  of  judgement  in 
dealing  with  it  is  merely  analogous  to  that 
which  it  observes  in  schematism.  In  other 
words,  what  agrees  with  the  concept  is  merely 
the  rule  of  this  procedure,  and  not  the  intuition 
itself.  Hence  the  agreement  is  merely  in  the 
form  of  reflection,  and  not  in  the  content. 

Notwithstanding  the  adoption  of  the  word 
symbolic  by  modern  logicians  in  a  sense  opposed 
to  an  intuitive  mode  of  representation,  it  is  a 
wrong  use  of  the  word  and  subversive  of  its 
true  meaning;  for  the  symbolic  is  only  a  mode 
of  any  intrinsic  connection  with  the  intuition  of 
sentation  is,  in  fact,  divisible  into  the  schematic 
and  the  symbolic.  Both  are  hypotyposes,  i.e., 
presentations  (exhibitiones) ,  not  mere  marks. 
Marks  are  merely  designations  of  concepts  by 
the  aid  of  accompanying  sensible  signs  devoid 
of  any  intrinsic  connection  with  the  intuition  of 
the  object.  Their  sole  function  is  to  afford  a 
means  of  reinvoking  the  concepts  according  to 
the  imagination’s  law  of  association — a  purely 
subjective  role.  Such  marks  are  either  words 
or  visible  (algebraic  or  even  mimetic)  signs, 
simply  as  expressions  for  concepts.1 

All  intuitions  by  which  a  priori  concepts  are 
given  a  foothold  are,  therefore,  either  schemata 
or  symbols.  Schemata  contain  direct,  symbols 
indirect,  presentations  of  the  concept.  Sche¬ 
mata  effect  this  presentation  demonstratively, 
symbols  by  the  aid  of  an  analogy  (for  which 
recourse  is  had  even  to  empirical  intuitions), 
in  which  analogy  judgement  performs  a  double 
function:  first  in  applying  the  concept  to  the 
object  of  a  sensible  intuition,  and  then,  sec¬ 
ondly,  in  applying  the  mere  rule  of  its  reflection 
upon  that  intuition  to  quite  another  object,  of 
which  the  former  is  but  the  symbol.  In  this 
way,  a  monarchical  state  is  represented  as  a 

1  The  intuitive  mode  of  knowledge  must  be  con¬ 
trasted  with  the  discursive  mode  (not  with  the  sym¬ 
bolic).  The  former  is  either  schematic,  by  means  of 
demonstration,  or  symbolic,  as  a  representation  follow¬ 
ing  a  mere  analogy. 


547 

living  body  when  it  is  governed  by  constitu¬ 
tional  laws,  but  as  a  mere  machine  (like  a  hand- 
mill)  when  it  is  governed  by  an  individual  abso¬ 
lute  will;  but  in  both  cases  the  representation 
is  merely  symbolic.  For  there  is  certainly  no 
likeness  between  a  despotic  state  and  a  hand- 
mill,  whereas  there  surely  is  between  the  rules 
of  reflection  upon  both  and  their  causality. 
Hitherto  this  function  has  been  but  little  ana¬ 
lysed,  worthy  as  it  is  of  a  deeper  study.  Still 
this  is  not  the  place  to  dwell  upon  it.  In  lan¬ 
guage  we  have  many  such  indirect  presentations 
modelled  upon  an  analogy  enabling  the  expres¬ 
sion  in  question  to  contain,  not  the  proper 
schema  for  the  concept,  but  merely  a  symbol 
for  reflection.  Thus  the  words  ground  (support, 
basis),  to  depend  (to  be  held  up  from  above), 
to  flow  from  (instead  of  to  follow),  substance 
(as  Locke  puts  it:  the  support  of  accidents), 
and  numberless  others,  are  not  schematic,  but 
rather  symbolic  hypotyposes,  and  express  con¬ 
cepts  without  employing  a  direct  intuition  for 
the  purpose,  but  only  drawing  upon  an  analogy 
with  one,  i.e.,  transferring  the  reflection  upon 
an  object  of  intuition  to  quite  a  new  concept, 
and  one  with  which  perhaps  no  intuition  could 
ever  directly  correspond.  Supposing  the  name 
of  knowledge  may  be  given  to  what  only 
amounts  to  a  mere  mode  of  representation 
(which  is  quite  permissible  where  this  is  not 
a  principle  of  the  theoretical  determination  of 
the  object  in  respect  of  what  it  is  in  itself,  but 
of  the  practical  determination  of  what  the  idea 
of  it  ought  to  be  for  us  and  for  its  final  employ¬ 
ment),  then  all  our  knowledge  of  God  is  mere¬ 
ly  symbolic;  and  one  who  takes  it,  with  the 
properties  of  understanding,  will,  and  so  forth, 
which  only  evidence  their  objective  reality  in 
beings  of  this  world,  to  be  schematic,  falls  into 
anthropomorphism,  just  as,  if  he  abandons 
every  intuitive  element,  he  falls  into  Deism 
which  furnishes  no  knowledge  whatsoever — not 
even  from  a  practical  point  of  view. 

Now,  I  say,  the  beautiful  is  the  symbol  of 
the  morally  good,  and  only  in  this  light  (a  point 
of  view  natural  to  every  one,  and  one  which 
every  one  exacts  from  others  as  a  duty)  does 
it  give  us  pleasure  with  an  attendant  claim  to 
the  agreement  of  every  one  else,  whereupon  the 
mind  becomes  conscious  of  a  certain  ennoble¬ 
ment  and  elevation  above  mere  sensibility  to 
pleasure  from  impressions  of  sense,  and  also  ap¬ 
praises  the  worth  of  others  on  the  score  of  a 
like  maxim  of  their  judgement.  This  is  that 
intelligible  to  which  taste,  as  noticed  in  the  pre¬ 
ceding  paragraph,  extends  its  view.  It  is,  that 


THE  CRITIQUE 


is  to  say,  what  brings  even  our  higher  cognitive 
faculties  into  common  accord,  and  is  that  apart 
from  which  sheer  contradiction  would  arise  be¬ 
tween  their  nature  and  the  claims  put  forward 
by  taste.  In  this  faculty,  judgement  does  not 
find  itself  subjected  to  a  heteronomy  of  laws 
of  experience  as  it  does  in  the  empirical  esti¬ 
mate  of  things — in  respect  of  the  objects  of 
such  a  pure  delight  it  gives  the  law  to  itself, 
just  as  reason  does  in  respect  of  the  faculty 
of  desire.1  Here,  too,  both  on  account  of  this 
inner  possibility  in  the  subject,  and  on  account 
of  the  external  possibility  of  a  nature  harmo¬ 
nizing  therewith,  it  finds  a  reference  in  itself  to 
something  in  the  subject  itself  and  outside  it, 
and  which  is  not  nature,  nor  yet  freedom,  but 
still  is  connected  with  the  ground  of  the  latter, 
i.e.,  the  supersensible — a  something  in  which 
the  theoretical  faculty  gets  bound  up  into  unity 
with  the  practical  in  an  intimate  and  obscure 
manner.  We  shall  bring  out  a  few  points  of  this 
analogy,  while  taking  care,  at  the  same  time, 
not  to  let  the  points  of  difference  escape  us. 

(i)  The  beautiful  pleases  immediately  (but 
only  in  reflective  intuition,  not,  like  morality,  in 
its  concept).2  (2)  It  pleases  apart  jrom  all  in¬ 
terest  (pleasure  in  the  morally  good  is  no  doubt 
necessarily  bound  up  with  an  interest,  but  not 
with  one  of  the  kind  that  are  antecedent  to  the 
judgement  upon  the  delight,  but  with  one  that 
judgement  itself  for  the  first  time  calls  into 
existence).  (3)  The  freedom  of  the  imagination 
(consequently  of  our  faculty  in  respect  of  its 
sensibility)  is,  in  estimating  the  beautiful,  rep¬ 
resented  as  in  accord  with  the  understanding’s 
conformity  to  law  (in  moral  judgements  the 
freedom  of  the  will  is  thought  as  the  harmony 
of  the  latter  with  itself  according  to  universal 
laws  of  Reason).  (4)  The  subjective  principles 
of  the  estimate  of  the  beautiful  is  represented 
as  universal,  i.e.,  valid  for  every  man,  but  as 
incognizable  by  means  of  any  universal  concept 
(the  objective  principle  of  morality  is  set  forth 
as  also  universal,  i.e.,  for  all  individuals,  and, 
at  the  same  time,  for  all  actions  of  the  same 
individual,  and,  besides,  as  cognizable  by  means 
of  a  universal  concept).  For  this  reason  the 
moral  judgement  not  alone  admits  of  definite 
constitutive  principles,  but  is  only  possible  by 
adopting  these  principles  and  their  universality 
as  the  ground  of  its  maxims. 

Even  common  understanding  is  wont  to  pay 
regard  to  this  analogy;  and  we  frequently  apply 

1  [Cf.  the  reference  to  heteronomy  and  autonomy, 
P-  546.1 

2  [Cf.  pp.  4S8,  512.] 


to  beautiful  objects  of  nature  or  of  art  names 
that  seem  to  rely  upon  the  basis  of  a  moral  esti¬ 
mate.  We  call  buildings  or  trees  majestic  and 
stately,  or  plains  laughing  and  gay;  even  colours 
are  called  innocent,  modest ,  soft ,  because  they 
excite  sensations  containing  something  analo¬ 
gous  to  the  consciousness  of  the  state  of  mind 
produced  by  moral  judgements.  Taste  makes, 
as  it  were,  the  transition  from  the  charm  of 
sense  to  habitual  moral  interest  possible  with¬ 
out  too  violent  a  leap,  for  it  represents  the 
imagination,  even  in  its  freedom,  as  amenable 
to  a  final  determination  for  understanding,  and 
teaches  us  to  find,  even  in  sensuous  objects,  a 
free  delight  apart  from  any  charm  of  sense. 

§  60.  Appendix.  The  methodology  of  taste 

The  division  of  a  critique  into  elementology 
and  methodology — a  division  which  is  intro¬ 
ductory  to  science — is  one  inapplicable  to  the 
critique  of  taste.  For  there  neither  is,  nor  can 
be,  a  science  of  the  beautiful,  and  the  judge¬ 
ment  of  taste  is  not  determinable  by  principles. 
For,  as  to  the  element  of  science  in  every  art — 
a  matter  which  turns  upon  truth  in  the  presen¬ 
tation  of  the  object  of  the  art — while  this  is, 
no  doubt,  the  indispensable  condition  ( conditio 
sine  qua  non)  of  fine  art,  it  is  not  itself  fine  art. 
Fine  art,  therefore,  has  only  got  a  manner 
{modus),  and  not  a  method  of  teaching 
{methodus) .  The  master  must  illustrate  what 
the  pupil  is  to  achieve  and  how  achievement  is 
to  be  attained,  and  the  proper  function  of  the 
universal  rules  to  which  he  ultimately  reduces 
his  treatment  is  rather  that  of  supplying  a  con¬ 
venient  text  for  recalling  its  chief  moments  to 
the  pupil’s  mind,  than  of  prescribing  them  to 
him.  Yet,  in  all  this,  due  regard  must  be  paid 
to  a  certain  ideal  which  art  must  keep  in  view, 
even  though  complete  success  ever  eludes  its 
happiest  efforts.  Only  by  exciting  the  pupil’s 
imagination  to  conformity  with  a  given  con¬ 
cept,  by  pointing  out  how  the  expression  falls 
short  of  the  idea  to  which,  as  aesthetic,  the  con¬ 
cept  itself  fails  to  attain,  and  by  means  of 
severe  criticism,  is  it  possible  to  prevent  his 
promptly  looking  upon  the  examples  set  before 
him  as  the  prototypes  of  excellence,  and  as 
models  for  him  to  imitate,  without  submission 
to  any  higher  standard  or  to  his  own  critical 
judgement.  This  would  result  in  genius  being 
stifled,  and,  with  it,  also  the  freedom  of  the  im¬ 
agination  in  its  very  conformity  to  law — a  free¬ 
dom  without  which  a  fine  art  is  not  possible, 
nor  even  as  much  as  a  correct  taste  of  one’s 
own  for  estimating  it. 


OF  AESTHETIC  JUDGEMENT 


The  propaedeutic  to  all  fine  art,  so  far  as  the 
highest  degree  of  its  perfection  is  what  is  in 
view,  appears  to  lie,  not  in  precepts,  but  in  the 
culture  of  the  mental  powers  produced  by  a 
sound  preparatory  education  in  what  are  called 
the  humaniora — so  called,  presumably,  because 
humanity  signifies,  on  the  one  hand,  the  uni¬ 
versal  feeling  of  sympathy ,  and,  on  the  other, 
the  faculty  of  being  able  to  communicate  uni¬ 
versally  one’s  inmost  self — properties  consti¬ 
tuting  in  conjunction  the  befitting  social  spirit 
of  mankind,  in  contradistinction  to  the  narrow 
life  of  the  lower  animals.  There  was  an  age  and 
there  were  nations  in  which  the  active  impulse 
towards  a  social  life  regulated  by  laws — what 
converts  a  people  into  a  permanent  community 
— grappled  with  the  huge  difficulties  presented 
by  the  trying  problem  of  bringing  freedom 
(and  therefore  equality  also)  into  union  with 
constraining  force  (more  that  of  respect  and 
dutiful  submission  than  of  fear).  And  such  must 
have  been  the  age,  and  such  the  nation,  that 
first  discovered  the  art  of  reciprocal  communi¬ 
cation  of  ideas  between  the  more  cultured  and 
ruder  sections  of  the  community,  and  how  to 
bridge  the  difference  between  the  amplitude 
and  refinement  of  the  former  and  the  natural 
simplicity  and  originality  of  the  latter — in  this 
way  hitting  upon  that  mean  between  higher 
culture  and  the  modest  worth  of  nature,  that 


549 

forms  for  taste  also,  as  a  sense  common  to  all 
mankind,  that  true  standard  which  no  universal 
rules  can  supply. 

Hardly  will  a  later  age  dispense  with  those 
models.  For  nature  will  ever  recede  farther  into 
the  background,  so  that  eventually,  with  no  per¬ 
manent  example  retained  from  the  past,  a 
future  age  would  scarce  be  in  a  position  to  form 
a  concept  of  the  happy  union,  in  one  and  the 
same  people,  of  the  law-directed  constraint  be¬ 
longing  to  the  highest  culture,  with  the  force 
and  truth  of  a  free  nature  sensible  of  its  proper 
worth. 

However,  taste  is,  in  the  ultimate  analysis,  a 
critical  faculty  that  judges  of  the  rendering  of 
moral  ideas  in  terms  of  sense  (through  the  in¬ 
tervention  of  a  certain  analogy  in  our  reflection 
on  both) ;  and  it  is  this  rendering  also,  and  the 
increased  sensibility,  founded  upon  it,  for  the 
feeling  which  these  ideas  evoke  (termed  moral 
sense ),  that  are  the  origin  of  that  pleasure 
which  taste  declares  valid  for  mankind  in  gen¬ 
eral  and  not  merely  for  the  private  feeling  of 
each  individual.  This  makes  it  clear  that  the 
true  propaedeutic  for  laying  the  foundations  of 
taste  is  the  development  of  moral  ideas  and  the 
culture  of  the  moral  feeling.  For  only  when  sen¬ 
sibility  is  brought  into  harmony  with  moral 
feeling  can  genuine  taste  assume  a  definite  un¬ 
changeable  form. 


SECOND  PART 

CRITIQUE  OF  TELEOLOGICAL  JUDGEMENT1 


§  61.  Objective  finality  in  nature. 

[ Introduction ] 1 

We  do  not  need  to  look  beyond  the  critical  ex¬ 
planation  of  the  possibility  of  knowledge  to 
find  ample  reason  for  assuming  a  subjective 
finality  on  the  part  of  nature  in  its  particular 
laws.  This  is  a  finality  relative  to  comprehen¬ 
sibility — man’s  power  of  judgement  being  such 
as  it  is — and  to  the  possibility  of  uniting  par¬ 
ticular  experiences  into  a  connected  system  of 
nature.  In  this  system,  then,  we  may  further 
anticipate  the  possible  existence  of  some  among 
the  many  products  of  nature  that,  as  if  put 
there  with  quite  a  special  regard  to  our  judge¬ 
ment.  are  of  a  form  particularly  adapted  to  that 
faculty.  Forms  of  this  kind  are  those  which  by 
their  combination  of  unity  and  heterogeneity 
serve  as  it  were  to  strengthen  and  entertain  the 
mental  powers  that  enter  into  play  in  the  exer¬ 
cise  of  the  faculty  of  judgement,  and  to  them 
the  name  of  beautijul  forms  is  accordingly 
given. 

But  the  universal  idea  of  nature,  as  the  com¬ 
plex  of  objects  of  sense,  gives  us  no  reason 
whatever  for  assuming  that  things  of  nature 
serve  one  another  as  means  to  ends,2  or  that 
their  very  possibility3  is  only  made  fully  intel¬ 
ligible  by  a  causality  of  this  sort.  For  since,  in 
the  case  of  the  beautiful  forms  above  men¬ 
tioned.  the  representation  of  the  things  is 
something  in  ourselves,  it  can  quite  readily  be 
thought  even  a  priori  as  one  well-adapted  and 
convenient  for  disposing  our  cognitive  faculties 
to  an  inward  and  final  harmony.  But  where  the 
ends  are  not  ends  of  our  own.  and  do  not  be¬ 
long  even  to  nature  (which  we  do  not  take  to 
be  an  intelligent  being),  there  is  no  reason  at 
all  for  presuming  a  priori  that  they  may  or 
ought  nevertheless  to  constitute  a  special  kind 
of  causality  or  at  least  a  quite  peculiar  order 
of  nature.  What  is  more,  the  actual  existence  of 

1  [For  passages  dealing  with  the  teleological  judge¬ 
ment  in  the  Preface  and  Introduction,  Cf.  above,  pp. 
462,  and  473~4-  The  table  of  faculties  at  p.  475  should 
also  be  considered.  The  first  paragraph  of  §  70,  below 
p.  562.  repeats  a  portion  of  the  introductory  matter. 1 

2  [Cf.  P.554-] 

3  [Cf.  above,  p.  473.] 


these  ends  cannot  be  proved  by  experience — 
save  on  the  assumption  of  an  antecedent  proc¬ 
ess  of  mental  jugglery  that  only  reads  the  con¬ 
ception  of  an  end  into  the  nature  of  the  things, 
and  that,  not  deriving  this  conception  from  the 
objects  and  what  it  knows  of  them  from  expe¬ 
rience  makes  use  of  it  more  for  the  purpose  of 
rendering  nature  intelligible  to  us  by  an  anal¬ 
ogy  to  a  subjective  ground  upon  which  our 
representations  are  brought  into  inner  con¬ 
nection.  than  for  that  of  cognizing  nature  from 
objective  grounds. 

Besides,  objective  finality,  as  a  principle 
upon  which  physical  objects  are  possible,  is  so 
far  from  attaching  necessarily  to  the  conception 
of  nature  that  it  is  the  stock  example  adduced 
to  show  the  contingency  of  nature  and  its  form. 
So  where  the  structure  of  a  bird,  for  instance, 
the  hollow  formation  of  its  bones,  the  position 
of  its  wings  for  producing  motion  and  of  its 
tail  for  steering,  are  cited,  we  are  told  that  all 
this  is  in  the  highest  degree  contingent  if  we 
simply  look  to  the  nexus  effectivus  in  nature, 
and  do  not  call  in  aid  a  special  kind  of  causality, 
namely,  that  of  ends  ( nexus  finalis).  This  means 
that  nature,  regarded  as  mere  mechanism,  could 
have  fashioned  itself  in  a  thousand  other  dif¬ 
ferent  ways  without  lighting  precisely  on  the 
unity  based  on  a  principle  like  this,  and  that, 
accordingly,  it  is  only  outside  the  conception 
of  nature,  and  not  in  it,  that  we  may  hope  to 
find  some  shadow  of  ground  a  priori  for  that 
unity. 

We  are  right,  however,  in  applying  the  teleo¬ 
logical  estimate,  at  least  problematically,  to  the 
investigation  of  nature;  but  only  with  a  view 
to  bringing  it  under  principles  of  observation 
and  research  by  analogy  to  the  causality  that 
looks  to  ends,  while  not  pretending  to  explain  it 
by  this  means.  Thus  it  is  an  estimate  of  the  re¬ 
flective,  not  of  the  determinant,  judgement.  Yet 
the  conception  of  combinations  and  forms  in 
nature  that  are  determined  by  ends  is  at  least 
one  more  principle  for  reducing  its  phenomena 
to  rules  in  cases  where  the  laws  of  its  purely 
mechanical  causality  do  not  carry  us  sufficiently 
far.  For  we  are  bringing  forward  a  teleological 
ground  where  we  endow  a  conception  of  an  ob- 
550 


OF  TELEOLOGICAL  JUDGEMENT  551 


ject — as  if  that  conception  were  to  be  found  in 
nature  instead  of  in  ourselves — with  causality  in 
respect  of  the  object,  or  rather  where  we  picture 
to  ourselves  the  possibility  of  the  object  on  the 
analogy  of  a  causality  of  this  kind — a  causality 
such  as  we  experience  in  ourselves — and  so  re¬ 
gard  nature  as  possessed  of  a  capacity  of  its  own 
for  acting  technically;  whereas  if  we  did  not  as¬ 
cribe  such  a  mode  of  operation  to  nature  its  cau¬ 
sality  would  have  to  be  regarded  as  blind  mecha¬ 
nism.  But  this  is  a  different  thing  from  crediting 
nature  with  causes  acting  designedly ,  to  which 
it  may  be  regarded  as  subjected  in  following  its 
particular  laws.  The  latter  would  mean  that 
teleology  is  based,  not  merely  on  a  regulative 
principle,  directed  to  the  simple  estimate  of 


phenomena,  but  is  actually  based  on  a  consti¬ 
tutive  principle  available  for  deriving  natural 
products  from  their  causes:  with  the  result  that 
the  conception  of  a  physical  end  no  longer  exists 
for  the  reflective,  but  for  the  determinant, 
judgement.  But  in  that  case  the  conception 
would  not  really  be  specially  connected  with 
the  power  of  judgement,  as  is  the  conception  of 
beauty  as  a  formal  subjective  finality.  It  would, 
on  the  contrary,  be  a  conception  of  reason,  and 
would  introduce  a  new  causality  into  science — 
one  which  we  are  borrowing  all  the  time  solely 
from  ourselves  and  attributing  to  other  beings, 
although  we  do  not  mean  to  assume  that  they 
and  we  are  similarly  constituted. 


First  Division.  Analytic  of  Teleological  Judgement 


§  62.  Purely  formal ,  as  distinguished  from 
material ,  objective  finality 

All  geometrical  figures  drawn  on  a  principle 
display  an  objective  finality  which  takes  many 
directions  and  has  often  been  admired.1  This 
finality  is  one  of  convenience  on  the  part  of  the 
figure  for  solving  a  number  of  problems  by  a 
single  principle,  and  even  for  solving  each  one 
of  the  problems  in  an  infinite  variety  of  ways. 
Here  the  finality  is  manifestly  objective  and 
intellectual,  not  simply  subjective  and  aesthetic. 
For  it  expresses  the  way  the  figure  lends  itself 
to  the  production  of  many  proposed  figures, 
and  it  is  cognized  through  reason.  Yet  this 
finality  does  not  make  the  conception  of  the 
object  itself  possible,  this  is  to  say,  we  do  not 
regard  the  object  as  possible  simply  because  it 
may  be  turned  to  such  use. 

In  such  a  simple  figure  as  the  circle  lies  the 
key  to  the  solution  of  a  host  of  problems  every 
one  of  which  would  separately  require  elaborate 
materials,  and  this  solution  follows,  we  might 
say,  directly  as  one  of  the  infinite  number  of 
excellent  properties  of  that  figure.  For  instance, 
suppose  we  have  to  construct  a  triangle,  being 
given  the  base  and  vertical  angle.  The  problem 
is  indeterminate,  i.e.,  it  admits  of  solution  in 
an  endless  variety  of  ways.  But  the  circle  em¬ 
braces  them  all  in  one,  as  the  geometrical  locus 
of  all  triangles  satisfying  this  condition.  Or  two 
lines  have  to  intersect  one  another  so  that  the 
rectangle  under  the  two  parts  of  the  one  shall 
be  equal  to  the  rectangle  under  the  two  parts 

1  [Cf.  pp.  561,  594.] 


of  the  other.  The  solution  of  the  problem  is 
apparently  full  of  difficulty.  But  all  lines  inter¬ 
secting  within  a  circle  whose  circumference 
passes  through  their  extremities  are  divided 
directly  in  this  ratio.  The  remaining  curves  sim¬ 
ilarly  suggest  to  us  other  useful  solutions,  never 
contemplated  in  the  rule  upon  which  they  are 
constructed.  All  conic  sections,  taken  separately 
or  compared  with  one  another,  are,  however 
simple  their  definition,  fruitful  in  principles  for 
solving  a  host  of  possible  problems.  It  is  a  real 
joy  to  see  the  ardour  with  which  the  older 
geometricians  investigated  these  properties  of 
such  lines,  without  allowing  themselves  to  be 
troubled  by  the  question  which  shallow  minds 
raise,  as  to  the  supposed  use  of  such  knowledge. 
Thus  they  investigated  the  properties  of  the 
parabola  in  ignorance  of  the  law  of  terrestrial 
gravitation  which  would  have  shown  them  its 
application  to  the  trajectory  of  heavy  bodies 
(for  the  direction  of  their  gravitation  when  in 
motion  may  be  regarded  as  parallel  to  the  curve 
of  a  parabola).  So  again  they  investigated  the 
properties  of  the  ellipse  without  a  suspicion  that 
a  gravitation  was  also  discoverable  in  the  celes¬ 
tial  bodies,  and  without  knowing  the  law  that 
governs  it  as  the  distance  from  the  point  of  at¬ 
traction  varies,  and  that  makes  the  bodies  de¬ 
scribe  this  curve  in  free  motion.  While  in  all 
these  labours  they  were  working  unwittingly 
for  those  who  were  to  come  after  them,  they 
delighted  themselves  with  a  finality  which,  al¬ 
though  belonging  to  the  nature  of  the  things, 
they  were  able  to  present  completely  a  priori  as 
necessary.  Plato,  himself  a  master  of  this 


THE  CRITIQUE 


science,  was  fired  with  the  idea  of  an  original 
constitution  of  things,  for  the  discovery  of 
which  we  could  dispense  with  all  experience, 
and  of  a  power  of  the  mind  enabling  it  to  derive 
the  harmony  of  real  things  from  their  super¬ 
sensible  principle  (and  with  these  real  things 
he  classed  the  properties  of  numbers  with  which 
the  mind  plays  in  music).  Thus  inspired,  he 
transcended  the  conceptions  of  experience  and 
rose  to  ideas  that  seemed  only  explicable  to  him 
on  the  assumption  of  a  community  of  intellect 
with  the  original  source  of  all  things  real.  No 
wonder  that  he  banished  from  his  school  the 
man  that  was  ignorant  of  geometry,  since  he 
thought  that  from  the  pure  intuition  residing 
in  the  depths  of  the  human  soul  he  could  derive 
all  that  Anaxagoras  inferred  from  the  objects 
of  experience  and  their  purposive  combination. 
For  it  is  the  necessity  of  that  which,  while  ap¬ 
pearing  to  be  an  original  attribute  belonging  to 
the  essential  nature  of  things  regardless  of  serv¬ 
ice  to  us,  is  yet  final,  and  formed  as  if  pur¬ 
posely  designed  for  our  use,  that  is  the  source 
of  our  great  admiration  of  nature — a  source  not 
so  much  external  to  ourselves  as  seated  in  our 
reason.  Surely  we  may  pardon  this  admiration 
if,  as  the  result  of  a  misapprehension,  it  is  in¬ 
clined  to  rise  by  degrees  to  fanatical  heights. 

This  intellectual  finality  is  simply  formal,  not 
real.  In  other  words,  it  is  a  finality  which  does 
not  imply  an  underlying  end,  and  which,  there¬ 
fore,  does  not  stand  in  need  of  teleology.  As 
such,  and  although  it  is  objective,  not  subjec¬ 
tive  like  aesthetic  finality,  its  possibility  is 
readily  comprehensible,  though  only  in  the  ab¬ 
stract.  The  figure  of  a  circle  is  an  intuition 
which  understanding  has  determined  according 
to  a  principle.  This  principle,  which  is  arbitra¬ 
rily  assumed  and  made  a  fundamental  concep¬ 
tion,  is  applied  to  space,  a  form  of  intuition 
which  similarly,  is  only  found  in  ourselves,  and 
found  a  priori,  as  a  representation.  It  is  the 
unity  of  this  principle  that  explains  the  unity 
of  the  numerous  rules  resulting  from  the  con¬ 
struction  of  that  conception.  These  rules  dis¬ 
play  finality  from  many  possible  points  of  view, 
but  we  must  not  rest  this  finality  on  an  end ,  or 
resort  to  any  explanation  beyond  the  above. 
This  is  different  from  finding  order  and  regu¬ 
larity  in  complexes  of  external  things  enclosed 
within  definite  bounds,  as,  for  instance,  order 
and  regularity  in  the  trees,  flower-beds,  and 
walks  in  a  garden,  which  is  one  that  I  cannot 
hope  to  deduce  a  priori  from  any  delimitation 
I  may  make  of  space  according  to  some  rule 
out  of  my  own  head.  For  these  are  things  having 


real  existence — things  that  to  be  cognized  must 
be  given  empirically — and  not  a  mere  represen¬ 
tation  in  myself  defined  a  priori  on  a  principle. 
Hence  the  latter  (empirical)  finality  is  real,  and, 
being  real,  is  dependent  on  the  conception  of 
an  end. 

But  we  can  also  quite  easily  see  the  reason 
for  the  admiration,  and,  in  fact,  regard  it  as 
justified,  even  where  the  finality  admired  is 
perceived  in  the  essential  nature  of  the  things, 
they  being  things  whose  conceptions  are  such 
as  we  can  construct.  The  various  rules  whose 
unity,  derived  from  a  principle,  excites  this  ad¬ 
miration  are  one  and  all  synthetic  and  do  not 
follow  from  any  conception  of  the  object,  as, 
for  instance,  from  the  conception  of  a  circle, 
but  require  to  have  this  object  given  in  intui¬ 
tion.  This  gives  the  unity  the  appearance  of 
having  an  external  source  of  its  rules  distinct 
from  our  faculty  of  representation,  just  as  if 
it  were  empirical.  Hence  the  way  the  object 
answers  to  the  understanding’s  own  peculiar 
need  for  rules  appears  intrinsically  contingent 
and,  therefore,  only  possible  by  virtue  of  an 
end  expressly  directed  to  its  production.  Now 
since  this  harmony,  despite  all  the  finality  men¬ 
tioned.  is  not  cognized  empirically,  but  a  priori , 
it  is  just  what  should  bring  home  to  us  the  fact 
that  space,  by  the  limitation  of  which  (by 
means  of  the  imagination  acting  in  accordance 
with  a  conception)  the  object  was  alone  pos¬ 
sible,  is  not  a  quality  of  the  things  outside  me, 
but  a  mere  mode  of  representation  existing  in 
myself.  Hence,  where  I  draw  a  figure  in  accord¬ 
ance  with  a  conception ,  or,  in  other  words,  when 
I  form  my  own  representation  of  what  is  given 
to  me  externally,  be  its  own  intrinsic  nature 
what  it  may,  what  really  happens  is  that  I  intro¬ 
duce  the  finality  into  that  figure  or  representa¬ 
tion.  I  derive  no  empirical  instruction  as  to  the 
finality  from  what  is  given  to  me  externally,  and 
consequently  the  figure  is  not  one  for  which  I 
require  any  special  end  external  to  myself  and 
residing  in  the  object.  But  this  reflection  pre¬ 
supposes  a  critical  use  of  reason,  and,  therefore, 
it  cannot  be  involved  then  and  there  in  the  esti¬ 
mate  of  the  object  and  its  properties.  Hence  all 
that  this  estimate  immediately  suggests  to  me 
is  a  unification  of  heterogeneous  rules  (united 
even  in  their  intrinsic  diversity)  in  a  principle 
the  truth  of  which  I  can  cognize  a  priori ,  with¬ 
out  requiring  for  that  purpose  some  special  ex¬ 
planation  lying  beyond  my  conception,  or,  to 
put  it  more  generally,  beyond  my  own  a  priori 
representation.  Now  astonishment  is  a  shock 
that  the  mind  receives  from  a  representation 


OF  TELEOLOGICAL  JUDGEMENT 


and  the  rule  given  through  it  being  incompatible 
with  the  mind’s  existing  fund  of  root  principles, 
and  that  accordingly  makes  one  doubt  one’s  own 
eyesight  or  question  one’s  judgement;  but  admi¬ 
ration  is  an  astonishment  that  keeps  continu¬ 
ally  recurring  despite  the  disappearance  of  this 
doubt.  Admiration  is  consequently  quite  a  natu¬ 
ral  effect  of  observing  the  above-mentioned 
finality  in  the  essence  of  things  (as  phenom¬ 
ena),  and  so  far  there  is  really  nothing  to  be 
said  against  it.  For  the  agreement  of  the  above 
form  of  sensuous  intuition,  which  is  called  space, 
with  the  faculty  of  conceptions,  namely  under¬ 
standing,  not  alone  leaves  it  inexplicable  why  it 
is  this  particular  form  of  agreement  and  not 
some  other,  but,  in  addition,  produces  an  expan¬ 
sion  of  the  mind  in  which  it  gets,  so  to  speak, 
the  secret  feeling  of  the  existence  of  something 
lying  beyond  the  confines  of  such  sensuous  rep¬ 
resentations,  in  which,  perhaps,  although  un¬ 
known  to  us,  the  ultimate  source  of  that  accord¬ 
ance  could  be  found.  It  is  true  that  we  have  also 
no  need  to  know  this  source  where  we  are 
merely  concerned  with  the  formal  finality  of  our 
a  priori  representations;  but  even  the  mere  fact 
that  we  are  compelled  to  look  out  in  that  direc¬ 
tion  excites  an  accompanying  admiration  for 
the  object  which  obliges  us  to  do  so. 

The  name  of  beauty  is  customarily  given  to 
the  properties  above  referred  to — both  those  of 
geometrical  figures  and  also  those  of  numbers — 
on  account  of  a  certain  finality  which  they  pos¬ 
sess  for  employment  in  all  kinds  of  ways  in  the 
field  of  knowledge,  which  finality  the  simplicity 
of  their  construction  would  not  lead  us  to  ex¬ 
pect.  Thus  people  speak  of  this  or  that  beautiful 
property  of  the  circle,  brought  to  light  in  this  or 
that  manner.  But  it  is  not  by  means  of  any  aes¬ 
thetic  appreciation  that  we  consider  such  prop¬ 
erties  final.  There  is  no  estimate  apart  from  a 
conception,  making  us  take  not  of  a  purely  sub¬ 
jective  finality  in  the  free  play  of  our  cognitive 
faculties.  On  the  contrary  it  is  an  intellectual 
estimate  according  to  conceptions,  in  which  we 
clearly  recognize  an  objective  finality,  that  is  to 
say,  adaptability  for  all  sorts  of  ends,  i.e.,  an 
infinite  manifold  of  ends.  Such  properties  should 
rather  be  termed  a  relative  perfection ,  than  a 
beauty,  of  the  mathematical  figure.  We  cannot 
even  properly  allow  the  expression  intellectual 
beauty  at  all :  as,  if  we  do,  the  word  beauty  must 
lose  all  definite  meaning,  and  the  delight  of  the 
intellect  all  superiority  over  that  of  the  senses. 
The  term  beautiful  could  be  better  applied  to  a 
demonstration  of  the  properties  in  question; 
since  here  understanding,  as  the  faculty  of  con¬ 


553 

ceptions,  and  imagination,  as  the  faculty  of  pre¬ 
senting  them  a  priori,  get  a  feeling  of  invigor- 
ation  (which,  with  the  addition  of  the  precision 
introduced  by  reason,  is  called  the  elegance  of 
the  demonstration) :  for  in  this  case  the  delight, 
although  founded  on  conceptions,  is  at  least  sub¬ 
jective,  whereas  perfection  involves  an  objec¬ 
tive  delight. 

§63.  Relative,  as  distinguished  from  intrinsic y 
finality  of  nature 

There  is  only  one  case  in  which  experience 
leads  our  judgement  to  the  conception  of  an 
objective  and  material  finality,  that  is  to  say,  to 
the  conception  of  an  end  of  nature.  This  is 
where  the  relation  in  which  some  cause  stands 
to  its  effect  is  under  review,1  and  where  we  are 
only  able  to  see  uniformity  in  this  relation  on 
introducing  into  the  causal  principle  the  idea  of 
the  effect  and  making  it  the  source  of  the  causal¬ 
ity  and  the  basal  condition  on  which  the  effect  is 
possible.  Now  this  can  be  done  in  two  ways.  We 
may  regard  the  effect  as  being,  as  it  stands,  an 
art-product,  or  we  may  only  regard  it  as  what 
other  possible  objects  in  nature  may  employ  for 
the  purposes  of  their  art.  We  may,  in  other 
words,  look  upon  the  effect  either  as  an  end,  or 
else  as  a  means  which  other  causes  use  in  the  pur¬ 
suit  of  ends.  The  latter  finality  is  termed  utility, 
where  it  concerns  human  beings,  and  adaptabil¬ 
ity  where  it  concerns  any  other  creatures.  It  is  a 
purely  relative  finality.  The  former,  on  the  con¬ 
trary,  is  an  intrinsic  finality  belonging  to  the 
thing  itself  as  a  natural  object. 

For  example,  rivers  in  their  course  carry 
down  earth  of  all  kinds  good  for  the  growth  of 
plants,  and  this  they  deposit  sometimes  inland, 
sometimes  at  their  mouths.  On  some  coasts  the 
high-tide  carries  this  alluvial  mud  inland,  or  de¬ 
posits  it  along  the  sea-shore.  Thus  the  fruitful 
soil  is  increased,  especially  where  man  helps  to 
hinder  the  ebb  tide  carrying  the  detritus  off 
again,  and  the  vegetable  kingdom  gains  a  home 
in  the  former  abode  of  fish  and  crustaceans.  Na¬ 
ture  has  in  this  way  itself  effected  most  accre¬ 
tions  to  the  land,  and  is  still,  though  slowly, 
continuing  the  process.  There  now  arises  the 
question  if  this  result  is  to  be  considered  an  end 
on  the  part  of  nature,  since  it  is  fraught  with 
benefit  to  man.  I  say  “to  man,”  for  the  benefit 
to  the  vegetable  kingdom  cannot  be  taken  into 

1  Pure  mathematics  can  never  deal  with  the  real  ex¬ 
istence  of  things,  but  only  with  their  possibility,  that  is 
to  say,  with  the  possibility  of  an  intuition  answering  to 
the  conceptions  of  the  things.  Hence  it  cannot  touch 
the  question  of  cause  and  effect,  and  consequently,  all 
the  finality  there  observed  must  always  be  regarded 
simply  as  formal,  and  never  as  a  physical  end. 


THE  CRITIQUE 


account,  inasmuch  as  against  the  gain  to  the 
land  there  is,  as  a  set  off,  as  much  loss  to  sea-life. 

Or  we  may  give  an  example  of  the  adaptabil¬ 
ity  of  particular  things  of  nature  as  means  for 
other  forms  of  life — setting  out  with  the  as¬ 
sumption  that  these  latter  are  ends.  Thus  there 
is  no  healthier  soil  for  pine  trees  than  a  sandy 
soil.  Now  before  the  primeval  sea  withdrew 
from  the  land  it  left  numerous  sand  tracts  be¬ 
hind  it  in  our  northern  regions.  The  result  was 
that  upon  this  soil,  generally  so  unfavourable 
for  cultivation  of  any  kind,  extensive  pine  for¬ 
ests  were  able  to  spring  up — forests  which  we 
frequently  blame  our  ancestors  for  having  wan¬ 
tonly  destroyed.  Now  it  may  be  asked  if  this 
primordial  deposit  of  sand  tracts  was  not  an  end 
that  nature  had  in  view  for  the  benefit  of  the 
possible  pine  forests  that  might  grow  on  them. 
This  much  is  clear:  that  if  the  pine  forests  are 
assumed  to  be  a  natural  end,  then  the  sand  must 
be  admitted  to  be  an  end  also — though  only  a 
relative  end — and  one  for  which,  in  turn,  the 
primeval  sea’s  beach  and  its  withdrawal  were 
means;  for  in  the  series  of  the  mutually  subor¬ 
dinated  members  of  a  final  nexus  each  interme¬ 
diate  member  must  be  regarded  as  an  end, 
though  not  a  final  end,  to  which  its  proximate 
cause  stands  as  means.  Similarly,  if  it  is  granted 
that  cattle,  sheep,  horses,  and  the  like,  were  to 
be  in  the  world,  then  there  had  to  be  grass  on 
the  earth,  while  alkaline  plants  had  to  grow  in 
the  deserts  if  camels  were  to  thrive.  Again,  these 
and  other  herbivora  had  to  abound  if  wolves, 
tigers,  and  lions  were  to  exist.  Consequently 
objective  finality  based  on  adaptability  is  not 
an  immanent  objective  finality  of  things,  as 
though  the  sand,  as  simple  sand,  could  not  be 
conceived  as  the  effect  of  its  cause,  the  sea,  un¬ 
less  we  made  this  cause  look  to  an  end,  and 
treated  the  effect,  namely  the  sand,  as  an  art- 
product.  It  is  a  purely  relative  finality,  and 
merely  contingent  to  the  thing  itself  to  which 
it  is  ascribed;  and  although  among  the  examples 
cited,  the  various  kinds  of  herbs  or  plants,  con¬ 
sidered  in  their  own  right,  are  to  be  estimated 
as  organized  products  of  nature,  and,  therefore, 
as  things  of  art,  yet,  in  relation  to  the  animals 
that  feed  on  them,  they  are  to  be  regarded  as 
mere  raw  material. 

Moreover,  the  freedom  of  man’s  causality 
enables  him  to  adapt  physical  things  to  the 
purposes  he  has  in  view.  These  purposes  are 
frequently  foolish— as  when  he  uses  the  gay- 
coloured  feathers  of  birds  for  adorning  his 
clothes,  and  coloured  earths  or  juices  of  plants 
for  painting  himself.  Sometimes  they  are  reason¬ 


able,  as  when  he  uses  the  horse  for  riding,  and 
the  ox  or,  as  in  Minorca,  even  the  ass  or  pig 
for  ploughing.  But  we  cannot  here  assume  even 
a  relative  end  of  nature — relative,  that  is,  to 
such  uses.  For  man’s  reason  informs  him  how 
to  adapt  things  to  his  own  arbitrary  whims — 
whims  for  which  he  was  not  himself  at  all 
predestined  by  nature.  All  we  can  say  is  that 
if  we  assume  that  it  is  intended  that  men  should 
live  on  the  earth,  then  at  least,  those  means 
without  which  they  could  not  exist  as  animals, 
and  even,  on  however  low  a  plane,  as  rational 
animals,  must  also  not  be  absent.  But  in  that 
case,  those  natural  things  that  are  indispensable 
for  such  existence  must  equally  be  regarded  as 
ends  of  nature. 

From  what  has  been  said  we  can  easily  see 
that  the  only  condition  on  which  extrinsic  final¬ 
ity,  that  is,  the  adaptability  of  a  thing  for  other 
things,  can  be  looked  on  as  an  extrinsic  physical 
end,  is  that  the  existence  of  the  thing  for  which 
it  is  proximately  or  remotely  adapted  is  itself, 
and  in  its  own  right,  an  end  of  nature.  But  this 
is  a  matter  that  can  never  be  decided  by  any 
mere  study  of  nature.  Hence  it  follows  that 
relative  finality,  although,  on  a  certain  suppo¬ 
sition,  it  points  to  natural  finality,  does  not 
warrant  any  absolute  teleological  judgement.1 

In  cold  countries  the  snow  protects  the  seeds 
from  the  frost.  It  facilitates  human  intercourse 
through  the  use  of  sleighs.  The  Laplander  finds 
animals  in  these  regions,  namely  reindeer,  to 
bring  about  this  intercourse.  The  latter  find 
sufficient  food  to  live  on  in  a  dry  moss  which 
they  have  to  scrape  out  for  themselves  from 
under  the  snow,  yet  they  submit  to  being  tamed 
without  difficulty,  and  readily  allow  themselves 
to  be  deprived  of  the  freedom  in  which  they 
could  quite  well  have  supported  themselves. 
For  other  dwellers  in  these  ice-bound  lands,  the 
sea  is  rich  in  its  supply  of  animals  that  afford 
them  fuel  for  heating  their  huts;  in  addition  to 
which  there  are  the  food  and  clothing  that  these 
animals  provide  and  the  wood  which  the  sea  it¬ 
self,  as  it  were,  washes  in  for  them  as  material 
for  their  homes.  Now  here  we  have  a  truly  mar¬ 
vellous  assemblage  of  many  relations  of  nature 
to  an  end — the  end  being  the  Greenlanders, 
Laplanders,  Samoyedes,  Jakutes,  and  the  like. 
But  we  do  not  see  why  men  should  live  in  these 
places  at  all.  To  say,  therefore,  that  the  facts 
that  vapour  falls  from  the  atmosphere  in  the 
form  of  snow,  that  the  ocean  has  its  currents 
that  wash  into  these  regions  the  wood  grown  in 
warmer  lands,  and  that  sea-monsters  containing 

1  [Cf.  p.  337.] 


OF  TELEOLOGICAL  JUDGEMENT 


quantities  of  oil  are  to  be  found  there,  are  due 
to  the  idea  of  some  benefit  to  certain  poor  crea¬ 
tures  underlying  the  cause  that  brings  together 
all  these  natural  products,  would  be  a  very  haz¬ 
ardous  and  arbitrary  assertion.  For  supposing 
that  all  this  utility  on  the  part  of  nature  were 
absent,  then  the  capacity  of  the  natural  causes 
to  serve  this  order  of  existence  would  not  be 
missed.  On  the  contrary  it  would  seem  auda¬ 
cious  and  inconsiderate  on  our  part  even  to  ask 
for  such  a  capacity,  or  demand  such  an  end 
from  nature — for  nothing  but  the  greatest  want 
of  social  unity  in  mankind  could  have  dispersed 
men  into  such  inhospitable  regions. 

§  64.  The  distinctive  character  of  things 
considered  as  physical  ends 

A  thing  is  possible  only  as  an  end  where  the 
causality  to  which  it  owes  its  origin  must  not  be 
sought  in  the  mechanism  of  nature,  but  in  a 
cause  whose  capacity  of  acting  is  determined 
by  conceptions.  What  is  required  in  order  that 
we  may  perceive  that  a  thing  is  only  possible  in 
this  way  is  that  its  form  is  not  possible  on  purely 
natural  laws1 — that  is  to  say,  such  laws  as  we 
may  cognize  by  means  of  unaided  understand¬ 
ing  applied  to  objects  of  sense — but  that,  on 
the  contrary,  even  to  know  it  empirically  in 
respect  of  its  cause  and  effect  presupposes  con¬ 
ceptions  of  reason.2  Here  we  have,  as  far  as  any 
empirical  laws  of  nature  go,  a  contingency  of 
the  form  of  fhe  thing  in  relation  to  reason.  Now 
reason  in  every  case  insists  on  cognizing  the 
necessity  of  the  form  of  a  natural  product,  even 
where  it  only  desires  to  perceive  the  conditions 
involved  in  its  production.  In  the  given  form 
above  mentioned,  however,  it  cannot  get  this 
necessity.  Hence  the  contingency  is  itself  a 
ground  for  making  us  look  upon  the  origin  of 
the  thing  as  if,  just  because  of  that  contin¬ 
gency,  it  could  only  be  possible  through  reason. 
But  the  causality,  so  construed,  becomes  the 
faculty  of  acting  according  to  ends — that  is  to 
say,  a  will ;  and  the  object,  which  is  represented 
as  only  deriving  its  possibility  from  such  a  will, 
will  be  represented  as  possible  only  as  an  end. 

Suppose  a  person  was  in  a  country  that  seemed 
to  him  uninhabited  and  was  to  see  a  geometrical 
figure,  say  a  regular  hexagon,  traced  on  the  sand. 
As  he  reflected,  and  tried  to  get  a  conception  of 
the  figure,  his  reason  would  make  him  conscious, 
though  perhaps  obscurely,  that  in  the  produc¬ 
tion  of  this  conception  there  was  unity  of  prin¬ 
ciple.  His  reason  would  then  forbid  him  to  con- 

1  [Cf.  pp.  569,  572,  574,  579-1 

2  [Cf.  pp.  556,  562,  568,  569,  578.] 


555 

sider  the  sand,  the  neighbouring  sea,  the  winds, 
or  even  animals  with  their  footprints,  as  causes 
familiar  to  him,  or  any  other  irrational  cause,  as 
the  ground  of  the  possibility  of  such  a  form. 
For  the  contingency  of  coincidence  with  a  con¬ 
ception  like  this,  which  is  only  possible  in  rea¬ 
son,  would  appear  to  him  so  infinitely  great  that 
there  might  just  as  well  be  no  law  of  nature  at 
all  in  the  case.  Hence  it  would  seem  that  the 
cause  of  the  production  of  such  an  effect  could 
not  be  contained  in  the  mere  mechanical  oper¬ 
ation  of  nature,  but  that,  on  the  contrary,  a  con¬ 
ception  of  such  an  object,  as  a  conception  that 
only  reason  can  give  and  compare  the  object 
with,  must  likewise  be  what  alone  contains  that 
causality.  On  these  grounds,  it  would  appear  to 
him  that  this  effect  was  one  that  might  without 
reservation  be  regarded  as  an  end,  though  not 
as  a  natural  end.  In  other  words  he  would  regard 
it  as  a  product  of  art — vestigium  hominis  video. 

But  where  a  thing  is  recognized  to  be  a  prod¬ 
uct  of  nature,  then  something  more  is  required 
— unless,  perhaps,  our  very  estimate  involves  a 
contradiction — if.  despite  its  being  such  a  prod¬ 
uct,  we  are  yet  to  estimate  it  as  an  end,  and, 
consequently,  as  a  physical  end.  As  a  provisional 
statement  I  would  say  that  a  thing  exists  as  a 
physical  end  if  it  is  (though  in  a  double  sense) 
both  cause  and  effect  of  itself.  For  this  involves 
a  kind  of  causality  that  we  cannot  associate  with 
the  mere  conception  of  a  nature  unless  we  make 
that  nature  rest  on  an  underlying  end,  but  which 
can  then,  though  incomprehensible,  be  thought 
without  contradiction.  Before  analysing  the 
component  factors  of  this  idea  of  a  physical  end. 
let  us  first  illustrate  its  meaning  by  an  example. 

A  tree  produces,  in  the  first  place,  another 
tree,  according  to  a  familiar  law  of  nature.  But 
the  tree  which  it  produces  is  of  the  same  genus. 
Hence,  in  its  genus ,  it  produces  itself.  In  the 
genus,  now  as  effect,  now  as  cause,  continually 
generated  from  itself  and  likewise  generating  it¬ 
self,  it  preserves  itself  generically. 

Secondly,  a  tree  produces  itself  even  as  an 
individual.  It  is  true  that  we  only  call  this  kind 
of  effect  growth;  but  growth  is  here  to  be  un¬ 
derstood  in  a  sense  that  makes  it  entirely  differ¬ 
ent  from  any  increase  according  to  mechanical 
laws,  and  renders  it  equivalent,  though  under 
another  name,  to  generation.  The  plant  first 
prepares  the  matter  that  it  assimilates  and  be¬ 
stows  upon  it  a  specifically  distinctive  quality 
which  the  mechanism  of  nature  outside  it  can¬ 
not  supply,  and  it  develops  itself  by  means  of  a 
material  which,  in  its  composite  character,  is  its 
own  product.  For,  although  in  respect  of  the 


556  THE  CRITIQUE 


constituents  that  it  derives  from  nature  outside, 
it  must  be  regarded  as  only  an  educt,  yet  in  the 
separation  and  recombination  of  this  raw  mate¬ 
rial  we  find  an  original  capacity  of  selection  and 
construction  on  the  part  of  natural  beings  of 
this  kind  such  as  infinitely  outdistances  all  the 
efforts  of  art,  when  the  latter  attempts  to  recon¬ 
stitute  those  products  of  the  vegetable  kingdom 
out  of  the  elements  which  it  obtains  through 
their  analysis,  or  else  out  of  the  material  which 
nature  supplies  for  their  nourishment. 

Thirdly ,  a  part  of  a  tree  also  generates  itself 
in  such  a  way  that  the  preservation  of  one  part 
is  reciprocally  dependent  on  the  preservation  of 
the  other  parts.  An  eye  taken  from  the  sprig  of 
one  tree  and  set  in  the  branch  of  another  pro¬ 
duces  in  the  alien  stock  a  growth  of  its  own 
species,  and  similarly  a  scion  grafted  on  the 
body  of  a  different  tree.  Hence  even  in  the  case 
of  the  same  tree  each  branch  or  leaf  may  be  re¬ 
garded  as  engrafted  or  inoculated  into  it,  and, 
consequently,  as  a  tree  with  a  separate  existence 
of  its  own,  and  only  attaching  itself  to  another 
and  living  parasitically  on  it.  At  the  same  time 
the  leaves  are  certainly  products  of  the  tree,  but 
they  also  maintain  it  in  turn;  for  repeated  de¬ 
foliation  would  kill  it,  and  its  growth  is  depend¬ 
ent  upon  the  action  of  the  leaves  on  the  trunk. 
The  way  nature  comes,  in  these  forms  of  life, 
to  her  own  aid  in  the  case  of  injury,  where  the 
want  of  one  part  necessary  for  the  maintenance 
of  the  neighbouring  parts  is  made  good  by  the 
rest;  the  abortions  or  malformations  in  growth, 
where,  on  account  of  some  chance  defect  or 
obstacle,  certain  parts  adopt  a  completely  new 
formation,  so  as  to  preserve  the  existing  growth, 
and  thus  produce  an  anomalous  form:  are  mat¬ 
ters  which  I  only  desire  to  mention  here  in  pass¬ 
ing,  although  they  are  among  the  most  wonder¬ 
ful  properties  of  the  forms  of  organic  life. 

§65.  Things  considered  as  physical  ends  are 
organisms 

Where  a  thing  is  a  product  of  nature  and  yet, 
so  regarded,  has  to  be  cognized  as  possible  only 
as  a  physical  end,  it  must,  from  its  character  as 
set  out  in  the  preceding  section,  stand  to  itself 
reciprocally  in  the  relation  of  cause  and  effect. 
This  is,  however,  a  somewhat  inexact  and  inde¬ 
terminate  expression  that  needs  derivation  from 
a  definite  conception. 

In  so  far  as  the  causal  connection  is  thought 
merely  by  means  of  understanding,  it  is  a  nexus 
constituting  a  series,  namely  of  causes  and  ef¬ 
fects,  that  is  invariable  progressive.  The  things 
that  as  effects  presuppose  others  as  their  causes 


cannot  themselves  in  turn  be  also  causes  of  the 
latter.  This  causal  connection  is  termed  that  of 
efficient  causes  ( nexus  effectivus).  On  the  other 
hand,  however,  we  are  also  able  to  think  a 
causal  connection  according  to  a  rational  con¬ 
cept,  that  of  ends,  which,  if  regarded  as  a  series, 
would  involve  regressive  as  well  as  progressive 
dependency.  It  would  be  one  in  which  the  thing 
that  for  the  moment  is  designated  effect  deserves 
none  the  less,  if  we  take  the  series  regressively, 
to  be  called  the  cause  of  the  thing  of  which  it 
was  said  to  be  the  effect.  In  the  domain  of  prac¬ 
tical  matters,  namely  in  art,  we  readily  find  ex¬ 
amples  of  a  nexus  of  this  kind.  Thus  a  house  is 
certainly  the  cause  of  the  money  that  is  received 
as  rent,  but  yet,  conversely,  the  representation 
of  this  possible  income  was  the  cause  of  the 
building  of  the  house.  A  causal  nexus  of  this 
kind  is  termed  that  of  final  causes  ( nexus  final - 
is).  The  former  might,  perhaps,  more  appro¬ 
priately  be  called  the  nexus  of  real ,  and  the  lat¬ 
ter  the  nexus  of  ideal  causes,  because  with  this 
use  of  terms  it  would  be  understood  at  once  that 
there  cannot  be  more  than  these  two  kinds  of 
causality. 

Now  the  first  requisite  of  a  thing,  considered 
as  a  physical  end,  is  that  its  parts,  both  as  to 
their  existence  and  form,  are  only  possible  by 
their  relation  to  the  whole.  For  the  thing  is  itself 
an  end,  and  is,  therefore,  comprehended  under 
a  conception  or  an  idea  that  must  determine 
a  priori  all  that  is  to  be  contained  in  it.  But  so 
far  as  the  possibility  of  a  thing  is  only  thought 
in  this  way,  it  is  simply  a  work  of  art.  It  is  the 
product,  in  other  words,  of  an  intelligent  cause, 
distinct  from  the  matter,  or  parts,  of  the  thing, 
and  of  one  whose  causality,  in  bringing  together 
and  combining  the  parts,  is  determined  by  its 
idea  of  a  whole  made  possible  through  that  idea 
and,  consequently,  not  by  external  nature. 

But  if  a  thing  is  a  product  of  nature,  and  in 
this  character  is  notwithstanding  to  contain  in¬ 
trinsically  and  in  its  inner  possibility  a  relation 
to  ends,  in  other  words,  is  to  be  possible  only  as 
a  physical  end  and  independently  of  the  causal¬ 
ity  of  the  conceptions  of  external  rational 
agents,  then  this  second  requisite  is  involved, 
namely,  that  the  parts  of  the  thing  combine  of 
themselves  into  the  unity  of  a  whole  by  being 
reciprocally  cause  and  effect  of  their  form.  For 
this  is  the  only  way  in  which  it  is  possible  that 
the  idea  of  the  whole  may  conversely,  or  recipro¬ 
cally,  determine  in  its  turn  the  form  and  combi¬ 
nation  of  all  the  parts,  not  as  cause — for  that 
would  make  it  an  art-product — but  as  the  epis¬ 
temological  basis  upon  which  the  systematic 


OF  TELEOLOGICAL  JUDGEMENT  557 


unity  of  the  form  and  combination  of  all  the 
manifold  contained  in  the  given  matter  becomes 
cognizable  for  the  person  estimating  it. 

What  we  require,  therefore,  in  the  case  of  a 
body  which  in  its  intrinsic  nature  and  inner 
possibility  has  to  be  estimated  as  a  physical  end, 
is  as  follows.  Its  parts  must  in  their  collective 
unity  reciprocally  produce  one  another  alike  as 
to  form  and  combination,  and  thus  by  their  own 
causality  produce  a  whole,  the  conception  of 
which,  conversely — in  a  being  possessing  the 
causality  according  to  conceptions  that  is  ade¬ 
quate  for  such  a  product — could  in  turn  be  the 
cause  of  the  whole  according  to  a  principle,  so 
that,  consequently,  the  nexus  of  efficient  causes 
might  be  no  less  estimated  as  an  operation 
brought  about  by  final  causes. 

In  such  a  natural  product  as  this  every  part 
is  thought  as  owing  its  presence  to  the  agency 
of  all  the  remaining  parts,  and  also  as  existing 
for  the  sake  of  the  others  and  of  the  whole, 
that  is  as  an  instrument,  or  organ.  But  this  is 
not  enough — for  it  might  be  an  instrument  of 
art,  and  thus  have  no  more  than  its  general  pos¬ 
sibility  referred  to  an  end.  On  the  contrary  the 
part  must  be  an  organ  producing  the  other  parts 
— each,  consequently,  reciprocally  producing 
the  others.  No  instrument  of  art  can  answer  to 
this  description,  but  only  the  instrument  of  that 
nature  from  whose  resources  the  materials  of 
every  instrument  are  drawn — even  the  materials 
for  instruments  of  art.  Only  under  these  condi¬ 
tions  and  upon  these  terms  can  such  a  product 
be  an  organized  and  self -organized  being ,  and, 
as  such,  be  called  a  physical  end . 

In  a  watch,  one  part  is  the  instrument  by 
which  the  movement  of  the  others  is  effected, 
but  one  wheel  is  not  the  efficient  cause  of  the 
production  of  the  other.  One  part  is  certainly 
present  for  the  sake  of  another,  but  it  does  not 
owe  its  presence  to  the  agency  of  that  other. 
For  this  reason,  also,  the  producing  cause  of  the 
watch  and  its  form  is  not  contained  in  the  na¬ 
ture  of  this  material,  but  lies  outside  the  watch 
in  a  being  that  can  act  according  to  ideas  of  a 
whole  which  its  causality  makes  possible.  Hence 
one  wheel  in  the  watch  does  not  produce  the 
other,  and,  still  less,  does  one  watch  produce 
other  watches,  by  utilizing,  or  organizing,  for¬ 
eign  material ;  hence  it  does  not  of  itself  replace 
parts  of  which  it  has  been  deprived,  nor,  if  these 
are  absent  in  the  original  construction,  does  it 
make  good  the  deficiency  by  the  subvention  of 
the  rest;  nor  does  it,  so  to  speak,  repair  its  own 
casual  disorders.  But  these  are  all  things  which 
we  are  justified  in  expecting  from  organized  na¬ 


ture.  An  organized  being  is,  therefore,  not  a 
mere  machine.  For  a  machine  has  solely  motive 
power ,  whereas  an  organized  being  possesses  in¬ 
herent  formative  power,  and  such,  moreover,  as 
it  can  impart  to  material  devoid  of  it — material 
which  it  organizes.  This,  therefore,  is  a  self- 
propagating  formative  power,1  which  cannot  be 
explained  by  the  capacity  of  movement  alone, 
that  is  to  say,  by  mechanism. 

We  do  not  say  half  enough  of  nature  and  her 
capacity  in  organized  products  when  we  speak 
of  this  capacity  as  being  the  analogue  of  art.  For 
what  is  here  present  to  our  minds  is  an  artist — 
a  rational  being — working  from  without.  But  na¬ 
ture,  on  the  contrary,  organizes  itself,  and  does 
so  in  each  species  of  its  organized  products — fol¬ 
lowing  a  single  pattern,  certainly,  as  to  general 
features,  but  nevertheless  admitting  deviations 
calculated  to  secure  self-preservation  under  par¬ 
ticular  circumstances.  We  might  perhaps  come 
nearer  to  the  description  of  this  impenetrable 
property  if  we  were  to  call  it  an  analogue  of  life. 
But  then  either  we  should  have  to  endow  matter 
as  mere  matter  with  a  property  (hylozoism) 
that  contradicts  its  essential  nature;  or  else  we 
should  have  to  associate  with  it  a  foreign  prin¬ 
ciple  standing  in  community  with  it  (a  soul). 
But,  if  such  a  product  is  to  be  a  natural  product, 
then  we  have  to  adopt  one  or  other  of  two 
courses  in  order  to  bring  in  a  soul.  Either  we 
must  presuppose  organized  matter  as  the  instru¬ 
ment  of  such  a  soul,  which  makes  organized 
matter  no  whit  more  intelligible,  or  else  we  must 
make  the  soul  the  artificer  of  this  structure,  in 
which  case  we  must  withdraw  the  product  from 
(corporal)  nature.  Strictly  speaking,  therefore, 
the  organization  of  nature  has  nothing  analo¬ 
gous  to  any  causality  known  to  us.2  Natural 
beauty  may  justly  be  termed  the  analogue  of 
art,  for  it  is  only  ascribed  to  the  objects  in  re¬ 
spect  of  reflection  upon  the  external  intuition  of 
them  and,  therefore,  only  on  account  of  their 
superficial  form.  But  intrinsic  natural  perfec¬ 
tion ,3  as  possessed  by  things  that  are  only  pos- 

1  [Cf.  “formative  impulse,”  p.  582.] 

2  We  may,  on  the  other  hand,  make  use  of  an  analogy 
to  the  above  mentioned  immediate  physical  ends  to 
throw  light  on  a  certain  union,  which,  however,  is  to  be 
found  more  often  in  idea  than  in  fact.  Thus  in  the  case 
of  a  complete  transformation,  recently  undertaken,  of  a 
great  people  into  a  state,  the  word  organization  has  fre¬ 
quently,  and  with  much  propriety,  been  used  for  the 
constitution  of  the  legal  authorities  and  even  of  the 
entire  body  politic.  For  in  a  whole  of  this  kind  certainly 
no  member  should  be  a  mere  means,  but  should  also  be 
an  end,  and,  seeing  that  he  contributes  to  the  possibility 
of  the  entire  body,  should  have  his  position  and  func¬ 
tion  in  turn  defined  by  the  idea  of  the  whole. 

3  [See  §  15,  p.  487;  Cf.  Preface  to  the  Metaphysical 
Elements  of  Ethics,  p.  370.] 


THE  CRITIQUE 


sible  as  physical  ends,  and  that  are  therefore 
called  organisms,  is  unthinkable  and  inexpli¬ 
cable  on  any  analogy  to  any  known  physical,  or 
natural,  agency,  not  even  excepting — since  we 
ourselves  are  part  of  nature  in  the  widest  sense 
— the  suggestion  of  any  strictly  apt  analogy  to 
human  art. 

The  concept  of  a  thing  as  intrinsically  a  phys¬ 
ical  end  is,  therefore,  not  a  constitutive  concep¬ 
tion  either  of  understanding  or  of  reason,  but 
yet  it  may  be  used  by  reflective  judgement  as  a 
regulative  conception  for  guiding  our  investiga¬ 
tion  of  objects  of  this  kind  by  a  remote  analogy 
with  our  own  causality  according  to  ends  gen¬ 
erally,  and  as  a  basis  of  reflection  upon  their 
supreme  source.  But  in  the  latter  connection  it 
cannot  be  used  to  promote  our  knowledge  either 
of  nature  or  of  such  original  source  of  those 
objects,  but  must  on  the  contrary  be  confined 
to  the  service  of  just  the  same  practical  faculty 
of  reason  in  analogy  with  which  we  considered 
the  cause  of  the  finality  in  question. 

Organisms  are,  therefore,  the  only  beings  in 
nature  that,  considered  in  their  separate  exist¬ 
ence  and  apart  from  any  relation  to  other  things, 
cannot  be  thought  possible  except  as  ends 
of  nature.  It  is  they,  then,  that  first  afford  ob¬ 
jective  reality  to  the  conception  of  an  end  that 
is  an  end  of  nature  and  not  a  practical  end. 
Thus  they  supply  natural  science  with  the  basis 
for  a  teleology,  or.  in  other  words,  a  mode  of 
estimating  its  objects  on  a  special  principle  that 
it  would  otherwise  be  absolutely  unjustifiable  to 
introduce  into  that  science — seeing  that  we  are 
quite  unable  to  perceive  a  priori  the  possibility 
of  such  a  kind  of  causality. 

§  66.  The  principle  on  which  the  intrinsic 
finality  in  organisms  is  estimated 

This  principle,  the  statement  of  which  serves 
to  define  what  is  meant  by  organisms,  is  as  fol¬ 
lows:  an  organized  natural  product  is  one  in 
which  every  part  is  reciprocally  both  end  a?id 
means.  In  such  a  product  nothing  is  in  vain, 
without  an  end,  or  to  be  ascribed  to  a  blind 
mechanism  of  nature.1 

It  is  true  that  the  occasion  for  adopting  this 
principle  must  be  derived  from  experience — 
from  such  experience,  namely,  as  is  methodi¬ 
cally  arranged  and  is  called  observation .  But 
owing  to  the  universality  and  necessity  which 
that  principle  predicates  of  such  finality,  it  can¬ 
not  rest  merely  on  empirical  grounds,  but  must 
have  some  underlying  a  priori  principle.  This 
principle,  however,  may  be  one  that  is  merely 

1  [Cf.  p.  5S0.] 


regulative,  and  it  may  be  that  the  ends  in  ques¬ 
tion  only  reside  in  the  idea  of  the  person  forming 
the  estimate  and  not  in  any  efficient  cause  what¬ 
ever.  Hence  the  above  named  principle  may  be 
called  a  maxim  for  estimating  the  intrinsic  final¬ 
ity  of  organisms. 

It  is  common  knowledge  that  scientists  who 
dissect  plants  and  animals,  seeking  to  investi¬ 
gate  their  structure  and  to  see  into  the  reasons 
why  and  the  end  for  which  they  are  provided 
with  such  and  such  parts,  why  the  parts  have 
such  and  such  a  position  and  interconnection, 
and  why  the  internal  form  is  precisely  what  it  is, 
adopt  the  above  maxim  as  absolutely  necessary. 
So  they  say  that  nothing  in  such  forms  of  life 
is  in  vain ,  and  they  put  the  maxim  on  the  same 
footing  of  validity  as  the  fundamental  principle 
of  all  natural  science,  that  nothing  happens  by 
chance.  They  are,  in  fact,  quite  as  unable  to  free 
themselves  from  this  teleological  principle  as 
from  that  of  general  physical  science.  For  just 
as  the  abandonment  of  the  latter  would  leave 
them  without  any  experience  at  all,  so  the  aban¬ 
donment  of  the  former  would  leave  them  with 
no  clue  to  assist  their  observation  of  a  type  of 
natural  things  that  have  once  come  to  be  thought 
under  the  conception  of  physical  ends. 

Indeed  this  conception  leads  reason  into  an 
order  of  things  entirely  different  from  that  of  a 
mere  mechanism  of  nature,  which  mere  mecha¬ 
nism  no  longer  proves  adequate  in  this  domain. 
An  idea  has  to  underlie  the  possibility  of  the 
natural  product.  But  this  idea  is  an  absolute 
unity  of  the  representation,  whereas  the  mate¬ 
rial  is  a  plurality  of  things  that  of  itself  can 
afford  no  definite  unity  of  composition.  Hence, 
if  that  unity  of  the  idea  is  actually  to  serve  as 
the  a  priori  determining  ground  of  a  natural  law 
of  the  causality  of  such  a  form  of  the  composite, 
the  end  of  nature  must  be  made  to  extend  to 
everything  contained  in  its  product.2  For  if  once 
we  lift  such  an  effect  out  of  the  sphere  of  the 
blind  mechanism  of  nature  and  relate  it  as  a 
whole  to  a  supersensible  ground  of  determina¬ 
tion,  we  must  then  estimate  it  out  and  out  on 
this  principle.  We  have  no  reason  for  assuming 
the  form  of  such  a  thing  to  be  still  partly  de¬ 
pendent  on  blind  mechanism,  for  with  such  con¬ 
fusion  of  heterogeneous  principles  every  reli¬ 
able  rule  for  estimating  things  would  disappear. 

It  is  no  doubt  the  case  that  in  an  animal  body, 
for  example,  many  parts  might  be  explained  as 
accretions  on  simple  mechanical  laws  (as  skin, 
bone,  hair).  Yet  the  cause  that  accumulates  the 
appropriate  material,  modifies  and  fashions  it, 

2  [Cf.  p.  558.] 


OF  TELEOLOGICAL  JUDGEMENT 


and  deposits  it  in  its  proper  place,  must  always 
be  estimated  teleologically.  Hence,  everything 
in  the  body  must  be  regarded  as  organized,  and 
everything,  also,  in  a  certain  relation  to  the 
thing  is  itself  in  turn  an  organ. 

§67.  The  principle  on  which  nature  in  general 

is  estimated  teleologically  as  a  system  of  ends 

We  have  said  above  that  the  extrinsic  finality 
of  natural  things  affords  no  adequate  justifica¬ 
tion  for  taking  them  as  ends  of  nature  to  explain 
the  reason  of  their  existence,  or  for  treating 
their  contingently  final  effects  as  ideally  the 
grounds  of  their  existence  on  the  principle  of 
final  causes.  Thus  we  are  not  entitled  to  con¬ 
sider  rivers  as  physical  ends  then  and  there,  be¬ 
cause  they  facilitate  international  intercourse  in 
inland  countries,  or  mountains ,  because  they 
contain  the  sources  of  the  rivers  and  hold  stores 
of  snow  for  the  maintenance  of  their  flow7  in 
dry  seasons,  or,  similarly,  the  slope  of  the  land, 
that  carries  down  these  waters  and  leaves  the 
country  dry.  For,  although  this  configuration  of 
the  earth’s  surface  is  very  necessary  for  the 
origination  and  sustenance  of  the  vegetable  and 
animal  kingdoms,  yet  intrinsically  it  contains 
nothing  the  possibility  of  which  should  make  us 
feel  obliged  to  invoke  a  causality  according  to 
ends.  The  same  applies  to  plants  utilized  or  en¬ 
joyed  by  man;  or  to  animals,  as  the  camel,  the 
ox,  the  horse,  dog,  etc.,  which  are  so  variously 
employed,  sometimes  as  servants  of  man,  some¬ 
times  as  food  for  him  to  live  on,  and  mostly 
found  quite  indispensable.  The  external  rela¬ 
tionship  of  things  that  we  have  no  reason  to  re¬ 
gard  as  ends  in  their  own  right  can  only  be 
hypothetically  estimated  as  final. 

There  is  an  essential  distinction  between  esti¬ 
mating  a  thing  as  a  physical  end  in  virtue  of  its 
intrinsic  form  and  regarding  the  real  existence 
of  this  thing  as  an  end  of  nature.  To  maintain 
the  latter  view  we  require,  not  merely  the  con¬ 
ception  of  a  possible  end,  but  a  knowledge  of  the 
final  end  ( scopus )  of  nature.  This  involves  our 
referring  nature  to  something  supersensible,  a 
reference  that  far  transcends  any  teleological 
knowledge  we  have  of  nature;  for,  to  find  the 
end  of  the  real  existence  of  nature  itself,  we 
must  look  beyond  nature.  That  the  origin  of  a 
simple  blade  of  grass  is  only  possible  on  the  rule 
of  ends  is,  to  our  human  critical  faculty,  suffi¬ 
ciently  proved  by  its  internal  form.  But  let  us 
lay  aside  this  consideration  and  look  only  to  the 
use  to  which  the  thing  is  put  by  other  natural 
beings — which  means  that  we  abandon  the 
study  of  the  internal  organization  and  look  only 


559 

to  external  adaptations  to  ends.  We  see,  then, 
that  the  grass  is  required  as  a  means  of  existence 
by  cattle,  and  cattle,  similarly,  by  man.  But  we 
do  not  see  why  after  all  it  should  be  necessary 
that  men  should  in  fact  exist  (a  question  that 
might  not  be  so  easy  to  answer  if  the  specimens 
of  humanity  that  we  had  in  mind  were,  say,  the 
New  Hollanders  or  Fuegians).  We  do  not  then 
arrive  in  this  way  at  any  categorical  end.  On  the 
contrary,  all  this  adaptation  is  made  to  rest  on 
a  condition  that  has  to  be  removed  to  an  ever- 
retreating  horizon.  This  condition  is  the  uncon¬ 
ditional  condition — the  existence  of  a  thing  as  a 
final  end — which,  as  such,  lies  entirely  outside 
the  study  of  the  world  on  physico-teleological 
lines.  But,  then,  such  a  thing  is  not  a  physical 
end  either,  since  it  (or  its  entire  genus)  is  not 
to  be  regarded  as  a  product  of  nature. 

Hence  it  is  only  in  so  far  as  matter  is  organ¬ 
ized  that  it  necessarily  involves  the  conception 
of  it  as  a  physical  end,  because  here  it  possesses 
a  form  that  is  at  once  specific  and  a  product  of 
nature.  But,  brought  so  far,  this  conception 
necessarily  leads  us  to  the  idea  of  aggregate  na¬ 
ture  as  a  system  following  the  rule  of  ends,  to 
which  idea,  again,  the  whole  mechanism  of  na¬ 
ture  has  to  be  subordinated  on  principles  of 
reason — at  least  for  the  purpose  of  testing 
phenomenal  nature  by  this  idea.  The  principle 
of  reason  is  one  which  it  is  competent  for  reason 
to  use  as  a  merely  subjective  principle,  that  is, 
as  a  maxim:  everything  in  the  world  is  good  for 
something  or  other;  nothing  in  it  is  in  vain;  we 
are  entitled,  nay  incited,  by  the  example  that 
nature  affords  us  in  its  organic  products,  to  ex¬ 
pect  nothing  from  it  and  its  laws  but  what  is 
final  when  things  are  viewed  as  a  whole. 

It  is  evident  that  this  is  a  principle  to  be 
applied  not  by  the  determinant,  but  only  by  the 
reflective,  judgement,  that  it  is  regulative  and 
not  constitutive,  and  that  all  that  we  obtain 
from  it  is  a  clue  to  guide  us  in  the  study  of 
natural  things.  These  things  it  leads  us  to  con¬ 
sider  in  relation  to  a  ground  of  determination 
already  given,  and  in  the  light  of  a  new  uniform¬ 
ity,  and  it  helps  us  to  extend  physical  science 
according  to  another  principle,  that,  namely, 
of  final  causes,  yet  without  interfering  with  the 
principle  of  the  mechanism  of  physical  causal¬ 
ity.  Furthermore,  this  principle  is  altogether 
silent  on  the  point  of  whether  anything  esti¬ 
mated  according  to  it  is,  or  is  not,  an  end  of 
nature  by  design:  whether,  that  is,  the  grass 
exists  for  the  sake  of  the  ox  or  the  sheep,  and 
whether  these  and  the  other  things  of  nature 
exist  for  the  sake  of  man.  We  do  well  to  con- 


THE  CRITIQUE 


sider  even  things  that  are  unpleasant  to  us,  and 
that  in  particular  connections  are  contra-final, 
from  this  point  of  view  also.  Thus,  for  example, 
one  might  say  that  the  vermin  which  plague 
men  in  their  clothes,  hair,  or  beds,  may,  by  a 
wise  provision  of  nature,  be  an  incitement  to¬ 
wards  cleanliness,  which  is  of  itself  an  impor¬ 
tant  means  for  preserving  health.  Or  the  mos¬ 
quitoes  and  other  stinging  insects  that  make  the 
wilds  of  America  so  trying  for  the  savages,  may 
be  so  many  goads  to  urge  these  primitive  men 
to  drain  the  marshes  and  bring  light  into  the 
dense  forests  that  shut  out  the  air,  and,  by  so 
doing,  as  well  as  by  the  tillage  of  the  soil,  to 
render  their  abodes  more  sanitary.  Even  what 
appears  to  man  to  be  contrary  to  nature  in  his 
internal  organization  affords,  when  treated  on 
these  lines,  an  interesting,  and  sometimes  even 
instructive,  outlook  into  a  teleological  order  of 
things,  to  which  mere  unaided  study  from  a 
physical  point  of  view  apart  from  such  a  prin¬ 
ciple  would  not  lead  us.  Some  persons  say  that 
men  or  animals  that  have  a  tapeworm  receive 
it  as  a  sort  of  compensation  to  make  good  some 
deficiency  in  their  vital  organs.  Now,  just  in  the 
same  way,  I  would  ask  if  dreams  (from  which 
our  sleep  is  never  free,  although  we  rarely 
remember  what  we  have  dreamed),  may  not  be 
a  regulation  of  nature  adapted  to  ends.  For, 
when  all  the  muscular  forces  of  the  body  are 
relaxed,  dreams  serve  the  purpose  of  internally 
stimulating  the  vital  organs  by  means  of  the 
imagination  and  the  great  activity  which  it 
exerts — an  activity  that  in  this  state  generally 
rises  to  psycho-physical  agitation.  This  seems 
to  be  why  imagination  is  usually  more  actively 
at  work  in  the  sleep  of  those  who  have  gone  to 
bed  at  night  with  a  loaded  stomach,  just  when 
this  stimulation  is  most  needed.  Hence,  I  would 
suggest  that  without  this  internal  stimulating 
force  and  fatiguing  unrest  that  makes  us  com¬ 
plain  of  our  dreams,  which  in  fact,  however,  are 
probably  curative,  sleep,  even  in  a  sound  state 
of  health,  would  amount  to  a  complete  extinc¬ 
tion  of  life. 

Once  the  teleological  estimate  of  nature,  sup¬ 
ported  by  the  physical  ends  actually  presented 
to  us  in  organic  beings,  has  entitled  us  to  form 
the  idea  of  a  vast  system  of  natural  ends,  we 
may  regard  even  natural  beauty  from  this  point 
of  view,  such  beauty  being  an  accordance  of 
nature  with  the  free  play  of  our  cognitive  facul¬ 
ties  as  engaged  in  grasping  and  estimating  its 
appearance.  For  then  we  may  look  upon  it  as  an 
objective  finality  of  nature  in  its  entirety  as  a 
system  of  which  man  is  a  member.  We  may  re¬ 


gard  it  as  a  favour1  that  nature  has  extended  to 
us,  that  besides  giving  us  what  is  useful  it  has 
dispensed  beauty  and  charms  in  such  abundance, 
and  for  this  we  may  love  it,  just  as  we  view  it 
with  respect  because  of  its  immensity,  and  feel 
ourselves  ennobled  by  such  contemplation — 
just  as  if  nature  had  erected  and  decorated  its 
splendid  stage  with  this  precise  purpose  in  its 
mind. 

The  general  purport  of  the  present  section  is 
simply  this:  once  we  have  discovered  a  capacity 
in  nature  for  bringing  forth  products  that  can 
only  be  thought  by  us  according  to  the  concep¬ 
tion  of  final  causes,  we  advance  a  step  farther. 
Even  products  which  do  not  (either  as  to  them¬ 
selves  or  the  relation,  however  final,  in  which 
they  stand)  make  it  necessarily  incumbent  upon 
us  to  go  beyond  the  mechanism  of  blind  efficient 
causes  and  seek  out  some  other  principle  on 
which  they  are  possible,  may  nevertheless  be 
justly  estimated  as  forming  part  of  a  system  of 
ends.  For  the  idea  from  which  we  started  is  one 
which,  when  we  consider  its  foundation,  already 
leads  beyond  the  world  of  sense,2  and  then  the 
unity  of  the  supersensible  principle  must  be 
treated,  not  as  valid  merely  for  certain  species 
of  natural  beings,  but  as  similarly  valid  for  the 
whole  of  nature  as  a  system. 

§  68.  The  principle  of  teleology  considered  as  an 
inherent  principle  of  natural  science 

The  principles  of  a  science  may  be  inherent 
in  that  science  itself,  and  are  then  termed  do¬ 
mestic  ( principia  domestica).  Or  they  may  rest 
on  conceptions  that  can  only  be  vouched  out¬ 
side  that  science,  and  are  foreign  principles 
( peregrina ).  Sciences  containing  the  latter  prin¬ 
ciples  rest  their  doctrines  on  auxiliary  proposi¬ 
tions  (lemmata),  that  is,  they  obtain  some  con¬ 
ception  or  other,  and  with  this  conception  some 
basis  for  a  regular  procedure,  on  credit  from 
another  science. 

Every  science  is  a  system  in  its  own  right; 
and  it  is  not  sufficient  that  in  it  we  construct 
according  to  principles,  and  so  proceed  techni¬ 
cally,  but  we  must  also  set  to  work  architec¬ 
tonically  with  it  as  a  separate  and  independent 

1  In  the  Part  on  Aesthetics,  the  statement  was  made: 
“we  regard  nature  with  favour because  we  take  a  de¬ 
light  in  its  form  that  is  altogether  free  (disinterested). 
For  in  this  judgement  of  mere  taste,  no  account  is  taken 
of  any  end  for  which  these  natural  beauties  exist: 
whether  to  excite  pleasure  in  us,  or  irrespective  of  us  as 
ends.  But  in  teleological  judgement  we  pay  attention 
to  this  relation;  and  so  we  can  regard  it  as  a  favour  of 
nature,  that  it  has  been  disposed  to  promote  our  cul¬ 
ture  by  exhibiting  so  many  beautiful  forms.  [Cf.  above. 


OF  TELEOLOGICAL  JUDGEMENT 


building.  We  must  treat  is  as  a  self-subsisting 
whole,  and  not  as  a  wing  or  section  of  another 
building — although  we  may  subsequently  make 
a  passage  to  or  fro  from  one  part  to  another. 

Hence  if  we  supplement  natural  science  by 
introducing  the  conception  of  God  into  its  con¬ 
text  for  the  purpose  of  rendering  the  finality  of 
nature  explicable,  and  if,  having  done  so,  we 
turn  round  and  use  this  finality  for  the  purpose 
of  proving  that  there  is  a  God,  then  both  natu¬ 
ral  science  and  theology  are  deprived  of  all 
intrinsic  substantiality.  This  deceptive  crossing 
and  recrossing  from  one  side  to  the  other  in¬ 
volves  both  in  uncertainty,  because  their  bound¬ 
aries  are  thus  allowed  to  overlap. 

The  expression  an  end  of  nature  is  of  itself 
sufficient  to  obviate  this  confusion  and  prevent 
our  confounding  natural  science  or  the  occasion 
it  affords  for  a  teleological  estimate  of  its  ob¬ 
jects  with  the  contemplation  of  God,  and  hence 
with  a  theological  derivation.  It  is  not  to  be  re¬ 
garded  as  a  matter  of  no  consequence  that  the 
above  expression  should  be  confused  with  that 
of  a  divine  end  in  the  appointment  of  nature, 
or  that  the  latter  should  even  be  passed  off  as 
the  more  appropriate  and  the  one  more  becom¬ 
ing  to  a  pious  soul,  on  the  ground  that,  say  what 
we  will,  it  must  eventually  come  back  to  our 
deriving  these  final  forms  in  nature  from  a  wise 
Author  of  the  universe.  On  the  contrary,  we 
must  scrupulously  and  modestly  restrict  our¬ 
selves  to  the  term  that  expresses  just  as  much 
as  we  know,  and  no  more — namely,  an  end  of 
nature.  For  before  we  arrive  at  the  question  of 
the  cause  of  nature  itself,  we  find  in  nature  and 
in  the  course  of  its  generative  processes  exam¬ 
ples  of  these  final  products  produced  in  nature 
according  to  known  empirical  laws.  It  is  accord¬ 
ing  to  these  laws  that  natural  science  must  esti¬ 
mate  its  objects,  and,  consequently,  it  must  seek 
within  itself  for  this  causality  according  to  the 
rule  of  ends.  Therefore  this  science  must  not 
overlap  its  bounds  for  the  purpose  of  drawing 
into  its  own  bosom,  as  a  domestic  principle,  one 
to  whose  conception  no  experience  can  be  ade¬ 
quate,  and  upon  which  we  are  not  authorized  to 
venture  until  after  natural  science  has  said  its 
last  word. 

Natural  qualities  that  are  demonstrable  a  pri¬ 
ori ,  and  so  reveal  their  possibility  on  universal 
principles  without  any  aid  from  experience,  may 
involve  a  technical  finality.  Yet,  being  abso¬ 
lutely  necessary,  they  cannot  be  credited  to 
natural  teleologic  at  all.  Natural  teleology  forms 
part  of  physics,  and  is  a  method  applicable  to 
the  solution  of  the  problems  of  physics.  Arith¬ 


56i 

metical  and  geometrical  analogies,  also  univer¬ 
sal  mechanical  laws,  however  strange  and  wor¬ 
thy  of  our  admiration  the  union  in  a  single  prin¬ 
ciple  of  a  variety  of  rules  apparently  quite 
disconnected  may  seem,  have  no  claim  on  that 
account  to  rank  as  teleological  grounds  of  ex¬ 
planation  in  physics.  They  may  deserve  to  be 
brought  under  review  in  the  universal  theory  of 
the  finality  of  the  things  of  nature  in  general, 
but,  if  so,  this  is  a  theory  that  would  have  to  be 
assigned  to  another  science,  namely  meta¬ 
physics.  It  would  not  form  an  inherent  principle 
of  natural  science:  whereas  in  the  case  of  the 
empirical  laws  of  the  physical  ends  which  or¬ 
ganisms  present  it  is  not  alone  permissible,  but 
even  unavoidable,  to  use  teleological  criticism 
as  a  principle  of  natural  science  in  respect  of  a 
peculiar  class  of  its  objects. 

For  the  purpose  of  keeping  strictly  within  its 
own  bounds  physics  entirely  ignores  the  ques¬ 
tion  whether  physical  ends  are  ends  designedly 
or  undesignedly.  To  deal  with  that  question 
would  be  to  meddle  in  the  affairs  of  others — 
namely,  in  what  is  the  business  of  metaphysics. 
Suffice  it  that  there  are  objects  whose  one  and 
only  explanation  is  on  natural  laws  that  we  are 
unable  to  conceive  otherwise  than  by  adopting 
the  idea  of  ends  as  principle,  objects  which,  in 
their  intrinsic  form,  and  with  nothing  more  in 
view  than  their  internal  relations,  are  cognizable 
in  this  way  alone.  It  is  true  that  in  teleology  we 
speak  of  nature  as  if  its  finality  were  a  thing  of 
design.  But  to  avoid  all  suspicion  of  presuming 
in  the  slightest  to  mix  up  with  our  sources  of 
knowledge  something  that  has  no  place  in 
physics  at  all,  namely  a  supernatural  cause,  we 
refer  to  design  in  such  a  way  that,  in  the  same 
breath,  we  attribute  this  design  to  nature,  that 
is,  to  matter.  Here  no  room  is  left  for  misin¬ 
terpretation,  since,  obviously,  no  one  would 
ascribe  design ,  in  the  proper  sense  of  the  term, 
to  a  lifeless  material.  Hence  our  real  intention 
is  to  indicate  that  the  word  design,  as  here  used, 
only  signifies  a  principle  of  the  reflective,  and 
not  of  the  determinant,  judgement,  and  conse¬ 
quently  is  not  meant  to  introduce  any  special 
ground  of  causality,  but  only  to  assist  the  em¬ 
ployment  of  reason  by  supplementing  investiga¬ 
tion  on  mechanical  laws  by  the  addition  of  an¬ 
other  method  of  investigation,  so  as  to  make  up 
for  the  inadequacy  of  the  former  even  as  a 
method  of  empirical  research  that  has  for  its 
object  all  particular  laws  of  nature.  Therefore, 
when  teleology  is  applied  to  physics,  we  speak 
with  perfect  justice  of  the  wisdom,  the  econ¬ 
omy,  the  forethought,  the  beneficence  of  nature. 


THE  CRITIQUE 


But  in  so  doing  we  do  not  convert  nature  into  an 
intelligent  being,  for  that  would  be  absurd;  but 
neither  do  we  dare  to  think  of  placing  another 
being,  one  that  is  intelligent,  above  nature  as  its 
architect,  for  that  would  be  extravagant.1  On 
the  contrary,  our  only  intention  is  to  designate 
in  this  way  a  kind  of  natural  causality  on  an 
analogy  with  our  own  causality  in  the  technical 
employment  of  reason,  for  the  purpose  of  keep¬ 
ing  in  view  the  rule  upon  which  certain  natural 
products  are  to  be  investigated. 

But  why,  then,  is  it  that  teleology  does  not 
usually  form  a  special  part  of  theoretical  natu¬ 
ral  science,  but  is  relegated  to  theology  by  way 
of  a  propaedeutic  or  transition?  This  is  done  in 
order  to  keep  the  study  of  the  mechanical  aspect 
of  nature  in  close  adherence  to  what  we  are  able 


so  to  subject  to  our  observation  or  experiment 
that  we  could  ourselves  produce  it  like  nature, 
or  at  least  produce  it  according  to  similar  laws. 
For  we  have  complete  insight  only  into  what 
we  can  make  and  accomplish  according  to  our 
conceptions.  But  to  effect  by  means  of  art  a 
presentation  similar  to  organization,  as  an  in¬ 
trinsic  end  of  nature,  infinitely  surpasses  all  our 
powers.  And  as  for  such  extrinsic  adjustments 
of  nature  as  are  considered  final  (e.g.,  winds, 
rains,  etc.),  physics  certainly  studies  their  mech¬ 
anism,  but  it  is  quite  unable  to  exhibit  their 
relation  to  ends  so  far  as  this  relation  pur¬ 
ports  to  be  a  condition  necessarily  attaching  to 
a  cause.  For  this  necessity  in  the  nexus  does  not 
touch  the  constitution  of  things,  but  turns 
wholly  on  the  combination  of  our  conceptions. 


Second  Division.  Dialectic  of  Teleological  Judgement 


§  69.  Nature  of  an  antinomy  of  judgement 

The  determinant  judgement  does  not  possess 
as  its  own  separate  property  any  principles  upon 
which  conceptions  of  objects  are  founded.  It  is 
not  an  autonomy;  for  it  subsumes  merely  under 
given  laws,  or  concepts,  as  principles.  Just  for 
this  reason,  it  is  not  exposed  to  any  danger  from 
inherent  antinomy  and  does  not  run  the  risk  of  a 
conflict  of  its  principles.  Thus  transcendental 
judgement,  which  was  shown  to  contain  the 
conditions  of  subsumption  under  categories,  was 
not  independently  nomothetic.  It  only  specified 
the  conditions  of  sensuous  intuition  upon  which 
reality,  that  is,  application,  can  be  afforded  to 
a  given  conception  as  a  law  of  understanding. 
In  the  discharge  of  this  office  it  could  never  fall 
into  a  state  of  internal  disunion,  at  least  in  the 
matter  of  principles. 

But  the  reflective  judgement  has  to  subsume 
under  a  law  that  is  not  yet  given.  It  has,  there¬ 
fore,  in  fact  only  a  principle  of  reflection  upon 
objects  for  which  we  are  objectively  at  a  com¬ 
plete  loss  for  a  law,  or  conception  of  the  object, 
sufficient  to  serve  as  a  principle  covering  the 
particular  cases  as  they  come  before  us.  Now  as 

1  [The  German  word  vermessert  (presumptuous)  is  a 
good  word  and  full  of  meaning.  A  judgement  in  w'hich 
we  forget  to  take  stock  of  the  extent  of  our  powers  of 
understanding  may  sometimes  sound  very  modest,  while 
yet  it  presumes  a  great  deal,  and  is  really  very  pre¬ 
sumptuous.  Of  this  type  are  the  majority  of  those  by 
which  we  purport  to  exalt  divine  wisdom  by  underlay¬ 
ing  the  works  of  creation  and  preservation  with  designs 
that  are  really  intended  to  do  honour  to  the  individual 
wisdom  of  our  own  subtle  intellects.] 


there  is  no  permissible  employment  of  the  cog¬ 
nitive  faculties  apart  from  principles,  the  reflec¬ 
tive  judgement  must  in  such  cases  be  a  principle 
to  itself.  As  this  principle  is  not  objective  and 
is  unable  to  introduce  any  basis  of  cognition  of 
the  object  sufficient  for  the  required  purpose  of 
subsumption,  it  must  serve  as  a  mere  subjective 
principle  for  the  employment  of  our  cognitive 
faculties  in  a  final  manner,  namely,  for  reflect¬ 
ing  upon  objects  of  a  particular  kind.  The  re¬ 
flective  judgement  has,  therefore,  its  maxims 
applicable  to  such  cases — maxims  that  are  in 
fact  necessary  for  obtaining  a  knowledge  of  the 
natural  laws  to  be  found  in  experience,  and 
which  are  directed  to  assist  us  in  attaining  to 
conceptions,  be  these  even  conceptions  of  rea¬ 
son,  wherever  such  conceptions  are  absolutely 
required  for  the  mere  purpose  of  getting  to 
know  nature  in  its  empirical  laws.  Between 
these  necessary  maxims  of  the  reflective  judge¬ 
ment  a  conflict  may  arise,  and  consequently  an 
antinomy.2  This  affords  the  basis  of  a  dialectic; 
and  if  each  of  the  mutually  conflicting  maxims 
has  its  foundation  in  the  nature  of  our  cognitive 
faculties,  this  dialectic  may  be  called  a  natural 
dialectic,  and  it  constitutes  an  unavoidable  illu¬ 
sion  which  it  is  the  duty  of  critical  philosophy 
to  expose  and  to  resolve  lest  it  should  deceive 
us. 

§  70.  Exposition  of  this  antinomy 

In  dealing  with  nature  as  the  complex  of 
objects  of  external  sense,  reason  is  able  to  rely 

2  [Cf.  Critique  of  Practical  Reason,  pp.  337.] 


OF  TELEOLOGICAL  JUDGEMENT  563 


upon  laws  some  of  which  are  prescribed  by  un¬ 
derstanding  itself  a  priori  to  nature,  while  oth¬ 
ers  are  capable  of  indefinite  extension  by  means 
of  the  empirical  determinations  occurring  in 
experience.  For  the  application  of  the  laws  pre¬ 
scribed  a  priori  by  understanding,  that  is,  of 
the  universal  laws  of  material  nature  in  general, 
judgement  does  not  need  any  special  principle 
of  reflection;  for  there  it  is  determinant,  an  ob¬ 
jective  principle  being  furnished  to  it  by  under¬ 
standing.  But  in  respect  of  the  particular  laws 
with  which  we  can  become  acquainted  through 
experience  alone,  there  is  such  a  wide  scope  for 
diversity  and  heterogeneity  that  judgement  must 
be  a  principle  to  itself,  even  for  the  mere  pur¬ 
pose  of  searching  for  a  law  and  tracking  one  out 
in  the  phenomena  of  nature.  For  it  needs  such  a 
principle  as  a  guiding  thread,  if  it  is  even  to 
hope  for  a  consistent  body  of  empirical  knowl¬ 
edge  based  on  a  thoroughgoing  uniformity  of 
nature — that  is  a  unity  of  nature  in  its  empirical 
laws.  Now  from  the  fact  of  this  contingent 
unity  of  particular  laws  it  may  come  to  pass 
that  judgement  acts  upon  two  maxims  in  its 
reflection,  one  of  which  it  receives  a  priori  from 
mere  understanding,  but  the  other  of  which  is 
prompted  by  particular  experiences  that  bring 
reason  into  play  to  institute  an  estimate  of  cor¬ 
poreal  nature  and  its  laws  according  to  a  par¬ 
ticular  principle.  What  happens  then  is  that 
these  two  different  maxims  seem  to  all  appear¬ 
ance  unable  to  run  in  the  same  harness,  and  a 
dialectic  arises  that  throws  judgement  into  con¬ 
fusion  as  to  the  principle  of  its  reflection. 

The  first  maxim  of  such  reflection  is  the 
thesis:  All  production  of  material  things  and 
their  forms  must  be  estimated  as  possible  on 
mere  mechanical  laws. 

The  second  maxim  is  the  antithesis:  Some 
products  of  material  nature  cannot  be  esti¬ 
mated  as  possible  on  mere  mechanical  laws 
(that  is,  for  estimating  them  quite  a  different 
law  of  causality  is  required,  namely,  that  of 
final  causes). 

If  now  these  regulative  principles  of  investi¬ 
gation  were  converted  into  constitutive  prin¬ 
ciples  of  the  possibility  of  the  objects  them¬ 
selves,  they  would  read  thus: 

Thesis:  All  production  of  material  things  is 
possible  on  mere  mechanical  laws. 

Antithesis:  Some  production  of  such  things  is 
not  possible  on  mere  mechanical  laws. 

In  this  latter  form,  as  objective  principles  for 
the  determinant  judgement,  they  would  contra¬ 
dict  one  another,  so  that  one  of  the  pair  would 
necessarily  be  false.  But  that  would  then  be  an 


antinomy  certainly,  though  not  one  of  judge¬ 
ment,  but  rather  a  conflict  in  the  legislation  of 
reason.  But  reason  is  unable  to  prove  either  one 
or  the  other  of  these  principles:  seeing  that  we 
can  have  no  a  priori  determining  principle  of 
the  possibility  of  things  on  mere  empirical  laws 
of  nature. 

On  the  other  hand,  looking  to  the  maxims  of 
a  reflective  judgement  as  first  set  out,  we  see 
that  they  do  not  in  fact  contain  any  contradic¬ 
tion  at  all.  For  if  I  say:  “I  must  estimate  the 
possibility  of  all  events  in  material  nature,  and, 
consequently,  also  all  forms  considered  as  its 
products,  on  mere  mechanical  laws,”  I  do  not 
thereby  assert  that  they  are  solely  possible  in 
this  way ,  that  is,  to  the  exclusion  of  every  other 
kind  of  causality.  On  the  contrary  this  assertion 
is  only  intended  to  indicate  that  I  ought  at  all 
times  to  reflect  upon  these  things  according  to 
the  principle  of  the  simple  mechanism  of  na¬ 
ture,  and,  consequently,  push  my  investigation 
with  it  as  far  as  I  can,  because  unless  I  make  it 
the  basis  of  research  there  can  be  no  knowledge 
of  nature  in  the  true  sense  of  the  term  at  all. 
Now  this  does  not  stand  in  the  way  of  the  sec¬ 
ond  maxim  when  a  proper  occasion  for  its  em¬ 
ployment  presents  itself — that  is  to  say,  in  the 
case  of  some  natural  forms  (and,  at  their  in¬ 
stance,  in  the  case  of  entire  nature),  we  may, 
in  our  reflection  upon  them,  follow  the  trail  of 
a  principle  which  is  radically  different  from  ex¬ 
planation  by  the  mechanism  of  nature,  namely 
the  principle  of  final  causes.  For  reflection  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  first  maxim  is  not  in  this  way 
superseded.  On  the  contrary,  we  are  directed  to 
pursue  it  as  far  as  we  can.  Further,  it  is  not 
asserted  that  those  forms  were  not  possible  on 
the  mechanism  of  nature.  It  is  only  maintained 
that  human  reason ,  adhering  to  this  maxim  and 
proceeding  on  these  lines,  could  never  discover 
a  particle  of  foundation  for  what  constitutes 
the  specific  character  of  a  physical  end,  what¬ 
ever  additions  it  might  make  in  this  way  to  its 
knowledge  of  natural  laws.  This  leaves  it  an 
open  question  whether,  in  the  unknown  inner 
basis  of  nature  itself,  the  physico-mechanical 
and  the  final  nexus  present  in  the  same  things 
may  not  cohere  in  a  single  principle;  it  being 
only  our  reason  that  is  not  in  a  position  to  unite 
them  in  such  a  principle,  so  that  our  judgement, 
consequently,  remains  reflective ,  not  determi¬ 
nant,  that  is,  acts  on  a  subjective  ground,  and 
not  according  to  an  objective  principle  of  the 
possibility  of  things  in  their  inherent  nature, 
and,  accordingly,  is  compelled  to  conceive  a  dif¬ 
ferent  principle  from  that  of  the  mechanism  of 


THE  CRITIQUE 


nature  as  a  ground  of  the  possibility  of  certain 
forms  in  nature. 

§  71.  Introduction  to  the  solution  of  the  above 
antinomy 

We  are  wholly  unable  to  prove  the  impossi¬ 
bility  of  the  production  of  organized  natural 
products  in  accordance  with  the  simple  mecha¬ 
nism  of  nature.  For  we  cannot  see  into  the  first 
and  inner  ground  of  the  infinite  multiplicity  of 
the  particular  laws  of  nature,  which,  being  only 
known  empirically,  are  for  us  contingent,  and 
so  we  are  absolutely  incapable  of  reaching  the 
intrinsic  and  all-sufficient  principle  of  the  pos¬ 
sibility  of  a  nature — a  principle  which  lies  in 
the  supersensible.  But  may  not  the  productive 
capacity  of  nature  be  just  as  adequate  for  what 
we  estimate  to  be  formed  or  connected  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  idea  of  ends  as  it  is  for  what  we  be¬ 
lieve  merely  calls  for  mechanical  functions  on 
the  part  of  nature?  Or  may  it  be  that  in  fact 
things  are  genuine  physical  ends  (as  we  must 
necessarily  estimate  them  to  be),  and  as  such 
founded  upon  an  original  causality  of  a  com¬ 
pletely  different  kind,  which  cannot  be  an  inci¬ 
dent  of  material  nature  or  of  its  intelligible  sub¬ 
strate,  namely,  the  causality  of  an  architectonic 
understanding?  What  has  been  said  shows  that 
these  are  questions  upon  which  our  reason,  very 
narrowly  restricted  in  respect  of  the  conception 
of  causality  if  this  conception  has  to  be  speci¬ 
fied  a  priori ,  can  give  absolutely  no  informa¬ 
tion.  But  that,  relatively  to  our  cognitive  facul¬ 
ties,  the  mere  mechanism  of  nature  is  also  un¬ 
able  to  furnish  any  explanation  of  the  produc¬ 
tion  of  organisms,  is  a  matter  just  as  indubita¬ 
bly  certain.  For  the  reflective  judgement ,  there¬ 
fore,  this  is  a  perfectly  sound  principle:  that 
for  the  clearly  manifest  nexus  of  things  accord¬ 
ing  to  final  causes,  we  must  think  a  causality 
distinct  from  mechanism,  namely  a  world-cause 
acting  according  to  ends,  that  is,  an  intelligent 
cause — however  rash  and  undemonstrable  a 
principle  this  might  be  for  the  determinant 
judgemeyit.  In  the  first  case  the  principle  is  a  sim¬ 
ple  maxim  of  judgement.  The  conception  of  cau¬ 
sality  which  it  involves  is  a  mere  idea  to  which 
we  in  no  way  undertake  to  concede  reality,  but 
only  make  use  of  it  to  guide  a  reflection  that 
still  leaves  the  door  open  for  any  available  me¬ 
chanical  explanation,  and  that  never  strays 
from  the  world  of  sense.  In  the  second  case,  the 
principle  would  be  an  objective  principle.  Rea¬ 
son  would  prescribe  it  and  judgement  would 
have  to  be  subject  to  it  and  determine  itself 
accordingly.  But  in  that  case,  reflection  wan¬ 


ders  from  the  world  of  sense  into  transcendent 
regions  and  possibly  gets  led  astray. 

All  semblance  of  an  antinomy  between  the 
maxims  of  the  strictly  physical,  or  mechanical, 
mode  of  explanation  and  the  teleological,  or 
technical,  rests,  therefore,  on  our  confusing  a 
principle  of  the  reflective  with  one  of  the  de¬ 
terminant  judgement.  The  autonomy  of  the  for¬ 
mer,  which  is  valid  merely  subjectively  for  the 
use  of  our  reason  in  respect  of  particular  em¬ 
pirical  laws,  is  mistaken  for  the  heteronomy  of 
the  second,  which  has  to  conform  to  the  laws, 
either  universal  or  particular,  given  by  under¬ 
standing. 

§  72.  The  various  kinds  of  systems  dealing  with 
the  finality  of  nature 

No  one  has  ever  yet  questioned  the  correct¬ 
ness  of  the  principle  that  when  judging  certain 
things  in  nature,  namely  organisms  and  their 
possibility,  we  must  look  to  the  conception  of 
final  causes.  Such  a  principle  is  admittedly  nec¬ 
essary  even  where  we  require  no  more  than  a 
guiding-thread  for  the  purpose  of  becoming  ac¬ 
quainted  with  the  character  of  these  things  by 
means  of  observation,  without  trenching  upon 
an  investigation  into  their  first  origin.  Hence 
the  question  can  only  be,  whether  this  principle 
is  merely  subjectively  valid,  that  is,  a  mere 
maxim  of  judgement,  or  is  an  objective  prin¬ 
ciple  of  nature.  On  the  latter  alternative  there 
would  belong  to  nature  another  type  of  cau¬ 
sality  beyond  its  mechanism  and  its  simple  dy¬ 
namical  laws,  namely,  the  causality  of  final 
causes,  under  which  natural  causes  (dynamical 
forces)  would  stand  only  as  intermediate  causes. 

Now  this  speculative  question  or  problem 
might  well  be  left  without  any  answer  or  solu¬ 
tion.  For,  if  we  content  ourselves  with  specu¬ 
lation  within  the  bounds  of  the  mere  knowledge 
of  nature,  the  above  maxims  are  ample  for  its 
study  as  far  as  human  powers  extend,  and  for 
probing  its  deepest  secrets.  So  it  must  be  that 
reason  wakens  some  suspicion,  or  that  nature, 
so  to  speak,  gives  us  a  hint.  With  the  help  of 
this  conception  of  final  causes,  might  we  not  be 
able  to  take  a  step,  we  are  prompted  to  think, 
beyond  and  above  nature,  and  connect  it  to  the 
supreme  point  in  the  series  of  causes?  Why  not 
relinquish  the  investigation  of  nature  (although 
we  have  not  advanced  so  very  far  with  it)  or, 
at  least,  lay  it  temporarily  aside,  and  try  first 
to  discover  whither  that  stranger  in  natural 
science,  the  conception  of  physical  ends,  would 
lead  us? 

Now  at  this  point,  certainly,  the  undisputed 


OF  TELEOLOGICAL  JUDGEMENT  565 


maxim  above  mentioned  would  have  to  merge  in 
a  problem  that  opens  up  a  wide  field  for  con¬ 
troversy.  For  it  may  be  alleged  that  the  nexus 
of  natural  finality  proves  the  existence  of  a 
special  kind  of  causality  for  nature.  Or  it  may 
be  contended  that  this  nexus,  considered  in  its 
true  nature  and  on  objective  principles,  is,  on 
the  contrary,  identical  with  the  mechanism  of 
nature,  or  rests  on  one  and  the  same  ground, 
though  in  the  case  of  many  natural  products 
this  ground  often  lies  too  deeply  buried  for  our 
investigation.  Hence,  as  is  contended,  we  have 
recourse  to  a  subjective  principle,  namely  art, 
or  causality  according  to  ideas,  in  order  to  in¬ 
troduce  it,  on  an  analogy,  as  the  basis  of  nature 
— an  expedient  that  in  fact  proves  successful 
in  many  cases,  in  some  certainly  seems  to  fail, 
but  in  no  case  entitles  us  to  introduce  into  natu¬ 
ral  science  a  mode  of  operation  different  from 
causality  on  mere  mechanical  laws  of  nature. 
Now,  in  giving  to  the  procedure,  or  causal  oper¬ 
ation  of  nature,  the  name  of  technic,  on  account 
of  the  suggestion  of  an  end  which  we  find  in  its 
products,  we  propose  to  divide  this  technic  into 
such  as  is  designed  {technica  intentionalis)  and 
such  as  is  undesigned  ( technica  naturalis).  The 
former  is  intended  to  convey  that  nature’s  ca¬ 
pacity  for  production  by  final  causes  must  be 
considered  a  special  kind  of  causality;  the  lat¬ 
ter,  that  this  capacity  is  at  bottom  identical 
with  natural  mechanism,  and  that  the  contin¬ 
gent  coincidence  with  our  artificial  conceptions 
and  their  rules  is  a  mere  subjective  condition  of 
our  estimating  this  capacity,  and  is  thus  errone¬ 
ously  interpreted  as  a  special  mode  of  natural 
production. 

To  speak  now  of  the  systems  that  offer  an 
explanation  of  nature  on  the  point  of  final 
causes,  one  cannot  fail  to  perceive  that  they  all, 
without  exception,  controvert  one  another  dog¬ 
matically.  In  other  words,  they  are  at  issue  upon 
objective  principles  of  the  possibility  of  things, 
be  this  possibility  one  due  to  causes  acting 
designedly  or  merely  undesignedly.  They  do 
not  attack  the  subjective  maxim  of  mere  judge¬ 
ment  upon  the  cause  of  the  final  products  in 
question.  In  the  latter  case,  disparate  principle 
might  very  well  be  reconciled,  whereas,  in  the 
former,  contradictorily  opposed  principles  annul 
one  another  and  are  mutually  inconsistent. 

The  systems  in  respect  of  the  technic  of 
nature,  that  is,  of  nature’s  power  of  production 
on  the  rule  of  ends,  are  of  two  kinds:  that  of 
the  idealism  and  that  of  the  realism  of  physical 
ends.  The  former  maintains  that  all  finality  on 
l  the  part  of  nature  is  undesigned;  the  latter,  that 


some,  namely  finality  in  organized  beings,  is 
designed.  From  the  latter  the  hypothetical  con¬ 
sequence  may  be  inferred,  that  the  technic  of 
nature  is  also  designed  in  what  concerns  all 
its  other  products  relatively  to  entire  nature, 
that  is,  is  an  end. 

1.  The  idealism  of  finality  (I  am  here  all 
along  referring  to  objective  finality)  is  either 
that  of  the  accidentality  or  fatality  of  the  deter¬ 
mination  of  nature  in  the  final  form  of  its  prod¬ 
ucts.  The  former  principle  fixes  on  the  ref¬ 
lation  of  matter  to  the  physical  basis  of  its  form, 
namely  dynamical  laws;  the  latter  on  its  rela¬ 
tion  to  the  hyperphysical  basis  of  matter  and 
entire  nature.  The  system  of  accidentality, 
which  is  attributed  to  Epicurus  or  Democritus, 
is,  in  its  literal  interpretation,  so  manifestly 
absurd  that  it  need  not  detain  us.  On  the  other 
hand,  the  system  of  fatality,  of  which  Spinoza 
is  the  accredited  author,  although  it  is  to  all  ap¬ 
pearances  much  older,  rests  upon  something 
supersensible,  into  which  our  insight,  accord¬ 
ingly,  is  unable  to  penetrate.  It  is  not  so  easy  to 
refute:  the  reason  being  that  its  conception  of 
the  original  being  is  quite  unintelligible.  But 
this  much  is  clear,  that  on  this  system  the  final 
nexus  in  the  world  must  be  regarded  as  unde¬ 
signed.  For,  while  it  is  derived  from  an  original 
being,  it  is  not  derived  from  its  intelligence,  and 
consequently  not  from  any  design  on  its  part, 
but  from  the  necessity  of  the  nature  of  this 
being  and  the  world-unity  flowing  from  that 
nature.  Hence  it  is  clear,  too,  that  the  fatalism 
of  finality  is  also  an  idealism  of  finality. 

2.  The  realism  of  the  finality  of  nature  is 
also  either  physical  or  hyperphysical.  The  for¬ 
mer  bases  natural  ends  on  the  analogue  of  a 
faculty  acting  designedly,  that  is,  on  the  life  of 
matter — this  life  being  either  inherent  in  it  or 
else  bestowed  upon  it  by  an  inner  animating 
principle  or  world-soul.  This  is  called  hylozoism. 
The  latter  derives  such  ends  from  the  original 
source  of  the  universe.  This  source  it  regards  as 
an  intelligent  Being  producing  with  design — or 
essentially  and  fundamentally  living.  It  is 
theism1 

1  We  see  from  this  how,  as  in  most  speculative  mat¬ 
ters  of  pure  reason,  the  schools  of  philosophy  have, 
in  the  way  of  dogmatic  assertions,  usually  attempted 
every  possible  solution  of  the  problem  before  them. 
Thus  in  the  case  of  the  finality  of  nature,  at  one  time 
a  lifeless  matter,  or  again  a  lifeless  God ,  at  another,  a 
living  matter,  or  else  a  living  God,  have  been  tried. 
Nothing  is  left  to  us  except,  if  needs  be,  to  break  away 
from  all  these  objective  assertions,  and  weigh  our  judge¬ 
ment  critically  in  its  mere  relation  to  our  cognitive  fac¬ 
ulties.  By  so  doing,  we  may  procure  for  their  principle 
a  validity  which,  if  not  dogmatic,  is  yet  that  of  a  max¬ 
im,  and  ample  for  the  reliable  employment  of  our  rea¬ 
son. 


566 


THE  CRITIQUE 


§  73.  None  of  the  above  systems  does 
what  it  professes  to  do 

What  is  the  aim  and  object  of  all  the  above 
systems?  It  is  to  explain  our  teleological  judge¬ 
ments  about  nature.  To  do  so,  they  adopt 
one  or  other  of  two  courses.  One  side  denies 
their  truth,  and  consequently,  describes  them 
as  an  idealism  of  nature  (represented  as 
art).  The  other  side  recognizes  their  truth 
and  promises  to  demonstrate  the  possibility 
of  a  nature  according  to  the  idea  of  final 
causes. 

1.  The  systems  that  contend  for  the  ideal¬ 
ism  of  the  final  causes  in  nature  fall  into  two 
classes.  One  class  does  certainly  concede  to 
the  principle  of  these  causes  a  causality  accord¬ 
ing  to  dynamical  laws  (to  which  causality  the 
natural  things  owe  their  final  existence).  But  it 
denies  to  it  intentiofiality — that  is,  it  denies 
that  this  causality  is  determined  designedly  to 
this  its  final  production,  or,  in  other  words,  that 
an  end  is  the  cause.  This  is  the  explanation 
adopted  by  Epicurus.  It  completely  denies  and 
abolishes  the  distinction  between  a  technic  of 
nature  and  its  mere  mechanism.  Blind  chance 
is  accepted  as  the  explanation,  not  alone  of  the 
agreement  of  the  generated  products  with  our 
conception,  and,  consequently,  of  the  technic 
of  nature,  but  even  of  the  determination  of  the 
causes  of  this  development  on  dynamical  laws, 
and,  consequently,  of  its  mechanism.  Hence 
nothing  is  explained,  not  even  the  illusion  in 
our  teleological  judgements,  so  that  the  alleged 
idealism  in  them  is  left  altogether  unsubstan¬ 
tiated. 

Spinoza,  as  the  representative  of  the  other 
class,  seeks  to  release  us  from  any  inquiry  into 
the  ground  of  possibility  of  ends  of  nature,  and 
to  deprive  this  idea  of  all  reality,  by  refusing 
to  allow  that  such  ends  are  to  be  regarded  as 
products  at  all.  They  are,  rather,  accidents  in¬ 
hering  in  an  original  being.  This  being,  he  says, 
is  the  substrate  of  the  natural  things,  and,  as 
such,  he  does  not  ascribe  to  it  causality  in  re¬ 
spect  of  them,  but  simply  subsistence.  Thanks, 
then,  to  the  unconditional  necessity  both  of 
this  being  and  of  all  the  things  of  nature,  as  its 
inherent  accidents,  he  assures  to  the  natural 
forms,  it  is  true,  that  unity  of  ground  necessary 
for  all  finality,  but  he  does  so  at  the  expense 
of  their  contingency,  apart  from  which  no  unity 
of  end  is  thinkable.  In  eliminating  this  unity, 
he  eliminates  all  trace  of  design  and  leaves  the 
original  ground  of  the  things  of  nature  divested 
of  all  intelligence. 


But  Spinozism  does  not  effect  what  it  intends. 
It  intends  to  furnish  an  explanation  of  the  final 
nexus  of  natural  things,  which  it  does  not  deny, 
and  it  refers  us  simply  to  the  unity  of  the  sub¬ 
ject  in  which  they  all  inhere.  But  suppose  we 
grant  it  this  mode  of  existence  for  its  beings 
of  the  world,  such  ontological  unity  is  not  then 
and  there  a  unity  of  end  and  does  not  make  it 
in  any  way  intelligible.  The  latter  is,  in  fact, 
quite  a  special  kind  of  unity.  It  does  not  follow 
from  the  nexus  of  things  in  one  subject,  or  of 
the  beings  of  the  world  in  an  original  being.  On 
the  contrary,  it  implies  emphatically  relation 
to  a  cause  possessed  of  intelligence.  Even  if  all 
the  things  were  to  be  united  in  one  simple  sub¬ 
ject,  yet  such  unity  would  never  exhibit  a  final 
relation  unless  these  things  were  understood 
to  be,  first,  inner  effects  of  the  substance  as  a 
cause ,  and,  secondly,  effects  of  it  as  cause  by 
virtue  of  its  intelligence.  Apart  from  these  for¬ 
mal  conditions,  all  unity  is  mere  necessity  of 
nature,  and,  when  it  is  ascribed  nevertheless  to 
things  that  we  represent  as  outside  one  another, 
blind  necessity.  But  if  what  the  scholastics1  call 
the  transcendental  perfection  of  things,  in  re¬ 
lation  to  their  own  proper  essence — a  perfec¬ 
tion  according  to  which  all  things  have  inherent 
in  them  all  the  requisites  for  being  the  thing 
they  are  and  not  any  other  thing — is  to  be 
termed  a  natural  finality,  we  then  get  a  childish 
playing  with  words  in  the  place  of  conceptions. 
For  if  all  things  must  be  thought  as  ends,  then 
to  be  a  thing  and  to  be  an  end  are  identical, 
so  that,  all  said  and  done,  there  is  nothing 
that  specially  deserves  to  be  represented  as 
an  end. 

This  makes  it  evident  that,  by  resolving  our 
conception  of  natural  finality  into  the  conscious¬ 
ness  of  our  own  inherence  in  an  all-embracing, 
though  at  the  same  time  simple,  being,  and  by 
seeking  the  form  of  finality  in  the  unity  of  that 
being,  Spinoza  must  have  intended  to  maintain 
the  idealism  of  the  finality  and  not  its  realism. 
But  even  this  he  was  unable  to  accomplish,  for 
the  mere  representation  of  the  unity  of  the  sub¬ 
strate  can  never  produce  the  idea  of  finality,  be 
it  even  undesigned. 

2.  Those  who  not  merely  maintain  the  real¬ 
ism  of  physical  ends,  but  purport  even  to  ex¬ 
plain  it,  think  they  can  detect  a  special  type  of 
causality,  namely  that  of  causes  operating  in¬ 
tentionally.  Or,  at  least,  they  think  they  are 
able  to  perceive  the  possibility  of  such  cau¬ 
sality — for  unless  they  did  they  could  not  set 

1  [Cf.  Critique  of  Pure  Reason,  p.  44.] 


OF  TELEOLOGICAL  JUDGEMENT 


about  trying  to  explain  it.  For  even  the  most 
daring  hypothesis  must  rely  at  least  on  the 
possibility  of  its  assumed  foundation  being  cer¬ 
tain ,  and  the  conception  of  this  foundation 
must  be  capable  of  being  assured  its  objective 
reality. 

But  the  possibility  of  a  living  matter  is  quite 
inconceivable.  The  very  conception  of  it  in¬ 
volves  self-contradiction,  since  lifelessness, 
inertia ,  constitutes  the  essential  characteristic 
of  matter.  Then  if  the  possibility  of  a  matter 
endowed  with  life  and  of  aggregate  nature  con¬ 
ceived  as  an  animal  is  invoked  in  support  of 
the  hypothesis  of  a  finality  of  nature  in  the 
macrocosm,  it  can  only  be  used  with  the  utmost 
reserve  in  so  far  as  it  is  manifested  empirically 
in  the  organization  of  nature  in  the  microcosm. 
Its  possibility  can  in  no  way  be  perceived 
a  priori.  Hence  there  must  be  a  vicious  circle 
in  the  explanation,  if  the  finality  of  nature  in 
organized  beings  is  sought  to  be  derived  from 
the  life  of  matter  and  if  this  life  in  turn  is  only 
to  be  known  in  organized  beings,  so  that  no 
conception  of  its  possibility  can  be  formed  apart 
from  such  experience.  Hence  hylozoism  does 
not  perform  what  it  promises. 

Finally  theism  is  equally  incapable  of  sub¬ 
stantiating  dogmatically  the  possibility  o  f 
physical  ends  as  a  key  to  teleology.  Yet  the 
source  of  its  explanation  of  them  has  this  ad¬ 
vantage  over  all  others,  that,  by  attributing  an 
intelligence  to  the  original  Being,  it  adopts  the 
best  mode  of  rescuing  the  finality  of  nature 
from  idealism  and  introduces  an  intentional 
causality  for  its  production. 

For  theism  would  first  have  to  succeed  in 
proving  to  the  satisfaction  of  the  determinant 
judgement  that  the  unity  of  end  in  matter  is 
an  impossible  result  of  the  mere  mechanism 
of  nature.  Otherwise  it  is  not  entitled  definitely 
to  locate  its  ground  beyond  and  above  nature. 
But  the  farthest  we  can  get  is  this.  The  first  and 
inner  ground  of  this  very  mechanism  being  be¬ 
yond  our  ken,  the  constitution  and  limits  of 
our  cognitive  faculties  are  such  as  to  preclude 
us  from  in  any  way  looking  to  matter  with  a 
view  to  finding  in  it  a  principle  of  determinate 
final  relations.  We  are  left,  on  the  contrary, 
with  no  alternative  mode  of  estimating  nature’s 
products  as  natural  ends  other  than  that  which 
resorts  to  a  supreme  Intelligence  as  the  cause 
of  the  world.  But  this  is  not  a  ground  for  the 
determinant  judgement,  but  only  for  the  reflec¬ 
tive  judgement,  and  it  is  absolutely  incapable 
of  authorizing  us  to  make  any  objective  as¬ 
sertion. 


567 

§  74.  The  impossibility  of  treating  the  concept 

of  a  technic  of  nature  dogmatically 

springs  from  the  inexplicability 

of  a  physical  end 

Even  though  a  conception  is  to  be  placed 
under  an  empirical  condition,  we  deal  dogmat¬ 
ically  with  it,  if  we  regard  it  as  contained  under 
another  conception  of  the  object — this  concep¬ 
tion  forming  a  principle  of  reason — and  deter¬ 
mine  it  in  accordance  with  the  latter.  But  we 
deal  merely  critically  with  the  conception  if  we 
only  regard  it  in  relation  to  our  cognitive  fac¬ 
ulties  and,  consequently,  to  the  subjective  con¬ 
ditions  of  thinking  it,  without  undertaking  to 
decide  anything  as  to  its  object.  Hence  the  dog¬ 
matic  treatment  of  a  conception  is  treatment 
which  is  authoritative  for  the  determinant 
judgement;  the  critical  treatment  is  such  as  is 
authoritative  merely  for  the  reflective  judge¬ 
ment. 

Now  the  conception  of  a  thing  as  a  physical 
end  is  one  that  subsumes  nature  under  a  cau¬ 
sality  that  is  only  thinkable  by  the  aid  of  reason, 
and  so  subsumes  it  for  the  purpose  of  letting  us 
judge  on  the  principle  of  what  is  given  of  the 
object  in  experience.  But  in  order  to  make  use 
of  this  conception  dogmatically  for  the  deter¬ 
minant  judgement,  we  should  have  first  to  be 
assured  of  its  objective  reality,  as  otherwise 
we  could  not  subsume  any  natural  thing  under 
it.  The  conception  of  a  thing  as  a  physical  end 
is,  however,  certainly  one  that  is  empirically 
conditioned,  that  is,  is  one  only  possible  under 
certain  conditions  given  in  experience.  Yet  it  is 
not  one  to  be  abstracted  from  these  conditions, 
but,  on  the  contrary,  it  is  only  possible  on  a 
rational  principle  in  the  estimating  of  the  object. 
Being  such  a  principle  we  have  no  insight  into 
its  objective  reality,  that  is  to  say,  we  cannot 
perceive  that  an  object  answering  to  it  is  pos¬ 
sible.  We  cannot  establish  it  dogmatically;  and 
we  do  not  know  whether  it  is  a  mere  logical 
fiction  and  an  objectively  empty  conception 
( conceptus  ratiocinans ),  or  whether  it  is  a 
rational  conception,  supplying  a  basis  of  knowl¬ 
edge  and  substantiated  by  reason  ( conceptus 
ratio cinatus) .  Hence  it  cannot  be  treated  dog¬ 
matically  on  behalf  of  the  determinant  judge¬ 
ment.  In  other  words,  not  alone  is  it  impossible 
to  decide  whether  or  not  things  of  nature,  con¬ 
sidered  as  physical  ends,  require  for  their  pro¬ 
duction  a  causality  of  a  quite  peculiar  kind, 
namely  an  intentional  causality,  but  the  very 
question  is  quite  out  of  order.  For  the  concep¬ 
tion  of  a  physical  end  is  altogether  unprovable 


THE  CRITIQUE 


by  reason  in  respect  of  its  objective  reality, 
which  means  that  it  is  not  constitutive  for  the 
determinant  judgement,  but  merely  regulative 
for  the  reflective  judgement. 

That  it  is  not  provable  is  clear  from  the  fol¬ 
lowing  considerations.  Being  a  conception  of  a 
natural  product  it  involves  necessity.  Yet  it  also 
involves  in  one  and  the  same  thing,  considered 
as  an  end,  an  accompanying  contingency  in  the 
form  of  the  object  in  respect  of  mere  laws  of 
nature.  Hence,  if  it  is  to  escape  self-contradic¬ 
tion,  besides  containing  a  basis  of  the  possibility 
of  the  thing  in  nature  it  must  further  contain 
a  basis  of  the  possibility  of  this  nature  itself 
and  of  its  reference  to  something  that  is  not  an 
empirically  cognizable  nature,  namely  to  some¬ 
thing  supersensible,  and,  therefore,  to  what  is 
not  cognizable  by  us  at  all.  Otherwise,  in  judging 
of  its  possibility,  we  should  not  have  to  esti¬ 
mate  it  in  the  light  of  a  kind  of  causality  dif¬ 
ferent  from  that  of  natural  mechanism.  Ac¬ 
cordingly  the  conception  of  a  thing  as  a  natural 
end  is  transcendent  for  the  determinant  judge¬ 
ment ,  if  its  object  is  viewed  by  reason — albeit 
for  the  reflective  judgement  it  may  be  imma¬ 
nent  in  respect  of  objects  of  experience.  Objec¬ 
tive  reality,  therefore,  cannot  be  procured  for 
it  on  behalf  of  the  determinant  judgement. 
Hence  we  can  understand  how  it  is  that  all 
systems  that  are  ever  devised  with  a  view  to 
the  dogmatic  treatment  of  the  conception  of 
physical  ends  or  of  nature  as  a  whole  that  owes 
its  consistency  and  coherence  to  final  causes, 
fail  to  decide  anything  whatever  either  by  their 
objective  affirmations  or  by  their  objective 
denials.  For,  if  things  are  subsumed  under  a 
conception  that  is  merely  problematic,  the  syn¬ 
thetic  predicates  attached  to  this  conception — 
as,  for  example,  in  the  present  case,  whether 
the  physical  end  which  we  suppose  for  the  pro¬ 
duction  of  the  thing  is  designed  or  undesigned 
— must  yield  judgements  about  the  object  of  a 
like  problematic  character,  be  they  affirmative 
or  negative,  since  one  does  not  know  whether 
one  is  judging  about  what  is  something  or  noth¬ 
ing.  The  conception  of  a  causality  through  ends, 
that  is,  ends  of  art,  has  certainly  objective 
reality,  just  as  that  of  a  causality  according  to 
the  mechanism  of  nature  has.  But  the  concep¬ 
tion  of  a  physical  causality  following  the  rule 
of  ends,  and  still  more  of  such  a  Being  as  is 
utterly  incapable  of  being  given  to  us  in  ex¬ 
perience — a  Being  regarded  as  the  original 
source  of  nature — while  it  may  no  doubt  be 
thought  without  self-contradiction,  is  neverthe¬ 
less  useless  for  the  purpose  of  dogmatic  defini¬ 


tive  assertions.  For,  since  it  is  incapable  of  be¬ 
ing  extracted  from  experience,  and  besides  is 
unnecessary  for  its  possibility,  there  is  nothing 
that  can  give  any  guarantee  of  its  objective 
reality.1  But  even  if  this  could  be  assured,  how 
can  I  reckon  among  products  of  nature  things 
that  are  definitely  posited  as  products  of  divine 
art,  when  it  was  the  very  incapacity  of  nature 
to  produce  such  things  according  to  its  own 
laws  that  necessitated  the  appeal  to  a  cause 
distinct  from  nature? 

§  75.  The  conception  of  an  objective  finality  of 
nature  is  a  critical  principle  of  reason  for 
the  use  of  the  reflective  judgement 

But  then  it  is  one  thing  to  say:  The  produc¬ 
tion  of  certain  things  of  nature,  or  even  of  entire 
nature,  is  only  possible  through  the  agency  of  a 
cause  that  pursues  designs  in  determining  itself 
to  action.  It  is  a  perfectly  different  thing  to 
say:  By  the  peculiar  constitution  of  my  cogni¬ 
tive  faculties ,  the  only  way  I  can  judge  of  the 
possibility  of  those  things  and  of  their  produc¬ 
tion  is  by  conceiving  for  that  purpose  a  cause 
working  designedly,  and,  consequently,  a  being 
whose  productivity  is  analogous  to  the  causality 
of  an  understanding.  In  the  former  case  I  desire 
to  ascertain  something  about  the  object,  and  I 
am  bound  to  prove  the  objective  reality  of  a 
conception  I  have  assumed.  In  the  latter  case  it 
is  only  the  employment  of  my  cognitive  fac¬ 
ulties  that  is  determined  by  reason  in  accord¬ 
ance  with  their  peculiar  character  and  the  essen¬ 
tial  conditions  imposed  both  by  their  range  and 
their  limitations.  The  first  principle  is,  there¬ 
fore,  an  objective  principle  intended  for  the 
determinant  judgement.  The  second  is  a  sub¬ 
jective  principle  for  the  use  merely  of  the  reflec¬ 
tive  judgement,  of  which  it  is,  consequently,  a 
maxim  that  reason  prescribes. 

In  fact,  if  we  desire  to  pursue  the  investiga¬ 
tion  of  nature  with  diligent  observation,  be  it 
only  in  its  organized  products,  we  cannot  get 
rid  of  the  necessity  of  adopting  the  conception 
of  a  design  as  basal.  We  have  in  this  conception, 
therefore,  a  maxim  absolutely  necessary  for  the 
empirical  employment  of  our  reason.  But  once 
such  a  guide  for  the  study  of  nature  has  been 
adopted,  and  its  application  verified,  it  is  ob¬ 
vious  that  we  must  at  least  try  this  maxim  of 
judgement  also  on  nature  as  a  whole,  because 
many  of  its  laws  might  be  discoverable  in  the 
light  of  this  maxim  which  otherwise,  with  the 
limitations  of  our  insight  into  its  mechanism, 
would  remain  hidden  from  us.  But  in  respect 
1  [Cf.  p.  550.] 


OF  TELEOLOGICAL  JUDGEMENT  569 


of  the  latter  employment,  useful  as  this  maxim 
of  judgement  is,  it  is  not  indispensable.  For 
nature  as  a  whole  is  not  given  to  us  as  organized 
— in  the  very  strict  sense  above  assigned  to  the 
word.  On  the  other  hand,  in  respect  of  those 
natural  products  that  can  only  be  estimated  as 
designedly  formed  in  the  way  they  are,  and  not 
otherwise,  the  above  maxim  or  reflective  judge¬ 
ment  is  essentially  necessary,  if  for  no  other 
purpose,  to  obtain  an  empirical  knowledge  of 
their  intrinsic  character.  For  the  very  notion 
that  they  are  organized  things  is  itself  impossible 
unless  we  associate  with  it  the  notion  of  a  pro¬ 
duction  by  design. 

Now  where  the  possibility  of  the  real  exist¬ 
ence  or  form  of  a  thing  is  represented  to  the 
mind  as  subject  to  the  condition  of  an  end,  there 
is  bound  up  indissolubly  with  the  conception  of 
the  thing  the  conception  of  its  contingency  on 
natural  laws.  For  this  reason,  those  natural 
things  which  we  consider  to  be  only  possible  as 
ends  constitute  the  foremost  proof  of  the  con¬ 
tingency  of  the  universe.  Alike  for  the  popular 
understanding  and  for  the  philosopher  they  are, 
too,  the  only  valid  argument  for  its  dependence 
upon  and  its  origin  from  an  extramundane  Be¬ 
ing,  and  from  one,  moreover,  that  the  above 
final  form  shows  to  be  intelligent.  Thus  they 
indicate  that  teleology  must  look  to  a  theology 
for  a  complete  answer  to  its  inquiries. 

But  suppose  teleology  brought  to  the  highest 
pitch  of  perfection,  what  would  it  all  prove  in 
the  end?  Does  it  prove,  for  example,  that  such 
an  intelligent  Being  really  exists?  No;  it  proves 
no  more  than  this,  that  by  the  constitution  of 
our  cognitive  faculties,  and,  therefore,  in  bring¬ 
ing  experience  into  touch  with  the  highest  prin¬ 
ciples  of  reason,  we  are  absolutely  incapable 
of  forming  any  conception  of  the  possibility  of 
such  a  world  unless  we  imagine  a  highest  cause 
operating  designedly.  We  are  unable,  therefore, 
objectively  to  substantiate  the  proposition: 
There  is  an  intelligent  original  Being.  On  the 
contrary,  we  can  only  do  so  subjectively  for  the 
employment  of  our  power  of  judgement  in  its 
reflection  on  the  ends  in  nature,  which  are  in¬ 
capable  of  being  thought  on  any  other  principle 
than  that  of  the  intentional  causality  of  a  high¬ 
est  cause. 

Should  we  desire  to  establish  the  major  prem¬ 
iss  dogmatically  from  teleological  grounds, 
we  should  become  entangled  in  inextricable 
difficulties.  For  then  these  reasonings  would 
have  to  be  supported  by  the  thesis:  The  organ¬ 
ized  beings  in  the  world  are  not  possible  other¬ 
wise  than  by  virtue  of  a  cause  operating  de¬ 


signedly.  But  are  we  to  say  that,  because  we 
can  only  push  forward  our  investigation  into 
the  causal  nexus  of  these  things  and  recognize 
the  conformity  to  law  which  it  displays  by  fol¬ 
lowing  the  idea  of  ends,  we  are  also  entitled  to 
presume  that  for  every  thinking  and  perceiving 
being  the  same  holds  true  as  a  necessary  condi¬ 
tion,  and  as  one,  therefore,  attaching  to  the  ob¬ 
ject  instead  of  merely  to  the  subject,  that  is, 
to  our  own  selves?  For  this  is  the  inevitable 
position  that  we  should  have  to  be  prepared  to 
take  up.  But  we  could  not  succeed  in  carrying 
such  a  point.  For,  strictly  speaking,  we  do  not 
observe  the  ends  in  nature  as  designed.  We  only 
read  this  conception  into  the  facts  as  a  guide  to 
judgement  in  its  reflection  upon  the  products  of 
nature.  Hence  these  ends  are  not  given  to  us  by 
the  object.  It  is  even  impossible  for  us  a  priori 
to  warrant  the  eligibility  of  such  a  conception 
if  taken  to  possess  objective  reality.  We  can 
get  absolutely  nothing,  therefore,  out  of  the 
thesis  beyond  a  proposition  resting  only  on  sub¬ 
jective  conditions,  that  is  to  say  the  conditions 
of  a  reflective  judgement  adapted  to  our  cog¬ 
nitive  faculties.  Were  this  proposition  to  be  ex¬ 
pressed  in  objective  terms  and  as  valid  dog¬ 
matically,  it  would  read:  There  is  a  God.  But 
all  that  is  permissible  for  us  men  is  the  narrow 
formula:  We  cannot  conceive  or  render  intel¬ 
ligible  to  ourselves  the  finality  that  must  be 
introduced  as  the  basis  even  of  our  knowledge 
of  the  intrinsic  possibility  of  many  natural 
things,  except  by  representing  it,  and,  in  gen¬ 
eral,  the  world,  as  the  product  of  an  intelligent 
cause — in  short,  of  a  God. 

Now  supposing  that  this  proposition,  founded 
as  it  is  upon  an  indispensably  necessary  maxim 
of  our  power  of  judgement,  is  perfectly  satis¬ 
factory  from  every  human  point  of  view  and 
for  any  use  to  which  we  can  put  our  reason, 
whether  speculative  or  practical,  I  should  like 
to  know  what  loss  we  suffer  from  our  inability 
to  prove  its  validity  for  higher  beings  also — 
that  is  to  say,  to  substantiate  it  on  pure  objec¬ 
tive  grounds,  which  unfortunately  are  beyond 
our  reach.1  It  is,  I  mean,  quite  certain  that  we 
can  never  get  a  sufficient  knowledge  of  organ¬ 
ized  beings  and  their  inner  possibility,  much 
less  get  an  explanation  of  them,  by  looking 
merely  to  mechanical  principles  of  nature.  In¬ 
deed,  so  certain  is  it,  that  we  may  confidently 
assert  that  it  is  absurd  for  men  even  to  enter¬ 
tain  any  thought  of  so  doing  or  to  hope  that 
maybe  another  Newton  may  some  day  arise, 
to  make  intelligible  to  us  even  the  genesis  of 
1  [Cf.  p.  571.] 


THE  CRITIQUE 


but  a  blade  of  grass  from  natural  laws  that  no 
design  has  ordered.  Such  insight  we  must  abso¬ 
lutely  deny  to  mankind.  But,  then,  are  we  to 
think  that  a  source  of  the  possibility  of  organ¬ 
ized  beings  amply  sufficient  to  explain  their 
origin  without  having  recourse  to  a  design,  could 
never  be  found  buried  among  the  secrets  even 
of  nature,  were  we  able  to  penetrate  to  the 
principle  upon  which  it  specifies  its  familiar 
universal  laws?  This,  in  its  turn,  would  be  a 
presumptuous  judgement  on  our  part.  For  how 
do  we  expect  to  get  any  knowledge  on  the  point? 
Probabilities  drop  entirely  out  of  count  in  a 
case  like  this,  where  the  question  turns  on 
judgements  of  pure  reason.  On  the  question, 
therefore,  whether  or  not  any  being  acting  de¬ 
signedly  stands  behind  what  we  properly  term 
physical  ends ,  as  a  world  cause,  and  conse¬ 
quently,  as  Author  of  the  world,  we  can  pass 
no  objective  judgement  whatever,  be  it  affirma¬ 
tive  or  negative.  This  much  alone  is  certain, 
that  if  we  ought,  for  all  that,  to  form  our  judge¬ 
ment  on  what  our  own  proper  nature  permits 
us  to  see,  that  is,  subject  to  the  conditions  and 
restrictions  of  our  reason,  we  are  utterly  unable 
to  ascribe  the  possibility  of  such  physical  ends 
to  any  other  source  than  an  intelligent  Being. 
This  alone  squares  with  the  maxim  of  our  re¬ 
flective  judgement,  and,  therefore,  with  a  sub¬ 
jective  ground  that  is  nevertheless  ineradicably 
fixed  in  the  human  race. 

§  76.  Remark 

The  following  survey  is  one  that  justly 
merits  detailed  elaboration  in  transcendental 
philosophy,  but  it  can  only  be  introduced  here 
as  an  explanatory  digression,  and  not  as  a  step 
in  the  main  argument. 

Reason  is  a  faculty  of  principles,  and  the  un¬ 
conditioned  is  the  ultimate  goal  at  which  it 
aims.  Understanding,  on  the  other  hand,  is  at 
its  disposal,  but  always  only  under  a  certain 
condition  that  must  be  given.  But,  without  con¬ 
ceptions  of  understanding,  to  which  objective 
reality  must  be  given,  reason  can  pass  no  ob¬ 
jective  (synthetical)  judgements  whatever.  As 
theoretical  reason,  it  is  absolutely  devoid  of  any 
constitutive  principles  of  its  own.  Its  principles, 
on  the  contrary,  are  merely  regulative.  It  will 
readily  be  perceived  that  once  reason  advances 
beyond  pursuit  of  understanding  it  becomes 
transcendent.  It  displays  itself  in  ideas — that 
have  certainly  a  foundation  as  regulative  prin¬ 
ciples — but  not  in  objectively  valid  conceptions. 

Understanding,  however,  unable  to  keep  pace 
with  it  and  yet  requisite  in  order  to  give  validity 


in  respect  of  objects,  restricts  the  validity  of 
these  ideas  to  the  judging  subject,  though  to 
the  subject  in  a  comprehensive  sense,  as  inclu¬ 
sive  of  all  who  belong  to  the  human  race.  In 
other  words,  it  limits  their  validity  to  the  terms 
of  this  condition:  “From  the  nature  of  our  hu¬ 
man  faculty  of  knowledge,  or,  to  speak  in  the 
broadest  terms,  even  according  to  any  concep¬ 
tion  that  we  are  able  to  form  for  ourselves  of 
the  capacity  of  a  finite  intelligent  being  in  gen¬ 
eral,  it  must  be  conceived  to  be  so  and  cannot 
be  conceived  otherwise” — terms  which  involve 
no  assertion  that  the  foundation  of  such  a 
judgement  lies  in  the  object.  We  shall  submit 
some  examples  which,  while  they  certainly 
possess  too  great  importance  and  are  also  too 
full  of  difficulty  to  be  here  forced  at  once  on 
the  reader  as  propositions  that  have  been 
proved,  may  yet  give  him  some  food  for  re¬ 
flection,  and  may  elucidate  the  matters  upon 
which  our  attention  is  here  specially  engaged. 

Human  understanding  cannot  avoid  the  ne¬ 
cessity  of  drawing  a  distinction  between  the 
possibility  and  the  actuality  of  things.  The  rea¬ 
son  of  this  lies  in  our  own  selves  and  the  nature 
of  our  cognitive  faculties.  For  were  it  not  that 
two  entirely  heterogeneous  factors,  understand¬ 
ing  for  conceptions  and  sensuous  intuition  for 
the  corresponding  objects,  are  required  for  the 
exercise  of  these  faculties,  there  would  be  no 
such  distinction  between  the  possible  and  the 
actual.  This  means  that  if  our  understanding 
were  intuitive  it  would  have  no  objects  but  such 
as  are  actual.  Conceptions,  which  are  merely 
directed  to  the  possibility  of  an  object,  and  sen¬ 
suous  intuitions,  which  give  us  something  and 
yet  do  not  thereby  let  us  cognize  it  as  an  object, 
would  both  cease  to  exist.  Now  the  whole  dis¬ 
tinction  which  we  draw  between  the  merely 
possible  and  the  actual  rests  upon  the  fact  that 
possibility  signifies  the  position  of  the  repre¬ 
sentation  of  a  thing  relatively  to  our  conception, 
and,  in  general,  to  our  capacity  of  thinking, 
whereas  actuality  signifies  the  positing  of  the 
thing  in  its  immediate  self-existence  apart  from 
this  conception.  Accordingly,  the  distinction  of 
possible  from  actual  things  is  one  that  is  merely 
valid  subjectively  for  human  understanding.  It 
arises  from  the  fact  that  even  if  something  does 
not  exist,  we  may  yet  always  give  it  a  place  in 
our  thoughts,  or  if  there  is  something  of  which 
we  have  no  conception  we  may  nevertheless 
imagine  it  given.  To  say,  therefore,  that  things 
may  be  possible  without  being  actual,  that  from 
mere  possibility,  therefore,  no  conclusion  what¬ 
ever  as  to  actuality  can  be  drawn,  is  to  state 


OF  TELEOLOGICAL  JUDGEMENT 


propositions  that  hold  true  for  human  reason, 
without  such  validity  proving  that  this  distinc¬ 
tion  lies  in  the  things  themselves.  That  this  in¬ 
ference  is  not  to  be  drawn  from  the  propositions 
stated,  and  that,  consequently,  while  these  are 
certainly  valid  even  of  objects,  so  far  as  our 
cognitive  faculties  in  their  subjection  to  sen¬ 
suous  conditions  are  also  occupied  with  objects 
of  sense,  they  are  not  valid  of  things  generally, 
is  apparent  when  we  look  to  the  demands  of 
reason.  For  reason  never  withdraws  its  challenge 
to  us  to  adopt  something  or  other  existing  with 
unconditioned  necessity — a  root  origin — in 
which  there  is  no  longer  to  be  any  difference 
between  possibility  and  actuality,  and  our  un¬ 
derstanding  has  absolutely  no  conception  to 
answer  to  this  idea — that  is,  it  can  discover  no 
way  of  representing  to  itself  any  such  thing  or 
of  forming  any  notion  of  its  mode  of  existence. 
For  if  understanding  thinks  it — let  it  think  it 
how  it  will — then  the  thing  is  represented  merely 
as  possible.  If  it  is  conscious  of  it  as  given  in 
intuition,  then  it  is  actual,  and  no  thought  of 
any  possibility  enters  into  the  case.  Hence  the 
conception  of  an  absolutely  necessary  being, 
while  doubtless  an  indispensable  idea  of  reason, 
is  for  human  understanding  an  unattainable 
problematic  conception.  Nevertheless  it  is  valid 
for  the  employment  of  our  cognitive  faculties 
according  to  their  peculiar  structure;  conse¬ 
quently  not  so  for  the  object  nor,  as  that  would 
mean,  for  every  knowing  being.  For  I  cannot 
take  for  granted  that  thought  and  intuition  are 
two  distinct  conditions  subject  to  which  every 
being  exercises  its  cognitive  faculties,  and. 
therefore,  that  things  have  a  possibility  and  ac¬ 
tuality.  An  understanding  into  whose  mode  of 
cognition  this  distinction  did  not  enter  would 
express  itself  by  saying:  “All  objects  that  I 
know  are ,  that  is,  exist”;  and  the  possibility  of 
some  that  did  not  exist,  in  other  words,  their 
contingency  supposing  them  to  exist,  and  there¬ 
fore,  the  necessity  that  would  be  placed  in  con¬ 
tradistinction  to  this  contingency,  would  never 
enter  into  the  imagination  of  such  a  being.  But 
what  makes  it  so  hard  for  our  understanding 
with  its  conceptions  to  rival  reason  is  simply 
this,  that  the  very  thing  that  reason  regards  as 
constitutive  of  the  object  and  adopts  as  prin¬ 
ciple  is  for  understanding,  in  its  human  form, 
transcendent,  that  is,  impossible  under  the  sub¬ 
jective  conditions  of  its  knowledge.  In  this  state 
of  affairs,  then,  this  maxim  always  holds  true, 
that  once  the  knowledge  of  objects  exceeds  the 
capacity  of  understanding  we  must  always  con¬ 
ceive  them  according  to  the  subjective  condi¬ 


57i 

tions  necessarily  attaching  to  our  human  nature 
in  the  exercise  of  its  faculties.1  And  if — as  must 
needs  be  the  case  with  transcendent  conceptions 
— judgements  passed  in  this  manner  cannot  be 
constitutive  principles  determining  the  char¬ 
acter  of  the  object,  we  shall  yet  be  left  with 
regulative  principles  whose  function  is  imma¬ 
nent  and  reliable,  and  which  are  adapted  to  the 
human  point  of  view. 

We  have  seen  that,  in  the  theoretical  study 
of  nature,  reason  must  assume  the  idea  of  an 
unconditioned  necessity  of  the  original  ground 
of  nature.  Similarly,  in  the  practical  sphere,  it 
must  presuppose  its  own  causality  as  uncondi¬ 
tioned  in  respect  of  nature,  in  other  words,  its 
freedom,  since  it  is  conscious  of  its  own  moral 
command.  Now  here  the  objective  necessity  of 
action  as  duty  is,  however,  regarded  as  opposed 
to  that  which  it  would  have  as  an  event  if  its 
source  lay  in  nature  instead  of  in  freedom  or 
rational  causality.  So  the  action,  with  its  abso¬ 
lute  necessity  of  the  moral  order,  is  looked  on 
as  physically  wholly  contingent — that  is,  we  rec¬ 
ognize  that  what  ought  necessarily  to  happen 
frequently  does  not  happen.  Hence  it  is  clear  that 
it  only  springs  from  the  subjective  character  of 
our  practical  faculty  that  the  moral  laws  must 
be  represented  as  commands,  and  the  actions 
conformable  to  them  as  duties,  and  that  reason 
expresses  this  necessity,  not  by  an  is  or 
“happens”  (being  or  fact),  but  by  an  “ought 
to  be”  (obligation).  This  would  not  occur  if 
reason  and  its  causality  were  considered  as  in¬ 
dependent  of  sensibility,  that  is,  as  free  from 
the  subjective  condition  of  its  application  to 
objects  in  nature,  and  as  being,  consequently,  a 
cause  in  an  intelligible  world  perfectly  harmo¬ 
nizing  with  the  moral  law.  For  in  such  a  world 
there  would  be  no  difference  between  obligation 
and  act,  or  between  a  practical  law  as  to  what 
is  possible  through  our  agency  and  a  theoretical 
law  as  to  what  we  make  actual.  However,  al¬ 
though  an  intelligible  world  in  which  everything 
is  actual  by  reason  of  the  simple  fact  that,  being 
something  good,  it  is  possible,  is  for  us  a  trans¬ 
cendent  conception — as  is  also  freedom  itself, 
the  formal  condition  of  that  world — yet  it  has 
its  proper  function.  For  while,  as  transcendent, 
it  is  useless  for  the  purpose  of  any  constitutive 
principle  determining  an  object  and  its  objec¬ 
tive  reality,  it  yet  serves  as  a  universal  regula¬ 
tive  principle.  This  is  due  to  the  constitution 
of  our  partly  sensuous  nature  and  capacity, 
which  makes  it  valid  for  us  and,  so  far  as  we 
can  imagine  from  the  constitution  of  our  rea- 

1  [Cf.  pp.  562,  563.] 


- 


THE  CRITIQUE 


son,  for  all  intelligent  beings  that  are  in  any 
way  bound  to  this  world  of  sense.  But  this  prin¬ 
ciple  does  not  objectively  determine  the  nature 
of  freedom  as  a  form  of  causality:  it  converts, 
and  converts  with  no  less  validity  than  if  it  did 
so  determine  the  nature  of  that  freedom,  the 
rule  of  actions  according  to  that  idea  into  a 
command  for  every  one. 

Similarly,  as  to  the  case  before  us,  we  may 
admit  that  we  should  find  no  distinction  between 
the  mechanism  and  the  technic  of  nature,  that 
is,  its  final  nexus,  were  it  not  for  the  type  of 
our  understanding.  Our  understanding  must 
move  from  the  universal  to  the  particular.  In 
respect  of  the  particular,  therefore,  judgement 
can  recognize  no  finality,  or,  consequently,  pass 
any  determinate  judgements,  unless  it  is  pos¬ 
sessed  of  a  universal  law  under  which  it  can 
subsume  that  particular.  But  the  particular  by 
its  very  nature  contains  something  contingent 
in  respect  of  the  universal.  Yet  reason  demands 
that  there  shall  also  be  unity  in  the  synthesis 
of  the  particular  laws  of  nature,  and,  conse¬ 
quently,  conformity  to  law — and  a  derivation 
a  priori  of  the  particular  from  the  universal 
laws  in  point  of  their  contingent  content  is  not 
possible  by  any  defining  of  the  conception  of 
the  object.  Now  the  above  conformity  to  law 
on  the  part  of  the  contingent  is  termed  finality. 
Hence  it  follows  that  the  conception  of  a  finality 
of  nature  in  its  products,  while  it  does  not  touch 
the  determination  of  objects,  is  a  necessary 
conception  for  the  human  power  of  judgement, 
in  respect  of  nature.  It  is,  therefore,  a  subjec¬ 
tive  principle  of  reason  for  the  use  of  judge¬ 
ment,  and  one  which,  taken  as  regulative  and 
not  as  constitutive,  is  as  necessarily  valid  for 
our  human  judgement  as  if  it  were  an  objective 
principle. 

§  77.  The  peculiarity  of  human  understanding 
that  makes  the  conception  of  a  physi¬ 
cal  end  possible  for  us 

In  the  foregoing  Remark,  we  have  noted 
peculiarities  belonging  to  our  faculty  of  cogni¬ 
tion — even  to  our  higher  faculty  of  cognition — 
which  we  are  easily  misled  into  treating  as  ob¬ 
jective  predicates  to  be  transferred  to  the  things 
themselves.  But  these  peculiarities  relate  to 
ideas  to  which  no  commensurate  object  can  be 
given  in  experience,  and  which  thus  could  only 
serve  as  regulative  principles  in  the  pursuit  of 
experience.  The  conception  of  a  physical  end 
stands,  no  doubt,  on  the  same  footing  as  re¬ 
gards  the  source  of  the  possibility  of  a  predicate 
like  this — a  source  which  can  only  be  ideal.1 


But  the  result  attributable  to  this  source,  name-  3 
ly,  the  product  itself,  is  nevertheless  given  in  1 
nature,  and  the  conception  of  a  causality  of 
nature,  regarded  as  a  being  acting  according  to  > 
ends,  seems  to  convert  the  idea  of  a  physical 
end  into  a  constitutive  teleological  principle. 
Herein  lies  a  point  of  difference  between  this 
and  all  other  ideas. 

But  this  difference  lies  in  the  fact  that  the 
idea  in  question  is  a  principle  of  reason  for  the 
use,  not  of  understanding,  but  of  judgement, 
and  is,  consequently,  a  principle  solely  for  the  > 
application  of  an  understanding  in  the  abstract 
to  possible  objects  of  experience.  Moreover,  this 
application  only  affects  a  field  where  the  judge¬ 
ment  passed  cannot  be  determinant  but  simply 
reflective.  Consequently,  while  the  object  may 
certainly  be  given  in  experience,  it  cannot  even 
be  judged  definitely — to  say  nothing  of  being  | 
judged  with  complete  adequacy — in  accordance 
with  the  idea,  but  can  only  be  made  an  object 
of  reflection. 

The  difference  turns,  therefore,  on  a  peculi¬ 
arity  of  our  (human)  understanding  relative 
to  our  power  of  judgement  in  reflecting  on 
things  in  nature.  But,  if  that  is  the  case,  then 
we  must  have  here  an  underlying  idea  of  a  pos¬ 
sible  understanding  different  from  the  human. 
(And  there  was  a  similar  implication  in  the 
Critique  of  Pure  Reason.  We  were  bound  to 
have  present  to  our  minds  the  thought  of  anoth¬ 
er  possible  form  of  intuition,  if  ours  was  to  be 
deemed  one  of  a  special  kind,  one,  namely,  for 
which  objects  were  only  to  rank  as  phenomena.) 
Were  this  not  so,  it  could  not  be  said  that  cer¬ 
tain  natural  products  must,  from  the  particular 
constitution  of  our  understanding,  be  considered 
by  us — if  we  are  to  conceive  the  possibility  of  y 
their  production — as  having  been  produced  de¬ 
signedly  and  as  ends,  yet  without  this  statement 
involving  any  demand  that  there  should,  as  a 
matter  of  fact,  be  a  particular  cause  present  in 
which  the  representation  of  an  end  acts  as  de¬ 
termining  ground,  or,  therefore,  without  involv¬ 
ing  any  assertion  as  to  the  powers  of  an  under¬ 
standing  different  from  the  human.  This  is  to 
say,  the  statement  does  not  deny  that  a  super¬ 
human  understanding  may  be  able  to  discover 
the  source  of  the  possibility  of  such  natural 
products  even  in  the  mechanism  of  nature,  that 
is,  in  the  mechanism  of  a  casual  nexus  for  which 
an  understanding  is  not  positively  assumed  as 
cause. 

Hence  what  we  are  here  concerned  with  is  the 
relation  which  our  understanding  bears  to 

1  [Cf.  p.  558.] 


OF  TELEOLOGICAL  JUDGEMENT  573 


judgement.  We  have,  in  fact,  to  examine  this 
relation  with  a  view  to  finding  a  certain  element 
of  contingency  in  the  constitution  of  our  un¬ 
derstanding,  so  as  to  note  it  as  a  peculiarity  of 
our  own  in  contradistinction  to  other  possible 
understandings. 

This  contingency  turns  up  quite  naturally  in 
the  particular  which  judgement  has  to  bring 
under  the  universal  supplied  by  the  conceptions 
of  understanding.  For  the  particular  is  not  de¬ 
termined  by  the  universal  of  our  (human)  un¬ 
derstanding.  Though  different  things  may  agree 
in  a  common  characteristic,  the  variety  of  forms 
in  which  they  may  be  presented  to  our  percep¬ 
tion  is  contingent.  Our  understanding  is  a  fac¬ 
ulty  of  conceptions.  This  means  that  it  is  a 
discursive  understanding  for  which  the  charac¬ 
ter  and  variety  to  be  found  in  the  particular 
given  to  it  in  nature  and  capable  of  being 
brought  under  its  conceptions  must  certainly 
be  contingent.  But  now  intuition  is  also  a  fac¬ 
tor  in  knowledge,  and  a  faculty  of  complete 
spontaneity  of  intuition  would  be  a  cognitive 
faculty  distinct  from  sensibility  and  wholly  in¬ 
dependent  of  it.  Hence  it  would  be  an  under¬ 
standing  in  the  widest  sense  of  the  term.  Thus 
we  are  also  able  to  imagine  an  intuitive  under¬ 
standing — negatively,  or  simply  as  not  discur¬ 
sive1 — which  does  not  move,  as  ours  does  with 
its  conceptions,  from  the  universal  to  the  par¬ 
ticular  and  so  to  the  individual.  Such  an  under¬ 
standing  would  not  experience  the  above  con¬ 
tingency  in  the  way  nature  and  understand¬ 
ing  accord  in  natural  products  subject  to  par¬ 
ticular  laws.  But  it  is  just  this  contingency 
that  makes  it  so  difficult  for  our  understanding 
to  reduce  the  multiplicity  of  nature  to  the  unity 
of  knowledge.  Our  understanding  can  only  ac¬ 
complish  this  task  through  the  harmonizing 
of  natural  features  with  our  faculty  of  con¬ 
ceptions — a  most  contingent  accord.  But  an 

i  “The  logical  negation  expressed  in  the  word  not 
does  not  properly  belong  to  a  conception,  but  only  to  the 
relation  of  one  conception  to  another  in  a  judgement, 
and  is  consequently  quite  insufficient  to  present  to  the 
mind  the  content  of  a  conception.”  Critique  of  Pure 
Reason,  p.  175.  “Our  understanding  attains  in  this  way 
a  sort  of  negative  extension.  That  is  to  say,  it  is  not 
limited  by,  but  rather  limits,  sensibility,  by  giving  the 
name  of  noumena  to  things,  not  considered  as  phenom¬ 
ena,  but  as  things  in  themselves.  But  it  at  the  same 
time  prescribes  limits  to  itself,  for  it  confesses  itself  un¬ 
able  to  cognize  these  by  means  of  the  categories,  and 
hence  is  compelled  to  cogitate  them  merely  as  an  un¬ 
known  something.”  p.  98.  “Even  if  we  should  suppose  a 
different  kind  of  intuition  from  our  own,  still  our  func¬ 
tions  of  thought  would  have  no  use  or  significance  in 
respect  thereof.”  p.  106.  “We  have  no  right  to  assume 
the  existence  of  new  powers,  not  existing  in  nature — 
for  example,  an  understanding  with  a  non-sensuous 
intuition.”  p.  227. 


intuitive  understanding  has  no  such  work  to 
perform. 

Accordingly  our  understanding  is  peculiarly 
circumstanced  in  respect  of  judgement.  For  in 
cognition  by  means  of  understanding,  the  par¬ 
ticular  is  not  determined  by  the  universal. 
Therefore  the  particular  cannot  be  derived 
from  the  universal  alone.  Yet  in  the  multiplicity 
of  nature,  and  through  the  medium  of  concep¬ 
tion  and  laws,  this  particular  has  to  accord  with 
the  universal  in  order  to  be  capable  of  being 
subsumed  under  it.  But,  under  the  circum¬ 
stances  mentioned,  this  accord  must  be  very 
contingent  and  must  exist  without  any  deter¬ 
minate  principle  to  guide  our  judgement. 

Nevertheless  we  are  able  at  least  to  conceive 
the  possibility  of  such  an  accord  of  the  things 
in  nature  with  the  power  of  judgement — an  ac¬ 
cord  which  we  represent  as  contingent,  and, 
consequently,  as  only  possible  by  means  of  an 
end  directed  to  its  production.  But,  to  do  so, 
we  must  at  the  same  time  imagine  an  under¬ 
standing  different  from  our  own,  relative  to 
which — and,  what  is  more,  without  starting  to 
attribute  an  end  to  it — we  may  represent  the 
above  accord  of  natural  laws  with  our  power 
of  judgement,  which  for  our  understanding  is 
only  thinkable  when  ends  are  introduced  as  a 
middle  term  effecting  the  connection,  as  neces¬ 
sary. 

It  is,  in  fact,  a  distinctive  characteristic  of 
our  understanding,  that  in  its  cognition — as, 
for  instance,  of  the  cause  of  the  product — it 
moves  from  the  analytic  universal  to  the  partic¬ 
ular,  or,  in  other  words,  from  conceptions  to 
given  empirical  intuitions.  In  this  process, 
therefore,  it  determines  nothing  in  respect  of 
the  multiplicity  of  the  particular.  On  the  con¬ 
trary,  understanding  must  wait  for  the  sub¬ 
sumption  of  the  empirical  intuition — supposing 
that  the  object  is  a  natural  product — under  the 
conception,  to  furnish  this  determination  for 
the  faculty  of  judgement.  But  now  we  are  able 
to  form  a  notion  of  an  understanding  which, 
not  being  discursive  like  ours,  but  intuitive, 
moves  from  the  synthetic  universal,  or  intuition 
of  a  whole  as  a  whole,  to  the  particular — that 
is  to  say,  from  the  whole  to  the  parts.  To  ren¬ 
der  possible  a  definite  form  of  the  whole  a 
contingency  in  the  synthesis  of  the  parts  is  not 
implied  by  such  an  understanding  or  its  repre¬ 
sentation  of  the  whole.  But  that  is  what  our 
understanding  requires.  It  must  advance  from 
the  parts  as  the  universally  conceived  principles 
to  different  possible  forms  to  be  subsumed 
thereunder  as  consequences.  Its  structure  is 


THE  CRITIQUE 


such  that  we  can  only  regard  a  real  whole  in 
nature  as  the  effect  of  the  concurrent  dynamical 
forces  of  the  parts.  How,  then,  may  we  avoid 
having  to  represent  the  possibility  of  the  whole 
as  dependent  upon  the  parts  in  a  manner  con¬ 
formable  to  our  discursive  understanding?  May 
we  follow  what  the  standard  of  the  intuitive 
or  archetypal  understanding  prescribes,  and  rep¬ 
resent  the  possibility  of  the  parts  as  both  in 
their  form  and  synthesis  dependent  upon  the 
whole?  The  very  peculiarity  of  our  understand¬ 
ing  in  question  prevents  this  being  done  in  such 
a  way  that  the  whole  contains  the  source  of  the 
possibility  of  the  nexus  of  the  parts.  This  would 
be  self-contradictory  in  knowledge  of  the  dis¬ 
cursive  type.  But  the  representation  of  a  whole 
may  contain  the  source  of  the  possibility  of  the 
form  of  that  whole  and  of  the  nexus  of  the 
parts  which  that  form  involves.  This  is  our  only 
road.  But,  now,  the  whole  would  in  that  case 
be  an  effect  or  product  the  representation  of 
which  is  looked  on  as  the  cause  of  its  possibility. 
But  the  product  of  a  cause  whose  determining 
ground  is  merely  the  representation  of  its  effect 
is  termed  an  end.  Hence  it  follows  that  it  is 
simply  a  consequence  flowing  from  the  partic¬ 
ular  character  of  our  understanding  that  we 
should  figure  to  our  minds  products  of  nature 
as  possible  according  to  a  different  type  of  cau¬ 
sality  from  that  of  the  physical  laws  of  matter, 
that  is,  as  only  possible  according  to  ends  and 
final  causes.  In  the  same  way,  we  explain  the 
fact  that  this  principle  does  not  touch  the  ques¬ 
tion  of  how  such  things  themselves,  even  con¬ 
sidered  as  phenomena,  are  possible  on  this  mode 
of  production,  but  only  concerns  the  estimate 
of  them  possible  to  our  understanding.  On  this 
view  we  see  at  the  same  time  why  it  is  that  in 
natural  science  we  are  far  from  being  satisfied 
with  an  explanation  of  natural  products  by 
means  of  a  causality  according  to  ends.  For  in 
such  an  explanation  all  we  ask  for  is  an  estimate 
of  physical  generation  adapted  to  our  critical 
faculty,  or  reflective  judgement,  instead  of  one 
adapted  to  the  things  themselves  on  behalf  of 
the  determinant  judgement.  Here  it  is  also  quite 
unnecessary  to  prove  that  an  intellects  arche- 
typus  like  this  is  possible.  It  is  sufficient  to  show 
that  we  are  led  to  this  idea  of  an  intellects 
archetypus  by  contrasting  with  it  our  discursive 
understanding  that  has  need  of  images  ( intel¬ 
lects  ectypus)  and  noting  the  contingent  char¬ 
acter  of  a  faculty  of  this  form,  and  that  this 
idea  involves  nothing  self-contradictory. 

Now  where  we  consider  a  material  whole  and 
regard  it  as  in  point  of  form  a  product  resulting 


from  the  parts  and  their  powers  and  capacities 
of  self-integration  (including  as  parts  any  for¬ 
eign  material  introduced  by  the  co-operative 
action  of  the  original  parts),  what  we  represent 
to  ourselves  in  this  way  is  a  mechanical  genera¬ 
tion  of  the  whole.  But  from  this  view  of  the 
generation  of  a  whole  we  can  elicit  no  concep¬ 
tion  of  a  whole  as  end — a  whole  whose  intrinsic 
possibility  emphatically  presupposes  the  idea  of 
a  whole  as  that  upon  which  the  very  nature  and 
action  of  the  parts  depend.  Yet  this  is  the  rep¬ 
resentation  which  we  must  form  of  an  organ¬ 
ized  body.  But,  as  has  just  been  shown,  we  are 
not  to  conclude  from  this  that  the  mechanical 
generation  of  an  organized  body  is  impossible. 
For  that  would  amount  to  saying  that  it  is  im¬ 
possible,  or,  in  other  words,  self-contradictory, 
for  any  understanding  to  form  a  representation 
of  such  a  unity  in  the  conjunction  of  the  mani¬ 
fold  without  also  making  the  idea  of  this  unity 
its  producing  cause,  that  is,  without  representing 
the  production  as  designed.  At  the  same  time 
this  is  the  conclusion  that  we  should  in  fact 
have  to  draw  were  we  entitled  to  look  on  ma¬ 
terial  beings  as  things  in  themselves.  For  in  that 
case  the  unity  constituting  the  basis  of  the  pos¬ 
sibility  of  natural  formations  would  only  be 
the  unity  of  space.  But  space  is  not  a  real 
ground  of  the  generation  of  things.  It  is  only 
their  formal  condition — although  from  the  fact 
that  no  part  in  it  can  be  determined  except  in 
relation  to  the  whole  (the  representation  of 
which,  therefore,  underlies  the  possibility  of  the 
parts)  it  has  some  resemblance  to  the  real 
ground  of  which  we  are  in  search.  But  then  it 
is  at  least  possible  to  regard  the  material  world 
as  a  mere  phenomenon,  and  to  think  something 
which  is  not  a  phenomenon,  namely  a  thing-in- 
itself,  as  its  substrate.  And  this  we  may  rest 
upon  a  corresponding  intellectual  intuition,  al¬ 
beit  it  is  not  the  intuition  we  possess.  In  this 
way  a  supersensible  real  ground,  although  for 
us  unknowable,  would  be  procured  for  nature, 
and  for  the  nature  of  which  we  ourselves  form 
part.  Everything,  therefore,  which  is  necessary 
in  this  nature  as  an  object  of  sense  we  should 
estimate  according  to  mechanical  laws.  But  the 
accord  and  unity  of  the  particular  laws  and  of 
their  resulting  subordinate  forms,  which  we 
must  deem  contingent  in  respect  of  mechanical 
laws — these  things  which  exist  in  nature  as  an 
object  of  reason,  and,  indeed,  nature  in  its  en¬ 
tirety  as  a  system,  we  should  also  consider  in 
the  light  of  teleological  laws.  Thus  we  should 
estimate  nature  on  two  kinds  of  principles.  The 
mechanical  mode  of  explanation  would  not  be 


OF  TELEOLOGICAL  JUDGEMENT  575 


excluded  by  the  teleological  as  if  the  two  prin¬ 
ciples  contradicted  one  another. 

Further,  this  gives  us  an  insight  into  what 
we  might  doubtless  have  easily  conjectured  in¬ 
dependently,  but  which  we  should  have  found  it 
difficult  to  assert  or  prove  with  certainty.  It 
shows  us  that,  while  the  principle  of  a  mechan¬ 
ical  derivation  of  natural  products  displaying 
finality  is  consistent  with  the  teleological,  it  in 
no  way  enables  us  to  dispense  with  it.  We  may 
apply  to  a  thing  which  we  have  to  estimate  as 
a  physical  end,  that  is,  to  an  organized  being, 
all  the  laws  of  mechanical  generation  known  or 
yet  to  be  discovered,  we  may  even  hope  to  make 
good  progress  in  such  researches,  but  we  can 
never  get  rid  of  the  appeal  to  a  completely  dif¬ 
ferent  source  of  generation  for  the  possibility 
of  a  product  of  this  kind,  namely  that  of  a 
causality  by  ends.  It  is  utterly  impossible  for 
human  reason,  or  for  any  finite  reason  qualita¬ 
tively  resembling  ours,  however  much  it  may 
surpass  it  in  degree,  to  hope  to  understand  the 
generation  even  of  a  blade  of  grass  from  mere 
mechanical  causes.  For  if  judgement  finds  the 
teleological  nexus  of  causes  and  effects  quite 
indispensable  for  the  possibility  of  an  object 
like  this,  be  it  only  for  the  purpose  of  studying 
it  under  the  guidance  of  experience,  and  if  a 
ground  involving  relation  to  ends  and  adequate 
for  external  objects  as  phenomena  altogether 
eludes  us,  so  that  we  are  compelled,  although 
this  ground  lies  in  nature,  to  look  for  it  in  the 
supersensible  substrate  of  nature,  all  possible  in¬ 
sight  into  which  is,  however,  cut  off  from  us:  it  is 
absolutely  impossible  for  us  to  obtain  any  ex¬ 
planation  at  the  hand  of  nature  itself  to  account 
for  any  synthesis  displaying  finality.  So  by  the 
constitution  of  our  human  faculty  of  knowl¬ 
edge  it  becomes  necessary  to  look  for  the 
supreme  source  of  this  finality  in  an  original 
understanding  as  the  cause  of  the  world. 

§  78.  The  union  of  the  principle  of  the  universal 

mechanism  of  matter  with  the  teleological 

principle  in  the  technic  of  nature 

It  is  of  endless  importance  to  reason  to  keep 
in  view  the  mechanism  which  nature  employs 
in  its  productions,  and  to  take  due  account  of  it 
in  explaining  them,  since  no  insight  into  the 
nature  of  things  can  be  attained  apart  from  that 
principle.  Even  the  concession  that  a  supreme 
Architect  has  directly  created  the  forms  of  na¬ 
ture  in  the  way  they  have  existed  from  all  time, 
or  has  predetermined  those  which  in  their  course 
of  evolution  regularly  conform  to  the  same  type, 
does  not  further  our  knowledge  of  nature  one 


whit.  The  reason  is  that  we  are  wholly  ignorant 
of  the  manner  in  which  the  supreme  Being  acts 
and  of  His  ideas,  in  which  the  principles  of  the 
possibility  of  the  natural  beings  are  supposed  to 
be  contained,  and  so  cannot  explain  nature  from 
Him  by  moving  from  above  downwards,  that  is 
a  priori.  On  the  other  hand,  our  explanation 
would  be  simply  tautological  if,  relying  on  the 
finality  found,  as  we  believe,  in  the  forms  of 
objects  of  experience,  we  should  set  out  from 
these  forms  and  move  from  below  upwards, 
that  is  a  posteriori ,  and  with  a  view  to  explain¬ 
ing  such  finality  should  appeal  to  a  cause  acting 
in  accordance  with  ends.  We  should  be  cheating 
reason  with  mere  words — not  to  mention  the 
fact  that  where,  by  resorting  to  explanation  of 
this  kind,  we  get  lost  in  the  transcendent,  and 
thus  stray  beyond  the  pursuit  of  natural  science, 
reason  is  betrayed  into  poetic  extravagance,  the 
very  thing  which  it  is  its  pre-eminent  vocation 
to  prevent. 

On  the  other  hand,  it  is  an  equally  necessary 
maxim  of  reason  not  to  overlook  the  principle 
of  ends  in  the  products  of  nature.  For  although 
this  principle  does  not  make  the  mode  in  which 
such  products  originate  any  more  comprehen¬ 
sible  to  us,  yet  it  is  a  heuristic  principle  for  the 
investigation  of  the  particular  laws  of  nature. 
And  this  remains  true  even  though  it  be  under¬ 
stood  that,  as  we  confine  ourselves  rigorously 
to  the  term  physical  ends,  even  where  such 
products  manifestly  exhibit  a  designed  final 
unity,  we  do  not  intend  to  make  any  use  of  the 
principle  for  the  purpose  of  explaining  nature 
itself — that  is  to  say,  in  speaking  of  physical 
ends,  pass  beyond  the  bounds  of  nature  in  quest 
of  the  source  of  the  possibility  of  those  prod¬ 
ucts.  However,  inasmuch  as  the  question  of  this 
possibility  must  be  met  sooner  or  later,  it  is 
just  as  necessary  to  conceive  a  special  type  of 
causality  for  it — one  not  to  be  found  in  nature 
— as  to  allow  that  the  mechanical  activity  of 
natural  causes  has  its  special  type.  For  the  re¬ 
ceptivity  for  different  forms  over  and  above 
those  which  matter  is  capable  of  producing  by 
virtue  of  such  mechanism  must  be  supplemented 
by  a  spontaneity  of  some  cause — which  cannot, 
therefore,  be  matter — as  in  its  absence  no  rea¬ 
son  can  be  assigned  for  those  forms.  Of  course, 
before  reason  takes  this  step  it  must  exercise 
due  caution  and  not  seek  to  explain  as  teleologi¬ 
cal  every  technic  of  nature — meaning  by  this  a 
formative  capacity  of  nature  which  displays  (as 
in  the  case  of  regularly  constructed  bodies) 
finality  of  structure  for  our  mere  apprehension. 
On  the  contrary,  it  must  continue  to  regard  such 


576  THE  CRITIQUE 


technic  as  possible  on  purely  mechanical  prin¬ 
ciples.  But  to  go  so  far  as  to  exclude  the  tele¬ 
ological  principle,  and  to  want  to  keep  always  to 
mere  mechanism,  even  where  reason,  in  its  in¬ 
vestigation  into  the  manner  in  which  natural 
forms  are  rendered  possible  by  their  causes, 
finds  a  finality  of  a  character  whose  relation  to 
a  different  type  of  causality  is  apparent  beyond 
all  denial,  is  equally  unscientific.  It  inevitably 
sends  reason  on  a  roving  expedition  among 
capacities  of  nature  that  are  only  cobwebs  of 
the  brain  and  quite  unthinkable,  in  just  the  same 
way  as  a  merely  teleological  mode  of  explana¬ 
tion  that  pays  no  heed  to  the  mechanism  of  na¬ 
ture  makes  it  visionary. 

These  two  principles  are  not  capable  of  being 
applied  in  conjunction  to  one  and  the  same  thing 
in  nature  as  co-ordinate  truths  available  for  the 
explanation  or  deduction  of  one  thing  by  or 
from  another.  In  other  words,  they  are  not  to 
be  united  in  that  way  as  dogmatic  and  constitu¬ 
tive  principles  affording  insight  into  nature  on 
behalf  of  the  determinant  judgement.  If  I 
suppose,  for  instance,  that  a  maggot  is  to  be  re¬ 
garded  as  a  product  of  the  mere  mechanism 
of  matter,  that  is  of  a  new  formative  process 
which  a  substance  brings  about  by  its  own  un¬ 
aided  resources  when  its  elements  are  liberated 
as  the  result  of  decomposition,  I  cannot  then 
turn  round  and  derive  the  same  product  from 
the  same  substance  as  a  causality  that  acts  from 
ends.  Conversely,  if  I  suppose  that  this  product 
is  a  physical  end,  I  am  precluded  from  relying 
on  its  mechanical  generation,  or  adopting  such 
generation  as  a  constitutive  principle  for  esti¬ 
mating  the  product  in  respect  of  its  possibility, 
and  thus  uniting  the  two  principles.  For  each 
mode  of  explanation  excludes  the  other — even 
supposing  that  objectively  both  grounds  of  the 
possibility  of  such  a  product  rest  on  a  single 
foundation,  provided  this  foundation  was  not 
what  we  were  thinking  of.  The  principle  which 
is  to  make  possible  the  compatibility  of  the 
above  pair  of  principles,  as  principles  to  be  fol¬ 
lowed  in  estimating  nature,  must  be  placed  in 
what  lies  beyond  both  (and  consequently  be¬ 
yond  the  possible  empirical  representation  of 
nature),  but  in  what  nevertheless  contains  the 
ground  of  the  representation  of  nature.  It  must, 
in  other  words,  be  placed  in  the  supersensible, 
and  to  this  each  of  the  two  modes  of  explanation 
must  be  referred.  Now  the  only  conception  we 
can  have  of  the  supersensible  is  the  indetermin¬ 
ate  conception  of  a  ground  that  makes  possible 
the  estimate  of  nature  according  to  empirical 
laws.  Beyond  this  we  cannot  go:  by  no  predicate 


can  we  determine  this  conception  any  further.  t  ( 
Hence  it  follows  that  the  union  of  the  two  prin-  3  f 
ciples  cannot  rest  on  one  basis  of  explanation  >  < 
setting  out  in  so  many  terms  how  a  product  is 
possible  on  given  laws  so  as  to  satisfy  the  deter¬ 
minant  judgement,  but  can  only  rest  on  a  single  , 
basis  of  exposition  elucidating  this  possibility 
for  the  reflective  judgement.  For  explanation 
means  derivation  from  a  principle,  which  must, 
therefore,  be  capable  of  being  clearly  cognized  | 
and  specified.  Now  the  principle  of  the  mecha-  k 
nism  of  nature  and  that  of  its  causality  accord-  j 
ing  to  ends,  when  applied  to  one  and  the  same 
product  of  nature,  must  cohere  in  a  single  higher  j 
principle  and  flow  from  it  as  their  common 
source,  for  if  this  were  not  so  they  could  not 
both  enter  consistently  into  the  same  survey  of  ] 
nature.  But  if  this  principle,  which  is  objectively  , 
common  to  both,  and  which,  therefore,  justifies 
the  association  of  its  dependent  maxims  of  natu¬ 
ral  research,  is  of  such  a  kind  that,  while  it  can 
be  indicated,  it  can  never  be  definitely  cognized 
or  clearly  specified  for  employment  in  particu¬ 
lar  cases  as  they  arise,  then  no  explanation  can 
be  extracted  from  such  a  principle.  There  can  , 
be  no  clear  and  definite  derivation,  in  other 
words,  of  the  possibility  of  a  natural  product,  as  I; 
one  possible  on  those  two  heterogeneous  princi-  J 
pies.  Now  the  principle  common  to  the  mechan¬ 
ical  derivation,  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  teleo-  $ 
logical,  on  the  other,  is  the  supersensible ,  which 
we  must  introduce  as  the  basis  of  nature  as 
phenomenon.  But  of  this  we  are  unable  from  a 
theoretical  point  of  view  to  form  the  slightest 
positive  determinate  conception.  How,  there¬ 
fore,  in  the  light  of  the  supersensible  as  princi¬ 
ple,  nature  in  its  particular  laws  constitutes  a 
system  for  us,  and  one  capable  of  being  cog¬ 
nized  as  possible  both  on  the  principle  of  pro¬ 
duction  from  physical  causes  and  on  that  of  . 
final  causes,  is  a  matter  which  does  not  admit  i 
of  any  explanation.  All  we  can  say  is  that  if  it 
happens  that  objects  of  nature  present  them¬ 
selves,  whose  possibility  is  incapable  of  being  i 
conceived  by  us  on  the  principle  of  mechanism 
— which  has  always  a  claim  upon  a  natural  being 
— unless  we  rely  on  teleological  principles,  it  is 
then  to  be  presumed  that  we  may  confidently 
study  natural  laws  on  lines  following  both  prin¬ 
ciples — according  as  the  possibility  of  the  natu¬ 
ral  product  is  cognizable  to  our  understandings 
from  one  or  other  principle — without  being  dis¬ 
turbed  by  the  apparent  conflict  that  arises  be¬ 
tween  the  principles  upon  which  our  estimate  of 
the  product  is  formed.  For  we  are  at  least  as¬ 
sured  of  the  possibility  of  both  being  reconciled, 


OF  TELEOLOGICAL  JUDGEMENT  577 


even  objectively,  in  a  single  principle,  inasmuch 
as  they  deal  with  phenomena,  and  these  pre¬ 
suppose  a  supersensible  ground. 

We  have  seen  that  the  principles  both  of 
nature’s  mechanical  operation  and  of  its  tele¬ 
ological  or  designed  technique,  as  bearing  upon 
one  and  the  same  product  and  its  possibility, 
may  alike  be  subordinated  to  a  common  higher 
principle  of  nature  in  its  particular  laws.  Never¬ 
theless,  this  principle  being  transcendent,  the 
narrow  capacity  of  our  understanding  is  such 
that  the  above  subordination  does  not  enable  us 
to  unite  the  two  principles  in  the  explanation  of 
the  same  natural  generation,  even  where,  as  is 
the  case  with  organized  substances,  the  intrinsic 
possibility  of  the  product  is  only  intelligible  by 
means  of  a  causality  according  to  ends.  Hence 
we  must  keep  to  the  statement  of  the  principle 
of  teleology  above  given.  So  we  say  that,  by  the 
constitution  of  our  human  understanding,  no 
causes  but  those  acting  by  design  can  be  adopted 
as  grounds  of  the  possibility  of  organized  be¬ 
ings  in  nature,  and  the  mere  mechanism  of 
nature  is  quite  insufficient  to  explain  these  its 
products;  and  we  add  that  this  implies  no  de¬ 
sire  to  decide  anything  by  that  principle  in 
respect  of  the  possibility  of  such  things 
themselves. 

This  principle,  we  mean  to  say,  is  only  a 
maxim  of  the  reflective,  not  of  the  determinant 
judgement.  Hence,  it  is  only  valid  subjectively 
for  us,  not  objectively  to  explain  the  possibility 
of  things  of  this  kind  themselves — in  which 
things  themselves  both  modes  of  generation 
might  easily  spring  consistently  from  one  and 
the  same  ground.  Furthermore,  unless  the  tele¬ 
ologically-conceived  mode  of  generation  were 
supplemented  by  a  conception  of  an  concomi¬ 
tantly  presented  mechanism  of  nature,  such 
genesis  could  not  be  estimated  as  a  product  of 
nature  at  all.  Hence,  we  see  that  the  above 
maxim  immediately  involves  the  necessity  of  a 
union  of  both  principles  in  the  estimate  of 
things  as  physical  ends.  But  this  union  is  not  to 
be  directed  to  substituting  one  principle,  either 
wholly  or  in  part,  in  the  place  of  the  other.  For 
in  the  room  of  what  is  regarded,  by  us  at  least, 
as  only  possible  by  design,  mechanism  cannot 
be  assumed,  and  in  the  room  of  what  is  cognized 
as  necessary  in  accordance  with  mechanism, 
such  contingency  as  would  require  an  end  as  its 
determining  ground  cannot  be  assumed.  On  the 
contrary,  we  can  only  subordinate  one  to  the 
other,  namely  mechanism  to  designed  technique. 
And  on  the  trancendental  principle  of  the  final¬ 
ity  of  nature  this  may  readily  be  done. 


For  where  ends  are  thought  as  the  sources  of 
the  possibility  of  certain  things,  means  have 
also  to  be  supposed.  Now  the  law  of  the  efficient 
causality  of  a  means,  considered  in  its  own  right, 
requires  nothing  that  presupposes  an  end,  and, 
consequently,  may  be  both  mechanical  and  yet 
a  subordinate  cause  of  designed  effects.  Hence, 
looking  only  to  organic  products  of  nature,  but 
still  more  if,  impressed  by  the  endless  multitude 
of  such  products,  we  go  on  and  adopt,  at  least 
on  an  allowable  hypothesis,  the  principle  of 
design,  in  the  connection  of  natural  causes  fol¬ 
lowing  particular  laws,  as  a  universal  principle 
of  the  reflective  judgement  in  respect  of  the 
whole  of  nature,  namely  the  world,  we  may 
imagine  a  vast  and  even  universal  intercon¬ 
nection  of  mechanical  and  teleological  laws  in 
the  generative  processes  of  nature.  Here  we 
neither  confuse  nor  transpose  the  principles 
upon  which  such  processes  are  estimated.  For  in 
a  teleological  estimate,  even  if  the  form  which 
the  matter  assumes  is  estimated  as  only  possible 
by  design,  yet  the  matter  itself,  considered  as  to 
its  nature,  may  also  be  subordinated,  conform¬ 
ably  to  mechanical  laws,  as  means  to  the  repre¬ 
sented  end.  At  the  same  time,  inasmuch  as  the 
basis  of  this  compatibility  lies  in  what  is  neither 
the  one  nor  the  other,  neither  mechanism  nor 
final  nexus,  but  is  the  supersensible  substrate 
of  nature  which  is  shut  out  from  our  view,  for 
our  human  reason  the  two  modes  of  represent¬ 
ing  the  possibility  of  such  objects  are  not  to  be 
fused  into  one.  On  the  contrary,  we  are  unable 
to  estimate  their  possibility  otherwise  than  as 
one  founded  in  accordance  with  the  nexus  of 
final  causes  on  a  supreme  understanding.  Thus 
the  teleological  mode  of  explanation  is  in  no 
way  prejudiced. 

But  now  it  is  an  open  question,  and  for  our 
reason  must  always  remain  an  open  question, 
how  much  the  mechanism  of  nature  contributes 
as  means  to  each  final  design  in  nature.  Further, 
having  regard  to  the  above-mentioned  intelligi¬ 
ble  principle  of  the  possibility  of  a  nature  in 
general,  we  may  even  assume  that  nature  is  pos¬ 
sible  in  all  respects  on  both  kinds  of  law,  the 
physical  laws  and  those  of  final  causes,  as  uni¬ 
versally  consonant  laws,  although  we  are  quite 
unable  to  see  how  this  is  so.  Hence,  we  are  igno¬ 
rant  how  far  the  mechanical  mode  of  explanation 
possible  for  us  may  penetrate.  This  much  only 
is  certain,  that  no  matter  what  progress  we  may 
succeed  in  making  with  it,  it  must  still  always 
remain  inadequate  for  things  that  we  have  once 
recognized  to  be  physical  ends.  Therefore,  by 
the  constitution  of  our  understanding  we  must 


578  THE  CRITIQUE 


subordinate  such  mechanical  grounds,  one  and 
all,  to  a  teleological  principle. 

Now  this  is  the  source  of  a  privilege  and, 
owing  to  the  importance  of  the  study  of  nature 
on  the  lines  of  the  principle  of  mechanism  for 
the  theoretical  employment  of  our  reason,  the 
source  also  of  a  duty.  We  may  and  should  ex¬ 
plain  all  products  and  events  of  nature,  even  the 
most  purposive,  so  far  as  in  our  power  lies,  on 
mechanical  lines — and  it  is  impossible  for  us  to 
assign  the  limits  of  our  powers  when  confined  to 
the  pursuit  of  inquiries  of  this  kind.  But  in  so 
doing  we  must  never  lose  sight  of  the  fact  that 
among  such  products  there  are  those  which  we 
cannot  even  subject  to  investigation  except  un¬ 
der  the  conception  of  an  end  of  reason.  These, 
if  we  respect  the  essential  nature  of  our  reason, 
we  are  obliged,  despite  those  mechanical  causes, 
to  subordinate  in  the  last  resort  to  causality 
according  to  ends.1 

Appendix.  Theory  of  the  Method  of  Ap¬ 
plying  the  Teleological  Judgement 

§  79.  Whether  teleology  must  be  treated  as  a 
branch  of  natural  science 

Every  science  must  have  its  definite  position 
in  the  complete  encyclopedia  of  the  sciences.  If 
it  is  a  philosophical  science,  its  position  must  be 
assigned  to  it  either  in  the  theoretical  or  the 
practical  division.  Further,  if  its  place  is  in  the 
theoretical  division,  then  the  position  assigned 
to  it  must  either  be  in  natural  science — which 
is  its  proper  position  when  it  considers  things 
capable  of  being  objects  of  experience — conse¬ 
quently  in  physics  proper,  psychology,  or  cos¬ 
mology,  or  else  in  theology —  as  the  science  of 
the  original  source  of  the  world  as  complex  of 
all  objects  of  experience. 

Now  the  question  arises:  What  position  does 
teleology  deserve?  Is  it  a  branch  of  natural 
science,  properly  so  called,  or  of  theology?  A 
branch  of  one  or  the  other  it  must  be;  for  no 
science  can  belong  to  the  transition  from  one  to 
the  other,  because  this  only  signifies  the  articu¬ 
lation  or  the  organization  of  the  system  and  not 
a  position  in  it. 

That  it  does  not  form  a  constituent  part  of 
theology,  although  the  use  that  may  there  be 
made  of  it  is  most  important,  is  evident  from 
the  nature  of  the  case.  For  its  objects  are  physi¬ 
cal  generations  and  their  cause;  and,  although 
it  points  to  this  cause  as  a  ground  residing  be¬ 
yond  and  above  nature,  namely  a  Divine  Author, 
yet  it  does  not  do  so  for  the  determinant  judge- 

1  [Cf.  Critique  of  Pure  Reason,  pp.  180-1.] 


ment.  It  only  points  to  this  cause  in  the  interests 
of  the  reflective  judgement  engaged  in  survey¬ 
ing  nature,  its  purpose  being  to  guide  our  esti¬ 
mate  of  the  things  in  the  world  by  means  of  the 
idea  of  such  a  ground,  as  a  regulative  principle, 
in  a  manner  adapted  to  our  human  understand¬ 
ing. 

But  just  as  little  does  it  appear  to  form  a  part 
of  natural  science.  For  this  science  requires  de¬ 
terminant,  and  not  merely  reflective,  principles 
for  the  purpose  of  assigning  objective  grounds 
of  physical  effects.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  also,  the 
theory  of  nature,  or  the  mechanical  explanation 
of  its  phenomena  by  efficient  causes,  is  in  no 
way  helped  by  considering  them  in  the  light  of 
the  correlation  of  ends.  The  exposition  of  the 
ends  pursued  by  nature  in  its  products,  so  far  as 
such  ends  form  a  system  according  to  teleologi¬ 
cal  conceptions,  is  strictly  speaking  only  inci¬ 
dent  to  a  description  of  nature  that  follows  a 
particular  guiding  star.  Here  reason  does  fine 
work,  and  work  that  is  full  of  practical  finality 
from  various  points  of  view.  But  it  gives  no  in¬ 
formation  whatever  as  to  the  origin  and  intrin¬ 
sic  possibility  of  these  forms.  Yet  this  is  what 
specially  concerns  the  theoretical  science  of 
nature. 

Teleology,  therefore,  in  the  form  of  a  science, 
is  not  a  branch  of  doctrine  at  all,  but  only  of 
critique,  and  of  the  critique  of  a  particular  cog¬ 
nitive  faculty,  namely  judgement.  But  it  does 
contain  a  priori  principles,  and  to  that  extent  it 
may,  and  in  fact  must,  specify  the  method  by 
which  nature  has  to  be  judged  according  to  the 
principle  of  final  causes.  In  this  way,  the  science 
of  its  methodical  application  exerts  at  least  a 
negative  influence  upon  the  procedure  to  be 
adopted  in  the  theoretical  science  of  nature.  It 
also  in  the  same  way  affects  the  metaphysical 
bearing  which  this  science  may  have  on  theol¬ 
ogy,  when  the  former  is  treated  as  a  propaedeu¬ 
tic  to  the  latter. 

§  80.  The  necessary  subordination  of  the  prin¬ 
ciple  of  mechanism  to  the  teleological  prin¬ 
ciple  in  the  explanation  of  a  thing  regarded 

as  a  physical  end 

Our  right  to  aim  at  an  explanation  of  all 
natural  products  on  simply  mechanical  lines  is 
in  itself  quite  unrestricted.  But  the  constitution 
of  our  understanding,  as  engaged  upon  things  in 
the  shape  of  physical  ends,  is  such  that  our 
power  of  meeting  all  demands  from  the  unaided 
resources  of  mechanical  explanation  is  not  alone 
very  limited,  but  is  also  circumscribed  within 
clearly  marked  bounds.  For  by  a  principle  of 


OF  TELEOLOGICAL  JUDGEMENT 


judgement  that  adopts  the  above  procedure 
alone  nothing  whatever  can  be  accomplished  in 
the  way  of  explaining  physical  ends.  For  this 
reason  our  estimate  of  such  products  must  at 
all  times  be  subordinated  to  a  concurrent  tele¬ 
ological  principle. 

Hence  there  is  reason,  and  indeed  merit,  in 
pursuing  the  mechanism  of  nature  for  the  pur¬ 
pose  of  explaining  natural  products  so  far  as 
this  can  be  done  with  probable  success,  and  in 
fact  never  abandoning  this  attempt  on  the 
ground  that  it  is  intrinsically  impossible  to  en¬ 
counter  the  finality  of  nature  along  this  road, 
but  only  on  the  ground  that  it  is  impossible  for 
us  as  men.  For  in  order  to  get  home  along  this 
line  of  investigation  we  should  require  an  intui¬ 
tion  different  from  our  sensuous  intuition  and  a 
determinate  knowledge  of  the  intelligible  sub¬ 
strate  of  nature — a  substrate  from  which  we 
could  show  the  reason  of  the  very  mechanism 
of  phenomena  in  their  particular  laws.  But  this 
wholly  surpasses  our  capacity. 

So  where  it  is  established  beyond  question 
that  the  conception  of  a  physical  end  applies  to 
things,  as  in  the  case  of  organized  beings,  if  the 
naturalist  is  not  to  throw  his  labour  away,  he 
must  always,  in  forming  an  estimate  of  them, 
accept  some  original  organization  or  other  as 
fundamental.  He  must  consider  that  this  or¬ 
ganization  avails  itself  of  the  very  mechanism 
above  mentioned  for  the  purpose  of  producing 
other  organic  forms,  or  for  evolving  new  struc¬ 
tures  from  those  given — such  new  structures, 
however,  always  issuing  from  and  in  accordance 
with  the  end  in  question. 

It  is  praiseworthy  to  employ  a  comparative 
anatomy  and  go  through  the  vast  creation  of 
organized  beings  in  order  to  see  if  there  is  not 
discoverable  in  it  some  trace  of  a  system,  and 
indeed  of  a  system  following  a  genetic  princi¬ 
ple.1  For  otherwise  we  should  be  obliged  to  con¬ 
tent  ourselves  with  the  mere  critical  principle — 
which  tells  us  nothing  that  gives  any  insight  into 
the  production  of  such  beings — and  to  abandon 
in  despair  all  claim  to  insight  into  nature  in  this 
field.  When  we  consider  the  agreement  of  so 
many  genera  of  animals  in  a  certain  common 
schema,  which  apparently  underlies  not  only 
the  structure  of  their  bones,  but  also  the  dis¬ 
position  of  their  remaining  parts,  and  when  we 
find  here  the  wonderful  simplicity  of  the  origi¬ 
nal  plan,  which  has  been  able  to  produce  such 
an  immense  variety  of  species  by  the  shortening 
of  one  member  and  the  lengthening  of  another, 
by  the  involution  of  this  part  and  the  evolution 

1  [Cf.  p.  S55-] 


579 

of  that,  there  gleams  upon  the  mind  a  ray  of 
hope,  however  faint,  that  the  principle  of  the 
mechanism  of  nature,  apart  from  which  there 
can  be  no  natural  science  at  all,  may  yet  enable 
us  to  arrive  at  some  explanation  in  the  case  of 
organic  life.  This  analogy  of  forms,  which  in  all 
their  differences  seem  to  be  produced  in  accord¬ 
ance  with  a  common  type,  strengthens  the  sus¬ 
picion  that  they  have  an  actual  kinship  due  to 
descent  from  a  common  parent.  This  we  might 
trace  in  the  gradual  approximation  of  one  ani¬ 
mal  species  to  another,  from  that  in  which  the 
principle  of  ends  seems  best  authenticated, 
namely  from  man,  back  to  the  polyp,  and  from 
this  back  even  to  mosses  and  lichens,  and  finally 
to  the  lowest  perceivable  stage  of  nature.  Here 
we  come  to  crude  matter;  and  from  this,  and 
the  forces  which  it  exerts  in  accordance  with 
mechanical  laws  (laws  resembling  those  by 
which  it  acts  in  the  formation  of  crystals)2 
seems  to  be  developed  the  whole  technic  of  na¬ 
ture,  which,  in  the  case  of  organized  beings,  is 
so  incomprehensible  to  us  that  we  feel  obliged 
to  imagine  a  different  principle  for  its  explana¬ 
tion. 

Here  the  archaeologist  of  nature  is  at  liberty 
to  go  back  to  the  traces  that  remain  of  nature’s 
earliest  revolutions,  and,  appealing  to  all  he 
knows  of  or  can  conjecture  about  its  mecha¬ 
nism,  to  trace  the  genesis  of  that  great  family  of 
living  things  (for  it  must  be  pictured  as  a  fam¬ 
ily  if  there  is  to  be  any  foundation  for  the  con¬ 
sistently  coherent  affinity  mentioned).  He  can 
suppose  that  the  womb  of  mother  earth  as  it 
first  emerged,  like  a  huge  animal,  from  its  cha¬ 
otic  state,  gave  birth  to  creatures  whose  form 
displayed  less  finality,  and  that  these  again  bore 
others  which  adapted  themselves  more  perfectly 
to  their  native  surroundings  and  their  relations 
to  each  other,  until  this  womb,  becoming  rigid 
and  ossified,  restricted  its  birth  to  definite  spe¬ 
cies  incapable  of  further  modification,  and  the 
multiplicity  of  forms  was  fixed  as  it  stood  when 
the  operation  of  that  fruitful  formative  power 
had  ceased.  Yet,  for  all  that,  he  is  obliged  even¬ 
tually  to  attribute  to  this  universal  mother  an 
organization  suitably  constituted  with  a  view  to 
all  these  forms  of  life,  for  unless  he  does  so,  the 
possibility  of  the  final  form  of  the  products  of 
the  animal  and  plant  kingdoms  is  quite  unthink¬ 
able.3  But  when  he  does  attribute  all  this  to 

2  [Cf.  p.  545,  above.] 

3  An  hypothesis  of  this  kind  may  be  called  a  daring 
venture  on  the  part  of  reason;  and  there  are  probably 
few  even  among  the  most  acute  scientists  to  whose  minds 
it  has  not  sometimes  occurred.  For  it  cannot  be  said  to 
be  absurd,  like  the  generatio  aequivoca,  which  means 
the  generation  of  an  organized  being  from  crude  inor- 


THE  CRITIQUE 


natuie,  he  has  only  pushed  the  explanation  a 
stage  farther  back.  He  cannot  pretend  to  have 
made  the  genesis  of  those  two  kingdoms  intel¬ 
ligible  independently  of  the  condition  of  final 
causes. 

Even  as  regards  the  alteration  which  certain 
individuals  of  the  organized  genera  contingently 
undergo,  where  we  find  that  the  character  thus 
altered  is  transmitted  and  taken  up  into  the 
generative  power,  we  can  form  no  other  plausi¬ 
ble  estimate  of  it  than  that  it  is  an  occasional 
development  of  a  purposive  capacity  originally 
present  in  the  species  with  a  view  to  the  preser¬ 
vation  of  the  race.  For  in  the  complete  inner 
finality  of  an  organized  being,  the  generation  of 
its  like  is  intimately  associated  with  the  condi¬ 
tion  that  nothing  shall  be  taken  up  into  the 
generative  force  which  does  not  also  belong,  in 
such  a  system  of  ends,  to  one  of  its  undeveloped 
native  capacities.  Once  we  depart  from  this  prin¬ 
ciple  we  cannot  know  with  certainty  whether 
many  constituents  of  the  form  at  present  found 
in  a  species  may  not  be  of  equally  contingent 
and  purposeless  origin,  and  the  principle  of  tele¬ 
ology,  that  nothing  in  an  organized  being  which 
is  preserved  in  the  propagation  of  the  species 
should  be  estimated  as  devoid  of  finality,  would 
be  made  very  unreliable  and  could  only  hold 
good  for  the  parent  stock,  to  which  our  knowl¬ 
edge  does  not  go  back. 

In  reply  to  those  who  feel  obliged  to  adopt  a 
teleological  principle  of  critical  judgement,  that 
is,  an  architectonic  understanding  in  the  case  of 
all  such  physical  ends,  Hume  raises  the  objec¬ 
tion  that  one  might  ask  with  equal  justice  how 
such  an  understanding  is  itself  possible.  By  this 
he  means  that  one  may  also  ask  how  it  is  possi¬ 
ble  that  there  should  be  such  a  teleological  co¬ 
incidence  in  one  being  of  the  manifold  faculties 
and  properties  presupposed  in  the  very  concep¬ 
tion  of  an  understanding  possessing  at  once  in- 


ganic  matter.  It  never  ceases  to  be  generatio  univoca 
in  the  widest  acceptation  of  the  word,  as  it  only  implies 
the  generation  of  something  organic  from  something 
else  that  is  also  organic,  although,  within  the  class  of 
organic  beings,  differing  specifically  from  it.  It  would 
be  as  if  we  supposed  that  certain  water  animals  trans¬ 
formed  themselves  by  degrees  into  marsh  animals,  and 
from  these  after  some  generations  into  land  animals.  In 
the  judgement  of  plain  reason  there  is  nothing  a  priori 
self-contradictory  in  this.  But  experience  offers  no  ex¬ 
ample  of  it.  On  the  contrary,  as  far  as  experience  goes, 
all  generation  known  to  us  is  generatio  homonyma .  It 
is  not  merely  univoca  in  contradistinction  to  generation 
from  an  unorganized  substance,  but  it  brings  forth  a 
product  which  in  its  very  organization  is  of  like  kind 
with  that  which  produced  it,  and  a  generatio  heterony- 
ma  is  not  met  with  anywhere  within  the  range  of  our 
experience. 


tellectual  and  executive  capacity.  But  there  is 
nothing  in  this  point.  For  the  whole  difficulty 
that  besets  the  question  as  to  the  genesis  of  a 
thing  that  involves  ends  and  that  is  solely  com¬ 
prehensible  by  their  means  rests  upon  the  de¬ 
mand  for  unity  in  the  source  of  the  synthesis  of 
the  multiplicity  of  externally  existing  elements 
in  this  product.  For,  if  this  source  is  laid  in  the 
understanding  of  a  productive  cause  regarded 
as  a  simple  substance,  the  above  question,  as  a 
teleological  problem,  is  abundantly  answered, 
whereas  if  the  cause  is  merely  sought  in  matter, 
as  an  aggregate  of  many  externally  existing  sub¬ 
stances,  the  unity  of  principle  requisite  for  the 
intrinsically  final  form  of  its  complex  structures 
is  wholly  absent.  The  autocracy  of  matter  in 
productions,  that  by  our  understanding  are 
only  conceivable  as  ends,  is  a  word  with  no 
meaning. 

This  is  the  reason  why  those  who  look  for  a 
supreme  ground  of  the  possibility  of  the  objec¬ 
tively  final  forms  of  matter,  and  yet  do  not 
concede  an  understanding  to  this  ground,  choose 
nevertheless  to  make  the  world-whole  either  an 
all-embracing  substance  (Pantheism),  or  else — 
what  is  only  the  preceding  in  more  defined  form 
— a  complex  of  many  determinations  inhering 
in  a  single  simple  substance  (Spinozism).  Their 
object  is  to  derive  from  this  substance  that  unity 
of  source  which  all  finality  presupposes.  And  in 
fact,  thanks  to  their  purely  ontological  concep¬ 
tion  of  a  simple  substance,  they  really  do  some¬ 
thing  to  satisfy  one  condition  of  the  problem — 
namely,  that  of  the  unity  implied  in  the  refer¬ 
ence  to  an  end.  But  they  have  nothing  to  say  on 
the  subject  of  the  other  condition,  namely  the 
relation  of  the  substance  to  its  consequence  re¬ 
garded  as  an  end,  this  relation  being  what  gives 
to  their  ontological  ground  the  more  precise 
determination  which  the  problem  demands.  The 
result  is  that  they  in  no  way  answer  the  entire 
problem.  Also  for  our  understanding  it  remains 
absolutely  unanswerable  except  on  the  follow¬ 
ing  terms.  First,  the  original  source  of  things 
must  be  pictured  by  us  as  a  simple  substance. 
Then  its  attribute,  as  simple  substance,  in  its 
relation  to  the  specific  character  of  the  natural 
forms  whose  source  it  is — the  character,  namely, 
of  final  unity — must  be  pictured  as  the  attribute 
of  an  intelligent  substance.  Lastly,  the  re¬ 
lation  of  this  intelligent  substance  to  the  natural 
forms  must,  owing  to  the  contingency  which 
we  find  in  everything  which  we  imagine  to  be 
possible  only  as  an  end,  be  pictured  as  one 
of  causality. 


OF  TELEOLOGICAL  JUDGEMENT  581 


§81.  The  association  of  mechanism  with  the 
teleological  principle  which  we  apply  to  the 
explanation  of  a  physical  end  considered  as 
a  product  of  nature 

We  have  seen  from  the  preceding  section1 
that  the  mechanism  of  nature  is  not  sufficient 
to  enable  us  to  conceive  the  possibility  of  an 
organized  being,  but  that  in  its  root  origin  it 
must  be  subordinated  to  a  cause  acting  by  de¬ 
sign — or,  at  least,  that  the  type  of  our  cognitive 
faculty  is  such  that  we  must  conceive  it  to  be 
so  subordinated.  But  just  as  little  can  the  mere 
teleological  source  of  a  being  of  this  kind  en¬ 
able  us  to  consider  and  to  estimate  it  as  at  once 
an  end  and  a  product  of  nature.  With  that  tele¬ 
ological  source  we  must  further  associate  the 
mechanism  of  nature  as  a  sort  of  instrument  of 
a  cause  acting  by  design  and  contemplating  an 
end  to  which  nature  is  subordinated  even  in  its 
mechanical  laws.  The  possibility  of  such  a  union 
of  two  completely  different  types  of  causality, 
namely,  that  of  nature  in  its  universal  conform¬ 
ity  to  law  and  that  of  an  idea  which  restricts 
nature  to  a  particular  form  of  which  nature,  as 
nature,  is  in  no  way  the  source,  is  something 
which  our  reason  does  not  comprehend.  For  it 
resides  in  the  supersensible  substrate  of  nature, 
of  which  we  are  unable  to  make  any  definite 
affirmation,  further  than  that  it  is  the  self-sub- 
sistent  being  of  which  we  know  merely  the 
phenomenon.  Yet,  for  all  that,  this  principle 
remains  in  full  and  undiminished  force,  that 
everything  which  we  assume  to  form  part  of 
phenomenal  nature  and  to  be  its  product  must 
be  thought  as  linked  with  nature  on  mechanical 
laws.  For,  apart  from  this  type  of  causality,  or¬ 
ganized  beings,  although  they  are  ends  of  na¬ 
ture,  would  not  be  natural  products. 

Now  supposing  we  adopt  the  teleological 
principle  of  the  production  of  organized  beings, 
as  indeed  we  cannot  avoid  doing,  we  may  base 
their  internally  final  form  either  on  the  occa¬ 
sionalism  or  on  the  pre-establishment  of  the 
cause.  According  to  occasionalism,  the  Supreme 
Cause  of  the  world  would  directly  supply  the 
organic  formation,  stamped  with  the  impress  of 
His  idea,  on  the  occasion  of  each  impregnation, 
to  the  commingling  substances  united  in  the 
generative  process.  On  the  system  of  pre-estab¬ 
lishment,  the  Supreme  Cause  would  only  endow 
the  original  products  of  His  wisdom  with  the 
inherent  capacity  by  means  of  which  an  organ¬ 
ized  being  produces  another  after  its  own  kind, 
and  the  species  preserves  its  continuous  exist- 
1  [Cf.  pp.  579,  580.] 


ence,  whilst  the  loss  of  individuals  is  ever  being 
repaired  through  the  agency  of  a  nature  that 
concurrently  labours  towards  their  destruction. 
If  the  occasionalism  of  the  production  of  or¬ 
ganized  beings  is  assumed,  all  co-operation  of 
nature  in  the  process  is  entirely  lost,  and  no 
room  is  left  for  the  exercise  of  reason  in  judging 
of  the  possibility  of  products  of  this  kind.  So  we 
may  take  it  for  granted  that  no  one  will  embrace 
this  system  who  cares  anything  for  philosophy. 

Again  the  system  of  pre-establishment  may 
take  either  of  two  forms.  Thus  it  treats  every 
organized  being  produced  from  one  of  its  own 
kind  either  as  its  educt  or  as  its  product.  The 
system  which  regards  the  generations  as  educts 
is  termed  that  of  individual  pre formation,  or, 
sometimes,  the  theory  of  evolution;  that  which 
regards  them  as  products  is  called  the  system  of 
epigenesis.  The  latter  may  also  be  called  the 
system  of  generic  preformation ,  inasmuch  as  it 
regards  the  productive  capacity  of  the  parents, 
in  respect  of  the  inner  final  tendency  that  would 
be  part  of  their  original  stock,  and,  therefore, 
the  specific  form,  as  still  having  been  virtualiter 
preformed.  On  this  statement  the  opposite 
theory  of  individual  preformation  might  also 
more  appropriately  be  called  the  theory  of  in¬ 
volution  (or  encasement) . 

The  advocates  of  the  theory  of  evolution  ex¬ 
clude  all  individuals  from  the  formative  force 
of  nature,  for  the  purpose  of  deriving  them 
directly  from  the  hand  of  the  Creator.  Yet  they 
would  not  venture  to  describe  the  occurrence 
on  the  lines  of  the  hypothesis  of  occasionalism, 
so  as  to  make  the  impregnation  an  idle  formal¬ 
ity,  which  takes  place  whenever  a  supreme  in¬ 
telligent  Cause  of  the  world  has  made  up  His 
mind  to  form  a  foetus  directly  with  His  own 
hand  and  relegate  to  the  mother  the  mere  task 
of  developing  and  nourishing  it.  They  would 
avow  adherence  to  the  theory  of  preformation; 
as  if  it  were  not  a  matter  of  indifference 
whether  a  supernatural  origin  of  such  forms  is 
allowed  to  take  place  at  the  start  or  in  the 
course  of  the  world-process.  They  fail  to  see 
that,  in  fact,  a  whole  host  of  supernatural  con¬ 
trivances  would  be  spared  by  acts  of  creation  as 
occasion  arose,  which  would  be  required  if  an 
embryo  formed  at  the  beginning  of  the  world 
had  to  be  preserved  from  the  destructive  forces 
of  nature,  and  had  to  keep  safe  and  sound  all 
through  the  long  ages  till  the  day  arrived  for 
its  development,  and  also  that  an  incalculably 
greater  number  of  such  preformed  entities 
would  be  created  than  would  be  destined  ever  to 


THE  CRITIQUE 


develop,  and  that  all  those  would  be  so  many 
creations  thus  rendered  superfluous  and  in  vain. 
Yet  they  would  like  to  leave  nature  some  role 
in  these  operations,  so  as  not  to  lapse  into  un¬ 
mitigated  hyperphysic  that  can  dispense  with  all 
explanation  on  naturalistic  lines.  Of  course  they 
would  still  remain  unshaken  in  their  hyper¬ 
physic;  so  much  so  that  they  would  discover 
even  in  abortions— which  yet  cannot  possibly 
be  deemed  ends  of  nature — a  marvellous  final¬ 
ity,  be  it  even  directed  to  no  better  purpose 
than  that  of  being  a  meaningless  finality  in¬ 
tended  to  set  some  chance  anatomist  at  his 
wit’s  end  and  make  him  fall  on  his  knees  with 
admiration.  However,  they  would  be  absolutely 
unable  to  make  the  generation  of  hybrids  fit  in 
with  the  system  of  preformation,  but  would  be 
compelled  to  allow  to  the  seed  of  the  male  crea¬ 
ture,  to  which  in  other  cases  they  had  denied  all 
but  the  mechanical  property  of  serving  as  the 
first  means  of  nourishment  for  the  embryo,  a 
further  and  additional  formative  force  directed 
to  ends.  And  yet  they  would  not  concede  this 
force  to  either  of  the  two  parents  when  dealing 
with  the  complete  product  of  two  creatures  of 
the  same  genus. 

As  against  this,  even  supposing  we  failed  to 
see  the  enormous  advantage  on  the  side  of  the 
advocate  of  epigenesis  in  the  matter  of  empiri¬ 
cal  evidences  in  support  of  his  theory,  still  rea¬ 
son  would  antecedently  be  strongly  prepossessed 
in  favour  of  his  line  of  explanation.  For  as  re¬ 
gards  things  the  possibility  of  whose  origin  can 
only  be  represented  to  the  mind  according  to  a 
causality  of  ends,  epigenesis  none  the  less  re¬ 
gards  nature  as  at  least  itself  productive  in  re¬ 
spect  of  the  continuation  of  the  process,  and  not 
as  merely  unravelling  something.  Thus,  with 
the  least  possible  expenditure  of  the  supernatu¬ 
ral,  it  entrusts  to  nature  the  explanation  of  all 
steps  subsequent  to  the  original  beginning.  But 
it  refrains  from  determining  anything  as  to  this 
original  beginning,  which  is  what  baffles  all  the 
attempts  of  physics,  no  matter  what  chain  of 
causes  it  adopts. 

No  one  has  rendered  more  valuable  services 
in  connection  with  this  theory  of  epigenesis  than 
Herr  Hofr.  Blumenbach.  This  is  as  true  of  what 
he  has  done  towards  establishing  the  correct 
principles  of  its  application — partly  by  setting 
due  bounds  to  an  over  liberal  employment  of  it 
— as  it  is  of  his  contributions  to  its  proof.  He 
makes  organic  substance  the  starting-point  for 
physical  explanation  of  these  formations.  For  to 
suppose  that  crude  matter,  obeying  mechanical 
laws,  was  originally  its  own  architect,  that  life 


could  have  sprung  up  from  the  nature  of  what 
is  void  of  life,  and  matter  have  spontaneously 
adopted  the  form  of  a  self-maintaining  finality, 
he  justly  declares  to  be  contrary  to  reason.  But, 
at  the  same  time,  he  leaves  to  the  mechanism 
of  nature,  in  its  subordination  to  this  inscru¬ 
table  principle  of  a  primordial  organization ,  an 
indeterminable  yet  also  unmistakable  function. 
The  capacity  of  matter  here  required  he  terms 
— in  contradistinction  to  the  simply  mechanical 
formative  force  universally  residing  in  it — in 
the  case  of  an  organized  body  a  formative  im¬ 
pulse ,  standing,  so  to  speak,  under  the  higher 
guidance  and  direction  of  the  above  principle. 

§  82.  The  teleological  system  in  the  extrinsic 
relations  of  organisms 

By  extrinsic  finality  I  mean  the  finality  that 
exists  where  one  things  in  nature  subserves  an¬ 
other  as  means  to  an  end.  Now  even  things  which 
do  not  possess  any  intrinsic  finality,  and  whose 
possibility  does  not  imply  any,  such  as  earth, 
air,  water,  and  the  like,  may  nevertheless  extrin- 
sically,  that  is,  in  relation  to  other  beings,  be 
very  well  adapted  to  ends.  But  then  those  other 
beings  must  in  all  cases  be  organized,  that  is,  be 
physical  ends,  for  unless  they  are  ends  the  for¬ 
mer  could  not  be  considered  means.  Thus  water, 
air,  and  earth  cannot  be  regarded  as  means  to 
the  upgrowth  of  mountains.  For  intrinsically 
there  is  nothing  in  mountains  that  calls  for  a 
source  of  their  possibility  according  to  ends. 
Hence  their  cause  can  never  be  referred  to  such 
a  source  and  represented  under  the  predicate  of 
a  means  subservient  thereto. 

Extrinsic  finality  is  an  entirely  different  con¬ 
ception  from  that  of  intrinsic  finality,  the  latter 
being  connected  with  the  possibility  of  an  ob¬ 
ject  irrespective  of  whether  its  actuality  is  itself 
an  end  or  not.  In  the  case  of  an  organism  we 
may  further  inquire:  For  what  end  does  it  exist? 
But  we  can  hardly  do  so  in  the  case  of  things 
in  which  we  recognize  the  simple  effect  of  the 
mechanism  of  nature.  The  reason  is  that  in  the 
case  of  organisms  we  have  already  pictured  to 
ourselves  a  causality  according  to  ends — a  crea¬ 
tive  understanding — to  account  for  their  intrin¬ 
sic  finality,  and  have  referred  this  active  faculty 
to  its  determining  ground,  the  design.  One  ex¬ 
trinsic  finality  is  the  single  exception — and  it  is 
one  intimately  bound  up  with  the  intrinsic  final¬ 
ity  of  an  organization.  It  does  not  leave  open 
the  question  as  to  the  ulterior  end  for  which  the 
nature  so  organized  must  have  existed,  and  yet 
it  lies  in  the  extrinsic  relation  of  a  means  to  an 
end.  This  is  the  organization  of  the  two  sexes  in 


OF  TELEOLOGICAL  JUDGEMENT 


their  mutual  relation  with  a  view  to  the  propa¬ 
gation  of  their  species.  For  here  we  may  always 
ask,  just  as  in  the  case  of  an  individual:  Why 
was  it  necessary  for  such  a  pair  to  exist?  The 
answer  is:  In  this  pair  we  have  what  first  forms 
an  organizing  whole,  though  not  an  organized 
whole  in  a  single  body. 

Now  when  it  is  asked  to  what  end  a  thing 
exists,  the  answer  may  take  one  or  other  of  two 
forms.  It  may  be  said  that  its  existence  and 
generation  have  no  relation  whatever  to  a  cause 
acting  designedly.  Its  origin  is  then  always  un¬ 
derstood  to  be  derived  from  the  mechanism  of 
nature.  Or  it  may  be  said  that  its  existence,  be¬ 
ing  that  of  a  contingent  natural  entity,  has  some 
ground  or  other  involving  design.  And  this  is  a 
thought  which  it  is  difficult  for  us  to  separate 
from  the  conception  of  a  thing  that  is  organized. 
For  inasmuch  as  we  are  compelled  to  rest  its  in¬ 
trinsic  possibility  on  the  causality  of  final 
causes  and  an  idea  underlying  this  causality,  we 
cannot  but  think  that  the  real  existence  of  this 
product  is  also  an  end.  For  where  the  represen¬ 
tation  of  an  effect  is  at  the  same  time  the  ground 
determining  an  intelligent  efficient  cause  to  its 
production,  the  effect  so  represented  is  termed 
an  end .  Here,  therefore,  we  may  either  say  that 
the  end  of  the  real  existence  of  a  natural  being 
of  this  kind  is  inherent  in  itself,  that  is,  that  it 
is  not  merely  an  end,  but  also  a  final  end;  or  we 
may  say  that  the  final  end  lies  outside  it  in 
other  natural  beings,  that  is,  that  its  real  exist¬ 
ence,  which  is  adapted  to  ends,  is  not  itself  a 
final  end,  but  is  necessitated  by  its  being  at  the 
same  time  a  means. 

But,  if  we  go  through  the  whole  of  nature,  we 
do  not  find  in  it,  as  nature,  any  being  capable  of 
laying  claim  to  the  distinction  of  being  the  final 
end  of  creation.  In  fact  it  may  even  be  proved 
a  priori  that  what  might  do  perhaps  as  an  ulti¬ 
mate  end  for  nature,  endowing  it  with  any  con¬ 
ceivable  qualities  or  properties  we  choose,  could 
nevertheless  in  its  character  of  a  natural  thing 
never  be  a  final  end. 

Looking  to  the  vegetable  kingdom,  we  might 
at  first  be  induced  by  the  boundless  fertility 
with  which  it  spreads  itself  abroad  upon  almost 
every  soil  to  think  that  it  should  be  regarded  as 
a  mere  product  of  the  mechanism  which  nature 
displays  in  its  formations  in  the  mineral  king¬ 
dom.  But  a  more  intimate  knowledge  of  its  in¬ 
describably  wise  organization  precludes  us  from 
entertaining  this  view,  and  drives  us  to  ask: 
For  what  purpose  do  these  forms  of  life  exist? 
Suppose  we  reply:  For  the  animal  kingdom, 
which  is  thus  provided  with  the  means  of  sus- 


533 

tenance,  so  that  it  has  been  enabled  to  spread 
over  the  face  of  the  earth  in  such  a  manifold 
variety  of  genera.  The  question  again  arises: 
For  what  purpose  then  do  these  herbivora  exist? 
The  answer  would  be  something  like  this:  For 
the  carnivora,  which  are  only  able  to  live  on 
what  itself  has  animal  life.  At  last  we  get  down 
to  the  question:  What  is  the  end  and  purpose  of 
these  and  all  the  preceding  natural  kingdoms? 
For  man,  we  say,  and  the  multifarious  uses  to 
which  his  intelligence  teaches  him  to  put  all 
these  forms  of  life.  He  is  the  ultimate  end  of 
creation  here  upon  earth,  because  he  is  the  one 
and  only  being  upon  it  that  is  able  to  form  a 
conception  of  ends  and,  from  an  aggregate  of 
things  purposively  fashioned,  to  construct  by 
the  aid  of  his  reason  a  system  of  ends. 

We  might  also  follow  the  chevalier  Linne  and 
take  the  seemingly  opposite  course.  Thus  we 
might  say:  The  herbivorous  animals  exist  for  the 
purpose  of  checking  the  profuse  growth  of  the 
vegetable  kingdom  by  which  many  species  of 
that  kingdom  would  be  choked;  the  carnivora 
for  the  purpose  of  setting  bounds  to  the  vorac¬ 
ity  of  the  herbivora;  and  finally  man  exists  so 
that  by  pursuing  the  latter  and  reducing  their 
numbers  a  certain  equilibrium  between  the  pro¬ 
ductive  and  destructive  forces  of  nature  may  be 
established.  So,  on  this  view,  however  much 
man  might  in  a  certain  relation  be  esteemed  as 
end,  in  a  different  relation  he  would  in  turn  only 
rank  as  a  means. 

If  we  adopt  the  principle  of  an  objective 
finality  in  the  manifold  variety  of  the  specific 
forms  of  terrestrial  life  and  in  their  extrinsic 
relations  to  one  another  as  beings  with  a  struc¬ 
ture  adapted  to  ends,  it  is  only  rational  to  go  on 
and  imagine  that  in  this  extrinsic  relation  there 
is  also  a  certain  organization  and  a  system  of 
the  whole  kingdom  of  nature  following  final 
causes.  But  experience  seems  here  to  give  the  lie 
to  the  maxim  of  reason,  more  especially  as  re¬ 
gards  an  ultimate  end  of  nature — an  end  which 
nevertheless  is  necessary  to  the  possibility  of 
such  a  system,  and  which  we  can  only  place  in 
man.  For,  so  far  from  making  man,  regarded  as 
one  of  the  many  animal  species,  an  ultimate 
end,  nature  has  no  more  exempted  him  from  its 
destructive  than  from  its  productive  forces,  nor 
has  it  made  the  smallest  exception  to  its  sub¬ 
jection  of  everything  to  a  mechanism  of  forces 
devoid  of  an  end. 

The  first  thing  that  would  have  to  be  ex¬ 
pressly  appointed  in  a  system  ordered  with  a 
view  to  a  final  whole  of  natural  beings  upon  the 
earth  would  be  their  habitat — the  soil  or  the 


THE  CRITIQUE 


element  upon  or  in  which  they  are  intended  to 
thrive.  But  a  more  intimate  knowledge  of  the 
nature  of  this  basal  condition  of  all  organic  pro¬ 
duction  shows  no  trace  of  any  causes  but  those 
acting  altogether  without  design,  and  in  fact 
tending  towards  destruction  rather  than  calcu¬ 
lated  to  promote  genesis  of  forms,  order,  and 
ends.  Land  and  seat  not  alone  contain  memo¬ 
rials  of  mighty  primeval  disasters  that  have 
overtaken  both  them  and  all  their  brood  of  liv¬ 
ing  forms,  but  their  entire  structure — the  strata 
of  the  land  and  the  coast  lines  of  the  sea — has 
all  the  appearance  of  being  the  outcome  of  the 
wild  and  all-subduing  forces  of  a  nature  work¬ 
ing  in  a  state  of  chaos.  However  wisely  the  con¬ 
figuration,  elevation  and  slope  of  the  land  may 
now  seem  to  be  adapted  for  the  reception  of 
water  from  the  air,  for  the  subterranean  chan¬ 
nels  of  the  springs  that  well  up  between  the 
diverse  layers  of  earth  (suitable  for  various 
products),  and  for  the  course  of  the  rivers,  yet 
a  closer  investigation  of  them  shows  that  they 
have  resulted  simply  as  the  effect  partly  of  vol¬ 
canic  eruptions,  partly  of  floods,  or  even  of  in¬ 
vasions  of  the  ocean.  And  this  is  not  alone  true 
as  regards  the  genesis  of  this  configuration,  but 
more  particularly  of  its  subsequent  transforma¬ 
tion,  attended  with  the  disappearance  of  its 
primitive  organic  productions.1  If  now  the 
abode  for  all  these  forms  of  life — the  lap  of  the 
land  and  the  bosom  of  the  deep — points  to  none 
but  a  wholly  undesigned  mechanical  generation, 
how  can  we,  or  what  right  have  we  to  ask  for  or 
to  maintain  a  different  origin  for  these  latter 
products?  And  even  if  man,  as  the  most  minute 
examination  of  the  remains  of  those  devasta¬ 
tions  of  nature  seems,  in  Camper’s  judgement, 
to  prove,  was  not  comprehended  in  such  revolu¬ 
tions,  yet  his  dependence  upon  the  remaining 
forms  of  terrestrial  life  is  such  that,  if  a  mecha¬ 
nism  of  nature  whose  power  overrides  these 
others  is  admitted,  he  must  be  regarded  as  in¬ 
cluded  within  its  scope,  although  his  intelli¬ 
gence,  to  a  large  extent  at  least,  has  been  able 

1  If  the  name  of  natural  history,  now  that  it  has  once 
been  adopted,  is  to  continue  to  be  used  for  the  descrip¬ 
tion  of  nature,  we  may  give  the  name  of  archaeology  of 
nature ,  as  contrasted  with  art,  to  that  which  the  former 
literally  indicates,  namely  an  account  of  the  bygone 
or  ancient  state  of  the  earth — a  matter  on  which,  though 
we  dare  not  hope  for  any  certainty,  we  have  good 
ground  for  conjecture.  Fossil  remains  would  be  objects 
for  the  archaeology  of  nature,  just  as  rudely  cut  stones, 
and  things  of  that  kind,  would  be  for  the  archaeology 
of  art.  For,  as  work  is  actually  being  done  in  this  depart¬ 
ment,  under  the  name  of  a  theory  of  the  earth ,  steadily 
though,  as  we  might  expect,  slowly,  this  name  would  not 
be  given  to  a  purely  imaginary  study  of  nature,  but  to 
one  to  which  nature  itself  invites  and  summons  us. 


to  save  him  from  its  work  of  destruction. 

But  this  argument  seems  to  go  beyond  what 
it  was  directed  to  prove.  For  it  would  seem  to 
show  not  merely  that  man  could  not  be  an  ulti¬ 
mate  end  of  nature  or,  for  the  same  reason,  the 
aggregate  of  the  organized  things  of  terrestrial 
nature  be  a  system  of  ends,  but  that  even  the 
products  of  nature  previously  deemed  to  be 
physical  ends  could  have  no  other  origin  than 
the  mechanism  of  nature. 

But,  then,  we  must  bear  in  mind  the  results 
of  the  solution  above  given  of  the  antinomy  of 
the  principles  of  the  mechanical  and  teleologi¬ 
cal  generation  of  organic  natural  beings.  These 
principles,  as  we  there  saw,  are  merely  princi¬ 
ples  of  reflective  judgement  in  respect  of  forma¬ 
tive  nature  and  its  particular  laws,  the  key  to 
whose  systematic  correlation  is  not  in  our  pos¬ 
session.  They  tell  us  nothing  definite  as  to  the 
origin  of  the  things  in  their  own  intrinsic  na¬ 
ture.  They  only  assert  that  by  the  constitution 
of  our  understanding  and  our  reason  we  are 
unable  to  conceive  the  origin  in  the  case  of 
beings  of  this  kind  otherwise  than  in  the  light 
of  final  causes.  The  utmost  persistence  possible, 
nay  even  a  boldness,  is  allowed  us  in  our  en¬ 
deavours  to  explain  them  on  mechanical  lines. 
More  than  that,  we  are  even  summoned  by  rea¬ 
son  to  do  so,  albeit  we  know  we  can  never  get 
home  with  such  an  explanation — not  because 
there  is  an  inherent  inconsistency  between  the 
mechanical  generation  and  an  origin  according 
to  ends,  but  for  subjective  reasons  involved  in 
the  particular  type  and  limitations  of  our  un¬ 
derstanding.  Lastly,  we  saw  that  the  reconcili¬ 
ation  of  the  two  modes  of  picturing  the  possi¬ 
bility  of  nature  might  easily  lie  in  the  super¬ 
sensible  principle  of  nature,  both  external  and 
internal.  For  the  mode  of  representation  based 
on  final  causes  is  only  a  subjective  condition  of 
the  exercise  of  our  reason  in  cases  where  it  is 
not  seeking  to  know  the  proper  estimate  to  form 
of  objects  arranged  merely  as  phenomena,  but 
is  bent  rather  on  referring  these  phenomena, 
principles  and  all,  to  their  supersensible  sub¬ 
strate,  for  the  purpose  of  recognizing  the  possi¬ 
bility  of  certain  laws  of  their  unity,  which  are  in¬ 
capable  of  being  figured  by  the  minds  otherwise 
than  by  means  of  ends  (of  which  reason  also 
possesses  examples  of  the  supersensuous  type). 

§  83.  The  ultimate  end  of  nature  as  a 
teleological  system 

We  have  shown  in  the  preceding  section  that, 
looking  to  principles  of  reason,  there  is  ample 


OF  TELEOLOGICAL  JUDGEMENT 


ground — for  the  reflective,  though  not  of  course 
for  the  determinant,  judgment — to  make  us  esti¬ 
mate  man  as  not  merely  a  physical  end,  such  as 
all  organized  beings  are,  but  as  the  being  upon 
this  earth  who  is  the  ultimate  end  of  nature,  and 
the  one  in  relation  to  whom  all  other  natural 
things  constitute  a  system  of  ends.1  What  now 
is  the  end  in  man,  and  the  end  which,  as  such,  is 
intended  to  be  promoted  by  means  of  his  con¬ 
nection  with  nature?  If  this  end  is  something 
which  must  be  found  in  man  himself,  it  must 
either  be  of  such  a  kind  that  man  himself  may 
be  satisfied  by  means  of  nature  and  its  benefi¬ 
cence,  or  else  it  is  the  aptitude  and  skill  for  all 
manner  of  ends  for  which  he  may  employ  na¬ 
ture  both  external  and  internal.  The  former  end 
of  nature  would  be  the  happiness  of  man,  the 
latter  his  culture. 

The  conception  of  happiness  is  not  one  which 
man  abstracts  more  or  less  from  his  instincts 
and  so  derives  from  his  animal  nature.  It  is,  on 
the  contrary,  a  mere  idea  of  a  state,  and  one  to 
which  he  seeks  to  make  his  actual  state  of  being 
adequate  under  purely  empirical  conditions — an 
impossible  task.  He  projects  this  idea  himself, 
and,  thanks  to  his  understanding  and  its  compli¬ 
cated  relations  with  imagination  and  sense,  pro¬ 
jects  it  in  such  different  ways,  and  even  alters 
his  conception  so  often,  that  were  nature  a  com¬ 
plete  slave  to  his  elective  will,  it  would  never¬ 
theless  be  utterly  unable  to  adopt  any  definite, 
universal,  and  fixed  law  by  which  to  accommo¬ 
date  itself  to  this  fluctuating  conception  and  so 
bring  itself  into  accord  with  the  end  that  each 
individual  arbitrarily  sets  before  himself.  But 
even  if  we  sought  to  reduce  this  conception  to 
the  level  of  the  true  wants  of  nature  in  which 
cur  species  is  in  complete  and  fundamental  ac¬ 
cord,  or  trying  the  other  alternative,  sought  to 
increase  to  the  highest  level  man’s  skill  in  com¬ 
passing  his  imagined  ends,  nevertheless  what 
man  means  by  happiness,  and  what  in  fact  con¬ 
stitutes  his  peculiar  ultimate  physical  end,  as 
opposed  to  the  end  of  freedom,  would  never  be 
attained  by  him.  For  his  own  nature  is  not  so 
constituted  as  to  rest  or  be  satisfied  in  any  pos¬ 
session  or  enjoyment  whatever.  Then  external 
nature  is  far  from  having  made  a  particular 
favourite  of  man  or  from  having  preferred  him 
to  all  other  animals  as  the  object  of  its  benefi¬ 
cence.  For  we  see  that  in  its  destructive  oper¬ 
ations— plague,  famine,  flood,  cold,  attacks  from 
animals  great  and  small,  and  all  such  things — 
it  has  as  little  spared  him  as  any  other  animal. 

1  [Cf.  p.  554-] 


585 

But,  besides  all  this,  the  discord  of  inner  natural 
tendencies  betrays  him  into  further  misfortunes 
of  his  own  invention,  and  reduces  other  mem¬ 
bers  of  his  species,  through  the  oppression  of 
lordly  power,  the  barbarism  of  wars,  and  the 
like,  to  such  misery,  while  he  himself  does  all 
he  can  to  work  ruin  to  his  race,  that,  even  with 
the  utmost  goodwill  on  the  part  of  external 
nature,  its  end,  supposing  it  were  directed  to  the 
happiness  of  our  species,  would  never  be  at¬ 
tained  in  a  system  of  terrestrial  nature,  because 
our  own  nature  is  not  capable  of  it.  Man,  there¬ 
fore,  is  ever  but  a  link  in  the  chain  of  physical 
ends.  True,  he  is  a  principle  in  respect  of  many 
ends  to  which  nature  seems  to  have  predeter¬ 
mined  him,  seeing  that  he  makes  himself  so; 
but,  nevertheless,  he  is  also  a  means  towards  the 
preservation  of  the  finality  in  the  mechanism  of 
the  remaining  members.  As  the  single  being 
upon  earth  that  possesses  understanding,  and, 
consequently,  a  capacity  for  setting  before  him¬ 
self  ends  of  his  deliberate  choice,  he  is  certainly 
titular  lord  of  nature,  and,  supposing  we  regard 
nature  as  a  teleological  system,  he  is  born  to  be 
its  ultimate  end.  But  this  is  always  on  the  terms 
that  he  has  the  intelligence  and  the  will  to  give 
to  it  and  to  himself  such  a  reference  to  ends  as 
can  be  self-sufficing  independently  of  nature, 
and,  consequently,  a  final  end.  Such  an  end, 
however,  must  not  be  sought  in  nature. 

But,  where  in  man,  at  any  rate,  are  we  to  place 
this  ultimate  end  of  nature?  To  discover  this  we 
must  seek  out  what  nature  can  supply  for  the 
purpose  of  preparing  him  for  what  he  himself 
must  do  in  order  to  be  a  final  end,  and  we  must 
segregate  it  from  all  ends  whose  possibility  rests 
upon  conditions  that  man  can  only  await  at  the 
hand  of  nature.  Earthly  happiness  is  an  end  of 
the  latter  kind.  It  is  understood  to  mean  the 
complex  of  all  possible  human  ends  attainable 
through  nature,  whether  in  man  or  external  to 
him.  In  other  words,  it  is  the  material  substance 
of  all  his  earthly  ends  and  what,  if  he  converts 
it  into  his  entire  end,  renders  him  incapable  of 
positing  a  final  end  for  his  own  real  existence 
and  of  harmonizing  therewith.  Therefore,  of  all 
his  ends  in  nature,  we  are  left  only  with  a  for¬ 
mal,  subjective  condition,  that,  namely,  of  the 
aptitude  for  setting  ends  before  himself  at  all, 
and,  independent  of  nature  in  his  power  of  de¬ 
termining  ends,  of  employing  nature  as  a  means 
in  accordance  with  the  maxims  of  his  free  ends 
generally.  This  alone  remains  as  what  nature 
can  effect  relative  to  the  final  end  that  lies  out¬ 
side  it,  and  as  what  may  therefore  be  regarded 


586  THE  CRITIQUE 


as  its  ultimate  end.  The  production  in  a  rational 
being  of  an  aptitude  for  any  ends  whatever  of 
his  own  choosing,  consequently  of  the  aptitude 
of  a  being  in  his  freedom,  is  culture.  Hence  it  is 
only  culture  that  can  be  the  ultimate  end  which 
we  have  cause  to  attribute  to  nature  in  respect 
of  the  human  race.  His  individual  happiness  on 
earth  and,  we  may  say,  the  mere  fact  that  he  is 
the  chief  instrument  for  instituting  order  and 
harmony  in  irrational  external  nature,  are  ruled 
out. 

But  not  every  form  of  culture  can  fill  the 
office  of  this  ultimate  end  of  nature.  Skill  is  a 
culture  that  is  certainly  the  principal  subjective 
condition  of  the  aptitude  for  the  furthering  of 
ends  of  all  kinds,  yet  it  is  incompetent  for  giv¬ 
ing  assistance  to  the  will  in  its  determination 
and  choice  of  its  ends.  But  this  is  an  essential 
factor,  if  an  aptitude  for  ends  is  to  have  its  full 
meaning.  This  latter  condition  of  aptitude,  in¬ 
volving  what  might  be  called  culture  by  way  of 
discipline,  is  negative.  It  consists  in  the  libera¬ 
tion  of  the  will  from  the  despotism  of  desires 
whereby,  in  our  attachment  to  certain  natural 
things,  we  are  rendered  incapable  of  exercising 
a  choice  of  our  own.  This  happens  when  we 
allow  ourselves  to  be  enchained  by  impulses 
with  which  nature  only  provided  us  that  they 
might  serve  as  leading  strings  to  prevent  our 
neglecting,  or  even  impairing,  the  animal  ele¬ 
ment  in  our  nature,  while  yet  we  are  left  free 
enough  to  tighten  or  slacken  them,  to  lengthen 
or  shorten  them,  as  the  ends  of  our  reason  dic¬ 
tate. 

Skill  can  hardly  be  developed  in  the  human 
race  otherwise  than  by  means  of  inequality 
among  men.  For  the  majority,  in  a  mechanical 
kind  of  way  that  calls  for  no  special  art,  pro¬ 
vide  the  necessaries  of  life  for  the  ease  and  con¬ 
venience  of  others  who  apply  themselves  to  the 
less  necessary  branches  of  culture  in  science 
and  art.  These  keep  the  masses  in  a  state  of 
oppression,  with  hard  work  and  little  enjoyment, 
though  in  the  course  of  time  much  of  the  culture 
of  the  higher  classes  spreads  to  them  also.  But 
with  the  advance  of  this  culture — the  culminat¬ 
ing  point  of  which,  where  devotion  to  what  is 
superfluous  begins  to  be  prejudicial  to  what  is 
indispensable,  is  called  luxury — misfortunes  in¬ 
crease  equally  on  both  sides.  With  the  lower 
classes  they  arise  by  force  of  domination  from 
without,  with  the  upper  from  seeds  of  discon¬ 
tent  within.  Yet  this  splendid  misery  is  con¬ 
nected  with  the  development  of  natural  ten¬ 
dencies  in  the  human  race,  and  the  end  pursued 
by  nature  itself,  though  it  be  not  our  end,  is 


thereby  attained.  The  formal  condition  under 
which  nature  can  alone  attain  this,  its  real  end, 
is  the  existence  of  a  constitution  so  regulating 
the  mutual  relations  of  men  that  the  abuse  of 
freedom  by  individuals  striving  one  against  an¬ 
other  is  opposed  by  a  lawful  authority  centred 
in  a  whole,  called  a  civil  community.  For  it  is 
only  in  such  a  constitution  that  the  greatest 
development  of  natural  tendencies  can  take 
place.  In  addition  to  this,  we  should  also  need  a 
cosmopolitan  whole — had  men  but  the  ingenuity 
to  discover  such  a  constitution  and  the  wisdom 
voluntarily  to  submit  themselves  to  its  con¬ 
straint.  It  would  be  a  system  of  all  states  that 
are  in  danger  of  acting  injuriously  to  one  an¬ 
other.  In  its  absence,  and  with  the  obstacles  that 
ambition,  love  of  power,  and  avarice,  especially 
on  the  part  of  those  who  hold  the  reins  of  au¬ 
thority,  put  in  the  way  even  of  the  possibility  of 
such  a  scheme,  war  is  inevitable.  Sometimes  this 
results  in  states  splitting  up  and  resolving  them¬ 
selves  into  lesser  states,  sometimes  one  state 
absorbs  other  smaller  states  and  endeavours  to 
build  up  a  larger  unit.  But  if  on  the  part  of  men 
war  is  a  thoughtless  undertaking,  being  stirred 
up  by  unbridled  passions,  it  is  nevertheless  a 
deep-seated,  maybe  far-seeing,  attempt  on  the 
part  of  supreme  wisdom,  if  not  to  found,  yet  to 
prepare  the  way  for  a  rule  of  law  governing  the 
freedom  of  states,  and  thus  bring  about  their 
unity  in  a  system  established  on  a  moral  basis. 
And,  in  spite  of  the  terrible  calamities  which  it 
inflicts  on  the  human  race,  and  the  hardships, 
perhaps  even  greater,  imposed  by  the  constant 
preparation  for  it  in  time  of  peace,  yet — as  the 
prospect  of  the  dawn  of  an  abiding  reign  of  na¬ 
tional  happiness  keeps  ever  retreating  farther 
into  the  distance — it  is  one  further  spur  for 
developing  to  the  highest  pitch  all  talents  that 
minister  to  culture. 

We  turn  now  to  the  discipline  of  inclinations. 
In  respect  of  these  our  natural  equipment  is 
very  purposively  adapted  to  the  performance 
of  our  essential  functions  as  an  animal  species, 
but  they  are  a  great  impediment  to  the  develop¬ 
ment  of  our  humanity.  Yet  here  again,  in  re¬ 
spect  of  this  second  requisite  for  culture,  we  see 
nature  striving  on  purposive  lines  to  give  us 
that  education  that  opens  the  door  to  higher 
ends  than  it  can  itself  afford.  The  preponder¬ 
ance  of  evil  which  a  taste  refined  to  the  extreme 
of  idealization,  and  which  even  luxury  in  the 
sciences,  considered  as  food  for  vanity,  diffuses 
among  us  as  the  result  of  the  crowd  of  insatia¬ 
ble  inclinations  which  they  beget,  is  indispu¬ 
table.  But,  while  that  is  so,  we  cannot  fail  to 


OF  TELEOLOGICAL  JUDGEMENT 


recognize  the  end  of  nature — ever  more  and 
more  to  prevail  over  the  rudeness  and  violence 
of  inclinations  that  belong  more  to  the  animal 
part  of  our  nature  and  are  most  inimical  to  edu¬ 
cation  that  would  fit  us  for  our  higher  vocation 
(inclinations  towards  enjoyment),  and  to  make 
way  for  the  development  of  our  humanity.  Fine 
art  and  the  sciences,  if  they  do  not  make  man 
morally  better,  yet,  by  conveying  a  pleasure 
that  admits  of  universal  communication  and 
by  introducing  polish  and  refinement  into  so¬ 
ciety,  make  him  civilized.  Thus  they  do  much 
to  overcome  the  tyrannical  propensities  of 
sense,  and  so  prepare  man  for  a  sovereignty  in 
which  reason  alone  shall  have  sway.  Meanwhile 
the  evils  visited  upon  us,  now  by  nature,  now 
by  the  truculent  egoism  of  man,  evoke  the  en¬ 
ergies  of  the  soul,  and  give  it  strength  and 
courage  to  submit  to  no  such  force,  and  at  the 
same  time  quicken  in  us  a  sense  that  in  the 
depths  of  our  nature  there  is  an  aptitude  for 
higher  ends.1 

§  84.  The  final  end  of  the  existence  of  a  world , 
that  is ,  of  creation  itself 

A  final  end  is  an  end  that  does  not  require 
any  other  end  as  condition  of  its  possibility. 

If  the  simple  mechanism  of  nature  is  ac¬ 
cepted  as  the  explanation  of  its  finality,  it  is  not 
open  to  us  to  ask:  For  what  end  do  the  things  in 
the  world  exist?  For,  on  such  an  idealistic  sys¬ 
tem,  we  have  only  to  reckon  with  the  physical 
possibility  of  things — and  things  that  it  would 
be  mere  empty  sophistry  to  imagine  as  ends.2 
Whether  we  refer  this  form  of  things  to  chance, 
or  whether  we  refer  it  to  blind  necessity,  such  a 
question  would  in  either  case  be  meaningless. 
But  if  we  suppose  the  final  nexus  in  the  world 
to  be  real,  and  assume  a  special  type  of  causal¬ 
ity  for  it,  namely  the  activity  of  a  cause  acting 
designedly ,  we  cannot  then  stop  short  at  the 

1  The  value  of  life  for  us,  measured  simply  by  what 
we  enjoy  (by  the  natural  end  of  the  sum  of  all  our  in¬ 
clinations,  that  is  by  happiness),  is  easy  to  decide.  It  is 
less  than  nothing.  For  who  would  enter  life  afresh  under 
the  same  conditions?  Who  would  even  do  so  according 
to  a  new,  self-devised  plan  (which  should,  however, 
follow  the  course  of  nature),  if  it  also  were  merely 
directed  to  enjoyment?  We  have  shown  above  what 
value  life  receives  from  what  it  involves  when  lived  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  end  with  which  nature  is  occupied  in  us, 
and  which  consists  in  what  we  do,  not  merely  what  we 
enjoy,  we  being,  however,  in  that  case  always  but  a 
means  to  an  undetermined  final  end.  There  remains  then 
nothing  but  the  worth  which  we  ourselves  assign  to  our 
life  by  what  we  not  alone  do,  but  do  with  a  view  to  an 
end  so  independent  of  nature  that  the  very  existence  of 
nature  itself  can  only  be  an  end  subject  to  the  condition 
so  imposed. 

2  [Cf.  p.  565.] 


587 

question:  What  is  the  end  for  which  things  in 
the  world,  namely  organized  beings,  possess  this 
or  that  form,  or  are  placed  by  nature  in  this  or 
that  relation  to  other  things?  On  the  contrary, 
once  we  have  conceived  an  understanding  that 
must  be  regarded  as  the  cause  of  the  possibility 
of  such  forms  as  they  are  actually  found  in 
things,  we  must  go  on  and  seek  in  this  under¬ 
standing  for  an  objective  ground  capable  of 
determining  such  productive  understanding  to 
the  production  of  an  effect  of  this  kind.  That 
ground  is  then  the  final  end  for  which  such 
things  exist. 

I  have  said  before  that  the  final  end  is  not  an 
end  which  nature  would  be  competent  to  re¬ 
alize  or  produce  in  terms  of  its  idea,  because  it 
is  one  that  is  unconditioned.  For  in  nature,  as  a 
thing  of  sense,  there  is  nothing  whose  determin¬ 
ing  ground,  discoverable  in  nature  itself,  is  not 
always  in  turn  conditioned.  This  is  not  merely 
true  of  external  or  material  nature,  but  also  of 
internal  or  thinking  nature — it  being  of  course 
understood  that  I  am  only  considering  what  in 
us  is  strictly  nature.  But  a  thing  which  by  vir¬ 
tue  of  its  objective  characterization  is  to  exist 
necessarily  as  the  final  end  of  an  intelligent 
cause,  must  be  of  such  a  kind  that  in  the  order 
of  ends  it  is  dependent  upon  no  further  or  other 
condition  than  simply  its  idea. 

Now  we  have  in  the  world  beings  of  but  one 
kind  whose  causality  is  teleological,  or  directed 
to  ends,  and  which  at  the  same  time  are  beings 
of  such  a  character  that  the  law  according  to 
which  they  have  to  determine  ends  for  them¬ 
selves  is  represented  by  them  themselves  as  un¬ 
conditioned  and  not  dependent  on  anything  in 
nature,  but  as  necessary  in  itself.  The  being  of 
this  kind  is  man,  but  man  regarded  as  noume- 
non.  He  is  the  only  natural  creature  whose  pe¬ 
culiar  objective  characterization  is  nevertheless 
such  as  to  enable  us  to  recognize  in  him  a  super¬ 
sensible  faculty — his  freedom — and  to  perceive 
both  the  law  of  the  causality  and  the  object  of 
freedom  which  that  faculty  is  able  to  set  before 
itself  as  the  highest  end — the  supreme  good  in 
the  world. 

Now  it  is  not  open  to  use  in  the  case  of  man, 
considered  as  a  moral  agent,  or  similarly  in  the 
case  of  any  rational  being  in  the  world,  to  ask 
the  further  question:  For  what  end  {quern  in 
finem)  does  he  exist?  His  existence  inherently 
involves  the  highest  end — the  end  to  which,  as 
far  as  in  him  lies,  he  may  subject  the  whole  of 
nature,  or  contrary  to  which  at  least  he  must 
not  deem  himself  subjected  to  any  influence  on 
its  part.  Now  assuming  that  things  in  the  world 


588  THE  CRITIQUE 


are  beings  that  are  dependent  in  point  of  their 
real  existence,  and,  as  such,  stand  in  need  of  a 
supreme  cause  acting  according  to  ends,  then 
man  is  the  final  end  of  creation.  For,  without 
man,  the  chain  of  mutually  subordinated  ends 
would  have  no  ultimate  point  of  attachment.1 
Only  in  man,  and  only  in  him  as  the  individual 
being  to  whom  the  moral  law  applies,  do  we  find 
unconditional  legislation  in  respect  of  ends.  This 
legislation,  therefore,  is  what  alone  qualifies  him 
to  be  a  final  end  to  which  entire  nature  is  tele¬ 
ologically  subordinated.2 

§  85.  Physico-Theology 

Physico-theology  is  the  attempt  on  the  part 
of  reason  to  infer  the  supreme  cause  of  nature 
and  its  attributes  from  the  ends  of  nature — 
ends  which  can  only  be  known  empirically.  A 
moral  theology ,  or  ethico-theology,  would  be  the 
attempt  to  infer  that  cause  and  its  attributes 
from  the  moral  end  of  rational  beings  in  nature 
— an  end  which  can  be  known  a  priori. 

The  former  naturally  precedes  the  latter.  For 
if  we  seek  to  infer  a  world-cause  from  the  things 
in  the  world  by  teleological  arguments,  we  must 
first  of  all  be  given  ends  of  nature.  Then,  for 
these  ends  so  given,  we  must  afterwards  look 
for  a  final  end,  and  this  final  end  obliges  us  to 

1  [Cf.  pp.  559,  590,  591.] 

2  It  would  be  possible  for  the  happiness  of  the  ra¬ 
tional  beings  in  the  world  to  be  an  end  of  nature,  and, 
were  it  so,  it  would  also  be  the  ultimate  end  of  nature. 
At  least  it  is  not  obvious  a  priori  why  nature  should 
not  be  so  ordered,  for,  so  far  as  we  can  see,  happiness 
is  an  effect  which  it  would  be  quite  possible  for  nature 
to  produce  by  means  of  its  mechanism.  But  morality,  or 
a  causality  according  to  ends  that  is  subordinate  to  mo¬ 
rality,  is  an  absolutely  impossible  result  of  natural 
causes.  For  the  principle  that  determines  such  causality 
to  action  is  supersensible.  In  the  order  of  ends,  therefore, 
it  is  the  sole  principle  possible  which  is  absolutely  un¬ 
conditioned  in  respect  of  nature,  and  it  is  what  alone 
qualifies  the  subject  of  such  causality  to  be  the  final  end 
of  creation,  and  the  one  to  which  entire  nature  is  sub¬ 
ordinated.  Happiness,  on  the  other  hand,  as  an  appeal 
to  the  testimony  of  experience  showed  in  the  preceding 
section,  so  far  from  being  a  final  end  of  creation,  is  not 
even  an  end  of  nature  as  regards  man  in  preference  to 
other  creatures.  It  may  ever  be  that  individual  men 
will  make  it  their  ultimate  subjective  end.  But  if,  seek¬ 
ing  for  the  final  end  of  creation.  I  ask:  “For  what  end 
was  it  necessary  that  men  should  exist?”  my  question 
then  refers  to  an  objective  supreme  end,  such  as  the 
highest  reason  would  demand  for  their  creation.  If, 
then,  to  this  question  we  reply:  “So  that  beings  may 
exist  upon  whom  that  supreme  Cause  may  exercise  this 
beneficence,”  we  then  belie  the  condition  to  which  the 
reason  of  man  subjects,  even  his  own  inmost  wish  for 
happiness,  namely,  harmony  with  his  own  inner  moral 
legislation.  This  proves  that  happiness  can  only  be  a 
conditional  end,  and,  therefore,  that  it  is  only  as  a 
moral  being  that  man  can  be  the  final  end  of  creation; 
while,  as  regards  his  state  of  being,  happiness  is  only 
incident  thereto  as  a  consequence  proportionate  to  the 
measure  of  his  harmony  with  that  end.  as  the  end  of 
his  existence. 


seek  the  principle  of  the  causality  of  the  su¬ 
preme  cause  in  question. 

Much  natural  research  can,  and  indeed  must, 
be  conducted  in  the  light  of  the  teleological 
principle  without  our  having  occasion  to  inquire  1 
into  the  source  of  the  possibility  of  the  final 
action  which  we  meet  with  in  various  products 
of  nature.  But  should  we  now  desire  to  have 
also  a  conception  of  this  source,  we  are  then  in 
the  position  of  having  absolutely  no  available 
insight  that  can  penetrate  beyond  our  mere 
maxim  of  reflective  judgement.  According  to 
this  maxim,  given  but  a  single  organized  prod¬ 
uct  of  nature,  then  the  structure  of  our  cog¬ 
nitive  faculty  is  such  that  the  only  source  which 
we  can  conceive  it  to  have  is  one  that  is  a  cause 
of  nature  itself — be  it  of  entire  nature  or  even 
only  of  this  particular  portion  of  it — and  that 
derives  from  an  understanding  the  requisite 
causality  for  such  a  product.  This  is  a  critical 
principle  which  doubtless  brings  us  no  whit  far¬ 
ther  in  the  explanation  of  natural  things  or  their 
origin.  Yet  it  discloses  to  our  view  a  prospect 
that  extends  beyond  the  horizon  of  nature  and 
points  to  our  being  able  perhaps  to  determine 
more  closely  the  conception  of  an  original  being 
otherwise  so  unfruitful. 

Now  I  say  that,  no  matter  how  far  physico- 
teleology  may  be  pushed,  it  can  never  disclose 
to  us  anything  about  a  final  end  of  creation; 
for  it  never  even  begins  to  look  for  a  final  end. 
Thus  it  can  justify,  no  doubt,  the  conception  of 
an  intelligent  world-cause  as  a  conception  which 
subjectively — that  is  in  relation  to  the  nature 
of  our  cognitive  faculty  alone — is  effective  to 
explain  the  possibility  of  things  that  we  can 
render  intelligible  to  ourselves  in  the  light  of 
ends.  But  neither  from  a  theoretical  nor  a  prac¬ 
tical  point  of  view  can  it  determine  this  con¬ 
ception  any  farther.  Its  attempt  falls  short  of 
its  proposed  aim  of  affording  a  basis  of  the¬ 
ology.  To  the  last,  it  remains  nothing  but  a 
physical  teleology:  for  the  final  nexus  which  it 
recognizes  is  only,  and  must  only,  be  regarded 
as  subject  to  natural  conditions.  Consequently 
it  can  never  institute  an  inquiry  into  the  end  for 
which  nature  itself  exists — this  being  an  end 
whose  source  must  be  sought  outside  nature. 
Yet  it  is  upon  the  definite  idea  of  this  end  that 
the  definite  conception  of  such  a  supreme  in¬ 
telligent  World-Cause,  and,  consequently,  the 
possibility  of  a  theology,  depend. 

Of  what  use  are  the  things  in  the  world  to  one 
another?  What  good  is  the  manifold  in  a  thing 
to  this  thing?  How  are  we  entitled  to  assume 
that  nothing  in  the  world  is  in  vain,  but  that, 


OF  TELEOLOGICAL  JUDGEMENT  589 


provided  we  grant  that  certain  things,  regarded 
as  ends,  ought  to  exist,  everything  serves  some 
purpose  or  other  in  nature ?  All  these  questions 
imply  that,  in  respect  of  our  judgement,  reason 
-  has  at  its  command  no  other  principle  of  the 
possibility  of  the  object  which  it  is  obliged  to 
estimate  teleologically  than  that  of  subordinat- 
e  ing  the  mechanism  of  nature  to  the  architec¬ 
tonic  of  an  intelligent  Author  of  the  world;  and 
directed  to  all  these  issues  the  teleological  sur¬ 
vey  of  the  world  plays  its  part  nobly  and  fills 
us  with  intense  admiration.  But  inasmuch  as  the 
data,  and,  consequently,  the  principles,  for  de¬ 
termining  such  a  conception  of  an  intelligent 
World-Cause,  regarded  as  the  supreme  Artist, 
are  merely  empirical,  they  do  not  allow  us  to 
infer  any  other  attributes  belonging  to  it  than 
those  which  experience  reveals  to  us  as  mani¬ 
fested  in  its  operations.  But  as  experience  is 
unable  to  embrace  aggregate  nature  as  a  system, 
it  must  frequently  find  support  for  arguments 
which,  to  all  appearances,  conflict  with  that  con¬ 
ception  and  with  one  another.  Yet  it  can  never 
lift  us  above  nature  to  the  end  of  its  real  ex¬ 
istence  or  thus  raise  us  to  a  definite  conception 
of  such  a  higher  intelligence — not  though  it 
were  in  our  power  empirically  to  review  the  en¬ 
tire  system  in  its  purely  physical  aspect. 

If  the  problem  which  physico-theology  has  to 
solve  is  set  to  a  lower  key,  then  its  solution 
seems  an  easy  matter.  Thus  we  may  think  of  an 
intelligent  being  possessing  a  number  of  super¬ 
lative  attributes,  without  the  full  complement 
of  those  necessary  for  establishing  a  nature  har¬ 
monizing  with  the  greatest  possible  end,  and  to 
all  beings  of  this  description — of  whom  there 
may  be  one  or  more — we  might  be  extravagant 
enough  to  apply  the  conception  of  a  Deity.  Or, 
if  we  let  it  pass  as  of  no  importance  to  supple¬ 
ment  by  arbitrary  additions  the  proofs  of  a  the¬ 
ory  where  the  grounds  of  proof  are  deficient; 
and  if,  therefore,  where  we  have  only  reason  to 
assume  much  perfection  (and  what,  pray,  is 
much  for  us?)  we  deem  ourselves  entitled  to 
take  all  possible  perfection  for  granted:  then 
physical  teleology  has  important  claims  to  the 
distinction  of  affording  the  basis  of  a  theology. 
But  what  is  there  to  lead  and,  more  than  that, 
authorize  us  to  supplement  the  facts  of  the  case 
in  this  way?  If  we  are  called  on  to  point  out 
what  it  is,  we  shall  seek  in  vain  for  any  ground 
of  justification  in  the  principles  of  the  theo¬ 
retical  employment  of  reason.  For  such  employ¬ 
ment  emphatically  demands  that,  for  the  pur¬ 
pose  of  explaining  an  object  of  experience,  we 
are  not  to  ascribe  to  it  more  attributes  than  we 


find  in  the  empirical  data  for  the  possibility  of 
the  object.  On  closer  investigation,  we  should 
see  that  underlying  our  procedure  is  an  idea 
of  a  Supreme  Being,  which  rests  on  an  entirely 
different  employment  of  reason,  namely,  its 
practical  employment,  and  that  it  is  this  idea, 
which  exists  in  us  a  priori ,  that  impels  us  to 
supplement  the  defective  representation  of  an 
original  ground  of  the  ends  in  nature  afforded 
by  physical  teleology,  and  enlarge  it  to  the  con¬ 
ception  of  a  Deity.  When  we  saw  this,  we 
should  not  erroneously  imagine  that  we  had 
evolved  this  idea,  and,  with  it,  a  theology  by 
means  of  the  theoretical  employment  of  reason 
in  the  physical  cognition  of  the  world — much 
less  that  we  had  proved  its  reality. 

One  cannot  blame  the  ancients  so  very  much 
for  imagining  that,  while  there  was  great  di¬ 
versity  among  their  gods,  both  in  respect  of 
their  power  and  of  their  purposes  and  disposi¬ 
tions,  they  were  all,  not  excepting  the  sovereign 
head  of  the  gods  himself,  invariably  limited  in 
human  fashion.  For,  on  surveying  the  order  and 
course  of  the  things  in  nature,  they  certainly 
found  ample  reason  for  assuming  something 
more  than  mere  mechanism  as  its  cause  and  for 
conjecturing  the  existence  of  purposes  on  the 
part  of  certain  higher  causes,  which  they  could 
only  conceive  to  be  superhuman,  behind  the  ma¬ 
chinery  of  this  world.  But,  since  they  encoun¬ 
tered  both  the  good  and  evil,  the  final  and  the 
contra-final,  very  much  interspersed,  at  least  to 
human  eyes,  and  could  not  take  the  liberty  of 
assuming,  for  the  sake  of  the  arbitrary  idea  of 
an  all-perfect  author,  that  there  were  never¬ 
theless  mysteriously  wise  and  beneficent  ends, 
of  which  they  did  not  see  the  evidence,  under¬ 
lying  all  this  apparent  antagonism,  their  judge¬ 
ment  on  the  supreme  world-cause  could  hardly 
be  other  than  it  was,  so  long,  that  is,  as  they 
followed  maxims  of  the  mere  theoretical  em¬ 
ployment  of  reason  with  strict  consistency.  Oth¬ 
ers  who  were  physicists  and  in  that  character 
desired  to  be  theologians  also,  thought  that  they 
would  give  full  satisfaction  to  reason  by  provid¬ 
ing  for  the  absolute  unity  of  the  principle  of 
natural  things,  which  reason  demands,  by  means 
of  the  idea  of  a  being  in  which,  as  sole  substance, 
the  whole  assemblage  of  those  natural  things 
would  be  contained  only  as  inhering  modes. 
While  this  substance  would  not  be  the  cause  of 
the  world  by  virtue  of  its  intelligence,  it  would 
nevertheless  be  a  subject  in  which  all  the  intelli¬ 
gence  on  the  part  of  the  beings  in  the  world  would 
reside.  Hence,  although  it  would  not  be  a  being 
that  produced  anything  according  to  ends,  it 


THE  CRITIQUE 


would  be  one  in  which  all  things — owing  to  the 
unity  of  the  subject  of  which  they  are  mere 
determinations — must  necessarily  be  intercon¬ 
nected  in  a  final  manner,  though  apart  from  end 
or  design.  Thus  they  introduced  the  idealism  of 
final  Causes,  by  converting  the  unity,  so  diffi¬ 
cult  to  deduce,  of  a  number  of  substances  stand¬ 
ing  in  a  final  connection,  from  a  causal  depend¬ 
ence  on  one  substance  into  the  unity  of  inher¬ 
ence  in  one.  Looked  at  from  the  side  of  the  be¬ 
ings  that  inhere,  this  system  became  pantheism , 
and  from  the  side  of  the  sole  subsisting  subject, 
as  original  being,  it  became,  by  a  later  develop¬ 
ment,  Spinozism.  Thus  in  the  end,  instead  of 
solving  the  problem  of  the  primary  source  of 
the  finality  of  nature,  it  represented  the  whole 
question  as  idle,  for  the  conception  of  such  fi¬ 
nality,  being  shorn  of  all  reality,  was  reduced  to 
a  simple  misinterpretation  of  the  universal  on¬ 
tological  conception  of  a  thing  in  the  abstract.1 

So  we  see  that  the  conception  of  a  Deity, 
such  as  would  meet  the  demands  of  our  teleo¬ 
logical  estimate  of  nature,  can  never  be  evolved 
according  to  mere  theoretical  principles  of  the 
employment  of  reason — and  these  are  the  only 
principles  upon  which  physico-theology  relies. 
For,  suppose  we  assert  that  all  teleology  is  a  de¬ 
lusion  on  the  part  of  judgement  in  its  estimate 
of  the  causal  nexus  of  things  and  take  refuge 
in  the  sole  principle  of  a  mere  mechanism  of 
nature.  Then  nature  only  appears  to  us  to  in¬ 
volve  a  universal  relation  to  ends,  owing  to  the 
unity  of  the  substance  that  contains  it  as  no 
more  than  the  multiplicity  of  its  modes.  Or, 
suppose  that  instead  of  adopting  this  idealism 
of  final  causes,  we  wish  to  adhere  to  the  prin¬ 
ciple  of  the  realism  of  this  particular  type  of 
causality.  Then — no  matter  whether  we  base 
natural  ends  on  a  number  of  intelligent  original 
beings  or  on  a  single  one — the  moment  we  find 
ourselves  with  nothing  upon  which  to  found  the 
conception  of  realism  but  empirical  principles 
drawn  from  ihe  actual  nexus  of  ends  in  the 
world,  on  the  one  hand  we  cannot  help  accept¬ 
ing  the  fact  of  the  discordance  with  final  unity 
of  which  nature  presents  many  examples,  and, 
on  the  other  hand,  we  can  never  obtain  a  suf¬ 
ficiently  definite  conception  of  a  single  intelli¬ 
gent  Cause — so  long  as  we  keep  to  what  mere 
experience  entitles  us  to  extract — to  satisfy  any 
sort  of  theology  whatever  which  will  be  of 
use  theoretically  or  practically. 

It  is  true  that  physical  teleology  urges  us  to 
go  in  quest  of  a  theology.  But  it  cannot  produce 
one — however  far  we  carry  our  investigations 

i  [Cf.  p.  566.] 


of  nature,  or  help  out  the  nexus  of  ends  discov¬ 
ered  in  it  with  ideas  of  reason  (which  for  physi¬ 
cal  problems  must  be  theoretical).  We  may 
pose  the  reasonable  question:  What  is  the  use 
of  our  basing  all  these  arrangements  on  a  great, 
and  for  us  unfathomable,  intelligence,  and  sup¬ 
posing  it  to  order  this  world  according  to  pur¬ 
poses,  if  nature  does  not  and  cannot  ever  tell  us 
anything  as  to  the  final  purpose  in  view?  For 
apart  from  a  final  purpose  we  are  unable  to  re¬ 
late  all  these  natural  ends  to  a  common  point, 
or  form  an  adequate  teleological  principle,  be 
it  for  combining  all  the  ends  in  a  known  system, 
or  be  it  for  framing  such  a  conception  of  the 
supreme  Intelligence,  as  cause  of  a  nature  like 
this,  as  could  act  as  a  standard  for  our  judge¬ 
ment  in  its  teleological  reflection  upon  nature.  I 
should  have,  it  is  true,  in  that  case  an  art  in¬ 
telligence  for  miscellaneous  ends,  but  no  wis¬ 
dom  for  a  final  end,  which  nevertheless  is  what 
must,  properly  speaking,  contain  the  ground  by 
which  such  intelligence  is  determined.  I  require 
a  final  end,  and  it  is  only  pure  reason  that  a 
priori  can  supply  this — for  all  ends  in  the  world 
are  empirically  conditioned  and  can  contain 
nothing  that  is  absolutely  good,  but  only  what 
is  good  for  this  or  that  purpose  regarded  as  con¬ 
tingent.  Such  a  final  end  alone  would  instruct 
me  how  I  am  to  conceive  the  supreme  cause  of 
nature — what  attributes  I  am  to  assign  to  it, 
and  in  what  degree,  and  how  I  am  to  conceive 
its  relation  to  nature — if  I  am  to  estimate  na¬ 
ture  as  a  teleological  system.  In  the  absence, 
then,  of  a  final  end,  what  liberty  or  what  au¬ 
thority  have  I  to  extend  at  will  such  a  very 
limited  conception  of  that  original  intelligence 
as  I  can  base  on  my  own  poor  knowledge  of  the 
world,  or  my  conception  of  the  power  of  this 
original  being  to  realize  its  ideas,  or  of  its  will 
to  do  so,  etc.,  and  expand  it  to  the  idea  of  an  all¬ 
wise  and  infinite  Being?  Were  I  able  to  do  this 
theoretically  it  would  presuppose  omniscience 
in  myself  to  enable  me  to  see  into  the  ends  of 
nature  in  their  entire  context,  and  in  addition  to 
conceive  all  other  possible  schemes,  as  com¬ 
pared  with  w'hich  the  present  would  have  to  be 
estimated  on  reasonable  grounds  to  be  the  best. 
For  without  this  perfected  knowledge  of  the  ef¬ 
fect,  my  reasoning  can  arrive  at  no  definite  con¬ 
ception  of  the  supreme  cause — which  is  only  to 
be  found  in  that  of  an  intelligence  in  every  re¬ 
spect  infinite,  that  is,  in  the  conception  of  a 
Deity — or  establish  a  basis  for  theology. 

Hence,  allowing  for  all  possible  extension  of 
physical  teleology,  we  may  keep  to  the  principle 
set  out  above  and  say  that  the  constitution  and 


OF  TELEOLOGICAL  JUDGEMENT 


principles  of  our  cognitive  faculty  are  such  that 
we  can  only  conceive  nature,  in  respect  of  those 
of  its  adjustments  that  are  familiar  to  us  and 
display  finality,  as  the  product  of  an  intelligence 
to  which  it  is  subjected.  But  whether  this  in¬ 
telligence  may  also  have  had  a  final  purpose  in 
view  in  the  production  of  nature  and  in  its  con¬ 
stitution  as  a  whole,  which  final  purpose  in  that 
case  would  not  reside  in  nature  as  the  world  of 
sense,  is  a  matter  that  the  theoretical  study  of 
nature  can  never  disclose.  On  the  contrary,  how¬ 
ever  great  our  knowledge  of  nature,  it  remains 
an  open  question  whether  that  supreme  cause  is 
the  original  source  of  nature  as  a  cause  acting 
throughout  according  to  a  final  end,  or  whether 
it  is  not  rather  such  a  source  by  virtue  of  an 
intelligence  that  is  determined  by  the  simple 
necessity  of  its  nature  to  the  production  of  cer¬ 
tain  forms  (by  analogy  to  what  we  call  the  ar¬ 
tistic  instinct  in  the  lower  animals).  The  latter 
version  does  not  involve  our  ascribing  even  wis¬ 
dom  to  such  intelligence,  much  less  wisdom  that 
is  supreme  and  conjoined  with  all  other  proper¬ 
ties  requisite  for  ensuring  the  perfection  of  its 
product. 

Hence  physico-theology  is  a  physical  tele¬ 
ology  misunderstood.  It  is  of  no  use  to  theology 
except  as  a  preparation  or  propaedeutic,  and  is 
only  sufficient  for  this  purpose  when  supple¬ 
mented  by  a  further  principle  on  what  it  can  rely. 
But  it  is  not,  as  its  name  would  suggest,  suffi¬ 
cient,  even  as  a  propaedeutic,  if  taken  by  itself. 

§  86.  Ethico-Theology 

There  is  a  judgement  which  even  the  com¬ 
monest  understanding  finds  irresistible  when  it 
reflects  upon  the  existence  of  the  things  in  the 
world  and  the  real  existence  of  the  world  itself. 
It  is  the  verdict  that  all  the  manifold  forms  of 
life,  co-ordinated  though  they  may  be  with  the 
greatest  art  and  concatenated  with  the  utmost 
variety  of  final  adaptations,  and  even  the  entire 
complex  that  embraces  their  numerous  systems, 
incorrectly  called  worlds,  would  all  exist  for 
nothing,  if  man,  or  rational  beings  of  some  sort, 
were  not  to  be  found  in  their  midst.  Without 
man,  in  other  words,  the  whole  of  creation 
would  be  a  mere  wilderness,  a  thing  in  vain,  and 
have  no  final  end.  Yet  it  is  not  man’s  cognitive 
faculty,  that  is,  theoretical  reason,  that  forms 
the  point  of  reference  which  alone  gives  its 
worth  to  the  existence  of  all  else  in  the  world — 
as  if  the  meaning  of  his  presence  in  the  world 
was  that  there  might  be  some  one  in  it  that 
could  make  it  an  object  of  contemplation.1  For 

i  [Cf.  p.  609.] 


59i 

if  this  contemplation  of  the  world  brought  to 
light  nothing  but  things  without  a  final  end,  the 
existence  of  the  world  could  not  acquire  a  worth 
from  the  fact  of  its  being  known.  A  final  end  of 
the  world  must  be  presupposed  as  that  in  rela¬ 
tion  to  which  the  contemplation  of  the  world 
may  itself  possess  a  worth.  Neither  is  it  in  rela¬ 
tion  to  the  feeling  of  pleasure  or  the  sum  of 
such  feelings  that  we  can  think  that  there  is  a 
given  final  end  of  creation,  that  is  to  say,  it  is 
not  by  well-being,  not  by  enjoyment,  whether 
bodily  or  mental,  not,  in  a  word,  by  happiness, 
that  we  value  that  absolute  worth.  For  the  fact 
that  man,  when  he  does  exist,  makes  happiness 
his  own  final  purpose,  affords  us  no  conception 
of  any  reason  why  he  should  exist  at  all,  or  of 
any  worth  he  himself  possesses,  for  which  his 
real  existence  should  be  made  agreeable  to  him. 
Hence  man  must  already  be  presupposed  to  be 
the  final  end  of  creation,  in  order  that  we  may 
have  a  rational  ground  to  explain  why  nature, 
when  regarded  as  an  absolute  whole  according 
to  principles  of  ends,  must  be  in  accord  with 
the  conditions  of  his  happiness.  Accordingly, 
it  is  only  the  faculty  of  desire  that  can  give  the 
required  point  of  reference — yet  not  that  fac¬ 
ulty  which  makes  man  dependent  upon  nature 
(through  impulses  of  sense),  that  is,  not  that 
in  respect  of  which  the  worth  of  his  existence 
is  dependent  upon  what  he  receives  and  enjoys. 
On  the  contrary,  it  is  the  worth  which  he  alone 
can  give  to  himself,  and  which  consists  in  what 
he  does — in  the  manner  in  which  and  the  prin¬ 
ciples  upon  which  he  acts  in  the  freedom  of  his 
faculty  of  desire,  and  not  as  a  link  in  the  chain 
of  nature.  In  other  words,  a  good  will  is  that 
whereby  man’s  existence  can  alone  possess  an 
absolute  worth,  and  in  relation  to  which  the  ex¬ 
istence  of  the  world  can  have  a  final  end. 

Even  the  popular  verdict  of  sound  human 
reason,  once  its  reflection  is  directed  to  this 
question  and  pressed  to  its  consideration,  is  in 
complete  accord  with  the  judgement  that  it  is 
only  as  a  moral  being  that  man  can  be  a  final 
end  of  creation.  What,  it  will  be  said,  does  it  all 
avail,  that  this  man  has  so  much  talent,  that  he 
is  even  so  active  in  its  employment  and  thus 
exerts  a  useful  influence  upon  social  and  public 
life,  and  that  he  possesses,  therefore,  consider¬ 
able  worth  alike  in  relation  to  his  own  state  of 
happiness  and  in  relation  to  what  is  good  for 
others,  if  he  has  not  a  good  will?  Looked  at 
from  the  point  of  view  of  his  inner  self,  he  is  a 
contemptible  object;  and,  if  creation  is  not  to 
be  altogether  devoid  of  a  final  end,  such  a  man, 
though  as  man  he  is  part  of  creation,  must  nev- 


THE  CRITIQUE 


ertheless,  as  a  bad  man  dwelling  in  a  world  sub¬ 
ject  to  moral  laws,  forfeit,  in  accordance  with 
those  laws,  his  own  subjective  end,  that  is  hap¬ 
piness,  as  the  sole  condition  under  which  his 
real  existence  can  consist  with  the  final  end. 

Now  if  we  find  instances  in  the  world  of  an 
order  adapted  to  ends,  and  if,  as  reason  inevi¬ 
tably  requires,  we  subordinate  the  ends  which 
are  only  conditionally  ends  to  one  that  is  uncon¬ 
ditioned  and  supreme,  that  is  to  a  final  end,  we 
readily  see,  to  begin  with,  that  we  are  not  deal¬ 
ing  with  an  end  of  nature,  included  in  nature 
taken  as  existent,  but  with  the  end  of  the  real 
existence  of  nature,  with  all  its  orderly  adap¬ 
tations  included.  Consequently  we  see  that  the 
question  is  one  of  the  ultimate  end  of  creation, 
and,  more  precisely,  of  the  supreme  condition 
under  which  alone  there  can  be  a  final  end,  or, 
in  other  words,  of  the  ground  that  determines  a 
highest  intelligence  to  the  production  of  the 
beings  in  the  world. 

It  is,  then,  only  as  a  moral  being  that  we  ac¬ 
knowledge  man  to  be  the  end  of  creation.  Hence 
we  have,  first  of  all,  a  reason,  or  at  least  the 
primary  condition,  for  regarding  the  world  as  a 
consistent  whole  of  interconnected  ends,  and  as 
a  system  of  final  causes.  Now  the  structure  of 
our  reason  is  such  that  we  necessarily  refer 
natural  ends  to  an  intelligent  world-cause.  Above 
all,  then,  we  have  one  principle  applicable  to 
this  relation,  enabling  us  to  think  the  nature 
and  attributes  of  this  first  cause  considered  as 
supreme  ground  in  the  kingdom  of  ends,  and  to 
form  a  definite  conception  of  it.  This  is  what 
could  not  be  done  by  physical  teleology,  which 
was  only  able  to  suggest  vague  conceptions  of 
such  a  ground — conceptions  which  this  vague¬ 
ness  made  as  useless  for  practical  as  for  theo¬ 
retical  employment. 

With  such  a  definite  principle  as  this,  of  the 
causality  of  the  original  being,  we  shall  not  have 
to  regard  it  merely  as  an  intelligence  and  as  leg¬ 
islating  for  nature,  but  as  the  Sovereign  Head 
legislating  in  a  moral  Kingdom  of  Ends.  In  re¬ 
lation  to  the  summum  bonum,  which  is  alone 
possible  under  His  sovereignty,  namely  the  real 
existence  of  rational  beings  under  moral  laws, 
we  shall  conceive  this  Original  Being  to  be  om¬ 
niscient,  so  that  even  our  inmost  sentiments — 
wherein  lies  the  distinctive  moral  worth  in  the 
actions  of  rational  beings  in  the  world — may 
not  be  hid  from  Him.  We  shall  conceive  Him 
as  omnipotent,  so  that  He  may  be  able  to  adapt 
entire  nature  to  this  highest  end;  as  both  all¬ 
good  and  just,  since  these  two  attributes,  which 
unite  to  form  wisdom ,  constitute  the  conditions 


under  which  a  supreme  cause  of  the  world  can 
be  the  source  of  the  greatest  good  under  moral 
laws.  Similarly  the  other  remaining  transcen¬ 
dental  attributes,  such  as  eternity,  omnipres-  c 

ence,  and  so  forth  (for  goodness  and  justice  are  \ 

moral  attributes),  all  attributes  that  are  pre-  l 
supposed  in  relation  to  such  a  final  end,  will 
have  to  be  regarded  as  belonging  to  this  Original 
Being.  In  this  way,  moral  teleology  supplements 
the  deficiency  of  physical  teleology,  and  for  the 
first  time  establishes  a  theology.  For  physical 
teleology,  if  it  is  not  to  borrow  secretly  from 
moral  teleology,  but  is  to  proceed  with  strict 
logical  rigour,  can  from  its  own  unaided  re¬ 
sources  establish  nothing  but  a  demonology, 
which  does  not  admit  of  any  definite  con¬ 
ception. 

But  the  principle  which,  because  of  the  moral 
and  teleological  significance  of  certain  beings  in 
the  world,  refers  the  world  to  a  Supreme  Cause 
as  Deity,  does  not  establish  this  relation  by  be¬ 
ing  simply  a  completion  of  the  physico-teleo- 
logical  argument,  and  therefore  by  adopting  this 
necessarily  as  its  foundation.  On  the  contrary, 
it  can  rely  on  its  own  resources  and  urges  atten¬ 
tion  to  the  ends  of  nature  and  inquiry  after  the 
incomprehensibly  great  art  that  lies  hidden  be¬ 
hind  its  forms,  so  as  to  give  to  the  ideas  pro¬ 
duced  by  pure  practical  reason  an  incidental 
confirmation  in  physical  ends.  For  the  concep¬ 
tion  of  beings  of  the  world  subject  to  moral 
laws  is  an  a  priori  principle  upon  which  man 
must  necessarily  estimate  himself.  Furthermore, 
if  there  is  a  world-cause  acting  designedly  and 
directed  to  an  end,  the  moral  relation  above 
mentioned  must  just  as  necessarily  be  the  con¬ 
dition  of  the  possibility  of  a  creation  as  is  the 
relation  determined  by  physical  laws — that  is, 
supposing  that  such  an  intelligent  cause  has  also 
a  final  end.  This  is  a  principle  which  reason  re¬ 
gards  even  a  priori  as  one  that  is  necessary  for 
its  teleological  estimate  of  the  real  existence  of 
things.  The  whole  question,  then,  is  reduced  to 
this:  Have  we  any  ground  capable  of  satisfying 
reason,  speculative  or  practical,  to  justify  our 
attributing  a  final  end  to  the  supreme  cause  that 
acts  according  to  ends?  For  that,  judging  by  the 
subjective  frame  of  our  reason,  or  even  by 
aught  we  can  at  all  imagine  of  the  reason  of 
other  beings,  such  final  end  could  be  nothing  but 
man  as  subject  to  moral  laws,  may  be  taken 
a  priori  as  a  matter  of  certainty;  whereas  we 
are  wholly  unable  to  cognize  a  priori  what  are 
the  ends  of  nature  in  the  physical  order,  and 
above  all  it  is  impossible  to  see  that  a  nature 
could  not  exist  apart  from  such  ends. 


OF  TELEOLOGICAL  JUDGEMENT  59 3 


Remark 

Imagine  a  man  at  the  moment  when  his 
mind  is  disposed  to  moral  feeling!  If,  amid 
beautiful  natural  surroundings,  he  is  in  calm 
and  serene  enjoyment  of  his  existence,  he  feels 
within  him  a  need — a  need  of  being  grateful  for 
it  to  some  one.  Or,  at  another  time,  in  the  same 
frame  of  mind,  he  may  find  himself  in  the  stress 
of  duties  which  he  can  only  perform  and  will 
perform  by  submitting  to  a  voluntary  sacrifice; 
then  he  feels  within  him  a  need — a  need  of 
having,  in  so  doing,  carried  out  some  command 
and  obeyed  a  Supreme  Lord.  Or  he  may  in  some 
thoughtless  manner  have  diverged  from  the 
path  of  duty,  though  not  so  as  to  have  made 
himself  answerable  to  man;  yet  words  of  stem 
self-reproach  will  then  fall  upon  an  inward  ear, 
and  he  will  seem  to  hear  the  voice  of  a  judge  to 
whom  he  has  to  render  account.  In  a  word,  he 
needs  a  moral  intelligence;  because  he  exists  for 
an  end,  and  this  end  demands  a  Being  that  has 
formed  both  him  and  the  world  with  that  end 
in  view.  It  is  waste  of  labour  to  go  burrowing 
behind  these  feelings  for  motives;  for  they  are 
immediately  connected  with  the  purest  moral 
sentiment:  gratitude ,  obedience ,  and  humilia¬ 
tion — that  is,  submission  before  a  deserved 
chastisement — being  special  modes  of  a  mental 
disposition  towards  duty.  It  is  merely  that  the 
mind  inclined  to  give  expansion  to  its  moral  sen¬ 
timent  here  voluntarily  imagines  an  object  that 
is  not  in  the  world,  in  order,  if  possible,  to  prove 
its  dutifulness  in  the  eyes  of  such  an  object 
also.  Hence  it  is  at  least  possible — and,  besides, 
there  is  in  our  moral  habits  of  thought  a  foun¬ 
dation  for  so  doing — to  form  a  representation 
depicting  a  pure  moral  need  for  the  real  exis¬ 
tence  of  a  Being,  whereby  our  morality  gains  in 
strength  or  even  obtains — at  least  on  the  side 
of  our  representation — an  extension  of  area, 
that  is  to  say,  is  given  a  new  object  for  its  exer¬ 
cise.  In  other  words,  it  is  possible  to  admit  a 
moral  Legislator  existing  apart  from  the  world, 
and  to  do  so  without  regard  to  the  theoretical 
proof,  and  still  less  to  self-interest,  but  on  a 
purely  moral  ground,  which,  while  of  course  only 
subjective,  is  free  from  all  foreign  influence, 
on  the  mere  recommendation  of  a  pure  practical 
reason  that  legislates  for  itself  alone.  It  may  be 
that  such  a  disposition  of  the  mind  is  but  a  rare 
occurrence,  or,  again,  does  not  last  long,  but 
rather  is  fleeting  and  of  no  permanent  effect, 
or,  it  may  be,  passes  away  without  the  mind 
bestowing  a  single  thought  upon  the  object  so 
shadowed  forth,  and  without  troubling  to  reduce 


it  to  clear  conceptions.  Yet  the  source  of  this 
disposition  is  unmistakable.  It  is  the  original 
moral  bent  of  our  nature,  as  a  subjective  prin¬ 
ciple,  that  will  not  let  us  be  satisfied,  in  our  re¬ 
view  of  the  world,  with  the  finality  which  it 
derives  through  natural  causes,  but  leads  us  to 
introduce  into  it  an  underlying  supreme  Cause 
governing  nature  according  to  moral  laws.  In 
addition  to  the  above,  there  is  the  fact  that  we 
feel  ourselves  urged  by  the  moral  law  to  strive 
after  a  universal  highest  end,  while  yet  we  feel 
ourselves,  and  all  nature  too,  incapable  of  its 
attainment.  Further,  it  is  only  so  far  as  we 
strive  after  this  end  that  we  can  judge  ourselves 
to  be  in  harmony  with  the  final  end  of  an  in¬ 
telligent  world-cause — if  such  there  be.  Thus 
we  have  a  pure  moral  ground  derived  from  prac¬ 
tical  reason  for  admitting  this  Cause  (since  we 
may  do  so  without  self-contradiction),  if  for  no 
better  reason,  in  order  that  we  may  not  run  the 
risk  of  regarding  such  striving  as  quite  idle  in 
its  effects,  and  of  allowing  it  to  flag  in  conse¬ 
quence. 

Let  us  restate  what  we  intended  to  convey 
here  by  all  these  remarks.  While  fear  doubtless 
in  the  first  instance  may  have  been  able  to  pro¬ 
duce  gods,  that  is  demons,  it  is  only  reason  by 
its  moral  principles  that  has  been  able  to  pro¬ 
duce  the  conception  of  God — and  it  has  been 
able  to  do  so  despite  the  great  ignorance  that 
has  prevailed  in  what  concerns  the  teleology  of 
nature,  or  the  considerable  doubt  that  arises 
from  the  difficulty  of  reconciling  by  a  sufficient¬ 
ly  established  principle  the  mutually  conflicting 
phenomena  that  nature  presents.  Further,  the 
inner  moral  destination  of  man’s  existence  sup¬ 
plements  the  shortcomings  of  natural  knowl¬ 
edge,  by  directing  us  to  join  to  the  thought  of 
the  final  end  of  the  existence  of  all  things — an 
end  the  principle  of  which  only  satisfies  reason 
from  an  ethical  point  of  view — the  thought  of 
the  supreme  cause  as  endowed  v/ith  attributes 
whereby  it  is  empowered  to  subject  entire  na¬ 
ture  to  that  single  purpose,  and  make  it  merely 
instrumental  thereto.  In  other  words  it  directs 
us  to  think  the  supreme  cause  as  a  Deity. 

§87.  The  moral  proof  of  the  existence  of  God 

We  have  a  physical  teleology  that  affords  evi¬ 
dence  sufficient  for  our  theoretical  reflective 
judgement  to  enable  us  to  admit  the  existence 
of  an  intelligent  world-cause.  But  in  ourselves, 
and  still  more  in  the  general  conception  of  a 
rational  being  endowed  with  freedom  of  its  cau¬ 
sality,  we  find  a  moral  teleology.  But  as  our  own 
relation  to  an  end,  together  with  the  law  gov- 


THE  CRITIQUE 


erning  it,  may  be  determined  a  priori ,  and  con¬ 
sequently  cognized  as  necessary,  moral  teleology 
does  not  stand  in  need  of  any  intelligent  cause 
outside  ourselves  to  explain  this  intrinsic  con¬ 
formity  to  law  any  more  than  what  we  consider 
final  in  the  geometrical  properties  of  figures 
(their  adaptation  for  all  possible  kinds  of  em¬ 
ployment  by  art)  lets  us  look  beyond  to  a  su¬ 
preme  understanding  that  imparts  this  finality 
to  them.  But  this  moral  teleology  deals  with  us 
for  all  that  as  beings  of  the  world  and,  therefore, 
as  beings  associated  with  other  things  in  the 
world;  and  the  same  moral  laws  enjoin  us  to 
turn  our  consideration  to  these  other  things  in 
the  world,  regarded  either  as  ends,  or  as  objects 
in  respect  of  which  we  ourselves  are  the  final 
end.  This  moral  teleology,  then,  which  deals 
with  the  relation  of  our  own  causality  to  ends, 
or  even  to  a  final  end  that  must  be  proposed  by 
us  in  the  world,  as  well  as  with  the  reciprocal 
relation  subsisting  between  the  world  and  that 
moral  end  and  the  possibility  of  realizing  it  un¬ 
der  external  conditions — a  matter  upon  which 
no  physical  teleology  can  give  us  any  guidance 
— raises  a  necessary  question.  For  we  must  ask: 
Does  this  moral  teleology  oblige  our  rational 
critical  judgement  to  go  beyond  the  world  and 
seek  for  an  intelligent  supreme  principle  in  re¬ 
spect  of  the  relation  of  nature  to  the  moral  side 
of  our  being,  so  that  we  may  form  a  representa¬ 
tion  of  nature  as  displaying  finality  in  relation 
also  to  our  inner  moral  legislation  and  its  pos¬ 
sible  realization?  Hence  there  is  certainly  a 
moral  teleology.  It  is  as  necessarily  implicated 
with  the  nomothetic  of  freedom  on  the  one 
hand,  and  that  of  nature  on  the  other,  as  with 
civil  legislation  is  implicated  the  question  of 
where  the  executive  authority  is  to  be  sought. 
In  fact  there  is  here  the  same  implication  as  is 
to  be  found  in  everything  in  which  reason  has 
to  assign  a  principle  of  the  actuality  of  a  cer¬ 
tain  uniform  order  of  things  that  is  only  possi¬ 
ble  according  to  ideas.  We  shall  begin  by  ex¬ 
hibiting  how,  from  the  above  moral  teleology 
and  its  relation  to  physical  teleology,  reason  ad¬ 
vances  to  theology .  Having  done  so,  we  shall 
make  some  observations  on  the  possibility  and 
conclusiveness  of  this  mode  of  reasoning. 

If  we  assume  the  existence  of  certain  things, 
or  even  only  of  certain  forms  of  things,  to  be 
contingent,  and  consequently  to  be  only  possi¬ 
ble  by  means  of  something  else  as  their  cause, 
we  may  then  look  for  the  supreme  source  of 
this  causality,  and,  therefore,  for  the  uncondi¬ 
tioned  ground  of  the  conditioned,  either  in  the 
physical  or  the  teleological  order — that  is,  we 


may  look  either  to  the  nexus  effectivus  or  to  the 
nexus  finalis.  In  other  words,  we  may  ask  which 
is  the  supreme  efficient  cause,  or  we  may  ask 
what  is  the  supreme  or  absolutely  uncondi¬ 
tioned  end  of  such  cause,  that  is,  what  in  gen¬ 
eral  is  the  final  end  for  which  it  produces  these 
or  all  its  products.  In  the  latter  question,  it  is 
obviously  taken  for  granted  that  this  cause  can 
form  a  representation  of  the  end,  and  is  conse¬ 
quently  an  intelligent  being,  or  at  least  that  it 
must  be  conceived  by  us  as  acting  according  to 
the  laws  of  such  a  being. 

Now,  supposing  we  follow  the  teleological 
order,  there  is  a  fundamental  principle  to  which 
even  the  most  ordinary  human  intelligence  is 
obliged  to  give  immediate  assent.  It  is  the  prin¬ 
ciple  that  if  there  is  to  be  a  final  end  at  all, 
which  reason  must  assign  a  priori ,  then  iLcan 
only  be  man — or  any  rational  being  in  the  world 
— subject  to  moral  laws.1  For — and  this  is  the 
verdict  of  everyone — if  the  world  only  con¬ 
sisted  of  lifeless  beings,  or  even  consisted  partly 
of  living,  but  yet  irrational  beings,  the  existence 
of  such  a  world  would  have  no  worth  whatever, 
because  there  would  exist  in  it  no  being  with 
the  least  conception  of  what  worth  is.  On  the 
other  hand,  if  there  were  even  rational  beings, 

1 1  say  deliberately:  under  moral  laws.  It  is  not 
man  in  accordance  with  moral  law's,  that  is  to  say, 
human  beings  living  in  conformity  with  such  law's, 
that  is  the  final  end  of  creation.  For  to  use  the  latter 
expression  w'ould  be  to  assert  more  than  we  know, 
namely,  that  it  is  in  the  power  of  an  author  of  the 
w'orld  to  ensure  that  man  should  always  conform  to 
the  moral  law's.  But  this  presupposes  a  conception 
of  freedom  and  of  nature — of  which  latter  alone  we 
can  think  an  external  author — that  implies  an  insight 
into  the  supersensible  substrate  of  nature  and  its 
identity  with  what  is  rendered  possible  in  the  w'orld  by 
causality  through  freedom.  Such  insight  far  exceeds 
that  of  our  reason.  It  is  only  of  matt  under  moral 
laws  that  we  are  able  to  affirm,  without  transcending 
the  limits  of  our  insight,  that  his  existence  forms  the 
final  end  of  the  world.  This  statement  also  accords 
perfectly  with  the  verdict  of  human  reason  in  its 
reflection  upon  the  course  of  the  world  from  a  moral 
standpoint.  We  believe  that  even  in  the  case  of  the 
wicked  we  perceive  the  traces  of  a  wise  design  in 
things,  if  we  see  that  the  w'anton  criminal  does  not 
die  before  he  has  suffered  the  just  punishment  of  his 
misdeeds.  According  to  our  conceptions  of  free  causal¬ 
ity,  good  or  bad  conduct  depends  upon  ourselves.  But 
where  we  think  that  the  supreme  wisdom  in  the  gov¬ 
ernment  of  the  world  lies,  is  in  the  fact  that  the 
occasion  for  the  former,  and  the  result  following  from 
both,  is  ordained  according  to  moral  laws.  In  the 
latter  consists,  properly  speaking,  the  glory  of  God, 
which  is  therefore  not  inappropriately  termed  by 
theologians  the  ultimate  end  of  creation.  We  should 
add  that  when  we  make  use  of  the  w'ord  creation,  we 
only  take  it  to  mean  what  is  spoken  of  here,  namely, 
the  cause  of  the  existence  of  a  world ,  or  of  the  things 
in  it,  that  is,  substances.  This  is  also  what  the  strict 
meaning  of  the  word  conveys — actuatio  substantiae 
est  creatio.  Consequently  it  implies  no  assumption 
of  a  cause  that  acts  freely  and  that  is  therefore  in¬ 
telligent.  The  existence  of  such  an  intelligent  cause 
is  w'hat  w'e  are  set  upon  proving. 


OF  TELEOLOGICAL  JUDGEMENT  595 


and  if  nevertheless  their  reason  were  only  able 
to  set  the  worth  of  the  existence  of  things  in 
the  bearing  which  nature  has  upon  them,  that 
is,  in  their  well-being,  instead  of  being  able  to 
procure  such  a  worth  for  themselves  from  origi¬ 
nal  sources,  that  is,  in  their  freedom,  then  there 
would  be,  it  is  true,  relative  ends  in  the  world, 
but  no  absolute  end,  since  the  existence  of  ra¬ 
tional  beings  of  this  kind  would  still  always  re¬ 
main  devoid  of  an  end.  It  is,  however,  a  dis¬ 
tinctive  feature  of  the  moral  laws  that  they 
prescribe  something  for  reason  in  the  form  of 
an  end  apart  from  any  condition  and,  conse¬ 
quently,  in  the  very  form  that  the  conception 
of  a  final  end  requires.  Therefore  the  real  ex¬ 
istence  of  a  reason  like  this,  that  in  the  order  of 
ends  can  be  the  supreme  law  to  itself,  in  other 
words,  the  real  existence  of  rational  beings  sub¬ 
ject  to  moral  laws,  can  alone  be  regarded  as  the 
final  end  of  the  existence  of  a  world.  But  if  this 
is  not  so,  then  either  no  end  whatsoever  in  the 
cause  underlies  the  existence  of  the  world,  or 
else  only  ends  without  a  final  end. 

The  moral  law  is  the  formal  rational  condi¬ 
tion  of  the  employment  of  our  freedom,  and,  as 
such,  of  itself  alone  lays  its  obligation  upon  us, 
independently  of  any  end  as  its  material  con¬ 
dition.  But  it  also  defines  for  us  a  final  end,  and 
does  so  a  priori ,  and  makes  it  obligatory  upon  us 
to  strive  towards  its  attainment.  This  end  is 
the  summum  bonum,  as  the  highest  good  in  the 
world  possible  through  freedom. 

The  subjective  condition  under  which  man, 
and,  as  far  as  we  can  at  all  conceive,  every 
rational  finite  being  also,  is  able  under  the  above 
law  to  set  before  himself  a  final  end,  is  happi¬ 
ness.  Consequently  the  highest  possible  physical 
good  in  the  world,  and  the  one  to  be  furthered 
so  far  as  in  us  lies  as  the  final  end,  is  happiness 
— subject  to  the  objective  condition  that  the 
individual  harmonizes  with  the  law  of  morality, 
regarded  as  worthiness  to  be  happy. 

But  by  no  faculty  of  our  reason  can  we  rep¬ 
resent  to  ourselves  these  two  requisites  for  the 
final  end  proposed  to  us  by  the  moral  law  to  be 
conjoined  by  means  of  mere  natural  causes  and 
also  conformed  to  the  idea  of  the  final  end  in 
contemplation.  Accordingly,  if  we  do  not  bring 
the  causality  of  any  other  means  besides  nature 
into  alliance  with  our  freedom,  the  conception 
of  the  practical  necessity  of  such  an  end  through 
the  application  of  our  powers  does  not  accord 
with  the  theoretical  conception  of  physical  pos¬ 
sibility  of  its  effectuation. 

Consequently  we  must  assume  a  moral  world- 
cause,  that  is,  an  Author  of  the  world,  if  we 


are  to  set  before  ourselves  a  final  end  in  con¬ 
formity  with  the  requirements  of  the  moral  law. 
And  as  far  as  it  is  necessary  to  set  such  an  end 
before  us,  so  far,  that  is  in  the  same  degree  and 
upon  the  same  ground,  it  is  necessary  to  assume 
an  Author  of  the  world,  or,  in  other  words,  that 
there  is  a  God.1 

This  proof,  to  which  we  may  easily  give  the 
form  of  logical  precision,  does  not  imply  that 
it  is  as  necessary  to  assume  the  existence  of  God 
as  it  is  to  recognize  the  validity  of  the  moral 
law,  and  that,  consequently,  one  who  is  unable 
to  convince  himself  of  the  former  may  deem 
himself  absolved  from  the  obligations  imposed 
by  the  latter.  No!  all  that  must  be  abandoned 
in  that  case  is  the  premeditation  of  the  final  end 
in  the  world  to  be  effectuated  by  the  pursuit  of 
the  moral  law,  that  is,  the  premeditation  of  a 
happiness  of  rational  beings  harmoniously  as¬ 
sociated  with  such  pursuit,  as  the  highest  good 
in  the  world.  Every  rational  being  would  have 
to  continue  to  recognize  himself  as  firmly  bound 
by  the  precept  of  morals,  for  their  laws  are  for¬ 
mal  and  command  unconditionally,  paying  no 
regard  to  ends  (as  the  subject-matter  of  voli¬ 
tion).  But  the  one  requirement  of  the  final  end, 
as  prescribed  by  practical  reason  to  the  beings 
of  the  world,  is  an  irresistible  end  planted  in 
them  by  their  nature  as  finite  beings.  Reason 
refuses  to  countenance  this  end  except  as  sub¬ 
ject  to  the  moral  law  as  inviolable  condition, 
and  would  only  have  it  made  universal  in  ac¬ 
cordance  with  this  condition.  Thus  it  makes  the 
furtherance  of  happiness,  in  agreement  with 
morality,  the  final  end.  To  promote  this  end — 
so  far,  in  respect  of  happiness,  as  lies  in  our 
power — is  commanded  us  by  the  moral  law, 
whatever  the  outcome  of  this  endeavour  may 
be.  The  fulfilment  of  duty  consists  in  the  form 
of  the  earnest  will,  not  in  the  intervening  causes 
that  contribute  to  success. 

Suppose,  then,  that  a  man,  influenced  partly 
by  the  weakness  of  all  the  speculative  arguments 
that  are  thought  so  much  of,  and  partly  by  the 
number  of  irregularities  he  finds  in  nature  and 
the  moral  world,  becomes  persuaded  oftheprop- 

1  This  moral  argument  is  not  intended  to  supply  an 
objectively  valid  proof  of  the  existence  of  God.  It  is 
not  meant  to  demonstrate  to  the  sceptic  that  there  is 
a  God,  but  that  he  must  adopt  the  assumption  of  this 
proposition  as  a  maxim  of  his  practical  reason,  if  he 
wishes  to  think  in  a  manner  consistent  with  morality. 
Further,  the  argument  is  not  intended  to  affirm  that 
it  is  necessary  for  the  purpose  of  morality  to  assume 
that  the  happiness  of  all  rational  beings  in  the  world 
is  proportioned  to  their  morality.  On  the  contrary  it 
is  by  virtue  of  morality  that  the  assumption  is  necessi¬ 
tated.  Consequently  it  is  an  argument  that  is  suf¬ 
ficient  subjectively  and  for  moral  persons. 


THE  CRITIQUE 


osition:  “There  is  no  God”;  nevertheless  in 
his  own  eyes  he  would  be  a  worthless  creature 
if  he  chose  on  that  account  to  regard  the  laws 
of  duty  as  simply  fanciful,  invalid,  and  inoblig- 
atory.  and  resolved  boldly  to  transgress  them. 
Again,  let  us  suppose  that  such  a  man  were  able 
subsequently  to  convince  himself  of  the  truth 
of  what  he  had  at  first  doubted;  he  would  still 
remain  worthless  if  he  held  to  the  above  way  of 
thinking.  This  is  so,  were  he  even  to  fulfil  his 
duty  as  punctiliously  as  could  be  desired,  so  far 
as  actual  actions  are  concerned,  but  were  to  do 
so  from  fear  or  with  a  view  to  reward,  and  with¬ 
out  an  inward  reverence  for  duty.  Conversely, 
if,  as  a  believer  in  God,  he  observes  his  duty 
according  to  his  conscience,  uprightly  and  dis¬ 
interestedly,  yet  if  whenever,  to  try  himself,  he 
puts  before  himself  the  case  of  his  haply  being 
able  to  convince  himself  that  there  is  no  God. 
he  straightway  believes  himself  free  from  all 
moral  obligation,  the  state  of  his  inner  moral 
disposition  could  then  only  be  bad. 

Let  us  then,  as  we  may,  take  the  case  of  a 
righteous  man,  such,  say,  as  Spinoza,  who  con¬ 
siders  himself  firmly  persuaded  that  there  is 
no  God  and — since  in  respect  of  the  object  of 
morality  a  similar  result  ensues — no  future  life 
either.  How  will  he  estimate  his  individual  in¬ 
trinsic  finality  that  is  derived  from  the  moral 
law  which  he  reveres  in  practice?  He  does  not 
require  that  its  pursuit  should  bring  him  any 
personal  benefit  either  in  this  or  any  other 
world.  On  the  contrary,  his  will  is  disinterestedly 
to  establish  only  that  good  to  which  the  holy  law 
directs  all  his  energies.  But  he  is  circumscribed 
in  his  endeavour.  He  may,  it  is  true,  expect  to 
find  a  chance  concurrence  now  and  again,  but 
he  can  never  expect  to  find  in  nature  a  uniform 
agreement — a  consistent  agreement  according 
to  fixed  rules,  answering  to  what  his  maxims 
are  and  must  be  subjectively,  with  that  end 
which  yet  he  feels  himself  obliged  and  urged  to 
realize.  Deceit,  violence,  and  envy  will  always  be 
rife  around  him,  although  he  himself  is  honest, 
peaceable,  and  benevolent;  and  the  other  right¬ 
eous  men  that  he  meets  in  the  world,  no  matter 
how  deserving  they  may  be  of  happiness,  will 
be  subjected  by  nature,  which  takes  no  heed  of 
such  deserts,  to  all  the  evils  of  want,  disease, 
and  untimely  death,  just  as  are  the  other  ani¬ 
mals  on  the  earth.  And  so  it  will  continue  to  be 
until  one  wide  grave  engulfs  them  all — just  and 
unjust,  there  is  no  distinction  in  the  grave — 
and  hurls  them  back  into  the  abyss  of  the  aim¬ 
less  chaos  of  matter  from  which  they  were 
taken — they  that  were  able  to  believe  them¬ 


selves  the  final  end  of  creation.  Thus  the  end 
which  this  right-minded  man  would  have,  and 
ought  to  have,  in  view  in  his  pursuit  of  the  moral 
law,  would  certainly  have  to  be  abandoned  by 
him  as  impossible.  But  perhaps  he  resolves  to 
remain  faithful  to  the  call  of  his  inner  moral 
vocation  and  would  fain  not  let  the  respect  with 
which  he  is  immediately  inspired  to  obedience 
by  the  moral  law  be  weakened  owing  to  the 
nullity  of  the  one  ideal  final  end  that  answers 
to  its  high  demand — which  could  not  happen 
without  doing  injury  to  moral  sentiment.  If  so, 
he  must  assume  the  existence  of  a  moral  author 
of  the  world,  that  is,  of  a  God.  As  this  assump¬ 
tion  at  least  involves  nothing  intrinsically  self¬ 
contradictory  he,  may  quite  readily  make  it  from 
a  practical  point  of  view,  that  is  to  say,  at  least 
for  the  purpose  of  framing  a  conception  of  the 
possibility  of  the  final  end  morally  prescribed 
to  him. 

§  88.  Limitation  of  the  validity  of  the 
moral  proof 

Pure  reason,  regarded  as  a  practical  faculty, 
a  capacity,  that  is  to  say,  for  determining  the 
pure  employment  of  our  causality  by  means  of 
ideas,  or  pure  rational  conceptions,  not  alone 
possesses  in  its  moral  law  a  principle  which  is 
regulative  of  our  actions,  but  by  virtue  of  that 
law  it  furnishes  at  the  same  time  an  additional 
principle  which,  from  a  subjective  point  of  view, 
is  constitutive.  This  principle  is  contained  in 
the  conception  of  an  object  which  reason  alone 
is  able  to  think,  and  which  is  meant  to  be  real¬ 
ized  in  the  world  through  our  actions  in  con¬ 
formity  to  that  law.  The  idea  of  a  final  end  in 
the  employment  of  freedom  in  obedience  to 
moral  laws  has,  therefore,  a  reality  that  is  sub¬ 
jectively  practical.  We  are  determined  a  priori 
by  reason  to  further  the  summum  bonum  as 
far  as  in  us  lies.  This  summum  bonum  is  formed 
by  the  union  of  the  greatest  welfare  of  the 
rational  beings  in  the  world  with  the  supreme 
condition  of  their  good,  or,  in  other  words,  by 
the  union  of  universal  happiness  with  the  strict¬ 
est  morality.  Now  the  possibility  of  one  of  the 
factors  of  this  final  end,  namely  that  of  happi¬ 
ness,  is  empirically  conditioned.  It  depends  upon 
how  nature  is  constituted — on  whether  nature 
harmonizes  or  not  with  this  end.  It  is,  there¬ 
fore,  from  a  theoretical  point  of  view  problem¬ 
atic;  whereas  the  other  factor,  namely  moral¬ 
ity,  in  respect  of  which  we  are  independent  of 
the  co-operation  of  nature,  is  a  priori  assured  of 
its  possibility  and  is  dogmatically  certain.  Ac¬ 
cordingly,  the  fact  that  we  have  a  final  end  set 


OF  TELEOLOGICAL  JUDGEMENT  597 


before  us  a  priori  does  not  meet  all  the  require¬ 
ments  of  the  objective  and  theoretical  reality 
of  the  conception  of  the  final  end  of  rational 
beings  in  the  world.  It  is  further  requisite  that 
creation,  that  is,  the  world  itself,  should,  in 
respect  of  its  real  existence,  have  a  final  end. 
Were  we  able  to  prove  a  priori  that  it  has  such 
an  end,  this  would  supplement  the  subjective 
reality  of  the  final  end  by  a  reality  that  is  ob¬ 
jective.  For,  if  creation  has  a  final  end  at  all, 
we  cannot  conceive  it  otherwise  than  as  har¬ 
monizing  necessarily  with  our  moral  faculty, 
which  is  what  alone  makes  the  conception  of 
an  end  possible.  But,  now,  we  do  find  in  the 
world  what  are  certainly  ends.  In  fact  physical 
teleology  exhibits  ends  in  such  abundance  that 
if  we  let  reason  guide  our  judgement  we  have 
after  all  justification  for  assuming,  as  a  prin¬ 
ciple  upon  which  to  investigate  nature,  that 
there  is  nothing  whatever  in  nature  that  has 
not  got  its  end.  Yet  in  nature  itself  we  search 
in  vain  for  its  own  final  end.  Hence,  just  as  the 
idea  of  this  final  end  resides  only  in  reason,  so 
it  is  only  in  rational  beings  that  such  an  end 
itself  can  and  must  be  sought  as  an  objective 
possibility.  But  the  practical  reason  of  these 
beings  does  not  merely  assign  this  final  end:  it 
also  determines  this  conception  in  respect  of 
the  conditions  under  which  a  final  end  of  crea¬ 
tion  can  alone  be  thought  by  us. 

Now  the  question  arises:  Is  it  not  possible  to 
substantiate  the  objective  reality  of  the  con¬ 
ception  of  a  final  end  in  a  manner  that  will  meet 
the  theoretical  requirements  of  pure  reason? 
This  cannot  indeed  be  done  apodeictically  for 
the  determinant  judgement.  Yet  may  it  not  be 
done  sufficiently  for  the  maxims  of  theoretical 
judgement  so  far  as  reflective?  This  is  the  least 
that  could  be  demanded  of  speculative  philos¬ 
ophy,  which  undertakes  to  connect  the  ethical 
end  with  physical  ends  by  means  of  the  idea  of 
a  single  end.  Yet  even  this  little  is  still  far  more 
than  it  can  ever  accomplish. 

Let  us  look  at  the  matter  from  the  stand¬ 
point  of  the  principle  of  the  theoretical  reflec¬ 
tive  judgement.  To  account  for  the  final  products 
of  nature,  are  we  not  justified  in  assuming  a 
supreme  cause  of  nature,  whose  causality  in 
respect  of  the  actuality  of  nature,  or  whose  act 
of  creation,  must  be  regarded  as  specifically 
different  from  that  which  is  required  for  the 
mechanism  of  nature,  or,  in  other  words,  as  the 
causality  of  an  understanding?  If  we  are,  then, 
on  the  above  principle,  we  should  say  that  we 
were  also  sufficiently  justified  in  attributing  to 
this  original  being,  not  merely  ends  prevalent 


throughout  nature,  but  also  a  final  end.  This 
does  not  serve  the  purpose  of  proving  the  ex¬ 
istence  of  such  a  being,  yet,  at  least,  as  was  the 
case  in  the  physical  teleology,  it  is  a  justifica¬ 
tion  sufficient  to  convince  us  that  to  make  the 
possibility  of  such  a  world  intelligible  to  our¬ 
selves  we  must  not  merely  look  to  ends,  but 
must  also  ascribe  its  real  existence  to  an  un¬ 
derlying  final  end. 

But  a  final  end  is  simply  a  conception  of  our 
practical  reason  and  cannot  be  inferred  from 
any  data  of  experience  for  the  purpose  of  form¬ 
ing  a  theoretical  estimate  of  nature,  nor  can  it 
be  applied  to  the  cognition  of  nature.  The  only 
possible  use  of  this  conception  is  for  practical 
reason  according  to  moral  laws;  and  the  final 
end  of  creation  is  such  a  constitution  of  the 
world  as  harmonizes  with  what  we  can  only  defi¬ 
nitely  specify  according  to  laws,  namely,  with 
the  final  end  of  our  pure  practical  reason  and 
of  this,  moreover,  so  far  as  intended  to  be  prac¬ 
tical.  Now,  by  virtue  of  the  moral  law  which 
enjoins  this  final  end  upon  us,  we  have  reason 
for  assuming  from  a  practical  point  of  view, 
that  is,  for  the  direction  of  our  energies  towards 
the  realization  of  that  end,  that  it  is  possible, 
or,  in  other  words,  practicable.  Consequently 
we  are  also  justified  in  assuming  a  nature  of 
things  harmonizing  with  such  a  possibility — for 
this  possibility  is  subject  to  a  condition  which 
does  not  lie  in  our  power,  and  unless  nature 
played  into  our  hands  the  realization  of  the  final 
end  would  be  impossible.  Hence,  we  have  a 
moral  justification  for  supposing  that  where  we 
have  a  world  we  have  also  a  final  end  of 
creation. 

This  does  not  yet  bring  us  to  the  inference 
from  moral  teleology  to  a  theology,  that  is,  to 
the  existence  of  a  moral  Author  of  the  world, 
but  only  to  a  final  end  of  creation,  which  is  de¬ 
fined  in  the  above  manner.  Now  must  we,  to 
account  for  this  creation,  that  is,  for  the  real 
existence  of  things  conformable  to  a  final  end , 
in  the  first  place  admit  an  intelligent  being,  and, 
in  the  second  place,  not  merely  an  intelligent 
being — as  had  to  be  admitted  to  account  for 
the  possibility  of  such  things  in  nature  as  we 
are  compelled  to  estimate  as  ends — but  one  that 
is  also  moral ,  as  Author  of  the  world,  and  con¬ 
sequently  a  God ?  This  admission  involves  a 
further  inference,  and  one  of  such  a  nature  that 
we  see  that  it  is  intended  for  the  power  of 
judging  by  conceptions  of  practical  reason, 
and,  being  so,  is  drawn  for  the  reflective,  not 
for  the  determinant  judgement.  It  is  true  that 
with  us  morally  practical  reason  is  essentially 


THE  CRITIQUE 


598 

different  in  its  principles  from  technically  prac¬ 
tical  reason.  But,  while  this  is  so,  we  cannot 
pretend  to  see  that  the  same  distinction  must 
also  hold  in  the  case  of  the  supreme  world-cause, 
if  it  is  assumed  to  be  an  intelligence,  and  that  a 
particular  type  of  causality  is  required  on  its 
part  for  the  final  end,  different  from  that  which 
is  requisite  simply  for  natural  ends,  or  that  we 
have,  consequently,  in  our  final  end,  not  merely 
a  moral  ground  for  admitting  a  final  end  of 
creation,  as  an  effect,  but  also  a  moral  being ,  as 
the  original  source  of  creation.  But  it  is  quite 
competent  for  us  to  assert  that  the  nature  of 
our  faculty  of  reason  is  such  that  without  an 
Author  and  Governor  of  the  world,  who  is  also 
a  moral  Lawgiver,  we  are  wholly  unable  to  ren¬ 
der  intelligible  to  ourselves  the  possibility  of 
a  finality,  related  to  the  moral  law  and  its 
object,  such  as  exists  in  this  final  end. 

The  actuality  of  a  supreme  morally  legisla¬ 
tive  Author  is,  therefore,  sufficiently  proved 
simply  for  the  practical  employment  of  our 
reason,  without  determining  anything  theoreti¬ 
cally  in  respect  of  its  existence.  For  reason  has 
an  end  which  is  prescribed  independently  by 
its  own  peculiar  legislation.  To  make  this  end 
possible  it  requires  an  idea  which  removes,  suf¬ 
ficiently  for  the  reflective  judgement,  the  ob¬ 
stacle  which  arises  from  our  inability  to  carry 
such  legislation  into  effect  when  we  have  a  mere 
physical  conception  of  the  world.  In  that  way 
this  idea  acquires  practical  reality,  although  for 
speculative  knowledge  it  fails  of  every  means 
that  would  procure  it  reality  from  a  theoretical 
point  of  view  for  explaining  nature  or  deter¬ 
mining  its  supreme  cause.  For  theoretical  reflec¬ 
tive  judgement  an  intelligent  w'orld-cause  was 
sufficiently  proved  by  physical  teleology  from 
the  ends  of  nature.  For  the  practical  reflective 
judgement,  moral  teleology  effects  the  same  by 
means  of  the  conception  of  a  final  end,  which  it 
is  obliged  to  ascribe  to  creation  from  a  practical 
point  of  view.  The  objective  reality  of  the  idea 
of  God,  regarded  as  a  moral  Author  of  the  world, 
cannot,  it  is  true,  be  substantiated  by  means 
of  physical  ends  alone.  Nevertheless,  when  the 
knowledge  of  those  ends  is  associated  with  that 
of  the  moral  end.  the  maxim  of  pure  reason, 
which  directs  us  to  pursue  unity  of  principles 
so  far  as  we  are  able  to  do  so,  lends  consider¬ 
able  importance  to  these  ends  for  the  purpose 
of  reinforcing  the  practical  reality  of  that  idea 
by  the  reality  which  it  already  possesses  from 
a  theoretical  point  of  view  for  judgement. 

In  this  connection  there  are  two  points  which 
it  is  most  necessary  to  note  for  the  purpose  of 


preventing  a  misunderstanding  which  might 
easily  arise.  In  the  first  place,  these  attributes 
of  the  Supreme  Being  can  only  be  conceived 
by  us  on  an  analogy.  For  how  are  we  to  investi¬ 
gate  its  nature  when  experience  can  show  us 
nothing  similar?  In  the  second  place,  such  attri¬ 
butes  also  only  enable  us  to  conceive  a  Supreme 
Being,  not  to  cognize  it  or  to  predicate  them 
of  it  in  more  or  less  theoretical  manner.  For 
this  could  only  be  done  on  behalf  of  the  deter¬ 
minant  judgement,  as  a  faculty  of  our  reason 
in  its  speculative  aspect,  and  for  the  purpose 
of  discerning  the  intrinsic  nature  of  the  supreme 
world-cause.  But  the  only  question  that  con¬ 
cerns  us  here  is  as  to  what  conception  we  have, 
by  the  structure  of  our  cognitive  faculties,  to 
form  of  this  Being,  and  whether  we  have  to  ad¬ 
mit  its  existence  on  account  of  an  end,  which 
pure  practical  reason,  apart  from  any  such  as¬ 
sumption,  enjoins  upon  us  to  realize  as  far  as 
in  us  lies,  and  for  which  we  seek  likewise  to 
procure  simply  practical  reality,  that  is  to  say, 
merely  to  be  able  to  regard  a  contemplated 
effect  as  possible.  It  may  well  be  that  the  above 
conception  is  transcendent  for  speculative  rea¬ 
son.  The  attributes  also  which  by  means  of  it 
we  ascribe  to  the  Being  in  question  may,  objec¬ 
tively  used,  involve  a  latent  anthropomorphism. 
Yet  the  object  which  we  have  in  view  in  em¬ 
ploying  them  is  not  that  we  wish  to  determine 
the  nature  of  that  Being  by  reference  to  them 
— a  nature  which  is  inaccessible  to  us — but 
rather  that  we  seek  to  use  them  for  determining 
our  own  selves  and  our  will.  We  may  name  a 
cause  after  the  conception  which  we  have  of 
its  effect — though  only  in  respect  of  the  rela¬ 
tion  in  which  it  stands  to  this  effect.  And  we 
may  do  this  without  on  that  account  seeking 
to  define  intrinsically  the  inherent  nature  of 
that  cause  by  the  only  properties  known  to  us 
of  causes  of  that  kind,  which  properties  must 
be  given  to  us  by  experience.  We  may,  for  in¬ 
stance,  ascribe  to  the  soul,  among  other  prop¬ 
erties.  a  vis  locomotive ,  because  physical  move¬ 
ments  are  actually  started  the  cause  of  which 
lies  in  the  mental  representation  of  them.  But 
this  we  do  without  on  that  account  meaning 
to  attribute  to  the  soul  the  only  kind  of  dynam¬ 
ical  force  of  which  we  have  any  knowledge — 
that  is,  force  exerted  by  attraction,  pressure, 
impact,  and,  consequently,  by  means  of  a  move¬ 
ment.  which  forces  always  presuppose  a  being 
extended  in  space.  Now  in  just  the  same  way 
we  have  to  assume  something  that  contains  the 
ground  of  the  possibility  and  practical  reality, 
or  practicability,  of  a  necessary  moral  final  end. 


OF  TELEOLOGICAL  JUDGEMENT  590 


But,  looking  to  the  character  of  the  effect  ex¬ 
pected  therefrom,  we  may  conceive  this  “some¬ 
thing”  as  a  wise  Being  ruling  the  world  accord¬ 
ing  to  moral  laws.  And,  conformably  to  the 
frame  of  our  cognitive  faculties,  we  are  obliged 
to  conceive  it  as  a  cause  of  things  that  is  dis¬ 
tinct  from  nature,  for  the  sole  purpose  of  ex¬ 
pressing  the  relation  in  which  this  being  that 
transcends  all  our  cognitive  faculties  stands  to 
the  object  of  our  practical  reason.  Yet  in  so 
doing  we  do  not  mean  on  that  account  to  as¬ 
cribe  to  this  being  theoretically  the  only  cau¬ 
sality  of  this  kind  familiar  to  us,  namely  an 
understanding  and  a  will.  Nay  more,  even  as  to 
the  causality  which  we  think  exists  in  this  Being 
in  respect  of  what  is  for  us  a  final  end,  we  do 
not  mean  to  differentiate  it  objectively,  as  it 
exists  in  this  being  itself,  from  the  causality  in 
respect  of  nature  and  all  its  final  modes.  On  the 
contrary,  we  only  presume  to  be  able  to  admit 
this  distinction  as  one  subjectively  necessary 
for  our  cognitive  faculty,  constituted  as  it  is, 
and  as  valid  for  the  reflective,  and  not  for  the 
objectively  determinant,  judgement.  But,  once 
the  question  touches  practical  matters,  a  regula¬ 
tive  principle  of  this  kind — one  for  prudence 
or  wisdom  to  follow — which  directs  us  to  act  in 
conformity  with  something,  as  an  end,  the  pos¬ 
sibility  of  which,  by  the  frame  of  our  cognitive 
faculties,  can  only  be  conceived  by  us  in  a  cer¬ 
tain  manner,  then  becomes  also  constitutive. 
In  other  words,  it  is  practically  determinant, 
whereas  the  very  same  principle  regarded  as 
one  upon  which  to  estimate  the  objective  pos¬ 
sibility  of  things  is  in  no  way  theoretically  de¬ 
terminant,  or,  in  other  words,  does  not  imply 
that  the  only  type  of  possibility  which  our 
thinking  faculty  recognizes  may  also  be  pred¬ 
icated  of  the  object  of  our  thought.  On  the 
contrary,  it  is  a  mere  regulative  principle  for 
the  use  of  reflective  judgement. 

Remark 

This  moral  proof  is  not  in  any  sense  a  newly 
discovered  argument,  but  at  the  most  only  an 
old  one  in  a  new  form.  For  its  germ  was  lying  in 
the  mind  of  man  when  his  reason  first  quickened 
into  life,  and  it  only  grew  and  ever  developed 
with  the  progressive  culture  of  that  faculty.  The 
moment  mankind  began  to  reflect  upon  right 
and  wrong — at  a  time  when  men’s  eyes  as  yet 
cast  but  a  heedless  regard  at  the  finality  of 
nature,  and  when  they  took  advantage  of  it 
without  imagining  the  presence  of  anything  but 
nature's  accustomed  course — one  inevitable 
judgement  must  have  forced  itself  upon  them. 


It  could  never  be  that  the  issue  is  all  alike, 
whether  a  man  has  acted  fairly  or  falsely,  with 
equity  or  with  violence,  albeit  to  his  life’s  end. 
as  far  at  least  as  human  eye  can  see,  his  virtues 
have  brought  him  no  reward,  his  transgressions 
no  punishment.  It  seems  as  though  they  per¬ 
ceived  a  voice  within  them  say  that  it  must 
make  a  difference.  So  there  must  also  have  been 
a  lurking  notion,  however  obscure,  of  something 
after  which  they  felt  themselves  bound  to  strive, 
and  with  which  such  a  result  would  be  wholly 
discordant,  or  with  which,  once  they  regarded 
the  course  of  the  natural  world  as  the  sole  order 
of  things,  they  would  then  be  unable  to  recon¬ 
cile  that  significant  bent  of  their  minds.  Now 
crude  as  are  the  various  notions  they  might 
form  of  the  way  in  which  such  an  irregularity 
could  be  put  straight — and  it  is  one  that  must 
be  far  more  revolting  to  the  human  mind  than 
the  blind  chance  which  some  have  sought  to 
make  the  underlying  principle  of  their  estimate 
of  nature — there  is  only  one  principle  upon 
which  they  could  even  conceive  it  possible  for 
nature  to  harmonize  with  the  moral  law  dwell¬ 
ing  within  them.  It  is  that  of  a  Supreme  Cause 
ruling  the  world  according  to  moral  laws.  For 
a  final  end  within,  that  is  set  before  them  as  a 
duty,  and  a  nature  without,  that  has  no  final 
end,  though  in  it  the  former  end  is  to  be  actual¬ 
ized,  are  in  open  contradiction.  I  admit  they 
might  hatch  many  absurdities  anent  the  inner 
nature  of  that  world-cause.  But  that  relation 
to  the  moral  order  in  the  government  of  the 
world  always  remained  the  same  as  is  univer¬ 
sally  comprehensible  to  the  most  untutored 
reason,  so  far  as  it  treats  itself  as  practical, 
though  speculative  reason  is  far  from  being 
able  to  keep  pace  with  it.  Further,  in  all  prob¬ 
ability,  it  was  this  moral  interest  that  first 
aroused  attentiveness  to  beauty  and  the  ends 
of  nature.  This  would  be  admirably  calculated 
to  strengthen  the  above  idea,  though  it  could 
not  supply  its  foundation.  Still  less  could  it  dis¬ 
pense  with  the  moral  interest;1  for  it  is  only 
in  relation  to  the  final  end  that  the  very  study 
of  the  ends  of  nature  acquires  that  immediate 
interest  displayed  to  so  great  an  extent  in  the 
admiration  bestowed  upon  nature  without  re¬ 
gard  to  any  accruing  advantage. 

§  89.  The  use  of  the  moral  argument 

The  fact  that,  in  respect  of  all  our  ideas  of 
the  supersensible,  reason  is  restricted  to  the 
conditions  of  its  practical  employment,  is  of 
obvious  use  in  connection  with  the  idea  of  God. 

1  LCf.  above,  p.  522.] 


6oc 


THE  CRITIQUE 


It  prevents  theology  from  losing  itself  in  the 
clouds  of  theosophy,  i.e.,  in  transcendent  con¬ 
ceptions  that  confuse  reason,  or  from  sinking 
into  the  depths  of  demonology,  i.e.,  an  an¬ 
thropomorphic  mode  of  representing  the  Su¬ 
preme  Being.  Also  it  keeps  religion  from  falling 
into  theurgy ,  which  is  a  fanatical  delusion  that 
a  feeling  can  be  communicated  to  us  from  other 
supersensible  beings  and  that  we  in  turn  can 
exert  an  influence  on  them,  or  into  idolatry , 
which  is  a  superstitious  delusion  that  one  can 
make  oneself  acceptable  to  the  Supreme  Being 
by  other  means  than  that  of  having  the  moral 
law  at  heart.1 

For  if  the  vanity  or  presumption  of  those 
who  would  argue  about  what  lies  beyond  the 
world  of  sense  is  allowed  to  determine  even  the 
smallest  point  theoretically,  and  so  as  to  extend 
our  knowledge;  if  any  boast  is  permitted  of 
light  upon  the  existence  and  constitution  of  the 
divine  nature,  its  intelligence  and  will,  and  the 
laws  of  both  these  and  the  attributes  which 
issue  therefrom  and  influence  the  world:  I 
should  like  to  know  at  what  precise  point  the 
line  is  going  to  be  drawn  for  these  pretensions 
of  reason.  From  whatever  source  such  light  is 
derived,  still  more  may  be  expected — if,  as  the 
idea  is,  we  only  rack  our  brains.  Yet  it  is  only 
on  some  principle  that  bounds  can  be  set  to 
such  claims — it  is  not  enough  simply  to  appeal 
to  our  experience  of  the  fact  that  all  attempts 
of  the  sort  have  so  far  miscarried;  for  that  is 
no  disproof  of  the  possibility  of  a  better  result. 
But  the  only  principle  possible  in  this  case  is 
either  that  of  admitting  that  in  respect  of  the 
supersensible  absolutely  nothing  can  be  deter¬ 
mined  theoretically  (unless  solely  by  way  of 
bare  negation),  or  that  of  supposing  the  exist¬ 
ence  in  our  reason  of  an  as  yet  unopened  mine 
of  who  knows  how  vast  and  enlightening  infor¬ 
mation  reserved  for  us  and  our  posterity.  But 
the  result,  so  far  as  concerns  religion — that  is, 
morality  in  relation  to  God  as  Lawgiver — would 
be  that  morality,  supposing  that  the  theoretical 
knowledge  of  God  has  to  take  the  lead,  must 
then  conform  to  theology.  Thus  not  alone  will 
an  extrinsic  and  arbitrary  legislation  on  the  part 
of  a  Supreme  Being  have  to  be  introduced  in 

1  A  religion  is  never  free  from  the  imputation  of 
idolatry,  in  a  practical  sense,  so  long  as  the  attributes 
with  which  it  endows  the  Supreme  Being  are  such 
that  anything  that  man  may  do  can  be  taken  as  in 
accordance  with  God’s  will  on  any  other  all-sufficing 
condition  than  that  of  morality.  For,  however  pure 
and  free  from  sensuous  images  the  form  of  that  con¬ 
ception  may  be  from  a  theoretical  point  of  view,  yet, 
with  such  attributes,  it  is  from  a  practical  point  of 
view  depicted  as  an  idol — the  nature  of  God’s  will, 
that  is  to  say,  is  represented  anthropomorphically. 


place  of  an  immanent  and  necessary  legislation 
of  reason,  but,  even  in  such  legislation,  all  the 
defects  of  our  insight  into  the  divine  nature  must 
spread  to  the  ethical  code,  and  religion  in  this 
way  be  divorced  from  morality  and  perverted. 

What  now  of  the  hope  of  a  future  life?  It  is 
open  to  us  to  look  to  the  final  end  which,  in 
obedience  to  the  injunction  of  the  moral  law, 
we  have  ourselves  to  fulfil,  and  to  adopt  it  as 
a  guide  to  the  verdict  of  reason  on  our  desti¬ 
nation — a  verdict  which  is  therefore  only  re¬ 
garded  as  necessary  or  worthy  of  acceptance 
from  a  practical  point  of  view.  But  if,  instead 
of  so  doing,  we  consult  our  faculty  of  theoreti¬ 
cal  knowledge,  then  the  same  lot  befalls  psy¬ 
chology  in  this  connection  as  befell  theology  in 
the  case  above.  It  supplies  no  more  than  a  nega¬ 
tive  conception  of  our  thinking  being.  It  tells 
us  that  not  one  of  the  operations  of  the  mind 
or  manifestations  of  the  internal  sense  can  be 
explained  on  materialistic  lines;  that,  accord¬ 
ingly,  no  enlightening  or  determinant  judgement 
as  to  the  separate  nature  of  what  thinks,  or  of 
the  continuance  or  discontinuance  of  its  person¬ 
ality  after  death,  can  possibly  be  passed  on 
speculative  grounds  by  any  exercise  of  our 
faculty  of  theoretical  knowledge.  Thus  every¬ 
thing  is  here  left  to  the  teleological  estimate 
of  our  existence  from  a  point  of  view  that  is 
necessary  in  the  practical  sphere,  and  to  the 
assumption  of  the  continuance  of  our  existence, 
as  a  condition  required  by  the  final  end  that  is 
absolutely  imposed  upon  us  by  reason.  Hence 
in  our  negative  result  we  see  at  once  a  gain — 
a  gain  that  at  first  sight  no  doubt  appears  a  loss. 
For  just  as  theology  can  never  become  theoso¬ 
phy,  so  rational  psychology  can  never  become 
pneumatology ,  as  a  science  that  extends  our 
knowledge,  nor  yet,  on  the  other  hand,  be  in 
danger  of  lapsing  into  any  sort  of  materialism. 
On  the  contrary,  we  see  that  it  is  really  a  mere 
anthropology  of  the  internal  sense,  a  knowledge, 
that  is  to  say,  of  our  thinking  self  as  alive ,  and 
that,  in  the  form  of  a  theoretical  cognition,  it 
also  remains  merely  empirical.  But,  as  concerned 
with  the  problem  of  our  eternal  existence,  ra¬ 
tional  psychology  is  not  a  theoretical  science  at 
all.  It  rests  upon  a  single  inference  of  moral  tele¬ 
ology,  just  as  the  entire  necessity  of  its  employ¬ 
ment  arises  out  of  moral  teleology  and  our 
practical  vocation. 

§  90.  The  type  of  assurance  in  a  teleological 
proof  of  the  existence  of  God 

Whether  a  proof  is  derived  from  immediate 
empirical  presentation  of  what  is  to  be  proved, 


OF  TELEOLOGICAL  JUDGEMENT 


as  in  the  case  of  proof  by  observation  of  the 
object  or  by  experiment,  or  whether  it  is  derived 
a  priori  by  reason  from  principles,  what  is  pri¬ 
marily  required  of  it  is  that  it  should  not  per¬ 
suade,  but  convince,  or  at  least  tend  to  convince. 
The  argument  or  inference,  in  other  words, 
should  not  be  simply  a  subjective,  or  aesthetic, 
ground  of  assent — a  mere  semblance — but 
should  be  objectively  valid  and  a  logical  source 
of  knowledge.  If  it  is  not  this,  intelligence  is 
taken  in,  not  won  over.  An  illusory  proof  of  the 
type  in  question  is  brought  forward  in  natural 
theology — maybe  with  the  best  of  intentions, 
but  nevertheless  with  a  deliberate  concealment 
of  its  weakness.  The  whole  host  of  evidences  of 
an  origin  of  the  things  of  nature  according  to 
the  principle  of  ends  is  marshalled  before  us, 
and  capital  is  made  out  of  the  purely  subjec¬ 
tive  foundation  of  human  reason.  The  latter  is 
inclined  of  its  own  proper  motion,  wherever  it 
can  do  so  without  contradiction,  to  think  one 
single  principle  in  place  of  several.  Also,  where 
this  principle  only  provides  one,  or,  it  may  be,  a 
large  proportion,  of  the  terms  necessary  for  de¬ 
fining  a  conception,  it  supplements  this  or  these 
by  adding  the  others,  so  as  to  complete  the  con¬ 
ception  of  the  thing  by  an  arbitrary  integration. 
For  naturally,  when  we  find  such  a  number  of 
products  of  nature  pointing  us  to  an  intelligent 
cause,  should  we  not  suppose  one  single  such 
cause  in  preference  to  supposing  a  plurality  of 
them?  And  why,  then,  stop  at  great  intelligence, 
might,  and  so  forth,  in  this  cause,  and  not  rather 
endow  it  with  omniscience  and  omnipotence, 
and,  in  a  word,  regard  it  as  one  that  contains  an 
ample  source  of  such  attributes  for  all  possible 
things?  And  why  not  go  on  and  ascribe  to  this 
single  all-powerful  primordial  being,  not  merely 
the  intelligence  necessary  for  the  laws  and  prod¬ 
ucts  of  nature,  but  also  the  supreme  ethical 
and  practical  reason  that  belongs  to  a  moral 
world-cause?  For  by  this  completion  of  the  con¬ 
cept  we  are  supplied  with  a  principle  that  meets 
the  joint  requirements  alike  of  insight  into 
nature  and  moral  wisdom — and  no  objection  of 
the  least  substance  can  be  brought  against  the 
possibility  of  such  an  idea.  If  now,  in  the  course 
of  this  argument,  the  moral  springs  that  stir  the 
mind  are  touched,  and  a  lively  interest  imparted 
to  them  with  all  the  force  of  rhetoric — of  which 
they  are  quite  worthy — a  persuasion  arises  of 
the  objective  sufficiency  of  the  proof,  and,  in 
most  cases  where  it  is  used,  an  even  beneficent 
illusion  that  disdains  any  examination  of  its 
logical  accuracy,  and  in  fact  abhors  and  sets  its 
face  against  logical  criticism,  as  if  it  sprang 


601 

from  some  impious  misgiving.  Now  there  is 
really  nothing  to  say  against  all  this,  so  long  as 
we  only  take  popular  expediency  into  consider¬ 
ation.  But  we  cannot  and  should  not  be  deterred 
from  the  analysis  of  the  proof  into  the  two 
heterogeneous  elements  which  this  argument 
involves,  namely  into  so  much  as  pertains  to 
physical,  and  so  much  as  pertains  to  moral, 
teleology.  For  the  fusing  of  both  elements  pre¬ 
vents  our  recognizing  where  the  real  nerve  of 
the  proof  lies,  or  in  what  part  or  in  what  way 
it  must  be  reshaped,  so  that  its  validity  may  be 
able  to  be  upheld  under  the  most  searching  ex¬ 
amination — even  though  on  some  points  we 
should  be  compelled  to  confess  that  reason  sees 
but  a  short  way.  Hence,  the  philosopher  finds 
it  his  duty — supposing  that  he  were  even  to 
pay  no  regard  to  what  he  owes  to  sincerity — to 
expose  the  illusion,  however  wholesome,  which 
such  a  confusion  can  produce.  He  must  segre¬ 
gate  what  is  mere  matter  of  persuasion  from 
what  leads  to  conviction — two  modes  of  assent 
that  differ  not  merely  in  degree  but  in  kind — 
so  as  to  be  able  to  present  openly  in  all  its  clear¬ 
ness  the  attitude  which  the  mind  adopts  in  this 
proof,  and  to  subject  it  frankly  to  the  most 
rigorous  test. 

Now  a  proof  which  is  directed  towards  con¬ 
viction  may  be  of  one  or  other  of  two  kinds. 
It  may  be  intended  to  decide  what  the  object 
is  in  itself,  or  else  what  it  is  for  us,  that  is,  for 
man  in  the  abstract,  according  to  the  rational 
principles  on  which  it  is  necessarily  estimated 
by  us.  It  may,  in  other  words,  be  a  proof 
/car’  aXrjdei av  or  one  /car’  avdpcowov — taking  the 
latter  word  in  the  broad  sense  of  man  in  the 
abstract.  In  the  first  case,  is  is  founded  on  prin¬ 
ciples  adequate  for  the  determinant  judgement, 
in  the  second,  on  such  as  are  adequate  merely 
for  the  reflective  judgement.  Where,  in  the  lat¬ 
ter  case,  a  proof  rests  simply  on  theoretical 
principles,  it  can  never  tend  towards  conviction. 
But  if  it  is  founded  on  a  practical  principle  of 
reason,  one  which,  consequently,  is  universal 
and  necessary,  it  may  well  lay  claim  to  a  con¬ 
viction  that  is  sufficient  from  a  practical  point 
of  view,  that  is,  to  a  moral  conviction.  But  a 
proof  tends  towards  conviction,  though  with¬ 
out  producing  conviction,  if  it  merely  puts  us 
on  the  road  to  conviction.  This  it  does  where 
it  only  involves  objective  sources  of  conviction 
which,  while  as  yet  insufficient  to  produce  certi¬ 
tude,  are  nevertheless  of  such  a  kind  that  they 
are  not  subjective  grounds  of  judgement,  which, 
as  such,  serve  merely  for  persuasion. 

Now  all  arguments  that  establish  a  theoret- 


602  THE  CRITIQUE 


ical  proof  are  sufficient  either:  (i)  for  proof 
by  logically  rigorous  syllogistic  inferences;  or, 
where  this  is  not  the  case,  (2)  for  inference  by 
analogy;  or,  should  even  such  inference  be 
absent,  still  (3)  for  probable  opinion;  or,  fi¬ 
nally,  for  what  is  least  of  all,  (4)  the  assump¬ 
tion  of  a  merely  possible  source  of  explanation 
as  an  hypothesis.  Now  I  assert  that  all  argu¬ 
ments,  without  exception,  that  tend  towards 
theoretical  conviction,  are  powerless  to  produce 
any  assurance  of  the  above  type,  from  its  high¬ 
est  degree  to  its  lowest,  where  the  proposition 
that  is  to  be  proved  is  the  real  existence  of  an 
original  being,  regarded  as  a  God  in  the  sense 
appropriate  to  the  complete  content  of  this  con¬ 
ception,  that  is  to  say,  regarded  as  a  moral 
Author  of  the  world,  and,  consequently,  in  such 
a  way  that  the  final  end  of  creation  is  at  once 
derived  from  Him. 

1.  The  Critique  has  abundantly  shown  how 
the  matter  stands  as  regards  proof  in  strict  log¬ 
ical  form — advancing,  that  is,  from  universal 
to  particular.  No  intuition  corresponding  to  the 
conception  of  a  being  which  has  to  be  sought 
beyond  nature  is  possible  for  us.  So  far,  there¬ 
fore,  as  that  conception  has  to  be  determined 
theoretically  by  synthetic  predicates,  it  always 
remains  for  us  a  problematical  conception. 
Hence,  there  exists  absolutely  nc  cognition  of 
such  a  being  that  would  in  the  smallest  degree 
enlarge  the  compass  of  our  theoretical  knowl¬ 
edge.  The  particular  conception  of  a  supersen¬ 
sible  being  cannot  possibly  be  subsumed  in  any 
way  under  the  universal  principles  of  the  nature 
of  things,  so  as  to  allow  of  its  being  determined 
by  inference  from  those  principles,  for  they  are 
solely  valid  for  nature  as  an  object  of  sense. 

2.  In  the  case  of  two  dissimilar  things,  we 
may  admittedly  form  some  conception  of  one 
of  them  by  an  analogy 1  which  one  bears  to  the 

1  Analogy,  in  a  qualitative  sense,  is  the  identity  of 
the  relation  subsisting  between  grounds  and  conse¬ 
quences — causes  and  effects — so  far  as  such  identity 
subsists  despite  the  specific  difference  of  the  things, 
or  of  those  properties,  considered  in  themselves  (i.e., 
apart  from  this  relation),  which  are  the  source  of  sim¬ 
ilar  consequences.  Thus  when  we  compare  the  forma¬ 
tive  operations  of  the  lower  animals  with  those  of 
man,  we  regard  the  unknown  source  of  such  effects  in 
the  former  case,  as  compared  with  the  known  source 
of  similar  effects  produced  by  man,  that  is  by  reason, 
as  the  analogon  of  reason.  By  this  we  mean  to  imply 
that,  while  the  source  of  the  formative  capacity  of  the 
lower  animals,  to  which  we  give  the  name  of  instinct, 
is  in  fact  specifically  different  from  reason,  yet,  com¬ 
paring,  say,  the  constructive  w'ork  of  beavers  and 
men,  it  stands  in  a  like  relation  to  its  effect.  But  this 
does  not  justify  me  in  inferring  that,  because  man 
emplo>s  reason  for  that  he  constructs,  beavers  must 
possess  reason  also,  and  in  calling  this  an  inference 
from  analogy.  But  from  the  similar  mode  of  opera¬ 
tion  on  the  part  of  the  lower  animals,  the  source 


other,  and  do  so  even  on  the  point  on  which 
they  are  dissimilar;  but  from  that  in  which  they 
are  dissimilar  we  cannot  draw  any  inference 
from  one  to  the  other  on  the  strength  of  the 
analogy — that  is,  we  cannot  transfer  the  mark 
of  the  specific  difference  to  the  second.  Thus,  on 
the  analogy  of  the  law  of  the  equality  of  action 
and  reaction  in  the  mutual  attraction  and  re¬ 
pulsion  of  bodies,  I  am  able  to  picture  to  my 
mind  the  social  relations  of  the  members  of  a 
commonwealth  regulated  by  civil  laws;  but  I 
cannot  transfer  to  these  relations  the  former 
specific  modes,  that  is,  physical  attraction  and 
repulsion,  and  ascribe  them  to  the  citizens,  so  as 
to  constitute  a  system  called  a  state.  In  the 
same  way,  the  causality  of  the  original  being 
may,  in  its  relation  to  the  things  of  the  world, 
regarded  as  physical  ends,  quite  properly  be 
conceived  on  the  analogy  of  an  intelligence,  re¬ 
garded  as  the  source  of  the  forms  of  certain 
products  that  we  call  works  of  art.  For  this  is 
only  done  in  the  interests  of  the  theoretical  or 
practical  use  which  our  cognitive  faculty  has 
to  make  of  this  conception  when  dealing  with 
the  things  in  the  world.  But  from  the  fact  that, 
with  the  beings  of  the  world,  intelligence  must 
be  ascribed  to  the  cause  of  an  effect  that  is 
considered  artificial,  we  are  wholly  unable  to 
infer  by  analogy  that,  in  relation  to  nature,  the 
very  same  causality  that  we  perceive  in  man 
belongs  also  to  the  being  which  is  entirely  dis¬ 
tinct  from  nature.  The  reason  is  that  this 
touches  the  precise  point  of  dissimilarity  be¬ 
tween  a  cause  that  is  sensuously  conditioned  in 
respect  of  its  effects  and  a  supersensible  origi- 

of  which  we  are  unable  directly  to  perceive,  com¬ 
pared  with  that  of  man,  of  which  we  are  immediately 
conscious,  we  may  quite  correctly  infer,  on  the 
strength  of  the  analogy,  that  the  lower  animals,  like 
man.  act  according  to  representations,  and  are  not 
machines,  as  Descartes  contends,  and  that,  despite 
their  specific  difference,  they  are  living  beings  and  as 
such  generally  kindred  to  man.  The  principle  that 
authorizes  us  to  draw'  this  inference  lies  in  the  fact 
that  we  have  exactly  the  same  reason  for  putting 
the  lower  animals  in  this  respect  in  the  same  genus 
with  men  as  in  man  for  putting  men,  so  far  as  we 
look  at  them  from  the  outside  and  compare  their  acts, 
in  the  same  genus  with  one  another.  There  is  par 
ratio.  In  the  same  way  the  causality  of  the  supreme 
world-cause  may  be  conceived  on  the  analogy  of  an 
understanding,  if  we  compare  its  final  products  in 
the  world  with  the  formative  works  of  man,  but  we 
cannot,  on  the  strength  of  the  analogy,  infer  such 
human  attributes  in  the  world-cause.  For  the  prin¬ 
ciple  that  would  make  such  a  mode  of  reasoning  pos¬ 
sible  is  absent  in  this  case,  namely  the  paritas  rationis 
for  including  the  supreme  being  and  man,  in  relation 
to  their  respective  causalities,  in  one  and  the  same 
genus.  The  causality  of  the  beings  in  the  world  which, 
like  causality  by  means  of  understanding,  is  always 
sensuously  conditioned,  cannot  be  transferred  to  a 
being  which  has  no  generic  conception  in  common 
with  man  beyond  that  of  a  thing  in  the  abstract. 


OF  TELEOLOGICAL  JUDGEMENT 


nal  being.  This  dissimilarity  is  implied  in  the 
very  conception  of  such  a  supersensible  being, 
and  the  distinguishing  feature  cannot  therefore 
be  transferred  to  it.  In  this  very  fact,  that  I 
am  required  to  conceive  the  causality  of  the 
Deity  only  on  the  analogy  of  an  understanding 
— a  faculty  which  is  not  known  to  us  in  any 
other  being  besides  man,  subject,  as  he  is,  to 
the  conditions  of  sense — lies  the  prohibition 
that  forbids  me  to  ascribe  to  God  an  under¬ 
standing  in  the  proper  sense  of  the  word.1 

3.  There  is  no  room  for  opinion  in  a  priori 
judgements.  Such  judgements,  on  the  contrary, 
enable  us  to  cognize  something  as  quite  certain, 
or  else  give  us  no  cognition  at  all.  But  even 
where  the  given  premisses  from  which  we  start 
are  empirical,  as  are  the  natural  ends  in  the  pres¬ 
ent  case,  yet  they  cannot  help  us  to  form  any 
opinion  that  extends  beyond  the  world  of  sense, 
and  to  such  rash  judgements  we  cannot  accord 
the  least  claim  to  probability.  For  probability 
is  a  fraction  of  a  possible  certainty  distributed 
over  a  particular  series  of  grounds — the  grounds 
of  the  possibility  within  the  series  being  com¬ 
pared  with  the  sufficient  ground  of  certainty,  as 
a  part  is  compared  with  a  whole.  Here  the  in¬ 
sufficient  ground  must  be  capable  of  being  in¬ 
creased  to  the  point  of  sufficiency.  But  these 
grounds,  being  the  determining  grounds  of  the 
certainty  of  one  and  the  same  judgement,  must 
be  of  the  same  order.  For  unless  they  are,  they 
would  not,  when  taken  together,  form  a  quan¬ 
tum — such  as  certainty  is.  Thus  one  component 
part  cannot  lie  within  the  bounds  of  possible 
experience  and  another  lie  beyond  all  possible 
experience.  Consequently,  since  premisses  that 
are  simply  empirical  do  not  lead  to  anything 
supersensible,  nothing  can  supplement  the  im¬ 
perfection  of  such  an  empirical  series.  Not  the 
smallest  approximation,  therefore,  occurs  in  the 
attempt  to  reach  the  supersensible,  or  a  knowl¬ 
edge  of  it,  from  such  premisses;  and  conse¬ 
quently  no  probability  enters  into  a  judgement 
about  the  supersensible,  when  it  rests  on  argu¬ 
ments  drawn  from  experience. 

4.  If  anything  is  intended  to  serve  as  an 
hypothesis  for  explaining  the  possibility  of  a 
given  phenomenon,  then  at  least  the  possibility 
of  that  thing  must  be  perfectly  certain.  We  give 
away  enough  when,  in  the  case  of  an  hypoth¬ 
esis,  we  waive  the  knowledge  of  actual  exist- 

1  This  does  not  involve  the  smallest  loss  to  our  repre¬ 
sentation  of  the  relation  in  which  this  Being  stands  to 
the  world,  so  far  as  concerns  the  consequences,  theo¬ 
retical  or  practical,  of  this  conception.  To  seek  to  in¬ 
quire  into  the  intrinsic  nature  of  this  Being  is  a  curi¬ 
osity  as  senseless  as  idle. 


603 

ence — which  is  affirmed  in  an  opinion  put  for¬ 
ward  as  probable — and  more  than  this  we  can¬ 
not  surrender.  At  least  the  possibility  of  what 
we  make  the  basis  of  an  explanation  must  be 
open  to  no  doubt,  otherwise  there  would  be  no 
end  to  empty  fictions  of  the  brain.  But  it  would 
be  taking  things  for  granted  without  anything 
whatever  to  go  upon,  if  we  were  to  assume 
the  possibility  of  a  supersensible  Being  defined 
according  to  positive  conceptions,  for  no  one 
of  the  conditions  requisite  for  cognition,  so  far 
as  concerns  the  element  dependent  on  intuition, 
is  given.  Hence,  all  that  is  left  as  the  criterion 
of  this  possibility  is  the  principle  of  contradic¬ 
tion — which  can  only  prove  the  possibility  of 
the  thought  and  not  of  the  thought  object  itself. 

The  net  result  is  that  for  the  existence  of  the 
original  being  regarded  as  a  Deity,  or  of  the  psy¬ 
chic  substance,  regarded  as  an  immortal  soul, 
it  is  absolutely  impossible  for  human  reason  to 
obtain  any  proof  from  a  theoretical  point  of 
view,  so  as  to  produce  the  smallest  degree  of 
assurance.  And  there  is  a  perfectly  intelligible 
reason  for  this,  since  we  have  no  available 
material  for  defining  the  idea  of  the  supersen¬ 
sible,  seeing  that  we  should  have  to  draw  that 
material  from  things  in  the  world  of  sense,  and 
then  its  character  would  make  it  utterly  inap¬ 
propriate  to  the  supersensible.  In  the  absence, 
therefore,  of  all  definition,  we  are  left  merely 
with  the  conception  of  a  not-sensible  something 
containing  the  ultimate  ground  of  the  world 
of  sense.  This  constitutes  no  cognition  of  its 
intrinsic  nature,  such  as  would  amplify  the 
conception. 

§  91.  The  type  of  assurance  produced 
by  a  practical  faith 2 

If  we  look  merely  to  the  manner  in  which 
something  can  be  an  object  of  knowledge  ( res 
cognoscibilis)  for  us,  that  is,  having  regard  to 
the  subjective  nature  of  our  powers  of  repre¬ 
sentation,  we  do  not  in  that  case  compare  our 
conceptions  with  the  objects,  but  merely  with 
our  faculties  of  cognition  and  the  use  that  they 
are  able  to  make  of  the  given  representation 
from  a  theoretical  or  practical  point  of  view. 
So  the  question  whether  something  is  a  cogni¬ 
zable  entity  or  not,  is  a  question  which  touches, 
not  the  possibility  of  the  things  themselves,  but 
the  possibility  of  our  knowledge  of  them. 

Things  cognizable  are  of  three  kinds :  matters 
of  opinion  (opiniabile) ,  matters  of  fact  ( scibile ), 
and  matters  of  faith  ( mere  credibile). 

2  [See  the  section  on  “Opinion,  Knowledge,  and  Be¬ 
lief,”  Critique  0}  Pure  Reason,  p.  240-3.] 


THE  CRITIQUE 


604 

1.  The  objects  of  mere  ideas  of  reason,  being 
wholly  incapable  of  presentation,  on  behalf  of 
theoretical  knowledge,  in  any  possible  expe¬ 
rience  whatever,  are  to  that  extent  also  things 
altogether  unknowable,  and,  consequently,  we 
cannot  even  form  an  opinion  about  them.  For 
to  form  an  opinion  a  priori  is  absurd  on  the 
face  of  it  and  the  straight  road  to  pure  figments 
of  the  brain.  Either  our  a  priori  proposition  is 
certain,  therefore,  or  it  involves  no  element  of 
assurance  at  all.  Hence,  matters  of  opinion  are 
always  objects  of  an  empirical  knowledge  that 
is  at  least  intrinsically  possible.  They  are,  in 
other  words,  objects  belonging  to  the  world  of 
sense,  but  objects  of  which  an  empirical  knowl¬ 
edge  is  impossible  for  us ,  because  the  degree 
of  empirical  knowledge  we  possess  is  as  it  is. 
Thus  the  ether  of  our  modern  physicists — an 
elastic  fluid  interpenetrating  all  other  substances 
and  completely  permeating  them — is  a  mere 
matter  of  opinion,  yet  it  is  in  all  respects  of 
such  a  kind  that  it  could  be  perceived  if  our  ex¬ 
ternal  senses  were  sharpened  to  the  highest  de¬ 
gree,  but  its  presentation  can  never  be  the  sub¬ 
ject  of  any  observation  or  experiment.  To  as¬ 
sume  rational  inhabitants  of  other  planets  is  a 
matter  of  opinion;  for  if  we  could  get  nearer 
the  planets,  which  is  intrinsically  possible,  ex¬ 
perience  would  decide  whether  such  inhabitants 
are  there  or  not;  but  as  we  never  shall  get  so 
near  to  them,  the  matter  remains  one  of  opinion. 
But  to  entertain  an  opinion  that  there  exist  in 
the  material  universe  pure  embodied  thinking 
spirits  is  mere  romancing — supposing,  I  mean, 
that  we  dismiss  from  our  notice,  as  well  we 
may,  certain  phenomena  that  have  been  passed 
off  for  such.  Such  a  notion  is  not  a  matter  of 
opinion  at  all,  but  an  idea  pure  and  simple.  It 
is  what  remains  over  when  we  take  away  from 
a  thinking  being  all  that  is  material  and  yet  let 
it  keep  its  thought.  But  whether,  when  we  have 
taken  away  everything  else,  the  thought — which 
we  only  know  in  man,  that  is,  in  connection  with 
a  body — would  still  remain,  is  a  matter  we  are 
unable  to  decide.  A  thing  like  this  is  a  fictitious 
logical  entity  (ens  rationis  ratio  cinantis),1  not 
a  rational  entity  (ens  rationis  ratiocinatae) .  With 
the  latter  it  is  anyway  possible  to  substantiate 
the  objective  reality  of  its  conception,  at  least 
in  a  manner  sufficient  for  the  practical  employ¬ 
ment  of  reason,  for  this  employment,  which  has 
its  peculiar  and  apodeictically  certain  a  priori 
principles,  in  fact  demands  and  postulates  that 
conception. 

2.  The  objects  that  answer  to  conceptions 

1  [Cf.  p.  567.] 


whose  objective  reality  can  be  proved  are  mat¬ 
ters  of  fact 2  (res  facti).  Such  proof  may  be  af¬ 
forded  by  pure  reason  or  by  experience,  and  in 
the  former  case  may  be  from  theoretical  or 
practical  data  of  reason,  but  in  all  cases  it  must 
be  effected  by  means  of  an  intuition  corre¬ 
sponding  to  the  conceptions.  Examples  of  mat¬ 
ters  of  fact  are  the  mathematical  properties  of 
geometrical  magnitudes,  for  they  admit  of  a 
priori  presentation  for  the  theoretical  employ¬ 
ment  of  reason.  Further,  things  or  qualities  of 
things  that  are  capable  of  being  verified  by  ex¬ 
perience,  be  it  one’s  own  personal  experience  or 
that  of  others  (supported  by  evidence),  are  in 
the  same  way  matters  of  fact.  But  there  is  this 
notable  point,  that  one  idea  of  reason,  strange 
to  say,  is  to  be  found  among  the  matters  of  fact 
— an  idea  which  does  not  of  itself  admit  of  any 
presentation  in  intuition,  or,  consequently,  of 
any  theoretical  proof  of  its  possibility.  The  idea 
in  question  is  that  of  freedom.  Its  reality  is  the 
reality  of  a  particular  kind  of  causality  (the 
conception  of  which  would  be  transcendent  if 
considered  theoretically),  and  as  a  causality  of 
that  kind  it  admits  of  verification  by  means  of 
practical  laws  of  pure  reason  and  in  the  actual 
actions  that  take  place  in  obedience  to  them, 
and,  consequently,  in  experience.  It  is  the  only 
one  of  all  the  ideas  of  pure  reason  whose  object 
is  a  matter  of  fact  and  must  be  included  among 
the  scibilia. 

3.  Objects  that  must  be  thought  a  priori, 
either  as  consequences  or  as  grounds,  if  pure 
practical  reason  is  to  be  used  as  duty  commands, 
but  which  are  transcendent  for  the  theoretical 
use  of  reason,  are  mere  matters  of  faith.  Such 
is  the  summum  bonum  which  has  to  be  realized 
in  the  world  through  freedom — a  conception 
whose  objective  reality  cannot  be  proved  in  any 
experience  possible  for  us,  or,  consequently,  so 
as  to  satisfy  the  requirements  of  the  theoretical 
employment  of  reason,  while  at  the  same  time 
we  are  enjoined  to  use  it  for  the  purpose  of 
realizing  that  end  through  pure  practical  reason 
in  the  best  way  possible,  and,  accordingly,  its 
possibility  must  be  assumed.  This  effect  which 
is  commanded,  together  with  the  only  condi¬ 
tions  on  which  its  possibility  is  conceivable  by 
us,  namely  the  existence  of  God  and  the  immor¬ 
tality  of  the  soul,  are  matters  of  faith  (res  fidei) 

2  I  here  extend  the  conception  of  a  matter  of  fact 
beyond  the  usual  meaning  of  the  term,  and,  I  think, 
rightly.  For  it  is  not  necessary,  and  indeed  not  prac¬ 
ticable,  to  restrict  this  expression  to  actual  experience 
where  we  are  speaking  of  the  relation  of  things  to 
our  cognitive  faculties,  as  we  do  not  need  more  than 
a  merely  possible  experience  to  enable  us  to  speak  of 
things  as  objects  of  a  definite  kind  of  knowledge. 


OF  TELEOLOGICAL  JUDGEMENT 


and,  moreover,  are  of  all  objects  the  only  ones 
that  can  be  so  called.1  For  although  we  have  to 
believe  what  we  can  only  learn  by  testimony 
from  the  experience  of  others,  yet  that  does  not 
make  what  is  so  believed  in  itself  a  matter  of 
faith,  for  with  one  of  those  witnesses  it  was 
personal  experience  and  matter  of  fact,  or  is 
assumed  to  have  been  so.  In  addition  it  must 
be  possible  to  arrive  at  knowledge  by  this  path 
— the  path  of  historical  faith;  and  the  objects 
of  history  and  geography,  as,  in  general,  every¬ 
thing  that  the  nature  of  our  cognitive  faculties 
makes  at  least  a  possible  subject  of  knowledge, 
are  to  be  classed  among  matters  of  fact,  not 
matters  of  faith.  It  is  only  objects  of  pure  rea¬ 
son  that  can  be  matters  of  faith  at  all,  and  even 
they  must  then  not  be  regarded  as  objects 
simply  of  pure  speculative  reason;  for  this  does 
not  enable  them  to  be  reckoned  with  any  cer¬ 
tainty  whatever  among  matters,  or  objects,  of 
that  knowledge  which  is  possible  for  us.  They 
are  ideas,  that  is  conceptions,  whose  objective 
reality  cannot  be  guaranteed  theoretically.  On 
the  other  hand,  the  supreme  final  end  to  be 
realized  by  us,  which  is  all  that  can  make  us 
worthy  of  being  ourselves  the  final  end  of  a 
creation,  is  an  idea  that  has  objective  reality 
for  us  in  practical  matters,  and  is  a  matter.  But 
since  we  cannot  procure  objective  reality  for 
this  conception  from  a  theoretical  point  of  view, 
it  is  a  mere  matter  of  faith  on  the  part  of  pure 
reason,  as  are  also  God  and  immortality,  they 
being  the  sole  conditions  under  which,  owing  to 
the  frame  of  our  human  reason,  we  are  able 
to  conceive  the  possibility  of  that  effect  of  the 
use  of  our  freedom  according  to  law.  But  as¬ 
surance  in  matters  of  faith  is  an  assurance 
from  a  purely  practical  point  of  view.  It  is  a 
moral  faith  that  proves  nothing  for  pure  rational 
knowledge  as  theoretical,  but  only  for  it  as 
practical  and  directed  to  the  fulfilment  of  its 
obligations.  It  in  no  way  extends  either  specu¬ 
lation  or  the  practical  rules  of  prudence  actu¬ 
ated  by  the  principle  of  self-love.  If  the  supreme 
principle  of  all  moral  laws  is  a  postulate,  this 
involves  the  possibility  of  its  supreme  object, 
and,  consequently,  the  condition  under  which 
we  are  able  to  conceive  such  possibility,  being 
also  postulated.  This  does  not  make  the  cogni- 

1  Being  a  matter  of  faith  does  not  make  a  thing  an 
article  of  faith,  if  by  articles  of  faith  we  mean  such 
matters  of  faith  as  one  can  be  bound  to  acknowledge, 
inwardly  or  outwardly — a  kind  therefore  that  does  not 
enter  into  natural  theology.  For,  being  matters  of  faith, 
they  cannot,  like  matters  of  fact,  depend  on  theoretical 
proofs,  and,  therefore,  the  assurance  is  a  free  assurance, 
and  it  is  only  as  such  that  it  is  compatible  with  the 
morality  of  the  subject. 


605 

tion  of  the  latter  any  knowledge  or  any  opinion 
of  the  existence  or  nature  of  these  conditions, 
as  a  mode  of  theoretical  knowledge,  but  a  mere 
assumption,  confined  to  matters  practical  and 
commanded  in  practical  interests,  on  behalf  of 
the  moral  use  of  our  reason. 

Were  we  able  with  any  plausibility  to  make 
the  ends  of  nature  which  physical  teleology  sets 
before  us  in  such  abundance  the  basis  of  a  de¬ 
terminate  conception  of  an  intelligent  world- 
cause,  the  existence  of  this  being  would  not  even 
then  be  a  matter  of  faith.  For  as  it  would  not 
be  assumed  on  behalf  of  the  performance  of  our 
duty,  but  only  for  the  purpose  of  explaining 
nature,  it  would  simply  be  the  opinion  and 
hypothesis  best  suited  to  our  reason.  Now  the 
teleology  in  question  does  not  lead  in  any  way 
to  a  determinate  conception  of  God.  On  the 
contrary,  such  a  conception  can  only  be  found 
in  that  of  a  moral  author  of  the  world,  because 
this  alone  assigns  the  final  end  to  which  we  can 
attach  ourselves  only  so  far  as  we  live  in  ac¬ 
cordance  with  what  the  moral  law  prescribes  to 
us  as  the  final  end  and,  consequently,  imposes 
upon  us  as  a  duty.  Hence,  it  is  only  by  relation 
to  the  object  of  our  duty,  as  the  condition  which 
makes  its  final  end  possible,  that  the  concep¬ 
tion  of  God  acquires  the  privilege  of  figuring 
in  our  assurance  as  a  matter  of  faith.  On  the 
other  hand,  this  very  same  conception  cannot 
make  its  object  valid  as  a  matter  of  fact,  for, 
although  the  necessity  of  duty  is  quite  plain 
for  practical  reason,  yet  the  attainment  of  its 
final  end,  so  far  as  it  does  not  lie  entirely  in 
our  own  hands,  is  merely  assumed  in  the  inter¬ 
ests  of  the  practical  employment  of  reason,  and, 
therefore,  is  not  practically  necessary  in  the 
way  duty  itself  is.2 

2  The  final  end  which  we  are  enjoined  by  the  moral 
law  to  pursue  is  not  the  foundation  of  duty.  For  duty 
lies  in  the  moral  law  which,  being  a  formal  practical 
principle,  directs  categorically,  irrespective  of  the  ob¬ 
jects  of  the  faculty  of  desire — the  subject-matter  of 
volition — and,  consequently,  of  any  end  whatever. 
This  formal  character  of  our  action — their  subordina¬ 
tion  to  the  principle  of  universal  validity — which  alone 
constitutes  their  intrinsic  moral  worth,  lies  entirely 
in  our  own  power;  and  we  can  quite  easily  make 
abstraction  from  the  possibility  or  the  impracticability 
of  the  ends  that  we  are  obliged  to  promote  in  ac¬ 
cordance  with  that  law — for  they  only  form  the  ex¬ 
trinsic  worth  of  our  actions.  Thus  we  put  them  out 
of  consideration,  as  what  does  not  lie  altogether  in  our 
own  power,  in  order  to  concentrate  our  attention  on 
what  rests  in  our  own  hands.  But  the  object  in  view — 
the  furthering  of  the  final  end  of  all  rational  beings, 
namely,  happiness  so  far  as  consistent  with  duty — is 
nevertheless  imposed  upon  us  by  the  law  of  duty. 
But  speculative  reason  does  not  in  any  way  perceive 
the  practicability  of  that  object — whether  we  look  at 
it  from  the  standpoint  of  our  own  physical  power  or 
from  that  of  the  co-operation  of  nature.  On  the  con¬ 
trary,  so  far  as  we  are  able  to  form  a  rational  judge- 


6o6 


THE  CRITIQUE 


Faith  as  habitus ,  not  as  actus ,  is  the  moral  at¬ 
titude  of  reason  in  its  assurance  of  the  truth  of 
what  is  beyond  the  reach  of  theoretical  knowl¬ 
edge.  It  is  the  steadfast  principle  of  the  mind, 
therefore,  according  to  which  the  truth  of  what 
must  necessarily  be  presupposed  as  the  condi¬ 
tion  of  the  supreme  final  end  being  possible  is 
assumed  as  true  in  consideration  of  the  fact  that 
we  are  under  an  obligation  to  pursue  that  end* 1 
— and  assumed  notwithstanding  that  we  have  no 
insight  into  its  possibility,  though  likewise  none 
into  its  impossibility.  Faith ,  in  the  plain  accep¬ 
tation  of  the  term,  is  a  confidence  of  attaining  a 
purpose  the  furthering  of  which  is  a  duty,  but 
whose  achievement  is  a  thing  of  which  we  are 
unable  to  perceive  the  possibility — or,  conse¬ 
quently,  the  possibility  of  what  we  can  alone 
conceive  to  be  its  conditions.  Thus  the  faith 
that  has  reference  to  particular  objects  is  en¬ 
tirely  a  matter  of  morality,  provided  such  ob¬ 
jects  are  not  objects  of  possible  knowledge  or 
opinion,  in  which  latter  case,  and  above  all  in 
matters  of  history,  it  must  be  called  credulity 
and  not  faith.  It  is  a  free  assurance,  not  of  any 
matter  for  which  dogmatic  proofs  can  be  found 
for  the  theoretical  determinant  judgement,  nor 


ment  on  the  point,  speculative  reason  must,  apart  from 
the  assumption  of  the  existence  of  God  and  immor¬ 
tality,  regard  it  as  a  baseless  and  idle,  though  well- 
intentioned,  expectation,  to  hope  that  mere  nature, 
internal  or  external,  will  from  such  causes  bring  about 
such  a  result  of  our  good  conduct,  and  could  it  have 
perfect  certainty  as  to  the  truth  of  this  judgement, 
it  would  have  to  look  on  the  moral  law  itself  as  a 
mere  delusion  of  our  reason  in  respect  of  practical 
matters.  But  speculative  reason  is  fully  convinced 
that  the  latter  can  never  happen,  whereas  those  ideas 
whose  object  lies  beyond  nature  may  be  thought  with¬ 
out  contradiction.  Hence  for  the  sake  of  its  own 
practical  law  and  the  task  which  it  imposes,  and, 
therefore,  in  respect  of  moral  concerns,  it  must  recog¬ 
nize  those  ideas  to  be  real,  in  order  not  to  fall  into 
self-contradiction. 

1  It  is  a  confidence  in  the  promise  of  the  moral 
law.  But  this  promise  is  not  regarded  as  one  involved 
in  the  moral  law  itself,  but  rather  as  one  which  we 
import  into  it,  and  so  import  on  morally  adequate 
grounds.  For  a  final  end  cannot  be  commanded  by 
any  law  of  reason,  unless  reason,  though  it  be  with 
uncertain  voice,  also  promises  its  attainability,  and 
at  the  same  time  authorizes  assurance  as  to  the  sole 
conditions  under  which  our  reason  can  imagine  such 
attainability.  The  very  word  fides  expresses  this;  and 
it  must  seem  suspicious  how  this  expression  and  this 
particular  idea  get  a  place  in  moral  philosophy,  since 
it  was  first  introduced  with  Christianity,  and  its  ac¬ 
ceptance  might  perhaps  seem  only  a  flattering  imita¬ 
tion  of  the  language  of  the  latter.  But  this  is  not  the 
only  case  in  which  this  wonderful  religion  has  in  the 
great  simplicity  of  its  statement  enriched  philosophy 
with  far  more  definite  and  purer  conceptions  of  mor¬ 
ality  than  morality  itself  could  have  previously  sup¬ 
plied.  But  once  these  conceptions  are  found,  they  are 
freely  approved  by  reason,  which  adopts  them  as 
conceptions  at  which  it  could  quite  well  have  arrived 
itself  and  which  it  might  and  ought  to  have  intro¬ 
duced. 


of  what  we  consider  a  matter  of  obligation,  but 
of  that  which  we  assume  in  the  interests  of  a 
purpose  which  we  set  before  ourselves  in  accord¬ 
ance  with  laws  of  freedom.  But  this  does  not 
mean  that  it  is  adopted  like  an  opinion  formed 
on  inadequate  grounds.  On  the  contrary,  it  is 
something  that  has  a  foundation  in  reason 
(though  only  in  relation  to  its  practical  employ¬ 
ment),  and  a  foundation  that  satisfies  the  pur¬ 
pose  of  reason.  For  without  it,  when  the  moral 
attitude  comes  into  collision  with  theoretical 
reason  and  fails  to  satisfy  its  demand  for  a 
proof  of  the  possibility  of  the  object  of  moral¬ 
ity,  it  loses  all  its  stability  and  wavers  between 
practical  commands  and  theoretical  doubts.  To 
be  incredulous  is  to  adhere  to  the  maxim  of 
placing  no  reliance  on  testimony;  but  a  person 
is  unbelieving  who  denies  all  validity  to  the 
above  ideas  of  reason  because  their  reality  has 
no  theoretical  foundation.  Hence,  such  a  person 
judges  dogmatically.  But  a  dogmatic  unbelief 
cannot  stand  side  by  side  with  a  moral  maxim 
governing  the  attitude  of  the  mind — for  reason 
cannot  command  one  to  pursue  an  end  that  is 
recognized  to  be  nothing  but  a  fiction  of  the 
brain.  But  the  case  is  different  with  a  doubtful 
faith.  For,  with  such  a  faith,  the  want  of  con¬ 
viction  from  grounds  of  speculative  reason  is 
only  an  obstacle — one  which  a  critical  insight 
into  the  limits  of  this  faculty  can  deprive  of 
any  influence  upon  conduct  and  for  which  it  can 
make  amends  by  a  paramount  practical  assur¬ 
ance. 

If  we  desire  to  replace  certain  mistaken  ef¬ 
forts  in  philosophy,  and  to  introduce  a  different 
principle,  and  gain  influence  for  it,  it  gives  great 
satisfaction  to  see  just  how  and  why  such  at¬ 
tempts  were  bound  to  miscarry. 

God ,  freedom)  and  the  immortality  of  the 
soul  are  the  problems  to  whose  solution,  as  their 
ultimate  and  unique  goal,  all  the  laborious 
preparations  of  metaphysics  are  directed.  Now 
it  was  believed  that  the  doctrine  of  freedom  was 
only  necessary  as  a  negative  condition  for  prac¬ 
tical  philosophy,  whereas  that  of  God  and  the 
nature  of  the  soul,  being  part  of  theoretical 
philosophy,  had  to  be  proved  independently  and 
separately.  Then  each  of  those  two  conceptions 
was  subsequently  to  be  united  with  what  is  com¬ 
manded  by  the  moral  law  (which  is  only  possi¬ 
ble  on  terms  of  freedom)  and  a  religion  was  to 
be  arrived  at  in  this  way.  But  we  perceive  at 
once  that  such  attempts  were  bound  to  miscarry. 
For  from  simple  ontological  conceptions  of 
things  in  the  abstract,  or  of  the  existence  of  a 


OF  TELEOLOGICAL  JUDGEMENT  607 


necessary  being,  we  can  form  absolutely  no  con¬ 
ception  of  an  original  being  determined  by 
predicates  which  admit  of  being  given  in  experi¬ 
ence  and  which  are  therefore  available  for  cog¬ 
nition.  But  should  the  conception  be  founded  on 
experience  of  the  physical  finality  of  nature,  it 
could  then  in  turn  supply  no  proof  adequate  for 
morality  or,  consequently,  the  cognition  of  a 
God.  Just  as  little  could  knowledge  of  the  soul 
drawn  from  experience — which  we  can  only  ob¬ 
tain  in  this  life — furnish  a  conception  of  its 
spiritual  and  immortal  nature,  or,  consequently, 
one  that  would  satisfy  morality.  Theology  and 
pneumatology ,  regarded  as  problems  framed  in 
the  interests  of  sciences  pursued  by  a  specula¬ 
tive  reason,  are  in  their  very  implication  tran¬ 
scendent  for  all  our  faculties  of  knowledge  and 
cannot,  therefore,  be  established  by  means  of 
any  empirical  data  or  predicates.  These  two  con¬ 
ceptions,  both  that  of  God  and  that  of  the  soul 
(in  respect  of  its  immortality),  can  only  be  de¬ 
fined  by  means  of  predicates  which,  although 
they  themselves  derive  their  possibility  entirely 
from  a  supersensible  source,  must,  for  all  that, 
prove  their  reality  in  experience,  for  this  is  the 
only  way  in  which  they  can  make  possible  a  cog¬ 
nition  of  a  wholly  supersensible  being.  Now  the 
only  conception  of  this  kind  to  be  found  in  hu¬ 
man  reason  is  that  of  the  freedom  of  man  sub¬ 
ject  to  moral  laws  and,  in  conjunction  there¬ 
with,  to  the  final  end  which  freedom  prescribes 
by  means  of  these  laws.  These  laws  and  this 
final  end  enable  us  to  ascribe,  the  former  to  the 
author  of  nature,  the  latter  to  man,  the  proper¬ 
ties  which  contain  the  necessary  conditions  of 
the  possibility  of  both.  Thus  it  is  from  this  idea 
that  an  inference  can  be  drawn  to  the  real  exist¬ 
ence  and  the  nature  of  both  God  and  the  soul 
— beings  that  otherwise  would  be  entirely  hidden 
from  us. 

Hence,  the  source  of  the  failure  of  the  at¬ 
tempt  to  attain  to  a  proof  of  God  and  immor¬ 
tality  by  the  merely  theoretical  route  lies  in  the 
fact  that  no  knowledge  of  the  supersensible  is 
possible  if  the  path  of  natural  conceptions  is 
followed.  The  reason  why  the  proof  succeeds, 
on  the  other  hand,  when  the  path  of  morals,  that 
is,  of  the  conception  of  freedom,  is  followed,  is 
because  from  the  supersensible,  which  in  morals 
is  fundamental  (i.e.,  as  freedom),  there  issues 
a  definite  law  of  causality.  By  means  of  this  law, 
the  supersensible  here  not  alone  provides  mate¬ 
rial  for  the  knowledge  of  the  other  supersen¬ 
sible,  that  is  of  the  moral  final  end  and  the  con¬ 
ditions  of  its  practicability,  but  it  also  substan¬ 
tiates  its  own  reality,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  in 


actions.1  For  that  very  reason,  however,  it  is 
unable  to  afford  any  valid  argument  other  than 
from  a  practical  point  of  view — which  is  also 
the  only  one  needful  for  religion. 

There  is  something  very  remarkable  in  the  way 
this  whole  matter  stands.  Of  the  three  ideas  of 
pure  reason — God,  freedom,  and  immortality — 
that  of  freedom  is  the  one  and  one  conception  of 
the  supersensible  which  (owing  to  the  causality 
implied  in  it)  proves  its  objective  reality  in 
nature  by  its  possible  effect  there.  By  this  means 
it  makes  possible  the  connection  of  the  two  other 
ideas  with  nature,  and  the  connection  of  all  three 
to  form  a  religion.  We  are  thus  ourselves  pos¬ 
sessed  of  a  principle  which  is  capable  of  deter¬ 
mining  the  idea  of  the  supersensible  within  us, 
and,  in  that  way,  also  of  the  supersensible  without 
us,  so  as  to  constitute  knowledge — a  knowledge, 
however,  which  is  only  possible  from  a  practical 
point  of  view.  This  is  something  of  which  mere 
speculative  philosophy — which  can  only  give  a 
simply  negative  conception  even  of  freedom — 
must  despair.  Consequently  the  conception  of 
freedom,  as  the  root-conception  of  all  uncondi- 
tionally-practical  laws,  can  extend  reason  be¬ 
yond  the  bounds  to  which  every  natural,  or 
theoretical,  conception  must  remain  hopelessly 
restricted. 

General  Remark  on  Teleology 

If  we  ask  how  the  moral  argument,  which 
only  proves  the  existence  of  God  as  a  matter  of 
faith  for  practical  pure  reason,  ranks  with  the 
other  arguments  in  philosophy,  the  value  of  the 
entire  stock  of  the  latter  may  be  readily  esti¬ 
mated.  It  turns  out  that  we  are  left  with  no 
choice  here,  but  that  philosophy  in  its  theoreti¬ 
cal  capacity  must  of  its  own  accord  resign  all  its 
claims  in  the  face  of  an  impartial  critique. 

Philosophy  must  lay  the  first  foundations  of 
all  assurance  on  what  is  matter  of  fact,  unless 
such  assurance  is  to  be  entirely  baseless.  Hence, 
the  only  difference  that  can  arise  in  the  proof  is 
on  the  point  of  whether  an  assurance  in  the  con¬ 
sequence  inferred  from  this  matter  of  fact  may 
be  based  upon  it  in  the  form  of  knowledge  for 
theoretical  cognition  or  in  the  form  of  faith  for 
practical  cognition.  All  matters  of  fact  come  un¬ 
der  the  head  either  of  the  conception  of  nature, 
which  proves  its  reality  in  objects  of  sense  that 
are  given,  or  might  be  given,  antecedently  to  all 
conceptions  of  nature;  or  else  of  the  conception 

1  [Cf.  pp.  604,  608;  Also:  Fundamental  Principles 
oj  the  Metaphysic  of  Morals ,  pp.  253,  254,  264,  270, 
272,  273,  275;  Also:  The  Critique  oj  Practical  Reason, 
pp.  291,  297,  302,  308,  310,  314,  336.] 


6o8  THE  CRITIQUE 


of  freedom ,  which  sufficiently  substantiates  its 
reality  by  the  causality  of  reason  in  respect  of 
certain  effects  in  the  world  of  sense  that  are 
possible  by  means  of  that  causality — a  causality 
which  reason  indisputably  postulates  in  the 
moral  law.  Now  the  conception  of  nature — 
which  pertains  merely  to  theoretical  cognition — 
is  either  metaphysical  and  wholly  a  priori;  or 
physical,  that  is  a  posteriori  and  of  necessity 
only  conceivable  by  means  of  determinate  ex¬ 
perience.  Hence,  the  metaphysical  conception 
of  nature — which  does  not  presuppose  any  de¬ 
terminate  experience — is  ontological. 

Now  the  ontological  proof  of  the  existence  of 
God,  drawn  from  the  conception  of  an  original 
being,  may  take  one  or  other  of  two  lines.  It 
may  start  from  the  ontological  predicates  which 
alone  enable  that  being  to  be  completely  de¬ 
fined  in  thought,  and  thence  infer  its  absolutely 
necessary  existence.  Or  it  may  start  from  the 
absolute  necessity  of  the  existence  of  something 
or  other,  whatever  it  may  be,  and  thence  infer 
the  predicates  of  the  original  being.  For  an  orig¬ 
inal  being  implies  by  its  very  conception — so 
that  it  may  not  be  derived — the  unconditional 
necessity  of  its  existence  and — so  that  this  ne¬ 
cessity  may  be  formulated  to  the  mind — its 
determination  through  and  through  by  its  con¬ 
ception.  Now  these  two  requirements  were  both 
supposed  to  be  found  in  the  conception  of  the 
ontological  idea  of  an  ens  realissimum  or  super¬ 
latively  real  being.  Thus  there  arose  two  meta¬ 
physical  arguments. 

The  proof  which  is  based  on  the  purely  meta¬ 
physical  conception  of  nature — the  strictly  on¬ 
tological  proof,  as  it  is  called — started  from  the 
conception  of  the  superlatively  real  being  and 
thence  inferred  its  absolutely  necessary  real  ex¬ 
istence,  the  argument  being  that  unless  it  ex¬ 
isted  it  would  lack  one  reality,  namely,  real 
existence.  The  other,  which  is  also  called  the 
metaphysico -cosmological  proof,  started  from 
the  necessity  of  the  real  existence  of  something 
or  other — and  as  much  as  that  I  must  certainly 
concede,  since  an  existence  is  given  to  me  in  my 
own  self-consciousness — and  thence  inferred  its 
complete  determination  as  the  superlatively  real 
being.  For,  as  was  argued,  while  all  that  has 
real  existence  is  determined  in  all  respects,  what 
is  absolutely  necessary — that  is,  what  we  have 
to  cognize  as  such,  and,  consequently,  cognize 
a  priori — must  be  completely  determined  by  its 
conception;  but  such  thorough  determination 
can  only  be  found  in  the  conception  of  a  super¬ 
latively  real  thing.  The  sophistries  in  both  these 
inferences  need  not  be  exposed  here,  as  that  has 


already  been  done  in  another  place.  All  I  need 
now  say  is  that,  let  such  proofs  be  defended  \ 
with  all  the  forms  of  dialectical  subtlety  you 
please,  yet  they  will  never  descend  from  the 
schools  and  enter  into  every-day  life  or  be  able 
to  exert  the  smallest  influence  on  ordinary 
healthy  intelligence. 

The  proof  which  is  founded  on  a  conception 
of  nature,  which,  while  it  can  only  be  empirical,  s 
is  yet  intended  to  lead  beyond  the  bounds  of  , 
nature  as  the  complex  of  objects  of  sense,  can 
only  be  the  proof  derived  from  the  ends  of  na¬ 
ture.  Though  the  conception  of  these  ends,  no 
doubt,  cannot  be  given  a  priori ,  but  only  through 
experience,  this  proof  promises  such  a  concep¬ 
tion  of  the  original  ground  of  nature  as  alone,  6 
of  all  those  that  we  can  conceive,  is  appropriate  - 
to  the  supersensible — the  conception,  namely, 
of  a  supreme  intelligence  as  cause  of  the  world. 
And  in  point  of  fact,  so  far  as  principles  of  the 
reflective  judgement  go,  that  is  to  say,  in  respect 
of  our  human  faculty  of  cognition,  it  is  as  good 
as  its  word.  But,  now,  is  this  proof  in  a  position 
to  give  us  that  conception  of  a  supreme  or  inde¬ 
pendent,  intelligent  being,  when  further  under¬ 
stood  as  that  of  a  God,  that  is  an  Author  of  a 
world  subject  to  moral  laws,  and  so  as,  there¬ 
fore,  to  be  sufficiently  definite  for  the  idea  of  a 
final  end  of  the  existence  of  the  world?  That  is 
the  question  on  which  everything  turns,  wheth¬ 
er  we  are  looking  for  a  theoretically  adequate 
conception  of  the  Original  Being  on  behalf  of 
our  knowledge  of  nature  as  a  whole,  or  for  a 
practical  conception  for  religion. 

This  argument,  drawn  from  physical  tele¬ 
ology,  is  deserving  of  all  respect.  It  appeals  to 
the  intelligence  of  the  man  in  the  street  with 
the  same  convincing  force  as  it  does  to  the  most 
subtle  thinker;  and  a  Reimarus  won  undying 
honour  for  himself  by  elaborating  this  line  of 
thought,  which  he  did  'with  his  characteristic 
profundity  and  clearness  in  that  work  of  his 
which  has  not  yet  been  excelled.  But  what  is 
the  source  of  the  powerful  influence  which  this 
proof  exerts  upon  the  mind,  and  exerts  espe¬ 
cially  on  a  calm  and  perfectly  voluntary  assent 
arising  from  the  cool  judgement  of  reason — for 
emotion  and  exaltation  of  the  mind  produced 
by  the  wonders  of  nature  may  be  put  down  to 
persuasion?  Is  it  physical  ends,  which  all  point 
to  an  inscrutable  intelligence  in  the  world- 
cause?  No,  they  would  be  an  inadequate  source, 
as  they  do  not  satisfy  the  needs  of  reason  or  an 
inquiring  mind.  For  reason  asks:  For  what  end 
do  all  those  things  of  nature  exist  which  exhibit 
art-forms?  And  for  what  end  does  man  himself 


OF  TELEOLOGICAL  JUDGEMENT  609 


exist — man  with  whose  consideration  we  are  in¬ 
evitably  brought  to  a  halt,  he  being  the  ultimate 
end  of  nature,  so  far  as  we  can  conceive?  Why 
does  this  universal  nature  exist,  and  what  is 
the  final  end  of  all  its  wealth  and  variety  of 
art?  To  suggest  that  it  was  made  for  enjoyment, 
or  to  be  gazed  at,  surveyed  and  admired — 
which,  if  the  matter  ends  there,  amounts  to  no 
more  than  enjoyment  of  a  particular  kind — as 
though  enjoyment  was  the  ultimate  and  final 
end  of  the  presence  here  of  the  world  and  of 
man  himself,  cannot  satisfy  reason.  For  a  per¬ 
sonal  worth,  which  man  can  only  give  to  him¬ 
self,  is  pre-supposed  by  reason,  as  the  sole  con¬ 
dition  upon  which  he  and  his  existence  can  be  a 
final  end.  In  the  absence  of  this  personal  worth 
— which  alone  admits  of  a  definite  conception — 
the  ends  of  nature  do  not  dispose  of  the  ques¬ 
tion.  In  particular  they  cannot  offer  any  definite 
conception  of  the  supreme  being  as  an  all-suf¬ 
ficient  (and  for  that  reason  one  and,  in  the  strict 
sense  of  the  term,  Supreme)  Being,  or  of  the 
laws  according  to  which  its  intelligence  is  cause 
of  the  world. 

That  the  physico-teleological  proof1  produces 
conviction  just  as  if  it  were  also  a  theological 
proof  is,  therefore,  not  due  to  the  use  of  ends 
of  nature  as  so  many  empirical  evidences  of  a 
supreme  intelligence.  On  the  contrary  it  is  the 
moral  evidence,  which  dwells  in  every  man  and 
affects  him  so  deeply,  that  insinuates  itself  into 
the  reasoning.  One  does  not  stop  at  the  being 
that  manifests  itself  with  such  incomprehensi¬ 
ble  art  in  the  ends  of  nature,  but  one  goes  on  to 
ascribe  to  it  a  final  end  and,  consequently,  wis¬ 
dom — although  the  perception  of  such  physical 
ends  does  not  entitle  one  to  do  this.  Thus  the 
above  argument  is  arbitrarily  supplemented  in 
respect  of  its  inherent  defect.  It  is,  therefore, 
really  the  moral  proof  that  alone  produces  the 
conviction,  and  even  this  only  does  so  from  the 
point  of  view  of  moral  considerations  to  which 
every  one  in  the  depth  of  his  heart  assents.  The 
sole  merit  of  the  physico-teleological  proof  is 
that  it  leads  the  mind  in  its  survey  of  the  world 
to  take  the  path  of  ends,  and  guides  it  in  this 
way  to  an  intelligent  author  of  the  world.  At 
this  point,  then,  the  moral  relation  to  ends  and 
the  idea  of  a  like  lawgiver  and  author  of  the 
world,  in  the  form  of  a  theological  conception, 
though  in  truth  purely  an  extraneous  addition, 
seems  to  grow  quite  naturally  out  of  the  phys¬ 
ico-teleological  evidence. 

Here  the  matter  may  be  let  rest  at  the  popu¬ 
lar  statement  of  the  case.  For  where  ordinary 

1  [Cf.  Critique  of  Pure  Reason,  p.  187.] 


sound  understanding  confuses  two  distinct  prin¬ 
ciples,  and  draws  its  correct  conclusion  in  point 
of  fact  only  from  one  of  them,  it  generally  finds 
it  difficult,  if  their  separation  calls  for  much 
reflection,  to  dissociate  one  from  the  other  as 
heterogeneous  principles.  But,  besides,  the  mor¬ 
al  argument  for  the  existence  of  God  does  not, 
strictly  speaking,  merely  as  it  were  supplement 
the  physico-teleological  so  as  to  make  it  a  com¬ 
plete  proof.  Rather  is  it  a  distinct  proof  which 
compensates  for  the  failure  of  the  latter  to  pro¬ 
duce  conviction.  For  the  physico-teleological 
argument  cannot  in  fact  do  anything  more  than 
direct  reason  in  its  estimate  of  the  source  of 
nature  and  its  contingent  but  admirable  order, 
which  is  only  known  to  us  through  experience, 
and  draw  its  attention  to  a  cause  that  acts  ac¬ 
cording  to  ends  and  is  as  such  the  source  of 
nature — a  cause  which  by  the  structure  of  our 
cognitive  faculty  we  must  conceive  as  intelligent 
— and  in  this  way  make  it  more  susceptible  to 
the  influence  of  the  moral  proof.  For  what  the 
latter  conception  needs  is  so  essentially  differ¬ 
ent  from  anything  that  is  to  be  found  in  or 
taught  by  physical  conceptions  that  it  requires 
a  special  premiss  and  proof  entirely  independ¬ 
ent  of  the  foregoing  if  the  conception  of  the 
original  being  is  to  be  specified  sufficiently  for 
theology  and  its  existence  inferred.  The  moral 
proof  (which  of  course  only  proves  the  exist¬ 
ence  of  God  when  we  take  the  practical,  though 
also  indispensable,  side  of  reason  into  account) 
would,  therefore,  continue  to  retain  its  full 
force  were  we  to  meet  with  no  material  at  all 
in  the  world,  or  only  ambiguous  material,  for 
physical  teleology.  We  can  imagine  rational  be¬ 
ings  finding  themselves  in  the  midst  of  a  nature 
such  as  to  show  no  clear  trace  of  organization, 
but  only  the  effects  of  a  mere  mechanism  of 
crude  matter,  so  that,  looking  to  them  and  to 
the  variability  of  some  merely  contingently  fi¬ 
nal  forms  and  relations,  there  would  appear  to 
be  no  reason  for  inferring  an  intelligent  author. 
In  this  nature  there  would  then  be  nothing  to 
suggest  a  physical  teleology.  And  yet  reason, 
while  receiving  no  instruction  here  from  physi¬ 
cal  conceptions,  would  find  in  the  conception  of 
freedom,  and  the  ethical  ideas  founded  thereon, 
a  ground,  sufficient  for  practice,  for  postulating 
the  conception  of  the  original  being  appropri¬ 
ate  to  those  ideas,  that  is,  as  a  Deity,  and  na¬ 
ture,  including  even  our  own  existence,  as  a  final 
end  answering  to  freedom  and  its  laws,  and  for 
doing  so  in  consideration  of  the  indispensable 
command  of  practical  reason.  However  the  fact 
that  in  the  actual  world  abundant  material  for 


THE  CRITIQUE 


physical  teleology  exists  to  satisfy  the  rational 
beings  in  it — a  fact  not  antecedently  necessary 
serves  as  a  desirable  confirmation  of  the  moral 
argument,  so  far  as  nature  can  adduce  anything 
analogous  to  the  ideas  of  reason  (moral  ideas 
in  this  case).  For  the  conception  of  a  supreme 
cause  that  possesses  intelligence — a  conception 
that  is  far  from  sufficient  for  a  theology — ac¬ 
quires  by  that  means  such  reality  as  is  sufficient 
for  the  reflective  judgement.  But  this  concep¬ 
tion  is  not  required  as  a  foundation  of  the  moral 
proof;  nor  can  the  latter  proof  be  used  for  com¬ 
pleting  the  former,  which  of  itself  does  not 
point  to  morality  at  all,  and  making  it  one  en¬ 
tire  proof  by  continuing  the  train  of  reasoning 
on  the  same  fundamental  lines.  Two  such  het¬ 
erogeneous  principles  as  nature  and  freedom 
cannot  but  yield  two  different  lines  of  proof — 
while  the  attempt  to  derive  the  proof  in  ques¬ 
tion  from  nature  will  be  found  inadequate  for 
what  is  meant  to  be  proved. 

If  the  premisses  of  the  physico-teleological 
argument  went  the  length  of  the  proof  sought, 
the  result  would  be  very  gratifying  to  specula¬ 
tive  reason.  For  they  would  afford  hope  of  pro¬ 
ducing  a  theology — that  being  the  name  one 
would  have  to  give  to  a  theoretical  knowledge 
of  the  divine  nature  and  its  existence  sufficient 
for  explaining  both  the  constitution  of  the 
world  and  the  distinctive  scope  of  the  moral 
laws.  Similarly,  if  psychology  was  sufficient  to 
enable  us  to  attain  to  a  knowledge  of  the  im¬ 
mortality  of  the  soul,  it  would  open  the  door 
to  a  pneumatology  which  would  be  equally  ac¬ 
ceptable  to  reason.  But,  however  much  it  might 
flatter  the  vanity  of  an  idle  curiosity,1  neither 
of  the  two  fulfil  the  desire  of  reason  in  respect 
of  theory,  which  would  have  to  be  based  on  a 
knowledge  of  the  nature  of  things.  But  whether 
they  do  not  better  fulfil  their  final  objective 
purpose,  the  first  in  the  form  of  theology,  the 
second  in  the  form  of  anthropology,  when  both 
founded  on  the  moral  principle,  namely  that  of 
freedom,  and  adapted,  therefore,  to  the  prac¬ 
tical  employment  of  reason,  is  a  different  ques¬ 
tion,  and  one  which  we  have  here  no  need  to 
pursue  farther. 

But  the  reason  why  the  physico-teleological 
argument  does  not  go  the  length  that  theology 
requires  is  that  it  does  not,  and  cannot,  give 
any  conception  of  the  original  being  that  is  suf¬ 
ficiently  definite  for  that  purpose.  Such  a  con¬ 
ception  has  to  be  derived  entirely  from  a  dif¬ 
ferent  quarter,  or  (at  least)  you  must  look  else¬ 
where  to  supplement  the  defects  of  the  concep- 

1  [Cf.  p.  603  note.] 


tion  by  what  is  an  arbitrary  addition.  You  infer 
an  intelligent  world-cause  from  the  great  final¬ 
ity  of  natural  forms  and  their  relations.  But 
what  is  the  degree  of  this  intelligence?  Beyond 
doubt,  you  cannot  assume  that  it  is  the  highest 
possible  intelligence;  for  to  do  so  you  would 
have  to  see  that  a  greater  intelligence  than  that 
of  which  you  perceive  evidences  in  the  world  is 
inconceivable,  which  means  attributing  omnis¬ 
cience  to  yourself.  In  the  same  way  you  infer 
from  the  greatness  of  the  world  a  very  great 
might  on  the  part  of  its  author.  But  you  will 
acknowledge  that  this  has  only  comparative 
significance  for  your  power  of  comprehension 
and  that,  since  you  do  not  know  all  that  is  pos¬ 
sible,  so  as  to  compare  it  with  the  magnitude 
of  the  world,  so  far  as  known  to  you,  you  cannot 
infer  the  omnipotence  of  its  author  from  so 
small  a  standard,  and  so  forth.  Now  this  does  I 
not  bring  you  to  any  definite  conception  of  an 
original  being  suitable  for  a  theology.  For  that 
conception  can  only  be  found  in  the  thought  of 
the  totality  of  the  perfections  associated  with 
an  intelligence,  and  for  this  merely  empirical 
data  can  give  you  no  assistance  whatever.  But, 
apart  from  a  determinate  conception  of  this 
kind,  you  can  draw  no  inference  to  a  single  in-  f 
telligent  original  being;  whatever  your  purpose, 
you  can  only  suppose  one.  Now,  certainly,  one 
may  quite  readily  give  you  the  liberty  of  mak¬ 
ing  an  arbitrary  addition — since  reason  raises 
no  valid  objection — and  saying  that  where  one 
meets  with  so  much  perfection  one  may  well 
suppose  all  perfection  to  be  united  in  a  unique 
world-cause;  because  reason  can  turn  such  a 
definite  principle  to  better  account  both  theo¬ 
retically  and  practically.  But  then  you  cannot 
cry  up  this  conception  of  the  original  being  as 
one  which  you  have  proved,  since  you  have 
only  assumed  it  in  the  interests  of  a  better  em¬ 
ployment  of  reason.  Hence  all  lament  or  im¬ 
potent  rage  on  account  of  the  supposed  enormity 
of  casting  a  doubt  on  the  conclusiveness  of 
your  chain  of  reasoning  is  idle  bluster.  It  would 
much  like  us  to  believe  that  the  doubt  that  is 
freely  expressed  as  to  the  validity  of  your  argu¬ 
ment  is  a  questioning  of  sacred  truth,  so  that 
under  this  cover  its  weakness  may  pass  un¬ 
noticed. 

On  the  other  hand,  moral  teleology,  whose 
foundations  are  no  less  firm  than  those  of  phys¬ 
ical  teleology,  and  which  in  fact  should  be  re¬ 
garded  as  in  a  better  position,  seeing  that  it 
rests  a  priori  on  principles  that  are  inseparable 
from  our  reason,  leads  to  what  the  possibility 
of  a  theology  requires,  namely  to  a  definite 


OF  TELEOLOGICAL  JUDGEMENT 


conception  of  the  supreme  cause  as  one  that  is 
the  cause  of  the  world  in  its  accordance  with 
moral  laws,  and,  consequently,  of  such  a  cause 
as  satisfies  our  moral  final  end.  Now  that  is  a 
cause  that  requires  nothing  less  than  omnis¬ 
cience,  omnipotence,  omnipresence,  and  so  forth, 
as  the  natural  attributes  characterizing  its  oper¬ 
ation.  These  attributes  must  be  thought  as  an¬ 
nexed  to  the  moral  final  end  which  is  infinite, 
and,  accordingly,  as  adequate  to  that  end.  Thus 
moral  teleology  can  alone  furnish  the  concep¬ 
tion  of  a  unique  Author  of  the  world  suitable 
for  a  theology. 

In  this  way,  theology  also  leads  directly  to 
religion,  that  is  the  recognition  of  our  duties  as 
divine  commands.  For  it  is  only  the  recognition 
of  our  duty  and  of  its  content — the  final  end 
enjoined  upon  us  by  reason — that  was  able  to 
produce  a  definite  conception  of  God.  This  con¬ 
ception  is,  therefore,  from  its  origin  indissolu¬ 
bly  connected  with  obligation  to  that  Being.  On 
the  other  hand,  even  supposing  that  by  pursuing 
the  theoretical  path  one  could  arrive  at  a  defi¬ 
nite  conception  of  the  original  being,  namely, 
as  simple  cause  of  nature,  one  would  afterwards 
encounter  considerable  difficulty  in  finding  valid 
proofs  for  ascribing  to  this  being  a  causality  in 
accordance  with  moral  laws,  and  might,  perhaps, 
not  be  able  to  do  so  at  all  without  resorting  to 
arbitrary  interpolation.  Yet,  if  the  conception 
of  such  causality  is  left  out,  that  would-be  the¬ 
ological  conception  can  form  no  basis  for  the 
support  of  religion.  Even  if  a  religion  could  be 
established  on  these  theoretical  lines,  yet  in  what 
touches  disposition,  which  is  the  essential  ele¬ 
ment  in  religion,  it  would  really  be  a  different 
religion  from  one  in  which  the  conception  of 
God  and  the  practical  conviction  of  His  exist¬ 
ence  springs  from  root-ideas  of  morality.  For  if 
omnipotence,  omniscience,  and  so  forth,  on  the 
part  of  an  Author  of  the  world,  were  concep¬ 
tions  given  to  us  from  another  quarter,  and  if, 
regarded  in  that  light,  we  had  to  take  them  for 
granted  for  the  purpose  only  of  applying  our 
conceptions  of  duties  to  our  relation  to  such 
Author,  then  these  latter  conceptions  would 
inevitably  betray  strong  traces  of  compulsion 
and  forced  submission.  But  what  of  the  alterna¬ 
tive?  What  if  the  final  end  of  our  true  being  is 
delineated  to  our  minds  quite  freely,  and  in 
virtue  of  the  precept  of  our  own  reason,  by  a 
reverence  for  the  moral  law?  Why,  then,  we 
accept  into  our  moral  perspective  a  cause  har¬ 
monizing  with  that  end  and  with  its  accom¬ 
plishment,  and  accept  it  with  deepest  venera¬ 
tion — wholly  different  from  any  pathological 


6n 

fear — and  we  willingly  bow  down  before  it.1 

But  why  should  it  be  of  any  consequence  to 
us  to  have  a  theology  at  all?  Well,  as  to  this,  it 
is  quite  obvious  that  it  is  not  necessary  for  the 
extension  or  rectification  of  our  knowledge  of 
nature  or,  in  fact,  for  any  theory  whatever.  We 
need  theology  solely  on  behalf  of  religion,  that 
is  to  say,  the  practical  or,  in  other  words,  moral 
employment  of  our  reason,  and  need  it  as  a 
subjective  requirement.  Now  if  it  turns  out 
that  the  one  and  only  argument  which  leads  to 
a  definite  conception  of  the  object  of  theology 
is  itself  a  moral  argument,  the  result  will  not 
seem  strange.  But,  more  than  that,  we  shall  not 
feel  that  the  assurance  produced  by  this  line  of 
proof  falls  in  any  way  short  of  the  final  purpose 
it  has  in  view,  provided  we  are  clear  on  the 
point  that  an  argument  of  this  kind  only  proves 
the  existence  of  God  in  a  way  that  satisfies 
the  moral  side  of  our  nature,  that  is,  from  a 
practical  point  of  view.  Speculation  does  not 
here  display  its  force  in  any  way,  nor  does  it 
enlarge  the  borders  of  its  realm.  Also  the  sur¬ 
prise  at  the  fact  that  we  here  assert  the  possi¬ 
bility  of  a  theology,  and  the  alleged  contradic¬ 
tion  in  that  assertion  with  what  the  Critique 
of  speculative  reason  said  of  the  categories, 
will  disappear  on  close  inspection.  What  that 
Critique  said  was  that  the  categories  can  only 
produce  knowledge  when  applied  to  objects  of 
sense,  and  that  they  can  in  no  way  do  so  when 
applied  to  the  supersensible.  But,  be  it  ob¬ 
served  that  while  the  categories  are  here  used 
on  behalf  of  the  knowledge  of  God,  they  are  so 
used  solely  for  practical,  not  for  theoretical 
purposes,  that  is  they  are  not  directed  to  the 
intrinsic,  and  for  us  inscrutable,  nature  of  God. 
Let  me  take  this  opportunity  of  putting  an  end 
to  the  misinterpretation  of  the  above  doctrine 
in  the  Critique — a  doctrine  which  is  very  nec¬ 
essary,  but  which,  to  the  chagrin  of  blind  dog¬ 
matists,  relegates  reason  to  its  proper  bounds. 
With  this  object  I  here  append  the  following 
elucidation. 

If  I  ascribe  motive  force  to  a  body,  and  con¬ 
ceive  it,  therefore,  by  means  of  the  category  of 
causality ,  then  at  the  same  time  and  by  the 

1  Both  the  admiration  for  beauty  and  the  emotion  ex¬ 
cited  by  the  profuse  variety  of  ends  of  nature,  which  a 
reflective  mind  is  able  to  feel  prior  to  any  clear  repre¬ 
sentation  of  an  intelligent  author  of  the  world,  have 
something  about  them  akin  to  a  religious  feeling.  Hence 
they  seem  primarily  to  act  upon  the  moral  feeling  (of 
gratitude  and  veneration  towards  the  unknown  cause) 
by  means  of  a  mode  of  critical  judgement  analogous  to 
the  moral  mode,  and  therefore  to  affect  the  mind  by 
exciting  moral  ideas.  It  is  then  that  they  inspire  that 
admiration  which  is  fraught  with  far  more  interest 
than  mere  theoretical  observation  can  produce. 


612 


THE  CRITIQUE 


same  means  I  cognize  it;  that  is  to  say,  I  de¬ 
termine  the  conception  which  I  have  of  it  as  an 
object  in  general  by  means  of  what  applies  to 
it  in  the  concrete  as  an  object  of  sense  (this 
being  the  condition  of  the  possibility  of  the  re¬ 
lation  in  question).  Thus,  suppose  the  dynami¬ 
cal  force  that  I  ascribe  to  it  is  that  of  repulsion, 
then — even  though  I  do  not  as  yet  place  beside 
it  another  body  against  which  it  exerts  this 
force — I  may  predicate  of  it  a  place  in  space, 
further  an  extension  or  space  possessed  by  the 
body  itself,  and,  besides,  a  filling  of  this  space 
by  the  repelling  forces  of  its  parts,  and,  finally, 
the  law  regulating  this  filling  of  space — I  mean 
the  law  that  the  force  of  repulsion  in  the  parts 
must  decrease  in  the  same  ratio  as  the  extension 
of  the  body  increases,  and  as  the  space  which  it 
fills  with  the  same  parts  and  by  means  of  this 
force  is  enlarged.  On  the  other  hand,  if  I  form 
a  notion  of  a  supersensible  being  as  prime 
mover,  and  thus  employ  the  category  of  cau¬ 
sality  in  consideration  of  the  same  mode  of 
action  in  the  world,  namely,  the  movement  of 
matter,  I  must  not  then  conceive  it  to  be  at  any 
place  in  space,  or  to  be  extended,  nay  I  am  not 
even  to  conceive  it  as  existing  in  time  at  all  or 
as  coexistent  with  other  beings.  Accordingly, 
I  have  no  forms  of  thought  whatever  that  could 
interpret  to  me  the  condition  under  which 
movement  derived  from  this  being  as  its  source 
is  possible.  Consequently,  from  the  predicate  of 
cause,  as  prime  mover,  I  do  not  get  the  least 
concrete  cognition  of  it:  I  have  only  the  repre¬ 
sentation  of  a  something  containing  the  source 
of  the  movements  in  the  world.  And  as  the  re¬ 
lation  in  which  this  something,  as  cause  stands 
to  these  movements,  does  not  give  me  anything 
further  that  belongs  to  the  constitution  of  the 
thing  which  is  cause,  it  leaves  the  conception  of 
this  cause  quite  empty.  The  reason  is  that  with 
predicates  that  only  get  their  object  in  the 
world  of  sense  I  may  no  doubt  advance  to  the 
existence  of  something  that  must  contain  the 
source  of  these  predicates,  but  I  cannot  advance 
to  the  determination  of  the  conception  of  this 
something  as  a  supersensible  being,  a  concep¬ 
tion  that  excludes  all  those  predicates.  If,  there¬ 
fore,  I  make  the  category  of  causality  determi¬ 
nate  by  means  of  the  conception  of  a  prime 
mover ,  it  does  not  help  me  in  the  slightest  to 
cognize  what  God  is.  But  maybe  I  shall  fare 
better  if  I  take  a  line  from  the  order  of  the 
world  and  proceed,  not  merely  to  conceive  the 
causality  of  the  supersensible  being  as  that  of  a 
supreme  intelligence ,  but  also  to  cognize  it  by 
means  of  this  determination  of  the  conception 


in  question;  for  then  the  troublesome  terms  of 
space  and  extension  drop  out.  Beyond  all  doubt, 
the  great  finality  present  in  the  world  compels 
us  to  conceive  that  there  is  a  supreme  cause  of 
this  finality  and  one  whose  causality  has  an  in¬ 
telligence  behind  it.  But  this  in  no  way  entitles 
us  to  ascribe  such  intelligence  to  that  cause. 
(Thus,  for  instance,  we  are  obliged  to  conceive 
the  eternity  of  God  as  an  existence  in  all  time, 
because  we  can  form  no  other  conception  of 
mere  existence  than  that  of  a  magnitude,  or,  in 
other  words,  than  as  duration.  Similarly  we 
have  to  conceive  the  divine  omnipotence  as  an 
existence  in  all  places,  in  order  to  interpret  to 
ourselves  God’s  immediate  presence  in  respect 
of  things  external  to  one  another.  All  this  we 
do  without,  however,  being  at  liberty  to  ascribe 
any  of  these  thought-forms  to  God  as  some¬ 
thing  cognized  in  Him.)  If  I  determine  the  cau¬ 
sality  of  man  in  respect  of  certain  products 
that  are  only  explicable  by  reference  to  inten¬ 
tional  finality,  by  conceiving  it  as  an  intelligence 
on  his  part,  I  need  not  stop  there,  but  I  can 
ascribe  this  predicate  to  him  as  a  familiar  attri¬ 
bute  of  man  and  thereby  cognize  him.  For  I 
know  that  intuitions  are  given  to  the  senses 
of  man,  and  by  means  of  understanding  are 
brought  under  a  conception  and  thus  under  a 
rule;  that  this  conception  contains  only  the 
common  mark,  letting  the  particular  drop  out, 
and  is  therefore  discursive;  that  the  rules  for 
bringing  representations  under  the  general  form 
of  a  consciousness  are  given  by  understanding 
antecedently  to  those  intuitions,  and  so  on.  Ac¬ 
cordingly,  I  ascribe  this  attribute  to  man  as  one 
whereby  I  cognize  him.  But  supposing,  now  that 
I  seek  to  conceive  a  supersensible  being  (God) 
as  Intelligence,  while  this  is  not  alone  allowable 
but  unavoidable  if  I  am  to  exercise  certain  func¬ 
tions  of  my  reason,  I  have  no  right  whatever  to 
flatter  myself  that  I  am  in  a  position  to  ascribe 
intelligence  to  that  being  and  thereby  to  cognize 
it  by  one  of  its  attributes.  For  in  that  case  I 
must  omit  all  the  above  conditions  under  which 
I  know  an  intelligence.  Consequently,  the  predi¬ 
cate  that  is  only  available  for  the  determination 
of  man  is  quite  inapplicable  to  a  supersensible 
object.  Hence  we  are  quite  unable  to  cognize 
what  God  is  by  means  of  any  such  definite  cau¬ 
sality.  And  it  is  so  with  all  categories.  They  can 
have  no  significance  whatever  for  knowledge 
theoretically  considered,  unless  they  are  applied 
to  objects  of  possible  experience.  But  I  am  able 
to  form  a  notion  even  of  a  supersensible  being 
on  the  analogy  of  an  understanding — nay  must 
do  so  when  I  look  to  certain  other  considera- 


OF  TELEOLOGICAL  JUDGEMENT 


tions — without,  however,  thereby  desiring  to 
cognize  it  theoretically.  I  refer  to  the  case  of 
this  mode  of  its  causality  having  to  do  with  an 
effect  in  the  world  that  is  fraught  with  an  end 
which  is  morally  necessary  but  for  creatures  of 
sense  unrealizable.  For,  in  that  case,  a  knowl¬ 
edge  of  God  and  His  existence,  that  is  to  say  a 
theology,  is  possible  by  means  of  attributes  and 
determinations  of  this  causality  merely  con¬ 
ceived  in  Him  according  to  analogy,  and  this 
knowledge  has  all  requisite  reality  in  a  practical 
relation,  but  also  in  respect  only  of  this  rela¬ 
tion,  that  is,  in  relation  to  morality.  An  ethical 
theology  is  therefore  quite  possible.  For  while 
morality  without  theology  may  certainly  carry 
on  with  its  own  rule,  it  cannot  do  so  with  the 
final  purpose  which  this  very  rule  enjoins,  unless 
it  throws  reason  to  the  winds  as  regards  this 
purpose.  But  a  theological  ethics — on  the  part 


613 

of  pure  reason — is  impossible,  seeing  that  laws 
which  are  not  originally  given  by  reason  itself, 
and  the  observance  of  which  it  does  not  bring 
about  as  a  practical  capacity,  cannot  be  moral. 
In  the  same  way  a  theological  physics  would  be 
a  monstrosity,  because  it  would  not  bring  for¬ 
ward  any  laws  of  nature  but  rather  ordinances 
of  a  supreme  will,  whereas  a  physical,  or, 
properly  speaking,  physico-teleological,  theol¬ 
ogy  can  at  least  serve  as  a  propaedeutic  to  the¬ 
ology  proper,  since  by  means  of  the  study  of 
physical  ends,  of  which  it  presents  a  rich  supply, 
it  awakens  us  to  the  idea  of  a  final  end  which 
nature  cannot  exhibit.  Consequently  it  can  make 
us  alive  to  the  need  of  a  theology  which  should 
define  the  conception  of  God  sufficiently  for  the 
highest  practical  employment  of  reason,  though 
it  cannot  produce  a  theology  or  find  evidences 
adequate  for  its  support. 


PRINTED  IN  U.S.A. 


. 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS,  Volumes  2  and  3 


rt»' 


-H--* 


ANGEL 

ANIMAL 

ARISTOCRACY 

ART 

ASTRONOMY 
BEAUTY 
BEING 
CAUSE 
CHANCE 
CHANGE 
CITIZEN 
CONSTITUTION 
COURAGE 
CUSTOM  AND 
CONVENTION 
DEFINITION 
DEMOCRACY 
DESIRE 
DIALECTIC 
DUTY 

EDUCATION 

ELEMENT 

EMOTION 

ETERNITY 

EVOLUTION 

EXPERIENCE 


FAMILY 

FATE 

FORM 

GOD 

GOOD  AND  EVIL 

GOVERNMENT 

HABIT 

HAPPINESS 

HISTORY 

HONOR 

HYPOTHESIS 

IDEA 

IMMORTALITY 

INDUCTION 

INFINITY 

JUDGMENT 

JUSTICE 

KNOWLEDGE 

LABOR 

LANGUAGE 

LAW 

LIBERTY 

LIFE  AND  DEATH 

LOGIC 

LOVE 

MAN 

MATHEMATICS 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS,  Volumes  2  and  3 


MATTER 

RELATION 

MECHANICS 

RELIGION 

MEDICINE 

REVOLUTION 

MEMORY  AND 

RHETORIC 

IMAGINATION 

SAME  AND  OTHER 

METAPHYSICS 

SCIENCE 

1^^ 


MIND 

MONARCHY 
NATURE 
NECESSITY  AND 
CONTINGENCY 
OLIGARCHY 
ONE  AND  MANY 
OPINION 
OPPOSITION 
PHILOSOPHY 
PHYSICS 

PLEASURE  AND  PAIN 

POETRY 

PRINCIPLE 

PROGRESS 

PROPHECY 

PRUDENCE 

PUNISHMENT 

QUALITY 

QUANTITY 

REASONING 


SENSE 

SIGN  AND  SYMBOL 
SIN 

SLAVERY 

SOUL 

SPACE 

STATE 

TEMPERANCE 
THEOLOGY 
TIME 
TRUTH 
TYRANNY 
UNIVERSAL  AND 
PARTICULAR 
VIRTUE  AND  VICE 
WAR  AND  PEACE 
WEALTH 
WILL 
WISDOM 
WORLD 


’WF? 


