GREAT  BOOKS  OF  THE  WESTERN  WORLD  f| 


Introductory  Volumes: 

1.  The  Great  Conversation 

2.  The  Great  Ideas  I 

3.  The  Great  Ideas  II 


4.  HOMER 

5.  AESCHYLUS 
SOPHOCLES 
EURIPIDES 
ARISTOPHANES 

6.  HERODOTUS 
THUCYDIDES 

7.  PLATO 

8.  ARISTOTLE  I 

9.  ARISTOTLE  II 

10.  HIPPOCRATES 
GALEN 

11.  EUCLID 


12.  LUCRETIUS 


EPICTETUS 
MARCUS  AURELIUS 

7^? 


13.  VIRGIL 

14.  PLUTARCH 

15.  TACITUS 

16.  PTOLEMY 
COPERNICUS 
KEPLER 


17.  PLOTINUS 

18.  AUGUSTINE 

19.  THOMAS  AQUINAS  I 

20.  THOMAS  AQUINAS  II 

21.  DANTE 

22.  CHAUCER 

23.  MACH  I A  VELLI 
HOBBES 

24.  RABELAIS 

25.  MONTAIGNE 

26.  SHAKESPEARE  I 


7^? 


7^? 


7^ 


7^? 


27.  SHAKESPEARE  II  ^ 

■^7 


ARCHIMEDES 

APOLLONIUS 

NICOMACHUS 


.  ^y^y 

GREAT  BOOKS  OF  THE  WESTERN  WORLD  §g 


28.  GILBERT 
GALILEO 
HARVEY 

29.  CERVANTES 

30.  FRANCIS  BACON 

31.  DESCARTES 
SPINOZA 

32.  MILTON 

33.  PASCAL 

34.  NEWTON 
HUYGENS 

35.  LOCKE 
BERKELEY 
HUME 

36.  SWIFT 
STERNE 

37.  FIELDING 

38.  MONTESQUIEU 
ROUSSEAU 

39.  ADAM  SMITH 

40.  GIBBON  I 


41.  GIBBON  II 

42.  KANT 

43.  AMERICAN  STATE 

PAPERS 

THE  FEDERALIST 
J.  S.  MILL 

44.  BOSWELL 

45.  LAVOISIER 
FOURIER 
FARADAY 

46.  HEGEL 

47.  GOETHE 

48.  MELVILLE 

49.  DARWIN 

50.  MARX 
ENGELS 

51.  TOLSTOY 

52.  DOSTOEVSKY 

53.  WILLIAM  JAMES 

54.  FREUD 


^y^y 

^^£y 

^£y 

^y^y 

^y 

^y^y 

^y^y 

>y^y 


R  25395 

808.8  GREAT  BOOKS  OF  THE 
G?86  WESTERN  WORLD 

V*^  Aristotle  I. 

_ _ _ l 


OCT  1 4  1992 


REFERENCE  BOOK 
UMITiO  CIRCULATION 


Archt 


archbishop  mitty  library 


7776 

ban  Jose,  v-m  7^ui/ 


RULES 

1.  All  pupils  in  the  school  are  entitled  to 
use  the  library  and  to  borrow  books. 

2.  Reserved  books  may  be  borrowed  for 
One  period,  or  at  the  close  of  school,  and 
should  be  returned  before  the  first  class  the 
following  school  day. 

3.  All  other  books  may  be  retained  for  two 
weeks. 

4.  Injury  to  books  beyond  reasonable  wear 
and  all  losses  shall  be  paid  for. 

5.  No  books  may  be  taken  from  the  library 
without  being  charged. 


o  ‘O 


f  #*& 
k  .  n.%  .u^-f  ■ 


GREAT  BOOKS 
OF  THE  WESTERN  WORLD 

ROBERT  MAYNARD  HUTCHINS,  EDITOR  IN  CHIEF 


8. 

ARISTOTLE:  I 


Mortimer  J.  Adler,  Associate  Editor 

Members  of  the  Advisory  Board:  Stringfellow  Barr,  Scott  Buchanan,  John  Erskine; 
Clarence  H.  Faust,  Alexander  Meiklejohn,  Joseph  J.  Schwab,  Mark  Van  Doren. 
Editorial  Consultants:  A.  F.  B.  Clark,  F.  L.  Lucas,  Walter  Murdoch. 
Wallace  Brockway,  Executive  Editor 


A 


-  1  ,  •  -  >  l 


24874 


•)»  )J>  )J)  ■»>  o»>  ■»>  ■>»  »>  ■»>  '»>  W  ^  ^  ^  ^  ^  ^ <<<m  (<f,m 


THE  WORKS  OF 

ARISTOTLE 

VOLUME  I 


A3CHBISHSP  MiTTY  HiGH  SCHOOL 
Library 

5000  Mitty  Avenue 
San  Jose,  CA  951 29-1 S97 


William  Benton,  Publisher 

ENCYCLOPAEDIA  BRITANNICA,  INC. 


CHICAGO  ■  LONDON  ■  TORONTO  ■  GENEVA  •  SYDNEY  ■  TOKYO  ■  MANILA 


The  text  and  annotations  of  this  edition  are  reprinted  from 
The  Worlds  of  Aristotle,  translated  into  English  under  the  editorship 
of  W.  D.  Ross,  by  arrangement  with  Oxford  University  Press. 


THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CHICAGO 
The  Great  Books 

is  published  with  the  editorial  advice  of  the  faculties 
of  The  University  of  Chicago 

No  part  of  this  work  may  be  reproduced  or  utilized  in  any  form  or  by  any 
means,  electronic  or  mechanical,  including  photocopying,  recording,  or  by  any 
information  storage  and  retrieval  system,  without  permission  in  writing  from  the 
publisher. 

© 

x952 

by  Encyclopaedia  Britannica,  Inc. 

Twenty-seventh  Printing,  1984 

Copyright  under  International  Copyright  Union 

All  Rights  Reserved  under  Pan  American  and  Universal  Copyright 
Conventions  by  Encyclopaedia  Britannica,  Inc. 

Library  of  Congress  Catalog  Card  Number:  55-10318 
International  Standard  Book  Number:  0-85229-163-9 


25395 


BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTE 

Aristotle,  384-322  b.c. 


Aristotle  was  born  in  384  at  Stagira,  a  Greek 
colonial  town  on  the  Aegean  near  the  Mace¬ 
donian  border  and  somewhat  east  of  the  mod¬ 
ern  city  of  Salonica.  Both  of  his  parents  were 
Ionian  in  origin.  His  mother  was  a  native  of 
Chalcis,  from  which  Stagira  had  been  colo¬ 
nized.  His  father,  Nicomachus,  belonged  to 
the  guild  of  the  “sons  of  Aesculapius”  and  was 
court  physician  to  Amyntas  II,  the  father  of 
Philip  of  Macedon.  Aristotle,  who  seems  to 
have  remained  with  his  parents  during  his 
first  seventeen  years,  may  have  studied  medi¬ 
cine  with  his  father,  and  it  was  sometimes 
claimed  in  antiquity  that  he  practised  medicine 
when  he  first  went  to  Athens. 

In  367  Aristotle  entered  the  Academy  at 
Athens.  Plato  was  then  sixty-one  and  just  en¬ 
tering  upon  his  intervention  in  the  politics  of 
Syracuse.  The  Academy  was  giving  particular 
attention  to  the  problems  of  politics  and  legisla¬ 
tion  and,  in  addition  to  its  more  general  phil¬ 
osophic  interests,  was  increasingly  preoccu¬ 
pied  with  mathematics  and  astronomy.  Few 
details  have  survived  of  the  life  Aristotle  led 
at  the  Academy  for  twenty  years.  He  is  said  to 
have  been  called  by  Plato  the  intellect  of  the 
school.  There  is  also  a  tradition  that  he  taught 
rhetoric.  He  is  known  to  have  written  numer¬ 
ous  dialogues  modeled  after  those  of  his  mas¬ 
ter,  which  were  famed  in  antiquity  for  their 
lucidity  and  the  easy  flow  of  their  style.  There 
is  little  evidence  of  any  serious  disagreement 
between  master  and  pupil  during  these  years, 
and  on  Plato’s  death  in  347  Aristotle  wrote  an 
elegy  for  an  altar  of  friendship  to  Plato  in 
which  he  praised  him  as  “the  man  whom  it  is 
not  lawful  for  bad  men  even  to  praise,  who 
alone  or  first  of  mortals  clearly  revealed,  by 
his  own  life  and  by  the  methods  of  his  words, 
how  to  be  happy  is  to  be  good.” 

When  Speusippus  became  head  of  the  Acad¬ 
emy  in  347,  Aristotle  and  another  of  Plato’s 
pupils,  Xenocrates,  left  Athens  for  Assus,  in 
the  Troiad,  where  two  former  members  of  the 
Academy  were  teaching.  The  “tyrant,”  or  ruler, 
of  the  territory,  Hermias,  had  become  their 
pupil  and,  out  of  gratitude,  had  bestowed  up¬ 
on  them  the  town  of  Assus.  The  four  set  up 
something  like  a  colonial  Academy.  Through 


his  teaching  Aristotle  apparently  became  the 
intimate  friend  of  Hermias,  and  he  married 
the  ruler’s  adopted  daughter.  Theophrastus 
from  the  neighboring  island  of  Lesbos  was  also 
among  his  pupils,  and  it  may  have  been  on  his 
suggestion  that  Aristotle  moved  about  344  to 
Mytilene  on  Lesbos,  where  for  two  years  he 
was  engaged  largely  in  the  study  of  natural 
history,  particularly  marine  biology. 

In  342  Aristotle  returned  to  Macedonia  to 
act  as  tutor  to  the  young  Alexander.  Although 
he  had  been  in  early  youth  close  to  the  Mace¬ 
donian  court  and  already  enjoyed  some  repu¬ 
tation  for  his  dialogues,  the  deciding  factor  in 
the  appointment  may  have  been  Aristotle’s 
connection  with  Hermias,  who  at  this  time 
was  apparently  negotiating  with  Philip  re¬ 
garding  an  expedition  against  Persia.  Aristotle 
stayed  in  Macedonia  for  seven  years.  The  tra¬ 
dition  is  that  he  taught  politics  and  rhetoric, 
and  he  is  said  to  have  prepared  an  edition  of 
Homer  for  the  use  of  Alexander,  who  was 
thirteen  at  the  time  of  his  coming.  In  340, 
after  Philip  went  to  war,  Alexander  directed 
political  affairs  at  home  as  regent,  and  it  is 
likely  that  Aristotle  set  up  a  school  and  gave 
the  greater  part  of  his  time  to  his  own  studies. 
He  induced  Alexander  to  restore  Stagira, 
which  had  been  destroyed  a  few  years  before, 
and  is  said  to  have  provided  it  with  a  con¬ 
stitution.  Perhaps  at  Alexander’s  request,  he 
wrote  the  two  political  treatises  or  pamphlets, 
no  longer  extant,  On  Kingship  and  On  Colo¬ 
nies .  Although  Aristotle  could  have  seen 
but  little  of  his  royal  pupil  during  the  latter 
years  of  his  Macedonian  sojourn,  there  is  evi¬ 
dence  that  Alexander  did  not  forget  his  mas¬ 
ter.  When  he  made  his  expedition  to  the  East, 
he  took  Aristotle’s  nephew,  Callisthenes,  as 
his  historian,  and  to  further  Aristotle’s  scien¬ 
tific  researches,  he  appointed  men  to  collect 
materials  and  specimens. 

After  the  accession  of  Alexander  in  336, 
Aristotle  returned  to  Athens,  where  his  friend, 
Xenocrates,  had  become  head  of  the  Academy. 
He  established  the  Lycaeum,  which  came  to 
be  known  as  the  Peripatetic  School  from  the 
path  in  its  garden  where  he  walked  and  talked 
with  his  pupils.  The  Lycaeum  was  an  organ- 


v 


Biographical  Note 


vi 

ized  institution  for  the  “cult  of  the  Muses/’ 
It  possessed  extensive  equipment,  including 
maps  and  the  largest  library  then  collected  in 
Europe.  It  had  its  regular  dinners  and  even  its 
plate,  and  Aristotle  himself  wrote  rules  for 
holding  symposia .  The  staff  of  lecturers  in¬ 
cluded  Theophrastus  and  Eudemus,  and  there 
was  a  fixed  schedule  for  the  lectures.  Aris¬ 
totle,  according  to  tradition,  devoted  the  morn¬ 
ings  to  the  more  difficult  parts  of  philosophy 
and  in  the  afternoon  addressed  a  wider  audi¬ 
ence  on  rhetoric  and  dialectic. 

The  great  body  of  the  extant  Aristotelian 
treatises  probably  represents  the  lectures  which 
Aristotle  delivered  at  the  Lycaeum.  It  is  not 
likely  that  all  were  written  at  this  time;  they 
had  probably  been  growing  since  he  first  be¬ 
gan  teaching.  His  various  works  of  compila¬ 
tion  almost  certainly  belong  to  these  last  years. 
He  drew  up  lists  of  the  victors  in  the  Pythian 
and  Olympic  games  and  a  chronology  of  the 
Athenian  drama,  later  the  basis  for  dating  the 
Greek  plays.  He  organized  the  collection  of 
one  hundred  and  fifty-eight  Greek  constitu¬ 
tions,  and  his  work  On  the  Athenian  Consti¬ 
tution,  the  only  extant  treatise  of  this  collec¬ 
tion,  is  thought  to  have  provided  the  model 
for  this  research.  He  also  drew  up  an  account 
of  the  “customs  of  the  barbarians”  and  a  trea¬ 
tise  on  “cases  of  constitutional  law.”  The  re¬ 
sults  of  his  investigations  in  natural  history 
are  evident  in  his  biological  works,  particu¬ 
larly  the  History  of  Animals. 


With  the  death  of  Alexander  in  323,  Aris¬ 
totle’s  life  at  the  Lycaeum  came  to  an  abrupt 
end.  Although  Aristotle  apparently  had  little 
relation  with  Alexander,  especially  after  his 
nephew  had  been  put  to  death  for  refusing  to 
render  oriental  obeisance  to  him,  the  philos¬ 
opher  enjoyed  the  friendship  and  protection  of 
Antipater,  who  governed  Alexander’s  Greek 
affairs  from  Athens.  The  revolt  of  the  Athe¬ 
nian  party,  following  the  news  of  Alexander’s 
death,  was  directed  against  Antipater  and 
through  him  it  involved  Aristotle.  Charged 
with  impiety  for  the  elegy  he  had  written  to 
Hermias  twenty  years  before,  Aristotle  re¬ 
called  the  fate  of  Socrates  and  fled  to  his  moth¬ 
er’s  property  in  Chalcis,  declaring,  “I  will  not 
let  the  Athenians  offend  twice  against  philos¬ 
ophy.” 

Aristotle  lived  in  Chalcis  for  only  a  few 
months.  Writing  to  Antipater,  he  noted,  “The 
more  I  am  by  myself,  and  alone,  the  fonder  I 
have  become  of  myths.”  He  died  in  322.  His 
will  discloses  the  care  with  which  he  put  his 
affairs  in  order;  he  provided  for  his  children 
and  the  disposition  of  his  property  in  Stagira 
and  Chalcis,  left  bequests  for  his  household 
servants  and  directions  for  their  freedom,  di¬ 
rected  that  his  body  should  be  buried  with  that 
of  his  wife,  as  she  had  desired,  and,  as  one  of 
the  arrangements  for  the  observance  of  familial 
piety,  ordered  his  executors  to  “set  up  in  Sta¬ 
gira  statues  of  life-size  to  Zeus  and  Athena  the 
Saviours.” 


GENERAL  CONTENTS ,  VOLUME  I 


Biographical  Note,  p.  v 

LOGIC  (Organon) 

Categories  (Categoriae),  translated  by  E.  M.  Edghill,  p.  5 

On  Interpretation  (De  interpretatione),  translated  by  E.  M. 
Edghill,  p.  25 

Prior  Analytics  (Analytica  priora),  translated  by  A.  J.  Jen- 
kinson,  p.  39 

Posterior  Analytics  (Analytica  posteriora),  translated  by 
G.  R.  G.  Mure,  p.  97 

Topics  (Topica),  translated  by  W.  A.  Pickard-Cambridge,  p. 
M3 

On  Sophistical  Refutations  (De  sophisticis  elenchis),  trans¬ 
lated  by  W.  A.  Pickard-Cambridge,  p.  227 

PHYSICAL  TREATISES 

Physics  (Physica),  translated  by  R.  P.  Hardie  and  R.  K.  Gaye, 
P*  259 

On  the  Heavens  (De  caelo),  translated  by  J.  L.  Stocks,  p.  359 

On  Generation  and  Corruption  (De  generatione  et  corrup- 
tione),  translated  by  H.  H.  Joachim,  p.  409 

Meteorology  (Meteorologica),  translated  by  E.  W.  Webster,  p. 
445 

METAPHYSICS  (Metaphysica),  translated  by  W.  D.  Ross,  p. 
499 

ON  THE  SOUL  (De  anima),  translated  by  J.  A.  Smith,  p.  631 

SHORT  PHYSICAL  TREATISES  (Parva  naturalia) 

On  Sense  and  the  Sensible  (De  sensu  et  sensibili),  translated 
by  J.  I.  Beare,  p.  673 

On  Memory  and  Reminiscence  (De  memoria  et  reminiscentia), 
translated  by  J.  I.  Beare,  p.  690 

On  Sleep  and  Sleeplessness  (De  somno  et  vigilia),  translated 
by  J.  I.  Beare,  p.  696 

On  Dreams  (De  somniis),  translated  by  J.  I.  Beare,  p.  702 

On  Prophesying  by  Dreams  (De  divinatione  per  somnum), 
translated  by  J.  I.  Beare,  p.  707 

On  Longevity  and  Shortness  of  Life  (De  longitudine  et 
brevitate  vitae),  translated  by  G.  R.  T.  Ross,  p.  710 

On  Youth  and  Old  Age,  On  Life  and  Death,  On  Breathing 
(De  iuventate  et  senectute,  De  vita  et  morte,  De  respira- 
tione),  translated  by  G.  R.  T.  Ross,  p.  714 


vii 


LOGIC  (ORGANON) 


CONTENTS:  CATEGORIES 


CHAP.  BERLIN  NOS. 

1.  Homonyms,  synonyms,  and  deriva-  ia  i 
tives 

2.  (i)  Simple  and  composite  expressions  ia  16 

(2)  Things  (a)  predicable  of  a  subject,  (b) 
present  in  a  subject,  (c)  both  predicable  of, 
and  present  in,  a  subject,  ( d )  neither  predica¬ 
ble  of,  nor  present  in,  a  subject 

3.  (1)  That  which  is  predicable  of  the  ib  10 
predicate  is  predicable  of  the  subject 

(2)  The  differentiae  of  species  in  one  genus  are 
not  the  same  as  those  in  another,  unless  one 
genus  is  included  in  the  other 

4.  The  eight  categories  of  the  objects  ib  25 
of  thought 

5.  Substance  2a  11 

(1)  Primary  and  secondary  substance 

(2)  Difference  in  the  relation  subsisting  be¬ 
tween  essential  and  accidental  attributes  and 
their  subject 

(3)  All  that  which  is  not  primary  substance  is 
either  an  essential  or  an  accidental  attribute  of 
primary  substance 

(4)  Of  secondary  substances,  species  are  more 
truly  substance  than  genera 

(5)  All  species,  which  are  not  genera,  are  sub¬ 
stance  in  the  same  degree,  and  all  primary  sub¬ 
stances  are  substance  in  the  same  degree. 

(6)  Nothing  except  species  and  genera  is  sec¬ 
ondary  substance 

(7)  The  relation  of  primary  substance  to  sec¬ 
ondary  substance  and  to  all  other  predicates  is 
the  same  as  that  of  secondary  substance  to  all 
other  predicates 

(8)  Substance  is  never  an  accidental  attribute 

(9)  The  differentiae  of  species  are  not  acci¬ 
dental  attributes 

(10)  Species,  genus,  and  differentiae,  as  predi¬ 
cates,  are  ‘univocal’  with  their  subject 

(11)  Primary  substance  is  individual;  second¬ 
ary  substance  is  the  qualification  of  that  which 
is  individual 

(12)  No  substance  has  a  contrary 

(13)  No  substance  can  be  what  it  is  in  varying 
degrees 

(14)  The  particular  mark  of  substance  is  that 
contrary  qualities  can  be  predicated  of  it 

(15)  Contrary  qualities  cannot  be  predicated 
of  anything  other  than  substances,  not  even  of 
propositions  and  judgements 

6.  Quantity  4b  20 

(1)  Discrete  and  continuous  quantity 

(2)  Division  of  quantities,  i.e.  number,  the 
spoken  word,  the  line,  the  surface,  the  solid, 
time,  place,  into  these  two  classes 

(3)  The  parts  of  some  quantities  have  a  rela¬ 


tive  position,  those  of  others  have  not.  Division 
of  quantities  into  these  two  classes 

(4)  Quantitative  terms  are  applied  to  things 
other  than  quantity,  in  view  of  their  relation 
to  one  of  the  aforesaid  quantities 

(5)  Quantities  have  no  contraries 

(6)  Terms  such  as  ‘great’  and  ‘small’  are  rela¬ 
tive,  not  quantitative,  and  moreover  cannot 
be  contrary  to  each  other 

(7)  That  which  is  most  reasonably  supposed 
to  contain  a  contrary  is  space 

(8)  No  quantity  can  be  what  it  is  in  varying 
degrees 

(9)  The  peculiar  mark  of  quantity  is  that 
equality  and  inequality  can  be  predicated  of  it 

7.  Relation  6a  36 

(1)  First  definition  of  relatives 

(2)  Some  relatives  have  contraries 

(3)  Some  relatives  are  what  they  are  in  vary¬ 
ing  degrees 

(4)  A  relative  term  has  always  its  correlative, 
and  the  two  are  interdependent 

(5)  The  correlative  is  only  clear  when  the  rela¬ 
tive  is  given  its  proper  name,  and  in  some  cases 
words  must  be  coined  for  this  purpose 

(6)  Most  relatives  come  into  existence  simul¬ 
taneously;  but  the  objects  of  knowledge  and 
perception  are  prior  to  knowledge  and  percep¬ 
tion 

(7)  No  primary  substance  or  part  of  a  prima¬ 
ry  substance  is  relative 

(8)  Revised  definition  of  relatives,  excluding 
secondary  substances 

(9)  It  is  impossible  to  know  that  a  thing  is 
relative,  unless  we  know  that  to  which  it  is 
relative 

8.  Quality  8b  25 

(1)  Definition  of  qualities 

(2)  Different  kinds  of  quality:  (a)  habits  and 
dispositions,  (b)  capacities,  (c)  affective  qual¬ 
ities  [Distinction  between  affective  qualities 
and  affections] ,  (d)  shape,  &c.  [Rarity,  den¬ 
sity,  &c.,  are  not  qualities] 

(3)  Adjectives  are  generally  formed  deriva¬ 
tively  from  the  names  of  the  corresponding 
qualities 

(4)  Most  qualities  have  contraries 

(5)  If  of  two  contraries  one  is  a  quality,  the 
other  is  also  a  quality 

(6)  A  quality  can  in  most  cases  be  what  it  is 
in  varying  degrees,  and  subjects  can  possess 
most  qualities  in  varying  degrees;  qualities  of 
shape  are  an  exception  to  this  rule 

(7)  The  peculiar  mark  of  quality  is  that  like¬ 
ness  and  unlikeness  is  predicable  of  things  in 
respect  of  it 


3 


CONTENTS 


(8)  Habits  and  dispositions  as  genera  are  rela¬ 
tive;  as  individual,  qualitative 

9.  Action  and  affection  and  the  other  ub  1 
categories  described 

10.  Four  classes  of  ‘opposites’:  (a)  Cor-  nb  15 
relatives,  (b)  Contraries  [Some  contraries 
have  an  intermediate,  and  some  have  not| ,  (c) 
Positives  and  privatives 

The  terms  expressing  possession  and  privation 
are  not  the  positive  and  privative,  though  the 
former  are  opposed  each  to  each  in  the  same 
sense  as  the  latter 

Similarly  the  facts  which  form  the  basis  of  an 
affirmation  or  a  denial  are  opposed  each  to  each 
in  the  same  sense  as  the  affirmation  and  denial 
themselves 

Positives  and  privatives  are  not  opposed  in  the 
sense  in  which  correlatives  are  opposed 
Positives  and  privatives  are  not  opposed  in  the 
same  sense  in  which  contraries  are  opposed 
For  (i)  they  are  not  of  the  class  which  has  no 
intermediate,  nor  of  the  class  which  has  inter¬ 
mediates 

(ii)  There  can  be  no  change  from  one  state 
(privation)  to  its  opposite 
(d)  Affirmation  and  negation;  these  are  dis¬ 
tinguished  from  other  contraries  by  the  fact 
that  one  is  always  false  and  the  other  true  [Op¬ 
posite  affirmations  seem  to  possess  this  mark, 
but  they  do  not] 


11.  Contraries  further  discussed  I3b36 

Evil  is  generally  the  contrary  of  good,  but 
sometimes  two  evils  are  contrary 

When  one  contrary  exists,  the  other  need  not 
exist 

Contrary  attributes  are  applicable  within  the 
same  species  or  genus 

Contraries  must  themselves  be  within  the  same 
genus,  or  within  opposite  genera,  or  be  them¬ 
selves  genera 

12.  The  word  ‘prior’  is  applicable:  (a)  14s  26 

to  that  which  is  previous  in  time,  ( b )  to  that 
on  which  something  else  depends,  but  which 
is  not  itself  dependent  on  it,  (c)  to  that  which 
is  prior  in  arrangement,  (d)  to  that  which  is 
better  or  more  honourable,  (e)  to  that  one  of 
two  interdependent  things  which  is  the  cause 
of  the  other. 

13.  The  word  ‘simultaneous’  is  used:  i4b24 

(a)  of  those  things  which  come  into  being  at 
the  same  time,  (b)  of  those  things  which  are 
interdependent,  but  neither  of  which  is  the 
cause  of  the  other  (r)  of  the  different  species 
of  the  same  genus 

14.  Motion  is  of  six  kinds  i5a  13 

Alteration  is  distinct  from  other  kinds  of  mo¬ 
tion 

Definition  of  the  contrary  of  motion  and  of  the 
various  kinds  of  motion 

15.  The  meanings  of  the  term  ‘to  have*  i5b  16 


CATEGORIES 


la  Things  are  said  to  be  named  ‘equivocally’ 
when,  though  they  have  a  common  name,  the 
definition  corresponding  with  the  name  differs 
for  each.  Thus,  a  real  man  and  a  figure  in  a  pic¬ 
ture  can  both  lay  claim  to  the  name  ‘animal’; 
yet  these  are  equivocally  so  named,  for,  though 
they  have  a  common  name,  the  definition  cor¬ 
responding  with  the  name  differs  for  each.  For 
[5]  should  any  one  define  in  what  sense  each 
is  an  animal,  his  definition  in  the  one  case  will 
be  appropriate  to  that  case  only. 

On  the  other  hand,  things  are  said  to  be 
named  ‘univocally’  which  have  both  the  name 
and  the  definition  answering  to  the  name  in 
common.  A  man  and  an  ox  are  both  ‘animal’, 
and  these  are  univocally  so  named,  inasmuch  as 
not  only  the  name,  but  also  the  definition,  is  the 
[/o]  same  in  both  cases:  for  if  a  man  should 
state  in  what  sense  each  is  an  animal,  the  state¬ 
ment  in  the  one  case  would  be  identical  with 
that  in  the  other. 

Things  are  said  to  be  named  ‘derivatively’, 
which  derive  their  name  from  some  other 
name,  but  differ  from  it  in  termination.  Thus 
the  grammarian  derives  his  name  from  the 
[75]  word  ‘grammar’,  and  the  courageous  man 
from  the  word  ‘courage’. 

2 

Forms  of  speech  are  either  simple  or  composite. 
Examples  of  the  latter  are  such  expressions  as 
‘the  man  runs’,  ‘the  man  wins’;  of  the  former 
‘man’,  ‘ox’,  ‘runs’,  ‘wins’. 

[20]  Of  things  themselves  some  are  predicable 
of  a  subject,  and  are  never  present  in  a  subject. 
Thus  ‘man’  is  predicable  of  the  individual  man, 
and  is  never  present  in  a  subject. 

By  being  ‘present  in  a  subject’  I  do  not  mean 
present  as  parts  are  present  in  a  whole,  but  be¬ 
ing  incapable  of  existence  apart  from  the  said 
subject. 

Some  things,  again,  are  present  in  a  subject, 
[25]  but  are  never  predicable  of  a  subject.  For 

Note:  The  bold  face  numbers  and  letters  are  approxi¬ 
mate  indications  of  the  pages  and  columns  of  the 
standard  Berlin  Greek  text;  the  bracketed  numbers, 
of  the  lines  in  the  Greek  text;  they  are  here  as¬ 
signed  as  they  are  assigned  in  the  Oxford  trans¬ 
lation. 


instance,  a  certain  point  of  grammatical  knowl¬ 
edge  is  present  in  the  mind,  but  is  not  predi¬ 
cable  of  any  subject;  or  again,  a  certain  white¬ 
ness  may  be  present  in  the  body  (for  colour 
requires  a  material  basis),  yet  it  is  never  predi¬ 
cable  of  anything. 

Other  things,  again,  are  both  predicable  of  a 
Ib  subject  and  present  in  a  subject.  Thus  while 
knowledge  is  present  in  the  human  mind,  it  is 
predicable  of  grammar. 

There  is,  lastly,  a  class  of  things  which  are 
neither  present  in  a  subject  nor  predicable  of  a 
[5]  subject,  such  as  the  individual  man  or  the 
individual  horse.  But,  to  speak  more  generally, 
that  which  is  individual  and  has  the  character 
of  a  unit  is  never  predicable  of  a  subject.  Yet  in 
some  cases  there  is  nothing  to  prevent  such  be¬ 
ing  present  in  a  subject.  Thus  a  certain  point  of 
grammatical  knowledge  is  present  in  a  subject. 

3 

[/o]  When  one  thing  is  predicated  of  another, 
all  that  which  is  predicable  of  the  predicate  will 
be  predicable  also  of  the  subject.  Thus,  ‘man’ 
is  predicated  of  the  individual  man;  but  ‘ani¬ 
mal’  is  predicated  of  ‘man’;  it  will,  therefore, 
[75]  be  predicable  of  the  individual  man  also: 
for  the  individual  man  is  both  ‘man’  and  ‘ani¬ 
mal’. 

If  genera  are  different  and  co-ordinate,  their 
differentiae  are  themselves  different  in  kind. 
Take  as  an  instance  the  genus  ‘animal’  and  the 
genus  ‘knowledge’.  ‘With  feet’,  ‘two-footed’, 
‘winged’,  ‘aquatic’,  are  differentiae  of  ‘animal’; 
the  species  of  knowledge  are  not  distinguished 
by  the  same  differentiae.  One  species  of  knowl¬ 
edge  does  not  differ  from  another  in  being 
‘two-footed’. 

[20]  But  where  one  genus  is  subordinate  to  an¬ 
other,  there  is  nothing  to  prevent  their  having 
the  same  differentiae:  for  the  greater  class  is 
predicated  of  the  lesser,  so  that  all  the  differ¬ 
entiae  of  the  predicate  will  be  differentiae  also 
of  the  subject. 

4 

[25]  Expressions  which  are  in  no  way  com¬ 
posite  signify  substance,  quantity,  quality,  rela¬ 
tion,  place,  time,  position,  state,  action,  or  affec¬ 
tion.  To  sketch  my  meaning  roughly,  examples 


5 


CATEGORIES 


of  substance  are  ‘man’  or  ‘the  horse’,  of  quan¬ 
tity,  such  terms  as  ‘two  cubits  long’  or  ‘three 
cubits  long’,  of  quality,  such  attributes  as 
‘white’,  ‘grammatical’.  ‘Double’,  ‘half’,  ‘great- 
2*  er’,  fall  under  the  category  of  relation;  ‘in 
the  market  place’,  ‘in  the  Lyceum’,  under  that 
of  place;  ‘yesterday’,  ‘last  year’,  under  that  of 
time.  ‘Lying’,  ‘sitting’,  are  terms  indicating 
position,  ‘shod’,  ‘armed’,  state;  ‘to  lance’,  ‘to 
cauterize’,  action;  ‘to  be  lanced’,  ‘to  be  cauter¬ 
ized’,  affection. 

No  one  of  these  terms,  in  and  by  itself,  in- 
[5]  volves  an  affirmation;  it  is  by  the  combina¬ 
tion  of  such  terms  that  positive  or  negative 
statements  arise.  For  every  assertion  must,  as  is 
admitted,  be  either  true  or  false,  whereas  ex¬ 
pressions  which  are  not  in  any  way  composite, 
[/o]  such  as  ‘man’,  ‘white’,  ‘runs’,  ‘wins’,  can¬ 
not  be  either  true  or  false. 

5 

Substance,  in  the  truest  and  primary  and  most 
definite  sense  of  the  word,  is  that  which  is 
neither  predicable  of  a  subject  nor  present  in  a 
subject;  for  instance,  the  individual  man  or 
horse.  But  in  a  secondary  sense  those  things 
are  called  substances  within  which,  as  species, 
[75]  the  primary  substances  are  included;  also 
those  which,  as  genera,  include  the  species.  For 
instance,  the  individual  man  is  included  in  the 
species  ‘man’,  and  the  genus  to  which  the  spe¬ 
cies  belongs  is  ‘animal’;  these,  therefore — that 
is  to  say,  the  species  ‘man’  and  the  genus  ‘ani¬ 
mal’ — are  termed  secondary  substances. 

It  is  plain  from  what  has  been  said  that  both 
[26]  the  name  and  the  definition  of  the  pred¬ 
icate  must  be  predicable  of  the  subject.  For  in¬ 
stance,  ‘man’  is  predicated  of  the  individual 
man.  Now  in  this  case  the  name  of  the  species 
‘man’  is  applied  to  the  individual,  for  we  use 
the  term  ‘man’  in  describing  the  individual; 
and  the  definition  of  ‘man’  will  also  be  pred¬ 
icated  of  the  individual  man,  for  the  individual 
[25]  man  is  both  man  and  animal.  Thus,  both 
the  name  and  the  definition  of  the  species  are 
predicable  of  the  individual. 

With  regard,  on  the  other  hand,  to  those 
things  which  are  present  in  a  subject,  it  is  gen¬ 
erally  the  case  that  neither  their  name  nor  their 
definition  is  predicable  of  that  in  which  they 
are  present.  Though,  however,  the  definition  is 
[jo]  never  predicable,  there  is  nothing  in  cer¬ 
tain  cases  to  prevent  the  name  being  used.  For 
instance,  ‘white’  being  present  in  a  body  is 
predicated  of  that  in  which  it  is  present,  for  a 
body  is  called  white:  the  definition,  however, 


2b 

of  the  colour  ‘white’  is  never  predicable  of  the 
body. 

Everything  except  primary  substances  is 
either  predicable  of  a  primary  substance  or 
resent  in  a  primary  substance.  This  becomes 
J5]  evident  by  reference  to  particular  in¬ 
stances  which  occur.  ‘Animal’  is  predicated  of 
the  species  ‘man’,  therefore  of  the  individual 
man,  for  if  there  were  no  individual  man  of 
whom  it  could  be  predicated,  it  could  not  be 
2b  predicated  of  the  species ‘man’ at  all.  Again, 
colour  is  present  in  body,  therefore  in  individ¬ 
ual  bodies,  for  if  there  were  no  individual  body 
in  which  it  was  present,  it  could  not  be  present 
in  body  at  all.  Thus  everything  except  primary 
substances  is  either  predicated  of  primary  sub- 
[5]  stances,  or  is  present  in  them,  and  if  these 
last  did  not  exist,  it  would  be  impossible  for 
anything  else  to  exist. 

Of  secondary  substances,  the  species  is  more 
truly  substance  than  the  genus,  being  more 
nearly  related  to  primary  substance.  For  if  any 
one  should  render  an  account  of  what  a  primary 
substance  is,  he  would  render  a  more  instruc¬ 
tive  account,  and  one  more  proper  to  the  sub- 
[/o]  ject,  by  stating  the  species  than  by  stating 
the  genus.  Thus,  he  would  give  a  more  instruc¬ 
tive  account  of  an  individual  man  by  stating 
that  he  was  man  than  by  stating  that  he  was 
animal,  for  the  former  description  is  peculiar 
to  the  individual  in  a  greater  degree,  while  the 
latter  is  too  general.  Again,  the  man  who  gives 
an  account  of  the  nature  of  an  individual  tree 
will  give  a  more  instructive  account  by  men¬ 
tioning  the  species  ‘tree’  than  by  mentioning 
the  genus  ‘plant’. 

[75]  Moreover,  primary  substances  are  most 
properly  called  substances  in  virtue  of  the  fact 
that  they  are  the  entities  which  underlie  every¬ 
thing  else,  and  that  everything  else  is  either 
predicated  of  them  or  present  in  them.  Now 
the  same  relation  which  subsists  between  pri¬ 
mary  substance  and  everything  else  subsists 
also  between  the  species  and  the  genus:  for  the 
species  is  to  the  genus  as  subject  is  to  predicate, 
[20]  since  the  genus  is  predicated  of  the  spe¬ 
cies,  whereas  the  species  cannot  be  predicated 
of  the  genus.  Thus  we  have  a  second  ground 
for  asserting  that  the  species  is  more  truly  sub¬ 
stance  than  the  genus. 

Of  species  themselves,  except  in  the  case  of 
such  as  are  genera,  no  one  is  more  truly  sub¬ 
stance  than  another.  We  should  not  give  a  more 
appropriate  account  of  the  individual  man  by 
[25]  stating  the  species  to  which  he  belonged, 
than  we  should  of  an  individual  horse  by  adopt- 


3b  CHAPTERS  4-5  7 


ing  the  same  method  of  definition.  In  the  same 
way,  of  primary  substances,  no  one  is  more 
truly  substance  than  another;  an  individual 
man  is  not  more  truly  substance  than  an  indi¬ 
vidual  ox. 

It  is,  then,  with  good  reason  that  of  all  that 
remains,  when  we  exclude  primary  substances, 
[jo]  we  concede  to  species  and  genera  alone 
the  name  ‘secondary  substance’,  for  these  alone 
of  all  the  predicates  convey  a  knowledge  of 
primary  substance.  For  it  is  by  stating  the  spe¬ 
cies  or  the  genus  that  we  appropriately  define 
any  individual  man;  and  we  shall  make  our 
definition  more  exact  by  stating  the  former 
than  by  stating  the  latter.  All  other  things  that 
[35]  we  state,  such  as  that  he  is  white,  that  he 
runs,  and  so  on,  are  irrelevant  to  the  definition. 
Thus  it  is  just  that  these  alone,  apart  from  pri¬ 
mary  substances,  should  be  called  substances. 

Further,  primary  substances  are  most  prop¬ 
erly  so  called,  because  they  underlie  and  are 
3a  the  subjects  of  everything  else.  Now  the 
same  relation  that  subsists  between  primary 
substance  and  everything  else  subsists  also  be¬ 
tween  the  species  and  the  genus  to  which  the 
primary  substance  belongs,  on  the  one  hand, 
and  every  attribute  which  is  not  included  with¬ 
in  these,  on  the  other.  For-  these  are  the  sub¬ 
jects  of  all  such.  If  we  call  an  individual  man 
‘skilled  in  grammar’,  the  predicate  is  applicable 
[5]  also  to  the  species  and  to  the  genus  to  which 
he  belongs.  This  law  holds  good  in  all  cases. 

It  is  a  common  characteristic  of  all  sub¬ 
stance  that  it  is  never  present  in  a  subject.  For 
primary  substance  is  neither  present  in  a  sub¬ 
ject  nor  predicated  of  a  subject;  while,  with 
regard  to  secondary  substances,  it  is  clear  from 
the  following  arguments  (apart  from  others) 
that  they  are  not  present  in  a  subject.  For 
[/o]  ‘man’  is  predicated  of  the  individual  man, 
but  is  not  present  in  any  subject:  for  manhood 
is  not  present  in  the  individual  man.  In  the 
same  way,  ‘animal’  is  also  predicated  of  the  in¬ 
dividual  man,  but  is  not  present  in  him.  Again, 
[75]  when  a  thing  is  present  in  a  subject, 
though  the  name  may  quite  well  be  applied 
to  that  in  which  it  is  present,  the  definition 
cannot  be  applied.  Yet  of  secondary  substances, 
not  only  the  name,  but  also  the  definition,  ap¬ 
plies  to  the  subject:  we  should  use  both  the 
definition  of  the  species  and  that  of  the  genus 
[20]  with  reference  to  the  individual  man. 
Thus  substance  cannot  be  present  in  a  subject. 

Yet  this  is  not  peculiar  to  substance,  for  it  is 
also  the  case  that  differentiae  cannot  be  present 
in  subjects.  The  characteristics  ‘terrestrial’  and 


‘two-footed’  are  predicated  of  the  species  ‘man’, 
but  not  present  in  it.  For  they  are  not  in  man. 
[25]  Moreover,  the  definition  of  the  differentia 
may  be  predicated  of  that  of  which  the  differ¬ 
entia  itself  is  predicated.  For  instance,  if  the 
characteristic  ‘terrestrial’  is  predicated  of  the 
species  ‘man’,  the  definition  also  of  that  char¬ 
acteristic  may  be  used  to  form  the  predicate  of 
the  species  ‘man’:  for  ‘man’  is  terrestrial. 

The  fact  that  the  parts  of  substances  appear 
to  be  present  in  the  whole,  as  in  a  subject, 
should  not  make  us  apprehensive  lest  we 
[30]  should  have  to  admit  that  such  parts  are 
not  substances:  for  in  explaining  the  phrase 
‘being  present  in  a  subject’,  we  stated1  that  we 
meant  ‘otherwise  than  as  parts  in  a  whole’. 

It  is  the  mark  of  substances  and  of  differ¬ 
entiae  that,  in  all  propositions  of  which  they 
form  the  predicate,  they  are  predicated  uni- 
vocally.  For  all  such  propositions  have  for 
[35]  ^eir  subject  either  the  individual  or  the 
species.  It  is  true  that,  inasmuch  as  primary 
substance  is  not  predicable  of  anything,  it  can 
never  form  the  predicate  of  any  proposition. 
But  of  secondary  substances,  the  species  is 
predicated  of  the  individual,  the  genus  both 
of  the  species  and  of  the  individual.  Similarly 
3b  the  differentiae  are  predicated  of  the  spe¬ 
cies  and  of  the  individuals.  Moreover,  the  defi¬ 
nition  of  the  species  and  that  of  the  genus  are 
applicable  to  the  primary  substance,  and  that  of 
the  genus  to  the  species.  For  all  that  is  predi¬ 
cated  of  the  predicate  will  be  predicated  also  of 
[5]  the  subject.  Similarly,  the  definition  of  the 
differentiae  will  be  applicable  to  the  species 
and  to  the  individuals.  But  it  was  stated  above2 
that  the  word  ‘univocal’  was  applied  to  those 
things  which  had  both  name  and  definition  in 
common.  It  is,  therefore,  established  that  in 
every  proposition,  of  which  either  substance  or 
a  differentia  forms  the  predicate,  these  are 

redicated  univocally. 

70]  All  substance  appears  to  signify  that 
which  is  individual.  In  the  case  of  primary  sub¬ 
stance  this  is  indisputably  true,  for  the  thing  is 
a  unit.  In  the  case  of  secondary  substances, 
when  we  speak,  for  instance,  of  ‘man’  or  ‘ani¬ 
mal’,  our  form  of  speech  gives  the  impression 
that  we  are  here  also  indicating  that  which  is 
[75]  individual,  but  the  impression  is  not  strict¬ 
ly  true;  for  a  secondary  substance  is  not  an  in¬ 
dividual,  but  a  class  with  a  certain  qualifica¬ 
tion;  for  it  is  not  one  and  single  as  a  primary 
substance  is;  the  words  ‘man’,  ‘animal’,  are 
predicable  of  more  than  one  subject. 

lIa24.  2  Ia6. 


8 

Yet  species  and  genus  do  not  merely  indicate 
quality,  like  the  term  ‘white’;  ‘white’  indicates 
quality  and  nothing  further,  but  species  and 

enus  determine  the  quality  with  reference  to 

20 ]  a  substance:  they  signify  substance  quali¬ 
tatively  differentiated.  The  determinate  quali¬ 
fication  covers  a  larger  field  in  the  case  of  the 
genus  that  in  that  of  the  species:  he  who  uses 
the  word  ‘animal’  is  herein  using  a  word  of 
wider  extension  than  he  who  uses  the  word 
‘man’. 

Another  mark  of  substance  is  that  it  has  no 
[25]  contrary.  What  could  be  the  contrary  of 
any  primary  substance,  such  as  the  individual 
man  or  animal?  It  has  none.  Nor  can  the  spe¬ 
cies  or  the  genus  have  a  contrary.  Yet  this  char¬ 
acteristic  is  not  peculiar  to  substance,  but  is  true 
of  many  other  things,  such  as  quantity.  There 
is  nothing  that  forms  the  contrary  of  ‘two 
cubits  long’  or  of  ‘three  cubits  long’,  or  of  ‘ten’, 
[jo]  or  of  any  such  term.  A  man  may  contend 
that  ‘much’  is  the  contrary  of  ‘little’,  or  ‘great’ 
of  ‘small’,  but  of  definite  quantitative  terms  no 
contrary  exists. 

Substance,  again,  does  not  appear  to  admit  of 
variation  of  degree.  I  do  not  mean  by  this  that 
one  substance  cannot  be  more  or  less  truly  sub¬ 
stance  than  another,  for  it  has  already  been 
[j5]  stated1  that  this  is  the  case;  but  that  no 
single  substance  admits  of  varying  degrees 
within  itself.  For  instance,  one  particular  sub 
stance,  ‘man’,  cannot  be  more  or  less  man  either 
than  himself  at  some  other  time  or  than  some 
other  man.  One  man  cannot  be  more  man  than 
another,  as  that  which  is  white  may  be  more  or 
4a  less  white  than  some  other  white  object,  or 
as  that  which  is  beautiful  may  be  more  or  less 
beautiful  than  some  other  beautiful  object. 
The  same  quality,  moreover,  is  said  to  subsist 
in  a  thing  in  varying  degrees  at  different  times. 
A  body,  being  white,  is  said  to  be  whiter  at 
one  time  than  it  was  before,  or,  being  warm,  is 
said  to  be  warmer  or  less  warm  than  at  some 
[5]  other  time.  But  substance  is  not  said  to  be 
more  or  less  that  which  it  is:  a  man  is  not  more 
truly  a  man  at  one  time  than  he  was  before,  nor 
is  anything,  if  it  is  substance,  more  or  less  what 
it  is.  Substance,  then,  does  not  admit  of  varia¬ 
tion  of  degree. 

[/o]  The  most  distinctive  niark  of  substance 
appears  to  be  that,  while  remaining  numerical¬ 
ly  one  and  the  same,  it  is  capable  of  admitting 
contrary  qualities.  From  among  things  other 
than  substance,  we  should  find  ourselves  un¬ 
able  to  bring  forward  any  which  possessed  this 

1  2a  n-b  22. 


4b 

[  75]  mark.  Thus,  one  and  the  same  colour  can 
not  be  white  and  black.  Nor  can  the  same  one 
action  be  good  and  bad:  this  law  holds  good 
with  everything  that  is  not  substance.  But  one 
and  the  selfsame  substance,  while  retaining  its 
identity,  is  yet  capable  of  admitting  contrary 

Jualities.  The  same  individual  person  is  at  one 
20]  time  white,  at  another  black,  at  one  time 
warm,  at  another  cold,  at  one  time  good,  at  an¬ 
other  bad.  This  capacity  is  found  nowhere  else, 
though  it  might  be  maintained  that  a  statement 
or  opinion  was  an  exception  to  the  rule.  The 
same  statement,  it  is  agreed,  can  be  both  true 
[25]  and  false.  For  if  the  statement  ‘he  is  sit¬ 
ting’  is  true,  yet,  when  the  person  in  question 
has  risen,  the  same  statement  will  be  false.  The 
same  applies  to  opinions.  For  if  any  one  thinks 
truly  that  a  person  is  sitting,  yet,  when  that  per¬ 
son  has  risen,  this  same  opinion,  if  still  held, 
will  be  false.  Yet  although  this  exception  may 
be  allowed,  there  is,  nevertheless,  a  difference 
in  the  manner  in  which  the  thing  takes  place, 
[jo]  It  is  by  themselves  changing  that  sub¬ 
stances  admit  contrary  qualities.  It  is  thus  that 
that  which  was  hot  becomes  cold,  for  it  has  en¬ 
tered  into  a  different  state.  Similarly  that  which 
was  white  becomes  black,  and  that  which  was 
bad  good,  by  a  process  of  change;  and  in  the 
same  way  in  all  other  cases  it  is  by  changing 
that  substances  are  capable  of  admitting  con¬ 
trary  qualities.  But  statements  and  opinions 
[^5]  themselves  remain  unaltered  in  all  re¬ 
spects:  it  is  by  the  alteration  in  the  facts  of  the 
case  that  the  contrary  quality  comes  to  be 
theirs.  The  statement  ‘he  is  sitting’  remains  un- 
4b  altered,  but  it  is  at  one  time  true,  at  another 
false,  according  to  circumstances.  What  has 
been  said  of  statements  applies  also  to  opinions. 
Thus,  in  respect  of  the  manner  in  which  the 
thing  takes  place,  it  is  the  peculiar  mark  of 
substance  that  it  should  be  capable  of  admitting 
contrary  qualities;  for  it  is  by  itself  changing 
that  it  does  so. 

If,  then,  a  man  should  make  this  exception 
and  contend  that  statements  and  opinions  are 
[5]  capable  of  admitting  contrary  qualities,  his 
contention  is  unsound.  For  statements  and 
opinions  are  said  to  have  this  capacity,  not  be¬ 
cause  they  themselves  undergo  modification, 
but  because  this  modification  occurs  in  the  case 
of  something  else.  The  truth  or  falsity  of  a 
statement  depends  on  facts,  and  not  on  any 
ower  on  the  part  of  the  statement  itself  of  ad- 
/o]  mitting  contrary  qualities.  In  short,  there 
is  nothing  which  can  alter  the  nature  of  state¬ 
ments  and  opinions.  As,  then,  no  change  takes 


CATEGORIES 


5b  CHAPTERS  5-6  9 


place  in  themselves,  these  cannot  be  said  to  be 
capable  of  admitting  contrary  qualities. 

But  it  is  by  reason  of  the  modification  which 
takes  place  within  the  substance  itself  that  a 
substance  is  said  to  be  capable  of  admitting  con¬ 
trary  qualities;  for  a  substance  admits  within 
itself  either  disease  or  health,  whiteness  or 
[75]  blackness.  It  is  in  this  sense  that  it  is  said 
to  be  capable  of  admitting  contrary  qualities. 

To  sum  up,  it  is  a  distinctive  mark  of  sub¬ 
stance,  that,  while  remaining  numerically  one 
and  the  same,  it  is  capable  of  admitting  con¬ 
trary  qualities,  the  modification  taking  place 
through  a  change  in  the  substance  itself. 

Let  these  remarks  suffice  on  the  subject  of 

substance.  , 

o 

[20]  Quantity  is  either  discrete  or  continuous. 
Moreover,  some  quantities  are  such  that  each 
part  of  the  whole  has  a  relative  position  to  the 
other  parts:  others  have  within  them  no  such 
relation  of  part  to  part. 

Instances  of  discrete  quantities  are  number 
and  speech;  of  continuous,  lines,  surfaces,  sol¬ 
ids,  and,  besides  these,  time  and  place. 

[25]  In  the  case  of  the  parts  of  a  number,  there 
is  no  common  boundary  at  which  they  join. 
For  example:  two  fives  make  ten,  but  the  two 
fives  have  no  common  boundary,  but  are  sep¬ 
arate;  the  parts  three  and  seven  also  do  not  join 
at  any  boundary.  Nor,  to  generalize,  would  it 
ever  be  possible  in  the  case  of  number  that 
there  should  be  a  common  boundary  among 
[jo]  the  parts;  they  are  always  separate.  Num¬ 
ber,  therefore,  is  a  discrete  quantity. 

The  same  is  true  of  speech.  That  speech  is  a 
quantity  is  evident:  for  it  is  measured  in  long 
and  short  syllables.  I  mean  here  that  speech 
which  is  vocal.  Moreover,  it  is  a  discrete  quan¬ 
tity,  for  its  parts  have  no  common  boundary. 
[55]  There  is  no  common  boundary  at  which 
the  syllables  join,  but  each  is  separate  and  dis¬ 
tinct  from  the  rest. 

5a  A  line,  on  the  other  hand,  is  a  continuous 
quantity,  for  it  is  possible  to  find  a  common 
boundary  at  which  its  parts  join.  In  the  case 
of  the  line,  this  common  boundary  is  the  point; 
in  the  case  of  the  plane,  it  is  the  line:  for  the 
parts  of  the  plane  have  also  a  common  bound¬ 
ary.  Similarly  you  can  find  a  common  bound- 
[5]  ary  in  the  case  of  the  parts  of  a  solid,  name¬ 
ly  either  a  line  or  a  plane. 

Space  and  time  also  belong  to  this  class  of 
quantities.  Time,  past,  present,  and  future, 
forms  a  continuous  whole.  Space,  likewise,  is 
a  continuous  quantity;  for  the  parts  of  a  solid 


occupy  a  certain  space,  and  these  have  a  com- 
[/o]  mon  boundary;  it  follows  that  the  parts 
of  space  also,  which  are  occupied  by  the  parts 
of  the  solid,  have  the  same  common  boundary 
as  the  parts  of  the  solid.  Thus,  not  only  time, 
but  space  also,  is  a  continuous  quantity,  for  its 
arts  have  a  common  boundary. 

75]  Quantities  consist  either  of  parts  which 
bear  a  relative  position  each  to  each,  or  of  parts 
which  do  not.  The  parts  of  a  line  bear  a  relative 
position  to  each  other,  for  each  lies  somewhere, 
and  it  would  be  possible  to  distinguish  each, 
and  to  state  the  position  of  each  on  the  plane 
and  to  explain  to  what  sort  of  part  among  the 
[20]  rest  each  was  contiguous.  Similarly  the 
parts  of  a  plane  have  position,  for  it  could  sim¬ 
ilarly  be  stated  what  was  the  position  of  each 
and  what  sort  of  parts  were  contiguous.  The 
same  is  true  with  regard  to  the  solid  and  to 
space.  But  it  would  be  impossible  to  show  that 
the  parts  of  a  number  had  a  relative  position 
[25]  each  to  each,  or  a  particular  position,  or  to 
state  what  parts  were  contiguous.  Nor  could 
this  be  done  in  the  case  of  time,  for  none  of  the 
parts  of  time  has  an  abiding  existence,  and  that 
which  does  not  abide  can  hardly  have  position. 
It  would  be  better  to  say  that  such  parts  had  a 
relative  order,  in  virtue  of  one  being  prior  to 
[30]  another.  Similarly  with  number:  in  count¬ 
ing,  ‘one’  is  prior  to  ‘two’,  and  ‘two*  to  ‘three’, 
and  thus  the  parts  of  number  may  be  said  to 
possess  a  relative  order,  though  it  would  be  im¬ 
possible  to  discover  any  distinct  position  for 
each.  This  holds  good  also  in  the  case  of  speech. 
None  of  its  parts  has  an  abiding  existence: 
when  once  a  syllable  is  pronounced,  it  is  not 
[55]  possible  to  retain  it,  so  that,  naturally,  as 
the  parts  do  not  abide,  they  cannot  have  posi¬ 
tion.  Thus,  some  quantities  consist  of  parts 
which  have  position,  and  some  of  those  which 
have  not. 

Strictly  speaking,  only  the  things  which  I 
have  mentioned  belong  to  the  category  of  quan¬ 
tity:  everything  else  that  is  called  quantitative 
is  a  quantity  in  a  secondary  sense.  It  is  because 
we  have  in  mind  some  one  of  these  quantities, 
properly  so  called,  that  we  apply  quantitative 
5b  terms  to  other  things.  We  speak  of  what  is 
white  as  large,  because  the  surface  over  which 
the  white  extends  is  large;  we  speak  of  an  ac¬ 
tion  or  a  process  as  lengthy,  because  the  time 
covered  is  long;  these  things  cannot  in  their 
own  right  claim  the  quantitative  epithet.  For 
[5]  instance,  should  any  one  explain  how  long 
an  action  was,  his  statement  would  be  made  in 
terms  of  the  time  taken,  to  the  effect  that  it 


10 

lasted  a  year,  or  something  of  that  sort.  In  the 
same  way,  he  would  explain  the  size  of  a  white 
object  in  terms  of  surface,  for  he  would  state 
the  area  which  it  covered.  Thus  the  things  al¬ 
ready  mentioned,  and  these  alone,  are  in  their 
intrinsic  nature  quantities;  nothing  else  can 
[/o]  claim  the  name  in  its  own  right,  but,  if  at 
all,  only  in  a  secondary  sense. 

Quantities  have  no  contraries.  In  the  case  of 
definite  quantities  this  is  obvious;  thus,  there 
is  nothing  that  is  the  contrary  of  ‘two  cubits 
long'  or  of  ‘three  cubits  long’,  or  of  a  surface, 
or  of  any  such  quantities.  A  man  might,  in¬ 
deed,  argue  that  ‘much’  was  the  contrary  of 
‘little’,  and  ‘great’  of  ‘small’.  But  these  are  not 
[75]  quantitative,  but  relative;  things  are  not 
great  or  small  absolutely,  they  are  so  called 
rather  as  the  result  of  an  act  of  comparison. 
For  instance,  a  mountain  is  called  small,  a 
grain  large,  in  virtue  of  the  fact  that  the  latter 
is  greater  than  others  of  its  kind,  the  former 
[20]  less.  Thus  there  is  a  reference  here  to  an 
external  standard,  for  if  the  terms  ‘great’  and 
‘small’  were  used  absolutely,  a  mountain  would 
never  be  called  small  or  a  grain  large.  Again, 
we  say  that  there  are  many  people  in  a  village, 
and  few  in  Athens,  although  those  in  the 
city  are  many  times  as  numerous  as  those  in 
[25]  the  village:  or  we  say  that  a  house  has 
many  in  it,  and  a  theatre  few,  though  those  in 
the  theatre  far  outnumber  those  in  the  house. 
The  terms  ‘two  cubits  long,’  ‘three  cubits  long,’ 
and  so  on  indicate  quantity,  the  terms  ‘great’ 
and  ‘small’  indicate  relation,  for  they  have  ref¬ 
erence  to  an  external  standard.  It  is,  therefore, 
plain  that  these  are  to  be  classed  as  relative. 
[50]  Again,  whether  we  define  them  as  quan¬ 
titative  or  not,  they  have  no  contraries:  for  how 
can  there  be  a  contrary  of  an  attribute  which  is 
not  to  be  apprehended  in  or  by  itself,  but  only 
by  reference  to  something  external?  Again,  if 
‘great’  and  ‘small’  are  contraries,  it  will  come 
about  that  the  same  subject  can  admit  contrary 
qualities  at  one  and  the  same  time,  and  that 
things  will  themselves  be  contrary  to  them- 
[55]  selves.  For  it  happens  at  times  that  the 
same  thing  is  both  small  and  great.  For  the 
same  thing  may  be  small  in  comparison  with 
one  thing,  and  great  in  comparison  with  an¬ 
other,  so  that  the  same  thing  comes  to  be  both 
small  and  great  at  one  and  the  same  time,  and 
is  of  such  a  nature  as  to  admit  contrary  qual¬ 
ities  at  one  and  the  same  moment.  Yet  it  was 
agreed,  when  substance  was  being  discussed, 
that  nothing  admits  contrary  qualities  at  one 
6a  and  the  same  moment.  For  though  sub- 


6* 

stance  is  capable  of  admitting  contrary  qual¬ 
ities,  yet  no  one  is  at  the  same  time  both  sick 
and  healthy,  nothing  is  at  the  same  time  both 
white  and  black.  Nor  is  there  anything  which 
is  qualified  in  contrary  ways  at  one  and  the 
same  time. 

Moreover,  if  these  were  contraries,  they 
would  themselves  be  contrary  to  themselves. 
[5]  For  if  ‘great’  is  the  contrary  of  ‘small’,  and 
the  same  thing  is  both  great  and  small  at  the 
same  time,  then  ‘small’  or  ‘great’  is  the  con¬ 
trary  of  itself.  But  this  is  impossible.  The  term 
‘great’,  therefore,  is  not  the  contrary  of  the 
term  ‘small’,  nor  ‘much’  of  ‘little’.  And  even 
though  a  man  should  call  these  terms  not  rela- 
[  jo]  tive  but  quantitative,  they  would  not  have 
contraries. 

It  is  in  the  case  of  space  that  quantity  most 
plausibly  appears  to  admit  of  a  contrary.  For 
men  define  the  term  ‘above’  as  the  contrary  of 
‘below’,  when  it  is  the  region  at  the  centre  they 
mean  by  ‘below’;  and  this  is  so,  because  noth¬ 
ing  is  farther  from  the  extremities  of  the  uni¬ 
t/5]  verse  than  the  region  at  the  centre.  Indeed, 
it  seems  that  in  defining  contraries  of  every 
kind  men  have  recourse  to  a  spatial  metaphor, 
for  they  say  that  those  things  are  contraries 
which,  within  the  same  class,  are  separated  by 
the  greatest  possible  distance . 

Quantity  does  not,  it  appears,  admit  of  varia- 
[20]  tion  of  degree.  One  thing  cannot  be  two 
cubits  long  in  a  greater  degree  than  another. 
Similarly  with  regard  to  number:  what  is 
‘three’  is  not  more  truly  three  than  what  is 
‘five’  is  five;  nor  is  one  set  of  three  more  truly 
three  than  another  set.  Again,  one  period  of 
time  is  not  said  to  be  more  truly  time  than  an¬ 
other.  Nor  is  there  any  other  kind  of  quantity, 
of  all  that  have  been  mentioned,  with  regard  to 
[25]  which  variation  of  degree  can  be  predi¬ 
cated.  The  category  of  quantity,  therefore,  does 
not  admit  of  variation  of  degree. 

The  most  distinctive  mark  of  quantity  is  that 
equality  and  inequality  are  predicated  of  it. 
Each  of  the  aforesaid  quantities  is  said  to  be 
equal  or  unequal.  For  instance,  one  solid  is  said 
to  be  equal  or  unequal  to  another;  number,  too, 
and  time  can  have  these  terms  applied  to  them, 
[50]  as  indeed  can  all  those  kinds  of  quantity 
that  have  been  mentioned. 

That  which  is  not  a  quantity  can  by  no 
means,  it  would  seem,  be  termed  equal  or  un¬ 
equal  to  anything  else.  One  particular  disposi¬ 
tion  or  one  particular  quality,  such  as  white¬ 
ness,  is  by  no  means  compared  with  another 
in  terms  of  equality  and  inequality  but  rather 


CATEGORIES 


II 


CHAPTERS  6-7 


in  terms  of  similarity.  Thus  it  is  the  distinctive 
[55]  mark  of  quantity  that  it  can  be  called 
equal  and  unequal. 

7 

Those  things  are  called  relative,  which,  be¬ 
ing  either  said  to  be  of  something  else  or  related 
to  something  else,  are  explained  by  reference  to 
that  other  thing.  For  instance,  the  word  ‘su¬ 
perior’  is  explained  by  reference  to  something 
else,  for  it  is  superiority  over  something  else 
that  is  meant.  Similarly,  the  expression  ‘dou¬ 
ble’  has  this  external  reference,  for  it  is  the  dou¬ 
ble  of  something  else  that  is  meant.  So  it  is  with 
6b  everything  else  of  this  kind.  There  are, 
moreover,  other  relatives,  e.g.  habit,  disposition, 
perception,  knowledge,  and  attitude.  The  sig¬ 
nificance  of  all  these  is  explained  by  a  reference 
to  something  else  and  in  no  other  way.  Thus,  a 
[5]  habit  is  a  habit  of  something,  knowledge  is 
knowledge  of  something ,  attitude  is  the  attitude 
of  something.  So  it  is  with  all  other  relatives 
that  have  been  mentioned.  Those  terms,  then, 
are  called  relative,  the  nature  of  which  is  ex¬ 
plained  by  reference  to  something  else,  the  prep¬ 
osition  ‘of’  or  some  other  preposition  being  used 
to  indicate  the  relation.  Thus,  one  mountain  is 
called  great  in  comparison'  with  another ;  for 
the  mountain  claims  this  attribute  by  compari¬ 
son  with  something.  Again,  that  which  is  called 
[/o]  similar  must  be  similar  to  something  else , 
and  all  other  such  attributes  have  this  external 
reference.  It  is  to  be  noted  that  lying  and  stand¬ 
ing  and  sitting  are  particular  attitudes,  but  at¬ 
titude  is  itself  a  relative  term.  To  lie,  to  stand, 
to  be  seated,  are  not  themselves  attitudes,  but 
take  their  name  from  the  aforesaid  attitudes. 
[75]  It  is  possible  for  relatives  to  have  con¬ 
traries.  Thus  virtue  has  a  contrary,  vice,  these 
both  being  relatives;  knowledge,  too,  has  a  con¬ 
trary,  ignorance.  But  this  is  not  the  mark  of  all 
relatives;  ‘double’  and  ‘triple’  have  no  contrary, 
nor  indeed  has  any  such  term. 

[20]  It  also  appears  that  relatives  can  admit  of 
variation  of  degree.  For  ‘like’  and  ‘unlike’, 
‘equal’  and  ‘unequal’,  have  the  modifications 
‘more’  and  ‘less’  applied  to  them,  and  each  of 
these  is  relative  in  character:  for  the  terms  ‘like’ 
and  ‘unequal’  bear  a  reference  to  something  ex¬ 
ternal.  Yet,  again,  it  is  not  every  relative  term 
that  admits  of  variation  of  degree.  No  term 
[25]  such  as  ‘double’  admits  of  this  modifica¬ 
tion.  All  relatives  have  correlatives:  by  the  term 
‘slave’  we  mean  the  slave  of  a  master;  by  the 
[jo]  term  ‘master’,  the  master  of  a  slave;  by 
‘double’,  the  double  of  its  half;  by  ‘half’,  the 


half  of  its  double;  by  ‘greater’,  greater  than 
that  which  is  less;  by  ‘less,’  less  than  that  which 
is  greater. 

So  it  is  with  every  other  relative  term;  but 
the  case  we  use  to  express  the  correlation  differs 
in  some  instances.  Thus,  by  knowledge  we 
mean  knowledge  of  the  knowable;  by  the 
knowable,  that  which  is  to  be  apprehended  by 
[55]  knowledge;  by  perception,  perception  of 
the  perceptible;  by  the  perceptible,  that  which 
is  apprehended  by  perception. 

Sometimes,  however,  reciprocity  of  correla¬ 
tion  does  not  appear  to  exist.  This  comes  about 
when  a  blunder  is  made,  and  that  to  which  the 
relative  is  related  is  not  accurately  stated.  If  a 
man  states  that  a  wing  is  necessarily  relative  to 
a  bird,  the  connexion  between  these  two  will 
not  be  reciprocal,  for  it  will  not  be  possible  to 
say  that  a  bird  is  a  bird  by  reason  of  its  wings. 
The  reason  is  that  the  original  statement  was 
7a  inaccurate,  for  the  wing  is  not  said  to  be 
relative  to  the  bird  qua  bird,  since  many  crea¬ 
tures  besides  birds  have  wings,  but  qua  winged 
creature.  If,  then,  the  statement  is  made  accu¬ 
rate,  the  connexion  will  be  reciprocal,  for  we 
can  speak  of  a  wing  having  reference  neces¬ 
sarily  to  a  winged  creature,  and  of  a  winged 
creature  as  being  such  because  of  its  wings. 

[5]  Occasionally,  perhaps,  it  is  necessary  to 
coin  words,  if  no  word  exists  by  which  a  corre¬ 
lation  can  adequately  be  explained.  If  we  define 
a  rudder  as  necessarily  having  reference  to  a 
boat,  our  definition  will  not  be  appropriate,  for 
the  rudder  does  not  have  this  reference  to  a 
[  /o]  boat  qua  boat,  as  there  are  boats  which  have 
no  rudders.  Thus  we  cannot  use  the  terms  re¬ 
ciprocally,  for  the  word  ‘boat’  cannot  be  said  to 
find  its  explanation  in  the  word  ‘rudder’.  As 
there  is  no  existing  word,  our  definition  would 
perhaps  be  more  accurate  if  we  coined  some 
word  like  ‘ruddered’  as  the  correlative  of  ‘rud¬ 
der’.  If  we  express  ourselves  thus  accurately,  at 
any  rate  the  terms  are  reciprocally  connected, 
for  the  ‘ruddered’  thing  is  ‘ruddered’  in  virtue 
[75]  of  its  rudder.  So  it  is  in  all  other  cases.  A 
head  will  be  more  accurately  defined  as  the  cor¬ 
relative  of  that  which  is  ‘headed’,  than  as  that 
of  an  animal,  for  the  animal  does  not  have  a 
head  qua  animal,  since  many  animals  have  no 
head. 

Thus  we  may  perhaps  most  easily  compre¬ 
hend  that  to  which  a  thing  is  related,  when  a 
name  does  not  exist,  if,  from  that  which  has  a 
name,  we  derive  a  new  name,  and  apply  it  to 
that  with  which  the  first  is  reciprocally  con- 
[20]  nected,  as  in  the  aforesaid  instances,  when 


12 

we  derived  the  word  ‘winged’  from  ‘wing’  and 
‘ruddered’  from  ‘rudder’. 

All  relatives,  then,  if  properly  defined,  have 
a  correlative.  I  add  this  condition  because,  if 
that  to  which  they  are  related  is  stated  as  hap¬ 
hazard  and  not  accurately,  the  two  are  not 
[25]  found  to  be  interdependent.  Let  me  state 
what  I  mean  more  clearly.  Even  in  the  case  of 
acknowledged  correlatives,  and  where  names 
exist  for  each,  there  will  be  no  interdependence 
if  one  of  the  two  is  denoted,  not  by  that  name 
which  expresses  the  correlative  notion,  but  by 
one  of  irrelevant  significance.  The  term  ‘slave,’ 
if  defined  as  related,  not  to  a  master,  but  to  a 
man,  or  a  biped,  or  anything  of  that  sort,  is  not 
reciprocally  connected  with  that  in  relation  to 
[50]  which  it  is  defined,  for  the  statement  is 
not  exact.  Further,  if  one  thing  is  said  to  be  cor¬ 
relative  with  another,  and  the  terminology  used 
is  correct,  then,  though  all  irrelevant  attributes 
should  be  removed,  and  only  that  one  attribute 
left  in  virtue  of  which  it  was  correctly  stated  to 
be  correlative  with  that  other,  the  stated  cor¬ 
relation  will  still  exist.  If  the  correlative  of  ‘the 
slave’  is  said  to  be  ‘the  master’,  then,  though  all 
[^5]  irrelevant  attributes  of  the  said  ‘master’, 
such  as  ‘biped’,  ‘receptive  of  knowledge’,  ‘hu¬ 
man’,  should  be  removed,  and  the  attribute 
‘master’  alone  left,  the  stated  correlation  exist¬ 
ing  between  him  and  the  slave  will  remain  the 
same,  for  it  is  of  a  master  that  a  slave  is  said  to 
be  the  slave.  On  the  other  hand,  if,  of  two  cor- 
7h  relatives,  one  is  not  correctly  termed,  then, 
when  all  other  attributes  are  removed  and  that 
alone  is  left  in  virtue  of  which  it  was  stated  to 
be  correlative,  the  stated  correlation  will  be 
found  to  have  disappeared. 

For  suppose  the  correlative  of  ‘the  slave’ 
should  be  said  to  be  ‘the  man’,  or  the  correlative 
of  ‘the  wing’  ‘the  bird’;  if  the  attribute  ‘master’ 
[5]  be  withdrawn  from  ‘the  man’,  the  correla¬ 
tion  between  ‘the  man’  and  ‘the  slave’  will  cease 
to  exist,  for  if  the  man  is  not  a  master,  the  slave 
is  not  a  slave.  Similarly,  if  the  attribute  ‘winged’ 
be  withdrawn  from  ‘the  bird’,  ‘the  wing’  will 
no  longer  be  relative;  for  if  the  so-called  cor¬ 
relative  is  not  winged,  it  follows  that  ‘the  wing’ 
has  no  correlative. 

[/o]  Thus  it  is  essential  that  the  correlated 
terms  should  be  exactly  designated;  if  there  is 
a  name  existing,  the  statement  will  be  easy;  if 
not,  it  is  doubtless  our  duty  to  construct  names. 
When  the  terminology  is  thus  correct,  it  is  evi¬ 
dent  that  all  correlatives  are  interdependent. 
[75]  Correlatives  are  thought  to  come  into  ex¬ 
istence  simultaneously.  This  is  for  the  most 


8a 

part  true,  as  in  the  case  of  the  double  and  the 
half.  The  existence  of  the  half  necessitates  the 
existence  of  that  of  which  it  is  a  half.  Similarly 
the  existence  of  a  master  necessitates  the  exist¬ 
ence  of  a  slave,  and  that  of  a  slave  implies  that 
of  a  master;  these  are  merely  instances  of  a  gen¬ 
eral  rule.  Moreover,  they  cancel  one  another; 
[20]  for  if  there  is  no  double  it  follows  that 
there  is  no  half,  and  vice  versa;  this  rule  also 
applies  to  all  such  correlatives.  Yet  it  does  not 
appear  to  be  true  in  all  cases  that  correlatives 
come  into  existence  simultaneously.  The  object 
of  knowledge  would  appear  to  exist  before 
knowledge  itself,  for  it  is  usually  the  case  that 
we  acquire  knowledge  of  objects  already  exist- 
[25]  ing;  it  would  be  difficult,  if  not  impossi¬ 
ble,  to  find  a  branch  of  knowledge  the  begin¬ 
ning  of  the  existence  of  which  was  contempo¬ 
raneous  with  that  of  its  object. 

Again,  while  the  object  of  knowledge,  if  it 
ceases  to  exist,  cancels  at  the  same  time  the 
knowledge  which  was  its  correlative,  the  con¬ 
verse  of  this  is  not  true.  It  is  true  that  if  the  ob¬ 
ject  of  knowledge  does  not  exist  there  can  be  no 
knowledge:  for  there  will  no  longer  be  any¬ 
thing  to  know.  Yet  it  is  equally  true  that,  if 
[jo]  the  knowledge  of  a  certain  object  does  not 
exist,  the  object  may  nevertheless  quite  well  ex¬ 
ist.  Thus,  in  the  case  of  the  squaring  of  the  cir¬ 
cle,  if  indeed  that  process  is  an  object  of  knowl¬ 
edge,  though  it  itself  exists  as  an  object  of 
knowledge,  yet  the  knowledge  of  it  has  not  yet 
come  into  existence.  Again,  if  all  animals 
ceased  to  exist,  there  would  be  no  knowledge, 
but  there  might  yet  be  many  objects  of  knowl- 
edge. 

[J5]  This  is  likewise  the  case  with  regard  to 
perception:  for  the  object  of  perception  is,  it 
appears,  prior  to  the  act  of  perception.  If  the 
perceptible  is  annihilated,  perception  also  will 
cease  to  exist;  but  the  annihilation  of  percep¬ 
tion  does  not  cancel  the  existence  of  the  percep¬ 
tible.  For  perception  implies  a  body  perceived 
and  a  body  in  which  perception  takes  place. 
Now  if  that  which  is  perceptible  is  annihilated, 
it  follows  that  the  body  is  annihilated,  for  the 
body  is  a  perceptible  thing;  and  if  the  body 
8a  does  not  exist,  it  follows  that  perception 
also  ceases  to  exist.  Thus  the  annihilation  of  the 
perceptible  involves  that  of  perception. 

But  the  annihilation  of  perception  does  not 
involve  that  of  the  perceptible.  For  if  the  ani¬ 
mal  is  annihilated,  it  follows  that  perception 
[5]  also  is  annihilated,  but  perceptibles  such  as 
body,  heat,  sweetness,  bitterness,  and  so  on, 
will  remain. 


CATEGORIES 


8b 

Again,  perception  is  generated  at  the  same 
time  as  the  perceiving  subject,  for  it  comes  into 
existence  at  the  same  time  as  the  animal.  But 
the  perceptible  surely  exists  before  perception ; 
for  fire  and  water  and  such  elements,  out  of 
[/o]  which  the  animal  is  itself  composed,  exist 
before  the  animal  is  an  animal  at  all,  and  before 
perception.  Thus  it  would  seem  that  the  per¬ 
ceptible  exists  before  perception. 

It  may  be  questioned  whether  it  is  true  that 
no  substance  is  relative,  as  seems  to  be  the  case, 
or  whether  exception  is  to  be  made  in  the  case 
of  certain  secondary  substances.  With  regard 
[75]  to  primary  substances,  it  is  quite  true  that 
there  is  no  such  possibility,  for  neither  wholes 
nor  parts  of  primary  substances  are  relative. 
The  individual  man  or  ox  is  not  defined  with 
reference  to  something  external.  Similarly  with 
[20]  the  parts:  a  particular  hand  or  head  is  not 
defined  as  a  particular  hand  or  head  of  a  par¬ 
ticular  person,  but  as  the  hand  or  head  of  a  par¬ 
ticular  person.  It  is  true  also,  for  the  most  part 
at  least,  in  the  case  of  secondary  substances; 
the  species  ‘man’  and  the  species  ‘ox’  are  not 
defined  with  reference  to  anything  outside 
themselves.  Wood,  again,  is  only  relative  in  so 
far  as  it  is  some  one’s  property,  not  in  so  far  as 
it  is  wood.  It  is  plain,  then,  that  in  the  cases 
mentioned  substance  is  not  relative.  But  with 
[25]  regard  to  some  secondary  substances  there 
is  a  difference  of  opinion;  thus,  such  terms  as 
‘head’  and  ‘hand’  are  defined  with  reference  to 
that  of  which  the  things  indicated  are  a  part, 
and  so  it  comes  about  that  these  appear  to  have 
a  relative  character.  Indeed,  if  our  definition  of 
that  which  is  relative  was  complete,  it  is  very 
[30]  difficult,  if  not  impossible,  to  prove  that 
no  substance  is  relative.  If,  however,  our  defi¬ 
nition  was  not  complete,  if  those  things  only 
are  properly  called  relative  in  the  case  of  which 
relation  to  an  external  object  is  a  necessary  con¬ 
dition  of  existence,  perhaps  some  explanation 
of  the  dilemma  may  be  found. 

The  former  definition  does  indeed  apply  to 
all  relatives,  but  the  fact  that  a  thing  is  ex¬ 
plained  with  reference  to  something  else  does 
not  make  it  essentially  relative. 

[33]  From  this  it  is  plain  that,  if  a  man  defi¬ 
nitely  apprehends  a  relative  thing,  he  will  also 
definitely  apprehend  that  to  which  it  is  relative. 
Indeed  this  is  self-evident:  for  if  a  man  knows 
that  some  particular  thing  is  relative,  assuming 
that  we  call  that  a  relative  in  the  case  of  which 
relation  to  something  is  a  necessary  condition 
Sb  of  existence,  he  knows  that  also  to  which  it 
is  related.  For  if  he  does  not  know  at  all  that  to 


13 

which  it  is  related,  he  will  not  know  whether 
or  not  it  is  relative.  This  is  clear,  moreover,  in 
particular  instances.  If  a  man  knows  definitely 
that  such  and  such  a  thing  is  ‘double’,  he  will 
[5]  also  forthwith  know  definitely  that  of 
which  it  is  the  double.  For  if  there  is  nothing 
definite  of  which  he  knows  it  to  be  the  double, 
he  does  not  know  at  all  that  it  is  double.  Again, 
if  he  knows  that  a  thing  is  more  beautiful,  it 
follows  necessarily  that  he  will  forthwith  defi¬ 
nitely  know  that  also  than  which  it  is  more 
beautiful.  He  will  not  merely  know  indefinitely 
[/o]  that  it  is  more  beautiful  than  something 
which  is  less  beautiful,  for  this  would  be  sup¬ 
position,  not  knowledge.  For  if  he  does  not 
know  definitely  that  than  which  it  is  more 
beautiful,  he  can  no  longer  claim  to  know  defi¬ 
nitely  that  it  is  more  beautiful  than  something 
else  which  is  less  beautiful:  for  it  might  be  that 
nothing  was  less  beautiful.  It  is,  therefore,  evi¬ 
dent  that  if  a  man  apprehends  some  relative 
thing  definitely,  he  necessarily  knows  that  also 
definitely  to  which  it  is  related. 

[75]  Now  the  head,  the  hand,  and  such  things 
are  substances,  and  it  is  possible  to  know  their 
essential  character  definitely,  but  it  does  not 
necessarily  follow  that  we  should  know  that  to 
which  they  are  related.  It  is  not  possible  to 
know  forthwith  whose  head  or  hand  is  meant. 
Thus  these  are  not  relatives,  and,  this  being  the 
[20]  case,  it  would  be  true  to  say  that  no  sub¬ 
stance  is  relative  in  character.  It  is  perhaps  a 
difficult  matter,  in  such  cases,  to  make  a  posi¬ 
tive  statement  without  more  exhaustive  exami¬ 
nation,  but  to  have  raised  questions  with  re¬ 
gard  to  details  is  not  without  advantage. 

8 

[25]  By  ‘quality’  I  mean  that  in  virtue  of  which 
people  are  said  to  be  such  and  such. 

Quality  is  a  term  that  is  used  in  many  senses. 
One  sort  of  quality  let  us  call  ‘habit’  or  ‘disposi¬ 
tion’.  Habit  differs  from  disposition  in  being 
more  lasting  and  more  firmly  established.  The 
various  kinds  of  knowledge  and  of  virtue  are 
habits,  for  knowledge,  even  when  acquired 
only  in  a  moderate  degree,  is,  it  is  agreed,  abid- 
[30]  ing  in  its  character  and  difficult  to  dis¬ 
place,  unless  some  great  mental  upheaval  takes 
place,  through  disease  or  any  such  cause.  The 
virtues,  also,  such  as  justice,  self-restraint,  and 
so  on,  are  not  easily  dislodged  or  dismissed,  so 
as  to  give  place  to  vice. 

[33]  By  a  disposition,  on  the  other  hand,  we 
mean  a  condition  that  is  easily  changed  and 
quickly  gives  place  to  its  opposite.  Thus,  heat. 


CHAPTERS  7-8 


CATEGORIES  9b 


cold,  disease,  health,  and  so  on  are  disposi¬ 
tions.  For  a  man  is  disposed  in  one  way  or  an¬ 
other  with  reference  to  these,  but  quickly 
changes,  becoming  cold  instead  of  warm,  ill  in- 
9a  stead  of  well.  So  it  is  with  all  other  disposi¬ 
tions  also,  unless  through  lapse  of  time  a  dis¬ 
position  has  itself  become  inveterate  and  almost 
impossible  to  dislodge :  in  which  case  we  should 
perhaps  go  so  far  as  to  call  it  a  habit. 

It  is  evident  that  men  incline  to  call  those 
conditions  habits  which  are  of  a  more  or  less 

fcrmanent  type  and  difficult  to  displace;  for 
5]  those  who  are  not  retentive  of  knowledge, 
but  volatile,  are  not  said  to  have  such  and  such 
a  ‘habit’  as  regards  knowledge,  yet  they  are 
disposed,  we  may  say,  either  better  or  worse, 
towards  knowledge.  Thus  habit  differs  from 
disposition  in  this,  that  while  the  latter  in 
ephemeral,  the  former  is  permanent  and  diffi¬ 
cult  to  alter. 

[/o]  Habits  are  at  the  same  time  dispositions, 
but  dispositions  are  not  necessarily  habits.  For 
those  who  have  some  specific  habit  may  be  said 
also,  in  virtue  of  that  habit,  to  be  thus  or  thus 
disposed;  but  those  who  are  disposed  in  some 
specific  way  have  not  in  all  cases  the  corre¬ 
sponding  habit. 

Another  sort  of  quality  is  that  in  virtue  of 
which,  for  example,  we  call  men  good  boxers 
or  runners,  or  healthy  or  sickly:  in  fact  it  in¬ 
f/5]  eludes  all  those  terms  which  refer  to  in¬ 
born  capacity  or  incapacity.  Such  things  are  not 
predicated  of  a  person  in  virtue  of  his  disposi¬ 
tion,  but  in  virtue  of  his  inborn  capacity  or  in¬ 
capacity  to  do  something  with  ease  or  to  avoid 
defeat  of  any  kind.  Persons  are  called  good  box¬ 
ers  or  good  runners,  not  in  virtue  of  such  and 
[20]  such  a  disposition,  but  in  virtue  of  an  in¬ 
born  capacity  to  accomplish  something  with 
ease.  Men  are  called  healthy  in  virtue  of  the  in¬ 
born  capacity  of  easy  resistance  to  those  un¬ 
healthy  influences  that  may  ordinarily  arise; 
unhealthy,  in  virtue  of  the  lack  of  this  capacity. 
Similarly  with  regard  to  softness  and  hardness. 
[25]  Hardness  is  predicated  of  a  thing  because 
it  has  that  capacity  of  resistance  which  enables 
it  to  withstand  disintegration;  softness,  again, 
is  predicated  of  a  thing  by  reason  of  the  lack  of 
that  capacity. 

A  third  class  within  this  category  is  that  of 
affective  qualities  and  affections.  Sweetness,  bit¬ 
terness,  sourness,  are  examples  of  this  sort  of 
quality,  together  with  all  that  is  akin  to  these ; 
[jo]  heat,  moreover,  and  cold,  whiteness,  and 
blackness  are  affective  qualities.  It  is  evident 
that  these  are  qualities,  for  those  things  that 


possess  them  are  themselves  said  to  be  such  and 
such  by  reason  of  their  presence.  Honey  is 
called  sweet  because  it  contains  sweetness;  the 
body  is  called  white  because  it  contains  white¬ 
ness;  and  so  in  all  other  cases. 

[J5]  The  term  ‘affective  quality’  is  not  used  as 
indicating  that  those  things  which  admit  these 
qualities  are  affected  in  any  way.  Honey  is  not 
9b  called  sweet  because  it  is  affected  in  a  spe¬ 
cific  way,  nor  is  this  what  is  meant  in  any  other 
instance.  Similarly  heat  and  cold  are  called  af¬ 
fective  qualities,  not  because  those  things  which 
admit  them  are  affected.  What  is  meant  is  that 
[5]  these  said  qualities  are  capable  of  produc¬ 
ing  an  ‘affection’  in  the  way  of  perception.  For 
sweetness  has  the  power  of  affecting  the  sense 
of  taste;  heat,  that  of  touch;  and  so  it  is  with  the 
rest  of  these  qualities. 

Whiteness  and  blackness,  however,  and  the 
other  colours,  are  not  said  to  be  affective  quali- 
[/o]  ties  in  this  sense,  but  because  they  them¬ 
selves  are  the  results  of  an  affection.  It  is  plain 
that  many  changes  of  colour  take  place  because 
of  affections.  When  a  man  is  ashamed,  he 
blushes;  when  he  is  afraid,  he  becomes  pale, 
and  so  on.  So  true  is  this,  that  when  a  man  is 
[75]  by  nature  liable  to  such  affections,  arising 
from  some  concomitance  of  elements  in  his  con¬ 
stitution,  it  is  a  probable  inference  that  he  has  the 
corresponding  complexion  of  skin.  For  the  same 
disposition  of  bodily  elements,  which  in  the  for¬ 
mer  instance  was  momentarily  present  in  the 
case  of  an  access  of  shame,  might  be  a  result  of 
a  man’s  natural  temperament,  so  as  to  produce 
the  corresponding  colouring  also  as  a  natural 
characteristic.  All  conditions,  therefore,  of  this 
[20]  kind,  if  caused  by  certain  permanent  and 
lasting  affections,  are  called  affective  qualities. 
For  pallor  and  duskiness  of  complexion  are 
called  qualities,  inasmuch  as  we  are  said  to  be 
such  and  such  in  virtue  of  them,  not  only  if 
they  originate  in  natural  constitution,  but  also 
if  they  come  about  through  long  disease  or  sun- 
[25]  burn,  and  are  difficult  to  remove,  or  in¬ 
deed  remain  throughout  life.  For  in  the  same 
way  we  are  said  to  be  such  and  such  because  of 
these. 

Those  conditions,  however,  which  arise  from 
causes  which  may  easily  be  rendered  ineffective 
or  speedily  removed,  are  called,  not  qualities, 
but  affections:  for  we  are  not  said  to  be  such 
[jo]  and  such  in  virtue  of  them.  The  man  who 
blushes  through  shame  is  not  said  to  be  a  con¬ 
stitutional  blusher,  nor  is  the  man  who  becomes 
pale  through  fear  said  to  be  constitutionally 
pale.  He  is  said  rather  to  have  been  affected. 


10b 

Thus  such  conditions  are  called  affections,  not 
qualities. 

In  like  manner  there  are  affective  qualities 
and  affections  of  the  soul.  That  temper  with 
[55]  w^ich  a  man  is  born  and  which  has  its 
origin  in  certain  deep-seated  affections  is  called 
10a  a  quality.  I  mean  such  conditions  as  insan¬ 
ity,  irascibility,  and  so  on:  for  people  are  said 
to  be  mad  or  irascible  in  virtue  of  these.  Simi¬ 
larly  those  abnormal  psychic  states  which  are 
not  inborn,  but  arise  from  the  concomitance  of 
certain  other  elements,  and  are  difficult  to  re- 
[5]  move,  or  altogether  permanent,  are  called 
qualities,  for  in  virtue  of  them  men  are  said  to 
be  such  and  such. 

Those,  however,  which  arise  from  causes  eas¬ 
ily  rendered  ineffective  are  called  affections,  not 
qualities.  Suppose  that  a  man  is  irritable  when 
vexed:  he  is  not  even  spoken  of  as  a  bad- 
tempered  man,  when  in  such  circumstances  he 
loses  his  temper  somewhat,  but  rather  is  said 
to  be  affected.  Such  conditions  are  therefore 
[10]  termed,  not  qualities,  but  affections. 

The  fourth  sort  of  quality  is  figure  and  the 
shape  that  belongs  to  a  thing;  and  besides  this, 
straightness  and  curvedness  and  any  other  qual¬ 
ities  of  this  type;  each  of  these  defines  a  thing 
as  being  such  and  such.  Because  it  is  triangular 
or  quadrangular  a  thing  is  said  to  have  a  spe¬ 
cific  character,  or  again  because  it  is  straight  or 
[75]  curved;  in  fact  a  thing’s  shape  in  every 
case  gives  rise  to  a  qualification  of  it. 

Rarity  and  density,  roughness  and  smooth¬ 
ness,  seem  to  be  terms  indicating  quality:  yet 
these,  it  would  appear,  really  belong  to  a  class 
different  from  that  of  quality.  For  it  is  rather  a 
certain  relative  position  of  the  parts  composing 
the  thing  thus  qualified  which,  it  appears,  is  in¬ 
dicated  by  each  of  these  terms.  A  thing  is  dense, 
[20]  owing  to  the  fact  that  its  parts  are  closely 
combined  with  one  another;  rare,  because  there 
are  interstices  between  the  parts;  smooth,  be¬ 
cause  its  parts  lie,  so  to  speak,  evenly;  rough, 
because  some  parts  project  beyond  others. 

[25]  There  may  be  other  sorts  of  quality,  but 
those  that  are  most  properly  so  called  have,  we 
may  safely  say,  been  enumerated. 

These,  then,  are  qualities,  and  the  things  that 
take  their  name  from  them  as  derivatives,  or 
are  in  some  other  way  dependent  on  them,  are 
said  to  be  qualified  in  some  specific  way.  In 
most,  indeed  in  almost  all  cases,  the  name  of 
that  which  is  qualified  is  derived  from  that  of 
[jo]  the  quality.  Thus  the  terms  ‘whiteness’, 
‘grammar’,  ‘justice’,  give  us  the  adjectives 
‘white’,  ‘grammatical’,  ‘just’,  and  so  on. 


J5 

There  are  some  cases,  however,  in  which,  as 
the  quality  under  consideration  has  no  name, 
it  is  impossible  that  those  possessed  of  it  should 
have  a  name  that  is  derivative.  For  instance, 
the  name  given  to  the  runner  or  boxer,  who  is 
[55]  so  called  in  virtue  of  an  inborn  capacity, 
is  not  derived  from  that  of  any  quality;  for 
10b  those  capacities  have  no  name  assigned  to 
them.  In  this,  the  inborn  capacity  is  distinct 
from  the  science,  with  reference  to  which  men 
are  called,  e.g.  boxers  or  wrestlers.  Such  a  sci¬ 
ence  is  classed  as  a  disposition;  it  has  a  name, 
and  is  called  ‘boxing’  or  ‘wrestling’  as  the  case 
may  be,  and  the  name  given  to  those  disposed 
in  this  way  is  derived  from  that  of  the  science. 
[5]  Sometimes,  even  though  a  name  exists  for 
the  quality,  that  which  takes  its  character  from 
the  quality  has  a  name  that  is  not  a  derivative. 
For  instance,  the  upright  man  takes  his  charac¬ 
ter  from  the  possession  of  the  quality  of  integ¬ 
rity,  but  the  name  given  him  is  not  derived 
from  the  word  ‘integrity’.  Yet  this  does  not  oc¬ 
cur  often. 

We  may  therefore  state  that  those  things  are 
said  to  be  possessed  of  some  specific  quality 
[/o]  which  have  a  name  derived  from  that  of 
the  aforesaid  quality,  or  which  are  in  some  oth¬ 
er  way  dependent  on  it. 

One  quality  may  be  the  contrary  of  another; 
thus  justice  is  the  contrary  of  injustice,  white¬ 
ness  of  blackness,  and  so  on.  The  things,  also, 
which  are  said  to  be  such  and  such  in  virtue  of 
these  qualities,  may  be  contrary  the  one  to  the 
other;  for  that  which  is  unjust  is  contrary  to 
that  which  is  just,  that  which  is  white  to  that 
[75]  which  is  black.  This,  however,  is  not  al¬ 
ways  the  case.  Red,  yellow,  and  such  colours, 
though  qualities,  have  no  contraries. 

If  one  of  two  contraries  is  a  quality,  the  other 
will  also  be  a  quality.  This  will  be  evident  from 
particular  instances,  if  we  apply  the  names  used 
to  denote  the  other  categories;  for  instance, 
granted  that  justice  is  the  contrary  of  injustice 
[20]  and  justice  is  a  quality,  injustice  will  also 
be  a  quality:  neither  quantity,  nor  relation,  nor 
place,  nor  indeed  any  other  category  but  that  of 
quality,  will  be  applicable  properly  to  injustice. 
So  it  is  with  all  other  contraries  falling  under 
[25]  the  category  of  quality. 

Qualities  admit  of  variation  of  degree.  White¬ 
ness  is  predicated  of  one  thing  in  a  greater  or 
less  degree  than  of  another.  This  is  also  the  case 
with  reference  to  justice.  Moreover,  one  and 
the  same  thing  may  exhibit  a  quality  in  a  great¬ 
er  degree  than  it  did  before:  if  a  thing  is  white, 
it  may  become  whiter. 


CHAPTER  8 


i6 

Though  this  is  generally  the  case,  there  are 
exceptions.  For  if  we  should  say  that  justice  ad- 
[jo]  mitted  of  variation  of  degree,  difficulties 
might  ensue,  and  this  is  true  with  regard  to  all 
those  qualities  which  are  dispositions.  There 
are  some,  indeed,  who  dispute  the  possibility 
of  variation  here.  They  maintain  that  justice 
and  health  cannot  very  well  admit  of  variation 
[35]  of  degree  themselves,  but  that  people  vary 
in  the  degree  in  which  they  possess  these  qual¬ 
ities,  and  that  this  is  the  case  with  grammatical 
l!a  learning  and  all  those  qualities  which  are 
classed  as  dispositions.  However  that  may  be, 
it  is  an  incontrovertible  fact  that  the  things 
which  in  virtue  of  these  qualities  are  said  to  be 
what  they  are  vary  in  the  degree  in  which  they 
possess  them;  for  one  man  is  said  to  be  better 
versed  in  grammar,  or  more  healthy  or  just, 
than  another,  and  so  on. 

[5]  The  qualities  expressed  by  the  terms  ‘tri¬ 
angular’  and  ‘quadrangular’  do  not  appear  to 
admit  of  variation  of  degree,  nor  indeed  do  any 
that  have  to  do  with  figure.  For  those  things  to 
which  the  definition  of  the  triangle  or  circle  is 
applicable  are  all  equally  triangular  or  circular. 
Those,  on  the  other  hand,  to  which  the  same 
definition  is  not  applicable,  cannot  be  said  to 
differ  from  one  another  in  degree;  the  square 
[/o]  is  no  more  a  circle  than  the  rectangle,  for 
to  neither  is  the  definition  of  the  circle  ap¬ 
propriate.  In  short,  if  the  definition  of  the  term 
proposed  is  not  applicable  to  both  objects,  they 
cannot  be  compared.  Thus  it  is  not  all  qualities 
which  admit  of  variation  of  degree. 

[75]  Whereas  none  of  the  characteristics  I 
have  mentioned  are  peculiar  to  quality,  the  fact 
that  likeness  and  unlikeness  can  be  predicated 
with  reference  to  quality  only,  gives  to  that  cat¬ 
egory  its  distinctive  feature.  One  thing  is  like 
another  only  with  reference  to  that  in  virtue  of 
which  it  is  such  and  such;  thus  this  forms  the 
eculiar  mark  of  quality. 

20]  We  must  not  be  disturbed  because  it  may 
be  argued  that,  though  proposing  to  discuss  the 
category  of  quality,  we  have  included  in  it 
many  relative  terms.  We  did  say  that  habits  and 
dispositions  were  relative.  In  practically  all  such 
cases  the  genus  is  relative,  the  individual  not. 
Thus  knowledge,  as  a  genus,  is  explained  by 
reference  to  something  else,  for  we  mean  a 
[25]  knowledge  of  something.  But  particular 
branches  of  knowledge  are  not  thus  explained. 
The  knowledge  of  grammar  is  not  relative  to 
anything  external,  nor  is  the  knowledge  of  mu¬ 
sic,  but  these,  if  relative  at  all,  are  relative  only 
in  virtue  of  their  genera;  thus  grammar  is  said 


Ilb 

[jo]  to  be  the  knowledge  of  something,  not  the 
grammar  of  something;  similarly  music  is  the 
knowledge  of  something,  not  the  music  of 
something. 

Thus  individual  branches  of  knowledge  are 
not  relative.  And  it  is  because  we  possess  these 
individual  branches  of  knowledge  that  we  are 
said  to  be  such  and  such.  It  is  these  that  we  ac¬ 
tually  possess:  we  are  called  experts  because  we 
possess  knowledge  in  some  particular  branch. 
Those  particular  branches,  therefore,  of  knowl- 
[^5]  edge,  in  virtue  of  which  we  are  sometimes 
said  to  be  such  and  such,  are  themselves  quali¬ 
ties,  and  are  not  relative.  Further,  if  anything 
should  happen  to  fall  within  both  the  category 
of  quality  and  that  of  relation,  there  would  be 
nothing  extraordinary  in  classing  it  under  both 
these  heads.  * 

9 

llb  Action  and  affection  both  admit  of  con¬ 
traries  and  also  of  variation  of  degree.  Heating 
is  the  contrary  of  cooling,  being  heated  of  be¬ 
ing  cooled,  being  glad  of  being  vexed.  Thus 
they  admit  of  contraries.  They  also  admit  of 
[5]  variation  of  degree:  for  it  is  possible  to  heat 
in  a  greater  or  less  degree;  also  to  be  heated  in 
a  greater  or  less  degree.  Thus  action  and  affec¬ 
tion  also  admit  of  variation  of  degree.  So  much, 
then,  is  stated  with  regard  to.  these  categories. 

We  spoke,  moreover,  of  the  category  of  po¬ 
sition  when  we  were  dealing  with  that  of  rela¬ 
tion,  and  stated  that  such  terms  derived  their 
names  from  those  of  the  corresponding  atti¬ 
tudes. 

[/o]  As  for  the  rest,  time,  place,  state,  since 
they  are  easily  intelligible,  I  say  no  more  about 
them  than  was  said  at  the  beginning,  that  in 
the  category  of  state  are  included  such  states  as 
‘shod’,  ‘armed’,  in  that  of  place  ‘in  the  Lyceum’ 
and  so  on,  as  was  explained  before. 

10 

[75]  The  proposed  categories  have,  then,  been 
adequately  dealt  with. 

We  must  next  explain  the  various  senses  in 
which  the  term  ‘opposite’  is  used.  Things  are 
said  to  be  opposed  in  four  senses:  (i)  as  correl¬ 
atives  to  one  another,  (ii)  as  contraries  to  one 
another,  (iii)  as  privatives  to  positives,  (iv)  as 
affirmatives  to  negatives. 

Let  me  sketch  my  meaning  in  outline.  An 
instance  of  the  use  of  the  word  ‘opposite’  with 
reference  to  correlatives  is  afforded  by  the  ex- 
[20]  pressions  ‘double’  and  ‘half’;  with  refer¬ 
ence  to  contraries  by  ‘bad’  and  ‘good’.  Oppo¬ 
sites  in  the  sense  of  ‘privatives’  and  ‘positives’ 


CATEGORIES 


12b 

are  ‘blindness’  and  ‘sight’;  in  the  sense  of  affirm¬ 
atives  and  negatives,  the  propositions  ‘he  sits’, 
‘he  does  not  sit’. 

(i)  Pairs  of  opposites  which  fall  under  the 
category  of  relation  are  explained  by  a  refer¬ 
ence  of  the  one  to  the  other,  the  reference  be- 
[25]  ing  indicated  by  the  preposition  ‘of’  or  by 
some  other  preposition.  Thus,  double  is  a  rela¬ 
tive  term,  for  that  which  is  double  is  explained 
as  the  double  of  something .  Knowledge,  again, 
is  the  opposite  of  the  thing  known,  in  the  same 
sense;  and  the  thing  known  also  is  explained 
[jo]  by  its  relation  to  its  opposite,  knowledge. 
For  the  thing  known  is  explained  as  that  which 
is  known  by  something;  that  is,  by  knowledge. 
Such  things,  then,  as  are  opposite  the  one  to 
the  other  in  the  sense  of  being  correlatives  are 
explained  by  a  reference  of  the  one  to  the  other. 

(ii)  Pairs  of  opposites  which  are  contraries 
are  not  in  any  way  interdependent,  but  are  con¬ 
trary  the  one  to  the  other.  The  good  is  not 
[j5J  spoken  of  as  the  good  of  the  bad ,  but  as 
the  contrary  of  the  bad,  nor  is  white  spoken  of 
as  the  white  of  the  blac\,  but  as  the  contrary  of 
the  blac\ .  These  two  types  of  opposition  are 
12a  therefore  distinct.  Those  contraries  which 
are  such  that  the  subjects  in  which  they  are  nat¬ 
urally  present,  or  of  which  they  are  predicated, 
must  necessarily  contain  either  the  one  or  the 
other  of  them,  have  no  intermediate,  but  those 
in  the  case  of  which  no  such  necessity  obtains, 
always  have  an  intermediate.  Thus  disease  and 
[5]  health  are  naturally  present  in  the  body  of 
an  animal,  and  it  is  necessary  that  either  the 
one  or  the  other  should  be  present  in  the  body 
of  an  animal.  Odd  and  even,  again,  are  predi¬ 
cated  of  number,  and  it  is  necessary  that  the 
one  or  the  other  should  be  present  in  numbers. 
Now  there  is  no  intermediate  between  the 
terms  of  either  of  these  two  pairs.  On  the  other 
hand,  in  those  contraries  with  regard  to  which 
[/o]  no  such  necessity  obtains,  we  find  an  in¬ 
termediate.  Blackness  and  whiteness  are  natu¬ 
rally  present  in  the  body,  but  it  is  not  necessary 
that  either  the  one  or  the  other  should  be  pres¬ 
ent  in  the  body,  inasmuch  as  it  is  not  true  to  say 
that  everybody  must  be  white  or  black.  Bad¬ 
ness  and  goodness,  again,  are  predicated  of 
[75]  man,  and  of  many  other  things,  but  it  is 
not  necessary  that  either  the  one  quality  or  the 
other  should  be  present  in  that  of  which  they 
are  predicated:  it  is  not  true  to  say  that  every¬ 
thing  that  may  be  good  or  bad  must  be  either 
good  or  bad.  These  pairs  of  contraries  have  in¬ 
termediates:  the  intermediates  between  white 
and  black  are  grey,  sallow,  and  all  the  other 


17 

colours  that  come  between;  the  intermediate 
between  good  and  bad  is  that  which  is  neither 
the  one  nor  the  other. 

[20]  Some  intermediate  qualities  have  names, 
such  as  grey  and  sallow  and  all  the  other  col¬ 
ours  that  come  between  white  and  black;  in 
other  cases,  however,  it  is  not  easy  to  name  the 
intermediate,  but  we  must  define  it  as  that 
which  is  not  either  extreme,  as  in  the  case  of 
that  which  is  neither  good  nor  bad,  neither 
[25]  just  nor  unjust. 

(iii)  ‘Privatives’  and  ‘positives’  have  refer¬ 
ence  to  the  same  subject.  Thus,  sight  and  blind¬ 
ness  have  reference  to  the  eye.  It  is  a  universal 
rule  that  each  of  a  pair  of  opposites  of  this  type 
has  reference  to  that  to  which  the  particular 
‘positive’  is  natural.  We  say  that  that  which  is 
capable  of  some  particular  faculty  or  possession 
has  suffered  privation  when  the  faculty  or  pos- 
[  jo]  session  in  question  is  in  no  way  present  in 
that  in  which,  and  at  the  time  at  which,  it 
should  naturally  be  present.  We  do  not  call 
that  toothless  which  has  not  teeth,  or  that  blind 
which  has  not  sight,  but  rather  that  which  has 
not  teeth  or  sight  at  the  time  when  by  nature 
it  should.  For  there  are  some  creatures  which 
from  birth  are  without  sight,  or  without  teeth, 
but  these  are  not  called  toothless  or  blind. 

[J5]  To  be  without  some  faculty  or  to  possess 
it  is  not  the  same  as  the  corresponding  ‘priva¬ 
tive’  or  ‘positive’.  ‘Sight’  is  a  ‘positive’,  ‘blind¬ 
ness’  a  ‘privative’,  but  ‘to  possess  sight’  is  not 
equivalent  to  ‘sight’,  ‘to  be  blind’  is  not  equiva¬ 
lent  to  ‘blindness’.  Blindness  is  a  ‘privative’,  to 
be  blind  is  to  be  in  a  state  of  privation,  but  is 
not  a  ‘privative’.  Moreover,  if  ‘blindness’  were 
equivalent  to  ‘being  blind’,  both  would  be 
[40]  predicated  of  the  same  subject;  but  though 
a  man  is  said  to  be  blind,  he  is  by  no  means  said 
to  be  blindness. 

12b  To  be  in  a  state  of  ‘possession’  is,  it  ap¬ 
pears,  the  opposite  of  being  in  a  state  of  ‘priva¬ 
tion’,  just  as  ‘positives’  and  ‘privatives’  them¬ 
selves  are  opposite.  There  is  the  same  type  of 
antithesis  in  both  cases;  for  just  as  blindness  is 
[5]  opposed  to  sight,  so  is  being  blind  opposed 
to  having  sight. 

That  which  is  affirmed  or  denied  is  not  itself 
affirmation  or  denial.  By  ‘affirmation’  we  mean 
an  affirmative  proposition,  by  ‘denial’  a  nega¬ 
tive.  Now,  those  facts  which  form  the  matter 
of  the  affirmation  or  denial  are  not  proposi- 
[/o]  tions;  yet  these  two  are  said  to  be  opposed 
in  the  same  sense  as  the  affirmation  and  denial, 
for  in  this  case  also  the  type  of  antithesis  is  the 
same.  For  as  the  affirmation  is  opposed  to  the 


CHAPTERS  8-10 


i8 

denial,  as  in  the  two  propositions  ‘he  sits’,  ‘he 
does  not  sit’,  so  also  the  fact  which  constitutes 
the  matter  of  the  proposition  in  one  case  is  op- 

osed  to  that  in  the  other,  his  sitting,  that  is 

75]  to  say,  to  his  not  sitting. 

It  is  evident  that  ‘positives’  and  ‘privatives’ 
are  not  opposed  each  to  each  in  the  same  sense 
as  relatives.  The  one  is  not  explained  by  refer¬ 
ence  to  the  other;  sight  is  not  sight  of  blindness, 
nor  is  any  other  preposition  used  to  indicate  the 
relation.  Similarly  blindness  is  not  said  to  be 
[20]  blindness  of  sight,  but  rather,  privation  of 
sight.  Relatives,  moreover,  reciprocate;  if  blind¬ 
ness,  therefore,  were  a  relative,  there  would  be 
a  reciprocity  of  relation  between  it  and  that 
with  which  it  was  correlative.  But  this  is  not 
[25]  the  case.  Sight  is  not  called  the  sight  of 
blindness . 

That  those  terms  which  fall  under  the  heads 
of  ‘positives’  and  ‘privatives’  are  not  opposed 
each  to  each  as  contraries,  either,  is  plain  from 
the  following  facts:  Of  a  pair  of  contraries  such 
that  they  have  no  intermediate,  one  or  the  other 
must  needs  be  present  in  the  subject  in  which 
[jo]  they  naturally  subsist,  or  of  which  they  are 
predicated;  for  it  is  those,  as  we  proved,1  in  the 
case  of  which  this  necessity  obtains,  that  have 
no  intermediate.  Moreover,  we  cited  health  and 
disease,  odd  and  even,  as  instances.  But  those 
contraries  which  have  an  intermediate  are  not 
subject  to  any  such  necessity.  It  is  not  necessary 
that  every  substance,  receptive  of  such  qualities, 
should  be  either  black  or  white,  cold  or  hot,  for 
something  intermediate  between  these  con- 
[J5]  traries  may  very  well  be  present  in  the 
subject.  We  proved,  moreover,  that  those  con¬ 
traries  have  an  intermediate  in  the  case  of 
which  the  said  necessity  does  not  obtain.  Yet 
when  one  of  the  two  contraries  is  a  constitutive 
property  of  the  subject,  as  it  is  a  constitutive 
property  of  fire  to  be  hot,  of  snow  to  be  white,  it 
is  necessary  determinately  that  one  of  the  two 
contraries,  not  one  or  the  other,  should  be  pres¬ 
to]  ent  in  the  subject;  for  fire  cannot  be  cold, 
or  snow  black.  Thus,  it  is  not  the  case  here  that 
one  of  the  two  must  needs  be  present  in  every 
subject  receptive  of  these  qualities,  but  only  in 
13*  that  subject  of  which  the  one  forms  a  con¬ 
stitutive  property.  Moreover,  in  such  cases  it  is 
one  member  of  the  pair  determinately,  and  not 
either  the  one  or  the  other,  which  must  be 
present. 

In  the  case  of  ‘positives’  and  ‘privatives’,  on 
the  other  hand,  neither  of  the  aforesaid  state¬ 
ments  holds  good.  For  it  is  not  necessary  that  a 

1  Cf.  nb  38. 


13* 

subject  receptive  of  the  qualities  should  always 
[5]  have  either  the  one  or  the  other;  that  which 
has  not  yet  advanced  to  the  state  when  sight  is 
natural  is  not  said  either  to  be  blind  or  to  see. 
Thus  ‘positives’  and  ‘privatives’  do  not  belong 
to  that  class  of  contraries  which  consists  of 
those  which  have  no  intermediate.  On  the 
other  hand,  they  do  not  belong  either  to  that 
class  which  consists  of  contraries  which  have  an 
intermediate.  For  under  certain  conditions  it  is 
necessary  that  either  the  one  or  the  other  should 
form  part  of  the  constitution  of  every  appro¬ 
bate  subject.  For  when  a  thing  has  reached 
/o]  the  stage  when  it  is  by  nature  capable  of 
sight,  it  will  be  said  either  to  see  or  to  be  blind, 
and  that  in  an  indeterminate  sense,  signifying 
that  the  capacity  may  be  either  present  or  ab¬ 
sent;  for  it  is  not  necessary  either  that  it  should 
see  or  that  it  should  be  blind,  but  that  it  should 
be  either  in  the  one  state  or  in  the  other.  Yet 
in  the  case  of  those  contraries  which  have  an 
intermediate  we  found  that  it  was  never  neces¬ 
sary  that  either  the  one  or  the  other  should  be 
present  in  every  appropriate  subject,  but  only 
that  in  certain  subjects  one  of  the  pair  should  be 
resent,  and  that  in  a  determinate  sense.  It  is, 
75]  therefore,  plain  that  ‘positives’  and  ‘priva¬ 
tives’  are  not  opposed  each  to  each  in  either  of 
the  senses  in  which  contraries  are  opposed. 

Again,  in  the  case  of  contraries,  it  is  possible 
that  there  should  be  changes  from  either  into 
the  other,  while  the  subject  retains  its  identity, 
unless  indeed  one  of  the  contraries  is  a  constitu¬ 
tive  property  of  that  subject,  as  heat  is  of  fire. 
[20]  For  it  is  possible  that  that  which  is  healthy 
should  become  diseased,  that  which  is  white, 
black,  that  which  is  cold,  hot,  that  which  is 
good,  bad,  that  which  is  bad,  good.  The  bad 
man,  if  he  is  being  brought  into  a  better  way  of 
life  and  thought,  may  make  some  advance, 
[25]  however  slight,  and  if  he  should  once  im¬ 
prove,  even  ever  so  little,  it  is  plain  that  he 
might  change  completely,  or  at  any  rate  make 
very  great  progress;  for  a  man  becomes  more 
and  more  easily  moved  to  virtue,  however 
small  the  improvement  was  at  first.  It  is,  there¬ 
fore,  natural  to  suppose  that  he  will  make  yet 
greater  progress  than  he  has  made  in  the  past; 
and  as  this  process  goes  on,  it  will  change  him 
completely  and  establish  him  in  the  contrary 
[jo]  state,  provided  he  is  not  hindered  by  lack 
of  time.  In  the  case  of  ‘positives’  and  ‘priva¬ 
tives’,  however,  change  in  both  directions  is  im¬ 
possible.  There  may  be  a  change  from  posses¬ 
sion  to  privation,  but  not  from  privation  to  pos¬ 
session.  The  man  who  has  become  blind  does 


CATEGORIES 


14a 

[35]  not  regain  his  sight;  the  man  who  has  be¬ 
come  bald  does  not  regain  his  hair;  the  man 
who  has  lost  his  teeth  does  not  grow  a  new  set. 
13b  (iv)  Statements  opposed  as  affirmation 
and  negation  belong  manifestly  to  a  class  which 
is  distinct,  for  in  this  case,  and  in  this  case  only, 
it  is  necessary  for  the  one  opposite  to  be  true 
and  the  other  false. 

Neither  in  the  case  of  contraries,  nor  in  the 
case  of  correlatives,  nor  in  the  case  of  ‘positives* 
and  ‘privatives’,  is  it  necessary  for  one  to  be  true 
and  the  other  false.  Health  and  disease  are 
[5]  contraries:  neither  of  them  is  true  or  false. 
‘Double*  and  ‘half’  are  opposed  to  each  other 
as  correlatives:  neither  of  them  is  true  or  false. 
The  case  is  the  same,  of  course,  with  regard  to 
‘positives*  and  ‘privatives*  such  as  ‘sight’  and 
[70]  ‘blindness’.  In  short,  where  there  is  no 
sort  of  combination  of  words,  truth  and  falsity 
have  no  place,  and  all  the  opposites  we  have 
mentioned  so  far  consist  of  simple  words. 

At  the  same  time,  when  the  words  which 
enter  into  opposed  statements  are  contraries, 
these,  more  than  any  other  set  of  opposites, 
would  seem  to  claim  this  characteristic.  ‘Soc¬ 
rates  is  ill’  is  the  contrary  of  ‘Socrates  is  well’, 
[75]  but  not  even  of  such  composite  expres¬ 
sions  is  it  true  to  say  that  one  of  the  pair  must 
always  be  true  and  the  other  false.  For  if  Soc¬ 
rates  exists,  one  will  be  true  and  the  other  false, 
but  if  he  does  not  exist,  both  will  be  false;  for 
neither  ‘Socrates  is  ill’  nor  ‘Socrates  is  well’  is 
true,  if  Socrates  does  not  exist  at  all. 

[20]  In  the  case  of  ‘positives’  and  ‘privatives’, 
if  the  subject  does  not  exist  at  all,  neither  prop¬ 
osition  is  true,  but  even  if  the  subject  exists,  it 
is  not  always  the  fact  that  one  is  true  and  the 
other  false.  For  ‘Socrates  has  sight’  is  the  oppo¬ 
site  of  ‘Socrates  is  blind’  in  the  sense  of  the 
word  ‘opposite’  which  applies  to  possession  and 
privation.  Now  if  Socrates  exists,  it  is  not  nec¬ 
essary  that  one  should  be  true  and  the  other 
false,  for  when  he  is  not  yet  able  to  acquire  the 
[25]  power  of  vision,  both  are  false,  as  also  if 
Socrates  is  altogether  non-existent. 

But  in  the  case  of  affirmation  and  negation, 
whether  the  subject  exists  or  not,  one  is  always 
false  and  the  other  true.  For  manifestly,  if  Soc¬ 
rates  exists,  one  of  the  two  propositions  ‘Soc- 
[50]  rates  is  ill’,  ‘Socrates  is  not  ill*,  is  true,  and 
the  other  false.  This  is  likewise  the  case  if  he 
does  not  exist;  for  if  he  does  not  exist,  to  say 
that  he  is  ill  is  false,  to  say  that  he  is  not  ill  is 
true.  Thus  it  is  in  the  case  of  those  opposites 
only,  which  are  opposite  in  the  sense  in  which 
the  term  is  used  with  reference  to  affirmation 


19 

and  negation,  that  the  rule  holds  good,  that  one 
[35]  of  the  pair  must  be  true  and  the  other 
false. 

11 

That  the  contrary  of  a  good  is  an  evil  is 
shown  by  induction:  the  contrary  of  health  is 
disease,  of  courage,  cowardice,  and  so  on.  But 
14a  the  contrary  of  an  evil  is  sometimes  a 
good,  sometimes  an  evil.  For  defect,  which  is 
an  evil,  has  excess  for  its  contrary,  this  also  be¬ 
ing  an  evil,  and  the  mean,  which  is  a  good,  is 
equally  the  contrary  of  the  one  and  of  the 
other.  It  is  only  in  a  few  cases,  however,  that 
[5]  we  see  instances  of  this:  in  most,  the  con¬ 
trary  of  an  evil  is  a  good. 

In  the  case  of  contraries,  it  is  not  always  nec¬ 
essary  that  if  one  exists  the  other  should  also 
exist:  for  if  all  become  healthy  there  will  be 
health  and  no  disease,  and  again,  if  everything 
turns  white,  there  will  be  white,  but  no  black, 
[/o]  Again,  since  the  fact  that  Socrates  is  ill  is 
the  contrary  of  the  fact  that  Socrates  is  well, 
and  two  contrary  conditions  cannot  both  obtain 
in  one  and  the  same  individual  at  the  same 
time,  both  these  contraries  could  not  exist  at 
once:  for  if  that  Socrates  was  well  was  a  fact, 
then  that  Socrates  was  ill  could  not  possibly  be 
one. 

[75]  It  is  plain  that  contrary  attributes  must 
needs  be  present  in  subjects  which  belong  to 
the  same  species  or  genus.  Disease  and  health 
require  as  their  subject  the  body  of  an  animal; 
white  and  black  require  a  body,  without  fur¬ 
ther  qualification;  justice  and  injustice  require 
as  their  subject  the  human  soul. 

Moreover,  it  is  necessary  that  pairs  of  con¬ 
traries  should  in  all  cases  either  belong  to  the 
same  genus  or  belong  to  contrary  genera  or  be 
[20]  themselves  genera.  White  and  black  be¬ 
long  to  the  same  genus,  colour;  justice  and  in¬ 
justice,  to  contrary  genera,  virtue  and  vice; 
while  good  and  evil  do  not  belong  to  genera, 
but  are  themselves  actual  genera,  with  terms 
[25]  under  them. 

12 

There  are  four  senses  in  which  one  thing 
can  be  said  to  be  ‘prior’  to  another.  Primarily 
and  most  properly  the  term  has  reference  to 
time:  in  this  sense  the  word  is  used  to  indicate 
that  one  thing  is  older  or  more  ancient  than  an¬ 
other,  for  the  expressions  ‘older’  and  ‘more  an¬ 
cient*  imply  greater  length  of  time. 

Secondly,  one  thing  is  said  to  be  ‘prior’  to 
[30]  another  when  the  sequence  of  their  being 
cannot  be  reversed.  In  this  sense  ‘one’  is  ‘prior’ 
to  ‘two’.  For  if  ‘two’  exists,  it  follows  directly 


CHAPTERS  10-12 


20 

that  ‘one’  must  exist,  but  if  ‘one’  exists,  it  does 
not  follow  necessarily  that  ‘two’  exists:  thus 
the  sequence  subsisting  cannot  be  reversed.  It 
is  agreed,  then,  that  when  the  sequence  of  two 
things  cannot  be  reversed,  then  that  one  on 
which  the  other  depends  is  called  ‘prior’  to 
[55]  that  other. 

In  the  third  place,  the  term  ‘prior’  is  used 
with  reference  to  any  order,  as  in  the  case  of 
science  and  of  oratory.  For  in  sciences  which 
use  demonstration  there  is  that  which  is  prior 
and  that  which  is  posterior  in  order;  in  geom- 
14b  etry,  the  elements  are  prior  to  the  proposi¬ 
tions;  in  reading  and  writing,  the  letters  of  the 
alphabet  are  prior  to  the  syllables.  Similarly,  in 
the  case  of  speeches,  the  exordium  is  prior  in 
order  to  the  narrative. 

Besides  these  senses  of  the  word,  there  is  a 
fourth.  That  which  is  better  and  more  honour¬ 
able  is  said  to  have  a  natural  priority.  In  com- 
[5]  mon  parlance  men  speak  of  those  whom 
they  honour  and  love  as  ‘coming  first’  with 
them.  This  sense  of  the  word  is  perhaps  the 
most  far-fetched. 

Such,  then,  are  the  different  senses  in  which 
the  term  ‘prior’  is  used. 

[/o]  Yet  it  would  seem  that  besides  those  men¬ 
tioned  there  is  yet  another.  For  in  those  things, 
the  being  of  each  of  which  implies  that  of  the 
other,  that  which  is  in  any  way  the  cause  may 
reasonably  be  said  to  be  by  nature  ‘prior’  to  the 
effect.  It  is  plain  that  there  are  instances  of  this. 
The  fact  of  the  being  of  a  man  carries  with  it 
[75]  the  truth  of  the  proposition  that  he  is,  and 
the  implication  is  reciprocal:  for  if  a  man  is,  the 
proposition  wherein  we  allege  that  he  is  is  true, 
and  conversely,  if  the  proposition  wherein  we 
allege  that  he  is  is  true,  then  he  is.  The  true 
proposition,  however,  is  in  no  way  the  cause  of 
the  being  of  the  man,  but  the  fact  of  the  man’s 
[20]  being  does  seem  somehow  to  be  the  cause 
of  the  truth  of  the  proposition,  for  the  truth  or 
falsity  of  the  proposition  depends  on  the  fact  of 
the  man’s  being  or  not  being. 

Thus  the  word  ‘prior’  may  be  used  in  five 
senses. 

13 

The  term  ‘simultaneous’  is  primarily  and 
most  appropriately  applied  to  those  things  the 
genesis  of  the  one  of  which  is  simultaneous 
[25]  with  that  of  the  other;  for  in  such  cases 
neither  is  prior  or  posterior  to  the  other.  Such 
things  are  said  to  be  simultaneous  in  point  of 
time.  Those  things,  again,  are  ‘simultaneous’  in 
point  of  nature,  the  being  of  each  of  which  in¬ 
volves  that  of  the  other,  while  at  the  same  time 


15a 

neither  is  the  cause  of  the  other’s  being.  This  is 
the  case  with  regard  to  the  double  and  the  half, 
[30]  for  these  are  reciprocally  dependent,  since, 
if  there  is  a  double,  there  is  also  a  half,  and  if 
there  is  a  half,  there  is  also  a  double,  while  at 
the  same  time  neither  is  the  cause  of  the  being 
of  the  other. 

Again,  those  species  which  are  distinguished 
one  from  another  and  opposed  one  to  another 
within  the  same  genus  are  said  to  be  ‘simultane¬ 
ous’  in  nature.  I  mean  those  species  which  are 
distinguished  each  from  each  by  one  and  the 
[35]  same  method  of  division.  Thus  the 
‘winged’  species  is  simultaneous  with  the  ‘ter¬ 
restrial’  and  the  ‘water’  species.  These  are  dis¬ 
tinguished  within  the  same  genus,  and  are  op¬ 
posed  each  to  each,  for  the  genus  ‘animal’  has 
the  ‘winged’,  the  ‘terrestrial’,  and  the  ‘water’ 
species,  and  no  one  of  these  is  prior  or  posterior 
to  another;  on  the  contrary,  all  such  things  ap- 
15a  pear  to  be  ‘simultaneous’  in  nature.  Each  of 
these  also,  the  terrestrial,  the  winged,  and  the 
water  species,  can  be  divided  again  into  sub¬ 
species.  Those  species,  then,  also  will  be  ‘simul¬ 
taneous’  in  point  of  nature,  which,  belonging  to 
the  same  genus,  are  distinguished  each  from 
each  by  one  and  the  same  method  of  differen¬ 
tiation. 

[5]  But  genera  are  prior  to  species,  for  the  se¬ 
quence  of  their  being  cannot  be  reversed.  If 
there  is  the  species  ‘water-animal’,  there  will 
be  the  genus  ‘animal’,  but  granted  the  being  of 
the  genus  ‘animal’,  it  does  not  follow  necessari¬ 
ly  that  there  will  be  the  species  ‘water-animal’. 

Those  things,  therefore,  are  said  to  be  ‘simul¬ 
taneous’  in  nature,  the  being  of  each  of  which 
involves  that  of  the  other,  while  at  the  same 
time  neither  is  in  any  way  the  cause  of  the 
[/o]  other’s  being;  those  species,  also,  which 
are  distinguished  each  from  each  and  opposed 
within  the  same  genus.  Those  things,  more¬ 
over,  are  ‘simultaneous’  in  the  unqualified 
sense  of  the  word  which  come  into  being  at  the 
same  time. 

r4 

There  are  six  sorts  of  movement:  generation, 
destruction,  increase,  diminution,  alteration, 
and  change  of  place. 

[75]  It  is  evident  in  all  but  one  case  that  all 
these  sorts  of  movement  are  distinct  each  from 
each.  Generation  is  distinct  from  destruction, 
increase  and  change  of  place  from  diminu¬ 
tion,  and  so  on.  But  in  the  case  of  alteration  it 
may  be  argued  that  the  process  necessarily  im¬ 
plies  one  or  other  of  the  other  five  sorts  of  mo- 
[20]  tion.  This  is  not  true,  for  we  may  say  that 


CATEGORIES 


21 


CHAPTERS  12-15 


15b 

all  affections,  or  nearly  all,  produce  in  us  an 
alteration  which  is  distinct  from  all’other  sorts 
of  motion,  for  that  which  is  affected  need  not 
suffer  either  increase  or  diminution  or  any  of 
the  other  sorts  of  motion.  Thus  alteration  is  a 
[25]  distinct  sort  of  motion;  for,  if  it  were  not, 
the  thing  altered  would  not  only  be  altered,  but 
would  forthwith  necessarily  suffer  increase  or 
diminution  or  some  one  of  the  other  sorts  of 
motion  in  addition;  which  as  a  matter  of  fact 
is  not  the  case.  Similarly  that  which  was  under¬ 
going  the  process  of  increase  or  was  subject  to 
some  other  sort  of  motion  would,  if  alteration 
were  not  a  distinct  form  of  motion,  necessarily 
be  subject  to  alteration  also.  But  there  are  some 
things  which  undergo  increase  but  yet  not  al- 
[30]  teration.  The  square,  for  instance,  if  a 
gnomon  is  applied  to  it,  undergoes  increase 
but  not  alteration,  and  so  it  is  with  all  other 
figures  of  this  sort.  Alteration  and  increase, 
therefore,  are  distinct. 

15b  Speaking  generally,  rest  is  the  contrary  of 
motion.  But  the  different  forms  of  motion  have 
their  own  contraries  in  other  forms;  thus  de¬ 
struction  is  the  contrary  of  generation,  diminu¬ 
tion  of  increase,  rest  in  a  place,  of  change  of 
place.  As  for  this  last,  change  in  the  reverse 
direction  would  seem  to  be  most  truly  its  con- 
[5]  trary;  thus  motion  upwards  is  the  contrary 
of  motion  downwards  and  vice  versa. 

In  the  case  of  that  sort  of  motion  which  yet 
remains,  of  those  that  have  been  enumerated,  it 
is  not  easy  to  state  what  is  its  contrary.  It  ap¬ 
pears  to  have  no  contrary,  unless  one  should 
define  the  contrary  here  also  either  as  ‘rest  in 
its  quality*  or  as  ‘change  in  the  direction  of  the 
[/o]  contrary  quality*,  just  as  we  defined  the 
contrary  of  change  of  place  either  as  rest  in  a 


place  or  as  change  in  the  reverse  direction.  For 
a  thing  is  altered  when  change  of  quality  takes 
place;  therefore  either  rest  in  its  quality  or 
change  in  the  direction  of  the  contrary  quality 
may  be  called  the  contrary  of  this  qualitative 
form  of  motion.  In  this  way  becoming  white  is 
[75]  the  contrary  of  becoming  black;  there  is 
alteration  in  the  contrary  direction,  since  a 
change  of  a  qualitative  nature  takes  place. 

The  term  ‘to  have’  is  used  in  various  senses. 
In  the  first  place  it  is  used  with  reference  to 
habit  or  disposition  or  any  other  quality,  for 
we  are  said  to  ‘have*  a  piece  of  knowledge  or 
a  virtue.  Then,  again,  it  has  reference  to  quan- 
[20]  tity,  as,  for  instance,  in  the  case  of  a  man’s 
height;  for  he  is  said  to  ‘have’  a  height  of  three 
or  four  cubits.  It  is  used,  moreover,  with  regard 
to  apparel,  a  man  being  said  to  ‘have’  a  coat  or 
tunic;  or  in  respect  of  something  which  we 
have  on  a  part  of  ourselves,  as  a  ring  on  the 
hand:  or  in  respect  of  something  which  is  a 
part  of  us,  as  hand  or  foot.  The  term  refers  also 
to  content,  as  in  the  case  of  a  vessel  and  wheat, 
or  of  a  jar  and  wine;  a  jar  is  said  to  ‘have’ 
[25]  wine,  and  a  corn-measure  wheat.  The  ex¬ 
pression  in  such  cases  has  reference  to  content. 
Or  it  refers  to  that  which  has  been  acquired; 
we  are  said  to  ‘have’  a  house  or  a  field.  A  man 
is  also  said  to  ‘have’  a  wife,  and  a  wife  a  hus¬ 
band,  and  this  appears  to  be  the  most  remote 
[50]  meaning  of  the  term,  for  by  the  use  of  it 
we  mean  simply  that  the  husband  lives  with 
the  wife. 

Other  senses  of  the  word  might  perhaps  be 
found,  but  the  most  ordinary  ones  have  all  been 
enumerated. 


.  : 


*  .  »  ;  i)  -1'  • 


•t 


CONTENTS:  ON  INTERPRETATION 


CHAP.  BERLIN  NOS. 

i.  (i)  The  spoken  word  is  a  symbol  of  i6a  i 
thought 

(2)  Isolated  thoughts  or  expressions  are  nei¬ 
ther  true  nor  false 

(3)  Truth  and  falsehood  are  only  attributable 
to  certain  combinations  of  thoughts  or  of 


words 

2.  (1)  Definition  of  a  noun  i6a  18 

(2)  Simple  and  composite  nouns 

(3)  Indefinite  nouns 

(4)  Cases  of  a  noun 

3.  (1)  Definition  of  a  verb  i6b6 

(2)  Indefinite  verbs 

(3)  Tenses  of  a  verb 

(4)  Verbal  nouns  and  adjectives 

4.  Definition  of  a  sentence  i6b  26 

5.  Simple  and  compound  propositions  i7a  8 

6.  Contradictory  propositions  i7a25 

7.  (1)  Universal,  indefinite,  and  par-  i7a36 
ticular  affirmations  and  denials 


(2)  Contrary  as  opposed  to  contradictory  pro¬ 
positions 

(3)  In  contrary  propositions,  of  which  the  sub¬ 
ject  is  universal  or  particular,  the  truth  of  the 
one  proposition  implies  the  falsity  of  the  other, 
but  this  is  hot  the  case  in  indefinite  proposi¬ 
tions 

8.  Definition  of  single  propositions  i8a  12 

9.  Propositions  which  refer  to  present  i8a  27 
or  past  time  must  be  either  true  or  false:  propo¬ 
sitions  which  refer  to  future  time  must  be 
either  true  or  false,  but  it  is  not  determined 
which  must  be  true  and  which  false. 

10.  (1)  Diagrammatic  arrangement  of  i9b5 
pairs  of  affirmations  and  denials,  (a)  without 
the  complement  of  the  verb  ‘to  be/  (b)  with 
the  complement  of  the  verb  ‘to  be,’  (c)  with  an 
indefinite  noun  for  subject 

(2)  The  right  position  of  the  negative 

(3)  Contraries  can  never  both  be  true,  but 
subcontraries  may  both  be  true 

(4)  In  particular  proposidons,  if  the  affirma¬ 


tive  is  false,  the  contrary  is  true;  in  universal 
propositions,  if  the  affirmative  is  false,  the  con¬ 
tradictory  is  true 

(5)  Propositions  consisting  of  an  indefinite 
noun  and  an  indefinite  verb  are  not  denials 

(6)  The  relation  to  other  propositions  of  those 
which  have  an  indefinite  noun  as  subject 

(7)  The  transposition  of  nouns  and  verbs 
makes  no  difference  to  the  sense  of  the  proposi¬ 
tion 

11.  (1)  Some  seemingly  simple  proposi-  20bn 
tions  are  really  compound 

(2)  Similarly  some  dialectical  questions  are 
really  compound 

(3)  The  nature  of  a  dialectical  question 

(4)  When  two  simple  propositions  having  the 
same  subject  are  true,  it  is  not  necessarily  the 
case  that  the  proposition  resulting  from  the 
combination  of  the  predicates  is  true 

(5)  A  plurality  of  predicates  which  individual¬ 
ly  belong  to  the  same  subject  can  only  be  com¬ 
bined  to  form  a  simple  proposition  when  they 
are  essentially  predicable  of  the  subject,  and 
when  one  is  not  implicit  in  another 

(6)  A  compound  predicate  cannot  be  resolved 
into  simple  predicates  when  the  compound 
predicate  has  within  it  a  contradiction  in 
terms,  or  when  one  of  the  predicates  is  used  in 
a  secondary  sense 

12.  (1)  Propositions  concerning  possi-  2ia34 
bility,  impossibility,  contingency,  and  necessity 
(2)  Determination  of  the  proper  contradic¬ 
tories  of  such  propositions 

13.  (1)  Scheme  to  show  the  relation  22a  14 
subsisting  between  such  propositions 

(2)  Illogical  character  of  this  scheme  proved 

(3)  Revised  scheme 

(4)  That  which  is  said  to  be  possible  may  be 
(a)  always  actual,  (b)  sometimes  actual  and 
sometimes  not,  (c)  never  actual 

14.  Discussion  as  to  whether  a  contrary  23s  26 
affirmation  or  a  denial  is  the  proper  contrary 
of  an  affirmation,  either  universal  or  particular 


23 


ON  INTERPRETATION 


1 6a  First  we  must  define  the  terms  ‘noun’  and 
‘verb’,  then  the  terms  ‘denial’  and  ‘affirmation’, 
then  ‘proposition’  and  ‘sentence.’ 

Spoken  words  are  the  symbols  of  mental  ex- 
[5]  perience  and  written  words  are  the  symbols 
of  spoken  words.  Just  as  all  men  have  not  the 
same  writing,  so  all  men  have  not  the  same 
speech  sounds,  but  the  mental  experiences, 
which  these  directly  symbolize,  are  the  same 
for  all,  as  also  are  those  things  of  which  our 
experiences  are  the  images.  This  matter  has, 
however,  been  discussed  in  my  treatise  about 
the  soul,  for  it  belongs  to  an  investigation  dis¬ 
tinct  from  that  which  lies  before  us. 

As  there  are  in  the  mind  thoughts  which  do 
[/o]  not  involve  truth  or  falsity,  and  also  those 
which  must  be  either  true  or  false,  so  it  is  in 
speech.  For  truth  and  falsity  imply  combina¬ 
tion  and  separation.  Nouns  and  verbs,  pro¬ 
vided  nothing  is  added,  are  like  thoughts  with¬ 
out  combination  or  separation;  ‘man’  and 
[75]  ‘white’,  as  isolated  terms,  are  not  yet 
either  true  or  false.  In  proof  of  this,  consider 
the  word  ‘goat-stag.’  It  has  significance,  but 
there  is  no  truth  or  falsity  about  it,  unless  ‘is’ 
or  ‘is  not’  is  added,  either  in  the  present  or  in 
some  other  tense. 

2 

By  a  noun  we  mean  a  sound  significant  by  con- 
[20]  vention,  which  has  no  reference  to  time, 
and  of  which  no  part  is  significant  apart  from 
the  rest.  In  the  noun  ‘Fairsteed,’  the  part 
‘steed’  has  no  significance  in  and  by  itself,  as  in 
the  phrase  ‘fair  steed.’  Yet  there  is  a  difference 
between  simple  and  composite  nouns;  for  in 
[25]  the  former  the  part  is  in  no  way  signif¬ 
icant,  in  the  latter  it  contributes  to  the  meaning 
of  the  whole,  although  it  has  not  an  independ¬ 
ent  meaning.  Thus  in  the  word  ‘pirate-boat’ 
the  word  ‘boat’  has  no  meaning  except  as  part 
of  the  whole  word. 

The  limitation  ‘by  convention’  was  intro- 

Note:  The  bold  face  numbers  and  letters  are  approxi¬ 
mate  indications  of  the  pages  and  columns  of  the 
standard  Berlin  Greek  text;  the  bracketed  numbers, 
of  the  lines  in  the  Greek  text;  they  are  here  as¬ 
signed  as  they  are  assigned  in  the  Oxford  trans¬ 
lation. 


duced  because  nothing  is  by  nature  a  noun  or 
name — it  is  only  so  when  it  becomes  a  symbol ; 
inarticulate  sounds,  such  as  those  which  brutes 
produce,  are  significant,  yet  none  of  these  con¬ 
stitutes  a  noun. 

[jo]  The  expression  ‘not-man’  is  not  a  noun. 
There  is  indeed  no  recognized  term  by  which 
we  may  denote  such  an  expression,  for  it  is  not 
a  sentence  or  a  denial.  Let  it  then  be  called  an 
indefinite  noun. 

The  expressions  ‘of  Philo’,  ‘to  Philo’,  and  so 
16b  on,  constitute  not  nouns,  but  cases  of  a 
noun.  The  definition  of  these  cases  of  a  noun 
is  in  other  respects  the  same  as  that  of  the  noun 
proper,  but,  when  coupled  with  ‘is’,  ‘was’,  or 
‘will  be’,  they  do  not,  as  they  are,  form  a  propo¬ 
sition  either  true  or  false,  and  this  the  noun 
proper  always  does,  under  these  conditions. 
Take  the  words  ‘of  Philo  is’  or  ‘of  Philo  is  not’; 
these  words  do  not,  as  they  stand,  form  either 
[5]  a  true  or  a  false  proposition. 

3 

A  verb  is  that  which,  in  addition  to  its  proper 
meaning,  carries  with  it  the  notion  of  time. 
No  part  of  it  has  any  independent  meaning, 
and  it  is  a  sign  of  something  said  of  something 
else. 

I  will  explain  what  I  mean  by  saying  that  it 
carries  with  it  the  notion  of  time.  ‘Health’  is  a 
noun,  but  ‘is  healthy’  is  a  verb;  for  besides  its 
proper  meaning  it  indicates  the  present  exist¬ 
ence  of  the  state  in  question. 

[/o]  Moreover,  a  verb  is  always  a  sign  of 
something  said  of  something  else,  i.e.  of  some¬ 
thing  either  predicable  of  or  present  in  some 
other  thing. 

Such  expressions  as  ‘is  not-healthy’,  ‘is  not- 
ill’,  I  do  not  describe  as  verbs;  for  though  they 
carry  the  additional  note  of  time,  and  always 
form  a  predicate,  there  is  no  specified  name  for 
this  variety;  but  let  them  be  called  indefinite 
[75]  verbs,  since  they  apply  equally  well  to 
that  which  exists  and  to  that  which  does  not. 

Similarly  ‘he  was  healthy’,  ‘he  will  be 
healthy’,  are  not  verbs,  but  tenses  of  a  verb;  the 
difference  lies  in  the  fact  that  the  verb  indicates 
present  time,  while  the  tenses  of  the  verb  indi¬ 
cate  those  times  which  lie  outside  the  present. 

Verbs  in  and  by  themselves  are  substantival 


25 


2  6 

[ 20 ]  and  have  significance,  for  he  who  uses 
such  expressions  arrests  the  hearer’s  mind,  and 
fixes  his  attention;  but  they  do  not,  as  they 
stand,  express  any  judgement,  either  positive 
or  negative.  For  neither  are  ‘to  be’  and  ‘not  to 
be’  and  the  participle  ‘being’  significant  of  any 
fact,  unless  something  is  added;  for  they  do  not 
themselves  indicate  anything,  but  imply  a  copu- 
[25]  lation,  of  which  we  cannot  form  a  con¬ 
ception  apart  from  the  things  coupled. 

4 

A  sentence  is  a  significant  portion  of  speech, 
some  parts  of  which  have  an  independent 
meaning,  that  is  to  say,  as  an  utterance,  though 
not  as  the  expression  of  any  positive  judge¬ 
ment.  Let  me  explain.  The  word  ‘human’  has 
meaning,  but  does  not  constitute  a  proposition, 
either  positive  or  negative.  It  is  only  when  other 
words  are  added  that  the  whole  will  form  an 
[jo]  affirmation  or  denial.  But  if  we  separate 
one  syllable  of  the  word  ‘human’  from  the 
other,  it  has  no  meaning;  similarly  in  the  word 
‘mouse’,  the  part  ‘-ouse’  has  no  meaning  in  it¬ 
self,  but  is  merely  a  sound.  In  composite  words, 
indeed,  the  parts  contribute  to  the  meaning  of 
the  whole;  yet,  as  has  been  pointed  out,1  they 
have  not  an  independent  meaning. 

1 7a  Every  sentence  has  meaning,  not  as  being 
the  natural  means  by  which  a  physical  faculty 
is  realized,  but,  as  we  have  said,  by  convention. 
Yet  every  sentence  is  not  a  proposition;  only 
such  are  propositions  as  have  in  them  either 
truth  or  falsity.  Thus  a  prayer  is  a  sentence,  but 
is  neither  true  nor  false. 

[5]  ^  us  therefore  dismiss  all  other  types  of 
sentence  but  the  proposition,  for  this  last  con¬ 
cerns  our  present  inquiry,  whereas  the  investi¬ 
gation  of  the  others  belongs  rather  to  the  study 
of  rhetoric  or  of  poetry.2 

5 

The  first  class  of  simple  propositions  is  the  sim¬ 
ple  affirmation,  the  next,  the  simple  denial;  all 
others  are  only  one  by  conjunction. 

[/o]  Every  proposition  must  contain  a  verb  or 
the  tense  of  a  verb.  The  phrase  which  defines 
the  species  ‘man’,  if  no  verb  in  present,  past,  or 
future  time  be  added,  is  not  a  proposition.  It 
may  be  asked  how  the  expression  ‘a  footed  ani¬ 
mal  with  two  feet’  can  be  called  single;  for  it  is 
not  the  circumstance  that  the  words  follow  in 
unbroken  succession  that  effects  the  unity.  This 
inquiry,  however,  finds  its  place  in  an  investi- 

1  Cf.  1 6a  22-26 

2  Cf.  On  Poetics,  i456b  11. 


1 7b 

ation  foreign  to  that  before  us.3 

75]  We  call  those  propositions  single  which 
indicate  a  single  fact,  or  the  conjunction  of  the 
parts  of  which  results  in  unity:  those  proposi¬ 
tions,  on  the  other  hand,  are  separate  and 
many  in  number,  which  indicate  many  facts,  or 
whose  parts  have  no  conjunction. 

Let  us,  moreover,  consent  to  call  a  noun  or  a 
verb  an  expression  only,  and  not  a  proposition, 
since  it  is  not  possible  for  a  man  to  speak  in 
this  way  when  he  is  expressing  something,  in 
such  a  way  as  to  make  a  statement,  whether  his 
utterance  is  an  answer  to  a  question  or  an  act 
of  his  own  initiation. 

[20]  To  return:  of  propositions  one  kind  is 
simple,  i.e.  that  which  asserts  or  denies  some¬ 
thing  of  something,  the  other  composite,  i.e. 
that  which  is  compounded  of  simple  proposi¬ 
tions.  A  simple  proposition  is  a  statement,  with 
meaning,  as  to  the  presence  of  something  in  a 
subject  or  its  absence,  in  the  present,  past,  or 
future,  according  to  the  divisions  of  time. 

6 

[25]  An  affirmation  is  a  positive  assertion  of 
something  about  something,  a  denial  a  nega¬ 
tive  assertion. 

Now  it  is  possible  both  to  affirm  and  to  deny 
the  presence  of  something  which  is  present  or 
of  something  which  is  not,  and  since  these  same 
affirmations  and  denials  are  possible  with  refer¬ 
ence  to  those  times  which  lie  outside  the  pres- 
[jo]  ent,  it  would  be  possible  to  contradict  any 
affirmation  or  denial.  Thus  it  is  plain  that  every 
affirmation  has  an  opposite  denial,  and  simi¬ 
larly  every  denial  an  opposite  affirmation. 

We  will  call  such  a  pair  of  propositions  a  pair 
of  contradictories.  Those  positive  and  negative 
propositions  are  said  to  be  contradictory  which 
have  the  same  subject  and  predicate.  The 
[35]  identity  of  subject  and  of  predicate  must 
not  be  ‘equivocal’.  Indeed  there  are  definitive 
qualifications  besides  this,  which  we  make  to 
meet  the  casuistries  of  sophists. 

7 

Some  things  are  universal,  others  individual. 
By  the  term  ‘universal’  I  mean  that  which  is  of 
such  a  nature  as  to  be  predicated  of  many  sub¬ 
jects,  by  ‘individual’  that  which  is  not  thus 
[40]  predicated.  Thus  ‘man’  is  a  universal, 
‘Callias’  an  individual. 

1 7b  Our  propositions  necessarily  sometimes 
concern  a  universal  subject,  sometimes  an  in¬ 
dividual. 

3  Cf.  Metaphysics ,  vn.  12,  vm.  6. 


ON  INTERPRETATION 


18a  CHAPTERS  3-8  27 


If,  then,  a  man  states  a  positive  and  a  nega¬ 
tive  proposition  of  universal  character  with  re- 
[5]  gafd  t0  a  universal,  these  two  propositions 
are  ‘contrary’.  By  the  expression  ‘a  proposition 
of  universal  character  with  regard  to  a  uni¬ 
versal’,  such  propositions  as  ‘every  man  is 
white’,  ‘no  man  is  white’  are  meant.  When,  on 
the  other  hand,  the  positive  and  negative  prop¬ 
ositions,  though  they  have  regard  to  a  uni¬ 
versal,  are  yet  not  of  universal  character,  they 
will  not  be  contrary,  albeit  the  meaning  in¬ 
tended  is  sometimes  contrary.  As  instances  of 
propositions  made  with  regard  to  a  universal, 
but  not  of  universal  character,  we  may  take  the 
[10]  propositions  ‘man  is  white’,  ‘man  is  not 
white’.  ‘Man’  is  a  universal,  but  the  proposition 
is  not  made  as  of  universal  character;  for  the 
word  ‘every’  does  not  make  the  subject  a  uni¬ 
versal,  but  rather  gives  the  proposition  a  uni¬ 
versal  character.  If,  however,  both  predicate 
and  subject  are  distributed,  the  proposition 
thus  constituted  is  contrary  to  truth;  no  affir¬ 
mation  will,  under  such  circumstances,  be  true. 
[75]  The  proposition  ‘every  man  is  every  ani¬ 
mal’  is  an  example  of  this  type. 

An  affirmation  is  opposed  to  a  denial  in  the 
sense  which  I  denote  by  the  term  ‘contradic¬ 
tory’,  when,  while  the  subject  remains  the 
same,  the  affirmation  is  of  universal  character 
and  the  denial  is  not.  The  affirmation  ‘every 
man  is  white’  is  the  contradictory  of  the  denial 
‘not  every  man  is  white’,  or  again,  the  proposi¬ 
tion  ‘no  man  is  white’  is  the  contradictory  of 
the  proposition  ‘some  men  are  white’.  But 
[20]  propositions  are  opposed  as  contraries 
when  both  the  affirmation  and  the  denial  are 
universal,  as  in  the  sentences  ‘every  man  is 
white’,  ‘no  man  is  white’,  ‘every  man  is  just’, 
‘no  man  is  just’. 

We  see  that  in  a  pair  of  this  sort  both  prop¬ 
ositions  cannot  be  true,  but  the  contradictories 
of  a  pair  of  contraries  can  sometimes  both  be 
true  with  reference  to  the  same  subject;  for 
[25]  instance  ‘not  every  man  is  white’  and 
‘some  men  are  white’  are  both  true.  Of  such 
corresponding  positive  and  negative  proposi¬ 
tions  as  refer  to  universals  and  have  a  uni¬ 
versal  character,  one  must  be  true  and  the 
other  false.  This  is  the  case  also  when  the 
reference  is  to  individuals,  as  in  the  proposi¬ 
tions  ‘Socrates  is  white’,  ‘Socrates  is  not  white’. 

When,  on  the  other  hand,  the  reference  is 
to  universals,  but  the  propositions  are  not  uni¬ 
versal,  it  is  not  always  the  case  that  one  is 
[jo]  true  and  the  other  false,  for  it  is  possible 
to  state  truly  that  man  is  white  and  that  man 


is  not  white  and  that  man  is  beautiful  and 
that  man  is  not  beautiful;  for  if  a  man  is  de¬ 
formed  he  is  the  reverse  of  beautiful,  also  if 
he  is  progressing  towards  beauty  he  is  not  yet 
beautiful. 

This  statement  might  seem  at  first  sight  to 
[35]  carry  with  it  a  contradiction,  owing  to 
the  fact  that  the  proposition  ‘man  is  not 
white’  appears  to  be  equivalent  to  the  proposi¬ 
tion  ‘no  man  is  white’.  This,  however,  is  not 
the  case,  nor  are  they  necessarily  at  the  same 
time  true  or  false. 

It  is  evident  also  that  the  denial  correspond¬ 
ing  to  a  single  affirmation  is  itself  single;  for 
the  denial  must  deny  just  that  which  the 
affirmation  affirms  concerning  the  same  sub¬ 
ject,  and  must  correspond  with  the  affirmation 
18a  both  in  the  universal  or  particular  char¬ 
acter  of  the  subject  and  in  the  distributed  or 
undistributed  sense  in  which  it  is  understood. 

For  instance,  the  affirmation  ‘Socrates  is 
white’  has  its  proper  denial  in  the  proposition 
‘Socrates  is  not  white’.  If  anything  else  be  nega¬ 
tively  predicated  of  the  subject  or  if  anything 
else  be  the  subject  though  the  predicate  remain 
the  same,  the  denial  will  not  be  the  denial 
proper  to  that  affirmation,  but  on  that  is  dis¬ 
tinct. 

The  denial  proper  to  the  affirmation  ‘every 
[5]  man  is  white’  is  ‘not  every  man  is  white’; 
that  proper  to  the  affirmation  ‘some  men  are 
white’  is  ‘no  man  is  white’,  while  that  proper 
to  the  affirmation  ‘man  is  white’  is  ‘man  is  not 
white’. 

We  have  shown  further  that  a  single  denial 
is  contradictorily  opposite  to  a  single  affirma¬ 
tion  and  we  have  explained  which  these  are; 
we  have  also  stated  that  contrary  are  distinct 
from  contradictory  propositions  and  which  the 
[/o]  contrary  are;  also  that  with  regard  to  a 
pair  of  opposite  propositions  it  is  not  always  the 
case  that  one  is  true  and  the  other  false.  We 
have  pointed  out,  moreover,  what  the  reason  of 
this  is  and  under  what  circumstances  the  truth 
of  the  one  involves  the  falsity  of  the  other. 

8 

An  affirmation  or  denial  is  single,  if  it  indicates 
some  one  fact  about  some  one  subject;  it  mat¬ 
ters  not  whether  the  subject  is  universal  and 
whether  the  statement  has  a  universal  charac¬ 
ter,  or  whether  this  is  not  so.  Such  single  prop¬ 
ositions  are:  ‘every  man  is  white’,  ‘not  every 
[75]  man  is  white’;  ‘man  is  white’,  ‘man  is  not 
white’;  ‘no  man  is  white’,  ‘some  men  are 
white’;  provided  the  word  ‘white’  has  one 


28 

meaning.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  one  word  has 
two  meanings  which  do  not  combine  to  form 
one,  the  affirmation  is  not  single.  For  instance, 
if  a  man  should  establish  the  symbol  ‘garment’ 
as  significant  both  of  a  horse  and  of  a  man, 
[20]  the  proposition  ‘garment  is  white’  would 
not  be  a  single  affirmation,  nor  its  opposite  a 
single  denial.  For  it  is  equivalent  to  the  propo¬ 
sition  ‘horse  and  man  are  white’,  which,  again, 
is  equivalent  to  the  two  propositions  ‘horse  is 
white’,  ‘man  is  white’.  If,  then,  these  two  prop¬ 
ositions  have  more  than  a  single  significance, 
and  do  not  form  a  single  proposition,  it  is  plain 
that  the  first  proposition  either  has  more  than 
[25]  one  significance  or  else  has  none;  for  a 
particular  man  is  not  a  horse. 

This,  then,  is  another  instance  of  those  prop¬ 
ositions  of  which  both  the  positive  and  the  neg¬ 
ative  forms  may  be  true  or  false  simultaneously. 

9 

In  the  case  of  that  which  is  or  which  has 
taken  place,  propositions,  whether  positive  or 
negative,  must  be  true  or  false.  Again,  in  the 
case  of  a  pair  of  contradictories,  either  when 
the  subject  is  universal  and  the  propositions 
[30]  are  of  a  universal  character,  or  when  it  is 
individual,  as  has  been  said,1  one  of  the  two 
must  be  true  and  the  other  false;  whereas  when 
the  subject  is  universal,  but  the  propositions 
are  not  of  a  universal  character,  there  is  no 
such  necessity.  We  have  discussed  this  type 
also  in  a  previous  chapter.2 

When  the  subject,  however,  is  individual, 
and  that  which  is  predicated  of  it  relates  to  the 
future,  the  case  is  altered.  For  if  all  proposi¬ 
tions  whether  positive  or  negative  are  either 
[ 33 ]  true  or  false,  then  any  given  predicate 
must  either  belong  to  the  subject  or  not,  so 
that  if  one  man  affirms  that  an  event  of  a  given 
character  will  take  place  and  another  denies  it, 
it  is  plain  that  the  statement  of  the  one  will 
correspond  with  reality  and  that  of  the  other 
will  not.  For  the  predicate  cannot  both  belong 
and  not  belong  to  the  subject  at  one  and  the 
same  time  with  regard  to  the  future. 

18b  Thus,  if  it  is  true  to  say  that  a  thing  is 
white,  it  must  necessarily  be  white;  if  the  re¬ 
verse  proposition  is  true,  it  will  of  necessity  not 
be  white.  Again,  if  it  is  white,  the  proposition 
stating  that  it  is  white  was  true;  if  it  is  not 
white,  the  proposition  to  the  opposite  effect  was 
true.  And  if  it  is  not  white,  the  man  who  states 
that  it  is  is  making  a  false  statement;  and  if  the 
man  who  states  that  it  is  white  is  making  a  false 

1  Cf.  1 7b  26-9.  2  Cf.  1 7b  29-37. 


18b 

statement,  it  follows  that  it  is  not  white.  It  may 
therefore  be  argued  that  it  is  necessary  that 
affirmations  or  denials  must  be  either  true  or 
false. 

[5]  Now  if  this  be  so,  nothing  is  or  takes  place 
fortuitously,  either  in  the  present  or  in  the  fu¬ 
ture,  and  there  are  no  real  alternatives;  every¬ 
thing  takes  place  of  necessity  and  is  fixed.  For 
either  he  that  affirms  that  it  will  take  place  or 
he  that  denies  this  is  in  correspondence  with 
fact,  whereas  if  things  did  not  take  place  of 
necessity,  an  event  might  just  as  easily  not  hap¬ 
pen  as  happen;  for  the  meaning  of  the  word 
‘fortuitous’  with  regard  to  present  or  future 
events  is  that  reality  is  so  constituted  that  it 
may  issue  in  either  of  two  opposite  directions, 
[/o]  Again,  if  a  thing  is  white  now,  it  was  true 
before  to  say  that  it  would  be  white,  so  that  of 
anything  that  has  taken  place  it  was  always  true 
to  say  ‘it  is’  or  ‘it  will  be’.  But  if  it  was  always 
true  to  say  that  a  thing  is  or  will  be,  it  is  not  pos¬ 
sible  that  it  should  not  be  or  not  be  about  to  be, 
and  when  a  thing  cannot  not  come  to  be,  it  is 
impossible  that  it  should  not  come  to  be,  and 
when  it  is  impossible  that  it  should  not  come  to 
be,  it  must  come  to  be.  All,  then,  that  is  about  to 
[75]  be  must  of  necessity  take  place.  It  results 
from  this  that  nothing  is  uncertain  or  fortui¬ 
tous,  for  if  it  were  fortuitous  it  would  not  be 
necessary. 

Again,  to  say  that  neither  the  affirmation 
nor  the  denial  is  true,  maintaining,  let  us  say, 
that  an  event  neither  will  take  place  nor  will 
not  take  place,  is  to  take  up  a  position  impos¬ 
sible  to  defend.  In  the  first  place,  though  facts 
should  prove  the  one  proposition  false,  the  op- 
[20]  posite  would  still  be  untrue.  Secondly,  if 
it  was  true  to  say  that  a  thing  was  both  white 
and  large,  both  these  qualities  must  necessarily 
belong  to  it;  and  if  they  will  belong  to  it  the 
next  day,  they  must  necessarily  belong  to  it  the 
next  day.  But  if  an  event  is  neither  to  take  place 
nor  not  to  take  place  the  next  day,  the  element 
of  chance  will  be  eliminated.  For  example,  it 
would  be  necessary  that  a  sea-fight  should 
[25]  neither  take  place  nor  fail  to  take  place 
on  the  next  day. 

These  awkward  results  and  others  of  the 
same  kind  follow,  if  it  is  an  irrefragable  law 
that  of  every  pair  of  contradictory  propositions, 
whether  they  have  regard  to  universals  and  are 
stated  as  universally  applicable,  or  whether  they 
have  regard  to  individuals,  one  must  be  true 
[30]  and  the  other  false,  and  that  there  are  no 
real  alternatives,  but  that  all  that  is  or  takes 
place  is  the  outcome  of  necessity.  There  would 


ON  INTERPRETATION 


19b  CHAPTERS  8-10  29 


be  no  need  to  deliberate  or  to  take  trouble,  on 
the  supposition  that  if  we  should  adopt  a  cer¬ 
tain  course,  a  certain  result  would  follow, 
while,  if  we  did  not,  the  result  would  not  fol¬ 
low.  For  a  man  may  predict  an  event  ten  thou¬ 
sand  years  beforehand,  and  another  may  pre- 
[35]  diet  the  reverse;  that  which  was  truly  pre¬ 
dicted  at  the  moment  in  the  past  will  of  neces¬ 
sity  take  place  in  the  fullness  of  time. 

Further,  it  makes  no  difference  whether  peo¬ 
ple  have  or  have  not  actually  made  the  contra¬ 
dictory  statements.  For  it  is  manifest  that  the 
circumstances  are  not  influenced  by  the  fact  of 
an  affirmation  or  denial  on  the  part  of  anyone. 
For  events  will  not  take  place  or  fail  to  take 
place  because  it  was  stated  that  they  would  or 
would  not  take  place,  nor  is  this  any  more  the 
case  if  the  prediction  dates  back  ten  thousand 
19a  years  or  any  other  space  of  time.  Where¬ 
fore,  if  through  all  time  the  nature  of  things 
was  so  constituted  that  a  prediction  about  an 
event  was  true,  then  through  all  time  it  was 
necessary  that  that  prediction  should  find  ful¬ 
filment;  and  with  regard  to  all  events,  circum¬ 
stances  have  always  been  such  that  their  occur¬ 
rence  is  a  matter  of  necessity.  For  that  of  which 
someone  has  said  truly  that  it  will  be,  cannot 
[5]  fail  to  take  place;  and  of  that  which  takes 
place,  it  was  always  true  to  say  that  it  would  be. 

Yet  this  view  leads  to  an  impossible  conclu¬ 
sion;  for  we  see  that  both  deliberation  and  ac¬ 
tion  are  causative  with  regard  to  the  future,  and 
that,  to  speak  more  generally,  in  those  things 
which  are  not  continuously  actual  there  is  a 
[jo]  potentiality  in  either  direction.  Such 
things  may  either  be  or  not  be;  events  also 
therefore  may  either  take  place  or  not  take 
place.  There  are  many  obvious  instances  of 
this.  It  is  possible  that  this  coat  may  be  cut  in 
half,  and  yet  it  may  not  be  cut  in  half,  but  wear 
out  first.  In  the  same  way,  it  is  possible  that  it 
[75]  should  not  be  cut  in  half;  unless  this  were 
so,  it  would  not  be  possible  that  it  should  wear 
out  first.  So  it  is  therefore  with  all  other  events 
which  possess  this  kind  of  potentiality.  It  is 
therefore  plain  that  it  is  not  of  necessity  that 
everything  is  or  takes  place;  but  in  some  in¬ 
stances  there  are  real  alternatives,  in  which  case 
the  affirmation  is  no  more  true  and  no  more 
[20]  false  than  the  denial;  while  some  exhibit  a 
predisposition  and  general  tendency  in  one  di¬ 
rection  or  the  other,  and  yet  can  issue  in  the 
opposite  direction  by  exception. 

Now  that  which  is  must  needs  be  when  it  is, 
and  that  which  is  not  must  needs  not  be  when 
it  is  not.  Yet  it  cannot  be  said  without  qualifica¬ 


tion  that  all  existence  and  non-existence  is  the 
outcome  of  necessity.  For  there  is  a  difference 
[25]  between  saying  that  that  which  is,  when 
it  is,  must  needs  be,  and  simply  saying  that  all 
that  is  must  needs  be,  and  similarly  in  the  case 
of  that  which  is  not.  In  the  case,  also,  of  two 
contradictory  propositions  this  holds  good. 
Everything  must  either  be  or  not  be,  whether 
in  the  present  or  in  the  future,  but  it  is  not  al¬ 
ways  possible  to  distinguish  and  state  determi- 
nately  which  of  these  alternatives  must  neces¬ 
sarily  come  about. 

[50]  Let  me  illustrate.  A  sea-fight  must  either 
take  place  to-morrow  or  not,  but  it  is  not  nec¬ 
essary  that  it  should  take  place  to-morrow, 
neither  is  it  necessary  that  it  should  not  take 
place,  yet  it  is  necessary  that  it  either  should  or 
should  not  take  place  to-morrow.  Since  propo¬ 
sitions  correspond  with  facts,  it  is  evident  that 
when  in  future  events  there  is  a  real  alternative, 
and  a  potentiality  in  contrary  directions,  the 
corresponding  affirmation  and  denial  have  the 
same  character. 

[35]  This  is  the  case  with  regard  to  that  which 
is  not  always  existent  or  not  always  non¬ 
existent.  One  of  the  two  propositions  in  such 
instances  must  be  true  and  the  other  false,  but 
we  cannot  say  determinately  that  this  or  that  is 
false,  but  must  leave  the  alternative  undecided. 
One  may  indeed  be  more  likely  to  be  true  than 
the  other,  but  it  cannot  be  either  actually  true 
or  actually  false.  It  is  therefore  plain  that  it  is 
19b  not  necessary  that  of  an  affirmation  and  a 
denial  one  should  be  true  and  the  other  false. 
For  in  the  case  of  that  which  exists  potentially, 
but  not  actually,  the  rule  which  applies  to  that 
which  exists  actually  does  not  hold  good.  The 
case  is  rather  as  we  have  indicated. 

10 

[5]  An  affirmation  is  the  statement  of  a  fact 
with  regard  to  a  subject,  and  this  subject  is 
either  a  noun  or  that  which  has  no  name;  the 
subject  and  predicate  in  an  affirmation  must 
each  denote  a  single  thing.  I  have  already  ex¬ 
plained1  what  is  meant  by  a  noun  and  by  that 
which  has  no  name;  for  I  stated  that  the  ex¬ 
pression  ‘not-man’  was  not  a  noun,  in  the 
proper  sense  of  the  word,  but  an  indefinite 
noun,  denoting  as  it  does  in  a  certain  sense  a 
single  thing.  Similarly  the  expression  ‘does  not 
enjoy  health’  is  not  a  verb  proper,  but  an  in- 
[jo]  definite  verb.  Every  affirmation,  then,  and 
every  denial,  will  consist  of  a  noun  and  a  verb, 
either  definite  or  indefinite. 

1  Cf.  1 6a  19,  30. 


3° 

There  can  be  no  affirmation  or  denial  with¬ 
out  a  verb;  for  the  expressions  ‘is’,  ‘will  be’, 
‘was’,  ‘is  coming  to  be’,  and  the  like  are  verbs 
according  to  our  definition,  since  besides  their 
specific  meaning  they  convey  the  notion  of  time. 

Thus  the  primary  affirmation  and  denial  are 
[75]  as  follows:  ‘man  is’,  ‘man  is  not’.  Next  to 
these,  there  are  the  propositions:  ‘not-man  is’, 
‘not-man  is  not’.  Again  we  have  the  proposi¬ 
tions:  ‘every  man  is,  ‘every  man  is  not’,  ‘all  that 
is  not-man  is’,  ‘all  that  is  not-man  is  not’.  The 
same  classification  holds  good  with  regard  to 
such  periods  of  time  as  lie  outside  the  present. 

When  the  verb  ‘is’  is  used  as  a  third  element 
in  the  sentence,  there  can  be  positive  and  nega¬ 
tive  propositions  of  two  sorts.  Thus  in  the  sen- 
[20]  tence  ‘man  is  just’  the  verb  ‘is’  is  used  as  a 
third  element,  call  it  verb  or  noun,  which  you 
will.  Four  propositions,  therefore,  instead  of 
two  can  be  formed  with  these  materials.  Two 
of  the  four,  as  regards  their  affirmation  and 
denial,  correspond  in  their  logical  sequence 
with  the  propositions  which  deal  with  a  condi¬ 
tion  of  privation;  the  other  two  do  not  cor¬ 
respond  with  these. 

I  mean  that  the  verb  ‘is’  is  added  either  to  the 
[25]  term  ‘just’  or  to  the  term  ‘not-just’,  and 
two  negative  propositions  are  formed  in  the 
same  way.  Thus  we  have  the  four  propositions. 
Reference  to  the  subjoined  table  will  make  mat¬ 
ters  clear: 


A.  Affirmation  B.  Denial 

Man  is  just  Man  is  not  just 


D.  Denial  C.  Affirmation 

Man  is  not  not-just  Man  is  not-just 

Here  ‘is’  and  ‘is  not’  are  added  either  to  ‘just’ 
[30]  or  to  ‘not-just’.  This  then  is  the  proper 
scheme  for  these  propositions,  as  has  been  said 
in  the  Analytics.1  The  same  rule  holds  good,  if 
the  subject  is  distributed.  Thus  we  have  the 
table: 

A'.  Affirmation  B7.  Denial 

Every  man  is  just  Not  every  man  is  just 


D7.  Denial  C7.  Affirmation 

Not  every  man  is  not-just  Every  man  is  not-just 

1  Prior  Analytics ,  5ib  36—52®  17. 


20* 

[35]  Yet  here  it  is  not  possible,  in  the  same  way 
as  in  the  former  case,  that  the  propositions 
joined  in  the  table  by  a  diagonal  line  should 
both  be  true;  though  under  certain  circum¬ 
stances  this  is  the  case. 

We  have  thus  set  out  two  pairs  of  opposite 
propositions;  there  are  moreover  two  other 
pairs,  if  a  term  be  conjoined  with  ‘not-man’, 
the  latter  forming  a  kind  of  subject.  Thus: 

A".  B". 

Not-man  is  just  Not-man  is  not  just 


D".  C". 

Not-man  is  not  not-just  Not-man  is  not-just 

20*  This  is  an  exhaustive  enumeration  of  all 
the  pairs  of  opposite  propositions  that  can  pos¬ 
sibly  be  framed.  This  last  group  should  remain 
distinct  from  those  which  preceded  it,  since  it 
employs  as  its  subject  the  expression  ‘not-man’. 

When  the  verb  ‘is’  does  not  fit  the  structure 
of  the  sentence  (for  instance,  when  the  verbs 
‘walks’,  ‘enjoys  health’  are  used),  that  scheme 
applies,  which  applied  when  the  word  ‘is’  was 
added. 

[5]  Thus  we  have  the  propositions:  ‘every  man 
enjoys  health’,  ‘every  man  does-not-enjoy- 
health’,  ‘all  that  is  not-man  enjoys  health’,  ‘all 
that  is  not-man  does-not-enjoy-health’. 

We  must  not  in  these  propositions  use  the 
expression  ‘not  every  man’.  The  negative  must 
be  attached  to  the  word  ‘man’,  for  the  word 
‘every’  does  not  give  to  the  subject  a  universal 
significance,  but  implies  that,  as  a  subject,  it  is 
[/o]  distributed.  This  is  plain  from  the  follow¬ 
ing  pairs:  ‘man  enjoys  health’,  ‘man  does  not 
enjoy  health’;  ‘not-man  enjoys  health’,  ‘not- 
man  does  not  enjoy  health’.  These  propositions 
differ  from  the  former  in  being  indefinite  and 
not  universal  in  character.  Thus  the  adjectives 
‘every’  and  ‘no’  have  no  additional  significance 
except  that  the  subject,  whether  in  a  positive  or 
in  a  negative  sentence,  is  distributed.  The  rest 
of  the  sentence,  therefore,  will  in  each  case  be 
[75]  the  same. 

Since  the  contrary  of  the  proposition  ‘every 
animal  is  just’  is  ‘no  animal  is  just’,  it  is  plain 
that  these  two  propositions  will  never  both  be 
true  at  the  same  time  or  with  reference  to  the 
same  subject.  Sometimes,  however,  the  contra¬ 
dictories  of  these  contraries  will  both  be  true,  as 
in  the  instance  before  us:  the  propositions  ‘not 


ON  INTERPRETATION 


20b  CHAPTERS  10-11  31 


every  animal  is  just’  and  ‘some  animals' are  just’ 
are  both  true. 

[20]  Further,  the  proposition  ‘no  man  is  just’ 
follows  from  the  proposition  ‘every  man  is  not- 
just’  and  the  proposition  ‘not  every  man  is  not- 
just’,  which  is  the  opposite  of  ‘every  man  is 
not-just’,  follows  from  the  proposition  ‘some 
men  are  just’;  for  if  this  be  true,  there  must  be 
some  just  men. 

It  is  evident,  also,  that  when  the  subject  is  in¬ 
dividual,  if  a  question  is  asked  and  the  negative 
answer  is  the  true  one,  a  certain  positive  propo- 
[25]  sition  is  also  true.  Thus,  if  the  question 
were  asked  ‘Is  Socrates  wise?’  and  the  negative 
answer  were  the  true  one,  the  positive  infer¬ 
ence  ‘Then  Socrates  is  unwise’  is  correct.  But 
no  such  inference  is  correct  in  the  case  of  uni¬ 
versal,  but  rather  a  negative  proposition.  For 
instance,  if  to  the  question  ‘Is  every  man  wise?’ 
the  answer  is  ‘no’,  the  inference  ‘Then  every 
man  is  unwise’  is  false.  But  under  these  circum¬ 
stances  the  inference  ‘Not  every  man  is  wise’  is 
[30]  correct.  This  last  is  the  contradictory,  the 
former  the  contrary.  Negative  expressions, 
which  consist  of  an  indefinite  noun  or  predi¬ 
cate,  such  as  ‘not-man’  or  ‘not-just’,  may  seem 
to  be  denials  containing  neither  noun  nor  verb 
in  the  proper  sense  of  the  words.  But  they  are 
not.  For  a  denial  must  always  be  either  true  or 
[35]  false,  and  he  that  uses  the  expression  ‘not- 
man’,  if  nothing  more  be  added,  is  not  nearer 
but  rather  further  from  making  a  true  or  a  false 
statement  than  he  who  uses  the  expression 
‘man’. 

The  propositions  ‘everything  that  is  not  man 
is  just’,  and  the  contradictory  of  this,  are  not 
equivalent  to  any  of  the  other  propositions;  on 
the  other  hand,  the  proposition  ‘everything  that 
is  not  man  is  not  just’  is  equivalent  to  the  prop- 
[40]  osition  ‘nothing  that  is  not  man  is  just’. 
20b  The  conversion  of  the  position  of  subject 
and  predicate  in  a  sentence  involves  no  differ¬ 
ence  in  its  meaning.  Thus  we  say  ‘man  is  white’ 
and  ‘white  is  man’.  If  these  were  not  equiva¬ 
lent,  there  would  be  more  than  one  contradic¬ 
tory  to  the  same  proposition,  whereas  it  has 
been  demonstrated1  that  each  proposition  has 
one  proper  contradictory  and  one  only.  For  of 
the  proposition  ‘man  is  white’  the  appropriate 
[5]  contradictory  is  ‘man  is  not  white’,  and  of 
the  proposition  ‘white  is  man’,  if  its  meaning  be 
different,  the  contradictory  will  either  be  ‘white 
is  not  not-man’  or  ‘white  is  not  man’.  Now  the 
former  of  these  is  the  contradictory  of  the  prop¬ 
osition  ‘white  is  not-man’,  and  the  latter  of 

iCf.  17b  38. 


these  is  the  contradictory  of  the  proposition 
‘man  is  white’;  thus  there  will  be  two  contra¬ 
dictories  to  one  proposition, 

[/o]  It  is  evident,  therefore,  that  the  inversion 
of  the  relative  position  of  subject  and  predicate 
does  not  affect  the  sense  of  affirmations  and  de¬ 
nials. 

11 

There  is  no  unity  about  an  affirmation  or 
denial  which,  either  positively  or  negatively, 
predicates  one  thing  of  many  subjects,  or  many 
things  of  the  same  subject,  unless  that  which  is 
indicated  by  the  many  is  really  some  one  thing. 
[75]  I  do  not  apply  this  word  ‘one’  to  those 
things  which,  though  they  have  a  single  recog¬ 
nized  name,  yet  do  not  combine  to  form  a 
unity.  Thus,  man  may  be  an  animal,  and  biped, 
and  domesticated,  but  these  three  predicates 
combine  to  form  a  unity.  On  the  other  hand, 
the  predicates  ‘white’,  ‘man’,  and  ‘walking’  do 
not  thus  combine.  Neither,  therefore,  if  these 
three  form  the  subject  of  an  affirmation,  nor  if 
[20]  they  form  its  predicate,  is  there  any  unity 
about  that  affirmation.  In  both  cases  the  unity 
is  linguistic,  but  not  real. 

If  therefore  the  dialectical  question  is  a  re¬ 
quest  for  an  answer,  i.e.  either  for  the  admis¬ 
sion  of  a  premiss  or  for  the  admission  of  one  of 
two  contradictories — and  the  premiss  is  itself 
always  one  of  two  contradictories — the  answer 
to  such  a  question  as  contains  the  above  predi¬ 
cates  cannot  be  a  single  proposition.  For  as  I 
[25]  have  explained  in  the  Topics ,2  the  ques¬ 
tion  is  not  a  single  one,  even  if  the  answer 
asked  for  is  true. 

At  the  same  time  it  is  plain  that  a  question  of 
the  form  ‘what  is  it?’  is  not  a  dialectical  ques¬ 
tion,  for  a  dialectical  questioner  must  by  the 
form  of  his  question  give  his  opponent  the 
chance  of  announcing  one  of  two  alternatives, 
whichever  he  wishes.  He  must  therefore  put 
[30]  the  question  into  a  more  definite  form, 
and  inquire,  e.g.  whether  man  has  such  and 
such  a  characteristic  or  not. 

Some  combinations  of  predicates  are  such 
that  the  separate  predicates  unite  to  form  a  sin¬ 
gle  predicate.  Let  us  consider  under  what  con¬ 
ditions  this  is  and  is  not  possible.  We  may  ei¬ 
ther  state  in  two  separate  propositions  that  man 
is  an  animal  and  that  man  is  a  biped,  or  we  may 
combine  the  two,  and  state  that  man  is  an  ani¬ 
mal  with  two  feet.  Similarly  we  may  use  ‘man’ 
and  ‘white’  as  separate  predicates,  or  unite  them 
[35]  into  one.  Yet  if  a  man  is  a  shoemaker  and 

2  Topics ,  vm.  7;  On  Sophistical  Refutations ,  169*6, 
I75b  39  sqq.,  181*  36  sqq. 


32 

is  also  good,  we  cannot  construct  a  composite 
proposition  and  say  that  he  is  a  good  shoemak¬ 
er.  For  if,  whenever  two  separate  predicates 
truly  belong  to  a  subject,  it  follows  that  the 
predicate  resulting  from  their  combination  also 
truly  belongs  to  the  subject,  many  absurd  re¬ 
sults  ensue.  For  instance,  a  man  is  man  and 
white.  Therefore,  if  predicates  may  always  be 
combined,  he  is  a  white  man.  Again,  if  the 
predicate  ‘white’  belongs  to  him,  then  the  com¬ 
bination  of  that  predicate  with  the  former  com¬ 
posite  predicate  will  be  permissible.  Thus  it 
will  be  right  to  say  that  he  is  a  white  white  man 
[40]  and  so  on  indefinitely.  Or,  again,  we  may 
combine  the  predicates  ‘musical’,  ‘white’,  and 
‘walking’,  and  these  may  be  combined  many 
21a  times.  Similarly  we  may  say  that  Socrates 
is  Socrates  and  a  man,  and  that  therefore  he  is 
the  man  Socrates,  or  that  Socrates  is  a  man  and 
a  biped,  and  that  therefore  he  is  a  two-footed 
[5]  man.  Thus  it  is  manifest  that  if  a  man 
states  unconditionally  that  predicates  can  al¬ 
ways  be  combined,  many  absurd  consequences 
ensue. 

We  will  now  explain  what  ought  to  be  laid 
down. 

Those  predicates,  and  terms  forming  the  sub¬ 
ject  of  predication,  which  are  accidental  either 
to  the  same  subject  or  to  one  another,  do  not 
[10]  combine  to  form  a  unity.  Take  the  prop¬ 
osition  ‘man  is  white  of  complexion  and  musi¬ 
cal’.  Whiteness  and  being  musical  do  not  coa¬ 
lesce  to  form  a  unity,  for  they  belong  only  acci¬ 
dentally  to  the  same  subject.  Nor  yet,  if  it  were 
true  to  say  that  that  which  is  white  is  musical, 
would  the  terms  ‘musical’  and  ‘white’  form  a 
unity,  for  it  is  only  incidentally  that  that  which 
is  musical  is  white;  the  combination  of  the  two 
will,  therefore,  not  form  a  unity. 

Thus,  again,  whereas,  if  a  man  is  both  good 
and  a  shoemaker,  we  cannot  combine  the  two 
propositions  and  say  simply  that  he  is  a  good 
shoemaker,  we  are,  at  the  same  time,  able  to 
combine  the  predicates  ‘animal’  and  ‘biped’ 
[75]  and  say  that  a  man  is  an  animal  with  two 
feet,  for  these  predicates  are  not  accidental. 

Those  predicates,  again,  cannot  form  a  unity, 
of  which  the  one  is  implicit  in  the  other:  thus 
we  cannot  combine  the  predicate  ‘white’  again 
and  again  with  that  which  already  contains  the 
notion  ‘white’,  nor  is  it  right  to  call  a  man  an 
animal-man  or  a  two-footed  man;  for  the  no¬ 
tions  ‘animal’  and  ‘biped’  are  implicit  in  the 
word  ‘man’.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  possible  to 
predicate  a  term  simply  of  any  one  instance, 
and  to  say  that  some  one  particular  man  is  a 


21b 

[20]  man  or  that  some  one  white  man  is  a 
white  man. 

Yet  this  is  not  always  possible:  indeed,  when 
in  the  adjunct  there  is  some  opposite  which  in¬ 
volves  a  contradiction,  the  predication  of  the 
simple  term  is  impossible.  Thus  it  is  not  right 
to  call  a  dead  man  a  man.  When,  however,  this 
is  not  the  case,  it  is  not  impossible. 

Yet  the  facts  of  the  case  might  rather  be 
stated  thus:  when  some  such  opposite  elements 
are  present,  resolution  is  never  possible,  but 
[25]  when  they  are  not  present,  resolution  is 
nevertheless  not  always  possible.  Take  the 
proposition  ‘Homer  is  so-and-so’,  say  ‘a  poet’; 
does  it  follow  that  Homer  is,  or  does  it  not? 
The  verb  ‘is’  is  here  used  of  Homer  only  inci¬ 
dentally,  the  proposition  being  that  Homer  is 
a  poet,  not  that  he  is,  in  the  independent  sense 
of  the  word. 

Thus,  in  the  case  of  those  predications  which 
have  within  them  no  contradiction  when  the 
[jo]  nouns  are  expanded  into  definitions,  and 
wherein  the  predicates  belong  to  the  subject  in 
their  own  proper  sense  and  not  in  any  indirect 
way,  the  individual  may  be  the  subject  of  the 
simple  propositions  as  well  as  of  the  composite. 
But  in  the  case  of  that  which  is  not,  it  is  not 
true  to  say  that  because  it  is  the  object  of  opin¬ 
ion,  it  is;  for  the  opinion  held  about  it  is  that 
it  is  not,  not  that  it  is. 

12 

As  these  distinctions  have  been  made,  we  must 
[j5]  consider  the  mutual  relation  of  those 
affirmations  and  denials  which  assert  or  deny 
possibility  or  contingency,  impossibility  or 
necessity:  for  the  subject  is  not  without  dif¬ 
ficulty. 

We  admit  that  of  composite  expressions  those 
are  contradictory  each  to  each  which  have  the 
verb  ‘to  be’  in  its  positive  and  negative  form  re¬ 
spectively.  Thus  the  contradictory  of  the  prop¬ 
osition  ‘man  is’  is  ‘man  is  not’,  not  ‘not-man  is’, 
21b  and  the  contradictory  of  ‘man  is  white’  is 
‘man  is  not  white’,  not  ‘man  is  not-white’.  For 
otherwise,  since  either  the  positive  or  the  nega¬ 
tive  proposition  is  true  of  any  subject,  it  will 
turn  out  true  to  say  that  a  piece  of  wood  is  a 
man  that  is  not  white. 

[5]  Now  if  this  is  the  case,  in  those  proposi¬ 
tions  which  do  not  contain  the  verb  ‘to  be’  the 
verb  which  takes  its  place  will  exercise  the  same 
function.  Thus  the  contradictory  of  ‘man 
walks’  is  ‘man  does  not  walk’,  not  ‘not-man 
walks’;  for  to  say  ‘man  walks’  is  merely  equiva¬ 
lent  to  saying  ‘man  is  walking’. 


ON  INTERPRETATION 


22a 


CHAPTERS  11-13 


33 


[/o]  If  then  this  rule  is  universal,  the  contra¬ 
dictory  of  ‘it  may  be’  is  ‘it  may  not  be’,  not  ‘it 
cannot  be’. 

Now  it  appears  that  the  same  thing  both  may 
and  may  not  be;  for  instance,  everything  that 
may  be  cut  or  may  walk  may  also  escape  cut¬ 
ting  and  refrain  from  walking;  and  the  reason 
is  that  those  things  that  have  potentiality  in 
[75]  this  sense  are  not  always  actual.  In  such 
cases,  both  the  positive  and  the  negative  propo¬ 
sitions  will  be  true;  for  that  which  is  capable 
of  walking  or  of  being  seen  has  also  a  potential¬ 
ity  in  the  opposite  direction. 

But  since  it  is  impossible  that  contradictory 
propositions  should  both  be  true  of  the  same 
subject,  it  follows  that  ‘it  may  not  be’  is  not  the 
contradictory  of  ‘it  may  be’.  For  it  is  a  logical 
consequence  of  what  we  have  said,  either  that 
the  same  predicate  can  be  both  applicable 
and  inapplicable  to  one  and  the  same  sub- 
[20]  ject  at  the  same  time,  or  that  it  is  not  by 
the  addition  of  the  verbs  ‘be’  and  ‘not  be’, 
respectively,  that  positive  and  negative  prop¬ 
ositions  are  formed.  If  the  former  of  these 
alternatives  must  be  rejected,  we  must  choose 
the  latter. 

The  contradictory,  then,  of  ‘it  may  be’  is  ‘it 
cannot  be’.  The  same  rule  applies  to  the  propo¬ 
sition  ‘it  is  contingent  that  it  should  be’;  the 
contradictory  of  this  is  ‘it  is  not  contingent  that 
[25]  it  should  be’.  The  similar  propositions, 
such  as  ‘it  is  necessary’  and  ‘it  is  impossible’, 
may  be  dealt  with  in  the  same  manner.  For  it 
comes  about  that  just  as  in  the  former  instances 
the  verbs  ‘is’  and  ‘is  not’  were  added  to  the 
subject-matter  of  the  sentence  ‘white’  and 
‘man’,  so  here  ‘that  it  should  be’  and  ‘that  it 
should  not  be’  are  the  subject-matter  and  ‘is 
[jo]  possible’,  ‘is  contingent’,  are  added.  These 
indicate  that  a  certain  thing  is  or  is  not  possible, 
just  as  in  the  former  instances  ‘is’  and  ‘is  not’ 
indicated  that  certain  things  were  or  were  not 
the  case. 

The  contradictory,  then,  of  ‘it  may  not  be’  is 
not  ‘it  cannot  be’,  but  ‘it  cannot  not  be’,  and  the 
contradictory  of  ‘it  may  be’  is  not  ‘it  may  not 
be’,  but  ‘it  cannot  be’.  Thus  the  propositions  ‘it 
[55]  may  be’  and  ‘it  may  not  be’  appear  each 
to  imply  the  other:  for,  since  these  two  proposi¬ 
tions  are  not  contradictory,  the  same  thing  both 
may  and  may  not  be.  But  the  propositions  ‘it 
may  be’  and  ‘it  cannot  be’  can  never  be  true  of 
the  same  subject  at  the  same  time,  for  they  are 
22a  contradictory.  Nor  can  the  propositions  ‘it 
may  not  be’  and  ‘it  cannot  not  be’  be  at  once 
true  of  the  same  subject. 


The  propositions  which  have  to  do  with  ne¬ 
cessity  are  governed  by  the  same  principle.  The 
contradictory  of  ‘it  is  necessary  that  it  should 
be’,  is  not  ‘it  is  necessary  that  it  should  not  be,’ 
but  ‘it  is  not  necessary  that  it  should  be’,  and 
[5]  the  contradictory  of  ‘it  is  necessary  that 
it  should  not  be’  is  ‘it  is  not  necessary  that  it 
should  not  be’. 

Again,  the  contradictory  of  ‘it  is  impossible 
that  it  should  be’  is  not  ‘it  is  impossible  that  it 
should  not  be’  but  ‘it  is  not  impossible  that  it 
should  be’,  and  the  contradictory  of  ‘it  is  impos¬ 
sible  that  it  should  not  be’  is  ‘it  is  not  impossible 
that  it  should  not  be’. 

To  generalize,  we  must,  as  has  been  stated, 
define  the  clauses  ‘that  it  should  be’  and  ‘that  it 
should  not  be’  as  the  subject-matter  of  the 
propositions,  and  in  making  these  terms  into 
[/o]  affirmations  and  denials  we  must  combine 
them  with  ‘that  it  should  be’  and  ‘that  it  should 
not  be’  respectively. 

We  must  consider  the  following  pairs  as 
contradictory  propositions: 


It  may  be. 

It  is  contingent. 
It  is  impossible. 
It  is  necessary. 

It  is  true. 


It  cannot  be. 

It  is  not  contingent. 
It  is  not  impossible. 
It  is  not  necessary. 
It  is  not  true. 


J3 

Logical  sequences  follow  in  due  course  when 
we  have  arranged  the  propositions  thus.  From 
[75]  the  proposition  ‘it  may  be’  it  follows  that 
it  is  contingent,  and  the  relation  is  reciprocal. 
It  follows  also  that  it  is  not  impossible  and  not 
necessary. 

From  the  proposition  ‘it  may  not  be’  or  ‘it  is 
contingent  that  it  should  not  be’  it  follows  that 
it  is  not  necessary  that  it  should  not  be  and  that 
it  is  not  impossible  that  it  should  not  be.  From 
the  proposition  ‘it  cannot  be’  or  ‘it  is  not  con¬ 
tingent’  it  follows  that  it  is  necessary  that  it 
should  not  be  and  that  it  is  impossible  that  it 
[20]  should  be.  From  the  proposition  ‘it  cannot 
not  be’  or  ‘it  is  not  contingent  that  it  should  not 
be’  it  follows  that  it  is  necessary  that  it  should 
be  and  that  it  is  impossible  that  it  should  not  be. 

Let  us  consider  these  statements  by  the  help 
of  a  table: 


A.  B. 

It  may  be.  It  cannot  be. 

[25]  It  is  contingent.  It  is  not  contingent. 
It  is  not  impossible  It  is  impossible  that  it 
that  it  should  be.  should  be. 

It  is  not  necessary  It  is  necessary  that  it 
that  it  should  be.  should  not  be. 


34 

C. 

It  may  not  be. 

It  is  contingent  that  it 
should  not  be. 

[3o]  It  is  not  impossi¬ 
ble  that  it  should  not  be. 
It  is  not  necessary  that 
it  should  not  be. 


ON  INTERPRETATION 


22b 


D. 

It  cannot  not  be. 

It  is  not  contingent  that 
it  should  not  be. 

It  is  impossible  that  it 
should  not  be. 

It  is  necessary  that  it 
should  be. 


Now  the  propositions  ‘it  is  impossible  that  it 
should  be’  and  ‘it  is  not  impossible  that  it 
should  be’  are  consequent  upon  the  proposi¬ 
tions  ‘it  may  be’,  ‘it  is  contingent’,  and  ‘it  can¬ 
not  be’,  ‘it  is  not  contingent’,  the  contradictories 
upon  the  contradictories.  But  there  is  inversion. 
The  negative  of  the  proposition  ‘it  is  impossi¬ 
ble’  is  consequent  upon  the  proposition  ‘it  may 
[35]  be’  and  the  corresponding  positive  in  the 
first  case  upon  the  negative  in  the  second.  For 
‘it  is  impossible’  is  a  positive  proposition  and  ‘it 
is  not  impossible’  is  negative. 

We  must  investigate  the  relation  subsisting 
between  these  propositions  and  those  which 
predicate  necessity.  That  there  is  a  distinction 
is  clear.  In  this  case,  contrary  propositions  fol¬ 
low  respectively  from  contradictory  proposi¬ 
tions,  and  the  contradictory  propositions  be¬ 
long  to  separate  sequences.  For  the  proposi¬ 
tion  ‘it  is  not  necessary  that  it  should  be’  is  not 
the  negative  of  ‘it  is  necessary  that  it  should  not 
22b  be’,  for  both  these  propositions  may  be  true 
of  the  same  subject;  for  when  it  is  necessary 
that  a  thing  should  not  be,  it  is  not  necessary 
that  it  should  be.  The  reason  why  the  proposi¬ 
tions  predicating  necessity  do  not  follow  in  the 
same  kind  of  sequence  as  the  rest,  lies  in  the 
fact  that  the  proposition  ‘it  is  impossible’  is 
equivalent,  when  used  with  a  contrary  subject, 
to  the  proposition  ‘it  is  necessary’.  For  when  it 
[5]  is  impossible  that  a  thing  should  be,  it  is 
necessary,  not  that  it  should  be,  but  that  it 
should  not  be,  and  when  it  is  impossible  that  a 
thing  should  not  be,  it  is  necessary  that  it  should 
be.  Thus,  if  the  propositions  predicating  im¬ 
possibility  or  non-impossibility  follow  without 
change  of  subject  from  those  predicating  possi¬ 
bility  or  non-possibility,  those  predicating  ne¬ 
cessity  must  follow  with  the  contrary  subject; 
for  the  propositions  ‘it  is  impossible’  and  ‘it  is 
necessary’  are  not  equivalent,  but,  as  has  been 
said,  inversely  connected. 

[/o]  Yet  perhaps  it  is  impossible  that  the  con¬ 
tradictory  propositions  predicating  necessity 
should  be  thus  arranged.  For  when  it  is  neces¬ 
sary  that  a  thing  should  be,  it  is  possible  that  it 
should  be.  (For  if  not,  the  opposite  follows, 


since  one  or  the  other  must  follow;  so,  if  it  is 
not  possible,  it  is  impossible,  and  it  is  thus  im¬ 
possible  that  a  thing  should  be,  which  must 
necessarily  be;  which  is  absurd.) 

Yet  from  the  proposition  ‘it  may  be’  it  fol¬ 
lows  that  it  is  not  impossible,  and  from  that  it 
[75]  follows  that  it  is  not  necessary;  it  comes 
about  therefore  that  the  thing  which  must  nec¬ 
essarily  be  need  not  be;  which  is  absurd.  But 
again,  the  proposition  ‘it  is  necessary  that  it 
should  be’  does  not  follow  from  the  proposi¬ 
tion  ‘it  may  be’,  nor  does  the  proposition  ‘it  is 
necessary  that  it  should  not  be’.  For  the  propo¬ 
sition  ‘it  may  be’  implies  a  twofold  possibility, 
while,  if  either  of  the  two  former  propositions 
is  true,  the  twofold  possibility  vanishes.  For  if 
[20]  a  thing  may  be,  it  may  also  not  be,  but  if 
it  is  necessary  that  it  should  be  or  that  it  should 
not  be,  one  of  the  two  alternatives  will  be  ex¬ 
cluded.  It  remains,  therefore,  that  the  proposi¬ 
tion  ‘it  is  not  necessary  that  it  should  not  be’ 
follows  from  the  proposition  ‘it  may  be’.  For 
this  is  true  also  of  that  which  must  necessarily 
be. 

Moreover  the  proposition  ‘it  is  not  necessary 
that  it  should  not  be’  is  the  contradictory  of 
that  which  follows  from  the  proposition  ‘it  can- 
[25]  not  be’;  for  ‘it  cannot  be’  is  followed  by  ‘it 
is  impossible  that  it  should  be’  and  by  ‘it  is  nec¬ 
essary  that  it  should  not  be’,  and  the  contra¬ 
dictory  of  this  is  the  proposition  ‘it  is  not  nec¬ 
essary  that  it  should  not  be’.  Thus  in  this 
case  also  contradictory  propositions  follow  con¬ 
tradictory  in  the  way  indicated,  and  no  logi¬ 
cal  impossibilities  occur  when  they  are  thus 
arranged. 

It  may  be  questioned  whether  the  proposi¬ 
tion  ‘it  may  be’  follows  from  the  proposition 
‘it  is  necessary  that  it  should  be’.  If  not,  the  con- 
[30]  tradictory  must  follow,  namely  that  it 
cannot  be,  or,  if  a  man  should  maintain  that 
this  is  not  the  contradictory,  then  the  proposi¬ 
tion  ‘it  may  not  be’. 

Now  both  of  these  are  false  of  that  which 
necessarily  is.  At  the  same  time,  it  is  thought 
that  if  a  thing  may  be  cut  it  may  also  not  be  cut, 
if  a  thing  may  be  it  may  also  not  be,  and  thus  it 
would  follow  that  a  thing  which  must  neces- 
[35]  sarily  be  may  possibly  not  be;  which  is 
false.  It  is  evident,  then,  that  it  is  not  always  the 
case  that  that  which  may  be  or  may  walk  pos¬ 
sesses  also  a  potentiality  in  the  other  direction. 
There  are  exceptions.  In  the  first  place  we  must 
except  those  things  which  possess  a  potentiality 
not  in  accordance  with  a  rational  principle,  as 


23  b  CHAPTERS  13-14  35 


fire  possesses  the  potentiality  of  giving  out  heat, 
that  is,  an  irrational  capacity.  Those  potential¬ 
ities  which  involve  a  rational  principle  are  po¬ 
tentialities  of  more  than  one  result,  that  is,  of 
23a  contrary  results;  those  that  are  irrational 
are  not  always  thus  constituted.  As  I  have  said, 
fire  cannot  both  heat  and  not  heat,  neither  has 
anything  that  is  always  actual  any  twofold  po¬ 
tentiality.  Yet  some  even  of  those  potentialities 
which  are  irrational  admit  of  opposite  results. 
[5]  However,  thus  much  has  been  said  to  em¬ 
phasize  the  truth  that  it  is  not  every  potential¬ 
ity  which  admits  of  opposite  results,  even  where 
the  word  is  used  always  in  the  same  sense. 

But  in  some  cases  the  word  is  used  equivo¬ 
cally.  For  the  term  ‘possible’  is  ambiguous,  be¬ 
ing  used  in  the  one  case  with  reference  to  facts, 
to  that  which  is  actualized,  as  when  a  man  is 
said  to  find  walking  possible  because  he  is  actu¬ 
ally  walking,  and  generally  when  a  capacity  is 
redicated  because  it  is  actually  realized;  in  the 
/o ]  other  case,  with  reference  to  a  state  in 
which  realization  is  conditionally  practicable, 
as  when  a  man  is  said  to  find  walking  possible 
because  under  certain  conditions  he  would 
walk.  This  last  sort  of  potentiality  belongs  only 
to  that  which  can  be  in  motion,  the  former  can 
exist  also  in  the  case  of  that  which  has  not  this 
power.  Both  of  that  which  is  walking  and  is 
actual,  and  of  that  which  has  the  capacity 
though  not  necessarily  realized,  it  is  true  to  say 
that  it  is  not  impossible  that  it  should  walk  (or, 
in  the  other  case,  that  it  should  be),  but  while 
[75]  we  cannot  predicate  this  latter  kind  of  po¬ 
tentiality  of  that  which  is  necessary  in  the  un¬ 
qualified  sense  of  the  word,  we  can  predicate 
the  former. 

Our  conclusion,  then,  is  this:  that  since  the 
universal  is  consequent  upon  the  particular, 
that  which  is  necessary  is  also  possible,  though 
not  in  every  sense  in  which  the  word  may  be 
used. 

We  may  perhaps  state  that  necessity  and  its 
absence  are  the  initial  principles  of  existence 
and  non-existence,  and  that  all  else  must  be 
[20]  regarded  as  posterior  to  these. 

It  is  plain  from  what  has  been  said  that  that 
which  is  of  necessity  is  actual.  Thus,  if  that 
which  is  eternal  is  prior,  actuality  also  is  prior 
to  potentiality.  Some  things  are  actualities  with¬ 
out  potentiality,  namely,  the  primary  sub¬ 
stances;  a  second  class  consists  of  those  things 
which  are  actual  but  also  potential,  whose  actu¬ 
ality  is  in  nature  prior  to  their  potentiality, 
[25]  though  posterior  in  time;  a  third  class 


comprises  those  things  which  are  never  actual¬ 
ized,  but  are  pure  potentialities. 

M 

The  question  arises  whether  an  affirmation 
finds  its  contrary  in  a  denial  or  in  another  af¬ 
firmation;  whether  the  proposition  ‘every  man 
is  just’  finds  its  contrary  in  the  proposition  ‘no 
man  is  just’,  or  in  the  proposition  ‘every  man 
[30]  is  unjust’.  Take  the  propositions  ‘Callias 
is  just’,  ‘Callias  is  not  just’,  ‘Callias  is  unjust’; 
we  have  to  discover  which  of  these  form  con¬ 
traries. 

Now  if  the  spoken  word  corresponds  with 
the  judgement  of  the  mind,  and  if,  in  thought, 
that  judgement  is  the  contrary  of  another, 
which  pronounces  a  contrary  fact,  in  the  way, 
for  instance,  in  which  the  judgement  ‘every 
man  is  just’  pronounces  a  contrary  to  that  pro¬ 
nounced  by  the  judgement  ‘every  man  is  un- 
[35]  just’,  the  same  must  needs  hold  good  with 
regard  to  spoken  affirmations. 

But  if,  in  thought,  it  is  not  the  judgement 
which  pronounces  a  contrary  fact  that  is  the 
contrary  of  another,  then  one  affirmation  will 
not  find  its  contrary  in  another,  but  rather  in 
the  corresponding  denial.  We  must  therefore 
consider  which  true  judgement  is  the  contrary 
of  the  false,  that  which  forms  the  denial  of  the 
false  judgement  or  that  which  affirms  the  con¬ 
trary  fact. 

[40 \  Let  me  illustrate.  There  is  a  true  judge¬ 
ment  concerning  that  which  is  good,  that  it  is 
good;  another,  a  false  judgement,  that  it  is  not 
good;  and  a  third,  which  is  distinct,  that  it  is 
23b  bad.  Which  of  these  two  is  contrary  to  the 
true?  And  if  they  are  one  and  the  same,  which 
mode  of  expression  forms  the  contrary? 

It  is  an  error  to  suppose  that  judgements  are 
to  be  defined  as  contrary  in  virtue  of  the  fact 
that  they  have  contrary  subjects;  for  the  judge¬ 
ment  concerning  a  good  thing,  that  it  is  good, 
and  that  concerning  a  bad  thing,  that  it  is  bad, 
[5]  may  be  one  and  the  same,  and  whether 
they  are  so  or  not,  they  both  represent  the  truth. 
Yet  the  subjects  here  are  contrary.  But  judge¬ 
ments  are  not  contrary  because  they  have  con¬ 
trary  subjects,  but  because  they  are  to  the  con¬ 
trary  effect. 

Now  if  we  take  the  judgement  that  that 
which  is  good  is  good,  and  another  that  it  is 
not  good,  and  if  there  are  at  the  same  time  oth¬ 
er  attributes,  which  do  not  and  cannot  belong 
to  the  good,  we  must  nevertheless  refuse  to 
treat  as  the  contraries  of  the  true  judgement 


36  ON  INTERPRETATION  24b 


those  which  opine  that  some  other  attribute 
subsists  which  does  not  subsist,  as  also  those 
[/o]  that  opine  that  some  other  attribute  does 
not  subsist  which  does  subsist,  for  both  these 
classes  of  judgement  are  of  unlimited  content. 

Those  judgements  must  rather  be  termed 
contrary  to  the  true  judgements,  in  which  er¬ 
ror  is  present.  Now  these  judgements  are  those 
which  are  concerned  with  the  starting  points 
of  generation,  and  generation  is  the  passing 
from  one  extreme  to  its  opposite;  therefore  er¬ 
ror  is  a  like  transition. 

[75]  Now  that  which  is  good  is  both  good  and 
not  bad.  The  first  quality  is  part  of  its  essence, 
the  second  accidental;  for  it  is  by  accident  that 
it  is  not  bad.  But  if  that  true  judgement  is 
most  really  true,  which  concerns  the  subject’s 
intrinsic  nature,  then  that  false  judgement 
likewise  is  most  really  false,  which  concerns  its 
intrinsic  nature.  Now  the  judgement  that  that 
which  is  good  is  not  good  is  a  false  judgement 
concerning  its  intrinsic  nature,  the  judgement 
that  it  is  bad  is  one  concerning  that  which  is 
accidental.  Thus  the  judgement  which  denies 
[20]  the  truth  of  the  true  judgement  is  more 
really  false  than  that  which  positively  asserts 
the  presence  of  the  contrary  quality.  But  it  is 
the  man  who  forms  that  judgement  which  is 
contrary  to  the  true  who  is  most  thoroughly 
deceived,  for  contraries  are  among  the  things 
which  differ  most  widely  within  the  same  class. 
If  then  of  the  two  judgements  one  is  contrary 
to  the  true  judgement,  but  that  which  is  con¬ 
tradictory  is  the  more  truly  contrary,  then  the 
latter,  it  seems,  is  the  real  contrary.  The  judge- 
[25]  ment  that  that  which  is  good  is  bad  is 
composite.  For  presumably  the  man  who  forms 
that  judgement  must  at  the  same  time  under¬ 
stand  that  that  which  is  good  is  not  good. 

Further,  the  contradictory  is  either  always 
the  contrary  or  never;  therefore,  if  it  must  nec¬ 
essarily  be  so  in  all  other  cases,  our  conclusion 
in  the  case  just  dealt  with  would  seem  to  be 
[jo]  correct.  Now  where  terms  have  no  con¬ 
trary,  that  judgement  is  false,  which  forms  the 
negative  of  the  true;  for  instance,  he  who 
thinks  a  man  is  not  a  man  forms  a  false  judge¬ 
ment.  If  then  in  these  cases  the  negative  is  the 
contrary,  then  the  principle  is  universal  in  its 
application. 

Again,  the  judgement  that  that  which  is  not 
good  is  not  good  is  parallel  with  the  judgement 
that  that  which  is  good  is  good.  Besides  these 
there  is  the  judgement  that  that  which  is  good 


is  not  good,  parallel  with  the  judgement  that 
[  J5]  that  which  is  not  good  is  good.  Let  us  con¬ 
sider,  therefore,  what  would  form  the  contrary 
of  the  true  judgement  that  that  which  is  not 
good  is  not  good.  The  judgement  that  it  is  bad 
would,  of  course,  fail  to  meet  the  case,  since 
two  true  judgements  are  never  contrary  and 
this  judgement  might  be  true  at  the  same  time 
as  that  with  which  it  is  connected.  For  since 
some  things  which  are  not  good  are  bad,  both 
judgements  may  be  true.  Nor  is  the  judgement 
that  it  is  not  bad  the  contrary,  for  this  too 
might  be  true,  since  both  qualities  might  be 

fredicated  of  the  same  subject.  It  remains, 
40]  therefore,  that  of  the  judgement  concern¬ 
ing  that  which  is  not  good,  that  it  is  not  good, 
the  contrary  judgement  is  that  it  is  good;  for 
24a  this  is  false.  In  the  same  way,  moreover, 
the  judgement  concerning  that  which  is  good, 
that  it  is  not  good,  is  the  contrary  of  the  judge¬ 
ment  that  it  is  good. 

It  is  evident  that  it  will  make  no  difference 
if  we  universalize  the  positive  judgement,  for 
the  universal  negative  judgement  will  form  the 
[5]  contrary.  For  instance,  the  contrary  of  the 
judgement  that  everything  that  is  good  is  good 
is  that  nothing  that  is  good  is  good.  For  the 
judgement  that  that  which  is  good  is  good,  if 
the  subject  be  understood  in  a  universal  sense, 
is  equivalent  to  the  judgement  that  whatever 
is  good  is  good,  and  this  is  identical  with  the 
judgement  that  everything  that  is  good  is  good. 
We  may  deal  similarly  with  judgements  con¬ 
cerning  that  which  is  not  good. 

24b  If  therefore  this  is  the  rule  with  judge¬ 
ments,  and  if  spoken  affirmations  and  denials 
are  judgements  expressed  in  words,  it  is  plain 
that  the  universal  denial  is  the  contrary  of  the 
affirmation  about  the  same  subject.  Thus  the 
propositions  ‘everything  good  is  good’,  ‘every 
man  is  good’,  have  for  their  contraries  the 

fropositions  ‘nothing  good  is  good’,  ‘no  man 
5]  is  good’.  The  contradictory  propositions, 
on  the  other  hand,  are  ‘not  everything  good  is 
good’,  ‘not  every  man  is  good’. 

It  is  evident,  also,  that  neither  true  judge¬ 
ments  nor  true  propositions  can  be  contrary 
the  one  to  the  other.  For  whereas,  when  two 
propositions  are  true,  a  man  may  state  both  at 
the  same  time  without  inconsistency,  contrary 
propositions  are  those  which  state  contrary 
conditions,  and  contrary  conditions  cannot 
subsist  at  one  and  the  same  time  in  the  same 
subject. 


CONTENTS:  PRIOR  ANALYTICS 


BOOK  I 

A.  Structure  of  the  Syllogism 

i.  Preliminary  Discussions 

CHAP.  BERLIN  NOS. 

1.  Subject  and  scope  of  the  Analytics;  24s  10 
certain  definitions  and  divisions 

2.  Conversion  of  pure  propositions  25s  1 

3.  Conversion  of  necessary  and  contin-  25s  26 
gent  propositions 

2.  Exposition  of  the  Three  Figures 

4.  Pure  syllogisms  in  the  first  figure  25b  26 

5.  Pure  syllogisms  in  the  second  figure  2^34 

6.  Pure  syllogisms  in  the  third  figure  28a  10 

7.  Common  properties  of  the  three  figures  29s  19 


8.  Syllogisms  with  two  necessary  prem-  29b  29 
isses 

9.  Syllogisms  with  one  pure  and  one  30a  15 
necessary  premiss  in  the  first  figure 

10.  Syllogisms  with  one  pure  and  one  3ob  7 
necessary  premiss  in  the  second  figure 

11.  Syllogisms  with  one  pure  and  one  31 a  18 

necessary  premiss  in  the  third  figure 

12.  Comparison  of  pure  and  necessary  32s  6 
conclusions 

13.  Preliminary  discussion  of  the  contin-  32s  15 
gent 


14.  Syllogisms  in  the  first  figure  with  two  32b  38 
contingent  premisses 

15.  Syllogisms  in  the  first  figure  with  one  33b  25 
contingent  and  one  pure  premiss 

16.  Syllogisms  in  the  first  figure  with  one  35b  23 
contingent  and  one  necessary  premiss 

17.  Syllogisms  in  the  second  figure  with  36b  26 
two  contingent  premisses 

18.  Syllogisms  in  the  second  figure  with  37b  19 
one  contingent  and  one  pure  premiss 

19.  Syllogisms  in  the  second  figure  with  38s  13 
one  contingent  and  one  necessary  premiss 

20.  Syllogisms  in  the  third  figure  with  39s  3 
two  contingent  premisses 

21.  Syllogisms  in  the  third  figure  with  39b  8 
one  contingent  and  one  pure  premiss 

22.  Syllogisms  in  the  third  figure  with  40a  3 
one  contingent  and  one  necessary  premiss 

3.  Supplementary  Discussions 

23.  Every  syllogism  is  in  one  of  the  three  40b  17 
figures,  is  completed  through  the  first  figure, 
and  reducible  to  a  universal  mood  of  the  first 
figure 

24.  Quality  and  quantity  of  the  premisses  4ib6 
of  the  syllogism 

25.  Number  of  the  terms,  propositions,  4ib36 
and  conclusions 


26.  The  kinds  of  proposition  to  be  estab-  42b  26 
lished  or  disproved  in  each  figure 

B.  Mode  of  discovery  of  arguments 

1.  General 

27.  Rules  for  categorical  syllogisms,  43a  20 

applicable  to  all  problems 

28.  Rules  for  categorical  syllogisms,  pe-  43b39 
culiar  to  different  problems 

29.  Rules  for  reductio  ad  impossible,  45a23 
hypothetical  syllogisms,  and  modal  syllogisms 

30.  2.  Proper  to  the  several  Sciences  and  46a3 

Arts 

31.  3.  Division  46s  31 

C.  Analysis  (i)  of  arguments  into  figures  and 

MOODS  OF  SYLLOGISM 

32.  Rules  for  the  choice  of  premisses,  terms,  46b  39 


middle  term,  figure 

33.  Quantity  of  the  premisses  47b  15 

34.  Concrete  and  abstract  terms  48s  1 

35.  Expressions  for  which  there  is  no  one  48s  29 
word 

36.  The  nominative  and  the  oblique  cases  48s  40 

37.  The  various  kinds  of  attribution  49s  6 

38.  Repetition  of  the  same  term  49s  1 1 

39.  Substitution  of  equivalent  expressions  49b  3 

40.  The  definite  article  49b  10 

41.  Interpretation  of  certain  expressions  49b  15 

42.  Analysis  of  composite  syllogisms  50s  5 

43.  Analysis  of  definitions  50s  11 

44.  Analysis  of  arguments  per  impossible  50s  16 
and  of  other  hypothetical  syllogisms 

45.  Analysis  (2)  of  syllogisms  in  one  5ob5 

FIGURE  INTO  ANOTHER 

46.  ‘Is  not  A’  and  ‘is  not-A’  5ib  5 


BOOK  II 

Properties  and  defects  of  syllogism;  arguments 

AKIN  TO  SYLLOGISM 


A.  Properties 

1.  The  drawing  of  more  than  one  con-  52b38 
elusion  from  the  same  premisses 

2.  The  drawing  of  true  conclusions  53b4 

from  false  premisses;  the  first  figure 

3.  The  drawing  of  true  conclusions  55b  2 

from  false  premisses;  the  second  figure 

4.  The  drawing  of  true  conclusions  56b  3 

from  false  premisses;  the  third  figure 

5.  Circular  proof;  the  first  figure  57b  18 

6.  Circular  proof;  the  second  figure  58b  13 

7.  Circular  proof;  the  third  figure  58b  39 

8.  Conversion ;  the  first  figure  59b  1 

9.  Conversion;  the  second  figure  6oa  15 


37 


38  CONTENTS 


10.  Conversion;  the  third  figure  6ob6 

11.  Reductio  ad  impossibile;  the  first  6ia  17 
figure 

12.  Reductio  ad  impossibile;  the  second  62a  20 
figure 

13.  Reductio  ad  impossibile;  the  third  62b5 
figure 

14.  Comparison  of  reductio  ad  impossi-  62b  29 
bile  and  ostensive  proof 

15.  Reasoning  from  opposites  63b2i 

B.  Dejects 

16.  Petitio  principii  64b  28 

17.  False  Cause  65s  38 

18.  Falsity  of  conclusion  due  to  falsity  66a  16 

in  one  or  more  premisses 


19.  How  to  impede  opposing  argu-  66a  25 
ments  and  conceal  one’s  own 

20.  When  refutation  is  possible  66b  3 

21.  Error  66bi8 

C.  Arguments  a\in  to  Syllogism 

22.  Rules  for  conversion  and  for  the  67b  26 
comparison  of  desirable  and  undesirable 
objects 

23.  Induction  68b  8 

24.  Example  68b37 

25.  Reduction  69s  20 

26.  Objection  69s  37 

27.  Enthymeme  7oa  3 


PRIOR  ANALYTICS 

BOOK  I 


I 

24a  [/o]  We  must  first  state  the  subject  of  our 
inquiry  and  the  faculty  to  which  it  belongs:  its 
subject  is  demonstration  and  the  faculty  that 
carries  it  out  demonstrative  science.  We  must 
next  define  a  premiss,  a  term,  and  a  syllogism, 
and  the  nature  of  a  perfect  and  of  an  imperfect 
syllogism;  and  after  that,  the  inclusion  or  non¬ 
inclusion  of  one  term  in  another  as  in  a  whole, 
and  what  we  mean  by  predicating  one  term  of 
[75]  all,  or  none,  of  another. 

A  premiss  then  is  a  sentence  affirming  or 
denying  one  thing  of  another.  This  is  either 
universal  or  particular  or  indefinite.  By  univer¬ 
sal  I  mean  the  statement  that  something  be¬ 
longs  to  all  or  none  of  something  else;  by 
particular  that  it  belongs  to  some  or  not  to  some 
or  not  to  all;  by  indefinite  that  it  does  or  does 
not  belong,  without  any  mark  to  show  whether 
[20]  it  is  universal  or  particular,  e.g.  ‘con¬ 
traries  are  subjects  of  the  same  science’,  or 
‘pleasure  is  not  good’.  The  demonstrative  prem¬ 
iss  differs  from  the  dialectical,  because  the 
demonstrative  premiss  is  the  assertion  of  one 
of  two  contradictory  statements  (the  demon¬ 
strator  does  not  ask  for  his  premiss,  but  lays 
it  down),  whereas  the  dialectical  premiss  de- 
[25]  pends  on  the  adversary’s  choice  between 
two  contradictories.  But  this  will  make  no  dif¬ 
ference  to  the  production  of  a  syllogism  in 
either  case ;  for  both  the  demonstrator  and  the 
dialectician  argue  syllogistically  after  stating 
that  something  does  or  does  not  belong  to 
something  else.  Therefore  a  syllogistic  premiss 
without  qualification  will  be  an  affirmation  or 
denial  of  something  concerning  something  else 
in  the  way  we  have  described;  it  will  be 
[jo]  demonstrative,  if  it  is  true  and  obtained 
through  the  first  principles  of  its  science;  while 
a  dialectical  premiss  is  the  giving  of  a  choice 
between  two  contradictories,  when  a  man  is 
proceeding  by  question,  but  when  he  is  syl- 
24b  [/o]  logizing  it  is  the  assertion  of  that 
which  is  apparent  and  generally  admitted,  as 

Note:  The  bold  face  numbers  and  letters  are  approxi¬ 
mate  indications  of  the  pages  and  columns  of  the  stand¬ 
ard  Berlin  Greek  text;  the  bracketed  numbers,  of  the 
lines  in  the  Greek  text;  they  are  here  assigned  as  they 
are  assigned  in  the  Oxford  translation. 


has  been  said  in  the  Topics.1  The  nature  then 
of  a  premiss  and  the  difference  between  syllo¬ 
gistic,  demonstrative,  and  dialectical  premisses, 
may  be  taken  as  sufficiently  defined  by  us  in 
[75]  relation  to  our  present  need,  but  will  be 
stated  accurately  in  the  sequel. 

I  call  that  a  term  into  which  the  premiss  is 
resolved,  i.  e.  both  the  predicate  and  that  of 
which  it  is  predicated,  ‘being’  being  added  and 
‘not  being’  removed,  or  vice  versa. 

A  syllogism  is  discourse  in  which,  certain 
things  being  stated,  something  other  than  what 
[20]  is  stated  follows  of  necessity  from  their 
being  so.  I  mean  by  the  last  phrase  that  they 
produce  the  consequence,  and  by  this,  that  no 
further  term  is  required  from  without  in  order 
to  make  the  consequence  necessary. 

I  call  that  a  perfect  syllogism  which  needs 
nothing  other  than  what  has  been  stated  to 
make  plain  what  necessarily  follows;  a  syllo- 
ism  is  imperfect,  if  it  needs  either  one  or  more 
25]  propositions,  which  are  indeed  the  neces¬ 
sary  consequences  of  the  terms  set  down,  but 
have  not  been  expressly  stated  as  premisses. 

That  one  term  should  be  included  in  another 
as  in  a  whole  is  the  same  as  for  the  other  to  be 
predicated  of  all  of  the  first.  And  we  say  that 
one  term  is  predicated  of  all  of  another,  when¬ 
ever  no  instance  of  the  subject  can  be  found  of 
which  the  other  term  cannot  be  asserted:  ‘to 
[jo]  be  predicated  of  none’  must  be  under¬ 
stood  in  the  same  way. 

2 

25a  Every  premiss  states  that  something  either 
is  or  must  be  or  may  be  the  attribute  of  some¬ 
thing  else;  of  premisses  of  these  three  kinds 
some  are  affirmative,  others  negative,  in  respect 
of  each  of  the  three  modes  of  attribution;  again 
some  affirmative  and  negative  premisses  are 
[5]  universal,  others  particular,  others  indefi¬ 
nite.  It  is  necessary  then  that  in  universal  at¬ 
tribution  the  terms  of  the  negative  premiss 
should  be  convertible,  e.g.  if  no  pleasure  is 
good,  then  no  good  will  be  pleasure;  the  terms 
of  the  affirmative  must  be  convertible,  not  how¬ 
ever  universally,  but  in  part,  e.g.  if  every  pleas¬ 
ure  is  good,  some  good  must  be  pleasure;  the 
[70]  particular  affirmative  must  convert  in  part 
1  iooa  29,  io4a  8. 


39 


4° 

(for  if  some  pleasure  is  good,  then  some  good 
will  be  pleasure);  but  the  particular  negative 
need  not  convert,  for  if  some  animal  is  not 
man,  it  does  not  follow  that  some  man  is  not 
animal. 

First  then  take  a  universal  negative  with  the 
[75]  terms  A  and  B.  If  no  B  is  A,  neither  can 
any  A  be  B.  For  if  some  A  (say  C)  were  B,  it 
would  not  be  true  that  no  B  is  A;  for  C  is  a  B. 
But  if  every  B  is  A,  then  some  A  is  B.  For  if  no 
A  were  B,  then  no  B  could  be  A.  But  we  as- 
[20]  sumed  that  every  B  is  A.  Similarly  too,  if 
the  premiss  is  particular.  For  if  some  B  is  A, 
then  some  of  the  As  must  be  B.  For  if  none 
were,  then  no  B  would  be  A.  But  if  some  B  is 
not  A,  there  is  no  necessity  that  some  of  the  As 
should  not  be  B;  e.g.  let  B  stand  for  animal 
[25]  and  A  for  man.  Not  every  animal  is  a 
man;  but  every  man  is  an  animal. 

3 

The  same  manner  of  conversion  will  hold  good 
also  in  respect  of  necessary  premisses.  The  uni¬ 
versal  negative  converts  universally;  each  of 
the  affirmatives  converts  into  a  particular.  If 
[30]  it  is  necessary  that  no  B  is  A,  it  is  nec¬ 
essary  also  that  no  A  is  B.  For  if  it  is  possible 
that  some  A  is  B,  it  would  be  possible  also  that 
some  B  is  A.  If  all  or  some  B  is  A  of  necessity, 
it  is  necessary  also  that  some  A  is  B:  for  if 
there  were  no  necessity,  neither  would  some  of 
[35]  the  Bs  be  A  necessarily.  But  the  particular 
negative  does  not  convert,  for  the  same  reason 
which  we  have  already  stated.1 

In  respect  of  possible  premisses,  since  pos¬ 
sibility  is  used  in  several  senses  (for  we  say  that 
what  is  necessary  and  what  is  not  necessary  and 
what  is  potential  is  possible),  affirmative  state- 
[40]  ments  will  all  convert  in  a  manner  sim¬ 
ilar  to  those  described.2  For  if  it  is  possible 
that  all  or  some  B  is  A,  it  will  be  possible 
25b  that  some  A  is  B.  For  if  that  were  not 
possible,  then  no  B  could  possibly  be  A. 
This  has  been  already  proved.3  But  in  nega¬ 
tive  statements  the  case  is  different.  What¬ 
ever  is  said  to  be  possible,  either  because  B 
necessarily  is  A,  or  because  B  is  not  necessarily 
[5]  A,  admits  of  conversion  like  other  negative 
statements,  e.g.  if  one  should  say,  it  is  possible 
that  man  is  not  horse,  or  that  no  garment  is 
white.  For  in  the  former  case  the  one  term 
necessarily  does  not  belong  to  the  other;  in  the 
latter  there  is  no  necessity  that  it  should:  and 
the  premiss  converts  like  other  negative  state¬ 
ments.  For  if  it  is  possible  for  no  man  to  be  a 

1  11.  12,  22-6.  2  In  11.  7-I3.  3  a20-2. 


26* 

[/o]  horse,  it  is  also  admissible  for  no  horse  to 
be  a  man;  and  if  it  is  admissible  for  no  gar¬ 
ment  to  be  white,  it  is  also  admissible  for  noth¬ 
ing  white  to  be  a  garment.  For  if  any  white 
thing  must  be  a  garment,  then  some  garment 
will  necessarily  be  white.  This  has  been  already 
proved.4  The  particular  negative  also  must  be 
treated  like  those  dealt  with  above.5  But  if  any¬ 
thing  is  said  to  be  possible  because  it  is  the  gen¬ 
t/5]  eral  rule  and  natural  (and  it  is  in  this  way 
we  define  the  possible),  the  negative  premisses 
can  no  longer  be  converted  like  the  simple  neg¬ 
atives;  the  universal  negative  premiss  does  not 
convert,  and  the  particular  does.  This  will  be 
plain  when  we  speak  about  the  possible.6  At 
resent  we  may  take  this  much  as  clear  in  addi- 
20]  tion  to  what  has  been  said:  the  statement 
that  it  is  possible  that  no  B  is  A  or  some  B  is 
not  A  is  affirmative  in  form:  for  the  expression 
‘is  possible’  ranks  along  with  ‘is’,  and  ‘is’  makes 
an  affirmation  always  and  in  every  case,  what¬ 
ever  the  terms  to  which  it  is  added,  in  predica¬ 
tion,  e.g.  ‘it  is  not-good’  or  ‘it  is  not-white’  or  in 
a  word  ‘it  is  not-this’.  But  this  also  will  be 
[25]  proved  in  the  sequel.7  In  conversion  these 
premisses  will  behave  like  the  other  affirma¬ 
tive  propositions. 

4 

After  these  distinctions  we  now  state  by  what 
means,  when,  and  how  every  syllogism  is  pro¬ 
duced;  subsequently8  we  must  speak  of  dem¬ 
onstration.  Syllogism  should  be  discussed  be¬ 
fore  demonstration,  because  syllogism  is  the 
[30]  more  general:  the  demonstration  is  a  sort 
of  syllogism,  but  not  every  syllogism  is  a  dem¬ 
onstration. 

Whenever  three  terms  are  so  related  to  one 
another  that  the  last  is  contained  in  the  middle 
as  in  a  whole,  and  the  middle  is  either  con¬ 
tained  in,  or  excluded  from,  the  first  as  in  or 
from  a  whole,  the  extremes  must  be  related  by 
[35]  a  perfect  syllogism.  I  call  that  term  mid¬ 
dle  which  is  itself  contained  in  another  and 
contains  another  in  itself:  in  position  also  this 
comes  in  the  middle.  By  extremes  I  mean  both 
that  term  which  is  itself  contained  in  another 
and  that  in  which  another  is  contained.  If  A 
is  predicated  of  all  B,  and  B  of  all  C,  A  must 
[40]  be  predicated  of  all  C:  we  have  already 
explained9  what  we  mean  by  ‘predicated  of  all’. 
26*  Similarly  also,  if  A  is  predicated  of  no  B , 

4  a  14-17.  6  In  a  12.  6cc.  13,  17. 

7  c.  46. 

8  In  the  Posterior  Analytics . 

9  24b  28. 


PRIOR  ANALYTICS 


26b  BOOK  I,  CHAPTERS  2-4  41 


and  B  of  all  C,  it  is  necessary  that  no  C  will 
be  A. 

But  if  the  first  term  belongs  to  all  the  mid¬ 
dle,  but  the  middle  to  none  of  the  last  term, 
there  will  be  no  syllogism  in  respect  of  the  ex¬ 
tremes;  for  nothing  necessary  follows  from  the 
terms  being  so  related;  for  it  is  possible  that  the 
[5]  first  should  belong  either  to  all  or  to  none 
of  the  last,  so  that  neither  a  particular  nor  a 
universal  conclusion  is  necessary.  But  if  there 
is  no  necessary  consequence,  there  cannot  be  a 
syllogism  by  means  of  these  premisses.  As  an 
example  of  a  universal  affirmative  relation  be¬ 
tween  the  extremes  we  may  take  the  terms  ani¬ 
mal,  man,  horse;  of  a  universal  negative  rela¬ 
tion,  the  terms  animal,  man,  stone.  Nor  again 
can  a  syllogism  be  formed  when  neither  the 
[/o]  first  term  belongs  to  any  of  the  middle, 
nor  the  middle  to  any  of  the  last.  As  an  ex¬ 
ample  of  a  positive  relation  between  the  ex¬ 
tremes  take  the  terms  science,  line,  medicine: 
of  a  negative  relation  science,  line,  unit. 

If  then  the  terms  are  universally  related,  it 
is  clear  in  this  figure  when  a  syllogism  will  be 

fossible  and  when  not,  and  that  if  a  syllogism 
75]  is  possible  the  terms  must  be  related  as 
described,  and  if  they  are  so  related  there  will 
be  a  syllogism. 

But  if  one  term  is  related  universally,  the 
other  in  part  only,  to  its  subject,  there  must  be 
a  perfect  syllogism  whenever  universality  is 
posited  with  reference  to  the  major  term  either 
affirmatively  or  negatively,  and  particularity 
[20]  with  reference  to  the  minor  term  affirma¬ 
tively:  but  whenever  the  universality  is  posited 
in  relation  to  the  minor  term,  or  the  terms  are 
related  in  any  other  way,  a  syllogism  is  im¬ 
possible.  I  call  that  term  the  major  in  which 
the  middle  is  contained  and  that  term  the 
minor  which  comes  under  the  middle.  Let  all 
B  be  A  and  some  C  be  B.  Then  if  ‘predicated 
of  all’  means  what  was  said  above,1  it  is  neces- 
[25]  sary  that  some  C  is  A.  And  if  no  B  is  A, 
but  some  C  is  B,  it  is  necessary  that  some  C  is 
not  A.  (The  meaning  of  ‘predicated  of  none’ 
has  also  been  defined.2)  So  there  will  be  a  per¬ 
fect  syllogism.  This  holds  good  also  if  the 
premiss  BC  should  be  indefinite,  provided  that 
it  is  affirmative:  for  we  shall  have  the  same 
syllogism  whether  the  premiss  is  indefinite  or 
particular. 

[30]  But  if  the  universality  is  posited  with  re¬ 
spect  to  the  minor  term  either  affirmatively  or 
negatively,  a  syllogism  will  not  be  possible, 
whether  the  major  premiss  is  positive  or  nega- 
1 24b  28.  2  24b  30. 


tive,  indefinite  or  particular:  e.g.  if  some  B  is 
or  is  not  A,  and  all  C  is  B.  As  an  example  of  a 

f  ositive  relation  between  the  extremes  take  the 
35]  terms  good,  state,  wisdom:  of  a  negative 
relation,  good,  state,  ignorance.  Again  if  no  C 
is  B,  but  some  B  is  or  is  not  A,  or  not  every  B 
is  A,  there  cannot  be  a  syllogism.  Take  the 
terms  white,  horse,  swan:  white,  horse,  raven. 
The  same  terms  may  be  taken  also  if  the  pre¬ 
miss  BA  is  indefinite. 

26b  Nor  when  the  major  premiss  is  universal, 
whether  affirmative  or  negative,  and  the  minor 
premiss  is  negative  and  particular,  can  there  be 
a  syllogism,  whether  the  minor  premiss  be  in¬ 
definite  or  particular:  e.g.  if  all  B  is  A,  and 
some  C  is  not  B,  or  if  not  all  C  is  B.  For  the 
major  term  may  be  predicable  both  of  all  and 
of  none  of  the  minor,  to  some  of  which  the 
[5]  middle  term  cannot  be  attributed.  Sup¬ 
pose  the  terms  are  animal,  man,  white:  next 
take  some  of  the  white  things  of  which  man  is 
not  predicated — swan  and  snow:  animal  is 
predicated  of  all  of  the  one,  but  of  none  of  the 
other.  Consequently  there  cannot  be  a  syllo* 
[/o]  gism.  Again  let  no  B  be  A,  but  let  some  C 
not  be  B.  Take  the  terms  inanimate,  man, 
white:  then  take  some  white  things  of  which 
man  is  not  predicated — swan  and  snow:  the 
term  inanimate  is  predicated  of  all  of  the  one, 
of  none  of  the  other. 

Further  since  it  is  indefinite  to  say  some  C 
[75]  is  not  B,  and  it  is  true  that  some  C  is  not 
B,  whether  no  C  is  B,  or  not  all  C  is  B,  and 
since  if  terms  are  assumed  such  that  no  C  is 
B,  no  syllogism  follows  (this  has  already  been 
stated3),  it  is  clear  that  this  arrangement  of 
terms  will  not  afford  a  syllogism:  otherwise 
one  would  have  been  possible  with  a  universal 
[20]  negative  minor  premiss.  A  similar  proof 
may  also  be  given  if  the  universal  premiss  is 
negative. 

Nor  can  there  in  any  way  be  a  syllogism  if 
both  the  relations  of  subject  and  predicate  are 
particular,  either  positively  or  negatively,  or 
the  one  negative  and  the  other  affirmative,  or 
one  indefinite  and  the  other  definite,  or  both 
[25]  indefinite.  Terms  common  to  all  the 
above  are  animal,  white,  horse:  animal,  white, 
stone. 

It  is  clear  then  from  what  has  been  said  that 
if  there  is  a  syllogism  in  this  figure  with  a  par¬ 
ticular  conclusion,  the  terms  must  be  related 
as  we  have  stated:  if  they  are  related  otherwise, 
no  syllogism  is  possible  anyhow.  It  is  evident 
also  that  all  the  syllogisms  in  this  figure  are 

3  a 


2. 


42 

[jo]  perfect  (for  they  are  all  completed  by 
means  of  the  premisses  originally  taken)  and 
that  all  conclusions  are  proved  by  this  figure, 
viz.  universal  and  particular,  affirmative  and 
negative.  Such  a  figure  I  call  the  first. 

5 

Whenever  the  same  thing  belongs  to  all  of  one 
[35]  subject,  and  to  none  of  another,  or  to  all 
of  each  subject  or  to  none  of  either,  I  call  such  a 
figure  the  second;  by  middle  term  in  it  I  mean 
that  which  is  predicated  of  both  subjects,  by  ex¬ 
tremes  the  terms  of  which  this  is  said,  by  major 
extreme  that  which  lies  near  the  middle,  by 
minor  that  which  is  further  away  from  the 
middle.  The  middle  term  stands  outside  the  ex- 
273  tremes,  and  is  first  in  position.  A  syllogism 
cannot  be  perfect  anyhow  in  this  figure,  but  it 
may  be  valid  whether  the  terms  are  related  uni¬ 
versally  or  not. 

If  then  the  terms  are  related  universally  a 
syllogism  will  be  possible,  whenever  the  mid¬ 
dle  belongs  to  all  of  one  subject  and  to  none 
of  another  (it  does  not  matter  which  has  the 
[5]  negative  relation),  but  in  no  other  way. 
Let  M  be  predicated  of  no  N,  but  of  all  O. 
Since,  then,  the  negative  relation  is  convertible, 
N  will  belong  to  no  M:  but  M  was  assumed  to 
belong  to  all  O:  consequently  N  will  belong  to 
no  O.  This  has  already  been  proved.1  Again  if 
[/o]  M  belongs  to  all  N,  but  to  no  O,  then  N 
will  belong  to  no  O.  For  if  M  belongs  to  no  O, 
O  belongs  to  no  M:  but  M  (as  was  said)  be¬ 
longs  to  all  N:  O  then  will  belong  to  no  N:  for 
the  first  figure  has  again  been  formed.  But 
since  the  negative  relation  is  convertible,  N  will 
belong  to  no  O.  Thus  it  will  be  the  same  syllo¬ 
gism  that  proves  both  conclusions. 

[75]  It  is  possible  to  prove  these  results  also  by 
reduction  ad  impossibile. 

It  is  clear  then  that  a  syllogism  is  formed 
when  the  terms  are  so  related,  but  not  a  perfect 
syllogism;  for  necessity  is  not  perfectly  estab¬ 
lished  merely  from  the  original  premisses; 
others  also  are  needed. 

But  if  M  is  predicated  of  every  N  and  O, 
there  cannot  be  a  syllogism.  Terms  to  illustrate 
a  positive  relation  between  the  extremes  are 
substance,  animal,  man;  a  negative  relation, 
[20]  substance,  animal,  number — substance  be¬ 
ing  the  middle  term. 

Nor  is  a  syllogism  possible  when  M  is  predi¬ 
cated  neither  of  any  N  nor  of  any  O.  Terms  to 
illustrate  a  positive  relation  are  line,  animal, 
man:  a  negative  relation,  line,  animal,  stone. 

1  25b  40. 


27b 

It  is  clear  then  that  if  a  syllogism  is  formed 
when  the  terms  are  universally  related,  the 
terms  must  be  related  as  we  stated  at  the  out- 
[25]  set:2  for  if  they  are  otherwise  related  no 
necessary  consequence  follows. 

If  the  middle  term  is  related  universally  to 
one  of  the  extremes,  a  particular  negative  syllo¬ 
gism  must  result  whenever  the  middle  term  is 
related  universally  to  the  major  whether  posi¬ 
tively  or  negatively,  and  particularly  to  the 
minor  and  in  a  manner  opposite  to  that  of  the 
universal  statement:  by  ‘an  opposite  manner’ 
I  mean,  if  the  universal  statement  is  negative, 
[jo]  the  particular  is  affirmative:  if  the  uni¬ 
versal  is  affirmative,  the  particular  is  negative. 
For  if  M  belongs  to  no  N,  but  to  some  O,  it  is 
necessary  that  N  does  not  belong  to  some  O. 
For  since  the  negative  statement  is  convertible, 
N  will  belong  to  no  M:  but  M  was  admitted  to 
[55]  belong  to  some  O:  therefore  N  will  not 
belong  to  some  O:  for  the  result  is  reached  by 
means  of  the  first  figure.  Again  if  M  belongs  to 
all  N,  but  not  to  some  O,  it  is  necessary  that  N 
does  not  belong  to  some  O:  for  if  N  belongs 
to  all  O,  and  M  is  predicated  also  of  all  N,  M 
27b  must  belong  to  all  O:  but  we  assumed  that 
M  does  not  belong  to  some  O.  And  if  M  be¬ 
longs  to  all  N  but  not  to  all  O,  we  shall  con¬ 
clude  that  N  does  not  belong  to  all  O:  the  proof 
is  the  same  as  the  above.  But  if  M  is  predicated 
of  all  O,  but  not  of  all  N,  there  will  be  no  syllo¬ 
gism.  Take  the  terms  animal,  substance,  raven; 
[5]  animal,  white,  raven.  Nor  will  there  be  a 
conclusion  when  M  is  predicated  of  no  O,  but 
of  some  N.  Terms  to  illustrate  a  positive  rela¬ 
tion  between  the  extremes  are  animal,  sub¬ 
stance,  unit:  a  negative  relation,  animal,  sub¬ 
stance,  science. 

If  then  the  universal  statement  is  opposed  to 
[/o]  the  particular,  we  have  stated  when  a 
syllogism  will  be  possible  and  when  not:  but 
if  the  premisses  are  similar  in  form,  I  mean 
both  negative  or  both  affirmative,  a  syllogism 
will  not  be  possible  anyhow.  First  let  them  be 
negative,  and  let  the  major  premiss  be  univer¬ 
sal,  e.g.  let  M  belong  to  no  N,  and  not  to  some 
[75]  O.  It  is  possible  then  for  N  to  belong  either 
to  all  O  or  to  no  O.  Terms  to  illustrate  the 
negative  relation  are  black,  snow,  animal.  But 
it  is  not  possible  to  find  terms  of  which  the  ex¬ 
tremes  are  related  positively  and  universally, 
if  M  belongs  to  some  O,  and  does  not  belong  to 
some  O.  For  if  N  belonged  to  all  O,  but  M  to 
no  N,  then  M  would  belong  to  no  O:  but  we 
assumed  that  it  belongs  to  some  O.  In  this  way 

2 1-  3- 


PRIOR  ANALYTICS 


28b  BOOK  I,  CHAPTERS  4-6  43 


[20]  then  it  is  not  admissible  to  take  terms:  our 
point  must  be  proved  from  the  indefinite  na¬ 
ture  of  the  particular  statement.  For  since  it  is 
true  that  M  does  not  belong  to  some  O,  even  if 
it  belongs  to  no  O,  and  since  if  it  belongs  to  no 
O  a  syllogism  is  (as  we  have  seen1)  not  pos¬ 
sible,  clearly  it  will  not  be  possible  now  either. 

Again  let  the  premisses  be  affirmative,  and 
let  the  major  premiss  as  before  be  universal, 
[25]  e.g.  let  M  belong  to  all  N  and  to  some  O. 
It  is  possible  then  for  N  to  belong  to  all  O  or 
to  no  O.  Terms  to  illustrate  the  negative  rela¬ 
tion  are  white,  swan,  stone.  But  it  is  not  pos¬ 
sible  to  take  terms  to  illustrate  the  universal 
affirmative  relation,  for  the  reason  already 
stated:2  the  point  must  be  proved  from  the 
indefinite  nature  of  the  particular  statement. 
[30]  But  if  the  minor  premiss  is  universal,  and 
M  belongs  to  no  O,  and  not  to  some  N,  it  is 
possible  for  N  to  belong  either  to  all  O  or  to  no 
O.  Terms  for  the  positive  relation  are  white, 
animal,  raven:  for  the  negative  relation,  white, 
stone,  raven.  If  the  premisses  are  affirmative, 
terms  for  the  negative  relation  are  white,  ani¬ 
mal,  snow;  for  the  positive  relation,  white,  ani¬ 
mal,  swan.  Evidently  then,  whenever  the  pre¬ 
misses  are  similar  in  form,  and  one  is  univer- 
[35]  sal,  the  other  particular,  a  syllogism  can¬ 
not  be  formed  anyhow.  Nor  is  one  possible  if 
the  middle  term  belongs  to  some  of  each  of  the 
extremes,  or  does  not  belong  to  some  of  either, 
or  belongs  to  some  of  the  one,  not  to  some  of 
the  other,  or  belongs  to  neither  universally,  or 
is  related  to  them  indefinitely.  Common  terms 
for  all  the  above  are  white,  animal,  man:  white, 
animal,  inanimate. 

28a  It  is  clear  then  from  what  has  been  said 
that  if  the  terms  are  related  to  one  another  in 
the  way  stated,  a  syllogism  results  of  necessity; 
and  if  there  is  a  syllogism,  the  terms  must  be  so 
related.  But  it  is  evident  also  that  all  the  syllo¬ 
gisms  in  this  figure  are  imperfect:  for  all  are 
[5]  made  perfect  by  certain  supplementary 
statements,  which  either  are  contained  in  the 
terms  of  necessity  or  are  assumed  as  hypotheses, 
i.e.  when  we  prove  per  impossible.  And  it  is 
evident  that  an  affirmative  conclusion  is  not 
attained  by  means  of  this  figure,  but  all  are 
negative,  whether  universal  or  particular. 

6 

[/o]  But  if  one  term  belongs  to  all,  and  an¬ 
other  to  none,  of  a  third,  or  if  both  belong  to 
all,  or  to  none,  of  it,  I  call  such  a  figure  the 
third;  by  middle  term  in  it  I  mean  that  of 
1  “21.  2 1.  18. 


which  both  the  predicates  are  predicated,  by 
extremes  I  mean  the  predicates,  by  the  major 
extreme  that  which  is  further  from  the  middle, 
by  the  minor  that  which  is  nearer  to  it.  The 
[75]  middle  term  stands  outside  the  extremes, 
and  is  last  in  position.  A  syllogism  cannot  be 
perfect  in  this  figure  either,  but  it  may  be  valid 
whether  the  terms  are  related  universally  or 
not  to  the  middle  term. 

If  they  are  universal,  whenever  both  P  and  R 
belong  to  S,  it  follows  that  P  will  necessarily  be¬ 
long  to  some  R .  For,  since  the  affirmative  state¬ 
ment  is  convertible,  S  will  belong  to  some  R: 
[20]  consequently  since  P  belongs  to  all  S,  and 
S  to  some  R,  P  must  belong  to  some  R:  for  a 
syllogism  in  the  first  figure  is  produced.  It  is 
possible  to  demonstrate  this  also  per  impossi¬ 
ble  and  by  exposition.  For  if  both  P  and  R  be¬ 
long  to  all  S,  should  one  of  the  Ss ,  e.g.  N,  be 
[25]  taken,  both  P  and  R  will  belong  to  this, 
and  thus  P  will  belong  to  some  R. 

If  R  belongs  to  all  S,  and  P  to  no  S,  there 
will  be  a  syllogism  to  prove  that  P  will  neces¬ 
sarily  not  belong  to  some  R.  This  may  be  dem¬ 
onstrated  in  the  same  way  as  before  by  convert¬ 
ing  the  premiss  RS.  It  might  be  proved  also 
[jo]  per  impossible,  as  in  the  former  cases. 
But  if  R  belongs  to  no  S,  P  to  all  S,  there  will 
be  no  syllogism.  Terms  for  the  positive  rela¬ 
tion  are  animal,  horse,  man:  for  the  negative 
relation  animal,  inanimate,  man. 

Nor  can  there  be  a  syllogism  when  both 
terms  are  asserted  of  no  S.  Terms  for  the  posi¬ 
tive  relation  are  animal,  horse,  inanimate;  for 
[35]  the  negative  relation  man,  horse,  inani¬ 
mate — inanimate  being  the  middle  term. 

It  is  clear  then  in  this  figure  also  when  a  syl¬ 
logism  will  be  possible  and  when  not,  if  the 
terms  are  related  universally.  For  whenever 
both  the  terms  are  affirmative,  there  will  be  a 
syllogism  to  prove  that  one  extreme  belongs  to 
some  of  the  other;  but  when  they  are  negative, 
28b  no  syllogism  will  be  possible.  But  when  one 
is  negative,  the  other  affirmative,  if  the  major 
is  negative,  the  minor  affirmative,  there  will  be 
a  syllogism  to  prove  that  the  one  extreme  does 
not  belong  to  some  of  the  other:  but  if  the  rela¬ 
tion  is  reversed,  no  syllogism  will  be  possible. 
[5]  If  one  term  is  related  universally  to  the 
middle,  the  other  in  part  only,  when  both  are 
affirmative  there  must  be  a  syllogism,  no  mat¬ 
ter  which  of  the  premisses  is  universal.  For  if 
R  belongs  to  all  S,  P  to  some  S,  P  must  belong 
to  some  R.  For  since  the  affirmative  statement 
[10]  is  convertible  S  will  belong  to  some  P: 
consequently  since  R  belongs  to  all  S,  and  S  to 


44 

some  P,  R  must  also  belong  to  some  P:  there¬ 
fore  P  must  belong  to  some  R . 

Again  if  R  belongs  to  some  S ,  and  P  to  all  S, 
P  must  belong  to  some  R .  This  may  be  demon¬ 
strated  in  the  same  way  as  the  preceding.  And 
it  is  possible  to  demonstrate  it  also  per  impos¬ 
sible  and  by  exposition,  as  in  the  former  cases. 
[75]  But  if  one  term  is  affirmative,  the  other 
negative,  and  if  the  affirmative  is  universal,  a 
syllogism  will  be  possible  whenever  the  minor 
term  is  affirmative.  For  if  R  belongs  to  all  S, 
but  P  does  not  belong  to  some  S,  it  is  necessary 
that  P  does  not  belong  to  some  R.  For  if  P  be¬ 
longs  to  all  R,  and  R  belongs  to  all  S,  then  P 
[20]  will  belong  to  all  S:  but  we  assumed  that 
it  did  not.  Proof  is  possible  also  without  reduc¬ 
tion  ad  impossible,  if  one  of  the  S s  be  taken  to 
which  P  does  not  belong. 

But  whenever  the  major  is  affirmative,  no 
syllogism  will  be  possible,  e.g.  if  P  belongs  to 
all  S ,  and  R  does  not  belong  to  some  S.  Terms 
for  the  universal  affirmative  relation  are  ani¬ 
mate,  man,  animal.  For  the  universal  negative 
[25]  relation  it  is  not  possible  to  get  terms,  if  R 
belongs  to  some  S ,  and  does  not  belong  to  some 
5.  For  if  P  belongs  to  all  S,  and  R  to  some  S, 
then  P  will  belong  to  some  R:  but  we  assumed 
that  it  belongs  to  no  R.  We  must  put  the  mat¬ 
ter  as  before.1  Since  the  expression  ‘it  does  not 
belong  to  some’  is  indefinite,  it  may  be  used 
truly  of  that  also  which  belongs  to  none.  But 
[30]  if  R  belongs  to  no  S,  no  syllogism  is  pos¬ 
sible,  as  has  been  shown.2  Clearly  then  no  syl¬ 
logism  will  be  possible  here. 

But  if  the  negative  term  is  universal,  when¬ 
ever  the  major  is  negative  and  the  minor 
affirmative  there  will  be  a  syllogism.  For  if  P 
belongs  to  no  S,  and  R  belongs  to  some  S,  P 
will  not  belong  to  some  R:  for  we  shall  have 
[35]  the  first  figure  again,  if  the  premiss  RS  is 
converted. 

But  when  the  minor  is  negative,  there  will  be 
no  syllogism.  Terms  for  the  positive  relation 
are  animal,  man,  wild:  for  the  negative  rela¬ 
tion,  animal,  science,  wild — the  middle  in  both 
being  the  term  wild. 

Nor  is  a  syllogism  possible  when  both  are 
stated  in  the  negative,  but  one  is  universal,  the 
other  particular.  When  the  minor  is  related 
29a  universally  to  the  middle,  take  the  terms 
animal,  science,  wild;  animal,  man,  wild. 
When  the  major  is  related  universally  to  the 
middle,  take  as  terms  for  a  negative  relation 
raven,  snow,  white.  For  a  positive  relation 
terms  cannot  be  found,  if  R  belongs  to  some  S, 

1  27b  20.  2  28a  30. 


29a 

[5]  and  does  not  belong  to  some  S.  For  if  P 
belongs  to  all  R,  and  R  to  some  S,  then  P  be¬ 
longs  to  some  S:  but  we  assumed  that  it  be¬ 
longs  to  no  S.  Our  point,  then,  must  be  proved 
from  the  indefinite  nature  of  the  particular 
statement. 

Nor  is  a  syllogism  possible  anyhow,  if  each 
of  the  extremes  belongs  to  some  of  the  middle, 
or  does  not  belong,  or  one  belongs  and  the 
other  does  not  to  some  of  the  middle,  or  one 
belongs  to  some  of  the  middle,  the  other  not  to 
all,  or  if  the  premisses  are  indefinite.  Common 
[/o]  terms  for  all  are  animal,  man,  white:  ani¬ 
mal,  inanimate,  white. 

It  is  clear  then  in  this  figure  also  when  a  syl¬ 
logism  will  be  possible,  and  when  not;  and 
that  if  the  terms  are  as  stated,  a  syllogism  re¬ 
sults  of  necessity,  and  if  there  is  a  syllogism, 
the  terms  must  be  so  related.  It  is  clear  also  that 
[75]  all  the  syllogisms  in  this  figure  are  imper¬ 
fect  (for  all  are  made  perfect  by  certain  sup¬ 
plementary  assumptions),  and  that  it  will  not 
be  possible  to  reach  a  universal  conclusion  by 
means  of  this  figure,  whether  negative  or  af¬ 
firmative. 

7 

It  is  evident  also  that  in  all  the  figures,  when- 
[20]  ever  a  proper  syllogism  does  not  result,  if 
both  the  terms  are  affirmative  or  negative  noth¬ 
ing  necessary  follows  at  all,  but  if  one  is  affirm¬ 
ative,  the  other  negative,  and  if  the  negative  is 
stated  universally,  a  syllogism  always  results  re¬ 
lating  the  minor  to  the  major  term,  e.g.  if  A 
belongs  to  all  or  some  B,  and  B  belongs  to  no 
C:  for  if  the  premisses  are  converted  it  is  nec- 
[25]  essary  that  C  does  not  belong  to  some  A, 
Similarly  also  in  the  other  figures:  a  syllogism 
always  results  by  means  of  conversion.  It  is 
evident  also  that  the  substitution  of  an  indefi¬ 
nite  for  a  particular  affirmative  will  effect  the 
same  syllogism  in  all  the  figures. 

[30]  It  is  clear  too  that  all  the  imperfect  syllo¬ 
gisms  are  made  perfect  by  means  of  the  first 
figure.  For  all  are  brought  to  a  conclusion 
either  ostensively  or  per  impossible.  In  both 
ways  the  first  figure  is  formed:  if  they  are  made 
perfect  ostensively,  because  (as  we  saw)  all  are 
brought  to  a  conclusion  by  means  of  conver¬ 
sion,  and  conversion  produces  the  first  figure: 
[35]  if  they  are  proved  per  impossible,  because 
on  the  assumption  of  the  false  statement  the 
syllogism  comes  about  by  means  of  the  first  fig¬ 
ure,  e.g.  in  the  last  figure,  if  A  and  B  belong  to 
all  C,  it  follows  that  A  belongs  to  some  B:  for 
if  A  belonged  to  no  B,  and  B  belongs  to  all  C, 


PRIOR  ANALYTICS 


30*  BOOK  I,  CHAPTERS  6-9  45 


A  would  belong  to  no  C:  but  (as  we  stated)  it 
belongs  to  all  C.  Similarly  also  with  the  rest. 
29b  It  is  possible  also  to  reduce  all  syllogisms 
to  the  universal  syllogisms  in  the  first  figure. 
Those  in  the  second  figure  are  clearly  made 
perfect  by  these,  though  not  all  in  the  same 
way;  the  universal  syllogisms  are  made  perfect 
[5]  by  converting  the  negative  premiss,  each 
of  the  particular  syllogisms  by  reduction  ad  im- 
possibile.  In  the  first  figure  particular  syllo¬ 
gisms  are  indeed  made  perfect  by  themselves, 
but  it  is  possible  also  to  prove  them  by  means  of 
the  second  figure,  reducing  them  ad  impos¬ 
sible,  e.g.  if  A  belongs  to  all  B,  and  B  to  some 
C,  it  follows  that  A  belongs  to  some  C.  For  if  it 
belonged  to  no  C,  and  belongs  to  all  B,  then  B 
[/o]  will  belong  to  no  C:  this  we  know  by 
means  of  the  second  figure.  Similarly  also  dem¬ 
onstration  will  be  possible  in  the  case  of  the 
negative.  For  if  A  belongs  to  no  B,  and  B  be¬ 
longs  to  some  C,  A  will  not  belong  to  some  C: 
for  if  it  belonged  to  all  C,  and  belongs  to  no  B, 
then  B  will  belong  to  no  C:  and  this  (as  we 
[75]  saw)  is  the  middle  figure.  Consequently, 
since  all  syllogisms  in  the  middle  figure  can  be  re¬ 
duced  to  universal  syllogisms  in  the  first  figure, 
and  since  particular  syllogisms  in  the  first  fig¬ 
ure  can  be  reduced  to  syllogisms  in  the  middle 
figure,  it  is  clear  that  particular  syllogisms  can 
be  reduced  to  universal  syllogisms  in  the  first 
figure.  Syllogisms  in  the  third  figure,  if  the 
[20]  terms  are  universal,  are  directly  made  per¬ 
fect  by  means  of  those  syllogisms;  but,  when 
one  of  the  premisses  is  particular,  by  means  of 
the  particular  syllogisms  in  the  first  figure:  and 
these  (we  have  seen)  may  be  reduced  to  the 
universal  syllogisms  in  the  first  figure:  conse¬ 
quently  also  the  particular  syllogisms  in  the 
third  figure  may  be  so  reduced.  It  is  clear  then 
that  all  syllogisms  may  be  reduced  to  the  uni- 
[25]  versal  syllogisms  in  the  first  figure. 

We  have  stated  then  how  syllogisms  which 
prove  that  something  belongs  or  does  not  be¬ 
long  to  something  else  are  constituted,  both 
how  syllogisms  of  the  same  figure  are  consti¬ 
tuted  in  themselves,  and  how  syllogisms  of  dif¬ 
ferent  figures  are  related  to  one  another. 

8 

Since  there  is  a  difference  according  as  some- 
[  jo]  thing  belongs,  necessarily  belongs,  or  may 
belong  to  something  else  (for  many  things  be¬ 
long  indeed,  but  not  necessarily,  others  neither 
necessarily  nor  indeed  at  all,  but  it  is  possible 
for  them  to  belong),  it  is  clear  that  there  will  be 
different  syllogisms  to  prove  each  of  these  rela¬ 


tions,  and  syllogisms  with  differently  related 
terms,  one  syllogism  concluding  from  what  is 
necessary,  another  from  what  is,  a  third  from 
[35]  what  is  possible. 

There  is  hardly  any  difference  between  syllo¬ 
gisms  from  necessary  premisses  and  syllogisms 
from  premisses  which  merely  assert.  When  the 
terms  are  put  in  the  same  way,  then,  whether 
something  belongs  or  necessarily  belongs  (or 
does  not  belong)  to  something  else,  a  syllogism 
will  or  will  not  result  alike  in  both  cases,  the 
only  difference  being  the  addition  of  the  ex- 
30*  pression  ‘necessarily’  to  the  terms.  For  the 
negative  statement  is  convertible  alike  in  both 
cases,  and  we  should  give  the  same  account  of 
the  expressions  ‘to  be  contained  in  something 
as  in  a  whole’  and  ‘to  be  predicated  of  all  of 
something’.  With  the  exceptions  to  be  made 
below,  the  conclusion  will  be  proved  to  be  nec¬ 
essary  by  means  of  conversion,  in  the  same 
[5]  manner  as  in  the  case  of  simple  predication. 
But  in  the  middle  figure  when  the  universal 
statement  is  affirmative,  and  the  particular  neg¬ 
ative,  and  again  in  the  third  figure  when  the 
universal  is  affirmative  and  the  particular  nega¬ 
tive,  the  demonstration  will  not  take  the  same 
form,  but  it  is  necessary  by  the  ‘exposition’  of  a 
part  of  the  subject  of  the  particular  negative 
[/o]  proposition,  to  which  the  predicate  does 
not  belong,  to  make  the  syllogism  in  reference 
to  this:  with  terms  so  chosen  the  conclusion 
will  necessarily  follow.  But  if  the  relation  is 
necessary  in  respect  of  the  part  taken,  it  must 
hold  of  some  of  that  term  in  which  this  part  is 
included :  for  the  part  taken  is  just  some  of  that. 
And  each  of  the  resulting  syllogisms  is  in  the 
appropriate  figure. 

9 

[75]  It  happens  sometimes  also  that  when  one 
premiss  is  necessary  the  conclusion  is  necessary, 
not  however  when  either  premiss  is  necessary, 
but  only  when  the  major  is,  e.g.  if  A  is  taken 
as  necessarily  belonging  or  not  belonging  to  B, 
but  B  is  taken  as  simply  belonging  to  C:  for  if 
[20]  the  premisses  are  taken  in  this  way,  A 
will  necessarily  belong  or  not  belong  to  C.  For 
since  A  necessarily  belongs,  or  does  not  belong, 
to  every  B,  and  since  C  is  one  of  the  Bs ,  it  is 
clear  that  for  C  also  the  positive  or  the  negative 
relation  to  A  will  hold  necessarily.  But  if  the 
major  premiss  is  not  necessary,  but  the  minor 
is  necessary,  the  conclusion  will  not  be  neces- 
[25]  sary.  For  if  it  were,  it  would  result  both 
through  the  first  figure  and  through  the  third 
that  A  belongs  necessarily  to  some  B .  But  this 


46  PRIOR  ANALYTICS  31* 


is  false;  for  B  may  be  such  that  it  is  possible 
that  A  should  belong  to  none  of  it.  Further,  an 
example  also  makes  it  clear  that  the  conclusion 
[3o]  will  not  be  necessary,  e.g.  if  A  were  move¬ 
ment,  B  animal,  C  man:  man  is  an  animal  nec¬ 
essarily,  but  an  animal  does  not  move  neces¬ 
sarily,  nor  does  man.  Similarly  also  if  the  major 
premiss  is  negative;  for  the  proof  is  the  same. 

In  particular  syllogisms,  if  the  universal 
[35]  premiss  is  necessary,  then  the  conclusion 
will  be  necessary;  but  if  the  particular,  the  con¬ 
clusion  will  not  be  necessary,  whether  the  uni¬ 
versal  premiss  is  negative  or  affirmative.  First 
let  the  universal  be  necessary,  and  let  A  belong 
to  all  B  necessarily,  but  let  B  simply  belong  to 
some  C:  it  is  necessary  then  that  A  belongs  to 
[40]  some  C  necessarily:  for  C  falls  under  B, 
30b  and  A  was  assumed  to  belong  necessarily 
to  all  B.  Similarly  also  if  the  syllogism  should 
be  negative:  for  the  proof  will  be  the  same.  But 
if  the  particular  premiss  is  necessary,  the  con¬ 
clusion  will  not  be  necessary:  for  from  the  de¬ 
nial  of  such  a  conclusion  nothing  impossible 
results,  just  as  it  does  not  in  the  universal  syl- 
[5]  logisms.  The  same  is  true  of  negative  syl¬ 
logisms.  Try  the  terms  movement,  animal, 
white. 

10 

In  the  second  figure,  if  the  negative  premiss 
is  necessary,  then  the  conclusion  will  be  neces¬ 
sary,  but  if  the  affirmative,  not  necessary.  First 
let  the  negative  be  necessary;  let  A  be  possible 
[/o]  of  no  B,  and  simply  belong  to  C.  Since 
then  the  negative  statement  is  convertible,  B  is 
possible  of  no  A.  But  A  belongs  to  all  C;  conse¬ 
quently  B  is  possible  of  no  C.  For  C  falls  under 
A.  The  same  result  would  be  obtained  if  the 
minor  premiss  were  negative:  for  if  A  is  possi- 
[75]  ble  be  of  no  C,  C  is  possible  of  no  A:  but  A 
belongs  to  all  B,  consequently  C  is  possible  of 
none  of  the  Bs:  for  again  we  have  obtained  the 
first  figure.  Neither  then  is  B  possible  of  C:  for 
conversion  is  possible  without  modifying  the 
relation. 

But  if  the  affirmative  premiss  is  necessary, 
the  conclusion  will  not  be  necessary.  Let  A  be- 
[20]  long  to  all  B  necessarily,  but  to  no  C  sim¬ 
ply.  If  then  the  negative  premiss  is  converted, 
the  first  figure  results.  But  it  has  been  proved1 
in  the  case  of  the  first  figure  that  if  the  nega¬ 
tive  major  premiss  is  not  necessary  the  conclu¬ 
sion  will  not  be  necessary  either.  Therefore  the 
same  result  will  obtain  here.  Further,  if  the 
[25]  conclusion  is  necessary,  it  follows  that  C 

1  &23'33- 


necessarily  does  not  belong  to  some  A.  For  if  B 
necessarily  belongs  to  no  C,  C  will  necessarily 
belong  to  no  B.  But  B  at  any  rate  must  belong 
to  some  A,  if  it  is  true  (as  was  assumed)  that  A 
necessarily  belongs  to  all  B.  Consequently  it  is 
[_?o]  necessary  that  C  does  not  belong  to  some 

A.  But  nothing  prevents  such  an  A  being  taken 
that  it  is  possible  for  C  to  belong  to  all  of  it. 
Further  one  might  show  by  an  exposition  of 
terms  that  the  conclusion  is  not  necessary  with¬ 
out  qualification,  though  it  is  a  necessary  con¬ 
clusion  from  the  premisses.  For  example  let  A 
be  animal,  B  man,  C  white,  and  let  the  prem¬ 
isses  be  assumed  to  correspond  to  what  we  had 
before:2  it  is  possible  that  animal  should  belong 
[35]  to  nothing  white.  Man  then  will  not  be¬ 
long  to  anything  white,  but  not  necessarily: 
for  it  is  possible  for  man  to  be  born  white,  not 
however  so  long  as  animal  belongs  to  nothing 
white.  Consequently  under  these  conditions 
the  conclusion  will  be  necessary,  but  it  is  not 
necessary  without  qualification. 

31a  Similar  results  will  obtain  also  in  particu¬ 
lar  syllogisms.  For  whenever  the  negative 
premiss  is  both  universal  and  necessary,  then 
the  conclusion  will  be  necessary:  but  whenever 
the  affirmative  premiss  is  universal,  the  nega¬ 
tive  particular,  the  conclusion  will  not  be  nec- 
[5]  essary.  First  then  let  the  negative  premiss 
be  both  universal  and  necessary:  let  it  be  pos¬ 
sible  for  no  B  that  A  should  belong  to  it,  and 
let  A  simply  belong  to  some  C.  Since  the  nega¬ 
tive  statement  is  convertible,  it  will  be  possible 
for  no  A  that  B  should  belong  to  it:  but  A  be¬ 
longs  to  some  C;  consequently  B  necessarily 
[/oj  does  not  belong  to  some  of  the  Cs.  Again 
let  the  affirmative  premiss  be  both  universal 
and  necessary,  and  let  the  major  premiss  be  af¬ 
firmative.  If  then  A  necessarily  belongs  to  all 

B,  but  does  not  belong  to  some  C,  it  is  clear 
that  B  will  not  belong  to  some  C,  but  not  nec¬ 
essarily.  For  the  same  terms  can  be  used  to 
demonstrate  the  point,  which  were  used  in  the 
[75]  universal  syllogisms.3  Nor  again,  if  the 
negative  statement  is  necessary  but  particular, 
will  the  conclusion  be  necessary.  The  point  can 
be  demonstrated  by  means  of  the  same  terms. 

11 

In  the  last  figure  when  the  terms  are  related 
universally  to  the  middle,  and  both  premisses 
are  affirmative,  if  one  of  the  two  is  necessary, 
[20]  then  the  conclusion  will  be  necessary.  But 
if  one  is  negative,  the  other  affirmative,  when¬ 
ever  the  negative  is  necessary  the  conclusion 
2 1.  20.  3  30b  33-40. 


32a 

also  will  be  necessary,  but  whenever  the  affirma¬ 
tive  is  necessary  the  conclusion  will  not  be  nec¬ 
essary.  First  let  both  the  premisses  be  affirma¬ 
tive,  and  let  A  and  B  belong  to  all  C,  and  let 
[25]  AC  be  necessary.  Since  then  B  belongs  to  all 
C,  C  also  will  belong  to  some  B,  because  the  uni¬ 
versal  is  convertible  into  the  particular:  conse¬ 
quently  if  A  belongs  necessarily  to  all  C,  and 
C  belongs  to  some  B,  it  is  necessary  that  A 
should  belong  to  some  B  also.  For  B  is  under 
[jo]  C.  The  first  figure  then  is  formed.  A  sim¬ 
ilar  proof  will  be  given  also  if  BC  is  necessary. 
For  C  is  convertible  with  some  A:  consequent¬ 
ly  if  B  belongs  necessarily  to  all  C,  it  will  be¬ 
long  necessarily  also  to  some  A . 

Again  let  AC  be  negative,  BC  affirmative, 
and  let  the  negative  premiss  be  necessary.  Since 
[55]  then  C  is  convertible  with  some  B,  but  A 
necessarily  belongs  to  no  C,  A  will  necessarily 
not  belong  to  some  B  either:  for  B  is  under  C. 
But  if  the  affirmative  is  necessary,  the  conclu¬ 
sion  will  not  be  necessary.  For  suppose  BC  is 
affirmative  and  necessary,  while  AC  is  negative 
and  not  necessary.  Since  then  the  affirmative  is 
[40]  convertible,  C  also  will  belong  to  some  B 
necessarily:  consequently  if  A  belongs  to  none 
of  the  Cs,  while  C  belongs  to  some  of  the  B s, 
31b  A  will  not  belong  to  some  of  the  Bs — but 
not  of  necessity;  for  it  has  been  proved,  in  the 
case  of  the  first  figure,  that  if  the  negative 
premiss  is  not  necessary,  neither  will  the  con¬ 
clusion  be  necessary.  Further,  the  point  may 
be  made  clear  by  considering  the  terms.  Let 
[5]  the  term  A  be  ‘good’,  let  that  which  B  sig¬ 
nifies  be  ‘animal’,  let  the  term  C  be  ‘horse’.  It 
is  possible  then  that  the  term  good  should  be¬ 
long  to  no  horse,  and  it  is  necessary  that  the 
term  animal  should  belong  to  every  horse:  but 
it  is  not  necessary  that  some  animal  should  not 
be  good,  since  it  is  possible  for  every  animal  to 
be  good.  Or  if  that  is  not  possible,  take  as  the 
term  ‘awake’  or  ‘asleep’:  for  every  animal  can 
[/o]  accept  these. 

If,  then,  the  premisses  are  universal,  we  have 
stated  when  the  conclusion  will  be  necessary. 
But  if  one  premiss  is  universal,  the  other  par¬ 
ticular,  and  if  both  are  affirmative,  whenever 
the  universal  is  necessary  the  conclusion  also 
[75]  must  be  necessary.  The  demonstration  is 
the  same  as  before;1  for  the  particular  affirma¬ 
tive  also  is  convertible.  If  then  it  is  necessary 
that  B  should  belong  to  all  C,  and  A  falls  under 
C,  it  is  necessary  that  B  should  belong  to  some 
A.  But  if  B  must  belong  to  some  A,  then  A 
must  belong  to  some  B:  for  conversion  is  pos- 

la24-33* 


47 

sible.  Similarly  also  if  AC  should  be  necessary 
[20]  and  universal:  for  B  falls  under  C.  But  if 
the  particular  premiss  is  necessary,  the  conclu¬ 
sion  will  not  be  necessary.  Let  the  premiss  BC 
be  both  particular  and  necessary,  and  let  A  be¬ 
long  to  all  C,  not  however  necessarily.  If  the 
proposition  BC  is  converted  the  first  figure  is 
[25]  formed,  and  the  universal  premiss  is  not 
necessary,  but  the  particular  is  necessary.  But 
when  the  premisses  were  thus,  the  conclusion 
(as  we  proved2)  was  not  necessary:  consequent¬ 
ly  it  is  not  here  either.  Further,  the  point  is 
clear  if  we  look  at  the  terms.  Let  A  be  waking, 
B  biped,  and  C  animal.  It  is  necessary  that  B 
should  belong  to  some  C,  but  it  is  possible  for 
[30]  A  to  belong  to  C,  and  that  A  should  be¬ 
long  to  B  is  not  necessary.  For  there  is  no  ne¬ 
cessity  that  some  biped  should  be  asleep  or 
awake.  Similarly  and  by  means  of  the  same 
terms  proof  can  be  made,  should  the  proposi¬ 
tion  AC  be  both  particular  and  necessary. 

But  if  one  premiss  is  affirmative,  the  other 
negative,  whenever  the  universal  is  both  nega¬ 
tive  and  necessary  the  conclusion  also  will  be 
[55]  necessary.  For  if  it  is  not  possible  that  A 
should  belong  to  any  C,  but  B  belongs  to  some 
C,  it  is  necessary  that  A  should  not  belong  to 
some  B.  But  whenever  the  affirmative  proposi¬ 
tion  is  necessary,  whether  universal  or  particu¬ 
lar,  or  the  negative  is  particular,  the  conclusion 
will  not  be  necessary.  The  proof  of  this  by  re- 
[40]  duction  will  be  the  same  as  before;3  but  if 
terms  are  wanted,  when  the  universal  affirma¬ 
tive  is  necessary,  take  the  terms  ‘waking’ — ‘an¬ 
imal’ — ‘man’,  ‘man’  being  middle,  and  when 
32a  the  affirmative  is  particular  and  necessary, 
take  the  terms  ‘waking’ — ‘animal’ — ‘white’:  for 
it  is  necessary  that  animal  should  belong  to 
some  white  thing,  but  it  is  possible  that  waking 
should  belong  to  none,  and  it  is  not  necessary 
that  waking  should  not  belong  to  some  animal. 
But  when  the  negative  proposition  being  par- 
[5]  ticular  is  necessary,  take  the  terms  ‘biped’, 
‘moving’,  ‘animal’,  ‘animal’  being  middle. 

12 

It  is  clear  then  that  a  simple  conclusion  is  not 
reached  unless  both  premisses  are  simple  asser¬ 
tions,  but  a  necessary  conclusion  is  possible  al¬ 
though  one  only  of  the  premisses  is  necessary. 
But  in  both  cases,  whether  the  syllogisms  are 
[/o]  affirmative  or  negative,  it  is  necessary  that 
one  premiss  should  be  similar  to  the  conclusion. 
I  mean  by  ‘similar’,  if  the  conclusion  is  a  sim¬ 
ple  assertion,  the  premiss  must  be  simple;  if 

2  3°a  35'7>  b  i-5*  3  Cf.  a  37-b  4,  b  20-7. 


BOOK  I,  CHAPTERS  9-12 


48  PRIOR  ANALYTICS  32b 


the  conclusion  is  necessary,  the  premiss  must 
be  necessary.  Consequently  this  also  is  clear,  that 
the  conclusion  will  be  neither  necessary  nor 
simple  unless  a  necessary  or  simple  premiss  is 
assumed. 

[75]  Perhaps  enough  has  been  said  about  the 
proof  of  necessity,  how  it  comes  about  and  how 
it  differs  from  the  proof  of  a  simple  statement. 
We  proceed  to  discuss  that  which  is  possible, 
when  and  how  and  by  what  means  it  can  be 
proved.  I  use  the  terms  ‘to  be  possible’  and  ‘the 
possible’  of  that  which  is  not  necessary  but,  be¬ 
ing  assumed,  results  in  nothing  impossible.  We 
[20]  say  indeed  ambiguously  of  the  necessary 
that  it  is  possible.  But  that  my  definition  of  the 
possible  is  correct  is  clear  from  the  phrases  by 
which  we  deny  or  on  the  contrary  affirm  possi¬ 
bility.  For  the  expressions  ‘it  is  not  possible  to 
belong’,  ‘it  is  impossible  to  belong’,  and  ‘it  is 
necessary  not  to  belong’  are  either  identical  or 
follow  from  one  another;  consequently  their 
[25]  opposites  also,  ‘it  is  possible  to  belong’,  ‘it 
is  not  impossible  to  belong’,  and  ‘it  is  not  neces¬ 
sary  not  to  belong’,  will  either  be  identical  or 
follow  from  one  another.  For  of  everything  the 
affirmation  or  the  denial  holds  good.  That 
which  is  possible  then  will  be  not  necessary  and 
that  which  is  not  necessary  will  be  possible.  It 
results  that  all  premisses  in  the  mode  of  possi- 
[30]  bility  are  convertible  into  one  another.  I 
mean  not  that  the  affirmative  are  convertible 
into  the  negative,  but  that  those  which  are  af¬ 
firmative  in  form  admit  of  conversion  by  op¬ 
position,  e.g.  ‘it  is  possible  to  belong’  may  be 
converted  into  ‘it  is  possible  not  to  belong’,  and 
‘it  is  possible  for  A  to  belong  to  all  15’  into  ‘it  is 
possible  for  A  to  belong  to  no  B ’  or  ‘not  to  all 
B\  and  ‘it  is  possible  for  A  to  belong  to  some  B* 
[35]  into  ‘it  is  possible  for  A  not  to  belong  to 
some  B\  And  similarly  the  other  propositions 
in  this  mode  can  be  converted.  For  since  that 
which  is  possible  is  not  necessary,  and  that 
which  is  not  necessary  may  possibly  not  belong, 
it  is  clear  that  if  it  is  possible  that  A  should  be¬ 
long  to  B,  it  is  possible  also  that  it  should  not 
belong  to  B:  and  if  it  is  possible  that  it  should 
belong  to  all,  it  is  also  possible  that  it  should 
not  belong  to  all.  The  same  holds  good  in  the 
case  of  particular  affirmations:  for  the  proof  is 
32b  identical.  And  such  premisses  are  affirma¬ 
tive  and  not  negative;  for  ‘to  be  possible’  is  in 
the  same  rank  as  ‘to  be’,  as  was  said  above.1 

Having  made  these  distinctions  we  next 

1  25b  21. 


foint  out  that  the  expression  ‘to  be  possible’  is 
5]  used  in  two  ways.  In  one  it  means  to  hap¬ 
pen  generally  and  fall  short  of  necessity,  e.g. 
man’s  turning  grey  or  growing  or  decaying,  or 
generally  what  naturally  belongs  to  a  thing 
(for  this  has  not  its  necessity  unbroken,  since 
man’s  existence  is  not  continuous  for  ever,  al¬ 
though  if  a  man  does  exist,  it  comes  about  ei- 
[/o]  ther  necessarily  or  generally).  In  another 
sense  the  expression  means  the  indefinite, 
which  can  be  both  thus  and  not  thus,  e.g.  an 
animal’s  walking  or  an  earthquake’s  taking 
place  while  it  is  walking,  or  generally  what 
happens  by  chance:  for  none  of  these  inclines 
by  nature  in  the  one  way  more  than  in  the  op¬ 
posite. 

That  which  is  possible  in  each  of  its  two 
senses  is  convertible  into  its  opposite,  not  how- 
[75]  ever  in  the  same  way:  but  what  is  natural 
is  convertible  because  it  does  not  necessarily 
belong  (for  in  this  sense  it  is  possible  that  a 
man  should  not  grow  grey)  and  what  is  indefi¬ 
nite  is  convertible  because  it  inclines  this  way 
no  more  than  that.  Science  and  demonstrative 
syllogism  are  not  concerned  with  things  which 
are  indefinite,  because  the  middle  term  is  un¬ 
certain;  but  they  are  concerned  with  things 
[20]  that  are  natural,  and  as  a  rule  arguments 
and  inquiries  are  made  about  things  which  are 
possible  in  this  sense.  Syllogisms  indeed  can  be 
made  about  the  former,  but  it  is  unusual  at  any 
rate  to  inquire  about  them. 

These  matters  will  be  treated  more  definite¬ 
ly  in  the  sequel;2  our  business  at  present  is  to 
state  the  moods  and  nature  of  the  syllogism 
made  from  possible  premisses.  The  expression 
[25]  ‘it  is  possible  for  this  to  belong  to  that’ 
may  be  understood  in  two  senses:  ‘that’  may 
mean  either  that  to  which  ‘that’  belongs  or  that 
to  which  it  may  belong;  for  the  expression  ‘ A 
is  possible  of  the  subject  of  By  means  that  it  is 
possible  either  of  that  of  which  B  is  stated  or  of 
that  of  which  B  may  possibly  be  stated.  It 
makes  no  difference  whether  we  say,  A  is  pos- 
[ 30]  sible  of  the  subject  of  B,  or  all  B  admits  of 
A.  It  is  clear  then  that  the  expression  *A  may 
possibly  belong  to  all  By  might  be  used  in  two 
senses.  First  then  we  must  state  the  nature  and 
characteristics  of  the  syllogism  which  arises  if 
B  is  possible  of  the  subject  of  C,  and  A  is  possi¬ 
ble  of  the  subject  of  J5.  For  thus  both  premisses 
[35]  are  assumed  in  the  mode  of  possibility; 
but  whenever  A  is  possible  of  that  of  which  B 
is  true,  one  premiss  is  a  simple  assertion,  the 
other  a  problematic.  Consequently  we  must 
2  Posterior  Analytics ,  1.  8. 


33b 

start  from  premisses  which  are  similar  in  form, 
as  in  the  other  cases. 

M 

Whenever  A  may  possibly  belong  to  all  B, 
and  B  to  all  C,  there  will  be  a  perfect  syllogism 
to  prove  that  A  may  possibly  belong  to  all  C. 
[40]  This  is  clear  from  the  definition:  for  it 
33a  was  in  this  way  that  we  explained  ‘to  be 
possible  for  one  term  to  belong  to  all  of  anoth¬ 
er’.1  Similarly  if  it  is  possible  for  A  to  belong  to 
no  B,  and  for  B  to  belong  to  all  C,  then  it  is  pos¬ 
sible  for  A  to  belong  to  no  C.  For  the  statement 
that  it  is  possible  for  A  not  to  belong  to  that  of 
which  B  may  be  true  means  (as  we  saw)  that 
none  of  those  things  which  can  possibly  fall 
[5]  under  the  term  B  is  left  out  of  account.  But 
whenever  A  may  belong  to  all  B ,  and  B  may 
belong  to  no  C,  then  indeed  no  syllogism  re¬ 
sults  from  the  premisses  assumed,  but  if  the 
premiss  BC  is  converted  after  the  manner  of 
problematic  propositions,  the  same  syllogism 
results  as  before.2  For  since  it  is  possible  that  B 
[70]  should  belong  to  no  C,  it  is  possible  also 
that  it  should  belong  to  all  C.  This  has  been 
stated  above.3  Consequently  if  B  is  possible  for 
all  C,  and  A  is  possible  for  all  B,  the  same  syl¬ 
logism  again  results.  Similarly  if  in  both  the 
premisses  the  negative  is  joined  with  ‘it  is  pos¬ 
sible’:  e.g.  if  A  may  belong  to  none  of  the  Bs , 
[75]  and  B  to  none  of  the  Cs.  No  syllogism  re¬ 
sults  from  the  assumed  premisses,  but  if  they 
are  converted  we  shall  have  the  same  syllogism 
as  before.  It  is  clear  then  that  if  the  minor 
premiss  is  negative,  or  if  both  premisses  are 
negative,  either  no  syllogism  results,  or  if  one 
[20]  does  it  is  not  perfect.  For  the  necessity  re¬ 
sults  from  the  conversion. 

But  if  one  of  the  premisses  is  universal,  the 
other  particular,  when  the  major  premiss  is 
universal  there  will  be  a  perfect  syllogism.  For 
if  A  is  possible  for  all  B,  and  B  for  some  C,  then 
A  is  possible  for  some  C.  This  is  clear  from  the 
[25]  definition  of  being  possible.4  Again  if  A 
may  belong  to  no  B,  and  B  may  belong  to  some 
of  the  Cs,  it  is  necessary  that  A  may  possibly 
not  belong  to  some  of  the  Cs.  The  proof  is  the 
same  as  above.  But  if  the  particular  premiss  is 
negative,  and  the  universal  is  affirmative,  the 
major  still  being  universal  and  the  minor  par¬ 
ticular,  e.g.  A  is  possible  for  all  B,  B  may  possi- 
[3°]  bly  not  belong  to  some  C,  then  a  clear  syl¬ 
logism  does  not  result  from  the  assumed  prem¬ 
isses,  but  if  the  particular  premiss  is  converted 
1  32b  25-37.  2  In  32b  38-40.  3  32s  34. 


49 

and  it  is  laid  down  that  B  possibly  may  belong 
to  some  C,  we  shall  have  the  same  conclusion 
as  before,5  as  in  the  cases  given  at  the  begin- 
ning.6 

[55]  But  if  the  major  premiss  is  particular, 
the  minor  universal,  whether  both  are  affirma¬ 
tive,  or  negative,  or  different  in  quality,  or  if 
both  are  indefinite  or  particular,  in  no  way  will 
a  syllogism  be  possible.  For  nothing  prevents 
B  from  reaching  beyond  A,  so  that  as  predi¬ 
cates  they  cover  unequal  areas.  Let  C  be  that 
[40]  by  which  B  extends  beyond  A.  To  C  it  is 
33b  not  possible  that  A  should  belong — either 
to  all  or  to  none  or  to  some  or  not  to  some,  since 
premisses  in  the  mode  of  possibility  are  con¬ 
vertible  and  it  is  possible  for  B  to  belong  to 
more  things  than  A  can.  Further,  this  is  ob¬ 
vious  if  we  take  terms;  for  if  the  premisses  are 
as  assumed,  the  major  term  is  both  possible  for 
[5]  none  of  the  minor  and  must  belong  to  all 
of  it.  Take  as  terms  common  to  all  the  cases 
under  consideration  ‘animal’ — ‘white’ — ‘man’, 
where  the  major  belongs  necessarily  to  the  mi¬ 
nor;  ‘animal’— ‘white’ — ‘garment’,  where  it  is 
not  possible  that  the  major  should  belong  to  the 
minor.  It  is  clear  then  that  if  the  terms  are  re¬ 
lated  in  this  manner,  no  syllogism  results.  For 
[70]  every  syllogism  proves  that  something  be¬ 
longs  either  simply  or  necessarily  or  possibly. 
It  is  clear  that  there  is  no  proof  of  the  first  or  of 
the  second.  For  the  affirmative  is  destroyed  by 
the  negative,  and  the  negative  by  the  affirma¬ 
tive.  There  remains  the  proof  of  possibility. 
But  this  is  impossible.  For  it  has  been  proved 
[75]  that  if  the  terms  are  related  in  this  man¬ 
ner  it  is  both  necessary  that  the  major  should 
belong  to  all  the  minor  and  not  possible  that  it 
should  belong  to  any.  Consequently  there  can¬ 
not  be  a  syllogism  to  prove  the  possibility ;  for 
the  necessary  (as  we  stated)  is  not  possible.7 

It  is  clear  that  if  the  terms  are  universal  in 
possible  premisses  a  syllogism  always  results  in 
the  first  figure,  whether  they  are  affirmative  or 
[20]  negative,  only  a  perfect  syllogism  results 
in  the  first  case,  an  imperfect  in  the  second.  But 
possibility  must  be  understood  according  to  the 
definition  laid  down,8  not  as  covering  neces¬ 
sity.  This  is  sometimes  forgotten. 

*5 

[25]  If  one  premiss  is  a  simple  proposition,  the 
other  a  problematic,  whenever  the  major  prem¬ 
iss  indicates  possibility  all  the  syllogisms  will 
be  perfect  and  establish  possibility  in  the  sense 

6 1.24.  6 11.  5-17.  7  32s  28. 

8  32®  18. 


32°  25'37-c 

f  ' 


ARCHBISHOP  MITTY  HIGH  SCHOOL  LIBRARY 
San  Jose,  California 


Ok&i 


BOOK  I,  CHAPTERS  12-15 


50 

defined;1  but  whenever  the  minor  premiss  in¬ 
dicates  possibility  all  the  syllogisms  will  be  im- 

f  erfect,  and  those  which  are  negative  will  es- 
30]  tablish  not  possibility  according  to  the  def¬ 
inition,  but  that  the  major  does  not  necessarily 
belong  to  any,  or  to  all,  of  the  minor.  For  if  this 
is  so,  we  say  it  is  possible  that  it  should  belong 
to  none  or  not  to  all.  Let  A  be  possible  for  all 
B,  and  let  B  belong  to  all  C.  Since  C  falls  under 
B,  and  A  is  possible  for  all  B,  clearly  it  is 
[35]  possible  for  all  C  also.  So  a  perfect  syllo¬ 
gism  results.  Likewise  if  the  premiss  AB  is 
negative,  and  the  premiss  BC  is  affirmative,  the 
former  stating  possible,  the  latter  simple  attri¬ 
bution,  a  perfect  syllogism  results  proving  that 
[40]  A  possibly  belongs  to  no  C. 

34a  It  is  clear  that  perfect  syllogisms  result  if 
the  minor  premiss  states  simple  belonging:  but 
that  syllogisms  will  result  if  the  modality  of  the 
premisses  is  reversed,  must  be  proved  per  im - 
possibile.  At  the  same  time  it  will  be  evident 
that  they  are  imperfect:  for  the  proof  proceeds 
[5]  not  from  the  premisses  assumed.  First  we 
must  state  that  if  B's  being  follows  necessarily 
from  A's  being,  B's  possibility  will  follow  nec¬ 
essarily  from  A’s  possibility.  Suppose,  the  terms 
being  so  related,  that  A  is  possible,  and  B  is  im¬ 
possible.  If  then  that  which  is  possible,  when  it 
is  possible  for  it  to  be,  might  happen,  and  if 
that  which  is  impossible,  when  it  is  impossible, 
[70]  could  not  happen,  and  if  at  the  same  time 
A  is  possible  and  B  impossible,  it  would  be  pos¬ 
sible  for  A  to  happen  without  B,  and  if  to  hap¬ 
pen,  then  to  be.  For  that  which  has  happened, 
when  it  has  happened,  is.  But  we  must  take  the 
impossible  and  the  possible  not  only  in  the 
sphere  of  becoming,  but  also  in  the  spheres  of 
truth  and  predicability,  and  the  various  other 
spheres  in  which  we  speak  of  the  possible:  for 
[75]  it  will  be  alike  in  all.  Further  we  must 
understand  the  statement  that  B's  being  de¬ 
pends  on  A's  being,  not  as  meaning  that  if 
some  single  thing  A  is,  B  will  be:  for  nothing 
follows  of  necessity  from  the  being  of  some  one 
thing,  but  from  two  at  least,  i.e.  when  the 
premisses  are  related  in  the  manner  stated  to 
be  that  of  the  syllogism.  For  if  C  is  predicated 
[20]  of  D,  and  D  of  F,  then  C  is  necessarily 
predicated  of  F.  And  if  each  is  possible,  the 
conclusion  also  is  possible.  If  then,  for  exam¬ 
ple,  one  should  indicate  the  premisses  by  A, 
and  the  conclusion  by  B,  it  would  not  only  re¬ 
sult  that  if  A  is  necessary  B  is  necessary,  but 
also  that  if  A  is  possible,  B  is  possible. 

[25]  Since  this  is  proved  it  is  evident  that  if  a 
1  32*  18. 


34b 

false  and  not  impossible  assumption  is  made, 
the  consequence  of  the  assumption  will  also  be 
false  and  not  impossible:  e.g.  if  A  is  false,  but 
not  impossible,  and  if  B  is  the  consequence  of 
A,  B  also  will  be  false  but  not  impossible.  For 
since  it  has  been  proved  that  if  B's  being  is  the 
consequence  of  A's  being,  then  B's  possibility 
[50]  will  follow  from  A's  possibility  (and  A  is 
assumed  to  be  possible),  consequently  B  will  be 
possible:  for  if  it  were  impossible,  the  same 
thing  would  at  the  same  time  be  possible  and 
impossible. 

Since  we  have  defined  these  points,  let  A  be¬ 
long  to  all  B,  and  B  be  possible  for  all  C:  it  is 
[55]  necessary  then  that  A  should  be  a  possi¬ 
ble  attribute  for  all  C.  Suppose  that  it  is  not 
possible,  but  assume  that  B  belongs  to  all  C: 
this  is  false  but  not  impossible.  If  then  A  is  not 
possible  for  C  but  B  belongs  to  all  C,  then  A  is 
not  possible  for  all  B:  for  a  syllogism  is  formed 
[40]  in  the  third  degree.  But  it  was  assumed 
that  A  is  a  possible  attribute  for  all  B.  It  is  nec¬ 
essary  then  that  A  is  possible  for  all  C.  For 
34b  though  the  assumption  we  made  is  false 
and  not  impossible,  the  conclusion  is  impossi¬ 
ble.  It  is  possible  also  in  the  first  figure  to  bring 
about  the  impossibility,  by  assuming  that  B  be¬ 
longs  to  C.  For  if  B  belongs  to  all  C,  and  A  is 
possible  for  all  B,  then  A  would  be  possible  for 
[5]  all  C.  But  the  assumption  was  made  that 
A  is  not  possible  for  all  C. 

We  must  understand  ‘that  which  belongs  to 
all’  with  no  limitation  in  respect  of  time,  e.g. 
to  the  present  or  to  a  particular  period,  but 
simply  without  qualification.  For  it  is  by  the 
help  of  such  premisses  that  we  make  syllo- 
[/o]  gisms,  since  if  the  premiss  is  understood 
with  reference  to  the  present  moment,  there 
cannot  be  a  syllogism.  For  nothing  perhaps  pre¬ 
vents  man’  belonging  at  a  particular  time  to 
everything  that  is  moving,  i.e.  if  nothing  else 
were  moving:  but  ‘moving’  is  possible  for  every 
horse;  yet  ‘man’  is  possible  for  no  horse.  Fur¬ 
ther  let  the  major  term  be  ‘animal’,  the  middle 
[75]  ‘moving’,  the  minor  ‘man’.  The  premisses 
then  will  be  as  before,  but  the  conclusion  nec¬ 
essary,  not  possible.  For  man  is  necessarily  ani¬ 
mal.  It  is  clear  then  that  the  universal  must  be 
understood  simply,  without  limitation  in  re¬ 
spect  of  time. 

Again  let  the  premiss  AB  be  universal  and 
negative,  and  assume  that  A  belongs  to  no  B, 
[20]  but  B  possibly  belongs  to  all  C.  These 
propositions  being  laid  down,  it  is  necessary 
that  A  possibly  belongs  to  no  C.  Suppose  that 
it  cannot  belong,  and  that  B  belongs  to  C,  as 


PRIOR  ANALYTICS 


35b  BOOK  L  CHAPTER  15 


above.1  It  is  necessary  then  that  A  belongs  to 
some  B:  for  we  have  a  syllogism  in  the  third 
[25]  figure:  but  this  is  impossible.  Thus  it  will 
be  possible  for  A  to  belong  to  no  C;  for  if  that 
is  supposed  false,  the  consequence  is  an  im¬ 
possible  one.  This  syllogism  then  does  not  es¬ 
tablish  that  which  is  possible  according  to  the 
definition,2  but  that  which  does  not  necessarily 
belong  to  any  part  of  the  subject  (for  this  is  the 
contradictory  of  the  assumption  which  was 
made:  for  it  was  supposed  that  A  necessarily 
[jo]  belongs  to  some  C,  but  the  syllogism  per 
impossibile  establishes  the  contradictory  which 
is  opposed  to  this).  Further,  it  is  clear  also  from 
an  example  that  the  conclusion  will  not  estab¬ 
lish  possibility.  Let  A  be  ‘raven’,  B  ‘intelligent’, 
and  C  ‘man’.  A  then  belongs  to  no  B:  for  no 
[^5]  intelligent  thing  is  a  raven.  But  B  is  pos¬ 
sible  for  all  C:  for  every  man  may  possibly  be 
intelligent.  But  A  necessarily  belongs  to  no  C: 
so  the  conclusion  does  not  establish  possibility. 
But  neither  is  it  always  necessary.  Let  A  be 
‘moving’,  B  ‘science’,  C  ‘man’.  A  then  will  be¬ 
long  to  no  B;  but  B  is  possible  for  all  C.  And 
the  conclusion  will  not  be  necessary.  For  it  is 
[40]  not  necessary  that  no  man  should  move; 
35a  rather  it  is  not  necessary  that  any  man 
should  move.  Clearly  then  the  conclusion  es¬ 
tablishes  that  one  term  does  not  necessarily  be¬ 
long  to  any  instance  of  another  term.  But  we 
must  take  our  terms  better. 

If  the  minor  premiss  is  negative  and  indi¬ 
cates  possibility,  from  the  actual  premisses 
taken  there  can  be  no  syllogism,  but  if  the  prob- 
[5]  lematic  premiss  is  converted,  a  syllogism 
will  be  possible,  as  before.3  Let  A  belong  to  all 
B,  and  let  B  possibly  belong  to  no  C.  If  the 
terms  are  arranged  thus,  nothing  necessarily 
follows:  but  if  the  proposition  BC  is  converted 
and  it  is  assumed  that  B  is  possible  for  all  C,  a 
[70]  syllogism  results  as  before:4  for  the  terms 
are  in  the  same  relative  positions.  Likewise  if 
both  the  relations  are  negative,  if  the  major 
premiss  states  that  A  does  not  belong  to  B,  and 
the  minor  premiss  indicates  that  B  may  possi¬ 
bly  belong  to  no  C.  Through  the  premisses  ac¬ 
tually  taken  nothing  necessary  results  in  any 
way;  but  if  the  problematic  premiss  is  con- 
[75]  verted,  we  shall  have  a  syllogism.  Sup¬ 
pose  that  A  belongs  to  no  B,  and  B  may  possi¬ 
bly  belong  to  no  C.  Through  these  comes  noth¬ 
ing  necessary.  But  if  B  is  assumed  to  be  possi¬ 
ble  for  all  C  (and  this  is  true)  and  if  the  prem¬ 
iss  AB  remains  as  before,  we  shall  again  have 

1  a  36.  2  Cf.  32s  1 8.  3  33a  7. 

4  34a  34- 


[20]  the  same  syllogism.  But  if  it  be  assumed 
that  B  does  not  belong  to  any  C,  instead  of 
possibly  not  belonging,  there  cannot  be  a  syllo¬ 
gism  anyhow,  whether  the  premiss  AB  is  nega¬ 
tive  or  affirmative.  As  common  instances  of  a 
necessary  and  positive  relation  we  may  take  the 
terms  white — animal — snow:  of  a  necessary 
and  negative  relation,  white — animal — pitch. 
[25]  Clearly  then  if  the  terms  are  universal, 
and  one  of  the  premisses  is  assertoric,  the  other 
problematic,  whenever  the  minor  premiss  is 
problematic  a  syllogism  always  results,  only 
sometimes  it  results  from  the  premisses  that  are 
taken,  sometimes  it  requires  the  conversion  of 
one  premiss.  We  have  stated  when  each  of 
[jo]  these  happens  and  the  reason  why.  But  if 
one  of  the  relations  is  universal,  the  other  par¬ 
ticular,  then  whenever  the  major  premiss  is 
universal  and  problematic,  whether  affirmative 
or  negative,  and  the  particular  is  affirmative 
and  assertoric,  there  will  be  a  perfect  syllo¬ 
gism,  just  as  when  the  terms  are  universal.  The 
[ J5]  demonstration  is  the  same  as  before.5 
But  whenever  the  major  premiss  is  universal, 
but  assertoric,  not  problematic,  and  the  minor 
is  particular  and  problematic,  whether  both 
premisses  are  negative  or  affirmative,  or  one  is 
negative,  the  other  affirmative,  in  all  cases 
there  will  be  an  imperfect  syllogism.  Only 
[^0]  some  of  them  will  be  proved  per  impossi - 
35b  bile,  others  by  the  conversion  of  the  prob¬ 
lematic  premiss,  as  has  been  shown  above.6  And 
a  syllogism  will  be  possible  by  means  of  con¬ 
version  when  the  major  premiss  is  universal 
and  assertoric,  whether  positive  or  negative, 
and  the  minor  particular,  negative,  and  prob- 
[5]  lematic,  e.g.  if  A  belongs  to  all  B  or  to  no 
B,  and  B  may  possibly  not  belong  to  some  C. 
For  if  the  premiss  BC  is  converted  in  respect 
of  possibility,  a  syllogism  results.  But  when¬ 
ever  the  particular  premiss  is  assertoric  and 
negative,  there  cannot  be  a  syllogism.  As  in¬ 
stances  of  the  positive  relation  we  may  take  the 
[70]  terms  white — animal — snow;  of  the  nega¬ 
tive,  white — animal — pitch.  For  the  demon¬ 
stration  must  be  made  through  the  indefinite 
nature  of  the  particular  premiss.  But  if  the  mi¬ 
nor  premiss  is  universal,  and  the  major  partic¬ 
ular,  whether  either  premiss  is  negative  or  af¬ 
firmative,  problematic  or  assertoric,  nohow  is  a 
syllogism  possible.  Nor  is  a  syllogism  possible 
[75]  when  the  premisses  are  particular  or  in¬ 
definite,  whether  problematic  or  assertoric,  or 
the  one  problematic,  the  other  assertoric.  The 
demonstration  is  the  same  as  above.7  As  in- 


4- 


52 


PRIOR  ANALYTICS 


36b 


stances  of  the  necessary  and  positive  relation 
we  may  take  the  terms  animal — white — man; 
of  the  necessary  and  negative  relation,  animal 
— white — garment.  It  is  evident  then  that  if 
[20]  the  major  premiss  is  universal,  a  syllo¬ 
gism  always  results,  but  if  the  minor  is  univer¬ 
sal  nothing  at  all  can  ever  be  proved. 

16 

Whenever  one  premiss  is  necessary,  the  other 
problematic,  there  will  be  a  syllogism  when 
the  terms  are  related  as  before;1  and  a  perfect 
[25]  syllogism  when  the  minor  premiss  is  nec¬ 
essary.  If  the  premisses  are  affirmative  the  con¬ 
clusion  will  be  problematic,  not  assertoric, 
whether  the  premisses  are  universal  or  not: 
but  if  one  is  affirmative,  the  other  negative, 
when  the  affirmative  is  necessary  the  conclu¬ 
sion  will  be  problematic,  not  negative  asser- 
[30]  toric;  but  when  the  negative  is  necessary 
the  conclusion  will  be  problematic  negative, 
and  assertoric  negative,  whether  the  premisses 
are  universal  or  not.  Possibility  in  the  conclu¬ 
sion  must  be  understood  in  the  same  manner 
as  before.2  There  cannot  be  an  inference  to  the 
necessary  negative  proposition:  for  ‘not  neces- 
[35]  sarily  to  belong’  is  different  from  ‘neces¬ 
sarily  not  to  belong’. 

If  the  premisses  are  affirmative,  clearly  the 
conclusion  which  follows  is  not  necessary.  Sup¬ 
pose  A  necessarily  belongs  to  all  B,  and  let  B 
be  possible  for  all  C.  We  shall  have  an  imper¬ 
fect  syllogism  to  prove  that  A  may  belong  to 
all  C.  That  it  is  imperfect  is  clear  from  the 
[40]  proof:  for  it  will  be  proved  in  the  same 
3 6a  manner  as  above.3  Again,  let  A  be  possible 
for  all  B,  and  let  B  necessarily  belong  to  all  C. 
We  shall  then  have  a  syllogism  to  prove  that 
A  may  belong  to  all  C,  not  that  A  does  belong 
[5]  to  all  C:  and  it  is  perfect,  not  imperfect: 
for  it  is  completed  directly  through  the  origi¬ 
nal  premisses. 

But  if  the  premisses  are  not  similar  in  qual¬ 
ity,  suppose  first  that  the  negative  premiss  is 
necessary,  and  let  A  necessarily  not  be  possible 
for  any  B,  but  let  B  be  possible  for  all  C.  It  is 
[jo]  necessary  then  that  A  belongs  to  no  C. 
For  suppose  A  to  belong  to  all  C  or  to  some  C. 
Now  we  assumed  that  A  is  not  possible  for  any 
B.  Since  then  the  negative  proposition  is  con¬ 
vertible,  B  is  not  possible  for  any  A .  But  A  is 
supposed  to  belong  to  all  C  or  to  some  C.  Con¬ 
sequently  B  will  not  be  possible  for  any  C  or 
[75]  for  all  C.  But  it  was  originally  laid  down 

1  Cf.  a25-b  8.  2  33b  29,  34b  27. 

3  34a  34'b  6. 


that  B  is  possible  for  all  C.  And  it  is  clear  that 
the  possibility  of  not  belonging  can  be  inferred, 
since  the  fact  of  not  belonging  is  inferred. 
Again,  let  the  affirmative  premiss  be  necessary, 
and  let  A  possibly  not  belong  to  any  B,  and  let 
B  necessarily  belong  to  all  C.  The  syllogism 
[20]  will  be  perfect,  but  it  will  establish  a  prob¬ 
lematic  negative,  not  an  assertoric  negative. 
For  the  major  premiss  was  problematic,  and 
further  it  is  not  possible  to  prove  the  assertoric 
conclusion  per  impossibile.  For  if  it  were  sup¬ 
posed  that  A  belongs  to  some  C,  and  it  is  laid 
down  that  A  possibly  does  not  belong  to  any 
B,  no  impossible  relation  between  B  and  C  fol¬ 
lows  from  these  premisses.  But  if  the  minor 
[25]  premiss  is  negative,  when  it  is  problemat¬ 
ic  a  syllogism  is  possible  by  conversion,  as 
above;4  but  when  it  is  necessary  no  syllogism 
can  be  formed.  Nor  again  when  both  premisses 
are  negative,  and  the  minor  is  necessary.  The 
same  terms  as  before5  serve  both  for  the  posi- 
[jo]  tive  relation — white — animal — snow,  and 
for  the  negative  relation — white — animal — 
pitch. 

The  same  relation  will  obtain  in  particular 
syllogisms.  Whenever  the  negative  proposition 
is  necessary,  the  conclusion  will  be  negative  as¬ 
sertoric:  e.g.  if  it  is  not  possible  that  A  should 
[55]  belong  to  any  B,  but  B  may  belong  to 
some  of  the  Cs,  it  is  necessary  that  A  should  not 
belong  to  some  of  the  Cs.  For  if  A  belongs  to 
all  C,  but  cannot  belong  to  any  B,  neither  can 
B  belong  to  any  A.  So  if  A  belongs  to  all  C,  to 
none  of  the  Cs  can  B  belong.  But  it  was  laid 
down  that  B  may  belong  to  some  C.  But  when 
[4o\  the  particular  affirmative  in  the  negative 
syllogism,  e.g.  BC  the  minor  premiss,  or  the 
universal  proposition  in  the  affirmative  syllo- 
36b  gism,  e.g.  AB  the  major  premiss,  is  neces¬ 
sary,  there  will  not  be  an  assertoric  conclusion. 
The  demonstration  is  the  same  as  before.6  But 
if  the  minor  premiss  is  universal,  and  problem¬ 
atic,  whether  affirmative  or  negative,  and  the 
[5]  major  premiss  is  particular  and  necessary, 
there  cannot  be  a  syllogism.  Premisses  of  this 
kind  are  possible  both  where  the  relation  is 
positive  and  necessary,  e.g.  animal — white — 
man,  and  where  it  is  necessary  and  negative, 
e.g.  animal — white — garment.  But  when  the 
universal  is  necessary,  the  particular  problem¬ 
atic,  if  the  universal  is  negative  we  may  take 
the  terms  animal — white — raven  to  illustrate 
[jo]  the  positive  relation,  or  animal — white — 
pitch  to  illustrate  the  negative;  and  if  the  uni¬ 
versal  is  affirmative  we  may  take  the  terms  ani- 
4  35b  7*  6  35b  IO*  6a  I9'25* 


37*  BOOK  I,  CHAPTERS  15-17  53 

mal — white — swan  to  illustrate  the  positive  re*  should  be  white),  but  it  is  not  true  to  say  that 


lation,  and  animal — white — snow  to  illustrate 
the  negative  and  necessary  relation.  Nor  again 
is  a  syllogism  possible  when  the  premisses  are 
indefinite,  or  both  particular.  Terms  applicable 
in  either  case  to  illustrate  the  positive  relation 
are  animal — white — man:  to  illustrate  the  neg- 
[75]  ative,  animal — white — inanimate.  For  the 
relation  of  animal  to  some  white,  and  of  white 
to  some  inanimate,  is  both  necessary  and  posi¬ 
tive  and  necessary  and  negative.  Similarly  if 
the  relation  is  problematic:  so  the  terms  may 
be  used  for  all  cases. 

Clearly  then  from  what  has  been  said  a  syllo- 
[20]  gism  results  or  not  from  similar  relations 
of  the  terms  whether  we  are  dealing  with  sim* 
pie  existence  or  necessity,  with  this  exception, 
that  if  the  negative  premiss  is  assertoric  the 
conclusion  is  problematic,  but  if  the  negative 
premiss  is  necessary  the  conclusion  is  both 
problematic  and  negative  assertoric.  [It  is  clear 
also  that  all  the  syllogisms  are  imperfect  and 
[25]  are  perfected  by  means  of  the  figures 
above  mentioned.] 

*7 

In  the  second  figure  whenever  both  premisses 
are  problematic,  no  syllogism  is  possible, 
whether  the  premisses  are  affirmative  or  nega¬ 
tive,  universal  or  particular.  But  when  one 
remiss  is  assertoric,  the  other  problematic,  if 
50]  the  affirmative  is  assertoric  no  syllogism  is 
possible,  but  if  the  universal  negative  is  asser¬ 
toric  a  conclusion  can  always  be  drawn.  Sim¬ 
ilarly  when  one  premiss  is  necessary,  the  other 
problematic.  Here  also  we  must  understand 
the  term  ‘possible’  in  the  conclusion,  in  the 
same  sense  as  before.1 

[55]  First  we  must  point  out  that  the  negative 
problematic  proposition  is  not  convertible,  e.g, 
if  A  may  belong  to  no  B,  it  does  not  follow 
that  B  may  belong  to  no  A,  For  suppose  it  to 
follow  and  assume  that  B  may  belong  to  no  A. 
Since  then  problematic  affirmations  are  con- 
[40]  vertible  with  negations,  whether  they  are 
contraries  or  contradictories,  and  since  B  may 
37*  belong  to  no  A,  it  is  clear  that  B  may  be¬ 
long  to  all  A .  But  this  is  false:  for  if  all  this 
can  be  that,  it  does  not  follow  that  all  that  can 
be  this:  consequently  the  negative  proposition 
is  not  convertible.  Further,  these  propositions 
are  not  incompatible,  ‘ A  may  belong  to  no  B\ 
[5]  ‘B  necessarily  does  not  belong  to  some  of 
the  As ’;  e.g.  it  is  possible  that  no  man  should 
be  white  (for  it  is  also  possible  that  every  man 
1  33b  29>  34b  27. 


it  is  possible  that  no  white  thing  should  be  a 
man:  for  many  white  things  are  necessarily 
not  men,  and  the  necessary  (as  we  saw2)  is 
other  than  the  possible. 

Moreover  it  is  not  possible  to  prove  the  con- 
[/o]  vertibility  of  these  propositions  by  a  re- 
ductio  ad  absurdum ,  i.e.  by  claiming  assent  to 
the  following  argument:  ‘since  it  is  false  that 
B  may  belong  to  no  A,  it  is  true  that  it  cannot 
belong  to  no  A,  for  the  one  statement  is  the 
contradictory  of  the  other.  But  if  this  is  so,  it  is 
true  that  B  necessarily  belongs  to  some  of  the 
As:  consequently  A  necessarily  belongs  to  some 
of  the  Bs.  But  this  is  impossible.’  The  argu¬ 
ment  cannot  be  admitted,  for  it  does  not  fol¬ 
low  that  some  A  is  necessarily  B,  if  it  is  not 
[75]  possible  that  no  A  should  be  B.  For  the 
latter  expression  is  used  in  two  senses,  one  if 
some  A  is  necessarily  B,  another  if  some  A  is 
necessarily  not  B.  For  it  is  not  true  to  say  that 
that  which  necessarily  does  not  belong  to  some 
of  the  As  may  possibly  not  belong  to  any  A, 
just  as  it  is  not  true  to  say  that  what  necessarily 
[20]  belongs  to  some  A  may  possibly  belong  to 
all  A .  If  any  one  then  should  claim  that  because 
it  is  not  possible  for  C  to  belong  to  all  D,  it 
necessarily  does  not  belong  to  some  D,  he 
would  make  a  false  assumption:  for  it  does  be¬ 
long  to  all  D,  but  because  in  some  cases  it  be¬ 
longs  necessarily,  therefore  we  say  that  it  is  not 
possible  for  it  to  belong  to  all.  Hence  both  the 
propositions  ‘A  necessarily  belongs  to  some  B’ 
[25]  and  ( A  necessarily  does  not  belong  to 
some  B *  are  opposed  to  the  proposition  *  A  may 
belong  to  all  B\  Similarly  also  they  are  op¬ 
posed  to  the  proposition  ‘A  may  belong  to  no 
B\  It  is  clear  then  that  in  relation  to  what  is 
possible  and  not  possible,  in  the  sense  orig¬ 
inally  defined,3  we  must  assume,  not  that  A 
necessarily  belongs  to  some  B,  but  that  A  nec¬ 
essarily  does  not  belong  to  some  B.  But  if  this 
[30]  is  assumed,  no  absurdity  results:  conse¬ 
quently  no  syllogism.  It  is  clear  from  what  has 
been  said  that  the  negative  proposition  is  not 
convertible. 

This  being  proved,  suppose  it  possible  that 
A  may  belong  to  no  B  and  to  all  C.  By  means 
of  conversion  no  syllogism  will  result:  for  the 
major  premiss,  as  has  been  said,  is  not  con- 
[35]  vertible.  Nor  can  a  proof  be  obtained  by  a 
reductio  ad  absurdum:  for  if  it  is  assumed  that 
B  can  belong  to  all  C,  no  false  consequence  re¬ 
sults:  for  A  may  belong  both  to  all  C  and  to  no 
C.  In  general,  if  there  is  a  syllogism,  it  is  clear 
232*28.  3  32®  18. 


54 

that  its  conclusion  will  be  problematic  because 
[40]  neither  of  the  premisses  is  assertoric;  and 
this  must  be  either  affirmative  or  negative.  But 
neither  is  possible.  Suppose  the  conclusion  is 
3 7b  affirmative:  it  will  be  proved  by  an  ex¬ 
ample  that  the  predicate  cannot  belong  to  the 
subject.  Suppose  the  conclusion  is  negative:  it 
will  be  proved  that  it  is  not  problematic  but 
necessary.  Let  A  be  white,  B  man,  C  horse.  It  is 
[5]  possible  then  for  A  to  belong  to  all  of  the 
one  and  to  none  of  the  other.  But  it  is  not  pos¬ 
sible  for  B  to  belong  nor  not  to  belong  to  C . 
That  it  is  not  possible  for  it  to  belong,  is  clear. 
For  no  horse  is  a  man.  Neither  is  it  possible 
for  it  not  to  belong.  For  it  is  necessary  that  no 
horse  should  be  a  man,  but  the  necessary  we 
[/o]  found  to  be  different  from  the  possible.1 
No  syllogism  then  results.  A  similar  proof  can 
be  given  if  the  major  premiss  is  negative,  the 
minor  affirmative,  or  if  both  are  affirmative  or 
negative.  The  demonstration  can  be  made  by 
means  of  the  same  terms.  And  whenever  one 
premiss  is  universal,  the  other  particular,  or 
both  are  particular  or  indefinite,  or  in  what- 
[75]  ever  other  way  the  premisses  can  be  al¬ 
tered,  the  proof  will  always  proceed  through 
the  same  terms.  Clearly  then,  if  both  the  prem¬ 
isses  are  problematic,  no  syllogism  results. 

18 

But  if  one  premiss  is  assertoric,  the  other  prob- 
[20]  lematic,  if  the  affirmative  is  assertoric  and 
the  negative  problematic  no  syllogism  will  be 
possible,  whether  the  premisses  are  universal 
or  particular.  The  proof  is  the  same  as  above, 
and  by  means  of  the  same  terms.  But  when  the 
affirmative  premiss  is  problematic,  and  the  neg- 
[25]  ative  assertoric,  we  shall  have  a  syllogism. 
Suppose  A  belongs  to  no  B,  but  can  belong  to 
all  C.  If  the  negative  proposition  is  converted, 
B  will  belong  to  no  A.  But  A  ex  hypothesi  can 
belong  to  all  C:  so  a  syllogism  is  made,  prov¬ 
ing  by  means  of  the  first  figure  that  B  may  be¬ 
long  to  no  C.  Similarly  also  if  the  minor  prem¬ 
iss  is  negative.  But  if  both  premisses  are  nega¬ 
te]  tive,  one  being  assertoric,  the  other  prob¬ 
lematic,  nothing  follows  necessarily  from  these 
premisses  as  they  stand,  but  if  the  problematic 
premiss  is  converted  into  its  complementary 
affirmative  a  syllogism  is  formed  to  prove  that 
B  may  belong  to  no  C,  as  before:  for  we  shall 
[35]  again  have  the  first  figure.  But  if  both 
premisses  are  affirmative,  no  syllogism  will  be 
possible.  This  arrangement  of  terms  is  possible 
both  when  the  relation  is  positive,  e.g.  health, 
1  32a  28. 


38a 

animal,  man,  and  when  it  is  negative,  e.g. 
health,  horse,  man. 

[40]  The  same  will  hold  good  if  the  syllogisms 
are  particular.  Whenever  the  affirmative  prop¬ 
osition  is  assertoric,  whether  universal  or  par- 
383  ticular,  no  syllogism  is  possible  (this  is 
proved  similarly  and  by  the  same  examples  as 
above),  but  when  the  negative  proposition  is 
assertoric,  a  conclusion  can  be  drawn  by  means 
of  conversion,  as  before.  Again  if  both  the  rela- 
[5]  tions  are  negative,  and  the  assertoric  prop¬ 
osition  is  universal,  although  no  conclusion 
follows  from  the  actual  premisses,  a  syllogism 
can  be  obtained  by  converting  the  problematic 
premiss  into  its  complementary  affirmative  as 
before.  But  if  the  negative  proposition  is  asser¬ 
toric,  but  particular,  no  syllogism  is  possible, 
whether  the  other  premiss  is  affirmative  or 
[70]  negative.  Nor  can  a  conclusion  be  drawn 
when  both  premisses  are  indefinite,  whether 
affirmative  or  negative,  or  particular.  The  proof 
is  the  same  and  by  the  same  terms. 

*9 

If  one  of  the  premisses  is  necessary,  the  other 
problematic,  then  if  the  negative  is  necessary  a 
syllogistic  conclusion  can  be  drawn,  not  merely 
[75]  a  negative  problematic  but  also  a  negative 
assertoric  conclusion;  but  if  the  affirmative 
premiss  is  necessary,  no  conclusion  is  possible. 
Suppose  that  A  necessarily  belongs  to  no  B,  but 
may  belong  to  all  C.  If  the  negative  premiss  is 
converted  B  will  belong  to  no  A:  but  A  ex  hy¬ 
pothesi  is  capable  of  belonging  to  all  C:  so  once 
[20]  more  a  conclusion  is  drawn  by  the  first 
figure  that  B  may  belong  to  no  C.  But  at  the 
same  time  it  is  clear  that  B  will  not  belong  to 
any  C.  For  assume  that  it  does:  then  if  A  can¬ 
not  belong  to  any  B,  and  B  belongs  to  some  of 
the  Cs ,  A  cannot  belong  to  some  of  the  Cs:  but 
[25]  ex  hypothesi  it  may  belong  to  all.  A  sim¬ 
ilar  proof  can  be  given  if  the  minor  premiss  is 
negative.  Again  let  the  affirmative  proposition 
be  necessary,  and  the  other  problematic;  i.e. 
suppose  that  A  may  belong  to  no  B,  but  neces¬ 
sarily  belongs  to  all  C.  When  the  terms  are  ar¬ 
ranged  in  this  way,  no  syllogism  is  possible. 
[30]  For  ( 1)  it  sometimes  turns  out  that  B  nec¬ 
essarily  does  not  belong  to  C.  Let  A  be  white, 
B  man,  C  swan.  White  then  necessarily  be¬ 
longs  to  swan,  but  may  belong  to  no  man;  and 
man  necessarily  belongs  to  no  swan.  Clearly 
then  we  cannot  draw  a  problematic  conclusion; 
[55]  for  that  which  is  necessary  is  admittedly 
distinct  from  that  which  is  possible.  (2)  Nor 
again  can  we  draw  a  necessary  conclusion:  for 


PRIOR  ANALYTICS 


39‘ 

that  presupposes  that  both  premisses  are  neces¬ 
sary,  or  at  any  rate  the  negative  premiss.  (3) 
Further  it  is  possible  also,  when  the  terms  are 
so  arranged,  that  B  should  belong  to  C:  for 
nothing  prevents  C  falling  under  B,  A  being 
[40]  possible  for  all  B,  and  necessarily  belong¬ 
ing  to  C;  e.g.  if  C  stands  for  ‘awake',  B  for 
‘animal',  A  for  ‘motion'.  For  motion  necessarily 
38b  belongs  to  what  is  awake,  and  is  possible 
for  every  animal:  and  everything  that  is  awake 
is  animal.  Clearly  then  the  conclusion  cannot 
be  the  negative  assertion,  if  the  relation  must 
be  positive  when  the  terms  are  related  as  above. 
Nor  can  the  opposite  affirmations  be  estab¬ 
lished:  consequently  no  syllogism  is  possible. 
[5]  A  similar  proof  is  possible  if  the  major 
premiss  is  affirmative. 

But  if  the  premisses  are  similar  in  quality, 
when  they  are  negative  a  syllogism  can  always 
be  formed  by  converting  the  problematic  prem¬ 
iss  into  its  complementary  affirmative  as  be¬ 
fore.  Suppose  A  necessarily  does  not  belong  to 
[/o]  B,  and  possibly  may  not  belong  to  C:  if 
the  premisses  are  converted  B  belongs  to  no  A, 
and  A  may  possibly  belong  to  all  C:  thus  we 
have  the  first  figure.  Similarly  if  the  minor 
premiss  is  negative.  But  if  the  premisses  are 
affirmative  there  cannot  be  a  syllogism.  Clearly 
[75]  the  conclusion  cannot  be  a  negative  asser- 
toric  or  a  negative  necessary  proposition  be¬ 
cause  no  negative  premiss  has  been  laid  down 
either  in  the  assertoric  or  in  the  necessary 
mode.  Nor  can  the  conclusion  be  a  problematic 
negative  proposition.  For  if  the  terms  are  so 
related,  there  are  cases  in  which  B  necessarily 
[20]  will  not  belong  to  C;  e.g.  suppose  that  A 
is  white,  B  swan,  C  man.  Nor  can  the  opposite 
affirmations  be  established,  since  we  have 
shown  a  case  in  which  B  necessarily  does  not 
belong  to  C.  A  syllogism  then  is  not  possible  at 
all. 

Similar  relations  will  obtain  in  particular 
[25]  syllogisms.  For  whenever  the  negative 
proposition  is  universal  and  necessary,  a  syllo¬ 
gism  will  always  be  possible  to  prove  both  a 
problematic  and  a  negative  assertoric  proposi¬ 
tion  (the  proof  proceeds  by  conversion);  but 
when  the  affirmative  proposition  is  universal 
and  necessary,  no  syllogistic  conclusion  can  be 
drawn.  This  can  be  proved  in  the  same  way  as 
for  universal  propositions,  and  by  the  same 
[30]  terms.1  Nor  is  a  syllogistic  conclusion  pos¬ 
sible  when  both  premisses  are  affirmative:  this 
also  may  be  proved  as  above.2  But  when  both 
premisses  are  negative,  and  the  premiss  that 

1  Cf.  a  26-b  5.  Ml.  12-23. 


55 

definitely  disconnects  two  terms  is  universal 
and  necessary,  though  nothing  follows  neces¬ 
sarily  from  the  premisses  as  they  are  stated,  a 
conclusion  can  be  drawn  as  above3  if  the  prob- 
[35]  lematic  premiss  is  converted  into  its  com¬ 
plementary  affirmative.  But  if  both  are  indefi¬ 
nite  or  particular,  no  syllogism  can  be  formed 
The  same  proof  will  serve,  and  the  same  terms.4 

It  is  clear  then  from  what  has  been  said  that  if 
the  universal  and  negative  premiss  is  necessary, 
[40]  a  syllogism  is  always  possible,  proving  not 
merely  a  negative  problematic,  but  also  a  nega¬ 
tive  assertoric  proposition;  but  if  the  affirma¬ 
tive  premiss  is  necessary  no  conclusion  can  be 
drawn.  It  is  clear  too  that  a  syllogism  is  possible 
or  not  under  the  same  conditions  whether  the 
39a  mode  of  the  premisses  is  assertoric  or  nec¬ 
essary.  And  it  is  clear  that  all  the  syllogisms 
are  imperfect,  and  are  completed  by  means  of 
the  figures  mentioned. 

20 

In  the  last  figure  a  syllogism  is  possible  whether 
[5]  both  or  only  one  of  the  premisses  is  prob¬ 
lematic.  When  the  premisses  are  problematic 
the  conclusion  will  be  problematic;  and  also 
when  one  premiss  is  problematic,  the  other  as¬ 
sertoric.  But  when  the  other  premiss  is  neces¬ 
sary,  if  it  is  affirmative  the  conclusion  will  be 
neither  necessary  or  assertoric;  but  if  it  is  nega- 
[/o]  tive  the  syllogism  will  result  in  a  negative 
assertoric  proposition,  as  above.5  In  these  also 
we  must  understand  the  expression  ‘possible' 
in  the  conclusion  in  the  same  way  as  before. 

First  let  the  premisses  be  problematic  and 
[75]  suppose  that  both  A  and  B  may  possibly 
belong  to  every  C.  Since  then  the  affirmative 
proposition  is  convertible  into  a  particular,  and 
B  may  possibly  belong  to  every  C,  it  follows 
that  C  may  possibly  belong  to  some  B.  So,  if  A 
is  possible  for  every  C,  and  C  is  possible  for 
some  of  the  Bs,  then  A  is  possible  for  some  of 
the  Bs.  For  we  have  got  the  first  figure.  And 
[20]  if  A  may  possibly  belong  to  no  C,  but  B 
may  possibly  belong  to  all  C,  it  follows  that  A 
may  possibly  not  belong  to  some  B:  for  we  shall 
have  the  first  figure  again  by  conversion.  But  if 
both  premisses  should  be  negative  no  necessary 
consequence  will  follow  from  them  as  they  are 
[25]  stated,  but  if  the  premisses  are  converted 
into  their  corresponding  affirmatives  there  will 
be  a  syllogism  as  before.  For  if  A  and  B  may 
possibly  not  belong  to  C,  if  ‘may  possibly  be¬ 
long'  is  substituted  we  shall  again  have  the  first 
figure  by  means  of  conversion.  But  if  one  of 

3 11.  25-7.  4  Cf.  3 6b  12-18.  638a  14. 


BOOK  I,  CHAPTERS  17-20 


56  PRIOR  ANALYTICS  40* 


the  premisses  is  universal,  the  other  particular, 
a  syllogism  will  be  possible,  or  not,  under  the 
[jo]  same  arrangement  of  the  terms  as  in  the 
case  of  assertoric  propositions.  Suppose  that  A 
may  possibly  belong  to  all  C,  and  B  to  some  C. 
We  shall  have  the  first  figure  again  if  the  par¬ 
ticular  premiss  is  converted.  For  if  A  is  pos¬ 
sible  for  all  C,  and  C  for  some  of  the  Bs,  then 
[ ^5]  A  is  possible  for  some  of  the  Bs .  Similarly 
if  the  proposition  BC  is  universal.  Likewise  al¬ 
so  if  the  proposition  AC  is  negative,  and  the 
proposition  BC  affirmative:  for  we  shall  again 
have  the  first  figure  by  conversion.  But  if  both 
premisses  should  be  negative — the  one  univer¬ 
sal  and  the  other  particular — although  no  syllo- 
39b  gistic  conclusion  will  follow  from  the  prem¬ 
isses  as  they  are  put,  it  will  follow  if  they  are 
converted,  as  above.  But  when  both  premisses 
are  indefinite  or  particular,  no  syllogism  can  be 
formed:  for  A  must  belong  sometimes  to  all  B 
and  sometimes  to  no  B .  To  illustrate  the  affirm- 
[5]  ative  relation  take  the  terms  animal — man 
— white;  to  illustrate  the  negative,  take  the 
terms  horse — man — white — white  being  the 
middle  term. 

21 

If  one  premiss  is  pure,  the  other  problematic, 
the  conclusion  will  be  problematic,  not  pure; 
and  a  syllogism  will  be  possible  under  the  same 
[/o]  arrangement  of  the  terms  as  before.  First 
let  the  premisses  be  affirmative:  suppose  that  A 
belongs  to  all  C,  and  B  may  possibly  belong 
to  all  C.  If  the  proposition  BC  is  convert¬ 
ed,  we  shall  have  the  first  figure,  and  the 
conclusion  that  A  may  possibly  belong  to  some 
[75]  of  the  Bs.  For  when  one  of  the  premisses 
in  the  first  figure  is  problematic,  the  conclusion 
also  (as  we  saw1)  is  problematic.  Similarly  if 
the  proposition  BC  is  pure,  AC  problematic;  or 
it  AC  is  negative,  BC  affirmative,  no  matter 
which  of  the  two  is  pure;  in  both  cases  the  con- 
[20]  elusion  will  be  problematic:  for  the  first 
figure  is  obtained  once  more,  and  it  has  been 
proved  that  if  one  premiss  is  problematic  in 
that  figure  the  conclusion  also  will  be  problem¬ 
atic.  But  if  the  minor  premiss  BC  is  negative, 
or  if  both  premisses  are  negative,  no  syllogistic 
conclusion  can  be  drawn  from  the  premisses  as 
they  stand,  but  if  they  are  converted  a  syllogism 
[25]  is  obtained  as  before. 

If  one  of  the  premisses  is  universal,  the  other 
particular,  then  when  both  are  affirmative,  or 
when  the  universal  is  negative,  the  particular 
affirmative,  we  shall  have  the  same  sort  of  syl- 

1  33b  25-40- 


logisms:  for  all  are  completed  by  means  of  the 
[30]  first  figure.  So  it  is  clear  that  we  shall  have 
not  a  pure  but  a  problematic  syllogistic  conclu¬ 
sion.  But  if  the  affirmative  premiss  is  universal, 
the  negative  particular,  the  proof  will  proceed 
by  a  reductio  ad  impossibile.  Suppose  that  B  be¬ 
longs  to  all  C,  and  A  may  possibly  not  belong  to 
[33]  some  C:  it  follows  that  A  may  possibly 
not  belong  to  some  B.  For  if  A  necessarily  be¬ 
longs  to  all  B,  and  B  (as  has  been  assumed)  be¬ 
longs  to  all  C,  A  will  necessarily  belong  to  all 
C:  for  this  has  been  proved  before.2  But  it  was 
assumed  at  the  outset  that  A  may  possibly  not 
belong  to  some  C. 

40*  Whenever  both  premisses  are  indefinite  or 
particular,  no  syllogism  will  be  possible.  The 
demonstration  is  the  same  as  was  given  in  the 
case  of  universal  premisses,  and  proceeds  by 
means  of  the  same  terms. 

22 

If  one  of  the  premisses  is  necessary,  the  other 
[5]  problematic,  when  the  premisses  are  af¬ 
firmative  a  problematic  affirmative  conclusion 
can  always  be  drawn;  when  one  proposition  is 
affirmative,  the  other  negative,  if  the  affirmative 
is  necessary  a  problematic  negative  can  be  in¬ 
ferred;  but  if  the  negative  proposition  is  neces¬ 
sary  both  a  problematic  and  a  pure  negative 
conclusion  are  possible.  But  a  necessary  nega- 
[/o]  tive  conclusion  will  not  be  possible,  any 
more  than  in  the  other  figures.  Suppose  first 
that  the  premisses  are  affirmative,  i.e.  that  A 
necessarily  belongs  to  all  C,  and  B  may  possibly 
belong  to  all  C.  Since  then  A  must  belong  to  all 
C,  and  C  may  belong  to  some  B,  it  follows  that 
[75]  A  may  (not  does)  belong  to  some  B:  for 
so  it  resulted3  in  the  first  figure.  A  similar  proof 
may  be  given  if  the  proposition  BC  is  necessary, 
and  AC  is  problematic.  Again  suppose  one 
proposition  is  affirmative,  the  other  negative, 
the  affirmative  being  necessary:  i.e.  suppose  A 
may  possibly  belong  to  no  C,  but  B  necessarily 
[20]  belongs  to  all  C.  We  shall  have  the  first 
figure  once  more:  and — since  the  negative 
premiss  is  problematic — it  is  clear  that  the  con¬ 
clusion  will  be  problematic:  for  when  the  prem¬ 
isses  stand  thus  in  the  first  figure,  the  conclu¬ 
sion  (as  we  found4)  is  problematic.  But  if  the 
[25]  negative  premiss  is  necessary,  the  conclu¬ 
sion  will  be  not  only  that  A  may  possibly  not 
belong  to  some  B  but  also  that  it  does  not  be¬ 
long  to  some  B.  For  suppose  that  A  necessarily 
does  not  belong  to  C,  but  B  may  belong  to  all 
C.  If  the  affirmative  proposition  BC  is  con- 
2  3°*  I5'23-  8  35a  26-8  4  36®  17-25. 


41 

verted,  we  shall  have  the  first  figure,  and  the 
negative  premiss  is  necessary.  But  when  the 
[3°]  premisses  stood  thus,  it  resulted1  that  A 
might  possibly  not  belong  to  some  C,  and  that 
it  did  not  belong  to  some  C;  consequently  here 
it  follows  that  A  does  not  belong  to  some  B. 
But  when  the  minor  premiss  is  negative,  if  it  is 

froblematic  we  shall  have  a  syllogism  by  alter- 
35]  *ng  the  premiss  into  its  complementary 
affirmative,  as  before;  but  if  it  is  necessary  no 
syllogism  can  be  formed.  For  A  sometimes 
necessarily  belongs  to  all  B,  and  sometimes 
cannot  possibly  belong  to  any  B .  To  illustrate 
the  former  take  the  terms  sleep — sleeping  horse 
— man;  to  illustrate  the  latter  take  the  terms 
sleep — waking  horse — man. 

Similar  results  will  obtain  if  one  of  the  terms 
[40]  is  related  universally  to  the  middle,  the 
other  in  part.  If  both  premisses  are  affirmative, 
40b  the  conclusion  will  be  problematic,  not 
pure;  and  also  when  one  premiss  is  negative, 
the  other  affirmative,  the  latter  being  necessary. 
But  when  the  negative  premiss  is  necessary,  the 
conclusion  also  will  be  a  pure  negative  proposi- 
[5]  tion;  for  the  same  kind  of  proof  can  be 
given  whether  the  terms  are  universal  or  not. 
For  the  syllogisms  must  be  made  perfect  by 
means  of  the  first  figure,  so  that  a  result  which 
follows  in  the  first  figure  follows  also  in  the 
third.  But  when  the  minor  premiss  is  negative 
[/o]  and  universal,  if  it  is  problematic  a  syllo¬ 
gism  can  be  formed  by  means  of  conversion; 
but  if  it  is  necessary  a  syllogism  is  not  possible. 
The  proof  will  follow  the  same  course  as 
where  the  premisses  are  universal;  and  the 
same  terms  may  be  used. 

It  is  clear  then  in  this  figure  also  when  and 
how  a  syllogism  can  be  formed,  and  when  the 
conclusion  is  problematic,  and  when  it  is  pure. 
It  is  evident  also  that  all  syllogisms  in  this  fig- 
[75]  ure  are  imperfect,  and  that  they  are  made 
perfect  by  means  of  the  first  figure. 

23 

It  is  clear  from  what  has  been  said  that  the  syl¬ 
logisms  in  these  figures  are  made  perfect  by 
means  of  universal  syllogisms  in  the  first  figure 
and  are  reduced  to  them.  That  every  syllogism 
[20]  without  qualification  can  be  so  treated, 
will  be  clear  presently,  when  it  has  been  proved 
that  every  syllogism  is  formed  through  one  or 
other  of  these  figures. 

It  is  necessary  that  every  demonstration  and 
every  syllogism  should  prove  either  that  some¬ 
thing  belongs  or  that  it  does  not,  and  this  either 
1  36*  32-9 


57 

[25]  universally  or  in  part,  and  further  either 
ostensively  or  hypothetically.  One  sort  of  hy¬ 
pothetical  proof  is  the  reductio  ad  impossibile. 
Let  us  speak  first  of  ostensive  syllogisms:  for 
after  these  have  been  pointed  out  the  truth  of 
our  contention  will  be  clear  with  regard  to 
those  which  are  proved  per  impossibile ,  and  in 
general  hypothetically. 

[30]  If  then  one  wants  to  prove  syllogistically 
A  of  B,  either  as  an  attribute  of  it  or  as  not  an 
attribute  of  it,  one  must  assert  something  of 
something  else.  If  now  A  should  be  asserted  of 
B,  the  proposition  originally  in  question  will 
have  been  assumed.  But  if  A  should  be  asserted 
of  C,  but  C  should  not  be  asserted  of  anything, 
nor  anything  of  it,  nor  anything  else  of  A,  no 
svllogism  will  be  possible.  For  nothing  neces- 
[35]  sarily  follows  from  the  assertion  of  some 
one  thing  concerning  some  other  single  thing. 
Thus  we  must  take  another  premiss  as  well.  If 
then  A  be  asserted  of  something  else,  or  some¬ 
thing  else  of  A ,  or  something  different  of  C, 
nothing  prevents  a  syllogism  being  formed,  but 
it  will  not  be  in  relation  to  B  through  the  prem- 
[40]  isses  taken.  Nor  when  C  belongs  to  some¬ 
thing  else,  and  that  to  something  else  and  so 
on,  no  connexion  however  being  made  with  B, 
41a  will  a  syllogism  be  possible  concerning  A 
in  its  relation  to  B .  For  in  general  we  stated2 
that  no  syllogism  can  establish  the  attribution 
of  one  thing  to  another,  unless  some  middle 
term  is  taken,  which  is  somehow  related  to 
each  by  way  of  predication.  For  the  syllogism 
[5]  in  general  is  made  out  of  premisses,  and  a 
syllogism  referring  to  this  out  of  premisses 
with  the  same  reference,  and  a  syllogism  relat¬ 
ing  this  to  that  proceeds  through  premisses 
which  relate  this  to  that.  But  it  is  impossible  to 
take  a  premiss  in  reference  to  B ,  if  we  neither 
affirm  nor  deny  anything  of  it;  or  again  to  take 
a  premiss  relating  A  to  B,  if  we  take  nothing 
[/o]  common,  but  affirm  or  deny  peculiar  at¬ 
tributes  of  each.  So  we  must  take  something 
midway  between  the  two,  which  will  connect 
the  predications,  if  we  are  to  have  a  syllogism 
relating  this  to  that.  If  then  we  must  take  some¬ 
thing  common  in  relation  to  both,  and  this  is 
[75]  possible  in  three  ways  (either  by  predicat¬ 
ing  A  of  C,  and  C  of  B,  or  C  of  both,  or  both  of 
C),  and  these  are  the  figures  of  which  we  have 
spoken,  it  is  clear  that  every  syllogism  must  be 
made  in  one  or  other  of  these  figures.  The 
argument  is  the  same  if  several  middle  terms 
should  be  necessary  to  establish  the  relation  to 
B;  for  the  figure  will  be  the  same  whether 
2  Cf.  25b  32. 


BOOK  I,  CHAPTERS  20-23 


58  PRIOR  ANALYTICS  42* 

[20]  there  is  one  middle  term  or  many.  outset  to  be  proved.  This  is  more  obvious  in 


It  is  clear  then  that  the  ostensive  syllogisms 
are  effected  by  means  of  the  aforesaid  figures; 
these  considerations  will  show  that  reductiones 
ad  impossible  also  are  effected  in  the  same 
way.  For  all  who  effect  an  argument  per  im¬ 
possible  infer  syllogistically  what  is  false,  and 
[25]  prove  the  original  conclusion  hypotheti¬ 
cally  when  something  impossible  results  from 
the  assumption  of  its  contradictory;  e.g.  that 
the  diagonal  of  the  square  is  incommensurate 
with  the  side,  because  odd  numbers  are  equal 
to  evens  if  it  is  supposed  to  be  commensurate. 
One  infers  syllogistically  that  odd  numbers 
come  out  equal  to  evens,  and  one  proves  hypo¬ 
thetically  the  incommensurability  of  the  diag- 
[_?o]  onal,  since  a  falsehood  results  through 
contradicting  this.  For  this  we  found  to  be  rea¬ 
soning  per  impossible,  viz.  proving  something 
impossible  by  means  of  an  hypothesis  conceded 
at  the  beginning.  Consequently,  since  the  false¬ 
hood  is  established  in  reductions  ad  impossible 
by  an  ostensive  syllogism,  and  the  original  con¬ 
clusion  is  proved  hypothetically,  and  we  have 
[^5]  already  stated  that  ostensive  syllogisms 
are  effected  by  means  of  these  figures,  it  is 
evident  that  syllogisms  per  impossible  also  will 
be  made  through  these  figures.  Likewise  all  the 
other  hypothetical  syllogisms:  for  in  every  case 
the  syllogism  leads  up  to  the  proposition  that 
[40]  is  substituted  for  the  original  thesis;  but 
the  original  thesis  is  reached  by  means  of  a 
concession  or  some  other  hypothesis.  But  if  this 
41b  is  true,  every  demonstration  and  every  syl¬ 
logism  must  be  formed  by  means  of  the  three 
figures  mentioned  above.  But  when  this  has 
been  shown  it  is  clear  that  every  syllogism  is 
perfected  by  means  of  the  first  figure  and  is  re- 
[5]  ducible  to  the  universal  syllogisms  in  this 
figure. 

24 

Further  in  every  syllogism  one  of  the  premisses 
must  be  affirmative,  and  universality  must  be 
present:  unless  one  of  the  premisses  is  univer¬ 
sal  either  a  syllogism  will  not  be  possible,  or  it 
will  not  refer  to  the  subject  proposed,  or  the 
original  position  will  be  begged.  Suppose  we 
[/o]  have  to  prove  that  pleasure  in  music  is 
good.  If  one  should  claim  as  a  premiss  that 
pleasure  is  good  without  adding  ‘all’,  no  syllo¬ 
gism  will  be  possible;  if  one  should  claim  that 
some  pleasure  is  good,  then  if  it  is  different 
from  pleasure  in  music,  it  is  not  relevant  to  the 
subject  proposed;  if  it  is  this  very  pleasure,  one 
is  assuming  that  which  was  proposed  at  the 


geometrical  proofs,  e.g.  that  the  angles  at  the 
[75]  base  of  an  isosceles  triangle  are  equal. 
Suppose  the  lines  A  and  B  have  been  drawn  to 
the  centre.  If  then  one  should  assume  that  the 
angle  AC  is  equal  to  the  angle  BD,  without 
claiming  generally  that  angles  of  semicircles 
are  equal;  and  again  if  one  should  assume  that 
the  angle  C  is  equal  to  the  angle  D,  without  the 
additional  assumption  that  every  angle  of  a 
segment  is  equal  to  every  other  angle  of  the 
same  segment;  and  further  if  one  should  as¬ 
sume  that  when  equal  angles  are  taken  from 
the  whole  angles,  which  are  themselves  equal, 
[20]  the  remainders  E  and  F  are  equal,  he  will 
beg  the  thing  to  be  proved,  unless  he  also  states 
that  when  equals  are  taken  from  equals  the  re¬ 
mainders  are  equal. 

It  is  clear  then  that  in  every  syllogism  there 
must  be  a  universal  premiss,  and  that  a  univer¬ 
sal  statement  is  proved  only  when  all  the  prem¬ 
isses  are  universal,  while  a  particular  state¬ 
ment  is  proved  both  from  two  universal  prem¬ 
isses  and  from  one  only:  consequently  if  the 
[25]  conclusion  is  universal,  the  premisses  also 
must  be  universal,  but  if  the  premisses  are  uni¬ 
versal  it  is  possible  that  the  conclusion  may  not 
be  universal.  And  it  is  clear  also  that  in  every 
syllogism  either  both  or  one  of  the  premisses 
must  be  like  the  conclusion.  I  mean  not  only 
in  being  affirmative  or  negative,  but  also  in  be- 
[jo]  ing  necessary,  pure,  problematic.  We 
must  consider  also  the  other  forms  of  predica¬ 
tion. 

It  is  clear  also  when  a  syllogism  in  general 
can  be  made  and  when  it  cannot;  and  when  a 
valid,  when  a  perfect  syllogism  can  be  formed; 
and  that  if  a  syllogism  is  formed  the  terms 
must  be  arranged  in  one  of  the  ways  that  have 
[_?5]  been  mentioned. 

25 

It  is  clear  too  that  every  demonstration  will 
proceed  through  three  terms  and  no  more,  un¬ 
less  the  same  conclusion  is  established  by  differ¬ 
ent  pairs  of  propositions;  e.g.  the  conclusion  E 
may  be  established  through  the  propositions  A 
and  B,  and  through  the  propositions  C  and  D, 
or  through  the  propositions  A  and  B,  or  A  and 
C,  or  B  and  C.  For  nothing  prevents  there  be- 
[40]  ing  several  middles  for  the  same  terms. 
But  in  that  case  there  is  not  one  but  several  syl- 
42a  logisms.  Or  again  when  each  of  the  propo¬ 
sitions  A  and  B  is  obtained  by  syllogistic  infer¬ 
ence,  e.g.  A  by  means  of  D  and  E,  and  again 
B  by  means  of  F  and  G.  Or  one  may  be  ob- 


42b 

tained  by  syllogistic,  the  other  by  inductive  in¬ 
ference.  But  thus  also  the  syllogisms  are  many; 
[5]  for  the  conclusions  are  many,  e.g.  A  and  B 
and  C .  But  if  this  can  be  called  one  syllogism, 
not  many,  the  same  conclusion  may  be  reached 
by  more  than  three  terms  in  this  way,  but  it 
cannot  be  reached  as  C  is  established  by  means 
of  A  and  B.  Suppose  that  the  proposition  E  is 
inferred  from  the  premisses  A,  B,  C,  and  D.  It 
is  necessary  then  that  of  these  one  should  be 
[/o]  related  to  another  as  whole  to  part:  for  it 
has  already  been  proved  that  if  a  syllogism  is 
formed  some  of  its  terms  must  be  related  in 
this  way.1  Suppose  then  that  A  stands  in  this 
relation  to  B.  Some  conclusion  then  follows 
from  them.  It  must  either  be  E  or  one  or  other 
of  C  and  D,  or  something  other  than  these. 
[75]  (1)  If  it  is  E  the  syllogism  will  have  A 
and  B  for  its  sole  premisses.  But  if  C  and  D 
are  so  related  that  one  is  whole,  the  other  part, 
some  conclusion  will  follow  from  them  also; 
and  it  must  be  either  E,  or  one  or  other  of  the 
propositions  A  and  B,  or  something  other  than 
these.  And  if  it  is  (i)  E,  or  (ii)  A  or  B,  either 
(i)  the  syllogisms  will  be  more  than  one,  or  (ii) 
the  same  thing  happens  to  be  inferred  by  means 
of  several  terms  only  in  the  sense  which  we  saw 
[20]  to  be  possible.2  But  if  (iii)  the  conclusion 
is  other  than  E  or  A  or  B,  the  syllogisms  will 
be  many,  and  unconnected  with  one  another. 
But  if  C  is  not  so  related  to  D  as  to  make  a  syl¬ 
logism,  the  propositions  will  have  been  as¬ 
sumed  to  no  purpose,  unless  for  the  sake  of  in¬ 
duction  or  of  obscuring  the  argument  or  some¬ 
thing  of  the  sort. 

(2)  But  if  from  the  propositions  A  and  B 
[25]  there  follows  not  E  but  some  other  con¬ 
clusion,  and  if  from  C  and  D  either  A  or  B 
follows  or  something  else,  then  there  are  sev¬ 
eral  syllogisms,  and  they  do  not  establish  the 
conclusion  proposed:  for  we  assumed  that  the 
syllogism  proved  E.  And  if  no  conclusion  fol¬ 
lows  from  C  and  D,  it  turns  out  that  these 

ropositions  have  been  assumed  to  no  purpose, 

jo]  and  the  syllogism  does  not  prove  the 
original  proposition. 

So  it  is  clear  that  every  demonstration  and 
every  syllogism  will  proceed  through  three 
terms  only. 

This  being  evident,  it  is  clear  that  a  syllo¬ 
gistic  conclusion  follows  from  two  premisses 
and  not  from  more  than  two.  For  the  three 
terms  make  two  premisses,  unless  a  new  prem¬ 
iss  is  assumed,  as  was  said  at  the  beginning,3 
[35]  t0  perfect  the  syllogisms.  It  is  clear  there- 

1  4ob  30.  2 1.  6.  3  Cf.  24b  24. 


59 

fore  that  in  whatever  syllogistic  argument  the 
premisses  through  which  the  main  conclusion 
follows  (for  some  of  the  preceding  conclusions 
must  be  premisses)  are  not  even  in  number, 
this  argument  either  has  not  been  drawn  syl- 
logistically  or  it  has  assumed  more  than  was 
[40]  necessary  to  establish  its  thesis. 

42b  If  then  syllogisms  are  taken  with  respect 
to  their  main  premisses,  every  syllogism  will 
consist  of  an  even  number  of  premisses  and  an 
odd  number  of  terms  (for  the  terms  exceed  the 
remisses  by  one),  and  the  conclusions  will  be 
5]  half  the  number  of  the  premisses.  But 
whenever  a  conclusion  is  reached  by  means  of 
prosyllogisms  or  by  means  of  several  continu¬ 
ous  middle  terms,  e.g.  the  proposition  AB  by 
means  of  the  middle  terms  C  and  D,  the  num¬ 
ber  of  the  terms  will  similarly  exceed  that  of 
the  premisses  by  one  (for  the  extra  term  must 
either  be  added  outside  or  inserted:  but  in 
either  case  it  follows  that  the  relations  of  predi¬ 
cation  are  one  fewer  than  the  terms  related), 
[/o]  and  the  premisses  will  be  equal  in  num¬ 
ber  to  the  relations  of  predication.  The  prem¬ 
isses  however  will  not  always  be  even,  the 
terms  odd;  but  they  will  alternate — when  the 
premisses  are  even,  the  terms  must  be  odd; 
when  the  terms  are  even,  the  premisses  must  be 
odd:  for  along  with  one  term  one  premiss  is 
added,  if  a  term  is  added  from  any  quarter. 
Consequently  since  the  premisses  were  (as  we 
[75]  saw)  even,  and  the  terms  odd,  we  must 
make  them  alternately  even  and  odd  at  each 
addition.  But  the  conclusions  will  not  follow 
the  same  arrangement  either  in  respect  to  the 
terms  or  to  the  premisses.  For  if  one  term  is 
added,  conclusions  will  be  added  less  by  one 
than  the  pre-existing  terms:  for  the  conclusion 
is  drawn  not  in  relation  to  the  single  term  last 
[20]  added,  but  in  relation  to  all  the  rest,  e.g.  if 
to  ABC  the  term  D  is  added,  two  conclusions 
are  thereby  added,  one  in  relation  to  A,  the 
other  in  relation  to  B.  Similarly  with  any  fur¬ 
ther  additions.  And  similarly  too  if  the  term  is 
inserted  in  the  middle:  for  in  relation  to  one 
term  only,  a  syllogism  will  not  be  constructed. 
[25]  Consequently  the  conclusions  will  be 
much  more  numerous  than  the  terms  or  the 
premisses. 

26 

Since  we  understand  the  subjects  with  which 
syllogisms  are  concerned,  what  sort  of  conclu¬ 
sion  is  established  in  each  figure,  and  in  how 
many  moods  this  is  done,  it  is  evident  to  us 
both  what  sort  of  problem  is  difficult  and  what 


BOOK  I,  CHAPTERS  23-26 


6o 

[jo]  sort  is  easy  to  prove.  For  that  which  is 
concluded  in  many  figures  and  through  many 
moods  is  easier;  that  which  is  concluded  in  few 
figures  and  through  few  moods  is  more  diffi¬ 
cult  to  attempt.  The  universal  affirmative  is 
proved  by  means  of  the  first  figure  only  and  by 
this  in  only  one  mood;  the  universal  negative 
is  proved  both  through  the  first  figure  and 
[^5]  through  the  second,  through  the  first  in 
one  mood,  through  the  second  in  two.  The 
particular  affirmative  is  proved  through  the 
first  and  through  the  last  figure,  in  one  mood 
through  the  first,  in  three  moods  through  the 
last.  The  particular  negative  is  proved  in  all 
the  figures,  but  once  in  the  first,  in  two  moods 
[40]  in  the  second,  in  three  moods  in  the 
43a  third.  It  is  clear  then  that  the  universal 
affirmative  is  most  difficult  to  establish,  most 
easy  to  overthrow.  In  general,  universals  are 
easier  game  for  the  destroyer  than  particulars: 
for  whether  the  predicate  belongs  to  none  or 
not  to  some,  they  are  destroyed:  and  the  par¬ 
ticular  negative  is  proved  in  all  the  figures,  the 
[5]  universal  negative  in  two.  Similarly  with 
universal  negatives:  the  original  statement  is 
destroyed,  whether  the  predicate  belongs  to  all 
or  to  some:  and  this  we  found  possible  in  two 
figures.  But  particular  statements  can  be  re¬ 
futed  in  one  way  only — by  proving  that  the 
predicate  belongs  either  to  all  or  to  none.  But 
particular  statements  are  easier  to  establish: 
[10]  for  proof  is  possible  in  more  figures  and 
through  more  moods.  And  in  general  we  must 
not  forget  that  it  is  possible  to  refute  statements 
by  means  of  one  another,  I  mean,  universal 
statements  by  means  of  particular,  and  par¬ 
ticular  statements  by  means  of  universal:  but  it 
is  not  possible  to  establish  universal  statements 
by  means  of  particular,  though  it  is  possible  to 
establish  particular  statements  by  means  of  uni¬ 
versal.  At  the  same  time  it  is  evident  that  it  is 
[75]  easier  to  refute  than  to  establish. 

The  manner  in  which  every  syllogism  is  pro¬ 
duced,  the  number  of  the  terms  and  premisses 
through  which  it  proceeds,  the  relation  of  the 
premisses  to  one  another,  the  character  of  the 
problem  proved  in  each  figure,  and  the  num¬ 
ber  of  the  figures  appropriate  to  each  problem, 
all  these  matters  are  clear  from  what  has  been 
said. 

27 

We  must  now  state  how  we  may  ourselves  al- 
[20]  ways  have  a  supply  of  syllogisms  in  refer¬ 
ence  to  the  problem  proposed  and  by  what  road 
we  may  reach  the  principles  relative  to  the 


43b 

problem:  for  perhaps  we  ought  not  only  to  in¬ 
vestigate  the  construction  of  syllogisms,  but  al¬ 
so  to  have  the  power  of  making  them. 

[25]  Of  all  the  things  which  exist  some  are 
such  that  they  cannot  be  predicated  of  any¬ 
thing  else  truly  and  universally,  e.g.  Cleon  and 
Callias,  i.e.  the  individual  and  sensible,  but 
other  things  may  be  predicated  of  them  (for 
each  of  these  is  both  man  and  animal);  and 
[30]  some  things  are  themselves  predicated  of 
others,  but  nothing  prior  is  predicated  of  them; 
and  some  are  predicated  of  others,  and  yet 
others  of  them,  e.g.  man  of  Callias  and  animal 
of  man.  It  is  clear  then  that  some  things  are 
naturally  not  stated  of  anything:  for  as  a  rule 
each  sensible  thing  is  such  that  it  cannot  be 
predicated  of  anything,  save  incidentally:  for 
[i5]  we  sometimes  say  that  that  white  object 
is  Socrates,  or  that  that  which  approaches  is 
Callias.  We  shall  explain  in  another  place1  that 
there  is  an  upward  limit  also  to  the  process  of 
predicating:  for  the  present  we  must  assume 
this.  Of  these  ultimate  predicates  it  is  not  possi¬ 
ble  to  demonstrate  another  predicate,  save  as  a 
matter  of  opinion,  but  these  may  be  predicated 
of  other  things.  Neither  can  individuals  be 
[40]  predicated  of  other  things,  though  other 
things  can  be  predicated  of  them.  Whatever 
lies  between  these  limits  can  be  spoken  of  in 
both  ways:  they  may  be  stated  of  others,  and 
others  stated  of  them.  And  as  a  rule  arguments 
and  inquiries  are  concerned  with  these  things. 
43  b  We  must  select  the  premisses  suitable  to 
each  problem  in  this  manner:  first  we  must  lay 
down  the  subject  and  the  definitions  and  the 
properties  of  the  thing;  next  we  must  lay  down 
those  attributes  which  follow  the  thing,  and 
again  those  which  the  thing  follows,  and  those 
[5]  which  cannot  belong  to  it.  But  those  to 
which  it  cannot  belong  need  not  be  selected, 
because  the  negative  statement  implied  above 
is  convertible.  Of  the  attributes  which  follow 
we  must  distinguish  those  which  fall  within  the 
definition,  those  which  are  predicated  as  prop¬ 
erties,  and  those  which  are  predicated  as  acci¬ 
dents,  and  of  the  latter  those  which  apparently 
and  those  which  really  belong.  The  larger  the 
[/o]  supply  a  man  has  of  these,  the  more 
quickly  will  he  reach  a  conclusion;  and  in  pro¬ 
portion  as  he  apprehends  those  which  are 
truer,  the  more  cogently  will  he  demonstrate. 
But  he  must  select  not  those  which  follow 
some  particular  but  those  which  follow  the 
thing  as  a  whole,  e.g.  not  what  follows  a  par¬ 
ticular  man  but  what  follows  every  man:  for 
1  Posterior  Analytics,  1.  19-22. 


PRIOR  ANALYTICS 


44a 

the  syllogism  proceeds  through  universal  prem- 
[75]  isses.  If  the  statement  is  indefinite,  it  is 
uncertain  whether  the  premiss  is  universal,  but 
if  the  statement  is  definite,  the  matter  is  clear. 
Similarly  one  must  select  those  attributes 
which  the  subject  follows  as  wholes,  for  the 
reason  given.  But  that  which  follows  one  must 
not  suppose  to  follow  as  a  whole,  e.g.  that  every 
animal  follows  man  or  every  science  music,  but 
only  that  it  follows,  without  qualification,  as 
[20]  indeed  we  state  it  in  a  proposition:  for 
the  other  statement  is  useless  and  impossible, 
e.g.  that  every  man  is  every  animal  or  justice  is 
all  good.  But  that  which  something  follows  re¬ 
ceives  the  mark  ‘every’.  Whenever  the  subject, 
for  which  we  must  obtain  the  attributes  that 
follow,  is  contained  by  something  else,  what 
follows  or  does  not  follow  the  highest  term 
universally  must  not  be  selected  in  dealing  with 
[25]  the  subordinate  term  (for  these  attributes 
have  been  taken  in  dealing  with  the  superior 
term;  for  what  follows  animal  also  follows 
man,  and  what  does  not  belong  to  animal  does 
not  belong  to  man);  but  we  must  choose  those 
attributes  which  are  peculiar  to  each  subject. 
For  some  things  are  peculiar  to  the  species  as 
distinct  from  the  genus;  for  species  being  dis¬ 
tinct  there  must  be  attributes  peculiar  to  each. 
Nor  must  we  take  as  things  which  the  superior 
term  follows,  those  things  which  the  inferior 
[jo]  term  follows,  e.g.  take  as  subjects  of  the 
predicate  ‘animal’  what  are  really  subjects  of 
the  predicate  ‘man’.  It  is  necessary  indeed,  if 
animal  follows  man,  that  it  should  follow  all 
these  also.  But  these  belong  more  properly  to 
the  choice  of  what  concerns  man.  One  must  ap¬ 
prehend  also  normal  consequents  and  normal 
antecedents;  for  propositions  which  obtain  nor¬ 
mally  are  established  syllogistically  from  prem- 
[35]  isses  which  obtain  normally,  some  if 
not  all  of  them  having  this  character  of  nor¬ 
mality.  For  the  conclusion  of  each  syllogism 
resembles  its  principles.  We  must  not  however 
choose  attributes  which  are  consequent  upon 
all  the  terms:  for  no  syllogism  can  be  made  out 
of  such  premisses.  The  reason  why  this  is  so 
will  be  clear  in  the  sequel.1 

28 

If  men  wish  to  establish  something  about  some 
[40]  whole,  they  must  look  to  the  subjects  of 
that  which  is  being  established  (the  subjects  of 
which  it  happens  to  be  asserted),  and  the  at¬ 
tributes  which  follow  that  of  which  it  is  to  be 
predicated.  For  if  any  of  these  subjects  is  the 

1  44b  20. 


61 

same  as  any  of  these  attributes,  the  attribute 
originally  in  question  must  belong  to  the  sub¬ 
ject  originally  in  question.  But  if  the  purpose 
is  to  establish  not  a  universal  but  a  particular 
proposition,  they  must  look  for  the  terms  of 
44a  which  the  terms  in  question  are  predica¬ 
ble:  for  if  any  of  these  are  identical,  the  attri¬ 
bute  in  question  must  belong  to  some  of  the 
subject  in  question.  Whenever  the  one  term  has 
to  belong  to  none  of  the  other,  one  must  look 
to  the  consequents  of  the  subject,  and  to  those 
attributes  which  cannot  possibly  be  present  in 
the  predicate  in  question:  or  conversely  to  the 
attributes  which  cannot  possibly  be  present  in 
[5]  the  subject,  and  to  the  consequents  of  the 
predicate.  If  any  members  of  these  groups  are 
identical,  one  of  the  terms  in  question  cannot 
possibly  belong  to  any  of  the  other.  For  some¬ 
times  a  syllogism  in  the  first  figure  results, 
sometimes  a  syllogism  in  the  second.  But  if  the 
object  is  to  establish  a  particular  negative 
proposition,  we  must  find  antecedents  of  the 
subject  in  question  and  attributes  which  cannot 
[/o]  possibly  belong  to  the  predicate  in  ques¬ 
tion.  If  any  members  of  these  two  groups  are 
identical,  it  follows  that  one  of  the  terms  in 
question  does  not  belong  to  some  of  the  other. 
Perhaps  each  of  these  statements  will  become 
clearer  in  the  following  way.  Suppose  the  con¬ 
sequents  of  A  are  designated  by  B,  the  ante¬ 
cedents  of  A  by  C,  attributes  which  cannot 
[75]  possibly  belong  to  A  by  D.  Suppose  again 
that  the  attributes  of  E  are  designated  by  F, 
the  antecedents  of  E  by  G,  and  attributes  which 
cannot  belong  to  E  by  H.  If  then  one  of  the  Cs 
should  be  identical  with  one  of  the  Fs,  A  must 
belong  to  all  E:  for  F  belongs  to  all  E,  and  A  to 
all  C,  consequently  A  belongs  to  all  E.  If  C  and 
[20]  G  are  identical,  A  must  belong  to  some  of 
the  Es:  for  A  follows  C,  and  E  follows  all  G. 
If  F  and  D  are  identical,  A  will  belong  to  none 
of  the  Es  by  a  prosyllogism:  for  since  the  nega¬ 
tive  proposition  is  convertible,  and  F  is  identi¬ 
cal  with  D,  A  will  belong  to  none  of  the  F s, 
but  F  belongs  to  all  E.  Again,  if  B  and  H  are 
[25]  identical,  A  will  belong  to  none  of  the 
Es:  for  B  will  belong  to  all  A,  but  to  no  E:  for 
it  was  assumed  to  be  identical  with  H ,  and  H 
belonged  to  none  of  the  Es.  If  D  and  G  are 
identical,  A  will  not  belong  to  some  of  the  Es: 
for  it  will  not  belong  to  G,  because  it  does  not 
[jo]  belong  to  D:  but  G  falls  under  E:  conse¬ 
quently  A  will  not  belong  to  some  of  the  Es. 
If  B  is  identical  with  G,  there  will  be  a  con¬ 
verted  syllogism:  for  E  will  belong  to  all  A, 
since  B  belongs  to  A  and  E  to  B  (for  B  was 


BOOK  I,  CHAPTERS  26-28 


62 

found  to  be  identical  with  G ):  but  that  A 
should  belong  to  all  F  is  not  necessary,  but  it 
must  belong  to  some  E  because  it  is  possible  to 
[^5]  convert  the  universal  statement  into  a 
particular. 

It  is  clear  then  that  in  every  proposition 
which  requires  proof  we  must  look  to  the 
aforesaid  relations  of  the  subject  and  predi¬ 
cate  in  question:  for  all  syllogisms  proceed 
through  these.  But  if  we  are  seeking  conse¬ 
quents  and  antecedents  we  must  look  for  those 
which  are  primary  and  most  universal,  e.g.  in 
[40]  reference  to  E  we  must  look  to  KF  rather 
than  to  F  alone,  and  in  reference  to  A  we  must 
look  to  KC  rather  than  to  C  alone.  For  if  A  be- 
44b  longs  to  KF,  it  belongs  both  to  F  and  to 
E:  but  if  it  does  not  follow  KF,  it  may  yet  fol¬ 
low  F.  Similarly  we  must  consider  the  ante¬ 
cedents  of  A  itself:  for  if  a  term  follows  the  pri¬ 
mary  antecedents,  it  will  follow  those  also 
which  are  subordinate,  but  if  it  does  not  follow 
[5]  the  former,  it  may  yet  follow  the  latter. 

It  is  clear  too  that  the  inquiry  proceeds 
through  the  three  terms  and  the  two  premisses, 
and  that  all  the  syllogisms  proceed  through  the 
aforesaid  figures.  For  it  is  proved  that  A  be¬ 
longs  to  all  E,  whenever  an  identical  term  is 
found  among  the  Cs  and  Fs.  This  will  be  the 
[/o]  middle  term;  A  and  E  will  be  the  ex¬ 
tremes.  So  the  first  figure  is  formed.  And  A 
will  belong  to  some  E,  whenever  C  and  G  are 
apprehended  to  be  the  same.  This  is  the  last  fig¬ 
ure:  for  G  becomes  the  middle  term.  And  A 
will  belong  to  no  E,  when  D  and  F  are  identi¬ 
cal.  Thus  we  have  both  the  first  figure  and  the 
middle  figure;  the  first,  because  A  belongs  to 
[75]  no  F,  since  the  negative  statement  is  con¬ 
vertible,  and  F  belongs  to  all  E:  the  middle  fig¬ 
ure  because  D  belongs  to  no  A,  and  to  all  E. 
And  A  will  not  belong  to  some  E,  whenever  D 
and  G  are  identical.  This  is  the  last  figure:  for 
A  will  belong  to  no  G,  and  E  will  belong  to  all 
[20]  G.  Clearly  then  all  syllogisms  proceed 
through  the  aforesaid  figures,  and  we  must  not 
select  consequents  of  all  the  terms,  because  no 
syllogism  is  produced  from  them.  For  (as  we 
saw)1  it  is  not  possible  at  all  to  establish  a 
proposition  from  consequents,  and  it  is  not 
possible  to  refute  by  means  of  a  consequent  of 
both  the  terms  in  question:  for  the  middle 
term  must  belong  to  the  one,  and  not  belong 
to  the  other. 

[25]  It  is  clear  too  that  other  methods  of  in¬ 
quiry  by  selection  of  middle  terms  are  useless 
to  produce  a  syllogism,  e.g.  if  the  consequents 

1  27®  18-20,  b  23-8. 


45a 

of  the  terms  in  question  are  identical,  or  if  the 
antecedents  of  A  are  identical  with  those  attri¬ 
butes  which  cannot  possibly  belong  to  E,  or  if 
those  attributes  are  identical  which  cannot  be¬ 
long  to  either  term:  for  no  syllogism  is  pro¬ 
duced  by  means  of  these.  For  if  the  conse- 
[jo]  quents  are  identical,  e.g.  B  and  F,  we 
have  the  middle  figure  with  both  premisses 
affirmative:  if  the  antecedents  of  A  are  identi¬ 
cal  with  attributes  which  cannot  belong  to  E, 
e.g.  C  with  H,  we  have  the  first  figure  with  its 
minor  premiss  negative.  If  attributes  which 
[ 35]  cannot  belong  to  either  term  are  identical, 
e.g.  C  and  H,  both  premisses  are  negative, 
either  in  the  first  or  in  the  middle  figure.  But 
no  syllogism  is  possible  in  this  way. 

It  is  evident  too  that  we  must  find  out  which 
terms  in  this  inquiry  are  identical,  not  which 
are  different  or  contrary,  first  because  the  ob- 
[40]  ject  of  our  investigation  is  the  middle 
term,  and  the  middle  term  must  be  not  diverse 
45a  but  identical.  Secondly,  wherever  it  hap¬ 
pens  that  a  syllogism  results  from  taking  con¬ 
traries  or  terms  which  cannot  belong  to  the 
same  thing,  all  arguments  can  be  reduced  to 
the  aforesaid  moods,  e.g.  if  B  and  F  are  con¬ 
traries  or  cannot  belong  to  the  same  thing.  For 
[5]  if  these  are  taken,  a  syllogism  will  be 
formed  to  prove  that  A  belongs  to  none  of  the 
Fs,  not  however  from  the  premisses  taken  but 
in  the  aforesaid  mood.  For  B  will  belong  to  all 
A  and  to  no  F.  Consequently  B  must  be  identi¬ 
cal  with  one  of  the  Hs.  Again,  if  B  and  G  can- 
[/o]  not  belong  to  the  same  thing,  it  follows 
that  A  will  not  belong  to  some  of  the  Fs:  for 
then  too  we  shall  have  the  middle  figure:  for 
B  will  belong  to  all  A  and  to  no  G.  Conse¬ 
quently  B  must  be  identical  with  some  of  the 
Hs.  For  the  fact  that  B  and  G  cannot  belong  to 
the  same  thing  differs  in  no  way  from  the  fact 
[75]  that  B  is  identical  with  some  of  thef/s:  for 
that  includes  everything  which  cannot  belong 
to  F. 

It  is  clear  then  that  from  the  inquiries  taken 
by  themselves  no  syllogism  results;  but  if  B 
and  F  are  contraries  B  must  be  identical  with 
one  of  the  Hs,  and  the  syllogism  results 
[20]  through  these  terms.  It  turns  out  then 
that  those  who  inquire  in  this  manner  are 
looking  gratuitously  for  some  other  way  than 
the  necessary  way  because  they  have  failed  to 
observe  the  identity  of  the  Bs  with  the  Hs. 

29 

Syllogisms  which  lead  to  impossible  conclu¬ 
sions  are  similar  to  ostensive  syllogisms;  they 


PRIOR  ANALYTICS 


46*  BOOK  I,  CHAPTERS  28-30  63 


also  are  formed  by  means  of  the  consequents 
[25]  and  antecedents  of  the  terms  in  question. 
In  both  cases  the  same  inquiry  is  involved.  For 
what  is  proved  ostensively  may  also  be  con¬ 
cluded  syllogistically  per  impossibile  by  means 
of  the  same  terms;  and  what  is  proved  per  im¬ 
possibile  may  also  be  proved  ostensively,  e.g. 
that  A  belongs  to  none  of  the  Es.  For  suppose 
A  to  belong  to  some  E :  then  since  B  belongs  to 
[30]  all  A  and  A  to  some  of  the  Es,  B  will  be¬ 
long  to  some  of  the  Es:  but  it  was  assumed 
that  it  belongs  to  none.  Again  we  may  prove 
that  A  belongs  to  some  E:  for  if  A  belonged  to 
none  of  the  Es,  and  E  belongs  to  all  G,  A  will 
belong  to  none  of  the  Gs :  but  it  was  assumed 
to  belong  to  all.  Similarly  with  the  other  prop¬ 
ositions  requiring  proof.  The  proof  per  impos- 
\35\  sibile  will  always  and  in  all  cases  be  from 
the  consequents  and  antecedents  of  the  terms 
in  question.  Whatever  the  problem  the  same 
inquiry  is  necessary  whether  one  wishes  to  use 
an  ostensive  syllogism  or  a  reduction  to  impos¬ 
sibility.  For  both  the  demonstrations  start  from 
the  same  terms,  e.g.  suppose  it  has  been  proved 
that/4  belongs  to  no E,  because  it  turns  out  that 
otherwise  B  belongs  to  some  of  the  Es  and  this 
is  impossible — if  now  it  is  assumed  that  B  be¬ 
longs  to  no  E  and  to  all  A,  it  is  clear  that  A  will 
45b  belong  to  no  E.  Again  if  it  has  been  proved 
by  an  ostensive  syllogism  that  A  belongs  to  no  E, 
assume  that  A  belongs  to  some  E  and  it  will  be 
proved  per  impossibile  to  belong  to  no  E.  Simi¬ 
larly  with  the  rest.  In  all  cases  it  is  necessary  to 
find  some  common  term  other  than  the  sub- 
[5]  jects  of  inquiry,  to  which  the  syllogism  es¬ 
tablishing  the  false  conclusion  may  relate,  so 
that  if  this  premiss  is  converted,  and  the  other 
remains  as  it  is,  the  syllogism  will  be  ostensive 
by  means  of  the  same  terms.  For  the  ostensive 
syllogism  differs  from  the  reductio  ad  impossi¬ 
bile  in  this:  in  the  ostensive  syllogism  both 
remisses  are  laid  down  in  accordance  with  the 
10  ]  truth,  in  the  reductio  ad  impossibile  one 
of  the  premisses  is  assumed  falsely. 

These  points  will  be  made  clearer  by  the  se¬ 
quel,1  when  we  discuss  the  reduction  to  impos¬ 
sibility:  at  present  this  much  must  be  clear,  that 
we  must  look  to  terms  of  the  kinds  mentioned 
whether  we  wish  to  use  an  ostensive  syllogism 
[75]  or  a  reduction  to  impossibility.  In  the  oth¬ 
er  hypothetical  syllogisms,  I  mean  those  which 
proceed  by  substitution,  or  by  positing  a  certain 
quality,  the  inquiry  will  be  directed  to  the 
terms  of  the  problem  to  be  proved — not  the 
terms  of  the  original  problem,  but  the  new 

1 11,  14. 


terms  introduced;  and  the  method  of  the  in¬ 
quiry  will  be  the  same  as  before.  But  we  must 
[20]  consider  and  determine  in  how  many 
ways  hypothetical  syllogisms  are  possible. 

Each  of  the  problems  then  can  be  proved  in 
the  manner  described;  but  it  is  possible  to  es¬ 
tablish  some  of  them  syllogistically  in  another 
way,  e.g.  universal  problems  by  the  inquiry 
which  leads  up  to  a  particular  conclusion,  with 
the  addition  of  an  hypothesis.  For  if  the  Cs  and 
the  Gs  should  be  identical,  but  E  should  be  as¬ 
sumed  to  belong  to  the  Gs  only,  then  A  would 
[25]  belong  to  every  E:  and  again  if  the  Ds  and 
the  Gs  should  be  identical,  but  E  should  be 
predicated  of  the  Gs  only,  it  follows  that  A 
will  belong  to  none  of  the  Es.  Clearly  then  we 
must  consider  the  matter  in  this  way  also.  The 
method  is  the  same  whether  the  relation  is  nec¬ 
essary  or  possible.  For  the  inquiry  will  be  the 
same,  and  the  syllogism  will  proceed  through 
[30]  terms  arranged  in  the  same  order  whether 
a  possible  or  a  pure  proposition  is  proved.  We 
must  find  in  the  case  of  possible  relations,  as 
well  as  terms  that  belong,  terms  which  can  be¬ 
long  though  they  actually  do  not:  for  we  have 
proved  that  the  syllogism  which  establishes  a 
possible  relation  proceeds  through  these  terms 
[35]  as  well.  Similarly  also  with  the  other 
modes  of  predication. 

It  is  clear  then  from  what  has  been  said  not 
only  that  all  syllogisms  can  be  formed  in  this 
way,  but  also  that  they  cannot  be  formed  in  any 
other.  For  every  syllogism  has  been  proved  to 
be  formed  through  one  of  the  aforementioned 
[40]  figures,  and  these  cannot  be  composed 
through  other  terms  than  the  consequents  and 
antecedents  of  the  terms  in  question:  for  from 
46a  these  we  obtain  the  premisses  and  find  the 
middle  term.  Consequently  a  syllogism  cannot 
be  formed  by  means  of  other  terms. 

30 

The  method  is  the  same  in  all  cases,  in  phi¬ 
losophy,  in  any  art  or  study.  We  must  look  for 
the  attributes  and  the  subjects  of  both  our 
[5]  terms,  and  we  must  supply  ourselves  with  as 
many  of  these  as  possible,  and  consider  them 
by  means  of  the  three  terms,  refuting  statements 
in  one  way,  confirming  them  in  another,  in  the 
pursuit  of  truth  starting  from  premisses  in 
which  the  arrangement  of  the  terms  is  in  ac¬ 
cordance  with  truth,  while  if  we  look  for  dia¬ 
lectical  syllogisms  we  must  start  from  probable 
[/o]  premisses.  The  principles  of  syllogisms 
have  been  stated  in  general  terms,  both  how 
they  are  characterized  and  how  we  must  hunt 


64  PRIOR  ANALYTICS  46b 


for  them,  so  as  not  to  look  to  everything  that  is 
said  about  the  terms  of  the  problem  or  to  the 
same  points  whether  we  are  confirming  or  re¬ 
futing,  or  again  whether  we  are  confirming  of 
[15]  all  or  of  some,  and  whether  we  are  refut¬ 
ing  of  all  or  some;  we  must  look  to  fewer 
points  and  they  must  be  definite.  We  have  also 
stated  how  we  must  select  with  reference  to 
everything  that  is,  e.g.  about  good  or  knowl¬ 
edge.  But  in  each  science  the  principles  which 
are  peculiar  are  the  most  numerous.  Conse¬ 
quently  it  is  the  business  of  experience  to  give 
the  principles  which  belong  to  each  subject.  I 
mean  for  example  that  astronomical  experi- 
[20]  ence  supplies  the  principles  of  astronomi¬ 
cal  science:  for  once  the  phenomena  were  ade¬ 
quately  apprehended,  the  demonstrations  of  as¬ 
tronomy  were  discovered.  Similarly  with  any 
other  art  or  science.  Consequently,  if  the  at¬ 
tributes  of  the  thing  are  apprehended,  our  busi¬ 
ness  will  then  be  to  exhibit  readily  the  demon¬ 
strations.  For  if  none  of  the  true  attributes  of 
[25]  things  had  been  omitted  in  the  histori¬ 
cal  survey,  we  should  be  able  to  discover  the 
proof  and  demonstrate  everything  which  ad¬ 
mitted  of  proof,  and  to  make  that  clear,  whose 
nature  does  not  admit  of  proof. 

In  general  then  we  have  explained  fairly 
well  how  we  must  select  premisses:  we  have 
discussed  the  matter  accurately  in  the  treatise 
[jo]  concerning  dialectic.1 

31 

It  is  easy  to  see  that  division  into  classes  is  a 
small  part  of  the  method  we  have  described: 
for  division  is,  so  to  speak,  a  weak  syllogism; 
for  what  it  ought  to  prove,  it  begs,  and  it  al¬ 
ways  establishes  something  more  general  than 
the  attribute  in  question.  First,  this  very  point 
[J5]  had  escaped  all  those  who  used  the  meth¬ 
od  of  division;  and  they  attempted  to  persuade 
men  that  it  was  possible  to  make  a  demonstra¬ 
tion  of  substance  and  essence.  Consequently 
they  did  not  understand  what  it  is  possible  to 
prove  syllogistically  by  division,  nor  did  they 
understand  that  it  was  possible  to  prove  syllo¬ 
gistically  in  the  manner  we  have  described.2  In 
demonstrations,  when  there  is  a  need  to  prove 
[40]  a  positive  statement,  the  middle  term 
46b  through  which  the  syllogism  is  formed 
must  always  be  inferior  to  and  not  comprehend 
the  first  of  the  extremes.  But  division  has  a  con¬ 
trary  intention:  for  it  takes  the  universal  as 
middle.  Let  animal  be  the  term  signified  by  A, 

1  Topics ,  especially  1.  14.  2  In  cc.  1-30. 


mortal  by  B,  and  immortal  by  C,  and  let  man, 
whose  definition  is  to  be  got,  be  signified  by 
[5]  D.  The  man  who  divides  assumes  that 
every  animal  is  either  mortal  or  immortal:  i.e. 
whatever  is  A  is  all  either  B  or  C.  Again,  al¬ 
ways  dividing,  he  lays  it  down  that  man  is  an 
animal,  so  he  assumes  A  of  D  as  belonging  to 
it.  Now  the  true  conclusion  is  that  every  D  is 
[/o]  either  B  or  C,  consequently  man  must  be 
either  mortal  or  immortal,  but  it  is  not  neces¬ 
sary  that  man  should  be  a  mortal  animal — this 
is  begged:  and  this  is  what  ought  to  have  been 
proved  syllogistically.  And  again,  taking  A  as 
mortal  animal,  B  as  footed,  C  as  footless,  and  D 
as  man,  he  assumes  in  the  same  way  that  A  in¬ 
f/5]  heres  either  in  B  or  in  C  (for  every  mor¬ 
tal  animal  is  either  footed  or  footless),  and  he 
assumes  A  of  D  (for  he  assumed  man,  as  we 
saw,  to  be  a  mortal  animal);  consequently  it  is 
necessary  that  man  should  be  either  a  footed  or 
a  footless  animal;  but  it  is  not  necessary  that 
man  should  be  footed:  this  he  assumes:  and  it 
is  just  this  again  which  he  ought  to  have  dem¬ 
onstrated.  Always  dividing  then  in  this  way  it 
[20]  turns  out  that  these  logicians  assume  as 
middle  the  universal  term,  and  as  extremes 
that  which  ought  to  have  been  the  subject  of 
demonstration  and  the  differentiae.  In  conclu¬ 
sion,  they  do  not  make  it  clear,  and  show  it  to 
be  necessary,  that  this  is  man  or  whatever  the 
subject  of  inquiry  may  be:  for  they  pursue  the 
[25]  other  method  altogether,  never  even  sus¬ 
pecting  the  presence  of  the  rich  supply  of  evi¬ 
dence  which  might  be  used.  It  is  clear  that  it  is 
neither  possible  to  refute  a  statement  by  this 
method  of  division,  nor  to  draw  a  conclusion 
about  an  accident  or  property  of  a  thing,  nor 
about  its  genus,  nor  in  cases  in  which  it  is  un¬ 
known  whether  it  is  thus  or  thus,  e.g.  whether 
the  diagonal  is  incommensurate.  For  if  he  as¬ 
sumes  that  every  length  is  either  commensu- 
[  jo]  rate  or  incommensurate,  and  the  diagonal 
is  a  length,  he  has  proved  that  the  diagonal  is 
either  incommensurate  or  commensurate.  But 
if  he  should  assume  that  it  is  incommensurate, 
he  will  have  assumed  what  he  ought  to  have 
proved.  He  cannot  then  prove  it:  for  this  is  his 
method,  but  proof  is  not  possible  by  this  meth¬ 
od.  Let  A  stand  for  ‘incommensurate  or  com¬ 
mensurate’,  B  for  ‘length’,  C  for  ‘diagonal’.  It 
[35]  is  clear  then  that  this  method  of  investi¬ 
gation  is  not  suitable  for  every  inquiry,  nor  is 
it  useful  in  those  cases  in  which  it  is  thought  to 
be  most  suitable. 

From  what  has  been  said  it  is  clear  from 


47b 

what  elements  demonstrations  are  formed  and 
in  what  manner,  and  to  what  points  we  must 
look  in  each  problem. 

32 

Our  next  business  is  to  state  how  we  can  re- 
47*  duce  syllogisms  to  the  aforementioned  fig¬ 
ures:  for  this  part  of  the  inquiry  still  remains. 
If  we  should  investigate  the  production  of  the 
syllogisms  and  had  the  power  of  discovering 
them,  and  further  if  we  could  resolve  the  syllo- 
isms  produced  into  the  aforementioned  fig- 
5]  ures,  our  original  problem  would  be 
brought  to  a  conclusion.  It  will  happen  at  the 
same  time  that  what  has  been  already  said  will 
be  confirmed  and  its  truth  made  clearer  by 
what  we  are  about  to  say.  For  everything  that 
is  true  must  in  every  respect  agree  with  itself, 
[/o]  First  then  we  must  attempt  to  select  the 
two  premisses  of  the  syllogism  (for  it  is  easier 
to  divide  into  large  parts  than  into  small,  and 
the  composite  parts  are  larger  than  the  ele¬ 
ments  out  of  which  they  are  made);  next  we 
must  inquire  which  are  universal  and  which 
particular,  and  if  both  premisses  have  not  been 
stated,  we  must  ourselves  assume  the  one 
which  is  missing.  For  sometimes  men  put  for- 
[75]  ward  the  universal  premiss,  but  do  not 
posit  the  premiss  which  is  contained  in  it,  ei¬ 
ther  in  writing  or  in  discussion:  or  men  put 
forward  the  premisses  of  the  principal  syllo¬ 
gism,  but  omit  those  through  which  they  are  in¬ 
ferred,  and  invite  the  concession  of  others  to  no 
purpose.  We  must  inquire  then  whether  any¬ 
thing  unnecessary  has  been  assumed,  or  any¬ 
thing  necessary  has  been  omitted,  and  we  must 
[20]  posit  the  one  and  take  away  the  other,  un¬ 
til  we  have  reached  the  two  premisses:  for  un¬ 
less  we  have  these,  we  cannot  reduce  argu¬ 
ments  put  forward  in  the  way  described.  In 
some  arguments  it  is  easy  to  see  what  is  want¬ 
ing,  but  some  escape  us,  and  appear  to  be  syl¬ 
logisms,  because  something  necessary  results 
from  what  has  been  laid  down,  e.g.  if  the  as¬ 
sumptions  were  made  that  substance  is  not  an- 
[25]  nihilated  by  the  annihilation  of  what  is 
not  substance,  and  that  if  the  elements  out  of 
which  a  thing  is  made  are  annihilated,  then 
that  which  is  made  out  of  them  is  destroyed: 
these  propositions  being  laid  down,  it  is  neces¬ 
sary  that  any  part  of  substance  is  substance; 
this  has  not  however  been  drawn  by  syllogism 
from  the  propositions  assumed,  but  premisses 
are  wanting.  Again  if  it  is  necessary  that  ani¬ 
mal  should  exist,  if  man  does,  and  that  sub- 


65 

stance  should  exist,  if  animal  does,  it  is  neces¬ 
sary  that  substance  should  exist  if  man  does: 
[jo]  but  as  yet  the  conclusion  has  not  been 
drawn  syllogistically:  for  the  premisses  are  not 
in  the  shape  we  required.  We  are  deceived  in 
such  cases  because  something  necessary  results 
from  what  is  assumed,  since  the  syllogism  also 
is  necessary.  But  that  which  is  necessary  is 
wider  than  the  syllogism:  for  every  syllogism  is 
[55]  necessary,  but  not  everything  which  is 
necessary  is  a  syllogism.  Consequently,  though 
something  results  when  certain  propositions 
are  assumed,  we  must  not  try  to  reduce  it  di¬ 
rectly,  but  must  first  state  the  two  premisses, 
then  divide  them  into  their  terms.  We  must 
take  that  term  as  middle  which  is  stated  in  both 
the  premisses:  for  it  is  necessary  that  the  mid- 
[40]  die  should  be  found  in  both  premisses  in 
all  the  figures. 

47b  If  then  the  middle  term  is  a  predicate  and 
a  subject  of  predication,  or  if  it  is  a  predicate, 
and  something  else  is  denied  of  it,  we  shall 
have  the  first  figure:  if  it  both  is  a  predicate 
and  is  denied  of  something,  the  middle  figure: 
if  other  things  are  predicated  of  it,  or  one  is 
[5]  denied,  the  other  predicated,  the  last  figure. 
For  it  was  thus  that  we  found  the  middle  term 
placed  in  each  figure.  It  is  placed  similarly  too 
if  the  premisses  are  not  universal:  for  the  mid¬ 
dle  term  is  determined  in  the  same  way.  Clear¬ 
ly  then,  if  the  same  term  is  not  stated  more 
than  once  in  the  course  of  an  argument,  a  syl¬ 
logism  cannot  be  made:  for  a  middle  term  has 
not  been  taken.  Since  we  know  what  sort  of 
thesis  is  established  in  each  figure,  and  in 
[/o]  which  the  universal,  in  what  sort  the  par¬ 
ticular  is  described,  clearly  we  must  not  look 
for  all  the  figures,  but  for  that  which  is  appro¬ 
priate  to  the  thesis  in  hand.  If  the  thesis  is  es¬ 
tablished  in  more  figures  than  one,  we  shall 
recognize  the  figure  by  the  position  of  the 
middle  term. 

33 

[75]  Men  are  frequently  deceived  about  syllo¬ 
gisms  because  the  inference  is  necessary,  as  has 
been  said  above;1  sometimes  they  are  deceived 
by  the  similarity  in  the  positing  of  the  terms; 
and  this  ought  not  to  escape  our  notice.  E.g.  if 
A  is  stated  of  B,  and  B  of  C:  it  would  seem  that 
a  sylfogism  is  possible  since  the  terms  stand 
thus:  but  nothing  necessary  results,  nor  does  a 
[20]  syllogism.  Let  A  represent  the  term  ‘being 
eternal’,  B  ‘Aristomenes  as  an  object  of 
1  a  31* 


BOOK  I,  CHAPTERS  30-33 


66 

thought’,  C  ‘Aristomenes’.  It  is  true  then  that  A 
belongs  to  B.  For  Aristomenes  as  an  object  of 
thought  is  eternal.  But  B  also  belongs  to  C:  for 
Aristomenes  is  Aristomenes  as  an  object  of 
[25]  thought.  But  A  does  not  belong  to  C:  for 
Aristomenes  is  perishable.  For  no  syllogism 
was  made  although  the  terms  stood  thus:  that 
required  that  the  premiss  AB  should  be  stated 
universally.  But  this  is  false,  that  every  Aris¬ 
tomenes  who  is  an  object  of  thought  is  eternal, 
since  Aristomenes  is  perishable.  Again  let  C 
[jo]  stand  for  ‘Miccalus’,  B  for  ‘musical  Mic- 
calus’,  A  for  ‘perishing  to-morrow’.  It  is  true  to 
predicate  B  of  C:  for  Miccalus  is  musical  Mic- 
calus.  Also  A  can  be  predicated  of  B:  for  musi¬ 
cal  Miccalus  might  perish  to-morrow.  But  to 
state  A  of  C  is  false  at  any  rate.  This  argument 
then  is  identical  with  the  former;  for  it  is  not 
[^5]  true  universally  that  musical  Miccalus 
perishes  to-morrow:  but  unless  this  is  assumed, 
no  syllogism  (as  we  have  shown)  is  possible. 

This  deception  then  arises  through  ignoring 
a  small  distinction.  For  if  we  accept  the  con¬ 
clusion  as  though  it  made  no  difference  whether 
we  said  ‘This  belong  to  that’  or  ‘This  belongs 
to  all  of  that’. 

34 

48a  Men  will  frequently  fall  into  fallacies 
through  not  setting  out  the  terms  of  the  prem¬ 
iss  well,  e.g.  suppose  A  to  be  health,  B  disease, 
C  man.  It  is  true  to  say  that  A  cannot  belong  to 
any  B  (for  health  belongs  to  no  disease)  and 
[5]  again  that  B  belongs  to  every  C  (for  every 
man  is  capable  of  disease).  It  would  seem  to 
follow  that  health  cannot  belong  to  any  man. 
The  reason  for  this  is  that  the  terms  are  not  set 
out  well  in  the  statement,  since  if  the  things 
which  are  in  the  conditions  are  substituted,  no 
[/o]  syllogism  can  be  made,  e.g.  if  ‘healthy’  is 
substituted  for  ‘health’  and  ‘diseased’  for  ‘dis¬ 
ease’.  For  it  is  not  true  to  say  that  being  healthy 
cannot  belong  to  one  who  is  diseased.  But  un¬ 
less  this  is  assumed  no  conclusion  results,  save 
in  respect  of  possibility:  but  such  a  conclusion 
is  not  impossible:  for  it  is  possible  that  health 
[75]  should  belong  to  no  man.  Again  the  fal¬ 
lacy  may  occur  in  a  similar  way  in  the  middle 
figure:  ‘it  is  not  possible  that  health  should  be¬ 
long  to  any  disease,  but  it  is  possible  that  health 
should  belong  to  every  man,  consequently  it  is 
not  possible  that  disease  should  belong  to  any 
man’.  In  the  third  figure  the  fallacy  results  in 
reference  to  possibility.  For  health  and  disease, 
[20]  and  knowledge  and  ignorance,  and  in 
general  contraries,  may  possibly  belong  to  the 


48b 

same  thing,  but  cannot  belong  to  one  another. 
This  is  not  in  agreement  with  what  was  said 
before:  for  we  stated1  that  when  several  things 
could  belong  to  the  same  thing,  they  could  be¬ 
long  to  one  another. 

It  is  evident  then  that  in  all  these  cases  the 
[25]  fallacy  arises  from  the  setting  out  of  the 
terms:  for  if  the  things  that  are  in  the  condi¬ 
tions  are  substituted,  no  fallacy  arises.  It  is  clear 
then  that  in  such  premisses  what  possesses  the 
condition  ought  always  to  be  substituted  for 
the  condition  and  taken  as  the  term. 

35 

We  must  not  always  seek  to  set  out  the  terms 
[30]  in  a  single  word:  for  we  shall  often  have 
complexes  of  words  to  which  a  single  name  is 
not  given.  Hence  it  is  difficult  to  reduce  syllo¬ 
gisms  with  such  terms.  Sometimes  too  fallacies 
will  result  from  such  a  search,  e.g.  the  belief 
that  syllogism  can  establish  that  which  has  no 
mean.  Let  A  stand  for  two  right  angles,  B  for 
triangle,  C  for  isosceles  triangle.  A  then  be- 
[55]  longs  to  C  because  of  B:  but  A  belongs  to 
B  without  the  mediation  of  another  term:  for 
the  triangle  in  virtue  of  its  own  nature  contains 
two  right  angles,  consequently  there  will  be  no 
middle  term  for  the  proposition  AB,  although 
it  is  demonstrable.  For  it  is  clear  that  the  mid¬ 
dle  must  not  always  be  assumed  to  be  an  indi¬ 
vidual  thing,  but  sometimes  a  complex  of 
words,  as  happens  in  the  case  mentioned. 

36 

[40)  That  the  first  term  belongs  to  the  middle, 
and  the  middle  to  the  extreme,  must  not  be  un¬ 
derstood  in  the  sense  that  they  can  always  be 
predicated  of  one  another  or  that  the  first  term 
48b  will  be  predicated  of  the  middle  in  the 
same  way  as  the  middle  is  predicated  of  the  last 
term.  The  same  holds  if  the  premisses  are  neg¬ 
ative.  But  we  must  suppose  the  verb  ‘to  be¬ 
long’  to  have  as  many  meanings  as  the  senses 
in  which  the  verb  ‘to  be’  is  used,  and  in  which 
the  assertion  that  a  thing  ‘is’  may  be  said  to  be 
[5]  true.  Take  for  example  the  statement  that 
there  is  a  single  science  of  contraries.  Let  A 
stand  for  ‘there  being  a  single  science’,  and  B 
for  things  which  are  contrary  to  one  another. 
Then  A  belongs  to  B,  not  in  the  sense  that  con¬ 
traries  are  the  fact  of  there  being  a  single  sci¬ 
ence  of  them,  but  in  the  sense  that  it  is  true  to 
say  of  the  contraries  that  there  is  a  single  sci¬ 
ence  of  them. 

[/o]  It  happens  sometimes  that  the  first  term 
1 39a  M-I9- 


PRIOR  ANALYTICS 


49*  BOOK  I,  CHAPTERS  33-38  67 


is  stated  of  the  middle,  but  the  middle  is  not 
stated  of  the  third  term,  e.g.  if  wisdom  is 
knowledge,  and  wisdom  is  of  the  good,  the 
conclusion  is  that  there  is  knowledge  of  the 
good.  The  good  then  is  not  knowledge,  though 
wisdom  is  knowledge.  Sometimes  the  middle 
[75]  term  is  stated  of  the  third,  but  the  first  is 
not  stated  of  the  middle,  e.g.  if  there  is  a  sci¬ 
ence  of  everything  that  has  a  quality,  or  is  a 
contrary,  and  the  good  both  is  a  contrary  and 
has  a  quality,  the  conclusion  is  that  there  is  a 
science  of  the  good,  but  the  good  is  not  science, 
nor  is  that  which  has  a  quality  or  is  a  con¬ 
trary,  though  the  good  is  both  of  these.  Some- 
[20]  times  neither  the  first  term  is  stated  of 
the  middle,  nor  the  middle  of  the  third,  while 
the  first  is  sometimes  stated  of  the  third,  and 
sometimes  not:  e.g.  if  there  is  a  genus  of  that 
of  which  there  is  a  science,  and  if  there  is  a 
science  of  the  good,  we  conclude  that  there  is 
a  genus  of  the  good.  But  nothing  is  predicated 
of  anything.  And  if  that  of  which  there  is  a 
[25]  science  is  a  genus,  and  if  there  is  a  science 
of  the  good,  we  conclude  that  the  good  is  a 
genus.  The  first  term  then  is  predicated  of  the 
extreme,  but  in  the  premisses  one  thing  is  not 
stated  of  another. 

The  same  holds  good  where  the  relation  is 
negative.  For  ‘that  does  not  belong  to  this’  does 
[jo]  not  always  mean  that  ‘this  is  not  that’,  but 
sometimes  that  ‘this  is  not  of  that’  or  ‘for  that’, 
e.g.  ‘there  is  not  a  motion  of  a  motion  or  a  be¬ 
coming  of  a  becoming,  but  there  is  a  becoming 
of  pleasure:  so  pleasure  is  not  a  becoming.’  Or 
again  it  may  be  said  that  there  is  a  sign  of 
laughter,  but  there  is  not  a  sign  of  a  sign,  con¬ 
sequently  laughter  is  not  a  sign.  This  holds  in 
the  other  cases  too,  in  which  the  thesis  is  re- 
[35]  futed  because  the  genus  is  asserted  in  a 
particular  way,  in  relation  to  the  terms  of  the 
thesis.  Again  take  the  inference  ‘opportunity  is 
not  the  right  time:  for  opportunity  belongs  to 
God,  but  the  right  time  does  not,  since  noth¬ 
ing  is  useful  to  God’.  We  must  take  as  terms 
opportunity — right  time — God:  but  the  prem¬ 
iss  must  be  understood  according  to  the  case  of 
the  noun.  For  we  state  this  universally  without 
[40]  qualification,  that  the  terms  ought  always 
to  be  stated  in  the  nominative,  e.g.  man,  good, 
contraries,  not  in  oblique  cases,  e.g.  of  man,  of 
49a  good,  of  contraries,  but  the  premisses 
ought  to  be  understood  with  reference  to  the 
cases  of  each  term — either  the  dative,  e.g.  ‘equal 
to  this’,  or  the  genitive,  e.g.  ‘double  of  this’,  or 
the  accusative,  e.g.  ‘that  which  strikes  or  sees 
this’,  or  the  nominative,  e.g.  ‘man  is  an  ani- 


[5]  mal’,  or  in  whatever  other  way  the  word 
falls  in  the  premiss. 

37 

The  expressions  ‘this  belongs  to  that’  and 
‘this  holds  true  of  that’  must  be  understood  in 
as  many  ways  as  there  are  different  categories, 
and  these  categories  must  be  taken  either  with 
or  without  qualification,  and  further  as  simple 
or  compound:  the  same  holds  good  of  the  cor¬ 
responding  negative  expressions.  We  must 
[/o]  consider  these  points  and  define  them 
better. 

38 

A  term  which  is  repeated  in  the  premisses 
ought  to  be  joined  to  the  first  extreme,  not  to 
the  middle.  I  mean  for  example  that  if  a  syllo¬ 
gism  should  be  made  proving  that  there  is 
knowledge  of  justice,  that  it  is  good,  the  ex¬ 
pression  ‘that  it  is  good  (or  *qud  good*)  should 
be  joined  to  the  first  term.  Let  A  stand  for 
[75]  ‘knowledge  that  it  is  good’,  B  for  good,  C 
for  justice.  It  is  true  to  predicate  A  of  B.  For 
of  the  good  there  is  knowledge  that  it  is  good. 
Also  it  is  true  to  predicate  B  of  C .  For  justice  is 
identical  with  a  good.  In  this  way  an  analysis 
of  the  argument  can  be  made.  But  if  the  ex- 
ression  ‘that  it  is  good’  were  added  to  B,  the 
20]  conclusion  will  not  follow:  for  A  will  be 
true  of  B,  but  B  will  not  be  true  of  C.  For  to 
predicate  of  justice  the  term  ‘good  that  it  is 
good’  is  false  and  not  intelligible.  Similarly  if 
it  should  be  proved  that  the  healthy  is  an  ob¬ 
ject  of  knowledge  qua  good,  of  goat-stag  an 
object  of  knowledge  qua  not  existing,  or  man 
perishable  qud  an  object  of  sense:  in  every  case 
in  which  an  addition  is  made  to  the  predicate, 
[25]  the  addition  must  be  joined  to  the  ex¬ 
treme. 

The  position  of  the  terms  is  not  the  same 
when  something  is  established  without  quali¬ 
fication  and  when  it  is  qualified  by  some  at¬ 
tribute  or  condition,  e.g.  when  the  good  is 
proved  to  be  an  object  of  knowledge  and  when 
it  is  proved  to  be  an  object  of  knowledge  that 
it  is  good.  If  it  has  been  proved  to  be  an  object 
[jo]  of  knowledge  without  qualification,  we 
must  put  as  middle  term  ‘that  which  is’,  but  if 
we  add  the  qualification  ‘that  it  is  good’,  the 
middle  term  must  be  ‘that  which  is  some¬ 
thing’.  Let  A  stand  for  ‘knowledge  that  it  is 
something’,  B  stand  for  ‘something’,  and  C 
stand  for  ‘good’.  It  is  true  to  predicate  A  of  B: 
for  ex  hy pot  he  si  there  is  a  science  of  that  which 
is  something,  that  it  is  something.  B  too  is  true 


68 

of  C:  for  that  which  C  represents  is  some* 
[^5]  thing.  Consequently  A  is  true  of  C:  there 
will  then  be  knowledge  of  the  good,  that  it  is 
good:  for  ex  hypothesi  the  term  ‘something’  in¬ 
dicates  the  thing’s  special  nature.  But  if  ‘being’ 
were  taken  as  middle  and  ‘being’  simply  were 
joined  to  the  extreme,  not  ‘being  something’, 
we  should  not  have  had  a  syllogism  proving 
that  there  is  knowledge  of  the  good,  that  it  is 
49b  good,  but  that  it  is;  e.g.  let  A  stand  for 
knowledge  that  it  is,  B  for  being,  C  for  good. 
Clearly  then  in  syllogisms  which  are  thus  lim¬ 
ited  we  must  take  the  terms  in  the  way  stated. 

39 

We  ought  also  to  exchange  terms  which  have 
the  same  value,  word  for  word,  and  phrase  for 
phrase,  and  word  and  phrase,  and  always  take 
[5]  a  word  in  preference  to  a  phrase:  for  thus 
the  setting  out  of  the  terms  will  be  easier.  For 
example  if  it  makes  no  difference  whether  we 
say  that  the  supposable  is  not  the  genus  of  the 
opinable  or  that  the  opinable  is  not  identical 
with  a  particular  kind  of  supposable  (for  what 
is  meant  is  the  same  in  both  statements),  it  is 
better  to  take  as  the  terms  the  supposable  and 
the  opinable  in  preference  to  the  phrase  sug¬ 
gested. 


40 

[/o]  Since  the  expressions  ‘pleasure  is  good’ 
and  ‘pleasure  is  the  good’  are  not  identical,  we 
must  not  set  out  the  terms  in  the  same  way; 
but  if  the  syllogism  is  to  prove  that  pleasure  is 
the  good,  the  term  must  be  ‘the  good’,  but  if 
the  object  is  to  prove  that  pleasure  is  good,  the 
term  will  be  ‘good’.  Similarly  in  all  other  cases. 

41 

[75]  It  is  not  the  same,  either  in  fact  or  in 
speech,  that  A  belongs  to  all  of  that  to  which 
B  belongs,  and  that  A  belongs  to  ail  of  that  to 
all  of  which  B  belongs:  for  nothing  prevents  B 
from  belonging  to  C,  though  not  to  all  C:  e.g. 
let  B  stand  for  beautiful,  and  C  for  white.  If 
beauty  belongs  to  something  white,  it  is  true  to 
say  that  beauty  belongs  to  that  which  is  white; 
but  not  perhaps  to  everything  that  is  white.  If 
[20]  then  A  belongs  to  B,  but  not  to  every¬ 
thing  of  which  B  is  predicated,  then  whether 
B  belongs  to  all  C  or  merely  belongs  to  C,  it  is 
not  necessary  that  A  should  belong,  I  do  not 
say  to  all  C,  but  even  to  C  at  all.  But  if  A  be¬ 
longs  to  everything  of  which  B  is  truly  stated, 
it  will  follow  that  A  can  be  said  of  all  of  that 


50* 

of  all  of  which  B  is  said.  If  however  A  is  said 
[25]  of  that  of  all  of  which  B  may  be  said, 
nothing  prevents  B  belonging  to  C,  and  yet  A 
not  belonging  to  all  C  or  to  any  C  at  all.  If 
then  we  take  three  terms  it  is  clear  that  the  ex¬ 
pression  ‘ A  is  said  of  all  of  which  B  is  said’ 
means  this,  lA  is  said  of  all  the  things  of  which 
[30]  B  is  said’.  And  if  B  is  said  of  all  of  a  third 
term,  so  also  is  A:  but  if  B  is  not  said  of  all  of 
the  third  term,  there  is  no  necessity  that  A 
should  be  said  of  all  of  it. 

We  must  not  suppose  that  something  absurd 
results  through  setting  out  the  terms:  for  we 
do  not  use  the  existence  of  this  particular 
thing,  but  imitate  the  geometrician  who  says 
[i5]  that  ‘this  line  a  foot  long’  or  ‘this  straight 
line’  or  ‘this  line  without  breadth’  exists  al¬ 
though  it  does  not,  but  does  not  use  the  dia¬ 
grams  in  the  sense  that  he  reasons  from  them. 
For  in  general,  if  two  things  are  not  related  as 
whole  to  part  and  part  to  whole,  the  prover 
does  not  prove  from  them,  and  so  no  syllogism 
50a  is  formed.  We  (I  mean  the  learner)  use 
the  process  of  setting  out  terms  like  perception 
by  sense,  not  as  though  it  were  impossible  to 
demonstrate  without  these  illustrative  terms, 
as  it  is  to  demonstrate  without  the  premisses  of 
the  syllogism. 

42 

[5]  We  should  not  forget  that  in  the  same  syl¬ 
logism  not  all  conclusions  are  reached  through 
one  figure,  but  one  through  one  figure,  an¬ 
other  through  another.  Clearly  then  we  must 
analyse  arguments  in  accordance  with  this. 
Since  not  every  problem  is  proved  in  every 
figure,  but  certain  problems  in  each  figure,  it  is 
[/o]  clear  from  the  conclusion  in  what  figure 
the  premisses  should  be  sought. 

43 

In  reference  to  those  arguments  aiming  at  a 
definition  which  have  been  directed  to  prove 
some  part  of  the  definition,  we  must  take  as  a 
term  the  point  to  which  the  argument  has  been 
directed,  not  the  whole  definition:  for  so  we 
shall  be  less  likely  to  be  disturbed  by  the  length 
of  the  term:  e.g.  if  a  man  proves  that  water  is  a 
[75]  drinkable  liquid,  we  must  take  as  terms 
drinkable  and  water. 

44 

Further  we  must  not  try  to  reduce  hypothetical 
syllogisms;  for  with  the  given  premisses  it  is 
not  possible  to  reduce  them.  For  they  have  not 
been  proved  by  syllogism,  but  assented  to  by 


PRIOR  ANALYTICS 


51a  BOOK  I,  CHAPTERS  38-45  69 


agreement.  For  instance  if  a  man  should  sup- 
[20]  pose  that  unless  there  is  one  faculty  of 
contraries,  there  cannot  be  one  science,  and 
should  then  argue  that  not  every  faculty  is  of 
contraries,  e.g.  of  what  is  healthy  and  what  is 
sickly:  for  the  same  thing  will  then  be  at  the 
same  time  healthy  and  sickly.  He  has  shown 
that  there  is  not  one  faculty  of  all  contraries, 
but  he  has  not  proved  that  there  is  not  a  sci- 
[25]  ence.  And  yet  one  must  agree.  But  the 
agreement  does  not  come  from  a  syllogism,  but 
from  an  hypothesis.  This  argument  cannot  be 
reduced:  but  the  proof  that  there  is  not  a  single 
faculty  can.  The  latter  argument  perhaps  was 
a  syllogism:  but  the  former  was  an  hypothesis. 

The  same  holds  good  of  arguments  which 
[50]  are  brought  to  a  conclusion  per  impossi - 
bile.  These  cannot  be  analysed  either;  but  the 
reduction  to  what  is  impossible  can  be  analysed 
since  it  is  proved  by  syllogism,  though  the  rest 
of  the  argument  cannot,  because  the  conclu¬ 
sion  is  reached  from  an  hypothesis.  But  these 
differ  from  the  previous  arguments:  for  in  the 
former  a  preliminary  agreement  must  be 
reached  if  one  is  to  accept  the  conclusion;  e.g. 
an  agreement  that  if  there  is  proved  to  be  one 
faculty  of  contraries,  then  contraries  fall  under 
[55]  the  same  science;  whereas  in  the  latter, 
even  if  no  preliminary  agreement  has  been 
made,  men  still  accept  the  reasoning,  because 
the  falsity  is  patent,  e.g.  the  falsity  of  what  fol¬ 
lows  from  the  assumption  that  the  diagonal  is 
commensurate,  viz.  that  then  odd  numbers  are 
equal  to  evens. 

Many  other  arguments  are  brought  to  a  con- 
[40]  elusion  by  the  help  of  an  hypothesis; 
these  we  ought  to  consider  and  mark  out  clear¬ 
ly.  We  shall  describe  in  the  sequel  their  differ- 
50b  ences,  and  the  various  ways  in  which  hy¬ 
pothetical  arguments  are  formed:  but  at  pres¬ 
ent  this  much  must  be  clear,  that  it  is  not 
possible  to  resolve  such  arguments  into  the 
figures.  And  we  have  explained  the  reason. 

45 

[5]  Whatever  problems  are  proved  in  more 
than  one  figure,  if  they  have  been  established 
in  one  figure  by  syllogism,  can  be  reduced  to 
another  figure,  e.g.  a  negative  syllogism  in  the 
first  figure  can  be  reduced  to  the  second,  and  a 
syllogism  in  the  middle  figure  to  the  first,  not  all 
however  but  some  only.  The  point  will  be  clear 
in  the  sequel.  If  A  belongs  to  no  B,  and  B  to 
[/o]  all  C,  then  A  belongs  to  no  C.  Thus  the 
first  figure;  but  if  the  negative  statement  is 
converted,  we  shall  have  the  middle  figure. 


For  B  belongs  to  no  A,  and  to  all  C.  Similarly 
if  the  syllogism  is  not  universal  but  particular, 
e.g.  if  A  belongs  to  no  B,  and  B  to  some  C. 
[75]  Convert  the  negative  statement  and  you 
will  have  the  middle  figure. 

The  universal  syllogisms  in  the  second  fig¬ 
ure  can  be  reduced  to  the  first,  but  only  one  of 
the  two  particular  syllogisms.  Let  A  belong  to 
no  B  and  to  all  C.  Convert  the  negative  state- 
[20]  ment,  and  you  will  have  the  first  figure. 
For  B  will  belong  to  no  A,  and  A  to  all  C.  But 
if  the  affirmative  statement  concerns  B,  and  the 
negative  C,  C  must  be  made  first  term.  For  C 
belongs  to  no  A,  and  A  to  all  B:  therefore  C 
belongs  to  no  B.  B  then  belongs  to  no  C:  for 
[25]  the  negative  statement  is  convertible. 

But  if  the  syllogism  is  particular,  whenever 
the  negative  statement  concerns  the  major  ex¬ 
treme,  reduction  to  the  first  figure  will  be  possi¬ 
ble,  e.g.  if  A  belongs  to  no  B  and  to  some  C: 
convert  the  negative  statement  and  you  will 
have  the  first  figure.  For  B  will  belong  to  no  A, 
[jo]  and  A  to  some  C.  But  when  the  affirma¬ 
tive  statement  concerns  the  major  extreme,  no 
resolution  will  be  possible,  e.g.  if  A  belongs  to 
all  B ,  but  not  to  all  C:  for  the  statement  AB 
does  not  admit  of  conversion,  nor  would  there 
be  a  syllogism  if  it  did. 

[35]  Again  syllogisms  in  the  third  figure  can¬ 
not  all  be  resolved  into  the  first,  though  all  syl¬ 
logisms  in  the  first  figure  can  be  resolved  into 
the  third.  Let  A  belong  to  all  B  and  B  to  some 
C.  Since  the  particular  affirmative  is  convert¬ 
ible,  C  will  belong  to  some  B:  but  A  belonged 
to  all  B:  so  that  the  third  figure  is  formed. 
Similarly  if  the  syllogism  is  negative:  for  the 
particular  affirmative  is  convertible:  therefore 
[40]  A  will  belong  to  no  B,  and  to  some  C. 
51a  Of  the  syllogisms  in  the  last  figure  one 
only  cannot  be  resolved  into  the  first,  viz.  when 
the  negative  statement  is  not  universal:  all  the 
rest  can  be  resolved.  Let  A  and  B  be  affirmed 
of  all  C:  then  C  can  be  converted  partially  with 
[5]  either  A  or  B:  C  then  belongs  to  some  B. 
Consequently  we  shall  get  the  first  figure,  if  A 
belongs  to  all  C,  and  C  to  some  of  the  B s.  If  A 
belongs  to  all  C  and  B  to  some  C,  the  argu¬ 
ment  is  the  same:  for  B  is  convertible  in  refer¬ 
ence  to  C.  But  if  B  belongs  to  all  C  and  A  to 
[/o]  some  C,  the  first  term  must  be  B:  for  B 
belongs  to  all  C,  and  C  to  some  A,  therefore  B 
belongs  to  some  A.  But  since  the  particular 
statement  is  convertible,  A  will  belong  to  some 
B.  If  the  syllogism  is  negative,  when  the  terms 
are  universal  we  must  take  them  in  a  similar 
way.  Let  B  belong  to  all  C,  and  A  to  no  C: 


7° 

[75]  then  C  will  belong  to  some  B,  and  A  to 
no  C ;  and  so  C  will  be  middle  term.  Similarly 
if  the  negative  statement  is  universal,  the  af¬ 
firmative  particular:  for  A  will  belong  to  no  C, 
and  C  to  some  of  the  Bs.  But  if  the  negative 
statement  is  particular,  no  resolution  will  be 
ossible,  e.g.  if  B  belongs  to  all  C,  and  A  does 
20]  not  belong  to  some  C:  convert  the  state¬ 
ment  BC  and  both  premisses  will  be  particular. 

It  is  clear  that  in  order  to  resolve  the  figures 
into  one  another  the  premiss  which  concerns 
the  minor  extreme  must  be  converted  in  both 
the  figures:  for  when  this  premiss  is  altered, 
[25]  the  transition  to  the  other  figure  is  made. 

One  of  the  syllogisms  in  the  middle  figure 
can,  the  other  cannot,  be  resolved  into  the  third 
figure.  Whenever  the  universal  statement  is 
negative,  resolution  is  possible.  For  if  A  be¬ 
longs  to  no  B  and  to  some  C,  both  B  and  C 
alike  are  convertible  in  relation  to  A,  so  that  B 
[jo]  belongs  to  no  A ,  and  C  to  some  A .  A 
therefore  is  middle  term.  But  when  A  belongs 
to  all  B,  and  not  to  some  C,  resolution  will  not 
be  possible:  for  neither  of  the  premisses  is  uni¬ 
versal  after  conversion. 

Syllogisms  in  the  third  figure  can  be  re- 
[j5J  solved  into  the  middle  figure,  whenever 
the  negative  statement  is  universal,  e.g.  if  A 
belongs  to  no  C,  and  B  to  some  or  all  C.  For  C 
then  will  belong  to  no  A  and  to  some  B.  But 
if  the  negative  statement  is  particular,  no  reso¬ 
lution  will  be  possible:  for  the  particular  nega¬ 
tive  does  not  admit  of  conversion. 

Uo]  it  is  clear  then  that  the  same  syllogisms 
cannot  be  resolved  in  these  figures  which  could 
not  be  resolved  into  the  first  figure,  and  that 
51b  when  syllogisms  are  reduced  to  the  first 
figure  these  alone  are  confirmed  by  reduction 
to  what  is  impossible. 

It  is  clear  from  what  we  have  said  how  we 
ought  to  reduce  syllogisms,  and  that  the  fig¬ 
ures  may  be  resolved  into  one  another. 

46 

[5]  In  establishing  or  refuting,  it  makes  some 
difference  whether  we  suppose  the  expressions 
‘not  to  be  this’  and  ‘to  be  not-this’  are  identical 
or  different  in  meaning,  e.g.  ‘not  to  be  white’ 
and  ‘to  be  not-white’.  For  they  do  not  mean  the 
same  thing,  nor  is  ‘to  be  not-white’  the  nega- 
[/o]  tion  of  ‘to  be  white’,  but  ‘not  to  be  white’. 
The  reason  for  this  is  as  follows.  The  relation 
of  ‘he  can  walk’  to  ‘he  can  not-walk’  is  similar 
to  the  relation  of  ‘it  is  white’  to  ‘it  is  not-white’; 
so  is  that  of  ‘he  knows  what  is  good’  to  ‘he 
knows  what  is  not-good’.  For  there  is  no  differ- 


52* 

ence  between  the  expressions  ‘he  knows  what  is 
ood’  and  ‘he  is  knowing  what  is  good’,  or  ‘he 
75]  can  walk’  and  ‘he  is  able  to  walk’:  there¬ 
fore  there  is  no  difference  between  their  con¬ 
traries  ‘he  cannot  walk’ — ‘he  is  not  able  to 
walk’.  If  then  ‘he  is  not  able  to  walk’  means 
the  same  as  ‘he  is  able  not  to  walk’,  capacity  to 
walk  and  incapacity  to  walk  will  belong  at  the 
same  time  to  the  same  person  (for  the  same 
man  can  both  walk  and  not-walk,  and  is  pos- 
[20]  sessed  of  knowledge  of  what  is  good  and 
of  what  is  not-good),  but  an  affirmation  and  a 
denial  which  are  opposed  to  one  another  do 
not  belong  at  the  same  time  to  the  same  thing. 
As  then  ‘not  to  know  what  is  good’  is  not  the 
same  as  ‘to  know  what  is  not  good’,  so  ‘to  be 
not-good’  is  not  the  same  as  ‘not  to  be  good’. 
For  when  two  pairs  correspond,  if  the  one  pair 
are  different  from  one  another,  the  other  pair 
[25]  also  must  be  different.  Nor  is  ‘to  be  not- 
equal’  the  same  as  ‘not  to  be  equal’:  for  there 
is  something  underlying  the  one,  viz.  that 
which  is  not-equal,  and  this  is  the  unequal,  but 
there  is  nothing  underlying  the  other.  Where¬ 
fore  not  everything  is  either  equal  or  unequal, 
but  everything  is  equal  or  is  not  equal.  Further 
the  expressions  ‘it  is  a  not-white  log’  and  ‘it  is 
not  a  white  log’  do  not  imply  one  another’s 
[30]  truth.  For  if  ‘it  is  a  not-white  log’,  it  must 
be  a  log:  but  that  which  is  not  a  white  log  need 
not  be  a  log  at  all.  Therefore  it  is  clear  that  ‘it  is 
not-good’  is  not  the  denial  of  ‘it  is  good’.  If  then 
every  single  statement  may  truly  be  said  to  be 
either  an  affirmation  or  a  negation,  if  it  is  not  a 
negation  clearly  it  must  in  a  sense  be  an  affir¬ 
mation.  But  every  affirmation  has  a  corre- 
[55]  sponding  negation.  The  negation  then  of 
‘it  is  not-good’  is  ‘it  is  not  not-good’.  The  rela¬ 
tion  of  these  statements  to  one  another  is  as 
follows.  Let  A  stand  for  ‘to  be  good’,  B  for  ‘not 
to  be  good’,  let  C  stand  for  ‘to  be  not-good’ 
and  be  placed  under  B,  and  let  D  stand  for 
‘not  to  be  not-good’  and  be  placed  under  A. 
Then  either  A  or  B  will  belong  to  everything, 
but  they  will  never  belong  to  the  same  thing; 
[40]  and  either  C  or  D  will  belong  to  every¬ 
thing,  but  they  will  never  belong  to  the  same 
thing.  And  B  must  belong  to  everything  to 
which  C  belongs.  For  if  it  is  true  to  say  ‘it  is 
52a  not-white’,  it  is  true  also  to  say  ‘it  is  not 
white’:  for  it  is  impossible  that  a  thing  should 
simultaneously  be  white  and  be  not-white,  or 
be  a  not-white  log  and  be  a  white  log;  con¬ 
sequently  if  the  affirmation  does  not  belong, 
the  denial  must  belong.  But  C  does  not  always 
belong  to  B:  for  what  is  not  a  log  at  all,  cannot 


PRIOR  ANALYTICS 


52b 

[5]  be  a  not-white  log  either.  On  the  other 
hand  D  belongs  to  everything  to  which  A  be¬ 
longs.  For  either  C  or  D  belongs  to  every¬ 
thing  to  which  A  belongs.  But  since  a  thing 
cannot  be  simultaneously  not-white  and  white, 
D  must  belong  to  everything  to  which  A  be¬ 
longs.  For  of  that  which  is  white  it  is  true  to 
say  that  it  is  not  not-white.  But  A  is  not  true  of 
all  D.  For  of  that  which  is  not  a  log  at  all  it  is 
[/o]  not  true  to  say  A,  viz.  that  it  is  a  white 
log.  Consequently  D  is  true,  but  A  is  not  true, 
i.e.  that  it  is  a  white  log.  It  is  clear  also  that  A 
and  C  cannot  together  belong  to  the  same 
thing,  and  that  B  and  D  may  possibly  belong 
to  the  same  thing. 

[75]  Privative  terms  are  similarly  related  to 
positive  terms  in  respect  of  this  arrangement. 
Let  A  stand  for  ‘equal’,  B  for  ‘not  equal’,  C  for 
‘unequal’,  D  for  ‘not  unequal’. 

In  many  things  also,  to  some  of  which  some¬ 
thing  belongs  which  does  not  belong  to  others, 
the  negation  may  be  true  in  a  similar  way,  viz. 
[20]  that  all  are  not  white  or  that  each  is  not 
white,  while  that  each  is  not-white  or  all  are 
not-white  is  false.  Similarly  also  ‘every  animal 
is  not-white’  is  not  the  negation  of  ‘every  ani¬ 
mal  is  white’  (for  both  are  false):  the  proper 
negation  is  ‘every  animal  is  not  white’.  Since  it 
[25]  is  clear  that  ‘it  is  not-white’  and  ‘it  is  not 
white’  mean  different  things,  and  one  is  an 
affirmation,  the  other  a  denial,  it  is  evident  that 
the  method  of  proving  each  cannot  be  the 
same,  e.g.  that  whatever  is  an  animal  is  not 
white  or  may  not  be  white,  and  that  it  is  true 
to  call  it  not-white;  for  this  means  that  it  is  not- 
white.  But  we  may  prove  that  it  is  true  to  call 
[50]  it  white  or  not-white  in  the  same  way 
for  both  are  proved  constructively  by  means  of 
the  first  figure.  For  the  expression  ‘it  is  true’ 
stands  on  a  similar  footing  to  ‘it  is’.  For  the 
negation  of  ‘it  is  true  to  call  it  white’  is  not  ‘it  is 
true  to  call  it  not-white’  but  ‘it  is  not  true  to 
call  it  white’.  If  then  it  is  to  be  true  to  say  that 
whatever  is  a  man  is  musical  or  is  not-musical, 
[55]  we  must  assume  that  whatever  is  an  ani¬ 
mal  either  is  musical  or  is  not-musical;  and 
the  proof  has  been  made.  That  whatever  is  a 
man  is  not  musical  is  proved  destructively  in 
the  three  ways  mentioned. 

In  general  whenever  A  and  B  are  such  that 
[40]  they  cannot  belong  at  the  same  time  to 
the  same  thing,  and  one  of  the  two  necessarily 
belongs  to  everything,  and  again  C  and  D  are 
52b  related  in  the  same  way,  and  A  follows  C 
but  the  relation  cannot  be  reversed,  then  D 


71 

must  follow  B  and  the  relation  cannot  be  re¬ 
versed.  And  A  and  D  may  belong  to  the  same 
thing,  but  B  and  C  cannot.  First  it  is  clear 
[5]  from  the  following  consideration  that  D 
follows  B.  For  since  either  C  or  D  necessarily 
belongs  to  everything;  and  since  C  cannot  be¬ 
long  to  that  to  which  B  belongs,  because  it 
carries  A  along  with  it  and  A  and  B  cannot 
belong  to  the  same  thing;  it  is  clear  that  D 
must  follow  B.  Again  since  C  does  not  recipro¬ 
cate  with  A,  but  C  or  D  belongs  to  everything, 
[/o]  it  is  possible  that  A  and  D  should  belong 
to  the  same  thing.  But  B  and  C  cannot  belong 
to  the  same  thing,  because  A  follows  C ;  and  so 
something  impossible  results.  It  is  clear  then 
that  B  does  not  reciprocate  with  D  either,  since 
it  is  possible  that  D  and  A  should  belong  at  the 
same  time  to  the  same  thing. 

It  results  sometimes  even  in  such  an  arrange- 
[75]  ment  of  terms  that  one  is  deceived 
through  not  apprehending  the  opposites  right¬ 
ly,  one  of  which  must  belong  to  everything, 
e.g.  we  may  reason  that  ‘if  A  and  B  cannot  be¬ 
long  at  the  same  time  to  the  same  thing,  but  it 
is  necessary  that  one  of  them  should  belong  to 
whatever  the  other  does  not  belong  to:  and 
again  C  and  D  are  related  in  the  same  way, 
and  A  follows  everything  which  C  follows:  it 
will  result  that  B  belongs  necessarily  to  every¬ 
thing  to  which  D  belongs’:  but  this  is  false. 
[20]  ‘Assume  that  F  stands  for  the  negation 
of  A  and  B,  and  again  that  H  stands  for  the 
negation  of  C  and  D.  It  is  necessary  then  that 
either  A  or  F  should  belong  to  everything:  for 
either  the  affirmation  or  the  denial  must  be¬ 
long.  And  again  either  C  or  H  must  belong  to 
everything:  for  they  are  related  as  affirmation 
and  denial.  And  ex  hypothesi  A  belongs  to 
everything  to  which  C  belongs.  Therefore  H 
[25]  belongs  to  everything  to  which  F  be¬ 
longs.  Again  since  either  F  or  B  belongs  to 
everything,  and  similarly  either  H  or  D,  and 
since  H  follows  F,  B  must  follow  D:  for  we 
know  this.1  If  then  A  follows  C,  B  must  follow 
D\  But  this  is  false:  for  as  we  proved2  the  se¬ 
quence  is  reversed  in  terms  so  constituted.  The 
fallacy  arises  because  perhaps  it  is  not  neces- 
[50]  sary  that  A  or  F  should  belong  to  every¬ 
thing,  or  that  F  or  B  should  belong  to  every¬ 
thing:  for  F  is  not  the  denial  of  A.  For  not - 
good  is  the  negation  of  good:  and  not-good  is 
not  identical  with  ‘neither  good  nor  not-good’. 
Similarly  also  with  C  and  D.  For  two  nega¬ 
tions  have  been  assumed  in  respect  to  one  term. 

1  From  B  39-b  13.  2  ft  39-b  13. 


BOOK  I,  CHAPTERS  45-46 


72 


PRIOR  ANALYTICS 


53b 


BOOK  II 


i 

52b  We  have  already  explained  the  number  of 
the  figures,  the  character  and  number  of  the 
[40]  premisses,  when  and  how  a  syllogism  is 
formed;1  further  what  we  must  look  for  when 
53a  refuting  and  establishing  propositions, 
and  how  we  should  investigate  a  given  prob¬ 
lem  in  any  branch  of  inquiry,  also  by  what 
means  we  shall  obtain  principles  appropriate  to 
each  subject.2  Since  some  syllogisms  are  univer- 
[5]  sal,  others  particular,  all  the  universal  syl¬ 
logisms  give  more  than  one  result,  and  of  par¬ 
ticular  syllogisms  the  affirmative  yield  more 
than  one,  the  negative  yield  only  the  stated 
conclusion.  For  all  propositions  are  convertible 
save  only  the  particular  negative:  and  the  con¬ 
clusion  states  one  definite  thing  about  another 
definite  thing.  Consequently  all  syllogisms 
save  the  particular  negative  yield  more  than 
one  conclusion,  e.g.  if  A  has  been  proved  to  be- 
[/o]  long  to  all  or  to  some  B,  then  B  must  be¬ 
long  to  some  A:  and  if  A  has  been  proved  to 
belong  to  no  B,  then  B  belongs  to  no  A.  This  is 
a  different  conclusion  from  the  former.  But  if 
A  does  not  belong  to  some  B,  it  is  not  necessary 
that  B  should  not  belong  to  some  A:  for  it 
may  possibly  belong  to  all  A. 

[75]  This  then  is  the  reason  common  to  all 
syllogisms  whether  universal  or  particular.  But 
it  is  possible  to  give  another  reason  concerning 
those  which  are  universal.  For  all  the  things 
that  are  subordinate  to  the  middle  term  or  to 
the  conclusion  may  be  proved  by  the  same  syl¬ 
logism,  if  the  former  are  placed  in  the  middle, 
the  latter  in  the  conclusion;  e.g.  if  the  conclu- 
[20]  sion  AB  is  proved  through  C,  whatever  is 
subordinate  to  B  or  C  must  accept  the  predi¬ 
cate  A:  for  if  D  is  included  in  B  as  in  a  whole, 
and  B  is  included  in  A,  then  D  will  be  included 
in  A.  Again  if  E  is  included  in  C  as  in  a 
whole,  and  C  is  included  in  A,  then  E  will  be 
included  in  A.  Similarly  if  the  syllogism  is 
negative.  In  the  second  figure  it  will  be  possible 
[25]  to  infer  only  that  which  is  subordinate  to 
the  conclusion,  e.g.  if  A  belongs  to  no  B  and 
to  all  C;  we  conclude  that  B  belongs  to  no  C. 
If  then  D  is  subordinate  to  C,  clearly  B  does 
not  belong  to  it.  But  that  B  does  not  belong  to 
what  is  subordinate  to  A,  is  not  clear  by  means 
[30]  of  the  syllogism.  And  yet  B  does  not  be¬ 
long  to  E,  if  E  is  subordinate  to  A.  But  while 
it  has  been  proved  through  the  syllogism  that 
1 1.  1-26.  2 1.  27-31. 


B  belongs  to  no  C,  it  has  been  assumed  with¬ 
out  proof  that  B  does  not  belong  to  A,  conse¬ 
quently  it  does  not  result  through  the  syllogism 
that  B  does  not  belong  to  E. 

But  in  particular  syllogisms  there  will  be  no 
[35]  necessity  of  inferring  what  is  subordinate 
to  the  conclusion  (for  a  syllogism  does  not  re¬ 
sult  when  this  premiss  is  particular),  but  what¬ 
ever  is  subordinate  to  the  middle  term  may  be 
inferred,  not  however  through  the  syllogism, 
e.g.  if  A  belongs  to  all  B  and  B  to  some  C. 
Nothing  can  be  inferred  about  that  which  is 
subordinate  to  C;  something  can  be  inferred 
about  that  which  is  subordinate  to  B,  but  not 
[40]  through  the  preceding  syllogism.  Sim¬ 
ilarly  in  the  other  figures.  That  which  is  sub¬ 
ordinate  to  the  conclusion  cannot  be  proved; 
53b  the  other  subordinate  can  be  proved,  only 
not  through  the  syllogism,  just  as  in  the  univer¬ 
sal  syllogisms  what  is  subordinate  to  the  mid¬ 
dle  term  is  proved  (as  we  saw)  from  a  premiss 
which  is  not  demonstrated:  consequently  either 
a  conclusion  is  not  possible  in  the  case  of  uni¬ 
versal  syllogisms  or  else  it  is  possible  also  in 
the  case  of  particular  syllogisms. 

2 

It  is  possible  for  the  premisses  of  the  syllogism 
[5]  to  be  true,  or  to  be  false,  or  to  be  the  one 
true,  the  other  false.  The  conclusion  is  either 
true  or  false  necessarily.  From  true  premisses  it 
is  not  possible  to  draw  a  false  conclusion,  but  a 
true  conclusion  may  be  drawn  from  false  prem¬ 
isses,  true  however  only  in  respect  to  the  fact, 
not  to  the  reason.  The  reason  cannot  be  estab¬ 
lished  from  false  premisses:  why  this  is  so  will 
[/o]  be  explained  in  the  sequel.3 

First  then  that  it  is  not  possible  to  draw  a 
false  conclusion  from  true  premisses,  is  made 
clear  by  this  consideration.  If  it  is  necessary 
that  B  should  be  when  A  is,  it  is  necessary  that 
A  should  not  be  when  B  is  not.  If  then  A  is 
true,  B  must  be  true:  otherwise  it  will  turn  out 
[15]  that  the  same  thing  both  is  and  is  not  at 
the  same  time.  But  this  is  impossible.  Let  it 
not,  because  A  is  laid  down  as  a  single  term, 
be  supposed  that  it  is  possible,  when  a  single 
fact  is  given,  that  something  should  necessarily 
result.  For  that  is  not  possible.  For  what  re¬ 
sults  necessarily  is  the  conclusion,  and  the 
means  by  which  this  comes  about  are  at  the 
least  three  terms,  and  two  relations  of  subject 

3  57s  4°"b  I7* 


54b  BOOK  II,  CHAPTERS  1-2  73 


[20]  and  predicate  or  premisses.  If  .then  it  is 
true  that  A  belongs  to  all  that  to  which  B  be¬ 
longs,  and  that  B  belongs  to  all  that  to  which 
C  belongs,  it  is  necessary  that  A  should  belong 
to  all  that  to  which  C  belongs,  and  this  cannot 
be  false:  for  then  the  same  thing  will  belong 
and  not  belong  at  the  same  time.  So  A  is 
posited  as  one  thing,  being  two  premisses  tak¬ 
en  together.  The  same  holds  good  of  negative 
[25]  syllogisms:  it  is  not  possible  to  prove  a 
false  conclusion  from  true  premisses. 

But  from  what  is  false  a  true  conclusion  may 
be  drawn,  whether  both  the  premisses  are  false 
or  only  one,  provided  that  this  is  not  either  of 
the  premisses  indifferently,  if  it  is  taken  as 
wholly  false:  but  if  the  premiss  is  not  taken  as 
wholly  false,  it  does  not  matter  which  of  the 
[30]  two  is  false.  (1)  Let  A  belong  to  the 
whole  of  C,  but  to  none  of  the  B s,  neither  let 
B  belong  to  C.  This  is  possible,  e.g.  animal  be¬ 
longs  to  no  stone,  nor  stone  to  any  man.  If 
then  A  is  taken  to  belong  to  all  B  and  B  to  all 
C,  A  will  belong  to  all  C;  consequently  though 
both  the  premisses  are  false  the  conclusion  is 
[35]  true:  for  every  man  is  an  animal.  Sim¬ 
ilarly  with  the  negative.  For  it  is  possible  that 
neither  A  nor  B  should  belong  to  any  C,  al¬ 
though  A  belongs  to  all  B,  e.g.  if  the  same 
terms  are  taken  and  man  is  put  as  middle:  for 
neither  animal  nor  man  belongs  to  any  stone, 
but  animal  belongs  to  every  man.  Conse¬ 
quently  if  one  term  is  taken  to  belong  to  none 
[40]  of  that  to  which  it  does  belong,  and  the 
other  term  is  taken  to  belong  to  all  of  that  to 
which  it  does  not  belong,  though  both  the 
premisses  are  false  the  conclusion  will  be  true. 
54*  (2)  A  similar  proof  may  be  given  if  each 
premiss  is  partially  false. 

(3)  But  if  one  only  of  the  premisses  is  false, 
when  the  first  premiss  is  wholly  false,  e.g.  AB, 
the  conclusion  will  not  be  true,  but  if  the  prem¬ 
iss  BC  is  wholly  false,  a  true  conclusion  will  be 
ossible.  I  mean  by  ‘wholly  false’  the  contrary 
5]  of  the  truth,  e.g.  if  what  belongs  to  none  is 
assumed  to  belong  to  all,  or  if  what  belongs  to 
all  is  assumed  to  belong  to  none.  Let  A  belong 
to  no  B,  and  B  to  all  C .  If  then  the  premiss  BC 
which  I  take  is  true,  and  the  premiss  AB  is 
wholly  false,  viz.  that  A  belongs  to  all  B,  it  is 
impossible  that  the  conclusion  should  be  true: 
for  A  belonged  to  none  of  the  Cs,  since  A  be- 
[/o]  longed  to  nothing  to  which  B  belonged, 
and  B  belonged  to  all  C.  Similarly  there  can¬ 
not  be  a  true  conclusion  if  A  belongs  to  all  B, 
and  B  to  all  C,  but  while  the  true  premiss  BC 
is  assumed,  the  wholly  false  premiss  AB  is  also 


assumed,  viz.  that  A  belongs  to  nothing  to 
which  B  belongs:  here  the  conclusion  must  be 
[75]  false.  For  A  will  belong  to  all  C,  since  A 
belongs  to  everything  to  which  B  belongs,  and 
B  to  all  C.  It  is  clear  then  that  when  the  first 
premiss  is  wholly  false,  whether  affirmative  or 
negative,  and  the  other  premiss  is  true,  the 
conclusion  cannot  be  true. 

(4)  But  if  the  premiss  is  not  wholly  false,  a 
true  conclusion  is  possible.  For  if  A  belongs  to 
all  C  and  to  some  B,  and  if  B  belongs  to  all  C, 
[20]  e.g.  animal  to  every  swan  and  to  some 
white  thing,  and  white  to  every  swan,  then  if 
we  take  as  premisses  that  A  belongs  to  all  B, 
and  B  to  all  C,  A  will  belong  to  all  C  truly:  for 
every  swan  is  an  animal.  Similarly  if  the  state¬ 
ment  AB  is  negative.  For  it  is  possible  that  A 
[25]  should  belong  to  some  B  and  to  no  C,  and 
that  B  should  belong  to  all  C,  e.g.  animal  to 
some  white  thing,  but  to  no  snow,  and  white 
to  all  snow.  If  then  one  should  assume  that  A 
belongs  to  no  B,  and  B  to  all  C,  then  A  will  be¬ 
long  to  no  C. 

(5)  But  if  the  premiss  AB,  which  is  as¬ 
sumed,  is  wholly  true,  and  the  premiss  BC  is 
wholly  false,  a  true  syllogism  will  be  possible: 
[30]  for  nothing  prevents  A  belonging  to  all  B 
and  to  all  C,  though  B  belongs  to  no  C,  e.g. 
these  being  species  of  the  same  genus  which 
are  not  subordinate  one  to  the  other:  for  animal 
belongs  both  to  horse  and  to  man,  but  horse  to 
no  man.  If  then  it  is  assumed  that  A  belongs 
to  all  B  and  B  to  all  C,  the  conclusion  will  be 
[35]  true,  although  the  premiss  BC  is  wholly 
false.  Similarly  if  the  premiss  AB  is  negative. 
For  it  is  possible  that  A  should  belong  neither 
to  any  B  nor  to  any  C,  and  that  B  should  not 
belong  to  any  C,  e.g.  a  genus  to  species  of  an¬ 
other  genus:  for  animal  belongs  neither  to 
music  nor  to  the  art  of  healing,  nor  does  mu- 
54h  sic  belong  to  the  art  of  healing.  If  then  it  is 
assumed  that  A  belongs  to  no  B,  and  B  to  all 
C,  the  conclusion  will  be  true. 

(6)  And  if  the  premiss  BC  is  not  wholly 
false  but  in  part  only,  even  so  the  conclusion 
may  be  true.  For  nothing  prevents  A  belonging 
[5]  to  the  whole  of  B  and  of  C,  while  B  be¬ 
longs  to  some  C,  e.g.  a  genus  to  its  species  and 
difference:  for  animal  belongs  to  every  man 
and  to  every  footed  thing,  and  man  to  some 
footed  things  though  not  to  all.  If  then  it  is 
assumed  that  A  belongs  to  all  B,  and  B  to  all 
C,  A  will  belong  to  all  C:  and  this  ex  hypothesi 
[/o]  is  true.  Similarly  if  the  premiss  AB  is 
negative.  For  it  is  possible  that  A  should 
neither  belong  to  any  B  nor  to  any  C,  though 


74 

B  belongs  to  some  C,  e.g.  a  genus  to  the  species 
of  another  genus  and  its  difference:  for  animal 
neither  belongs  to  any  wisdom  nor  to  any  in¬ 
stance  of  ‘speculative’,  hut  wisdom  belongs  to 
some  instance  of  ‘speculative’.  If  then  it  should 
[75]  he  assumed  that  A  belongs  to  no  B,  and  B 
to  all  C,  A  will  belong  to  no  C:  and  this  ex 
hypothesi  is  true. 

In  particular  syllogisms  it  is  possible  when 
the  first  premiss  is  wholly  false,  and  the  other 
true,  that  the  conclusion  should  be  true;  also 
when  the  first  premiss  is  false  in  part,  and  the 
[20]  other  true;  and  when  the  first  is  true,  and 
the  particular  is  false;  and  when  both  are  false. 
(7)  For  nothing  prevents  A  belonging  to  no  B, 
but  to  some  C,  and  B  to  some  C,  e.g.  animal 
belongs  to  no  snow,  but  to  some  white  thing, 
and  snow  to  some  white  thing.  If  then  snow 
[25]  is  taken  as  middle,  and  animal  as  first 
term,  and  it  is  assumed  that  A  belongs  to  the 
whole  of  B,  and  B  to  some  C,  then  the  premiss 
AB  is  wholly  false,  the  premiss  BC  true,  and 
the  conclusion  true.  Similarly  if  the  premiss 
AB  is  negative:  for  it  is  possible  that  A  should 
belong  to  the  whole  of  B ,  but  not  to  some  C, 
[30]  although  B  belongs  to  some  C,  e.g.  ani¬ 
mal  belongs  to  every  man,  but  does  not  follow 
some  white,  but  man  belongs  to  some  white; 
consequently  if  man  be  taken  as  middle  term 
and  it  is  assumed  that  A  belongs  to  no  B  but 
B  belongs  to  some  C,  the  conclusion  will  be 
true  although  the  premiss  AB  is  wholly  false. 
[^5]  (8)  If  the  premiss  AB  is  false  in  part,  the 
conclusion  may  be  true.  For  nothing  prevents 
A  belonging  both  to  B  and  to  some  C,  and  B 
belonging  to  some  C,  e.g.  animal  to  something 
beautiful  and  to  something  great,  and  beautiful 
belonging  to  something  great.  If  then  A  is  as¬ 
sumed  to  belong  to  all  B,  and  B  to  some  C,  the 
55a  premiss  AB  will  be  partially  false,  the 
premiss  BC  will  be  true,  and  the  conclusion 
true.  Similarly  if  the  premiss  AB  is  negative. 
For  the  same  terms  will  serve,  and  in  the  same 
positions,  to  prove  the  point. 

(9)  Again  if  the  premiss  AB  is  true,  and  the 
[5]  premiss  BC  is  false,  the  conclusion  may  be 
true.  For  nothing  prevents  A  belonging  to  the 
whole  of  B  and  to  some  C,  while  B  belongs  to 
no  C,  e.g.  animal  to  every  swan  and  to  some 
black  things,  though  swan  belongs  to  no  black 
thing.  Consequently  if  it  should  be  assumed 
that  A  belongs  to  all  B,  and  B  to  some  C,  the 
[/o]  conclusion  will  be  true,  although  the 
statement  BC  is  false.  Similarly  if  the  premiss 
AB  is  negative.  For  it  is  possible  that  A  should 
belong  to  no  B,  and  not  to  some  C,  while  B  be¬ 


55b 

longs  to  no  C,  e.g.  a  genus  to  the  species  of 
another  genus  and  to  the  accident  of  its  own 
[75]  species:  for  animal  belongs  to  no  number 
and  not  to  some  white  things,  and  number  be¬ 
longs  to  nothing  white.  If  then  number  is  tak¬ 
en  as  middle,  and  it  is  assumed  that  A  belongs 
to  no  B,  and  B  to  some  C,  then  A  will  not  be¬ 
long  to  some  C,  which  ex  hypothesi  is  true.  And 
the  premiss  AB  is  true,  the  premiss  BC  false. 

(10)  Also  if  the  premiss  AB  is  partially  false, 
[20]  and  the  premiss  BC  is  false  too,  the  con¬ 
clusion  may  be  true.  For  nothing  prevents  A 
belonging  to  some  B  and  to  some  C,  though  B 
belongs  to  no  C,  e.g.  if  B  is  the  contrary  of  C, 
and  both  are  accidents  of  the  same  genus:  for 
animal  belongs  to  some  white  things  and  to 
some  black  things,  but  white  belongs  to  no 
[25]  black  thing.  If  then  it  is  assumed  that  A 
belongs  to  all  B,  and  B  to  some  C,  the  conclu¬ 
sion  will  be  true.  Similarly  if  the  premiss  AB 
is  negative:  for  the  same  terms  arranged  in 
the  same  way  will  serve  for  the  proof. 

(n)  Also  though  both  premisses  are  false 
the  conclusion  may  be  true.  For  it  is  possible 
that  A  may  belong  to  no  B  and  to  some  C, 
[jo]  while  B  belongs  to  no  C,  e.g.  a  genus  in 
relation  to  the  species  of  another  genus,  and  to 
the  accident  of  its  own  species:  for  animal  be¬ 
longs  to  no  number,  but  to  some  white  things, 
and  number  to  nothing  white.  If  then  it  is  as¬ 
sumed  that  A  belongs  to  all  B  and  B  to  some 
[35]  the  conclusion  will  be  true,  though 
both  premisses  are  false.  Similarly  also  if  the 
premiss  AB  is  negative.  For  nothing  prevents 
A  belonging  to  the  whole  of  B,  and  not  to 
some  C,  while  B  belongs  to  no  C,  e.g.  animal 
belongs  to  every  swan,  and  not  to  some  black 
things,  and  swan  belongs  to  nothing  black. 
[40]  Consequently  if  it  is  assumed  that  A  be- 
55b  longs  to  no  B,  and  B  to  some  C,  then  A 
does  not  belong  to  some  C .  The  conclusion 
then  is  true,  but  the  premisses  are  false. 

3 

In  the  middle  figure  it  is  possible  in  every  way 
to  reach  a  true  conclusion  through  false  prem¬ 
isses,  whether  the  syllogisms  are  universal  or 

Particular,  viz.  when  both  premisses  are  wholly 
5]  false;  when  each  is  partially  false;  when 
one  is  true,  the  other  wholly  false  (it  does  not 
matter  which  of  the  two  premisses  is  false);  if 
both  premisses  are  partially  false;  if  one  is  quite 
true,  the  other  partially  false;  if  one  is  wholly 
[70]  false,  the  other  partially  true.  For  (1)  if 
A  belongs  to  no  B  and  to  all  C,  e.g.  animal  to 
no  stone  and  to  every  horse,  then  if  the  prem- 


PRIOR  ANALYTICS 


56b 

isses  are  stated  contrariwise  and  it  is  assumed 
that  A  belongs  to  all  B  and  to  no  C,  though  the 
remisses  are  wholly  false  they  will  yield  a  true 
75]  conclusion.  Similarly  if  A  belongs  to  all 
B  and  to  no  C:  for  we  shall  have  the  same 
syllogism. 

(2)  Again  if  one  premiss  is  wholly  false,  the 
other  wholly  true:  for  nothing  prevents  A  be¬ 
longing  to  all  B  and  to  all  C,  though  B  belongs 
to  no  C,  e.g.  a  genus  to  its  co-ordinate  species. 
For  animal  belongs  to  every  horse  and  man, 
[20]  and  no  man  is  a  horse.  If  then  it  is  as¬ 
sumed  that  animal  belongs  to  all  of  the  one, 
and  none  of  the  other,  the  one  premiss  will  be 
wholly  false,  the  other  wholly  true,  and  the 
conclusion  will  be  true  whichever  term  the 
negative  statement  concerns. 

(3)  Also  if  one  premiss  is  partially  false,  the 
other  wholly  true.  For  it  is  possible  that  A 
should  belong  to  some  B  and  to  all  C,  though 
[25]  B  belongs  to  no  C,  e.g.  animal  to  some 
white  things  and  to  every  raven,  though  white 
belongs  to  no  raven.  If  then  it  is  assumed  that 
A  belongs  to  no  B,  but  to  the  whole  of  C,  the 
premiss  AB  is  partially  false,  the  premiss  AC 
wholly  true,  and  the  conclusion  true.  Similarly 
[30]  if  the  negative  statement  is  transposed: 
the  proof  can  be  made  by  means  of  the  same 
terms.  Also  if  the  affirmative  premiss  is  par¬ 
tially  false,  the  negative  wholly  true,  a  true 
conclusion  is  possible.  For  nothing  prevents  A 
belonging  to  some  B,  but  not  to  C  as  a  whole, 
while  B  belongs  to  no  C,  e.g.  animal  belongs 
to  some  white  things,  but  to  no  pitch,  and 
[35]  white  belongs  to  no  pitch.  Consequently 
if  it  is  assumed  that  A  belongs  to  the  whole  of 
B,  but  to  no  C,  the  premiss  AB  is  partially 
false,  the  premiss  AC  is  wholly  true,  and  the 
conclusion  is  true. 

(4)  And  if  both  the  premisses  are  partially 
false,  the  conclusion  may  be  true.  For  it  is  pos¬ 
sible  that  A  should  belong  to  some  B  and  to 
[40]  some  C,  and  B  to  no  C,  e.g.  animal  to 
some  white  things  and  to  some  black  things, 
56a  though  white  belongs  to  nothing  black.  If 
then  it  is  assumed  that  A  belongs  to  all  B  and 
to  no  C,  both  premisses  are  partially  false,  but 
the  conclusion  is  true.  Similarly,  if  the  nega¬ 
tive  premiss  is  transposed,  the  proof  can  be 
made  by  means  of  the  same  terms. 

[5]  It  is  clear  also  that  our  thesis  holds  in  par¬ 
ticular  syllogisms.  For  (5)  nothing  prevents  A 
belonging  to  all  B  and  to  some  C,  though  B 
does  not  belong  to  some  C,  e.g.  animal  to  ev¬ 
ery  man  and  to  some  white  things,  though 
man  will  not  belong  to  some  white  things.  If 


75 

then  it  is  stated  that  A  belongs  to  no  B  and  to 
[10]  some  C,  the  universal  premiss  is  wholly 
false,  the  particular  premiss  is  true,  and  the 
conclusion  is  true.  Similarly  if  the  premiss  AB 
is  affirmative:  for  it  is  possible  that  A  should 
belong  to  no  B,  and  not  to  some  C,  though  B 
does  not  belong  to  some  C,  e.g.  animal  belongs 
to  nothing  lifeless,  and  does  not  belong  to  some 
[75]  white  things,  and  lifeless  will  not  belong 
to  some  white  things.  If  then  it  is  stated  that  A 
belongs  to  all  B  and  not  to  some  C,  the  premiss 
AB  which  is  universal  is  wholly  false,  the  prem¬ 
iss  AC  is  true,  and  the  conclusion  is  true.  Also 
a  true  conclusion  is  possible  when  the  univer¬ 
sal  premiss  is  true,  and  the  particular  is  false. 
For  nothing  prevents  A  following  neither  B 
[20]  nor  C  at  all,  while  B  does  not  belong  to 
some  C,  e.g.  animal  belongs  to  no  number  nor 
to  anything  lifeless,  and  number  does  not  fol¬ 
low  some  lifeless  things.  If  then  it  is  stated  that 
A  belongs  to  no  B  and  to  some  C,  the  conclu¬ 
sion  will  be  true,  and  the  universal  premiss 
[25]  true,  but  the  particular  false.  Similarly  if 
the  premiss  which  is  stated  universally  is  af¬ 
firmative.  For  it  is  possible  that  A  should  be¬ 
long  both  to  B  and  to  C  as  wholes,  though  B 
does  not  follow  some  C,  e.g.  a  genus  in  relation 
to  its  species  and  difference:  for  animal  fol¬ 
lows  every  man  and  footed  things  as  a  whole, 
but  man  does  not  follow  every  footed  thing. 
Consequently  if  it  is  assumed  that  A  belongs 
[_?o]  to  the  whole  of  B,  but  does  not  belong  to 
some  C,  the  universal  premiss  is  true,  the  par¬ 
ticular  false,  and  the  conclusion  true. 

(6)  It  is  clear  too  that  though  both  premisses 
are  false  they  may  yield  a  true  conclusion, 
since  it  is  possible  that  A  should  belong  both 
to  B  and  to  C  as  wholes,  though  B  does  not  fol- 
[s$\  low  some  C.  For  if  it  is  assumed  that  A 
belongs  to  no  B  and  to  some  C,  the  premisses 
are  both  false,  but  the  conclusion  is  true.  Simi¬ 
larly  if  the  universal  premiss  is  affirmative  and 
the  particular  negative.  For  it  is  possible  that 
A  should  follow  no  B  and  all  C,  though  B  does 
[40]  not  belong  to  some  C,  e.g.  animal  follows 
no  science  but  every  man,  though  science  does 
not  follow  every  man.  If  then  A  is  assumed  to 
56b  belong  to  the  whole  of  B,  and  not  to  fol¬ 
low  some  C,  the  premisses  are  false  but  the 
conclusion  is  true. 

4 

In  the  last  figure  a  true  conclusion  may 
come  through  what  is  false,  alike  when  both 
[5]  premisses  are  wholly  false,  when  each  is 
partly  false,  when  one  premiss  is  wholly  true, 


BOOK  II,  CHAPTERS  2-4 


76  PRIOR  ANALYTICS  57a 


the  other  false,  when  one  premiss  is  partly 
false,  the  other  wholly  true,  and  vice  versa,  and 
in  every  other  way  in  which  it  is  possible  to 
alter  the  premisses.  For  (i)  nothing  prevents 
[/o]  neither  A  nor  B  from  belonging  to  any 
C,  while  A  belongs  to  some  B,  e.g.  neither  man 
nor  footed  follows  anything  lifeless,  though 
man  belongs  to  some  footed  things.  If  then  it  is 
assumed  that  A  and  B  belong  to  all  C,  the 
premisses  will  be  wholly  false,  but  the  conclu¬ 
sion  true.  Similarly  if  one  premiss  is  negative, 
the  other  affirmative.  For  it  is  possible  that  B 
[75]  should  belong  to  no  C,  but  A  to  all  C, 
and  that  A  should  not  belong  to  some  B,  e.g. 
black  belongs  to  no  swan,  animal  to  every 
swan,  and  animal  not  to  everything  black.  Con¬ 
sequently  if  it  is  assumed  that  B  belongs  to  all 
C,  and  A  to  no  C,  A  will  not  belong  to  some 
[20]  B:  and  the  conclusion  is  true,  though  the 
premisses  are  false. 

(2)  Also  if  each  premiss  is  partly  false,  the 
conclusion  may  be  true.  For  nothing  prevents 
both  A  and  B  from  belonging  to  some  C  while 
A  belongs  to  some  B,  e.g.  white  and  beautiful 
belong  to  some  animals,  and  white  to  some 
beautiful  things.  If  then  it  is  stated  that  A  and 
[25]  B  belong  to  all  C,  the  premisses  are  par¬ 
tially  false,  but  the  conclusion  is  true.  Similarly 
if  the  premiss  AC  is  stated  as  negative.  For 
nothing  prevents  A  from  not  belonging,  and 
B  from  belonging,  to  some  C,  while  A  does  not 
belong  to  all  B,  e.g.  white  does  not  belong  to 
some  animals,  beautiful  belongs  to  some  ani- 
[  jo]  mals,  and  white  does  not  belong  to  every¬ 
thing  beautiful.  Consequently  if  it  is  assumed 
that  A  belongs  to  no  C,  and  B  to  all  C,  both 
premisses  are  partly  false,  but  the  conclusion  is 
true. 

(3) Similarly  if  one  of  the  premisses  assumed 
is  wholly  false,  the  other  wholly  true.  For  it  is 
possible  that  both  A  and  B  should  follow  all  C, 
[55]  though  A  does  not  belong  to  some  B,  e.g. 
animal  and  white  follow  every  swan,  though 
animal  does  not  belong  to  everything  white. 
Taking  these  then  as  terms,  if  one  assumes  that 
B  belongs  to  the  whole  of  C,  but  A  does  not 
belong  to  C  at  all,  the  premiss  BC  will  be 
wholly  true,  the  premiss  AC  wholly  false,  and 
the  conclusion  true.  Similarly  if  the  statement 
[40]  BC  is  false,  the  statement  AC  true,  the 
conclusion  may  be  true.  The  same  terms  will 
57a  serve  for  the  proof.  Also  if  both  the  prem¬ 
isses  assumed  are  affirmative,  the  conclusion 
may  be  true.  For  nothing  prevents  B  from  fol¬ 
lowing  all  C,  and  A  from  not  belonging  to  C 
at  all,  though  A  belongs  to  some  B,  e.g.  animal 


belongs  to  every  swan,  black  to  no  swan,  and 
[5]  black  to  some  animals.  Consequently  if  it 
is  assumed  that  A  and  B  belong  to  every  C,  the 
premiss  BC  is  wholly  true,  the  premiss  AC  is 
wholly  false,  and  the  conclusion  is  true.  Simi¬ 
larly  if  the  premiss  AC  which  is  assumed  is 
true:  the  proof  can  be  made  through  the  same 
terms. 

(4)  Again  if  one  premiss  is  wholly  true,  the 
[/o]  other  partly  false,  the  conclusion  may  be 
true.  For  it  is  possible  that  B  should  belong  to 
all  C,  and  A  to  some  C,  while  A  belongs  to 
some  B,  e.g.  biped  belongs  to  every  man,  beau¬ 
tiful  not  to  every  man,  and  beautiful  to  some 
bipeds.  If  then  it  is  assumed  that  both  A  and 
B  belong  to  the  whole  of  C,  the  premiss  BC  is 
wholly  true,  the  premiss  AC  partly  false,  the 
[75]  conclusion  true.  Similarly  if  of  the  prem¬ 
isses  assumed  AC  is  true  and  BC  partly  false, 
a  true  conclusion  is  possible:  this  can  be  proved, 
if  the  same  terms  as  before  are  transposed. 
Also  the  conclusion  may  be  true  if  one  premiss 
is  negative,  the  other  affirmative.  For  since  it 
is  possible  that  B  should  belong  to  the  whole 
of  C,  and  A  to  some  C,  and,  when  they  are  so, 
[20]  that  A  should  not  belong  to  all  B,  there¬ 
fore  it  is  assumed  that  B  belongs  to  the  whole 
of  C,  and  A  to  no  C,  the  negative  premiss  is 
partly  false,  the  other  premiss  wholly  true,  and 
the  conclusion  is  true.  Again  since  it  has  been 
proved  that  if  A  belongs  to  no  C  and  B  to  some 
C,  it  is  possible  that  A  should  not  belong  to 
[25]  some  C,  it  is  clear  that  if  the  premiss  AC 
is  wholly  true,  and  the  premiss  BC  partly  false, 
it  is  possible  that  the  conclusion  should  be  true. 
For  if  it  is  assumed  that  A  belongs  to  no  C, 
and  B  to  all  C,  the  premiss  AC  is  wholly  true, 
and  the  premiss  BC  is  partly  false. 

(5)  It  is  clear  also  in  the  case  of  particular 
syllogisms  that  a  true  conclusion  may  come 
[jo]  through  what  is  false,  in  every  possible 
way.  For  the  same  terms  must  be  taken  as  have 
been  taken  when  the  premisses  are  universal, 
positive  terms  in  positive  syllogisms,  negative 
terms  in  negative.  For  it  makes  no  difference 
to  the  setting  out  of  the  terms,  whether  one  as¬ 
sumes  that  what  belongs  to  none  belongs  to  all 
[35]  or  that  what  belongs  to  some  belongs  to 
ail.  The  same  applies  to  negative  statements. 

It  is  clear  then  that  if  the  conclusion  is  false, 
the  premisses  of  the  argument  must  be  false, 
either  all  or  some  of  them;  but  when  the  con¬ 
clusion  is  true,  it  is  not  necessary  that  the  prem¬ 
isses  should  be  true,  either  one  or  all,  yet  it  is 
possible,  though  no  part  of  the  syllogism  is 
[4o]  true,  that  the  conclusion  may  none  the 


58‘ 

less  be  true;  but  it  is  not  necessitated:  The  rea- 
5 7b  son  is  that  when  two  things  are  so  related 
to  one  another,  that  if  the  one  is,  the  other  nec¬ 
essarily  is,  then  if  the  latter  is  not,  the  former 
will  not  be  either,  but  if  the  latter  is,  it  is  not 
necessary  that  the  former  should  be.  But  it  is 
impossible  that  the  same  thing  should  be  ne¬ 
cessitated  by  the  being  and  by  the  not-being  of 
the  same  thing.  I  mean,  for  example,  that  it  is 
impossible  that  B  should  necessarily  be  great 
[5]  since  A  is  white  and  that  B  should  neces¬ 
sarily  be  great  since  A  is  not  white.  For  when¬ 
ever  since  this,  A,  is  white  it  is  necessary  that 
that,  B,  should  be  great,  and  since  B  is  great 
that  C  should  not  be  white,  then  it  is  necessary 
if  A  is  white  that  C  should  not  be  white.  And 
whenever  it  is  necessary,  since  one  of  two 
[/o]  things  is,  that  the  other  should  be,  it  is 
necessary,  if  the  latter  is  not,  that  the  former 
(viz.  A)  should  not  be.  If  then  B  is  not  great 
A  cannot  be  white.  But  if,  when  A  is  not 
white,  it  is  necessary  that  B  should  be  great,  it 
necessarily  results  that  if  B  is  not  great,  B  it¬ 
self  is  great.  (But  this  is  impossible.)  For  if  B 
is  not  great,  A  will  necessarily  not  be  white.  If 
[75]  then  when  this  is  not  white  B  must  be 
great,  it  results  that  if  B  is  not  great,  it  is  great, 
just  as  if  it  were  proved  through  three  terms. 

5 

Circular  and  reciprocal  proof  means  proof  by 
means  of  the  conclusion,  i.e.  by  converting 
one  of  the  premisses  simply  and  inferring  the 
[20]  other  premiss  which  was  assumed  in  the 
original  syllogism:  e.g.  suppose  it  has  been  nec¬ 
essary  to  prove  that  A  belongs  to  all  C,  and  it 
has  been  proved  through  B;  suppose  that  A 
should  now  be  proved  to  belong  to  B  by  as¬ 
suming  that  A  belongs  to  C,  and  C  to  B — so 
A  belongs  to  B:  but  in  the  first  syllogism  the 
[25]  converse  was  assumed,  viz.  that  B  be¬ 
longs  to  C.  Or  suppose  it  is  necessary  to  prove 
that  B  belongs  to  C,  and  A  is  assumed  to  be¬ 
long  to  C,  which  was  the  conclusion  of  the  first 
syllogism,  and  B  to  belong  to  A:  but  the  con¬ 
verse  was  assumed  in  the  earlier  syllogism,  viz. 
that  A  belongs  to  B.  In  no  other  way  is  recip¬ 
rocal  proof  possible.  If  another  term  is  taken 
as  middle,  the  proof  is  not  circular:  for  neither 
[3o\  of  the  propositions  assumed  is  the  same 
as  before:  if  one  of  the  accepted  terms  is  taken 
as  middle,  only  one  of  the  premisses  of  the  first 
syllogism  can  be  assumed  in  the  second:  for  if 
both  of  them  are  taken  the  same  conclusion  as 
before  will  result:  but  it  must  be  different.  If 
the  terms  are  not  convertible,  one  of  the  prem- 


77 

isses  from  which  the  syllogism  results  must  be 
undemonstrated:  for  it  is  not  possible  to  dem¬ 
onstrate  through  these  terms  that  the  third  be¬ 
longs  to  the  middle  or  the  middle  to  the  first. 
[35]  If  the  terms  are  convertible,  it  is  possible 
to  demonstrate  everything  reciprocally,  e.g.  if 
A  and  B  and  C  are  convertible  with  one  an¬ 
other.  Suppose  the  proposition  AC  has  been 
demonstrated  through  B  as  middle  term,  and 
again  the  proposition  AB  through  the  conclu¬ 
sion  and  the  premiss  BC  converted,  and  simi- 
[40]  larly  the  proposition  BC  through  the  con¬ 
clusion  and  the  premiss  AB  converted.  But  it 
58a  is  necessary  to  prove  both  the  premiss  CB, 
and  the  premiss  BA:  for  we  have  used  these 
alone  without  demonstrating  them.  If  then  it  is 
assumed  that  B  belongs  to  all  C,  and  C  to  all 
A,  we  shall  have  a  syllogism  relating  B  to  A . 
[5]  Again  if  it  is  assumed  that  C  belongs  to 
all  A,  and  A  to  all  B,  C  must  belong  to  all  B. 
In  both  these  syllogisms  the  premiss  CA  has 
been  assumed  without  being  demonstrated:  the 
other  premisses  had  ex  hypothesi  been  proved. 
Consequently  if  we  succeed  in  demonstrating 
this  premiss,  all  the  premisses  will  have  been 
[/o]  proved  reciprocally.  If  then  it  is  assumed 
that  C  belongs  to  all  B,  and  B  to  all  A,  both  the 
premisses  assumed  have  been  proved,  and  C 
must  belong  to  A.  It  is  clear  then  that  only  if 
the  terms  are  convertible  is  circular  and  recip¬ 
rocal  demonstration  possible  (if  the  terms  are 
not  convertible,  the  matter  stands  as  we  said 
[75]  above).  But  it  turns  out  in  these  also  that 
we  use  for  the  demonstration  the  very  thing 
that  is  being  proved:  for  C  is  proved  of  B,  and 
B  of  A,  by  assuming  that  C  is  said  of  A,  and  C 
is  proved  of  A  through  these  premisses,  so  that 
[20]  we  use  the  conclusion  for  the  demonstra¬ 
tion. 

In  negative  syllogisms  reciprocal  proof  is  as 
follows.  Let  B  belong  to  all  C,  and  A  to  none 
of  the  Bs :  we  conclude  that  A  belongs  to  none 
of  the  C s.  If  again  it  is  necessary  to  prove  that 
A  belongs  to  none  of  the  Bs  (which  was  pre- 
[25]  viously  assumed)  A  must  belong  to  no 
C,  and  C  to  all  B:  thus  the  previous  premiss  is 
reversed.  If  it  is  necessary  to  prove  that  B  be¬ 
longs  to  C,  the  proposition  AB  must  no  longer 
be  converted  as  before:  for  the  premiss  ‘B  be¬ 
longs  to  no  A *  is  identical  with  the  premiss  ‘A 
belongs  to  no  B\  But  we  must  assume  that  B 
belongs  to  all  of  that  to  none  of  which  A  be- 
[30]  longs.  Let  A  belong  to  none  of  the  Cs 
(which  was  the  previous  conclusion)  and  as¬ 
sume  that  B  belongs  to  all  of  that  to  none  of 
which  A  belongs.  It  is  necessary  then  that  B 


BOOK  II,  CHAPTERS  4-5 


78  PRIOR  ANALYTICS  59a 


should  belong  to  all  C.  Consequently  each  of 
the  three  propositions  has  been  made  a  conclu¬ 
sion,  and  this  is  circular  demonstration,  to  as¬ 
sume  the  conclusion  and  the  converse  of  one  of 
[35]  the  premisses,  and  deduce  the  remaining 
premiss. 

In  particular  syllogisms  it  is  not  possible  to 
demonstrate  the  universal  premiss  through  the 
other  propositions,  but  the  particular  premiss 
can  be  demonstrated.  Clearly  it  is  impossible 
to  demonstrate  the  universal  premiss:  for  what 
is  universal  is  proved  through  propositions 
[40}  which  are  universal,  but  the  conclusion  is 
not  universal,  and  the  proof  must  start  from 
the  conclusion  and  the  other  premiss.  Further 
a  syllogism  cannot  be  made  at  all  if  the  other 
58b  premiss  is  converted:  for  the  result  is  that 
both  premisses  are  particular.  But  the  particu¬ 
lar  premiss  may  be  proved.  Suppose  that  A  has 
been  proved  of  some  C  through  B.  If  then  it  is 
assumed  that  B  belongs  to  all  A,  and  the  con- 
[5]  elusion  is  retained,  B  will  belong  to  some 
C:  for  we  obtain  the  first  figure  and  A  is  mid¬ 
dle.  But  if  the  syllogism  is  negative,  it  is  not 
possible  to  prove  the  universal  premiss,  for  the 
reason  given  above.  But  it  is  possible  to  prove 
the  particular  premiss,  if  the  proposition  AB 
is  converted  as  in  the  universal  syllogism,  i.e. 
[10]  ‘B  belongs  to  some  of  that  to  some  of 
which  A  does  not  belong’:  otherwise  no  syllo¬ 
gism  results  because  the  particular  premiss  is 
negative. 

6 

In  the  second  figure  it  is  not  possible  to 
prove  an  affirmative  proposition  in  this  way, 
but  a  negative  proposition  may  be  proved.  An 
[75]  affirmative  proposition  is  not  proved  be¬ 
cause  both  premisses  of  the  new  syllogism  are 
not  affirmative  (for  the  conclusion  is  negative) 
but  an  affirmative  proposition  is  (as  we  saw) 
proved  from  premisses  which  are  both  affirma¬ 
tive.  The  negative  is  proved  as  follows.  Let  A 
belong  to  all  B,  and  to  no  C:  we  conclude  that 
[20]  B  belongs  to  no  C .  If  then  it  is  assumed 
that  B  belongs  to  all  A,  it  is  necessary  that  A 
should  belong  to  no  C:  for  we  get  the  second 
figure,  with  B  as  middle.  But  if  the  premiss 
AB  was  negative,  and  the  other  affirmative, 
we  shall  have  the  first  figure.  For  C  belongs  to 
all  A,  and  B  to  no  C,  consequently  B  belongs 
[25]  to  no  A:  neither  then  does  A  belong  to 
B.  Through  the  conclusion,  therefore,  and  one 
premiss,  we  get  no  syllogism,  but  if  another 
premiss  is  assumed  in  addition,  a  syllogism 
will  be  possible.  But  if  the  syllogism  is  not  uni¬ 


versal,  the  universal  premiss  cannot  be  proved, 
for  the  same  reason  as  we  gave  above,1  but  the 
[30]  particular  premiss  can  be  proved  when¬ 
ever  the  universal  statement  is  affirmative.  Let 
A  belong  to  all  B,  and  not  to  all  C:  the  conclu¬ 
sion  is  BC.  If  then  it  is  assumed  that  B  belongs 
to  all  A,  but  not  to  all  C,  A  will  not  belong  to 
some  C,  B  being  middle.  But  if  the  universal 
premiss  is  negative,  the  premiss  AC  will  not  be 
demonstrated  by  the  conversion  of  AB:  for  it 
[35]  turns  out  that  either  both  or  one  of  the 
premisses  is  negative;  consequently  a  syllo¬ 
gism  will  not  be  possible.  But  the  proof  will 
proceed  as  in  the  universal  syllogisms,  if  it  is 
assumed  that  A  belongs  to  some  of  that  to 
some  of  which  B  does  not  belong. 

7 

In  the  third  figure,  when  both  premisses  are 
[40]  taken  universally,  it  is  not  possible  to 
prove  them  reciprocally:  for  that  which  is  uni¬ 
versal  is  proved  through  statements  which  are 
59a  universal,  but  the  conclusion  in  this  figure 
is  always  particular,  so  that  it  is  clear  that  it  is 
not  possible  at  all  to  prove  through  this  figure 
the  universal  premiss.  But  if  one  premiss  is 
universal,  the  other  particular,  proof  of  the  lat¬ 
ter  will  sometimes  be  possible,  sometimes  not. 
When  both  the  premisses  assumed  are  affirma- 
[5]  tive,  and  the  universal  concerns  the  minor 
extreme,  proof  will  be  possible,  but  when  it 
concerns  the  other  extreme,  impossible.  Let  A 
belong  to  all  C  and  B  to  some  C:  the  conclu¬ 
sion  is  the  statement  AB.  If  then  it  is  assumed 
that  C  belongs  to  all  A,  it  has  been  proved  that 
C  belongs  to  some  B,  but  that  B  belongs  to 
some  C  has  not  been  proved.  And  yet  it  is  nec- 
[/o]  essary,  if  C  belongs  to  some  B,  that  B 
should  belong  to  some  C.  But  it  is  not  the 
same  that  this  should  belong  to  that,  and  that 
to  this:  but  we  must  assume  besides  that  if  this 
belongs  to  some  of  that,  that  belongs  to  some 
of  this.  But  if  this  is  assumed  the  syllogism  no 
longer  results  from  the  conclusion  and  the  oth- 
[75]  er  premiss.  But  if  B  belongs  to  all  C,  and 
A  to  some  C,  it  will  be  possible  to  prove  the 
proposition  AC,  when  it  is  assumed  that  C  be¬ 
longs  to  all  B,  and  A  to  some  B.  For  if  C  be¬ 
longs  to  all  B  and  A  to  some  B,  it  is  necessary 
that  A  should  belong  to  some  C,  B  being  mid¬ 
dle.  And  whenever  one  premiss  is  affirmative, 
the  other  negative,  and  the  affirmative  is  uni¬ 
versal,  the  other  premiss  can  be  proved.  Let  B 
[20]  belong  to  all  C,  and  A  not  to  some  C:  the 
conclusion  is  that  A  does  not  belong  to  some 
1  a  38. 


60* 

B.  If  then  it  is  assumed  further  that  C  belongs 
to  all  B,  it  is  necessary  that  A  should  not  be¬ 
long  to  some  C,  B  being  middle.  But  when  the 
negative  premiss  is  universal,  the  other  prem- 
[25]  iss  is  not  proved,  except  as  before,1  viz.  if 
it  is  assumed  that  that  belongs  to  some  of  that, 
to  some  of  which  this  does  not  belong,  e.g.  if 
A  belongs  to  no  C,  and  B  to  some  C:  the  con¬ 
clusion  is  that  A  does  not  belong  to  some  B.  If 
then  it  is  assumed  that  C  belongs  to  some  of 
that  to  some  of  which  A  does  not  belong,  it  is 
necessary  that  C  should  belong  to  some  of  the 
Bs.  In  no  other  way  is  it  possible  by  converting 
[jo]  the  universal  premiss  to  prove  the  other: 
for  in  no  other  way  can  a  syllogism  be  formed. 

It  is  clear  then  that  in  the  first  figure  recip¬ 
rocal  proof  is  made  both  through  the  third  and 
through  the  first  figure — if  the  conclusion  is 
affirmative  through  the  first;  if  the  conclusion 
[55]  is  negative  through  the  last.  For  it  is  as¬ 
sumed  that  that  belongs  to  all  of  that  to  none 
of  which  this  belongs.  In  the  middle  figure, 
when  the  syllogism  is  universal,  proof  is  possi¬ 
ble  through  the  second  figure  and  through  the 
first,  but  when  particular  through  the  second 
and  the  last.  In  the  third  figure  all  proofs  are 
made  through  itself.  It  is  clear  also  that  in  the 
[40]  third  figure  and  in  the  middle  figure 
those  syllogisms  which  are  not  made  through 
those  figures  themselves  either  are  not  of  the 
nature  of  circular  proof  or  are  imperfect. 

8 

59b  To  convert  a  syllogism  means  to  alter  the 
conclusion  and  make  another  syllogism  to 
prove  that  either  the  extreme  cannot  belong  to 
the  middle  or  the  middle  to  the  last  term.  For 
it  is  necessary,  if  the  conclusion  has  been 
changed  into  its  opposite  and  one  of  the  prem¬ 
isses  stands,  that  the  other  premiss  should  be 
[5]  destroyed.  For  if  it  should  stand,  the  con¬ 
clusion  also  must  stand.  It  makes  a  difference 
whether  the  conclusion  is  converted  into  its 
contradictory  or  into  its  contrary.  For  the  same 
syllogism  does  not  result  whichever  form  the 
conversion  takes.  This  will  be  made  clear  by 
the  sequel.  By  contradictory  opposition  I  mean 
the  opposition  of  ‘to  air  to  ‘not  to  all*,  and  of 
‘to  some’  to  ‘to  none’;  by  contrary  opposition  I 
[/o]  mean  the  opposition  of  ‘to  all*  to ‘to  none', 
and  of  ‘to  some’  to  ‘not  to  some’.  Suppose  that 
A  has  been  proved  of  C,  through  B  as  middle 
term.  If  then  it  should  be  assumed  that  A  be¬ 
longs  to  no  C,  but  to  all  B,  B  will  belong  to  no 

C.  And  if  A  belongs  to  no  C ,  and  B  to  all  C, 
l58b  9. 


79 

A  will  belong,  not  to  no  B  at  all,  but  not  to  all 
[75]  B.  For  (as  we  saw)  the  universal  is  not 
proved  through  the  last  figure.2  In  a  word  it  is 
not  possible  to  refute  universally  by  conversion 
the  premiss  which  concerns  the  major  extreme: 
for  the  refutation  always  proceeds  through  the 
third  figure;  since  it  is  necessary  to  take  both 

? remisses  in  reference  to  the  minor  extreme. 
20]  Similarly  if  the  syllogism  is  negative.  Sup¬ 
pose  it  has  been  proved  that  A  belongs  to  no 
C  through  B.  Then  if  it  is  assumed  that  A  be¬ 
longs  to  all  C,  and  to  no  B,  B  will  belong  to 
none  of  the  Cs.  And  if  A  and  B  belong  to  all 
C,  A  will  belong  to  some  B:  but  in  the  original 
remiss  it  belonged  to  no  B. 

25]  If  the  conclusion  is  converted  into  its  con¬ 
tradictory,  the  syllogisms  will  be  contradictory 
and  not  universal.  For  one  premiss  is  particu¬ 
lar,  so  that  the  conclusion  also  will  be  particu¬ 
lar.  Let  the  syllogism  be  affirmative,  and  let  it 
be  converted  as  stated.  Then  if  A  belongs  not 
to  all  C,  but  to  all  B,  B  will  belong  not  to  all 
[jo]  C.  And  if  A  belongs  not  to  all  C,  but  B 
belongs  to  all  C,  A  will  belong  not  to  all  B. 
Similarly  if  the  syllogism  is  negative.  For  if  A 
belongs  to  some  C,  and  to  no  B,  B  will  belong, 
not  to  no  C  at  all,  but — not  to  some  C.  And  if 
A  belongs  to  some  C,  and  B  to  all  C,  as  was 
[35]  originally  assumed,  A  will  belong  to  some 
B. 

In  particular  syllogisms  when  the  conclusion 
is  converted  into  its  contradictory,  both  prem¬ 
isses  may  be  refuted,  but  when  it  is  converted 
into  its  contrary,  neither.  For  the  result  is  no 
[40]  longer,  as  in  the  universal  syllogisms,3  a 
refutation  in  which  the  conclusion  reached  by 
60*  conversion  lacks  universality,  but  no  refu¬ 
tation  at  all.  Suppose  that  A  has  been  proved 
of  some  C.  If  then  it  is  assumed  that  A  belongs 
to  no  C,  and  B  to  some  C,  A  will  not  belong  to 
some  B:  and  if  A  belongs  to  no  C,  but  to  all 
B,  B  will  belong  to  no  C.  Thus  both  premisses 
are  refuted.  But  neither  can  be  refuted  if  the 
[5]  conclusion  is  converted  into  its  contrary. 
For  if  A  does  not  belong  to  some  C,  but  to  all 
B,  then  B  will  not  belong  to  some  C.  But  the 
original  premiss  is  not  yet  refuted:  for  it  is 
possible  that  B  should  belong  to  some  C,  and 
should  not  belong  to  some  C.  The  universal 
premiss  AB  cannot  be  affected  by  a  syllogism 
at  all:  for  if  A  does  not  belong  to  some  of  the 
[/o]  Cs,  but  B  belongs  to  some  of  the  Cs,  nei¬ 
ther  of  the  premisses  is  universal.  Similarly  if 
the  syllogism  is  negative:  for  if  it  should  be 
assumed  that  A  belongs  to  all  C,  both  prem- 
2 1.  6.  8 11.  13-20,  23-4. 


BOOK  II,  CHAPTERS  5-8 


8o 

isses  are  refuted:  but  if  the  assumption  is  that 
A  belongs  to  some  C,  neither  premiss  is  re¬ 
futed.  The  proof  is  the  same  as  before. 

9 

[75]  In  the  second  figure  it  is  not  possible  to 
refute  the  premiss  which  concerns  the  major 
extreme  by  establishing  something  contrary  to 
it,  whichever  form  the  conversion  of  the  con¬ 
clusion  may  take.  For  the  conclusion  of  the 
refutation  will  always  be  in  the  third  figure,  and 
in  this  figure  (as  we  saw1)  there  is  no  univer¬ 
sal  syllogism.  The  other  premiss  can  be  refuted 
in  a  manner  similar  to  the  conversion:  I  mean, 
if  the  conclusion  of  the  first  syllogism  is  con- 
[20]  verted  into  its  contrary,  the  conclusion  of 
the  refutation  will  be  the  contrary  of  the  minor 
premiss  of  the  first,  if  into  its  contradictory, 
the  contradictory.  Let  A  belong  to  all  B  and  to 
no  C:  conclusion  BC.  If  then  it  is  assumed  that 
B  belongs  to  all  C,  and  the  proposition  AB 
stands,  A  will  belong  to  all  C,  since  the  first 
figure  is  produced.  If  B  belongs  to  all  C,  and 
[25]  A  to  no  C,  then  A  belongs  not  to  all  B: 
the  figure  is  the  last.  But  if  the  conclusion  BC 
is  converted  into  its  contradictory,  the  premiss 
AB  will  be  refuted  as  before,  the  premiss 
AC  by  its  contradictory.  For  if  B  belongs  to 
some  C,  and  A  to  no  C,  then  A  will  not  belong 
to  some  B.  Again  if  B  belongs  to  some  C,  and 
[30]  A  to  all  B,  A  will  belong  to  some  C,  so 
that  the  syllogism  results  in  the  contradictory 
of  the  minor  premiss.  A  similar  proof  can  be 
given  if  the  premisses  are  transposed  in  respect 
of  their  quality. 

If  the  syllogism  is  particular,  when  the  con¬ 
clusion  is  converted  into  its  contrary  neither 
premiss  can  be  refuted,  as  also  happened  in  the 
first  figure,2  but  if  the  conclusion  is  converted 
[35]  into  its  contradictory,  both  premisses  can 
be  refuted.  Suppose  that  A  belongs  to  no  B, 
and  to  some  C:  the  conclusion  is  BC .  If  then  it 
is  assumed  that  B  belongs  to  some  C,  and  the 
statement  AB  stands,  the  conclusion  will  be 
that  A  does  not  belong  to  some  C.  But  the  orig¬ 
inal  statement  has  not  been  refuted:  for  it  is 
possible  that  A  should  belong  to  some  C  and 
also  not  to  some  C .  Again  if  B  belongs  to  some 
[40]  C  and  A  to  some  C,  no  syllogism  will  be 
possible:  for  neither  of  the  premisses  taken  is 
60b  universal.  Consequently  the  proposition 
AB  is  not  refuted.  But  if  the  conclusion  is  con¬ 
verted  into  its  contradictory ,  both  premisses 
can  be  refuted.  For  if  B  belongs  to  all  C,  and  A 
to  no  B,  A  will  belong  to  no  C:  but  it  was  as- 
1 1.  6.  2  59b  39-6oft  1.  60®  5-14. 


60b 

sumed  to  belong  to  some  C.  Again  if  B  belongs 
to  all  C  and  A  to  some  C,  A  will  belong  to 
some  B.  The  same  proof  can  be  given  if  the 
[5]  universal  statement  is  affirmative. 

10 

In  the  third  figure  when  the  conclusion  is 
converted  into  its  contrary,  neither  of  the 
premisses  can  be  refuted  in  any  of  the  syllo¬ 
gisms,  but  when  the  conclusion  is  converted 
into  its  contradictory ,  both  premisses  may  be 
refuted  and  in  all  the  moods.  Suppose  it  has 
been  proved  that  A  belongs  to  some  B,  C  being 
[/o]  taken  as  middle,  and  the  premisses 
being  universal.  If  then  it  is  assumed  that  A 
does  not  belong  to  some  B,  but  B  belongs  to 
all  C,  no  syllogism  is  formed  about  A  and  C. 
Nor  if  A  does  not  belong  to  some  B,  but  be¬ 
longs  to  all  C,  will  a  syllogism  be  possible 
about  B  and  C.  A  similar  proof  can  be  given 
[75]  if  the  premisses  are  not  universal.  For 
either  both  premisses  arrived  at  by  the  conver¬ 
sion  must  be  particular,  or  the  universal  prem¬ 
iss  must  refer  to  the  minor  extreme.  But  we 
found  that  no  syllogism  is  possible  thus  either 
in  the  first  or  in  the  middle  figure.3  But  if  the 
conclusion  is  converted  into  its  contradictory , 
[20]  both  the  premisses  can  be  refuted.  For  if 
A  belongs  to  no  B,  and  B  to  all  C,  then  A  be¬ 
longs  to  no  C:  again  if  A  belongs  to  no  B,  and 
to  all  C,  B  belongs  to  no  C.  And  similarly  if 
one  of  the  premisses  is  not  universal.  For  if  A 
belongs  to  no  B,  and  B  to  some  C,  A  will  not 
belong  to  some  C:  if  A  belongs  to  no  B,  and  to 
[25]  all  C,  B  will  belong  to  no  C. 

Similarly  if  the  original  syllogism  is  nega¬ 
tive.  Suppose  it  has  been  proved  that  A  does 
not  belong  to  some  B,  BC  being  affirmative, 
AC  being  negative:  for  it  was  thus  that,  as  we 
saw,4  a  syllogism  could  be  made.  Whenever 
then  the  contrary  of  the  conclusion  is  assumed 
a  syllogism  will  not  be  possible.  For  if  A  be- 
[30]  longs  to  some  B,  and  B  to  all  C,  no  syllo¬ 
gism  is  possible  (as  we  saw5)  about  A  and  C. 
Nor,  if  A  belongs  to  some  B,  and  to  no  C,  was 
a  syllogism  possible  concerning  B  and  C. 
Therefore  the  premisses  are  not  refuted.  But 
when  the  contradictory  of  the  conclusion  is  as¬ 
sumed,  they  are  refuted.  For  if  A  belongs  to 
[35]  all  B,  and  B  to  C,  A  belongs  to  all  C:  but 
A  was  supposed  originally  to  belong  to  no  C. 
Again  if  A  belongs  to  all  B,  and  to  no  C,  then 
B  belongs  to  no  C:  but  it  was  supposed  to  be¬ 
long  to  all  C.  A  similar  proof  is  possible  if  the 

3  26s  17-21,  27s  4-12.  428b  1-4,  15-29®  10. 

6  26®  30-6. 


PRIOR  ANALYTICS 


61b 

premisses  are  not  universal.  For  AC  becomes 
universal  and  negative,  the  other  premiss  par¬ 
ticular  and  affirmative.  If  then  A  belongs  to  all 
[40]  B,  and  B  to  some  C,  it  results  that  A  be¬ 
longs  to  some  C:  but  it  was  supposed  to  belong 
to  no  C.  Again  if  A  belongs  to  all  B,  and  to  no 
61a  C,  then  B  belongs  to  no  C:  but  it  was  as¬ 
sumed  to  belong  to  some  C.  If  A  belongs  to 
some  B  and  B  to  some  C,  no  syllogism  results: 
nor  yet  if  A  belongs  to  some  B,  and  to  no  C. 
Thus  in  one  way  the  premisses  are  refuted,  in 
the  other  way  they  are  not. 

[5]  From  what  has  been  said  it  is  clear  how  a 
syllogism  results  in  each  figure  when  the  con¬ 
clusion  is  converted;  when  a  result  contrary  to 
the  premiss,  and  when  a  result  contradictory  to 
the  premiss,  is  obtained.  It  is  clear  that  in  the 
first  figure  the  syllogisms  are  formed  through 
the  middle  and  the  last  figures,  and  the  prem¬ 
iss  which  concerns  the  minor  extreme  is  always 
[/o]  refuted  through  the  middle  figure,  the 
premiss  which  concerns  the  major  through  the 
last  figure.  In  the  second  figure  syllogisms  pro¬ 
ceed  through  the  first  and  the  last  figures,  and 
the  premiss  which  concerns  the  minor  extreme 
is  always  refuted  through  the  first  figure,  the 
premiss  which  concerns  the  major  extreme 
through  the  last.  In  the  third  figure  the  refuta¬ 
tion  proceeds  through  the  first  and  the  middle 
figures;  the  premiss  which  concerns  the  major 
[75]  is  always  refuted  through  the  first  figure, 
the  premiss  which  concerns  the  minor  through 
the  middle  figure. 

11 

It  is  clear  then  what  conversion  is,  how  it  is 
effected  in  each  figure,  and  what  syllogism  re¬ 
sults.  The  syllogism  per  impossible  is  proved 
when  the  contradictory  of  the  conclusion  is 
[20]  stated  and  another  premiss  is  assumed;  it 
can  be  made  in  all  the  figures.  For  it  resem¬ 
bles  conversion,  differing  only  in  this:  conver¬ 
sion  takes  place  after  a  syllogism  has  been 
formed  and  both  the  premisses  have  been 
taken,  but  a  reduction  to  the  impossible  takes 
place  not  because  the  contradictory  has  been 
[25]  agreed  to  already,  but  because  it  is  clear 
that  it  is  true.  The  terms  are  alike  in  both,  and 
the  premisses  of  both  are  taken  in  the  same 
way.  For  example  if  A  belongs  to  all  B,  C  be¬ 
ing  middle,  then  if  it  is  supposed  that  A  does 
not  belong  to  all  B  or  belongs  to  no  B,  but  to 
all  C  (which  was  admitted  to  be  true),  it  fol- 
[jo]  lows  that  C  belongs  to  no  B  or  not  to  all 
B.  But  this  is  impossible:  consequently  the 
supposition  is  false:  its  contradictory  then  is 


81 

true.  Similarly  in  the  other  figures:  for  what¬ 
ever  moods  admit  of  conversion  admit  also  of 
the  reduction  per  impossibile. 

All  the  problems  can  be  proved  per  impos¬ 
sibile  in  all  the  figures,  excepting  the  universal 
[£5]  affirmative,  which  is  proved  in  the  mid¬ 
dle  and  third  figures,  but  not  in  the  first.  Sup¬ 
pose  that  A  belongs  not  to  all  B,  or  to  no  B, 
and  take  besides  another  premiss  concerning 
either  of  the  terms,  viz.  that  C  belongs  to  all 

A,  or  that  B  belongs  to  all  D;  thus  we  get  the 
[40]  first  figure.  If  then  it  is  supposed  that  A 
does  not  belong  to  all  B,  no  syllogism  results 
whichever  term  the  assumed  premiss  concerns; 
61b  but  if  it  is  supposed  that  A  belongs  to  no 

B,  when  the  premiss  BD  is  assumed  as  well 
we  shall  prove  syllogistically  what  is  false,  but 
not  the  problem  proposed.  For  if  A  belongs  to 
no  B,  and  B  belongs  to  all  D,  A  belongs  to  no 
[5]  D .  Let  this  be  impossible:  it  is  false  then 
that  A  belongs  to  no  B.  But  the  universal  af¬ 
firmative  is  not  necessarily  true  if  the  universal 
negative  is  false.  But  if  the  premiss  CA  is  as¬ 
sumed  as  well,  no  syllogism  results,  nor  does  it 
do  so  when  it  is  supposed  that  A  does  not  be¬ 
long  to  all  B.  Consequently  it  is  clear  that  the 
universal  affirmative  cannot  be  proved  in  the 
first  figure  per  impossibile. 

[/o]  But  the  particular  affirmative  and  the  uni¬ 
versal  and  particular  negatives  can  all  be 
proved.  Suppose  that  A  belongs  to  no  B,  and 
let  it  have  been  assumed  that  B  belongs  to  all 
or  to  some  C.  Then  it  is  necessary  that  A 
should  belong  to  no  C  or  not  to  all  C.  But  this 
is  impossible  (for  let  it  be  true  and  clear  that 
A  belongs  to  all  C ):  consequently  if  this  is 
[75]  false,  it  is  necessary  that  A  should  belong 
to  some  B.  But  if  the  other  premiss  assumed 
relates  to  A,  no  syllogism  will  be  possible.  Nor 
can  a  conclusion  be  drawn  when  the  contrary 
of  the  conclusion  is  supposed,  e.g.  that  A  does 
not  belong  to  some  B.  Clearly  then  we  must 
suppose  the  contradictory. 

Again  suppose  that  A  belongs  to  some  B, 
and  let  it  have  been  assumed  that  C  belongs  to 
[20]  all  A.  It  is  necessary  then  that  C  should 
belong  to  some  B.  But  let  this  be  impossible,  so 
that  the  supposition  is  false:  in  that  case  it  is 
true  that  A  belongs  to  no  B.  We  may  proceed 
in  the  same  way  if  the  proposition  CA  has 
been  taken  as  negative.  But  if  the  premiss  as¬ 
sumed  concerns  B,  no  syllogism  will  be  possi¬ 
ble.  If  the  contrary  is  supposed,  we  shall  have 
a  syllogism  and  an  impossible  conclusion,  but 
[25]  the  problem  in  hand  is  not  proved.  Sup¬ 
pose  that  A  belongs  to  all  B,  and  let  it  have 


BOOK  II,  CHAPTERS  8-11 


82 

been  assumed  that  C  belongs  to  all  It  is  nec¬ 
essary  then  that  C  should  belong  to  all  B.  But 
this  is  impossible,  so  that  it  is  false  that  A  be¬ 
longs  to  all  B.  But  we  have  not  yet  shown  it  to  be 
necessary  that  A  belongs  to  no  B,  if  it  does  not 
[30]  belong  to  all  B.  Similarly  if  the  other 
premiss  taken  concerns  B;  we  shall  have  a  syl¬ 
logism  and  a  conclusion  which  is  impossible, 
but  the  hypothesis  is  not  refuted.  Therefore  it 
is  the  contradictory  that  we  must  suppose. 

To  prove  that  A  does  not  belong  to  all  B,  we 
must  suppose  that  it  belongs  to  all  B:  for  if  A 
belongs  to  all  B,  and  C  to  all  A,  then  C  belongs 
[ J5]  to  all  B;  so  that  if  this  is  impossible,  the 
hypothesis  is  false.  Similarly  if  the  other  prem¬ 
iss  assumed  concerns  B.  The  same  results  if 
the  original  proposition  CA  was  negative:  for 
thus  also  we  get  a  syllogism.  But  if  the  nega¬ 
tive  proposition  concerns  B,  nothing  is  proved. 
If  the  hypothesis  is  that  A  belongs  not  to  all 
[40]  but  to  some  B ,  it  is  not  proved  that  A  be¬ 
longs  not  to  all  B,  but  that  it  belongs  to  no  B. 
For  if  A  belongs  to  some  B,  and  C  to  all  A, 
then  C  will  belong  to  some  B.  If  then  this  is 
impossible,  it  is  false  that  A  belongs  to  some 
62a  B;  consequently  it  is  true  that  A  belongs 
to  no  B,  But  if  this  is  proved,  the  truth  is  re¬ 
futed  as  well;  for  the  original  conclusion  was 
that  A  belongs  to  some  B,  and  does  not  belong 
to  some  B.  Further  the  impossible  does  not  re¬ 
sult  from  the  hypothesis:  for  then  the  hypothe- 
[5]  sis  would  be  false,  since  it  is  impossible  to 
draw  a  false  conclusion  from  true  premisses: 
but  in  fact  it  is  true:  for  A  belongs  to  some  B. 
Consequently  we  must  not  suppose  that  A  be¬ 
longs  to  some  B,  but  that  it  belongs  to  all  B. 
Similarly  if  we  should  be  proving  that  A  does 
not  belong  to  some  B:  for  if  ‘not  to  belong  to 
some’  and  ‘to  belong  not  to  all’  have  the  same 
[/o]  meaning,  the  demonstration  of  both  will 
be  identical. 

It  is  clear  then  that  not  the  contrary  but  the 
contradictory  ought  to  be  supposed  in  all  the 
syllogisms.  For  thus  we  shall  have  necessity  of 
inference,  and  the  claim  we  make  is  one  that 
will  be  generally  accepted.  For  if  of  everything 
one  or  other  of  two  contradictory  statements 
holds  good,  then  if  it  is  proved  that  the  nega¬ 
tion  does  not  hold,  the  affirmation  must  be 
[75]  true.  Again  if  it  is  not  admitted  that  the 
affirmation  is  true,  the  claim  that  the  negation 
is  true  will  be  generally  accepted.  But  in  nei¬ 
ther  way  does  it  suit  to  maintain  the  contrary : 
for  it  is  not  necessary  that  if  the  universal  neg- 
tive  is  false,  the  universal  affirmative  should  be 


62b 

true,  nor  is  it  generally  accepted  that  if  the  one 
is  false  the  other  is  true. 

12 

[20]  It  is  clear  then  that  in  the  first  figure  all 
problems  except  the  universal  affirmative  are 
proved  per  impossibile.  But  in  the  middle  and 
the  last  figures  this  also  is  proved.  Suppose 
that  A  does  not  belong  to  all  B,  and  let  it  have 
been  assumed  that  A  belongs  to  all  C.  If  then 
[25]  A  belongs  not  to  all  B ,  but  to  all  C,  C 
will  not  belong  to  all  B .  But  this  is  impossible 
(for  suppose  it  to  be  clear  that  C  belongs  to  all 
B):  consequently  the  hypothesis  is  false.  It  is 
true  then  that  A  belongs  to  all  B.  But  if  the 
contrary  is  supposed,  we  shall  have  a  syllogism 
and  a  result  which  is  impossible:  but  the  prob- 
[30]  lem  in  hand  is  not  proved.  For  if  A  be¬ 
longs  to  no  B,  and  to  all  C,  C  will  belong  to 
no  B.  This  is  impossible;  so  that  it  is  false  that 
A  belongs  to  no  B.  But  though  this  is  false,  it 
does  not  follow  that  it  is  true  that  A  belongs 
to  all  B. 

When  A  belongs  to  some  B,  suppose  that  A 
belongs  to  no  B,  and  let  A  belong  to  all  C.  It 
is  necessary  then  that  C  should  belong  to  no 
[^5]  B.  Consequently,  if  this  is  impossible,  A 
must  belong  to  some  B.  But  if  it  is  supposed 
that  A  does  not  belong  to  some  B,  we  shall 
have  the  same  results  as  in  the  first  figure.1 

Again  suppose  that  A  belongs  to  some  B, 
and  let  A  belong  to  no  C.  It  is  necessary  then 
that  C  should  not  belong  to  some  B.  But  origi¬ 
nally  it  belonged  to  all  B,  consequently  the  hy- 
[40]  pothesis  is  false:  A  then  will  belong  to 
no  B. 

When  A  does  not  belong  to  all  B,  suppose  it 
62b  does  belong  to  all  B,  and  to  no  C.  It  is  nec¬ 
essary  then  that  C  should  belong  to  no  B.  But 
this  is  impossible:  so  that  it  is  true  that  A  does 
not  belong  to  all  B.  It  is  clear  then  that  all  the 
syllogisms  can  be  formed  in  the  middle  figure. 

[5]  Similarly  they  can  all  be  formed  in  the  last 
figure.  Suppose  that  A  does  not  belong  to  some 
B,  but  C  belongs  to  all  B:  then  A  does  not  be¬ 
long  to  some  C.  If  then  this  is  impossible,  it  is 
false  that  A  does  not  belong  to  some  B;  so  that 
it  is  true  that  A  belongs  to  all  B .  But  if  it  is 
supposed  that  A  belongs  to  no  B,  we  shall  have 
a  syllogism  and  a  conclusion  which  is  impos¬ 
sible:  but  the  problem  in  hand  is  not  proved: 
[/o]  for  if  the  contrary  is  supposed,  we  shall 
have  the  same  results  as  before.2 

1 6ib  39-62*  8.  2  a  28-32. 


PRIOR  ANALYTICS 


63b  BOOK  II,  CHAPTERS  11-14  83 


But  to  prove  that  A  belongs  to  some  B,  this 
hypothesis  must  be  made.  If  A  belongs  to  no 

B ,  and  C  to  some  B,  A  will  belong  not  to  all 

C.  If  then  this  is  false,  it  is  true  that  A  belongs 
to  some  B. 

[75]  When  A  belongs  to  no  B,  suppose  A  be¬ 
longs  to  some  B,  and  let  it  have  been  assumed 
that  C  belongs  to  all  B.  Then  it  is  necessary 
that  A  should  belong  to  some  C.  But  ex  hy- 
pothesi  it  belongs  to  no  C,  so  that  it  is  false 
that  A  belongs  to  some  B.  But  if  it  is  supposed 
that  A  belongs  to  all  B,  the  problem  is  not 
proved. 

But  this  hypothesis  must  be  made  if  we  are 
[20]  to  prove  that  A  belongs  not  to  all  B.  For 
if  A  belongs  to  all  B  and  C  to  some  B ,  then  A 
belongs  to  some  C.  But  this  we  assumed  not 
to  be  so,  so  it  is  false  that  A  belongs  to  all  B . 
But  in  that  case  it  is  true  that  A  belongs  not  to 
all  B.  If  however  it  is  assumed  that  A  belongs 
to  some  B,  we  shall  have  the  same  result  as  be¬ 
fore.1 

[25]  it  is  clear  then  that  in  all  the  syllogisms 
which  proceed  per  impossibile  the  contradic¬ 
tory  must  be  assumed.  And  it  is  plain  that  in 
the  middle  figure  an  affirmative  conclusion, 
and  in  the  last  figure  a  universal  conclusion, 
are  proved  in  a  way. 

14 

Demonstration  per  impossibile  differs  from  os- 
[30]  tensive  proof  in  that  it  posits  what  it 
wishes  to  refute  by  reduction  to  a  statement  ad¬ 
mitted  to  be  false;  whereas  ostensive  proof 
starts  from  admitted  positions.  Both,  indeed, 
take  two  premisses  that  are  admitted,  but  the 
latter  takes  the  premisses  from  which  the  syl¬ 
logism  starts,  the  former  takes  one  of  these, 
along  with  the  contradictory  of  the  original 
[35]  conclusion.  Also  in  the  ostensive  proof  it 
is  not  necessary  that  the  conclusion  should  be 
known,  nor  that  one  should  suppose  before¬ 
hand  that  it  is  true  or  not:  in  the  other  it  is 
necessary  to  suppose  beforehand  that  it  is  not 
true.  It  makes  no  difference  whether  the  con¬ 
clusion  is  affirmative  or  negative;  the  method 
is  the  same  in  both  cases.  Everything  which  is 
concluded  ostensively  can  be  proved  per  impos- 
[40]  sibile,  and  that  which  is  proved  per  im¬ 
possibile  can  be  proved  ostensively,  through 
the  same  terms.  Whenever  the  syllogism  is 
63a  formed  in  the  first  figure,  the  truth  will  be 
found  in  the  middle  or  the  last  figure,  if  nega¬ 
tive  in  the  middle,  if  affirmative  in  the  last. 
Whenever  the  syllogism  is  formed  in  the  mid- 
1  6ib  39-62*  8. 


die  figure,  the  truth  will  be  found  in  the  first, 
whatever  the  problem  may  be.  Whenever  the 
[5]  syllogism  is  formed  in  the  last  figure,  the 
truth  will  be  found  in  the  first  and  middle  fig¬ 
ures,  if  affirmative  in  the  first,  if  negative  in 
the  middle.  Suppose  that  A  has  been  proved  to 
belong  to  no  B,  or  not  to  all  B,  through  the  first 
figure.  Then  the  hypothesis  must  have  been 
that  A  belongs  to  some  B ,  and  the  original 
[/o]  premisses  that  C  belongs  to  all  A  and  to 
no  B.  For  thus  the  syllogism  was  made  and  the 
impossible  conclusion  reached.  But  this  is  the 
middle  figure,  if  C  belongs  to  all  A  and  to  no 

B.  And  it  is  clear  from  these  premisses  that  A 
belongs  to  no  B.  Similarly  if  A  has  been  proved 
[75]  not  to  belong  to  all  B.  For  the  hypothesis 
is  that  A  belongs  to  all  B;  and  the  original 
premisses  are  that  C  belongs  to  all  A  but  not  to 
all  B .  Similarly  too,  if  the  premiss  CA  should 
be  negative:  for  thus  also  we  have  the  middle 
figure.  Again  suppose  it  has  been  proved  that 
A  belongs  to  some  B.  The  hypothesis  here  is 
[20]  that  A  belongs  to  no  B;  and  the  original 
premisses  that  B  belongs  to  all  C ,  and  A  either 
to  all  or  to  some  C:  for  in  this  way  we  shall 
get  what  is  impossible.  But  if  A  and  B  belong 
to  all  C,  we  have  the  last  figure.  And  it  is  clear 
from  these  premisses  that  A  must  belong  to 
some  B.  Similarly  if  B  or  A  should  be  assumed 
to  belong  to  some  C. 

[25]  Again  suppose  it  has  been  proved  in  the 
middle  figure  that  A  belongs  to  all  B.  Then  the 
hypothesis  must  have  been  that  A  belongs  not 
to  all  B,  and  the  original  premisses  that  A  be¬ 
longs  to  all  C,  and  C  to  all  B:  for  thus  we  shall 
get  what  is  impossible.  But  if  A  belongs  to  all 

C,  and  C  to  all  B,  we  have  the  first  figure. 
Similarly  if  it  has  been  proved  that  A  belongs 
[30]  to  some  B:  for  the  hypothesis  then  must 
have  been  that  A  belongs  to  no  B,  and  the 
original  premisses  that  A  belongs  to  all  C,  and 
C  to  some  B.  If  the  syllogism  is  negative,  the 
hypothesis  must  have  been  that  A  belongs  to 
some  B}  and  the  original  premisses  that  A  be¬ 
longs  to  no  C,  and  C  to  all  B,  so  that  the  first 
[35]  figure  results.  If  the  syllogism  is  not  uni¬ 
versal,  but  proof  has  been  given  that  A  does 
not  belong  to  some  B,  we  may  infer  in  the 
same  way.  The  hypothesis  is  that  A  belongs  to 
all  B,  the  original  premisses  that  A  belongs  to 
no  C,  and  C  belongs  to  some  B:  for  thus  we 
get  the  first  figure. 

[40]  Again  suppose  it  has  been  proved  in  the 
third  figure  that  A  belongs  to  all  B.  Then  the 
hypothesis  must  have  been  that  A  belongs  not 
63b  to  all  B,  and  the  original  premisses  that 


84  PRIOR  ANALYTICS  64a 


C  belongs  to  all  B,  and  A  belongs  to  all  C;  for 
thus  we  shall  get  what  is  impossible.  And  the 
original  premisses  form  the  first  figure.  Sim¬ 
ilarly  if  the  demonstration  establishes  a  par¬ 
ticular  proposition:  the  hypothesis  then  must 
have  been  that  A  belongs  to  no  B ,  and  the  orig- 
[5]  inal  premisses  that  C  belongs  to  some  B, 
and  A  to  all  C.  If  the  syllogism  is  negative, 
the  hypothesis  must  have  been  that  A  belongs 
to  some  B,  and  the  original  premisses  that  C 
belongs  to  no  A  and  to  all  B,  and  this  is  the 
middle  figure.  Similarly  if  the  demonstration 
is  not  universal.  The  hypothesis  will  then  be 
[/o]  that  A  belongs  to  all  B,  the  premisses  that 
C  belongs  to  no  A  and  to  some  B:  and  this  is 
the  middle  figure. 

It  is  clear  then  that  it  is  possible  through  the 
same  terms  to  prove  each  of  the  problems  os- 
tensively  as  well.  Similarly  it  will  be  possible 
if  the  syllogisms  are  ostensive  to  reduce  them 
[75]  ad  impossibile  in  the  terms  which  have 
been  taken,  whenever  the  contradictory  of  the 
conclusion  of  the  ostensive  syllogism  is  taken 
as  a  premiss.  For  the  syllogisms  become  iden¬ 
tical  with  those  which  are  obtained  by  means 
of  conversion,  so  that  we  obtain  immediately 
the  figures  through  which  each  problem  will 
be  solved.  It  is  clear  then  that  every  thesis  can 
be  proved  in  both  ways,  i.e.  per  impossibile 
[20]  and  ostensively,  and  it  is  not  possible  to 
separate  one  method  from  the  other. 

In  what  figure  it  is  possible  to  draw  a  conclu¬ 
sion  from  premisses  which  are  opposed,  and  in 
what  figure  this  is  not  possible,  will  be  made 
clear  in  this  way.  Verbally  four  kinds  of  oppo¬ 
sition  are  possible,  viz.  universal  affirmative  to 
[25]  universal  negative,  universal  affirmative 
to  particular  negative,  particular  affirmative  to 
universal  negative,  and  particular  affirmative 
to  particular  negative:  but  really  there  are  only 
three:  for  the  particular  affirmative  is  only 
verbally  opposed  to  the  particular  negative.  Of 
the  genuine  opposites  I  call  those  which  are 
universal  contraries ,  the  universal  affirmative 
and  the  universal  negative,  e.g.  ‘every  science 
[jo]  is  good’?  ‘no  science  is  good’;  the  others  I 
call  contradictories. 

In  the  first  figure  no  syllogism  whether  af¬ 
firmative  or  negative  can  be  made  out  of  op¬ 
posed  premisses:  no  affirmative  syllogism  is 
possible  because  both  premisses  must  be  affir¬ 
mative,  but  opposites  are,  the  one  affirmative, 
[35]  the  other  negative:  no  negative  syllogism 


is  possible  because  opposites  affirm  and  deny 
the  same  predicate  of  the  same  subject,  and 
the  middle  term  in  the  first  figure  is  not  predi¬ 
cated  of  both  extremes,  but  one  thing  is  denied 
of  it,  and  it  is  affirmed  of  something  else:  but 
such  premisses  are  not  opposed. 

[40]  In  the  middle  figure  a  syllogism  can  be 
made  both  of  contradictories  and  of  contraries. 
Let  A  stand  for  good,  let  B  and  C  stand  for 
64a  science.  If  then  one  assumes  that  every 
science  is  good,  and  no  science  is  good,  A  be¬ 
longs  to  all  B  and  to  no  C,  so  that  B  belongs  to 
no  C:  no  science  then  is  a  science.  Similarly  if 
after  taking  ‘every  science  is  good’  one  took 
[5]  ‘the  science  of  medicine  is  not  good’;  for  A 
belongs  to  all  B  but  to  no  C,  so  that  a  par¬ 
ticular  science  will  not  be  a  science.  Again,  a 
particular  science  will  not  be  a  science  if  A  be¬ 
longs  to  all  C  but  to  no  B,  and  B  is  science,  C 
medicine,  and  A  supposition:  for  after  taking 
‘no  science  is  supposition’,  one  has  assumed 
[/o]  that  a  particular  science  is  supposition. 
This  syllogism  differs  from  the  preceding  be¬ 
cause  the  relations  between  the  terms  are  re¬ 
versed:  before,  the  affirmative  statement  con¬ 
cerned  B,  now  it  concerns  C .  Similarly  if  one 
premiss  is  not  universal:  for  the  middle  term  is 
always  that  which  is  stated  negatively  of  one 
extreme,  and  affirmatively  of  the  other.  Conse- 
[75]  quently  it  is  possible  that  contradictories 
may  lead  to  a  conclusion,  though  not  always  or 
in  every  mood,  but  only  if  the  terms  subordi¬ 
nate  to  the  middle  are  such  that  they  are  either 
identical  or  related  as  whole  to  part.  Otherwise 
it  is  impossible:  for  the  premisses  cannot  any¬ 
how  be  either  contraries  or  contradictories. 
[20]  In  the  third  figure  an  affirmative  syllo¬ 
gism  can  never  be  made  out  of  opposite  prem¬ 
isses,  for  the  reason  given  in  reference  to  the 
first  figure;1  but  a  negative  syllogism  is  possible 
whether  the  terms  are  universal  or  not.  Let  B 
and  C  stand  for  science,  A  for  medicine.  If 
[25]  then  one  should  assume  that  all  medicine 
is  science  and  that  no  medicine  is  science,  he 
has  asumed  that  B  belongs  to  all  A  and  C  to  no 
A,  so  that  a  particular  science  will  not  be  a 
science.  Similarly  if  the  premiss  BA  is  not  as¬ 
sumed  universally.  For  if  some  medicine  is 
science  and  again  no  medicine  is  science,  it 
[jo]  results  that  some  science  is  not  science. 
The  premisses  are  contrary  if  the  terms  are  tak¬ 
en  universally;  if  one  is  particular,  they  are 
contradictory. 

We  must  recognize  that  it  is  possible  to  take 

1 63b  33. 


85 


65*  BOOK  II,  CHAPTERS  14-16 


opposites  in  the  way  we  said,  viz.  ‘all  science 
[35]  1S  good’  and  ‘no  science  is  good’  or  ‘some 
science  is  not  good’.  This  does  not  usually 
escape  notice.  But  it  is  possible  to  establish 
one  part  of  a  contradiction  through  other 
premisses,  or  to  assume  it  in  the  way  suggested 
in  the  Topics }  Since  there  are  three  oppositions 
to  affirmative  statements,  it  follows  that  op¬ 
posite  statements  may  be  assumed  as  prem¬ 
isses  in  six  ways;  we  may  have  either  uni¬ 
versal  affirmative  and  negative,  or  universal 
[40]  affirmative  and  particular  negative,  or 
particular  affirmative  and  universal  negative, 
and  the  relations  between  the  terms  may  be 
64b  reversed;  e.g.  A  may  belong  to  all  B  and 
to  no  C,  or  to  all  C  and  to  no  B,  or  to  all  of 
the  one,  not  to  all  of  the  other;  here  too  the 
relation  between  the  terms  may  be  reversed. 
Similarly  in  the  third  figure.  So  it  is  clear  in 
[5]  how  many  ways  and  in  what  figures  a  syl¬ 
logism  can  be  made  by  means  of  premisses 
which  are  opposed. 

It  is  clear  too  that  from  false  premisses  it  is 
possible  to  draw  a  true  conclusion,  as  has  been 
said  before,2  but  it  is  not  possible  if  the  prem¬ 
isses  are  opposed.  For  the  syllogism  is  always 
[10]  contrary  to  the  fact,  e.g.  if  a  thing  is 
good,  it  is  proved  that  it  is  not  good,  if  an  ani¬ 
mal,  that  it  is  not  an  animal,  because  the  syllo¬ 
gism  springs  out  of  a  contradiction  and  the 
terms  presupposed  are  either  identical  or  re¬ 
lated  as  whole  and  part.  It  is  evident  also  that 
in  fallacious  reasonings  nothing  prevents  a 
contradiction  to  the  hypothesis  from  resulting, 
e.g.  if  something  is  odd,  it  is  not  odd.  For  the 
[75]  syllogism  owed  its  contrariety  to  its  con¬ 
tradictory  premisses;  if  we  assume  such  prem¬ 
isses  we  shall  get  a  result  that  contradicts  our 
hypothesis.  But  we  must  recognize  that  con¬ 
traries  cannot  be  inferred  from  a  single  syllo¬ 
gism  in  such  a  way  that  we  conclude  that  what 
is  not  good  is  good,  or  anything  of  that  sort, 
[20]  unless  a  self-contradictory  premiss  is  at 
once  asumed,  e.g.  ‘every  animal  is  white  and 
not  white’,  and  we  proceed  ‘man  is  an  animal’. 
Either  we  must  introduce  the  contradiction  by 
an  additional  assumption,  assuming,  e.g.,  that 
every  science  is  supposition,  and  then  assuming 
‘Medicine  is  a  science,  but  none  of  it  is  suppo¬ 
sition*  (which  is  the  mode  in  which  refuta- 
[25]  tions  are  made),  or  we  must  argue  from 
two  syllogisms.  In  no  other  way  than  this,  as 
was  said  before,  is  it  possible  that  the  premisses 
should  be  really  contrary. 

1  viii.  1.  2  Chapters  2-4. 


16 

To  beg  and  assume  the  original  question  is  a 
species  of  failure  to  demonstrate  the  problem 
[jo]  proposed;  but  this  happens  in  many  ways. 
A  man  may  not  reason  syllogistically  at  all,  or 
he  may  argue  from  premisses  which  are  less 
known  or  equally  unknown,  or  he  may  estab¬ 
lish  the  antecedent  by  means  of  its  conse¬ 
quents;  for  demonstration  proceeds  from  what 
is  more  certain  and  is  prior.  Now  begging  the 
question  is  none  of  these:  but  since  we  get  to 
know  some  things  naturally  through  them¬ 
selves,  and  other  things  by  means  of  some- 
[55]  thing  else  (the  first  principles  through 
themselves,  what  is  subordinate  to  them 
through  something  else),  whenever  a  man  tries 
to  prove  what  is  not  self-evident  by  means  of 
itself,  then  he  begs  the  original  question.  This 
may  be  done  by  assuming  what  is  in  question 
at  once;  it  is  also  possible  to  make  a  transi- 
[40]  tion  to  other  things  which  would  natur¬ 
ally  be  proved  through  the  thesis  proposed,  and 
65a  demonstrate  it  through  them,  e.g.  if  A 
should  be  proved  through  B,  and  B  through  C, 
though  it  was  natural  that  C  should  be  proved 
through  A:  for  it  turns  out  that  those  who  rea¬ 
son  thus  are  proving  A  by  means  of  itself.  This 
is  what  those  persons  do  who  suppose  that  they 
[5]  are  constructing  parallel  straight  lines:  for 
they  fail  to  see  that  they  are  assuming  facts 
which  it  is  impossible  to  demonstrate  unless 
the  parallels  exist.  So  it  turns  out  that  those 
who  reason  thus  merely  say  a  particular  thing 
is,  if  it  is:  in  this  way  everything  will  be  self- 
evident.  But  that  is  impossible. 

[/o]  If  then  it  is  uncertain  whether  A  belongs 
to  C,  and  also  whether  A  belongs  to  B ,  and  if 
one  should  assume  that  A  does  belong  to  B,  it 
is  not  yet  clear  whether  he  begs  the  original 
question,  but  it  is  evident  that  he  is  not  demon¬ 
strating:  for  what  is  as  uncertain  as  the  ques¬ 
tion  to  be  answered  cannot  be  a  principle  of  a 
demonstration.  If  however  B  is  so  related  to  C 
that  they  are  identical,  or  if  they  are  plainly 
[75]  convertible,  or  the  one  belongs  to  the 
other,  the  original  question  is  begged.  For  one 
might  equally  well  prove  that  A  belongs  to  B 
through  those  terms  if  they  are  convertible. 
But  if  they  are  not  convertible,  it  is  the  fact 
that  they  are  not  that  prevents  such  a  demon¬ 
stration,  not  the  method  of  demonstrating. 
But  if  one  were  to  make  the  conversion,  then 
he  would  be  doing  what  we  have  described3 
3  In  11.  1-4. 


86 

and  effecting  a  reciprocal  proof  with  three 
propositions. 

Similarly  if  he  should  assume  that  B  be- 
[20]  longs  to  C,  this  being  as  uncertain  as  the 
question  whether  A  belongs  to  C,  the  question 
is  not  yet  begged,  but  no  demonstration  is 
made.  If  however  A  and  B  are  identical  either 
because  they  are  convertible  or  because  A  fol¬ 
lows  B,  then  the  question  is  begged  for  the 
same  reason  as  before.  For  we  have  explained 
the  meaning  of  begging  the  question,  viz. 
[25]  proving  that  which  is  not  self-evident  by 
means  of  itself. 

If  then  begging  the  question  is  proving  what 
is  not  self-evident  by  means  of  itself,  in  other 
words  failing  to  prove  when  the  failure  is  due 
to  the  thesis  to  be  proved  and  the  premiss 
through  which  it  is  proved  being  equally  un¬ 
certain,  either  because  predicates  which  are 
identical  belong  to  the  same  subject,  or  because 
the  same  predicate  belongs  to  subjects  which 
are  identical,  the  question  may  be  begged  in 
[jo]  the  middle  and  third  figures  in  both  ways, 
though,  if  the  syllogism  is  affirmative,  only  in 
the  third  and  first  figures.  If  the  syllogism  is 
negative,  the  question  is  begged  when  identical 
predicates  are  denied  of  the  same  subject;  and 
both  premisses  do  not  beg  the  question  indif¬ 
ferently  (in  a  similar  way  the  question  may  be 
begged  in  the  middle  figure),  because  the 
terms  in  negative  syllogisms  are  not  converti- 
[35]  hie.  In  scientific  demonstrations  the  ques¬ 
tion  is  begged  when  the  terms  are  really  related 
in  the  manner  described,  in  dialectical  argu¬ 
ments  when  they  are  according  to  common 
opinion  so  related. 

*7 

The  objection  that  ‘this  is  not  the  reason  why 
the  result  is  false’,  which  we  frequently  make 
in  argument,  is  made  primarily  in  the  case  of 
[40]  a  reductio  ad  impossible,  to  rebut  the 
proposition  which  was  being  proved  by  the  re- 
6515  duction.  For  unless  a  man  has  contradicted 
this  proposition  he  will  not  say,  ‘False  cause’, 
but  urge  that  something  false  has  been  as¬ 
sumed  in  the  earlier  parts  of  the  argument;  nor 
will  he  use  the  formula  in  the  case  of  an  osten- 
sive  proof;  for  here  what  one  denies  is  not  as¬ 
sumed  as  a  premiss.  Further  when  anything  is 
refuted  ostensively  by  the  terms  ABC,  it  can- 
[5]  not  be  objected  that  the  syllogism  does  not 
depend  on  the  assumption  laid  down.  For  we 
use  the  expression  ‘false  cause’,  when  the  syllo¬ 
gism  is  concluded  in  spite  of  the  refutation  of 
this  position;  but  that  is  not  possible  in  osten- 


66* 

sive  proofs:  since  if  an  assumption  is  refuted,  a 
syllogism  can  no  longer  be  drawn  in  reference 
to  it.  It  is  clear  then  that  the  expression  ‘false 
[/o]  cause’  can  only  be  used  in  the  case  of  a 
reductio  ad  impossible ,  and  when  the  original 
hypothesis  is  so  related  to  the  impossible  con¬ 
clusion,  that  the  conclusion  results  indifferent¬ 
ly  whether  the  hypothesis  is  made  or  not.  The 
most  obvious  case  of  the  irrelevance  of  an  as¬ 
sumption  to  a  conclusion  which  is  false  is  when 
a  syllogism  drawn  from  middle  terms  to  an 
[75]  impossible  conclusion  is  independent  of 
the  hypothesis,  as  we  have  explained  in  the 
Topics.1  For  to  put  that  which  is  not  the  cause 
as  the  cause,  is  just  this:  e.g.  if  a  man,  wishing 
to  prove  that  the  diagonal  of  the  square  is  in¬ 
commensurate  with  the  side,  should  try  to 
prove  Zeno’s  theorem  that  motion  is  impos¬ 
sible,  and  so  establish  a  reductio  ad  impossi - 
[20]  bile :  for  Zeno’s  false  theorem  has  no  con¬ 
nexion  at  all  with  the  original  assumption.  An¬ 
other  case  is  where  the  impossible  conclusion  is 
connected  with  the  hypothesis,  but  does  not  re¬ 
sult  from  it.  This  may  happen  whether  one 
traces  the  connexion  upwards  or  downwards, 
[25]  e.g.  if  it  is  laid  down  that  A  belongs  to  B, 
B  to  C,  and  C  to  D,  and  it  should  be  false 
that  B  belongs  to  D:  for  if  we  eliminated  A 
and  assumed  all  the  same  that  B  belongs  to  C 
and  C  to  D,  the  false  conclusion  would  not  de¬ 
pend  on  the  original  hypothesis.  Or  again  trace 
the  connexion  upwards;  e.g.  suppose  that  A 
[jo]  belongs  to  B,  E  to  A,  and  F  to  E,  it  being 
false  that  F  belongs  to  A.  In  this  way  too  the 
impossible  conclusion  would  result,  though  the 
original  hypothesis  were  eliminated.  But  the 
impossible  conclusion  ought  to  be  connected 
with  the  original  terms:  in  this  way  it  will  de¬ 
pend  on  the  hypothesis,  e.g.  when  one  traces 
the  connexion  downwards,  the  impossible  con- 
[  J5]  elusion  must  be  connected  with  that  term 
which  is  predicate  in  the  hypothesis:  for  if  it 
is  impossible  that  A  should  belong  to  D ,  the 
false  conclusion  will  no  longer  result  after  A 
has  been  eliminated.  If  one  traces  the  con¬ 
nexion  upwards,  the  impossible  conclusion 
must  be  connected  with  that  term  which 
is  subject  in  the  hypothesis:  for  if  it  is  impossi¬ 
ble  that  F  should  belong  to  B,  the  impossible 
conclusion  will  disappear  if  B  is  eliminated. 
[40]  Similarly  when  the  syllogisms  are  nega¬ 
tive. 

66*  It  is  clear  then  that  when  the  impossibility 
is  not  related  to  the  original  terms,  the  false 
conclusion  does  not  result  on  account  of  the 
1  On  Sophistical  Refutations ,  i6jh  21-36. 


PRIOR  ANALYTICS 


66b  BOOK  II,  CHAPTERS  16-21  87 


assumption.  Or  perhaps  even  so  it  may  some¬ 
times  be  independent.  For  if  it  were  laid  down 
that  A  belongs  not  to  B  but  to  K,  and  that  K  be- 
[5]  longs  to  C  and  C  to  D,  the  impossible  con¬ 
clusion  would  still  stand.  Similarly  if  one  takes 
the  terms  in  an  ascending  series.  Consequently 
since  the  impossibility  results  whether  the  first 
assumption  is  suppressed  or  not,  it  would  ap¬ 
pear  to  be  independent  of  that  assumption.  Or 
perhaps  we  ought  not  to  understand  the  state¬ 
ment  that  the  false  conclusion  results  inde¬ 
pendently  of  the  assumption,  in  the  sense  that 
if  something  else  were  supposed  the  impossi- 
[/o]  bility  would  result;  but  rather  we  mean 
that  when  the  first  assumption  is  eliminated, 
the  same  impossibility  results  through  the  re¬ 
maining  premisses;  since  it  is  not  perhaps  ab¬ 
surd  that  the  same  false  result  should  follow 
from  several  hypotheses,  e.g.  that  parallels 
meet,  both  on  the  assumption  that  the  interior 
angle  is  greater  than  the  exterior  and  on  the 
assumption  that  a  triangle  contains  more  than 
[75]  two  right  angles. 

18 

A  false  argument  depends  on  the  first  false 
statement  in  it.  Every  syllogism  is  made  out  of 
two  or  more  premisses.  If  then  the  false  con¬ 
clusion  is  drawn  from  two  premisses,  one  or 
both  of  them  must  be  false:  for  (as  we  proved1) 
a  false  syllogism  cannot  be  drawn  from  true 
[20]  premisses.  But  if  the  premisses  are  more 
than  two,  e.g.  if  C  is  established  through  A 
and  B,  and  these  through  D,  E,  F,  and  G,  one 
of  these  higher  propositions  must  be  false,  and 
on  this  the  argument  depends:  for  A  and  B  are 
inferred  by  means  of  D,  E,  F,  and  G.  There¬ 
fore  the  conclusion  and  the  error  results  from 
one  of  them. 

x9 

[25]  In  order  to  avoid  having  a  syllogism 
drawn  against  us  we  must  take  care,  whenever 
an  opponent  asks  us  to  admit  the  reason  with¬ 
out  the  conclusions,  not  to  grant  him  the  same 
term  twice  over  in  his  premisses,  since  we 
know  that  a  syllogism  cannot  be  drawn  with¬ 
out  a  middle  term,  and  that  term  which  is 
stated  more  than  once  is  the  middle.  How  we 
ought  to  watch  the  middle  in  reference  to  each 
[30]  conclusion,  is  evident  from  our  knowing 
what  kind  of  thesis  is  proved  in  each  figure. 
This  will  not  escape  us  since  we  know  how  we 
are  maintaining  the  argument. 

That  which  we  urge  men  to  beware  of  in 
l53h 


their  admissions,  they  ought  in  attack  to  try 
to  conceal.  This  will  be  possible  first,  if,  instead 
[35]  of  drawing  the  conclusions  of  preliminary 
syllogisms,  they  take  the  necessary  premisses 
and  leave  the  conclusions  in  the  dark;  sec¬ 
ondly  if  instead  of  inviting  assent  to  proposi¬ 
tions  which  are  closely  connected  they  take  as 
far  as  possible  those  that  are  not  connected  by 
middle  terms.  For  example  suppose  that  A  is 
to  be  inferred  to  be  true  of  F;  B,  C,  D,  and  E 
being  middle  terms.  One  ought  then  to  ask 
whether  A  belongs  to  B,  and  next  whether  D 
belongs  to  E,  instead  of  asking  whether  B  be- 
[40]  longs  to  C;  after  that  he  may  ask  whether 
66b  B  belongs  to  C,  and  so  on.  If  the  syllogism 
is  drawn  through  one  middle  term,  he  ought 
to  begin  with  that:  in  this  way  he  will  most 
likely  deceive  his  opponent. 

20 

Since  we  know  when  a  syllogism  can  be 
[5]  formed  and  how  its  terms  must  be  related, 
it  is  clear  when  refutation  will  be  possible  and 
when  impossible.  A  refutation  is  possible 
whether  everything  is  conceded,  or  the  answers 
alternate  (one,  I  mean,  being  affirmative,  the 
other  negative).  For  as  has  been  shown  a 
syllogism  is  possible  whether  the  terms  are  re¬ 
lated  in  affirmative  propositions  or  one  propo¬ 
sition  is  affirmative,  the  other  negative:  con¬ 
sequently,  if  what  is  laid  down  is  contrary  to 
[/o]  the  conclusion,  a  refutation  must  take 
place:  for  a  refutation  is  a  syllogism  which  es¬ 
tablishes  the  contradictory.  But  if  nothing  is 
conceded,  a  refutation  is  impossible:  for  no 
syllogism  is  possible  (as  we  saw2)  when  all  the 
terms  are  negative:  therefore  no  refutation  is 
ossible.  For  if  a  refutation  were  possible,  a 
75]  syllogism  must  be  possible;  although  if  a 
syllogism  is  possible  it  does  not  follow  that  a 
refutation  is  possible.  Similarly  refutation  is 
not  possible  if  nothing  is  conceded  universally: 
since  the  fields  of  refutation  and  syllogism  are 
defined  in  the  same  way. 

21 

It  sometimes  happens  that  just  as  we  are  de¬ 
ceived  in  the  arrangement  of  the  terms,  so 
error  may  arise  in  our  thought  about  them, 
[20]  e.g.  if  it  is  possible  that  the  same  predi¬ 
cate  should  belong  to  more  than  one  subject 
immediately,  but  although  knowing  the  one,  a 
man  may  forget  the  other  and  think  the  op¬ 
posite  true.  Suppose  that  A  belongs  to  B  and  to 
C  in  virtue  of  their  nature,  and  that  B  and  C 
241  b6. 


88 

belong  to  all  D  in  the  same  way.  If  then  a  man 
thinks  that  A  belongs  to  all  B,  and  B  to  D,  but 
A  to  no  C,  and  C  to  all  D,  he  will  both  know 
[25]  and  not  know  the  same  thing  in  respect 
of  the  same  thing.  Again  if  a  man  were  to 
make  a  mistake  about  the  members  of  a  single 
series;  e.g.  suppose  A  belongs  to  B,  B  to  C,  and 
C  to  D,  but  some  one  thinks  that  A  belongs  to 
all  B,  but  to  no  C:  he  will  both  know  that  A 
[30]  belongs  to  D,  and  think  that  it  does  not. 
Does  he  then  maintain  after  this  simply  that 
what  he  knows,  he  does  not  think?  For  he 
knows  in  a  way  that  A  belongs  to  C  through 
B,  since  the  part  is  included  in  the  whole;  so 
that  what  he  knows  in  a  way,  this  he  main¬ 
tains  he  does  not  think  at  all:  but  that  is  im- 

fossible. 

33]  In  the  former  case,  where  the  middle 
term  does  not  belong  to  the  same  series,  it  is 
not  possible  to  think  both  the  premisses  with 
reference  to  each  of  the  two  middle  terms:  e.g. 
that  A  belongs  to  all  B,  but  to  no  C,  and  both 
B  and  C  belong  to  all  D.  For  it  turns  out  that 
the  first  premiss  of  the  one  syllogism  is  either 
wholly  or  partially  contrary  to  the  first  premiss 
of  the  other.  For  if  he  thinks  that  A  belongs  to 
[40]  everything  to  which  B  belongs,  and  he 
67a  knows  that  B  belongs  to  D,  then  he  knows 
that  A  belongs  to  D.  Consequently  if  again  he 
thinks  that  A  belongs  to  nothing  to  which  C 
belongs,  he  thinks  that  A  does  not  belong  to 
some  of  that  to  which  B  belongs;  but  if  he 
thinks  that  A  belongs  to  everything  to  which 
B  belongs,  and  again  thinks  that  A  does  not  be¬ 
long  to  some  of  that  to  which  B  belongs,  these 
[5]  beliefs  are  wholly  or  partially  contrary.  In 
this  way  then  it  is  not  possible  to  think;  but 
nothing  prevents  a  man  thinking  one  premiss 
of  each  syllogism  or  both  premisses  of  one  of 
the  two  syllogisms:  e.g.  A  belongs  to  all  B, 
and  B  to  D,  and  again  A  belongs  to  no  C.  An 
error  of  this  kind  is  similar  to  the  error  into 
which  we  fall  concerning  particulars:  e.g.  if  A 
[/o]  belongs  to  all  B,  and  B  to  all  C,  A  will 
belong  to  all  C.  If  then  a  man  knows  that  A 
belongs  to  everything  to  which  B  belongs,  he 
knows  that  A  belongs  to  C.  But  nothing 
prevents  his  being  ignorant  that  C  exists;  e.g. 
let  A  stand  for  two  right  angles,  B  for  triangle, 
C  for  a  particular  diagram  of  a  triangle.  A 
man  might  think  that  C  did  not  exist,  though 
[75]  he  knew  that  every  triangle  contains  two 
right  angles;  consequently  he  will  know  and 
not  know  the  same  thing  at  the  same  time. 
For  the  expression  ‘to  know  that  every  triangle 
has  its  angles  equal  to  two  right  angles’  is  am- 


67b 

biguous,  meaning  to  have  the  knowledge  either 
of  the  universal  or  of  the  particulars.  Thus 
then  he  knows  that  C  contains  two  right 
angles  with  a  knowledge  of  the  universal,  but 
[20]  not  with  a  knowledge  of  the  particulars; 
consequently  his  knowledge  will  not  be  con¬ 
trary  to  his  ignorance.  The  argument  in  the 
Meno1  that  learning  is  recollection  may  be 
criticized  in  a  similar  way.  For  it  never  hap¬ 
pens  that  a  man  starts  with  a  foreknowledge 
of  the  particular,  but  along  with  the  process  of 
being  led  to  see  the  general  principle  he  re¬ 
ceives  a  knowledge  of  the  particulars,  by  an  act 
(as  it  were)  of  recognition.  For  we  know  some 
things  directly;  e.g.  that  the  angles  are  equal 
[25]  to  two  right  angles,  if  we  know  that  the 
figure  is  a  triangle.  Similarly  in  all  other  cases. 

By  a  knowledge  of  the  universal  then  we  see 
the  particulars,  but  we  do  not  know  them  by 
the  kind  of  knowledge  which  is  proper  to 
them;  consequently  it  is  possible  that  we  may 
make  mistakes  about  them,  but  not  that  we 
should  have  the  knowledge  and  error  that  are 
contrary  to  one  another:  rather  we  have  the 
knowledge  of  the  universal  but  make  a  mis- 
[jo]  take  in  apprehending  the  particular.  Sim¬ 
ilarly  in  the  cases  stated  above.2  The  error  in 
respect  of  the  middle  term  is  not  contrary  to 
the  knowledge  obtained  through  the  syllogism, 
nor  is  the  thought  in  respect  of  one  middle 
term  contrary  to  that  in  respect  of  the  other. 
Nothing  prevents  a  man  who  knows  both  that 
A  belongs  to  the  whole  of  B,  and  that  B  again 
belongs  to  C,  thinking  that  A  does  not  belong 
[35]  to  e.g.  knowing  that  every  mule  is 
sterile  and  that  this  is  a  mule,  and  thinking 
that  this  animal  is  with  foal:  for  he  does  not 
know  that  A  belongs  to  C,  unless  he  considers 
the  two  propositions  together.  So  it  is  evident 
that  if  he  knows  the  one  and  does  not  know 
the  other,  he  will  fall  into  error.  And  this  is  the 
relation  of  knowledge  of  the  universal  to 
67b  knowledge  of  the  particular.  For  we  know 
no  sensible  thing,  once  it  has  passed  beyond 
the  range  of  our  senses,  even  if  we  happen  to 
have  perceived  it,  except  by  means  of  the  uni¬ 
versal  and  the  possession  of  the  knowledge 
which  is  proper  to  the  particular,  but  without 
the  actual  exercise  of  that  knowledge.  For  to 
know  is  used  in  three  senses:  it  may  mean 
either  to  have  knowledge  of  the  universal  or  to 
[5]  have  knowledge  proper  to  the  matter  in 
hand  or  to  exercise  such  knowledge:  conse¬ 
quently  three  kinds  of  error  also  are  possible. 
Nothing  then  prevents  a  man  both  knowing 

1  Plato,  Meno ,  81.  2  66b  20-6,  26-30 


PRIOR  ANALYTICS 


68*  BOOK  II,  CHAPTERS  21-22  89 


and  being  mistaken  about  the  same  thing,  pro¬ 
vided  that  his  knowledge  and  his  error  are  not 
contrary.  And  this  happens  also  to  the  man 
whose  knowledge  is  limited  to  each  of  the 
premisses  and  who  has  not  previously  con¬ 
sidered  the  particular  question.  For  when  he 
thinks  that  the  mule  is  with  foal  he  has  not 
the  knowledge  in  the  sense  of  its  actual  ex- 
[/o]  ercise,  nor  on  the  other  hand  has  his 
thought  caused  an  error  contrary  to  his  knowl¬ 
edge:  for  the  error  contrary  to  the  knowledge 
of  the  universal  would  be  a  syllogism. 

But  he  who  thinks  the  essence  of  good  is  the 
essence  of  bad  will  think  the  same  thing  to  be 
the  essence  of  good  and  the  essence  of  bad.  Let 
A  stand  for  the  essence  of  good  and  B  for  the 
essence  of  bad,  and  again  C  for  the  essence  of 
[75]  good.  Since  then  he  thinks  B  and  C  iden¬ 
tical,  he  will  think  that  C  is  B ,  and  similarly 
that  B  is  A,  consequently  that  C  is  A .  For  just 
as  we  saw  that  if  B  is  true  of  all  of  which  C  is 
true,  and  A  is  true  of  all  of  which  B  is  true,  A 
is  true  of  C,  similarly  with  the  word  ‘think’. 
[20]  Similarly  also  with  the  word  ‘is’;  for  we 
saw  that  if  C  is  the  same  as  B,  and  B  as  A,  C 
is  the  same  as  A.  Similarly  therefore  with 
‘opine’.  Perhaps  then  this  is  necessary  if  a  man 
will  grant  the  first  point.  But  presumably  that 
is  false,  that  any  one  could  suppose  the  es¬ 
sence  of  good  to  be  the  essence  of  bad,  save 
[25]  incidentally.  For  it  is  possible  to  think 
this  in  many  different  ways.  But  we  must  con¬ 
sider  this  matter  better. 

22 

Whenever  the  extremes  are  convertible  it  is 
necessary  that  the  middle  should  be  convertible 
with  both.  For  if  A  belongs  to  C  through  B, 
then  if  A  and  C  are  convertible  and  C  be¬ 
longs  to  everything  to  which  A  belongs,  B  is 
[jo]  convertible  with  A,  and  B  belongs  to 
everything  to  which  A  belongs,  through  C  as 
middle,  and  C  is  convertible  with  B  through  A 
as  middle.  Similarly  if  the  conclusion  is  nega¬ 
tive,  e.g.  if  B  belongs  to  C,  but  A  does  not  be¬ 
long  to  B,  neither  will  A  belong  to  C.  If  then 
B  is  convertible  with  A,  C  will  be  convertible 
[j5]  with  At.  Suppose  B  does  not  belong  to  A; 
neither  then  will  C:  for  ex  hypothesi  B  be¬ 
longed  to  all  C.  And  if  C  is  convertible  with 
B,  B  is  convertible  also  with  A:  for  C  is  said  of 
that  of  all  of  which  B  is  said.  And  if  C  is  con¬ 
vertible  in  relation  to  A  and  to  B,  B  also  is 
convertible  in  relation  to  A .  For  C  belongs  to 
68*  that  to  which  B  belongs:  but  C  does  not 
belong  to  that  to  which  A  belongs.  And  this 


alone  starts  from  the  conclusion;  the  preceding 
moods  do  not  do  so  as  in  the  affirmative  syllo¬ 
gism.  Again  if  A  and  B  are  convertible,  and 
[5]  similarly  C  and  D,  and  if  A  or  C  must  be¬ 
long  to  anything  whatever,  then  B  and  D  will 
be  such  that  one  or  other  belongs  to  anything 
whatever.  For  since  B  belongs  to  that  to  which 
A  belongs,  and  D  belongs  to  that  to  which  C 
belongs,  and  since  A  or  C  belongs  to  every¬ 
thing,  but  not  together,  it  is  clear  that  B  or  D 
belongs  to  everything,  but  not  together.  For 
example  if  that  which  is  uncreated  is  incor¬ 
ruptible  and  that  which  is  incorruptible  is  un¬ 
created,  it  is  necessary  that  what  is  created 
[/o]  should  be  corruptible  and  what  is  cor¬ 
ruptible  should  have  been  created.  For  two  syl¬ 
logisms  have  been  put  together.  Again  if  A  or 
B  belongs  to  everything  and  if  C  or  D  belongs 
to  everything,  but  they  cannot  belong  together, 
then  when  A  and  C  are  convertible  B  and  D 
are  convertible.  For  if  B  does  not  belong  to 
something  to  which  D  belongs,  it  is  clear  that 
[75]  A  belongs  to  it.  But  if  A  then  C:  for  they 
are  convertible.  Therefore  C  and  D  belong  to¬ 
gether.  But  this  is  impossible.  When  A  belongs 
to  the  whole  of  B  and  to  C  and  is  affirmed  of 
nothing  else,  and  B  also  belongs  to  all  C,  it  is 
necessary  that  A  and  B  should  be  convertible: 
for  since  A  is  said  of  B  and  C  only,  and  B 
[20]  is  affirmed  both  of  itself  and  of  C,  it  is 
clear  that  B  will  be  said  of  everything  of  which 
A  is  said,  except  A  itself.  Again  when  A  and  B 
belong  to  the  whole  of  C,  and  C  is  convertible 
with  B,  it  is  necessary  that  A  should  belong  to 
all  B:  for  since  A  belongs  to  all  C,  and  C  to  B 
by  conversion,  A  will  belong  to  all  B. 

[25]  When,  of  two  opposites  A  and  B,  A  is 
preferable  to  B,  and  similarly  D  is  preferable 
to  C,  then  if  A  and  C  together  are  preferable 
to  B  and  D  together,  A  must  be  preferable  to 
D.  For  A  is  an  object  of  desire  to  the  same 
extent  as  B  is  an  object  of  aversion,  since  they 
are  opposites:  and  C  is  similarly  related  to  D , 
since  they  also  are  opposites.  If  then  A  is  an 
[30]  object  of  desire  to  the  same  extent  as  D, 
B  is  an  object  of  aversion  to  the  same  extent  as 
C  (since  each  is  to  the  same  extent  as  each — 
the  one  an  object  of  aversion,  the  other  an  ob¬ 
ject  of  desire).  Therefore  both  A  and  C  to¬ 
gether,  and  B  and  D  together,  will  be  equally 
objects  of  desire  or  aversion.  But  since  A  and 
C  are  preferable  to  B  and  D,  A  cannot  be  equal¬ 
ly  desirable  with  D;  for  then  B  along  with  D 
would  be  equally  desirable  with  A  along  with 
[55]  C.  But  if  D  is  preferable  to  A,  then  B 
must  be  less  an  object  of  aversion  than  C:  for 


9o 

the  less  is  opposed  to  the  less.  But  the  greater 
good  and  lesser  evil  are  preferable  to  the 
lesser  good  and  greater  evil:  the  whole  BD 
then  is  preferable  to  the  whole  AC.  But  ex 
hypothesi  this  is  not  so.  A  then  is  preferable  to 
D,  and  C  consequently  is  less  an  object  of  aver¬ 
sion  than  B.  If  then  every  lover  in  virtue  of  his 
[40]  love  would  prefer  A,  viz.  that  the  be¬ 
loved  should  be  such  as  to  grant  a  favour,  and 
yet  should  not  grant  it  (for  which  C  stands), 
to  the  beloved’s  granting  the  favour  (repre- 
68b  sented  by  D)  without  being  such  as  to 
grant  it  (represented  by  B ),  it  is  clear  that  A 
(being  of  such  a  nature)  is  preferable  to  grant¬ 
ing  the  favour.  To  receive  affection  then  is 
preferable  in  love  to  sexual  intercourse.  Love 
then  is  more  dependent  on  friendship  than  on 
intercourse.  And  if  it  is  most  dependent  on 
[5]  receiving  affection,  then  this  is  its  end. 
Intercourse  then  either  is  not  an  end  at  all  or  is 
an  end  relative  to  the  further  end,  the  receiv¬ 
ing  of  affection.  And  indeed  the  same  is  true 
of  the  other  desires  and  arts. 

23 

It  is  clear  then  how  the  terms  are  related  in 
conversion,  and  in  respect  of  being  in  a  higher 
degree  objects  of  aversion  or  of  desire.  We 
[/o]  must  now  state  that  not  only  dialectical 
and  demonstrative  syllogisms  are  formed  by 
means  of  the  aforesaid  figures,  but  also  rhe¬ 
torical  syllogisms  and  in  general  any  form  of 
persuasion,  however  it  may  be  presented.  For 
every  belief  comes  either  through  syllogism  or 
from  induction. 

[75]  Now  induction,  or  rather  the  syllogism 
which  springs  out  of  induction,  consists  in  es¬ 
tablishing  syllogistically  a  relation  between  one 
extreme  and  the  middle  by  means  of  the  other 
extreme,  e.g.  if  B  is  the  middle  term  between 
A  and  C,  it  consists  in  proving  through  C  that 
A  belongs  to  B.  For  this  is  the  manner  in 
which  we  make  inductions.  For  example  let 
A  stand  for  long-lived,  B  for  bileless,  and  C 
[20]  for  the  particular  long-lived  animals,  e.g. 
man,  horse,  mule.  A  then  belongs  to  the  whole 
of  C:  for  whatever  is  bileless  is  long-lived.  But 
B  also  (‘not  possessing  bile’)  belongs  to  all  C. 
If  then  C  is  convertible  with  B,  and  the  middle 
term  is  not  wider  in  extension,  it  is  necessary 
that  A  should  belong  to  B.  For  it  has  already 
[25]  been  proved1  that  if  two  things  belong  to 
the  same  thing,  and  the  extreme  is  convertible 
with  one  of  them,  then  the  other  predicate 
will  belong  to  the  predicate  that  is  converted. 
la  21-25. 


69a 

But  we  must  apprehend  C  as  made  up  of 
all  the  particulars.  For  induction  proceeds 
through  an  enumeration  of  all  the  cases. 

[jo]  Such  is  the  syllogism  which  establishes 
the  first  and  immediate  premiss:  for  where 
there  is  a  middle  term  the  syllogism  proceeds 
through  the  middle  term;  when  there  is  no 
middle  term,  through  induction.  And  in  a 
way  induction  is  opposed  to  syllogism:  for  the 
latter  proves  the  major  term  to  belong  to  the 
third  term  by  means  of  the  middle,  the  for¬ 
mer  proves  the  major  to  belong  to  the  middle 
[35]  by  means  of  the  third.  In  the  order  of 
nature,  syllogism  through  the  middle  term  is 
prior  and  better  known,  but  syllogism  through 
induction  is  clearer  to  us. 

24 

We  have  an  ‘example’  when  the  major  term  is 
proved  to  belong  to  the  middle  by  means  of  a 
term  which  resembles  the  third.  It  ought  to  be 
known  both  that  the  middle  belongs  to  the 
[40]  third  term,  and  that  the  first  belongs  to 
that  which  resembles  the  third.  For  example 
let  A  be  evil,  B  making  war  against  neigh- 
69a  bours,  C  Athenians  against  Thebans,  D 
Thebans  against  Phocians.  If  then  we  wish  to 
prove  that  to  fight  with  the  Thebans  is  an  evil, 
we  must  assume  that  to  fight  against  neigh¬ 
bours  is  an  evil.  Evidence  of  this  is  obtained 
from  similar  cases,  e.g.  that  the  war  against 
[5]  the  Phocians  was  an  evil  to  the  Thebans. 
Since  then  to  fight  against  neighbours  is  an 
evil,  and  to  fight  against  the  Thebans  is  to  fight 
against  neighbours,  it  is  clear  that  to  fight 
against  the  Thebans  is  an  evil.  Now  it  is  clear 
that  B  belongs  to  C  and  to  D  (for  both  are 
cases  of  making  war  upon  one’s  neighbours) 
and  that  A  belongs  to  D  (for  the  war  against 
[/o]  the  Phocians  did  not  turn  out  well  for  the 
Thebans):  but  that  A  belongs  to  B  will  be 
proved  through  D.  Similarly  if  the  belief  in  the 
relation  of  the  middle  term  to  the  extreme 
should  be  produced  by  several  similar  cases. 
Clearly  then  to  argue  by  example  is  neither 
like  reasoning  from  part  to  whole,  nor  like 
reasoning  from  whole  to  part,  but  rather  rea- 
[75]  soning  from  part  to  part,  when  both  par¬ 
ticulars  are  subordinate  to  the  same  term,  and 
one  of  them  is  known.  It  differs  from  induc¬ 
tion,  because  induction  starting  from  all  the 
particular  cases  proves  (as  we  saw2)  that  the 
major  term  belongs  to  the  middle,  and  does 
not  apply  the  syllogistic  conclusion  to  the  minor 
term,  whereas  argument  by  example  does 
2  Chapter  23. 


PRIOR  ANALYTICS 


70*  BOOK  II,  CHAPTERS  22-26  91 


make  this  application  and  does  not  draw  its 
proof  from  all  the  particular  cases. 

25 

[20]  By  reduction  we  mean  an  argument  in 
which  the  first  term  clearly  belongs  to  the  mid¬ 
dle,  but  the  relation  of  the  middle  to  the  last 
term  is  uncertain  though  equally  or  more 
probable  than  the  conclusion;  or  again  an  argu¬ 
ment  in  which  the  terms  intermediate  between 
the  last  term  and  the  middle  are  few.  For  in 
any  of  these  cases  it  turns  out  that  we  approach 
more  nearly  to  knowledge.  For  example  let  A 
[25]  stand  for  what  can  be  taught,  B  for 
knowledge,  C  for  justice.  Now  it  is  clear  that 
knowledge  can  be  taught:  but  it  is  uncertain 
whether  virtue  is  knowledge.  If  now  the 
statement  BC  is  equally  or  more  probable  than 
AC,  we  have  a  reduction:  for  we  are  nearer  to 
knowledge,  since  we  have  taken  a  new  term, 
being  so  far  without  knowledge  that  A  be¬ 
longs  to  C.  Or  again  suppose  that  the  terms 
intermediate  between  B  and  C  are  few:  for 
[jo]  thus  too  we  are  nearer  knowledge.  For 
example  let  D  stand  for  squaring,  E  for  rec¬ 
tilinear  figure,  F  for  circle.  If  there  were  only 
one  term  intermediate  between  E  and  F  (viz. 
that  the  circle  is  made  equal  to  a  rectilinear 
figure  by  the  help  of  lunules),  we  should 
be  near  to  knowledge.  But  when  BC  is  not 
[35]  more  probable  than  AC,  and  the  interme¬ 
diate  terms  are  not  few,  I  do  not  call  this  re¬ 
duction:  nor  again  when  the  statement  BC 
is  immediate:  for  such  a  statement  is  knowl¬ 
edge. 

26 

An  objection  is  a  premiss  contrary  to  a  prenv 
iss.  It  differs  from  a  premiss,  because  it  may  be 
particular,  but  a  premiss  either  cannot  be  par¬ 
ticular  at  all  or  not  in  universal  syllogisms.  An 
69b  objection  is  brought  in  two  ways  and 
through  two  figures;  in  two  ways  because 
every  objection  is  either  universal  or  particular, 
by  two  figures  because  objections  are  brought 
in  opposition  to  the  premiss,  and  opposites  can 
[5]  be  proved  only  in  the  first  and  third  fig¬ 
ures.  If  a  man  maintains  a  universal  affirma¬ 
tive,  we  reply  with  a  universal  or  a  particular 
negative;  the  former  is  proved  from  the  first 
figure,  the  latter  from  the  third.  For  example 
let  A  stand  for  there  being  a  single  science,  B 
for  contraries.  If  a  man  premises  that  con¬ 
traries  are  subjects  of  a  single  science,  the  ob- 
[/o]  jection  may  be  either  that  opposites  are 
never  subjects  of  a  single  science,  and  contraries 


are  opposites,  so  that  we  get  the  first  figure,  or 
that  the  knowable  and  the  unknowable  are 
not  subjects  of  a  single  science:  this  proof  is  in 
the  third  figure:  for  it  is  true  of  C  (the  know- 
able  and  the  unknowable)  that  they  are  con¬ 
traries,  and  it  is  false  that  they  are  the  subjects 
of  a  single  science. 

[75]  Similarly  if  the  premiss  objected  to  is 
negative.  For  if  a  man  maintains  that  con¬ 
traries  are  not  subjects  of  a  single  science,  we 
reply  either  that  all  opposites  or  that  certain 
contraries,  e.g.  what  is  healthy  and  what  is 
sickly,  are  subjects  of  the  same  science:  the 
former  argument  issues  from  the  first,  the  lat¬ 
ter  from  the  third  figure. 

In  general  if  a  man  urges  a  universal  objec- 
[20]  tion  he  must  frame  his  contradiction  with 
reference  to  the  universal  of  the  terms  taken  by 
his  opponent,  e.g.  if  a  man  maintains  that 
contraries  are  not  subjects  of  the  same  science, 
his  opponent  must  reply  that  there  is  a  single 
science  of  all  opposites.  Thus  we  must  have  the 
first  figure:  for  the  term  which  embraces  the 
original  subject  becomes  the  middle  term. 

If  the  objection  is  particular,  the  objector 
must  frame  his  contradiction  with  reference  to 
a  term  relatively  to  which  the  subject  of  his  op¬ 
ponent’s  premiss  is  universal,  e.g.  he  will  point 
[25]  out  that  the  knowable  and  the  unknow¬ 
able  are  not  subjects  of  the  same  science:  ‘con¬ 
traries’  is  universal  relatively  to  these.  And  we 
have  the  third  figure:  for  the  particular  term 
assumed  is  middle,  e.g.  the  knowable  and  the 
unknowable.  Premisses  from  which  it  is  possi¬ 
ble  to  draw  the  contrary  conclusion  are  what 
we  start  from  when  we  try  to  make  objec- 
[30]  tions.  Consequently  we  bring  objections 
in  these  figures  only:  for  in  them  only  are 
opposite  syllogisms  possible,  since  the  second 
figure  cannot  produce  an  affirmative  conclu¬ 
sion. 

Besides,  an  objection  in  the  middle  figure 
would  require  a  fuller  argument,  e.g.  if  it 
should  not  be  granted  that  A  belongs  to  B, 
because  C  does  not  follow  B.  This  can  be  made 
[35]  clear  only  by  other  premisses.  But  an  ob¬ 
jection  ought  not  to  turn  off  into  other  things, 
but  have  its  new  premiss  quite  clear  immedi¬ 
ately.  For  this  reason  also  this  is  the  only  figure 
from  which  proof  by  signs  cannot  be  obtained. 

We  must  consider  later  the  other  kinds  of 
objection,  namely  the  objection  from  contra¬ 
ries,  from  similars,  and  from  common  opinion, 
70*  and  inquire  whether  a  particular  objec¬ 
tion  cannot  be  elicited  from  the  first  figure  or 
a  negative  objection  from  the  second. 


PRIOR  ANALYTICS  7 0b 

essary  that  she  should  be  with  child.  Truth 
then  may  be  found  in  signs  whatever  their 


A  probability  and  a  sign  are  not  identical, 
but  a  probability  is  a  generally  approved  prop¬ 
osition:  what  men  know  to  happen  or  not  to 
[5]  happen,  to  be  or  not  to  be,  for  the  most 
part  thus  and  thus,  is  a  probability,  e.g.  ‘the  en¬ 
vious  hate’,  ‘the  beloved  show  affection’.  A  sign 
means  a  demonstrative  proposition  necessary 
or  generally  approved:  for  anything  such  that 
when  it  is  another  thing  is,  or  when  it  has 
come  into  being  the  other  has  come  into  being 
before  or  after,  is  a  sign  of  the  other’s  being  or 
having  come  into  being.  Now  an  enthymeme 
[/o]  is  a  syllogism  starting  from  probabilities 
or  signs,  and  a  sign  may  be  taken  in  three  ways, 
corresponding  to  the  position  of  the  middle 
term  in  the  figures.  For  it  may  be  taken  as  in 
the  first  figure  or  the  second  or  the  third.  For 
example  the  proof  that  a  woman  is  with  child 
because  she  has  milk  is  in  the  first  figure:  for 
[75]  to  have  milk  is  the  middle  term.  Let  A 
represent  to  be  with  child,  B  to  have  milk,  C 
woman.  The  proof  that  wise  men  are  good, 
since  Pittacus  is  good,  comes  through  the  last 
figure.  Let  A  stand  for  good,  B  for  wise  men, 
C  for  Pittacus.  It  is  true  then  to  affirm  both  A 
and  B  of  C:  only  men  do  not  say  the  latter,  be¬ 
cause  they  know  it,  though  they  state  the  for- 
[20]  mer.  The  proof  that  a  woman  is  with 
child  because  she  is  pale  is  meant  to  come 
through  the  middle  figure:  for  since  paleness 
follows  women  with  child  and  is  a  concomitant 
of  this  woman,  people  suppose  it  has  been 
proved  that  she  is  with  child.  Let  A  stand  for 
paleness,  B  for  being  with  child,  C  for  woman. 
Now  if  the  one  proposition  is  stated,  we  have 
[25]  only  a  sign,  but  if  the  other  is  stated  as 
well,  a  syllogism,  e.g.  ‘Pittacus  is  generous, 
since  ambitious  men  are  generous  and  Pittacus 
is  ambitious.’  Or  again  ‘Wise  men  are  good, 
since  Pittacus  is  not  only  good  but  wise.’  In  this 
way  then  syllogisms  are  formed,  only  that  which 
proceeds  through  the  first  figure  is  irrefutable 
if  it  is  true  (for  it  is  universal),  that  which 
[jo]  proceeds  through  the  last  figure  is  refuta¬ 
ble  even  if  the  conclusion  is  true,  since  the  syl¬ 
logism  is  not  universal  nor  correlative  to  the 
matter  in  question:  for  though  Pittacus  is  good, 
it  is  not  therefore  necessary  that  all  other  wise 
men  should  be  good.  But  the  syllogism  which 
proceeds  through  the  middle  figure  is  always 
refutable  in  any  case:  for  a  syllogism  can  never 
[35]  be  formed  when  the  terms  are  related  in 
this  way:  for  though  a  woman  with  child  is 
pale,  and  this  woman  also  is  pale,  it  is  not  nec- 


kind,  but  they  have  the  differences  we  have 
stated. 

7 0b  We  must  either  divide  signs  in  the  way 
stated,  and  among  them  designate  the  middle 
term  as  the  index  (for  people  call  that  the  in¬ 
dex  which  makes  us  know,  and  the  middle 
term  above  all  has  this  character),  or  else  we 
must  call  the  arguments  derived  from  the  ex¬ 
tremes  signs,  that  derived  from  the  middle 
term  the  index:  for  that  which  is  proved 
[5]  through  the  first  figure  is  most  generally 
accepted  and  most  true. 

It  is  possible  to  infer  character  from  fea¬ 
tures,  if  it  is  granted  that  the  body  and  the  soul 
are  changed  together  by  the  natural  affections: 
I  say  ‘natural’,  for  though  perhaps  by  learning 
music  a  man  has  made  some  change  in  his 
[/o]  soul,  this  is  not  one  of  those  affections 
which  are  natural  to  us;  rather  I  refer  to  pas¬ 
sions  and  desires  when  I  speak  of  natural  emo¬ 
tions.  If  then  this  were  granted  and  also  that 
for  each  change  there  is  a  corresponding  sign, 
and  we  could  state  the  affection  and  sign  proper 
to  each  kind  of  animal,  we  shall  be  able  to  in¬ 
fer  character  from  features.  For  if  there  is  an 
affection  which  belongs  properly  to  an  individ- 
[75]  ual  kind,  e.g.  courage  to  lions,  it  is  neces¬ 
sary  that  there  should  be  a  sign  of  it:  for  ex 
hypothesi  body  and  soul  are  affected  together. 
Suppose  this  sign  is  the  possession  of  large  ex¬ 
tremities:  this  may  belong  to  other  kinds  also 
though  not  universally.  For  the  sign  is  proper 
in  the  sense  stated,  because  the  affection  is 
proper  to  the  whole  kind,  though  not  proper  to 
it  alone,  according  to  our  usual  manner  of 
[20]  speaking.  The  same  thing  then  will  be 
found  in  another  kind,  and  man  may  be  brave, 
and  some  other  kinds  of  animal  as  well.  They 
will  then  have  the  sign:  for  ex  hypothesi  there 
is  one  sign  corresponding  to  each  affection.  If 
then  this  is  so,  and  we  can  collect  signs  of  this 
sort  in  these  animals  which  have  only  one  af¬ 
fection  proper  to  them — but  each  affection  has 
its  sign,  since  it  is  necessary  that  it  should  have 
[25]  a  single  sign — we  shall  then  be  able  to  in¬ 
fer  character  from  features.  But  if  the  kind  as 
a  whole  has  two  properties,  e.g.  if  the  lion  is 
both  brave  and  generous,  how  shall  we  know 
which  of  the  signs  which  are  its  proper  con¬ 
comitants  is  the  sign  of  a  particular  affection? 
Perhaps  if  both  belong  to  some  other  kind 
though  not  to  the  whole  of  it,  and  if,  in  those 
kinds  in  which  each  is  found  though  not  in  the 
whole  of  their  members,  some  members  pos- 


7 Ob  BOOK  II,  CHAPTER  27  93 


sess  one  of  the  affections  and  not  the  other: 
e.g.  if  a  man  is  brave  but  not  generous,  but 
[30]  possesses,  of  the  two  signs,  large  extremi¬ 
ties,  it  is  clear  that  this  is  the  sign  of  courage 
in  the  lion  also.  To  judge  character  from  fea¬ 
tures,  then,  is  possible  in  the  first  figure  if  the 
middle  term  is  convertible  with  the  first  ex¬ 
treme,  but  is  wider  than  the  third  term  and 


not  convertible  with  it:  e.g.  let  A  stand  for 
courage,  B  for  large  extremities,  and  C  for  lion. 
[35]  B  ^en  belongs  to  everything  to  which  C 
belongs,  but  also  to  others.  But  A  belongs  to 
everything  to  which  B  belongs,  and  to  nothing 
besides,  but  is  convertible  with  B:  otherwise, 
there  would  not  be  a  single  sign  correlative 
with  each  affection. 


CONTENTS:  POSTERIOR  ANALYTICS 


BOOK  I 

CHAP.  BERLIN  NOS. 

1.  The  student’s  need  of  pre-existent  7ia  i 
knowledge;  its  nature 

2.  The  nature  of  scientific  knowledge;  7ib  8 
the  conditions  of  demonstration;  the  meaning 
of  Contradiction,  Enunciation,  Proposition, 
Basic  truth,  Thesis,  Axiom,  Hypothesis,  Defi¬ 
nition 

3.  Two  erroneous  views  of  scientific  72b  5 

knowledge;  the  futility  of  circular  demonstra¬ 
tion 

4.  Types  of  attribute:  ‘True  in  every  in-  73s  21 
stance’,  ‘Essential’,  ‘Commensurate  and  uni¬ 
versal’,  ‘Accidental’ 

5.  Causes  through  which  we  errone-  74s  4 
ously  suppose  a  conclusion  commensurate  and 
universal  when  it  is  not;  how  to  avoid  this 
error 

6.  The  premisses  of  demonstration  must  74b  5 
be  necessary  and  essential 

7.  The  premisses  and  conclusion  of  a  75s  38 
demonstration  must  fall  within  a  single  genus; 
the  three  constituent  elements  of  demonstra¬ 
tion 

8.  Only  eternal  connexions  can  be  75b2i 

demonstrated 

9.  Demonstration  must  proceed  from  75b  36 
the  basic  premisses  peculiar  to  each  science,  ex¬ 
cept  in  the  case  of  subalternate  sciences 

10.  The  different  sorts  of  basic  truth  76a  31 

11.  The  function  of  the  common  axioms  77a  5 
in  demonstration 

12.  The  scientific  premiss  in  interrogative  77s  36 
form;  formal  fallacy;  the  growth  of  a  science 

13.  The  difference  between  knowledge  78s  22 
of  the  fact  and  knowledge  of  the  reasoned  fact 


14.  The  first  figure  is  the  true  type  of  79a  16 
scientific  syllogism 

15.  Immediate  negative  propositions  79s  33 

16.  Ignorance  as  erroneous  inference  when  79b  23 
the  premisses  are  immediate 

17.  Ignorance  as  erroneous  inference  8ob  16 
when  the  premisses  are  mediate 

18.  Ignorance  as  the  negation  of  knowl-  8ia  37 


edge,  e.g.  such  as  must  result  from  the  lack  of 
a  sense 

19.  Can  demonstration  develop  an  indefi-  8ib  10 
nite  regress  of  premisses,  (1)  supposing  the 
primary  attribute  fixed?  (2)  supposing  the  ul¬ 


timate  subject  fixed?  (3)  supposing  both  pri¬ 
mary  attribute  and  ultimate  subject  fixed? 

20.  If  (1)  and  (2)  are  answered  nega-  82a2i 
tively,  the  answer  to  (3)  must  be  in  the  nega¬ 
tive 

21.  If  affirmative  demonstration  cannot  82s  36 
develop  an  indefinite  regress,  then  negative 
demonstration  cannot 

22.  Dialectical  and  analytic  proofs  that  82b  36 
the  answer  to  both  (1)  and  (2)  is  in  the  nega¬ 
tive 

23.  Corollaries  84b  3 

24.  The  superiority  of  universal  to  particu-  85s  12 
lar  demonstration 

25.  The  superiority  of  affirmative  to  nega-  86a  31 
five  demonstration 

26.  The  superiority  of  affirmative  and  nega-  87s  1 
tive  demonstration  to  reductio  ad  impossibile 

27.  The  more  abstract  science  is  the  prior  87a  31 
and  the  more  accurate  science 

28.  What  constitutes  the  unity  of  a  87s  38 

science 

29.  How  there  may  be  several  demonstra-  87b  5 
tions  of  one  connexion 

30.  Chance  conjunctions  are  not  demon-  87b  18 
strable 

31.  There  can  be  no  demonstration  87b  27 

through  sense-perception 

32.  Different  sciences  must  possess  differ-  88a  17 
ent  basic  truths 

33.  The  relation  of  opinion  to  knowledge  88b  30 

34.  Quick  wit:  the  faculty  of  instantane-  89b  10 
ously  hitting  upon  the  middle  term 

BOOK  II 


1.  The  four  possible  forms  of  inquiry  89b2i 

2.  They  all  concern  the  middle  term  89b  36 

3.  The  difference  between  definition  and  9oa  35 
demonstration 

4.  Essential  nature  cannot  be  demon-  91s  12 
strated 

5.  Essential  nature  cannot  be  inferred  by  9ib  11 
division 

6.  Attempts  to  prove  a  thing’s  essential  92s  6 


nature  either  hypothetically  or  through  the 
definition  of  its  contrary  beg  the  question 

7.  Definition  does  not  touch  the  question  92s  33 
of  existence;  demonstration  proves  existence; 
hence  definition  cannot  demonstrate 

8.  Yet  only  demonstration  can  reveal  the  93s  1 


95 


96 


CONTENTS 


essential  nature  of  things  which  have  a  cause 
other  than  themselves — i.e.  attributes 
9.  That  which  is  self-caused — the  basic  93b  21 
premisses — is  grasped  immediately 
10.  Types  of  definition  93b  28 

n.  The  several  causes  as  middle  terms  94a  20 

12.  The  question  of  time  in  causal  infer-  95a  10 

ence 

13.  How  to  obtain  the  definition  of  a  sub-  96a  20 
stance;  the  use  of  division  for  this  purpose 

14.  How  to  select  a  connexion  for  98a  1 

demonstration 


15.  One  middle  will  often  serve  to  prove  98a  24 
several  connexions 

16.  If  the  effect  is  present,  is  the  cause  98a  35 
also  present?  Plurality  of  causes  is  impossible 
where  cause  and  effect  are  commensurate 

1 7.  Different  causes  may  produce  the  99a  1 

same  effect,  but  not  in  things  specifically  iden¬ 
tical 

18.  The  true  cause  of  a  connexion  is  the  99b7 
proximate  and  not  the  more  universal  cause 

19.  How  the  individual  mind  comes  to  99b  15 
know  the  basic  truths 


POSTERIOR  ANALYTICS 


BOOK  I 


I 

71®  All  instruction  given  or  received  by  way 
of  argument  proceeds  from  pre-existent  knowl¬ 
edge.  This  becomes  evident  upon  a  survey  of 
all  the  species  of  such  instruction.  The  mathe¬ 
matical  sciences  and  all  other  speculative  disci¬ 
plines  are  acquired  in  this  way,  and  so  are  the 
two  forms  of  dialectical  reasoning,  syllogistic 
[5]  and  inductive;  for  each  of  these  latter  make 
use  of  old  knowledge  to  impart  new,  the  syl¬ 
logism  assuming  an  audience  that  accepts  its 
premisses,  induction  exhibiting  the  universal 
as  implicit  in  the  clearly  known  particular. 
Again,  the  persuasion  exerted  by  rhetorical  ar¬ 
guments  is  in  principle  the  same,  since  they 
[/o]  use  either  example,  a  kind  of  induction, 
or  enthymeme,  a  form  of  syllogism. 

The  pre-existent  knowledge  required  is  of 
two  kinds.  In  some  cases  admission  of  the  fact 
must  be  assumed,  in  others  comprehension  of 
the  meaning  of  the  term  used,  and  sometimes 
both  assumptions  are  essential.  Thus,  we  as¬ 
sume  that  every  predicate  can  be  either  truly 
affirmed  or  truly  denied  of  any  subject,  and 
that  ‘triangle’  means  so  and  so;  as  regards 
‘unit’  we  have  to  make  the  double  assumption 
[75]  of  the  meaning  of  the  word  and  the  ex¬ 
istence  of  the  thing.  The  reason  is  that  these 
several  objects  are  not  equally  obvious  to  us. 
Recognition  of  a  truth  may  in  some  cases  con¬ 
tain  as  factors  both  previous  knowledge  and 
also  knowledge  acquired  simultaneously  with 
that  recognition — knowledge,  this  latter,  of  the 
particulars  actually  falling  under  the  universal 
and  therein  already  virtually  known.  For  ex¬ 
ample,  the  student  knew  beforehand  that  the 
[20]  angles  of  every  triangle  are  equal  to  two 
right  angles;  but  it  was  only  at  the  actual  mo¬ 
ment  at  which  he  was  being  led  on  to  recog¬ 
nize  this  as  true  in  the  instance  before  him 
that  he  came  to  know  ‘this  figure  inscribed  in 
the  semicircle’  to  be  a  triangle.  For  some 
things  (viz.  the  singulars  finally  reached  which 


are  not  predicable  of  anything  else  as  subject) 
are  only  learnt  in  this  way,  i.e.  there  is  here  no 
recognition  through  a  middle  of  a  minor  term 
as  subject  to  a  major.  Before  he  was  led  on  to 
recognition  or  before  he  actually  drew  a  con- 
[25]  elusion,  we  should  perhaps  say  that  in  a 
manner  he  knew,  in  a  manner  not. 

If  he  did  not  in  an  unqualified  sense  of  the 
term  \notv  the  existence  of  this  triangle,  how 
could  he  kjiow  without  qualification  that  its 
angles  were  equal  to  two  right  angles?  No: 
clearly  he  \nows  not  without  qualification  but 
only  in  the  sense  that  he  \nows  universally.  If 
this  distinction  is  not  drawn,  we  are  faced  with 
the  dilemma  in  the  Meno:1  either  a  man  will 
learn  nothing  or  what  he  already  knows;  for 
[30]  we  cannot  accept  the  solution  which  some 
people  offer.  A  man  is  asked,  ‘Do  you,  or  do 
you  not,  know  that  every  pair  is  even?’  He 
says  he  does  know  it.  The  questioner  then  pro¬ 
duces  a  particular  pair,  of  the  existence,  and  so 
a  fortiori  of  the  evenness,  of  which  he  was  un¬ 
aware.  The  solution  which  some  people  offer  is 
to  assert  that  they  do  not  know  that  every  pair 
is  even,  but  only  that  everything  which  they 
71 b  know  to  be  a  pair  is  even:  yet  what  they 
know  to  be  even  is  that  of  which  they  have  dem¬ 
onstrated  evenness,  i.e.  what  they  made  the 
subject  of  their  premiss,  viz.  not  merely  every 
triangle  or  number  which  they  know  to  be 
such,  but  any  and  every  number  or  triangle  with¬ 
out  reservation.  For  no  premiss  is  ever  couched 
in  the  form  ‘every  number  which  you  know  to 
be  such’,  or  ‘every  rectilinear  figure  which 
you  know  to  be  such’:  the  predicate  is  always 
[5]  construed  as  applicable  to  any  and  every 
instance  of  the  thing.  On  the  other  hand,  I  im¬ 
agine  there  is  nothing  to  prevent  a  man  in  one 
sense  knowing  what  he  is  learning,  in  another 
not  knowing  it.  The  strange  thing  would  be, 
not  if  in  some  sense  he  knew  what  he  was  learn¬ 
ing,  but  if  he  were  to  know  it  in  that  precise 
sense  and  manner  in  which  he  was  learning  it. 


Note:  The  bold  face  numbers  and  letters  are  approxi-  2 

mate  indications  of  the  pages  and  columns  of  the  stand¬ 
ard  Berlin  Greek  text;  the  bracketed  numbers,  of  the  .e  suppose  our  selves  to  possess  unqualified 
lines  in  the  Greek  text;  they  are  here  assigned  as  they  scientific  knowledge  of  a  thing,  as  opposed  to 
are  assigned  in  the  Oxford  translation.  1  Plato,  Meno ,  80 


97 


98  POSTERIOR 

knowing  it  in  the  accidental  way  in  which  the 
[/o]  sophist  knows,  when  we  think  that  we 
know  the  cause  on  which  the  fact  depends,  as 
the  cause  of  that  fact  and  of  no  other,  and, 
further,  that  the  fact  could  not  be  other  than  it 

is.  Now  that  scientific  knowing  is  something 
of  this  sort  is  evident — witness  both  those  who 
falsely  claim  it  and  those  who  actually  possess 

it,  since  the  former  merely  imagine  themselves 
to  be,  while  the  latter  are  also  actually,  in  the 
condition  described.  Consequently  the  proper 
[75]  object  of  unqualified  scientific  knowledge 
is  something  which  cannot  be  other  than  it  is. 

There  may  be  another  manner  of  knowing 
as  well — that  will  be  discussed  later.1  What  I 
now  assert  is  that  at  all  events  we  do  know  by 
demonstration.  By  demonstration  I  mean  a  syl¬ 
logism  productive  of  scientific  knowledge,  a 
syllogism,  that  is,  the  grasp  of  which  is  eo  ipso 
such  knowledge.  Assuming  then  that  my  the¬ 
sis  as  to  the  nature  of  scientific  knowing  is  cor- 
[20]  rect,  the  premisses  of  demonstrated 
knowledge  must  be  true,  primary,  immediate, 
better  known  than  and  prior  to  the  conclusion, 
which  is  further  related  to  them  as  effect  to 
cause.  Unless  these  conditions  are  satisfied,  the 
basic  truths  will  not  be  ‘appropriate’  to  the 
conclusion.  Syllogism  there  may  indeed  be 
without  these  conditions,  but  such  syllogism, 
not  being  productive  of  scientific  knowledge, 
will  not  be  demonstration.  The  premisses  must 
[25]  be  true:  for  that  which  is  non-existent 
cannot  be  known — we  cannot  know,  e.g.  that 
the  diagonal  of  a  square  is  commensurate  with 
its  side.  The  premisses  must  be  primary  and 
indemonstrable;  otherwise  they  will  require 
demonstration  in  order  to  be  known,  since  to 
have  knowledge,  if  it  be  not  accidental  knowl¬ 
edge,  of  things  which  are  demonstrable,  means 
precisely  to  have  a  demonstration  of  them.  The 
premisses  must  be  the  causes  of  the  conclusion, 
better  known  than  it,  and  prior  to  it;  its  causes, 
[jo]  since  we  possess  scientific  knowledge  of 
a  thing  only  when  we  know  its  cause;  prior, 
in  order  to  be  causes;  antecedently  known,  this 
antecedent  knowledge  being  not  our  mere  un¬ 
derstanding  of  the  meaning,  but  knowledge  of 
the  fact  as  well.  Now  ‘prior’  and  ‘better  known’ 
are  ambiguous  terms,  for  there  is  a  difference 
between  what  is  prior  and  better  known  in  the 
7 2a  order  of  being  and  what  is  prior  and  bet¬ 
ter  known  to  man.  I  mean  that  objects  nearer 
to  sense  are  prior  and  better  known  to  man; 
objects  without  qualification  prior  and  better 

1  Cf.  the  following  chapter  and  more  particularly  11, 
ch.  19. 


ANALYTICS  72- 

known  are  those  further  from  sense.  Now  the 
most  universal  causes  are  furthest  from  sense 
and  particular  causes  are  nearest  to  sense,  and 
[5]  they  are  thus  exactly  opposed  to  one  an¬ 
other.  In  saying  that  the  premisses  of  demon¬ 
strated  knowledge  must  be  primary,  I  mean 
that  they  must  be  the  ‘appropriate’  basic 
truths,  for  I  identify  primary  premiss  and  basic 
truth.  A  ‘basic  truth’  in  a  demonstration  is  an 
immediate  proposition.  An  immediate  proposi¬ 
tion  is  one  which  has  no  other  proposition 
prior  to  it.  A  proposition  is  either  part  of  an 
enunciation,  i.e.  it  predicates  a  single  attribute 
of  a  single  subject.  If  a  proposition  is  dialecti- 
[/o]  cal,  it  assumes  either  part  indifferently; 
if  it  is  demonstrative,  it  lays  down  one  part  to 
the  definite  exclusion  of  the  other  because  that 
part  is  true.  The  term  ‘enunciation’  denotes  ei¬ 
ther  part  of  a  contradiction  indifferently.  A 
contradiction  is  an  opposition  which  of  its  own 
nature  excludes  a  middle.  The  part  of  a  con¬ 
tradiction  which  conjoins  a  predicate  with  a 
subject  is  an  affirmation;  the  part  disjoining 
them  is  a  negation.  I  call  an  immediate  basic 
[75]  truth  of  syllogism  a  ‘thesis’  when,  though 
it  is  not  susceptible  of  proof  by  the  teacher,  yet 
ignorance  of  it  does  not  constitute  a  total  bar  to 
progress  on  the  part  of  the  pupil:  one  which 
the  pupil  must  know  if  he  is  to  learn  anything 
whatever  is  an  axiom.  I  call  it  an  axiom  be¬ 
cause  there  are  such  truths  and  we  give  them 
the  name  of  axioms  par  excellence .  If  a  thesis 
assumes  one  part  or  the  other  of  an  enuncia- 
[20]  tion,  i.e.  asserts  either  the  existence  or  the 
non-existence  of  a  subject,  it  is  a  hypothesis;  if 
it  does  not  so  assert,  it  is  a  definition.  Defini¬ 
tion  is  a  ‘thesis’  or  a  ‘laying  something  down’, 
since  the  arithmetician  lays  it  down  that  to  be 
a  unit  is  to  be  quantitatively  indivisible;  but  it 
is  not  a  hypothesis,  for  to  define  what  a  unit  is 
is  not  the  same  as  to  affirm  its  existence. 

[25]  Now  since  the  required  ground  of  our 
knowledge — i.e.  of  our  conviction — of  a  fact  is 
the  possession  of  such  a  syllogism  as  we  call 
demonstration,  and  the  ground  of  the  syllo¬ 
gism  is  the  facts  constituting  its  premisses,  we 
must  not  only  know  the  primary  premisses — 
some  if  not  all  of  them — beforehand,  but  know 
them  better  than  the  conclusion:  for  the  cause 
of  an  attribute’s  inherence  in  a  subject  always 
itself  inheres  in  the  subject  more  firmly  than 
that  attribute;  e.g.  the  cause  of  our  loving  any¬ 
thing  is  dearer  to  us  than  the  object  of  our 
[jo]  love.  So  since  the  primary  premisses  are 
the  cause  of  our  knowledge — i.e.  of  our  convic¬ 
tion — it  follows  that  we  know  them  better — 


73 

that  is,  are  more  convinced  of  them — than 
their  consequences,  precisely  because  of  our 
knowledge  of  the  latter  is  the  effect  of  our 
knowledge  of  the  premisses.  Now  a  man  can¬ 
not  believe  in  anything  more  than  in  the 
things  he  knows,  unless  he  has  either  actual 
knowledge  of  it  or  something  better  than  ac¬ 
tual  knowledge.  But  we  are  faced  with  this 
[35]  paradox  if  a  student  whose  belief  rests  on 
demonstration  has  not  prior  knowledge;  a  man 
must  believe  in  some,  if  not  in  all,  of  the  basic 
truths  more  than  in  the  conclusion.  Moreover, 
if  a  man  sets  out  to  acquire  the  scientific 
knowledge  that  comes  through  demonstration, 
he  must  not  only  have  a  better  knowledge  of 
the  basic  truths  and  a  firmer  conviction  of 
them  than  of  the  connexion  which  is  being 
72b  demonstrated:  more  than  this,  nothing 
must  be  more  certain  or  better  known  to  him 
than  these  basic  truths  in  their  character  as 
contradicting  the  fundamental  premisses 
which  lead  to  the  opposed  and  erroneous  con¬ 
clusion.  For  indeed  the  conviction  of  pure  sci¬ 
ence  must  be  unshakable. 

3 

[5]  Some  hold  that,  owing  to  the  necessity  of 
knowing  the  primary  premisses,  there  is  no  sci¬ 
entific  knowledge.  Others  think  there  is,  but 
that  all  truths  are  demonstrable.  Neither  doc¬ 
trine  is  either  true  or  a  necessary  deduction 
from  the  premisses.  The  first  school,  assuming 
that  there  is  no  way  of  knowing  other  than  by 
demonstration,  maintain  that  an  infinite  re¬ 
gress  is  involved,  on  the  ground  that  if  be¬ 
hind  the  prior  stands  no  primary,  we  could  not 
[/o]  know  the  posterior  through  the  prior 
(wherein  they  are  right,  for  one  cannot  traverse 
an  infinite  series):  if  on  the  other  hand — they 
say — the  series  terminates  and  there  are  primary 
premisses,  yet  these  are  unknowable  because 
incapable  of  demonstration,  which  according  to 
them  is  the  only  form  of  knowledge.  And  since 
thus  one  cannot  know  the  primary  premisses, 
knowledge  of  the  conclusions  which  follow 
from  them  is  not  pure  scientific  knowledge  nor 
properly  knowing  at  all,  but  rests  on  the  mere 
supposition  that  the  premisses  are  true.  The 
[75]  other  party  agree  with  them  as  regards 
knowing,  holding  that  it  is  only  possible  by 
demonstration,  but  they  see  no  difficulty  in 
holding  that  all  truths  are  demonstrated,  on 
the  ground  that  demonstration  may  be  circu¬ 
lar  and  reciprocal. 

Our  own  doctrine  is  that  not  all  knowledge 
is  demonstrative:  on  the  contrary,  knowledge 


99 

of  the  immediate  premisses  is  independent  of 
[20]  demonstration.  (The  necessity  of  this  is 
obvious;  for  since  we  must  know  the  prior 
premisses  from  which  the  demonstration  is 
drawn,  and  since  the  regress  must  end  in  im¬ 
mediate  truths,  those  truths  must  be  indemon¬ 
strable.)  Such,  then,  is  our  doctrine,  and  in  ad¬ 
dition  we  maintain  that  besides  scientific 
knowledge  there  is  its  originative  source  which 
enables  us  to  recognize  the  definitions. 

[25]  Now  demonstration  must  be  based  on 
premisses  prior  to  and  better  known  than  the 
conclusion;  and  the  same  things  cannot  simul¬ 
taneously  be  both  prior  and  posterior  to  one 
another:  so  circular  demonstration  is  clearly 
not  possible  in  the  unqualified  sense  of ‘demon¬ 
stration’,  but  only  possible  if  ‘demonstration’ 
be  extended  to  include  that  other  method  of 
argument  which  rests  on  a  distinction  between 
truths  prior  to  us  and  truths  without  qualifica¬ 
tion  prior,  i.e.  the  method  by  which  induction 
[jo]  produces  knowledge.  But  if  we  accept 
this  extension  of  its  meaning,  our  definition  of 
unqualified  knowledge  will  prove  faulty;  for 
there  seem  to  be  two  kinds  of  it.  Perhaps,  how¬ 
ever,  the  second  form  of  demonstration,  that 
which  proceeds  from  truths  better  known  to 
us,  is  not  demonstration  in  the  unqualified 
sense  of  the  term. 

The  advocates  of  circular  demonstration  are 
not  only  faced  with  the  difficulty  we  have  just 
stated:  in  addition  their  theory  reduces  to  the 
mere  statement  that  if  a  thing  exists,  then  it 
does  exist — an  easy  way  of  proving  anything. 
[^5]  That  this  is  so  can  be  clearly  shown  by 
taking  three  terms,  for  to  constitute  the  circle 
it  makes  no  difference  whether  many  terms  or 
few  or  even  only  two  are  taken.  Thus  by  direct 
proof,  if  A  is,  B  must  be;  if  B  is,  C  must  be; 
therefore  if  A  is,  C  must  be.  Since  then — by 
the  circular  proof — if  A  is,  B  must  be,  and  if 
73a  B  is,  A  must  be,  A  may  be  substituted  for 
C  above.  Then  ‘if  B  is,  A  must  be’  =  ‘if  B  is, 
C  must  be’,  which  above  gave  the  conclusion 
‘if  A  is,  C  must  be’:  but  C  and  A  have  been 
identified.  Consequently  the  upholders  of  cir¬ 
cular  demonstration  are  in  the  position  of  say- 
[5]  ing  that  if  A  is,  A  must  be — a  simple  way 
of  proving  anything.  Moreover,  even  such  cir¬ 
cular  demonstration  is  impossible  except  in  the 
case  of  attributes  that  imply  one  another,  viz. 
‘peculiar’  properties. 

Now,  it  has  been  shown  that  the  positing  of 
one  thing — be  it  one  term  or  one  premiss — 
never  involves  a  necessary  consequent:1  two 

1  Prior  Analytics,  1,  25. 


BOOK  I,  CHAPTERS  2-3 


100  POSTERIOR 

[/o]  premisses  constitute  the  first  and  smallest 
foundation  for  drawing  a  conclusion  at  all  and 
therefore  a  fortiori  for  the  demonstrative  syllo¬ 
gism  of  science.  If,  then,  A  is  implied  in  B  and 
C,  and  B  and  C  are  reciprocally  implied  in  one 
another  and  in  A,  it  is  possible,  as  has  been 
shown  in  my  writings  on  the  syllogism,1  to 
prove  all  the  assumptions  on  which  the  original 
conclusion  rested,  by  circular  demonstration  in 
[75]  the  first  figure.  But  it  has  also  been 
shown  that  in  the  other  figures  either  no  con¬ 
clusion  is  possible,  or  at  least  none  which 
proves  both  the  original  premisses.2  Proposi¬ 
tions  the  terms  of  which  are  not  convertible 
cannot  be  circularly  demonstrated  at  all,  and 
since  convertible  terms  occur  rarely  in  actual 
demonstrations,  it  is  clearly  frivolous  and  im- 
ossible  to  say  that  demonstration  is  reciprocal 
20]  and  that  therefore  everything  can  be 
demonstrated. 

4 

Since  the  object  of  pure  scientific  knowledge 
cannot  be  other  than  it  is,  the  truth  obtained 
by  demonstrative  knowledge  will  be  necessary. 
And  since  demonstrative  knowledge  is  only 
present  when  we  have  a  demonstration,  it  fol¬ 
lows  that  demonstration  is  an  inference  from 
necessary  premisses.  So  we  must  consider  what 
are  the  premisses  of  demonstration — i.e.  what 
[25]  is  their  character:  and  as  a  preliminary, 
let  us  define  what  we  mean  by  an  attribute 
‘true  in  every  instance  of  its  subject’,  an  ‘essen¬ 
tial’  attribute,  and  a  ‘commensurate  and  uni¬ 
versal’  attribute.  I  call  ‘true  in  every  instance’ 
what  is  truly  predicable  of  all  instances — not  of 
one  to  the  exclusion  of  others — and  at  all  times, 
not  at  this  or  that  time  only;  e.g.  if  animal  is 
[jo]  truly  predicable  of  every  instance  of  man, 
then  if  it  be  true  to  say  ‘this  is  a  man’,  ‘this  is 
an  animal’  is  also  true,  and  if  the  one  be  true 
now  the  other  is  true  now.  A  corresponding  ac¬ 
count  holds  if  point  is  in  every  instance  predi¬ 
cable  as  contained  in  line.  There  is  evidence  for 
this  in  the  fact  that  the  objection  we  raise 
against  a  proposition  put  to  us  as  true  in  every 
instance  is  either  an  instance  in  which,  or  an 
occasion  on  which,  it  is  not  true.  Essential 
attributes  are  (1)  such  as  belong  to  their  sub- 
[35]  )ect  as  elements  in  its  essential  nature  (e.g. 
line  thus  belongs  to  triangle,  point  to  line;  for 
the  very  being  or  ‘substance’  of  triangle  and  line 
is  composed  of  these  elements,  which  are  con¬ 
tained  in  the  formulae  defining  triangle  and 
line):  (2)  such  that,  while  they  belong  to  cer- 
1  Ibid.,  11,  5.  2  Ibid.,  11,  5  and  6. 


ANALYTICS  73b 

tain  subjects,  the  subjects  to  which  they  belong 
are  contained  in  the  attribute’s  own  defining 
formula.  Thus  straight  and  curved  belong  to 
[40]  line,  odd  and  even,  prime  and  com¬ 
pound,  square  and  oblong,  to  number;  and  also 
73b  the  formula  defining  any  one  of  these  at¬ 
tributes  contains  its  subject — e.g.  line  or  num¬ 
ber  as  the  case  may  be. 

Extending  this  classification  to  all  other  at¬ 
tributes,  I  distinguish  those  that  answer  the 
above  description  as  belonging  essentially  to 
their  respective  subjects;  whereas  attributes  re¬ 
lated  in  neither  of  these  two  ways  to  their  sub¬ 
jects  I  call  accidents  or  ‘coincidents’;  e.g.  musi¬ 
cal  or  white  is  a  ‘coincident’  of  animal. 

[5]  Further  (a)  that  is  essential  which  is  not 
predicated  of  a  subject  other  than  itself:  e.g. 
‘the  walking  [thing]’  walks  and  is  white  in 
virtue  of  being  something  else  besides;  where¬ 
as  substance,  in  the  sense  of  whatever  signifies 
a  ‘this  somewhat’,  is  not  what  it  is  in  virtue  of 
being  something  else  besides.  Things,  then,  not 
predicated  of  a  subject  I  call  essential;  things 
predicated  of  a  subject  I  call  accidental  or  ‘co¬ 
incidental’. 

[/o]  In  another  sense  again  ( b )  a  thing  conse¬ 
quentially  connected  with  anything  is  essen¬ 
tial;  one  not  so  connected  is  ‘coincidental’.  An 
example  of  the  latter  is  ‘While  he  was  walking 
it  lightened’:  the  lightning  was  not  due  to  his 
walking;  it  was,  we  should  say,  a  coincidence. 
If,  on  the  other  hand,  there  is  a  consequential 
connexion,  the  predication  is  essential;  e.g.  if  a 
beast  dies  when  its  throat  is  being  cut,  then  its 
death  is  also  essentially  connected  with  the  cut- 
[/ 5]  ting,  because  the  cutting  was  the  cause  of 
death,  not  death  a  ‘coincident’  of  the  cutting. 

So  far  then  as  concerns  the  sphere  of  con¬ 
nexions  scientifically  known  in  the  unqualified 
sense  of  that  term,  all  attributes  which  (within 
that  sphere)  are  essential  either  in  the  sense 
that  their  subjects  are  contained  in  them,  or  in 
the  sense  that  they  are  contained  in  their  sub¬ 
jects,  are  necessary  as  well  as  consequentially 
connected  with  their  subjects.  For  it  is  impos¬ 
sible  for  them  not  to  inhere  in  their  subjects — 
either  simply  or  in  the  qualified  sense  that  one 
or  other  of  a  pair  of  opposites  must  inhere  in 
[20]  the  subject;  e.g.  in  line  must  be  either 
straightness  or  curvature,  in  number  either 
oddness  or  evenness.  For  within  a  single  iden¬ 
tical  genus  the  contrary  of  a  given  attribute  is 
either  its  privative  or  its  contradictory;  e.g. 
within  number  what  is  not  odd  is  even,  inas¬ 
much  as  within  this  sphere  even  is  a  necessary 
consequent  of  not-odd.  So,  since  any  given 


IOI 


BOOK  I,  CHAPTERS  3-5 


74a 

predicate  must  be  either  affirmed  or.  denied  of 
any  subject,  essential  attributes  must  inhere  in 
their  subjects  of  necessity. 

[25]  Thus,  then,  we  have  established  the  dis¬ 
tinction  between  the  attribute  which  is  ‘true  in 
every  instance’  and  the  ‘essential’  attribute. 

I  term  ‘commensurately  universal’  an  attri¬ 
bute  which  belongs  to  every  instance  of  its  sub¬ 
ject,  and  to  every  instance  essentially  and  as 
such;  from  which  it  clearly  follows  that  all 
commensurate  universal  inhere  necessarily  in 
their  subjects.  The  essential  attribute,  and  the 
attribute  that  belongs  to  its  subject  as  such,  are 
identical.  E.g.  point  and  straight  belong  to  line 
[jo]  essentially,  for  they  belong  to  line  as  such; 
and  triangle  as  such  has  two  right  angles,  for 
it  is  essentially  equal  to  two  right  angles. 

An  attribute  belongs  commensurately  and 
universally  to  a  subject  when  it  can  be  shown 
to  belong  to  any  random  instance  of  that  sub¬ 
ject  and  when  the  subject  is  the  first  thing  to 
which  it  can  be  shown  to  belong.  Thus,  e.g. 
(1)  the  equality  of  its  angles  to  two  right  an¬ 
gles  is  not  a  commensurately  universal  attri¬ 
bute  of  figure.  For  though  it  is  possible  to 
[55]  show  that  a  figure  has  its  angles  equal  to 
two  right  angles,  this  attribute  cannot  be  dem¬ 
onstrated  of  any  figure  selected  at  haphazard, 
nor  in  demonstrating  does  one  take  a  figure  at 
random — a  square  is  a  figure  but  its  angles  are 
not  equal  to  two  right  angles.  On  the  other 
hand,  any  isosceles  triangle  has  its  angles  equal 
to  two  right  angles,  yet  isosceles  triangle  is  not 
the  primary  subject  of  this  attribute  but  trian¬ 
gle  is  prior.  So  whatever  can  be  shown  to  have 
[40]  its  angles  equal  to  two  right  angles,  or  to 
possess  any  other  attribute,  in  any  random  in¬ 
stance  of  itself  and  primarily — that  is  the  first 
subject  to  which  the  predicate  in  question  be- 
7 4a  longs  commensurately  and  universally, 
and  the  demonstration,  in  the  essential  sense, 
of  any  predicate  is  the  proof  of  it  as  belonging 
to  this  first  subject  commensurately  and  uni¬ 
versally:  while  the  proof  of  it  as  belonging  to 
the  other  subjects  to  which  it  attaches  is  dem¬ 
onstration  only  in  a  secondary  and  unessential 
sense.  Nor  again  (2)  is  equality  to  two  right 
angles  a  commensurately  universal  attribute  of 
isosceles;  it  is  of  wider  application. 

5 

We  must  not  fail  to  observe  that  we  often 
fall  into  error  because  our  conclusion  is  not  in 
[5]  fact  primary  and  commensurately  univer¬ 
sal  in  the  sense  in  which  we  think  we  prove  it 
so.  We  make  this  mistake  (1)  when  the  subject 


is  an  individual  or  individuals  above  which 
there  is  no  universal  to  be  found:  (2)  when  the 
subjects  belong  to  different  species  and  there  is 
a  higher  universal,  but  it  has  no  name:  (3) 
when  the  subject  which  the  demonstrator  takes 
as  a  whole  is  really  only  a  part  of  a  larger 
whole;  for  then  the  demonstration  will  be  true 
[/o]  of  the  individual  instances  within  the 
part  and  will  hold  in  every  instance  of  it,  yet 
the  demonstration  will  not  be  true  of  this  sub¬ 
ject  primarily  and  commensurately  and  uni¬ 
versally.  When  a  demonstration  is  true  of  a 
subject  primarily  and  commensurately  and 
universally,  that  is  to  be  taken  to  mean  that  it 
is  true  of  a  given  subject  primarily  and  as  such. 
Case  (3)  may  be  thus  exemplified.  If  a  proof 
were  given  that  perpendiculars  to  the  same  line 
are  parallel,  it  might  be  supposed  that  lines 
thus  perpendicular  were  the  proper  subject  of 
the  demonstration  because  being  parallel  is 
true  of  every  instance  of  them.  But  it  is  not  so, 
[75]  for  the  parallelism  depends  not  on  these 
angles  being  equal  to  one  another  because  each 
is  a  right  angle,  but  simply  on  their  being  equal 
to  one  another.  An  example  of  (1)  would  be  as 
follows:  if  isosceles  were  the  only  triangle,  it 
would  be  thought  to  have  its  angles  equal  to 
two  right  angles  qua  isosceles.  An  instance  of 
(2)  would  be  the  law  that  proportionals  alter¬ 
nate.  Alternation  used  to  be  demonstrated  sep¬ 
arately  of  numbers,  lines,  solids,  and  dura¬ 
tions,  though  it  could  have  been  proved  of 
[20]  them  all  by  a  single  demonstration.  Be¬ 
cause  there  was  no  single  name  to  denote  that 
in  which  numbers,  lengths,  durations,  and  sol¬ 
ids  are  identical,  and  because  they  differed  spe¬ 
cifically  from  one  another,  this  property  was 
proved  of  each  of  them  separately.  To-day, 
however,  the  proof  is  commensurately  univer¬ 
sal,  for  they  do  not  possess  this  attribute  qua 
lines  or  qua  numbers,  but  qua  manifesting  this 
generic  character  which  they  are  postulated  as 
[25]  possessing  universally.  Hence,  even  if  one 
prove  of  each  kind  of  triangle  that  its  angles 
are  equal  to  two  right  angles,  whether  by 
means  of  the  same  or  different  proofs;  still,  as 
long  as  one  treats  separately  equilateral,  sca¬ 
lene,  and  isosceles,  one  does  not  yet  know,  ex¬ 
cept  sophistically,  that  triangle  has  its  angles 
equal  to  two  right  angles,  nor  does  one  yet 
know  that  triangle  has  this  property  commen¬ 
surately  and  universally,  even  if  there  is  no 
other  species  of  triangle  but  these.  For  one  does 
[30]  not  know  that  triangle  as  such  has  this 
property,  nor  even  that  ‘all’  triangles  have  it 
— unless  ‘all’  means  ‘each  taken  singly’:  if  ‘all’ 


102 

means  ‘as  a  whole  class’,  then,  though  there  be 
none  in  which  one  does  not  recognize  this 
property,  one  does  not  know  it  of  ‘all  triangles’. 

When,  then,  does  our  knowledge  fail  of 
commensurate  universality,  and  when  it  is  un¬ 
qualified  knowledge?  If  triangle  be  identical  in 
essence  with  equilateral,  i.e.  with  each  or  all 
equilaterals,  then  clearly  we  have  unqualified 
knowledge:  if  on  the  other  hand  it  be  not,  and 
the  attribute  belongs  to  equilateral  qua  trian¬ 
gle;  then  our  knowledge  fails  of  commensurate 
[^5]  universality.  ‘But’,  it  will  be  asked,  ‘does 
this  attribute  belong  to  the  subject  of  which  it 
has  been  demonstrated  qua  triangle  or  qua 
isosceles?  What  is  the  point  at  which  the  sub¬ 
ject  to  which  it  belongs  is  primary?  (i.e.  to 
what  subject  can  it  be  demonstrated  as  belong¬ 
ing  commensurately  and  universally?)’  Clear¬ 
ly  this  point  is  the  first  term  in  which  it  is 
found  to  inhere  as  the  elimination  of  inferior 
differentiae  proceeds.  Thus  the  angles  of  a 
brazen  isosceles  triangle  are  equal  to  two  right 
angles:  but  eliminate  brazen  and  isosceles  and 
the  attribute  remains.  ‘But’ — you  may  say — 
74b  ‘eliminate  figure  or  limit,  and  the  attri¬ 
bute  vanishes.’  True,  but  figure  and  limit  are 
not  the  first  differentiae  whose  elimination  de¬ 
stroys  the  attribute.  ‘Then  what  is  the  first?’  If 
it  is  triangle,  it  will  be  in  virtue  of  triangle  that 
the  attribute  belongs  to  all  the  other  subjects  of 
which  it  is  predicable,  and  triangle  is  the  sub¬ 
ject  to  which  it  can  be  demonstrated  as  belong¬ 
ing  commensurately  and  universally. 

6 

[5]  Demonstrative  knowledge  must  rest  on 
necessary  basic  truths;  for  the  object  of  scien¬ 
tific  knowledge  cannot  be  other  than  it  is.  Now 
attributes  attaching  essentially  to  their  subjects 
attach  necessarily  to  them:  for  essential  attri¬ 
butes  are  either  elements  in  the  essential  nature 
of  their  subjects,  or  contain  their  subjects  as 
elements  in  their  own  essential  nature.  (The 
pairs  of  opposites  which  the  latter  class  includes 
are  necessary  because  one  member  or  the  other 
[/o]  necessarily  inheres.)  It  follows  from  this 
that  premisses  of  the  demonstrative  syllogism 
must  be  connexions  essential  in  the  sense  ex¬ 
plained:  for  all  attributes  must  inhere  essen¬ 
tially  or  else  be  accidental,  and  accidental  attri¬ 
butes  are  not  necessary  to  their  subjects. 

We  must  either  state  the  case  thus,  or  else 
premise  that  the  conclusion  of  demonstration  is 
necessary  and  that  a  demonstrated  conclusion 
cannot  be  other  than  it  is,  and  then  infer  that 
[75]  the  conclusion  must  be  developed  from 


75* 

necessary  premisses.  For  though  you  may  rea¬ 
son  from  true  premisses  without  demonstrat¬ 
ing,  yet  if  your  premisses  are  necessary  you 
will  assuredly  demonstrate — in  such  necessity 
you  have  at  once  a  distinctive  character  of  dem¬ 
onstration.  That  demonstration  proceeds  from 
necessary  premisses  is  also  indicated  by  the 
fact  that  the  objection  we  raise  against  a  pro¬ 
fessed  demonstration  is  that  a  premiss  of  it  is 
[20]  not  a  necessary  truth — whether  we  think 
it  altogether  devoid  of  necessity,  or  at  any  rate 
so  far  as  our  opponent’s  previous  argument 
goes.  This  shows  how  naive  it  is  to  suppose 
one’s  basic  truths  rightly  chosen  if  one  starts 
with  a  proposition  which  is  (1)  popularly  ac¬ 
cepted  and  (2)  true,  such  as  the  sophists’  as¬ 
sumption  that  to  know  is  the  same  as  to  possess 
knowledge.1  For  (1)  popular  acceptance  or  re¬ 
jection  is  no  criterion  of  a  basic  truth,  which 
can  only  be  the  primary  law  of  the  genus  con¬ 
stituting  the  subject  matter  of  the  demonstra- 
[25]  tion;  and  (2)  not  all  truth  is  ‘appropriate’. 

A  further  proof  that  the  conclusion  must  be 
the  development  of  necessary  premisses  is  as 
follows.  Where  demonstration  is  possible,  one 
who  can  give  no  account  which  includes  the 
cause  has  no  scientific  knowledge.  If,  then,  we 
suppose  a  syllogism  in  which,  though  A  nec¬ 
essarily  inheres  in  C,  yet  B,  the  middle  term  of 
the  demonstration,  is  not  necessarily  connected 
with  A  and  C,  then  the  man  who  argues  thus 
[jo]  has  no  reasoned  knowledge  of  the  conclu¬ 
sion,  since  this  conclusion  does  not  owe  its  ne¬ 
cessity  to  the  middle  term;  for  though  the  con¬ 
clusion  is  necessary,  the  mediating  link  is  a 
contingent  fact.  Or  again,  if  a  man  is  without 
knowledge  now,  though  he  still  retains  the 
steps  of  the  argument,  though  there  is  no 
change  in  himself  or  in  the  fact  and  no  lapse  of 
memory  on  his  part;  then  neither  had  he 
knowledge  previously.  But  the  mediating  link, 
not  being  necessary,  may  have  perished  in  the 
[J5]  interval;  and  if  so,  though  there  be  no 
change  in  him  nor  in  the  fact,  and  though  he 
will  still  retain  the  steps  of  the  argument,  yet 
he  has  not  knowledge,  and  therefore  had  not 
knowledge  before.  Even  if  the  link  has  not  ac¬ 
tually  perished  but  is  liable  to  perish,  this  situ¬ 
ation  is  possible  and  might  occur.  But  such  a 
condition  cannot  be  knowledge. 

75a  When  the  conclusion  is  necessary,  the 
middle  through  which  it  was  proved  may  yet 
quite  easily  be  non-necessary.  You  can  in  fact 
infer  the  necessary  even  from  a  non-necessary 
premiss,  just  as  you  can  infer  the  true  from  the 
1  Plato,  Euthydemus,  277. 


POSTERIOR  ANALYTICS 


75b 

not  true.  On  the  other  hand,  when  the  middle 
is  necessary  the  conclusion  must  be  necessary; 
[5]  just  as  true  premisses  always  give  a  true 
conclusion.  Thus,  if  A  is  necessarily  predicated 
of  B  and  B  of  C,  then  A  is  necessarily  predi¬ 
cated  of  C.  But  when  the  conclusion  is  non¬ 
necessary  the  middle  cannot  be  necessary  ei¬ 
ther.  Thus:  let  A  be  predicated  non-necessarily 
[/o]  of  C  but  necessarily  of  B,  and  let  B  be  a 
necessary  predicate  of  C;  then  A  too  will  be  a 
necessary  predicate  of  C,  which  by  hypothesis 
it  is  not. 

To  sum  up,  then:  demonstrative  knowledge 
must  be  knowledge  of  a  necessary  nexus,  and 
therefore  must  clearly  be  obtained  through  a 
necessary  middle  term;  otherwise  its  possessor 
will  know  neither  the  cause  nor  the  fact  that 
[75]  his  conclusion  is  a  necessary  connexion. 
Either  he  will  mistake  the  non-necessary  for 
the  necessary  and  believe  the  necessity  of  the 
conclusion  without  knowing  it,  or  else  he  will 
not  even  believe  it — in  which  case  he  will  be 
equally  ignorant,  whether  he  actually  infers  the 
mere  fact  through  middle  terms  or  the  rea¬ 
soned  fact  and  from  immediate  premisses. 

Of  accidents  that  are  not  essential  according 
to  our  definition  of  essential  there  is  no  demon¬ 
strative  knowledge;  for  since  an  accident,  in 
[20]  the  sense  in  which  I  here  speak  of  it,  may 
also  not  inhere,  it  is  impossible  to  prove  its  in¬ 
herence  as  a  necessary  conclusion.  A  difficulty, 
however,  might  be  raised  as  to  why  in  dialec¬ 
tic,  if  the  conclusion  is  not  a  necessary  connex¬ 
ion,  such  and  such  determinate  premisses 
should  be  proposed  in  order  to  deal  with  such 
and  such  determinate  problems.  Would  not  the 
result  be  the  same  if  one  asked  any  questions 
whatever  and  then  merely  stated  one’s  conclu- 
[25]  sion?  The  solution  is  that  determinate 
questions  have  to  be  put,  not  because  the  re¬ 
plies  to  them  affirm  facts  which  necessitate 
facts  affirmed  by  the  conclusion,  but  because 
these  answers  are  propositions  which  if  the  an¬ 
swerer  affirm,  he  must  affirm  the  conclusion — 
and  affirm  it  with  truth  if  they  are  true. 

Since  it  is  just  those  attributes  within  every 
genus  which  are  essential  and  possessed  by 
their  respective  subjects  as  such  that  are  neces¬ 
sary,  it  is  clear  that  both  the  conclusions  and 
[30]  the  premisses  of  demonstrations  which 
produce  scientific  knowledge  are  essential.  For 
accidents  are  not  necessary:  and,  further,  since 
accidents  are  not  necessary  one  does  not  neces¬ 
sarily  have  reasoned  knowledge  of  a  conclusion 
drawn  from  them  (this  is  so  even  if  the  acci¬ 
dental  premisses  are  invariable  but  not  essen- 


I03 

tial,  as  in  proofs  through  signs;  for  though  the 
conclusion  be  actually  essential,  one  will  not 
know  it  as  essential  nor  know  its  reason);  but 
[33]  to  have  reasoned  knowledge  of  a  conclu¬ 
sion  is  to  know  it  through  its  cause.  We  may 
conclude  that  the  middle  must  be  consequen¬ 
tially  connected  with  the  minor,  and  the  major 
with  the  middle. 

7 

It  follows  that  we  cannot  in  demonstrating 
pass  from  one  genus  to  another.  We  cannot, 
for  instance,  prove  geometrical  truths  by  arith¬ 
metic.  For  there  are  three  elements  in  demon- 
[40]  stration:  (1)  what  is  proved,  the  conclu¬ 
sion — an  attribute  inhering  essentially  in  a  ge- 
75b  nus;  (2)  the  axioms,  i.e.  axioms  which  are 
premisses  of  demonstration;  (3)  the  subject- 
genus  whose  attributes,  i.e.  essential  prop¬ 
erties,  are  revealed  by  the  demonstration.  The 
axioms  which  are  premisses  of  demonstration 
may  be  identical  in  two  or  more  sciences:  but 
in  the  case  of  two  different  genera  such  as 
arithmetic  and  geometry  you  cannot  apply 
arithmetical  demonstration  to  the  properties 
[5]  of  magnitudes  unless  the  magnitudes  in 
question  are  numbers.  How  in  certain  cases 
transference  is  possible  I  will  explain  later.1 

Arithmetical  demonstration  and  the  other 
sciences  likewise  possess,  each  of  them,  their 
own  genera;  so  that  if  the  demonstration  is  to 
pass  from  one  sphere  to  another,  the  genus 
must  be  either  absolutely  or  to  some  extent  the 
[/o]  same.  If  this  is  not  so,  transference  is 
clearly  impossible,  because  the  extreme  and  the 
middle  terms  must  be  drawn  from  the  same 
genus:  otherwise,  as  predicated,  they  will  not 
be  essential  and  will  thus  be  accidents.  That  is 
why  it  cannot  be  proved  by  geometry  that  op¬ 
posites  fall  under  one  science,  nor  even  that 
the  product  of  two  cubes  is  a  cube.  Nor  can  the 
theorem  of  any  one  science  be  demonstrated  by 
[75]  means  of  another  science,  unless  these 
theorems  are  related  as  subordinate  to  superior 
(e.g.  as  optical  theorems  to  geometry  or  har¬ 
monic  theorems  to  arithmetic) .  Geometry  again 
cannot  prove  of  lines  any  property  which 
they  do  not  possess  qua  lines,  i.e.  in  virtue  of 
the  fundamental  truths  of  their  peculiar  genus: 
it  cannot  show,  for  example,  that  the  straight 
line  is  the  most  beautiful  of  lines  or  the  con¬ 
trary  of  the  circle;  for  these  qualities  do  not  be¬ 
long  to  lines  in  virtue  of  their  peculiar  genus, 
but  through  some  property  which  it  shares 
[20]  with  other  genera. 

1  Cf.  1,  9  and  13. 


BOOK  I,  CHAPTERS  5-7 


io4  POSTERIOR 

8 

It  is  also  clear  that  if  the  premisses  from 
which  the  syllogism  proceeds  are  commensu- 
rately  universal,  the  conclusion  of  such  dem¬ 
onstration — demonstration,  i.e.  in  the  unquali¬ 
fied  sense — must  also  be  eternal.  Therefore  no 
attribute  can  be  demonstrated  nor  known  by 
strictly  scientific  knowledge  to  inhere  in  per¬ 
ishable  things.  The  proof  can  only  be  acciden- 
[25]  tal,  because  the  attribute’s  connexion  with 
its  perishable  subject  is  not  commensurately 
universal  but  temporary  and  special.  If  such  a 
demonstration  is  made,  one  premiss  must  be 
perishable  and  not  commensurately  universal 
(perishable  because  only  if  it  is  perishable  will 
the  conclusion  be  perishable;  not  commensu¬ 
rately  universal,  because  the  predicate  will  be 
predicable  of  some  instances  of  the  subject  and 
not  of  others);  so  that  the  conclusion  can  only 
be  that  a  fact  is  true  at  the  moment — not  com- 
[jo]  mensurately  and  universally.  The  same  is 
true  of  definitions,  since  a  definition  is  either  a 
primary  premiss  or  a  conclusion  of  a  demon¬ 
stration,  or  else  only  differs  from  a  demonstra¬ 
tion  in  the  order  of  its  terms.  Demonstration 
and  science  of  merely  frequent  occurrences — 
e.g.  of  eclipse  as  happening  to  the  moon — are, 
as  such,  clearly  eternal:  whereas  so  far  as  they 
are  not  eternal  they  are  not  fully  commensu- 
[^5]  rate.  Other  subjects  too  have  properties 
attaching  to  them  in  the  same  way  as  eclipse 
attaches  to  the  moon. 

9 

It  is  clear  that  if  the  conclusion  is  to  show  an 
attribute  inhering  as  such,  nothing  can  be  dem¬ 
onstrated  except  from  its  ‘appropriate’  basic 
truths.  Consequently  a  proof  even  from  true,  in¬ 
demonstrable,  and  immediate  premisses  does 
[40]  not  constitute  knowledge.  Such  proof s  are 
like  Bryson’s  method  of  squaring  the  circle;  for 
they  operate  by  taking  as  their  middle  a  common 
character — a  character,  therefore,  which  the 
76a  subject  may  share  with  another — and  con¬ 
sequently  they  apply  equally  to  subjects  differ¬ 
ent  in  kind.  They  therefore  afford  knowledge 
of  an  attribute  only  as  inhering  accidentally, 
not  as  belonging  to  its  subject  as  such:  other¬ 
wise  they  would  not  have  been  applicable  to 
another  genus. 

Our  knowledge  of  any  attribute’s  connexion 
with  a  subject  is  accidental  unless  we  know 
that  connexion  through  the  middle  term  in 
[5]  virtue  of  which  it  inheres,  and  as  an  infer¬ 
ence  from  basic  premisses  essential  and  ‘ap¬ 


ANALYTICS  76a 

propriate’  to  the  subject — unless  we  know, 
e.g.  the  property  of  possessing  angles  equal  to 
two  right  angles  as  belonging  to  that  subject  in 
which  it  inheres  essentially,  and  as  inferred 
from  basic  premisses  essential  and  ‘appro¬ 
priate’  to  that  subject:  so  that  if  that  middle 
term  also  belongs  essentially  to  the  minor,  the 
middle  must  belong  to  the  same  kind  as  the 
major  and  minor  terms.  The  only  exceptions 
to  this  rule  are  such  cases  as  theorems  in  har¬ 
monics  which  are  demonstrable  by  arithmetic, 
[/o]  Such  theorems  are  proved  by  the  same 
middle  terms  as  arithmetical  properties,  but 
with  a  qualification — the  fact  falls  under  a 
separate  science  (for  the  subject  genus  is  sep¬ 
arate),  but  the  reasoned  fact  concerns  the 
superior  science,  to  which  the  attributes  essen¬ 
tially  belong.  Thus,  even  these  apparent  excep¬ 
tions  show  that  no  attribute  is  strictly  demon- 
[/5J  strable  except  from  its  ‘appropriate’  basic 
truths,  which,  however,  in  the  case  of  these 
sciences  have  the  requisite  identity  of  char¬ 
acter. 

It  is  no  less  evident  that  the  peculiar  basic 
truths  of  each  inhering  attribute  are  indemon¬ 
strable;  for  basic  truths  from  which  they  might 
be  deduced  would  be  basic  truths  of  all  that  is, 
and  the  science  to  which  they  belonged  would 
possess  universal  sovereignty.  This  is  so  be¬ 
cause  he  knows  better  whose  knowledge  is  de¬ 
duced  from  higher  causes,  for  his  knowledge 
[20]  is  from  prior  premisses  when  it  derives 
from  causes  themselves  uncaused:  hence,  if  he 
knows  better  than  others  or  best  of  all,  his 
knowledge  would  be  science  in  a  higher  or  the 
highest  degree.  But,  as  things  are,  demonstra¬ 
tion  is  not  transferable  to  another  genus,  with 
such  exceptions  as  we  have  mentioned  of  the 
application  of  geometrical  demonstrations  to 
theorems  in  mechanics  or  optics,  or  of  arith- 
[25]  metical  demonstrations  to  those  of  har¬ 
monics. 

It  is  hard  to  be  sure  whether  one  knows  or 
not;  for  it  is  hard  to  be  sure  whether  one’s 
knowledge  is  based  on  the  basic  truths  ap¬ 
propriate  to  each  attribute — the  differentia  of 
true  knowledge.  We  think  we  have  scientific 
knowledge  if  we  have  reasoned  from  true  and 
primary  premisses.  But  that  is  not  so:  the  con¬ 
clusion  must  be  homogeneous  with  the  basic 
[jo]  facts  of  the  science. 

10 

I  call  the  basic  truths  of  every  genus  those  ele¬ 
ments  in  it  the  existence  of  which  cannot  be 
proved.  As  regards  both  these  primary  truths 


77*  BOOK  I,  CHAPTERS  8-11  105 


and  the  attributes  dependent  on  them  the 
meaning  of  the  name  is  assumed.  The  fact  of 
their  existence  as  regards  the  primary  truths 
must  be  assumed;  but  it  has  to  be  proved  of 
the  remainder,  the  attributes.  Thus  we  assume 
the  meaning  alike  of  unity,  straight,  and  tri- 
[35]  angular;  but  while  as  regards  unity  and 
magnitude  we  assume  also  the  fact  of  their  ex¬ 
istence,  in  the  case  of  the  remainder  proof  is 
required. 

Of  the  basic  truths  used  in  the  demonstrative 
sciences  some  are  peculiar  to  each  science,  and 
some  are  common,  but  common  only  in  the 
sense  of  analogous,  being  of  use  only  in  so  far 
as  they  fall  within  the  genus  constituting  the 
province  of  the  science  in  question. 

[40]  Peculiar  truths  are,  e.g.  the  definitions  of 
line  and  straight;  common  truths  are  such  as 
‘take  equals  from  equals  and  equals  remain’. 
Only  so  much  of  these  common  truths  is  re¬ 
quired  as  falls  within  the  genus  in  question: 
76b  for  a  truth  of  this  kind  will  have  the  same 
force  even  if  not  used  generally  but  applied  by 
the  geometer  only  to  magnitudes,  or  by  the 
arithmetician  only  to  numbers.  Also  peculiar  to 
a  science  are  the  subjects  the  existence  as  well 
as  the  meaning  of  which  it  assumes,  and  the 
essential  attributes  of  which  it  investigates,  e.g. 
[5]  in  arithmetic  units,  in  geometry  points  and 
lines.  Both  the  existence  and  the  meaning  of 
the  subjects  are  assumed  by  these  sciences;  but 
of  their  essential  attributes  only  the  meaning 
is  assumed.  For  example  arithmetic  assumes 
the  meaning  of  odd  and  even,  square  and  cube, 
geometry  that  of  incommensurable,  or  of  de¬ 
flection  or  verging  of  lines,  whereas  the  exist¬ 
ence  of  these  attributes  is  demonstrated  by 
[/o]  means  of  the  axioms  and  from  previous 
conclusions  as  premisses.  Astronomy  too  pro¬ 
ceeds  in  the  same  way.  For  indeed  every  dem¬ 
onstrative  science  has  three  elements:  (1)  that 
which  it  posits,  the  subject  genus  whose  essen¬ 
tial  attributes  it  examines;  (2)  the  so-called 
[75]  axioms,  which  are  primary  premisses  of 
its  demonstration;  (3)  the  attributes,  the  mean¬ 
ing  of  which  it  assumes.  Yet  some  sciences  may 
very  well  pass  over  some  of  these  elements; 
e.g.  we  might  not  expressly  posit  the  existence 
of  the  genus  if  its  existence  were  obvious  (for 
instance,  the  existence  of  hot  and  cold  is  more 
evident  than  that  of  number);  or  we  might 
omit  to  assume  expressly  the  meaning  of  the 
attributes  if  it  were  well  understood.  In  the 
[20]  same  way  the  meaning  of  axioms,  such  as 
‘Take  equals  from  equals  and  equals  remain’, 
is  well  known  and  so  not  expressly  assumed. 


Nevertheless  in  the  nature  of  the  case  the  essen¬ 
tial  elements  of  demonstration  are  three:  the 
subject,  the  attributes,  and  the  basic  premisses. 

That  which  expresses  necessary  self-grounded 
fact,  and  which  we  must  necessarily  believe,  is 
distinct  both  from  the  hypotheses  of  a  science 
and  from  illegitimate  postulate — I  say  ‘must 
believe’,  because  all  syllogism,  and  therefore 
a  fortiori  demonstration,  is  addressed  not  to  the 
[25]  spoken  word,  but  to  the  discourse  within 
the  soul,  and  though  we  can  always  raise  ob¬ 
jections  to  the  spoken  word,  to  the  inward  dis¬ 
course  we  cannot  always  object.  That  which  is 
capable  of  proof  but  assumed  by  the  teacher 
without  proof  is,  if  the  pupil  believes  and  ac¬ 
cepts  it,  hypothesis,  though  only  in  a  limited 
sense  hypothesis — that  is,  relatively  to  the  pu- 
[30]  pil;  if  the  pupil  has  no  opinion  or  a  con¬ 
trary  opinion  on  the  matter,  the  same  assump¬ 
tion  is  an  illegitimate  postulate.  Therein  lies 
the  distinction  between  hypothesis  and  illegiti¬ 
mate  postulate:  the  latter  is  the  contrary  of  the 
pupil’s  opinion,  demonstrable,  but  assumed 
and  used  without  demonstration. 

[35]  The  definition — viz.  those  which  are  not 
expressed  as  statements  that  anything  is  or  is 
not — are  not  hypotheses:  but  it  is  in  the  prem¬ 
isses  of  a  science  that  its  hypotheses  are  con¬ 
tained.  Definitions  require  only  to  be  under¬ 
stood,  and  this  is  not  hypothesis — unless  it  be 
contended  that  the  pupil’s  hearing  is  also  an 
hypothesis  required  by  the  teacher.  Hypoth¬ 
eses,  on  the  contrary,  postulate  facts  on  the  be¬ 
ing  of  which  depends  the  being  of  the  fact 
[40]  inferred.  Nor  are  the  geometer’s  hypoth¬ 
eses  false,  as  some  have  held,  urging  that  one 
must  not  employ  falsehood  and  that  the  geom¬ 
eter  is  uttering  falsehood  in  stating  that  the 
line  which  he  draws  is  a  foot  long  or  straight, 
when  it  is  actually  neither.  The  truth  is  that 
77*  the  geometer  does  not  draw  any  conclu¬ 
sion  from  the  being  of  the  particular  line  of 
which  he  speaks,  but  from  what  his  diagrams 
symbolize.  A  further  distinction  is  that  all  hy¬ 
potheses  and  illegitimate  postulates  are  either 
universal  or  particular,  whereas  a  definition  is 
neither. 

11 

[5]  So  demonstration  does  not  necessarily  im¬ 
ply  the  being  of  Forms  nor  a  One  beside  a 
Many,  but  it  does  necessarily  imply  the  possi¬ 
bility  of  truly  predicating  one  of  many;  since 
without  this  possibility  we  cannot  save  the 
universal,  and  if  the  universal  goes,  the  mid¬ 
dle  term  goes  with  it,  and  so  demonstration  be- 


10  6  POSTERIOR 

comes  impossible.  We  conclude,  then,  that 
there  must  be  a  single  identical  term  unequiv¬ 
ocally  predicable  of  a  number  of  individuals, 
[/o]  The  law  that  it  is  impossible  to  affirm  and 
deny  simultaneously  the  same  predicate  of  the 
same  subject  is  not  expressly  posited  by  any 
demonstration  except  when  the  conclusion  also 
has  to  be  expressed  in  that  form;  in  which  case 
the  proof  lays  down  as  its  major  premiss  that 
the  major  is  truly  affirmed  of  the  middle  but 
falsely  denied.  It  makes  no  difference,  how¬ 
ever,  if  we  add  to  the  middle,  or  again  to  the 
minor  term,  the  corresponding  negative.  For 
[75]  grant  a  minor  term  of  which  it  is  true  to 
predicate  man — even  if  it  be  also  true  to  predi¬ 
cate  not-man  of  it — still  grant  simply  that  man 
is  animal  and  not  not-animal,  and  the  conclu¬ 
sion  follows:  for  it  will  still  be  true  to  say  that 
Callias — even  if  it  be  also  true  to  say  that  not- 
Callias — is  animal  and  not  not-animal.  The 
reason  is  that  the  major  term  is  predicable  not 
only  of  the  middle,  but  of  something  other 
than  the  middle  as  well,  being  of  wider  appli- 
[20]  cation;  so  that  the  conclusion  is  not  af¬ 
fected  even  if  the  middle  is  extended  to  cover 
the  original  middle  term  and  also  what  is  not 
the  original  middle  term. 

The  law  that  every  predicate  can  be  either 
truly  affirmed  or  truly  denied  of  every  subject 
is  posited  by  such  demonstration  as  uses  re- 
ductio  ad  impossible,  and  then  not  always  uni¬ 
versally,  but  so  far  as  it  is  requisite;  within  the 
limits,  that  is,  of  the  genus — the  genus,  I  mean 
(as  I  have  already  explained1),  to  which  the 
[25]  man  of  science  applies  his  demonstra¬ 
tions.  In  virtue  of  the  common  elements  of 
demonstration — I  mean  the  common  axioms 
which  are  used  as  premisses  of  demonstration, 
not  the  subjects  nor  the  attributes  demon¬ 
strated  as  belonging  to  them — all  the  sciences 
have  communion  with  one  another,  and  in 
communion  with  them  all  is  dialectic  and  any 
science  which  might  attempt  a  universal  proof 
of  axioms  such  as  the  law  of  excluded  middle, 
[30]  the  law  that  the  subtraction  of  equals 
from  equals  leaves  equal  remainders,  or  other 
axioms  of  the  same  kind.  Dialectic  has  no  defi¬ 
nite  sphere  of  this  kind,  not  being  confined  to 
a  single  genus.  Otherwise  its  method  would  not 
be  interrogative;  for  the  interrogative  method 
is  barred  to  the  demonstrator,  who  cannot  use 
the  opposite  facts  to  prove  the  same  nexus . 
[ss\  This  was  shown  in  my  work  on  the  syllo¬ 
gism.2 

1  Cf.  75*  42  ff.  and  76b  13. 

2  Prior  Analytics,  1.  1. 


ANALYTICS  77b 

12 

If  a  syllogistic  question  is  equivalent  to  a  prop¬ 
osition  embodying  one  of  the  two  sides  of  a 
contradiction,  and  if  each  science  has  its  pe¬ 
culiar  propositions  from  which  its  peculiar  con¬ 
clusion  is  developed,  then  there  is  such  a  thing 
as  a  distinctively  scientific  question,  and  it  is 
the  interrogative  form  of  the  premisses  from 
which  the  ‘appropriate’  conclusion  of  each  sci- 
[40]  ence  is  developed.  Hence  it  is  clear  that 
not  every  question  will  be  relevant  to  geometry, 
nor  to  medicine,  nor  to  any  other  science:  only 
77b  those  questions  will  be  geometrical  which 
form  premisses  for  the  proof  of  the  theorems 
of  geometry  or  of  any  other  science,  such  as 
optics,  which  uses  the  same  basic  truths  as  ge¬ 
ometry.  Of  the  other  sciences  the  like  is  true. 
Of  these  questions  the  geometer  is  bound  to 
give  his  account,  using  the  basic  truths  of  ge¬ 
ometry  in  conjunction  with  his  previous  con- 
[5]  elusions;  of  the  basic  truths  the  geometer, 
as  such,  is  not  bound  to  give  any  account.  The 
like  is  true  of  the  other  sciences.  There  is  a 
limit,  then,  to  the  questions  which  we  may  put 
to  each  man  of  science;  nor  is  each  man  of  sci¬ 
ence  bound  to  answer  all  inquiries  on  each 
several  subject,  but  only  such  as  fall  within  the 
defined  field  of  his  own  science.  If,  then,  in 
controversy  with  a  geometer  qua  geometer  the 
disputant  confines  himself  to  geometry  and 
[/o]  proves  anything  from  geometrical  prem¬ 
isses,  he  is  clearly  to  be  applauded;  if  he  goes 
outside  these  he  will  be  at  fault,  and  obviously 
cannot  even  refute  the  geometer  except  acci¬ 
dentally.  One  should  therefore  not  discuss  ge¬ 
ometry  among  those  who  are  not  geometers,  for 
in  such  a  company  an  unsound  argument  will 
pass  unnoticed.  This  is  correspondingly  true  in 
[75]  the  other  sciences. 

Since  there  are  ‘geometrical’  questions,  does 
it  follow  that  there  are  also  distinctively  ‘un- 
geometrical’  questions?  Further,  in  each  spe¬ 
cial  science — geometry  for  instance — what  kind 
of  error  is  it  that  may  vitiate  questions,  and  yet 
not  exclude  them  from  that  science?  Again,  is 
the  erroneous  conclusion  one  constructed  from 
premisses  opposite  to  the  true  premisses,  or  is 
[20]  it  formal  fallacy  though  drawn  from  ge¬ 
ometrical  premisses?  Or,  perhaps,  the  errone¬ 
ous  conclusion  is  due  to  the  drawing  of  prem¬ 
isses  from  another  science;  e.g.  in  a  geometrical 
controversy  a  musical  question  is  distinctively 
ungeometrical,  whereas  the  notion  that  paral¬ 
lels  meet  is  in  one  sense  geometrical,  being  un¬ 
geometrical  in  a  different  fashion:  the  reason 


78b 

being  that  ‘ungeometrical’,  like  ‘unrhythmical’, 
is  equivocal,  meaning  in  the  one  case  not  ge- 
[25]  ometry  at  all,  in  the  other  bad  geometry? 
It  is  this  error,  i.e.  error  based  on  premisses  of 
this  kind — ‘of’  the  science  but  false — that  is  the 
contrary  of  science.  In  mathematics  the  formal 
fallacy  is  not  so  common,  because  it  is  the  mid¬ 
dle  term  in  which  the  ambiguity  lies,  since  the 
major  is  predicated  of  the  whole  of  the  middle 
[jo]  and  the  middle  of  the  whole  of  the  minor 
(the  predicate  of  course  never  has  the  prefix 
‘all’);  and  in  mathematics  one  can,  so  to  speak, 
see  these  middle  terms  with  an  intellectual 
vision,  while  in  dialectic  the  ambiguity  may 
escape  detection.  E.g.  ‘Is  every  circle  a  figure?’ 
A  diagram  shows  that  this  is  so,  but  the  minor 
premiss  ‘Are  epics  circles?’  is  shown  by  the 
diagram  to  be  false. 

If  a  proof  has  an  inductive  minor  premiss, 
[^5]  one  should  not  bring  an ‘objection’ against 
it.  For  since  every  premiss  must  be  applicable 
to  a  number  of  cases  (otherwise  it  will  not  be 
true  in  every  instance,  which,  since  the  syllo¬ 
gism  proceeds  from  universals,  it  must  be), 
then  assuredly  the  same  is  true  of  an  ‘objec¬ 
tion’;  since  premisses  and  ‘objections’  are  so 
far  the  same  that  anything  which  can  be  valid¬ 
ly  advanced  as  an  ‘objection’  must  be  such  that 
it  could  take  the  form  of  a  premiss,  either 
[40]  demonstrative  or  dialectical.  On  the  other 
hand,  arguments  formally  illogical  do  some¬ 
times  occur  through  taking  as  middles  mere 
attributes  of  the  major  and  minor  terms.  An 
78a  instance  of  this  is  Caeneus’  proof  that  fire 
increases  in  geometrical  proportion:  ‘Fire’,  he 
argues,  ‘increases  rapidly,  and  so  does  geomet¬ 
rical  proportion’.  There  is  no  syllogism  so,  but 
there  is  a  syllogism  if  the  most  rapidly  increas¬ 
ing  proportion  is  geometrical  and  the  most 
rapidly  increasing  proportion  is  attributable  to 
[5]  fire  in  its  motion.  Sometimes,  no  doubt,  it 
is  impossible  to  reason  from  premisses  predi¬ 
cating  mere  attributes:  but  sometimes  it  is  pos¬ 
sible,  though  the  possibility  is  overlooked.  If 
false  premisses  could  never  give  true  conclu¬ 
sions  ‘resolution’  would  be  easy,  for  premisses 
and  conclusion  would  in  that  case  inevitably 
reciprocate.  I  might  then  argue  thus:  let  A  be 
an  existing  fact;  let  the  existence  of  A  imply 
such  and  such  facts  actually  known  to  me  to 
exist,  which  we  may  call  B.  I  can  now,  since 
they  reciprocate,  infer  A  from  B. 

[/o]  Reciprocation  of  premisses  and  conclu¬ 
sion  is  more  frequent  in  mathematics,  because 
mathematics  takes  definitions,  but  never  an 
accident,  for  its  premisses — a  second  character- 


107 

istic  distinguishing  mathematical  reasoning 
from  dialectical  disputations. 

A  science  expands  not  by  the  interposition  of 
fresh  middle  terms,  but  by  the  apposition  of 
fresh  extreme  terms.  E.g.  A  is  predicated  of  B, 
[75]  B  of  C,  C  of  D,  and  so  indefinitely.  Or 
the  expansion  may  be  lateral:  e.g.  one  major, 
A,  may  be  proved  of  two  minors,  C  and 
E.  Thus  let  A  represent  number — a  num¬ 
ber  or  number  taken  indeterminately;  B  deter¬ 
minate  odd  number;  C  any  particular  odd 
[20]  number.  We  can  then  predicate  A  of  C. 
Next  let  D  represent  determinate  even  num¬ 
ber,  and  E  even  number.  Then  A  is  predicable 
of  E. 

x3 

Knowledge  of  the  fact  differs  from  knowledge 
of  the  reasoned  fact.  To  begin  with,  they  differ 
within  the  same  science  and  in  two  ways:  (1) 
when  the  premisses  of  the  syllogism  are  not 
[25]  immediate  (for  then  the  proximate  cause 
is  not  contained  in  them — a  necessary  condi¬ 
tion  of  knowledge  of  the  reasoned  fact):  (2) 
when  the  premisses  are  immediate,  but  in¬ 
stead  of  the  cause  the  better  known  of  the  two 
reciprocals  is  taken  as  the  middle;  for  of  two 
reciprocally  predicable  terms  the  one  which  is 
not  the  cause  may  quite  easily  be  the  better 
known  and  so  become  the  middle  term  of  the 
demonstration.  Thus  (2)  (a)  you  might  prove 
[jo]  as  follows  that  the  planets  are  near  be¬ 
cause  they  do  not  twinkle:  let  C  be  the  planets, 
B  not  twinkling,  A  proximity.  Then  B  is  predi¬ 
cable  of  C;  for  the  planets  do  not  twinkle.  But 
A  is  also  predicable  of  B,  since  that  which  does 
not  twinkle  is  near — we  must  take  this  truth 
[55]  as  having  been  reached  by  induction  or 
sense-perception.  Therefore  A  is  a  necessary 
predicate  of  C;  so  that  we  have  demonstrated 
that  the  planets  are  near.  This  syllogism,  then, 
proves  not  the  reasoned  fact  but  only  the  fact; 
since  they  are  not  near  because  they  do  not 
twinkle,  but,  because  they  are  near,  do  not 
twinkle.  The  major  and  middle  of  the  proof, 
however,  may  be  reversed,  and  then  the  dem- 
[40]  onstration  will  be  of  the  reasoned  fact. 
78b  Thus:  let  C  be  the  planets,  B  proximity,  A 
not  twinkling.  Then  B  is  an  attribute  of  C,  and 
A — not  twinkling — of  B.  Consequently  A  is 
predicable  of  C,  and  the  syllogism  proves  the 
reasoned  fact,  since  its  middle  term  is  the  prox¬ 
imate  cause.  Another  example  is  the  inference 
that  the  moon  is  spherical  from  its  manner  of 
[5]  waxing.  Thus:  since  that  which  so  waxes 
is  spherical,  and  since  the  moon  so  waxes, 


BOOK  I,  CHAPTERS  11-13 


ro8 

clearly  the  moon  is  spherical.  Put  in  this  form, 
the  syllogism  turns  out  to  be  proof  of  the  fact, 
but  if  the  middle  and  major  be  reversed  it  is 
proof  of  the  reasoned  fact;  since  the  moon  is 
not  spherical  because  it  waxes  in  a  certain  man¬ 
ner,  but  waxes  in  such  a  manner  because  it  is 
[/o]  spherical.  (Let  C  be  the  moon,  B  spheri¬ 
cal,  and  A  waxing.)  Again  (£),  in  cases  where 
the  cause  and  the  effect  are  not  reciprocal  and 
the  effect  is  the  better  known,  the  fact  is  dem¬ 
onstrated  but  not  the  reasoned  fact.  This  also 
occurs  (i)  when  the  middle  falls  outside  the 
major  and  minor,  for  here  too  the  strict  cause 
is  not  given,  and  so  the  demonstration  is  of  the 
[75]  fact,  not  of  the  reasoned  fact.  For  ex¬ 
ample,  the  question  ‘Why  does  not  a  wall 
breathe?’  might  be  answered,  ‘Because  it  is  not 
an  animal’;  but  that  answer  would  not  give  the 
strict  cause,  because  if  not  being  an  animal 
causes  the  absence  of  respiration,  then  being 
an  animal  should  be  the  cause  of  respiration, 
according  to  the  rule  that  if  the  negation  of  x 
[20]  causes  the  non-inherence  of  y,  the  affirma¬ 
tion  of  x  causes  the  inherence  of  y;  e.g.  if  the 
disproportion  of  the  hot  and  cold  elements  is 
the  cause  of  ill  health,  their  proportion  is  the 
cause  of  health;  and  conversely,  if  the  asser¬ 
tion  of  x  causes  the  inherence  of  y,  the  negation 
of  x  must  cause  y  s  non-inherence.  But  in  the 
case  given  this  consequence  does  not  result; 
for  not  every  animal  breathes.  A  syllogism  with 
this  kind  of  cause  takes  place  in  the  second  fig¬ 
ure.  Thus:  let  A  be  animal,  B  respiration,  C 
[25]  wall.  Then  A  is  predicable  of  all  B  (for 
all  that  breathes  is  animal),  but  of  no  C;  and 
consequently  B  is  predicable  of  no  C;  that  is, 
the  wall  does  not  breathe.  Such  causes  are  like 
far-fetched  explanations,  which  precisely  con¬ 
sist  in  making  the  cause  too  remote,  as  in 
[jo]  Anacharsis’  account  of  why  the  Scythians 
have  no  flute-players;  namely  because  they 
have  no  vines. 

Thus,  then,  do  the  syllogism  of  the  fact  and 
the  syllogism  of  the  reasoned  fact  differ  within 
one  science  and  according  to  the  position  of 
the  middle  terms.  But  there  is  another  way  too 
in  which  the  fact  and  the  reasoned  fact  differ, 
and  that  is  when  they  are  investigated  respec¬ 
ts]  tively  by  different  sciences.  This  occurs  in 
the  case  of  problems  related  to  one  another  as 
subordinate  and  superior,  as  when  optical 
problems  are  subordinated  to  geometry,  me¬ 
chanical  problems  to  stereometry,  harmonic 
roblems  to  arithmetic,  the  data  of  observation 
40]  to  astronomy.  (Some  of  these  sciences 
7 9a  bear  almost  the  same  name;  e.g.  mathe- 


79a 

matical  and  nautical  astronomy,  mathematical 
and  acoustical  harmonics.)  Here  it  is  the  busi¬ 
ness  of  the  empirical  observers  to  know  the 
fact,  of  the  mathematicians  to  know  the  rea¬ 
soned  fact;  for  the  latter  are  in  possession  of 
the  demonstrations  giving  the  causes,  and  are 
often  ignorant  of  the  fact:  just  as  we  have  often 
[5]  a  clear  insight  into  a  universal,  but  through 
lack  of  observation  are  ignorant  of  some  of  its 
particular  instances.  These  connexions  have  a 
perceptible  existence  though  they  are  mani¬ 
festations  of  forms.  For  the  mathematical  sci¬ 
ences  concern  forms:  they  do  not  demonstrate 
properties  of  a  substratum,  since,  even  though 
the  geometrical  subjects  are  predicable  as  prop¬ 
erties  of  a  perceptible  substratum,  it  is  not  as 
thus  predicable  that  the  mathematician  demon- 
M  strates  properties  of  them.  As  optics  is  re¬ 
lated  to  geometry,  so  another  science  is  related 
to  optics,  namely  the  theory  of  the  rainbow. 
Here  knowledge  of  the  fact  is  within  the  prov¬ 
ince  of  the  natural  philosopher,  knowledge 
of  the  reasoned  fact  within  that  of  the  opti¬ 
cian,  either  qua  optician  or  qua  mathematical 
optician.  Many  sciences  not  standing  in  this 
mutual  relation  enter  into  it  at  points;  e.g. 
medicine  and  geometry:  it  is  the  physician’s 
[75]  business  to  know  that  circular  wounds 
heal  more  slowly,  the  geometer’s  to  know  the 
reason  why. 

M 

Of  all  the  figures  the  most  scientific  is  the  first. 
Thus,  it  is  the  vehicle  of  the  demonstrations  of 
all  the  mathematical  sciences,  such  as  arith¬ 
metic,  geometry,  and  optics,  and  practically  of 
[20]  all  sciences  that  investigate  causes:  for 
the  syllogism  of  the  reasoned  fact  is  either  ex¬ 
clusively  or  generally  speaking  and  in  most 
cases  in  this  figure — a  second  proof  that  this 
figure  is  the  most  scientific;  for  grasp  of  a  rea¬ 
soned  conclusion  is  the  primary  condition  of 
knowledge.  Thirdly,  the  first  is  the  only  figure 
[25]  which  enables  us  to  pursue  knowledge  of 
the  essence  of  a  thing.  In  the  second  figure  no 
affirmative  conclusion  is  possible,  and  knowl¬ 
edge  of  a  thing’s  essence  must  be  affirmative; 
while  in  the  third  figure  the  conclusion  can  be 
affirmative,  but  cannot  be  universal,  and  es¬ 
sence  must  have  a  universal  character:  e.g. 
man  is  not  two-footed  animal  in  any  qualified 
sense,  but  universally.  Finally,  the  first  figure 
[3o]  has  no  need  of  the  others,  while  it  is  by 
means  of  the  first  that  the  other  two  figures  are 
developed,  and  have  their  intervals  close- 
packed  until  immediate  premisses  are  reached. 


POSTERIOR  ANALYTICS 


80*  BOOK  I,  CHAPTERS  13-16  109 


Clearly,  therefore,  the  first  figure  is  the  pri¬ 
mary  condition  of  knowledge. 

*5 

Just  as  an  attribute  A  may  (as  we  saw)  be 
atomically  connected  with  a  subject  By  so 
its  disconnexion  may  be  atomic.  I  call  ‘atomic' 
connexions  or  disconnexions  which  involve  no 
[55]  intermediate  term;  since  in  that  case  the 
connexion  or  disconnexion  will  not  be  medi¬ 
ated  by  something  other  than  the  terms  them¬ 
selves.  It  follows  that  if  either  A  or  B,  or  both 
A  and  B,  have  a  genus,  their  disconnexion  can¬ 
not  be  primary.  Thus:  let  C  be  the  genus  of  A. 
Then,  if  C  is  not  the  genus  of  B — for  A  may 
well  have  a  genus  which  is  not  the  genus  of 
[40]  B — there  will  be  a  syllogism  proving  A's 
disconnexion  from  B  thus: 

79b  all  A  is  C, 

no  B  is  C, 
no  B  is  A . 

Or  if  it  is  B  which  has  a  genus  D,  we  have 
all  B  is  D, 
no  D  is  A, 

.*.  no  B  is  A,  by  syllogism; 

[5]  and  the  proof  will  be  similar  if  both  A  and 
B  have  a  genus.  That  the  genus  of  A  need  not 
be  the  genus  of  B  and  vice  versa,  is  shown  by 
the  existence  of  mutually  exclusive  coordinate 
series  of  predication.  If  no  term  in  the  series 
ACD  ...  is  predicable  of  any  term  in  the 
series  BEF  .  .  .,  and  if  G — a  term  in  the  for¬ 
mer  series — is  the  genus  of  A,  clearly  G  will 
[/o]  not  be  the  genus  of  B;  since,  if  it  were, 
the  series  would  not  be  mutually  exclusive.  So 
also  if  B  has  a  genus,  it  will  not  be  the  genus  of 
A .  If,  on  the  other  hand,  neither  A  nor  B  has 
a  genus  and  A  does  not  inhere  in  B,  this  dis¬ 
connexion  must  be  atomic.  If  there  be  a  middle 
term,  one  or  other  of  them  is  bound  to  have  a 
[75]  genus,  for  the  syllogism  will  be  either  in 
the  first  or  the  second  figure.  If  it  is  in  the  first, 
B  will  have  a  genus — for  the  premiss  contain¬ 
ing  it  must  be  affirmative;  if  in  the  second, 
either  A  or  B  indifferently,  since  syllogism  is 
ossible  if  either  is  contained  in  a  negative 
20]  premiss,  but  not  if  both  premisses  are 
negative. 

Hence  it  is  clear  that  one  thing  may  be  atom¬ 
ically  disconnected  from  another,  and  we  have 
stated  when  and  how  this  is  possible. 

16 

Ignorance — defined  not  as  the  negation  of 
knowledge  but  as  a  positive  state  of  mind — is 
error  produced  by  inference. 


[25]  (1)  Let  us  first  consider  propositions  as¬ 
serting  a  predicate's  immediate  connexion  with 
or  disconnexion  from  a  subject.  Here,  it  is  true, 
positive  error  may  befall  one  in  alternative 
ways;  for  it  may  arise  where  one  directly  be¬ 
lieves  a  connexion  or  disconnexion  as  well  as 
where  one’s  belief  is  acquired  by  inference. 
The  error,  however,  that  consists  in  a  direct 
belief  is  without  complication;  but  the  error 
resulting  from  inference — which  here  concerns 
us — takes  many  forms.  Thus,  let  A  be  atom¬ 
ically  disconnected  from  all  B:  then  the  conclu- 
[50]  sion  inferred  through  a  middle  term  C, 
that  all  B  is  Ay  will  be  a  case  of  error  produced 
by  syllogism.  Now,  two  cases  are  possible. 
Either  (a)  both  premisses,  or  (b)  one  premiss 
only,  may  be  false,  (a)  If  neither  A  is  an  attri¬ 
bute  of  any  C  nor  C  of  any  B,  whereas  the 
contrary  was  posited  in  both  cases,  both  prem- 
[55]  isses  will  be  false.  ( C  may  quite  well  be 
so  related  to  A  and  B  that  C  is  neither  subor¬ 
dinate  to  A  nor  a  universal  attribute  of  B:  for 
B,  since  A  was  said  to  be  primarily  discon¬ 
nected  from  By  cannot  have  a  genus,  and  A 
need  not  necessarily  be  a  universal  attribute  of 
all  things.  Consequently  both  premisses  may 
[40]  be  false.)  On  the  other  hand,  (b)  one  of 
the  premisses  may  be  true,  though  not  either 
80a  indifferently  but  only  the  major  A-C; 
since,  B  having  no  genus,  the  premiss  C-B  will 
always  be  false,  while  A-C  may  be  true.  This 
is  the  case  if,  for  example,  A  is  related  atom¬ 
ically  to  both  C  and  B;  because  when  the  same 
term  is  related  atomically  to  more  terms  than 
one,  neither  of  those  terms  will  belong  to  the 
other.  It  is,  of  course,  equally  the  case  if  A-C 
[5]  is  not  atomic. 

Error  of  attribution,  then,  occurs  through 
these  causes  and  in  this  form  only — for  we 
found  that  no  syllogism  of  universal  attribu¬ 
tion  was  possible  in  any  figure  but  the  first.1 
On  the  other  hand,  an  error  of  non-attribution 
may  occur  either  in  the  first  or  in  the  second 
figure.  Let  us  therefore  first  explain  the  various 
forms  it  takes  in  the  first  figure  and  the  char- 
[/o]  acter  of  the  premisses  in  each  case. 

(c)  It  may  occur  when  both  premisses  are 
false;  e.g.  supposing  A  atomically  connected 
with  both  C  and  B,  if  it  be  then  assumed  that 
no  C  is  A ,  and  all  B  is  C ,  both  premisses  are 
false. 

( d )  It  is  also  possible  when  one  is  false.  This 
[75]  may  be  either  premiss  indifferently.  A-C 
may  be  true,  C-B  false — A-C  true  because  A 
is  not  an  attribute  of  all  things,  C-B  false  be- 

1  Prior  Analytics ,  i.  i. 


no 

cause  C,  which  never  has  the  attribute  A,  can¬ 
not  be  an  attribute  of  B;  for  if  C-B  were  true, 
the  premiss  A-C  would  no  longer  be  true,  and 
[20]  besides  if  both  premisses  were  true,  the 
conclusion  would  be  true.  Or  again,  C-B  may 
be  true  and  A-C  false;  e.g.  if  both  C  and  A 
contain  B  as  genera,  one  of  them  must  be  sub¬ 
ordinate  to  the  other,  so  that  if  the  premiss 
takes  the  form  No  C  is  A,  it  will  be  false.  This 
makes  it  clear  that  whether  either  or  both 
[25]  premisses  are  false,  the  conclusion  will 
equally  be  false. 

In  the  second  figure  the  premisses  cannot 
both  be  wholly  false;  for  if  all  B  is  A,  no  mid¬ 
dle  term  can  be  with  truth  universally  affirmed 
of  one  extreme  and  universally  denied  of  the 
[jo]  other:  but  premisses  in  which  the  middle 
is  affirmed  of  one  extreme  and  denied  of  the 
other  are  the  necessary  condition  if  one  is  to 
get  a  valid  inference  at  all.  Therefore  if,  taken 
in  this  way,  they  are  wholly  false,  their  con¬ 
traries  conversely  should  be  wholly  true.  But 
this  is  impossible.  On  the  other  hand,  there  is 
nothing  to  prevent  both  premisses  being  par¬ 
tially  false;  e.g.  if  actually  some  A  is  C  and 
[55]  some  B  is  C,  then  if  it  is  premised  that  all 
A  is  C  and  no  B  is  C,  both  premisses  are  false, 
yet  partially,  not  wholly,  false.  The  same  is 
true  if  the  major  is  made  negative  instead  of 
the  minor.  Or  one  premiss  may  be  wholly  false, 
and  it  may  be  either  of  them.  Thus,  supposing 
that  actually  an  attribute  of  all  A  must  also  be 
[40]  an  attribute  of  all  B ,  then  if  C  is  yet  taken 
80b  to  be  a  universal  attribute  of  all  A  but  uni¬ 
versally  non-attributable  to  B,  C-A  will  be  true 
but  C-B  false.  Again,  actually  that  which  is  an 
attribute  of  no  B  will  not  be  an  attribute  of  all 
A  either;  for  if  it  be  an  attribute  of  all  A,  it 
will  also  be  an  attribute  of  all  5,  which  is  con¬ 
trary  to  supposition;  but  if  C  be  nevertheless 
assumed  to  be  a  universal  attribute  of  A,  but 
[5]  an  attribute  of  no  B,  then  the  premiss  C-B 
is  true  but  the  major  is  false.  The  case  is  sim¬ 
ilar  if  the  major  is  made  the  negative  premiss. 
For  in  fact  what  is  an  attribute  of  no  A  will 
not  be  an  attribute  of  any  B  either;  and  if  it  be 
yet  assumed  that  C  is  universally  non-attribu¬ 
table  to  A ,  but  a  universal  attribute  of  B,  the 
[/o]  premiss  C-A  is  true  but  the  minor  wholly 
false.  Again,  in  fact  it  is  false  to  assume  that 
that  which  is  an  attribute  of  all  B  is  an  attribute 
of  no  A ,  for  if  it  be  an  attribute  of  all  B ,  it  must 
be  an  attribute  of  some  A.  If  then  C  is  never¬ 
theless  assumed  to  be  an  attribute  of  all  B 
but  of  no  A,  C-B  will  be  true  but  C-A  false. 

It  is  thus  clear  that  in  the  case  of  atomic 


81* 

[75]  propositions  erroneous  inference  will  be 
possible  not  only  when  both  premisses  are 
false  but  also  when  only  one  is  false. 

17 

(2)  In  the  case  of  attributes  not  atomically 
connected  with  or  disconnected  from  their  sub¬ 
jects,  (a)  (i)  as  long  as  the  false  conclusion  is 
inferred  through  the  ‘appropriate'  middle,  only 
[20]  the  major  and  not  both  premisses  can  be 
false.  By  ‘appropriate  middle’  I  mean  the  mid¬ 
dle  term  through  which  the  contradictory — i.e. 
the  true — conclusion  is  inferrible.  Thus,  let  A 
be  attributable  to  B  through  a  middle  term  C: 
then,  since  to  produce  a  conclusion  the  premiss 
C-B  must  be  taken  affirmatively,  it  is  clear  that 
[25]  this  premiss  must  always  be  true,  for  its 
quality  is  not  changed.  But  the  major  A-C  is 
false,  for  it  is  by  a  change  in  the  quality  of  A- 
C  that  the  conclusion  becomes  its  contradictory 
— i.e.  true.  Similarly  (ii)  if  the  middle  is  taken 
from  another  series  of  predication;  e.g.  sup¬ 
pose  D  to  be  not  only  contained  within  A  as  a 
part  within  its  whole  but  also  predicable  of  all 
B.  Then  the  premiss  D-B  must  remain  un- 
[jo]  changed,  but  the  quality  of  A-D  must  be 
changed;  so  that  D-B  is  always  true,  A-D  al¬ 
ways  false.  Such  error  is  practically  identical 
with  that  which  is  inferred  through  the  ‘ap¬ 
propriate’  middle.  On  the  other  hand,  ( b )  if 
the  conclusion  is  not  inferred  through  the  ‘ap¬ 
propriate’  middle — (i)  when  the  middle  is 
subordinate  to  A  but  is  predicable  of  no  B, 
[35]  both  premisses  must  be  false,  because  if 
there  is  to  be  a  conclusion  both  must  be  posited 
as  asserting  the  contrary  of  what  is  actually  the 
fact,  and  so  posited  both  become  false:  e.g. 
suppose  that  actually  all  D  is  A  but  no  B  is  D; 
then  if  these  premisses  are  changed  in  quality, 
a  conclusion  will  follow  and  both  of  the  new 
[40]  premisses  will  be  false.  When,  however, 
81*  (ii)  the  middle  D  is  not  subordinate  to  A, 
A-D  will  be  true,  D-B  false — A-D  true  be¬ 
cause  A  was  not  subordinate  to  D,  D-B  false 
because  if  it  had  been  true,  the  conclusion  too 
would  have  been  true;  but  it  is  ex  hypothesi 
false. 

[5]  When  the  erroneous  inference  is  in  the 
second  figure,  both  premisses  cannot  be  en¬ 
tirely  false;  since  if  B  is  subordinate  to  A,  there 
can  be  no  middle  predicable  of  all  of  one  ex¬ 
treme  and  of  none  of  the  other,  as  was  stated 
before.1  One  premiss,  however,  may  be  false, 
and  it  may  be  either  of  them.  Thus,  if  C  is 
[/o]  actually  an  attribute  of  both  A  and  B,  but 
1  Cf.  80“  29. 


POSTERIOR  ANALYTICS 


Ill 


81b  BOOK  I.  CHAPTERS  16-19 


is  assumed  to  be  an  attribute  of  A  only  and 
not  of  B,  C-A  will  be  true,  C-B  false:  or  again 
if  C  be  assumed  to  be  attributable  to  B  but  to 
no  A,  C-B  will  be  true,  C-A  false. 

[75]  We  have  stated  when  and  through  what 
kinds  of  premisses  error  will  result  in  cases 
where  the  erroneous  conclusion  is  negative.  If 
the  conclusion  is  affirmative,  (a)  (i)  it  may  be 
inferred  through  the  ‘appropriate’  middle 
term.  In  this  case  both  premisses  cannot  be 
false  since,  as  we  said  before,1  C-B  must  re¬ 
main  unchanged  if  there  is  to  be  a  conclusion, 
and  consequently  A-C,  the  quality  of  which  is 
[20]  changed,  will  always  be  false.  This  is 
equally  true  if  (ii)  the  middle  is  taken  from 
another  series  of  predication,  as  was  stated  to  be 
the  case  also  with  regard  to  negative  error;2  for 
D-B  must  remain  unchanged,  while  the  qual¬ 
ity  of  A-D  must  be  converted,  and  the  type  of 
error  is  the  same  as  before. 

[25]  (b)  The  middle  may  be  inappropriate. 
Then  (i)  if  D  is  subordinate  to  A,  A-D  will  be 
true,  but  D-B  false;  since  A  may  quite  well  be 
predicable  of  several  terms  no  one  of  which 
can  be  subordinated  to  another.  If,  however, 
(ii)  D  is  not  subordinate  to  A,  obviously  A-D, 
since  it  is  affirmed,  will  always  be  false,  while 
D-B  may  be  either  true  or  false;  for  A  may 
[jo]  very  well  be  an  attribute  of  no  D,  whereas 
all  B  is  D,  e.g.  no  science  is  animal,  all  music 
is  science.  Equally  well  A  may  be  an  attribute 
of  no  D,  and  D  of  no  B .  It  emerges,  then,  that 
if  the  middle  term  is  not  subordinate  to  the 
major,  not  only  both  premisses  but  either  sing¬ 
ly  may  be  false. 

[^5]  Thus  we  have  made  it  clear  how  many 
varieties  of  erroneous  inference  are  liable  to 
happen  and  through  what  kinds  of  premisses 
they  occur,  in  the  case  both  of  immediate  and 
of  demonstrable  truths. 

18 

It  is  also  clear  that  the  loss  of  any  one  of  the 
senses  entails  the  loss  of  a  corresponding  por¬ 
tion  of  knowledge,  and  that,  since  we  learn 
either  by  induction  or  by  demonstration,  this 
[40]  knowledge  cannot  be  acquired.  Thus 
81b  demonstration  develops  from  universal, 
induction  from  particulars;  but  since  it  is  possi¬ 
ble  to  familiarize  the  pupil  with  even  the  so- 
called  mathematical  abstractions  only  through 
induction — i.e.  only  because  each  subject  genus 
possesses,  in  virtue  of  a  determinate  mathe¬ 
matical  character,  certain  properties  which  can 
be  treated  as  separate  even  though  they  do  not 
1  Cf.  8ob  17-26.  2  Cf.  8ob  26-32. 


[5]  exist  in  isolation — it  is  consequently  im¬ 
possible  to  come  to  grasp  universals  except 
through  induction.  But  induction  is  impossible 
for  those  who  have  not  sense-perception.  For 
it  is  sense-perception  alone  which  is  adequate 
for  grasping  the  particulars:  they  cannot  be 
objects  of  scientific  knowledge,  because  neither 
can  universals  give  us  knowledge  of  them  with¬ 
out  induction,  nor  can  we  get  it  through  induc¬ 
tion  without  sense-perception. 

*9 

[/o]  Every  syllogism  is  effected  by  means  of 
three  terms.  One  kind  of  syllogism  serves  to 
prove  that  A  inheres  in  C  by  showing  that  A 
inheres  in  B  and  B  in  C;  the  other  is  negative 
and  one  of  its  premisses  asserts  one  term  of 
another,  while  the  other  denies  one  term  of  an¬ 
other.  It  is  clear,  then,  that  these  are  the  funda¬ 
mentals  and  so-called  hypotheses  of  syllogism. 
[75]  Assume  them  as  they  have  been  stated, 
and  proof  is  bound  to  follow — proof  that  A 
inheres  in  C  through  B,  and  again  that  A  in¬ 
heres  in  B  through  some  other  middle  term, 
and  similarly  that  B  inheres  in  C.  If  our  rea¬ 
soning  aims  at  gaining  credence  and  so  is 
merely  dialectical,  it  is  obvious  that  we  have 
only  to  see  that  our  inference  is  based  on  prem- 
[20]  isses  as  credible  as  possible:  so  that  if  a 
middle  term  between  A  and  B  is  credible 
though  not  real,  one  can  reason  through  it  and 
complete  a  dialectical  syllogism.  If,  however, 
one  is  aiming  at  truth,  one  must  be  guided  by 
the  real  connexions  of  subjects  and  attributes. 
Thus:  since  there  are  attributes  which  are 
predicated  of  a  subject  essentially  or  naturally 
[25]  and  not  coincidentally — not,  that  is,  in 
the  sense  in  which  we  say  ‘That  white  (thing) 
is  a  man’,  which  is  not  the  same  mode  of  predi¬ 
cation  as  when  we  say  ‘The  man  is  white’:  the 
man  is  white  not  because  he  is  something  else 
but  because  he  is  man,  but  the  white  is  man 
because  ‘being  white’  coincides  with  ‘human¬ 
ity’  within  one  substratum — therefore  there  are 
terms  such  as  are  naturally  subjects  of  predi- 
[30]  cates.  Suppose,  then,  C  such  a  term  not 
itself  attributable  to  anything  else  as  to  a  sub¬ 
ject,  but  the  proximate  subject  of  the  attribute 
B — i.e.  so  that  B-C  is  immediate;  suppose  fur¬ 
ther  E  related  immediately  to  F,  and  F  to  B. 
The  first  question  is,  must  this  series  terminate, 
or  can  it  proceed  to  infinity?  The  second  ques¬ 
tion  is  as  follows:  Suppose  nothing  is  essen¬ 
tially  predicated  of  A ,  but  A  is  predicated  pri- 
[ 33]  marily  of  H  and  of  no  intermediate  prior 
term,  and  suppose  H  similarly  related  to  G  and 


1 1 2 

G  to  B;  then  must  this  series  also  terminate,  or 
can  it  too  proceed  to  infinity?  There  is  this 
much  difference  between  the  questions:  the 
first  is,  is  it  possible  to  start  from  that  which  is 
not  itself  attributable  to  anything  else  but  is  the 
[40]  subject  of  attributes,  and  ascend  to  infin¬ 
ity?  The  second  is  the  problem  whether  one 
can  start  from  that  which  is  a  predicate  but 
82a  not  itself  a  subject  of  predicates,  and  de¬ 
scend  to  infinity?  A  third  question  is,  if  the  ex¬ 
treme  terms  are  fixed,  can  there  be  an  infinity 
of  middles?  I  mean  this:  suppose  for  example 
that  A  inheres  in  C  and  B  is  intermediate  be¬ 
tween  them,  but  between  B  and  A  there  are 
[5]  other  middles,  and  between  these  again 
fresh  middles;  can  these  proceed  to  infinity  or 
can  they  not?  This  is  the  equivalent  of  inquir¬ 
ing,  do  demonstrations  proceed  to  infinity,  i.e. 
is  everything  demonstrable?  Or  do  ultimate 
subject  and  primary  attribute  limit  one  an¬ 
other? 

I  hold  that  the  same  questions  arise  with  re- 
[/o]  gard  to  negative  conclusions  and  prem¬ 
isses:  viz.  if  A  is  attributable  to  no  B,  then 
either  this  predication  will  be  primary,  or  there 
will  be  an  intermediate  term  prior  to  B  to 
which  A  is  not  attributable — G,  let  us  say, 
which  is  attributable  to  all  B — and  there  may 
still  be  another  term  H  prior  to  G,  which  is 
attributable  to  all  G.  The  same  questions  arise, 
I  say,  because  in  these  cases  too  either  the  series 
of  prior  terms  to  which  A  is  not  attributable  is 
infinite  or  it  terminates. 

[75]  One  cannot  ask  the  same  questions  in  the 
case  of  reciprocating  terms,  since  when  sub¬ 
ject  and  predicate  are  convertible  there  is 
neither  primary  nor  ultimate  subject,  seeing 
that  all  the  reciprocals  qua  subjects  stand  in 
the  same  relation  to  one  another,  whether  we 
say  that  the  subject  has  an  infinity  of  attributes 
or  that  both  subjects  and  attributes — and  we 
raised  the  question  in  both  cases — are  infinite 
in  number.  These  questions  then  cannot  be 
asked — unless,  indeed,  the  terms  can  recipro¬ 
cate  by  two  different  modes,  by  accidental 
[20]  predication  in  one  relation  and  natural 
predication  in  the  other. 

20 

Now,  it  is  clear  that  if  the  predications  termi¬ 
nate  in  both  the  upward  and  the  downward 
direction  (by  ‘upward’  I  mean  the  ascent  to 
the  more  universal,  by  ‘downward’  the  de¬ 
scent  to  the  more  particular),  the  middle 
terms  cannot  be  infinite  in  number.  For  sup¬ 
pose  that  A  is  predicated  of  F,  and  that  the  in- 


821’ 

[25]  termediates — call  them  BB'B"  .  .  . — are 
infinite,  then  clearly  you  might  descend  from 
A  and  find  one  term  predicated  of  another  ad 
infinitum ,  since  you  have  an  infinity  of  terms 
between  you  and  F;  and  equally,  if  you  ascend 
from  F,  there  are  infinite  terms  between  you 
and  A.  It  follows  that  if  these  processes  are  im¬ 
possible  there  cannot  be  an  infinity  of  inter¬ 
mediates  between  A  and  F.  Nor  is  it  of  any 
[jo]  effect  to  urge  that  some  terms  of  the 
series  AB  .  . .  F  are  contiguous  so  as  to  exclude 
intermediates,  while  others  cannot  be  taken 
into  the  argument  at  all:  whichever  terms  of 
the  series  B  ...  I  take,  the  number  of  inter¬ 
mediates  in  the  direction  either  of  A  or  of  F 
must  be  finite  or  infinite:  where  the  infinite 
series  starts,  whether  from  the  first  term  or 
from  a  later  one,  is  of  no  moment,  for  the  suc- 
[55]  ceeding  terms  in  any  case  are  infinite  in 
number. 

21 

Further,  if  in  affirmative  demonstration  the 
series  terminates  in  both  directions,  clearly  it 
will  terminate  too  in  negative  demonstration. 
Let  us  assume  that  we  cannot  proceed  to  infin¬ 
ity  either  by  ascending  from  the  ultimate  term 
(by  ‘ultimate  term’  I  mean  a  term  such  as  F 
82b  was,  not  itself  attributable  to  a  subject  but 
itself  the  subject  of  attributes),  or  by  descend¬ 
ing  towards  an  ultimate  from  the  primary 
term  (by  ‘primary  term’  I  mean  a  term  predi¬ 
cable  of  a  subject  but  not  itself  a  subject).  If 
this  assumption  is  justified,  the  series  will  also 
terminate  in  the  case  of  negation.  For  a  nega¬ 
tive  conclusion  can  be  proved  in  all  three  fig- 
15]  ures.  In  the  first  figure  it  is  proved  thus: 
no  B  is  A ,  all  C  is  B.  In  packing  the  interval 
B-C  we  must  reach  immediate  propositions — 
as  is  always  the  case  with  the  minor  premiss — 
since  B-C  is  affirmative.  As  regards  the  other 
premiss  it  is  plain  that  if  the  major  term  is  de¬ 
nied  of  a  term  D  prior  to  F,  D  will  have  to  be 
[/o]  predicable  of  all  B,  and  if  the  major  is 
denied  of  yet  another  term  prior  to  D,  this 
term  must  be  predicable  of  all  D.  Consequent¬ 
ly,  since  the  ascending  series  is  finite,  the  de¬ 
scent  will  also  terminate  and  there  will  be  a 
subject  of  which  A  is  primarily  non-predicable. 
In  the  second  figure  the  syllogism  is,  all  A  is 
By  no  C  is  B,  .  .  no  C  is  A.  If  proof  of  this  is 
[75]  required,  plainly  it  may  be  shown  either 
in  the  first  figure  as  above,  in  the  second  as 
here,  or  in  the  third.  The  first  figure  has  been 
discussed,  and  we  will  proceed  to  display  the 
second,  proof  by  which  will  be  as  follows:  all 


POSTERIOR  ANALYTICS 


83°  BOOK  I,  CHAPTERS  19-22  113 


B  is  D,  no  C  is  D  .  .  since  it  is  required  that 
B  should  be  a  subject  of  which  a  predicate  is 
affirmed.  Next,  since  D  is  to  be  proved  not  to 
belong  to  C,  then  D  has  a  further  predicate 
which  is  denied  of  C.  Therefore,  since  the  suc- 
[20]  cession  of  predicates  affirmed  of  an  ever 
higher  universal  terminates,  the  succession  of 
predicates  denied  terminates  too. 

The  third  figure  shows  it  as  follows:  all  B 
is  A,  some  B  is  not  C,  some  A  is  not  C. 
This  premiss,  i.e.  C-B,  will  be  proved  either  in 
the  same  figure  or  in  one  of  the  two  figures 
[25]  discussed  above.  In  the  first  and  second 
figures  the  series  terminates.  If  we  use  the  third 
figure,  we  shall  take  as  premisses,  all  E  is  B, 
some  E  is  not  C,  and  this  premiss  again  will  be 
proved  by  a  similar  prosyllogism.  But  since  it 
is  assumed  that  the  series  of  descending  sub¬ 
jects  also  terminates,  plainly  the  series  of  more 
universal  non-predicables  will  terminate  also. 
Even  supposing  that  the  proof  is  not  confined 
to  one  method,  but  employs  them  all  and  is 
[jo]  now  in  the  first  figure,  now  in  the  sec¬ 
ond  or  third — even  so  the  regress  will  termi¬ 
nate,  for  the  methods  are  finite  in  number,  and 
if  finite  things  are  combined  in  a  finite  number 
of  ways,  the  result  must  be  finite. 

Thus  it  is  plain  that  the  regress  of  middles 
terminates  in  the  case  of  negative  demonstra¬ 
tion,  if  it  does  so  also  in  the  case  of  affirmative 
demonstration.  That  in  fact  the  regress  termi- 
[35]  nates  in  both  these  cases  may  be  made 
clear  by  the  following  dialectical  considera¬ 
tions. 

22 

In  the  case  of  predicates  constituting  the  essen¬ 
tial  nature  of  a  thing,  it  clearly  terminates,  see¬ 
ing  that  if  definition  is  possible,  or  in  other 
words,  if  essential  form  is  knowable,  and  an 
infinite  series  cannot  be  traversed,  predicates 
constituting  a  thing’s  essential  nature  must  be 
83a  finite  in  number.  But  as  regards  predicates 
generally  we  have  the  following  prefatory  re¬ 
marks  to  make.  (1)  We  can  affirm  without 
falsehood  ‘the  white  (thing)  is  walking,  and 
‘that  big  (thing)  is  a  log’;  or  again,  ‘the  log  is 
big’,  and  ‘the  man  walks’.  But  the  affirmation 
differs  in  the  two  cases.  When  I  affirm  ‘the 
[5]  white  is  a  log’,  I  mean  that  something 
which  happens  to  be  white  is  a  log — not  that 
white  is  the  substratum  in  which  log  inheres, 
for  it  was  not  qua  white  or  qua  a  species  of 
white  that  the  white  (thing)  came  to  be  a  log, 
and  the  white  (thing)  is  consequently  not  a  log 
except  incidentally.  On  the  other  hand,  when  I 


affirm  ‘the  log  is  white’,  I  do  not  mean  that 
[/o]  something  else,  which  happens  also  to  be  a 
log,  is  white  (as  I  should  if  I  said  ‘the  musician 
is  white,’  which  would  mean  ‘the  man  who 
happens  also  to  be  a  musician  is  white’);  on  the 
contrary,  log  is  here  the  substratum — the  sub¬ 
stratum  which  actually  came  to  be  white,  and 
did  so  qua  wood  or  qua  a  species  of  wood  and 
qua  nothing  else. 

If  we  must  lay  down  a  rule,  let  us  entitle  the 
[75]  latter  kind  of  statement  predication,  and 
the  former  not  predication  at  all,  or  not  strict 
but  accidental  predication.  ‘White’  and  ‘log’ 
will  thus  serve  as  types  respectively  of  predi¬ 
cate  and  subject. 

We  shall  assume,  then,  that  the  predicate  is 
[20]  invariably  predicated  strictly  and  not  ac¬ 
cidentally  of  the  subject,  for  on  such  predica¬ 
tion  demonstrations  depend  for  their  force.  It 
follows  from  this  that  when  a  single  attribute 
is  predicated  of  a  single  subject,  the  predicate 
must  affirm  of  the  subject  either  some  element 
constituting  its  essential  nature,  or  that  it  is  in 
some  way  qualified,  quantified,  essentially  re¬ 
lated,  active,  passive,  placed,  or  dated. 

(2)  Predicates  which  signify  substance  sig¬ 
nify  that  the  subject  is  identical  with  the  predi¬ 
cate  or  with  a  species  of  the  predicate.  Predi- 
[25]  cates  not  signifying  substance  which  are 
predicated  of  a  subject  not  identical  with  them¬ 
selves  or  with  a  species  of  themselves  are  acci¬ 
dental  or  coincidental;  e.g.  white  is  a  coinci¬ 
dent  of  man,  seeing  that  man  is  not  identical 
with  white  or  a  species  of  white,  but  rather 
with  animal,  since  man  is  identical  with  a  spe- 
[30]  cies  of  animal.  These  predicates  which  do 
not  signify  substance  must  be  predicates  of 
some  other  subject,  and  nothing  can  be  white 
which  is  not  also  other  than  white.  The  Forms 
we  can  dispense  with,  for  they  are  mere  sound 
without  sense;  and  even  if  there  are  such 
things,  they  are  not  relevant  to  our  discussion, 
since  demonstrations  are  concerned  with  predi- 
[35]  cates  such  as  we  have  defined. 

(3)  If  A  is  a  quality  of  B,  B  cannot  be  a  qual¬ 
ity  of  A — a  quality  of  a  quality.  Therefore  A 
and  B  cannot  be  predicated  reciprocally  of  one 
another  in  strict  predication:  they  can  be  af¬ 
firmed  without  falsehood  of  one  another,  but 
not  genuinely  predicated  of  each  other.  For  one 
alternative  is  that  they  should  be  substantially 
predicated  of  one  another,  i.e.  B  would  become 
83b  the  genus  or  differentia  of  A — the  predi¬ 
cate  now  become  subject.  But  it  has  been 
shown  that  in  these  substantial  predications 
neither  the  ascending  predicates  nor  the  de- 


1 14  POSTERIOR 

scending  subjects  form  an  infinite  series;  e.g. 
neither  the  series,  man  is  biped,  biped  is  ani¬ 
mal,  &c.,  nor  the  series  predicating  animal  of 
man,  man  of  Callias,  Callias  of  a  further  sub¬ 
ject  as  an  element  of  its  essential  nature,  is  in- 
[5]  finite.  For  all  such  substance  is  definable, 
and  an  infinite  series  cannot  be  traversed  in 
thought:  consequently  neither  the  ascent  nor 
the  descent  is  infinite,  since  a  substance  whose 
predicates  were  infinite  would  not  be  definable. 
Hence  they  will  not  be  predicated  each  as  the 
genus  of  the  other;  for  this  would  equate  a 
[/o]  genus  with  one  of  its  own  species.  Nor 
(the  other  alternative)  can  a  quale  be  recipro¬ 
cally  predicated  of  a  quale,  nor  any  term  be¬ 
longing  to  an  adjectival  category  of  another 
such  term,  except  by  accidental  predication; 
for  all  such  predicates  are  coincidents  and  are 
predicated  of  substances.  On  the  other  hand — 
in  proof  of  the  impossibility  of  an  infinite  as¬ 
cending  series — every  predication  displays  the 
subject  as  somehow  qualified  or  quantified  or 
as  characterized  under  one  of  the  other  adjec¬ 
tival  categories,  or  else  is  an  element  in  its  sub- 
[75]  stantial  nature:  these  latter  are  limited  in 
number,  and  the  number  of  the  widest  kinds 
under  which  predications  fall  is  also  limited, 
for  every  predication  must  exhibit  its  subject 
as  somehow  qualified,  quantified,  essentially 
related,  acting  or  suffering,  or  in  some  place 
or  at  some  time. 

I  assume  first  that  predication  implies  a  sin¬ 
gle  subject  and  a  single  attribute,  and  secondly 
that  predicates  which  are  not  substantial  are 
not  predicated  of  one  another.  We  assume  this 
because  such  predicates  are  all  coincidents,  and 
though  some  are  essential  coincidents,  others 
[20]  of  a  different  type,  yet  we  maintain  that 
all  of  them  alike  are  predicated  of  some  sub¬ 
stratum  and  that  a  coincident  is  never  a  sub¬ 
stratum — since  we  do  not  class  as  a  coincident 
anything  which  does  not  owe  its  designation  to 
its  being  something  other  than  itself,  but  al¬ 
ways  hold  that  any  coincident  is  predicated  of 
some  substratum  other  than  itself,  and  that  an¬ 
other  group  of  coincidents  may  have  a  differ¬ 
ent  substratum.  Subject  to  these  assumptions 
[25]  then,  neither  the  ascending  nor  the  de¬ 
scending  series  of  predication  in  which  a  single 
attribute  is  predicated  of  a  single  subject  is  in¬ 
finite.  For  the  subjects  of  which  coincidents  are 
predicated  are  as  many  as  the  constitutive  ele¬ 
ments  of  each  individual  substance,  and  these 
we  have  seen  are  not  infinite  in  number,  while 
in  the  ascending  series  are  contained  those  con¬ 
stitutive  elements  with  their  coincidents — both 


ANALYTICS  84* 

of  which  are  finite.  We  conclude  that  there  is  a 
given  subject  (D)  of  which  some  attribute  (C) 
is  primarily  predicable;  that  there  must  be  an 
attribute  \B)  primarily  predicable  of  the  first 
attribute,  and  that  the  series  must  end  with  a 
[30]  term  (A)  not  predicable  of  any  term  prior 
to  the  last  subject  of  which  it  was  predicated 
(  B ),  and  of  which  no  term  prior  to  it  is  predi¬ 
cable. 

The  argument  we  have  given  is  one  of  the 
so-called  proofs;  an  alternative  proof  follows. 
Predicates  so  related  to  their  subjects  that  there 
are  other  predicates  prior  to  them  predicable  of 
those  subjects  are  demonstrable;  but  of  demon¬ 
strable  propositions  one  cannot  have  something 
[35]  better  than  knowledge,  nor  can  one 
know  them  without  demonstration.  Secondly, 
if  a  consequent  is  only  known  through  an 
antecedent  (viz.  premisses  prior  to  it)  and  we 
neither  know  this  antecedent  nor  have  some¬ 
thing  better  than  knowledge  of  it,  then  we 
shall  not  have  scientific  knowledge  of  the  con¬ 
sequent.  Therefore,  if  it  is  possible  through 
demonstration  to  know  anything  without  qual¬ 
ification  and  not  merely  as  dependent  on  the 
acceptance  of  certain  premisses — i.e.  hypothet¬ 
ically — the  series  of  intermediate  predications 
84a  must  terminate.  If  it  does  not  terminate, 
and  beyond  any  predicate  taken  as  higher  than 
another  there  remains  another  still  higher,  then 
every  predicate  is  demonstrable.  Consequently, 
since  these  demonstrable  predicates  are  infinite 
in  number  and  therefore  cannot  be  traversed, 
we  shall  not  know  them  by  demonstration.  If, 
therefore,  we  have  not  something  better  than 
[5]  knowledge  of  them,  we  cannot  through 
demonstration  have  unqualified  but  only  hy¬ 
pothetical  science  of  anything. 

As  dialectical  proofs  of  our  contention  these 
may  carry  conviction,  but  an  analytic  process 
will  show  more  briefly  that  neither  the  ascent 
nor  the  descent  of  predication  can  be  infinite  in 
[/o]  the  demonstrative  sciences  which  are  the 
object  of  our  investigation.  Demonstration 
proves  the  inherence  of  essential  attributes  in 
things.  Now  attributes  may  be  essential  for 
two  reasons:  either  because  they  are  elements 
in  the  essential  nature  of  their  subjects,  or  be¬ 
cause  their  subjects  are  elements  in  their  essen¬ 
tial  nature.  An  example  of  the  latter  is  odd  as 
an  attribute  of  number — though  it  is  number’s 
[75]  attribute,  yet  number  itself  is  an  element 
in  the  definition  of  odd;  of  the  former,  mul¬ 
tiplicity  or  the  indivisible,  which  are  elements 
in  the  definition  of  number.  In  neither  kind  of 
attribution  can  the  terms  be  infinite.  They  are 


84b  BOOK  I,  CHAPTERS  22-23 


not  infinite  where  each  is  related  to  the  term 
below  it  as  odd  is  to  number,  for  this  would 
mean  the  inherence  in  odd  of  another  attribute 
of  odd  in  whose  nature  odd  was  an  essential 
[20]  element:  but  then  number  will  be  an  ulti¬ 
mate  subject  of  the  whole  infinite  chain  of 
attributes,  and  be  an  element  in  the  definition 
of  each  of  them.  Hence,  since  an  infinity  of  at¬ 
tributes  such  as  contain  their  subject  in  their 
definition  cannot  inhere  in  a  single  thing,  the 
ascending  series  is  equally  finite.  Note,  more¬ 
over,  that  all  such  attributes  must  so  inhere  in 
the  ultimate  subject — e.g.  its  attributes  in  num¬ 
ber  and  number  in  them — as  to  be  commen¬ 
surate  with  the  subject  and  not  of  wider  extent. 
[25]  Attributes  which  are  essential  elements  in 
the  nature  of  their  subjects  are  equally  finite: 
otherwise  definition  would  be  impossible. 
Hence,  if  all  the  attributes  predicated  are  essen¬ 
tial  and  these  cannot  be  infinite,  the  ascending 
series  will  terminate,  and  consequently  the  de¬ 
scending  series  too. 

If  this  is  so,  it  follows  that  the  intermediates 
between  any  two  terms  are  also  always  lim¬ 
ited  in  number.  An  immediately  obvious  con- 
[jo]  sequence  of  this  is  that  demonstrations 
necessarily  involve  basic  truths,  and  that  the 
contention  of  some — referred,  to  at  the  outset — 
that  all  truths  are  demonstrable  is  mistaken. 
For  if  there  are  basic  truths,  (a)  not  all  truths 
are  demonstrable,  and  ( b )  an  infinite  regress  is 
impossible;  since  if  either  ( a )  or  (b)  were  not 
a  fact,  it  would  mean  that  no  interval  was  im- 
[55]  mediate  and  indivisible,  but  that  all  in¬ 
tervals  were  divisible.  This  is  true  because  a 
conclusion  is  demonstrated  by  the  interposi¬ 
tion,  not  the  apposition,  of  a  fresh  term.  If  such 
interposition  could  continue  to  infinity  there 
might  be  an  infinite  number  of  terms  between 
any  two  terms;  but  this  is  impossible  if  both 
84b  the  ascending  and  descending  series  of 
predication  terminate;  and  of  this  fact,  which 
before  was  shown  dialectically,  analytic  proof 
has  now  been  given. 

23 

It  is  an  evident  corollary  of  these  conclusions 
that  if  the  same  attribute  A  inheres  in  two 
terms  C  and  D  predicable  either  not  at  all,  or 
[5]  not  of  all  instances,  of  one  another,  it  does 
not  always  belong  to  them  in  virtue  of  a  com¬ 
mon  middle  term.  Isosceles  and  scalene  possess 
the  attribute  of  having  their  angles  equal  to 
two  right  angles  in  virtue  of  a  common  middle; 
for  they  possess  it  in  so  far  as  they  are  both  a 
certain  kind  of  figure,  and  not  in  so  far  as  they 


differ  from  one  another.  But  this  is  not  always 
the  case:  for,  were  it  so,  if  we  take  B  as  the  com¬ 
mon  middle  in  virtue  of  which  A  inheres  in  C 
[/o]  and  D,  clearly  B  would  inhere  in  C  and 
D  through  a  second  common  middle,  and  this 
in  turn  would  inhere  in  C  and  D  through  a 
third,  so  that  between  two  terms  an  infinity  of 
intermediates  would  fall — an  impossibility. 
Thus  it  need  not  always  be  in  virtue  of  a  com¬ 
mon  middle  term  that  a  single  attribute  in¬ 
heres  in  several  subjects,  since  there  must  be 
[75]  immediate  intervals.  Yet  if  the  attribute 
to  be  proved  common  to  two  subjects  is  to  be 
one  of  their  essential  attributes,  the  middle 
terms  involved  must  be  within  one  subject 
genus  and  be  derived  from  the  same  group  of 
immediate  premisses;  for  we  have  seen  that 
processes  of  proof  cannot  pass  from  one  genus 
to  another.1 

It  is  also  clear  that  when  A  inheres  in  B,  this 
[20]  can  be  demonstrated  if  there  is  a  middle 
term.  Further,  the  ‘elements’  of  such  a  con¬ 
clusion  are  the  premisses  containing  the  mid¬ 
dle  in  question,  and  they  are  identical  in  num¬ 
ber  with  the  middle  terms,  seeing  that  the 
immediate  propositions — or  at  least  such  im¬ 
mediate  propositions  as  are  universal — are  the 
‘elements’.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  there  is  no 
middle  term,  demonstration  ceases  to  be  pos¬ 
sible:  we  are  on  the  way  to  the  basic  truths. 
Similarly  if  A  does  not  inhere  in  B,  this  can 
be  demonstrated  if  there  is  a  middle  term  or  a 
[25]  term  prior  to  B  in  which  A  does  not  in¬ 
here:  otherwise  there  is  no  demonstration  and 
a  basic  truth  is  reached.  There  are,  moreover, 
as  many  ‘elements’  of  the  demonstrated  con¬ 
clusion  as  there  are  middle  terms,  since  it  is 
propositions  containing  these  middle  terms 
that  are  the  basic  premisses  on  which  the  dem¬ 
onstration  rests;  and  as  there  are  some  inde¬ 
monstrable  basic  truths  asserting  that  ‘this  is 
that’  or  that  ‘this  inheres  in  that’,  so  there  are 
[jo]  others  denying  that  ‘this  is  that’  or  that 
‘this  inheres  in  that’ — in  fact  some  basic  truths 
will  affirm  and  some  will  deny  being. 

When  we  are  to  prove  a  conclusion,  we  must 
take  a  primary  essential  predicate — suppose  it 
C — of  the  subject  B ,  and  then  suppose  A  sim¬ 
ilarly  predicable  of  C.  If  we  proceed  in  this 
manner,  no  proposition  or  attribute  which  falls 
beyond  A  is  admitted  in  the  proof:  the  interval 
is  constantly  condensed  until  subject  and  predi- 
[55]  cate  become  indivisible,  i.e.  one.  We  have 
our  unit  when  the  premiss  becomes  immediate, 
since  the  immediate  premiss  alone  is  a  single 

1 1«  7* 


ii  6  POSTERIOR 

premiss  in  the  unqualified  sense  of  ‘single’. 
And  as  in  other  spheres  the  basic  element  is 
simple  but  not  identical  in  all — in  a  system  of 
weight  it  is  the  mina,  in  music  the  quarter- 
tone,  and  so  on — so  in  syllogism  the  unit  is  an 
85a  immediate  premiss,  and  in  the  knowledge 
that  demonstration  gives  it  is  an  intuition.  In 
syllogisms,  then,  which  prove  the  inherence  of 
an  attribute,  nothing  falls  outside  the  major 
term.  In  the  case  of  negative  syllogisms  on  the 
other  hand,  (i)  in  the  first  figure  nothing  falls 
outside  the  major  term  whose  inherence  is  in 
question;  e.g.  to  prove  through  a  middle  C 
that  A  does  not  inhere  in  B  the  premisses  re- 
[5]  quired  are,  all  B  is  C,  no  C  is  A .  Then  if  it 
has  to  be  proved  that  no  C  is  A,  a  middle  must 
be  found  between  A  and  C;  and  this  procedure 
will  never  vary. 

(2)  If  we  have  to  show  that  E  is  not  D  by 
means  of  the  premisses,  all  D  is  C;  no  E,  or  not 
all  E,  is  C;  then  the  middle  will  never  fall  be¬ 
yond  E,  and  E  is  the  subject  of  which  D  is  to 
be  denied  in  the  conclusion. 

[/o]  (3)  In  the  third  figure  the  middle  will 
never  fall  beyond  the  limits  of  the  subject  and 
the  attribute  denied  of  it. 

24 

Since  demonstrations  may  be  either  commen- 
surately  universal  or  particular,  and  either 
affirmative  or  negative;  the  question  arises, 
[75]  which  form  is  the  better?  And  the  same 
question  may  be  put  in  regard  to  so-called  ‘di¬ 
rect’  demonstration  and  reductio  ad  impos si- 
bile.  Let  us  first  examine  the  commensurately 
universal  and  the  particular  forms,  and  when 
we  have  cleared  up  this  problem  proceed  to 
discuss  ‘direct’  demonstration  and  reductio  ad 
impossibile. 

[20]  The  following  considerations  might  lead 
some  minds  to  prefer  particular  demonstration. 

( 1 )  The  superior  demonstration  is  the  dem¬ 
onstration  which  gives  us  greater  knowledge 
(for  this  is  the  ideal  of  demonstration),  and 
we  have  greater  knowledge  of  a  particular  in¬ 
dividual  when  we  know  it  in  itself  than  when 
we  know  it  through  something  else;  e.g.  we 
know  Coriscus  the  musician  better  when  we 
[25]  know  that  Coriscus  is  musical  than  when 
we  know  only  that  man  is  musical,  and  a  like 
argument  holds  in  all  other  cases.  But  commen¬ 
surately  universal  demonstration,  instead  of 
proving  that  the  subject  itself  actually  is  x, 
proves  only  that  something  else  is  x — e.g.  in 
attempting  to  prove  that  isosceles  is  x,  it  proves 
not  that  isosceles  but  only  that  triangle  is  x — 


ANALYTICS  85b 

whereas  particular  demonstration  proves  that 
the  subject  itself  is  x.  The  demonstration,  then, 
that  a  subject,  as  such,  possesses  an  attribute  is 
superior.  If  this  is  so,  and  if  the  particular  rath¬ 
er  than  the  commensurately  universal  form  so 
[30]  demonstrates,  particular  demonstration  is 
superior. 

(2)  The  universal  has  not  a  separate  being 
over  against  groups  of  singulars.  Demonstra¬ 
tion  nevertheless  creates  the  opinion  that  its 
function  is  conditioned  by  something  like  this 
— some  separate  entity  belonging  to  the  real 
world;  that,  for  instance,  of  triangle  or  of  fig¬ 
ure  or  number,  over  against  particular  trian- 
[35]  gles,  figures,  and  numbers.  But  demon¬ 
stration  which  touches  the  real  and  will  not 
mislead  is  superior  to  that  which  moves  among 
unrealities  and  is  delusory.  Now  commensu¬ 
rately  universal  demonstration  is  of  the  latter 
kind:  if  we  engage  in  it  we  find  ourselves  rea¬ 
soning  after  a  fashion  well  illustrated  by  the 
argument  that  the  proportionate  is  what  an¬ 
swers  to  the  definition  of  some  entity  which  is 
neither  line,  number,  solid,  nor  plane,  but  a 
85b  proportionate  apart  from  all  these.  Since, 
then,  such  a  proof  is  characteristically  com¬ 
mensurate  and  universal,  and  less  touches  real¬ 
ity  than  does  particular  demonstration,  and 
creates  a  false  opinion,  it  will  follow  that  com¬ 
mensurate  and  universal  is  inferior  to  particu¬ 
lar  demonstration. 

We  may  retort  thus.  (1)  The  first  argument 
applies  no  more  to  commensurate  and  univer¬ 
sal  than  to  particular  demonstration.  If  equal¬ 
ly]  ity  to  two  right  angles  is  attributable  to  its 
subject  not  qua  isosceles  but  qua  triangle,  he 
who  knows  that  isosceles  possesses  that  attribute 
knows  the  subject  as  qua  itself  possessing  the 
attribute,  to  a  less  degree  than  he  who  knows 
that  triangle  has  that  attribute.  To  sum  up  the 
whole  matter:  if  a  subject  is  proved  to  possess 
qua  triangle  an  attribute  which  it  does  not  in 
fact  possess  qua  triangle,  that  is  not  demon¬ 
stration:  but  if  it  does  possess  it  qua  triangle, 
the  rule  applies  that  the  greater  knowledge  is 
his  who  knows  the  subject  as  possessing  its  at¬ 
tribute  qua  that  in  virtue  of  which  it  actually 
does  possess  it.  Since,  then,  triangle  is  the  wider 
[/o]  term,  and  there  is  one  identical  defini¬ 
tion  of  triangle — i.e.  the  term  is  not  equivocal 
— and  since  equality  to  two  right  angles  be¬ 
longs  to  all  triangles,  it  is  isosceles  qua  triangle 
and  not  triangle  qua  isosceles  which  has  its 
angles  so  related.  It  follows  that  he  who  knows 
a  connexion  universally  has  greater  knowl¬ 
edge  of  it  as  it  in  fact  is  than  he  who  knows  the 


86a  BOOK  I,  CHAPTERS  23-24  117 


particular;  and  the  inference  is  that.commen- 
surate  and  universal  is  superior  to  particular 
demonstration. 

[75]  (2)  If  there  is  a  single  identical  definition 
— i.e.  if  the  commensurate  universal  is  un¬ 
equivocal — then  the  universal  will  possess  be¬ 
ing  not  less  but  more  than  some  of  the  particu¬ 
lars,  inasmuch  as  it  is  universal  which  com¬ 
prise  the  imperishable,  particulars  that  tend  to 
perish. 

(3)  Because  the  universal  has  a  single  mean¬ 
ing,  we  are  not  therefore  compelled  to  suppose 
that  in  these  examples  it  has  being  as  a  sub¬ 
stance  apart  from  its  particulars — any  more 
than  we  need  make  a  similar  supposition  in 
the  other  cases  of  unequivocal  universal  predi¬ 
cation,  viz.  where  the  predicate  signifies  not 
[20]  substance  but  quality,  essential  related¬ 
ness,  or  action.  If  such  a  supposition  is  enter¬ 
tained,  the  blame  rests  not  with  the  demonstra¬ 
tion  but  with  the  hearer. 

(4)  Demonstration  is  syllogism  that  proves 
the  cause,  i.e.  the  reasoned  fact,  and  it  is  rather 
the  commensurate  universal  than  the  particu¬ 
lar  which  is  causative  (as  may  be  shown  thus: 
that  which  possesses  an  attribute  through  its 
[25]  own  essential  nature  is  itself  the  cause  of 
the  inherence,  and  the  commensurate  univer¬ 
sal  is  primary;  hence  the  commensurate  uni¬ 
versal  is  the  cause).  Consequently  commensu- 
rately  universal  demonstration  is  superior  as 
more  especially  proving  the  cause,  that  is  the 
reasoned  fact. 

(5)  Our  search  for  the  reason  ceases,  and  we 
think  that  we  know,  when  the  coming  to  be  or 
existence  of  the  fact  before  us  is  not  due  to  the 
coming  to  be  or  existence  of  some  other  fact, 
for  the  last  step  of  a  search  thus  conducted  is 
[30]  eo  ipso  the  end  and  limit  of  the  problem. 
Thus:  ‘Why  did  he  come?’  ‘To  get  the  money 
— wherewith  to  pay  a  debt — that  he  might 
thereby  do  what  was  right.’  When  in  this  re¬ 
gress  we  can  no  longer  find  an  efficient  or  final 
cause,  we  regard  the  last  step  of  it  as  the  end  of 
the  coming — or  being  or  coming  to  be — and 
we  regard  ourselves  as  then  only  having  full 
knowledge  of  the  reason  why  he  came. 

[35]  If,  then,  all  causes  and  reasons  are  alike 
in  this  respect,  and  if  this  is  the  means  to  full 
knowledge  in  the  case  of  final  causes  such  as 
we  have  exemplified,  it  follows  that  in  the  case 
of  the  other  causes  also  full  knowledge  is  at¬ 
tained  when  an  attribute  no  longer  inheres  be¬ 
cause  of  something  else.  Thus,  when  we  learn 
that  exterior  angles  are  equal  to  four  right  an¬ 
gles  because  they  are  the  exterior  angles  of  an 


isosceles,  there  still  remains  the  question  ‘Why 
86a  has  isosceles  this  attribute?’  and  its  answer 
‘Because  it  is  a  triangle,  and  a  triangle  has  it 
because  a  triangle  is  a  rectilinear  figure.’  If 
rectilinear  figure  possesses  the  property  for  no 
further  reason,  at  this  point  we  have  full 
knowledge — but  at  this  point  our  knowledge 
has  become  commensurately  universal,  and  so 
we  conclude  that  commensurately  universal 
demonstration  is  superior. 

(6)  The  more  demonstration  becomes  particu¬ 
lar  the  more  it  sinks  into  an  indeterminate 
manifold,  while  universal  demonstration  tends 
[5]  to  the  simple  and  determinate.  But  objects 
so  far  as  they  are  an  indeterminate  manifold 
are  unintelligible,  so  far  as  they  are  determi¬ 
nate,  intelligible:  they  are  therefore  intelligible 
rather  in  so  far  as  they  are  universal  than  in  so 
far  as  they  are  particular.  From  this  it  follows 
that  universals  are  more  demonstrable:  but 
since  relative  and  correlative  increase  concomi¬ 
tantly,  of  the  more  demonstrable  there  will  be 
fuller  demonstration.  Hence  the  commensurate 
and  universal  form,  being  more  truly  demon- 
[/o]  stration,  is  the  superior. 

(7)  Demonstration  which  teaches  two 
things  is  preferable  to  demonstration  which 
teaches  only  one.  He  who  possesses  commensu¬ 
rately  universal  demonstration  knows  the  par¬ 
ticular  as  well,  but  he  who  possesses  particular 
demonstration  does  not  know  the  universal. 
So  that  this  is  an  additional  reason  for  prefer¬ 
ring  commensurately  universal  demonstration. 
And  there  is  yet  this  further  argument: 

(8)  Proof  becomes  more  and  more  proof  of 
the  commensurate  universal  as  its  middle  term 
approaches  nearer  to  the  basic  truth,  and  noth- 
[75]  ing  is  so  near  as  the  immediate  premiss 
which  is  itself  the  basic  truth.  If,  then,  proof 
from  the  basic  truth  is  more  accurate  than 
proof  not  so  derived,  demonstration  which  de¬ 
pends  more  closely  on  it  is  more  accurate  than 
demonstration  which  is  less  closely  dependent. 
But  commensurately  universal  demonstration 
is  characterized  by  this  closer  dependence,  and 
is  therefore  superior.  Thus,  if  A  had  to  be 
proved  to  inhere  in  D,  and  the  middles  were 
B  and  C,  B  being  the  higher  term  would  ren- 
[20]  der  the  demonstration  which  it  mediated 
the  more  universal. 

Some  of  these  arguments,  however,  are  dia¬ 
lectical.  The  clearest  indication  of  the  preced¬ 
ence  of  commensurately  universal  demonstra¬ 
tion  is  as  follows:  if  of  two  propositions,  a 
prior  and  a  posterior,  we  have  a  grasp  of  the 
prior,  we  have  a  kind  of  knowledge — a  poten- 


1 1 8 

tial  grasp — of  the  posterior  as  well.  For  exam- 
[25]  pie,  if  one  knows  that  the  angles  of  all 
triangles  are  equal  to  two  right  angles,  one 
knows  in  a  sense — potentially — that  the  isos¬ 
celes*  angles  also  are  equal  to  two  right  angles, 
even  if  one  does  not  know  that  the  isosceles  is 
a  triangle;  but  to  grasp  this  posterior  proposi¬ 
tion  is  by  no  means  to  know  the  commensu¬ 
rate  universal  either  potentially  or  actually. 
Moreover,  commensurately  universal  demon¬ 
stration  is  through  and  through  intelligible; 
[jo]  particular  demonstration  issues  in  sense- 
perception. 

25 

The  preceding  arguments  constitute  our  de¬ 
fence  of  the  superiority  of  commensurately  uni¬ 
versal  to  particular  demonstration.  That  affirm¬ 
ative  demonstration  excels  negative  may  be 
shown  as  follows. 

(1)  We  may  assume  the  superiority  ceteris 
paribus  of  the  demonstration  which  derives 
from  fewer  postulates  or  hypotheses — in  short 
[55]  from  fewer  premisses;  for,  given  that  all 
these  are  equally  well  known,  where  they  are 
fewer  knowledge  will  be  more  speedily  ac¬ 
quired,  and  that  is  a  desideratum.  The  argu¬ 
ment  implied  in  our  contention  that  demon¬ 
stration  from  fewer  assumptions  is  superior 
may  be  set  out  in  universal  form  as  follows. 
Assuming  that  in  both  cases  alike  the  middle 
terms  are  known,  and  that  middles  which  are 
prior  are  better  known  than  such  as  are  poste¬ 
rior,  we  may  suppose  two  demonstrations  of 
the  inherence  of  A  in  E}  the  one  proving  it 
86b  through  the  middles  B,  C  and  D,  the 
other  through  F  and  G.  Then  A-D  is  known 
to  the  same  degree  as  A-E  (in  the  second 
proof),  but  A-D  is  better  known  than  and 
prior  to  A-E  (in  the  first  proof);  since  A-E 
is  proved  through  A-D ,  and  the  ground  is 
more  certain  than  the  conclusion. 

[5]  Hence  demonstration  by  fewer  premisses 
is  ceteris  paribus  superior.  Now  both  affirma¬ 
tive  and  negative  demonstration  operate 
through  three  terms  and  two  premisses,  but 
whereas  the  former  assumes  only  that  some¬ 
thing  is,  the  latter  assumes  both  that  something 
is  and  that  something  else  is  not,  and  thus 
operating  through  more  kinds  of  premiss  is  in¬ 
ferior. 

[/o]  (2)  It  has  been  proved1  that  no  conclusion 
follows  if  both  premisses  are  negative,  but 
that  one  must  be  negative,  the  other  affirma¬ 
tive.  So  we  are  compelled  to  lay  down  the  fol- 
1  Prior  Analytics ,  1.  7. 


87* 

lowing  additional  rule:  as  the  demonstration 
expands,  the  affirmative  premisses  must  in¬ 
crease  in  number,  but  there  cannot  be  more 
[75]  than  one  negative  premiss  in  each  com¬ 
plete  proof.  Thus,  suppose  no  B  is  A,  and  all  C 
is  B.  Then  if  both  the  premisses  are  to  be  again 
expanded,  a  middle  must  be  interposed.  Let  us 
interpose  D  between  A  and  B,  and  E  between 
B  and  C.  Then  clearly  E  is  affirmatively  re- 
120]  lated  to  B  and  C,  while  D  is  affirmatively 
related  to  B  but  negatively  to  A;  for  all  B  is  D, 
but  there  must  be  no  D  which  is  A.  Thus  there 
proves  to  be  a  single  negative  premiss,  A-D. 
In  the  further  prosyllogisms  too  it  is  the  same, 
because  in  the  terms  of  an  affirmative  syllo¬ 
gism  the  middle  is  always  related  affirmatively 
to  both  extremes;  in  a  negative  syllogism  it 
[25]  must  be  negatively  related  only  to  one  of 
them,  and  so  this  negation  comes  to  be  a  single 
negative  premiss,  the  other  premisses  being 
affirmative.  If,  then,  that  through  which  a  truth 
is  proved  is  a  better  known  and  more  certain 
truth,  and  if  the  negative  proposition  is  proved 
through  the  affirmative  and  not  vice  versa, 
affirmative  demonstration,  being  prior  and  bet¬ 
ter  known  and  more  certain,  will  be  superior, 
[jo]  (3)  The  basic  truth  of  demonstrative  syl¬ 
logism  is  the  universal  immediate  premiss,  and 
the  universal  premiss  asserts  in  affirmative 
demonstration  and  in  negative  denies:  and  the 
affirmative  proposition  is  prior  to  and  better 
known  than  the  negative  (since  affirmation  ex¬ 
plains  denial  and  is  prior  to  denial,  just  as  be- 
[55]  m§  1S  prior  to  not-being).  It  follows  that 
the  basic  premiss  of  affirmative  demonstration 
is  superior  to  that  of  negative  demonstration, 
and  the  demonstration  which  uses  superior 
basic  premisses  is  superior. 

(4)  Affirmative  demonstration  is  more  of  the 
nature  of  a  basic  form  of  proof,  because  it  is  a 
sine  qua  non  of  negative  demonstration. 

26 

8 7a  Since  affirmative  demonstration  is  superior 
to  negative,  it  is  clearly  superior  also  to  reduc - 
tio  ad  impossibile.  We  must  first  make  certain 
what  is  the  difference  between  negative  dem¬ 
onstration  and  reductio  ad  impossibile.  Let  us 
suppose  that  no  B  is  A,  and  that  all  C  is  B:  the 
conclusion  necessarily  follows  that  no  C  is  A. 
[5]  If  these  premisses  are  assumed,  therefore, 
the  negative  demonstration  that  no  C  is  A  is 
direct.  Reductio  ad  impossibile ,  on  the  other 
hand,  proceeds  as  follows.  Supposing  we  are 
to  prove  that  A  does  not  inhere  in  B,  we  have 
to  assume  that  it  does  inhere,  and  further  that 


POSTERIOR  ANALYTICS 


BOOK  I,  CHAPTERS  24-30 


87b 

B  inheres  in  C,  with  the  resulting  inference 
that  A  inheres  in  C.  This  we  have  to  suppose  a 
known  and  admitted  impossibility;  and  we 
[/o]  then  infer  that  A  cannot  inhere  in  B. 
Thus  if  the  inherence  of  B  in  C  is  not  ques¬ 
tioned,  A's  inherence  in  B  is  impossible. 

The  order  of  the  terms  is  the  same  in  both 
proofs:  they  differ  according  to  which  of  the 
negative  propositions  is  the  better  known,  the 
one  denying  A  of  B  or  the  one  denying  A  of  C. 
When  the  falsity  of  the  conclusion  is  the  better 
[75]  known,  we  use  reductio  ad  impossible; 
when  the  major  premiss  of  the  syllogism  is  the 
more  obvious,  we  use  direct  demonstration.  All 
the  same  the  proposition  denying  A  of  B  is,  in 
the  order  of  being,  prior  to  that  denying  A  of 
C;  for  premisses  are  prior  to  the  conclusion 
which  follows  from  them,  and  'no  C  is  A’  is 
the  conclusion,  ‘no  B  is  A’  one  of  its  premisses. 
[20]  For  the  destructive  result  of  reductio  ad 
impossible  is  not  a  proper  conclusion,  nor  are 
its  antecedents  proper  premisses.  On  the  con¬ 
trary:  the  constituents  of  syllogism  are  prem¬ 
isses  related  to  one  another  as  whole  to  part  or 
part  to  whole,  whereas  the  premisses  A-C  and 
[25]  A-B  are  not  thus  related  to  one  another. 
Now  the  superior  demonstration  is  that  which 
proceeds  from  better  known  and  prior  prem¬ 
isses,  and  while  both  these  forms  depend  for 
credence  on  the  not-being  of  something,  yet 
the  source  of  the  one  is  prior  to  that  of  the 
other.  Therefore  negative  demonstration  will 
have  an  unqualified  superiority  to  reductio  ad 
impossible,  and  affirmative  demonstration, 
being  superior  to  negative,  will  consequently 
[jo]  be  superior  also  to  reductio  ad  impos¬ 
sible, 

27 

The  science  which  is  knowledge  at  once  of  the 
fact  and  of  the  reasoned  fact,  not  of  the  fact  by 
itself  without  the  reasoned  fact,  is  the  more  ex¬ 
act  and  the  prior  science. 

A  science  such  as  arithmetic,  which  is  not  a 
science  of  properties  qua  inhering  in  a  sub¬ 
stratum,  is  more  exact  than  and  prior  to  a  sci¬ 
ence  like  harmonics,  which  is  a  science  of 
properties  inhering  in  a  substratum;  and  sim¬ 
ilarly  a  science  like  arithmetic,  which  is  con¬ 
stituted  of  fewer  basic  elements,  is  more  exact 
than  and  prior  to  geometry,  which  requires 
[55]  additional  elements.  What  I  mean  by 
‘additional  elements’  is  this:  a  unit  is  sub¬ 
stance  without  position,  while  a  point  is  sub¬ 
stance  with  position;  the  latter  contains  an  ad¬ 
ditional  element. 


A  single  science  is  one  whose  domain  is  a  sin¬ 
gle  genus,  viz.  all  the  subjects  constituted  out 
of  the  primary  entities  of  the  genus — i.e.  the 
parts  of  this  total  subject — and  their  essential 
properties. 

One  science  differs  from  another  when  their 
basic  truths  have  neither  a  common  source  nor 
are  derived  those  of  the  one  science  from  those 
87b  of  the  other.  This  is  verified  when  we 
reach  the  indemonstrable  premisses  of  a  sci¬ 
ence,  for  they  must  be  within  one  genus  with 
its  conclusions:  and  this  again  is  verified  if  the 
conclusions  proved  by  means  of  them  fall  with¬ 
in  one  genus — i.e.  are  homogeneous. 

29 

[5]  One  can  have  several  demonstrations  of 
the  same  connexion  not  only  by  taking  from 
the  same  series  of  predication  middles  which 
are  other  than  the  immediately  cohering  term 
— e.g.  by  taking  C,  D,  and  F  severally  to  prove 
A-B — but  also  by  taking  a  middle  from  an¬ 
other  series.  Thus  let  A  be  change,  D  altera¬ 
tion  of  a  property,  B  feeling  pleasure,  and  G 
relaxation.  We  can  then  without  falsehood 
[70]  predicate  D  of  B  and  A  of  D,  for  he  who 
is  pleased  suffers  alteration  of  a  property,  and 
that  which  alters  a  property  changes.  Again, 
we  can  predicate  A  of  G  without  falsehood, 
and  G  of  B;  for  to  feel  pleasure  is  to  relax,  and 
to  relax  is  to  change.  So  the  conclusion  can  be 
drawn  through  middles  which  are  different, 
i.e.  not  in  the  same  series — yet  not  so  that 
neither  of  these  middles  is  predicable  of  the 
[75]  other,  for  they  must  both  be  attributable 
to  some  one  subject. 

A  further  point  worth  investigating  is  how 
many  ways  of  proving  the  same  conclusion  can 
be  obtained  by  varying  the  figure. 

30 

There  is  no  knowledge  by  demonstration  of 
chance  conjunctions;  for  chance  conjunctions 
exist  neither  by  necessity  nor  as  general  con- 
[20]  nexions  but  comprise  what  comes  to  be  as 
something  distinct  from  these.  Now  demon¬ 
stration  is  concerned  only  with  one  or  other  of 
these  two;  for  all  reasoning  proceeds  from  nec¬ 
essary  or  general  premisses,  the  conclusion  be¬ 
ing  necessary  if  the  premisses  are  necessary  and 
[25]  general  if  the  premisses  are  general.  Con¬ 
sequently,  if  chance  conjunctions  are  neither 
general  nor  necessary,  they  are  not  demon¬ 
strable. 


POSTERIOR  ANALYTICS 


31 

Scientific  knowledge  is  not  possible  through 
the  act  of  perception.  Even  if  perception  as  a 
faculty  is  of  ‘the  such’  and  not  merely  of  a 
‘this  somewhat’,  yet  one  must  at  any  rate  actu¬ 
ally  perceive  a  ‘this  somewhat’,  and  at  a  defi- 
[jo]  nite  present  place  and  time:  but  that 
which  is  commensurately  universal  and  true 
in  all  cases  one  cannot  perceive,  since  it  is  not 
‘this’  and  it  is  not  ‘now’;  if  it  were,  it  would 
not  be  commensurately  universal — the  term 
we  apply  to  what  is  always  and  everywhere. 
Seeing,  therefore,  that  demonstrations  are 
commensurately  universal  and  universal  im¬ 
perceptible,  we  clearly  cannot  obtain  scientific 
[35]  knowledge  by  the  act  of  perception:  nay, 
it  is  obvious  that  even  if  it  were  possible  to 
perceive  that  a  triangle  has  its  angles  equal  to 
two  right  angles,  we  should  still  be  looking 
for  a  demonstration — we  should  not  (as  some 
say)  possess  knowledge  of  it;  for  perception 
must  be  of  a  particular,  whereas  scientific 
knowledge  involves  the  recognition  of  the 
commensurate  universal.  So  if  we  were  on  the 
moon,  and  saw  the  earth  shutting  out  the  sun’s 
[40]  light,  we  should  not  know  the  cause  of 
88a  the  eclipse:  we  should  perceive  the  present 
fact  of  the  eclipse,  but  not  the  reasoned  fact  at 
all,  since  the  act  of  perception  is  not  of  the 
commensurate  universal.  I  do  not,  of  course, 
deny  that  by  watching  the  frequent  recur¬ 
rence  of  this  event  we  might,  after  tracking 
the  commensurate  universal,  possess  a  dem¬ 
onstration,  for  the  commensurate  universal  is 
elicited  from  the  several  groups  of  singulars. 

[5]  The  commensurate  universal  is  precious 
because  it  makes  clear  the  cause;  so  that  in  the 
case  of  facts  like  these  which  have  a  cause  other 
than  themselves  universal  knowledge  is  more 
precious  than  sense-perceptions  and  than  in¬ 
tuition.  (As  regards  primary  truths  there  is  of 
course  a  different  account  to  be  given.1)  Hence 
it  is  clear  that  knowledge  of  things  demon¬ 
strable  cannot  be  acquired  by  perception,  un- 
[/o]  less  the  term  perception  is  applied  to  the 
possession  of  scientific  knowledge  through 
demonstration.  Nevertheless  certain  points  do 
arise  with  regard  to  connexions  to  be  proved 
which  are  referred  for  their  explanation  to  a 
failure  in  sense-perception:  there  are  cases 
when  an  act  of  vision  would  terminate  our  in¬ 
quiry,  not  because  in  seeing  we  should  be 
knowing,  but  because  we  should  have  elicited 
the  universal  from  seeing;  if,  for  example,  we 
1  Cf.,  e.g.,  ioob  12. 


88b 

[75]  saw  the  pores  in  the  glass  and  the  light 
passing  through,  the  reason  of  the  kindling 
would  be  clear  to  us  because  we  should  at  the 
same  time  see  it  in  each  instance  and  intuit 
that  it  must  be  so  in  all  instances. 

32 

All  syllogisms  cannot  have  the  same  basic 
truths.  This  may  be  shown  first  of  all  by  the 
following  dialectical  considerations.  (1)  Some 
syllogisms  are  true  and  some  false:  for  though 
[20]  a  true  inference  is  possible  from  false 
premisses,  yet  this  occurs  once  only — I  mean  if 
A,  for  instance,  is  truly  predicable  of  C,  but  B, 
the  middle,  is  false,  both  A-B  and  B-C  being 
false;  nevertheless,  if  middles  are  taken  to 
prove  these  premisses,  they  will  be  false  be- 
[25]  cause  every  conclusion  which  is  a  false¬ 
hood  has  false  premisses,  while  true  conclu¬ 
sions  have  true  premisses,  and  false  and  true 
differ  in  kind.  Then  again,  (2)  falsehoods  are 
not  all  derived  from  a  single  identical  set  of 
principles:  there  are  falsehoods  which  are  the 
contraries  of  one  another  and  cannot  coexist, 
e.g.  ‘justice  is  injustice’,  and  ‘justice  is  cow¬ 
ardice’;  ‘man  is  horse’,  and  ‘man  is  ox’;  ‘the 
equal  is  greater’,  and  ‘the  equal  is  less.’  From 
[jo]  our  established  principles  we  may  argue 
the  case  as  follows,  confining  ourselves  there¬ 
fore  to  true  conclusions.  Not  even  all  these  are 
inferred  from  the  same  basic  truths;  many  of 
them  in  fact  have  basic  truths  which  differ 
generically  and  are  not  transferable;  units,  for 
instance,  which  are  without  position,  cannot 
take  the  place  of  points,  which  have  position. 
The  transferred  terms  could  only  fit  in  as  mid- 
[^5]  die  terms  or  as  major  or  minor  terms,  or 
else  have  some  of  the  other  terms  between 
them,  others  outside  them. 

Nor  can  any  of  the  common  axioms — such, 
I  mean,  as  the  law  of  excluded  middle — serve 
as  premisses  for  the  proof  of  all  conclusions. 
88b  For  the  kinds  of  being  are  different,  and 
some  attributes  attach  to  quanta  and  some  to 
qualia  only;  and  proof  is  achieved  by  means  of 
the  common  axioms  taken  in  conjunction  with 
these  several  kinds  and  their  attributes. 

Again,  it  is  not  true  that  the  basic  truths  are 
[5]  much  fewer  than  the  conclusions,  for  the 
basic  truths  are  the  premisses,  and  the  prem¬ 
isses  are  formed  by  the  apposition  of  a  fresh 
extreme  term  or  the  interposition  of  a  fresh 
middle.  Moreover,  the  number  of  conclusions 
is  indefinite,  though  the  number  of  middle 
terms  is  finite;  and  lastly  some  of  the  basic 
truths  are  necessary,  others  variable. 


121 


BOOK  I,  CHAPTERS  31-33 


89a 

Looking  at  it  in  this  way  we  see  that,  since 
the  number  of  conclusions  is  indefinite,  the 
basic  truths  cannot  be  identical  or  limited  in 
[/o]  number.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  identity  is 
used  in  another  sense,  and  it  is  said,  e.g.  ‘these 
and  no  other  are  the  fundamental  truths  of  ge¬ 
ometry,  these  the  fundamentals  of  calculation, 
these  again  of  medicine';  would  the  statement 
mean  anything  except  that  the  sciences  have 
basic  truths?  To  call  them  identical  because 
they  are  self-identical  is  absurd,  since  every¬ 
thing  can  be  identified  with  everything  in  that 
[75]  sense  of  identity.  Nor  again  can  the  con¬ 
tention  that  all  conclusions  have  the  same  basic 
truths  mean  that  from  the  mass  of  all  possible 
premisses  any  conclusion  may  be  drawn.  That 
would  be  exceedingly  naive,  for  it  is  not  the 
case  in  the  clearly  evident  mathematical  sci¬ 
ences,  nor  is  it  possible  in  analysis,  since  it  is 
the  immediate  premisses  which  are  the  basic 
truths,  and  a  fresh  conclusion  is  only  formed 
[20]  by  the  addition  of  a  new  immediate  prem¬ 
iss:  but  if  it  be  admitted  that  it  is  these  primary 
immediate  premisses  which  are  basic  truths, 
each  subject-genus  will  provide  one  basic  truth. 
If,  however,  it  is  not  argued  that  from  the  mass 
of  all  possible  premisses  any  conclusion  may 
be  proved,  nor  yet  admitted  that  basic  truths 
differ  so  as  to  be  generically  different  for  each 
science,  it  remains  to  consider  the  possibility 
that,  while  the  basic  truths  of  all  knowledge 
are  within  one  genus,  special  premisses  are  re- 
[25]  quired  to  prove  special  conclusions.  But 
that  this  cannot  be  the  case  has  been  shown  by 
our  proof  that  the  basic  truths  of  things  gen¬ 
erically  different  themselves  differ  generically. 
For  fundamental  truths  are  of  two  kinds,  those 
which  are  premisses  of  demonstration  and  the 
subject-genus;  and  though  the  former  are  com¬ 
mon,  the  latter — number,  for  instance,  and 
magnitude — are  peculiar. 

33 

[jo]  Scientific  knowledge  and  its  object  differ 
from  opinion  and  the  object  of  opinion  in 
that  scientific  knowledge  is  commensurately 
universal  and  proceeds  by  necessary  connex¬ 
ions,  and  that  which  is  necessary  cannot  be 
otherwise.  So  though  there  are  things  which 
are  true  and  real  and  yet  can  be  otherwise,  sci¬ 
entific  knowledge  clearly  does  not  concern 
them:  if  it  did,  things  which  can  be  otherwise 
[i5]  would  be  incapable  of  being  otherwise. 
Nor  are  they  any  concern  of  rational  intuition 
— by  rational  intuition  I  mean  an  originative 
source  of  scientific  knowledge — nor  of  inde¬ 


monstrable  knowledge,  which  is  the  grasping  of 
89a  the  immediate  premiss.  Since  then  ration¬ 
al  intuition,  science,  and  opinion,  and  what  is 
revealed  by  these  terms,  are  the  only  things 
that  can  be  ‘true’,  it  follows  that  it  is  opinion 
that  is  concerned  with  that  which  may  be 
true  or  false,  and  can  be  otherwise:  opinion  in 
fact  is  the  grasp  of  a  premiss  which  is  immedi¬ 
ate  but  not  necessary.  This  view  also  fits  the 
[5]  observed  facts,  for  opinion  is  unstable,  and 
so  is  the  kind  of  being  we  have  described  as  its 
object.  Besides,  when  a  man  thinks  a  truth  in¬ 
capable  of  being  otherwise  he  always  thinks 
that  he  knows  it,  never  that  he  opines  it.  He 
thinks  that  he  opines  when  he  thinks  that  a 
connexion,  though  actually  so,  may  quite  easily 
be  otherwise;  for  he  believes  that  such  is  the 
[/o]  proper  object  of  opinion,  while  the  nec¬ 
essary  is  the  object  of  knowledge. 

In  what  sense,  then,  can  the  same  thing  be 
the  object  of  both  opinion  and  knowledge? 
And  if  any  one  chooses  to  maintain  that  all 
that  he  knows  he  can  also  opine,  why  should 
not  opinion  be  knowledge?  For  he  that  knows 
and  he  that  opines  will  follow  the  same  train 
of  thought  through  the  same  middle  terms 
until  the  immediate  premisses  are  reached; 
[75]  because  it  is  possible  to  opine  not  only 
the  fact  but  also  the  reasoned  fact,  and  the 
reason  is  the  middle  term;  so  that,  since  the 
former  knows,  he  that  opines  also  has  knowl¬ 
edge. 

The  truth  perhaps  is  that  if  a  man  grasp 
truths  that  cannot  be  other  than  they  are,  in 
the  way  in  which  he  grasps  the  definitions 
through  which  demonstrations  take  place,  he 
will  have  not  opinion  but  knowledge:  if  on  the 
other  hand  he  apprehends  these  attributes  as 
inhering  in  their  subjects,  but  not  in  virtue  of 
the  subjects'  substance  and  essential  nature,  he 
[20]  possesses  opinion  and  not  genuine  knowl¬ 
edge;  and  his  opinion,  if  obtained  through  im¬ 
mediate  premisses,  will  be  both  of  the  fact  and 
of  the  reasoned  fact;  if  not  so  obtained,  of  the 
fact  alone.  The  object  of  opinion  and  knowl¬ 
edge  is  not  quite  identical;  it  is  only  in  a  sense 
identical,  just  as  the  object  of  true  and  false 
[25]  opinion  is  in  a  sense  identical.  The  sense 
in  which  some  maintain  that  true  and  false 
opinion  can  have  the  same  object  leads  them 
to  embrace  many  strange  doctrines,  particular¬ 
ly  the  doctrine  that  what  a  man  opines  falsely 
he  does  not  opine  at  all.  There  are  really  many 
senses  of  ‘identical',  and  in  one  sense  the  ob¬ 
ject  of  true  and  false  opinion  can  be  the  same, 
in  another  it  cannot.  Thus,  to  have  a  true  opin- 


122 

ion  that  the  diagonal  is  commensurate  with 
[ ?o]  the  side  would  be  absurd:  but  because  the 
diagonal  with  which  they  are  both  concerned 
is  the  same,  the  two  opinions  have  objects  so 
far  the  same:  on  the  other  hand,  as  regards 
their  essential  definable  nature  these  objects 
differ.  The  identity  of  the  objects  of  knowl¬ 
edge  and  opinion  is  similar.  Knowledge  is  the 
apprehension  of,  e.g.  the  attribute  ‘animal’  as 
incapable  of  being  otherwise,  opinion  the  ap¬ 
prehension  of  ‘animal’  as  capable  of  being 
[35]  otherwise — e.g.  the  apprehension  that 
animal  is  an  element  in  the  essential  nature  of 
man  is  knowledge;  the  apprehension  of  animal 
as  predicable  of  man  but  not  as  an  element  in 
man’s  essential  nature  is  opinion:  man  is  the 
subject  in  both  judgements,  but  the  mode  of  in¬ 
herence  differs. 

This  also  shows  that  one  cannot  opine  and 
know  the  same  thing  simultaneously;  for  then 
one  would  apprehend  the  same  thing  as  both 
capable  and  incapable  of  being  otherwise — an 
89b  impossibility.  Knowledge  and  opinion  of 
the  same  thing  can  co-exist  in  two  different 
people  in  the  sense  we  have  explained,  but  not 
simultaneously  in  the  same  person.  That  would 
involve  a  man’s  simultaneously  apprehending, 
e.g.  (1)  that  man  is  essentially  animal — i.e. 
cannot  be  other  than  animal — and  (2)  that 


90* 

[5]  man  is  not  essentially  animal,  that  is,  we 
may  assume,  may  be  other  than  animal. 

Further  consideration  of  modes  of  thinking 
and  their  distribution  under  the  heads  of  dis¬ 
cursive  thought,  intuition,  science,  art,  prac¬ 
tical  wisdom,  and  metaphysical  thinking,  be¬ 
longs  rather  partly  to  natural  science,  partly  to 
moral  philosophy. 

34 

[/o]  Quick  wit  is  a  faculty  of  hitting  upon  the 
middle  term  instantaneously.  It  would  be  ex¬ 
emplified  by  a  man  who  saw  that  the  moon  has 
her  bright  side  always  turned  towards  the  sun, 
and  quickly  grasped  the  cause  of  this,  namely 
that  she  borrows  her  light  from  him;  or  ob¬ 
served  somebody  in  conversation  with  a  man  of 
wealth  and  divined  that  he  was  borrowing 
money,  or  that  the  friendship  of  these  people 
sprang  from  a  common  enmity.  In  all  these  in¬ 
stances  he  has  seen  the  major  and  minor  terms 
[75]  and  then  grasped  the  causes,  the  middle 
terms. 

Let  A  represent  ‘bright  side  turned  sun¬ 
ward’,  B  ‘lighted  from  the  sun’,  C  the  moon. 
Then  B ,  ‘lighted  from  the  sun’,  is  predicable  of 
C,  the  moon,  and  A,  ‘having  her  bright  side 
towards  the  source  of  her  light’,  is  predicable 
[20]  of  B.  So  A  is  predicable  of  C  through  B. 


POSTERIOR  ANALYTICS 


BOOK  II 


1 

The  kinds  of  question  we  ask  are  as  many  as 
the  kinds  of  things  which  we  know.  They  are 
in  fact  four: — ( 1 )  whether  the  connexion  of  an 
attribute  with  a  thing  is  a  fact,  (2)  what  is  the 
reason  of  the  connexion,  (3)  whether  a  thing 
[25]  exists,  (4)  what  is  the  nature  of  the  thing. 
Thus,  when  our  question  concerns  a  complex 
of  thing  and  attribute  and  we  ask  whether  the 
thing  is  thus  or  otherwise  qualified — whether, 
e.g.  the  sun  suffers  eclipse  or  not — then  we 
are  asking  as  to  the  fact  of  a  connexion.  That 
our  inquiry  ceases  with  the  discovery  that  the 
sun  does  suffer  eclipse  is  an  indication  of  this; 
and  if  we  know  from  the  start  that  the  sun  suf¬ 
fers  eclipse,  we  do  not  inquire  whether  it  does 
so  or  not.  On  the  other  hand,  when  we  know 
the  fact  we  ask  the  reason;  as,  for  example, 
when  we  know  that  the  sun  is  being  eclipsed 
[30]  and  that  an  earthquake  is  in  progress,  it  is 
the  reason  of  eclipse  or  earthquake  into  which 
we  inquire. 

Where  a  complex  is  concerned,  then,  those 


are  the  two  questions  we  ask ;  but  for  some  ob¬ 
jects  of  inquiry  we  have  a  different  kind  of 
question  to  ask,  such  as  whether  there  is  or  is 
not  a  centaur  or  a  God.  (By  ‘is  or  is  not’  I 
mean  ‘is  or  is  not,  without  further  qualifica¬ 
tion’;  as  opposed  to  ‘is  or  is  not  (e.g.)  white’.) 
On  the  other  hand,  when  we  have  ascertained 
the  thing’s  existence,  we  inquire  as  to  its  na¬ 
ture,  asking,  for  instance,  ‘what,  then,  is  God?’ 
[35]  or  ‘what  is  man?’. 

2 

These,  then,  are  the  four  kinds  of  question  we 
ask,  and  it  is  in  the  answers  to  these  questions 
that  our  knowledge  consists. 

Now  when  we  ask  whether  a  connexion  is 
a  fact,  or  whether  a  thing  without  qualifica¬ 
tion  is,  we  are  really  asking  whether  the  con¬ 
nexion  or  the  thing  has  a  ‘middle’;  and  when 
we  have  ascertained  either  that  the  connexion 
is  a  fact  or  that  the  thing  is — i.e.  ascertained 
either  the  partial  or  the  unqualified  being  of 
90a  the  thing — and  are  proceeding  to  ask  the 
reason  of  the  connexion  or  the  nature  of  the 


90b  BOOK  I,  CHAPTERS  33-34 

thing,  then  we  are  asking  what  the  ‘middle’  is. 

(By  distinguishing  the  fact  of  the  connexion 
and  the  existence  of  the  thing  as  respectively 
the  partial  and  the  unqualified  being  of  the 
thing,  I  mean  that  if  we  ask  ‘does  the  moon 
suffer  eclipse?’,  or  ‘does  the  moon  wax?’,  the 
question  concerns  a  part  of  the  thing’s  being; 
for  what  we  are  asking  in  such  questions  is 
whether  a  thing  is  this  or  that,  i.e.  has  or  has 
not  this  or  that  attribute:  whereas,  if  we  ask 
whether  the  moon  or  night  exists,  the  ques¬ 
tion  concerns  the  unqualified  being  of  a  thing.) 
[5]  We  conclude  that  in  all  our  inquiries  we 
are  asking  either  whether  there  is  a  ‘middle’  or 
what  the  ‘middle’  is:  for  the  ‘middle’  here  is 
precisely  the  cause,  and  it  is  the  cause  that  we 
seek  in  all  our  inquiries.  Thus,  ‘Does  the  moon 
suffer  eclipse?’  means  ‘Is  there  or  is  there  not  a 
cause  producing  eclipse  of  the  moon?’,  and 
when  we  have  learnt  that  there  is,  our  next 
question  is,  ‘What,  then,  is  this  cause?’;  for  the 
cause  through  which  a  thing  is — not  is  this 
[/o]  or  that ,  i.e.  has  this  or  that  attribute, 
but  without  qualification  is — and  the  cause 
through  which  it  is — not  is  without  qualifica¬ 
tion,  but  is  this  or  that  as  having  some  essential 
attribute  or  some  accident — are  both  alike  the 
‘middle’.  By  that  which  is  without  qualifica¬ 
tion  I  mean  the  subject,  e.g.  moon  or  earth  or 
sun  or  triangle;  by  that  which  a  subject  is  (in 
the  partial  sense)  I  mean  a  property,  e.g. 
eclipse,  equality  or  inequality,  interposition  or 
non-interposition.  For  in  all  these  examples  it 
is  clear  that  the  nature  of  the  thing  and  the 
[75]  reason  of  the  fact  are  identical:  the  ques¬ 
tion  ‘What  is  eclipse?’  and  its  answer  ‘The  pri¬ 
vation  of  the  moon’s  light  by  the  interposition 
of  the  earth’  are  identical  with  the  question 
‘What  is  the  reason  of  eclipse?’  or  ‘Why  does 
the  moon  suffer  eclipse?’  and  the  reply  ‘Be¬ 
cause  of  the  failure  of  light  through  the  earth’s 
shutting  it  out’.  Again,  for  ‘What  is  a  concord? 
A  commensurate  numerical  ratio  of  a  high  and 
a  low  note’,  we  may  substitute  ‘What  reason 
[20]  makes  a  high  and  a  low  note  concordant? 
Their  relation  according  to  a  commensurate 
numerical  ratio.’  ‘Are  the  high  and  the  low 
note  concordant?’  is  equivalent  to  ‘Is  their 
ratio  commensurate?’;  and  when  we  find  that 
it  is  commensurate,  we  ask  ‘What,  then,  is 
their  ratio?’. 

Cases  in  which  the  ‘middle’  is  sensible  show 
[25]  that  the  object  of  our  inquiry  is  always 
the  ‘middle’:  we  inquire,  because  we  have  not 
perceived  it,  whether  there  is  or  is  not  a  ‘mid¬ 
dle’  causing,  e.g.  an  eclipse.  On  the  other  hand, 


—BOOK  II,  CHAPTERS  1-3  123 

if  we  were  on  the  moon  we  should  not  be  in¬ 
quiring  either  as  to  the  fact  or  the  reason,  but 
both  fact  and  reason  would  be  obvious  simul¬ 
taneously.  For  the  act  of  perception  would  have 
enabled  us  to  know  the  universal  too;  since,  the 
present  fact  of  an  eclipse  being  evident,  per¬ 
ception  would  then  at  the  same  time  give  us 
the  present  fact  of  the  earth’s  screening  the 
[jo]  sun’s  light,  and  from  this  would  arise  the 
universal. 

Thus,  as  we  maintain,  to  know  a  thing’s  na¬ 
ture  is  to  know  the  reason  why  it  is;  and  this 
is  equally  true  of  things  in  so  far  as  they  are 
said  without  qualification  to  be  as  opposed  to 
being  possessed  of  some  attribute,  and  in  so  far 
as  they  are  said  to  be  possessed  of  some  attri¬ 
bute  such  as  equal  to  two  right  angles,  or 
greater  or  less. 

3 

[35]  It  is  clear,  then,  that  all  questions  are  a 
search  for  a  ‘middle’.  Let  us  now  state  how  es¬ 
sential  nature  is  revealed,  and  in  what  way  it 
can  be  reduced  to  demonstration;  what  defini¬ 
tion  is,  and  what  things  are  definable.  And  let 
us  first  discuss  certain  difficulties  which  these 
90b  questions  raise,  beginning  what  we  have 
to  say  with  a  point  most  intimately  connected 
with  our  immediately  preceding  remarks, 
namely  the  doubt  that  might  be  felt  as  to 
whether  or  not  it  is  possible  to  know  the  same 
thing  in  the  same  relation,  both  by  definition 
and  by  demonstration.  It  might,  I  mean,  be 
urged  that  definition  is  held  to  concern  essen¬ 
tial  nature  and  is  in  every  case  universal  and 
affirmative;  whereas,  on  the  other  hand,  some 
[5]  conclusions  are  negative  and  some  are  not 
universal;  e.g.  all  in  the  second  figure  are  nega¬ 
tive,  none  in  the  third  are  universal.  And 
again,  not  even  all  affirmative  conclusions  in 
the  first  figure  are  definable,  e.g.  ‘every  triangle 
has  its  angles  equal  to  two  right  angles’.  An 
argument  proving  this  difference  between 
demonstration  and  definition  is  that  to  have 
scientific  knowledge  of  the  demonstrable  is 
[70]  identical  with  possessing  a  demonstration 
of  it:  hence  if  demonstration  of  such  conclu¬ 
sions  as  these  is  possible,  there  clearly  cannot 
also  be  definition  of  them.  If  there  could,  one 
might  know  such  a  conclusion  also  in  virtue  of 
its  definition  without  possessing  the  demon¬ 
stration  of  it;  for  there  is  nothing  to  stop  our 
having  the  one  without  the  other. 

Induction  too  will  sufficiently  convince  us  of 
[75]  this  difference;  for  never  yet  by  defining 
anything — essential  attribute  or  accident — did 


I24  POSTERIOR 

we  get  knowledge  of  it.  Again,  if  to  define  is 
to  acquire  knowledge  of  a  substance,  at  any 
rate  such  attributes  are  not  substances. 

It  is  evident,  then,  that  not  everything  de¬ 
monstrable  can  be  defined.  What  then?  Can 
everything  definable  be  demonstrated,  or  not? 
There  is  one  of  our  previous  arguments  which 
[20]  covers  this  too.  Of  a  single  thing  qua  sin¬ 
gle  there  is  a  single  scientific  knowledge. 
Hence,  since  to  know  the  demonstrable  sci¬ 
entifically  is  to  possess  the  demonstration  of  it, 
an  impossible  consequence  will  follow: —  pos¬ 
session  of  its  definition  without  its  demonstra¬ 
tion  will  give  knowledge  of  the  demonstrable. 

Moreover,  the  basic  premisses  of  demonstra¬ 
tions  are  definitions,  and  it  has  already  been 
shown1  that  these  will  be  found  indemonstra- 
[25]  ble;  either  the  basic  premisses  will  be 
demonstrable  and  will  depend  on  prior  prem¬ 
isses,  and  the  regress  will  be  endless;  or  the  pri¬ 
mary  truths  will  be  indemonstrable  definitions. 

But  if  the  definable  and  the  demonstrable 
are  not  wholly  the  same,  may  they  yet  be  par¬ 
tially  the  same?  Or  is  that  impossible,  because 
there  can  be  no  demonstration  of  the  defin- 
[30]  able?  There  can  be  none,  because  defini¬ 
tion  is  of  the  essential  nature  or  being  of  some¬ 
thing,  and  all  demonstrations  evidently  posit 
and  assume  the  essential  nature — mathematical 
demonstrations,  for  example,  the  nature  of 
unity  and  the  odd,  and  all  the  other  sciences 
likewise.  Moreover,  every  demonstration  proves 
a  predicate  of  a  subject  as  attaching  or  as  not 
attaching  to  it,  but  in  definition  one  thing  is 
[55]  not  predicated  of  another;  we  do  not,  e.g. 
predicate  animal  of  biped  nor  biped  of  animal, 
nor  yet  figure  of  plane — plane  not  being  figure 
nor  figure  plane.  Again,  to  prove  essential  na¬ 
ture  is  not  the  same  as  to  prove  the  fact  of  a 
91a  connexion.  Now  definition  reveals  essen¬ 
tial  nature,  demonstration  reveals  that  a  given 
attribute  attaches  or  does  not  attach  to  a  given 
subject;  but  different  things  require  different 
demonstrations — unless  the  one  demonstration 
is  related  to  the  other  as  part  to  whole.  I  add 
this  because  if  all  triangles  have  been  proved 
to  possess  angles  equal  to  two  right  angles, 
then  this  attribute  has  been  proved  to  attach  to 
isosceles;  for  isosceles  is  a  part  of  which  all  tri- 
[5]  angles  constitute  the  whole.  But  in  the 
case  before  us  the  fact  and  the  essential  nature 
are  not  so  related  to  one  another,  since  the  one 
is  not  a  part  of  the  other. 

So  it  emerges  that  not  all  the  definable  is 
demonstrable  nor  all  the  demonstrable  defin- 
1  Cf.  72b  18-25  and  84*  3o-b  2. 


ANALYTICS  91* 

able;  and  we  may  draw  the  general  conclusion 
that  there  is  no  identical  object  of  which  it  is 
ossible  to  possess  both  a  definition  and  a  dem- 
/o]  onstration.  It  follows  obviously  that  defi¬ 
nition  and  demonstration  are  neither  identical 
nor  contained  either  within  the  other:  if  they 
were,  their  objects  would  be  related  either  as 
identical  or  as  whole  and  part. 

4 

So  much,  then,  for  the  first  stage  of  our  prob¬ 
lem.  The  next  step  is  to  raise  the  question 
whether  syllogism — i.e.  demonstration — of  the 
definable  nature  is  possible  or,  as  our  recent 
argument  assumed,  impossible. 

We  might  argue  it  impossible  on  the  fol¬ 
lowing  grounds: — (a)  syllogism  proves  an  at¬ 
tribute  of  a  subject  through  the  middle  term; 
[75]  on  the  other  hand  (b)  its  definable  na¬ 
ture  is  both  ‘peculiar’  to  a  subject  and  predi¬ 
cated  of  it  as  belonging  to  its  essence.  But  in 
that  case  ( 1 )  the  subject,  its  definition,  and  the 
middle  term  connecting  them  must  be  recipro¬ 
cally  predicable  of  one  another;  for  if  A  is 
‘peculiar’  to  C,  obviously  A  is  ‘peculiar’  to  B 
and  B  to  C — in  fact  all  three  terms  are  ‘pecul¬ 
iar’  to  one  another:  and  further  (2)  if  A  in¬ 
heres  in  the  essence  of  all  B  and  B  is  predicated 
universally  of  all  C  as  belonging  to  C’s  essence, 
[20]  A  also  must  be  predicated  of  C  as  belong¬ 
ing  to  its  essence. 

If  one  does  not  take  this  relation  as  thus 
duplicated — if,  that  is,  A  is  predicated  as  being 
of  the  essence  of  B,  but  B  is  not  of  the  essence 
of  the  subjects  of  which  it  is  predicated — A 
will  not  necessarily  be  predicated  of  C  as  be¬ 
longing  to  its  essence.  So  both  premisses  will 
predicate  essence,  and  consequently  B  also  will 
be  predicated  of  C  as  its  essence.  Since,  there- 
[25]  fore,  both  premisses  do  predicate  essence 
— i.e.  definable  form — C’s  definable  form  will 
appear  in  the  middle  term  before  the  conclu¬ 
sion  is  drawn. 

We  may  generalize  by  supposing  that  it  is 
possible  to  prove  the  essential  nature  of  man. 
Let  C  be  man,  A  man’s  essential  nature — two- 
footed  animal,  or  aught  else  it  may  be.  Then, 
if  we  are  to  syllogize,  A  must  be  predicated  of 
all  B.  But  this  premiss  will  be  mediated  by  a 
[jo]  fresh  definition,  which  consequently  will 
also  be  the  essential  nature  of  man.  Therefore 
the  argument  assumes  what  it  has  to  prove, 
since  B  too  is  the  essential  nature  of  man.  It 
is,  however,  the  case  in  which  there  are  only 
the  two  premisses — i.e.  in  which  the  premisses 
are  primary  and  immediate — which  we  ought 


92s 

to  investigate,  because  it  best  illustrates  the 

foint  under  discussion. 

^5]  Thus  they  who  prove  the  essential  nature 
of  soul  or  man  or  anything  else  through  recip¬ 
rocating  terms  beg  the  question.  It  would  be 
begging  the  question,  for  example,  to  contend 
that  the  soul  is  that  which  causes  its  own  life, 
and  that  what  causes  its  own  life  is  a  self- 
moving  number;  for  one  would  have  to  postu¬ 
late  that  the  soul  is  a  self-moving  number  in 
91b  the  sense  of  being  identical  with  it.  For  if 
A  is  predicable  as  a  mere  consequent  of  B  and 
B  of  C,  A  will  not  on  that  account  be  the  defin¬ 
able  form  of  C:  A  will  merely  be  what  it  was 
true  to  say  of  C.  Even  if  A  is  predicated  of  all 
B  inasmuch  as  B  is  identical  with  a  species 
of  A,  still  it  will  not  follow:  being  an  animal 
[5]  is  predicated  of  being  a  man — since  it  is 
true  that  in  all  instances  to  be  human  is  to 
be  animal,  just  as  it  is  also  true  that  every 
man  is  an  animal — but  not  as  identical  with 
being  man. 

We  conclude,  then,  that  unless  one  takes  both 
the  premisses  as  predicating  essence,  one  can¬ 
not  infer  that  A  is  the  definable  form  and  es¬ 
sence  of  C:  but  if  one  does  so  take  them,  in  as¬ 
suming  B  one  will  have  assumed,  before  draw¬ 
ing  the  conclusion,  what  the  definable  form  of 
[/o]  C  is;  so  that  there  has  been  no  inference, 
for  one  has  begged  the  question. 

5 

Nor,  as  was  said  in  my  formal  logic,1  is  the 
method  of  division  a  process  of  inference  at  all, 
since  at  no  point  does  the  characterization  of 
the  subject  follow  necessarily  from  the  premis¬ 
ing  of  certain  other  facts:  division  demon- 
[75]  strates  as  little  as  does  induction.  For  in  a 
genuine  demonstration  the  conclusion  must 
not  be  put  as  a  question  nor  depend  on  a  con¬ 
cession,  but  must  follow  necessarily  from  its 
premisses,  even  if  the  respondent  deny  it.  The 
definer  asks  ‘Is  man  animal  or  inanimate?’  and 
then  assumes — he  has  not  inferred — that  man 
is  animal.  Next,  when  presented  with  an  ex¬ 
haustive  division  of  animal  into  terrestrial  and 
[20]  aquatic,  he  assumes  that  man  is  terrestrial. 
Moreover,  that  man  is  the  complete  formula, 
terrestrial-animal,  does  not  follow  necessarily 
from  the  premisses:  this  too  is  an  assumption, 
and  equally  an  assumption  whether  the  division 
comprises  many  differentiae  or  few.  (Indeed 
as  this  method  of  division  is  used  by  those  who 
proceed  by  it,  even  truths  that  can  be  inferred 
actually  fail  to  appear  as  such.)  For  why  should 
1  Cf.  Prior  Analytics ,  1.  31. 


*25 

[25]  not  the  whole  of  this  formula  be  true  of 
man,  and  yet  not  exhibit  his  essential  nature  or 
definable  form?  Again,  what  guarantee  is 
there  against  an  unessential  addition,  or  against 
the  omission  of  the  final  or  of  an  intermediate 
determinant  of  the  substantial  being? 

The  champion  of  division  might  here  urge 
that  though  these  lapses  do  occur,  yet  we  can 
solve  that  difficulty  if  all  the  attributes  we  as¬ 
sume  are  constituents  of  the  definable  form, 
and  if,  postulating  the  genus,  we  produce  by 
division  the  requisite  uninterrupted  sequence 
of  terms,  and  omit  nothing;  and  that  indeed 
[50]  we  cannot  fail  to  fulfil  these  conditions  if 
what  is  to  be  divided  falls  whole  into  the  divi¬ 
sion  at  each  stage,  and  none  of  it  is  omitted; 
and  that  this — the  dividendum — must  without 
further  question  be  (ultimately)  incapable  of 
fresh  specific  division.  Nevertheless,  we  reply, 
division  does  not  involve  inference;  if  it  gives 
knowledge,  it  gives  it  in  another  way.  Nor  is 
there  any  absurdity  in  this:  induction,  perhaps, 
is  not  demonstration  any  more  than  is  division, 
yet  it  does  make  evident  some  truth.  Yet  to 
[^5]  state  a  definition  reached  by  division  is 
not  to  state  a  conclusion:  as,  when  conclusions 
are  drawn  without  their  appropriate  middles, 
the  alleged  necessity  by  which  the  inference 
follows  from  the  premisses  is  open  to  a  ques¬ 
tion  as  to  the  reason  for  it,  so  definitions 
reached  by  division  invite  the  same  question. 
92a  Thus  to  the  question  ‘What  is  the  essen¬ 
tial  nature  of  man?’  the  divider  replies  ‘Ani¬ 
mal,  mortal,  footed,  biped,  wingless’;  and 
when  at  each  step  he  is  asked  ‘Why?’,  he  will 
say,  and,  as  he  thinks,  proves  by  division,  that 
all  animal  is  mortal  or  immortal:  but  such  a 
formula  taken  in  its  entirety  is  not  definition; 
so  that  even  if  division  does  demonstrate  its 
formula,  definition  at  any  rate  does  not  turn 
[5]  out  to  be  a  conclusion  of  inference. 

6 

Can  we  nevertheless  actually  demonstrate  what 
a  thing  essentially  and  substantially  is,  but  hy¬ 
pothetically,  i.e.  by  premising  (1)  that  its  de¬ 
finable  form  is  constituted  by  the  ‘peculiar’  at¬ 
tributes  of  its  essential  nature;  (2)  that  such 
and  such  are  the  only  attributes  of  its  essential 
nature,  and  that  the  complete  synthesis  of  them 
is  peculiar  to  the  thing;  and  thus — since  in  this 
synthesis  consists  the  being  of  the  thing — ob¬ 
taining  our  conclusion?  Or  is  the  truth  that, 
[10]  since  proof  must  be  through  the  middle 
term,  the  definable  form  is  once  more  assumed 
in  this  minor  premiss  too? 


BOOK  II,  CHAPTERS  3-6 


126  POSTERIOR 

Further,  just  as  in  syllogizing  we  do  not 
premise  what  syllogistic  inference  is  (since  the 
premisses  from  which  we  conclude  must  be  re¬ 
lated  as  whole  and  part),  so  the  definable  form 
must  not  fall  within  the  syllogism  but  remain 
outside  the  premisses  posited.  It  is  only  against 
[75]  a  doubt  as  to  its  having  been  a  syllogistic 
inference  at  all  that  we  have  to  defend  our  ar¬ 
gument  as  conforming  to  the  definition  of  syllo¬ 
gism.  It  is  only  when  some  one  doubts  whether 
the  conclusion  proved  is  the  definable  form 
that  we  have  to  defend  it  as  conforming  to  the 
definition  of  definable  form  which  we  assumed. 
Hence  syllogistic  inference  must  be  possible 
even  without  the  express  statement  of  what 
syllogism  is  or  what  definable  form  is. 

[20]  The  following  type  of  hypothetical  proof 
also  begs  the  question.  If  evil  is  definable  as 
the  divisible,  and  the  definition  of  a  thing’s 
contrary — if  it  has  one — is  the  contrary  of  the 
thing’s  definition;  then,  if  good  is  the  con¬ 
trary  of  evil  and  the  indivisible  of  the  divisible, 
we  conclude  that  to  be  good  is  essentially  to  be 
indivisible.  The  question  is  begged  because  de¬ 
finable  form  is  assumed  as  a  premiss,  and  as  a 

f remiss  which  is  to  prove  definable  form.  ‘But 
25]  not  the  same  definable  form’,  you  may 
object.  That  I  admit,  for  in  demonstrations  also 
we  premise  that  ‘this’  is  predicable  of  ‘that’; 
but  in  this  premiss  the  term  we  assert  of  the 
minor  is  neither  the  major  itself  nor  a  term 
identical  in  definition,  or  convertible,  with  the 
major. 

Again,  both  proof  by  division  and  the  syllo¬ 
gism  just  described  are  open  to  the  question 
why  man  should  be  animal-biped-terrestrial 
and  not  merely  animal  and  terrestrial,  since 
[jo]  what  they  premise  does  not  ensure  that 
the  predicates  shall  constitute  a  genuine  unity 
and  not  merely  belong  to  a  single  subject  as  do 
musical  and  grammatical  when  predicated  of 
the  same  man. 

7 

How  then  by  definition  shall  we  prove  sub- 
[35]  stance  or  essential  nature?  We  cannot 
show  it  as  a  fresh  fact  necessarily  following 
from  the  assumption  of  premisses  admitted  to 
be  facts — the  method  of  demonstration:  we 
may  not  proceed  as  by  induction  to  establish  a 
universal  on  the  evidence  of  groups  of  particu¬ 
lars  which  offer  no  exception,  because  induc¬ 
tion  proves  not  what  the  essential  nature  of  a 
92b  thing  is  but  that  it  has  or  has  not  some 
attribute.  Therefore,  since  presumably  one 
cannot  prove  essential  nature  by  an  appeal  to 


ANALYTICS  92b 

sense  perception  or  by  pointing  with  the  finger, 
what  other  method  remains? 

To  put  it  another  way:  how  shall  we  by 
definition  prove  essential  nature ?  He  who 
knows  what  human — or  any  other — nature  is, 
[5]  must  know  also  that  man  exists;  for  no  one 
knows  the  nature  of  what  does  not  exist — one 
can  know  the  meaning  of  the  phrase  or  name 
‘goat-stag’  but  not  what  the  essential  nature  of 
a  goat-stag  is.  But  further,  if  definition  can 
prove  what  is  the  essential  nature  of  a  thing, 
can  it  also  prove  that  it  exists?  And  how  will  it 
prove  them  both  by  the  same  process,  since 
definition  exhibits  one  single  thing  and  dem- 
[/o]  onstration  another  single  thing,  and  what 
human  nature  is  and  the  fact  that  man  exists 
are  not  the  same  thing?  Then  too  we  hold  that 
it  is  by  demonstration  that  the  being  of  every¬ 
thing  must  be  proved — unless  indeed  to  be 
were  its  essence;  and,  since  being  is  not  a  ge¬ 
nus,  it  is  not  the  essence  of  anything.  Hence 
the  being  of  anything  as  fact  is  matter  for  dem- 
[75]  onstration;  and  this  is  the  actual  proce¬ 
dure  of  the  sciences,  for  the  geometer  assumes 
the  meaning  of  the  word  triangle,  but  that  it  is 
possessed  of  some  attribute  he  proves.  What  is 
it,  then,  that  we  shall  prove  in  defining  essen¬ 
tial  nature?  Triangle?  In  that  case  a  man  will 
know  by  definition  what  a  thing’s  nature  is 
without  knowing  whether  it  exists.  But  that  is 
impossible. 

Moreover  it  is  clear,  if  we  consider  the 
methods  of  defining  actually  in  use,  that  defini¬ 
tion  does  not  prove  that  the  thing  defined 
[20]  exists:  since  even  if  there  does  actually 
exist  something  which  is  equidistant  from  a 
centre,  yet  why  should  the  thing  named  in  the 
definition  exist?  Why,  in  other  words,  should 
this  be  the  formula  defining  circle?  One  might 
equally  well  call  it  the  definition  of  mountain 
copper.  For  definitions  do  not  carry  a  further 
guarantee  that  the  thing  defined  can  exist  or 
that  it  is  what  they  claim  to  define:  one  can 
[25]  always  ask  why. 

Since,  therefore,  to  define  is  to  prove  either 
a  thing’s  essential  nature  or  the  meaning  of  its 
name,  we  may  conclude  that  definition,  if  it  in 
no  sense  proves  essential  nature,  is  a  set  of 
words  signifying  precisely  what  a  name  signi¬ 
fies.  But  that  were  a  strange  consequence;  for 
( 1 )  both  what  is  not  substance  and  what  does 
not  exist  at  all  would  be  definable,  since  even 
non-existents  can  be  signified  by  a  name:  (2) 
[jo]  all  sets  of  words  or  sentences  would  be 
definitions,  since  any  kind  of  sentence  could  be 
given  a  name;  so  that  we  should  all  be  talking 


93b  BOOK  II,  CHAPTERS  6-8  127 

in  definitions,  and  even  the  Iliad  would  be  a  [20]  rant  whether  it  exists  we  cannot  know 
definition:  (3)  no  demonstration  can  prove  its  essential  nature.  Moreover  we  are  aware 


that  any  particular  name  means  any  particular 
thing:  neither,  therefore,  do  definitions,  in  ad¬ 
dition  to  revealing  the  meaning  of  a  name,  also 
reveal  that  the  name  has  this  meaning.  It  ap- 
[35]  Pears  then  from  these  considerations  that 
neither  definition  and  syllogism  nor  their  ob¬ 
jects  are  identical,  and  further  that  definition 
neither  demonstrates  nor  proves  anything,  and 
that  knowledge  of  essential  nature  is  not  to  be 
obtained  either  by  definition  or  by  demonstra¬ 
tion. 

8 

93  a  We  must  now  start  afresh  and  consider 
which  of  these  conclusions  are  sound  and  which 
are  not,  and  what  is  the  nature  of  definition, 
and  whether  essential  nature  is  in  any  sense 
demonstrable  and  definable  or  in  none. 

Now  to  know  its  essential  nature  is,  as  we 
said,1  the  same  as  to  know  the  cause  of  a  thing’s 
existence,  and  the  proof  of  this  depends  on  the 
[5]  fact  that  a  thing  must  have  a  cause.  More¬ 
over,  this  cause  is  either  identical  with  the  es¬ 
sential  nature  of  the  thing  or  distinct  from  it; 
and  if  its  cause  is  distinct  from  it,  the  essential 
nature  of  the  thing  is  either  demonstrable  or 
indemonstrable.  Consequently,  if  the  cause  is 
distinct  from  the  thing’s  essential  nature  and 
demonstration  is  possible,  the  cause  must  be 
the  middle  term,  and,  the  conclusion  proved 
being  universal  and  affirmative,  the  proof  is  in 
the  first  figure.  So  the  method  just  examined 
of  proving  it  through  another  essential  nature 
[/o]  would  be  one  way  of  proving  essential 
nature,  because  a  conclusion  containing  essen¬ 
tial  nature  must  be  inferred  through  a  middle 
which  is  an  essential  nature  just  as  a  ‘peculiar’ 
property  must  be  inferred  through  a  middle 
which  is  a  ‘peculiar’  property;  so  that  of  the 
two  definable  natures  of  a  single  thing  this 
method  will  prove  one  and  not  the  other. 

Now  it  was  said  before2  that  this  method 
could  not  amount  to  demonstration  of  essential 
nature — it  is  actually  a  dialectical  proof  of  it — 
[75]  so  let  us  begin  again  and  explain  by  what 
method  it  can  be  demonstrated.  When  we  are 
aware  of  a  fact  we  seek  its  reason,  and  though 
sometimes  the  fact  and  the  reason  dawn  on  us 
simultaneously,  yet  we  cannot  apprehend  the 
reason  a  moment  sooner  than  the  fact;  and 
clearly  in  just  the  same  way  we  cannot  appre¬ 
hend  a  thing’s  definable  form  without  appre¬ 
hending  that  it  exists,  since  while  we  are  igno- 

1 11.  2.  2  n.  2. 


whether  a  thing  exists  or  not  sometimes 
through  apprehending  an  element  in  its  char¬ 
acter,  and  sometimes  accidentally,  as,  for  ex¬ 
ample,  when  we  are  aware  of  thunder  as  a 
noise  in  the  clouds,  of  eclipse  as  a  privation  of 
light,  or  of  man  as  some  species  of  animal,  or 
of  the  soul  as  a  self-moving  thing.  As  often  as 
we  have  accidental  knowledge  that  the  thing 
[25]  exists,  we  must  be  in  a  wholly  negative 
state  as  regards  awareness  of  its  essential  na¬ 
ture;  for  we  have  not  got  genuine  knowledge 
even  of  its  existence,  and  to  search  for  a  thing’s 
essential  nature  when  we  are  unaware  that  it 
exists  is  to  search  for  nothing.  On  the  other 
hand,  whenever  we  apprehend  an  element  in 
the  thing’s  character  there  is  less  difficulty. 
Thus  it  follows  that  the  degree  of  our  knowl¬ 
edge  of  a  thing’s  essential  nature  is  determined 
by  the  sense  in  which  we  are  aware  that  it  ex¬ 
ists.  Let  us  then  take  the  following  as  our  first 
instance  of  being  aware  of  an  element  in  the 
[30]  essential  nature.  Let  A  be  eclipse,  C  the 
moon,  B  the  earth’s  acting  as  a  screen.  Now  to 
ask  whether  the  moon  is  eclipsed  or  not  is  to 
ask  whether  or  not  B  has  occurred.  But  that  is 
precisely  the  same  as  asking  whether  A  has  a 
defining  condition;  and  if  this  condition  actu¬ 
ally  exists,  we  assert  that  A  also  actually  exists. 
Or  again  we  may  ask  which  side  of  a  contra¬ 
diction  the  defining  condition  necessitates:  does 
it  make  the  angles  of  a  triangle  equal  or  not 
equal  to  two  right  angles?  When  we  have 
found  the  answer,  if  the  premisses  are  im- 
[35]  mediate,  we  know  fact  and  reason  to 
gether;  if  they  are  not  immediate,  we  know 
the  fact  without  the  reason,  as  in  the  following 
example:  let  C  be  the  moon,  A  eclipse,  B  the 
fact  that  the  moon  fails  to  produce  shadows 
though  she  is  full  and  though  no  visible  body 
intervenes  between  us  and  her.  Then  if  B, 
failure  to  produce  shadows  in  spite  of  the  ab- 
93b  sence  of  an  intervening  body,  is  attributa¬ 
ble  to  C,  and  A,  eclipse,  is  attributable  to  B,  it 
is  clear  that  the  moon  is  eclipsed,  but  the  rea¬ 
son  why  is  not  yet  clear,  and  we  know  that 
eclipse  exists,  but  we  do  not  know  what  its  es¬ 
sential  nature  is.  But  when  it  is  clear  that  A  is 
attributable  to  C  and  we  proceed  to  ask  the 
reason  of  this  fact,  we  are  inquiring  what  is  the 
[5]  nature  of  B:  is  it  the  earth’s  acting  as  a 
screen,  or  the  moon’s  rotation  or  her  extinc¬ 
tion?  But  B  is  the  definition  of  the  other  term, 
viz.  in  these  examples,  of  the  major  term  A; 
for  eclipse  is  constituted  by  the  earth  acting  as 


128  POSTERIOR 

a  screen.  Thus,  (i)  ‘What  is  thunder?’  ‘The 
quenching  of  fire  in  cloud’,  and  (2)  ‘Why  does 
it  thunder?’  ‘Because  fire  is  quenched  in  the 
[/o]  cloud’,  are  equivalent.  Let  C  be  cloud,  A 
thunder,  B  the  quenching  of  fire.  Then  B  is 
attributable  to  C,  cloud,  since  fire  is  quenched 
in  it;  and  A,  noise,  is  attributable  to  B;  and  B 
is  assuredly  the  definition  of  the  major  term  A. 
If  there  be  a  further  mediating  cause  of  B,  it 
will  be  one  of  the  remaining  partial  definitions 
of  A . 

[75]  We  have  stated  then  how  essential  nature 
is  discovered  and  becomes  known,  and  we  see 
that,  while  there  is  no  syllogism — i.e.  no  de¬ 
monstrative  syllogism — of  essential  nature,  yet 
it  is  through  syllogism,  viz.  demonstrative  syl¬ 
logism,  that  essential  nature  is  exhibited.  So  we 
conclude  that  neither  can  the  essential  nature 
of  anything  which  has  a  cause  distinct  from 
itself  be  known  without  demonstration,  nor 
cafi  it  be  demonstrated ;  and  this  is  what  we  con- 
[20]  tended  in  our  preliminary  discussions.1 

9 

Now  while  some  things  have  a  cause  distinct 
from  themselves,  others  have  not.  Hence  it  is 
evident  that  there  are  essential  natures  which 
are  immediate,  that  is  are  basic  premisses;  and 
of  these  not  only  that  they  are  but  also  what 
they  are  must  be  assumed  or  revealed  in  some 
other  way.  This  too  is  the  actual  procedure  of 
the  arithmetician,  who  assumes  both  the  na- 
[25]  ture  and  the  existence  of  unit.  On  the 
other  hand,  it  is  possible  (in  the  manner  ex¬ 
plained)  to  exhibit  through  demonstration  the 
essential  nature  of  things  which  have  a  ‘mid¬ 
dle’,  i.e.  a  cause  of  their  substantial  being  other 
than  that  being  itself;  but  we  do  not  thereby 
demonstrate  it. 

10 

Since  definition  is  said  to  be  the  statement  of  a 
thing’s  nature,  obviously  one  kind  of  defini¬ 
tion  will  be  a  statement  of  the  meaning  of  the 
[30]  name,  or  of  an  equivalent  nominal  for¬ 
mula.  A  definition  in  this  sense  tells  you,  e.g. 
the  meaning  of  the  phrase  ‘triangular  charac¬ 
ter’.  When  we  are  aware  that  triangle  exists,  we 
inquire  the  reason  why  it  exists.  But  it  is  diffi¬ 
cult  thus  to  learn  the  definition  of  things  the 
existence  of  which  we  do  not  genuinely  know 
— the  cause  of  this  difficulty  being,  as  we  said 
[33]  before,2  that  we  only  know  accidentally 
whether  or  not  the  thing  exists.  Moreover,  a 
statement  may  be  a  unity  in  either  of  two  ways, 

1 11.  3.  2  Cf.  93®  16-27. 


ANALYTICS  94a 

by  conjunction,  like  the  Iliad,  or  because  it  ex¬ 
hibits  a  single  predicate  as  inhering  not  acci¬ 
dentally  in  a  single  subject. 

That  then  is  one  way  of  defining  definition. 
Another  kind  of  definition  is  a  formula  ex¬ 
hibiting  the  cause  of  a  thing’s  existence.  Thus 
94a  the  former  signifies  without  proving,  but 
the  latter  will  clearly  be  a  ^^/-demonstration 
of  essential  nature,  differing  from  demonstra¬ 
tion  in  the  arrangement  of  its  terms.  For  there 
is  a  difference  between  stating  why  it  thunders, 
and  stating  what  is  the  essential  nature  of 
thunder;  since  the  first  statement  will  be  ‘Be¬ 
cause  fire  is  quenched  in  the  clouds’,  while  the 
statement  of  what  the  nature  of  thunder  is  will 
be  ‘The  noise  of  fire  being  quenched  in  the 
[5]  clouds’.  Thus  the  same  statement  takes  a 
different  form:  in  one  form  it  is  continuous 
demonstration,  in  the  other  definition.  Again, 
thunder  can  be  defined  as  noise  in  the  clouds, 
which  is  the  conclusion  of  the  demonstration 
embodying  essential  nature.  On  the  other  hand 
the  definition  of  immediates  is  an  indemonstra- 
[/o]  ble  positing  of  essential  nature. 

We  conclude  then  that  definition  is  (a)  an 
indemonstrable  statement  of  essential  nature, 
or  (b)  a  syllogism  of  essential  nature  differing 
from  demonstration  in  grammatical  form,  or 
(c)  the  conclusion  of  a  demonstration  giving 
essential  nature. 

Our  discussion  has  therefore  made  plain  ( 1 ) 
in  what  sense  and  of  what  things  the  essential 
[75]  nature  is  demonstrable,  and  in  what  sense 
and  of  what  things  it  is  not;  (2)  what  are  the 
various  meanings  of  the  term  definition,  and 
in  what  sense  and  of  what  things  it  proves  the 
essential  nature,  and  in  what  sense  and  of  what 
things  it  does  not;  (3)  what  is  the  relation  of 
definition  to  demonstration,  and  how  far  the 
same  thing  is  both  definable  and  demonstrable 
and  how  far  it  is  not. 

11 

[20]  We  think  we  have  scientific  knowledge 
when  we  know  the  cause,  and  there  are  four 
causes:  (1)  the  definable  form,  (2)  an  ante¬ 
cedent  which  necessitates  a  consequent,  (3) 
the  efficient  cause,  (4)  the  final  cause.  Hence 
each  of  these  can  be  the  middle  term  of  a  proof, 
for  (a)  though  the  inference  from  antecedent 
to  necessary  consequent  does  not  hold  if  only 
[25]  one  premiss  is  assumed — two  is  the  min¬ 
imum — still  when  there  are  two  it  holds  on 
condition  that  they  have  a  single  common  mid¬ 
dle  term.  So  it  is  from  the  assumption  of  this 
single  middle  term  that  the  conclusion  follows 


95 

necessarily.  The  following  example  will  also 
show  this.  Why  is  the  angle  in  a  semicircle  a 
right  angle? — or  from  what  assumption  does 
it  follow  that  it  is  a  right  angle?  Thus,  let  A 
be  right  angle,  B  the  half  of  two  right  angles, 
[jo]  C  the  angle  in  a  semicircle.  Then  B  is  the 
cause  in  virtue  of  which  A,  right  angle,  is  at¬ 
tributable  to  C,  the  angle  in  a  semicircle,  since 
B=A  and  the  other,  viz.  C,—B,  for  C  is  half 
of  two  right  angles.  Therefore  it  is  the  assump¬ 
tion  of  B,  the  half  of  two  right  angles,  from 
which  it  follows  that  A  is  attributable  to  C, 
i.e.  that  the  angle  in  a  semicircle  is  a  right  an¬ 
gle.  Moreover,  B  is  identical  with  (b)  the  de- 
[^5]  fining  form  of  A,  since  it  is  what  A's  defi¬ 
nition  signifies.  Moreover,  the  formal  cause  has 
already  been  shown  to  be  the  middle,  (c)  ‘Why 
did  the  Athenians  become  involved  in  the  Per¬ 
sian  war?*  means  ‘What  cause  originated  the 
waging  of  war  against  the  Athenians?’  and  the 
94b  answer  is,  ‘Because  they  raided  Sardis 
with  the  Eretrians’,  since  this  originated  the 
war.  Let  A  be  war,  B  unprovoked  raiding,  C 
the  Athenians.  Then  B,  unprovoked  raiding, 
is  true  of  C,  the  Athenians,  and  A  is  true  of  B, 
[5]  since  men  make  war  on  the  unjust  aggres¬ 
sor.  So  A,  having  war  waged  upon  them,  is 
true  of  B,  the  initial  aggressors,  and  B  is  true 
of  C,  the  Athenians,  who  were  the  aggressors. 
Hence  here  too  the  cause — in  this  case  the  effi¬ 
cient  cause — is  the  middle  term,  (d)  This  is  no 
less  true  where  the  cause  is  the  final  cause.  E.g. 
why  does  one  take  a  walk  after  supper?  For 
the  sake  of  one’s  health.  Why  does  a  house 
[/o]  exist?  For  the  preservation  of  one’s  goods. 
The  end  in  view  is  in  the  one  case  health,  in 
the  other  preservation.  To  ask  the  reason  why 
one  must  walk  after  supper  is  precisely  to  ask 
to  what  end  one  must  do  it.  Let  C  be  walking 
after  supper,  B  the  non-regurgitation  of  food, 
A  health.  Then  let  walking  after  supper  pos¬ 
sess  the  property  of  preventing  food  from  ris- 
[75]  ing  to  the  orifice  of  the  stomach,  and  let 
this  condition  be  healthy;  since  it  seems  that 
B,  the  non-regurgitation  of  food,  is  attributable 
to  C,  taking  a  walk,  and  that  A,  health,  is  at¬ 
tributable  to  B.  What,  then,  is  the  cause 
through  which  A,  the  final  cause,  inheres  in 
C?  It  is  B,  the  non-regurgitation  of  food;  but 
B  is  a  kind  of  definition  of  A,  for  A  will  be 
[20]  explained  by  it.  Why  is  B  the  cause  of 
A’ s  belonging  to  C?  Because  to  be  in  a  condi¬ 
tion  such  as  B  is  to  be  in  health.  The  defini¬ 
tions  must  be  transposed,  and  then  the  detail 
will  become  clearer.  Incidentally,  here  the 
order  of  coming  to  be  is  the  reverse  of  what  it 


129 

is  in  proof  through  the  efficient  cause:  in  the 
efficient  order  the  middle  term  must  come  to 
be  first,  whereas  in  the  teleological  order  the 
[25]  minor,  C,  must  first  take  place,  and  the 
end  in  view  comes  last  in  time. 

The  same  thing  may  exist  for  an  end  and 
be  necessitated  as  well.  For  example,  light 
shines  through  a  lantern  (1)  because  that 
which  consists  of  relatively  small  particles  nec¬ 
essarily  passes  through  pores  larger  than  those 
[jo]  particles — assuming  that  light  does  issue 
by  penetration — and  (2)  for  an  end,  namely  to 
save  us  from  stumbling.  If,  then,  a  thing  can 
exist  through  two  causes,  can  it  come  to  be 
through  two  causes — as  for  instance  if  thunder 
be  a  hiss  and  a  roar  necessarily  produced  by  the 
quenching  of  fire,  and  also  designed,  as  the 
Pythagoreans  say,  for  a  threat  to  terrify  those 
that  lie  in  Tartarus?  Indeed,  there  are  very 
[J5]  many  such  cases,  mostly  among  the  proc¬ 
esses  and  products  of  the  natural  world;  for 
nature,  in  different  senses  of  the  term  ‘nature’, 
produces  now  for  an  end,  now  by  necessity. 

Necessity  too  is  of  two  kinds.  It  may  work 
in  accordance  with  a  thing’s  natural  tendency, 
95a  or  by  constraint  and  in  opposition  to  it;  as, 
for  instance,  by  necessity  a  stone  is  borne  both 
upwards  and  downwards,  but  not  by  the  same 
necessity. 

Of  the  products  of  man’s  intelligence  some 
are  never  due  to  chance  or  necessity  but  al¬ 
ways  to  an  end,  as  for  example  a  house  or  a 
[5]  statue;  others,  such  as  health  or  safety,  may 
result  from  chance  as  well. 

It  is  mostly  in  cases  where  the  issue  is  inde¬ 
terminate  (though  only  where  the  production 
does  not  originate  in  chance,  and  the  end  is 
consequently  good),  that  a  result  is  due  to  an 
end,  and  this  is  true  alike  in  nature  or  in  art. 
By  chance,  on  the  other  hand,  nothing  comes 
to  be  for  an  end. 

12 

[/o]  The  effect  may  be  still  coming  to  be,  or 
its  occurrence  may  be  past  or  future,  yet  the 
cause  will  be  the  same  as  when  it  is  actually  ex¬ 
istent — for  it  is  the  middle  which  is  the  cause 
— except  that  if  the  effect  actually  exists  the 
cause  is  actually  existent,  if  it  is  coming  to  be  so 
is  the  cause,  if  its  occurrence  is  past  the  cause 
is  past,  if  future  the  cause  is  future.  For  exam¬ 
ple,  the  moon  was  eclipsed  because  the  earth 
intervened,  is  becoming  eclipsed  because  the 
[75]  earth  is  in  process  of  intervening,  will  be 
eclipsed  because  the  earth  will  intervene,  is 
eclipsed  because  the  earth  intervenes. 


BOOK  II,  CHAPTERS  8-12 


130  POSTERIOR 

To  take  a  second  example:  assuming  that 
the  definition  of  ice  is  solidified  water,  let  C  be 
water,  A  solidified,  B  the  middle,  which  is  the 
cause,  namely  total  failure  of  heat.  Then  B  is 
attributed  to  C,  and  A,  solidification,  to  B:  ice 
[20]  forms  when  B  is  occurring,  has  formed 
when  B  has  occurred,  and  will  form  when  B 
shall  occur. 

This  sort  of  cause,  then,  and  its  effect  come 
to  be  simultaneously  when  they  are  in  process 
of  becoming,  and  exist  simultaneously  when 
they  actually  exist;  and  the  same  holds  good 
when  they  are  past  and  when  they  are  future. 
But  what  of  cases  where  they  are  not  simulta¬ 
neous?  Can  causes  and  effects  different  from 
one  another  form,  as  they  seem  to  us  to  form, 
[25]  a  continuous  succession,  a  past  effect  re¬ 
sulting  from  a  past  cause  different  from  itself, 
a  future  effect  from  a  future  cause  different 
from  it,  and  an  effect  which  is  coming-to-be 
from  a  cause  different  from  and  prior  to  it? 
Now  on  this  theory  it  is  from  the  posterior 
event  that  we  reason  (and  this  though  these 
later  events  actually  have  their  source  of  origin 
in  previous  events — a  fact  which  shows  that 
also  when  the  effect  is  coming-to-be  we  still 
reason  from  the  posterior  event),  and  from  the 
prior  event  we  cannot  reason  (we  cannot  argue 
[30]  that  because  an  event  A  has  occurred, 
therefore  an  event  B  has  occurred  subsequently 
to  A  but  still  in  the  past — and  the  same  holds 
good  if  the  occurrence  is  future) — cannot  rea¬ 
son  because,  be  the  time  interval  definite  or  in¬ 
definite,  it  will  never  be  possible  to  infer  that 
because  it  is  true  to  say  that  A  occurred,  there¬ 
fore  it  is  true  to  say  that  B,  the  subsequent 
event,  occurred;  for  in  the  interval  between  the 
events,  though  A  has  already  occurred,  the 
[35]  latter  statement  will  be  false.  And  the 
same  argument  applies  also  to  future  events; 
i.e.  one  cannot  infer  from  an  event  which  oc¬ 
curred  in  the  past  that  a  future  event  will  oc¬ 
cur.  The  reason  of  this  is  that  the  middle  must 
be  homogeneous,  past  when  the  extremes  are 
past,  future  when  they  are  future,  coming  to  be 
when  they  are  coming-to-be,  actually  existent 
when  they  are  actually  existent;  and  there  can¬ 
not  be  a  middle  term  homogeneous  with  ex¬ 
tremes  respectively  past  and  future.  And  it  is 
a  further  difficulty  in  this  theory  that  the  time 
[40]  interval  can  be  neither  indefinite  nor  defi- 
95b  nite,  since  during  it  the  inference  will  be 
false.  We  have  also  to  inquire  what  it  is  that 
holds  events  together  so  that  the  coming-to-be 
now  occurring  in  actual  things  follows  upon  a 
past  event.  It  is  evident,  we  may  suggest,  that 


ANALYTICS  95b 

a  past  event  and  a  present  process  cannot  be 
‘contiguous’,  for  not  even  two  past  events  can 
be  ‘contiguous’.  For  past  events  are  limits  and 
[5]  atomic;  so  just  as  points  are  not  ‘contigu¬ 
ous’  neither  are  past  events,  since  both  are  in¬ 
divisible.  For  the  same  reason  a  past  event  and 
a  present  process  cannot  be  ‘contiguous’,  for 
the  process  is  divisible,  the  event  indivisible. 
Thus  the  relation  of  present  process  to  past 
event  is  analogous  to  that  of  line  to  point,  since 
[/o]  a  process  contains  an  infinity  of  past 
events.  These  questions,  however,  must  re¬ 
ceive  a  more  explicit  treatment  in  our  general 
theory  of  change.1 

The  following  must  suffice  as  an  account  of 
the  manner  in  which  the  middle  would  be 
identical  with  the  cause  on  the  supposition  that 
coming-to-be  is  a  series  of  consecutive  events: 
for  in  the  terms  of  such  a  series  too  the  middle 
[75]  and  major  terms  must  form  an  immediate 
premiss;  e.g.  we  argue  that,  since  C  has  oc¬ 
curred,  therefore  A  occurred:  and  C's  occur¬ 
rence  was  posterior,  A’s  prior;  but  C  is  the 
source  of  the  inference  because  it  is  nearer  to 
the  present  moment,  and  the  starting-point  of 
time  is  the  present.  We  next  argue  that,  since 
D  has  occurred,  therefore  C  occurred.  Then  we 
conclude  that,  since  D  has  occurred,  therefore 
[20]  A  must  have  occurred;  and  the  cause  is 
C,  for  since  D  has  occurred  C  must  have  oc¬ 
curred,  and  since  C  has  occurred  A  must  pre¬ 
viously  have  occurred. 

If  we  get  our  middle  term  in  this  way,  will 
the  series  terminate  in  an  immediate  premiss, 
or  since,  as  we  said,  no  two  events  are  ‘contig¬ 
uous’,  will  a  fresh  middle  term  always  inter¬ 
vene  because  there  is  an  infinity  of  middles? 
No:  though  no  two  events  are  ‘contiguous’, 
yet  we  must  start  from  a  premiss  consisting  of 
a  middle  and  the  present  event  as  major.  The 
[25]  like  is  true  of  future  events  too,  since  if  it 
is  true  to  say  that  D  will  exist,  it  must  be  a 
prior  truth  to  say  that  A  will  exist,  and  the 
cause  of  this  conclusion  is  C;  for  if  D  will  exist, 
C  will  exist  prior  to  D,  and  if  C  will  exist,  A 
will  exist  prior  to  it.  And  here  too  the  same 
[jo]  infinite  divisibility  might  be  urged,  since 
future  events  are  not  ‘contiguous’.  But  here  too 
an  immediate  basic  premiss  must  be  assumed. 
And  in  the  world  of  fact  this  is  so:  if  a  house 
has  been  built,  then  blocks  must  have  been 
quarried  and  shaped.  The  reason  is  that  a 
house  having  been  built  necessitates  a  founda¬ 
tion  having  been  laid,  and  if  a  foundation  has 
[55]  been  laid  blocks  must  have  been  shaped 

1  Cf.  Physics  vi. 


96b 

beforehand.  Again,  if  a  house  will  be  built, 
blocks  will  similarly  be  shaped  beforehand; 
and  proof  is  through  the  middle  in  the  same 
way,  for  the  foundation  will  exist  before  the 
house. 

Now  we  observe  in  Nature  a  certain  kind  of 
circular  process  of  coming-to-be;  and  this  is 
ossible  only  if  the  middle  and  extreme  terms 
40]  are  reciprocal,  since  conversion  is  condi¬ 
tioned  by  reciprocity  in  the  terms  of  the  proof. 
96a  This — the  convertibility  of  conclusions 
and  premisses — has  been  proved  in  our  early 
chapters,1  and  the  circular  process  is  an  instance 
of  this.  In  actual  fact  it  is  exemplified  thus: 
when  the  earth  had  been  moistened  an  exhala¬ 
tion  was  bound  to  rise,  and  when  an  exhalation 
had  risen  cloud  was  bound  to  form,  and  from 
the  formation  of  cloud  rain  necessarily  result¬ 
ed,  and  by  the  fall  of  rain  the  earth  was  neces- 
[5]  sarily  moistened:  but  this  was  the  starting- 
point,  so  that  a  circle  is  completed;  for  posit 
any  one  of  the  terms  and  another  follows  from 
it,  and  from  that  another,  and  from  that  again 
the  first. 

Some  occurrences  are  universal  (for  they 
are,  or  come-to-be  what  they  are,  always  and  in 
every  case);  others  again  are  not  always  what 
[/o]  they  are  but  only  as  a  general  rule:  for 
instance,  not  every  man  can  grow  a  beard,  but 
it  is  the  general  rule.  In  the  case  of  such  con¬ 
nexions  the  middle  term  too  must  be  a  general 
rule.  For  if  A  is  predicated  universally  of  B 
and  B  of  C,  A  too  must  be  predicated  always 
and  in  every  instance  of  C,  since  to  hold  in 
[75]  every  instance  and  always  is  of  the  nature 
of  the  universal.  But  we  have  assumed  a  con¬ 
nexion  which  is  a  general  rule;  consequently 
the  middle  term  B  must  also  be  a  general  rule. 
So  connexions  which  embody  a  general  rule — 
i.e.  which  exist  or  come  to  be  as  a  general  rule 
— will  also  derive  from  immediate  basic  prem¬ 
isses. 

[20]  We  have  already  explained  how  essential 
nature  is  set  out  in  the  terms  of  a  demonstra¬ 
tion,  and  the  sense  in  which  it  is  or  is  not  de¬ 
monstrable  or  definable;  so  let  us  now  discuss 
the  method  to  be  adopted  in  tracing  the  ele¬ 
ments  predicated  as  constituting  the  definable 
form. 

Now  of  the  attributes  which  inhere  always 
in  each  several  thing  there  are  some  which  are 
wider  in  extent  than  it  but  not  wider  than  its 
[25]  genus  (by  attributes  of  wider  extent  I 

1 1.  3;  and  Prior  Analytics,  11.  3-5,  8-10. 


I31 

mean  all  such  as  are  universal  attributes  of  each 
several  subject,  but  in  their  application  are  not 
confined  to  that  subject).  I.e.  while  an  attribute 
may  inhere  in  every  triad,  yet  also  in  a  subject 
not  a  triad — as  being  inheres  in  triad  but  also 
in  subjects  not  numbers  at  all — odd  on  the 
other  hand  is  an  attribute  inhering  in  every 
triad  and  of  wider  application  (inhering  as  it 
[30]  does  also  in  pentad),  but  which  does  not 
extend  beyond  the  genus  of  triad;  for  pentad  is 
a  number,  but  nothing  outside  number  is  odd. 
It  is  such  attributes  which  we  have  to  select, 
up  to  the  exact  point  at  which  they  are  sever¬ 
ally  of  wider  extent  than  the  subject  but  collec¬ 
tively  coextensive  with  it;  for  this  synthesis 
must  be  the  substance  of  the  thing.  For  exam¬ 
ple  every  triad  possesses  the  attributes  number, 
[35]  odd,  and  prime  in  both  senses,  i.e.  not 
only  as  possessing  no  divisors,  but  also  as  not 
being  a  sum  of  numbers.  This,  then,  is  pre¬ 
cisely  what  triad  is,  viz.  a  number,  odd,  and 
prime  in  the  former  and  also  the  latter  sense  of 
the  term:  for  these  attributes  taken  severally 
96b  apply,  the  first  two  to  all  odd  numbers, 
the  last  to  the  dyad  also  as  well  as  to  the  triad, 
but,  taken  collectively,  to  no  other  subject. 
Now  since  we  have  shown  above2  that  attri¬ 
butes  predicated  as  belonging  to  the  essential 
nature  are  necessary  and  that  universals  are 
necessary,  and  since  the  attributes  which  we  se¬ 
lect  as  inhering  in  triad,  or  in  any  other  subject 
whose  attributes  we  select  in  this  way,  are  pred- 
[5]  icated  as  belonging  to  its  essential  nature, 
triad  will  thus  possess  these  attributes  neces¬ 
sarily.  Further,  that  the  synthesis  of  them  con¬ 
stitutes  the  substance  of  triad  is  shown  by  the 
following  argument.  If  it  is  not  identical  with 
the  being  of  triad,  it  must  be  related  to  triad  as 
a  genus  named  or  nameless.  It  will  then  be  of 
wider  extent  than  triad — assuming  that  wider 
[10]  potential  extent  is  the  character  of  a  ge¬ 
nus.  If  on  the  other  hand  this  synthesis  is  ap¬ 
plicable  to  no  subject  other  than  the  individual 
triads,  it  will  be  identical  with  the  being  of 
triad,  because  we  make  the  further  assumption 
that  the  substance  of  each  subject  is  the  predi¬ 
cation  of  elements  in  its  essential  nature  down 
to  the  last  differentia  characterizing  the  indi¬ 
viduals.  It  follows  that  any  other  synthesis  thus 
exhibited  will  likewise  be  identical  with  the 
being  of  the  subject. 

[75]  The  author  of  a  hand-book  on  a  subject 
that  is  a  generic  whole  should  divide  the  genus 
into  its  first  infimae  species — number  e.g.  into 
triad  and  dyad — and  then  endeavour  to  seize 
2 1*  4. 


BOOK  II,  CHAPTERS  12-13 


i32  posterior 

their  definitions  by  the  method  we  have  de¬ 
scribed — the  definition,  for  example,  of  straight 
line  or  circle  or  right  angle.  After  that,  having 
established  what  the  category  is  to  which  the 
subaltern  genus  belongs — quantity  or  quality, 
[20]  for  instance — he  should  examine  the  prop¬ 
erties  ‘peculiar’  to  the  species,  working  through 
the  proximate  common  differentiae.  He  should 
proceed  thus  because  the  attributes  of  the  gen¬ 
era  compounded  of  the  infimae  species  will  be 
clearly  given  by  the  definitions  of  the  species; 
since  the  basic  element  of  them  all  is  the  defi¬ 
nition,  i.e.  the  simple  infirma  species ,  and  the 
attributes  inhere  essentially  in  the  simple  in¬ 
fimae  species,  in  the  genera  only  in  virtue  of 
these. 

[25]  Divisions  according  to  differentiae  are  a 
useful  accessory  to  this  method.  What  force 
they  have  as  proofs  we  did,  indeed,  explain 
above,1  but  that  merely  towards  collecting  the 
essential  nature  they  may  be  of  use  we  will  pro¬ 
ceed  to  show.  They  might,  indeed,  seem  to  be 
of  no  use  at  all,  but  rather  to  assume  every¬ 
thing  at  the  start  and  to  be  no  better  than  an 
[jo]  initial  assumption  made  without  divi¬ 
sion.  But,  in  fact,  the  order  in  which  the  attri¬ 
butes  are  predicated  does  make  a  difference — 
it  matters  whether  we  say  animal — tame — bi¬ 
ped,  or  biped — animal — tame.  For  if  every  de¬ 
finable  thing  consists  of  two  elements  and  ‘ani¬ 
mal-tame’  forms  a  unity,  and  again  out  of 
this  and  the  further  differentia  man  (or  what¬ 
ever  else  is  the  unity  under  construction)  is 
constituted,  then  the  elements  we  assume  have 
necessarily  been  reached  by  division.  Again,  di- 
[35]  vision  is  the  only  possible  method  of 
avoiding  the  omission  of  any  element  of  the  es¬ 
sential  nature.  Thus,  if  the  primary  genus  is 
assumed  and  we  then  take  one  of  the  lower  di¬ 
visions,  the  dividendum  will  not  fall  whole 
into  this  division:  e.g.  it  is  not  all  animal  which 
is  either  whole-winged  or  split-winged  but  all 
winged  animal,  for  it  is  winged  animal  to 
9 7a  which  this  differentiation  belongs.  The 
primary  differentiation  of  animal  is  that  within 
which  all  animal  falls.  The  like  is  true  of  every 
other  genus,  whether  outside  animal  or  a  sub¬ 
altern  genus  of  animal;  e.g.  the  primary  differ¬ 
entiation  of  bird  is  that  within  which  falls  ev¬ 
ery  bird,  of  fish  that  within  which  falls  every 
fish.  So,  if  we  proceed  in  this  way,  we  can  be 
sure  that  nothing  has  been  omitted:  by  any 
[5]  other  method  one  is  bound  to  omit  some¬ 
thing  without  knowing  it. 

To  define  and  divide  one  need  not  know  the 
1 11.  5;  and  Prior  Analytics ,  1.  31. 


ANALYTICS  97* 

whole  of  existence.  Yet  some  hold  it  impossi¬ 
ble  to  know  the  differentiae  distinguishing 
each  thing  from  every  single  other  thing  with¬ 
out  knowing  every  single  other  thing;  and  one 
cannot,  they  say,  know  each  thing  without 
knowing  its  differentiae,  since  everything  is 
[/o]  identical  with  that  from  which  it  does  not 
differ,  and  other  than  that  from  which  it  dif¬ 
fers.  Now  first  of  all  this  is  a  fallacy:  not  every 
differentia  precludes  identity,  since  many  dif¬ 
ferentiae  inhere  in  things  specifically  identical, 
though  not  in  the  substance  of  these  nor  essen¬ 
tially.  Secondly,  when  one  has  taken  one’s  dif¬ 
fering  pair  of  opposites  and  assumed  that  the 
[75]  two  sides  exhaust  the  genus,  and  that  the 
subject  one  seeks  to  define  is  present  in  one  or 
other  of  them,  and  one  has  further  verified  its 
presence  in  one  of  them;  then  it  does  not  mat¬ 
ter  whether  or  not  one  knows  all  the  other  sub¬ 
jects  of  which  the  differentiae  are  also  predi¬ 
cated.  For  it  is  obvious  that  when  by  this  proc¬ 
ess  one  reaches  subjects  incapable  of  further 
differentiation  one  will  possess  the  formula  de¬ 
fining  the  substance.  Moreover,  to  postulate 
that  the  division  exhausts  the  genus  is  not  ille- 
[20]  gitimate  if  the  opposites  exclude  a  mid¬ 
dle;  since  if  it  is  the  differentia  of  that  genus, 
anything  contained  in  the  genus  must  lie  on 
one  of  the  two  sides. 

In  establishing  a  definition  by  division  one 
should  keep  three  objects  in  view:  (1)  the  ad¬ 
mission  only  of  elements  in  the  definable  form, 
(2)  the  arrangement  of  these  in  the  right  or- 
[25]  der,  (3)  the  omission  of  no  such  ele¬ 
ments.  The  first  is  feasible  because  one  can  es¬ 
tablish  genus  and  differentia  through  the  topic 
of  the  genus,  just  as  one  can  conclude  the  in¬ 
herence  of  an  accident  through  the  topic  of  the 
accident.  The  right  order  will  be  achieved  if 
the  right  term  is  assumed  as  primary,  and  this 
will  be  ensured  if  the  term  selected  is  predica¬ 
te]  ble  of  all  the  others  but  not  all  they  of  it; 
since  there  must  be  one  such  term.  Having  as¬ 
sumed  this  we  at  once  proceed  in  the  same  way 
with  the  lower  terms;  for  our  second  term  will 
be  the  first  of  the  remainder,  our  third  the  first 
of  those  which  follow  the  second  in  a  ‘contigu¬ 
ous’  series,  since  when  the  higher  term  is  ex¬ 
cluded,  that  term  of  the  remainder  which  is 
‘contiguous’  to  it  will  be  primary,  and  so  on. 
Our  procedure  makes  it  clear  that  no  elements 
[35]  in  the  definable  form  have  been  omitted: 
we  have  taken  the  differentia  that  comes  first 
in  the  order  of  division,  pointing  out  that  ani¬ 
mal,  e.g.  is  divisible  exhaustively  into  A  and 
B,  and  that  the  subject  accepts  one  of  the  two 


98' 

as  its  predicate.  Next  we  have  taken  the  differ¬ 
entia  of  the  whole  thus  reached,  and  shown 
that  the  whole  we  finally  reach  is  not  further 
divisible — i.e.  that  as  soon  as  we  have  taken  the 
last  differentia  to  form  the  concrete  totality, 
this  totality  admits  of  no  division  into  species. 
9 7b  For  it  is  clear  that  there  is  no  superfluous 
addition,  since  all  these  terms  we  have  selected 
are  elements  in  the  definable  form;  and  noth¬ 
ing  lacking,  since  any  omission  would  have 
to  be  a  genus  or  a  differentia.  Now  the  pri¬ 
mary  term  is  a  genus,  and  this  term  taken  in 
conjunction  with  its  differentiae  is  a  genus: 
moreover  the  differentiae  are  all  included,  be¬ 
cause  there  is  now  no  further  differentia;  if 
[5]  there  were,  the  final  concrete  would  admit 
of  division  into  species,  which,  we  said,  is  not 
the  case. 

To  resume  our  account  of  the  right  method 
of  investigation:  We  must  start  by  observing  a 
set  of  similar — i.e.  specifically  identical — indi¬ 
viduals,  and  consider  what  element  they  have 
in  common.  We  must  then  apply  the  same 
process  to  another  set  of  individuals  which  be¬ 
long  to  one  species  and  are  generically  but  not 
specifically  identical  with  the  former  set.  When 
f/o]  we  have  established  what  the  common 
element  is  in  all  members  of  this  second  spe¬ 
cies,  and  likewise  in  members  of  further  spe¬ 
cies,  we  should  again  consider  whether  the  re¬ 
sults  established  possess  any  identity,  and  perse¬ 
vere  until  we  reach  a  single  formula,  since  this 
will  be  the  definition  of  the  thing.  But  if  we 
reach  not  one  formula  but  two  or  more,  evi¬ 
dently  the  definiendum  cannot  be  one  thing 
[75]  but  must  be  more  than  one.  I  may  illus¬ 
trate  my  meaning  as  follows.  If  we  were  in¬ 
quiring  what  the  essential  nature  of  pride  is, 
we  should  examine  instances  of  proud  men  we 
know  of  to  see  what,  as  such,  they  have  in 
common;  e.g.  if  Alcibiades  was  proud,  or 
Achilles  and  Ajax  were  proud,  we  should  find 
on  inquiring  what  they  all  had  in  common, 
that  it  was  intolerance  of  insult;  it  was  this 
which  drove  Alcibiades  to  war,  Achilles  to 
[20]  wrath,  and  Ajax  to  suicide.  We  should 
next  examine  other  cases,  Lysander,  for  exam¬ 
ple,  or  Socrates,  and  then  if  these  have  in  com¬ 
mon  indifference  alike  to  good  and  ill  fortune, 
I  take  these  two  results  and  inquire  what  com¬ 
mon  element  have  equanimity  amid  the  vicis¬ 
situdes  of  life  and  impatience  of  dishonour.  If 
[25]  they  have  none,  there  will  be  two  genera 
of  pride.  Besides,  every  definition  is  always 
universal  and  commensurate:  the  physician 
does  not  prescribe  what  is  healthy  for  a  single 


133 

eye,  but  for  all  eyes  or  for  a  determinate  spe¬ 
cies  of  eye.  It  is  also  easier  by  this  method  to 
define  the  single  species  than  the  universal,  and 
that  is  why  our  procedure  should  be  from  the 
several  species  to  the  universal  genera — this  for 
[30]  the  further  reason  too  that  equivocation 
is  less  readily  detected  in  genera  than  in  in- 
fimae  species .  Indeed,  perspicuity  is  essential 
in  definitions,  just  as  inferential  movement  is 
the  minimum  required  in  demonstrations;  and 
we  shall  attain  perspicuity  if  we  can  collect 
separately  the  definition  of  each  species  through 
the  group  of  singulars  which  we  have  estab¬ 
lished — e.g.  the  definition  of  similarity  not  un- 
[35]  qualified  but  restricted  to  colours  and  to 
figures;  the  definition  of  acuteness,  but  only  of 
sound — and  so  proceed  to  the  common  univer¬ 
sal  with  a  careful  avoidance  of  equivocation. 
We  may  add  that  if  dialectical  disputation 
must  not  employ  metaphors,  clearly  metaphors 
and  metaphorical  expressions  are  precluded  in 
definition:  otherwise  dialectic  would  involve 
metaphors. 

M 

98a  In  order  to  formulate  the  connexions  we 
wish  to  prove  we  have  to  select  our  analyses 
and  divisions.  The  method  of  selection  consists 
in  laying  down  the  common  genus  of  all  our 
subjects  of  investigation — if  e.g.  they  are  ani¬ 
mals,  we  lay  down  what  the  properties  are 
which  inhere  in  every  animal.  These  estab¬ 
lished,  we  next  lay  down  the  properties  essen- 
[5]  tially  connected  with  the  first  of  the  re¬ 
maining  classes — e.g.  if  this  first  subgenus  is 
bird,  the  essential  properties  of  every  bird — 
and  so  on,  always  characterizing  the  proximate 
subgenus.  This  will  clearly  at  once  enable  us  to 
say  in  virtue  of  what  character  the  subgenera 
— man,  e.g.  or  horse — possess  their  properties. 
Let  A  be  animal,  B  the  properties  of  every  ani- 
[/o]  mal,  C  D  E  various  species  of  animal. 
Then  it  is  clear  in  virtue  of  what  character  B 
inheres  in  D — namely  A — and  that  it  inheres 
in  C  and  E  for  the  same  reason:  and  through¬ 
out  the  remaining  subgenera  always  the  same 
rule  applies. 

We  are  now  taking  our  examples  from  the 
traditional  class-names,  but  we  must  not  con¬ 
fine  ourselves  to  considering  these.  We  must 
collect  any  other  common  character  which  we 
[75]  observe,  and  then  consider  with  what 
species  it  is  connected  and  what  properties  be¬ 
long  to  it.  For  example,  as  the  common  proper¬ 
ties  of  horned  animals  we  collect  the  possession 
of  a  third  stomach  and  only  one  row  of  teeth. 


BOOK  II,  CHAPTERS  13-14 


i34  POSTERIOR 

Then  since  it  is  clear  in  virtue  of  what  charac¬ 
ter  they  possess  these  attributes — namely  their 
horned  character — the  next  question  is,  to 
what  species  does  the  possession  of  horns  at¬ 
tach  ? 

[20]  Yet  a  further  method  of  selection  is  by 
analogy:  for  we  cannot  find  a  single  identical 
name  to  give  to  a  squid’s  pounce,  a  fish’s  spine, 
and  an  animal’s  bone,  although  these  too  pos¬ 
sess  common  properties  as  if  there  were  a  sin¬ 
gle  osseous  nature. 

r5 

Some  connexions  that  require  proof  are  iden¬ 
tical  in  that  they  possess  an  identical  ‘middle’ 
— e.g.  a  whole  group  might  be  proved  through 
[25]  ‘reciprocal  replacement’ — and  of  these  one 
class  are  identical  in  genus,  namely  all  those 
whose  difference  consists  in  their  concerning 
different  subjects  or  in  their  mode  of  manifes¬ 
tation.  This  latter  class  may  be  exemplified  by 
the  questions  as  to  the  causes  respectively  of 
echo,  of  reflection,  and  of  the  rainbow:  the  con¬ 
nexions  to  be  proved  which  these  questions 
embody  are  identical  generically,  because  all 
three  are  forms  of  repercussion;  but  specifically 
they  are  different. 

Other  connexions  that  require  proof  only 
differ  in  that  the  ‘middle’  of  the  one  is  subor- 
[30]  dinate  to  the  ‘middle’  of  the  other.  For 
example:  Why  does  the  Nile  rise  towards  the 
end  of  the  month?  Because  towards  its  close 
the  month  is  more  stormy.  Why  is  the  month 
more  stormy  towards  its  close?  Because  the 
moon  is  waning.  Here  the  one  cause  is  subordi¬ 
nate  to  the  other. 

16 

[35]  The  question  might  be  raised  with  regard 
to  cause  and  effect  whether  when  the  effect  is 
present  the  cause  also  is  present;  whether,  for 
instance,  if  a  plant  sheds  its  leaves  or  the  moon 
is  eclipsed,  there  is  present  also  the  cause  of  the 
eclipse  or  of  the  fall  of  the  leaves — the  posses¬ 
sion  of  broad  leaves,  let  us  say,  in  the  latter 
98b  case,  in  the  former  the  earth’s  interposi¬ 
tion.  For,  one  might  argue,  if  this  cause  is  not 
present,  these  phenomena  will  have  some  other 
cause:  if  it  is  present,  its  effect  will  be  at  once 
implied  by  it — the  eclipse  by  the  earth’s  inter¬ 
position,  the  fall  of  the  leaves  by  the  possession 
of  broad  leaves;  but  if  so,  they  will  be  logically 
coincident  and  each  capable  of  proof  through 
[5]  the  other.  Let  me  illustrate:  Let  A  be  de¬ 
ciduous  character,  B  the  possession  of  broad 
leaves,  C  vine.  Now  if  A  inheres  in  B  (for  ev- 


ANALYTICS  98b 

ery  broad-leaved  plant  is  deciduous),  and  B  in 
C  (every  vine  possessing  broad  leaves);  then 
A  inheres  in  C  (every  vine  is  deciduous),  and 
the  middle  term  B  is  the  cause.  But  we  can  also 
[/o]  demonstrate  that  the  vine  has  broad  leaves 
because  it  is  deciduous.  Thus,  let  D  be  broad¬ 
leaved,  E  deciduous,  F  vine.  Then  E  inheres  in 
F  (since  every  vine  is  deciduous),  and  D  in  E 
(for  every  deciduous  plant  has  broad  leaves): 
[75]  therefore  every  vine  has  broad  leaves,  and 
the  cause  is  its  deciduous  character.  If,  how¬ 
ever,  they  cannot  each  be  the  cause  of  the  other 
(for  cause  is  prior  to  effect,  and  the  earth’s  in¬ 
terposition  is  the  cause  of  the  moon’s  eclipse 
and  not  the  eclipse  of  the  interposition) — if, 
then,  demonstration  through  the  cause  is  of  the 
[20]  reasoned  fact  and  demonstration  not 
through  the  cause  is  of  the  bare  fact,  one  who 
knows  it  through  the  eclipse  knows  the  fact  of 
the  earth’s  interposition  but  not  the  reasoned 
fact.  Moreover,  that  the  eclipse  is  not  the  cause 
of  the  interposition,  but  the  interposition  of  the 
eclipse,  is  obvious  because  the  interposition  is 
an  element  in  the  definition  of  eclipse,  which 
shows  that  the  eclipse  is  known  through  the 
interposition  and  not  vice  versa. 

[25]  On  the  other  hand,  can  a  single  effect 
have  more  than  one  cause?  One  might  argue 
as  follows:  if  the  same  attribute  is  predicable 
of  more  than  one  thing  as  its  primary  subject, 
let  B  be  a  primary  subject  in  which  A  inheres, 
and  C  another  primary  subject  of  A,  and  D 
and  E  primary  subjects  of  B  and  C  respective¬ 
ly.  A  will  then  inhere  in  D  and  E,  and  B  will 
be  the  cause  of  A's  inherence  in  D,  C  of  A’s  in¬ 
herence  in  E.  The  presence  of  the  cause  thus 
[30]  necessitates  that  of  the  effect,  but  the  pres¬ 
ence  of  the  effect  necessitates  the  presence  not 
of  all  that  may  cause  it  but  only  of  a  cause 
which  yet  need  not  be  the  whole  cause.  We 
may,  however,  suggest  that  if  the  connexion  to 
be  proved  is  always  universal  and  commensu¬ 
rate,  not  only  will  the  cause  be  a  whole  but 
also  the  effect  will  be  universal  and  commen¬ 
surate.  For  instance,  deciduous  character  will 
belong  exclusively  to  a  subject  which  is  a 
whole,  and,  if  this  whole  has  species,  univer¬ 
sally  and  commensurately  to  those  species — 
i.e.  either  to  all  species  of  plant  or  to  a  single 
[35]  species.  So  in  these  universal  and  com¬ 
mensurate  connexions  the  ‘middle’  and  its  ef¬ 
fect  must  reciprocate,  i.e.  be  convertible.  Sup¬ 
posing,  for  example,  that  the  reason  why  trees 
are  deciduous  is  the  coagulation  of  sap,  then 
if  a  tree  is  deciduous,  coagulation  must  be  pres¬ 
ent,  and  if  coagulation  is  present — not  in  any 


99b  BOOK  II,  CHAPTERS  14-18  135 

subject  but  in  a  tree — then  that  tree  -must  be  ous.  I  say  that,  because  you  will  first  reach  a 
deciduous.  middle  next  the  subject,  and  a  premiss  assert¬ 

ing  it  of  the  whole  subject,  and  after  that  a 
middle — the  coagulation  of  sap  or  something 


99a  Can  the  cause  of  an  identical  effect  be  not 
identical  in  every  instance  of  the  effect  but  dif¬ 
ferent?  Or  is  that  impossible?  Perhaps  it  is  im¬ 
possible  if  the  effect  is  demonstrated  as  essen¬ 
tial  and  not  as  inhering  in  virtue  of  a  symptom 
or  an  accident — because  the  middle  is  then  the 
definition  of  the  major  term — though  possible 
if  the  demonstration  is  not  essential.  Now  it  is 
[5]  possible  to  consider  the  effect  and  its  sub¬ 
ject  as  an  accidental  conjunction,  though  such 
conjunctions  would  not  be  regarded  as  con¬ 
nexions  demanding  scientific  proof.  But  if  they 
are  accepted  as  such,  the  middle  will  corre¬ 
spond  to  the  extremes,  and  be  equivocal  if 
they  are  equivocal,  generically  one  if  they  are 
generically  one.  Take  the  question  why  pro¬ 
portionals  alternate.  The  cause  when  they  are 
lines,  and  when  they  are  numbers,  is  both  dif¬ 
ferent  and  identical;  different  in  so  far  as  lines 
are  lines  and  not  numbers,  identical  as  involv- 
[/o]  ing  a  given  determinate  increment.  In  all 
proportionals  this  is  so.  Again,  the  cause  of 
likeness  between  colour  and  colour  is  other 
than  that  between  figure  and* figure;  for  like¬ 
ness  here  is  equivocal,  meaning  perhaps  in  the 
latter  case  equality  of  the  ratios  of  the  sides  and 
equality  of  the  angles,  in  the  case  of  colours 
identity  of  the  act  of  perceiving  them,  or  some- 
[75]  thing  else  of  the  sort.  Again,  connexions 
requiring  proof  which  are  identical  by  analogy 
have  middles  also  analogous. 

The  truth  is  that  cause,  effect,  and  subject 
are  reciprocally  predicable  in  the  following 
way.  If  the  species  are  taken  severally,  the  ef¬ 
fect  is  wider  than  the  subject  (e.g.  the  posses¬ 
sion  of  external  angles  equal  to  four  right  an¬ 
gles  is  an  attribute  wider  than  triangle  or 
square),  but  it  is  coextensive  with  the  species 
[20]  taken  collectively  (in  this  instance  with 
all  figures  whose  external  angles  are  equal  to 
four  right  angles).  And  the  middle  likewise 
reciprocates,  for  the  middle  is  a  definition  of 
the  major;  which  is  incidentally  the  reason 
why  all  the  sciences  are  built  up  through  defi¬ 
nition. 

We  may  illustrate  as  follows.  Deciduous  is 
a  universal  attribute  of  vine,  and  is  at  the  same 
time  of  wider  extent  than  vine;  and  of  fig,  and 
is  of  wider  extent  than  fig:  but  it  is  not  wider 
than  but  coextensive  with  the  totality  of  the 
[25 J  species.  Then  if  you  take  the  middle 
which  is  proximate,  it  is  a  definition  of  decidu- 


of  the  sort — proving  the  connexion  of  the  first 
middle  with  the  major:  but  it  is  the  coagula¬ 
tion  of  sap  at  the  junction  of  leaf-stalk  and 
stem  which  defines  deciduous. 

[30]  If  an  explanation  in  formal  terms  of  the 
inter-relation  of  cause  and  effect  is  demanded, 
we  shall  offer  the  following.  Let  A  be  an  attri¬ 
bute  of  all  B,  and  B  of  every  species  of  D,  but 
so  that  both  A  and  B  are  wider  than  their  re¬ 
spective  subjects.  Then  B  will  be  a  universal 
attribute  of  each  species  of  D  (since  I  call  such 
an  attribute  universal  even  if  it  is  not  commen¬ 
surate,  and  I  call  an  attribute  primary  univer¬ 
sal  if  it  is  commensurate,  not  with  each  spe¬ 
cies  severally  but  with  their  totality),  and  it  ex¬ 
tends  beyond  each  of  them  taken  separately. 
[55]  Thus,  B  is  the  cause  of  A's  inherence  in 
the  species  0/  D:  consequently  A  must  be  of 
wider  extent  than  B;  otherwise  why  should  B 
be  the  cause  of  A's  inherence  in  D  any  more 
than  A  the  cause  of  B's  inherence  in  D?  Now 
if  A  is  an  attribute  of  all  the  species  of  E,  all 
the  species  of  E  will  be  united  by  possessing 
some  common  cause  other  than  B:  otherwise 
how  shall  we  be  able  to  say  that  A  is  predicable 
of  all  of  which  E  is  predicable,  while  E  is  not 
99b  predicable  of  all  of  which  A  can  be  predi¬ 
cated?  I  mean  how  can  there  fail  to  be  some 
special  cause  of  A’ s  inherence  in  E,  as  there 
was  of  A* s  inherence  in  all  the  species  of  D? 
Then  are  the  species  of  E,  too,  united  by  pos¬ 
sessing  some  common  cause?  This  cause  we 
must  look  for.  Let  us  call  it  C. 

We  conclude,  then,  that  the  same  effect  may 
have  more  than  one  cause,  but  not  in  subjects 
specifically  identical.  For  instance,  the  cause  of 
[5]  longevity  in  quadrupeds  is  lack  of  bile,  in 
birds  a  dry  constitution — or  certainly  some¬ 
thing  different. 

18 

If  immediate  premisses  are  not  reached  at 
once,  and  there  is  not  merely  one  middle  but 
several  middles,  i.e.  several  causes;  is  the  cause 
of  the  property’s  inherence  in  the  several  spe¬ 
cies  the  middle  which  is  proximate  to  the 
[/o]  primary  universal,  or  the  middle  which 
is  proximate  to  the  species?  Clearly  the  cause 
is  that  nearest  to  each  species  severally  in  which 
it  is  manifested,  for  that  is  the  cause  of  the  sub¬ 
ject’s  falling  under  the  universal.  To  illustrate 
formally:  C  is  the  cause  of  B's  inherence  in  D; 


1 36  POSTERIOR 

hence  C  is  the  cause  of  A’ s  inherence  in  D,  B 
of  A’s  inherence  in  C,  while  the  cause  of  A's 
inherence  in  B  is  B  itself. 

19 

[75]  As  regards  syllogism  and  demonstration, 
the  definition  of,  and  the  conditions  required 
to  produce  each  of  them,  are  now  clear,  and 
with  that  also  the  definition  of,  and  the  con¬ 
ditions  required  to  produce,  demonstrative 
knowledge,  since  it  is  the  same  as  demonstra¬ 
tion.  As  to  the  basic  premisses,  how  they  be¬ 
come  known  and  what  is  the  developed  state 
of  knowledge  of  them  is  made  clear  by  raising 
some  preliminary  problems. 

[20]  We  have  already  said1  that  scientific 
knowledge  through  demonstration  is  impossi¬ 
ble  unless  a  man  knows  the  primary  immedi¬ 
ate  premisses.  But  there  are  questions  which 
might  be  raised  in  respect  of  the  apprehension 
of  these  immediate  premisses:  one  might  not 
only  ask  whether  it  is  of  the  same  kind  as  the 
apprehension  of  the  conclusions,  but  also 
whether  there  is  or  is  not  scientific  knowledge 
of  both;  or  scientific  knowledge  of  the  latter, 
and  of  the  former  a  different  kind  of  knowl¬ 
edge;  and,  further,  whether  the  developed 
[25]  states  of  knowledge  are  not  innate  but 
come  to  be  in  us,  or  are  innate  but  at  first  un¬ 
noticed.  Now  it  is  strange  if  we  possess  them 
from  birth;  for  it  means  that  we  possess  appre¬ 
hensions  more  accurate  than  demonstration 
and  fail  to  notice  them.  If  on  the  other  hand 
we  acquire  them  and  do  not  previously  possess 
them,  how  could  we  apprehend  and  learn 
without  a  basis  of  pre-existent  knowledge?  For 
that  is  impossible,  as  we  used  to  find2  in  the 
[30]  case  of  demonstration.  So  it  emerges  that 
neither  can  we  possess  them  from  birth,  nor 
can  they  come  to  be  in  us  if  we  are  without 
knowledge  of  them  to  the  extent  of  having  no 
such  developed  state  at  all.  Therefore  we  must 
possess  a  capacity  of  some  sort,  but  not  such  as 
to  rank  higher  in  accuracy  than  these  devel¬ 
oped  states.  And  this  at  least  is  an  obvious  char¬ 
acteristic  of  all  animals,  for  they  possess  a  con- 
[55]  genital  discriminative  capacity  which  is 
called  sense-perception.  But  though  sense-per¬ 
ception  is  innate  in  all  animals,  in  some  the 
sense-impression  comes  to  persist,  in  others  it 
does  not.  So  animals  in  which  this  persistence 
does  not  come  to  be  have  either  no  knowledge 
at  all  outside  the  act  of  perceiving,  or  no 
knowledge  of  objects  of  which  no  impression 
persists;  animals  in  which  it  does  come  into 
1 1.  2.  2 1.  1. 


ANALYTICS  l00b 

being  have  perception  and  can  continue  to  re¬ 
tain  the  sense-impression  in  the  soul:  and  when 
100a  such  persistence  is  frequently  repeated  a 
further  distinction  at  once  arises  between  those 
which  out  of  the  persistence  of  such  sense- 
impressions  develop  a  power  of  systematizing 
them  and  those  which  do  not.  So  out  of  sense- 
perception  comes  to  be  what  we  call  memory, 
and  out  of  frequently  repeated  memories  of 
[5]  the  same  thing  develops  experience;  for  a 
number  of  memories  constitute  a  single  expe¬ 
rience.  From  experience  again — i.e.  from  the 
universal  now  stabilized  in  its  entirety  within 
the  soul,  the  one  beside  the  many  which  is  a 
single  identity  within  them  all — originate  the 
skill  of  the  craftsman  and  the  knowledge  of 
the  man  of  science,  skill  in  the  sphere  of  com¬ 
ing  to  be  and  science  in  the  sphere  of  being. 

We  conclude  that  these  states  of  knowledge 
[/o]  are  neither  innate  in  a  determinate  form, 
nor  developed  from  other  higher  states  of 
knowledge,  but  from  sense-perception.  It  is  like 
a  rout  in  battle  stopped  by  first  one  man  mak¬ 
ing  a  stand  and  then  another,  until  the  original 
formation  has  been  restored.  The  soul  is  so 
constituted  as  to  be  capable  of  this  process. 

Let  us  now  restate  the  account  given  al- 
[75]  ready,  though  with  insufficient  clearness. 
When  one  of  a  number  of  logically  indiscrim- 
inable  particulars  has  made  a  stand,  the  earliest 
universal  is  present  in  the  soul:  for  though  the 
act  of  sense-perception  is  of  the  particular,  its 
content  is  universal — is  man,  for  example,  not 
100b  the  man  Callias.  A  fresh  stand  is  made 
among  these  rudimentary  universals,  and  the 
process  does  not  cease  until  the  indivisible  con¬ 
cepts,  the  true  universals,  are  established:  e.g. 
such  and  such  a  species  of  animal  is  a  step  to¬ 
wards  the  genus  animal,  which  by  the  same 
process  is  a  step  towards  a  further  generaliza¬ 
tion. 

Thus  it  is  clear  that  we  must  get  to  know 
the  primary  premisses  by  induction;  for  the 
method  by  which  even  sense-perception  im- 
[5]  plants  the  universal  is  inductive.  Now  of 
the  thinking  states  by  which  we  grasp  truth, 
some  are  unfailingly  true,  others  admit  of  er¬ 
ror — opinion,  for  instance,  and  calculation, 
whereas  scientific  knowing  and  intuition  are 
always  true:  further,  no  other  kind  of  thought 
except  intuition  is  more  accurate  than  scientific 
knowledge,  whereas  primary  premisses  are 
more  knowable  than  demonstrations,  and  all 
[70]  scientific  knowledge  is  discursive.  From 
these  considerations  it  follows  that  there  will 
be  no  scientific  knowledge  of  the  primary 


100b 

premisses,  and  since  except  intuition  nothing 
can  be  truer  than  scientific  knowledge,  it  will 
be  intuition  that  apprehends  the  primary  prem¬ 
isses — a  result  which  also  follows  from  the  fact 
that  demonstration  cannot  be  the  originative 
source  of  demonstration,  nor,  consequently, 
scientific  knowledge  of  scientific  knowledge. 


*37 

If,  therefore,  it  is  the  only  other  kind  of  true 
thinking  except  scientific  knowing,  intuition 
[75]  will  be  the  originative  source  of  scientific 
knowledge.  And  the  originative  source  of  sci¬ 
ence  grasps  the  original  basic  premiss,  while 
science  as  a  whole  is  similarly  related  as  origi¬ 
native  source  to  the  whole  body  of  fact. 


BOOK  II,  CHAPTERS  18-19 


' 

' 


CONTENTS:  TOPICS 


BOOK  I 
Introductory 


CHAP.  BERLIN  NOS. 

1.  Programme  of  treatise  iooa  18 

2.  Uses  of  treatise  ioia  25 

3.  Ideal  aimed  at  ioib  5 

A.  Subjects  and  Materials  of  Discussions 

4.  Subjects  (Problems)  and  materials  ioib  11 
(Propositions)  classified  into  four  groups  ac¬ 
cording  to  nature  of  Predicable  concerned 

5.  The  four  Predicables  ioib  37 

6.  How  far  to  be  treated  separately  i02b  27 

7.  Different  kinds  of  sameness  i03a  6 

8.  Twofold  proof  of  division  of  Pred-  i03b  1 

icables 

9.  The  ten  Categories  and  their  rela-  i03b  20 
tion  to  the  Predicables 

10.  Dialectical  Propositions  I04a  3 

11.  Dialectical  Problems: — Theses  10413 1 

12.  Dialectical  Reasoning  and  Induction  105s  10 

B.  The  Supply  of  Arguments 

13.  Four  sources  of  arguments:  105s  20 

14.  (1)  How  to  secure  propositions  i05a33 

15.  (2)  How  to  distinguish  ambiguous  io6a  1 

meanings 

16.  (3)  How  to  note  differences  i07b  36 

17.  (4)  How  to  note  resemblances  io8a6 

18.  The  special  uses  of  the  last  three  io8a  17 
processes 


Commonplace  Rules  respecting  Predications 
(a)  Of  Accident:  (i)  Universal  Predications 


Part  i.  Simple  predications  of  Accidents  generally 


BOOK  II 


io8b  37 

I09a  34 
noa  23 
ma  8 
mb  31 
1 12a  24 
I  I2b  26 


1.  Proposed  plan  of  treatment 

2.  Various  rules 

3.  Rules  for  dealing  with  Ambiguity 

4.  Various  rules 

5.  Rules  for  diverting  the  argument 

6.  Various  rules 

7.  Rules  drawn  from  contraries 

8.  Rules  drawn  from  different  modes 
of  opposition,  or  kinds  of  opposite 

9.  Rules  drawn  from  co-ordinates  and 
inflexions,  from  contraries,  and  from  proces¬ 
ses  or  agents  whereby  things  come  to  be  or  are 
destroyed 

10.  Rules  drawn  from  likeness  be¬ 
tween  things  or  their  relations,  and  from  vari¬ 
ations  in  degree 


ii3b  15 


ii4a  26 


ii4b  25 


11.  Rules  for  arguing  (a)  from  the  re-  115s  25 
suits  of  adding  things  together  to  the  char¬ 
acter  of  the  things;  (b)  from  qualified  to  sim¬ 
ple  or  absolute  predications 

Part  II.  Comparative  predications  of  Value- 
predicates  of  A  or  B 

BOOK  III 

1.  Various  rules;  including  rules  n6ai 

drawn  from  nature  of  subjects  to  which  A  or 
B  belong  (n6b  12-22) ;  or  from  consideration 
of  ends  and  means  (n6b  22-36) 

2.  Various  rules;  including  rules  117*5 

drawn  from  consideration  of  antecedents  and 
consequences  (ii7a5~i5);  of  numbers  (ii7a 
16-25) ;  of  times  and  seasons  (ii7a  26-37) ;  of 
self-sufficiency  (ii7a37~b2;  of  destructions, 
losses,  contraries,  production,  and  acquisition 
( 1 17b 3—9) ;  of  some  ideal  pattern  (ii7bio- 
27)  . 

3.  Various  rules;  including  rules  n8a26 

drawn  from  comparison  with  some  common 
standard  (n8b  1-4);  from  result  of  adding  A 
and  B  to,  or  subtracting  them  from,  some 
other  thing  of  known  value  (n8b  10-19); 
from  comparison  of  grounds  for  desiring  A  or 
B  (n8b20-36) 

Part  III.  Simple  predications  of  Value-predicates 

4.  How  to  adapt  previous  rules  ii9a  1 

Part  IV.  Comparative  predications  of  Accidents 
generally 

5.  Various  rules  119s  11 

(ii)  Particular  Predications 

6.  How  to  adapt  the  previous  rules  119s  32 
(ii9a  32— i2oa  5) ;  proof  and  disproof,  how  af¬ 
fected  by  definiteness  or  indefiniteness  of 
thesis  (i20a6~3i);  how  to  adapt  the  previous 
rules,  continued  (i20a32-b7) 

{b)  Of  Genus 
BOOK  IV 

1.  Various  rules  i20b  12 

2.  ( Continued )  i2ib  24 

3.  Various  rules;  including  rules  123s  20 

from  contraries,  useful  for  disproof  (i23b  1— 

1 24s  2),  and  for  proof  (124s  3-10);  from  in¬ 
flexions  and  co-ordinates  (124s  10-14) 

4.  Various  rules;  including  rules  124s  15 

from  likeness  of  relations  (124s  15-19);  from 
processes  or  agents  of  generation  and  destruc¬ 
tion  (i24a  20-30) ;  from  capacities  and  uses  of 
things  (i24a  31-34) ;  from  opposition  between 


139 


CONTENTS 


states  and  their  privations  (124s  35~b  6);  from 
contradictory  oppositions  (124b  7-14);  from 
relative  oppositions  (124b  15-34) ;  from  in¬ 
flexions  (i24b  35~i25a  4) :  also  special  rules  ap¬ 
plying  where  genus  and  species  are  relative 
terms  (125s  5~b  14) 

5.  Various  rules;  including  special  125b  15 

rules  applying  where  genus  or  species  is  a 
state,  or  a  capacity  or  an  affection. 

6.  Various  rules ;  including  rules  from  127s  20 
variations  in  degree,  useful  for  disproof  (i27b 
18-36)  and  for  proof  (127b  37-128**  12) ;  also 
rules  for  distinguishing  genus  from  differentia 
(i28a  20-30) 

(r)  Of  Property 
BOOK  V 

1.  Different  kinds  of  property  i28b  14 

(i28b  i6-i29a  16);  suitability  of  each  for  dis¬ 
cussion  (i29a  17-31);  lines  of  argument  upon 
each  (129®  32-35) 

2.  Rules  for  testing  whether  a  property  i29b  i 
is  rendered  correctly 

3.  ( Continued )  i3ob  38 

Rules  for  testing  whether  a  term  belongs  as  a 
property  at  all: — 

4.  Various  rules;  including  note  on  i32a23 
certain  sophistical  difficulties  arising  from  am¬ 
biguity  of  the  terms  ‘same’  and  ‘different’ 

5.  Various  rules;  including  notes  on  i34a5 
difficulties  arising  from  failure  to  say  explicitly 
how  the  alleged  property  belongs  (i34a5~i7, 
18-25,  26-i35a  9) ;  and  a  special  rule  applying 
to  a  whole  consisting  of  like  parts  ( 135s  20- 
b  6) 

6.  Rules  drawn  from  different  modes  i35b6 
of  opposition — contrary  opposition  (i35b7~ 
16),  relative  opposition  (i35b  17-26),  that  of 
a  state  and  its  privation  (i35b  27-136**  4), 
contradictory  opposition,  applied  to  predicates 
only  (136s 6-13),  to  both  predicates  and  sub¬ 
jects  (136s  14-28),  and  to  subjects  only  (i36a 
29~b  2) ;  from  co-ordinate  members  of  a  divi¬ 
sion  (136b  3-14) 

7.  Rules  drawn  from  inflexions  I36b  15 

(i36b  15-32);  from  relations  like  the  relation 
alleged  to  be  a  property  (i36b  33-137**  7) ; 
from  identity  of  relations  between  the  alleged 
property  and  two  subjects  ( 137s  8-20);  from 
processes  of  becoming  and  destruction 
(i37a2i-b2);  from  reference  of  the  alleged 
property  to  the  ‘idea*  of  its  subject  (i37b  3-13) 

8.  Rules  drawn  from  variations  in  i37b  14 
degree  (i37b  I4~i38a  29) ;  from  comparison  of 
an  attribute-relation  that  is  like  the  alleged 
property-relation,  between  a  different  attribute 
and  a  different  subject  (138s  30-b  5),  between 
the  subject  of  the  alleged  property  and  a  dif¬ 
ferent  attribute  (i38b6-i5),  between  the  al¬ 
leged  property  and  a  different  subject  (i38b 
16-22) ;  two  rules  (i38b  27-139*  8,  139s  9-20) 


(d)  Of  Definition 
BOOK  VI 

1.  General  division  of  problems  re-  i39a24 
lating  to  definition  (i39a  24-35);  distinction 
of  problems  treated  and  problems  yet  to  be 
treated  (i39a36-bn) 

Rules  for  testing  whether  definition  is  ren¬ 
dered  correctly:  obscurity  and  redundancy  to 
be  avoided  (i39b  12-18) 

2.  Obscurity,  how  avoided  i39b  19 

3.  Redundancy,  how  avoided  I40a  23 

Rules  for  testing  whether  the  formula  ren¬ 
dered  is  a  definition  at  all: 

4.  Rules  to  secure  that  terms  of  defi-  14 ia  22 
nition  shall  be  prior  and  more  intelligible; 
how  to  detect  failure  in  latter  respect  (14^3- 
142s  21);  in  former  (142s  22-b  19) 

5.  Rules  as  to  genus  i42b2o 

6.  Rules  as  to  differentia  143s  29 

7.  Various  rules,  including  rules  for  i45b  34 

testing  the  definition  of  terms  admitting  varia¬ 
tions  in  degree  (146s  3-20) 

8.  Rules  for  testing  the  definition  of  146s  36 
a  relative  term 

9.  Rules  for  testing  the  definition  of  147s  11 
a  state  (i47a  12-22);  of  a  relative  term  (i47a 
23-3  0 ;  of  contraries  (147s  32-b  25) ;  of  a  pri¬ 
vation  (i47b  26-i48a  2)  or  what  is  confused 
with  one  (i48a  3-9) 

10.  Rules  drawn  from  like  inflexions  i48a9 
(i48a  10-13)  >  from  reference  of  the  definition 
to  the  ‘idea’  of  the  term  defined  (i48a  14- 
22) ;  rules  for  testing  the  definition  of  an  am¬ 
biguous  term  (i48a  23-b  22) 

11.  Rules  for  testing  the  definition  of  I48b22 
a  complex  term 

12.  Various  rules,  including  rules  for  149s  38 
testing  the  definition  of  anything  real  (i49a 
38-b  3) ;  of  a  relative  term  (i49b  4-23) ;  of  any 
term  intrinsically  valuable  (149b  31-39) 

13.  Definitions  of  the  forms:  150s  1 

(1)  X  is  ‘A  and  B’  (150s  1-21) 

(2)  X  is  ‘the  product  of  A  and  B’  (i5oa  22-b 
26) 

(3)  X  is  ‘A-fB’  (i5ob  27-151®  19) 

14.  Various  rules;  including  rules  how  i5ia20 
to  test  the  definition  of  compound  whole  (151s 
20-31) ;  and  how  to  examine  an  unclear  defi¬ 
nition  (15^3-17) 

(e)  Of  Sameness 
BOOK  VII 

1.  Various  rules  i5ib26 

2.  Bearing  of  these  rules  on  problem  152b  36 
of  definition 

(/)  Of  Definition — continued 

3.  Rules  for  establishing  a  definition  I53a6 

4.  Note  on  the  comparative  useful-  154s  11 


CONTENTS 


ness  of  the  different  kinds  of  commonplace- 
rules 

5.  Note  on  the  comparative  difficulty  154s  23 
of  proving  or  disproving  the  various  kinds  of 
Predicable 

C.  Concerning  the  Practice  of,  and  Practice 
in,  Dialectics 

(a)  How  to  arrange  and  put  questions 
BOOK  VIII 

1.  Introductory  (i55b3“i7)  i55b  1 

( 1 )  Of  necessary  and  other  premisses 
Premisses  other  than  necessary  premisses,  and 
their  four  aims  (i55b  18-28) 

Use  of  necessary  premisses  (i55b  29~i56a  2) 
Use  of  premisses  other  than  necessary: 

(1)  for  inductions  (156s  3-7) 

(2)  for  concealment  of  intended  conclusion 
156*  7-157*  5) 

3)  for  ornament  ( i57a  6—13) 

(4)  for  clearness  (157s  14-17) 

2.  (2)  Of  inductions  (i57a  18-33)  I57a  18 

(3)  Of  objections  ( i57a  34~b  33) 

(4)  Of  argument  per  impossible  (i57b34~ 
I58a  2) 

(5)  Miscellaneous  hints  ( 158s  3-30) 

3.  On  the  comparative  difficulty  or  158s  31 
ease  of  certain  dialectical  arguments 

(b)  How  to  answer 

4.  Answerer’s  role  and  questioner’s  role  159s  15 


141 

5.  Introductory  note  on  lack  of  tradi-  I59a  25 
tion  respecting  discussions  held  for  training 
and  examination  (159s  25-37) 

The  answerer’s  procedure  as  determined  by 
the  character: 


(1)  of  his  own  thesis  (i59a38-b35) 

6.  (2)  of  the  particular  question  put  i59b  36 
— its  general  acceptability  and  relevance 


7- 

Its  clearness 

i6oa 17 

8. 

And  its  importance  for  the  argu¬ 
ment 

i6oa  35 

9* 

Rules  respecting  the  answerer’s 
original  thesis 

i6ob  14 

10. 

On  the  solution  of  fallacious  argu¬ 
ments  (i6ob  23-39) 

i6ob  23 

Four  types  of  objection  distinguished  (i6ia 

1-15) 

(c)  Supplementary  discussions 

11.  On  faults  of  argument  and  faults  i6ia  16 
of  questioner 

12.  On  clearness  in  argument: — its  i62a35 

three  kinds  distinguished  (i62a  35~b  2) 

On  fallacy  in  argument:  its  four  kinds  distin¬ 
guished  (i62b  3—15) ;  how  far  censurable 
(i62b  16-24):  test  questions  for  its  detection 
(i62b  24-30) 

13.  On  begging  the  question,  and  on  i62b3i 
the  begging  of  contraries:  five  types  of  each 
distinguished 

14.  Hints  upon  training  and  practice  i63a29 
in  dialectical  arguments 


TOPICS 

BOOK  I 


100*  [/#]  Our  treatise  proposes  to  find  a  line 
of  inquiry  whereby  we  shall  be  able  to  reason 
from  opinions  that  are  generally  accepted  about 
[20]  every  problem  propounded  to  us,  and  also 
shall  ourselves,  when  standing  up  to  an  argu¬ 
ment,  avoid  saying  anything  that  will  obstruct 
us.  First,  then,  we  must  say  what  reasoning  is, 
and  what  its  varieties  are,  in  order  to  grasp 
dialectical  reasoning:  for  this  is  the  object  of 
our  search  in  the  treatise  before  us. 

[25]  Now  reasoning  is  an  argument  in  which, 
certain  things  being  laid  down,  something  oth¬ 
er  than  these  necessarily  comes  about  through 
them,  (a)  It  is  a  ‘demonstration’,  when  the 
premisses  from  which  the  reasoning  starts  are 
true  and  primary,  or  are  such  that  our  knowl¬ 
edge  of  them  has  originally  come  through 
premisses  which  are  primary  and  true:  ( b ) 
[30]  reasoning,  on  the  other  hand,  is  ‘dialecti¬ 
cal’,  if  it  reasons  from  opinions  that  are  gener¬ 
ally  accepted.  Things  are  ‘true’  and  ‘primary’ 
100b  [/#]  which  are  believed  on  the  strength 
not  of  anything  else  but  of  themselves:  for  in 
regard  to  the  first  principles  of  science  it  is  im- 
roper  to  ask  any  further  for  the  why  and 
20]  wherefore  of  them;  each  of  the  first  prin¬ 
ciples  should  command  belief  in  and  by  itself. 
On  the  other  hand,  those  opinions  are  ‘gener¬ 
ally  accepted’  which  are  accepted  by  every  one 
or  by  the  majority  or  by  the  philosophers — i.e. 
by  all,  or  by  the  majority,  or  by  the  most  nota¬ 
ble  and  illustrious  of  them.  Again  (c),  reason¬ 
ing  is  ‘contentious’  if  it  starts  from  opinions 
that  seem  to  be  generally  accepted,  but  are  not 
[25]  really  such,  or  again  if  it  merely  seems  to 
reason  from  opinions  that  are  or  seem  to  be 
generally  accepted.  For  not  every  opinion  that 
seems  to  be  generally  accepted  actually  is  gen¬ 
erally  accepted.  For  in  none  of  the  opinions 
which  we  call  generally  accepted  is  the  illusion 
entirely  on  the  surface,  as  happens  in  the  case  of 
the  principles  of  contentious  arguments;  for  the 
nature  of  the  fallacy  in  these  is  obvious  imme- 

Note:  The  bold  face  numbers  and  letters  are  approxi¬ 
mate  indications  of  the  pages  and  columns  of  the  stand¬ 
ard  Berlin  Greek  text;  the  bracketed  numbers,  of  the 
lines  in  the  Greek  text;  they  are  here  assigned  as  they 
are  assigned  in  the  Oxford  translation. 


[50]  diately,  and  as  a  rule  even  to  persons  with 
little  power  of  comprehension.  So  then,  of 
101*  the  contentious  reasonings  mentioned,  the 
former  really  deserves  to  be  called  ‘reasoning’ 
as  well,  but  the  other  should  be  called  ‘con¬ 
tentious  reasoning’,  but  not  ‘reasoning’,  since 
it  appears  to  reason,  but  does  not  really  do  so. 
[5]  Further  (d),  besides  all  the  reasonings  we 
have  mentioned  there  are  the  mis-reasonings 
that  start  from  the  premisses  peculiar  to  the 
special  sciences,  as  happens  (for  example)  in 
the  case  of  geometry  and  her  sister  sciences. 
For  this  form  of  reasoning  appears  to  differ 
from  the  reasonings  mentioned  above;  the  man 
who  draws  a  false  figure  reasons  from  things 
[/o]  that  are  neither  true  and  primary,  nor  yet 
generally  accepted.  For  he  does  not  fall  within 
the  definition;  he  does  not  assume  opinions 
that  are  received  either  by  every  one  or  by  the 
majority  or  by  philosophers — that  is  to  say,  by 
all,  or  by  most,  or  by  the  most  illustrious  of 
them — but  he  conducts  his  reasoning  upon  as¬ 
sumptions  which,  though  appropriate  to  the 
[75]  science  in  question,  are  not  true;  for  he 
effects  his  mis-reasoning  either  by  describing 
the  semicircles  wrongly  or  by  drawing  certain 
lines  in  a  way  in  which  they  could  not  be 
drawn. 

The  foregoing  must  stand  for  an  outline  sur¬ 
vey  of  the  species  of  reasoning.  In  general,  in 
regard  both  to  all  that  we  have  already  dis- 
[20]  cussed  and  to  those  which  we  shall  discuss 
later,  we  may  remark  that  that  amount  of  dis¬ 
tinction  between  them  may  serve,  because  it  is 
not  our  purpose  to  give  the  exact  definition  of 
any  of  them;  we  merely  want  to  describe  them 
in  outline;  we  consider  it  quite  enough  from 
the  point  of  view  of  the  line  of  inquiry  before 
us  to  be  able  to  recognize  each  of  them  in  some 
sort  of  way. 

2 

[25]  Next  in  order  after  the  foregoing,  we 
must  say  for  how  many  and  for  what  purposes 
the  treatise  is  useful.  They  are  three — intellec¬ 
tual  training,  casual  encounters,  and  the  philo¬ 
sophical  sciences.  That  it  is  useful  as  a  training 
is  obvious  on  the  face  of  it.  The  possession  of 
a  plan  of  inquiry  will  enable  us  more  easily  to 

M3 


i44  TOPICS  102a 


[jo]  argue  about  the  subject  proposed.  For 
purposes  of  casual  encounters,  it  is  useful  be¬ 
cause  when  we  have  counted  up  the  opinions 
held  by  most  people,  we  shall  meet  them  on 
the  ground  not  of  other  people’s  convictions 
but  of  their  own,  while  we  shift  the  ground  of 
any  argument  that  they  appear  to  us  to  state 
unsoundly.  For  the  study  of  the  philosophical 
sciences  it  is  useful,  because  the  ability  to  raise 
[33]  searching  difficulties  on  both  sides  of  a 
subject  will  make  us  detect  more  easily  the 
truth  and  error  about  the  several  points  that 
arise.  It  has  a  further  use  in  relation  to  the  ulti¬ 
mate  bases  of  the  principles  used  in  the  several 
sciences.  For  it  is  impossible  to  discuss  them 
at  all  from  the  principles  proper  to  the  particu¬ 
lar  science  in  hand,  seeing  that  the  principles 
are  the  prius  of  everything  else:  it  is  through 
101b  the  opinions  generally  held  on  the  par¬ 
ticular  points  that  these  have  to  be  discussed, 
and  this  task  belongs  properly,  or  most  appro¬ 
priately,  to  dialectic:  for  dialectic  is  a  process 
of  criticism  wherein  lies  the  path  to  the  princi¬ 
ples  of  all  inquiries. 

3 

[5]  We  shall  be  in  perfect  possession  of  the 
way  to  proceed  when  we  are  in  a  position  like 
that  which  we  occupy  in  regard  to  rhetoric 
and  medicine  and  faculties  of  that  kind:  this 
means  the  doing  of  that  which  we  choose  with 
the  materials  that  are  available.  For  it  is  not 
every  method  that  the  rhetorician  will  employ 
to  persuade,  or  the  doctor  to  heal;  still,  if  he 
omits  none  of  the  available  means,  we  shall  say 
[/o]  that  his  grasp  of  the  science  is  adequate. 

4 

First,  then,  we  must  see  of  what  parts  our 
inquiry  consists.  Now  if  we  were  to  grasp  (a) 
with  reference  to  how  many,  and  what  kind  of, 
things  arguments  take  place,  and  with  what 
materials  they  start,  and  (b)  how  we  are  to 
become  well  supplied  with  these,  we  should 
have  sufficiently  won  our  goal.  Now  the  mate¬ 
rials  with  which  arguments  start  are  equal  in 
number,  and  are  identical,  with  the  subjects  on 
[75]  which  reasonings  take  place.  For  argu¬ 
ments  start  with  ‘propositions’,  while  the  sub¬ 
jects  on  which  reasonings  take  place  are  ‘prob¬ 
lems’.  Now  every  proposition  and  every  prob¬ 
lem  indicates  either  a  genus  or  a  peculiarity  or 
an  accident — for  the  differentia  too,  applying 
as  it  does  to  a  class  (or  genus),  should  be 
ranked  together  with  the  genus.  Since,  how¬ 
ever,  of  what  is  peculiar  to  anything  part  signi- 


[20]  fies  its  essence,  while  part  does  not,  let  us 
divide  the  ‘peculiar’  into  both  the  aforesaid 
parts,  and  call  that  part  which  indicates  the  es¬ 
sence  a  ‘definition’,  while  of  the  remainder  let 
us  adopt  the  terminology  which  is  generally 
current  about  these  things,  and  speak  of  it  as  a 
‘property’.  What  we  have  said,  then,  makes  it 
clear  that  according  to  our  present  division,  the 
elements  turn  out  to  be  four,  all  told,  namely 
[25]  either  property  or  definition  or  genus  or 
accident.  Do  not  let  any  one  suppose  us  to 
mean  that  each  of  these  enunciated  by  itself 
constitutes  a  proposition  or  problem,  but  only 
that  it  is  from  these  that  both  problems  and 
propositions  are  formed.  The  difference  be¬ 
tween  a  problem  and  a  proposition  is  a  differ¬ 
ence  in  the  turn  of  the  phrase.  For  if  it  be  put 
[30]  in  this  way,  ‘  “An  animal  that  walks  on 
two  feet”  is  the  definition  of  man,  is  it  not?’  or 
‘  “Animal”  is  the  genus  of  man,  is  it  not?’  the 
result  is  a  proposition:  but  if  thus,  ‘Is  “an  ani¬ 
mal  that  walks  on  two  feet”  a  definition  of 
man  or  no?’  [or  ‘Is  “animal”  his  genus  or  no?’] 
the  result  is  a  problem.  Similarly  too  in  other 
cases.  Naturally,  then,  problems  and  proposi- 
[33]  tions  are  equal  in  number:  for  out  of  ev¬ 
ery  proposition  you  will  make  a  problem  if  you 
change  the  turn  of  the  phrase. 

5 

We  must  now  say  what  are  ‘definition’,  ‘prop¬ 
erty’,  ‘genus’,  and  ‘accident’.  A  ‘definition’ 
is  a  phrase  signifying  a  thing’s  essence.  It 
is  rendered  in  the  form  either  of  a  phrase  in 
102a  lieu  of  a  term,  or  of  a  phrase  in  lieu  of 
another  phrase;  for  it  is  sometimes  possible  to 
define  the  meaning  of  a  phrase  as  well.  Peo¬ 
ple  whose  rendering  consists  of  a  term  only, 
try  it  as  they  may,  clearly  do  not  render  the 
definition  of  the  thing  in  question,  because  a 
definition  is  always  a  phrase  of  a  certain  kind. 
[5]  One  may,  however,  use  the  word  ‘defini- 
tory’  also  of  such  a  remark  as  ‘The  “becom¬ 
ing”  is  “beautiful”  ’,  and  likewise  also  of  the 
question,  ‘Are  sensation  and  knowledge  the 
same  or  different?’,  for  argument  about  defini¬ 
tions  is  mostly  concerned  with  questions  of 
sameness  and  difference.  In  a  word  we  may 
call  ‘definitory’  everything  that  falls  under  the 
same  branch  of  inquiry  as  definitions;  and  that 
[/o]  all  the  above-mentioned  examples  are  of 
this  character  is  clear  on  the  face  of  them.  For 
if  we  are  able  to  argue  that  two  things  are  the 
same  or  are  different,  we  shall  be  well  supplied 
by  the  same  turn  of  argument  with  lines  of  at¬ 
tack  upon  their  definitions  as  well:  for  when 


102b 

we  have  shown  that  they  are  not  the  same  we 
shall  have  demolished  the  definition.  Observe, 
lease,  that  the  converse  of  this  last  statement 
75]  does  not  hold:  for  to  show  that  they  are 
the  same  is  not  enough  to  establish  a  defini¬ 
tion.  To  show,  however,  that  they  are  not  the 
same  is  enough  of  itself  to  overthrow  it. 

A  ‘property’  is  a  predicate  which  does  not 
indicate  the  essence  of  a  thing,  but  yet  belongs 
to  that  thing  alone,  and  is  predicated  converti- 
bly  of  it.  Thus  it  is  a  property  of  man  to  be 
[20]  capable  of  learning  grammar:  for  if  A  be 
a  man,  then  he  is  capable  of  learning  grammar, 
and  if  he  be  capable  of  learning  grammar,  he 
is  a  man.  For  no  one  calls  anything  a  ‘property’ 
which  may  possibly  belong  to  something  else, 
e.g.  ‘sleep’  in  the  case  of  man,  even  though  at 
a  certain  time  it  may  happen  to  belong  to  him 
alone.  That  is  to  say,  if  any  such  thing  were 
[25]  actually  to  be  called  a  property,  it  will  be 
called  not  a  ‘property’  absolutely,  but  a  ‘tem¬ 
porary’  or  a  ‘relative’  property:  for  ‘being  on 
the  right  hand  side’  is  a  temporary  property, 
while  ‘two-footed’  is  in  point  of  fact  ascribed 
as  a  property  in  certain  relations;  e.g.  it  is  a 
property  of  man  relatively  to  a  horse  and  a  dog. 
That  nothing  which  may  belong  to  anything 
else  than  A  is  a  convertible  predicate  of  A  is 
clear:  for  it  does  not  necessarily  follow  that  if 
[jo]  something  is  asleep  it  is  a  man. 

A  ‘genus’  is  what  is  predicated  in  the  cate¬ 
gory  of  essence  of  a  number  of  things  exhibit¬ 
ing  differences  in  kind.  We  should  treat  as 
predicates  in  the  category  of  essence  all  such 
things  as  it  would  be  appropriate  to  mention 
in  reply  to  the  question,  ‘What  is  the  object 
before  you?’;  as,  for  example,  in  the  case  of 
[55]  man,  if  asked  that  question,  it  is  appropri¬ 
ate  to  say  ‘He  is  an  animal’.  The  question,  ‘Is 
one  thing  in  the  same  genus  as  another  or  in  a 
different  one?’  is  also  a  ‘generic’  question;  for 
a  question  of  that  kind  as  well  falls  under  the 
same  branch  of  inquiry  as  the  genus:  for  hav¬ 
ing  argued  that  ‘animal’  is  the  genus  of  man, 
and  likewise  also  of  ox,  we  shall  have  argued 
that  they  are  in  the  same  genus;  whereas  if  we 
102b  show  that  it  is  the  genus  of  the  one  but 
not  of  the  other,  we  shall  have  argued  that 
these  things  are  not  in  the  same  genus. 

An  ‘accident’  is  (1)  something  which, 
though  it  is  none  of  the  foregoing — i.e.  neither 
[5]  a  definition  nor  a  property  nor  a  genus — 
yet  belongs  to  the  thing:  (2)  something  which 
may  possibly  either  belong  or  not  belong  to 
any  one  and  the  self-same  thing,  as  (e.g.)  the 
‘sitting  posture’  may  belong  or  not  belong  to 


145 

some  self-same  thing.  Likewise  also  ‘white¬ 
ness’,  for  there  is  nothing  to  prevent  the  same 
thing  being  at  one  time  white,  and  at  another 
not  white.  Of  the  definitions  of  accident  the 
[/o]  second  is  the  better:  for  if  he  adopts  the 
first,  any  one  is  bound,  if  he  is  to  understand  it, 
to  know  already  what  ‘definition’  and  ‘genus’ 
and  ‘property’  are,  whereas  the  second  is  suffi¬ 
cient  of  itself  to  tell  us  the  essential  meaning 
of  the  term  in  question.  To  Accident  are  to  be 
[75]  attached  also  all  comparisons  of  things 
together,  when  expressed  in  language  that  is 
drawn  in  any  kind  of  way  from  what  happens 
( accidit )  to  be  true  of  them;  such  as,  for  ex¬ 
ample,  the  question,  ‘Is  the  honourable  or  the 
expedient  preferable?’  and  ‘Is  the  life  of  virtue 
or  the  life  of  self-indulgence  the  pleasanter?’, 
and  any  other  problem  which  may  happen  to 
be  phrased  in  terms  like  these.  For  in  all  such 
cases  the  question  is  ‘to  which  of  the  two  does 
[20]  the  predicate  in  question  happen  ( accidit ) 
to  belong  more  closely?’  It  is  clear  on  the  face 
of  it  that  there  is  nothing  to  prevent  an  acci¬ 
dent  from  becoming  a  temporary  or  relative 
property.  Thus  the  sitting  posture  is  an  acci¬ 
dent,  but  will  be  a  temporary  property,  when¬ 
ever  a  man  is  the  only  person  sitting,  while  if 
he  be  not  the  only  one  sitting,  it  is  still  a  prop¬ 
erty  relatively  to  those  who  are  not  sitting.  So 
[25]  then,  there  is  nothing  to  prevent  an  acci¬ 
dent  from  becoming  both  a  relative  and  a 
temporary  property;  but  a  property  absolutely 
it  will  never  be. 

6 

We  must  not  fail  to  observe  that  all  remarks 
made  in  criticism  of  a  ‘property’  and  ‘genus’ 
and  ‘accident’  will  be  applicable  to  ‘definitions’ 
as  well.  For  when  we  have  shown  that  the  at¬ 
tribute  in  question  fails  to  belong  only  to  the 
[30]  term  defined,  as  we  do  also  in  the  case  of 
a  property,  or  that  the  genus  rendered  in  the 
definition  is  not  the  true  genus,  or  that  any  of 
the  things  mentioned  in  the  phrase  used  does 
not  belong,  as  would  be  remarked  also  in  the 
case  of  an  accident,  we  shall  have  demolished 
the  definition;  so  that,  to  use  the  phrase  previ¬ 
ously  employed,1  all  the  points  we  have  enu- 
[55]  merated  might  in  a  certain  sense  be  called 
‘definitory’.  But  we  must  not  on  this  account 
expect  to  find  a  single  line  of  inquiry  which 
will  apply  universally  to  them  all:  for  this  is 
not  an  easy  thing  to  find,  and,  even  were  one 
found,  it  would  be  very  obscure  indeed,  and  of 
little  service  for  the  treatise  before  us.  Rather, 
la9- 


BOOK  I,  CHAPTERS  2-6 


146  TOPICS  103b 


a  special  plan  of  inquiry  must  be  laid  down  for 
each  of  the  classes  we  have  distinguished,  and 
then,  starting  from  the  rules  that  are  appropri¬ 
ate  in  each  case,  it  will  probably  be  easier  to 
103a  make  our  way  right  through  the  task  be¬ 
fore  us.  So  then,  as  was  said  before,1  we  must 
outline  a  division  of  our  subject,  and  other 
questions  we  must  relegate  each  to  the  particu¬ 
lar  branch  to  which  it  most  naturally  belongs, 
speaking  of  them  as  ‘definitory’  and  ‘generic’ 
questions.  The  questions  I  mean  have  practi- 
[5]  cally  been  already  assigned  to  their  several 
branches. 

7 

First  of  all  we  must  define  the  number  of 
senses  borne  by  the  term  ‘Sameness’.  Sameness 
would  be  generally  regarded  as  falling,  roughly 
speaking,  into  three  divisions.  We  generally 
apply  the  term  numerically  or  specifically  or 
generically — numerically  in  cases  where  there 
[/o]  is  more  than  one  name  but  only  one 
thing,  e.g.  ‘doublet’  and  ‘cloak’;  specifically, 
where  there  is  more  than  one  thing,  but  they 
present  no  differences  in  respect  of  their  spe¬ 
cies,  as  one  man  and  another,  or  one  horse 
and  another:  for  things  like  this  that  fall  under 
the  same  species  are  said  to  be  ‘specifically  the 
same’.  Similarly,  too,  those  things  are  called 
generically  the  same  which  fall  under  the 
same  genus,  such  as  a  horse  and  a  man.  It 
might  appear  that  the  sense  in  which  water 
[75]  from  the  same  spring  is  called  ‘the  same 
water’  is  somehow  different  and  unlike  the 
senses  mentioned  above:  but  really  such  a  case 
as  this  ought  to  be  ranked  in  the  same  class 
with  the  things  that  in  one  way  or  another  are 
called  ‘the  same’  in  view  of  unity  of  species. 
For  all  such  things  seem  to  be  of  one  family 
and  to  resemble  one  another.  For  the  reason 
[20]  why  all  water  is  said  to  be  specifically  the 
same  as  all  other  water  is  because  of  a  certain 
likeness  it  bears  to  it,  and  the  only  difference 
in  the  case  of  water  drawn  from  the  same 
spring  is  this,  that  the  likeness  is  more  em¬ 
phatic:  that  is  why  we  do  not  distinguish  it 
from  the  things  that  in  one  way  or  another 
are  called  ‘the  same’  in  view  of  unity  of  spe¬ 
cies.  It  is  generally  supposed  that  the  term  ‘the 
same’  is  most  used  in  a  sense  agreed  on  by 
every  one  when  applied  to  what  is  numerically 
[25]  one.  But  even  so,  it  is  apt  to  be  rendered 
in  more  than  one  sense;  its  most  literal  and 
primary  use  is  found  whenever  the  sameness 
is  rendered  in  reference  to  an  alternative  name 
1  IOIa  22. 


or  definition,  as  when  a  cloak  is  said  to  be  the 
same  as  a  doublet,  or  an  animal  that  walks  on 
two  feet  is  said  to  be  the  same  as  a  man:  a  sec¬ 
ond  sense  is  when  it  is  rendered  in  reference  to 
a  property,  as  when  what  can  acquire  knowl¬ 
edge  is  called  the  same  as  a  man,  and  what 
naturally  travels  upward  the  same  as  fire: 
while  a  third  use  is  found  when  it  is  rendered 
in  reference  to  some  term  drawn  from  Acci- 
[jo]  dent,  as  when  the  creature  who  is  sitting, 
or  who  is  musical,  is  called  the  same  as  Soc¬ 
rates.  For  all  these  uses  mean  to  signify  numer¬ 
ical  unity.  That  what  I  have  just  said  is  true 
may  be  best  seen  where  one  form  of  appella¬ 
tion  is  substituted  for  another.  For  often  when 
we  give  the  order  to  call  one  of  the  people  who 
are  sitting  down,  indicating  him  by  name,  we 
change  our  description,  whenever  the  person 
[55]  to  whom  we  give  the  order  happens  not 
to  understand  us;  he  will,  we  think,  under¬ 
stand  better  from  some  accidental  feature;  so 
we  bid  him  call  to  us  ‘the  man  who  is  sitting’ 
or  ‘who  is  conversing  over  there’ — clearly  sup¬ 
posing  ourselves  to  be  indicating  the  same  ob¬ 
ject  by  its  name  and  by  its  accident. 

8 

103b  Of  ‘sameness*  then,  as  has  been  said,2 
three  senses  are  to  be  distinguished.  Now  one 
way  to  confirm  that  the  elements  mentioned 
above  are  those  out  of  which  and  through 
which  and  to  which  arguments  proceed,  is  by 
induction:  for  if  any  one  were  to  survey  prop¬ 
ositions  and  problems  one  by  one,  it  would  be 
[5]  seen  that  each  was  formed  either  from  the 
definition  of  something  or  from  its  property  or 
from  its  genus  or  from  its  accident.  Another 
way  to  confirm  it  is  through  reasoning.  For 
every  predicate  of  a  subject  must  of  necessity 
be  either  convertible  with  its  subject  or  not: 
and  if  it  is  convertible,  it  would  be  its  defini- 
[/o]  tion  or  property,  for  if  it  signifies  the  es¬ 
sence,  it  is  the  definition;  if  not,  it  is  a  prop¬ 
erty:  for  this  was  what  a  property  is,  viz.  what 
is  predicated  convertibly,  but  does  not  signify 
the  essence.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  not 
predicated  convertibly  of  the  thing,  it  either  is 
or  is  not  one  of  the  terms  contained  in  the 
definition  of  the  subject:  and  if  it  be  one  of 
[75]  those  terms,  then  it  will  be  the  genus  or 
the  differentia,  inasmuch  as  the  definition  con¬ 
sists  of  genus  and  differentiae;  whereas,  if  it 
be  not  one  of  those  terms,  clearly  it  would  be 
an  accident,  for  accident  was  said3  to  be  what 
belongs  as  an  attribute  to  a  subject  without  be- 
2  a  7.  3  I02b  4. 


104s 

ing  either  its  definition  or  its  genus  or  a  prop¬ 
erty. 

9 

[20]  Next,  then,  we  must  distinguish  between 
the  classes  of  predicates  in  which  the  four  or¬ 
ders  in  question  are  found.  These  are  ten  in 
number:  Essence,  Quantity,  Quality,  Relation, 
Place,  Time,  Position,  State,  Activity,  Passiv¬ 
ity.  For  the  accident  and  genus  and  property 
[25]  and  definition  of  anything  will  always  be 
in  one  of  these  categories:  for  all  the  proposi¬ 
tions  found  through  these  signify  either  some¬ 
thing’s  essence  or  its  quality  or  quantity  or  some 
one  of  the  other  types  of  predicate.  It  is  clear, 
too,  on  the  face  of  it  that  the  man  who  signifies 
something’s  essence  signifies  sometimes  a  sub¬ 
stance,  sometimes  a  quality,  sometimes  some 
one  of  the  other  types  of  predicate.  For  when 
[jo]  a  man  is  set  before  him  and  he  says  that 
what  is  set  there  is  ‘a  man’  or  ‘an  animal’,  he 
states  its  essence  and  signifies  a  substance;  but 
when  a  white  colour  is  set  before  him  and  he 
says  that  what  is  set  there  is  ‘white’  or  is  ‘a 
colour’,  he  states  its  essence  and  signifies  a 
quality.  Likewise,  also,  if  a  magnitude  of  a 
cubit  be  set  before  him  and  he  says  that  what  is 
set  there  is  a  magnitude  of  a  cubit,  he  will  be 
describing  its  essence  and  signifying  a  quan¬ 
ta]  tity.  Likewise,  also,  in  the  other  cases:  for 
each  of  these  kinds  of  predicate,  if  either  it  be 
asserted  of  itself,  or  its  genus  be  asserted  of  it, 
signifies  an  essence:  if,  on  the  other  hand,  one 
kind  of  predicate  is  asserted  of  another  kind, 
it  does  not  signify  an  essence,  but  a  quantity 
or  a  quality  or  one  of  the  other  kinds  of  predi¬ 
cate.  Such,  then,  and  so  many,  are  the  subjects 
104a  on  which  arguments  take  place,  and  the 
materials  with  which  they  start.  How  we  are 
to  acquire  them,  and  by  what  means  we  are  to 
become  well  supplied  with  them,  falls  next  to 
be  told. 

10 

First,  then,  a  definition  must  be  given  of  a 
‘dialectical  proposition’  and  a  ‘dialectical  prob¬ 
lem’.  For  it  is  not  every  proposition  nor  yet 
every  problem  that  is  to  be  set  down  as  dialec- 
[5]  tical:  for  no  one  in  his  senses  would  make 
a  proposition  of  what  no  one  holds,  nor  yet 
make  a  problem  of  what  is  obvious  to  every¬ 
body  or  to  most  people:  for  the  latter  admits  of 
no  doubt,  while  to  the  former  no  one  would 
assent.  Now  a  dialectical  proposition  consists  in 
asking  something  that  is  held  by  all  men  or  by 
most  men  or  by  the  philosophers,  i.e.  either  by 


M7 

all,  or  by  most,  or  by  the  most  notable  of  these, 
[/o]  provided  it  be  not  contrary  to  the  general 
opinion;  for  a  man  would  probably  assent  to 
the  view  of  the  philosophers,  if  it  be  not  con¬ 
trary  to  the  opinions  of  most  men.  Dialectical 
propositions  also  include  views  which  are  like 
those  generally  accepted;  also  propositions 
which  contradict  the  contraries  of  opinions  that 
are  taken  to  be  generally  accepted,  and  also  all 
opinions  that  are  in  accordance  with  the  recog- 
[75]  nized  arts.  Thus,  supposing  it  to  be  a  gen¬ 
eral  opinion  that  the  knowledge  of  contraries  is 
the  same,  it  might  probably  pass  for  a  general 
opinion  also  that  the  perception  of  contraries  is 
the  same:  also,  supposing  it  to  be  a  general 
opinion  that  there  is  but  one  single  science  of 
grammar,  it  might  pass  for  a  general  opinion 
that  there  is  but  one  science  of  flute-playing  as 
well,  whereas,  if  it  be  a  general  opinion  that 
there  is  more  than  one  science  of  grammar,  it 
might  pass  for  a  general  opinion  that  there  is 
more  than  one  science  of  flute-playing  as  well: 
[20]  for  all  these  seem  to  be  alike  and  akin. 
Likewise,  also,  propositions  contradicting  the 
contraries  of  general  opinions  will  pass  as  gen¬ 
eral  opinions:  for  if  it  be  a  general  opinion 
that  one  ought  to  do  good  to  one’s  friends,  it 
will  also  be  a  general  opinion  that  one  ought 
not  to  do  them  harm.  Here,  that  one  ought  to 
do  harm  to  one’s  friends  is  contrary  to  the  gen¬ 
eral  view,  and  that  one  ought  not  to  do  them 
harm  is  the  contradictory  of  that  contrary. 
[25]  Likewise  also,  if  one  ought  to  do  good  to 
one’s  friends,  one  ought  not  to  do  good  to  one’s 
enemies:  this  too  is  the  contradictory  of  the 
view  contrary  to  the  general  view;  the  contrary 
being  that  one  ought  to  do  good  to  one’s  en¬ 
emies.  Likewise,  also,  in  other  cases.  Also,  on 
comparison,  it  will  look  like  a  general  opinion 
that  the  contrary  predicate  belongs  to  the  con¬ 
trary  subject:  e.g.  if  one  ought  to  do  good  to 
[30]  one’s  friends,  one  ought  also  to  do  evil 
to  one’s  enemies,  it  might  appear  also  as  if 
doing  good  to  one’s  friends  were  a  contrary  to 
doing  evil  to  one’s  enemies:  but  whether  this  is 
or  is  not  so  in  reality  as  well  will  be  stated  in 
the  course  of  the  discussion  upon  contraries.1 
Clearly  also,  all  opinions  that  are  in  accordance 
with  the  arts  are  dialectical  propositions;  for 
people  are  likely  to  assent  to  the  views  held  by 
[33]  those  who  have  made  a  study  of  these 
things,  e.g.  on  a  question  of  medicine  they 
will  agree  with  the  doctor,  and  on  a  question 
of  geometry  with  the  geometrician;  and  like¬ 
wise  also  in  other  cases. 

1 11.  7. 


BOOK  I,  CHAPTERS  6-10 


148 


TOPICS 


11 

104b  A  dialectical  problem  is  a  subject  of  in¬ 
quiry  that  contributes  either  to  choice  and 
avoidance,  or  to  truth  and  knowledge,  and  that 
either  by  itself,  or  as  a  help  to  the  solution  of 
some  other  such  problem.  It  must,  moreover, 
be  something  on  which  either  people  hold  no 
opinion  either  way,  or  the  masses  hold  a  con¬ 
trary  opinion  to  the  philosophers,  or  the  phil- 
[5]  osophers  to  the  masses,  or  each  of  them 
among  themselves.  For  some  problems  it  is 
useful  to  know  with  a  view  to  choice  or  avoid¬ 
ance,  e.g.  whether  pleasure  is  to  be  chosen  or 
not,  while  some  it  is  useful  to  know  merely 
with  a  view  to  knowledge,  e.g.  whether  the 
universe  is  eternal  or  not:  others,  again,  are 
not  useful  in  and  by  themselves  for  either  of 
these  purposes,  but  yet  help  us  in  regard  to 
[/o]  some  such  problems;  for  there  are  many 
things  which  we  do  not  wish  to  know  in  and 
by  themselves,  but  for  the  sake  of  other  things, 
in  order  that  through  them  we  may  come  to 
know  something  else.  Problems  also  include 
questions  in  regard  to  which  reasonings  con¬ 
flict  (the  difficulty  then  being  whether  so-and- 
so  is  so  or  not,  there  being  convincing  argu¬ 
fy]  ments  for  both  views);  others  also  in  re¬ 
gard  to  which  we  have  no  argument  because 
they  are  so  vast,  and  we  find  it  difficult  to 
give  our  reasons,  e.g.  the  question  whether  the 
universe  is  eternal  or  no:  for  into  questions  of 
that  kind  too  it  is  possible  to  inquire. 

Problems,  then,  and  propositions  are  to  be 
defined  as  aforesaid.1  A  ‘thesis’  is  a  supposition 
[20]  of  some  eminent  philosopher  that  con¬ 
flicts  with  the  general  opinion;  e.g.  the  view 
that  contradiction  is  impossible,  as  Antisthenes 
said;  or  the  view  of  Heraclitus  that  all  things 
are  in  motion;  or  that  Being  is  one,  as  Melissus 
says:  for  to  take  notice  when  any  ordinary  per¬ 
son  expresses  views  contrary  to  men’s  usual 
opinions  would  be  silly.  Or  it  may  be  a  view 
about  which  we  have  a  reasoned  theory  con¬ 
trary  to  men’s  usual  opinions,  e.g.  the  view 
[25]  maintained  by  the  sophists  that  what  is 
need  not  in  every  case  either  have  come  to  be 
or  be  eternal:  for  a  musician  who  is  a  gram¬ 
marian  ‘is’  so  without  ever  having  ‘come  to  be’ 
so,  or  being  so  eternally.  For  even  if  a  man 
does  not  accept  this  view,  he  might  do  so  on 
the  ground  that  it  is  reasonable. 

Now  a  ‘thesis’  also  is  a  problem,  though  a 
[jo]  problem  is  not  always  a  thesis,  inasmuch 
as  some  problems  are  such  that  we  have  no 
1  b  1, a  8. 


105* 

opinion  about  them  either  way.  That  a  thesis, 
however,  also  forms  a  problem,  is  clear:  for  it 
follows  of  necessity  from  what  has  been  said 
that  either  the  mass  of  men  disagree  with  the 
philosophers  about  the  thesis,  or  that  the  one 
or  the  other  class  disagree  among  themselves, 
seeing  that  the  thesis  is  a  supposition  in  con¬ 
flict  with  general  opinion.  Practically  all  dialec- 
[55]  tical  problems  indeed  are  now  called 
‘theses’.  But  it  should  make  no  difference 
whichever  description  is  used;  for  our  object 
in  thus  distinguishing  them  has  not  been  to 
create  a  terminology,  but  to  recognize  what  dif- 
105*  ferences  happen  to  be  found  between 
them. 

Not  every  problem,  nor  every  thesis,  should 
be  examined,  but  only  one  which  might  puzzle 
one  of  those  who  need  argument,  not  punish- 
[5]  ment  or  perception.  For  people  who  are 
puzzled  to  know  whether  one  ought  to  honour 
the  gods  and  love  one’s  parents  or  not  need 
punishment,  while  those  who  are  puzzled  to 
know  whether  snow  is  white  or  not  need  per¬ 
ception.  The  subjects  should  not  border  too 
closely  upon  the  sphere  of  demonstration,  nor 
yet  be  too  far  removed  from  it:  for  the  former 
cases  admit  of  no  doubt,  while  the  latter  in¬ 
volve  difficulties  too  great  for  the  art  of  the 
trainer. 

12 

[/o]  Having  drawn  these  definitions,  we  must 
distinguish  how  many  species  there  are  of  dia¬ 
lectical  arguments.  There  is  on  the  one  hand 
Induction,  on  the  other  Reasoning.  Now  what 
reasoning  is  has  been  said  before:2  induction  is 
a  passage  from  individuals  to  universal,  e.g. 
the  argument  that  supposing  the  skilled  pilot 
is  the  most  effective,  and  likewise  the  skilled 
[75]  charioteer,  then  in  general  the  skilled  man 
is  the  best  at  his  particular  task.  Induction  is 
the  more  convincing  and  clear:  it  is  more 
readily  learnt  by  the  use  of  the  senses,  and  is 
applicable  generally  to  the  mass  of  men,  though 
Reasoning  is  more  forcible  and  effective  against 
contradictious  people. 

T3 

[20]  The  classes,  then,  of  things  about  which, 
and  of  things  out  of  which,  arguments  are  con¬ 
structed,  are  to  be  distinguished  in  the  way  we 
have  said  before.  The  means  whereby  we  are 
to  become  well  supplied  with  reasonings  are 
four:  (1)  the  securing  of  propositions;  (2)  the 
power  to  distinguish  in  how  many  senses  a 
2  iooa  25. 


106* 

particular  expression  is  used;  (3)  the  discovery 
of  the  differences  of  things;  (4)  the  investiga- 
[25]  tion  of  likeness.  The  last  three,  as  well, 
are  in  a  certain  sense  propositions:  for  it  is 
possible  to  make  a  proposition  corresponding 
to  each  of  them,  e.g.  (1)  ‘The  desirable  may 
mean  either  the  honourable  or  the  pleasant  or 
the  expedient’;  and  (2)  ‘Sensation  differs  from 
knowledge  in  that  the  latter  may  be  recovered 
again  after  it  has  been  lost,  while  the  former 
[30]  cannot’;  and  (3)  ‘The  relation  of  the 
healthy  to  health  is  like  that  of  the  vigorous  to 
vigour’.  The  first  proposition  depends  upon 
the  use  of  one  term  in  several  senses,  the  sec¬ 
ond  upon  the  differences  of  things,  the  third 
upon  their  likenesses. 

M 

Propositions  should  be  selected  in  a  number  of 
ways  corresponding  to  the  number  of  distinc¬ 
tions  drawn  in  regard  to  the  proposition:  thus 
[35]  one  may  first  take  in  hand  the  opinions 
held  by  all  or  by  most  men  or  by  the  philoso¬ 
phers,  i.e.  by  all,  or  most,  or  the  most  notable 
of  them;  or  opinions  contrary  to  those  that 
105b  seem  to  be  generally  held;  and,  again,  all 
opinions  that  are  in  accordance  with  the  arts. 
We  must  make  propositions  also  of  the  con¬ 
tradictories  of  opinions  contrary  to  those  that 
seem  to  be  generally  held,  as  was  laid  down 
before.  It  is  useful  also  to  make  them  by  select¬ 
ing  not  only  those  opinions  that  actually  are 
[5]  accepted,  but  also  those  that  are  like  these, 
e.g.  ‘The  perception  of  contraries  is  the  same’ 
— the  knowledge  of  them  being  so — and  ‘we 
see  by  admission  of  something  into  ourselves, 
not  by  an  emission’;  for  so  it  is,  too,  in  the  case 
of  the  other  senses;  for  in  hearing  we  admit 
something  into  ourselves;  we  do  not  emit;  and 
we  taste  in  the  same  way.  Likewise  also  in  the 
[/o]  other  cases.  Moreover,  all  statements  that 
seem  to  be  true  in  all  or  in  most  cases,  should 
be  taken  as  a  principle  or  accepted  position; 
for  they  are  posited  by  those  who  do  not  also 
see  what  exception  there  may  be.  We  should 
select  also  from  the  written  handbooks  of  ar¬ 
gument,  and  should  draw  up  sketch-lists  of 
them  upon  each  several  kind  of  subject,  put¬ 
ting  them  down  under  separate  headings,  e.g. 
[75]  ‘On  Good’,  or  ‘On  Life’ — and  that  ‘On 
Good’  should  deal  with  every  form  of  good,  be¬ 
ginning  with  the  category  of  essence.  In  the 
margin,  too,  one  should  indicate  also  the 
opinions  of  individual  thinkers,  e.g.  ‘Emped¬ 
ocles  said  that  the  elements  of  bodies  were 


M9 

four’:  for  any  one  might  assent  to  the  saying 
of  some  generally  accepted  authority. 

Of  propositions  and  problems  there  are — to 
[20]  comprehend  the  matter  in  outline — three 
divisions:  for  some  are  ethical  propositions, 
some  are  on  natural  philosophy,  while  some 
are  logical.  Propositions  such  as  the  following 
are  ethical,  e.g.  ‘Ought  one  rather  to  obey  one’s 
parents  or  the  laws,  if  they  disagree?’;  such  as 
this  are  logical,  e.g.  ‘Is  the  knowledge  of  op¬ 
posites  the  same  or  not?’;  while  such  as  this 
[25]  are  on  natural  philosophy,  e.g.  ‘Is  the 
universe  eternal  or  not?’  Likewise  also  with 
problems.  The  nature  of  each  of  the  aforesaid 
kinds  of  proposition  is  not  easily  rendered  in 
a  definition,  but  we  have  to  try  to  recognize 
each  of  them  by  means  of  the  familiarity  at¬ 
tained  through  induction,  examining  them  in 
the  light  of  the  illustrations  given  above. 

[30]  For  purposes  of  philosophy  we  must  treat 
of  these  things  according  to  their  truth,  but 
for  dialectic  only  with  an  eye  to  general  opin¬ 
ion.  All  propositions  should  be  taken  in  their 
most  universal  form;  then,  the  one  should  be 
made  into  many.  E.g.  ‘The  knowledge  of  op¬ 
posites  is  the  same’;  next,  ‘The  knowledge  of 
contraries  is  the  same’,  and  that  ‘of  relative 
terms’.  In  the  same  way  these  two  should  again 
[35]  be  divided,  as  long  as  division  is  possible, 
e.g.  the  knowledge  of  ‘good  and  evil’,  of  ‘white 
and  black’,  or  ‘cold  and  hot’.  Likewise  also  in 
other  cases. 

106a  On  the  formation,  then,  of  propositions, 
the  above  remarks  are  enough.  As  regards  the 
number  of  senses  a  term  bears,  we  must  not 
only  treat  of  those  terms  which  bear  different 
senses,  but  we  must  also  try  to  render  their 
definitions;  e.g.  we  must  not  merely  say  that 
justice  and  courage  are  called  ‘good’  in  one 
[5]  sense,  and  that  what  conduces  to  vigour 
and  what  conduces  to  health  are  called  so  in 
another,  but  also  that  the  former  are  so  called 
because  of  a  certain  intrinsic  quality  they 
themselves  have,  the  latter  because  they  are 
productive  of  a  certain  result  and  not  because 
cf  any  intrinsic  quality  in  themselves.  Sim¬ 
ilarly  also  in  other  cases. 

Whether  a  term  bears  a  number  of  specific 
[/o]  meanings  or  one  only,  may  be  considered 
by  the  following  means.  First,  look  and  see  if 
its  contrary  bears  a  number  of  meanings, 
whether  the  discrepancy  between  them  be  one 
of  kind  or  one  of  names.  For  in  some  cases  a 
difference  is  at  once  displayed  even  in  the 


BOOK  I,  CHAPTERS  11-15 


150  TOPICS  106b 


names;  e.g.  the  contrary  of  ‘sharp’  in  the  case 
of  a  note  is  ‘flat’,  while  in  the  case  of  a  solid 
edge  it  is  ‘dull’.  Clearly,  then,  the  contrary  of 
‘sharp’  bears  several  meanings,  and  if  so,  so 
[75]  also  does  ‘sharp’;  for  corresponding  to 
each  of  the  former  terms  the  meaning  of  its 
contrary  will  be  different.  For  ‘sharp’  will  not 
be  the  same  when  contrary  to  ‘dull’  and  to 
‘flat’,  though  ‘sharp’  is  the  contrary  of  each. 
Again  1 Qapv  (‘flat’,  ‘heavy’)  in  the  case  of  a 
note  has  ‘sharp’  as  its  contrary,  but  in  the  case 
of  a  solid  mass  ‘light’,  so  that  (3apv  is  used  with 
a  number  of  meanings,  inasmuch  as  its  con- 
[20]  trary  also  is  so  used.  Likewise,  also,  ‘fine’ 
as  applied  to  a  picture  has  ‘ugly’  as  its  con¬ 
trary,  but,  as  applied  to  a  house,  ‘ramshackle’; 
so  that  ‘fine’  is  an  ambiguous  term. 

In  some  cases  there  is  no  discrepancy  of  any 
sort  in  the  names  used,  but  a  difference  of  kind 
between  the  meanings  is  at  once  obvious:  e.g. 
in  the  case  of  ‘clear’  and  ‘obscure’:  for  sound  is 
[25]  called  ‘clear’  and  ‘obscure’,  just  as  ‘col¬ 
our’  is  too.  As  regards  the  names,  then,  there 
is  no  discrepancy,  but  the  difference  in  kind 
between  the  meanings  is  at  once  obvious:  for 
colour  is  not  called  ‘clear’  in  a  like  sense  to 
sound.  This  is  plain  also  through  sensation: 
for  of  things  that  are  the  same  in  kind  we  have 
[jo]  the  same  sensation,  whereas  we  do  not 
judge  clearness  by  the  same  sensation  in  the 
case  of  sound  and  of  colour,  but  in  the  latter 
case  we  judge  by  sight,  in  the  former  by  hear¬ 
ing.  Likewise  also  with  ‘sharp’  and  ‘dull’  in 
regard  to  flavours  and  solid  edges:  here  in  the 
latter  case  we  judge  by  touch,  but  in  the  former 
by  taste.  For  here  again  there  is  no  discrepancy 
in  the  names  used,  in  the  case  either  of  the 
[35]  original  terms  or  of  their  contraries:  for 
the  contrary  also  of  sharp  in  either  sense  is 
‘dull’. 

Moreover,  see  if  one  sense  of  a  term  has  a 
contrary,  while  another  has  absolutely  none; 
e.g.  the  pleasure  of  drinking  has  a  contrary  in 
the  pain  of  thirst,  whereas  the  pleasure  of  see¬ 
ing  that  the  diagonal  is  incommensurate  with 
106b  the  side  has  none,  so  that  ‘pleasure’  is 
used  in  more  than  one  sense.  To  ‘love’  also, 
used  of  the  frame  of  mind,  has  to  ‘hate’  as  its 
contrary,  while  as  used  of  the  physical  activity 
(kissing)  it  has  none:  clearly,  therefore,  to 
‘love’  is  an  ambiguous  term.  Further,  see  in 
regard  to  their  intermediates,  if  some  mean¬ 
ings  and  their  contraries  have  an  intermediate, 
[5]  while  others  have  none,  or  if  both  have 
one  but  not  the  same  one,  as  e.g.  ‘clear’  and  ‘ob¬ 
scure’  in  the  case  of  colours  have  ‘grey’  as  an 


intermediate,  whereas  in  the  case  of  sound  they 
have  none,  or,  if  they  have,  it  is  ‘harsh’,  as 
some  people  say  that  a  harsh  sound  is  inter¬ 
mediate.  ‘Clear’,  then,  is  an  ambiguous  term, 
and  likewise  also  ‘obscure’.  See,  moreover,  if 
some  of  them  have  more  than  one  intermedi- 
[/o]  ate,  while  others  have  but  one,  as  is  the 
case  with  ‘clear’  and  ‘obscure’,  for  in  the  case 
of  colours  there  are  numbers  of  intermediates, 
whereas  in  regard  to  sound  there  is  but  one, 
viz.  ‘harsh’. 

Again,  in  the  case  of  the  contradictory  op¬ 
posite,  look  and  see  if  it  bears  more  than  one 
meaning.  For  if  this  bears  more  than  one 
[75]  meaning,  then  the  opposite  of  it  also  will 
be  used  in  more  than  one  meaning;  e.g.  ‘to  fail 
to  see’  is  a  phrase  with  more  than  one  meaning, 
viz.  (1)  to  fail  to  possess  the  power  of  sight, 
(2)  to  fail  to  put  that  power  to  active  use.  But 
if  this  has  more  than  one  meaning,  it  follows 
necessarily  that  ‘to  see’  also  has  more  than  one 
meaning:  for  there  will  be  an  opposite  to  each 
sense  of  ‘to  fail  to  see’;  e.g.  the  opposite  of  ‘not 
to  possess  the  power  of  sight’  is  to  possess  it, 
[20]  while  of  ‘not  to  put  the  power  of  sight  to 
active  use’,  the  opposite  is  to  put  it  to  active 
use. 

Moreover,  examine  the  case  of  terms  that  de¬ 
note  the  privation  or  presence  of  a  certain 
state:  for  if  the  one  term  bears  more  than  one 
meaning,  then  so  will  the  remaining  term:  e.g. 
if  ‘to  have  sense’  be  used  with  more  than  one 
meaning,  as  applied  to  the  soul  and  to  the  body, 
then  ‘to  be  wanting  in  sense’  too  will  be  used 
with  more  than  one  meaning,  as  applied  to  the 
[25]  soul  and  to  the  body.  That  the  opposition 
between  the  terms  now  in  question  depends 
upon  the  privation  or  presence  of  a  certain 
state  is  clear,  since  animals  naturally  possess 
each  kind  of  ‘sense’,  both  as  applied  to  the  soul 
and  as  applied  to  the  body. 

Moreover,  examine  the  inflected  forms.  For 
[jo]  if  ‘justly’  has  more  than  one  meaning, 
then  ‘just’,  also,  will  be  used  with  more  than 
one  meaning;  for  there  will  be  a  meaning  of 
‘just’  corresponding  to  each  of  the  meanings  of 
‘justly’;  e.g.  if  the  word  ‘justly’  be  used  of 
judging  according  to  one’s  own  opinion,  and 
also  of  judging  as  one  ought,  then  ‘just’  also 
will  be  used  in  like  manner.  In  the  same  way 
also,  if  ‘healthy’  has  more  than  one  meaning, 
then  ‘healthily’  also  will  be  used  with  more 
than  one  meaning:  e.g.  if  ‘healthy’  describes 
[33]  both  what  produces  health  and  what  pre¬ 
serves  health  and  what  betokens  health,  then 
‘healthily’  also  will  be  used  to  mean  ‘in  such  a 


107b 

way  as  to  produce’  or  ‘preserve’  or  ‘betoken’ 
health.  Likewise  also  in  other  cases,  whenever 
the  original  term  bears  more  than  one  mean- 
10 7a  ing,  the  inflexion  also  that  is  formed 
from  it  will  be  used  with  more  than  one  mean¬ 
ing,  and  vice  versa. 

Look  also  at  the  classes  of  the  predicates  sig¬ 
nified  by  the  term,  and  see  if  they  are  the  same 
in  all  cases.  For  if  they  are  not  the  same,  then 
[5]  clearly  the  term  is  ambiguous:  e.g.  ‘good’ 
in  the  case  of  food  means  ‘productive  of  pleas¬ 
ure’,  and  in  the  case  of  medicine  ‘productive  of 
health’,  whereas  as  applied  to  the  soul  it  means 
to  be  of  a  certain  quality,  e.g.  temperate  or 
courageous  or  just:  and  likewise  also,  as  ap¬ 
plied  to  ‘man’.  Sometimes  it  signifies  what  hap¬ 
pens  at  a  certain  time,  as  (e.g.)  the  good  that 
happens  at  the  right  time:  for  what  happens  at 
the  right  time  is  called  good.  Often  it  signifies 
[/o]  what  is  of  a  certain  quantity,  e.g.  as  ap¬ 
plied  to  the  proper  amount:  for  the  proper 
amount  too  is  called  good.  So  then  the  term 
‘good’  is  ambiguous.  In  the  same  way  also 
‘clear’,  as  applied  to  a  body,  signifies  a  colour, 
but  in  regard  to  a  note  it  denotes  what  is  ‘easy 
to  hear’.  ‘Sharp’,  too,  is  in  a  closely  similar 
case:  for  the  same  term  does  not  bear  the  same 
meaning  in  all  its  applications:  for  a  sharp 
[75]  note  is  a  swift  note,  as  the  mathematical 
theorists  of  harmony  tell  us,  whereas  a  sharp 
(acute)  angle  is  one  that  is  less  than  a  right 
angle,  while  a  sharp  dagger  is  one  containing 
a  sharp  angle  (point). 

Look  also  at  the  genera  of  the  objects  de¬ 
noted  by  the  same  term,  and  see  if  they  are 
different  without  being  subaltern,  as  (e.g.) 
‘donkey’,  which  denotes  both  the  animal  and 
[20]  the  engine.  For  the  definition  of  them 
that  corresponds  to  the  name  is  different:  for 
the  one  will  be  declared  to  be  an  animal  of  a 
certain  kind,  and  the  other  to  be  an  engine  of  a 
certain  kind.  If,  however,  the  genera  be  sub¬ 
altern,  there  is  no  necessity  for  the  definitions 
to  be  different.  Thus  (e.g.)  ‘animal’  is  the 
genus  of  ‘raven’,  and  so  is  ‘bird’.  Whenever 
therefore  we  say  that  the  raven  is  a  bird,  we 
[25]  also  say  that  it  is  a  certain  kind  of  animal, 
so  that  both  the  genera  are  predicated  of  it. 
Likewise  also  whenever  we  call  the  raven  a 
‘flying  biped  animal’,  we  declare  it  to  be  a  bird: 
in  this  way,  then,  as  well,  both  the  genera  are 
predicated  of  raven,  and  also  their  definition. 
But  in  the  case  of  genera  that  are  not  subaltern 
[30]  this  does  not  happen,  for  whenever  we 
call  a  thing  an  ‘engine’,  we  do  not  call  it  an 
animal,  nor  vice  versa. 


151 

Look  also  and  see  not  only  if  the  genera  of 
the  term  before  you  are  different  without  be¬ 
ing  subaltern,  but  also  in  the  case  of  its  con¬ 
trary:  for  if  its  contrary  bears  several  senses, 
[35]  clearly  the  term  before  you  does  so  as  well. 

It  is  useful  also  to  look  at  the  definition  that 
arises  from  the  use  of  the  term  in  combination, 
e.g.  of  a  ‘clear  (lit.  white)  body’  and  of  a  ‘clear 
note’.  For  then  if  what  is  peculiar  in  each  case 
be  abstracted,  the  same  expression  ought  to  re¬ 
main  over.  This  does  not  happen  in  the  case  of 
107b  ambiguous  terms,  e.g.  in  the  cases  just 
mentioned.  For  the  former  will  be  ‘a  body  pos¬ 
sessing  such  and  such  a  colour’,  while  the  lat¬ 
ter  will  be  ‘a  note  easy  to  hear’.  Abstract,  then, 
‘a  body’  and  ‘a  note’,  and  the  remainder  in  each 
case  is  not  the  same.  It  should,  however,  have 
[5]  been  had  the  meaning  of  ‘clear’  in  each 
case  been  synonymous. 

Often  in  the  actual  definitions  as  well  am¬ 
biguity  creeps  in  unawares,  and  for  this  rea¬ 
son  the  definitions  also  should  be  examined.  If 
(e.g.)  any  one  describes  what  betokens  and 
what  produces  health  as  ‘related  commensu¬ 
rably  to  health’,  we  must  not  desist  but  go  on 
to  examine  in  what  sense  he  has  used  the  term 
[/o]  ‘commensurably’  in  each  case,  e.g.  if  in 
the  latter  case  it  means  that  ‘it  is  of  the  right 
amount  to  produce  health’,  whereas  in  the  for¬ 
mer  it  means  that  ‘it  is  such  as  to  betoken 
what  kind  of  state  prevails’. 

Moreover,  see  if  the  terms  cannot  be  com¬ 
pared  as  ‘more  or  less’  or  as  ‘in  like  manner’, 
as  is  the  case  (e.g.)  with  a  ‘clear’  (lit.  white) 
sound  and  a  ‘clear’  garment,  and  a  ‘sharp’ 
[75]  flavour  and  a  ‘sharp’  note.  For  neither 
are  these  things  said  to  be  clear  or  sharp  ‘in  a 
like  degree’,  nor  yet  is  the  one  said  to  be 
clearer  or  sharper  than  the  other.  ‘Clear’,  then, 
and  ‘sharp’  are  ambiguous.  For  synonyms  are 
always  comparable;  for  they  will  always  be 
used  either  in  like  manner,  or  else  in  a  greater 
degree  in  one  case. 

Now  since  of  genera  that  are  different  with- 
[20]  out  being  subaltern  the  differentiae  also 
are  different  in  kind,  e.g.  those  of  ‘animal’  and 
‘knowledge’  (for  the  differentiae  of  these  are 
different),  look  and  see  if  the  meanings  com¬ 
prised  under  the  same  term  are  differentiae  of 
genera  that  are  different  without  being  subal¬ 
tern,  as  e.g.  ‘sharp’  is  of  a  ‘note’  and  a  ‘solid’. 
For  being  ‘sharp’  differentiates  note  from  note, 
and  likewise  also  one  solid  from  another. 
[25]  ‘Sharp’,  then,  is  an  ambiguous  term:  for 
it  forms  differentiae  of  genera  that  are  differ¬ 
ent  without  being  subaltern. 


BOOK  I,  CHAPTER  15 


*52 

Again,  see  if  the  actual  meanings  included 
under  the  same  term  themselves  have  differ¬ 
ent  differentiae,  e.g.  ‘colour’  in  bodies  and 
‘colour’  in  tunes:  for  the  differentiae  of  ‘col¬ 
our’  in  bodies  are  ‘sight-piercing’  and  ‘sight- 
[30]  compressing’,  whereas  ‘colour’  in  melo¬ 
dies  has  not  the  same  differentiae.  Colour,  then, 
is  an  ambiguous  term;  for  things  that  are  the 
same  have  the  same  differentiae. 

Moreover,  since  the  species  is  never  the  dif¬ 
ferentia  of  anything,  look  and  see  if  one  of  the 
meanings  included  under  the  same  term  be  a 
species  and  another  a  differentia,  as  (e.g.) 
[35]  ‘clear’  (lit.  white)  as  applied  to  a  body  is 
a  species  of  colour,  whereas  in  the  case  of  a 
note  it  is  a  differentia;  for  one  note  is  differ¬ 
entiated  from  another  by  being  ‘clear’. 

16 

The  presence,  then,  of  a  number  of  meanings 
in  a  term  may  be  investigated  by  these  and  like 
means.  The  differences  which  things  present 
to  each  other  should  be  examined  within  the 
same  genera,  e.g.  ‘Wherein  does  justice  differ 
108a  from  courage,  and  wisdom  from  temper¬ 
ance?’ — for  all  these  belong  to  the  same  genus; 
and  also  from  one  genus  to  another,  provided 
they  be  not  very  much  too  far  apart,  e.g. 
‘Wherein  does  sensation  differ  from  knowl- 
[5]  edge?:  for  in  the  case  of  genera  that  are 
very  far  apart,  the  differences  are  entirely  ob¬ 
vious. 

17 

Likeness  should  be  studied,  first,  in  the  case 
of  things  belonging  to  different  genera,  the 
formulae  being  ‘A:B  =  C:D’  (e.g.  as  knowl¬ 
edge  stands  to  the  object  of  knowledge,  so  is 
sensation  related  to  the  object  of  sensation), 
[/o]  and  ‘As  A  is  in  B,  so  is  C  in  D’  (e.g.  as 
sight  is  in  the  eye,  so  is  reason  in  the  soul,  and 
as  is  a  calm  in  the  sea,  so  is  windlessness  in  the 
air).  Practice  is  more  especially  needed  in  re¬ 
gard  to  terms  that  are  far  apart;  for  in  the  case 
of  the  rest,  we  shall  be  more  easily  able  to  see 
in  one  glance  the  points  of  likeness.  We  should 
[75]  also  look  at  things  which  belong  to  the 
same  genus,  to  see  if  any  identical  attribute 
belongs  to  them  all,  e.g.  to  a  man  and  a  horse 
and  a  dog;  for  in  so  far  as  they  have  any 
identical  attribute,  in  so  far  they  are  alike. 

18 

It  is  useful  to  have  examined  the  number  of 
meanings  of  a  term  both  for  clearness’  sake 
(for  a  man  is  more  likely  to  know  what  it 


108b 

is  he  asserts,  if  it  has  been  made  clear  to  him 
[20]  how  many  meanings  it  may  have),  and 
also  with  a  view  to  ensuring  that  our  reason¬ 
ings  shall  be  in  accordance  with  the  actual 
facts  and  not  addressed  merely  to  the  term 
used.  For  as  long  as  it  is  not  clear  in  how  many 
senses  a  term  is  used,  it  is  possible  that  the 
answerer  and  the  questioner  are  not  directing 
their  minds  upon  the  same  thing:  whereas 
when  once  it  has  been  made  clear  how  many 
meanings  there  are,  and  also  upon  which  of 
them  the  former  directs  his  mind  when  he 
[25]  makes  his  assertion,  the  questioner  would 
then  look  ridiculous  if  he  failed  to  address  his 
argument  to  this.  It  helps  us  also  both  to  avoid 
being  misled  and  to  mislead  by  false  reasoning: 
for  if  we  know  the  number  of  meanings  of  a 
term,  we  shall  certainly  never  be  misled  by 
false  reasoning,  but  shall  know  if  the  ques¬ 
tioner  fails  to  address  his  argument  to  the 
same  point;  and  when  we  ourselves  put  the 
[30]  questions  we  shall  be  able  to  mislead  him, 
if  our  answerer  happens  not  to  know  the  num¬ 
ber  of  meanings  of  our  terms.  This,  however, 
is  not  possible  in  all  cases,  but  only  when  of 
the  many  senses  some  are  true  and  others  are 
false.  This  manner  of  argument,  however,  does 
not  belong  properly  to  dialectic;  dialecticians 
[35]  should  therefore  by  all  means  beware  of 
this  kind  of  verbal  discussion,  unless  any  one 
is  absolutely  unable  to  discuss  the  subject  be¬ 
fore  him  in  any  other  way. 

The  discovery  of  the  differences  of  things 
helps  us  both  in  reasonings  about  sameness  and 
difference,  and  also  in  recognizing  what  any 
108b  particular  thing  is.  That  it  helps  us  in 
reasoning  about  sameness  and  difference  is 
clear:  for  when  we  have  discovered  a  differ¬ 
ence  of  any  kind  whatever  between  the  objects 
before  us,  we  shall  already  have  shown  that 
they  are  not  the  same:  while  it  helps  us  in  rec¬ 
ognizing  what  a  thing  is,  because  we  usually 
distinguish  the  expression  that  is  proper  to  the 
[5]  essence  of  each  particular  thing  by  means 
of  the  differentiae  that  are  proper  to  it. 

The  examination  of  likeness  is  useful  with  a 
view  both  to  inductive  arguments  and  to  hypo¬ 
thetical  reasonings,  and  also  with  a  view  to  the 
rendering  of  definitions.  It  is  useful  for  induc- 
[/o]  tive  arguments,  because  it  is  by  means  of 
an  induction  of  individuals  in  cases  that  are 
alike  that  we  claim  to  bring  the  universal  in 
evidence:  for  it  is  not  easy  to  do  this  if  we  do 
not  know  the  points  of  likeness.  It  is  useful 
for  hypothetical  reasonings  because  it  is  a  gen¬ 
eral  opinion  that  among  similars  what  is  true 


TOPICS 


109*  BOOK  I,  CHAPTERS  15-18 

of  one  is  true  also  of  the  rest.  If,  then,  with  re- 
ard  to  any  of  them  we  are  well  supplied  with 
75]  matter  for  a  discussion,  we  shall  secure  a 
preliminary  admission  that  however  it  is  in 
these  cases,  so  it  is  also  in  the  case  before  us: 
then  when  we  have  shown  the  former  we  shall 
have  shown,  on  the  strength  of  the  hypothesis, 
the  matter  before  us  as  well:  for  we  have  first 
made  the  hypothesis  that  however  it  is  in  these 
cases,  so  it  is  also  in  the  case  before  us,  and 
have  then  proved  the  point  as  regards  these 
cases.  It  is  useful  for  the  rendering  of  defini- 
[20]  tions  because,  if  we  are  able  to  see  in  one 
glance  v/hat  is  the  same  in  each  individual  case 
of  it,  we  shall  be  at  no  loss  into  what  genus  we 
ought  to  put  the  object  before  us  when  we  de¬ 
fine  it:  for  of  the  common  predicates  that  which 
is  most  definitely  in  the  category  of  essence  is 
likely  to  be  the  genus.  Likewise,  also,  in  the 


—BOOK  II,  CHAPTERS  1-2  153 

case  of  objects  widely  divergent,  the  examina¬ 
tion  of  likeness  is  useful  for  purposes  of  defini¬ 
tion,  e.g.  the  sameness  of  a  calm  at  sea,  and 
[25]  windlessness  in  the  air  (each  being  a 
form  of  rest),  and  of  a  point  on  a  line  and  the 
unit  in  number — each  being  a  starting  point. 
If,  then,  we  render  as  the  genus  what  is  com¬ 
mon  to  all  the  cases,  we  shall  get  the  credit  of 
defining  not  inappropriately.  Definition-mon¬ 
gers  too  nearly  always  render  them  in  this  way: 
[30]  for  they  declare  the  unit  to  be  the  starting- 
point  of  number,  and  the  point  the  starting- 
point  of  a  line.  It  is  clear,  then,  that  they  place 
them  in  that  which  is  common  to  both  as  their 
genus. 

The  means,  then,  whereby  reasonings  are 
effected,  are  these:  the  commonplace  rules,  for 
the  observance  of  which  the  aforesaid  means 
are  useful,  are  as  follows. 


BOOK  II 


1 

[37]  Of  problems  some  are  universal,  others 
particular.  Universal  problems  are  such  as 
‘Every  pleasure  is  good’  and  ‘No  pleasure  is 
good’;  particular  problems  are  such  as  ‘Some 
109*  pleasure  is  good’  and  ‘Some  pleasure  is 
not  good’.  The  methods  of  establishing  and 
overthrowing  a  view  universally  are  common 
to  both  kinds  of  problems;  for  when  we  have 
shown  that  a  predicate  belongs  in  every  case, 
we  shall  also  have  shown  that  it  belongs  in 
some  cases.  Likewise,  also,  if  we  show  that  it 
[5]  does  not  belong  in  any  case,  we  shall  also 
have  shown  that  it  does  not  belong  in  every 
case.  First,  then,  we  must  speak  of  the  methods 
of  overthrowing  a  view  universally,  because 
such  are  common  to  both  universal  and  par¬ 
ticular  problems,  and  because  people  more  usu¬ 
ally  introduce  theses  asserting  a  predicate  than 
[/o]  denying  it,  while  those  who  argue  with 
them  overthrow  it.  The  conversion  of  an  ap¬ 
propriate  name  which  is  drawn  from  the  ele¬ 
ment  ‘accident*  is  an  extremely  precarious 
thing;  for  in  the  case  of  accidents  and  in  no 
other  it  is  possible  for  something  to  be  true 
conditionally  and  not  universally.  Names 
drawn  from  the  elements  ‘definition*  and  ‘prop¬ 
erty*  and  ‘genus*  are  bound  to  be  convertible; 
e.g.  if  ‘to  be  an  animal  that  walks  on  two  feet 
is  an  attribute  of  S*,  then  it  will  be  true  by  con- 
[75]  version  to  say  that  ‘S  is  an  animal  that 
walks  on  two  feet*.  Likewise,  also,  if  drawn 
from  the  genus;  for  if  ‘to  be  an  animal  is  an 


attribute  of  S*,  then  ‘S  is  an  animal*.  The  same 
is  true  also  in  the  case  of  a  property;  for  if  ‘to 
be  capable  of  learning  grammar  is  an  attribute 
of  S*,  then  ‘S  will  be  capable  of  learning  gram- 
[20]  mar*.  For  none  of  these  attributes  can  pos¬ 
sibly  belong  or  not  belong  in  part;  they  must 
either  belong  or  not  belong  absolutely.  In  the 
case  of  accidents,  on  the  other  hand,  there  is 
nothing  to  prevent  an  attribute  (e.g.  whiteness 
or  justice)  belonging  in  part,  so  that  it  is  not 
enough  to  show  that  whiteness  or  justice  is  an 
attribute  of  a  man  in  order  to  show  that  he  is 
white  or  just;  for  it  is  open  to  dispute  it  and 
[25]  say  that  he  is  white  or  just  in  part  only. 
Conversion,  then,  is  not  a  necessary  process  in 
the  case  of  accidents. 

We  must  also  define  the  errors  that  occur  in 
problems.  They  are  of  two  kinds,  caused  either 
by  false  statement  or  by  transgression  of  the 
established  diction.  For  those  who  make  false 
statements,  and  say  that  an  attribute  belongs  to 
[30]  a  thing  which  does  not  belong  to  it, 
commit  error;  and  those  who  call  objects  by 
the  names  of  other  objects  (e.g.  calling  a  plane- 
tree  a  ‘man*)  transgress  the  established  ter¬ 
minology. 

2 

Now  one  commonplace  rule  is  to  look  and  see 
[35]  if  a  man  has  ascribed  as  an  accident  what 
belongs  in  some  other  way.  This  mistake  is 
most  commonly  made  in  regard  to  the  genera 
of  things,  e.g.  if  one  were  to  say  that  white 
happens  ( accidit )  to  be  a  colour — for  being  a 


154 

colour  does  not  happen  by  accident  to  white, 
but  colour  is  its  genus.  The  assertor  may  of 
109b  course  define  it  so  in  so  many  words,  say¬ 
ing  (e.g.)  that  ‘Justice  happens  ( accidit )  to  be 
a  virtue’;  but  often  even  without  such  defini¬ 
tion  it  is  obvious  that  he  has  rendered  the  ge¬ 
nus  as  an  accident;  e.g.  suppose  that  one  were 
to  say  that  whiteness  is  coloured  or  that  walk¬ 
ing  is  in  motion.  For  a  predicate  drawn  from 
[5]  the  genus  is  never  ascribed  to  the  species 
in  an  inflected  form,  but  always  the  genera  are 
predicated  of  their  species  literally;  for  the  spe¬ 
cies  take  on  both  the  name  and  the  definition 
of  their  genera.  A  man  therefore  who  says  that 
white  is  ‘coloured’  has  not  rendered  ‘coloured’ 
as  its  genus,  seeing  that  he  has  used  an  inflect¬ 
ed  form,  nor  yet  as  its  property  or  as  its  defini- 
[/o]  tion:  for  the  definition  and  property  of  a 
thing  belong  to  it  and  to  nothing  else,  whereas 
many  things  besides  white  are  coloured,  e.g.  a 
log,  a  stone,  a  man,  and  a  horse.  Clearly  then 
he  renders  it  as  an  accident. 

Another  rule  is  to  examine  all  cases  where  a 
predicate  has  been  either  asserted  or  denied 
universally  to  belong  to  something.  Look  at 
them  species  by  species,  and  not  in  their  infi- 
[75]  nite  multitude:  for  then  the  inquiry  will 
proceed  more  directly  and  in  fewer  steps.  You 
should  look  and  begin  with  the  most  primary 
groups,  and  then  proceed  in  order  down  to 
those  that  are  not  further  divisible:  e.g.  if  a 
man  has  said  that  the  knowledge  of  opposites 
is  the  same,  you  should  look  and  see  whether 
it  be  so  of  relative  opposites  and  of  contraries 
and  of  terms  signifying  the  privation  or  pres¬ 
ence  of  certain  states,  and  of  contradictory 
[20]  terms.  Then,  if  no  clear  result  be  reached 
so  far  in  these  cases,  you  should  again  divide 
these  until  you  come  to  those  that  are  not  fur¬ 
ther  divisible,  and  see  (e.g.)  whether  it  be  so 
of  just  deeds  and  unjust,  or  of  the  double  and 
the  half,  or  of  blindness  and  sight,  or  of  being 
and  not-being:  for  if  in  any  case  it  be  shown 
that  the  knowledge  of  them  is  not  the  same 
we  shall  have  demolished  the  problem.  Like¬ 
wise,  also,  if  the  predicate  belongs  in  no  case. 
[25]  This  rule  is  convertible  for  both  destruc¬ 
tive  and  constructive  purposes:  for  if,  when  we 
have  suggested  a  division,  the  predicate  ap¬ 
pears  to  hold  in  all  or  in  a  large  number  of 
cases,  we  may  then  claim  that  the  other  should 
actually  assert  it  universally,  or  else  bring  a 
negative  instance  to  show  in  what  case  it  is 
not  so:  for  if  he  does  neither  of  these  things, 
a  refusal  to  assert  it  will  make  him  look 
absurd. 


no* 

[jo]  Another  rule  is  to  make  definitions  both 
of  an  accident  and  of  its  subject,  either  of  both 
separately  or  else  of  one  of  them,  and  then  look 
and  see  if  anything  untrue  has  been  assumed 
as  true  in  the  definitions.  Thus  (e.g.)  to  see  if 
it  is  possible  to  wrong  a  god,  ask  what  is  ‘to 
wrong’?  For  if  it  be  ‘to  injure  deliberately’, 
clearly  it  is  not  possible  for  a  god  to  be  wronged: 
[35]  for  it  is  impossible  that  God  should  be 
injured.  Again,  to  see  if  the  good  man  is  jeal¬ 
ous,  ask  who  is  the  ‘jealous’  man  and  what  is 
‘jealousy’.  For  if  ‘jealousy’  is  pain  at  the  appar¬ 
ent  success  of  some  well-behaved  person,  clear¬ 
ly  the  good  man  is  not  jealous:  for  then  he 
would  be  bad.  Again,  to  see  if  the  indignant 
man  is  jealous,  ask  who  each  of  them  is:  for 
then  it  will  be  obvious  whether  the  statement 
110a  is  true  or  false;  e.g.  if  he  is  ‘jealous’  who 
grieves  at  the  successes  of  the  good,  and  he  is 
‘indignant’  who  grieves  at  the  successes  of  the 
evil,  then  clearly  the  indignant  man  would  not 
be  jealous.  A  man  should  substitute  definitions 
[5]  also  for  the  terms  contained  in  his  defini¬ 
tions,  and  not  stop  until  he  comes  to  a  familiar 
term:  for  often  if  the  definition  be  rendered 
whole,  the  point  at  issue  is  not  cleared  up, 
whereas  if  for  one  of  the  terms  used  in  the  defi¬ 
nition  a  definition  be  stated,  it  becomes  ob¬ 
vious. 

[/o]  Moreover,  a  man  should  make  the  prob¬ 
lem  into  a  proposition  for  himself,  and  then 
bring  a  negative  instance  against  it:  for  the 
negative  instance  will  be  a  ground  of  attack 
upon  the  assertion.  This  rule  is  very  nearly  the 
same  as  the  rule  to  look  into  cases  where  a 
predicate  has  been  attributed  or  denied  univer¬ 
sally:  but  it  differs  in  the  turn  of  the  argument. 

Moreover,  you  should  define  what  kind  of 
things  should  be  called  as  most  men  call  them, 
[75]  and  what  should  not.  For  this  is  useful 
both  for  establishing  and  for  overthrowing  a 
view:  e.g.  you  should  say  that  we  ought  to  use 
our  terms  to  mean  the  same  things  as  most  peo¬ 
ple  mean  by  them,  but  when  we  ask  what  kind 
of  things  are  or  are  not  of  such  and  such  a 
kind,  we  should  not  here  go  with  the  multi¬ 
tude:  e.g.  it  is  right  to  call  ‘healthy’  whatever 
[207  tends  to  produce  health,  as  do  most  men: 
but  in  saying  whether  the  object  before  us 
tends  to  produce  health  or  not,  we  should 
adopt  the  language  no  longer  of  the  multitude 
but  of  the  doctor. 

3 

Moreover,  if  a  term  be  used  in  several  senses, 
and  it  has  been  laid  down  that  it  is  or  that  it  is 


TOPICS 


llla  BOOK  II,  CHAPTERS  2-3  155 


not  an  attribute  of  S,  you  should  show  your 
[25]  case  of  one  of  its  several  senses,  if  you 
cannot  show  it  of  both.  This  rule  is  to  be  ob¬ 
served  in  cases  where  the  difference  of  mean¬ 
ing  is  undetected;  for  supposing  this  to  be  ob¬ 
vious,  then  the  other  man  will  object  that  the 
point  which  he  himself  questioned  has  not 
been  discussed,  but  only  the  other  point.  This 
commonplace  rule  is  convertible  for  purposes 
both  of  establishing  and  of  overthrowing  a 
view.  For  if  we  want  to  establish  a  statement, 
[50]  we  shall  show  that  in  one  sense  the  attri¬ 
bute  belongs,  if  we  cannot  show  it  of  both 
senses:  whereas  if  we  are  overthrowing  a  state¬ 
ment,  we  shall  show  that  in  one  sense  the  attri¬ 
bute  does  not  belong,  if  we  cannot  show  it  of 
both  senses.  Of  course,  in  overthrowing  a  state¬ 
ment  there  is  no  need  to  start  the  discussion  by 
securing  any  admission,  either  when  the  state¬ 
ment  asserts  or  when  it  denies  the  attribute 
universally:  for  if  we  show  that  in  any  case 
[35]  whatever  the  attribute  does  not  belong, 
we  shall  have  demolished  the  universal  asser¬ 
tion  of  it,  and  likewise  also  if  we  show  that  it 
belongs  in  a  single  case,  we  shall  demolish  the 
universal  denial  of  it.  Whereas  in  establishing 
a  statement  we  ought  to  secure  a  preliminary 
admission  that  if  it  belongs  in  any  case  what¬ 
ever,  it  belongs  universally,  supposing  this 
claim  to  be  a  plausible  one.  For  it  is  not 
110b  enough  to  discuss  a  single  instance  in  or¬ 
der  to  show  that  an  attribute  belongs  univer¬ 
sally;  e.g.  to  argue  that  if  the  soul  of  man  be 
immortal,  then  every  soul  is  immortal,  so  that 
a  previous  admission  must  be  secured  that  if 
any  soul  whatever  be  immortal,  then  every 
soul  is  immortal.  This  is  not  to  be  done  in  ev¬ 
ery  case,  but  only  whenever  we  are  not  easily 
[5]  able  to  quote  any  single  argument  apply¬ 
ing  to  all  cases  in  common,  as  (e.g.)  the  geo¬ 
metrician  can  argue  that  the  triangle  has  its 
angles  equal  to  two  right  angles. 

If,  again,  the  variety  of  meanings  of  a  term 
be  obvious,  distinguish  how  many  meanings  it 
has  before  proceeding  either  to  demolish  or  to 
establish  it:  e.g.  supposing  ‘the  right’  to  mean 
[/o]  ‘the  expedient’  or  ‘the  honourable’,  you 
should  try  either  to  establish  or  to  demolish 
both  descriptions  of  the  subject  in  question; 
e.g.  by  showing  that  it  is  honourable  and  ex¬ 
pedient,  or  that  it  is  neither  honourable  nor 
expedient.  Supposing,  however,  that  it  is  im¬ 
possible  to  show  both,  you  should  show  the 
one,  adding  an  indication  that  it  is  true  in  the 
one  sense  and  not  in  the  other.  The  same  rule 
applies  also  when  the  number  of  senses  into 


[/5J  which  it  is  divided  is  more  than  two. 

Again,  consider  those  expressions  whose 
meanings  are  many,  but  differ  not  by  way  of 
ambiguity  of  a  term,  but  in  some  other  way: 
e.g.  ‘The  science  of  many  things  is  one’:  here 
‘many  things’  may  mean  the  end  and  the 
means  to  that  end,  as  (e.g.)  medicine  is  the 
science  both  of  producing  health  and  of  diet¬ 
ing;  or  they  may  be  both  of  them  ends,  as  the 
[20]  science  of  contraries  is  said  to  be  the  same 
(for  of  contraries  the  one  is  no  more  an  end 
than  the  other) ;  or  again  they  may  be  an  essen¬ 
tial  and  an  accidental  attribute,  as  (e.g.)  the  es¬ 
sential  fact  that  the  triangle  has  its  angles  equal 
to  two  right  angles,  and  the  accidental  fact  that 
the  equilateral  figure  has  them  so:  for  it  is  be¬ 
cause  of  the  accident  of  the  equilateral  triangle 
happening  to  be  a  triangle  that  we  know  that 
[25]  it  has  its  angles  equal  to  two  right  angles. 
If,  then,  it  is  not  possible  in  any  sense  of  the 
term  that  the  science  of  many  things  should  be 
the  same,  it  clearly  is  altogether  impossible 
that  it  should  be  so;  or,  if  it  is  possible  in  some 
sense,  then  clearly  it  is  possible.  Distinguish  as 
many  meanings  as  are  required:  e.g.  if  we 
want  to  establish  a  view,  we  should  bring  for¬ 
ward  all  such  meanings  as  admit  that  view, 
[jo]  and  should  divide  them  only  into  those 
meanings  which  also  are  required  for  the  es¬ 
tablishment  of  our  case:  whereas  if  we  want  to 
overthrow  a  view,  we  should  bring  forward  all 
that  do  not  admit  that  view,  and  leave  the  rest 
aside.  We  must  deal  also  in  these  cases  as  well 
with  any  uncertainty  about  the  number  of 
meanings  involved.  Further,  that  one  thing  is, 
or  is  not,  ‘of’  another  should  be  established  by 
means  of  the  same  commonplace  rules;  e.g. 
that  a  particular  science  is  of  a  particular  thing, 
[55]  treated  either  as  an  end  or  as  a  means  to 
its  end,  or  as  accidentally  connected  with  it; 
or  again  that  it  is  not  ‘of’  it  in  any  of  the  afore¬ 
said  ways.  The  same  rule  holds  true  also  of  de¬ 
sire  and  all  other  terms  that  have  more  than 
one  object.  For  the  ‘desire  of  X’  may  mean  the 
llla  desire  of  it  as  an  end  (e.g.  the  desire  of 
health)  or  as  a  means  to  an  end  (e.g.  the  desire 
of  being  doctored),  or  as  a  thing  desired  acci¬ 
dentally,  as,  in  the  case  of  wine,  the  sweet¬ 
toothed  person  desires  it  not  because  it  is  wine 
but  because  it  is  sweet.  For  essentially  he  de¬ 
sires  the  sweet,  and  only  accidentally  the  wine: 
[5]  for  if  it  be  dry,  he  no  longer  desires  it.  His 
desire  for  it  is  therefore  accidental.  This  rule  is 
useful  in  dealing  with  relative  terms:  for  cases 
of  this  kind  are  generally  cases  of  relative 
terms. 


1 56  TOPICS  111* 

or  knowledge  of  one  of  the  other  sciences;  and 
4  if  any  one  possesses  scientific  knowledge  or  is 

Moreover,  it  is  well  to  alter  a  term  into  one  lllb  described  by  a  term  derived  from  ‘sci- 


more  familiar,  e.g.  to  substitute  ‘clear’  for  ‘ex¬ 
act’  in  describing  a  conception,  and  ‘being 
[/o]  fussy’  for  ‘being  busy’:  for  when  the  ex¬ 
pression  is  made  more  familiar,  the  thesis 
becomes  easier  to  attack.  This  commonplace 
rule  also  is  available  for  both  purposes  alike, 
both  for  establishing  and  for  overthrowing 
a  view. 

In  order  to  show  that  contrary  attributes  be- 
[75]  long  to  the  same  thing,  look  at  its  genus; 
e.g.  if  we  want  to  show  that  rightness  and 
wrongness  are  possible  in  regard  to  perception, 
and  to  perceive  is  to  judge,  while  it  is  possible 
to  judge  rightly  or  wrongly,  then  in  regard  to 
perception  as  well  rightness  and  wrongness 
must  be  possible.  In  the  present  instance  the 
proof  proceeds  from  the  genus  and  relates  to 
the  species:  for  ‘to  judge’  is  the  genus  of  ‘to 
[20]  perceive’;  for  the  man  who  perceives 
judges  in  a  certain  way.  But  per  contra  it  may 
proceed  from  the  species  to  the  genus:  for  all 
the  attributes  that  belong  to  the  species  belong 
to  the  genus  as  well;  e.g.  if  there  is  a  bad  and  a 
good  knowledge  there  is  also  a  bad  and  a  good 
disposition:  for  ‘disposition’  is  the  genus  of 
knowledge.  Now  the  former  commonplace  ar¬ 
gument  is  fallacious  for  purposes  of  establish¬ 
ing  a  view,  while  the  second  is  true.  For  there 
[25]  is  no  necessity  that  all  the  attributes  that 
belong  to  the  genus  should  belong  also  to  the 
species;  for  ‘animal’  is  flying  and  quadruped, 
but  not  so  ‘man’.  Ail  the  attributes,  on  the  oth¬ 
er  hand,  that  belong  to  the  species  must  of  ne¬ 
cessity  belong  also  to  the  genus;  for  if  ‘man’  is 
good,  then  animal  also  is  good.  On  the  other 
hand,  for  purposes  of  overthrowing  a  view,  the 
[jo]  former  argument  is  true  while  the  latter 
is  fallacious;  for  all  the  attributes  which  do  not 
belong  to  the  genus  do  not  belong  to  the  spe¬ 
cies  either;  whereas  all  those  that  are  wanting 
to  the  species  are  not  of  necessity  wanting  to 
the  genus. 

Since  those  things  of  which  the  genus  is 
predicated  must  also  of  necessity  have  one  of 
its  species  predicated  of  them,  and  since  those 
things  that  are  possessed  of  the  genus  in  ques¬ 
ts]  tion,  or  are  described  by  terms  derived 
from  that  genus,  must  also  of  necessity  be  pos¬ 
sessed  of  one  of  its  species  or  be  described  by 
terms  derived  from  one  of  its  species  (e.g.  if 
to  anything  the  term  ‘scientific  knowledge’  be 
applied,  then  also  there  will  be  applied  to  it 
the  term  ‘grammatical’  or  ‘musical’  knowledge, 


ence’,  then  he  will  also  possess  grammatical  or 
musical  knowledge  or  knowledge  of  one  of 
the  other  sciences,  or  will  be  described  by  a 
term  derived  from  one  of  them,  e.g.  as  a  ‘gram¬ 
marian’  or  a  ‘musician’) — therefore  if  any  ex¬ 
pression  be  asserted  that  is  in  any  way  derived 
from  the  genus  (e.g.  that  the  soul  is  in  motion), 
[5]  look  and  see  whether  it  be  possible  for  the 
soul  to  be  moved  with  any  of  the  species  of 
motion;  whether  (e.g.)  it  can  grow  or  be  de¬ 
stroyed  or  come  to  be,  and  so  forth  with  all  the 
other  species  of  motion.  For  if  it  be  not  moved 
in  any  of  these  ways,  clearly  it  does  not  move 
at  all.  This  commonplace  rule  is  common  for 
both  purposes,  both  for  overthrowing  and  for 
establishing  a  view:  for  if  the  soul  moves  with 
[/o]  one  of  the  species  of  motion,  clearly  it 
does  move;  while  if  it  does  not  move  with  any 
of  the  species  of  motion,  clearly  it  does  not 
move. 

If  you  are  not  well  equipped  with  an  argu¬ 
ment  against  the  assertion,  look  among  the 
definitions,  real  or  apparent,  of  the  thing  be¬ 
fore  you,  and  if  one  is  not  enough,  draw  upon 
[75]  several.  For  it  will  be  easier  to  attack  peo¬ 
ple  when  committed  to  a  definition:  for  an  at¬ 
tack  is  always  more  easily  made  on  definitions. 

Moreover,  look  and  see  in  regard  to  the 
thing  in  question,  what  it  is  whose  reality  con¬ 
ditions  the  reality  of  the  thing  in  question,  or 
what  it  is  whose  reality  necessarily  follows  if 
the  thing  in  question  be  real:  if  you  wish  to  es¬ 
tablish  a  view  inquire  what  there  is  on  whose 
reality  the  reality  of  the  thing  in  question  will 
[20]  follow  (for  if  the  former  be  shown  to  be 
real,  then  the  thing  in  question  will  also  have 
been  shown  to  be  real);  while  if  you  want  to 
overthrow  a  view,  ask  what  it  is  that  is  real  if 
the  thing  in  question  be  real,  for  if  we  show 
that  what  follows  from  the  thing  in  question  is 
unreal,  we  shall  have  demolished  the  thing  in 
question. 

Moreover,  look  at  the  time  involved,  to  see 
if  there  be  any  discrepancy  anywhere:  e.g. 
[25]  suppose  a  man  to  have  stated  that  what  is 
being  nourished  of  necessity  grows:  for  ani¬ 
mals  are  always  of  necessity  being  nourished, 
but  they  do  not  always  grow.  Likewise,  also, 
if  he  has  said  that  knowing  is  remembering: 
for  the  one  is  concerned  with  past  time,  where¬ 
as  the  other  has  to  do  also  with  the  present  and 
the  future.  For  we  are  said  to  know  things 
present  and  future  (e.g.  that  there  will  be  an 


112b 


BOOK  II,  CHAPTERS  4-6 


157 


[30]  eclipse),  whereas  it  is  impossible  to  re¬ 
member  anything  save  what  is  in  the  past. 

5 

Moreover,  there  is  the  sophistic  turn  of  argu¬ 
ment,  whereby  we  draw  our  opponent  into  the 
kind  of  statement  against  which  we  shall  be 
well  supplied  with  lines  of  argument.  This 
process  is  sometimes  a  real  necessity,  sometimes 
an  apparent  necessity,  sometimes  neither  an 
apparent  nor  a  real  necessity.  It  is  really  neces- 
[35]  sary  whenever  the  answerer  has  denied 
any  view  that  would  be  useful  in  attacking  the 
thesis,  and  the  questioner  thereupon  addresses 
his  arguments  to  the  support  of  this  view,  and 
when  moreover  the  view  in  question  happens 
to  be  one  of  a  kind  on  which  he  has  a  good 
stock  of  lines  of  argument.  Likewise,  also,  it  is 
really  necessary  whenever  he  (the  questioner) 
112a  first,  by  an  induction  made  by  means  of 
the  view  laid  down,  arrives  at  a  certain  state¬ 
ment  and  then  tries  to  demolish  that  state¬ 
ment:  for  when  once  this  has  been  demolished, 
the  view  originally  laid  down  is  demolished  as 
well.  It  is  an  apparent  necessity,  when  the 
point  to  which  the  discussion  comes  to  be  di¬ 
rected  appears  to  be  useful,  and  relevant  to  the 
thesis,  without  being  really  so;  whether  it  be 
[5]  that  the  man  who  is  standing  up  to  the 
argument  has  refused  to  concede  something, 
or  whether  he  (the  questioner)  has  first 
reached  it  by  a  plausible  induction  based  upon 
the  thesis  and  then  tries  to  demolish  it.  The 
remaining  case  is  when  the  point  to  which  the 
discussion  comes  to  be  directed  is  neither  really 
nor  apparently  necessary,  and  it  is  the  answer¬ 
er’s  luck  to  be  confuted  on  a  mere  side  issue. 
[jo]  You  should  beware  of  the  last  of  the 
aforesaid  methods;  for  it  appears  to  be  wholly 
disconnected  from,  and  foreign  to,  the  art  of 
dialectic.  For  this  reason,  moreover,  the  an¬ 
swerer  should  not  lose  his  temper,  but  assent 
to  those  statements  that  are  of  no  use  in  attack¬ 
ing  the  thesis,  adding  an  indication  whenever 
he  assents  although  he  does  not  agree  with  the 
view.  For,  as  a  rule,  it  increases  the  confusion 
[75]  of  questioners  if,  after  all  propositions  of 
this  kind  have  been  granted  them,  they  can 
then  draw  no  conclusion. 

Moreover,  any  one  who  has  made  any  state¬ 
ment  whatever  has  in  a  certain  sense  made 
several  statements,  inasmuch  as  each  statement 
has  a  number  of  necessary  consequences:  e.g. 
the  man  who  said  ‘X  is  a  man’  has  also  said 
that  it  is  an  animal  and  that  it  is  animate  and 
a  biped  and  capable  of  acquiring  reason  and 


[20]  knowledge,  so  that  by  the  demolition  of 
any  single  one  of  these  consequences,  of  what¬ 
ever  kind,  the  original  statement  is  demolished 
as  well.  But  you  should  beware  here  too  of 
making  a  change  to  a  more  difficult  subject:  for 
sometimes  the  consequence,  and  sometimes 
the  original  thesis,  is  the  easier  to  demolish. 

6 

In  regard  to  subjects  which  must  have  one 
and  one  only  of  two  predicates,  as  (e.g.)  a  man 
[25]  must  have  either  a  disease  or  health,  sup¬ 
posing  we  are  well  supplied  as  regards  the  one 
for  arguing  its  presence  or  absence,  we  shall  be 
well  equipped  as  regards  the  remaining  one  as 
well.  This  rule  is  convertible  for  both  purposes: 
for  when  we  have  shown  that  the  one  attribute 
belongs,  we  shall  have  shown  that  the  remain¬ 
ing  one  does  not  belong;  while  if  we  show  that 
the  one  does  not  belong,  we  shall  have  shown 
[30]  that  the  remaining  one  does  belong. 
Clearly  then  the  rule  is  useful  for  both  pur¬ 
poses. 

Moreover,  you  may  devise  a  line  of  attack  by 
reinterpreting  a  term  in  its  literal  meaning, 
with  the  implication  that  it  is  most  fitting  so 
to  take  it  rather  than  in  its  established  mean¬ 
ing:  e.g.  the  expression  ‘strong  at  heart’  will 
suggest  not  the  courageous  man,  according  to 
the  use  now  established,  but  the  man  the  state 
[33]  of  whose  heart  is  strong;  just  as  also  the 
expression  ‘of  a  good  hope’  may  be  taken  to 
mean  the  man  who  hopes  for  good  things. 
Likewise  also  ‘well-starred’  may  be  taken  to 
mean  the  man  whose  star  is  good,  as  Xenoc- 
rates  says  ‘well-starred  is  he  who  has  a  noble 
soul’.1  For  a  man’s  star  is  his  soul. 

112b  Some  things  occur  of  necessity,  others 
usually,  others  however  it  may  chance;  if 
therefore  a  necessary  event  has  been  asserted 
to  occur  usually,  or  if  a  usual  event  (or,  failing 
such  an  event  itself,  its  contrary)  has  been 
stated  to  occur  of  necessity,  it  always  gives  an 
[5]  opportunity  for  attack.  For  if  a  necessary 
event  has  been  asserted  to  occur  usually,  clear¬ 
ly  the  speaker  has  denied  an  attribute  to  be 
universal  which  is  universal,  and  so  has  made 
a  mistake:  and  so  he  has  if  he  has  declared  the 
usual  attribute  to  be  necessary:  for  then  he  de¬ 
clares  it  to  belong  universally  when  it  does  not 
so  belong.  Likewise  also  if  he  has  declared  the 
[/o]  contrary  of  what  is  usual  to  be  necessary. 
For  the  contrary  of  a  usual  attribute  is  always 
a  comparatively  rare  attribute:  e.g.  if  men  are 
usually  bad,  they  are  comparatively  seldom 
1  Fr.  81,  Heinze. 


158  TOPICS  113a 


good,  so  that  his  mistake  is  even  worse  if  he 
has  declared  them  to  be  good  of  necessity.  The 
same  is  true  also  if  he  has  declared  a  mere  mat¬ 
ter  of  chance  to  happen  of  necessity  or  usually; 
[75]  for  a  chance  event  happens  neither  of  ne¬ 
cessity  nor  usually.  If  the  thing  happens  usual¬ 
ly,  then  even  supposing  his  statement  does  not 
distinguish  whether  he  meant  that  it  happens 
usually  or  that  it  happens  necessarily,  it  is  open 
to  you  to  discuss  it  on  the  assumption  that  he 
meant  that  it  happens  necessarily:  e.g.  if  he  has 
stated  without  any  distinction  that  disinherited 
persons  are  bad,  you  may  assume  in  discussing 
[20]  it  that  he  means  that  they  are  so  necessa¬ 
rily. 

Moreover,  look  and  see  also  if  he  has  stated 
a  thing  to  be  an  accident  of  itself,  taking  it  to 
be  a  different  thing  because  it  has  a  different 
name,  as  Prodicus  used  to  divide  pleasures  into 
joy  and  delight  and  good  cheer:  for  all  these 
are  names  of  the  same  thing,  to  wit,  Pleasure. 
If  then  any  one  says  that  joyfulness  is  an  acci- 
[25]  dental  attribute  of  cheerfulness,  he  would 
be  declaring  it  to  be  an  accidental  attribute  of 


Inasmuch  as  contraries  can  be  conjoined  with 
each  other  in  six  ways,  and  four  of  these 
conjunctions  constitute  a  contrariety,  we  must 
grasp  the  subject  of  contraries,  in  order  that  it 
may  help  us  both  in  demolishing  and  in  estab- 
[jo]  lishing  a  view.  Well  then,  that  the  modes 
of  conjunction  are  six  is  clear:  for  either  (1) 
each  of  the  contrary  verbs  will  be  conjoined  to 
each  of  the  contrary  objects;  and  this  gives  two 
modes:  e.g.  to  do  good  to  friends  and  to  do  evil 
to  enemies,  or  per  contra  to  do  evil  to  friends 
and  to  do  good  to  enemies.  Or  else  (2)  both 
verbs  may  be  attached  to  one  object;  and  this 
[35]  t0°  gives  two  modes,  e.g.  to  do  good  to 
friends  and  to  do  evil  to  friends,  or  to  do  good 
to  enemies  and  to  do  evil  to  enemies.  Or  (3)  a 
single  verb  may  be  attached  to  both  objects: 
and  this  also  gives  two  modes;  e.g.  to  do  good 
to  friends  and  to  do  good  to  enemies,  or  to  do 
evil  to  friends  and  evil  to  enemies. 

113a  The  first  two  then  of  the  aforesaid  con¬ 
junctions  do  not  constitute  any  contrariety;  for 
the  doing  of  good  to  friends  is  not  contrary  to 
the  doing  of  evil  to  enemies:  for  both  courses 
are  desirable  and  belong  to  the  same  disposi¬ 
tion.  Nor  is  the  doing  of  evil  to  friends  contrary 
to  the  doing  of  good  to  enemies:  for  both  of 
[5]  these  are  objectionable  and  belong  to  the 
same  disposition:  and  one  objectionable  thing 


is  not  generally  thought  to  be  the  contrary  of 
another,  unless  the  one  be  an  expression  denot¬ 
ing  an  excess,  and  the  other  an  expression  de¬ 
noting  a  defect:  for  an  excess  is  generally 
thought  to  belong  to  the  class  of  objectionable 
things,  and  likewise  also  a  defect.  But  the  other 
four  all  constitute  a  contrariety.  For  to  do  good 
[/o]  to  friends  is  contrary  to  the  doing  of  evil 
to  friends:  for  it  proceeds  from  the  contrary 
disposition,  and  the  one  is  desirable,  and  the 
other  objectionable.  The  case  is  the  same  also  in 
regard  to  the  other  conjunctions:  for  in  each 
combination  the  one  course  is  desirable,  and 
the  other  objectionable,  and  the  one  belongs  to 
a  reasonable  disposition  and  the  other  to  a  bad. 
Clearly,  then,  from  what  has  been  said,  the 
same  course  has  more  than  one  contrary.  For 
[75]  the  doing  of  good  to  friends  has  as  its 
contrary  both  the  doing  of  good  to  enemies  and 
the  doing  of  evil  to  friends.  Likewise,  if  we  ex¬ 
amine  them  in  the  same  way,  we  shall  find 
that  the  contraries  of  each  of  the  others  also 
are  two  in  number.  Select  therefore  whichever 
of  the  two  contraries  is  useful  in  attacking  the 
thesis. 

[20]  Moreover,  if  the  accident  of  a  thing  have 
a  contrary,  see  whether  it  belongs  to  the  sub¬ 
ject  to  which  the  accident  in  question  has  been 
declared  to  belong:  for  if  the  latter  belongs  the 
former  could  not  belong;  for  it  is  impossible 
that  contrary  predicates  should  belong  at  the 
same  time  to  the  same  thing. 

Or  again,  look  and  see  if  anything  has  been 
said  about  something,  of  such  a  kind  that  if  it 
be  true,  contrary  predicates  must  necessarily 
[25]  belong  to  the  thing:  e.g.  if  he  has  said  that 
the  ‘Ideas’  exist  in  us.  For  then  the  result  will 
be  that  they  are  both  in  motion  and  at  rest,  and 
moreover  that  they  are  objects  both  of  sensa¬ 
tion  and  of  thought.  For  according  to  the  views 
of  those  who  posit  the  existence  of  Ideas,  those 
Ideas  are  at  rest  and  are  objects  of  thought; 
while  if  they  exist  in  us,  it  is  impossible  that 
they  should  be  unmoved:  for  when  we  move, 
it  follows  necessarily  that  all  that  is  in  us  moves 
[jo]  with  us  as  well.  Clearly  also  they  are  ob¬ 
jects  of  sensation,  if  they  exist  in  us:  for  it  is 
through  the  sensation  of  sight  that  we  recog¬ 
nize  the  Form  present  in  each  individual. 

Again,  if  there  be  posited  an  accident  which 
has  a  contrary,  look  and  see  if  that  which  ad¬ 
mits  of  the  accident  will  admit  of  its  contrary 
as  well:  for  the  same  thing  admits  of  contra- 
[35]  ries.  Thus  (e.g.)  if  he  has  asserted  that 
hatred  follows  anger,  hatred  would  in  that  case 
be  in  the  ‘spirited  faculty’:  for  that  is  where 


114a 

113b  anger  is.  You  should  therefore  look  and 
see  if  its  contrary,  to  wit,  friendship,  be  also  in 
the  ‘spirited  faculty’:  for  if  not — if  friendship 
is  in  the  faculty  of  desire — then  hatred  could 
not  follow  anger.  Likewise  also  if  he  has  as¬ 
serted  that  the  faculty  of  desire  is  ignorant. 
[5]  For  if  it  were  capable  of  ignorance,  it 
would  be  capable  of  knowledge  as  well:  and 
this  is  not  generally  held — I  mean  that  the  fac¬ 
ulty  of  desire  is  capable  of  knowledge.  For  pur¬ 
poses,  then,  of  overthrowing  a  view,  as  has 
been  said,  this  rule  should  be  observed:  but 
for  purposes  of  establishing  one,  though  the 
rule  will  not  help  you  to  assert  that  the  accident 
actually  belongs,  it  will  help  you  to  assert  that 
it  may  possibly  belong.  For  having  shown  that 
the  thing  in  question  will  not  admit  of  the  con¬ 
trary  of  the  accident  asserted,  we  shall  have 
[70]  shown  that  the  accident  neither  belongs 
nor  can  possibly  belong;  while  on  the  other 
hand,  if  we  show  that  the  contrary  belongs,  or 
that  the  thing  is  capable  of  the  contrary,  we 
shall  not  indeed  as  yet  have  shown  that  the  ac¬ 
cident  asserted  does  belong  as  well;  our  proof 
will  merely  have  gone  to  this  point,  that  it  is 
possible  for  it  to  belong. 

8 

[75]  Seeing  that  the  modes  of  opposition  are 
four  in  number,  you  should  look  for  arguments 
among  the  contradictories  of  your  terms,  con¬ 
verting  the  order  of  their  sequence,  both  when 
demolishing  and  when  establishing  a  view, 
and  you  should  secure  them  by  means  of  in¬ 
duction — such  arguments  (e.g.)  as  that  ‘If  man 
be  an  animal,  what  is  not  an  animal  is  not  a 
man’:  and  likewise  also  in  other  instances  of 
contradictories.  For  in  those  cases  the  sequence 
is  converse:  for  ‘animal’  follows  upon  ‘man’, 
[20]  but  ‘not-animal’  does  not  follow  upon 
‘not-man’,  but  conversely  ‘not-man’  upon  ‘not- 
animal’.  In  all  cases,  therefore,  a  postulate  of 
this  sort  should  be  made,  (e.g.)  that  ‘If  the 
honourable  is  pleasant,  what  is  not  pleasant  is 
not  honourable,  while  if  the  latter  be  untrue,  so 
is  the  former’.  Likewise,  also,  ‘If  what  is  not 
pleasant  be  not  honourable,  then  what  is  hon¬ 
ourable  is  pleasant’.  Clearly,  then,  the  conver- 
[25]  sion  of  the  sequence  formed  by  contra¬ 
diction  of  the  terms  of  the  thesis  is  a  method 
convertible  for  both  purposes. 

Then  look  also  at  the  case  of  the  contraries 
of  S  and  P  in  the  thesis,  and  see  if  the  contrary 
of  the  one  follows  upon  the  contrary  of  the 
other,  either  directly  or  conversely,  both  when 
you  are  demolishing  and  when  you  are  estab- 


T59 

lishing  a  view:  secure  arguments  of  this  kind 
as  well  by  means  of  induction,  so  far  as  may  be 
[jo]  required.  Now  the  sequence  is  direct  in 
a  case  such  as  that  of  courage  and  cowardice: 
for  upon  the  one  of  them  virtue  follows,  and 
vice  upon  the  other;  and  upon  the  one  it  fol¬ 
lows  that  it  is  desirable,  while  upon  the  other 
it  follows  that  it  is  objectionable.  The  sequence, 
therefore,  in  the  latter  case  also  is  direct;  for 
the  desirable  is  the  contrary  of  the  objection¬ 
able.  Likewise  also  in  other  cases.  The  sequence 
is,  on  the  other  hand,  converse  in  such  a  case 
[35]  as  this:  Health  follows  upon  vigour,  but 
disease  does  not  follow  upon  debility;  rather 
debility  follows  upon  disease.  In  this  case,  then, 
clearly  the  sequence  is  converse.  Converse  se¬ 
ll  4a  quence  is,  however,  rare  in  the  case  of 
contraries;  usually  the  sequence  is  direct.  If, 
therefore,  the  contrary  of  the  one  term  does  not 
follow  upon  the  contrary  of  the  other  either  di¬ 
rectly  or  conversely,  clearly  neither  does  the 
one  term  follow  upon  the  other  in  the  state- 
[5]  ment  made:  whereas  if  the  one  followed 
the  other  in  the  case  of  the  contraries,  it  must 
of  necessity  do  so  as  well  in  the  original  state¬ 
ment. 

You  should  look  also  into  cases  of  the  priva¬ 
tion  or  presence  of  a  state  in  like  manner  to  the 
case  of  contraries.  Only,  in  the  case  of  such  pri¬ 
vations  the  converse  sequence  does  not  occur: 
the  sequence  is  always  bound  to  be  direct:  e.g. 
[/o]  as  sensation  follows  sight,  while  absence 
of  sensation  follows  blindness.  For  the  opposi¬ 
tion  of  sensation  to  absence  of  sensation  is  an 
opposition  of  the  presence  to  the  privation  of  a 
state:  for  the  one  of  them  is  a  state,  and  the 
other  the  privation  of  it. 

The  case  of  relative  terms  should  also  be 
studied  in  like  manner  to  that  of  a  state  and  its 
privation:  for  the  sequence  of  these  as  well  is 
[75]  direct;  e.g.  if  3/1  is  a  multiple,  then  1/3 
is  a  fraction:  for  3/1  is  relative  to  1/3,  and  so 
is  a  multiple  to  a  fraction.  Again,  if  knowl¬ 
edge  be  a  conceiving,  then  also  the  object  of 
knowledge  is  an  object  of  conception;  and  if 
sight  be  a  sensation,  then  also  the  object  of 
[20]  sight  is  an  object  of  sensation.  An  objec¬ 
tion  may  be  made  that  there  is  no  necessity  for 
the  sequence  to  take  place,  in  the  case  of  rela¬ 
tive  terms,  in  the  way  described:  for  the  object 
of  sensation  is  an  object  of  knowledge,  whereas 
sensation  is  not  knowledge.  The  objection  is, 
however,  not  generally  received  as  really  true; 
for  many  people  deny  that  there  is  knowledge 
of  objects  of  sensation.  Moreover,  the  principle 
stated  is  just  as  useful  for  the  contrary  pur- 


BOOK  II,  CHAPTERS  6-8 


i6o 

fose,  e.g.  to  show  that  the  object  of  sensation 
25]  is  not  an  object  of  knowledge,  on  the 
ground  that  neither  is  sensation  knowledge. 

9 

Again  look  at  the  case  of  the  co-ordinates 
and  inflected  forms  of  the  terms  in  the  thesis, 
both  in  demolishing  and  in  establishing  it.  By 
‘co-ordinates’  are  meant  terms  such  as  the  fol¬ 
lowing:  ‘Just  deeds’  and  the  ‘just  man’  are  co¬ 
ordinates  of  ‘justice’,  and  ‘courageous  deeds’ 
and  the  ‘courageous  man’  are  co-ordinates  of 
‘courage’.  Likewise  also  things  that  tend  to 
produce  and  to  preserve  anything  are  called 
[30]  co-ordinates  of  that  which  they  tend  to 
produce  and  to  preserve,  as  e.g.  ‘healthy  hab¬ 
its’  are  co-ordinates  of  ‘health’  and  a  ‘vigorous 
constitutional’  of  a  ‘vigorous  constitution’ — 
and  so  forth  also  in  other  cases.  ‘Co-ordinate’, 
then,  usually  describes  cases  such  as  these, 
whereas  ‘inflected  forms’  are  such  as  the  fol¬ 
lowing:  ‘justly’,  ‘courageously’,  ‘healthily’,  and 
such  as  are  formed  in  this  way.  It  is  usually 
[ss\  held  that  words  when  used  in  their  in¬ 
flected  forms  as  well  are  co-ordinates,  as  (e.g.) 
‘justly’  in  relation  to  justice,  and  ‘courageous¬ 
ly’  to  courage;  and  then  ‘co-ordinate’  describes 
all  the  members  of  the  same  kindred  series, 
e.g.  ‘justice’,  ‘just’,  of  a  man  or  an  act,  ‘justly’. 
Clearly,  then,  when  any  one  member,  what¬ 
ever  its  kind,  of  the  same  kindred  series  is 
114b  shown  to  be  good  or  praiseworthy,  then 
all  the  rest  as  well  come  to  be  shown  to  be  so: 
e.g.  if  ‘justice’  be  something  praiseworthy,  then 
so  will  ‘just’,  of  a  man  or  thing,  and  ‘justly’ 
connote  something  praiseworthy.  Then  ‘justly’ 
will  be  rendered  also  ‘praiseworthily’,  derived 
[5]  by  the  same  inflexion  from  ‘the  praise¬ 
worthy’  whereby  ‘justly’  is  derived  from  ‘jus¬ 
tice’. 

Look  not  only  in  the  case  of  the  subject  men¬ 
tioned,  but  also  in  the  case  of  its  contrary,  for 
the  contrary  predicate:  e.g.  argue  that  good  is 
not  necessarily  pleasant;  for  neither  is  evil 
painful:  or  that,  if  the  latter  be  the  case,  so  is 
the  former.  Also,  if  justice  be  knowledge,  then 
injustice  is  ignorance:  and  if  ‘justly’  means 
[/o]  ‘knowingly’  and  ‘skilfully’,  then  ‘unjust¬ 
ly’  means  ‘ignorantly’  and  ‘unskilfully’:  where¬ 
as  if  the  latter  be  not  true,  neither  is  the  former, 
as  in  the  instance  given  just  now:  for  ‘unjustly’ 
is  more  likely  to  seem  equivalent  to  ‘skilfully’ 
than  to  ‘unskilfully’.  This  commonplace  rule 
has  been  stated  before  in  dealing  with  the  se¬ 
quence  of  contraries;1  for  all  we  are  claiming 
1  ii3b  27-114®  6. 


115® 

[75]  now  is  that  the  contrary  of  P  shall  follow 
the  contrary  of  S. 

Moreover,  look  at  the  modes  of  generation 
and  destruction  of  a  thing,  and  at  the  things 
which  tend  to  produce  or  to  destroy  it,  both  in 
demolishing  and  in  establishing  a  view.  For 
those  things  whose  modes  of  generation  rank 
among  good  things,  are  themselves  also  good; 
and  if  they  themselves  be  good,  so  also  are 
their  modes  of  generation.  If,  on  the  other 
hand,  their  modes  of  generation  be  evil,  then 
they  themselves  also  are  evil.  In  regard  to 
modes  of  destruction  the  converse  is  true:  for 
[20]  if  the  modes  of  destruction  rank  as  good 
things,  then  they  themselves  rank  as  evil 
things;  whereas  if  the  modes  of  destruction 
count  as  evil,  they  themselves  count  as  good. 
The  same  argument  applies  also  to  things  tend¬ 
ing  to  produce  and  destroy:  for  things  whose 
productive  causes  are  good,  themselves  also 
rank  as  good;  whereas  if  causes  destructive  of 
them  are  good,  they  themselves  rank  as  evil. 

10 

[25]  Again,  look  at  things  which  are  like  the 
subject  in  question,  and  see  if  they  are  in  like 
case;  e.g.  if  one  branch  of  knowledge  has  more 
than  one  object,  so  also  will  one  opinion;  and 
if  to  possess  sight  be  to  see,  then  also  to  possess 
hearing  will  be  to  hear.  Likewise  also  in  the 
case  of  other  things,  both  those  which  are  and 
those  which  are  generally  held  to  be  like.  The 
rule  in  question  is  useful  for  both  purposes; 
[jo]  for  if  it  be  as  stated  in  the  case  of  some 
one  like  thing,  it  is  so  with  the  other  like  things 
as  well,  whereas  if  it  be  not  so  in  the  case  of 
some  one  of  them,  neither  is  it  so  in  the  case  of 
the  others.  Look  and  see  also  whether  the  cases 
are  alike  as  regards  a  single  thing  and  a  num¬ 
ber  of  things:  for  sometimes  there  is  a  discrep¬ 
ancy.  Thus,  if  to  ‘know’  a  thing  be  to  ‘think  of’ 
it,  then  also  to  ‘know  many  things’  is  to  ‘be 
thinking  of  many  things’;  whereas  this  is  not 
true;  for  it  is  possible  to  know  many  things 
but  not  to  be  thinking  of  them.  If,  then,  the 
[  J5]  latter  proposition  be  not  true,  neither  was 
the  former  that  dealt  with  a  single  thing,  viz. 
that  to  ‘know’  a  thing  is  to  ‘think  of  it. 

Moreover,  argue  from  greater  and  less  de¬ 
grees.  In  regard  to  greater  degrees  there  are 
four  commonplace  rules.  One  is:  See  whether 
a  greater  degree  of  the  predicate  follows  a 
greater  degree  of  the  subject:  e.g.  if  pleasure  be 
good,  see  whether  also  a  greater  pleasure  be  a 
greater  good:  and  if  to  do  a  wrong  be  evil,  see 
115®  whether  also  to  do  a  greater  wrong  is  a 


TOPICS 


115b 

greater  evil.  Now  this  rule  is  of  use  for  both 
purposes:  for  if  an  increase  of  the  accident  fol¬ 
lows  an  increase  of  the  subject,  as  we  have 
said,  clearly  the  accident  belongs;  while  if  it 
[5]  does  not  follow,  the  accident  does  not  be¬ 
long.  You  should  establish  this  by  induction. 
Another  rule  is:  If  one  predicate  be  attributed 
to  two  subjects;  then  supposing  it  does  not  be¬ 
long  to  the  subject  to  which  it  is  the  more  like¬ 
ly  to  belong,  neither  does  it  belong  where  it  is 
less  likely  to  belong;  while  if  it  does  belong 
where  it  is  less  likely  to  belong,  then  it  belongs 
as  well  where  it  is  more  likely.  Again:  If  two 
predicates  be  attributed  to  one  subject,  then  if 
the  one  which  is  more  generally  thought  to  be¬ 
long  does  not  belong,  neither  does  the  one  that 
[70]  is  less  generally  thought  to  belong;  or,  if 
the  one  that  is  less  generally  thought  to  belong 
does  belong,  so  also  does  the  other.  Moreover: 
If  two  predicates  be  attributed  to  two  subjects, 
then  if  the  one  which  is  more  usually  thought 
to  belong  to  the  one  subject  does  not  belong, 
neither  does  the  remaining  predicate  belong  to 
the  remaining  subject;  or,  if  the  one  which  is 
less  usually  thought  to  belong  to  the  one  sub¬ 
ject  does  belong,  so  too  does  the  remaining 

redicate  to  the  remaining  subject. 

75]  Moreover,  you  can  argue  from  the  fact 
that  an  attribute  belongs,  or  is  generally  sup¬ 
posed  to  belong,  in  a  like  degree,  in  three  ways, 
viz.  those  described  in  the  last  three  rules  given 
in  regard  to  a  greater  degree.1  For  supposing 
that  one  predicate  belongs,  or  is  supposed  to 
belong,  to  two  subjects  in  a  like  degree,  then 
if  it  does  not  belong  to  the  one,  neither  does  it 
belong  to  the  other;  while  if  it  belongs  to  the 
one,  it  belongs  to  the  remaining  one  as  well. 
Or,  supposing  two  predicates  to  belong  in  a 
[20]  like  degree  to  the  same  subject,  then,  if 
the  one  does  not  belong,  neither  does  the  re¬ 
maining  one;  while  if  the  one  does  belong,  the 
remaining  one  belongs  as  well.  The  case  is  the 
same  also  if  two  predicates  belong  in  a  like  de¬ 
gree  to  two  subjects;  for  if  the  one  predicate 
does  not  belong  to  the  one  subject,  neither  does 
the  remaining  predicate  belong  to  the  remain¬ 
ing  subject,  while  if  the  one  predicate  does  be¬ 
long  to  the  one  subject,  the  remaining  predi¬ 
cate  belongs  to  the  remaining  subject  as  well. 

11 

[25]  You  can  argue,  then,  from  greater  or  less 
or  like  degrees  of  truth  in  the  aforesaid  num¬ 
ber  of  ways.  Moreover,  you  should  argue  from 
the  addition  of  one  thing  to  another.  If  the  ad- 

1 11.  6-14. 


161 

dition  of  one  thing  to  another  makes  that  other 
good  or  white,  whereas  formerly  it  was  not 
white  or  good,  then  the  thing  added  will  be 
white  or  good — it  will  possess  the  character  it 
imparts  to  the  whole  as  well.  Moreover,  if  an 
[jo]  addition  of  something  to  a  given  object 
intensifies  the  character  which  it  had  as  given, 
then  the  thing  added  will  itself  as  well  be  of 
that  character.  Likewise,  also,  in  the  case  of 
other  attributes.  The  rule  is  not  applicable  in 
all  cases,  but  only  in  those  in  which  the  excess 
described  as  an  ‘increased  intensity'  is  found 
to  take  place.  The  above  rule  is,  however,  not 
convertible  for  overthrowing  a  view.  For  if  the 
thing  added  does  not  make  the  other  good,  it 
[55]  is  not  thereby  made  clear  whether  in  itself 
it  may  not  be  good:  for  the  addition  of  good 
115b  to  evil  does  not  necessarily  make  the 
whole  good,  any  more  than  the  addition  of 
white  to  black  makes  the  whole  white. 

Again,  any  predicate  of  which  we  can  speak 
of  greater  or  less  degrees  belongs  also  abso¬ 
lutely:  for  greater  or  less  degrees  of  good  or  of 
white  will  not  be  attributed  to  what  is  not  good 
[5]  or  white:  for  a  bad  thing  will  never  be 
said  to  have  a  greater  or  less  degree  of  good¬ 
ness  than  another,  but  always  of  badness.  This 
rule  is  not  convertible,  either,  for  the  purpose 
of  overthrowing  a  predication:  for  several 
predicates  of  which  we  cannot  speak  of  a 
greater  degree  belong  absolutely:  for  the  term 
‘man’  is  not  attributed  in  greater  and  less  de- 
[/o]  grees,  but  a  man  is  a  man  for  all  that. 

You  should  examine  in  the  same  way  predi¬ 
cates  attributed  in  a  given  respect,  and  at  a 
given  time  and  place:  for  if  the  predicate  be 
possible  in  some  respect,  it  is  possible  also  ab¬ 
solutely.  Likewise,  also,  is  what  is  predicated 
at  a  given  time  or  place:  for  what  is  absolutely 
impossible  is  not  possible  either  in  any  respect 
or  at  any  place  or  time.  An  objection  may  be 
[75]  raised  that  in  a  given  respect  people  may 
be  good  by  nature,  e.g.  they  may  be  generous 
or  temperately  inclined,  while  absolutely  they 
are  not  good  by  nature,  because  no  one  is  pru¬ 
dent  by  nature.  Likewise,  also,  it  is  possible 
for  a  destructible  thing  to  escape  destruction 
at  a  given  time,  whereas  it  is  not  possible  for  it 
to  escape  absolutely.  In  the  same  way  also  it  is 
a  good  thing  at  certain  places  to  follow  such 
[20]  and  such  a  diet,  e.g.  in  infected  areas, 
though  it  is  not  a  good  thing  absolutely.  More¬ 
over,  in  certain  places  it  is  possible  to  live 
singly  and  alone,  but  absolutely  it  is  not  pos¬ 
sible  to  exist  singly  and  alone.  In  the  same  way 
also  it  is  in  certain  places  honourable  to  sac- 


BOOK  II,  CHAPTERS  8-11 


1 62 

rifice  one’s  father,  e.g.  among  the  Triballi, 
whereas,  absolutely,  it  is  not  honourable.  Or 
possibly  this  may  indicate  a  relativity  not  to 
laces  but  to  persons:  for  it  is  all  the  same 
25]  wherever  they  may  be:  for  everywhere  it 
will  be  held  honourable  among  the  Triballi 
themselves,  just  because  they  are  Triballi. 
Again,  at  certain  times  it  is  a  good  thing  to 
take  medicines,  e.g.  when  one  is  ill,  but  it  is 
not  so  absolutely.  Or  possibly  this  again  may 
indicate  a  relativity  not  to  a  certain  time,  but 
to  a  certain  state  of  health:  for  it  is  all  the 
same  whenever  it  occurs,  if  only  one  be  in  that 


116b 

state.  A  thing  is  ‘absolutely’  so  which  without 
[50]  any  addition  you  are  prepared  to  say  is 
honourable  or  the  contrary.  Thus  (e.g.)  you 
will  deny  that  to  sacrifice  one’s  father  is  hon¬ 
ourable:  it  is  honourable  only  to  certain  per¬ 
sons:  it  is  not  therefore  honourable  absolutely. 
On  the  other  hand,  to  honour  the  gods  you 
will  declare  to  be  honourable  without  adding 
anything,  because  that  is  honourable  abso¬ 
lutely.  So  that  whatever  without  any  addition 
is  generally  accounted  to  be  honourable  or  dis- 
[55]  honourable  or  anything  else  of  that  kind, 
will  be  said  to  be  so  ‘absolutely’. 


TOPICS 


BOOK  III 


1 

11 6a  The  question  which  is  the  more  desir¬ 
able,  or  the  better,  of  two  or  more  things, 
should  be  examined  upon  the  following  lines: 
only  first  of  all  it  must  be  clearly  laid  down 
that  the  inquiry  we  are  making  concerns  not 
[5]  things  that  are  widely  divergent  and  that 
exhibit  great  differences  from  one  another  (for 
nobody  raises  any  doubt  whether  happiness  or 
wealth  is  more  desirable),  but  things  that  are 
nearly  related  and  about  which  we  commonly 
discuss  for  which  of  the  two  we  ought  rather 
to  vote,  because  we  do  not  see  any  advantage 
on  either  side  as  compared  with  the  other, 
[/o]  Clearly,  then,  in  such  cases  if  we  can  show 
a  single  advantage,  or  more  than  one,  our 
judgement  will  record  our  assent  that  which¬ 
ever  side  happens  to  have  the  advantage  is  the 
more  desirable. 

First,  then,  that  which  is  more  lasting  or  se¬ 
cure  is  more  desirable  than  that  which  is  less 
so:  and  so  is  that  which  is  more  likely  to  be 
chosen  by  the  prudent  or  by  the  good  man  or 
[75]  by  the  right  law,  or  by  men  who  are  good 
in  any  particular  line,  when  they  make  their 
choice  as  such,  or  by  the  experts  in  regard  to 
any  particular  class  of  things;  i.e.  either  what¬ 
ever  most  of  them  or  what  all  of  them  would 
choose;  e.g.  in  medicine  or  in  carpentry  those 
things  are  more  desirable  which  most,  or  all, 
doctors  would  choose;  or,  in  general,  whatever 
most  men  or  all  men  or  all  things  would 
choose,  e.g.  the  good:  for  everything  aims  at 
[20]  the  good.  You  should  direct  the  argument 
you  intend  to  employ  to  whatever  purpose  you 
require.  Of  what  is  ‘better’  or  ‘more  desirable’ 
the  absolute  standard  is  the  verdict  of  the  bet¬ 
ter  science,  though  relatively  to  a  given  indi¬ 


vidual  the  standard  may  be  his  own  particular 
science. 

In  the  second  place,  that  which  is  known  as 
‘an  x’  is  more  desirable  than  that  which  does 
not  come  within  the  genus  ‘x’ — e.g.  justice 
than  a  just  man;  for  the  former  falls  within  the 
genus  ‘good’,  whereas  the  other  does  not,  and 
[25]  the  former  is  called  ‘a  good’,  whereas  the 
latter  is  not:  for  nothing  which  does  not  hap¬ 
pen  to  belong  to  the  genus  in  question  is  called 
by  the  generic  name;  e.g.  a  ‘white  man’  is  not 
‘a  colour’.  Likewise  also  in  other  cases. 

Also,  that  which  is  desired  for  itself  is  more 
desirable  than  that  which  is  desired  for  some¬ 
thing  else;  e.g.  health  is  more  desirable  than 
[50]  gymnastics:  for  the  former  is  desired  for 
itself,  the  latter  for  something  else.  Also,  that 
which  is  desirable  in  itself  is  more  desirable 
than  what  is  desirable  per  accidens;  e.g.  justice 
in  our  friends  than  justice  in  our  enemies:  for 
the  former  is  desirable  in  itself,  the  latter  per 
accidens :  for  we  desire  that  our  enemies  should 
be  just  per  accidens,  in  order  that  they  may  do 
us  no  harm.  This  last  principle  is  the  same  as 
[35]  the  one  that  precedes  it,  with,  however,  a 
different  turn  of  expression.  For  we  desire  jus¬ 
tice  in  our  friends  for  itself,  even  though  it  will 
make  no  difference  to  us,  and  even  though  they 
be  in  India;  whereas  in  our  enemies  we  desire 
it  for  something  else,  in  order  that  they  may  do 
us  no  harm. 

116b  Also,  that  which  is  in  itself  the  cause  of 
good  is  more  desirable  than  what  is  so  per 
accidens,  e.g.  virtue  than  luck  (for  the  former 
is  in  itself,  and  the  latter  per  accidens,  the 
cause  of  good  things),  and  so  in  other  cases  of 
the  same  kind.  Likewise  also  in  the  case  of  the 
[5]  contrary;  for  what  is  in  itself  the  cause  of 
evil  is  more  objectionable  than  what  is  so  per 


117s 


BOOK  II,  CHAPTER  11- 

accidens,  e.g.  vice  and  chance:  for  -the  one  is 
bad  in  itself,  whereas  chance  is  so  per  accidens. 
Also,  what  is  good  absolutely  is  more  desir¬ 
able  than  what  is  good  for  a  particular  person, 
e.g.  recovery  of  health  than  a  surgical  opera¬ 
tion;  for  the  former  is  good  absolutely,  the  lat- 
[/o]  ter  only  for  a  particular  person,  viz.  the 
man  who  needs  an  operation.  So  too  what  is 
good  by  nature  is  more  desirable  than  the  good 
that  is  not  so  by  nature,  e.g.  justice  than  the 
just  man;  for  the  one  is  good  by  nature,  where¬ 
as  in  the  other  case  the  goodness  is  acquired. 
Also  the  attribute  is  more  desirable  which  be¬ 
longs  to  the  better  and  more  honourable  sub¬ 
ject,  e.g.  to  a  god  rather  than  to  a  man,  and  to 
the  soul  rather  than  to  the  body.  So  too  the 
property  of  the  better  thing  is  better  than  the 
roperty  of  the  worse;  e.g.  the  property  of  God 
/5J  than  the  property  of  man:  for  whereas  in 
respect  of  what  is  common  in  both  of  them 
they  do  not  differ  at  all  from  each  other,  in 
respect  of  their  properties  the  one  surpasses 
the  other.  Also  that  is  better  which  is  inherent 
in  things  better  or  prior  or  more  honourable: 
thus  (e.g.)  health  is  better  than  strength  and 
beauty:  for  the  former  is  inherent  in  the  moist 
and  the  dry,  and  the  hot  and  the  cold,  in  fact 
in  all  the  primary  constituents  of  an  animal, 
whereas  the  others  are  inherent  in  what  is  sec- 
[20]  ondary,  strength  being  a  feature  of  the 
sinews  and  bones,  while  beauty  is  generally 
supposed  to  consist  in  a  certain  symmetry  of 
the  limbs.  Also  the  end  is  generally  supposed 
to  be  more  desirable  than  the  means,  and  of 
two  means,  that  which  lies  nearer  the  end.  In 
general,  too,  a  means  directed  towards  the  end 
of  life  is  more  desirable  than  a  means  to  any- 
[25]  thing  else,  e.g.  that  which  contributes  to 
happiness  than  that  which  contributes  to  pru¬ 
dence.  Also  the  competent  is  more  desirable 
than  the  incompetent.  Moreover,  of  two  pro¬ 
ductive  agents  that  one  is  more  desirable  whose 
end  is  better;  while  between  a  productive 
agent  and  an  end  we  can  decide  by  a  propor¬ 
tional  sum  whenever  the  excess  of  the  one  end 
over  the  other  is  greater  than  that  of  the  latter 
over  its  own  productive  means:  e.g.  supposing 
the  excess  of  happiness  over  health  to  be  greater 
[50]  than  that  of  health  over  what  produces 
health,  then  what  produces  happiness  is  better 
than  health.  For  what  produces  happiness  ex¬ 
ceeds  what  produces  health  just  as  much  as 
happiness  exceeds  health.  But  health  exceeds 
what  produces  health  by  a  smaller  amount; 
ergo ,  the  excess  of  what  produces  happiness 
over  what  produces  health  is  greater  than  that 


BOOK  III,  CHAPTERS  1-2  163 

of  health  over  what  produces  health.  Clearly, 
[35]  therefore,  what  produces  happiness  is 
more  desirable  than  health:  for  it  exceeds  the 
same  standard  by  a  greater  amount. 

Moreover,  what  is  in  itself  nobler  and  more 
precious  and  praiseworthy  is  more  desirable 
than  what  is  less  so,  e.g.  friendship  than  wealth, 
and  justice  than  strength.  For  the  former  be¬ 
long  in  themselves  to  the  class  of  things  pre- 
117a  cious  and  praiseworthy,  while  the  latter 
do  so  not  in  themselves  but  for  something  else: 
for  no  one  prizes  wealth  for  itself  but  always 
for  something  else,  whereas  we  prize  friend¬ 
ship  for  itself,  even  though  nothing  else  is 
likely  to  come  to  us  from  it. 

2 

[5]  Moreover,  whenever  two  things  are  very 
much  like  one  another,  and  we  cannot  see  any 
superiority  in  the  one  over  the  other  of  them, 
we  should  look  at  them  from  the  standpoint 
of  their  consequences.  For  the  one  which  is 
followed  by  the  greater  good  is  the  more  de¬ 
sirable:  or,  if  the  consequences  be  evil,  that  is 
more  desirable  which  is  followed  by  the  less 
evil.  For  though  both  may  be  desirable,  yet 
[/o]  there  may  possibly  be  some  unpleasant 
consequence  involved  to  turn  the  scale.  Our 
survey  from  the  point  of  view  of  consequences 
lies  in  two  directions,  for  there  are  prior  con¬ 
sequences  and  later  consequences:  e.g.  if  a  man 
learns,  it  follows  that  he  was  ignorant  before 
and  knows  afterwards.  As  a  rule,  the  later  con¬ 
sequence  is  the  better  to  consider.  You  should 
take,  therefore,  whichever  of  the  consequences 
[75]  suits  your  purpose. 

Moreover,  a  greater  number  of  good  things 
is  more  desirable  than  a  smaller,  either  abso¬ 
lutely  or  when  the  one  is  included  in  the 
other,  viz.  the  smaller  number  in  the  greater. 
An  objection  may  be  raised  suppose  in  some 
particular  case  the  one  is  valued  for  the  sake  of 
the  other;  for  then  the  two  together  are  not 
more  desirable  than  the  one;  e.g.  recovery  of 
[20]  health  and  health,  than  health  alone,  inas¬ 
much  as  we  desire  recovery  of  health  for  the 
sake  of  health.  Also  it  is  quite  possible  for 
what  is  not  good,  together  with  what  is,  to  be 
more  desirable  than  a  greater  number  of  good 
things,  e.g.  the  combination  of  happiness  and 
something  else  which  is  not  good  may  be  more 
desirable  than  the  combination  of  justice  and 
courage.  Also,  the  same  things  are  more  valu¬ 
able  if  accompanied  than  if  unaccompanied  by 
pleasure,  and  likewise'  when  free  from  pain 
[25]  than  when  attended  with  pain. 


1 64  TOPICS  118* 


Also,  everything  is  more  desirable  at  the  sea¬ 
son  when  it  is  of  greater  consequence;  e.g. 
freedom  from  pain  in  old  age  more  than  in 
youth:  for  it  is  of  greater  consequence  in  old 
age.  On  the  same  principle  also,  prudence  is 
more  desirable  in  old  age;  for  no  man  chooses 
[jo]  the  young  to  guide  him,  because  he  does 
not  expect  them  to  be  prudent.  With  courage, 
the  converse  is  the  case,  for  it  is  in  youth  that 
the  active  exercise  of  courage  is  more  impera¬ 
tively  required.  Likewise  also  with  temper¬ 
ance;  for  the  young  are  more  troubled  by  their 

fassions  than  are  their  elders. 

?5]  Also,  that  is  more  desirable  which  is  more 
useful  at  every  season  or  at  most  seasons,  e.g. 
justice  and  temperance  rather  than  courage: 
for  they  are  always  useful,  while  courage  is 
only  useful  at  times.  Also,  that  one  of  two 
things  which  if  all  possess,  we  do  not  need  the 
other  thing,  is  more  desirable  than  that  which 
all  may  possess  and  still  we  want  the  other  one 
as  well.  Take  the  case  of  justice  and  courage; 
if  everybody  were  just,  there  would  be  no  use 
11 7b  for  courage,  whereas  all  might  be  cou¬ 
rageous,  and  still  justice  would  be  of  use. 

Moreover,  judge  by  the  destructions  and 
losses  and  generations  and  acquisitions  and 
contraries  of  things:  for  things  whose  destruc- 
[5]  tion  is  more  objectionable  are  themselves 
more  desirable.  Likewise  also  with  the  losses 
and  contraries  of  things;  for  a  thing  whose 
loss  or  whose  contrary  is  more  objectionable 
is  itself  more  desirable.  With  the  generations  or 
acquisitions  of  things  the  opposite  is  the  case: 
for  things  whose  acquisition  or  generation  is 
more  desirable  are  themselves  also  desirable, 
[/o]  Another  commonplace  rule  is  that  what 
is  nearer  to  the  good  is  better  and  more  desir¬ 
able,  i.e.  what  more  nearly  resembles  the  good: 
thus  justice  is  better  than  a  just  man.  Also,  that 
which  is  more  like  than  another  thing  to  some¬ 
thing  better  than  itself,  as  e.g.  some  say  that 
Ajax  was  a  better  man  than  Odysseus  because 
he  was  more  like  Achilles.  An  objection  may 
be  raised  to  this  that  it  is  not  true:  for  it  is 
uite  possible  that  Ajax  did  not  resemble 
75]  Achilles  more  nearly  than  Odysseus  in 
the  points  which  made  Achilles  the  best  of 
them,  and  that  Odysseus  was  a  good  man, 
though  unlike  Achilles.  Look  also  to  see  wheth¬ 
er  the  resemblance  be  that  of  a  caricature,  like 
the  resemblance  of  a  monkey  to  a  man,  whereas 
a  horse  bears  none:  for  the  monkey  is  not  the 
more  handsome  creature,  despite  its  nearer  re¬ 
semblance  to  a  man.  Again,  in  the  case  of  two 
[20]  things,  if  one  is  more  like  the  better 


thing  while  another  is  more  like  the  worse, 
then  that  is  likely  to  be  better  which  is  more 
like  the  better.  This  too,  however,  admits  of  an 
objection:  for  quite  possibly  the  one  only 
slightly  resembles  the  better,  while  the  other 
strongly  resembles  the  worse,  e.g.  supposing 
the  resemblance  of  Ajax  to  Achilles  to  be 
slight,  while  that  of  Odysseus  to  Nestor  is 
[25]  strong.  Also  it  may  be  that  the  one  which 
is  like  the  better  type  shows  a  degrading  like¬ 
ness,  whereas  the  one  which  is  like  the  worse 
type  improves  upon  it:  witness  the  likeness  of 
a  horse  to  a  donkey,  and  that  of  a  monkey  to 
a  man. 

Another  rule  is  that  the  more  conspicuous 
good  is  more  desirable  than  the  less  con¬ 
spicuous,  and  the  more  difficult  than  the  easier: 
for  we  appreciate  better  the  possession  of  things 
[30]  that  cannot  be  easily  acquired.  Also  the 
more  personal  possession  is  more  desirable 
than  the  more  widely  shared.  Also,  that  which 
is  more  free  from  connexion  with  evil:  for 
what  is  not  attended  by  any  unpleasantness  is 
more  desirable  than  what  is  so  attended. 

Moreover,  if  A  be  without  qualification  bet¬ 
ter  than  B,  then  also  the  best  of  the  members 
of  A  is  better  than  the  best  of  the  members  of 
B;  e.g.  if  Man  be  better  than  Horse,  then  also 
[^5]  the  best  man  is  better  than  the  best  horse. 
Also,  if  the  best  in  A  be  better  than  the  best  in 
B,  then  also  A  is  better  than  B  without  qualifi¬ 
cation;  e.g.  if  the  best  man  be  better  than  the 
best  horse,  then  also  Man  is  better  than  Horse 
without  qualification. 

118*  Moreover,  things  which  our  friends  can 
share  are  more  desirable  than  those  they  can¬ 
not.  Also,  things  which  we  like  rather  to  do  to 
our  friend  are  more  desirable  than  those  we 
like  to  do  to  the  man  in  the  street,  e.g.  just 
dealing  and  the  doing  of  good  rather  than  the 
[5]  semblance  of  them:  for  we  would  rather 
really  do  good  to  our  friends  than  seem  to  do 
so,  whereas  towards  the  man  in  the  street  the 
converse  is  the  case. 

Also,  superfluities  are  better  than  necessities, 
and  are  sometimes  more  desirable  as  well:  for 
the  good  life  is  better  than  mere  life,  and  good 
life  is  a  superfluity,  whereas  mere  life  itself  is  a 
necessity.  Sometimes,  though,  what  is  better  is 
not  also  more  desirable:  for  there  is  no  neces- 
[/o]  sity  that  because  it  is  better  it  should  also 
be  more  desirable:  at  least  to  be  a  philosopher 
is  better  than  to  make  money,  but  it  is  not 
more  desirable  for  a  man  who  lacks  the  neces¬ 
sities  of  life.  The  expression  ‘superfluity’  ap¬ 
plies  whenever  a  man  possesses  the  necessities 


118b  BOOK  III,  CHAPTERS  2-3  165 


of  life  and  sets  to  work  to  secure  as  well  other 
noble  acquisitions.  Roughly  speaking,  perhaps, 
[75]  necessities  are  more  desirable,  while  su¬ 
perfluities  are  better. 

Also,  what  cannot  be  got  from  another  is 
more  desirable  than  what  can  be  got  from  an¬ 
other  as  well,  as  (e.g.)  is  the  case  of  justice 
compared  with  courage.  Also,  A  is  more  de¬ 
sirable  if  A  is  desirable  without  B,  but  not  B 
without  A:  power  (e.g.)  is  not  desirable  with¬ 
out  prudence,  but  prudence  is  desirable  with- 
[20J  out  power.  Also,  if  of  two  things  we  re¬ 
pudiate  the  one  in  order  to  be  thought  to  pos¬ 
sess  the  other,  then  that  one  is  more  desirable 
which  we  wish  to  be  thought  to  possess;  thus 
(e.g.)  we  repudiate  the  love  of  hard  work  in 
order  that  people  may  think  us  geniuses. 

Moreover,  that  is  more  desirable  in  whose 
[25]  absence  it  is  less  blameworthy  for  people 
to  be  vexed;  and  that  is  more  desirable  in 
whose  absence  it  is  more  blameworthy  for  a 
man  not  to  be  vexed. 

3 

Moreover,  of  things  that  belong  to  the  same 
species  one  which  possesses  the  peculiar  virtue 
of  the  species  is  more  desirable  than  one  which 
does  not.  If  both  possess  it,  then  the  one  which 
possesses  it  in  a  greater  degree  is  more  desir¬ 
able. 

Moreover,  if  one  thing  makes  good  whatever 
[jo]  it  touches,  while  another  does  not,  the 
former  is  more  desirable,  just  as  also  what 
makes  things  warm  is  warmer  than  what  does 
not.  If  both  do  so,  then  that  one  is  more  desir¬ 
able  which  does  so  in  a  greater  degree,  or  if  it 
render  good  the  better  and  more  important 
object — if  (e.g.),  the  one  makes  good  the  soul, 
and  the  other  the  body. 

Moreover,  judge  things  by  their  inflexions 
[55]  and  uses  and  actions  and  works,  and 
judge  these  by  them:  for  they  go  with  each 
other:  e.g.  if  ‘justly’  means  something  more 
desirable  than  ‘courageously’,  then  also  justice 
means  something  more  desirable  than  courage; 
and  if  justice  be  more  desirable  than  courage, 
then  also  ‘justly’  means  something  more  de¬ 
sirable  than  ‘courageously’.  Similarly  also  in 
the  other  cases. 

118b  Moreover,  if  one  thing  exceeds  while 
the  other  falls  short  of  the  same  standard  of 
good,  the  one  which  exceeds  is  the  more  de¬ 
sirable;  or  if  the  one  exceeds  an  even  higher 
standard.  Nay  more,  if  there  be  two  things 
both  preferable  to  something,  the  one  which  is 
more  highly  preferable  to  it  is  more  desirable 


than  the  less  highly  preferable.  Moreover, 
[5]  when  the  excess  of  a  thing  is  more  desir¬ 
able  than  the  excess  of  something  else,  that 
thing  is  itself  also  more  desirable  than  the 
other,  as  (e.g.)  friendship  than  money:  for  an 
excess  of  friendship  is  more  desirable  than  an 
excess  of  money.  So  also  that  of  which  a  man 
would  rather  that  it  were  his  by  his  own  doing 
is  more  desirable  than  what  he  would  rather 
get  by  another’s  doing,  e.g.  friends  than  money, 
[/o]  Moreover,  judge  by  means  of  an  addition, 
and  see  if  the  addition  of  A  to  the  same  thing 
as  B  makes  the  whole  more  desirable  than  does 
the  addition  of  B.  You  must,  however,  beware 
of  adducing  a  case  in  which  the  common 
term  uses,  or  in  some  other  way  helps  the  case 
of,  one  of  the  things  added  to  it,  but  not  the 
other,  as  (e.g.)  if  you  took  a  saw  and  a  sickle 
in  combination  with  the  art  of  carpentry:  for 
[  75]  in  the  combination  the  saw  is  a  more  de¬ 
sirable  thing,  but  it  is  not  a  more  desirable 
thing  without  qualification.  Again,  a  thing  is 
more  desirable  if,  when  added  to  a  lesser 
good,  it  makes  the  whole  a  greater  good.  Like¬ 
wise,  also,  you  should  judge  by  means  of  sub¬ 
traction:  for  the  thing  upon  whose  subtraction 
the  remainder  is  a  lesser  good  may  be  taken 
to  be  a  greater  good,  whichever  it  be  whose  sub¬ 
traction  makes  the  remainder  a  lesser  good. 
[20]  Also,  if  one  thing  be  desirable  for  itself, 
and  the  other  for  the  look  of  it,  the  former  is 
more  desirable,  as  (e.g.)  health  than  beauty. 
A  thing  is  defined  as  being  desired  for  the 
look  of  it  if,  supposing  no  one  knew  of  it,  you 
would  not  care  to  have  it.  Also,  it  is  more  de¬ 
sirable  both  for  itself  and  for  the  look  of  it, 
while  the  other  thing  is  desirable  on  the  one 
ground  alone.  Also,  whichever  is  the  more 
precious  for  itself,  is  also  better  and  more 
[25]  desirable.  A  thing  may  be  taken  to  be 
more  precious  in  itself  which  we  choose  rather 
for  itself,  without  anything  else  being  likely  to 
come  of  it. 

Moreover,  you  should  distinguish  in  how 
many  senses  ‘desirable’  is  used,  and  with  a 
view  to  what  ends,  e.g.  expediency  or  honour 
or  pleasure.  For  what  is  useful  for  all  or  most 
of  them  may  be  taken  to  be  more  desirable 
[30]  than  what  is  not  useful  in  like  manner. 
If  the  same  characters  belong  to  both  things 
you  should  look  and  see  which  possesses  them 
more  markedly,  i.e.  which  of  the  two  is  the 
more  pleasant  or  more  honourable  or  more 
expedient.  Again,  that  is  more  desirable  which 
serves  the  better  purpose,  e.g.  that  which 
serves  to  promote  virtue  more  than  that  which 


1 66 

serves  to  promote  pleasure.  Likewise  also  in 
the  case  of  objectionable  things;  for  that  is  more 
objectionable  which  stands  more  in  the  way  of 
[35]  what  is  desirable,  e.g.  disease  more  than 
ugliness:  for  disease  is  a  greater  hindrance  both 
to  pleasure  and  to  being  good. 

Moreover,  argue  by  showing  that  the  thing 
in  question  is  in  like  measure  objectionable 
and  desirable:  for  a  thing  of  such  a  character 
that  a  man  might  well  desire  and  object  to  it 
alike  is  less  desirable  than  the  other  which  is 
desirable  only. 

4 

119*  Comparisons  of  things  together  should 
therefore  be  conducted  in  the  manner  pre¬ 
scribed.  The  same  commonplace  rules  are  use¬ 
ful  also  for  showing  that  anything  is  simply 
desirable  or  objectionable:  for  we  have  only  to 
subtract  the  excess  of  one  thing  over  another. 
For  if  what  is  more  precious  be  more  desirable, 
then  also  what  is  precious  is  desirable;  and  if 
[5]  what  is  more  useful  be  more  desirable,  then 
also  what  is  useful  is  desirable.  Likewise,  also, 
in  the  case  of  other  things  which  admit  of 
comparisons  of  that  kind.  For  in  some  cases  in 
the  very  course  of  comparing  the  things  to¬ 
gether  we  at  once  assert  also  that  each  of  them, 
or  the  one  of  them,  is  desirable,  e.g.  whenever 
we  call  the  one  good  ‘by  nature'  and  the  other 
[/o]  ‘not  by  nature’:  for  clearly  what  is  good 
by  nature  is  desirable. 

5 

The  commonplace  rules  relating  to  compara¬ 
tive  degrees  and  amounts  ought  to  be  taken  in 
the  most  general  possible  form:  for  when  so 
taken  they  are  likely  to  be  useful  in  a  larger 
number  of  instances.  It  is  possible  to  render 
[75]  some  of  the  actual  rules  given  above  more 
universal  by  a  slight  alteration  of  the  expres¬ 
sion,  e.g.  that  what  by  nature  exhibits  such 
and  such  a  quality  exhibits  that  quality  in  a 
greater  degree  than  what  exhibits  it  not  by 
nature.  Also,  if  one  thing  does,  and  another 
does  not,  impart  such  and  such  a  quality  to 
that  which  possesses  it,  or  to  which  it  belongs, 
then  whichever  does  impart  it  is  of  that  qual¬ 
ity  in  greater  degree  than  the  one  which  does 
not  impart  it;  and  if  both  impart  it,  then  that 
one  exhibits  it  in  a  greater  degree  which  im¬ 
parts  it  in  a  greater  degree. 

[20]  Moreover,  if  in  any  character  one  thing 
exceeds  and  another  falls  short  of  the  same 
standard;  also,  if  the  one  exceeds  something 
which  exceeds  a  given  standard,  while  the 


119b 

other  does  not  reach  that  standard,  then  clearly 
the  first-named  thing  exhibits  that  character  in 
a  greater  degree.  Moreover,  you  should  judge 
by  means  of  addition,  and  see  if  A  when  added 
to  the  same  thing  as  B  imparts  to  the  whole 
such  and  such  a  character  in  a  more  marked 
degree  than  B,  or  if,  when  added  to  a  thing 
which  exhibits  that  character  in  a  less  degree, 
it  imparts  that  character  to  the  whole  in  a 
[25]  greater  degree.  Likewise,  also,  you  may 
judge  by  means  of  subtraction:  for  a  thing  up¬ 
on  whose  subtraction  the  remainder  exhibits 
such  and  such  a  character  in  a  less  degree,  it¬ 
self  exhibits  that  character  in  a  greater  degree. 
Also,  things  exhibit  such  and  such  a  character 
in  a  greater  degree  if  more  free  from  admixture 
with  their  contraries;  e.g.  that  is  whiter  which 
is  more  free  from  admixture  with  black.  More¬ 
over,  apart  from  the  rules  given  above,  that 
has  such  and  such  a  character  in  greater  de¬ 
gree  which  admits  in  a  greater  degree  of  the 
[jo]  definition  proper  to  the  given  character; 
e.g.  if  the  definition  of  ‘white’  be  ‘a  colour 
which  pierces  the  vision’,  then  that  is  whiter 
which  is  in  a  greater  degree  a  colour  that 
pierces  the  vision. 

6 

If  the  question  be  put  in  a  particular  and  not 
in  a  universal  form,  in  the  first  place  the  uni¬ 
versal  constructive  or  destructive  common¬ 
place  rules  that  have  been  given  may  all  be 
brought  into  use.  For  in  demolishing  or  estab- 
[^5]  lishing  a  thing  universally  we  also  show  it 
in  particular:  for  if  it  be  true  of  all,  it  is  true 
also  of  some,  and  if  untrue  of  all,  it  is  untrue 
of  some.  Especially  handy  and  of  general  ap¬ 
plication  are  the  commonplace  rules  that  are 
drawn  from  the  opposites  and  co-ordinates  and 
inflexions  of  a  thing:  for  public  opinion  grants 
alike  the  claim  that  if  all  pleasure  be  good,  then 
also  all  pain  is  evil,  and  the  claim  that  if  some 
119b  pleasure  be  good,  then  also  some  pain  is 
evil.  Moreover,  if  some  form  of  sensation  be 
not  a  capacity,  then  also  some  form  of  failure 
of  sensation  is  not  a  failure  of  capacity.  Also,  if 
the  object  of  conception  is  in  some  cases  an  ob¬ 
ject  of  knowledge,  then  also  some  form  of 
conceiving  is  knowledge.  Again,  if  what  is  un¬ 
just  be  in  some  cases  good,  then  also  what  is 
[5]  just  is  in  some  cases  evil;  and  if  what  hap¬ 
pens  justly  is  in  some  cases  evil,  then  also  what 
happens  unjustly  is  in  some  cases  good.  Also, 
if  what  is  pleasant  is  in  some  cases  objection¬ 
able,  then  pleasure  is  in  some  cases  an  objec¬ 
tionable  thing.  On  the  same  principle,  also,  if 


TOPICS 


120a  BOOK  III,  CHAPTERS  3-6  167 


what  is  pleasant  is  in  some  cases  beneficial, 
then  pleasure  is  in  some  cases  a  beneficial 
thing.  The  case  is  the  same  also  as  regards  the 
things  that  destroy,  and  the  processes  of  gen¬ 
eration  and  destruction.  For  if  anything  that 
[/o]  destroys  pleasure  or  knowledge  be  in 
some  cases  good,  then  we  may  take  it  that 
pleasure  or  knowledge  is  in  some  cases  an  evil 
thing.  Likewise,  also,  if  the  destruction  of 
knowledge  be  in  some  cases  a  good  thing  or  its 
production  an  evil  thing,  then  knowledge  will 
be  in  some  cases  an  evil  thing;  e.g.  if  for  a 
man  to  forget  his  disgraceful  conduct  be  a 
good  thing,  and  to  remember  it  be  an  evil 
thing,  then  the  knowledge  of  his  disgraceful 
[75]  conduct  may  be  taken  to  be  an  evil  thing. 
The  same  holds  also  in  other  cases:  in  all  such 
cases  the  premiss  and  the  conclusion  are  equal¬ 
ly  likely  to  be  accepted. 

Moreover  you  should  judge  by  means  of 
greater  or  smaller  or  like  degrees:  for  if  some 
member  of  another  genus  exhibit  such  and 
such  a  character  in  a  more  marked  degree  than 
your  object,  while  no  member  of  that  genus 
exhibits  that  character  at  all,  then  you  may  take 
it  that  neither  does  the  object  in  question  ex¬ 
hibit  it;  e.g.  if  some  form  of  knowledge  be 

food  in  a  greater  degree  than  pleasure,  while 
20]  no  form  of  knowledge  is  good,  then  you 
may  take  it  that  pleasure  is  not  good  either. 
Also,  you  should  judge  by  a  smaller  or  like 
degree  in  the  same  way:  for  so  you  will  find 
it  possible  both  to  demolish  and  to  establish  a 
view,  except  that  whereas  both  are  possible  by 
means  of  like  degrees,  by  means  of  a  smaller 
degree  it  is  possible  only  to  establish,  not  to 
overthrow.  For  if  a  certain  form  of  capacity  be 
ood  in  a  like  degree  to  knowledge,  and  a  cer- 
25]  tain  form  of  capacity  be  good,  then  so 
also  is  knowledge;  while  if  no  form  of  capacity 
be  good,  then  neither  is  knowledge.  If,  too,  a 
certain  form  of  capacity  be  good  in  a  less  de¬ 
gree  than  knowledge,  and  a  certain  form  of 
capacity  be  good,  then  so  also  is  knowledge; 
but  if  no  form  of  capacity  be  good,  there  is  no 
necessity  that  no  form  of  knowledge  either 
should  be  good.  Clearly,  then,  it  is  only  possible 
[50]  to  establish  a  view  by  means  of  a  less 
degree. 

Not  only  by  means  of  another  genus  can 
you  overthrow  a  view,  but  also  by  means  of 
the  same,  if  you  take  the  most  marked  instance 
of  the  character  in  question;  e.g.  if  it  be  main¬ 
tained  that  some  form  of  knowledge  is  good, 
then,  suppose  it  to  be  shown  that  prudence  is 
not  good,  neither  will  any  other  kind  be  good, 


seeing  that  not  even  the  kind  upon  which  there 
is  most  general  agreement  is  so.  Moreover, 
[35]  y°u  should  go  to  work  by  means  of  an 
hypothesis;  you  should  claim  that  the  attri¬ 
bute,  if  it  belongs  or  does  not  belong  in  one 
case,  does  so  in  a  like  degree  in  all,  e.g.  that  if 
the  soul  of  man  be  immortal,  so  are  other  souls 
as  well,  while  if  this  one  be  not  so,  neither  are 
the  others.  If,  then,  it  be  maintained  that  in 
some  instance  the  attribute  belongs,  you  must 
show  that  in  some  instance  it  does  not  belong: 
for  then  it  will  follow,  by  reason  of  the  hypoth¬ 
esis,  that  it  does  not  belong  to  any  instance 
at  all.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  it  be  maintained 
120a  that  it  does  not  belong  in  some  instance, 
you  must  show  that  it  does  belong  in  some  in¬ 
stance,  for  in  this  way  it  will  follow  that  it  be¬ 
longs  to  all  instances.  It  is  clear  that  the  maker 
of  the  hypothesis  universalizes  the  question, 
whereas  it  was  stated  in  a  particular  form: 
for  he  claims  that  the  maker  of  a  particular 
admission  should  make  a  universal  admission, 
[5]  inasmuch  as  he  claims  that  if  the  attribute 
belongs  in  one  instance,  it  belongs  also  in  all 
instances  alike. 

If  the  problem  be  indefinite,  it  is  possible  to 
overthrow  a  statement  in  only  one  way;  e.g. 
if  a  man  has  asserted  that  pleasure  is  good  or 
is  not  good,  without  any  further  definition. 
For  if  he  meant  that  a  particular  pleasure  is 
good,  you  must  show  universally  that  no  pleas¬ 
ure  is  good,  if  the  proposition  in  question  is 
[/o]  to  be  demolished.  And  likewise,  also,  if 
he  meant  that  some  particular  pleasure  is  not 
good  you  must  show  universally  that  all  pleas¬ 
ure  is  good:  it  is  impossible  to  demolish  it  in 
any  other  way.  For  if  we  show  that  some  par¬ 
ticular  pleasure  is  not  good  or  is  good,  the 
proposition  in  question  is  not  yet  demolished. 
It  is  clear,  then,  that  it  is  possible  to  demolish 
an  indefinite  statement  in  one  way  only,  where- 
[75]  as  it  can  be  established  in  two  ways:  for 
whether  we  show  universally  that  all  pleasure 
is  good,  or  whether  we  show  that  a  particular 
pleasure  is  good,  the  proposition  in  question 
will  have  been  proved.  Likewise,  also,  sup¬ 
posing  we  are  required  to  argue  that  some  par¬ 
ticular  pleasure  is  not  good,  if  we  show  that 
no  pleasure  is  good  or  that  a  particular  pleas¬ 
ure  is  not  good,  we  shall  have  produced  an 
argument  in  both  ways,  both  universally  and 
[20]  in  particular,  to  show  that  some  particular 
pleasure  is  not  good.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  the 
statement  made  be  definite,  it  will  be  possible 
to  demolish  it  in  two  ways;  e.g.  if  it  be  main¬ 
tained  that  it  is  an  attribute  of  some  particular 


1 68 

pleasure  to  be  good,  while  of  some  it  is  not: 
for  whether  it  be  shown  that  all  pleasure,  or 
that  no  pleasure,  is  good,  the  proposition  in 
question  will  have  been  demolished.  If,  how¬ 
ever,  he  has  stated  that  only  one  single  pleas¬ 
ure  is  good,  it  is  possible  to  demolish  it  in 
three  ways:  for  by  showing  that  all  pleasure, 
[25]  or  that  no  pleasure,  or  that  more  than 
one  pleasure,  is  good,  we  shall  have  demolished 
the  statement  in  question.  If  the  statement  be 
made  still  more  definite,  e.g.  that  prudence 
alone  of  the  virtues  is  knowledge,  there  are 
four  ways  of  demolishing  it:  for  if  it  be  shown 
that  all  virtue  is  knowledge,  or  that  no  virtue 
[30]  is  so,  or  that  some  other  virtue  (e.g. 
justice)  is  so,  or  that  prudence  itself  is  not 
knowledge,  the  proposition  in  question  will 
have  been  demolished. 

It  is  useful  also  to  take  a  look  at  individual 
instances,  in  cases  where  some  attribute  has 
been  said  to  belong  or  not  to  belong,  as  in  the 
case  of  universal  questions.  Moreover,  you 
should  take  a  glance  among  genera,  dividing 


121a 

[35]  them  by  their  species  until  you  come  to 
those  that  are  not  further  divisible,  as  has  been 
said  before:1  for  whether  the  attribute  is  found 
to  belong  in  all  cases  or  in  none,  you  should, 
after  adducing  several  instances,  claim  that  he 
should  either  admit  your  point  universally,  or 
else  bring  an  objection  showing  in  what  case  it 
does  not  hold.  Moreover,  in  cases  where  it  is 
possible  to  make  the  accident  definite  either 
specifically  or  numerically,  you  should  look 
and  see  whether  perhaps  none  of  them  belongs, 
showing  e.g.  that  time  is  not  moved,  nor  yet 
120b  is  a  movement,  by  enumerating  how 
many  species  there  are  of  movement:  for  if 
none  of  these  belong  to  time,  clearly  it  does  not 
move,  nor  yet  is  a  movement.  Likewise,  also, 
you  can  show  that  the  soul  is  not  a  number,  by 
dividing  all  numbers  into  either  odd  or  even: 
[5]  for  then,  if  the  soul  be  neither  odd  nor 
even,  clearly  it  is  not  a  number. 

In  regard  then  to  Accident,  you  should  set 
to  work  by  means  like  these,  and  in  this 
manner. 


TOPICS 


BOOK  IV 


1 

[12]  Next  we  must  go  on  to  examine  ques¬ 
tions  relating  to  Genus  and  Property.  These 
are  elements  in  the  questions  that  relate  to 
definitions,  but  dialecticians  seldom  address 
[75]  their  inquiries  to  these  by  themselves.  If, 
then,  a  genus  be  suggested  for  something  that 
is,  first  take  a  look  at  all  objects  which  belong 
to  the  same  genus  as  the  thing  mentioned,  and 
see  whether  the  genus  suggested  is  not  predi¬ 
cated  of  one  of  them,  as  happens  in  the  case 
of  an  accident:  e.g.  if  ‘good’  be  laid  down  to  be 
the  genus  of  ‘pleasure’,  see  whether  some  par¬ 
ticular  pleasure  be  not  good:  for,  if  so,  clearly 
‘good’  is  not  the  genus  of  pleasure:  for  the 
[20]  genus  is  predicated  of  all  the  members  of 
the  same  species.  Secondly,  see  whether  it  be 
predicated  not  in  the  category  of  essence,  but 
as  an  accident,  as  ‘white’  is  predicated  of 
‘snow’,  or  ‘self-moved’  of  the  soul.  For  ‘snow’ 
is  not  a  kind  of  ‘white’,  and  therefore  ‘white’ 
is  not  the  genus  of  snow,  nor  is  the  soul  a  kind 
of  ‘moving  object’:  its  motion  is  an  accident  of 
[25]  it,  as  it  often  is  of  an  animal  to  walk  or  to 
be  walking.  Moreover,  ‘moving’  does  not  seem 
to  indicate  the  essence,  but  rather  a  state  of 
doing  or  of  having  something  done  to  it.  Like¬ 
wise,  also,  ‘white’:  for  it  indicates  not  the  es¬ 
sence  of  snow,  but  a  certain  quality  of  it.  So 


that  neither  of  them  is  predicated  in  the  cate¬ 
gory  of  ‘essence’. 

[30]  Especially  you  should  take  a  look  at  the 
definition  of  Accident,  and  see  whether  it  fits 
the  genus  mentioned,  as  (e.g.)  is  also  the  case 
in  the  instances  just  given.  For  it  is  possible  for 
a  thing  to  be  and  not  to  be  self-moved,  and 
likewise,  also,  for  it  to  be  and  not  to  be  white. 
So  that  neither  of  these  attributes  is  the  genus 
but  an  accident,  since  we  were  saying2  that  an 
accident  is  an  attribute  which  can  belong  to  a 
[^5]  thing  and  also  not  belong. 

Moreover,  see  whether  the  genus  and  the 
species  be  not  found  in  the  same  division,  but 
the  one  be  a  substance  while  the  other  is  a 
quality,  or  the  one  be  a  relative  while  the  other 
is  a  quality,  as  (e.g.)  ‘snow’  and  ‘swan’  are 
each  a  substance,  while  ‘white’  is  not  a  sub¬ 
stance  but  a  quality,  so  that  ‘white’  is  not  the 
genus  either  of  ‘snow’  or  of  ‘swan’.  Again, 
121a  ‘knowledge’  is  a  relative,  while  ‘good’ 
and  ‘noble’  are  each  a  quality,  so  that  good,  or 
noble,  is  not  the  genus  of  knowledge.  For  the 
genera  of  relatives  ought  themselves  also  to  be 
relatives,  as  is  the  case  with  ‘double’:  for 
[5]  ‘multiple’,  which  is  the  genus  of  ‘double’, 
is  itself  also  a  relative.  To  speak  generally,  the 
genus  ought  to  fall  under  the  same  division 
as  the  species:  for  if  the  species  be  a  substance, 
1  ic>9b  15  2  io2b  6. 


121b  BOOK  III,  CHAPTER  6— 

so  too  should  be  the  genus,  and  if  the  species 
be  a  quality,  so  too  the  genus  should  be  a  qual¬ 
ity;  e.g.  if  white  be  a  quality,  so  too  should 
colour  be.  Likewise,  also,  in  other  cases. 

[/o]  Again,  see  whether  it  be  necessary  or  pos¬ 
sible  for  the  genus  to  partake  of  the  object 
which  has  been  placed  in  the  genus.  ‘To  par¬ 
take’  is  defined  as  ‘to  admit  the  definition’  of 
that  which  is  partaken.  Clearly,  therefore,  the 
species  partake  of  the  genera,  but  not  the  genera 
of  the  species:  for  the  species  admits  the  defini¬ 
tion  of  the  genus,  whereas  the  genus  does  not 
admit  that  of  the  species.  You  must  look,  there- 
[75]  fore,  and  see  whether  the  genus  rendered 
partakes  or  can  possibly  partake  of  the  species, 
e.g.  if  any  one  were  to  render  anything  as 
genus  of  ‘being’  or  of  ‘unity’:  for  then  the  re¬ 
sult  will  be  that  the  genus  partakes  of  the  spe¬ 
cies:  for  of  everything  that  is,  ‘being’  and 
‘unity’  are  predicated,  and  therefore  their  defi¬ 
nition  as  well. 

[20]  Moreover,  see  if  there  be  anything  of 
which  the  species  rendered  is  true,  while  the 
genus  is  not  so,  e.g.  supposing  ‘being’  or  ‘ob¬ 
ject  of  knowledge’  were  stated  to  be  the  genus 
of  ‘object  of  opinion’.  For  ‘object  of  opinion’ 
will  be  a  predicate  of  what  does  not  exist;  for 
many  things  which  do  not  exist  are  objects  of 
opinion;  whereas  that  ‘being’  or  ‘object  of 
knowledge’  is  not  predicated  of  what  does  not 
exist  is  clear.  So  that  neither  ‘being’  nor  ‘object 
[25]  of  knowledge’  is  the  genus  of  ‘object  of 
opinion’:  for  of  the  objects  of  which  the  species 
is  predicated,  the  genus  ought  to  be  predicated 
as  well. 

Again,  see  whether  the  object  placed  in  the 
genus  be  quite  unable  to  partake  of  any  of  its 
species:  for  it  is  impossible  that  it  should  par¬ 
take  of  the  genus  if  it  do  not  partake  of  any 
of  its  species,  except  it  be  one  of  the  species 
[jo]  reached  by  the  first  division:  these  do 
partake  of  the  genus  alone.  If,  therefore,  ‘Mo¬ 
tion’  be  stated  as  the  genus  of  pleasure,  you 
should  look  and  see  if  pleasure  be  neither  loco¬ 
motion  nor  alteration,  nor  any  of  the  rest  of 
the  given  modes  of  motion:  for  clearly  you  may 
then  take  it  that  it  does  not  partake  of  any  of 
the  species,  and  therefore  not  of  the  genus 
either,  since  what  partakes  of  the  genus  must 
[55]  necessarily  partake  of  one  of  the  species 
as  well:  so  that  pleasure  could  not  be  a  species 
of  Motion,  nor  yet  be  one  of  the  individual 
phenomena  comprised  under  the  term  ‘mo¬ 
tion’.  For  individuals  as  well  partake  in  the 
genus  and  the  species,  as  (e.g.)  an  individual 
man  partakes  of  both  ‘man’  and  ‘animal’. 


BOOK  IV,  CHAPTERS  1-2  169 

121b  Moreover,  see  if  the  term  placed  in  the 
genus  has  a  wider  denotation  than  the  genus, 
as  (e.g.)  ‘object  of  opinion’  has,  as  compared 
with  ‘being’:  for  both  what  is  and  what  is  not 
are  objects  of  opinion,  so  that  ‘object  of  opin¬ 
ion’  could  not  be  a  species  of  being:  for  the 
genus  is  always  of  wider  denotation  than  the 
species.  Again,  see  if  the  species  and  its  genus 
[5]  have  an  equal  denotation;  suppose,  for  in¬ 
stance,  that  of  the  attributes  which  go  with 
everything,  one  were  to  be  stated  as  a  species 
and  the  other  as  its  genus,  as  for  example 
Being  and  Unity:  for  everything  has  being  and 
unity,  so  that  neither  is  the  genus  of  the  other, 
since  their  denotation  is  equal.  Likewise,  also, 
if  the  ‘first’  of  a  series  and  the  ‘beginning’  were 
to  be  placed  one  under  the  other:  for  the  be- 
[/o]  ginning  is  first  and  the  first  is  the  begin¬ 
ning,  so  that  either  both  expressions  are  iden¬ 
tical  or  at  any  rate  neither  is  the  genus  of  the 
other.  The  elementary  principle  in  regard  to 
all  such  cases  is  that  the  genus  has  a  wider 
denotation  than  the  species  and  its  differentia: 
for  the  differentia  as  well  has  a  narrower  deno¬ 
tation  than  the  genus. 

[75]  See  also  whether  the  genus  mentioned 
fails,  or  might  be  generally  thought  to  fail,  to 
apply  to  some  object  which  is  not  specifically 
different  from  the  thing  in  question;  or,  if  your 
argument  be  constructive,  whether  it  does  so 
apply.  For  all  things  that  are  not  specifically 
different  have  the  same  genus.  If,  therefore,  it 
be  shown  to  apply  to  one,  then  clearly  it  ap¬ 
plies  to  all,  and  if  it  fails  to  apply  to  one,  clearly 
it  fails  to  apply  to  any;  e.g.  if  any  one  who  as¬ 
sumes  ‘indivisible  lines’  were  to  say  that  the  ‘in- 
[20]  divisible’  is  their  genus.  For  the  aforesaid 
term  is  not  the  genus  of  divisible  lines,  and 
these  do  not  differ  as  regards  their  species  from 
indivisible:  for  straight  lines  are  never  differ¬ 
ent  from  each  other  as  regards  their  species. 

2 

Look  and  see,  also,  if  there  be  any  other  genus 
[25]  of  the  given  species  which  neither  em¬ 
braces  the  genus  rendered  nor  yet  falls  under 
it,  e.g.  suppose  any  one  were  to  lay  down  that 
‘knowledge’  is  the  genus  of  justice.  For  virtue 
is  its  genus  as  well,  and  neither  of  these  genera 
embraces  the  remaining  one,  so  that  knowledge 
could  not  be  the  genus  of  justice:  for  it  is  gen¬ 
erally  accepted  that  whenever  one  species  falls 
under  two  genera,  the  one  is  embraced  by  the 
[jo]  other.  Yet  a  principle  of  this  kind  gives 
rise  to  a  difficulty  in  some  cases.  For  some 
people  hold  that  prudence  is  both  virtue  and 


i7o  TOPICS  122b 


knowledge,  and  that  neither  of  its  genera  is 
embraced  by  the  other:  although  certainly  not 
everybody  admits  that  prudence  is  knowledge. 
If,  however,  any  one  were  to  admit  the  truth 
of  this  assertion,  yet  it  would  still  be  generally 
ti5]  agreed  to  be  necessary  that  the  genera  of 
the  same  object  must  at  any  rate  be  subordinate 
either  the  one  to  the  other  or  both  to  the  same, 
as  actually  is  the  case  with  virtue  and  knowl¬ 
edge.  For  both  fall  under  the  same  genus;  for 
each  of  them  is  a  state  and  a  disposition.  You 
should  look,  therefore,  and  see  whether  neither 
of  these  things  is  true  of  the  genus  rendered; 
122a  for  if  the  genera  be  subordinate  neither 
the  one  to  the  other  nor  both  to  the  same,  then 
what  is  rendered  could  not  be  the  true  genus. 

Look,  also,  at  the  genus  of  the  genus  ren¬ 
dered,  and  so  continually  at  the  next  higher 
genus,  and  see  whether  all  are  predicated  of 
[5]  the  species,  and  predicated  in  the  category 
of  essence:  for  all  the  higher  genera  should  be 
predicated  of  the  species  in  the  category  of  es¬ 
sence.  If,  then,  there  be  anywhere  a  discrep¬ 
ancy,  clearly  what  is  rendered  is  not  the  true 
genus.  [Again,  see  whether  either  the  genus 
itself,  or  one  of  its  higher  genera,  partakes  of 
the  species:  for  the  higher  genus  does  not  par¬ 
take  of  any  of  the  lower.]  If,  then,  you  are 
[70]  overthrowing  a  view,  follow  the  rule  as 
given:  if  establishing  one,  then — suppose  that 
what  has  been  named  as  genus  be  admitted  to 
belong  to  the  species,  only  it  be  disputed 
whether  it  belongs  as  genus — it  is  enough  to 
show  that  one  of  its  higher  genera  is  predi¬ 
cated  of  the  species  in  the  category  of  essence. 
For  if  one  of  them  be  predicated  in  the  cate¬ 
gory  of  essence,  all  of  them,  both  higher  and 
[75]  lower  than  this  one,  if  predicated  at  all  of 
the  species,  will  be  predicated  of  it  in  the  cate¬ 
gory  of  essence:  so  that  what  has  been  rendered 
as  genus  is  also  predicated  in  the  category  of 
essence.  The  premiss  that  when  one  genus  is 
predicated  in  the  category  of  essence,  all  the 
rest,  if  predicated  at  all,  will  be  predicated  in 
the  category  of  essence,  should  be  secured  by  in¬ 
duction.  Supposing,  however,  that  it  be  dis- 
[20]  puted  whether  what  has  been  rendered  as 
genus  belongs  at  all,  it  is  not  enough  to  show 
that  one  of  the  higher  genera  is  predicated  of 
the  species  in  the  category  of  essence:  e.g.  if 
any  one  has  rendered  ‘locomotion’  as  the  genus 
of  walking,  it  is  not  enough  to  show  that  walk¬ 
ing  is  ‘motion’  in  order  to  show  that  it  is  ‘loco¬ 
motion’,  seeing  that  there  are  other  forms  of 
motion  as  well;  but  one  must  show  in  addition 
[25]  that  walking  does  not  partake  of  any  of 


the  species  of  motion  produced  by  the  same 
division  except  locomotion.  For  of  necessity 
what  partakes  of  the  genus  partakes  also  of 
one  of  the  species  produced  by  the  first  division 
of  the  genus.  If,  therefore,  walking  does  not 
partake  either  of  increase  or  decrease  or  of  the 
other  kinds  of  motion,  clearly  it  would  partake 
[30]  of  locomotion,  so  that  locomotion  would 
be  the  genus  of  walking. 

Again,  look  among  the  things  of  which  the 
given  species  is  predicated  as  genus,  and  see  if 
what  is  rendered  as  its  genus  be  also  predi¬ 
cated  in  the  category  of  essence  of  the  very 
things  of  which  the  species  is  so  predicated, 
and  likewise  if  all  the  genera  higher  than  this 
genus  are  so  predicated  as  well.  For  if  there  be 
anywhere  a  discrepancy,  clearly  what  has  been 
[35]  rendered  is  not  the  true  genus:  for  had  it 
been  the  genus,  then  both  the  genera  higher 
than  it,  and  it  itself,  would  all  have  been  predi¬ 
cated  in  the  category  of  essence  of  those  ob¬ 
jects  of  which  the  species  too  is  predicated  in 
the  category  of  essence.  If,  then,  you  are  over¬ 
throwing  a  view,  it  is  useful  to  see  whether 
the  genus  fails  to  be  predicated  in  the  category 
of  essence  of  those  things  of  which  the  species 
too  is  predicated.  If  establishing  a  view,  it  is 
122b  useful  to  see  whether  it  is  predicated  in 
the  category  of  essence:  for  if  so,  the  result  will 
be  that  the  genus  and  the  species  will  be  predi¬ 
cated  of  the  same  object  in  the  category  of  es¬ 
sence,  so  that  the  same  object  falls  under  two 
genera:  the  genera  must  therefore  of  necessity 
be  subordinate  one  to  the  other,  and  therefore 
[5]  if  it  be  shown  that  the  one  we  wish  to  es¬ 
tablish  as  genus  is  not  subordinate  to  the  spe¬ 
cies,  clearly  the  species  would  be  subordinate 
to  it,  so  that  you  may  take  it  as  shown  that  it 
is  the  genus. 

Look,  also,  at  the  definitions  of  the  genera, 
and  see  whether  they  apply  both  to  the  given 
species  and  to  the  objects  which  partake  of  the 
species.  For  of  necessity  the  definitions  of  its 
genera  must  be  predicated  of  the  species  and 
[70]  of  the  objects  which  partake  of  the  spe¬ 
cies:  if,  then,  there  be  anywhere  a  discrepancy, 
clearly  what  has  been  rendered  is  not  the 
genus. 

Again,  see  if  he  has  rendered  the  differentia 
as  the  genus,  e.g.  ‘immortal’  as  the  genus  of 
‘God’.  For  ‘immortal’  is  a  differentia  of  ‘living 
being’,  seeing  that  of  living  beings  some  are 
mortal  and  others  immortal.  Clearly,  then,  a 
[75]  bad  mistake  has  been  made;  for  the  dif¬ 
ferentia  of  a  thing  is  never  its  genus.  And  that 
this  is  true  is  clear:  for  a  thing’s  differentia 


123b  BOOK  IV,  CHAPTERS  2-3  171 


never  signifies  its  essence,  but  rather  some 
quality,  as  do  ‘walking’  and  ‘biped’. 

Also,  see  whether  he  has  placed  the  differ¬ 
entia  inside  the  genus,  e.g.  by  taking  ‘odd’  as 
‘a  number’.  For  ‘odd’  is  a  differentia  of  num- 
[20]  ber,  not  a  species.  Nor  is  the  differentia 
generally  thought  to  partake  of  the  genus:  for 
what  partakes  of  the  genus  is  always  either  a 
species  or  an  individual,  whereas  the  differentia 
is  neither  a  species  nor  an  individual.  Clearly, 
therefore,  the  differentia  does  not  partake  of 
the  genus,  so  that  ‘odd’  too  is  no  species  but  a 
differentia,  seeing  that  it  does  not  partake  of 
the  genus. 

[25]  Moreover,  see  whether  he  has  placed  the 
genus  inside  the  species,  e.g.  by  taking  ‘con¬ 
tact’  to  be  a  ‘juncture’,  or  ‘mixture’  a  ‘fusion’, 
or,  as  in  Plato’s  definition,1  ‘locomotion’  to  be 
the  same  as  ‘carriage’.  For  there  is  no  neces¬ 
sity  that  contact  should  be  juncture:  rather, 
conversely,  juncture  must  be  contact:  for  what 
is  in  contact  is  not  always  joined,  though 
what  is  joined  is  always  in  contact.  Likewise, 
[jo]  also,  in  the  remaining  instances:  for  mix¬ 
ture  is  not  always  a  ‘fusion’  (for  to  mix  dry 
things  does  not  fuse  them),  nor  is  locomotion 
always  ‘carriage’.  For  walking  is  not  generally 
thought  to  be  carriage:  for  ‘carriage’  is  mostly 
used  of  things  that  change  one  place  for  an¬ 
other  involuntarily,  as  happens  in  the  case  of 
IJ5]  inanimate  things.  Clearly,  also,  the  spe¬ 
cies,  in  the  instances  given,  has  a  wider  deno¬ 
tation  than  the  genus,  whereas  it  ought  to  be 
vice  versa. 

Again,  see  whether  he  has  placed  the  differ¬ 
entia  inside  the  species,  by  taking  (e.g.)  ‘im¬ 
mortal’  to  be  ‘a  god’.  For  the  result  will  be 
that  the  species  has  an  equal  or  wider  denota¬ 
tion:  and  this  cannot  be,  for  always  the  differ- 
123a  entia  has  an  equal  or  a  wider  denotation 
than  the  species.  Moreover,  see  whether  he  has 
placed  the  genus  inside  the  differentia,  by  mak¬ 
ing  ‘colour’  (e.g.)  to  be  a  thing  that  ‘pierces’, 
or  ‘number’  a  thing  that  is  ‘odd’.  Also,  see  if 
he  has  mentioned  the  genus  as  differentia:  for 
it  is  possible  for  a  man  to  bring  forward  a 
statement  of  this  kind  as  well,  e.g.  that  ‘mix¬ 
ture’  is  the  differentia  of  ‘fusion’,  or  that 
[5]  ‘change  of  place’  is  the  differentia  of  ‘car¬ 
riage’.  All  such  cases  should  be  examined  by 
means  of  the  same  principles:  for  they  depend 
upon  common  rules:  for  the  genus  should  have 
a  wider  denotation  that  its  differentia,  and  also 
should  not  partake  of  its  differentia;  whereas, 
if  it  be  rendered  in  this  manner,  neither  of  the 
1  Theaetetus ,  181. 


aforesaid  requirements  can  be  satisfied:  for  the 
genus  will  both  have  a  narrower  denotation 
[/o]  than  its  differentia,  and  will  partake  of  it. 

Again,  if  no  differentia  belonging  to  the 
genus  be  predicated  of  the  given  species, 
neither  will  the  genus  be  predicated  of  it;  e.g. 
of  ‘soul’  neither  ‘odd’  nor  ‘even’  is  predicated: 
neither  therefore  is  ‘number’.  Moreover,  see 
whether  the  species  is  naturally  prior  and  abol- 
[75]  ishes  the  genus  along  with  itself:  for  the 
contrary  is  the  general  view.  Moreover,  if  it  be 
possible  for  the  genus  stated,  or  for  its  differ¬ 
entia,  to  be  absent  from  the  alleged  species, 
e.g.  for  ‘movement’  to  be  absent  from  the 
‘soul’,  or  ‘truth  and  falsehood’  from  ‘opinion’, 
then  neither  of  the  terms  stated  could  be  its 
genus  or  its  differentia:  for  the  general  view  is 
that  the  genus  and  the  differentia  accompany 
the  species,  as  long  as  it  exists. 

3 

[20]  Look  and  see,  also,  if  what  is  placed  in 
the  genus  partakes  or  could  possibly  partake  of 
any  contrary  of  the  genus:  for  in  that  case  the 
same  thing  will  at  the  same  time  partake  of 
contrary  things,  seeing  that  the  genus  is  never 
absent  from  it,  while  it  partakes,  or  can  pos¬ 
sibly  partake,  of  the  contrary  genus  as  well. 
Moreover,  see  whether  the  species  shares  in 
any  character  which  it  is  utterly  impossible  for 
any  member  of  the  genus  to  have.  Thus  (e.g.) 
[25]  if  the  soul  has  a  share  in  life,  while  it  is 
impossible  for  any  number  to  live,  then  the 
soul  could  not  be  a  species  of  number. 

You  should  look  and  see,  also,  if  the  species 
be  a  homonym  of  the  genus,  and  employ  as 
your  elementary  principles  those  already  stated 
for  dealing  with  homonymity:2  for  the  genus 
and  the  species  are  synonymous. 

[30]  Seeing  that  of  every  genus  there  is  more 
than  one  species,  look  and  see  if  it  be  impossi¬ 
ble  that  there  should  be  another  species  than 
the  given  one  belonging  to  the  genus  stated: 
for  if  there  should  be  none,  then  clearly  what 
has  been  stated  could  not  be  a  genus  at  all. 

Look  and  see,  also,  if  he  has  rendered  as 
genus  a  metaphorical  expression,  describing 
(e.g.)  ‘temperance’  as  a  ‘harmony’:  for  a  genus 
[35]  is  always  predicated  of  its  species  in  its 
literal  sense,  whereas  ‘harmony’  is  predicated 
of  temperance  not  in  a  literal  sense  but  meta¬ 
phorically:  for  a  harmony  always  consists  in 
notes. 

123b  Moreover,  if  there  be  any  contrary  of  the 
species,  examine  it.  The  examination  may  take 
2  io6a  9  if. 


i72  TOPICS  124a 


different  forms;  first  of  all  see  if  the  contrary 
as  well  be  found  in  the  same  genus  as  the  spe¬ 
cies,  supposing  the  genus  to  have  no  contrary; 
for  contraries  ought  to  be  found  in  the  same 
[5]  genus,  if  there  be  no  contrary  to  the  genus. 
Supposing,  on  the  other  hand,  that  there  is  a 
contrary  to  the  genus,  see  if  the  contrary  of 
the  species  be  found  in  the  contrary  genus:  for 
of  necessity  the  contrary  species  must  be  in  the 
contrary  genus,  if  there  be  any  contrary  to  the 
genus.  Each  of  these  points  is  made  plain  by 
means  of  induction.  Again,  see  whether  the 
contrary  of  the  species  be  not  found  in  any  ge¬ 
nus  at  all,  but  be  itself  a  genus,  e.g.  ‘good’:  for 
if  this  be  not  found  in  any  genus,  neither  will 
[/o]  its  contrary  be  found  in  any  genus,  but 
will  itself  be  a  genus,  as  happens  in  the  case  of 
‘good’  and  ‘evil*:  for  neither  of  these  is  found 
in  a  genus,  but  each  of  them  is  a  genus.  More¬ 
over,  see  if  both  genus  and  species  be  contrary 
to  something,  and  one  pair  of  contraries  have 
an  intermediary,  but  not  the  other.  For  if  the 
enera  have  an  intermediary,  so  should  their 
75]  species  as  well,  and  if  the  species  have,  so 
should  their  genera  as  well,  as  is  the  case  with 
(1)  virtue  and  vice  and  (2)  justice  and  injus¬ 
tice:  for  each  pair  has  an  intermediary.  An  ob¬ 
jection  to  this  is  that  there  is  no  intermediary 
between  health  and  disease,  although  there  is 
one  between  evil  and  good.  Or  see  whether, 
though  there  be  indeed  an  intermediary  be¬ 
tween  both  pairs,  i.e.  both  between  the  species 
and  between  the  genera,  yet  it  be  not  similarly 
related,  but  in  one  case  be  a  mere  negation  of 
[20]  the  extremes,  whereas  in  the  other  case  it 
is  a  subject.  For  the  general  view  is  that  the  re¬ 
lation  should  be  similar  in  both  cases,  as  it  is  in 
the  cases  of  virtue  and  vice  and  of  justice  and 
injustice:  for  the  intermediaries  between  both 
are  mere  negations.  Moreover,  whenever  the 
genus  has  no  contrary,  look  and  see  not  merely 
whether  the  contrary  of  the  species  be  found 
in  the  same  genus,  but  the  intermediate  as  well: 
[25]  for  the  genus  containing  the  extremes 
contains  the  intermediates  as  well,  as  (e.g.)  in 
the  case  of  white  and  black:  for  ‘•colour’  is  the 
genus  both  of  these  and  of  all  the  intermediate 
colours  as  well.  An  objection  may  be  raised  that 
‘defect’  and  ‘excess’  are  found  in  the  same  ge¬ 
nus  (for  both  are  in  the  genus  ‘evil’),  whereas 
‘moderate  amount’,  the  intermediate  between 
them,  is  found  not  in  ‘evil’  but  in  ‘good’.  Look 
[jo]  and  see  also  whether,  while  the  genus  has 
a  contrary,  the  species  has  none;  for  if  the  ge¬ 
nus  be  contrary  to  anything,  so  too  is  the  spe¬ 
cies,  as  virtue  to  vice  and  justice  to  injustice. 


Likewise,  also,  if  one  were  to  look  at  other  in¬ 
stances,  one  would  come  to  see  clearly  a  fact 
like  this.  An  objection  may  be  raised  in  the  case 
of  health  and  disease:  for  health  in  general  is 
[  J5]  the  contrary  of  disease,  whereas  a  particu¬ 
lar  disease,  being  a  species  of  disease,  e.g.  fever 
and  ophthalmia  and  any  other  particular  dis¬ 
ease,  has  no  contrary. 

124a  If,  therefore,  you  are  demolishing  a  view, 
there  are  all  these  ways  in  which  you  should 
make  your  examination:  for  if  the  aforesaid 
characters  do  not  belong  to  it,  clearly  what  has 
been  rendered  is  not  the  genus.  If,  on  the  other 
hand,  you  are  establishing  a  view,  there  are 
three  ways:  in  the  first  place,  see  whether  the 
contrary  of  the  species  be  found  in  the  genus 
stated,  suppose  the  genus  have  no  contrary:  for 
[5]  if  the  contrary  be  found  in  it,  clearly  the 
species  in  question  is  found  in  it  as  well.  More¬ 
over,  see  if  the  intermediate  species  is  found  in 
the  genus  stated:  for  whatever  genus  contains 
the  intermediate  contains  the  extremes  as  well. 
Again,  if  the  genus  have  a  contrary,  look  and 
see  whether  also  the  contrary  species  is  found 
in  the  contrary  genus:  for  if  so,  clearly  also  the 
species  in  question  is  found  in  the  genus  in 
question. 

[/o]  Again,  consider  in  the  case  of  the  inflex¬ 
ions  and  the  co-ordinates  of  species  and  genus, 
and  see  whether  they  follow  likewise,  both  in 
demolishing  and  in  establishing  a  view.  For 
whatever  attribute  belongs  or  does  not  belong 
to  one  belongs  or  does  not  belong  at  the  same 
time  to  all;  e.g.  if  justice  be  a  particular  form 
of  knowledge,  then  also  ‘justly’  is  ‘knowingly’ 
and  the  just  man  is  a  man  of  knowledge: 
whereas  if  any  of  these  things  be  not  so,  then 
neither  is  any  of  the  rest  of  them. 

4 

[75]  Again,  consider  the  case  of  things  that 
bear  a  like  relation  to  one  another.  Thus  (e.g.) 
the  relation  of  the  pleasant  to  pleasure  is  like 
that  of  the  useful  to  the  good:  for  in  each  case 
the  one  produces  the  other.  If  therefore  pleasure 
be  a  kind  of  ‘good’,  then  also  the  pleasant  will 
be  a  kind  of  ‘useful’:  for  clearly  it  may  be  taken 
to  be  productive  of  good,  seeing  that  pleasure  is 
[20]  good.  In  the  same  way  also  consider  the 
case  of  processes  of  generation  and  destruction; 
if  (e.g.)  to  build  be  to  be  active,  then  to  have 
built  is  to  have  been  active,  and  if  to  learn  be  to 
recollect,  then  also  to  have  learnt  is  to  have  rec¬ 
ollected,  and  if  to  be  decomposed  be  to  be  de¬ 
stroyed,  then  to  have  been  decomposed  is  to 
have  been  destroyed,  and  decomposition  is  a 


125a  BOOK  IV,  CHAPTERS  3-4  173 

kind  of  destruction.  Ccasider  also  in  the  same  [75]  If  the  species  be  a  relative  term,  see  wheth- 


[25]  way  the  case  of  things  that  generate  or 
destroy,  and  of  the  capacities  and  uses  of 
things;  and  in  general,  both  in  demolishing 
and  in  establishing  an  argument,  you  should 
examine  things  in  the  light  of  any  resemblance 
of  whatever  description,  as  we  were  saying  in 
the  case  of  generation  and  destruction.  For  if 
what  tends  to  destroy  tends  to  decompose,  then 
also  to  be  destroyed  is  to  be  decomposed:  and 
if  what  tends  to  generate  tends  to  produce,  then 
[30]  to  be  generated  is  to  be  produced,  and 
generation  is  production.  Likewise,  also,  in  the 
case  of  the  capacities  and  uses  of  things:  for  if 
a  capacity  be  a  disposition,  then  also  to  be  capa¬ 
ble  of  something  is  to  be  disposed  to  it,  and  if 
the  use  of  anything  be  an  activity,  then  to  use 
it  is  to  be  active,  and  to  have  used  it  is  to  have 
been  active. 

[35]  If  the  opposite  of  the  species  be  a  priva¬ 
tion,  there  are  two  ways  of  demolishing  an  ar¬ 
gument,  first  of  all  by  looking  to  see  if  the  op¬ 
posite  be  found  in  the  genus  rendered:  for  ei¬ 
ther  the  privation  is  to  be  found  absolutely  no¬ 
where  in  the  same  genus,  or  at  least  not  in  the 
same  ultimate  genus:  e.g.  if  the  ultimate  genus 
containing  sight  be  sensation,  then  blindness 
will  not  be  a  sensation.  Secondly,  if  there  be  a 
I24b  privation  opposed  to  both  genus  and  spe¬ 
cies,  but  the  opposite  of  the  species  be  not  found 
in  the  opposite  of  the  genus,  then  neither  could 
the  species  rendered  be  in  the  genus  rendered. 
If,  then,  you  are  demolishing  a  view,  you 
should  follow  the  rule  as  stated;  but  if  establish¬ 
ing  one  there  is  but  one  way:  for  if  the  opposite 
species  be  found  in  the  opposite  genus,  then 
[5]  also  the  species  in  question  would  be  found 
in  the  genus  in  question:  e.g.  if  ‘blindness’  be 
a  form  of  ‘insensibility’,  then  ‘sight’  is  a  form 
of  ‘sensation’. 

Again,  look  at  the  negations  of  the  genus  and 
species  and  convert  the  order  of  terms,  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  method  described  in  the  case  of  Acci¬ 
dent:  1  e.g.  if  the  pleasant  be  a  kind  of  good,  what 
is  not  good  is  not  pleasant.  For  were  this  not 
[/o]  so,  something  not  good  as  well  would  then 
be  pleasant.  That,  however,  cannot  be,  for  it  is 
impossible,  if  ‘good’  be  the  genus  of  pleasant, 
that  anything  not  good  should  be  pleasant:  for 
of  things  of  which  the  genus  is  not  predicated, 
none  of  the  species  is  predicated  either.  Also, 
in  establishing  a  view,  you  should  adopt  the 
same  method  of  examination:  for  if  what  is  not 
good  be  not  pleasant,  then  what  is  pleasant  is 
good,  so  that  ‘good’  is  the  genus  of  ‘pleasant’. 

1  ii3b  15-26. 


er  the  genus  be  a  relative  term  as  well:  for  if 
the  species  be  a  relative  term,  so  too  is  the  ge¬ 
nus,  as  is  the  case  with  ‘double’  and  ‘multiple’: 
for  each  is  a  relative  term.  If,  on  the  other  hand, 
the  genus  be  a  relative  term,  there  is  no  neces¬ 
sity  that  the  species  should  be  so  as  well:  for 
‘knowledge’  is  a  relative  term,  but  not  so  ‘gram¬ 
mar’.  Or  possibly  not  even  the  first  statement 
[20]  would  be  generally  considered  true:  for 
virtue  is  a  kind  of  ‘noble’  and  a  kind  of  ‘good’ 
thing,  and  yet,  while  ‘virtue’  is  a  relative  term, 
‘good’  and  ‘noble’  are  not  relatives  but  quali¬ 
ties.  Again,  see  whether  the  species  fails  to  be 
used  in  the  same  relation  when  called  by  its 
own  name,  and  when  called  by  the  name  of  its 
genus:  e.g.  if  the  term  ‘double’  be  used  to 
[25]  mean  the  double  of  a  ‘half’,  then  also  the 
term  ‘multiple’  ought  to  be  used  to  mean  multi¬ 
ple  of  a  ‘half’.  Otherwise  ‘multiple’  could  not 
be  the  genus  of  ‘double’. 

Moreover,  see  whether  the  term  fail  to  be 
used  in  the  same  relation  both  when  called  by 
the  name  of  its  genus,  and  also  when  called  by 
those  of  all  the  genera  of  its  genus.  For  if  the 
[30]  double  be  a  multiple  of  a  half,  then  ‘in 
excess  of’  will  also  be  used  in  relation  to  a  ‘half’: 
and,  in  general,  the  double  will  be  called  by  the 
names  of  all  the  higher  genera  in  relation  to  a 
‘half’.  An  objection  may  be  raised  that  there  is 
no  necessity  for  a  term  to  be  used  in  the  same 
relation  when  called  by  its  own  name  and 
when  called  by  that  of  its  genus:  for  ‘knowl¬ 
edge’  is  called  knowledge  ‘of  an  object’,  where¬ 
as  it  is  called  a  ‘state’  and  ‘disposition’  not  of 
an  ‘object’  but  of  the  ‘soul’. 

[35]  Again,  see  whether  the  genus  and  the  spe¬ 
cies  be  used  in  the  same  way  in  respect  of  the 
inflexions  they  take,  e.g.  datives  and  genitives 
and  all  the  rest.  For  as  the  species  is  used,  so 
should  the  genus  be  as  well,  as  in  the  case  of 
‘double’  and  its  higher  genera:  for  we  say  both 
‘double  of’  and  ‘multiple  of’  a  thing.  Likewise, 
also,  in  the  case  of  ‘knowledge’:  for  both 
125a  ‘knowledge’  itself  and  its  genera,  e.g. 
‘disposition’  and  ‘state’,  are  said  to  be  ‘of’  some¬ 
thing.  An  objection  may  be  raised  that  in  some 
cases  it  is  not  so:  for  we  say  ‘superior  to  and 
‘contrary  to  so  and  so,  whereas  ‘other’,  which 
is  the  genus  of  these  terms,  demands  not  ‘to’ 
but  ‘than’:  for  the  expression  is  ‘other  than  so 
and  so. 

[5]  Again,  see  whether  terms  used  in  like  case- 
relationships  fail  to  yield  a  like  construction 
when  converted,  as  do  ‘double’  and  ‘multiple’. 
For  each  of  these  terms  takes  a  genitive  both  in 


T74 

itself  and  in  its  converted  form:  for  we  say  both 
‘a  half  of  and  ‘a  fraction  of’  something.  The 
case  is  the  same  also  as  regards  both  ‘knowl- 
[/o]  edge’  and  ‘conception’:  for  these  take  a 
genitive,  and  by  conversion  an  ‘object  of  knowl¬ 
edge’  and  an  ‘object  of  conception’  are  both 
alike  used  with  a  dative.  If,  then,  in  any  cases 
the  constructions  after  conversion  be  not  alike, 
clearly  the  one  term  is  not  the  genus  of  the 
other. 

Again,  see  whether  the  species  and  the  genus 
fail  to  be  used  in  relation  to  an  equal  number 
of  things:  for  the  general  view  is  that  the  uses 
[75]  of  both  are  alike  and  equal  in  number,  as 
is  the  case  with  ‘present’  and  ‘grant’.  For  a 
‘present’  is  of  something  or  to  some  one,  and 
also  a  ‘grant’  is  of  something  and  to  some  one: 
and  ‘grant’  is  the  genus  of  ‘present’,  for  a  ‘pres¬ 
ent’  is  a  ‘grant  that  need  not  be  returned’.  In 
some  cases,  however,  the  number  of  relations 
in  which  the  terms  are  used  happens  not  to  be 
[20]  equal,  for  while  ‘double’  is  double  of 
something,  we  speak  of  ‘in  excess’  or  ‘greater’ 
in  something,  as  well  as  of  or  than  something: 
for  what  is  in  excess  or  greater  is  always  in  ex¬ 
cess  in  something,  as  well  as  in  excess  of  some¬ 
thing.  Hence  the  terms  in  question  are  not  the 
genera  of  ‘double’,  inasmuch  as  they  are  not 
used  in  relation  to  an  equal  number  of  things 
with  the  species.  Or  possibly  it  is  not  univer¬ 
sally  true  that  species  and  genus  are  used  in  re¬ 
lation  to  an  equal  number  of  things. 

[25]  See,  also,  if  the  opposite  of  the  species 
have  the  opposite  of  the  genus  as  its  genus,  e.g. 
whether,  if  ‘multiple’  be  the  genus  of  ‘double’, 
‘fraction’  be  also  the  genus  of  ‘half’.  For  the 
opposite  of  the  genus  should  always  be  the  ge¬ 
nus  of  the  opposite  species.  If,  then,  any  one 
were  to  assert  that  knowledge  is  a  kind  of  sen¬ 
sation,  then  also  the  object  of  knowledge  will 
have  to  be  a  kind  of  object  of  sensation,  where¬ 
as  it  is  not:  for  an  object  of  knowledge  is  not 
[30]  always  an  object  of  sensation:  for  objects 
of  knowledge  include  some  of  the  objects  of 
intuition  as  well.  Hence  ‘object  of  sensation’  is 
not  the  genus  of  ‘object  of  knowledge’:  and  if 
this  be  so,  neither  is  ‘sensation’  the  genus  of 
‘knowledge’. 

Seeing  that  of  relative  terms  some  are  of  ne¬ 
cessity  found  in,  or  used  of,  the  things  in  rela¬ 
tion  to  which  they  happen  at  any  time  to  be 
[35]  used  (e.g.  ‘disposition’  and  ‘state’  and 
‘balance’;  for  in  nothing  else  can  the  aforesaid 
terms  possibly  be  found  except  in  the  things  in 
relation  to  which  they  are  used),  while  others 
need  not  be  found  in  the  things  in  relation  to 


125b 

which  they  are  used  at  any  time,  though  they 
still  may  be  (e.g.  if  the  term  ‘object  of  knowl¬ 
edge’  be  applied  to  the  soul:  for  it  is  quite  pos¬ 
sible  that  the  knowledge  of  itself  should  be  pos¬ 
sessed  by  the  soul  itself,  but  it  is  not  necessary, 
[40]  for  it  is  possible  for  this  same  knowledge 
125b  to  be  found  in  some  one  else),  while  for 
others,  again,  it  is  absolutely  impossible  that 
they  should  be  found  in  the  things  in  relation 
to  which  they  happen  at  any  time  to  be  used 
(as  e.g.  that  the  contrary  should  be  found  in 
the  contrary  or  knowledge  in  the  object  of 
knowledge,  unless  the  object  of  knowledge 
happen  to  be  a  soul  or  a  man) — you  should 
[5]  look,  therefore,  and  see  whether  he  places 
a  term  of  one  kind  inside  a  genus  that  is  not  of 
that  kind,  e.g.  suppose  he  has  said  that  ‘mem¬ 
ory’  is  the  ‘abiding  of  knowledge’.  For  ‘abid¬ 
ing’  is  always  found  in  that  which  abides,  and 
is  used  of  that,  so  that  the  abiding  of  knowl¬ 
edge  also  will  be  found  in  knowledge.  Mem¬ 
ory,  then,  is  found  in  knowledge,  seeing  that 
it  is  the  abiding  of  knowledge.  But  this  is  im- 
[/o]  possible,  for  memory  is  always  found  in 
the  soul.  The  aforesaid  commonplace  rule  is 
common  to  the  subject  of  Accident  as  well:  for 
it  is  all  the  same  to  say  that  ‘abiding’  is  the  ge¬ 
nus  of  memory,  or  to  allege  that  it  is  an  acci¬ 
dent  of  it.  For  if  in  any  way  whatever  memory 
be  the  abiding  of  knowledge,  the  same  argu¬ 
ment  in  regard  to  it  will  apply. 

5 

[75]  Again,  see  if  he  has  placed  what  is  a  ‘state’ 
inside  the  genus  ‘activity’,  or  an  activity  inside 
the  genus  ‘state’,  e.g.  by  defining  ‘sensation’  as 
‘movement  communicated  through  the  body’: 
for  sensation  is  a  ‘state’,  whereas  movement  is 
an  ‘activity’.  Likewise,  also,  if  he  has  said  that 
memory  is  a  ‘state  that  is  retentive  of  a  concep¬ 
tion’,  for  memory  is  never  a  state,  but  rather  an 
activity. 

[20]  They  also  make  a  bad  mistake  who  rank 
a  ‘state’  within  the  ‘capacity’  that  attends  it,  e.g. 
by  defining  ‘good  temper’  as  the  ‘control  of  an¬ 
ger’,  and  ‘courage’  and  ‘justice’  as  ‘control  of 
fears’  and  of  ‘gains’:  for  the  terms  ‘courageous’ 
and  ‘good-tempered’  are  applied  to  a  man  who 
is  immune  from  passion,  whereas  ‘self-con¬ 
trolled’  describes  the  man  who  is  exposed  to 
passion  and  not  led  by  it.  Quite  possibly,  in¬ 
deed,  each  of  the  former  is  attended  by  a  ca¬ 
pacity  such  that,  if  he  were  exposed  to  passion, 
[25]  he  would  control  it  and  not  be  led  by  it: 
but,  for  all  that,  this  is  not  what  is  meant  by 
being  ‘courageous’  in  the  one  case,  and  ‘good- 


TOPICS 


126b 

tempered’  in  the  other;  what  is  meant  .is  an  ab¬ 
solute  immunity  from  any  passions  of  that  kind 
at  all. 

Sometimes,  also,  people  state  any  kind  of  at¬ 
tendant  feature  as  the  genus,  e.g.  ‘pain’  as  the 

fenus  of  ‘anger’  and  ‘conception’  as  that  of 
30]  ‘conviction’.  For  both  of  the  things  in 
question  follow  in  a  certain  sense  upon  the  giv¬ 
en  species,  but  neither  of  them  is  genus  to  it. 
For  when  the  angry  man  feels  pain,  the  pain 
has  appeared  in  him  earlier  than  the  anger:  for 
his  anger  is  not  the  cause  of  his  pain,  but  his  pain 
of  his  anger,  so  that  anger  emphatically  is  not 
pain.  By  the  same  reasoning,  neither  is  convic¬ 
ts]  tion  conception:  for  it  is  possible  to  have  the 
same  conception  even  without  being  convinced 
of  it,  whereas  this  is  impossible  if  conviction  be 
a  species  of  conception:  for  it  is  impossible  for 
a  thing  still  to  remain  the  same  if  it  be  entirely 
transferred  out  of  its  species,  ju§t  as  neither 
could  the  same  animal  at  one  time  be,  and  at 
another  not  be,  a  man.  If,  on  the  other  hand, 
[40]  any  one  says  that  a  man  who  has  a  con¬ 
ception  must  of  necessity  be  also  convinced  of 
it,  then  ‘conception’  and  ‘conviction’  will  be 
126a  used  with  an  equal  denotation,  so  that 
not  even  so  could  the  former  be  the  genus  of  the 
latter:  for  the  denotation  of  the  genus  should 
be  wider. 

See,  also,  whether  both  naturally  come  to  be 
anywhere  in  the  same  thing:  for  what  contains 
the  species  contains  the  genus  as  well:  e.g.  what 
contains  ‘white’  contains  ‘colour’  as  well,  and 
[5]  what  contains  ‘knowledge  of  grammar’ 
contains  ‘knowledge’  as  well.  If,  therefore,  any 
one  says  that  ‘shame’  is  ‘fear’,  or  that  ‘anger’  is 
‘pain’,  the  result  will  be  that  genus  and  species 
are  not  found  in  the  same  thing:  for  shame  is 
found  in  the  ‘reasoning’  faculty,  whereas  fear  is 
in  the  ‘spirited’  faculty,  and  ‘pain’  is  found  in  the 
[/o]  faculty  of  ‘desires’  (for  in  this  pleasure 
also  is  found),  whereas  ‘anger’  is  found  in  the 
‘spirited’  faculty.  Hence  the  terms  rendered  are 
not  the  genera,  seeing  that  they  do  not  natu¬ 
rally  come  to  be  in  the  same  faculty  as  the  spe¬ 
cies.  Likewise,  also,  if  ‘friendship’  be  found  in 
the  faculty  of  desires,  you  may  take  it  that  it  is 
not  a  form  of  ‘wishing’:  for  wishing  is  always 
found  in  the  ‘reasoning’  faculty.  This  common¬ 
place  rule  is  useful  also  in  dealing  with  Acci- 
[75]  dent:  for  the  accident  and  that  of  which 
it  is  an  accident  are  both  found  in  the  same 
thing,  so  that  if  they  do  not  appear  in  the  same 
thing,  clearly  it  is  not  an  accident. 

Again,  see  if  the  species  partakes  of  the  ge¬ 
nus  attributed  only  in  some  particular  respect: 


175 

for  it  is  the  general  view  that  the  genus  is  not 
thus  imparted  only  in  some  particular  respect: 
for  a  man  is  not  an  animal  in  a  particular  re¬ 
spect,  nor  is  grammar  knowledge  in  a  particu¬ 
lar  respect  only.  Likewise  also  in  other  in- 
[20]  stances.  Look,  therefore,  and  see  if  in  the 
case  of  any  of  its  species  the  genus  be  imparted 
only  in  a  certain  respect;  e.g.  if  ‘animal’  has 
been  described  as  an  ‘object  of  perception’  or 
of  ‘sight’.  For  an  animal  is  an  object  of  percep¬ 
tion  or  of  sight  in  a  particular  respect  only;  for 
it  is  in  respect  of  its  body  that  it  is  perceived 
and  seen,  not  in  respect  of  its  soul,  so  that  ‘ob¬ 
ject  of  sight’  and  ‘object  of  perception’  could 
[25]  not  be  the  genus  of  ‘animal’. 

Sometimes  also  people  place  the  whole  in¬ 
side  the  part  without  detection,  defining  (e.g.) 
‘animal’  as  an  ‘animate  body’;  whereas  the  part 
is  not  predicated  in  any  sense  of  the  whole,  so 
that  ‘body’  could  not  be  the  genus  of  animal, 
seeing  that  it  is  a  part. 

[30]  See  also  if  he  has  put  anything  that  is 
blameworthy  or  objectionable  into  the  class 
‘capacity’  or  ‘capable’,  e.g.  by  defining  a  ‘soph¬ 
ist’  or  a  ‘slanderer’,  or  a  ‘thief’  as  ‘one  who  is 
capable  of  secretly  thieving  other  people’s 
property’.  For  none  of  the  aforesaid  characters 
is  so  called  because  he  is  ‘capable’  in  one  of 
these  respects:  for  even  God  and  the  good  man 
[35]  are  capable  of  doing  bad  things,  but  that 
is  not  their  character:  for  it  is  always  in  respect 
of  their  choice  that  bad  men  are  so  called. 
Moreover,  a  capacity  is  always  a  desirable 
thing:  for  even  the  capacities  for  doing  bad 
things  are  desirable,  and  therefore  it  is  we  say 
that  even  God  and  the  good  man  possess  them; 
for  they  are  capable  (we  say)  of  doing  evil.  So 
then  ‘capacity’  can  never  be  the  genus  of  any- 
126b  thing  blameworthy.  Else,  the  result  will 
be  that  what  is  blameworthy  is  sometimes  de¬ 
sirable:  for  there  will  be  a  certain  form  of  ca¬ 
pacity  that  is  blameworthy. 

Also,  see  if  he  has  put  anything  that  is  pre¬ 
cious  or  desirable  for  its  own  sake  into  the  class 
[5]  ‘capacity’  or  ‘capable’  or  ‘productive’  of  any¬ 
thing.  For  capacity,  and  what  is  capable  or  pro¬ 
ductive  of  anything,  is  always  desirable  for  the 
sake  of  something  else. 

Or  see  if  he  has  put  anything  that  exists  in 
two  genera  or  more  into  one  of  them  only.  For 
some  things  it  is  impossible  to  place  in  a  single 
genus,  e.g.  the  ‘cheat’  and  the  ‘slanderer’:  for 
neither  he  who  has  the  will  without  the  capac- 
[70]  ity,  nor  he  who  has  the  capacity  without 
the  will,  is  a  slanderer  or  cheat,  but  he  who  has 
both  of  them.  Hence  he  must  be  put  not  into 


BOOK  IV,  CHAPTERS  4-5 


i76  TOPICS  127* 


one  genus,  but  into  both  the  aforesaid  genera. 

Moreover,  people  sometimes  in  converse  or¬ 
der  render  genus  as  differentia,  and  differentia 
as  genus,  defining  (e.g.)  astonishment  as  ‘excess 
[75]  of  wonderment’  and  conviction  as  ‘vehe¬ 
mence  of  conception’.  For  neither  ‘excess’  nor 
‘vehemence’  is  the  genus,  but  the  differentia: 
for  astonishment  is  usually  taken  to  be  an  ‘ex¬ 
cessive  wonderment’,  and  conviction  to  be  a 
‘vehement  conception’,  so  that  ‘wonderment’ 
and  ‘conception’  are  the  genus,  while  ‘excess’ 
and  ‘vehemence’  are  the  differentia.  Moreover, 
if  any  one  renders  ‘excess’  and  ‘vehemence’  as 
[20]  genera,  then  inanimate  things  will  be 
convinced  and  astonished.  For  ‘vehemence’  and 
‘excess’  of  a  thing  are  found  in  a  thing  which 
is  thus  vehement  and  in  excess.  If,  therefore, 
astonishment  be  excess  of  wonderment  the  as¬ 
tonishment  will  be  found  in  the  wonderment, 
so  that  ‘wonderment’  will  be  astonished!  Like- 
[25]  wise,  also,  conviction  will  be  found  in  the 
conception,  if  it  be  ‘vehemence  of  conception’, 
so  that  the  conception  will  be  convinced.  More¬ 
over,  a  man  who  renders  an  answer  in  this  style 
will  in  consequence  find  himself  calling  vehe¬ 
mence  vehement  and  excess  excessive:  for  there 
is  such  a  thing  as  a  vehement  conviction:  if 
then  conviction  be  ‘vehemence’,  there  would  be 
[jo]  a  ‘vehement  vehemence’.  Likewise,  also, 
there  is  such  a  thing  as  excessive  astonishment: 
if  then  astonishment  be  an  excess,  there  would 
be  an  ‘excessive  excess’.  Whereas  neither  of 
these  things  is  generally  believed,  any  more 
than  that  knowledge  is  a  knower  or  motion  a 
moving  thing. 

Sometimes,  too,  people  make  the  bad  mis¬ 
take  of  putting  an  affection  into  that  which  is 
[^5]  affected,  as  its  genus,  e.g.  those  who  say 
that  immortality  is  everlasting  life:  for  immor¬ 
tality  seems  to  be  a  certain  affection  or  acci¬ 
dental  feature  of  life.  That  this  saying  is  true 
would  appear  clear  if  any  one  were  to  admit 
that  a  man  can  pass  from  being  mortal  and  be¬ 
come  immortal:  for  no  one  will  assert  that  he 
takes  another  life,  but  that  a  certain  acciden¬ 
tal  feature  or  affection  enters  into  this  one  as  it 
127*  is.  So  then  ‘life’  is  not  the  genus  of  im¬ 
mortality. 

Again,  see  if  to  an  affection  he  has  ascribed 
as  genus  the  object  of  which  it  is  an  affection, 
by  defining  (e.g.)  wind  as  ‘air  in  motion’. 
Rather,  wind  is  ‘a  movement  of  air’:  for  the 
[5]  same  air  persists  both  when  it  is  in  motion 
and  when  it  is  still.  Hence  wind  is  not  ‘air’  at 
all:  for  then  there  would  also  have  been  wind 
when  the  air  was  not  in  motion,  seeing  that  the 


same  air  which  formed  the  wind  persists.  Like¬ 
wise,  also,  in  other  cases  of  the  kind.  Even, 
then,  if  we  ought  in  this  instance  to  admit  the 
oint  that  wind  is  ‘air  in  motion’,  yet  we  should 
/o]  accept  a  definition  of  the  kind,  not  about 
all  those  things  of  which  the  genus  is  not  true, 
but  only  in  cases  where  the  genus  rendered  is 
a  true  predicate.  For  in  some  cases,  e.g. 
‘mud’  or  ‘snow’,  it  is  not  generally  held  to  be 
true.  For  people  tell  you  that  snow  is  ‘frozen 
water’  and  mud  is  ‘earth  mixed  with  moisture’, 
[75]  whereas  snow  is  not  water,  nor  mud 
earth,  so  that  neither  of  the  terms  rendered 
could  be  the  genus:  for  the  genus  should  be  true 
of  all  its  species.  Likewise  neither  is  wine  ‘fer¬ 
mented  water’,  as  Empedocles  speaks  of  ‘water 
fermented  in  wood’;1  for  it  simply  is  not  water 
at  all. 

6 

[20]  Moreover,  see  whether  the  term  rendered 
fail  to  be  the  genus  of  anything  at  all;  for  then 
clearly  it  also  fails  to  be  the  genus  of  the  spe¬ 
cies  mentioned.  Examine  the  point  by  seeing 
whether  the  objects  that  partake  of  the  genus 
fail  to  be  specifically  different  from  one  anoth¬ 
er,  e.g.  white  objects:  for  these  do  not  differ 
specifically  from  one  another,  whereas  of  a  ge¬ 
nus  the  species  are  always  different,  so  that 
[25]  ‘white’  could  not  be  the  genus  of  any¬ 
thing. 

Again,  see  whether  he  has  named  as  genus 
or  differentia  some  feature  that  goes  with  ev¬ 
erything:  for  the  number  of  attributes  that  fol¬ 
low  everything  is  comparatively  large:  thus 
(e.g.)  ‘Being’  and  ‘Unity’  are  among  the  num¬ 
ber  of  attributes  that  follow  everything.  If, 
therefore,  he  has  rendered  ‘Being’  as  a  genus, 
clearly  it  would  be  the  genus  of  everything, 
seeing  that  it  is  predicated  of  everything;  for 
[jo]  the  genus  is  never  predicated  of  anything 
except  of  its  species.  Hence  Unity,  inter  alia , 
will  be  a  species  of  Being.  The  result,  there¬ 
fore,  is  that  of  all  things  of  which  the  genus  is 
predicated,  the  species  is  predicated  as  well, 
seeing  that  Being  and  Unity  are  predicates  of 
absolutely  everything,  whereas  the  predication 
of  the  species  ought  to  be  of  narrower  range. 
[35]  !f»  on  the  other  hand,  he  has  named  as 
differentia  some  attribute  that  follows  every¬ 
thing,  clearly  the  denotation  of  the  differentia 
will  be  equal  to,  or  wider  than,  that  of  the  ge¬ 
nus.  For  if  the  genus,  too,  be  some  attribute 
that  follows  everything,  the  denotation  of  the 
differentia  will  be  equal  to  its  denotation,  while 
1  Fr.  81. 


128*  BOOK  IV,  CHAPTERS  5-6  177 


if  the  genus  do  not  follow  everything,  it  will  be 
still  wider. 

127b  Moreover,  see  if  the  description  ‘inherent 
in  S’  be  used  of  the  genus  rendered  in  relation 
to  its  species,  as  it  is  used  of  ‘white’  in  the  case 
of  snow,  thus  showing  clearly  that  it  could  not 
be  the  genus:  for  ‘ true  of  S’  is  the  only  descrip¬ 
tion  used  of  the  genus  in  relation  to  its  species. 
[5]  Look  and  see  also  if  the  genus  fails  to  be 
synonymous  with  its  species.  For  the  genus  is 
always  predicated  of  its  species  synonymously. 

Moreover,  beware,  whenever  both  species 
and  genus  have  a  contrary,  and  he  places  the 
better  of  the  contraries  inside  the  worse  genus: 
for  the  result  will  be  that  the  remaining  species 
[/o]  will  be  found  in  the  remaining  genus,  see¬ 
ing  that  contraries  are  found  in  contrary  gen¬ 
era,  so  that  the  better  species  will  be  found  in 
the  worse  genus  and  the  worse  in  the  better: 
whereas  the  usual  view  is  that  of  the  better  spe¬ 
cies  the  genus  too  is  better.  Also  see  if  he  has 
placed  the  species  inside  the  worse  and  not  in¬ 
side  the  better  genus,  when  it  is  at  the  same 
time  related  in  like  manner  to  both,  as  (e.g.) 
[75]  if  he  has  defined  the  ‘soul’  as  a  ‘form  of 
motion’  or  ‘a  form  of  moving  thing’.  For  the 
same  soul  is  usually  thought  to  be  a  principle 
alike  of  rest  and  of  motion,  so  that,  if  rest  is 
the  better  of  the  two,  this  is  the  genus  into 
which  the  soul  should  have  been  put. 

Moreover,  judge  by  means  of  greater  and  less 
degrees:  if  overthrowing  a  view,  see  whether 
the  genus  admits  of  a  greater  degree,  whereas 
neither  the  species  itself  does  so,  nor  any  term 
[20]  that  is  called  after  it:  e.g.  if  virtue  admits 
of  a  greater  degree,  so  too  does  justice  and  the 
just  man:  for  one  man  is  called  ‘more  just  than 
another’.  If,  therefore,  the  genus  rendered  ad¬ 
mits  of  a  greater  degree,  whereas  neither  the 
species  does  so  itself  nor  yet  any  term  called 
after  it,  then  what  has  been  rendered  could  not 
[25]  be  the  genus. 

Again,  if  what  is  more  generally,  or  as  gen¬ 
erally,  thought  to  be  the  genus  be  not  so,  clearly 
neither  is  the  genus  rendered.  The  common¬ 
place  rule  in  question  is  useful  especially  in 
cases  where  the  species  appears  to  have  several 
predicates  in  the  category  of  essence,  and  where 
no  distinction  has  been  drawn  between  them, 
and  we  cannot  say  which  of  them  is  genus;  e.g. 
[jo]  both  ‘pain’  and  the  ‘conception  of  a  slight’ 
are  usually  thought  to  be  predicates  of  ‘anger’ 
in  the  category  of  essence:  for  the  angry  man  is 
both  in  pain  and  also  conceives  that  he  is  slight¬ 
ed.  The  same  mode  of  inquiry  may  be  applied 
also  to  the  case  of  the  species,  by  comparing  it 


with  some  other  species:  for  if  the  one  which 
is  more  generally,  or  as  generally,  thought  to 
[55]  be  found  in  the  genus  rendered  be  not 
found  therein,  then  clearly  neither  could  the 
species  rendered  be  found  therein. 

In  demolishing  a  view,  therefore,  you  should 
follow  the  rule  as  stated.  In  establishing  one, 
on  the  other  hand,  the  commonplace  rule  that 
you  should  see  if  both  the  genus  rendered  and 
128*  the  species  admit  of  a  greater  degree  will 
not  serve:  for  even  though  both  admit  it,  it  is 
still  possible  for  one  not  to  be  the  genus  of  the 
other.  For  both  ‘beautiful’  and  ‘white’  admit  of 
a  greater  degree,  and  neither  is  the  genus  of 
the  other.  On  the  other  hand,  the  comparison 
[5]  of  the  genera  and  of  the  species  one  with 
another  is  of  use:  e.g.  supposing  A  and  B  to 
have  a  like  claim  to  be  genus,  then  if  one  be  a 
genus,  so  also  is  the  other.  Likewise,  also,  if 
what  has  less  claim  be  a  genus,  so  also  is  what 
has  more  claim:  e.g.  if  ‘capacity’  have  more 
claim  than  ‘virtue’  to  be  the  genus  of  self-con¬ 
trol,  and  virtue  be  the  genus,  so  also  is  capacity. 
The  same  observations  will  apply  also  in  the 
[/o]  case  of  the  species.  For  instance,  suppos¬ 
ing  A  and  B  to  have  a  like  claim  to  be  a  spe¬ 
cies  of  the  genus  in  question,  then  if  the  one  be 
a  species,  so  also  is  the  other:  and  if  that  which 
is  less  generally  thought  to  be  so  be  a  species, 
so  also  is  that  which  is  more  generally  thought 
to  be  so. 

Moreover,  to  establish  a  view,  you  should 
look  and  see  if  the  genus  is  predicated  in  the 
category  of  essence  of  those  things  of  which  it 
has  been  rendered  as  the  genus,  supposing  the 
[75]  species  rendered  to  be  not  one  single  spe¬ 
cies  but  several  different  ones:  for  then  clearly 
it  will  be  the  genus.  If,  on  the  other,  the  species 
rendered  be  single,  look  and  see  whether  the 
genus  be  predicated  in  the  category  of  essence 
of  other  species  as  well:  for  then,  again,  the  re¬ 
sult  will  be  that  it  is  predicated  of  several  dif¬ 
ferent  species. 

[20]  Since  some  people  think  that  the  differen¬ 
tia,  too,  is  a  predicate  of  the  various  species  in 
the  category  of  essence,  you  should  distinguish 
the  genus  from  the  differentia  by  employing 
the  aforesaid  elementary  principles — ( a )  that 
the  genus  has  a  wider  denotation  than  the  dif¬ 
ferentia;  (b)  that  in  rendering  the  essence  of  a 
thing  it  is  more  fitting  to  state  the  genus  than 
the  differentia:  for  any  one  who  says  that  ‘man’ 
[25]  is  an  ‘animal’  shows  what  man  is  better 
than  he  who  describes  him  as  ‘walking’;  also 
(c)  that  the  differentia  always  signifies  a  qual¬ 
ity  of  the  genus,  whereas  the  genus  does  not  do 


i78  TOPICS  129* 


this  of  the  differentia:  for  he  who  says  ‘walk¬ 
ing’  describes  an  animal  of  a  certain  quality, 
whereas  he  who  says  ‘animal’  does  not  de¬ 
scribe  a  walking  thing  of  a  certain  quality. 

[jo]  The  differentia,  then,  should  be  distin¬ 
guished  from  the  genus  in  this  manner.  Now 
seeing  it  is  generally  held  that  if  what  is  musi¬ 
cal,  in  being  musical,  possesses  knowledge  in 
some  respect,  then  also  ‘music’  is  a  particular 
kind  of  ‘knowledge’;  and  also  that  if  what 
walks  is  moved  in  walking,  then  ‘walking’  is  a 
particular  kind  of  ‘movement’;  you  should 
therefore  examine  in  the  aforesaid  manner  any 
genus  in  which  you  want  to  establish  the  ex¬ 
istence  of  something;  e.g.  if  you  wish  to  prove 
[55]  that  ‘knowledge’  is  a  form  of  ‘conviction’, 
see  whether  the  knower  in  knowing  is  con¬ 
vinced:  for  then  clearly  knowledge  would  be  a 
particular  kind  of  conviction.  You  should  pro¬ 
ceed  in  the  same  way  also  in  regard  to  the  oth¬ 
er  cases  of  this  kind. 

Moreover,  seeing  that  it  is  difficult  to  distin¬ 


guish  whatever  always  follows  along  with  a 
thing,  and  is  not  convertible  with  it,  from  its 
genus,  if  A  follows  B  universally,  whereas  B 
128b  does  not  follow  A  universally — as  e.g. 
‘rest’  always  follows  a  ‘calm’  and  ‘divisibility’ 
follows  ‘number’,  but  not  conversely  (for  the 
divisible  is  not  always  a  number,  nor  rest  a 
calm) — you  may  yourself  assume  in  your  treat¬ 
ment  of  them  that  the  one  which  always  fol¬ 
lows  is  the  genus,  whenever  the  other  is  not 
[5]  convertible  with  it:  if,  on  the  other  hand, 
some  one  else  puts  forward  the  proposition, 
do  not  accept  it  universally.  An  objection  to 
it  is  that  ‘not-being’  always  follows  what  is 
‘coming  to  be’  (for  what  is  coming  to  be  is 
not)  and  is  not  convertible  with  it  (for  what 
is  not  is  not  always  coming  to  be),  and  that 
still  ‘not-being’  is  not  the  genus  of  ‘coming 
to  be’:  for  ‘not-being’  has  not  any  species 
at  all. 

[/o]  Questions,  then,  in  regard  to  Genus 
should  be  investigated  in  the  ways  described. 


BOOK  V 


1 

[14]  The  question  whether  the  attribute  stated 
is  or  is  not  a  property,  should  be  examined  by 
the  following  methods: 

Any  ‘property’  rendered  is  always  either  es¬ 
sential  and  permanent  or  relative  and  tempo¬ 
rary:  e.g.  it  is  an  ‘essential  property’  of  man  to 
be  ‘by  nature  a  civilized  animal’:  a  ‘relative 
property’  is  one  like  that  of  the  soul  in  relation 
to  the  body,  viz.  that  the  one  is  fitted  to  com¬ 
mand,  and  the  other  to  obey:  a  ‘permanent 
property’  is  one  like  the  property  which  be- 
[20]  longs  to  God,  of  being  an  ‘immortal  liv¬ 
ing  being’:  a  ‘temporary  property’  is  one  like 
the  property  which  belongs  to  any  particular 
man  of  walking  in  the  gymnasium. 

[The  rendering  of  a  property  ‘relatively’ 
gives  rise  either  to  two  problems  or  to  four.  For 
if  he  at  the  same  time  render  this  property  of 
one  thing  and  deny  it  of  another,  only  two 
problems  arise,  as  in  the  case  of  a  statement 
[25]  that  it  is  a  property  of  a  man,  in  relation 
to  a  horse,  to  be  a  biped.  For  one  might  try 
both  to  show  that  a  man  is  not  a  biped,  and  also 
that  a  horse  is  a  biped:  in  both  ways  the  prop¬ 
erty  would  be  upset.  If  on  the  other  hand  he 
render  one  apiece  of  two  attributes  to  each  of 
two  things,  and  deny  it  in  each  case  of  the 
other,  there  will  then  be  four  problems;  as  in 
the  case  of  a  statement  that  it  is  a  property  of  a 


[jo]  man  in  relation  to  a  horse  for  the  former 
to  be  a  biped  and  the  latter  a  quadruped.  For 
then  it  is  possible  to  try  to  show  both  that  a 
man  is  not  naturally  a  biped,  and  that  he  is  a 
quadruped,  and  also  that  the  horse  both  is  a  bi¬ 
ped,  and  is  not  a  quadruped.  If  you  show  any 
of  these  at  all,  the  intended  attribute  is  demol¬ 
ished.] 

An  ‘essential’  property  is  one  which  is  ren¬ 
dered  of  a  thing  in  comparison  with  every¬ 
th]  thing  else  and  distinguishes  the  said  thing 
from  everything  else,  as  does  ‘a  mortal  living 
being  capable  of  receiving  knowledge’  in  the 
case  of  man.  A  ‘relative’  property  is  one  which 
separates  its  subject  off  not  from  everything 
else  but  only  from  a  particular  definite  thing,  as 
does  the  property  which  virtue  possesses,  in 
comparison  with  knowledge,  viz.  that  the  for¬ 
mer  is  naturally  produced  in  more  than  one 
faculty,  whereas  the  latter  is  produced  in  that 
of  reason  alone,  and  in  those  who  have  a  rea¬ 
soning  faculty.  A  ‘permanent’  property  is  one 
129*  which  is  true  at  every  time,  and  never 
fails,  like  being  ‘compounded  of  soul  and  body’, 
in  the  case  of  a  living  creature.  A  ‘temporary’ 
property  is  one  which  is  true  at  some  particular 
time,  and  does  not  of  necessity  always  follow; 
as,  of  some  particular  man,  that  he  walks  in 
[5]  the  market-place. 

To  render  a  property  ‘relatively’  to  some¬ 
thing  else  means  to  state  the  difference  between 


129b  BOOK  IV,  CHAPTER  6- 

them  as  it  is  found  either  universally  and  al¬ 
ways,  or  generally  and  in  most  cases:  thus  a 
difference  that  is  found  universally  and  always, 
is  one  such  as  man  possesses  in  comparison 
with  a  horse,  viz.  being  a  biped:  for  a  man  is 
always  and  in  every  case  a  biped,  whereas  a 
[/o]  horse  is  never  a  biped  at  any  time.  On  the 
other  hand,  a  difference  that  is  found  generally 
and  in  most  cases,  is  one  such  as  the  faculty 
of  reason  possesses  in  comparison  with  that 
of  desire  and  spirit,  in  that  the  former  com¬ 
mands,  while  the  latter  obeys:  for  the  reason¬ 
ing  faculty  does  not  always  command,  but 
sometimes  also  is  under  command,  nor  is 
[75]  that  of  desire  and  spirit  always  under 
command,  but  also  on  occasion  assumes  the 
command,  whenever  the  soul  of  a  man  is 
vicious. 

Of  ‘properties’  the  most  ‘arguable’  are  the 
essential  and  permanent  and  the  relative.  For  a 
relative  property  gives  rise,  as  we  said  before,1 
[20]  to  several  questions:  for  of  necessity  the 
questions  arising  are  either  two  or  four,  or  that 
arguments  in  regard  to  these  are  several.  An  es¬ 
sential  and  a  permanent  property  you  can  dis¬ 
cuss  in  relation  to  many  things,  or  can  ob¬ 
serve  in  relation  to  many  periods  of  time:  if 
‘essential’,  discuss  it  in  comparison  with  many 
[25]  things:  for  the  property  ought  to  belong 
to  its  subject  in  comparison  with  every  single 
thing  that  is,  so  that  if  the  subject  be  not  dis¬ 
tinguished  by  it  in  comparison  with  every¬ 
thing  else,  the  property  could  not  have  been 
rendered  correctly.  So  a  permanent  property 
you  should  observe  in  relation  to  many  periods 
of  time;  for  if  it  does  not  or  did  not,  or  is  not 
going  to,  belong,  it  will  not  be  a  property.  On 
the  other  hand,  about  a  temporary  property  we 
do  not  inquire  further  than  in  regard  to  the 
time  called  ‘the  present’;  and  so  arguments  in 
[jo]  regard  to  it  are  not  many;  whereas  an 
‘arguable’  question  is  one  in  regard  to  which  it 
is  possible  for  arguments  both  numerous  and 
good  to  arise. 

The  so-called  ‘relative’  property,  then,  should 
be  examined  by  means  of  the  commonplace  ar¬ 
guments  relating  to  Accident,  to  see  whether  it 
belongs  to  the  one  thing  and  not  to  the  other: 
on  the  other  hand,  permanent  and  essential 
[35]  properties  should  be  considered  by  the 
following  methods. 

2 

I29b  First,  see  whether  the  property  has  or  has 
not  been  rendered  correctly.  Of  a  rendering  be- 

1  I28b  22. 


BOOK  V,  CHAPTERS  1-2  179 

ing  incorrect  or  correct,  one  test  is  to  see  wheth¬ 
er  the  terms  in  which  the  property  is  stated  are 
not  or  are  more  intelligible — for  destructive 
purposes,  whether  they  are  not  so,  and  for  con- 
[5]  structive  purposes,  whether  they  are  so.  Of 
the  terms  not  being  more  intelligible,  one  test 
is  to  see  whether  the  property  which  he  renders 
is  altogether  more  unintelligible  than  the  sub¬ 
ject  whose  property  he  has  stated:  for,  if  so,  the 
property  will  not  have  been  stated  correctly. 
For  the  object  of  getting  a  property  constituted 
is  to  be  intelligible:  the  terms  therefore  in 
which  it  is  rendered  should  be  more  intelligi¬ 
ble:  for  in  that  case  it  will  be  possible  to  con- 
[/o]  ceive  it  more  adequately,  e.g.  any  one  who 
has  stated  that  it  is  a  property  of  ‘fire’  to  ‘bear  a 
very  close  resemblance  to  the  soul’,  uses  the 
term  ‘soul’,  which  is  less  intelligible  than  ‘fire’ 
— for  we  know  better  what  fire  is  than  what 
soul  is — ,  and  therefore  a  ‘very  close  resemblance 
to  the  soul’  could  not  be  correctly  stated  to  be  a 
property  of  fire.  Another  test  is  to  see  whether 
the  attribution  of  A  (property)  to  B  (subject) 
fails  to  be  more  intelligible.  For  not  only  should 
the  property  be  more  intelligible  than  its  sub- 
[  7  5 1  ject,  but  also  it  should  be  something  whose 
attribution  to  the  particular  subject  is  a  more 
intelligible  attribution.  For  he  who  does  not 
know  whether  it  is  an  attribute  of  the  par¬ 
ticular  subject  at  all,  will  not  know  either 
whether  it  belongs  to  it  alone,  so  that  which¬ 
ever  of  these  results  happens,  its  character  as  a 
property  becomes  obscure.  Thus  (e.g.)  a  man 
who  has  stated  that  it  is  a  property  of  fire  to  be 
‘the  primary  element  wherein  the  soul  is  nat¬ 
urally  found’,  has  introduced  a  subject  which 
is  less  intelligible  than  ‘fire’,  viz.  whether  the 
[20]  soul  is  found  in  it,  and  whether  it  is 
found  there  primarily;  and  therefore  to  be  ‘the 
primary  element  in  which  the  soul  is  naturally 
found’  could  not  be  correctly  stated  to  be  a 
property  of  ‘fire’.  On  the  other  hand,  for  con¬ 
structive  purposes,  see  whether  the  terms  in 
which  the  property  is  stated  are  more  intelligi¬ 
ble,  and  if  they  are  more  intelligible  in  each  of 
the  aforesaid  ways.  For  then  the  property  will 
have  been  correctly  stated  in  this  respect:  for 
[25]  of  constructive  arguments,  showing  the 
correctness  of  a  rendering,  some  will  show  the 
correctness  merely  in  this  respect,  while  others 
will  show  it  without  qualification.  Thus  (e.g.) 
a  man  who  has  said  that  the  ‘possession  of  sen¬ 
sation’  is  a  property  of  ‘animal’  has  both  used 
more  intelligible  terms  and  has  rendered  the 
property  more  intelligible  in  each  of  the  afore¬ 
said  senses;  so  that  to  ‘possess  sensation’  would 


i8o 

in  this  respect  have  been  correctly  rendered  as 
a  property  of  ‘animal’. 

[30]  Next,  for  destructive  purposes,  see  wheth¬ 
er  any  of  the  terms  rendered  in  the  property  is 
used  in  more  than  one  sense,  or  whether  the 
whole  expression  too  signifies  more  than  one 
thing.  For  then  the  property  will  not  have  been 
correctly  stated.  Thus  (e.g.)  seeing  that  to  ‘be 
sentient’  signifies  more  than  one  thing,  viz.  ( i ) 
to  possess  sensation,  (2)  to  use  one’s  sensation, 
[35]  ‘being  naturally  sentient’  could  not  be  a 
130a  correct  statement  of  a  property  of  ‘ani¬ 
mal’.  The  reason  why  the  term  you  use,  or 
the  whole  expression  signifying  the  property, 
should  not  bear  more  than  one  meaning  is 
this,  that  an  expression  bearing  more  than  one 
meaning  makes  the  object  described  obscure, 
because  the  man  who  is  about  to  attempt  an 
argument  is  in  doubt  which  of  the  various 
senses  the  expression  bears:  and  this  will  not 
do,  for  the  object  of  rendering  the  property  is 
[5]  that  he  may  understand.  Moreover,  in  addi¬ 
tion  to  this,  it  is  inevitable  that  those  who  ren¬ 
der  a  property  after  this  fashion  should  be 
somehow  refuted  whenever  any  one  addresses 
his  syllogism  to  that  one  of  the  term’s  several 
meanings  which  does  not  agree.  For  construc¬ 
tive  purposes,  on  the  other  hand,  see  whether 
both  all  the  terms  and  also  the  expression  as  a 
[/o]  whole  avoid  bearing  more  than  one  sense: 
for  then  the  property  will  have  been  correctly 
stated  in  this  respect.  Thus  (e.g.)  seeing  that 
‘body’  does  not  bear  several  meanings,  nor 
‘quickest  to  move  upwards  in  space’,  nor  yet 
the  whole  expression  made  by  putting  them  to¬ 
gether,  it  would  be  correct  in  this  respect  to  say 
that  it  is  a  property  of  fire  to  be  the  ‘body  quick¬ 
est  to  move  upwards  in  space’. 

[75]  Next,  for  destructive  purposes,  see  if  the 
term  of  which  he  renders  the  property  is  used 
in  more  than  one  sense,  and  no  distinction  has 
been  drawn  as  to  which  of  them  it  is  whose 
property  he  is  stating:  for  then  the  property 
will  not  have  been  correctly  rendered.  The  rea¬ 
sons  why  this  is  so  are  quite  clear  from  what 
has  been  said  above:1  for  the  same  results  are 
bound  to  follow.  Thus  (e.g.)  seeing  that  ‘the 
[20]  knowledge  of  this’  signifies  many  things 
— for  it  means  (1)  the  possession  of  knowledge 
by  it,  (2)  the  use  of  its  knowledge  by  it,  (3) 
the  existence  of  knowledge  about  it,  (4)  the 
use  of  knowledge  about  it — no  property  of  the 
‘knowledge  of  this’  could  be  rendered  correctly 
unless  he  draw  a  distinction  as  to  which  of 
these  it  is  whose  property  he  is  rendering.  For 
1  i29b  7. 


130b 

constructive  purposes,  a  man  should  see  if  the 
term  of  which  he  is  rendering  the  property 
[25]  avoids  bearing  many  senses  and  is  one 
and  simple:  for  then  the  property  will  have 
been  correctly  stated  in  this  respect.  Thus  (e.g.) 
seeing  that  ‘man’  is  used  in  a  single  sense, 
‘naturally  civilized  animal’  would  be  correctly 
stated  as  a  property  of  man. 

Next,  for  destructive  purposes,  see  whether 
[30]  the  same  term  has  been  repeated  in  the 
property.  For  people  often  do  this  undetected 
in  rendering  ‘properties’  also,  just  as  they  do  in 
their  ‘definitions’  as  well:  but  a  property  to 
which  this  has  happened  will  not  have  been 
correctly  stated:  for  the  repetition  of  it  con¬ 
fuses  the  hearer;  thus  inevitably  the  meaning 
becomes  obscure,  and  further,  such  people  are 
thought  to  babble.  Repetition  of  the  same  term 
[35]  is  likely  to  happen  in  two  ways;  one  is, 
when  a  man  repeatedly  uses  the  same  word,  as 
would  happen  if  any  one  were  to  render,  as  a 
property  of  fire,  ‘the  body  which  is  the  most 
rarefied  of  bodies’  (for  he  has  repeated  the 
word  ‘body’);  the  second  is,  if  a  man  replaces 
words  by  their  definitions,  as  would  happen  if 
130b  any  one  were  to  render,  as  a  property  of 
earth,  ‘the  substance  which  is  by  its  nature 
most  easily  of  all  bodies  borne  downwards  in 
space’,  and  were  then  to  substitute  ‘substances 
of  such  and  such  a  kind’  for  the  word  ‘bodies’: 
for  ‘body’  and  ‘a  substance  of  such  and  such  a 
kind’  mean  one  and  the  same  thing.  For  he  will 
have  repeated  the  word  ‘substance’,  and  ac¬ 
cordingly  neither  of  the  properties  would  be 
[5]  correctly  stated.  For  constructive  purposes, 
on  the  other  hand,  see  whether  he  avoids  ever 
repeating  the  same  term;  for  then  the  property 
will  in  this  respect  have  been  correctly  ren¬ 
dered.  Thus  (e.g.)  seeing  that  he  who  has 
stated  ‘animal  capable  of  acquiring  knowledge’ 
as  a  property  of  man  has  avoided  repeating  the 
[/o]  same  term  several  times,  the  property 
would  in  this  respect  have  been  correctly  ren¬ 
dered  of  man. 

Next,  for  destructive  purposes,  see  whether 
he  has  rendered  in  the  property  any  such  term 
as  is  a  universal  attribute.  For  one  which  does 
not  distinguish  its  subject  from  other  things  is 
useless,  and  it  is  the  business  of  the  language 
of  ‘properties’,  as  also  of  the  language  of  defini- 
[75]  tions,  to  distinguish.  In  the  case  contem¬ 
plated,  therefore,  the  property  will  not  have 
been  correctly  rendered.  Thus  (e.g.)  a  man  who 
has  stated  that  it  is  a  property  of  knowledge  to 
be  a  ‘conception  incontrovertible  by  argument, 
because  of  its  unity’,  has  used  in  the  property  a 


TOPICS 


131* 

term  of  that  kind,  viz.  'unity’,  which,  is  a  uni¬ 
versal  attribute;  and  therefore  the  property 
of  knowledge  could  not  have  been  correctly 
stated.  For  constructive  purposes,  on  the  other 
hand,  see  whether  he  has  avoided  all  terms  that 
are  common  to  everything  and  used  a  term  that 
distinguishes  the  subject  from  something:  for 
then  the  property  will  in  this  respect  have  been 
[20]  correctly  stated.  Thus  (e.g.)  inasmuch  as 
he  who  has  said  that  it  is  a  property  of  a  ‘living 
creature’  to  ‘have  a  soul’  has  used  no  term  that 
is  common  to  everything,  it  would  in  this  re¬ 
spect  have  been  correctly  stated  to  be  a  property 
of  a  ‘living  creature’  to  ‘have  a  soul’. 

Next,  for  destructive  purposes  see  whether 
he  renders  more  than  one  property  of  the  same 
thing,  without  a  definite  proviso  that  he  is 
stating  more  than  one:  for  then  the  property 
[25]  will  not  have  been  correctly  stated.  For 
just  as  in  the  case  of  definitions  too  there  should 
be  no  further  addition  beside  the  expression 
which  shows  the  essence,  so  too  in  the  case  of 
properties  nothing  further  should  be  rendered 
beside  the  expression  that  constitutes  the  prop¬ 
erty  mentioned:  for  such  an  addition  is  made 
to  no  purpose.  Thus  (e.g.)  a  man  who  has  said 
that  it  is  a  property  of  fire  to  be  ‘the  most  rare- 
[jo]  fied  and  lightest  body’  has  rendered  more 
than  one  property  (for  each  term  is  a  true 
predicate  of  fire  alone);  and  so  it  could  not  be 
a  correctly  stated  property  of  fire  to  be  ‘the  most 
rarefied  and  lightest  body’.  On  the  other  hand, 
for  constructive  purposes,  see  whether  he  has 
avoided  rendering  more  than  one  property  of 
the  same  thing,  and  has  rendered  one  only:  for 
then  the  property  will  in  this  respect  have  been 
[35]  correctly  stated.  Thus  (e.g.)  a  man  who 
has  said  that  it  is  a  property  of  a  liquid  to  be  a 
‘body  adaptable  to  every  shape’  has  rendered 
as  its  property  a  single  character  and  not  sev¬ 
eral,  and  so  the  property  of  ‘liquid’  would  in 
this  respect  have  been  correctly  stated. 

3 

Next,  for  destructive  purposes,  see  whether  he 
has  employed  either  the  actual  subject  whose 
property  he  is  rendering,  or  any  of  its  species: 
for  then  the  property  will  not  have  been  cor- 
131*  rectly  stated.  For  the  object  of  rendering 
the  property  is  that  people  may  understand: 
now  the  subject  itself  is  just  as  unintelligible  as 
it  was  to  start  with,  while  any  one  of  its  spe¬ 
cies  is  posterior  to  it,  and  so  is  no  more  intelligi¬ 
ble.  Accordingly  it  is  impossible  to  understand 
anything  further  by  the  use  of  these  terms. 
Thus  (e.g.)  any  one  who  has  said  that  it  is  a 


181 

property  of  ‘animal’  to  be  ‘the  substance  to 
which  “man”  belongs  as  a  species’  has  em- 
[5]  ployed  one  of  its  species,  and  therefore  the 
property  could  not  have  been  correctly  stated. 
For  constructive  purposes,  on  the  other  hand, 
see  whether  he  avoids  introducing  either  the 
subject  itself  or  any  of  its  species:  for  then  the 
property  will  in  this  respect  have  been  cor¬ 
rectly  stated.  Thus  (e.g.)  a  man  who  has  stated 
that  it  is  a  property  of  a  living  creature  to  be 
‘compounded  of  soul  and  body’  has  avoided  in¬ 
troducing  among  the  rest  either  the  subject  it- 
[/o]  self  or  any  of  its  species,  and  therefore  in 
this  respect  the  property  of  a  ‘living  creature’ 
would  have  been  correctly  rendered. 

You  should  inquire  in  the  same  way  also  in 
the  case  of  other  terms  that  do  or  do  not  make 
the  subject  more  intelligible:  thus,  for  destruc¬ 
tive  purposes,  see  whether  he  has  employed 
anything  either  opposite  to  the  subject  or,  in 
[75]  general,  anything  simultaneous  by  nature 
with  it  or  posterior  to  it:  for  then  the  property 
will  not  have  been  correctly  stated.  For  an  op¬ 
posite  is  simultaneous  by  nature  with  its  oppo¬ 
site,  and  what  is  simultaneous  by  nature  or  is 
posterior  to  it  does  not  make  its  subject  more 
intelligible.  Thus  (e.g.)  any  one  who  has  said 
that  it  is  a  property  of  good  to  be  ‘the  most 
direct  opposite  of  evil’,  has  employed  the  oppo¬ 
site  of  good,  and  so  the  property  of  good  could 
[20]  not  have  been  correctly  rendered.  For 
constructive  purposes,  on  the  other  hand,  see 
whether  he  has  avoided  employing  anything 
either  opposite  to,  or,  in  general,  simultaneous 
by  nature  with  the  subject,  or  posterior  to  it: 
for  then  the  property  will  in  this  respect  have 
been  correctly  rendered.  Thus  (e.g.)  a  man 
who  has  stated  that  it  is  a  property  of  knowl¬ 
edge  to  be  ‘the  most  convincing  conception’ 
has  avoided  employing  anything  either  oppo¬ 
site  to,  or  simultaneous  by  nature  with,  or  pos- 
[25]  tcrior  to,  the  subject;  and  so  the  property 
of  knowledge  would  in  this  respect  have  been 
correctly  stated. 

Next,  for  destructive  purposes,  see  whether 
he  has  rendered  as  property  something  that 
does  not  always  follow  the  subject  but  some¬ 
times  ceases  to  be  its  property:  for  then  the 
property  will  not  have  been  correctly  described, 
[jo]  For  there  is  no  necessity  either  that  the 
name  of  the  subject  must  also  be  true  of  any¬ 
thing  to  which  we  find  such  an  attribute  be¬ 
longing;  nor  yet  that  the  name  of  the  subject 
will  be  untrue  of  anything  to  which  such  an 
attribute  is  found  not  to  belong.  Moreover,  in 
addition  to  this,  even  after  he  has  rendered  the 


BOOK  V,  CHAPTERS  2-3 


1 82 

property  it  will  not  be  clear  whether  it  belongs, 
seeing  that  it  is  the  kind  of  attribute  that  may 
[^5]  fail:  and  so  the  property  will  not  be  clear. 
Thus  (e.g.)  a  man  who  has  stated  that  it  is  a 
property  of  animal  ‘sometimes  to  move  and 
sometimes  to  stand  still’  has  rendered  the  kind 
of  property  which  sometimes  is  not  a  property, 
and  so  the  property  could  not  have  been  cor¬ 
rectly  stated.  For  constructive  purposes,  on  the 
other  hand,  see  whether  he  has  rendered  some¬ 
thing  that  of  necessity  must  always  be  a  prop- 
13  lb  erty:  for  then  the  property  will  have  been 
in  this  respect  correctly  stated.  Thus  (e.g.)  a 
man  who  has  stated  that  it  is  a  property  of  vir¬ 
tue  to  be  ‘what  makes  its  possessor  good’  has 
rendered  as  property  something  that  always 
follows,  and  so  the  property  of  virtue  would  in 
this  respect  have  been  correctly  rendered. 

[5]  Next,  for  destructive  purposes,  see  whether 
in  rendering  the  property  of  the  present  time 
he  has  omitted  to  make  a  definite  proviso  that 
it  is  the  property  of  the  present  time  which  he 
is  rendering:  for  else  the  property  will  not  have 
been  correctly  stated.  For  in  the  first  place,  any 
unusual  procedure  always  needs  a  definite  pro¬ 
viso:  and  it  is  the  usual  procedure  for  every¬ 
body  to  render  as  property  some  attribute  that 
[/o]  always  follows.  In  the  second  place,  a 
man  who  omits  to  provide  definitely  whether  it 
was  the  property  of  the  present  time  which  he 
intended  to  state,  is  obscure:  and  one  should 
not  give  any  occasion  for  adverse  criticism. 
Thus  (e.g.)  a  man  who  has  stated  it  as  the 
property  of  a  particular  man  ‘to  be  sitting  with 
a  particular  man’,  states  the  property  of  the 
present  time,  and  so  he  cannot  have  rendered 
the  property  correctly,  seeing  that  he  has  de¬ 
scribed  it  without  any  definite  proviso.  For 
constructive  purposes,  on  the  other  hand,  see 
whether,  in  rendering  the  property  of  the 
[75]  present  time,  he  has,  in  stating  it,  made  a 
definite  proviso  that  it  is  the  property  of  the 
present  time  that  he  is  stating:  for  then  the 
property  will  in  this  respect  have  been  correctly 
stated.  Thus  (e.g.)  a  man  who  has  said  that  it 
is  the  property  of  a  particular  man  ‘to  be  walk¬ 
ing  now’,  has  made  this  distinction  in  his 
statement,  and  so  the  property  would  have  been 
correctly  stated. 

Next,  for  destructive  purposes,  see  whether 
[20]  he  has  rendered  a  property  of  the  kind 
whose  appropriateness  is  not  obvious  except 
by  sensation:  for  then  the  property  will  not 
have  been  correctly  stated.  For  every  sensible 
attribute,  once  it  is  taken  beyond  the  sphere  of 
sensation,  becomes  uncertain.  For  it  is  not  clear 


132a 

whether  it  still  belongs,  because  it  is  evidenced 
only  by  sensation.  This  principle  will  be  true 
[25]  in  the  case  of  any  attributes  that  do  not 
always  and  necessarily  follow.  Thus  (e.g.)  any 
one  who  has  stated  that  it  is  a  property  of  the 
sun  to  be  ‘the  brightest  star  that  moves  over 
the  earth’,  has  used  in  describing  the  property 
an  expression  of  that  kind,  viz.  ‘to  move  over 
the  earth’,  which  is  evidenced  by  sensation; 
and  so  the  sun’s  property  could  not  have  been 
correctly  rendered:  for  it  will  be  uncertain, 
whenever  the  sun  sets,  whether  it  continues  to 
[30]  move  over  the  earth,  because  sensation 
then  fails  us.  For  constructive  purposes,  on  the 
other  hand,  see  whether  he  has  rendered  the 
property  of  a  kind  that  is  not  obvious  to  sensa¬ 
tion,  or,  if  it  be  sensible,  must  clearly  belong  of 
necessity:  for  then  the  property  will  in  this  re¬ 
spect  have  been  correctly  stated.  Thus  (e.g.)  a 
man  who  has  stated  that  it  is  a  property  of  a 
surface  to  be  ‘the  primary  thing  that  is  col¬ 
oured’,  has  introduced  amongst  the  rest  a  sensi- 
[33]  ble  quality,  ‘to  be  coloured’,  but  still  a 
quality  such  as  manifestly  always  belongs,  and 
so  the  property  of  ‘surface’  would  in  this  re¬ 
spect  have  been  correctly  rendered. 

Next,  for  destructive  purposes,  see  whether 
he  has  rendered  the  definition  as  a  property: 
for  then  the  property  will  not  have  been  cor¬ 
rectly  stated:  for  the  property  of  a  thing  ought 
132a  not  to  show  its  essence.  Thus  (e.g.)  a 
man  who  has  said  that  it  is  the  property  of  man 
to  be  ‘a  walking,  biped  animal’  has  rendered  a 
property  of  man  so  as  to  signify  his  essence, 
and  so  the  property  of  man  could  not  have  been 
correctly  rendered.  For  constructive  purposes, 
on  the  other  hand,  see  whether  the  property 
which  he  has  rendered  forms  a  predicate  con¬ 
vertible  with  its  subject,  without,  however, 
[5]  signifying  its  essence:  for  then  the  property 
will  in  this  respect  have  been  correctly  ren¬ 
dered.  Thus  (e.g.)  he  who  has  stated  that  it  is 
a  property  of  man  to  be  a  ‘naturally  civilized 
animal’  has  rendered  the  property  so  as  to  be 
convertible  with  its  subject,  without,  however, 
showing  its  essence,  and  so  the  property  of 
‘man’  would  in  this  respect  have  been  cor¬ 
rectly  rendered. 

[/o]  Next,  for  destructive  purposes,  see  wheth¬ 
er  he  has  rendered  the  property  without  hav¬ 
ing  placed  the  subject  within  its  essence.  For  of 
properties,  as  also  of  definitions,  the  first  term 
to  be  rendered  should  be  the  genus,  and  then 
the  rest  of  it  should  be  appended  immediately 
afterwards,  and  should  distinguish  its  subject 
from  other  things.  Hence  a  property  which  is 


TOPICS 


132b  BOOK  V,  CHAPTERS  3-4  183 


not  stated  in  this  way  could  not  have  been  cor- 
[75]  reedy  rendered.  Thus  (e.g.)  a  man  who 
has  said  that  it  is  a  property  of  a  living  creature 
to  ‘have  a  soul’  has  not  placed  ‘living  creature’ 
within  its  essence,  and  so  the  property  of  a  liv¬ 
ing  creature  could  not  have  been  correctly 
stated.  For  constructive  purposes,  on  the  other 
hand,  see  whether  a  man  first  places  within  its 
essence  the  subject  whose  property  he  is  render¬ 
ing,  and  then  appends  the  rest:  for  then  the 
property  will  in  this  respect  have  been  correctly 
rendered.  Thus  (e.g.)  he  who  has  stated  that 
[20]  it  is  a  property  of  man  to  be  an  ‘animal 
capable  of  receiving  knowledge’,  has  rendered 
the  property  after  placing  the  subject  within  its 
essence,  and  so  the  property  of  ‘man’  would  in 
this  respect  have  been  correctly  rendered. 

4 

The  inquiry,  then,  whether  the  property  has 
been  correctly  rendered  or  no,  should  be  made 
by  these  means.  The  question,  on  the  other 
hand,  whether  what  is  stated  is  or  is  not  a 
[25]  property  at  all,  you  should  examine  from 
the  following  points  of  view.  For  the  common¬ 
place  arguments  which  establish  absolutely 
that  the  property  is  accurately  stated  will  be 
the  same  as  those  that  constitute  it  a  property 
at  all:  accordingly  they  will  be  described  in  the 
course  of  them. 

Firstly,  then,  for  destructive  purposes,  take 
a  look  at  each  subject  of  which  he  has  rendered 
the  property,  and  see  (e.g.)  if  it  fails  to  belong 
to  any  of  them  at  all,  or  to  be  true  of  them  in 
that  particular  respect,  or  to  be  a  property  of 
[30]  each  of  them  in  respect  of  that  character 
of  which  he  has  rendered  the  property:  for  then 
what  is  stated  to  be  a  property  will  not  be  a 
property.  Thus,  for  example,  inasmuch  as  it  is 
not  true  of  the  geometrician  that  he  ‘cannot  be 
deceived  by  an  argument’  (for  a  geometrician 
is  deceived  when  his  figure  is  misdrawn),  it 
could  not  be  a  property  of  the  man  of  science 
that  he  is  not  deceived  by  an  argument.  For 
[35]  constructive  purposes,  on  the  other  hand, 
see  whether  the  property  rendered  be  true  of 
every  instance,  and  true  in  that  particular  re¬ 
spect:  for  then  what  is  stated  not  to  be  a  prop¬ 
erty  will  be  a  property.  Thus,  for  example,  in- 
132b  asmuch  as  the  description  ‘an  animal 
capable  of  receiving  knowledge’  is  true  of 
every  man,  and  true  of  him  qua  man,  it  would 
be  a  property  of  man  to  be  ‘an  animal  capable 
of  receiving  knowledge’.  [This  commonplace 
[5]  rule  means — for  destructive  purposes,  see 
if  the  description  fails  to  be  true  of  that  of 


which  the  name  is  true;  and  if  the  name  fails 
to  be  true  of  that  of  which  the  description  is 
true:  for  constructive  purposes,  on  the  other 
hand,  see  if  the  description  too  is  predicated  of 
that  of  which  the  name  is  predicated,  and  if  the 
name  too  is  predicated  of  that  of  which  the 
description  is  predicated.] 

Next,  for  destructive  purposes,  see  if  the  de¬ 
scription  fails  to  apply  to  that  to  which  the 
name  applies,  and  if  the  name  fails  to  apply  to 
[/o]  that  to  which  the  description  applies:  for 
then  what  is  stated  to  be  a  property  will  not  be 
a  property.  Thus  (e.g.)  inasmuch  as  the  de¬ 
scription  ‘a  living  being  that  partakes  of  knowl¬ 
edge’  is  true  of  God,  while  ‘man’  is  not  predi¬ 
cated  of  God,  to  be  a  living  being  that  partakes 
of  knowledge’  could  not  be  a  property  of  man. 
For  constructive  purposes,  on  the  other  hand, 
see  if  the  name  as  well  be  predicated  of  that  of 
which  the  description  is  predicated,  and  if  the 
description  as  well  be  predicated  of  that  of 
[75]  which  the  name  is  predicated.  For  then 
what  is  stated  not  to  be  a  property  will  be  a 
property.  Thus  (e.g.)  the  predicate  ‘living  crea¬ 
ture’  is  true  of  that  of  which  ‘having  a  soul’  is 
true,  and  ‘having  a  soul’  is  true  of  that  of  which 
the  predicate  ‘living  creature’  is  true;  and  so 
‘having  a  soul’  would  be  a  property  of  ‘living 
creature’. 

Next,  for  destructive  purposes,  see  if  he  has 
[20]  rendered  a  subject  as  a  property  of  that 
which  is  described  as  ‘in  the  subject’:  for  then 
what  has  been  stated  to  be  a  property  will  not 
be  a  property.  Thus  (e.g.)  inasmuch  as  he  who 
has  rendered  ‘fire’  as  the  property  of  ‘the  body 
with  the  most  rarefied  particles’,  has  rendered 
the  subject  as  the  property  of  its  predicate,  ‘fire’ 
could  not  be  a  property  of  ‘the  body  with  the 
most  rarefied  particles’.  The  reason  why  the 
subject  will  not  be  a  property  of  that  which  is 
[25]  found  in  the  subject  is  this,  that  then  the 
same  thing  will  be  the  property  of  a  number  of 
things  that  are  specifically  different.  For  the 
same  thing  has  quite  a  number  of  specifically 
different  predicates  that  belong  to  it  alone,  and 
the  subject  will  be  a  property  of  all  of  these,  if 
any  one  states  the  property  in  this  way.  For 
constructive  purposes,  on  the  other  hand,  see  if 
he  has  rendered  what  is  found  in  the  subject  as 
a  property  of  the  subject:  for  then  what  has 
[30]  been  stated  not  to  be  a  property  will  be  a 
property,  if  it  be  predicated  only  of  the  things 
of  which  it  has  been  stated  to  be  the  property. 
Thus  (e.g.)  he  who  has  said  that  it  is  a  prop¬ 
erty  of  ‘earth’  to  be  ‘specifically  the  heaviest 
body’  has  rendered  of  the  subject  as  its  property 


184  TOPICS  I33b 


something  that  is  said  of  the  thing  in  question 
alone,  and  is  said  of  it  in  the  manner  in  which 
a  property  is  predicated,  and  so  the  property  of 
‘earth’  would  have  been  rightly  stated. 

[i5]  Next,  for  destructive  purposes,  see  if  he 
has  rendered  the  property  as  partaken  of:  for 
then  what  is  stated  to  be  a  property  will  not  be 
a  property.  For  an  attribute  of  which  the  sub- 
133*  ject  partakes  is  a  constituent  part  of  its 
essence:  and  an  attribute  of  that  kind  would  be 
a  differentia  applying  to  some  one  species.  E.g. 
inasmuch  as  he  who  has  said  that  ‘walking  on 
two  feet’  is  a  property  of  man  has  rendered  the 
[5]  property  as  partaken  of,  ‘walking  on  two 
feet’  could  not  be  a  property  of  ‘man’.  For  con¬ 
structive  purposes,  on  the  other  hand,  see  if  he 
has  avoided  rendering  the  property  as  partaken 
of,  or  as  showing  the  essence,  though  the  sub¬ 
ject  is  predicated  convertibly  with  it:  for  then 
what  is  stated  not  to  be  a  property  will  be  a 
property.  Thus  (e.g.)  he  who  has  stated  that  to 
be  ‘naturally  sentient’  is  a  property  of  ‘animal’ 
has  rendered  the  property  neither  as  partaken 
[/o]  of  nor  as  showing  the  essence,  though  the 
subject  is  predicated  convertibly  with  it;  and 
so  to  be  ‘naturally  sentient’  would  be  a  property 
of  ‘animal’. 

Next,  for  destructive  purposes,  see  if  the 
property  cannot  possibly  belong  simultaneous¬ 
ly,  but  must  belong  either  as  posterior  or  as 
prior  to  the  attribute  described  in  the  name: 
for  then  what  is  stated  to  be  a  property  will  not 
[75]  be  a  property — either  never,  or  not  always. 
Thus  (e.g.)  inasmuch  as  it  is  possible  for  the 
attribute  ‘walking  through  the  market-place’ 
to  belong  to  an  object  as  prior  and  as  posterior 
to  the  attribute  ‘man’,  ‘walking  through  the 
market-place’  could  not  be  a  property  of  ‘man’ 
— either  never,  or  not  always.  For  constructive 
purposes,  on  the  other  hand,  see  if  it  always 
and  of  necessity  belongs  simultaneously,  with¬ 
out  being  either  a  definition  or  a  differentia: 
[20]  for  then  what  is  stated  not  to  be  a  prop¬ 
erty  will  be  a  property.  Thus  (e.g.)  the  attri¬ 
bute  ‘an  animal  capable  of  receiving  knowl¬ 
edge’  always  and  of  necessity  belongs  simul¬ 
taneously  with  the  attribute  ‘man’,  and  is 
neither  differentia  nor  definition  of  its  subject, 
and  so  ‘an  animal  capable  of  receiving  knowl¬ 
edge’  would  be  a  property  of  ‘man’. 

Next,  for  destructive  purposes,  see  if  the 
same  thing  fails  to  be  a  property  of  things  that 
[25]  are  the  same  as  the  subject,  so  far  as  they 
are  the  same:  for  then  what  is  stated  to  be  a 
property  will  not  be  a  property.  Thus,  for  ex¬ 
ample,  inasmuch  as  it  is  no  property  of  a 


‘proper  object  of  pursuit’  to  ‘appear  good  to 
certain  persons’,  it  could  not  be  a  property  of 
the  ‘desirable’  either  to  ‘appear  good  to  certain 
persons’:  for  ‘proper  object  of  pursuit’  and  ‘de¬ 
sirable’  mean  the  same.  For  constructive  pur¬ 
poses,  on  the  other  hand,  see  if  the  same  thing 
be  a  property  of  something  that  is  the  same  as 
the  subject,  in  so  far  as  it  is  the  same.  For  then 
[30]  what  is  stated  not  to  be  a  property  will  be 
a  property.  Thus  (e.g.)  inasmuch  as  it  is  called 
a  property  of  a  man,  in  so  far  as  he  is  a  man, 
‘to  have  a  tripartite  soul’,  it  would  also  be  a 
property  of  a  mortal,  in  so  far  as  he  is  a  mortal, 
to  have  a  tripartite  soul.  This  commonplace 
rule  is  useful  also  in  dealing  with  Accident: 
for  the  same  attributes  ought  either  to  belong 
or  not  belong  to  the  same  things,  in  so  far  as 
they  are  the  same. 

[35]  Next,  for  destructive  purposes,  see  if  the 
property  of  things  that  are  the  same  in  kind  as 
the  subject  fails  to  be  always  the  same  in  kind 
as  the  alleged  property:  for  then  neither  will 
133b  what  is  stated  to  be  the  property  of  the 
subject  in  question.  Thus  (e.g.)  inasmuch  as  a 
man  and  a  horse  are  the  same  in  kind,  and  it  is 
not  always  a  property  of  a  horse  to  stand  by  its 
own  initiative,  it  could  not  be  a  property  of  a 
man  to  move  by  his  own  initiative;  for  to  stand 
and  to  move  by  his  own  initiative  are  the  same 
[5]  in  kind,  because  they  belong  to  each  of 
them  in  so  far  as  each  is  an  ‘animal’.  For  con¬ 
structive  purposes,  on  the  other  hand,  see  if  of 
things  that  are  the  same  in  kind  as  the  subject 
the  property  that  is  the  same  as  the  alleged 
property  is  always  true:  for  then  what  is  stated 
not  to  be  a  property  will  be  a  property.  Thus 
(e.g.)  since  it  is  a  property  of  man  to  be  a 
‘walking  biped,’  it  would  also  be  a  property  of 
[/o]  a  bird  to  be  a  ‘flying  biped’:  for  each  of 
these  is  the  same  in  kind,  in  so  far  as  the  one 
pair  have  the  sameness  of  species  that  fall  under 
the  same  genus,  being  under  the  genus  ‘ani¬ 
mal’,  while  the  other  pair  have  that  of  differen¬ 
tiae  of  the  genus,  viz.  of  ‘animal’.  This  com¬ 
monplace  rule  is  deceptive  whenever  one  of  the 
properties  mentioned  belongs  to  some  one  spe¬ 
cies  only  while  the  other  belongs  to  many,  as 
does  ‘walking  quadruped’. 

[75]  Inasmuch  as  ‘same’  and  ‘different’  are 
terms  used  in  several  senses,  it  is  a  job  to  ren¬ 
der  to  a  sophistical  questioner  a  property  that 
belongs  to  one  thing  and  that  only.  For  an 
attribute  that  belongs  to  something  qualified 
by  an  accident  will  also  belong  to  the  accident 
taken  along  with  the  subject  which  it  qualifies; 
e.g.  an  attribute  that  belongs  to  ‘man’  will  be- 


134b  BOOK  V,  CHAPTERS  4-5  185 


[20]  long  also  to  ‘white  man’,  if  there  be  a 
white  man,  and  one  that  belongs  to  ‘white 
man’  will  belong  also  to  ‘man’.  One  might, 
then,  bring  captious  criticism  against  the  ma¬ 
jority  of  properties,  by  representing  the  sub¬ 
ject  as  being  one  thing  in  itself,  and  another 
thing  when  combined  with  its  accident,  saying, 
for  example,  that  ‘man’  is  one  thing,  and 
‘white  man’  another,  and  moreover  by  repre- 
[25]  senting  as  different  a  certain  state  and 
what  is  called  after  that  state.  For  an  attribute 
that  belongs  to  the  state  will  belong  also  to 
what  is  called  after  that  state,  and  one  that  be¬ 
longs  to  what  is  called  after  a  state  will  belong 
also  to  the  state:  e.g.  inasmuch  as  the  condition 
of  the  scientist  is  called  after  his  science,  it 
could  not  be  a  property  of  ‘science’  that  it  is 
‘incontrovertible  by  argument’;  for  then  the 
[jo]  scientist  also  will  be  incontrovertible  by 
argument.  For  constructive  purposes,  however, 
you  should  say  that  the  subject  of  an  accident  is 
not  absolutely  different  from  the  accident  taken 
along  with  its  subject;  though  it  is  called  ‘an¬ 
other’  thing  because  the  mode  of  being  of  the 
two  is  different:  for  it  is  not  the  same  thing  for 
[55]  a  man  to  be  a  man  and  for  a  white  man 
to  be  a  white  man.  Moreover,  you  should  take 
a  look  along  at  the  inflections,*  and  say  that  the 
134a  description  of  the  man  of  science  is 
wrong:  one  should  say  not  ‘it’  but ' he  is  incon¬ 
trovertible  by  argument’;  while  the  description 
of  Science  is  wrong  too:  one  should  say  not  ‘it’ 
but  ' she  is  incontrovertible  by  argument’.  For 
against  an  objector  who  sticks  at  nothing  the 
defence  should  stick  at  nothing. 

5 

[5]  Next,  for  destructive  purposes,  see  if,  while 
intending  to  render  an  attribute  that  naturally 
belongs,  he  states  it  in  his  language  in  such  a 
way  as  to  indicate  one  that  invariably  belongs: 
for  then  it  would  be  generally  agreed  that  what 
has  been  stated  to  be  a  property  is  upset.  Thus 
(e.g.)  the  man  who  has  said  that  ‘biped’  is  a 
property  of  man  intends  to  render  the  attribute 
[/o]  that  naturally  belongs,  but  his  expression 
actually  indicates  one  that  invariably  belongs: 
accordingly,  ‘biped’  could  not  be  a  property  of 
man:  for  not  every  man  is  possessed  of  two 
feet.  For  constructive  purposes,  on  the  other 
hand,  see  if  he  intends  to  render  the  property 
that  naturally  belongs,  and  indicates  it  in  that 
way  in  his  language:  for  then  the  property  will 
not  be  upset  in  this  respect.  Thus  (e.g.)  he 
who  renders  as  a  property  of  ‘man’  the  phrase 
[75]  ‘an  animal  capable  of  receiving  knowl¬ 


edge’  both  intends,  and  by  his  language  indi¬ 
cates,  the  property  that  belongs  by  nature,  and 
so  ‘an  animal  capable  of  receiving  knowledge’ 
would  not  be  upset  or  shown  in  that  respect  not 
to  be  a  property  of  man. 

Moreover,  as  regards  all  the  things  that  are 
called  as  they  are  primarily  after  something 
else,  or  primarily  in  themselves,  it  is  a  job  to 
render  the  property  of  such  things.  For  if  you 
[20]  render  a  property  as  belonging  to  the  sub¬ 
ject  that  is  so  called  after  something  else,  then 
it  will  be  true  of  its  primary  subject  as  well; 
whereas  if  you  state  it  of  its  primary  subject, 
then  it  will  be  predicated  also  of  the  thing  that 
is  so  called  after  this  other.  Thus  (e.g.)  if  any 
one  renders  ‘coloured’  as  the  property  of  ‘sur¬ 
face’,  ‘coloured’  will  be  true  of  body  as  well; 
whereas  if  he  render  it  of  ‘body’,  it  will  be 
[25]  predicated  also  of  ‘surface’.  Hence  the 
name  as  well  will  not  be  true  of  that  of  which 
the  description  is  true. 

In  the  case  of  some  properties  it  mostly  hap¬ 
pens  that  some  error  is  incurred  because  of  a 
failure  to  define  how  as  well  as  to  what  things 
the  property  is  stated  to  belong.  For  every  one 
tries  to  render  as  the  property  of  a  thing  some¬ 
thing  that  belongs  to  it  either  naturally,  as 
[jo]  ‘biped’  belongs  to  ‘man’,  or  actually,  as 
‘having  four  fingers’  belongs  to  a  particular 
man,  or  specifically,  as  ‘consisting  of  most 
rarefied  particles’  belongs  to  ‘fire’,  or  abso¬ 
lutely,  as  ‘life’  to  ‘living  being’,  or  one  that  be¬ 
longs  to  a  thing  only  as  called  after  something 
else,  as  ‘wisdom’  to  the  ‘soul’,  or  on  the  other 
hand  primarily,  as  ‘wisdom’  to  the  ‘rational 
faculty’,  or  because  the  thing  is  in  a  certain 
[35]  state,  as  ‘incontrovertible  by  argument’ 
belongs  to  a  ‘scientist’  (for  simply  and  solely  by 
reason  of  his  being  in  a  certain  state  will  he  be 
‘incontrovertible  by  argument’),  or  because  it 
is  the  state  possessed  by  something,  as  ‘incon¬ 
trovertible  by  argument’  belongs  to  ‘science’, 
134b  or  because  it  is  partaken  of,  as  ‘sensation’ 
belongs  to  ‘animal’  (for  other  things  as  well 
have  sensation,  e.g.  man,  but  they  have  it  be¬ 
cause  they  already  partake  of  ‘animal’),  or  be¬ 
cause  it  partakes  of  something  else,  as  ‘life’  be¬ 
longs  to  a  particular  kind  of  ‘living  being’. 
[5]  Accordingly  he  makes  a  mistake  if  he  has 
failed  to  add  the  word  ‘naturally’,  because 
what  belongs  naturally  may  fail  to  belong  to 
the  thing  to  which  it  naturally  belongs,  as 
(e.g.)  it  belongs  to  a  man  to  have  two  feet:  so 
too  he  errs  if  he  does  not  make  a  definite  pro¬ 
viso  that  he  is  rendering  what  actually  belongs, 
because  one  day  that  attribute  will  not  be  what 


1 86 

it  now  is,  e.g.  the  man’s  possession  of  four 
[/o]  fingers.  So  he  errs  if  he  has  not  shown 
that  he  states  a  thing  to  be  such  and  such  pri¬ 
marily,  or  that  he  calls  it  so  after  something 
else,  because  then  its  name  too  will  not  be  true 
of  that  of  which  the  description  is  true,  as  is  the 
case  with  ‘coloured’,  whether  rendered  as  a 
property  of  ‘surface’  or  of  ‘body’.  So  he  errs  if 
he  has  not  said  beforehand  that  he  has  rendered 
a  property  to  a  thing  either  because  that  thing 
possesses  a  state,  or  because  it  is  a  state  pos¬ 
sessed  by  something;  because  then  it  will  not 
be  a  property.  For,  supposing  he  renders  the 
[75]  property  to  something  as  being  a  state 
possessed,  it  will  belong  to  what  possesses  that 
state;  while  supposing  he  renders  it  to  what 
possesses  the  state,  it  will  belong  to  the  state 
possessed,  as  did  ‘incontrovertible  by  argu¬ 
ment’  when  stated  as  a  property  of  ‘science’  or 
of  the  ‘scientist’.  So  he  errs  if  he  has  not  indi¬ 
cated  beforehand  that  the  property  belongs  be¬ 
cause  the  thing  partakes  of,  or  is  partaken  of 
by,  something;  because  then  the  property  will 
[20]  belong  to  certain  other  things  as  well.  For 
if  he  renders  it  because  its  subject  is  partaken 
of,  it  will  belong  to  the  things  which  partake  of 
it;  whereas  if  he  renders  it  because  its  subject 
partakes  of  something  else,  it  will  belong  to  the 
things  partaken  of,  as  (e.g.)  if  he  were  to 
state  ‘life’  to  be  a  property  of  a  ‘particular  kind 
of  living  being’,  or  just  of  ‘living  being’.  So  he 
errs  if  he  has  not  expressly  distinguished  the 
property  that  belongs  specifically,  because  then 
it  will  belong  only  to  one  of  the  things  that  fall 
under  the  term  of  which  he  states  the  property: 
for  the  superlative  belongs  only  to  one  of  them, 
[25]  e.g.  ‘lightest’  as  applied  to  ‘fire’.  Some¬ 
times,  too,  a  man  may  even  add  the  word  ‘spe¬ 
cifically’,  and  still  make  a  mistake.  For  the 
things  in  question  should  all  be  of  one  species, 
whenever  the  word  ‘specifically’  is  added:  and 
in  some  cases  this  does  not  occur,  as  it  does  not, 
in  fact,  in  the  case  of  fire.  For  fire  is  not  all  of 
one  species;  for  live  coals  and  flame  and  light 
are  each  of  them  ‘fire’,  but  are  of  different  spe- 
[30]  cies.  The  reason  why,  whenever  ‘specifi¬ 
cally’  is  added,  there  should  not  be  any  species 
other  than  the  one  mentioned,  is  this,  that  if 
there  be,  then  the  property  in  question  will  be¬ 
long  to  some  of  them  in  a  greater  and  to  others 
in  a  less  degree,  as  happens  with  ‘consisting  of 
most  rarefied  particles’  in  the  case  of  fire:  for 
‘light’  consists  of  more  rarefied  particles  than 
live  coals  and  flame.  And  this  should  not  hap- 
[35]  pen  unless  the  name  too  be  predicated  in  a 
greater  degree  of  that  of  which  the  description 


135* 

is  truer;  otherwise  the  rule  that  where  the  de¬ 
scription  is  truer  the  name  too  should  be  truer 
135*  is  not  fulfilled.  Moreover,  in  addition  to 
this,  the  same  attribute  will  be  the  property 
both  of  the  term  which  has  it  absolutely  and  of 
that  element  therein  which  has  it  in  the  highest 
degree,  as  is  the  condition  of  the  property  ‘con¬ 
sisting  of  most  rarefied  particles’  in  the  case  of 
‘fire’:  for  this  same  attribute  will  be  the  prop- 
[5]  erty  of  ‘light’  as  well:  for  it  is  Tight’  that 
‘consists  of  the  most  rarefied  particles’.  If,  then, 
any  one  else  renders  a  property  in  this  way  one 
should  attack  it;  for  oneself,  one  should  not 
give  occasion  for  this  objection,  but  should  de¬ 
fine  in  what  manner  one  states  the  property  at 
the  actual  time  of  making  the  statement. 

Next,  for  destructive  purposes,  see  if  he  has 
stated  a  thing  as  a  property  of  itself:  for  then 
[/o]  what  has  been  stated  to  be  a  property  will 
not  be  a  property.  For  a  thing  itself  always 
shows  its  own  essence,  and  what  shows  the  es¬ 
sence  is  not  a  property  but  a  definition.  Thus 
(e.g.)  he  who  has  said  that  ‘becoming’  is  a 
property  of  ‘beautiful’  has  rendered  the  term  as 
a  property  of  itself  (for  ‘beautiful’  and  ‘becom¬ 
ing’  are  the  same);  and  so  ‘becoming’  could 
not  be  a  property  of  ‘beautiful’.  For  construc- 
[75]  tive  purposes,  on  the  other  hand,  see  if  he 
has  avoided  rendering  a  thing  as  a  property  of 
itself,  but  has  yet  stated  a  convertible  predicate: 
for  then  what  is  stated  not  to  be  a  property  will 
be  a  property.  Thus  he  who  has  stated  ‘animate 
substance’  as  a  property  of  ‘living-creature’  has 
not  stated  ‘living-creature’  as  a  property  of  it¬ 
self,  but  has  rendered  a  convertible  predicate, 
so  that  ‘animate  substance’  would  be  a  property 
of  ‘living-creature’. 

[20]  Next,  in  the  case  of  things  consisting  of 
like  parts,  you  should  look  and  see,  for  destruc¬ 
tive  purposes,  if  the  property  of  the  whole  be 
not  true  of  the  part,  or  if  that  of  the  part  be  not 
predicated  of  the  whole:  for  then  what  has  been 
stated  to  be  the  property  will  not  be  a  property. 
In  some  cases  it  happens  that  this  is  so:  for 
sometimes  in  rendering  a  property  in  the  case 
[25]  of  things  that  consist  of  like  parts  a  man 
may  have  his  eye  on  the  whole,  while  some¬ 
times  he  may  address  himself  to  what  is  predi¬ 
cated  of  the  part:  and  then  in  neither  case  will 
it  have  been  rightly  rendered.  Take  an  instance 
referring  to  the  whole:  the  man  who  has  said 
that  it  is  a  property  of  the  ‘sea’  to  be  ‘the  largest 
volume  of  salt  water’,  has  stated  the  property 
of  something  that  consists  of  like  parts,  but  has 
rendered  an  attribute  of  such  a  kind  as  is  not 
[jo]  true  of  the  part  (for  a  particular  sea  is  not 


TOPICS 


136*  BOOK  V,  CHAPTERS  5-6  187 


‘the  largest  volume  of  salt  water’);  aijd  so  ‘the 
largest  volume  of  salt  water’  could  not  be  a 
property  of  the  ‘sea’.  Now  take  one  referring 
to  the  part:  the  man  who  has  stated  that  it  is  a 
property  of  ‘air’  to  be  ‘breathable’  has  stated  the 
property  of  something  that  consists  of  like 
[j5J  Parts>  but  he  has  stated  an  attribute  such 
as,  though  true  of  some  air,  is  still  not  predica¬ 
ble  of  the  whole  (for  the  whole  of  the  air  is  not 
breathable);  and  so  ‘breathable’  could  not  be 
135b  a  property  of  ‘air’.  For  constructive  pur¬ 
poses,  on  the  other  hand,  see  whether,  while  it 
is  true  of  each  of  the  things  with  similar  parts, 
it  is  on  the  other  hand  a  property  of  them  taken 
as  a  collective  whole:  for  then  what  has  been 
stated  not  to  be  a  property  will  be  a  property. 
Thus  (e.g.)  while  it  is  true  of  earth  every- 
[5]  where  that  it  naturally  falls  downwards,  it 
is  a  property  of  the  various  particular  pieces  of 
earth  taken  as  ‘the  Earth’,  so  that  it  would  be 
a  property  of  ‘earth’  ‘naturally  to  fall  down- 
wards’. 

6 

Next,  look  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  respec¬ 
tive  opposites,  and  first  (a)  from  that  of  the 
contraries,  and  see,  for  destructive  purposes,  if 
the  contrary  of  the  term  rendered  fails  to  be  a 
property  of  the  contrary  subject.  For  then 
neither  will  the  contrary  of  the  first  be  a  prop- 
[/o]  erty  of  the  contrary  of  the  second.  Thus 
(e.g.)  inasmuch  as  injustice  is  contrary  to  jus¬ 
tice,  and  the  lowest  evil  to  the  highest  good, 
but  ‘to  be  the  highest  good’  is  not  a  property  of 
‘justice’,  therefore  ‘to  be  the  lowest  evil’  could 
not  be  a  property  of  ‘injustice’.  For  construc¬ 
tive  purposes,  on  the  other  hand,  see  if  the  con¬ 
trary  is  the  property  of  the  contrary:  for  then 
also  the  contrary  of  the  first  will  be  the  property 
of  the  contrary  of  the  second.  Thus  (e.g.)  inas- 
[75]  much  as  evil  is  contrary  to  good,  and  ob¬ 
jectionable  to  desirable,  and  ‘desirable’  is  a 
property  of  ‘good’,  ‘objectionable’  would  be  a 
property  of  ‘evil’. 

Secondly  ( b )  look  from  the  point  of  view  of 
relative  opposites  and  see,  for  destructive  pur¬ 
poses,  if  the  correlative  of  the  term  rendered 
fails  to  be  a  property  of  the  correlative  of  the 
subject:  for  then  neither  will  the  correlative  of 
the  first  be  a  property  of  the  correlative  of  the 
[20]  second.  Thus  (e.g.)  inasmuch  as  ‘double’ 
is  relative  to  ‘half’,  and  ‘in  excess’  to  ‘exceeded’, 
while  ‘in  excess’  is  not  a  property  of  ‘double’, 
‘exceeded’  could  not  be  a  property  of  ‘half’.  For 
constructive  purposes,  on  the  other  hand,  see  if 
the  correlative  of  the  alleged  property  is  a 


property  of  the  subject’s  correlative:  for  then 
also  the  correlative  of  the  first  will  be  a  property 
of  the  correlative  of  the  second:  e.g.  inasmuch 
as  ‘double’  is  relative  to  ‘half’,  and  the  propor- 
[25]  tion  1:  2  is  relative  to  the  proportion  2:  1, 
while  it  is  a  property  of  ‘double’  to  be  ‘in  the 
proportion  of  2  to  T,  it  would  be  a  property  of 
‘half’  to  be  ‘in  the  proportion  of  1  to  2’. 

Thirdly  (r)  for  destructive  purposes,  see  if 
an  attribute  described  in  terms  of  a  state  (X) 
fails  to  be  a  property  of  the  given  state  (Y): 
for  then  neither  will  the  attribute  described  in 
terms  of  the  privation  (of  X)  be  a  property  of 
the  privation  (of  Y).  Also  if,  on  the  other  hand, 
[jo]  an  attribute  described  in  terms  of  the 
privation  (of  X)  be  not  a  property  of  the  given 
privation  (of  Y),  neither  will  the  attribute  de¬ 
scribed  in  terms  of  the  state  (X)  be  a  property 
of  the  state  (Y).  Thus,  for  example,  inasmuch 
as  it  is  not  predicated  as  a  property  of  ‘deafness’ 
to  be  a  ‘lack  of  sensation’,  neither  could  it  be  a 
property  of  ‘hearing’  to  be  a  ‘sensation’.  For 
constructive  purposes,  on  the  other  hand,  see  if 
an  attribute  described  in  terms  of  a  state  (X)  is 
a  property  of  the  given  state  (Y):  for  then  also 
the  attribute  that  is  described  in  terms  of  the 
privation  (of  X)  will  be  a  property  of  the  pri- 
[35]  vation  (of  Y).  Also,  if  an  attribute  de¬ 
scribed  in  terms  of  a  privation  (of  X)  be  a 
136*  property  of  the  privation  (of  Y),  then 
also  the  attribute  that  is  described  in  terms  of 
the  state  (X)  will  be  a  property  of  the  state 
(Y).  Thus  (e.g.)  inasmuch  as  ‘to  see’  is  a 
property  of  ‘sight’,  inasmuch  as  we  have  sight, 
‘failure  to  see’  would  be  a  property  of  ‘blind¬ 
ness’,  inasmuch  as  we  have  not  got  the  sight  we 
should  naturally  have. 

[5]  Next,  look  from  the  point  of  view  of  posi¬ 
tive  and  negative  terms;  and  first  (a)  from 
the  point  of  view  of  the  predicates  taken  by 
themselves.  This  common-place  rule  is  useful 
only  for  a  destructive  purpose.  Thus  (e.g.)  see 
if  the  positive  term  or  the  attribute  described  in 
terms  of  it  is  a  property  of  the  subject:  for  then 
the  negative  term  or  the  attribute  described  in 
[/o]  terms  of  it  will  not  be  a  property  of  the 
subject.  Also  if,  on  the  other  hand,  the  negative 
term  or  the  attribute  described  in  terms  of  it  is 
a  property  of  the  subject,  then  the  positive  term 
or  the  attribute  described  in  terms  of  it  will  not 
be  a  property  of  the  subject:  e.g.  inasmuch  as 
‘animate’  is  a  property  of  ‘living  creature’,  ‘in¬ 
animate’  could  not  be  a  property  of  ‘living  crea¬ 
ture’. 

Secondly  (b)  look  from  the  point  of  view  of 
[75]  the  predicates,  positive  or  negative,  and 


1 88 

their  respective  subjects;  and  see,  for  destruc¬ 
tive  purposes,  if  the  positive  term  fails  to  be  a 
property  of  the  positive  subject:  for  then 
neither  will  the  negative  term  be  a  property  of 
the  negative  subject.  Also,  if  the  negative  term 
fails  to  be  a  property  of  the  negative  subject, 
neither  will  the  positive  term  be  a  property  of 
the  positive  subject.  Thus  (e.g.)  inasmuch  as 
‘animal*  is  not  a  property  of  ‘man*,  neither 
could  ‘not-animal*  be  a  property  of  ‘not-man*. 
[20]  Also  if  ‘not-animal’  seems  not  to  be  a 
property  of  ‘not-man*,  neither  will  ‘animal*  be  a 
property  of  ‘man*.  For  constructive  purposes, 
on  the  other  hand,  see  if  the  positive  term  is  a 
property  of  the  positive  subject:  for  then  the 
negative  term  will  be  a  property  of  the  nega¬ 
tive  subject  as  well.  Also  if  the  negative  term 
be  a  property  of  the  negative  subject,  the  posi¬ 
tive  will  be  a  property  of  the  positive  as  well. 
[25]  Thus  (e.g.)  inasmuch  as  it  is  a  property 
of  ‘not-living  being*  ‘not  to  live*,  it  would  be  a 
property  of  ‘living  being*  ‘to  live*:  also  if  it 
seems  to  be  a  property  of  ‘living  being*  ‘to  live*, 
it  will  also  seem  to  be  a  property  of  ‘not-living 
being*  ‘not  to  live*. 

Thirdly  ( c )  look  from  the  point  of  view  of 
the  subjects  taken  by  themselves,  and  see,  for 
destructive  purposes,  if  the  property  rendered 
[jo]  is  a  property  of  the  positive  subject:  for 
then  the  same  term  will  not  be  a  property  of  the 
negative  subject  as  well.  Also,  if  the  term  ren¬ 
dered  be  a  property  of  the  negative  subject,  it 
will  not  be  a  property  of  the  positive.  Thus 
(e.g.)  inasmuch  as  ‘animate*  is  a  property  of 
‘living  creature*,  ‘animate*  could  not  be  a  prop¬ 
erty  of  ‘not-living  creature*.  For  constructive 
purposes,  on  the  other  hand,  if  the  term  ren¬ 
dered  fails  to  be  a  property  of  the  affirmative 
[35]  subject  it  would  be  a  property  of  the  nega¬ 
tive.  This  commonplace  rule  is,  however,  de¬ 
ceptive:  for  a  positive  term  is  not  a  property  of 
a  negative,  or  a  negative  of  a  positive.  For  a 
positive  term  does  not  belong  at  all  to  a  nega- 
136b  tive,  while  a  negative  term,  though  it  be¬ 
longs  to  a  positive,  does  not  belong  as  a  prop¬ 
erty. 

Next,  look  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  co¬ 
ordinate  members  of  a  division,  and  see,  for 
destructive  purposes,  if  none  of  the  co-ordinate 
members  (parallel  with  the  property  rendered) 
be  a  property  of  any  of  the  remaining  set  of 
[5]  co-ordinate  members  (parallel  with  the 
subject):  for  then  neither  will  the  term  stated 
be  a  property  of  that  of  which  it  is  stated  to  be 
a  property.  Thus  (e.g.)  inasmuch  as  ‘sensible 
living  being*  is  not  a  property  of  any  of  the 


136b 

other  living  beings,  ‘intelligible  living  being* 
could  not  be  a  property  of  God.  For  construc¬ 
tive  purposes,  on  the  other  hand,  see  if  some 
one  or  other  of  the  remaining  co-ordinate  mem¬ 
bers  (parallel  with  the  property  rendered)  be 
a  property  of  each  of  these  co-ordinate  mem¬ 
bers  (parallel  with  the  subject):  for  then  the  re- 
[/o]  maining  one  too  will  be  a  property  of  that 
of  which  it  has  been  stated  not  to  be  a  prop¬ 
erty.  Thus  (e.g.)  inasmuch  as  it  is  a  property 
of  ‘wisdom’  to  be  essentially  ‘the  natural  virtue 
of  the  rational  faculty*,  then,  taking  each  of  the 
other  virtues  as  well  in  this  way,  it  would  be  a 
property  of  ‘temperance’  to  be  essentially  ‘the 
natural  virtue  of  the  faculty  of  desire*. 

7 

[75]  Next,  look  from  the  point  of  view  of  the 
inflexions,  and  see,  for  destructive  purposes,  if 
the  inflexion  of  the  property  rendered  fails  to  be 
a  property  of  the  inflexion  of  the  subject:  for 
then  neither  will  the  other  inflexion  be  a  prop¬ 
erty  of  the  other  inflexion.  Thus  (e.g.)  inas¬ 
much  as  ‘beautifully’  is  not  a  property  of  ‘just¬ 
ly*,  neither  could  ‘beautiful’  be  a  property  of 
‘just*.  For  constructive  purposes,  on  the  other 
hand,  see  if  the  inflexion  of  the  property  ren¬ 
dered  is  a  property  of  the  inflexion  of  the  sub¬ 
ject:  for  then  also  the  other  inflexion  will  be  a 
property  of  the  other  inflexion.  Thus  (e.g.)  in- 
[20]  asmuch  as  ‘walking  biped’  is  a  property  of 
man,  it  would  also  be  any  one’s  property  ' as 
a  man*  to  be  described  ‘ as  a  walking  biped*. 
Not  only  in  the  case  of  the  actual  term  men¬ 
tioned  should  one  look  at  the  inflexions,  but 
also  in  the  case  of  its  opposites,  just  as  has  been 
laid  down  in  the  case  of  the  former  common¬ 
place  rules  as  well.1  Thus,  for  destructive  pur- 
[25]  poses,  see  if  the  inflexion  of  the  opposite 
of  the  property  rendered  fails  to  be  the  property 
of  the  inflexion  of  the  opposite  of  the  subject: 
for  then  neither  will  the  inflexion  of  the  other 
opposite  be  a  property  of  the  inflexion  of  the 
other  opposite.  Thus  (e.g.)  inasmuch  as  ‘well’ 
is  not  a  property  of  ‘justly*,  neither  could  ‘bad¬ 
ly*  be  a  property  of  ‘unjustly*.  For  constructive 
purposes,  on  the  other  hand,  see  if  the  inflexion 
of  the  opposite  of  the  property  originally  sug¬ 
gested  is  a  property  of  the  inflexion  of  the  oppo- 
[jo]  site  of  the  original  subject:  for  then  also 
the  inflexion  of  the  other  opposite  will  be  a 
property  of  the  inflexion  of  the  other  opposite. 
Thus  (e.g.)  inasmuch  as  ‘best’  is  a  property  of 
‘the  good*,  ‘worst*  also  will  be  a  property  of 
‘the  evil*. 

1  ii4b  6-15. 


TOPICS 


137b  BOOK  V,  CHAPTERS  6-7  189 

Next,  look  from  the  point  of  view  of  things  [20]  in  process  of  comparison  with  more  than 


that  are  in  a  like  relation,  and  see,  for  destruc¬ 
tive  purposes,  if  what  is  in  a  relation  like  that 
of  the  property  rendered  fails  to  be  a  property 
of  what  is  in  a  relation  like  that  of  the  subject: 
for  then  neither  will  what  is  in  a  relation  like 
[35]  that  of  the  fifst  be  a  property  of  what  is  in 
a  relation  like  that  of  the  second.  Thus  (e.g.) 
inasmuch  as  the  relation  of  the  builder  towards 
the  production  of  a  house  is  like  that  of  the  doc¬ 
tor  towards  the  production  of  health,  and  it  is 
137a  not  a  property  of  a  doctor  to  produce 
health,  it  could  not  be  a  property  of  a  builder 
to  produce  a  house.  For  constructive  purposes, 
on  the  other  hand,  see  if  what  is  in  a  relation 
like  that  of  the  property  rendered  is  a  property 
of  what  is  in  a  relation  like  that  of  the  subject: 
for  then  also  what  is  in  a  relation  like  that  of 
the  first  will  be  a  property  of  what  is  in  a  rela¬ 
tion  like  that  of  the  second.  Thus  (e.g.)  in¬ 
asmuch  as  the  relation  of  a  doctor  towards 
the  possession  of  ability  to  produce  health 
[5]  is  like  that  of  a  trainer  towards  the  pos¬ 
session  of  ability  to  produce  vigour,  and  it  is 
a  property  of  a  trainer  to  possess  the  ability 
to  produce  vigour,  it  would  be  a  property 
of  a  doctor  to  possess  the  ability  to  produce 
health. 

Next  look  from  the  point  of  view  of  things 
that  are  identically  related,  and  see,  for  destruc¬ 
tive  purposes,  if  the  predicate  that  is  identically 
related  towards  two  subjects  fails  to  be  a  prop¬ 
erty  of  the  subject  which  is  identically  related 
to  it  as  the  subject  in  question;  for  then  neither 
[/o]  will  the  predicate  that  is  identically  re¬ 
lated  to  both  subjects  be  a  property  of  the  sub¬ 
ject  which  is  identically  related  to  it  as  the  first. 
If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  predicate  which  is 
identically  related  to  two  subjects  is  the  prop¬ 
erty  of  the  subject  which  is  identically  related 
to  it  as  the  subject  in  question,  then  it  will  not 
be  a  property  of  that  of  which  it  has  been  stated 
to  be  a  property.  [Thus  (e.g.)  inasmuch  as 
prudence  is  identically  related  to  both  the  noble 
and  the  base,  since  it  is  knowledge  of  each  of 
them,  and  it  is  not  a  property  of  prudence  to 
be  knowledge  of  the  noble,  it  could  not  be  a 
[75]  property  of  prudence  to  be  knowledge  of 
the  base.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  a  property 
of  prudence  to  be  the  knowledge  of  the  noble,  it 
could  not  be  a  property  of  it  to  be  the  knowl¬ 
edge  of  the  base.]  For  it  is  impossible  for  the 
same  thing  to  be  a  property  of  more  than  one 
subject.  For  constructive  purposes,  on  the  other 
hand,  this  commonplace  rule  is  of  no  use:  for 
what  is  ‘identically  related’  is  a  single  predicate 


one  subject. 

Next,  for  destructive  purposes,  see  if  the 
predicate  qualified  by  the  verb  ‘to  be’  fails  to  be 
a  property  of  the  subject  qualified  by  the  verb 
‘to  be’:  for  then  neither  will  the  destruction  of 
the  one  be  a  property  of  the  other  qualified  by 
the  verb  ‘to  be  destroyed’,  nor  will  the  ‘becom¬ 
ing’  the  one  be  a  property  of  the  other  qualified 
by  the  verb  ‘to  become’.  Thus  (e.g.)  inasmuch 
as  it  is  not  a  property  of  ‘man’  to  be  an  animal, 
neither  could  it  be  a  property  of  becoming  a 
[25]  man  to  become  an  animal;  nor  could  the 
destruction  of  an  animal  be  a  property  of  the 
destruction  of  a  man.  In  the  same  way  one 
should  derive  arguments  also  from  ‘becoming’ 
to  ‘being’  and  ‘being  destroyed’,  and  from  ‘be¬ 
ing  destroyed’  to  ‘being’  and  to  ‘becoming’,  ex- 
[jo]  actly  as  they  have  just  been  given  from 
‘being’  to  ‘becoming’  and  ‘being  destroyed’. 
For  constructive  purposes,  on  the  other  hand, 
see  if  the  subject  set  down  as  qualified  by  the 
verb  ‘to  be’  has  the  predicate  set  down  as  so 
qualified,  as  its  property:  for  then  also  the  sub¬ 
ject  qualified  by  the  very  ‘to  become’  will  have 
the  predicate  qualified  by  ‘to  become’  as  its 
property,  and  the  subject  qualified  by  the  verb 
‘to  be  destroyed’  will  have  as  its  property  the 
predicate  rendered  with  this  qualification. 
Thus,  for  example,  inasmuch  as  it  is  a  property 
[^5]  of  man  to  be  a  mortal,  it  would  be  a  prop¬ 
erty  of  becoming  a  man  to  become  a  mortal, 
and  the  destruction  of  a  mortal  would  be  a 
property  of  the  destruction  of  a  man.  In  the  same 
137b  way  one  should  derive  arguments  also 
from  ‘becoming’  and  ‘being  destroyed’  both  to 
‘being’  and  to  the  conclusions  that  follow  from 
them,  exactly  as  was  directed  also  for  the  pur¬ 
pose  of  destruction. 

Next  take  a  look  at  the  ‘idea’  of  the  subject 
stated,  and  see,  for  destructive  purposes,  if  the 
suggested  property  fails  to  belong  to  the  ‘idea’ 
in  question,  or  fails  to  belong  to  it  in  virtue  of 
[5]  that  character  which  causes  it  to  bear  the 
description  of  which  the  property  was  ren¬ 
dered:  for  then  what  has  been  stated  to  be  a 
property  will  not  be  a  property.  Thus  (e.g.) 
inasmuch  as  ‘being  motionless’  does  not  belong 
to  ‘man-himself’  qua  ‘man’,  but  qua  ‘idea’,  it 
could  not  be  a  property  of  ‘man’  to  be  motion¬ 
less.  For  constructive  purposes,  on  the  other 
hand,  see  if  the  property  in  question  belongs  to 
the  idea,  and  belongs  to  it  in  that  respect  in 
virtue  of  which  there  is  predicated  of  it  that 
[/o]  character  of  which  the  predicate  in  ques¬ 
tion  has  been  stated  not  to  be  a  property:  for 


190  TOPICS  138a 


then  what  has  been  stated  not  to  be  a  property 
will  be  a  property.  Thus  (e.g.)  inasmuch  as  it 
belongs  to  ‘living-creature-itself’  to  be  com¬ 
pounded  of  soul  and  body,  and  further  this  be¬ 
longs  to  it  qua  ‘living-creature’,  it  would  be  a 
property  of  ‘living-creature’  to  be  compounded 
of  soul  and  body. 

8 

Next  look  from  the  point  of  view  of  greater 
[75]  and  less  degrees,  and  first  (a)  for  destruc¬ 
tive  purposes,  see  if  what  is  more-P  fails  to  be  a 
property  of  what  is  more-S:  for  then  neither 
will  what  is  less-P  be  a  property  of  what  is  less- 
S,  nor  least-P  of  least-S,  nor  most-P  of  most-S, 
nor  P  simply  of  S  simply.  Thus  (e.g.)  inas¬ 
much  as  being  more  highly  coloured  is  not  a 
property  of  what  is  more  a  body,  neither  could 
[20]  being  less  highly  coloured  be  a  property  of 
what  is  less  a  body,  nor  being  coloured  be  a 
property  of  body  at  all.  For  constructive  pur¬ 
poses,  on  the  other  hand,  see  if  what  is  more-P 
is  a  property  of  what  is  more-S:  for  then  also 
what  is  less-P  will  be  a  property  of  what  is  less- 
S,  and  least-P  of  least-S,  and  most-P  of  most-S, 
and  P  simply  of  S  simply.  Thus  (e.g.)  inas¬ 
much  as  a  higher  degree  of  sensation  is  a  prop¬ 
erty  of  a  higher  degree  of  life,  a  lower  degree 
[25]  of  sensation  also  would  be  a  property  of  a 
lower  degree  of  life,  and  the  highest  of  the 
highest  and  the  lowest  of  the  lowest  degree, 
and  sensation  simply  of  life  simply. 

Also  you  should  look  at  the  argument  from 
a  simple  predication  to  the  same  qualified 
types  of  predication,  and  see,  for  destructive 
purposes,  if  P  simply  fails  to  be  a  property  of  S 
[jo]  simply;  for  then  neither  will  more-P  be 
a  property  of  more-S,  nor  less-P  of  less-S,  nor 
most-P  of  most-S,  nor  least-P  of  least-S.  Thus 
(e.g.)  inasmuch  as  ‘virtuous’  is  not  a  property 
of  ‘man’,  neither  could  ‘more  virtuous’  be  a 
property  of  what  is  ‘more  human’.  For  con¬ 
structive  purposes,  on  the  other  hand,  see  if  P 
simply  is  a  property  of  S  simply:  for  then  more- 
P  also  will  be  a  property  of  more-S,  and  less-P 
[35]  less-S,  and  least-P  of  least-S,  and  most-P 
of  most-S.  Thus  (e.g.)  a  tendency  to  move  up¬ 
wards  by  nature  is  a  property  of  fire,  and  so 
138a  also  a  greater  tendency  to  move  upwards 
by  nature  would  be  a  property  of  what  is  more 
fiery.  In  the  same  way  too  one  should  look  at 
all  these  matters  from  the  point  of  view  of  the 
others  as  well. 

Secondly  (b)  for  destructive  purposes,  see  if 
the  more  likely  property  fails  to  be  a  property 
of  the  more  likely  subject:  for  then  neither  will 


[5]  the  less  likely  property  be  a  property  of  the 
less  likely  subject.  Thus  (e.g.)  inasmuch  as 
‘perceiving’  is  more  likely  to  be  a  property  of 
‘animal’  than  ‘knowing’  of  ‘man’,  and  ‘perceiv¬ 
ing’  is  not  a  property  of  ‘animal’,  ‘knowing’ 
could  not  be  a  property  of  ‘man’.  For  construc¬ 
tive  purposes,  on  the  other  hand,  see  if  the  less 
likely  property  is  a  property  of  the  less  likely 
subject;  for  then  too  the  more  likely  property 
will  be  a  property  of  the  more  likely  subject, 
[/o]  Thus  (e.g.)  inasmuch  as  ‘to  be  naturally 
civilized’  is  less  likely  to  be  a  property  of  man 
than  ‘to  live’  of  an  animal,  and  it  is  a  property 
of  man  to  be  naturally  civilized,  it  would  be  a 
property  of  animal  to  live. 

Thirdly  (c)  for  destructive  purposes,  see  if 
the  predicate  fails  to  be  a  property  of  that  of 
which  it  is  more  likely  to  be  a  property:  for 
then  neither  will  it  be  a  property  of  that  of 
which  it  is  less  likely  to  be  a  property:  while  if 
[75]  it  is  a  property  of  the  former,  it  will  not 
be  a  property  of  the  latter.  Thus  (e.g.)  inas¬ 
much  as  ‘to  be  coloured’  is  more  likely  to  be  a 
property  of  a  ‘surface’  than  of  a  ‘body’,  and  it  is 
not  a  property  of  a  surface,  ‘to  be  coloured’ 
could  not  be  a  property  of  ‘body’;  while  if  it  is  a 
property  of  a  ’surface’,  it  could  not  be  a  prop¬ 
erty  of  a  ‘body’.  For  constructive  purposes,  on 
the  other  hand,  this  commonplace  rule  is  not  of 
[20]  any  use:  for  it  is  impossible  for  the  same 
thing  to  be  a  property  of  more  than  one  thing. 

Fourthly  (d)  for  destructive  purposes,  see  if 
what  is  more  likely  to  be  a  property  of  a  given 
subject  fails  to  be  its  property:  for  then  neither 
will  what  is  less  likely  to  be  a  property  of  it  be 
its  property.  Thus  (e.g.)  inasmuch  as  ‘sensible’ 
is  more  likely  than  ‘divisible’  to  be  a  property 
of  ‘animal’,  and  ‘sensible’  is  not  a  property  of 
[25]  animal,  ‘divisible’  could  not  be  a  property 
of  animal.  For  constructive  purposes,  on  the 
other  hand,  see  if  what  is  less  likely  to  be  a 
property  of  it  is  a  property;  for  then  what  is 
more  likely  to  be  a  property  of  it  will  be  a  prop¬ 
erty  as  well.  Thus,  for  example,  inasmuch  as 
‘sensation’  is  less  likely  to  be  a  property  of  ‘ani¬ 
mal’  than  life’,  and  ‘sensation’  is  a  property  of 
animal,  ‘life’  would  be  a  property  of  animal, 
[jo]  Next,  look  from  the  point  of  view  of  the 
attributes  that  belong  in  a  like  manner,  and 
first  (a)  for  destructive  purposes,  see  if  what  is 
as  much  a  property  fails  to  be  a  property  of  that 
of  which  it  is  as  much  a  property:  for  then  nei¬ 
ther  will  that  which  is  as  much  a  property  as  it 
be  a  property  of  that  of  which  it  is  as  much  a 
property.  Thus  (e.g.)  inasmuch  as  ‘desiring’  is 
as  much  a  property  of  the  faculty  of  desire  as 


139a 

‘reasoning’  is  a  property  of  the  faculty  of  rea- 
[55]  son,  and  desiring  is  not  a  property  of  the 
faculty  of  desire,  reasoning  could  not  be  a 
property  of  the  faculty  of  reason.  For  construc¬ 
tive  purposes,  on  the  other  hand,  see  if  what  is 
as  much  a  property  is  a  property  of  that  of 
which  it  is  as  much  a  property:  for  then  also 
138b  what  is  as  much  a  property  as  it  will  be  a 
property  of  that  of  which  it  is  as  much  a  prop¬ 
erty.  Thus  (e.g.)  inasmuch  as  it  is  as  much  a 
property  of  ‘the  faculty  of  reason’  to  be  ‘the 
primary  seat  of  wisdom’  as  it  is  of  ‘the  faculty 
of  desire’  to  be  ‘the  primary  seat  of  temper¬ 
ance’,  and  it  is  a  property  of  the  faculty  of  rea¬ 
son  to  be  the  primary  seat  of  wisdom,  it  would 
be  a  property  of  the  faculty  of  desire  to  be  the 
[5]  primary  seat  of  temperance. 

Secondly  ( b )  for  destructive  purposes,  see  if 
what  is  as  much  a  property  of  anything  fails  to 
be  a  property  of  it:  for  then  neither  will  what 
is  as  much  a  property  be  a  property  of  it.  Thus 
(e.g.)  inasmuch  as  ‘seeing’  is  as  much  a  prop¬ 
erty  of  man  as  ‘hearing’,  and  ‘seeing’  is  not  a 
property  of  man,  ‘hearing’  could  not  be  a  prop¬ 
erty  of  man.  For  constructive  purposes,  on  the 
[/o]  other  hand,  see  if  what  is  as  much  a  prop¬ 
erty  of  it  is  its  property:  for  then  what  is  as 
much  a  property  of  it  as  the  former  will  be  its 
property  as  well.  Thus  (e.g.)  it  is  as  much  a 
property  of  the  soul  to  be  the  primary  possessor 
of  a  part  that  desires  as  of  a  part  that  reasons, 
and  it  is  a  property  of  the  soul  to  be  the  pri¬ 
mary  possessor  of  a  part  that  desires,  and  so  it 
[75]  would  be  a  property  of  the  soul  to  be  the 
primary  possessor  of  a  part  that  reasons. 

Thirdly  (r)  for  destructive  purposes,  see  if  it 
fails  to  be  a  property  of  that  of  which  it  is  as 
much  a  property:  for  then  neither  will  it  be  a 
property  of  that  of  which  it  is  as  much  a  prop¬ 
erty  as  of  the  former,  while  if  it  be  a  property 
of  the  former,  it  will  not  be  a  property  of  the 
other.  Thus  (e.g.)  inasmuch  as  ‘to  burn’  is  as 
much  a  property  of  ‘flame’  as  of  ‘live  coals’,  and 
‘to  burn’  is  not  a  property  of  flame,  ‘to  burn’ 
[20]  could  not  be  a  property  of  live  coals:  while 
if  it  is  a  property  of  flame,  it  could  not  be  a 
property  of  live  coals.  For  constructive  pur¬ 
poses,  on  the  other  hand,  this  commonplace 
rule  is  of  no  use. 

The  rule  based  on  things  that  are  in  a  like 
relation1  differs  from  the  rule  based  on  attri¬ 
butes  that  belong  in  a  like  manner,2  because 
the  former  point  is  secured  by  analogy,  not 
[25]  from  reflection  on  the  belonging  of  any 
attribute,  while  the  latter  is  judged  by  a  com- 
1  *36b  33“I37a  7*  2  138®  3o-b  22. 


191 

parison  based  on  the  fact  that  an  attribute  be¬ 
longs. 

Next,  for  destructive  purposes,  see  if  in  ren¬ 
dering  the  property  potentially,  he  has  also 
through  that  potentiality  rendered  the  prop¬ 
erty  relatively  to  something  that  does  not  exist, 
when  the  potentiality  in  question  cannot  be- 
[jo]  long  to  what  does  not  exist:  for  then  what 
is  stated  to  be  a  property  will  not  be  a  property. 
Thus  (e.g.)  he  who  has  said  that  ‘breathable’ 
is  a  property  of  ‘air’  has,  on  the  one  hand,  ren¬ 
dered  the  property  potentially  (for  that  is 
‘breathable’  which  is  such  as  can  be  breathed), 
and  on  the  other  hand  has  also  rendered  the 
property  relatively  to  what  does  not  exist: — for 
while  air  may  exist,  even  though  there  exist  no 
animal  so  constituted  as  to  breathe  the  air,  it  is 
[^5]  not  possible  to  breathe  it  if  no  animal  ex¬ 
ist:  so  that  it  will  not,  either,  be  a  property  of 
air  to  be  such  as  can  be  breathed  at  a  time  when 
there  exists  no  animal  such  as  to  breathe  it — 
and  so  it  follows  that  ‘breathable’  could  not  be 
a  property  of  air. 

139a  For  constructive  purposes,  see  if  in  ren¬ 
dering  the  property  potentially  he  renders  the 
property  either  relatively  to  something  that  ex¬ 
ists,  or  to  something  that  does  not  exist,  when 
the  potentiality  in  question  can  belong  to  what 
does  not  exist:  for  then  what  has  been  stated 
not  to  be  a  property  will  be  a  property.  Thus 
(e.g.)  he  who  renders  it  as  a  property  of  ‘being’ 
[5]  to  be  ‘capable  of  being  acted  upon  or  of 
acting’,  in  rendering  the  property  potentially, 
has  rendered  the  property  relatively  to  some¬ 
thing  that  exists:  for  when  ‘being’  exists,  it  will 
also  be  capable  of  being  acted  upon  or  of  acting 
in  a  certain  way:  so  that  to  be  ‘capable  of  being 
acted  upon  or  of  acting’  would  be  a  property  of 
‘being’. 

Next,  for  destructive  purposes,  see  if  he  has 
stated  the  property  in  the  superlative:  for  then 
[/o]  what  has  been  stated  to  be  a  property  will 
not  be  a  property.  For  people  who  render  the 
property  in  that  way  find  that  of  the  object  of 
which  the  description  is  true,  the  name  is  not 
true  as  well:  for  though  the  object  perish  the 
description  will  continue  in  being  none  the 
less;  for  it  belongs  most  nearly  to  something 
that  is  in  being.  An  example  would  be  suppos¬ 
ing  any  one  were  to  render  ‘the  lightest  body’ 
as  a  property  of  ‘fire’:  for,  though  fire  perish, 
[75]  there  will  still  be  some  form  of  body  that 
is  the  lightest,  so  that  ‘the  lightest  body’  could 
not  be  a  property  of  fire.  For  constructive  pur¬ 
poses,  on  the  other  hand,  see  if  he  has  avoided 
rendering  the  property  in  the  superlative:  for 


BOOK  V,  CHAPTERS  7-8 


192  TOPICS  140a 

then  the  property  will  in  this  respect  have  been  property  of  man  has  not  rendered  the  property 
correctly  stated.  Thus  (e.g.)  inasmuch  as  he  [20]  in  the  superlative,  the  property  would  in 
who  states  ‘a  naturally  civilized  animal’  as  a  this  respect  have  been  correctly  stated. 

BOOK  VI 


1 

The  discussion  of  Definitions  falls  into  five 
parts.  For  you  have  to  show  either  (1)  that  it 
[25]  is  not  true  at  all  to  apply  the  expression  as 
well  to  that  to  which  the  term  is  applied  (for 
the  definition  of  Man  ought  to  be  true  of  every 
man);  or  (2)  that  though  the  object  has  a  ge¬ 
nus,  he  has  failed  to  put  the  object  defined  into 
the  genus,  or  to  put  it  into  the  appropriate  ge¬ 
nus  (for  the  framer  of  a  definition  should  first 
place  the  object  in  its  genus,  and  then  append 
[30]  its  differences:  for  of  all  the  elements  of 
the  definition  the  genus  is  usually  supposed  to 
be  the  principal  mark  of  the  essence  of  what  is 
defined):  or  (3)  that  the  expression  is  not  pe¬ 
culiar  to  the  object  (for,  as  we  said  above  as 
well,1  a  definition  ought  to  be  peculiar):  or 
else  (4)  see  if,  though  he  has  observed  all  the 
aforesaid  cautions,  he  has  yet  failed  to  define 
the  object,  that  is,  to  express  its  essence.  (5)  It 
remains,  apart  from  the  foregoing,  to  see  if  he 
[35]  has  defined  it,  but  defined  it  incorrectly. 

Whether,  then,  the  expression  be  not  also 
true  of  that  of  which  the  term  is  true  you 
should  proceed  to  examine  according  to  the 
commonplace  rules  that  relate  to  Accident.  For 
there  too  the  question  is  always  ‘Is  so  and  so 
true  or  untrue  ?  ’ :  for  whenever  we  argue  that  an 
139b  accident  belongs,  we  declare  it  to  be  true, 
while  whenever  we  argue  that  it  does  not  be¬ 
long,  we  declare  it  to  be  untrue.  If,  again,  he 
has  failed  to  place  the  object  in  the  appropriate 
genus,  or  if  the  expression  be  not  peculiar  to 
the  object,  we  must  go  on  to  examine  the  case 
according  to  the  commonplace  rules  that  relate 
[5]  t0  genus  and  property. 

It  remains,  then,  to  prescribe  how  to  investi¬ 
gate  whether  the  object  has  been  either  not  de¬ 
fined  at  all,  or  else  defined  incorrectly.  First, 
then,  we  must  proceed  to  examine  if  it  has  been 
defined  incorrectly:  for  with  anything  it  is  eas¬ 
ier  to  do  it  than  to  do  it  correctly.  Clearly,  then, 
more  mistakes  are  made  in  the  latter  task  on 
account  of  its  greater  difficulty.  Accordingly 
[/o]  the  attack  becomes  easier  in  the  latter  case 
than  in  the  former. 

Incorrectness  falls  into  two  branches:  (1) 
first,  the  use  of  obscure  language  (for  the  lan- 
1  ioib  19. 


guage  of  a  definition  ought  to  be  the  very  clear¬ 
est  possible,  seeing  that  the  whole  purpose  of 
[75]  rendering  it  is  to  make  something 
known);  (2)  secondly,  if  the  expression  used 
be  longer  than  is  necessary:  for  all  additional 
matter  in  a  definition  is  superfluous.  Again, 
each  of  the  aforesaid  branches  is  divided  into  a 
number  of  others. 

2 

One  commonplace  rule,  then,  in  regard  to 
obscurity  is,  See  if  the  meaning  intended  by  the 
[20]  definition  involves  an  ambiguity  with  any 
other,  e.g.  ‘Becoming  is  a  passage  into  being’, 
or  ‘Health  is  the  balance  of  hot  and  cold  ele¬ 
ments’.  Here  ‘passage’  and  ‘balance’  are  am¬ 
biguous  terms:  it  is  accordingly  not  clear  which 
of  the  several  possible  senses  of  the  term  he  in¬ 
tends  to  convey.  Likewise  also,  if  the  term  de¬ 
fined  be  used  in  different  senses  and  he  has 
spoken  without  distinguishing  between  them: 
[25]  for  then  it  is  not  clear  to  which  of  them 
the  definition  rendered  applies,  and  one  can 
then  bring  a  captious  objection  on  the  ground 
that  the  definition  does  not  apply  to  all  the 
things  whose  definition  he  has  rendered:  and 
this  kind  of  thing  is  particularly  easy  in  the 
case  where  the  definer  does  not  see  the  ambi¬ 
guity  of  his  terms.  Or,  again,  the  questioner 
may  himself  distinguish  the  various  senses  of 
the  term  rendered  in  the  definition,  and  then 
[30]  institute  his  argument  against  each:  for 
if  the  expression  used  be  not  adequate  to  the 
subject  in  any  of  its  senses,  it  is  clear  that  he 
cannot  have  defined  it  in  any  sense  aright. 

Another  rule  is,  See  if  he  has  used  a  meta¬ 
phorical  expression,  as,  for  instance,  if  he  has 
defined  knowledge  as  ‘unsupplantable’,  or  the 
earth  as  a  ‘nurse’,  or  temperance  as  a  ‘har¬ 
mony’.  For  a  metaphorical  expression  is  always 
[35]  obscure.  It  is  possible,  also,  to  argue  so- 
phistically  against  the  user  of  a  metaphorical 
expression  as  though  he  had  used  it  in  its  lit¬ 
eral  sense:  for  the  definition  stated  will  not  ap¬ 
ply  to  the  term  defined,  e.g.  in  the  case  of  tem¬ 
perance:  for  harmony  is  always  found  between 
notes.  Moreover,  if  harmony  be  the  genus  of 
temperance,  then  the  same  object  will  occur  in 
140a  two  genera  of  which  neither  contains  the 
other:  for  harmony  does  not  contain  virtue,  nor 


140b 

virtue  harmony.  Again,  see  if  he  uses  terms 
that  are  unfamiliar,  as  when  Plato  describes  the 
eye  as  ‘brow-shaded’,  or  a  certain  spider  as 
[5]  ‘poison-fanged’,  or  the  marrow  as  ‘bone- 
formed’.  For  an  unusual  phrase  is  always  ob¬ 
scure. 

Sometimes  a  phrase  is  used  neither  ambigu¬ 
ously,  nor  yet  metaphorically,  nor  yet  literally, 
as  when  the  law  is  said  to  be  the  ‘measure’  or 
‘image’  of  the  things  that  are  by  nature  just. 
Such  phrases  are  worse  than  metaphor;  for  the 
latter  does  make  its  meaning  to  some  extent 
clear  because  of  the  likeness  involved;  for  those 
[10]  who  use  metaphors  do  so  always  in  view 
of  some  likeness:  whereas  this  kind  of  phrase 
makes  nothing  clear;  for  there  is  no  likeness  to 
justify  the  description  ‘measure’  or  ‘image’,  as 
applied  to  the  law,  nor  is  the  law  ordinarily  so 
called  in  a  literal  sense.  So  then,  if  a  man  says 
that  the  law  is  literally  a  ‘measure’  or  an  ‘im- 
[75]  age’,  he  speaks  falsely:  for  an  image  is 
something  produced  by  imitation,  and  this  is 
not  found  in  the  case  of  the  law.  If,  on  the  other 
hand,  he  does  not  mean  the  term  literally,  it  is 
clear  that  he  has  used  an  unclear  expression, 
and  one  that  is  worse  than  any  sort  of  meta¬ 
phorical  expression. 

Moreover,  see  if  from  the  expression  used 
the  definition  of  the  contrary  be  not  clear;  for 
definitions  that  have  been  correctly  rendered 
also  indicate  their  contraries  as  well.  Or,  again, 
[20]  see  if,  when  it  is  merely  stated  by  itself,  it 
is  not  evident  what  it  defines:  just  as  in  the 
works  of  the  old  painters,  unless  there  were  an 
inscription,  the  figures  used  to  be  unrecogniza¬ 
ble. 

3 

If,  then,  the  definition  be  not  clear,  you  should 
proceed  to  examine  on  lines  such  as  these. 
If,  on  the  other  hand,  he  has  phrased  the 
definition  redundantly,  first  of  all  look  and  see 
[25]  whether  he  has  used  any  attribute  that  be¬ 
longs  universally,  either  to  real  objects  in  gen¬ 
eral,  or  to  all  that  fall  under  the  same  genus  as 
the  object  defined:  for  the  mention  of  this  is 
sure  to  be  redundant.  For  the  genus  ought  to 
divide  the  object  from  things  in  general,  and 
the  differentia  from  any  of  the  things  con¬ 
tained  in  the  same  genus.  Now  any  term  that 
belongs  to  everything  separates  off  the  given 
object  from  absolutely  nothing,  while  any  that 
[50]  belongs  to  all  the  things  that  fall  under 
the  same  genus  does  not  separate  it  off  from  the 
things  contained  in  the  same  genus.  Any  addi¬ 
tion,  then,  of  that  kind  will  be  pointless. 


x93 

Or  see  if,  though  the  additional  matter  may 
be  peculiar  to  the  given  term,  yet  even  when  it 
is  struck  out  the  rest  of  the  expression  too  is 
peculiar  and  makes  clear  the  essence  of  the 
[55]  term.  Thus,  in  the  definition  of  man,  the 
addition  ‘capable  of  receiving  knowledge’  is 
superfluous;  for  strike  it  out,  and  still  the  ex¬ 
pression  is  peculiar  and  makes  clear  his  essence. 
140b  Speaking  generally,  everything  is  super¬ 
fluous  upon  whose  removal  the  remainder  still 
makes  the  term  that  is  being  defined  clear. 
Such,  for  instance,  would  also  be  the  definition 
of  the  soul,  assuming  it  to  be  stated  as  a  ‘self- 
moving  number’;1  for  the  soul  is  just  ‘the  self- 
moving’,  as  Plato  defined  it.2  Or  perhaps  the 
expression  used,  though  appropriate,  yet  does 
not  declare  the  essence,  if  the  word  ‘number’  be 
[5]  eliminated.  Which  of  the  two  is  the  real 
state  of  the  case  it  is  difficult  to  determine  clear¬ 
ly:  the  right  way  to  treat  the  matter  in  all 
cases  is  to  be  guided  by  convenience.  Thus 
(e.g.)  it  is  said  that  the  definition  of  phlegm  is 
the  ‘undigested  moisture  that  comes  first  off 
food’.  Here  the  addition  of  the  word  ‘undi¬ 
gested’  is  superfluous,  seeing  that  ‘the  first’  is 
one  and  not  many,  so  that  even  when  ‘undi- 
[10]  gested’  is  left  out  the  definition  will  still 
be  peculiar  to  the  subject:  for  it  is  impossible 
that  both  phlegm  and  also  something  else 
should  both  be  the  first  to  arise  from  the  food. 
Or  perhaps  the  phlegm  is  not  absolutely  the 
first  thing  to  come  off  the  food,  but  only  the 
first  of  the  undigested  matters,  so  that  the  addi¬ 
tion  ‘undigested’  is  required;  for  stated  the  oth¬ 
er  way  the  definition  would  not  be  true  unless 
[75]  the  phlegm  comes  first  of  all. 

Moreover,  see  if  anything  contained  in  the 
definition  fails  to  apply  to  everything  that  falls 
under  the  same  species:  for  this  sort  of  defini¬ 
tion  is  worse  than  those  which  include  an  attri¬ 
bute  belonging  to  all  things  universally.  For  in 
that  case,  if  the  remainder  of  the  expression  be 
peculiar,  the  whole  too  will  be  peculiar:  for  ab¬ 
solutely  always,  if  to  something  peculiar  any- 
[20]  thing  whatever  that  is  true  be  added,  the 
whole  too  becomes  peculiar.  Whereas  if  any 
part  of  the  expression  do  not  apply  to  every¬ 
thing  that  falls  under  the  same  species,  it  is  im¬ 
possible  that  the  expression  as  a  whole  should  be 
peculiar:  for  it  will  not  be  predicated  converti- 
bly  with  the  object;  e.g.  ‘a  walking  biped  ani¬ 
mal  six  feet  high’:  for  an  expression  of  that 
kind  is  not  predicated  convertibly  with  the 
[25]  term,  because  the  attribute  ‘six  feet  high’ 

1  Xenocrates,  Fr.  60,  Heinze. 

2  PhaedruSy  245. 


BOOK  V,  CHAPTER  8— BOOK  VI,  CHAPTERS  1-3 


*94 

does  not  belong  to  everything  that  falls  under 
the  same  species. 

Again,  see  if  he  has  said  the  same  thing  more 
than  once,  saying  (e.g.)  ‘desire’  is  a  ‘conation 
for  the  pleasant’.  For  ‘desire’  is  always  ‘for  the 
pleasant’,  so  that  what  is  the  same  as  desire  will 
also  be  ‘for  the  pleasant’.  Accordingly  our  defi- 
[  jo]  nition  of  desire  becomes  ‘conation-for-the- 
pleasant  for  the  pleasant’:  for  the  word  ‘desire’ 
is  the  exact  equivalent  of  the  words  ‘conation- 
for-the-pleasant’,  so  that  both  alike  will  be  ‘for 
the  pleasant’.  Or  perhaps  there  is  no  absurdity 
in  this;  for  consider  this  instance: — ‘Man  is  a 
biped’:  therefore,  what  is  the  same  as  man  is  a 
biped:  but  ‘a  walking  biped  animal’  is  the  same 
as  man,  and  therefore  ‘a  walking  biped  animal 
[35]  ls  a  biped’.  But  this  involves  no  real  ab¬ 
surdity.  For  ‘biped’  is  not  a  predicate  of  ‘walk¬ 
ing  animal’:  if  it  were,  then  we  should  certainly 
have  ‘biped’  predicated  twice  of  the  same 
thing;  but  as  a  matter  of  fact  the  subject  said  to 
141a  be  a  biped  is  ‘a  walking  biped  animal’,  so 
that  the  word  ‘biped’  is  only  used  as  a  predicate 
once.  Likewise  also  in  the  case  of  ‘desire’  as 
well:  for  it  is  not  ‘conation’  that  is  said  to  be 
‘for  the  pleasant’,  but  rather  the  whole  idea,  so 
that  there  too  the  predication  is  only  made 
[5]  once.  Absurdity  results,  not  when  the  same 
word  is  uttered  twice,  but  when  the  same  thing 
is  more  than  once  predicated  of  a  subject;  e.g. 
if  he  says,  like  Xenocrates,  that  wisdom  defines 
and  contemplates  reality:1  for  definition  is  a 
certain  type  of  contemplation,  so  that  by  add¬ 
ing  the  words  ‘and  contemplates’  over  again  he 
says  the  same  thing  twice  over.  Likewise,  too, 
those  fail  who  say  that  ‘cooling’  is  ‘the  privation 
[/o]  of  natural  heat’.  For  all  privation  is  a  pri¬ 
vation  of  some  natural  attribute,  so  that  the  ad¬ 
dition  of  the  word  ‘natural’  is  superfluous:  it 
would  have  been  enough  to  say  ‘privation  of 
heat’,  for  the  word  ‘privation’  shows  of  itself 
that  the  heat  meant  is  natural  heat. 

[75]  Again,  see  if  a  universal  have  been  men¬ 
tioned  and  then  a  particular  case  of  it  be  added 
as  well,  e.g.  ‘Equity  is  a  remission  of  what  is 
expedient  and  just’;  for  what  is  just  is  a  branch 
of  what  is  expedient  and  is  therefore  included 
in  the  latter  term:  its  mention  is  therefore  re¬ 
dundant,  an  addition  of  the  particular  after  the 
universal  has  been  already  stated.  So  also,  if  he 
defines  ‘medicine’  as  ‘knowledge  of  what 
makes  for  health  in  animals  and  men’,  or  ‘the 
[20]  law’  as  ‘the  image  of  what  is  by  nature 
noble  and  just’;  for  what  is  just  is  a  branch  of 
1  Fr.  7,  Heinze. 


141b 

what  is  noble,  so  that  he  says  the  same  thing 
more  than  once. 

4 

Whether,  then,  a  man  defines  a  thing  cor¬ 
rectly  or  incorrectly  you  should  proceed  to  ex¬ 
amine  on  these  and  similar  lines.  But  whether 
he  has  mentioned  and  defined  its  essence  or  no, 
[25]  should  be  examined  as  follows: — 

First  of  all,  see  if  he  has  failed  to  make  the 
definition  through  terms  that  are  prior  and 
more  intelligible.  For  the  reason  why  the  defi¬ 
nition  is  rendered  is  to  make  known  the  term 
stated,  and  we  make  things  known  by  taking 
not  any  random  terms,  but  such  as  are  prior 
and  more  intelligible,  as  is  done  in  demonstra¬ 
te]  tions  (for  so  it  is  with  all  teaching  and 
learning);  accordingly,  it  is  clear  that  a  man 
who  does  not  define  through  terms  of  this  kind 
has  not  defined  at  all.  Otherwise,  there  will  be 
more  than  one  definition  of  the  same  thing:  for 
clearly  he  who  defines  through  terms  that  are 
prior  and  more  intelligible  has  also  framed  a 
definition,  and  a  better  one,  so  that  both  would 
then  be  definitions  of  the  same  object.  This 
sort  of  view,  however,  does  not  generally  find 
[J5]  acceptance:  for  of  each  real  object  the  es¬ 
sence  is  single:  if,  then,  there  are  to  be  a  num¬ 
ber  of  definitions  of  the  same  thing,  the  essence 
of  the  object  will  be  the  same  as  it  is  represent¬ 
ed  to  be  in  each  of  the  definitions,  and  these 
representations  are  not  the  same,  inasmuch  as 
141b  the  definitions  are  different.  Clearly, 
then,  any  one  who  has  not  defined  a  thing 
through  terms  that  are  prior  and  more  intelli¬ 
gible  has  not  defined  it  at  all. 

The  statement  that  a  definition  has  not  been 
made  through  more  intelligible  terms  may  be 
understood  in  two  senses,  either  supposing  that 
its  terms  are  absolutely  less  intelligible,  or  sup- 
[5]  posing  that  they  are  less  intelligible  to  us: 
for  either  sense  is  possible.  Thus  absolutely  the 
prior  is  more  intelligible  than  the  posterior,  a 
point,  for  instance,  than  a  line,  a  line  than  a 
plane,  and  a  plane  than  a  solid;  just  as  also  a 
unit  is  more  intelligible  than  a  number;  for  it 
is  the  prius  and  starting-point  of  all  number. 
Likewise,  also,  a  letter  is  more  intelligible  than 
a  syllable.  Whereas  to  us  it  sometimes  happens 
that  the  converse  is  the  case:  for  the  solid  falls 
[/o]  under  perception  most  of  all — more  than 
a  plane — and  a  plane  more  than  a  line,  and  a 
line  more  than  a  point;  for  most  people  learn 
things  like  the  former  earlier  than  the  latter; 
for  any  ordinary  intelligence  can  grasp  them, 


TOPICS 


142b 

whereas  the  others  require  an  exact  and  excep¬ 
tional  understanding. 

[  75]  Absolutely,  then,  it  is  better  to  try  to  make 
what  is  posterior  known  through  what  is  prior, 
inasmuch  as  such  a  way  of  procedure  is  more 
scientific.  Of  course,  in  dealing  with  persons 
who  cannot  recognize  things  through  terms  of 
that  kind,  it  may  perhaps  be  necessary  to  frame 
the  expression  through  terms  that  are  intelligi¬ 
ble  to  them.  Among  definitions  of  this  kind  are 
those  of  a  point,  a  line,  and  a  plane,  all  of 
[20]  which  explain  the  prior  by  the  posterior; 
for  they  say  that  a  point  is  the  limit  of  a  line,  a 
line  of  a  plane,  a  plane  of  a  solid.  One  must, 
however,  not  fail  to  observe  that  those  who  de¬ 
fine  in  this  way  cannot  show  the  essential  na¬ 
ture  of  the  term  they  define,  unless  it  so  hap- 
[25]  pens  that  the  same  thing  is  more  intelli¬ 
gible  both  to  us  and  also  absolutely,  since  a  cor¬ 
rect  definition  must  define  a  thing  through  its 
genus  and  its  differentiae,  and  these  belong  to 
the  order  of  things  which  are  absolutely  more 
intelligible  than,  and  prior  to,  the  species.  For 
annul  the  genus  and  differentia,  and  the  spe¬ 
cies  too  is  annulled,  so  that  these  are  prior  to 
the  species.  They  are  also  more  intelligible;  for 
[jo]  if  the  species  be  known,  the  genus  and 
differentia  must  of  necessity  be  known  as  well 
(for  any  one  who  knows  what  a  man  is  knows 
also  what  ‘animal’  and  ‘walking’  are),  whereas 
if  the  genus  or  the  differentia  be  known  it  does 
not  follow  of  necessity  that  the  species  is  known 
as  well:  thus  the  species  is  less  intelligible. 
Moreover,  those  who  say  that  such  definitions, 
[55]  viz.  those  which  proceed  from  what  is  in¬ 
telligible  to  this,  that,  or  the  other  man,  are 
really  and  truly  definitions,  will  have  to  say 
that  there  are  several  definitions  of  one  and  the 
same  thing.  For,  as  it  happens,  different  things 
are  more  intelligible  to  different  people,  not 
142a  the  same  things  to  all;  and  so  a  different 
definition  would  have  to  be  rendered  to  each 
several  person,  if  the  definition  is  to  be  con¬ 
structed  from  what  is  more  intelligible  to  par¬ 
ticular  individuals.  Moreover,  to  the  same  peo¬ 
ple  different  things  are  more  intelligible  at  dif¬ 
ferent  times;  first  of  all  the  objects  of  sense; 
then,  as  they  become  more  sharpwitted,  the 
converse;  so  that  those  who  hold  that  a  defini- 
[5]  tion  ought  to  be  rendered  through  what  is 
more  intelligible  to  particular  individuals 
would  not  have  to  render  the  same  definition 
at  all  times  even  to  the  same  person.  It  is  clear, 
then,  that  the  right  way  to  define  is  not  through 
terms  of  that  kind,  but  through  what  is  abso- 


195 

lutely  more  intelligible:  for  only  in  this  way 
could  the  definition  come  always  to  be  one  and 
the  same.  Perhaps,  also,  what  is  absolutely  in- 
[/o]  telligible  is  what  is  intelligible,  not  to  all, 
but  to  those  who  are  in  a  sound  state  of  under¬ 
standing,  just  as  what  is  absolutely  healthy  is 
what  is  healthy  to  those  in  a  sound  state  of 
body.  All  such  points  as  this  ought  to  be  made 
very  precise,  and  made  use  of  in  the  course  of 
discussion  as  occasion  requires.  The  demolition 
of  a  definition  will  most  surely  win  a  general 
[75]  approval  if  the  definer  happens  to  have 
framed  his  expression  neither  from  what  is 
absolutely  more  intelligible  nor  yet  from  what 
is  so  to  us. 

One  form,  then,  of  the  failure  to  work 
through  more  intelligible  terms  is  the  exhibi¬ 
tion  of  the  prior  through  the  posterior,  as  we 
remarked  before.1  Another  form  occurs  if  we 
find  that  the  definition  has  been  rendered  of 
[20]  what  is  at  rest  and  definite  through  what 
is  indefinite  and  in  motion:  for  what  is  still  and 
definite  is  prior  to  what  is  indefinite  and  in  mo¬ 
tion. 

Of  the  failure  to  use  terms  that  are  prior 
there  are  three  forms: 

(1)  The  first  is  when  an  opposite  has  been 
defined  through  its  opposite,  e.g.  good  through 
evil:  for  opposites  are  always  simultaneous  by 
nature.  Some  people  think,  also,  that  both  are 
[25]  objects  of  the  same  science,  so  that  the  one 
is  not  even  more  intelligible  than  the  other. 
One  must,  however,  observe  that  it  is  perhaps 
not  possible  to  define  some  things  in  any  other 
way,  e.g.  the  double  without  the  half,  and  all 
the  terms  that  are  essentially  relative:  for  in  all 
such  cases  the  essential  being  is  the  same  as  a 
certain  relation  to  something,  so  that  it  is  im- 
[30]  possible  to  understand  the  one  term  with¬ 
out  the  other,  and  accordingly  in  the  definition 
of  the  one  the  other  too  must  be  embraced.  One 
ought  to  learn  up  all  such  points  as  these,  and 
use  them  as  occasion  may  seem  to  require. 

(2)  Another  is — if  he  has  used  the  term  de¬ 
fined  itself.  This  passes  unobserved  when  the 
actual  name  of  the  object  is  not  used,  e.g.  sup- 
[55]  posing  any  one  had  defined  the  sun  as  a 
142b  ‘star  that  appears  by  day’.2  For  in  bring¬ 
ing  in  ‘day’  he  brings  in  the  sun.  To  detect 
errors  of  this  sort,  exchange  the  word  for  its 
definition,  e.g.  the  definition  of  ‘day’  as  the 
‘passage  of  the  sun  over  the  earth’.  Clearly, 
whoever  has  said  ‘the  passage  of  the  sun  over 
the  earth’  has  said  ‘the  sun’,  so  that  in  bringing 

1  141®  2 6.  2  Cf.  Plato,  Def.  41 1  a. 


BOOK  VI,  CHAPTERS  3-4 


196  TOPICS  143* 


[5]  in  the  ‘day’  he  has  brought  in  the  sun. 

(3)  Again,  see  if  he  has  defined  one  co¬ 
ordinate  member  of  a  division  by  another,  e.g. 
‘an  odd  number’  as  ‘that  which  is  greater  by 
one  than  an  even  number’.  For  the  co-ordinate 
members  of  a  division  that  are  derived  from 
the  same  genus  are  simultaneous  by  nature, 
[/o]  and  ‘odd’  and  ‘even’  are  such  terms:  for 
both  are  differentiae  of  number. 

Likewise  also,  see  if  he  has  defined  a  su¬ 
perior  through  a  subordinate  term,  e.g.  ‘An 
“even  number”  is  “a  number  divisible  into 
halves”  ’,  or  ‘  “the  good”  is  a  “state  of  virtue”  ’. 
For  ‘half’  is  derived  from  ‘two’,  and  ‘two’  is 
an  even  number:  virtue  also  is  a  kind  of  good, 
[75]  so  that  the  latter  terms  are  subordinate  to 
the  former.  Moreover,  in  using  the  subordinate 
term  one  is  bound  to  use  the  other  as  well:  for 
whoever  employs  the  term  ‘virtue’  employs  the 
term  ‘good’,  seeing  that  virtue  is  a  certain  kind 
of  good:  likewise,  also,  whoever  employs  the 
term  ‘half’  employs  the  term  ‘even’,  for  to  be 
‘divided  in  half’  means  to  be  divided  into  two, 
and  two  is  even. 

5 

[20]  Generally  speaking,  then,  one  common¬ 
place  rule  relates  to  the  failure  to  frame  the  ex¬ 
pression  by  means  of  terms  that  are  prior  and 
more  intelligible:  and  of  this  the  subdivisions 
are  those  specified  above.  A  second  is,  see 
whether,  though  the  object  is  in  a  genus,  it  has 
not  been  placed  in  a  genus.  This  sort  of  error  is 
always  found  where  the  essence  of  the  object 
does  not  stand  first  in  the  expression,  e.g.  the 
definition  of  ‘body’  as  ‘that  which  has  three 
[25]  dimensions’,  or  the  definition  of  ‘man’, 
supposing  any  one  to  give  it,  as  ‘that  which 
knows  how  to  count’:  for  it  is  not  stated  what 
it  is  that  has  three  dimensions,  or  what  it  is 
that  knows  how  to  count:  whereas  the  genus  is 
meant  to  indicate  just  this,  and  is  submitted 
first  of  the  terms  in  the  definition. 

[30]  Moreover,  see  if,  while  the  term  to  be  de¬ 
fined  is  used  in  relation  to  many  things,  he  has 
failed  to  render  it  in  relation  to  all  of  them;  as 
(e.g.)  if  he  define  ‘grammar’  as  the  ‘knowl¬ 
edge  how  to  write  from  dictation’:  for  he  ought 
also  to  say  that  it  is  a  knowledge  how  to  read 
as  well.  For  in  rendering  it  as  ‘knowledge  of 
writing’  he  has  no  more  defined  it  than  by  ren¬ 
dering  it  as  ‘knowledge  of  reading’:  neither  in 
fact  has  succeeded,  but  only  he  who  mentions 
both  these  things,  since  it  is  impossible  that 
[35]  there  should  be  more  than  one  definition 
of  the  same  thing.  It  is  only,  however,  in  some 


143a  cases  that  what  has  been  said  corresponds 
to  the  actual  state  of  things:  in  some  it  does 
not,  e.g.  all  those  terms  which  are  not  used  es¬ 
sentially  in  relation  to  both  things:  as  medicine 
is  said  to  deal  with  the  production  of  disease 
and  health;  for  it  is  said  essentially  to  do  the 
latter,  but  the  former  only  by  accident:  for  it  is 
[5]  absolutely  alien  to  medicine  to  produce 
disease.  Here,  then,  the  man  who  renders  med¬ 
icine  as  relative  to  both  of  these  things  has  not 
defined  it  any  better  than  he  who  mentions  the 
one  only.  In  fact  he  has  done  it  perhaps  worse, 
for  any  one  else  besides  the  doctor  is  capable  of 
producing  disease. 

Moreover,  in  a  case  where  the  term  to  be  de- 
[/o]  fined  is  used  in  relation  to  several  things, 
see  if  he  has  rendered  it  as  relative  to  the  worse 
rather  than  to  the  better;  for  every  form  of 
knowledge  and  potentiality  is  generally  thought 
to  be  relative  to  the  best. 

Again,  if  the  thing  in  question  be  not  placed 
in  its  own  proper  genus,  one  must  examine  it 
according  to  the  elementary  rules  in  regard  to 
genera,  as  has  been  said  before.1 
[75]  Moreover,  see  if  he  uses  language  which 
transgresses  the  genera  of  the  things  he  defines, 
defining,  e.g.  justice  as  a  ‘state  that  produces 
equality’  or  ‘distributes  what  is  equal’:  for  by 
defining  it  so  he  passes  outside  the  sphere  of 
virtue,  and  so  by  leaving  out  the  genus  of  jus¬ 
tice  he  fails  to  express  its  essence:  for  the  es¬ 
sence  of  a  thing  must  in  each  case  bring  in  its 
genus.  It  is  the  same  thing  if  the  object  be  not 
[20]  put  into  its  nearest  genus;  for  the  man 
who  puts  it  into  the  nearest  one  has  stated  all 
the  higher  genera,  seeing  that  all  the  higher 
genera  are  predicated  of  the  lower.  Either, 
then,  it  ought  to  be  put  into  its  nearest  genus, 
or  else  to  the  higher  genus  all  the  differentiae 
ought  to  be  appended  whereby  the  nearest 
genus  is  defined.  For  then  he  would  not  have 
[25]  left  out  anything:  but  would  merely  have 
mentioned  the  subordinate  genus  by  an  expres¬ 
sion  instead  of  by  name.  On  the  other  hand,  he 
who  mentions  merely  the  higher  genus  by  it¬ 
self,  does  not  state  the  subordinate  genus  as 
well:  in  saying  ‘plant’  a  man  does  not  specify 
‘a  tree’. 

6 

Again,  in  regard  to  the  differentiae,  we  must 
[30]  examine  in  like  manner  whether  the  dif¬ 
ferentiae,  too,  that  he  has  stated  be  those  of  the 
genus.  For  if  a  man  has  not  defined  the  object 
by  the  differentiae  peculiar  to  it,  or  has  men- 
1 139b  3- 


144* 

tioned  something  such  as  is  utterly  incapable  of 
being  a  differentia  of  anything,  e.g.  ‘animal’  or 
‘substance’,  clearly  he  has  not  defined  it  at  all: 
for  the  aforesaid  terms  do  not  differentiate 
anything  at  all.  Further,  we  must  see  whether 
the  differentia  stated  possesses  anything  that  is 
[35]  co-ordinate  with  it  in  a  division;  for,  if 
not,  clearly  the  one  stated  could  not  be  a  dif¬ 
ferentia  of  the  genus.  For  a  genus  is  always 
divided  by  differentiae  that  are  co-ordinate 
143b  members  of  a  division,  as,  for  instance, 
‘animal’  by  the  terms  ‘walking’,  ‘flying’,  ‘aquat¬ 
ic’,  and  ‘biped’.  Or  see  if,  though  the  con¬ 
trasted  differentia  exists,  it  yet  is  not  true  of  the 
genus,  for  then,  clearly,  neither  of  them  could 
be  a  differentia  of  the  genus;  for  differentiae 
that  are  co-ordinates  in  a  division  with  the 
differentia  of  a  thing  are  all  true  of  the  genus 
[5]  to  which  the  thing  belongs.  Likewise,  also, 
see  if,  though  it  be  true,  yet  the  addition  of  it 
to  the  genus  fails  to  make  a  species.  For  then, 
clearly,  this  could  not  be  a  specific  differentia  of 
the  genus:  for  a  specific  differentia,  if  added  to 
the  genus,  always  makes  a  species.  If,  however, 
this  be  no  true  differentia,  no  more  is  the  one 
[/o]  adduced,  seeing  that  it  is  a  co-ordinate 
member  of  a  division  with  this. 

Moreover,  see  if  he  divides  the  genus  by  a 
negation,  as  those  do  who  define  a  line  as 
‘length  without  breadth’:  for  this  means  sim¬ 
ply  that  it  has  not  any  breadth.  The  genus  will 
then  be  found  to  partake  of  its  own  species:  for, 
[75]  since  of  everything  either  an  affirmation 
or  its  negation  is  true,  length  must  always 
either  lack  breadth  or  possess  it,  so  that  ‘length’ 
as  well,  i.e.  the  genus  of  ‘line’,  will  be  either 
with  or  without  breadth.  But  ‘length  without 
breadth’  is  the  definition  of  a  species,  as  also  is 
‘length  with  breadth’:  for  ‘without  breadth’ 
and  ‘with  breadth’  are  differentiae,  and  the 
enus  and  differentia  constitute  the  definition 
20]  of  the  species.  Hence  the  genus  would 
admit  of  the  definition  of  its  species.  Likewise, 
also,  it  will  admit  of  the  definition  of  the  dif¬ 
ferentia,  seeing  that  one  or  the  other  of  the 
aforesaid  differentiae  is  of  necessity  predicated 
of  the  genus.  The  usefulness  of  this  principle  is 
found  in  meeting  those  who  assert  the  existence 
[25]  of  ‘Ideas’:  for  if  absolute  length  exist, 
how  will  it  be  predicable  of  the  genus  that  it 
has  breadth  or  that  it  lacks  it?  For  one  asser¬ 
tion  or  the  other  will  have  to  be  true  of  ‘length’ 
universally,  if  it  is  to  be  true  of  the  genus  at 
all:  and  this  is  contrary  to  the  fact:  for  there 
exist  both  lengths  which  have,  and  lengths 
which  have  not,  breadth.  Hence  the  only  peo- 


197 

pie  against  whom  the  rule  can  be  employed  are 
[jo]  those  who  assert  that  a  genus  is  always 
numerically  one;  and  this  is  what  is  done  by 
those  who  assert  the  real  existence  of  the 
‘Ideas’;  for  they  allege  that  absolute  length  and 
absolute  animal  are  the  genus. 

It  may  be  that  in  some  cases  the  definer  is 
obliged  to  employ  a  negation  as  well,  e.g.  in  de¬ 
fining  privations.  For  ‘blind’  means  a  thing 
[35]  which  cannot  see  when  its  nature  is  to  see. 
There  is  no  difference  between  dividing  the 
genus  by  a  negation,  and  dividing  it  by  such  an 
144a  affirmation  as  is  bound  to  have  a  negation 
as  its  co-ordinate  in  a  division,  e.g.  supposing 
he  had  defined  something  as  ‘length  possessed 
of  breadth’;  for  co-ordinate  in  the  division  with 
that  which  is  possessed  of  breadth  is  that  which 
possesses  no  breadth  and  that  only,  so  that 
again  the  g^nus  is  divided  by  a  negation. 

[5]  Again,  see  if  he  rendered  the  species  as  a 
differentia,  as  do  those  who  define  ‘contumely’ 
as  ‘insolence  accompanied  by  jeering’;  for  jeer¬ 
ing  is  a  kind  of  insolence,  i.e.  it  is  a  species  and 
not  a  differentia. 

Moreover,  see  if  he  has  stated  the  genus  as 
[/o]  the  differentia,  e.g.  ‘Virtue  is  a  good  or 
noble  state:  for  ‘good’  is  the  genus  of  ‘virtue’. 
Or  possibly  ‘good’  here  is  not  the  genus  but  the 
differentia,  on  the  principle  that  the  same  thing 
cannot  be  in  two  genera  of  which  neither  con¬ 
tains  the  other:  for  ‘good’  does  not  include 
‘state’,  nor  vice  versa:  for  not  every  state  is 
good  nor  every  good  a  ‘state’.  Both,  then,  could 
[75]  not  be  genera,  and  consequently,  if  ‘state’ 
is  the  genus  of  virtue,  clearly  ‘good’  cannot  be 
its  genus:  it  must  rather  be  the  differentia. 
Moreover,  ‘a  state’  indicates  the  essence  of  vir¬ 
tue,  whereas  ‘good’  indicates  not  the  essence 
but  a  quality:  and  to  indicate  a  quality  is  gen¬ 
erally  held  to  be  the  function  of  the  differentia. 
[20]  See,  further,  whether  the  differentia  ren¬ 
dered  indicates  an  individual  rather  than  a 
quality:  for  the  general  view  is  that  the  dif¬ 
ferentia  always  expresses  a  quality. 

Look  and  see,  further,  whether  the  differ¬ 
entia  belongs  only  by  accident  to  the  object  de¬ 
fined.  For  the  differentia  is  never  an  accidental 
[25]  attribute,  any  more  than  the  genus  is: 
for  the  differentia  of  a  thing  cannot  both  be¬ 
long  and  not  belong  to  it. 

Moreover,  if  either  the  differentia  or  the  spe¬ 
cies,  or  any  of  the  things  which  are  under  the 
species,  is  predicable  of  the  genus,  then  he 
could  not  have  defined  the  term.  For  none  of 
[30]  the  aforesaid  can  possibly  be  predicated  of 
the  genus,  seeing  that  the  genus  is  the  term 


BOOK  VI,  CHAPTERS  4-6 


198  TOPICS  145* 


with  the  widest  range  of  all.  Again,  see  if  the 
genus  be  predicated  of  the  differentia;  for  the 
general  view  is  that  the  genus  is  predicated,  not 
of  the  differentia,  but  of  the  objects  of  which 
the  differentia  is  predicated.  Animal  (e.g.)  is 
[^5]  predicated  of  ‘man’  or  ‘ox’  or  other  walk¬ 
ing  animals,  not  of  the  actual  differentia  itself 
which  we  predicate  of  the  species.  For  if  ‘ani¬ 
mal’  is  to  be  predicated  of  each  of  its  differ¬ 
entiae,  then  ‘animal’  would  be  predicated  of  the 
144b  species  several  times  over;  for  the  differ¬ 
entiae  are  predicates  of  the  species.  Moreover, 
the  differentiae  will  be  all  either  species  or 
individuals,  if  they  are  animals;  for  every  ani¬ 
mal  is  either  a  species  or  an  individual. 

Likewise  you  must  inquire  also  if  the  species 
[5]  or  any  of  the  objects  that  come  under  it  is 
predicated  of  the  differentia:  for  this  is  impos¬ 
sible,  seeing  that  the  differentia  is  a  term  with 
a  wider  range  than  the  various  species.  More¬ 
over,  if  any  of  the  species  be  predicated  of  it, 
the  result  will  be  that  the  differentia  is  a  spe¬ 
cies:  if,  for  instance,  ‘man’  be  predicated,  the 
differentia  is  clearly  the  human  race.  Again,  see 
if  the  differentia  fails  to  be  prior  to  the  species: 
[/o]  for  the  differentia  ought  to  be  posterior  to 
the  genus,  but  prior  to  the  species. 

Look  and  see  also  if  the  differentia  men¬ 
tioned  belongs  to  a  different  genus,  neither  con¬ 
tained  in  nor  containing  the  genus  in  question. 
For  the  general  view  is  that  the  same  differ¬ 
entia  cannot  be  used  of  two  non-subaltern 
[75]  genera.  Else  the  result  will  be  that  the 
same  species  as  well  will  be  in  two  non-subal¬ 
tern  genera:  for  each  of  the  differentiae  imports 
its  own  genus,  e.g.  ‘walking’  and  ‘biped’  import 
with  them  the  genus  ‘animal’.  If,  then,  each  of 
the  genera  as  well  is  true  of  that  of  which  the 
differentia  is  true,  it  clearly  follows  that  the 
species  must  be  in  two  non-subaltern  genera. 
[20]  Or  perhaps  it  is  not  impossible  for  the 
same  differentia  to  be  used  of  two  non-subal¬ 
tern  genera,  and  we  ought  to  add  the  words 
‘except  they  both  be  subordinate  members  of 
the  same  genus’.  Thus  ‘walking  animal’  and 
‘flying  animal’  are  non-subaltern  genera,  and 
‘biped’  is  the  differentia  of  both.  The  words  ‘ex- 
[25]  cept  they  both  be  subordinate  members  of 
the  same  genus’  ought  therefore  to  be  added; 
for  both  these  are  subordinate  to  ‘animal’. 
From  this  possibility,  that  the  same  differentia 
may  be  used  of  two  non-subaltern  genera,  it  is 
clear  also  that  there  is  no  necessity  for  the  dif¬ 
ferentia  to  carry  with  it  the  whole  of  the  genus 
to  which  it  belongs,  but  only  the  one  or  the 
other  of  its  limbs  together  with  the  genera  that 


are  higher  than  this,  as  ‘biped’  carries  with  it 
|jo]  either  ‘flying’  or  ‘walking  animal’. 

See,  too,  if  he  has  rendered  ‘existence  in’ 
something  as  the  differentia  of  a  thing’s  es¬ 
sence:  for  the  general  view  is  that  locality  can¬ 
not  differentiate  between  one  essence  and  an¬ 
other.  Hence,  too,  people  condemn  those  who 
divide  animals  by  means  of  the  terms  ‘walk¬ 
ing’  and  ‘aquatic’,  on  the  ground  that  ‘walk¬ 
ing’  and  ‘aquatic’  indicate  mere  locality.  Or 
ossibly  in  this  case  the  censure  is  undeserved; 
J5]  for  ‘aquatic’  does  not  mean  ‘in’  anything; 
nor  does  it  denote  a  locality,  but  a  certain  qual¬ 
ity:  for  even  if  the  thing  be  on  the  dry  land,  still 
it  is  aquatic:  and  likewise  a  land-animal,  even 
though  it  be  in  the  water,  will  still  be  a  land- 
145a  and  not  an  aquatic-animal.  But  all  the 
same,  if  ever  the  differentia  does  denote  ex¬ 
istence  in  something,  clearly  he  will  have  made 
a  bad  mistake. 

Again,  see  if  he  has  rendered  an  affection  as 
the  differentia:  for  every  affection,  if  intensi¬ 
fied,  subverts  the  essence  of  the  thing,  while 
the  differentia  is  not  of  that  kind:  for  the  dif- 
[5]  ferentia  is  generally  considered  rather  to 
preserve  that  which  it  differentiates;  and  it  is 
absolutely  impossible  for  a  thing  to  exist  with¬ 
out  its  own  special  differentia:  for  if  there  be 
no  ‘walking’,  there  will  be  no  ‘man’.  In  fact, 
we  may  lay  down  absolutely  that  a  thing  can¬ 
not  have  as  its  differentia  anything  in  respect 
of  which  it  is  subject  to  alteration:  for  all  things 
of  that  kind,  if  intensified,  destroy  its  essence. 
[70]  If,  then,  a  man  has  rendered  any  differ¬ 
entia  of  this  kind,  he  has  made  a  mistake:  for 
we  undergo  absolutely  no  alteration  in  respect 
of  our  differentiae. 

Again,  see  if  he  has  failed  to  render  the  dif¬ 
ferentia  of  a  relative  term  relatively  to  some¬ 
thing  else;  for  the  differentiae  of  relative  terms 
are  themselves  relative,  as  in  the  case  also  of 
[75]  knowledge.  This  is  classed  as  speculative, 
practical  and  productive;  and  each  of  these  de¬ 
notes  a  relation:  for  it  speculates  upon  some¬ 
thing,  and  produces  something  and  does  some¬ 
thing. 

Look  and  see  also  if  the  definer  renders  each 
[20]  relative  term  relatively  to  its  natural  pur¬ 
pose:  for  while  in  some  cases  the  particular 
relative  term  can  be  used  in  relation  to  its  nat¬ 
ural  purpose  only  and  to  nothing  else,  some  can 
be  used  in  relation  to  something  else  as  well. 
Thus  sight  can  only  be  used  for  seeing,  but  a 
strigil  can  also  be  used  to  dip  up  water.  Still,  if 
any  one  were  to  define  a  strigil  as  an  instru¬ 
ment  for  dipping  water,  he  has  made  a  mis- 


146s 

[25]  take:  for  that  is  not  its  natural  function. 
The  definition  of  a  thing’s  natural  function  is 
‘that  for  which  it  would  be  used  by  the  prudent 
man,  acting  as  such,  and  by  the  science  that 
deals  specially  with  that  thing’. 

Or  see  if,  whenever  a  term  happens  to  be 
used  in  a  number  of  relations,  he  has  failed  to 
introduce  it  in  its  primary  relation:  e.g.  by  de¬ 
fining  ‘wisdom’  as  the  virtue  of  ‘man’  or  of  the 
[50]  ‘soul’,  rather  than  of  the  ‘reasoning  fac¬ 
ulty’:  for  ‘wisdom’  is  the  virtue  primarily  of  the 
reasoning  faculty:  for  it  is  in  virtue  of  this  that 
both  the  man  and  his  soul  are  said  to  be  wise. 

Moreover,  if  the  thing  of  which  the  term  de¬ 
fined  has  been  stated  to  be  an  affection  or  dis¬ 
position,  or  whatever  it  may  be,  be  unable  to 
admit  it,  the  definer  has  made  a  mistake.  For 
every  disposition  and  every  affection  is  formed 
[55]  naturally  in  that  of  which  it  is  an  affection 
or  disposition,  as  knowledge,  too,  is  formed  in 
the  soul,  being  a  disposition  of  soul.  Sometimes, 
however,  people  make  bad  mistakes  in  matters 
of  this  sort,  e.g.  all  those  who  say  that  ‘sleep’  is 
145b  a  ‘failure  of  sensation’,  or  that  ‘perplex¬ 
ity’  is  a  state  of  ‘equality  between  contrary  rea¬ 
sonings’,  or  that  ‘pain’  is  a  ‘violent  disruption 
of  parts  that  are  naturally  conjoined’.  For  sleep 
is  not  an  attribute  of  sensation,  whereas  it 
ought  to  be,  if  it  is  a  failure  of  sensation.  Like- 
[5]  wise,  perplexity  is  not  an  attribute  of  oppo¬ 
site  reasonings,  nor  pain  of  parts  naturally  con¬ 
joined:  for  then  inanimate  things  will  be  in 
pain,  since  pain  will  be  present  in  them.  Sim¬ 
ilar  in  character,  too,  is  the  definition  of 
‘health’,  say,  as  a  ‘balance  of  hot  and  cold  ele¬ 
ments’:  for  then  health  will  be  necessarily  ex¬ 
hibited  by  the  hot  and  cold  elements:  for  a 
[/o]  balance  of  anything  is  an  attribute  inher¬ 
ent  in  those  things  of  which  it  is  the  balance, 
so  that  health  would  be  an  attribute  of  them. 
Moreover,  people  who  define  in  this  way  put 
effect  for  cause,  or  cause  for  effect.  For  the  dis¬ 
ruption  of  parts  naturally  conjoined  is  not 
pain,  but  only  a  cause  of  pain:  nor  again  is  a 
failure  of  sensation  sleep,  but  the  one  is  the 
[75]  cause  of  the  other:  for  either  we  go  to 
sleep  because  sensation  fails,  or  sensation  fails 
because  we  go  to  sleep.  Likewise  also  an  equal¬ 
ity  between  contrary  reasonings  would  be  gen¬ 
erally  considered  to  be  a  cause  of  perplexity: 
for  it  is  when  we  reflect  on  both  sides  of  a 
question  and  find  everything  alike  to  be  in 
keeping  with  either  course  that  we  are  per- 
[20]  plexed  which  of  the  two  we  are  to  do. 

Moreover,  with  regard  to  all  periods  of  time 
look  and  see  whether  there  be  any  discrepancy 


x99 

between  the  differentia  and  the  thing  defined: 
e.g.  supposing  the  ‘immortal’  to  be  defined  as  a 
‘living  thing  immune  at  present  from  destruc¬ 
tion’.  For  a  living  thing  that  is  immune  ‘at 
present’  from  destruction  will  be  immortal  ‘at 
present’.  Possibly,  indeed,  in  this  case  this  result 
does  not  follow,  owing  to  the  ambiguity  of  the 
words  ‘immune  at  present  from  destruction’: 
[25]  for  it  may  mean  either  that  the  thing  has 
not  been  destroyed  at  present,  or  that  it  can¬ 
not  be  destroyed  at  present,  or  that  at  present  it 
is  such  that  it  never  can  be  destroyed.  When¬ 
ever,  then,  we  say  that  a  living  thing  is  at  pres¬ 
ent  immune  from  destruction,  we  mean  that  it 
is  at  present  a  living  thing  of  such  a  kind  as 
never  to  be  destroyed:  and  this  is  equivalent  to 
saying  that  it  is  immortal,  so  that  it  is  not 
[50]  meant  that  it  is  immortal  only  at  present. 
Still,  if  ever  it  does  happen  that  what  has 
been  rendered  according  to  the  definition  be¬ 
longs  in  the  present  only  or  past,  whereas 
what  is  meant  by  the  word  does  not  so  be¬ 
long,  then  the  two  could  not  be  the  same.  So, 
then,  this  commonplace  rule  ought  to  be  fol¬ 
lowed,  as  we  have  said. 

7 

You  should  look  and  see  also  whether  the  term 
being  defined  is  applied  in  consideration  of 
something  other  than  the  definition  rendered. 
[^5]  Suppose  (e.g.)  a  definition  of  ‘justice’  as 
the  ‘ability  to  distribute  what  is  equal’.  This 
would  not  be  right,  for  ‘just’  describes  rather 
the  man  who  chooses,  than  the  man  who  is  able 
to  distribute  what  is  equal:  so  that  justice  could 
146a  not  be  an  ability  to  distribute  what  is 
equal:  for  then  also  the  most  just  man  would  be 
the  man  with  the  most  ability  to  distribute 
what  is  equal. 

Moreover,  see  if  the  thing  admits  of  degrees, 
whereas  what  is  rendered  according  to  the 
definition  does  not,  or,  vice  versa,  what  is  ren- 
[5]  dered  according  to  the  definition  admits  of 
degrees  while  the  thing  does  not.  For  either 
both  must  admit  them  or  else  neither,  if  indeed 
what  is  rendered  according  to  the  definition  is 
the  same  as  the  thing.  Moreover,  see  if,  while 
both  of  them  admit  of  degrees,  they  yet  do  not 
both  become  greater  together:  e.g.  suppose 
sexual  love  to  be  the  desire  for  intercourse:  for 
[/o]  he  who  is  more  intensely  in  love  has  not 
a  more  intense  desire  for  intercourse,  so  that 
both  do  not  become  intensified  at  once:  they 
certainly  should,  however,  had  they  been  the 
same  thing. 

Moreover,  suppose  two  things  to  be  before 


BOOK  VI,  CHAPTERS  6-7 


200  TOPICS  147a 


you,  see  if  the  term  to  be  defined  applies  more 
particularly  to  the  one  to  which  the  content  of 
the  definition  is  less  applicable.  Take,  for  in- 
[75]  stance,  the  definition  of  ‘fire’  as  the  ‘body 
that  consists  of  the  most  rarefied  particles’.  For 
‘fire’  denotes  flame  rather  than  light,  but  flame 
is  less  the  body  that  consists  of  the  most  rare¬ 
fied  particles  than  is  light:  whereas  both  ought 
to  be  more  applicable  to  the  same  thing,  if  they 
had  been  the  same.  Again,  see  if  the  one  ex¬ 
pression  applies  alike  to  both  the  objects  before 
[20]  you,  while  the  other  does  not  apply  to 
both  alike,  but  more  particularly  to  one  of 
them. 

Moreover,  see  if  he  renders  the  definition 
relative  to  two  things  taken  separately:  thus, 
‘the  beautiful’  is  ‘what  is  pleasant  to  the  eyes  or 
to  the  ears’1:  or  ‘the  real’  is  ‘what  is  capable  of 
being  acted  upon  or  of  acting’.  For  then  the 
same  thing  will  be  both  beautiful  and  not  beau¬ 
tiful,  and  likewise  will  be  both  real  and  not 
real.  For  ‘pleasant  to  the  ears’  will  be  the  same 
[25]  as  ‘beautiful’,  so  that  ‘not  pleasant  to  the 
ears’  will  be  the  same  as  ‘not  beautiful’:  for  of 
identical  things  the  opposites,  too,  are  identical, 
and  the  opposite  of  ‘beautiful’  is  ‘not  beautiful’, 
while  of  ‘pleasant  to  the  ears’  the  opposite  is 
‘not  pleasant  to  the  ears’:  clearly,  then,  ‘not 
pleasant  to  the  ears’  is  the  same  thing  as  ‘not 
beautiful’.  If,  therefore,  something  be  pleasant 
[jo]  to  the  eyes  but  not  to  the  ears,  it  will  be 
both  beautiful  and  not  beautiful.  In  like  man¬ 
ner  we  shall  show  also  that  the  same  thing  is 
both  real  and  unreal. 

Moreover,  of  both  genera  and  differentiae 
and  all  the  other  terms  rendered  in  definitions 
you  should  frame  definitions  in  lieu  of  the 
[35]  terms,  and  then  see  if  there  be  any  dis¬ 
crepancy  between  them. 

8 

If  the  term  defined  be  relative,  either  in  itself 
or  in  respect  of  its  genus,  see  whether  the  defi¬ 
nition  fails  to  mention  that  to  which  the  term, 
146b  either  in  itself  or  in  respect  of  its  genus, 
is  relative,  e.g.  if  he  has  defined  ‘knowledge’  as 
an  ‘incontrovertible  conception’  or  ‘wishing’  as 
‘painless  conation’.  For  of  everything  relative 
the  essence  is  relative  to  something  else,  seeing 
that  the  being  of  every  relative  term  is  identical 
with  being  in  a  certain  relation  to  something. 
[5]  He  ought,  therefore,  to  have  said  that 
knowledge  is  ‘conception  of  a  knowable’  and 
that  wishing  is  ‘conation  for  a  good’.  Likewise, 
also,  if  he  has  defined  ‘grammar’  as  ‘knowl- 
1  Cf.  Plato,  Hipp.  Mai.  297  e,  299  c. 


edge  of  letters’:  whereas  in  the  definition  there 
ought  to  be  rendered  either  the  thing  to  which 
the  term  itself  is  relative,  or  that,  whatever  it  is, 
to  which  its  genus  is  relative.  Or  see  if  a  rela¬ 
tive  term  has  been  described  not  in  relation  to 
[/o]  its  end,  the  end  in  anything  being  what¬ 
ever  is  best  in  it  or  gives  its  purpose  to  the  rest. 
Certainly  it  is  what  is  best  or  final  that  should 
be  stated,  e.g.  that  desire  is  not  for  the  pleasant 
but  for  pleasure:  for  this  is  our  purpose  in 
choosing  what  is  pleasant  as  well. 

Look  and  see  also  if  that  in  relation  to  which 
he  has  rendered  the  term  be  a  process  or  an 
activity:  for  nothing  of  that  kind  is  an  end, 
[  75]  for  the  completion  of  the  activity  or  proc¬ 
ess  is  the  end  rather  than  the  process  or  ac¬ 
tivity  itself.  Or  perhaps  this  rule  is  not  true 
in  all  cases,  for  almost  everybody  prefers  the 
present  experience  of  pleasure  to  its  cessa¬ 
tion,  so  that  they  would  count  the  activity 
as  the  end  rather  than  its  completion. 

[20]  Again  see  in  some  cases  if  he  has  failed  to 
distinguish  the  quantity  or  quality  or  place  or 
other  differentiae  of  an  object;  e.g.  the  quality 
and  quantity  of  the  honour  the  striving  for 
which  makes  a  man  ambitious:  for  all  men 
strive  for  honour,  so  that  it  is  not  enough  to  de¬ 
fine  the  ambitious  man  as  him  who  strives  for 
honour,  but  the  aforesaid  differentiae  must  be 
added.  Likewise,  also,  in  defining  the  covetous 
[25]  man  the  quantity  of  money  he  aims  at,  or 
in  the  case  of  the  incontinent  man  the  quality 
of  the  pleasures,  should  be  stated.  For  it  is  not 
the  man  who  gives  way  to  any  sort  of  pleasure 
whatever  who  is  called  incontinent,  but  only  he 
who  gives  way  to  a  certain  kind  of  pleasure. 
Or  again,  people  sometimes  define  night  as  a 
‘shadow  on  the  earth’,  or  an  earthquake  as  a 
‘movement  of  the  earth’,  or  a  cloud  as  ‘conden¬ 
sation  of  the  air’,  or  a  wind  as  a  ‘movement  of 
the  air’;  whereas  they  ought  to  specify  as  well 
[30]  quantity,  quality,  place,  and  cause.  Like¬ 
wise,  also,  in  other  cases  of  the  kind:  for  by 
omitting  any  differentiae  whatever  he  fails  to 
state  the  essence  of  the  term.  One  should  al¬ 
ways  attack  deficiency.  For  a  movement  of  the 
earth  does  not  constitute  an  earthquake,  nor  a 
movement  of  the  air  a  wind,  irrespective  of  its 
[55]  manner  and  the  amount  involved. 

Moreover,  in  the  case  of  conations,  and  in 
any  other  cases  where  it  applies,  see  if  the  word 
‘apparent’  is  left  out,  e.g.  ‘wishing  is  a  conation 
147a  after  the  good’,  or  ‘desire  is  a  conation 
after  the  pleasant’ — instead  of  saying  ‘the  ap¬ 
parently  good’,  or  ‘pleasant’.  For  often  those 
who  exhibit  the  conation  do  not  perceive  what 


201 


BOOK  VI,  CHAPTERS  7-9 


14  7b 

is  good  or  pleasant,  so  that  their  aim  need  not 
be  really  good  or  pleasant,  but  only  apparently 
so.  They  ought,  therefore,  to  have  rendered  the 
[5]  definition  also  accordingly.  On  the  other 
hand,  any  one  who  maintains  the  existence  of 
Ideas  ought  to  be  brought  face  to  face  with  his 
Ideas,  even  though  he  does  render  the  word  in 
question:  for  there  can  be  no  Idea  of  anything 
merely  apparent:  the  general  view  is  that  an 
Idea  is  always  spoken  of  in  relation  to  an  Idea: 
thus  absolute  desire  is  for  the  absolutely  pleas¬ 
ant,  and  absolute  wishing  is  for  the  absolutely 
good;  they  therefore  cannot  be  for  an  apparent¬ 
ly  good  or  an  apparently  pleasant:  for  the  ex- 
[/o]  istence  of  an  absolutely-apparently-good 
or  pleasant  would  be  an  absurdity. 

9 

Moreover,  if  the  definition  be  of  the  state  of 
anything,  look  at  what  is  in  the  state,  while  if 
it  be  of  what  is  in  the  state,  look  at  the  state: 
and  likewise  also  in  other  cases  of  the  kind. 
Thus  if  the  pleasant  be  identical  with  the  bene- 
[75]  ficial,  then,  too,  the  man  who  is  pleased  is 
benefited.  Speaking  generally,  in  definitions  of 
this  sort  it  happens  that  what  the  definer  de¬ 
fines  is  in  a  sense  more  than  one  thing:  for  in 
defining  knowledge,  a  man  in  a  sense  defines 
ignorance  as  well,  and  likewise  also  what  has 
knowledge  and  what  lacks  it,  and  what  it  is  to 
know  and  to  be  ignorant.  For  if  the  first  be 
[20]  made  clear,  the  others  become  in  a  cer¬ 
tain  sense  clear  as  well.  We  have,  then,  to  be 
on  our  guard  in  all  such  cases  against  discrep¬ 
ancy,  using  the  elementary  principles  drawn 
from  consideration  of  contraries  and  of  co¬ 
ordinates. 

Moreover,  in  the  case  of  relative  terms,  see  if 
the  species  is  rendered  as  relative  to  a  species  of 
that  to  which  the  genus  is  rendered  as  relative, 
e.g.  supposing  belief  to  be  relative  to  some  ob- 
[25]  ject  of  belief,  see  whether  a  particular  be¬ 
lief  is  made  relative  to  some  particular  object 
of  belief:  and,  if  a  multiple  be  relative  to  a  frac¬ 
tion,  see  whether  a  particular  multiple  be  made 
relative  to  a  particular  fraction.  For  if  it  be  not 
so  rendered,  clearly  a  mistake  has  been  made. 

See,  also,  if  the  opposite  of  the  term  has  the 
[3°]  opposite  definition,  whether  (e.g.)  the 
definition  of  ‘half’  is  the  opposite  of  that  of 
‘double’:  for  if  ‘double’  is  ‘that  which  exceeds 
another  by  an  equal  amount  to  that  other’,  ‘half’ 
is  ‘that  which  is  exceeded  by  an  amount  equal 
to  itself’.  In  the  same  way,  too,  with  contraries. 
For  to  the  contrary  term  will  apply  the  defini¬ 
tion  that  is  contrary  in  some  one  of  the  ways  in 


which  contraries  are  conjoined.  Thus  (e.g.)  if 
‘useful’  =  ‘productive  of  good’,  ‘injurious’  = 
‘productive  of  evil’  or  ‘destructive  of  good’,  for 
[35]  one  or  the  other  of  these  is  bound  to  be 
147b  contrary  to  the  term  originally  used. 
Suppose,  then,  neither  of  these  things  to  be  the 
contrary  of  the  term  originally  used,  then  clear¬ 
ly  neither  of  the  definitions  rendered  later 
could  be  the  definition  of  the  contrary  of  the 
term  originally  defined:  and  therefore  the  defi¬ 
nition  originally  rendered  of  the  original  term 
has  not  been  rightly  rendered  either.  Seeing, 
moreover,  that  of  contraries,  the  one  is  some- 
[5]  times  a  word  forced  to  denote  the  privation 
of  the  other,  as  (e.g.)  inequality  is  generally 
held  to  be  the  privation  of  equality  (for  ‘un¬ 
equal’  merely  describes  things  that  are  not 
‘equal’),  it  is  therefore  clear  that  that  con¬ 
trary  whose  form  denotes  the  privation  must  of 
necessity  be  defined  through  the  other;  whereas 
the  other  cannot  then  be  defined  through  the 
one  whose  form  denotes  the  privation;  for  else 
we  should  find  that  each  is  being  interpreted  by 
[/o]  the  other.  We  must  in  the  case  of  contrary 
terms  keep  an  eye  on  this  mistake,  e.g.  suppos¬ 
ing  any  one  were  to  define  equality  as  the  con¬ 
trary  of  inequality:  for  then  he  is  defining  it 
through  the  term  which  denotes  privation  of 
it.  Moreover,  a  man  who  so  defines  is  bound  to 
use  in  his  definition  the  very  term  he  is  defin¬ 
ing;  and  this  becomes  clear,  if  for  the  word  we 
substitute  its  definition.  For  to  say  ‘inequality’ 
[75]  is  the  same  as  to  say  ‘privation  of  equal¬ 
ity’.  Therefore  equality  so  defined  will  be  ‘the 
contrary  of  the  privation  of  equality’,  so  that  he 
would  have  used  the  very  word  to  be  defined. 
Suppose,  however,  that  neither  of  the  contraries 
be  so  formed  as  to  denote  privation,  but  yet  the 
definition  of  it  be  rendered  in  a  manner  like 
the  above,  e.g.  suppose  ‘good’  to  be  defined  as 
‘the  contrary  of  evil’,  then,  since  it  is  clear  that 
‘evil’  too  will  be  ‘the  contrary  of  good’  (for  the 
definition  of  things  that  are  contrary  in  this 
[20]  way  must  be  rendered  in  a  like  manner), 
the  result  again  is  that  he  uses  the  very  term 
being  defined:  for  ‘good’  is  inherent  in  the  defi¬ 
nition  of  ‘evil’.  If,  then,  ‘good’  be  the  contrary 
of  evil,  and  evil  be  nothing  other  than  the  ‘con¬ 
trary  of  good’,  then  ‘good’  will  be  the  ‘contrary 
of  the  contrary  of  good’.  Clearly,  then,  he  has 
[25]  used  the  very  word  to  be  defined. 

Moreover,  see  if  in  rendering  a  term  formed 
to  denote  privation,  he  has  failed  to  render  the 
term  of  which  it  is  the  privation,  e.g.  the  state, 
or  contrary,  or  whatever  it  may  be  whose  priva¬ 
tion  it  is:  also  if  he  has  omitted  to  add  either 


202 

any  term  at  all  in  which  the  privation  is  nat¬ 
urally  formed,  or  else  that  in  which  it  is  nat¬ 
urally  formed  primarily,  e.g.  whether  in  defin- 
[30]  ing  ‘ignorance’  as  a  privation  he  has  failed 
to  say  that  it  is  the  privation  of  ‘knowledge’;  or 
has  failed  to  add  in  what  it  is  naturally  formed, 
or,  though  he  has  added  this,  has  failed  to  ren¬ 
der  the  thing  in  which  it  is  primarily  formed, 
placing  it  (e.g.)  in  ‘man’  or  in  ‘the  soul’,  and 
not  in  the  ‘reasoning  faculty’:  for  if  in  any  of 
these  respects  he  fails,  he  has  made  a  mistake. 
Likewise,  also,  if  he  has  failed  to  say  that 
‘blindness’  is  the  ‘privation  of  sight  in  an  eye’: 
[35]  f°r  a  proper  rendering  of  its  essence  must 
148a  state  both  of  what  it  is  the  privation  and 
what  it  is  that  is  deprived. 

Examine  further  whether  he  has  defined  by 
the  expression  ‘a  privation’  a  term  that  is  not 
used  to  denote  a  privation:  thus  a  mistake  of 
this  sort  also  would  be  generally  thought  to  be 
[5]  incurred  in  the  case  of  ‘error’  by  any  one 
who  is  not  using  it  as  a  merely  negative  term. 
For  what  is  generally  thought  to  be  in  error  is 
not  that  which  has  no  knowledge,  but  rather 
that  which  has  been  deceived,  and  for  this  rea¬ 
son  we  do  not  talk  of  inanimate  things  or  of 
children  as  ‘erring’.  ‘Error’,  then,  is  not  used 
to  denote  a  mere  privation  of  knowledge. 

10 

Moreover,  see  whether  the  like  inflexions  in  the 
[/o]  definition  apply  to  the  like  inflexions  of 
the  term;  e.g.  if  ‘beneficial’  means  ‘productive 
of  health’,  does  ‘beneficially’  mean  produc¬ 
tively  of  health’  and  a  ‘benefactor’  a  ‘producer 
of  health’? 

Look  too  and  see  whether  the  definition  giv¬ 
en  will  apply  to  the  Idea  as  well.  For  in  some 
cases  it  will  not  do  so;  e.g.  in  the  Platonic  defi- 
[75]  nition  where  he  adds  the  word  ‘mortal’  in 
his  definitions  of  living  creatures:  for  the  Idea 
(e.g.  the  absolute  Man)  is  not  mortal,  so  that 
the  definition  will  not  fit  the  Idea.  So  always 
wherever  the  words  ‘capable  of  acting  on’  or 
‘capable  of  being  acted  upon’  are  added,  the 
definition  and  the  Idea  are  absolutely  bound  to 
[20]  be  discrepant:  for  those  who  assert  the 
existence  of  Ideas  hold  that  they  are  incapable 
of  being  acted  upon,  or  of  motion.  In  dealing 
with  these  people  even  arguments  of  this  kind 
are  useful. 

Further,  see  if  he  has  rendered  a  single  com¬ 
mon  definition  of  terms  that  are  used  ambigu¬ 
ously.  For  terms  whose  definition  correspond¬ 
ing  to  their  common  name  is  one  and  the  same, 
[25]  are  synonymous ;  if,  then,  the  definition 


148b 

applies  in  a  like  manner  to  the  whole  range  of 
the  ambiguous  term,  it  is  not  true  of  any  one 
of  the  objects  described  by  the  term.  This  is, 
moreover,  what  happens  to  Dionysius’  defini¬ 
tion  of  ‘life’  when  stated  as  ‘a  movement  of  a 
creature  sustained  by  nutriment,  congenitally 
present  with  it’:  for  this  is  found  in  plants  as 
much  as  in  animals,  whereas  ‘life’  is  generally 
[30]  understood  to  mean  not  one  kind  of  thing 
only,  but  to  be  one  thing  in  animals  and  an¬ 
other  in  plants.  It  is  possible  to  hold  the  view 
that  life  is  a  synonymous  term  and  is  always 
used  to  describe  one  thing  only,  and  therefore 
to  render  the  definition  in  this  way  on  purpose: 
or  it  may  quite  well  happen  that  a  man  may 
see  the  ambiguous  character  of  the  word,  and 
wish  to  render  the  definition  of  the  one  sense 
[_J5]  only,  and  yet  fail  to  see  that  he  has  ren¬ 
dered  a  definition  common  to  both  senses  in¬ 
stead  of  one  peculiar  to  the  sense  he  intends.  In 
either  case,  whichever  course  he  pursues,  he  is 
equally  at  fault.  Since  ambiguous  terms  some¬ 
times  pass  unobserved,  it  is  best  in  questioning 
148b  to  treat  such  terms  as  though  they  were 
synonymous  (for  the  definition  of  the  one 
sense  will  not  apply  to  the  other,  so  that  the 
answerer  will  be  generally  thought  not  to  have 
defined  it  correctly,  for  to  a  synonymous  term 
the  definition  should  apply  in  its  full  range), 
whereas  in  answering  you  should  yourself  dis¬ 
tinguish  between  the  senses.  Further,  as  some 
[5]  answerers  call  ‘ambiguous’  what  is  really 
synonymous,  whenever  the  definition  rendered 
fails  to  apply  universally,  and,  vice  versa,  call 
synonymous  what  is  really  ambiguous  suppos¬ 
ing  their  definition  applies  to  both  senses  of  the 
term,  one  should  secure  a  preliminary  admis¬ 
sion  on  such  points,  or  else  prove  beforehand 
that  so-and-so  is  ambiguous  or  synonymous,  as 
the  case  may  be:  for  people  are  more  ready  to 
agree  when  they  do  not  foresee  what  the  conse- 
[/o]  quence  will  be.  If,  however,  no  admission 
has  been  made,  and  the  man  asserts  that  what 
is  really  synonymous  is  ambiguous  because  the 
definition  he  has  rendered  will  not  apply  to  the 
second  sense  as  well,  see  if  the  definition  of  this 
second  meaning  applies  also  to  the  other  mean¬ 
ings:  for  if  so,  this  meaning  must  clearly  be 
synonymous  with  those  others.  Otherwise, 
there  will  be  more  than  one  definition  of  those 
[75]  other  meanings,  for  there  are  applicable  to 
them  two  distinct  definitions  in  explanation  of 
the  term,  viz.  the  one  previously  rendered  and 
also  the  later  one.  Again,  if  any  one  were  to 
define  a  term  used  in  several  senses,  and,  find¬ 
ing  that  his  definition  does  not  apply  to  them 


TOPICS 


149b 

all,  were  to  contend  not  that  the  term  is  am¬ 
biguous,  but  that  even  the  term  does  not  prop¬ 
erly  apply  to  all  those  senses,  just  because  his 
definition  will  not  do  so  either,  then  one  may 
retort  to  such  a  man  that  though  in  some  things 
[20]  one  must  not  use  the  language  of  the  peo¬ 
ple,  yet  in  a  question  of  terminology  one  is 
bound  to  employ  the  received  and  traditional 
usage  and  not  to  upset  matters  of  that  sort. 

11 

Suppose  now  that  a  definition  has  been  ren¬ 
dered  of  some  complex  term,  take  away  the 
definition  of  one  of  the  elements  in  the  com- 
[25]  plex,  and  see  if  also  the  rest  of  the  defini¬ 
tion  defines  the  rest  of  it:  if  not,  it  is  clear  that 
neither  does  the  whole  definition  define  the 
whole  complex.  Suppose,  e.g.  that  some  one 
has  defined  a  ‘finite  straight  line’  as  ‘the  limit 
of  a  finite  plane,  such  that  its  centre  is  in  a  line 
with  its  extremes’ ;  if  now  the  definition  of  a 
[jo]  ‘finite  line’  be  the  ‘limit  of  a  finite  plane’, 
the  rest  (viz.  ‘such  that  its  centre  is  in  a  line 
with  its  extremes’)  ought  to  be  a  definition  of 
‘straight’.  But  an  infinite  straight  line  has 
neither  centre  nor  extremes  and  yet  is  straight 
so  that  this  remainder  does  not  define  the  re¬ 
mainder  of  the  term. 

Moreover,  if  the  term  defined  be  a  com¬ 
pound  notion,  see  if  the  definition  rendered  be 
equimembral  with  the  term  defined.  A  defini¬ 
tion  is  said  to  be  equimembral  with  the  term 
[35]  defined  when  the  number  of  the  elements 
compounded  in  the  latter  is  the  same  as  the 
number  of  nouns  and  verbs  in  the  definition. 
For  the  exchange  in  such  cases  is  bound  to  be 
merely  one  of  term  for  term,  in  the  case  of  some 
149a  if  not  of  all,  seeing  that  there  are  no  more 
terms  used  now  than  formerly;  whereas  in  a 
definition  terms  ought  to  be  rendered  by 
phrases,  if  possible  in  every  case,  or  if  not,  in 
the  majority.  For  at  that  rate,  simple  objects 
too  could  be  defined  by  merely  calling  them  by 
a  different  name,  e.g.  ‘cloak’  instead  of  ‘dou¬ 
blet’. 

[5]  The  mistake  is  even  worse,  if  actually  a  less 
well  known  term  be  substituted,  e.g.  ‘pellucid 
mortal’  for  ‘white  man’:  for  it  is  no  definition, 
and  moreover  is  less  intelligible  when  put  in 
that  form. 

Look  and  see  also  whether,  in  the  exchange 
of  words,  the  sense  fails  still  to  be  the  same. 
Take,  for  instance,  the  explanation  of  ‘specula¬ 
tive  knowledge’  as  ‘speculative  conception’: 
[/o]  for  conception  is  not  the  same  as  knowl¬ 
edge — as  it  certainly  ought  to  be  if  the  whole 


203 

is  to  be  the  same  too:  for  though  the  word  ‘spec¬ 
ulative’  is  common  to  both  expressions,  yet  the 
remainder  is  different. 

Moreover,  see  if  in  replacing  one  of  the 
terms  by  something  else  he  has  exchanged  the 
[75]  genus  and  not  the  differentia,  as  in  the 
example  just  given:  for  ‘speculative’  is  a  less 
familiar  term  than  knowledge;  for  the  one  is 
the  genus  and  the  other  the  differentia,  and  the 
genus  is  always  the  most  familiar  term  of  all; 
so  that  it  is  not  this,  but  the  differentia,  that 
ought  to  have  been  changed,  seeing  that  it  is  the 
[20]  less  familiar.  It  might  be  held  that  this 
criticism  is  ridiculous:  because  there  is  no  rea¬ 
son  why  the  most  familiar  term  should  not  de¬ 
scribe  the  differentia,  and  not  the  genus;  in 
which  case,  clearly,  the  term  to  be  altered 
would  also  be  that  denoting  the  genus  and  not 
the  differentia.  If,  however,  a  man  is  substi¬ 
tuting  for  a  term  not  merely  another  term  but 
[25]  a  phrase,  clearly  it  is  of  the  differentia 
rather  than  of  the  genus  that  a  definition 
should  be  rendered,  seeing  that  the  object  of 
rendering  the  definition  is  to  make  the  subject 
familiar;  for  the  differentia  is  less  familiar  than 
the  genus. 

If  he  has  rendered  the  definition  of  the  dif- 
[30]  ferentia,  see  whether  the  definition  ren¬ 
dered  is  common  to  it  and  something  else  as 
well:  e.g.  whenever  he  says  that  an  odd  num¬ 
ber  is  a  ‘number  with  a  middle’,  further  defini¬ 
tion  is  required  of  how  it  has  a  middle:  for  the 
word  ‘number’  is  common  to  both  expressions, 
and  it  is  the  word  ‘odd’  for  which  the  phrase 
has  been  substituted.  Now  both  a  line  and  a 
body  have  a  middle,  yet  they  are  not  ‘odd’;  so 
[35]  that  this  could  not  be  a  definition  of  ‘odd’. 
If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  phrase  ‘with  a  mid¬ 
dle’  be  used  in  several  senses,  the  sense  here  in¬ 
tended  requires  to  be  defined.  So  that  this  will 
either  discredit  the  definition  or  prove  that  it 
is  no  definition  at  all. 

12 

Again,  see  if  the  term  of  which  he  renders  the 
definition  is  a  reality,  whereas  what  is  con¬ 
tained  in  the  definition  is  not,  e.g.  Suppose 
149b  ‘white’  to  be  defined  as  ‘colour  mingled 
with  fire’:  for  what  is  bodiless  cannot  be  min¬ 
gled  with  body,  so  that  ‘colour’  ‘mingled  with 
fire’  could  not  exist,  whereas  ‘white’  does  exist. 

Moreover,  those  who  in  the  case  of  relative 
terms  do  not  distinguish  to  what  the  object  is 
related,  but  have  described  it  only  so  as  to  in- 
[5]  elude  it  among  too  large  a  number  of 
things,  are  wrong  either  wholly  or  in  part;  e.g. 


BOOK  VI,  CHAPTERS  9-12 


204  TOPICS  150a 


suppose  some  one  to  have  defined  ‘medicine’  as 
a  ‘science  of  Reality’.  For  if  medicine  be  not  a 
science  of  anything  that  is  real,  the  definition  is 
clearly  altogether  false;  while  if  it  be  a  science 
of  some  real  thing,  but  not  of  another,  it  is 
partly  false;  for  it  ought  to  hold  of  all  reality, 
if  it  is  said  to  be  of  Reality  essentially  and  not 
[/o]  accidentally:  as  is  the  case  with  other 
relative  terms:  for  every  object  of  knowledge  is 
a  term  relative  to  knowledge:  likewise,  also, 
with  other  relative  terms,  inasmuch  as  all  such 
are  convertible.  Moreover,  if  the  right  way  to 
render  account  of  a  thing  be  to  render  it  as  it  is 
not  in  itself  but  accidentally,  then  each  and 
[75]  every  relative  term  would  be  used  in  rela¬ 
tion  not  to  one  thing  but  to  a  number  of  things. 
For  there  is  no  reason  why  the  same  thing 
should  not  be  both  real  and  white  and  good,  so 
that  it  would  be  a  correct  rendering  to  render 
the  object  in  relation  to  any  one  whatsoever  of 
these,  if  to  render  what  it  is  accidentally  be  a 
correct  way  to  render  it.  It  is,  moreover,  impos¬ 
sible  that  a  definition  of  this  sort  should  be 
peculiar  to  the  term  rendered:  for  not  only 
[20]  medicine,  but  the  majority  of  the  other 
sciences  too,  have  for  their  object  some  real 
thing,  so  that  each  will  be  a  science  of  reality. 
Clearly,  then,  such  a  definition  does  not  define 
any  science  at  all;  for  a  definition  ought  to  be 
peculiar  to  its  own  term,  not  general. 

Sometimes,  again,  people  define  not  the 
[25]  thing  but  only  the  thing  in  a  good  or  per¬ 
fect  condition.  Such  is  the  definition  of  a  rhet¬ 
orician  as  ‘one  who  can  always  see  what  will 
persuade  in  the  given  circumstances,  and  omit 
nothing’;  or  of  a  thief,  as  ‘one  who  pilfers  in 
secret’:  for  clearly,  if  they  each  do  this,  then  the 
one  will  be  a  good  rhetorician,  and  the  other  a 
good  thief:  whereas  it  is  not  the  actual  pilfering 
[jo]  in  secret,  but  the  wish  to  do  it,  that  con¬ 
stitutes  the  thief. 

Again,  see  if  he  has  rendered  what  is  desir¬ 
able  for  its  own  sake  as  desirable  for  what  it 
produces  or  does,  or  as  in  any  way  desirable  be¬ 
cause  of  something  else,  e.g.  by  saying  that 
justice  is  ‘what  preserves  the  laws’  or  that  wis¬ 
dom  is  ‘what  produces  happiness’;  for  what 
produces  or  preserves  something  else  is  one  of 
the  things  desirable  for  something  else.  It 
[  J5]  might  be  said  that  it  is  possible  for  what  is 
desirable  in  itself  to  be  desirable  for  something 
else  as  well:  but  still  to  define  what  is  desirable 
in  itself  in  such  a  way  is  none  the  less  wrong: 
for  the  essence  contains  par  excellence  what  is 
best  in  anything,  and  it  is  better  for  a  thing  to 


be  desirable  in  itself  than  to  be  desirable  for 
something  else,  so  that  this  is  rather  what  the 
definition  too  ought  to  have  indicated. 

150a  See  also  whether  in  defining  anything  a 
man  has  defined  it  as  an  ‘A  and  B’,  or  as  a 
‘product  of  A  and  B’  or  as  an  ‘A+B’.  If  he  de¬ 
fines  it  as  ‘A  and  B’,  the  definition  will  be  true 
of  both  and  yet  of  neither  of  them;  suppose, 
e.g.  justice  to  be  defined  as  ‘temperance  and 
[5]  courage.’  For  if  of  two  persons  each  has 
one  of  the  two  only,  both  and  yet  neither  will 
be  just:  for  both  together  have  justice,  and  yet 
each  singly  fails  to  have  it.  Even  if  the  situation 
here  described  does  not  so  far  appear  very  ab¬ 
surd  because  of  the  occurrence  of  this  kind  of 
thing  in  other  cases  also  (for  it  is  quite  possible 
for  two  men  to  have  a  mina  between  them, 
though  neither  of  them  has  it  by  himself),  yet 
[/o]  at  least  that  they  should  have  contrary  at¬ 
tributes  surely  seems  quite  absurd;  and  yet  this 
will  follow  if  the  one  be  temperate  and  yet  a 
coward,  and  the  other,  though  brave,  be  a  prof¬ 
ligate;  for  then  both  will  exhibit  both  justice 
and  injustice:  for  if  justice  be  temperance  and 
bravery,  then  injustice  will  be  cowardice  and 
[75]  profligacy.  In  general,  too,  all  the  ways  of 
showing  that  the  whole  is  not  the  same  as  the 
sum  of  its  parts  are  useful  in  meeting  the  type 
just  described;  for  a  man  who  defines  in  this 
way  seems  to  assert  that  the  parts  are  the  same 
as  the  whole.  The  arguments  are  particularly 
appropriate  in  cases  where  the  process  of  put¬ 
ting  the  parts  together  is  obvious,  as  in  a  house 
[20]  and  other  things  of  that  sort:  for  there, 
clearly,  you  may  have  the  parts  and  yet  not 
have  the  whole,  so  that  parts  and  whole  cannot 
be  the  same. 

If,  however,  he  has  said  that  the  term  being 
defined  is  not  ‘A  and  B’  but  the  ‘product  of  A 
and  B’,  look  and  see  in  the  first  place  if  A  and 
B  cannot  in  the  nature  of  things  have  a  single 
product:  for  some  things  are  so  related  to  one 
[25]  another  that  nothing  can  come  of  them, 
e.g.  a  line  and  a  number.  Moreover,  see  if  the 
term  that  has  been  defined  is  in  the  nature  of 
things  found  primarily  in  some  single  subject, 
whereas  the  things  which  he  has  said  produce  it 
are  not  found  primarily  in  any  single  subject, 
but  each  in  a  separate  one.  If  so,  clearly  that 
term  could  not  be  the  product  of  these  things: 
for  the  whole  is  bound  to  be  in  the  same  things 
wherein  its  parts  are,  so  that  the  whole  will 
[jo]  then  be  found  primarily  not  in  one  sub- 


151*  BOOK  VI,  CHAPTERS  12-13  205 


ject  only,  but  in  a  number  of  them.  If,  on  the 
other  hand,  both  parts  and  whole  are  found 
primarily  in  some  single  subject,  see  if  that 
medium  is  not  the  same,  but  one  thing  in  the 
case  of  the  whole  and  another  in  that  of  the 
parts.  Again,  see  whether  the  parts  perish  to¬ 
gether  with  the  whole:  for  it  ought  to  happen, 
vice  versa,  that  the  whole  perishes  when  the 
[35]  Parts  perish;  when  the  whole  perishes, 
there  is  no  necessity  that  the  parts  should  per¬ 
ish  too.  Or  again,  see  if  the  whole  be  good  or 
evil,  and  the  parts  neither,  or,  vice  versa,  if  the 
parts  be  good  or  evil  and  the  whole  neither.  For 
it  is  impossible  either  for  a  neutral  thing  to 
150b  produce  something  good  or  bad,  or  for 
things  good  or  bad  to  produce  a  neutral  thing. 
Or  again,  see  if  the  one  thing  is  more  distinctly 
good  than  the  other  is  evil,  and  yet  the  product 
be  no  more  good  than  evil,  e.g.  suppose  shame¬ 
lessness  be  defined  as  ‘the  product  of  courage 
and  false  opinion’:  here  the  goodness  of  cour- 
[5]  age  exceeds  the  evil  of  false  opinion;  ac¬ 
cordingly  the  product  of  these  ought  to  have 
corresponded  to  this  excess,  and  to  be  either 
good  without  qualification,  or  at  least  more 
good  than  evil.  Or  it  may  be  that  this  does  not 
necessarily  follow,  unless  each  be  in  itself  good 
or  bad;  for  many  things  that  are  productive  are 
not  good  in  themselves,  but  only  in  combina¬ 
tion;  or,  per  contra,  they  are  good  taken  singly, 
[/o]  and  bad  or  neutral  in  combination.  What 
has  just  been  said  is  most  clearly  illustrated  in 
the  case  of  things  that  make  for  health  or  sick¬ 
ness;  for  some  drugs  are  such  that  each  taken 
alone  is  good,  but  if  they  are  both  administered 
in  a  mixture,  bad. 

Again,  see  whether  the  whole,  as  produced 
[75]  from  a  better  and  worse,  fails  to  be  worse 
than  the  better  and  better  than  the  worse  ele¬ 
ment.  This  again,  however,  need  not  neces¬ 
sarily  be  the  case,  unless  the  elements  com¬ 
pounded  be  in  themselves  good;  if  they  are  not, 
the  whole  may  very  well  not  be  good,  as  in  the 
cases  just  instanced. 

Moreover,  see  if  the  whole  be  synonymous 
with  one  of  the  elements:  for  it  ought  not  to  be, 
any  more  than  in  the  case  of  syllables:  for  the 
[20]  syllable  is  not  synonymous  with  any  of 
the  letters  of  which  it  is  made  up. 

Moreover,  see  if  he  has  failed  to  state  the 
manner  of  their  composition:  for  the  mere  men¬ 
tion  of  its  elements  is  not  enough  to  make  the 
thing  intelligible.  For  the  essence  of  any  com¬ 
pound  thing  is  not  merely  that  it  is  a  product  of 
so-and-so,  but  that  it  is  a  product  of  them  com- 


[25]  pounded  in  such  and  such  a  way,  just  as 
in  the  case  of  a  house:  for  here  the  materials  do 
not  make  a  house  irrespective  of  the  way  they 
are  put  together. 

If  a  man  has  defined  an  object  as  ‘A+B’,  the 
first  thing  to  be  said  is  that  ‘A+B’  means  the 
same  either  as  ‘A  and  B’,  or  as  the  ‘product  of 
A  and  B.’  for  ‘honey+water’  means  either  the 
honey  and  the  water,  or  the  ‘drink  made  of 
[jo]  honey  and  water’.  If,  then,  he  admits  that 
‘A+B’  is  the  same  as  either  of  these  two  things, 
the  same  criticisms  will  apply  as  have  already 
been  given  for  meeting  each  of  them.  More¬ 
over,  distinguish  between  the  different  senses 
in  which  one  thing  may  be  said  to  be  ‘+’  an¬ 
other,  and  see  if  there  is  none  of  them  in  which 
A  could  be  said  to  exist  ‘+  B.’  Thus  e.g.  sup- 
[35]  posing  the  expression  to  mean  that  they 
exist  either  in  some  identical  thing  capable  of 
containing  them  (as  e.g.  justice  and  courage 
are  found  in  the  soul),  or  else  in  the  same  place 
or  in  the  same  time,  and  if  this  be  in  no  way 
true  of  the  A  and  B  in  question,  clearly  the  def¬ 
inition  rendered  could  not  hold  of  anything,  as 
there  is  no  possible  way  in  which  A  can  exist 
15  la  ‘+B’.  If,  however,  among  the  various 
senses  above  distinguished,  it  be  true  that  A 
and  B  are  each  found  in  the  same  time  as  the 
other,  look  and  see  if  possibly  the  two  are  not 
used  in  the  same  relation.  Thus  e.g.  suppose 
courage  to  have  been  defined  as  ‘daring  with 
right  reasoning’:  here  it  is  possible  that  the  per¬ 
son  exhibits  daring  in  robbery,  and  right  rea- 
[5]  soning  in  regard  to  the  means  of  health: 
but  he  may  have  ‘the  former  quality + the  lat¬ 
ter’  at  the  same  time,  and  not  as  yet  be  coura¬ 
geous!  Moreover,  even  though  both  be  used  in 
the  same  relation  as  well,  e.g.  in  relation  to 
medical  treatment  (for  a  man  may  exhibit  both 
daring  and  right  reasoning  in  respect  of  medi¬ 
cal  treatment),  still,  none  the  less,  not  even  this 
combination  of  ‘the  one+the  other’  makes  him 
‘courageous’.  For  the  two  must  not  relate  to  any 
[/o]  casual  object  that  is  the  same,  any  more 
than  each  to  a  different  object;  rather,  they 
must  relate  to  the  function  of  courage,  e.g. 
meeting  the  perils  of  war,  or  whatever  is  more 
properly  speaking  its  function  than  this. 

Some  definitions  rendered  in  this  form  fail 
to  come  under  the  aforesaid  division  at  all,  e.g. 
[75]  a  definition  of  anger  as  ‘pain  with  a  con¬ 
sciousness  of  being  slighted’.  For  what  this 
means  to  say  is  that  it  is  because  of  a  conscious¬ 
ness  of  this  sort  that  the  pain  occurs;  but  to 
occur  ‘because  of’  a  thing  is  not  the  same 


20 6  TOPICS  152* 


as  to  occur  ‘  +  a  thing  in  any  of  its  aforesaid 
senses. 

M 

[ 20 ]  Again,  if  he  have  described  the  whole 
compounded  as  the  ‘composition’  of  these 
things  (e.g.  ‘a  living  creature’  as  a  ‘composition 
of  soul  and  body’),  first  of  all  see  whether  he 
has  omitted  to  state  the  kind  of  composition,  as 
(e.g.)  in  a  definition  of  ‘flesh’  or  ‘bone’  as  the 
‘composition  of  fire,  earth,  and  air’.  For  it  is  not 
enough  to  say  it  is  a  composition,  but  you 
should  also  go  on  to  define  the  kind  of  com- 
[25]  position:  for  these  things  do  not  form 
flesh  irrespective  of  the  manner  of  their  compo¬ 
sition,  but  when  compounded  in  one  way  they 
form  flesh,  when  in  another,  bone.  It  appears, 
moreover,  that  neither  of  the  aforesaid  sub¬ 
stances  is  the  same  as  a  ‘composition’  at  all:  for 
a  composition  always  has  a  decomposition  as  its 
contrary,  whereas  neither  of  the  aforesaid  has 
any  contrary.  Moreover,  if  it  is  equally  proba¬ 
ble  that  every  compound  is  a  composition  or 
[jo]  else  that  none  is,  and  every  kind  of  living 
creature,  though  a  compound,  is  never  a  com¬ 
position,  then  no  other  compound  could  be  a 
composition  either. 

Again,  if  in  the  nature  of  a  thing  two  con¬ 
traries  are  equally  liable  to  occur,  and  the  thing 
has  been  defined  through  the  one,  clearly  it  has 
not  been  defined;  else  there  will  be  more  than 
one  definition  of  the  same  thing;  for  how  is  it 
[^5]  any  more  a  definition  to  define  it  through 
this  one  than  through  the  other,  seeing  that 
both  alike  are  naturally  liable  to  occur  in  it? 

15 lb  Such  is  the  definition  of  the  soul,  if  de¬ 
fined  as  a  substance  capable  of  receiving  knowl- 

BOOK 

1 

Whether  two  things  are  ‘the  same’  or  ‘dif¬ 
ferent’,  in  the  most  literal  of  the  meanings  as¬ 
cribed  to  ‘sameness’  (and  we  said1  that  ‘the 
same’  applies  in  the  most  literal  sense  to  what 
[jo]  is  numerically  one),  may  be  examined  in 
the  light  of  their  inflexions  and  coordinates  and 
opposites.  For  if  justice  be  the  same  as  courage, 
then  too  the  just  man  is  the  same  as  the  brave 
man,  and  ‘justly’  is  the  same  as  ‘bravely’.  Like¬ 
wise,  too,  in  the  case  of  their  opposites:  for  if 
two  things  be  the  same,  their  opposites  also  will 
[^5]  be  the  same,  in  any  of  the  recognized 
1 103s  23. 


edge:  for  it  has  a  like  capacity  for  receiving  ig¬ 
norance. 

Also,  even  when  one  cannot  attack  the  defi¬ 
nition  as  a  whole  for  lack  of  acquaintance  with 
the  whole,  one  should  attack  some  part  of  it,  if 
[5]  one  knows  that  part  and  sees  it  to  be  incor¬ 
rectly  rendered:  for  if  the  part  be  demolished, 
so  too  is  the  whole  definition.  Where,  again,  a 
definition  is  obscure,  one  should  first  of  all  cor¬ 
rect  and  reshape  it  in  order  to  make  some  part 
of  it  clear  and  get  a  handle  for  attack,  and  then 
proceed  to  examine  it.  For  the  answerer  is 
[jo]  bound  either  to  accept  the  sense  as  taken 
by  the  questioner,  or  else  himself  to  explain 
clearly  whatever  it  is  that  his  definition  means. 
Moreover,  just  as  in  the  assemblies  the  ordi¬ 
nary  practice  is  to  move  an  emendation  of  the 
existing  law  and,  if  the  emendation  is  better, 
they  repeal  the  existing  law,  so  one  ought  to  do 
in  the  case  of  definitions  as  well:  one  ought 
oneself  to  propose  a  second  definition:  for  if  it 
[75]  is  seen  to  be  better,  and  more  indicative 
of  the  object  defined,  clearly  the  definition  al¬ 
ready  laid  down  will  have  been  demolished,  on 
the  principle  that  there  cannot  be  more  than 
one  definition  of  the  same  thing. 

In  combating  definitions  it  is  always  one  of 
the  chief  elementary  principles  to  take  by  one¬ 
self  a  happy  shot  at  a  definition  of  the  object 
before  one,  or  to  adopt  some  correctly  expressed 
[20]  definition.  For  one  is  bound,  with  the 
model  (as  it  were)  before  one’s  eyes,  to  discern 
both  any  shortcoming  in  any  features  that  the 
definition  ought  to  have,  and  also  any  super¬ 
fluous  addition,  so  that  one  is  better  supplied 
with  lines  of  attack. 

As  to  definitions,  then,  let  so  much  suffice. 

VII 

forms  of  opposition.  For  it  is  the  same  thing  to 
take  the  opposite  of  the  one  or  that  of  the  other, 
seeing  that  they  are  the  same.  Again  it  may  be 
examined  in  the  light  of  those  things  which 
152*  tend  to  produce  or  to  destroy  the  things 
in  question  of  their  formation  and  destruction, 
and  in  general  of  any  thing  that  is  related  in 
like  manner  to  each.  For  where  things  are  ab¬ 
solutely  the  same,  their  formations  and  de¬ 
structions  also  are  the  same,  and  so  are  the 
things  that  tend  to  produce  or  to  destroy  them. 
[5]  Look  and  see  also,  in  a  case  where  one  of 
two  things  is  said  to  be  something  or  other  in 
a  superlative  degree,  if  the  other  of  these  al¬ 
leged  identical  things  can  also  be  described  by  a 


152b  BOOK  VI,  CHAPTERS  13-14— BOOK  VII,  CHAPTER  1 


superlative  in  the  same  respect.  Thus  Xenoc- 
rates  argues  that  the  happy  life  arid  the  good 
life  are  the  same,  seeing  that  of  all  forms  of  life 
the  good  life  is  the  most  desirable  and  so  also 
is  the  happy  life:  for  ‘the  most  desirable’  and 
‘the  greatest’  apply  but  to  one  thing.1  Likewise 
[ /o ]  also  in  other  cases  of  the  kind.  Each,  how¬ 
ever,  of  the  two  things  termed  ‘greatest’  or 
‘most  desirable’  must  be  numerically  one:  oth¬ 
erwise  no  proof  will  have  been  given  that  they 
are  the  same;  for  it  does  not  follow  because 
Peloponnesians  and  Spartans  are  the  bravest  of 
the  Greeks,  that  Peloponnesians  are  the  same 
as  Spartans,  seeing  that  ‘Peloponnesian’  is  not 
[75]  any  one  person  nor  yet  ‘Spartan’;  it  only 
follows  that  the  one  must  be  included  under 
the  other  as  ‘Spartans’  are  under  ‘Peloponne¬ 
sians’:  for  otherwise,  if  the  one  class  be  not  in¬ 
cluded  under  the  other,  each  will  be  better  than 
the  other.  For  then  the  Peloponnesians  are 
[20]  bound  to  be  better  than  the  Spartans,  see¬ 
ing  that  the  one  class  is  not  included  under  the 
other;  for  they  are  better  than  anybody  else. 
Likewise  also  the  Spartans  must  perforce  be 
better  than  the  Peloponnesians;  for  they  too  are 
better  than  anybody  else;  each  then  is  better 
[25]  than  the  other!  Clearly  therefore  what  is 
styled  ‘best’  and  ‘greatest’  must  be  a  single 
thing,  if  it  is  to  be  proved  to  be  ‘the  same’  as 
another.  This  also  is  why  Xenocrates  fails  to 
prove  his  case:  for  the  happy  life  is  not  numeri¬ 
cally  single,  nor  yet  the  good  life,  so  that  it  does 
not  follow  that,  because  they  are  both  the  most 
desirable,  they  are  therefore  the  same,  but  only 
[jo]  that  the  one  falls  under  the  other. 

Again,  look  and  see  if,  supposing  the  one  to 
be  the  same  as  something,  the  other  also  is  the 
same  as  it:  for  if  they  be  not  both  the  same  as 
the  same  thing,  clearly  neither  are  they  the 
same  as  one  another. 

Moreover,  examine  them  in  the  light  of  their 
accidents  or  of  the  things  of  which  they  are  ac¬ 
cidents:  for  any  accident  belonging  to  the 
[35]  one  must  .belong  also  to  the  other,  and  if 
the  one  belong  to  anything  as  an  accident,  so 
must  the  other  also.  If  in  any  of  these  respects 
there  is  a  discrepancy,  clearly  they  are  not  the 
same. 

See  further  whether,  instead  of  both  being 
found  in  one  class  of  predicates,  the  one  signi¬ 
fies  a  quality  and  the  other  a  quantity  or  rela¬ 
tion.  Again,  see  if  the  genus  of  each  be  not  the 
152b  same,  the  one  being  ‘good’  and  the  other 
‘evil’,  or  the  one  being  ‘virtue’  and  the  other 
1  Fr.  82,  Heinze. 


‘knowledge’:  or  see  if,  though  the  genus  is  the 
same,  the  differentiae  predicted  of  either  be  not 
the  same,  the  one  (e.g.)  being  distinguished  as 
a  ‘speculative’  science,  the  other  as  a  ‘practical’ 
[5]  science.  Likewise  also  in  other  cases. 

Moreover,  from  the  point  of  view  of  ‘de¬ 
grees’,  see  if  the  one  admits  an  increase  of  de¬ 
gree  but  not  the  other,  or  if  though  both  admit 
it,  they  do  not  admit  it  at  the  same  time;  just  as 
it  is  not  the  case  that  a  man  desires  intercourse 
more  intensely,  the  more  intensely  he  is  in  love, 
so  that  love  and  the  desire  for  intercourse  are 
not  the  same. 

[/o]  Moreover,  examine  them  by  means  of  an 
addition,  and  see  whether  the  addition  of  each 
to  the  same  thing  fails  to  make  the  same  whole; 
or  if  the  subtraction  of  the  same  thing  from 
each  leaves  a  different  remainder.  Suppose 
(e.g.)  that  he  has  declared  ‘double  a  half’  to  be 
the  same  as  ‘a  multiple  of  a  half’:  then,  sub¬ 
tracting  the  words  ‘a  half  from  each,  the  re¬ 
mainders  ought  to  have  signified  the  same 
[75]  thing:  but  they  do  not;  for  ‘double’  and 
‘a  multiple  of  do  not  signify  the  same  thing. 

Inquire  also  not  only  if  some  impossible  con¬ 
sequence  results  directly  from  the  statement 
made,  that  A  and  B  are  the  same,  but  also 
whether  it  is  possible  for  a  supposition  to  bring 
it  about;  as  happens  to  those  who  assert  that 
[20]  ‘empty’  is  the  same  as  ‘full  of  air’:  for 
clearly  if  the  air  be  exhausted,  the  vessel  will 
not  be  less  but  more  empty,  though  it  will  no 
longer  be  full  of  air.  So  that  by  a  supposition, 
which  may  be  true  or  may  be  false  (it  makes 
no  difference  which),  the  one  character  is  an¬ 
nulled  and  not  the  other,  showing  that  they  are 
not  the  same. 

[25]  Speaking  generally,  one  ought  to  be  on 
the  look-out  for  any  discrepancy  anywhere  in 
any  sort  of  predicate  of  each  term,  and  in  the 
things  of  which  they  are  predicated.  For  all 
that  is  predicated  of  the  one  should  be  predi¬ 
cated  also  of  the  other,  and  of  whatever  the  one 
is  a  predicate,  the  other  should  be  a  predicate 
of  it  as  well. 

[jo]  Moreover,  as  ‘sameness’  is  a  term  used  in 
many  senses,  see  whether  things  that  are  the 
same  in  one  way  are  the  same  also  in  a  differ¬ 
ent  way.  For  there  is  either  no  necessity  or  even 
no  possibility  that  things  that  are  the  same  spe¬ 
cifically  or  generically  should  be  numerically 
the  same,  and  it  is  with  the  question  whether 
they  are  or  are  not  the  same  in  that  sense  that 
we  are  concerned. 

Moreover,  see  whether  the  one  can  exist 


208  TOPICS  153*> 


[35]  without  the  other;  for,  if  so,  they  could 
not  be  the  same. 

2 

Such  is  the  number  of  the  commonplace 
rules  that  relate  to  ‘sameness’.  It  is  clear  from 
what  has  been  said  that  all  the  destructive 
commonplaces  relating  to  sameness  are  useful 
also  in  questions  of  definition,  as  was  said  be¬ 
fore:1  for  if  what  is  signified  by  the  term  and 
by  the  expression  be  not  the  same,  clearly  the 
153a  expression  rendered  could  not  be  a  defini¬ 
tion.  None  of  the  constructive  commonplaces, 
on  the  other  hand,  helps  in  the  matter  of  defi¬ 
nition;  for  it  is  not  enough  to  show  the  same¬ 
ness  of  content  between  the  expression  and  the 
term,  in  order  to  establish  that  the  former  is  a 
definition,  but  a  definition  must  have  also  all 
[5]  the  other  characters  already  announced.2 

3 

This  then  is  the  way,  and  these  the  argu¬ 
ments,  whereby  the  attempt  to  demolish  a  defi¬ 
nition  should  always  be  made.  If,  on  the  other 
hand,  we  desire  to  establish  one,  the  first  thing 
to  observe  is  that  few  if  any  who  engage  in  dis¬ 
cussion  arrive  at  a  definition  by  reasoning: 
they  always  assume  something  of  the  kind  as 
[/o]  their  starting  point, — both  in  geometry 
and  in  arithmetic  and  the  other  studies  of  that 
kind.  In  the  second  place,  to  say  accurately 
what  a  definition  is,  and  how  it  should  be  giv¬ 
en,  belongs  to  another  inquiry.3  At  present  it 
concerns  us  only  so  far  as  is  required  for  our 
present  purpose,  and  accordingly  we  need  only 
make  the  bare  statement  that  to  reason  to  a 
[75]  thing’s  definition  and  essence  is  quite  pos¬ 
sible.  For  if  a  definition  is  an  expression  signi¬ 
fying  the  essence  of  the  thing  and  the  predi¬ 
cates  contained  therein  ought  also  to  be  the 
only  ones  which  are  predicated  of  the  thing  in 
the  category  of  essence;  and  genera  and  differ¬ 
entiae  are  so  predicated  in  that  category:  it  is 
obvious  that  if  one  were  to  get  an  admission 
that  so  and  so  are  the  only  attributes  predicated 
[20]  in  that  category,  the  expression  contain¬ 
ing  so  and  so  would  of  necessity  be  a  definition; 
for  it  is  impossible  that  anything  else  should  be 
a  definition,  seeing  that  there  is  not  anything 
else  predicated  of  the  thing  in  the  category  of 
essence. 

That  a  definition  may  thus  be  reached  by  a 
process  of  reasoning  is  obvious.  The  means 
whereby  it  should  be  established  have  been 

1  1 02a  11.  2  139*27-35. 

8  Posterior  Analytics,  11.  3-13. 


more  precisely  defined  elsewhere,4  but  for  the 
[25]  purposes  of  the  inquiry  now  before  us  the 
same  commonplace  rules  serve.  For  we  have  to 
examine  into  the  contraries  and  other  opposites 
of  the  thing,  surveying  the  expressions  used 
both  as  wholes  and  in  detail:  for  if  the  opposite 
definition  defines  that  opposite  term,  the  defi¬ 
nition  given  must  of  necessity  be  that  of  the 
term  before  us.  Seeing,  however,  that  contra- 
[30]  ries  may  be  conjoined  in  more  than  one 
way,  we  have  to  select  from  those  contraries  the 
one  whose  contrary  definition  seems  most  ob¬ 
vious.  The  expressions,  then,  have  to  be  exam¬ 
ined  each  as  a  whole  in  the  way  we  have  said, 
and  also  in  detail  as  follows.  First  of  all,  see  that 
the  genus  rendered  is  correctly  rendered;  for  if 
the  contrary  thing  be  found  in  the  contrary  ge¬ 
nus  to  that  stated  in  the  definition,  and  the 
thing  before  you  is  not  in  that  same  genus,  then 
[35]  ^  would  clearly  be  in  the  contrary  genus: 
for  contraries  must  of  necessity  be  either  in  the 
same  genus  or  in  contrary  genera.  The  differ¬ 
entiae,  too,  that  are  predicated  of  contraries  we 
expect  to  be  contrary,  e.g.  those  of  white  and 
black,  for  the  one  tends  to  pierce  the  vision, 
153b  while  the  other  tends  to  compress  it.  So 
that  if  contrary  differentiae  to  those  in  the  defi¬ 
nition  are  predicated  of  the  contrary  term,  then 
those  rendered  in  the  definition  would  be  pred¬ 
icated  of  the  term  before  us.  Seeing,  then,  that 
both  the  genus  and  the  differentiae  have  been 
rightly  rendered,  clearly  the  expression  given 
must  be  the  right  definition.  It  might  be  replied 
that  there  is  no  necessity  why  contrary  differ- 
[5]  entiae  should  be  predicated  of  contraries, 
unless  the  contraries  be  found  within  the  same 
genus:  of  things  whose  genera  are  themselves 
contraries  it  may  very  well  be  that  the  same 
differentia  is  used  of  both,  e.g.  of  justice  and  in¬ 
justice;  for  the  one  is  a  virtue  and  the  other  a 
vice  of  the  soul:  ‘of  the  soul’,  therefore,  is  the 
[/o]  differentia  in  both  cases,  seeing  that  the 
body  as  well  has  its  virtue  and  vice.  But  this 
much  at  least  is  true,  that  the  differentiae  of 
contraries  are  either  contrary  or  else  the  same. 
If,  then,  the  contrary  differentia  to  that  given 
be  predicated  of  the  contrary  term  and  not  of 
the  one  in  hand,  clearly  the  differentia  stated 
must  be  predicated  of  the  latter.  Speaking  gen¬ 
erally,  seeing  that  the  definition  consists  of  ge- 
[75]  nus  and  differentiae,  if  the  definition  of 
the  contrary  term  be  apparent,  the  definition 
of  the  term  before  you  will  be  apparent  also: 
for  since  its  contrary  is  found  either  in  the 
same  genus  or  in  the  contrary  genus,  and  like- 
4  Ibid.,  II.  13. 


154b  BOOK  VII,  CHAPTERS  1-5 

wise  also  the  differentiae  predicated  of  oppo¬ 


sites  are  either  contrary  to,  or  the  same  as,  each 
other,  clearly  of  the  term  before  you  there  will 
be  predicated  either  the  same  genus  as  of  its 
[ 20 ]  contrary,  while,  of  its  differentiae,  either 
all  are  contrary  to  those  of  its  contrary,  or  at 
least  some  of  them  are  so  while  the  rest  remain 
the  same;  or,  vice  versa,  the  differentiae  will 
be  the  same  and  the  genera  contrary;  or  both 
genera  and  differentiae  will  be  contrary.  And 
that  is  all;  for  that  both  should  be  the  same  is 
not  possible;  else  contraries  will  have  the  same 
definition. 

[25]  Moreover,  look  at  it  from  the  point  of 
view  of  its  inflexions  and  coordinates.  For  gen¬ 
era  and  definitions  are  bound  to  correspond  in 
either  case.  Thus  if  forgetfulness  be  the  loss  of 
knowledge,  to  forget  is  to  lose  knowledge,  and 
to  have  forgotten  is  to  have  lost  knowledge.  If, 
then,  any  one  whatever  of  these  is  agreed  to, 
[jo]  the  others  must  of  necessity  be  agreed  to 
as  well.  Likewise,  also,  if  destruction  is  the  de¬ 
composition  of  the  thing’s  essence,  then  to  be 
destroyed  is  to  have  its  essence  decomposed, 
and  ‘destructively’  means  ‘in  such  a  way  as  to 
decompose  its  essence’;  if  again  ‘destructive’ 
means  ‘apt  to  decompose  something’s  essence’, 
then  also  ‘destruction’  means  ‘the  decomposi¬ 
tion  of  its  essence’.  Likewise  also  with  the  rest: 
get  an  admission  of  any  one  of  them  whatever, 
[55]  and  all  the  rest  are  admitted  too. 

Moreover,  look  at  it  from  the  point  of  view 
of  things  that  stand  in  relations  that  are  like 
each  other.  For  if  ‘healthy’  means  ‘productive 
of  health*,  ‘vigorous’  too  will  mean  ‘productive 
of  vigour’,  and  ‘useful’  will  mean  ‘productive 
of  good.’  For  each  of  these  things  is  related  in 
154a  like  manner  to  its  own  peculiar  end,  so 
that  if  one  of  them  is  defined  as  ‘productive  of’ 
that  end,  this  will  also  be  the  definition  of  each 
of  the  rest  as  well. 

Moreover,  look  at  it  from  the  point  of  view 
of  greater  and  like  degrees,  in  all  the  ways  in 
which  it  is  possible  to  establish  a  result  by  com- 
[5]  paring  two  and  two  together.  Thus  if  A 
defines  a  better  than  B  defines  /3,  and  B  is  a 
definition  of  so  too  is  A  of  a.  Further,  if  A’s 
claim  to  define  a  is  like  B’s  to  define  and  B 
defines  /3,  then  A  too  defines  a.  This  examina¬ 
tion  from  the  point  of  view  of  greater  degrees 
is  of  no  use  when  a  single  definition  is  com- 
[/o]  pared  with  two  things,  or  two  definitions 
with  one  thing;  for  there  cannot  possibly  be 
one  definition  of  two  things  or  two  of  the  same 
thing. 


The  most  handy  of  all  the  commonplace  ar¬ 
guments  are  those  just  mentioned  and  those 
from  co-ordinates  and  inflexions,  and  these 
therefore  are  those  which  it  is  most  important 
to  master  and  to  have  ready  to  hand:  for  they 
are  the  most  useful  on  the  greatest  number  of 
occasions.  Of  the  rest,  too,  the  most  important 
[75]  are  those  of  most  general  application:  for 
these  are  the  most  effective,  e.g.  that  you  should 
examine  the  individual  cases,  and  then  look  to 
see  in  the  case  of  their  various  species  whether 
the  definition  applies.  For  the  species  is  syn¬ 
onymous  with  its  individuals.  This  sort  of  in¬ 
quiry  is  of  service  against  those  who  assume 
the  existence  of  Ideas,  as  has  been  said  before.1 
[20]  Moreover  see  if  a  man  has  used  a  term 
metaphorically,  or  predicated  it  of  itself  as 
though  it  were  something  different.  So  too  if 
any  other  of  the  commonplace  rules  is  of  gen¬ 
eral  application  and  effective,  it  should  be  em¬ 
ployed. 

5 

That  it  is  more  difficult  to  establish  than  to 
overthrow  a  definition,  is  obvious  from  con¬ 
siderations  presently  to  be  urged.  For  to  see  for 
[25]  oneself,  and  to  secure  from  those  whom 
one  is  questioning,  an  admission  of  premisses 
of  this  sort  is  no  simple  matter,  e.g.  that  of  the 
elements  of  the  definition  rendered  the  one  is 
genus  and  the  other  differentia,  and  that  only 
the  genus  and  differentiae  are  predicated  in  the 
category  of  essence.  Yet  without  these  prem¬ 
isses  it  is  impossible  to  reason  to  a  definition; 
for  if  any  other  things  as  well  are  predicated  of 
[30]  the  thing  in  the  category  of  essence,  there 
is  no  telling  whether  the  formula  stated  or 
some  other  one  is  its  definition,  for  a  definition 
is  an  expression  indicating  the  essence  of  a 
thing.  The  point  is  clear  also  from  the  follow¬ 
ing:  It  is  easier  to  draw  one  conclusion  than 
many.  Now  in  demolishing  a  definition  it  is 
sufficient  to  argue  against  one  point  only  (for 
if  we  have  overthrown  any  single  point  what¬ 
soever,  we  shall  have  demolished  the  defini- 
[33]  tion);  whereas  in  establishing  a  defini¬ 
tion,  one  is  bound  to  bring  people  to  the  view 
that  everything  contained  in  the  definition  is 
attributable.  Moreover,  in  establishing  a  case, 
the  reasoning  brought  forward  must  be  uni¬ 
versal:  for  the  definition  put  forward  must  be 
154b  predicated  of  everything  of  which  the 
term  is  predicated,  and  must  moreover  be  con- 
1  148®  14 


210 

vertible,  if  the  definition  rendered  is  to  be  pe¬ 
culiar  to  the  subject.  In  overthrowing  a  view, 
on  the  other  hand,  there  is  no  longer  any  neces¬ 
sity  to  show  one’s  point  universally:  for  it  is 
enough  to  show  that  the  formula  is  untrue 
of  any  one  of  the  things  embraced  under  the 
term. 

[5]  Further,  even  supposing  it  should  be  neces¬ 
sary  to  overthrow  something  by  a  universal 
proposition,  not  even  so  is  there  any  need  to 
prove  the  converse  of  the  proposition  in  the 
process  of  overthrowing  the  definition.  For 
merely  to  show  that  the  definition  fails  to  be 
predicated  of  every  one  of  the  things  of  which 
the  term  is  predicated,  is  enough  to  overthrow 
it  universally:  and  there  is  no  need  to  prove  the 
converse  of  this  in  order  to  show  that  the  term 
[/o]  is  predicated  of  things  of  which  the  ex¬ 
pression  is  not  predicated.  Moreover,  even  if  it 
applies  to  everything  embraced  under  the  term, 
but  not  to  it  alone,  the  definition  is  thereby  de¬ 
molished. 

The  case  stands  likewise  in  regard  to  the 
property  and  genus  of  a  term  also.  For  in  both 
cases  it  is  easier  to  overthrow  than  to  establish. 
[75]  As  regards  the  property  this  is  clear  from 
what  has  been  said:  for  as  a  rule  the  property 
is  rendered  in  a  complex  phrase,  so  that  to  over¬ 
throw  it,  it  is  only  necessary  to  demolish  one  of 
the  terms  used,  whereas  to  establish  it  it  is  nec¬ 
essary  to  reason  to  them  all.  Then,  too,  nearly 
all  the  other  rules  that  apply  to  the  definition 
will  apply  also  to  the  property  of  a  thing.  For 
[20]  in  establishing  a  property  one  has  to  show 
that  it  is  true  of  everything  included  under  the 
term  in  question,  whereas  to  overthrow  one  it 
is  enough  to  show  in  a  single  case  only  that  it 
fails  to  belong:  further,  even  if  it  belongs  to 
everything  falling  under  the  term,  but  not  to 
that  only,  it  is  overthrown  in  this  case  as  well, 
as  was  explained  in  the  case  of  the  definition.1 
In  regard  to  the  genus,  it  is  clear  that  you  are 
bound  to  establish  it  in  one  way  only,  viz.  by 
[25]  showing  that  it  belongs  in  every  case, 
while  of  overthrowing  it  there  are  two  ways: 
for  if  it  has  been  shown  that  it  belongs  either 
never  or  not  in  a  certain  case,  the  original  state¬ 
ment  has  been  demolished.  Moreover,  in  estab¬ 
lishing  a  genus  it  is  not  enough  to  show  that  it 
belongs,  but  also  that  it  belongs  as  genus  has  to 
be  shown;  whereas  in  overthrowing  it,  it  is 
enough  to  show  its  failure  to  belong  either  in 
some  particular  case  or  in  every  case.  It  appears, 
[50]  in  fact,  as  though,  just  as  in  other  things 
to  destroy  is  easier  than  to  create,  so  in  these 
1 1. 10. 


155a 

matters  too  to  overthrow  is  easier  than  to  es¬ 
tablish. 

In  the  case  of  an  accidental  attribute  the  uni¬ 
versal  proposition  is  easier  to  overthrow  than 
[55]  to  establish;  for  to  establish  it,  one  has  to 
show  that  it  belongs  in  every  case,  whereas  to 
overthrow  it,  it  is  enough  to  show  that  it  does 
not  belong  in  one  single  case.  The  particular 
proposition  is,  on  the  contrary,  easier  to  estab¬ 
lish  than  to  overthrow:  for  to  establish  it,  it  is 
enough  to  show  that  it  belongs  in  a  particular 
155a  instance,  whereas  to  overthrow  it,  it  has 
to  be  shown  that  it  never  belongs  at  all. 

It  is  clear  also  that  the  easiest  thing  of  all  is 
to  overthrow  a  definition.  For  on  account  of  the 
number  of  statements  involved  we  are  pre¬ 
sented  in  the  definition  with  the  greatest  num¬ 
ber  of  points  for  attack,  and  the  more  plentiful 
[5]  the  material,  the  quicker  an  argument 
comes:  for  there  is  more  likelihood  of  a  mis¬ 
take  occurring  in  a  large  than  in  a  small  num¬ 
ber  of  things.  Moreover,  the  other  rules  too  may 
be  used  as  means  for  attacking  a  definition: 
for  if  either  the  formula  be  not  peculiar,  or  the 
genus  rendered  be  the  wrong  one,  or  some¬ 
thing  included  in  the  formula  fail  to  belong, 
the  definition  is  thereby  demolished.  On  the 
[/o]  other  hand,  against  the  others  we  can¬ 
not  bring  all  of  the  arguments  drawn  from 
definitions,  nor  yet  of  the  rest:  for  only  those 
relating  to  accidental  attributes  apply  gener¬ 
ally  to  all  the  aforesaid  kinds  of  attribute.  For 
while  each  of  the  aforesaid  kinds  of  attribute 
must  belong  to  the  thing  ill  question,  yet  the 
genus  may  very  well  not  belong  as  a  property 
without  as  yet  being  thereby  demolished.  Like- 
[75]  wise  also  the  property  need  not  belong  as 
a  genus,  nor  the  accident  as  a  genus  or  prop¬ 
erty,  so  long  as  they  do  belong.  So  that  it  is 
impossible  to  use  one  set  as  a  basis  of  attack 
upon  the  other  except  in  the  case  of  definition. 
Clearly,  then,  it  is  the  easiest  of  all  things  to 
demolish  a  definition,  while  to  establish  one  is 
the  hardest.  For  there  one  both  has  to  establish 
all  those  other  points  by  reasoning  (i.e.  that 
[20]  the  attributes  stated  belong,  and  that  the 
genus  rendered  is  the  true  genus,  and  that  the 
formula  is  peculiar  to  the  term),  and  moreover, 
besides  this,  that  the  formula  indicates  the  es¬ 
sence  of  the  thing;  and  this  has  to  be  done  cor¬ 
rectly. 

Of  the  rest,  the  property  is  most  nearly  of 
this  kind:  for  it  is  easier  to  demolish,  because  as 
a  rule  it  contains  several  terms;  while  it  is  the 
[25]  hardest  to  establish,  both  because  of 
the  number  of  things  that  people  must  be 


TOPICS 


15  6* 

brought  to  accept,  and,  besides  this,  because  it 
belongs  to  its  subject  alone  and  is  predicated 
convertibly  with  its  subject. 

The  easiest  thing  of  all  to  establish  is  an  ac¬ 
cidental  predicate:  for  in  other  cases  one  has  to 
show  not  only  that  the  predicate  belongs,  but 
also  that  it  belongs  in  such  and  such  a  par- 
[30]  ticular  way:  whereas  in  the  case  of  the 
accident  it  is  enough  to  show  merely  that  it  be¬ 
longs.  On  the  other  hand,  an  accidental  predi¬ 
cate  is  the  hardest  thing  to  overthrow,  because 
it  affords  the  least  material:  for  in  stating  an 


211 

accident  a  man  does  not  add  how  the  predicate 
belongs;  and  accordingly,  while  in  other  cases  it 
is  possible  to  demolish  what  is  said  in  two 
ways,  by  showing  either  that  the  predicate  does 
not  belong,  or  that  it  does  not  belong  in  the 
[55]  particular  way  stated,  in  the  case  of  an  ac¬ 
cidental  predicate  the  only  way  to  demolish  it 
is  to  show  that  it  does  not  belong  at  all. 

The  commonplace  arguments  through  which 
we  shall  be  well  supplied  with  lines  of  argu¬ 
ment  with  regard  to  our  several  problems  have 
now  been  enumerated  at  about  sufficient  length. 


BOOK  VII,  CHAPTER  5-BOOK  VIII,  CHAPTER  1 


BOOK  VIII 


1 

155b  Next  there  fall  to  be  discussed  the  prob¬ 
lems  of  arrangement  and  method  in  putting 
questions.  Any  one  who  intends  to  frame  ques¬ 
tions  must,  first  of  all,  select  the  ground  from 
[5]  which  he  should  make  his  attack;  sec¬ 
ondly,  he  must  frame  them  and  arrange 
them  one  by  one  to  himself;  thirdly  and  lastly, 
he  must  proceed  actually  to  put  them  to  the 
other  party.  Now  so  far  as  the  selection  of  his 
ground  is  concerned  the  problem  is  one  alike 
for  the  philosopher  and  the  dialectician;  but 
how  to  go  on  to  arrange  his  points  and  frame 
his  questions  concerns  the  dialectician  only: 
for  in  every  problem  of  that  kind  a  reference 
[/o]  to  another  party  is  involved.  Not  so  with 
the  philosopher,  and  the  man  who  is  investi¬ 
gating  by  himself:  the  premisses  of  his  reason¬ 
ing,  although  true  and  familiar,  may  be  re¬ 
fused  by  the  answerer  because  they  lie  too  near 
the  original  statement  and  so  he  foresees  what 
will  follow  if  he  grants  them:  but  for  this  the 
philosopher  does  not  care.  Nay,  he  may  possi¬ 
bly  be  even  anxious  to  secure  axioms  as  famil¬ 
iar  and  as  near  to  the  question  in  hand  as  pos- 
[75]  sible:  for  these  are  the  bases  on  which  sci¬ 
entific  reasonings  are  built  up. 

The  sources  from  which  one’s  commonplace 
arguments  should  be  drawn  have  already  been 
described:1  we  have  now  to  discuss  the  ar¬ 
rangement  and  formation  of  questions  and  first 
to  distinguish  the  premisses,  other  than  the 
necessary  premisses,  which  have  to  be  adopted. 
[20]  By  necessary  premisses  are  meant  those 
through  which  the  actual  reasoning  is  con¬ 
structed.  Those  which  are  secured  other  than 
these  are  of  four  kinds;  they  serve  either  in¬ 
ductively  to  secure  the  universal  premiss  being 
granted,  or  to  lend  weight  to  the  argument,  or 

1  Topics ,  ii-vii. 


to  conceal  the  conclusion,  or  to  render  the  argu¬ 
ment  more  clear.  Beside  these  there  is  no  other 
[25]  premiss  which  need  be  secured:  these  are 
the  ones  whereby  you  should  try  to  multiply 
and  formulate  your  questions.  Those  which  are 
used  to  conceal  the  conclusion  serve  a  contro¬ 
versial  purpose  only ;  but  inasmuch  as  an  under¬ 
taking  of  this  sort  is  always  conducted  against 
another  person,  we  are  obliged  to  employ  them 
as  well. 

The  necessary  premisses  through  which  the 
[50]  reasoning  is  effected,  ought  not  to  be  pro¬ 
pounded  directly  in  so  many  words.  Rather  one 
should  soar  as  far  aloof  from  them  as  possible. 
Thus  if  one  desires  to  secure  an  admission  that 
the  knowledge  of  contraries  is  one,  one  should 
ask  him  to  admit  it  not  of  contraries,  but  of 
opposites:  for,  if  he  grants  this,  one  will  then 
argue  that  the  knowledge  of  contraries  is  also 
the  same,  seeing  that  contraries  are  opposites; 
if  he  does  not,  one  should  secure  the  admission 
by  induction,  by  formulating  a  proposition  to 
that  effect  in  the  case  of  some  particular  pair 
[35]  °f  contraries.  For  one  must  secure  the 
necessary  premisses  either  by  reasoning  or  by 
induction,  or  else  partly  by  one  and  partly  by 
the  other,  although  any  propositions  which  are 
too  obvious  to  be  denied  may  be  formulated  in 
so  many  words.  This  is  because  the  coming 
156a  conclusion  is  less  easily  discerned  at  the 
greater  distance  and  in  the  process  of  induc¬ 
tion,  while  at  the  same  time,  even  if  one  cannot 
reach  the  required  premisses  in  this  way,  it  is 
still  open  to  one  to  formulate  them  in  so  many 
words.  The  premisses,  other  than  these,  that 
were  mentioned  above,2  must  be  secured  with  a 
view  to  the  latter.  The  way  to  employ  them 
respectively  is  as  follows:  Induction  should 
[5]  proceed  from  individual  cases  to  the  uni¬ 
versal  and  from  the  known  to  the  unknown; 

2  i55b2o-28. 


212 

and  the  objects  of  perception  are  better  known, 
to  most  people  if  not  invariably.  Concealment 
of  one’s  plan  is  obtained  by  securing  through 
prosyllogisms  the  premisses  through  which 
the  proof  of  the  original  proposition  is  going  to 
be  constructed — and  as  many  of  them  as  possi¬ 
ble.  This  is  likely  to  be  effected  by  making  syl¬ 
logisms  to  prove  not  only  the  necessary  prem- 
[/o]  isses  but  also  some  of  those  which  are  re¬ 
quired  to  establish  them.  Moreover,  do  not 
state  the  conclusions  of  these  premisses  but 
draw  them  later  one  after  another;  for  this  is 
likely  to  keep  the  answerer  at  the  greatest  pos¬ 
sible  distance  from  the  original  proposition. 
Speaking  generally,  a  man  who  desires  to  get 
information  by  a  concealed  method  should  so 
ut  his  questions  that  when  he  has  put  his 
75]  whole  argument  and  has  stated  the  con¬ 
clusion,  people  still  ask  ‘Well,  but  why  is  that?’ 
This  result  will  be  secured  best  of  all  by  the 
method  above  described:  for  if  one  states  only 
the  final  conclusion,  it  is  unclear  how  it  comes 
about;  for  the  answerer  does  not  foresee  on 
what  grounds  it  is  based,  because  the  previous 
syllogisms  have  not  been  made  articulate  to 
[20]  him:  while  the  final  syllogism,  showing 
the  conclusion,  is  likely  to  be  kept  least  articu¬ 
late  if  we  lay  down  not  the  secured  propositions 
on  which  it  is  based,  but  only  the  grounds  on 
which  we  reason  to  them. 

It  is  a  useful  rule,  too,  not  to  secure  the  ad¬ 
missions  claimed  as  the  bases  of  the  syllogisms 
in  their  proper  order,  but  alternately  those  that 
conduce  to  one  conclusion  and  those  that  con- 
[25]  duce  to  another;  for,  if  those  which  go 
together  are  set  side  by  side,  the  conclusion  that 
will  result  from  them  is  more  obvious  in  ad¬ 
vance. 

One  should  also,  wherever  possible,  secure 
the  universal  premiss  by  a  definition  relating 
not  to  the  precise  terms  themselves  but  to  their 
co-ordinates;  for  people  deceive  themselves, 
whenever  the  definition  is  taken  in  regard  to  a 
[30]  co-ordinate,  into  thinking  that  they  are 
not  making  the  admission  universally.  An  in¬ 
stance  would  be,  supposing  one  had  to  secure 
the  admission  that  the  angry  man  desires 
vengeance  on  account  of  an  apparent  slight, 
and  were  to  secure  this,  that  ‘anger’  is  a  desire 
for  vengeance  on  account  of  an  apparent  slight: 
for,  clearly,  if  this  were  secured,  we  should  have 
universally  what  we  intend.  If,  on  the  other 
hand,  people  formulate  propositions  relating 
[35]  to  the  actual  terms  themselves,  they  often 
find  that  the  answerer  refuses  to  grant  them 
because  on  the  actual  term  itself  he  is  readier 


156b 

with  his  objection,  e.g.  that  the  ‘angry  man’ 
does  not  desire  vengeance,  because  we  become 
angry  with  our  parents,  but  we  do  not  desire 
vengeance  on  them.  Very  likely  the  objection 
is  not  valid;  for  upon  some  people  it  is  venge- 
156b  ance  enough  to  cause  them  pain  and 
make  them  sorry;  but  still  it  gives  a  certain 
plausibility  and  air  of  reasonableness  to  the 
denial  of  the  proposition.  In  the  case,  however, 
of  the  definition  of  ‘anger’  it  is  not  so  easy  to 
find  an  objection. 

Moreover,  formulate  your  proposition  as 
though  you  did  so  not  for  its  own  sake,  but  in 
order  to  get  at  something  else:  for  people  are 
[5]  shy  of  granting  what  an  opponent’s  case 
really  requires.  Speaking  generally,  a  ques¬ 
tioner  should  leave  it  as  far  as  possible  doubt¬ 
ful  whether  he  wishes  to  secure  an  admission 
of  his  proposition  or  of  its  opposite:  for  if  it  be 
uncertain  what  their  opponent’s  argument  re¬ 
quires,  people  are  more  ready  to  say  what  they 
themselves  think. 

[/o]  Moreover,  try  to  secure  admissions  by 
means  of  likeness:  for  such  admissions  are 
plausible,  and  the  universal  involved  is  less 
patent;  e.g.  make  the  other  person  admit  that 
as  knowledge  and  ignorance  of  contraries  is  the 
same,  so  too  perception  of  contraries  is  the 
same;  or  vice  versa,  that  since  the  perception  is 
the  same,  so  is  the  knowledge  also.  This  argu¬ 
ment  resembles  induction,  but  is  not  the  same 
[75]  thing;  for  in  induction  it  is  the  universal 
whose  admission  is  secured  from  the  particu¬ 
lars,  whereas  in  arguments  from  likeness,  what 
is  secured  is  not  the  universal  under  which  all 
the  like  cases  fall. 

It  is  a  good  rule  also,  occasionally  to  bring  an 
objection  against  oneself:  for  answerers  are  put 
off  their  guard  against  those  who  appear  to  be 
[20]  arguing  impartially.  It  is  useful  too,  to  add 
that  ‘So  and  so  is  generally  held  or  commonly 
said’;  for  people  are  shy  of  upsetting  the  re¬ 
ceived  opinion  unless  they  have  some  positive 
objection  to  urge:  and  at  the  same  time  they  are 
cautious  about  upsetting  such  things  because 
they  themselves  too  find  them  useful.  More¬ 
over,  do  not  be  insistent,  even  though  you  real¬ 
ly  require  the  point:  for  insistence  always 
[25]  arouses  the  more  opposition.  Further,  for¬ 
mulate  your  premiss  as  though  it  were  a  mere 
illustration:  for  people  admit  the  more  readily 
a  proposition  made  to  serv^  some  other  pur¬ 
pose,  and  not  required  on  its  own  account. 
Moreover,  do  not  formulate  the  very  proposi¬ 
tion  you  need  to  secure,  but  rather  something 
from  which  that  necessarily  follows:  for  people 


TOPICS 


15  7b 

are  more  willing  to  admit  the  latter,  because  it 
is  not  so  clear  from  this  what  the  result  will  be, 
and  if  the  one  has  been  secured,  the  other  has 
[jo]  been  secured  also.  Again,  one  should  put 
last  the  point  which  one  most  wishes  to  have 
conceded;  for  people  are  specially  inclined  to 
deny  the  first  questions  put  to  them,  because 
most  people  in  asking  questions  put  first  the 
points  which  they  are  most  eager  to  secure.  On 
the  other  hand,  in  dealing  with  some  people 
propositions  of  this  sort  should  be  put  forward 
first:  for  ill-tempered  men  admit  most  readily 
[35]  what  comes  first,  unless  the  conclusion 
that  will  result  actually  stares  them  in  the  face, 
while  at  the  close  of  an  argument  they  show 
their  ill-temper.  Likewise  also  with  those  who 
consider  themselves  smart  at  answering:  for 
when  they  have  admitted  most  of  what  you 
want  they  finally  talk  clap-trap  to  the  effect 
that  the  conclusion  does  not  follow  from  their 
admissions:  yet  they  say  ‘Yes’  readily,  confident 
in  their  own  character,  and  imagining  that  they 
15 7a  cannot  suffer  any  reverse.  Moreover,  it  is 
well  to  expand  the  argument  and  insert  things 
that  it  does  not  require  at  all,  as  do  those  who 
draw  false  geometrical  figures:  for  in  the  mul¬ 
titude  of  details  the  whereabouts  of  the  fallacy 
is  obscured.  For  this  reason,  also  a  questioner 
sometimes  evades  observation  as  he  adds  in  a 
[5]  corner  what,  if  he  formulated  it  by  itself, 
would  not  be  granted. 

For  concealment,  then,  the  rules  which 
should  be  followed  are  the  above.  Ornament  is 
attained  by  induction  and  distinction  of  things 
closely  akin.  What  sort  of  process  induction  is 
is  obvious:  as  for  distinction,  an  instance  of  the 
kind  of  thing  meant  is  the  distinction  of  one 
form  of  knowledge  as  better  than  another  by 
being  either  more  accurate,  or  concerned  with 
[/o]  better  objects;  or  the  distinction  of  sci¬ 
ences  into  speculative,  practical,  and  produc¬ 
tive.  For  everything  of  this  kind  lends  addi¬ 
tional  ornament  to  the  argument,  though  there 
is  no  necessity  to  say  them,  so  far  as  the  con¬ 
clusion  goes. 

For  clearness,  examples  and  comparisons 
[75]  should  be  adduced,  and  let  the  illustra¬ 
tions  be  relevant  and  drawn  from  things  that 
we  know,  as  in  Homer  and  not  as  in  Choerilus; 
for  then  the  proposition  is  likely  to  become 
clearer. 

2 

In  dialectics,  syllogism  should  be  employed  in 
[20]  reasoning  against  dialecticians  rather 
than  against  the  crowd:  induction,  on  the 


213 

other  hand,  is  most  useful  against  the  crowd. 
This  point  has  been  treated  previously  as  well.1 
In  induction,  it  is  possible  in  some  cases  to  ask 
the  question  in  its  universal  form,  but  in  others 
this  is  not  easy,  because  there  is  no  established 
general  term  that  covers  all  the  resemblances: 
in  this  case,  when  people  need  to  secure  the  uni¬ 
versal,  they  use  the  phrase  ‘in  all  cases  of  this 
sort’.  But  it  is  one  of  the  very  hardest  things 
[25]  to  distinguish  which  of  the  things  ad¬ 
duced  are  ‘of  this  sort’,  and  which  are  not:  and 
in  this  connexion  people  often  throw  dust  in 
each  others’  eyes  in  their  discussion,  the  one 
party  asserting  the  likeness  of  things  that  are 
not  alike,  and  the  other  disputing  the  likeness 
of  things  that  are.  One  ought,  therefore,  to  try 
[30]  oneself  to  coin  a  word  to  cover  all  things 
of  the  given  sort,  so  as  to  leave  no  opportunity 
either  to  the  answerer  to  dispute,  and  say  that 
the  thing  advanced  does  not  answer  to  a  like 
description,  or  to  the  questioner  to  suggest 
falsely  that  it  does  answer  to  a  like  description, 
for  many  things  appear  to  answer  to  like  de¬ 
scriptions  that  do  not  really  do  so. 

If  one  has  made  an  induction  on  the  strength 
of  several  cases  and  yet  the  answerer  refuses  to 
grant  the  universal  proposition,  then  it  is  fair 
[55]  to  demand  his  objection.  But  until  one 
has  oneself  stated  in  what  cases  it  is  so,  it  is 
not  fair  to  demand  that  he  shall  say  in  what 
cases  it  is  not  so:  for  one  should  make  the  in¬ 
duction  first,  and  then  demand  the  objection. 
One  ought,  moreover,  to  claim  that  the  objec¬ 
tions  should  not  be  brought  in  reference  to  the 
actual  subject  of  the  proposition,  unless  that 
subject  happen  to  be  the  one  and  only  thing  of 
the  kind,  as  for  instance  two  is  the  one  prime 
157b  number  among  the  even  numbers:  for, 
unless  he  can  say  that  this  subject  is  unique  of 
its  kind,  the  objector  ought  to  make  his  objec¬ 
tion  in  regard  to  some  other.  People  sometimes 
object  to  a  universal  proposition,  and  bring 
their  objection  not  in  regard  to  the  thing  itself, 
but  in  regard  to  some  homonym  of  it:  thus  they 
[5]  argue  that  a  man  can  very  well  have  a  col¬ 
our  or  a  foot  or  a  hand  other  than  his  own,  for 
a  painter  may  have  a  colour  that  is  not  his  own, 
and  a  cook  may  have  a  foot  that  is  not  his  own. 
To  meet  them,  therefore,  you  should  draw  the 
distinction  before  putting  your  question  in 
such  cases:  for  so  long  as  the  ambiguity  re¬ 
mains  undetected,  so  long  will  the  objection  to 
the  proposition  be  deemed  valid.  If,  however, 
he  checks  the  series  of  questions  by  an  objection 
in  regard  not  to  some  homonym,  but  to  the  ac- 

1 105*  16. 


BOOK  VIII,  CHAPTERS  1-2 


tual  thing  asserted,  the  questioner  should  with- 
[/o]  draw  the  point  objected  to,  and  form  the 
remainder  into  a  universal  proposition,  until 
he  secures  what  he  requires;  e.g.  in  the  case  of 
forgetfulness  and  having  forgotten:  for  people 
refuse  to  admit  that  the  man  who  has  lost  his 
knowledge  of  a  thing  has  forgotten  it,  because 
if  the  thing  alters,  he  has  lost  knowledge  of  it, 
but  he  has  not  forgotten  it.  Accordingly  the 
thing  to  do  is  to  withdraw  the  part  objected  to, 
[75]  and  assert  the  remainder,  e.g.  that  if  a 
person  have  lost  knowledge  of  a  thing  while  it 
still  remains,  he  then  has  forgotten  it.  One 
should  similarly  treat  those  who  object  to  the 
statement  that  ‘the  greater  the  good,  the  greater 
the  evil  that  is  its  opposite’:  for  they  allege  that 
health,  which  is  a  less  good  thing  than  vigour, 
has  a  greater  evil  as  its  opposite:  for  disease  is  a 
[20]  greater  evil  than  debility.  In  this  case  too, 
therefore,  we  have  to  withdraw  the  point  ob¬ 
jected  to;  for  when  it  has  been  withdrawn,  the 
man  is  more  likely  to  admit  the  proposition, 
e.g.  that  ‘the  greater  good  has  the  greater  evil 
as  its  opposite,  unless  the  one  good  involves  the 
other  as  well’,  as  vigour  involves  health.  This 
should  be  done  not  only  when  he  formulates 
an  objection,  but  also  if,  without  so  doing,  he 
[25]  refuses  to  admit  the  point  because  he 
foresees  something  of  the  kind:  for  if  the  point 
objected  to  be  withdrawn,  he  will  be  forced  to 
admit  the  proposition  because  he  cannot  foresee 
in  the  rest  of  it  any  case  where  it  does  not  hold 
true:  if  he  refuse  to  admit  it,  then  when  asked 
for  an  objection  he  certainly  will  be  unable  to 
render  one.  Propositions  that  are  partly  false 
[50]  and  partly  true  are  of  this  type:  for  in  the 
case  of  these  it  is  possible  by  withdrawing  a 
part  to  leave  the  rest  true.  If,  however,  you  for¬ 
mulate  the  proposition  on  the  strength  of  many 
cases  and  he  has  no  objection  to  bring,  you  may 
claim  that  he  shall  admit  it:  for  a  premiss  is 
valid  in  dialectics  which  thus  holds  in  several 
instances  and  to  which  no  objection  is  forth¬ 
coming. 

Whenever  it  is  possible  to  reason  to  the  same 
[^5]  conclusion  either  through  or  without  a 
reductio  per  impossibile,  if  one  is  demonstrat¬ 
ing  and  not  arguing  dialectically  it  makes  no 
difference  which  method  of  reasoning  be 
adopted,  but  in  argument  with  another  reason¬ 
ing  per  impossibile  should  be  avoided.  For 
where  one  has  reasoned  without  the  reductio 
per  impossibile,  no  dispute  can  arise;  if,  on  the 
other  hand,  one  does  reason  to  an  impossible 
conclusion,  unless  its  falsehood  is  too  plainly 
158a  manifest,  people  deny  that  it  is  impos- 


158a 

sible,  so  that  the  questioners  do  not  get  what 
they  want. 

One  should  put  forward  all  propositions  that 
hold  true  of  several  cases,  and  to  which  either 
no  objection  whatever  appears  or  at  least  not 
any  on  the  surface:  for  when  people  cannot  see 
[5]  any  case  in  which  it  is  not  so,  they  admit  it 
for  true. 

The  conclusion  should  not  be  put  in  the  form 
of  a  question;  if  it  be,  and  the  man  shakes  his 
head,  it  looks  as  if  the  reasoning  had  failed.  For 
often,  even  if  it  be  not  put  as  a  question  but  ad¬ 
vanced  as  a  consequence,  people  deny  it,  and 
[/o]  then  those  who  do  not  see  that  it  follows 
upon  the  previous  admissions  do  not  realize 
that  those  who  deny  it  have  been  refuted: 
when,  then,  the  one  man  merely  asks  it  as  a 
question  without  even  saying  that  it  so  follows, 
and  the  other  denies  it,  it  looks  altogether  as  if 
the  reasoning  had  failed. 

Not  every  universal  question  can  form  a  dia- 
[75]  lectical  proposition  as  ordinarily  under¬ 
stood,  e.g.  ‘What  is  man?’  or  ‘How  many 
meanings  has  “the  good”?’  For  a  dialectical 
premiss  must  be  of  a  form  to  which  it  is  pos¬ 
sible  to  reply  ‘Yes’  or  ‘No’,  whereas  to  the 
aforesaid  it  is  not  possible.  For  this  reason 
questions  of  this  kind  are  not  dialectical  unless 
the  questioner  himself  draws  distinctions  or 
divisions  before  expressing  them,  e.g.  ‘Good 
means  this,  or  this,  does  it  not?’  For  questions 
[20]  of  this  sort  are  easily  answered  by  a  Yes  or 
a  No.  Hence  one  should  endeavour  to  formu¬ 
late  propositions  of  this  kind  in  this  form.  It  is 
at  the  same  time  also  perhaps  fair  to  ask  the 
other  man  how  many  meanings  of  ‘the  good’ 
there  are,  whenever  you  have  yourself  distin¬ 
guished  and  formulated  them,  and  he  will  not 
admit  them  at  all. 

[25]  Any  one  who  keeps  on  asking  one  thing 
for  a  long  time  is  a  bad  inquirer.  For  if  he  does 
so  though  the  person  questioned  keeps  on  an¬ 
swering  the  questions,  clearly  he  asks  a  large 
number  of  questions,  or  else  asks  the  same  ques¬ 
tion  a  large  number  of  times:  in  the  one  case  he 
merely  babbles,  in  the  other  he  fails  to  reason: 
for  reasoning  always  consists  of  a  small  num¬ 
ber  of  premisses.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  he  does 
it  because  the  person  questioned  does  not  an¬ 
swer  the  questions,  he  is  at  fault  in  not  taking 
[jo]  him  to  task  or  breaking  off  the  discussion. 

3 

There  are  certain  hypotheses  upon  which  it  is 
at  once  difficult  to  bring,  and  easy  to  stand  up 
to,  an  argument.  Such  (e.g.)  are  those  things 


159*  BOOK  VIII,  CHAPTERS  2-4  215 

which  stand  first  and  those  which  stand  last  in  pie  to  see  whether  it  is  possible  for  the  same 


the  order  of  nature.  For  the  former  Squire  def¬ 
inition,  while  the  latter  have  to  be  arrived  at 
through  many  steps  if  one  wishes  to  secure  a 
[55]  continuous  proof  from  first  principles,  or 
else  all  discussion  about  them  wears  the  air  of 
mere  sophistry:  for  to  prove  anything  is  im¬ 
possible  unless  one  begins  with  the  appropriate 
principles,  and  connects  inference  with  infer¬ 
ence  till  the  last  are  reached.  Now  to  define 
first  principles  is  just  what  answerers  do  not 
care  to  do,  nor  do  they  pay  any  attention  if  the 
questioner  makes  a  definition:  and  yet  until  it 
is  clear  what  it  is  that  is  proposed,  it  is  not 
158b  easy  to  discuss  it.  This  sort  of  thing  hap¬ 
pens  particularly  in  the  case  of  the  first  prin¬ 
ciples:  for  while  the  other  propositions  are 
shown  through  these,  these  cannot  be  shown 
through  anything  else:  we  are  obliged  to  un¬ 
derstand  every  item  of  that  sort  by  a  definition. 
[5]  The  inferences,  too,  that  lie  too  close  to  the 
first  principle  are  hard  to  treat  in  argument: 
for  it  is  not  possible  to  bring  many  arguments 
in  regard  to  them,  because  of  the  small  number 
of  those  steps,  between  the  conclusion  and  the 
principle,  whereby  the  succeeding  propositions 
have  to  be  shown.  The  hardest,  however,  of  all 
definitions  to  treat  in  argument  are  those  that 
employ  terms  about  which,  in  the  first  place,  it 
[/o]  is  uncertain  whether  they  are  used  in  one 
sense  or  several,  and,  further,  whether  they  are 
used  literally  or  metaphorically  by  the  definer. 
For  because  of  their  obscurity,  it  is  impossible 
to  argue  upon  such  terms;  and  because  of  the 
impossibility  of  saying  whether  this  obscurity 
is  due  to  their  being  used  metaphorically,  it  is 
[75]  impossible  to  refute  them. 

In  general,  it  is  safe  to  suppose  that,  when¬ 
ever  any  problem  proves  intractable,  it  either 
needs  definition  or  else  bears  either  several 
senses,  or  a  metaphorical  sense,  or  it  is  not  far 
removed  from  the  first  principles;  or  else  the 
reason  is  that  we  have  yet  to  discover  in  the 
[20]  first  place  just  this — in  which  of  the  afore¬ 
said  directions  the  source  of  our  difficulty  lies: 
when  we  have  made  this  clear,  then  obviously 
our  business  must  be  either  to  define  or  to  dis¬ 
tinguish,  or  to  supply  the  intermediate  prem¬ 
isses:  for  it  is  through  these  that  the  final  con¬ 
clusions  are  shown. 

It  often  happens  that  a  difficulty  is  found  in 
[25]  discussing  or  arguing  a  given  position 
because  the  definition  has  not  been  correctly 
rendered:  e.g.  ‘Has  one  thing  one  contrary  or 
manyP,i  here  when  the  term  ‘contraries’  has 
been  properly  defined,  it  is  easy  to  bring  peo- 


thing  to  have  several  contraries  or  not:  in  the 
same  way  also  with  other  terms  requiring 
definition.  It  appears  also  in  mathematics  that 
[30]  the  difficulty  in  using  a  figure  is  some¬ 
times  due  to  a  defect  in  definition;  e.g.  in 
proving  that  the  line  which  cuts  the  plane 
parallel  to  one  side  divides  similarly  both  the 
line  which  it  cuts  and  the  area;  whereas  if  the 
definition  be  given,  the  fact  asserted  becomes 
immediately  clear:  for  the  areas  have  the  same 
fraction  subtracted  from  them  as  have  the 
[35]  sides:  and  this  is  the  definition  of  ‘the 
same  ratio’.  The  most  primary  of  the  elemen¬ 
tary  principles  are  without  exception  very  easy 
to  show,  if  the  definitions  involved,  e.g.  the  na¬ 
ture  of  a  line  or  of  a  circle,  be  laid  down;  only 
the  arguments  that  can  be  brought  in  regard 
to  each  of  them  are  not  many,  because  there 
are  not  many  intermediate  steps.  If,  on  the 
other  hand,  the  definition  of  the  starting-points 
be  not  laid  down,  to  show  them  is  difficult  and 
159*  may  even  prove  quite  impossible.  The 
case  of  the  significance  of  verbal  expressions  is 
like  that  of  these  mathematical  conceptions. 

One  may  be  sure  then,  whenever  a  position 
is  hard  to  discuss,  that  one  or  other  of  the 
aforesaid  things  has  happened  to  it.  Whenever, 
on  the  other  hand,  it  is  a  harder  task  to  argue 
[5]  to  the  point  claimed,  i.e.  the  premiss,  than 
to  the  resulting  position,  a  doubt  may  arise 
whether  such  claims  should  be  admitted  or 
not:  for  if  a  man  is  going  to  refuse  to  admit  it 
and  claim  that  you  shall  argue  to  it  as  well,  he 
will  be  giving  the  signal  for  a  harder  under¬ 
taking  than  was  originally  proposed:  if,  on  the 
other  hand,  he  grants  it,  he  will  be  giving  the 
original  thesis  credence  on  the  strength  of 
what  is  less  credible  than  itself.  If,  then,  it  is 
essential  not  to  enhance  the  difficulty  of  the 
[/o]  problem,  he  had  better  grant  it;  if,  on  the 
other  hand,  it  be  essential  to  reason  through 
premisses  that  are  better  assured,  he  had  better 
refuse.  In  other  words,  in  serious  inquiry  he 
ought  not  to  grant  it,  unless  he  be  more  sure 
about  it  than  about  the  conclusion;  whereas  in 
a  dialectical  exercise  he  may  do  so  if  he  is  mere¬ 
ly  satisfied  of  its  truth.  Clearly,  then,  the 
circumstances  under  which  such  admissions 
should  be  claimed  are  different  for  a  mere 
questioner  and  for  a  serious  teacher. 

4 

[75]  As  to  the  formulation,  then,  and  arrange¬ 
ment  of  one’s  questions,  about  enough  has  been 
said. 


2i6  TOPICS  159b 


With  regard  to  the  giving  of  answers,  we 
must  first  define  what  is  the  business  of  a  good 
answerer,  as  of  a  good  questioner.  The  business 
of  the  questioner  is  so  to  develop  the  argument 
as  to  make  the  answerer  utter  the  most  extrava- 
[20]  gant  paradoxes  that  necessarily  follow  be¬ 
cause  of  his  position:  while  that  of  the  answerer 
is  to  make  it  appear  that  it  is  not  he  who  is  re¬ 
sponsible  for  the  absurdity  or  paradox,  but 
only  his  position:  for  one  may,  perhaps,  dis¬ 
tinguish  between  the  mistake  of  taking  up  a 
wrong  position  to  start  with,  and  that  of  not 
maintaining  it  properly,  when  once  taken  up. 

5 

[25]  Inasmuch  as  no  rules  are  laid  down  for 
those  who  argue  for  the  sake  of  training  and 
of  examination: — and  the  aim  of  those  en¬ 
gaged  in  teaching  or  learning  is  quite  differ¬ 
ent  from  that  of  those  engaged  in  a  competi¬ 
tion;  as  is  the  latter  from  that  of  those  who  dis¬ 
cuss  things  together  in  the  spirit  of  inquiry: 
for  a  learner  should  always  state  what  he 
thinks:  for  no  one  is  even  trying  to  teach  him 
[50]  what  is  false;  whereas  in  a  competition 
the  business  of  the  questioner  is  to  appear  by 
all  means  to  produce  an  effect  upon  the  other, 
while  that  of  the  answerer  is  to  appear  un¬ 
affected  by  him;  on  the  other  hand,  in  an  as¬ 
sembly  of  disputants  discussing  in  the  spirit 
not  of  a  competition  but  of  an  examination 
and  inquiry,  there  are  as  yet  no  articulate  rules 
[35]  about  what  the  answerer  should  aim  at, 
and  what  kind  of  things  he  should  and  should 
not  grant  for  the  correct  or  incorrect  defence 
of  his  position: — inasmuch,  then,  as  we  have 
no  tradition  bequeathed  to  us  by  others,  let  us 
try  to  say  something  upon  the  matter  for  our¬ 
selves. 

The  thesis  laid  down  by  the  answerer  before 
facing  the  questioner’s  argument  is  bound  of 
necessity  to  be  one  that  is  either  generally  ac¬ 
cepted  or  generally  rejected  or  else  is  neither: 
and  moreover  is  so  accepted  or  rejected  either 
159b  absolutely  or  else  with  a  restriction,  e.g. 
by  some  given  person,  by  the  speaker  or  by 
some  one  else.  The  manner,  however,  of  its 
acceptance  or  rejection,  whatever  it  be,  makes 
no  difference:  for  the  right  way  to  answer,  i.e. 
to  admit  or  to  refuse  to  admit  what  has  been 
asked,  will  be  the  same  in  either  case.  If,  then, 
the  statement  laid  down  by  the  answerer  be 
generally  rejected,  the  conclusion  aimed  at  by 
[5]  the  questioner  is  bound  to  be  one  generally 
accepted,  whereas  if  the  former  be  generally 
accepted,  the  latter  is  generally  rejected:  for 


the  conclusion  which  the  questioner  tries  to 
draw  is  always  the  opposite  of  the  statement 
laid  down.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  what  is  laid 
down  is  generally  neither  rejected  nor  ac¬ 
cepted,  the  conclusion  will  be  of  the  same  type 
as  well.  Now  since  a  man  who  reasons  cor¬ 
rectly  demonstrates  his  proposed  conclusion 
from  premisses  that  are  more  generally  ac¬ 
cepted,  and  more  familiar,  it  is  clear  that  ( 1 ) 
where  the  view  laid  down  by  him  is  one  that 
[10]  generally  is  absolutely  rejected,  the  an¬ 
swerer  ought  not  to  grant  either  what  is  thus 
absolutely  not  accepted  at  all,  or  what  is  ac¬ 
cepted  indeed,  but  accepted  less  generally  than 
the  questioner’s  conclusion.  For  if  the  state¬ 
ment  laid  down  by  the  answerer  be  generally 
rejected,  the  conclusion  aimed  at  by  the  ques¬ 
tioner  will  be  one  that  is  generally  accepted,  so 
that  the  premisses  secured  by  the  questioner 
should  all  be  views  generally  accepted,  and 
[75]  more  generally  accepted  than  his  pro¬ 
posed  conclusion,  if  the  less  familiar  is  to  be 
inferred  through  the  more  familiar.  Conse¬ 
quently,  if  any  of  the  questions  put  to  him  be 
not  of  this  character,  the  answerer  should  not 
grant  them.  (2)  If,  on  the  other  hand,  the 
statement  laid  down  by  the  answerer  be  gen¬ 
erally  accepted  without  qualification,  clearly 
the  conclusion  sought  by  the  questioner  will  be 
one  generally  rejected  without  qualification. 
Accordingly,  the  answerer  should  admit  all 
views  that  are  generally  accepted  and,  of  those 
that  are  not  generally  accepted,  all  that  are 
less  generally  rejected  than  the  conclusion 
sought  by  the  questioner.  For  then  he  will 
probably  be  thought  to  have  argued  suffi- 
[20]  ciently  well.  (3)  Likewise,  too,  if  the 
statement  laid  down  by  the  answerer  be  neither 
rejected  generally  nor  generally  accepted;  for 
then,  too,  anything  that  appears  to  be  true 
should  be  granted,  and,  of  the  views  not  gen¬ 
erally  accepted,  any  that  are  more  generally 
accepted  than  the  questioner’s  conclusion;  for 
in  that  case  the  result  will  be  that  the  argu¬ 
ments  will  be  more  generally  accepted.  If, 
then,  the  view  laid  down  by  the  answerer  be 
one  that  is  generally  accepted  or  rejected  with¬ 
out  qualification,  then  the  views  that  are  ac- 
[25]  cepted  absolutely  must  be  taken  as  the 
standard  of  comparison:  whereas  if  the  view 
laid  down  be  one  that  is  not  generally  accepted 
or  rejected,  but  only  by  the  answerer,  then  the 
standard  whereby  the  latter  must  judge  what  is 
generally  accepted  or  not,  and  must  grant  or 
refuse  to  grant  the  point  asked,  is  himself.  If, 
again,  the  answerer  be  defending  some  one 


160b  BOOK  VIII,  CHAPTERS  4-8  217 


else’s  opinion,  then  clearly  it  will  be  the  latter’s 
judgement  to  which  he  must  have  regard  in 
granting  or  denying  the  various  points.  This 
is  why  those,  too,  who  introduce  other’s  opin- 
[ jo]  ions,  e.g.  that  ‘good  and  evil  are  the  same 
thing’,  as  Heraclitus  says,1  refuse  to  admit  the 
impossibility  of  contraries  belonging  at  the 
same  time  to  the  same  thing;  not  because  they 
do  not  themselves  believe  this,  but  because  on 
Heraclitus’  principles  one  has  to  say  so.  The 
same  thing  is  done  also  by  those  who  take  on 
[35]  the  defence  of  one  another’s  positions; 
their  aim  being  to  speak  as  would  the  man 
who  stated  the  position. 

6 

It  is  clear,  then,  what  the  aims  of  the  answerer 
should  be,  whether  the  position  he  lays  down 
be  a  view  generally  accepted  without  qualifica¬ 
tion  or  accepted  by  some  definite  person.  Now 
every  question  asked  is  bound  to  involve  some 
view  that  is  either  generally  held  or  generally 
rejected  or  neither,  and  is  also  bound  to  be 
either  relevant  to  the  argument  or  irrelevant: 
if  then  it  be  a  view  generally  accepted  and  ir- 
160*  relevant,  the  answerer  should  grant  it 
and  remark  that  it  is  the  accepted  view:  if  it 
be  a  view  not  generally  accepted  and  irrelevant, 
he  should  grant  it  but  add  a  comment  that  it  is 
not  generally  accepted,  in  order  to  avoid  the 
appearance  of  being  a  simpleton.  If  it  be  rele¬ 
vant  and  also  be  generally  accepted,  he  should 
admit  that  it  is  the  view  generally  accepted  but 
[5]  saY  that  h  lies  to°  close  to  the  original 
proposition,  and  that  if  it  be  granted  the  prob¬ 
lem  proposed  collapses.  If  what  is  claimed  by 
the  questioner  be  relevant  but  too  generally  re¬ 
jected,  the  answerer,  while  admitting  that  if  it 
be  granted  the  conclusion  sought  follows, 
should  yet  protest  that  the  proposition  is  too 
absurd  to  be  admitted.  Suppose,  again,  it  be  a 
view  that  is  neither  rejected  generally  nor  gen¬ 
erally  accepted,  then,  if  it  be  irrelevant  to  the 
argument,  it  may  be  granted  without  restric- 
[/o]  tion;  if,  however,  it  be  relevant,  the  an¬ 
swerer  should  add  the  comment  that,  if  it  be 
granted,  the  original  problem  collapses.  For 
then  the  answerer  will  not  be  held  to  be  per¬ 
sonally  accountable  for  what  happens  to  him, 
if  he  grants  the  several  points  with  his  eyes 
open,  and  also  the  questioner  will  be  able  to 
draw  his  inference,  seeing  that  all  the  prem¬ 
isses  that  are  more  generally  accepted  than  the 
conclusion  are  granted  him.  Those  who  try  to 
[75]  draw  an  inference  from  premisses  more 
1  Frr.  58,  102,  Diels. 


generally  rejected  than  the  conclusion  clearly 
do  not  reason  correctly:  hence,  when  men  ask 
these  things,  they  ought  not  to  be  granted. 

7 

The  questioner  should  be  met  in  a  like  man¬ 
ner  also  in  the  case  of  terms  used  obscurely,  i.e. 
in  several  senses.  For  the  answerer,  if  he  does 
not  understand,  is  always  permitted  to  say  ‘I 
do  not  understand’:  he  is  not  compelled  to  re- 
120]  ply  ‘Yes’  or  ‘No’  to  a  question  which  may 
mean  different  things.  Clearly,  then,  in  the 
first  place,  if  what  is  said  be  not  clear,  he 
ought  not  to  hesitate  to  say  that  he  does  not 
understand  it;  for  often  people  encounter  some 
difficulty  from  assenting  to  questions  that  are 
not  clearly  put.  If  he  understands  the  question 
and  yet  it  covers  many  senses,  then  supposing 
[25]  what  it  says  to  be  universally  true  or 
false,  he  should  give  it  an  unqualified  assent  or 
denial:  if,  on  the  other  hand,  it  be  partly  true 
and  partly  false,  he  should  add  a  comment  that 
it  bears  different  senses,  and  also  that  in  one 
it  is  true,  in  the  other  false:  for  if  he  leave  this 
distinction  till  later,  it  becomes  uncertain 
whether  originally  as  well  he  perceived  the  am¬ 
biguity  or  not.  If  he  does  not  foresee  the  am¬ 
biguity,  but  assents  to  the  question  having  in 
[50]  view  the  one  sense  of  the  words,  then,  if 
the  questioner  takes  it  in  the  other  sense,  he 
should  say,  ‘That  was  not  what  I  had  in  view 
when  I  admitted  it;  I  meant  the  other  sense’: 
for  if  a  term  or  expression  covers  more  than 
one  thing,  it  is  easy  to  disagree.  If,  however, 
the  question  is  both  clear  and  simple,  he  should 
answer  either  ‘Yes’  or  ’No’. 

8 

[35]  A  premiss  in  reasoning  always  either  is 
one  of  the  constituent  elements  in  the  reason¬ 
ing,  or  else  goes  to  establish  one  of  these:  (and 
you  can  always  tell  when  it  is  secured  in  order 
to  establish  something  else  by  the  fact  of  a 
number  of  similar  questions  being  put:  for  as 
a  rule  people  secure  their  universal  by  means 
either  of  induction  or  of  likeness): — accord¬ 
ingly  the  particular  propositions  should  all  be 
160b  admitted,  if  they  are  true  and  generally 
held.  On  the  other  hand,  against  the  universal 
one  should  try  to  bring  some  negative  instance; 
for  to  bring  the  argument  to  a  standstill  with¬ 
out  a  negative  instance,  either  real  or  apparent, 
shows  ill-temper.  If,  then,  a  man  refuses  to 
grant  the  universal  when  supported  by  many 


2l8 

instances,  although  he  has  no  negative  instance 
to  show,  he  obviously  shows  ill-temper.  If, 
[5]  moreover,  he  cannot  even  attempt  a  coun¬ 
ter-proof  that  it  is  not  true,  far  more  likely  is 
he  to  be  thought  ill-tempered — although  even 
counter-proof  is  not  enough:  for  we  often  hear 
arguments  that  are  contrary  to  common  opin¬ 
ions,  whose  solution  is  yet  difficult,  e.g.  the 
argument  of  Zeno  that  it  is  impossible  to  move 
or  to  traverse  the  stadium; — but  still,  this  is 
no  reason  for  omitting  to  assert  the  opposites 
[/o]  of  these  views.  If,  then,  a  man  refuses  to 
admit  the  proposition  without  having  either  a 
negative  instance  or  some  counter-argument  to 
bring  against  it,  clearly  he  is  ill-tempered:  for 
ill-temper  in  argument  consists  in  answering 
in  ways  other  than  the  above,  so  as  to  wreck 
the  reasoning. 

9 

Before  maintaining  either  a  thesis  or  a  defini¬ 
tion  the  answerer  should  try  his  hand  at  attack- 
[75]  ing  it  by  himself;  for  clearly  his  business 
is  to  oppose  those  positions  from  which  ques¬ 
tioners  demolish  what  he  has  laid  down. 

He  should  beware  of  maintaining  a  hypoth¬ 
esis  that  is  generally  rejected:  and  this  it  may 
be  in  two  ways:  for  it  may  be  one  which  re¬ 
sults  in  absurd  statements,  e.g.  suppose  any 
one  were  to  say  that  everything  is  in  motion  or 
that  nothing  is;  and  also  there  are  all  those 
[20]  which  only  a  bad  character  would  choose, 
and  which  are  implicitly  opposed  to  men's 
wishes,  e.g.  that  pleasure  is  the  good,  and  that 
to  do  injustice  is  better  than  to  suffer  it.  For 
people  then  hate  him,  supposing  him  to  main¬ 
tain  them  not  for  the  sake  of  argument  but  be¬ 
cause  he  really  thinks  them. 

10 

Of  all  arguments  that  reason  to  a  false  conclu¬ 
sion  the  right  solution  is  to  demolish  the  point 
on  which  the  fallacy  that  occurs  depends:  for 
the  demolition  of  any  random  point  is  no  solu- 
[25]  tion,  even  though  the  point  demolished 
be  false.  For  the  argument  may  contain  many 
falsehoods,  e.g.  suppose  some  one  to  secure  the 
premisses,  ‘He  who  sits,  writes'  and  ‘Socrates  is 
sitting':  for  from  these  it  follows  that  ‘Socrates 
is  writing'.  Now  we  may  demolish  the  propo¬ 
sition  ‘Socrates  is  sitting',  and  still  be  no  nearer 
a  solution  of  the  argument;  it  may  be  true  that 
[jo]  the  point  claimed  is  false;  but  it  is  not  on 
that  that  the  fallacy  of  the  argument  depends: 
for  supposing  that  any  one  should  happen  to 
be  sitting  and  not  writing,  it  would  be  impos- 


161* 

sible  in  such  a  case  to  apply  the  same  solu¬ 
tion.  Accordingly,  it  is  not  this  that  needs  to  be 
demolished,  but  rather  that  ‘He  who  sits, 
writes':  for  he  who  sits  does  not  always  write. 
He,  then,  who  has  demolished  the  point  on 
which  the  fallacy  depends,  has  given  the  solu¬ 
tion  of  the  argument  completely.  Any  one  who 
knows  that  it  is  on  such  and  such  a  point  that 
[^5]  the  argument  depends,  knows  the  solu¬ 
tion  of  it,  just  as  in  the  case  of  a  figure  falsely 
drawn.  For  it  is  not  enough  to  object,  even  if 
the  point  demolished  be  a  falsehood,  but  the 
reason  of  the  fallacy  should  also  be  proved:  for 
then  it  would  be  clear  whether  the  man  makes 
his  objection  with  his  eyes  open  or  not. 

161a  There  are  four  possible  ways  of  prevent¬ 
ing  a  man  from  working  his  argument  to  a 
conclusion.  It  can  be  done  either  by  demolish¬ 
ing  the  point  on  which  the  falsehood  that 
comes  about  depends,  or  by  stating  an  objec¬ 
tion  directed  against  the  questioner:  for  often 
when  a  solution  has  not  as  a  matter  of  fact  been 
brought,  yet  the  questioner  is  rendered  thereby 
unable  to  pursue  the  argument  any  farther. 
[5]  Thirdly,  one  may  object  to  the  questions 
asked:  for  it  may  happen  that  what  the  ques¬ 
tioner  wants  does  not  follow  from  the  ques¬ 
tions  he  has  asked  because  he  has  asked  them 
badly,  whereas  if  something  additional  be 
granted  the  conclusion  comes  about.  If,  then, 
the  questioner  be  unable  to  pursue  his  argu¬ 
ment  farther,  the  objection  would  properly  be 
directed  against  the  questioner;  if  he  can  do  so, 
then  it  would  be  against  his  questions.  The 
fourth  and  worst  kind  of  objection  is  that 
[/o]  which  is  directed  to  the  time  allowed  for 
discussion:  for  some  people  bring  objections  of 
a  kind  which  would  take  longer  to  answer 
than  the  length  of  the  discussion  in  hand. 

There  are  then,  as  we  said,  four  ways  of 
making  objections:  but  of  them  the  first  alone 
is  a  solution:  the  others  are  just  hindrances  and 
[75]  stumbling-blocks  to  prevent  the  conclu¬ 
sions. 

11 

Adverse  criticism  of  an  argument  on  its  own 
merits,  and  of  it  when  presented  in  the  form 
of  questions,  are  two  different  things.  For 
often  the  failure  to  carry  through  the  argument 
correctly  in  discussion  is  due  to  the  person 
questioned,  because  he  will  not  grant  the  steps 
of  which  a  correct  argument  might  have  been 
made  against  his  position:  for  it  is  not  in  the 
[20]  power  of  the  one  side  only  to  effect  prop¬ 
erly  a  result  that  depends  on  both  alike.  Ac- 


TOPICS 


162a  BOOK  VIII,  CHAPTERS  8-11  219 


cordingly  it  sometimes  becomes  necessary  to 
attack  the  speaker  and  not  his  position,  when 
the  answerer  lies  in  wait  for  the  points  that 
are  contrary  to  the  questioner  and  becomes 
abusive  as  well:  when  people  lose  their  tempers 
in  this  way,  their  argument  becomes  a  con¬ 
test,  not  a  discussion.  Moreover,  since  argu- 
[25]  ments  of  this  kind  are  held  not  for  the 
sake  of  instruction  but  for  purposes  of  prac¬ 
tice  and  examination,  clearly  one  has  to  reason 
not  only  to  true  conclusions,  but  also  to  false 
ones,  and  not  always  through  true  premisses, 
but  sometimes  through  false  as  well.  For  often, 
when  a  true  proposition  is  put  forward,  the 
dialectician  is  compelled  to  demolish  it:  and 
then  false  propositions  have  to  be  formulated, 
[jo]  Sometimes  also  when  a  false  proposition 
is  put  forward,  it  has  to  be  demolished  by 
means  of  false  propositions:  for  it  is  possible 
for  a  given  man  to  believe  what  is  not  the  fact 
more  firmly  than  the  truth.  Accordingly,  if  the 
argument  be  made  to  depend  on  something 
that  he  holds,  it  will  be  easier  to  persuade  or 
help  him.  He,  however,  who  would  rightly 
convert  any  one  to  a  different  opinion  should 
do  so  in  a  dialectical  and  not  in  a  contentious 
[^5]  manner,  just  as  a  geometrician  should 
reason  geometrically,  whether  his  conclusion 
be  false  or  true:  what  kind  of  syllogisms  are 
dialectical  has  already  been  said.1  The  prin¬ 
ciple  that  a  man  who  hinders  the  common 
business  is  a  bad  partner,  clearly  applies  to  an 
argument  as  well;  for  in  arguments  as  well 
there  is  a  common  aim  in  view,  except  with 
[40]  mere  contestants,  for  these  cannot  both 
reach  the  same  goal;  for  more  than  one  cannot 
161b  possibly  win.  It  makes  no  difference 
whether  he  effects  this  as  answerer  or  as  ques¬ 
tioner:  for  both  he  who  asks  contentious  ques¬ 
tions  is  a  bad  dialectician,  and  also  he  who  in 
answering  fails  to  grant  the  obvious  answer  or 
[5]  to  understand  the  point  of  the  questioner’s 
inquiry.  What  has  been  said,  then,  makes  it 
clear  that  adverse  criticism  is  not  to  be  passed 
in  a  like  strain  upon  the  argument  on  its  own 
merits,  and  upon  the  questioner:  for  it  may 
very  well  be  that  the  argument  is  bad,  but  that 
the  questioner  has  argued  with  the  answerer 
in  the  best  possible  way:  for  when  men  lose 
their  tempers,  it  may  perhaps  be  impossible  to 
make  one’s  inferences  straight-forwardly  as 
[/o]  one  would  wish:  we  have  to  do  as  we  can. 

Inasmuch  as  it  is  indeterminate  when  people 
are  claiming  the  admission  of  contrary  things, 
and  when  they  are  claiming  what  originally 

1  IOOa22. 


they  set  out  to  prove — for  often  when  they  are 
talking  by  themselves  they  say  contrary  things, 
and  admit  afterwards  what  they  have  previ¬ 
ously  denied;  for  which  reason  they  often  as¬ 
sent,  when  questioned,  to  contrary  things  and 
[75]  to  what  originally  had  to  be  proved — the 
argument  is  sure  to  become  vitiated.  The  re¬ 
sponsibility,  however,  for  this  rests  with  the 
answerer,  because  while  refusing  to  grant 
other  points,  he  does  grant  points  of  that  kind. 
It  is,  then,  clear  that  adverse  criticism  is  not  to 
be  passed  in  a  like  manner  upon  questioners 
and  upon  their  arguments. 

In  itself  an  argument  is  liable  to  five  kinds 
of  adverse  criticism: 

[20]  (1)  The  first  is  when  neither  the  pro¬ 
posed  conclusion  nor  indeed  any  conclusion  at 
all  is  drawn  from  the  questions  asked,  and 
when  most,  if  not  all,  of  the  premisses  on  which 
the  conclusion  rests  are  false  or  generally  re¬ 
jected,  when,  moreover,  neither  any  with¬ 
drawals  nor  additions  nor  both  together  can 
bring  the  conclusions  about. 

[25]  (2)  The  second  is,  supposing  the  reason¬ 
ing,  though  constructed  from  the  premisses, 
and  in  the  manner,  described  above,  were  to  be 
irrelevant  to  the  original  position. 

(3)  The  third  is,  supposing  certain  addi¬ 
tions  would  bring  an  inference  about  but  yet 
these  additions  were  to  be  weaker  than  those 
that  were  put  as  questions  and  less  generally 
held  than  the  conclusion. 

(4)  Again,  supposing  certain  withdrawals 
[30]  could  effect  the  same:  for  sometimes  peo¬ 
ple  secure  more  premisses  than  are  necessary, 
so  that  it  is  not  through  them  that  the  infer¬ 
ence  comes  about. 

(5)  Moreover,  suppose  the  premisses  be  less 
generally  held  and  less  credible  than  the  con¬ 
clusion,  or  if,  though  true,  they  require  more 
trouble  to  prove  than  the  proposed  view. 

One  must  not  claim  that  the  reasoning  to  a 
[35]  proposed  view  shall  in  every  case  equally 
be  a  view  generally  accepted  and  convincing: 
for  it  is  a  direct  result  of  the  nature  of  things 
that  some  subjects  of  inquiry  shall  be  easier 
and  some  harder,  so  that  if  a  man  brings  peo¬ 
ple  to  accept  his  point  from  opinions  that  are 
as  generally  received  as  the  case  admits,  he  has 
argued  his  case  correctly.  Clearly,  then,  not 
even  the  argument  itself  is  open  to  the  same 
adverse  criticism  when  taken  in  relation  to  the 
proposed  conclusion  and  when  taken  by  itself. 
For  there  is  nothing  to  prevent  the  argument 
[40]  being  open  to  reproach  in  itself,  and  yet 
162a  commendable  in  relation  to  the  proposed 


220 

conclusion,  or  again,  vice  versa,  being  com¬ 
mendable  in  itself,  and  yet  open  to  reproach  in 
relation  to  the  proposed  conclusion,  whenever 
there  are  many  propositions  both  generally 
held  and  also  true  whereby  it  could  easily  be 
proved.  It  is  possible  also  that  an  argument, 
even  though  brought  to  a  conclusion,  may 
[5]  sometimes  be  worse  than  one  which  is  not 
so  concluded,  whenever  the  premisses  of  the 
former  are  silly,  while  its  conclusion  is  not  so; 
whereas  the  latter,  though  requiring  certain 
additions,  requires  only  such  as  are  generally 
held  and  true,  and  moreover  does  not  rest  as 
an  argument  on  these  additions.  With  those 
which  bring  about  a  true  conclusion  by  means 
of  false  premisses,  it  is  not  fair  to  find  fault:  for 
a  false  conclusion  must  of  necessity  always  be 
[/o]  reached  from  a  false  premiss,  but  a  true 
conclusion  may  sometimes  be  drawn  even 
from  false  premisses;  as  is  clear  from  the 
Analytics.1 

Whenever  by  the  argument  stated  something 
is  demonstrated,  but  that  something  is  other 
than  what  is  wanted  and  has  no  bearing  what¬ 
ever  on  the  conclusion,  then  no  inference  as  to 
the  latter  can  be  drawn  from  it:  and  if  there 
[75]  appears  to  be,  it  will  be  a  sophism,  not  a 
proof.  A  philosopheme  is  a  demonstrative  in¬ 
ference:  an  epichireme  is  a  dialectical  infer¬ 
ence:  a  sophism  is  a  contentious  inference:  an 
aporeme  is  an  inference  that  reasons  dialecti¬ 
cally  to  a  contradiction. 

If  something  were  to  be  shown  from  prem- 
[20]  isses,  both  of  which  are  views  generally 
accepted,  but  not  accepted  with  like  convic¬ 
tion,  it  may  very  well  be  that  the  conclusion 
shown  is  something  held  more  strongly  than 
either.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  general  opinion 
be  for  the  one  and  neither  for  nor  against  the 
other,  or  if  it  be  for  the  one  and  against  the 
other,  then,  if  the  pro  and  con  be  alike  in  the 
case  of  the  premisses,  they  will  be  alike  for  the 
conclusion  also:  if,  on  the  other  hand,  the  one 
preponderates,  the  conclusion  too  will  follow 
suit. 

It  is  also  a  fault  in  reasoning  when  a  man 
[25]  shows  something  through  a  long  chain  of 
steps,  when  he  might  employ  fewer  steps  and 
those  already  included  in  his  argument:  sup¬ 
pose  him  to  be  showing  (e.g.)  that  one  opin¬ 
ion  is  more  properly  so  called  than  another, 
and  suppose  him  to  make  his  postulates  as  fol¬ 
lows:  ‘x-in-itself  is  more  fully  x  than  any¬ 
thing  else’:  ‘there  genuinely  exists  an  object  of 
opinion  in  itself:  therefore  ‘the  object-of-opin- 

1  Prior  Analytics ,  11.  2. 


162b 

ion-in-itself  is  more  fully  an  object  of  opinion 
than  the  particular  objects  of  opinion’.  Now  ‘a 
relative  term  is  more  fully  itself  when  its  corre¬ 
late  is  more  fully  itself:  and  ‘there  exists  a  gen- 
[jo]  uine  opinion-in-itself,  which  will  be 
“opinion”  in  a  more  accurate  sense  than  the 
particular  opinions’:  and  it  has  been  postulated 
both  that  ‘a  genuine  opinion-in-itself  exists’, 
and  that  ‘x-in-itself  is  more  fully  x  than  any¬ 
thing  else’:  therefore  ‘this  will  be  opinion  in  a 
more  accurate  sense’.  Wherein  lies  the  vicious¬ 
ness  of  the  reasoning?  Simply  in  that  it  con¬ 
ceals  the  ground  on  which  the  argument  de¬ 
pends. 

12 

[35]  An  argument  is  clear  in  one,  and  that  the 
most  ordinary,  sense,  if  it  be  so  brought  to  a 
conclusion  as  to  make  no  further  questions  nec¬ 
essary:  in  another  sense,  and  this  is  the  type 
most  usually  advanced,  when  the  propositions 
162b  secured  are  such  as  compel  the  conclu¬ 
sion,  and  the  argument  is  concluded  through 
premisses  that  are  themselves  conclusions: 
moreover,  it  is  so  also  if  some  step  is  omitted 
that  generally  is  firmly  accepted. 

An  argument  is  called  fallacious  in  four 
senses:  (1)  when  it  appears  to  be  brought  to  a 
conclusion,  and  is  not  really  so — what  is  called 
[5]  ‘contentious’  reasoning:  (2)  when  it  comes 
to  a  conclusion  but  not  to  the  conclusion  pro¬ 
posed — which  happens  principally  in  the  case 
of  reductiones  ad  impossible:  (3)  when  it 
comes  to  the  proposed  conclusion  but  not  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  mode  of  inquiry  appropriate  to 
the  case,  as  happens  when  a  non-medical  ar¬ 
gument  is  taken  to  be  a  medical  one,  or  one 
which  is  not  geometrical  for  a  geometrical  ar- 
[/o]  gument,  or  one  which  is  not  dialectical  for 
dialectical,  whether  the  result  reached  be  true 
or  false:  (4)  if  the  conclusion  be  reached 
through  false  premisses:  of  this  type  the  con¬ 
clusion  is  sometimes  false,  sometimes  true:  for 
while  a  false  conclusion  is  always  the  result  of 
false  premisses,  a  true  conclusion  may  be  drawn 
[75]  even  from  premisses  that  are  not  true,  as 
was  said  above  as  well.2 

Fallacy  in  argument  is  due  to  a  mistake  of 
the  arguer  rather  than  of  the  argument:  yet  it 
is  not  always  the  fault  of  the  arguer  either,  but 
only  when  he  is  not  aware  of  it:  for  we  often 
accept  on  its  merits  in  preference  to  many  true 
ones  an  argument  which  demolishes  some  true 
[20]  proposition  if  it  does  so  from  premisses 
as  far  as  possible  generally  accepted.  For  an 

2  a  10. 


TOPICS 


221 


163a  BOOK  VIII,  CHAPTERS  11-14 


argument  of  that  kind  does  demonstrate  other 
things  that  are  true:  for  one  of  the  premisses 
laid  down  ought  never  to  be  there  at  all,  and 
this  will  then  be  demonstrated.  If,  however,  a 
true  conclusion  were  to  be  reached  through 
premisses  that  are  false  and  utterly  childish,  the 
argument  is  worse  than  many  arguments  that 
lead  to  a  false  conclusion,  though  an  argument 
which  leads  to  a  false  conclusion  may  also  be 
of  this  type.  Clearly  then  the  first  thing  to  ask 
[25]  in  regard  to  the  argument  in  itself  is, 
‘Has  it  a  conclusion?’;  the  second,  ‘Is  the  con¬ 
clusion  true  or  false?’;  the  third,  ‘Of  what  kind 
of  premisses  does  it  consist?’:  for  if  the  latter, 
though  false,  be  generally  accepted,  the  argu¬ 
ment  is  dialectical,  whereas  if,  though  true, 
they  be  generally  rejected,  it  is  bad:  if  they  be 
both  false  and  also  entirely  contrary  to  general 
opinion,  clearly  it  is  bad,  either  altogether  or 
[jo]  else  in  relation  to  the  particular  matter  in 
hand. 

*3 

Of  the  ways  in  which  a  questioner  may  beg  the 
original  question  and  also  beg  contraries  the 
true  account  has  been  given  in  the  Analytics:1 
but  an  account  on  the  level  of  general  opinion 
must  be  given  now. 

People  appear  to  beg  their  original  question 
[35}  in  five  ways:  the  first  and  most  obvious 
being  if  any  one  begs  the  actual  point  requir¬ 
ing  to  be  shown:  this  is  easily  detected  when 
put  in  so  many  words;  but  it  is  more  apt  to 
escape  detection  in  the  case  of  different  terms, 
163a  or  a  term  and  an  expression,  that  mean 
the  same  thing.  A  second  way  occurs  when¬ 
ever  any  one  begs  universally  something  which 
he  has  to  demonstrate  in  a  particular  case:  sup¬ 
pose  (e.g.)  he  were  trying  to  prove  that  the 
knowledge  of  contraries  is  one  and  were  to 
claim  that  the  knowledge  of  opposites  in  gen¬ 
eral  is  one:  for  then  he  is  generally  thought  to 
be  begging,  along  with  a  number  of  other 
things,  that  which  he  ought  to  have  shown  by 
[5]  itself.  A  third  way  is  if  any  one  were  to 
beg  in  particular  cases  what  he  undertakes  to 
show  universally:  e.g.  if  he  undertook  to  show 
that  the  knowledge  of  contraries  is  always 
one,  and  begged  it  of  certain  pairs  of  con¬ 
traries:  for  he  also  is  generally  considered  to  be 
begging  independently  and  by  itself  what,  to¬ 
gether  with  a  number  of  other  things,  he  ought 
to  have  shown.  Again,  a  man  begs  the  question 
if  he  begs  his  conclusion  piecemeal:  supposing 
e.g.  that  he  had  to  show  that  medicine  is  a  sci- 

1  Prior  Analytics,  n,  16. 


[/o]  ence  of  what  leads  to  health  and  to  dis¬ 
ease,  and  were  to  claim  first  the  one,  then  the 
other;  or,  fifthly,  if  he  were  to  beg  the  one  or 
the  other  of  a  pair  of  statements  that  necessarily 
involve  one  other;  e.g.  if  he  had  to  show  that 
the  diagonal  is  incommensurable  with  the  side, 
and  were  to  beg  that  the  side  is  incommensur¬ 
able  with  the  diagonal. 

The  ways  in  which  people  assume  contraries 
are  equal  in  number  to  those  in  which  they  beg 
their  original  question.  For  it  would  happen, 
[75]  firstly,  if  any  one  were  to  beg  an  opposite 
affirmation  and  negation;  secondly,  if  he  were 
to  beg  the  contrary  terms  of  an  antithesis,  e.g. 
that  the  same  thing  is  good  and  evil;  thirdly, 
suppose  any  one  were  to  claim  something  uni¬ 
versally  and  then  proceed  to  beg  its  contra¬ 
dictory  in  some  particular  case,  e.g.  if  having 
secured  that  the  knowledge  of  contraries  is 
one,  he  were  to  claim  that  the  knowledge  of 
what  makes  for  health  or  for  disease  is  differ- 
[20]  ent;  or,  fourthly,  suppose  him,  after 
postulating  the  latter  view,  to  try  to  secure  uni¬ 
versally  the  contradictory  statement.  Again, 
fifthly,  suppose  a  man  begs  the  contrary  of  the 
conclusion  which  necessarily  comes  about 
through  the  premisses  laid  down;  and  this 
would  happen  suppose,  even  without  begging 
the  opposites  in  so  many  words,  he  were  to 
beg  two  premisses  such  that  this  contradictory 
statement  that  is  opposite  to  the  first  conclusion 
will  follow  from  them.  The  securing  of  con¬ 
traries  differs  from  begging  the  original  ques- 
[25]  tion  in  this  way:  in  the  latter  case  the 
mistake  lies  in  regard  to  the  conclusion;  for  it 
is  by  a  glance  at  the  conclusion  that  we  tell  that 
the  original  question  has  been  begged:  whereas 
contrary  views  lie  in  the  premisses,  viz.  in  a 
certain  relation  which  they  bear  to  one  another. 

H 

The  best  way  to  secure  training  and  practice 
[30]  in  arguments  of  this  kind  is  in  the  first 
place  to  get  into  the  habit  of  converting  the 
arguments.  For  in  this  way  we  shall  be  better 
equipped  for  dealing  with  the  proposition 
stated,  and  after  a  few  attempts  we  shall  know 
several  arguments  by  heart.  For  by  ‘conversion’ 
of  an  argument  is  meant  the  taking  the  reverse 
of  the  conclusion  together  with  the  remaining 
propositions  asked  and  so  demolishing  one  of 
those  that  were  conceded:  for  it  follows  neces- 
[55]  sarily  that  if  the  conclusion  be  untrue, 
some  one  of  the  premisses  is  demolished,  seeing 
that,  given  all  the  premisses,  the  conclusion 
was  bound  to  follow.  Always,  in  dealing  with 


222 

any  proposition,  be  on  the  look-out  for  a  line  of 
163b  argument  both  pro  and  con:  and  on  dis¬ 
covering  it  at  once  set  about  looking  for  the 
solution  of  it:  for  in  this  way  you  will  soon 
find  that  you  have  trained  yourself  at  the  same 
time  in  both  asking  questions  and  answering 
them.  If  we  cannot  find  any  one  else  to  argue 
with,  we  should  argue  with  ourselves.  Select, 
moreover,  arguments  relating  to  the  same 
[5]  thesis  and  range  them  side  by  side:  for  this 
produces  a  plentiful  supply  of  arguments  for 
carrying  a  point  by  sheer  force,  and  in  refuta¬ 
tion  also  it  is  of  great  service,  whenever  one  is 
well  stocked  with  arguments  pro  and  con:  for 
then  you  find  yourself  on  your  guard  against 
contrary  statements  to  the  one  you  wish  to 
secure.  Moreover,  as  contributing  to  knowl¬ 
edge  and  to  philosophic  wisdom  the  power  of 
[/o]  discerning  and  holding  in  one  view  the 
results  of  either  of  two  hypotheses  is  no  mean 
instrument;  for  it  then  only  remains  to  make  a 
right  choice  of  one  of  them.  For  a  task  of  this 
kind  a  certain  natural  ability  is  required:  in 
fact  real  natural  ability  just  is  the  power  right¬ 
ly  to  choose  the  true  and  shun  the  false.  Men 
[75]  of  natural  ability  can  do  this;  for  by  a 
right  liking  or  disliking  for  whatever  is  pro¬ 
posed  to  them  they  rightly  select  what  is  best. 

It  is  best  to  know  by  heart  arguments  upon 
those  questions  which  are  of  most  frequent  oc¬ 
currence,  and  particularly  in  regard  to  those 
propositions  which  are  ultimate:  for  in  discus¬ 
sing  these  answerers  frequently  give  up  in 
despair.  Moreover,  get  a  good  stock  of  defini- 
[20]  tions:  and  have  those  of  familiar  and 
primary  ideas  at  your  fingers’  ends:  for  it  is 
through  these  that  reasonings  are  effected. 
You  should  try,  moreover,  to  master  the 
heads  under  which  other  arguments  mostly 
tend  to  fall.  For  just  as  in  geometry  it  is 
useful  to  be  practised  in  the  elements,  and  in 
arithmetic  to  have  the  multiplication  table  up 
[25]  to  ten  at  one’s  fingers’  ends — and  indeed 
it  makes  a  great  difference  in  one’s  knowledge 
of  the  multiples  of  other  numbers  too — like¬ 
wise  also  in  arguments  it  is  a  great  advantage 
to  be  well  up  in  regard  to  first  principles,  and 
to  have  a  thorough  knowledge  of  premisses  at 
the  tip  of  one’s  tongue.  For  just  as  in  a  person 
with  a  trained  memory,  a  memory  of  things 
[jo]  themselves  is  immediately  caused  by  the 
mere  mention  of  their  loci,  so  these  habits  too 
will  make  a  man  readier  in  reasoning,  because 
he  has  his  premisses  classified  before  his  mind’s 
eye,  each  under  its  number.  It  is  better  to  com¬ 
mit  to  memory  a  premiss  of  general  applica- 


164b 

tion  than  an  argument:  for  it  is  difficult  to  be 
even  moderately  ready  with  a  first  principle,  or 
hypothesis. 

Moreover,  you  should  get  into  the  habit  of 
[35]  turning  one  argument  into  several,  and 
conceal  your  procedure  as  darkly  as  you  can: 
this  kind  of  effect  is  best  produced  by  keeping 
as  far  as  possible  away  from  topics  akin  to  the 
subject  of  the  argument.  This  can  be  done  with 
arguments  that  are  entirely  universal,  e.g.  the 
164a  statement  that  ‘there  cannot  be  one 
knowledge  of  more  than  one  thing’:  for  that  is 
the  case  with  both  relative  terms  and  con¬ 
traries  and  co-ordinates. 

Records  of  discussions  should  be  made  in  a 
universal  form,  even  though  one  has  argued 
only  some  particular  case:  for  this  will  enable 
[5]  one  to  turn  a  single  rule  into  several.  A 
like  rule  applies  in  Rhetoric  as  well  to  enthy- 
memes.  For  yourself,  however,  you  should  as 
far  as  possible  avoid  universalizing  your  rea¬ 
sonings.  You  should,  moreover,  always  ex¬ 
amine  arguments  to  see  whether  they  rest  on 
principles  of  general  application:  for  all  par¬ 
ticular  arguments  really  reason  universally,  as 
well,  i.e.  a  particular  demonstration  always 
[/o]  contains  a  universal  demonstration,  be¬ 
cause  it  is  impossible  to  reason  at  all  without 
using  universal. 

You  should  display  your  training  in  induc¬ 
tive  reasoning  against  a  young  man,  in  deduc¬ 
tive  against  an  expert.  You  should  try,  more¬ 
over,  to  secure  from  those  skilled  in  deduction 
[75]  their  premisses,  from  inductive  reasoners 
their  parallel  cases;  for  this  is  the  thing  in 
which  they  are  respectively  trained.  In  general, 
too,  from  your  exercises  in  argumentation  you 
should  try  to  carry  away  either  a  syllogism  on 
some  subject  or  a  refutation  or  a  proposition  or 
an  objection,  or  whether  some  one  put  his 
question  properly  or  improperly  (whether  it 
was  yourself  or  some  one  else)  and  the  point 
164b  which  made  it  the  one  or  the  other.  For 
this  is  what  gives  one  ability,  and  the  whole 
object  of  training  is  to  acquire  ability,  espe¬ 
cially  in  regard  to  propositions  and  objections. 
For  it  is  the  skilled  propounder  and  objector 
who  is,  speaking  generally,  a  dialectician.  To 
formulate  a  proposition  is  to  form  a  number  of 
[5]  things  into  one — for  the  conclusion  to 
which  the  argument  leads  must  be  taken  gen¬ 
erally,  as  a  single  thing — whereas  to  formulate 
an  objection  is  to  make  one  thing  into  many; 
for  the  objector  either  distinguishes  or  demol¬ 
ishes,  partly  granting,  partly  denying  the  state¬ 
ments  proposed. 


TOPICS 


164b 

Do  not  argue  with  every  one,  nor  practise 
upon  the  man  in  the  street:  for  there  are  some 
people  with  whom  any  argument  is  bound  to 
[/o]  degenerate.  For  against  any  one  who  is 
ready  to  try  all  means  in  order  to  seem  not  to 
be  beaten,  it  is  indeed  fair  to  try  all  means  of 
bringing  about  one’s  conclusion:  but  it  is  not 
good  form.  Wherefore  the  best  rule  is,  not 
lightly  to  engage  with  casual  acquaintances,  or 
bad  argument  is  sure  to  result.  For  you  see 


223 

how  in  practising  together  people  cannot  re- 
[75]  frain  from  contentious  argument. 

It  is  best  also  to  have  ready-made  arguments 
relating  to  those  questions  in  which  a  very 
small  stock  will  furnish  us  with  arguments 
serviceable  on  a  very  large  number  of  occasions. 
These  are  those  that  are  universal,  and  those  in 
regard  to  which  it  is  rather  difficult  to  produce 
points  for  ourselves  from  matters  of  everyday 
experience. 


BOOK  VIII,  CHAPTER  14 


■ 

i<  bs^ 


. 


> 


CONTENTS:  ON  SOPHISTICAL  REFUTATIONS 


Introductory 

CHAP.  BERLIN  NOS. 

1.  General  distinction  of  genuine  164s  20 

and  merely  apparent  reasonings  and  refutations 

2.  Four  classes  of  arguments  in  dia-  165s  37 
logue  form:  Didactic  arguments,  Dialectical 
arguments,  Examination  arguments,  and  Con¬ 
tentious  arguments  (the  subject  of  the  pres¬ 
ent  Book) 

Perpetration  of  Fallacies 

3.  Aims  of  contentious  reasoning  165b  12 
fivefold: 

4.  A.  Refutation  165b  23 

(a)  by  fallacies  dependent  on  diction:  proof 
that  these  are  six  in  number  (i65b  24-30) :  due 
respectively  to 

(1)  Ambiguity  (i65b  30-i66a  6) 

(2)  Amphiboly  (i66a6-23) 

(3)  Ambiguous  combination  of  words  (i66a 

23-32) 

(4)  Ambiguous  division  of  words  (i66a33- 

8) 

(5)  Wrong  accent  (i66b  1-9) 

(6)  The  form  of  expression  used  (i66b  10-21) 

(b)  by  fallacies  not  dependent  on  diction: 
seven  in  number  (i66b2i~7):  depending  re¬ 
spectively  upon 

5.  (1)  Accident  (i66b  28-36)  i66b28 

(2)  The  use  of  words  without  or  with  quali¬ 
fication  (i66b  37~i67a  20) 

(3)  Ignoratio  elenchi  (i67a  21-35) 

(4)  Petitio  principii  (i67a  36-9) 

(5)  The  consequent  (i67b  1-20) 

(6)  False  cause  (i67b  21-38) 

(7)  Many  questions  (i67b  38-i68a  16) 

6.  Proof  that  all  the  above  can  be  ex-  i68a  17 
hibited  as  forms  of  a  single  fallacy,  viz.  igno¬ 
ratio  elenchi 

7.  Proof  that  all  the  above  arise  from  i69a  22 
confusion  and  failure  to  draw  proper  distinc¬ 
tions 

8.  (r)  by  arguments  (or  refutations)  16 9b  18 

which,  though  valid,  are  only  apparently  ap¬ 
propriate  to  the  subject  matter)  (Examination- 
arguments,  which  expose  ignorance  of  the  sub¬ 
ject  by  arguments  really  appropriate  to  it  (169b 
18-29) 

These  sophistical  refutations  can  all  be  ana¬ 


lysed  by  the  same  method  as  the  forms  of  ap¬ 
parent  proof  (169b  30-i70a  11) 

Sophistical  refutation  never  refutes  absolutely, 
but  always  relatively  (to  the  answerer)  (i70a 
12-19) 

9.  Refutations  being  infinite  in  num-  I70a  20 
ber,  an  exhaustive  study  of  all  is  impossible 
(170=*  20-34) 

Our  concern  is  not  with  those  that  rest  on 
principles  peculiar  to  any  particular  science 
(i7°a  34-8) 

The  object  of  dialectic  is  to  grasp  how  to  con¬ 
struct  and  to  solve  refutations  that  depend  on 
dialectic,  i.e.  on  common  principles  (i.e.  such 
refutations  as  are  either  really  dialectical  or  ap¬ 
parently  dialectical,  or  suited  to  an  examina¬ 
tion)  (i70a38-bn) 

10.  The  distinction  of  arguments  di-  170b  11 
rected  against  the  expression  )(  arguments 
directed  against  the  thought  expressed,  ex¬ 
posed  as  unreal 

Didactic)  (dialectical  argument  (i7ia3i-b2: 
cf.  i72a  15-21) 

11.  Examination-argument  and  dialec-  I7ib3 
tical  (171b  3-6,  i72a  21— b  1) 

Contentious  (sophistical)  reasoning  )  (  dialec¬ 
tical  (171b  6-7,  34~i72a  15) 

Two  types  of  contentious  reasoning  (171b  8- 


10, 11  ff.) 

12.  B.  Fallacy:  how  to  show  172b  9 

(172b  10-28) 

C.  Paradox:  how  to  entrap  into 
(172b  10-24,  29“i73a  30) 

13.  D.  Babbling:  how  to  produce  173s1 31 

14.  E .  Solecism:  how  to  produce  173b  16 

15.  How  to  arrange  arguments  most  174s  16 
effectively 


Solution  of  Fallacies 

16.  General  remarks:  uses  of  studying  175s  1 
solutions:  need  of  practice 

17.  Of  apparent  solutions  175s1  31 

18.  Of  genuine  solutions  176b  29 

19.  A.  Solution  of  Refutations  I77a  9 

(a)  dependent  on  diction 

(1)  Ambiguity 

(2)  Amphiboly 

20.  (3)  Ambiguous  division  i77a33 

(4)  Ambiguous  combination,  of  words 

21.  (5)  Wrong  accent  177h  35 


225 


226  CONTENTS 


22.  (6)  Like  expressions  for  different  178s  4 
things 

23.  General  rule  for  solution  of  falla-  179s  11 
cies  depending  on  diction 

(b)  not  dependent  on  diction 

24.  (1)  Accident  I79a26 

25.  (2)  The  use  of  words  with  or  i8oa23 

without  qualification 

26.  (3)  Ignoratio  elenchi  18 ia  1 

27.  (4)  Petitio  principii  18 ia  15 

28.  (5)  The  consequent  i8ia2i 

29.  (6)  Insertion  of  irrelevant  matter  i8ia3i 

(False  cause) 


30.  (7)  Many  questions  i8ia36 

31.  B.  Solution  of  arguments  tending  i8ib25 
to  Babbling 

32.  C.  Solution  of  arguments  tending  i82a6 
to  Solecism 

33.  Varying  degrees  of  difficulty  in  re-  i82b6 
spect  of  fallacies 

Epilogue 

34.  (1)  Our  programme  and  its  per-  183s1 27 
formance  (183s  27~b  15) 

(2)  History  of  dialectical  theory  compared 
with  that  of  rhetoric  ( 18315 15-end) 


ON  SOPHISTICAL  REFUTATIONS 


I 

164a  [20]  Let  us  now  discuss  sophistic  refuta¬ 
tions,  i.e.  what  appear  to  be  refutations  but 
are  really  fallacies  instead.  We  will  begin  in  the 
natural  order  with  the  first. 

That  some  reasonings  are  genuine,  while 
others  seem  to  be  so  but  are  not,  is  evident. 
This  happens  with  arguments,  as  also  else- 
[25]  where,  through  a  certain  likeness  between 
the  genuine  and  the  sham.  For  physically  some 
164b  people  are  in  a  vigorous  condition,  while 
others  merely  seem  to  be  so  by  blowing  and 
[20]  rigging  themselves  out  as  the  tribesmen 
do  their  victims  for  sacrifice;  and  some  people 
are  beautiful  thanks  to  their  beauty,  while 
others  seem  to  be  so,  by  dint  of  embellishing 
themselves.  So  it  is,  too,  with  inanimate  things; 
for  of  these,  too,  some  are  really  silver  and 
others  gold,  while  others  are  not  and  merely 
seem  to  be  such  to  our  sense;  e.g.  things  made 
of  litharge  and  tin  seem  to  be  of  silver,  while 
[25]  those  made  of  yellow  metal  look  golden. 
In  the  same  way  both  reasoning  and  refutation 
are  sometimes  genuine,  sometimes  not,  though 
inexperience  may  make  them  appear  so:  for 
inexperienced  people  obtain  only,  as  it  were,  a 
165a  distant  view  of  these  things.  For  reason¬ 
ing  rests  on  certain  statements  such  that  they 
involve  necessarily  the  assertion  of  something 
other  than  what  has  been  stated,  through 
what  has  been  stated:  refutation  is  reasoning 
involving  the  contradictory  of  the  given  con¬ 
clusion.  Now  some  of  them  do  not  really 
achieve  this,  though  they  seem  to  do  so  for  a 
number  of  reasons;  and  of  these  the  most  pro¬ 
lific  and  usual  domain  is  the  argument  that 
[5]  turns  upon  names  only.  It  is  impossible  in 
a  discussion  to  bring  in  the  actual  things  dis¬ 
cussed:  we  use  their  names  as  symbols  instead 
of  them;  and  therefore  we  suppose  that  what 
follows  in  the  names,  follows  in  the  things  as 
well,  just  as  people  who  calculate  suppose  in 
[zo]  regard  to  their  counters.  But  the  two  cases 
(names  and  things)  are  not  alike.  For  names 

Note:  The  bold  face  numbers  and  letters  are  approxi¬ 
mate  indications  of  the  pages  and  columns  of  the  stand¬ 
ard  Berlin  Greek  text;  the  bracketed  numbers,  of  the 
lines  in  the  Greek  text ;  they  are  here  assigned  as  they 
are  assigned  in  the  Oxford  translation. 


are  finite  and  so  is  the  sum-total  of  formulae, 
while  things  are  infinite  in  number.  Inevita¬ 
bly,  then,  the  same  formulae,  and  a  single 
name,  have  a  number  of  meanings.  According¬ 
ly  just  as,  in  counting,  those  who  are  not  clever 
in  manipulating  their  counters  are  taken  in  by 
[75]  the  experts,  in  the  same  way  in  arguments 
too  those  who  are  not  well  acquainted  with  the 
force  of  names  misreason  both  in  their  own 
discussions  and  when  they  listen  to  others.  For 
this  reason,  then,  and  for  others  to  be  men¬ 
tioned  later,  there  exists  both  reasoning  and 
refutation  that  is  apparent  but  not  real.  Now 
for  some  people  it  is  better  worth  while  to  seem 
[20]  to  be  wise,  than  to  be  wise  without  seem¬ 
ing  to  be  (for  the  art  of  the  sophist  is  the  sem¬ 
blance  of  wisdom  without  the  reality,  and  the 
sophist  is  one  who  makes  money  from  an  ap¬ 
parent  but  unreal  wisdom);  for  them,  then, 
it  is  clearly  essential  also  to  seem  to  accomplish 
the  task  of  a  wise  man  rather  than  to  accom¬ 
plish  it  without  seeming  to  do  so.  To  reduce  it 
to  a  single  point  of  contrast  it  is  the  business 
[25]  of  one  who  knows  a  thing,  himself  to 
avoid  fallacies  in  the  subjects  which  he  knows 
and  to  be  able  to  show  up  the  man  who  makes 
them;  and  of  these  accomplishments  the  one 
depends  on  the  faculty  to  render  an  answer, 
and  the  other  upon  the  securing  of  one.  Those, 
then,  who  would  be  sophists  are  bound  to 
study  the  class  of  arguments  aforesaid:  for  it  is 
[jo]  worth  their  while:  for  a  faculty  of  this 
kind  will  make  a  man  seem  to  be  wise,  and 
this  is  the  purpose  they  happen  to  have  in  view. 

Clearly,  then,  there  exists  a  class  of  argu¬ 
ments  of  this  kind,  and  it  is  at  this  kind  of 
ability  that  those  aim  whom  we  call  sophists. 
Let  us  now  go  on  to  discuss  how  many  kinds 
there  are  of  sophistical  arguments,  and  how 
[55]  many  in  number  are  the  elements  of 
which  this  faculty  is  composed,  and  how  many 
branches  there  happen  to  be  of  this  inquiry, 
and  the  other  factors  that  contribute  to  this  art. 

2 

Of  arguments  in  dialogue  form  there  are  four 
classes: 

Didactic,  Dialectical,  Examination-argu- 
165b  ments,  and  Contentious  arguments.  Di¬ 
dactic  arguments  are  those  that  reason  from 


227 


228 

the  principles  appropriate  to  each  subject  and 
not  from  the  opinions  held  by  the  answerer 
(for  the  learner  should  take  things  on  trust): 
dialectical  arguments  are  those  that  reason 
from  premisses  generally  accepted,  to  the  con¬ 
tradictory  of  a  given  thesis:  examination-argu- 
[5]  ments  are  those  that  reason  from  premisses 
which  are  accepted  by  the  answerer  and  which 
any  one  who  pretends  to  possess  knowledge  of 
the  subject  is  bound  to  know — in  what  man¬ 
ner,  has  been  defined  in  another  treatise:1  con¬ 
tentious  arguments  are  those  that  reason  or  ap¬ 
pear  to  reason  to  a  conclusion  from  premisses 
that  appear  to  be  generally  accepted  but  are 
not  so.  The  subject,  then,  of  demonstrative  ar¬ 
guments  has  been  discussed  in  the  Analytics, 
[/o]  while  that  of  dialectic  arguments  and  ex¬ 
amination-arguments  has  been  discussed  else¬ 
where:2  let  us  now  proceed  to  speak  of  the 
arguments  used  in  competitions  and  contests. 

3 

First  we  must  grasp  the  number  of  aims  en¬ 
tertained  by  those  who  argue  as  competitors 
and  rivals  to  the  death.  These  are  five  in  num¬ 
ber,  refutation,  fallacy,  paradox,  solecism,  and 
[75]  fifthly  to  reduce  the  opponent  in  the  dis¬ 
cussion  to  babbling — i.e.  to  constrain  him  to 
repeat  himself  a  number  of  times:  or  it  is  to 
produce  the  appearance  of  each  of  these  things 
without  the  reality.  For  they  choose  if  possible 
plainly  to  refute  the  other  party,  or  as  the  sec¬ 
ond  best  to  show  that  he  is  committing  some 
fallacy,  or  as  a  third  best  to  lead  him  into  para¬ 
dox,  or  fourthly  to  reduce  him  to  solecism,  i.e. 
[20]  to  make  the  answerer,  in  consequence  of 
the  argument,  to  use  an  ungrammatical  ex¬ 
pression;  or,  as  a  last  resort,  to  make  him  re¬ 
peat  himself. 

4 

There  are  two  styles  of  refutation:  for  some 
depend  on  the  language  used,  while  some  are 
independent  of  language.  Those  ways  of  pro- 
[25]  ducing  the  false  appearance  of  an  argu¬ 
ment  which  depend  on  language  are  six  in 
number:  they  are  ambiguity,  amphiboly,  com¬ 
bination,  division  of  words,  accent,  form  of  ex¬ 
pression.  Of  this  we  may  assure  ourselves  both 
by  induction,  and  by  syllogistic  proof  based  on 
this — and  it  may  be  on  other  assumptions  as 
well — that  this  is  the  number  of  ways  in  which 
we  might  fail  to  mean  the  same  thing  by  the 
same  names  or  expressions.  Arguments  such  as 
[30]  the  following  depend  upon  ambiguity. 

1  Topics ,  viii.  5.  2  Topics ,  i-viii. 


166* 

‘Those  learn  who  know:  for  it  is  those  who 
know  their  letters  who  learn  the  letters  dic¬ 
tated  to  them’.  For  to  ‘learn’  is  ambiguous;  it 
signifies  both  ‘to  understand’  by  the  use  of 
knowledge,  and  also  ‘to  acquire  knowledge’. 
Again,  ‘Evils  are  good:  for  what  needs  to  be  is 
[35]  g°°d>  and  evils  must  needs  be’.  For  ‘what 
needs  to  be’  has  a  double  meaning:  it  means 
what  is  inevitable,  as  often  is  the  case  with 
evils,  too  (for  evil  of  some  kind  is  inevitable), 
while  on  the  other  hand  we  say  of  good  things 
as  well  that  they  ‘need  to  be’.  Moreover,  ‘The 
same  man  is  both  seated  and  standing  and  he 
is  both  sick  and  in  health:  for  it  is  he  who 
stood  up  who  is  standing,  and  he  who  is  re- 
166*  covering  who  is  in  health:  but  it  is  the 
seated  man  who  stood  up,  and  the  sick  man 
who  was  recovering’.  For  ‘The  sick  man  does 
so  and  so’,  or  ‘has  so  and  so  done  to  him’  is  not 
single  in  meaning:  sometimes  it  means  ‘the 
man  who  is  sick  or  is  seated  now’,  sometimes 
‘the  man  who  was  sick  formerly’.  Of  course, 
the  man  who  was  recovering  was  the  sick  man, 
[5]  who  really  was  sick  at  the  time:  but  the 
man  who  is  in  health  is  not  sick  at  the  same 
time:  he  is  ‘the  sick  man’  in  the  sense  not  that 
he  is  sick  now,  but  that  he  was  sick  formerly. 
Examples  such  as  the  following  depend  upon 
amphiboly:  ‘I  wish  that  you  the  enemy  may 
capture’.  Also  the  thesis,  ‘There  must  be 
knowledge  of  what  one  knows’:  for  it  is  possi¬ 
ble  by  this  phrase  to  mean  that  knowledge  be¬ 
longs  to  both  the  knower  and  the  known.  Also, 
‘There  must  be  sight  of  what  one  sees:  one 
[/o]  sees  the  pillar:  ergo  the  pillar  has  sight’. 
Also,  ‘What  you  profess  to-be,  that  you  profess- 
to-be:  you  profess  a  stone  to-be:  ergo  you  pro- 
fess-to-be  a  stone’.  Also,  ‘Speaking  of  the  silent 
is  possible’:  for  ‘speaking  of  the  silent’  also  has 
a  double  meaning:  it  may  mean  that  the 
speaker  is  silent  or  that  the  things  of  which  he 
speaks  are  so.  There  are  three  varieties  of  these 
[75]  ambiguities  and  amphibolies:  (1)  When 
either  the  expression  or  the  name  has  strictly 
more  than  one  meaning,  e.g.  aeros  and  the 
‘dog’;  (2)  when  by  custom  we  use  them  so; 
(3)  when  words  that  have  a  simple  sense  taken 
alone  have  more  than  one  meaning  in  com¬ 
bination;  e.g.  ‘knowing  letters’.  For  each  word, 
[20]  both  ‘knowing’  and  ‘letters’,  possibly  has 
a  single  meaning:  but  both  together  have  more 
than  one — either  that  the  letters  themselves 
have  knowledge  or  that  someone  else  has  it  of 
them. 

Amphiboly  and  ambiguity,  then,  depend  on 
these  modes  of  speech.  Upon  the  combination 


ON  SOPHISTICAL  REFUTATIONS 


16? 

of  words  there  depend  instances  such  as  the 
following:  ‘A  man  can  walk  while  sitting,  and 
can  write  while  not  writing’.  For  the  mean¬ 
ly]  hig  is  not  the  same  if  one  divides  the 
words  and  if  one  combines  them  in  saying  that 
‘it  is  possible  to  walk-while-sitting’  [and  write 
while  not  writing].  The  same  applies  to  the 
latter  phrase,  too,  if  one  combines  the  words 
‘to  write-while-not-writing’:  for  then  it  means 
that  he  has  the  power  to  write  and  not  to  write 
at  once;  whereas  if  one  does  not  combine 
them,  it  means  that  when  he  is  not  writing  he 
[jo]  has  the  power  to  write.  Also,  ‘He  knows 
now  if  he  has  learnt  his  letters’.  Moreover, 
there  is  the  saying  that  ‘One  single  thing  if  you 
can  carry  a  crowd  you  can  carry  too’. 

Upon  division  depend  the  propositions  that 
5  is  2  and  3,  and  even  and  odd,  and  that  the 
greater  is  equal:  for  it  is  that  amount  and  more 
[35]  besides.  For  the  same  phrase  would  not 
be  thought  always  to  have  the  same  meaning 
when  divided  and  when  combined,  e.g.  ‘I  made 
thee  a  slave  once  a  free  man’,  and  ‘God-like 
Achilles  left  fifty  a  hundred  men’. 

An  argument  depending  upon  accent  it  is 
166b  not  easy  to  construct  in  unwritten  dis¬ 
cussion;  in  written  discussions  and  in  poetry 
it  is  easier.  Thus  (e.g.)  some  people  emend 
Homer  against  those  who  criticize  as  unnatural 
his  expression  rd  /jl&  ov  KaraTTvSerai  o/x/Spcp.1 
For  they  solve  the  difficulty  by  a  change  of  ac- 

[5]  cent,  pronouncing  the  ou  with  an  acuter  ac¬ 
cent.  Also,  in  the  passage  about  Agamem¬ 
non’s  dream,  they  say  that  Zeus  did  not  him¬ 
self  say  ‘We  grant  him  the  fulfilment  of  his 
prayer’,2  but  that  he  bade  the  dream  grant  it. 
Instances  such  as  these,  then,  turn  upon  the 
accentuation. 

[10]  Others  come  about  owing  to  the  form  of 
expression  used,  when  what  is  really  different 
is  expressed  in  the  same  form,  e.g.  a  masculine 
thing  by  a  feminine  termination,  or  a  feminine 
thing  by  a  masculine,  or  a  neuter  by  either  a 
masculine  or  a  feminine;  or,  again,  when  a 
quality  is  expressed  by  a  termination  proper  to 
quantity  or  vice  versa,  or  what  is  active  by  a 
passive  word,  or  a  state  by  an  active  word,  and 
so  forth  with  the  other  divisions  previously3 
[75]  laid  down.  For  it  is  possible  to  use  an  ex¬ 
pression  to  denote  what  does  not  belong  to  the 
class  of  actions  at  all  as  though  it  did  so  belong. 
Thus  (e.g.)  ‘flourishing’  is  a  word  which  in 
the  form  of  its  expression  is  like  ‘cutting’  or 
‘building’:  yet  the  one  denotes  a  certain  qual- 

1  Iliad ,  xxiii.  328.  2  Ibid.,  xxi.  297. 

3  Topics ,  1.  9. 


229 

ity — i.e.  a  certain  condition — while  the  other 
denotes  a  certain  action.  In  the  same  manner 
also  in  the  other  instances. 

[20]  Refutations,  then,  that  depend  upon  lan¬ 
guage  are  drawn  from  these  common-place 
rules.  Of  fallacies,  on  the  other  hand,  that  are 
independent  of  language  there  are  seven  kinds: 

(1)  that  which  depends  upon  Accident: 

(2)  the  use  of  an  expression  absolutely  or  not 
absolutely  but  with  some  qualification  of  re¬ 
spect  or  place,  or  time,  or  relation: 

(3)  that  which  depends  upon  ignorance  of 
what  ‘refutation’  is: 

[25]  (4)  that  which  depends  upon  the  conse¬ 
quent: 

(5)  that  which  depends  upon  assuming  the 
original  conclusion: 

(6)  stating  as  cause  what  is  not  the  cause: 

(7)  the  making  of  more  than  one  question 
into  one. 

5 

Fallacies,  then,  that  depend  on  Accident  occur 
whenever  any  attribute  is  claimed  to  belong  in 
[jo]  a  like  manner  to  a  thing  and  to  its  acci¬ 
dent.  For  since  the  same  thing  has  many  acci¬ 
dents  there  is  no  necessity  that  all  the  same 
attributes  should  belong  to  all  of  a  thing’s 
predicates  and  to  their  subject  as  well.  Thus 
(e.g.),  ‘If  Coriscus  be  different  from  “man”,  he 
is  different  from  himself:  for  he  is  a  man’:  or 
‘If  he  be  different  from  Socrates,  and  Socrates 
[35]  be  a  man,  then’,  they  say,  ‘he  has  ad¬ 
mitted  that  Coriscus  is  different  from  a  man, 
because  it  so  happens  ( accidit )  that  the  person 
from  whom  he  said  that  he  (Coriscus)  is  dif¬ 
ferent  is  a  man’. 

Those  that  depend  on  whether  an  expression 
is  used  absolutely  or  in  a  certain  respect  and 
not  strictly,  occur  whenever  an  expression  used 
in  a  particular  sense  is  taken  as  though  it  were 
167a  used  absolutely,  e.g.  in  the  argument  ‘If 
what  is  not  is  the  object  of  an  opinion,  then 
what  is  not  is’:  for  it  is  not  the  same  thing  ‘to 
be  x  and  ‘to  be’  absolutely.  Or  again,  ‘What  is, 
is  not,  if  it  is  not  a  particular  kind  of  being, 
e.g.  if  it  is  not  a  man.’  For  it  is  not  the  same 
thing  ‘not  to  be  *’  and  ‘not  to  be’  at  all:  it 
looks  as  if  it  were,  because  of  the  closeness  of 
[5]  the  expression,  i.e.  because  ‘to  be  x  is  but 
little  different  from  ‘to  be’,  and  ‘not  to  be  x 
from  ‘not  to  be’.  Likewise  also  with  any  argu¬ 
ment  that  turns  upon  the  point  whether  an  ex¬ 
pression  is  used  in  a  certain  respect  or  used 
absolutely.  Thus  e.g.  ‘Suppose  an  Indian  to  be 
black  all  over,  but  white  in  respect  of  his  teeth; 


CHAPTERS  2-5 


230  ON  SOPHISTICAL  REFUTATIONS  167b 


then  he  is  both  white  and  not  white.'  Or  if 
both  characters  belong  in  a  particular  respect, 
[/o]  then,  they  say,  ‘contrary  attributes  belong 
at  the  same  time’.  This  kind  of  thing  is  in 
some  cases  easily  seen  by  any  one,  e.g.  suppose 
a  man  were  to  secure  the  statement  that  the 
Ethiopian  is  black,  and  were  then  to  ask 
whether  he  is  white  in  respect  of  his  teeth;  and 
then,  if  he  be  white  in  that  respect,  were  to 
suppose  at  the  conclusion  of  his  questions  that 
therefore  he  had  proved  dialectically  that  he 
was  both  white  and  not  white.  But  in  some 
cases  it  often  passes  undetected,  viz.  in  all 
cases  where,  whenever  a  statement  is  made  of 
[75]  something  in  a  certain  respect,  it  would 
he  generally  thought  that  the  absolute  state¬ 
ment  follows  as  well;  and  also  in  all  cases  where 
it  is  not  easy  to  see  which  of  the  attributes 
ought  to  be  rendered  strictly.  A  situation  of 
this  kind  arises,  where  both  the  opposite  attri¬ 
butes  belong  alike:  for  then  there  is  general 
support  for  the  view  that  one  must  agree  abso¬ 
lutely  to  the  assertion  of  both,  or  of  neither: 
e.g.  if  a  thing  is  half  white  and  half  black,  is 
[20]  it  white  or  black? 

Other  fallacies  occur  because  the  terms 
‘proof’  or  ‘refutation’  have  not  been  defined, 
and  because  something  is  left  out  in  their  defi¬ 
nition.  For  to  refute  is  to  contradict  one  and 
the  same  attribute — not  merely  the  name,  but 
the  reality — and  a  name  that  is  not  merely 
synonymous  but  the  same  name — and  to  con- 
[25]  fute  it  from  the  propositions  granted, 
necessarily,  without  including  in  the  reckon¬ 
ing  the  original  point  to  be  proved,  in  the  same 
respect  and  relation  and  manner  and  time  in 
which  it  was  asserted.  A  ‘false  assertion’  about 
anything  has  to  be  defined  in  the  same  way. 
Some  people,  however,  omit  some  one  of  the 
said  conditions  and  give  a  merely  apparent 
refutation,  showing  (e.g.)  that  the  same  thing 
is  both  double  and  not  double:  for  two  is  dou- 
[30]  ble  of  one,  but  not  double  of  three.  Or,  it 
may  be,  they  show  that  it  is  both  double  and 
not  double  of  the  same  thing,  but  not  that  it  is 
so  in  the  same  respect:  for  it  is  double  in 
length  but  not  double  in  breadth.  Or,  it 
may  be,  they  show  it  to  be  both  double  and 
not  double  of  the  same  thing  and  in  the  same 
respect  and  manner,  but  not  that  it  is  so  at 
the  same  time:  and  therefore  their  refuta¬ 
tion  is  merely  apparent.  One  might,  with 
[35)  some  violence,  bring  this  fallacy  into  the 
group  of  fallacies  dependent  on  language  as 
well. 

Those  that  depend  on  the  assumption  of  the 


original  point  to  be  proved,  occur  in  the  same 
way,  and  in  as  many  ways,  as  it  is  possible  to 
beg  the  original  point;  they  appear  to  refute 
because  men  lack  the  power  to  keep  their  eyes 
at  once  upon  what  is  the  same  and  what  is  dif¬ 
ferent. 

167b  The  refutation  which  depends  upon  the 
consequent  arises  because  people  suppose  that 
the  relation  of  consequence  is  convertible.  For 
whenever,  suppose  A  is,  B  necessarily  is,  they 
then  suppose  also  that  if  B  is,  A  necessarily  is. 
[5]  This  is  also  the  source  of  the  deceptions 
that  attend  opinions  based  on  sense-perception. 
For  people  often  suppose  bile  to  be  honey  be¬ 
cause  honey  is  attended  by  a  yellow  colour: 
also,  since  after  rain  the  ground  is  wet  in  con¬ 
sequence,  we  suppose  that  if  the  ground  is  wet, 
it  has  been  raining;  whereas  that  does  not  nec¬ 
essarily  follow.  In  rhetoric  proofs  from  signs 
are  based  on  consequences.  For  when  rhetori- 
[/o]  cians  wish  to  show  that  a  man  is  an 
adulterer,  they  take  hold  of  some  consequence 
of  an  adulterous  life,  viz.  that  the  man  is 
smartly  dressed,  or  that  he  is  observed  to  wan¬ 
der  about  at  night.  There  are,  however,  many 
people  of  whom  these  things  are  true,  while 
the  charge  in  question  is  untrue.  It  happens 
like  this  also  in  real  reasoning;  e.g.  Melissus’ 
argument,  that  the  universe  is  eternal,  assumes 
that  the  universe  has  not  come  to  be  (for  from 
[75]  what  is  not  nothing  could  possibly  come 
to  be)  and  that  what  has  come  to  be  has  done 
so  from  a  first  beginning.  If,  therefore,  the  uni¬ 
verse  has  not  come  to  be,  it  has  no  first  begin¬ 
ning,  and  is  therefore  eternal.  But  this  does 
not  necessarily  follow:  for  even  if  what  has 
come  to  be  always  has  a  first  beginning,  it  does 
not  also  follow  that  what  has  a  first  beginning 
has  come  to  be;  any  more  than  it  follows  that  if 
[20]  a  man  in  a  fever  be  hot,  a  man  who  is  hot 
must  be  in  a  fever. 

The  refutation  which  depends  upon  treating 
as  cause  what  is  not  a  cause,  occurs  whenever 
what  is  not  a  cause  is  inserted  in  the  argument, 
as  though  the  refutation  depended  upon  it. 
This  kind  of  thing  happens  in  arguments  that 
reason  ad  impossibile:  for  in  these  we  are  bound 
to  demolish  one  of  the  premisses.  If,  then,  the 
false  cause  be  reckoned  in  among  the  ques- 
[25]  tions  that  are  necessary  to  establish  the  re¬ 
sulting  impossibility,  it  will  often  be  thought 
that  the  refutation  depends  upon  it,  e.g.  in  the 
proof  that  the  ‘soul’  and  ‘life’  are  not  the  same: 
for  if  coming-to-be  be  contrary  to  perishing, 
then  a  particular  form  of  perishing  will  have  a 
particular  form  of  coming-to-be  as  its  contrary: 


I68b  CHAPTERS  5-6  231 


now  death  is  a  particular  form  of  perishing  and 
is  contrary  to  life:  life,  therefore,  is  a  coming- 
to-be,  and  to  live  is  to  come-to-be.  But  this  is 
[30]  impossible:  accordingly,  the  ‘soul’  and 
‘life’  are  not  the  same.  Now  this  is  not  proved: 
for  the  impossibility  results  all  the  same,  even 
if  one  does  not  say  that  life  is  the  same  as  the 
soul,  but  merely  says  that  life  is  contrary  to 
death,  which  is  a  form  of  perishing,  and  that 
perishing  has  ‘coming-to-be’  as  its  contrary.  Ar¬ 
guments  of  that  kind,  then,  though  not  incon¬ 
clusive  absolutely,  are  inconclusive  in  relation 
[35]  t0  proposed  conclusion.  Also  even  the 
questioners  themselves  often  fail  quite  as  much 
to  see  a  point  of  that  kind. 

Such,  then,  are  the  arguments  that  depend 
upon  the  consequent  and  upon  false  cause. 
Those  that  depend  upon  the  making  of  two 
questions  into  one  occur  whenever  the  plural¬ 
ity  is  undetected  and  a  single  answer  is  re¬ 
turned  as  if  to  a  single  question.  Now,  in  some 
168a  cases,  it  is  easy  to  see  that  there  is  more 
than  one,  and  that  an  answer  is  not  to  be  given, 
e.g.  ‘Does  the  earth  consist  of  sea,  or  the  sky?’ 
But  in  some  cases  it  is  less  easy,  and  then  peo¬ 
ple  treat  the  question  as  one,  and  either  con¬ 
fess  their  defeat  by  failing  to  answer  the  ques¬ 
tion,  or  are  exposed  to  an  apparent  refutation. 
[5]  Thus  ‘Is  A  and  is  B  a  man?’  ‘Yes.’  ‘Then 
if  any  one  hits  A  and  B,  he  will  strike  a  man’ 
(singular),  ‘not  men’  (plural).  Or  again,  where 
part  is  good  and  part  bad,  ‘is  the  whole  good 
or  bad?’  For  whichever  he  says,  it  is  possible 
that  he  might  be  thought  to  expose  himself  to 
[/o]  an  apparent  refutation  or  to  make  an  ap¬ 
parently  false  statement:  for  to  say  that  some¬ 
thing  is  good  which  is  not  good,  or  not  good 
which  is  good,  is  to  make  a  false  statement. 
Sometimes,  however,  additional  premisses  may 
actually  give  rise  to  a  genuine  refutation;  e.g. 
suppose  a  man  were  to  grant  that  the  descrip¬ 
tions  ‘white’  and  ‘naked’  and  ‘blind’  apply  to 
one  thing  and  to  a  number  of  things  in  a  like 
sense.  For  if  ‘blind’  describes  a  thing  that  can¬ 
not  see  though  nature  designed  it  to  see,  it  will 
also  describe  things  that  cannot  see  though  na- 
[75]  ture  designed  them  to  do  so.  Whenever, 
then,  one  thing  can  see  while  another  cannot, 
they  will  either  both  be  able  to  see  or  else  both 
be  blind;  which  is  impossible. 

6 

The  right  way,  then,  is  either  to  divide  ap¬ 
parent  proofs  and  refutations  as  above,  or  else 
to  refer  them  all  to  ignorance  of  what  ‘refuta¬ 
tion’  is,  and  make  that  our  starting-point:  for 


it  is  possible  to  analyse  all  the  aforesaid  modes 
[20]  of  fallacy  into  breaches  of  the  definition 
of  a  refutation.  In  the  first  place,  we  may  see  if 
they  are  inconclusive:  for  the  conclusion  ought 
to  result  from  the  premisses  laid  down,  so  as  to 
compel  us  necessarily  to  state  it  and  not  merely 
to  seem  to  compel  us.  Next  we  should  also  take 
the  definition  bit  by  bit,  and  try  the  fallacy 
thereby.  For  of  the  fallacies  that  consist  in  lan¬ 
guage,  some  depend  upon  a  double  meaning, 
e.g.  ambiguity  of  words  and  of  phrases,  and  the 
[25]  fallacy  of  like  verbal  forms  (for  we  habit¬ 
ually  speak  of  everything  as  though  it  were  a 
particular  substance) — while  fallacies  of  com¬ 
bination  and  division  and  accent  arise  because 
the  phrase  in  question  or  the  term  as  altered  is 
not  the  same  as  was  intended.  Even  this,  how¬ 
ever,  should  be  the  same,  just  as  the  thing  sig¬ 
nified  should  be  as  well,  if  a  refutation  or  proof 
is  to  be  effected;  e.g.  if  the  point  concerns  a 
[30]  doublet,  then  you  should  draw  the  con¬ 
clusion  of  a  ‘doublet’,  not  of  a  ‘cloak’.  For  the 
former  conclusion  also  would  be  true,  but  it 
has  not  been  proved;  we  need  a  further  ques¬ 
tion  to  show  that  ‘doublet’  means  the  same 
thing,  in  order  to  satisfy  any  one  who  asks 
why  you  think  your  point  proved. 

Fallacies  that  depend  on  Accident  are  clear 
cases  of  ignoratio  elenchi  when  once  ‘proof’ 
has  been  defined.  For  the  same  definition  ought 
[35]  to  hold  good  of  ‘refutation’  too,  except 
that  a  mention  of  ‘the  contradictory’  is  here 
added:  for  a  refutation  is  a  proof  of  the  contra¬ 
dictory.  If,  then,  there  is  no  proof  as  regards  an 
accident  of  anything,  there  is  no  refutation.  For 
supposing,  when  A  and  B  are,  C  must  necessa¬ 
rily  be,  and  C  is  white,  there  is  no  necessity  for 
[40]  it  to  be  white  on  account  of  the  syllogism. 
So,  if  the  triangle  has  its  angles  equal  to  two 
168b  right-angles,  and  it  happens  to  be  a  fig¬ 
ure,  or  the  simplest  element  or  starting  point, 
it  is  not  because  it  is  a  figure  or  a  starting  point 
or  simplest  element  that  it  has  this  character. 
For  the  demonstration  proves  the  point  about 
it  not  qua  figure  or  qua  simplest  element,  but 
qua  triangle.  Likewise  also  in  other  cases.  If, 
then,  refutation  is  a  proof,  an  argument  which 
[5]  argued  per  accidens  could  not  be  a  refuta¬ 
tion.  It  is,  however,  just  in  this  that  the  experts 
and  men  of  science  generally  suffer  refutation 
at  the  hand  of  the  unscientific:  for  the  latter 
meet  the  scientists  with  reasonings  constituted 
per  accidens;  and  the  scientists  for  lack  of  the 
power  to  draw  distinctions  either  say  ‘Yes’  to 
their  questions,  or  else  people  suppose  them  to 
[/o]  have  said  ‘Yes’,  although  they  have  not. 


23^ 

Those  that  depend  upon  whether  something 
is  said  in  a  certain  respect  only  or  said  abso¬ 
lutely,  are  clear  cases  of  ignoratio  elenchi  be¬ 
cause  the  affirmation  and  the  denial  are  not 
concerned  with  the  same  point.  For  of  ‘white 
in  a  certain  respect’  the  negation  is  ‘not  white 
in  a  certain  respect’,  while  of  ‘white  absolutely’ 
it  is  ‘not  white,  absolutely’.  If,  then,  a  man 
treats  the  admission  that  a  thing  is  ‘white  in  a 
certain  respect’  as  though  it  were  said  to  be 
[75]  white  absolutely,  he  does  not  effect  a  refu¬ 
tation,  but  merely  appears  to  do  so  owing  to 
ignorance  of  what  refutation  is. 

The  clearest  cases  of  all,  however,  are  those 
that  were  previously  described1  as  depending 
upon  the  definition  of  a  ‘refutation’:  and  this 
is  also  why  they  were  called  by  that  name.  For 
the  appearance  of  a  refutation  is  produced  be¬ 
cause  of  the  omission  in  the  definition,  and  if 
[20]  we  divide  fallacies  in  the  above  manner, 
we  ought  to  set  ‘Defective  definition’  as  a  com¬ 
mon  mark  upon  them  all. 

Those  that  depend  upon  the  assumption  of 
the  original  point  and  upon  stating  as  the 
cause  what  is  not  the  cause,  are  clearly  shown 
to  be  cases  of  ignoratio  elenchi  through  the 
definition  thereof.  For  the  conclusion  ought  to 
come  about  ‘because  these  things  are  so’,  and 
this  does  not  happen  where  the  premisses  are 
[25]  not  causes  of  it:  and  again  it  should  come 
about  without  taking  into  account  the  original 
point,  and  this  is  not  the  case  with  those  argu¬ 
ments  which  depend  upon  begging  the  origi¬ 
nal  point. 

Those  that  depend  upon  the  consequent  are 
a  branch  of  Accident:  for  the  consequent  is  an 
accident,  only  it  differs  from  the  accident  in 
this,  that  you  may  secure  an  admission  of  the 
accident  in  the  case  of  one  thing  only  (e.g.  the 
[jo]  identity  of  a  yellow  thing  and  honey  and 
of  a  white  thing  and  swan),  whereas  the  con¬ 
sequent  always  involves  more  than  one  thing: 
for  we  claim  that  things  that  are  the  same  as 
one  and  the  same  thing  are  also  the  same  as  one 
another,  and  this  is  the  ground  of  a  refutation 
dependent  on  the  consequent.  It  is,  however, 
not  always  true,  e.g.  suppose  that  A  and  B  are 
‘the  same’  as  C  per  accidens;  for  both  ‘snow’ 
and  the  ‘swan’  are  the  same  as  something 
[55]  ‘white’.  Or  again,  as  in  Melissus’  argument, 
a  man  assumes  that  to  ‘have  been  generated’ 
and  to  ‘have  a  beginning’  are  the  same  thing,  or 
to  ‘become  equal’  and  to  ‘assume  the  same  mag¬ 
nitude’.  For  because  what  has  been  generated 
has  a  beginning,  he  claims  also  that  what  has  a 

1 167s  21-35. 


169a 

beginning  has  been  generated,  and  argues  as 
though  both  what  has  been  generated  and  what 
is  finite  were  the  same  because  each  has  a  be- 
[40]  ginning.  Likewise  also  in  the  case  of 
things  that  are  made  equal  he  assumes  that  if 
169*  things  that  assume  one  and  the  same 
magnitude  become  equal,  then  also  things  that 
become  equal  assume  one  magnitude:  i.e.  he 
assumes  the  consequent.  Inasmuch,  then,  as  a 
refutation  depending  on  accident  consists  in 
ignorance  of  what  a  refutation  is,  clearly  so 
also  does  a  refutation  depending  on  the  conse- 
[5]  quent.  We  shall  have  further  to  examine 
this  in  another  way  as  well.2 

Those  fallacies  that  depend  upon  the  mak¬ 
ing  of  several  questions  into  one  consist  in  our 
failure  to  dissect  the  definition  of  ‘proposition’. 
For  a  proposition  is  a  single  statement  about  a 
single  thing.  For  the  same  definition  applies  to 
‘one  single  thing  only’  and  to  the  ‘thing’,  sim¬ 
ply,  e.g.  to  ‘man’  and  to  ‘one  single  man  only’; 
[/o]  and  likewise  also  in  other  cases.  If,  then, 
a  ‘single  proposition’  be  one  which  claims  a 
single  thing  of  a  single  thing,  a  ‘proposition’, 
simply,  will  also  be  the  putting  of  a  question  of 
that  kind.  Now  since  a  proof  starts  from  prop¬ 
ositions  and  refutation  is  a  proof,  refutation, 
too,  will  start  from  propositions.  If,  then,  a 
proposition  is  a  single  statement  about  a  single 
thing,  it  is  obvious  that  this  fallacy  too  consists 
in  ignorance  of  what  a  refutation  is:  for  in  it 
[/5J  what  is  not  a  proposition  appears  to  be 
one.  If,  then,  the  answerer  has  returned  an  an¬ 
swer  as  though  to  a  single  question,  there  will 
be  a  refutation;  while  if  he  has  returned  one 
not  really  but  apparently,  there  will  be  an  ap¬ 
parent  refutation  of  his  thesis.  All  the  types  of 
fallacy,  then,  fall  under  ignorance  of  what  a 
refutation  is,  some  of  them  because  the  contra- 
[20]  diction,  which  is  the  distinctive  mark  of 
a  refutation,  is  merely  apparent,  and  the  rest 
failing  to  conform  to  the  definition  of  a  proof. 

7 

The  deception  comes  about  in  the  case  of  ar¬ 
guments  that  depend  on  ambiguity  of  words 
and  of  phrases  because  we  are  unable  to  divide 
the  ambiguous  term  (for  some  terms  it  is  not 
easy  to  divide,  e.g.  ‘unity’,  ‘being’,  and  ‘same- 
[25]  ness’),  while  in  those  that  depend  on  com¬ 
bination  and  division,  it  is  because  we  suppose 
that  it  makes  no  difference  whether  the  phrase 
be  combined  or  divided,  as  is  indeed  the  case 
with  most  phrases.  Likewise  also  with  those 
that  depend  on  accent:  for  the  lowering  or 
2  Chapters  24, 28. 


ON  SOPHISTICAL  REFUTATIONS 


170*  CHAPTERS  6-8  233 


raising  of  the  voice  upon  a  phrase  is  thought 
not  to  alter  its  meaning — with  any  phrase,  or 
not  with  many.  With  those  that  depend  on  the 
[30]  form  of  expression  it  is  because  of  the 
likeness  of  expression.  For  it  is  hard  to  distin¬ 
guish  what  kind  of  things  are  signified  by  the 
same  and  what  by  different  kinds  of  expres¬ 
sion:  for  a  man  who  can  do  this  is  practically 
next  door  to  the  understanding  of  the  truth.  A 
special  reason  why  a  man  is  liable  to  be  hur¬ 
ried  into  assent  to  the  fallacy  is  that  we  suppose 
every  predicate  of  everything  to  be  an  individ¬ 
ual  thing,  and  we  understand  it  as  being  one 
with  the  thing:  and  we  therefore  treat  it  as  a 
substance:  for  it  is  to  that  which  is  one  with  a 
[35]  thing  or  substance,  as  also  to  substance  it¬ 
self,  that  ‘individuality’  and  ‘being’  are  deemed 
to  belong  in  the  fullest  sense.  For  this  reason, 
too,  this  type  of  fallacy  is  to  be  ranked  among 
those  that  depend  on  language;  in  the  first 
place,  because  the  deception  is  effected  the 
more  readily  when  we  are  inquiring  into  a 
problem  in  company  with  others  than  when  we 
do  so  by  ourselves  (for  an  inquiry  with  anoth¬ 
er  person  is  carried  on  by  means  of  speech, 
whereas  an  inquiry  by  oneself  is  carried  on 
quite  as  much  by  means  of  the  object  itself); 
[40]  secondly  a  man  is  liable  to  be  deceived, 
169b  even  when  inquiring  by  himself,  when 
he  takes  speech  as  the  basis  of  his  inquiry: 
moreover  the  deception  arises  out  of  the  like¬ 
ness  (of  two  different  things),  and  the  likeness 
arises  out  of  the  language.  With  those  fallacies 
that  depend  upon  Accident,  deception  comes 
about  because  we  cannot  distinguish  the  same¬ 
ness  and  otherness  of  terms,  i.e.  their  unity 
[5]  and  multiplicity,  or  what  kinds  of  predi¬ 
cate  have  all  the  same  accidents  as  their  sub¬ 
ject.  Likewise  also  with  those  that  depend  on 
the  Consequent:  for  the  consequent  is  a  branch 
of  Accident.  Moreover,  in  many  cases  appear¬ 
ances  point  to  this — and  the  claim  is  made — 
that  if  A  is  inseparable  from  B,  so  also  is  B 
from  A.  With  those  that  depend  upon  an  im- 
[/o]  perfection  in  the  definition  of  a  refuta¬ 
tion,  and  with  those  that  depend  upon  the  dif¬ 
ference  between  a  qualified  and  an  absolute 
statement,  the  deception  consists  in  the  small¬ 
ness  of  the  difference  involved;  for  we  treat 
the  limitation  to  the  particular  thing  or  respect 
or  manner  or  time  as  adding  nothing  to  the 
meaning,  and  so  grant  the  statement  univer¬ 
sally.  Likewise  also  in  the  case  of  those  that  as¬ 
sume  the  original  point,  and  those  of  false 
cause,  and  all  that  treat  a  number  of  questions 
[75]  as  one:  for  in  all  of  them  the  deception 


lies  in  the  smallness  of  the  difference:  for  our 
failure  to  be  quite  exact  in  our  definition  of 
‘premiss’  and  of  ‘proof’  is  due  to  the  aforesaid 
reason. 

8 

Since  we  know  on  how  many  points  appar¬ 
ent  syllogisms  depend,  we  know  also  on  how 
many  sophistical  syllogisms  and  refutations 
[20]  may  depend.  By  a  sophistical  refutation 
and  syllogism  I  mean  not  only  a  syllogism  or 
refutation  which  appears  to  be  valid  but  is  not, 
but  also  one  which,  though  it  is  valid,  only  ap¬ 
pears  to  be  appropriate  to  the  thing  in  ques¬ 
tion.  These  are  those  which  fail  to  refute  and 
prove  people  to  be  ignorant  according  to  the 
nature  of  the  thing  in  question,  which  was  the 
function  of  the  art  of  examination.  Now  the 
[25]  art  of  examining  is  a  branch  of  dialectic: 
and  this  may  prove  a  false  conclusion  because 
of  the  ignorance  of  the  answerer.  Sophistic  ref¬ 
utations  on  the  other  hand,  even  though  they 
prove  the  contradictory  of  his  thesis,  do  not 
make  clear  whether  he  is  ignorant:  for  soph¬ 
ists  entangle  the  scientist  as  well  with  these  ar¬ 
guments. 

[30]  That  we  know  them  by  the  same  line  of 
inquiry  is  clear:  for  the  same  considerations 
which  make  it  appear  to  an  audience  that  the 
points  required  for  the  proof  were  asked  in  the 
questions  and  that  the  conclusion  wTas  proved, 
would  make  the  answerer  think  so  as  well,  so 
that  false  proof  will  occur  through  all  or  some 
of  these  means:  for  what  a  man  has  not  been 
asked  but  thinks  he  has  granted,  he  would  also 
[35]  grant  if  he  were  asked.  Of  course,  in  some 
cases  the  moment  we  add  the  missing  ques¬ 
tion,  we  also  show  up  its  falsity,  e.g.  in  fallacies 
that  depend  on  language  and  on  solecism.  If 
then,  fallacious  proofs  of  the  contradictory  of 
a  thesis  depend  on  their  appearing  to  refute,  it 
is  clear  that  the  considerations  on  which  both 
proofs  of  false  conclusions  and  an  apparent 
refutation  depend  must  be  the  same  in  num- 
[40]  ber.  Now  an  apparent  refutation  depends 
upon  the  elements  involved  in  a  genuine  one: 
170*  for  the  failure  of  one  or  other  of  these 
must  make  the  refutation  merely  apparent, 
e.g.  that  which  depends  on  the  failure  of  the 
conclusion  to  follow  from  the  argument  (the 
argument  ad  impossibile )  and  that  which  treats 
two  questions  as  one  and  so  depends  upon  a 
flaw  in  the  premiss,  and  that  which  depends 
on  the  substitution  of  an  accident  for  an  essen¬ 
tial  attribute,  and — a  branch  of  the  last — that 
[5]  which  depends  upon  the  consequent:  more- 


23  4 

over,  the  conclusion  may  follow  not  in  fact  but 
only  verbally:  then,  instead  of  proving  the  con¬ 
tradictory  universally  and  in  the  same  respect 
and  relation  and  manner,  the  fallacy  may  be 
dependent  on  some  limit  of  extent  or  on  one 
or  other  of  these  qualifications:  moreover, 
there  is  the  assumption  of  the  original  point  to 
be  proved,  in  violation  of  the  clause  ‘without 
reckoning  in  the  original  point’.  Thus  we 
should  have  the  number  of  considerations  on 
[/o]  which  the  fallacious  proofs  depend:  for 
they  could  not  depend  on  more,  but  all  will 
depend  on  the  points  aforesaid. 

A  sophistical  refutation  is  a  refutation  not 
absolutely  but  relatively  to  some  one:  and  so  is 
a  proof,  in  the  same  way.  For  unless  that  which 
depends  upon  ambiguity  assumes  that  the  am¬ 
biguous  term  has  a  single  meaning,  and  that 
[75]  which  depends  on  like  verbal  forms  as¬ 
sumes  that  substance  is  the  only  category,  and 
the  rest  in  the  same  way,  there  will  be  neither 
refutations  nor  proofs,  either  absolutely  or  rela¬ 
tively  to  the  answerer:  whereas  if  they  do  as¬ 
sume  these  things,  they  will  stand,  relatively  to 
the  answerer;  but  absolutely  they  will  not 
stand:  for  they  have  not  secured  a  statement 
that  does  have  a  single  meaning,  but  only 
one  that  appears  to  have,  and  that  only  from 
this  particular  man. 

9 

[20]  The  number  of  considerations  on  which 
depend  the  refutations  of  those  who  are  refut¬ 
ed,  we  ought  not  to  try  to  grasp  without  a 
knowledge  of  everything  that  is.  This,  how¬ 
ever,  is  not  the  province  of  any  special  study: 
for  possibly  the  sciences  are  infinite  in  number, 
so  that  obviously  demonstrations  may  be  infi¬ 
nite  too.  Now  refutations  may  be  true  as  well 
as  false:  for  whenever  it  is  possible  to  demon¬ 
strate  something,  it  is  also  possible  to  refute  the 
[25]  man  who  maintains  the  contradictory  of 
the  truth;  e.g.  if  a  man  has  stated  that  the  di¬ 
agonal  is  commensurate  with  the  side  of  the 
square,  one  might  refute  him  by  demonstrat¬ 
ing  that  it  is  incommensurate.  Accordingly,  to 
exhaust  all  possible  refutations  we  shall  have  to 
have  scientific  knowledge  of  everything:  for 
some  refutations  depend  upon  the  principles 
that  rule  in  geometry  and  the  conclusions  that 
follow  from  these,  others  upon  those  that  rule 
in  medicine,  and  others  upon  those  of  the  oth- 
[30]  er  sciences.  For  the  matter  of  that,  the 
false  refutations  likewise  belong  to  the  num¬ 
ber  of  the  infinite:  for  according  to  every  art 
there  is  false  proof,  e.g.  according  to  geometry 


170b 

there  is  false  geometrical  proof,  and  according 
to  medicine  there  is  false  medical  proof.  By 
‘according  to  the  art’,  I  mean  ‘according  to  the 
principles  of  it’.  Clearly,  then,  it  is  not  of  all 
refutations,  but  only  of  those  that  depend  upon 
[35]  dialectic  that  we  need  to  grasp  the  com¬ 
mon-place  rules:  for  these  stand  in  a  common 
relation  to  every  art  and  faculty.  And  as  re¬ 
gards  the  refutation  that  is  according  to  one  or 
other  of  the  particular  sciences  it  is  the  task  of 
that  particular  scientist  to  examine  whether  it 
is  merely  apparent  without  being  real,  and,  if 
it  be  real,  what  is  the  reason  for  it:  whereas  it 
is  the  business  of  dialecticians  so  to  examine 
the  refutation  that  proceeds  from  the  common 
first  principles  that  fall  under  no  particular 
special  study.  For  if  we  grasp  the  starting- 
points  of  the  accepted  proofs  on  any  subject 
[40]  whatever  we  grasp  those  of  the  refuta- 
170b  tions  current  on  that  subject.  For  a  refu¬ 
tation  is  the  proof  of  the  contradictory  of  a 
given  thesis,  so  that  either  one  or  two  proofs 
of  the  contradictory  constitute  a  refutation.  We 
grasp,  then,  the  number  of  considerations  on 
which  all  such  depend:  if,  however,  we  grasp 
this,  we  also  grasp  their  solutions  as  well;  for 
the  objections  to  these  are  the  solutions  of 
[5]  them.  We  also  grasp  the  number  of  con¬ 
siderations  on  which  those  refutations  depend, 
that  are  merely  apparent — apparent,  I  mean, 
not  to  everybody,  but  to  people  of  a  certain 
stamp;  for  it  is  an  indefinite  task  if  one  is  to  in¬ 
quire  how  many  are  the  considerations  that 
make  them  apparent  to  the  man  in  the  street. 
Accordingly  it  is  clear  that  the  dialectician’s 
business  is  to  be  able  to  grasp  on  how  many 
considerations  depends  the  formation,  through 
the  common  first  principles,  of  a  refutation 
[/o]  that  is  either  real  or  apparent,  i.e.  either 
dialectical  or  apparently  dialectical,  or  suitable 
for  an  examination. 

10 

It  is  no  true  distinction  between  arguments 
which  some  people  draw  when  they  say  that 
some  arguments  are  directed  against  the  ex¬ 
pression,  and  others  against  the  thought  ex- 
ressed:  for  it  is  absurd  to  suppose  that  some 
75]  arguments  are  directed  against  the  expres¬ 
sion  and  others  against  the  thought,  and  that 
they  are  not  the  same.  For  what  is  failure  to 
direct  an  argument  against  the  thought  except 
what  occurs  whenever  a  man  does  not  in  using 
the  expression  think  it  to  be  used  in  his  ques¬ 
tion  in  the  same  sense  in  which  the  person 
questioned  granted  it?  And  this  is  the  same 


ON  SOPHISTICAL  REFUTATIONS 


171 

thing  as  to  direct  the  argument  against  the  ex¬ 
pression.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  directed 
against  the  thought  whenever  a  man  uses  the 
expression  in  the  same  sense  which  the  answer¬ 
er  had  in  mind  when  he  granted  it.  If  now  any 
[20]  one  (i.e.  both  the  questioner  and  the  per¬ 
son  questioned),  in  dealing  with  an  expression 
with  more  than  one  meaning,  were  to  suppose 
it  to  have  one  meaning — as  e.g.  it  may  be  that 
‘Being’  and  ‘One’  have  many  meanings,  and 
yet  both  the  answerer  answers  and  the  ques¬ 
tioner  puts  his  question  supposing  it  to  be  one, 
and  the  argument  is  to  the  effect  that  ‘All 
things  are  one’ — will  this  discussion  be  directed 
any  more  against  the  expression  than  against 
[25]  the  thought  of  the  person  questioned?  If, 
on  the  other  hand,  one  of  them  supposes  the 
expression  to  have  many  meanings,  it  is  clear 
that  such  a  discussion  will  not  be  directed 
against  the  thought.  Such  being  the  meanings 
of  the  phrases  in  question,  they  clearly  cannot 
describe  two  separate  classes  of  argument.  For, 
in  the  first  place,  it  is  possible  for  any  such  ar¬ 
gument  as  bears  more  than  one  meaning  to  be 
directed  against  the  expression  and  against  the 
thought,  and  next  it  is  possible  for  any  argu¬ 
ment  whatsoever;  for  the  fact  of  being  directed 
against  the  thought  consists  not  in  the  nature 
of  the  argument,  but  in  the  special  attitude  of 
[jo]  the  answerer  towards  the  points  he  con¬ 
cedes.  Next,  all  of  them  may  be  directed  to 
the  expression.  For  ‘to  be  directed  against  the 
expression’  means  in  this  doctrine  ‘not  to  be  di¬ 
rected  against  the  thought’.  For  if  not  all  are 
directed  against  either  expression  or  thought, 
there  will  be  certain  other  arguments  directed 
neither  against  the  expression  nor  against  the 
thought,  whereas  they  say  that  all  must  be  one 
or  the  other,  and  divide  them  all  as  directed 
either  against  the  expression  or  against  the 
[J5]  thought,  while  others  (they  say)  there 
are  none.  But  in  point  of  fact  those  that  depend 
on  mere  expression  are  only  a  branch  of  those 
syllogisms  that  depend  on  a  multiplicity  of 
meanings.  For  the  absurd  statement  has  actu¬ 
ally  been  made  that  the  description  ‘dependent 
on  mere  expression’  describes  all  the  arguments 
that  depend  on  language:  whereas  some  of 
these  are  fallacies  not  because  the  answerer 
adopts  a  particular  attitude  towards  them,  but 
because  the  argument  itself  involves  the  asking 
[40]  of  a  question  such  as  bears  more  than  one 
meaning. 

17la  It  is,  too,  altogether  absurd  to  discuss 
Refutation  without  first  discussing  Proof:  for 
a  refutation  is  a  proof,  so  that  one  ought  to 


235 

discuss  proof  as  well  before  describing  false 
refutation:  for  a  refutation  of  that  kind  is  a 
[5]  merely  apparent  proof  of  the  contradictory 
of  a  thesis.  Accordingly,  the  reason  of  the  fal¬ 
sity  will  be  either  in  the  proof  or  in  the  contra¬ 
diction  (for  mention  of  the  ‘contradiction’ 
must  be  added),  while  sometimes  it  is  in  both, 
if  the  refutation  be  merely  apparent.  In  the 
argument  that  speaking  of  the  silent  is  possi¬ 
ble  it  lies  in  the  contradiction,  not  in  the  proof; 
in  the  argument  that  one  can  give  what  one 
[/o]  does  not  possess,  it  lies  in  both;  in  the 
proof  that  Homer’s  poem  is  a  figure  through 
its  being  a  cycle  it  lies  in  the  proof.  An  argu¬ 
ment  that  does  not  fail  in  either  respect  is  a 
true  proof. 

But,  to  return  to  the  point  whence  our  argu¬ 
ment  digressed,1  are  mathematical  reasonings 
directed  against  the  thought,  or  not?  And  if 
any  one  thinks  ‘triangle’  to  be  a  word  with 
many  meanings,  and  granted  it  in  some  differ- 
[75]  ent  sense  from  the  figure  which  was 
proved  to  contain  two  right  angles,  has  the 
questioner  here  directed  his  argument  against 
the  thought  of  the  former  or  not  ? 

Moreover,  if  the  expression  bears  many 
senses,  while  the  answerer  does  not  under¬ 
stand  or  suppose  it  to  have  them,  surely  the 
questioner  here  has  directed  his  argument 
against  his  thought!  Or  how  else  ought  he  to 
put  his  question  except  by  suggesting  a  distinc¬ 
tion — suppose  one’s  question  to  be  ‘Is  speaking 
of  the  silent  possible  or  not?’ — as  follows,  ‘Is 
[20]  the  answer  “No”  in  one  sense,  but  “Yes” 
in  another?’  If,  then,  any  one  were  to  answer 
that  it  was  not  possible  in  any  sense  and  the 
other  were  to  argue  that  it  was,  has  not  his  ar¬ 
gument  been  directed  against  the  thought  of 
the  answerer?  Yet  his  argument  is  supposed 
to  be  one  of  those  that  depend  on  the  expres¬ 
sion.  There  is  not,  then,  any  definite  kind  of 
arguments  that  is  directed  against  the  thought. 
Some  arguments  are,  indeed,  directed  against 
the  expression:  but  these  are  not  all  even  ap- 
[25]  parent  refutations,  let  alone  all  refuta¬ 
tions.  For  there  are  also  apparent  refutations 
which  do  not  depend  upon  language,  e.g.  those 
that  depend  upon  accident,  and  others. 

If,  however,  any  one  claims  that  one  should 
actually  draw  the  distinction,  and  say,  ‘By 
“speaking  of  the  silent”  I  mean,  in  one  sense 
this  and  in  the  other  sense  that’,  surely  to 
[jo]  claim  this  is  in  the  first  place  absurd  (for 
sometimes  the  questioner  does  not  see  the  am¬ 
biguity  of  his  question,  and  he  cannot  possibly 
1  i7ob4o. 


CHAPTERS  8-10 


2 36  ON  SOPHISTICAL  REFUTATIONS  172a 


draw  a  distinction  which  he  does  not  think  to 
be  there):  in  the  second  place,  what  else  but 
this  will  didactic  argument  be?  For  it  will 
make  manifest  the  state  of  the  case  to  one  who 
has  never  considered,  and  does  not  know  or 
suppose  that  there  is  any  other  meaning  but 
one.  For  what  is  there  to  prevent  the  same 
thing  also  happening  to  us  in  cases  where  there 
is  no  double  meaning?  ‘Are  the  units  in  four 
[55]  equal  to  the  twos?  Observe  that  the  twos 
are  contained  in  four  in  one  sense  in  this  way, 
in  another  sense  in  that’.  Also,  ‘Is  the  knowl¬ 
edge  of  contraries  one  or  not?  Observe  that 
some  contraries  are  known,  while  others  are 
unknown’.  Thus  the  man  who  makes  this 
claim  seems  to  be  unaware  of  the  difference 
171b  between  didactic  and  dialectical  argu¬ 
ment,  and  of  the  fact  that  while  he  who  argues 
didactically  should  not  ask  questions  but  make 
things  clear  himself,  the  other  should  merely 
ask  questions. 

11 

Moreover,  to  claim  a  ‘Yes’  or  ‘No’  answer 
is  the  business  not  of  a  man  who  is  showing 
something,  but  of  one  who  is  holding  an  ex¬ 
amination.  For  the  art  of  examining  is  a  branch 
[5]  of  dialectic  and  has  in  view  not  the  man 
who  has  knowledge,  but  the  ignorant  pretend¬ 
er.  He,  then,  is  a  dialectician  who  regards  the 
common  principles  with  their  application  to 
the  particular  matter  in  hand,  while  he  who 
only  appears  to  do  this  is  a  sophist.  Now  for 
contentious  and  sophistical  reasoning:  (1)  one 
such  is  a  merely  apparent  reasoning,  on  sub¬ 
jects  on  which  dialectical  reasoning  is  the  prop¬ 
er  method  of  examination,  even  though  its 
[/o]  conclusion  be  true:  for  it  misleads  us  in 
regard  to  the  cause:  also  (2)  there  are  those 
misreasonings  which  do  not  conform  to  the 
line  of  inquiry  proper  to  the  particular  sub¬ 
ject,  but  are  generally  thought  to  conform  to 
the  art  in  question.  For  false  diagrams  of  geo¬ 
metrical  figures  are  not  contentious  (for  the 
resulting  fallacies  conform  to  the  subject  of 
the  art) — any  more  than  is  any  false  diagram 
that  may  be  offered  in  proof  of  a  truth — e.g. 
[75]  Hippocrates’  figure  or  the  squaring  of  the 
circle  by  means  of  the  lunules.  But  Bryson’s 
method  of  squaring  the  circle,  even  if  the  circle 
is  thereby  squared,  is  still  sophistical  because 
it  does  not  conform  to  the  subject  in  hand.  So, 
then,  any  merely  apparent  reasoning  about 
these  things  is  a  contentious  argument,  and 
any  reasoning  that  merely  appears  to  conform 
[20]  to  the  subject  in  hand,  even  though  it  be 


genuine  reasoning,  is  a  contentious  argument: 
for  it  is  merely  apparent  in  its  conformity  to 
the  subject-matter,  so  that  it  is  deceptive  and 
plays  foul.  For  just  as  a  foul  in  a  race  is  a  defi¬ 
nite  type  of  fault,  and  is  a  kind  of  foul  fight¬ 
ing,  so  the  art  of  contentious  reasoning  is  foul 
fighting  in  disputation:  for  in  the  former  case 
those  who  are  resolved  to  win  at  all  costs  snatch 
at  everything,  and  so  in  the  latter  case  do  con¬ 
tentious  reasoners.  Those,  then,  who  do  this  in 
order  to  win  the  mere  victory  are  generally 
[25]  considered  to  be  contentious  and  quarrel¬ 
some  persons,  while  those  who  do  it  to  win  a 
reputation  with  a  view  to  making  money  are 
sophistical.  For  the  art  of  sophistry  is,  as  we 
said,1  a  kind  of  art  of  money-making  from  a 
merely  apparent  wisdom,  and  this  is  why  they 
aim  at  a  merely  apparent  demonstration:  and 
[jo]  quarrelsome  persons  and  sophists  both 
employ  the  same  arguments,  but  not  with  the 
same  motives:  and  the  same  argument  will  be 
sophistical  and  contentious,  but  not  in  the  same 
respect;  rather,  it  will  be  contentious  in  so  far 
as  its  aim  is  an  apparent  victory,  while  in  so  far 
as  its  aim  is  an  apparent  wisdom,  it  will  be 
sophistical:  for  the  art  of  sophistry  is  a  certain 
appearance  of  wisdom  without  the  reality.  The 
[^5]  contentious  argument  stands  in  some¬ 
what  the  same  relation  to  the  dialectical  as  the 
drawer  of  false  diagrams  to  the  geometrician; 
for  it  beguiles  by  misreasoning  from  the  same 
principles  as  dialectic  uses,  just  as  the  drawer 
of  a  false  diagram  beguiles  the  geometrician. 
But  whereas  the  latter  is  not  a  contentious  rea- 
soner,  because  he  bases  his  false  diagram  on 
the  principles  and  conclusions  that  fall  under 
172a  the  art  of  geometry,  the  argument  which 
is  subordinate  to  the  principles  of  dialectic  will 
yet  clearly  be  contentious  as  regards  other  sub¬ 
jects.  Thus,  e.g.  though  the  squaring  of  the 
circle  by  means  of  the  lunules  is  not  conten¬ 
tious,  Bryson’s  solution  is  contentious:  and  the 
former  argument  cannot  be  adapted  to  any  sub- 
[5]  ject  except  geometry,  because  it  proceeds 
from  principles  that  are  peculiar  to  geometry, 
whereas  the  latter  can  be  adapted  as  an  argu¬ 
ment  against  all  the  number  of  people  who  do 
not  know  what  is  or  is  not  possible  in  each  par¬ 
ticular  context:  for  it  will  apply  to  them  all. 
Or  there  is  the  method  whereby  Antiphon 
squared  the  circle.  Or  again,  an  argument 
which  denied  that  it  was  better  to  take  a  walk 
after  dinner,  because  of  Zeno’s  argument, 
would  not  be  a  proper  argument  for  a  doctor, 
because  Zeno’s  argument  is  of  general  applica- 
1 165s  22. 


17  2b 

tion.  If,  then,  the  relation  of  the  contentious 
[/o]  argument  to  the  dialectical  were  exactly 
like  that  of  the  drawer  of  false  diagrams  to  the 
geometrician,  a  contentious  argument  upon  the 
aforesaid  subjects  could  not  have  existed.  But, 
as  it  is,  the  dialectical  argument  is  not  con¬ 
cerned  with  any  definite  kind  of  being,  nor 
does  it  show  anything,  nor  is  it  even  an  argu¬ 
ment  such  as  we  find  in  the  general  philoso¬ 
phy  of  being.  For  all  beings  are  not  contained 
in  any  one  kind,  nor,  if  they  were,  could  they 
[75]  possibly  fall  under  the  same  principles. 
Accordingly,  no  art  that  is  a  method  of  show¬ 
ing  the  nature  of  anything  proceeds  by  asking 
questions:  for  it  does  not  permit  a  man  to 
grant  whichever  he  likes  of  the  two  alterna¬ 
tives  in  the  question:  for  they  will  not  both  of 
them  yield  a  proof.  Dialectic,  on  the  other 
hand,  does  proceed  by  questioning,  whereas  if 
it  were  concerned  to  show  things,  it  would 
have  refrained  from  putting  questions,  even  if 
not  about  everything,  at  least  about  the  first 
principles  and  the  special  principles  that  apply 
to  the  particular  subject  in  hand.  For  suppose 
[20]  the  answerer  not  to  grant  these,  it  would 
then  no  longer  have  had  any  grounds  from 
which  to  argue  any  longer  against  the  objec¬ 
tion.  Dialectic  is  at  the  same,  time  a  mode  of 
examination  as  well.  For  neither  is  the  art  of 
examination  an  accomplishment  of  the  same 
kind  as  geometry,  but  one  which  a  man  may 
possess,  even  though  he  has  not  knowledge. 
For  it  is  possible  even  for  one  without  knowl¬ 
edge  to  hold  an  examination  of  one  who  is 
without  knowledge,  if  also  the  latter  grants 
him  points  taken  not  from  thing  that  he  knows 
[25]  or  from  the  special  principles  of  the  sub¬ 
ject  under  discussion  but  from  all  that  range  of 
consequences  attaching  to  the  subject  which  a 
man  may  indeed  know  without  knowing  the 
theory  of  the  subject,  but  which  if  he  do  not 
know,  he  is  bound  to  be  ignorant  of  the  theory. 
So  then  clearly  the  art  of  examining  does  not 
consist  in  knowledge  of  any  definite  subject. 
For  this  reason,  too,  it  deals  with  everything: 
for  every  ‘theory’  of  anything  employs  also 
certain  common  principles.  Hence  everybody, 
[jo]  including  even  amateurs,  makes  use  in  a 
way  of  dialectic  and  the  practice  of  examining: 
for  all  undertake  to  some  extent  a  rough  trial 
of  those  who  profess  to  know  things.  What 
serves  them  here  is  the  general  principles:  for 
they  know  these  of  themselves  just  as  well  as 
the  scientist,  even  if  in  what  they  say  they  seem 
to  the  latter  to  go  wildly  astray  from  them. 
All,  then,  are  engaged  in  refutation;  for  they 


237 

take  a  hand  as  amateurs  in  the  same  task  with 
[35]  which  dialectic  is  concerned  profession¬ 
ally;  and  he  is  a  dialectician  who  examines  by 
the  help  of  a  theory  of  reasoning.  Now  there 
are  many  identical  principles  which  are  true  of 
everything,  though  they  are  not  such  as  to  con¬ 
stitute  a  particular  nature,  i.e.  a  particular  kind 
of  being,  but  are  like  negative  terms,  while  oth¬ 
er  principles  are  not  of  this  kind  but  are  spe¬ 
cial  to  particular  subjects;  accordingly  it  is  pos¬ 
sible  from  these  general  principles  to  hold  an 
examination  on  everything,  and  that  there 
172b  should  be  a  definite  art  of  so  doing,  and, 
moreover,  an  art  which  is  not  of  the  same  kind 
as  those  which  demonstrate.  This  is  why  the 
contentious  reasoner  does  not  stand  in  the  same 
condition  in  all  respects  as  the  drawer  of  a 
false  diagram:  for  the  contentious  reasoner 
will  not  be  given  to  misreasoning  from  any 
definite  class  of  principles,  but  will  deal  with 
every  class. 

[5]  These,  then,  are  the  types  of  sophistical 
refutations:  and  that  it  belongs  to  the  dialecti¬ 
cian  to  study  these,  and  to  be  able  to  effect 

them,  is  not  difficult  to  see:  for  the  investiga¬ 
tion  of  premisses  comprises  the  whole  of  this 
study. 

12 

So  much,  then,  for  apparent  refutations.  As 
for  showing  that  the  answerer  is  committing 
[/o]  some  fallacy,  and  drawing  his  argument 
into  paradox — for  this  was  the  second  item  of 
the  sophist’s  programme — in  the  first  place, 

then,  this  is  best  brought  about  by  a  certain 
manner  of  questioning  and  through  the  ques¬ 
tion.  For  to  put  the  question  without  framing 
it  with  reference  to  any  definite  subject  is  a 
good  bait  for  these  purposes:  for  people  are 
more  inclined  to  make  mistakes  when  they  talk 
at  large,  and  they  talk  at  large  when  they  have 
[75]  no  definite  subject  before  them.  Also  the 
putting  of  several  questions,  even  though  the 
position  against  which  one  is  arguing  be  quite 
definite,  and  the  claim  that  he  shall  say  only 
what  he  thinks,  create  abundant  opportunity 
for  drawing  him  into  paradox  or  fallacy,  and 
also,  whether  to  any  of  these  questions  he  re¬ 
plies  ‘Yes’  or  replies  ‘No’,  of  leading  him  on  to 
statements  against  which  one  is  well  off  for  a 
line  of  attack.  Nowadays,  however,  men  are  less 
[20]  able  to  play  foul  by  these  means  than  they 
were  formerly:  for  people  rejoin  with  the  ques¬ 
tion,  ‘What  has  that  to  do  with  the  original 
subject?’  It  is,  too,  an  elementary  rule  for  elicit¬ 
ing  some  fallacy  or  paradox  that  one  should 


CHAPTERS  10-12 


238  ON  SOPHISTICAL  REFUTATIONS  173b 


never  put  a  controversial  question  straight 
away,  but  say  that  one  puts  it  from  the  wish 
for  information:  for  the  process  of  inquiry  thus 
invited  gives  room  for  an  attack. 

[25]  A  rule  specially  appropriate  for  showing 
up  a  fallacy  is  the  sophistic  rule,  that  one 
should  draw  the  answerer  on  to  the  kind  of 
statements  against  which  one  is  well  supplied 
with  arguments:  this  can  be  done  both  prop¬ 
erly  and  improperly,  as  was  said  before.1 

Again,  to  draw  a  paradoxical  statement,  look 
and  see  to  what  school  of  philosophers  the  per¬ 
son  arguing  with  you  belongs,  and  then  ques- 
[3o]  tion  him  as  to  some  point  wherein  their 
doctrine  is  paradoxical  to  most  people:  for  with 
every  school  there  is  some  point  of  that  kind. 
It  is  an  elementary  rule  in  these  matters  to 
have  a  collection  of  the  special  ‘theses’  of  the 
various  schools  among  your  propositions.  The 
solution  recommended  as  appropriate  here,  too, 
is  to  point  out  that  the  paradox  does  not  come 
about  because  of  the  argument:  whereas  this  is 
[^5]  what  his  opponent  always  really  wants. 

Moreover,  argue  from  men’s  wishes  and 
their  professed  opinions.  For  people  do  not 
wish  the  same  things  as  they  say  they  wish: 
they  say  what  will  look  best,  whereas  they  wish 
what  appears  to  be  to  their  interest:  e.g.  they 
say  that  a  man  ought  to  die  nobly  rather  than 
to  live  in  pleasure,  and  to  live  in  honest  poverty 
173a  rather  than  in  dishonourable  riches;  but 
they  wish  the  opposite.  Accordingly,  a  man 
who  speaks  according  to  his  wishes  must  be  led 
into  stating  the  professed  opinions  of  people, 
while  he  who  speaks  according  to  these  must 
be  led  into  admitting  those  that  people  keep 
[5]  hidden  away:  for  in  either  case  they  are 
bound  to  introduce  a  paradox;  for  they  will 
speak  contrary  either  to  men’s  professed  or  to 
their  hidden  opinions. 

The  widest  range  of  common-place  argu¬ 
ment  for  leading  men  into  paradoxical  state¬ 
ment  is  that  which  depends  on  the  standards  of 
Nature  and  of  the  Law:  it  is  so  that  both  Cal- 
licles  is  drawn  as  arguing  in  the  Gorgias,2  and 
that  all  the  men  of  old  supposed  the  result  to 
come  about:  for  nature  (they  said)  and  law  are 
[/o]  opposites,  and  justice  is  a  fine  thing  by  a 
legal  standard,  but  not  by  that  of  nature.  Ac¬ 
cordingly,  they  said,  the  man  whose  statement 
agrees  with  the  standard  of  nature  you  should 
meet  by  the  standard  of  the  law,  but  the  man 
who  agrees  with  the  law  by  leading  him  to  the 
facts  of  nature:  for  in  both  ways  paradoxical 
statements  may  be  committed.  In  their  view 

1  Topics ,  n.  5.  2  482. 


[75]  the  standard  of  nature  was  the  truth, 
while  that  of  the  law  was  the  opinion  held  by 
the  majority.  So  that  it  is  clear  that  they,  too, 
used  to  try  either  to  refute  the  answerer  or  to 
make  him  make  paradoxical  statements,  just 
as  the  men  of  to-day  do  as  well. 

Some  questions  are  such  that  in  both  forms 
[20]  the  answer  is  paradoxical;  e.g.  ‘Ought 
one  to  obey  the  wise  or  one’s  father?’  and 
‘Ought  one  to  do  what  is  expedient  or  what  is 
just?’  and  ‘Is  it  preferable  to  suffer  injustice 
or  to  do  an  injury?’  You  should  lead  people, 
then,  into  views  opposite  to  the  majority  and 
to  the  philosophers;  if  any  one  speaks  as  do 
the  expert  reasoners,  lead  him  into  opposition 
to  the  majority,  while  if  he  speaks  as  do  the 
majority,  then  into  opposition  to  the  reasoners. 
[25]  For  some  say  that  of  necessity  the  happy 
man  is  just,  whereas  it  is  paradoxical  to  the 
many  that  a  king  should  be  happy.  To  lead  a 
man  into  paradoxes  of  this  sort  is  the  same  as 
to  lead  him  into  the  opposition  of  the  stand¬ 
ards  of  nature  and  law:  for  the  law  represents 
the  opinion  of  the  majority,  whereas  philoso- 
[3o]  phers  speak  according  to  the  standard  of 
nature  and  the  truth. 

*3 

Paradoxes,  then,  you  should  seek  to  elicit  by 
means  of  these  common-place  rules.  Now  as 
for  making  any  one  babble,  we  have  already 
said  what  we  mean  by  ‘to  babble’.  This  is  the 
object  in  view  in  all  arguments  of  the  follow¬ 
ing  kind:  If  it  is  all  the  same  to  state  a  term 
and  to  state  its  definition,  the  ‘double’  and 
[35]  ‘double  of  half’  are  the  same:  if  then  ‘dou¬ 
ble’  be  the  ‘double  of  half’,  it  will  be  the  ‘dou¬ 
ble  of  half  of  half’.  And  if,  instead  of  ‘double’, 
‘double  of  half’  be  again  put,  then  the  same  ex¬ 
pression  will  be  repeated  three  times,  ‘double 
of  half  of  half  of  half’.  Also  ‘desire  is  of  the 
pleasant,  isn’t  it?’  But  desire  is  conation  for  the 
leasant:  accordingly,  ‘desire’  is  ‘conation  for 
40]  the  pleasant  for  the  pleasant’. 

173b  All  arguments  of  this  kind  occur  in  deal¬ 
ing  (1)  with  any  relative  terms  which  not  only 
have  relative  genera,  but  are  also  themselves 
relative,  and  are  rendered  in  relation  to  one 
and  the  same  thing,  as  e.g.  conation  is  conation 
for  something,  and  desire  is  desire  of  some¬ 
thing,  and  double  is  double  of  something,  i.e. 
[5]  double  of  half:  also  in  dealing  (2)  with  any 
terms  which,  though  they  be  not  relative  terms 
at  all,  yet  have  their  substance,  viz.  the  things 
of  which  they  are  the  states  or  affections  or 
what  not,  indicated  as  well  in  their  definition, 


174* 


CHAPTERS  12-15 


239 


they  being  predicated  of  these  things.  Thus 
e.g.  ‘odd’  is  a  ‘number  containing  a  middle’: 
but  there  is  an  ‘odd  number’:  therefore  there  is 
a  ‘number-containing-a-middle  number’.  Also, 
[/o]  if  snub-ness  be  a  concavity  of  the  nose, 
and  there  be  a  snub  nose,  there  is  therefore  a 
‘concave-nose  nose’. 

People  sometimes  appear  to  produce  this  re¬ 
sult,  without  really  producing  it,  because  they 
do  not  add  the  question  whether  the  expres¬ 
sion  ‘double’,  just  by  itself,  has  any  meaning  or 
no,  and  if  so,  whether  it  has  the  same  meaning, 
or  a  different  one;  but  they  draw  their  conclu¬ 
sion  straight  away.  Still  it  seems,  inasmuch  as 
[75]  the  word  is  the  same,  to  have  the  same 
meaning  as  well. 

M 

We  have  said  before  what  kind  of  thing 
‘solecism’  is.1  It  is  possible  both  to  commit  it, 
and  to  seem  to  do  so  without  doing  so,  and  to 
do  so  without  seeming  to  do  so.  Suppose,  as 
Protagoras  used  to  say  that  /zr}m  (‘wrath’) 
[20]  and  (‘helmet’)  are  masculine:  ac¬ 

cording  to  him  a  man  who  calls  wrath  a  ‘de- 
structress’  ( ovKonevrjv )  commits  a  solecism, 
though  he  does  not  seem  to  do  so  to  other  peo¬ 
ple,  where  he  who  calls  it  a  ‘destructor’ 
(  ovKofievov  )  commits  no  solecism  though  he 
seems  to  do  so.  It  is  clear,  then,  that  any  one 
could  produce  this  effect  by  art  as  well:  and 
for  this  reason  many  arguments  seem  to  lead  to 
solecism  which  do  not  really  do  so,  as  happens 
[25]  in  the  case  of  refutations. 

Almost  all  apparent  solecisms  depend  upon 
the  word  ‘this’  ( rode ),  and  upon  occasions 
when  the  inflection  denotes  neither  a  mascu¬ 
line  nor  a  feminine  object  but  a  neuter.  For 
‘he’  (  ovtos  )  signifies  a  masculine,  and  ‘she’ 
(a Orrj)  a  feminine;  but  ‘this’  (tovto),  though 
meant  to  signify  a  neuter,  often  also  signifies 
one  or  other  of  the  former:  e.g.  ‘What  is  this?’ 
[30]  ‘It  is  Calliope’;  ‘it  is  a  log’;  ‘it  is  Coriscus’. 
Now  in  the  masculine  and  feminine  the  in¬ 
flections  are  all  different,  whereas  in  the  neu¬ 
ter  some  are  and  some  are  not.  Often,  then, 
when  ‘this’  (  tovto)  has  been  granted,  people 
reason  as  if  ‘him’  (tovtov)  had  been  said:  and 
likewise  also  they  substitute  one  inflection  for 
another.  The  fallacy  comes  about  because  ‘this’ 
[35]  (tovto)  is  a  common  form  of  several  in¬ 
flections:  for  ‘this’  signifies  sometimes  ‘he’ 
(outos)  and  sometimes  ‘him’  (tovtov).  It 
should  signify  them  alternately;  when  com¬ 
bined  with  ‘is’  (  eoTL )  it  should  be  ‘he’,  while 

1  i65b2o. 


with  ‘being’  it  should  be  ‘him’:  e.g.  ‘Coriscus 
(KopioKos)  is’,  but  ‘being  Coriscus’  (K opioKov). 
It  happens  in  the  same  way  in  the  case  of 
feminine  nouns  as  well,  and  in  the  case  of  the 
[40]  so-called  ‘chattels’  that  have  feminine  or 
masculine  designations.  For  only  those  names 
174a  which  end  in  -o  and  v,  have  the  designa¬ 
tion  proper  to  a  chattel,  e.g.  %v\ov  (‘log’), 
c txolvLov  (‘rope’);  those  which  do  not  end  so 
have  that  of  a  masculine  or  feminine  object, 
though  some  of  them  we  apply  to  chattels:  e.g. 
olokos  (‘wineskin’)  is  a  masculine  noun,  and 
kKIvt)  (‘bed’)  a  feminine.  For  this  reason  in 
cases  of  this  kind  as  well  there  will  be  a  differ¬ 
ence  of  the  same  sort  between  a  construction 
[5]  with  ‘is’  (&m)  or  with  ‘being’  (to  elvai). 
Also,  Solecism  resembles  in  a  certain  way  those 
refutations  which  are  said  to  depend  on  the  like 
expression  of  unlike  things.  For,  just  as  there 
we  come  upon  a  material  solecism,  so  here  we 
come  upon  a  verbal:  for  ‘man’  is  both  a  ‘mat¬ 
ter’  for  expression  and  also  a  ‘word’:  and  so  is 
‘white’. 

[10]  It  is  clear,  then,  that  for  solecisms  we 
must  try  to  construct  our  argument  out  of  the 
aforesaid  inflections. 

These,  then,  are  the  types  of  contentious  ar¬ 
guments,  and  the  subdivisions  of  those  types, 
and  the  methods  for  conducting  them  afore¬ 
said.  But  it  makes  no  little  difference  if  the 
materials  for  putting  the  question  be  arranged 
in  a  certain  manner  with  a  view  to  conceal¬ 
ment,  as  in  the  case  of  dialectics.  Following 
[75]  then  upon  what  we  have  said,  this  must 
be  discussed  first. 

*5 

With  a  view  then  to  refutation,  one  resource  is 
length — for  it  is  difficult  to  keep  several  things 
in  view  at  once;  and  to  secure  length  the  ele¬ 
mentary  rules  that  have  been  stated  before2 
should  be  employed.  One  resource,  on  the 
other  hand,  is  speed;  for  when  people  are  left 
[20]  behind  they  look  ahead  less.  Moreover, 
there  is  anger  and  contentiousness,  for  when 
agitated  everybody  is  less  able  to  take  care  of 
himself.  Elementary  rules  for  producing  anger 
are  to  make  a  show  of  the  wish  to  play  foul, 
and  to  be  altogether  shameless.  Moreover, 
there  is  the  putting  of  one’s  questions  alter¬ 
nately,  whether  one  has  more  than  one  argu¬ 
ment  leading  to  the  same  conclusion,  or 
whether  one  has  arguments  to  show  both  that 
[25]  something  is  so,  and  that  it  is  not  so:  for 
the  result  is  that  he  has  to  be  on  his  guard  at 

2  i55b  26-157*  5. 


240 

the  same  time  either  against  more  than  one 
line,  or  against  contrary  lines,  of  argument.  In 
general,  all  the  methods  described  before1  of 
producing  concealment  are  useful  also  for  pur¬ 
poses  of  contentious  argument:  for  the  object 
of  concealment  is  to  avoid  detection,  and  the 
object  of  this  is  to  deceive. 

[jo]  To  counter  those  who  refuse  to  grant 
whatever  they  suppose  to  help  one’s  argument, 
one  should  put  the  question  negatively,  as 
though  desirous  of  the  opposite  answer,  or  at 
any  rate  as  though  one  put  the  question  with¬ 
out  prejudice;  for  when  it  is  obscure  what  an¬ 
swer  one  wants  to  secure,  people  are  less  re¬ 
fractory.  Also  when,  in  dealing  with  particu¬ 
lars,  a  man  grants  the  individual  case,  when 
the  induction  is  done  you  should  often  not  put 
[_?5]  universal  as  a  question,  but  take  it  for 
granted  and  use  it:  for  sometimes  people  them¬ 
selves  suppose  that  they  have  granted  it,  and 
also  appear  to  the  audience  to  have  done  so, 
for  they  remember  the  induction  and  assume 
that  the  questions  could  not  have  been  put  for 
nothing.  In  cases  where  there  is  no  term  to 
indicate  the  universal,  still  you  should  avail 
yourself  of  the  resemblance  of  the  particulars 
to  suit  your  purpose;  for  resemblance  often  es¬ 
capes  detection.  Also,  with  a  view  to  obtaining 
[40]  your  premiss,  you  ought  to  put  it  in  your 
174b  question  side  by  side  with  its  contrary. 
E.g.  if  it  were  necessary  to  secure  the  admis¬ 
sion  that  ‘A  man  should  obey  his  father  in 
everything’,  ask  ‘Should  a  man  obey  his  par¬ 
ents  in  everything,  or  disobey  them  in  every¬ 
thing?’;  and  to  secure  that  ‘A  number  multi¬ 
plied  by  a  large  number  is  a  large  number’,  ask 
‘Should  one  agree  that  it  is  a  large  number  or 
a  small  one?’  For  then,  if  compelled  to  choose, 
[5]  one  will  be  more  inclined  to  think  it  a 
large  one:  for  the  placing  of  their  contraries 
close  beside  them  makes  things  look  big  to 
men,  both  relatively  and  absolutely,  and  worse 
and  better. 

A  strong  appearance  of  having  been  refuted 
is  often  produced  by  the  most  highly  sophis¬ 
tical  of  all  the  unfair  tricks  of  questioners, 
when  without  proving  anything,  instead  of 
[/o]  putting  their  final  proposition  as  a  ques¬ 
tion,  they  state  it  as  a  conclusion,  as  though 
they  had  proved  that  ‘Therefore  so-and-so  is 
not  true’. 

It  is  also  a  sophistical  trick,  when  a  paradox 
has  been  laid  down,  first  to  propose  at  the  start 
some  view  that  is  generally  accepted,  and  then 

1  i55b  26-157*  5. 


174b 

claim  that  the  answerer  shall  answer  what  he 
thinks  about  it,  and  to  put  one’s  question  on 
matters  of  that  kind  in  the  form  ‘Do  you  think 
[75]  that  .  .  .?’  For  then,  if  the  question  be 
taken  as  one  of  the  premisses  of  one’s  argu¬ 
ment,  either  a  refutation  or  a  paradox  is  bound 
to  result;  if  he  grants  the  view,  a  refutation;  if 
he  refuses  to  grant  it  or  even  to  admit  it  as  the 
received  opinion,  a  paradox;  if  he  refuses  to 
grant  it,  but  admits  that  it  is  the  received  opin¬ 
ion,  something  very  like  a  refutation,  results. 

Moreover,  just  as  in  rhetorical  discourses,  so 
[20]  also  in  those  aimed  at  refutation,  you 
should  examine  the  discrepancies  of  the  an¬ 
swerer’s  position  either  with  his  own  state¬ 
ments,  or  with  those  of  persons  whom  he  ad¬ 
mits  to  say  and  do  aright,  moreover  with  those 
of  people  who  are  generally  supposed  to  bear 
that  kind  of  character,  or  who  are  like  them, 
or  with  those  of  the  majority  or  of  all  men. 
Also  just  as  answerers,  too,  often,  when  they 
are  in  process  of  being  confuted,  draw  a  dis¬ 
tinction,  if  their  confutation  is  just  about  to 
[25]  take  place,  so  questioners  also  should  re¬ 
sort  to  this  from  time  to  time  to  counter  ob¬ 
jectors,  pointing  out,  supposing  that  against 
one  sense  of  the  words  the  objection  holds,  but 
not  against  the  other,  that  they  have  taken  it 
in  the  latter  sense,  as  e.g.  Cleophon  does  in 
the  Mandrobulus.  They  should  also  break  of! 
their  argument  and  cut  down  their  other  lines 
of  attack,  while  in  answering,  if  a  man  per¬ 
ceives  this  being  done  beforehand,  he  should 
[jo]  put  in  his  objection  and  have  his  say  first. 
One  should  also  lead  attacks  sometimes  against 
positions  other  than  the  one  stated,  on  the  un¬ 
derstood  condition  that  one  cannot  find  lines 
of  attack  against  the  view  laid  down,  as  Lyco- 
phron  did  when  ordered  to  deliver  a  eulogy 
upon  the  lyre.  To  counter  those  who  demand 
‘Against  what  are  you  directing  your  effort?’, 
since  one  is  generally  thought  bound  to  state 
the  charge  made,  while,  on  the  other  hand, 
[^5]  some  ways  of  stating  it  make  the  defence 
too  easy,  you  should  state  as  your  aim  only  the 
general  result  that  always  happens  in  refuta¬ 
tions,  namely  the  contradiction  of  his  thesis — 
viz.  that  your  effort  is  to  deny  what  he  has 
affirmed,  or  to  affirm  what  he  denied:  don’t 
say  that  you  are  trying  to  show  that  the  knowl¬ 
edge  of  contraries  is,  or  is  not,  the  same.  One 
must  not  ask  one’s  conclusion  in  the  form  of 
a  premiss,  while  some  conclusions  should  not 
[40]  even  be  put  as  questions  at  all;  one  should 
take  and  use  it  as  granted. 


ON  SOPHISTICAL  REFUTATIONS 


175b 

16 

1 75a  We  have  now  therefore  dealt  with  the 
sources  of  questions,  and  the  methods  of  ques¬ 
tioning  in  contentious  disputations:  next  we 
have  to  speak  of  answering,  and  of  how  solu¬ 
tions  should  be  made,  and  of  what  requires 
them,  and  of  what  use  is  served  by  arguments 
of  this  kind. 

[5]  The  use  of  them,  then,  is,  for  philosophy, 
twofold.  For  in  the  first  place,  since  for  the 
most  part  they  depend  upon  the  expression, 
they  put  us  in  a  better  condition  for  seeing  in 
how  many  senses  any  term  is  used,  and  what 
kind  of  resemblances  and  what  kind  of  differ¬ 
ences  occur  between  things  and  between  their 
names.  In  the  second  place  they  are  useful  for 
[/o]  one’s  own  personal  researches;  for  the 
man  who  is  easily  committed  to  a  fallacy  by 
some  one  else,  and  does  not  perceive  it,  is  like¬ 
ly  to  incur  this  fate  of  himself  also  on  many 
occasions.  Thirdly  and  lastly,  they  further  con¬ 
tribute  to  one’s  reputation,  viz.  the  reputation 
of  being  well  trained  in  everything,  and  not  in¬ 
experienced  in  anything:  for  that  a  party  to 
arguments  should  find  fault  with  them,  if  he 
[  75  ]  cannot  definitely  point  out  their  weakness, 
creates  a  suspicion,  making  it  seem  as  though 
it  were  not  the  truth  of  the  matter  but  merely 
inexperience  that  put  him  out  of  temper. 

Answerers  may  clearly  see  how  to  meet  ar¬ 
guments  of  this  kind,  if  our  previous  account 
was  right  of  the  sources  whence  fallacies  came, 
and  also  our  distinctions  adequate  of  the  forms 
[20]  of  dishonesty  in  putting  questions.  But  it 
is  not  the  same  thing  to  take  an  argument  in 
one’s  hand  and  then  to  see  and  solve  its  faults, 
as  it  is  to  be  able  to  meet  it  quickly  while  be¬ 
ing  subjected  to  questions:  for  what  we  know, 
we  often  do  not  know  in  a  different  context. 
Moreover,  just  as  in  other  things  speed  is  en¬ 
hanced  by  training,  so  it  is  with  arguments  too, 
[25]  so  that  supposing  we  are  unpractised, 
even  though  a  point  be  clear  to  us,  we  are  often 
too  late  for  the  right  moment.  Sometimes  too 
it  happens  as  with  diagrams;  for  there  we  can 
sometimes  analyse  the  figure,  but  not  construct 
it  again :  so  too  in  refutations,  though  we  know 
the  thing  on  which  the  connexion  of  the  argu- 
[30]  ment  depends,  we  still  are  at  a  loss  to 
split  the  argument  apart. 

r7 

First  then,  just  as  we  say  that  we  ought  some¬ 
times  to  choose  to  prove  something  in  the  gen¬ 


241 

eral  estimation  rather  than  in  truth,  so  also  we 
have  sometimes  to  solve  arguments  rather  in 
the  general  estimation  than  according  to  the 
truth.  For  it  is  a  general  rule  in  fighting  con¬ 
tentious  persons,  to  treat  them  not  as  refuting, 
but  as  merely  appearing  to  refute:  for  we  say 
[35]  that  they  don’t  really  prove  their  case,  so 
that  our  object  in  correcting  them  must  be  to 
dispel  the  appearance  of  it.  For  if  refutation  be 
an  unambiguous  contradiction  arrived  at  from 
certain  views,  there  could  be  no  need  to  draw 
distinctions  against  amphiboly  and  ambiguity: 
for  they  do  not  effect  a  proof.  The  only  motive 
for  drawing  further  distinctions  is  that  the 
[40]  conclusion  reached  looks  like  a  refuta¬ 
tion.  What,  then,  we  have  to  beware  of,  is  not 
being  refuted,  but  seeming  to  be,  because  of 
course  the  asking  of  amphibolies  and  of  ques- 
175b  tions  that  turn  upon  ambiguity,  and  all 
the  other  tricks  of  that  kind,  conceal  even  a 
genuine  refutation,  and  make  it  uncertain  who 
is  refuted  and  who  is  not.  For  since  one  has  the 
right  at  the  end,  when  the  conclusion  is 
drawn,  to  say  that  the  only  denial  made  of 
[5]  one’s  statement  is  ambiguous,  no  matter 
how  precisely  he  may  have  addressed  his  argu¬ 
ment  to  the  very  same  point  as  oneself,  it  is 
not  clear  whether  one  has  been  refuted:  for  it 
is  not  clear  whether  at  the  moment  one  is 
speaking  the  truth.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  one 
had  drawn  a  distinction,  and  questioned  him 
on  the  ambiguous  term  or  the  amphiboly,  the 
refutation  would  not  have  been  a  matter  of  un¬ 
certainty.  Also  what  is  incidentally  the  object 
of  contentious  arguers,  though  less  so  nowa¬ 
days  than  formerly,  would  have  been  fulfilled, 
namely  that  the  person  questioned  should 
[10]  answer  either  ‘Yes’  or  ‘No’:  whereas 
nowadays  the  improper  forms  in  which  ques¬ 
tioners  put  their  questions  compel  the  party 
questioned  to  add  something  to  his  answer 
in  correction  of  the  faultiness  of  the  propo¬ 
sition  as  put:  for  certainly,  if  the  questioner 
distinguishes  his  meaning  adequately, 
the  answerer  is  bound  to  reply  either  ‘Yes’ 
or  ‘No’. 

[75]  If  any  one  is  going  to  suppose  that  an  ar¬ 
gument  which  turns  upon  ambiguity  is  a  refu¬ 
tation,  it  will  be  impossible  for  an  answerer  to 
escape  being  refuted  in  a  sense:  for  in  the  case 
of  visible  objects  one  is  bound  of  necessity  to 
deny  the  term  one  has  asserted,  and  to  assert 
what  one  has  denied.  For  the  remedy  which 
some  people  have  for  this  is  quite  unavailing. 
They  say,  not  that  Coriscus  is  both  musical  and 


CHAPTERS  15-17 


242 

[20]  unmusical,  but  that  this  Coriscus  is  mu¬ 
sical  and  this  Coriscus  unmusical.  But  this  will 
not  do,  for  to  say  ‘this  Coriscus  is  unmusical’, 
or  ‘musical’,  and  to  say  'this  Coriscus’  is  so,  is 
to  use  the  same  expression:  and  this  he  is  both 
affirming  and  denying  at  once.  ‘But  perhaps 
they  do  not  mean  the  same.’  Well,  nor  did  the 
simple  name  in  the  former  case:  so  where  is 
the  difference?  If,  however,  he  is  to  ascribe  to 
[25]  the  one  person  the  simple  title  ‘Coriscus’, 
while  to  the  other  he  is  to  add  the  prefix  ‘one’ 
or  ‘this’,  he  commits  an  absurdity:  for  the  lat¬ 
ter  is  no  more  applicable  to  the  one  than  to  the 
other:  for  to  whichever  he  adds  it,  it  makes  no 
difference. 

All  the  same,  since  if  a  man  does  not  dis¬ 
tinguish  the  senses  of  an  amphiboly,  it  is  not 
clear  whether  he  has  been  confuted  or  has  not 
been  confuted,  and  since  in  arguments  the 
[jo]  right  to  distinguish  them  is  granted,  it  is 
evident  that  to  grant  the  question  simply  with¬ 
out  drawing  any  distinction  is  a  mistake,  so 
that,  even  if  not  the  man  himself,  at  any  rate 
his  argument  looks  as  though  it  had  been  re¬ 
futed.  It  often  happens,  however,  that,  though 
they  see  the  amphiboly,  people  hesitate  to  draw 
such  distinctions,  because  of  the  dense  crowd 
of  persons  who  propose  questions  of  the  kind, 
[35]  in  order  that  they  may  not  be  thought  to 
be  obstructionists  at  every  turn:  then,  though 
they  would  never  have  supposed  that  that  was 
the  point  on  which  the  argument  turned,  they 
often  find  themselves  faced  by  a  paradox.  Ac¬ 
cordingly,  since  the  right  of  drawing  the  dis¬ 
tinction  is  granted,  one  should  not  hesitate,  as 
has  been  said  before.1 

If  people  never  made  two  questions  into  one 
[40]  question,  the  fallacy  that  turns  upon  am¬ 
biguity  and  amphiboly  would  not  have  existed 
either,  but  either  genuine  refutation  or  none. 
For  what  is  the  difference  between  asking  ‘Are 
1 76a  Callias  and  Themistocles  musical?’  and 
what  one  might  have  asked  if  they,  being  dif¬ 
ferent,  had  had  one  name  ?  For  if  the  term  ap¬ 
plied  means  more  than  one  thing,  he  has  asked 
more  than  one  question.  If  then  it  be  not  right 
to  demand  simply  to  be  given  a  single  answer 
to  two  questions,  it  is  evident  that  it  is  not 

f roper  to  give  a  simple  answer  to  any  am- 
5]  biguous  question,  not  even  if  the  predi¬ 
cate  be  true  of  all  the  subjects,  as  some  claim 
that  one  should.  For  this  is  exactly  as  though 
he  had  asked  ‘Are  Coriscus  and  Callias  at 
home  or  not  at  home?’,  supposing  them  to  be 
both  in  or  both  out:  for  in  both  cases  there  is 
1  i6oa23  ff. 


176a 

a  number  of  propositions:  for  though  the  sim¬ 
ple  answer  be  true,  that  does  not  make  the 
[/o]  question  one.  For  it  is  possible  for  it  to 
be  true  to  answer  even  countless  different  ques¬ 
tions  when  put  to  one,  all  together  with  either 
a  ‘Yes’  or  a  ‘No’:  but  still  one  should  not  an¬ 
swer  them  with  a  single  answer:  for  that  is  the 
death  of  discussion.  Rather,  the  case  is  like  as 
though  different  things  has  actually  had  the 
same  name  applied  to  them.  If  then,  one  should 
[75]  not  give  a  single  answer  to  two  questions, 
it  is  evident  that  we  should  not  say  simply 
‘Yes’  or  ‘No’  in  the  case  of  ambiguous  terms 
either:  for  the  remark  is  simply  a  remark,  not 
an  answer  at  all,  although  among  disputants 
such  remarks  are  loosely  deemed  to  be  an¬ 
swers,  because  they  do  not  see  what  the  con¬ 
sequence  is. 

As  we  said,2  then,  inasmuch  as  certain  refu¬ 
tations  are  generally  taken  for  such,  though 
[20]  not  such  really,  in  the  same  way  also  cer¬ 
tain  solutions  will  be  generally  taken  for  solu¬ 
tions,  though  not  really  such.  Now  these,  we 
say,  must  sometimes  be  advanced  rather  than 
the  true  solutions  in  contentious  reasonings 
and  in  the  encounter  with  ambiguity.  The 
proper  answer  in  saying  what  one  thinks  is  to 
say  ‘Granted’;  for  in  that  way  the  likelihood  of 
[25]  being  refuted  on  a  side  issue  is  mini¬ 
mized.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  one  is  compelled 
to  say  something  paradoxical,  one  should  then 
be  most  careful  to  add  that  ‘it  seems’  so:  for  in 
that  way  one  avoids  the  impression  of  being 
either  refuted  or  paradoxical.  Since  it  is  clear 
what  is  meant  by  ‘begging  the  original  ques¬ 
tion’,  and  people  think  that  they  must  at  all 
costs  overthrow  the  premisses  that  lie  near  the 
conclusion,  and  plead  in  excuse  for  refusing  to 
grant  him  some  of  them  that  he  is  begging  the 
original  question,  so  whenever  any  one  claims 
[jo]  from  us  a  point  such  as  is  bound  to  fol¬ 
low  as  a  consequence  from  our  thesis,  but  is 
false  or  paradoxical,  we  must  plead  the  same: 
for  the  necessary  consequences  are  generally 
held  to  be  a  part  of  the  thesis  itself.  Moreover, 
whenever  the  universal  has  been  secured  not 
under  a  definite  name,  but  by  a  comparison  of 
instances,  one  should  say  that  the  questioner 
assumes  it  not  in  the  sense  in  which  it  was 
granted  nor  in  which  he  proposed  it  in  the 
[55]  premiss:  for  this  too  is  a  point  upon 
which  a  refutation  often  depends. 

If  one  is  debarred  from  these  defences  one 
must  pass  to  the  argument  that  the  conclusion 
has  not  been  properly  shown,  approaching  it 
2 164b  25. 


ON  SOPHISTICAL  REFUTATIONS 


1 77a  CHAPTERS  17-19  243 


in  the  light  of  the  aforesaid  distinction  be¬ 
tween  the  different  kinds  of  fallacy.1* 

In  the  case,  then,  of  names  that  are  used 
literally  one  is  bound  to  answer  either  simply 
or  by  drawing  a  distinction:  the  tacit  under¬ 
standings  implied  in  our  statements,  e.g.  in 
[40]  answer  to  questions  that  are  not  put 
clearly  but  elliptically — it  is  upon  this  that  the 
176b  consequent  refutation  depends.  For  ex¬ 
ample,  ‘Is  what  belongs  to  Athenians  the  prop¬ 
erty  of  Athenians?’  Yes.  ‘And  so  it  is  likewise 
in  other  cases.  But  observe;  man  belongs  to  the 
animal  kingdom,  doesn’t  he?’  Yes.  ‘Then  man 
is  the  property  of  the  animal  kingdom.’  But 
this  is  a  fallacy:  for  we  say  that  man  ‘belongs 
to’  the  animal  kingdom  because  he  is  an  ani- 
[5]  mal,  just  as  we  say  that  Lysander  ‘belongs 
to’  the  Spartans,  because  he  is  a  Spartan.  It  is 
evident,  then,  that  where  the  premiss  put  for¬ 
ward  is  not  clear,  one  must  not  grant  it  simply. 

Whenever  of  two  things  it  is  generally 
thought  that  if  the  one  is  true  the  other  is  true 
of  necessity,  whereas,  if  the  other  is  true,  the 
first  is  not  true  of  necessity,  one  should,  if 
[/o]  asked  which  of  them  is  true,  grant  the 
smaller  one:  for  the  larger  the  number  of  prem¬ 
isses,  the  harder  it  is  to  draw  a  conclusion  from 
them.  If,  again,  the  sophist  tries  to  secure  that 
A  has  a  contrary  while  B  has  not,  suppose  what 
he  says  is  true,  you  should  say  that  each  has  a 
contrary,  only  for  the  one  there  is  no  estab¬ 
lished  name. 

Since,  again,  in  regard  to  some  of  the  views 
[75]  they  express,  most  people  would  say  that 
any  one  who  did  not  admit  them  was  telling 
a  falsehood,  while  they  would  not  say  this  in 
regard  to  some,  e.g.  to  any  matters  whereon 
opinion  is  divided  (for  most  people  have  no 
distinct  view  whether  the  soul  of  animals  is 
destructible  or  immortal),  accordingly  (1) 
wherever  it  is  uncertain  in  which  of  two  senses 
the  premiss  proposed  is  usually  meant — wheth¬ 
er  as  maxims  are  (for  people  call  by  the  name 
of  ‘maxims’  both  true  opinions  and  general 
[20]  assertions),  or  like  the  doctrine  ‘the  diag¬ 
onal  of  a  square  is  incommensurate  with  its 
side’:  and  moreover  (2)  whenever  opinions  are 
divided  as  to  the  truth,  we  then  have  subjects 
of  which  it  is  very  easy  to  change  the  termi¬ 
nology  undetected.  For  because  of  the  uncer¬ 
tainty  in  which  of  the  two  senses  the  premiss 
contains  the  truth,  one  will  not  be  thought  to 
be  playing  any  trick,  while  because  of  the  divi¬ 
sion  of  opinion,  one  will  not  be  thought  to  be 
telling  a  falsehood.  Change  the  terminology 

1  Cf.  chapter  6. 


[25]  therefore,  for  the  change  will  make  the 
position  irrefutable. 

Moreover,  whenever  one  foresees  any  ques¬ 
tion  coming,  one  should  put  in  one’s  objection 
and  have  one’s  say  beforehand:  for  by  doing 
so  one  is  likely  to  embarrass  the  questioner 
most  effectually. 

18 

Inasmuch  as  a  proper  solution  is  an  exposure 
[30]  of  false  reasoning,  showing  on  what  kind 
of  question  the  falsity  depends,  and  whereas 
‘false  reasoning’  has  a  double  meaning — for  it 
is  used  either  if  a  false  conclusion  has  been 
proved,  or  if  there  is  only  an  apparent  proof 
and  no  real  one — there  must  be  both  the  kind 
of  solution  just  described,2  and  also  the  correc¬ 
tion  of  a  merely  apparent  proof,  so  as  to  show 
upon  which  of  the  questions  the  appearance 
[35]  depends.  Thus  it  comes  about  that  one 
solves  arguments  that  are  properly  reasoned  by 
demolishing  them,  whereas  one  solves  merely 
apparent  arguments  by  drawing  distinctions. 
Again,  inasmuch  as  of  arguments  that  are 
properly  reasoned  some  have  a  true  and  others 
a  false  conclusion,  those  that  are  false  in  re¬ 
spect  of  their  conclusion  it  is  possible  to  solve 
in  two  ways;  for  it  is  possible  both  by  demol- 
[40]  ishing  one  of  the  premisses  asked,  and  by 
showing  that  the  conclusion  is  not  the  real 
177a  state  of  the  case:  those,  on  the  other 
hand,  that  are  false  in  respect  of  the  premisses 
can  be  solved  only  by  a  demolition  of  one  of 
them;  for  the  conclusion  is  true.  So  that  those 
who  wish  to  solve  an  argument  should  in  the 
first  place  look  and  see  if  it  is  properly  rea¬ 
soned,  or  is  unreasoned;  and  next,  whether 
the  conclusion  be  true  or  false,  in  order  that  we 
may  effect  the  solution  either  by  drawing  some 
[5]  distinction  or  by  demolishing  something, 
and  demolishing  it  either  in  this  way  or  in 
that,  as  was  laid  down  before.  There  is  a  very 
great  deal  of  difference  between  solving  an  ar¬ 
gument  when  being  subjected  to  questions  and 
when  not:  for  to  foresee  traps  is  difficult, 
whereas  to  see  them  at  one’s  leisure  is  easier. 

19 

Of  the  refutations,  then,  that  depend  upon  am- 
[/o]  biguity  and  amphiboly  some  contain 
some  question  with  more  than  one  meaning, 
while  others  contain  a  conclusion  bearing  a 
number  of  senses:  e.g.  in  the  proof  that  ‘speak¬ 
ing  of  the  silent’  is  possible,  the  conclusion  has 
a  double  meaning,  while  in  the  proof  that  ‘he 

2  Chapter  17. 


244 

who  knows  does  not  understand  what  he 
knows’  one  of  the  questions  contains  an  am¬ 
phiboly.  Also  the  double-edged  saying  is  true 
[75]  in  one  context  but  not  in  another:  it 
means  something  that  is  and  something  that 
is  not. 

Whenever,  then,  the  many  senses  lie  in  the 
conclusion  no  refutation  takes  place  unless  the 
sophist  secures  as  well  the  contradiction  of  the 
conclusion  he  means  to  prove;  e.g.  in  the  proof 
that  ‘seeing  of  the  blind’  is  possible:  for  with¬ 
out  the  contradiction  there  was  no  refutation. 
Whenever,  on  the  other  hand,  the  many  senses 
lie  in  the  questions,  there  is  no  necessity  to  be¬ 
gin  by  denying  the  double-edged  premiss:  for 
this  was  not  the  goal  of  the  argument  but  only 
[20]  its  support.  At  the  start,  then,  one  should 
reply  with  regard  to  an  ambiguity,  whether 
of  a  term  or  of  a  phrase,  in  this  manner,  that 
‘in  one  sense  it  is  so,  and  in  another  not  so’, 
as  e.g.  that  ‘speaking  of  the  silent’  is  in  one 
sense  possible  but  in  another  not  possible:  also 
that  in  one  sense  ‘one  should  do  what  must 
needs  be  done’,  but  not  in  another:  for  ‘what 
must  needs  be’  bears  a  number  of  senses.  If, 
however,  the  ambiguity  escapes  one,  one 
[25]  should  correct  it  at  the  end  by  making  an 
addition  to  the  question:  ‘Is  speaking  of  the 
silent  possible?’  ‘No,  but  to  speak  of  A  while 
he  is  silent  is  possible.’  Also,  in  cases  which 
contain  the  ambiguity  in  their  premisses,  one 
should  reply  in  like  manner:  ‘Do  people  then 
not  understand  what  they  know?’  ‘Yes,  but  not 
those  who  know  it  in  the  manner  described’: 
for  it  is  not  the  same  thing  to  say  that  ‘those 
who  know  cannot  understand  what  they  know’, 
and  to  say  that  ‘those  who  know  something 
[50]  in  this  particular  manner  cannot  do  so’. 
In  general,  too,  even  though  he  draws  his  con¬ 
clusion  in  a  quite  unambiguous  manner,  one 
should  contend  that  what  he  has  negated  is  not 
the  fact  which  one  has  asserted  but  only  its 
name;  and  that  therefore  there  is  no  refutation. 

20 

It  is  evident  also  how  one  should  solve  those 
refutations  that  depend  upon  the  division  and 
combination  of  words:  for  if  the  expression 
means  something  different  when  divided  and 
[35]  when  combined,  as  soon  as  one’s  op¬ 
ponent  draws  his  conclusion  one  should  take 
the  expression  in  the  contrary  way.  All  such 
expressions  as  the  following  depend  upon  the 
combination  or  division  of  the  words:  ‘Was  X 
being  beaten  with  that  with  which  you  saw 
him  being  beaten?’  and  ‘Did  you  see  him  be¬ 


177b 

ing  beaten  with  that  with  which  he  was  being 
beaten?’  This  fallacy  has  also  in  it  an  element 
177b  of  amphiboly  in  the  questions,  but  it 
really  depends  upon  combination.  For  the 
meaning  that  depends  upon  the  division  of  the 
words  is  not  really  a  double  meaning  (for  the 
expression  when  divided  is  not  the  same),  un¬ 
less  also  the  word  that  is  pronounced,  accord¬ 
ing  to  its  breathing,  as  6pos  and  6pos  is  a  case 
of  double  meaning.  (In  writing,  indeed,  a 
word  is  the  same  whenever  it  is  written  of  the 
[5]  same  letters  and  in  the  same  manner — and 
even  there  people  nowadays  put  marks  at  the 
side  to  show  the  pronunciation — but  the  spok¬ 
en  words  are  not  the  same.)  Accordingly  an 
expression  that  depends  upon  division  is  not 
an  ambiguous  one.  It  is  evident  also  that  not 
all  refutations  depend  upon  ambiguity  as  some 
people  say  they  do. 

[10]  The  answerer,  then,  must  divide  the  ex¬ 
pression:  for  ‘I-saw-a-man-being-beaten  with 
my  eyes’  is  not  the  same  as  to  say  ‘I  saw  a  man 
being-beaten-with-my-eyes’.  Also  there  is  the 
argument  of  Euthydemus  proving  ‘Then  you 
know  now  in  Sicily  that  there  are  triremes  in 
Piraeus’:  and  again,  ‘Can  a  good  man  who  is 
a  cobbler  be  bad?’  ‘No.’  ‘But  a  good  man  may 
be  a  bad  cobbler:  therefore  a  good  cobbler  will 
[75]  be  bad.’  Again,  ‘Things  the  knowledge 
of  which  is  good,  are  good  things  to  learn, 
aren’t  they?’  ‘Yes.’  ‘The  knowledge,  however, 
of  evil  is  good:  therefore  evil  is  a  good  thing 
to  know.’  ‘Yes.  But,  you  see,  evil  is  both  evil 
and  a  thing-to-learn,  so  that  evil  is  an  evil- 
thing-to-learn,  although  the  knowledge  of 
[20]  evils  is  good.’  Again,  ‘Is  it  true  to  say  in 
the  present  moment  that  you  are  born?’  ‘Yes.’ 
‘Then  you  are  born  in  the  present  moment.’ 
‘No;  the  expression  as  divided  has  a  different 
meaning:  for  it  is  true  to  say-in-the-present- 
moment  that  “you  are  born”,  but  not  “You  are 
born-in-the-present-moment”.’  Again,  ‘Could 
you  do  what  you  can,  and  as  you  can?’  ‘Yes.’ 
‘But  when  not  harping,  you  have  the  power  to 
harp:  and  therefore  you  could  harp  when  not 
[25]  harping.’  ‘No:  he  has  not  the  power  to 
harp-while-not-harping;  merely,  when  he  is  not 
doing  it,  he  has  the  power  to  do  it.’ 

Some  people  solve  this  last  refutation  in  an¬ 
other  way  as  well.  For,  they  say,  if  he  has 
granted  that  he  can  do  anything  in  the  way  he 
can,  still  it  does  not  follow  that  he  can  harp 
when  not  harping:  for  it  has  not  been  granted 
that  he  will  do  anything  in  every  way  in  which 
[30]  he  can;  and  it  is  not  the  same  thing  ‘to  do 
a  thing  in  the  way  he  can’  and  ‘to  do  it  in 


ON  SOPHISTICAL  REFUTATIONS 


1 78b 

every  way  in  which  he  can’.  But  evidently 
they  do  not  solve  it  properly:  for  of  arguments 
that  depend  upon  the  same  point  the  solution 
is  the  same,  whereas  this  will  not  fit  all  cases 
of  the  kind  nor  yet  all  ways  of  putting  the 
questions:  it  is  valid  against  the  questioner, 
but  not  against  his  argument. 

21 

[^5]  Accentuation  gives  rise  to  no  fallacious  ar¬ 
guments,  either  as  written  or  as  spoken,  except 
perhaps  some  few  that  might  be  made  up;  e.g. 
the  following  argument.  ‘Is  ov  KaraXveis  a 
house?’  ‘Yes.’  ‘Is  then  ov  kcltoXv ets  the  nega- 
1 78a  tion  of  KaraXi>€6S?’  ‘Yes.’  ‘But  you  said 
that  o5  KCLTaXveis  is  a  house:  therefore  the 
house  is  a  negation.’  How  one  should  solve 
this,  is  clear:  for  the  word  does  not  mean  the 
same  when  spoken  with  an  acuter  and  when 
spoken  with  a  graver  accent. 

22 

It  is  clear  also  how  one  must  meet  those  fal- 
[5]  lacies  that  depend  on  the  identical  expres¬ 
sions  of  things  that  are  not  identical,  seeing 
that  we  are  in  possession  of  the  kinds  of  predi¬ 
cations.  For  the  one  man,  say,  has  granted, 
when  asked,  that  a  term  denoting  a  substance 
does  not  belong  as  an  attribute,  while  the  other 
has  shown  that  some  attribute  belongs  which  is 
in  the  Category  of  Relation  or  of  Quantity,  but 
is  usually  thought  to  denote  a  substance  be¬ 
cause  of  its  expression;  e.g.  in  the  following 
argument:  ‘Is  it  possible  to  be  doing  and  to 
have  done  the  same  thing  at  the  same  time?’ 
[jo]  ‘No.’  ‘But,  you  see,  it  is  surely  possible  to 
be  seeing  and  to  have  seen  the  same  thing  at 
the  same  time,  and  in  the  same  aspect.’  Again, 
‘Is  any  mode  of  passivity  a  mode  of  activity?’ 
‘No.’  ‘Then  “he  is  cut”,  “he  is  burnt”,  “he  is 
struck  by  some  sensible  object”  are  alike  in 
expression  and  all  denote  some  form  of  passiv¬ 
ity,  while  again  “to  say”,  “to  run”,  “to  see”  are 
[75]  like  one  another  in  expression:  but,  you 
see,  “to  see”  is  surely  a  form  of  being  struck  by 
a  sensible  object;  therefore  it  is  at  the  same  time 
a  form  of  passivity  and  of  activity.’  Suppose, 
however,  that  in  that  case  any  one,  after  grant¬ 
ing  that  it  is  not  possible  to  do  and  to  have 
done  the  same  thing  in  the  same  time,  were 
to  say  that  it  is  possible  to  see  and  to  have  seen 
it,  still  he  has  not  yet  been  refuted,  suppose 
him  to  say  that  ‘to  see’  is  not  a  form  of  ‘doing’ 
(activity)  but  of  ‘passivity’:  for  this  question 
is  required  as  well,  though  he  is  supposed  by 
[20]  the  listener  to  have  already  granted  it, 


245 

when  he  granted  that  ‘to  cut’  is  a  form  of  pres¬ 
ent,  and  ‘to  have  cut’  a  form  of  past,  activity, 
and  so  on  with  the  other  things  that  have  a  like 
expression.  For  the  listener  adds  the  rest  by 
himself,  thinking  the  meaning  to  be  alike: 
whereas  really  the  meaning  is  not  alike,  though 
it  appears  to  be  so  because  of  the  expression. 
[25]  The  same  thing  happens  here  as  happens 
in  cases  of  ambiguity:  for  in  dealing  with  am¬ 
biguous  expressions  the  tyro  in  argument  sup¬ 
poses  the  sophist  to  have  negated  the  fact  which 
he  (the  tyro)  affirmed,  and  not  merely  the 
name:  whereas  there  still  wants  the  question 
whether  in  using  the  ambiguous  term  he  had  a 
single  meaning  in  view:  for  if  he  grants  that 
that  was  so,  the  refutation  will  be  effected. 

Like  the  above  are  also  the  following  argu- 
[30]  ments.  It  is  asked  if  a  man  has  lost  what 
he  once  had  and  afterwards  has  not:  for  a  man 
will  no  longer  have  ten  dice  even  though  he 
has  only  lost  one  die.  No:  rather  it  is  that  he 
has  lost  what  he  had  before  and  has  not  now; 
but  there  is  no  necessity  for  him  to  have  lost 
as  much  or  as  many  things  as  he  has  not  now. 
So  then,  he  asks  the  questions  as  to  what  he 
has,  and  draws  the  conclusion  as  to  the  whole 
number  that  he  has:  for  ten  is  a  number.  If 
then  he  had  asked  to  begin  with,  whether  a 
man  no  longer  having  the  number  of  things 
[^5]  he  once  had  has  lost  the  whole  number, 
no  one  would  have  granted  it,  but  would  have 
said  ‘Either  the  whole  number  or  one  of  them’. 
Also  there  is  the  argument  that  ‘a  man  may 
give  what  he  has  not  got’:  for  he  has  not  got 
only  one  die.  No:  rather  it  is  that  he  has  given, 
not  what  he  had  not  got,  but  in  a  manner  in 
which  he  had  not  got  it,  viz.  just  the  one.  For 
the  word  ‘only’  does  not  signify  a  particular 
substance  or  quality  or  number,  but  a  manner 
178b  of  relation,  e.g.  that  it  is  not  coupled 
with  any  other.  It  is  therefore  just  as  if  he  had 
asked  ‘Could  a  man  give  what  he  has  not  got?’ 
and,  on  being  given  the  answer  ‘No’,  were  to 
ask  if  a  man  could  give  a  thing  quickly  when 
he  had  not  got  it  quickly,  and,  on  this  being 
granted,  were  to  conclude  that  ‘a  man  could 
give  what  he  had  not  got’.  It  is  quite  evident 
[5]  that  he  has  not  proved  his  point:  for  to 
‘give  quickly’  is  not  to  give  a  thing,  but  to  give 
in  a  certain  manner;  and  a  man  could  certainly 
give  a  thing  in  a  manner  in  which  he  has  not 
got  it,  e.g.  he  might  have  got  it  with  pleasure 
and  give  it  with  pain. 

Like  these  are  also  all  arguments  of  the  fol¬ 
lowing  kind:  ‘Could  a  man  strike  a  blow  with 
a  hand  which  he  has  not  got,  or  see  with  an  eye 


CHAPTERS  19-22 


246  ON  SOPHISTICAL  REFUTATIONS  179* 


which  he  has  not  got?’  For  he  has  not  got 
[/o]  only  one  eye.  Some  people  solve  this  case, 
where  a  man  has  more  than  one  eye,  or  more 
than  one  of  anything  else,  by  saying  also  that 
he  has  only  one.  Others  also  solve  it  as  they 
solve  the  refutation  of  the  view  that  ‘what  a 
man  has,  he  has  received’:  for  A  gave  only  one 
vote;  and  certainly  B,  they  say,  has  only  one 
vote  from  A.  Others,  again,  proceed  by  de¬ 
molishing  straight  away  the  proposition  asked, 
and  admitting  that  it  is  quite  possible  to  have 
what  one  has  not  received;  e.g.  to  have  received 
[75]  sweet  wine,  but  then,  owing  to  its  going 
bad  in  the  course  of  receipt,  to  have  it  sour. 
But,  as  was  said  also  above,1  all  these  persons 
direct  their  solutions  against  the  man,  not 
against  his  argument.  For  if  this  were  a  genu¬ 
ine  solution,  then,  suppose  any  one  to  grant 
the  opposite,  he  could  find  no  solution,  just  as 
happens  in  other  cases;  e.g.  suppose  the  true 
solution  to  be  ‘So-and-so  is  partly  true  and 
[20]  partly  not’,  then,  if  the  answerer  grants 
the  expression  without  any  qualification,  the 
sophist’s  conclusion  follows.  If,  on  the  other 
hand,  the  conclusion  does  not  follow,  then  that 
could  not  be  the  true  solution:  and  what  we 
say  in  regard  to  the  foregoing  examples  is  that, 
even  if  all  the  sophist’s  premisses  be  granted, 
still  no  proof  is  effected. 

Moreover,  the  following  too  belong  to  this 
[25]  group  of  arguments.  ‘If  something  be  in 
writing  did  some  one  write  it?’  ‘Yes.’  ‘But  it 
is  now  in  writing  that  you  are  seated — a  false 
statement,  though  it  was  true  at  the  time  when 
it  was  written:  therefore  the  statement  that 
was  written  is  at  the  same  time  false  and  true.’ 
But  this  is  fallacious,  for  the  falsity  or  truth  of 
a  statement  or  opinion  indicates  not  a  sub¬ 
stance  but  a  quality:  for  the  same  account  ap¬ 
plies  to  the  case  of  an  opinion  as  well.  Again, 
‘Is  what  a  learner  learns  what  he  learns?’  ‘Yes.’ 
[jo]  ‘But  suppose  some  one  learns  “slow” 
quick’.  Then  his  (the  sophist’s)  words  denote 
not  what  the  learner  learns  but  how  he  learns 
it.  Also,  ‘Does  a  man  tread  upon  what  he  walks 
through?’  ‘Yes.’  ‘But  X  walks  through  a  whole 
day.’  No,  rather  the  words  denote  not  what 
he  walks  through,  but  when  he  walks;  just  as 
when  any  one  uses  the  words  ‘to  drink  the 
cup’  he  denotes  not  what  he  drinks,  but  the 
vessel  out  of  which  he  drinks.  Also,  ‘Is  it 
either  by  learning  or  by  discovery  that  a  man 
knows  what  he  knows?’  ‘Yes.’  ‘But  suppose 
[35]  that  of  a  pair  of  things  he  has  discovered 
one  and  learned  the  other,  the  pair  is  not 

1 177b3I* 


known  to  him  by  either  method.’  No:  ‘what’ 
he  knows,  means  ‘every  single  thing’  he  knows, 
individually;  but  this  does  not  mean  ‘all  the 
things’  he  knows,  collectively.  Again,  there  is 
the  proof  that  there  is  a  ‘third  man’  distinct 
from  Man  and  from  individual  men.  But  that 
is  a  fallacy,  for  ‘Man’,  and  indeed  every  gen¬ 
eral  predicate,  denotes  not  an  individual  sub¬ 
stance,  but  a  particular  quality,  or  the  being 
related  to  something  in  a  particular  manner, 
or  something  of  that  sort.  Likewise  also  in  the 
179a  case  of  ‘Coriscus’  and  ‘Coriscus  the 
musician’  there  is  the  problem,  ‘Are  they  the 
same  or  different?’  For  the  one  denotes  an  in¬ 
dividual  substance  and  the  other  a  quality,  so 
that  it  cannot  be  isolated;  though  it  is  not  the 
isolation  which  creates  the  ‘third  man’,  but  the 
admission  that  it  is  an  individual  substance. 
[5]  For  ‘Man’  cannot  be  an  individual  sub¬ 
stance,  as  Callias  is.  Nor  is  the  case  improved 
one  whit  even  if  one  were  to  call  the  element 
he  has  isolated  not  an  individual  substance  but 
a  quality:  for  there  will  still  be  the  one  beside 
the  many,  just  as  ‘Man’  was.  It  is  evident  then 
that  one  must  not  grant  that  what  is  a  com¬ 
mon  predicate  applying  to  a  class  universally  is 
an  individual  substance,  but  must  say  that  it 
[/o]  denotes  either  a  quality,  or  a  relation,  or 
a  quantity,  or  something  of  that  kind. 

23 

It  is  a  general  rule  in  dealing  with  arguments 
that  depend  on  language  that  the  solution  al¬ 
ways  follows  the  opposite  of  the  point  on  which 
the  argument  turns:  e.g.  if  the  argument  de¬ 
pends  upon  combination,  then  the  solution  con¬ 
sists  in  division;  if  upon  division,  then  in  com¬ 
bination.  Again,  if  it  depends  on  an  acute  accent, 
the  solution  is  a  grave  accent;  if  on  a  grave  ac- 
[75]  cent,  it  is  an  acute.  If  it  depends  on  am¬ 
biguity,  one  can  solve  it  by  using  the  opposite 
term;  e.g.  if  you  find  yourself  calling  something 
inanimate,  despite  your  previous  denial  that  it 
was  so,  show  in  what  sense  it  is  alive:  if,  on  the 
other  hand,  one  has  declared  it  to  be  inanimate 
and  the  sophist  has  proved  it  to  be  animate, 
say  how  it  is  inanimate.  Likewise  also  in  a  case 
[20]  of  amphiboly.  If  the  argument  depends 
on  likeness  of  expression,  the  opposite  will  be 
the  solution.  ‘Could  a  man  give  what  he  has 
not  got?’  ‘No,  not  what  he  has  not  got;  but  he 
could  give  it  in  a  way  in  which  he  has  not  got 
it,  e.g.  one  die  by  itself.’  Does  a  man  know 
either  by  learning  or  by  discovery  each  thing 
that  he  knows,  singly?  ‘Yes,  but  not  the  things 
that  he  knows,  collectively.’  Also  a  man  treads. 


180* 

perhaps,  on  any  thing  he  walks  through,  but 
not  on  the  time  he  walks  through.  Likewise 
[25]  also  in  the  case  of  the  other  examples. 

24 

In  dealing  with  arguments  that  depend  on 
Accident,  one  and  the  same  solution  meets  all 
cases.  For  since  it  is  indeterminate  when  an  at¬ 
tribute  should  be  ascribed  to  a  thing,  in  cases 
where  it  belongs  to  the  accident  of  the  thing, 
and  since  in  some  cases  it  is  generally  agreed 
and  people  admit  that  it  belongs,  while  in 
others  they  deny  that  it  need  belong,  we  should 
[jo]  therefore,  as  soon  as  the  conclusion  has 
been  drawn,  say  in  answer  to  them  all  alike, 
that  there  is  no  need  for  such  an  attribute  to 
belong.  One  must,  however,  be  prepared  to  ad¬ 
duce  an  example  of  the  kind  of  attribute 
meant.  All  arguments  such  as  the  following 
depend  upon  Accident.  ‘Do  you  know  what  I 
am  going  to  ask  you?’  ‘Do  you  know  the  man 
who  is  approaching’,  or  ‘the  man  in  the  mask’? 
‘Is  the  statue  your  work  of  art?’  or  ‘Is  the  dog 
[35]  y°ur  father?’  ‘Is  the  product  of  a  small 
number  with  a  small  number  a  small  num¬ 
ber?’  For  it  is  evident  in  all  these  cases  that 
there  is  no  necessity  for  the  attribute  which  is 
true  of  the  thing’s  accident  to  be  true  of  the 
thing  as  well.  For  only  to  things  that  are  indis¬ 
tinguishable  and  one  in  essence  is  it  generally 
agreed  that  all  the  same  attributes  belong; 
whereas  in  the  case  of  a  good  thing,  to  be  good 
is  not  the  same  as  to  be  going  to  be  the  subject 
179b  of  a  question;  nor  in  the  case  of  a  man 
approaching,  or  wearing  a  mask,  is  ‘to  be  ap¬ 
proaching’  the  same  thing  as  ‘to  be  Coriscus’, 
so  that  suppose  I  know  Coriscus,  but  do  not 
know  the  man  who  is  approaching,  it  still  isn’t 
the  case  that  I  both  know  and  do  not  know  the 
same  man;  nor,  again,  if  this  is  mine  and  is 
[5]  also  a  work  of  art,  is  it  therefore  my  work 
of  art,  but  my  property  or  thing  or  something 
else.  (The  solution  is  after  the  same  manner  in 
the  other  cases  as  well.) 

Some  solve  these  refutations  by  demolish¬ 
ing  the  original  proposition  asked:  for  they  say 
that  it  is  possible  to  know  and  not  to  know  the 
same  thing,  only  not  in  the  same  respect:  ac¬ 
cordingly,  when  they  don’t  know  the  man  who 
is  coming  towards  them,  but  do  know  Coris- 
[/o]  cus,  they  assert  that  they  do  know  and 
don’t  know  the  same  object,  but  not  in  the 
same  respect.  Yet,  as  we  have  already  re¬ 
marked,1  the  correction  of  arguments  that  de- 

1 177h  31* 


247 

pend  upon  the  same  point  ought  to  be  the 
same,  whereas  this  one  will  not  stand  if  one 
adopts  the  same  principle  in  regard  not  to 
knowing  something,  but  to  being,  or  to  being 
in  a  certain  state,  e.g.  suppose  that  X  is  a 
[75]  father,  and  is  also  yours:  for  if  in  some 
cases  this  is  true  and  it  is  possible  to  know  and 
not  to  know  the  same  thing,  yet  with  that  case 
the  solution  stated  has  nothing  to  do.  Certainly 
there  is  nothing  to  prevent  the  same  argument 
from  having  a  number  of  flaws;  but  it  is  not 
the  exposition  of  any  and  every  fault  that  con¬ 
stitutes  a  solution:  for  it  is  possible  for  a  man 
to  show  that  a  false  conclusion  has  been 
proved,  but  not  to  show  on  what  it  depends, 
e.g.  in  the  case  of  Zeno’s  argument  to  prove 
[20]  that  motion  is  impossible.  So  that  even  if 
any  one  were  to  try  to  establish  that  this  doc¬ 
trine  is  an  impossible  one,  he  still  is  mistaken, 
and  even  if  he  proved  his  case  ten  thousand 
times  over,  still  this  is  no  solution  of  Zeno’s 
argument:  for  the  solution  was  all  along  an 
exposition  of  false  reasoning,  showing  on  what 
its  falsity  depends.  If  then  he  has  not  proved 
his  case,  or  is  trying  to  establish  even  a  true 
proposition,  or  a  false  one,  in  a  false  manner, 
[25]  to  point  this  out  is  a  true  solution.  Pos¬ 
sibly,  indeed,  the  present  suggestion  may  very 
well  apply  in  some  cases:  but  in  these  cases,  at 
any  rate,  not  even  this  would  be  generally 
agreed:  for  he  knows  both  that  Coriscus  is 
Coriscus  and  that  the  approaching  figure  is 
approaching.  To  know  and  not  to  know  the 
same  thing  is  generally  thought  to  be  possible, 
when  e.g.  one  knows  that  X  is  white,  but  does 
[30]  not  realize  that  he  is  musical:  for  in  that 
way  he  does  know  and  not  know  the  same 
thing,  though  not  in  the  same  respect.  But  as 
to  the  approaching  figure  and  Coriscus  he 
knows  both  that  it  is  approaching  and  that  he 
is  Coriscus. 

A  like  mistake  to  that  of  those  whom  we 
have  mentioned  is  that  of  those  who  solve  the 
proof  that  every  number  is  a  small  number: 
[55]  for  if,  when  the  conclusion  is  not  proved, 
they  pass  this  over  and  say  that  a  conclusion 
has  been  proved  and  is  true,  on  the  ground  that 
every  number  is  both  great  and  small,  they 
make  a  mistake. 

Some  people  also  use  the  principle  of  ambi¬ 
guity  to  solve  the  aforesaid  reasonings,  e.g. 
the  proof  that  ‘X  is  your  father’,  or  ‘son’,  or 
‘slave’.  Yet  it  is  evident  that  if  the  appearance 
180a  of  a  proof  depends  upon  a  plurality  of 
meanings,  the  term,  or  the  expression  in  ques¬ 
tion,  ought  to  bear  a  number  of  literal  senses. 


CHAPTERS  22-24 


248 

whereas  no  one  speaks  of  A  as  being  ‘B’s 
child’  in  the  literal  sense,  if  B  is  the  child’s 
master,  but  the  combination  depends  upon 
[5]  Accident.  ‘Is  A  yours P’  ‘Yes.’  ‘And  is  A  a 
child?’  ‘Yes.’  ‘Then  the  child  A  is  yours,’  be¬ 
cause  he  happens  to  be  both  yours  and  a  child; 
but  he  is  not  ‘your  child’. 

There  is  also  the  proof  that  ‘something  “of 
evils”  is  good’;  for  wisdom  is  a  ‘knowledge  “of 
evils”  ’.  But  the  expression  that  this  is  ‘of  so- 
and-so’  (=‘so-and-so’s’)  has  not  a  number  of 
[/o]  meanings:  it  means  that  it  is  ‘so-and-so’s 
property’.  We  may  suppose  of  course,  on  the 
other  hand,  that  it  has  a  number  of  meanings 
— for  we  also  say  that  man  is  ‘of  the  animals’, 
though  not  their  property;  and  also  that  any 
term  related  to  ‘evils’  in  a  way  expressed  by  a 
genitive  case  is  on  that  account  a  so-and-so  ‘of 
evils’,  though  it  is  not  one  of  the  evils — but  in 
that  case  the  apparently  different  meanings 
seem  to  depend  on  whether  the  term  is  used 
relatively  or  absolutely.  ‘Yet  it  is  conceivably 
ossible  to  find  a  real  ambiguity  in  the  phrase 
75]  “Something  of  evils  is  good”.’  Perhaps, 
but  not  with  regard  to  the  phrase  in  question. 
It  would  occur  more  nearly,  suppose  that  ‘A 
servant  is  good  of  the  wicked’;  though  per¬ 
haps  it  is  not  quite  found  even  there:  for  a 
thing  may  be  ‘good’  and  be  ‘XV  without  being 
at  the  same  time  ‘X’s  good’.  Nor  is  the  saying 
that  ‘Man  is  of  the  animals’  a  phrase  with  a 
number  of  meanings:  for  a  phrase  does  not 
[20]  become  possessed  of  a  number  of  mean¬ 
ings  merely  suppose  we  express  it  elliptically: 
for  we  express  ‘Give  me  the  Iliad’  by  quoting 
half  a  line  of  it,  e.g.  ‘Give  me  “Sing,  goddess, 
of  the  wrath  . . ’ 

Those  arguments  which  depend  upon  an  ex¬ 
pression  that  is  valid  of  a  particular  thing,  or  in 
a  particular  respect,  or  place,  or  manner,  or  re¬ 
lation,  and  not  valid  absolutely,  should  be 
solved  by  considering  the  conclusion  in  rela- 
[25]  tion  to  its  contradictory,  to  see  if  any  of 
these  things  can  possibly  have  happened  to  it. 
For  it  is  impossible  for  contraries  and  oppo¬ 
sites  and  an  affirmative  and  a  negative  to  be¬ 
long  to  the  same  thing  absolutely;  there  is, 
however,  nothing  to  prevent  each  from  belong¬ 
ing  in  a  particular  respect  or  relation  or  man¬ 
ner,  or  to  prevent  one  of  them  from  belonging 
in  a  particular  respect  and  the  other  absolutely. 
So  that  if  this  one  belongs  absolutely  and  that 
[jo]  one  in  a  particular  respect,  there  is  as  yet 
no  refutation.  This  is  a  feature  one  has  to  find 


180b 

in  the  conclusion  by  examining  it  in  compari¬ 
son  with  its  contradictory. 

All  arguments  of  the  following  kind  have 
this  feature:  ‘Is  it  possible  for  what  is-not  to 
be?’  ‘No.’  ‘But,  you  see,  it  is  something,  despite 
its  not  being .’  Likewise  also,  Being  will  not  be; 
for  it  will  not  be  some  particular  form  of  being. 
[J5]  ‘Is  it  possible  for  the  same  man  at  the 
same  time  to  be  a  keeper  and  a  breaker  of  his 
oath?’  ‘Can  the  same  man  at  the  same  time 
both  obey  and  disobey  the  same  man?’  Or  isn’t 
it  the  case  that  being  something  in  particular 
and  Being  are  not  the  same?  On  the  other 
hand,  Not-being,  even  if  it  be  something,  need 
not  also  have  absolute  ‘being’  as  well.  Nor  if  a 
man  keeps  his  oath  in  this  particular  instance 
or  in  this  particular  respect,  is  he  bound  also  to 
be  a  keeper  of  oaths  absolutely,  but  he  who 
180b  swears  that  he  will  break  his  oath,  and 
then  breaks  it,  keeps  this  particular  oath  only; 
he  is  not  a  keeper  of  his  oath:  nor  is  the  dis¬ 
obedient  man  ‘obedient’,  though  he  obeys  one 
particular  command.  The  argument  is  similar, 
also,  as  regards  the  problem  whether  the  same 
man  can  at  the  same  time  say  what  is  both  false 
and  true:  but  it  appears  to  be  a  troublesome 
question  because  it  is  not  easy  to  see  in  which 
of  the  two  connexions  the  word  ‘absolutely’  is 
to  be  rendered — with  ‘true’  or  with  ‘false’. 
[5]  There  is,  however,  nothing  to  prevent  it 
from  being  false  absolutely,  though  true  in 
some  particular  respect  or  relation,  i.e.  being 
true  in  some  things,  though  not  ‘true’  absolute¬ 
ly.  Likewise  also  in  cases  of  some  particular  re¬ 
lation  and  place  and  time.  For  all  arguments  of 
the  following  kind  depend  upon  this.  ‘Is  health, 
or  wealth,  a  good  thing?’  ‘Yes.’  ‘But  to  the  fool 
[70]  who  does  not  use  it  aright  it  is  not  a  good 
thing:  therefore  it  is  both  good  and  not  good.’ 
‘Is  health,  or  political  power,  a  good  thing?’ 
‘Yes.’  ‘But  sometimes  it  is  not  particularly  good: 
therefore  the  same  thing  is  both  good  and  not 
good  to  the  same  man.’  Or  rather  there  is  noth¬ 
ing  to  prevent  a  thing,  though  good  absolutely, 
being  not  good  to  a  particular  man,  or  being 
good  to  a  particular  man,  and  yet  not  good 
[75]  now  or  here.  ‘Is  that  which  the  prudent 
man  would  not  wish,  an  evil?’  ‘Yes.’  ‘But  to 
get  rid  of,  he  would  not  wish  the  good:  there¬ 
fore  the  good  is  an  evil.’  But  that  is  a  mistake; 
for  it  is  not  the  same  thing  to  say  ‘The  good  is 
an  evil’  and  ‘to  get  rid  of  the  good  is  an  evil’. 
Likewise  also  the  argument  of  the  thief  is  mis¬ 
taken.  For  it  is  not  the  case  that  if  the  thief  is 
an  evil  thing,  acquiring  things  is  also  evil: 
what  he  wishes,  therefore,  is  not  what  is  evil 


ON  SOPHISTICAL  REFUTATIONS 


181 

[ 20 ]  but  what  is  good;  for  to  acquire  some¬ 
thing  good  is  good.  Also,  disease  is  an  evil 
thing,  but  not  to  get  rid  of  disease.  ‘Is  the  just 
preferable  to  the  unjust,  and  what  takes  place 
justly  to  what  takes  place  unjustly?’  ‘Yes.’  ‘But 
to  be  put  to  death  unjustly  is  preferable.’  ‘Is  it 
just  that  each  should  have  his  own?’  ‘Yes.’  ‘But 
whatever  decisions  a  man  comes  to  on  the 
[25]  strength  of  his  personal  opinion,  even  if  it 
be  a  false  opinion,  are  valid  in  law:  therefore 
the  same  result  is  both  just  and  unjust.’  Also, 
‘should  one  decide  in  favour  of  him  who  says 
what  is  just,  or  of  him  who  says  what  is  un¬ 
just?’  ‘The  former.’  ‘But,  you  see,  it  is  just  for 
the  injured  party  also  to  say  fully  the  things  he 
has  suffered;  and  these  were  unjust.’  But  these 
are  fallacies.  For  because  to  suffer  a  thing  un¬ 
justly  is  preferable,  unjust  ways  are  not  there¬ 
to]  fore  preferable  to  just;  but,  absolutely, 
just  ways  are  preferable,  though  in  this  partic¬ 
ular  case  the  unjust  may  very  well  be  better 
than  the  just.  Also,  to  have  one’s  own  is  just, 
while  to  have  what  is  another’s  is  not  just:  all 
the  same,  the  decision  in  question  may  very 
well  be  a  just  decision,  whatever  it  be  that  the 
opinion  of  the  man  who  gave  the  decision  sup¬ 
ports:  for  because  it  is  just  in  this  particular 
case  or  in  this  particular  manner,  it  is  not  also 
just  absolutely.  Likewise  also,  though  things 
are  unjust,  there  is  nothing  to  prevent  the 
[35]  speaking  of  them  being  just:  for  because 
to  speak  of  things  is  just,  there  is  no  necessity 
that  the  things  should  be  just,  any  more  than 
because  to  speak  of  things  be  of  use,  the  things 
need  be  of  use.  Likewise  also  in  the  case  of 
what  is  just.  So  that  it  is  not  the  case  that  be¬ 
cause  the  things  spoken  of  are  unjust,  the  vic¬ 
tory  goes  to  him  who  speaks  unjust  things:  for 
he  speaks  of  things  that  are  just  to  speak  of, 
though  absolutely,  i.e.  to  suffer,  they  are  unjust. 

26 

181a  Refutations  that  depend  on  the  definition 
of  a  refutation  must,  according  to  the  plan 
sketched  above,1  be  met  by  comparing  together 
the  conclusion  with  its  contradictory,  and  see¬ 
ing  that  it  shall  involve  the  same  attribute  in 
the  same  respect  and  relation  and  manner  and 
[5]  time.  If  this  additional  question  be  put  at 
the  start,  you  should  not  admit  that  it  is  impos¬ 
sible  for  the  same  thing  to  be  both  double  and 
not  double,  but  grant  that  it  is  possible,  only 
not  in  such  a  way  as  was  agreed  to  constitute 
a  refutation  of  your  case.  All  the  following 
arguments  depend  upon  a  point  of  that  kind. 

1 167s  21. 


249 

‘Does  a  man  who  knows  A  to  be  A,  know  the 
thing  called  A ?'  and  in  the  same  way,  ‘is  one 
who  is  ignorant  that  A  is  A  ignorant  of  the 
[/o]  thing  called  A ?’  ‘Yes.’  ‘But  one  who 
knows  that  Coriscus  is  Coriscus  might  be  igno¬ 
rant  of  the  fact  that  he  is  musical,  so  that  he 
both  knows  and  is  ignorant  of  the  same  thing.’ 
‘Is  a  thing  four  cubits  long  greater  than  a  thing 
three  cubits  long?’  ‘Yes.’  ‘But  a  thing  might 
grow  from  three  to  four  cubits  in  length;’  now 
what  is  ‘greater’  is  greater  than  a  ‘less’:  accord¬ 
ingly  the  thing  in  question  will  be  both  greater 
and  less  than  itself  in  the  same  respect. 

27 

[75]  As  to  refutations  that  depend  on  begging 
and  assuming  the  original  point  to  be  proved, 
suppose  the  nature  of  the  question  to  be  obvi¬ 
ous,  one  should  not  grant  it,  even  though  it  be 
a  view  generally  held,  but  should  tell  him  the 
truth.  Suppose,  however,  that  it  escapes  one, 
then,  thanks  to  the  badness  of  arguments  of 
that  kind,  one  should  make  one’s  error  recoil 
upon  the  questioner,  and  say  that  he  has 
brought  no  argument:  for  a  refutation  must  be 
proved  independently  of  the  original  point. 
Secondly,  one  should  say  that  the  point  was 
ranted  under  the  impression  that  he  intended 
20]  not  to  use  it  as  a  premiss,  but  to  reason 
against  it,  in  the  opposite  way  from  that  adopted 
in  refutations  on  side  issues. 

28 

Also,  those  refutations  that  bring  one  to  their 
conclusion  through  the  consequent  you  should 
show  up  in  the  course  of  the  argument  itself. 
The  mode  in  which  consequences  follow  is 
twofold.  For  the  argument  either  is  that  as 
the  universal  follows  on  its  particular — as  (e.g.) 
‘animal’  follows  from  ‘man’ — so  does  the  par- 
125]  ticular  on  its  universal:  for  the  claim  is 
made  that  if  A  is  always  found  with  £,  then  B 
also  is  always  found  with  A.  Or  else  it  proceeds 
by  way  of  the  opposites  of  the  terms  involved: 
for  if  A  follows  B ,  it  is  claimed  that  A’s  oppo¬ 
site  will  follow  B's  opposite.  On  this  latter 
claim  the  argument  of  Melissus  also  depends: 
for  he  claims  that  because  that  which  has  come 
to  be  has  a  beginning,  that  which  has  not  come 
to  be  has  none,  so  that  if  the  heaven  has  not 
come  to  be,  it  is  also  eternal.  But  that  is  not  so; 
[50]  for  the  sequence  is  vice  versa. 

29 

In  the  case  of  any  refutations  whose  reasoning 
depends  on  some  addition,  look  and  see  if  upon 


CHAPTERS  24-29 


250  ON  SOPHISTICAL  REFUTATIONS  182a 


its  subtraction  the  absurdity  follows  none  the 
less:  and  then  if  so,  the  answerer  should  point 
this  out,  and  say  that  he  granted  the  addition 
not  because  he  really  thought  it,  but  for  the 
sake  of  the  argument,  whereas  the  questioner 
[35]  has  not  used  it  for  the  purpose  of  his  argu¬ 
ment  at  all. 

30 

To  meet  those  refutations  which  make  several 
questions  into  one,  one  should  draw  a  distinc¬ 
tion  between  them  straight  away  at  the  start. 
For  a  question  must  be  single  to  which  there  is 
a  single  answer,  so  that  one  must  not  affirm  or 
deny  several  things  of  one  thing,  nor  one  thing 
of  many,  but  one  of  one.  But  just  as  in  the  case 
of  ambiguous  terms,  an  attribute  belongs  to  a 
181b  term  sometimes  in  both  its  senses,  and 
sometimes  in  neither,  so  that  a  simple  answer 
does  one,  as  it  happens,  no  harm  despite  the 
fact  that  the  question  is  not  simple,  so  it  is  in 
these  cases  of  double  questions  too.  Whenever, 
then,  the  several  attributes  belong  to  the  one 
subject,  or  the  one  to  the  many,  the  man  who 
[5]  gives  a  simple  answer  encounters  no  ob¬ 
stacle  even  though  he  has  committed  this  mis¬ 
take:  but  whenever  an  attribute  belongs  to  one 
subject  but  not  to  the  other,  or  there  is  a  ques¬ 
tion  of  a  number  of  attributes  belonging  to  a 
number  of  subjects  and  in  one  sense  both  belong 
to  both,  while  in  another  sense,  again,  they  do 
not,  then  there  is  trouble,  so  that  one  must  be¬ 
ware  of  this.  Thus  (e.g.)  in  the  following  argu¬ 
ments:  Supposing  A  to  be  good  and  B  evil,  you 
[/o]  will,  if  you  give  a  single  answer  about 
both,  be  compelled  to  say  that  it  is  true  to  call 
these  good,  and  that  it  is  true  to  call  them  evil 
and  likewise  to  call  them  neither  good  nor  evil 
(for  each  of  them  has  not  each  character),  so 
that  the  same  thing  will  be  both  good  and  evil 
and  neither  good  nor  evil.  Also,  since  every¬ 
thing  is  the  same  as  itself  and  different  from 
anything  else,  inasmuch  as  the  man  who  an¬ 
swers  double  questions  simply  can  be  made  to 
say  that  several  things  are  ‘the  same’  not  as  oth¬ 
er  things  but  ‘as  themselves’,  and  also  that  they 
are  different  from  themselves,  it  follows  that 
the  same  things  must  be  both  the  same  as  and 
[75]  different  from  themselves.  Moreover,  if 
what  is  good  becomes  evil  while  what  is  evil  is 
good,  then  they  must  both  become  two.  So  of 
two  unequal  things  each  being  equal  to  itself, 
it  will  follow  that  they  are  both  equal  and  un¬ 
equal  to  themselves  . 

Now  these  refutations  fall  into  the  province 
[20]  of  other  solutions  as  well:  for  ‘both’  and 


‘all’  have  more  than  one  meaning,  so  that  the 
resulting  affirmation  and  denial  of  the  same 
thing  does  not  occur,  except  verbally:  and  this 
is  not  what  we  meant  by  a  refutation.  But  it  is 
clear  that  if  there  be  not  put  a  single  question 
on  a  number  of  points,  but  the  answerer  has 
affirmed  or  denied  one  attribute  only  of  one 
subject  only,  the  absurdity  will  not  come  to 
pass. 

31 

[25]  With  regard  to  those  who  draw  one  into 
repeating  the  same  thing  a  number  of  times,  it 
is  clear  that  one  must  not  grant  that  predica¬ 
tions  of  relative  terms  have  any  meaning  in  ab¬ 
straction  by  themselves,  e.g.  that  ‘double’  is  a 
significant  term  apart  from  the  whole  phrase 
‘double  of  half’  merely  on  the  ground  that  it 
figures  in  it.  For  ten  figures  in  ‘ten  minus  one’ 
[30]  and  ‘do’  in  ‘not  do’,  and  generally  the  af¬ 
firmation  in  the  negation;  but  for  all  that,  sup¬ 
pose  any  one  were  to  say,  ‘This  is  not  white’, 
he  does  not  say  that  it  is  white.  The  bare  word 
‘double’,  one  may  perhaps  say,  has  not  even  any 
meaning  at  all,  any  more  than  has  ‘the’  in  ‘the 
half’:  and  even  if  it  has  a  meaning,  yet  it  has 
not  the  same  meaning  as  in  the  combination. 
Nor  is  ‘knowledge’  the  same  thing  in  a  specific 
branch  of  it  (suppose  it,  e.g.  to  be  ‘medical 
[35]  knowledge’)  as  it  is  in  general:  for  in 
general  it  was  the  ‘knowledge  of  the  know- 
able’.  In  the  case  of  terms  that  are  predicated 
of  the  terms  through  which  they  are  defined, 
you  should  say  the  same  thing,  that  the  term 
defined  is  not  the  same  in  abstraction  as  it  is  in 
the  whole  phrase.  For  ‘concave’  has  a  general 
meaning  which  is  the  same  in  the  case  of  a 
snub  nose,  and  of  a  bandy  leg,  but  when  added 
to  either  substantive  nothing  prevents  it  from 
differentiating  its  meaning;  in  fact  it  bears  one 
182a  sense  as  applied  to  the  nose,  and  another 
as  applied  to  the  leg:  for  in  the  former  connex¬ 
ion  it  means  ‘snub’  and  in  the  latter  ‘bandy¬ 
shaped’;  i.e.  it  makes  no  difference  whether 
you  say  ‘a  snub  nose’  or  ‘a  concave  nose’.  More¬ 
over,  the  expression  must  not  be  granted  in  the 
nominative  case:  for  it  is  a  falsehood.  For  snub¬ 
ness  is  not  a  concave  nose  but  something  (e.g. 
an  affection)  belonging  to  a  nose:  hence,  there 
[5]  is  no  absurdity  in  supposing  that  the  snub 
nose  is  a  nose  possessing  the  concavity  that  be¬ 
longs  to  a  nose. 

32 

With  regard  to  solecisms,  we  have  previous¬ 
ly  said1  what  it  is  that  appears  to  bring  them 
1  i65b  20  f. 


182b  CHAPTERS  29-33  251 


about;  the  method  of  their  solution  will  be 
clear  in  the  course  of  the  arguments  them¬ 
selves.  Solecism  is  the  result  aimed  at  in  all  ar- 
[10]  guments  of  the  following  kind:  ‘Is  a  thing 
truly  that  which  you  truly  call  it?’  ‘Yes\  ‘But, 
speaking  of  a  stone,  you  call  him  real:  therefore 
of  a  stone  it  follows  that  “him  is  real”.*  No: 
rather,  talking  of  a  stone  means  not  saying 
‘which’  but  ‘whom’,  and  not  ‘that’  but  ‘him’. 
If,  then,  any  one  were  to  ask,  ‘Is  a  stone  him 
whom  you  truly  call  him?’  he  would  be  gener¬ 
ally  thought  not  to  be  speaking  good  Greek, 
any  more  than  if  he  were  to  ask,  ‘Is  he  what 
you  call  her?'  Speak  in  this  way  of  a  ‘stick’  or 
[75]  any  neuter  word,  and  the  difference  does 
not  break  out.  For  this  reason,  also,  no  sole¬ 
cism  is  incurred,  suppose  any  one  asks,  ‘Is  a 
thing  what  you  say  it  to  be?’  ‘Yes’.  ‘But,  speak¬ 
ing  of  a  stick,  you  call  it  real:  therefore,  of  a 
stick  it  follows  that  it  is  real.’  ‘Stone’,  however, 
and  ‘he’  have  masculine  designations.  Now 
suppose  some  one  were  to  ask,  ‘Can  “he”  be  a 
“she”  (a  female)?’,  and  then  again,  ‘Well,  but 
is  not  he  Coriscus?’  and  then  were  to  say, 
[20]  ‘Then  he  is  a  “she”,’  he  has  not  proved 
the  solecism,  even  if  the  name  ‘Coriscus’  does 
signify  a  ‘she’,  if,  on  the  other  hand,  the  an¬ 
swerer  does  not  grant  this:  this  point  must  be 
put  as  an  additional  question:  while  if  neither 
is  it  the  fact  nor  does  he  grant  it,  then  the  soph¬ 
ist  has  not  proved  his  case  either  in  fact  or  as 
against  the  person  he  has  been  questioning.  In 
like  manner,  then,  in  the  above  instance  as 
[25]  well  it  must  be  definitely  put  that  ‘he’ 
means  the  stone.  If,  however,  this  neither  is  so 
nor  is  granted,  the  conclusion  must  not  be 
stated:  though  it  follows  apparently,  because 
the  case  (the  accusative),  that  is  really  unlike, 
appears  to  be  like  the  nominative.  ‘Is  it  true  to 
say  that  this  object  is  what  you  call  it  by  name?’ 
‘Yes’.  ‘But  you  call  it  by  the  name  of  a  shield: 
this  object  therefore  is  “of  a  shield”.’  No:  not 
necessarily,  because  the  meaning  of  ‘this  object’ 
[jo]  is  not  ‘of  a  shield’  but  ‘a  shield’:  ‘of  a 
shield’  would  be  the  meaning  of  ‘this  object’s’. 
Nor  again  if ‘He  is  what  you  call  him  by  name’, 
while  ‘the  name  you  call  him  by  is  Cleon’s’,  is 
he  therefore  ‘Cleon’s’:  for  he  is  not  ‘Cleon’s’, 
for  what  was  said  was  that  'He,  not  his,  is  what 
I  call  him  by  name’.  For  the  question,  if  put  in 
the  latter  way,  would  not  even  be  Greek.  ‘Do 
[35]  y°u  know  this?’  ‘Yes.’  ‘But  this  is  he: 
therefore  you  know  he’.  No:  rather  ‘this’  has  not 
the  same  meaning  in  ‘Do  you  know  this?’  as  in 
‘This  is  a  stone’;  in  the  first  it  stands  for  an  ac¬ 
cusative,  in  the  second  for  a  nominative  case. 


‘When  you  have  understanding  of  anything, 
do  you  understand  it?’  ‘Yes.’  ‘But  you  have 
understanding  of  a  stone:  therefore  you  under¬ 
stand  of  a  stone.’  No:  the  one  phrase  is  in  the 
genitive,  ‘of  a  stone’,  while  the  other  is  in  the 
182b  accusative,  ‘a  stone’:  and  what  was  grant¬ 
ed  was  that  ‘you  understand  that,  not  of  that, 
of  which  you  have  understanding’,  so  that  you 
understand  not  ‘of  a  stone’,  but  ‘the  stone’. 

Thus  that  arguments  of  this  kind  do  not 
prove  solecism  but  merely  appear  to  do  so,  and 
both  why  they  so  appear  and  how  you  should 
[5]  meet  them,  is  clear  from  what  has  been 
said. 

33 

We  must  also  observe  that  of  all  the  argu¬ 
ments  aforesaid  it  is  easier  with  some  to  see 
why  and  where  the  reasoning  leads  the  hearer 
astray,  while  with  others  it  is  more  difficult, 
though  often  they  are  the  same  arguments  as 
the  former.  For  we  must  call  an  argument  the 
same  if  it  depends  upon  the  same  point;  but 
the  same  argument  is  apt  to  be  thought  by 
[/o]  some  to  depend  on  diction,  by  others  on 
accident,  and  by  others  on  something  else,  be¬ 
cause  each  of  them,  when  worked  with  differ¬ 
ent  terms,  is  not  so  clear  as  it  was.  Accordingly, 
just  as  in  fallacies  that  depend  on  ambiguity, 
which  are  generally  thought  to  be  the  silliest 
[75]  form  of  fallacy,  some  are  clear  even  to  the 
man  in  the  street  (for  humorous  phrases  near¬ 
ly  all  depend  on  diction;  e.g.  ‘The  man  got  the 
cart  down  from  the  stand’;  and  ‘Where  are  you 
bound?’  ‘To  the  yard  arm’;  and  ‘Which  cow 
will  calve  afore?’  ‘Neither,  but  both  behind;’ 
and  ‘Is  the  North  wind  clear?*  ‘No,  indeed; 
for  it  has  murdered  the  beggar  and  the  mer- 
[20]  chant.*  ‘Is  he  a  Goodenough-King?’  ‘No, 
indeed;  a  Rob-son*:  and  so  with  the  great  ma¬ 
jority  of  the  rest  as  well),  while  others  appear 
to  elude  the  most  expert  (and  it  is  a  symptom 
of  this  that  they  often  fight  about  their  terms, 
e.g.  whether  the  meaning  of  ‘Being’  and  ‘One’ 
is  the  same  in  all  their  applications  or  different; 
[25]  for  some  think  that  ‘Being’  and  ‘One’ 
mean  the  same;  while  others  solve  the  argu¬ 
ment  of  Zeno  and  Parmenides  by  asserting  that 
‘One*  and  ‘Being*  are  used  in  a  number  of 
senses),  likewise  also  as  regards  fallacies  of 
Accident  and  each  of  the  other  types,  some  of 
the  arguments  will  be  easier  to  see  while  others 
are  more  difficult;  also  to  grasp  to  which  class  a 
[jo]  fallacy  belongs,  and  whether  it  is  a  refuta¬ 
tion  or  not  a  refutation,  is  not  equally  easy  in 
all  cases. 

An  incisive  argument  is  one  which  produces 


252  ON  SOPHISTICAL  REFUTATIONS  183b 


the  greatest  perplexity:  for  this  is  the  one  with 
the  sharpest  fang.  Now  perplexity  is  twofold, 
one  which  occurs  in  reasoned  arguments,  re¬ 
specting  which  of  the  propositions  asked  one  is 
[35]  t0  demolish,  and  the  other  in  contentious 
arguments,  respecting  the  manner  in  which  one 
is  to  assent  to  what  is  propounded.  Therefore 
it  is  in  syllogistic  arguments  that  the  more  in¬ 
cisive  ones  produce  the  keenest  heart-search¬ 
ing.  Now  a  syllogistic  argument  is  most  inci¬ 
sive  if  from  premisses  that  are  as  generally  ac¬ 
cepted  as  possible  it  demolishes  a  conclusion 
that  is  accepted  as  generally  as  possible.  For 
the  one  argument,  if  the  contradictory  is 
changed  about,  makes  all  the  resulting  syllo- 
183a  gisms  alike  in  character:  for  always  from 
premisses  that  are  generally  accepted  it  will 
prove  a  conclusion,  negative  or  positive  as  the 
case  may  be,  that  is  just  as  generally  accepted; 
and  therefore  one  is  bound  to  feel  perplexed. 
An  argument,  then,  of  this  kind  is  the  most  in¬ 
cisive,  viz.  the  one  that  puts  its  conclusion  on 
all  fours  with  the  propositions  asked;  and  sec¬ 
ond  comes  the  one  that  argues  from  premisses, 
all  of  which  are  equally  convincing:  for  this 
[5]  will  produce  an  equal  perplexity  as  to  what 
kind  of  premiss,  of  those  asked,  one  should  de¬ 
molish.  Herein  is  a  difficulty:  for  one  must  de¬ 
molish  something,  but  what  one  must  demol¬ 
ish  is  uncertain.  Of  contentious  arguments,  on 
the  other  hand,  the  most  incisive  is  the  one 
which,  in  the  first  place,  is  characterized  by  an 
initial  uncertainty  whether  it  has  been  properly 
reasoned  or  not;  and  also  whether  the  solution 
depends  on  a  false  premiss  or  on  the  drawing 
of  a  distinction;  while,  of  the  rest,  the  second 
[/o]  place  is  held  by  that  whose  solution  clear¬ 
ly  depends  upon  a  distinction  or  a  demolition, 
and  yet  it  does  not  reveal  clearly  which  it  is  of 
the  premisses  asked,  whose  demolition,  or  the 
drawing  of  a  distinction  within  it,  will  bring 
the  solution  about,  but  even  leaves  it  vague 
whether  it  is  on  the  conclusion  or  on  one  of  the 
premisses  that  the  deception  depends. 

Now  sometimes  an  argument  which  has  not 
been  properly  reasoned  is  silly,  supposing  the 
[75]  assumptions  required  to  be  extremely 
contrary  to  the  general  view  or  false;  but  some¬ 
times  it  ought  not  to  be  held  in  contempt.  For 
whenever  some  question  is  left  out,  of  the  kind 
that  concerns  both  the  subject  and  the  nerve  of 
the  argument,  the  reasoning  that  has  both 
failed  to  secure  this  as  well,  and  also  failed  to 
reason  properly,  is  silly ;  but  when  what  is  omit¬ 
ted  is  some  extraneous  question,  then  it  is  by 
no  means  to  be  lightly  despised,  but  the  argu- 


[20]  ment  is  quite  respectable,  though  the 
questioner  has  not  put  his  questions  well. 

Just  as  it  is  possible  to  bring  a  solution  some¬ 
times  against  the  argument,  at  others  against 
the  questioner  and  his  mode  of  questioning, 
and  at  others  against  neither  of  these,  likewise 
also  it  is  possible  to  marshal  one’s  questions  and 
reasoning  both  against  the  thesis,  and  against 
[25]  the  answerer  and  against  the  time,  when¬ 
ever  the  solution  requires  a  longer  time  to  ex¬ 
amine  than  the  period  available. 

34 

As  to  the  number,  then,  and  kind  of  sources 
whence  fallacies  arise  in  discussion,  and  how 
we  are  to  show  that  our  opponent  is  commit¬ 
ting  a  fallacy  and  make  him  utter  paradoxes; 
moreover,  by  the  use  of  what  materials  sole¬ 
mn]  cism  is  brought  about,  and  how  to  ques¬ 
tion  and  what  is  the  way  to  arrange  the  ques¬ 
tions;  moreover,  as  to  the  question  what  use  is 
served  by  all  arguments  of  this  kind,  and  con¬ 
cerning  the  answerer’s  part,  both  as  a  whole  in 
general,  and  in  particular  how  to  solve  argu¬ 
ments  and  solecisms — on  all  these  things  let 
the  foregoing  discussion  suffice.  It  remains  to 
[35]  recall  our  original  proposal  and  to  bring 
our  discussion  to  a  close  with  a  few  words 
upon  it. 

Our  programme  was,  then,  to  discover  some 
faculty  of  reasoning  about  any  theme  put  be¬ 
fore  us  from  the  most  generally  accepted  prem¬ 
isses  that  there  are.  For  that  is  the  essential 
task  of  the  art  of  discussion  (dialectic)  and  of 
183b  examination  (peirastic).  Inasmuch,  how¬ 
ever,  as  it  is  annexed  to  it,  on  account  of  the 
near  presence  of  the  art  of  sophistry  (sophis¬ 
tic),  not  only  to  be  able  to  conduct  an  examina¬ 
tion  dialectically  but  also  with  a  show  of  knowl¬ 
edge,  we  therefore  proposed  for  our  treatise 
not  only  the  aforesaid  aim  of  being  able  to  ex¬ 
act  an  account  of  any  view,  but  also  the  aim  of 
[5]  ensuring  that  in  standing  up  to  an  argu¬ 
ment  we  shall  defend  our  thesis  in  the  same 
manner  by  means  of  views  as  generally  held  as 
possible.  The  reason  of  this  we  have  explained;1 
for  this,  too,  was  why  Socrates  used  to  ask 
questions  and  not  to  answer  them;  for  he  used 
to  confess  that  he  did  not  know.  We  have  made 
clear,  in  the  course  of  what  precedes,  the  num¬ 
ber  both  of  the  points  with  reference  to  which, 
and  of  the  materials  from  which,  this  will  be 
accomplished,  and  also  from  what  sources  we 
[/o]  can  become  well  supplied  with  these:  we 
have  shown,  moreover,  how  to  question  or  ar- 
1 165®  19-27. 


184b 

range  the  questioning  as  a  whole,  and  the  prob¬ 
lems  concerning  the  answers  and  solutions  to 
be  used  against  the  reasonings  of  the  question¬ 
er.  We  have  also  cleared  up  the  problems  con¬ 
cerning  all  other  matters  that  belong  to  the 
same  inquiry  into  arguments.  In  addition  to 
this  we  have  been  through  the  subject  of  Fal- 
[75]  lacies,  as  we  have  already  stated  above.1 

That  our  programme,  then,  has  been  ade¬ 
quately  completed  is  clear.  But  we  must  not 
omit  to  notice  what  has  happened  in  regard 
to  this  inquiry.  For  in  the  case  of  all  discoveries 
the  results  of  previous  labours  that  have  been 
handed  down  from  others  have  been  advanced 
bit  by  bit  by  those  who  have  taken  them  on, 
whereas  the  original  discoveries  generally  make 
[20]  an  advance  that  is  small  at  first  though 
much  more  useful  than  the  development  which 
later  springs  out  of  them.  For  it  may  be  that  in 
everything,  as  the  saying  is,  ‘the  first  start  is  the 
main  part’:  and  for  this  reason  also  it  is  the 
most  difficult;  for  in  proportion  as  it  is  most 

fotent  in  its  influence,  so  it  is  smallest  in  its 
25]  compass  and  therefore  most  difficult  to 
see:  whereas  when  this  is  once  discovered,  it  is 
easier  to  add  and  develop  the  remainder  in  con¬ 
nexion  with  it.  This  is  in  fact  what  has  hap¬ 
pened  in  regard  to  rhetorical  speeches  and  to 
practically  all  the  other  arts:  for  those  who  dis¬ 
covered  the  beginnings  of  them  advanced  them 
in  all  only  a  little  way,  whereas  the  celebrities 
[50]  of  to-day  are  the  heirs  (so  to  speak)  of  a 
long  succession  of  men  who  have  advanced 
them  bit  by  bit,  and  so  have  developed  them  to 
their  present  form,  Tisias  coming  next  after 
the  first  founders,  then  Thrasymachus  after 
Tisias,  and  Theodorus  next  to  him,  while  sev¬ 
eral  people  have  made  their  several  contribu- 
1 183*  27. 


253 

tions  to  it:  and  therefore  it  is  not  to  be  won¬ 
dered  at  that  the  art  has  attained  considerable 
dimensions.  Of  this  inquiry,  on  the  other  hand, 
[55]  h  was  not  the  case  that  part  of  the  work 
had  been  thoroughly  done  before,  while  part 
had  not.  Nothing  existed  at  all.  For  the  train¬ 
ing  given  by  the  paid  professors  of  contentious 
arguments  was  like  the  treatment  of  the  matter 
by  Gorgias.  For  they  used  to  hand  out  speeches 
to  be  learned  by  heart,  some  rhetorical,  others 
in  the  form  of  question  and  answer,  each  side 
supposing  that  their  arguments  on  either  side 
184a  generally  fall  among  them.  And  there¬ 
fore  the  teaching  they  gave  their  pupils  was 
ready  but  rough.  For  they  used  to  suppose  that 
they  trained  people  by  imparting  to  them  not 
the  art  but  its  products,  as  though  any  one  pro¬ 
fessing  that  he  would  impart  a  form  of  knowl- 
[5]  edge  to  obviate  any  pain  in  the  feet,  were 
then  not  to  teach  a  man  the  art  of  shoe-making 
or  the  sources  whence  he  can  acquire  anything 
of  the  kind,  but  were  to  present  him  with  sev¬ 
eral  kinds  of  shoes  of  all  sorts:  for  he  has 
helped  him  to  meet  his  need,  but  has  not  im¬ 
parted  an  art  to  him.  Moreover,  on  the  subject 
of  Rhetoric  there  exists  much  that  has  been 
184b  said  long  ago,  whereas  on  the  subject  of 
reasoning  we  had  nothing  else  of  an  earlier 
date  to  speak  of  at  all,  but  were  kept  at  work 
for  a  long  time  in  experimental  researches.  If, 
then,  it  seems  to  you  after  inspection  that,  such 
being  the  situation  as  it  existed  at  the  start,  our 
investigation  is  in  a  satisfactory  condition  com- 
[5]  pared  with  the  other  inquiries  that  have 
been  developed  by  tradition,  there  must  remain 
for  all  of  you,  or  for  our  students,  the  task  of  ex¬ 
tending  us  your  pardon  for  the  shortcomings 
of  the  inquiry,  and  for  the  discoveries  thereof 
your  warm  thanks. 


CHAPTERS  33-34 


PHYSICAL  TREATISES 


CONTENTS:  PHYSICS 


BOOK  I 

CHAP.  BERLIN  NOS. 

1.  The  scope  and  method  of  this  book  i84a  io 

2.  The  problem:  the  number  and  i84b  15 

character  of  the  first  principles  of  nature 
Reality  is  not  one  in  the  way  that  Parmenides 
and  Melissus  supposed  (i85a  20) 

3.  Refutation  of  their  arguments  i86a4 

4.  Statement  and  examination  of  the  i87a  12 
opinions  of  the  natural  philosophers 

5.  The  principles  are  contraries  i88a  18 

6.  The  principles  are  two,  or  three,  in  189s  11 

number 

7.  The  number  and  nature  of  the  i89b  30 
principles 

8.  The  true  opinion  removes  the  diffi-  I9ia  23 
culty  felt  by  the  early  philosophers 

9.  Further  reflections  on  the  first 
principles  of  nature 


BOOK  II 

A. 

1.  Nature  and  the  natural  i92b8 

B. 

2.  Distinction  of  the  natural  philoso-  i93b  22 
pher  from  the  mathematician  and  the  meta¬ 
physician 

C.  The  conditions  of  change 


3.  The  essential  conditions  I94b  16 

4.  The  opinions  of  others  about  I95b  31 

chance  and  spontaneity 

5.  Do  chance  and  spontaneity  exist?  I96b  10 
What  is  chance  and  what  are  its  characteris¬ 
tics? 

6.  Distinction  between  chance  and  i97a36 


spontaneity,  and  between  both  and  the  essen¬ 
tial  conditions  of  change 

D.  Proof  in  natural  philosophy 

7.  The  physicist  demonstrates  by  ip8a  14 

means  of  the  four  conditions  of  change 

8.  Does  nature  act  for  an  end?  ip8b  10 

9.  The  sense  in  which  necessity  is  I99b  33 

present  in  natural  things 

BOOK  III 

A.  Motion 

1.  The  nature  of  motion  200b  10 

2.  The  nature  of  motion  (continued)  20  ib  16 

3.  The  mover  and  the  moved  202a  12 


B.  The  infinite 

4.  Opinions  of  the  early  202b  30 

philosophers 

Main  arguments  for  belief  in  the  infinite 
(203  b  15) 

5.  Criticism  of  the  Pythagorean  and  204s  9 
Platonic  belief  in  a  separately  existing  infinite 
There  is  no  infinite  sensible  body  (204s  34) 

6.  That  the  infinite  exists  and  how  it  2o6a  8 
exists 

What  the  infinite  is  (2o6b  33) 

7.  The  various  kinds  of  infinite  207s  33 

Which  of  the  four  conditions  of  change  the 
infinite  is  to  be  referred  to  (207b  34) 

8.  Refutation  of  the  arguments  for  an  2o8a  5 
actual  infinite 

BOOK  IV 


A.  Place 

1.  Does  place  exist?  2o8a28 

Doubts  about  the  nature  of  place  (209s  2) 

2.  Is  place  matter  or  form?  209s 31 

3.  Can  a  thing  be  in  itself  or  a  place  2ioa  14 

be  in  a  place? 

4.  What  place  is  2iob  33 

5.  Corollaries  2i2a3i 

B.  The  void 

6.  The  views  of  others  about  the  void  213s  11 

7.  What  ‘void’  means  2i3b  30 

Refutation  of  the  arguments  for  belief  in  the 
void  (214s  16) 

8.  There  is  no  void  separate  from  2i4b  11 

bodies 

There  is  no  void  occupied  by  any  body  (216s 
26) 

9.  There  is  no  void  in  bodies  2i6b  21 

C.  Time 

10.  Doubts  about  the  existence  of  time  2i7b  29 
Various  opinions  about  the  nature  of  time 
(218s  31) 

11.  What  time  is  2i8b2i 

The  ‘now’  (2i9b  9) 

12.  Various  attributes  of  time  220a27 

The  things  that  are  in  time  (220b  32) 

13.  Definitions  of  temporal  terms  222a  10 

14.  Further  reflections  about  dme  222b  30 

BOOK  V 

1.  Classification  of  movements  and  224s  20 
changes 


Classification  of  changes  per  se  (224b  35) 


257 


258  CONTENTS 


2.  Classification  of  movements  per  se  225b  10 
The  unmovable  ( 226 b  10) 

3.  The  meaning  of  ‘together,’  ‘apart,’  226b  18 
‘touch,’  ‘intermediate,’  ‘successive,’  ‘contigu¬ 
ous,’  ‘continuous’ 

4.  The  unity  and  diversity  of  move-  227b3 
ments 

5.  Contrariety  of  movement  22Qa  7 

6.  Contrariety  of  movement  and  rest  229°  22 


Contrariety  of  natural  and  unnatural  move¬ 
ment  or  rest  (230s  18) 

BOOK  VI 


1.  Every  continuum  consists  of  con-  231s  20 
tinuous  and  divisible  parts 

2.  (Continued)  232s  23 

3.  A  moment  is  indivisible  and  noth-  233b  32 
ing  is  moved,  or  rests,  in  a  moment 

4.  Whatever  is  moved  is  divisible  234b  10 


Classification  of  movement  (234b2i) 

The  time,  the  movement,  the  being-in-motion, 
the  moving  body,  and  the  sphere  of  movement, 
are  all  similarly  divided  (235s  13) 

5.  Whatever  has  changed  is,  as  soon  235b6 
as  it  has  changed,  in  that  to  which  it  has 
changed 

That  in  which  (directly)  it  has  changed  is  in¬ 
divisible  (235b32) 

In  change  there  is  a  last  but  no  first  element 

(236*  7) 

6.  In  whatever  time  a  thing  changes  236b  20 
(directly),  it  changes  in  any  part  of  that  time 
Whatever  changes  has  changed  before,  and 
whatever  has  changed,  before  was  changing 
(236b  32) 

7.  The  finitude  or  infinity  of  move-  23 7b  23 

ment,  of  extension,  and  of  the  moved 

8.  Of  coming  to  rest,  and  of  rest  238b  23 

A  thing  that  is  moved  in  any  time  directly  is 
in  no  part  of  that  time  in  a  part  of  the  space 
through  which  it  moves  (239s  23) 

9.  Refutation  of  the  arguments  239b5 

against  the  possibility  of  movement 


10.  That  which  has  not  parts  cannot  move  240b  8 
Can  change  be  infinite?  (24 ia  26) 

BOOK  VII 

1.  Whatever  is  moved  is  moved  by  24^24 
something 

There  is  a  first  movent  which  is  not  moved 
by  anything  else  (242s  19) 

2.  The  movent  and  the  moved  are  243s  3 
together 

3.  All  alteration  pertains  to  sensible  245b2 
qualities 

4.  Comparison  of  movements  248s  10 

5.  Proportion  of  movements  249b  26 

BOOK  VIII 

1.  There  always  has  been  and  always  250b  10 
will  be  movement 

2.  Refutation  of  objections  to  the  252b7 
eternity  of  movement 

3.  There  are  things  that  are  some-  253s  21 
times  in  movement,  sometimes  at  rest 

4.  Whatever  is  in  movement  is  moved  254b  7 
by  something  else 

5.  The  first  movent  is  not  moved  256s  3 
by  anything  outside  itself 

The  first  movent  is  immovable  (257s  31) 

6.  The  immovable  first  movent  is  258b  10 

eternal  and  one 

The  first  movent  is  not  moved  even  inciden¬ 
tally  (259s  20) 

The  primum  mobile  is  eternal  (259b  32) 

7.  Locomotion  is  the  primary  kind  of  26oa  20 
movement 

No  movement  or  change  is  continuous  except 
locomotion  (26ia28) 

8.  Only  circular  movement  can  be  26ib  26 
continuous  and  infinite 

9.  Circular  movement  is  the  primary  265s  13 
kind  of  locomotion 

Confirmation  of  the  above  doctrines  (265s  27) 

10.  The  first  movent  has  no  parts  nor  266a  10 
magnitude,  and  is  at  the  circumference  of  the 
world. 


PHYSICS 

BOOK  I 


184a  [/o]  When  the  objects  of  an  inquiry,  in 
any  department,  have  principles,  conditions,  or 
elements,  it  is  through  acquaintance  with  these 
that  knowledge,  that  is  to  say  scientific  knowl¬ 
edge,  is  attained.  For  we  do  not  think  that  we 
know  a  thing  until  we  are  acquainted  with  its 
primary  conditions  or  first  principles,  and  have 
carried  our  analysis  as  far  as  its  simplest  ele¬ 
ments.  Plainly  therefore  in  the  science  of  Na- 
[75]  ture,  as  in  other  branches  of  study,  our 
first  task  will  be  to  try  to  determine  what  re¬ 
lates  to  its  principles. 

The  natural  way  of  doing  this  is  to  start 
from  the  things  which  are  more  knowable  and 
obvious  to  us  and  proceed  towards  those  which 
are  clearer  and  more  knowable  by  nature;  for 
the  same  things  are  not  ‘knowable  relatively  to 
us’  and  ‘knowable’  without  qualification.  So  in 
the  present  inquiry  we  must  follow  this  meth¬ 
od  and  advance  from  what  is'  more  obscure  by 
[20]  nature,  but  clearer  to  us,  towards  what  is 
more  clear  and  more  knowable  by  nature. 

Now  what  is  to  us  plain  and  obvious  at  first 
is  rather  confused  masses,  the  elements  and 
principles  of  which  become  known  to  us  later 
by  analysis.  Thus  we  must  advance  from  gen¬ 
eralities  to  particulars;  for  it  is  a  whole  that  is 
[25]  best  known  to  sense-perception,  and  a 
generality  is  a  kind  of  whole,  comprehending 
many  things  within  it,  like  parts.  Much  the 
184b  [10]  same  thing  happens  in  the  relation 
of  the  name  to  the  formula.  A  name,  e.g. 
‘round’,  means  vaguely  a  sort  of  whole:  its  def¬ 
inition  analyses  this  into  its  particular  senses. 
Similarly  a  child  begins  by  calling  all  men 
‘father’,  and  all  women  ‘mother’,  but  later  on 
distinguishes  each  of  them. 

2 

[75]  The  principles  in  question  must  be  either 
(a)  one  or  (b)  more  than  one. 

If  (a)  one,  it  must  be  either  (i)  motionless, 
as  Parmenides  and  Melissus  assert,  or  (ii)  in 

Note:  The  bold  face  numbers  and  letters  are  approxi¬ 
mate  indications  of  the  pages  and  columns  of  the  stand¬ 
ard  Berlin  Greek  text;  the  bracketed  numbers,  of  the 
lines  in  the  Greek  text;  they  are  here  assigned  as  they 
are  assigned  in  the  Oxford  translation. 


motion,  as  the  physicists  hold,  some  declaring 
air  to  be  the  first  principle,  others  water. 

If  (b)  more  than  one,  then  either  (i)  a  finite 
or  (ii)  an  infinite  plurality.  If  (i)  finite  (but 
more  than  one),  then  either  two  or  three  or 
[20]  four  or  some  other  number.  If  (ii)  infi¬ 
nite,  then  either  as  Democritus  believed  one  in 
kind,  but  differing  in  shape  or  form;  or  differ¬ 
ent  in  kind  and  even  contrary. 

A  similar  inquiry  is  made  by  those  who  in¬ 
quire  into  the  number  of  existents:  for  they  in¬ 
quire  whether  the  ultimate  constituents  of  ex¬ 
isting  things  are  one  or  many,  and  if  many, 
whether  a  finite  or  an  infinite  plurality.  So  they 
too  are  inquiring  whether  the  principle  or  ele¬ 
ment  is  one  or  many. 

[25]  Now  to  investigate  whether  Being  is  one 
and  motionless  is  not  a  contribution  to  the  sci- 
185a  ence  of  Nature.  For  just  as  the  geometer 
has  nothing  more  to  say  to  one  who  denies  the 
principles  of  his  science — this  being  a  question 
for  a  different  science  or  for  one  common  to  all 
— so  a  man  investigating  principles  cannot  ar¬ 
gue  with  one  who  denies  their  existence.  For 
if  Being  is  just  one,  and  one  in  the  way  men¬ 
tioned,  there  is  a  principle  no  longer,  since  a 
principle  must  be  the  principle  of  some  thing 
or  things. 

[5]  To  inquire  therefore  whether  Being  is  one 
in  this  sense  would  be  like  arguing  against  any 
other  position  maintained  for  the  sake  of  argu¬ 
ment  (such  as  the  Heraclitean  thesis,  or  such  a 
thesis  as  that  Being  is  one  man)  or  like  refut¬ 
ing  a  merely  contentious  argument — a  descrip¬ 
tion  which  applies  to  the  arguments  both  of 
Melissus  and  of  Parmenides:  their  premisses 
[70]  are  false  and  their  conclusions  do  not  fol¬ 
low.  Or  rather  the  argument  of  Melissus  is 
gross  and  palpable  and  offers  no  difficulty  at 
all:  accept  one  ridiculous  proposition  and  the 
rest  follows — a  simple  enough  proceeding. 

We  physicists,  on  the  other  hand,  must  take 
for  granted  that  the  things  that  exist  by  nature 
are,  either  all  or  some  of  them,  in  motion — 
which  is  indeed  made  plain  by  induction. 
Moreover,  no  man  of  science  is  bound  to  solve 
[75]  every  kind  of  difficulty  that  may  be  raised, 
but  only  as  many  as  are  drawn  falsely  from  the 
principles  of  the  science:  it  is  not  our  business 


260 

to  refute  those  that  do  not  arise  in  this  way: 
just  as  it  is  the  duty  of  the  geometer  to  refute 
the  squaring  of  the  circle  by  means  of  seg¬ 
ments,  but  it  is  not  his  duty  to  refute  Anti¬ 
phon’s  proof.  At  the  same  time  the  holders  of 
the  theory  of  which  we  are  speaking  do  inci¬ 
dentally  raise  physical  questions,  though  Na¬ 
ture  is  not  their  subject:  so  it  will  perhaps  be 
as  well  to  spend  a  few  words  on  them,  espe¬ 
cially  as  the  inquiry  is  not  without  scientific 
interest. 

*[ 20 ]  The  most  pertinent  question  with  which 
to  begin  will  be  this:  In  what  sense  is  it  assert¬ 
ed  that  all  things  are  one?  For  ‘is’  is  used  in 
many  senses.  Do  they  mean  that  all  things  ‘are’ 
substance  or  quantities  or  qualities?  And,  fur¬ 
ther,  are  all  things  one  substance — one  man, 
one  horse,  or  one  soul — or  quality  and  that  one 
[25]  and  the  same — white  or  hot  or  something 
of  the  kind?  These  are  all  very  different  doc¬ 
trines  and  all  impossible  to  maintain. 

For  if  both  substance  and  quantity  and  qual¬ 
ity  are,  then,  whether  these  exist  independently 
of  each  other  or  not,  Being  will  be  many. 

If  on  the  other  hand  it  is  asserted  that  all 
things  are  quality  or  quantity,  then,  whether 
substance  exists  or  not,  an  absurdity  results,  if 
[jo]  indeed  the  impossible  can  properly  be 
called  absurd.  For  none  of  the  others  can  exist 
independently:  substance  alone  is  independ¬ 
ent:  for  everything  is  predicated  of  substance 
as  subject.  Now  Melissus  says  that  Being  is  in¬ 
finite.  It  is  then  a  quantity.  For  the  infinite  is 
in  the  category  of  quantity,  whereas  substance 
or  quality  or  affection  cannot  be  infinite  except 
through  a  concomitant  attribute,  that  is,  if  at 
185b  the  same  time  they  are  also  quantities. 
For  to  define  the  infinite  you  must  use  quan¬ 
tity  in  your  formula,  but  not  substance  or  qual¬ 
ity.  If  then  Being  is  both  substance  and  quan¬ 
tity,  it  is  two,  not  one:  if  only  substance,  it  is 
not  infinite  and  has  no  magnitude;  for  to  have 
that  it  will  have  to  be  a  quantity. 

[5]  Again,  ‘one’  itself,  no  less  than  ‘being’,  is 
used  in  many  senses,  so  we  must  consider  in 
what  sense  the  word  is  used  when  it  is  said  that 
the  All  is  one. 

Now  we  say  that  (a)  the  continuous  is  one 
or  that  (b)  the  indivisible  is  one,  or  (c)  things 
are  said  to  be  ‘one’,  when  their  essence  is  one 
and  the  same,  as  ‘liquor’  and  ‘drink’. 

If  (a)  their  One  is  one  in  the  sense  of  con- 
[/o]  tinuous,  it  is  many,  for  the  continuous  is 
divisible  ad  infinitum. 

There  is,  indeed,  a  difficulty  about  part  and 
whole,  perhaps  not  relevant  to  the  present  ar- 


186a 

gument,  yet  deserving  consideration  on  its  own 
account — namely,  whether  the  part  and  the 
whole  are  one  or  more  than  one,  and  how  they 
can  be  one  or  many,  and,  if  they  are  more  than 
one,  in  what  sense  they  are  more  than  one. 
(Similarly  with  the  parts  of  wholes  which  are 
[75]  not  continuous.)  Further,  if  each  of  the 
two  parts  is  indivisibly  one  with  the  whole,  the 
difficulty  arises  that  they  will  be  indivisibly  one 
with  each  other  also. 

But  to  proceed:  If  ( b )  their  One  is  one  as  in¬ 
divisible,  nothing  will  have  quantity  or  qual¬ 
ity,  and  so  the  one  will  not  be  infinite,  as  Me¬ 
lissus  says — nor,  indeed,  limited,  as  Parmeni¬ 
des  says,  for  though  the  limit  is  indivisible, 
the  limited  is  not. 

But  if  (c)  all  things  are  one  in  the  sense  of 
having  the  same  definition,  like  ‘raiment’  and 
[20]  ‘dress’,  then  it  turns  out  that  they  are 
maintaining  the  Heraclitean  doctrine,  for  it 
will  be  the  same  thing  ‘to  be  good’  and  ‘to  be 
bad’,  and  ‘to  be  good’  and  ‘to  be  not  good’,  and 
so  the  same  thing  will  be  ‘good’  and  ‘not  good’, 
and  man  and  horse;  in  fact,  their  view  will  be, 
not  that  all  things  are  one,  but  that  they  are 
nothing;  and  that  ‘to  be  of  such-and-such  a 
quality’  is  the  same  as  ‘to  be  of  such-and-such 
a  size’. 

[25]  Even  the  more  recent  of  the  ancient  think¬ 
ers  were  in  a  pother  lest  the  same  thing  should 
turn  out  in  their  hands  both  one  and  many.  So 
some,  like  Lycophron,  were  led  to  omit  ‘is’, 
others  to  change  the  mode  of  expression  and 
say  ‘the  man  has  been  whitened’  instead  of  ‘is 
white’,  and  ‘walks’  instead  of  ‘is  walking’,  for 
[jo]  fear  that  if  they  added  the  word  ‘is’  they 
should  be  making  the  one  to  be  many — as  if 
‘one’  and  ‘being’  were  always  used  in  one  and 
the  same  sense.  What  ‘is’  may  be  many  either 
in  definition  (for  example  ‘to  be  white’  is  one 
thing,  ‘to  be  musical’  another,  yet  the  same 
thing  may  be  both,  so  the  one  is  many)  or  by 
division,  as  the  whole  and  its  parts.  On  this 
186a  point,  indeed,  they  were  already  getting 
into  difficulties  and  admitted  that  the  one  was 
many — as  if  there  was  any  difficulty  about  the 
same  thing  being  both  one  and  many,  provided 
that  these  are  not  opposites;  for  ‘one’  may 
mean  either  ‘potentially  one’  or  ‘actually  one’. 

3 

If,  then,  we  approach  the  thesis  in  this  way 
[5]  it  seems  impossible  for  all  things  to  be  one. 
Further,  the  arguments  they  use  to  prove  their 
position  are  not  difficult  to  expose.  For  both  of 
them  reason  contentiously — I  mean  both  Me- 


PHYSICS 


186b  BOOK  L  CHAPTERS  2-3  261 


lissus  and  Parmenides.  [Their  premisses  are 
false  and  their  conclusions  do  not  follow.  Or 
rather  the  argument  of  Melissus  is  gross  and 
palpable  and  offers  no  difficulty  at  all:  admit 
one  ridiculous  proposition  and  the  rest  follows 
— a  simple  enough  proceeding.] 

[10]  The  fallacy  of  Melissus  is  obvious.  For  he 
supposes  that  the  assumption  ‘what  has  come 
into  being  always  has  a  beginning’  justifies  the 
assumption  ‘what  has  not  come  into  being  has 
no  beginning’.  Then  this  also  is  absurd,  that  in 
every  case  there  should  be  a  beginning  of  the 
thing — not  of  the  time  and  not  only  in  the  case 
of  coming  to  be  in  the  full  sense  but  also  in  the 
case  of  coming  to  have  a  quality — as  if  change 
[75]  never  took  place  suddenly.  Again,  does  it 
follow  that  Being,  if  one,  is  motionless?  Why 
should  it  not  move,  the  whole  of  it  within 
itself,  as  parts  of  it  do  which  are  unities, 
e.g.  this  water?  Again,  why  is  qualitative 
change  impossible?  But,  further,  Being  cannot 
[20]  be  one  in  form,  though  it  may  be  in  what 
it  is  made  of.  (Even  some  of  the  physicists  hold 
it  to  be  one  in  the  latter  way,  though  not  in  the 
former.)  Man  obviously  differs  from  horse  in 
form,  and  contraries  from  each  other. 

The  same  kind  of  argument  holds  good 
against  Parmenides  also,  besides  any  that  may 
apply  specially  to  his  view:  the  answer  to  him 
being  that  ‘this  is  not  true’  and  ‘that  does  not 
follow’.  His  assumption  that  one  is  used  in  a 
single  sense  only  is  false,  because  it  is  used  in 
[25]  several.  His  conclusion  does  not  follow, 
because  if  we  take  only  white  things,  and  if 
‘white’  has  a  single  meaning,  none  the  less 
what  is  white  will  be  many  and  not  one.  For 
what  is  white  will  not  be  one  either  in  the  sense 
that  it  is  continuous  or  in  the  sense  that  it  must 
be  defined  in  only  one  way.  ‘Whiteness’  will 
be  different  from  ‘what  has  whiteness’.  Nor 
does  this  mean  that  there  is  anything  that  can 
[50]  exist  separately,  over  and  above  what  is 
white.  For  ‘whiteness’  and  ‘that  which  is  white’ 
differ  in  definition,  not  in  the  sense  that  they  are 
things  which  can  exist  apart  from  each  other. 
But  Parmenides  had  not  come  in  sight  of  this 
distinction. 

It  is  necessary  for  him,  then,  to  assume  not 
only  that  ‘being’  has  the  same  meaning,  of 
whatever  it  is  predicated,  but  further  that  it 
means  ( 1 )  what  just  is  and  (2)  what  is  just  one. 

It  must  be  so,  for  (1)  an  attribute  is  predi¬ 
cated  of  some  subject,  so  that  the  subject  to 
[i5]  which  ‘being’  is  attributed  will  not  be,  as 
it  is  something  different  from  ‘being’.  Some- 
186b  thing,  therefore,  which  is  not  will  be. 


Hence  ‘substance’  will  not  be  a  predicate  of 
anything  else.  For  the  subject  cannot  be  a  be¬ 
ing,  unless  ‘being’  means  several  things,  in  such 
a  way  that  each  is  something.  But  ex  hypoth - 
esi  ‘being’  means  only  one  thing. 

If,  then,  ‘substance’  is  not  attributed  to  any¬ 
thing,  but  other  things  are  attributed  to  it,  how 
[5]  does  ‘substance’  mean  what  is  rather  than 
what  is  not?  For  suppose  that  ‘substance’  is 
also  ‘white’.  Since  the  definition  of  the  latter  is 
different  (for  being  cannot  even  be  attributed  to 
white,  as  nothing  is  which  is  not  ‘substance’), 
it  follows  that  ‘white’  is  not-being — and  that 
not  in  the  sense  of  a  particular  not-being,  but 
in  the  sense  that  it  is  not  at  all.  Hence  ‘sub- 
[/o]  stance’  is  not;  for  it  is  true  to  say  that  it 
is  white,  which  we  found  to  mean  not-being. 
If  to  avoid  this  we  say  that  even  ‘white’  means 
substance,  it  follows  that  ‘being’  has  more  than 
one  meaning. 

In  particular,  then,  Being  will  not  have  mag¬ 
nitude,  if  it  is  substance.  For  each  of  the  two 
parts  must  be  in  a  different  sense. 

(2)  Substance  is  plainly  divisible  into  other 
substances,  if  we  consider  the  mere  nature  of  a 
[75]  definition.  For  instance,  if  ‘man’  is  a  sub¬ 
stance,  ‘animal’  and  ‘biped’  must  also  be  sub¬ 
stances.  For  if  not  substances,  they  must  be  at¬ 
tributes — and  if  attributes,  attributes  either  of 
(a)  man  or  of  (b)  some  other  subject.  But  nei¬ 
ther  is  possible. 

(a)  An  attribute  is  either  that  which  may  or 
[20]  may  not  belong  to  the  subject  or  that  in 
whose  definition  the  subject  of  which  it  is  an 
attribute  is  involved.  Thus  ‘sitting’  is  an  exam¬ 
ple  of  a  separable  attribute,  while  ‘snubness’ 
contains  the  definition  of  ‘nose’,  to  which  we 
attribute  snubness.  Further,  the  definition  of 
the  whole  is  not  contained  in  the  definitions  of 
the  contents  or  elements  of  the  definitory  for¬ 
mula;  that  of  ‘man’  for  instance  in  ‘biped’,  or 
[25]  that  of  ‘white  man’  in  ‘white’.  If  then  this 
is  so,  and  if  ‘biped’  is  supposed  to  be  an  attri¬ 
bute  of  ‘man’,  it  must  be  either  separable,  so 
that  ‘man’  might  possibly  not  be  ‘biped’,  or  the 
definition  of  ‘man’  must  come  into  the  defini- 
[30]  tion  of  ‘biped’ — which  is  impossible,  as 
the  converse  is  the  case. 

(b)  If,  on  the  other  hand,  we  suppose  that 
‘biped’  and  ‘animal’  are  attributes  not  of  man 
but  of  something  else,  and  are  not  each  of  them 
a  substance,  then  ‘man’  too  will  be  an  attribute 
of  something  else.  But  we  must  assume  that 
substance  is  not  the  attribute  of  anything,  and 
that  the  subject  of  which  both  ‘biped’  and  ‘ani¬ 
mal’  and  each  separately  are  predicated  is  the 


262 

subject  also  of  the  complex  ‘biped  animal’. 

[35] Are  we  then  to  say  that  the  All  is  com¬ 
posed  of  indivisible  substances?  Some  thinkers 
1 87a  did,  in  point  of  fact,  give  way  to  both  ar¬ 
guments.  To  the  argument  that  all  things  are 
one  if  being  means  one  thing,  they  conceded 
that  not-being  is;  to  that  from  bisection,  they 
yielded  by  positing  atomic  magnitudes.  Rut 
obviously  it  is  not  true  that  if  being  means  one 
thing,  and  cannot  at  the  same  time  mean  the 
[5]  contradictory  of  this,  there  will  be  nothing 
which  is  not,  for  even  if  what  is  not  cannot  be 
without  qualification,  there  is  no  reason  why  it 
should  not  be  a  particular  not-being.  To  say 
that  all  things  will  be  one,  if  there  is  nothing 
besides  Being  itself,  is  absurd.  For  who  under¬ 
stands  ‘being  itself  to  be  anything  but  a  par¬ 
ticular  substance?  But  if  this  is  so,  there  is 
nothing  to  prevent  there  being  many  beings,  as 
has  been  said. 

[70]  It  is,  then,  clearly  impossible  for  Being  to 
be  one  in  this  sense. 

4 

The  physicists  on  the  other  hand  have  two 
modes  of  explanation. 

The  first  set  make  the  underlying  body  one 
— either  one  of  the  three  or  something  else 
which  is  denser  than  fire  and  rarer  than  air — 
[75]  then  generate  everything  else  from  this, 
and  obtain  multiplicity  by  condensation  and 
rarefaction.  Now  these  are  contraries,  which 
may  be  generalized  into  ‘excess  and  defect’. 
(Compare  Plato’s  ‘Great  and  Small’ — except 
that  he  make  these  his  matter,  the  one  his  form, 
while  the  others  treat  the  one  which  underlies 
as  matter  and  the  contraries  as  differentiae,  i.e. 
forms). 

[20]  The  second  set  assert  that  the  contrarieties 
are  contained  in  the  one  and  emerge  from  it 
by  segregation,  for  example  Anaximander  and 
also  all  those  who  assert  that  ‘what  is’  is  one 
and  many,  like  Empedocles  and  Anaxagoras; 
for  they  too  produce  other  things  from  their 
mixture  by  segregation.  These  differ,  however, 
from  each  other  in  that  the  former  imagines  a 
cycle  of  such  changes,  the  latter  a  single  series. 
[25]  Anaxagoras  again  made  both  his  ‘homoe- 
omerous’  substances  and  his  contraries  infinite 
in  multitude,  whereas  Empedocles  posits  only 
the  so-called  elements. 

The  theory  of  Anaxagoras  that  the  princi¬ 
ples  are  infinite  in  multitude  was  probably  due 
to  his  acceptance  of  the  common  opinion  of  the 
physicists  that  nothing  comes  into  being  from 
not-being.  For  this  is  the  reason  why  they  use 


1 87b 

[30]  the  phrase  ‘all  things  were  together’  and 
the  coming  into  being  of  such  and  such  a  kind 
of  thing  is  reduced  to  change  of  quality,  while 
some  spoke  of  combination  and  separation. 
Moreover,  the  fact  that  the  contraries  proceed 
from  each  other  led  them  to  the  conclusion. 
The  one,  they  reasoned,  must  have  already  ex¬ 
isted  in  the  other;  for  since  everything  that 
comes  into  being  must  arise  either  from  what 
is  or  from  what  is  not,  and  it  is  impossible  for 
it  to  arise  from  what  is  not  (on  this  point  all 
the  physicists  agree),  they  thought  that  the 
[35]  truth  of  the  alternative  necessarily  fol¬ 
lowed,  namely  that  things  come  into  being  out 
of  existent  things,  i.e.  out  of  things  already 
present,  but  imperceptible  to  our  senses  because 
187b  of  the  smallness  of  their  bulk.  So  they  as¬ 
sert  that  everything  has  been  mixed  in  every¬ 
thing,  because  they  saw  everything  arising  out 
of  everything.  But  things,  as  they  say,  appear 
different  from  one  another  and  receive  differ¬ 
ent  names  according  to  the  nature  of  the  parti¬ 
cles  which  are  numerically  predominant  among 
the  innumerable  constituents  of  the  mixture. 
For  nothing,  they  say,  is  purely  and  entirely 
[5]  white  or  black  or  sweet,  bone  or  flesh,  but 
the  nature  of  a  thing  is  held  to  be  that  of  which 
it  contains  the  most. 

Now  (1)  the  infinite  qua  infinite  is  unknow¬ 
able,  so  that  what  is  infinite  in  multitude  or 
size  is  unknowable  in  quantity,  and  what  is  in¬ 
finite  in  variety  of  kind  is  unknowable  in  qual- 
[/o]  ity.  But  the  principles  in  question  are  in¬ 
finite  both  in  multitude  and  in  kind.  Therefore 
it  is  impossible  to  know  things  which  are  com¬ 
posed  of  them;  for  it  is  when  we  know  the  na¬ 
ture  and  quantity  of  its  components  that  we 
suppose  we  know  a  complex. 

Further  (2)  if  the  parts  of  a  whole  may  be  of 
any  size  in  the  direction  either  of  greatness  or 
[75]  of  smallness  (by  ‘parts’  I  mean  compo¬ 
nents  into  which  a  whole  can  be  divided  and 
which  are  actually  present  in  it),  it  is  necessary 
that  the  whole  thing  itself  may  be  of  any  size. 
Clearly,  therefore,  since  it  is  impossible  for  an 
animal  or  plant  to  be  indefinitely  big  or  small, 
neither  can  its  parts  be  such,  or  the  whole  will 
be  the  same.  But  flesh,  bone,  and  the  like  are 
[20]  the  parts  of  animals,  and  the  fruits  are 
the  parts  of  plants.  Hence  it  is  obvious  that  nei¬ 
ther  flesh,  bone,  nor  any  such  thing  can  be  of 
indefinite  size  in  the  direction  either  of  the 
greater  or  of  the  less. 

Again  (3)  according  to  the  theory  all  such 
things  are  already  present  in  one  another  and 
do  not  come  into  being  but  are  constituents 


PHYSICS 


1 88b  BOOK  I,  CHAPTERS  3-5  263 


which  are  separated  out,  and  a  thing  receives 
its  designation  from  its  chief  constituent.  Fur¬ 
ther,  anything  may  come  out  of  anything — wa¬ 
ter  by  segregation  from  flesh  and  flesh  from 
[25]  water.  Hence,  since  every  finite  body  is 
exhausted  by  the  repeated  abstraction  of  a  fi¬ 
nite  body,  it  seems  obviously  to  follow  that  ev¬ 
erything  cannot  subsist  in  everything  else.  For 
let  flesh  be  extracted  from  water  and  again 
more  flesh  be  produced  from  the  remainder  by 
repeating  the  process  of  separation:  then,  even 
though  the  quantity  separated  out  will  contin¬ 
ually  decrease,  still  it  will  not  fall  below  a  cer- 
[30]  tain  magnitude.  If,  therefore,  the  process 
comes  to  an  end,  everything  will  not  be  in  ev¬ 
erything  else  (for  there  will  be  no  flesh  in  the 
remaining  water);  if  on  the  other  hand  it  does 
not,  and  further  extraction  is  always  possible, 
there  will  be  an  infinite  multitude  of  finite 
equal  particles  in  a  finite  quantity — which  is 
[35]  impossible.  Another  proof  may  be  added: 
Since  every  body  must  diminish  in  size  when 
something  is  taken  from  it,  and  flesh  is  quanti¬ 
tatively  definite  in  respect  both  of  greatness 
and  smallness,  it  is  clear  that  from  the  mini¬ 
mum  quantity  of  flesh  no  body  can  be  sepa- 
188*  rated  out;  for  the  flesh  left  would  be  less 
than  the  minimum  of  flesh. 

Lastly  (4)  in  each  of  his  infinite  bodies  there 
would  be  already  present  infinite  flesh  and 
blood  and  brain — having  a  distinct  existence, 
however,  from  one  another,  and  no  less  real 
than  the  infinite  bodies,  and  each  infinite: 
which  is  contrary  to  reason. 

[5]  The  statement  that  complete  separation 
never  will  take  place  is  correct  enough,  though 
Anaxagoras  is  not  fully  aware  of  what  it  means. 
For  affections  are  indeed  inseparable.  If  then 
colours  and  states  had  entered  into  the  mix¬ 
ture,  and  if  separation  took  place,  there  would 
be  a  ‘white’  or  a  ‘healthy’  which  was  nothing 
but  white  or  healthy,  i.e.  was  not  the  predicate 
of  a  subject.  So  his  ‘Mind’  is  an  absurd  person 
aiming  at  the  impossible,  if  he  is  supposed  to 
[/o]  wish  to  separate  them,  and  it  is  impossi¬ 
ble  to  do  so,  both  in  respect  of  quantity  and  of 
quality — of  quantity,  because  there  is  no  mini¬ 
mum  magnitude,  and  of  quality,  because  af¬ 
fections  are  inseparable. 

Nor  is  Anaxagoras  right  about  the  coming 
to  be  of  homogeneous  bodies.  It  is  true  there  is 
a  sense  in  which  clay  is  divided  into  pieces  of 
clay,  but  there  is  another  in  which  it  is  not. 
[75]  Water  and  air  are,  and  are  generated 
‘from’  each  other,  but  not  in  the  way  in  which 
bricks  come  ‘from’  a  house  and  again  a  house 


‘from’  bricks;  and  it  is  better  to  assume  a 
smaller  and  finite  number  of  principles,  as 
Empedocles  does. 

5 

All  thinkers  then  agree  in  making  the  con¬ 
traries  principles,  both  those  who  describe  the 
All  as  one  and  unmoved  (for  even  Parmeni- 
[20]  des  treats  hot  and  cold  as  principles  un¬ 
der  the  names  of  fire  and  earth)  and  those  too 
who  use  the  rare  and  the  dense.  The  same  is 
true  of  Democritus  also,  with  his  plenum  and 
void,  both  of  which  exist,  he  says,  the  one  as 
being,  the  other  as  not-being.  Again  he  speaks 
of  differences  in  position,  shape,  and  order, 
and  these  are  genera  of  which  the  species  are 
contraries,  namely,  of  position,  above  and  be¬ 
low,  before  and  behind;  of  shape,  angular  and 
[25]  angle-less,  straight  and  round. 

It  is  plain  then  that  they  all  in  one  way  or 
another  identify  the  contraries  with  the  prin¬ 
ciples.  And  with  good  reason.  For  first  princi¬ 
ples  must  not  be  derived  from  one  another  nor 
from  anything  else,  while  everything  has  to  be 
derived  from  them.  But  these  conditions  are 
fulfilled  by  the  primary  contraries,  which  are 
not  derived  from  anything  else  because  they 
are  primary,  nor  from  each  other  because  they 
are  contraries. 

[jo]  But  we  must  see  how  this  can  be  arrived 
at  as  a  reasoned  result,  as  well  as  in  the  way 
just  indicated. 

Our  first  presupposition  must  be  that  in  na¬ 
ture  nothing  acts  on,  or  is  acted  on  by,  any  oth¬ 
er  thing  at  random,  nor  may  anything  come 
from  anything  else,  unless  we  mean  that  it  does 
so  in  virtue  of  a  concomitant  attribute.  For 
[35]  how  could  ‘white’  come  from  ‘musical’, 
unless  ‘musical’  happened  to  be  an  attribute  of 
the  not-white  or  of  the  black?  No,  ‘white’ 
comes  from  ‘not-white’ — and  not  from  any 
‘not-white’,  but  from  black  or  some  intermedi- 
188b  ate  colour.  Similarly,  ‘musical’  comes  to 
be  from  ‘not-musicaF,  but  not  from  any  thing 
other  than  musical,  but  from  ‘unmusical’  or 
any  intermediate  state  there  may  be. 

Nor  again  do  things  pass  into  the  first  chance 
thing;  ‘white’  does  not  pass  into  ‘musical’  (ex¬ 
cept,  it  may  be,  in  virtue  of  a  concomitant  attri¬ 
bute),  but  into  ‘not-white’ — and  not  into  any 
chance  thing  which  is  not  white,  but  into  black 
or  an  intermediate  colour;  ‘musical’  passes  into 
[5]  ‘not-musical’ — and  not  into  any  chance 
thing  other  than  musical,  but  into  ‘unmusical’ 
or  any  intermediate  state  there  may  be. 

The  same  holds  of  other  things  also:  even 


264  PHYSICS  189* 


things  which  are  not  simple  but  complex  fol- 
[/o]  low  the  same  principle,  but  the  opposite 
state  has  not  received  a  name,  so  we  fail  to  no¬ 
tice  the  fact.  What  is  in  tune  must  come  from 
what  is  not  in  tune,  and  vice  versa;  the  tuned 
passes  into  untunedness — and  not  into  any  un- 
tunedness,  but  into  the  corresponding  oppo- 
[75]  site.  It  does  not  matter  whether  we  take 
attunement,  order,  or  composition  for  our  il¬ 
lustration;  the  principle  is  obviously  the  same 
in  all,  and  in  fact  applies  equally  to  the  pro¬ 
duction  of  a  house,  a  statue,  or  any  other  com¬ 
plex.  A  house  comes  from  certain  things  in  a 
certain  state  of  separation  instead  of  conjunc¬ 
tion,  a  statue  (or  any  other  thing  that  has  been 
[20]  shaped)  from  shapelessness — each  of 
these  objects  being  partly  order  and  partly 
composition. 

If  then  this  is  true,  everything  that  comes  to 
be  or  passes  away  from,  or  passes  into,  its  con¬ 
trary  or  an  intermediate  state.  But  the  interme¬ 
diates  are  derived  from  the  contraries — col¬ 
ours,  for  instance,  from  black  and  white.  Ev- 
[25]  ery thing,  therefore,  that  comes  to  be  by 
a  natural  process  is  either  a  contrary  or  a  prod¬ 
uct  of  contraries. 

Up  to  this  point  we  have  practically  had 
most  of  the  other  writers  on  the  subject  with 
us,  as  I  have  said  already1:  for  all  of  them  iden¬ 
tify  their  elements,  and  what  they  call  their 
principles,  with  the  contraries,  giving  no  rea¬ 
son  indeed  for  the  theory,  but  contrained  as  it 
were  by  the  truth  itself.  They  differ,  however, 
[jo]  from  one  another  in  that  some  assume 
contraries  which  are  more  primary,  others  con¬ 
traries  which  are  less  so:  some  those  more 
knowable  in  the  order  of  explanation,  others 
those  more  familiar  to  sense.  For  some  make 
hot  and  cold,  or  again  moist  and  dry,  the  con¬ 
ditions  of  becoming;  while  others  make  odd 
[^5]  and  even,  or  again  Love  and  Strife;  and 
these  differ  from  each  other  in  the  way  men¬ 
tioned. 

Hence  their  principles  are  in  one  sense  the 
same,  in  another  different;  different  certainly, 
as  indeed  most  people  think,  but  the  same  in- 
189a  asmuch  as  they  are  analogous;  for  all  are 
taken  from  the  same  table  of  columns,2  some  of 
the  pairs  being  wider,  others  narrower  in  ex¬ 
tent.  In  this  way  then  their  theories  are  both 
the  same  and  different,  some  better,  some 
worse;  some,  as  I  have  said,  take  as  their  con¬ 
traries  what  is  more  knowable  in  the  order  of 
explanation,  others  what  is  more  familiar  to 
[5]  sense.  (The  universal  is  more  knowable  in 

1  ai9“3°*  2  Metaphysics ,  1.  986*  23. 


the  order  of  explanation,  the  particular  in  the 
order  of  sense:  for  explanation  has  to  do  with 
the  universal,  sense  with  the  particular.)  ‘The 
great  and  the  small*,  for  example,  belong  to  the 
former  class,  ‘the  dense  and  the  rare’  to  the 
latter. 

[70]  It  is  clear  then  that  our  principles  must  be 
contraries. 

6 

The  next  question  is  whether  the  principles 
are  two  or  three  or  more  in  number. 

One  they  cannot  be,  for  there  cannot  be  one 
contrary.  Nor  can  they  be  innumerable,  be¬ 
cause,  if  so,  Being  will  not  be  knowable:  and 
in  any  one  genus  there  is  only  one  contrariety, 
and  substance  is  one  genus:  also  a  finite  num- 
[75]  ber  is  sufficient,  and  a  finite  number,  such 
as  the  principles  of  Empedocles,  is  better  than 
an  infinite  multitude;  for  Empedocles  pro¬ 
fesses  to  obtain  from  his  principles  all  that 
Anaxagoras  obtains  from  his  innumerable 
principles.  Lastly,  some  contraries  are  more 
primary  than  others,  and  some  arise  from 
others — for  example  sweet  and  bitter,  white 
and  black — whereas  the  principles  must  al¬ 
ways  remain  principles. 

[20]  This  will  suffice  to  show  that  the  prin¬ 
ciples  are  neither  one  nor  innumerable. 

Granted,  then,  that  they  are  a  limited  num¬ 
ber,  it  is  plausible  to  suppose  them  more  than 
two.  For  it  is  difficult  to  see  how  either  density 
should  be  of  such  a  nature  as  to  act  in  any  way 
on  rarity  or  rarity  on  density.  The  same  is  true 
of  any  other  pair  of  contraries;  for  Love  does 
[25]  not  gather  Strife  together  and  make 
things  out  of  it,  nor  does  Strife  make  any¬ 
thing  out  of  Love,  but  both  act  on  a  third 
thing  different  from  both.  Some  indeed  assume 
more  than  one  such  thing  from  which  they 
construct  the  world  of  nature. 

Other  objections  to  the  view  that  it  is  not 
necessary  to  assume  a  third  principle  as  a  sub¬ 
stratum  may  be  added.  (1)  We  do  not  find 
that  the  contraries  constitute  the  substance  of 
[jo]  any  thing.  But  what  is  a  first  principle 
ought  not  to  be  the  predicate  of  any  subject.  If 
it  were,  there  would  be  a  principle  of  the  sup¬ 
posed  principle:  for  the  subject  is  a  principle, 
and  prior  presumably  to  what  is  predicated  of 
it.  Again  (2)  we  hold  that  a  substance  is  not 
contrary  to  another  substance.  How  then  can 
substance  be  derived  from  what  are  not  sub¬ 
stances?  Or  how  can  non-substances  be  prior 
to  substance? 

If  then  we  accept  both  the  former  argument 


190*  BOOK  I,  CHAPTERS  5-7  265 


[35]  and  this  one,  we  must,  to  preserve  both,  as¬ 
sume  a  third  somewhat  as  the  substratum  of 
189b  the  contraries,  such  as  is  spoken  of  by 
those  who  describe  the  All  as  one  nature — 
water  or  fire  or  what  is  intermediate  between 
them.  What  is  intermediate  seems  preferable; 
for  fire,  earth,  air,  and  water  are  already  in- 
15]  volved  with  pairs  of  contraries.  There  is, 
therefore,  much  to  be  said  for  those  who  make 
the  underlying  substance  different  from  these 
four;  of  the  rest,  the  next  best  choice  is  air,  as 
presenting  sensible  differences  in  a  less  degree 
than  the  others;  and  after  air,  water.  All,  how¬ 
ever,  agree  in  this,  that  they  differentiate  their 
One  by  means  of  the  contraries,  such  as  density 
[70]  and  rarity  and  more  and  less,  which  may 
of  course  be  generalized,  as  has  already  been 
said,1  into  excess  and  defect.  Indeed  this  doc¬ 
trine  too  (that  the  One  and  excess  and  defect 
are  the  principles  of  things)  would  appear  to 
be  of  old  standing,  though  in  different  forms; 
for  the  early  thinkers  made  the  two  the  active 
and  the  one  the  passive  principle,  whereas 
[75]  some  of  the  more  recent  maintain  the 
reverse. 

To  suppose  then  that  the  elements  are  three 
in  number  would  seem,  from  these  and  sim¬ 
ilar  considerations,  a  plausible  view,  as  I  said 
before.2  On  the  other  hand,  the  view  that  they 
are  more  than  three  in  number  would  seem  to 
be  untenable. 

For  the  one  substratum  is  sufficient  to  be 
[20]  acted  on;  but  if  we  have  four  contraries, 
there  will  be  two  contrarieties,  and  we  shall 
have  to  suppose  an  intermediate  nature  for 
each  pair  separately.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  the 
contrarieties,  being  two,  can  generate  from 
each  other,  the  second  contrariety  will  be  super¬ 
fluous.  Moreover,  it  is  impossible  that  there 
should  be  more  than  one  primary  contrariety. 
For  substance  is  a  single  genus  of  being,  so 
that  the  principles  can  differ  only  as  prior  and 
[25]  posterior,  not  in  genus;  in  a  single  genus 
there  is  always  a  single  contrariety,  all  the 
other  contrarieties  in  it  being  held  to  be  re¬ 
ducible  to  one. 

It  is  clear  then  that  the  number  of  elements 
is  neither  one  nor  more  than  two  or  three;  but 
whether  two  or  three  is,  as  I  said,  a  question  of 
considerable  difficulty. 

7 

[50]  We  will  now  give  our  own  account,  ap¬ 
proaching  the  question  first  with  reference  to 
becoming  in  its  widest  sense:  for  we  shall  be 

1  187®  l6.  2a2I. 


following  the  natural  order  of  inquiry  if  we 
speak  first  of  common  characteristics,  and  then 
investigate  the  characteristics  of  special  cases. 

We  say  that  one  thing  comes  to  be  from  an¬ 
other  thing,  and  one  sort  of  thing  from  another 
sort  of  thing,  both  in  the  case  of  simple  and  of 
complex  things.  I  mean  the  following.  We  can 
say  (1)  the  ‘man  becomes  musical’,  (2)  what 
[55]  is  ‘not-musical  becomes  musical’,  or  (3) 
190*  the  ‘not-musical  man  becomes  a  musical 
man’.  Now  what  becomes  in  (1)  and  (2) — 
‘man’  and  ‘not  musical’ — I  call  simple,  and 
what  each  becomes — ‘musical’ — simple  also. 
But  when  (3)  we  say  the  ‘not-musical  man  be¬ 
comes  a  musical  man’,  both  what  becomes  and 
what  it  becomes  are  complex. 

[5]  As  regards  one  of  these  simple  ‘things  that 
become’  we  say  not  only  ‘this  becomes  so-and- 
so’,  but  also  ‘from  being  this,  comes  to  be  so- 
and-so’,  as  ‘from  being  not-musical  comes  to  be 
musical’;  as  regards  the  other  we  do  not  say 
this  in  all  cases,  as  we  do  not  say  (1)  ‘from  be¬ 
ing  a  man  he  came  to  be  musical’  but  only  ‘the 
man  became  musical’. 

When  a  ‘simple’  thing  is  said  to  become 
something,  in  one  case  ( 1 )  it  survives  through 
the  process,  in  the  other  (2)  it  does  not.  For 
[/o]  the  man  remains  a  man  and  is  such  even 
when  he  becomes  musical,  whereas  what  is  not 
musical  or  is  unmusical  does  not  continue  to 
exist,  either  simply  or  combined  with  the  sub¬ 
ject. 

These  distinctions  drawn,  one  can  gather 
from  surveying  the  various  cases  of  becoming 
in  the  way  we  are  describing  that,  as  we  say. 
there  must  always  be  an  underlying  something. 
[75]  namely  that  which  becomes,  and  that  this, 
though  always  one  numerically,  in  form  at 
least  is  not  one.  (By  that  I  mean  that  it  can  be 
described  in  different  ways.)  For  ‘to  be  man’ 
is  not  the  same  as  ‘to  be  unmusical’.  One  part 
survives,  the  other  does  not:  what  is  not  an 
opposite  survives  (for  ‘man’  survives),  but 
‘not-musical’  or  ‘unmusical’  does  not  survive, 
[20]  nor  does  the  compound  of  the  two,  name¬ 
ly  ‘unmusical  man’. 

We  speak  of  ‘becoming  that  from  this’  in¬ 
stead  of  ‘this  becoming  that’  more  in  the  case 
of  what  does  not  survive  the  change — ‘becom¬ 
ing  musical  from  unmusical’,  not  ‘from  man’ 
— but  there  are  exceptions,  as  we  sometimes 
[25]  use  the  latter  form  of  expression  even  of 
what  survives;  we  speak  of  ‘a  statue  coming  to 
be  from  bronze’,  not  of  the  ‘bronze  becoming 
a  statue’.  The  change,  however,  from  an  oppo¬ 
site  which  does  not  survive  is  described  indif- 


266 

ferently  in  both  ways,  ‘becoming  that  from 
this’  or  ‘this  becoming  that’.  We  say  both  that 
[30]  ‘the  unmusical  becomes  musical’,  and 
that  ‘from  unmusical  he  becomes  musical’. 
And  so  both  forms  are  used  of  the  complex, 
‘becoming  a  musical  man  from  an  unmusical 
man’,  and  ‘an  unmusical  man  becoming  a  mu¬ 
sical  man’. 

But  there  are  different  senses  of  ‘coming  to 
be’.  In  some  cases  we  do  not  use  the  expression 
‘come  to  be’,  but  ‘come  to  be  so-and-so’.  Only 
substances  are  said  to  ‘come  to  be’  in  the 
unqualified  sense. 

Now  in  all  cases  other  than  substance  it  is 
plain  that  there  must  be  some  subject,  namely, 
that  which  becomes.  For  we  know  that  when  a 
thing  comes  to  be  of  such  a  quantity  or  quality 
[35]  or  in  such  a  relation,  time,  or  place,  a 
subject  is  always  presupposed,  since  substance 
alone  is  not  predicated  of  another  subject,  but 
everything  else  of  substance. 

190b  But  that  substances  too,  and  anything 
else  that  can  be  said  ‘to  be’  without  qualifica¬ 
tion,  come  to  be  from  some  substratum,  will 
appear  on  examination.  For  we  find  in  every 
case  something  that  underlies  from  which  pro¬ 
ceeds  that  which  comes  to  be;  for  instance,  ani¬ 
mals  and  plants  from  seed. 

[5]  Generally  things  which  come  to  be,  come 
to  be  in  different  ways:  (1)  by  change  of 
shape,  as  a  statue;  (2)  by  addition,  as  things 
which  grow;  (3)  by  taking  away,  as  the 
Hermes  from  the  stone;  (4)  by  putting  to¬ 
gether,  as  a  house;  (5)  by  alteration,  as  things 
which  ‘turn’  in  respect  of  their  material  sub¬ 
stance. 

It  is  plain  that  these  are  all  cases  of  coming 
to  be  from  a  substratum. 

[10]  Thus,  clearly,  from  what  has  been  said, 
whatever  comes  to  be  is  always  complex.  There 
is,  on  the  one  hand,  (a)  something  which 
comes  into  existence,  and  again  (b)  something 
which  becomes  that — the  latter  (b)  in  two 
senses,  either  the  subject  or  the  opposite.  By 
the  ‘opposite’  I  mean  the  ‘unmusical’,  by  the 
‘subject’  ‘man’,  and  similarly  I  call  the  absence 
[75]  of  shape  or  form  or  order  the  ‘opposite’, 
and  the  bronze  or  stone  or  gold  the  ‘subject’. 

Plainly  then,  if  there  are  conditions  and 
principles  which  constitute  natural  objects  and 
from  which  they  primarily  are  or  have  come 
to  be — have  come  to  be,  I  mean,  what  each  is 
said  to  be  in  its  essential  nature,  not  what  each 
is  in  respect  of  a  concomitant  attribute — plain¬ 
ly  ]  ly,  I  say,  everything  comes  to  be  from  both 
subject  and  form.  For  ‘musical  man’  is  com¬ 


191* 

posed  (in  a  way)  of  ‘man’  and  ‘musical’:  you 
can  analyse  it  into  the  definitions  of  its  ele¬ 
ments.  It  is  clear  then  that  what  comes  to  be 
will  come  to  be  from  these  elements. 

Now  the  subject  is  one  numerically,  though 
it  is  two  in  form.  (For  it  is  the  man,  the  gold 
— the  ‘matter’  generally — that  is  counted,  for 
[25]  it  is  more  of  the  nature  of  a  ‘this’,  and 
what  comes  to  be  does  not  come  from  it  in 
virtue  of  a  concomitant  attribute;  the  priva¬ 
tion,  on  the  other  hand,  and  the  contrary  are 
incidental  in  the  process.)  And  the  positive 
form  is  one — the  order,  the  acquired  art  of 
music,  or  any  similar  predicate. 

There  is  a  sense,  therefore,  in  which  we  must 
declare  the  principles  to  be  two,  and  a  sense  in 
[30]  which  they  are  three;  a  sense  in  which  the 
contraries  are  the  principles — say  for  example 
the  musical  and  the  unmusical,  the  hot  and  the 
cold,  the  tuned  and  the  untuned — and  a  sense 
in  which  they  are  not,  since  it  is  impossible  for 
the  contraries  to  be  acted  on  by  each  other. 
But  this  difficulty  also  is  solved  by  the  fact  that 
the  substratum  is  different  from  the  contraries, 
[35]  for  it  is  itself  not  a  contrary.  The  prin¬ 
ciples  therefore  are,  in  a  way,  not  more  in  num¬ 
ber  than  the  contraries,  but  as  it  were  two,  nor 
yet  precisely  two,  since  there  is  a  difference 
191*  of  essential  nature,  but  three.  For  ‘to  be 
man’  is  different  from  ‘to  be  unmusical’,  and 
‘to  be  unformed’  from  ‘to  be  bronze’. 

We  have  now  stated  the  number  of  the  prin¬ 
ciples  of  natural  objects  which  are  subject  to 
generation,  and  how  the  number  is  reached: 
and  it  is  clear  that  there  must  be  a  substratum 
for  the  contraries,  and  that  the  contraries  must 
[5]  be  two.  (Yet  in  another  way  of  putting  it 
this  is  not  necessary,  as  one  of  the  contraries 
will  serve  to  effect  the  change  by  its  successive 
absence  and  presence.) 

The  underlying  nature  is  an  object  of  sci¬ 
entific  knowledge,  by  an  analogy.  For  as  the 
bronze  is  to  the  statue,  the  wood  to  the  bed, 
[/o]  or  the  matter  and  the  formless  before 
receiving  form  to  any  thing  which  has  form, 
so  is  the  underlying  nature  to  substance,  i.e. 
the  ‘this’  or  existent. 

This  then  is  one  principle  (though  not  one 
or  existent  in  the  same  sense  as  the  ‘this’),  and 
the  definition  was  one  as  we  agreed;  then  fur¬ 
ther  there  is  its  contrary,  the  privation.  In  what 
sense  these  are  two,  and  in  what  sense  more, 
[75]  has  been  stated  above.  Briefly,  we  ex¬ 
plained  first1  that  only  the  contraries  were 
principles,  and  later2  that  a  substratum  was  in- 

1  Chapter  5.  2  Chapter  6. 


PHYSICS 


191b  BOOK  I,  CHAPTERS  7-9  267 

dispensable,  and  that  the  principles  were  three;  [/o]  It  was  through  failure  to  make  this  dis- 
our  last  statement1  has  elucidated  the  differ-  tinction  that  those  thinkers  gave  the  matter  up, 


ence  between  the  contraries,  the  mutual  rela¬ 
tion  of  the  principles,  and  the  nature  of  the 
substratum.  Whether  the  form  or  the  sub¬ 
stratum  is  the  essential  nature  of  a  physical  ob- 
[20]  ject  is  not  yet  clear.  But  that  the  prin¬ 
ciples  are  three,  and  in  what  sense,  and  the 
way  in  which  each  is  a  principle,  is  clear. 

So  much  then  for  the  question  of  the  num¬ 
ber  and  the  nature  of  the  principles. 

8 

We  will  now  proceed  to  show  that  the  diffi¬ 
culty  of  the  early  thinkers,  as  well  as  our  own, 
is  solved  in  this  way  alone. 

The  first  of  those  who  studied  science  were 
[25]  misled  in  their  search  for  truth  and  the 
nature  of  things  by  their  inexperience,  which 
as  it  were  thrust  them  into  another  path.  So 
they  say  that  none  of  the  things  that  are  either 
comes  to  be  or  passes  out  of  existence,  because 
what  comes  to  be  must  do  so  either  from  what 
is  or  from  what  is  not,  both  of  which  are  im- 
[_?o]  possible.  For  what  is  cannot  come  to  be 
(because  it  is  already),  and  from  what  is  not 
nothing  could  have  come  to  be  (because  some¬ 
thing  must  be  present  as  a  substratum).  So  too 
they  exaggerated  the  consequence  of  this,  and 
went  so  far  as  to  deny  even  the  existence  of  a 
plurality  of  things,  maintaining  that  only  Be¬ 
ing  itself  is.  Such  then  was  their  opinion,  and 
such  the  reason  for  its  adoption. 

Our  explanation  on  the  other  hand  is  that 
the  phrases  ‘something  comes  to  be  from  what 
is  or  from  what  is  not’,  ‘what  is  not  or  what  is 
[_J5]  does  something  or  has  something  done  to 
it  or  becomes  some  particular  thing’,  are  to  be 
taken  (in  the  first  way  of  putting  our  explana- 
191b  tion)  in  the  same  sense  as  ‘a  doctor  does 
something  or  has  something  done  to  him’,  ‘is 
or  becomes  something  from  being  a  doctor’. 
These  expressions  may  be  taken  in  two  senses, 
and  so  too,  clearly,  may  ‘from  being’,  and  ‘be¬ 
ing  acts  or  is  acted  on’.  A  doctor  builds  a 
house,  not  qua  doctor,  but  qua  housebuilder, 
[5]  and  turns  gray,  not  qua  doctor,  but  qua 
darkhaired.  On  the  other  hand  he  doctors  or 
fails  to  doctor  qua  doctor.  But  we  are  using 
words  most  appropriately  when  we  say  that  a 
doctor  does  something  or  undergoes  some¬ 
thing,  or  becomes  something  from  being  a  doc¬ 
tor,  if  he  does,  undergoes,  or  becomes  qua 
doctor.  Clearly  then  also  ‘to  come  to  be  so-and- 
so  from  not-being’  means  ‘ qua  not-being’. 

1  Chapter  7. 


and  through  this  error  that  they  went  so  much 
farther  astray  as  to  suppose  that  nothing  else 
comes  to  be  or  exists  apart  from  Being  itself, 
thus  doing  away  with  all  becoming. 

We  ourselves  are  in  agreement  with  them  in 
holding  that  nothing  can  be  said  without  qual¬ 
ification  to  come  from  what  is  not.  But  never¬ 
theless  we  maintain  that  a  thing  may  ‘come  to 
be  from  what  is  not’ — that  is,  in  a  qualified 
[75]  sense.  For  a  thing  comes  to  be  from  the 
privation,  which  in  its  own  nature  is  not-being, 
— this  not  surviving  as  a  constituent  of  the  re¬ 
sult.  Yet  this  causes  surprise,  and  it  is  thought 
impossible  that  something  should  come  to  be 
in  the  way  described  from  what  is  not. 

In  the  same  way  we  maintain  that  nothing 
comes  to  be  from  being,  and  that  being  does 
not  come  to  be  except  in  a  qualified  sense.  In 
that  way,  however,  it  does,  just  as  animal 
might  come  to  be  from  animal,  and  an  animal 
[20]  of  a  certain  kind  from  an  animal  of  a 
certain  kind.  Thus,  suppose  a  dog  to  come  to 
be  from  a  horse.  The  dog  would  then,  it  is  true, 
come  to  be  from  animal  (as  well  as  from  an 
animal  of  a  certain  kind)  but  not  as  animal, 
for  that  is  already  there.  But  if  anything  is  to 
become  an  animal,  not  in  a  qualified  sense,  it 
will  not  be  from  animal:  and  if  being,  not 
[25]  from  being — nor  from  not-being  either, 
for  it  has  been  explained2  that  by  ‘from  not- 
being’  we  mean  from  not-being  qua  not-being. 

Note  further  that  we  do  not  subvert  the 
principle  that  everything  either  is  or  is  not. 

This  then  is  one  way  of  solving  the  difficulty. 
Another  consists  in  pointing  out  that  the  same 
things  can  be  explained  in  terms  of  potentiality 
and  actuality.  But  this  has  been  done  with 
greater  precision  elsewhere.3 
[30]  So,  as  we  said,  the  difficulties  which  con¬ 
strain  people  to  deny  the  existence  of  some  of 
the  things  we  mentioned  are  now  solved.  For 
it  was  this  reason  which  also  caused  some  of 
the  earlier  thinkers  to  turn  so  far  aside  from 
the  road  which  leads  to  coming  to  be  and  pass¬ 
ing  away  and  change  generally.  If  they  had 
come  in  sight  of  this  nature,  all  their  ignorance 
would  have  been  dispelled. 

9 

[^5]  Others,  indeed,  have  apprehended  the 
nature  in  question,  but  not  adequately. 

In  the  first  place  they  allow  that  a  thing  may 
come  to  be  without  qualification  from  not- 
2  1.  9.  8  Metaphysics ,  ix,  and  v  (io 1 7*  35-b  9). 


268 

being,  accepting  on  this  point  the  statement  of 
192*  Parmenides.  Secondly,  they  think  that  if 
the  substratum  is  one  numerically,  it  must 
have  also  only  a  single  potentiality — which  is 
a  very  different  thing. 

Now  we  distinguish  matter  and  privation, 
and  hold  that  one  of  these,  namely  the  matter, 
is  not-being  only  in  virtue  of  an  attribute 
which  it  has,  while  the  privation  in  its  own 
[5]  nature  is  not-being;  and  that  the  matter  is 
nearly,  in  a  sense  is,  substance,  while  the  priva¬ 
tion  in  no  sense  is.  They,  on  the  other  hand, 
identify  their  Great  and  Small  alike  with  not- 
being,  and  that  whether  they  are  taken  to¬ 
gether  as  one  or  separately.  Their  triad  is 
therefore  of  quite  a  different  kind  from  ours. 
For  they  got  so  far  as  to  see  that  there  must 
[/o]  be  some  underlying  nature,  but  they 
make  it  one — for  even  if  one  philosopher1 
makes  a  dyad  of  it,  which  he  calls  Great  and 
Small,  the  effect  is  the  same,  for  he  overlooked 
the  other  nature.  For  the  one  which  persists  is 
a  joint  cause,  with  the  form,  of  what  comes  to 
be — a  mother,  as  it  were.  But  the  negative  part 
[75]  of  the  contrariety  may  often  seem,  if  you 
concentrate  your  attention  on  it  as  an  evil 
agent,  not  to  exist  at  all. 

For  admitting  with  them  that  there  is  some¬ 
thing  divine,  good,  and  desirable,  we  hold  that 
there  are  two  other  principles,  the  one  contrary 
to  it,  the  other  such  as  of  its  own  nature  to  de¬ 
sire  and  yearn  for  it.  But  the  consequence  of 
their  view  is  that  the  contrary  desires  its  own 
[20]  extinction.  Yet  the  form  cannot  desire 
itself,  for  it  is  not  defective;  nor  can  the 
contrary  desire  it,  for  contraries  are  mutu- 


192b 

ally  destructive.  The  truth  is  that  what  de¬ 
sires  the  form  is  matter,  as  the  female  desires 
the  male  and  the  ugly  the  beautiful — only 
the  ugly  or  the  female  not  per  se  but  per 
accidens . 

[25]  The  matter  comes  to  be  and  ceases  to  be 
in  one  sense,  while  in  another  it  does  not.  As 
that  which  contains  the  privation,  it  ceases  to 
be  in  its  own  nature,  for  what  ceases  to  be — 
the  privation — is  contained  within  it.  But  as 
potentiality  it  does  not  cease  to  be  in  its  own 
nature,  but  is  necessarily  outside  the  sphere  of 
becoming  and  ceasing  to  be.  For  if  it  came  to 
be,  something  must  have  existed  as  a  primary 
substratum  from  which  it  should  come  and 
[jo]  which  should  persist  in  it;  but  this  is  its 
own  special  nature,  so  that  it  will  be  before 
coming  to  be.  (For  my  definition  of  matter  is 
just  this — the  primary  substratum  of  each 
thing,  from  which  it  comes  to  be  without  qual¬ 
ification,  and  which  persists  in  the  result.) 
And  if  it  ceases  to  be  it  will  pass  into  that  at  the 
last,  so  it  will  have  ceased  to  be  before  ceasing 
to  be. 

The  accurate  determination  of  the  first  prin¬ 
ciple  in  respect  of  form,  whether  it  is  one  or 
many  and  what  it  is  or  what  they  are,  is  the 
[55]  province  of  the  primary  type  of  science; 
so  these  questions  may  stand  over  till  then.2 
192b  But  of  the  natural,  i.e.  perishable,  forms 
we  shall  speak  in  the  expositions  which  fol¬ 
low.3 

The  above,  then,  may  be  taken  as  sufficient 
to  establish  that  there  are  principles  and  what 
they  are  and  how  many  there  are.  Now  let  us 
make  a  fresh  start  and  proceed. 


PHYSICS 


BOOK  II 


1 

Of  things  that  exist,  some  exist  by  nature,  some 
from  other  causes. 

‘By  nature’  the  animals  and  their  parts  exist, 
[/o]  and  the  plants  and  the  simple  bodies 
(earth,  fire,  air,  water) — for  we  say  that  these 
and  the  like  exist  ‘by  nature’. 

All  the  things  mentioned  present  a  feature 
in  which  they  differ  from  things  which  are  not 
constituted  by  nature.  Each  of  them  has  within 
itself  a  principle  of  motion  and  of  stationari- 
[75]  ness  (in  respect  of  place,  or  of  growth  and 
decrease,  or  by  way  of  alteration).  On  the 
other  hand,  a  bed  and  a  coat  and  anything  else 
of  that  sort,  qua  receiving  these  designations — 
1  Plato. 


i.e.  in  so  far  as  they  are  products  of  art — have 
no  innate  impulse  to  change.  But  in  so  far  as 
they  happen  to  be  composed  of  stone  or  of 
[20]  earth  or  of  a  mixture  of  the  two,  they  do 
have  such  an  impulse,  and  just  to  that  extent — 
which  seems  to  indicate  that  nature  is  a  source 
or  cause  of  being  moved  and  of  being  at  rest 
in  that  to  which  it  belongs  primarily,  in  virtue 
of  itself  and  not  in  virtue  of  a  concomitant 
attribute. 

1  say  ‘not  in  virtue  of  a  concomitant  attri¬ 
bute’,  because  (for  instance)  a  man  who  is  a 
doctor  might  cure  himself.  Nevertheless  it  is 

2  Metaphysics ,  xn.  7-9. 

8  I.e.  the  rest  of  the  Physics ,  the  On  the  Heavens ,  On 
Generation  and  Corruption ,  etc.  (especially  On  Generation 
and  Corruption ,  11). 


193b  BOOK  I,  CHAPTER  9- 

not  in  so  far  as  he  is  a  patient  that  he  pos- 
[25]  sesses  the  art  of  medicine:  it  merely  has 
happened  that  the  same  man  is  doctor  and  pa¬ 
tient — and  that  is  why  these  attributes  are  not 
always  found  together.  So  it  is  with  all  other 
artificial  products.  None  of  them  has  in  itself 
the  source  of  its  own  production.  But  while  in 
some  cases  (for  instance  houses  and  the  other 
products  of  manual  labour)  that  principle  is  in 
something  else  external  to  the  thing,  in  others 
[jo]  — those  which  may  cause  a  change  in 
themselves  in  virtue  of  a  concomitant  attribute 
— it  lies  in  the  things  themselves  (but  not  in 
virtue  of  what  they  are). 

‘Nature’  then  is  what  has  been  stated. 
Things  ‘have  a  nature’  which  have  a  principle 
of  this  kind.  Each  of  them  is  a  substance;  for 
it  is  a  subject,  and  nature  always  implies  a 
subject  in  which  it  inheres. 

[55]  The  term  ‘according  to  nature’  is  applied 
to  all  these  things  and  also  to  the  attributes 
which  belong  to  them  in  virtue  of  what  they 
are,  for  instance  the  property  of  fire  to  be  car¬ 
ried  upwards — which  is  not  a  ‘nature’  nor  ‘has 
a  nature’  but  is  ‘by  nature’  or  ‘according  to 
nature’. 

193a  What  nature  is,  then,  and  the  meaning 
of  the  terms  ‘by  nature’  and  ‘according  to  na¬ 
ture’,  has  been  stated.  That  nature  exists,  it 
would  be  absurd  to  try  to  prove;  for  it  is  ob¬ 
vious  that  there  are  many  things  of  this  kind, 
[5]  and  to  prove  what  is  obvious  by  what  is 
not  is  the  mark  of  a  man  who  is  unable  to  dis¬ 
tinguish  what  is  self-evident  from  what  is  not. 
(This  state  of  mind  is  clearly  possible.  A  man 
blind  from  birth  might  reason  about  colours. 
Presumably  therefore  such  persons  must  be 
talking  about  words  without  any  thought  to 
correspond.) 

Some  identify  the  nature  or  substance  of  a 
[/o]  natural  object  with  that  immediate  con¬ 
stituent  of  it  which  taken  by  itself  is  without 
arrangement,  e.g.  the  wood  is  the  ‘nature’  of 
the  bed,  and  the  bronze  the  ‘nature’  of  the 
statue. 

As  an  indication  of  this  Antiphon  points  out 
that  if  you  planted  a  bed  and  the  rotting  wood 
acquired  the  power  of  sending  up  a  shoot,  it 
would  not  be  a  bed  that  would  come  up,  but 
wood — which  shows  that  the  arrangement  in 
[75]  accordance  with  the  rules  of  the  art  is 
merely  an  incidental  attribute,  whereas  the  real 
nature  is  the  other,  which,  further,  persists 
continuously  through  the  process  of  making. 

But  if  the  material  of  each  of  these  objects 
has  itself  the  same  relation  to  something  else, 


—BOOK  II,  CHAPTER  1  269 

[20]  say  bronze  (or  gold)  to  water,  bones  (or 
wood)  to  earth  and  so  on,  that  (they  say) 
would  be  their  nature  and  essence.  Conse¬ 
quently  some  assert  earth,  others  fire  or  air  or 
water  or  some  or  all  of  these,  to  be  the  nature 
of  the  things  that  are.  For  whatever  any  one 
of  them  supposed  to  have  this  character — 
whether  one  thing  or  more  than  one  thing — 
[25]  this  or  these  he  declared  to  be  the  whole 
of  substance,  all  else  being  its  affections,  states, 
or  dispositions.  Every  such  thing  they  held  to 
be  eternal  (for  it  could  not  pass  into  anything 
else),  but  other  things  to  come  into  being  and 
cease  to  be  times  without  number. 

This  then  is  one  account  of  ‘nature’,  namely 
that  it  is  the  immediate  material  substratum  of 
things  which  have  in  themselves  a  principle  of 
motion  or  change. 

[30]  Another  account  is  that  ‘nature’  is  the 
shape  or  form  which  is  specified  in  the  defini¬ 
tion  of  the  thing. 

For  the  word  ‘nature’  is  applied  to  what  is 
according  to  nature  and  the  natural  in  the 
same  way  as  ‘art’  is  applied  to  what  is  artistic 
or  a  work  of  art.  We  should  not  say  in  the 
latter  case  that  there  is  anything  artistic  about 
a  thing,  if  it  is  a  bed  only  potentially,  not  yet 
having  the  form  of  a  bed;  nor  should  we  call 
[33]  it  a  work  of  art.  The  same  is  true  of  nat¬ 
ural  compounds.  What  is  potentially  flesh  or 
bone  has  not  yet  its  own  ‘nature’,  and  does  not 
exist  ‘by  nature’,  until  it  receives  the  form  spec- 
193b  ified  in  the  definition,  which  we  name 
in  defining  what  flesh  or  bone  is.  Thus  in  the 
second  sense  of  ‘nature’  it  would  be  the  shape 
or  form  (not  separable  except  in  statement)  of 
[3]  things  which  have  in  themselves  a  source 
of  motion.  (The  combination  of  the  two,  e.g. 
man,  is  not  ‘nature’  but  ‘by  nature’  or  ‘nat¬ 
ural’.) 

The  form  indeed  is  ‘nature’  rather  than  the 
matter;  for  a  thing  is  more  properly  said  to  be 
what  it  is  when  it  has  attained  to  fulfilment 
than  when  it  exists  potentially.  Again  man  is 
born  from  man,  but  not  bed  from  bed.  That  is 
why  people  say  that  the  figure  is  not  the  nature 
[/o]  of  a  bed,  but  the  wood  is — if  the  bed 
sprouted  not  a  bed  but  wood  would  come 
up.  But  even  if  the  figure  is  art,  then  on  the 
same  principle  the  shape  of  man  is  his  nature. 
For  man  is  born  from  man. 

We  also  speak  of  a  thing’s  nature  as  being 
exhibited  in  the  process  of  growth  by  which 
its  nature  is  attained.  The  ‘nature’  in  this  sense 
is  not  like  ‘doctoring’,  which  leads  not  to  the 
[75]  art  of  doctoring  but  to  health.  Doctoring 


27  o 

must  start  from  the  art,  not  lead  to  it.  But  it  is 
not  in  this  way  that  nature  (in  the  one  sense) 
is  related  to  nature  (in  the  other).  What  grows 
qua  growing  grows  from  something  into 
something.  Into  what  then  does  it  grow?  Not 
into  that  from  which  it  arose  but  into  that  to 
which  it  tends.  The  shape  then  is  nature. 

‘Shape’  and  ‘nature’,  it  should  be  added,  are 
[20]  used  in  two  senses.  For  the  privation  too 
is  in  a  way  form.  But  whether  in  unqualified 
coming  to  be  there  is  privation,  i.e.  a  contrary 
to  what  comes  to  be,  we  must  consider  later.1 

2 

We  have  distinguished,  then,  the  different 
ways  in  which  the  term  ‘nature’  is  used. 

The  next  point  to  consider  is  how  the  mathe¬ 
matician  differs  from  the  physicist.  Obviously 
physical  bodies  contain  surfaces  and  volumes, 
lines  and  points,  and  these  are  the  subject- 
matter  of  mathematics. 

[25]  Further,  is  astronomy  different  from 
physics  or  a  department  of  it  ?  It  seems  absurd 
that  the  physicist  should  be  supposed  to  know 
the  nature  of  sun  or  moon,  but  not  to  know 
any  of  their  essential  attributes,  particularly  as 
the  writers  on  physics  obviously  do  discuss 
[jo]  their  shape  also  and  whether  the  earth 
and  the  world  are  spherical  or  not. 

Now  the  mathematician,  though  he  too 
treats  of  these  things,  nevertheless  does  not 
treat  of  them  as  the  limits  of  a  physical  body; 
nor  does  he  consider  the  attributes  indicated 
as  the  attributes  of  such  bodies.  That  is  why 
he  separates  them;  for  in  thought  they  are 
separable  from  motion,  and  it  makes  no  differ¬ 
ence,  nor  does  any  falsity  result,  if  they  are 
[35]  separated.  The  holders  of  the  theory  of 
Forms  do  the  same,  though  they  are  not  aware 
of  it;  for  they  separate  the  objects  of  physics, 
which  are  less  separable  than  those  of  mathe- 
194a  matics.  This  becomes  plain  if  one  tries 
to  state  in  each  of  the  two  cases  the  definitions 
of  the  things  and  of  their  attributes.  ‘Odd’  and 
‘even’,  ‘straight’  and  ‘curved’,  and  likewise 
‘number’,  ‘line’,  and  ‘figure’,  do  not  involve 
[5]  motion;  not  so  ‘flesh’  and  ‘bone’  and  ‘man’ 
— these  are  defined  like  ‘snub  nose’,  not  like 
‘curved’. 

Similar  evidence  is  supplied  by  the  more 
physical  of  the  branches  of  mathematics,  such 
as  optics,  harmonics,  and  astronomy.  These  are 
in  a  way  the  converse  of  geometry.  While 
eometry  investigates  physical  lines  but  not 
10]  qua  physical,  optics  investigates  mathe- 

1  On  Generation  and  Corruption,  1. 3. 


l94b 

matical  lines,  but  qua  physical,  not  qua  math¬ 
ematical. 

Since  ‘nature’  has  two  senses,  the  form  and 
the  matter,  we  must  investigate  its  objects  as 
we  would  the  essence  of  snubness.  That  is,  such 
things  are  neither  independent  of  matter  nor 
can  be  defined  in  terms  of  matter  only.  Here 
[75]  too  indeed  one  might  raise  a  difficulty. 
Since  there  are  two  natures,  with  which  is  the 
physicist  concerned?  Or  should  he  investigate 
the  combination  of  the  two?  But  if  the  com¬ 
bination  of  the  two,  then  also  each  severally. 
Does  it  belong  then  to  the  same  or  to  different 
sciences  to  know  each  severally? 

If  we  look  at  the  ancients,  physics  would 
[20]  seem  to  be  concerned  with  the  matter . 
(It  was  only  very  slightly  that  Empedocles 
and  Democritus  touched  on  the  forms  and  the 
essence.) 

But  if  on  the  other  hand  art  imitates  nature, 
and  it  is  the  part  of  the  same  discipline  to  know 
the  form  and  the  matter  up  to  a  point  (e.g. 
the  doctor  has  a  knowledge  of  health  and  also 
of  bile  and  phlegm,  in  which  health  is  realized, 
and  the  builder  both  of  the  form  of  the  house 
[25]  and  of  the  matter,  namely  that  it  is  bricks 
and  beams,  and  so  forth):  if  this  is  so,  it 
would  be  the  part  of  physics  also  to  know  na¬ 
ture  in  both  its  senses. 

Again,  ‘that  for  the  sake  of  which’,  or  the 
end,  belongs  to  the  same  department  of  knowl¬ 
edge  as  the  means.  But  the  nature  is  the  end 
or  ‘that  for  the  sake  of  which’.  For  if  a  thing 
undergoes  a  continuous  change  and  there  is 
a  stage  which  is  last,  this  stage  is  the  end  or 
[jo]  ‘that  for  the  sake  of  which’.  (That  is  why 
the  poet  was  carried  away  into  making  an 
absurd  statement  when  he  said  ‘he  has  the  end 
for  the  sake  of  which  he  was  born’.2  For  not 
every  stage  that  is  last  claims  to  be  an  end,  but 
only  that  which  is  best.) 

For  the  arts  make  their  material  (some  sim¬ 
ply  ‘make’  it,  others  make  it  serviceable),  and 
we  use  everything  as  if  it  was  there  for  our 
[J5]  sake.  (We  also  are  in  a  sense  an  end. 
‘That  for  the  sake  of  which’  has  two  senses: 
the  distinction  is  made  in  our  work  On  Phil¬ 
osophy .3)  The  arts,  therefore,  which  govern 
194b  the  matter  and  have  knowledge  are  two, 
namely  the  art  which  uses  the  product  and  the 
art  which  directs  the  production  of  it.  That  is 
why  the  using  art  also  is  in  a  sense  directive; 
but  it  differs  in  that  it  knows  the  form,  where¬ 
as  the  art  which  is  directive  as  being  concerned 

*  Kock,  Com.  Alt.  Fr.  hi,  p.  493. 

8  I.e.  in  the  dialogue  Dc  Philosophia. 


PHYSICS 


195*  BOOK  II,  CHAPTERS  1-3  271 


with  production  knows  the  matter.  For  the 
[5]  helmsman  knows  and  prescribes  what  sort 
of  form  a  helm  should  have,  the  other  from 
what  wood  it  should  be  made  and  by  means  of 
what  operations.  In  the  products  of  art,  how¬ 
ever,  we  make  the  material  with  a  view  to 
the  function,  whereas  in  the  products  of  nature 
the  matter  is  there  all  along. 

Again,  matter  is  a  relative  term:  to  each 
form  there  corresponds  a  special  matter.  How 
far  then  must  the  physicist  know  the  form  or 
[/o]  essence?  Up  to  a  point,  perhaps,  as  the 
doctor  must  know  sinew  or  the  smith  bronze 
(i.e.  until  he  understands  the  purpose  of 
each):  and  the  physicist  is  concerned  only  with 
things  whose  forms  are  separable  indeed,  but 
do  not  exist  apart  from  matter.  Man  is  begot¬ 
ten  by  man  and  by  the  sun  as  well.  The  mode 
of  existence  and  essence  of  the  separable  it  is 
[75]  the  business  of  the  primary  type  of  phi¬ 
losophy  to  define. 

3 

Now  that  we  have  established  these  distinctions, 
we  must  proceed  to  consider  causes,  their  char¬ 
acter  and  number.  Knowledge  is  the  object  of 
our  inquiry,  and  men  do  not  think  they  know 
a  thing  till  they  have  grasped  the  ‘why’  of  it 
[20]  (which  is  to  grasp  its  primary  cause).  So 
clearly  we  too  must  do  this  as  regards  both 
coming  to  be  and  passing  away  and  every 
kind  of  physical  change,  in  order  that,  know¬ 
ing  their  principles,  we  may  try  to  refer  to 
these  principles  each  of  our  problems. 

In  one  sense,  then,  (1)  that  out  of  which  a 
thing  comes  to  be  and  which  persists,  is  called 
‘cause’,  e.g.  the  bronze  of  the  statue,  the  silver 
[25]  of  the  bowl,  and  the  genera  of  which  the 
bronze  and  the  silver  are  species. 

In  another  sense  (2)  the  form  or  the  arche¬ 
type,  i.e.  the  statement  of  the  essence,  and  its 
genera,  are  called  ‘causes’  (e.g.  of  the  octave 
the  relation  of  2  :  1,  and  generally  number), 
and  the  parts  in  the  definition. 

Again  (3)  the  primary  source  of  the  change 
[30]  or  coming  to  rest;  e.g.  the  man  who  gave 
advice  is  a  cause,  the  father  is  cause  of  the 
child,  and  generally  what  makes  of  what  is 
made  and  what  causes  change  of  what  is 
changed. 

Again  (4)  in  the  sense  of  end  or  ‘that  for 
the  sake  of  which’  a  thing  is  done,  e.g.  health 
is  the  cause  of  walking  about.  (‘Why  is  he 
walking  about?’  we  say.  ‘To  be  healthy’,  and, 
having  said  that,  we  think  we  have  assigned 
[35]  the  cause.)  The  same  is  true  also  of  all 


the  intermediate  steps  which  are  brought  about 
through  the  action  of  something  else  as  means 
towards  the  end,  e.g.  reduction  of  flesh,  purg¬ 
ing,  drugs,  or  surgical  instruments  are  means 
195*  towards  health.  All  these  things  are  ‘for 
the  sake  of’  the  end,  though  they  differ  from 
one  another  in  that  some  are  activities,  others 
instruments. 

This  then  perhaps  exhausts  the  number  of 
ways  in  which  the  term  ‘cause’  is  used. 

As  the  word  has  several  senses,  it  follows 
that  there  are  several  causes  of  the  same  thing 
not  merely  in  virtue  of  a  concomitant  attri- 
5]  bute),  e.g.  both  the  art  of  the  sculptor  and 
the  bronze  are  causes  of  the  statue.  These  are 
causes  of  the  statue  qua  statue,  not  in  virtue 
of  anything  else  that  it  may  be — only  not  in 
the  same  way,  the  one  being  the  material 
cause,  the  other  the  cause  whence  the  motion 
comes.  Some  things  cause  each  other  recipro- 
[/o]  cally,  e.g.  hard  work  causes  fitness  and 
vice  versa,  but  again  not  in  the  same  way,  but 
the  one  as  end,  the  other  as  the  origin  of 
change.  Further  the  same  thing  is  the  cause  of 
contrary  results.  For  that  which  by  its  pres¬ 
ence  brings  about  one  result  is  sometimes 
blamed  for  bringing  about  the  contrary  by  its 
absence.  Thus  we  ascribe  the  wreck  of  a  ship 
to  the  absence  of  the  pilot  whose  presence  was 
the  cause  of  its  safety. 

[75]  All  the  causes  now  mentioned  fall  into 
four  familiar  divisions.  The  letters  are  the 
causes  of  syllables,  the  material  of  artificial 
products,  fire,  &c.,  of  bodies,  the  parts  of  the 
whole,  and  the  premisses  of  the  conclusion,  in 
the  sense  of  ‘that  from  which’.  Of  these  pairs 
[20]  the  one  set  are  causes  in  the  sense  of  sub¬ 
stratum,  e.g.  the  parts,  the  other  set  in  the 
sense  of  essence — the  whole  and  the  combina¬ 
tion  and  the  form.  But  the  seed  and  the  doctor 
and  the  adviser,  and  generally  the  maker,  are 
all  sources  whence  the  change  or  stationariness 
originates,  while  the  others  are  causes  in  the 
sense  of  the  end  or  the  good  of  the  rest;  for 
‘that  for  the  sake  of  which’  means  what  is  best 
[25]  and  the  end  of  the  things  that  lead  up  to 
it.  (Whether  we  say  the  ‘good  itself’  or  the  ‘ap¬ 
parent  good’  makes  no  difference.) 

Such  then  is  the  number  and  nature  of  the 
kinds  of  cause. 

Now  the  modes  of  causation  are  many, 
though  when  brought  under  heads  they  too 
can  be  reduced  in  number.  For  ‘cause’  is  used 
in  many  senses  and  even  within  the  same  kind 
[30]  one  may  be  prior  to  another  (e.g.  the 
doctor  and  the  expert  are  causes  of  health,  the 


272 

relation  2  :  1  and  number  of  the  octave),  and 
always  what  is  inclusive  to  what  is  particular. 
Another  mode  of  causation  is  the  incidental 
and  its  genera,  e.g.  in  one  way  ‘Polyclitus’,  in 
another  ‘sculptor’  is  the  cause  of  a  statue,  be- 
[_?5]  cause  ‘being  Polyclitus’  and  ‘sculptor’  are 
incidentally  conjoined.  Also  the  classes  in 
which  the  incidental  attribute  is  included; 
thus  ‘a  man’  could  be  said  to  be  the  cause  of  a 
195b  statue  or,  generally,  ‘a  living  creature’. 
An  incidental  attribute  too  may  be  more  or  less 
remote,  e.g.  suppose  that  ‘a  pale  man’  or  ‘a 
musical  man’  were  said  to  be  the  cause  of  the 
statue. 

All  causes,  both  proper  and  incidental,  may 
[5]  be  spoken  of  either  as  potential  or  as  ac¬ 
tual;  e.g.  the  cause  of  a  house  being  built  is 
either  ‘house-builder’  or  ‘house-builder  build- 

i  ng’: 

Similar  distinctions  can  be  made  in  the 
things  of  which  the  causes  are  causes,  e.g.  of 
‘this  statue’  or  of  ‘statue’  or  of  ‘image’  gen¬ 
erally,  of  ‘this  bronze’  or  of  ‘bronze’  or  of  ‘ma¬ 
terial’  generally.  So  too  with  the  incidental  at- 
[/o]  tributes.  Again  we  may  use  a  complex 
expression  for  either  and  say,  e.g.  neither 
‘Polyclitus’  nor  ‘sculptor’  but  ‘Polyclitus,  sculp¬ 
tor’. 

All  these  various  uses,  however,  come  to  six 
in  number,  under  each  of  which  again  the 
usage  is  twofold.  Cause  means  either  what  is 
particular  or  a  genus,  or  an  incidental  attri- 
[75]  bute  or  a  genus  of  that,  and  these  either 
as  a  complex  or  each  by  itself;  and  all  six 
either  as  actual  or  as  potential.  The  difference 
is  this  much,  that  causes  which  are  actually 
at  work  and  particular  exist  and  cease  to  exist 
simultaneously  with  their  effect,  e.g.  this  heal¬ 
ing  person  with  this  being-healed  person  and 
that  housebuilding  man  with  that  being-built 
house;  but  this  is  not  always  true  of  potential 
[20]  causes — the  house  and  the  housebuilder 
do  not  pass  away  simultaneously. 

In  investigating  the  cause  of  each  thing  it  is 
always  necessary  to  seek  what  is  most  precise 
(as  also  in  other  things):  thus  man  builds  be¬ 
cause  he  is  a  builder,  and  a  builder  builds  in 
virtue  of  his  art  of  building.  This  last  cause 
then  is  prior:  and  so  generally. 

[25]  Further,  generic  effects  should  be  as¬ 
signed  to  generic  causes,  particular  effects  to 
particular  causes,  e.g.  statue  to  sculptor,  this 
statue  to  this  sculptor;  and  powers  are  relative 
to  possible  effects,  actually  operating  causes  to 
things  which  are  actually  being  effected. 

This  must  suffice  for  our  account  of  the 


196a 

[30]  number  of  causes  and  the  modes  of  causa¬ 
tion. 

4 

But  chance  also  and  spontaneity  are  reckoned 
among  causes:  many  things  are  said  both  to  be 
and  to  come  to  be  as  a  result  of  chance  and 
spontaneity.  We  must  inquire  therefore  in 
what  manner  chance  and  spontaneity  are 
present  among  the  causes  enumerated,  and 
[33]  whether  they  are  the  same  or  different, 
and  generally  what  chance  and  spontaneity  are. 

Some  people  even  question  whether  they  are 
196a  real  or  not.  They  say  that  nothing  hap¬ 
pens  by  chance,  but  that  everything  which  we 
ascribe  to  chance  or  spontaneity  has  some  defi¬ 
nite  cause,  e.g.  coming  ‘by  chance’  into  the 
market  and  finding  there  a  man  whom  one 
wanted  but  did  not  expect  to  meet  is  due  to 
one’s  wish  to  go  and  buy  in  the  market.  Sim- 
[5]  ilarly  in  other  cases  of  chance  it  is  always 
possible,  they  maintain,  to  find  something 
which  is  the  cause;  but  not  chance,  for  if 
chance  were  real,  it  would  seem  strange  indeed, 
and  the  question  might  be  raised,  why  on 
earth  none  of  the  wise  men  of  old  in  speaking 
of  the  causes  of  generation  and  decay  took  ac- 
[/o]  count  of  chance;  whence  it  would  seem 
that  they  too  did  not  believe  that  anything  is  by 
chance.  But  there  is  a  further  circumstance  that 
is  surprising.  Many  things  both  come  to  be  and 
are  by  chance  and  spontaneity,  and  although 
all  know  that  each  of  them  can  be  ascribed  to 
some  cause  (as  the  old  argument  said  which 
[75]  denied  chance),  nevertheless  they  speak 
of  some  of  these  things  as  happening  by  chance 
and  others  not.  For  this  reason  also  they  ought 
to  have  at  least  referred  to  the  matter  in  some 
way  or  other. 

Certainly  the  early  physicists  found  no  place 
for  chance  among  the  causes  which  they  recog¬ 
nized — love,  strife,  mind,  fire,  or  the  like.  This 
is  strange,  whether  they  supposed  that  there 
is  no  such  thing  as  chance  or  whether  they 
[20]  thought  there  is  but  omitted  to  mention 
it — and  that  too  when  they  sometimes  used  it, 
as  Empedocles  does  when  he  says  that  the  air  is 
not  always  separated  into  the  highest  region, 
but  ‘as  it  may  chance’.  At  any  rate  he  says  in 
his  cosmogony  that  ‘it  happened  to  run  that 
way  at  that  time,  but  it  often  ran  otherwise.’1 
He  tells  us  also  that  most  of  the  parts  of  ani¬ 
mals  came  to  be  by  chance. 

[25]  There  are  some  too  who  ascribe  this 
heavenly  sphere  and  all  the  worlds  to  spon- 
1  Fr.  53- 


PHYSICS 


19 7*  BOOK  II,  CHAPTERS  3-5  273 


taneity.  They  say  that  the  vortex  arose  spon¬ 
taneously,  i.e.  the  motion  that  separated  and 
arranged  in  its  present  order  all  that  exists. 
This  statement  might  well  cause  surprise.  For 
they  are  asserting  that  chance  is  not  responsible 
for  the  existence  or  generation  of  animals  and 
[jo]  plants,  nature  or  mind  or  something  of 
the  kind  being  the  cause  of  them  (for  it  is  not 
any  chance  thing  that  comes  from  a  given  seed 
but  an  olive  from  one  kind  and  a  man  from 
another) ;  and  yet  at  the  same  time  they  assert 
that  the  heavenly  sphere  and  the  divinest  of 
visible  things  arose  spontaneously,  having  no 
[33]  such  cause  as  is  assigned  to  animals  and 
plants.  Yet  if  this  is  so,  it  is  a  fact  which  de¬ 
serves  to  be  dwelt  upon,  and  something  might 
196b  well  have  been  said  about  it.  For  be¬ 
sides  the  other  absurdities  of  the  statement,  it 
is  the  more  absurd  that  people  should  make  it 
when  they  see  nothing  coming  to  be  spon¬ 
taneously  in  the  heavens,  but  much  happening 
by  chance  among  the  things  which  as  they  say 
are  not  due  to  chance;  whereas  we  should  have 
expected  exactly  the  opposite. 

[5]  Others  there  are  who,  indeed,  believe  that 
chance  is  a  cause,  but  that  it  is  inscrutable  to 
human  intelligence,  as  being  a  divine  thing 
and  full  of  mystery. 

Thus  we  must  inquire  what  chance  and 
spontaneity  are,  whether  they  are  the  same  or 
different,  and  how  they  fit  into  our  division  of 
causes. 

5 

[/o]  First  then  we  observe  that  some  things 
always  come  to  pass  in  the  same  way,  and 
others  for  the  most  part.  It  is  clearly  of  neither 
of  these  that  chance  is  said  to  be  the  cause,  nor 
can  the  ‘effect  of  chance’  be  identified  with  any 
of  the  things  that  come  to  pass  by  necessity  and 
always,  or  for  the  most  part.  But  as  there  is  a 
third  class  of  events  besides  these  two — events 
which  all  say  are  ‘by  chance’ — it  is  plain  that 
there  is  such  a  thing  as  chance  and  spontaneity; 
|>5]  for  we  know  that  things  of  this  kind  are 
due  to  chance  and  that  things  due  to  chance  are 
of  this  kind. 

But,  secondly,  some  events  are  for  the  sake 
of  something,  others  not.  Again,  some  of  the 
former  class  are  in  accordance  with  deliberate 
intention,  others  not,  but  both  are  in  the  class 
of  things  which  are  for  the  sake  of  something. 
[20]  Hence  it  is  clear  that  even  among  the 
things  which  are  outside  the  necessary  and  the 
normal,  there  are  some  in  connexion  with- 
which  the  phrase  ‘for  the  sake  of  something’  is 


applicable.  (Events  that  are  for  the  sake  of 
something  include  whatever  may  be  done  as  a 
result  of  thought  or  of  nature.)  Things  of  this 
kind,  then,  when  they  come  to  pass  incidental¬ 
ly  are  said  to  be  ‘by  chance’.  For  just  as  a  thing 
[25]  is  something  either  in  virtue  of  itself  or 
incidentally,  so  may  it  be  a  cause.  For  instance, 
the  housebuilding  faculty  is  in  virtue  of  itself 
the  cause  of  a  house,  whereas  the  pale  or  the 
musical  is  the  incidental  cause.  That  which  is 
per  se  cause  of  the  effect  is  determinate,  but  the 
incidental  cause  is  indeterminable,  for  the  pos¬ 
sible  attributes  of  an  individual  are  innumer¬ 
able.  To  resume  then;  when  a  thing  of  this 
[30]  kind  comes  to  pass  among  events  which 
are  for  the  sake  of  something,  it  is  said  to  be 
spontaneous  or  by  chance.  (The  distinction  be¬ 
tween  the  two  must  be  made  later1 — for  the 
present  it  is  sufficient  if  it  is  plain  that  both 
are  in  the  sphere  of  things  done  for  the  sake  of 
something.) 

Example:  A  man  is  engaged  in  collecting 
subscriptions  for  a  feast.  He  would  have  gone 
to  such  and  such  a  place  for  the  purpose  of 
getting  the  money,  if  he  had  known.  He 
[35]  actually  went  there  for  another  purpose, 
and  it  was  only  incidentally  that  he  got  his 
money  by  going  there;  and  this  was  not  due  to 
the  fact  that  he  went  there  as  a  rule  or  neces- 
19 7a  sarily,  nor  is  the  end  effected  (getting 
the  money)  a  cause  present  in  himself — it  be¬ 
longs  to  the  class  of  things  that  are  intentional 
and  the  result  of  intelligent  deliberation.  It  is 
when  these  conditions  are  satisfied  that  the 
man  is  said  to  have  gone  ‘by  chance’.  If  he  had 
gone  of  deliberate  purpose  and  for  the  sake  of 
this — if  he  always  or  normally  went  there  when 
he  was  collecting  payments — he  would  not  be 
said  to  have  gone  ‘by  chance’. 

[5]  It  is  clear  then  that  chance  is  an  incidental 
cause  in  the  sphere  of  those  actions  for  the  sake 
of  something  which  involve  purpose.  Intelli¬ 
gent  reflection,  then,  and  chance  are  in  the 
same  sphere,  for  purpose  implies  intelligent 
reflection. 

It  is  necessary,  no  doubt,  that  the  causes  of 
what  comes  to  pass  by  chance  be  indefinite; 
and  that  is  why  chance  is  supposed  to  belong 
to  the  class  of  the  indefinite  and  to  be  in- 
[/o]  scrutable  to  man,  and  why  it  might  be 
thought  that,  in  a  way,  nothing  occurs  by 
chance.  For  all  these  statements  are  correct, 
because  they  are  well  grounded.  Things  do,  in 
a  way,  occur  by  chance,  for  they  occur  inci¬ 
dentally  and  chance  is  an  incidental  cause .  But 

1  In  chapter  6. 


274  PHYSICS  19  7b 


strictly  it  is  not  the  cause — without  qualifica¬ 
tion — of  anything;  for  instance,  a  housebuilder 
is  the  cause  of  a  house;  incidentally,  a  flute- 
layer  may  be  so. 

75]  And  the  causes  of  the  man’s  coming  and 
getting  the  money  (when  he  did  not  come  for 
the  sake  of  that)  are  innumerable.  He  may 
have  wished  to  see  somebody  or  been  follow¬ 
ing  somebody  or  avoiding  somebody,  or  may 
have  gone  to  see  a  spectacle.  Thus  to  say  that 
chance  is  a  thing  contrary  to  rule  is  correct. 
For  ‘rule’  applies  to  what  is  always  true  or 
true  for  the  most  part,  whereas  chance  be- 
[20]  longs  to  a  third  type  of  event.  Hence,  to 
conclude,  since  causes  of  this  kind  are  indefi¬ 
nite,  chance  too  is  indefinite.  (Yet  in  some 
cases  one  might  raise  the  question  whether  any 
incidental  fact  might  be  the  cause  of  the  chance 
occurrence,  e.g.  of  health  the  fresh  air  or  the 
sun’s  heat  may  be  the  cause,  but  having  had 
one’s  hair  cut  cannot;  for  some  incidental 
causes  are  more  relevant  to  the  effect  than 
others.) 

[25]  Chance  or  fortune  is  called  ‘good’  when 
the  result  is  good,  ‘evil’  when  it  is  evil.  The 
terms  ‘good  fortune’  and  ‘ill  fortune’  are  used 
when  either  result  is  of  considerable  magni¬ 
tude.  Thus  one  who  comes  within  an  ace  of 
some  great  evil  or  great  good  is  said  to  be 
fortunate  or  unfortunate.  The  mind  affirms  the 
resence  of  the  attribute,  ignoring  the  hair’s 
50]  breadth  of  difference.  Further,  it  is  with 
reason  that  good  fortune  is  regarded  as  un¬ 
stable;  for  chance  is  unstable,  as  none  of  the 
things  which  result  from  it  can  be  invariable  or 
normal. 

Both  are  then,  as  I  have  said,  incidental 
causes — both  chance  and  spontaneity — in  the 
sphere  of  things  which  are  capable  of  coming 
to  pass  not  necessarily,  nor  normally,  and  with 
[35]  reference  to  such  of  these  as  might  come 
to  pass  for  the  sake  of  something. 

6 

They  differ  in  that  ‘spontaneity’  is  the  wider 
term.  Every  result  of  chance  is  from  what  is 
spontaneous,  but  not  everything  that  is  from 
what  is  spontaneous  is  from  chance. 

197b  Chance  and  what  results  from  chance 
are  appropriate  to  agents  that  are  capable  of 
good  fortune  and  of  moral  action  generally. 
Therefore  necessarily  chance  is  in  the  sphere 
of  moral  actions.  This  is  indicated  by  the  fact 
that  good  fortune  is  thought  to  be  the  same, 
or  nearly  the  same,  as  happiness,  and  happi¬ 
ness  to  be  a  kind  of  moral  action,  since  it  is 


[5]  well-doing.  Hence  what  is  not  capable  of 
moral  action  cannot  do  anything  by  chance. 
Thus  an  inanimate  thing  or  a  lower  animal  or 
a  child  cannot  do  anything  by  chance,  because 
it  is  incapable  of  deliberate  intention;  nor  can 
‘good  fortune’  or  ‘ill  fortune’  be  ascribed  to 
them,  except  metaphorically,  as  Protarchus,1 
for  example,  said  that  the  stones  of  which 
altars  are  made  are  fortunate  because  they  are 
[/o]  held  in  honour,  while  their  fellows  are 
trodden  under  foot.  Even  these  things,  how¬ 
ever,  can  in  a  way  be  affected  by  chance,  when 
one  who  is  dealing  with  them  does  something 
to  them  by  chance,  but  not  otherwise. 

The  spontaneous  on  the  other  hand  is  found 
[75]  both  in  the  lower  animals  and  in  many 
inanimate  objects.  We  say,  for  example,  that 
the  horse  came  ‘spontaneously’,  because, 
though  his  coming  saved  him,  he  did  not  come 
for  the  sake  of  safety.  Again,  the  tripod  fell 
‘of  itself’,  because,  though  when  it  fell  it  stood 
on  its  feet  so  as  to  serve  for  a  seat,  it  did  not 
fall  for  the  sake  of  that. 

Hence  it  is  clear  that  events  which  (1)  be¬ 
long  to  the  general  class  of  things  that  may 
come  to  pass  for  the  sake  of  something,  (2)  do 
not  come  to  pass  for  the  sake  of  what  actually 
results,  and  (3)  have  an  external  cause,  may  be 
[20]  described  by  the  phrase  ‘from  spontane¬ 
ity’.  These  ‘spontaneous’  events  are  said  to  be 
‘from  chance’  if  they  have  the  further  char¬ 
acteristics  of  being  the  objects  of  deliberate  in¬ 
tention  and  due  to  agents  capable  of  that  mode 
of  action.  This  is  indicated  by  the  phrase  ‘in 
vain’,  which  is  used  when  A,  which  is  for  the 
sake  of  B ,  does  not  result  in  B.  For  instance, 
taking  a  walk  is  for  the  sake  of  evacuation  of 
the  bowels;  if  this  does  not  follow  after  walk¬ 
ing,  we  say  that  we  have  walked  ‘in  vain’  and 
that  the  walking  was  ‘vain’.  This  implies  that 
[25]  what  is  naturally  the  means  to  an  end  is 
‘in  vain’,  when  it  does  not  effect  the  end 
towards  which  it  was  the  natural  means — for 
it  would  be  absurd  for  a  man  to  say  that  he 
had  bathed  in  vain  because  the  sun  was  not 
eclipsed,  since  the  one  was  not  done  with  a  view 
to  the  other.  Thus  the  spontaneous  is  even  ac¬ 
cording  to  its  derivation  the  case  in  which  the 
thing  itself  happens  in  vain.  The  stone  that 
[30]  struck  the  man  did  not  fall  for  the  pur¬ 
pose  of  striking  him;  therefore  it  fell  spon¬ 
taneously,  because  it  might  have  fallen  by  the 
action  of  an  agent  and  for  the  purpose  of 
striking.  The  difference  between  spontaneity 

1  Probably  the  reference  is  to  the  Protarchus  described 
as  a  pupil  of  Gorgias  in  Plato,  Philebus ,  58. 


19  8b 

and  what  results  by  chance  is  greatest  in  things 
that  come  to  be  by  nature;  for  when  anything 
comes  to  be  contrary  to  nature,  we  do  not  say 
[55]  that  it  came  to  be  by  chance,  but  by  spon¬ 
taneity.  Yet  strictly  this  too  is  different  from  the 
spontaneous  proper;  for  the  cause  of  the  latter 
is  external,  that  of  the  former  internal. 

198a  We  have  now  explained  what  chance  is 
and  what  spontaneity  is,  and  in  what  they  dif¬ 
fer  from  each  other.  Both  belong  to  the  mode 
of  causation  ‘source  of  change’,  for  either  some 
natural  or  some  intelligent  agent  is  always  the 
cause;  but  in  this  sort  of  causation  the  number 
of  possible  causes  is  infinite. 

[5]  Spontaneity  and  chance  are  causes  of  ef¬ 
fects  which  though  they  might  result  from  in¬ 
telligence  or  nature,  have  in  fact  been  caused 
by  something  incidentally.  Now  since  nothing 
which  is  incidental  is  prior  to  what  is  per  se, 
it  is  clear  that  no  incidental  cause  can  be  prior 
to  a  cause  per  se.  Spontaneity  and  chance, 
therefore,  are  posterior  to  intelligence  and  na- 
[/o]  ture.  Hence,  however  true  it  may  be  that 
the  heavens  are  due  to  spontaneity,  it  will  still 
be  true  that  intelligence  and  nature  will  be 
prior  causes  of  this  All  and  of  many  things  in 
it  besides. 

7 

It  is  clear  then  that  there  are  causes,  and  that 
[75]  the  number  of  them  is  what  we  have 
stated.  The  number  is  the  same  as  that  of  the 
things  comprehended  under  the  question  ‘why’. 
The  ‘why’  is  referred  ultimately  either  (1),  in 
things  which  do  not  involve  motion,  e.g.  in 
mathematics,  to  the  ‘what’  (to  the  definition  of 
‘straight  line’  or  ‘commensurable’,  &c.),  or  (2) 
to  what  initiated  a  motion,  e.g.  ‘why  did  they 
go  to  war? — because  there  had  been  a  raid’; 
[20]  or  (3)  we  are  inquiring  ‘for  the  sake  of 
what?’ — ‘that  they  may  rule’;  or  (4),  in  the 
case  of  things  that  come  into  being,  we  are 
looking  for  the  matter.  The  causes,  therefore, 
are  these  and  so  many  in  number. 

Now,  the  causes  being  four,  it  is  the  busi¬ 
ness  of  the  physicist  to  know  about  them  all, 
and  if  he  refers  his  problems  back  to  all  of 
them,  he  will  assign  the  ‘why’  in  the  way 
proper  to  his  science — the  matter,  the  form,  the 
[25]  mover,  ‘that  for  the  sake  of  which’.  The 
last  three  often  coincide;  for  the  ‘what’  and 
‘that  for  the  sake  of  which’  are  one,  while  the 
primary  source  of  motion  is  the  same  in  spe¬ 
cies  as  these  (for  man  generates  man),  and  so 
too,  in  general,  are  all  things  which  cause 
movement  by  being  themselves  moved;  and 


275 

such  as  are  not  of  this  kind  are  no  longer  in¬ 
side  the  province  of  physics,  for  they  cause  mo¬ 
tion  not  by  possessing  motion  or  a  source  of 
motion  in  themselves,  but  being  themselves  in¬ 
capable  of  motion.  Hence  there  are  three 
[30]  branches  of  study,  one  of  things  which 
are  incapable  of  motion,  the  second  of  things 
in  motion,  but  indestructible,  the  third  of  de¬ 
structible  things. 

The  question  ‘why’,  then,  is  answered  by 
reference  to  the  matter,  to  the  form,  and  to  the 
primary  moving  cause.  For  in  respect  of  com¬ 
ing  to  be  it  is  mostly  in  this  last  way  that 
causes  are  investigated — ‘what  comes  to  be  aft¬ 
er  what?  what  was  the  primary  agent  or 
patient?’  and  so  at  each  step  of  the  series. 

[35]  Now  the  principles  which  cause  motion 
in  a  physical  way  are  two,  of  which  one  is  not 
physical,  as  it  has  no  principle  of  motion  in 
198b  itself.  Of  this  kind  is  whatever  causes 
movement,  not  being  itself  moved,  such  as  ( 1 ) 
that  which  is  completely  unchangeable,  the 
primary  reality,  and  (2)  the  essence  of  that 
which  is  coming  to  be,  i.e.  the  form;  for  this 
is  the  end  or  ‘that  for  the  sake  of  which’. 
Hence  since  nature  is  for  the  sake  of  some¬ 
thing,  we  must  know  this  cause  also.  We  must 
[5]  explain  the  ‘why’  in  all  the  senses  of  the 
term,  namely,  ( 1 )  that  from  this  that  will  nec¬ 
essarily  result  (‘from  this’  either  without  qual¬ 
ification  or  in  most  cases);  (2)  that  ‘this  must 
be  so  if  that  is  to  be  so’  (as  the  conclusion 
presupposes  the  premisses);  (3)  that  this  was 
the  essence  of  the  thing;  and  (4)  because  it  is 
better  thus  (not  without  qualification,  but  with 
reference  to  the  essential  nature  in  each  case). 

8 

[10]  We  must  explain  then  (1)  that  Nature 
belongs  to  the  class  of  causes  which  act  for  the 
sake  of  something;  (2)  about  the  necessary  and 
its  place  in  physical  problems,  for  all  writers 
ascribe  things  to  this  cause,  arguing  that  since 
the  hot  and  the  cold,  &c.,  are  of  such  and  such 
a  kind,  therefore  certain  things  necessarily  are 
and  come  to  be — and  if  they  mention  any  other 
[75]  cause  (one  his  ‘friendship  and  strife’,  an¬ 
other  his  ‘mind’),  it  is  only  to  touch  on  it,  and 
then  good-bye  to  it. 

A  difficulty  presents  itself:  why  should  not 
nature  work,  not  for  the  sake  of  something, 
nor  because  it  is  better  so,  but  just  as  the  sky 
rains,  not  in  order  to  make  the  corn  grow,  but 
of  necessity?  What  is  drawn  up  must  cool,  and 
[20]  what  has  been  cooled  must  become  water 
and  descend,  the  result  of  this  being  that  the 


BOOK  II,  CHAPTERS  5-8 


2  j6 

corn  grows.  Similarly  if  a  man's  crop  is  spoiled 
on  the  threshing-floor,  the  rain  did  not  fall  for 
the  sake  of  this — in  order  that  the  crop  might 
be  spoiled — but  that  result  just  followed.  Why 
then  should  it  not  be  the  same  with  the  parts 
in  nature,  e.g.  that  our  teeth  should  come  up 
of  necessity — the  front  teeth  sharp,  fitted  for 
[25]  tearing,  the  molars  broad  and  useful  for 
grinding  down  the  food — since  they  did  not 
arise  for  this  end,  but  it  was  merely  a  coinci¬ 
dent  result;  and  so  with  all  other  parts  in 
which  we  suppose  that  there  is  purpose? 
Wherever  then  all  the  parts  came  about  just 
what  they  would  have  been  if  they  had  come 
[jo]  to  be  for  an  end,  such  things  survived, 
being  organized  spontaneously  in  a  fitting 
way;  whereas  those  which  grew  otherwise  per¬ 
ished  and  continue  to  perish,  as  Empedocles 
says  his  ‘man-faced  ox-progeny'  did.1 

Such  are  the  arguments  (and  others  of  the 
kind)  which  may  cause  difficulty  on  this  point. 
Yet  it  is  impossible  that  this  should  be  the 
true  view.  For  teeth  and  all  other  natural 
[35]  things  either  invariably  or  normally  come 
about  in  a  given  way;  but  of  not  one  of  the 
results  of  chance  or  spontaneity  is  this  true. 
We  do  not  ascribe  to  chance  or  mere  coinci- 
199a  dence  the  frequency  of  rain  in  winter, 
but  frequent  rain  in  summer  we  do;  nor  heat 
in  the  dog-days,  but  only  if  we  have  it  in  win¬ 
ter.  If  then,  it  is  agreed  that  things  are  either 
the  result  of  coincidence  or  for  an  end,  and 
these  cannot  be  the  result  of  coincidence  or 
[5]  spontaneity,  it  follows  that  they  must  be 
for  an  end;  and  that  such  things  are  all  due  to 
nature  even  the  champions  of  the  theory  which 
is  before  us  would  agree.  Therefore  action  for 
an  end  is  present  in  things  which  come  to  be 
and  are  by  nature. 

Further,  where  a  series  has  a  completion,  all 
the  preceding  steps  are  for  the  sake  of  that. 
Now  surely  as  in  intelligent  action,  so  in  na- 
[jo]  ture;  and  as  in  nature,  so  it  is  in  each 
action,  if  nothing  interferes.  Now  intelligent 
action  is  for  the  sake  of  an  end;  therefore  the 
nature  of  things  also  is  so.  Thus  if  a  house, 
e.g.  had  been  a  thing  made  by  nature,  it 
would  have  been  made  in  the  same  way  as  it 
is  now  by  art;  and  if  things  made  by  nature 
were  made  also  by  art,  they  would  come  to  be 
in  the  same  way  as  by  nature.  Each  step  then 
[75]  in  the  series  is  for  the  sake  of  the  next; 
and  generally  art  partly  completes  what  nature 
cannot  bring  to  a  finish,  and  partly  imitates 
her.  If,  therefore,  artificial  products  are  for  the 

1  Fr.  61. 2. 


199b 

sake  of  an  end,  so  clearly  also  are  natural 
products.  The  relation  of  the  later  to  the 
earlier  terms  of  the  series  is  the  same  in  both. 
[20]  This  is  most  obvious  in  the  animals  other 
than  man:  they  make  things  neither  by  art  nor 
after  inquiry  or  deliberation.  Wherefore  peo¬ 
ple  discuss  whether  it  is  by  intelligence  or  by 
some  other  faculty  that  these  creatures  work, — 
spiders,  ants,  and  the  like.  By  gradual  advance 
in  this  direction  we  come  to  see  clearly  that  in 
[25]  plants  too  that  is  produced  which  is  con¬ 
ducive  to  the  end — leaves,  e.g.  grow  to  pro¬ 
vide  shade  for  the  fruit.  If  then  it  is  both  by 
nature  and  for  an  end  that  the  swallow  makes 
its  nest  and  the  spider  its  web,  and  plants  grow 
leaves  for  the  sake  of  the  fruit  and  send  their 
roots  down  (not  up)  for  the  sake  of  nourish¬ 
ment,  it  is  plain  that  this  kind  of  cause  is 
[3o]  operative  in  things  which  come  to  be  and 
are  by  nature.  And  since  ‘nature'  means  two 
things,  the  matter  and  the  form,  of  which  the 
latter  is  the  end,  and  since  all  the  rest  is  for 
the  sake  of  the  end,  the  form  must  be  the 
cause  in  the  sense  of  ‘that  for  the  sake  of 
which'. 

Now  mistakes  come  to  pass  even  in  the 
operations  of  art:  the  grammarian  makes  a 
mistake  in  writing  and  the  doctor  pours  out 
[33]  the  wrong  dose.  Hence  clearly  mistakes 
199b  are  possible  in  the  operations  of  nature 
also.  If  then  in  art  there  are  cases  in  which 
what  is  rightly  produced  serves  a  purpose,  and 
if  where  mistakes  occur  there  was  a  purpose  in 
what  was  attempted,  only  it  was  not  attained, 
so  must  it  be  also  in  natural  products,  and 
[5]  monstrosities  will  be  failures  in  the  pur¬ 
posive  effort.  Thus  in  the  original  combina¬ 
tions  the  ‘ox-progeny'  if  they  failed  to  reach  a 
determinate  end  must  have  arisen  through  the 
corruption  of  some  principle  corresponding  to 
what  is  now  the  seed. 

Further,  seed  must  have  come  into  being 
first,  and  not  straightway  the  animals:  the 
words  ‘whole-natured  first  .  .  .'2  must  have 
meant  seed. 

Again,  in  plants  too  we  find  the  relation  of 
[/o]  means  to  end,  though  the  degree  of  or¬ 
ganization  is  less.  Were  there  then  in  plants 
also  ‘olive-headed  vine-progeny',  like  the  ‘man¬ 
headed  ox-progeny',  or  not?  An  absurd  sug¬ 
gestion;  yet  there  must  have  been,  if  there  were 
such  things  among  animals. 

Moreover,  among  the  seeds  anything  must 
have  come  to  be  at  random.  But  the  person 
who  asserts  this  entirely  does  away  with  ‘na- 

2  Empedocles,  Fr.  62.  4. 


PHYSICS 


200b 

[75]  ture’  and  what  exists  ‘by  nature’.  For 
those  things  are  natural  which,  by  a  continu¬ 
ous  movement  originated  from  an  internal 
principle,  arrive  at  some  completion:  the  same 
completion  is  not  reached  from  every  prin¬ 
ciple;  nor  any  chance  completion,  but  always 
the  tendency  in  each  is  towards  the  same  end, 
if  there  is  no  impediment. 

The  end  and  the  means  towards  it  may  come 
[20]  about  by  chance.  We  say,  for  instance, 
that  a  stranger  has  come  by  chance,  paid  the 
ransom,  and  gone  away,  when  he  does  so  as 
if  he  had  come  for  that  purpose,  though  it  was 
not  for  that  that  he  came.  This  is  incidental, 
for  chance  is  an  incidental  cause,  as  I  re¬ 
marked  before.1  But  when  an  event  takes 

flace  always  or  for  the  most  part,  it  is  not 
25]  incidental  or  by  chance.  In  natural  prod¬ 
ucts  the  sequence  is  invariable,  if  there  is  no 
impediment. 

It  is  absurd  to  suppose  that  purpose  is  not 
present  because  we  do  not  observe  the  agent 
deliberating.  Art  does  not  deliberate.  If  the 
ship-building  art  were  in  the  wood,  it  would 
produce  the  same  results  by  nature .  If,  there¬ 
fore,  purpose  is  present  in  art,  it  is  present 
[30]  also  in  nature.  The  best  illustration  is 
a  doctor  doctoring  himself:  nature  is  like 
that. 

It  is  plain  then  that  nature  is  a  cause,  a 
cause  that  operates  for  a  purpose. 

9 

As  regards  what  is  ‘of  necessity’,  we  must  ask 
[35]  whether  the  necessity  is  ‘hypothetical’,  or 
‘simple’  as  well.  The  current  view  places  what 
is  of  necessity  in  the  process  of  production,  just 
200*  as  if  one  were  to  suppose  that  the  wall  of 
a  house  necessarily  comes  to  be  because  what  is 
heavy  is  naturally  carried  downwards  and 
what  is  light  to  the  top,  wherefore  the  stones 
and  foundations  take  the  lowest  place,  with 
earth  above  because  it  is  lighter,  and  wood  at 
[5]  the  top  of  all  as  being  the  lightest.  Where¬ 
as,  though  the  wall  does  not  come  to  be  with¬ 
out  these,  it  is  not  due  to  these,  except  as  its 
material  cause:  it  comes  to  be  for  the  sake  of 
sheltering  and  guarding  certain  things.  Sim¬ 
ilarly  in  all  other  things  which  involve  produc¬ 
tion  for  an  end;  the  product  cannot  come  to  be 
without  things  which  have  a  necessary  nature, 
but  it  is  not  due  to  these  (except  as  its  ma- 
[/o]  terial);  it  comes  to  be  for  an  end.  For 
instance,  why  is  a  saw  such  as  it  is?  To  effect 
so-and-so  and  for  the  sake  of  so-and-so.  This 
1  io6b  23-7. 


277 

end,  however,  cannot  be  realized  unless  the 
saw  is  made  of  iron.  It  is,  therefore,  necessary 
for  it  to  be  of  iron,  if  we  are  to  have  a  saw 
and  perform  the  operation  of  sawing.  What  is 
necessary  then,  is  necessary  on  a  hypothesis;  it 
is  not  a  result  necessarily  determined  by  ante¬ 
cedents.  Necessity  is  in  the  matter,  while  ‘that 
for  the  sake  of  which’  is  in  the  definition. 

[75]  Necessity  in  mathematics  is  in  a  way 
similar  to  necessity  in  things  which  come  to  be 
through  the  operation  of  nature.  Since  a 
straight  line  is  what  it  is,  it  is  necessary  that 
the  angles  of  a  triangle  should  equal  two  right 
angles.  But  not  conversely;  though  if  the  an¬ 
gles  are  not  equal  to  two  right  angles,  then  the 
straight  line  is  not  what  it  is  either.  But  in 
things  which  come  to  be  for  an  end,  the  re¬ 
verse  is  true.  If  the  end  is  to  exist  or  does  exist, 
[20]  that  also  which  precedes  it  will  exist  or 
does  exist;  otherwise  just  as  there,  if  the  con¬ 
clusion  is  not  true,  the  premiss  will  not  be 
true,  so  here  the  end  or  ‘that  for  the  sake  of 
which’  will  not  exist.  For  this  too  is  itself  a 
starting-point,  but  of  the  reasoning,  not  of  the 
action;  while  in  mathematics  the  starting- 
point  is  the  starting-point  of  the  reasoning 
only,  as  there  is  no  action.  If  then  there  is  to  be 
[25]  a  house,  such-and-such  things  must  be 
made  or  be  there  already  or  exist,  or  gen¬ 
erally  the  matter  relative  to  the  end,  bricks  and 
stones  if  it  is  a  house.  But  the  end  is  not  due 
to  these  except  as  the  matter,  nor  will  it  come 
to  exist  because  of  them.  Yet  if  they  do  not 
exist  at  all,  neither  will  the  house,  or  the  saw 
— the  former  in  the  absence  of  stones,  the  lat¬ 
ter  in  the  absence  of  iron — just  as  in  the  other 
case  the  premisses  will  not  be  true,  if  the 
angles  of  the  triangle  are  not  equal  to  two  right 
angles. 

[50]  The  necessary  in  nature,  then,  is  plainly 
what  we  call  by  the  name  of  matter,  and  the 
changes  in  it.  Both  causes  must  be  stated  by 
the  physicist,  but  especially  the  end;  for  that 
is  the  cause  of  the  matter,  not  vice  versa;  and 
the  end  is  ‘that  for  the  sake  of  which’,  and  the 
beginning  starts  from  the  definition  or  es- 
[55]  sence;  as  in  artificial  products,  since  a 
200b  house  is  of  such-and-such  a  kind,  certain 
things  must  necessarily  come  to  be  or  be  there 
already,  or  since  health  is  this,  these  things 
must  necessarily  come  to  be  or  be  there  already. 
Similarly  if  man  is  this,  then  these;  if  these, 
then  those.  Perhaps  the  necessary  is  present 
also  in  the  definition.  For  if  one  defines  the 
[5]  operation  of  sawing  as  being  a  certain  kind 
of  dividing,  then  this  cannot  come  about  un- 


BOOK  II,  CHAPTERS  8-9 


278  PHYSICS  201a 

less  the  saw  has  teeth  of  a  certain  kind;  and  definition  too  there  are  some  parts  that  are,  as 

these  cannot  be  unless  it  is  of  iron.  For  in  the  it  were,  its  matter. 

BOOK  III 


1 

Nature  has  been  defined  as  a  ‘principle  of  mo¬ 
tion  and  change*,  and  it  is  the  subject  of  our 
inquiry.  We  must  therefore  see  that  we  under¬ 
stand  the  meaning  of  ‘motion*;  for  if  it  were 
unknown,  the  meaning  of  ‘nature’  too  would 
be  unknown. 

[75]  When  we  have  determined  the  nature  of 
motion,  our  next  task  will  be  to  attack  in  the 
same  way  the  terms  which  are  involved  in  it. 
Now  motion  is  supposed  to  belong  to  the  class 
of  things  which  are  continuous ;  and  the  in¬ 
finite  presents  itself  first  in  the  continuous — 
that  is  how  it  comes  about  that  ‘infinite’  is 
often  used  in  definitions  of  the  continuous 
(‘what  is  infinitely  divisible  is  continuous*). 
[20]  Besides  these,  place ,  void,  and  time  are 
thought  to  be  necessary  conditions  of  motion. 

Clearly,  then,  for  these  reasons  and  also  be¬ 
cause  the  attributes  mentioned  are  common  to, 
and  coextensive  with,  all  the  objects  of  our  sci¬ 
ence,  we  must  first  take  each  of  them  in  hand 
and  discuss  it.  For  the  investigation  of  special 
attributes  comes  after  that  of  the  common  attri¬ 
butes. 

[25]  To  begin  then,  as  we  said,  with  motion. 

We  may  start  by  distinguishing  (1)  what 
exists  in  a  state  of  fulfilment  only,  (2)  what 
exists  as  potential,  (3)  what  exists  as  potential 
and  also  in  fulfilment — one  being  a  ‘this’,  an¬ 
other  ‘so  much*,  a  third  ‘such’,  and  similarly  in 
each  of  the  other  modes  of  the  predication  of 
being. 

Further,  the  word  ‘relative*  is  used  with 
[30]  reference  to  (1)  excess  and  defect,  (2) 
agent  and  patient  and  generally  what  can 
move  and  what  can  be  moved.  For  ‘what  can 
cause  movement’  is  relative  to  ‘what  can  be 
moved’,  and  vice  versa. 

Again,  there  is  no  such  thing  as  motion  over 
and  above  the  things.  It  is  always  with  respect 
to  substance  or  to  quantity  or  to  quality  or  to 
place  that  what  changes  changes.  But  it  is  im¬ 
possible,  as  we  assert,  to  find  anything  com- 
[35]  mon  to  these  which  is  neither  ‘this’  nor 
201a  quantum  nor  quale  nor  any  of  the  other 
predicates.  Hence  neither  will  motion  and 
change  have  reference  to  something  over  and 
above  the  things  mentioned,  for  there  is  noth¬ 
ing  over  and  above  them. 


Now  each  of  these  belongs  to  all  its  subjects 
in  either  of  two  ways:  namely  (1)  substance — 
the  one  is  positive  form,  the  other  privation; 
[5]  (2)  in  quality,  white  and  black;  (3)  in 
quantity,  complete  and  incomplete;  (4)  in  re¬ 
spect  of  locomotion,  upwards  and  downwards 
or  light  and  heavy.  Hence  there  are  as  many 
types  of  motion  or  change  as  there  are  mean¬ 
ings  of  the  word  ‘is*. 

We  have  now  before  us  the  distinctions  in 
the  various  classes  of  being  between  what  is 
fully  real  and  what  is  potential. 

[/o]  Def.  The  fulfilment  of  what  exists  poten¬ 
tially,  in  so  far  as  it  exists  potentially ,  is  mo¬ 
tion — namely,  of  what  is  alterable  qua  altera¬ 
ble,  alteration:  of  what  can  be  increased  and  its 
opposite  what  can  be  decreased  (there  is  no 
common  name),  increase  and  decrease :  of 
what  can  come  to  be  and  can  pass  away,  com¬ 
ing  to  be  and  passing  away:  of  what  can  be 
carried  along,  locomotion . 

[75]  Examples  will  elucidate  this  definition  of 
motion.  When  the  buildable,  in  so  far  as  it  is 
just  that,  is  fully  real,  it  is  being  built,  and  this 
is  build/tf^.  Similarly,  learning,  doctoring,  roll¬ 
ing,  leaping,  ripening,  ageing. 

The  same  thing,  if  it  is  of  a  certain  kind,  can 
[20]  be  both  potential  and  fully  real,  not  in¬ 
deed  at  the  same  time  or  not  in  the  same  re¬ 
spect,  but  e.g.  potentially  hot  and  actually  cold. 
Hence  at  once  such  things  will  act  and  be  acted 
on  by  one  another  in  many  ways:  each  of  them 
will  be  capable  at  the  same  time  of  causing  al¬ 
teration  and  of  being  altered.  Hence,  too,  what 
effects  motion  as  a  physical  agent  can  be  moved: 
when  a  thing  of  this  kind  causes  motion,  it  is 
[25]  itself  also  moved.  This,  indeed,  has  led 
some  people  to  suppose  that  every  mover  is 
moved.  But  this  question  depends  on  another 
set  of  arguments,  and  the  truth  will  be  made 
clear  later.1  It  is  possible  for  a  thing  to  cause 
motion,  though  it  is  itself  incapable  of  being 
moved. 

It  is  the  fulfilment  of  what  is  potential  when 
it  is  already  fully  real  and  operates  not  as  itself 
but  as  movable,  that  is  motion.  What  I  mean 
by  ‘as’  is  this:  Bronze  is  potentially  a  statue. 
[30]  But  it  is  not  the  fulfilment  of  bronze  as 
bronze  which  is  motion.  For  ‘to  be  bronze’  and 
‘to  be  a  certain  potentiality’  are  not  the  same. 

1  vni.  5. 


202a  BOOK  II,  CHAPTER  9— BOOK  III,  CHAPTERS  1-3  279 


If  they  were  identical  without  qualification,  i.e. 
in  definition,  the  fulfilment  of  bronze  as  bronze 
would  have  been  motion.  But  they  are  not  the 
same,  as  has  been  said.  (This  is  obvious  in  con- 
[^5]  traries.  ‘To  be  capable  of  health’  and  ‘to 
be  capable  of  illness’  are  not  the  same,  for  if 
201b  they  were  there  would  be  no  difference 
between  being  ill  and  being  well.  Yet  the  sub¬ 
ject  both  of  health  and  of  sickness — whether  it 
is  humour  or  blood — is  one  and  the  same.) 

We  can  distinguish,  then,  between  the  two 
— just  as,  to  give  another  example,  ‘colour’  and 
‘visible’  are  different — and  clearly  it  is  the  ful¬ 
filment  of  what  is  potential  as  potential  that  is 
[5]  motion.  So  this,  precisely,  is  motion. 

Further  it  is  evident  that  motion  is  an  attri¬ 
bute  of  a  thing  just  when  it  is  fully  real  in  this 
way,  and  neither  before  nor  after.  For  each 
thing  of  this  kind  is  capable  of  being  at  one 
time  actual,  at  another  not.  Take  for  instance 
the  buildable  as  buildable.  The  actuality  of  the 
[/o]  buildable  as  buildable  is  the  process  of 
building.  For  the  actuality  of  the  buildable 
must  be  either  this  or  the  house.  But  when 
there  is  a  house,  the  buildable  is  no  longer 
buildable.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  the  build¬ 
able  which  is  being  built.  The  process  then  of 
being  built  must  be  the  kind  of  actuality  re¬ 
quired.  But  building  is  a  kind  of  motion,  and 
the  same  account  will  apply  to  the  other  kinds 
[75]  also. 

2 

The  soundness  of  this  definition  is  evident 
both  when  we  consider  the  accounts  of  motion 
that  the  others  have  given,  and  also  from  the 
difficulty  of  defining  it  otherwise. 

One  could  not  easily  put  motion  and  change 
in  another  genus — this  is  plain  if  we  consider 
where  some  people  put  it;  they  identify  motion 
[20]  with  ‘difference’  or  ‘inequality’  or  ‘not  be¬ 
ing’;  but  such  things  are  not  necessarily  moved, 
whether  they  are  ‘different’  or  ‘unequal’  or 
‘non-existent’;  Nor  is  change  either  to  or  from 
these  rather  than  to  or  from  their  opposites. 

The  reason  why  they  put  motion  into  these 
[25]  genera  is  that  it  is  thought  to  be  some¬ 
thing  indefinite,  and  the  principles  in  the  sec¬ 
ond  column  are  indefinite  because  they  are 
privative:  none  of  them  is  either  ‘this’  or  ‘such’ 
or  comes  under  any  of  the  other  modes  of 
predication.  The  reason  in  turn  why  motion  is 
thought  to  be  indefinite  is  that  it  cannot  be 
classed  simply  as  a  potentiality  or  as  an  actual¬ 
ity — a  thing  that  is  merely  capable  of  having  a 
[ so]  certain  size  is  not  undergoing  change,  nor 


yet  a  thing  that  is  actually  of  a  certain  size,  and 
motion  is  thought  to  be  a  sort  of  actuality,  but 
incomplete,  the  reason  for  this  view  being  that 
the  potential  whose  actuality  it  is  is  incomplete. 
This  is  why  it  is  hard  to  grasp  what  motion  is. 
It  is  necessary  to  class  it  with  privation  or  with 
potentiality  or  with  sheer  actuality,  yet  none  of 
these  seems  possible.  There  remains  then  the 
[55]  suggested  mode  of  definition,  namely  that 
202a  it  is  a  sort  of  actuality,  or  actuality  of  the 
kind  described,  hard  to  grasp,  but  not  incapa¬ 
ble  of  existing. 

The  mover  too  is  moved,  as  has  been  said — 
every  mover,  that  is,  which  is  capable  of  mo¬ 
tion,  and  whose  immobility  is  rest — when  a 
thing  is  subject  to  motion  its  immobility  is  rest. 
[5]  For  to  act  on  the  movable  as  such  is  just  to 
move  it.  But  this  it  does  by  contact,  so  that  at 
the  same  time  it  is  also  acted  on.  Hence  we  can 
define  motion  as  the  fulfilment  of  the  movable 
qua  movable,  the  cause  of  the  attribute  being 
contact  with  what  can  move,  so  that  the  mover 
is  also  acted  on.  The  mover  or  agent  will  al¬ 
ways  be  the  vehicle  of  a  form,  either  a  ‘this’  or 
[/o]  a  ‘such’,  which,  when  it  acts,  will  be  the 
source  and  cause  of  the  change,  e.g.  the  full- 
formed  man  begets  man  from  what  is  poten¬ 
tially  man. 

3 

The  solution  of  the  difficulty  that  is  raised 
about  the  motion — whether  it  is  in  the  mova¬ 
ble — is  plain.  It  is  the  fulfilment  of  this  poten¬ 
tiality,  and  by  the  action  of  that  which  has  the 
power  of  causing  motion;  and  the  actuality  of 
that  which  has  the  power  of  causing  motion  is 
[75]  not  other  than  the  actuality  of  the  mova¬ 
ble,  for  it  must  be  the  fulfilment  of  both .  A 
thing  is  capable  of  causing  motion  because  it 
can  do  this,  it  is  a  mover  because  it  actually 
does  it.  But  it  is  on  the  movable  that  it  is  capa¬ 
ble  of  acting.  Hence  there  is  a  single  actuality 
of  both  alike,  just  as  one  to  two  and  two  to  one 
are  the  same  interval,  and  the  steep  ascent  and 
[20]  the  steep  descent  are  one — for  these  are 
one  and  the  same,  although  they  can  be  de¬ 
scribed  in  different  ways.  So  it  is  with  the  mov¬ 
er  and  the  moved. 

This  view  has  a  dialectical  difficulty.  Per¬ 
haps  it  is  necessary  that  the  actuality  of  the 
agent  and  that  of  the  patient  should  not  be  the 
same.  The  one  is  ‘agency’  and  the  other  ‘pa- 
tiency’;  and  the  outcome  and  completion  of  the 
one  is  an  ‘action’,  that  of  the  other  a  ‘passion’. 
[25]  Since  then  they  are  both  motions,  we  may 
ask:  in  what  are  they,  if  they  are  different? 


280 

Either  (a)  both  are  in  what  is  acted  on  and 
moved,  or  (b)  the  agency  is  in  the  agent  and 
the  patiency  in  the  patient.  (If  we  ought  to 
call  the  latter  also  ‘agency’,  the  word  would  be 
used  in  two  senses.) 

Now,  in  alternative  ( b ),  the  motion  will  be 
in  the  mover,  for  the  same  statement  will  hold 
of  ‘mover’  and  ‘moved’.  Hence  either  every 
[jo]  mover  will  be  moved,  or,  though  having 
motion,  it  will  not  be  moved. 

If  on  the  other  hand  (a)  both  are  in  what  is 
moved  and  acted  on — both  the  agency  and  the 
patiency  (e.g.  both  teaching  and  learning, 
though  they  are  two,  in  the  learner),  then,  first, 
the  actuality  of  each  will  not  be  present  in 
each,  and,  a  second  absurdity,  a  thing  will  have 
two  motions  at  the  same  time.  How  will  there 
[55]  be  two  alterations  of  quality  in  one  sub¬ 
ject  towards  one  definite  quality?  The  thing  is 
impossible:  the  actualization  will  be  one. 

202b  But  (some  one  will  say)  it  is  contrary  to 
reason  to  suppose  that  there  should  be  one  iden¬ 
tical  actualization  of  two  things  which  are  dif¬ 
ferent  in  kind.  Yet  there  will  be,  if  teaching 
and  learning  are  the  same,  and  agency  and  pa¬ 
tiency.  To  teach  will  be  the  same  as  to  learn, 
and  to  act  the  same  as  to  be  acted  on — the 
teacher  will  necessarily  be  learning  everything 
that  he  teaches,  and  the  agent  will  be  acted  on. 
[5]  One  may  reply: 

(1)  It  is  not  absurd  that  the  actualization  of 
one  thing  should  be  in  another.  Teaching  is 
the  activity  of  a  person  who  can  teach,  yet  the 
operation  is  performed  on  some  patient — it  is 
not  cut  adrift  from  a  subject,  but  is  of  A  on  B. 

(2)  There  is  nothing  to  prevent  two  things 
having  one  and  the  same  actualization,  provid¬ 
ed  the  actualizations  are  not  described  in  the 
same  way,  but  are  related  as  what  can  act  to 
what  is  acting. 

[/o]  (3)  Nor  is  it  necessary  that  the  teacher 
should  learn,  even  if  to  act  and  to  be  acted  on 
are  one  and  the  same,  provided  they  are  not 
the  same  in  definition  (as  ‘raiment’  and  ‘dress’), 
but  are  the  same  merely  in  the  sense  in  which 
the  road  from  Thebes  to  Athens  and  the  road 
from  Athens  to  Thebes  are  the  same,  as  has 
been  explained  above.1  For  it  is  not  things 
which  are  in  a  way  the  same  that  have  all  their 
[75]  attributes  the  same,  but  only  such  as  have 
the  same  definition.  But  indeed  it  by  no  means 
follows  from  the  fact  that  teaching  is  the  same 
as  learning,  that  to  learn  is  the  same  as  to  teach, 
any  more  than  it  follows  from  the  fact  that 
there  is  one  distance  between  two  things  which 
^f.  “18-20. 


203* 

are  at  a  distance  from  each  other,  that  the  two 
vectors  AB  and  BA  are  one  and  the  same.  To 
generalize,  teaching  is  not  the  same  as  learn¬ 
ing,  or  agency  as  patiency,  in  the  full  sense, 
[20]  though  they  belong  to  the  same  subject , 
the  motion;  for  the  ‘actualization  of  X  in  Y’ 
and  the  ‘actualization  of  Y  through  the  action 
of  X*  differ  in  definition. 

What  then  Motion  is,  has  been  stated  both 
generally  and  particularly.  It  is  not  difficult  to 
see  how  each  of  its  types  will  be  defined — al- 
[25]  teration  is  the  fulfillment  of  the  alterable 
qua  alterable  (or,  more  scientifically,  the  ful¬ 
filment  of  what  can  act  and  what  can  be  acted 
on,  as  such) — generally  and  again  in  each  par¬ 
ticular  case,  building,  healing,  &c.  A  similar 
definition  will  apply  to  each  of  the  other  kinds 
of  motion. 

4 

[jo]  The  science  of  nature  is  concerned  with 
spatial  magnitudes  and  motion  and  time,  and 
each  of  these  at  least  is  necessarily  infinite  or 
finite,  even  if  some  things  dealt  with  by  the 
science  are  not,  e.g.  a  quality  or  a  point — it  is 
not  necessary  perhaps  that  such  things  should 
be  put  under  either  head.  Hence  it  is  incum¬ 
bent  on  the  person  who  specializes  in  physics 
[ J5]  to  discuss  the  infinite  and  to  inquire 
whether  there  is  such  a  thing  or  not,  and,  if 
there  is,  what  it  is. 

The  appropriateness  to  the  science  of  this 
problem  is  clearly  indicated.  All  who  have 
203a  touched  on  this  kind  of  science  in  a  way 
worth  considering  have  formulated  views 
about  the  infinite,  and  indeed,  to  a  man,  make 
it  a  principle  of  things. 

(1)  Some,  as  the  Pythagoreans  and  Plato, 
[5]  make  the  infinite  a  principle  in  the  sense 
of  a  self-subsistent  substance,  and  not  as  a  mere 
attribute  of  some  other  thing.  Only  the  Pythag¬ 
oreans  place  the  infinite  among  the  objects  of 
sense  (they  do  not  regard  number  as  separa¬ 
ble  from  these),  and  assert  that  what  is  outside 
the  heaven  is  infinite.  Plato,  on  the  other  hand, 
holds  that  there  is  no  body  outside  (the  Forms 
are  not  outside,  because  they  are  nowhere),  yet 
that  the  infinite  is  present  not  only  in  the  ob¬ 
jects  of  sense  but  in  the  Forms  also. 

[70]  Further,  the  Pythagoreans  identify  the  in¬ 
finite  with  the  even.  For  this,  they  say,  when 
it  is  cut  off  and  shut  in  by  the  odd,  provides 
things  with  the  element  of  infinity.  An  indica¬ 
tion  of  this  is  what  happens  with  numbers.  If 
the  gnomons  are  placed  round  the  one,  and 
without  the  one,  in  the  one  construction  the 


PHYSICS 


204* 

figure  that  results  is  always  differerit,  in  the 
[75]  other  it  is  always  the  same.  But  Plato  has 
two  infinites,  the  Great  and  the  Small. 

The  physicists,  on  the  other  hand,  all  of 
them,  always  regard  the  infinite  as  an  attribute 
of  a  substance  which  is  different  from  it  and 
belongs  to  the  class  of  the  so-called  elements — 
water  or  air  or  what  is  intermediate  between 
them.  Those  who  make  them  limited  in  num¬ 
ber  never  make  them  infinite  in  amount.  But 
those  who  make  the  elements  infinite  in  num- 
[20]  ber,  as  Anaxagoras  and  Democritus  do, 
say  that  the  infinite  is  continuous  by  contact — 
compounded  of  the  homogeneous  parts  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  one,  of  the  seed-mass  of  the  atomic 
shapes  according  to  the  other. 

Further,  Anaxagoras  held  that  any  part  is  a 
mixture  in  the  same  way  as  the  All,  on  the 
ground  of  the  observed  fact  that  anything 
comes  out  of  anything.  For  it  is  probably  for 
this  reason  that  he  maintains  that  once  upon  a 
[25]  time  all  things  were  together.  ( This  flesh 
and  this  bone  were  together,  and  so  of  any 
thing:  therefore  all  things:  and  at  the  same 
time  too.)  For  there  is  a  beginning  of  separa¬ 
tion,  not  only  for  each  thing,  but  for  all.  Each 
thing  that  comes  to  be  comes  from  a  similar 
body,  and  there  is  a  coming  to  be  of  all  things, 
though  not,  it  is  true,  at  the  same  time.  Hence 
[jo]  there  must  also  be  an  origin  of  coming  to 
be.  One  such  source  there  is  which  he  calls 
Mind,  and  Mind  begins  its  work  of  thinking 
from  some  starting-point.  So  necessarily  all 
things  must  have  been  together  at  a  certain 
time,  and  must  have  begun  to  be  moved  at  a 
certain  time. 

Democritus,  for  his  part,  asserts  the  con¬ 
trary,  namely  that  no  element  arises  from  an¬ 
other  element.  Nevertheless  for  him  the  com- 
203b  mon  body  is  a  source  of  all  things,  differ¬ 
ing  from  part  to  part  in  size  and  in  shape. 

It  is  clear  then  from  these  considerations 
that  the  inquiry  concerns  the  physicist.  Nor  is 
it  without  reason  that  they  all  make  it  a  princi- 
le  or  source.  We  cannot  say  that  the  infinite 
5]  has  no  effect,  and  the  only  effectiveness 
which  we  can  ascribe  to  it  is  that  of  a  principle. 
Everything  is  either  a  source  or  derived  from 
a  source.  But  there  cannot  be  a  source  of  the 
infinite  or  limitless,  for  that  would  be  a  limit 
of  it.  Further,  as  it  is  a  beginning,  it  is  both 
uncreatable  and  indestructible.  For  there  must 
be  a  point  at  which  what  has  come  to  be  reaches 
completion,  and  also  a  termination  of  all  pass- 
[/o]  ing  away.  That  is  why,  as  we  say,  there  is 
no  principle  of  this,  but  it  is  this  which  is  held 


281 

to  be  the  principle  of  other  things,  and  to  en¬ 
compass  all  and  to  steer  all,  as  those  assert  who 
do  not  recognize,  alongside  the  infinite,  other 
causes,  such  as  Mind  or  Friendship.  Further 
they  identify  it  with  the  Divine,  for  it  is  ‘death¬ 
less  and  imperishable’  as  Anaximander  says, 
with  the  majority  of  the  physicists. 

[75]  Belief  in  the  existence  of  the  infinite 
comes  mainly  from  five  considerations: 

(1)  From  the  nature  of  time — for  it  is  infi¬ 
nite. 

(2)  From  the  division  of  magnitudes — for 
the  mathematicians  also  use  the  notion  of  the 
infinite. 

(3)  If  coming  to  be  and  passing  away  do  not 
give  out,  it  is  only  because  that  from  which 
things  come  to  be  is  infinite. 

[20]  (4)  Because  the  limited  always  finds  its 
limit  in  something,  so  that  there  must  be  no 
limit,  if  everything  is  always  limited  by  some¬ 
thing  different  from  itself. 

(5)  Most  of  all,  a  reason  which  is  peculiarly 
appropriate  and  presents  the  difficulty  that  is 
felt  by  everybody — not  only  number  but  also 
mathematical  magnitudes  and  what  is  outside 
the  heaven  are  supposed  to  be  infinite  because 
they  never  give  out  in  our  thought . 

[25]  The  last  fact  (that  what  is  outside  is  infi¬ 
nite)  leads  people  to  suppose  that  body  also  is 
infinite,  and  that  there  is  an  infinite  number  of 
worlds.  Why  should  there  be  body  in  one  part 
of  the  void  rather  than  in  another?  Grant  only 
that  mass  is  anywhere  and  it  follows  that  it 
must  be  everywhere.  Also,  if  void  and  place  are 
infinite,  there  must  be  infinite  body  too,  for  in 
the  case  of  eternal  things  what  maybe  must  be. 
[30]  But  the  problem  of  the  infinite  is  difficult: 
many  contradictions  result  whether  we  sup¬ 
pose  it  to  exist  or  not  to  exist.  If  it  exists,  we 
have  still  to  ask  how  it  exists;  as  a  substance  or 
as  the  essential  attribute  of  some  entity?  Or  in 
neither  way,  yet  none  the  less  is  there  some¬ 
thing  which  is  infinite  or  some  things  which 
are  infinitely  many? 

204*  The  problem,  however,  which  specially 
belongs  to  the  physicist  is  to  investigate  wheth¬ 
er  there  is  a  sensible  magnitude  which  is  in¬ 
finite. 

We  must  begin  by  distinguishing  the  vari¬ 
ous  senses  in  which  the  term  ‘infinite’  is  used. 

( 1 )  What  is  incapable  of  being  gone  through, 
because  it  is  not  in  its  nature  to  be  gone 
through  (the  sense  in  which  the  voice  is  ‘invisi¬ 
ble’). 

(2)  What  admits  of  being  gone  through,  the 
process  however  having  no  termination,  or 


BOOK  III,  CHAPTERS  3-4 


282  PHYSICS  204b 


(3)  what  scarcely  admits  of  being  gone 
[5]  through. 

(4)  What  naturally  admits  of  being  gone 
through,  but  is  not  actually  gone  through  or 
does  not  actually  reach  an  end. 

Further,  everything  that  is  infinite  may  be 
so  in  respect  of  addition  or  division  or  both. 

5 

Now  it  is  impossible  that  the  infinite  should 
be  a  thing  which  is  itself  infinite,  separable 
from  sensible  objects.  If  the  infinite  is  neither 
[/o]  a  magnitude  nor  an  aggregate,  but  is  it¬ 
self  a  substance  and  not  an  attribute,  it  will  be 
indivisible;  for  the  divisible  must  be  either  a 
magnitude  or  an  aggregate.  But  if  indivisible, 
then  not  infinite,  except  in  the  sense  (1)  in 
which  the  voice  is  ‘invisible’.  But  this  is  not  the 
sense  in  which  it  is  used  by  those  who  say  that 
the  infinite  exsts,  nor  that  in  which  we  are  in¬ 
vestigating  it,  namely  as  (2),  ‘that  which  can¬ 
not  be  gone  through’.  But  if  the  infinite  exists 
[75]  as  an  attribute,  it  would  not  be,  qua  infi¬ 
nite,  an  element  in  substances,  any  more  than 
the  invisible  would  be  an  element  of  speech, 
though  the  voice  is  invisible. 

Further,  how  can  the  infinite  be  itself  any 
thing,  unless  both  number  and  magnitude,  of 
which  it  is  an  essential  attribute,  exist  in  that 
way?  If  they  are  not  substances,  a  fortiori  the 
infinite  is  not. 

[20]  It  is  plain,  too,  that  the  infinite  cannot  be 
an  actual  thing  and  a  substance  and  principle. 
For  any  part  of  it  that  is  taken  will  be  infinite, 
if  it  has  parts:  for  ‘to  be  infinite’  and  ‘the  infi¬ 
nite’  are  the  same,  if  it  is  a  substance  and  not 
predicated  of  a  subject.  Hence  it  will  be  either 
[25]  indivisible  or  divisible  into  infinites.  But 
the  same  thing  cannot  be  many  infinites.  (Yet 
just  as  part  of  air  is  air,  so  a  part  of  the  infinite 
would  be  infinite,  if  it  is  supposed  to  be  a  sub¬ 
stance  and  principle.)  Therefore  the  infinite 
must  be  without  parts  and  indivisible.  But  this 
cannot  be  true  of  what  is  infinite  in  full  com¬ 
pletion:  for  it  must  be  a  definite  quantity. 

Suppose  then  that  infinity  belongs  to  sub¬ 
stance  as  an  attribute.  But,  if  so,  it  cannot,  as 
[30]  we  have  said,  be  described  as  a  principle, 
but  rather  that  of  which  it  is  an  attribute — the 
air  or  the  even  number. 

Thus  the  view  of  those  who  speak  after  the 
manner  of  the  Pythagoreans  is  absurd.  With 
the  same  breath  they  treat  the  infinite  as  sub¬ 
stance,  and  divide  it  into  parts. 

This  discussion,  however,  involves  the  more 
[55]  general  question  whether  the  infinite  can 


be  present  in  mathematical  objects  and  things 
which  are  intelligible  and  do  not  have  exten- 
204b  sion,  as  well  as  among  sensible  objects. 
Our  inquiry  (as  physicists)  is  limited  to  its  spe¬ 
cial  subject-matter,  the  objects  of  sense,  and  we 
have  to  ask  whether  there  is  or  is  not  among 
them  a  body  which  is  infinite  in  the  direction 
of  increase. 

We  may  begin  with  a  dialectical  argument 
and  show  as  follows  that  there  is  no  such  thing. 

[5]  If  ‘bounded  by  a  surface’  is  the  definition 
of  body  there  cannot  be  an  infinite  body  either 
intelligible  or  sensible.  Nor  can  number  taken 
in  abstraction  be  infinite,  for  number  or  that 
which  has  number  is  numerable.  If  then  the 
numerable  can  be  numbered,  it  would  also  be 
possible  to  go  through  the  infinite. 

[/o]  If,  on  the  other  hand,  we  investigate  the 
question  more  in  accordance  with  principles 
appropriate  to  physics,  we  are  led  as  follows  to 
the  same  result. 

The  infinite  body  must  be  either  (1)  com¬ 
pound,  or  (2)  simple;  yet  neither  alternative 
is  possible. 

( 1)  Compound  the  infinite  body  will  not  be, 
if  the  elements  are  finite  in  number.  For  they 
must  be  more  than  one,  and  the  contraries 
must  always  balance,  and  no  one  of  them  can 
be  infinite.  If  one  of  the  bodies  falls  in  any  de- 
[75]  gree  short  of  the  other  in  potency — sup¬ 
pose  fire  is  finite  in  amount  while  air  is  infinite 
and  a  given  quantity  of  fire  exceeds  in  power 
the  same  amount  of  air  in  any  ratio  provided 
it  is  numerically  definite — the  infinite  body 
will  obviously  prevail  over  and  annihilate  the 
finite  body.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  impossible 
that  each  should  be  infinite.  ‘Body’  is  what  has 
[20]  extension  in  all  directions  and  the  infinite 
is  what  is  boundlessly  extended,  so  that  the  in¬ 
finite  body  would  be  extended  in  all  directions 
ad  infinitum. 

Nor  (2)  can  the  infinite  body  be  one  and 
simple,  whether  it  is,  as  some  hold,  a  thing  over 
and  above  the  elements  (from  which  they  gen¬ 
erate  the  elements)  or  is  not  thus  qualified. 

{a)  We  must  consider  the  former  alterna¬ 
tive;  for  there  are  some  people  who  make  this 
the  infinite,  and  not  air  or  water,  in  order  that 
[25]  the  other  elements  may  not  be  annihilated 
by  the  element  which  is  infinite.  They  have 
contrariety  with  each  other — air  is  cold,  water 
moist,  fire  hot;  if  one  were  infinite,  the  others 
by  now  would  have  ceased  to  be.  As  it  is,  they 
say,  the  infinite  is  different  from  them  and  is 
their  source. 

It  is  impossible,  however,  that  there  should 


205b  BOOK  III,  CHAPTERS  4-5  283 


[30]  be  such  a  body;  not  because  it  is  infinite 
— on  that  point  a  general  proof  can  be  given 
which  applies  equally  to  all,  air,  water,  or  any¬ 
thing  else — but  simply  because  there  is,  as  a 
matter  of  fact,  no  such  sensible  body,  alongside 
the  so-called  elements.  Everything  can  be  re¬ 
solved  into  the  elements  of  which  it  is  com¬ 
posed.  Hence  the  body  in  question  would  have 
been  present  in  our  world  here,  alongside  air 
and  fire  and  earth  and  water:  but  nothing  of 
the  kind  is  observed. 

[35]  (^)  Nor  can  fire  or  any  other  of  the  ele¬ 
ments  be  infinite.  For  generally,  and  apart  from 
205a  the  question  of  how  any  of  them  could 
be  infinite,  the  All,  even  if  it  were  limited,  can¬ 
not  either  be  or  become  one  of  them,  as  Hera¬ 
clitus  says  that  at  some  time  all  things  become 
fire.  (The  same  argument  applies  also  to  the 
[5]  one  which  the  physicists  suppose  to  exist 
alongside  the  elements:  for  everything  changes 
from  contrary  to  contrary,  e.g.  from  hot  to 
cold). 

The  preceding  consideration  of  the  various 
cases  serves  to  show  us  whether  it  is  or  is  not 
possible  that  there  should  be  an  infinite  sensi¬ 
ble  body.  The  following  arguments  give  a  gen¬ 
eral  demonstration  that  it  is  not  possible. 

[/o]  It  is  the  nature  of  every  kind  of  sensible 
body  to  be  somewhere,  and  there  is  a  place  ap¬ 
propriate  to  each,  the  same  for  the  part  and  for 
the  whole,  e.g.  for  the  whole  earth  and  for  a 
single  clod,  and  for  fire  and  for  a  spark. 

Suppose  (a)  that  the  infinite  sensible  body 
is  homogeneous.  Then  each  part  will  be  either 
immovable  or  always  being  carried  along.  Yet 
neither  is  possible.  For  why  downwards  rather 
than  upwards  or  in  any  other  direction?  I 
mean,  e.g.  if  you  take  a  clod,  where  will  it  be 
[75]  moved  or  where  will  it  be  at  rest?  For  ex 
hypothesi  the  place  of  the  body  akin  to  it  is  in¬ 
finite.  Will  it  occupy  the  whole  place,  then? 
And  how?  What  then  will  be  the  nature  of  its 
rest  and  of  its  movement,  or  where  will  they 
be?  It  will  either  be  at  home  everywhere — then 
it  will  not  be  moved;  or  it  will  be  moved  every¬ 
where — then  it  will  not  come  to  rest. 

But  if  (b)  the  All  has  dissimilar  parts,  the 

f roper  places  of  the  parts  will  be  dissimilar 
20  J  also,  and  the  body  of  the  All  will  have  no 
unity  except  that  of  contact.  Then,  further,  the 
parts  will  be  either  finite  or  infinite  in  variety 
of  kind,  (i)  Finite  they  cannot  be,  for  if  the 
All  is  to  be  infinite,  some  of  them  would  have 
to  be  infinite,  while  the  others  were  not,  e.g. 
fire  or  water  will  be  infinite.  But,  as  we  have 
seen  before,  such  an  element  would  destroy 


[25]  what  is  contrary  to  it.  (This  indeed  is  the 
reason  why  none  of  the  physicists  made  fire  or 
earth  the  one  infinite  body,  but  either  water  or 
air  or  what  is  intermediate  between  them,  be¬ 
cause  the  abode  of  each  of  the  two  was  plainly 
determinate,  while  the  others  have  an  ambigu¬ 
ous  place  between  up  and  down.) 

But  (ii)  if  the  parts  are  infinite  in  number 
and  simple,  their  proper  places  too  will  be  in¬ 
finite  in  number,  and  the  same  will  be  true  of 
[30]  the  elements  themselves.  If  that  is  impos¬ 
sible,  and  the  places  are  finite,  the  whole  too 
must  be  finite;  for  the  place  and  the  body  can¬ 
not  but  fit  each  other.  Neither  is  the  whole 
place  larger  than  what  can  be  filled  by  the 
body  (and  then  the  body  would  no  longer  be 
[35]  infinite),  nor  is  the  body  larger  than  the 
place;  for  either  there  would  be  an  empty  space 
or  a  body  whose  nature  it  is  to  be  nowhere. 
205b  Anaxagoras  gives  an  absurd  account  of 
why  the  infinite  is  at  rest.  He  says  that  the  in¬ 
finite  itself  is  the  cause  of  its  being  fixed.  This 
because  it  is  in  itself,  since  nothing  else  con¬ 
tains  it — on  the  assumption  that  wherever  any- 
[5]  thing  is,  it  is  there  by  its  own  nature.  But 
this  is  not  true:  a  thing  could  be  somewhere  by 
compulsion,  and  not  where  it  is  its  nature  to  be. 

Even  if  it  is  true  as  true  can  be  that  the 
whole  is  not  moved  (for  what  is  fixed  by  itself 
and  is  in  itself  must  be  immovable),  yet  we 
must  explain  why  it  is  not  its  nature  to  be 
moved.  It  is  not  enough  just  to  make  this  state¬ 
ment  and  then  decamp.  Anything  else  might 
[/o]  be  in  a  state  of  rest,  but  there  is  no  reason 
why  it  should  not  be  its  nature  to  be  moved. 
The  earth  is  not  carried  along,  and  would  not 
be  carried  along  if  it  were  infinite,  provided  it 
is  held  together  by  the  centre.  But  it  would  not 
be  because  there  was  no  other  region  in  which 
it  could  be  carried  along  that  it  would  remain 
at  the  centre,  but  because  this  is  its  nature.  Yet 
in  this  case  also  we  may  say  that  it  fixes  itself. 
If  then  in  the  case  of  the  earth,  supposed  to  be 
[75]  infinite,  it  is  at  rest,  not  because  it  is  infi¬ 
nite,  but  because  it  has  weight  and  what  is 
heavy  rests  at  the  centre  and  the  earth  is  at  the 
centre,  similarly  the  infinite  also  would  rest  in 
itself,  not  because  it  is  infinite  and  fixes  itself, 
but  owing  to  some  other  cause. 

Another  difficulty  emerges  at  the  same  time. 
Any  part  of  the  infinite  body  ought  to  remain 
at  rest.  Just  as  the  infinite  remains  at  rest  in  it¬ 
self  because  it  fixes  itself,  so  too  any  part  of  it 
[20]  you  may  take  will  remain  in  itself. 
The  appropriate  places  of  the  whole  and  of  the 
part  are  alike,  e.g.  of  the  whole  earth  and 


284 

of  a  clod  the  appropriate  place  is  the  lower  re¬ 
gion  ;  of  fire  as  a  whole  and  of  a  spark,  the  up¬ 
per  region.  If,  therefore,  to  be  in  itself  is  the 
place  of  the  infinite,  that  also  will  be  appropri¬ 
ate  to  the  part.  Therefore  it  will  remain  in  it¬ 
self. 

In  general,  the  view  that  there  is  an  infinite 
[25]  body  is  plainly  incompatible  with  the  doc¬ 
trine  that  there  is  necessarily  a  proper  place  for 
each  kind  of  body,  if  every  sensible  body  has 
either  weight  or  lightness,  and  if  a  body  has  a 
natural  locomotion  towards  the  centre  if  it  is 
heavy,  and  upwards  if  it  is  light.  This  would 
need  to  be  true  of  the  infinite  also.  But  neither 
character  can  belong  to  it:  it  cannot  be  either 
as  a  whole,  nor  can  it  be  half  the  one  and  half 
[50]  the  other.  For  how  should  you  divide  it? 
or  how  can  the  infinite  have  the  one  part  up 
and  the  other  down,  or  an  extremity  and  a 
centre  ? 

Further,  every  sensible  body  is  in  place,  and 
the  kinds  or  differences  of  place  are  up-down, 
before-behind,  right-left;  and  these  distinctions 
hold  not  only  in  relation  to  us  and  by  arbitrary 
[35]  agreement,  but  also  in  the  whole  itself. 
But  in  the  infinite  body  they  cannot  exist.  In 
general,  if  it  is  impossible  that  there  should  be 
an  infinite  place,  and  if  every  body  is  in  place, 
206a  there  cannot  be  an  infinite  body. 

Surely  what  is  in  a  special  place  is  in  place, 
and  what  is  in  place  is  in  a  special  place.  Just, 
then,  as  the  infinite  cannot  be  quantity — that 
would  imply  that  it  has  a  particular  quantity, 
e.g.  two  or  three  cubits;  quantity  just  means 
[5]  these — so  a  thing’s  being  in  place  means 
that  it  is  some  where,  and  that  is  either  up  or 
down  or  in  some  other  of  the  six  differences 
of  position:  but  each  of  these  is  a  limit. 

It  is  plain  from  these  arguments  that  there 
is  no  body  which  is  actually  infinite. 

6 

But  on  the  other  hand  to  suppose  that  the  in¬ 
finite  does  not  exist  in  any  way  leads  obviously 
to  many  impossible  consequences:  there  will  be 
[10]  a  beginning  and  an  end  of  time,  a  mag¬ 
nitude  will  not  be  divisible  into  magnitudes, 
number  will  not  be  infinite.  If,  then,  in  view  of 
the  above  considerations,  neither  alternative 
seems  possible,  an  arbiter  must  be  called  in; 
and  clearly  there  is  a  sense  in  which  the  infinite 
exists  and  another  in  which  it  does  not. 

We  must  keep  in  mind  that  the  word  ‘is’ 
means  either  what  potentially  is  or  what  fully  is. 
[75]  Further,  a  thing  is  infinite  either  by  addi¬ 
tion  or  by  division. 


206b 

Now,  as  we  have  seen,  magnitude  is  not  ac¬ 
tually  infinite.  But  by  division  it  is  infinite. 
(There  is  no  difficulty  in  refuting  the  theory  of 
indivisible  lines.)  The  alternative  then  remains 
that  the  infinite  has  a  potential  existence. 

But  the  phrase  ‘potential  existence’  is  am¬ 
biguous.  When  we  speak  of  the  potential  exist¬ 
ence  of  a  statue  we  mean  that  there  will  be  an 
[20]  actual  statue.  It  is  not  so  with  the  infi¬ 
nite.  There  will  not  be  an  actual  infinite.  The 
word  ‘is’  has  many  senses,  and  we  say  that  the 
infinite  ‘is’  in  the  sense  in  which  we  say  ‘it  is 
day’  or  ‘it  is  the  games’,  because  one  thing  after 
another  is  always  coming  into  existence.  For 
of  these  things  too  the  distinction  between  po¬ 
tential  and  actual  existence  holds.  We  say  that 
there  are  Olympic  games,  both  in  the  sense  that 
they  may  occur  and  that  they  are  actually  oc¬ 
curring. 

[25]  The  infinite  exhibits  itself  in  different 
ways — in  time,  in  the  generations  of  man,  and 
in  the  division  of  magnitudes.  For  generally  the 
infinite  has  this  mode  of  existence:  one  thing  is 
always  being  taken  after  another,  and  each 
thing  that  is  taken  is  always  finite,  but  always 
different.  Again,  ‘being’  has  more  than  one 
[jo]  sense,  so  that  we  must  not  regard  the  in¬ 
finite  as  a  ‘this’,  such  as  a  man  or  a  horse,  but 
must  suppose  it  to  exist  in  the  sense  in  which 
we  speak  of  the  day  or  the  games  as  existing — 
things  whose  being  has  not  come  to  them  like 
that  of  a  substance,  but  consists  in  a  process  of 
coming  to  be  or  passing  away;  definite  if  you 
like  at  each  stage,  yet  always  different. 

206b  But  when  this  takes  place  in  spatial  mag¬ 
nitudes,  what  is  taken  perists,  while  in  the 
succession  of  time  and  of  men  it  takes  place  by 
the  passing  away  of  these  in  such  a  way  that 
the  source  of  supply  never  gives  out. 

In  a  way  the  infinite  by  addition  is  the  same 
thing  as  the  infinite  by  division.  In  a  finite 
magnitude,  the  infinite  by  addition  comes 
about  in  a  way  inverse  to  that  of  the  other.  For 
[5]  in  proportion  as  we  see  division  going  on, 
in  the  same  proportion  we  see  addition  being 
made  to  what  is  already  marked  off.  For  if  we 
take  a  determinate  part  of  a  finite  magnitude 
and  add  another  part  determined  by  the  same 
ratio  (not  taking  in  the  same  amount  of  the 
original  whole),  and  so  on,  we  shall  not  trav- 
[/o]  erse  the  given  magnitude.  But  if  we  in¬ 
crease  the  ratio  of  the  part,  so  as  always  to  take 
in  the  same  amount,  we  shall  traverse  the  mag¬ 
nitude,  for  every  finite  magnitude  is  exhausted 
by  means  of  any  determinate  quantity  however 
small. 


PHYSICS 


20 7b  BOOK  III,  CHAPTERS  5-7  285 


The  infinite,  then,  exists  in  no  other  way, 
but  in  this  way  it  does  exist,  potentially  and  by 
reduction.  It  exists  fully  in  the  sense  in  which 
we  say  ‘it  is  day’  or  ‘it  is  the  games’;  and  po- 
[75]  tentially  as  matter  exists,  not  independ¬ 
ently  as  what  is  finite  does. 

By  addition  then,  also,  there  is  potentially  an 
infinite,  namely,  what  we  have  described  as 
being  in  a  sense  the  same  as  the  infinite  in  re¬ 
spect  of  division.  For  it  will  always  be  possible 
to  take  something  ab  extra .  Yet  the  sum  of  the 
parts  taken  will  not  exceed  every  determinate 
magnitude,  just  as  in  the  direction  of  division 
every  determinate  magnitude  is  surpassed  in 
smallness  and  there  will  be  a  smaller  part. 

[20]  But  in  respect  of  addition  there  cannot  be 
an  infinite  which  even  potentially  exceeds  ev¬ 
ery  assignable  magnitude,  unless  it  has  the  at¬ 
tribute  of  being  actually  infinite,  as  the  physi¬ 
cists  hold  to  be  true  of  the  body  which  is  out¬ 
side  the  world,  whose  essential  nature  is  air  or 
something  of  the  kind.  But  if  there  cannot  be 
in  this  way  a  sensible  body  which  is  infinite  in 
[25]  the  full  sense,  evidently  there  can  no  more 
be  a  body  which  is  potentially  infinite  in  re¬ 
spect  of  addition,  except  as  the  inverse  of  the 
infinite  by  division,  as  we  have  said.  It  is  for 
this  reason  that  Plato  also  made  the  infinites 
two  in  number,  because  it  is  supposed  to  be 
possible  to  exceed  all  limits  and  to  proceed  ad 
infinitum  in  the  direction  both  of  increase  and 
of  reduction.  Yet  though  he  makes  the  infi¬ 
nites  two,  he  does  not  use  them.  For  in  the 
[jo]  numbers  the  infinite  in  the  direction  of 
reduction  is  not  present,  as  the  monad  is  the 
smallest;  nor  is  the  infinite  in  the  direction  of 
increase,  for  the  parts  number  only  up  to  the 
decad. 

The  infinite  turns  out  to  be  the  contrary  of 
what  it  is  said  to  be.  It  is  not  what  has  nothing 
207a  outside  it  that  is  infinite,  but  what  always 
has  something  outside  it.  This  is  indicated  by 
the  fact  that  rings  also  that  have  no  bezel  are 
described  as  ‘endless’,  because  it  is  always  pos¬ 
sible  to  take  a  part  which  is  outside  a  given 
part.  The  description  depends  on  a  certain  sim¬ 
ilarity,  but  it  is  not  true  in  the  full  sense  of  the 
[5]  word.  This  condition  alone  is  not  suffi¬ 
cient:  it  is  necessary  also  that  the  next  part 
which  is  taken  should  never  be  the  same.  In 
the  circle,  the  latter  condition  is  not  satisfied: 
it  is  only  the  adjacent  part  from  which  the  new 
part  is  different. 

Our  definition  then  is  as  follows: 

A  quantity  is  infinite  if  it  is  such  that  we  can 
always  ta\e  a  part  outside  what  has  been  al¬ 


ready  taken.  On  the  other  hand,  what  has  noth¬ 
ing  outside  it  is  complete  and  whole.  For  thus 
we  define  the  whole — that  from  which  noth- 
[/o]  ing  is  wanting,  as  a  whole  man  or  a 
whole  box.  What  is  true  of  each  particular  is 
true  of  the  whole  as  such — the  whole  is  that  of 
which  nothing  is  outside.  On  the  other  hand 
that  from  which  something  is  absent  and  out¬ 
side,  however  small  that  may  be,  is  not  ‘all’. 
‘Whole’  and  ‘complete’  are  either  quite  identi¬ 
cal  or  closely  akin.  Nothing  is  complete 
(reXeiop)  which  has  no  end  (reXos);  and  the 
end  is  a  limit. 

[75]  Hence  Parmenides  must  be  thought  to 
have  spoken  better  than  Melissus.  The  latter 
says  that  the  whole  is  infinite,  but  the  former 
describes  it  as  limited,  ‘equally  balanced  from 
the  middle’.1  For  to  connect  the  infinite  with 
the  all  and  the  whole  is  not  like  joining  two 
pieces  of  string;  for  it  is  from  this  they  get  the 
dignity  they  ascribe  to  the  infinite — its  contain- 
[20]  ing  all  things  and  holding  the  all  in  it¬ 
self — from  its  having  a  certain  similarity  to  the 
whole.  It  is  in  fact  the  matter  of  the  complete¬ 
ness  which  belongs  to  size,  and  what  is  poten¬ 
tially  a  whole,  though  not  in  the  full  sense.  It 
is  divisible  both  in  the  direction  of  reduction 
and  of  the  inverse  addition.  It  is  a  whole  and 
limited;  not,  however,  in  virtue  of  its  own  na¬ 
ture,  but  in  virtue  of  what  is  other  than  it.  It 
does  not  contain,  but,  in  so  far  as  it  is  infinite, 
[25]  is  contained.  Consequently,  also,  it  is  un¬ 
knowable,  qua  infinite;  for  the  matter  has  no 
form.  (Hence  it  is  plain  that  the  infinite  stands 
in  the  relation  of  part  rather  than  of  whole. 
For  the  matter  is  part  of  the  whole,  as  the 
bronze  is  of  the  bronze  statue.)  If  it  contains  in 
the  case  of  sensible  things,  in  the  case  of  intel¬ 
ligible  things  the  great  and  the  small  ought  to 
[30]  contain  them.  But  it  is  absurd  and  impos¬ 
sible  to  suppose  that  the  unknowable  and  inde¬ 
terminate  should  contain  and  determine. 

7 

It  is  reasonable  that  there  should  not  be  held 
to  be  an  infinite  in  respect  of  addition  such  as 
to  surpass  every  magnitude,  but  that  there 
should  be  thought  to  be  such  an  infinite  in  the 
direction  of  division.  For  the  matter  and  the 
[55]  infinite  are  contained  inside  what  con¬ 
tains  them,  while  it  is  the  form  which  con- 
20  7b  tains.  It  is  natural  too  to  suppose  that  in 
number  there  is  a  limit  in  the  direction  of  the 
minimum,  and  that  in  the  other  direction  every 
assigned  number  is  surpassed.  In  magnitude, 
1  Fr.  8. 44. 


286 

on  the  contrary,  every  assigned  magnitude  is 
surpassed  in  the  direction  of  smallness,  while 
[5]  in  the  other  direction  there  is  no  infinite 
magnitude.  The  reason  is  that  what  is  one  is 
indivisible  whatever  it  may  be,  e.g.  a  man  is 
one  man,  not  many.  Number  on  the  other 
hand  is  a  plurality  of  ‘ones’  and  a  certain  quan¬ 
tity  of  them.  Hence  number  must  stop  at  the 
indivisible:  for  ‘two’  and  ‘three’  are  merely  de¬ 
rivative  terms,  and  so  with  each  of  the  other 
[/o]  numbers.  But  in  the  direction  of  large¬ 
ness  it  is  always  possible  to  think  of  a  larger 
number:  for  the  number  of  times  a  magnitude 
can  be  bisected  is  infinite.  Hence  this  infinite 
is  potential,  never  actual:  the  number  of  parts 
that  can  be  taken  always  surpasses  any  as¬ 
signed  number.  But  this  number  is  not  separa¬ 
ble  from  the  process  of  bisection,  and  its  infin¬ 
ity  is  not  a  permanent  actuality  but  consists 
in  a  process  of  coming  to  be,  like  time  and  the 
number  of  time. 

[75]  With  magnitudes  the  contrary  holds. 
What  is  continuous  is  divided  ad  infnitum, 
but  there  is  no  infinite  in  the  direction  of  in¬ 
crease.  For  the  size  which  it  can  potentially  be, 
it  can  also  actually  be.  Hence  since  no  sensible 
magnitude  is  infinite,  it  is  impossible  to  exceed 
every  assigned  magnitude;  for  if  it  were  possi- 
[20]  ble  there  would  be  something  bigger  than 
the  heavens. 

The  infinite  is  not  the  same  in  magnitude 
and  movement  and  time,  in  the  sense  of  a  sin¬ 
gle  nature,  but  its  secondary  sense  depends  on 
its  primary  sense,  i.e.  movement  is  called  infi¬ 
nite  in  virtue  of  the  magnitude  covered  by  the 
movement  (or  alteration  or  growth),  and  time 
because  of  the  movement.  (I  use  these  terms 
[25]  for  the  moment.  Later  I  shall  explain 
what  each  of  them  means,  and  also  why  every 
magnitude  is  divisible  into  magnitudes.) 

Our  account  does  not  rob  the  mathemati¬ 
cians  of  their  science,  by  disproving  the  actual 
existence  of  the  infinite  in  the  direction  of  in¬ 
crease,  in  the  sense  of  the  untraversable.  In 
point  of  fact  they  do  not  need  the  infinite  and 
[jo]  do  not  use  it.  They  postulate  only  that  the 
finite  straight  line  may  be  produced  as  far  as 
they  wish.  It  is  possible  to  have  divided  in  the 
same  ratio  as  the  largest  quantity  another  mag¬ 
nitude  of  any  size  you  like.  Hence,  for  the  pur¬ 
poses  of  proof,  it  will  make  no  difference  to 


208a 

them  to  have  such  an  infinite  instead,  while  its 
existence  will  be  in  the  sphere  of  real  magni¬ 
tudes. 

[35]  In  the  fourfold  scheme  of  causes,  it  is 
plain  that  the  infinite  is  a  cause  in  the  sense  of 
matter,  and  that  its  essence  is  privation,  the 
208a  subject  as  such  being  what  is  continuous 
and  sensible.  All  the  other  thinkers,  too,  evi¬ 
dently  treat  the  infinite  as  matter — that  is  why 
it  is  inconsistent  in  them  to  make  it  what  con¬ 
tains,  and  not  what  is  contained. 

8 

[5]  It  remains  to  dispose  of  the  arguments 
which  are  supposed  to  support  the  view  that 
the  infinite  exists  not  only  potentially  but  as  a 
separate  thing.  Some  have  no  cogency;  others 
can  be  met  by  fresh  objections  that  are  valid. 

(1)  In  order  that  coming  to  be  should  not 
fail,  it  is  not  necessary  that  there  should  be  a 
sensible  body  which  is  actually  infinite.  The 
passing  away  of  one  thing  may  be  the  coming 
[/o]  to  be  of  another,  the  All  being  limited. 

(2)  There  is  a  difference  between  touching 
and  being  limited.  The  former  is  relative  to 
something  and  is  the  touching  of  something 
(for  everything  that  touches  touches  some¬ 
thing),  and  further  is  an  attribute  of  some  one 
of  the  things  which  are  limited.  On  the  other 
hand,  what  is  limited  is  not  limited  in  relation 
to  anything.  Again,  contact  is  not  necessarily 
possible  between  any  two  things  taken  at  ran¬ 
dom. 

[75]  (3)  To  rely  on  mere  thinking  is  absurd, 
for  then  the  excess  or  defect  is  not  in  the  thing 
but  in  the  thought.  One  might  think  that  one 
of  us  is  bigger  than  he  is  and  magnify  him  ad 
infinitum.  But  it  does  not  follow  that  he  is  big¬ 
ger  than  the  size  we  are,  just  because  some  one 
thinks  he  is,  but  only  because  he  is  the  size  he 
is.  The  thought  is  an  accident. 

[20]  ( a )  Time  indeed  and  movement  are  in¬ 
finite,  and  also  thinking,  in  the  sense  that  each 
part  that  is  taken  passes  in  succession  out  of 
existence. 

( b )  Magnitude  is  not  infinite  either  in  the 
way  of  reduction  or  of  magnification  in 
thought. 

This  concludes  my  account  of  the  way  in 
which  the  infinite  exists,  and  of  the  way  in 
which  it  does  not  exist,  and  of  what  it  is. 


PHYSICS 


209 


BOOK  III,  CHAPTERS  7-8— BOOK  IV,  CHAPTER  1 


287 


BOOK  IV 


1 

The  physicist  must  have  a  knowledge  of 
Place,  too,  as  well  as  of  the  infinite — namely, 
whether  there  is  such  a  thing  or  not,  and  the 
manner  of  its  existence  and  what  it  is — both 
[50]  because  all  suppose  that  things  which  ex¬ 
ist  are  somewhere  (the  non-existent  is  no¬ 
where — where  is  the  goat-stag  or  the  sphinx?  ), 
and  because  ‘motion’  in  its  most  general  and 
primary  sense  is  change  of  place,  which  we  call 
‘locomotion’. 

The  question,  what  is  place?  presents  many 
difficulties.  An  examination  of  all  the  relevant 
facts  seems  to  lead  to  divergent  conclusions. 
[35]  Moreover,  we  have  inherited  nothing 
from  previous  thinkers,  whether  in  the  way  of 
a  statement  of  difficulties  or  of  a  solution. 
208b  The  existence  of  place  is  held  to  be  ob¬ 
vious  from  the  fact  of  mutual  replacement. 
Where  water  now  is,  there  in  turn,  when  the 
water  has  gone  out  as  from  a  vessel,  air  is  pres- 
[  5]  ent.  When  therefore  another  body  occupies 
this  same  place,  the  place  is  thought  to  be  dif¬ 
ferent  from  all  the  bodies  which  come  to  be  in 
it  and  replace  one  another.  What  now  contains 
air  formerly  contained  water,  so  that  clearly 
the  place  or  space  into  which  and  out  of  which 
they  passed  was  something  different  from  both. 

Further,  the  typical  locomotions  of  the  ele¬ 
mentary  natural  bodies — namely,  fire,  earth, 
and  the  like — show  not  only  that  place  is  some- 
[/o]  thing,  but  also  that  it  exerts  a  certain  in¬ 
fluence.  Each  is  carried  to  its  own  place,  if  it  is 
not  hindered,  the  one  up,  the  other  down.  Now 
these  are  regions  or  kinds  of  place — up  and 
down  and  the  rest  of  the  six  directions.  Nor  do 
such  distinctions  (up  and  down  and  right  and 
[75]  left,  &c.)  hold  only  in  relation  to  us.  To 
us  they  are  not  always  the  same  but  change 
with  the  direction  in  which  we  are  turned: 
that  is  why  the  same  thing  may  be  both  right 
and  left,  up  and  down,  before  and  behind.  But 
in  nature  each  is  distinct,  taken  apart  by  itself. 
It  is  not  every  chance  direction  which  is  ‘up’, 
but  where  fire  and  what  is  light  are  carried; 
[20]  similarly,  too,  ‘down’  is  not  any  chance 
direction  but  where  what  has  weight  and  what 
is  made  of  earth  are  carried — the  implication 
being  that  these  places  do  not  differ  merely  in 
relative  position,  but  also  as  possessing  distinct 
potencies.  This  is  made  plain  also  by  the  ob¬ 
jects  studied  by  mathematics.  Though  they 


have  no  real  place,  they  nevertheless,  in  respect 
of  their  position  relatively  to  us,  have  a  right 
and  left  as  attributes  ascribed  to  them  only  in 
consequence  of  their  relative  position,  not  hav¬ 
ing  by  nature  these  various  characteristics. 
[25]  Again,  the  theory  that  the  void  exists  in¬ 
volves  the  existence  of  place:  for  one  would 
define  void  as  place  bereft  of  body. 

These  considerations  then  would  lead  us  to 
suppose  that  place  is  something  distinct  from 
bodies,  and  that  every  sensible  body  is  in  place. 
Hesiod  too  might  be  held  to  have  given  a  cor¬ 
rect  account  of  it  when  he  made  chaos  first, 
[jo]  At  least  he  says: 

First  of  all  things  came  chaos  to  being ,  then 
broad-breasted  earth ,l 

implying  that  things  need  to  have  space  first, 
because  he  thought,  with  most  people,  that  ev¬ 
erything  is  somewhere  and  in  place.  If  this  is 
its  nature,  the  potency  of  place  must  be  a  mar¬ 
vellous  thing,  and  take  precedence  of  all  other 
[35]  things.  For  that  without  which  nothing 
else  can  exist,  while  it  can  exist  without  the 
others,  must  needs  be  first;  for  place  does  not 
209a  pass  out  of  existence  when  the  things  in 
it  are  annihilated. 

True,  but  even  if  we  suppose  its  existence 
settled,  the  question  of  its  nature  presents  dif¬ 
ficulty — whether  it  is  some  sort  of  ‘bulk’  of 
body  or  some  entity  other  than  that,  for  we 
must  first  determine  its  genus. 

[5]  (1)  Now  it  has  three  dimensions,  length, 
breadth,  depth,  the  dimensions  by  which  all 
body  also  is  bounded.  But  the  place  cannot  be 
body;  for  if  it  were  there  would  be  two  bodies 
in  the  same  place. 

(2)  Further,  if  body  has  a  place  and  space, 
clearly  so  too  have  surface  and  the  other  lim¬ 
its  of  body;  for  the  same  statement  will  apply 
to  them:  where  the  bounding  planes  of  the 
[70]  water  were,  there  in  turn  will  be  those  of 
the  air.  But  when  we  come  to  a  point  we  can¬ 
not  make  a  distinction  between  it  and  its  place. 
Hence  if  the  place  of  a  point  is  not  different 
from  the  point,  no  more  will  that  of  any  of  the 
others  be  different,  and  place  will  not  be  some¬ 
thing  different  from  each  of  them. 

(3)  What  in  the  world  then  are  we  to  sup¬ 
pose  place  to  be?  If  it  has  the  sort  of  nature  de¬ 
scribed,  it  cannot  be  an  element  or  composed 
[75]  of  elements,  whether  these  be  corporeal 
or  incorporeal:  for  while  it  has  size,  it  has  not 

1  Theogony ,  1 16  f. 


288 

body.  But  the  elements  of  sensible  bodies  are 
bodies,  while  nothing  that  has  size  results  from 
a  combination  of  intelligible  elements. 

(4)  Also  we  may  ask:  of  what  in  things  is 
space  the  cause?  None  of  the  four  modes  of 
causation  can  be  ascribed  to  it.  It  is  neither 
[20]  cause  in  the  sense  of  the  matter  of  exist- 
ents  (for  nothing  is  composed  of  it),  nor  as  the 
form  and  definition  of  things,  nor  as  end,  nor 
does  it  move  existents. 

(5)  Further,  too,  if  it  is  itself  an  existent, 
where  will  it  be?  Zeno’s  difficulty  demands  an 
explanation:  for  if  everything  that  exists  has  a 
[25]  place,  place  too  will  have  a  place,  and  so 
on  ad  infinitum. 

(6)  Again,  just  as  every  body  is  in  place,  so, 
too,  every  place  has  a  body  in  it.  What  then 
shall  we  say  about  growing  things?  It  follows 
from  these  premisses  that  their  place  must 
grow  with  them,  if  their  place  is  neither  less 
nor  greater  than  they  are. 

By  asking  these  questions,  then,  we  must 
raise  the  whole  problem  about  place — not  only 
[30]  as  to  what  it  is,  but  even  whether  there  is 
such  a  thing. 

2 

We  may  distinguish  generally  between  pred¬ 
icating  B  of  A  because  it  (A)  is  itself,  and  be¬ 
cause  it  is  something  else;  and  particularly  be¬ 
tween  place  which  is  common  and  in  which 
all  bodies  are,  and  the  special  place  occupied 
primarily  by  each.  I  mean,  for  instance,  that 
you  are  now  in  the  heavens  because  you  are  in 
the  air  and  it  is  in  the  heavens;  and  you  are  in 
the  air  because  you  are  on  the  earth;  and  simi- 
[35]  lafly  on  t^le  earth  because  you  are  in  this 
place  which  contains  no  more  than  you. 

209b  Now  if  place  is  what  primarily  contains 
each  body,  it  would  be  a  limit,  so  that  the  place 
would  be  the  form  or  shape  of  each  body  by 
which  the  magnitude  or  the  matter  of  the  mag¬ 
nitude  is  defined:  for  this  is  the  limit  of  each 
body. 

[5]  If,  then,  we  look  at  the  question  in  this 
way  the  place  of  a  thing  is  its  form.  But,  if  we 
regard  the  place  as  the  extension  of  the  magni¬ 
tude,  it  is  the  matter.  For  this  is  different  from 
the  magnitude:  it  is  what  is  contained  and  de¬ 
fined  by  the  form,  as  by  a  bounding  plane. 
Matter  or  the  indeterminate  is  of  this  nature; 
when  the  boundary  and  attributes  of  a  sphere 
[/o]  are  taken  away,  nothing  but  the  matter  is 
left. 

This  is  why  Plato  in  the  Timaeus 1  says  that 

X52. 


210a 

matter  and  space  are  the  same;  for  the  ‘partici¬ 
pant’  and  space  are  identical.  (It  is  true,  in¬ 
deed,  that  the  account  he  gives  there  of  the 
‘participant’  is  different  from  what  he  says  in 
[75]  his  so-called  ‘unwritten  teaching’.  Never¬ 
theless,  he  did  identify  place  and  space.)  I  men¬ 
tion  Plato  because,  while  all  hold  place  to  be 
something,  he  alone  tried  to  say  what  it  is. 

In  view  of  these  facts  we  should  naturally 
expect  to  find  difficulty  in  determining  what 
place  is,  if  indeed  it  is  one  of  these  two  things, 
[20]  matter  or  form.  They  demand  a  very 
close  scrutiny,  especially  as  it  is  not  easy  to 
recognize  them  apart. 

But  it  is  at  any  rate  not  difficult  to  see  that 
place  cannot  be  either  of  them.  The  form  and 
the  matter  are  not  separate  from  the  thing, 
whereas  the  place  can  be  separated.  As  we 
pointed  out,2  where  air  was,  water  in  turn 
comes  to  be,  the  one  replacing  the  other;  and 
[25]  similarly  with  other  bodies.  Hence  the 
place  of  a  thing  is  neither  a  part  nor  a  state  of 
it,  but  is  separable  from  it.  For  place  is  sup¬ 
posed  to  be  something  like  a  vessel — the  ves¬ 
sel  being  a  transportable  place.  But  the  vessel  is 
no  part  of  the  thing. 

[30]  In  so  far  then  as  it  is  separable  from  the 
thing,  it  is  not  the  form:  qua  containing,  it 
is  different  from  the  matter. 

Also  it  is  held  that  what  is  anywhere  is  both 
itself  something  and  that  there  is  a  different 
thing  outside  it.  (Plato  of  course,  if  we  may  di¬ 
gress,  ought  to  tell  us  why  the  form  and  the 
[35]  numbers  are  not  in  place,  if  ‘what  par¬ 
ticipates’  is  place — whether  what  participates 
is  the  Great  and  the  Small  or  the  matter,  as  he 
210a  called  it  in  writing  in  the  Timaeus. )3 

Further,  how  could  a  body  be  carried  to  its 
own  place,  if  place  was  the  matter  or  the  form? 
It  is  impossible  that  what  has  no  reference  to 
motion  or  the  distinction  of  up  and  down  can 
be  place.  So  place  must  be  looked  for  among 
things  which  have  these  characteristics. 

[5]  If  the  place  is  in  the  thing  (it  must  be  if  it 
is  either  shape  or  matter)  place  will  have  a 
place:  for  both  the  form  and  the  indeterminate 
undergo  change  and  motion  along  with  the 
thing,  and  are  not  always  in  the  same  place,  but 
are  where  the  thing  is.  Hence  the  place  will 
have  a  place. 

Further,  when  water  is  produced  from  air, 
[/o]  the  place  has  been  destroyed,  for  the  re¬ 
sulting  body  is  not  in  the  same  place.  What 
sort  of  destruction  then  is  that? 

This  concludes  my  statement  of  the  rea- 

2  2o8b  2.  3  52. 


PHYSICS 


210b  BOOK  IV,  CHAPTERS  1-4  289 


sons  why  space  must  be  something,  and  again 
of  the  difficulties  that  may  be  raised  about  its 
essential  nature. 

3 

The  next  step  we  must  take  is  to  see  in  how 
many  senses  one  thing  is  said  to  be  ‘in’  an¬ 
other. 

[75]  ( 1)  As  the  finger  is  ‘in’  the  hand  and  gen¬ 
erally  the  part  ‘in*  the  whole. 

(2)  As  the  whole  is  ‘in’  the  parts:  for  there 
is  no  whole  over  and  above  the  parts. 

(3)  As  man  is  ‘in’  animal  and  generally  spe¬ 
cies  ‘in*  genus. 

(4)  As  the  genus  is  ‘in’  the  species  and  gen¬ 
erally  the  part  of  the  specific  form  ‘in’  the 
definition  of  the  specific  form. 

[20]  (5)  As  health  is  ‘in’  the  hot  and  the  cold 
and  generally  the  form  ‘in’  the  matter. 

(6)  As  the  affairs  of  Greece  centre  ‘in’  the 
king,  and  generally  events  centre  ‘in’  their 
primary  motive  agent. 

(7)  As  the  existence  of  a  thing  centres  ‘in* 
its  good  and  generally  ‘in*  its  end,  i.e.  in  ‘that 
for  the  sake  of  which’  it  exists. 

(8)  In  the  strictest  sense  of  all,  as  a  thing  is 
‘in’  a  vessel,  and  generally  ‘in’  place. 

[25]  One  might  raise  the  question  whether  a 
thing  can  be  in  itself,  or  whether  nothing  can 
be  in  itself — everything  being  either  nowhere 
or  in  something  else . 

The  question  is  ambiguous;  we  may  mean 
the  thing  qua  itself  or  qua  something  else. 

When  there  are  parts  of  a  whole — the  one 
that  in  which  a  thing  is,  the  other  the  thing 
which  is  in  it — the  whole  will  be  described  as 
being  in  itself.  For  a  thing  is  described  in 
terms  of  its  parts,  as  well  as  in  terms  of  the 
thing  as  a  whole,  e.g.  a  man  is  said  to  be  white 
because  tfie  visible  surface  of  him  is  white,  or 
to  be  scientific  because  his  thinking  faculty 
[30]  has  been  trained.  The  jar  then  will  not 
be  in  itself  and  the  wine  will  not  be  in  itself. 
But  the  jar  of  wine  will:  for  the  contents  and 
the  container  are  both  parts  of  the  same  whole. 

In  this  sense  then,  but  not  primarily,  a  thing 
can  be  in  itself,  namely,  as  ‘white’  is  in  body 
(for  the  visible  surface  is  in  body),  and  science 
is  in  the  mind. 

210b  It  is  from  these,  which  are  ‘parts’  (in  the 
sense  at  least  of  being  ‘in’  the  man),  that  the 
man  is  called  white,  &c.  But  the  jar  and  the 
wine  in  separation  are  not  parts  of  a  whole, 
though  together  they  are.  So  when  there  are 
parts,  a  thing  will  be  in  itself,  as  ‘white’  is  in 
man  because  it  is  in  body,  and  in  body  because 


it  resides  in  the  visible  surface.  We  cannot  go 

[5]  further  and  say  that  it  is  in  surface  in  vir¬ 
tue  of  something  other  than  itself.  (Yet  it  is 
not  in  itself:  though  these  are  in  a  way  the 
same  thing,)  they  differ  in  essence,  each  hav¬ 
ing  a  special  nature  and  capacity,  ‘surface’  and 
‘white’. 

Thus  if  we  look  at  the  matter  inductively  we 
do  not  find  anything  to  be  ‘in’  itself  in  any  of 
the  senses  that  have  been  distinguished;  and 
it  can  be  seen  by  argument  that  it  is  impossible, 
[/o]  For  each  of  two  things  will  have  to  be 
both,  e.g.  the  jar  will  have  to  be  both  vessel 
and  wine,  and  the  wine  both  wine  and  jar,  if 
it  is  possible  for  a  thing  to  be  in  itself;  so  that, 
however  true  it  might  be  that  they  were  in  each 
other,  the  jar  will  receive  the  wine  in  virtue 
[75]  not  of  its  being  wine  but  of  the  wine’s  be¬ 
ing  wine,  and  the  wine  will  be  in  the  jar  in 
virtue  not  of  its  being  a  jar  but  of  the  jar’s  be¬ 
ing  a  jar.  Now  that  they  are  different  in  re¬ 
spect  of  their  essence  is  evident;  for  ‘that  in 
which  something  is’  and  ‘that  which  is  in  it’ 
would  be  differently  defined. 

Nor  is  it  possible  for  a  thing  to  be  in  itself 
even  incidentally:  for  two  things  would  be  at 
[20]  the  same  time  in  the  same  thing.  The 
jar  would  be  in  itself — if  a  thing  whose  nature 
it  is  to  receive  can  be  in  itself;  and  that  which 
it  receives,  namely  (if  wine)  wine,  will  be  in  it. 

Obviously  then  a  thing  cannot  be  in  itself 
primarily . 

Zeno’s  problem — that  if  Place  is  something 
it  must  be  in  something — is  not  difficult  to 
solve.  There  is  nothing  to  prevent  the  first 
place  from  being  ‘in’  something  else — not  in- 
[25]  deed  in  that  as  ‘in’  place,  but  as  health 
is  ‘in’  the  hot  as  a  positive  determination  of  it 
or  as  the  hot  is  ‘in’  body  as  an  affection.  So  we 
escape  the  infinite  regress. 

Another  thing  is  plain:  since  the  vessel  is  no 
part  of  what  is  in  it  (what  contains  in  the 
strict  sense  is  different  from  what  is  con¬ 
tained),  place  could  not  be  either  the  matter 
or  the  form  of  the  thing  contained,  but  must 
[30]  be  different — for  the  latter,  both  the  mat¬ 
ter  and  the  shape,  are  parts  of  what  is  con¬ 
tained. 

This  then  may  serve  as  a  critical  statement 
of  the  difficulties  involved. 

4 

What  then  after  all  is  place?  The  answer  to 
this  question  may  be  elucidated  as  follows. 

Let  us  take  for  granted  about  it  the  various 
characteristics  which  are  supposed  correctly  to 


290  PHYSICS  211b 


belong  to  it  essentially.  We  assume  then — 

( i )  Place  is  what  contains  that  of  which  it  is 
the  place. 

211®  (2)  Place  is  no  part  of  the  thing. 

(3)  The  immediate  place  of  a  thing  is  neither 
less  nor  greater  than  the  thing. 

(4)  Place  can  be  left  behind  by  the  thing 
and  is  separable.  In  addition: 

(5)  All  place  admits  of  the  distinction  of  up 
and  down,  and  each  of  the  bodies  is  naturally 
[5]  carried  to  its  appropriate  place  and  rests 
there,  and  this  makes  the  place  either  up  or 
down. 

Having  laid  these  foundations,  we  must 
complete  the  theory.  We  ought  to  try  to  make 
our  investigation  such  as  will  render  an  ac¬ 
count  of  place,  and  will  not  only  solve  the 
difficulties  connected  with  it,  but  will  also  show 
that  the  attributes  supposed  to  belong  to  it  do 
really  belong  to  it,  and  further  will  make  clear 
[/o]  the  cause  of  the  trouble  and  of  the  diffi¬ 
culties  about  it.  Such  is  the  most  satisfactory 
kind  of  exposition. 

First  then  we  must  understand  that  place 
would  not  have  been  thought  of,  if  there  had 
not  been  a  special  kind  of  motion,  namely 
that  with  respect  to  place.  It  is  chiefly  for  this 
reason  that  we  suppose  the  heaven  also  to  be 
in  place,  because  it  is  in  constant  movement. 
Of  this  kind  of  change  there  are  two  species — 
locomotion  on  the  one  hand  and,  on  the  other, 
[75]  increase  and  diminution.  For  these  too 
involve  variation  of  place:  what  was  then  in 
this  place  has  now  in  turn  changed  to  what  is 
larger  or  smaller. 

Again,  when  we  say  a  thing  is  ‘moved’,  the 
predicate  either  (1)  belongs  to  it  actually,  in 
virtue  of  its  own  nature,  or  (2)  in  virtue  of 
something  conjoined  with  it.  In  the  latter  case 
it  may  be  either  (a)  something  which  by  its  own 
[20]  nature  is  capable  of  being  moved,  e.g.  the 
parts  of  the  body  or  the  nail  in  the  ship,  or  ( b ) 
something  which  is  not  in  itself  capable  of 
being  moved,  but  is  always  moved  through  its 
conjunction  with  something  else,  as  ‘whiteness’ 
or  ‘science’.  These  have  changed  their  place 
only  because  the  subjects  to  which  they  belong 
do  so. 

We  say  that  a  thing  is  in  the  world,  in  the 
[25]  sense  of  in  place,  because  it  is  in  the  air, 
and  the  air  is  in  the  world;  and  when  we  say 
it  is  in  the  air,  we  do  not  mean  it  is  in  every 
part  of  the  air,  but  that  it  is  in  the  air  because 
of  the  outer  surface  of  the  air  which  surrounds 
it;  for  if  all  the  air  were  its  place,  the  place  of 
a  thing  would  not  be  equal  to  the  thing — 


which  it  is  supposed  to  be,  and  which  the  pri¬ 
mary  place  in  which  a  thing  is  actually  is. 

When  what  surrounds,  then,  is  not  separate 
[30]  from  the  thing,  but  is  in  continuity  with 
it,  the  thing  is  said  to  be  in  what  surrounds  it, 
not  in  the  sense  of  in  place,  but  as  a  part  in  a 
whole.  But  when  the  thing  is  separate  and  in 
contact,  it  is  immediately  ‘in’  the  inner  surface 
of  the  surrounding  body,  and  this  surface  is 
neither  a  part  of  what  is  in  it  nor  yet  greater 
than  its  extension,  but  equal  to  it;  for  the  ex¬ 
tremities  of  things  which  touch  are  coincident. 

Further,  if  one  body  is  in  continuity  with  an- 
[35]  other,  it  is  not  moved  in  that  but  with 
that.  On  the  other  hand  it  is  moved  in  that  if 
it  is  separate.  It  makes  no  difference  whether 
what  contains  is  moved  or  not. 

21  lb  Again,  when  it  is  not  separate  it  is  de¬ 
scribed  as  a  part  in  a  whole,  as  the  pupil  in  the 
eye  or  the  hand  in  the  body:  when  it  is  sep¬ 
arate,  as  the  water  in  the  cask  or  the  wine  in 
the  jar.  For  the  hand  is  moved  with  the  body 
and  the  water  in  the  cask. 

[5]  It  will  now  be  plain  from  these  considera¬ 
tions  what  place  is.  There  are  just  four  things 
of  which  place  must  be  one — the  shape,  or  the 
matter,  or  some  sort  of  extension  between  the 
bounding  surfaces  of  the  containing  body,  or 
this  boundary  itself  if  it  contains  no  extension 
over  and  above  the  bulk  of  the  body  which 
comes  to  be  in  it. 

Three  of  these  it  obviously  cannot  be: 

[/o]  (1)  The  shape  is  supposed  to  be  place 
because  it  surrounds,  for  the  extremities  of 
what  contains  and  of  what  is  contained  are 
coincident.  Both  the  shape  and  the  place,  it  is 
true,  are  boundaries.  But  not  of  the  same 
thing:  the  form  is  the  boundary  of  the  thing, 
the  place  is  the  boundary  of  the  body  which 
contains  it. 

(2)  The  extension  between  the  extremities  is 
thought  to  be  something,  because  what  is  con¬ 
tained  and  separate  may  often  be  changed 
[75]  while  the  container  remains  the  same  (as 
water  may  be  poured  from  a  vessel) — the  as¬ 
sumption  being  that  the  extension  is  something 
over  and  above  the  body  displaced.  But  there 
is  no  such  extension.  One  of  the  bodies  which 
change  places  and  are  naturally  capable  of  be¬ 
ing  in  contact  with  the  container  falls  in — 
whichever  it  may  chance  to  be. 

If  there  were  an  extension  which  were  such 
[20]  as  to  exist  independently  and  be  per¬ 
manent,  there  would  be  an  infinity  of  places  in 
the  same  thing.  For  when  the  water  and  the 
air  change  places,  all  the  portions  of  the  two 


212b 

together  will  play  the  same  part  in  the  whole 
which  was  previously  played  by  all  the  water 
in  the  vessel;  at  the  same  time  the  place  too 
will  be  undergoing  change;  so  that  there  will 
be  another  place  which  is  the  place  of  the 
[25]  pi  ace,  and  many  places  will  be  coincident. 
There  is  not  a  different  place  of  the  part,  in 
which  it  is  moved,  when  the  whole  vessel 
changes  its  place:  it  is  always  the  same:  for  it 
is  in  the  (proximate)  place  where  they  are  that 
the  air  and  the  water  (or  the  parts  of  the 
water)  succeed  each  other,  not  in  that  place  in 
which  they  come  to  be,  which  is  part  of  the 

f  lace  which  is  the  place  of  the  whole  world. 

3°]  (3)  The  matter,  too,  might  seem  to  be 
place,  at  least  if  we  consider  it  in  what  is  at 
rest  and  is  thus  separate  but  in  continuity.  For 
just  as  in  change  of  quality  there  is  something 
which  was  formerly  black  and  is  now  white, 
or  formerly  soft  and  now  hard — this  is  just 
why  we  say  that  the  matter  exists — so  place, 
because  it  presents  a  similar  phenomenon,  is 
[35]  thought  to  exist — only  in  the  one  case  we 
say  so  because  what  was  air  is  now  water,  in 
the  other  because  where  air  formerly  was  there 
212a  is  now  water.  But  the  matter,  as  we  said 
before,1  is  neither  separable  from  the  thing  nor 
contains  it,  whereas  place  has  both  character¬ 
istics. 

Well,  then,  if  place  is  none  of  the  three — 
neither  the  form  nor  the  matter  nor  an  exten¬ 
sion  which  is  always  there,  different  from,  and 
over  and  above,  the  extension  of  the  thing 
[5]  which  is  displaced — place  necessarily  is  the 
one  of  the  four  which  is  left,  namely,  the 
boundary  of  the  containing  body  at  which  it 
is  in  contact  with  the  contained  body.  (By  the 
contained  body  is  meant  what  can  be  moved 
by  way  of  locomotion.) 

Place  is  thought  to  be  something  important 
and  hard  to  grasp,  both  because  the  matter 
and  the  shape  present  themselves  along  with 
it,  and  because  the  displacement  of  the  body 
that  is  moved  takes  place  in  a  stationary  con- 
[/o]  tainer,  for  it  seems  possible  that  there 
should  be  an  interval  which  is  other  than  the 
bodies  which  are  moved.  The  air,  too,  which  is 
thought  to  be  incorporeal,  contributes  some¬ 
thing  to  the  belief:  it  is  not  only  the  boun¬ 
daries  of  the  vessel  which  seem  to  be  place,  but 
also  what  is  between  them,  regarded  as  empty. 
Just,  in  fact,  as  the  vessel  is  transportable 
[75]  place,  so  place  is  a  non-portable  vessel.  So 
when  what  is  within  a  thing  which  is  moved, 
is  moved  and  changes  its  place,  as  a  boat  on  a 
1 209b  22-32. 


291 

river,  what  contains  plays  the  part  of  a  vessel 
rather  than  that  of  place.  Place  on  the  other 
hand  is  rather  what  is  motionless:  so  it  is 
rather  the  whole  river  that  is  place,  because  as 
a  whole  it  is  motionless. 

[20]  Hence  we  conclude  that  the  innermost 
motionless  boundary  of  what  contains  is  place. 

This  explains  why  the  middle  of  the  heaven 
and  the  surface  which  faces  us  of  the  rotating 
system  are  held  to  be  ‘up’  and  ‘down’  in  the 
strict  and  fullest  sense  for  all  men:  for  the  one 
is  always  at  rest,  while  the  inner  side  of  the 
rotating  body  remains  always  coincident  with 
[25]  itself.  Hence  since  the  light  is  what  is 
naturally  carried  up,  and  the  heavy  what  is 
carried  down,  the  boundary  which  contains  in 
the  direction  of  the  middle  of  the  universe,  and 
the  middle  itself,  are  down,  and  that  which 
contains  in  the  direction  of  the  outermost  part 
of  the  universe,  and  the  outermost  part  itself, 
are  up. 

For  this  reason,  too,  place  is  thought  to  be  a 
kind  of  surface,  and  as  it  were  a  vessel,  i.e.  a 
container  of  the  thing. 

[jo]  Further,  place  is  coincident  with  the 
thing,  for  boundaries  are  coincident  with  the 
bounded. 

5 

If  then  a  body  has  another  body  outside  it  and 
containing  it,  it  is  in  place,  and  if  not,  not. 
That  is  why,  even  if  there  were  to  be  water 
which  had  not  a  container,  the  parts  of  it,  on 
the  one  hand,  will  be  moved  (for  one  part  is 
contained  in  another),  while,  on  the  other 
hand,  the  whole  will  be  moved  in  one  sense, 
[35]  but  not  in  another.  For  as  a  whole  it  does 
not  simultaneously  change  its  place,  though  it 
212b  will  be  moved  in  a  circle:  for  this  place 
is  the  place  of  its  parts.  (Some  things  are 
moved,  not  up  and  down,  but  in  a  circle;  others 
up  and  down,  such  things  namely  as  admit 
of  condensation  and  rarefaction.) 

As  was  explained,2  some  things  are  poten¬ 
tially  in  place,  others  actually.  So,  when  you 
have  a  homogeneous  substance  which  is  con- 
[5]  tinuous,  the  parts  are  potentially  in  place: 
when  the  parts  are  separated,  but  in  contact, 
like  a  heap,  they  are  actually  in  place. 

Again,  (1)  some  things  are  per  se  in  place, 
namely  every  body  which  is  movable  either  by 
way  of  locomotion  or  by  way  of  increase  is  per 
se  somewhere,  but  the  heaven,  as  has  been 
said,3  is  not  anywhere  as  a  whole,  nor  in  any 
[/o]  place,  if  at  least,  as  we  must  suppose,  no 

22IIaI7-b5.  3ft32. 


BOOK  IV,  CHAPTERS  4-5 


292 

body  contains  it.  On  the  line  on  which  it  is 
moved,  its  parts  have  place:  for  each  is  con¬ 
tiguous  to  the  next. 

But  (2)  other  things  are  in  place  indirectly, 
through  something  conjoined  with  them,  as 
the  soul  and  the  heaven.  The  latter  is,  in  a  way, 
in  place,  for  all  its  parts  are:  for  on  the  orb 
one  part  contains  another.  That  is  why  the 
upper  part  is  moved  in  a  circle,  while  the  All 
[75]  is  not  anywhere.  For  what  is  somewhere 
is  itself  something,  and  there  must  be  along¬ 
side  it  some  other  thing  wherein  it  is  and 
which  contains  it.  But  alongside  the  All  or  the 
Whole  there  is  nothing  outside  the  All,  and  for 
this  reason  all  things  are  in  the  heaven;  for 
the  heaven,  we  may  say,  is  the  All.  Yet  their 
place  is  not  the  same  as  the  heaven.  It  is  part 
of  it,  the  innermost  part  of  it,  which  is  in 
[20]  contact  with  the  movable  body;  and  for 
this  reason  the  earth  is  in  water,  and  this  in 
the  air,  and  the  air  in  the  aether,  and  the 
aether  in  heaven,  but  we  cannot  go  on  and  say 
that  the  heaven  is  in  anything  else. 

It  is  clear,  too,  from  these  considerations  that 
all  the  problems  which  were  raised  about  place 
will  be  solved  when  it  is  explained  in  this  way: 

(1)  There  is  no  necessity  that  the  place 
should  grow  with  the  body  in  it, 

(2)  Nor  that  a  point  should  have  a  place, 
[25]  (3)  Nor  that  two  bodies  should  be  in  the 
same  place, 

(4)  Nor  that  place  should  be  a  corporeal  in¬ 
terval:  for  what  is  between  the  boundaries  of 
the  place  is  any  body  which  may  chance  to  be 
there,  not  an  interval  in  body. 

Further,  (5)  place  is  also  somewhere,  not  in 
the  sense  of  being  in  a  place,  but  as  the  limit 
is  in  the  limited;  for  not  everything  that  is  is  in 
place,  but  only  movable  body. 

Also  (6)  it  is  reasonable  that  each  kind  of 
[30]  body  should  be  carried  to  its  own  place. 
For  a  body  which  is  next  in  the  series  and  in 
contact  (not  by  compulsion)  is  akin,  and 
bodies  which  are  united  do  not  affect  each 
other,  while  those  which  are  in  contact  inter¬ 
act  on  each  other. 

Nor  (7)  is  it  without  reason  that  each  should 
remain  naturally  in  its  proper  place.  For  this 

fart  has  the  same  relation  to  its  place,  as  a 
35]  separable  part  to  its  whole,  as  when  one 
21 3a  moves  a  part  of  water  or  air:  so,  too,  air 
is  related  to  water,  for  the  one  is  like  matter, 
the  other  form — water  is  the  matter  of  air,  air 
as  it  were  the  actuality  of  water,  for  water  is 
potentially  air,  while  air  is  potentially  water, 
though  in  another  way. 


213b 

These  distinctions  will  be  drawn  more  care- 
[5]  fully  later.1  On  the  present  occasion  it 
was  necessary  to  refer  to  them:  what  has  now 
been  stated  obscurely  will  then  be  made  more 
clear.  If  the  matter  and  the  fulfilment  are  the 
same  thing  (for  water  is  both,  the  one  poten¬ 
tially,  the  other  completely),  water  will  be  re¬ 
lated  to  air  in  a  way  as  part  to  whole.  That  is 
why  these  have  contact :  it  is  organic  union 
when  both  become  actually  one. 

[/o]  This  concludes  my  account  of  place — 
both  of  its  existence  and  of  its  nature. 

6 

The  investigation  of  similar  questions  about 
the  void,  also,  must  be  held  to  belong  to  the 
physicist — namely  whether  it  exists  or  not, 
and  how  it  exists  or  what  it  is — just  as  about 
place.  The  views  taken  of  it  involve  arguments 
both  for  and  against,  in  much  the  same  sort 
[75]  of  way.  For  those  who  hold  that  the  void 
exists  regard  it  as  a  sort  of  place  or  vessel 
which  is  supposed  to  be  ‘full’  when  it  holds 
the  bulk  which  it  is  capable  of  containing, 
‘void’  when  it  is  deprived  of  that — as  if  ‘void’ 
and  ‘full’  and  ‘place’  denoted  the  same  thing, 
though  the  essence  of  the  three  is  different. 

[20]  We  must  begin  the  inquiry  by  putting 
down  the  account  given  by  those  who  say  that 
it  exists,  then  the  account  of  those  who  say 
that  it  does  not  exist,  and  third  the  current 
view  on  these  questions. 

Those  who  try  to  show  that  the  void  does  not 
exist  do  not  disprove  what  people  really  mean 
by  it,  but  only  their  erroneous  way  of  speak¬ 
ing;  this  is  true  of  Anaxagoras  and  of  those 
who  refute  the  existence  of  the  void  in  this 
[25]  way.  They  merely  give  an  ingenious 
demonstration  that  air  is  something — by 
straining  wine-skins  and  showing  the  resist¬ 
ance  of  the  air,  and  by  cutting  it  off  in  clepsy¬ 
dras.  But  people  really  mean  that  there  is  an 
empty  interval  in  which  there  is  no  sensible 
body.  They  hold  that  everything  which  is  is 
[30]  body  and  say  that  what  has  nothing  in  it 
at  all  is  void  (so  what  is  full  of  air  is  void). 
It  is  not  then  the  existence  of  air  that  needs 
to  be  proved,  but  the  non-existence  of  an  inter¬ 
val,  different  from  the  bodies,  either  separable 
or  actual — an  interval  which  divides  the  whole 
body  so  as  to  break  its  continuity,  as  Democ¬ 
ritus  and  Leucippus  hold,  and  many  other 
213b  physicists — or  even  perhaps  as  some¬ 
thing  which  is  outside  the  whole  body,  which 
remains  continuous. 

1  On  Generation  and  Corruption ,  i.  3. 


PHYSICS 


214a 

These  people,  then,  have  not  reached  even 
the  threshold  of  the  problem,  but  rather  those 
who  say  that  the  void  exists. 

Si )  They  argue,  for  one  thing,  that  change 
in  place  (i.e.  locomotion  and  increase) 
would  not  be.  For  it  is  maintained  that  motion 
would  seem  not  to  exist,  if  there  were  no  void, 
since  what  is  full  cannot  contain  anything 
more.  If  it  could,  and  there  were  two  bodies  in 
the  same  place,  it  would  also  be  true  that  any 
number  of  bodies  could  be  together;  for  it  is 
impossible  to  draw  a  line  of  division  beyond 
which  the  statement  would  become  untrue.  If 
this  were  possible,  it  would  follow  also  that 
[/o]  the  smallest  body  would  contain  the 
greatest;  for  ‘many  a  little  makes  a  mickle’: 
thus  if  many  equal  bodies  can  be  together,  so 
also  can  many  unequal  bodies. 

Melissus,  indeed,  infers  from  these  consid¬ 
erations  that  the  All  is  immovable;  for  if  it 
were  moved  there  must,  he  says,  be  void,  but 
void  is  not  among  the  things  that  exist. 

This  argument,  then,  is  one  way  in  which 
they  show  that  there  is  a  void. 

[75]  (2)  They  reason  from  the  fact  that  some 
things  are  observed  to  contract  and  be  com¬ 
pressed,  as  people  say  that  a  cask  will  hold  the 
wine  which  formerly  filled  it,  along  with  the 
skins  into  which  the  wine  has  been  decanted, 
which  implies  that  the  compressed  body  con¬ 
tracts  into  the  voids  present  in  it. 

Again  (3)  increase,  too,  is  thought  to  take 
[20]  place  always  by  means  of  void,  for  nutri¬ 
ment  is  body,  and  it  is  impossible  for  two 
bodies  to  be  together.  A  proof  of  this  they  find 
also  in  what  happens  to  ashes,  which  absorb  as 
much  water  as  the  empty  vessel. 

The  Pythagoreans,  too,  (4)  held  that  void 
exists  and  that  it  enters  the  heaven  itself,  which 
as  it  were  inhales  it,  from  the  infinite  air.  Fur¬ 
ther  it  is  the  void  which  distinguishes  the  na- 
[25]  tures  of  things,  as  if  it  were  like  what 
separates  and  distinguishes  the  terms  of  a 
series.  This  holds  primarily  in  the  numbers,  for 
the  void  distinguishes  their  nature. 

These,  then,  and  so  many,  are  the  main 
grounds  on  which  people  have  argued  for  and 
against  the  existence  of  the  void. 

7 

[30]  As  a  step  towards  settling  which  view  is 
true,  we  must  determine  the  meaning  of  the 
name. 

The  void  is  thought  to  be  place  with  noth¬ 
ing  in  it.  The  reason  for  this  is  that  people 
take  what  exists  to  be  body,  and  hold  that 


293 

while  every  body  is  in  place,  void  is  place  in 
which  there  is  no  body,  so  that  where  there  is 
no  body,  there  must  be  void. 

214a  Every  body,  again,  they  suppose  to  be 
tangible;  and  of  this  nature  is  whatever  has 
weight  or  lightness. 

Hence,  by  a  syllogism,  what  has  nothing 
heavy  or  light  in  it,  is  void. 

This  result,  then,  as  I  have  said,  is  reached 
[5]  by  syllogism.  It  would  be  absurd  to  sup¬ 
pose  that  the  point  is  void;  for  the  void  must 
be  place  which  has  in  it  an  interval  in  tangible 
body. 

But  at  all  events  we  observe  then  that  in  one 
way  the  void  is  described  as  what  is  not  full  of 
body  perceptible  to  touch;  and  what  has  heavi¬ 
ness  and  lightness  is  perceptible  to  touch.  So 
we  would  raise  the  question:  what  would  they 
say  of  an  interval  that  has  colour  or  sound — is 
[/o]  it  void  or  not?  Clearly  they  would  reply 
that  if  it  could  receive  what  is  tangible  it  was 
void,  and  if  not,  not. 

In  another  way  void  is  that  in  which  there 
is  no  ‘this’  or  corporeal  substance.  So  some  say 
that  the  void  is  the  matter  of  the  body  (they 
identify  the  place,  too,  with  this),  and  in  this 
they  speak  incorrectly;  for  the  matter  is  not 
[75]  separable  from  the  things,  but  they  are 
inquiring  about  the  void  as  about  something 
separable. 

Since  we  have  determined  the  nature  of 
place,  and  void  must,  if  it  exists,  be  place  de¬ 
prived  of  body,  and  we  have  stated  both  in 
what  sense  place  exists  and  in  what  sense  it 
does  not,  it  is  plain  that  on  this  showing  void 
does  not  exist,  either  unseparated  or  separated; 
[20]  for  the  void  is  meant  to  be,  not  body  but 
rather  an  interval  in  body.  This  is  why  the 
void  is  thought  to  be  something,  viz.  because 
place  is,  and  for  the  same  reasons.  For  the  fact 
of  motion  in  respect  of  place  comes  to  the  aid 
both  of  those  who  maintain  that  place  is 
something  over  and  above  the  bodies  that 
come  to  occupy  it,  and  of  those  who  maintain 
that  the  void  is  something.  They  state  that  the 
void  is  the  condition  of  movement  in  the 
sense  of  that  in  which  movement  takes  place; 
[25]  and  this  would  be  the  kind  of  thing  that 
some  say  place  is. 

But  there  is  no  necessity  for  there  being  a 
void  if  there  is  movement.  It  is  not  in  the  least 
needed  as  a  condition  of  movement  in  general, 
for  a  reason  which,  incidentally,  escaped 
Melissus;  viz.  that  the  full  can  suffer  qualita¬ 
tive  change. 

But  not  even  movement  in  respect  of  place 


BOOK  IV,  CHAPTERS  5-7 


294  PHYSICS  215* 


involves  a  void;  for  bodies  may  simultaneously 
make  room  for  one  another,  though  there  is  no 
[jo]  interval  separate  and  apart  from  the 
bodies  that  are  in  movement.  And  this  is  plain 
even  in  the  rotaion  of  continuous  things,  as  in 
that  of  liquids. 

And  things  can  also  be  compressed  not  into 
a  void  but  because  they  squeeze  out  what  is 
contained  in  them  (as,  for  instance,  when  wa¬ 
ter  is  compressed  the  air  within  it  is  squeezed 
214b  out);  and  things  can  increase  in  size  not 
only  by  the  entrance  of  something  but  also  by 
qualitative  change;  e.g.  if  water  were  to  be 
transformed  into  air. 

In  general,  both  the  argument  about  increase 
of  size  and  that  about  water  poured  on  to  the 
[5]  ashes  get  in  their  own  way.  For  either  not 
any  and  every  part  of  the  body  is  increased,  or 
bodies  may  be  increased  otherwise  than  by  the 
addition  of  body,  or  there  may  be  two  bodies 
in  the  same  place  (in  which  case  they  are 
claiming  to  solve  a  quite  general  difficulty,  but 
are  not  proving  the  existence  of  void),  or  the 
whole  body  must  be  void,  if  it  is  increased  in 
every  part  and  is  increased  by  means  of  void. 
The  same  argument  applies  to  the  ashes. 

[/o]  It  is  evident,  then,  that  it  is  easy  to  refute 
the  arguments  by  which  they  prove  the  ex¬ 
istence  of  the  void. 

8 

Let  us  explain  again  that  there  is  no  void  ex¬ 
isting  separately,  as  some  maintain.  If  each  of 
the  simple  bodies  has  a  natural  locomotion, 
e.g.  fire  upward  and  earth  downward  and 
[75]  towards  the  middle  of  the  universe,  it  is 
clear  that  it  cannot  be  the  void  that  is  the  con¬ 
dition  of  locomotion.  What,  then,  will  the  void 
be  the  condition  of?  It  is  thought  to  be  the  con¬ 
dition  of  movement  in  respect  of  place,  and  it 
is  not  the  condition  of  this. 

Again,  if  void  is  a  sort  of  place  deprived  of 
body,  when  there  is  a  void  where  will  a  body 
placed  in  it  move  to?  It  certainly  cannot  move 
into  the  whole  of  the  void.  The  same  argu- 
[20]  ment  applies  as  against  those  who  think 
that  place  is  something  separate,  into  which 
things  are  carried;  viz.  how  will  what  is 
placed  in  it  move,  or  rest?  Much  the  same  ar¬ 
gument  will  apply  to  the  void  as  to  the  ‘up’ 
and  ‘down’  in  place,  as  is  natural  enough 
since  those  who  maintain  the  existence  of  the 
void  make  it  a  place. 

And  in  what  way  will  things  be  present 
[25]  either  in  place  or  in  the  void?  For  the 
expected  result  does  not  take  place  when  a 


body  is  placed  as  a  whole  in  a  place  conceived 
of  as  separate  and  permanent;  for  a  part  of  it, 
unless  it  be  placed  apart,  will  not  be  in  a  place 
but  in  the  whole.  Further,  if  separate  place 
does  not  exist,  neither  will  void. 

If  people  say  that  the  void  must  exist,  as 
being  necessary  if  there  is  to  be  movement, 
what  rather  turns  out  to  be  the  case,  if  one 
[30]  studies  the  matter,  is  the  opposite,  that 
not  a  single  thing  can  be  moved  if  there  is  a 
void;  for  as  with  those  who  for  a  like  reason 
say  the  earth  is  at  rest,  so,  too,  in  the  void 
things  must  be  at  rest;  for  there  is  no  place  to 
which  things  can  move  more  or  less  than  to 
another;  since  the  void  in  so  far  as  it  is  void 
admits  no  difference. 

215a  The  second  reason  is  this:  all  movement 
is  either  compulsory  or  according  to  nature, 
and  if  there  is  compulsory  movement  there 
must  also  be  natural  (for  compulsory  move¬ 
ment  is  contrary  to  nature,  and  movement 
contrary  to  nature  is  posterior  to  that  accord¬ 
ing  to  nature,  so  that  if  each  of  the  natural 
bodies  has  not  a  natural  movement,  none  of  the 
[5]  other  movements  can  exist) ;  but  how  can 
there  be  natural  movement  if  there  is  no  dif¬ 
ference  throughout  the  void  or  the  infinite? 
For  in  so  far  as  it  is  infinite,  there  will  be  no  up 
or  down  or  middle,  and  in  so  far  as  it  is  a 
void,  up  differs  no  whit  from  down;  for  as 
[/o]  there  is  no  difference  in  what  is  nothing, 
there  is  none  in  the  void  (for  the  void  seems  to 
be  a  non-existent  and  a  privation  of  being), 
but  natural  locomotion  seems  to  be  differenti¬ 
ated,  so  that  the  things  that  exist  by  nature 
must  be  differentiated.  Either,  then,  nothing 
has  a  natural  locomotion,  or  else  there  is  no 
void. 

Further,  in  point  of  fact  things  that  are 
thrown  move  though  that  which  gave  them 
their  impulse  is  not  touching  them,  either  by 
[75]  reason  of  mutual  replacement,  as  some 
maintain,  or  because  the  air  that  has  been 
pushed  pushes  them  with  a  movement  quicker 
than  the  natural  locomotion  of  the  projectile 
wherewith  it  moves  to  its  proper  place.  But  in 
a  void  none  of  these  things  can  take  place,  nor 
can  anything  be  moved  save  as  that  which  is 
carried  is  moved. 

Further,  no  one  could  say  why  a  thing  once 
[20]  set  in  motion  should  stop  anywhere;  for 
why  should  it  stop  here  rather  than  here ?  So 
that  a  thing  will  either  be  at  rest  or  must  be 
moved  ad  infinitum,  unless  something  more 
powerful  get  in  its  way. 

Further,  things  are  now  thought  to  move 


216* 

into  the  void  because  it  yields;  but  in  a  void 
this  quality  is  present  equally  everywhere,  so 
that  things  should  move  in  all  directions. 

Further,  the  truth  of  what  we  assert  is  plain 
[25]  from  the  following  considerations.  We 
see  the  same  weight  or  body  moving  faster 
than  another  for  two  reasons,  either  because 
there  is  a  difference  in  what  it  moves  through, 
as  between  water,  air,  and  earth,  or  because, 
other  things  being  equal,  the  moving  body  dif¬ 
fers  from  the  other  owing  to  excess  of  weight 
or  of  lightness. 

Now  the  medium  causes  a  difference  be¬ 
cause  it  impedes  the  moving  thing,  most  of  all 
if  it  is  moving  in  the  opposite  direction,  but  in 
[50]  a  secondary  degree  even  if  it  is  at  rest; 
and  especially  a  medium  that  is  not  easily  di¬ 
vided,  i.e.  a  medium  that  is  somewhat  dense. 
215b  A,  then,  will  move  through  B  in  time  T, 
and  through  A,  which  is  thinner,  in  time  E 
(if  the  length  of  B  is  equal  to  A),  in  propor¬ 
tion  to  the  density  of  the  hindering  body.  For 
let  B  be  water  and  A  air;  then  by  so  much  as 
[5]  air  is  thinner  and  more  incorporeal  than 
water,  A  will  move  through  A  faster  than 
through  B.  Let  the  speed  have  the  same  ratio 
to  the  speed,  then,  that  air  has  to  water.  Then 
if  air  is  twice  as  thin,  the  body  will  traverse  B 
in  twice  the  time  that  it  does  A,  and  the  time 
T  will  be  twice  the  time  E.  And  always,  by  so 
[jo]  much  as  the  medium  is  more  incorporeal 
and  less  resistant  and  more  easily  divided,  the 
faster  will  be  the  movement. 

Now  there  is  no  ratio  in  which  the  void  is 
exceeded  by  body,  as  there  is  no  ratio  of  0  to  a 
number.  For  if  4  exceeds  3  by  1,  and  2  by  more 
than  1,  and  1  by  still  more  than  it  exceeds  2, 
[75]  still  there  is  no  ratio  by  which  it  exceeds 
o;  for  that  which  exceeds  must  be  divisible  into 
the  excess  +  that  which  is  exceeded,  so  that  4 
will  be  what  it  exceeds  o  by  +  0.  For  this 
reason,  too,  a  line  does  not  exceed  a  point — 
unless  it  is  composed  of  points!  Similarly  the 
[20]  void  can  bear  no  ratio  to  the  full,  and 
therefore  neither  can  movement  through  the 
one  to  movement  through  the  other,  but  if  a 
thing  moves  through  the  thickest  medium  such 
and  such  a  distance  in  such  and  such  a  time,  it 
moves  through  the  void  with  a  speed  beyond 
any  ratio.  For  let  Z  be  void,  equal  in  magni¬ 
tude  to  B  and  to  A.  Then  if  A  is  to  traverse 
and  move  through  it  in  a  certain  time,  H,  a 
[25]  time  less  than  E,  however,  the  void  will 
bear  this  ratio  to  the  full.  But  in  a  time  equal 
to  H,  A  will  traverse  the  part  0  of  A.  And  it 
will  surely  also  traverse  in  that  time  any  sub- 


295 

stance  Z  which  exceeds  air  in  thickness  in  the 
[30]  ratio  which  the  time  E  bears  to  the  time 
H.  For  if  the  body  Z  be  as  much  thinner  than 
A  as  E  exceeds  H,  A,  if  it  moves  through  Z, 
will  traverse  it  in  a  time  inverse  to  the  speed  of 
216*  the  movement,  i.e.  in  a  time  equal  to  H. 
If,  then,  there  is  no  body  in  Z,  A  will  traverse 
Z  still  more  quickly.  But  we  supposed  that  its 
traverse  of  Z  when  Z  was  void  occupied  the 
time  H.  So  that  it  will  traverse  Z  in  an  equal 
time  whether  Z  be  full  or  void.  But  this  is  im¬ 
possible.  It  is  plain,  then,  that  if  there  is  a  time 
in  which  it  will  move  through  any  part  of  the 
void,  this  impossible  result  will  follow:  it  will 
[5]  be  found  to  traverse  a  certain  distance, 
whether  this  be  full  or  void,  in  an  equal  time; 
for  there  will  be  some  body  which  is  in  the 
same  ratio  to  the  other  body  as  the  time  is  to 
the  time. 

To  sum  the  matter  up,  the  cause  of  this  re¬ 
sult  is  obvious,  viz.  that  between  any  two 
movements  there  is  a  ratio  (for  they  occupy 
[/o]  time,  and  there  is  a  ratio  between  any 
two  times,  so  long  as  both  are  finite),  but 
there  is  no  ratio  of  void  to  full. 

These  are  the  consequences  that  result  from 
a  difference  in  the  media;  the  following  de¬ 
pend  upon  an  excess  of  one  moving  body  over 
another.  We  see  that  bodies  which  have  a 
greater  impulse  either  of  weight  or  of  light- 
[75]  ness,  if  they  are  alike  in  other  respects, 
move  faster  over  an  equal  space,  and  in  the 
ratio  which  their  magnitudes  bear  to  each 
other.  Therefore  they  will  also  move  through 
the  void  with  this  ratio  of  speed.  But  that  is 
impossible;  for  why  should  one  move  faster? 
(In  moving  through  plena  it  must  be  so;  for 
the  greater  divides  them  faster  by  its  force. 
For  a  moving  thing  cleaves  the  medium  either 
by  its  shape,  or  by  the  impulse  which  the  body 
[20]  that  is  carried  along  or  is  projected  pos¬ 
sesses.)  Therefore  all  will  possess  equal  veloc¬ 
ity.  But  this  is  impossible. 

It  is  evident  from  what  has  been  said,  then, 
that,  if  there  is  a  void,  a  result  follows  which 
is  the  very  opposite  of  the  reason  for  which 
those  who  believe  in  a  void  set  it  up.  They 
think  that  if  movement  in  respect  of  place  is  to 
exist,  the  void  cannot  exist,  separated  all  by 
itself;  but  this  is  the  same  as  to  say  that  place 
[25]  is  a  separate  cavity;  and  this  has  already 
been  stated  to  be  impossible. 

But  even  if  we  consider  it  on  its  own  merits 
the  so-called  vacuum  will  be  found  to  be  really 
vacuous.  For  as,  if  one  puts  a  cube  in  water, 
an  amount  of  water  equal  to  the  cube  will  be 


BOOK  IV,  CHAPTERS  7-8 


2 96  PHYSICS  217a 


displaced;  so  too  in  air;  but  the  effect  is  imper¬ 
ceptible  to  sense.  And  indeed  always,  in  the 
[50]  case  of  any  body  that  can  be  displaced,  it 
must,  if  it  is  not  compressed,  be  displaced  in 
the  direction  in  which  it  is  its  nature  to  be 
displaced — always  either  down,  if  its  locomo¬ 
tion  is  downwards  as  in  the  case  of  earth,  or  up, 
if  it  is  fire,  or  in  both  directions — whatever  be 
the  nature  of  the  inserted  body.  Now  in  the 
void  this  is  impossible;  for  it  is  not  body;  the 
void  must  have  penetrated  the  cube  to  a  dis- 
[^5]  tance  equal  to  that  which  this  portion  of 
void  formerly  occupied  in  the  void,  just  as  if 
216b  the  water  or  air  had  not  been  displaced 
by  the  wooden  cube,  but  had  penetrated  right 
through  it. 

But  the  cube  also  has  a  magnitude  equal  to 
that  occupied  by  the  void;  a  magnitude  which, 
if  it  is  also  hot  or  cold,  or  heavy  or  light,  is 
[5]  none  the  less  different  in  essence  from  all 
its  attributes,  even  if  it  is  not  separable  from 
them;  I  mean  the  volume  of  the  wooden  cube. 
So  that  even  if  it  were  separated  from  every¬ 
thing  else  and  were  neither  heavy  nor  light,  it 
will  occupy  an  equal  amount  of  void,  and  fill 
the  same  place,  as  the  part  of  place  or  of  the 
void  equal  to  itself.  How  then  will  the  body  of 
[/o]  the  cube  differ  from  the  void  or  place  that 
is  equal  to  it?  And  if  there  can  be  two  such 
things,  why  cannot  there  be  any  number  coin¬ 
ciding? 

This,  then,  is  one  absurd  and  impossible  im¬ 
plication  of  the  theory.  It  is  also  evident  that 
the  cube  will  have  this  same  volume  even  if  it 
is  displaced,  which  is  an  attribute  possessed  by 
all  other  bodies  also.  Therefore  if  this  differs 
in  no  respect  from  its  place,  why  need  we  as¬ 
sume  a  place  for  bodies  over  and  above  the 
volume  of  each,  if  their  volume  be  conceived 
[75]  of  as  free  from  attributes?  It  contributes 
nothing  to  the  situation  if  there  is  an  equal 
interval  attached  to  it  as  well.  [Further,  it 
ought  to  be  clear  by  the  study  of  moving 
things  what  sort  of  thing  void  is.  But  in  fact  it 
is  found  nowhere  in  the  world.  For  air  is  some¬ 
thing,  though  it  does  not  seem  to  be  so — nor, 
for  that  matter,  would  water,  if  fishes  were 
made  of  iron;  for  the  discrimination  of  the 
tangible  is  by  touch.] 

[20]  It  is  clear,  then,  from  these  considerations 
that  there  is  no  separate  void. 

9 

There  are  some  who  think  that  the  existence 
of  rarity  and  density  shows  that  there  is  a 
void.  If  rarity  and  density  do  not  exist,  they 


say,  neither  can  things  contract  and  be  com- 
ressed.  But  if  this  were  not  to  take  place, 
25]  either  there  would  be  no  movement  at 
all,  or  the  universe  would  bulge,  as  Xuthus 
said,  or  air  and  water  must  always  change  into 
equal  amounts  (e.g.  if  air  has  been  made  out  of 
a  cupful  of  water,  at  the  same  time  out  of  an 
equal  amount  of  air  a  cupful  of  water  must 
have  been  made),  or  void  must  necessarily 
exist;  for  compression  and  expansion  cannot 
take  place  otherwise. 

[jo]  Now,  if  they  mean  by  the  rare  that  which 
has  many  voids  existing  separately,  it  is  plain 
that  if  void  cannot  exist  separate  any  more 
than  a  place  can  exist  with  an  extension  all  to 
itself,  neither  can  the  rare  exist  in  this  sense. 
But  if  they  mean  that  there  is  void,  not  sep¬ 
arately  existent,  but  still  present  in  the  rare, 
this  is  less  impossible,  yet,  first,  the  void  turns 
out  not  to  be  a  condition  of  all  movement,  but 
[55]  only  of  movement  upwards  (for  the  rare 
21 7a  is  light,  which  is  the  reason  why  they 
say  fire  is  rare) ;  second,  the  void  turns  out  to  be 
a  condition  of  movement  not  as  that  in  which 
it  takes  place,  but  in  that  the  void  carries 
things  up  as  skins  by  being  carried  up  them¬ 
selves  carry  up  what  is  continuous  with  them. 
Yet  how  can  void  have  a  local  movement  or  a 
place?  For  thus  that  into  which  void  moves  is 
till  then  void  of  a  void. 

[5]  Again,  how  will  they  explain,  in  the  case 
of  what  is  heavy,  its  movement  downwards? 
And  it  is  plain  that  if  the  rarer  and  more  void 
a  thing  is  the  quicker  it  will  move  upwards,  if 
it  were  completely  void  it  would  move  with  a 
maximum  speed!  But  perhaps  even  this  is  im¬ 
possible,  that  it  should  move  at  all;  the  same 
reason  which  showed  that  in  the  void  all  things 
are  incapable  of  moving  shows  that  the  void 
cannot  move,  viz.  the  fact  that  the  speeds  are 
incomparable. 

[/o]  Since  we  deny  that  a  void  exists,  but  for 
the  rest  the  problem  has  been  truly  stated,  that 
either  there  will  be  no  movement,  if  there  is 
not  to  be  condensation  and  rarefaction,  or  the 
universe  will  bulge,  or  a  transformation  of  wa¬ 
ter  into  air  will  always  be  balanced  by  an  equal 
transformation  of  air  into  water  (for  it  is  clear 
that  the  air  produced  from  water  is  bulkier 
[75]  than  the  water):  it  is  necessary  therefore, 
if  compression  does  not  exist,  either  that  the 
next  portion  will  be  pushed  outwards  and 
make  the  outermost  part  bulge,  or  that  some¬ 
where  else  there  must  be  an  equal  amount  of 
water  produced  out  of  air,  so  that  the  entire 
bulk  of  the  whole  may  be  equal,  or  that  noth- 


218a  BOOK  IV,  CHAPTERS  8-10  297 


ing  moves.  For  when  anything  is  displaced  this 
will  always  happen,  unless  it  comes  round  in  a 
circle;  but  locomotion  is  not  always  circular, 
but  sometimes  in  a  straight  line. 

[20]  These  then  are  the  reasons  for  which  they 
might  say  that  there  is  a  void;  our  statement  is 
based  on  the  assumption  that  there  is  a  single 
matter  for  contraries,  hot  and  cold  and  the 
other  natural  contrarieties,  and  that  what  exists 
actually  is  produced  from  a  potential  existent, 
and  that  matter  is  not  separable  from  the  con- 
[25]  traries  but  its  being  is  different,  and  that 
a  single  matter  may  serve  for  colour  and  heat 
and  cold. 

The  same  matter  also  serves  for  both  a  large 
and  a  small  body.  This  is  evident;  for  when 
air  is  produced  from  water,  the  same  matter 
has  become  something  different,  not  by  ac¬ 
quiring  an  addition  to  it,  but  has  become  ac¬ 
tually  what  it  was  potentially,  and,  again,  wa¬ 
ter  is  produced  from  air  in  the  same  way,  the 
[jo]  change  being  sometimes  from  smallness 
to  greatness,  and  sometimes  from  greatness  to 
smallness.  Similarly,  therefore,  if  air  which  is 
large  in  extent  comes  to  have  a  smaller  volume, 
or  becomes  greater  from  being  smaller,  it  is 
the  matter  which  is  potentially  both  that  comes 
to  be  each  of  the  two. 

For  as  the  same  matter  becomes  hot  from 
being  cold,  and  cold  from  being  hot,  because 
it  was  potentially  both,  so  too  from  hot  it  can 
21 7b  become  more  hot,  though  nothing  in  the 
matter  has  become  hot  that  was  not  hot  when 
the  thing  was  less  hot;  just  as,  if  the  arc  or 
curve  of  a  greater  circle  becomes  that  of  a 
smaller,  whether  it  remains  the  same  or  be¬ 
comes  a  different  curve,  convexity  has  not  come 
[5]  to  exist  in  anything  that  was  not  convex 
but  straight  (for  differences  of  degree  do  not 
depend  on  an  intermission  of  the  quality);  nor 
can  we  get  any  portion  of  a  flame,  in  which 
both  heat  and  whiteness  are  not  present.  So 
too,  then,  is  the  earlier  heat  related  to  the  later. 
So  that  the  greatness  and  smallness,  also,  of  the 
sensible  volume  are  extended,  not  by  the  mat¬ 
ter’s  acquiring  anything  new,  but  because  the 
matter  is  potentially  matter  for  both  states;  so 
[/o]  that  the  same  thing  is  dense  and  rare,  and 
the  two  qualities  have  one  matter. 

The  dense  is  heavy,  and  the  rare  is  light. 
[Again,  as  the  arc  of  a  circle  when  contracted 
into  a  smaller  sp&ce  does  not  acquire  a  new 
part  which  is  convex,  but  what  was  there  has 
been  contracted;  and  as  any  part  of  fire  that 
[75]  one  takes  will  be  hot;  so,  too,  it  is  all  a 
question  of  contraction  and  expansion  of  the 


same  matter.]  There  are  two  types  in  each 
case,  both  in  the  dense  and  in  the  rare;  for 
both  the  heavy  and  the  hard  are  thought  to  be 
dense,  and  contrariwise  both  the  light  and  the 
soft  are  rare;  and  weight  and  hardness  fail  to 
coincide  in  the  case  of  lead  and  iron. 

[20]  From  what  has  been  said  it  is  evident, 
then,  that  void  does  not  exist  either  separate 
(either  absolutely  separate  or  as  a  separate  ele¬ 
ment  in  the  rare)  or  potentially,  unless  one  is 
willing  to  call  the  condition  of  movement  void, 
whatever  it  may  be.  At  that  rate  the  matter  of 
the  heavy  and  the  light,  qua  matter  of  them, 
would  be  the  void;  for  the  dense  and  the  rare 
are  productive  of  locomotion  in  virtue  of  this 
[25]  contrariety,  and  in  virtue  of  their  hard¬ 
ness  and  softness  productive  of  passivity  and 
impassivity,  i.e.  not  of  locomotion  but  rather  of 
qualitative  change. 

So  much,  then,  for  the  discussion  of  the  void, 
and  of  the  sense  in  which  it  exists  and  the  sense 
in  which  it  does  not  exist. 

10 

Next  for  discussion  after  the  subjects  men- 
[30]  tioned  is  Time.  The  best  plan  will  be  to 
begin  by  working  out  the  difficulties  connected 
with  it,  making  use  of  the  current  arguments. 
First,  does  it  belong  to  the  class  of  things  that 
exist  or  to  that  of  things  that  do  not  exist? 
Then  secondly,  what  is  its  nature?  To  start, 
then:  the  following  considerations  would 
make  one  suspect  that  it  either  does  not  exist 
at  all  or  barely,  and  in  an  obscure  way.  One 
part  of  it  has  been  and  is  not,  while  the  other 
218a  is  going  to  be  and  is  not  yet.  Yet  time — 
both  infinite  time  and  any  time  you  like  to  take 
— is  made  up  of  these.  One  would  naturally 
suppose  that  what  is  made  up  of  things  which 
do  not  exist  could  have  no  share  in  reality. 

Further,  if  a  divisible  thing  is  to  exist,  it  is 
necessary  that,  when  it  exists,  all  or  some  of  its 
[5]  parts  must  exist.  But  of  time  some  parts 
have  been,  while  others  have  to  be,  and  no  part 
of  it  is,  though  it  is  divisible.  For  what  is 
‘now’  is  not  a  part:  a  part  is  a  measure  of  the 
whole,  which  must  be  made  up  of  parts.  Time, 
on  the  other  hand,  is  not  held  to  be  made  up 
of  ‘nows’. 

Again,  the  ‘now’  which  seems  to  bound  the 
ast  and  the  future — does  it  always  remain  one 
/o]  and  the  same  or  is  it  always  other  and 
other?  It  is  hard  to  say. 

(1)  If  it  is  always  different  and  different, 
and  if  none  of  the  parts  in  time  which  are 
other  and  other  are  simultaneous  (unless  the 


298  PHYSICS  219a 


one  contains  and  the  other  is  contained,  as  the 
shorter  time  is  by  the  longer),  and  if  the  ‘now’ 
which  is  not,  but  formerly  was,  must  have 
[75]  ceased-to-be  at  some  time,  the  ' nows’  too 
cannot  be  simultaneous  with  one  another,  but 
the  prior  ‘now’  must  always  have  ceased-to-be. 
But  the  prior  ‘now’  cannot  have  ceased-to-be 
in  itself  (since  it  then  existed);  yet  it  cannot 
have  ceased-to-be  in  another  ‘now’.  For  we 
may  lay  it  down  that  one  ‘now’  cannot  be  next 
to  another,  any  more  than  point  to  point.  If 
then  it  did  not  cease-to-be  in  the  next  ‘now’ 
[20]  but  in  another,  it  would  exist  simultane¬ 
ously  with  the  innumerable  ‘nows’  between 
the  two — which  is  impossible. 

Yes,  but  (2)  neither  is  it  possible  for  the 
‘now’  to  remain  always  the  same.  No  determi¬ 
nate  divisible  thing  has  a  single  termination, 
whether  it  is  continuously  extended  in  one  or 
in  more  than  one  dimension:  but  the  ‘now’  is 
a  termination,  and  it  is  possible  to  cut  off  a 
[25]  determinate  time.  Further,  if  coincidence 
in  time  (i.e.  being  neither  prior  nor  posterior) 
means  to  be  ‘in  one  and  the  same  “now”  ’, 
then,  if  both  what  is  before  and  what  is  after 
are  in  this  same  ‘now’,  things  which  happened 
ten  thousand  years  ago  would  be  simultaneous 
with  what  has  happened  to-day,  and  nothing 
would  be  before  or  after  anything  else. 

[jo]  This  may  serve  as  a  statement  of  the  diffi¬ 
culties  about  the  attributes  of  time. 

As  to  what  time  is  or  what  is  its  nature,  the 
traditional  accounts  give  us  as  little  light  as 
the  preliminary  problems  which  we  have 
worked  through. 

Some  assert  that  it  is  (1)  the  movement  of 
218b  the  whole,  others  that  it  is  (2)  the  sphere 
itself. 

(1)  Yet  part,  too,  of  the  revolution  is  a  time, 
but  it  certainly  is  not  a  revolution:  for  what  is 
taken  is  part  of  a  revolution,  not  a  revolution. 
Besides,  if  there  were  more  heavens  than  one, 
the  movement  of  any  of  them  equally  would  be 
time,  so  that  there  would  be  many  times  at  the 
same  time. 

[5]  (2)  Those  who  said  that  time  is  the  sphere 
of  the  whole  thought  so,  no  doubt,  on  the 
ground  that  all  things  are  in  time  and  all 
things  are  in  the  sphere  of  the  whole.  The 
view  is  too  naive  for  it  to  be  worth  while  to 
consider  the  impossibilities  implied  in  it. 

But  as  time  is  most  usually  supposed  to  be 
(3)  motion  and  a  kind  of  change,  we  must  con¬ 
sider  this  view. 

[/o]  Now  (a)  the  change  or  movement  of 
each  thing  is  only  in  the  thing  which  changes 


or  where  the  thing  itself  which  moves  or 
changes  may  chance  to  be.  But  time  is  present 
equally  everywhere  and  with  all  things. 

Again,  ( b )  change  is  always  faster  or  slower, 
[75]  whereas  time  is  not:  for  ‘fast’  and  ‘slow’ 
are  defined  by  time — ‘fast’  is  what  moves  much 
in  a  short  time,  ‘slow’  what  moves  little  in  a 
long  time;  but  time  is  not  defined  by  time,  by 
being  either  a  certain  amount  or  a  certain  kind 
of  it. 

Clearly  then  it  is  not  movement.  (We  need 
[20]  not  distinguish  at  present  between  ‘move¬ 
ment’  and  ‘change’.) 

11 

But  neither  does  time  exist  without  change; 
for  when  the  state  of  our  own  minds  does  not 
change  at  all,  or  we  have  not  noticed  its 
changing,  we  do  not  realize  that  time  has 
elapsed,  any  more  than  those  who  are  fabled  to 
[25]  sleep  among  the  heroes  in  Sardinia  do 
when  they  are  awakened;  for  they  connect  the 
earlier  ‘now’  with  the  later  and  make  them 
one,  cutting  out  the  interval  because  of  their 
failure  to  notice  it.  So,  just  as,  if  the  ‘now’ 
were  not  different  but  one  and  the  same, 
there  would  not  have  been  time,  so  too  when 
its  difference  escapes  our  notice  the  interval  does 
not  seem  to  be  time.  If,  then,  the  non-realiza- 
[30]  tion  of  the  existence  of  time  happens  to  us 
when  we  do  not  distinguish  any  change,  but 
the  soul  seems  to  stay  in  one  indivisible  state, 
and  when  we  perceive  and  distinguish  we  say 
time  has  elapsed,  evidently  time  is  not  inde¬ 
pendent  of  movement  and  change.  It  is  evi- 
219a  dent,  then,  that  time  is  neither  movement 
nor  independent  of  movement. 

We  must  take  this  as  our  starting-point  and 
try  to  discover — since  we  wish  to  know  what 
time  is — what  exactly  it  has  to  do  with  move¬ 
ment. 

Now  we  perceive  movement  and  time  to¬ 
gether:  for  even  when  it  is  dark  and  we  are  not 
[5]  being  affected  through  the  body,  if  any 
movement  takes  place  in  the  mind  we  at  once 
suppose  that  some  time  also  has  elapsed;  and 
not  only  that  but  also,  when  some  time  is 
thought  to  have  passed,  some  movement  also 
along  with  it  seems  to  have  taken  place.  Hence 
time  is  either  movement  or  something  that  be¬ 
longs  to  movement.  Since  then  it  is  not  move¬ 
ment,  it  must  be  the  other. 

[70]  But  what  is  moved  is  moved  from  some¬ 
thing  to  something,  and  all  magnitude  is  con¬ 
tinuous.  Therefore  the  movement  goes  with 
the  magnitude.  Because  the  magnitude  is  con- 


220*  BOOK  IV,  CHAPTERS  10-11  299 


tinuous,  the  movement  too  must  he  continu¬ 
ous,  and  if  the  movement,  then  the  time;  for 
the  time  that  has  passed  is  always  thought  to  be 
in  proportion  to  the  movement. 

The  distinction  of  ‘before’  and  ‘after’  holds 
rimarily,  then,  in  place;  and  there  in  virtue 
75]  of  relative  position.  Since  then  ‘before’ 
and  ‘after’  hold  in  magnitude,  they  must  hold 
also  in  movement,  these  corresponding  to 
those.  But  also  in  time  the  distinction  of  ‘be¬ 
fore’  and  ‘after’  must  hold,  for  time  and  move¬ 
ment  always  correspond  with  each  other.  The 
‘before’  and  ‘after’  in  motion  is  identical  in  sub- 
[20]  stratum  with  motion  yet  differs  from  it 
in  definition,  and  is  not  identical  with  motion. 

But  we  apprehend  time  only  when  we  have 
marked  motion,  marking  it  by  ‘before’  and  ‘aft¬ 
er’;  and  it  is  only  when  we  have  perceived 
‘before’  and  ‘after’  in  motion  that  we  say  that 
[25]  time  has  elapsed.  Now  we  mark  them  by 
judging  that  A  and  B  are  different,  and  that 
some  third  thing  is  intermediate  to  them. 
When  we  think  of  the  extremes  as  different 
from  the  middle  and  the  mind  pronounces 
that  the  ‘nows’  are  two,  one  before  and  one  aft¬ 
er,  it  is  then  that  we  say  that  there  is  time, 
and  this  that  we  say  is  time.  For  what  is 
bounded  by  the  ‘now’  is  thought  to  be  time — 
we  may  assume  this. 

[50]  When,  therefore,  we  perceive  the  ‘now’  as 
one,  and  neither  as  before  and  after  in  a  motion 
nor  as  an  identity  but  in  relation  to  a  ‘before’ 
and  an  ‘after’,  no  time  is  thought  to  have 
elapsed,  because  there  has  been  no  motion 
either.  On  the  other  hand,  when  we  do  per- 
219b  ceive  a  ‘before’  and  an  ‘after’,  then  we  say 
that  there  is  time.  For  time  is  just  this — num¬ 
ber  of  motion  in  respect  of  ‘before’  and  ‘after’. 

Hence  time  is  not  movement,  but  only  move¬ 
ment  in  so  far  as  it  admits  of  enumeration.  A 
proof  of  this:  we  discriminate  the  more  or  the 
less  by  number,  but  more  or  less  movement  by 
time.  Time  then  is  a  kind  of  number.  (Num- 
[5]  ber,  we  must  note,  is  used  in  two  senses — 
both  of  what  is  counted  or  the  countable  and 
also  of  that  with  which  we  count.  Time  obvi¬ 
ously  is  what  is  counted,  not  that  with  which 
we  count:  there  are  different  kinds  of  thing.) 

Just  as  motion  is  a  perpetual  succession,  so 
[10]  also  is  time.  But  every  simultaneous  time 
is  self-identical;  for  the  ‘now’  as  a  subject  is  an 
identity,  but  it  accepts  different  attributes.  The 
‘now’  measures  time,  in  so  far  as  time  involves 
the  ‘before  and  after’. 

The  ‘now’  in  one  sense  is  the  same,  in  an¬ 
other  it  is  not  the  same.  In  so  far  as  it  is  in 


succession,  it  is  different  (which  is  just  what  its 
being  now  was  supposed  to  mean),  but  its 
[75]  substratum  is  an  identity:  for  motion,  as 
was  said,1  goes  with  magnitude,  and  time,  as 
we  maintain,  with  motion.  Similarly,  then, 
there  corresponds  to  the  point  the  body  which 
is  carried  along,  and  by  which  we  are  aware  of 
the  motion  and  of  the  ‘before  and  after’  in¬ 
volved  in  it.  This  is  an  identical  substratum 
(whether  a  point  or  a  stone  or  something  else 
of  the  kind),  but  it  has  different  attributes — 
[20]  as  the  sophists  assume  that  Coriscus’  be¬ 
ing  in  the  Lyceum  is  a  different  thing  from 
Coriscus’  being  in  the  market-place.  And  the 
body  which  is  carried  along  is  different,  in  so 
far  as  it  is  at  one  time  here  and  at  another 
there.  But  the  ‘now’  corresponds  to  the  body 
that  is  carried  along,  as  time  corresponds  to  the 
motion.  For  it  is  by  means  of  the  body  that  is 
carried  along  that  we  become  aware  of  the  ‘be- 
[25]  fore  and  after’  in  the  motion,  and  if  we  re¬ 
gard  these  as  countable  we  get  the  ‘now’.  Hence 
in  these  also  the  ‘now’  as  substratum  remains 
the  same  (for  it  is  what  is  before  and  after  in 
movement),  but  what  is  predicated  of  it  is 
different;  for  it  is  in  so  far  as  the  ‘before  and 
after’  is  numerable  that  we  get  the  ‘now’.  This 
is  what  is  most  knowable:  for,  similarly,  mo¬ 
tion  is  known  because  of  that  which  is  moved, 
locomotion  because  of  that  which  is  carried, 
[jo]  For  what  is  carried  is  a  real  thing,  the 
movement  is  not.  Thus  what  is  called  ‘now’  in 
one  sense  is  always  the  same;  in  another  it  is 
not  the  same:  for  this  is  true  also  of  what  is 
carried. 

Clearly,  too,  if  there  were  no  time,  there 
220a  would  be  no  ‘now’,  and  vice  versa.  Just 
as  the  moving  body  and  its  locomotion  involve 
each  other  mutually,  so  too  do  the  number  of 
the  moving  body  and  the  number  of  its  loco¬ 
motion.  For  the  number  of  the  locomotion  is 
time,  while  the  ‘now’  corresponds  to  the  mov¬ 
ing  body,  and  is  like  the  unit  of  number. 

Time,  then,  also  is  both  made  continuous  by 
[5]  the  ‘now’  and  divided  at  it.  For  here  too 
there  is  a  correspondence  with  the  locomotion 
and  the  moving  body.  For  the  motion  or  loco¬ 
motion  is  made  one  by  the  thing  which  is 
moved,  because  it  is  one — not  because  it  is  one 
in  its  own  nature  (for  there  might  be  pauses  in 
the  movement  of  such  a  thing) — but  because  it 
is  one  in  definition:  for  this  determines  the 
movement  as  ‘before’  and  ‘after’.  Here,  too, 
[70]  there  is  a  correspondence  with  the  point; 
for  the  point  also  both  connects  and  terminates 


300  PHYSICS  221° 


the  length — it  is  the  beginning  of  one  and  the 
end  of  another.  But  when  you  take  it  in  this 
way,  using  the  one  point  as  two,  a  pause  is 
necessary,  if  the  same  point  is  to  be  the  begin¬ 
ning  and  the  end.  The  ‘now*  on  the  other 
hand,  since  the  body  carried  is  moving,  is  al¬ 
ways  different. 

Hence  time  is  not  number  in  the  sense  in 
which  there  is  ‘number’  of  the  same  point  be¬ 
cause  it  is  beginning  and  end,  but  rather  as 
[75]  the  extremities  of  a  line  form  a  number, 
and  not  as  the  parts  of  the  line  do  so,  both  for 
the  reason  given  (for  we  can  use  the  middle 
point  as  two,  so  that  on  that  analogy  time 
might  stand  still),  and  further  because  obvi¬ 
ously  the  ‘now’  is  no  part  of  time  nor  the  sec¬ 
tion  any  part  of  the  movement,  any  more  than 
the  points  are  parts  of  the  line — for  it  is  two 
[20]  lines  that  are  parts  of  one  line. 

In  so  far  then  as  the  ‘now’  is  a  boundary,  it  is 
not  time,  but  an  attribute  of  it;  in  so  far  as  it 
numbers,  it  is  number;  for  boundaries  belong 
only  to  that  which  they  bound,  but  number 
(e.g.  ten)  is  the  number  of  these  horses,  and 
belongs  also  elsewhere. 

It  is  clear,  then,  that  time  is  ‘number  of 
[25]  movement  in  respect  of  the  before  and 
after’,  and  is  continuous  since  it  is  an  attribute 
of  what  is  continuous. 

12 

The  smallest  number,  in  the  strict  sense  of  the 
word  ‘number’,  is  two.  But  of  number  as  con¬ 
crete,  sometimes  there  is  a  minimum,  some¬ 
times  not:  e.g.  of  a  ‘line’,  the  smallest  in  respect 
of  multiplicity  is  two  (or,  if  you  like,  one), 
[30]  but  in  respect  of  size  there  is  no  mini¬ 
mum;  for  every  line  is  divided  ad  infinitum. 
Hence  it  is  so  with  time.  In  respect  of  number 
the  minimum  is  one  (or  two);  in  point  of 
extent  there  is  no  minimum. 

It  is  clear,  too,  that  time  is  not  described  as 
220b  fast  or  slow,  but  as  many  or  few  and  as 
long  or  short.  For  as  continuous  it  is  long  or 
short  and  as  a  number  many  or  few,  but  it  is 
not  fast  or  slow — any  more  than  any  number 
with  which  we  number  is  fast  or  slow. 

[5]  Further,  there  is  the  same  time  everywhere 
at  once,  but  not  the  same  time  before  and  aft¬ 
er,  for  while  the  present  change  is  one,  the 
change  which  has  happened  and  that  which 
will  happen  are  different.  Time  is  not  number 
with  which  we  count,  but  the  number  of 
things  which  are  counted,  and  this  according 
as  it  occurs  before  or  after  is  always  different, 
[/o]  for  the  ‘nows’  are  different.  And  the  num¬ 


ber  of  a  hundred  horses  and  a  hundred  men  is 
the  same,  but  the  things  numbered  are  differ¬ 
ent — the  horses  from  the  men.  Further,  as  a 
movement  can  be  one  and  the  same  again  and 
again,  so  too  can  time,  e.g.  a  year  or  a  spring  or 
an  autumn. 

[75]  Not  only  do  we  measure  the  movement 
by  the  time,  but  also  the  time  by  the  move¬ 
ment,  because  they  define  each  other.  The 
time  marks  the  movement,  since  it  is  its  num¬ 
ber,  and  the  movement  the  time.  We  describe 
the  time  as  much  or  little,  measuring  it  by  the 
movement,  just  as  we  know  the  number  by 
what  is  numbered,  e.g.  the  number  of  the 
[20]  horses  by  one  horse  as  the  unit.  For  we 
know  how  many  horses  there  are  by  the  use  of 
the  number;  and  again  by  using  the  one  horse 
as  unit  we  know  the  number  of  the  horses  it¬ 
self.  So  it  is  with  the  time  and  the  movement; 
for  we  measure  the  movement  by  the  time  and 
vice  versa.  It  is  natural  that  this  should  happen; 
[25]  for  the  movement  goes  with  the  distance 
and  the  time  with  the  movement,  because  they 
are  quanta  and  continuous  and  divisible.  The 
movement  has  these  attributes  because  the  dis¬ 
tance  is  of  this  nature,  and  the  time  has  them 
because  of  the  movement.  And  we  measure 
both  the  distance  by  the  movement  and  the 
movement  by  the  distance;  for  we  say  that  the 
road  is  long,  if  the  journey  is  long,  and  that 
[30]  this  is  long,  if  the  road  is  long — the  time, 
too,  if  the  movement,  and  the  movement,  if 
the  time. 

221a  Time  is  a  measure  of  motion  and  of  be¬ 
ing  moved,  and  it  measures  the  motion  by  de¬ 
termining  a  motion  which  will  measure  exactly 
the  whole  motion,  as  the  cubit  does  the  length 
by  determining  an  amount  which  will  measure 
out  the  whole.  Further  ‘to  be  in  time’  means, 
for  movement,  that  both  it  and  its  essence  are 
measured  by  time  (for  simultaneously  it  meas- 
[5]  ures  both  the  movement  and  its  essence, 
and  this  is  what  being  in  time  means  for  it, 
that  its  essence  should  be  measured). 

Clearly  then  ‘to  be  in  time’  has  the  same 
meaning  for  other  things  also,  namely,  that 
their  being  should  be  measured  by  time.  ‘To 
be  in  time’  is  one  of  two  things:  (1)  to  exist 
[70]  when  time  exists,  (2)  as  we  say  of  some 
things  that  they  are  ‘in  number’.  The  latter 
means  either  what  is  a  part  or  mode  of  num¬ 
ber — in  general,  something  which  belongs  to 
number — or  that  things  have  a  number. 

Now,  since  time  is  number,  the  ‘now’  and 
[75]  the  ‘before*  and  the  like  are  in  time,  just 
as  ‘unit’  and  ‘odd’  and  ‘even’  are  in  number, 


222*  BOOK  IV,  CHAPTERS  11-13 

i.e.  in  the  sense  that  the  one  set  belongs  to 


number,  the  other  to  time.  But  things  are  in 
time  as  they  are  in  number.  If  this  is  so,  they 
are  contained  by  time  as  things  in  place  are 
contained  by  place. 

Plainly,  too,  to  be  in  time  does  not  mean  to 
[20]  co-exist  with  time,  any  more  than  to  be  in 
motion  or  in  place  means  to  co-exist  with  mo¬ 
tion  or  place.  For  if  ‘to  be  in  something’  is  to 
mean  this,  then  all  things  will  be  in  anything, 
and  the  heaven  will  be  in  a  grain;  for  when  the 
grain  is,  then  also  is  the  heaven.  But  this  is  a 
merely  incidental  conjunction,  whereas  the 
other  is  necessarily  involved:  that  which  is  in 
[25]  time  necessarily  involves  that  there  is 
time  when  it  is,  and  that  which  is  in  motion 
that  there  is  motion  when  it  is. 

Since  what  is  ‘in  time’  is  so  in  the  same 
sense  as  what  is  in  number  is  so,  a  time  greater 
than  everything  in  time  can  be  found.  So  it  is 
necessary  that  all  the  things  in  time  should  be 
contained  by  time,  just  like  other  things  also 
which  are  ‘in  anything’,  e.g.  the  things  ‘in 
place’  by  place. 

[jo]  A  thing,  then,  will  be  affected  by  time, 
just  as  we  are  accustomed  to  say  that  time 
wastes  things  away,  and  that  all  things  grow 
old  through  time,  and  that  there  is  oblivion 
owing  to  the  lapse  of  time,  but  we  do  not 
221b  say  the  same  of  getting  to  know  or  of 
becoming  young  or  fair.  For  time  is  by  its 
nature  the  cause  rather  of  decay,  since  it  is 
the  number  of  change,  and  change  removes 
what  is. 

Hence,  plainly,  things  which  are  always  are 
not,  as  such,  in  time,  for  they  are  not  contained 
by  time,  nor  is  their  being  measured  by  time. 
[5]  A  proof  of  this  is  that  none  of  them  is 
affected  by  time,  which  indicates  that  they  are 
not  in  time. 

Since  time  is  the  measure  of  motion,  it  will 
be  the  measure  of  rest  too — indirectly.  For  all 
rest  is  in  time.  For  it  does  not  follow  that  what 
is  in  time  is  moved,  though  what  is  in  motion 
[/o]  is  necessarily  moved.  For  time  is  not  mo¬ 
tion,  but  ‘number  of  motion’:  and  what  is  at 
rest,  also,  can  be  in  the  number  of  motion.  Not 
everything  that  is  not  in  motion  can  be  said  to 
be  ‘at  rest’ — but  only  that  which  can  be  moved, 
though  it  actually  is  not  moved,  as  was  said 
above.1 

‘To  be  in  number’  means  that  there  is  a 
[  75]  number  of  the  thing,  and  that  its  being  is 
measured  by  the  number  in  which  it  is.  Hence 
if  a  thing  is  ‘in  time’  it  will  be  measured  by 
1  202a  4. 


301 

time.  But  time  will  measure  what  is  moved 
and  what  is  at  rest,  the  one  qua  moved,  the 
other  qua  at  rest;  for  it  will  measure  their  mo¬ 
tion  and  rest  respectively. 

Hence  what  is  moved  will  not  be  measurable 
by  the  time  simply  in  so  far  as  it  has  quantity, 
[20]  but  in  so  far  as  its  motion  has  quantity. 
Thus  none  of  the  things  which  are  neither 
moved  nor  at  rest  are  in  time:  for  ‘to  be  in 
time’  is  ‘to  be  measured  by  time’,  while  time 
is  the  measure  of  motion  and  rest. 

Plainly,  then,  neither  will  everything  that 
does  not  exist  be  in  time,  i.e.  those  non-exist¬ 
ent  things  that  cannot  exist,  as  the  diagonal 
cannot  be  commensurate  with  the  side. 

[25]  Generally,  if  time  is  directly  the  measure 
of  motion  and  indirectly  of  other  things,  it  is 
clear  that  a  thing  whose  existence  is  measured 
by  it  will  have  its  existence  in  rest  or  motion. 
Those  things  therefore  which  are  subject  to 
perishing  and  becoming  —  generally,  tho.se 
which  at  one  time  exist,  at  another  do  not — 
[jo]  are  necessarily  in  time:  for  there  is  a 
greater  time  which  will  extend  both  beyond 
their  existence  and  beyond  the  time  which 
measures  their  existence.  Of  things  which  do 
not  exist  but  are  contained  by  time  some  were, 
222*  e.g.  Homer  once  was,  some  will  be,  e.g. 
a  future  event;  this  depends  on  the  direction  in 
which  time  contains  them;  if  on  both,  they 
have  both  modes  of  existence.  As  to  such  things 
as  it  does  not  contain  in  any  way,  they  neither 
were  nor  are  nor  will  be.  These  are  those  non- 
existents  whose  opposites  always  are,  as  the 
[5]  incommensurability  of  the  diagonal  always 
is — and  this  will  not  be  in  time.  Nor  will  the 
commensurability,  therefore;  hence  this  eter¬ 
nally  is  not,  because  it  is  contrary  to  what 
eternally  is.  A  thing  whose  contrary  is  not 
eternal  can  be  and  not  be,  and  it  is  of  such 
things  that  there  is  coming  to  be  and  passing 
away. 

*3 

[/o]  The  ‘now’  is  the  link  of  time,  as  has  been 
said2  (for  it  connects  past  and  future  time), 
and  it  is  a  limit  of  time  (for  it  is  the  beginning 
of  the  one  and  the  end  of  the  other).  But  this 
is  not  obvious  as  it  is  with  the  point,  which  is 
fixed.  It  divides  potentially,  and  in  so  far  as  it 
[75]  is  dividing  the  ‘now’  is  always  different, 
but  in  so  far  as  it  connects  it  is  always  the  same, 
as  it  is  with  mathematical  lines.  For  the  intel¬ 
lect  it  is  not  always  one  and  the  same  point, 
since  it  is  other  and  other  when  one  divides 
2  220*  5. 


3°2 

the  line;  but  in  so  far  as  it  is  one,  it  is  the 
same  in  every  respect. 

So  the  ‘now’  also  is  in  one  way  a  potential 
dividing  of  time,  in  another  the  termination  of 
both  parts,  and  their  unity.  And  the  dividing 
and  the  uniting  are  the  same  thing  and  in  the 
same  reference,  but  in  essence  they  are  not  the 
same. 

[ 20 ]  So  one  kind  of  ‘now’  is  described  in  this 
way:  another  is  when  the  time  is  near  this 
kind  of  ‘now’.  ‘He  will  come  now’  because  he 
will  come  to-day;  ‘he  has  come  now’  because  he 
came  to-day.  But  the  things  in  the  Iliad  have 
not  happened  ‘now’,  nor  is  the  flood  ‘now’ — 
not  that  the  time  from  now  to  them  is  not 
continuous,  but  because  they  are  not  near. 

‘At  some  time’  means  a  time  determined  in 
[25]  relation  to  the  first  of  the  two  types  of 
‘now’,  e.g.  ‘at  some  time’  Troy  was  taken,  and 
‘at  some  time’  there  will  be  a  flood;  for  it  must 
be  determined  with  reference  to  the  ‘now’. 
There  will  thus  be  a  determinate  time  from 
this  ‘now’  to  that,  and  there  was  such  in  refer¬ 
ence  to  the  past  event.  But  if  there  be  no  time 
which  is  not  ‘sometime’,  every  time  will  be  de¬ 
termined. 

Will  time  then  fail?  Surely  not,  if  motion  al- 
[jo]  ways  exists.  Is  time  then  always  different 
or  does  the  same  time  recur?  Clearly  time  is, 
in  the  same  way  as  motion  is.  For  if  one  and 
the  same  motion  sometimes  recurs,  it  will  be 
one  and  the  same  time,  and  if  not,  not. 

222b  Since  the  ‘now’  is  an  end  and  a  begin¬ 
ning  of  time,  not  of  the  same  time  however, 
but  the  end  of  that  which  is  past  and  the  be¬ 
ginning  of  that  which  is  to  come,  it  follows 
that,  as  the  circle  has  its  convexity  and  its  con¬ 
cavity,  in  a  sense,  in  the  same  thing,  so  time  is 
always  at  a  beginning  and  at  an  end.  And  for 
this  reason  it  seems  to  be  always  different;  for 
[5]  the  ‘now’  is  not  the  beginning  and  the  end 
of  the  same  thing;  if  it  were,  it  would  be  at  the 
same  time  and  in  the  same  respect  two  oppo¬ 
sites.  And  time  will  not  fail;  for  it  is  always  at 
a  beginning. 

‘Presently’  or  ‘just’  refers  to  the  part  of  fu- 
[jo]  ture  time  which  is  near  the  indivisible 
present  ‘now’  (‘When  do  you  walk?’  ‘Present¬ 
ly’,  because  the  time  in  which  he  is  going  to  do 
so  is  near),  and  to  the  part  of  past  time  which 
is  not  far  from  the  ‘now’  (‘When  do  you 
walk?’  ‘I  have  just  been  walking’).  But  to  say 
that  Troy  has  just  been  taken — we  do  not  say 
that,  because  it  is  too  far  from  the  ‘now’.  ‘Late¬ 
ly’,  too,  refers  to  the  part  of  past  time  which  is 
near  the  present  ‘now’.  ‘When  did  you  go?’ 


223 a 

‘Lately’,  if  the  time  is  near  the  existing  now. 
‘Long  ago’  refers  to  the  distant  past. 

[75]  ‘Suddenly’  refers  to  what  has  departed 
from  its  former  condition  in  a  time  impercepti¬ 
ble  because  of  its  smallness;  but  it  is  the  nature 
of  all  change  to  alter  things  from  their  former 
condition.  In  time  all  things  come  into  being 
and  pass  away;  for  which  reason  some  called  it 
the  wisest  of  all  things,  but  the  Pythagorean 
Paron  called  it  the  most  stupid,  because  in  it  we 
also  forget;  and  his  was  the  truer  view.  It  is 
clear  then  that  it  must  be  in  itself,  as  we  said 
[20]  before,1  the  condition  of  destruction 
rather  than  of  coming  into  being  (for  change, 
in  itself,  makes  things  depart  from  their  for¬ 
mer  condition),  and  only  incidentally  of  com¬ 
ing  into  being,  and  of  being.  A  sufficient  evi¬ 
dence  of  this  is  that  nothing  comes  into  being 
without  itself  moving  somehow  and  acting, 
but  a  thing  can  be  destroyed  even  if  it  does  not 
move  at  all.  And  this  is  what,  as  a  rule,  we 
[25]  chiefly  mean  by  a  thing’s  being  destroyed 
by  time.  Still,  time  does  not  work  even  this 
change;  even  this  sort  of  change  takes  place 
incidentally  in  time. 

We  have  stated,  then,  that  time  exists  and 
what  it  is,  and  in  how  many  senses  we  speak 
of  the  ‘now’,  and  what  ‘at  some  time’,  ‘lately’, 
‘presently’  or  'just’,  ‘long  ago’,  and  ‘suddenly’ 
mean. 

[30]  These  distinctions  having  been  drawn,  it 
is  evident  that  every  change  and  everything 
that  moves  is  in  time;  for  the  distinction  of 
faster  and  slower  exists  in  reference  to  all 
change,  since  it  is  found  in  every  instance.  In 
the  phrase  ‘moving  faster’  I  refer  to  that  which 
223a  changes  before  another  into  the  condition 
in  question,  when  it  moves  over  the  same  inter¬ 
val  and  with  a  regular  movement;  e.g.  in  the 
case  of  locomotion,  if  both  things  move  along 
the  circumference  of  a  circle,  or  both  along  a 
straight  line;  and  similarly  in  all  other  cases. 
But  what  is  before  is  in  time;  for  we  say  ‘be- 
[5]  fore’  and  ‘after’  with  reference  to  the  dis¬ 
tance  from  the  ‘now’,  and  the  ‘now’  is  the 
boundary  of  the  past  and  the  future;  so  that 
since  ‘nows’  are  in  time,  the  before  and  the  aft¬ 
er  will  be  in  time  too;  for  in  that  in  which  the 
‘now’  is,  the  distance  from  the  ‘now’  will  also 
be.  But  ‘before’  is  used  contrariwise  with  refer- 
[/o]  ence  to  past  and  to  future  time;  for  in  the 
past  we  call  ‘before’  what  is  farther  from  the 
‘now’,  and  ‘after’  what  is  nearer,  but  in  the 

122IbI. 


PHYSICS 


224* 

future  we  call  the  nearer  ‘before’  and  the  far¬ 
ther  ‘after’.  So  that  since  the  ‘before’  is  in  time, 
[75]  and  every  movement  involves  a  ‘before’, 
evidently  every  change  and  every  movement  is 
in  time. 

It  is  also  worth  considering  how  time  can 
be  related  to  the  soul;  and  why  time  is  thought 
to  be  in  everything,  both  in  earth  and  in  sea 
and  in  heaven.  Is  it  because  it  is  an  attribute, 
or  state,  or  movement  (since  it  is  the  number 
of  movement)  and  all  these  things  are  mov¬ 
able  (for  they  are  all  in  place),  and  time  and 
[20]  movement  are  together,  both  in  respect  of 
potentiality  and  in  respect  of  actuality? 

Whether  if  soul  did  not  exist  time  would 
exist  or  not,  is  a  question  that  may  fairly  be 
asked;  for  if  there  cannot  be  some  one  to  count 
there  cannot  be  anything  that  can  be  counted, 
so  that  evidently  there  cannot  be  number;  for 
number  is  either  what  has  been,  or  what  can 
[25]  be,  counted.  But  if  nothing  but  soul,  or  in 
soul  reason,  is  qualified  to  count,  there  would 
not  be  time  unless  there  were  soul,  but  only 
that  of  which  time  is  an  attribute,  i.e.  if  move¬ 
ment  can  exist  without  soul,  and  the  before 
and  after  are  attributes  of  movement,  and 
time  is  these  qua  numerable. 

One  might  also  raise  the  question  what  sort 
[jo]  of  movement  time  is  the  number  of.  Must 
we  not  say  ‘of  any  kind’?  For  things  both  come 
into  being  in  time  and  pass  away,  and  grow, 
and  are  altered  in  time,  and  are  moved  locally; 
thus  it  is  of  each  movement  qua  movement 
that  time  is  the  number.  And  so  it  is  simply 
the  number  of  continuous  movement,  not  of 
any  particular  kind  of  it. 

223b  But  other  things  as  well  may  have  been 
moved  now,  and  there  would  be  a  number  of 
each  of  the  two  movements.  Is  there  another 
time,  then,  and  will  there  be  two  equal  times 
at  once?  Surely  not.  For  a  time  that  is  both 
equal  and  simultaneous  is  one  and  the  same 
time,  and  even  those  that  are  not  simultaneous 
are  one  in  kind;  for  if  there  were  dogs,  and 
[5]  horses,  and  seven  of  each,  it  would  be  the 
same  number.  So,  too,  movements  that  have 
simultaneous  limits  have  the  same  time,  yet 
the  one  may  in  fact  be  fast  and  the  other  not, 
and  one  may  be  locomotion  and  the  other  alter¬ 
ation;  still  the  time  of  the  two  changes  is  the 
same  if  their  number  also  is  equal  and  simul- 
[/o]  taneous;  and  for  this  reason,  while  the 
movements  are  different  and  separate,  the  time 
is  everywhere  the  same,  because  the  number 
of  equal  and  simultaneous  movements  is  every¬ 
where  one  and  the  same. 


3°3 

Now  there  is  such  a  thing  as  locomotion, 
and  in  locomotion  there  is  included  circular 
movement,  and  everything  is  measured  by 
some  one  thing  homogeneous  with  it,  units  by 
a  unit,  horses  by  a  horse,  and  similarly  times 
['5]  by  some  definite  time,  and,  as  we  said,1 
time  is  measured  by  motion  as  well  as  motion 
by  time  (this  being  so  because  by  a  motion 
definite  in  time  the  quantity  both  of  the  mo¬ 
tion  and  of  the  time  is  measured):  if,  then, 
what  is  first  is  the  measure  of  everything 
homogeneous  with  it,  regular  circular  motion 
is  above  all  else  the  measure,  because  the  num- 
[20]  ber  of  this  is  the  best  known.  Now 
neither  alteration  nor  increase  nor  coming  into 
being  can  be  regular,  but  locomotion  can  be. 
This  also  is  why  time  is  thought  to  be  the 
movement  of  the  sphere,  viz.  because  the 
other  movements  are  measured  by  this,  and 
time  by  this  movement. 

This  also  explains  the  common  saying  that 
[25]  human  affairs  form  a  circle,  and  that 
there  is  a  circle  in  all  other  things  that  have  a 
natural  movement  and  coming  into  being  and 
passing  away.  This  is  because  all  other  things 
are  discriminated  by  time,  and  end  and  begin 
as  though  conforming  to  a  cycle;  for  even  time 
itself  is  thought  to  be  a  circle.  And  this  opin- 
[30]  ion  again  is  held  because  time  is  the 
measure  of  this  kind  of  locomotion  and  is 
itself  measured  by  such.  So  that  to  say  that 
the  things  that  come  into  being  form  a  circle 
is  to  say  that  there  is  a  circle  of  time;  and 
this  is  to  say  that  it  is  measured  by  the  cir¬ 
cular  movement;  for  apart  from  the  meas- 
224a  ure  nothing  else  to  be  measured  is 
observed;  the  whole  is  just  a  plurality  of 
measures. 

It  is  said  rightly,  too,  that  the  number  of  the 
sheep  and  of  the  dogs  is  the  same  number  if 
the  two  numbers  are  equal,  but  not  the  same 
decad  or  the  same  ten;  just  as  the  equilateral 
[5]  and  the  scalene  are  not  the  same  triangle, 
yet  they  are  the  same  figure,  because  they  are 
both  triangles.  For  things  are  called  the  same 
so-and-so  if  they  do  not  differ  by  a  differentia 
of  that  thing,  but  not  if  they  do;  e.g.  triangle 
differs  from  triangle  by  a  differentia  of  tri¬ 
angle,  therefore  they  are  different  triangles; 
but  they  do  not  differ  by  a  differentia  of  figure, 
but  are  in  one  and  the  same  division  of  it.  For 
a  figure  of  the  one  kind  is  a  circle  and  a  figure 
[/o]  of  another  kind  of  triangle,  and  a  triangle 
of  one  kind  is  equilateral  and  a  triangle  of 
another  kind  scalene.  They  are  the  same  figure, 
1  220b  28. 


BOOK  IV,  CHAPTERS  13-14 


3°4 


PHYSICS 


224b 


then,  and  that,  triangle,  but  not  the  same  tri¬ 
angle.  Therefore  the  number  of  two  groups 
also  is  the  same  number  (for  their  number  does 
not  differ  by  a  differentia  of  number),  but  it  is 
not  the  same  decad;  for  the  things  of  which  it 


is  asserted  differ;  one  group  are  dogs,  and  the 
other  horses. 

[75]  We  have  now  discussed  time — both  time 
itself  and  the  matters  appropriate  to  the  con¬ 
sideration  of  it. 


BOOK  V 


1 

Everything  which  changes  does  so  in  one  of 
three  senses.  It  may  change  (1)  accidentally , 
as  for  instance  when  we  say  that  something 
musical  walks,  that  which  walks  being  some¬ 
thing  in  which  aptitude  for  music  is  an  acci¬ 
dent .  Again  (2)  a  thing  is  said  without  qual¬ 
ification  to  change  because  something  belong¬ 
ing  to  it  changes,  i.e.  in  statements  which  refer 
[25]  to  part  of  the  thing  in  question:  thus  the 
body  is  restored  to  health  because  the  eye  or  the 
chest,  that  is  to  say  a  part  of  the  whole  body,  is 
restored  to  health.  And  above  all  there  is  (3) 
the  case  of  a  thing  which  is  in  motion  neither 
accidentally  nor  in  respect  of  something  else 
belonging  to  it,  but  in  virtue  of  being  itself  di¬ 
rectly  in  motion.  Here  we  have  a  thing  which 
is  essentially  movable:  and  that  which  is  so  is  a 
different  thing  according  to  the  particular  vari¬ 
ety  of  motion:  for  instance  it  may  be  a  thing 
capable  of  alteration:  and  within  the  sphere  of 
alteration  it  is  again  a  different  thing  according 
[jo]  as  it  is  capable  of  being  restored  to  health 
or  capable  of  being  heated.  And  there  are  the 
same  distinctions  in  the  case  of  the  mover:  (1) 
one  thing  causes  motion  accidentally,  (2)  an¬ 
other  partially  (because  something  belonging 
to  it  causes  motion),  (3)  another  of  itself  di¬ 
rectly,  as,  for  instance,  the  physician  heals,  the 
hand  strikes.  We  have,  then,  the  following  fac¬ 
tors:  (a)  on  the  one  hand  that  which  directly 
causes  motion,  and  (b)  on  the  other  hand  that 
which  is  in  motion:  further,  we  have  (r)  that 
[35]  in  which  motion  takes  place,  namely 
time,  and  (distinct  from  these  three)  (d)  that 
224b  from  which  and  ( e )  that  to  which  it  pro¬ 
ceeds:  for  every  motion  proceeds  from  some¬ 
thing  and  to  something,  that  which  is  directly 
in  motion  being  distinct  from  that  to  which  it  is 
in  motion  and  that  from  which  it  is  in  motion: 
for  instance,  we  may  take  the  three  things 
‘wood’,  ‘hot’,  and  ‘cold’,  of  which  the  first  is 
that  which  is  in  motion,  the  second  is  that  to 
which  the  motion  proceeds,  and  the  third  is 
that  from  which  it  proceeds.  This  being  so,  it 
is  clear  that  the  motion  is  in  the  wood,  not  in 
[5]  its  form:  for  the  motion  is  neither  caused 


nor  experienced  by  the  form  or  the  place  or  the 
quantity.  So  we  are  left  with  a  mover,  a  moved, 
and  a  goal  of  motion.  I  do  not  include  the 
starting-point  of  motion:  for  it  is  the  goal 
rather  than  the  starting-point  of  motion  that 
gives  its  name  to  a  particular  process  of  change. 
Thus  ‘perishing*  is  change  to  not-being,  though 
it  is  also  true  that  that  which  perishes  changes 
from  being:  and  ‘becoming*  is  change  to  being , 
though  it  is  also  change  from  not-being . 

[/o]  Now  a  definition  of  motion  has  been  giv¬ 
en  above,1  from  which  it  will  be  seen  that 
every  goal  of  motion,  whether  it  be  a  form,  an 
affection,  or  a  place,  is  immovable,  as,  for  in¬ 
stance,  knowledge  and  heat.  Here,  however,  a 
difficulty  may  be  raised.  Affections,  it  may  be 
said,  are  motions,  and  whiteness  is  an  affection: 
thus  there  may  be  change  to  a  motion.  To  this 
[75]  we  may  reply  that  it  is  not  whiteness  but 
whitening  that  is  a  motion.  Here  also  the  same 
distinctions  are  to  be  observed:  a  goal  of  mo¬ 
tion  may  be  so  accidentally,  or  partially  and 
with  reference  to  something  other  than  itself, 
or  directly  and  with  no  reference  to  anything 
else:  for  instance,  a  thing  which  is  becoming 
white  changes  accidentally  to  an  object  of 
thought,  the  colour  being  only  accidentally  the 
[20]  object  of  thought;  it  changes  to  colour, 
because  white  is  a  part  of  colour,  or  to  Europe, 
because  Athens  is  a  part  of  Europe;  but  it 
changes  essentially  to  white  colour.  It  is  now 
clear  in  what  sense  a  thing  is  in  motion  essen¬ 
tially,  accidentally,  or  in  respect  of  something 
other  than  itself,  and  in  what  sense  the  phrase 
‘itself  directly*  is  used  in  the  case  both  of  the 
[25]  mover  and  of  the  moved:  and  it  is  also 
clear  that  the  motion  is  not  in  the  form  but  in 
that  which  is  in  motion,  that  is  to  say  ‘the  mov¬ 
able  in  activity*.  Now  accidental  change  we 
may  leave  out  of  account:  for  it  is  to  be  found 
in  everything,  at  any  time,  and  in  any  respect. 
Change  which  is  not  accidental  on  the  other 
hand  is  not  to  be  found  in  everything,  but  only 
in  contraries,  in  things  intermediate  between 
[jo]  contraries,  and  in  contradictories,  as  may 
be  proved  by  induction.  An  intermediate  may 
be  a  starting-point  of  change,  since  for  the 
1 201 a  10. 


225 b  BOOK  IV,  CHAPTER  14— BOOK  V,  CHAPTERS  1-2 


purposes  of  the  change  it  serves  as  contrary  to 
either  of  two  contraries:  for  the  intermediate 
is  in  a  sense  the  extremes.  Hence  we  speak  of 
the  intermediate  as  in  a  sense  a  contrary  rela¬ 
tively  to  the  extremes  and  of  either  extreme  as 
a  contrary  relatively  to  the  intermediate:  for 
instance,  the  central  note  is  low  relatively  to 
the  highest  and  high  relatively  to  the  lowest, 
and  grey  is  light  relatively  to  black  and  dark 
relatively  to  white. 

[55]  And  since  every  change  is  from  some- 
225a  thing  to  something — as  the  word  itself 
(neTapoXrj)  indicates,  implying  something  ‘aft¬ 
er’  (mctci  )  something  else,  that  is  to  say  some¬ 
thing  earlier  and  something  later — that  which 
changes  must  change  in  one  of  four  ways: 
from  subject  to  subject,  from  subject  to  non- 
[5]  subject,  from  non-subject  to  subject,  or 
from  non-subject  to  non-subject,  where  by  ‘sub¬ 
ject’  I  mean  what  is  affirmatively  expressed.  So 
it  follows  necessarily  from  what  has  been  said 
above1  that  there  are  only  three  kinds  of 
change,  that  from  subject  to  subject,  that  from 
subject  to  non-subject,  and  that  from  non- 
[/o]  subject  to  subject:  for  the  fourth  con¬ 
ceivable  kind,  that  from  non-subject  to  non¬ 
subject,  is  not  change,  as  in  that  case  there  is 
no  opposition  either  of  contraries  or  of  con¬ 
tradictories. 

Now  change  from  non-subject  to  subject, 
the  relation  being  that  of  contradiction,  is 
‘coming  to  be’ — ‘unqualified  coming  to  be’ 
when  the  change  takes  place  in  an  unqualified 
way,  ‘particular  coming  to  be’  when  the  change 
is  change  in  a  particular  character:  for  instance, 
a  change  from  not-white  to  white  is  a  coming 
to  be  of  the  particular  thing,  white,  while 
[75]  change  from  unqualified  not-being  to  be¬ 
ing  is  coming  to  be  in  an  unqualified  way,  in 
respect  of  which  we  say  that  a  thing  ‘comes  to 
be’  without  qualification,  not  that  it  ‘comes  to 
be’  some  particular  thing.  Change  from  sub¬ 
ject  to  non-subject  is  ‘perishing’ — ‘unqualified 
perishing’  when  the  change  is  from  being  to 
not-being,  ‘particular  perishing’  when  the 
change  is  to  the  opposite  negation,  the  distinc¬ 
tion  being  the  same  as  that  made  in  the  case 
of  coming  to  be. 

[20]  Now  the  expression  ‘not-being’  is  used  in 
several  senses:  and  there  can  be  motion  neither 
of  that  which  ‘is  not’  in  respect  of  the  affirma¬ 
tion  or  negation  of  a  predicate,  nor  of  that 
which  ‘is  not’  in  the  sense  that  it  only  poten¬ 
tially  ‘is’,  that  is  to  say  the  opposite  of  that 
which  actually  ‘is’  in  an  unqualified  sense: 

1 224b  28, 29. 


for  although  that  which  is  ‘not-white’  or 
‘not-good’  may  nevertheless  be  in  motion  ac¬ 
cidentally  (for  example  that  which  is  ‘not- 
white’  might  be  a  man),  yet  that  which  is 
without  qualification  ‘not-so-and-so’  cannot  in 
[25]  any  sense  be  in  motion:  therefore  it  is 
impossible  for  that  which  is  not  to  be  in  mo¬ 
tion.  This  being  so,  it  follows  that  ‘becoming’ 
cannot  be  a  motion:  for  it  is  that  which  ‘is 
not’  that  ‘becomes’.  For  however  true  it  may 
be  that  it  accidentally  ‘becomes’,  it  is  neverthe¬ 
less  correct  to  say  that  it  is  that  which  ‘is  not’ 
that  in  an  unqualified  sense  ‘becomes’.  And 
similarly  it  is  impossible  for  that  which  ‘is  not’ 
to  be  at  rest. 

[50]  There  are  these  difficulties,  then,  in  the 
way  of  the  assumption  that  that  which  ‘is  not’ 
can  be  in  motion:  and  it  may  be  further  ob¬ 
jected  that,  whereas  everything  which  is  in 
motion  is  in  space,  that  which  ‘is  not’  is  not  in 
space:  for  then  it  would  be  somewhere. 

So,  too,  ‘perishing’  is  not  a  motion:  for  a 
motion  has  for  its  contrary  either  another  mo¬ 
tion  or  rest,  whereas  ‘perishing’  is  the  contrary 
of  ‘becoming’. 

Since,  then,  every  motion  is  a  kind  of 
change,  and  there  are  only  the  three  kinds  of 
[^5]  change  mentioned  above,2  and  since  of 
these  three  those  which  take  the  form  of  ‘be- 
225b  coming’  and  ‘perishing’,  that  is  to  say 
those  which  imply  a  relation  of  contradiction, 
are  not  motions:  it  necessarily  follows  that  only 
change  from  subject  to  subject  is  motion.  And 
every  such  subject  is  either  a  contrary  or  an  in¬ 
termediate  (for  a  privation  may  be  allowed  to 
rank  as  a  contrary)  and  can  be  affirmatively  ex¬ 
pressed,  as  naked,  toothless,  or  black.  If,  then, 
[5]  the  categories  are  severally  distinguished  as 
Being,  Quality,  Place,  Time,  Relation,  Quan¬ 
tity,  and  Activity  or  Passivity,  it  necessarily 
follows  that  there  are  three  kinds  of  motion — 
qualitative,  quantitative,  and  local. 

2 

[/o]  In  respect  of  Substance  there  is  no  mo¬ 
tion,  because  Substance  has  no  contrary  among 
things  that  are.  Nor  is  there  motion  in  respect 
of  Relation:  for  it  may  happen  that  when  one 
correlative  changes,  the  other,  although  this 
does  not  itself  change,  is  no  longer  applicable, 
so  that  in  these  cases  the  motion  is  accidental. 
Nor  is  there  motion  in  respect  of  Agent  and 
Patient — in  fact  there  can  never  be  motion  of 
mover  and  moved,  because  there  cannot  be 
M.  7. 


3o  6  PHYSICS  226* 


[75]  motion  of  motion  or  becoming  of  becom¬ 
ing  or  in  general  change  of  change. 

For  in  the  first  place  there  are  two  senses  in 
which  motion  of  motion  is  conceivable.  (1) 
The  motion  of  which  there  is  motion  might 
be  conceived  as  subject;  e.g.  a  man  is  in  motion 
because  he  changes  from  fair  to  dark.  Can  it  be 
that  in  this  sense  motion  grows  hot  or  cold,  or 
[20]  changes  place,  or  increases  or  decreases? 
Impossible:  for  change  is  not  a  subject.  Or  (2) 
can  there  be  motion  of  motion  in  the  sense  that 
some  other  subject  changes  from  a  change  to 
another  mode  of  being,  as  e.g.  a  man  changes 
from  falling  ill  to  getting  well?  Even  this  is 
possible  only  in  an  accidental  sense.  For,  what¬ 
ever  the  subject  may  be,  movement  is  change 
from  one  form  to  another.  (And  the  same 
[25]  holds  good  of  becoming  and  perishing, 
except  that  in  these  processes  we  have  a  change 
to  a  particular  kind  of  opposite,  while  the 
other,  motion,  is  a  change  to  a  different  kind.) 
So,  if  there  is  to  be  motion  of  motion,  that 
which  is  changing  from  health  to  sickness 
must  simultaneously  be  changing  from  this 
very  change  to  another.  It  is  clear,  then,  that 
by  the  time  that  it  has  become  sick,  it  must  also 
have  changed  to  whatever  may  be  the  other 
change  concerned  (for  that  it  should  be  at  rest, 
though  logically  possible,  is  excluded  by  the 
theory).  Moreover  this  other  can  never  be  any 
casual  change,  but  must  be  a  change  from 
[30]  something  definite  to  some  other  definite 
thing.  So  in  this  case  it  must  be  the  opposite 
change,  viz.  convalescence.  It  is  only  acciden¬ 
tally  that  there  can  be  change  of  change,  e.g. 
there  is  a  change  from  remembering  to  for¬ 
getting  only  because  the  subject  of  this  change 
changes  at  one  time  to  knowledge,  at  another 
to  ignorance. 

In  the  second  place,  if  there  is  to  be  change 
of  change  and  becoming  of  becoming,  we  shall 
have  an  infinite  regress.  Thus  if  one  of  a  series 
[35]  of  changes  is  to  be  a  change  of  change, 
226*  the  preceding  change  must  also  be  so: 
e.g.  if  simple  becoming  was  ever  in  process  of 
becoming,  then  that  which  was  becoming  sim¬ 
ple  becoming  was  also  in  process  of  becoming, 
so  that  we  should  not  yet  have  arrived  at  what 
was  in  process  of  simple  becoming  but  only  at 
what  was  already  in  process  of  becoming  in 
process  of  becoming.  And  this  again  was  some¬ 
time  in  process  of  becoming,  so  that  even  then 
we  should  not  have  arrived  at  what  was  in 
process  of  simple  becoming.  And  since  in  an 
infinite  series  there  is  no  first  term,  here  there 
will  be  no  first  stage  and  therefore  no  follow- 


[5]  ing  stage  either.  On  this  hypothesis,  then, 
nothing  can  become  or  be  moved  or  change. 

Thirdly,  if  a  thing  is  capable  of  any  particu¬ 
lar  motion,  it  is  also  capable  of  the  correspond¬ 
ing  contrary  motion  or  the  corresponding 
coming  to  rest,  and  a  thing  that  is  capable  of 
becoming  is  also  capable  of  perishing:  conse¬ 
quently,  if  there  be  becoming  of  becoming, 
that  which  is  in  process  of  becoming  is  in 
process  of  perishing  at  the  very  moment  when 
it  has  reached  the  stage  of  becoming:  since  it 
cannot  be  in  process  of  perishing  when  it  is 
just  beginning  to  become  or  after  it  has  ceased 
to  become:  for  that  which  is  in  process  of  per¬ 
ishing  must  be  in  existence. 

[/o]  Fourthly,  there  must  be  a  substrate  un¬ 
derlying  all  processes  of  becoming  and  chang¬ 
ing.  What  can  this  be  in  the  present  case?  It 
is  either  the  body  or  the  soul  that  undergoes 
alteration:  what  is  it  that  correspondingly  be¬ 
comes  motion  or  becoming?  And  again  what  is 
the  goal  of  their  motion?  It  must  be  the  mo¬ 
tion  or  becoming  of  something  from  some¬ 
thing  to  something  else.  But  in  what  sense 
[75]  can  this  be  so?  For  the  becoming  of 
learning  cannot  be  learning:  so  neither  can  the 
becoming  of  becoming  be  becoming,  nor  can 
the  becoming  of  any  process  be  that  process. 

Finally,  since  there  are  three  kinds  of  mo¬ 
tion,  the  substratum  and  the  goal  of  motion 
must  be  one  or  other  of  these,  e.g.  locomotion 
will  have  to  be  altered  or  to  be  locally  moved. 

To  sum  up,  then,  since  everything  that  is 
moved  is  moved  in  one  of  three  ways,  either 
accidentally,  or  partially,  or  essentially,  change 
[20]  can  change  only  accidentally,  as  e.g.  when 
a  man  who  is  being  restored  to  health  runs  or 
learns:  and  accidental  change  we  have  long 
ago1  decided  to  leave  out  of  account. 

Since,  then,  motion  can  belong  neither  to 
Being  nor  to  Relation  nor  to  Agent  and  Pa¬ 
tient,  it  remains  that  there  can  be  motion  only 
in  respect  of  Quality,  Quantity,  and  Place:  for 
[25]  with  each  of  these  we  have  a  pair  of  con¬ 
traries.  Motion  in  respect  of  Quality  let  us  call 
alteration,  a  general  designation  that  is  used  to 
include  both  contraries:  and  by  Quality  I  do 
not  here  mean  a  property  of  substance  (in  that 
sense  that  which  constitutes  a  specific  distinc¬ 
tion  is  a  quality)  but  a  passive  quality  in  vir¬ 
tue  of  which  a  thing  is  said  to  be  acted  on  or 
to  be  incapable  of  being  acted  on.  Motion  in 
[30]  respect  of  Quantity  has  no  name  that  in¬ 
cludes  both  contraries,  but  it  is  called  increase 
or  decrease  according  as  one  or  the  other  is 
1  224b26. 


227*  BOOK  V,  CHAPTERS  2-3  307 


designated:  that  is  to  say  motion  in  the  direc¬ 
tion  of  complete  magnitude  is  increase,  motion 
in  the  contrary  direction  is  decrease.  Motion 
in  respect  of  Place  has  no  name  either  general 
or  particular:  but  we  may  designate  it  by  the 
general  name  of  locomotion,  though  strictly  the 
term  ‘locomotion’  is  applicable  to  things  that 
change  their  place  only  when  they  have  not 
[35]  the  power  to  come  to  a  stand,  and  to 
things  that  do  not  move  themselves  locally. 
226b  Change  within  the  same  kind  from  a 
lesser  to  a  greater  or  from  a  greater  to  a  lesser 
degree  is  alteration:  for  it  is  motion  either 
from  a  contrary  or  to  a  contrary,  whether  in 
an  unqualified  or  in  a  qualified  sense:  for 
change  to  a  lesser  degree  of  a  quality  will  be 
called  change  to  the  contrary  of  that  quality, 
[5]  and  change  to  a  greater  degree  of  a  quality 
will  be  regarded  as  change  from  the  contrary 
of  that  quality  to  the  quality  itself.  It  makes  no 
difference  whether  the  change  be  qualified  or 
unqualified,  except  that  in  the  former  case  the 
contraries  will  have  to  be  contrary  to  one  an¬ 
other  only  in  a  qualified  sense:  and  a  thing’s 
possessing  a  quality  in  a  greater  or  in  a  lesser 
degree  means  the  presence  or  absence  in  it  of 
more  or  less  of  the  opposite  quality.  It  is  now 
clear,  then,  that  there  are  only  these  three  kinds 
of  motion. 

[/o]  The  term  ‘immovable’  we  apply  in  the 
first  place  to  that  which  is  absolutely  incapable 
of  being  moved  (just  as  we  correspondingly 
apply  the  term  invisible  to  sound);  in  the  sec¬ 
ond  place  to  that  which  is  moved  with  diffi¬ 
culty  after  a  long  time  or  whose  movement  is 
slow  at  the  start — in  fact,  what  we  describe  as 
hard  to  move;  and  in  the  third  place  to  that 
which  is  naturally  designed  for  and  capable 
of  motion,  but  is  not  in  motion  when,  where, 
and  as  it  naturally  would  be  so.  This  last  is 
the  only  kind  of  immovable  thing  of  which  I 
use  the  term  ‘being  at  rest’:  for  rest  is  con- 
[75]  trary  to  motion,  so  that  rest  will  be  nega¬ 
tion  of  motion  in  that  which  is  capable  of 
admitting  motion. 

The  foregoing  remarks  are  sufficient  to  ex¬ 
plain  the  essential  nature  of  motion  and  rest, 
the  number  of  kinds  of  change,  and  the  dif¬ 
ferent  varieties  of  motion. 

3 

Let  us  now  proceed  to  define  the  terms  ‘to¬ 
gether’  and  ‘apart’,  ‘in  contact’,  ‘between’,  ‘in 
[20]  succession’,  ‘contiguous’,  and  ‘continu¬ 
ous’,  and  to  show  in  what  circumstances  each 
of  these  terms  is  naturally  applicable. 


Things  are  said  to  be  together  in  place  when 
they  are  in  one  place  (in  the  strictest  sense  of 
the  word  ‘place’)  and  to  be  apart  when  they 
are  in  different  places. 

Things  are  said  to  be  in  contact  when  their 
extremities  are  together. 

That  which  a  changing  thing,  if  it  changes 
[25]  continuously  in  a  natural  manner,  nat¬ 
urally  reaches  before  it  reaches  that  to  which 
it  changes  last,  is  between.  Thus  ‘between’  im¬ 
plies  the  presence  of  at  least  three  things:  for 
in  a  process  of  change  it  is  the  contrary  that  is 
‘last’:  and  a  thing  is  moved  continuously  if  it 
leaves  no  gap  or  only  the  smallest  possible  gap 
in  the  material — not  in  the  time  (for  a  gap  in 
the  time  does  not  prevent  things  having  a  ‘be¬ 
tween’,  while,  on  the  other  hand,  there  is 
nothing  to  prevent  the  highest  note  sounding 
[30]  immediately  after  the  lowest)  but  in  the 
material  in  which  the  motion  takes  place.  This 
is  manifestly  true  not  only  in  local  changes  but 
in  every  other  kind  as  well.  (Now  every 
227*  [7]  change  implies  a  pair  of  opposites, 
and  opposites  may  be  either  contraries  or  con¬ 
tradictories;  since  then  contradiction  admits  of 
no  mean  term,  it  is  obvious  that  ‘between’  must 
imply  a  pair  of  contraries.)  That  is  locally  con- 
226b  [32]  trary  which  is  most  distant  in  a 
straight  line:  for  the  shortest  line  is  definitely 
limited,  and  that  which  is  definitely  limited 
constitutes  a  measure. 

A  thing  is  ‘in  succession’  when  it  is  after 
[35]  the  beginning  in  position  or  in  form  or 
in  some  other  respect  in  which  it  is  definitely 
227*  so  regarded,  and  when  further  there  is 
nothing  of  the  same  kind  as  itself  between  it 
and  that  to  which  it  is  in  succession,  e.g.  a 
line  or  lines  if  it  is  a  line,  a  unit  or  units  if  it  is 
a  unit,  a  house  if  it  is  a  house  (there  is  nothing 
to  prevent  something  of  a  different  kind  being 
between).  For  that  which  is  in  succession  is  in 
succession  to  a  particular  thing,  and  is  some¬ 
thing  posterior:  for  one  is  not  ‘in  succession’  to 
[5]  two,  nor  is  the  first  day  of  the  month  to  be 
second:  in  each  case  the  latter  is  ‘in  succession’ 
to  the  former. 

A  thing  that  is  in  succession  and  touches  is 
[/o]  ‘contiguous’.  The  ‘continuous’  is  a  sub¬ 
division  of  the  contiguous:  things  are  called 
continuous  when  the  touching  limits  of  each 
become  one  and  the  same  and  are,  as  the  word 
implies,  contained  in  each  other:  continuity  is 
impossible  if  these  extremities  are  two.  This 
definition  makes  it  plain  that  continuity  be¬ 
longs  to  things  that  naturally  in  virtue  of  their 
[75]  mutual  contact  form  a  unity.  And  in 


3o8  PHYSICS  228* 


whatever  way  that  which  holds  them  together 
is  one,  so  too  will  the  whole  be  one,  e.g.  by  a 
rivet  or  glue  or  contact  or  organic  union. 

It  is  obvious  that  of  these  terms  ‘in  succes¬ 
sion  ’  is  first  in  order  of  analysis:  for  that  which 
touches  is  necessarily  in  succession,  but  not 
everything  that  is  in  succession  touches:  and  so 
succession  is  a  property  of  things  prior  in 
[20]  definition,  e.g.  numbers,  while  contact  is 
not.  And  if  there  is  continuity  there  is  neces¬ 
sarily  contact,  but  if  there  is  contact,  that  alone 
does  not  imply  continuity:  for  the  extremities 
of  things  may  be  ' together  without  necessarily 
being  one :  but  they  cannot  be  one  without  be¬ 
ing  necessarily  together.  So  natural  junction  is 
last  in  coming  to  be:  for  the  extremities  must 
necessarily  come  into  contact  if  they  are  to  be 
[25]  naturally  joined:  but  things  that  are  in 
contact  are  not  all  naturally  joined,  while 
there  is  no  contact  clearly  there  is  no  natural 
junction  either.  Hence,  if  as  some  say  ‘point’ 
and  ‘unit’  have  an  independent  existence  of 
their  own,  it  is  impossible  for  the  two  to  be 
identical:  for  points  can  touch  while  units  can 
[50]  only  be  in  succession.  Moreover,  there 
can  always  be  something  between  points  (for 
all  lines  are  intermediate  between  points), 
whereas  it  is  not  necessary  that  there  should 
possibly  be  anything  between  units:  for  there 
can  be  nothing  between  the  numbers  one  and 
two. 

We  have  now  defined  what  is  meant  by  ‘to- 
227b  gether’  and  ‘apart’,  ‘contact’,  ‘between’ 
and  ‘in  succession’,  ‘contiguous’  and  ‘continu¬ 
ous’:  and  we  have  shown  in  what  circum¬ 
stances  each  of  these  terms  is  applicable. 

4 

There  are  many  senses  in  which  motion  is  said 
to  be  ‘one’:  for  we  use  the  term  ‘one’  in  many 
senses. 

Motion  is  one  generically  according  to  the 
[5]  different  categories  to  which  it  may  be 
assigned:  thus  any  locomotion  is  one  generi¬ 
cally  with  any  other  locomotion,  whereas 
alteration  is  different  generically  from  loco¬ 
motion. 

Motion  is  one  specifically  when  besides  being 
one  generically  it  also  takes  place  in  a  species 
incapable  of  subdivision:  e.g.  colour  has  spe¬ 
cific  differences:  therefore  blackening  and 
whitening  differ  specifically;  but  at  all  events 
every  whitening  will  be  specifically  the  same 
with  every  other  whitening  and  every  black¬ 
ening  with  every  other  blackening.  But  white- 
[/o]  ness  is  not  further  subdivided  by  specific 


differences:  hence  any  whitening  is  specifically 
one  with  any  other  whitening.  Where  it  hap¬ 
pens  that  the  genus  is  at  the  same  time  a  spe¬ 
cies,  it  is  clear  that  the  motion  will  then  in  a 
sense  be  one  specifically  though  not  in  an  un¬ 
qualified  sense:  learning  is  an  example  of  this, 
knowledge  being  on  the  one  hand  a  species  of 
apprehension  and  on  the  other  hand  a  genus 
including  the  various  knowledges.  A  difficulty, 
however,  may  be  raised  as  to  whether  a  mo- 
[75]  tion  is  specifically  one  when  the  same 
thing  changes  from  the  same  to  the  same,  e.g. 
when  one  point  changes  again  and  again  from 
a  particular  place  to  a  particular  place:  if  this 
motion  is  specifically  one,  circular  motion  will 
be  the  same  as  rectilinear  motion,  and  rolling 
the  same  as  walking.  But  is  not  this  difficulty 
removed  by  the  principle  already  laid  down 
that  if  that  in  which  the  motion  takes  place  is 
specifically  different  (as  in  the  present  instance 
the  circular  path  is  specifically  different  from 
[20]  the  straight)  the  motion  itself  is  also  dif¬ 
ferent?  We  have  explained,  then,  what  is 
meant  by  saying  that  motion  is  one  generically 
or  one  specifically. 

Motion  is  one  in  an  unqualified  sense  when 
it  is  one  essentially  or  numerically:  and  the 
following  distinctions  will  make  clear  what 
this  kind  of  motion  is.  There  are  three  classes 
of  things  in  connexion  with  which  we  speak 
of  motion,  the  ‘that  which’,  the  ‘that  in  which’, 
and  the  ‘that  during  which’.  I  mean  that  there 
[25]  must  be  something  that  is  in  motion,  e.g. 
a  man  or  gold,  and  it  must  be  in  motion  in 
something,  e.g.  a  place  or  an  affection,  and 
during  something,  for  all  motion  takes  place 
during  a  time.  Of  these  three  it  is  the  thing  in 
which  the  motion  takes  place  that  makes  it 
one  generically  or  specifically,  it  is  the  thing 
moved  that  makes  the  motion  one  in  subject, 
and  it  is  the  time  that  makes  it  consecutive: 
but  it  is  the  three  together  that  make  it  one 
without  qualification:  to  effect  this,  that  in 
[jo]  which  the  motion  takes  place  (the  spe¬ 
cies)  must  be  one  and  incapable  of  subdivision, 
that  during  which  it  takes  place  (the  time) 
must  be  one  and  unintermittent,  and  that 
which  is  in  motion  must  be  one — not  in  an 
accidental  sense  (i.e.  it  must  be  one  as  the 
white  that  blackens  is  one  or  Coriscus  who 
walks  is  one,  not  in  the  accidental  sense  in 
228*  which  Coriscus  and  white  may  be  one), 
nor  merely  in  virtue  of  community  of  nature 
(for  there  might  be  a  case  of  two  men  being 
restored  to  health  at  the  same  time  in  the  same 
way,  e.g.  from  inflammation  of  the  eye,  yet 


22 8b  BOOK  V,  CHAPTERS  3-4  309 


this  motion  is  not  really  one,  but  only  spe¬ 
cifically  one). 

Suppose,  however,  that  Socrates  undergoes 
an  alteration  specifically  the  same  but  at  one 
time  and  again  at  another:  in  this  case  if  it  is 
possible  for  that  which  ceased  to  be  again  to 
come  into  being  and  remain  numerically  the 
[5]  same,  then  this  motion  too  will  be  one: 
otherwise  it  will  be  the  same  but  not  one.  And 
akin  to  this  difficulty  there  is  another;  viz.  is 
health  one?  and  generally  are  the  states  and 
affections  in  bodies  severally  one  in  essence  al¬ 
though  (as  is  clear)  the  things  that  contain 
them  are  obviously  in  motion  and  in  flux? 
Thus  if  a  person's  health  at  daybreak  and  at 
[/o]  the  present  moment  is  one  and  the  same, 
why  should  not  this  health  be  numerically  one 
with  that  which  he  recovers  after  an  interval? 
The  same  argument  applies  in  each  case.  There 
is,  however,  we  may  answer,  this  difference: 
that  if  the  states  are  two  then  it  follows  simply 
from  this  fact  that  the  activities  must  also  in 
point  of  number  be  two  (for  only  that  which 
is  numerically  one  can  give  rise  to  an  activity 
[75]  that  is  numerically  one),  but  if  the  state 
is  one,  this  is  not  in  itself  enough  to  make  us 
regard  the  activity  also  as  one:  for  when  a  man 
ceases  walking,  the  walking,  no  longer  is,  but 
it  will  again  be  if  he  begins  to  walk  again. 
But,  be  this  as  it  may,  if  in  the  above  instance 
the  health  is  one  and  the  same,  then  it  must  be 
possible  for  that  which  is  one  and  the  same  to 
come  to  be  and  to  cease  to  be  many  times. 
However,  these  difficulties  lie  outside  our  pres¬ 
ent  inquiry. 

[20]  Since  every  motion  is  continuous,  a  mo¬ 
tion  that  is  one  in  an  unqualified  sense  must 
(since  every  motion  is  divisible)  be  continuous, 
and  a  continuous  motion  must  be  one.  There 
will  not  be  continuity  between  any  motion  and 
any  other  indiscriminately  any  more  than  there 
is  between  any  two  things  chosen  at  random 
in  any  other  sphere:  there  can  be  continuity 
only  when  the  extremities  of  the  two  things  are 
one.  Now  some  things  have  no  extremities  at 
all:  and  the  extremities  of  others  differ  spe- 
[25]  cifically  although  we  give  them  the  same 
name  of  ‘end’:  how  should  e.g.  the  ‘end’  of  a 
line  and  the  ‘end’  of  walking  touch  or  come 
to  be  one?  Motions  that  are  not  the  same  either 
specifically  or  generically  may,  it  is  true,  be 
consecutive  (e.g.  a  man  may  run  and  then  at 
once  fall  ill  of  a  fever),  and  again,  in  the 
torch-race  we  have  consecutive  but  not  con¬ 
tinuous  locomotion:  for  according  to  our  defi¬ 
nition  there  can  be  continuity  only  when  the 


ends  of  the  two  things  are  one.  Hence  motions 
[jo]  may  be  consecutive  or  successive  in  virtue 
of  the  time  being  continuous,  but  there  can  be 
continuity  only  in  virtue  of  the  motions  them¬ 
selves  being  continuous,  that  is  when  the  end 
of  each  is  one  with  the  end  of  the  other.  Mo- 
228*5  tion,  therefore,  that  is  in  an  unqualified 
sense  continuous  and  one  must  be  specifically 
the  same,  of  one  thing,  and  in  one  time.  Unity 
is  required  in  respect  of  time  in  order  that 
there  may  be  no  interval  of  immobility,  for 
where  there  is  intermission  of  motion  there 
must  be  rest,  and  a  motion  that  includes  inter¬ 
vals  of  rest  will  be  not  one  but  many,  so  that 
[5]  a  motion  that  is  interrupted  by  stationari- 
ness  is  not  one  or  continuous,  and  it  is  so  inter¬ 
rupted  if  there  is  an  interval  of  time.  And 
though  of  a  motion  that  is  not  specifically  one 
(even  if  the  time  is  unintermittent)  the  time 
is  one,  the  motion  is  specifically  different,  and 
so  cannot  really  be  one,  for  motion  that  is  one 
[/o]  must  be  specifically  one,  though  motion 
that  is  specifically  one  is  not  necessarily  one  in 
an  unqualified  sense.  We  have  now  explained 
what  we  mean  when  we  call  a  motion  one 
without  qualification. 

Further,  a  motion  is  also  said  to  be  one  ge¬ 
nerically,  specifically,  or  essentially  when  it  is 
complete,  just  as  in  other  cases  completeness 
and  wholeness  are  characteristics  of  what  is 
one:  and  sometimes  a  motion  even  if  incom¬ 
plete  is  said  to  be  one,  provided  only  that  it  is 
continuous. 

[75]  And  besides  the  cases  already  mentioned 
there  is  another  in  which  a  motion  is  said  to  be 
one,  viz.  when  it  is  regular:  for  in  a  sense  a 
motion  that  is  irregular  is  not  regarded  as  one, 
that  title  belonging  rather  to  that  which  is  reg¬ 
ular,  as  a  straight  line  is  regular,  the  irregular 
being  as  such  divisible.  But  the  difference 
would  seem  to  be  one  of  degree.  In  every  kind 
of  motion  we  may  have  regularity  or  irregu- 
[20]  larity:  thus  there  may  be  regular  altera¬ 
tion,  and  locomotion  in  a  regular  path,  e.g.  in 
a  circle  or  on  a  straight  line,  and  it  is  the  same 
with  regard  to  increase  and  decrease.  The  dif¬ 
ference  that  makes  a  motion  irregular  is  some¬ 
times  to  be  found  in  its  path:  thus  a  motion 
cannot  be  regular  if  its  path  is  an  irregular 
magnitude,  e.g.  a  broken  line,  a  spiral,  or  any 
other  magnitude  that  is  not  such  that  any  part 
of  it  taken  at  random  fits  on  to  any  other  that 
[25]  may  be  chosen.  Sometimes  it  is  found 
neither  in  the  place  nor  in  the  time  nor  in  the 
goal  but  in  the  manner  of  the  motion:  for  in 
some  cases  the  motion  is  differentiated  by 


310 

quickness  and  slowness:  thus  if  its  velocity  is 
uniform  a  motion  is  regular,  if  not  it  is  irregu¬ 
lar.  So  quickness  and  slowness  are  not  species 
of  motion  nor  do  they  constitute  specific  dif¬ 
ferences  of  motion,  because  this  distinction  oc¬ 
curs  in  connexion  with  all  the  distinct  species 
[jo]  of  motion.  The  same  is  true  of  heaviness 
and  lightness  when  they  refer  to  the  same 
thing:  e.g.  they  do  not  specifically  distinguish 
earth  from  itself  or  fire  from  itself.  Irregular 
229a  motion,  therefore,  while  in  virtue  of  be¬ 
ing  continuous  it  is  one,  is  so  in  a  lesser  de¬ 
gree,  as  is  the  case  with  locomotion  in  a  broken 
line:  and  a  lesser  degree  of  something  always 
means  an  admixture  of  its  contrary.  And  since 
every  motion  that  is  one  can  be  both  regular 
and  irregular,  motions  that  are  consecutive 
[5]  but  not  specifically  the  same  cannot  be  one 
and  continuous:  for  how  should  a  motion  com¬ 
posed  of  alteration  and  locomotion  be  regular? 
If  a  motion  is  to  be  regular  its  parts  ought  to 
fit  one  another. 

5 

We  have  further  to  determine  what  motions  are 
contrary  to  each  other,  and  to  determine  sim¬ 
ilarly  how  it  is  with  rest.  And  we  have  first  to 
decide  whether  contrary  motions  are  motions 
respectively  from  and  to  the  same  thing,  e.g. 
[/o]  a  motion  from  health  and  a  motion  to 
health  (where  the  opposition,  it  would  seem,  is 
of  the  same  kind  as  that  between  coming  to  be 
and  ceasing  to  be);  or  motions  respectively 
from  contraries,  e.g.  a  motion  from  health  and 
a  motion  from  disease;  or  motions  respectively 
to  contraries,  e.g.  a  motion  to  health  and  a  mo¬ 
tion  to  disease;  or  motions  respectively  from  a 
contrary  and  to  the  opposite  contrary,  e.g.  a 
motion  from  health  and  a  motion  to  disease; 
or  motions  respectively  from  a  contrary  to  the 
opposite  contrary  and  from  the  latter  to  the  for¬ 
mer,  e.g.  a  motion  from  health  to  disease  and  a 
motion  from  disease  to  health:  for  motions 
[75]  must  be  contrary  to  one  another  in  one  or 
more  of  these  ways,  as  there  is  no  other  way  in 
which  they  can  be  opposed. 

Now  motions  respectively  from  a  contrary 
and  to  the  opposite  contrary,  e.g.  a  motion 
from  health  and  a  motion  to  disease,  are  not 
contrary  motions:  for  they  are  one  and  the 
same.  (Yet  their  essence  is  not  the  same,  just 
as  changing  from  health  is  different  from 
changing  to  disease.)  Nor  are  motions  re- 
[20]  spectively  from  a  contrary  and  from  the 
opposite  contrary  contrary  motions,  for  a  mo¬ 
tion  from  a  contrary  is  at  the  same  time  a  mo- 


229b 

tion  to  a  contrary  or  to  an  intermediate  (of 
this,  however,  we  shall  speak  later),1  but 
changing  to  a  contrary  rather  than  chang¬ 
ing  from  a  contrary  would  seem  to  be  the 
cause  of  the  contrariety  of  motions,  the  latter 
being  the  loss,  the  former  the  gain,  of  con- 
[25]  trariness.  Moreover,  each  several  motion 
takes  its  name  rather  from  the  goal  than  from 
the  starting-point  of  change,  e.g.  motion  to 
health  we  call  convalescence,  motion  to  dis¬ 
ease  sickening.  Thus  we  are  left  with  motions 
respectively  to  contraries,  and  motions  respec¬ 
tively  to  contraries  from  the  opposite  con¬ 
traries.  Now  it  would  seem  that  motions  to 
contraries  are  at  the  same  time  motions  from 
contraries  (though  their  essence  may  not  be 
the  same;  ‘to  health’  is  distinct,  I  mean,  from 
‘from  disease’,  and  ‘from  health’  from  ‘to  dis¬ 
ease’). 

[30]  Since  then  change  differs  from  motion 
(motion  being  change  from  a  particular  sub¬ 
ject  to  a  particular  subject),  it  follows  that  con¬ 
trary  motions  are  motions  respectively  from  a 
contrary  to  the  opposite  contrary  and  from  the 
229b  latter  to  the  former,  e.g.  a  motion  from 
health  to  disease  and  a  motion  from  disease  to 
health.  Moreover,  the  consideration  of  par¬ 
ticular  examples  will  also  show  what  kinds  of 
processes  are  generally  recognized  as  contrary: 
thus  falling  ill  is  regarded  as  contrary  to  recov- 
[5]  ering  one’s  health,  these  processes  having 
contrary  goals,  and  being  taught  as  contrary  to 
being  led  into  error  by  another,  it  being  pos¬ 
sible  to  acquire  error,  like  knowledge,  either  by 
one’s  own  agency  or  by  that  of  another.  Sim¬ 
ilarly  we  have  upward  locomotion  and  down¬ 
ward  locomotion,  which  are  contrary  length¬ 
wise,  locomotion  to  the  right  and  locomotion 
to  the  left,  which  are  contrary  breadthwise,  and 
forward  locomotion  and  backward  locomo¬ 
tion,  which  too  are  contraries.  On  the  other 
[zo]  hand,  a  process  simply  to  a  contrary, 
e.g.  that  denoted  by  the  expression  ‘becom¬ 
ing  white’,  where  no  starting-point  is  speci¬ 
fied,  is  a  change  but  not  a  motion.  And  in 
all  cases  of  a  thing  that  has  no  contrary  we 
have  as  contraries  change  from  and  change  to 
the  same  thing.  Thus  coming  to  be  is  contrary 
to  ceasing  to  be,  and  losing  to  gaining.  But 
these  are  changes  and  not  motions.  And  wher- 
[75]  ever  a  pair  of  contraries  admit  of  an  inter¬ 
mediate,  motions  to  that  intermediate  must  be 
held  to  be  in  a  sense  motions  to  one  or  other  of 
the  contraries:  for  the  intermediate  serves  as  a 
contrary  for  the  purposes  of  the  motion,  in 
1 1.  28  sqq. 


PHYSICS 


23  Ob  BOOK  V,  CHAPTERS  4-6  31 1 

whichever  direction  the  change  may  be,  e.g.  [/o]  there  be  a  particular  subject,  absence  of 


grey  in  a  motion  from  grey  to  white  takes  the 
place  of  black  as  starting-point,  in  a  motion 
from  white  to  grey  it  takes  the  place  of  black 
as  goal,  and  in  a  motion  from  black  to  grey  it 
takes  the  place  of  white  as  goal:  for  the  middle 
[20]  is  opposed  in  a  sense  to  either  of  the  ex¬ 
tremes,  as  has  been  said  above.1  Thus  we  see 
that  two  motions  are  contrary  to  each  other 
only  when  one  is  a  motion  from  a  contrary  to 
the  opposite  contrary  and  the  other  is  a  motion 
from  the  latter  to  the  former. 

6 

But  since  a  motion  appears  to  have  contrary 
to  it  not  only  another  motion  but  also  a  state 
of  rest,  we  must  determine  how  this  is  so.  A 
motion  has  for  its  contrary  in  the  strict  sense 
of  the  term  another  motion,  but  it  also  has  for 
an  opposite  a  state  of  rest  (for  rest  is  the  priva- 
[25]  tion  of  motion  and  the  privation  of  any¬ 
thing  may  be  called  its  contrary),  and  motion 
of  one  kind  has  for  its  opposite  rest  of  that 
kind,  e.g.  local  motion  has  local  rest.  This 
statement,  however,  needs  further  qualifica¬ 
tion:  there  remains  the  question,  is  the  oppo¬ 
site  of  remaining  at  a  particular  place  motion 
from  or  motion  to  that  place?  It  is  surely  clear 
that  since  there  are  two  subjects  between  which 
[30]  motion  takes  place,  motion  from  one  of 
these  (A)  to  its  contrary  ( B )  has  for  its  oppo¬ 
site  remaining  in  A,  while  the  reverse  motion 
has  for  its  opposite  remaining  in  B .  At  the  same 
time  these  two  are  also  contrary  to  each  other: 
for  it  would  be  absurd  to  suppose  that  there 
are  contrary  motions  and  not  opposite  states  of 
230a  rest.  States  of  rest  in  contraries  are  op¬ 
posed.  To  take  an  example,  a  state  of  rest  in 
health  is  ( 1 )  contrary  to  a  state  of  rest  in  dis¬ 
ease,  and  (2)  the  motion  to  which  it  is  con¬ 
trary  is  that  from  health  to  disease.  For  (2)  it 
would  be  absurd  that  its  contrary  motion 
should  be  that  from  disease  to  health,  since 
motion  to  that  in  which  a  thing  is  at  rest  is 
[5]  rather  a  coming  to  rest,  the  coming  to  rest 
being  found  to  come  into  being  simultaneously 
with  the  motion;  and  one  of  these  two  motions 
it  must  be.  And  (1)  rest  in  whiteness  is  of 
course  not  contrary  to  rest  in  health. 

Of  all  things  that  have  no  contraries  there 
are  opposite  changes  (viz.  change  from  the 
thing  and  change  to  the  thing,  e.g.  change 
from  being  and  change  to  being),  but  no  mo¬ 
tion.  So,  too,  of  such  things  there  is  no  remain¬ 
ing  though  there  is  absence  of  change.  Should 

1 224*  32  sqq. 


change  in  its  being  will  be  contrary  to  absence 
of  change  in  its  not-being.  And  here  a  difficulty 
may  be  raised:  if  not-being  is  not  a  particular 
something,  what  is  it,  it  may  be  asked,  that  is 
contrary  to  absence  of  change  in  a  thing’s  be¬ 
ing?  and  is  this  absence  of  change  a  state  of 
rest?  If  it  is,  then  either  it  is  not  true  that  every 
state  of  rest  is  contrary  to  a  motion  or  else 
coming  to  be  and  ceasing  to  be  are  motion. 
[75]  It  is  clear  then  that,  since  we  exclude 
these  from  among  motions,  we  must  not  say 
that  this  absence  of  change  is  a  state  of  rest: 
we  must  say  that  it  is  similar  to  a  state  of  rest 
and  call  it  absence  of  change.  And  it  will  have 
for  its  contrary  either  nothing  or  absence  of 
change  in  the  thing’s  not-being,  or  the  ceasing 
to  be  of  the  thing:  for  such  ceasing  to  be  is 
change  from  it  and  the  thing’s  coming  to  be  is 
change  to  it. 

Again,  a  further  difficulty  may  be  raised. 
How  is  it,  it  may  be  asked,  that  whereas  in 
local  change  both  remaining  and  moving  may 
[20]  be  natural  or  unnatural,  in  the  other 
changes  this  is  not  so?  e.g.  alteration  is  not  now 
natural  and  now  unnatural,  for  convalescence 
is  no  more  natural  or  unnatural  than  falling  ill, 
whitening  no  more  natural  or  unnatural  than 
blackening;  so,  too,  with  increase  and  decrease: 
these  are  not  contrary  to  each  other  in  the  sense 
[25]  that  either  of  them  is  natural  while  the 
other  is  unnatural,  nor  is  one  increase  contrary 
to  another  in  this  sense;  and  the  same  account 
may  be  given  of  becoming  and  perishing:  it  is 
not  true  that  becoming  is  natural  and  perish¬ 
ing  unnatural  (for  growing  old  is  natural), 
nor  do  we  observe  one  becoming  to  be  natural 
and  another  unnatural.  We  answer  that  if 
[30]  what  happens  under  violence  is  unnat¬ 
ural,  then  violent  perishing  is  unnatural  and  as 
such  contrary  to  natural  perishing.  Are  there 
then  also  some  becomings  that  are  violent  and 
not  the  result  of  natural  necessity,  and  are 
therefore  contrary  to  natural  becomings,  and 
23 0b  violent  increases  and  decreases,  e.g.  the 
rapid  growth  to  maturity  of  profligates  and  the 
rapid  ripening  of  seeds  even  when  not  packed 
close  in  the  earth?  And  how  is  it  with  altera¬ 
tions?  Surely  just  the  same:  we  may  say  that 
some  alterations  are  violent  while  others  are 
natural,  e.g.  patients  alter  naturally  or  unnat- 
[5]  urally  according  as  they  throw  off  fevers  on 
the  critical  days  or  not.  But,  it  may  be  objected, 
then  we  shall  have  perishings  contrary  to  one 
another,  not  to  becoming.  Certainly:  and  why 
should  not  this  in  a  sense  be  so?  Thus  it  is  so  if 


312 

one  perishing  is  pleasant  and  another  painful: 
and  so  one  perishing  will  be  contrary  to  an¬ 
other  not  in  an  unqualified  sense,  but  in  so  far 
as  one  has  this  quality  and  the  other  that. 

[/o]  Now  motions  and  states  of  rest  universal¬ 
ly  exhibit  contrariety  in  the  manner  described 
above,1  e.g.  upward  motion  and  rest  above  are 
respectively  contrary  to  downward  motion  and 
rest  below,  these  being  instances  of  local  con¬ 
trariety;  and  upward  locomotion  belongs  nat¬ 
urally  to  fire  and  downward  to  earth,  i.e.  the 
locomotions  of  the  two  are  contrary  to  each 
other.  And  again,  fire  moves  up  naturally  and 
down  unnaturally:  and  its  natural  motion  is 
[75]  certainly  contrary  to  its  unnatural  mo¬ 
tion.  Similarly  with  remaining:  remaining 
above  is  contrary  to  motion  from  above  down¬ 
wards,  and  to  earth  this  remaining  comes  un¬ 
naturally,  this  motion  naturally.  So  the  un¬ 
natural  remaining  of  a  thing  is  contrary  to  its 
natural  motion,  just  as  we  find  a  similar  con- 
[20]  trariety  in  the  motion  of  the  same  thing: 
one  of  its  motions,  the  upward  or  the  down¬ 
ward,  will  be  natural,  the  other  unnatural. 

Here,  however,  the  question  arises,  has  every 
state  of  rest  that  is  not  permanent  a  becoming, 
and  is  this  becoming  a  coming  to  a  standstill? 
If  so,  there  must  be  a  becoming  of  that  which 
is  at  rest  unnaturally,  e.g.  of  earth  at  rest 
above:  and  therefore  this  earth  during  the  time 
that  it  was  being  carried  violently  upward  was 
coming  to  a  standstill.  But  whereas  the  velocity 
of  that  which  comes  to  a  standstill  seems  al¬ 
ways  to  increase,  the  velocity  of  that  which  is 
[25]  carried  violently  seems  always  to  de¬ 
crease:  so  it  will  be  in  a  state  of  rest  without 
having  become  so.  Moreover  ‘coming  to  a 
standstill’  is  generally  recognized  to  be  iden¬ 
tical  or  at  least  concomitant  with  the  locomo¬ 
tion  of  a  thing  to  its  proper  place. 

There  is  also  another  difficulty  involved  in 
the  view  that  remaining  in  a  particular  place  is 
contrary  to  motion  from  that  place.  For  when 
a  thing  is  moving  from  or  discarding  some- 


23 1* 

thing,  it  still  appears  to  have  that  which  is 
[30]  being  discarded,  so  that  if  a  state  of  rest 
is  itself  contrary  to  the  motion  from  the  state 
of  rest  to  its  contrary,  the  contraries  rest  and 
motion  will  be  simultaneously  predicable  of 
the  same  thing.  May  we  not  say,  however,  that 
in  so  far  as  the  thing  is  still  stationary  it  is  in  a 
state  of  rest  in  a  qualified  sense?  For,  in  fact, 
whenever  a  thing  is  in  motion,  part  of  it  is  at 
the  starting-point  while  part  is  at  the  goal  to 
23  la  which  it  is  changing:  and  consequently 
a  motion  finds  its  true  contrary  rather  in  an¬ 
other  motion  than  in  a  state  of  rest. 

With  regard  to  motion  and  rest,  then,  we 
have  now  explained  in  what  sense  each  of  them 
is  one  and  under  what  conditions  they  exhibit 
contrariety. 

[5]  [With  regard  to  coming  to  a  standstill  the 
question  may  be  raised  whether  there  is  an  op¬ 
posite  state  of  rest  to  unnatural  as  well  as  to 
natural  motions.  It  would  be  absurd  if  this 
were  not  the  case:  for  a  thing  may  remain  still 
merely  under  violence:  thus  we  shall  have  a 
thing  being  in  a  non-permanent  state  of  rest 
without  having  become  so.  But  it  is  clear  that 
it  must  be  the  case:  for  just  as  there  is  unnat¬ 
ural  motion,  so,  too,  a  thing  may  be  in  an  un- 
[/o]  natural  state  of  rest.  Further,  some 
things  have  a  natural  and  an  unnatural  motion, 
e.g.  fire  has  a  natural  upward  motion  and  an 
unnatural  downward  motion:  is  it,  then,  this 
unnatural  downward  motion  or  is  it  the  nat¬ 
ural  downward  motion  of  earth  that  is  contrary 
to  the  natural  upward  motion?  Surely  it  is 
clear  that  both  are  contrary  to  it  though  not  in 
the  same  sense:  the  natural  motion  of  earth 
is  contrary  inasmuch  as  the  motion  of  fire  is 
[75]  also  natural,  whereas  the  upward  motion 
of  fire  as  being  natural  is  contrary  to  the 
downward  motion  of  fire  as  being  unnatural. 
The  same  is  true  of  the  corresponding  cases  of 
remaining.  But  there  would  seem  to  be  a  sense 
in  which  a  state  of  rest  and  a  motion  are  op¬ 
posites.] 


PHYSICS 


BOOK  VI 


1 

Now  if  the  terms  ‘continuous’,  ‘in  contact’,  and 
‘in  succession’  are  understood  as  defined  above2 
— things  being  ‘continuous’  if  their  extrem¬ 
ities  are  one,  ‘in  contact’  if  their  extremities  are 
together,  and  ‘in  succession’  if  there  is  nothing 
of  their  own  kind  intermediate  between  them 
1  In  chapter  5.  2  v.  3. 


— nothing  that  is  continuous  can  be  composed 
[25]  of  indivisibles:  e.g.  a  line  cannot  be  com¬ 
posed  of  points,  the  line  being  continuous  and 
the  point  indivisible.  For  the  extremities  of 
two  points  can  neither  be  one  (since  of  an  in¬ 
divisible  there  can  be  no  extremity  as  distinct 
from  some  other  part)  nor  together  (since  that 
which  has  no  parts  can  have  no  extremity,  the 


232*  BOOK  V,  CHAPTER  6— BOOK  VI,  CHAPTER  1 


extremity  and  the  thing  of  which  it  is  the 
extremity  being  distinct). 

Moreover,  if  that  which  is  continuous  is 
[jo]  composed  of  points,  these  points  must  be 
either  continuous  or  in  contact  with  one  an¬ 
other:  and  the  same  reasoning  applies  in  the 
231^  case  of  all  indivisibles.  Now  for  the  rea¬ 
son  given  above  they  cannot  be  continuous: 
and  one  thing  can  be  in  contact  with  another 
only  if  whole  is  in  contact  with  whole  or  part 
with  part  or  part  with  whole.  But  since  indi¬ 
visibles  have  no  parts,  they  must  be  in  con¬ 
tact  with  one  another  as  whole  with  whole. 
And  if  they  are  in  contact  with  one  another  as 
whole  with  whole,  they  will  not  be  continuous: 
[5]  for  that  which  is  continuous  has  distinct 
parts:  and  these  parts  into  which  it  is  divisible 
are  different  in  this  way,  i.e.  spatially  separate. 

Nor,  again,  can  a  point  be  in  succession  to  a 
point  or  a  moment  to  a  moment  in  such  a  way 
that  length  can  be  composed  of  points  or  time 
of  moments:  for  things  are  in  succession  if 
there  is  nothing  of  their  own  kind  intermedi¬ 
ate  between  them,  whereas  that  which  is  inter¬ 
mediate  between  points  is  always  a  line  and 
that  which  is  intermediate  between  moments 
is  always  a  period  of  time. 

[/o]  Again,  if  length  and  time  could  thus  be 
composed  of  indivisibles,  they  could  be  divided 
into  indivisibles,  since  each  is  divisible  into  the 
parts  of  which  it  is  composed.  But,  as  we  saw, 
no  continuous  thing  is  divisible  into  things 
without  parts.  Nor  can  there  be  anything  of 
any  other  kind  intermediate  between  the  parts 
or  between  the  moments:  for  if  there  could  be 
any  such  thing  it  is  clear  that  it  must  be  either 
indivisible  or  divisible,  and  if  it  is  divisible, 
it  must  be  divisible  either  into  indivisibles  or 
into  divisibles  that  are  infinitely  divisible,  in 
which  case  it  is  continuous. 

[75]  Moreover,  it  is  plain  that  everything  con¬ 
tinuous  is  divisible  into  divisibles  that  are 
infinitely  divisible:  for  if  it  were  divisible  into 
indivisibles,  we  should  have  an  indivisible  in 
contact  with  an  indivisible,  since  the  extrem¬ 
ities  of  things  that  are  continuous  with  one 
another  are  one  and  are  in  contact. 

The  same  reasoning  applies  equally  to  mag¬ 
nitude,  to  time,  and  to  motion:  either  all  of 
these  are  composed  of  indivisibles  and  are  di¬ 
visible  into  indivisibles,  or  none.  This  may  be 
[20]  made  clear  as  follows.  If  a  magnitude  is 
composed  of  indivisibles,  the  motion  over  that 
magnitude  must  be  composed  of  correspond¬ 
ing  indivisible  motions:  e.g.  if  the  magnitude 
ABr  is  composed  of  the  indivisibles  A,  B,  T, 


each  corresponding  part  of  the  motion  AEZ 
[25]  of  £2  over  ABr  is  indivisible.  Therefore, 
since  where  there  is  motion  there  must  be 
something  that  is  in  motion,  and  where  there 
is  something  in  motion  there  must  be  motion, 
therefore  the  being-moved  will  also  be  com¬ 
posed  of  indivisibles.  So  £2  traversed  A  when 
its  motion  was  A,  B  when  its  motion  was  E, 
and  T  similarly  when  its  motion  was  Z.  Now 
a  thing  that  is  in  motion  from  one  place  to 
another  cannot  at  the  moment  when  it  was  in 
motion  both  be  in  motion  and  at  the  same 
time  have  completed  its  motion  at  the  place  to 
which  it  was  in  motion:  e.g.  if  a  man  is  walk¬ 
ing  to  Thebes,  he  cannot  be  walking  to  Thebes 
[jo]  and  at  the  same  time  have  completed  his 
walk  to  Thebes:  and,  as  we  saw,  £2  traverses 
232*  the  partless  section  A  in  virtue  of  the 
presence  of  the  motion  A.  Consequently,  if  £2 
actually  passed  through  A  after  being  in  proc¬ 
ess  of  passing  through,  the  motion  must  be 
divisible:  for  at  the  time  when  £2  was  passing 
through,  it  neither  was  at  rest  nor  had  com¬ 
pleted  its  passage  but  was  in  an  intermediate 
state:  while  if  it  is  passing  through  and  has 
completed  its  passage  at  the  same  moment, 
[5]  then  that  which  is  walking  will  at  the 
moment  when  it  is  walking  have  completed  its 
walk  and  will  be  in  the  place  to  which  it  is 
walking;  that  is  to  say,  it  will  have  completed 
its  motion  at  the  place  to  which  it  is  in  mo¬ 
tion.  And  if  a  thing  is  in  motion  over  the 
whole  AB  T  and  its  motion  is  the  three  A,  E, 
and  Z,  and  if  it  is  not  in  motion  at  all  over  the 
partless  section  A  but  has  completed  its  motion 
over  it,  then  the  motion  will  consist  not  of  mo¬ 
tions  but  of  starts,  and  will  take  place  by  a 
thing’s  having  completed  a  motion  without  be¬ 
ing  in  motion:  for  on  this  assumption  it  has 
completed  its  passage  through  A  without  pass- 
[10]  ing  through  it.  So  it  will  be  possible  for  a 
thing  to  have  completed  a  walk  without  ever 
walking:  for  on  this  assumption  it  has  com¬ 
pleted  a  walk  over  a  particular  distance  without 
walking  over  that  distance.  Since,  then,  every¬ 
thing  must  be  either^  at  rest  or  in  motion,  and 
£2  is  therefore  at  rest  in  each  of  the  sections 
A,  B,  and  T,  it  follows  that  a  thing  can  be  con¬ 
tinuously  at  rest  and  at  the  same  time  in  mo¬ 
tion:  for,  as  we  saw,  £2  is  in  motion  over  the 
whole  ABr  and  at  rest  in  any  part  (and  conse- 
[75]  quently  in  the  whole)  of  it.  Moreover,  if 
the  indivisibles  composing  AEZ  are  motions,  it 
would  be  possible  for  a  thing  in  spite  of  the 
presence  in  it  of  motion  to  be  not  in  motion  but 
at  rest,  while  if  they  are  not  motions,  it  would 


3 14  PHYSICS  233a 


be  possible  for  motion  to  be  composed  of  some¬ 
thing  other  than  motions. 

And  if  length  and  motion  are  thus  indivisi¬ 
ble,  it  is  neither  more  nor  less  necessary  that 
time  also  be  similarly  indivisible,  that  is  to 
say  be  composed  of  indivisible  moments:  for  if 
[20]  the  whole  distance  is  divisible  and  an 
equal  velocity  will  cause  a  thing  to  pass 
through  less  of  it  in  less  time,  the  time  must 
also  be  divisible,  and  conversely,  if  the  time  in 
which  a  thing  is  carried  over  the  section  A  is 
divisible,  this  section  A  must  also  be  divisible. 

2 

And  since  every  magnitude  is  divisible  into 
magnitudes — for  we  have  shown  that  it  is  im¬ 
possible  for  anything  continuous  to  be  com¬ 
posed  of  indivisible  parts,  and  every  magni- 
[25]  tude  is  continuous — it  necessarily  follows 
that  the  quicker  of  two  things  traverses  a 
greater  magnitude  in  an  equal  time,  an  equal 
magnitude  in  less  time,  and  a  greater  magni¬ 
tude  in  less  time,  in  conformity  with  the  defi¬ 
nition  sometimes  given  of  ‘the  quicker’.  Sup¬ 
pose  that  A  is  quicker  than  B.  Now  since  of 
two  things  that  which  changes  sooner  is 
quicker,  in  the  time  ZH,  in  which  A  has 
[30]  changed  from  T  to  A,  B  will  not  yet  have 
arrived  at  A  but  will  be  short  of  it:  so  that  in 
an  equal  time  the  quicker  will  pass  over  a 
greater  magnitude.  More  than  this,  it  will  pass 
over  a  greater  magnitude  in  less  time:  for  in 
the  time  in  which  A  has  arrived  at  A,  B  being 
the  slower  has  arrived,  let  us  say,  at  E.  Then 
since  A  has  occupied  the  whole  time  ZH  in 
232b  arriving  at  A,  it  will  have  arrived  at  0 
in  less  time  than  this,  say  ZK.  Now  the  magni¬ 
tude  T0  that  A  has  passed  over  is  greater  than 
the  magnitude  TE,  and  the  time  ZK  is  less 
than  the  whole  time  ZH:  so  that  the  quicker 
will  pass  over  a  greater  magnitude  in  less  time. 
[5]  And  from  this  it  is  also  clear  that  the 
quicker  will  pass  over  an  equal  magnitude  in 
less  time  than  the  slower.  For  since  it  passes 
over  the  greater  magnitude  in  less  time  than 
the  slower,  and  (regarded  by  itself)  passes  over 
AM  the  greater  in  more  time  than  AS  the 
lesser,  the  time  IIP  in  which  it  passes  over 
AM  will  be  more  than  the  time  112  in  which 
[/o]  it  passes  over  AS:  so  that,  the  time  IIP 
being  less  than  the  time  IIX  in  which  the 
slower  passes  over  AS,  the  time  112  will  also 
be  less  than  the  time  IIX:  for  it  is  less  than 
the  time  IIP,  and  that  which  is  less  than  some¬ 
thing  else  that  is  less  than  a  thing  is  also  itself 
less  than  that  thing.  Hence  it  follows  that  the 


quicker  will  traverse  an  equal  magnitude  in 
less  time  than  the  slower.  Again,  since  the  mo- 
[75]  tion  of  anything  must  always  occupy 
either  an  equal  time  or  less  or  more  time  in 
comparison  with  that  of  another  thing,  and 
since,  whereas  a  thing  is  slower  if  its  motion 
occupies  more  time  and  of  equal  velocity  if 
its  motion  occupies  an  equal  time,  the  quicker 
is  neither  of  equal  velocity  nor  slower,  it  fol¬ 
lows  that  the  motion  of  the  quicker  can  occupy 
neither  an  equal  time  nor  more  time.  It  can 
only  be,  then,  that  it  occupies  less  time,  and 
thus  we  get  the  necessary  consequence  that 
the  quicker  will  pass  over  an  equal  magnitude 
[20]  (as  well  as  a  greater)  in  less  time  than  the 
slower. 

And  since  every  motion  is  in  time  and  a  mo¬ 
tion  may  occupy  any  time,  and  the  motion  of 
everything  that  is  in  motion  may  be  either 
quicker  or  slower,  both  quicker  motion  and 
slower  motion  may  occupy  any  time:  and  this 
being  so,  it  necessarily  follows  that  time  also  is 
continuous.  By  continuous  I  mean  that  which 
is  divisible  into  divisibles  that  are  infinitely 
[25]  divisible:  and  if  we  take  this  as  the  defi¬ 
nition  of  continuous,  it  follows  necessarily  that 
time  is  continuous.  For  since  it  has  been  shown 
that  the  quicker  will  pass  over  an  equal  mag¬ 
nitude  in  less  time  than  the  slower,  suppose 
that  A  is  quicker  and  B  slower,  and  that  the 
[30]  slower  has  traversed  the  magnitude  TA 
in  the  time  ZH.  Now  it  is  clear  that  the  quicker 
will  traverse  the  same  magnitude  in  less  time 
than  this:  let  us  say  in  the  time  Z0.  Again, 
since  the  quicker  has  passed  over  the  whole 
TA  in  the  time  Z0,  the  slower  will  in  the 
same  time  pass  over  TK,  say,  which  is  less 
233a  than  TA.  And  since  B,  the  slower,  has 
passed  over  TK  in  the  time  Z0,  the  quicker 
will  pass  over  it  in  less  time:  so  that  the  time 
Z0  will  again  be  divided.  And  if  this  is  di¬ 
vided  the  magnitude  TK  will  also  be  divided 
just  as  TA  was:  and  again,  if  the  magnitude 
is  divided,  the  time  will  also  be  divided.  And 
[5]  we  can  carry  on  this  process  for  ever,  tak¬ 
ing  the  slower  after  the  quicker  and  the 
quicker  after  the  slower  alternately,  and  using 
what  has  been  demonstrated  at  each  stage  as  a 
new  point  of  departure:  for  the  quicker  will 
divide  the  time  and  the  slower  will  divide  the 
length.  If,  then,  this  alternation  always  holds 
good,  and  at  every  turn  involves  a  division,  it 
[/o]  is  evident  that  all  time  must  be  continu¬ 
ous.  And  at  the  same  time  it  is  clear  that 
all  magnitude  is  also  continuous;  for  the  divi¬ 
sions  of  which  time  and  magnitude  respec- 


233b  BOOK  VI,  CHAPTERS  1-3  315 


tively  are  susceptible  are  the  same  and  equal. 

Moreover,  the  current  popular  arguments 
make  it  plain  that,  if  time  is  continuous,  mag¬ 
nitude  is  continuous  also,  inasmuch  as  a  thing 
passes  over  half  a  given  magnitude  in  half  the 
[75]  time  taken  to  cover  the  whole:  in  fact 
without  qualification  it  passes  over  a  less  mag¬ 
nitude  in  less  time;  for  the  divisions  of  time 
and  of  magnitude  will  be  the  same.  And  if 
either  is  infinite,  so  is  the  other,  and  the  one  is 
so  in  the  same  way  as  the  other;  i.e.  if  time  is 
infinite  in  respect  of  its  extremities,  length  is 
also  infinite  in  respect  of  its  extremities:  if 
time  is  infinite  in  respect  of  divisibility, 
[20]  length  is  also  infinite  in  respect  of  divisi¬ 
bility:  and  if  time  is  infinite  in  both  respects, 
magnitude  is  also  infinite  in  both  respects. 

Hence  Zeno’s  argument  makes  a  false  as¬ 
sumption  in  asserting  that  it  is  impossible  for 
a  thing  to  pass  over  or  severally  to  come  in  con¬ 
tact  with  infinite  things  in  a  finite  time.  For 
there  are  two  senses  in  which  length  and  time 
and  generally  anything  continuous  are  called 
[25]  ‘infinite’:  they  are  called  so  either  in  re¬ 
spect  of  divisibility  or  in  respect  of  their  ex¬ 
tremities.  So  while  a  thing  in  a  finite  time  can¬ 
not  come  in  contact  with  things  quantitatively 
infinite,  it  can  come  in  contact  with  things  in¬ 
finite  in  respect  of  divisibility:  for  in  this  sense 
the  time  itself  is  also  infinite:  and  so  we  find 
that  the  time  occupied  by  the  passage  over  the 
[30]  infinite  is  not  a  finite  but  an  infinite  time, 
and  the  contact  with  the  infinites  is  made  by 
means  of  moments  not  finite  but  infinite  in 
number. 

The  passage  over  the  infinite,  then,  cannot 
occupy  a  finite  time,  and  the  passage  over  the 
finite  cannot  occupy  an  infinite  time:  if  the 
time  is  infinite  the  magnitude  must  be  infinite 
also,  and  if  the  magnitude  is  infinite,  so  also  is 
the  time.  This  may  be  shown  as  follows.  Let 
AB  be  a  finite  magnitude,  and  let  us  suppose 
that  it  is  traversed  in  infinite  time  T,  and  let 
[35]  a  finite  period  TA  of  the  time  be  taken. 
233b  Now  in  this  period  the  thing  in  motion 
will  pass  over  a  certain  segment  of  the  magni¬ 
tude:  let  BE  be  the  segment  that  it  has  thus 
passed  over.  (This  will  be  either  an  exact  meas¬ 
ure  of  AB  or  less  or  greater  than  an  exact 
measure:  it  makes  no  difference  which  it  is.) 
Then,  since  a  magnitude  equal  to  BE  will  al¬ 
ways  be  passed  over  in  an  equal  time,  and  BE 
[5]  measures  the  whole  magnitude,  the  whole 
time  occupied  in  passing  over  AB  will  be 
finite:  for  it  will  be  divisible  into  periods  equal 
in  number  to  the  segments  into  which  the 


magnitude  is  divisible.  Moreover,  if  it  is  the 
case  that  infinite  time  is  not  occupied  in  pass¬ 
ing  over  every  magnitude,  but  it  is  possible  to 
pass  over  some  magnitude,  say  BE,  in  a  finite 
[/o]  time,  and  if  this  BE  measures  the  whole 
of  which  it  is  a  part,  and  if  an  equal  magnitude 
is  passed  over  in  an  equal  time,  then  it  follows 
that  the  time  like  the  magnitude  is  finite.  That 
infinite  time  will  not  be  occupied  in  passing 
over  BE  is  evident  if  the  time  be  taken  as  lim¬ 
ited  in  one  direction:  for  as  the  part  will  be 
passed  over  in  less  time  than  the  whole,  the 
time  occupied  in  traversing  this  part  must  be 
finite,  the  limit  in  one  direction  being  given. 
The  same  reasoning  will  also  show  the  falsity 
of  the  assumption  that  infinite  length  can  be 
[75]  traversed  in  a  finite  time.  It  is  evident, 
then,  from  what  has  been  said  that  neither  a 
line  nor  a  surface  nor  in  fact  anything  con¬ 
tinuous  can  be  indivisible. 

This  conclusion  follows  not  only  from  the 
present  argument  but  from  the  consideration 
that  the  opposite  assumption  implies  the  di¬ 
visibility  of  the  indivisible.  For  since  the  dis¬ 
tinction  of  quicker  and  slower  may  apply  to 
[20]  motions  occupying  any  period  of  time 
and  in  an  equal  time  the  quicker  passes  over  a 
greater  length,  it  may  happen  that  it  will  pass 
over  a  length  twice,  or  one  and  a  half  times,  as 
great  as  that  passed  over  by  the  slower:  for 
their  respective  velocities  may  stand  to  one 
another  in  this  proportion.  Suppose,  then,  that 
the  quicker  has  in  the  same  time  been  carried 
over  a  length  one  and  a  half  times  as  great  as 
that  traversed  by  the  slower,  and  that  the  re¬ 
spective  magnitudes  are  divided,  that  of  the 
quicker,  the  magnitude  ABrA,  into  three  in¬ 
divisibles,  and  that  of  the  slower  into  the  two 
[25]  indivisibles  EZ,  ZH.  Then  the  time  may 
also  be  divided  into  three  indivisibles,  for  an 
equal  magnitude  will  be  passed  over  in  an 
equal  time.  Suppose  then  that  it  is  thus  divided 
into  KA,  AM,  MN.  Again,  since  in  the  same 
time  the  slower  has  been  carried  over  EZ,  ZH, 
the  time  may  also  be  similarly  divided  into  two. 
Thus  the  indivisible  will  be  divisible,  and  that 
[30]  which  has  no  parts  will  be  passed  over 
not  in  an  indivisible  but  in  a  greater  time.  It 
is  evident,  therefore,  that  nothing  continuous 
is  without  parts. 

3 

The  present  also  is  necessarily  indivisible — the 
present,  that  is,  not  in  the  sense  in  which  the 
word  is  applied  to  one  thing  in  virtue  of  an¬ 
other,  but  in  its  proper  and  primary  sense;  in 


3 1 6  PHYSICS  23 4b 


[35]  which  sense  it  is  inherent  in  all  time.  For 
234a  the  present  is  something  that  is  an  ex¬ 
tremity  of  the  past  (no  part  of  the  future  be¬ 
ing  on  this  side  of  it)  and  also  of  the  future 
(no  part  of  the  past  being  on  the  other  side  of 
it):  it  is,  as  we  have  said,1  a  limit  of  both.  And 
if  it  is  once  shown  that  it  is  essentially  of  this 
character  and  one  and  the  same,  it  will  at  once 
be  evident  also  that  it  is  indivisible. 

[5]  Now  the  present  that  is  the  extremity  of 
both  times  must  be  one  and  the  same:  for  if 
each  extremity  were  different,  the  one  could  not 
be  in  succession  to  the  other,  because  nothing 
continuous  can  be  composed  of  things  having 
no  parts:  and  if  the  one  is  apart  from  the  other, 
there  will  be  time  intermediate  between  them, 
because  everything  continuous  is  such  that  there 
is  something  intermediate  between  its  limits 
and  described  by  the  same  name  as  itself.  But 
if  the  intermediate  thing  is  time,  it  will  be 
[jo]  divisible:  for  all  time  has  been  shown2  to 
be  divisible.  Thus  on  this  assumption  the 
present  is  divisible.  But  if  the  present  is  divisi¬ 
ble,  there  will  be  part  of  the  past  in  the  future 
and  part  of  the  future  in  the  past:  for  past  time 
will  be  marked  off  from  future  time  at  the 
actual  point  of  division.  Also  the  present  will 
[75]  be  a  present  not  in  the  proper  sense  but  in 
virtue  of  something  else:  for  the  division  which 
yields  it  will  not  be  a  division  proper.  Further¬ 
more,  there  will  be  a  part  of  the  present  that  is 
past  and  a  part  that  is  future,  and  it  will  not 
always  be  the  same  part  that  is  past  or  future: 
in  fact  one  and  the  same  present  will  not  be 
simultaneous:  for  the  time  may  be  divided  at 
many  points.  If,  therefore,  the  present  cannot 
possibly  have  these  characteristics,  it  follows 
that  it  must  be  the  same  present  that  belongs 
[20]  to  each  of  the  two  times.  But  if  this  is  so 
it  is  evident  that  the  present  is  also  indivisible: 
for  if  it  is  divisible  it  will  be  involved  in  the 
same  implications  as  before.  It  is  clear,  then, 
from  what  has  been  said  that  time  contains 
something  indivisible,  and  this  is  what  we  call 
a  present. 

We  will  now  show  that  nothing  can  be  in 
[25]  motion  in  a  present.  For  if  this  is  possible, 
there  can  be  both  quicker  and  slower  motion 
in  the  present.  Suppose  then  that  in  the  present 
N  the  quicker  has  traversed  the  distance  AB. 
That  being  so,  the  slower  will  in  the  same 
present  traverse  a  distance  less  than  AB,  say 
AT.  But  since  the  slower  will  have  occupied 
the  whole  present  in  traversing  Ar,  the 
[30]  quicker  will  occupy  less  than  this  in  trav- 
1  222*  12.  2  Chapter  2. 


ersing  it.  Thus  we  shall  have  a  division  of  the 
present,  whereas  we  found  it  to  be  indivisible. 
It  is  impossible,  therefore,  for  anything  to  be 
in  motion  in  a  present. 

Nor  can  anything  be  at  rest  in  a  present:  for, 
as  we  were  saying,3  that  only  can  be  at  rest 
which  is  naturally  designed  to  be  in  motion  but 
is  not  in  motion  when,  where,  or  as  it  would 
naturally  be  so:  since,  therefore,  nothing  is 
naturally  designed  to  be  in  motion  in  a  present, 
it  is  clear  that  nothing  can  be  at  rest  in  a 
present  either. 

Moreover,  inasmuch  as  it  is  the  same  present 
[35]  that  belongs  to  both  the  times,  and  it  is 
possible  for  a  thing  to  be  in  motion  throughout 
one  time  and  to  be  at  rest  throughout  the 
234b  other,  and  that  which  is  in  motion  or  at 
rest  for  the  whole  of  a  time  will  be  in  motion 
or  at  rest  as  the  case  may  be  in  any  part  of  it 
in  which  it  is  naturally  designed  to  be  in  mo¬ 
tion  or  at  rest:  this  being  so,  the  assumption 
that  there  can  be  motion  or  rest  in  a  present 
will  carry  with  it  the  implication  that  the  same 
thing  can  at  the  same  time  be  at  rest  and  in  mo¬ 
tion:  for  both  the  times  have  the  same  ex¬ 
tremity,  viz.  the  present. 

[5]  Again,  when  we  say  that  a  thing  is  at  rest, 
we  imply  that  its  condition  in  whole  and  in 
part  is  at  the  time  of  speaking  uniform  with 
what  it  was  previously:  but  the  present  con¬ 
tains  no  ‘previously’ :  consequently,  there  can 
be  no  rest  in  it. 

It  follows  then  that  the  motion  of  that  which 
is  in  motion  and  the  rest  of  that  which  is  at 
rest  must  occupy  time. 

4 

[jo]  Further,  everything  that  changes  must  be 
divisible.  For  since  every  change  is  from  some¬ 
thing  to  something,  and  when  a  thing  is  at  the 
goal  of  its  change  it  is  no  longer  changing,  and 
when  both  it  itself  and  all  its  parts  are  at  the 
starting-point  of  its  change  it  is  not  changing 
(for  that  which  is  in  whole  and  in  part  in  an 
unvarying  condition  is  not  in  a  state  of 
[75]  change);  it  follows,  therefore,  that  part  of 
that  which  is  changing  must  be  at  the  starting- 
point  and  part  at  the  goal:  for  as  a  whole  it 
cannot  be  in  both  or  in  neither.  (Here  by  ‘goal 
of  change’  I  mean  that  which  comes  first  in  the 
process  of  change:  e.g.  in  a  process  of  change 
from  white  the  goal  in  question  will  be  grey, 
not  black:  for  it  is  not  necessary  that  that  which 
[20]  is  changing  should  be  at  either  of 
the  extremes.)  It  is  evident,  therefore,  that 
*  226b  12  sqq. 


235b 

everything  that  changes  must  be .  divisible. 

Now  motion  is  divisible  in  two  senses.  In  the 
first  place  it  is  divisible  in  virtue  of  the  time 
that  it  occupies.  In  the  second  place  it  is  divis¬ 
ible  according  to  the  motions  of  the  several 
parts  of  that  which  is  in  motion:  e.g.  if  the 
whole  Ar  is  in  motion,  there  will  be  a  motion 
of  AB  and  a  motion  of  BI\  That  being  so,  let 
AE  be  the  motion  of  the  part  AB  and  EZ  the 
[25]  motion  of  the  part  BI\  Then  the  whole 
AZ  must  be  the  motion  of  Ar:  for  AZ  must 
constitute  the  motion  of  AT  inasmuch  as  AE 
and  EZ  severally  constitute  the  motions  of  each 
of  its  parts.  But  the  motion  of  a  thing  can  never 
be  constituted  by  the  motion  of  something 
else:  consequently  the  whole  motion  is  the  mo¬ 
tion  of  the  whole  magnitude. 

Again,  since  every  motion  is  a  motion  of 
something,  and  the  whole  motion  AZ  is  not 
the  motion  of  either  of  the  parts  (for  each  of 
the  parts  AE,  EZ  is  the  motion  of  one  of  the 
[30]  parts  AB,  Br  )  or  of  anything  else  (for, 
the  whole  motion  being  the  motion  of  a  whole, 
the  parts  of  the  motion  are  the  motions  of  the 
parts  of  that  whole:  and  the  parts  of  AZ  are 
the  motions  of  AB,  Br  and  of  nothing  else: 
for,  as  we  saw,1  a  motion  that  is  one  cannot  be 
the  motion  of  more  things  than  one):  since 
this  is  so,  the  whole  motion  will  be  the  motion 
of  the  magnitude  ABr. 

Again,  if  there  is  a  motion  of  the  whole 
other  than  AZ,  say  01,  the  motion  of  each  of 
the  parts  may  be  subtracted  from  it:  and  these 
[55]  motions  will  be  equal  to  AE,  EZ  respec- 
235a  tively:  for  the  motion  of  that  which  is 
one  must  be  one.  So  if  the  whole  motion  01 
may  be  divided  into  the  motions  of  the  parts, 
01  will  be  equal  to  AZ:  if  on  the  other  hand 
there  is  any  remainder,  say  KI,  this  will  be  a 
[5]  motion  of  nothing:  for  it  can  be  the  mo¬ 
tion  neither  of  the  whole  nor  of  the  parts  (as 
the  motion  of  that  which  is  one  must  be  one) 
nor  of  anything  else:  for  a  motion  that  is  con¬ 
tinuous  must  be  the  motion  of  things  that  are 
continuous.  And  the  same  result  follows  if  the 
division  of  01  reveals  a  surplus  on  the  side  of 
the  motions  of  the  parts.  Consequently,  if  this 
is  impossible,  the  whole  motion  must  be  the 
same  as  and  equal  to  AZ. 

This  then  is  what  is  meant  by  the  division 
of  motion  according  to  the  motions  of  the 
parts:  and  it  must  be  applicable  to  everything 
that  is  divisible  into  parts. 

[/o]  Motion  is  also  susceptible  of  another  kind 
of  division,  that  according  to  time.  For  since 

1 223b  1  sqq. 


3*7 

all  motion  is  in  time  and  all  time  is  divisible, 
and  in  less  time  the  motion  is  less,  it  follows 
that  every  motion  must  be  divisible  according 
to  time.  And  since  everything  that  is  in  motion 
is  in  motion  in  a  certain  sphere  and  for  a  cer¬ 
tain  time  and  has  a  motion  belonging  to  it,  it 
[75]  follows  that  the  time,  the  motion,  the 
being-in-motion,  the  thing  that  is  in  motion, 
and  the  sphere  of  the  motion  must  all  be  sus¬ 
ceptible  of  the  same  divisions  (though  spheres 
of  motion  are  not  all  divisible  in  a  like  man¬ 
ner:  thus  quantity  is  essentially,  quality  acci¬ 
dentally  divisible).  For  suppose  that  A  is 'the 
time  occupied  by  the  motion  B.  Then  if  all  the 
[20]  time  has  been  occupied  by  the  whole  mo¬ 
tion,  it  will  take  less  of  the  motion  to  occupy 
half  the  time,  less  again  to  occupy  a  further 
subdivision  of  the  time,  and  so  on  to  infinity. 
Again,  the  time  will  be  divisible  similarly  to 
the  motion:  for  if  the  whole  motion  occupies 
all  the  time  half  the  motion  will  occupy  half 
the  time,  and  less  of  the  motion  again  will 
occupy  less  of  the  time. 

[25]  In  the  same  way  the  being-in-motion  will 
also  be  divisible.  For  let  T  be  the  whole  being- 
in-motion.  Then  the  being-in-motion  that 
corresponds  to  half  the  motion  will  be  less 
than  the  whole  being-in-motion,  that  which 
corresponds  to  a  quarter  of  the  motion  will  be 
less  again,  and  so  on  to  infinity.  Moreover  by 
setting  out  successively  the  being-in-motion 
corresponding  to  each  of  the  two  motions  Ar 
(say)  and  TE,  we  may  argue  that  the  whole 
[jo]  being-in-motion  will  correspond  to  the 
whole  motion  (for  if  it  were  some  other  being- 
in-motion  that  corresponded  to  the  whole  mo¬ 
tion,  there  would  be  more  than  one  being-in¬ 
motion  corresponding  to  the  same  motion), 
the  argument  being  the  same  as  that  whereby 
we  showed2  that  the  motion  of  a  thing  is  di¬ 
visible  into  the  motions  of  the  parts  of  the 
thing:  for  if  we  take  separately  the  being-in¬ 
motion  corresponding  to  each  of  the  two  mo¬ 
tions,  we  shall  see  that  the  whole  being-in- 
motion  is  continuous. 

The  same  reasoning  will  show  the  divisi¬ 
bility  of  the  length,  and  in  fact  of  everything 
that  forms  a  sphere  of  change  (though  some 
[ J5]  of  these  are  only  accidentally  divisible  be¬ 
cause  that  which  changes  is  so):  for  the  divi¬ 
sion  of  one  term  will  involve  the  division  of 
all.  So,  too,  in  the  matter  of  their  being  finite 
or  infinite,  they  will  all  alike  be  either  the  one 
235b  or  the  other.  And  we  now  see  that  in 
most  cases  the  fact  that  all  the  terms  are  divisi- 
2  234b  24  sqq.,  especially  234**  34  sqq. 


BOOK  VI,  CHAPTERS  3-4 


3i  8  PHYSICS  236* 


ble  or  infinite  is  a  direct  consequence  of  the 
fact  that  the  thing  that  changes  is  divisible  or 
infinite:  for  the  attributes  ‘divisible’  and  ‘in¬ 
finite’  belong  in  the  first  instance  to  the  thing 
[5]  that  changes.  That  divisibility  does  so  we 
have  already1  shown:  that  infinity  does  so  will 
be  made  clear  in  what  follows.2 

5 

Since  everything  that  changes  changes  from 
something  to  something,  that  which  has 
changed  must  at  the  moment  when  it  has  first 
changed  be  in  that  to  which  it  has  changed.  For 
that  which  changes  retires  from  or  leaves  that 
from  which  it  changes:  and  leaving,  if  not 
identical  with  changing,  is  at  any  rate  a  con- 
[/o]  sequence  of  it.  And  if  leaving  is  a  conse¬ 
quence  of  changing,  having  left  is  a  conse¬ 
quence  of  having  changed:  for  there  is  a  like 
relation  between  the  two  in  each  case. 

One  kind  of  change,  then,  being  change  in  a 
relation  of  contradiction,  where  a  thing  has 
changed  from  not-being  to  being  it  has  left 
[75]  not-being.  Therefore  it  will  be  in  being: 
for  everything  must  either  be  or  not  be.  It  is 
evident,  then,  that  in  contradictory  change  that 
which  has  changed  must  be  in  that  to  which 
it  has  changed.  And  if  this  is  true  in  this  kind 
of  change,  it  will  be  true  in  all  other  kinds  as 
well:  for  in  this  matter  what  holds  good  in  the 
case  of  one  will  hold  good  likewise  in  the  case 
of  the  rest. 

Moreover,  if  we  take  each  kind  of  change 
separately,  the  truth  of  our  conclusion  will  be 
equally  evident,  on  the  ground  that  that  which 
has  changed  must  be  somewhere  or  in  some- 
[20]  thing.  For,  since  it  has  left  that  from  which 
it  has  changed  and  must  be  somewhere,  it  must 
be  either  in  that  to  which  it  has  changed  or  in 
something  else.  If,  then,  that  which  has  changed 
to  B  is  in  something  other  than  B,  say  T,  it 
must  again  be  changing  from  T  to  B:  for  it 
cannot  be  assumed  that  there  is  no  interval  be- 
[25]  tween  T  and  B,  since  change  is  continu¬ 
ous.  Thus  we  have  the  result  that  the  thing 
that  has  changed,  at  the  moment  when  it  has 
changed,  is  changing  to  that  to  which  it  has 
changed,  which  is  impossible:  that  which  has 
changed,  therefore,  must  be  in  that  to  which  it 
has  changed.  So  it  is  evident  likewise  that  that 
which  has  come  to  be,  at  the  moment  when  it 
has  come  to  be,  will  be,  and  that  which  has 
ceased  to  be  will  not-be:  for  what  we  have  said 
applies  universally  to  every  kind  of  change, 
and  its  truth  is  most  obvious  in  the  case  of 

1 234b  10-20.  *  Chapter  7. 


[30]  contradictory  change.  It  is  clear,  then, 
that  that  which  has  changed,  at  the  moment 
when  it  has  first  changed,  is  in  that  to  which  it 
has  changed. 

We  will  now  show  that  the  ‘primary  when’ 
in  which  that  which  has  changed  effected  the 
completion  of  its  change  must  be  indivisible, 
where  by  ‘primary’  I  mean  possessing  the  char¬ 
acteristics  in  question  of  itself  and  not  in  virtue 
of  the  possession  of  them  by  something  else 
belonging  to  it.  For  let  AT  be  divisible,  and 
[35]  let  h  be  divided  at  B.  If  then  the  com¬ 
pletion  of  change  has  been  effected  in  AB  or 
again  in  BT,  AT  cannot  be  the  primary  thing 
in  which  the  completion  of  change  has  been 
effected.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  it  has  been 
changing  in  both  AB  and  Br  (for  it  must 
either  have  changed  or  be  changing  in  each  of 
236*  them),  it  must  have  been  changing  in 
the  whole  AT:  but  our  assumption  was  that 
AT  contains  only  the  completion  of  the 
change.  It  is  equally  impossible  to  suppose  that 
one  part  of  Ar  contains  the  process  and  the 
other  the  completion  of  the  change:  for  then 
we  shall  have  something  prior  to  what  is  pri¬ 
mary.  So  that  in  which  the  completion  of 
change  has  been  effected  must  be  indivisible. 
[5]  it  is  also  evident,  therefore,  that  that  in 
which  that  which  has  ceased  to  be  has  ceased 
to  be  and  that  in  which  that  which  has  come  to 
be  has  come  to  be  are  indivisible. 

But  there  are  two  senses  of  the  expression 
‘the  primary  when  in  which  something  has 
changed’.  On  the  one  hand  it  may  mean  the 
primary  when  containing  the  completion  of  the 
process  of  change — the  moment  when  it  is  cor¬ 
rect  to  say  ‘it  has  changed’:  on  the  other  hand 
it  may  mean  the  primary  when  containing  the 
beginning  of  the  process  of  change.  Now  the 
[/o]  primary  when  that  has  reference  to  the 
end  of  the  change  is  something  really  existent: 
for  a  change  may  really  be  completed,  and 
there  is  such  a  thing  as  an  end  of  change, 
which  we  have  in  fact  shown  to  be  indivisible 
because  it  is  a  limit.  But  that  which  has  refer¬ 
ence  to  the  beginning  is  not  existent  at  all:  for 
there  is  no  such  thing  as  a  beginning  of  a 
process  of  change,  and  the  time  occupied  by 
the  change  does  not  contain  any  primary  when 
[75]  in  which  the  change  began.  For  suppose 
that  A  A  is  such  a  primary  when.  Then  it  can¬ 
not  be  indivisible:  for,  if  it  were,  the  moment 
immediately  preceding  the  change  and  the 
moment  in  which  the  change  begins  would 
be  consecutive  (and  moments  cannot  be  con¬ 
secutive).  Again,  if  the  changing  thing  is  at 


23 7‘ 

rest  in  the  whole  preceding  time  T A  (for  we 
may  suppose  that  it  is  at  rest),  it  is  at  rest  in  A 
also:  so  if  AA  is  without  parts,  it  will  simul¬ 
taneously  be  at  rest  and  have  changed:  for  it  is 
[20]  at  rest  in  A  and  has  changed  in  A.  Since 
then  AA  is  not  without  parts,  it  must  be  di¬ 
visible,  and  the  changing  thing  must  have 
changed  in  every  part  of  it  (for  if  it  has 
changed  in  neither  of  the  two  parts  into  which 
AA  is  divided,  it  has  not  changed  in  the  whole 
either:  if,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  in  process  of 
change  in  both  parts,  it  is  likewise  in  process 
of  change  in  the  whole:  and  if,  again,  it  has 
changed  in  one  of  the  two  parts,  the  whole  is 
not  the  primary  when  in  which  it  has  changed: 
[25]  it  must  therefore  have  changed  in  every 
part).  It  is  evident,  then,  that  with  reference  to 
the  beginning  of  change  there  is  no  primary 
when  in  which  change  has  been  effected:  for 
the  divisions  are  infinite. 

So,  too,  of  that  which  has  changed  there  is 
no  primary  part  that  has  changed.  For  suppose 
that  of  AE  the  primary  part  that  has  changed 
is  AZ  (everything  that  changes  having  been 
[jo]  shown1  to  be  divisible):  and  let  91  be  the 
time  in  which  AZ  has  changed.  If,  then,  in  the 
whole  time  AZ  has  changed,  in  half  the  time 
there  will  be  a  part  that  has  changed,  less  than 
and  therefore  prior  to  AZ:  and  again  there 
will  be  another  part  prior  to  this,  and  yet  an¬ 
other,  and  so  on  to  infinity.  Thus  of  that  which 
changes  there  cannot  be  any  primary  part  that 
[55]  has  changed.  It  is  evident,  then,  from 
what  has  been  said,  that  neither  of  that  which 
changes  nor  of  the  time  in  which  it  changes  is 
there  any  primary  part. 

236b  With  regard,  however,  to  the  actual  sub¬ 
ject  of  change — that  is  to  say  that  in  respect  of 
which  a  thing  changes — there  is  a  difference  to 
be  observed.  For  in  a  process  of  change  we  may 
distinguish  three  terms — that  which  changes, 
that  in  which  it  changes,  and  the  actual  sub¬ 
ject  of  change,  e.g.  the  man,  the  time,  and  the 
fair  complexion.  Of  these  the  man  and  the  time 
[5]  are  divisible:  but  with  the  fair  complexion 
it  is  otherwise  (though  they  are  all  divisible 
accidentally,  for  that  in  which  the  fair  com¬ 
plexion  or  any  other  quality  is  an  accident  is 
divisible).  For  of  actual  subjects  of  change  it 
will  be  seen  that  those  which  are  classed  as  es¬ 
sentially,  not  accidentally,  divisible  have  no 
[/o]  primary  part.  Take  the  case  of  magni¬ 
tudes:  let  AB  be  a  magnitude,  and  suppose 
that  it  has  moved  from  B  to  a  primary  ‘where* 
T.  Then  if  Br  is  taken  to  be  indivisible,  two 
1  234b  10  sqq. 


319 

things  without  parts  will  have  to  be  contiguous 
(which  is  impossible):  if  on  the  other  hand  it 
is  taken  to  be  divisible,  there  will  be  something 
prior  to  T  to  which  the  magnitude  has 
changed,  and  something  else  again  prior  to 
that,  and  so  on  to  infinity,  because  the  process 
[75]  of  division  may  be  continued  without 
end.  Thus  there  can  be  no  primary  ‘where*  to 
which  a  thing  has  changed.  And  if  we  take  the 
case  of  quantitative  change,  we  shall  get  a  like 
result,  for  here  too  the  change  is  in  something 
continuous.  It  is  evident,  then,  that  only  in 
qualitative  motion  can  there  be  anything  essen¬ 
tially  indivisible. 

6 

[20]  Now  everything  that  changes  changes  in 
time,  and  that  in  two  senses:  for  the  time  in 
which  a  thing  is  said  to  change  may  be  the 
primary  time,  or  on  the  other  hand  it  may  have 
an  extended  reference,  as  e.g.  when  we  say 
that  a  thing  changes  in  a  particular  year  be¬ 
cause  it  changes  in  a  particular  day.  That  be¬ 
ing  so,  that  which  changes  must  be  changing 
in  any  part  of  the  primary  time  in  which  it 
changes.  This  is  clear  from  our  definition  of 
‘primary*,2  in  which  the  word  is  said  to  express 
just  this:  it  may  also,  however,  be  made  evident 
by  the  following  argument.  Let  XP  be  the  pri- 
[25]  mary  time  in  which  that  which  is  in  mo¬ 
tion  is  in  motion:  and  (as  all  time  is  divisible) 
let  it  be  divided  at  K.  Now  in  the  time  XK  it 
either  is  in  motion  or  is  not  in  motion,  and 
the  same  is  likewise  true  of  the  time  KP.  Then 
if  it  is  in  motion  in  neither  of  the  two  parts,  it 
will  be  at  rest  in  the  whole:  for  it  is  impossible 
that  it  should  be  in  motion  in  a  time  in  no 
[30]  part  of  which  it  is  in  motion.  If  on  the 
other  hand  it  is  in  motion  in  only  one  of  the 
two  parts  of  the  time,  XP  cannot  be  the  pri¬ 
mary  time  in  which  it  is  in  motion:  for  its 
motion  will  have  reference  to  a  time  other 
than  XP.  It  must,  then,  have  been  in  motion  in 
any  part  of  XP. 

And  now  that  this  has  been  proved,  it  is 
evident  that  everything  that  is  in  motion  must 
have  been  in  motion  before.  For  if  that  which 
is  in  motion  has  traversed  the  distance  KA  in 
[^5]  the  primary  time  XP,  in  half  the  time  a 
thing  that  is  in  motion  with  equal  velocity  and 
began  its  motion  at  the  same  time  will  have 
traversed  half  the  distance.  But  if  this  second 
thing  whose  velocity  is  equal  has  traversed  a 
23 7a  certain  distance  in  a  certain  time,  the 
original  thing  that  is  in  motion  must  have 
*  235b  33- 


BOOK  VI,  CHAPTERS  4-6 


320  PHYSICS  23 7b 

traversed  the  same  distance  in  the  same  time.  thing  has  changed  from  T  to  A.  Then  if  TA 
Hence  that  which  is  in  motion  must  have  been  is  indivisible,  two  things  without  parts  will  be 


in  motion  before. 

Again,  if  by  taking  the  extreme  moment  of 
[5]  the  time — for  it  is  the  moment  that  defines 
the  time,  and  time  is  that  which  is  intermedi¬ 
ate  between  moments — we  are  enabled  to  say 
that  motion  has  taken  place  in  the  whole  time 
XP  or  in  fact  in  any  period  of  it,  motion  may 
likewise  be  said  to  have  taken  place  in  every 
other  such  period.  But  half  the  time  finds  an 
extreme  in  the  point  of  division.  Therefore 
motion  will  have  taken  place  in  half  the  time 
and  in  fact  in  any  part  of  it:  for  as  soon  as  any 
division  is  made  there  is  always  a  time  defined 
by  moments.  If,  then,  all  time  is  divisible,  and 
[/o]  that  which  is  intermediate  between  mo¬ 
ments  is  time,  everything  that  is  changing  must 
have  completed  an  infinite  number  of  changes. 

Again,  since  a  thing  that  changes  continu¬ 
ously  and  has  not  perished  or  ceased  from  its 
change  must  either  be  changing  or  have 
changed  in  any  part  of  the  time  of  its  change, 
and  since  it  cannot  be  changing  in  a  moment, 
it  follows  that  it  must  have  changed  at  every 
[75]  moment  in  the  time:  consequently,  since 
the  moments  are  infinite  in  number,  every¬ 
thing  that  is  changing  must  have  completed  an 
infinite  number  of  changes. 

And  not  only  must  that  which  is  changing 
have  changed,  but  that  which  has  changed 
must  also  previously  have  been  changing,  since 
everything  that  has  changed  from  something 
[20]  to  something  has  changed  in  a  period  of 
time.  For  suppose  that  a  thing  has  changed 
from  A  to  B  in  a  moment.  Now  the  moment 
in  which  it  has  changed  cannot  be  the  same  as 
that  in  which  it  is  at  A  (since  in  that  case  it 
would  be  in  A  and  B  at  once):  for  we  have 
shown  above1  that  that  which  has  changed, 
when  it  has  changed,  is  not  in  that  from  which 
it  has  changed.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  a 
different  moment,  there  will  be  a  period  of 
time  intermediate  between  the  two:  for,  as  we 
saw,2  moments  are  not  consecutive.  Since,  then, 
[25]  it  has  changed  in  a  period  of  time,  and  all 
time  is  divisible,  in  half  the  time  it  will  have 
completed  another  change,  in  a  quarter  an¬ 
other,  and  so  on  to  infinity:  consequently  when 
it  has  changed,  it  must  have  previously  been 
changing. 

Moreover,  the  truth  of  what  has  been  said  is 
more  evident  in  the  case  of  magnitude,  because 
[30]  the  magnitude  over  which  what  is  chang¬ 
ing  changes  is  continuous.  For  suppose  that  a 
1  235b  6  sqq.  2  23 ib  6  sqq. 


consecutive.  But  since  this  is  impossible,  that 
which  is  intermediate  between  them  must  be  a 
magnitude  and  divisible  into  an  infinite  num¬ 
ber  of  segments:  consequently,  before  the 
change  is  completed,  the  thing  changes  to  those 
segments.  Everything  that  has  changed,  there¬ 
fore,  must  previously  have  been  changing:  for 
[35]  same  proof  also  holds  good  of  change 
237b  with  respect  to  what  is  not  continuous, 
changes,  that  is  to  say,  between  contraries  and 
between  contradictories.  In  such  cases  we  have 
only  to  take  the  time  in  which  a  thing  has 
changed  and  again  apply  the  same  reasoning. 
So  that  which  has  changed  must  have  been 
changing  and  that  which  is  changing  must 
have  changed,  and  a  process  of  change  is  pre¬ 
ceded  by  a  completion  of  change  and  a  com- 
[5]  pletion  by  a  process:  and  we  can  never  take 
any  stage  and  say  that  it  is  absolutely  the  first. 
The  reason  of  this  is  that  no  two  things  with¬ 
out  parts  can  be  contiguous,  and  therefore  in 
change  the  process  of  division  is  infinite,  just 
as  lines  may  be  infinitely  divided  so  that  one 
part  is  continually  increasing  and  the  other 
continually  decreasing. 

[10]  So  it  is  evident  also  that  that  which  has 
become  must  previously  have  been  in  process  of 
becoming,  and  that  which  is  in  process  of  be¬ 
coming  must  previously  have  become,  every¬ 
thing  (that  is)  that  is  divisible  and  continuous: 
though  it  is  not  always  the  actual  thing  that  is 
in  process  of  becoming  of  which  this  is  true: 
sometimes  it  is  something  else,  that  is  to  say, 
some  part  of  the  thing  in  question,  e.g.  the 
foundation-stone  of  a  house.  So,  too,  in  the  case 
of  that  which  is  perishing  and  that  which  has 
perished:  for  that  which  becomes  and  that 
which  perishes  must  contain  an  element  of 
infiniteness  as  an  immediate  consequence  of 
[75]  the  fact  that  they  are  continuous  things: 
and  so  a  thing  cannot  be  in  process  of  becom¬ 
ing  without  having  become  or  have  become 
without  having  been  in  process  of  becoming. 
So,  too,  in  the  case  of  perishing  and  having 
perished:  perishing  must  be  preceded  by  hav¬ 
ing  perished,  and  having  perished  must  be  pre¬ 
ceded  by  perishing.  It  is  evident,  then,  that  that 
which  has  become  must  previously  have  been 
in  process  of  becoming,  and  that  which  is  in 
[20]  process  of  becoming  must  previously  have 
become:  for  all  magnitudes  and  all  periods  of 
time  are  infinitely  divisible. 

Consequently  no  absolutely  first  stage  of 
change  can  be  represented  by  any  particular 


23 8b  BOOK  VI,  CHAPTERS  6-7  321 


part  of  space  or  time  which  the  .changing 
thing  may  occupy. 

7 

Now  since  the  motion  of  everything  that  is  in 
motion  occupies  a  period  of  time,  and  a  greater 
magnitude  is  traversed  in  a  longer  time,  it  is 
impossible  that  a  thing  should  undergo  a  finite 
[25]  motion  in  an  infinite  time,  if  this  is  un¬ 
derstood  to  mean  not  that  the  same  motion  or 
a  part  of  it  is  continually  repeated,  but  that  the 
whole  infinite  time  is  occupied  by  the  whole 
finite  motion.  In  all  cases  where  a  thing  is  in 
motion  with  uniform  velocity  it  is  clear  that 
the  finite  magnitude  is  traversed  in  a  finite 
time.  For  if  we  take  a  part  of  the  motion  which 
shall  be  a  measure  of  the  whole,  the  whole  mo¬ 
tion  is  completed  in  as  many  equal  periods  of 
[30]  the  time  as  there  are  parts  of  the  motion. 
Consequently,  since  these  parts  are  finite,  both 
in  size  individually  and  in  number  collectively, 
the  whole  time  must  also  be  finite:  for  it  will 
be  a  multiple  of  the  portion,  equal  to  the  time 
occupied  in  completing  the  aforesaid  part  mul¬ 
tiplied  by  the  number  of  the  parts. 

But  it  makes  no  difference  even  if  the  veloc¬ 
ity  is  not  uniform.  For  let  us  suppose  that  the 
[35]  line  AB  represents  a  finite  stretch  over 
which  a  thing  has  been  moved  in  the  given 
time,  and  let  TA  be  the  infinite  time.  Now  if 
23 8a  one  part  of  the  stretch  must  have  been 
traversed  before  another  part  (this  is  clear,  that 
in  the  earlier  and  in  the  later  part  of  the  time  a 
different  part  of  the  stretch  has  been  traversed: 
for  as  the  time  lengthens  a  different  part  of 
the  motion  will  always  be  completed  in  it, 
[5]  whether  the  thing  in  motion  changes  with 
uniform  velocity  or  not:  and  whether  the  rate 
of  motion  increases  or  diminishes  or  remains 
stationary  this  is  none  the  less  so),  let  us  then 
take  AE  a  part  of  the  whole  stretch  of  motion 
AB  which  shall  be  a  measure  of  AB.  Now  this 
part  of  the  motion  occupies  a  certain  period  of 
the  infinite  time:  it  cannot  itself  occupy  an 
infinite  time,  for  we  are  assuming  that  that  is 
occupied  by  the  whole  AB.  And  if  again  I  take 
[/o]  another  part  equal  to  AE,  that  also  must 
occupy  a  finite  time  in  consequence  of  the 
same  assumption.  And  if  I  go  on  taking  parts 
in  this  way,  on  the  one  hand  there  is  no  part 
which  will  be  a  measure  of  the  infinite  time 
(for  the  infinite  cannot  be  composed  of  finite 
parts  whether  equal  or  unequal,  because  there 
must  be  some  unity  which  will  be  a  measure 
[75]  of  things  finite  in  multitude  or  in  magni¬ 
tude,  which,  whether  they  are  equal  or  un¬ 


equal,  are  none  the  less  limited  in  magnitude); 
while  on  the  other  hand  the  finite  stretch  of 
motion  AB  is  a  certain  multiple  of  AE:  conse¬ 
quently  the  motion  AB  must  be  accomplished 
in  a  finite  time.  Moreover  it  is  the  same  with 
coming  to  rest  as  with  motion.  And  so  it  is  im¬ 
possible  for  one  and  the  same  thing  to  be  in¬ 
finitely  in  process  of  becoming  or  of  perishing. 
[20]  The  same  reasoning  will  prove  that  in  a 
finite  time  there  cannot  be  an  infinite  extent  of 
motion  or  of  coming  to  rest,  whether  the  mo¬ 
tion  is  regular  or  irregular.  For  if  we  take  a 
part  which  shall  be  a  measure  of  the  whole 
time,  in  this  part  a  certain  fraction,  not  the 
whole,  of  the  magnitude  will  be  traversed,  be¬ 
cause  we  assume  that  the  traversing  of  the 
whole  occupies  all  the  time.  Again,  in  another 
equal  part  of  the  time  another  part  of  the  mag- 
[25]  nitude  will  be  traversed:  and  similarly  in 
each  part  of  the  time  that  we  take,  whether 
equal  or  unequal  to  the  part  originally  taken. 
It  makes  no  difference  whether  the  parts  are 
equal  or  not,  if  only  each  is  finite:  for  it  is 
clear  that  while  the  time  is  exhausted  by  the 
subtraction  of  its  parts,  the  infinite  magnitude 
will  not  be  thus  exhausted,  since  the  process  of 
subtraction  is  finite  both  in  respect  of  the 
quantity  subtracted  and  of  the  number  of 
times  a  subtraction  is  made.  Consequently  the 
infinite  magnitude  will  not  be  traversed  in  a 
[30]  finite  time:  and  it  makes  no  difference 
whether  the  magnitude  is  infinite  in  only  one 
direction  or  in  both:  for  the  same  reasoning 
will  hold  good. 

This  having  been  proved,  it  is  evident  that 
neither  can  a  finite  magnitude  traverse  an  in¬ 
finite  magnitude  in  a  finite  time,  the  reason  be¬ 
ing  the  same  as  that  given  above:  in  part  of 
[35]  the  time  it  will  traverse  a  finite  magni¬ 
tude  and  in  each  several  part  likewise,  so  that 
in  the  whole  time  it  will  traverse  a  finite  mag¬ 
nitude. 

And  since  a  finite  magnitude  will  not  trav- 
238b  erse  an  infinite  in  a  finite  time,  it  is  clear 
that  neither  will  an  infinite  traverse  a  finite  in 
a  finite  time.  For  if  the  infinite  could  traverse 
the  finite,  the  finite  could  traverse  the  infinite; 
for  it  makes  no  difference  which  of  the  two  is 
the  thing  in  motion;  either  case  involves  the 
traversing  of  the  infinite  by  the  finite.  For 
[5]  when  the  infinite  magnitude  A  is  in  mo¬ 
tion  a  part  of  it,  say  TA,  will  occupy  the 
finite  B,  and  then  another,  and  then  another, 
and  so  on  to  infinity.  Thus  the  two  results  will 
coincide:  the  infinite  will  have  completed  a 
motion  over  the  finite  and  the  finite  will  have 


322 


PHYSICS 


23 9a 


traversed  the  infinite:  for  it  would  seem  to  be 
[w]  impossible  for  the  motion  of  the  infinite 
over  the  finite  to  occur  in  any  way  other  than 
by  the  finite  traversing  the  infinite  either  by 
locomotion  over  it  or  by  measuring  it.  There¬ 
fore,  since  this  is  impossible,  the  infinite  can¬ 
not  traverse  the  finite. 

Nor  again  will  the  infinite  traverse  the  in¬ 
finite  in  a  finite  time.  Otherwise  it  would  also 
[75]  traverse  the  finite,  for  the  infinite  in¬ 
cludes  the  finite.  We  can  further  prove  this  in 
the  same  way  by  taking  the  time  as  our  start¬ 
ing-point. 

Since,  then,  it  is  established  that  in  a  finite 
time  neither  will  the  finite  traverse  the  infinite, 
nor  the  infinite  the  finite,  nor  the  infinite  the 
[20]  infinite,  it  is  evident  also  that  in  a  finite 
time  there  cannot  be  infinite  motion:  for  what 
difference  does  it  make  whether  we  take  the 
motion  or  the  magnitude  to  be  infinite?  If 
either  of  the  two  is  infinite,  the  other  must  be 
so  likewise:  for  all  locomotion  is  in  space. 

8 

Since  everything  to  which  motion  or  rest  is 
natural  is  in  motion  or  at  rest  in  the  natural 
time,  place,  and  manner,  that  which  is  coming 
to  a  stand,  when  it  is  coming  to  a  stand,  must 
[25]  be  in  motion:  for  if  it  is  not  in  motion  it 
must  be  at  rest:  but  that  which  is  at  rest  can¬ 
not  be  coming  to  rest.  From  this  it  evidently 
follows  that  coming  to  a  stand  must  occupy  a 
period  of  time:  for  the  motion  of  that  which  is 
in  motion  occupies  a  period  of  time,  and  that 
which  is  coming  to  a  stand  has  been  shown  to 
be  in  motion:  consequently  coming  to  a  stand 
must  occupy  a  period  of  time. 

Again,  since  the  terms  ‘quicker’  and  ‘slower’ 
[30]  are  used  only  of  that  which  occupies  a 
period  of  time,  and  the  process  of  coming  to  a 
stand  may  be  quicker  or  slower,  the  same  con¬ 
clusion  follows. 

And  that  which  is  coming  to  a  stand  must  be 
coming  to  a  stand  in  any  part  of  the  primary 
time  in  which  it  is  coming  to  a  stand.  For  if  it 
is  coming  to  a  stand  in  neither  of  two  parts  into 
which  the  time  may  be  divided,  it  cannot  be 
coming  to  a  stand  in  the  whole  time,  with  the 
result  that  that  which  is  coming  to  a  stand  will 
not  be  coming  to  a  stand.  If  on  the  other  hand 
it  is  coming  to  a  stand  in  only  one  of  the  two 
parts  of  the  time,  the  whole  cannot  be  the  pri- 
[35]  mary  time  in  which  it  is  coming  to  a 
stand:  for  it  is  coming  to  a  stand  in  the  whole 
time  not  primarily  but  in  virtue  of  something 
distinct  from  itself,  the  argument  being  the 


same  as  that  which  we  used  above  about 
things  in  motion.1 

And  just  as  there  is  no  primary  time  in 
which  that  which  is  in  motion  is  in  motion,  so 
239a  too  there  is  no  primary  time  in  which 
that  which  is  coming  to  a  stand  is  coming  to  a 
stand,  there  being  no  primary  stage  either  of 
being  in  motion  or  of  coming  to  a  stand.  For 
let  AB  be  the  primary  time  in  which  a  thing 
is  coming  to  a  stand.  Now  AB  cannot  be  with¬ 
out  parts:  for  there  cannot  be  motion  in  that 
which  is  without  parts,  because  the  moving 
thing  would  necessarily  have  been  already 
moved  for  part  of  the  time  of  its  movement: 
[5]  and  that  which  is  coming  to  a  stand  has 
been  shown  to  be  in  motion.  But  since  AB  is 
therefore  divisible,  the  thing  is  coming  to  a 
stand  in  every  one  of  the  parts  of  AB:  for  we 
have  shown  above2  that  it  is  coming  to  a  stand 
in  every  one  of  the  parts  in  which  it  is  prima¬ 
rily  coming  to  a  stand.  Since  then,  that  in  which 
primarily  a  thing  is  coming  to  a  stand  must  be 
a  period  of  time  and  not  something  indivisible, 
and  since  all  time  is  infinitely  divisible,  there 
cannot  be  anything  in  which  primarily  it  is 
coming  to  a  stand. 

[/o]  Nor  again  can  there  be  a  primary  time  at 
which  the  being  at  rest  of  that  which  is  at  rest 
occurred:  for  it  cannot  have  occurred  in  that 
which  has  no  parts,  because  there  cannot  be 
motion  in  that  which  is  indivisible,  and  that 
in  which  rest  takes  place  is  the  same  as  that 
in  which  motion  takes  place:  for  we  defined3 
a  state  of  rest  to  be  the  state  of  a  thing  to  which 
motion  is  natural  but  which  is  not  in  motion 
when  (that  is  to  say  in  that  in  which)  motion 
would  be  natural  to  it.  Again,  our  use  of  the 
[75]  phrase  ‘being  at  rest’  also  implies  that  the 
previous  state  of  a  thing  is  still  unaltered,  not 
one  point  only  but  two  at  least  being  thus 
needed  to  determine  its  presence:  consequently 
that  in  which  a  thing  is  at  rest  cannot  be  with¬ 
out  parts.  Since,  then  it  is  divisible,  it  must  be 
a  period  of  time,  and  the  thing  must  be  at  rest 
in  every  one  of  its  parts,  as  may  be  shown  by 
the  same  method  as  that  used  above  in  similar 
demonstrations. 

[20]  So  there  can  be  no  primary  part  of  the 
time:  and  the  reason  is  that  rest  and  motion  are 
always  in  a  period  of  time,  and  a  period  of  time 
has  no  primary  part  any  more  than  a  magni¬ 
tude  or  in  fact  anything  continuous:  for  every¬ 
thing  continuous  is  divisible  into  an  infinite 
number  of  parts. 

And  since  everything  that  is  in  motion  is  in 
1  Chapter  6.  2  238b  31  sqq.  3  226b  12  sqq. 


240*  BOOK  VI,  CHAPTERS  7-9  323 


motion  in  a  period  of  time  and  changes  from 
something  to  something,  when  its  motion  is 
comprised  within  a  particular  period  of  time 
essentially — that  is  to  say  when  it  fills  the  whole 
[25]  and  not  merely  a  part  of  the  time  in  ques¬ 
tion — it  is  impossible  that  in  that  time  that 
which  is  in  motion  should  be  over  against  some 
particular  thing  primarily.  For  if  a  thing — 
itself  and  each  of  its  parts — occupies  the  same 
space  for  a  definite  period  of  time,  it  is  at  rest: 
for  it  is  in  just  these  circumstances  that  we  use 
the  term  ‘being  at  rest’ — when  at  one  moment 
after  another  it  can  be  said  with  truth  that  a 
thing,  itself  and  its  parts,  occupies  the  same 
[30]  space.  So  if  this  is  being  at  rest  it  is  impos¬ 
sible  for  that  which  is  changing  to  be  as  a  whole, 
at  the  time  when  it  is  primarily  changing,  over 
against  any  particular  thing  (for  the  whole 
period  of  time  is  divisible),  so  that  in  one  part 
of  it  after  another  it  will  be  true  to  say  that  the 
thing,  itself  and  its  parts,  occupies  the  same 
space.  If  this  is  not  so  and  the  aforesaid  propo¬ 
sition  is  true  only  at  a  single  moment,  then 
the  thing  will  be  over  against  a  particular 
thing  not  for  any  period  of  time  but  only  at  a 
moment  that  limits  the  time.  It  is  true  that  at 
[35]  any  moment  it  is  always  over  against 
239b  something  stationary:  but  it  is  not  at 
rest:  for  at  a  moment  it  is  not  possible  for  any¬ 
thing  to  be  either  in  motion  or  at  rest.  So  while 
it  is  true  to  say  that  that  which  is  in  motion  is 
at  a  moment  not  in  motion  and  is  opposite 
some  particular  thing,  it  cannot  in  a  period  of 
time  be  over  against  that  which  is  at  rest:  for 
that  would  involve  the  conclusion  that  that 
which  is  in  locomotion  is  at  rest. 

9 

[5]  Zeno’s  reasoning,  however,  is  fallacious, 
when  he  says  that  if  everything  when  it  occu¬ 
pies  an  equal  space  is  at  rest,  and  if  that  which 
is  in  locomotion  is  always  occupying  such  a 
space  at  any  moment,  the  flying  arrow  is  there¬ 
fore  motionless.  This  is  false,  for  time  is  not 
composed  of  indivisible  moments  any  more 
than  any  other  magnitude  is  composed  of  indi¬ 
visibles. 

[/o]  Zeno’s  arguments  about  motion,  which 
cause  so  much  disquietude  to  those  who  try  to 
solve  the  problems  that  they  present,  are  four  in 
number.  The  first  asserts  the  non-existence  of 
motion  on  the  ground  that  that  which  is  in 
locomotion  must  arrive  at  the  half-way  stage 
before  it  arrives  at  the  goal.  This  we  have  dis¬ 
cussed  above.1 
l233a  i3sqq. 


The  second  is  the  so-called  ‘Achilles’,  and  it 
[75]  amounts  to  this,  that  in  a  race  the  quick¬ 
est  runner  can  never  overtake  the  slowest,  since 
the  pursuer  must  first  reach  the  point  whence 
the  pursued  started,  so  that  the  slower  must 
always  hold  a  lead.  This  argument  is  the  same 
in  principle  as  that  which  depends  on  bisec¬ 
tion,  though  it  differs  from  it  in  that  the  spaces 
with  which  we  successively  have  to  deal  are  not 
[20]  divided  into  halves.  The  result  of  the  ar¬ 
gument  is  that  the  slower  is  not  overtaken:  but 
it  proceeds  along  the  same  lines  as  the  bisec¬ 
tion-argument  (for  in  both  a  division  of  the 
space  in  a  certain  way  leads  to  the  result  that 
the  goal  is  not  reached,  though  the  ‘Achilles’ 
goes  further  in  that  it  affirms  that  even  the 
quickest  runner  in  legendary  tradition  must 
[25]  fail  in  his  pursuit  of  the  slowest),  so  that 
the  solution  must  be  the  same.  And  the  axiom 
that  that  which  holds  a  lead  is  never  overtaken 
is  false:  it  is  not  overtaken,  it  is  true,  while  it 
holds  a  lead:  but  it  is  overtaken  nevertheless  if 
it  is  granted  that  it  traverses  the  finite  distance 
prescribed.  These  then  are  two  of  his  argu¬ 
ments. 

[30]  The  third  is  that  already  given  above,  to 
the  effect  that  the  flying  arrow  is  at  rest,  which 
result  follows  from  the  assumption  that  time  is 
composed  of  moments:  if  this  assumption  is 
not  granted,  the  conclusion  will  not  follow. 

The  fourth  argument  is  that  concerning  the 
two  rows  of  bodies,  each  row  being  composed 
of  an  equal  number  of  bodies  of  equal  size, 
passing  each  other  on  a  race-course  as  they  pro¬ 
ceed  with  equal  velocity  in  opposite  directions, 
the  one  row  originally  occupying  the  space  be¬ 
tween  the  goal  and  the  middle  point  of  the 
course  and  the  other  that  between  the  middle 
[35]  point  and  the  starting-post.  This,  he 
thinks,  involves  the  conclusion  that  half  a  giv¬ 
en  time  is  equal  to  double  that  time.  The  fallacy 
240a  of  the  reasoning  lies  in  the  assumption 
that  a  body  occupies  an  equal  time  in  passing 
with  equal  velocity  a  body  that  is  in  motion 
and  a  body  of  equal  size  that  is  at  rest;  which  is 
false.  For  instance  (so  runs  the  argument),  let 
A,  A  ...  be  the  stationary  bodies  of  equal  size, 
[5]  B,  B  . . .  the  bodies,  equal  in  number  and  in 
size  to  A,  A  .  .  .,  originally  occupying  the  half 
of  the  course  from  the  starting-post  to  the  mid¬ 
dle  of  the  A’s,  and  I\  T  . . .  those  originally  oc¬ 
cupying  the  other  half  from  the  goal  to  the  mid¬ 
dle  of  the  A’s,  equal  in  number,  size,  and  ve¬ 
locity  to  B,  B  .  .  .  .  Then  three  consequences 
follow: 

First,  as  the  B’s  and  the  T’s  pass  one  another, 


324  PHYSICS  241- 


the  first  B  reaches  the  last  T  at  the  same  mo¬ 
ment  as  the  first  T  reaches  the  last  B.  Secondly, 
[/o]  at  this  moment  the  first  T  has  passed  all 
the  A’s,  whereas  the  first  B  has  passed  only  half 
the  A’s,  and  has  consequently  occupied  only 
half  the  time  occupied  by  the  first  T,  since  each 
of  the  two  occupies  an  equal  time  in  passing 
each  A.  Thirdly,  at  the  same  moment  all  the 
B’s  have  passed  all  the  T’s:  for  the  first  T  and 
the  first  B  will  simultaneously  reach  the  oppo- 
[  75]  site  ends  of  the  course,  since  (so  says  Zeno) 
the  time  occupied  by  the  first  T  in  passing  each 
of  the  B’s  is  equal  to  that  occupied  by  it  in  pass¬ 
ing  each  of  the  A’s,  because  an  equal  time  is  oc¬ 
cupied  by  both  the  first  B  and  the  first  T  in 
passing  all  the  A’s.  This  is  the  argument,  but  it 
presupposed  the  aforesaid  fallacious  assump¬ 
tion. 

Nor  in  reference  to  contradictory  change 
shall  we  find  anything  unanswerable  in  the  ar- 
[20]  gument  that  if  a  thing  is  changing  from 
not-white,  say,  to  white,  and  is  in  neither  con¬ 
dition,  then  it  will  be  neither  white  nor  not- 
white:  for  the  fact  that  it  is  not  wholly  in  either 
condition  will  not  preclude  us  from  calling  it 
white  or  not-white.  We  call  a  thing  white  or 
not-white  not  necessarily  because  it  is  wholly 
either  one  or  the  other,  but  because  most  of  its 
parts  or  the  most  essential  parts  of  it  are  so:  not 
[25]  being  in  a  certain  condition  is  different 
from  not  being  wholly  in  that  condition.  So, 
too,  in  the  case  of  being  and  not-being  and  all 
other  conditions  which  stand  in  a  contradictory 
relation:  while  the  changing  thing  must  of  ne¬ 
cessity  be  in  one  of  the  two  opposites,  it  is 
never  wholly  in  either. 

Again,  in  the  case  of  circles  and  spheres  and 
everything  whose  motion  is  confined  within 
the  space  that  it  occupies,  it  is  not  true  to  say 
[30]  that  the  motion  can  be  nothing  but  rest, 
on  the  ground  that  such  things  in  motion, 
themselves  and  their  parts,  will  occupy  the 
same  position  for  a  period  of  time,  and  that 
therefore  they  will  be  at  once  at  rest  and  in  mo¬ 
tion.  For  in  the  first  place  the  parts  do  not  oc¬ 
cupy  the  same  position  for  any  period  of  time: 
and  in  the  second  place  the  whole  also  is  al¬ 
ways  changing  to  a  different  position:  for  if  we 
240b  take  the  orbit  as  described  from  a  point 
A  on  a  circumference,  it  will  not  be  the  same  as 
the  orbit  as  described  from  B  or  T  or  any  other 
point  on  the  same  circumference  except  in  an 
accidental  sense,  the  sense  that  is  to  say  in 
which  a  musical  man  is  the  same  as  a  man. 
[5]  Thus  one  orbit  is  always  changing  into  an¬ 
other,  and  the  thing  will  never  be  at  rest.  And 


it  is  the  same  with  the  sphere  and  everything 
else  whose  motion  is  confined  within  the  space 
that  it  occupies. 

10 

Our  next  point  is  that  that  which  is  without 
parts  cannot  be  in  motion  except  accidentally: 
i.e.  it  can  be  in  motion  only  in  so  far  as  the 
body  or  the  magnitude  is  in  motion  and  the 
[/o]  partless  is  in  motion  by  inclusion 
therein,  just  as  that  which  is  in  a  boat  may  be  in 
motion  in  consequence  of  the  locomotion  of 
the  boat,  or  a  part  may  be  in  motion  in  virtue 
of  the  motion  of  the  whole.  (It  must  be  remem¬ 
bered,  however,  that  by  ‘that  which  is  without 
parts’  I  mean  that  which  is  quantitatively  indi¬ 
visible  (and  that  the  case  of  the  motion  of  a 
part  is  not  exactly  parallel) :  for  parts  have  mo¬ 
tions  belonging  essentially  and  severally  to 
[75]  themselves  distinct  from  the  motion  of 
the  whole.  The  distinction  may  be  seen  most 
clearly  in  the  case  of  a  revolving  sphere,  in 
which  the  velocities  of  the  parts  near  the  centre 
and  of  those  on  the  surface  are  different  from 
one  another  and  from  that  of  the  whole;  this 
implies  that  there  is  not  one  motion  but  many). 
As  we  have  said,  then,  that  which  is  without 
parts  can  be  in  motion  in  the  sense  in  which  a 
man  sitting  in  a  boat  is  in  motion  when  the 
boat  is  travelling,  but  it  cannot  be  in  motion  of 
[20]  itself.  For  suppose  that  it  is  changing  from 
AB  to  Br — either  from  one  magnitude  to  an¬ 
other,  or  from  one  form  to  another,  or  from 
some  state  to  its  contradictory — and  let  A  be 
the  primary  time  in  which  it  undergoes  the 
change.  Then  in  the  time  in  which  it  is  chang¬ 
ing  it  must  be  either  in  AB  or  in  Br  or  partly 
[25]  in  one  and  partly  in  the  other:  for  this,  as 
we  saw,1  is  true  of  everything  that  is  changing. 
Now  it  cannot  be  partly  in  each  of  the  two:  for 
then  it  would  be  divisible  into  parts.  Nor  again 
can  it  be  in  Br:  for  then  it  will  have  completed 
the  change,  whereas  the  assumption  is  that  the 
change  is  in  process.  It  remains,  then,  that  in 
the  time  in  which  it  is  changing,  it  is  in  AB. 
That  being  so,  it  will  be  at  rest:  for,  as  we  saw,2 
to  be  in  the  same  condition  for  a  period  of  time 
[30]  is  to  be  at  rest.  So  it  is  not  possible  for  that 
which  has  no  parts  to  be  in  motion  or  to  change 
in  any  way:  for  only  one  condition  could  have 
made  it  possible  for  it  to  have  motion,  viz.  that 
time  should  be  composed  of  moments,  in  which 
case  at  any  moment  it  would  have  completed  a 
241a  motion  or  a  change,  so  that  it  would  nev¬ 
er  be  in  motion,  but  would  always  have  been  in 
1234b  10  sqq.  2  239®  27. 


241b  BOOK  VI,  CHAPTERS  9-10  325 


motion.  But  this  we  have  already  shown  above1 
to  be  impossible:  time  is  not  composed  of  mo¬ 
ments,  just  as  a  line  is  not  composed  of  points, 
and  motion  is  not  composed  of  starts:  for  this 
[5]  theory  simply  makes  motion  consist  of  in¬ 
divisibles  in  exactly  the  same  way  as  time  is 
made  to  consist  of  moments  or  a  length  of 
points. 

Again,  it  may  be  shown  in  the  following  way 
that  there  can  be  no  motion  of  a  point  or  of  any 
other  indivisible.  That  which  is  in  motion  can 
never  traverse  a  space  greater  than  itself  with¬ 
out  first  traversing  a  space  equal  to  or  less  than 
itself.  That  being  so,  it  is  evident  that  the  point 
[/o]  also  must  first  traverse  a  space  equal  to  or 
less  than  itself.  But  since  it  is  indivisible,  there 
can  be  no  space  less  than  itself  for  it  to  traverse 
first:  so  it  will  have  to  traverse  a  distance  equal 
to  itself.  Thus  the  line  will  be  composed  of 
points,  for  the  point,  as  it  continually  traverses 
a  distance  equal  to  itself,  will  be  a  measure  of 
the  whole  line.  But  since  this  is  impossible,  it  is 
likewise  impossible  for  the  indivisible  to  be  in 
motion. 

[75]  Again,  since  motion  is  always  in  a  period 
of  time  and  never  in  a  moment,  and  all  time  is 
divisible,  for  everything  that  is  in  motion  there 
must  be  a  time  less  than  that  in  which  it  trav¬ 
erses  a  distance  as  great  as  itself.  For  that  in 
which  it  is  in  motion  will  be  a  time,  because  all 
motion  is  in  a  period  of  time;  and  all  time  has 
been  shown  above2  to  be  divisible.  Therefore, 
if  a  point  is  in  motion,  there  must  be  a  time 
less  than  that  in  which  it  has  itself  traversed 
[20]  any  distance.  But  this  is  impossible,  for  in 
less  time  it  must  traverse  less  distance,  and  thus 
the  indivisible  will  be  divisible  into  something 
less  than  itself,  just  as  the  time  is  so  divisible: 
the  fact  being  that  the  only  condition  under 
which  that  which  is  without  parts  and  indivisi¬ 
ble  could  be  in  motion  would  have  been  the 
ossibility  of  the  infinitely  small  being  in  mo- 
25]  tion  in  a  moment:  for  in  the  two  ques¬ 
tions — that  of  motion  in  a  moment  and  that  of 
motion  of  something  indivisible — the  same 
principle  is  involved. 

Our  next  point  is  that  no  process  of  change 
is  infinite:  for  every  change,  whether  between 
contradictories  or  between  contraries,  is  a 
change  from  something  to  something.  Thus  in 
contradictory  changes  the  positive  or  the  nega- 

1 23 ib  18  sqq.  2  232b  23  sqq. 


tive,  as  the  case  may  be,  is  the  limit,  e.g.  being 
is  the  limit  of  coming  to  be  and  not-being  is 
the  limit  of  ceasing  to  be:  and  in  contrary 
changes  the  particular  contraries  are  the  limits, 
[50]  since  these  are  the  extreme  points  of  any 
such  process  of  change,  and  consequently  of 
every  process  of  alteration:  for  alteration  is  al¬ 
ways  dependent  upon  some  contraries.  Similar¬ 
ly  contraries  are  the  extreme  points  of  processes 
of  increase  and  decrease:  the  limit  of  increase 
is  to  be  found  in  the  complete  magnitude  prop- 
24115  er  to  the  peculiar  nature  of  the  thing  that 
is  increasing,  while  the  limit  of  decrease  is  the 
complete  loss  of  such  magnitude.  Locomotion, 
it  is  true,  we  cannot  show  to  be  finite  in  this 
way,  since  it  is  not  always  between  contraries. 
But  since  that  which  cannot  be  cut  (in  the 
sense  that  it  is  inconceivable  that  it  should  be 
cut,  the  term  ‘cannot’  being  used  in  several 
[5]  senses) — since  it  is  inconceivable  that  that 
which  in  this  sense  cannot  be  cut  should  be  in 
process  of  being  cut,  and  generally  that  that 
which  cannot  come  to  be  should  be  in  process 
of  coming  to  be,  it  follows  that  it  is  incon¬ 
ceivable  that  that  which  cannot  complete  a 
change  should  be  in  process  of  changing  to 
that  to  which  it  cannot  complete  a  change. 
If,  then,  it  is  to  be  assumed  that  that  which 
is  in  locomotion  is  in  process  of  changing, 
it  must  be  capable  of  completing  the  change. 
Consequently  its  motion  is  not  infinite,  and 
[/o]  it  will  not  be  in  locomotion  over  an 
infinite  distance,  for  it  cannot  traverse  such  a 
distance. 

It  is  evident,  then,  that  a  process  of  change 
cannot  be  infinite  in  the  sense  that  it  is  not  de¬ 
fined  by  limits.  But  it  remains  to  be  considered 
whether  it  is  possible  in  the  sense  that  one  and 
the  same  process  of  change  may  be  infinite  in 
respect  of  the  time  which  it  occupies.  If  it  is  not 
one  process,  it  would  seem  that  there  is  nothing 
[75J  to  prevent  its  being  infinite  in  this  sense; 
e.g.  if  a  process  of  locomotion  be  succeeded  by 
a  process  of  alteration  and  that  by  a  process  of 
increase  and  that  again  by  a  process  of  coming 
to  be:  in  this  way  there  may  be  motion  for  ever 
so  far  as  the  time  is  concerned,  but  it  will  not 
be  one  motion,  because  all  these  motions  do  not 
compose  one.  If  it  is  to  be  one  process,  no  mo¬ 
tion  can  be  infinite  in  respect  of  the  time  that 
it  occupies,  with  the  single  exception  of  rota- 
[20]  tory  locomotion. 


326 


PHYSICS 


242b 


BOOK  VII 


I 

Everything  that  is  in  motion  must  be  moved 
[25]  by  something.  For  if  it  has  not  the  source 
of  its  motion  in  itself  it  is  evident  that  it  is 
moved  by  something  other  than  itself,  for  there 
must  be  something  else  that  moves  it.  If  on  the 
other  hand  it  has  the  source  of  its  motion  in  it¬ 
self,  let  AB  be  taken  to  represent  that  which  is 
in  motion  essentially  of  itself  and  not  in  virtue 
of  the  fact  that  something  belonging  to  it  is  in 
motion.  Now  in  the  first  place  to  assume  that 
[jo]  AB,  because  it  is  in  motion  as  a  whole  and 
is  not  moved  by  anything  external  to  itself,  is 
therefore  moved  by  itself — this  is  just  as  if,  sup¬ 
posing  that  KA  is  moving  AM  and  is  also  itself 
in  motion,  we  were  to  deny  that  KM  is  moved 
by  anything  on  the  ground  that  it  is  not  evident 
which  is  the  part  that  is  moving  it  and  which 
the  part  that  is  moved.  In  the  second  place  that 
which  is  in  motion  without  being  moved  by 
anything  does  not  necessarily  cease  from  its 
242a  motion  because  something  else  is  at  rest, 
but  a  thing  must  be  moved  by  something  if  the 
fact  of  something  else  having  ceased  from  its 
motion  causes  it  to  be  at  rest.  Thus,  if  this  is  ac¬ 
cepted,  everything  that  is  in  motion  must  be 
[5]  moved  by  something.  For  AB,  which  has 
been  taken  to  represent  that  which  is  in  mo¬ 
tion,  must  be  divisible,  since  everything  that  is 
in  motion  is  divisible.  Let  it  be  divided,  then, 
at  T.  Now  if  TB  is  not  in  motion,  then  AB  will 
not  be  in  motion:  for  if  it  is,  it  is  clear  that  Ar 
would  be  in  motion  while  Br  is  at  rest,  and 
[zo]  thus  AB  cannot  be  in  motion  essentially 
and  primarily.  But  ex  hypothesi  AB  is  in  mo¬ 
tion  essentially  and  primarily.  Therefore  if  TB 
is  not  in  motion  AB  will  be  at  rest.  But  we 
have  agreed  that  that  which  is  at  rest  if  some¬ 
thing  else  is  not  in  motion  must  be  moved  by 
something.  Consequently,  everything  that  is  in 
motion  must  be  moved  by  something:  for  that 
[75]  which  is  in  motion  will  always  be  divisi¬ 
ble,  and  if  a  part  of  it  is  not  in  motion  the 
whole  must  be  at  rest. 

Since  everything  that  is  in  motion  must  be 
moved  by  something,  let  us  take  the  case  in 
which  a  thing  is  in  locomotion  and  is  moved  by 
something  that  is  itself  in  motion,  and  that 
again  is  moved  by  something  else  that  is  in  mo¬ 
tion,  and  that  by  something  else,  and  so  on  con- 
[20]  tinually:  then  the  series  cannot  go  on  to 
infinity,  but  there  must  be  some  first  movent. 


For  let  us  suppose  that  this  is  not  so  and  take 
the  series  to  be  infinite.  Let  A  then  be  moved 
by  B,  B  by  I\  T  by  A,  and  so  on,  each  member 
of  the  series  being  moved  by  that  which  comes 
next  to  it.  Then  since  ex  hypothesi  the  movent 
while  causing  motion  is  also  itself  in  motion, 
and  the  motion  of  the  moved  and  the  motion 
of  the  movent  must  proceed  simultaneously 
(for  the  movent  is  causing  motion  and  the 
[25]  moved  is  being  moved  simultaneously)  it 
is  evident  that  the  respective  motions  of  A,  B, 
r,  and  each  of  the  other  moved  movents  are 
simultaneous.  Let  us  take  the  motion  of  each 
separately  and  let  E  be  the  motion  of  A,  Z  of 
B,  and  H  and  0  respectively  the  motions  of  T 
and  A  :  for  though  they  are  all  moved  several¬ 
ly  one  by  another,  yet  we  may  still  take  the  mo¬ 
tion  of  each  as  numerically  one,  since  every  mo* 
[30]  tion  is  from  something  to  something  and 
is  not  infinite  in  respect  of  its  extreme  points. 
By  a  motion  that  is  numerically  one  I  mean  a 
motion  that  proceeds  from  something  numeri¬ 
cally  one  and  the  same  to  something  numeri¬ 
cally  one  and  the  same  in  a  period  of  time  nu¬ 
merically  one  and  the  same:  for  a  motion  may 
[35]  be  the  same  generically,  specifically,  or  nu¬ 
merically:  it  is  generically  the  same  if  it  belongs 
to  the  same  category,  e.g.  substance  or  quality:  it 
is  specifically  the  same  if  it  proceeds  from  some¬ 
thing  specifically  the  same  to  something  specifi¬ 
cally  the  same,  e.g.  from  white  to  black  or  from 
good  to  bad,  which  is  not  of  a  kind  specifically 
242b  distinct:  it  is  numerically  the  same  if  it 
proceeds  from  something  numerically  one  to 
something  numerically  one  in  the  same  period 
of  time,  e.g.  from  a  particular  white  to  a  partic¬ 
ular  black,  or  from  a  particular  place  to  a  par¬ 
ticular  place,  in  a  particular  period  of  time:  for 
if  the  period  of  time  were  not  one  and  the  same, 
the  motion  would  no  longer  be  numerically 
one  though  it  would  still  be  specifically  one. 
[4, 5]  We  have  dealt  with  this  question  above.1 
Now  let  us  further  take  the  time  in  which  A  has 
completed  its  motion,  and  let  it  be  represented 
by  K.  Then  since  the  motion  of  A  is  finite  the 
time  will  also  be  finite.  But  since  the  movents 
and  the  things  moved  are  infinite,  the  motion 
EZH0,  i.e.  the  motion  that  is  composed  of  all 
[75]  the  individual  motions,  must  be  infinite. 
For  the  motions  of  A,  B,  and  the  others  may  be 
equal,  or  the  motions  of  the  others  may  be 
greater:  but  assuming  what  is  conceivable,  we 
1v-  4  (227b  3  sqq.). 


243 b  BOOK  VII,  CHAPTERS  1-2  327 

find  that  whether  they  are  equal  or  some  are  another.  And  since  there  are  three  kinds  of  mo- 


greater,  in  both  cases  the  whole  motion  is  infi¬ 
nite.  And  since  the  motion  of  A  and  that  of 
each  of  the  others  are  simultaneous,  the  whole 
motion  must  occupy  the  same  time  as  the  mo¬ 
tion  of  A:  but  the  time  occupied  by  the  motion 
of  A  is  finite:  consequently  the  motion  will  be 
infinite  in  a  finite  time,  which  is  impossible. 

It  might  be  thought  that  what  we  set  out  to 
[20]  prove  has  thus  been  shown,  but  our  argu¬ 
ment  so  far  does  not  prove  it,  because  it  does 
not  yet  prove  that  anything  impossible  results 
from  the  contrary  supposition:  for  in  a  finite 
time  there  may  be  an  infinite  motion,  though 
not  of  one  thing,  but  of  many:  and  in  the  case 
that  we  are  considering  this  is  so:  for  each 
thing  accomplishes  its  own  motion,  and  there 
is  no  impossibility  in  many  things  being  in  mo¬ 
tion  simultaneously.  But  if  (as  we  see  to  be  uni¬ 
versally  the  case)  that  which  primarily  is 
moved  locally  and  corporeally  must  be  either 
[25]  in  contact  with  or  continuous  with  that 
which  moves  it,  the  things  moved  and  the  mov¬ 
ents  must  be  continuous  or  in  contact  with  one 
another,  so  that  together  they  all  form  a  single 
unity:  whether  this  unity  is  finite  or  infinite 
makes  no  difference  to  our  present  argument; 
for  in  any  case  since  the  things  in  motion  are 
infinite  in  number  the  whole  motion  will  be  in¬ 
finite,  if,  as  is  theoretically  possible,  each  mo¬ 
tion  is  either  equal  to  or  greater  than  that 
which  follows  it  in  the  series:  for  we  shall  take 
as  actual  that  which  is  theoretically  possible. 
[30]  If,  then,  A,  B,  I\  A  form  an  infinite  mag¬ 
nitude  that  passes  through  the  motion  EZH  0 
in  the  finite  time  K,  this  involves  the  conclu¬ 
sion  that  an  infinite  motion  is  passed  through 
in  a  finite  time:  and  whether  the  magnitude 
in  question  is  finite  or  infinite  this  is  in  either 
case  impossible.  Therefore  the  series  must  come 
to  an  end,  and  there  must  be  a  first  movent  and 
a  first  moved:  for  the  fact  that  this  impossibil- 
243a  ity  results  only  from  the  assumption  of  a 
particular  case  is  immaterial,  since  the  case  as¬ 
sumed  is  theoretically  possible,  and  the  assump¬ 
tion  of  a  theoretically  possible  case  ought  not  to 
give  rise  to  any  impossible  result. 

2 

That  which  is  the  first  movement  of  a  thing — 
in  the  sense  that  it  supplies  not  ‘that  for  the 
sake  of  which’  but  the  source  of  the  motion — 
is  always  together  with  that  which  is  moved  by 
it  (by  ‘together’  I  mean  that  there  is  nothing 
[5]  intermediate  between  them).  This  is  uni¬ 
versally  true  wherever  one  thing  is  moved  by 


tion,  local,  qualitative,  and  quantitative,  there 
[/o]  must  also  be  three  kinds  of  movent,  that 
which  causes  locomotion,  that  which  causes  al¬ 
teration,  and  that  which  causes  increase  or  de¬ 
crease. 

Let  us  begin  with  locomotion,  for  this  is  the 
primary  motion.  Everything  that  is  in  locomo¬ 
tion  is  moved  either  by  itself  or  by  something 
else.  In  the  case  of  things  that  are  moved  by 
themselves  it  is  evident  that  the  moved  and  the 
movent  are  together:  for  they  contain  within 
themselves  their  first  movent,  so  that  there  is 
[75]  nothing  in  between.  The  motion  of  things 
that  are  moved  by  something  else  must  pro¬ 
ceed  in  one  of  four  ways:  for  there  are  four 
kinds  of  locomotion  caused  by  something  other 
than  that  which  is  in  motion,  viz.  pulling,  push¬ 
ing,  carrying,  and  twirling.  All  forms  of  loco¬ 
motion  are  reducible  to  these.  Thus  pushing  on 
is  a  form  of  pushing  in  which  that  which  is 
causing  motion  away  from  itself  follows  up 
that  which  it  pushes  and  continues  to  push  it: 
pushing  off  occurs  when  the  movent  does  not 
follow  up  the  thing  that  it  has  moved:  throw- 
[20]  ing  when  the  movent  causes  a  motion 
243 b  away  from  itself  more  violent  than  the 
natural  locomotion  of  the  thing  moved,  which 
continues  its  course  so  long  as  it  is  controlled 
by  the  motion  imparted  to  it.  Again,  pushing 
apart  and  pushing  together  are  forms  respec¬ 
tively  of  pushing  off  and  pulling:  pushing  apart 
is  pushing  off,  which  may  be  a  motion  either 
away  from  the  pusher  or  away  from  something 
[5]  else,  while  pushing  together  is  pulling, 
which  may  be  a  motion  towards  something  else 
as  well  as  towards  the  puller.  We  may  similar¬ 
ly  classify  all  the  varieties  of  these  last  two,  e.g. 
packing  and  combing:  the  former  is  a  form  of 
pushing  together,  the  latter  a  form  of  pushing 
apart.  The  same  is  true  of  the  other  processes 
of  combination  and  separation  (they  will  all  be 
found  to  be  forms  of  pushing  apart  or  of  push¬ 
ing  together),  except  such  as  are  involved  in 
the  processes  of  becoming  and  perishing.  (At 
[10]  the  same  time  it  is  evident  that  there  is  no 
other  kind  of  motion  but  combination  and  sepa¬ 
ration:  for  they  may  all  be  apportioned  to  one  or 
other  of  those  already  mentioned.)  Again,  in¬ 
haling  is  a  form  of  pulling,  exhaling  a  form  of 
pushing:  and  the  same  is  true  of  spitting  and 
of  all  other  motions  that  proceed  through  the 
body,  whether  secretive  or  assimilative,  the  as¬ 
similative  being  forms  of  pulling,  the  secretive 
[75]  of  pushing  off.  All  other  kinds  of  locomo¬ 
tion  must  be  similarly  reduced,  for  they  all  fall 


328  PHYSICS  245a 


under  one  or  other  of  our  four  heads.  And 
again,  of  these  four,  carrying  and  twirling  are 
reducible  to  pulling  and  pushing.  For  carrying 
always  follows  one  of  the  other  three  methods, 
for  that  which  is  carried  is  in  motion  acciden¬ 
tally,  because  it  is  in  or  upon  something  that  is 
[20]  in  motion,  and  that  which  carries  it  is  in 
doing  so  being  either  pulled  or  pushed  or 
244a  twirled;  thus  carrying  belongs  to  all  the 
other  three  kinds  of  motion  in  common.  And 
twirling  is  a  compound  of  pulling  and  pushing, 
for  that  which  is  twirling  a  thing  must  be  pull¬ 
ing  one  part  of  the  thing  and  pushing  another 
part,  since  it  impels  one  part  away  from  itself 
and  another  part  towards  itself.  If,  therefore,  it 
can  be  shown  that  that  which  is  pushing  and 
that  which  is  pulling  are  adjacent  respectively 
to  that  which  is  being  pushed  and  that  which 
[5]  is  being  pulled,  it  will  be  evident  that  in  all 
locomotion  there  is  nothing  intermediate  be¬ 
tween  moved  and  movent.  But  the  former  fact 
is  clear  even  from  the  definitions  of  pushing 
and  pulling,  for  pushing  is  motion  to  some¬ 
thing  else  from  oneself  or  from  something  else, 
and  pulling  is  motion  from  something  else  to 
oneself  or  to  something  else,  when  the  motion 
of  that  which  is  pulling  is  quicker  than  the  mo- 
[  jo]  tion  that  would  separate  from  one  another 
the  two  things  that  are  continuous:  for  it  is  this 
that  causes  one  thing  to  be  pulled  on  along 
with  the  other.  (It  might  indeed  be  thought 
that  there  is  a  form  of  pulling  that  arises  in  an¬ 
other  way:  that  wood,  e.g.  pulls  fire  in  a  man¬ 
ner  different  from  that  described  above.  But  it 
makes  no  difference  whether  that  which  pulls  is 
in  motion  or  is  stationary  when  it  is  pulling:  in 
the  latter  case  it  pulls  to  the  place  where  it  is, 
while  in  the  former  it  pulls  to  the  place  where 
it  was.)  Now  it  is  impossible  to  move  anything 
[75]  either  from  oneself  to  something  else  or 
from  something  else  to  oneself  without  being 
244b  in  contact  with  it:  it  is  evident,  therefore, 
that  in  all  locomotion  there  is  nothing  interme¬ 
diate  between  moved  and  movent. 

Nor  again  is  there  anything  intermediate 
between  that  which  undergoes  and  that  which 
causes  alteration:  this  can  be  proved  by  induc¬ 
tion:  for  in  every  case  we  find  that  the  respec¬ 
tive  extremities  of  that  which  causes  and  that 
which  undergoes  alteration  are  adjacent.  For 
our  assumption  is  that  things  that  are  under¬ 
going  alteration  are  altered  in  virtue  of  their 
being  affected  in  respect  of  their  so-called  affec¬ 
tive  qualities,  since  that  which  is  of  a  certain 
quality  is  altered  in  so  far  as  it  is  sensible,  and 
the  characteristics  in  which  bodies  differ  from 


one  another  are  sensible  characteristics:  for  ev¬ 
ery  body  differs  from  another  in  possessing  a 
greater  or  lesser  number  of  sensible  character¬ 
istics  or  in  possessing  the  same  sensible  charac¬ 
teristics  in  a  greater  or  lesser  degree.  But  the 
alteration  of  that  which  undergoes  alteration  is 
also  caused  by  the  above-mentioned  character- 
[5]  istics,  which  are  affections  of  some  particu¬ 
lar  underlying  quality.  Thus  we  say  that  a 
thing  is  altered  by  becoming  hot  or  sweet  or 
thick  or  dry  or  white:  and  we  make  these  asser¬ 
tions  alike  of  what  is  inanimate  and  of  what  is 
animate,  and  further,  where  animate  things  are 
in  question,  we  make  them  both  of  the  parts 
that  have  no  power  of  sense-perception  and  of 
[jo]  the  senses  themselves.  For  in  a  way  even 
the  senses  undergo  alteration,  since  the  active 
sense  is  a  motion  through  the  body  in  the 
course  of  which  the  sense  is  affected  in  a  cer¬ 
tain  way.  We  see,  then,  that  the  animate  is  ca¬ 
pable  of  every  kind  of  alteration  of  which  the 
inanimate  is  capable:  but  the  inanimate  is  not 
capable  of  every  kind  of  alteration  of  which 
the  animate  is  capable,  since  it  is  not  capable  of 
alteration  in  respect  of  the  senses:  moreover 
[75]  the  inanimate  is  unconscious  of  being  af- 
245a  fected  by  alteration,  whereas  the  animate 
is  conscious  of  it,  though  there  is  nothing  to 
prevent  the  animate  also  being  unconscious  of 
it  when  the  process  of  the  alteration  does  not 
concern  the  senses.  Since,  then,  the  alteration  of 
that  which  undergoes  alteration  is  caused  by 
sensible  things,  in  every  case  of  such  alteration 
it  is  evident  that  the  respective  extremities  of 
that  which  causes  and  that  which  undergoes 
[5]  alteration  are  adjacent.  Thus  the  air  is  con¬ 
tinuous  with  that  which  causes  the  alteration, 
and  the  body  that  undergoes  alteration  is  con¬ 
tinuous  with  the  air.  Again,  the  colour  is  con¬ 
tinuous  with  the  light  and  the  light  with  the 
sight.  And  the  same  is  true  of  hearing  and 
smelling:  for  the  primary  movent  in  respect  to 
the  moved  is  the  air.  Similarly,  in  the  case  of 
tasting,  the  flavour  is  adjacent  to  the  sense  of 
[70]  taste.  And  it  is  just  the  same  in  the  case  of 
things  that  are  inanimate  and  incapable  of 
sense-perception.  Thus  there  can  be  nothing 
intermediate  between  that  which  undergoes 
and  that  which  causes  alteration. 

Nor,  again,  can  there  be  anything  interme¬ 
diate  between  that  which  suffers  and  that 
which  causes  increase:  for  the  part  of  the  latter 
that  starts  the  increase  does  so  by  becoming  at¬ 
tached  in  such  a  way  to  the  former  that  the 
whole  becomes  one.  Again,  the  decrease  of  that 
which  suffers  decrease  is  caused  by  a  part  of 


246b 

the  thing  becoming  detached.  So  that  which 
[75]  causes  increase  and  that  which  causes  de¬ 
crease  must  be  continuous  with  that  which  suf¬ 
fers  increase  and  that  which  suffers  decrease 
respectively:  and  if  two  things  are  continuous 
with  one  another  there  can  be  nothing  interme¬ 
diate  between  them. 

It  is  evident,  therefore,  that  between  the  ex- 
24515  tremities  of  the  moved  and  the  movent 
that  are  respectively  first  and  last  in  reference 
to  the  moved  there  is  nothing  intermediate. 

3 

Everything,  we  say,  that  undergoes  altera¬ 
tion  is  altered  by  sensible  causes,  and  there  is 
alteration  only  in  things  that  are  said  to  be  es¬ 
sentially  affected  by  sensible  things.  The  truth 
[5]  of  this  is  to  be  seen  from  the  following  con¬ 
siderations.  Of  all  other  things  it  would  be 
most  natural  to  suppose  that  there  is  alteration 
in  figures  and  shapes,  and  in  acquired  states 
and  in  the  processes  of  acquiring  and  losing 
these:  but  as  a  matter  of  fact  in  neither  of  these 
two  classes  of  things  is  there  alteration. 

In  the  first  place,  when  a  particular  forma- 
[/o]  tion  of  a  thing  is  completed,  we  do  not 
call  it  by  the  name  of  its  material:  e.g.  we  do 
not  call  the  statue  ‘bronze’  or  the  pyramid  ‘wax’ 
or  the  bed  ‘wood’,  but  we  use  a  derived  expres¬ 
sion  and  call  them  ‘of  bronze’,  ‘waxen’,  and 
‘wooden’  respectively.  But  when  a  thing  has 
been  affected  and  altered  in  any  way  we  still 
call  it  by  the  original  name:  thus  we  speak  of 
the  bronze  or  the  wax  being  dry  or  fluid  or 
hard  or  hot. 

[75]  And  not  only  so:  we  also  speak  of  the  par¬ 
ticular  fluid  or  hot  substance  as  being  bronze, 
giving  the  material  the  same  name  as  that 
which  we  use  to  describe  the  affection. 

246a  Since,  therefore,  having  regard  to  the  fig¬ 
ure  or  shape  of  a  thing  we  no  longer  call  that 
which  has  become  of  a  certain  figure  by  the 
name  of  the  material  that  exhibits  the  figure, 
whereas  having  regard  to  a  thing’s  affections 
or  alterations  we  still  call  it  by  the  name  of  its 
material,  it  is  evident  that  becomings  of  the 
former  kind  cannot  be  alterations. 

Moreover  it  would  seem  absurd  even  to 
speak  in  this  way,  to  speak,  that  is  to  say,  of  a 
[5]  man  or  house  or  anything  else  that  has 
come  into  existence  as  having  been  altered. 
Though  it  may  be  true  that  every  such  becom¬ 
ing  is  necessarily  the  result  of  something’s  be¬ 
ing  altered,  the  result,  e.g.  of  the  material’s  be¬ 
ing  condensed  or  rarefied  or  heated  or  cooled, 
nevertheless  it  is  not  the  things  that  are  coming 


329 

into  existence  that  are  altered,  and  their  becom¬ 
ing  is  not  an  alteration. 

[70]  Again,  acquired  states,  whether  of  the 
body  or  of  the  soul,  are  not  alterations.  For 
some  are  excellences  and  others  are  defects, 
and  neither  excellence  nor  defect  is  an  altera¬ 
tion:  excellence  is  a  perfection  (for  when  any¬ 
thing  acquires  its  proper  excellence  we  call  it 
erfect,  since  it  is  then  if  ever  that  we  have  a 
75]  thing  in  its  natural  state:  e.g.  we  have  a 
perfect  circle  when  we  have  one  as  good  as  pos¬ 
sible),  while  defect  is  a  perishing  of  or  depar¬ 
ture  from  this  condition.  So  just  as  when  speak¬ 
ing  of  a  house  we  do  not  call  its  arrival  at  per¬ 
fection  an  alteration  (for  it  would  be  absurd  to 
suppose  that  the  coping  or  the  tiling  is  an  alter- 
[20]  ation  or  that  in  receiving  its  coping  or  its 
tiling  a  house  is  altered  and  not  perfected),  the 
same  also  holds  good  in  the  case  of  excellences 
and  defects  and  of  the  persons  or  things  that 
246b  possess  or  acquire  them:  for  excellences 
are  perfections  of  a  thing’s  nature  and  defects 
are  departures  from  it:  consequently  they  are 
not  alterations. 

Further,  we  say  that  all  excellences  depend 
upon  particular  relations.  Thus  bodily  excel¬ 
lences  such  as  health  and  a  good  state  of  body 
[5]  we  regard  as  consisting  in  a  blending  of  hot 
and  cold  elements  within  the  body  in  due  pro¬ 
portion,  in  relation  either  to  one  another  or  to 
the  surrounding  atmosphere:  and  in  like  man¬ 
ner  we  regard  beauty,  strength,  and  all  the  other 
bodily  excellences  and  defects.  Each  of  them 
exists  in  virtue  of  a  particular  relation  and  puts 
that  which  possesses  it  in  a  good  or  bad  condi¬ 
tion  with  regard  to  its  proper  affections,  where 
by  ‘proper’  affections  I  mean  those  influences 
that  from  the  natural  constitution  of  a  thing 
tend  to  promote  or  destroy  its  existence.  Since, 
[70]  then,  relatives  are  neither  themselves  alter¬ 
ations  nor  the  subjects  of  alteration  or  of  becom¬ 
ing  or  in  fact  of  any  change  whatever,  it  is  evi¬ 
dent  that  neither  states  nor  the  processes  of  los¬ 
ing  and  acquiring  states  are  alterations,  though 
it  may  be  true  that  their  becoming  or  perishing 
[75]  is  necessarily,  like  the  becoming  or  perish¬ 
ing  of  a  specific  character  or  form,  the  result  of 
the  alteration  of  certain  other  things,  e.g.  hot 
and  cold  or  dry  and  wet  elements  or  the  ele¬ 
ments,  whatever  they  may  be,  on  which  the 
states  primarily  depend.  For  each  several  bod¬ 
ily  defect  or  excellence  involves  a  relation  with 
those  things  from  which  the  possessor  of  the 
defect  or  excellence  is  naturally  subject  to  al¬ 
teration:  thus  excellence  disposes  its  possessor 
to  be  unaffected  by  these  influences  or  to  be  af- 


BOOK  VII,  CHAPTERS  2-3 


330 

fected  by  those  of  them  that  ought  to  be  admit¬ 
ted,  while  defect  disposes  its  possessor  to  be  af¬ 
fected  by  them  or  to  be  unaffected  by  those  of 
them  that  ought  to  be  admitted. 

[20]  And  the  case  is  similar  in  regard  to  the 
24 7a  states  of  the  soul,  all  of  which  (like  those 
of  body)  exist  in  virtue  of  particular  relations, 
the  excellences  being  perfections  of  nature  and 
the  defects  departures  from  it:  moreover,  excel¬ 
lence  puts  its  possessor  in  good  condition,  while 
defect  puts  its  possessor  in  a  bad  condition,  to 
meet  his  proper  affections.  Consequently  these 
cannot  any  more  than  the  bodily  states  be  alter- 
[5]  ations,  nor  can  the  processes  of  losing  and 
acquiring  them  be  so,  though  their  becoming 
is  necessarily  the  result  of  an  alteration  of  the 
sensitive  part  of  the  soul,  and  this  is  altered  by 
sensible  objects:  for  all  moral  excellence  is  con¬ 
cerned  with  bodily  pleasures  and  pains,  which 
again  depend  either  upon  acting  or  upon  re¬ 
membering  or  upon  anticipating.  Now  those 
that  depend  upon  action  are  determined  by 
[/o]  sense-perception,  i.e.  they  are  stimulated 
by  something  sensible:  and  those  that  depend 
upon  memory  or  anticipation  are  likewise  to  be 
traced  to  sense-perception,  for  in  these  cases 
pleasure  is  felt  either  in  remembering  what  one 
has  experienced  or  in  anticipating  what  one  is 
going  to  experience.  Thus  all  pleasure  of  this 
kind  must  be  produced  by  sensible  things:  and 
since  the  presence  in  any  one  of  moral  defect 
or  excellence  involves  the  presence  in  him  of 
[75]  pleasure  or  pain  (with  which  moral  excel¬ 
lence  and  defect  are  always  concerned),  and 
these  pleasures  and  pains  are  alterations  of  the 
sensitive  part,  it  is  evident  that  the  loss  and  ac¬ 
quisition  of  these  states  no  less  than  the  loss  and 
acquisition  of  the  states  of  the  body  must  be  the 
result  of  the  alteration  of  something  else.  Con¬ 
sequently,  though  their  becoming  is  accompa¬ 
nied  by  an  alteration,  they  are  not  themselves 
alterations. 

247b  Again,  the  states  of  the  intellectual  part 
of  the  soul  are  not  alterations,  nor  is  there  any 
becoming  of  them.  In  the  first  place  it  is  much 
more  true  of  the  possession  of  knowledge  that 
it  depends  upon  a  particular  relation.  And  fur¬ 
ther,  it  is  evident  that  there  is  no  becoming  of 
these  states.  For  that  which  is  potentially  pos¬ 
sessed  of  knowledge  becomes  actually  possessed 
of  it  not  by  being  set  in  motion  at  all  itself 
[5]  but  by  reason  of  the  presence  of  something 
else:  i.e.  it  is  when  it  meets  with  the  particular 
object  that  it  knows  in  a  manner  the  particular 
through  its  knowledge  of  the  universal.  (Again, 
there  is  no  becoming  of  the  actual  use  and  ac- 


248a 

tivity  of  these  states,  unless  it  is  thought  that 
there  is  a  becoming  of  vision  and  touching  and 
that  the  activity  in  question  is  similar  to  these.) 
And  the  original  acquisition  of  knowledge  is 
not  a  becoming  or  an  alteration:  for  the  terms 
[/o]  ‘knowing’  and  ‘understanding’  imply  that 
the  intellect  has  reached  a  state  of  rest  and 
come  to  a  standstill,  and  there  is  no  becoming 
that  leads  to  a  state  of  rest,  since,  as  we  have 
said  above,1  no  change  at  all  can  have  a  becom¬ 
ing.  Moreover,  just  as  to  say,  when  any  one  has 
passed  from  a  state  of  intoxication  or  sleep  or 
disease  to  the  contrary  state,  that  he  has  become 
[75]  possessed  of  knowledge  again  is  incorrect 
in  spite  of  the  fact  that  he  was  previously  inca¬ 
pable  of  using  his  knowledge,  so,  too,  when 
any  one  originally  acquires  the  state,  it  is  incor¬ 
rect  to  say  that  he  becomes  possessed  of  knowl¬ 
edge:  for  the  possession  of  understanding  and 
knowledge  is  produced  by  the  soul’s  settling 
down  out  of  the  restlessness  natural  to  it. 
Hence,  too,  in  learning  and  in  forming  judge¬ 
ments  on  matters  relating  to  their  sense-percep- 
248a  tions  children  are  inferior  to  adults  ow¬ 
ing  to  the  great  amount  of  restlessness  and  mo¬ 
tion  in  their  souls.  Nature  itself  causes  the  soul 
to  settle  down  and  come  to  a  state  of  rest  for 
the  performance  of  some  of  its  functions,  while 
for  the  performance  of  others  other  things  do 
so:  but  in  either  case  the  result  is  brought  about 
through  the  alteration  of  something  in  the 
body,  as  we  see  in  the  case  of  the  use  and  activ- 
[5]  ity  of  the  intellect  arising  from  a  man’s  be¬ 
coming  sober  or  being  awakened.  It  is  evident, 
then,  from  the  preceding  argument  that  altera¬ 
tion  and  being  altered  occur  in  sensible  things 
and  in  the  sensitive  part  of  the  soul,  and,  ex¬ 
cept  accidentally,  in  nothing  else. 

4 

[70]  A  difficulty  may  be  raised  as  to  whether 
every  motion  is  commensurable  with  every  oth¬ 
er  or  not.  Now  if  they  are  all  commensurable 
and  if  two  things  to  have  the  same  velocity 
must  accomplish  an  equal  motion  in  an  equal 
time,  then  we  may  have  a  circumference  equal 
to  a  straight  line,  or,  of  course,  the  one  may  be 
greater  or  less  than  the  other.  Further,  if  one 
thing  alters  and  another  accomplishes  a  loco¬ 
motion  in  an  equal  time,  we  may  have  an  alter- 
[75]  ation  and  a  locomotion  equal  to  one  an¬ 
other:  thus  an  affection  will  be  equal  to  a 
length,  which  is  impossible.  But  is  it  not  only 
when  an  equal  motion  is  accomplished  by  two 
things  in  an  equal  time  that  the  velocities  of 
1  v.  2  (225b  15  sqq.). 


PHYSICS 


249a  BOOK  VII,  CHAPTERS  3-4  331 


the  two  are  equal?  Now  an  affection  cannot  be 
equal  to  a  length.  Therefore  there  cannot  be  an 
alteration  equal  to  or  less  than  a  locomotion: 
and  consequently  it  is  not  the  case  that  every 
motion  is  commensurable  with  every  other. 

But  how  will  our  conclusion  work  out  in  the 
case  of  the  circle  and  the  straight  line?  It  would 
be  absurd  to  suppose  that  the  motion  of  one 
[20]  thing  in  a  circle  and  of  another  in  a 
straight  line  cannot  be  similar,  but  that  the  one 
must  inevitably  move  more  quickly  or  more 
slowly  than  the  other,  just  as  if  the  course  of 
one  were  downhill  and  of  the  other  uphill. 
Moreover  it  does  not  as  a  matter  of  fact  make 
any  difference  to  the  argument  to  say  that  the 
one  motion  must  inevitably  be  quicker  or  slow¬ 
er  than  the  other:  for  then  the  circumference 
can  be  greater  or  less  than  the  straight  line; 
and  if  so  it  is  possible  for  the  two  to  be  equal. 
[25]  For  if  in  the  time  A  the  quicker  (B) 
passes  over  the  distance  B'  and  the  slower  (T) 
248b  passes  over  the  distance  T\  B'  will  be 
greater  than  T':  for  this  is  what  we1  took 
‘quicker’  to  mean:  and  so  quicker  motion  also 
implies  that  one  thing  traverses  an  equal  dis¬ 
tance  in  less  time  than  another:  consequently 
there  will  be  a  part  of  A  in  which  B  will  pass 
over  a  part  of  the  circle  equal  to  T\  while  T 
will  occupy  the  whole  of  A  in  passing  over  T '• 
None  the  less,  if  the  two  motions  are  commen- 
[5]  surable,  we  are  confronted  with  the  conse¬ 
quence  stated  above,  viz.  that  there  may  be  a 
straight  line  equal  to  a  circle.  But  these  are  not 
commensurable:  and  so  the  corresponding  mo¬ 
tions  are  not  commensurable  either. 

But  may  we  say  that  things  are  always  com¬ 
mensurable  if  the  same  terms  are  applied  to 
them  without  equivocation?  e.g.  a  pen,  a  wine, 
and  the  highest  note  in  a  scale  are  not  com¬ 
mensurable:  we  cannot  say  whether  any  one  of 
them  is  sharper  than  any  other:  and  why  is 
this?  they  are  incommensurable  because  it  is 
only  equivocally  that  the  same  term  ‘sharp’  is 
applied  to  them:  whereas  the  highest  note  in  a 
scale  is  commensurable  with  the  leading-note, 
because  the  term  ‘sharp’  has  the  same  meaning 
[jo]  as  applied  to  both.  Can  it  be,  then,  that 
the  term  ‘quick’  has  not  the  same  meaning  as 
applied  to  straight  motion  and  to  circular  mo¬ 
tion  respectively  ?  If  so,  far  less  will  it  have  the 
same  meaning  as  applied  to  alteration  and  to 
locomotion. 

Or  shall  we  in  the  first  place  deny  that  things 
are  always  commensurable  if  the  same  terms 
are  applied  to  them  without  equivocation?  For 

1  vi.  2(232**  25  sqq.). 


the  term  ‘much’  has  the  same  meaning  wheth¬ 
er  applied  to  water  or  to  air,  yet  water  and  air 
are  not  commensurable  in  respect  of  it:  or,  if 
this  illustration  is  not  considered  satisfactory, 
‘double’  at  any  rate  would  seem  to  have  the 
same  meaning  as  applied  to  each  (denoting  in 
each  case  the  proportion  of  two  to  one),  yet 
water  and  air  are  not  commensurable  in  re¬ 
f/5]  spect  of  it.  But  here  again  may  we  not 
take  up  the  same  position  and  say  that  the 
term  ‘much’  is  equivocal?  In  fact  there  are 
some  terms  of  which  even  the  definitions  are 
equivocal;  e.g.  if  ‘much’  were  defined  as  ‘so 
much  and  more’,  ‘so  much’  would  mean  some¬ 
thing  different  in  different  cases:  ‘equal’  is  sim¬ 
ilarly  equivocal;  and  ‘one’  again  is  perhaps  in- 
[20]  evitably  an  equivocal  term;  and  if  ‘one’  is 
equivocal,  so  is  ‘two’.  Otherwise  why  is  it  that 
some  things  are  commensurable  while  others 
are  not,  if  the  nature  of  the  attribute  in  the  two 
cases  is  really  one  and  the  same? 

Can  it  be  that  the  incommensurability  of  tv^o 
things  in  respect  of  any  attribute  is  due  to  a  dif¬ 
ference  in  that  which  is  primarily  capable  of 
carrying  the  attribute?  Thus  horse  and  dog  are 
so  commensurable  that  we  may  say  which  is 
the  whiter,  since  that  which  primarily  contains 
the  whiteness  is  the  same  in  both,  viz.  the  sur¬ 
face:  and  similarly  they  are  commensurable  in 
respect  of  size.  But  water  and  speech  are  not 
commensurable  in  respect  of  clearness,  since 
that  which  primarily  contains  the  attribute  is 
[25]  different  in  the  two  cases.  It  would  seem, 
however,  that  we  must  reject  this  solution, 
since  clearly  we  could  thus  make  all  equivocal 
attributes  univocal  and  say  merely  that  that 
which  contains  each  of  them  is  different  in  dif- 
249a  ferent  cases:  thus  ‘equality’,  ‘sweetness’, 
and  ‘whiteness’  will  severally  always  be  the 
same,  though  that  which  contains  them  is  dif¬ 
ferent  in  different  cases.  Moreover,  it  is  not  any 
casual  thing  that  is  capable  of  carrying  any  at¬ 
tribute:  each  single  attribute  can  be  carried  pri¬ 
marily  only  by  one  single  thing. 

Must  we  then  say  that,  if  two  things  are  to 
be  commensurable  in  respect  of  any  attribute, 
not  only  must  the  attribute  in  question  be  ap¬ 
plicable  to  both  without  equivocation,  but  there 
must  also  be  no  specific  differences  either  in 
the  attribute  itself  or  in  that  which  contains  the 
[5]  attribute — that  these,  I  mean,  must  not  be 
divisible  in  the  way  in  which  colour  is  divided 
into  kinds?  Thus  in  this  respect  one  thing  will 
not  be  commensurable  with  another,  i.e.  we 
cannot  say  that  one  is  more  coloured  than  the 
other  where  only  colour  in  general  and  not  any 


332 


PHYSICS 


249b 


particular  colour  is  meant;  but  they  are  com¬ 
mensurable  in  respect  of  whiteness. 

Similarly  in  the  case  of  motion:  two  things 
are  of  the  same  velocity  if  they  occupy  an  equal 
time  in  accomplishing  a  certain  equal  amount  of 
motion.  Suppose,  then,  that  in  a  certain  time  an 
alteration  is  undergone  by  one  half  of  a  body’s 
length  and  a  locomotion  is  accomplished  by 
[70]  the  other  half:  can  be  say  that  in  this  case 
the  alteration  is  equal  to  the  locomotion  and  of 
the  same  velocity  ?  That  would  be  absurd,  and 
the  reason  is  that  there  are  different  species  of 
motion.  And  if  in  consequence  of  this  we  must 
say  that  two  things  are  of  equal  velocity  if  they 
accomplish  locomotion  over  an  equal  distance 
in  an  equal  tme,  we  have  to  admit  the  equality 
of  a  straight  line  and  a  circumference.  What, 
then,  is  the  reason  of  this?  Is  it  that  locomo- 
[75]  tion  is  a  genus  or  that  line  is  a  genus? 
(We  may  leave  the  time  out  of  account,  since 
that  is  one  and  the  same.)  If  the  lines  are  spe¬ 
cifically  different,  the  locomotions  also  differ 
specifically  from  one  another:  for  locomotion 
is  specifically  differentiated  according  to  the 
specific  differentiation  of  that  over  which  it 
takes  place.  (It  is  also  similarly  differentiated, 
it  would  seem,  accordingly  as  the  instrument 
of  the  locomotion  is  different:  thus  if  feet  are 
the  instrument,  it  is  walking,  if  wings  it  is  fly¬ 
ing;  but  perhaps  we  should  rather  say  that 
this  is  not  so,  and  that  in  this  case  the  differ¬ 
ences  in  the  locomotion  are  merely  differences 
of  posture  in  that  which  is  in  motion.)  We  may 
say,  therefore,  that  things  are  of  equal  velocity 
[20]  if  in  an  equal  time  they  traverse  the  same 
magnitude:  and  when  I  call  it  ‘the  same’  I 
mean  that  it  contains  no  specific  difference  and 
therefore  no  difference  in  the  motion  that  takes 
place  over  it.  So  we  have  now  to  consider  how 
motion  is  differentiated:  and  this  discussion 
serves  to  show  that  the  genus  is  not  a  unity  but 
contains  a  plurality  latent  in  it  and  distinct 
from  it,  and  that  in  the  case  of  equivocal  terms 
sometimes  the  different  senses  in  which  they 
are  used  are  far  removed  from  one  another, 
while  sometimes  there  is  a  certain  likeness  be¬ 
tween  them,  and  sometimes  again  they  are 
nearly  related  either  generically  or  analogical¬ 
ly,  with  the  result  that  they  seem  not  to  be 
equivocal  though  they  really  are. 

[25]  When,  then,  is  there  a  difference  of  spe¬ 
cies?  Is  an  attribute  specifically  different  if  the 
subject  is  different  while  the  attribute  is  the 
same,  or  must  the  attribute  itself  be  different  as 
well?  And  how  are  we  to  define  the  limits  of 
a  species?  What  will  enable  us  to  decide  that 


particular  instances  of  whiteness  or  sweetness 
are  the  same  or  different?  Is  it  enough  that  it 
appears  different  in  one  subject  from  what  it 
appears  in  another?  Or  must  there  be  no  same¬ 
ness  at  all?  And  further,  where  alteration  is  in 
question,  how  is  one  alteration  to  be  of  equal 
velocity  with  another?  One  person  may  be 
cured  quickly  and  another  slowly,  and  cures 
[30]  may  also  be  simultaneous:  so  that,  recov¬ 
ery  of  health  being  an  alteration,  we  have  here 
alterations  of  equal  velocity,  since  each  altera- 
249b  tion  occupies  an  equal  time.  But  what 
alteration?  We  cannot  here  speak  of  an  ‘equal’ 
alteration:  what  corresponds  in  the  category  of 
quality  to  equality  in  the  category  of  quantity 
is  ‘likeness’.  However,  let  us  say  that  there  is 
equal  velocity  where  the  same  change  is  accom- 
[5]  plished  in  an  equal  time.  Are  we,  then,  to 
find  the  commensurability  in  the  subject  of 
the  affection  or  in  the  affection  itself?  In  the  case 
that  we  have  just  been  considering  it  is  the  fact 
that  health  is  one  and  the  same  that  enables  us 
to  arrive  at  the  conclusion  that  the  one  altera¬ 
tion  is  neither  more  nor  less  than  the  other,  but 
that  both  are  alike.  If  on  the  other  hand  the  af¬ 
fection  is  different  in  the  two  cases,  e.g.  when 
the  alterations  take  the  form  of  becoming  white 
and  becoming  healthy  respectively,  here  there 
is  no  sameness  or  equality  or  likeness  inas¬ 
much  as  the  difference  in  the  affections  at 
[/o]  once  makes  the  alterations  specifically  dif¬ 
ferent,  and  there  is  no  unity  of  alteration  any 
more  than  there  would  be  unity  of  locomotion 
under  like  conditions.  So  we  must  find  out  how 
many  species  there  are  of  alteration  and  of  lo¬ 
comotion  respectively.  Now  if  the  things  that 
are  in  motion — that  is  to  say,  the  things  to 
which  the  motions  belong  essentially  and  not 
accidentally — differ  specifically,  then  their  re¬ 
spective  motions  will  also  differ  specifically:  if 
on  the  other  hand  they  differ  generically  or  nu¬ 
merically,  the  motions  also  will  differ  generi¬ 
cally  or  numerically  as  the  case  may  be.  But 
[75]  there  still  remains  the  question  whether, 
supposing  that  two  alterations  are  of  equal  ve¬ 
locity,  we  ought  to  look  for  this  equality  in  the 
sameness  (or  likeness)  of  the  affections,  or  in 
the  things  altered,  to  see  e.g.  whether  a  certain 
quantity  of  each  has  become  white.  Or  ought 
we  not  rather  to  look  for  it  in  both?  That  is  to 
say,  the  alterations  are  the  same  or  different 
according  as  the  affections  are  the  same  or  dif¬ 
ferent,  while  they  are  equal  or  unequal  ac¬ 
cording  as  the  things  altered  are  equal  or  un¬ 
equal. 

And  now  we  must  consider  the  same  ques- 


25  Ob 

[20]  tion  in  the  case  of  becoming  and  perish¬ 
ing:  how  is  one  becoming  of  equal  velocity 
with  another?  They  are  of  equal  velocity  if  in 
an  equal  time  there  are  produced  two  things 
that  are  the  same  and  specifically  inseparable, 
e.g.  two  men  (not  merely  generically  insepara¬ 
ble  as  e.g.  two  animals).  Similarly  one  is  quick¬ 
er  than  the  other  if  in  an  equal  time  the  prod¬ 
uct  is  different  in  the  two  cases.  I  state  it  thus 
because  we  have  no  pair  of  terms  that  will  con¬ 
vey  this  ‘difference’  in  the  way  in  which  un¬ 
likeness  is  conveyed.  If  we  adopt  the  theory 
that  it  is  number  that  constitutes  being,  we  may 
indeed  speak  of  a  ‘greater  number’  and  a  ‘less¬ 
er  number’  within  the  same  species,  but  there 
is  no  common  term  that  will  include  both  rela¬ 
tions,  nor  are  there  terms  to  express  each  of 
[25]  them  separately  in  the  same  way  as  we 
indicate  a  higher  degree  or  preponderance  of 
an  affection  by  ‘more’,  of  a  quantity  by  ‘greater.’ 

5 

Now  since  wherever  there  is  a  movent,  its 
motion  always  acts  upon  something,  is  always 
in  something,  and  always  extends  to  something 
(by  ‘is  always  in  something’  I  mean  that  it  oc¬ 
cupies  a  time:  and  by  ‘extends  to  something’  I 
mean  that  it  involves  the  traversing  of  a  certain 
amount  of  distance:  for  at  any  moment  when 
a  thing  is  causing  motion,  it  also  has  caused 
motion,  so  that  there  must  always  be  a  certain 
amount  of  distance  that  has  been  traversed  and 
a  certain  amount  of  time  that  has  been  occu- 
[jo]  pied).  If,  then,  A  the  movent  have  moved 
250a  B  a  distance  T  in  a  time  A,  then  in  the 
same  time  the  same  force  A  will  move  V2B 
twice  the  distance  T,  and  in  l/2A  it  will  move 
Yz  B  the  whole  distance  T:  for  thus  the  rules  of 
proportion  will  be  observed.  Again  if  a  given 
[5]  force  move  a  given  weight  a  certain  dis¬ 
tance  in  a  certain  time  and  half  the  distance  in 
half  the  time,  half  the  motive  power  will  move 
half  the  weight  the  same  distance  in  the  same 
time.  Let  E  represent  half  the  motive  power  A 
and  Z  half  the  weight  B:  then  the  ratio  be¬ 
tween  the  motive  power  and  the  weight  in  the 
one  case  is  similar  and  proportionate  to  the  ratio 
in  the  other,  so  that  each  force  will  cause  the 
same  distance  to  be  traversed  in  the  same  time. 
[10]  But  if  E  move  Z  a  distance  T  in  a  time  A, 
it  does  not  necessarily  follow  that  E  can  move 
twice  Z  half  the  distance  T  in  the  same  time. 
If,  then,  A  move  B  a  distance  T  in  a  time  A,  it 
does  not  follow  that  E,  being  half  of  A,  will  in 
the  time  A  or  in  any  fraction  of  it  cause  B  to 
traverse  a  part  of  T  the  ratio  between  which 


333 

and  the  whole  of  T  is  proportionate  to  that  be¬ 
tween  A  and  E  (whatever  fraction  of  A  E  may 
[75]  be):  in  fact  it  might  well  be  that  it  will 
cause  no  motion  at  all;  for  it  does  not  follow 
that,  if  a  given  motive  power  causes  a  certain 
amount  of  motion,  half  that  power  will  cause 
motion  either  of  any  particular  amount  or  in 
any  length  of  time:  otherwise  one  man  might 
move  a  ship,  since  both  the  motive  power  of  the 
ship-haulers  and  the  distance  that  they  all 
cause  the  ship  to  traverse  are  divisible  into  as 
many  parts  as  there  are  men.  Hence  Zeno’s  rea- 
[20]  soning  is  false  when  he  argues  that  there 
is  no  part  of  the  millet  that  does  not  make  a 
sound:  for  there  is  no  reason  why  any  such 
part  should  not  in  any  length  of  time  fail  to 
move  the  air  that  the  whole  bushel  moves  in 
falling.  In  fact  it  does  not  of  itself  move  even 
such  a  quantity  of  the  air  as  it  would  move  if 
this  part  were  by  itself:  for  no  part  even  exists 
otherwise  than  potentially. 

[25]  If  on  the  other  hand  we  have  two  forces 
each  of  which  separately  moves  one  of  two 
weights  a  given  distance  in  a  given  time,  then  the 
forces  in  combination  will  move  the  combined 
weights  an  equal  distance  in  an  equal  time: 
for  in  this  case  the  rules  of  proportion  apply. 

Then  does  this  hold  good  of  alteration  and  of 
increase  also?  Surely  it  does,  for  in  any  given 
case  we  have  a  definite  thing  that  causes  in- 
[  jo]  crease  and  a  definite  thing  that  suffers  in¬ 
crease,  and  the  one  causes  and  the  other  suffers 
a  certain  amount  of  increase  in  a  certain 
amount  of  time.  Similarly  we  have  a  definite 
thing  that  causes  alteration  and  a  definite  thing 
that  undergoes  alteration,  and  a  certain 
amount,  or  rather  degree,  of  alteration  is  com- 
250b  pleted  in  a  certain  amount  of  time:  thus 
in  twice  as  much  time  twice  as  much  alteration 
will  be  completed  and  conversely  twice  as  much 
alteration  will  occupy  twice  as  much  time:  and 
the  alteration  of  half  of  its  object  will  occupy 
half  as  much  time  and  in  half  as  much  time 
half  of  the  object  will  be  altered:  or  again,  in 
the  same  amount  of  time  it  will  be  altered  twice 
as  much. 

On  the  other  hand  if  that  which  causes  alter¬ 
ation  or  increase  causes  a  certain  amount  of  in¬ 
crease  or  alteration  respectively  in  a  certain 
[5]  amount  of  time,  it  does  not  necessarily  fol¬ 
low  that  half  the  force  will  occupy  twice  the 
time  in  altering  or  increasing  the  object,  or 
that  in  twice  the  time  the  alteration  or  increase 
will  be  completed  by  it:  it  may  happen  that 
there  will  be  no  alteration  or  increase  at  all,  the 
case  being  the  same  as  with  the  weight. 


BOOK  VII,  CHAPTERS  4-5 


334 


PHYSICS 


251* 


BOOK  VIII 


i 

It  remains  to  consider  the  following  ques¬ 
tion.  Was  there  ever  a  becoming  of  motion  be¬ 
fore  which  it  had  no  being,  and  is  it  perishing 
again  so  as  to  leave  nothing  in  motion?  Or  are 
we  to  say  that  it  never  had  any  becoming  and 
is  not  perishing,  but  always  was  and  always 
will  be?  Is  it  in  fact  an  immortal  never-failing 
property  of  things  that  are,  a  sort  of  life  as  it 
were  to  all  naturally  constituted  things? 

[75]  Now  the  existence  of  motion  is  asserted 
by  all  who  have  anything  to  say  about  nature, 
because  they  all  concern  themselves  with  the 
construction  of  the  world  and  study  the  ques¬ 
tion  of  becoming  and  perishing,  which  proc¬ 
esses  could  not  come  about  without  the  exist¬ 
ence  of  motion.  But  those  who  say  that  there  is 
an  infinite  number  of  worlds,  some  of  which 
are  in  process  of  becoming  while  others  are  in 
[20]  process  of  perishing,  assert  that  there  is  al¬ 
ways  motion  (for  these  processes  of  becoming 
and  perishing  of  the  worlds  necessarily  involve 
motion),  whereas  those  who  hold  that  there  is 
only  one  world,  whether  everlasting  or  not, 
make  corresponding  assumptions  in  regard  to 
motion.  If  then  it  is  possible  that  at  any  time 
nothing  should  be  in  motion,  this  must  come 
about  in  one  of  two  ways:  either  in  the  manner 
described  by  Anaxagoras,  who  says  that  all 
[25]  things  were  together  and  at  rest  for  an  in¬ 
finite  period  of  time,  and  that  then  Mind  intro¬ 
duced  motion  and  separated  them;  or  in  the 
manner  described  by  Empedocles,  according  to 
whom  the  universe  is  alternately  in  motion  and 
at  rest — in  motion,  when  Love  is  making  the 
one  out  of  many,  or  Strife  is  making  many  out 
of  one,  and  at  rest  in  the  intermediate  periods 
of  time — his  account  being  as  follows: 

[30]  ' Since  One  hath  learned  to  spring  from 
Manifold, 

And  One  disjoined  makes  Manifold  arise, 
251*  Thus  they  Become,  nor  stable  is  their 
life: 

But  since  their  motion  must  alternate 
be, 

Thus  have  they  ever  Rest  upon  their 
round’: 

for  we  must  suppose  that  he  means  by  this  that 
[5]  they  alternate  from  the  one  motion  to  the 
other.  We  must  consider,  then,  how  this  mat¬ 
ter  stands,  for  the  discovery  of  the  truth  about 
it  is  of  importance,  not  only  for  the  study  of 


nature,  but  also  for  the  investigation  of  the 
First  Principle. 

Let  us  take  our  start  from  what  we  have  al¬ 
ready1  laid  down  in  our  course  on  Physics.  Mo¬ 
tion,  we  say,  is  the  fulfilment  of  the  movable  in 
[/o]  so  far  as  it  is  movable.  Each  kind  of  mo¬ 
tion,  therefore,  necessarily  involves  the  pres¬ 
ence  of  the  things  that  are  capable  of  that  mo¬ 
tion.  In  fact,  even  apart  from  the  definition  of 
motion,  every  one  would  admit  that  in  each 
kind  of  motion  it  is  that  which  is  capable  of 
that  motion  that  is  in  motion:  thus  it  is  that 
which  is  capable  of  alteration  that  is  altered, 
and  that  which  is  capable  of  local  change  that 
[75]  is  in  locomotion:  and  so  there  must  be 
something  capable  of  being  burned  before  there 
can  be  a  process  of  being  burned,  and  some¬ 
thing  capable  of  burning  before  there  can  be  a 
process  of  burning.  Moreover,  these  things  also 
must  either  have  a  beginning  before  which 
they  had  no  being,  or  they  must  be  eternal. 
Now  if  there  was  a  becoming  of  every  movable 
thing,  it  follows  that  before  the  motion  in  ques¬ 
tion  another  change  or  motion  must  have  taken 
place  in  which  that  which  was  capable  of  being 
moved  or  of  causing  motion  had  its  becoming. 
[20]  To  suppose,  on  the  other  hand,  that  these 
things  were  in  being  throughout  all  previous 
time  without  there  being  any  motion  appears 
unreasonable  on  a  moment’s  thought,  and  still 
more  unreasonable,  we  shall  find,  on  further 
consideration.  For  if  we  are  to  say  that,  while 
there  are  on  the  one  hand  things  that  are  mov¬ 
able,  and  on  the  other  hand  things  that  are  mo¬ 
tive,  there  is  a  time  when  there  is  a  first  movent 
and  a  first  moved,  and  another  time  when  there 
is  no  such  thing  but  only  something  that  is  at 
[25]  rest,  then  this  thing  that  is  at  rest  must 
previously  have  been  in  process  of  change:  for 
there  must  have  been  some  cause  of  its  rest, 
rest  being  the  privation  of  motion.  Therefore, 
before  this  first  change  there  will  be  a  previous 
change.  For  some  things  cause  motion  in  only 
one  way,  while  others  can  produce  either  of 
two  contrary  motions:  thus  fire  causes  heating 
[30]  but  not  cooling,  whereas  it  would  seem 
that  knowledge  may  be  directed  to  two  con¬ 
trary  ends  while  remaining  one  and  the  same. 
Even  in  the  former  class,  however,  there  seems 
to  be  something  similar,  for  a  cold  thing  in  a 
sense  causes  heating  by  turning  away  and  re¬ 
tiring,  just  as  one  possessed  of  knowledge  vol- 
1  m.  1. 


252a  BOOK  VIII, 

untarily  makes  an  error  when  he  uses  his 
25 lb  knowledge  in  the  reverse  way.  But  at  any 
rate  all  things  that  are  capable  respectively  of 
affecting  and  being  affected,  or  of  causing  mo¬ 
tion  and  being  moved,  are  capable  of  it  not  un¬ 
der  all  conditions,  but  only  when  they  are  in  a 
particular  condition  and  approach  one  anoth¬ 
er:  so  it  is  on  the  approach  of  one  thing  to  an¬ 
other  that  the  one  causes  motion  and  the  other 
is  moved,  and  when  they  are  present  under 
such  conditions  as  rendered  the  one  motive  and 
[5]  the  other  movable.  So  if  the  motion  was 
not  always  in  process,  it  is  clear  that  they  must 
have  been  in  a  condition  not  such  as  to  render 
them  capable  respectively  of  being  moved  and 
of  causing  motion,  and  one  or  other  of  them 
must  have  been  in  process  of  change:  for  in 
what  is  relative  this  is  a  necessary  consequence: 
e.g.  if  one  thing  is  double  another  when  before 
it  was  not  so,  one  or  other  of  them,  if  not  both, 
must  have  been  in  process  of  change.  It  follows, 
then,  that  there  will  be  a  process  of  change  pre¬ 
vious  to  the  fr/st. 

[/o]  (Further,  how  can  there  be  any  ‘before’ 
and  ‘after’  without  the  existence  of  time?  Or 
how  can  there  be  any  time  without  the  exist¬ 
ence  of  motion  ?  If,  then,  time  is  the  number  of 
motion  or  itself  a  kind  of  motion,  it  follows 
that,  if  there  is  always  time,  motion  must  also 
be  eternal.  But  so  far  as  time  is  concerned  we 
see  that  all  with  one  exception  are  in  agreement 
in  saying  that  it  is  uncreated:  in  fact,  it  is  just 
[75]  this  that  enables  Democritus  to  show  that 
all  things  cannot  have  had  a  becoming:  for 
time,  he  says,  is  uncreated.  Plato  alone  asserts 
the  creation  of  time,  saying1  that  it  had  a  be¬ 
coming  together  with  the  universe,  the  uni¬ 
verse  according  to  him  having  had  a  becoming. 
Now  since  time  cannot  exist  and  is  unthinka¬ 
ble  apart  from  the  moment,  and  the  moment 
[20]  is  a  kind  of  middle-point,  uniting  as  it 
does  in  itself  both  a  beginning  and  an  end,  a 
beginning  of  future  time  and  an  end  of  past 
time,  it  follows  that  there  must  always  be  time: 
for  the  extremity  of  the  last  period  of  time  that 
we  take  must  be  found  in  some  moment,  since 
time  contains  no  point  of  contact  for  us  except 
[25]  the  moment.  Therefore,  since  the  moment 
is  both  a  beginning  and  an  end,  there  must  al¬ 
ways  be  time  on  both  sides  of  it.  But  if  this  is 
true  of  time,  it  is  evident  that  it  must  also  be 
true  of  motion,  time  being  a  kind  of  affection 
of  motion.) 

The  same  reasoning  will  also  serve  to  show 
the  imperishability  of  motion:  just  as  a  becom- 

1Aristotle  is  thinking  of  a  passage  in  the  Timaeus  (38). 


CHAPTER  1  335 

ing  of  motion  would  involve,  as  we  saw,  the 
[jo]  existence  of  a  process  of  change  previous 
to  the  first,  in  the  same  way  a  perishing  of  mo¬ 
tion  would  involve  the  existence  of  a  process  of 
change  subsequent  to  the  last:  for  when  a  thing 
ceases  to  be  moved,  it  does  not  therefore  at  the 
same  time  cease  to  be  movable — e.g.  the  cessa¬ 
tion  of  the  process  of  being  burned  does  not  in¬ 
volve  the  cessation  of  the  capacity  of  being 
burned,  since  a  thing  may  be  capable  of  being 
burned  without  being  in  process  of  being 
burned — nor,  when  a  thing  ceases  to  be  mov¬ 
ent,  does  it  therefore  at  the  same  time  cease  to 
252a  be  motive.  Again,  the  destructive  agent 
will  have  to  be  destroyed,  after  what  it  destroys 
has  been  destroyed,  and  then  that  which  has 
the  capacity  of  destroying  it  will  have  to  be  de¬ 
stroyed  afterwards,  (so  that  there  will  be  a 
process  of  change  subsequent  to  the  last,)  for 
being  destroyed  also  is  a  kind  of  change.  If, 
then,  the  view  which  we  are  criticizing  in¬ 
volves  these  impossible  consequences,  it  is  clear 
that  motion  is  eternal  and  cannot  have  existed 
at  one  time  and  not  at  another:  in  fact,  such  a 
view  can  hardly  be  described  as  anything  else 
than  fantastic. 

[5]  And  much  the  same  may  be  said  of  the 
view  that  such  is  the  ordinance  of  nature  and 
that  this  must  be  regarded  as  a  principle,  as 
would  seem  to  be  the  view  of  Empedocles  when 
he  says  that  the  constitution  of  the  world  is  of 
necessity  such  that  Love  and  Strife  alternately 
predominate  and  cause  motion,  while  in  the  in¬ 
termediate  period  of  time  there  is  a  state  of  rest, 
[/o]  Probably  also  those  who,  like  Anaxagoras, 
assert  a  single  principle  (of  motion)  would 
hold  this  view.  But  that  which  is  produced  or 
directed  by  nature  can  never  be  anything  dis¬ 
orderly:  for  nature  is  everywhere  the  cause  of 
order.  Moreover,  there  is  no  ratio  in  the  rela¬ 
tion  of  the  infinite  to  the  infinite,  whereas  order 
always  means  ratio.  But  if  we  say  that  there  is 
first  a  state  of  rest  for  an  infinite  time,  and 
[75]  then  motion  is  started  at  some  moment, 
and  that  the  fact  that  it  is  this  rather  than  a 
previous  moment  is  of  no  importance,  and  in¬ 
volves  no  order,  then  we  can  no  longer  say  that 
it  is  nature’s  work:  for  if  anything  is  of  a  cer¬ 
tain  character  naturally,  it  either  is  so  invari¬ 
ably  and  is  not  sometimes  of  this  and  some¬ 
times  of  another  character  (e.g.  fire,  which 
travels  upwards  naturally,  does  not  sometimes 
do  so  and  sometimes  not)  or  there  is  a  ratio  in 
the  variation.  It  would  be  better,  therefore,  to 
[20]  say  with  Empedocles  and  any  one  else 
who  may  have  maintained  such  a  theory  as 


336  PHYSICS  253a 


his  that  the  universe  is  alternately  at  rest  and  in 
motion:  for  in  a  system  of  this  kind  we  have  at 
once  a  certain  order.  But  even  here  the  holder 
of  the  theory  ought  not  only  to  assert  the  fact: 
he  ought  to  explain  the  cause  of  it:  i.e.  he 
should  not  make  any  mere  assumption  or  lay 
down  any  gratuitous  axiom,  but  should  em- 
[25]  ploy  either  inductive  or  demonstrative 
reasoning.  The  Love  and  Strife  postulated  by 
Empedocles  are  not  in  themselves  causes  of  the 
fact  in  question,  nor  is  it  of  the  essence  of  either 
that  it  should  be  so,  the  essential  function  of 
the  former  being  to  unite,  of  the  latter  to  sep¬ 
arate.  If  he  is  to  go  on  to  explain  this  alternate 
predominance,  he  should  adduce  cases  where 
such  a  state  of  things  exists,  as  he  points  to  the 
fact  that  among  mankind  we  have  something 
that  unites  men,  namely  Love,  while  on  the 
[30]  other  hand  enemies  avoid  one  another: 
thus  from  the  observed  fact  that  this  occurs  in 
certain  cases  comes  the  assumption  that  it  oc¬ 
curs  also  in  the  universe.  Then,  again,  some 
argument  is  needed  to  explain  why  the  pre¬ 
dominance  of  each  of  the  two  forces  lasts  for 
an  equal  period  of  time.  But  it  is  a  wrong  as¬ 
sumption  to  suppose  universally  that  we  have 
an  adequate  first  principle  in  virtue  of  the  fact 
that  something  always  is  so  or  always  happens 
so.  Thus  Democritus  reduces  the  causes  that 
explain  nature  to  the  fact  that  things  happened 
in  the  past  in  the  same  way  as  they  happen 
[35]  now:  but  he  does  not  think  fit  to  seek  for 
252b  a  first  principle  to  explain  this  'always’: 
so,  while  his  theory  is  right  in  so  far  as  it  is 
applied  to  certain  individual  cases,  he  is  wrong 
in  making  it  of  universal  application.  Thus,  a 
triangle  always  has  its  angles  equal  to  two  right 
angles,  but  there  is  nevertheless  an  ulterior 
cause  of  the  eternity  of  this  truth,  whereas  first 
principles  are  eternal  and  have  no  ulterior 
[5]  cause.  Let  this  conclude  what  we  have  to 
say  in  support  of  our  contention  that  there 
never  was  a  time  when  there  was  not  motion, 
and  never  will  be  a  time  when  there  will  not 
be  motion. 

2 

The  arguments  that  may  be  advanced  against 
this  position  are  not  difficult  to  dispose  of.  The 
chief  considerations  that  might  be  thought  to 
indicate  that  motion  may  exist  though  at  one 
time  it  had  not  existed  at  all  are  the  following: 

First,  it  may  be  said  that  no  process  of 
change  is  eternal:  for  the  nature  of  all  change 
[/o]  is  such  that  it  proceeds  from  something 
to  something,  so  that  every  process  of  change 


must  be  bounded  by  the  contraries  that  mark 
its  course,  and  no  motion  can  go  on  to  infinity. 

Secondly,  we  see  that  a  thing  that  neither  is 
in  motion  nor  contains  any  motion  within  it¬ 
self  can  be  set  in  motion;  e.g.  inanimate  things 
that  are  (whether  the  whole  or  some  part  is  in 

uestion)  not  in  motion  but  at  rest,  are  at 

75]  some  moment  set  in  motion:  whereas,  if 
motion  cannot  have  a  becoming  before  which 
it  had  no  being,  these  things  ought  to  be  either 
always  or  never  in  motion. 

Thirdly,  the  fact  is  evident  above  all  in  the 
case  of  animate  beings:  for  it  sometimes  hap¬ 
pens  that  there  is  no  motion  in  us  and  we  are 
quite  still,  and  that  nevertheless  we  are  then  at 
some  moment  set  in  motion,  that  is  to  say  it 
sometimes  happens  that  we  produce  a  begin- 
[20]  ning  of  motion  in  ourselves  spontane¬ 
ously  without  anything  having  set  us  in  mo¬ 
tion  from  without.  We  see  nothing  like  this  in 
the  case  of  inanimate  things,  which  are  always 
set  in  motion  by  something  else  from  without: 
the  animal,  on  the  other  hand,  we  say,  moves 
itself:  therefore,  if  an  animal  is  ever  in  a  state 
of  absolute  rest,  we  have  a  motionless  thing  in 
which  motion  can  be  produced  from  the  thing 
itself,  and  not  from  without.  Now  if  this 
[25]  can  occur  in  an  animal,  why  should  not 
the  same  be  true  also  of  the  universe  as  a 
whole?  If  it  can  occur  in  a  small  world  it  could 
also  occur  in  a  great  one:  and  if  it  can  occur  in 
the  world,  it  could  also  occur  in  the  infinite; 
that  is,  if  the  infinite  could  as  a  whole  possibly 
be  in  motion  or  at  rest. 

Of  these  objections,  then,  the  first-mentioned 
[30] — that  motion  to  opposites  is  not  always 
the  same  and  numerically  one — is  a  correct 
statement;  in  fact,  this  may  be  said  to  be  a 
necessary  conclusion,  provided  that  it  is  possi¬ 
ble  for  the  motion  of  that  which  is  one  and  the 
same  to  be  not  always  one  and  the  same.  (I 
mean  that  e.g.  we  may  question  whether  the 
note  given  by  a  single  string  is  one  and  the 
same,  or  is  different  each  time  the  string  is 
struck,  although  the  string  is  in  the  same  con¬ 
dition  and  is  moved  in  the  same  way.)  But 
[35]  still,  however  this  may  be,  there  is  noth¬ 
ing  to  prevent  there  being  a  motion  that  is  the 
253a  same  in  virtue  of  being  continuous  and 
eternal:  we  shall  have  something  to  say  later1 
that  will  make  this  point  clearer. 

As  regards  the  second  objection,  no  absurd¬ 
ity  is  involved  in  the  fact  that  something  not 
in  motion  may  be  set  in  motion,  that  which 
caused  the  motion  from  without  being  at  one 

1  Chapter  8. 


253b 

time  present,  and  at  another  absent.  Neverthe¬ 
less,  how  this  can  be  so  remains  matter  for  in¬ 
quiry;  how  it  comes  about,  I  mean,  that  the 
same  motive  force  at  one  time  causes  a  thing 
to  be  in  motion,  and  at  another  does  not  do  so: 
[5]  for  the  difficulty  raised  by  our  objector 
really  amounts  to  this — why  is  it  that  some 
things  are  not  always  at  rest,  and  the  rest  al¬ 
ways  in  motion? 

The  third  objection  may  be  thought  to  pre¬ 
sent  more  difficulty  than  the  others,  namely, 
that  which  alleges  that  motion  arises  in  things 
in  which  it  did  not  exist  before,  and  adduces 
in  proof  the  case  of  animate  things:  thus  an 
[/o]  animal  is  first  at  rest  and  afterwards 
walks,  not  having  been  set  in  motion  apparent¬ 
ly  by  anything  from  without.  This,  however,  is 
false:  for  we  observe  that  there  is  always  some 
part  of  the  animal’s  organism  in  motion,  and 
the  cause  of  the  motion  of  this  part  is  not  the 
animal  itself,  but,  it  may  be,  its  environment. 
Moreover,  we  say  that  the  animal  itself  origi¬ 
nates  not  all  of  its  motions  but  its  locomotion. 
[75]  So  it  may  well  be  the  case — or  rather  we 
may  perhaps  say  that  it  must  necessarily  be 
the  case — that  many  motions  are  produced  in 
the  body  by  its  environment,  and  some  of  these 
set  in  motion  the  intellect  or  the  appetite,  and 
this  again  then  sets  the  whole  animal  in  mo¬ 
tion:  this  is  what  happens  when  animals  are 
asleep:  though  there  is  then  no  perceptive  mo¬ 
tion  in  them,  there  is  some  motion  that  causes 
[20]  them  to  wake  up  again.  But  we  will  leave 
this  point  also  to  be  elucidated  at  a  later1  stage 
in  our  discussion. 

3 

Our  enquiry  will  resolve  itself  at  the  outset  into 
a  consideration  of  the  above-mentioned  prob¬ 
lem — what  can  be  the  reason  why  some  things 
in  the  world  at  one  time  are  in  motion  and  at 
another  are  at  rest  again?  Now  one  of  three 
things  must  be  true:  either  all  things  are  al- 
[25]  ways  at  rest,  or  all  things  are  always  in 
motion,  or  some  things  are  in  motion  and 
others  at  rest:  and  in  this  last  case  again  either 
the  things  that  are  in  motion  are  always  in  mo¬ 
tion  and  the  things  that  are  at  rest  are  always 
at  rest,  or  they  are  all  constituted  so  as  to  he 
capable  alike  of  motion  and  of  rest;  or  there  is 
yet  a  third  possibility  remaining — it  may  be 
that  some  things  in  the  world  are  always  mo¬ 
tionless,  others  always  in  motion,  while  others 
again  admit  of  both  conditions.  This  last  is 
[jo]  the  account  of  the  matter  that  we  must 
1  Chapter  6^ 


337 

give:  for  herein  lies  the  solution  of  all  the  diffi¬ 
culties  raised  and  the  conclusion  of  the  inves¬ 
tigation  upon  which  we  are  engaged. 

To  maintain  that  all  things  are  at  rest,  and 
to  disregard  sense-perception  in  an  attempt  to 
show  the  theory  to  be  reasonable,  would  be  an 
instance  of  intellectual  weakness:  it  would  call 
in  question  a  whole  system,  not  a  particular 
[J5]  detail:  moreover,  it  would  be  an  attack 
not  only  on  the  physicist  but  on  almost  all  sci¬ 
ences  and  all  received  opinions,  since  motion 
253b  plays  a  part  in  all  of  them.  Further,  just 
as  in  arguments  about  mathematics  objections 
that  involve  first  principles  do  not  affect  the 
mathematician — and  the  other  sciences  are  in 
similar  case — so,  too,  objections  involving  the 
point  that  we  have  just  raised  do  not  affect  the 
[5]  physicist:  for  it  is  a  fundamental  assump¬ 
tion  with  him  that  motion  is  ultimately  refer¬ 
able  to  nature  herself. 

The  assertion  that  all  things  are  in  motion 
we  may  fairly  regard  as  equally  false,  though 
it  is  less  subversive  of  physical  science:  for 
though  in  our  course  on  physics  it  was  laid 
down  that  rest  no  less  than  motion  is  ultimately 
referable  to  nature  herself,  nevertheless  mo¬ 
tion  is  the  characteristic  fact  of  nature:  more¬ 
over,  the  view  is  actually  held  by  some  that  not 
[/o]  merely  some  things  but  all  things  in  the 
world  are  in  motion  and  always  in  motion, 
though  we  cannot  apprehend  the  fact  by 
sense-perception.  Although  the  supporters  of 
this  theory  do  not  state  clearly  what  kind  of 
motion  they  mean,  or  whether  they  mean  all 
kinds,  it  is  no  hard  matter  to  reply  to  them: 
thus  we  may  point  out  that  there  cannot  be  a 
continuous  process  either  of  increase  or  of  de¬ 
crease:  that  which  comes  between  the  two  has 
[75]  to  be  included.  The  theory  resembles  that 
about  the  stone  being  worn  away  by  the  drop 
of  water  or  split  by  plants  growing  out  of  it:  if 
so  much  has  been  extruded  or  removed  by  the 
drop,  it  does  not  follow  that  half  the  amount 
has  previously  been  extruded  or  removed  in 
half  the  time:  the  case  of  the  hauled  ship  is  ex¬ 
actly  comparable:  here  we  have  so  many  drops 
setting  so  much  in  motion,  but  a  part  of  them 
will  not  set  as  much  in  motion  in  any  period  of 
time.  The  amount  removed  is,  it  is  true,  di- 
[20]  visible  into  a  number  of  parts,  but  no  one 
of  these  was  set  in  motion  separately:  they  were 
all  set  in  motion  together.  It  is  evident,  then, 
that  from  the  fact  that  the  decrease  is  divisible 
into  an  infinite  number  of  parts  it  does  not  fol¬ 
low  that  some  part  must  always  be  passing 
away:  it  all  passes  away  at  a  particular  mo- 


BOOK  VIII,  CHAPTERS  1-3 


338  PHYSICS  25 4b 


ment.  Similarly,  too,  in  the  case  of  any  altera¬ 
tion  whatever  if  that  which  suffers  alteration 
is  infinitely  divisible  it  does  not  follow  from 
[25]  this  that  the  same  is  true  of  the  alteration 
itself,  which  often  occurs  all  at  once,  as  in 
freezing.  Again,  when  any  one  has  fallen  ill, 
there  must  follow  a  period  of  time  in  which  his 
restoration  to  health  is  in  the  future:  the  proc¬ 
ess  of  change  cannot  take  place  in  an  instant: 
yet  the  change  cannot  be  a  change  to  anything 
else  but  health.  The  assertion,  therefore,  that 
alteration  is  continuous  is  an  extravagant  call- 
[30]  ing  into  question  of  the  obvious:  for  al¬ 
teration  is  a  change  from  one  contrary  to  an¬ 
other.  Moreover,  we  notice  that  a  stone  be¬ 
comes  neither  harder  nor  softer.  Again,  in  the 
matter  of  locomotion,  it  would  be  a  strange 
thing  if  a  stone  could  be  falling  or  resting  on 
the  ground  without  our  being  able  to  perceive 
the  fact.  Further,  it  is  a  law  of  nature  that 
earth  and  all  other  bodies  should  remain  in 
[35]  their  proper  places  and  be  moved  from 
them  only  by  violence:  from  the  fact  then  that 
some  of  them  are  in  their  proper  places  it  fol¬ 
lows  that  in  respect  of  place  also  all  things  can- 
254a  not  be  in  motion.  These  and  other  sim¬ 
ilar  arguments,  then,  should  convince  us  that 
it  is  impossible  either  that  all  things  are  al¬ 
ways  in  motion  or  that  all  things  are  always 
at  rest. 

Nor  again  can  it  be  that  some  things  are  al¬ 
ways  at  rest,  others  always  in  motion,  and 
nothing  sometimes  at  rest  and  sometimes  in 
[5]  motion.  This  theory  must  be  pronounced 
impossible  on  the  same  grounds  as  those  previ¬ 
ously  mentioned:  viz.  that  we  see  the  above- 
mentioned  changes  occurring  in  the  case  of  the 
same  things.  We  may  further  point  out  that 
the  defender  of  this  position  is  fighting  against 
the  obvious,  for  on  this  theory  there  can  be  no 
such  thing  as  increase:  nor  can  there  be  any 
such  thing  as  compulsory  motion,  if  it  is  im- 
ossible  that  a  thing  can  be  at  rest  before  being 
/o]  set  in  motion  unnaturally.  This  theory, 
then,  does  away  with  becoming  and  perishing. 
Moreover,  motion,  it  would  seem,  is  generally 
thought  to  be  a  sort  of  becoming  and  perishing, 
for  that  to  which  a  thing  changes  comes  to  be, 
or  occupancy  of  it  comes  to  be,  and  that  from 
which  a  thing  changes  ceases  to  be,  or  there 
ceases  to  be  occupancy  of  it.  It  is  clear,  there¬ 
fore,  that  there  are  cases  of  occasional  motion 
and  occasional  rest. 

[75]  We  have  now  to  take  the  assertion  that 
all  things  are  sometimes  at  rest  and  sometimes 
in  motion  and  to  confront  it  with  the  argu¬ 


ments  previously  advanced.  We  must  take  our 
start  as  before  from  the  possibilities  that  we 
distinguished  just  above.  Either  all  things  are 
at  rest,  or  all  things  are  in  motion,  or  some 
things  are  at  rest  and  others  in  motion.  And  if 
some  things  are  at  rest  and  others  in  motion, 
[20]  then  it  must  be  that  either  all  things  are 
sometimes  at  rest  and  sometimes  in  motion,  or 
some  things  are  always  at  rest  and  the  re¬ 
mainder  always  in  motion,  or  some  of  the 
things  are  always  at  rest  and  others  always  in 
motion  while  others  again  are  sometimes  at 
rest  and  sometimes  in  motion.  Now  we  have 
said  before  that  it  is  impossible  that  all  things 
should  be  at  rest:  nevertheless  we  may  now 
repeat  that  assertion.  We  may  point  out  that, 
[25]  even  if  it  is  really  the  case,  as  certain  per¬ 
sons  assert,  that  the  existent  is  infinite  and  mo¬ 
tionless,  it  certainly  does  not  appear  to  be  so  if 
we  follow  sense-perception:  many  things  that 
exist  appear  to  be  in  motion.  Now  if  there  is 
such  a  thing  as  false  opinion  or  opinion  at  all, 
there  is  also  motion;  and  similarly  if  there  is 
such  a  thing  as  imagination,  or  if  it  is  the  case 
that  anything  seems  to  be  different  at  differ¬ 
ent  times:  for  imagination  and  opinion  are 
[30]  thought  to  be  motions  of  a  kind.  But  to 
investigate  this  question  at  all — to  seek  a  rea¬ 
soned  justification  of  a  belief  with  regard  to 
which  we  are  too  well  off  to  require  reasoned 
justification — implies  bad  judgement  of  what 
is  better  and  what  is  worse,  what  commends 
itself  to  belief  and  what  does  not,  what  is  ulti¬ 
mate  and  what  is  not.  It  is  likewise  impossible 
that  all  things  should  be  in  motion  or  that 
some  things  should  be  always  in  motion  and 
[35]  the  remainder  always  at  rest.  We  have  suf¬ 
ficient  ground  for  rejecting  all  these  theories 
in  the  single  fact  that  we  see  some  things  that 
254b  are  sometimes  in  motion  and  sometimes 
at  rest.  It  is  evident,  therefore,  that  it  is  no  less 
impossible  that  some  things  should  be  always 
in  motion  and  the  remainder  always  at  rest 
than  that  all  things  should  be  at  rest  or  that  all 
things  should  be  in  motion  continuously.  It 
remains,  then,  to  consider  whether  all  things 
are  so  constituted  as  to  be  capable  both  of  be¬ 
ing  in  motion  and  of  being  at  rest,  or  whether, 
[5]  while  some  things  are  so  constituted,  some 
are  always  at  rest  and  some  are  always  in  mo¬ 
tion:  for  it  is  this  last  view  that  we  have  to 
show  to  be  true. 

4 

Now  of  things  that  cause  motion  or  suffer  mo¬ 
tion,  to  some  the  motion  is  accidental,  to  others 


255* 

essential:  thus  it  is  accidental  to  what  merely 
belongs  to  or  contains  as  a  part  a  thing  that 
causes  motion  or  suffers  motion,  essential  to  a 
[/o]  thing  that  causes  motion  or  suffers  mo¬ 
tion  not  merely  by  belonging  to  such  a  thing  or 
containing  it  as  a  part. 

Of  things  to  which  the  motion  is  essential 
some  derive  their  motion  from  themselves, 
others  from  something  else:  and  in  some  cases 
their  motion  is  natural,  in  others  violent  and 
unnatural.  Thus  in  things  that  derive  their 
[75]  motion  from  themselves,  e.g.  all  animals, 
the  motion  is  natural  (for  when  an  animal  is  in 
motion  its  motion  is  derived  from  itself):  and 
whenever  the  source  of  the  motion  of  a  thing  is 
in  the  thing  itself  we  say  that  the  motion  of 
that  thing  is  natural.  Therefore  the  animal  as  a 
whole  moves  itself  naturally:  but  the  body  oi 
the  animal  may  be  in  motion  unnaturally  as 
well  as  naturally:  it  depends  upon  the  kind  of 
motion  that  it  may  chance  to  be  suffering  and 
[20]  the  kind  of  element  of  which  it  is  com¬ 
posed.  And  the  motion  of  things  that  derive 
their  motion  from  something  else  is  in  some 
cases  natural,  in  other  unnatural:  e.g.  upward 
motion  of  earthy  things  and  downward  mo¬ 
tion  of  fire  are  unnatural.  Moreover  the  parts 
of  animals  are  often  in  motion  in  an  unnatural 
way,  their  positions  and  the  character  of  the 
motion  being  abnormal.  The  fact  that  a  thing 
[25]  that  is  in  motion  derives  its  motion  from 
something  is  most  evident  in  things  that  are  in 
motion  unnaturally,  because  in  such  cases  it  is 
clear  that  the  motion  is  derived  from  some¬ 
thing  other  than  the  thing  itself.  Next  to  things 
that  are  in  motion  unnaturally  those  whose 
motion  while  natural  is  derived  from  them¬ 
selves — e.g.  animals — make  this  fact  clear:  for 
here  the  uncertainty  is  not  as  to  whether  the 
motion  is  derived  from  something  but  as  to 
how  we  ought  to  distinguish  in  the  thing  be¬ 
tween  the  movent  and  the  moved.  It  would 
[50]  seem  that  in  animals,  just  as  in  ships  and 
things  not  naturally  organized,  that  which 
causes  motion  is  separate  from  that  which  suf¬ 
fers  motion,  and  that  it  is  only  in  this  sense 
that  the  animal  as  a  whole  causes  its  own  mo¬ 
tion. 

The  greatest  difficulty,  however,  is  pre¬ 
sented  by  the  remaining  case  of  those  that  we 
last  distinguished.  Where  things  derive  their 
motion  from  something  else  we  distinguished 
[^5]  the  cases  in  which  the  motion  is  unnat¬ 
ural:  we  are  left  with  those  that  are  to  be  con¬ 
trasted  with  the  others  by  reason  of  the  fact 
255*  that  the  motion  is  natural.  It  is  in  these 


339 

cases  that  difficulty  would  be  experienced  in 
deciding  whence  the  motion  is  derived,  e.g.  in 
the  case  of  light  and  heavy  things.  When 
these  things  are  in  motion  to  positions  the  re¬ 
verse  of  those  they  would  properly  occupy, 
their  motion  is  violent:  when  they  are  in  mo¬ 
tion  to  their  proper  positions — the  light  thing 
up  and  the  heavy  thing  down — their  motion  is 
natural;  but  in  this  latter  case  it  is  no  longer 
evident,  as  it  is  when  the  motion  is  unnatural, 
[5]  whence  their  motion  is  derived.  It  is  im¬ 
possible  to  say  that  their  motion  is  derived 
from  themselves:  this  is  a  characteristic  of  life 
and  peculiar  to  living  things.  Further,  if  it 
were,  it  would  have  been  in  their  power  to  stop 
themselves  (I  mean  that  if  e.g.  a  thing  can 
cause  itself  to  walk  it  can  also  cause  itself  not 
to  walk),  and  so,  since  on  this  supposition  fire 
itself  possesses  the  power  of  upward  locomo¬ 
tion,  it  is  clear  that  it  should  also  possess  the 
[/o]  power  of  downward  locomotion.  More¬ 
over  if  things  move  themselves,  it  would  be 
unreasonable  to  suppose  that  in  only  one  kind 
of  motion  is  their  motion  derived  from  them¬ 
selves.  Again,  how  can  anything  of  continuous 
and  naturally  connected  substance  move  it¬ 
self?  In  so  far  as  a  thing  is  one  and  continuous 
not  merely  in  virtue  of  contact,  it  is  impassive: 
it  is  only  in  so  far  as  a  thing  is  divided  that 
one  part  of  it  is  by  nature  active  and  another 
[75]  passive.  Therefore  none  of  the  things  that 
we  are  now  considering  move  themselves  (for 
they  are  of  naturally  connected  substance),  nor 
does  anything  else  that  is  continuous:  in  each 
case  the  movent  must  be  separate  from  the 
moved,  as  we  see  to  be  the  case  with  inanimate 
things  when  an  animate  thing  moves  them.  It 
is  the  fact  that  these  things  also  always  derive 
their  motion  from  something:  what  it  is  would 
become  evident  if  we  were  to  distinguish  the 
different  kinds  of  cause. 

[20]  The  above-mentioned  distinctions  can 
also  be  made  in  the  case  of  things  that  cause 
motion:  some  of  them  are  capable  of  causing 
motion  unnaturally  (e.g.  the  lever  is  not  nat¬ 
urally  capable  of  moving  the  weight),  others 
naturally  (e.g.  what  is  actually  hot  is  naturally 
capable  of  moving  what  is  potentially  hot): 
and  similarly  in  the  case  of  all  other  things  of 
this  kind. 

In  the  same  way,  too,  what  is  potentially  of 
a  certain  quality  or  of  a  certain  quantity  or  in  a 
[25]  certain  place  is  naturally  movable  when  it 
contains  the  corresponding  principle  in  itself 
and  not  accidentally  (for  the  same  thing  may 
be  both  of  a  certain  quality  and  of  a  certain 


BOOK  VIII,  CHAPTERS  3-4 


340 

quantity,  but  the  one  is  an  accidental,  not  an 
essential  property  of  the  other).  So  when  fire 
or  earth  is  moved  by  something  the  motion  is 
violent  when  it  is  unnatural,  and  natural  when 
it  brings  to  actuality  the  proper  activities  that 
[30]  they  potentially  possess.  But  the  fact  that 
the  term  ‘potentially’  is  used  in  more  than  one 
sense  is  the  reason  why  it  is  not  evident  whence 
such  motions  as  the  upward  motion  of  fire  and 
the  downward  motion  of  earth  are  derived. 
One  who  is  learning  a  science  potentially 
knows  it  in  a  different  sense  from  one  who 
while  already  possessing  the  knowledge  is  not 
actually  exercising  it.  Wherever  we  have  some¬ 
thing  capable  of  acting  and  something  capable 
of  being  correspondingly  acted  on,  in  the  event 
[35]  of  any  such  pair  being  in  contact  what  is 
255b  potential  becomes  at  times  actual:  e.g. 
the  learner  becomes  from  one  potential  some¬ 
thing  another  potential  something:  for  one 
who  possesses  knowledge  of  a  science  but  is 
not  actually  exercising  it  knows  the  science 
potentially  in  a  sense,  though  not  in  the  same 
sense  as  he  knew  it  potentially  before  he  learnt 
it.  And  when  he  is  in  this  condition,  if  some¬ 
thing  does  not  prevent  him,  he  actively  exer¬ 
cises  his  knowledge:  otherwise  he  would  be  in 
the  contradictory  state  of  not  knowing.  In  re- 
[5]  gard  to  natural  bodies  also  the  case  is  simi¬ 
lar.  Thus  what  is  cold  is  potentially  hot:  then 
a  change  takes  place  and  it  is  fire,  and  it  burns, 
unless  something  prevents  and  hinders  it.  So, 
too,  with  heavy  and  light:  light  is  generated 
from  heavy,  e.g.  air  from  water  (for  water  is 
[/o]  the  first  thing  that  is  potentially  light), 
and  air  is  actually  light,  and  will  at  once  realize 
its  proper  activity  as  such  unless  something 
prevents  it.  The  activity  of  lightness  consists  in 
the  light  thing  being  in  a  certain  situation, 
namely  high  up:  when  it  is  in  the  contrary  situ¬ 
ation,  it  is  being  prevented  from  rising.  The 
case  is  similar  also  in  regard  to  quantity  and 
quality.  But,  be  it  noted,  this  is  the  question  we 
are  trying  to  answer — how  can  we  account  for 
the  motion  of  light  things  and  heavy  things  to 
their  proper  situations?  The  reason  for  it  is 
[75]  that  they  have  a  natural  tendency  respec¬ 
tively  towards  a  certain  position:  and  this  con¬ 
stitutes  the  essence  of  lightness  and  heaviness, 
the  former  being  determined  by  an  upward, 
the  latter  by  a  downward,  tendency.  As  we 
have  said,  a  thing  may  be  potentially  light  or 
heavy  in  more  senses  than  one.  Thus  not  only 
when  a  thing  is  water  is  it  in  a  sense  potentially 
light,  but  when  it  has  become  air  it  may  be  still 
potentially  light:  for  it  may  be  that  through 


256® 

some  hindrance  it  does  not  occupy  an  upper 
[20]  position,  whereas,  if  what  hinders  it  is 
removed,  it  realizes  its  activity  and  continues 
to  rise  higher.  The  process  whereby  what  is  of 
a  certain  quality  changes  to  a  condition  of  ac¬ 
tive  existence  is  similar:  thus  the  exercise  of 
knowledge  follows  at  once  upon  the  possession 
of  it  unless  something  prevents  it.  So,  too,  what 
is  of  a  certain  quantity  extends  itself  over  a 
certain  space  unless  something  prevents  it.  The 
thing  in  a  sense  is  and  in  a  sense  is  not  moved 
by  one  who  moves  what  is  obstructing  and 
[25]  preventing  its  motion  (e.g.  one  who  pulls 
away  a  pillar  from  under  a  roof  or  one  who 
removes  a  stone  from  a  wineskin  in  the  water 
is  the  accidental  cause  of  motion):  and  in  the 
same  way  the  real  cause  of  the  motion  of  a  ball 
rebounding  from  a  wall  is  not  the  wall  but  the 
thrower.  So  it  is  clear  that  in  all  these  cases  the 
[30]  thing  does  not  move  itself,  but  it  contains 
within  itself  the  source  of  motion — not  of  mov¬ 
ing  something  or  of  causing  motion,  but  of 
suffering  it. 

If  then  the  motion  of  all  things  that  are  in 
motion  is  either  natural  or  unnatural  and  vio¬ 
lent,  and  all  things  whose  motion  is  violent  and 
unnatural  are  moved  by  something,  and  some¬ 
thing  other  than  themselves,  and  again  all 
things  whose  motion  is  natural  are  moved  by 
something — both  those  that  are  moved  by  them¬ 
selves  and  those  that  are  not  moved  by  them- 
[35]  selves  (e.g.  light  things  and  heavy  things, 
256®  which  are  moved  either  by  that  which 
brought  the  thing  into  existence  as  such  and 
made  it  light  and  heavy,  or  by  that  which  re¬ 
leased  what  was  hindering  and  preventing  it); 
then  all  things  that  are  in  motion  must  be 
moved  by  something. 

5 

Now  this  may  come  about  in  either  of  two 
ways.  Either  the  movent  is  not  itself  respon¬ 
sible  for  the  motion,  which  is  to  be  referred 
to  something  else  which  moves  the  movent, 
[5]  or  the  movent  is  itself  responsible  for  the 
motion.  Further,  in  the  latter  case,  either  the 
movent  immediately  precedes  the  last  thing 
in  the  series,  or  there  may  be  one  or  more  in¬ 
termediate  links:  e.g.  the  stick  moves  the  stone 
and  is  moved  by  the  hand,  which  again  is 
moved  by  the  man:  in  the  man,  however,  we 
have  reached  a  movent  that  is  not  so  in  virtue 
of  being  moved  by  something  else.  Now  we 
say  that  the  thing  is  moved  both  by  the  last 
and  by  the  first  movent  in  the  series,  but  more 


PHYSICS 


25 6b  BOOK  VIII,  CHAPTERS  4-5  341 


[/o]  strictly  by  the  first,  since  the  .first  mov¬ 
ent  moves  the  last,  whereas  the  last  does  not 
move  the  first,  and  the  first  will  move  the 
thing  without  the  last,  but  the  last  will  not 
move  it  without  the  first:  e.g.  the  stick  will  not 
move  anything  unless  it  is  itself  moved  by  the 
man.  If  then  everything  that  is  in  motion  must 
be  moved  by  something,  and  the  movent  must 
either  itself  be  moved  by  something  else  or  not, 
[75]  and  in  the  former  case  there  must  be 
some  first  movent  that  is  not  itself  moved  by 
anything  else,  while  in  the  case  of  the  immedi¬ 
ate  movent  being  of  this  kind  there  is  no  need 
of  an  intermediate  movent  that  is  also  moved 
(for  it  is  impossible  that  there  should  be  an 
infinite  series  of  movents,  each  of  which  is 
itself  moved  by  something  else,  since  in  an  in¬ 
finite  series  there  is  no  first  term) — if  then 
everything  that  is  in  motion  is  moved  by  some- 
[20]  thing,  and  the  first  movent  is  moved  but 
not  by  anything  else,  it  much  be  moved  by 
itself. 

This  same  argument  may  also  be  stated  in 
another  way  as  follows.  Every  movent  moves 
something  and  moves  it  with  something,  either 
with  itself  or  with  something  else:  e.g.  a  man 
moves  a  thing  either  himself  or  with  a  stick, 
and  a  thing  is  knocked  down  either  by  the 
[25]  wind  itself  or  by  a  stone  propelled  by  the 
wind.  But  it  is  impossible  for  that  with  which 
a  thing  is  moved  to  move  it  without  being 
moved  by  that  which  imparts  motion  by  its 
own  agency:  on  the  other  hand,  if  a  thing  im¬ 
parts  motion  by  its  own  agency,  it  is  not  nec¬ 
essary  that  there  should  be  anything  else  with 
which  it  imparts  motion,  whereas  if  there  is  a 
different  thing  with  which  it  imparts  motion, 
there  must  be  something  that  imparts  motion 
not  with  something  else  but  with  itself,  or  else 
there  will  be  an  infinite  series.  If,  then,  any¬ 
thing  is  a  movent  while  being  itself  moved, 
[30]  the  series  must  stop  somewhere  and  not 
be  infinite.  Thus,  if  the  stick  moves  something 
in  virtue  of  being  moved  by  the  hand,  the  hand 
moves  the  stick:  and  if  something  else  moves 
with  the  hand,  the  hand  also  is  moved  by  some¬ 
thing  different  from  itself.  So  when  motion  by 
means  of  an  instrument  is  at  each  stage  caused 
by  something  different  from  the  instrument, 
this  must  always  be  preceded  by  something 
else  which  imparts  motion  with  itself.  There¬ 
fore,  if  this  last  movent  is  in  motion  and  there 
256b  is  nothing  else  that  moves  it,  it  must 
move  itself.  So  this  reasoning  also  shows  that, 
when  a  thing  is  moved,  if  it  is  not  moved  im¬ 
mediately  by  something  that  moves  itself,  the 


series  brings  us  at  some  time  or  other  to  a 
movent  of  this  kind. 

And  if  we  consider  the  matter  in  yet  a  third 
way  we  shall  get  this  same  result  as  follows. 
[5]  If  everything  that  is  in  motion  is  moved  by 
something  that  is  in  motion,  either  this  being  in 
motion  is  an  accidental  attribute  of  the  move¬ 
ments  in  question,  so  that  each  of  them  moves 
something  while  being  itself  in  motion,  but 
not  always  because  it  is  itself  in  motion,  or  it 
is  not  accidental  but  an  essential  attribute. 
Let  us  consider  the  former  alternative.  If 
then  it  is  an  accidental  attribute,  it  is  not 
necessary  that  that  which  is  in  motion  should 
be  in  motion:  and  if  this  is  so  it  is  clear  that 
there  may  be  a  time  when  nothing  that  ex¬ 
ists  is  in  motion,  since  the  accidental  is  not 
[jo]  necessary  but  contingent.  Now  if  we  as¬ 
sume  the  existence  of  a  possibility,  any  con¬ 
clusion  that  we  thereby  reach  will  not  be  an 
impossibility,  though  it  may  be  contrary  to 
fact.  But  the  non-existence  of  motion  is  an  im¬ 
possibility:  for  we  have  shown  above1  that 
there  must  always  be  motion. 

Moreover,  the  conclusion  to  which  we  have 
been  led  is  a  reasonable  one.  For  there  must  be 
three  things — the  moved,  the  movent,  and  the 
[75]  instrument  of  motion.  Now  the  moved 
must  be  in  motion,  but  it  need  not  move  any¬ 
thing  else:  the  instrument  of  motion  must  both 
move  something  else  and  be  itself  in  motion 
(for  it  changes  together  with  the  moved,  with 
which  it  is  in  contact  and  continuous,  as  is 
clear  in  the  case  of  things  that  move  other 
things  locally,  in  which  case  the  two  things 
must  up  to  a  certain  point  be  in  contact):  and 
the  movent — that  is  to  say,  that  which  causes 
motion  in  such  a  manner  that  it  is  not  merely 
the  instrument  of  motion — must  be  unmoved. 
[20]  Now  we  have  visual  experience  of  the 
last  term  in  this  series,  namely  that  which  has 
the  capacity  of  being  in  motion,  but  does  not 
contain  a  motive  principle,  and  also  of  that 
which  is  in  motion  but  is  moved  by  itself  and 
not  by  anything  else:  it  is  reasonable,  therefore, 
not  to  say  necessary,  to  suppose  the  existence 
of  the  third  term  also,  that  which  causes  mo¬ 
tion  but  is  itself  unmoved.  So,  too,  Anaxagoras 
[25]  is  right  when  he  says  that  Mind  is  im¬ 
passive  and  unmixed,  since  he  makes  it  the 
principle  of  motion:  for  it  could  cause  motion 
in  this  sense  only  by  being  itself  unmoved,  and 
have  supreme  control  only  by  being  unmixed. 

We  will  now  take  the  second  alternative.  If 
the  movent  is  not  accidentally  but  necessarily 
1  Chapter  1 . 


342 

in  motion — so  that,  if  it  were  not  in  motion,  it 
would  not  move  anything — then  the  movent, 
in  so  far  as  it  is  in  motion,  must  be  in  motion 
[jo]  in  one  of  two  ways:  it  is  moved  either  as 
that  is  which  is  moved  with  the  same  kind  of 
motion,  or  with  a  different  kind — either  that 
which  is  heating,  I  mean,  is  itself  in  process  of 
becoming  hot,  that  which  is  making  healthy  in 
process  of  becoming  healthy,  and  that  which  is 
causing  locomotion  in  process  of  locomotion, 
or  else  that  which  is  making  healthy  is,  let  us 
say,  in  process  of  locomotion,  and  that  which  is 
causing  locomotion  in  process  of,  say,  increase. 
But  it  is  evident  that  this  is  impossible.  For  if 
we  adopt  the  first  assumption  we  have  to  make 
it  apply  within  each  of  the  very  lowest  species 
25 7a  into  which  motion  can  be  divided:  e.g. 
we  must  say  that  if  some  one  is  teaching  some 
lesson  in  geometry,  he  is  also  in  process  of  be¬ 
ing  taught  that  same  lesson  in  geometry,  and 
that  if  he  is  throwing  he  is  in  process  of  being 
thrown  in  just  the  same  manner.  Or  if  we  re¬ 
ject  this  assumption  we  must  say  that  one  kind 
of  motion  is  derived  from  another;  e.g.  that 
that  which  is  causing  locomotion  is  in  process 
[5]  of  increase,  that  which  is  causing  this  in¬ 
crease  is  in  process  of  being  altered  by  some¬ 
thing  else,  and  that  which  is  causing  this  altera¬ 
tion  is  in  process  of  suffering  some  different 
kind  of  motion.  But  the  series  must  stop  some¬ 
where,  since  the  kinds  of  motion  are  limited; 
and  if  we  say  that  the  process  is  reversible,  and 
that  that  which  is  causing  alteration  is  in  proc¬ 
ess  of  locomotion,  we  do  no  more  than  if  we 
had  said  at  the  outset  that  that  which  is  causing 
locomotion  is  in  process  of  locomotion,  and 
[/o]  that  one  who  is  teaching  is  in  process  of 
being  taught:  for  it  is  clear  that  everything 
that  is  moved  is  moved  by  the  movent  that  is 
further  back  in  the  series  as  well  as  by  that 
which  immediately  moves  it:  in  fact  the  earlier 
movent  is  that  which  more  strictly  moves  it. 
But  this  is  of  course  impossible:  for  it  involves 
the  consequence  that  one  who  is  teaching  is  in 
process  of  learning  what  he  is  teaching,  where¬ 
as  teaching  necessarily  implies  possessing 
knowledge,  and  learning  not  possessing  it. 
Still  more  unreasonable  is  the  consequence  in- 
[75]  volved  that,  since  everything  that  is 
moved  is  moved  by  something  that  is  itself 
moved  by  something  else,  everything  that  has 
a  capacity  for  causing  motion  has  as  such  a 
corresponding  capacity  for  being  moved:  i.e. 
it  will  have  a  capacity  for  being  moved  in  the 
sense  in  which  one  might  say  that  everything 
that  has  a  capacity  for  making  healthy,  and 


25 7b 

exercises  that  capacity,  has  as  such  a  capacity 
for  being  made  healthy,  and  that  which  has  a 
capacity  for  building  has  as  such  a  capacity  for 
being  built.  It  will  have  the  capacity  for  being 
thus  moved  either  immediately  or  through  one 
or  more  links  (as  it  will  if,  while  everything 
that  has  a  capacity  for  causing  motion  has  as 
such  a  capacity  for  being  moved  by  something 
[20]  else,  the  motion  that  it  has  the  capacity 
for  suffering  is  not  that  with  which  it  affects 
what  is  next  to  it,  but  a  motion  of  a  different 
kind;  e.g.  that  which  has  a  capacity  for  making 
healthy  might  as  such  have  a  capacity  for  learn¬ 
ing:  the  series,  however,  could  be  traced  back, 
as  we  said  before,  until  at  some-  time  or  other 
we  arrived  at  the  same  kind  of  motion).  Now 
the  first  alternative  is  impossible,  and  the  sec¬ 
ond  is  fantastic:  it  is  absurd  that  that  which 
has  a  capacity  for  causing  alteration  should  as 
[25]  such  necessarily  have  a  capacity,  let  us 
say,  for  increase.  It  is  not  necessary,  therefore, 
that  that  which  is  moved  should  always  be 
moved  by  something  else  that  is  itself  moved 
by  something  else:  so  there  will  be  an  end  to 
the  series.  Consequently  the  first  thing  that  is 
in  motion  will  derive  its  motion  either  from 
something  that  is  at  rest  or  from  itself.  But  if 
there  were  any  need  to  consider  which  of  the 
two,  that  which  moves  itself  or  that  which  is 
moved  by  something  else,  is  the  cause  and 
principle  of  motion,  every  one  would  decide 
[jo]  for  the  former:  for  that  which  is  itself 
independently  a  cause  is  always  prior  as  a  cause 
to  that  which  is  so  only  in  virtue  of  being  itself 
dependent  upon  something  else  that  makes 
it  so. 

We  must  therefore  make  a  fresh  start  and 
consider  the  question;  if  a  thing  moves  itself, 
in  what  sense  and  in  what  manner  does  it  do 
so?  Now  everything  that  is  in  motion  must  be 
infinitely  divisible,  for  it  has  been  shown  al- 
25  7b  ready1  in  our  general  course  on  Physics, 
that  everything  that  is  essentially  in  motion  is 
continuous.  Now  it  is  impossible  that  that 
which  moves  itself  should  in  its  entirety  move 
itself:  for  then,  while  being  specifically  one 
and  indivisible,  it  would  as  a  whole  both  un¬ 
dergo  and  cause  the  same  locomotion  or  altera¬ 
tion:  thus  it  would  at  the  same  time  be  both 
[5]  teaching  and  being  taught  (the  same 
thing),  or  both  restoring  to  and  being  restored 
to  the  same  health.  Moreover,  we  have  estab¬ 
lished  the  fact  that  it  is  the  movable  that  is 
moved;  and  this  is  potentially,  not  actually,  in 
motion,  but  the  potential  is  in  process  to  actu- 
JThe  reference  is  apparently  to  vi.  4  (234k  10  sqq.). 


PHYSICS 


258a  BOOK  VIII, 

ality,  and  motion  is  an  incomplete  actuality  of 
the  movable.  The  movent  on  the  other  hand 
is  already  in  activity:  e.g.  it  is  that  which  is  hot 
that  produces  heat:  in  fact,  that  which  pro¬ 
duces  the  form  is  always  something  that  pos- 
[/o]  sesses  it.  Consequently  (if  a  thing  can 
move  itself  as  a  whole),  the  same  thing  in  re¬ 
spect  of  the  same  thing  may  be  at  the  same 
time  both  hot  and  not  hot.  So,  too,  in  every 
other  case  where  the  movent  must  be  described 
by  the  same  name  in  the  same  sense  as  the 
moved.  Therefore  when  a  thing  moves  itself  it 
is  one  part  of  it  that  is  the  movent  and  another 
part  that  is  moved.  But  it  is  not  self-moving 
in  the  sense  that  each  of  the  two  parts  is  moved 
by  the  other  part:  the  following  considerations 
[75]  make  this  evident.  In  the  first  place,  it 
each  of  the  two  parts  is  to  move  the  other,  there 
will  be  no  first  movent.  If  a  thing  is  moved  by 
a  series  of  movents,  that  which  is  earlier  in 
the  series  is  more  the  cause  of  its  being 
moved  than  that  which  comes  next,  and  will 
be  more  truly  the  movent:  for  we  found  that 
there  are  two  kinds  of  movent,  that  which  is 
itself  moved  by  something  else  and  that  which 
derives  its  motion  from  itself:  and  that  which 
is  further  from  the  thing  that  is  moved  is 
nearer  to  the  principle  of  motion  than  that 
[20]  which  is  intermediate.  In  the  second 
place,  there  is  no  necessity  for  the  movent  part 
to  be  moved  by  anything  but  itself:  so  it  can 
only  be  accidentally  that  the  other  part  moves 
it  in  return.  I  take  then  the  possible  case  of  its 
not  moving  it:  then  there  will  be  a  part  that  is 
moved  and  a  part  that  is  an  unmoved  movent. 
In  the  third  place,  there  is  no  necessity  for  the 
movent  to  be  moved  in  return:  on  the  con¬ 
trary  the  necessity  that  there  should  always  be 
motion  makes  it  necessary  that  there  should  be 
some  movent  that  is  either  unmoved  or  moved 
[25]  by  itself.  In  the  fourth  place  we  should 
then  have  a  thing  undergoing  the  same  motion 
that  it  is  causing — that  which  is  producing 
heat,  therefore,  being  heated.  But  as  a  matter 
of  fact  that  which  primarily  moves  itself  can¬ 
not  contain  either  a  single  part  that  moves  it¬ 
self  or  a  number  of  parts  each  of  which  moves 
itself.  For,  if  the  whole  is  moved  by  itself,  it 
must  be  moved  either  by  some  part  of  itself  or 
[jo]  as  a  whole  by  itself  as  a  whole.  If,  then,  it 
is  moved  in  virtue  of  some  part  of  it  being 
moved  by  that  part  itself,  it  is  this  part  that 
will  be  the  primary  self-movent,  since,  if  this 
part  is  separated  from  the  whole,  the  part  will 
still  move  itself,  but  the  whole  will  do  so  no 
longer.  If  on  the  other  hand  the  whole  is  moved 


CHAPTER  5  343 

by  itself  as  a  whole,  it  must  be  accidentally 
that  the  parts  move  themselves:  and  therefore, 
their  self-motion  not  being  necessary,  we  may 
258a  take  the  case  of  their  not  being  moved 
by  themselves.  Therefore  in  the  whole  of  the 
thing  we  may  distinguish  that  which  imparts 
motion  without  itself  being  moved  and  that 
which  is  moved:  for  only  in  this  way  is  it  pos¬ 
sible  for  a  thing  to  be  self-moved.  Further,  if 
the  whole  moves  itself  we  may  distinguish  in  it 
that  which  imparts  the  motion  and  that  which 
is  moved:  so  while  we  say  that  AB  is  moved  by 
[5]  itself,  we  may  also  say  that  it  is  moved  by 
A.  And  since  that  which  imparts  motion  may 
be  either  a  thing  that  is  moved  by  something 
else  or  a  thing  that  is  unmoved,  and  that  which 
is  moved  may  be  either  a  thing  that  imparts 
motion  to  something  else  or  a  thing  that  does 
not,  that  which  moves  itself  must  be  composed 
of  something  that  is  unmoved  but  imparts  mo¬ 
tion  and  also  of  something  that  is  moved  but 
does  not  necessarily  impart  motion  but  may  or 
may  not  do  so.  Thus  let  A  be  something  that 
imparts  motion  but  is  unmoved,  B  something 
that  is  moved  by  A  and  moves  I\  T  some- 
[/o]  thing  that  is  moved  by  B  but  moves  noth- 
ing  (granted  that  we  eventually  arrive  at  T 
we  may  take  it  that  there  is  only  one  inter¬ 
mediate  term,  though  there  may  be  more). 
Then  the  whole  ABT  moves  itself.  But  if  I 
take  away  T,  AB  will  move  itself,  A  imparting 
motion  and  B  being  moved,  whereas  T  will 
not  move  itself  or  in  fact  be  moved  at  all.  Nor 
[75]  again  will  BT  move  itself  apart  from  A: 
for  B  imparts  motion  only  through  being 
moved  by  something  else,  not  through  being 
moved  by  any  part  of  itself.  So  only  AB  moves 
itself.  That  which  moves  itself,  therefore,  must 
comprise  something  that  imparts  motion  but 
is  unmoved  and  something  that  is  moved  but 
[20]  does  not  necessarily  move  anything  else: 
and  each  of  these  two  things,  or  at  any  rate 
one  of  them,  must  be  in  contact  with  the  other. 
If,  then,  that  which  imparts  motion  is  a  con¬ 
tinuous  substance — that  which  is  moved  must 
of  course  be  so — it  is  clear  that  it  is  not  through 
some  part  of  the  whole  being  of  such  a  nature 
as  to  be  capable  of  moving  itself  that  the  whole 
moves  itself:  it  moves  itself  as  a  whole,  both 
being  moved  and  imparting  motion  through 
[25]  containing  a  part  that  imparts  motion 
and  a  part  that  is  moved.  It  does  not  impart 
motion  as  a  whole  nor  is  it  moved  as  a  whole: 
it  is  A  alone  that  imparts  motion  and  B  alone 
that  is  moved.  It  is  not  true,  further,  that  T 
is  moved  by  A,  which  is  impossible. 


344 

Here  a  difficulty  arises:  if  something  is  taken 
away  from  A  (supposing  that  that  which  im¬ 
parts  motion  but  is  unmoved  is  a  continuous 
substance),  or  from  B  the  part  that  is  moved, 
will  the  remainder  of  A  continue  to  impart  mo- 
[jo]  tion  or  the  remainder  of  B  continue  to  be 
moved?  If  so,  it  will  not  be  AB  primarily  that 
is  moved  by  itself,  since,  when  something  is 
taken  away  from  AB,  the  remainder  of  AB 
will  still  continue  to  move  itself.  Perhaps  we 
258b  may  state  the  case  thus:  there  is  nothing 
to  prevent  each  of  the  two  parts,  or  at  any  rate 
one  of  them,  that  which  is  moved,  being  di¬ 
visible  though  actually  undivided,  so  that  if  it 
is  divided  it  will  not  continue  in  the  possession 
of  the  same  capacity:  and  so  there  is  nothing 
to  prevent  self-motion  residing  primarily  in 
things  that  are  potentially  divisible. 

From  what  has  been  said,  then,  it  is  evident 
[5]  that  that  which  primarily  imparts  motion 
is  unmoved:  for,  whether  the  series  is  closed  at 
once  by  that  which  is  in  motion  but  moved  by 
something  else  deriving  its  motion  directly 
from  the  first  unmoved,  or  whether  the  motion 
is  derived  from  what  is  in  motion  but  moves 
itself  and  stops  its  own  motion,  on  both  sup¬ 
positions  we  have  the  result  that  in  all  cases  of 
things  being  in  motion  that  which  primarily 
imparts  motion  is  unmoved. 

6 

[/o]  Since  there  must  always  be  motion  with¬ 
out  intermission,  there  must  necessarily  be 
something,  one  thing  or  it  may  be  a  plurality, 
that  first  imparts  motion,  and  this  first  movent 
must  be  unmoved.  Now  the  question  whether 
each  of  the  things  that  are  unmoved  but  impart 
motion  is  eternal  is  irrelevant  to  our  present  ar¬ 
gument:  but  the  following  considerations  will 
make  it  clear  that  there  must  necessarily  be 
some  such  thing,  which,  while  it  has  the  capac¬ 
ity  of  moving  something  else,  is  itself  un¬ 
moved  and  exempt  from  all  change,  which 
[75]  can  affect  it  neither  in  an  unqualified  nor 
in  an  accidental  sense.  Let  us  suppose,  if  any 
one  likes,  that  in  the  case  of  certain  things  it  is 
possible  for  them  at  different  times  to  be  and 
not  to  be,  without  any  process  of  becoming  and 
perishing  (in  fact  it  would  seem  to  be  neces¬ 
sary,  if  a  thing  that  has  not  parts  at  one  time 
is  and  at  another  time  is  not,  that  any  such 
thing  should  without  undergoing  any  process 
of  change  at  one  time  be  and  at  another  time 
[20]  not  be).  And  let  us  further  suppose  it 
possible  that  some  principles  that  are  unmoved 
but  capable  of  imparting  motion  at  one  time 


259* 

are  and  at  another  time  are  not.  Even  so,  this 
cannot  be  true  of  all  such  principles,  since 
there  must  clearly  be  something  that  causes 
things  that  move  themselves  at  one  time  to  be 
and  at  another  not  to  be.  For,  since  nothing 
that  has  not  parts  can  be  in  motion,  that  which 
[25]  moves  itself  must  as  a  whole  have  magni¬ 
tude,  though  nothing  that  we  have  said  makes 
this  necessarily  true  of  every  movent.  So  the 
fact  that  some  things  become  and  others  perish, 
and  that  this  is  so  continuously,  cannot  be 
caused  by  any  one  of  those  things  that,  though 
they  are  unmoved,  do  not  always  exist:  nor 
again  can  it  be  caused  by  any  of  those  which 
move  certain  particular  things,  while  others 
move  other  things.  The  eternity  and  continu¬ 
ity  of  the  process  cannot  be  caused  either  by 
any  one  of  them  singly  or  by  the  sum  of  them, 
[jo]  because  this  causal  relation  must  be  eter¬ 
nal  and  necessary,  whereas  the  sum  of  these 
movents  is  infinite  and  they  do  not  all  exist 
together.  It  is  clear,  then,  that  though  there 
may  be  countless  instances  of  the  perishing  of 
259a  some  principles  that  are  unmoved  but 
impart  motion,  and  though  many  things  that 
move  themselves  perish  and  are  succeeded  by 
others  that  come  into  being,  and  though  one 
thing  that  is  unmoved  moves  one  thing  while 
another  moves  another,  nevertheless  there  is 
something  that  comprehends  them  all,  and  that 
as  something  apart  from  each  one  of  them,  and 
this  it  is  that  is  the  cause  of  the  fact  that  some 
things  are  and  others  are  not  and  of  the  con- 
[5]  tinuous  process  of  change:  and  this  causes 
the  motion  of  the  other  movents,  while  they 
are  the  causes  of  the  motion  of  other  things. 
Motion,  then,  being  eternal,  the  first  movent,  if 
there  is  but  one,  will  be  eternal  also:  if  there  are 
more  than  one,  there  will  be  a  plurality  of  such 
eternal  movents.  We  ought,  however,  to  sup¬ 
pose  that  there  is  one  rather  than  many,  and 
a  finite  rather  than  an  infinite  number.  When 
the  consequences  of  either  assumption  are  the 
same,  we  should  always  assume  that  things 
are  finite  rather  than  infinite  in  number,  since 
[/o]  in  things  constituted  by  nature  that  which 
is  finite  and  that  which  is  better  ought,  if  pos¬ 
sible,  to  be  present  rather  than  the  reverse:  and 
here  it  is  sufficient  to  assume  only  one  movent, 
the  first  of  unmoved  things,  which  being  eter¬ 
nal  will  be  the  principle  of  motion  to  every¬ 
thing  else. 

The  following  argument  also  makes  it  evi¬ 
dent  that  the  first  movent  must  be  something 
that  is  one  and  eternal.  We  have  shown1  that 
1  Chapter  1. 


PHYSICS 


260*  BOOK  VIII,  CHAPTERS  5-6  345 


[75]  there  must  always  be  motion.  That  being 
so,  motion  must  also  be  continuous,  because 
what  is  always  is  continuous,  whereas  what  is 
merely  in  succession  is  not  continuous.  But 
further,  if  motion  is  continuous,  it  is  one:  and 
it  is  one  only  if  the  movent  and  the  moved  that 
constitute  it  are  each  of  them  one,  since  in  the 
event  of  a  thing’s  being  moved  now  by  one 
thing  and  now  by  another  the  whole  motion 
will  not  be  continuous  but  successive. 

[20]  Moreover  a  conviction  that  there  is  a  first 
unmoved  something  may  be  reached  not  only 
from  the  foregoing  arguments,  but  also  by  con¬ 
sidering  again  the  principles  operative  in  mov¬ 
ents.  Now  it  is  evident  that  among  existing 
things  there  are  some  that  are  sometimes  in 
motion  and  sometimes  at  rest.  This  fact  has 
served  above1  to  make  it  clear  that  it  is  not  true 
either  that  all  things  are  in  motion  or  that  all 
things  are  at  rest  or  that  some  things  are  al- 
[25]  ways  at  rest  and  the  remainder  always  in 
motion:  on  this  matter  proof  is  supplied  by 
things  that  fluctuate  between  the  two  and  have 
the  capacity  of  being  sometimes  in  motion  and 
sometimes  at  rest.  The  existence  of  things  of 
this  kind  is  clear  to  all:  but  we  wish  to  explain 
also  the  nature  of  each  of  the  other  two  kinds 
and  show  that  there  are  some  things  that  are 
always  unmoved  and  some  things  that  are  al¬ 
ways  in  motion.  In  the  course  of  our  argument 
[30]  directed  to  this  end  we  established  the 
fact  that  everything  that  is  in  motion  is  moved 
by  something,  and  that  the  movent  is  either  un¬ 
moved  or  in  motion,  and  that,  if  it  is  in  mo¬ 
tion,  it  is  moved  either  by  itself  or  by  some¬ 
thing  else  and  so  on  throughout  the  series:  and 
so  we  proceeded  to  the  position  that  the  first 
principle  that  directly  causes  things  that  are  in 
motion  to  be  moved  is  that  which  moves  itself, 
and  the  first  principle  of  the  whole  series  is 
259b  the  unmoved.  Further  it  is  evident  from 
actual  observation  that  there  are  things  that 
have  the  characteristic  of  moving  themselves, 
e.g.  the  animal  kingdom  and  the  whole  class  of 
living  things.  This  being  so,  then,  the  view  was 
suggested  that  perhaps  it  may  be  possible  for 
motion  to  come  to  be  in  a  thing  without  hav¬ 
ing  been  in  existence  at  all  before,  because  we 
[5]  see  this  actually  occurring  in  animals:  they 
are  unmoved  at  one  time  and  then  again  they 
are  in  motion,  as  it  seems.  We  must  grasp  the 
fact,  therefore,  that  animals  move  themselves 
only  with  one  kind  of  motion,  and  that  this  is 
not  strictly  originated  by  them.  The  cause  of 
it  is  not  derived  from  the  animal  itself:  it  is 
1  Chapter  3. 


connected  with  other  natural  motions  in  ani¬ 
mals,  which  they  do  not  experience  through 
their  own  instrumentality,  e.g.  increase,  de- 
[/o]  crease,  and  respiration:  these  are  ex¬ 
perienced  by  every  animal  while  it  is  at  rest 
and  not  in  motion  in  respect  of  the  motion  set 
up  by  its  own  agency:  here  the  motion  is  caused 
by  the  atmosphere  and  by  many  things  that 
enter  into  the  animal:  thus  in  some  cases  the 
cause  is  nourishment:  when  it  is  being  digested 
animals  sleep,  and  when  it  is  being  distributed 
through  the  system  they  awake  and  move 
themselves,  the  first  principle  of  this  motion 
being  thus  originally  derived  from  outside. 
Therefore  animals  are  not  always  in  continu¬ 
ous  motion  by  their  own  agency:  it  is  some- 
[75]  thing  else  that  moves  them,  itself  being 
in  motion  and  changing  as  it  comes  into  rela¬ 
tion  with  each  several  thing  that  moves  itself. 
(Moreover  in  all  these  self-moving  things  the 
first  movent  and  cause  of  their  self-motion  is 
itself  moved  by  itself,  though  in  an  accidental 
sense:  that  is  to  say,  the  body  changes  its  place, 
so  that  that  which  is  in  the  body  changes  its 
place  also  and  is  a  self-movent  through  its 
[20]  exercise  of  leverage.)  Hence  we  may  con¬ 
fidently  conclude  that  if  a  thing  belongs  to  the 
class  of  unmoved  movents  that  are  also  them¬ 
selves  moved  accidentally,  it  is  impossible  that 
it  should  cause  continuous  motion.  So  the  ne¬ 
cessity  that  there  should  be  motion  continuous¬ 
ly  requires  that  there  should  be  a  first  movent 
that  is  unmoved  even  accidentally,  if,  as  we 
[25]  have  said,2  there  is  to  be  in  the  world  of 
things  an  unceasing  and  undying  motion,  and 
the  world  is  to  remain  permanently  self-con¬ 
tained  and  within  the  same  limits:  for  if  the 
first  principle  is  permanent,  the  universe  must 
also  be  permanent,  since  it  is  continuous  with 
the  first  principle.  (We  must  distinguish, 
however,  between  accidental  motion  of  a  thing 
by  itself  and  such  motion  by  something  else, 
the  former  being  confined  to  perishable  things, 
whereas  the  latter  belongs  also  to  certain  first 
principles  of  heavenly  bodies,  of  all  those,  that 
[jo]  is  to  say,  that  experience  more  than  one 
locomotion.) 

And  further,  if  there  is  always  something  of 
260*  this  nature,  a  movent  that  is  itself  un¬ 
moved  and  eternal,  then  that  which  is  first 
moved  by  it  must  be  eternal.  Indeed  this  is 
clear  also  from  the  consideration  that  there 
would  otherwise  be  no  becoming  and  perish¬ 
ing  and  no  change  of  any  kind  in  other  things, 
which  require  something  that  is  in  motion  to 
2  Chapter  1. 


346  PHYSICS  260b 


move  them:  for  the  motion  imparted  by  the 
unmoved  will  always  be  imparted  in  the  same 
way  and  be  one  and  the  same,  since  the  un¬ 
moved  does  not  itself  change  in  relation  to 
[5]  that  which  is  moved  by  it.  But  that  which 
is  moved  by  something  that,  though  it  is  in 
motion,  is  moved  directly  by  the  unmoved 
stands  in  varying  relations  to  the  things  that  it 
moves,  so  that  the  motion  that  it  causes  will 
not  be  always  the  same:  by  reason  of  the  fact 
that  it  occupies  contrary  positions  or  assumes 
contrary  forms  at  different  times  it  will  pro- 
[/o]  duce  contrary  motions  in  each  several 
thing  that  it  moves  and  will  cause  it  to  be  at 
one  time  at  rest  and  at  another  time  in  motion. 

The  foregoing  argument,  then,  has  served 
to  clear  up  the  point  about  which  we  raised  a 
difficulty  at  the  outset1 — why  is  it  that  instead 
of  all  things  being  either  in  motion  or  at  rest, 
or  some  things  being  always  in  motion  and  the 
remainder  always  at  rest,  there  are  things  that 
are  sometimes  in  motion  and  sometimes  not? 
The  cause  of  this  is  now  plain:  it  is  because, 
while  some  things  are  moved  by  an  eternal 
unmoved  movent  and  are  therefore  always  in 
[75]  motion,  other  things  are  moved  by  a  mov¬ 
ent  that  is  in  motion  and  changing,  so  that 
they  too  must  change.  But  the  unmoved  mov¬ 
ent,  as  has  been  said,  since  it  remains  per¬ 
manently  simple  and  unvarying  and  in  the 
same  state,  will  cause  motion  that  is  one  and 
simple. 

7 

[20]  This  matter  will  be  made  clearer,  how¬ 
ever,  if  we  start  afresh  from  another  point.  We 
must  consider  whether  it  is  or  is  not  possible 
that  there  should  be  a  continuous  motion,  and, 
if  it  is  possible,  which  this  motion  is,  and  which 
is  the  primary  motion:  for  it  is  plain  that  if 
there  must  always  be  motion,  and  a  particular 
motion  is  primary  and  continuous,  then  it  is 
[25]  this  motion  that  is  imparted  by  the  first 
movent,  and  so  it  is  necessarily  one  and  the 
same  and  continuous  and  primary. 

Now  of  the  three  kinds  of  motion  that  there 
are — motion  in  respect  of  magnitude,  motion 
in  respect  of  affection,  and  motion  in  respect  of 
place — it  is  this  last,  which  we  call  locomotion, 
that  must  be  primary.  This  may  be  shown  as 
follows.  It  is  impossible  that  there  should  be 
[jo]  increase  without  the  previous  occurrence 
of  alteration:  for  that  which  is  increased,  al¬ 
though  in  a  sense  it  is  increased  by  what  is  like 
itself,  is  in  a  sense  increased  by  what  is  unlike 

1  Chapter  3. 


itself:  thus  it  is  said  that  contrary  is  nourish¬ 
ment  to  contrary:  but  growth  is  effected  only 
by  things  becoming  like  to  like.  There  must  be 
alteration,  then,  in  that  there  is  this  change 
260b  from  contrary  to  contrary.  But  the  fact 
that  a  thing  is  altered  requires  that  there  should 
be  something  that  alters  it,  something  e.g.  that 
makes  the  potentially  hot  into  the  actually  hot: 
so  it  is  plain  that  the  movent  does  not  maintain 
a  uniform  relation  to  it  but  is  at  one  time 
nearer  to  and  at  another  farther  from  that 
[5]  which  is  altered:  and  we  cannot  have  this 
without  locomotion.  If,  therefore,  there  must 
always  be  motion,  there  must  also  always  be 
locomotion  as  the  primary  motion,  and,  if 
there  is  a  primary  as  distinguished  from  a  sec¬ 
ondary  form  of  locomotion,  it  must  be  the  pri¬ 
mary  form.  Again,  all  affections  have  their 
origin  in  condensation  and  rarefaction:  thus 
[/o]  heavy  and  light,  soft  and  hard,  hot  and 
cold,  are  considered  to  be  forms  of  density  and 
rarity.  But  condensation  and  rarefaction  are 
nothing  more  than  combination  and  separa¬ 
tion,  processes  in  accordance  with  which  sub¬ 
stances  are  said  to  become  and  perish:  and  in 
being  combined  and  separated  things  must 
change  in  respect  of  place.  And  further,  when 
a  thing  is  increased  or  decreased  its  magnitude 
changes  in  respect  of  place. 

[75]  Again,  there  is  another  point  of  view 
from  which  it  will  be  clearly  seen  that  locomo¬ 
tion  is  primary.  As  in  the  case  of  other  things 
so  too  in  the  case  of  motion  the  word  ‘primary’ 
may  be  used  in  several  senses.  A  thing  is  said 
to  be  prior  to  other  things  when,  if  it  does  not 
exist,  the  others  will  not  exist,  whereas  it  can 
exist  without  the  others:  and  there  is  also  pri¬ 
ority  in  time  and  priority  in  perfection  of  ex¬ 
istence.  Let  us  begin,  then,  with  the  first  sense. 
[20]  Now  there  must  be  motion  continuously, 
and  there  may  be  continuously  either  continu¬ 
ous  motion  or  successive  motion,  the  former, 
however,  in  a  higher  degree  than  the  latter: 
moreover  it  is  better  that  it  should  be  continu¬ 
ous  rather  than  successive  motion,  and  we  al¬ 
ways  assume  the  presence  in  nature  of  the  bet¬ 
ter,  if  it  be  possible:  since,  then,  continuous 
motion  is  possible  (this  will  be  proved  later:2 
for  the  present  let  us  take  it  for  granted),  and 
[25]  no  other  motion  can  be  continuous  except 
locomotion,  locomotion  must  be  primary.  For 
there  is  no  necessity  for  the  subject  of  locomo¬ 
tion  to  be  the  subject  either  of  increase  or  of 
alteration,  nor  need  it  become  or  perish:  on  the 
other  hand  there  cannot  be  any  one  of  these 
2  Chapter  8. 


261b  BOOK  VIII,  CHAPTERS  6-7  347 


processes  without  the  existence  of  the  continu¬ 
ous  motion  imparted  by  the  first  movent. 

Secondly,  locomotion  must  be  primary  in 
time:  for  this  is  the  only  motion  possible  for 
[30]  eternal  things.  It  is  true  indeed  that,  in 
the  case  of  any  individual  thing  that  has  a  be¬ 
coming,  locomotion  must  be  the  last  of  its  mo¬ 
tions:  for  after  its  becoming  it  first  experiences 
alteration  and  increase,  and  locomotion  is  a  mo¬ 
tion  that  belongs  to  such  things  only  when  they 
261a  are  perfected.  But  there  must  previously 
be  something  else  that  is  in  process  of  locomo¬ 
tion  to  be  the  cause  even  of  the  becoming  of 
things  that  become,  without  itself  being  in 
process  of  becoming,  as  e.g.  the  begotten  is  pre¬ 
ceded  by  what  begot  it:  otherwise  becoming 
might  be  thought  to  be  the  primary  motion  on 
the  ground  that  the  thing  must  first  become. 
[5]  But  though  this  is  so  in  the  case  of  any  in¬ 
dividual  thing  that  becomes,  nevertheless  be¬ 
fore  anything  becomes,  something  else  must  be 
in  motion,  not  itself  becoming  but  being,  and 
before  this  there  must  again  be  something  else. 
And  since  becoming  cannot  be  primary — for, 
if  it  were,  everything  that  is  in  motion  would 
be  perishable — it  is  plain  that  no  one  of  the  mo¬ 
tions  next  in  order  can  be  prior  to  locomotion, 
[/o]  By  the  motions  next  in  order  I  mean  in¬ 
crease  and  then  alteration,  decrease,  and  per¬ 
ishing.  All  these  are  posterior  to  becoming: 
consequently,  if  not  even  becoming  is  prior  to 
locomotion,  then  no  one  of  the  other  processes 
of  change  is  so  either. 

Thirdly,  that  which  is  in  process  of  becom¬ 
ing  appears  universally  as  something  imperfect 
and  proceeding  to  a  first  principle:  and  so  what 
is  posterior  in  the  order  of  becoming  is  prior  in 
the  order  of  nature.  Now  all  things  that  go 
through  the  process  of  becoming  acquire  loco¬ 
motion  last.  It  is  this  that  accounts  for  the  fact 
[75]  that  some  living  things,  e.g.  plants  and 
many  kinds  of  animals,  owing  to  lack  of  the 
requisite  organ,  are  entirely  without  motion, 
whereas  others  acquire  it  in  the  course  of  their 
being  perfected.  Therefore,  if  the  degree  in 
which  things  possess  locomotion  corresponds 
to  the  degree  in  which  they  have  realized  their 
natural  development,  then  this  motion  must  be 
prior  to  all  others  in  respect  of  perfection  of  ex- 
[20]  istence:  and  not  only  for  this  reason  but 
also  because  a  thing  that  is  in  motion  loses  its 
essential  character  less  in  the  process  of  locomo¬ 
tion  than  in  any  other  kind  of  motion:  it  is  the 
only  motion  that  does  not  involve  a  change  of 
being  in  the  sense  in  which  there  is  a  change 
in  quality  when  a  thing  is  altered  and  a  change 


in  quantity  when  a  thing  is  increased  or  de¬ 
creased.  Above  all  it  is  plain  that  this  motion, 
motion  in  respect  of  place,  is  what  is  in  the 
strictest  sense  produced  by  that  which  moves 
[25]  itself;  but  it  is  the  self-movent  that  we  de¬ 
clare  to  be  the  first  principle  of  things  that  are 
moved  and  impart  motion  and  the  primary 
source  to  which  things  that  are  in  motion  are 
to  be  referred. 

It  is  clear,  then,  from  the  foregoing  argu¬ 
ments  that  locomotion  is  the  primary  motion. 
We  have  now  to  show  which  kind  of  locomo¬ 
tion  is  primary.  The  same  process  of  reasoning 
will  also  make  clear  at  the  same  time  the  truth 
of  the  assumption  we  have  made  both  now  and 
[30]  at  a  previous  stage1  that  it  is  possible  that 
there  should  be  a  motion  that  is  continuous  and 
eternal.  Now  it  is  clear  from  the  following  con¬ 
siderations  that  no  other  than  locomotion  can 
be  continuous.  Every  other  motion  and  change 
is  from  an  opposite  to  an  opposite:  thus  for  the 
processes  of  becoming  and  perishing  the  limits 
are  the  existent  and  the  non-existent,  for  alter¬ 
ation  the  various  pairs  of  contrary  affections, 
[35]  and  for  increase  and  decrease  either  great¬ 
ness  and  smallness  or  perfection  and  imperfec¬ 
tion  of  magnitude:  and  changes  to  the  respec¬ 
tive  contraries  are  contrary  changes.  Now  a 
261b  thing  that  is  undergoing  any  particular 
kind  of  motion,  but  though  previously  existent 
has  not  always  undergone  it,  must  previously 
have  been  at  rest  so  far  as  that  motion  is  con¬ 
cerned.  It  is  clear,  then,  that  for  the  changing 
thing  the  contraries  will  be  states  of  rest.  And 
we  have  a  similar  result  in  the  case  of  changes 
that  are  not  motions:  for  becoming  and  perish¬ 
ing,  whether  regarded  simply  as  such  without 
qualification  or  as  affecting  something  in  par- 
[5]  ticular,  are  opposites:  therefore  provided  it 
is  impossible  for  a  thing  to  undergo  opposite 
changes  at  the  same  time,  the  change  will  not 
be  continuous,  but  a  period  of  time  will  inter¬ 
vene  between  the  opposite  processes.  The  ques¬ 
tion  whether  these  contradictory  changes  are 
contraries  or  not  makes  no  difference,  provided 
only  it  is  impossible  for  them  both  to  be  pres¬ 
ent  to  the  same  thing  at  the  same  time:  the 
point  is  of  no  importance  to  the  argument.  Nor 
[/o]  does  it  matter  if  the  thing  need  not  rest  in 
the  contradictory  state,  or  if  there  is  no  state  of 
rest  as  a  contrary  to  the  process  of  change:  it 
may  be  true  that  the  non-existent  is  not  at  rest, 
and  that  perishing  is  a  process  to  the  non-exist¬ 
ent.  All  that  matters  is  the  intervention  of  a 
time:  it  is  this  that  prevents  the  change  from 

1 253a  29* 


348  PHYSICS  262* 


being  continuous:  so,  too,  in  our  previous  in¬ 
stances  the  important  thing  was  not  the  rela¬ 
tion  of  contrariety  but  the  impossibility  of  the 
two  processes  being  present  to  a  thing  at  the 
[75]  same  time.  And  there  is  no  need  to  be  dis¬ 
turbed  by  the  fact  that  on  this  showing  there 
may  be  more  than  one  contrary  to  the  same 
thing,  that  a  particular  motion  will  be  contrary 
both  to  rest  and  to  motion  in  the  contrary  di¬ 
rection.  We  have  only  to  grasp  the  fact  that  a 
particular  motion  is  in  a  sense  the  opposite  both 
of  a  state  of  rest  and  of  the  contrary  motion,  in 
the  same  way  as  that  which  is  of  equal  or  stand¬ 
ard  measure  is  the  opposite  both  of  that  which 
surpasses  it  and  of  that  which  it  surpasses,  and 
[20]  that  it  is  impossible  for  the  opposite  mo¬ 
tions  or  changes  to  be  present  to  a  thing  at  the 
same  time.  Furthermore,  in  the  case  of  becom¬ 
ing  and  perishing  it  would  seem  to  be  an  utter¬ 
ly  absurd  thing  if  as  soon  as  anything  has  be¬ 
come  it  must  necessarily  perish  and  cannot  con¬ 
tinue  to  exist  for  any  time:  and,  if  this  is  true  of 
becoming  and  perishing,  we  have  fair  grounds 
[25]  for  inferring  the  same  to  be  true  of  the 
other  kinds  of  change,  since  it  would  be  in  the 
natural  order  of  things  that  they  should  be  uni¬ 
form  in  this  respect. 

8 

Let  us  now  proceed  to  maintain  that  it  is  pos¬ 
sible  that  there  should  be  an  infinite  motion 
that  is  single  and  continuous,  and  that  this  mo¬ 
tion  is  rotatory  motion.  The  motion  of  every¬ 
thing  that  is  in  process  of  locomotion  is  either 
rotatory  or  rectilinear  or  a  compound  of  the 
two:  consequently,  if  one  of  the  former  two  is 
not  continuous,  that  which  is  composed  of 
[30]  them  both  cannot  be  continuous  either. 
Now  it  is  plain  that  if  the  locomotion  of  a  thing 
is  rectilinear  and  finite  it  is  not  continuous  lo¬ 
comotion:  for  the  thing  must  turn  back,  and 
that  which  turns  back  in  a  straight  line  under¬ 
goes  two  contrary  locomotions,  since,  so  far  as 
motion  in  respect  of  place  is  concerned,  upward 
motion  is  the  contrary  of  downward  motion, 
forward  motion  of  backward  motion,  and  mo- 
[55]  tion  t0  the  left  of  motion  to  the  right, 
these  being  the  pairs  of  contraries  in  the  sphere 
262*  of  place.  But  we  have  already1  defined 
single  and  continuous  motion  to  be  motion  of  a 
single  thing  in  a  single  period  of  time  and  op¬ 
erating  within  a  sphere  admitting  of  no  further 
specific  differentiation  (for  we  have  three 
things  to  consider,  first  that  which  is  in  motion, 
e.g.  a  man  or  a  god,  secondly  the  ‘when’  of  the 

V.  4. 


motion,  that  is  to  say,  the  time,  and  thirdly  the 
sphere  within  which  it  operates,  which  may  be 
either  place  or  affection  or  essential  form  or 
[5]  magnitude):  and  contraries  are  specifically 
not  one  and  the  same  but  distinct:  and  within 
the  sphere  of  place  we  have  the  above-men¬ 
tioned  distinctions.  Moreover  we  have  an  indi¬ 
cation  that  motion  from  A  to  B  is  the  contrary 
of  motion  from  B  to  A  in  the  fact  that,  if  they 
occur  at  the  same  time,  they  arrest  and  stop 
each  other.  And  the  same  is  true  in  the  case  of 
a  circle:  the  motion  from  A  towards  B  is  the 
contrary  of  the  motion  from  A  towards  T:  for 
[10]  even  if  they  are  continuous  and  there  is  no 
turning  back  they  arrest  each  other,  because 
contraries  annihilate  or  obstruct  one  another. 
On  the  other  hand  lateral  motion  is  not  the 
contrary  of  upward  motion.  But  what  shows 
most  clearly  that  rectilinear  motion  cannot  be 
continuous  is  the  fact  that  turning  back  neces¬ 
sarily  implies  coming  to  a  stand,  not  only  when 
it  is  a  straight  line  that  is  traversed,  but  also  in 
[75]  the  case  of  locomotion  in  a  circle  (which 
is  not  the  same  thing  as  rotatory  locomotion: 
for,  when  a  thing  merely  traverses  a  circle,  it 
may  either  proceed  on  its  course  without  a 
break  or  turn  back  again  when  it  has  reached 
the  same  point  from  which  it  started).  We  may 
assure  ourselves  of  the  necessity  of  this  coming 
to  a  stand  not  only  on  the  strength  of  observa¬ 
tion,  but  also  on  theoretical  grounds.  We  may 
start  as  follows:  we  have  three  points,  starting- 
point,  middle-point,  and  finishing-point,  of 
[20  J  which  the  middle-point  in  virtue  of  the  re¬ 
lations  in  which  it  stands  severally  to  the  other 
two  is  both  a  starting-point  and  a  finishing-point, 
and  though  numerically  one  is  theoretically  two. 
We  have  further  the  distinction  between  the 
potential  and  the  actual.  So  in  the  straight  line 
in  question  any  one  of  the  points  lying  between 
the  two  extremes  is  potentially  a  middle-point: 
but  it  is  not  actually  so  unless  that  which  is  in 
motion  divides  the  line  by  coming  to  a  stand  at 
that  point  and  beginning  its  motion  again:  thus 
[25]  the  middle-point  becomes  both  a  starting- 
point  and  a  goal,  the  starting-point  of  the  latter 
part  and  the  finishing-point  of  the  first  part  of 
the  motion.  This  is  the  case  e.g.  when  A  in  the 
course  of  its  locomotion  comes  to  a  stand  at  B 
and  starts  again  towards  T:  but  when  its  mo¬ 
tion  is  continuous  A  cannot  either  have  come  to 
be  or  have  ceased  to  be  at  the  point  B:  it  can 
[30]  only  have  been  there  at  the  moment  of 
passing,  its  passage  not  being  contained  within 
any  period  of  time  except  the  whole  of  which 
the  particular  moment  is  a  dividing-point.  To 


263 a  BOOK  VIII,  CHAPTERS  7-8  349 


maintain  that  it  has  come  to  be  and  ceased  to 
be  there  will  involve  the  consequence  that  A  in 
the  course  of  its  locomotion  will  always  be 
coming  to  a  stand:  for  it  is  impossible  that  A 
262b  should  simultaneously  have  come  to  be  at 
B  and  ceased  to  be  there,  so  that  the  two  things 
must  have  happened  at  different  points  of  time, 
and  therefore  there  will  be  the  intervening  pe¬ 
riod  of  time:  consequently  A  will  be  in  a  state 
of  rest  at  B,  and  similarly  at  all  other  points, 
since  the  same  reasoning  holds  good  in  every 
[5]  case.  When  to  A,  that  which  is  in  process  of 
locomotion,  B,  the  middle-point,  serves  both  as 
a  finishing-point  and  as  a  starting-point  for  its 
motion,  A  must  come  to  a  stand  at  B,  because 
it  makes  it  two  just  as  one  might  do  in  thought. 
However,  the  point  A  is  the  real  starting-point 
at  which  the  moving  body  has  ceased  to  be,  and 
it  is  at  T  that  it  has  really  come  to  be  when  its 
course  is  finished  and  it  comes  to  a  stand.  So 
this  is  how  we  must  meet  the  difficulty  that 
[/o]  then  arises,  which  is  as  follows.  Suppose 
the  line  E  is  equal  to  the  line  Z,  that  A  pro¬ 
ceeds  in  continuous  locomotion  from  the  ex¬ 
treme  point  of  E  to  T,  and  that,  at  the  moment 
when  A  is  at  the  point  B,  A  is  proceeding  in 
uniform  locomotion  and  with  the  same  velocity 
as  A  from  the  extremity  of  Z  to  H:  then,  says 
the  argument,  A  will  have  reached  H  before  A 
has  reached  T:  for  that  which  makes  an  earlier 
start  and  departure  must  make  an  earlier  ar- 
[75]  rival:  the  reason,  then,  for  the  late  arrival 
of  A  is  that  it  has  not  simultaneously  come  to 
be  and  ceased  to  be  at  B:  otherwise  it  will  not 
arrive  later:  for  this  to  happen  it  will  be  neces¬ 
sary  that  it  should  come  to  a  stand  there.  There¬ 
fore  we  must  not  hold  that  there  was  a  mo¬ 
ment  when  A  came  to  be  at  B  and  that  at  the 
same  moment  A  was  in  motion  from  the  ex¬ 
tremity  of  Z:  for  the  fact  of  A’s  having  come  to 
[20]  be  at  B  will  involve  the  fact  of  its  also 
ceasing  to  be  there,  and  the  two  events  will  not 
be  simultaneous,  whereas  the  truth  is  that  A 
is  at  B  at  a  sectional  point  of  time  and  does  not 
occupy  time  there.  In  this  case,  therefore,  where 
the  motion  of  a  thing  is  continuous,  it  is  impos¬ 
sible  to  use  this  form  of  expression.  On  the  oth¬ 
er  hand  in  the  case  of  a  thing  that  turns  back 
in  its  course  we  must  do  so.  For  suppose  H  in 
the  course  of  its  locomotion  proceeds  to  A  and 
then  turns  back  and  proceeds  downwards 
again:  then  the  extreme  point  A  has  served  as 
finishing-point  and  as  starting-point  for  it,  one 
point  thus  serving  as  two:  therefore  H  must 
[25]  have  come  to  a  stand  there:  it  cannot  have 
come  to  be  at  A  and  departed  from  A  simul¬ 


taneously,  for  in  that  case  it  would  simulta¬ 
neously  be  there  and  not  be  there  at  the  same 
moment.  And  here  we  cannot  apply  the  argu¬ 
ment  used  to  solve  the  difficulty  stated  above: 
we  cannot  argue  that  H  is  at  A  at  a  sectional 
point  of  time  and  has  not  come  to  be  or  ceased 
to  be  there.  For  here  the  goal  that  is  reached  is 
[30]  necessarily  one  that  is  actually,  not  po¬ 
tentially,  existent.  Now  the  point  in  the  middle 
is  potential:  but  this  one  is  actual,  and  regard¬ 
ed  from  below  it  is  a  finishing-point,  while  re¬ 
garded  from  above  it  is  a  starting-point,  so  that 
it  stands  in  these  same  two  respective  relations 
263a  to  the  two  motions.  Therefore  that  which 
turns  back  in  traversing  a  rectilinear  course 
must  in  so  doing  come  to  a  stand.  Consequent¬ 
ly  there  cannot  be  a  continuous  rectilinear  mo¬ 
tion  that  is  eternal. 

The  same  method  should  also  be  adopted  in 
replying  to  those  who  ask,  in  the  terms  of 
[5]  Zeno’s  argument,  whether  we  admit  that 
before  any  distance  can  be  traversed  half  the 
distance  must  be  traversed,  that  these  half-dis¬ 
tances  are  infinite  in  number,  and  that  it  is  im¬ 
possible  to  traverse  distances  infinite  in  num¬ 
ber — or  some  on  the  lines  of  this  same  argu¬ 
ment  put  the  questions  in  another  form,  and 
would  have  us  grant  that  in  the  time  during 
which  a  motion  is  in  progress  it  should  be  possi¬ 
ble  to  reckon  a  half-motion  before  the  whole  for 
every  half-distance  that  we  get,  so  that  we  have 
the  result  that  when  the  whole  distance  is  trav- 
[/o]  ersed  we  have  reckoned  an  infinite  num¬ 
ber,  which  is  admittedly  impossible.  Now  when 
we  first  discussed  the  question  of  motion  we 
put  forward  a  solution1  of  this  difficulty  turn¬ 
ing  on  the  fact  that  the  period  of  time  occupied 
in  traversing  the  distance  contains  within  itself 
an  infinite  number  of  units:  there  is  no  absurd¬ 
ity,  we  said,  in  supposing  the  traversing  of  in¬ 
finite  distances  in  infinite  time,  and  the  ele¬ 
ment  of  infinity  is  present  in  the  time  no  less 
[75]  than  in  the  distance.  But,  although  this  so 
lution  is  adequate  as  a  reply  to  the  questioner 
(the  question  asked  being  whether  it  is  possi¬ 
ble  in  a  finite  time  to  traverse  or  reckon  an  in¬ 
finite  number  of  units),  nevertheless  as  an  ac¬ 
count  of  the  fact  and  explanation  of  its  true  na¬ 
ture  it  is  inadequate.  For  suppose  the  distance 
to  be  left  out  of  account  and  the  question  asked 
to  be  no  longer  whether  it  is  possible  in  a  finite 
[20]  time  to  traverse  an  infinite  number  of  dis¬ 
tances,  and  suppose  that  the  inquiry  is  made  to 
refer  to  the  time  taken  by  itself  (for  the  time 
contains  an  infinite  number  of  divisions):  then 
Vi.  2  (233*  21  sqq.),  and  vi.  9. 


350 

this  solution  will  no  longer  be  adequate,  and 
we  must  apply  the  truth  that  we  enunciated  in 
our  recent  discussion,  stating  it  in  the  follow¬ 
ing  way.  In  the  act  of  dividing  the  continuous 
distance  into  two  halves  one  point  is  treated  as 
two,  since  we  make  it  a  starting-point  and  a 
finishing-point:  and  this  same  result  is  also  pro- 
[25]  duced  by  the  act  of  reckoning  halves  as 
well  as  by  the  act  of  dividing  into  halves.  But  if 
divisions  are  made  in  this  way,  neither  the  dis¬ 
tance  nor  the  motion  will  be  continuous:  for 
motion  if  it  is  to  be  continuous  must  relate  to 
what  is  continuous:  and  though  what  is  con¬ 
tinuous  contains  an  infinite  number  of  halves, 
they  are  not  actual  but  potential  halves.  If  the 
halves  are  made  actual,  we  shall  get  not  a  con¬ 
tinuous  but  an  intermittent  motion.  In  the  case 
[30]  of  reckoning  the  halves,  it  is  clear  that  this 
result  follows:  for  then  one  point  must  be  reek- 
26315  oned  as  two:  it  will  be  the  finishing-point 
of  the  one  half  and  the  starting-point  of  the 
other,  if  we  reckon  not  the  one  continuous 
whole  but  the  two  halves.  Therefore  to  the 
question  whether  it  is  possible  to  pass  through 
an  infinite  number  of  units  either  of  time  or  of 
distance  we  must  reply  that  in  a  sense  it  is  and 
in  a  sense  it  is  not.  If  the  units  are  actual,  it  is 
[5]  not  possible:  if  they  are  potential,  it  is  pos¬ 
sible.  For  in  the  course  of  a  continuous  motion 
the  traveller  has  traversed  an  infinite  number 
of  units  in  an  accidental  sense  but  not  in  an  un¬ 
qualified  sense:  for  though  it  is  an  accidental 
characteristic  of  the  distance  to  be  an  infinite 
number  of  half-distances,  this  is  not  its  real  and 
essential  character.  It  is  also  plain  that  unless 
[/o]  we  hold  that  the  point  of  time  that  divides 
earlier  from  later  always  belongs  only  to  the 
later  so  far  as  the  thing  is  concerned,  we  shall 
be  involved  in  the  consequence  that  the  same 
thing  is  at  the  same  moment  existent  and  not 
existent,  and  that  a  thing  is  not  existent  at  the 
moment  when  it  has  become.  It  is  true  that  the 
point  is  common  to  both  times,  the  earlier  as 
well  as  the  later,  and  that,  while  numerically 
one  and  the  same,  it  is  theoretically  not  so,  be¬ 
ing  the  finishing-point  of  the  one  and  the  start¬ 
ing-point  of  the  other:  but  so  far  as  the  thing 
is  concerned  it  belongs  to  the  later  stage  of  what 
[75]  happens  to  it.  Let  us  suppose  a  time  ABr 
and  a  thing  A,  A  being  white  in  the  time  A 
and  not-white  in  the  time  B.  Then  A  is  at  the 
moment  T  white  and  not-white:  for  if  we  were 
right  in  saying  that  it  is  white  during  the  whole 
time  A,  it  is  true  to  call  it  white  at  any  moment 
of  A,  and  not-white  in  B,  and  T  is  in  both  A 
[20]  and  B.  We  must  not  allow,  therefore,  that 


264a 

it  is  white  in  the  whole  of  A,  but  must  say  that 
it  is  so  in  all  of  it  except  the  last  moment  T.  T 
belongs  already  to  the  later  period,  and  if  in 
the  whole  of  A  not-white  was  in  process  of  be¬ 
coming  and  white  of  perishing,  at  V  the  process 
is  complete.  And  so  T  is  the  first  moment  at 
which  it  is  true  to  call  the  thing  white  or  not- 
white  respectively.  Otherwise  a  thing  may  be 
non-existent  at  the  moment  when  it  has  become 
and  existent  at  the  moment  when  it  has  per¬ 
ished:  or  else  it  must  be  possible  for  a  thing  at 
[25]  the  same  time  to  be  white  and  not  white 
and  in  fact  to  be  existent  and  non-existent.  Fur¬ 
ther,  if  anything  that  exists  after  having  been 
previously  non-existent  must  become  existent 
and  does  not  exist  when  it  is  becoming,  time 
cannot  be  divisible  into  time-atoms.  For  sup¬ 
pose  that  A  was  becoming  white  in  the  time  A 
and  that  at  another  time  B,  a  time-atom  consec¬ 
utive  with  the  last  atom  of  A,  A  has  already 
become  white  and  so  is  white  at  that  moment: 
[jo]  then,  inasmuch  as  in  the  time  A  it  was  be¬ 
coming  white  and  so  was  not  white  and  at 
the  moment  B  it  is  white,  there  must  have 
been  a  becoming  between  A  and  B  and  there¬ 
fore  also  a  time  in  which  the  becoming  took 
264a  place.  On  the  other  hand,  those  who  deny 
atoms  of  time  (as  we  do)  are  not  affected  by 
this  argument:  according  to  them  A  has  be¬ 
come  and  so  is  white  at  the  last  point  of  the  ac¬ 
tual  time  in  which  it  was  becoming  white:  and 
this  point  has  no  other  point  consecutive  with 
or  in  succession  to  it,  whereas  time-atoms  are 
conceived  as  successive.  Moreover  it  is  clear 
that  if  A  was  becoming  white  in  the  whole 
[5]  time  A,  the  time  occupied  by  it  in  having 
become  white  in  addition  to  having  been  in 
process  of  becoming  white  is  no  more  than  all 
that  it  occupied  in  the  mere  process  of  becom¬ 
ing  white. 

These  and  such-like,  then,  are  the  arguments 
for  our  conclusion  that  derive  cogency  from  the 
fact  that  they  have  a  special  bearing  on  the 
point  at  issue.  If  we  look  at  the  question  from 
the  point  of  view  of  general  theory,  the  same 
result  would  also  appear  to  be  indicated  by  the 
following  arguments.  Everything  whose  mo¬ 
tion  is  continuous  must,  on  arriving  at  any 
[/o]  point  in  the  course  of  its  locomotion,  have 
been  previously  also  in  process  of  locomotion 
to  that  point,  if  it  is  not  forced  out  of  its  path 
by  anything:  e.g.  on  arriving  at  B  a  thing  must 
also  have  been  in  process  of  locomotion  to  B, 
and  that  not  merely  when  it  was  near  to  B,  but 
from  the  moment  of  its  starting  on  its  course, 
since  there  can  be  no  reason  for  its  being  so  at 


PHYSICS 


264b  BOOK  VIII, 

any  particular  stage  rather  than  at  an  earlier 
one.  So,  too,  in  the  case  of  the  other  kinds  of 
motion.  Now  we  are  to  suppose  that  a  thing 
proceeds  in  locomotion  from  A  to  T  and  that  at 
[75]  the  moment  of  its  arrival  at  T  the  contin¬ 
uity  of  its  motion  is  unbroken  and  will  remain 
so  until  it  has  arrived  back  at  A.  Then  when  it 
is  undergoing  locomotion  from  A  to  T  it  is  at 
the  same  time  undergoing  also  its  locomotion 
to  A  from  T:  consequently  it  is  simultaneously 
undergoing  two  contrary  motions,  since  the 
two  motions  that  follow  the  same  straight  line 
are  contrary  to  each  other.  With  this  conse¬ 
quence  there  also  follows  another:  we  have  a 
thing  that  is  in  process  of  change  from  a  posi¬ 
tion  in  which  it  has  not  yet  been:  so,  inasmuch 
as  this  is  impossible,  the  thing  must  come  to  a 
[20]  stand  at  I\  Therefore  the  motion  is  not  a 
single  motion,  since  motion  that  is  interrupted 
by  stationariness  is  not  single. 

Further,  the  following  argument  will  serve 
better  to  make  this  point  clear  universally  in 
respect  of  every  kind  of  motion.  If  the  motion 
undergone  by  that  which  is  in  motion  is  always 
one  of  those  already  enumerated,  and  the  state 
of  rest  that  it  undergoes  is  one  of  those  that  are 
the  opposites  of  the  motions  (for  we  found1 
that  there  could  be  no  other  besides  these),  and 
moreover  that  which  is  undergoing  but  does 
not  always  undergo  a  particular  motion  (by 
[25]  this  I  mean  one  of  the  various  specifically 
distinct  motions,  not  some  particular  part  of  the 
whole  motion)  must  have  been  previously  un¬ 
dergoing  the  state  of  rest  that  is  the  opposite  of 
the  motion,  the  state  of  rest  being  privation  of 
motion;  then,  inasmuch  as  the  two  motions 
that  follow  the  same  straight  line  are  contrary 
motions,  and  it  is  impossible  for  a  thing  to  un¬ 
dergo  simultaneously  two  contrary  motions, 
that  which  is  undergoing  locomotion  from  A 
[jo]  to  r  cannot  also  simultaneously  be  under¬ 
going  locomotion  from  T  to  A:  and  since  the 
latter  locomotion  is  not  simultaneous  with  the 
former  but  is  still  to  be  undergone,  before  it  is 
undergone  there  must  occur  a  state  of  rest  at 
T:  for  this,  as  we  found,2  is  the  state  of  rest 
that  is  the  opposite  of  the  motion  from  T.  The 
foregoing  argument,  then,  makes  it  plain  that 
the  motion  in  question  is  not  continuous. 

264b  Our  next  argument  has  a  more  special 
bearing  than  the  foregoing  on  the  point  at  is¬ 
sue.  We  will  suppose  that  there  has  occurred 
in  something  simultaneously  a  perishing  of 
not-white  and  a  becoming  of  white.  Then  if  the 
alteration  to  white  and  from  white  is  a  continu- 
1  v.  2,  2  v.  6  (229b  28  sqq.) 


CHAPTER  8  351 

ous  process  and  the  white  does  not  remain  any 
[5]  time,  there  must  have  occurred  simulta¬ 
neously  a  perishing  of  not-white,  a  becoming 
of  white,  and  a  becoming  of  not-white:  for  the 
time  of  the  three  will  be  the  same. 

Again,  from  the  continuity  of  the  time  in 
which  the  motion  takes  place  we  cannot  infer 
continuity  in  the  motion,  but  only  successive¬ 
ness:  in  fact,  how  could  contraries,  e.g.  white¬ 
ness  and  blackness,  meet  in  the  same  extreme 
point  ? 

On  the  other  hand,  in  motion  on  a  circular 
line  we  shall  find  singleness  and  continuity:  for 
here  we  are  met  by  no  impossible  consequence: 
[/o]  that  which  is  in  motion  from  A  will  in 
virtue  of  the  same  direction  of  energy  be  si¬ 
multaneously  in  motion  to  A  (since  it  is  in  mo¬ 
tion  to  the  point  at  which  it  will  finally  arrive), 
and  yet  will  not  be  undergoing  two  contrary  or 
opposite  motions:  for  a  motion  to  a  point  and  a 
motion  from  that  point  are  not  always  contra¬ 
ries  or  opposites:  they  are  contraries  only  if 
they  are  on  the  same  straight  line  (for  then 
[75]  they  are  contrary  to  one  another  in  re¬ 
spect  of  place,  as  e.g.  the  two  motions  along  the 
diameter  of  the  circle,  since  the  ends  of  this  are 
at  the  greatest  possible  distance  from  one  an¬ 
other),  and  they  are  opposites  only  if  they  are 
along  the  same  line.  Therefore  in  the  case  we 
are  now  considering  there  is  nothing  to  pre¬ 
vent  the  motion  being  continuous  and  free 
from  all  intermission:  for  rotatory  motion  is  mo¬ 
tion  of  a  thing  from  its  place  to  its  place,  where¬ 
to]  as  rectilinear  motion  is  motion  from  its 
place  to  another  place. 

Moreover  the  progress  of  rotatory  motion  is 
never  localized  within  certain  fixed  limits, 
whereas  that  of  rectilinear  motion  repeatedly  is 
so.  Now  a  motion  that  is  always  shifting  its 
ground  from  moment  to  moment  can  be  con¬ 
tinuous:  but  a  motion  that  is  repeatedly  local¬ 
ized  within  certain  fixed  limits  cannot  be  so, 
since  then  the  same  thing  would  have  to  under¬ 
go  simultaneously  two  opposite  motions.  So, 
too,  there  cannot  be  continuous  motion  in  a 
[25]  semicircle  or  in  any  other  arc  of  a  circle, 
since  here  also  the  same  ground  must  be  trav¬ 
ersed  repeatedly  and  two  contrary  processes  of 
change  must  occur.  The  reason  is  that  in  these 
motions  the  starting-point  and  the  termination 
do  not  coincide,  whereas  in  motion  over  a  cir¬ 
cle  they  do  coincide,  and  so  this  is  the  only  per¬ 
fect  motion. 

This  differentiation  also  provides  another 
means  of  showing  that  the  other  kinds  of  mo¬ 
tion  cannot  be  continuous  either:  for  in  all  of 


352 

[jo]  them  we  find  that  there  is  the  same 
ground  to  be  traversed  repeatedly;  thus  in  al¬ 
teration  there  are  the  intermediate  stages  of  the 
process,  and  in  quantitative  change  there  are 
the  intervening  degrees  of  magnitude:  and  in 
becoming  and  perishing  the  same  thing  is  true. 
It  makes  no  difference  whether  we  take  the  in¬ 
termediate  stages  of  the  process  to  be  few  or 
many,  or  whether  we  add  or  subtract  one:  for 
265a  in  either  case  we  find  that  there  is  still  the 
same  ground  to  be  traversed  repeatedly.  More¬ 
over  it  is  plain  from  what  has  been  said  that 
those  physicists  who  assert  that  all  sensible 
things  are  always  in  motion  are  wrong:  for 
their  motion  must  be  one  or  other  of  the  mo- 
[5]  tions  just  mentioned:  in  fact  they  mostly 
conceive  it  as  alteration  (things  are  always  in 
flux  and  decay,  they  say),  and  they  go  so  far  as 
to  speak  even  of  becoming  and  perishing  as  a 
process  of  alteration.  On  the  other  hand,  our 
argument  has  enabled  us  to  assert  the  fact,  ap¬ 
plying  universally  to  all  motions,  that  no  mo¬ 
tion  admits  of  continuity  except  rotatory  mo¬ 
tion:  consequently  neither  alteration  nor  in- 
[/o]  crease  admits  of  continuity.  We  need  now 
say  no  more  in  support  of  the  position  that 
there  is  no  process  of  change  that  admits  of  in¬ 
finity  or  continuity  except  rotatory  locomotion. 

9 

It  can  now  be  shown  plainly  that  rotation  is 
the  primary  locomotion.  Every  locomotion,  as 
we  said  before,1  is  either  rotatory  or  rectilinear 
[75]  or  a  compound  of  the  two:  and  the  two 
former  must  be  prior  to  the  last,  since  they  are 
the  elements  of  which  the  latter  consists.  More¬ 
over  rotatory  locomotion  is  prior  to  rectilinear 
locomotion,  because  it  is  more  simple  and  com¬ 
plete,  which  may  be  shown  as  follows.  The 
straight  line  traversed  in  rectilinear  motion  can¬ 
not  be  infinite:  for  there  is  no  such  thing  as  an 
infinite  straight  line;  and  even  if  there  were,  it 
would  not  be  traversed  by  anything  in  motion: 
for  the  impossible  does  not  happen  and  it  is  im- 
[20]  possible  to  traverse  an  infinite  distance. 
On  the  other  hand  rectilinear  motion  on  a  finite 
straight  line  is  if  it  turns  back  a  composite  mo¬ 
tion,  in  fact  two  motions,  while  if  it  does  not 
turn  back  it  is  incomplete  and  perishable:  and 
in  the  order  of  nature,  of  definition,  and  of 
time  alike  the  complete  is  prior  to  the  incom¬ 
plete  and  the  imperishable  to  the  perishable. 
Again,  a  motion  that  admits  of  being  eternal  is 
[25]  prior  to  one  that  does  not.  Now  rotatory 
motion  can  be  eternal:  but  no  other  motion, 
Chapter  8  (26ib  28). 


265 b 

whether  locomotion  or  motion  of  any  other 
kind,  can  be  so,  since  in  all  of  them  rest  must 
occur  and  with  the  occurrence  of  rest  the  mo¬ 
tion  has  perished.  Moreover  the  result  at  which 
we  have  arrived,  that  rotatory  motion  is  single 
and  continuous,  and  rectilinear  motion  is  not, 
is  a  reasonable  one.  In  rectilinear  motion  we 
have  a  definite  starting-point,  finishing-point, 
[30]  and  middle-point,  which  all  have  their 
place  in  it  in  such  a  way  that  there  is  a  point 
from  which  that  which  is  in  motion  can  be  said 
to  start  and  a  point  at  which  it  can  be  said  to 
finish  its  course  (for  when  anything  is  at  the 
limits  of  its  course,  whether  at  the  starting- 
point  or  at  the  finishing-point,  it  must  be  in  a 
state  of  rest).  On  the  other  hand  in  circular 
motion  there  are  no  such  definite  points:  for 
why  should  any  one  point  on  the  line  be  a  limit 
rather  than  any  other?  Any  one  point  as  much 
as  any  other  is  alike  starting-point,  middle- 
point,  and  finishing-point,  so  that  we  can  say 
of  certain  things  both  that  they  are  always  and 
that  they  never  are  at  a  starting-point  and  at  a 
265b  finishing-point  (so  that  a  revolving 
sphere,  while  it  is  in  motion,  is  also  in  a  sense 
at  rest,  for  it  continues  to  occupy  the  same 
place).  The  reason  of  this  is  that  in  this  case  all 
these  characteristics  belong  to  the  centre:  that 
is  to  say,  the  centre  is  alike  starting-point,  mid¬ 
dle-point,  and  finishing-point  of  the  space  trav¬ 
ersed;  consequently  since  this  point  is  not  a 
[5]  point  on  the  circular  line,  there  is  no  point 
at  which  that  which  is  in  process  of  locomotion 
can  be  in  a  state  of  rest  as  having  traversed  its 
course,  because  in  its  locomotion  it  is  proceed¬ 
ing  always  about  a  central  point  and  not  to  an 
extreme  point:  therefore  it  remains  still,  and 
the  whole  is  in  a  sense  always  at  rest  as  well  as 
continuously  in  motion.  Our  next  point  gives 
a  convertible  result:  on  the  one  hand,  because 
rotation  is  the  measure  of  motions  it  must  be 
the  primary  motion  (for  all  things  are  meas- 
[/oj  ured  by  what  is  primary):  on  the  other 
hand,  because  rotation  is  the  primary  motion  it 
is  the  measure  of  all  other  motions.  Again,  ro¬ 
tatory  motion  is  also  the  only  motion  that  ad¬ 
mits  of  being  regular.  In  rectilinear  locomotion 
the  motion  of  things  in  leaving  the  starting- 
point  is  not  uniform  with  their  motion  in  ap¬ 
proaching  the  finishing-point,  since  the  velocity 
of  a  thing  always  increases  proportionately  as 
it  removes  itself  farther  from  its  position  of 
rest:  on  the  other  hand  rotatory  motion  is  the 
only  motion  whose  course  is  naturally  such  that 
[75]  it  has  no  starting-point  or  finishing-point 
in  itself  but  is  determined  from  elsewhere. 


PHYSICS 


266b  BOOK  VIII,  CHAPTERS  8-10  353 


As  to  locomotion  being  the  primary  motion, 
this  is  a  truth  that  is  attested  by  all  who  have 
ever  made  mention  of  motion  in  their  theories: 
they  all  assign  their  first  principles  of  motion 
to  things  that  impart  motion  of  this  kind.  Thus 
‘separation’  and  ‘combination’  are  motions  in 
[20]  respect  of  place,  and  the  motion  imparted 
by  ‘Love’  and  ‘Strife’  takes  these  forms,  the  lat¬ 
ter  ‘separating’  and  the  former  ‘combining’. 
Anaxagoras,  too,  says  that  ‘Mind’,  his  first 
movent,  ‘separates’.  Similarly  those  who  assert 
no  cause  of  this  kind  but  say  that  ‘void’  accounts 
[25]  for  motion — they  also  hold  that  the  mo¬ 
tion  of  natural  substance  is  motion  in  respect 
of  place:  for  their  motion  that  is  accounted  for 
by  ‘void’  is  locomotion,  and  its  sphere  of  oper¬ 
ation  may  be  said  to  be  place.  Moreover  they 
are  of  opinion  that  the  primary  substances  are 
not  subject  to  any  of  the  other  motions,  though 
the  things  that  are  compounds  of  these  sub¬ 
stances  are  so  subject:  the  processes  of  increase 
and  decrease  and  alteration,  they  say,  are  effects 
[30]  of  the  ‘combination’  and  ‘separation’  of 
‘atoms’.  It  is  the  same,  too,  with  those  who 
make  out  that  the  becoming  or  perishing  of  a 
thing  is  accounted  for  by  ‘density’  or  ‘rarity’: 
for  it  is  by  ‘combination’  and  ‘separation’  that 
the  place  of  these  things  in  their  systems  is  de¬ 
termined.  Moreover  to  these  we  may  add  those 
who  make  Soul  the  cause  of  motion:  for  they 
say  that  things  that  undergo  motion  have  as 
their  first  principle  ‘that  which  moves  itself’: 
and  when  animals  and  all  living  things  move 
266a  themselves,  the  motion  is  motion  in  re¬ 
spect  of  place.  Finally  it  is  to  be  noted  that  we 
say  that  a  thing  ‘is  in  motion’  in  the  strict  sense 
of  the  term  only  when  its  motion  is  motion  in 
respect  of  place:  if  a  thing  is  in  process  of  in¬ 
crease  or  decrease  or  is  undergoing  some  alter¬ 
ation  while  remaining  at  rest  in  the  same  place, 
we  say  that  it  is  in  motion  in  some  particular 
respect:  we  do  not  say  that  it  ‘is  in  motion’ 
[5]  without  qualification. 

Our  present  position,  then,  is  this:  We  have 
argued  that  there  always  was  motion  and  al¬ 
ways  will  be  motion  throughout  all  time,  and 
we  have  explained  what  is  the  first  principle  of 
this  eternal  motion:  we  have  explained  further 
which  is  the  primary  motion  and  which  is  the 
only  motion  that  can  be  eternal:  and  we  have 
pronounced  the  first  movent  to  be  unmoved. 

10 

[/o]  We  have  now  to  assert  that  the  first  mov¬ 
ent  must  be  without  parts  and  without  magni¬ 
tude,  beginning  with  the  establishment  of  the 


premisses  on  which  this  conclusion  depends. 

One  of  these  premisses  is  that  nothing  finite 
can  cause  motion  during  an  infinite  time.  We 
have  three  things,  the  movent,  the  moved,  and 
thirdly  that  in  which  the  motion  takes  place, 
namely  the  time:  and  these  are  either  all  infinite 
or  all  finite  or  partly — that  is  to  say  two  of  them 
[75]  or  one  of  them — finite  and  partly  infinite. 
Let  A  be  the  movent,  B  the  moved,  and  T  the  in¬ 
finite  time.  Now  let  us  suppose  that  A  moves 
E,  a  part  of  B.  Then  the  time  occupied  by  this 
motion  cannot  be  equal  to  T:  for  the  greater  the 
amount  moved,  the  longer  the  time  occupied. 
It  follows  that  the  time  Z  is  not  infinite.  Now 
we  see  that  by  continuing  to  add  to  A  I  shall 
use  up  A  and  by  continuing  to  add  to  E  I  shall 
[20]  use  up  B:  but  I  shall  not  use  up  the  time 
by  continually  subtracting  a  corresponding 
amount  from  it,  because  it  is  infinite.  Conse¬ 
quently  the  duration  of  the  part  of  T  which  is 
occupied  by  all  A  in  moving  the  whole  of  B, 
will  be  finite.  Therefore  a  finite  thing  cannot 
impart  to  anything  an  infinite  motion.  It  is 
clear,  then,  that  it  is  impossible  for  the  finite  to 
cause  motion  during  an  infinite  time. 

[25]  It  has  now  to  be  shown  that  in  no  case  is 
it  possible  for  an  infinite  force  to  reside  in  a  fi¬ 
nite  magnitude.  This  can  be  shown  as  follows: 
we  take  it  for  granted  that  the  greater  force  is 
always  that  which  in  less  time  than  another 
does  an  equal  amount  of  work  when  engaged 
in  any  activity — in  heating,  for  example,  or 
sweetening  or  throwing;  in  fact,  in  causing  any 
kind  of  motion.  Then  that  on  which  the  forces 
act  must  be  affected  to  some  extent  by  our  sup¬ 
posed  finite  magnitude  possessing  an  infinite 
force  as  well  as  by  anything  else,  in  fact  to  a 
greater  extent  than  by  anything  else,  since  the 
[30]  infinite  force  is  greater  than  any  other. 
But  then  there  cannot  be  any  time  in  which  its 
action  could  take  place.  Suppose  that  A  is  the 
time  occupied  by  the  infinite  power  in  the  per¬ 
formance  of  an  act  of  heating  or  pushing,  and 
that  AB  is  the  time  occupied  by  a  finite  power 
in  the  performance  of  the  same  act:  then  by 
266b  adding  to  the  latter  another  finite  power 
and  continually  increasing  the  magnitude  of 
the  power  so  added  I  shall  at  some  time  or  oth¬ 
er  reach  a  point  at  which  the  finite  power  has 
completed  the  motive  act  in  the  time  A:  for  by 
continual  addition  to  a  finite  magnitude  I  must 
arrive  at  a  magnitude  that  exceeds  any  assigned 
limit,  and  in  the  same  way  by  continual  sub¬ 
traction  I  must  arrive  at  one  that  falls  short  of 
any  assigned  limit.  So  we  get  the  result  that  the 
finite  force  will  occupy  the  same  amount  of 


354 

time  in  performing  the  motive  act  as  the  infi- 
[5]  nite  force.  But  this  is  impossible.  Therefore 
nothing  finite  can  possess  an  infinite  force.  So 
it  is  also  impossible  for  a  finite  force  to  reside 
in  an  infinite  magnitude.  It  is  true  that  a  great¬ 
er  force  can  reside  in  a  lesser  magnitude:  but 
the  superiority  of  any  such  greater  force  can  be 
still  greater  if  the  magnitude  in  which  it  re¬ 
sides  is  greater.  Now  let  AB  be  an  infinite  mag¬ 
nitude.  Then  Br  possesses  a  certain  force  that 
occupies  a  certain  time,  let  us  say  the  time  EZ, 
[/o]  in  moving  A.  Now  if  I  take  a  magnitude 
twice  as  great  at  Br,  the  time  occupied  by  this 
magnitude  in  moving  A  will  be  half  of  EZ 
(assuming  this  to  be  the  proportion):  so  we 
may  call  this  time  ZH.  That  being  so,  by  con¬ 
tinually  taking  a  greater  magnitude  in  this  way 
I  shall  never  arrive  at  the  full  AB,  whereas  I 
shall  always  be  getting  a  lesser  fraction  of  the 
time  originally  given.  Therefore  the  force  must 
[75]  be  infinite,  since  it  exceeds  any  finite  force. 
Moreover  the  time  occupied  by  the  action  of 
any  finite  force  must  also  be  finite:  for  if  a 
given  force  moves  something  in  a  certain  time, 
a  greater  force  will  do  so  in  a  lesser  time,  but 
still  a  definite  time,  in  inverse  proportion.  But 
a  force  must  always  be  infinite — just  as  a  num¬ 
ber  or  a  magnitude  is — if  it  exceeds  all  definite 
[20]  limits.  This  point  may  also  be  proved  in 
another  way — by  taking  a  finite  magnitude  in 
which  there  resides  a  force  the  same  in  kind 
as  that  which  resides  in  the  infinite  magnitude, 
so  that  this  force  will  be  a  measure  of  the  finite 
force  residing  in  the  infinite  magnitude. 

[25]  It  is  plain,  then,  from  the  foregoing  argu¬ 
ments  that  it  is  impossible  for  an  infinite  force 
to  reside  in  a  finite  magnitude  or  for  a  finite 
force  to  reside  in  an  infinite  magnitude.  But 
before  proceeding  to  our  conclusion  it  will  be 
well  to  discuss  a  difficulty  that  arises  in  con¬ 
nexion  with  locomotion.  If  everything  that  is 
in  motion  with  the  exception  of  things  that 
move  themselves  is  moved  by  something  else, 
how  is  it  that  some  things,  e.g.  things  thrown, 
continue  to  be  in  motion  when  their  movent 
is  no  longer  in  contact  with  them?  If  we  say 
[50]  that  the  movent  in  such  cases  moves  some¬ 
thing  else  at  the  same  time,  that  the  thrower 
e.g.  also  moves  the  air,  and  that  this  in  being 
moved  is  also  a  movent,  then  it  would  be  no 
more  possible  for  this  second  thing  than  for  the 
original  thing  to  be  in  motion  when  the  orig¬ 
inal  movent  is  not  in  contact  with  it  or  moving 
it:  all  the  things  moved  would  have  to  be  in 
motion  simultaneously  and  also  to  have  ceased 
simultaneously  to  be  in  motion  when  the  orig- 


267a 

267a  inal  movent  ceases  to  move  them,  even  if, 
like  the  magnet,  it  makes  that  which  it  has 
moved  capable  of  being  a  movent.  Therefore, 
while  we  must  accept  this  explanation  to  the 
extent  of  saying  that  the  original  movent  gives 
the  power  of  being  a  movent  either  to  air  or  to 
water  or  to  something  else  of  the  kind,  nat- 
[5]  urally  adapted  for  imparting  and  undergo¬ 
ing  motion,  we  must  say  further  that  this  thing 
does  not  cease  simultaneously  to  impart  mo¬ 
tion  and  to  undergo  motion:  it  ceases  to  be  in 
motion  at  the  moment  when  its  movent  ceases 
to  move  it,  but  it  still  remains  a  movent,  and 
so  it  causes  something  else  consecutive  with  it 
to  be  in  motion,  and  of  this  again  the  same  may 
be  said.  The  motion  begins  to  cease  when  the 
motive  force  produced  in  one  member  of  the 
consecutive  series  is  at  each  stage  less  than  that 
possessed  by  the  preceding  member,  and  it 
finally  ceases  when  one  member  no  longer 
causes  the  next  member  to  be  a  movent  but 
[/o]  only  causes  it  to  be  in  motion.  The  mo¬ 
tion  of  these  last  two — of  the  one  as  movent 
and  of  the  other  as  moved — must  cease  simul¬ 
taneously,  and  with  this  the  whole  motion 
ceases.  Now  the  things  in  which  this  motion 
is  produced  are  things  that  admit  of  being 
sometimes  in  motion  and  sometimes  at  rest, 
and  the  motion  is  not  continuous  but  only  ap¬ 
pears  so:  for  it  is  motion  of  things  that  are 
either  successive  or  in  contact,  there  being  not 
[75]  one  movent  but  a  number  of  movents 
consecutive  with  one  another:  and  so  motion 
of  this  kind  takes  place  in  air  and  water.  Some 
say  that  it  is  ‘mutual  replacement’:  but  we 
must  recognize  that  the  difficulty  raised  can¬ 
not  be  solved  otherwise  than  in  the  way  we 
have  described.  So  far  as  they  are  affected  by 
‘mutual  replacement’,  all  the  members  of  the 
series  are  moved  and  impart  motion  simultane¬ 
ously,  so  that  their  motions  also  cease  simul¬ 
taneously:  but  our  present  problem  concerns 
the  appearance  of  continuous  motion  in  a  sin- 
[20]  gle  thing,  and  therefore,  since  it  cannot  be 
moved  throughout  its  motion  by  the  same 
movent,  the  question  is,  what  moves  it? 

Resuming  our  main  argument,  we  proceed 
from  the  positions  that  there  must  be  continu¬ 
ous  motion  in  the  world  of  things,  that  this  is  a 
single  motion,  that  a  single  motion  must  be  a 
motion  of  a  magnitude  (for  that  which  is  with¬ 
out  magnitude  cannot  be  in  motion),  and  that 
the  magnitude  must  be  a  single  magnitude 
moved  by  a  single  movent  (for  otherwise  there 
will  not  be  continuous  motion  but  a  consecu¬ 
tive  series  of  separate  motions),  and  that  if  the 


PHYSICS 


2 67b  BOOK  VIII,  CHAPTER  10  355 


movent  is  a  single  thing,  it  is  either  itself  in 
[25]  motion  or  itself  unmoved:  if,  then,  it  is  in 
motion,  it  will  have  to  be  subject  to  the  same 
conditions  as  that  which  it  moves,  that  is  to  say 
it  will  itself  be  in  process  of  change  and  in  be- 
2 67b  ing  so  will  also  have  to  be  moved  by 
something:  so  we  have  a  series  that  must  come 
to  an  end,  and  a  point  will  be  reached  at  which 
motion  is  imparted  by  something  that  is  un¬ 
moved.  Thus  we  have  a  movent  that  has  no 
need  to  change  along  with  that  which  it  moves 
but  will  be  able  to  cause  motion  always  (for 
the  causing  of  motion  under  these  conditions 
involves  no  effort):  and  this  motion  alone  is 
regular,  or  at  least  it  is  so  in  a  higher  degree 
than  any  other,  since  the  movent  is  never  sub- 
[5]  ject  to  any  change.  So,  too,  in  order  that 
the  motion  may  continue  to  be  of  the  same 
character,  the  moved  must  not  be  subject  to 
change  in  respect  of  its  relation  to  the  movent. 
Moreover  the  movent  must  occupy  either  the 
centre  or  the  circumference,  since  these  are  the 
first  principles  from  which  a  sphere  is  derived. 
But  the  things  nearest  the  movent  are  those 
whose  motion  is  quickest,  and  in  this  case  it  is 
the  motion  of  the  circumference  that  is  the 
quickest:  therefore  the  movent  occupies  the 
circumference. 

There  is  a  further  difficulty  in  supposing  it 
to  be  possible  for  anything  that  is  in  motion  to 
cause  motion  continuously  and  not  merely  in 
[/o]  the  way  in  which  it  is  caused  by  some¬ 
thing  repeatedly  pushing  (in  which  case  the 
continuity  amounts  to  no  more  than  successive¬ 


ness).  Such  a  movent  must  either  itself  con¬ 
tinue  to  push  or  pull  or  perform  both  these 
actions,  or  else  the  action  must  be  taken  up  by 
something  else  and  be  passed  on  from  one  mov¬ 
ent  to  another  (the  process  that  we  described 
before  as  occurring  in  the  case  of  things 
thrown,  since  the  air  or  the  water,  being  divisi¬ 
ble,  is  a  movent  only  in  virtue  of  the  fact  that 
different  parts  of  the  air  are  moved  one  after 
[75]  another):  and  in  either  case  the  motion 
cannot  be  a  single  motion,  but  only  a  consecu¬ 
tive  series  of  motions.  The  only  continuous 
motion,  then,  is  that  which  is  caused  by  the 
unmoved  movent:  and  this  motion  is  continu¬ 
ous  because  the  movent  remains  always  in¬ 
variable,  so  that  its  relation  to  that  which  it 
moves  remains  also  invariable  and  continuous. 

Now  that  these  points  are  settled,  it  is  clear 
that  the  first  unmoved  movent  cannot  have  any 
magnitude.  For  if  it  has  magnitude,  this  must 
be  either  a  finite  or  an  infinite  magnitude.  Now 
[20]  we  have  already1  proved  in  our  course  on 
Physics  that  there  cannot  be  an  infinite  magni¬ 
tude:  and  we  have  now  proved  that  it  is  im¬ 
possible  for  a  finite  magnitude  to  have  an  in¬ 
finite  force,  and  also  that  it  is  impossible  for 
a  thing  to  be  moved  by  a  finite  magnitude 
during  an  infinite  time.  But  the  first  movent 
causes  a  motion  that  is  eternal  and  does 
[25]  cause  it  during  an  infinite  time.  It  is 
clear,  therefore,  that  the  first  movent  is  indi¬ 
visible  and  is  without  parts  and  without  mag¬ 
nitude. 

1  hi.  5. 


l 

- 

' 


CONTENTS:  ON  THE  HEAVENS 


Of  the  Heavenly  Bodies 
BOOK  I 

CHAP.  BERLIN  NOS. 

1.  The  subject  of  inquiry  268a  i 

2.  That  in  addition  to  the  four  ele-  268b  1 1 

ments,  earth,  water,  air,  and  fire,  there  is  a 
fifth  element,  the  movement  of  which  is  cir¬ 
cular 

3.  That  this  body  is  exempt  from  269b  18 
alteration  and  decay 

4.  That  the  circular  movement  has  27ob3i 
no  contrary 

5.  That  no  body  is  infinite:  (i)  Not  2jih  1 
the  primary  body,  or  fifth  element 

6.  (ii)  None  of  the  other  elements  273a  6 

7.  (iii)  In  general,  an  infinite  body  274s  30 
is  impossible 

8.  That  there  cannot  be  more  than  276s  18 
one  Heaven:  (i)  Proved  from  a  consideration 
of  the  natural  movements  and  places  of  the 
elements 

9.  (ii)  Proved  by  the  principles  of  277b  26 
form  and  matter,  the  three  different  senses  of 
the  term  ‘heaved  being  explained.  Corollary: 
There  is  no  place  or  void  or  time  outside  the 
Heaven 

10.  That  the  Heaven  is  ungenerated  and  279b4 
indestructible:  (i)  Review  of  previous  theories 


11.  (ii)  Definition  of  the  terms  ‘ungen-  28ob  1 
crated’  and  ‘indestructible’,  and  of  their  op¬ 
posites 

12.  (iii)  Proof  of  the  thesis  28ia28 

BOOK  II 

1.  Corroboration  of  this  result  283b26 

2.  Of  the  sense  in  which  the  spatial  284b6 
oppositions,  up  and  down,  right  and  left,  can 
be  attributed  to  the  Heaven 

3.  Why  there  is  a  plurality  of  move-  286a  3 
ments  and  of  bodies  within  the  Heaven 

4.  That  the  Heaven  is  perfectly  286b  10 

spherical 

5.  Why  the  first  Heaven  revolves  in  287b  22 
one  direction  rather  than  the  other 

6.  That  the  movement  of  the  first  288a  13 
Heaven  is  regular 

7.  Of  the  stars:  (i)  That  they  are  not  289s  11 
composed  of  fire 

8.  (ii)  That  their  movement  is  due  289b  1 


to  the  movement  of  circles  to  which  they  are 
attached 


9.  (iii)  That  no  ‘harmony  of  the  29ob  12 
spheres’  results  from  their  movement 

10.  (iv)  Of  their  order  291s  30 

11.  (v)  Of  their  spherical  shape  29ibn 

12.  (vi)  Solution  of  two  problems  29ib  24 

concerning  their  order  and  movements 

13.  Of  the  Earth:  (i)  Review  of  pre-  293s  15 
vious  theories 

14.  (ii)  That  it  is  at  rest  at  the  centre,  296s  24 
and  spherical  in  shape 


Of  the  Sublunary  Bodies 
BOOK  III 

1.  Previous  theories  concerning  gen-  298s  24 
eration  stated;  the  analysis  of  bodies  into 
planes  refuted 

2.  That  every  simple  body  possesses  300a20 
a  natural  movement;  that  this  movement  is 
either  upward  or  downward;  how  unnatural 
movement  occurs.  General  results  concerning 
generation 

3.  Of  bodies  subject  to  generation:  302a  10 

(i)  What  the  elements  are 

4.  (ii)  That  the  elements  are  limited  302b  10 
in  number;  the  view  of  Leucippus  and  De¬ 
mocritus  refuted 

5.  (iii)  That  the  elements  cannot  be  303b9 
reduced  to  one 

6.  (iv)  That  the  elements  are  not  304^4 
eternal,  but  are  generated  out  of  one  another 

7.  (v)  Of  the  manner  of  their  gen-  305^4 
eration:  the  view  of  Empedocles  and  the  ex¬ 
planation  by  planes  refuted 

8.  (vi)  Refutation  of  the  attempt  to  3o6b3 
differentiate  the  elements  by  their  shapes 

BOOK  IV 

1.  Of  the  meaning  of  the  terms  307b29 

‘heavy’  and  ‘light’ 

2.  Review  of  previous  theories  con-  308s  34 
cerning  these 

3.  Explanation  of  the  variety  of  mo-  3ioa  14 
tions  exhibited  by  the  elements 

4.  Of  the  distinctive  constitution  and  3iia  15 
properties  of  the  four  elements 

5.  In  what  sense  the  matter  of  which  3i2a  22 
the  elements  are  composed  may  be  regarded 
as  one 

6.  That  the  shape  of  a  body  cannot  3i3a  14 
account  for  the  direction,  but  only  for  the  pace, 
of  its  movement 


357 


' 


ON  THE  HEAVENS 

BOOK  I 


2 68a  The  science  which  has  to  do  with  nature 
clearly  concerns  itself  for  the  most  part  with 
bodies  and  magnitudes  and  their  properties 
and  movements,  but  also  with  the  principles  of 
this  sort  of  substance,  as  many  as  they  may  be. 
[5]  For  of  things  constituted  by  nature  some 
are  bodies  and  magnitudes,  some  possess  body 
and  magnitude,  and  some  are  principles  of 
things  which  possess  these.  Now  a  continuum 
is  that  which  is  divisible  into  parts  always  ca¬ 
pable  of  subdivision,  and  a  body  is  that  which 
is  every  way  divisible.  A  magnitude  if  divisible 
one  way  is  a  line,  if  two  ways  a  surface,  and  if 
three  a  body.  Beyond  these  there  is  no  other 
[/o]  magnitude,  because  the  three  dimensions 
are  all  that  there,  are,  and  that  which  is  divisi¬ 
ble  in  three  directions  is  divisible  in  all.  For,  as 
the  Pythagoreans  say,  the  world  and  all  that  is 
in  it  is  determined  by  the  number  three,  since 
beginning  and  middle  and  end  give  the  num¬ 
ber  of  an  ‘air,  and  the  number  they  give  is  the 
triad.  And  so,  having  taken  these  three  from 
nature  as  (so  to  speak)  laws  of  it,  we  make 
[75]  further  use  of  the  number  three  in  the 
worship  of  the  Gods.  Further,  we  use  the  terms 
in  practice  in  this  way.  Of  two  things,  or  men, 
we  say  ‘both’,  but  not  ‘all’:  three  is  the  first 
number  to  which  the  term  ‘all’  has  been  appro¬ 
priated.  And  in  this,  as  we  have  said,  we  do 
[20]  but  follow  the  lead  which  nature  gives. 
Therefore,  since  ‘every’  and  ‘all’  and  ‘com¬ 
plete’  do  not  differ  from  one  another  in  respect 
of  form,  but  only,  if  at  all,  in  their  matter  and 
in  that  to  which  they  are  applied,  body  alone 
among  magnitudes  can  be  complete.  For  it 
alone  is  determined  by  the  three  dimensions, 
that  is,  is  an  ‘all’.  But  if  it  is  divisible  in  three 
dimensions  it  is  every  way  divisible,  while  the 
[25]  other  magnitudes  are  divisible  in  one  di¬ 
mension  or  in  two  alone:  for  the  divisibility 
and  continuity  of  magnitudes  depend  upon  the 
number  of  the  dimensions,  one  sort  being  con- 

Note:  The  bold  face  numbers  and  letters  are  approxi¬ 
mate  indications  of  the  pages  and  columns  of  the  stand¬ 
ard  Berlin  Greek  text;  the  bracketed  numbers,  of  the 
lines  in  the  Greek  text;  they  are  here  assigned  as  they 
are  assigned  in  the  Oxford  translation. 


tinuous  in  one  direction,  another  in  two,  an¬ 
other  in  all.  All  magnitudes,  then,  which  are 
divisible  are  also  continuous.  Whether  we  can 
also  say  that  whatever  is  continuous  is  divisible 
[jo]  does  not  yet,  on  our  present  grounds,  ap¬ 
pear.  One  thing,  however,  is  clear.  We  cannot 
268b  pass  beyond  body  to  a  further  kind,  as  we 
passed  from  length  to  surface,  and  from  sur¬ 
face  to  body.  For  if  we  could,  it  would  cease  to 
be  true  that  body  is  complete  magnitude.  We 
could  pass  beyond  it  only  in  virtue  of  a  defect 
in  it;  and  that  which  is  complete  cannot  be  de- 
[5]  fective,  since  it  has  being  in  every  respect. 
Now  bodies  which  are  classed  as  parts  of  the 
whole  are  each  complete  according  to  our  for¬ 
mula,  since  each  possesses  every  dimension.  But 
each  is  determined  relatively  to  that  part  which 
is  next  to  it  by  contact,  for  which  reason  each 
of  them  is  in  a  sense  many  bodies.  But  the 
whole  of  which  they  are  parts  must  necessarily 
be  complete,  and  thus,  in  accordance  with  the 
[/o]  meaning  of  the  word,  have  being,  not  in 
some  respect  only,  but  in  every  respect. 

2 

The  question  as  to  the  nature  of  the  whole, 
whether  it  is  infinite  in  size  or  limited  in  its  to¬ 
tal  mass,  is  a  matter  for  subsequent  inquiry.1 
We  will  now  speak  of  those  parts  of  the  whole 
which  are  specifically  distinct.  Let  us  take  this 
[75]  as  our  starting-point.  All  natural  bodies 
and  magnitudes  we  hold  to  be,  as  such,  capable 
of  locomotion;  for  nature,  we  say,  is  their  prin¬ 
ciple  of  movement.2  But  all  movement  that  is 
in  place,  all  locomotion,  as  we  term  it,  is  either 
straight  or  circular  or  a  combination  of  these 
two,  which  are  the  only  simple  movements. 
And  the  reason  of  this  is  that  these  two,  the 
[20]  straight  and  the  circular  line,  are  the  only 
simple  magnitudes.  Now  revolution  about  the 
centre  is  circular  motion,  while  the  upward  and 
downward  movements  are  in  a  straight  line, 
‘upward’  meaning  motion  away  from  the  cen¬ 
tre,  and  ‘downward’  motion  towards  it.  All 
simple  motion,  then,  must  be  motion  either 
away  from  or  towards  or  about  the  centre.  This 
[25]  seems  to  be  in  exact  accord  with  what  we 
said  above:  as  body  found  its  completion  in 
1  See  chapter  7.  2  Cf.  Physics ,  i92b  20. 


359 


360  ON  THE  HEAVENS  269b 


three  dimensions,  so  its  movement  completes 
itself  in  three  forms. 

Bodies  are  either  simple  or  compounded  of 
such;  and  by  simple  bodies  I  mean  those  which 
possess  a  principle  of  movement  in  their  own 
nature,  such  as  fire  and  earth  with  their  kinds, 
and  whatever  is  akin  to  them.  Necessarily,  then, 
[jo]  movements  also  will  be  either  simple  or 
in  some  sort  compound — simple  in  the  case  of 
269a  the  simple  bodies,  compound  in  that  of 
the  composite — and  in  the  latter  case  the  mo¬ 
tion  will  be  that  of  the  simple  body  which  pre¬ 
vails  in  the  composition.  Supposing,  then,  that 
there  is  such  a  thing  as  simple  movement,  and 
that  circular  movement  is  an  instance  of  it,  and 
that  both  movement  of  a  simple  body  is  simple 
and  simple  movement  is  of  a  simple  body  (for 
if  it  is  movement  of  a  compound  it  will  be  in 
[5]  virtue  of  a  prevailing  simple  element), 
then  there  must  necessarily  be  some  simple 
body  which  revolves  naturally  and  in  virtue  of 
its  own  nature  with  a  circular  movement.  By 
constraint,  of  course,  it  may  be  brought  to 
move  with  the  motion  of  something  else  differ¬ 
ent  from  itself,  but  it  cannot  so  move  naturally, 
since  there  is  one  sort  of  movement  natural  to 
each  of  the  simple  bodies.  Again,  if  the  unnatu¬ 
ral  movement  is  the  contrary  of  the  natural  and 
[/o]  a  thing  can  have  no  more  than  one  con¬ 
trary,  it  will  follow  that  circular  movement, 
being  a  simple  motion,  must  be  unnatural,  if  it 
is  not  natural,  to  the  body  moved.  If  then  (1) 
the  body,  whose  movement  is  circular,  is  fire  or 
some  other  element,  its  natural  motion  must  be 
the  contrary  of  the  circular  motion.  But  a  sin¬ 
gle  thing  has  a  single  contrary;  and  upward 
and  downward  motion  are  the  contraries  of  one 
[75]  another.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  (2)  the 
body  moving  with  this  circular  motion  which 
is  unnatural  to  it  is  something  different  from 
the  elements,  there  will  be  some  other  motion 
which  is  natural  to  it.  But  this  cannot  be.  For  if 
the  natural  motion  is  upward,  it  will  be  fire  or 
air,  and  if  downward,  water  or  earth.  Further, 
this  circular  motion  is  necessarily  primary.  For 
[20]  the  perfect  is  naturally  prior  to  the  imper¬ 
fect,  and  the  circle  is  a  perfect  thing.  This  can¬ 
not  be  said  of  any  straight  line: — not  of  an  in¬ 
finite  line;  for,  if  it  were  perfect,  it  would  have 
a  limit  and  an  end:  nor  of  any  finite  line;  for  in 
every  case  there  is  something  beyond  it,  since 
any  finite  line  can  be  extended.  And  so,  since 
the  prior  movement  belongs  to  the  body  which 
[25]  is  naturally  prior,  and  circular  movement 
is  prior  to  straight,  and  movement  in  a  straight 
line  belongs  to  simple  bodies — fire  moving 


straight  upward  and  earthy  bodies  straight 
downward  towards  the  centre — since  this  is  so, 
it  follows  that  circular  movement  also  must  be 
the  movement  of  some  simple  body.  For  the 
movement  of  composite  bodies  is,  as  we  said, 
determined  by  that  simple  body  which  prepon- 
[30]  derates  in  the  composition.  These  prem¬ 
ises  clearly  give  the  conclusion  that  there  is  in 
nature  some  bodily  substance  other  than  the 
formations  we  know,  prior  to  them  all  and 
more  divine  than  they.  But  it  may  also  be 
proved  as  follows.  We  may  take  it  that  all  move¬ 
ment  is  either  natural  or  unnatural,  and  that 
the  movement  which  is  unnatural  to  one  body 
is  natural  to  another — as,  for  instance,  is  the 
case  with  the  upward  and  downward  move- 
[35]  ments,  which  are  natural  and  unnatural 
269b  to  fire  and  earth  respectively.  It  necessa¬ 
rily  follows  that  circular  movement,  being  un¬ 
natural  to  these  bodies,  is  the  natural  movement 
of  some  other.  Further,  if,  on  the  one  hand,  cir¬ 
cular  movement  is  natural  to  something,  it 
must  surely  be  some  simple  and  primary  body 
which  is  ordained  to  move  with  a  natural  cir- 
[5]  cular  motion,  as  fire  is  ordained  to  fly  up 
and  earth  down.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  the 
movement  of  the  rotating  bodies  about  the  cen¬ 
tre  is  unnatural,  it  would  be  remarkable  and 
indeed  quite  inconceivable  that  this  movement 
alone  should  be  continuous  and  eternal,  being 
nevertheless  contrary  to  nature.  At  any  rate  the 
evidence  of  all  other  cases  goes  to  show  that  it 
[/o]  is  the  unnatural  which  quickest  passes 
away.  And  so,  if,  as  some  say,  the  body  so 
moved  is  fire,  this  movement  is  just  as  unnatu¬ 
ral  to  it  as  downward  movement;  for  any  one 
can  see  that  fire  moves  in  a  straight  line  away 
from  the  centre.  On  all  these  grounds,  there¬ 
fore,  we  may  infer  with  confidence  that  there 
[75]  is  something  beyond  the  bodies  that  are 
about  us  on  this  earth,  different  and  separate 
from  them;  and  that  the  superior  glory  of  its 
nature  is  proportionate  to  its  distance  from  this 
world  of  ours. 

3 

In  consequence  of  what  has  been  said,  in  part 
by  way  of  assumption  and  in  part  by  way  of 
roof,  it  is  clear  that  not  every  body  either  pos- 
20]  sesses  lightness  or  heaviness.  As  a  prelimi¬ 
nary  we  must  explain  in  what  sense  we  are  us¬ 
ing  the  words  ‘heavy’  and  ‘light’,  sufficiently,  at 
least,  for  our  present  purpose:  we  can  examine 
the  terms  more  closely  later,  when  we  come  to 
consider  their  essential  nature.  Let  us  then  ap¬ 
ply  the  term  ‘heavy’  to  that  which  naturally 


27 Ob  BOOK  1,  CHAPTERS  2-3  361 


moves  towards  the  centre,  and  ‘light’  to  that 
which  moves  naturally  away  from  the  centre. 
The  heaviest  thing  will  be  that  which  sinks  to 
[25]  the  bottom  of  all  things  that  move  down¬ 
ward,  and  the  lightest  that  which  rises  to  the 
surface  of  everything  that  moves  upward.  Now, 
necessarily,  everything  which  moves  either  up 
or  down  possesses  lightness  or  heaviness  or  both 
— but  not  both  relatively  to  the  same  thing:  for 
things  are  heavy  and  light  relatively  to  one  an¬ 
other;  air,  for  instance,  is  light  relatively  to  wa- 
[50]  ter,  and  water  light  relatively  to  earth. 
The  body,  then,  which  moves  in  a  circle  cannot 
possibly  possess  either  heaviness  or  lightness. 
For  neither  naturally  nor  unnaturally  can  it 
move  either  towards  or  away  from  the  centre. 
Movement  in  a  straight  line  certainly  does  not 
belong  to  it  naturally,  since  one  sort  of  move¬ 
ment  is,  as  we  saw,  appropriate  to  each  simple 
body,  and  so  we  should  be  compelled  to  iden- 
[jj]  tify  it  with  one  of  the  bodies  which  move 
in  this  way.  Suppose,  then,  that  the  movement 
is  unnatural.  In  that  case,  if  it  is  the  downward 
270*  movement  which  is  unnatural,  the  up¬ 
ward  movement  will  be  natural;  and  if  it  is  the 
upward  which  is  unnatural,  the  downward  will 
be  natural.  For  we  decided  that  of  contrary 
movements,  if  the  one  is  unnatural  to  anything, 
the  other  will  be  natural  to  it.  But  since  the  nat¬ 
ural  movement  of  the  whole  and  of  its  part — 
of  earth,  for  instance,  as  a  whole  and  of  a  small 
[5]  clod — have  one  and  the  same  direction,  it 
results,  in  the  first  place,  that  this  body  can  pos¬ 
sess  no  lightness  or  heaviness  at  all  (for  that 
would  mean  that  it  could  move  by  its  own  na¬ 
ture  either  from  or  towards  the  centre,  which, 
as  we  know,  is  impossible);  and,  secondly,  that 
it  cannot  possibly  move  in  the  way  of  locomo¬ 
tion  by  being  forced  violently  aside  in  an  up- 
[/o]  ward  or  downward  direction.  For  neither 
naturally  nor  unnaturally  can  it  move  with  any 
other  motion  but  its  own,  either  itself  or  any 
part  of  it,  since  the  reasoning  which  applies  to 
the  whole  applies  also  to  the  part. 

It  is  equally  reasonable  to  assume  that  this 
body  will  be  ungenerated  and  indestructible 
and  exempt  from  increase  and  alteration,  since 
everything  that  comes  to  be  comes  into  being 
[75]  from  its  contrary  and  in  some  substrate, 
and  passes  away  likewise  in  a  substrate  by  the 
action  of  the  contrary  into  the  contrary,  as  we 
explained  in  our  opening  discussions.1  Now 
the  motions  of  contraries  are  contrary.  If  then 
this  body  can  have  no  contrary,  because  there 
can  be  no  contrary  motion  to  the  circular,  na- 

lPhysics,  1.  7-9. 


[20]  ture  seems  justly  to  have  exempted  from 
contraries  the  body  which  was  to  be  ungener¬ 
ated  and  indestructible.  For  it  is  in  contraries 
that  generation  and  decay  subsist.  Again,  that 
which  is  subject  to  increase  increases  upon  con¬ 
tact  with  a  kindred  body,  which  is  resolved 
[25]  into  its  matter.  But  there  is  nothing  out 
of  which  this  body  can  have  been  generated. 
And  if  it  is  exempt  from  increase  and  diminu¬ 
tion,  the  same  reasoning  leads  us  to  suppose 
that  it  is  also  unalterable.  For  alteration  is 
movement  in  respect  of  quality;  and  qualitative 
states  and  dispositions,  such  as  health  and  dis¬ 
ease,  do  not  come  into  being  without  changes 
of  properties.  But  all  natural  bodies  which 
[jo]  change  their  properties  we  see  to  be  sub¬ 
ject  without  exception  to  increase  and  diminu¬ 
tion.  This  is  the  case,  for  instance,  with  the 
bodies  of  animals  and  their  parts  and  with  veg¬ 
etable  bodies,  and  similarly  also  with  those  of 
the  elements.  And  so,  if  the  body  which  moves 
with  a  circular  motion  cannot  admit  of  in- 
[^5]  crease  or  diminution,  it  is  reasonable  to 
suppose  that  it  is  also  unalterable. 

270b  The  reasons  why  the  primary  body  is 
eternal  and  not  subject  to  increase  or  diminu¬ 
tion,  but  unaging  and  unalterable  and  unmodi¬ 
fied,  will  be  clear  from  what  has  been  said  to 
any  one  who  believes  in  our  assumptions.  Our 
theory  seems  to  confirm  experience  and  to  be 
[5]  confirmed  by  it.  For  all  men  have  some 
conception  of  the  nature  of  the  gods,  and  all 
who  believe  in  the  existence  of  gods  at  all, 
whether  barbarian  or  Greek,  agree  in  allotting 
the  highest  place  to  the  deity,  surely  because 
they  suppose  that  immortal  is  linked  with  im¬ 
mortal  and  regard  any  other  supposition  as  in- 
[10]  conceivable.  If  then  there  is,  as  there  cer¬ 
tainly  is,  anything  divine,  what  we  have  just 
said  about  the  primary  bodily  substance  was 
well  said.  The  mere  evidence  of  the  senses  is 
enough  to  convince  us  of  this,  at  least  with  hu¬ 
man  certainty.  For  in  the  whole  range  of  time 
ast,  so  far  as  our  inherited  records  reach,  no 
75]  change  appears  to  have  taken  place  either 
in  the  whole  scheme  of  the  outermost  heaven 
or  in  any  of  its  proper  parts.  The  common 
name,  too,  which  has  been  handed  down  from 
our  distant  ancestors  even  to  our  own  day, 
seems  to  show  that  they  conceived  of  it  in  the 
fashion  which  we  have  been  expressing.  The 
same  ideas,  one  must  believe,  recur  in  men’s 
[20]  minds  not  once  or  twice  but  again  and 
again.  And  so,  implying  that  the  primary  body 
is  something  else  beyond  earth,  fire,  air,  and 
water,  they  gave  the  highest  place  a  name  of  its 


362  ON  THE 

own,  aither,  derived  from  the  fact  that  it  ‘runs 
always’  for  an  eternity  of  time.  Anaxagoras, 
[25]  however,  scandalously  misuses  this  name, 
taking  aither  as  equivalent  to  fire. 

It  is  also  clear  from  what  has  been  said  why 
the  number  of  what  we  call  simple  bodies  can¬ 
not  be  greater  than  it  is.  The  motion  of  a  sim¬ 
ple  body  must  iself  be  simple,  and  we  assert 
that  there  are  only  these  two  simple  motions, 
[jo]  the  circular  and  the  straight,  the  latter 
being  subdivided  into  motion  away  from  and 
motion  towards  the  centre. 

4 

That  there  is  no  other  form  of  motion  op¬ 
posed  as  contrary  to  the  circular  may  be  proved 
in  various  ways.  In  the  first  place,  there  is  an 
obvious  tendency  to  oppose  the  straight  line  to 
[55]  the  circular.  For  concave  and  convex  are 
271a  not  only  regarded  as  opposed  to  one  an¬ 
other,  but  they  are  also  coupled  together  and 
treated  as  a  unity  in  opposition  to  the  straight. 
And  so,  if  there  is  a  contrary  to  circular  motion, 
motion  in  a  straight  line  must  be  recognized  as 
having  the  best  claim  to  that  name.  But  the  two 
forms  of  rectilinear  motion  are  opposed  to  one 
[5]  another  by  reason  of  their  places;  for  up 
and  down  is  a  difference  and  a  contrary  oppo¬ 
sition  in  place.  Secondly,  it  may  be  thought  that 
the  same  reasoning  which  holds  good  of  the  rec¬ 
tilinear  path  applies  also  the  circular,  movement 
from  A  to  B  being  opposed  as  contrary  to 
movement  from  B  to  A.  But  what  is  meant  is 
still  rectilinear  motion.  For  that  is  limited  to  a 
[/o]  single  path,  while  the  circular  paths  which 
pass  through  the  same  two  points  are  infinite 
in  number.  Even  if  we  are  confined  to  the  sin¬ 
gle  semicircle  and  the  opposition  is  between 
movement  from  C  to  D  and  from  D  to  C  along 
that  semicircle,  the  case  is  no  better.  For  the 
motion  is  the  same  as  that  along  the  diameter, 
since  we  invariably  regard  the  distance  be¬ 
tween  two  points  as  the  length  of  the  straight 
line  which  joins  them.  It  is  no  more  satisfac¬ 
tory  to  construct  a  circle  and  treat  motion 
[75]  along  one  semicircle  as  contrary  to  motion 
along  the  other.  For  example,  taking  a  com¬ 
plete  circle,  motion  from  E  to  F  on  the  semi¬ 
circle  G  may  be  opposed  to  motion  from  F  to  E 
on  the  semicircle  H.  But  even  supposing  these 
are  contraries,  it  in  no  way  follows  that  the  re¬ 
verse  motions  on  the  complete  circumference 
[20]  are  contraries.  Nor  again  can  motion 
along  the  circle  from  A  to  B  be  regarded  as  the 
contrary  of  motion  from  A  to  C:  for  the  motion 
goes  from  the  same  point  towards  the  same 


HEAVENS  271b 

point,  and  contrary  motion  was  distinguished 
as  motion  from  a  contrary  to  its  contrary.  And 
even  if  the  motion  round  a  circle  is  the  contrary 
of  the  reverse  motion,  one  of  the  two  would  be 
ineffective:  for  both  move  to  the  same  point, 
because  that  which  moves  in  a  circle,  at  what- 
[25]  ever  point  it  begins,  must  necessarily  pass 
through  all  the  contrary  places  alike.  (By  con¬ 
trarieties  of  place  I  mean  up  and  down,  back 
and  front,  and  right  and  left;  and  the  contrary 
oppositions  of  movements  are  determined  by 
those  of  places.)  One  of  the  motions,  then, 
would  be  ineffective,  for  if  the  two  motions 
were  of  equal  strength,  there  would  be  no 
movement  either  way,  and  if  one  of  the  two 
[jo]  were  preponderant,  the  other  would  be 
inoperative.  So  that  if  both  bodies  were  there, 
one  of  them,  inasmuch  as  it  would  not  be  mov¬ 
ing  with  its  own  movement,  would  be  useless, 
in  the  sense  in  which  a  shoe  is  useless  when  it 
is  not  worn.  But  God  and  nature  create  noth¬ 
ing  that  has  not  its  use. 

5 

271b  This  being  clear,  we  must  go  on  to  con¬ 
sider  the  questions  which  remain.  First,  is  there 
an  infinite  body,  as  the  majority  of  the  ancient 
philosophers  thought,  or  is  this  an  impossibil¬ 
ity?  The  decision  of  this  question,  either  way, 
[5]  is  not  unimportant,  but  rather  all-impor¬ 
tant,  to  our  search  for  the  truth.  It  is  this  prob¬ 
lem  which  has  practically  always  been  the 
source  of  the  differences  of  those  who  have 
written  about  nature  as  a  whole.  So  it  has  been 
and  so  it  must  be;  since  the  least  initial  devia¬ 
tion  from  the  truth  is  multiplied  later  a  thou- 
[/o]  sandfold.  Admit,  for  instance,  the  exist¬ 
ence  of  a  minimum  magnitude,  and  you  will 
find  that  the  minimum  which  you  have  intro¬ 
duced,  small  as  it  is,  causes  the  greatest  truths 
of  mathematics  to  totter.  The  reason  is  that  a 
principle  is  great  rather  in  power  than  in  ex¬ 
tent;  hence  that  which  was  small  at  the  start 
turns  out  a  giant  at  the  end.  Now  the  concep¬ 
tion  of  the  infinite  possesses  this  power  of  prin¬ 
ciples,  and  indeed  in  the  sphere  of  quantity 
[75]  possesses  it  in  a  higher  degree  than  any 
other  conception;  so  that  it  is  in  no  way  absurd 
or  unreasonable  that  the  assumption  that  an  in¬ 
finite  body  exists  should  be  of  peculiar  moment 
to  our  inquiry.  The  infinite,  then,  we  must 
now  discuss,  opening  the  whole  matter  from 
the  beginning. 

Every  body  is  necessarily  to  be  classed  either 
as  simple  or  as  composite;  the  infinite  body, 
therefore,  will  be  either  simple  or  composite. 


272b  BOOK  I,  CHAPTERS  3-5  363 


[20]  But  it  is  clear,  further,  that  if  the  simple 
bodies  are  finite,  the  composite  must  also  be  fi¬ 
nite,  since  that  which  is  composed  of  bodies 
finite  both  in  number  and  in  magnitude  is  it¬ 
self  finite  in  respect  of  number  and  magnitude: 
its  quantity  is  in  fact  the  same  as  that  of  the 
bodies  which  compose  it.  What  remains  for  us 
to  consider,  then,  is  whether  any  of  the  simple 
bodies  can  be  infinite  in  magnitude,  or  wheth- 
[25]  er  this  is  impossible.  Let  us  try  the  pri¬ 
mary  body  first,  and  then  go  on  to  consider  the 
others. 

The  body  which  moves  in  a  circle  must  nec¬ 
essarily  be  finite  in  every  respect,  for  the  fol¬ 
lowing  reasons.  ( 1 )  If  the  body  so  moving  is 
infinite,  the  radii  drawn  from  the  centre  will  be 
[30]  infinite.  But  the  space  between  infinite 
radii  is  infinite:  and  by  the  space  between  the 
radii  I  mean  the  area  outside  which  no  magni¬ 
tude  which  is  in  contact  with  the  two  lines  can 
be  conceived  as  falling.  This,  I  say,  will  be  in¬ 
finite:  first,  because  in  the  case  of  finite  radii  it 
272a  is  always  finite;  and  secondly,  because  in 
it  one  can  always  go  on  to  a  width  greater  than 
any  given  width;  thus  the  reasoning  which 
forces  us  to  believe  in  infinite  number,  because 
there  is  no  maximum,  applies  also  to  the  space 
between  the  radii.  Now  the  infinite  cannot  be 
traversed,  and  if  the  body  is  infinite  the  interval 
between  the  radii  is  necessarily  infinite:  circu- 
[5]  lar  motion  therefore  is  an  impossibility. 
Yet  our  eyes  tell  us  that  the  heavens  revolve  in 
a  circle,  and  by  argument  also  we  have  deter¬ 
mined  that  there  is  something  to  which  circu¬ 
lar  movement  belongs. 

(2)  Again,  if  from  a  finite  time  a  finite  time 
be  subtracted,  what  remains  must  be  finite  and 
have  a  beginning.  And  if  the  time  of  a  journey 
[10]  has  a  beginning,  there  must  be  a  begin¬ 
ning  also  of  the  movement,  and  consequently 
also  of  the  distance  traversed.  This  applies  uni¬ 
versally.  Take  a  line,  ACE ,  infinite  in  one  di¬ 
rection,  E,  and  another  line,  BB,  infinite  in 
both  directions.  Let  ACE  describe  a  circle,  re- 
[75]  volving  upon  C  as  centre.  In  its  movement 
it  will  cut  BB  continuously  for  a  certain  time. 
This  will  be  a  finite  time,  since  the  total  time  is 
finite  in  which  the  heavens  complete  their  cir¬ 
cular  orbit,  and  consequently  the  time  subtract¬ 
ed  from  it,  during  which  the  one  line  in  its 
motion  cuts  the  other,  is  also  finite.  Therefore 
there  will  be  a  point  at  which  A  CE  began  for 
the  first  time  to  cut  BB.  This,  however,  is  im- 
ossible.  The  infinite,  then,  cannot  revolve  in 
20]  a  circle;  nor  could  the  world,  if  it  were  in¬ 
finite. 


(3)  That  the  infinite  cannot  move  may  also 
be  shown  as  follows.  Let  A  be  a  finite  line  mov¬ 
ing  past  the  finite  line,  B.  Of  necessity  A  will 

f>ass  clear  of  B  and  B  of  A  at  the  same  mo- 
25]  ment;  for  each  overlaps  the  other  to  precise¬ 
ly  the  same  extent.  Now  if  the  two  were  both 
moving,  and  moving  in  contrary  directions, 
they  would  pass  clear  of  one  another  more  rap¬ 
idly;  if  one  were  still  and  the  other  moving  past 
it,  less  rapidly;  provided  that  the  speed  of  the 
latter  were  the  same  in  both  cases.  This,  how¬ 
ever,  is  clear:  that  it  is  impossible  to  traverse  an 
infinite  line  in  a  finite  time.  Infinite  time,  then, 
[30]  would  be  required.  (This  we  demonstrat¬ 
ed  above  in  the  discussion  of  movement.1)  And 
it  makes  no  difference  whether  a  finite  is  pass- 
2721’  ing  by  an  infinite  or  an  infinite  by  a  fi¬ 
nite.  For  when  A  is  passing  B,  then  B  overlaps 
A,  and  it  makes  no  difference  whether  B  is 
moved  or  unmoved,  except  that,  if  both  move, 
they  pass  clear  of  one  another  more  quickly.  It 
is,  however,  quite  possible  that  a  moving  line 
should  in  certain  cases  pass  one  which  is  sta¬ 
tionary  quicker  than  it  passes  one  moving  in  an 
[5]  opposite  direction.  One  has  only  to  imag¬ 
ine  the  movement  to  be  slow  where  both  move 
and  much  faster  where  one  is  stationary.  To 
suppose  one  line  stationary,  then,  makes  no 
difficulty  for  our  argument,  since  it  is  quite 
possible  for  A  to  pass  B  at  a  slower  rate  when 
both  are  moving  than  when  only  one  is.  If, 
[/o]  therefore,  the  time  which  the  finite  mov¬ 
ing  line  takes  to  pass  the  other  is  infinite,  then 
necessarily  the  time  occupied  by  the  motion  of 
the  infinite  past  the  finite  is  also  infinite.  For 
the  infinite  to  move  at  all  is  thus  absolutely  im¬ 
possible;  since  the  very  smallest  movement  con¬ 
ceivable  must  take  an  infinity  of  time.  More¬ 
over  the  heavens  certainly  revolve,  and  they 
complete  their  circular  orbit  in  a  finite  time;  so 
[75]  that  they  pass  round  the  whole  extent  of 
any  line  within  their  orbit,  such  as  the  finite 
line  AB.  The  revolving  body,  therefore,  can¬ 
not  be  infinite. 

(4)  Again,  as  a  line  which  has  a  limit  cannot 
be  infinite,  or,  if  it  is  infinite,  is  so  only  in 
length,  so  a  surface  cannot  be  infinite  in  that 
respect  in  which  it  has  a  limit;  or,  indeed,  if  it 
is  completely  determinate,  in  any  respect  what- 
[20]  ever.  Whether  it  be  a  square  or  a  circle  or 
a  sphere,  it  cannot  be  infinite,  any  more  than  a 
foot-rule  can.  There  is  then  no  such  thing  as  an 
infinite  sphere  or  square  or  circle,  and  where 
there  is  no  circle  there  can  be  no  circular  move¬ 
ment,  and  similarly  where  there  is  no  infinite 
xPhysicSj  vi.  7. 


364  ON  THE 

at  all  there  can  be  no  infinite  movement;  and 
from  this  it  follows  that,  an  infinite  circle  be¬ 
ing  itself  an  impossibility,  there  can  be  no  cir¬ 
cular  motion  of  an  infinite  body. 

[25]  (5)  Again,  take  a  centre  C,  an  infinite 
line,  AB,  another  infinite  line  at  right  angles 
to  it,  E,  and  a  moving  radius,  CD.  CD  will 
never  cease  contact  with  E,  but  the  position 
will  always  be  something  like  CE,  CD  cutting 
E  at  F.  The  infinite  line,  therefore,  refuses  to 
complete  the  circle. 

[j°]  (6)  Again,  if  the  heaven  is  infinite  and 
moves  in  a  circle,  we  shall  have  to  admit  that 
in  a  finite  time  it  has  traversed  the  infinite.  For 
suppose  the  fixed  heaven  infinite,  and  that 
which  moves  within  it  equal  to  it.  It  results 
that  when  the  infinite  body  has  completed  its 
revolution,  it  has  traversed  an  infinite  equal  to 
273a  itself  in  a  finite  time.  But  that  we  know 
to  be  impossible. 

(7)  It  can  also  be  shown,  conversely,  that 
if  the  time  of  revolution  is  finite,  the  area 
traversed  must  also  be  finite;  but  the  area  trav¬ 
ersed  was  equal  to  itself;  therefore,  it  is  itself 
finite. 

[5]  We  have  now  shown  that  the  body  which 
moves  in  a  circle  is  not  endless  or  infinite,  but 
has  its  limit. 

6 

Further,  neither  that  which  moves  towards 
nor  that  which  moves  away  from  the  centre 
can  be  infinite.  For  the  upward  and  downward 
motions  are  contraries  and  are  therefore  mo¬ 
tions  towards  contrary  places.  But  if  one  of  a 
[/o]  pair  of  contraries  is  determinate,  the  oth¬ 
er  must  be  determinate  also.  Now  the  centre  is 
determined;  for,  from  whatever  point  the  body 
which  sinks  to  the  bottom  starts  its  downward 
motion,  it  cannot  go  farther  than  the  centre. 
The  centre,  therefore,  being  determinate,  the 
upper  place  must  also  be  determinate.  But  if 
these  two  places  are  determined  and  finite,  the 
[75]  corresponding  bodies  must  also  be  finite. 
Further,  if  up  and  down  are  determinate,  the 
intermediate  place  is  also  necessarily  determi¬ 
nate.  For,  if  it  is  indeterminate,  the  movement 
within  it  will  be  infinite;  and  that  we  have  al¬ 
ready  shown  to  be  an  impossibility.1  The  mid¬ 
dle  region  then  is  determinate,  and  consequent¬ 
ly  any  body  which  either  is  in  it,  or  might  be  in 
it,  is  determinate.  But  the  bodies  which  move 
[20]  up  and  down  may  be  in  it,  since  the  one 
moves  naturally  away  from  the  centre  and  the 
other  towards  it. 

1  Physics,  viii.  8. 


HEAVENS  273b 

From  this  alone  it  is  clear  that  an  infinite 
body  is  an  impossibility;  but  there  is  a  further 
point.  If  there  is  no  such  thing  as  infinite 
weight,  then  it  follows  that  none  of  these  bod¬ 
ies  can  be  infinite.  For  the  supposed  infinite 
[25]  body  would  have  to  be  infinite  in  weight. 
(The  same  argument  applies  to  lightness:  for 
as  the  one  supposition  involves  infinite  weight, 
so  the  infinity  of  the  body  which  rises  to  the 
surface  involves  infinite  lightness.)  This  is 
proved  as  follows.  Assume  the  weight  to  be  fi¬ 
nite,  and  take  an  infinite  body,  AB,  of  the 
weight  C.  Subtract  from  the  infinite  body  a  fi- 
[_?o]  nite  mass,  BD,  the  weight  of  which  shall 
be  E.  E  then  is  less  than  C,  since  it  is  the  weight 
of  a  lesser  mass.  Suppose  then  that  the  smaller 
goes  into  the  greater  a  certain  number  of  times, 
273b  and  take  BF  bearing  the  same  proportion 
to  BD  which  the  greater  weight  bears  to  the 
smaller.  For  you  may  subtract  as  much  as  you 
please  from  an  infinite.  If  now  the  masses  are 
proportionate  to  the  weights,  and  the  lesser 
weight  is  that  of  the  lesser  mass,  the  greater 
[5]  must  be  that  of  the  greater.  The  weights, 
therefore,  of  the  finite  and  of  the  infinite  body 
are  equal.  Again,  if  the  weight  of  a  greater 
body  is  greater  than  that  of  a  less,  the  weight 
of  GB  will  be  greater  than  that  of  FB;  and  thus 
the  weight  of  the  finite  body  is  greater  than 
that  of  the  infinite.  And,  further,  the  weight  of 
unequal  masses  will  be  the  same,  since  the  in¬ 
finite  and  the  finite  cannot  be  equal.  It  does 
[10]  not  matter  whether  the  weights  are  com¬ 
mensurable  or  not.  If  (a)  they  are  incommen¬ 
surable  the  same  reasoning  holds.  For  instance, 
suppose  E  multiplied  by  three  is  rather  more 
than  C:  the  weight  of  three  masses  of  the  full 
size  of  BD  will  be  greater  than  C.  We  thus  ar- 
[75]  rive  at  the  same  impossibility  as  before. 
Again  (b)  we  may  assume  weights  which  are 
commensurate;  for  it  makes  no  difference 
whether  we  begin  with  the  weight  or  with  the 
mass.  For  example,  assume  the  weight  E  to  be 
commensurate  with  C,  and  take  from  the  in¬ 
finite  mass  a  part  BD  of  weight  E.  Then  let  a 
[20]  mass  BF  be  taken  having  the  same  pro¬ 
portion  to  BD  which  the  two  weights  have  to 
one  another.  (For  the  mass  being  infinite  you 
may  subtract  from  it  as  much  as  you  please.) 
These  assumed  bodies  will  be  commensurate 
in  mass  and  in  weight  alike.  Nor  again  does  it 
make  any  difference  to  our  demonstration 
whether  the  total  mass  has  its  weight  equally 
or  unequally  distributed.  For  it  must  always  be 
[25]  possible  to  take  from  the  infinite  mass  a 
body  of  equal  weight  to  BD  by  diminishing  or 


274b  BOOK  I,  CHAPTERS  5-7  365 


increasing  the  size  of  the  section  to  the  neces¬ 
sary  extent. 

From  what  we  have  said,  then,  it  is  clear  that 
the  weight  of  the  infinite  body  cannot  be  finite. 
It  must  then  be  infinite.  We  have  therefore 
only  to  show  this  to  be  impossible  in  order  to 
prove  an  infinite  body  impossible.  But  the  im- 
[30]  possibility  of  infinite  weight  can  be  shown 
in  the  following  way.  A  given  weight  moves  a 
given  distance  in  a  given  time;  a  weight  which 
is  as  great  and  more  moves  the  same  distance 
in  a  less  time,  the  times  being  in  inverse  pro- 
274a  portion  to  the  weights.  For  instance,  if 
one  weight  is  twice  another,  it  will  take  half  as 
long  over  a  given  movement.  Further,  a  finite 
weight  traverses  any  finite  distance  in  a  finite 
time.  It  necessarily  follows  from  this  that  infi¬ 
nite  weight,  if  there  is  such  a  thing,  being,  on 
[5]  the  one  hand,  as  great  and  more  than  as 
great  as  the  finite,  will  move  accordingly,  but 
being,  on  the  other  hand,  compelled  to  move  in 
a  time  inversely  proportionate  to  its  greatness, 
cannot  move  at  all.  The  time  should  be  less  in 
proportion  as  the  weight  is  greater.  But  there  is 
no  proportion  between  the  infinite  and  the  fi¬ 
nite:  proportion  can  only  hold  between  a  less 
and  a  greater  finite  time.  And  though  you  may 
say  that  the  time  of  the  movement  can  be  con- 
[/o]  tinually  diminished,  yet  there  is  no  mini¬ 
mum.  Nor,  if  there  were,  would  it  help  us.  For 
some  finite  body  could  have  been  found  greater 
than  the  given  finite  in  the  same  proportion 
which  is  supposed  to  hold  between  the  infinite 
and  the  given  finite;  so  that  an  infinite  and  a 
finite  weight  must  have  traversed  an  equal  dis¬ 
tance  in  equal  time.  But  that  is  impossible. 
Again,  whatever  the  time,  so  long  as  it  is  finite, 
[75]  in  which  the  infinite  performs  the  motion, 
a  finite  weight  must  necessarily  move  a  certain 
finite  distance  in  that  same  time.  Infinite  weight 
is  therefore  impossible,  and  the  same  reasoning 
applies  also  to  infinite  lightness.  Bodies  then  of 
infinite  weight  and  of  infinite  lightness  are 
equally  impossible. 

That  there  is  no  infinite  body  may  be  shown, 
as  we  have  shown  it,  by  a  detailed  considera- 
[20]  tion  of  the  various  cases.  But  it  may  also 
be  shown  universally,  not  only  by  such  reason¬ 
ing  as  we  advanced  in  our  discussion  of  princi¬ 
ples1  (though  in  that  passage  we  have  already 
determined  universally  the  sense  in  which  the 
existence  of  an  infinite  is  to  be  asserted  or  de¬ 
nied),  but  also  suitably  to  our  present  purpose 
in  the  following  way.  That  will  lead  us  to  a  fur- 
[25]  ther  question.  Even  if  the  total  mass  is  not 
1  Physics ,  hi.  4-8. 


infinite,  it  may  yet  be  great  enough  to  admit  a 
plurality  of  universes.  The  question  might  pos¬ 
sibly  be  raised  whether  there  is  any  obstacle  to 
our  believing  that  there  are  other  universes 
composed  on  the  pattern  of  our  own,  more 
than  one,  though  stopping  short  of  infinity. 
First,  however,  let  us  treat  of  the  infinite  uni¬ 
versally. 

7 

[30]  Every  body  must  necessarily  be  either  fi¬ 
nite  or  infinite,  and  if  infinite,  either  of  similar 
or  of  dissimilar  parts.  If  its  parts  are  dissimilar , 
they  must  represent  either  a  finite  or  an  infinite 
number  of  kinds.  That  the  kinds  cannot  be  in¬ 
finite  is  evident,  if  our  original  presuppositions 
274b  remain  unchallenged.  For  the  primary 
movements  being  finite  in  number,  the  kinds 
of  simple  body  are  necessarily  also  finite,  since 
the  movement  of  a  simple  body  is  simple,  and 
the  simple  movements  are  finite,  and  every  nat¬ 
ural  body  must  always  have  its  proper  motion. 
[5]  Now  if  the  infinite  body  is  to  be  composed 
of  a  finite  number  of  kinds,  then  each  of  its 
parts  must  necessarily  be  infinite  in  quantity, 
that  is  to  say,  the  water,  fire,  &c.,  which  com¬ 
pose  it.  But  this  is  impossible,  because,  as  we 
have  already  shown,  infinite  weight  and  light¬ 
ness  do  not  exist.  Moreover  it  would  be  neces¬ 
sary  also  that  their  places  should  be  infinite  in 
[/o]  extent,  so  that  the  movements  too  of  all 
these  bodies  would  be  infinite.  But  this  is  not 
possible,  if  we  are  to  hold  to  the  truth  of  our 
original  presuppositions  and  to  the  view  that 
neither  that  which  moves  downward,  nor,  by 
the  same  reasoning,  that  which  moves  upward, 
can  prolong  its  movement  to  infinity.  For  it  is 
true  in  regard  to  quality,  quantity,  and  place 
alike  that  any  process  of  change  is  impossible 
[75]  which  can  have  no  end.  I  mean  that  if  it 
is  impossible  for  a  thing  to  have  come  to  be 
white,  or  a  cubit  long,  or  in  Egypt,  it  is  also 
impossible  for  it  to  be  in  process  of  coming  to 
be  any  of  these.  It  is  thus  impossible  for  a  thing 
to  be  moving  to  a  place  at  which  in  its  motion 
it  can  never  by  any  possibility  arrive.  Again, 
suppose  the  body  to  exist  in  dispersion,  it  may 
be  maintained  none  the  less  that  the  total  of  all 
these  scattered  particles,  say,  of  fire,  is  infinite. 
[20]  But  body  we  saw  to  be  that  which  has  ex¬ 
tension  every  way.  How  can  there  be  several 
dissimilar  elements,  each  infinite?  Each  would 
have  to  be  infinitely  extended  every  way. 

It  is  no  more  conceivable,  again,  that  the  in¬ 
finite  should  exist  as  a  whole  of  similar  parts. 
For,  in  the  first  place,  there  is  no  other 


366  ON  THE 

(straight)  movement  beyond  those  mentioned: 
vve  must  therefore  give  it  one  of  them.  And  if 
[25]  so,  vve  shall  have  to  admit  either  infinite 
weight  or  infinite  lightness.  Nor,  secondly, 
could  the  body  whose  movement  is  circular  be 
infinite,  since  it  is  impossible  for  the  infinite  to 
move  in  a  circle.  This,  indeed,  would  be  as 
good  as  saying  that  the  heavens  are  infinite, 
which  we  have  shown  to  be  impossible. 

[30]  Moreover,  in  general,  it  is  impossible  that 
the  infinite  should  move  at  all.  If  it  did,  it 
would  move  either  naturally  or  by  constraint: 
and  if  by  constraint,  it  possesses  also  a  natural 
motion,  that  is  to  say,  there  is  another  place, 
infinite  like  itself,  to  which  it  will  move.  But 
that  is  impossible. 

That  in  general  it  is  impossible  for  the  infi¬ 
nite  to  be  acted  upon  by  the  finite  or  to  act 
upon  it  may  be  shown  as  follows. 

275a  (1.  The  infinite  cannot  he  acted  upon  by 
the  finite .)  Let  A  be  an  infinite,  B  a  finite,  C 
the  time  of  a  given  movement  produced  by  one 
in  the  other.  Suppose,  then,  that  A  was  heated, 
or  impelled,  or  modified  in  any  way,  or  caused 
to  undergo  any  sort  of  movement  whatever,  by 
B  in  the  time  C.  Let  D  be  less  than  B;  and,  as¬ 
suming  that  a  lesser  agent  moves  a  lesser  pa- 
[5]  tient  in  an  equal  time,  call  the  quantity 
thus  modified  by  D,  E.  Then,  as  D  is  to  B,  so  is 
E  to  some  finite  quantum.  We  assume  that  the 
alteration  of  equal  by  equal  takes  equal  time, 
and  the  alteration  of  less  by  less  or  of  greater 
by  greater  takes  the  same  time,  if  the  quantity 
of  the  patient  is  such  as  to  keep  the  proportion 
[/o]  which  obtains  between  the  agents,  greater 
and  less.  If  so,  no  movement  can  be  caused  in 
the  infinite  by  any  finite  agent  in  any  time 
whatever.  For  a  less  agent  will  produce  that 
movement  in  a  less  patient  in  an  equal  time, 
and  the  proportionate  equivalent  of  that  pa¬ 
tient  will  be  a  finite  quantity,  since  no  propor¬ 
tion  holds  between  finite  and  infinite. 

(2.  The  infinite  cannot  act  upon  the  finite.) 
Nor,  again,  can  the  infinite  produce  a  move- 
[75]  ment  in  the  finite  in  any  time  whatever. 
Let  A  be  an  infinite,  B  a  finite,  C  the  time  of 
action.  In  the  time  C,  D  will  produce  that  mo¬ 
tion  in  a  patient  less  than  B,  say  F.  Then  take 
E,  bearing  the  same  proportion  to  D  as  the 
whole  BF  bears  to  F.  E  will  produce  the  mo¬ 
tion  in  BF  in  the  time  C.  Thus  the  finite  and 
[20]  the  infinite  effect  the  same  alteration  in 
equal  times.  But  this  is  impossible;  for  the  as¬ 
sumption  is  that  the  greater  effects  it  in  a  short¬ 
er  time.  It  will  be  the  same  with  any  time  that 
can  be  taken,  so  that  there  will  no  time  in 


HEAVENS  275b 

which  the  infinite  can  effect  this  movement. 
And,  as  to  infinite  time,  in  that  nothing  can 
move  another  or  be  moved  by  it.  For  such  time 
has  no  limit,  while  the  action  and  reaction 
have. 

(3.  There  is  no  interaction  between  infi¬ 
nites.)  Nor  can  infinite  be  acted  upon  in  any 
[25]  way  by  infinite.  Let  A  and  B  be  infinites, 
CD  being  the  time  of  the  action  of  A  upon  B. 
Now  the  whole  B  was  modified  in  a  certain 
time,  and  the  part  of  this  infinite,  E,  cannot  be 
so  modified  in  the  same  time,  since  we  assume 
that  a  less  quantity  makes  the  movement  in  a 
less  time.  Let  E  then,  when  acted  upon  by  A, 
[30]  complete  the  movement  in  the  time  D. 
Then,  as  D  is  to  CD,  so  is  E  to  some  finite  part 
of  B.  This  part  will  necessarily  be  moved  by  A 
in  the  time  CD.  For  we  suppose  that  the  same 
agent  produces  a  given  effect  on  a  greater  and 
275b  a  smaller  mass  in  longer  and  shorter 
times,  the  times  and  masses  varying  propor¬ 
tionately.  There  is  thus  no  finite  time  in  which 
infinites  can  move  one  another.  Is  their  time 
then  infinite?  No,  for  infinite  time  has  no  end, 
but  the  movement  communicated  has. 

[5]  If  therefore  every  perceptible  body  pos¬ 
sesses  the  power  of  acting  or  of  being  acted 
upon,  or  both  of  these,  it  is  impossible  that  an 
infinite  body  should  be  perceptible.  All  bodies, 
however,  that  occupy  place  are  perceptible. 
There  is  therefore  no  infinite  body  beyond  the 
heaven.  Nor  again  is  there  anything  of  limited 
extent  beyond  it.  And  so  beyond  the  heaven 
there  is  no  body  at  all.  For  if  you  suppose  it  an 
[/o]  object  of  intelligence,  it  will  be  in  a  place 
— since  place  is  what  ‘within’  and  ‘beyond’  de¬ 
note — and  therefore  an  object  of  perception. 
But  nothing  that  is  not  in  a  place  is  perceptible. 

The  question  may  also  be  examined  in  the 
light  of  more  general  considerations  as  follows. 
The  infinite,  considered  as  a  whole  of  similar 
parts,  cannot,  on  the  one  hand,  move  in  a  cir¬ 
cle.  For  there  is  no  centre  of  the  infinite,  and 
[75]  that  which  moves  in  a  circle  moves  about 
the  centre.  Nor  again  can  the  infinite  move  in 
a  straight  line.  For  there  would  have  to  be  an¬ 
other  place  infinite  like  itself  to  be  the  goal  of 
its  natural  movement  and  another,  equally 
great,  for  the  goal  of  its  unnatural  movement. 
Moreover,  whether  its  rectilinear  movement  is 
natural  or  constrained,  in  either  case  the  force 
[20]  which  causes  its  motion  will  have  to  be  in¬ 
finite.  For  infinite  force  is  force  of  an  infinite 
body,  and  of  an  infinite  body  the  force  is  infi¬ 
nite.  So  the  motive  body  also  will  be  infinite. 
(The  proof  of  this  is  given  in  our  discussion  of 


276b  BOOK  1,  CHAPTERS  7-8  367 


movement,1  where  it  is  shown  that  no  finite 
thing  possesses  infinite  power,  and  no  infinite 
thing  finite  power.)  If  then  that  which  moves 
naturally  can  also  move  unnaturally,  there  will 
[25]  be  two  infinites,  one  which  causes,  and  an¬ 
other  which  exhibits  the  latter  motion.  Again, 
what  is  it  that  moves  the  infinite?  If  it  moves 
itself,  it  must  be  animate.  But  how  can  it  pos¬ 
sibly  be  conceived  as  an  infinite  animal?  And 
if  there  is  something  else  that  moves  it,  there 
will  be  two  infinites,  that  which  moves  and  that 
which  is  moved,  differing  in  their  form  and 
power. 

[30]  If  the  whole  is  not  continuous,  but  exists, 
as  Democritus  and  Leucippus  think,  in  the 
form  of  parts  separated  by  void,  there  must 
necessarily  be  one  movement  of  all  the  multi¬ 
tude.  They  are  distinguished,  we  are  told,  from 
276a  one  another  by  their  figures;  but  their  na¬ 
ture  is  one,  like  many  pieces  of  gold  separated 
from  one  another.  But  each  piece  must,  as  we 
assert,  have  the  same  motion.  For  a  single  clod 
moves  to  the  same  place  as  the  whole  mass  of 
earth,  and  a  spark  to  the  same  place  as  the  whole 
mass  of  fire.  So  that  if  it  be  weight  that  all  pos¬ 
sess,  no  body  is,  strictly  speaking,  light:  and  if 
[5]  lightness  be  universal,  none  is  heavy. 
Moreover,  whatever  possesses  weight  or  light¬ 
ness  will  have  its  place  either  at  one  of  the  ex¬ 
tremes  or  in  the  middle  region.  But  this  is  im¬ 
possible  while  the  world  is  conceived  as  infi¬ 
nite.  And,  generally,  that  which  has  no  centre 
or  extreme  limit,  no  up  or  down,  gives  the  bod- 
[/o]  ies  no  place  for  their  motion;  and  without 
that  movement  is  impossible.  A  thing  must 
move  either  naturally  or  unnaturally,  and  the 
two  movements  are  determined  by  the  proper 
and  alien  places.  Again,  a  place  in  which  a 
thing  rests  or  to  which  it  moves  unnaturally, 
[75]  must  be  the  natural  place  for  some  other 
body,  as  experience  shows.  Necessarily,  there¬ 
fore,  not  everything  possesses  weight  or  light¬ 
ness,  but  some  things  do  and  some  do  not. 
From  these  arguments  then  it  is  clear  that  the 
body  of  the  universe  is  not  infinite. 

8 

We  must  now  proceed  to  explain  why  there 
cannot  be  more  than  one  heaven — the  further 
question  mentioned  above.  For  it  may  be 
thought  that  we  have  not  proved  universally 
[20]  of  bodies  that  none  whatever  can  exist 
outside  our  universe,  and  that  our  argument 
applied  only  to  those  of  indeterminate  extent. 

Now  all  things  rest  and  move  naturally  and 

1  Physics ,  viii.  io. 


by  constraint.  A  thing  moves  naturally  to  a 
place  in  which  it  rests  without  constraint,  and 
rests  naturally  in  a  place  to  which  it  moves 
[25]  without  constraint.  On  the  other  hand,  a 
thing  moves  by  constraint  to  a  place  in  which 
it  rests  by  constraint,  and  rests  by  constraint  in 
a  place  to  which  it  moves  by  constraint.  Fur¬ 
ther,  if  a  given  movement  is  due  to  constraint, 
its  contrary  is  natural.  If,  then,  it  is  by  con¬ 
straint  that  earth  moves  from  a  certain  place  to 
the  centre  here,  its  movement  from  here  to 
there  will  be  natural,  and  if  earth  from  there 
rests  here  without  constraint,  its  movement  hith- 
[30]  er  will  be  natural.  And  the  natural  move¬ 
ment  in  each  case  is  one.  Further,  these  worlds, 
being  similar  in  nature  to  ours,  must  all  be 
composed  of  the  same  bodies  as  it.  Moreover 
each  of  the  bodies,  fire,  I  mean,  and  earth  and 
276b  their  intermediates,  must  have  the  same 
power  as  in  our  world.  For  if  these  names  are 
used  equivocally,  if  the  identity  of  name  does 
not  rest  tipon  an  identity  of  form  in  these  ele¬ 
ments  and  ours,  then  the  whole  to  which  they 
belong  can  only  be  called  a  world  by  equivoca- 
[5]  tion.  Clearly,  then,  one  of  the  bodies  will 
move  naturally  away  from  the  centre  and  an¬ 
other  towards  the  centre,  since  fire  must  be 
identical  with  fire,  earth  with  earth,  and  so  on, 
as  the  fragments  of  each  are  identical  in  this 
world.  That  this  must  be  the  case  is  evident 
from  the  principles  laid  down  in  our  discus¬ 
sion  of  the  movements,2  for  these  are  limited 
in  number,  and  the  distinction  of  the  elements 
[/o]  depends  upon  the  distinction  of  the 
movements.  Therefore,  since  the  movements 
are  the  same,  the  elements  must  also  be  the 
same  everywhere.  The  particles  of  earth,  then, 
in  another  world  move  naturally  also  to  our 
centre  and  its  fire  to  our  circumference.  This, 
[75]  however,  is  impossible,  since,  if  it  were 
true,  earth  must,  in  its  own  world,  move  up¬ 
wards,  and  fire  to  the  centre;  in  the  same  way 
the  earth  of  our  world  must  move  naturally 
away  from  the  centre  when  it  moves  towards 
the  centre  of  another  universe.  This  follows 
from  the  supposed  juxtaposition  of  the  worlds. 
For  either  we  must  refuse  to  admit  the  iden- 
[20]  tical  nature  of  the  simple  bodies  in  the 
various  universes,  or,  admitting  this,  we  must 
make  the  centre  and  the  extremity  one  as  sug¬ 
gested.  This  being  so,  it  follows  that  there 
cannot  be  more  worlds  than  one. 

To  postulate  a  difference  of  nature  in  the 
simple  bodies  according  as  they  are  more  or 
less  distant  from  their  proper  places  is  unrea- 

2Above,  Chapters  2-4. 


368  ON  THE  HEAVENS  277b 


sonable.  For  what  difference  can  it  make 
whether  we  say  that  a  thing  is  this  distance 
[25]  away  or  that?  One  would  have  to  sup¬ 
pose  a  difference  proportionate  to  the  distance 
and  increasing  with  it,  but  the  form  is  in  fact 
the  same.  Moreover,  the  bodies  must  have  some 
movement,  since  the  fact  that  they  move  is 
quite  evident.  Are  we  to  say  then  that  all  their 
movements,  even  those  which  are  mutually 
contrary,  are  due  to  constraint?  No,  for  a 
body  which  has  no  natural  movement  at  all 
cannot  be  moved  by  constraint.  If  then  the 
[jo]  bodies  have  a  natural  movement,  the 
movement  of  the  particular  instances  of  each 
form  must  necessarily  have  for  goal  a  place 
numerically  one,  i.e.  a  particular  centre  or  a 
particular  extremity.  If  it  be  suggested  that  the 
goal  in  each  case  is  one  in  form  but  numer- 
277a  ically  more  than  one,  on  the  analogy  of 
particulars  which  are  many  though  each  un¬ 
differentiated  in  form,  we  reply  that  the  va¬ 
riety  of  goal  cannot  be  limited  to  this  portion 
or  that  but  must  extend  to  all  alike.  For  all  are 
equally  undifferentiated  in  form,  but  any  one 
[5]  is  different  numerically  from  any  other. 
What  I  mean  is  this:  if  the  portions  in  this 
world  behave  similarly  both  to  one  another 
and  to  those  in  another  world,  then  the  por¬ 
tion  which  is  taken  hence  will  not  behave  dif¬ 
ferently  either  from  the  portions  in  another 
world  or  from  those  in  the  same  world,  but 
similarly  to  them,  since  in  form  no  portion 
differs  from  another.  The  result  is  that  we 
must  either  abandon  our  present  assumptions 
[/o]  or  assert  that  the  centre  and  the  extrem¬ 
ity  are  each  numerically  one.  But  this  being  so, 
the  heaven,  by  the  same  evidence  and  the  same 
necessary  inferences,  must  be  one  only  and  no 
more. 

A  consideration  of  the  other  kinds  of  move¬ 
ment  also  makes  it  plain  that  there  is  some 
point  to  which  earth  and  fire  move  naturally. 
For  in  general  that  which  is  moved  changes 
[75]  from  something  into  something,  the 
starting-point  and  the  goal  being  different  in 
form,  and  always  it  is  a  finite  change.  For  in¬ 
stance,  to  recover  health  is  to  change  from  dis¬ 
ease  to  health,  to  increase  is  to  change  from 
smallness  to  greatness.  Locomotion  must  be 
similar:  for  it  also  has  its  goal  and  starting- 
point — and  therefore  the  starting-point  and 
the  goal  of  the  natural  movement  must  differ 
in  form — just  as  the  movement  of  coming  to 
[20]  health  does  not  take  any  direction  which 
chance  or  the  wishes  of  the  mover  may  select. 
Thus,  too,  fire  and  earth  move  not  to  infinity 


but  to  opposite  points;  and  since  the  opposi¬ 
tion  in  place  is  between  above  and  below,  these 
will  be  the  limits  of  their  movement.  (Even  in 
circular  movement  there  is  a  sort  of  opposition 
between  the  ends  of  the  diameter,  though  the 
movement  as  a  whole  has  no  contrary:  so  that 
[25]  here  too  the  movement  has  in  a  sense  an 
opposed  and  finite  goal.)  There  must  there¬ 
fore  be  some  end  to  locomotion:  it  cannot  con¬ 
tinue  to  infinity. 

This  conclusion  that  local  movement  is  not 
continued  to  infinity  is  corroborated  by  the 
fact  that  earth  moves  more  quickly  the  nearer 
it  is  to  the  centre,  and  fire  the  nearer  it  is  to 
[jo]  the  upper  place.  But  if  movement  were 
infinite  speed  would  be  infinite  also;  and  if 
speed  then  weight  and  lightness.  For  as  su¬ 
perior  speed  in  downward  movement  implies 
superior  weight,  so  infinite  increase  of  weight 
necessitates  infinite  increase  of  speed. 

277b  Further,  it  is  not  the  action  of  another 
body  that  makes  one  of  these  bodies  move  up 
and  the  other  down;  nor  is  it  constraint,  like 
the  ‘extrusion’  of  some  writers.  For  in  that 
case  the  larger  the  mass  of  fire  or  earth  the 
slower  would  be  the  upward  or  downward 
movement;  but  the  fact  is  the  reverse:  the 
greater  the  mass  of  fire  or  earth  the  quicker 
[5]  always  is  its  movement  towards  its  own 
place.  Again,  the  speed  of  the  movement  would 
not  increase  towards  the  end  if  it  were  due  to 
constraint  or  extrusion;  for  a  constrained  move¬ 
ment  always  diminishes  in  speed  as  the  source 
of  constraint  becomes  more  distant,  and  a  body 
moves  without  constraint  to  the  place  whence 
it  was  moved  by  constraint. 

A  consideration  of  these  points,  then,  gives 
adequate  assurance  of  the  truth  of  our  conten¬ 
tions.  The  same  could  also  be  shown  with  the 
[/o]  aid  of  the  discussions  which  fall  under 
First  Philosophy,  as  well  as  from  the  nature  of 
the  circular  movement,  which  must  be  eternal 
both  here  and  in  the  other  worlds.  It  is  plain, 
too,  from  the  following  considerations  that  the 
universe  must  be  one. 

The  bodily  elements  are  three,  and  there- 
[75]  fore  the  places  of  the  elements  will  be 
three  also;  the  place,  first,  of  the  body  which 
sinks  to  the  bottom,  namely  the  region  about 
the  centre;  the  place,  secondly,  of  the  revolving 
body,  namely  the  outermost  place,  and  thirdly, 
the  intermediate  place,  belonging  to  the  inter¬ 
mediate  body.  Here  in  this  third  place  will  be 
the  body  which  rises  to  the  surface;  since,  if 
not  here,  it  will  be  elsewhere,  and  it  cannot  be 
elsewhere:  for  we  have  two  bodies,  one  weight- 


2 78b  BOOK  I,  CHAPTERS  8-9  369 


less,  one  endowed  with  weight,  and  below  is 
[20]  the  place  of  the  body  endowed  with 
weight,  since  the  region  about  the  centre  has 
been  given  to  the  heavy  body.  And  its  position 
cannot  be  unnatural  to  it,  for  it  would  have  to 
be  natural  to  something  else,  and  there  is 
nothing  else.  It  must  then  occupy  the  inter¬ 
mediate  place.  What  distinctions  there  are 
within  the  intermediate  itself  we  will  explain 
later  on. 

We  have  now  said  enough  to  make  plain 
the  character  and  number  of  the  bodily  ele¬ 
ments,  the  place  of  each,  and  further,  in  gen- 
[25]  eral,  how  many  in  number  the  various 
places  are. 

9 

We  must  show  not  only  that  the  heaven  is  one, 
but  also  that  more  than  one  heaven  is  impos¬ 
sible,  and,  further,  that,  as  exempt  from  decay 
and  generation,  the  heaven  is  eternal.  We  may 
begin  by  raising  a  difficulty.  From  one  point  of 
[30]  view  it  might  seem  impossible  that  the 
heaven  should  be  one  and  unique,  since  in  all 
formations  and  products  whether  of  nature  or 
of  art  we  can  distinguish  the  shape  in  itself 
and  the  shape  in  combination  with  matter.  For 
278a  instance  the  form  of  the  sphere  is  one 
thing  and  the  gold  or  bronze  sphere  another; 
the  shape  of  the  circle  again  is  one  thing,  the 
bronze  or  wooden  circle  another.  For  when 
we  state  the  essential  nature  of  the  sphere  or 
circle  we  do  not  include  in  the  formula  gold  or 
[5]  bronze,  because  they  do  not  belong  to  the 
essence,  but  if  we  are  speaking  of  the  copper  or 
gold  sphere  we  do  include  them.  We  still  make 
the  distinction  even  if  we  cannot  conceive  or 
apprehend  any  other  example  beside  the  par¬ 
ticular  thing.  This  may,  of  course,  sometimes 
be  the  case:  it  might  be,  for  instance,  that  only 
one  circle  could  be  found;  yet  none  the  less  the 
difference  will  remain  between  the  being  of 
circle  and  of  this  particular  circle,  the  one  be¬ 
ing  form,  the  other  form  in  matter,  i.e.  a  par- 
[/o]  ticular  thing.  Now  since  the  universe  is 
perceptible  it  must  be  regarded  as  a  particular; 
for  everything  that  is  perceptible  subsists,  as  we 
know,  in  matter.  But  if  it  is  a  particular,  there 
will  be  a  distinction  between  the  being  of  ‘this 
universe*  and  of  ‘universe’  unqualified.  There 
is  a  difference,  then,  between  ‘this  universe’ 
and  simple  ‘universe’;  the  second  is  form  and 
[75]  shape,  the  first  form  in  combination  with 
matter;  and  any  shape  or  form  has,  or  may 
have,  more  than  one  particular  instance. 

On  the  supposition  of  Forms  such  as  some 


assert,  this  must  be  the  case,  and  equally  on 
the  view  that  no  such  entity  has  a  separate  ex¬ 
istence.  For  in  every  case  in  which  the  essence 
is  in  matter  it  is  a  fact  of  observation  that  the 
articulars  of  like  form  are  several  or  infinite 
20]  in  number.  Hence  there  either  are,  or 
may  be,  more  heavens  than  one.  On  these 
grounds,  then,  it  might  be  inferred  either  that 
there  are  or  that  there  might  be  several  heav¬ 
ens.  We  must,  however,  return  and  ask  how 
much  of  this  argument  is  correct  and  how 
much  not. 

Now  it  is  quite  right  to  say  that  the  formula 
of  the  shape  apart  from  the  matter  must  be  dif- 
[25]  ferent  from  that  of  the  shape  in  the  mat¬ 
ter,  and  we  may  allow  this  to  be  true.  We  are 
not,  however,  therefore  compelled  to  assert  a 
plurality  of  worlds.  Such  a  plurality  is  in  fact 
impossible  if  this  world  contains  the  entirety 
of  matter,  as  in  fact  it  does.  But  perhaps  our 
contention  can  be  made  clearer  in  this  way. 
Suppose  ‘aquilinity’  to  be  curvature  in  the  nose 
[30]  or  flesh,  and  flesh  to  be  the  matter  of 
aquilinity.  Suppose  further,  that  all  flesh  came 
together  into  a  single  whole  of  flesh  endowed 
with  this  aquiline  quality.  Then  neither  would 
there  be,  nor  could  there  arise,  any  other  thing 
that  was  aquiline.  Similarly,  suppose  flesh  and 
bones  to  be  the  matter  of  man,  and  suppose  a 
[•75]  man  to  be  created  of  all  flesh  and  all  bones 
in  indissoluble  union.  The  possibility  of  an¬ 
other  man  would  be  removed.  Whatever  case 
278b  you  took  it  would  be  the  same.  The  gen¬ 
eral  rule  is  this:  a  thing  whose  essence  resides 
in  a  substratum  of  matter  can  never  come  into 
being  in  the  absence  of  all  matter.  Now  the 
universe  is  certainly  a  particular  and  a  material 
thing:  if  however,  it  is  composed  not  of  a  part 
[5]  but  of  the  whole  of  matter,  then  though 
the  being  of  ‘universe’  and  of  ‘this  universe’ 
are  still  distinct,  yet  there  is  no  other  universe, 
and  no  possibility  of  others  being  made,  be¬ 
cause  all  the  matter  is  already  included  in  this. 
It  remains,  then,  only  to  prove  that  it  is  com- 
osed  of  all  natural  perceptible  body. 

/o]  First,  however,  we  must  explain  what  we 
mean  by  ‘heaven’  and  in  how  many  senses  we 
use  the  word,  in  order  to  make  clearer  the  ob¬ 
ject  of  our  inquiry,  (a)  In  one  sense,  then,  we 
call  ‘heaven’  the  substance  of  the  extreme  cir¬ 
cumference  of  the  whole,  or  that  natural  body 
whose  place  is  at  the  extreme  circumference. 
We  recognize  habitually  a  special  right  to  the 
[75]  name  ‘heaven’  in  the  extremity  or  upper 
region,  which  we  take  to  be  the  seat  of  all  that 
is  divine,  (b)  In  another  sense,  we  use  this 


37° 

name  for  the  body  continuous  with  the  ex¬ 
treme  circumference  which  contains  the  moon, 
the  sun,  and  some  of  the  stars;  these  we  say 
are  ‘in  the  heaven’,  (c)  In  yet  another  sense 
we  give  the  name  to  all  body  included  within 
[20]  the  extreme  circumference,  since  we  ha¬ 
bitually  call  the  whole  or  totality  ‘the  heaven’. 
The  word,  then,  is  used  in  three  senses. 

Now  the  whole  included  within  the  extreme 
circumference  must  be  composed  of  all  physical 
and  sensible  body,  because  there  neither  is,  nor 
can  come  into  being,  any  body  outside  the 
[25]  heaven.  For  if  there  is  a  natural  body 
outside  the  extreme  circumference  it  must  be 
either  a  simple  or  a  composite  body,  and  its 
position  must  be  either  natural  or  unnatural. 
But  it  cannot  be  any  of  the  simple  bodies.  For, 
first,  it  has  been  shown1  that  that  which  moves 
[jo]  in  a  circle  cannot  change  its  place.  And, 
secondly,  it  cannot  be  that  which  moves  from 
the  centre  or  that  which  lies  lowest.  Naturally 
they  could  not  be  there,  since  their  proper 
places  are  elsewhere;  and  if  these  are  there 
unnaturally ,  the  exterior  place  will  be  natural 
to  some  other  body,  since  a  place  which  is  un¬ 
natural  to  one  body  must  be  natural  to  another: 
but  we  saw  that  there  is  no  other  body  besides 
[55]  these.2  Then  it  is  not  possible  that  any 
279a  simple  body  should  be  outside  the  heav¬ 
en.  But,  if  no  simple  body,  neither  can  any 
mixed  body  be  there:  for  the  presence  of  the 
simple  body  is  involved  in  the  presence  of  the 
mixture.  Further  neither  can  any  body  come 
into  that  place:  for  it  will  do  so  either  nat¬ 
urally  or  unnaturally,  and  will  be  either  sim- 
[5]  or  composite;  so  that  the  same  argu¬ 
ment  will  apply,  since  it  makes  no  difference 
whether  the  question  is  ‘does  A  exist?’  or 
‘could  A  come  to  exist?’  From  our  arguments 
then  it  is  evident  not  only  that  there  is  not,  but 
also  that  there  could  never  come  to  be,  any 
bodily  mass  whatever  outside  the  circumfer¬ 
ence.  The  world  as  a  whole,  therefore,  includes 
all  its  appropriate  matter,  which  is,  as  we  saw, 
natural  perceptible  body.  So  that  neither  are 
there  now,  nor  have  there  ever  been,  nor  can 
[/o]  there  ever  be  formed  more  heavens  than 
one,  but  this  heaven  of  ours  is  one  and  unique 
and  complete. 

It  is  therefore  evident  that  there  is  also  no 
place  or  void  or  time  outside  the  heaven.  For 
in  every  place  body  can  be  present;  and  void 
is  said  to  be  that  in  which  the  presence  of 
[75]  body,  though  not  actual,  is  possible;  and 

1  Chapters  2  and  3  above. 

2  Chapter  2  above. 


279b 

time  is  the  number  of  movement.  But  in  the 
absence  of  natural  body  there  is  no  movement, 
and  outside  the  heaven,  as  we  have  shown, 
body  neither  exists  nor  can  come  to  exist.  It  is 
clear  then  that  there  is  neither  place,  nor  void, 
nor  time,  outside  the  heaven.  Hence  whatever 
is  there,  is  of  such  a  nature  as  not  to  occupy  any 

flace,  nor  does  time  age  it;  nor  is  there  any 
20]  change  in  any  of  the  things  which  lie  be¬ 
yond  the  outermost  motion;  they  continue 
through  their  entire  duration  unalterable  and 
unmodified,  living  the  best  and  most  self- 
sufficient  of  lives.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  this  word 
‘duration’  possessed  a  divine  significance  for 
the  ancients,  for  the  fulfilment  which  includes 
the  period  of  life  of  any  creature,  outside  of 
which  no  natural  development  can  fall,  has 
[25]  been  called  its  duration.  On  the  same 
principle  the  fulfilment  of  the  whole  heaven, 
the  fulfilment  which  includes  all  time  and 
infinity,  is  ‘duration’ — a  name  based  upon  the 
fact  that  it  is  always — duration  immortal  and 
divine.  From  it  derive  the  being  and  life  which 
[30]  other  things,  some  more  or  less  articu¬ 
lately  but  others  feebly,  enjoy.  So,  too,  in  its 
discussions  concerning  the  divine,  popular 
philosophy  often  propounds  the  view  that 
whatever  is  divine,  whatever  is  primary  and 
supreme,  is  necessarily  unchangeable.  This  fact 
confirms  what  we  have  said.  For  there  is  noth¬ 
ing  else  stronger  than  it  to  move  it — since  that 
[j5]  would  mean  more  divine — and  it  has  no 
279b  defect  and  lacks  none  of  its  proper  excel¬ 
lences.  Its  unceasing  movement,  then,  is  also 
reasonable,  since  everything  ceases  to  move 
when  it  comes  to  its  proper  place,  but  the  body 
whose  path  is  the  circle  has  one  and  the  same 
place  for  starting-point  and  goal. 

10 

Having  established  these  distinctions,  we  may 
[5]  now  proceed  to  the  question  whether  the 
heaven  is  ungenerated  or  generated,  indestruct¬ 
ible  or  destructible.  Let  us  start  with  a  review 
of  the  theories  of  other  thinkers;  for  the  proofs 
of  a  theory  are  difficulties  for  the  contrary  theory. 
Besides,  those  who  have  first  heard  the  pleas  of 
our  adversaries  will  be  more  likely  to  credit  the 
[/o]  assertions  which  we  are  going  to  make. 
We  shall  be  less  open  to  the  charge  of  procur¬ 
ing  judgement  by  default.  To  give  a  satisfac¬ 
tory  decision  as  to  the  truth  it  is  necessary 
to  be  rather  an  arbitrator  than  a  party  to  the 
dispute. 

That  the  world  was  generated  all  are  agreed, 
but,  generation  over,  some  say  that  it  is  eternal, 


ON  THE  HEAVENS 


280b  BOOK  I,  CHAPTERS  9-11  371 


others  say  that  it  is  destructible  like  any  other 
natural  formation.  Others  again,  with  Emped- 
[75]  odes  of  Acragas  and  Heraclitus  of 
Ephesus,  believe  that  there  is  alternation  in 
the  destructive  process,  which  takes  now  this 
direction,  now  that,  and  continues  without 
end. 

Now  to  assert  that  it  was  generated  and  yet 
is  eternal  is  to  assert  the  impossible;  for  we 
cannot  reasonably  attribute  to  anything  any 
characteristics  but  those  which  observation 
[20]  detects  in  many  or  all  instances.  But  in 
this  case  the  facts  point  the  other  way:  gen¬ 
erated  things  are  seen  always  to  be  destroyed. 
Further,  a  thing  whose  present  state  had  no 
beginning  and  which  could  not  have  been 
other  than  it  was  at  any  previous  moment 
throughout  its  entire  duration,  cannot  possibly 
be  changed.  For  there  will  have  to  be  some 
cause  of  change,  and  if  this  had  been  present 
earlier  it  would  have  made  possible  another 
condition  of  that  to  which  any  other  condition 
[25]  was  impossible.  Suppose  that  the  world 
was  formed  out  of  elements  which  were  for¬ 
merly  otherwise  conditioned  than  as  they  are 
now.  Then  ( 1 )  if  their  condition  was  always 
so  and  could  not  have  been  otherwise,  the 
world  could  never  have  come  into  being.  And 
(2)  if  the  world  did  come  into  being,  then, 
clearly,  their  condition  must  have  been  capable 
of  change  and  not  eternal:  after  combination 
therefore  they  will  be  dispersed,  just  as  in  the 
past  after  dispersion  they  came  into  combina¬ 
tion,  and  this  process  either  has  been,  or  could 
[30]  have  been,  indefinitely  repeated.  But  if 
this  is  so,  the  world  cannot  be  indestructible, 
and  it  does  not  matter  whether  the  change  of 
condition  has  actually  occurred  or  remains  a 
possibility. 

Some  of  those  who  hold  that  the  world, 
though  indestructible,  was  yet  generated,  try 
to  support  their  case  by  a  parallel  which  is  illu¬ 
sory.  They  say  that  in  their  statements  about 
its  generation  they  are  doing  what  geometri- 
[35]  cians  do  when  they  construct  their  fig¬ 
ures,  not  implying  that  the  universe  really  had 
a  beginning,  but  for  didactic  reasons  facilitat- 
280a  ing  understanding  by  exhibiting  the  ob¬ 
ject,  like  the  figure,  as  in  course  of  formation. 
The  two  cases,  as  we  said,  are  not  parallel; 
for,  in  the  construction  of  the  figure,  when  the 
various  steps  are  completed  the  required  fig¬ 
ure  forthwith  results;  but  in  these  other  dem¬ 
onstrations  what  results  is  not  that  which  was 
[5]  required.  Indeed  it  cannot  be  so;  for  ante¬ 
cedent  and  consequent,  as  assumed,  are  in  con¬ 


tradiction.  The  ordered,  it  is  said,1  arose  out  of 
the  unordered;  and  the  same  thing  cannot  be 
at  the  same  time  both  ordered  and  unordered; 
there  must  be  a  process  and  a  lapse  of  time 
separating  the  two  states.  In  the  figure,  on  the 
[70]  other  hand,  there  is  no  temporal  separa¬ 
tion.  It  is  clear  then  that  the  universe  cannot 
be  at  once  eternal  and  generated. 

To  say  that  the  universe  alternately  com¬ 
bines  and  dissolves  is  no  more  paradoxical  than 
to  make  it  eternal  but  varying  in  shape.  It  is 
as  if  one  were  to  think  that  there  was  now 
[75]  destruction  and  now  existence  when  from 
a  child  a  man  is  generated,  and  from  a  man  a 
child.  For  it  is  clear  that  when  the  elements 
come  together  the  result  is  not  a  chance  system 
and  combination,  but  the  very  same  as  before 
— especially  on  the  view  of  those  who  hold  this 
theory,  since  they  say  that  the  contrary  is  the 
cause  of  each  state.  So  that  if  the  totality  of 
[20]  body,  which  is  a  continuum,  is  now  in 
this  order  or  disposition  and  now  in  that,  and 
if  the  combination  of  the  whole  is  a  world  or 
heaven,  then  it  will  not  be  the  world  that 
comes  into  being  and  is  destroyed,  but  only  its 
dispositions. 

If  the  world  is  believed  to  be  one,  it  is  im¬ 
possible  to  suppose  that  it  should  be,  as  a 
whole,  first  generated  and  then  destroyed, 
never  to  reappear;  since  before  it  came  into 
[25]  being  there  was  always  present  the  com¬ 
bination  prior  to  it,  and  that,  we  hold,  could 
never  change  if  it  was  never  generated.  If,  on 
the  other  hand,  the  worlds  are  infinite  in  num¬ 
ber  the  view  is  more  plausible.  But  whether 
this  is,  or  is  not,  impossible  will  be  clear  from 
what  follows.  For  there  are  some  who  think  it 
possible  both  for  the  ungenerated  to  be  de- 
[30]  stroyed  and  for  the  generated  to  persist 
undestroyed.  (This  is  held  in  the  Timaeus , 
where  Plato  says  that  the  heaven,  though  it 
was  generated,  will  none  the  less  exist  to 
eternity.)  So  far  as  the  heaven  is  concerned  we 
have  answered  this  view  with  arguments  ap¬ 
propriate  to  the  nature  of  the  heaven:  on  the 
general  question  we  shall  attain  clearness  when 
we  examine  the  matter  universally. 

11 

280b  We  must  first  distinguish  the  senses  in 
which  we  use  the  words  ‘ungenerated’  and 
‘generated’,  ‘destructible’  and  ‘indestructible’. 
These  have  many  meanings,  and  though  it  may 
make  no  difference  to  the  argument,  yet  some 
confusion  of  mind  must  result  from  treating 

K^p.  Plato,  Timaeus ,  30. 


372 

[5]  as  uniform  in  its  use  a  word  which  has  sev¬ 
eral  distinct  applications.  The  character  which 
is  the  ground  of  the  predication  will  always 
remain  obscure. 

The  word  ‘ungenerated*  then  is  used  (a)  in 
one  sense  whenever  something  now  is  which 
formerly  was  not,  no  process  of  becoming  or 
change  being  involved.  Such  is  the  case,  accord¬ 
ing  to  some,  with  contact  and  motion,  since 
there  is  no  process  of  coming  to  be  in  contact 
or  in  motion.  ( b )  It  is  used  in  another  sense, 
when  something  which  is  capable  of  coming 
[/o]  to  be,  with  or  without  process,  does  not 
exist;  such  a  thing  is  ungenerated  in  the  sense 
that  its  generation  is  not  a  fact  but  a  possi¬ 
bility.  (c)  It  is  also  applied  where  there  is  gen¬ 
eral  impossibility  of  any  generation  such  that 
the  thing  now  is  which  then  was  not.  And 
‘impossibility*  has  two  uses:  first,  where  it  is 
untrue  to  say  that  the  thing  can  ever  come  into 
being,  and  secondly,  where  it  cannot  do  so 
easily,  quickly,  or  well.  In  the  same  way  the 
[75]  word  ‘generated*  is  used,  (a)  first,  where 
what  formerly  was  not  afterwards  is,  whether  a 
process  of  becoming  was  or  was  not  involved, 
so  long  as  that  which  then  was  not,  now  is; 
(b)  secondly,  of  anything  capable  of  existing, 
‘capable’  being  defined  with  reference  either  to 
truth  or  to  facility;  (c)  thirdly,  of  anything  to 
which  the  passage  from  not  being  to  being  be¬ 
longs,  whether  already  actual,  if  its  existence 
is  due  to  a  past  process  of  becoming,  or  not 
[20]  yet  actual  but  only  possible.  The  uses  of 
the  words  ‘destructible*  and  ‘indestructible* 
are  similar.  ’Destructible’  is  applied  (a)  to 
that  which  formerly  was  and  afterwards  either 
is  not  or  might  not  be,  whether  a  period  of  be¬ 
ing  destroyed  and  changed  intervenes  or  not; 
and  (b)  sometimes  we  apply  the  word  to  that 
which  a  process  of  destruction  may  cause  not 
to  be;  and  also  (c)  in  a  third  sense,  to  that 
[25]  which  is  easily  destructible,  to  the  ‘easily- 
destroyed*,  so  to  speak.  Of  the  indestructible 
the  same  account  holds  good.  It  is  either  (a) 
that  which  now  is  and  now  is  not,  without 
any  process  of  destruction,  like  contact,  which 
without  being  destroyed  afterwards  is  not, 
though  formerly  it  was;  or  (b)  that  which  is 
but  might  not  be,  or  which  will  at  some  time 
not  be,  though  it  now  is.  For  you  exist  now  and 
[jo]  so  does  the  contact;  yet  both  are  destruct¬ 
ible,  because  a  time  will  come  when  it  will  not 
be  true  of  you  that  you  exist,  nor  of  these  things 
that  they  are  in  contact.  Thirdly  (c)  in  its 
most  proper  use,  it  is  that  which  is,  but  is  in¬ 
capable  of  any  destruction  such  that  the  thing 


281* 

which  now  is  later  ceases  to  be  or  might  cease 
to  be;  or  again,  that  which  has  not  yet  been 
destroyed,  but  in  the  future  may  cease  to  be. 
281*  For  indestructible  is  also  used  of  that 
which  is  destroyed  with  difficulty. 

This  being  so,  we  must  ask  what  we  mean 
by  ‘possible*  and  ‘impossible*.  For  in  its  most 
proper  use  the  predicate  ‘indestructible’  is 
given  because  it  is  impossible  that  the  thing 
should  be  destroyed,  i.e.  exist  at  one  time  and 
[5]  not  at  another.  And  ‘ungenerated’  also  in¬ 
volves  impossibility  when  used  for  that  which 
cannot  be  generated,  in  such  fashion  that, 
while  formerly  it  was  not,  later  it  is.  An  in¬ 
stance  is  a  commensurable  diagonal.  Now 
when  we  speak  of  a  power  to  move  or  to  lift 
weights,  we  refer  always  to  the  maximum.  We 
speak,  for  instance,  of  a  power  to  lift  a  hun¬ 
dred  talents  or  walk  a  hundred  stades — though 
a  power  to  effect  the  maximum  is  also  a  power 
[/o]  to  effect  any  part  of  the  maximum — since 
we  feel  obliged  in  defining  the  pov/er  to  give 
the  limit  or  maximum.  A  thing,  then,  which  is 
capable  of  a  certain  amount  as  maximum  must 
also  be  capable  of  that  which  lies  within  it.  If, 
for  example,  a  man  can  lift  a  hundred  talents, 
he  can  also  lift  two,  and  if  he  can  walk  a  hun¬ 
dred  stades,  he  can  also  walk  two.  But  the  power 
[75]  is  of  the  maximum,  and  a  thing  said,  with 
reference  to  its  maximum,  to  be  incapable  of 
so  much  is  also  incapable  of  any  greater 
amount.  It  is,  for  instance,  clear  that  a  person 
who  cannot  walk  a  thousand  stades  will  also 
be  unable  to  walk  a  thousand  and  one.  This 
point  need  not  trouble  us,  for  we  may  take  it  as 
settled  that  what  is,  in  the  strict  sense,  possible 
is  determined  by  a  limiting  maximum.  Now 
[20]  perhaps  the  objection  might  be  raised 
[25]  that  there  is  no  necessity  in  this,  since  he 
who  sees  a  stade  need  not  see  the  smaller 
measures  contained  in  it,  while,  on  the  con¬ 
trary,  he  who  can  see  a  dot  or  hear  a  small 
sound  will  perceive  what  is  greater.  This, 
however,  does  not  touch  our  argument.  The 
maximum  may  be  determined  either  in  the 
power  or  in  its  object.  The  application  of  this 
is  plain.  Superior  sight  is  sight  of  the  smaller 
body,  but  superior  speed  is  that  of  the  greater 
body. 

12 

Having  established  these  distinctions  we  can 
now  proceed  to  the  sequel.  If  there  are  things 
capable  both  of  being  and  of  not  being,  there 
must  be  some  definite  maximum  time  of  their 
[30]  being  and  not  being;  a  time,  I  mean,  dur- 


ON  THE  HEAVENS 


282*  BOOK  I,  CHAPTERS  11-12  373 


ing  which  continued  existence  is  possible  to 
them  and  a  time  during  which  continued  non¬ 
existence  is  possible.  And  this  is  true  in  every 
category,  whether  the  thing  is,  for  example, 
‘man’,  or  ‘white’,  or  ‘three  cubits  long’,  or 
whatever  it  may  be.  For  if  the  time  is  not 
definite  in  quantity,  but  longer  than  any  that 
can  be  suggested  and  shorter  than  none,  then 
28 lb  it  will  be  possible  for  one  and  the  same 
thing  to  exist  for  infinite  time  and  not  to  exist 
for  another  infinity.  This,  however,  is  im¬ 
possible. 

Let  us  take  our  start  from  this  point.  The 
impossible  and  the  false  have  not  the  same 
significance.  One  use  of  ‘impossible’  and  ‘pos- 
[5]  sible’,  and  ‘false’  and  ‘true’,  is  hypothetical. 
It  is  impossible,  for  instance,  on  a  certain  hy¬ 
pothesis  that  the  triangle  should  have  its  angles 
equal  to  two  right  angles,  and  on  another  the 
diagonal  is  commensurable.  But  there  are  also 
things  possible  and  impossible,  false  and  true, 
absolutely.  Now  it  is  one  thing  to  be  abso¬ 
lutely  false,  and  another  thing  to  be  absolutely 
impossible.  To  say  that  you  are  standing  when 
you  are  not  standing  is  to  assert  a  falsehood, 
[/o]  but  not  an  impossibility.  Similarly  to  say 
that  a  man  who  is  playing  the  harp,  but  not 
singing,  is  singing,  is  to  say  what  is  false  but 
not  impossible.  To  say,  however,  that  you  are 
at  once  standing  and  sitting,  or  that  the  diag¬ 
onal  is  commensurable,  is  to  say  what  is  not 
only  false  but  also  impossible.  Thus  it  is  not  the 
same  thing  to  make  a  false  and  to  make  an 
impossible  hypothesis,  and  from  the  impossible 
[75]  hypothesis  impossible  results  follow.  A 
man  has,  it  is  true,  the  capacity  at  once  of  sit¬ 
ting  and  of  standing,  because  when  he  pos¬ 
sesses  the  one  he  also  possesses  the  other;  but 
it  does  not  follow  that  he  can  at  once  sit  and 
stand,  only  that  at  another  time  he  can  do  the 
other  also.  But  if  a  thing  has  for  infinite  time 
more  than  one  capacity,  another  time  is  impos¬ 
sible  and  the  times  must  coincide.  Thus  if  any- 
[20]  thing  which  exists  for  infinite  time  is 
destructible,  it  will  have  the  capacity  of  not  be¬ 
ing.  Now  if  it  exists  for  infinite  time  let  this 
capacity  be  actualized;  and  it  will  be  in  actual¬ 
ity  at  once  existent  and  non-existent.  Thus  a 
false  conclusion  would  follow  because  a  false 
assumption  was  made,  but  if  what  was  as¬ 
sumed  had  not  been  impossible  its  consequence 
[25]  would  not  have  been  impossible. 

Anything  then  which  always  exists  is  abso¬ 
lutely  imperishable.  It  is  also  ungenerated, 
since  if  it  was  generated  it  will  have  the  power 
for  some  time  of  not  being.  For  as  that  which 


formerly  was,  but  now  is  not,  or  is  capable  at 
some  future  time  of  not  being,  is  destructible, 
so  that  which  is  capable  of  formerly  not  having 
been  is  generated.  But  in  the  case  of  that  which 
always  is,  there  is  no  time  for  such  a  capacity  of 
[30]  not  being,  whether  the  supposed  time  is 
finite  or  infinite;  for  its  capacity  of  being  must 
include  the  finite  time  since  it  covers  infinite 
time. 

It  is  therefore  impossible  that  one  and  the 
same  thing  should  be  capable  of  always  exist¬ 
ing  and  of  always  not-existing.  And  ‘not  al¬ 
ways  existing’,  the  contradictory,  is  also  ex¬ 
cluded.  Thus  it  is  impossible  for  a  thing  always 
282a  to  exist  and  yet  to  be  destructible.  Nor, 
similarly,  can  it  be  generated.  For  of  two  attri¬ 
butes  if  B  cannot  be  present  without  A,  the 
impossibility  of  A  proves  the  impossibility  of 
B .  What  always  is,  then,  since  it  is  incapable  of 
ever  not  being,  cannot  possibly  be  generated. 
[5]  But  since  the  contradictory  of  ‘that  which 
is  always  capable  of  being’  is  ‘that  which  is  not 
always  capable  of  being’;  while  ‘that  which  is 
always  capable  of  not  being’  is  the  contrary, 
whose  contradictory  in  turn  is  ‘that  which  is 
not  always  capable  of  not  being’,  it  is  necessary 
that  the  contradictories  of  both  terms  should 
be  predicable  of  one  and  the  same  thing,  and 
thus  that,  intermediate  between  what  always 
is  and  what  always  is  not,  there  should  be  that 
[/o]  to  which  being  and  not-being  are  both 
possible;  for  the  contradictory  of  each  will  at 
times  be  true  of  it  unless  it  always  exists. 
Hence  that  which  not  always  is  not  will  some¬ 
times  be  and  sometimes  not  be;  and  it  is  clear 
that  this  is  true  also  of  that  which  cannot 
always  be  but  sometimes  is  and  therefore  some¬ 
times  is  not.  One  thing,  then,  will  have  the 
power  of  being,  and  will  thus  be  intermediate 
between  the  other  two. 

Expresed  universally  our  argument  is  as  fol- 
[75]  lows.  Let  there  be  two  attributes,  A  and  B, 
not  capable  of  being  present  in  any  one  thing 
together,  while  either  A  or  C  and  either  B  or 
D  are  capable  of  being  present  in  everything. 
Then  C  and  D  must  be  predicated  of  every¬ 
thing  of  which  neither  A  nor  B  is  predicated. 
Let  E  lie  between  A  and  B;  for  that  which  is 
neither  of  two  contraries  is  a  mean  between 
them.  In  E  both  C  and  D  must  be  present,  for 
[20]  either  A  or  C  is  present  everywhere  and 
therefore  in  E.  Since  then  A  is  impossible,  C 
must  be  present,  and  the  same  argument  holds 
of  D. 

Neither  that  which  always  is,  therefore,  nor 
that  which  always  is  not  is  either  generated  or 


374  ON  THE 

destructible.  And  clearly  whatever  is  generated 
or  destructible  is  not  eternal.  If  it  were,  it 
would  be  at  once  capable  of  always  being  and 
[25]  capable  of  not  always  being,  but  it  has 
already  been  shown1  that  this  is  impossible. 
Surely  then  whatever  is  ungenerated  and  in 
being  must  be  eternal,  and  whatever  is  inde¬ 
structible  and  in  being  must  equally  be  so.  (I 
use  the  words  ‘ungenerated’  and  ‘indestruct¬ 
ible’  in  their  proper  sense,  ‘ungenerated’  for 
that  which  now  is  and  could  not  at  any  previ¬ 
ous  time  have  been  truly  said  not  to  be;  ‘in¬ 
destructible’  for  that  which  now  is  and  cannot 
[jo]  at  any  future  time  be  truly  said  not  to  be.) 
If,  again,  the  two  terms  are  coincident,  if  the 
ungenerated  is  indestructible,  and  the  inde¬ 
structible  ungenearted,  then  each  of  them  is 
282b  coincident  with  ‘eternal’;  anything  un¬ 
generated  is  eternal  and  anything  indestruct¬ 
ible  is  eternal.  This  is  clear  too  from  the  defini¬ 
tion  of  the  terms,  Whatever  is  destructible 
must  be  generated;  for  it  is  either  ungenerated, 
or  generated,  but,  if  ungenerated,  it  is  by  hy¬ 
pothesis  indestructible.  Whatever,  further,  is 
generated  must  be  destructible.  For  it  is  either 
[5] destructible  or  indestructible,  but,  if  in¬ 
destructible,  it  is  by  hypothesis  ungenerated. 

If,  however,  ‘indestructible’  and  ‘ungener¬ 
ated’  are  not  coincident,  there  is  no  necessity 
that  either  the  ungenerated  or  the  indestruct¬ 
ible  should  be  eternal.  But  they  must  be  coin¬ 
cident,  for  the  following  reasons.  The  terms 
‘generated’  and  ‘destructible’  are  coincident; 
[/o]  this  is  obvious  from  our  former  remarks, 
since  between  what  always  is  and  what  always 
is  not  there  is  an  intermediate  which  is  neither, 
and  that  intermediate  is  the  generated  and  de¬ 
structible.  For  whatever  is  either  of  these  is 
capable  both  of  being  and  of  not  being  for  a 
definite  time:  in  either  case,  I  mean,  there  is  a 
certain  period  of  time  during  which  the  thing 
is  and  another  during  which  it  is  not.  Anything 
[75]  therefore  which  is  generated  or  destruct¬ 
ible  must  be  intermediate.  Now  let  A  be  that 
which  always  is  and  B  that  which  always  is  not, 
C  the  generated,  and  D  the  destructible.  Then 
C  must  be  intermediate  between  A  and  B.  For 
in  their  case  there  is  no  time  in  the  direction  of 
either  limit,  in  which  either  A  is  not  or  B  is. 
But  for  the  generated  there  must  be  such  a 
[20]  time  either  actually  or  potentially,  though 
not  for  A  and  B  in  either  way.  C  then  will  be, 
and  also  not  be,  for  a  limited  length  of  time, 
and  this  is  true  also  of  D,  the  destructible. 
Therefore  each  is  both  generated  and  destruct- 
*281 b  18  ff. 


HEAVENS  283* 

ible.  Therefore  ‘generated’  and  ‘destructible’ 
are  coincident.  Now  let  E  stand  for  the  ungen- 
[25]  erated,  F  for  the  generated,  G  for  the  in¬ 
destructible,  and  H  for  the  destructible.  As  for 
F  and  //,  it  has  been  shown  that  they  are  coin¬ 
cident.  But  when  terms  stand  to  one  another 
as  these  do,  F  and  H  coincident,  E  and  F  never 
predicated  of  the  same  thing  but  one  or  other 
of  everything,  and  G  and  H  likewise,  then  E 
[30]  and  G  must  needs  be  coincident.  For  sup¬ 
pose  that  E  is  not  coincident  with  G,  then  F 
will  be,  since  either  E  or  F  is  predictable  of 
everything.  But  of  that  of  which  F  is  predi¬ 
cated  H  will  be  predicable  also.  H  will  then  be 
283*  coincident  with  G,  but  this  we  saw  to  be 
impossible.  And  the  same  argument  shows 
that  G  is  coincident  with  E. 

Now  the  relation  of  the  ungenerated  (E) 
to  the  generated  ( F )  is  the  same  as  that  of  the 
indestructible  (G)  to  the  destructible  ( H ).  To 
say  then  that  there  is  no  reason  why  anything 
should  not  be  generated  and  yet  indestructible 
[5]  or  ungenerated  and  yet  destroyed,  to  im¬ 
agine  that  in  the  one  case  generation  and  in  the 
other  case  destruction  occurs  once  for  all,  is  to 
destroy  part  of  the  data.  For  (1)  everything  is 
capable  of  acting  or  being  acted  upon,  of  being 
or  not  being,  either  for  an  infinite,  or  for  a 
definitely  limited  space  of  time;  and  the  infi¬ 
nite  time  is  only  a  possible  alternative  because 
it  is  after  a  fashion  defined,  as  a  length  of  time 
[/o]  which  cannot  be  exceeded.  But  infinity  in 
one  direction  is  neither  infinite  or  finite.  (2) 
Further,  why,  after  always  existing,  was  the 
thing  destroyed,  why,  after  an  infinity  of  not 
being,  was  it  generated,  at  one  moment  rather 
than  another?  If  every  moment  is  alike  and  the 
moments  are  infinite  in  number,  it  is  clear  that 
a  generated  or  destructible  thing  existed  for  an 
infinite  time.  It  has  therefore  for  an  infinite 
time  the  capacity  of  not  being  (since  the  capacity 
[75]  of  being  and  the  capacity  of  not  being 
will  be  present  together),  if  destructible,  in  the 
time  before  destruction,  if  generated,  in  the 
time  after  generation.  If  then  we  assume  the 
two  capacities  to  be  actualized,  opposites  will 
be  present  together.  (3)  Further,  this  second 
capacity  will  be  present  like  the  first  at  every 
moment,  so  that  the  thing  will  have  for  an  in¬ 
finite  time  the  capacity  both  of  being  and  of 
not  being;  but  this  has  been  shown  to  be  im- 
[20]  possible.  (4)  Again,  if  the  capacity  is 
present  prior  to  the  activity,  it  will  be  present 
for  all  time,  even  while  the  thing  was  as  yet 
ungenerated  and  non-existent,  throughout  the 
infinite  time  in  which  it  was  capable  of  being 


284a  BOOK  I,  CHAPTER  12- 

generated.  At  the  time,  then,  when  it  was  not, 
at  that  same  time  it  had  the  capacity  of  being, 
both  of  being  then  and  of  being  thereafter,  and 
therefore  for  an  infinity  of  time. 

[25]  It  is  clear  also  on  other  grounds  that  it  is 
impossible  that  the  destructible  should  not  at 
some  time  be  destroyed.  For  otherwise  it  will 
always  be  at  once  destructible  and  in  actuality 
indestructible,  so  that  it  will  be  at  the  same  time 
capable  of  always  existing  and  of  not  always 
existing.  Thus  the  destructible  is  at  some  time 
actually  destroyed.  The  generable,  similarly, 
has  been  generated,  for  it  is  capable  of  having 
been  generated  and  thus  also  of  not  always 
existing. 

[3o]  We  may  also  see  in  the  following  way 
how  impossible  it  is  either  for  a  thing  which  is 
generated  to  be  thenceforward  indestructible, 
or  for  a  thing  which  is  ungenerated  and  has 
always  hitherto  existed  to  be  destroyed.  Noth¬ 
ing  that  is  by  chance  can  be  indestructible  or 
ungenerated,  since  the  products  of  chance  and 
283b  fortune  are  opposed  to  what  is,  or  comes 
to  be,  always  or  usually,  while  anything  which 
exists  for  a  time  infinite  either  absolutely  or  in 
one  direction,  is  in  existence  either  always  or 
usually.  That  which  is  by  chance,  then,  is  by 
nature  such  as  to  exist  at  one  time  and  not  at 
another.  But  in  things  of  that  character  the 
[5]  contradictory  states  proceed  from  one  and 
the  same  capacity,  the  matter  of  the  thing  be¬ 
ing  the  cause  equally  of  its  existence  and  of  its 


—BOOK  II,  CHAPTER  1  375 

non-existence.  Hence  contradictories  would  be 
present  together  in  actuality. 

Further,  it  cannot  truly  be  said  of  a  thing 
now  that  it  exists  last  year,  nor  could  it  be 
said  last  year  that  it  exists  now.  It  is  therefore 
impossible  for  what  once  did  not  exist  later  to 
be  eternal.  For  in  its  later  state  it  will  possess 
the  capacity  of  not  existing,  only  not  of  not 
[/o]  existing  at  a  time  when  it  exists — since 
then  it  exists  in  actuality — but  of  not  existing 
last  year  or  in  the  past.  Now  suppose  it  to  be  in 
actuality  what  it  is  capable  of  being.  It  will 
then  be  true  to  say  now  that  it  does  not  exist 
last  year.  But  this  is  impossible.  No  capacity 
relates  to  being  in  the  past,  but  always  to  being 
in  the  present  or  future.  It  is  the  same  with  the 
notion  of  an  eternity  of  existence  followed  later 
[75]  by  non-existence.  In  the  later  state  the 
capacity  will  be  present  for  that  which  is  not 
there  in  actuality.  Actualize,  then,  the  capacity. 
It  will  be  true  to  say  now  that  this  exists  last 
year  or  in  the  past  generally. 

Considerations  also  not  general  like  these  but 
proper  to  the  subject  show  it  to  be  impossible 
that  what  was  formerly  eternal  should  later  be 
destroyed  or  that  what  formerly  was  not  should 
[20]  later  be  eternal.  Whatever  is  destructible 
or  generated  is  always  alterable.  Now  altera¬ 
tion  is  due  to  contraries,  and  the  things  which 
compose  the  natural  body  are  the  very  same 
that  destroy  it. 


BOOK  II 


1 

That  the  heaven  as  a  whole  neither  came  into 
being  nor  admits  of  destruction,  as  some  assert, 
but  is  one  and  eternal,  with  no  end  or  begin¬ 
ning  of  its  total  duration,  containing  and  em- 
[30]  bracing  in  itself  the  infinity  of  time,  we 
may  convince  ourselves  not  only  by  the  argu¬ 
ments  already  set  forth  but  also  by  a  considera¬ 
tion  of  the  views  of  those  who  differ  from  us 
in  providing  for  its  generation.  If  our  view  is  a 
possible  one,  and  the  manner  of  generation 
284a  which  they  assert  is  impossible,  this  fact 
will  have  great  weight  in  convincing  us  of  the 
immortality  and  eternity  of  the  world.  Hence  it 
is  well  to  persuade  oneself  of  the  truth  of  the 
ancient  and  truly  traditional  theories,  that 
there  is  some  immortal  and  divine  thing  which 
possesses  movement,  but  movement  such  as 
[5]  has  no  limit  and  is  rather  itself  the  limit 
of  all  other  movement.  A  limit  is  a  thing  which 


contains;  and  this  motion,  being  perfect,  con¬ 
tains  those  imperfect  motions  which  have  a 
limit  and  a  goal,  having  itself  no  beginning  or 
end,  but  unceasing  through  the  infinity  of 
[/o]  time,  and  of  other  movements,  to  some 
the  cause  of  their  beginning,  to  others  offering 
the  goal.  The  ancients  gave  to  the  Gods  the 
heaven  or  upper  place,  as  being  alone  im¬ 
mortal;  and  our  present  argument  testifies  that 
it  is  indestructible  and  ungenerated.  Further, 
it  is  unaffected  by  any  mortal  discomfort,  and, 
[75]  in  addition,  effortless;  for  it  needs  no  con¬ 
straining  necessity  to  keep  it  to  its  path,  and 
prevent  it  from  moving  with  some  other  move¬ 
ment  more  natural  to  itself.  Such  a  constrained 
movement  would  necessarily  involve  effort — 
the  more  so,  the  more  eternal  it  were — and 
would  be  inconsistent  with  perfection.  Hence 
we  must  not  believe  the  old  tale  which  says 
[20]  that  the  world  needs  some  Atlas  to  keep 
it  safe — a  tale  composed,  it  would  seem,  by  men 


376  ON  THE  HEAVENS  285a 


who,  like  later  thinkers,  conceived  of  all  the 
upper  bodies  as  earthy  and  endowed  with 
weight,  and  therefore  supported  it  in  their  fab¬ 
ulous  way  upon  animate  necessity.  We  must 
no  more  believe  that  than  follow  Empedocles 
when  he  says  that  the  world,  by  being  whirled 
[25]  round,  received  a  movement  quick  enough 
to  overpower  its  own  downward  tendency,  and 
thus  has  been  kept  from  destruction  all  this 
time.  Nor,  again,  is  it  conceivable  that  it 
should  persist  eternally  by  the  necessitation  of 
a  soul.  For  a  soul  could  not  live  in  such  condi¬ 
tions  painlessly  or  happily,  since  the  movement 
[jo]  involves  constraint,  being  imposed  on  the 
first  body,  whose  natural  motion  is  different, 
and  imposed  continuously.  It  must  therefore  be 
uneasy  and  devoid  of  all  rational  satisfaction; 
for  it  could  not  even,  like  the  soul  of  mortal  ani¬ 
mals,  take  recreation  in  the  bodily  relaxation  of 
[35]  sleep.  An  Ixion’s  lot  must  needs  possess  it, 
284b  without  end  or  respite.  If  then,  as  we 
said,  the  view  already  stated  of  the  first  motion 
is  a  possible  one,  it  is  not  only  more  appropriate 
so  to  conceive  of  its  eternity,  but  also  on  this 
hypothesis  alone  are  we  able  to  advance  a 
[5]  theory  consistent  with  popular  divinations 
of  the  divine  nature.  But  of  this  enough  for  the 
present. 

2 

Since  there  are  some  who  say  that  there  is  a 
right  and  a  left  in  the  heaven,  with  those  who 
are  known  as  Pythagoreans — to  whom  indeed 
the  view  really  belongs — we  must  consider 
whether,  if  we  are  to  apply  these  principles  to 
[/o]  the  body  of  the  universe,  we  should  follow 
their  statement  of  the  matter  or  find  a  better 
way.  At  the  start  we  may  say  that,  if  right  and 
left  are  applicable,  there  are  prior  principles 
which  must  first  be  applied.  These  principles 
have  been  analysed  in  the  discussion  of  the 
movements  of  animals,1  for  the  reason  that 
they  are  proper  to  animal  nature.  For  in  some 
[75]  animals  we  find  all  such  distinctions  of 
parts  as  this  of  right  and  left  clearly  present, 
and  in  others  some;  but  in  plants  we  find  only 
above  and  below.  Now  if  we  are  to  apply  to  the 
heaven  such  a  distinction  of  parts,  we  must  ex¬ 
pect,  as  we  have  said,  to  find  in  it  also  that 
[20]  distinction  which  in  animals  is  found  first 
of  them  all.  The  distinctions  are  three,  namely, 
above  and  below,  front  and  its  opposite,  right 
and  left — all  these  three  oppositions  we  expect 
to  find  in  the  perfect  body — and  each  may  be 
called  a  principle.  Above  is  the  principle  of 
1  On  the  Gait  of  Animals ,  chapters  4,  5. 


[25]  length,  right  of  breadth,  front  of  depth. 
Or  again  we  may  connect  them  with  the  vari¬ 
ous  movements,  taking  principle  to  mean  that 
part,  in  a  thing  capable  of  movement,  from 
which  movement  first  begins.  Growth  starts 
from  above,  locomotion  from  the  right,  sense- 
movement  from  in  front  (for  front  is  simply 
[30]  the  part  to  which  the  senses  are  directed). 
Hence  we  must  not  look  for  above  and  below, 
right  and  left,  front  and  back,  in  every  kind  of 
body,  but  only  in  those  which,  being  animate, 
have  a  principle  of  movement  within  them¬ 
selves.  For  in  no  inanimate  thing  do  we  ob¬ 
serve  a  part  from  which  movement  originates. 
Some  do  not  move  at  all,  some  move,  but  not 
[35]  indifferently  in  any  direction;  fire,  for  ex- 
2853  ample,  only  upward,  and  earth  only  to 
the  centre.  It  is  true  that  we  speak  of  above  and 
below,  right  and  left,  in  these  bodies  relatively 
to  ourselves.  The  reference  may  be  to  our  own 
right  hands,  as  with  the  diviner,  or  to  some 
similarity  to  our  own  members,  such  as  the 
[5]  parts  of  a  statue  possess;  or  we  may  take 
the  contrary  spatial  order,  calling  right  that 
which  is  to  our  left,  and  left  that  which  is  to  our 
right.  We  observe,  however,  in  the  things 
themselves  none  of  these  distinctions;  indeed 
if  they  are  turned  round  we  proceed  to  speak 
of  the  opposite  parts  as  right  and  left,  above 
[/o]  and  below,  front  and  back.  Hence  it  is  re¬ 
markable  that  the  Pythagoreans  should  have 
spoken  of  these  two  principles,  right  and  left, 
only,  to  the  exclusion  of  the  other  four,  which 
have  as  good  a  title  as  they.  There  is  no  less 
difference  between  above  and  below  or  front 
[75]  and  back  in  animals  generally  than  be¬ 
tween  right  and  left.  The  difference  is  some¬ 
times  only  one  of  function,  sometimes  also  one 
of  shape;  and  while  the  distinction  of  above 
and  below  is  characteristic  of  all  animate  things, 
whether  plants  or  animals,  that  of  right  and 
left  is  not  found  in  plants.  Further,  inasmuch 
as  length  is  prior  to  breadth,  if  above  is  the 
[20]  principle  of  length,  right  of  breadth,  and 
if  the  principle  of  that  which  is  prior  is  itself 
prior,  then  above  will  be  prior  to  right,  or  let 
us  say,  since  ‘prior'  is  ambiguous,  prior  in  or¬ 
der  of  generation.  If,  in  addition,  above  is  the 
region  from  which  movement  originates,  right 
the  region  in  which  it  starts,  front  the  region 
[25]  to  which  it  is  directed,  then  on  this  ground 
too  above  has  a  certain  original  character  as 
compared  with  the  other  forms  of  position.  On 
these  two  grounds,  then,  they  may  fairly  be 
criticized,  first,  for  omitting  the  more  funda¬ 
mental  principles,  and  secondly,  for  thinking 


286*  BOOK  II,  CHAPTERS  1-3  377 


that  the  two  they  mentioned  were  attributable 
equally  to  everything. 

Since  we  have  already  determined  that  func¬ 
tions  of  this  kind  belong  to  things  which  pos¬ 
sess  a  principle  of  movement,  and  that  the 
[30]  heaven  is  animate  and  possesses  a  prin¬ 
ciple  of  movement,  clearly  the  heaven  must 
also  exhibit  above  and  below,  right  and  left. 
We  need  not  be  troubled  by  the  question,  aris¬ 
ing  from  the  spherical  shape  of  the  world,  how 
there  can  be  a  distinction  of  right  and  left 
285b  within  it,  all  parts  being  alike  and  all  for 
ever  in  motion.  We  must  think  of  the  world  as 
of  something  in  which  right  differs  from  left 
in  shape  as  well  as  in  other  respects,  which 
subsequently  is  included  in  a  sphere.  The  dif¬ 
ference  of  function  will  persist,  but  will  appear 
[5]  not  to  by  reason  of  the  regularity  of  shape. 
In  the  same  fashion  must  we  conceive  of  the  be¬ 
ginning  of  its  movement.  For  even  if  it  never 
began  to  move,  yet  it  must  possess  a  principle 
from  which  it  would  have  begun  to  move  if  it 
had  begun,  and  from  which  it  would  begin 
again  if  it  came  to  a  stand.  Now  by  its  length 
I  mean  the  interval  between  its  poles,  one  pole 
[/o]  being  above  and  the  other  below;  for  two 
hemispheres  are  specially  distinguished  from 
all  others  by  the  immobility  of  the  poles.  Fur¬ 
ther,  by  ‘transverse'  in  the  universe  we  com¬ 
monly  mean,  not  above  and  below,  but  a  direc¬ 
tion  crossing  the  line  of  the  poles,  which,  by 
implication,  is  length:  for  transverse  motion  is 
[75]  motion  crossing  motion  up  and  down.  Of 
the  poles,  that  which  we  see  above  us  is  the 
lower  region,  and  that  which  we  do  not  see  is 
the  upper.  For  right  in  anything  is,  as  we  say, 
the  region  in  which  locomotion  originates,  and 
the  rotation  of  the  heaven  originates  in  the 
region  from  which  the  stars  rise.  So  this  will  be 
the  right,  and  the  region  where  they  set  the 
[20]  left.  If  then  they  begin  from  the  right 
and  move  round  to  the  right,  the  upper  must 
be  the  unseen  pole.  For  if  it  is  the  pole  we  see, 
the  movement  will  be  leftward,  which  we  deny 
to  be  the  fact.  Clearly  then  the  invisible  pole 
is  above.  And  those  who  live  in  the  other 
[25]  hemisphere  are  above  and  to  the  right, 
while  we  are  below  and  to  the  left.  This  is  just 
the  opposite  of  the  view  of  the  Pythagoreans, 
who  make  us  above  and  on  the  right  side  and 
those  in  the  other  hemisphere  below  and  on  the 
left  side;  the  fact  being  the  exact  opposite.  Rela¬ 
tively,  however,  to  the  secondary  revolution,  I 
mean  that  of  the  planets,  we  are  above  and  on 
[30]  the  right  and  they  are  below  and  on  the 
left.  For  the  principle  of  their  movement  has 


the  reverse  position,  since  the  movement  itself 
is  the  contrary  of  the  other:  hence  it  follows 
that  we  are  at  its  beginning  and  they  at  its 
286*  end.  Here  we  may  end  our  discussion  of 
the  distinctions  of  parts  created  by  the  three 
dimensions  and  of  the  consequent  differences 
of  position. 

3 

Since  circular  motion  is  not  the  contrary  of  the 
reverse  circular  motion,  we  must  consider  why 
[5]  there  is  more  than  one  motion,  though  we 
have  to  pursue  our  inquiries  at  a  distance — a 
distance  created  not  so  much  by  our  spatial 
position  as  by  the  fact  that  our  senses  enable  us 
to  perceive  very  few  of  the  attributes  of  the 
heavenly  bodies.  But  let  not  that  deter  us.  The 
reason  must  be  sought  in  the  following  facts. 
Everything  which  has  a  function  exists  for  its 
function.  The  activity  of  God  is  immortality, 
[/o]  i.e.  eternal  life.  Therefore  the  movement 
of  that  which  is  divine  must  be  eternal.  But 
such  is  the  heaven,  viz.  a  divine  body,  and  for 
that  reason  to  it  is  given  the  circular  body 
whose  nature  it  is  to  move  always  in  a  circle. 
Why,  then,  is  not  the  whole  body  of  the  heaven 
of  the  same  character  as  that  part?  Because 
there  must  be  something  at  rest  at  the  centre  of 
the  revolving  body;  and  of  that  body  no  part 
[75]  can  be  at  rest,  either  elsewhere  or  at  the 
centre.  It  could  do  so  only  if  the  body’s  natural 
movement  were  towards  the  centre.  But  the 
circular  movement  is  natural,  since  otherwise 
it  could  not  be  eternal:  for  nothing  unnatural 
is  eternal.  The  unnatural  is  subsequent  to  the 
natural,  being  a  derangement  of  the  natural 
[20]  which  occurs  in  the  course  of  its  genera¬ 
tion.  Earth  then  has  to  exist;  for  it  is  earth 
which  is  at  rest  at  the  centre.  (At  present  we 
may  take  this  for  granted:  it  shall  be  explained 
later.1)  But  if  earth  must  exist,  so  must  fire. 
For,  if  one  of  a  pair  of  contraries  naturally  ex¬ 
ists,  the  other,  if  it  is  really  contrary,  exists  also 
naturally.  In  some  form  it  must  be  present, 
[25]  since  the  matter  of  contraries  is  the  same. 
Also,  the  positive  is  prior  to  its  privation 
(warm,  for  instance,  to  cold),  and  rest  and 
heaviness  stand  for  the  privation  of  lightness 
and  movement.  But  further,  if  fire  and  earth 
exist,  the  intermediate  bodies  must  exist  also: 
[30]  for  each  element  stands  in  a  contrary  rela¬ 
tion  to  every  other.  (This,  again,  we  will  here 
take  for  granted  and  try  later  to  explain.2) 
With  these  four  elements  generation  clearly  is 

*See  chapter  14. 

2See  On  Generation  and  Corruption,  n.  3,  4. 


378  ON  THE  HEAVENS  287* 


involved,  since  none  of  them  can  be  eternal: 
for  contraries  interact  with  one  another  and 
destroy  one  another.  Further,  it  is  inconceiva¬ 
ble  that  a  movable  body  should  be  eternal,  if 
[35]  its  movement  cannot  be  regarded  as  nat- 
286b  urally  eternal:  and  these  bodies  we  know 
to  possess  movement.  Thus  we  see  that  genera¬ 
tion  is  necessarily  involved.  But  if  so,  there 
must  be  at  least  one  other  circular  motion:  for 
a  single  movement  of  the  whole  heaven  would 
necessitate  an  identical  relation  of  the  elements 
[5]  of  bodies  to  one  another.  This  matter  also 
shall  be  cleared  up  in  what  follows:  but  for 
the  present  so  much  is  clear,  that  the  reason 
why  there  is  more  than  one  circular  body  is 
the  necessity  of  generation,  which  follows  on 
the  presence  of  fire,  which,  with  that  of  the 
other  bodies,  follows  on  that  of  earth;  and 
earth  is  required  because  eternal  movement  in 
one  body  necessitates  eternal  rest  in  another. 

4 

[/o]  The  shape  of  the  heaven  is  of  necessity 
spherical;  for  that  is  the  shape  most  appro¬ 
priate  to  its  substance  and  also  by  nature 
primary. 

First,  let  us  consider  generally  which  shape 
is  primary  among  planes  and  solids  alike. 
Every  plane  figure  must  be  either  rectilinear 
[75]  ~t>r  curvilinear.  Now  the  rectilinear  is 
bounded  by  more  than  one  line,  the  curvilinear 
by  one  only.  But  since  in  any  kind  the  one  is 
naturally  prior  to  the  many  and  the  simple  to 
the  complex,  the  circle  will  be  the  first  of  plane 
figures.  Again,  if  by  complete,  as  previously 
[20]  defined,1  we  mean  a  thing  outside  which 
no  part  of  itself  can  be  found,  and  if  addition 
is  always  possible  to  the  straight  line  but  never 
to  the  circular,  clearly  the  line  which  embraces 
the  circle  is  complete.  If  then  the  complete  is 
prior  to  the  incomplete,  it  follows  on  this 
ground  also  that  the  circle  is  primary  among 
figures.  And  the  sphere  holds  the  same  posi¬ 
tion  among  solids.  For  it  alone  is  embraced  by 
[25]  a  single  surface,  while  rectilinear  solids 
have  several.  The  sphere  is  among  solids 
what  the  circle  is  among  plane  figures.  Further, 
those  who  divide  bodies  into  planes  and  gen¬ 
erate  them  out  of  planes  seem  to  bear  witness 
to  the  truth  of  this.  Alone  among  solids  they 
leave  the  sphere  undivided,  as  not  possessing 
[30]  more  than  one  surface:  for  the  division 
into  surfaces  is  not  just  dividing  a  whole  by 
cutting  it  into  its  parts,  but  division  of  an¬ 
other  fashion  into  parts  different  in  form.  It  is 

lPhysics,  hi.  207s  8. 


clear,  then,  that  the  sphere  is  first  of  solid 
figures. 

If,  again,  one  orders  figures  according  to 
[35]  their  numbers,  it  is  most  natural  to  ar¬ 
range  them  in  this  way.  The  circle  corresponds 
287*  to  the  number  one,  the  triangle,  being 
the  sum  of  two  right  angles,  to  the  number 
two.  But  if  one  is  assigned  to  the  triangle,  the 
circle  will  not  be  a  figure  at  all. 

Now  the  first  figure  belongs  to  the  first  body, 
and  the  first  body  is  that  at  the  farthest  cir¬ 
cumference.  It  follows  that  the  body  which  re¬ 
volves  with  a  circular  movement  must  be 
[5]  spherical.  The  same  then  will  be  true  of  the 
body  continuous  with  it:  for  that  which  is  con¬ 
tinuous  with  the  spherical  is  spherical.  The 
same  again  holds  of  the  bodies  between  these 
and  the  centre.  Bodies  which  are  bounded  by 
the  spherical  and  in  contact  with  it  must  be,  as 
wholes,  spherical;  and  the  bodies  below  the 
sphere  of  the  planets  are  contiguous  with  the 
sphere  above  them.  The  sphere  then  will  be 
[/o]  spherical  throughout;  for  every  body 
within  it  is  contiguous  and  continuous  with 
spheres. 

Again,  since  the  whole  revolves,  palpably 
and  by  assumption,  in  a  circle,  and  since  it  has 
been  shown  that  outside  the  farthest  circum¬ 
ference  there  is  neither  void  nor  place,  from 
these  grounds  also  it  will  follow  necessarily 
that  the  heaven  is  spherical.  For  if  it  is  to  be 
rectilinear  in  shape,  it  will  follow  that  there  is 
[75]  place  and  body  and  void  without  it.  For 
a  rectilinear  figure  as  it  revolves  never  contin¬ 
ues  in  the  same  room,  but  where  formerly  was 
body,  is  now  none,  and  where  now  is  none, 
body  will  be  in  a  moment  because  of  the  pro¬ 
jection  at  the  corners.  Similarly,  if  the  world 
[20]  had  some  other  figure  with  unequal  radii, 
if,  for  instance,  it  were  lentiform,  or  oviform, 
in  every  case  we  should  have  to  admit  space 
and  void  outside  the  moving  body,  because 
the  whole  body  would  not  always  occupy  the 
same  room. 

Again,  if  the  motion  of  the  heaven  is  the 
measure  of  all  movements  whatever  in  virtue 
of  being  alone  continuous  and  regular  and  eter- 
[25]  nal,  and  if,  in  each  kind,  the  measure  is 
the  minimum,  and  the  minimum  movement  is 
the  swiftest,  then,  clearly,  the  movement  of  the 
heaven  must  be  the  swiftest  of  all  movements. 
Now  of  lines  which  return  upon  themselves 
the  line  which  bounds  the  circle  is  the  shortest; 
and  that  movement  is  the  swiftest  which  fol¬ 
lows  the  shortest  line.  Therefore,  if  the  heaven 
moves  in  a  circle  and  moves  more  swiftly  than 


288* 

[jo]  anything  else,  it  must  necessarily  be 
spherical. 

Corroborative  evidence  may  be  drawn  from 
the  bodies  whose  position  is  about  the  centre. 
If  earth  is  enclosed  by  water,  water  by  air,  air 
by  fire,  and  these  similarly  by  the  upper  bodies 
— which  while  not  continuous  are  yet  contigu- 
2 87b  ous  with  them — and  if  the  surface  of  wa¬ 
ter  is  spherical,  and  that  which  is  continuous 
with  or  embraces  the  spherical  must  itself  be 
spherical,  then  on  these  grounds  also  it  is  clear 
that  the  heavens  are  spherical.  But  the  surface 
[5]  of  water  is  seen  to  be  spherical  if  we  take  as 
our  starting-point  the  fact  that  water  naturally 
tends  to  collect  in  a  hollow  place — ‘hollow’ 
meaning  ‘nearer  the  centre’.  Draw  from  the 
centre  the  lines  AB,  AC,  and  let  their  extremi¬ 
ties  be  joined  by  the  straight  line  BC.  The  line 
AD,  drawn  to  the  base  of  the  triangle,  will  be 
shorter  than  either  of  the  radii.  Therefore  the 
[/o]  place  in  which  it  terminates  will  be  a  hol¬ 
low  place.  The  water  then  will  collect  there  un¬ 
til  equality  is  established,  that  is  until  the  line 
AE  is  equal  to  the  two  radii.  Thus  water  forces 
its  way  to  the  ends  of  the  radii,  and  there  only 
will  it  rest:  but  the  line  which  connects  the  ex¬ 
tremities  of  the  radii  is  circular:  therefore  the 
surface  of  the  water  BEC  is  spherical. 

[75]  It  is  plain  from  the  foregoing  that  the  uni¬ 
verse  is  spherical.  It  is  plain,  further,  that  it  is 
turned  (so  to  speak)  with  a  finish  which  no 
manufactured  thing  nor  anything  else  within 
the  range  of  our  observation  can  even  approach. 
For  the  matter  of  which  these  are  composed 
does  not  admit  of  anything  like  the  same  regu¬ 
larity  and  finish  as  the  substance  of  the  envel- 
[20]  oping  body;  since  with  each  step  away 
from  earth  the  matter  manifestly  becomes  finer 
in  the  same  proportion  as  water  is  finer  than 
earth. 

5 

Now  there  are  two  ways  of  moving  along  a 
circle,  from  A  to  B  or  from  A  to  C,  and  we 
have  already  explained1  that  these  movements 
are  not  contrary  to  one  another.  But  nothing 
[25]  which  concerns  the  eternal  can  be  a  mat¬ 
ter  of  chance  or  spontaneity,  and  the  heaven 
and  its  circular  motion  are  eternal.  We  must 
therefore  ask  why  this  motion  takes  one  direc¬ 
tion  and  not  the  other.  Either  this  is  itself  an 
ultimate  fact  or  there  is  an  ultimate  fact  behind 
it.  It  may  seem  evidence  of  excessive  folly  or 
excessive  zeal  to  try  to  provide  an  explanation 
[jo]  of  some  things,  or  of  everything,  admit- 

h.  4. 


379 

ting  no  exception.  The  criticism,  however,  is 
not  always  just:  one  should  first  consider  what 
reason  there  is  for  speaking,  and  also  what 
kind  of  certainty  is  looked  for,  whether  human 
merely  or  of  a  more  cogent  kind.  When  any 
288*  one  shall  succeed  in  finding  proofs  of 
greater  precision,  gratitude  will  be  due  to  him 
for  the  discovery,  but  at  present  we  must  be 
content  with  a  probable  solution.  If  nature  al¬ 
ways  follows  the  best  course  possible,  and,  just 
as  upward  movement  is  the  superior  form  of 
rectilinear  movement,  since  the  upper  region 
[5]  is  more  divine  than  the  lower,  so  forward 
movement  is  superior  to  backward,  then  front 
and  back  exhibits,  like  right  and  left,  as  we  said 
before  and  as  the  difficulty  just  stated  itself  sug¬ 
gests,  the  distinction  of  prior  and  posterior, 
which  provides  a  reason  and  so  solves  our  dif¬ 
ficulty.  Supposing  that  nature  is  ordered  in  the 
[/o]  best  way  possible,  this  may  stand  as  the 
reason  of  the  fact  mentioned.  For  it  is  best  to 
move  with  a  movement  simple  and  unceasing, 
and,  further,  in  the  superior  of  two  possible 
directions. 

6 

We  have  next  to  show  that  the  movement  of 
the  heaven  is  regular  and  not  irregular.  This 
[75]  applies  only  to  the  first  heaven  and  the 
first  movement;  for  the  lower  spheres  exhibit 
a  composition  of  several  movements  into  one. 
If  the  movement  is  uneven,  clearly  there  will 
be  acceleration,  maximum  speed,  and  retarda¬ 
tion,  since  these  appear  in  all  irregular  mo- 
[20]  tions.  The  maximum  may  occur  either  at 
the  starting-point  or  at  the  goal  or  between  the 
two;  and  we  expect  natural  motion  to  reach  its 
maximum  at  the  goal,  unnatural  motion  at  the 
starting-point,  and  missiles  midway  between 
the  two.  But  circular  movement,  having  no  be¬ 
ginning  or  limit  or  middle  in  the  direct  sense 
of  the  words,  has  neither  whence  nor  whither 
nor  middle:  for  in  time  it  is  eternal,  and  in 
[25]  length  it  returns  upon  itself  without  a 
break.  If  then  its  movement  has  no  maximum, 
it  can  have  no  irregularity,  since  irregularity  is 
produced  by  retardation  and  acceleration.  Fur¬ 
ther,  since  everything  that  is  moved  is  moved 
by  something,  the  cause  of  the  irregularity  of 
movement  must  lie  either  in  the  mover  or  in  the 
[30]  moved  or  both.  For  if  the  mover  moved 
not  always  with  the  same  force,  or  if  the  moved 
were  altered  and  did  not  remain  the  same,  or  if 
both  were  to  change,  the  result  might  well  be 
an  irregular  movement  in  the  moved.  But  none 
of  these  possibilities  can  be  conceived  as  actual 


BOOK  II,  CHAPTERS  3-6 


380  ON  THE  HEAVENS  289a 


in  the  case  of  the  heavens.  As  to  that  which  is 
moved,  we  have  shown  that  it  is  primary  and 
288b  simple  and  ungenerated  and  indestructi¬ 
ble  and  generally  unchanging;  and  the  mover 
has  an  even  better  right  to  these  attributes.  It  is 
the  primary  that  moves  the  primary,  the  sim¬ 
ple  the  simple,  the  indestructible  and  ungener¬ 
ated  that  which  is  indestructible  and  ungener- 
[5]  ated.  Since  then  that  which  is  moved,  being 
a  body,  is  nevertheless  unchanging,  how 
should  the  mover,  which  is  incorporeal,  be 
changed? 

It  follows  then,  further,  that  the  motion  can¬ 
not  be  irregular.  For  if  irregularity  occurs, 
there  must  be  change  either  in  the  movement 
as  a  whole,  from  fast  to  slow  and  slow  to  fast, 
or  in  its  parts.  That  there  is  no  irregularity  in 
[/o]  the  parts  is  obvious,  since,  if  there  were, 
some  divergence  of  the  stars  would  have  taken 
place  before  now  in  the  infinity  of  time,  as  one 
moved  slower  and  another  faster:  but  no  altera¬ 
tion  of  their  intervals  is  ever  observed.  Nor 
again  is  a  change  in  the  movement  as  a  whole 
admissible.  Retardation  is  always  due  to  inca- 
acity,  and  incapacity  is  unnatural.  The  inca- 
75]  pacities  of  animals,  age,  decay,  and  the 
like,  are  all  unnatural,  due,  it  seems,  to  the  fact 
that  the  whole  animal  complex  is  made  up  of 
materials  which  differ  in  respect  of  their  proper 
places,  and  no  single  part  occupies  its  own 
place.  If  therefore  that  which  is  primary  con- 
[20]  tains  nothing  unnatural,  being  simple  and 
unmixed  and  in  its  proper  place  and  having  no 
contrary,  then  it  has  no  place  for  incapacity, 
nor,  consequently,  for  retardation  or  (since  ac¬ 
celeration  involves  retardation)  for  accelera¬ 
tion.  Again,  it  is  inconceivable  that  the  mover 
should  first  show  incapacity  for  an  infinite 
time,  and  capacity  afterwards  for  another  infin¬ 
ity.  For  clearly  nothing  which,  like  incapacity, 
[25]  is  unnatural  ever  continues  for  an  infinity 
of  time;  nor  does  the  unnatural  .endure  as  long 
as  the  natural,  or  any  form  of  incapacity  as 
long  as  the  capacity.  But  if  the  movement  is  re¬ 
tarded  it  must  necessarily  be  retarded  for  an 
infinite  time.  Equally  impossible  is  perpetual 
acceleration  or  perpetual  retardation.  For  such 
movement  would  be  infinite  and  indefinite,  but 
every  movement,  in  our  view,  proceeds  from 
[jo]  one  point  to  another  and  is  definite  in 
character.  Again,  suppose  one  assumes  a  mini¬ 
mum  time  in  less  than  which  the  heaven  could 
not  complete  its  movement.  For,  as  a  given 
walk  or  a  given  exercise  on  the  harp  cannot 
take  any  and  every  time,  but  every  perform¬ 
ance  has  its  definite  minimum  time  which  is 


unsurpassable,  so,  one  might  suppose,  the 
movement  of  the  heaven  could  not  be  complet- 
289a  ed  in  any  and  every  time.  But  in  that  case 
perpetual  acceleration  is  impossible  (and,  equal¬ 
ly,  perpetual  retardation:  for  the  argument 
holds  of  both  and  each),  if  we  may  take  accel¬ 
eration  to  proceed  by  identical  or  increasing 
additions  of  speed  and  for  an  infinite  time.  The 
[5]  remaining  alternative  is  to  say  that  the 
movement  exhibits  an  alternation  of  slower 
and  faster:  but  this  is  a  mere  fiction  and 
quite  inconceivable.  Further,  irregularity  of 
this  kind  would  be  particularly  unlikely  to  pass 
unobserved,  since  contrast  makes  observation 
easy. 

That  there  is  one  heaven,  then,  only,  and 
that  it  is  ungenerated  and  eternal,  and  further 
that  its  movement  is  regular,  has  now  been 
[/o]  sufficiently  explained. 

7 

We  have  next  to  speak  of  the  stars,  as  they 
are  called,  of  their  composition,  shape,  and 
movements.  It  would  be  most  natural  and  con¬ 
sequent  upon  what  has  been  said  that  each  of 
[75]  the  stars  should  be  composed  of  that  sub¬ 
stance  in  which  their  path  lies,  since,  as  we  said, 
there  is  an  element  whose  natural  movement  is 
circular.  In  so  saying  we  are  only  following  the 
same  line  of  thought  as  those  who  say  that  the 
stars  are  fiery  because  they  believe  the  upper 
body  to  be  fire,  the  presumption  being  that  a 
thing  is  composed  of  the  same  stuff  as  that  in 
which  it  is  situated.  The  warmth  and  light 
[20]  which  proceed  from  them  are  caused  by 
the  friction  set  up  in  the  air  by  their  motion. 
Movement  tends  to  create  fire  in  wood,  stone, 
and  iron;  and  with  even  more  reason  should  it 
have  that  effect  on  air,  a  substance  which  is 
closer  to  fire  than  these.  An  example  is  that  of 
missiles,  which  as  they  move  are  themselves 
fired  so  strongly  that  leaden  balls  are  melted; 
[25]  and  if  they  are  fired  the  surrounding  air 
must  be  similarly  affected.  Now  while  the  mis¬ 
siles  are  heated  by  reason  of  their  motion  in  air, 
which  is  turned  into  fire  by  the  agitation  pro¬ 
duced  by  their  movement,  the  upper  bodies  are 
carried  on  a  moving  sphere,  so  that,  though 
[jo]  they  are  not  themselves  fired,  yet  the  air 
underneath  the  sphere  of  the  revolving  body  is 
necessarily  heated  by  its  motion,  and  particu¬ 
larly  in  that  part  where  the  sun  is  attached  to 
it.  Hence  warmth  increases  as  the  sun  gets 
nearer  or  higher  or  overhead.  Of  the  fact,  then, 
[55]  that  the  stars  are  neither  fiery  nor  move 
in  fire,  enough  has  been  said. 


290“ 


BOOK  II,  CHAPTERS  6-8  381 


8 

289b  Since  changes  evidently  occur  not  only 
in  the  position  of  the  stars  but  also  in  that  of 
the  whole  heaven,  there  are  three  possibilities. 
Either  (1)  both  are  at  rest,  or  (2)  both  are  in 
motion,  or  (3)  the  one  is  at  rest  and  the  other 
in  motion. 

(1)  That  both  should  be  at  rest  is  impossi¬ 
ble;  for,  if  the  earth  is  at  rest,  the  hypothesis 
[5]  does  not  account  for  the  observations;  and 
we  take  it  as  granted  that  the  earth  is  at  rest.  It 
remains  either  that  both  are  moved,  or  that  the 
one  is  moved  and  the  other  at  rest. 

(2)  On  the  view,  first,  that  both  are  in  mo¬ 
tion,  we  have  the  absurdity  that  the  stars  and 
the  circles  move  with  the  same  speed,  i.e.  that 
the  pace  of  every  star  is  that  of  the  circle  in 
[/o]  which  it  moves.  For  star  and  circle  are 
seen  to  come  back  to  the  same  place  at  the  same 
moment;  from  which  it  follows  that  the  star 
has  traversed  the  circle  and  the  circle  has  com¬ 
pleted  its  own  movement,  i.e.  traversed  its  own 
circumference,  at  one  and  the  same  moment. 
But  it  is  difficult  to  conceive  that  the  pace  of 
[75]  each  star  should  be  exactly  proportioned  to 
the  size  of  its  circle.  That  the  pace  of  each  circle 
should  be  proportionate  to  its  size  is  not  absurd 
but  inevitable:  but  that  the  same  should  be 
true  of  the  movement  of  the  stars  contained  in 
the  circles  is  quite  incredible.  For  if,  on  the  one 
hand,  we  suppose  that  the  star  which  moves  on 
the  greater  circle  is  necessarily  swifter,  clearly 
we  also  admit  that  if  stars  shifted  their  position 
[20]  so  as  to  exchange  circles,  the  slower  would 
become  swifter  and  the  swifter  slower.  But  this 
would  show  that  their  movement  was  not  their 
own,  but  due  to  the  circles.  If,  on  the  other 
hand,  the  arrangement  was  a  chance  combina¬ 
tion,  the  coincidence  in  every  case  of  a  greater 
circle  with  a  swifter  movement  of  the  star  con¬ 
tained  in  it  is  too  much  to  believe.  In  one  or 
[25]  two  cases  it  might  not  inconceivably  fall 
out  so,  but  to  imagine  it  in  every  case  alike  is  a 
mere  fiction.  Besides,  chance  has  no  place  in 
that  which  is  natural,  and  what  happens  every¬ 
where  and  in  every  case  is  no  matter  of  chance. 

(3)  The  same  absurdity  is  equally  plain  if  it 
is  supposed  that  the  circles  stand  still  and  that 
it  is  the  stars  themselves  which  move.  For  it 
will  follow  that  the  outer  stars  are  the  swifter, 
[30]  and  that  the  pace  of  the  stars  corresponds 
to  the  size  of  their  circles. 

Since,  then,  we  cannot  reasonably  suppose 
either  that  both  are  in  motion  or  that  the  star 
alone  moves,  the  remaining  alternative  is  that 


the  circles  should  move,  while  the  stars  are  at 
rest  and  move  with  the  circles  to  which  they 
are  attached.  Only  on  this  supposition  are  we 
involved  in  no  absurd  consequence.  For,  in  the 
first  place,  the  quicker  movement  of  the  larger 
[55]  circle  is  natural  when  all  the  circles  are 
290a  attached  to  the  same  centre.  Whenever 
bodies  are  moving  with  their  proper  motion, 
the  larger  moves  quicker.  It  is  the  same  here 
with  the  revolving  bodies:  for  the  arc  inter¬ 
cepted  by  two  radii  will  be  larger  in  the  larger 
circle,  and  hence  it  is  not  surprising  that  the 
[5]  revolution  of  the  larger  circle  should  take 
the  same  time  as  that  of  the  smaller.  And  sec¬ 
ondly,  the  fact  that  the  heavens  do  not  break  in 
pieces  follows  not  only  from  this  but  also  from 
the  proof  already  given1  of  the  continuity  of 
the  whole. 

Again,  since  the  stars  are  spherical,  as  our 
opponents  assert  and  we  may  consistently  ad¬ 
mit,  inasmuch  as  we  construct  them  out  of  the 
spherical  body,  and  since  the  spherical  body  has 
[/o]  two  movements  proper  to  itself,  namely 
rolling  and  spinning,  it  follows  that  if  the  stars 
have  a  movement  of  their  own,  it  will  be  one  of 
these.  But  neither  is  observed.  (1)  Suppose 
them  to  spin.  They  would  then  stay  where 
they  were,  and  not  change  their  place,  as,  by 
observation  and  general  consent,  they  do.  Fur¬ 
ther,  one  would  expect  them  all  to  exhibit  the 
same  movement:  but  the  only  star  which  ap- 
[75]  pears  to  possess  this  movement  is  the  sun, 
at  sunrise  or  sunset,  and  this  appearance  is  due 
not  to  the  sun  itself  but  to  the  distance  from 
which  we  observe  it.  The  visual  ray  being  ex¬ 
cessively  prolonged  becomes  weak  and  waver¬ 
ing.  The  same  reason  probably  accounts  for  the 
apparent  twinkling  of  the  fixed  stars  and  the 
[20]  absence  of  twinkling  in  the  planets.  The 
planets  are  near,  so  that  the  visual  ray  reaches 
them  in  its  full  vigour,  but  when  it  comes  to  the 
fixed  stars  it  is  quivering  because  of  the  dis¬ 
tance  and  its  excessive  extension;  and  its  tre¬ 
mor  produces  an  appearance  of  movement  in 
the  star:  for  it  makes  no  difference  whether 
movement  is  set  up  in  the  ray  or  in  the  object 
of  vision. 

[25]  (2)  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  also  clear  that 
the  stars  do  not  roll.  For  rolling  involves  rota¬ 
tion:  but  the  ‘face’,  as  it  is  called,  of  the  moon 
is  always  seen.  Therefore,  since  any  movement 
of  their  own  which  the  stars  possessed  would 
presumably  be  one  proper  to  themselves,  and 
no  such  movement  is  observed  in  them,  clearly 
they  have  no  movement  of  their  own. 

*Cf.  chapter  4. 


382  ON  THE  HEAVENS  291a 


[jo]  There  is,  further,  the  absurdity  that  na¬ 
ture  has  bestowed  upon  them  no  organ  appro¬ 
priate  to  such  movement.  For  nature  leaves 
nothing  to  chance,  and  would  not,  while  car¬ 
ing  for  animals,  overlook  things  so  precious. 
Indeed,  nature  seems  deliberately  to  have 
stripped  them  of  everything  which  makes  self- 
originated  progression  possible,  and  to  have  re¬ 
moved  them  as  far  as  possible  from  things 
[j5]  which  have  organs  of  movement.  This  is 
just  why  it  seems  proper  that  the  whole  heaven 
290b  and  every  star  should  be  spherical.  For 
while  of  all  shapes  the  sphere  is  the  most  con¬ 
venient  for  movement  in  one  place,  making 
possible,  as  it  does,  the  swiftest  and  most  self- 
contained  motion,  for  forward  movement  it  is 
[5]  the  most  unsuitable,  least  of  all  resembling 
shapes  which  are  self-moved,  in  that  it  has  no 
dependent  or  projecting  part,  as  a  rectilinear 
figure  has,  and  is  in  fact  as  far  as  possible  re¬ 
moved  in  shape  from  ambulatory  bodies.  Since, 
therefore,  the  heavens  have  to  move  in  one 
lace,  and  the  stars  are  not  required  to  move 
/o]  themselves  forward,  it  is  natural  that  both 
should  be  spherical — a  shape  which  best  suits 
the  movement  of  the  one  and  the  immobility  of 
the  other. 

9 

From  all  this  it  is  clear  that  the  theory  that 
the  movement  of  the  stars  produces  a  harmony, 
i.e.  that  the  sounds  they  make  are  concordant, 
in  spite  of  the  grace  and  originality  with  which 
[75]  it  has  been  stated,  is  nevertheless  untrue. 
Some  thinkers  suppose  that  the  motion  of  bod¬ 
ies  of  that  size  must  produce  a  noise,  since  on 
our  earth  the  motion  of  bodies  far  inferior  in 
size  and  in  speed  of  movement  has  that  effect. 
Also,  when  the  sun  and  the  moon,  they  say,  and 
all  the  stars,  so  great  in  number  and  in  size,  are 
[20]  moving  with  so  rapid  a  motion,  how 
should  they  not  produce  a  sound  immensely 
great?  Starting  from  this  argument  and  from 
the  observation  that  their  speeds,  as  measured 
by  their  distances,  are  in  the  same  ratios  as  mu¬ 
sical  concordances,  they  assert  that  the  sound 
given  forth  by  the  circular  movement  of  the 
stars  is  a  harmony.  Since,  however,  it  appears 
unaccountable  that  we  should  not  hear  this 
[25]  music,  they  explain  this  by  saying  that  the 
sound  is  in  our  ears  from  the  very  moment  of 
birth  and  is  thus  indistinguishable  from  its 
contrary  silence,  since  sound  and  silence  are 
discriminated  by  mutual  contrast.  What  hap¬ 
pens  to  men,  then,  is  just  what  happens  to  cop¬ 
persmiths,  who  are  so  accustomed  to  the  noise 


of  the  smithy  that  it  makes  no  difference  to 
[jo]  them.  But,  as  we  said  before,  melodious 
and  poetical  as  the  theory  is,  it  cannot  be  a  true 
account  of  the  facts.  There  is  not  only  the  ab¬ 
surdity  of  our  hearing  nothing,  the  ground  of 
which  they  try  to  remove,  but  also  the  fact  that 
no  effect  other  than  sensitive  is  produced  upon 
us.  Excessive  noises,  we  know,  shatter  the  solid 
[35]  bodies  even  of  inanimate  things:  the  noise 
291a  of  thunder,  for  instance,  splits  rocks  and 
the  strongest  of  bodies.  But  if  the  moving  bod¬ 
ies  are  so  great,  and  the  sound  which  pene¬ 
trates  to  us  is  proportionate  to  their  size,  that 
sound  must  needs  reach  us  in  an  intensity 
many  times  that  of  thunder,  and  the  force  of  its 
action  must  be  immense.  Indeed  the  reason 
[5]  why  we  do  not  hear,  and  show  in  our  bod¬ 
ies  none  of  the  effects  of  violent  force,  is  easily 
given:  it  is  that  there  is  no  noise.  But  not  only 
is  the  explanation  evident;  it  is  also  a  corrobo¬ 
ration  of  the  truth  of  the  views  we  have  ad¬ 
vanced.  For  the  very  difficulty  which  made  the 
Pythagoreans  say  that  the  motion  of  the  stars 
produces  a  concord  corroborates  our  view, 
[/o]  Bodies  which  are  themselves  in  motion, 
produce  noise  and  friction:  but  those  which  are 
attached  or  fixed  to  a  moving  body,  as  the  parts 
to  a  ship,  can  no  more  create  noise,  than  a  ship 
on  a  river  moving  with  the  stream.  Yet  by  the 
same  argument  one  might  say  it  was  absurd 
that  on  a  large  vessel  the  motion  of  mast  and 
[75]  poop  should  not  make  a  great  noise,  and 
the  like  might  be  said  of  the  movement  of  the 
vessel  itself.  But  sound  is  caused  when  a  mov¬ 
ing  body  is  enclosed  in  an  unmoved  body,  and 
cannot  be  caused  by  one  enclosed  in,  and  con¬ 
tinuous  with,  a  moving  body  which  creates  no 
friction.  We  may  say,  then,  in  this  matter  that 
if  the  heavenly  bodies  moved  in  a  generally 
[20]  diffused  mass  of  air  or  fire,  as  every  one 
supposes,  their  motion  would  necessarily  cause 
a  noise  of  tremendous  strength  and  such  a 
noise  would  necessarily  r<=ach  and  shatter  us. 
Since,  therefore,  this  effect  is  evidently  not  pro¬ 
duced,  it  follows  that  none  of  them  can  move 
with  the  motion  either  of  animate  nature  or  of 
constraint.  It  is  as  though  nature  had  foreseen 
[25]  the  result,  that  if  their  movement  were 
other  than  it  is,  nothing  on  this  earth  could 
maintain  its  character. 

That  the  stars  are  spherical  and  are  not  self- 
moved,  has  now  been  explained. 

10 

[jo]  With  their  order — I  mean  the  position  of 
each,  as  involving  the  priority  of  some  and  the 


292*  BOOK  II,  CHAPTERS  8-12  383 


posteriority  of  others,  and  their  respective  dis¬ 
tances  from  the  extremity — with  this  astrono¬ 
my  may  be  left  to  deal,  since  the  astronomical 
discussion  is  adequate.  This  discussion  shows 
that  the  movements  of  the  several  stars  depend, 
as  regards  the  varieties  of  speed  which  they  ex¬ 
hibit,  on  the  distance  of  each  from  the  extrem- 
[35]  ity.  It  is  established  that  the  outermost 
revolution  of  the  heavens  is  a  simple  move- 
291b  ment  and  the  swiftest  of  all,  and  that  the 
movement  of  all  other  bodies  is  composite  and 
relatively  slow,  for  the  reason  that  each  is  mov¬ 
ing  on  its  own  circle  with  the  reverse  motion 
to  that  of  the  heavens.  This  at  once  leads  us  to 
expect  that  the  body  which  is  nearest  to  that 
first  simple  revolution  should  take  the  longest 
[5]  time  to  complete  its  circle,  and  that  which 
is  farthest  from  it  the  shortest,  the  others  taking 
a  longer  time  the  nearer  they  are  and  a  shorter 
time  the  farther  away  they  are.  For  it  is  the 
nearest  body  which  is  most  strongly  influenced, 
and  the  most  remote,  by  reason  of  its  distance, 
which  is  least  affected,  the  influence  on  the  in¬ 
termediate  bodies  varying,  as  the  mathemati- 
[/o]  cians  show,  with  their  distance. 

11 

With  regard  to  the  shape  pf  each  star,  the 
most  reasonable  view  is  that  they  are  spherical. 
It  has  been  shown1  that  it  is  not  in  their  nature 
to  move  themselves,  and,  since  nature  is  no 
wanton  or  random  creator,  clearly  she  will 
[75]  have  given  things  which  possess  no  move¬ 
ment  a  shape  particularly  unadapted  to  move¬ 
ment.  Such  a  shape  is  the  sphere,  since  it  pos¬ 
sesses  no  instrument  of  movement.  Clearly  then 
their  mass  will  have  the  form  of  a  sphere. 
Again,  what  holds  of  one  holds  of  all,  and  the 
evidence  of  our  eyes  shows  us  that  the  moon  is 
spherical.  For  how  else  should  the  moon  as  it 
[20]  waxes  and  wanes  show  for  the  most  part 
a  crescent-shaped  or  gibbous  figure,  and  only 
at  one  moment  a  half-moon?  And  astronomi¬ 
cal  arguments  give  further  confirmation;  for 
no  other  hypothesis  accounts  for  the  crescent 
shape  of  the  sun’s  eclipses.  One,  then,  of  the 
heavenly  bodies  being  spherical,  clearly  the  rest 
will  be  spherical  also. 

12 

There  are  two  difficulties,  which  may  very 
reasonably  here  be  raised,  of  which  we  must 
[25]  now  attempt  to  state  the  probable  solu¬ 
tion:  for  we  regard  the  zeal  of  one  whose  thirst 
after  philosophy  leads  him  to  accept  even  slight 
Chapter  8. 


indications  where  it  is  very  difficult  to  see  one’s 
way,  as  a  proof  rather  of  modesty  than  of  over- 
confidence. 

Of  many  such  problems  one  of  the  strangest 
[30]  is  the  problem  why  we  find  the  greatest 
number  of  movements  in  the  intermediate  bod¬ 
ies,  and  not,  rather,  in  each  successive  body  a 
variety  of  movement  proportionate  to  its  dis¬ 
tance  from  the  primary  motion.  For  we  should 
expect,  since  the  primary  body  shows  one  mo¬ 
tion  only,  that  the  body  which  is  nearest  to  it 
should  move  with  the  fewest  movements,  say 
two,  and  the  one  next  after  that  with  three,  or 
[35]  some  similar  arrangement.  But  the  oppo¬ 
site  is  the  case.  The  movements  of  the  sun  and 
292*  moon  are  fewer  than  those  of  some  of  the 
planets.  Yet  these  planets  are  farther  from  the 
centre  and  thus  nearer  to  the  primary  body 
than  they,  as  observation  has  itself  revealed. 
For  we  have  seen  the  moon,  half-full,  pass  be- 
[5]  neath  the  planet  Mars,  which  vanished  on 
its  shadow  side  and  came  forth  by  the  bright 
and  shining  part.  Similar  accounts  of  other 
stars  are  given  by  the  Egyptians  and  Babylo¬ 
nians,  whose  observations  have  been  kept  for 
very  many  years  past,  and  from  whom  much  of 
our  evidence  about  particular  stars  is  derived, 
[/o]  A  second  difficulty  which  may  with  equal 
justice  be  raised  is  this.  Why  is  it  that  the  pri¬ 
mary  motion  includes  such  a  multitude  of  stars 
that  their  whole  array  seems  to  defy  counting, 
while  of  the  other  stars  each  one  is  separated 
off,  and  in  no  case  do  we  find  two  or  more  at¬ 
tached  to  the  same  motion? 

On  these  questions,  I  say,  it  is  well  that  we 
should  seek  to  increase  our  understanding, 
[75]  though  we  have  but  little  to  go  upon,  and 
are  placed  at  so  great  a  distance  from  the  facts 
in  question.  Nevertheless  there  are  certain  prin¬ 
ciples  on  which  if  we  base  our  consideration 
we  shall  not  find  this  difficulty  by  any  means 
insoluble.  We  may  object  that  we  have  been 
thinking  of  the  stars  as  mere  bodies,  and  as 
[20]  units  with  a  serial  order  indeed  but  en¬ 
tirely  inanimate;  but  should  rather  conceive 
them  as  enjoying  life  and  action.  On  this  view 
the  facts  cease  to  appear  surprising.  For  it  is 
natural  that  the  best-conditioned  of  all  things 
should  have  its  good  without  action,  that  that 
which  is  nearest  to  it  should  achieve  it  by  little 
and  simple  action,  and  that  which  is  farther 
removed  by  a  complexity  of  actions,  just  as  with 
[25]  men’s  bodies  one  is  in  good  condition 
without  exercise  at  all,  another  after  a  short 
walk,  while  another  requires  running  and 
wrestling  and  hard  training,  and  there  are  yet 


384  ON  THE  HEAVENS  293* 


others  who  however  hard  they  worked  them¬ 
selves  could  never  secure  this  good,  but  only 
some  substitute  for  it.  To  succeed  often  or  in 
many  things  is  difficult.  For  instance,  to  throw 
[3o]  ten  thousand  Coan  throws  with  the  dice 
would  be  impossible,  but  to  throw  one  or  two 
is  comparatively  easy.  In  action,  again,  when  A 
has  to  be  done  to  get  B,  B  to  get  C,  and  C  to  get 
D,  one  step  or  two  present  little  difficulty,  but 
292b  as  the  series  extends  the  difficulty  grows. 
We  must,  then,  think  of  the  action  of  the  lower 
stars  as  similar  to  that  of  animals  and  plants. 
For  on  our  earth  it  is  man  that  has  the  greatest 
variety  of  actions — for  there  are  many  goods 
that  man  can  secure;  hence  his  actions  are  vari¬ 
ous  and  directed  to  ends  beyond  them — while 
[5]  the  perfectly  conditioned  has  no  need  of 
action,  since  it  is  itself  the  end,  and  action  al¬ 
ways  requires  two  terms,  end  and  means.  The 
lower  animals  have  less  variety  of  action  than 
man;  and  plants  perhaps  have  little  action  and 
of  one  kind  only.  For  either  they  have  but  one 
attainable  good  (as  indeed  man  has),  or,  if  sev- 
[/o]  eral,  each  contributes  directly  to  their  ul¬ 
timate  good.  One  thing  then  has  and  enjoys  the 
ultimate  good,  other  things  attain  to  it,  one  im¬ 
mediately  by  few  steps,  another  by  many,  while 
yet  another  does  not  even  attempt  to  secure  it 
but  is  satisfied  to  reach  a  point  not  far  removed 
from  that  consummation.  Thus,  taking  health 
as  the  end,  there  will  be  one  thing  that  always 
possesses  health,  others  that  attain  it,  one  by  re¬ 
ducing  flesh,  another  by  running  and  thus  re¬ 
ducing  flesh,  another  by  taking  steps  to  enable 
[75]  himself  to  run,  thus  further  increasing  the 
number  of  movements,  while  another  cannot 
attain  health  itself,  but  only  running  or  reduc¬ 
tion  of  flesh,  so  that  one  or  other  of  these  is  for 
such  a  being  the  end.  For  while  it  is  clearly  best 
for  any  being  to  attain  the  real  end,  yet,  if  that 
cannot  be,  the  nearer  it  is  to  the  best  the  better 
[20]  will  be  its  state.  It  is  for  this  reason  that 
the  earth  moves  not  at  all  and  the  bodies  near 
to  it  with  few  movements.  For  they  do  not  at¬ 
tain  the  final  end,  but  only  come  as  near  to  it  as 
their  share  in  the  divine  principle  permits.  But 
the  first  heaven  finds  it  immediately  with  a  sin- 
[25]  gle  movement,  and  the  bodies  interme¬ 
diate  between  the  first  and  last  heavens  attain 
it  indeed,  but  at  the  cost  of  a  multiplicity  of 
movement. 

As  to  the  difficulty  that  into  the  one  primary 
motion  is  crowded  a  vast  multitude  of  stars, 
while  of  the  other  stars  each  has  been  separate¬ 
ly  given  special  movements  of  its  own,  there  is 
in  the  first  place  this  reason  for  regarding  the 


arrangement  as  a  natural  one.  In  thinking  of 
the  life  and  moving  principle  of  the  several 
heavens  one  must  regard  the  first  as  far  supe- 
[jo]  rior  to  the  others.  Such  a  superiority 
would  be  reasonable.  For  this  single  first  mo¬ 
tion  has  to  move  many  of  the  divine  bodies, 
293a  while  the  numerous  other  motions  move 
only  one  each,  since  each  single  planet  moves 
with  a  variety  of  motions.  Thus,  then,  nature 
makes  matters  equal  and  establishes  a  certain 
order,  giving  to  the  single  motion  many  bodies 
and  to  the  single  body  many  motions.  And 
there  is  a  second  reason  why  the  other  motions 
[5]  have  each  only  one  body,  in  that  each  of 
them  except  the  last,  i.e.  that  which  contains 
the  one  star,  is  really  moving  many  bodies.  For 
this  last  sphere  moves  with  many  others,  to 
which  it  is  fixed,  each  sphere  being  actually  a 
body;  so  that  its  movement  will  be  a  joint  prod¬ 
uct.  Each  sphere,  in  fact,  has  its  particular  nat- 
[/o]  ural  motion,  to  which  the  general  move¬ 
ment  is,  as  it  were,  added.  But  the  force  of  any 
limited  body  is  only  adequate  to  moving  a  lim¬ 
ited  body. 

The  characteristics  of  the  stars  which  move 
with  a  circular  motion,  in  respect  of  substance 
and  shape,  movement  and  order,  have  now 
been  sufficiently  explained. 

!3 

[75]  It  remains  to  speak  of  the  earth,  of  its  po¬ 
sition,  of  the  question  whether  it  is  at  rest  or 
in  motion,  and  of  its  shape. 

1.  As  to  its  position  there  is  some  difference 
of  opinion.  Most  people — all,  in  fact,  who  re¬ 
gard  the  whole  heaven  as  finite — say  it  lies  at 
[20]  the  centre.  But  the  Italian  philosophers 
known  as  Pythagoreans  take  the  contrary  view. 
At  the  centre,  they  say,  is  fire,  and  the  earth  is 
one  of  the  stars,  creating  night  and  day  by  its 
circular  motion  about  the  centre.  They  further 
construct  another  earth  in  opposition  to  ours 
[25]  to  which  they  give  the  name  counter¬ 
earth.  In  all  this  they  are  not  seeking  for  theo¬ 
ries  and  causes  to  account  for  observed  facts, 
but  rather  forcing  their  observations  and  trying 
to  accommodate  them  to  certain  theories  and 
opinions  of  their  own.  But  there  are  many  oth¬ 
ers  who  would  agree  that  it  is  wrong  to  give  the 
earth  the  central  position,  looking  for  confir- 
|jo]  mation  rather  to  theory  than  to  the  facts 
of  observation.  Their  view  is  that  the  most  pre¬ 
cious  place  befits  the  most  precious  thing:  but 
fire,  they  say,  is  more  precious  than  earth,  and 
the  limit  than  the  intermediate,  and  the  cir¬ 
cumference  and  the  centre  are  limits.  Reason- 


294*  BOOK  II,  CHAPTERS  12-13  385 


in g  on  this  basis  they  take  the  view  that  it  is  not 
earth  that  lies  at  the  centre  of  the  sphere,  but 
293b  rather  fire.  The  Pythagoreans  have  a  fur¬ 
ther  reason.  They  hold  that  the  most  important 
part  of  the  world,  which  is  the  centre,  should 
be  most  strictly  guarded,  and  name  it,  or  rather 
the  fire  which  occupies  that  place,  the  ‘Guard¬ 
house  of  Zeus’,  as  if  the  word  ‘centre’  were 

fuite  unequivocal,  and  the  centre  of  the  mathe- 
5]  matical  figure  were  always  the  same  with 
that  of  the  thing  or  the  natural  centre.  But  it  is 
better  to  conceive  of  the  case  of  the  whole  heav¬ 
en  as  analogous  to  that  of  animals,  in  which 
the  centre  of  the  animal  and  that  of  the  body 
are  different.  For  this  reason  they  have  no  need 
to  be  so  disturbed  about  the  world,  or  to  call  in 
[/o]  a  guard  for  its  centre:  rather  let  them 
look  for  the  centre  in  the  other  sense  and  tell  us 
what  it  is  like  and  where  nature  has  set  it.  That 
centre  will  be  something  primary  and  pre¬ 
cious;  but  to  the  mere  position  we  should  give 
the  last  place  rather  than  the  first.  For  the  mid¬ 
dle  is  what  is  defined,  and  what  defines  it  is 
the  limit,  and  that  which  contains  or  limits  is 
more  precious  than  that  which  is  limited,  see- 
[75]  ing  that  the  latter  is  the  matter  and  the 
former  the  essence  of  the  system. 

11.  As  to  the  position  of  the  earth,  then,  this 
is  the  view  which  some  advance,  and  the  views 
advanced  concerning  its  rest  or  motion  are  sim¬ 
ilar.  For  here  too  there  is  no  general  agree¬ 
ment.  All  who  deny  that  the  earth  lies  at  the 
centre  think  that  it  revolves  about  the  centre, 
[20]  and  not  the  earth  only  but,  as  we  said  be¬ 
fore,  the  counter-earth  as  well.  Some  of  them 
even  consider  it  possible  that  there  are  several 
bodies  so  moving,  which  are  invisible  to  us  ow¬ 
ing  to  the  interposition  of  the  earth.  This,  they 
say,  accounts  for  the  fact  that  eclipses  of  the 
moon  are  more  frequent  than  eclipses  of  the 
sun:  for  in  addition  to  the  earth  each  of  these 
[25]  moving  bodies  can  obstruct  it.  Indeed,  as 
in  any  case  the  surface  of  the  earth  is  not  actu¬ 
ally  a  centre  but  distant  from  it  a  full  hemi¬ 
sphere,  there  is  no  more  difficulty,  they  think, 
in  accounting  for  the  observed  facts  on  their 
view  that  we  do  not  dwell  at  the  centre,  than 
on  the  common  view  that  the  earth  is  in  the 
middle.  Even  as  it  is,  there  is  nothing  in  the 
observations  to  suggest  that  we  are  removed 
[30]  from  the  centre  by  half  the  diameter  of 
the  earth.  Others,  again,  say  that  the  earth, 
which  lies  at  the  centre,  is  ‘rolled’,  and  thus  in 
motion,  about  the  axis  of  the  whole  heaven,  So 
it  stands  written  in  the  Timaeus } 

l4o. 


hi.  There  are  similar  disputes  about  the 
shape  of  the  earth.  Some  think  it  is  spherical, 
others  that  it  is  flat  and  drum-shaped.  For  evi- 
294a  dence  they  bring  the  fact  that,  as  the  sun 
rises  and  sets,  the  part  concealed  by  the  earth 
shows  a  straight  and  not  a  curved  edge,  where¬ 
as  if  the  earth  were  spherical  the  line  of  section 
would  have  to  be  circular.  In  this  they  leave  out 
[5]  of  account  the  great  distance  of  the  sun 
from  the  earth  and  the  great  size  of  the  circum¬ 
ference,  which,  seen  from  a  distance  on  these 
apparently  small  circles  appears  straight.  Such 
an  appearance  ought  not  to  make  them  doubt 
the  circular  shape  of  the  earth.  But  they  have 
another  argument.  They  say  that  because  it  is 
[/o]  at  rest,  the  earth  must  necessarily  have 
this  shape.  For  there  are  many  different  ways 
in  which  the  movement  or  rest  of  the  earth  has 
been  conceived. 

The  difficulty  must  have  occurred  to  every 
one.  It  would  indeed  be  a  complacent  mind 
that  felt  no  surprise  that,  while  a  little  bit  of 
earth,  let  loose  in  mid-air,  moves  and  will  not 
[75]  stay  still,  and  the  more  there  is  of  it  the 
faster  it  moves,  the  whole  earth,  free  in  mid¬ 
air,  should  show  no  movement  at  all.  Yet  here 
is  this  great  weight  of  earth,  and  it  is  at  rest. 
And  again,  from  beneath  one  of  these  moving 
fragments  of  earth,  before  it  falls,  take  away 
the  earth,  and  it  will  continue  its  downward 
movement  with  nothing  to  stop  it.  The  diffi¬ 
culty  then,  has  naturally  passed  into  a  com- 
[20]  monplace  of  philosophy;  and  one  may 
well  wonder  that  the  solutions  offered  are  not 
seen  to  involve  greater  absurdities  than  the 
problem  itself. 

By  these  considerations  some  have  been  led 
to  assert  that  the  earth  below  us  is  infinite,  say¬ 
ing,  with  Xenophanes  of  Colophon,  that  it  has 
‘pushed  its  roots  to  infinity’,2 — in  order  to  save 
the  trouble  of  seeking  for  the  cause.  Hence  the 
[25]  sharp  rebuke  of  Empedocles,  in  the  words 
‘if  the  deeps  of  the  earth  are  endless  and  endless 
the  ample  ether — such  is  the  vain  tale  told  by 
many  a  tongue,  poured  from  the  mouths  of 
those  who  have  seen  but  little  of  the  whole’.3 
Others  say  the  earth  rests  upon  water.  This,  in¬ 
deed,  is  the  oldest  theory  that  has  been  pre¬ 
served,  and  is  attributed  to  Thales  of  Miletus. 
[30]  It  was  supposed  to  stay  still  because  it 
floated  like  wood  and  other  similar  substances, 
which  are  so  constituted  as  to  rest  upon  water 

2Diels,  Vorsohjatiker 5,  n  a  47  (53,  38  ff.),  b  28  (63,  8). 
Ritter  and  Preller,  103  b.  Cf.  Burnet,  E.G.P.3  §  60. 

3Diels,  Vors.z  21  b  39  (241,  16).  Ritter  and  Preller, 
103  b.  Burnet,  E.G.P.3  p.  212. 


386  ON  THE 

but  not  upon  air.  As  if  the  same  account  had 
not  to  be  given  of  the  water  which  carries  the 
earth  as  of  the  earth  itself!  It  is  not  the  nature 
of  water,  any  more  than  of  earth,  to  stay  in 
294b  mid-air:  it  must  have  something  to  rest 
upon.  Again,  as  air  is  lighter  than  water,  so  is 
water  than  earth:  how  then  can  they  think  that 
the  naturally  lighter  substance  lies  below  the 
heavier?  Again,  if  the  earth  as  a  whole  is  capa¬ 
ble  of  floating  upon  water,  that  must  obviously 
be  the  case  with  any  part  of  it.  But  observation 
[5]  shows  that  this  is  not  the  case.  Any  piece 
of  earth  goes  to  the  bottom,  the  quicker  the 
larger  it  is.  These  thinkers  seem  to  push  their 
inquiries  some  way  into  the  problem,  but  not 
so  far  as  they  might.  It  is  what  we  are  all  in¬ 
clined  to  do,  to  direct  our  inquiry  not  by  the 
matter  itself,  but  by  the  views  of  our  oppo¬ 
nents:  and  even  when  interrogating  oneself  one 
[/o]  pushes  the  inquiry  only  to  the  point  at 
which  one  can  no  longer  offer  any  opposition. 
Hence  a  good  inquirer  will  be  one  who  is 
ready  in  bringing  forward  the  objections  prop¬ 
er  to  the  genus,  and  that  he  will  be  when  he  has 
gained  an  understanding  of  all  the  differences. 

Anaximenes  and  Anaxagoras  and  Democri¬ 
tus  give  the  flatness  of  the  earth  as  the  cause  of 
[75]  its  staying  still.  Thus,  they  say,  it  does  not 
cut,  but  covers  like  a  lid,  the  air  beneath  it. 
This  seems  to  be  the  way  of  flat-shaped  bodies: 
for  even  the  wind  can  scarcely  move  them  be¬ 
cause  of  their  power  of  resistance.  The  same 
immobility,  they  say,  is  produced  by  the  flat¬ 
ness  of  the  surface  which  the  earth  presents  to 
the  air  which  underlies  it;  while  the  air,  not 
[20]  having  room  enough  to  change  its  place 
because  it  is  underneath  the  earth,  stays  there 
in  a  mass,  like  the  water  in  the  case  of  the  wa¬ 
ter-clock.  And  they  adduce  an  amount  of  evi¬ 
dence  to  prove  that  air,  when  cut  off  and  at 
rest,  can  bear  a  considerable  weight. 

Now,  first,  if  the  shape  of  the  earth  is  not 
flat,  its  flatness  cannot  be  the  cause  of  its  im¬ 
mobility.  But  in  their  own  account  it  is  rather 
[25]  the  size  of  the  earth  than  its  flatness  that 
causes  it  to  remain  at  rest.  For  the  reason  why 
the  air  is  so  closely  confined  that  it  cannot  find 
a  passage,  and  therefore  stays  where  it  is,  is  its 
great  amount:  and  this  amount  is  great  because 
the  body  which  isolates  it,  the  earth,  is  very 
large.  This  result,  then,  will  follow,  even  if  the 
[jo]  earth  is  spherical,  so  long  as  it  retains  its 
size.  So  far  as  their  arguments  go,  the  earth 
will  still  be  at  rest. 

In  general,  our  quarrel  with  those  who  speak 
of  movement  in  this  way  cannot  be  confined  to 


HEAVENS  295® 

the  parts;  it  concerns  the  whole  universe.  One 
must  decide  at  the  outset  whether  bodies  have 
a  natural  movement  or  not,  whether  there  is  no 
natural  but  only  constrained  movement.  See- 
295®  ing,  however,  that  we  have  already  de¬ 
cided  this  matter  to  the  best  of  our  ability,  we 
are  entitled  to  treat  our  results  as  representing 
fact.  Bodies,  we  say,  which  have  no  natural 
movement,  have  no  constrained  movement; 
and  where  there  is  no  natural  and  no  con¬ 
strained  movement  there  will  be  no  movement 
[5]  at  all.  This  is  a  conclusion,  the  necessity  of 
which  we  have  already  decided,1  and  we  have 
seen  further  that  rest  also  will  be  inconceiva¬ 
ble,  since  rest,  like  movement,  is  either  natural 
or  constrained.  But  if  there  is  any  natural  move¬ 
ment,  constraint  will  not  be  the  sole  principle 
of  motion  or  of  rest.  If,  then,  it  is  by  constraint 
that  the  earth  now  keeps  its  place,  the  so-called 
[/o]  ‘whirling’  movement  by  which  its  parts 
came  together  at  the  centre  was  also  con¬ 
strained.  (The  form  of  causation  supposed 
they  all  borrow  from  observations  of  liquids  and 
of  air,  in  which  the  larger  and  heavier  bodies 
always  move  to  the  centre  of  the  whirl.  This  is 
thought  by  all  those  who  try  to  generate  the 
heavens  to  explain  why  the  earth  came  together 
[75]  at  the  centre.  They  then  seek  a  reason  for 
its  staying  there;  and  some  say,  in  the  manner 
explained,  that  the  reason  is  its  size  and  flat¬ 
ness,  others,  with  Empedocles,  that  the  motion 
of  the  heavens,  moving  about  it  at  a  higher 
speed,  prevents  movement  of  the  earth,  as  the 
[20]  water  in  a  cup,  when  the  cup  is  given  a 
circular  motion,  though  it  is  often  underneath 
the  bronze,  is  for  this  same  reason  prevented 
from  moving  with  the  downward  movement 
which  is  natural  to  it.)  But  suppose  both  the 
‘whirl’  and  its  flatness  (the  air  beneath  being 
withdrawn)  cease  to  prevent  the  earth’s  mo¬ 
tion,  where  will  the  earth  move  to  then?  Its 
movement  to  the  centre  was  constrained,  and 
its  rest  at  the  centre  is  due  to  constraint;  but 
there  must  be  some  motion  which  is  natural  to 
[25]  it.  Will  this  be  upward  motion  or  down¬ 
ward  or  what?  It  must  have  some  motion;  and 
if  upward  and  downward  motion  are  alike  to 
it,  and  the  air  above  the  earth  does  not  prevent 
upward  movement,  then  no  more  could  air  be¬ 
low  it  prevent  downward  movement.  For  the 
same  cause  must  necessarily  have  the  same  ef¬ 
fect  on  the  same  thing. 

[jo]  Further,  against  Empedocles  there  is  an¬ 
other  point  which  might  be  made.  When  the 
elements  were  separated  off  by  Hate,  what 
xi.  2-4. 


296*  BOOK  II,  CHAPTERS  13-14  387 


caused  the  earth  to  keep  its  place?  Surely  the 
‘whirl’  cannot  have  been  then  also  the  cause. 
It  is  absurd  too  not  to  perceive  that,  while  the 
whirling  movement  may  have  been  responsi¬ 
ble  for  the  original  coming  together  of  the 
parts  of  earth  at  the  centre,  the  question  re- 
[35]  mains,  why  now  do  all  heavy  bodies  move 
to  the  earth.  For  the  whirl  surely  does  not  come 
295b  near  us.  Why,  again,  does  fire  move  up¬ 
ward?  Not,  surely,  because  of  the  whirl.  But  if 
fire  is  naturally  such  as  to  move  in  a  certain  di¬ 
rection,  clearly  the  same  may  be  supposed  to 
hold  of  earth.  Again,  it  cannot  be  the  whirl 
which  determines  the  heavy  and  the  light. 
[5]  Rather  that  movement  caused  the  pre-exist¬ 
ent  heavy  and  light  things  to  go  to  the  middle 
and  stay  on  the  surface  respectively.  Thus,  be¬ 
fore  ever  the  whirl  began,  heavy  and  light  ex¬ 
isted;  and  what  can  have  been  the  ground  of 
their  distinction,  or  the  manner  and  direction 
of  their  natural  movements?  In  the  infinite 
chaos  there  can  have  been  neither  above  nor 
below,  and  it  is  by  these  that  heavy  and  light 
are  determined. 

[/o]  It  is  to  these  causes  that  most  writers  pay 
attention:  but  there  are  some,  Anaximander, 
for  instance,  among  the  ancients,  who  say  that 
the  earth  keeps  its  place  because  of  its  indiffer¬ 
ence.  Motion  upward  and  downward  and  side¬ 
ways  were  all,  they  thought,  equally  inappro¬ 
priate  to  that  which  is  set  at  the  centre  and  in¬ 
differently  related  to  every  extreme  point;  and 
[75]  to  move  in  contrary  directions  at  the  same 
time  was  impossible:  so  it  must  needs  remain 
still.  This  view  is  ingenious  but  not  true.  The  ar¬ 
gument  would  prove  that  everything,  whatever 
it  be,  which  is  put  at  the  centre,  must  stay  there. 
Fire,  then,  will  rest  at  the  centre:  for  the  proof 
turns  on  no  peculiar  property  of  earth.  But  this 
[20]  does  not  follow.  The  observed  facts  about 
earth  are  not  only  that  it  remains  at  the  centre, 
but  also  that  it  moves  to  the  centre.  The  place 
to  which  any  fragment  of  earth  moves  must 
necessarily  be  the  place  to  which  the  whole 
moves;  and  in  the  place  to  which  a  thing  natu¬ 
rally  moves,  it  will  naturally  rest.  The  reason 
then  is  not  in  the  fact  that  the  earth  is  indiffer¬ 
ently  related  to  every  extreme  point:  for  this 
[25]  would  apply  to  any  body,  whereas  move¬ 
ment  to  the  centre  is  peculiar  to  earth.  Again 
it  is  absurd  to  look  for  a  reason  why  the  earth 
remains  at  the  centre  and  not  for  a  reason  why 
fire  remains  at  the  extremity.  If  the  extremity 
is  the  natural  place  of  fire,  clearly  earth  must 
also  have  a  natural  place.  But  suppose  that  the 
[30]  centre  is  not  its  place,  and  that  the  reason 


of  its  remaining  there  is  this  necessity  of  indif¬ 
ference — on  the  analogy  of  the  hair  which,  it  is 
said,  however  great  the  tension,  will  not  break 
under  it,  if  it  be  evenly  distributed,  or  of  the 
men  who,  though  exceedingly  hungry  and 
thirsty,  and  both  equally,  yet  being  equidistant 
from  food  and  drink,  is  therefore  bound  to  stay 
[35]  where  he  is — even  so,  it  still  remains  to 
296a  explain  why  fire  stays  at  the  extremities. 
It  is  strange,  too,  to  ask  about  things  staying 
still  but  not  about  their  motion, — why,  I  mean, 
one  thing,  if  nothing  stops  it,  moves  up,  and 
another  thing  to  the  centre.  Again,  their  state¬ 
ments  are  not  true.  It  happens,  indeed,  to  be  the 
[5]  case  that  a  thing  to  which  movement  this 
way  and  that  is  equally  inappropriate  is  obliged 
to  remain  at  the  centre.  But  so  far  as  their  ar¬ 
gument  goes,  instead  of  remaining  there,  it  will 
move,  only  not  as  a  mass  but  in  fragments.  For 
the  argument  applies  equally  to  fire.  Fire,  if  set 
at  the  centre,  should  stay  there,  like  earth,  since 
[/o]  it  will  be  indifferently  related  to  every 
point  on  the  extremity.  Nevertheless  it  will 
move,  as  in  fact  it  always  does  move  when 
nothing  stops  it,  away  from  the  centre  to  the 
extremity.  It  will  not,  however,  move  in  a  mass 
to  a  single  point  on  the  circumference — the 
only  possible  result  on  the  lines  of  the  indiffer¬ 
ence  theory — but  rather  each  corresponding 
[75]  portion  of  fire  to  the  corresponding  part 
of  the  extremity,  each  fourth  part,  for  instance, 
to  a  fourth  part  of  the  circumference.  For  since 
no  body  is  a  point,  it  will  have  parts.  The  ex¬ 
pansion,  when  the  body  increased  the  place  oc¬ 
cupied,  would  be  on  the  same  principle  as  the 
contraction,  in  which  the  place  was  diminished. 
Thus,  for  all  the  indifference  theory  shows  to 
the  contrary,  earth  also  would  have  moved  in 
[20]  this  manner  away  from  the  centre,  unless 
the  centre  had  been  its  natural  place. 

We  have  now  outlined  the  views  held  as  to 
the  shape,  position,  and  rest  or  movement  of 
the  earth. 

x4 

Let  us  first  decide  the  question  whether  the 
earth  moves  or  is  at  rest.  For,  as  we  said,  there 
[25]  are  some  who  make  it  one  of  the  stars,  and 
others  who,  setting  it  at  the  centre,  suppose  it  to 
be  ‘rolled’  and  in  motion  about  the  pole  as  axis. 
That  both  views  are  untenable  will  be  clear  if 
we  take  as  our  starting-point  the  fact  that  the 
earth’s  motion,  whether  the  earth  be  at  the  cen¬ 
tre  or  away  from  it,  must  needs  be  a  con- 
[30]  strained  motion.  It  cannot  be  the  move¬ 
ment  of  the  earth  itself.  If  it  were,  any  portion 


388  ON  THE  HEAVENS  297* 


of  it  would  have  this  movement;  but  in  fact  ev¬ 
ery  part  moves  in  a  straight  line  to  the  centre. 
Being,  then,  constrained  and  unnatural,  the 
movement  could  not  be  eternal.  But  the  order 
of  the  universe  is  eternal.  Again,  everything 
that  moves  with  the  circular  movement,  except 
[35]  the  first  sphere,  is  observed  to  be  passed, 
296b  and  to  move  with  more  than  one  mo¬ 
tion.  The  earth,  then,  also,  whether  it  move 
about  the  centre  or  as  stationary  at  it,  must 
necessarily  move  with  two  motions.  But  if  this 
were  so,  there  would  have  to  be  passings  and 
[5]  turnings  of  the  fixed  stars.  Yet  no  such 
thing  is  observed.  The  same  stars  always  rise 
and  set  in  the  same  parts  of  the  earth. 

Further,  the  natural  movement  of  the  earth, 
part  and  whole  alike,  is  the  centre  of  the  whole 
— whence  the  fact  that  it  is  now  actually  situat¬ 
ed  at  the  centre — but  it  might  be  questioned, 
[/o]  since  both  centres  are  the  same,  which 
centre  it  is  that  portions  of  earth  and  other 
heavy  things  move  to.  Is  this  their  goal  because 
it  is  the  centre  of  the  earth  or  because  it  is  the 
centre  of  the  whole  ?  The  goal,  surely,  must  be 
the  centre  of  the  whole.  For  fire  and  other  light 
things  move  to  the  extremity  of  the  area  which 
[75]  contains  the  centre.  It  happens,  however, 
that  the  centre  of  the  earth  and  of  the  whole  is 
the  same.  Thus  they  do  move  to  the  centre  of 
the  earth,  but  accidentally,  in  virtue  of  the  fact 
that  the  earth’s  centre  lies  at  the  centre  of  the 
whole.  That  the  centre  of  the  earth  is  the  goal 
of  their  movement  is  indicated  by  the  fact  that 
heavy  bodies  moving  towards  the  earth  do  not 
[20]  move  parallel  but  so  as  to  make  equal  an¬ 
gles,  and  thus  to  a  single  centre,  that  of  the 
earth.  It  is  clear,  then,  that  the  earth  must  be  at 
the  centre  and  immovable,  not  only  for  the  rea¬ 
sons  already  given,  but  also  because  heavy  bod¬ 
ies  forcibly  thrown  quite  straight  upward  re¬ 
turn  to  the  point  from  which  they  started,  even 
[25]  if  they  are  thrown  to  an  infinite  distance. 
From  these  considerations  then  it  is  clear  that 
the  earth  does  not  move  and  does  not  lie  else¬ 
where  than  at  the  centre. 

From  what  we  have  said  the  explanation  of 
the  earth’s  immobility  is  also  apparent.  If  it  is 
the  nature  of  earth,  as  observation  shows,  to 
move  from  any  point  to  the  centre,  as  of  fire 
contrariwise  to  move  from  the  centre  to  the  ex- 
[30]  tremity,  it  is  impossible  that  any  portion 
of  earth  should  move  away  from  the  centre  ex¬ 
cept  by  constraint.  For  a  single  thing  has  a  sin¬ 
gle  movement,  and  a  simple  thing  a  simple: 
contrary  movements  cannot  belong  to  the  same 
thing,  and  movement  away  from  the  centre  is 


the  contrary  of  movement  to  it.  If  then  no  por¬ 
tion  of  earth  can  move  away  from  the  centre, 
obviously  still  less  can  the  earth  as  a  whole  so 
[35]  move.  For  it  is  the  nature  of  the  whole  to 
move  to  the  point  to  which  the  part  naturally 
297*  moves.  Since,  then,  it  would  require  a 
force  greater  than  itself  to  move  it,  it  must 
needs  stay  at  the  centre.  This  view  is  further 
supported  by  the  contributions  of  mathemati¬ 
cians  to  astronomy,  since  the  observations  made 
[5]  as  the  shapes  change  by  which  the  order 
of  the  stars  is  determined,  are  fully  accounted 
for  on  the  hypothesis  that  the  earth  lies  at  the 
centre.  Of  the  position  of  the  earth  and  of  the 
manner  of  its  rest  or  movement,  our  discussion 
may  here  end. 

Its  shape  must  necessarily  be  spherical.  For 
[/o]  every  portion  of  earth  has  weight  until  it 
reaches  the  centre,  and  the  jostling  of  parts 
greater  and  smaller  would  bring  about  not  a 
waved  surface,  but  rather  compression  and  con¬ 
vergence  of  part  and  part  until  the  centre  is 
reached.  The  process  should  be  conceived  by 
supposing  the  earth  to  come  into  being  in  the 
way  that  some  of  the  natural  philosophers  de- 
[75]  scribe.  Only  they  attribute  the  downward 
movement  to  constraint,  and  it  is  better  to  keep 
to  the  truth  and  say  that  the  reason  of  this  mo¬ 
tion  is  that  a  thing  which  possesses  weight  is 
naturally  endowed  with  a  centripetal  move¬ 
ment.  When  the  mixture,  then,  was  merely  po¬ 
tential,  the  things  that  were  separated  of! 
moved  similarly  from  every  side  towards  the 
centre.  Whether  the  parts  which  came  together 
[20]  at  the  centre  were  distributed  at  the  ex¬ 
tremities  evenly,  or  in  some  other  way,  makes 
no  difference.  If,  on  the  one  hand,  there  were  a 
similar  movement  from  each  quarter  of  the  ex¬ 
tremity  to  the  single  centre,  it  is  obvious  that 
the  resulting  mass  would  be  similar  on  every 
side.  For  if  an  equal  amount  is  added  on  every 
side  the  extremity  of  the  mass  will  be  every- 
[25]  where  equidistant  from  its  centre,  i.e.  the 
figure  will  be  spherical.  But  neither  will  it  in 
any  way  affect  the  argument  if  there  is  not  a 
similar  accession  of  concurrent  fragments  from 
every  side.  For  the  greater  quantity,  finding  a 
lesser  in  front  of  it,  must  necessarily  drive  it  on, 
both  having  an  impulse  whose  goal  is  the  centre, 
[30]  and  the  greater  weight  driving  the  lesser 
forward  till  this  goal  is  reached.  In  this  we 
have  also  the  solution  of  a  possible  difficulty. 
The  earth,  it  might  be  argued,  is  at  the  centre 
and  spherical  in  shape:  if,  then,  a  weight  many 
times  that  of  the  earth  were  added  to  one  hemi¬ 
sphere,  the  centre  of  the  earth  and  of  the  whole 


298h  BOOK  II,  CHAPTER  14— BOOK  III,  CHAPTER  1  389 


will  no  longer  be  coincident.  So  that  either  the 
earth  will  not  stay  still  at  the  centre,  or  if  it 
29 7b  does,  it  will  be  at  rest  without  having  its 
centre  at  the  place  to  which  it  is  still  its  nature 
to  move.  Such  is  the  difficulty.  A  short  consid¬ 
eration  will  give  us  an  easy  answer,  if  we  first 
give  precision  to  our  postulate  that  any  body 
endowed  with  weight,  of  whatever  size,  moves 
[5]  towards  the  centre.  Clearly  it  will  not  stop 
when  its  edge  touches  the  centre.  The  greater 
quantity  must  prevail  until  the  body’s  centre 
occupies  the  centre.  For  that  is  the  goal  of  its 
impulse.  Now  it  makes  no  difference  whether 
we  apply  this  to  a  clod  or  common  fragment  of 
earth  or  to  the  earth  as  a  whole.  The  fact  indi¬ 
cated  does  not  depend  upon  degrees  of  size  but 
[/o]  applies  universally  to  everything  that  has 
the  centripetal  impulse.  Therefore  earth  in  mo¬ 
tion,  whether  in  a  mass  or  in  fragments,  neces¬ 
sarily  continues  to  move  until  it  occupies  the 
centre  equally  every  way,  the  less  being  forced 
to  equalize  itself  by  the  greater  owing  to  the 
forward  drive  of  the  impulse. 

If  the  earth  was  generated,  then,  it  must  have 
[75]  been  formed  in  this  way,  and  so  clearly  its 
generation  was  spherical;  and  if  it  is  ungener¬ 
ated  and  has  remained  so  always,  its  character 
must  be  that  which  the  initial  generation,  if  it 
had  occurred,  would  have  given  it.  But  the 
spherical  shape,  necessitated  by  this  argument, 
follows  also  from  the  fact  that  the  motions  of 
heavy  bodies  always  make  equal  angles,  and 
[20]  are  not  parallel.  This  would  be  the  natu¬ 
ral  form  of  movement  towards  what  is  natu¬ 
rally  spherical.  Either  then  the  earth  is  spheri¬ 
cal  or  it  is  at  least  naturally  spherical.  And  it  is 
right  to  call  anything  that  which  nature  intends 
it  to  be,  and  which  belongs  to  it,  rather  than 
that  which  it  is  by  constraint  and  contrary  to  na¬ 
ture.  The  evidence  of  the  senses  further  corrob- 
[25]  orates  this.  How  else  would  eclipses  of 


the  moon  show  segments  shaped  as  we  see 
them?  As  it  is,  the  shapes  which  the  moon  it¬ 
self  each  month  shows  are  of  every  kind — 
straight,  gibbous,  and  concave — but  in  eclipses 
the  outline  is  always  curved:  and,  since  it  is  the 
interposition  of  the  earth  that  makes  the  eclipse, 
[30]  the  form  of  this  line  will  be  caused  by  the 
form  of  the  earth’s  surface,  which  is  therefore 
spherical.  Again,  our  observations  of  the  stars 
make  it  evident,  not  only  that  the  earth  is  cir¬ 
cular,  but  also  that  it  is  a  circle  of  no  great  size. 
For  quite  a  small  change  of  position  to  south 
or  north  causes  a  manifest  alteration  of  the  hori- 
298a  zon.  There  is  much  change,  I  mean,  in 
the  stars  which  are  overhead,  and  the  stars  seen 
are  different,  as  one  moves  northward  or  south¬ 
ward.  Indeed  there  are  some  stars  seen  in 
Egypt  and  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Cyprus 
which  are  not  seen  in  the  northerly  regions; 
[5]  and  stars,  which  in  the  north  are  never  be¬ 
yond  the  range  of  observation,  in  those  regions 
rise  and  set.  All  of  which  goes  to  show  not  only 
that  the  earth  is  circular  in  shape,  but  also  that 
it  is  a  sphere  of  no  great  size:  for  otherwise  the 
effect  of  so  slight  a  change  of  place  would  not 
be  so  quickly  apparent.  Hence  one  should  not 
[/o]  be  too  sure  of  the  incredibility  of  the  view 
of  those  who  conceive  that  there  is  continuity 
between  the  parts  about  the  pillars  of  Hercules 
and  the  parts  about  India,  and  that  in  this  way 
the  ocean  is  one.  As  further  evidence  in  favour 
of  this  they  quote  the  case  of  elephants,  a  spe¬ 
cies  occurring  in  each  of  these  extreme  regions, 
suggesting  that  the  common  characteristic  of 
[75]  these  extremes  is  explained  by  their  con¬ 
tinuity.  Also,  those  mathematicians  who  try  to 
calculate  the  size  of  the  earth’s  circumference 
arrive  at  the  figure  400,000  stades.  This  indi¬ 
cates  not  only  that  the  earth’s  mass  is  spherical 
in  shape,  but  also  that  as  compared  with  the 
[20]  stars  it  is  not  of  great  size. 


BOOK  III 


1 

We  have  already  discussed  the  first  heaven 
and  its  parts,  the  moving  stars  within  it,  the 
[25]  matter  of  which  these  are  composed  and 
their  bodily  constitution,  and  we  have  also 
shown  that  they  are  ungenerated  and  inde¬ 
structible.  Now  things  that  we  call  natural  are 
either  substances  or  functions  and  attributes  of 
substances.  As  substances  I  class  the  simple 
[30]  bodies — fire,  earth,  and  the  other  terms  of 
the  series — and  all  things  composed  of  them; 


for  example,  the  heaven  as  a  whole  and  its 
parts,  animals,  again,  and  plants  and  their 
parts.  By  attributes  and  functions  I  mean  the 
movements  of  these  and  of  all  other  things  in 
which  they  have  power  in  themselves  to  cause 
movement,  and  also  their  alterations  and  re- 
298b  ciprocal  transformations.  It  is  obvious, 
then,  that  the  greater  part  of  the  inquiry  into 
nature  concerns  bodies:  for  a  natural  substance 
is  either  a  body  or  a  thing  which  cannot  come 
into  existence  without  body  and  magnitude. 
[5]  This  appears  plainly  from  an  analysis  of 


390 

the  character  of  natural  things,  and  equally 
from  an  inspection  of  the  instances  of  inquiry 
into  nature.  Since,  then,  we  have  spoken  of  the 
primary  element,  of  its  bodily  constitution,  and 
of  its  freedom  from  destruction  and  genera¬ 
tion,  it  remains  to  speak  of  the  other  two.  In 
speaking  of  them  we  shall  be  obliged  also  to  in- 
[/o]  quire  into  generation  and  destruction.  For 
if  there  is  generation  anywhere,  it  must  be  in 
these  elements  and  things  composed  of  them. 

This  is  indeed  the  first  question  we  have  to 
ask:  is  generation  a  fact  or  not?  Earlier  specu¬ 
lation  was  at  variance  both  with  itself  and  with 
the  views  here  put  forward  as  to  the  true  an- 
[75]  swer  to  this  question.  Some  removed  gen¬ 
eration  and  destruction  from  the  world  alto¬ 
gether.  Nothing  that  is,  they  said,  is  generated 
or  destroyed,  and  our  conviction  to  the  con¬ 
trary  is  an  illusion.  So  maintained  the  school  of 
Melissus  and  Parmenides.  But  however  excel¬ 
lent  their  theories  may  otherwise  be,  anyhow 
they  cannot  be  held  to  speak  as  students  of  na¬ 
ture.  There  may  be  things  not  subject  to  gener¬ 
ation  or  any  kind  of  movement,  but'  if  so  they 
[20]  belong  to  another  and  a  higher  inquiry 
than  the  study  of  nature.  They,  however,  had 
no  idea  of  any  form  of  being  other  than  the 
substance  of  things  perceived;  and  when  they 
saw,  what  no  one  previously  had  seen,  that 
there  could  be  no  knowledge  or  wisdom  with¬ 
out  some  such  unchanging  entities,  they  nat¬ 
urally  transferred  what  was  true  of  them  to 
things  perceived.  Others,  perhaps  intentionally, 
[25]  maintain  precisely  the  contrary  opinion 
to  this.  It  has  been  asserted  that  everything  in 
the  world  was  subject  to  generation  and  noth¬ 
ing  was  ungenerated,  but  that  after  being  gen¬ 
erated  some  things  remained  indestructible 
while  the  rest  were  again  destroyed.  This  had 
been  asserted  in  the  first  instance  by  Hesiod 
and  his  followers,  but  afterwards  outside  his 
circle  by  the  earliest  natural  philosophers.  But 
what  these  thinkers  maintained  was  that  all 
[30]  else  has  been  generated  and,  as  they  said, 
‘is  flowing  away’,  nothing  having  any  solidity, 
except  one  single  thing  which  persists  as 
the  basis  of  all  these  transformations.  So  we 
may  interpret  the  statements  of  Heraclitus  of 
Ephesus  and  many  others.  And  some  subject 
all  bodies  whatever  to  generation,  by  means  of 
299a  the  composition  and  separation  of  planes. 

Discussion  of  the  other  views  may  be  post¬ 
poned.  But  this  last  theory  which  composes 
every  body  of  planes  is,  as  the  most  superficial 
observation  shows,  in  many  respects  in  plain 
contradiction  with  mathematics.  It  is,  however, 


299b 

[5]  wrong  to  remove  the  foundations  of  a  sci¬ 
ence  unless  you  can  replace  them  with  others 
more  convincing.  And,  secondly,  the  same 
theory  which  composes  solids  of  planes  clearly 
composes  planes  of  lines  and  lines  of  points,  so 
that  a  part  of  a  line  need  not  be  a  line.  This 
matter  has  been  already  considered  in  our  dis- 
[/o]  cussion  of  movement,  where  we  have 
shown  that  an  indivisible  length  is  impossible.1 
But  with  respect  to  natural  bodies  there  are  im¬ 
possibilities  involved  in  the  view  which  asserts 
indivisible  lines,  which  we  may  briefly  consider 
at  this  point.  For  the  impossible  consequences 
which  result  from  this  view  in  the  mathemati¬ 
cal  sphere  will  reproduce  themselves  when  it  is 
applied  to  physical  bodies,  but  there  will  be 
[75]  difficulties  in  physics  which  are  not  pres¬ 
ent  in  mathematics;  for  mathematics  deals  with 
an  abstract  and  physics  with  a  more  concrete 
object.  There  are  many  attributes  necessarily 
present  in  physical  bodies  which  are  neces¬ 
sarily  excluded  by  indivisibility;  all  attributes, 
in  fact,  which  are  divisible.  There  can  be  noth¬ 
ing  divisible  in  an  indivisible  thing,  but  the 
attributes  of  bodies  are  all  divisible  in  one  of 
[20]  two  ways.  They  are  divisible  into  kinds, 
as  colour  is  divided  into  white  and  black,  and 
they  are  divisible  per  accidens  when  that  which 
has  them  is  divisible.  In  this  latter  sense  attri¬ 
butes  which  are  simple  are  nevertheless  divis¬ 
ible.  Attributes  of  this  kind  will  serve,  there¬ 
fore,  to  illustrate  the  impossibility  of  the  view. 
[25]  It  is  impossible,  if  two  parts  of  a  thing 
have  no  weight,  that  the  two  together  should 
have  weight.  But  either  all  perceptible  bodies 
or  some,  such  as  earth  and  water,  have  weight, 
as  these  thinkers  would  themselves  admit. 
Now  if  the  point  has  no  weight,  clearly  the 
lines  have  not  either,  and,  if  they  have  not, 
neither  have  the  planes.  Therefore  no  body  has 
[30]  weight.  It  is,  further,  manifest  that  their 
point  cannot  have  weight.  For  while  a  heavy 
thing  may  always  be  heavier  than  something 
299b  and  a  light  thing  lighter  than  something, 
a  thing  which  is  heavier  or  lighter  than  some¬ 
thing  need  not  be  itself  heavy  or  light,  just  as 
a  large  thing  is  larger  than  others,  but  what  is 
larger  is  not  always  large.  A  thing  which, 
judged  absolutely,  is  small  may  none  the  less 
[5]  be  larger  than  other  things.  Whatever, 
then,  is  heavy  and  also  heavier  than  something 
else,  must  exceed  this  by  something  which  is 
heavy.  A  heavy  thing  therefore  is  always  divis¬ 
ible.  But  it  is  common  ground  that  a  point  is 
indivisible.  Again,  suppose  that  what  is  heavy 
1  Physics,  vi.  1. 


ON  THE  HEAVENS 


300b  BOOK  III,  CHAPTERS  1-2  391 


is  a  dense  body,  and  what  is  light  rare.  Dense 
differs  from  rare  in  containing  more  matter  in 
the  same  cubic  area.  A  point,  then,  if  it  may  be 
[10]  heavy  or  light,  may  be  dense  or  rare.  But 
the  dense  is  divisible  while  a  point  is  indivis¬ 
ible.  And  if  what  is  heavy  must  be  either  hard 
or  soft,  an  impossible  consequence  is  easy  to 
draw.  For  a  thing  is  soft  if  its  surface  can  be 
pressed  in,  hard  if  it  cannot;  and  if  it  can  be 
pressed  in  it  is  divisible. 

[75]  Moreover,  no  weight  can  consist  of  parts 
not  possessing  weight.  For  how,  except  by  the 
merest  fiction,  can  they  specify  the  number  and 
character  of  the  parts  which  will  produce 
weight?  And,  further,  when  one  weight  is 
greater  than  another,  the  difference  is  a  third 
weight;  from  which  it  will  follow  that  every 
indivisible  part  possesses  weight.  For  suppose 
that  a  body  of  four  points  possesses  weight.  A 
body  composed  of  more  than  four  points  will 
[20]  be  superior  in  weight  to  it,  a  thing  which 
has  weight.  But  the  difference  between  weight 
and  weight  must  be  a  weight,  as  the  difference 
between  white  and  whiter  is  white.  Here  the 
difference  which  makes  the  superior  weight 
heavier  is  the  single  point  which  remains  when 
the  common  number,  four,  is  subtracted.  A 
single  point,  therefore,  has  weight. 

Further,  to  assume,  on  the  one  hand,  that  the 
[25]  planes  can  only  be  put  in  linear  contact 
would  be  ridiculous.  For  just  as  there  are  two 
ways  of  putting  lines  together,  namely,  end  to 
end  and  side  by  side,  so  there  must  be  two 
ways  of  putting  planes  together.  Lines  can  be 
put  together  so  that  contact  is  linear  by  laying 
one  along  the  other,  though  not  by  putting 
them  end  to  end.  But  if,  similarly,  in  putting 
the  planes  together,  superficial  contact  is  al- 
[30]  lowed  as  an  alternative  to  linear,  that 
method  will  give  them  bodies  which  are  not  any 
element  nor  composed  of  elements.  Again,  if  it 
is  the  number  of  planes  in  a  body  that  makes 
300a  one  heavier  than  another,  as  the  Ti- 
maeus 1  explains,  clearly  the  line  and  the  point 
will  have  weight.  For  the  three  cases  are,  as  we 
said  before,  analogous.  But  if  the  reason  of 
differences  of  weight  is  not  this,  but  rather  the 
[5]  heaviness  of  earth  and  the  lightness  of  fire, 
then  some  of  the  planes  will  be  light  and  others 
heavy  (which  involves  a  similar  distinction  in 
the  lines  and  the  points);  the  earthplane,  I 
mean,  will  be  heavier  than  the  fire-plane.  In 
general,  the  result  is  either  that  there  is  no 
magnitude  at  all,  or  that  all  magnitude  could 
be  done  away  with.  For  a  point  is  to  a  line  as 

1  Plato,  TimaeiiSy  5 6. 


[/o]  a  line  is  to  a  plane  and  as  a  plane  is  to  a 
body.  Now  the  various  forms  in  passing  into 
one  another  will  each  be  resolved  into  its  ulti¬ 
mate  constituents.  It  might  happen  therefore 
that  nothing  existed  except  points,  and  that 
there  was  no  body  at  all.  A  further  considera¬ 
tion  is  that  if  time  is  similarly  constituted, 
there  would  be,  or  might  be,  a  time  at  which 
it  was  done  away  with.  For  the  indivisible  now 
f/5]  is  like  a  point  in  a  line.  The  same  conse¬ 
quences  follow  from  composing  the  heaven  of 
numbers,  as  some  of  the  Pythagoreans  do  who 
make  all  nature  out  of  numbers.  For  natural 
bodies  are  manifestly  endowed  with  weight 
and  lightness,  but  an  assemblage  of  units  can 
neither  be  composed  to  form  a  body  nor  pos¬ 
sess  weight. 

2 

[20]  The  necessity  that  each  of  the  simple 
bodies  should  have  a  natural  movement  may 
be  shown  as  follows.  They  manifestly  move, 
and  if  they  have  no  proper  movement  they 
must  move  by  constraint:  and  the  constrained 
is  the  same  as  the  unnatural.  Now  an  unnat¬ 
ural  movement  presupposes  a  natural  move- 
[25]  ment  which  it  contravenes,  and  which, 
however  many  the  unnatural  movements,  is  al¬ 
ways  one.  For  naturally  a  thing  moves  in  one 
way,  while  its  unnatural  movements  are  mani¬ 
fold.  The  same  may  be  shown  from  the  fact 
of  rest.  Rest,  also,  must  either  be  constrained  or 
natural,  constrained  in  a  place  to  which  move¬ 
ment  was  constrained,  natural  in  a  place  move¬ 
ment  to  which  was  natural.  Now  manifestly 
[30]  there  is  a  body  which  is  at  rest  at  the  cen¬ 
tre.  If  then  this  rest  is  natural  to  it,  clearly  mo¬ 
tion  to  this  place  is  natural  to  it.  If,  on  the  other 
hand,  its  rest  is  constrained,  what  is  hindering 
its  motion?  Something,  perhaps,  which  is  at 
rest:  but  if  so,  we  shall  simply  repeat  the  same 
argument;  and  either  we  shall  come  to  an  ulti- 
300b  mate  something  to  which  rest  where  it 
is  is  natural,  or  we  shall  have  an  infinite  proc¬ 
ess,  which  is  impossible.  The  hindrance  to  its 
movement,  then,  we  will  suppose,  is  a  moving 
thing — as  Empedocles  says  that  it  is  the  vortex 
which  keeps  the  earth  still — :  but  in  that  case 
we  ask,  where  would  it  have  moved  to  but  for 
the  vortex?  It  could  not  move  infinitely;  for  to 
[5]  traverse  an  infinite  is  impossible,  and  im¬ 
possibilities  do  not  happen.  So  the  moving 
thing  must  stop  somewhere,  and  there  rest  not 
by  constraint  but  naturally.  But  a  natural  rest 
proves  a  natural  movement  to  the  place  of  rest. 
Hence  Leucippus  and  Democritus,  who  say 


392 

that  the  primary  bodies  are  in  perpetual  move- 
[/o]  ment  in  the  void  or  infinite,  may  be 
asked  to  explain  the  manner  of  their  motion 
and  the  kind  of  movement  which  is  natural  to 
them.  For  if  the  various  elements  are  con¬ 
strained  by  one  another  to  move  as  they  do, 
each  must  still  have  a  natural  movement  which 
the  constrained  contravenes,  and  the  prime 
mover  must  cause  motion  not  by  constraint  but 
[75]  naturally.  If  there  is  no  ultimate  natural 
cause  of  movement  and  each  preceding  term  in 
the  series  is  always  moved  by  constraint,  we 
shall  have  an  infinite  process.  The  same  diffi¬ 
culty  is  involved  even  if  it  is  supposed,  as  we 
read  in  the  Timaeus /  that  before  the  ordered 
world  was  made  the  elements  moved  without 
order.  Their  movement  must  have  been  due 
either  to  constraint  or  to  their  nature.  And  if 
[20]  their  movement  was  natural,  a  moment’s 
consideration  shows  that  there  was  already  an 
ordered  world.  For  the  prime  mover  must 
cause  motion  in  virtue  of  its  own  natural  move¬ 
ment,  and  the  other  bodies,  moving  without 
constraint,  as  they  came  to  rest  in  their  proper 
places,  would  fall  into  the  order  in  which  they 
now  stand,  the  heavy  bodies  moving  towards 
[25]  the  centre  and  the  light  bodies  away  from 
it.  But  that  is  the  order  of  their  distribution  in 
our  world.  There  is  a  further  question,  too, 
which  might  be  asked.  Is  it  possible  or  im¬ 
possible  that  bodies  in  unordered  movement 
should  combine  in  some  cases  into  combina¬ 
tions  like  those  of  which  bodies  of  nature’s 
composing  are  composed,  such,  I  mean,  as 
bones  and  flesh?  Yet  this  is  what  Empedocles 
[30]  asserts  to  have  occurred  under  Love. 
‘Many  a  head’,  says  he,  ‘came  to  birth  without 
a  neck.’2  The  answer  to  the  view  that  there  are 
infinite  bodies  moving  in  an  infinite  is  that, 
if  the  cause  of  movement  is  single,  they  must 
move  with  a  single  motion,  and  therefore  not 
without  order;  and  if,  on  the  other  hand,  the 
301a  causes  are  of  infinite  variety,  their  mo¬ 
tions  too  must  be  infinitely  varied.  For  a  finite 
number  of  causes  would  produce  a  kind  of 
order,  since  absence  of  order  is  not  proved  by 
diversity  of  direction  in  motions:  indeed,  in  the 
world  we  know,  not  all  bodies,  but  only  bodies 
of  the  same  kind,  have  a  common  goal  of 
[5]  movement.  Again,  disorderly  movement 
means  in  reality  unnatural  movement,  since 
the  order  proper  to  perceptible  things  is  their 
nature.  And  there  is  also  absurdity  and  impos¬ 
sibility  in  the  notion  that  the  disorderly  move- 

1  Plato,  Timaeus ,  30. 

2  Fr.  57, 1.  1,  Diels,  Vors*  245,  20. 


301b 

ment  is  infinitely  continued.  For  the  nature  of 
things  is  the  nature  which  most  of  them  possess 
for  most  of  the  time.  Thus  their  view  brings 
[/o]  them  into  the  contrary  position  that  dis¬ 
order  is  natural,  and  order  or  system  unnatural. 
But  no  natural  fact  can  originate  in  chance. 
This  is  a  point  which  Anaxagoras  seems  to 
have  thoroughly  grasped;  for  he  starts  his  cos¬ 
mogony  from  unmoved  things.  The  others,  it 
is  true,  make  things  collect  together  some¬ 
how  before  they  try  to  produce  motion  and  sep¬ 
aration.  But  there  is  no  sense  in  starting  gen¬ 
t/5]  eration  from  an  original  state  in  which 
bodies  are  separated  and  in  movement.  Hence 
Empedocles  begins  after  the  process  ruled  by 
Love:  for  he  could  not  have  constructed  the 
heaven  by  building  it  up  out  of  bodies  in  sep¬ 
aration,  making  them  to  combine  by  the  power 
of  Love,  since  our  world  has  its  constituent 
elements  in  separation,  and  therefore  presup- 
[20]  poses  a  previous  state  of  unity  and  com¬ 
bination. 

These  arguments  make  it  plain  that  every 
body  has  its  natural  movement,  which  is  not 
constrained  or  contrary  to  its  nature.  We  go 
on  to  show  that  there  are  certain  bodies  whose 
necessary  impetus  is  that  of  weight  and  light¬ 
ness.  Of  necessity,  we  assert,  they  must  move, 
[25]  and  a  moved  thing  which  has  no  natural 
impetus  cannot  move  either  towards  or  away 
from  the  centre.  Suppose  a  body  A  without 
weight,  and  a  body  B  endowed  with  weight. 
Suppose  the  weightless  body  to  move  the  dis¬ 
tance  CD,  while  B  in  the  same  time  moves  the 
distance  CE,  which  will  be  greater  since  the 
heavy  thing  must  move  further.  Let  the  heavy 
[30]  body  then  be  divided  in  the  proportion 
CE  :  CD  (for  there  is  no  reason  why  a  part  of 
B  should  not  stand  in  this  relation  to  the 
whole).  Now  if  the  whole  moves  the  whole 
distance  CE,  the  part  must  in  the  same  time 
move  the  distance  CD.  A  weightless  body, 
therefore,  and  one  which  has  weight  will  move 
301b  the  same  distance,  which  is  impossible. 
And  the  same  argument  would  fit  the  case  of 
lightness.  Again,  a  body  which  is  in  motion  but 
has  neither  weight  nor  lightness,  must  be 
moved  by  constraint,  and  must  continue  its 
constrained  movement  infinitely.  For  there  will 
[5]  be  a  force  which  moves  it,  and  the  smaller 
and  lighter  a  body  is  the  further  will  a  given 
force  move  it.  Now  let  A,  the  weightless  body, 
be  moved  the  distance  CE,  and  B,  which  has 
weight,  be  moved  in  the  same  time  the  dis¬ 
tance  CD.  Dividing  the  heavy  body  in  the  pro¬ 
portion  CE:CD,  we  subtract  from  the  heavy 


ON  THE  HEAVENS 


393 


BOOK  III,  CHAPTERS  2-4 


302b 

[/o]  body  a  part  which  will  in  the  same  time 
move  the  distance  CE,  since  the  whole  moved 
CD:  for  the  relative  speeds  of  the  two  bodies 
will  be  in  inverse  ratio  to  their  respective  sizes. 
Thus  the  weightless  body  will  move  the  same 
distance  as  the  heavy  in  the  same  time.  But 
[75]  this  is  impossible.  Hence,  since  the  mo¬ 
tion  of  the  weightless  body  will  cover  a  greater 
distance  than  any  that  is  suggested,  it  will  con¬ 
tinue  infinitely.  It  is  therefore  obvious  that 
every  body  must  have  a  definite  weight  or 
lightness.  But  since  ‘nature’  means  a  source  of 
movement  within  the  thing  itself,  while  a 
force  is  a  source  of  movement  in  something 
other  than  it  or  in  itself  qua  other,  and  since 
[20]  movement  is  always  due  either  to  nature 
or  to  constraint,  movement  which  is  natural, 
as  downward  movement  is  to  a  stone,  will  be 
merely  accelerated  by  an  external  force,  while 
an  unnatural  movement  will  be  due  to  the 
force  alone.  In  either  case  the  air  is  as  it  were 
instrumental  to  the  force.  For  air  is  both  light 
and  heavy,  and  thus  qua  light  produces  up¬ 
ward  motion,  being  propelled  and  set  in  mo- 
[25]  tion  by  the  force,  and  qua  heavy  produces 
a  downward  motion.  In  either  case  the  force 
transmits  the  movement  to  the  body  by  first,  as 
it  were,  impregnating  the  air.  That  is  why  a 
body  moved  by  constraint  continues  to  move 
when  that  which  gave  the  impulse  ceases  to 
accompany  it.  Otherwise,  i.e.  if  the  air  were  not 
endowed  with  this  function,  constrained  move¬ 
ment  would  be  impossible.  And  the  natural 
[jo]  movement  of  a  body  may  be  helped  on  in 
the  same  way.  This  discussion  suffices  to  show 
(1)  that  all  bodies  are  either  light  or  heavy, 
and  (2)  how  unnatural  movement  takes  place. 

From  what  has  been  said  earlier1  it  is  plain 
that  there  cannot  be  generation  either  of  every¬ 
thing  or  in  an  absolute  sense  of  anything.  It  is 
impossible  that  everything  should  be  gener- 
302a  ated,  unless  an  extra-corporeal  void  is  pos¬ 
sible.  For,  assuming  generation,  the  place 
which  is  to  be  occupied  by  that  which  is  com¬ 
ing  to  be,  must  have  been  previously  occupied 
by  void  in  which  no  body  was.  Now  it  is  quite 
possible  for  one  body  to  be  generated  out  of 
[5]  another,  air  for  instance  out  of  fire,  but  in 
the  absence  of  any  pre-existing  mass  generation 
is  impossible.  That  which  is  potentially  a  cer¬ 
tain  kind  of  body  may,  it  is  true,  become  such 
in  actuality.  But  if  the  potential  body  was  not 
already  in  actuality  some  other  kind  of  body, 
the  existence  of  an  extra-corporeal  void  must 
be  admitted. 

1  Physics ,  IV.  6-9. 


3 

[/o]  It  remains  to  say  what  bodies  are  subject 
to  generation,  and  why.  Since  in  every  case 
knowledge  depends  on  what  is  primary,  and 
the  elements  are  the  primary  constituents  of 
bodies,  we  must  ask  which  of  such  bodies  are 
elements,  and  why;  and  after  that  what  is  their 
[75]  number  and  character.  The  answer  will 
be  plain  if  we  first  explain  what  kind  of  sub¬ 
stance  an  element  is.  An  element,  we  take  it,  is 
a  body  into  which  other  bodies  may  be  ana¬ 
lysed,  present  in  them  potentially  or  in  actuality 
(which  of  these,  is  still  disputable),  and  not 
itself  divisible  into  bodies  different  in  form. 
That,  or  something  like  it,  is  what  all  men  in 
every  case  mean  by  element.  Now  if  what  we 
[20]  have  described  is  an  element,  clearly  there 
must  be  such  bodies.  For  flesh  and  wood  and 
all  other  similar  bodies  contain  potentially  fire 
and  earth,  since  one  sees  these  elements  exuded 
from  them;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  neither  in 
potentiality  nor  in  actuality  does  fire  contain 
[25]  flesh  or  wood,  or  it  would  exude  them. 
Similarly,  even  if  there  were  only  one  elemen¬ 
tary  body,  it  would  not  contain  them.  For 
though  it  will  be  either  flesh  or  bone  or  some¬ 
thing  else,  that  does  not  at  once  show  that  it 
contained  these  in  potentiality:  the  further 
question  remains,  in  what  manner  it  becomes 
them.  Now  Anaxagoras  opposes  Empedocles’ 
view  of  the  elements.  Empedocles  says  that  fire 
[30]  and  earth  and  the  related  bodies  are  ele¬ 
mentary  bodies  of  which  all  things  are  com¬ 
posed;  but  this  Anaxagoras  denies.  His  ele- 
302b  ments  are  the  homoeomerous  things,  viz. 
flesh,  bone,  and  the  like.  Earth  and  fire  are 
mixtures,  composed  of  them  and  all  the  other 
seeds,  each  consisting  of  a  collection  of  all  the 
homoeomerous  bodies,  separately  invisible; 
and  that  explains  why  from  these  two  bodies 
all  others  are  generated.  (To  him  fire  and 
[5]  aither  are  the  same  thing.)  But  since  every 
natural  body  has  it  proper  movement,  and 
movements  are  either  simple  or  mixed,  mixed 
in  mixed  bodies  and  simple  in  simple,  there 
must  obviously  be  simple  bodies;  for  there  are 
simple  movements.  It  is  plain,  then,  that  there 
are  elements,  and  why. 

4 

[70]  The  next  question  to  consider  is  whether 
the  elements  are  finite  or  infinite  in  number, 
and,  if  finite,  what  their  number  is.  Let  us  first 
show  reason  or  denying  that  their  number  is 
infinite,  as  some  suppose.  We  begin  with  the 


394 

view  of  Anaxagoras  that  all  the  homoeomerous 
[75]  bodies  are  elements.  Any  one  who  adopts 
this  view  misapprehends  the  meaning  of  ele¬ 
ment.  Observation  shows  that  even  mixed 
bodies  are  often  divisible  into  homoeomerous 
parts;  examples  are  flesh,  bone,  wood,  and 
stone.  Since  then  the  composite  cannot  be  an 
element,  not  every  homoeomerous  body  can 
be  an  element;  only,  as  we  said  before,1  that 
[20]  which  is  not  divisible  into  bodies  differ¬ 
ent  in  form.  But  even  taking  ‘element’  as  they 
do,  they  need  not  assert  an  infinity  of  elements, 
since  the  hypothesis  of  a  finite  number  will 
give  identical  results.  Indeed  even  two  or  three 
such  bodies  serve  the  purpose  as  well,  as  Em¬ 
pedocles’  attempt  shows.  Again,  even  on  their 
view  it  turns  out  that  all  things  are  not  com- 
[25]  posed  of  homoeomerous  bodies.  They  do 
not  pretend  that  a  face  is  composed  of  faces,  or 
that  any  other  natural  conformation  is  com¬ 
posed  of  parts  like  itself.  Obviously  then  it 
would  be  better  to  assume  a  finite  number  of 
principles.  They  should,  in  fact,  be  as  few  as 
ossible,  consistently  with  proving  what  has  to 
jo]  be  proved.  This  is  the  common  demand 
of  mathematicians,  who  always  assume  as 
principles  things  finite  either  in  kind  or  in 
number.  Again,  if  body  is  distinguished  from 
body  by  the  appropriate  qualitative  difference, 
and  there  is  a  limit  to  the  number  of  differ- 
303a  ences  (for  the  difference  lies  in  qualities 
apprehended  by  sense,  which  are  in  fact  finite 
in  number,  though  this  requires  proof),  then 
manifestly  there  is  necessarily  a  limit  to  the 
number  of  elements. 

There  is,  further,  another  view — that  of 
Leucippus  and  Democritus  of  Abdera — the 
implications  of  which  are  also  unacceptable. 
[5]  The  primary  masses,  according  to  them, 
are  infinite  in  number  and  indivisible  in  mass: 
one  cannot  turn  into  many  nor  many  into  one; 
and  all  things  are  generated  by  their  combina¬ 
tion  and  involution.  Now  this  view  in  a  sense 
makes  things  out  to  be  numbers  or  composed 
[/o]  of  numbers.  The  exposition  is  not  clear, 
but  this  is  its  real  meaning.  And  further,  they 
say  that  since  the  atomic  bodies  differ  in  shape, 
and  there  is  an  infinity  of  shapes,  there  is  an 
infinity  of  simple  bodies.  But  they  have  never 
explained  in  detail  the  shapes  of  the  various 
[75]  elements,  except  so  far  to  allot  the  sphere 
to  fire.  Air,  water,  and  the  rest  they  distin¬ 
guished  by  the  relative  size  of  the  atom,  assum¬ 
ing  that  the  atomic  substance  was  a  sort  of 
master-seed  for  each  and  every  element.  Now, 

1  Above,  302s  1 8. 


303b 

in  the  first  place,  they  make  the  mistake  al¬ 
ready  noticed.  The  principles  which  they  as¬ 
sume  are  not  limited  in  number,  though  such 
limitation  would  necessitate  no  other  alteration 
in  their  theory.  Further,  if  the  differences  of 
[20]  bodies  are  not  infinite,  plainly  the  ele¬ 
ments  will  not  be  an  infinity.  Besides,  a  view 
which  asserts  atomic  bodies  must  needs  come 
into  conflict  with  the  mathematical  sciences,  in 
addition  to  invalidating  many  common  opin¬ 
ions  and  apparent  data  of  sense  perception.  But 
of  these  things  we  have  already  spoken  in  our 
discussion  of  time  and  movement.2  They  are 
[25]  also  bound  to  contradict  themselves.  For 
if  the  elements  are  atomic,  air,  earth,  and  water 
cannot  be  differentiated  by  the  relative  sizes  of 
their  atoms,  since  then  they  could  not  be  gen¬ 
erated  out  of  one  another.  The  extrusion  of  the 
largest  atoms  is  a  process  that  will  in  time  ex¬ 
haust  the  supply;  and  it  is  by  such  a  process 
that  they  account  for  the  generation  of  water, 
air,  and  earth  from  one  another.  Again,  even 
[jo]  on  their  own  presuppositions  it  does  not 
seem  as  if  the  elements  would  be  infinite  in 
number.  The  atoms  differ  in  figure,  and  all 
figures  are  composed  of  pyramids,  rectilinear 
303b  in  the  case  of  rectilinear  figures,  while 
the  sphere  has  eight  pyramidal  parts.  The  fig¬ 
ures  must  have  their  principles,  and,  whether 
these  are  one  or  two  or  more,  the  simple  bodies 
must  be  the  same  in  number  as  they.  Again,  if 
every  element  has  its  proper  movement,  and  a 
[5]  simple  body  has  a  simple  movement,  and 
the  number  of  simple  movements  is  not  in¬ 
finite,  because  the  simple  motions  are  only  two 
and  the  number  of  places  is  not  infinite,  on 
these  grounds  also  we  should  have  to  deny 
that  the  number  of  elements  is  infinite. 

5 

Since  the  number  of  the  elements  must  be  lim- 
[70]  ited,  it  remains  to  inquire  whether  there 
is  more  than  one  element.  Some  assume  one 
only,  which  is  according  to  some  water,  to 
others  air,  to  others  fire,  to  others  again  some¬ 
thing  finer  than  water  and  denser  than  air,  an 
infinite  body — so  they  say — embracing  all  the 
heavens. 

Now  those  who  decide  for  a  single  element, 
which  is  either  water  or  air  or  a  body  finer 
than  water  and  denser  than  air,  and  proceed  to 
[75]  generate  other  things  out  of  it  by  use  of 
the  attributes  density  and  rarity,  all  alike  fail 
to  observe  the  fact  that  they  are  depriving  the 

2  Especially  Physics ,  vi.  1-2  (231®  18  ff.). 


ON  THE  HEAVENS 


304b  BOOK  III,  CHAPTERS  4-5  395 


element  of  its  priority.  Generation  out  of  the 
elements  is,  as  they  say,  synthesis,  and  genera¬ 
tion  into  the  elements  is  analysis,  so  that  the 
body  with  the  finer  parts  must  have  priority 
[20]  in  the  order  of  nature.  But  they  say  that 
fire  is  of  all  bodies  the  finest.  Hence  fire  will 
be  first  in  the  natural  order.  And  whether  the 
finest  body  is  fire  or  not  makes  no  difference; 
anyhow  it  must  be  one  of  the  other  bodies  that 
is  primary  and  not  that  which  is  intermediate. 
Again,  density  and  rarity,  as  instruments  of 
generation,  are  equivalent  to  fineness  and 
coarseness,  since  the  fine  is  rare,  and  coarse  in 
[25]  their  use  means  dense.  But  fineness  and 
coarseness,  again,  are  equivalent  to  greatness 
and  smallness,  since  a  thing  with  small  parts 
is  fine  and  a  thing  with  large  parts  coarse.  For 
that  which  spreads  itself  out  widely  is  fine, 
and  a  thing  composed  of  small  parts  is  so 
spread  out.  In  the  end,  then,  they  distinguish 
the  various  other  substances  from  the  element 
[30]  by  the  greatness  and  smallness  of  their 
parts.  This  method  of  distinction  makes  all 
judgement  relative.  There  will  be  no  absolute 
distinction  between  fire,  water,  and  air,  but  one 
and  the  same  body  will  be  relatively  to  this 
304a  fire,  relatively  to  something  else  air.  The 
same  difficulty  is  involved  equally  in  the  view 
which  recognizes  several  elements  and  distin¬ 
guishes  them  by  their  greatness  and  smallness. 
The  principle  of  distinction  between  bodies  be¬ 
ing  quantity,  the  various  sizes  will  be  in  a 
[5]  definite  ratio,  and  whatever  bodies  are  in 
this  ratio  to  one  another  must  be  air,  fire,  earth, 
and  water  respectively.  For  the  ratios  of 
smaller  bodies  may  be  repeated  among  greater 
bodies. 

Those  who  start  from  fire  as  the  single  ele¬ 
ment,  while  avoiding  this  difficulty,  involve 
themselves  in  many  others.  Some  of  them  give 
[/o]  fire  a  particular  shape,  like  those  who 
make  it  a  pyramid,  and  this  on  one  of  two 
grounds.  The  reason  given  may  be — more 
crudely — that  the  pyramid  is  the  most  piercing 
of  figures  as  fire  is  of  bodies,  or — more  in¬ 
geniously — the  position  may  be  supported  by 
the  following  argument.  As  all  bodies  are  com- 
[75]  posed  of  that  which  has  the  finest  parts, 
so  all  solid  figures  are  composed  of  pryamids: 
but  the  finest  body  is  fire,  while  among  figures 
the  pyramid  is  primary  and  has  the  smallest 
parts;  and  the  primary  body  must  have  the 
primary  figure:  therefore  fire  will  be  a  pyra¬ 
mid.  Others,  again,  express  no  opinion  on  the 
subject  of  its  figure,  but  simply  regard  it  as  the 
[20]  body  of  the  finest  parts,  which  in  com¬ 


bination  will  form  other  bodies,  as  the  fusing 
of  gold-dust  produces  solid  gold.  Both  of  these 
views  involve  the  same  difficulties.  For  (1)  if, 
on  the  one  hand,  they  make  the  primary  body 
an  atom,  the  view  will  be  open  to  the  objec¬ 
tions  already  advanced  against  the  atomic 
theory.  And  further  the  theory  is  inconsistent 
[25]  with  a  regard  for  the  facts  of  nature.  For 
if  all  bodies  are  quantitatively  commensurable, 
and  the  relative  size  of  the  various  homoeomer- 
ous  masses  and  of  their  several  elements  are  in 
the  same  ratio,  so  that  the  total  mass  of  water, 
for  instance,  is  related  to  the  total  mass  of  air 
as  the  elements  of  each  are  to  one  another,  and 
[30]  so  on,  and  if  there  is  more  air  than  water 
and,  generally,  more  of  the  finer  body  than  of 
the  coarser,  obviously  the  element  of  water  will 
be  smaller  than  that  of  air.  But  the  lesser 
quantity  is  contained  in  the  greater.  Therefore 
304b  the  air  element  is  divisible.  And  the 
same  could  be  shown  of  fire  and  of  all  bodies 
whose  parts  are  relatively  fine.  (2)  If,  on  the 
other  hand,  the  primary  body  is  divisible,  then 
(a)  those  who  give  fire  a  special  shape  will 
have  to  say  that  a  part  of  fire  is  not  fire,  because 
[5]  a  pyramid  is  not  composed  of  pyramids, 
and  also  that  not  every  body  is  either  an  ele¬ 
ment  or  composed  of  elements,  since  a  part  of 
fire  will  be  neither  fire  nor  any  other  element. 
And  ( b )  those  whose  ground  of  distinction  is 
size  will  have  to  recognize  an  element  prior 
to  the  element,  a  regress  which  continues  in¬ 
finitely,  since  every  body  is  divisible  and  that 
which  has  the  smallest  parts  is  the  element. 
Further,  they  too  will  have  to  say  that  the  same 
[/o]  body  is  relatively  to  this  fire  and  rela¬ 
tively  to  that  air,  to  others  again  water  and 
earth. 

The  common  error  of  all  views  which  as¬ 
sume  a  single  element  is  that  they  allow  only 
one  natural  movement,  which  is  the  same  for 
every  body.  For  it  is  a  matter  of  observation 
that  a  natural  body  possesses  a  principle  of 
[75]  movement.  If  then  all  bodies  are  one,  all 
will  have  one  movement.  With  this  motion 
the  greater  their  quantity  the  more  they  will 
move,  just  as  fire,  in  proportion  as  its  quantity 
is  greater,  moves  faster  with  the  upward  mo¬ 
tion  which  belongs  to  it.  But  the  fact  is  that 
increase  of  quantity  makes  many  things  move 
the  faster  downward.  For  these  reasons,  then, 
[20]  as  well  as  from  the  distinction  already 
established1  of  a  plurality  of  natural  move¬ 
ments,  it  is  impossible  that  there  should  be  only 
one  element.  But  if  the  elements  are  not  an 
1  Book  i,  chapter  2. 


396  ON  THE 

infinity  and  not  reducible  to  one,  they  must  be 
several  and  finite  in  number. 

6 

First  we  must  inquire  whether  the  elements 
are  eternal  or  subject  to  generation  and  de¬ 
struction;  for  when  this  question  has  been  an- 
[25]  swered  their  number  and  character  will 
be  manifest.  In  the  first  place,  they  cannot  be 
eternal.  It  is  a  matter  of  observation  that  fire, 
water,  and  every  simple  body  undergo  a  proc¬ 
ess  of  analysis,  which  must  either  continue 
infinitely  or  stop  somewhere.  (1)  Suppose  it 
infinite.  Then  the  time  occupied  by  the  process 
will  be  infinite,  and  also  that  occupied  by  the 
[jo]  reverse  process  of  synthesis.  For  the  proc¬ 
esses  of  analysis  and  synthesis  succeed  one  an¬ 
other  in  the  various  parts.  It  will  follow  that 
there  are  two  infinite  times  which  are  mutually 
exclusive,  the  time  occupied  by  the  synthesis, 
which  is  infinite,  being  preceded  by  the  period 
of  analysis.  There  are  thus  two  mutually  ex- 
3053  elusive  infinites,  which  is  impossible.  (2) 
Suppose,  on  the  other  hand,  that  the  analysis 
stops  somewhere.  Then  the  body  at  which  it 
stops  will  be  either  atomic  or,  as  Empedocles 
seems  to  have  intended,  a  divisible  body  which 
will  yet  never  be  divided.  The  foregoing  argu- 
[5]  ments1  show  that  it  cannot  be  an  atom; 
but  neither  can  it  be  a  divisible  body  which 
analysis  will  never  reach.  For  a  smaller  body  is 
more  easily  destroyed  than  a  larger;  and  a  de¬ 
structive  process  which  succeeds  in  destroying, 
that  is,  in  resolving  into  smaller  bodies,  a  body 
of  some  size,  cannot  reasonably  be  expected  to 
fail  with  the  smaller  body.  Now  in  fire  we  ob- 
[/o]  serve  a  destruction  of  two  kinds:  it  is 
destroyed  by  its  contrary  when  it  is  quenched, 
and  by  itself  when  it  dies  out.  But  the  effect  is 
produced  by  a  greater  quantity  upon  a  lesser, 
and  the  more  quickly  the  smaller  it  is.  The  ele¬ 
ments  of  bodies  must  therefore  be  subject  to 
destruction  and  generation. 

Since  they  are  generated,  they  must  be  gen- 
[75]  erated  either  from  something  incorporeal 
or  from  a  body,  and  if  from  a  body,  either 
from  one  another  or  from  something  else.  The 
theory  which  generates  them  from  something 
incorporeal  requires  an  extra-corporeal  void. 
For  everything  that  comes  to  be  comes  to  be  in 
something,  and  that  in  which  the  generation 
takes  place  must  either  be  incorporeal  or  pos¬ 
sess  body;  and  if  it  has  body,  there  will  be  two 
bodies  in  the  same  place  at  the  same  time,  viz. 
[20]  that  which  is  coming  to  be  and  that  which 
1  Chapter  4. 


HEAVENS  305b 

was  previously  there,  while  if  it  is  incorporeal, 
there  must  be  an  extra-corporeal  void.  But  we 
have  already  shown2  that  this  is  impossible. 
But,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  equally  impossible 
that  the  elements  should  be  generated  from 
some  kind  of  body.  That  would  involve  a  body 
distinct  from  the  elements  and  prior  to  them. 
But  if  this  body  possesses  weight  or  lightness, 
[25]  it  will  be  one  of  the  elements;  and  if  it  has 
no  tendency  to  movement,  it  will  be  an  im¬ 
movable  or  mathematical  entity,  and  therefore 
not  in  a  place  at  all.  A  place  in  which  a  thing 
is  at  rest  is  a  place  in  which  it  might  move, 
either  by  constraint,  i.e.  unnaturally,  or  in  the 
absence  of  constraint,  i.e.  naturally.  If,  then,  it 
is  in  a  place  and  somewhere,  it  will  be  one  of 
the  elements;  and  if  it  is  not  in  a  place,  nothing 
[50]  can  come  from  it,  since  that  which  comes 
into  being  and  that  out  of  which  it  comes  must 
needs  be  together.  The  elements  therefore  can¬ 
not  be  generated  from  something  incorporeal 
nor  from  a  body  which  is  not  an  element,  and 
the  only  remaining  alternative  is  that  they  are 
generated  from  one  another. 

7 

We  must,  therefore,  turn  to  the  question,  what 
is  the  manner  of  their  generation  from  one  an- 
[35]  other?  Is  it  as  Empedocles  and  Democrit¬ 
us  say,  or  as  those  who  resolve  bodies  into 
305b  planes  say,  or  is  there  yet  another  possi¬ 
bility?  (1)  What  the  followers  of  Empedocles 
do,  though  without  observing  it  themselves,  is 
to  reduce  the  generation  of  elements  out  of  one 
another  to  an  illusion.  They  make  it  a  process 
of  excretion  from  a  body  of  what  was  in  it  all 
the  time — as  though  generation  required  a 
[5]  vessel  rather  than  a  material — so  that  it  in¬ 
volves  no  change  of  anything.  And  even  if  this 
were  accepted,  there  are  other  implications 
equally  unsatisfactory.  We  do  not  expect  a 
mass  of  matter  to  be  made  heavier  by  compres¬ 
sion.  But  they  will  be  bound  to  maintain  this, 
if  they  say  that  water  is  a  body  present  in  air 
and  excreted  from  air,  since  air  becomes 
[/o]  heavier  when  it  turns  into  water.  Again, 
when  the  mixed  body  is  divided,  they  can  show 
no  reason  why  one  of  the  constituents  must  by 
itself  take  up  more  room  than  the  body  did: 
but  when  water  turns  into  air,  the  room  occu¬ 
pied  is  increased.  The  fact  is  that  the  finer 
body  takes  up  more  room,  as  is  obvious  in  any 
[75]  case  of  transformation.  As  the  liquid  is 
converted  into  vapour  or  air  the  vessel  which 
contains  it  is  often  burst  because  it  does  not 

2  Physics ,  IV.  8. 


30 6b  BOOK  III,  CHAPTERS  5-8  397 


contain  room  enough.  Now,  if  there  is  no  void 
at  all,  and  if,  as  those  who  take  this  view  say, 
there  is  no  expansion  of  bodies,  the  impossibil¬ 
ity  of  this  is  manifest:  and  if  there  is  void  and 
expansion,  there  is  no  accounting  for  the  fact 
that  the  body  which  results  from  division  occu- 
[20]  pies  of  necessity  a  greater  space.  It  is  in¬ 
evitable,  too,  that  generation  of  one  out  of 
another  should  come  to  a  stop,  since  a  finite 
quantum  cannot  contain  an  infinity  of  finite 
quanta.  When  earth  produces  water  something 
is  taken  away  from  the  earth,  for  the  process  is 
one  of  excretion.  The  same  thing  happens 
again  when  the  residue  produces  water.  But 
[25]  this  can  only  go  on  for  ever,  if  the  finite 
body  contains  an  infinity,  which  is  impossible. 
Therefore  the  generation  of  elements  out  of 
one  another  will  not  always  continue. 

(2)  We  have  now  explained  that  the  mutual 
transformations  of  the  elements  cannot  take 
place  by  means  of  excretion.  The  remaining 
alternative  is  that  they  should  be  generated  by 
changing  into  one  another.  And  this  in  one  of 
[30]  two  ways,  either  by  change  of  shape,  as 
the  same  wax  takes  the  shape  both  of  a  sphere 
and  of  a  cube,  or,  as  some  assert,  by  resolution 
into  planes.  ( a )  Generation  by  change  of  shape 
would  necessarily  involve  the  assertion  of 
atomic  bodies.  For  if  the  particles  were  divisi¬ 
ble  there  would  be  a  part  of  fire  which  was  not 
fire  and  a  part  of  earth  which  was  not  earth, 
[35]  for  the  reason  that  not  every  part  of  a 
30 6a  pyramid  is  a  pyramid  nor  of  a  cube  a 
cube.  But  if  ( b )  the  process  is  resolution  into 
planes,  the  first  difficulty  is  that  the  elements 
cannot  all  be  generated  out  of  one  another. 
This  they  are  obliged  to  assert,  and  do  assert. 
It  is  absurd,  because  it  is  unreasonable  that  one 
element  alone  should  have  no  part  in  the  trans¬ 
formations,  and  also  contrary  to  the  observed 
[5]  data  of  sense,  according  to  which  all  alike 
change  into  one  another.  In  fact  their  explana¬ 
tion  of  the  observations  is  not  consistent  with 
the  observations.  And  the  reason  is  that  their 
ultimate  principles  are  wrongly  assumed:  they 
had  certain  predetermined  views,  and  were  re¬ 
solved  to  bring  everything  into  line  with  them. 
M  it  seems  that  perceptible  things  require 
perceptible  principles,  eternal  things  eternal 
principles,  corruptible  things  corruptible  prin¬ 
ciples;  and,  in  general,  every  subject  matter 
principles  homogeneous  with  itself.  But  they, 
owing  to  their  love  for  their  principles,  fall 
into  the  attitude  of  men  who  undertake  the 
defence  of  a  position  in  argument.  In  the  con¬ 
fidence  that  the  principles  are  true  they  are 


ready  to  accept  any  consequence  of  their  ap- 
[75]  plication.  As  though  some  principles  did 
not  require  to  be  judged  from  their  results, 
and  particularly  from  their  final  issue!  And 
that  issue,  which  in  the  case  of  productive 
knowledge  is  the  product,  in  the  knowledge  of 
nature  is  the  unimpeachable  evidence  of  the 
senses  as  to  each  fact. 

The  result  of  their  view  is  that  earth  has  the 
best  right  to  the  name  element,  and  is  alone 
indestructible;  for  that  which  is  indissoluble  is 
[20]  indestructible  and  elementary,  and  earth 
alone  cannot  be  dissolved  into  any  body  but 
itself.  Again,  in  the  case  of  those  elements 
which  do  suffer  dissolution,  the  ‘suspension’ 
of  the  triangles  is  unsatisfactory.  But  this  takes 
place  whenever  one  is  dissolved  into  another, 
because  of  the  numerical  inequality  of  the  tri¬ 
angles  which  compose  them.  Further,  those 
who  hold  these  views  must  needs  suppose  that 
[25]  generation  does  not  start  from  a  body.  For 
what  is  generated  out  of  planes  cannot  be  said 
to  have  been  generated  from  a  body.  And  they 
must  also  assert  that  not  all  bodies  are  divisible, 
coming  thus  into  conflict  with  our  most  accu¬ 
rate  sciences,  namely  the  mathematical,  which 
assume  that  even  the  intelligible  is  divisible, 
while  they,  in  their  anxiety  to  save  their  hy- 
[30]  pothesis,  cannot  even  admit  this  of  every 
perceptible  thing.  For  any  one  who  gives  each 
element  a  shape  of  its  own,  and  makes  this  the 
ground  of  distinction  between  the  substances, 
has  to  attribute  to  them  indivisibility;  since 
division  of  a  pyramid  or  a  sphere  must  leave 
somewhere  at  least  a  residue  which  is  not  a 
sphere  or  a  pvramid.  Either,  then,  a  part  of 
fire  is  not  fire,  so  that  there  is  a  body  prior  to 
306b  the  element — for  every  body  is  either  an 
element  or  composed  of  elements — or  not  every 
body  is  divisible. 

8 

In  general,  the  attempt  to  give  a  shape  to  each 
of  the  simple  bodies  is  unsound,  for  the  reason, 
[5]  first,  that  they  will  not  succeed  in  filling 
the  whole.  It  is  agreed  that  there  are  only  three 
plane  figures  which  can  fill  a  space,  the  tri¬ 
angle,  the  square,  and  the  hexagon,  and  only 
two  solids,  the  pyramid  and  the  cube.  But  the 
theory  needs  more  than  these  because  the  ele¬ 
ments  which  it  recognizes  are  more  in  number. 
Secondly,  it  is  manifest  that  the  simple  bodies 
[/o]  are  often  given  a  shape  by  the  place  in 
which  they  are  included,  particularly  water 
and  air.  In  such  a  case  the  shape  of  the  element 
cannot  persist;  for,  if  it  did,  the  contained  mass 


398  ON  THE 

would  not  be  in  continuous  contact  with  the 
containing  body;  while,  if  its  shape  is  changed, 
it  will  cease  to  be  water,  since  the  distinctive 
[75]  quality  is  shape.  Clearly,  then,  their 
shapes  are  not  fixed.  Indeed,  nature  itself  seems 
to  offer  corroboration  of  this  theoretical  con¬ 
clusion.  Just  as  in  other  cases  the  substratum 
must  be  formless  and  unshapen — for  thus  the 
‘all-receptive,,  as  we  read  in  the  Timaeus,1  will 
be  best  for  modelling — so  the  elements  should 
[20]  be  conceived  as  a  material  for  composite 
things;  and  that  is  why  they  can  put  off  their 
qualitative  distinctions  and  pass  into  one  an¬ 
other.  Further,  how  can  they  account  for  the 
generation  of  flesh  and  bone  or  any  other 
continuous  body?  The  elements  alone  catt¬ 
le 25]  not  produce  them  because  their  colloca¬ 
tion  cannot  produce  a  continuum.  Nor  can 
the  composition  of  planes;  for  this  produces 
the  elements  themselves,  not  bodies  made  up 
of  them.  Any  one  then  who  insists  upon  an 
exact  statement  of  this  kind  of  theory,  instead 
of  assenting  after  a  passing  glance  at  it,  will 
see  that  it  removes  generation  from  the 
world. 

[30]  Further,  the  very  properties,  powers,  and 
motions,  to  which  they  paid  particular  atten¬ 
tion  in  allotting  shapes,  show  the  shapes  not  to 
be  in  accord  with  the  bodies.  Because  fire  is 
mobile  and  productive  of  heat  and  combustion, 
some  made  it  a  sphere,  others  a  pyramid. 
These  shapes,  they  thought,  were  the  most  mo¬ 
bile  because  they  offer  the  fewest  points  of  con- 
30  7a  tact  and  are  the  least  stable  of  any;  they 
were  also  the  most  apt  to  produce  warmth 
and  combustion,  because  the  one  is  angular 
throughout  while  the  other  has  the  most  acute 
angles,  and  the  angles,  they  say,  produce 
warmth  and  combustion.  Now,  in  the  first 
place,  with  regard  to  movement  both  are  in 
[5]  error.  These  may  be  the  figures  best 
adapted  to  movement;  they  are  not,  however, 
well  adapted  to  the  movement  of  fire,  which 
is  an  upward  and  rectilinear  movement,  but 
rather  to  that  form  of  circular  movement  which 
we  call  rolling.  Earth,  again,  they  call  a  cube 
because  it  is  stable  and  at  rest.  But  it  rests  only 
in  its  own  place,  not  anywhere;  from  any  other 
[70]  it  moves  if  nothing  hinders,  and  fire  and 
the  other  bodies  do  the  same.  The  obvious  in¬ 
ference,  therefore,  is  that  fire  and  each  several 
element  is  in  a  foreign  place  a  sphere  or  a 
pyramid,  but  in  its  own  a  cube.  Again,  if  the 
ossession  of  angles  makes  a  body  produce  heat 
75]  and  combustion,  every  element  produces 
1  Plato,  Timaeus,  51. 


HEAVENS  30 7b 

heat,  though  one  may  do  so  more  than  another. 
For  they  all  possess  angles,  the  octahedron  and 
dodecahedron  as  well  as  the  pyramid;  and  De¬ 
mocritus  makes  even  the  sphere  a  kind  of 
angle,  which  cuts  things  because  of  its  mo¬ 
bility.  The  difference,  then,  will  be  one  of  de¬ 
gree:  and  this  is  plainly  false.  They  must  also 
accept  the  inference  that  the  mathematical 
[20]  solids  produce  heat  and  combustion,  since 
they  too  possess  angles  and  contain  atomic 
spheres  and  pyramids,  especially  if  there  are,  as 
they  allege,  atomic  figures.  Anyhow  if  these 
functions  belong  to  some  of  these  things  and 
not  to  others,  they  should  explain  the  differ¬ 
ence,  instead  of  speaking  in  quite  general 
terms  as  they  do.  Again,  combustion  of  a  body 
[25]  produces  fire,  and  fire  is  a  sphere  or  a 
pyramid.  The  body,  then,  is  turned  into 
spheres  or  pyramids.  Let  us  grant  that  these 
figures  may  reasonably  be  supposed  to  cut  and 
break  up  bodies  as  fire  does;  still  it  remains 
quite  inexplicable  that  a  pyramid  must  needs 
produce  pyramids  or  a  sphere  spheres.  One 
might  as  well  postulate  that  a  knife  or  a  saw 
[30]  divides  things  into  knives  or  saws.  It  is 
also  ridiculous  to  think  only  of  division  when 
allotting  fire  its  shape.  Fire  is  generally  thought 
of  as  combining  and  connecting  rather  than  as 
30 7b  separating.  For  though  it  separates  bodies 
different  in  kind,  it  combines  those  which  are 
the  same;  and  the  combining  is  essential  to  it, 
the  functions  of  connecting  and  uniting  being 
a  mark  of  fire,  while  the  separating  is  inci¬ 
dental.  For  the  expulsion  of  the  foreign  body 
is  an  incident  in  the  compacting  of  the  homo¬ 
geneous.  In  choosing  the  shape,  then,  they 
[5]  should  have  thought  either  of  both  func¬ 
tions  or  preferably  of  the  combining  function. 
In  addition,  since  hot  and  cold  are  contrary 
powers,  it  is  impossible  to  allot  any  shape  to  the 
cold.  For  the  shape  given  must  be  the  contrary 
of  that  given  to  the  hot,  but  there  is  no  con¬ 
trariety  between  figures.  That  is  why  they  have 
all  left  the  cold  out,  though  properly  either  all 
[70]  or  none  should  have  their  distinguishing 
figures.  Some  of  them,  however,  do  attempt  to 
explain  this  power,  and  they  contradict  them¬ 
selves.  A  body  of  large  particles,  they  say,  is 
cold  because  instead  of  penetrating  through 
the  passages  it  crushes.  Clearly,  then,  that 
which  is  hot  is  that  which  penetrates  these 
passages,  or  in  other  words  that  which  has  fine 
[75]  particles.  It  results  that  hot  and  cold  are 
distinguished  not  by  the  figure  but  by  the  size 
of  the  particles.  Again,  if  the  pyramids  are  un¬ 
equal  in  size,  the  large  ones  will  not  be  fire, 


30 8b  BOOK  III,  CHAPTER  8— BOOK  IV,  CHAPTERS  1-2  399 


and  that  figure  will  produce  not  combustion 
but  its  contrary. 

From  what  has  been  said  it  is  clear  that  the 
difference  of  the  elements  does  not  depend 
upon  their  shape.  Now  their  most  important 
[20]  differences  are  those  of  property,  function, 


and  power;  for  every  natural  body  has,  we 
maintain,  its  own  functions,  properties,  and 
powers.  Our  first  business,  then,  will  be  to 
speak  of  these,  and  that  inquiry  will  enable 
us  to  explain  the  differences  of  each  from 
each. 


BOOK  IV 


1 

We  have  now  to  consider  the  terms  ‘heavy’ 
and  ‘light’.  We  must  ask  what  the  bodies  so 
called  are,  how  they  are  constituted,  and  what 
[jo]  is  the  reason  of  their  possessing  these 
powers.  The  consideration  of  these  questions 
is  a  proper  part  of  the  theory  of  movement, 
since  we  call  things  heavy  and  light  because 
they  have  the  power  of  being  moved  naturally 
in  a  certain  way.  The  activities  corresponding 
to  these  powers  have  not  been  given  any  name, 
308a  unless  it  is  thought  that  ‘impetus’  is  such 
a  name.  But  because  the  inquiry  into  nature  is 
concerned  with  movement,  and  these  things 
have  in  themselves  some  spark  (as  it  were)  of 
movement,  all  inquirers  avail  themselves  of 
these  powers,  though  in  all  but  a  few  cases 
without  exact  discrimination.  We  must  then 
[5]  first  look  at  whatever  others  have  said,  and 
formulate  the  questions  which  require  settle¬ 
ment  in  the  interests  of  this  inquiry,  before  we 
go  on  to  state  our  own  view  of  the  matter. 

Language  recognizes  (a)  an  absolute,  ( b )  a 
relative  heavy  and  light.  Of  two  heavy  things, 
such  as  wood  and  bronze,  we  say  that  the  one 
is  relatively  light,  the  other  relatively  heavy, 
[/o]  Our  predecessors  have  not  dealt  at  all  with 
the  absolute  use  of  the  terms,  but  only  with  the 
relative.  I  mean,  they  do  not  explain  what  the 
heavy  is  or  what  the  light  is,  but  only  the  rela¬ 
tive  heaviness  and  lightness  of  things  possess¬ 
ing  weight.  This  can  be  made  clearer  as  fol¬ 
lows.  There  are  things  whose  constant  nature 
it  is  to  move  away  from  the  centre,  while  others 
[75]  move  constantly  towards  the  centre;  and 
of  these  movements  that  which  is  away  from 
the  centre  I  call  upward  movement  and  that 
which  is  towards  it  I  call  downward  move¬ 
ment.  (The  view,  urged  by  some,1  that  there 
is  no  up  and  no  down  in  the  heaven,  is  absurd. 
There  can  be,  they  say,  nq  up  and  no  down, 
[20]  since  the  universe  is  similar  every  way, 
and  from  any  point  on  the  earth’s  surface  a 
man  by  advancing  far  enough  will  come  to 
stand  foot  to  foot  with  himself.  But  the  ex- 

1  Plato,  Timaeus ,  62. 


tremity  of  the  whole,  which  we  call  ‘above’,  is 
in  position  above  and  in  nature  primary.  And 
since  the  universe  has  an  extremity  and  a  cen¬ 
tre,  it  must  clearly  have  an  up  and  down.  Com- 
[25]  mon  usage  is  thus  correct,  though  inade¬ 
quate.  And  the  reason  of  its  inadequacy  is  that 
men  think  that  the  universe  is  not  similar  every 
way.  They  recognise  only  the  hemisphere 
which  is  over  us.  But  if  they  went  on  to  think 
of  the  world  as  formed  on  this  pattern  all 
round,  with  a  centre  identically  related  to  each 
point  on  the  extremity,  they  would  have  to 
admit  that  the  extremity  was  above  and  the 
centre  below.)  By  absolutely  light,  then,  we 
[30]  mean  that  which  moves  upward  or  to  the 
extremity,  and  by  absolutely  heavy  that  which 
moves  downward  or  to  the  centre.  By  lighter 
or  relatively  light  we  mean  that  one,  of  two 
bodies  endowed  with  weight  and  equal  in 
bulk,  which  is  exceeded  by  the  other  in  the 
speed  of  its  natural  downward  movement. 

2 

Those  of  our  predecessors  who  have  entered 
[35]  upon  this  inquiry  have  for  the  most  part 
spoken  of  light  and  heavy  things  only  in  the 
308b  sense  in  which  one  of  two  things  both 
endowed  with  weight  is  said  to  be  the  lighter. 
And  this  treatment  they  consider  a  sufficient 
analysis  also  of  the  notions  of  absolute  heavi¬ 
ness,  to  which  their  account  does  not  apply. 
This,  however,  will  become  clearer  as  we  ad¬ 
vance.  One  use  of  the  terms  ‘lighter’  and 
[5]  ‘heavier’  is  that  which  is  set  forth  in  writ¬ 
ing  in  the  Timaeus ,2  that  the  body  which  is 
composed  of  the  greater  number  of  identical 
parts  is  relatively  heavy,  while  that  which  is 
composed  of  a  smaller  number  is  relatively 
light.  As  a  larger  quantity  of  lead  or  of  bronze 
is  heavier  than  a  smaller — and  this  holds  good 
of  all  homogeneous  masses,  the  superior  weight 
always  depending  upon  a  numerical  superi- 
[/o]  ority  of  equal  parts — in  precisely  the  same 
way,  they  assert,  lead  is  heavier  than  wood.  For 
all  bodies,  in  spite  of  the  general  opinion  to 
the  contrary,  are  composed  of  identical  parts 
2  63. 


400 

and  of  a  single  material.  But  this  analysis  says 
nothing  of  the  absolutely  heavy  and  light.  The 
facts  are  that  fire  is  always  light  and  moves 
upward,  while  earth  and  all  earthy  things 
move  downwards  or  towards  the  centre.  It 
[75]  cannot  then  be  the  fewness  of  the  tri¬ 
angles  (of  which,  in  their  view,  all  these  bodies 
are  composed)  which  disposes  fire  to  move 
upward.  If  it  were,  the  greater  the  quantity  of 
fire  the  slower  it  would  move,  owing  to  the  in¬ 
crease  of  weight  due  to  the  increased  number 
of  triangles.  But  the  palpable  fact,  on  the  con¬ 
trary,  is  that  the  greater  the  quantity,  the 
lighter  the  mass  is  and  the  quicker  its  upward 
[20]  movement:  and,  similarly,  in  the  reverse 
movement  from  above  downward,  the  small 
mass  will  move  quicker  and  the  large  slower. 
Further,  since  to  be  lighter  is  to  have  fewer  of 
these  homogeneous  parts  and  to  be  heavier  is 
to  have  more,  and  air,  water,  and  fire  are  com¬ 
posed  of  the  same  triangles,  the  only  difference 
[25]  being  in  the  number  of  such  parts,  which 
must  therefore  explain  any  distinction  of  rela¬ 
tively  light  and  heavy  between  these  bodies,  it 
follows  that  there  must  be  a  certain  quantum 
of  air  which  is  heavier  than  water.  But  the 
facts  are  directly  opposed  to  this.  The  larger 
the  quantity  of  air  the  more  readily  it  moves 
upward,  and  any  portion  of  air  without  excep¬ 
tion  will  rise  up  out  of  the  water. 

So  much  for  one  view  of  the  distinction  be- 
[jo]  tween  light  and  heavy.  To  others  the 
analysis  seems  insufficient;  and  their  views  on 
the  subject,  though  they  belong  to  an  older 
generation  than  ours,  have  an  air  of  novelty. 
It  is  apparent  that  there  are  bodies  which, 
when  smaller  in  bulk  than  others,  yet  exceed 
them  in  weight.  It  is  therefore  obviously  insuf¬ 
ficient  to  say  that  bodies  of  equal  weight  are 
[55]  composed  of  an  equal  number  of  primary 
parts:  for  that  would  give  equality  of  bulk. 
Those  who  maintain  that  the  primary  or 
atomic  parts,  of  which  bodies  endowed  with 
309a  weight  are  composed,  are  planes,  cannot 
so  speak  without  absurdity;  but  those  who  re¬ 
gard  them  as  solids  are  in  a  better  position  to  as¬ 
sert  that  of  such  bodies  the  larger  is  the  heavier. 
But  since  in  composite  bodies  the  weight  obvi¬ 
ously  does  not  correspond  in  this  way  to  the 
[5]  bulk,  the  lesser  bulk  being  often  superior  in 
weight  (as,  for  instance,  if  one  be  wool  and  the 
other  bronze),  there  are  some  who  think  and 
say  that  the  cause  is  to  be  found  elsewhere.  The 
void,  they  say,  which  is  imprisoned  in  bodies, 
lightens  them  and  sometimes  makes  the  larger 
body  the  lighter.  The  reason  is  that  there  is 


309b 

more  void.  And  this  would  also  account  for 
the  fact  that  a  body  composed  of  a  number  of 
solid  parts  equal  to,  or  even  smaller  than,  that 
of  another  is  sometimes  larger  in  bulk  than  it. 
[  /o]  In  short,  generally  and  in  every  case  a  body 
is  relatively  light  when  it  contains  a  relatively 
large  amount  of  void.  This  is  the  way  they 
put  it  themselves,  but  their  account  requires 
an  addition.  Relative  lightness  must  depend 
not  only  on  an  excess  of  void,  but  also  an  a 
defect  of  solid:  for  if  the  ratio  of  solid  to  void 
[75]  exceeds  a  certain  proportion,  the  relative 
lightness  will  disappear.  Thus  fire,  they  say,  is 
the  lightest  of  things  just  for  this  reason  that  it 
has  the  most  void.  But  it  would  follow  that  a 
large  mass  of  gold,  as  containing  more  void 
than  a  small  mass  of  fire,  is  lighter  than  it,  un¬ 
less  it  also  contains  many  times  as  much  solid. 
The  addition  is  therefore  necessary. 

Of  those  who  deny  the  existence  of  a  void 
some,  like  Anaxagoras  and  Empedocles,  have 
not  tried  to  analyse  the  notions  of  light  and 
[20]  heavy  at  all;  and  those  who,  while  still 
denying  the  existence  of  a  void,  have  at¬ 
tempted  this,1  have  failed  to  explain  why  there 
are  bodies  which  are  absolutely  heavy  and 
light,  or  in  other  words  why  some  move  up¬ 
ward  and  others  downward.  The  fact,  again, 
[25]  that  the  body  of  greater  bulk  is  sometimes 
lighter  than  smaller  bodies  is  one  which  they 
have  passed  over  in  silence,  and  what  they  have 
said  gives  no  obvious  suggestion  for  reconciling 
their  views  with  the  observed  facts. 

But  those  who  attribute  the  lightness  of  fire 
to  its  containing  so  much  void  are  necessarily 
involved  in  practically  the  same  difficulties. 
For  though  fire  be  supposed  to  contain  less 
[jo]  solid  than  any  other  body,  as  well  as 
more  void,  yet  there  will  be  a  certain  quantum 
of  fire  in  which  the  amount  of  solid  or  plenum 
is  in  excess  of  the  solids  contained  in  some 
small  quantity  of  earth.  They  may  reply  that 
there  is  an  excess  of  void  also.  But  the  question 
is,  how  will  they  discriminate  the  absolutely 
heavy?  Presumably,  either  by  its  excess  of 
solid  or  by  its  defect  of  void.  On  the  former 
309b  view  there  could  be  an  amount  of  earth 
so  small  as  to  contain  less  solid  than  a  large 
mass  of  fire.  And  similarly,  if  the  distinction 
rests  on  the  amount  of  void,  there  will  be  a 
body,  lighter  than  the  absolutely  light,  which 
nevertheless  moves  downward  as  constantly  as 
[5]  the  other  moves  upward.  But  that  cannot  be 
so,  since  the  absolutely  light  is  always  lighter 
than  bodies  which  have  weight  and  move 
1  Plato,  in  the  Timaeus. 


ON  THE  HEAVENS 


310b  BOOK  IV,  CHAPTERS  2-3  401 


downward,  while,  on  the  other  hand,  that 
which  is  lighter  need  not  be  light,  because  in 
common  speech  we  distinguish  a  lighter  and  a 
heavier  (viz.  water  and  earth)  among  bodies 
endowed  with  weight.  Again,  the  suggestion  of 
a  certain  ratio  between  the  void  and  the  solid 
in  a  body  is  no  more  equal  to  solving  the  prob- 
[/o]  lem  before  us.  The  manner  of  speaking 
will  issue  in  a  similar  impossibility.  For  any 
two  portions  of  fire,  small  or  great,  will  exhibit 
the  same  ratio  of  solid  to  void;  but  the  upward 
movement  of  the  greater  is  quicker  than  that  of 
the  less,  just  as  the  downward  movement  of  a 
mass  of  gold  or  lead,  or  of  any  other  body  en- 
[75]  dowed  with  weight,  is  quicker  in  propor¬ 
tion  to  its  size.  This,  however,  should  not  be 
the  case  if  the  ratio  is  the  ground  of  distinction 
between  heavy  things  and  light.  There  is  also 
an  absurdity  in  attributing  the  upward  move¬ 
ment  of  bodies  to  a  void  which  does  not  itself 
move.  If,  however,  it  is  the  nature  of  a  void  to 
move  upward  and  of  a  plenum  to  move  down¬ 
ward,  and  therefore  each  causes  a  like  move- 
[20]  ment  in  other  things,  there  was  no  need  to 
raise  the  question  why  composite  bodies  are 
some  light  and  some  heavy;  they  had  only  to 
explain  why  these  two  things  are  themselves 
light  and  heavy  respectively,  and  to  give,  fur¬ 
ther,  the  reason  why  the  plenum  and  the  void 
are  not  eternally  separated.  It  is  also  unreason- 
[25]  able  to  imagine  a  place  for  the  void,  as  if 
the  void  were  not  itself  a  kind  of  place.  But  if 
the  void  is  to  move,  it  must  have  a  place  out  of 
which  and  into  which  the  change  carries  it. 
Also  what  is  the  cause  of  its  movement?  Not, 
surely,  its  voidness:  for  it  is  not  the  void  only 
which  is  moved,  but  also  the  solid. 

Similar  difficulties  are  involved  in  all  other 
methods  of  distinction,  whether  they  account 
[jo]  for  the  relative  lightness  and  heaviness  of 
bodies  by  distinctions  of  size,  or  proceed  on  any 
other  principle,  so  long  as  they  attribute  to  each 
the  same  matter,  or  even  if  they  recognize 
more  than  one  matter,  so  long  as  that  means 
only  a  pair  of  contraries.  If  there  is  a  single 
matter,  as  with  those  who  compose  things  of 
triangles,  nothing  can  be  absolutely  heavy  or 
310a  light:  and  if  there  is  one  matter  and  its 
contrary — the  void,  for  instance,  and  the  plen¬ 
um — no  reason  can  be  given  for  the  relative 
lightness  and  heaviness  of  the  bodies  interme¬ 
diate  between  the  absolutely  light  and  heavy 
when  compared  either  with  one  another  or 
with  these  themselves.  The  view  which  bases 
the  distinction  upon  differences  of  size  is  more 
[5]  like  a  mere  fiction  than  those  previously 


mentioned,  but,  in  that  it  is  able  to  make  dis¬ 
tinctions  between  the  four  elements,  it  is  in  a 
stronger  position  for  meeting  the  foregoing  dif¬ 
ficulties.  Since,  however,  it  imagines  that  these 
bodies  which  differ  in  size  are  all  made  of  one 
substance,  it  implies,  equally  with  the  view  that 
there  is  but  one  matter,  that  there  is  nothing 
absolutely  light  and  nothing  which  moves  up- 
[/o]  ward  (except  as  being  passed  by  other 
things  or  forced  up  by  them) ;  and  since  a  mul¬ 
titude  of  small  atoms  are  heavier  than  a  few 
large  ones,  it  will  follow  that  much  air  or  fire 
is  heavier  than  a  little  water  or  earth,  which  is 
impossible. 

3 

These,  then,  are  the  views  which  have  been 
advanced  by  others  and  the  terms  in  which 
[75]  they  state  them.  We  may  begin  our  own 
statement  by  settling  a  question  which  to  some 
has  been  the  main  difficulty — the  question  why 
some  bodies  move  always  and  naturally  up¬ 
ward  and  others  downward,  while  others  again 
move  both  upward  and  downward.  After  that 
we  will  inquire  into  light  and  heavy  and  the 
[20]  explanation  of  the  various  phenomena 
connected  with  them.  The  local  movement  of 
each  body  into  its  own  place  must  be  regarded 
as  similar  to  what  happens  in  connexion  with 
other  forms  of  generation  and  change.  There 
are,  in  fact,  three  kinds  of  movement,  affecting 
respectively  the  size,  the  form,  and  the  place  of 
a  thing,  and  in  each  it  is  observable  that  change 
[25]  proceeds  from  a  contrary  to  a  contrary 
or  to  something  intermediate:  it  is  never  the 
change  of  any  chance  subject  in  any  chance  di¬ 
rection,  nor,  similarly,  is  the  relation  of  the 
mover  to  its  object  fortuitous:  the  thing  altered 
is  different  from  the  thing  increased,  and  pre¬ 
cisely  the  same  difference  holds  between  that 
which  produces  alteration  and  that  which  pro- 
[30]  duces  increase.  In  the  same  manner  it 
must  be  thought  that  that  which  produces  local 
motion  and  that  which  is  so  moved  are  not  for¬ 
tuitously  related.  Now,  that  which  produces 
upward  and  downward  movement  is  that 
which  produces  weight  and  lightness,  and  that 
which  is  moved  is  that  which  is  potentially 
heavy  or  light,  and  the  movement  of  each  body 
to  its  own  place  is  motion  towards  its  own 
310b  form.  (It  is  best  to  interpret  in  this  sense 
the  common  statement  of  the  older  writers  that 
‘like  moves  to  like’.  For  the  words  are  not  in 
every  sense  true  to  fact.  If  one  were  to  remove 
the  earth  to  where  the  moon  now  is,  the  vari¬ 
ous  fragments  of  earth  would  each  move  not 


402  ON  THE 

[5]  towards  it  but  to  the  place  in  which  it  now 
is.  In  general,  when  a  number  of  similar  and 
undifferentiated  bodies  are  moved  with  the 
same  motion  this  result  is  necessarily  produced, 
viz.  that  the  place  which  is  the  natural  goal  of 
the  movement  of  each  single  part  is  also  that  of 
the  whole.  But  since  the  place  of  a  thing  is  the 
boundary  of  that  which  contains  it,  and  the 
continent  of  all  things  that  move  upward  or 
downward  is  the  extremity  and  the  centre,  and 
[/o]  this  boundary  comes  to  be,  in  a  sense,  the 
form  of  that  which  is  contained,  it  is  to  its  like 
that  a  body  moves  when  it  moves  to  its  own 
place.  For  the  successive  members  of  the  series 
are  like  one  another:  water,  I  mean,  is  like  air 
and  air  like  fire,  and  between  intermediates  the 
relation  may  be  converted,  though  not  between 
them  and  the  extremes;  thus  air  is  like  water, 
but  water  is  like  earth:  for  the  relation  of  each 
[75]  outer  body  to  that  which  is  next  within  it 
is  that  of  form  to  matter.)  Thus  to  ask  why  fire 
moves  upward  and  earth  downward  is  the 
same  as  to  ask  why  the  healable,  when  moved 
and  changed  qua  healable,  attains  health  and 
not  whiteness;  and  similar  questions  might  be 
asked  concerning  any  other  subject  of  altera- 
[20]  tion.  Of  course  the  subject  of  increase, 
when  changed  qua  increasable,  attains  not 
health  but  a  superior  size.  The  same  applies  in 
the  other  cases.  One  thing  changes  in  quality, 
another  in  quantity:  and  so  in  place,  a  light 
thing  goes  upward,  a  heavy  thing  downward. 
The  only  difference  is  that  in  the  last  case,  viz. 
that  of  the  heavy  and  the  light,  the  bodies  are 
[25]  thought  to  have  a  spring  of  change  within 
themselves,  while  the  subjects  of  healing  and 
increase  are  thought  to  be  moved  purely  from 
without.  Sometimes,  however,  even  they  change 
of  themselves,  i.e.  in  response  to  a  slight  exter¬ 
nal  movement  reach  health  or  increase,  as  the 
case  may  be.  And  since  the  same  thing  which  is 
[jo]  healable  is  also  receptive  of  disease,  it  de¬ 
pends  on  whether  it  is  moved  qua  healable  or 
qua  liable  to  disease  whether  the  motion  is  to¬ 
wards  health  or  towards  disease.  But  the  rea¬ 
son  why  the  heavy  and  the  light  appear  more 
than  these  things  to  contain  within  themselves 
the  source  of  their  movements  is  that  their  mat¬ 
ter  is  nearest  to  being.  This  is  indicated  by  the 
fact  that  locomotion  belongs  to  bodies  only 
when  isolated  from  other  bodies,  and  is  gener¬ 
ated  last  of  the  several  kinds  of  movement;  in 
order  of  being  then  it  will  be  first.  Now  when- 
311a  ever  air  comes  into  being  out  of  water, 
light  out  of  heavy,  it  goes  to  the  upper  place.  It 
is  forthwith  light:  becoming  is  at  an  end,  and 


HEAVENS  3lia 

in  that  place  it  has  being.  Obviously,  then,  it  is 
a  potentiality,  which,  in  its  passage  to  actuality, 
[5]  comes  into  that  place  and  quantity  and 
quality  which  belong  to  its  actuality.  And 
the  same  fact  explains  why  what  is  already 
actually  fire  or  earth  moves,  when  nothing 
obstructs  it,  towards  its  own  place.  For  mo¬ 
tion  is  equally  immediate  in  the  case  of  nutri¬ 
ment,  when  nothing  hinders,  and  in  the  case  of 
the  thing  healed,  when  nothing  stays  the  heal¬ 
ing.  But  the  movement  is  also  due  to  the  origi- 
[/o]  nal  creative  force  and  to  that  which  re¬ 
moves  the  hindrance  or  off  which  the  moving 
thing  rebounded,  as  was  explained  in  our  open¬ 
ing  discussions,  where  we  tried  to  show  how 
none  of  these  things  moves  itself.1  The  reason 
of  the  various  motions  of  the  various  bodies, 
and  the  meaning  of  the  motion  of  a  body  to  its 
own  place,  have  now  been  explained. 

4 

[75]  We  have  now  to  speak  of  the  distinctive 
properties  of  these  bodies  and  of  the  various 
phenomena  connected  with  them.  In  accord¬ 
ance  with  general  conviction  we  may  distin¬ 
guish  the  absolutely  heavy,  as  that  which  sinks 
to  the  bottom  of  all  things,  from  the  absolutely 
light,  which  is  that  which  rises  to  the  surface 
of  all  things.  I  use  the  term  ‘absolutely’,  in  view 
of  the  generic  character  of  ‘light’  and  ‘heavy’, 
in  order  to  confine  the  application  to  bodies 
which  do  not  combine  lightness  and  heaviness. 
[20]  It  is  apparent,  I  mean,  that  fire,  in  what¬ 
ever  quantity,  so  long  as  there  is  no  external 
obstacle  moves  upward,  and  earth  downward; 
and,  if  the  quantity  is  increased,  the  movement 
is  the  same,  though  swifter.  But  the  heaviness 
and  lightness  of  bodies  which  combine  these 
qualities  is  different  from  this,  since  while  they 
rise  to  the  surface  of  some  bodies  they  sink  to  the 
bottom  of  others.  Such  are  air  and  water.  Nei¬ 
ther  of  them  is  absolutely  either  light  or  heavy. 
[25]  Both  are  lighter  than  earth — for  any  por¬ 
tion  of  either  rises  to  the  surface  of  it — but  heav¬ 
ier  than  fire,  since  a  portion  of  either,  whatever 
its  quantity,  sinks  to  the  bottom  of  fire;  com¬ 
pared  together,  however,  the  one  has  absolute 
weight,  the  other  absolute  lightness,  since  air  in 
any  quantity  rises  to  the  surface  of  water,  while 
water  in  any  quantity  sinks  to  the  bottom  of  air. 
[jo]  Now  other  bodies  are  severally  light  and 
heavy,  and  evidently  in  them  the  attributes  are 
due  to  the  difference  of  their  uncompounded 
parts:  that  is  to  say,  according  as  the  one  or  the 
other  happens  to  preponderate  the  bodies  will 

1  Physics ,  VII.  i(24ib  24);  vm.  4(254b  7). 


312a  BOOK  IV,  CHAPTERS  3-5  403 


be  heavy  and  light  respectively.  Therefore  we 
need  only  speak  of  these  parts,  since  they  are 
[35]  primary  and  all  else  consequential:  and 
in  so  doing  we  shall  be  following  the  advice 
which  we  gave1  to  those  whose  attribute  heavi- 
311b  ness  to  the  presence  of  plenum  and  light¬ 
ness  to  that  of  void.  It  is  due  to  the  properties 
of  the  elementary  bodies  that  a  body  which  is 
regarded  as  light  in  one  place  is  regarded  as 
heavy  in  another,  and  vice  versa.  In  air,  for  in¬ 
stance,  a  talent’s  weight  of  wood  is  heavier 
than  a  mina  of  lead,  but  in  water  the  wood  is 
the  lighter.  The  reason  is  that  all  the  elements 
[5]  except  fire  have  weight  and  all  but  earth 
lightness.  Earth,  then,  and  bodies  in  which 
earth  preponderates,  must  needs  have  weight 
everywhere,  while  water  is  heavy  anywhere 
but  in  earth,  and  air  is  heavy  when  not  in  wa¬ 
ter  or  earth.  In  its  own  place  each  of  these  bod¬ 
ies  has  weight  except  fire,  even  air.  Of  this  we 
[/o]  have  evidence  in  the  fact  that  a  bladder 
when  inflated  weighs  more  than  when  empty. 
A  body,  then,  in  which  air  preponderates  over 
earth  and  water,  may  well  be  lighter  than  some¬ 
thing  in  water  and  yet  heavier  than  it  in  air, 
since  such  a  body  does  not  rise  in  air  but  rises 
to  the  surface  in  water. 

[75]  The  following  account  will  make  it  plain 
that  there  is  an  absolutely  light  and  an  absolute¬ 
ly  heavy  body.  And  by  absolutely  light  I  mean 
one  which  of  its  own  nature  always  moves  up¬ 
ward,  by  absolutely  heavy  one  which  of  its  own 
nature  always  moves  downward,  if  no  obstacle 
is  in  the  way.  There  are,  I  say,  these  two  kinds 
of  body,  and  it  is  not  the  case,  as  some  main¬ 
tain,  that  all  bodies  have  weight.  Different  views 
are  in  fact  agreed  that  there  is  a  heavy  body, 
which  moves  uniformly  towards  the  centre.  But 
[20]  there  is  also  similarly  a  light  body.  For  we 
see  with  our  eyes,  as  we  said  before,2  that  earthy 
things  sink  to  the  bottom  of  all  things  and  move 
towards  the  centre.  But  the  centre  is  a  fixed 
point.  If  therefore  there  is  some  body  which 
rises  to  the  surface  of  all  things — and  we  ob¬ 
serve  fire  to  move  upward  even  in  air  itself, 
while  the  air  remains  at  rest — clearly  this  body 
is  moving  towards  the  extremity.  It  cannot 
then  have  any  weight.  If  it  had,  there  would  be 
[25]  another  body  in  which  it  sank:  and  if  that 
had  weight,  there  would  be  yet  another  which 
moved  to  the  extremity  and  thus  rose  to  the  sur¬ 
face  of  all  moving  things.  In  fact,  however,  we 
have  no  evidence  of  such  a  body.  Fire,  then, 
has  no  weight.  Neither  has  earth  any  lightness, 
since  it  sinks  to  the  bottom  of  all  things,  and 
1  Above,  309b  20.  2  Above,  311“  20. 


that  which  sinks  moves  to  the  centre.  That 
there  is  a  centre  towards  which  the  motion  of 
[jo]  heavy  things,  and  away  from  which  that 
of  light  things  is  directed,  is  manifest  in  many 
ways.  First,  because  no  movement  can  continue 
to  infinity.  For  what  cannot  be  can  no  more 
come-to-be  than  be,  and  movement  is  a  coming- 
to-be  in  one  place  from  another.  Secondly,  like 
the  upward  movement  of  fire,  the  downward 
[55]  movement  of  earth  and  all  heavy  things 
makes  equal  angles  on  every  side  with  the 
earth’s  surface:  it  must  therefore  be  directed  to- 
312a  wards  the  centre.  Whether  it  is  really  the 
centre  of  the  earth  and  not  rather  that  of  the 
whole  to  which  it  moves,  may  be  left  to  another 
inquiry,  since  these  are  coincident.  But  since 
that  which  sinks  to  the  bottom  of  all  things 
moves  to  the  centre,  necessarily  that  which  rises 
to  the  surface  moves  to  the  extremity  of  the  re- 
[5]  gion  in  which  the  movement  of  these  bod¬ 
ies  takes  place.  For  the  centre  is  opposed  as  con¬ 
trary  to  the  extremity,  as  that  which  sinks  is 
opposed  to  that  which  rises  to  the  surface.  This 
also  gives  a  reasonable  ground  for  the  duality 
of  heavy  and  light  in  the  spatial  duality  centre 
and  extremity.  Now  there  is  also  the  intermedi¬ 
ate  region  to  which  each  name  is  given  in  op- 
[/o]  position  to  the  other  extreme.  For  that 
which  is  intermediate  between  the  two  is  in  a 
sense  both  extremity  and  centre.  For  this  rea¬ 
son  there  is  another  heavy  and  light;  namely, 
water  and  air.  But  in  our  view  the  continent 
pertains  to  form  and  the  contained  to  matter: 
and  this  distinction  is  present  in  every  genus. 
Alike  in  the  sphere  of  quality  and  in  that  of 
[75]  quantity  there  is  that  which  corresponds 
rather  to  form  and  that  which  corresponds  to 
matter.  In  the  same  way,  among  spatial  distinc¬ 
tions,  the  above  belongs  to  the  determinate, 
the  below  to  matter.  The  same  holds,  conse¬ 
quently,  also  of  the  matter  itself  of  that  which 
is  heavy  and  light:  as  potentially  possessing  the 
one  character,  it  is  matter  for  the  heavy,  and  as 
potentially  possessing  the  other,  for  the  light.  It 
is  the  same  matter,  but  its  being  is  different,  as 
[20]  that  which  is  receptive  of  disease  is  the 
same  as  that  which  is  receptive  of  health, 
though  in  being  different  from  it,  and  therefore 
diseasedness  is  different  from  healthiness. 

5 

A  thing  then  which  has  the  one  kind  of  mat¬ 
ter  is  light  and  always  moves  upward,  while  a 
thing  which  has  the  opposite  matter  is  heavy 
and  always  moves  downward.  Bodies  com¬ 
posed  of  kinds  of  matter  different  from  these 


4°4 

but  having  relatively  to  each  other  the  charne¬ 
ls]  ter  which  these  have  absolutely,  possess 
both  the  upward  and  the  downward  motion. 
Hence  air  and  water  each  have  both  lightness 
and  weight,  and  water  sinks  to  the  bottom  of 
all  things  except  earth,  while  air  rises  to  the 
surface  of  all  things  except  fire.  But  since  there 
is  one  body  only  which  rises  to  the  surface  of 
all  things  and  one  only  which  sinks  to  the 
bottom  of  all  things,  there  must  needs  be  two 
[_jo]  other  bodies  which  sink  in  some  bodies 
and  rise  to  the  surface  of  others.  The  kinds  of 
matter,  then,  must  be  as  numerous  as  these 
bodies,  i.e.  four,  but  though  they  are  four  there 
must  be  a  common  matter  of  all — particularly 
if  they  pass  into  one  another — which  in  each 
is  in  being  different.  There  is  no  reason  why 
312b  there  should  not  be  one  or  more  inter¬ 
mediates  between  the  contraries,  as  in  the  case 
of  colour;  for  ‘intermediate’  and  ‘mean’  are 
capable  of  more  than  one  application. 

Now  in  its  own  place  every  body  endowed 
with  both  weight  and  lightness  has  weight — 
whereas  earth  has  weight  everywhere — but 
[5]  they  only  have  lightness  among  bodies  to 
whose  surface  they  rise.  Hence  when  a  support 
is  withdrawn  such  a  body  moves  downward 
until  it  reaches  the  body  next  below  it,  air  to 
the  place  of  water  and  water  to  that  of  earth. 
But  if  the  fire  above  air  is  removed,  it  will  not 
move  upward  to  the  place  of  fire,  except  by 
constraint;  and  in  that  way  water  also  may  be 
drawn  up,  when  the  upward  movement  of  air 
[/o]  which  has  had  a  common  surface  with  it 
is  swift  enough  to  overpower  the  downward 
impulse  of  the  water.  Nor  does  water  move  up¬ 
ward  to  the  place  of  air,  except  in  the  manner 
just  described.  Earth  is  not  so  affected  at  all,  be¬ 
cause  a  common  surface  is  not  possible  to  it. 
Hence  water  is  drawn  up  into  the  vessel  to 
which  fire  is  applied,  but  not  earth.  As  earth 
[75]  fails  to  move  upward,  so  fire  fails  to  move 
downward  when  air  is  withdrawn  from  be¬ 
neath  it:  for  fire  has  no  weight  even  in  its  own 
place,  as  earth  has  no  lightness.  The  other  two 
move  downward  when  the  body  beneath  is 
withdrawn  because,  while  the  absolutely  heavy 
is  that  which  sinks  to  the  bottom  of  all  things, 
the  relatively  heavy  sinks  to  its  own  place  or  to 
the  surface  of  the  body  in  which  it  rises,  since 
it  is  similar  in  matter  to  it. 

[20]  It  is  plain  that  one  must  suppose  as  many 
distinct  species  of  matter  as  there  are  bodies. 
For  if,  first ,  there  is  a  single  matter  of  all 
things,  as,  for  instance,  the  void  or  the  plenum 
or  extension  or  the  triangles,  either  all  things 


313a 

will  move  upward  or  all  things  will  move 
downward,  and  the  second  motion  will  be 
abolished.  And  so,  either  there  will  be  no  abso¬ 
lutely  light  body,  if  superiority  of  weight  is 
[25]  due  to  superior  size  or  number  of  the 
constituent  bodies  or  to  the  fullness  of  the 
body:  but  the  contrary  is  a  matter  of  observa¬ 
tion,  and  it  has  been  shown  that  the  downward 
and  upward  movements  are  equally  constant 
and  universal:  or,  if  the  matter  in  question  is 
the  void  or  something  similar,  which  moves 
uniformly  upward,  there  will  be  nothing  to 
move  uniformly  downward.  Further,  it  will 
follow  that  the  intermediate  bodies  move 
downward  in  some  cases  quicker  than  earth: 
for  air  in  sufficiently  large  quantity  will  con- 
[jo]  tain  a  larger  number  of  triangles  or  sol¬ 
ids  or  particles.  It  is,  however,  manifest  that  no 
portion  of  air  whatever  moves  downward.  And 
the  same  reasoning  applies  to  lightness,  if  that 
is  supposed  to  depend  on  superiority  of  quan¬ 
tity  of  matter.  But  if,  secondly,  the  kinds  of 
matter  are  two,  it  will  be  difficult  to  make  the 
intermediate  bodies  behave  as  air  and  water 
313a  behave.  Suppose,  for  example,  that  the 
two  asserted  are  void  and  plenum.  Fire,  then,  as 
moving  upward,  will  be  void,  earth,  as  moving 
downward,  plenum;  and  in  air,  it  will  be  said, 
fire  preponderates,  in  water,  earth.  There  will 
then  be  a  quantity  of  water  containing  more 
fire  than  a  little  air,  and  a  large  amount  of  air 
will  contain  more  earth  than  a  little  water: 
[5]  consequently  we  shall  have  to  say  that  air 
in  a  certain  quantity  moves  downward  more 
quickly  than  a  little  water.  But  such  a  thing 
has  never  been  observed  anywhere.  Neces¬ 
sarily,  then,  as  fire  goes  up  because  it  has  some¬ 
thing,  e.g.  void,  which  other  things  do  not 
have,  and  earth  goes  downward  because  it  has 
plenum,  so  air  goes  to  its  own  place  above 
[/o]  water  because  it  has  something  else,  and 
water  goes  downward  because  of  some  special 
kind  of  body.  But  if  the  two  bodies  are  one 
matter,  or  two  matters  both  present  in  each, 
there  will  be  a  certain  quantity  of  each  at  which 
water  will  excel  a  little  air  in  the  upward 
movement  and  air  excel  water  in  the  down¬ 
ward  movement,  as  we  have  already  often  said. 

6 

The  shape  of  bodies  will  not  account  for  their 
[75]  moving  upward  or  downward  in  general, 
though  it  will  account  for  their  moving  faster 
or  slower.  The  reasons  for  this  are  not  difficult 
to  see.  For  the  problem  thus  raised  is  why  a 


ON  THE  HEAVENS 


313b  BOOK  IV,  CHAPTERS  5-6  405 


flat  piece  of  iron  or  lead  floats  upon  water, 
while  smaller  and  less  heavy  things,  so  long  as 
they  are  round  or  long — a  needle,  for  instance 
— sink  down;  and  sometimes  a  thing  floats  be- 
[20]  cause  it  is  small,  as  with  gold  dust  and 
the  various  earthy  and  dusty  materials  which 
throng  the  air.  With  regard  to  these  questions, 
it  is  wrong  to  accept  the  explanation  offered  by 
Democritus.  He  says  that  the  warm  bodies 
moving  up  out  of  the  water  hold  up  heavy 
313b  bodies  which  are  broad,  while  the  narrow 
ones  fall  through,  because  the  bodies  which 
offer  this  resistance  are  not  numerous.  But 
this  would  be  even  more  likely  to  happen  in 
air — an  objection  which  he  himself  raises.  His 
reply  to  the  objection  is  feeble.  In  the  air,  he 
[5]  says,  the  ‘drive’  (meaning  by  drive  the 
movement  of  the  upward  moving  bodies)  is 
not  uniform  in  direction.  But  since  some  con- 
tinua  are  easily  divided  and  others  less  easily, 
and  things  which  produce  division  differ  sim¬ 
ilarly  in  the  ease  with  which  they  produce  it, 
the  explanation  must  be  found  in  this  fact.  It  is 
the  easily  bounded,  in  proportion  as  it  is  easily 
bounded,  which  is  easily  divided;  and  air  is 


[/o]  more  so  than  water,  water  than  earth. 
Further,  the  smaller  the  quantity  in  each  kind, 
the  more  easily  it  is  divided  and  disrupted. 
Thus  the  reason  why  broad  things  keep  their 
place  is  because  they  cover  so  wide  a  surface 
and  the  greater  quantity  is  less  easily  disrupted. 
Bodies  of  the  opposite  shape  sink  down  be- 
[75]  cause  they  occupy  so  little  of  the  surface, 
which  is  therefore  easily  parted.  And  these 
considerations  apply  with  far  greater  force  to 
air,  since  it  is  so  much  more  easily  divided 
than  water.  But  since  there  are  two  factors, 
the  force  responsible  for  the  downward  motion 
of  the  heavy  body  and  the  disruption-resisting 
force  of  the  continuous  surface,  there  must  be 
some  ratio  between  the  two.  For  in  proportion 
as  the  force  applied  by  the  heavy  thing  towards 
[20]  disruption  and  division  exceeds  that 
which  resides  in  the  continuum,  the  quicker 
will  it  force  its  way  down;  only  if  the  force  of 
the  heavy  thing  is  the  weaker,  will  it  ride  upon 
the  surface. 

We  have  now  finished  our  examination  of 
the  heavy  and  the  light  and  of  the  phenomena 
connected  with  them. 


■f 

. 


- 

, 


T 


CONTENTS: 


ON  GENERATION  AND  CORRUPTION 


BOOK  I 

Coming-to-be  and  passing-away  are  distinguished 
from  Alteration ’  and  from  growth  and  dimi¬ 
nution 

CHAP.  BERLIN  NOS. 

1.  Are  coming-to-be  and  passing-away  314s  1 
distinct  from  ‘alteration’?  It  is  clear  that, 
amongst  the  ancient  philosophers,  the  monists 
are  logically  bound  to  identify,  and  the  plural- 
ists  to  distinguish,  these  changes.  Hence  both 
Anaxagoras  and  Empedocles  (who  are  plu- 
ralists)  are  inconsistent  in  their  statements  on 
this  subject.  Empedocles,  it  must  be  added,  is 
inconsistent  and  obscure  in  many  other  re¬ 
spects  as  well 

2.  There  are  no  indivisible  magni-  315^6 
tudes.  Nevertheless,  coming-to-be  and  passing- 
away  may  well  occur  and  be  distinct  from 
‘alteration’.  For  coming-to-be  is  not  effected 
by  the  ‘association’  of  discrete  constituents, 
nor  passing-away  by  their  ‘dissociation’;  and 
‘change  in  what  is  continuous’  is  not  always 
‘alteration’ 

3.  Coming-to-be  and  passing-away  317s  32 
(in  the  strict  or  ‘unqualified’  sense  of  the 
terms)  are  in  fact  always  occurring  in  Nature. 
Their  ceaseless  occurrence  is  made  possible  by 
the  character  of  Matter  ( materia  prima) 

4.  ‘Alteration’  is  change  of  quality.  It  3i9b5 
is  thus  essentially  distinct  from  coming-to-be 
and  passing-away,  which  are  changes  of  sub¬ 
stance 

5.  Definition  and  explanation  of  320a  8 

growth  and  diminution 

What  comes-to-be  is  formed  out  of  certain  material 
constituents ,  by  their  t combination Combi¬ 
nation  implies  Action  and  passion 9,  which  in 
turn  imply  ‘ contact ’ 

6.  Definition  and  explanation  of  ‘con-  322**  1 
tact’ 

7.  Agent  and  patient  are  neither  ab-  323b  1 
solutely  identical  with,  nor  sheerly  other  than, 
one  another.  They  must  be  contrasted  species 
of  the  same  genus,  opposed  formations  of  the 
same  matter 


8.  Bodies  do  not  consist  of  indivisible  324**  26 
solids  with  void  interspaces,  as  the  Atomists 
maintain:  nor  are  there  ‘pores’  or  empty  chan¬ 
nels  running  through  them,  as  Empedocles 
supposes.  Neither  of  these  theories  could  ac¬ 
count  for  ‘action-passion’ 

9.  The  true  explanation  of  ‘action-  32613  29 
passion’  depends  (a)  upon  the  distinction  be¬ 
tween  a  body’s  actual  and  potential  possession 
of  a  quality,  and  (b)  upon  the  fact  that  po¬ 
tential  possession  (i.e.  ‘susceptibility’)  may 
vary  in  intensity  or  degree  in  different  parts 
of  the  body 

10.  What  ‘combination’  is,  and  how  it  327s  30 
can  take  place 

BOOK  II 

The  material  constituents  of  all  that  comes-to-be 
and  passes-away  are  the  so-called  ‘ elements 9 , 

i.e.  the  ‘ simple*  bodies.  What  these  are,  how 
they  are  transformed  into  one  another,  and 
how  they  Aombine 9 

1.  Earth,  Air,  Fire,  and  Water  are  not  328b25 
really  ‘elements’  of  body,  but  ‘simple’  bodies. 
The  ‘elements’  of  body  are  ‘primary  matter’ 
and  certain  ‘contrarieties’ 

2.  The  ‘contrarieties’  in  question  are  329**  6 
‘the  hot  and  the  cold’  and  ‘the  dry  and  the 
moist’ 

3.  These  four  ‘elementary  qualities’  330a30 
(hot,  cold,  dry,  moist)  are  diversely  coupled 
so  as  to  constitute  four  ‘simple’  bodies  analo¬ 
gous  to,  but  purer  than,  Earth,  Air,  Fire,  and 
Water 

4.  The  four  ‘simple’  bodies  undergo  33ia6 
reciprocal  transformation  in  various  manners 

5.  Restatement  and  confirmation  of  332a  5 
the  preceding  doctrine 

6.  Empedocles  maintains  that  his  333s  16 
four  ‘elements’  cannot  be  transformed  into  one 
another.  How  then  can  they  be  ‘equal’  (i.e. 
comparable)  as  he  asserts?  His  whole  theory, 
indeed,  is  thoroughly  unsatisfactory.  In  par¬ 
ticular,  he  entirely  fails  to  explain  how  com¬ 
pounds  (e.g.  bone  or  flesh)  com  e-to-be  out  of 
his  ‘elements’ 

7.  How  the  ‘simple’  bodies  combine  334s  16 
to  form  compounds 

407 


408 

8.  Every  compound  body  requires  all 
four  ‘simple’  bodies  as  its  constituents 

The  causes  of  coming-to-be  and  passing-away 

9.  Material,  formal,  and  final  causes  335s  24 
of  coming-to-be  and  passing-away.  The  failure 
of  earlier  theories — e.g.  of  the  ‘materialist’ 
theory  and  of  the  theory  advanced  by  Socrates 
in  the  Phaedo — must  be  ascribed  to  inade¬ 
quate  recognition  of  the  efficient  cause 

10.  The  sun’s  annual  movement  in  the  336s  13 


ecliptic  or  zodiac  circle  is  the  efficient  cause  of 
coming-to-be  and  passing-away.  It  explains  the 
occurrence  of  these  changes  and  their  ceaseless 
alternation 

Appendix 

11.  In  what  sense,  and  under  what  337a  34 
conditions,  the  things  which  come-to-be  are 
‘necessary’.  Absolute  necessity  characterizes 
every  sequence  of  transformations  which  is 
cyclical 


CONTENTS 
334b3* 


ON  GENERATION  AND  CORRUPTION 

BOOK  I 


314a  Our  next  task  is  to  study  coming-to-be 
and  passing-away.  We  are  to  distinguish  the 
causes,  and  to  state  the  definitions,  of  these 
processes  considered  in  general — as  changes 
predicable  uniformly  of  all  the  things  that 
come-to-be  and  pass-away  by  nature.  Further, 
we  are  to  study  growth  and  ‘alteration’.  We 
must  inquire  what  each  of  them  is;  and 
[5]  whether  ‘alteration’  is  to  be  identified 
with  coming-to-be,  or  whether  to  these  dif¬ 
ferent  names  there  correspond  two  separate 
processes  with  distinct  natures. 

On  this  question,  indeed,  the  early  philos¬ 
ophers  are  divided.  Some  of  them  assert  that 
the  so-called  ‘unqualified  coming-to-be’  is  ‘al¬ 
teration’,  while  others  maintain  that  ‘altera¬ 
tion’  and  coming-to-be  are  distinct.  For  those 
who  say  that  the  universe  is  one  something 
(i.e.  those  who  generate  all  things  out  of  one 
thing)  are  bound  to  assert  that  coming-to-be 
[/o]  is  ‘alteration’,  and  that  whatever  ‘comes- 
to-be’  in  the  proper  sense  of  the  term  is  ‘being 
altered’:  but  those  who  make  the  matter  of 
things  more  than  one  must  distinguish  com¬ 
ing-to-be  from  ‘alteration’.  To  this  latter  class 
belong  Empedocles,  Anaxagoras,  and  Leucip¬ 
pus.  And  yet  Anaxagoras  himself  failed  to 
understand  his  own  utterance.  He  says ,  at  all 
events,  that  coming-to-be  and  passing-away 
[75]  are  the  same  as  ‘being  altered’:1  yet,  in 
common  with  other  thinkers,  he  affirms  that 
the  elements  are  many.  Thus  Empedocles 
holds  that  the  corporeal  elements  are  four, 
while  all  the  elements — including  those  which 
initiate  movement — are  six  in  number;  where¬ 
as  Anaxagoras  agrees  with  Leucippus  and 
Democritus  that  the  elements  are  infinite. 

(Anaxagoras  posits  as  elements  the  ‘homoe- 
[20]  omeries’,  viz.  bone,  flesh,  marrow,  and 
everything  else  which  is  such  that  part  and 
whole  are  the  same  in  name  and  nature;  while 
1  Cf.  fr.  17,  Diels,  pp.  320-1. 

Note:  The  bold  face  numbers  and  letters  are  approxi¬ 
mate  indications  of  the  pages  and  columns  of  the  stand¬ 
ard  Berlin  Greek  text;  the  bracketed  numbers,  of  the 
lines  in  the  Greek  text;  they  are  here  assigned  as  they 
are  assigned  in  the  Oxford  translation. 


Democritus  and  Leucippus  say  that  there  are 
indivisible  bodies,  infinite  both  in  number  and 
in  the  varieties  of  their  shapes,  of  which  every¬ 
thing  else  is  composed — the  compounds  dif¬ 
fering  one  from  another  according  to  the 
shapes,  ‘positions’,  and  ‘groupings’  of  their 
constituents.) 

[25]  For  the  views  of  the  school  of  Anaxa¬ 
goras  seem  diametrically  opposed  to  those  of 
the  followers  of  Empedocles.  Empedocles  says 
that  Fire,  Water,  Air,  and  Earth  are  four  ele¬ 
ments,  and  are  thus  ‘simple’  rather  than  flesh, 
bone,  and  bodies  which,  like  these,  are  ‘homoe- 
omeries’.  But  the  followers  of  Anaxagoras  re¬ 
gard  the  ‘homoeomeries’  as  ‘simple’  and  ele¬ 
ments,  whilst  they  affirm  that  Earth,  Fire, 
Water,  and  Air  are  composite;  for  each  of 
314b  these  is  (according  to  them)  a  ‘common 
seminary’  of  all  the  ‘homoeomeries’. 

Those,  then,  who  construct  all  things  out  of  a 
single  element,  must  maintain  that  coming-to- 
be  and  passing-away  are  ‘alteration’.  For  they 
must  affirm  that  the  underlying  something  al¬ 
ways  remains  identical  and  one;  and  change 
of  such  a  substratum  is  what  we  call  ‘altering’ 
Those,  on  the  other  hand,  who  make  the  ulti- 
[5]  mate  kinds  of  things  more  than  one,  must 
maintain  that  ‘alteration’  is  distinct  from 
coming-to-be:  for  coming-to-be  and  passing- 
away  result  from  the  consilience  and  the  disso¬ 
lution  of  the  many  kinds.  That  is  why  Emped¬ 
ocles  too  uses  language  to  this  effect,  when  he 
says  ‘There  is  no  coming-to-be  of  anything,  but 
only  a  mingling  and  a  divorce  of  what  has  been 
mingled’.2  Thus  it  is  clear  (i)  that  to  describe 
coming-to-be  and  passing-away  in  these  terms 
[/o]  is  in  accordance  with  their  fundamental 
assumption,  and  (ii)  that  they  do  in  fact  so  de¬ 
scribe  them:  nevertheless,  they  too  must  recog¬ 
nize  ‘alteration’  as  a  fact  distinct  from  coming- 
to-be,  though  it  is  impossible  for  them  to  do  so 
consistently  with  what  they  say. 

That  we  are  right  in  this  criticism  is  easy  to 
perceive.  For  ‘alteration’  is  a  fact  of  observa¬ 
tion.  While  the  substance  of  the  thing  remains 
unchanged,  we  see  it  ‘altering’  just  as  we  see  in 
[75]  it  the  changes  of  magnitude  called 

2  Cf.  fr.  8,  Diels,  p.  175,  and  the  paraphrase  in  MXG, 
975a  36-bi6. 


ON  GENERATION  AND  CORRUPTION  315b 


‘growth’  and  ‘diminution’.  Nevertheless,  the 
statements  of  those  who  posit  more  ‘original 
reals’  than  one  make  ‘alteration’  impossible. 
For  ‘alteration’,  as  we  assert,  takes  place  in 
respect  to  certain  qualities:  and  these  qualities 
(I  mean,  e.g.  hot-cold,  white-black,  dry-moist, 
[20]  soft-hard,  and  so  forth)  are,  all  of  them, 
differences  characterizing  the  ‘elements’.  The 
actual  words  of  Empedocles  may  be  quoted  in 
illustration — 

The  sun  everywhere  bright  to  see,  and  hot; 

The  rain  everywhere  dai\  and  cold;1 

and  he  distinctively  characterizes  his  remain¬ 
ing  elements  in  a  similar  manner.  Since,  there¬ 
fore,  it  is  not  possible  for  Fire  to  become  Water, 
or  Water  to  become  Earth,  neither  will  it  be 
possible  for  anything  white  to  become  black,  or 
[25]  anything  soft  to  become  hard;  and  the 
same  argument  applies  to  all  the  other  qual¬ 
ities.  Yet  this  is  what  ‘alteration’  essentially  is. 

It  follows,  as  an  obvious  corollary,  that  a  sin¬ 
gle  matter  must  always  be  assumed  as  under¬ 
lying  the  contrary  ‘poles’  of  any  change — 
whether  change  of  place,  or  growth  and  dim¬ 
inution,  or  ‘alteration’;  further,  that  the  being 
of  this  matter  and  the  being  of  ‘alteration’ 
stand  and  fall  together.  For  if  the  change  is 
315a  ‘alteration’,  then  the  substratum  is  a  sin¬ 
gle  element;  i.e.  all  things  which  admit  of 
change  into  one  another  have  a  single  mattef* 
And,  conversely,  if  the  substratum  of  the 
changing  things  is  one,  there  is  ‘alteration’. 

Empedocles,  indeed,  seems  to  contradict  his 
[5]  own  statements  as  well  as  the  observed 
facts.  For  he  denies  that  any  one  of  his  ele¬ 
ments  comes-to-be  out  of  any  other,  insisting 
on  the  contrary  that  they  are  the  things  out  of 
which  everything  else  comes-to-be;  and  yet 
(having  brought  the  entirety  of  existing  things, 
except  Strife,  together  into  one)  he  maintains, 
simultaneously  with  this  denial,  that  each 
thing  once  more  comes-to-be  out  of  the  One. 
Hence  it  was  clearly  out  of  a  One  that  this 
came-to-be  Water,  and  that  Fire,  various  por- 
[/o]  tions  of  it  being  separated  off  by  certain 
characteristic  differences  or  qualities — as  in¬ 
deed  he  calls  the  sun  ‘white  and  hot’,  and  the 
earth  ‘heavy  and  hard’.  If,  therefore,  these 
characteristic  differences  be  taken  away  (for 
they  can  be  taken  away,  since  they  came-to-be), 
it  will  clearly  be  inevitable  for  Earth  to  come- 
to-be  out  of  Water  and  Water  out  of  Earth, 
and  for  each  of  the  other  elements  to  undergo 
a  similar  transformation — not  only  then,  but 

1  Cf.  fr.  21, 11.  3  and  5,  Diels,  p.  180. 


[75]  also  now — if,  and  because,  they  change 
their  qualities.  And,  to  judge  by  what  he  says, 
the  qualities  are  such  that  they  can  be  ‘at¬ 
tached’  to  things  and  can  again  be  ‘separated’ 
from  them,  especially  since  Strife  and  Love  are 
still  fighting  with  one  another  for  the  mastery. 
It  was  owing  to  this  same  conflict  that  the  ele¬ 
ments  were  generated  from  a  One  at  the  for¬ 
mer  period.  I  say  ‘generated’,  for  presumably 
Fire,  Earth,  and  Water  had  no  distinctive  ex¬ 
istence  at  all  while  merged  in  one. 

There  is  another  obscurity  in  the  theory  of 
[20]  Empedocles.  Are  we  to  regard  the  One  as 
his  ‘original  real’?  Or  is  it  the  Many — i.e. 
Fire  and  Earth,  and  the  bodies  co-ordinate 
with  these?  For  the  One  is  an  ‘element’  in  so 
far  as  it  underlies  the  process  as  matter — as 
that  out  of  which  Earth  and  Fire  come-to-be 
through  a  change  of  qualities  due  to  ‘the  mo¬ 
tion’.  On  the  other  hand,  in  so  far  as  the  One 
results  from  composition  (by  a  consilience  of 
the  Many),  whereas  they  result  from  disin¬ 
tegration,  the  Many  are  more  ‘elementary* 
[25]  than  the  One,  and  prior  to  it  in  their 
nature. 

2 

We  have  therefore  to  discuss  the  whole  sub¬ 
ject  of  ‘unqualified’  coming-to-be  and  passing- 
away;  we  have  to  inquire  whether  these 
changes  do  or  do  not  occur  and,  if  they  occur, 
to  explain  the  precise  conditions  of  their  occur¬ 
rence.  We  must  also  discuss  the  remaining 
forms  of  change,  viz.  growth  and  ‘alteration’. 
For  though,  no  doubt,  Plato  investigated  the 
conditions  under  which  things  come-to-be  and 
[jo]  pass-away,  he  confined  his  inquiry  to 
these  changes;  and  he  discussed  not  all  com¬ 
ing-to-be,  but  only  that  of  the  elements.  He 
asked  no  questions  as  to  how  flesh  or  bones, 
or  any  of  the  other  similar  compound  things, 
come-to-be;  nor  again  did  he  examine  the  con¬ 
ditions  under  which  ‘alteration’  or  growth  are 
attributable  to  things. 

A  similar  criticism  applies  to  all  our  prede- 
[35]  cessors  with  the  single  exception  of  De¬ 
mocritus.  Not  one  of  them  penetrated  below 
the  surface  or  made  a  thorough  examination  of 
a  single  one  of  the  problems.  Democritus,  how¬ 
ever,  does  seem  not  only  to  have  thought  care¬ 
fully  about  all  the  problems,  but  also  to  be 
315b  distinguished  from  the  outset  by  his 
method.  For,  as  we  are  saying,  none  of  the 
other  philosophers  made  any  definite  state¬ 
ment  about  growth,  except  such  as  any  ama¬ 
teur  might  have  made.  They  said  that  things 


31 6a  BOOK  I,  CHAPTERS  1-2  411 


grow  ‘by  the  accession  of  like  to  like’,  but  they 
did  not  proceed  to  explain  the  manner  of  this 
accession.  Nor  did  they  give  any  account  of 
‘combination’:  and  they  neglected  almost  every 
single  one  of  the  remaining  problems,  offering 
[5]  no  explanation,  e.g.  of  ‘action’  or  ‘passion’ 
— how  in  physical  actions  one  thing  acts  and 
the  other  undergoes  action.  Democritus  and 
Leucippus,  however,  postulate  the  ‘figures’, 
and  make  ‘alteration’  and  coming-to-be  result 
from  them.  They  explain  coming-to-be  and 
passing-away  by  their  ‘dissociation’  and  ‘asso¬ 
ciation’,  but  ‘alteration’  by  their  ‘grouping’  and 
‘position’.  And  since  they  thought  that  the 
[/o]  truth  lay  in  the  appearance,  and  the  ap¬ 
pearances  are  conflicting  and  infinitely  many, 
they  made  the  ‘figures’  infinite  in  number. 
Hence — owing  to  the  changes  of  the  com¬ 
pound — the  same  thing  seems  different  and 
conflicting  to  different  people:  it  is  ‘trans¬ 
posed’  by  a  small  additional  ingredient,  and 
appears  utterly  other  by  the  ‘transposition’  of 
[75]  a  single  constituent.  For  Tragedy  and 
Comedy  are  both  composed  of  the  same  letters. 

Since  almost  all  our  predecessors  think  (i) 
that  coming-to-be  is  distinct  from  ‘alteration’, 
and  (ii)  that,  whereas  things  ‘alter’  by  change 
of  their  qualities,  it  is  by  ‘association’  and  ‘dis¬ 
sociation’  that  they  come-to-be  and  pass-away, 
we  must  concentrate  our  attention  on  these 
theses.  For  they  lead  to  many  perplexing  and 
[20]  well-grounded  dilemmas.  If,  on  the  one 
hand,  coming-to-be  is  ‘association’,  many  im¬ 
possible  consequences  result:  and  yet  there  are 
other  arguments,  not  easy  to  unravel,  which 
force  the  conclusion  upon  us  that  coming-to-be 
cannot  possibly  be  anything  else.  If,  on  the 
other  hand,  coming-to-be  is  not  ‘association’, 
either  there  is  no  such  thing  as  coming-to-be 
at  all  or  it  is  ‘alteration’:  or  else  we  must  en¬ 
deavour  to  unravel  this  dilemma  too — and  a 
stubborn  one  we  shall  find  it. 

[25]  The  fundamental  question,  in  dealing 
with  all  these  difficulties,  is  this:  ‘Do  things 
come-to-be  and  “alter”  and  grow,  and  undergo 
the  contrary  changes,  because  the  primary 
“reals”  are  indivisible  magnitudes?  Or  is  no 
magnitude  indivisible?’  For  the  answer  we 
give  to  this  question  makes  the  greatest  dif¬ 
ference.  And  again,  if  the  primary  ‘reals’  are 
[jo]  indivisible  magnitudes,  are  these  bodies, 
as  Democritus  and  Leucippus  maintain?  Or 
are  they  planes,  as  is  asserted  in  the  Timaeusl 
To  resolve  bodies  into  planes  and  no  further 
— this,  as  we  have  also  remarked  elsewhere,1  is 
1  Cf.,  e.g.  On  The  Heavens ,  299®  6-1 1. 


in  itself  a  paradox.  Hence  there  is  more  to  be 
said  for  the  view  that  there  are  indivisible 
bodies.  Yet  even  these  involve  much  of  para¬ 
dox.  Still,  as  we  have  said,  it  is  possible  to  con- 
[35]  struct  ‘alteration’  and  coming-to-be  with 
them,  if  one  ‘transposes’  the  same  by  ‘turning’ 
316a  and  ‘intercontact’,  and  by  ‘the  varieties  of 
the  figures’,  as  Democritus  does.  (His  denial 
of  the  reality  of  colour  is  a  corollary  from  this 
position:  for,  according  to  him,  things  get  col¬ 
oured  by  ‘turning’  of  the  ‘figures’.)  But  the 
possibility  of  such  a  construction  no  longer 
exists  for  those  who  divide  bodies  into  planes. 
For  nothing  except  solids  results  from  putting 
planes  together:  they  do  not  even  attempt  to 
generate  any  quality  from  them. 

[5]  Lack  of  experience  diminishes  our  power 
of  taking  a  comprehensive  view  of  the  ad¬ 
mitted  facts.  Hence  those  who  dwell  in  inti¬ 
mate  association  with  nature  and  its  phenom¬ 
ena  grow  more  and  more  able  to  formulate,  as 
the  foundations  of  their  theories,  principles 
such  as  to  admit  of  a  wide  and  coherent  de¬ 
velopment:  while  those  whom  devotion  to  ab¬ 
stract  discussions  has  rendered  unobservant  of 
[/o]  the  facts  are  too  ready  to  dogmatize  on 
the  basis  of  a  few  observations.  The  rival  treat¬ 
ments  of  the  subject  now  before  us  will  serve 
to  illustrate  how  great  is  the  difference  be¬ 
tween  a  ‘scientific’  and  a  ‘dialectical’  method  of 
inquiry.  For,  whereas  the  Platonists  argue  that 
there  must  be  atomic  magnitudes  ‘because 
otherwise  “The  Triangle”  will  be  more  than 
one’,  Democritus  would  appear  to  have  been 
convinced  by  arguments  appropriate  to  the 
subject,  i.e.  drawn  from  the  science  of  nature. 
Our  meaning  will  become  clear  as  we  proceed. 
[75]  For  to  suppose  that  a  body  (i.e.  a  magni¬ 
tude)  is  divisible  through  and  through,  and 
that  this  division  is  possible,  involves  a  diffi¬ 
culty.  What  will  there  be  in  the  body  which 
escapes  the  division? 

If  it  is  divisible  through  and  through,  and  if 
this  division  is  possible,  then  it  might  be,  at 
one  and  the  same  moment,  divided  through 
and  through,  even  though  the  dividings  had 
not  been  effected  simultaneously:  and  the  ac¬ 
tual  occurrence  of  this  result  would  involve 
no  impossibility.  Hence  the  same  principle  will 
[20]  apply  whenever  a  body  is  by  nature  divis¬ 
ible  through  and  through,  whether  by  bisec¬ 
tion,  or  generally  by  any  method  whatever: 
nothing  impossible  will  have  resulted  if  it  has 
actually  been  divided — not  even  if  it  has  been 
divided  into  innumerable  parts,  themselves 
divided  innumerable  times.  Nothing  impos- 


ON  GENERATION  AND  CORRUPTION  317* 


sible  will  have  resulted,  though  perhaps  no¬ 
body  in  fact  could  so  divide  it. 

Since,  therefore,  the  body  is  divisible  through 
and  through,  let  it  have  been  divided.  What, 
then,  will  remain?  A  magnitude?  No:  that  is 
impossible,  since  then  there  will  be  something 
[25]  not  divided,  whereas  ex  hypothesi  the 
body  was  divisible  through  and  through.  But 
if  it  be  admitted  that  neither  a  body  nor  a 
magnitude  will  remain,  and  yet  division  is  to 
take  place,  the  constituents  of  the  body  will 
either  be  points  (i.e.  without  magnitude)  or 
absolutely  nothing.  If  its  constituents  are  noth¬ 
ings,  then  it  might  both  come-to-be  out  of 
nothings  and  exist  as  a  composite  of  nothings: 
and  thus  presumably  the  whole  body  will  be 
nothing  but  an  appearance.  But  if  it  consists 
[jo]  of  points,  a  similar  absurdity  will  result: 
it  will  not  possess  any  magnitude.  For  when 
the  points  were  in  contact  and  coincided  to 
form  a  single  magnitude,  they  did  not  make 
the  whole  any  bigger  (since,  when  the  body 
was  divided  into  two  or  more  parts,  the  whole 
was  not  a  bit  smaller  or  bigger  than  it  was  be¬ 
fore  the  division):  hence,  even  if  all  the  points 
be  put  together,  they  will  not  make  any  magni¬ 
tude. 

But  suppose  that,  as  the  body  is  being  di¬ 
vided,  a  minute  section — a  piece  of  sawdust, 
316b  as  it  were — is  extracted,  and  that  in  this 
sense  a  body  ‘comes  away’  from  the  magnitude, 
evading  the  division.  Even  then  the  same  argu¬ 
ment  applies.  For  in  what  sense  is  that  section 
divisible?  But  if  what  ‘came  away’  was  not  a 
body  but  a  separable  form  or  quality,  and  if 
the  magnitude  is  ‘points  or  contacts  thus  quali- 
[5]  fied’:  it  is  paradoxical  that  a  magnitude 
should  consist  of  elements  which  are  not  mag¬ 
nitudes.  Moreover,  where  will  the  points  be? 
And  are  they  motionless  or  moving?  And 
every  contact  is  always  a  contact  of  two  some¬ 
things,  i.e.  there  is  always  something  besides 
the  contact  or  the  division  or  the  point. 

These,  then,  are  the  difficulties  resulting 
from  the  supposition  that  any  and  every  body, 
whatever  its  size,  is  divisible  through  and 
through.  There  is,  besides,  this  further  con- 
[/o]  sideration.  If,  having  divided  a  piece  of 
wood  or  anything  else,  I  put  it  together,  it  is 
again  equal  to  what  it  was,  and  is  one.  Clearly 
this  is  so,  whatever  the  point  at  which  I  cut 
the  wood.  The  wood,  therefore,  has  been  di¬ 
vided  potentially  through  and  through.  What, 
then,  is  there  in  the  wood  besides  the  division? 
For  even  if  we  suppose  there  is  some  quality, 
yet  how  is  the  wood  dissolved  into  such  con¬ 


stituents  and  how  does  it  come-to-be  out  of 
them?  Or  how  are  such  constituents  separated 
so  as  to  exist  apart  from  one  another? 

[75]  Since,  therefore,  it  is  impossible  for  mag¬ 
nitudes  to  consist  of  contacts  or  points,  there 
must  be  indivisible  bodies  and  magnitudes. 
Yet,  if  we  do  postulate  the  latter,  we  are  con¬ 
fronted  with  equally  impossible  consequences, 
which  we  have  examined  in  other  works.1  But 
we  must  try  to  disentangle  these  perplexities, 
and  must  therefore  formulate  the  whole  prob¬ 
lem  over  again. 

[20]  On  the  one  hand,  then,  it  is  in  no  way 
paradoxical  that  every  perceptible  body  should 
be  indivisible  as  well  as  divisible  at  any  and 
every  point.  For  the  second  predicate  will  at¬ 
tach  to  it  potentially,  but  the  first  actually.  On 
the  other  hand,  it  would  seem  to  be  impossible 
for  a  body  to  be,  even  potentially,  divisible  at 
all  points  simultaneously.  For  if  it  were  pos¬ 
sible,  then  it  might  actually  occur,  with  the 
result,  not  that  the  body  would  simultaneously 
be  actually  both  (indivisible  and  divided),  but 
[25]  that  it  would  be  simultaneously  divided 
at  any  and  every  point.  Consequently,  noth¬ 
ing  will  remain  and  the  body  will  have 
passed-away  into  what  is  incorporeal:  and  so 
it  might  come-to-be  again  either  out  of  points 
or  absolutely  out  of  nothing.  And  how  is  that 
possible? 

But  now  it  is  obvious  that  a  body  is  in  fact 
divided  into  separable  magnitudes  which  are 
smaller  at  each  division — into  magnitudes 
which  fall  apart  from  one  another  and  are 
actually  separated.  Hence  (it  is  urged)  the 
[jo]  process  of  dividing  a  body  part  by  part 
is  not  a  ‘breaking  up’  which  could  continue  ad 
infinitum;  nor  can  a  body  be  simultaneously 
divided  at  every  point,  for  that  is  not  possible; 
but  there  is  a  limit,  beyond  which  the  ‘break¬ 
ing  up’  cannot  proceed.  The  necessary  conse¬ 
quence — especially  if  coming-to-be  and  pass- 
ing-away  are  to  take  place  by  ‘association’  and 
‘dissociation’  respectively — is  that  a  body  must 
contain  atomic  magnitudes  which  are  invisible. 
317a  Such  is  the  argument  which  is  believed  to 
establish  the  necessity  of  atomic  magnitudes: 
we  must  now  show  that  it  conceals  a  faulty 
inference,  and  exactly  where  it  conceals  it. 

For,  since  point  is  not  ‘immediately-next’  to 
point,  magnitudes  are  ‘divisible  through  and 
through*  in  one  sense,  and  yet  not  in  another. 
When,  however,  it  is  admitted  that  a  magni- 
[5]  tude  is  ‘divisible  through  and  through’,  it 
is  thought  there  is  a  point  not  only  anywhere, 
1  Cf.  Physics,  23  ia  21  fif. ;  On  the  Heavens ,  303®  3  ff. 


31 7b  BOOK  I,  CHAPTERS  2-3  413 


but  also  everywhere,  in  it:  hence  it  is. supposed 
to  follow,  from  the  admission,  that  the  magni¬ 
tude  must  be  divided  away  into  nothing.  For — 
it  is  supposed — there  is  a  point  everywhere 
within  it,  so  that  it  consists  either  of  contacts  or 
of  points.  But  it  is  only  in  one  sense  that  the 
magnitude  is  ‘divisible  through  and  through’, 
viz.  in  so  far  as  there  is  one  point  anywhere 
within  it  and  all  its  points  are  everywhere 
within  it  if  you  take  them  singly  one  by  one. 
But  there  are  not  more  points  than  one  any¬ 
where  within  it,  for  the  points  are  not  ‘con¬ 
secutive’:  hence  it  is  not  simultaneously  ‘divis- 
[/o]  ible  through  and  through’.  For  if  it  were, 
then,  if  it  be  divisible  at  its  centre,  it  will  be  di¬ 
visible  also  at  a  point  ‘immediately-next’  to  its 
centre.  But  it  is  not  so  divisible:  for  position  is 
not  ‘immediately-next’  to  position,  nor  point  to 
point — in  other  words,  division  is  not  ‘im¬ 
mediately-next’  to  division,  nor  composition  to 
composition. 

Hence  there  are  both  ‘association’  and  ‘dis¬ 
sociation’,  though  neither  (a)  into,  and  out  of, 
atomic  magnitudes  (for  that  involves  many 
[75]  impossibilities),  nor  (h)  so  that  division 
takes  place  through  and  through — for  this 
would  have  resulted  only  if  point  had  been 
‘immediately-next’  to  point:  but  ‘dissociation’ 
takes  place  into  small  (i.e.  relatively  small) 
parts,  and  ‘association’  takes  place  out  of  rela* 
tively  small  parts. 

It  is  wrong,  however,  to  suppose,  as  some 
assert,  that  coming-to-be  and  passing-away  in 
the  unqualified  and  complete  sense  are  dis¬ 
tinctively  defined  by  ‘association’  and  ‘dissocia¬ 
tion’,  while  the  change  that  takes  place  in  what 
is  continuous  is  ‘alteration’.  On  the  contrary, 
[20]  this  is  where  the  whole  error  lies.  For 
unqualified  coming-to-be  and  passing-away  are 
not  effected  by  ‘association’  and  ‘dissociation’. 
They  take  place  when  a  thing  changes,  from 
this  to  that,  as  a  whole.  But  the  philosophers 
we  are  criticizing  suppose  that  all  such  change 
is  ‘alteration’:  whereas  in  fact  there  is  a  differ¬ 
ence.  For  in  that  which  underlies  the  change 
there  is  a  factor  corresponding  to  the  defini- 
[25]  tion  and  there  is  a  material  factor.  When, 
then,  the  change  is  in  these  constitutive  factors, 
there  will  be  coming-to-be  or  passing-away: 
but  when  it  is  in  the  thing’s  qualities,  i.e.  a 
change  of  the  thing  per  accidens,  there  will  be 
‘alteration’. 

‘Dissociation’  and  ‘association’  affect  the 
thing’s  susceptibility  to  passing-away.  For  if 
water  has  first  been  ‘dissociated’  into  smallish 
drops,  air  comes-to-be  out  of  it  more  quickly: 


while,  if  drops  of  water  have  first  been  ‘asso¬ 
ciated’,  air  comes-to-be  more  slowly.  Our  doc- 
[30]  trine  will  become  clearer  in  the  sequel.1 
Meantime,  so  much  may  be  taken  as  established 
— viz.  that  coming-to-be  cannot  be  ‘associa¬ 
tion’,  at  least  not  the  kind  of  ‘association’  some 
philosophers  assert  it  to  be. 

3 

Now  that  we  have  established  the  preceding 
distinctions,  we  must  first  consider  whether 
there  is  anything  which  comes-to-be  and 
passes-away  in  the  unqualified  sense:  or  wheth¬ 
er  nothing  comes-to-be  in  this  strict  sense,  but 
everything  always  comes-to-be  something  and 
[35]  out  °f  something — I  mean,  e.g.  comes- 
to-be-healthy  out  of  being-ill  and  ill  out  of 
being-healthy,  comes-to-be-small  out  of  being- 
31715  big  and  big  out  of  being-small,  and  so  on 
in  every  other  instance.  For  if  there  is  to  be 
coming-to-be  without  qualification,  ‘some¬ 
thing’  must — without  qualification — ‘come-to- 
be  out  of  not-being’,  so  that  it  would  be  true  to 
say  that  ‘not-being  is  an  attribute  of  some 
things’.  For  qualified  coming-to-be  is  a  process 
out  of  qualified  not-being  (e.g.  out  of  not- 
[5]  white  or  not-beautiful),  but  unqualified 
coming-to-be  is  a  process  out  of  unqualified 
not-being. 

Now  ‘unqualified’  means  either  (i)  the  pri¬ 
mary  predication  within  each  Category,  or  (ii) 
the  universal,  i.e.  the  all-comprehensive,  pred¬ 
ication.  Hence,  if  ‘unqualified  not-being’  means 
the  negation  of  ‘being’  in  the  sense  of  the  pri¬ 
mary  term  of  the  Category  in  question,  we 
shall  have,  in  ‘unqualified  coming-to-be*,  a 
coming-to-be  of  a  substance  out  of  not-sub- 
stance.  But  that  which  is  not  a  substance  or  a 
‘this’  clearly  cannot  possess  predicates  drawn 
[/o]  from  any  of  the  other  Categories  either 
— e.g.  we  cannot  attribute  to  it  any  quality, 
quantity,  or  position.  Otherwise,  properties 
would  admit  of  existence  in  separation  from 
substances.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  ‘unqualified 
not-being’  means  ‘what  is  not  in  any  sense  at 
all’,  it  will  be  a  universal  negation  of  all  forms 
of  being,  so  that  what  comes-to-be  will  have 
to  come-to-be  out  of  nothing. 

Although  we  have  dealt  with  these  prob¬ 
lems  at  greater  length  in  another  work,2  where 
we  have  set  forth  the  difficulties  and  estab¬ 
lished  the  distinguishing  definitions,  the  fol- 
[75]  lowing  concise  restatement  of  our  results 
must  here  be  offered: — 

In  one  sense  things  come-to-be  out  of  that 

1  Cf.  328®  23  ff.  2  Physics ,  i.  6-9. 


4 14  ON  GENERATION 

which  has  no  ‘being’  without  qualification:  yet 
in  another  sense  they  come-to-be  always  out  of 
‘what  is’.  For  coming-to-be  necessarily  im¬ 
plies  the  pre-existence  of  something  which 
potentially  ‘is’,  but  actually  ‘is  not’;  and  this 
something  is  spoken  of  both  as  ‘being’  and  as 
‘not-being’. 

These  distinctions  may  be  taken  as  estab¬ 
lished:  but  even  then  it  is  extraordinarily  diffi¬ 
cult  to  see  how  there  can  be  ‘unqualified  com¬ 
ing-to-be’  (whether  we  suppose  it  to  occur  out 
[20]  of  what  potentially  ‘is’,  or  in  some  other 
way),  and  we  must  recall  this  problem  for 
further  examination.  For  the  question  might  be 
raised  whether  substance  (i.e.  the  ‘this’)  comes- 
to-be  at  all.  Is  it  not  rather  the  ‘such’,  the  ‘so 
great’,  or  the  ‘somewhere’,  which  comes-to-be? 
And  the  same  question  might  be  raised  about 
‘passing-away’  also.  For  if  a  substantial  thing 
comes-to-be,  it  is  clear  that  there  will  ‘be’  (not 
actually,  but  potentially)  a  substance,  out  of 
which  its  coming-to-be  will  proceed  and  into 
[25]  which  the  thing  that  is  passing-away  will 
necessarily  change.  Then  will  any  predicate 
belonging  to  the  remaining  Categories  attach 
actually  to  this  presupposed  substance?  In 
other  words,  will  that  which  is  only  poten¬ 
tially  a  ‘this’  (which  only  potentially  is), 
while  without  the  qualification  ‘potentially’  it 
is  not  a  ‘this’  (i.e.  is  not),  possess,  e.g.  any 
determinate  size  or  quality  or  position?  For 
(i)  if  it  possesses  none  of  these  determinations 
actually,  but  all  of  them  only  potentially,  the 
result  is  first  that  a  being,  which  is  not  a  de¬ 
terminate  being,  is  capable  of  separate  exist¬ 
ence;  and  in  addition  that  coming-to-be  pro¬ 
ceeds  out  of  nothing  pre-existing — a  thesis 
[jo]  which,  more  than  any  other,  preoccupied 
and  alarmed  the  earliest  philosophers.  On  the 
other  hand  (ii)  if,  although  it  is  not  a  ‘this 
somewhat’  or  a  substance,  it  is  to  possess  some 
of  the  remaining  determinations  quoted  above, 
then  (as  we  said)1  properties  will  be  separable 
from  substances. 

We  must  therefore  concentrate  all  our  pow¬ 
ers  on  the  discussion  of  these  difficulties  and  on 
[35]  the  solution  of  a  further  question — viz. 
What  is  the  cause  of  the  perpetuity  of  coming- 
to-be?  Why  is  there  always  unqualified,  as  well 
as  partial,  coming-to-be? 

318a  ‘Cause’  in  this  connexion  has  two  senses. 
It  means  (i)  the  source  from  which,  as  we  say, 
the  process  ‘originates’,  and  (ii)  the  matter. 
It  is  the  material  cause  that  we  have  here  to 
state.  For,  as  to  the  other  cause,  we  have  al- 
1  Cf.  above,  317b  10-1 1. 


AND  CORRUPTION  318a 

ready  explained  (in  our  treatise  on  Motion2) 
that  it  involves  (a)  something  immovable 
through  all  time  and  ( b )  something  always 
[5]  being  moved.  And  the  accurate  treatment 
of  the  first  of  these — of  the  immovable  ‘orig¬ 
inative  source’ — belongs  to  the  province  of  the 
other,  or  ‘prior’,  philosophy:  while  as  regards 
‘that  which  sets  everything  else  in  motion  by 
being  itself  continuously  moved’,  we  shall  have 
to  explain  later3  which  amongst  the  so-called 
‘specific’  causes  exhibits  this  character.  But  at 
present  we  are  to  state  the  material  cause — the 
cause  classed  under  the  head  of  matter — to 
[/o]  which  it  is  due  that  passing-away  and 
coming-to-be  never  fail  to  occur  in  Nature.  For 
perhaps,  if  we  succeed  in  clearing  up  this  ques¬ 
tion,  it  will  simultaneously  become  clear  what 
account  we  ought  to  give  of  that  which  per¬ 
plexed  us  just  now,  i.e.  of  unqualified  passing- 
away  and  coming-to-be. 

Our  new  question  too — viz.  ‘what  is  the 
cause  of  the  unbroken  continuity  of  coming- 
to-be?’ — is  sufficiently  perplexing,  if  in  fact 
what  passes-away  vanishes  into  ‘what  is  not’ 
[75]  and  ‘what  is  not’  is  nothing  (since  ‘what 
is  not’  is  neither  a  thing,  nor  possessed  of  a 
quality  or  quantity,  nor  in  any  place).  If,  then, 
some  one  of  the  things  ‘which  are’  is  constantly 
disappearing,  why  has  not  the  whole  of  ‘what 
is’  been  used  up  long  ago  and  vanished  away — 
assuming  of  course  that  the  material  of  all  the 
several  comings-to-be  was  finite?  For,  presum¬ 
ably,  the  unfailing  continuity  of  coming-to-be 
cannot  be  attributed  to  the  infinity  of  the 
[20]  material.  That  is  impossible,  for  nothing 
is  actually  infinite.  A  thing  is  infinite  only  po¬ 
tentially,  i.e.  the  dividing  of  it  can  continue 
indefinitely:  so  that  we  should  have  to  suppose 
there  is  only  one  kind  of  coming-to-be  in  the 
world — viz.  one  which  never  fails,  because  it  is 
such  that  what  comes-to-be  is  on  each  succes¬ 
sive  occasion  smaller  than  before.  But  in  fact 
this  is  not  what  we  see  occurring. 

[25]  Why,  then,  is  this  form  of  change  neces¬ 
sarily  ceaseless?  Is  it  because  the  passing-away 
of  this  is  a  coming-to-be  of  something  else, 
and  the  coming-to-be  of  this  a  passing-away  of 
something  else ? 

The  cause  implied  in  this  solution  must  no 
doubt  be  considered  adequate  to  account  for 
coming-to-be  and  passing-away  in  their  general 
character  as  they  occur  in  all  existing  things 
[jo]  alike.  Yet,  if  the  same  process  is  a  coming- 
to-be  of  this  but  a  passing-away  of  that,  and  a 

2  Physics ,  viii.  3  ff.,  especially  258**  10  ff. 

3Cf.  below,  11.  10. 


319*  BOOK  I,  CHAPTER  3  415 


passing-away  of  this  but  a  coming-to-be  of  that, 
why  are  some  things  said  to  come-to-be  and 
pass-away  without  qualification,  but  others  only 
with  a  qualification? 

The  distinction  must  be  investigated  once 
more,  for  it  demands  some  explanation.  (It  is 
applied  in  a  twofold  manner.)  For  (i)  we  say 
‘it  is  now  passing-away’  without  qualification, 
and  not  merely  ‘ this  is  passing-away5:  and  we 
call  this  change  ‘coming-to-be5,  and  that  ‘pass¬ 
ing-away5,  without  qualification.  And  (ii)  so- 
and-so  ‘comes-to-be-something5,  but  does  not 
‘come-to-be5  without  qualification;  for  we  say 
[35]  that  the  student  ‘comes-to-be-learned5, 
not  ‘comes-to-be5  without  qualification. 

318b  (i)  Now  we  often  divide  terms  into 
those  which  signify  a  ‘this  somewhat5  and 
those  which  do  not.  And  (the  first  form  of) 
the  distinction,  which  we  are  investigating,  re¬ 
sults  from  a  similar  division  of  terms:  for  it 
makes  a  difference  into  what  the  changing 
thing  changes.  Perhaps,  e.g.  the  passage  into 
Fire  is  ‘coming-to-be5  unqualified,  but  ‘passing- 
away-of-something5  (e.g.  of  Earth):  whilst  the 
[5]  coming-to-be  of  Earth  is  qualified  (not 
unqualified)  ‘coming-to-be5,  though  unquali¬ 
fied  ‘passing-away5  (e.g.  of  Fire).  This  would 
be  the  case  on  the  theory  set-  forth  in  Parmen¬ 
ides:  for  he  says  that  the  things  into  which 
change  takes  place  are  two,  and  he  asserts  that 
these  two,  viz.  what  is  and  what  is  not,  are 
Fire  and  Earth.  Whether  we  postulate  these, 
or  other  things  of  a  similar  kind,  makes  no 
difference.  For  we  are  trying  to  discover  not 
what  undergoes  these  changes,  but  what  is 
their  characteristic  manner.  The  passage,  then, 
[/o]  into  what  ‘is5  not  except  with  a  qualifica¬ 
tion  is  unqualified  passing-away,  while  the 
passage  into  what  ‘is5  without  qualification  is 
unqualified  coming-to-be.  Hence  whatever  the 
contrasted  ‘poles5  of  the  changes  may  be — 
whether  Fire  and  Earth,  or  some  other  couple 
— the  one  of  them  will  be  ‘a  being5  and  the 
other  ‘a  not-being5. 

We  have  thus  stated  one  characteristic  man¬ 
ner  in  which  unqualified  will  be  distinguished 
from  qualified  coming-to-be  and  passing-away: 
but  they  are  also  distinguished  according  to 
the  special  nature  of  the  material  of  the  chang- 
[75]  ing  thing.  For  a  material,  whose  constitu¬ 
tive  differences  signify  more  a  ‘this  somewhat5, 
is  itself  more  ‘substantial5  or  ‘real5:  while  a  ma¬ 
terial,  whose  constitutive  differences  signify 
privation,  is  ‘not  real5.  (Suppose,  e.g.  that  ‘the 
hot5  is  a  positive  predication,  i.e.  a  ‘form5, 
whereas  ‘cold5  is  a  privation,  and  that  Earth 


and  Fire  differ  from  one  another  by  these  con¬ 
stitutive  differences.) 

The  opinion,  however,  which  most  people 
are  inclined  to  prefer,  is  that  the  distinction 
depends  upon  the  difference  between  ‘the  per¬ 
ceptible5  and  ‘the  imperceptible5.  Thus,  when 
[20]  there  is  a  change  into  perceptible  ma¬ 
terial,  people  say  there  is  ‘coming-to-be5;  but 
when  there  is  a  change  into  invisible  material, 
they  call  it  ‘passing-away5.  For  they  distinguish 
‘what  is5  and  ‘what  is  not5  by  their  perceiving 
and  not-perceiving,  just  as  what  is  knowable  ‘is5 
and  what  is  unknowable  ‘is  not5 — perception 
on  their  view  having  the  force  of  knowledge. 
[25]  Hence,  just  as  they  deem  themselves  to 
live  and  to  ‘be5  in  virtue  of  their  perceiving  or 
their  capacity  to  perceive,  so  too  they  deem 
the  things  to  ‘be5  qua  perceived  or  perceptible 
— and  in  this  they  are  in  a  sense  on  the  track  of 
the  truth,  though  what  they  actually  say  is 
not  true. 

Thus  unqualified  coming-to-be  and  passing- 
away  turn  out  to  be  different  according  to 
common  opinion  from  what  they  are  in  truth. 
For  Wind  and  Air  are  in  truth  more  real — 
more  a  ‘this  somewhat5  or  a  ‘form5 — than 
Earth.  But  they  are  less  real  to  perception — 
which  explains  why  things  are  commonly  said 
[30]  to  ‘pass-away5  without  qualification 
when  they  change  into  Wind  and  Air,  and  to 
‘come-to-be5  when  they  change  into  what  is 
tangible,  i.e.  into  Earth. 

We  have  now  explained  why  there  is  ‘un¬ 
qualified  coming-to-be5  (though  it  is  a  passing- 
away-of-something)  and  ‘unqualified  passing- 
away5  (though  it  is  a  coming-to-be-of-some- 
[35]  thing).  For  this  distinction  of  appellation 
depends  upon  a  difference  in  the  material  out 
of  which,  and  into  which,  the  changes  are 
effected.  It  depends  either  upon  whether  the 
319a  material  is  or  is  not  ‘substantial5,  or  upon 
whether  it  is  more  or  less  ‘substantial5,  or  upon 
whether  it  is  more  or  less  perceptible. 

(ii)  But  why  are  some  things  said  to  ‘come- 
to-be5  without  qualification,  and  others  only 
to  ‘come-to-be-so-and-so5,  in  cases  different 
from  the  one  we  have  been  considering  where 
two  things  come-to-be  reciprocally  out  of  one 
[5]  another?  For  at  present  we  have  explained 
no  more  than  this: — why,  when  two  things 
change  reciprocally  into  one  another,  we  do 
not  attribute  coming-to-be  and  passing-away 
uniformly  to  them  both,  although  every  com¬ 
ing-to-be  is  a  passing-away  of  something  else 
and  every  passing-away  some  other  thing’s 
coming-to-be.  But  the  question  subsequently 


1 6  ON  GENERATION  AND  CORRUPTION  319b 


formulated  involves  a  different  problem — viz. 
why,  although  the  learning  thing  is  said  to 
[ io ]  ‘come-to-be-learned’  but  not  to  ‘come-to- 
be’  without  qualification,  yet  the  growing 
thing  is  said  to  ‘come-to-be’. 

The  distinction  here  turns  upon  the  differ¬ 
ence  of  the  Categories.  For  some  things  signify 
a  this  somewhat,  others  a  such,  and  others  a 
so-much.  Those  things,  then,  which  do  not 
signify  substance,  are  not  said  to  ‘come-to-be’ 
without  qualification,  but  only  to  ‘come-to-be- 
so-and-so\  Nevertheless,  in  all  changing  things 
alike,  we  speak  of  ‘coming-to-be’  when  the 
[75]  thing  comes-to-be  something  in  one  of 
the  two  Columns — e.g.  in  Substance,  if  it 
comes-to-be  Fire  but  not  if  it  comes-to-be 
Earth;  and  in  Quality,  if  it  comes-to-be  learned 
but  not  when  it  comes-to-be  ignorant. 

We  have  explained  why  some  things  come- 
to-be  without  qualification,  but  not  others — 
both  in  general,  and  also  when  the  changing 
things  are  substances  and  nothing  else;  and  we 
have  stated  that  the  substratum  is  the  material 
cause  of  the  continuous  occurrence  of  coming- 
to-be,  because  it  is  such  as  to  change  from  con- 
[20]  trary  to  contrary  and  because,  in  sub¬ 
stances,  the  coming-to-be  of  one  thing  is  al¬ 
ways  a  passing-away  of  another,  and  the 
passing-away  of  one  thing  is  always  another’s 
coming-to-be.  But  there  is  no  need  even  to  dis¬ 
cuss  the  other  question  we  raised — viz.  why 
coming-to-be  continues  though  things  are  con¬ 
stantly  being  destroyed.  For  just  as  people 
speak  of  ‘a  passing-away’  without  qualification 
when  a  thing  has  passed  into  what  is  imper¬ 
ceptible  and  what  in  that  sense  ‘is  not’,  so 
[25]  also  they  speak  of  ‘a  coming-to-be  out  of 
a  not-being’  when  a  thing  emerges  from  an 
imperceptible.  Whether,  therefore,  the  sub¬ 
stratum  is  or  is  not  something,  what  comes-to- 
be  emerges  out  of  a  ‘not-being’:  so  that  a  thing 
‘comes-to-be  out  of  a  not-being’  just  as  much 
as  it  ‘passes-away  into  what  is  not’.  Hence  it  is 
reasonable  enough  that  coming-to-be  should 
never  fail.  For  coming-to-be  is  a  passing-away 
of  ‘what  is  not’  and  passing-away  is  a  coming- 
to-be  of  ‘what  is  not’. 

But  what  about  that  which  ‘is’  not  except 
[30]  with  a  qualification?  Is  it  one  of  the  two 
contrary  poles  of  the  change — e.g.  is  Earth 
(i.e.  the  heavy)  a  ‘not-being’,  but  Fire  (i.e. 
the  light)  a  ‘being’?  Or,  on  the  contrary,  does 
‘what  is’  include  Earth  as  well  as  Fire,  whereas 
‘what  is  not’  is  matter — the  matter  of  Earth  and 
Fire  alike?  And  again,  is  the  matter  of  each 
different?  Or  is  it  the  same,  since  otherwise 


319b  they  would  not  come-to-be  reciprocally 
out  of  one  another,  i.e.  contraries  out  of  con¬ 
traries?  For  these  things — Fire,  Earth,  Water, 
Air — are  characterized  by  ‘the  contraries’. 

Perhaps  the  solution  is  that  their  matter  is  in 
one  sense  the  same,  but  in  another  sense  differ¬ 
ent.  For  that  which  underlies  them,  whatever 
its  nature  may  be  qua  underlying  them,  is  the 
same:  but  its  actual  being  is  not  the  same.  So 
much,  then,  on  these  topics. 

4 

[5]  Next  we  must  state  what  the  difference  is 
between  coming-to-be  and  ‘alteration’ — for  we 
maintain  that  these  changes  are  distinct  from 
one  another. 

Since,  then,  we  must  distinguish  (a)  the 
substratum,  and  {b)  the  property  whose  na¬ 
ture  it  is  to  be  predicated  of  the  substratum; 
[/o]  and  since  change  of  each  of  these  occurs; 
there  is  ‘alteration’  when  the  substratum  is 
perceptible  and  persists,  but  changes  in  its  own 
properties,  the  properties  in  question  being  op¬ 
posed  to  one  another  either  as  contraries  or  as 
intermediates.  The  body,  e.g.  although  persist¬ 
ing  as  the  same  body,  is  now  healthy  and  now 
ill;  and  the  bronze  is  now  spherical  and  at  an¬ 
other  time  angular,  and  yet  remains  the  same 
[75]  bronze.  But  when  nothing  perceptible 
persists  in  its  identity  as  a  substratum,  and  the 
thing  changes  as  a  whole  (when  e.g.  the  seed 
as  a  whole  is  converted  into  blood,  or  water 
into  air,  or  air  as  a  whole  into  water),  such  an 
occurrence  is  no  longer  ‘alteration’.  It  is  a  com¬ 
ing-to-be  of  one  substance  and  a  passing-away 
of  the  other — especially  if  the  change  proceeds 
from  an  imperceptible  something  to  something 
perceptible  (either  to  touch  or  to  all  the  senses), 
[20]  as  when  water  comes-to-be  out  of,  or 
passes-away  into,  air:  for  air  is  pretty  well  im¬ 
perceptible.  If,  however,  in  such  cases,  any 
property  (being  one  of  a  pair  of  contraries) 
persists,  in  the  thing  that  has  come-to-be,  the 
same  as  it  was  in  the  thing  which  has  passed- 
away — if,  e.g.  when  water  comes-to-be  out  of 
air,  both  are  transparent  or  cold — the  second 
thing,  into  which  the  first  changes,  must  not  be 
a  property  of  this  persistent  identical  some¬ 
thing.  Otherwise  the  change  will  be  ‘alteration.’ 
[25]  Suppose,  e.g.  that  the  musical  man 
passed-away  and  an  unmusical  man  came-to- 
be,  and  that  the  man  persists  as  something 
identical.  Now,  if  ‘  musicalness  and  unmusical¬ 
ness’  had  not  been  a  property  essentially  inher¬ 
ing  in  man,  these  changes  would  have  been  a 
coming-to-be  of  unmusicalness  and  a  passing- 


320b  BOOK  I,  CHAPTERS  3-5  417 


away  of  musicalness:  but  in  fact  ‘musicalness 
and  unmusicalness’  are  a  property  of  the  per¬ 
sistent  identity,  viz.  man.  (Hence,  as  regards 
man,  these  changes  are ‘modifications’;  though, 
[50]  as  regards  musical  man  and  unmusical 
man,  they  are  a  passing-away  and  a  coming-to- 
be.)  Consequently  such  changes  are ‘alteration.’ 

When  the  change  from  contrary  to  contrary 
is  in  quantity,  it  is  ‘growth  and  diminution’; 
when  it  is  in  place,  it  is  ‘motion’;  when  it  is  in 
property,  i.e.  in  quality,  it  is  ‘alteration’:  but 
320a  when  nothing  persists,  of  which  the  re¬ 
sultant  is  a  property  (or  an  ‘accident’  in  any 
sense  of  the  term),  it  is  ‘coming-to-be’,  and  the 
converse  change  is  ‘passing-away’. 

‘Matter’,  in  the  most  proper  sense  of  the 
term,  is  to  be  identified  with  the  substratum 
which  is  receptive  of  coming-to-be  and  passing- 
away:  but  the  substratum  of  the  remaining 
kinds  of  change  is  also,  in  a  certain  sense,  ‘mat- 
[5]  ter’,  because  all  these  substrata  are  recep¬ 
tive  of  ‘contrarieties’  of  some  kind.  So  much, 
then,  as  an  answer  to  the  questions  (i)  wheth¬ 
er  coming-to-be  ‘is’  or  ‘is  not’ — i.e.  what  are 
the  precise  conditions  of  its  occurrence  and 
(ii)  what  ‘alteration’  is:  but  we  have  still  to 
treat  of  growth. 

We  must  explain  (i)  wherein  growth  differs 
from  coming-to-be  and  from  ‘alteration’,  and 
(ii)  what  is  the  process  of  growing  and  the 
[70]  process  of  diminishing  in  each  and  all  of 
the  things  that  grow  and  diminish. 

Hence  our  first  question  is  this:  Do  these 
changes  differ  from  one  another  solely  because 
of  a  difference  in  their  respective  ‘spheres’?  In 
other  words,  do  they  differ  because,  while  a 
change  from  this  to  that  (viz.  from  potential  to 
actual  substance)  is  coming-to-be,  a  change  in 
the  sphere  of  magnitude  is  growth  and  one  in 
[75]  the  sphere  of  quality  is  ‘alteration’ — both 
growth  and  ‘alteration’  being  changes  from 
what  is-potentially  to  what  is-actually  magni¬ 
tude  and  quality  respectively?  Or  is  there  also 
a  difference  in  the  manner  of  the  change,  since 
it  is  evident  that,  whereas  neither  what  is  ‘alter¬ 
ing’  nor  what  is  coming-to-be  necessarily 
changes  its  place,  what  is  growing  or  diminish¬ 
ing  changes  its  spatial  position  of  necessity, 
though  in  a  different  manner  from  that  in 
which  the  moving  thing  does  so?  For  that 
[20]  which  is  being  moved  changes  its  place 
as  a  whole:  but  the  growing  thing  changes  its 
place  like  a  metal  that  is  being  beaten,  retain¬ 
ing  its  position  as  a  whole  while  its  parts 
change  their  places.  They  change  their  places, 


but  not  in  the  same  way  as  the  parts  of  a  re¬ 
volving  globe.  For  the  parts  of  the  globe 
change  their  places  while  the  whole  continues 
to  occupy  an  equal  place:  but  the  parts  of 
the  growing  thing  expand  over  an  everdncreas- 
[25]  ing  place  and  the  parts  of  the  diminish¬ 
ing  thing  contract  within  an  ever-diminishing 
area. 

It  is  clear,  then,  that  these  changes — the 
changes  of  that  which  is  coming-to-be,  of  that 
which  is  ‘altering’,  and  of  that  which  is  grow¬ 
ing — differ  in  manner  as  well  as  in  sphere.  But 
how  are  we  to  conceive  the  ‘sphere’  of  the 
change  which  is  growth  and  diminution?  The 
‘sphere’  of  growing  and  diminishing  is  be¬ 
lieved  to  be  magnitude.  Are  we  to  suppose  that 
body  and  magnitude  come-to-be  out  of  some- 
[jo]  thing  which,  though  potentially  magni¬ 
tude  and  body,  is  actually  incorporeal  and  de¬ 
void  of  magnitude?  And  since  this  description 
may  be  understood  in  two  different  ways,  in 
which  of  these  two  ways  are  we  to  apply  it  to 
the  process  of  growth?  Is  the  matter,  out  of 
which  growth  takes  place,  (i)  ‘separate’  and 
existing  alone  by  itself,  or  (ii)  ‘separate’  but 
contained  in  another  body? 

Perhaps  it  is  impossible  for  growth  to  take 
place  in  either  of  these  ways.  For  since  the  mat- 
320b  ter  is  ‘separate’,  either  (a)  it  will  occupy 
no  place  (as  if  it  were  a  point),  or  (b)  it  will  be 
a  ‘void’,  i.e.  a  non-perceptible  body.  But  the 
first  of  these  alternatives  is  impossible.  For 
since  what  comes-to-be  out  of  this  incorporeal 
and  sizeless  something  will  always  be  ‘some¬ 
where’,  it  too  must  be  ‘somewhere’ — either  in- 
[5]  trinsically  or  indirectly.  And  the  second 
alternative  necessarily  implies  that  the  matter 
is  contained  in  some  other  body.  But  if  it  is  to 
be  ‘in’  another  body  and  yet  remains  ‘separate’ 
in  such  a  way  that  it  is  in  no  sense  a  part  of 
that  body  (neither  a  part  of  its  substantial  be¬ 
ing  nor  an  ‘accident’  of  it),  many  impossibili¬ 
ties  will  result.  It  is  as  if  we  were  to  suppose 
that  when,  e.g.  air  comes-to-be  out  of  water 
the  process  were  due  not  to  a  change  of  the 
[/o]  water,  but  to  the  matter  of  the  air  being 
‘contained  in’  the  water  as  in  a  vessel.  This  is 
impossible.  For  (i)  there  is  nothing  to  prevent 
an  indeterminate  number  of  matters  being 
thus  ‘contained  in’  the  water,  so  that  they  might 
come-to-be  actually  an  indeterminate  quantity 
of  air;  and  (ii)  we  do  not  in  fact  see  air  com¬ 
ing-to-be  out  of  water  in  this  fashion,  viz.  with¬ 
drawing  out  of  it  and  leaving  it  unchanged. 

It  is  therefore  better  to  suppose  that  in  all  in¬ 
stances  of  coming-to-be  the  matter  is  insepara- 


4i8  ON  GENERATION  AND  CORRUPTION  321* 


ble,  being  numerically  identical  and  one  with 
the  ‘containing’  body,  though  isolable  from  it 
by  definition.  But  the  same  reasons  also  forbid 
[75]  us  to  regard  the  matter,  out  of  which  the 
body  comes-to-be,  as  points  or  lines.  The  mat¬ 
ter  is  that  of  which  points  and  lines  are  limits, 
and  it  is  something  that  can  never  exist  with¬ 
out  quality  and  without  form. 

Now  it  is  no  doubt  true,  as  we  have  also  es¬ 
tablished  elsewhere,1  that  one  thing  ‘comes-to- 
be’  (in  the  unqualified  sense)  out  of  another 
thing:  and  further  it  is  true  that  the  efficient 
cause  of  its  coming-to-be  is  either  (i)  an  actual 
thing  (which  is  the  same  as  the  effect  either 
generic  ally — for  the  efficient  cause  of  the  com- 
ing-to-be  of  a  hard  thing  is  not  a  hard  thing — 
[20]  or  specifically,  as  e.g.  fire  is  the  efficient 
cause  of  the  coming-to-be  of  fire  or  one  man  of 
the  birth  of  another),  or  (ii)  an  actuality.  Nev¬ 
ertheless,  since  there  is  also  a  matter  out  of 
which  corporeal  substance  itself  comes-to-be 
(corporeal  substance,  however,  already  charac¬ 
terized  as  such-and-such  a  determinate  body, 
for  there  is  no  such  thing  as  body  in  general), 
this  same  matter  is  also  the  matter  of  magni¬ 
tude  and  quality — being  separable  from  these 
matters  by  definition,  but  not  separable  in  place 
[25]  unless  Qualities  are,  in  their  turn,  separa¬ 
ble. 

It  is  evident,  from  the  preceding2  develop¬ 
ment  and  discussion  of  difficulties,  that  growth 
is  not  a  change  out  of  something  which, 
though  potentially  a  magnitude,  actually  pos¬ 
sesses  no  magnitude.  For,  if  it  were,  the  ‘void’ 
would  exist  in  separation;  but  we  have  ex¬ 
plained  in  a  former  work3  that  this  is  impossi¬ 
ble.  Moreover,  a  change  of  that  kind  is  not  pe¬ 
culiarly  distinctive  of  growth,  but  characterizes 
[30]  coming-to-be  as  such  or  in  general.  For 
growth  is  an  increase,  and  diminution  is  a  less¬ 
ening,  of  the  magnitude  which  is  there  already 
— that,  indeed,  is  why  the  growing  thing  must 
possess  some  magnitude.  Hence  growth  must 
not  be  regarded  as  a  process  from  a  matter 
without  magnitude  to  an  actuality  of  magni¬ 
tude:  for  this  would  be  a  body’s  coming-to-be 
rather  than  its  growth. 

We  must  therefore  come  to  closer  quarters 
321*  with  the  subject  of  our  inquiry.  We  must 
‘grapple’  with  it  (as  it  were)  from  its  begin¬ 
ning,  and  determine  the  precise  character  of 
the  growing  and  diminishing  whose  causes  we 
are  investigating. 

1  Cf.  Physics ,  1.  7;  Metaphysics ,  1032*  12  ff. 

2  Cf.  above,  32oa  27-b  12. 

3  Cf.  Physics ,  iv.  6-9. 


It  is  evident  (i)  that  any  and  every  part  of 
the  growing  thing  has  increased,  and  that  simi¬ 
larly  in  diminution  every  part  has  become 
smaller:  also  (ii)  that  a  thing  grows  by  the 
[5]  accession,  and  diminishes  by  the  depar¬ 
ture,  of  something.  Hence  it  must  grow  by 
the  accession  either  (a)  of  something  in¬ 
corporeal  or  (b)  of  a  body.  Now,  if  (a)  it 
grows  by  the  accession  of  something  incor¬ 
poreal,  there  will  exist  separate  a  void:  but 
(as  we  have  stated  before)4  it  is  impossible 
for  a  matter  of  magnitude  to  exist  ‘sepa¬ 
rate’.  If,  on  the  other  hand  ( b )  it  grows  by 
the  accession  of  a  body,  there  will  be  two 
bodies — that  which  grows  and  that  which  in¬ 
creases  it — in  the  same  place:  and  this  too  is 
impossible. 

[/o]  But  neither  is  it  open  to  us  to  say  that 
growth  or  diminution  occurs  in  the  way  in 
which  e.g.  air  is  generated  from  water.  For,  al¬ 
though  the  volume  has  then  become  greater, 
the  change  will  not  be  growth,  but  a  coming- 
to-be  of  the  one — viz.  of  that  into  which  the 
change  is  taking  place — and  a  passing-away  of 
the  contrasted  body.  It  is  not  a  growth  of  ei¬ 
ther.  Nothing  grows  in  the  process;  unless  in¬ 
deed  there  be  something  common  to  both 
[75]  things  (to  that  which  is  coming-to-be  and 
to  that  which  passed-away),  e.g.  ‘body’,  and 
this  grows.  The  water  has  not  grown,  nor  has 
the  air:  but  the  former  has  passed-away  and 
the  latter  has  come-to-be,  and — if  anything  has 
grown — there  has  been  a  growth  of  ‘body.’  Yet 
this  too  is  impossible.  For  our  account  of 
growth  must  preserve  the  characteristics  of  that 
which  is  growing  and  diminishing.  And  these 
characteristics  are  three:  (i)  any  and  every  part 
[20]  of  the  growing  magnitude  is  made  bigger 
(e.g.  if  flesh  grows,  every  particle  of  the  flesh 
gets  bigger),  (ii)  by  the  accession  of  something, 
and  (iii)  in  such  a  way  that  the  growing  thing 
is  preserved  and  persists.  For  whereas  a  thing 
does  not  persist  in  the  processes  of  unqualified 
coming-to-be  or  passing-away,  that  which 
grows  or  ‘alters’  persists  in  its  identity  through 
the  ‘altering’  and  through  the  growing  or  di- 
[25]  minishing,  though  the  quality  (in  ‘altera¬ 
tion’)  and  the  size  (in  growth)  do  not  remain 
the  same.  Now  if  the  generation  of  air  from 
water  is  to  be  regarded  as  growth,  a  thing 
might  grow  without  the  accession  (and  with¬ 
out  the  persistence)  of  anything,  and  diminish 
without  the  departure  of  anything — and  that 
which  grows  need  not  persist.  But  this  charac¬ 
teristic  must  be  preserved:  for  the  growth  we 
4  Cf.  above,  320®  27-b  25. 


322*  BOOK  I,  CHAPTER  5  419 


are  discussing  has  been  assumed  to  be  thus 
characterized. 

[jo]  One  might  raise  a  further  difficulty.  What 
is  ‘that  which  grows’?  Is  it  that  to  which  some¬ 
thing  is  added?  If,  e.g.  a  man  grows  in  his 
shin,  is  it  the  shin  which  is  greater — but  not 
that  ‘whereby’  he  grows,  viz.  not  the  food? 
Then  why  have  not  both  ‘grown’?  For  when 
A  is  added  to  B,  both  A  and  B  are  greater,  as 
when  you  mix  wine  with  water;  for  each  in¬ 
gredient  is  alike  increased  in  volume.  Perhaps 
the  explanation  is  that  the  substance  of  the  one 
[35]  remains  unchanged,  but  the  substance  of 
the  other  (viz.  of  the  food)  does  not.  For  in¬ 
deed,  even  in  the  mixture  of  wine  and  water,  it 
321b  is  the  prevailing  ingredient  which  is  said 
to  have  increased  in  volume.  We  say,  e.g.  that 
the  wine  has  increased,  because  the  whole  mix¬ 
ture  acts  as  wine  but  not  as  water.  A  similar 
principle  applies  also  to  ‘alteration’.  Flesh  is 
said  to  have  been  ‘altered’  if,  while  its  charac¬ 
ter  and  substance  remain,  some  one  of  its  es¬ 
sential  properties,  which  was  not  there  before, 
[5]  now  qualifies  it:  on  the  other  hand,  that 
‘whereby’  it  has  been  ‘altered’  may  have  under¬ 
gone  no  change,  though  sometimes  it  too  has 
been  affected.  The  altering  agent,  however, 
and  the  originative  source  of  the  process  are  in 
the  growing  thing  and  in  that  which  is  being 
‘altered’:  for  the  efficient  cause  is  in  these.  No 
doubt  the  food,  which  has  come  in,  may  some¬ 
times  expand  as  well  as  the  body  that  has  con¬ 
sumed  it  (that  is  so,  e.g.  if,  after  having  come 
in,  a  food  is  converted  into  wind),  but  when 
[/o]  it  has  undergone  this  change  ithaspassed- 
away:  and  the  efficient  cause  is  not  in  the  food. 

We  have  now  developed  the  difficulties  suffi¬ 
ciently  and  must  therefore  try  to  find  a  solution 
of  the  problem.  Our  solution  must  preserve  in¬ 
tact  the  three  characteristics  of  growth — that 
the  growing  thing  persists,  that  it  grows  by  the 
accession  (and  diminishes  by  the  departure)  of 
something,  and  further  that  every  perceptible 
article  of  it  has  become  either  larger  or  small- 
75]  er.  We  must  recognize  also  (a)  that  the 
growing  body  is  not  ‘void’  and  that  yet  there 
are  not  two  magnitudes  in  the  same  place,  and 
( b )  that  it  does  not  grow  by  the  accession  of 
something  incorporeal. 

Two  preliminary  distinctions  will  prepare  us 
to  grasp  the  cause  of  growth.  We  must  note  (i) 
that  the  organic  parts  grow  by  the  growth  of 
the  tissues  (for  every  organ  is  composed  of 
these  as  its  constituents);  and  (ii)  that  flesh, 
[20]  bone,  and  every  such  part — like  every  oth¬ 
er  thing  which  has  its  form  immersed  in  mat¬ 


ter — has  a  twofold  nature:  for  the  form  as 
well  as  the  matter  is  called  ‘flesh’  or  ‘bone’. 

Now,  that  any  and  every  part  of  the  tissue 
qua  form  should  grow — and  grow  by  the  ac¬ 
cession  of  something — is  possible,  but  not  that 
any  and  every  part  of  the  tissue  qua  matter 
should  do  so.  For  we  must  think  of  the  tissue 
[25]  after  the  image  of  flowing  water  that  is 
measured  by  one  and  the  same  measure:  parti¬ 
cle  after  particle  comes-to-be,  and  each  succes¬ 
sive  particle  is  different.  And  it  is  in  this  sense 
that  the  matter  of  the  flesh  grows,  some  flow¬ 
ing  out  and  some  flowing  in  fresh;  not  in  the 
sense  that  fresh  matter  accedes  to  every  particle 
of  it.  There  is,  however,  an  accession  to  every 
part  of  its  figure  or  ‘form’. 

That  growth  has  taken  place  proportionally, 
is  more  manifest  in  the  organic  parts — e.g.  in 
the  hand.  For  there  the  fact  that  the  matter  is 
[30]  distinct  from  the  form  is  more  manifest 
than  in  flesh,  i.e.  than  in  the  tissues.  That  is 
why  there  is  a  greater  tendency  to  suppose  that 
a  corpse  still  possesses  flesh  and  bone  than  that 
it  still  has  a  hand  or  an  arm. 

Hence  in  one  sense  it  is  true  that  any  and  ev¬ 
ery  part  of  the  flesh  has  grown;  but  in  another 
sense  it  is  false.  For  there  has  been  an  acces¬ 
sion  to  every  part  of  the  flesh  in  respect  to  its 
form,  but  not  in  respect  to  its  matter.  The 
[55]  whole,  however,  has  become  larger.  And 
this  increase  is  due  (a)  on  the  one  hand  to  the 
accession  of  something,  which  is  called  ‘food’ 
322a  and  is  said  to  be  ‘contrary’  to  flesh,  but 
(b)  on  the  other  hand  to  the  transformation  of 
this  food  into  the  same  form  as  that  of  flesh — 
as  if,  e.g.  ‘moist’  were  to  accede  to  ‘dry’  and, 
having  acceded,  were  to  be  transformed  and  to 
become  ‘dry’.  For  in  one  sense  ‘Like  grows  by 
Like’,  but  in  another  sense  ‘Unlike  grows  by 
Unlike’. 

One  might  discuss  what  must  be  the  charac- 
[5]  ter  of  that  ‘whereby’  a  thing  grows.  Clear¬ 
ly  it  must  be  potentially  that  which  is  growing 
— potentially  flesh,  e.g.  if  it  is  flesh  that  is 
growing.  Actually,  therefore,  it  must  be  ‘other’ 
than  the  growing  thing.  This  ‘actual  other’, 
then,  has  passed-away  and  come-to-be  flesh.  But 
it  has  not  been  transformed  into  flesh  alone  by 
itself  (for  that  would  have  been  a  coming-to-be, 
not  a  growth) :  on  the  contrary,  it  is  the  growing 
thing  which  has  come-to-be  flesh  (and  grown) 
by  the  food.  In  what  way,  then,  has  the  food 
been  modified  by  the  growing  thing?  Perhaps 
we  should  say  that  it  has  been  ‘mixed’  with  it, 
as  if  one  were  to  pour  water  into  wine  and  the 
[/o]  wine  were  able  to  convert  the  new  ingre- 


420  ON  GENERATION 

dient  into  wine.  And  as  fire  lays  hold  of  the  in¬ 
flammable,  so  the  active  principle  of  growth, 
dwelling  in  the  growingthing  (i.e.  in  that  which 
is  actually  flesh),  lays  hold  of  an  acceding  food 
which  is  potentially  flesh  and  converts  it  into 
actual  flesh.  The  acceding  food,  therefore,  must 
be  together  with  the  growing  thing:  for  if  it 
were  apart  from  it,  the  change  would  be  a  com- 
[75]  ing-to-be.  For  it  is  possible  to  produce  fire 
by  piling  logs  on  to  the  already  burning  fire. 
That  is  ‘growth'.  But  when  the  logs  themselves 
are  set  on  fire,  that  is  ‘coming-to-be'. 

‘Quantum-in-general'  does  not  come-to-be 
any  more  than  ‘animal'  which  is  neither  man 
nor  any  other  of  the  specific  forms  of  animal: 
what  ‘animal-in-general'  is  in  coming-to-be, 
that  ‘quantum-in-general'  is  in  growth.  But 
what  does  come-to-be  in  growth  is  flesh  or  bone 
— or  a  hand  or  arm  (i.e.  the  tissues  of  these  or- 
[20]  ganic  parts).  Such  things  come-to-be,  then, 
by  the  accession  not  of  quantified-flesh  but  of  a 
quantified-something.  In  so  far  as  this  acced¬ 
ing  food  is  potentially  the  double  result — 
e.g.  is  potentially  so-much-flesh — it  produces 
growth:  for  it  is  bound  to  become  actually  both 
so-much  and  flesh .  But  in  so  far  as  it  is  poten¬ 
tially  flesh  only,  it  nourishes:  for  it  is  thus  that 
‘nutrition’  and  ‘growth'  differ  by  their  defini¬ 
tion.  That  is  why  a  body's  ‘nutrition'  continues 
so  long  as  it  is  kept  alive  (even  when  it  is  dimin¬ 
ishing),  though  not  its  ‘growth';  and  why  nu- 
[25]  trition,  though  ‘the  same'  as  growth,  is  yet 
different  from  it  in  its  actual  being.  For  in  so 
far  as  that  which  accedes  is  potentially  ‘so- 
much-flesh'  it  tends  to  increase  flesh:  whereas, 
in  so  far  as  it  is  potentially  ‘flesh'  only,  it  is 
nourishment. 

The  form  of  which  we  have  spoken  is  a  kind 
of  power  immersed  in  matter — a  duct,  as  it 
were.  If,  then,  a  matter  accedes — a  mat- 
[30]  ter,  which  is  potentially  a  duct  and  also 
potentially  possesses  determinate  quantity — 
the  ducts  to  which  it  accedes  will  become  big¬ 
ger.  But  if  it  is  no  longer  able  to  act — if  it  has 
been  weakened  by  the  continued  influx  of  mat¬ 
ter,  just  as  water,  continually  mixed  in  greater 
and  greater  quantity  with  wine,  in  the  end 
makes  the  wine  watery  and  converts  it  into 
water — then  it  wil  cause  a  diminution  of  the 
quantum;  though  still  the  form  persists. 

6 

322b  (In  discussing  the  causes  of  coming-to- 
be)  we  must  first  investigate  the  matter,  i.e. 
the  so-called  ‘elements'.  We  must  ask  whether 
they  really  are  elements  or  not,  i.e.  whether 


AND  CORRUPTION  322b 

each  of  them  is  eternal  or  whether  there  is  a 
sense  in  which  they  come-to-be:  and,  if  they  do 
come-to-be,  whether  all  of  them  come-to-be  in 
the  same  manner  reciprocally  out  of  one  anoth- 
•  er,  or  whether  one  amongst  them  is  something 
[5]  primary.  Hence  we  must  begin  by  explain¬ 
ing  certain  preliminary  matters,  about  which 
the  statements  now  current  are  vague. 

For  all  (the  pluralist  philosophers) — those 
who  generate  the  ‘elements’  as  well  as  those 
who  generate  the  bodies  that  are  compounded 
of  the  elements — make  use  of  ‘dissociation’  and 
‘association’,  and  of  ‘action’  and  ‘passion’.  Now 
‘association’  is  ‘combination’;  but  the  precise 
meaning  of  the  process  we  call  ‘combining’  has 
not  been  explained.  Again,  (all  the  monists 
make  use  of  ‘alteration’:  but)  without  an  agent 
[/o]  and  a  patient  there  cannot  be  ‘altering’ 
any  more  than  there  can  be  ‘dissociating’  and 
‘associating’.  For  not  only  those  who  postulate 
a  plurality  of  elements  employ  their  reciprocal 
action  and  passion  to  generate  the  compounds: 
those  who  derive  things  from  a  single  element 
are  equally  compelled  to  introduce  ‘acting’. 
And  in  this  respect  Diogenes  is  right  when  he 
argues  that  ‘unless  all  things  were  derived  from 
[75]  one,  reciprocal  action  and  passion  could 
not  have  occurred’.1  The  hot  thing,  e.g.  would 
not  be  cooled  and  the  cold  thing  in  turn  be 
warmed:  for  heat  and  cold  do  not  change  re¬ 
ciprocally  into  one  another,  but  what  changes 
(it  is  clear)  is  the  substratum.  Hence,  when¬ 
ever  there  is  action  and  passion  between  two 
things,  that  which  underlies  them  must  be  a 
single  something.  No  doubt,  it  is  not  true  to 
say  that  all  things  are  of  this  character:  but  it 
[20]  is  true  of  all  things  between  which  there 
is  reciprocal  action  and  passion. 

But  if  we  must  investigate  ‘action-passion’ 
and  ‘combination’,  we  must  also  investigate 
‘contact’.  For  action  and  passion  (in  the  proper 
sense  of  the  terms)  can  only  occur  between 
things  which  are  such  as  to  touch  one  another; 
[25]  nor  can  things  enter  into  combination  at 
all  unless  they  have  come  into  a  certain  kind  of 
contact.  Hence  we  must  give  a  definite  account 
of  these  three  things — of  ‘contact’,  ‘combina¬ 
tion’,  and  ‘acting’. 

Let  us  start  as  follows.  All  things  which  ad¬ 
mit  of  ‘combination’  must  be  capable  of  recip¬ 
rocal  contact:  and  the  same  is  true  of  any  two 
things,  of  which  one  ‘acts’  and  the  other  ‘suf¬ 
fers  action’  in  the  proper  sense  of  the  terms. 
For  this  reason  we  must  treat  of  ‘contact’  first. 
[  ?o]  Now  every  term  which  possesses  a  variety 

KUf.  Diogenes,  fr.  2,  Diels,  p.  334. 


323b  BOOK  I,  CHAPTERS  5-7  421 


of  meanings  includes  those  various  meanings 
either  owing  to  a  mere  coincidence  of  lan¬ 
guage,  or  owing  to  a  real  order  of  derivation  in 
the  different  things  to  which  it  is  applied:  but, 
though  this  may  be  taken  to  hold  of  ‘contact' 
as  of  all  such  terms,  it  is  nevertheless  true  that 
‘contact'  in  the  proper  sense  applies  only  to 
things  which  have  ‘position’.  And  ‘position’  be¬ 
longs  only  to  those  things  which  also  have  a 
323a  ‘place’:  for  in  so  far  as  we  attribute  ‘con¬ 
tact’  to  the  mathematical  things,  we  must  also 
attribute  ‘place’  to  them,  whether  they  exist  in 
separation  or  in  some  other  fashion.  Assuming, 
therefore,  that  ‘to  touch’  is — as  we  have  de¬ 
fined  it  in  a  previous  work1 — ‘to  have  the  ex¬ 
tremes  together’,  only  those  things  will  touch 
[5]  one  another  which,  being  separate  magni¬ 
tudes  and  possessing  position,  have  their  ex¬ 
tremes  ‘together’.  And  since  position  belongs 
only  to  those  things  which  also  have  a  ‘place’, 
while  the  primary  differentiation  of  ‘place’  is 
‘the  above’  and  ‘the  below’  (and  the  similar 
pairs  of  opposites),  all  things  which  touch  one 
another  will  have  ‘weight’  or  ‘lightness’ — ei¬ 
ther  both  these  qualities  or  one  or  the  other  of 
them.  But  bodies  which  are  heavy  or  light  are 
[/o]  such  as  to  ‘act’  and  ‘suffer  action’.  Hence 
it  is  clear  that  those  things  are  by  nature  such 
as  to  touch  one  another,  which  (being  separate 
magnitudes)  have  their  extremes  ‘together’  and 
are  able  to  move,  and  be  moved  by,  one  another. 

The  manner  in  which  the  ‘mover’  moves  the 
‘moved’  is  not  always  the  same:  on  the  contrary, 
whereas  one  kind  of  ‘mover’  can  only  impart 
motion  by  being  itself  moved,  another  kind  can 
do  so  though  remaining  itself  unmoved.  Clear- 
[75]  ly  therefore  we  must  recognize  a  corre¬ 
sponding  variety  in  speaking  of  the  ‘acting’ 
thing  too:  for  the  ‘mover’  is  said  to  ‘act’  (in  a 
sense)  and  the  ‘acting’  thing  to  ‘impart  mo¬ 
tion’.  Nevertheless  there  is  a  difference  and  we 
must  draw  a  distinction.  For  not  every  ‘mover’ 
can  ‘act’,  if  (a)  the  term  ‘agent’  is  to  be  used 
in  contrast  to  ‘patient’  and  ( b )  ‘patient’  is  to  be 
applied  only  to  those  things  whose  motion  is  a 
[20]  ‘qualitative  affection’ — i.e.  a  quality,  like 
‘white’  or  ‘hot’,  in  respect  to  which  they  are 
‘moved’  only  in  the  sense  that  they  are  ‘al¬ 
tered’:  on  the  contrary,  to  ‘impart  motion’  is 
a  wider  term  than  to  ‘act’.  Still,  so  much,  at  any 
rate,  is  clear:  the  things  which  are  ‘such  as  to 
impart  motion’,  if  that  description  be  inter¬ 
preted  in  one  sense,  will  touch  the  things  which 
are  ‘such  as  to  be  moved  by  them’ — while  they 
will  not  touch  them,  if  the  description  be  inter- 

1  Cf.  Physics ,  226b  21-23. 


preted  in  a  different  sense.  But  the  disjunctive 
definition  of  ‘touching’  must  include  and  dis¬ 
tinguish  (a)  ‘contact  in  general’  as  the  relation 
between  two  things  which,  having  position, 
are  such  that  one  is  able  to  impart  motion  and 
the  other  to  be  moved,  and  ( b )  ‘reciprocal  con¬ 
tact’  as  the  relation  between  two  things,  one 
able  to  impart  motion  and  the  other  able  to  be 
moved  in  such  a  way  that  ‘action  and  passion’ 
[25]  are  predicable  of  them. 

As  a  rule,  no  doubt,  if  A  touches  B,  B  touches 
A.  For  indeed  practically  all  the  ‘movers’  with¬ 
in  our  ordinary  experience  impart  motion  by 
being  moved:  in  their  case,  what  touches  inevit¬ 
ably  must,  and  also  evidently  does,  touch  some¬ 
thing  which  reciprocally  touches  it.  Yet,  if  A 
moves  B,  it  is  possible — as  we  sometimes  ex¬ 
press  it — for  A  ‘merely  to  touch’  B,  and  that 
which  touches  need  not  touch  a  something 
[jo]  which  touches  it.  Nevertheless  it  is  com¬ 
monly  supposed  that  ‘touching’  must  be  recip¬ 
rocal.  The  reason  of  this  belief  is  that  ‘movers’ 
which  belong  to  the  same  kind  as  the  ‘moved’ 
impart  motion  by  being  moved.  Hence  if  any¬ 
thing  imparts  motion  without  itself  being 
moved,  it  may  touch  the  ‘moved’  and  yet  itself 
be  touched  by  nothing — for  we  say  sometimes 
that  the  man  who  grieves  us  ‘touches’  us,  but 
not  that  we  ‘touch’  him. 

The  account  just  given  may  serve  to  distin¬ 
guish  and  define  the  ‘contact’  which  occurs  in 
the  things  of  Nature. 

7 

323b  Next  in  order  we  must  discuss  ‘action’ 
and  ‘passion’.  The  traditional  theories  on  the 
subject  are  conflicting.  For  (i)  most  thinkers 
are  unanimous  in  maintaining  (a)  that  ‘like’  is 
always  unaffected  by  ‘like’,  because  (as  they 
[5]  argue)  neither  of  two  ‘likes’  is  more  apt 
than  the  other  either  to  act  or  to  suffer  action, 
since  all  the  properties  which  belong  to  the  one 
belong  identically  and  in  the  same  degree  to 
the  other;  and  (b)  that  ‘unlikes’,  i.e.  ‘differ- 
ents’,  are  by  nature  such  as  to  act  and  suffer 
action  reciprocally.  For  even  when  the  smaller 
fire  is  destroyed  by  the  greater,  it  suffers  this 
effect  (they  say)  owing  to  its  ‘contrariety’ — 
[/o]  since  the  great  is  contrary  to  the  small. 
But  (ii)  Democritus  dissented  from  all  the  oth¬ 
er  thinkers  and  maintained  a  theory  peculiar 
to  himself.  He  asserts  that  agent  and  patient 
are  identical,  i.e.  ‘like’.  It  is  not  possible  (he 
says)  that  ‘others’,  i.e.  ‘differents’,  should  suf¬ 
fer  action  from  one  another:  on  the  contrary, 
even  if  two  things,  being  ‘others’,  do  act  in 


ON  GENERATION  AND  CORRUPTION  324b 


[75]  some  way  on  one  another,  this  happens  to 
them  not  qua  ‘others’  but  qua  possessing  an 
identical  property. 

Such,  then,  are  the  traditional  theories,  and 
it  looks  as  if  the  statements  of  their  advocates 
were  in  manifest  conflict.  But  the  reason  of  this 
conflict  is  that  each  group  is  in  fact  stating  a 
part,  whereas  they  ought  to  have  taken  a  com¬ 
prehensive  view  of  the  subject  as  a  whole.  For 
(i)  if  A  and  B  are  ‘like’ — absolutely  and  in  all 
respects  without  difference  from  one  another 
[20]  — it  is  reasonable  to  infer  that  neither  is 
in  any  way  affected  by  the  other.  Why,  indeed, 
should  either  of  them  tend  to  act  any  more 
than  the  other?  Moreover,  if  ‘like’  can  be  af¬ 
fected  by  ‘like’,  a  thing  can  also  be  affected  by 
itself:  and  yet  if  that  were  so — if  ‘like’  tended 
in  fact  to  act  qua  ‘like’ — there  would  be  noth¬ 
ing  indestructible  or  immovable,  for  every¬ 
thing  would  move  itself.  And  (ii)  the  same 
[25]  consequence  follows  if  A  and  B  are  abso¬ 
lutely  ‘other’,  i.e.  in  no  respect  identical.  White¬ 
ness  could  not  be  affected  in  any  way  by  line 
nor  line  by  whiteness — except  perhaps  ‘coinci¬ 
dentally’,  viz.  if  the  line  happened  to  be  white 
or  black:  for  unless  two  things  either  are,  or 
are  composed  of,  ‘contraries’,  neither  drives 
the  other  out  of  its  natural  condition.  But  (iii) 
[jo]  since  only  those  things  which  either  in¬ 
volve  a  ‘contrariety’  or  are  ‘contraries’ — and 
not  any  things  selected  at  random — are  such  as 
to  suffer  action  and  to  act,  agent  and  patient 
must  be  ‘like’  (i.e.  identical)  in  kind  and  yet 
‘unlike’  (i.e.  contrary)  in  species.  (For  it  is  a 
law  of  nature  that  body  is  affected  by  body, 
flavour  by  flavour,  colour  by  colour,  and  so  in 
324a  general  what  belongs  to  any  kind  by  a 
member  of  the  same  kind — the  reason  being 
that  ‘contraries’  are  in  every  case  within  a  sin¬ 
gle  identical  kind,  and  it  is  ‘contraries’  which 
reciprocally  act  and  suffer  action.)  Hence  agent 
and  patient  must  be  in  one  sense  identical,  but 
in  another  sense  other  than  (i.e.  ‘unlike’)  one 
[5]  another.  And  since  (a)  patient  and  agent 
are  generically  identical  (i.e.  ‘like’)  but  specifi¬ 
cally  ‘unlike’,  while  ( b )  it  is  ‘contraries’  that 
exhibit  this  character:  it  is  clear  that  ‘contra¬ 
ries’  and  their  ‘intermediates’  are  such  as  to 
suffer  action  and  to  act  reciprocally — for  in¬ 
deed  it  is  these  that  constitute  the  entire  sphere 
of  passing-away  and  coming-to-be. 

[/o]  We  can  now  understand  why  fire  heats 
and  the  cold  thing  cools,  and  in  general  why 
the  active  thing  assimilates  to  itself  the  patient. 
For  agent  and  patient  are  contrary  to  one  an¬ 
other,  and  coming-to-be  is  a  process  into  the 


contrary:  hence  the  patient  must  change  into 
the  agent,  since  it  is  only  thus  that  coming-to- 
be  will  be  a  process  into  the  contrary.  And, 
again,  it  is  intelligible  that  the  advocates  of 
both  views,  although  their  theories  are  not  the 
[75]  same,  are  yet  in  contact  with  the  nature  of 
the  facts.  For  sometimes  we  speak  of  the  sub¬ 
stratum  as  suffering  action  (e.g.  of  ‘the  man’ 
as  being  healed,  being  warmed  and  chilled, 
and  similarly  in  all  the  other  cases),  but  at  oth¬ 
er  times  we  say  ‘what  is  cold  is  being  warmed’, 
‘what  is  sick  is  being  healed’:  and  in  both  these 
ways  of  speaking  we  express  the  truth,  since  in 
one  sense  it  is  the  ‘matter’,  while  in  another 
sense  it  is  the  ‘contrary’,  which  suffers  action. 

We  make  the  same  distinction  in  speaking  of 

20]  the  agent:  for  sometimes  we  say  that  ‘the 
man’,  but  at  other  times  that  ‘what  is  hot’,  pro¬ 
duces  heat.)  Now  the  one  group  of  thinkers 
supposed  that  agent  and  patient  must  possess 
something  identical,  because  they  fastened  their 
attention  on  the  substratum:  while  the  other 
group  maintained  the  opposite  because  their 
attention  was  concentrated  on  the  ‘contraries’. 
[25]  We  must  conceive  the  same  account  to 
hold  of  action  and  passion  as  that  which  is  true 
of  ‘being  moved’  and  ‘imparting  motion’.  For 
the  ‘mover’,  like  the  ‘agent’,  has  two  meanings. 
Both  (a)  that  which  contains  the  originative 
source  of  the  motion  is  thought  to  ‘impart  mo¬ 
tion’  (for  the  originative  source  is  first  amongst 
the  causes),  and  also  ( b )  that  which  is  last,  i.e. 
immediately  next  to  the  moved  thing  and  to 
the  coming-to-be.  A  similar  distinction  holds 
[jo]  also  of  the  agent:  for  we  speak  not  only 
(a)  of  the  doctor,  but  also  (b)  of  the  wine,  as 
healing.  Now,  in  motion,  there  is  nothing  to 
prevent  the  first  mover  being  unmoved  (in¬ 
deed,  as  regards  some  ‘first  movers’  this  is  ac¬ 
tually  necessary)  although  the  last  mover  al¬ 
ways  imparts  motion  by  being  itself  moved: 
and,  in  action,  there  is  nothing  to  prevent  the 
first  agent  being  unaffected,  while  the  last 
agent  only  acts  by  suffering  action  itself.  For 
(a)  if  agent  and  patient  have  not  the  same 
[J5]  matter,  agent  acts  without  being  affected: 
thus  the  art  of  healing  produces  health  without 
itself  being  acted  upon  in  any  way  by  that 
324b  which  is  being  healed.  But  (b)  the  food, 
in  acting,  is  itself  in  some  way  acted  upon:  for, 
in  acting,  it  is  simultaneously  heated  or  cooled 
or  otherwise  affected.  Now  the  art  of  healing 
corresponds  to  an  ‘originative  source’,  while 
the  food  corresponds  to  ‘the  last’  (i.e.  ‘contigu¬ 
ous’)  mover. 

[5]  Those  active  powers,  then,  whose  forms 


325a  BOOK  I,  CHAPTERS  7-8  423 


are  not  embodied  in  matter,  are  unaffected:  but 
those  whose  forms  are  in  matter  are  such  as  to 
be  affected  in  acting.  For  we  maintain  that  one 
and  the  same  ‘matter’  is  equally,  so  to  say,  the 
basis  of  either  of  the  two  opposed  things — be¬ 
ing  as  it  were  a  ‘kind’;  and  that  that  which  can 
be  hot  must  be  made  hot,  provided  the  heating 
agent  is  there,  i.e.  comes  near.  Hence  (as  we 
[/o]  have  said)  some  of  the  active  powers  are 
unaffected  while  others  are  such  as  to  be  af¬ 
fected;  and  what  holds  of  motion  is  true  also 
of  the  active  powers.  For  as  in  motion  ‘the  first 
mover’  is  unmoved,  so  among  the  active  pow¬ 
ers  ‘the  first  agent’  is  unaffected. 

The  active  power  is  a  ‘cause’  in  the  sense  of 
that  from  which  the  process  originates:  but  the 
end,  for  the  sake  of  which  it  takes  place,  is  not 
[75]  ‘active’.  (That  is  why  health  is  not  ‘ac¬ 
tive’,  except  metaphorically.)  For  when  the 
agent  is  there,  the  patient  becomes  something: 
but  when  ‘states’  are  there,  the  patient  no  long¬ 
er  becomes  but  already  is — and  ‘forms’  (i.e. 
‘ends’)  are  a  kind  of  ‘state’.  As  to  the  ‘matter’, 
it  ( qua  matter)  is  passive.  Now  fire  contains 
‘the  hot’  embodied  in  matter:  but  a  ‘hot’  sepa- 
[20]  rate  from  matter  (if  such  a  thing  existed) 
could  not  suffer  any  action.  Perhaps,  indeed,  it 
is  impossible  that  ‘the  hot’  should  exist  in  sepa¬ 
ration  from  matter:  but  if  there  are  any  entities 
thus  separable,  what  we  are  saying  would  be 
true  of  them. 

We  have  thus  explained  what  action  and 
passion  are,  what  things  exhibit  them,  why 
they  do  so,  and  in  what  manner.  We  must  go 
[25]  on  to  discuss  how  it  is  possible  for  action 
and  passion  to  take  place. 

8 

Some  philosophers  think  that  the  ‘last’  agent 
— the  ‘agent’  in  the  strictest  sense — enters  in 
through  certain  pores,  and  so  the  patient  suf¬ 
fers  action.  It  is  in  this  way,  they  assert,  that 
we  see  and  hear  and  exercise  all  our  other 
senses.  Moreover,  according  to  them,  things 
are  seen  through  air  and  water  and  other  trans- 
[50]  parent  bodies,  because  such  bodies  possess 
pores,  invisible  indeed  owing  to  their  minute¬ 
ness,  but  close-set  and  arranged  in  rows:  and 
the  more  transparent  the  body,  the  more  fre¬ 
quent  and  serial  they  suppose  its  pores  to  be. 

Such  was  the  theory  which  some  philoso¬ 
phers  (including  Empedocles)  advanced  in  re¬ 
gard  to  the  structure  of  certain  bodies.  They 
do  not  restrict  it  to  the  bodies  which  act  and 
suffer  action:  but  ‘combination’  too,  they  say, 
[35]  takes  place  ‘only  between  bodies  whose 


pores  are  in  reciprocal  symmetry’.  The  most  sys¬ 
tematic  and  consistent  theory,  however,  and  one 
325a  that  applied  to  all  bodies,  was  advanced 
by  Leucippus  and  Democritus:  and,  in  main¬ 
taining  it,  they  took  as  their  starting-point 
what  naturally  comes  first. 

For  some  of  the  older  philosophers  thought 
that  ‘what  is’  must  of  necessity  be  ‘one’  and 
immovable.  The  void,  they  argue,  ‘is  not’:  but 
[5]  unless  there  is  a  void  with  a  separate  being 
of  its  own,  ‘what  is’  cannot  be  moved — nor 
again  can  it  be  ‘many’,  since  there  is  nothing 
to  keep  things  apart.  And  in  this  respect,  they 
insist,  the  view  that  the  universe  is  not  ‘contin¬ 
uous’  but  ‘discretes-in-contact’  is  no  better  than 
the  view  that  there  are  ‘many’  (and  not  ‘one’) 
and  a  void.  For  (suppose  that  the  universe  is 
discretes-in-contact.  Then),  if  it  is  divisible 
through  and  through,  there  is  no  ‘one’,  and 
therefore  no  ‘many’  either,  but  the  Whole  is 
void;  while  to  maintain  that  it  is  divisible  at 
[10]  some  points,  but  not  at  others,  looks  like 
an  arbitrary  fiction.  For  up  to  what  limit  is  it 
divisible?  And  for  what  reason  is  part  of  the 
Whole  indivisible,  i.e.  a  plenum,  and  part  di¬ 
vided?  Further,  they  maintain,  it  is  equally 
necessary  to  deny  the  existence  of  motion. 

Reasoning  in  this  way,  therefore,  they  were 
led  to  transcend  sense-perception,  and  to  disre¬ 
gard  it  on  the  ground  that  ‘one  ought  to  follow 
the  argument’:  and  so  they  assert  that  the  uni¬ 
t/5]  verse  is  ‘one’  and  immovable.  Some  of 
them  add  that  it  is  ‘infinite’,  since  the  limit  (if 
it  had  one)  would  be  a  limit  against  the  void. 

There  were,  then,  certain  thinkers  who,  for 
the  reasons  we  have  stated,  enunciated  views 
of  this  kind  as  their  theory  of  ‘The  Truth’. .  .  . 
Moreover,  although  these  opinions  appear  to 
follow  logically  in  a  dialectical  discussion,  yet 
to  believe  them  seems  next  door  to  madness 
[20]  when  one  considers  the  facts.  For  indeed 
no  lunatic  seems  to  be  so  far  out  of  his  senses 
as  to  suppose  that  fire  and  ice  are  ‘one’:  it  is 
only  between  what  is  right  and  what  seems 
right  from  habit,  that  some  people  are  mad 
enough  to  see  no  difference. 

Leucippus,  however,  thought  he  had  a  the¬ 
ory  which  harmonized  with  sense-perception 
and  would  not  abolish  either  coming-to-be  and 
[25]  passing-away  or  motion  and  the  multi¬ 
plicity  of  things.  He  made  these  concessions  to 
the  facts  of  perception:  on  the  other  hand,  he 
conceded  to  the  Monists  that  there  could  be  no 
motion  without  a  void.  The  result  is  a  theory 
which  he  states  as  follows:  ‘The  void  is  a  “not- 
being”,  and  no  part  of  “what  is”  is  a  “not-be- 


424 

ing”;  for  what  “is”  in  the  strict  sense  of  the 
term  is  an  absolute  plenum.  This  plenum, 
however,  is  not  “one”:  on  the  contrary,  it  is  a 
[jo]  “many”  infinite  in  number  and  invisible 
owing  to  the  minuteness  of  their  bulk.  The 
“many”  move  in  the  void  (for  there  is  a  void): 
and  by  coming  together  they  produce  “coming- 
to-be”,  while  by  separating  they  produce  “pass- 
ing-away”.  Moreover,  they  act  and  suffer  ac¬ 
tion  wherever  they  chance  to  be  in  contact  (for 
there  they  are  not  “one”),  and  they  generate 
by  being  put  together  and  becoming  inter¬ 
twined.  From  the  genuinely-one,  on  the  other 
[55]  hand,  there  never  could  have  come-to-be 
a  multiplicity,  nor  from  the  genuinely-many  a 
325b  “one”:  that  is  impossible.  But’  (just  as 
Empedocles  and  some  of  the  other  philosophers 
say  that  things  suffer  action  through  their 
pores,  so)  ‘all  “alteration”  and  all  “passion” 
take  place  in  the  way  that  has  been  explained: 
breaking-up  (i.e.  passing-away)  is  effected  by 
means  of  the  void,  and  so  too  is  growth — solids 
[5]  creeping  in  to  fill  the  void  places.’ 

Empedocles  too  is  practically  bound  to  adopt 
the  same  theory  as  Leucippus.  For  he  must  say 
that  there  are  certain  solids  which,  however, 
are  indivisible — unless  there  are  continuous 
pores  all  through  the  body.  But  this  last  alter¬ 
native  is  impossible:  for  then  there  will  be 
nothing  solid  in  the  body  (nothing  beside  the 
pores)  but  all  of  it  will  be  void.  It  is  necessary, 
therefore,  for  his  ‘contiguous  discretes’  to  be 
[/o]  indivisible,  while  the  intervals  between 
them — which  he  calls  ‘pores’ — must  be  void. 
But  this  is  precisely  Leucippus’  theory  of  ac¬ 
tion  and  passion. 

Such,  approximately,  are  the  current  expla¬ 
nations  of  the  manner  in  which  some  things 
‘act’  while  others  ‘suffer  action’.  And  as  regards 
the  Atomists,  it  is  not  only  clear  what  their  ex- 
lanation  is:  it  is  also  obvious  that  it  follows 
75]  with  tolerable  consistency  from  the  as¬ 
sumptions  they  employ.  But  there  is  less  ob¬ 
vious  consistency  in  the  explanation  offered  by 
the  other  thinkers.  It  is  not  clear,  for  instance, 
how,  on  the  theory  of  Empedocles,  there  is  to 
be  ‘passing-away’  as  well  as  ‘alteration’.  For  the 
primary  bodies  of  the  Atomists — the  primary 
constituents  of  which  bodies  are  composed,  and 
the  ultimate  elements  into  which  they  are  dis¬ 
solved — are  indivisible,  differing  from  one  an¬ 
other  only  in  figure.  In  the  philosophy  of  Em¬ 
pedocles,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  evident  that  all 
[20]  the  other  bodies  down  to  the  ‘elements’ 
have  their  coming-to-be  and  their  passing- 
away:  but  it  is  not  clear  how  the  ‘elements’ 


326* 

themselves,  severally  in  their  aggregated  mass¬ 
es,  come-to-be  and  pass-away.  Nor  is  it  possible 
for  Empedocles  to  explain  how  they  do  so, 
since  he  does  not  assert  that  Fire  too  (and  simi¬ 
larly  every  one  of  his  other  ‘elements’)  possess¬ 
es  ‘elementary  constituents’  of  itself. 

Such  an  assertion  would  commit  him  to  doc¬ 
trines  like  those  which  Plato  has  set  forth  in 
[25]  the  Timaeus.  For  although  both  Plato  and 
Leucippus  postulate  elementary  constituents 
that  are  indivisible  and  distinctively  character¬ 
ized  by  figures,  there  is  this  great  difference 
between  the  two  theories:  the  ‘indivisibles’  of 
Leucippus  (i)  are  solids,  while  those  of  Plato 
are  planes,  and  (ii)  are  characterized  by  an  infi¬ 
nite  variety  of  figures,  while  the  characterizing 
figures  employed  by  Plato  are  limited  in  num- 
[30]  ber.  Thus  the  ‘comings-to-be’  and  the 
‘dissociations’  result  from  the  ‘indivisibles’  (a) 
according  to  Leucippus  through  the  void  and 
through  contact  (for  it  is  at  the  point  of  con¬ 
tact  that  each  of  the  composite  bodies  is  divisi¬ 
ble),  but  ( b )  according  to  Plato  in  virtue  of 
contact  alone,  since  he  denies  there  is  a  void. 

Now  we  have  discussed  ‘indivisible  planes’  in 
the  preceding  treatise.1  But  with  regard  to  the 
[35]  assumption  of ‘indivisible  solids’,  although 
we  must  not  now  enter  upon  a  detailed  study 
of  its  consequences,  the  following  criticisms 
fall  within  the  compass  of  a  short  digression: — 
326a  1.  The  Atomists  are  committed  to  the 
view  that  every  ‘indivisible’  is  incapable  alike 
of  receiving  a  sensible  property  (for  nothing 
can  ‘suffer  action’  except  through  the  void)  and 
of  producing  one — no  ‘indivisible’  can  be,  e.g. 
either  hard  or  cold.  Yet  it  is  surely  a  paradox 
that  an  exception  is  made  of  ‘the  hot’ — ‘the  hot’ 
[5]  being  assigned  as  peculiar  to  the  spherical 
figure:  for,  that  being  so,  its  ‘contrary’  also 
(‘the  cold’)  is  bound  to  belong  to  another  of 
the  figures.  If,  however,  these  properties  (heat 
and  cold)  do  belong  to  the  ‘indivisibles’,  it  is  a 
further  paradox  that  they  should  not  possess 
heaviness  and  lightness,  and  hardness  and  soft- 
[/o]  ness.  And  yet  Democritus  says  ‘the  more 
any  indivisible  exceeds,  the  heavier  it  is’ — to 
which  we  must  clearly  add  ‘and  the  hotter  it 
is’.  But  if  that  is  their  character,  it  is  impossible 
they  should  not  be  affected  by  one  another:  the 
‘slightly-hot  indivisible’,  e.g.  will  inevitably 
suffer  action  from  one  which  far  exceeds  it  in 
heat.  Again,  if  any  ‘indivisible’  is  ‘hard’,  there 
must  also  be  one  which  is  ‘soft’:  but  ‘the  soft’ 
derives  its  very  name  from  the  fact  that  it  suf- 

1  Cf.  On  the  Heavens ,  in.  1,  especially  2gSb  33  ff.,  in.  7 
and  iv.  2. 


ON  GENERATION  AND  CORRUPTION 


32 6b 

fers  a  certain  action — for  ‘soft’  is  that  which 
yields  to  pressure. 

ii.  But  further,  not  only  is  it  paradoxical  (i) 
[75]  that  no  property  except  figure  should  be¬ 
long  to  the  ‘indivisibles’:  it  is  also  paradoxical 
(ii)  that,  if  other  properties  do  belong  to  them, 
one  only  of  these  additional  properties  should 
attach  to  each — e.g.  that  this  ‘indivisible’  should 
be  cold  and  that  ‘indivisible’  hot.  For,  on  that 
supposition,  their  substance  would  not  even  be 
uniform.  And  it  is  equally  impossible  (iii)  that 
more  than  one  of  these  additional  properties 
should  belong  to  the  single  ‘indivisible’.  For, 
being  indivisible,  it  will  possess  these  proper¬ 
ties  in  the  same  point — so  that,  if  it  ‘suffers  ac- 
[20]  tion’  by  being  chilled,  it  will  also,  qua 
chilled,  ‘act’  or  ‘suffer  action’  in  some  other 
way.  And  the  same  line  of  argument  applies  to 
all  the  other  properties  too:  for  the  difficulty 
we  have  just  raised  confronts,  as  a  necessary 
consequence,  all  who  advocate  ‘indivisibles’ 
(whether  solids  or  planes),  since  their  ‘indivisi¬ 
bles’  cannot  become  either  ‘rarer’  or  ‘denser’  in¬ 
asmuch  as  there  is  no  void  in  them. 

[25]  iii.  It  is  a  further  paradox  that  there 
should  be  small  ‘indivisibles’,  but  not  large 
ones.  For  it  is  natural  enough,  from  the  ordi¬ 
nary  point  of  view,  that  the  larger  bodies  should 
be  more  liable  to  fracture  than  the  small  ones, 
since  they  (viz.  the  large  bodies)  are  easily 
broken  up  because  they  collide  with  many  oth¬ 
er  bodies.  But  why  should  indivisibility  as  such 
be  the  property  of  small,  rather  than  of  large, 
[jo]  bodies? 

iv.  Again,  is  the  substance  of  all  those  solids 
uniform,  or  do  they  fall  into  sets  which  differ 
from  one  another — as  if,  e.g.  some  of  them,  in 
their  aggregated  bulk,  were  ‘fiery’,  others 
‘earthy’?  For  (i)  if  all  of  them  are  uniform  in 
substance,  what  is  it  that  separated  one  from 
another?  Or  why,  when  they  come  into  contact, 
do  they  not  coalesce  into  one,  as  drops  of  water 
run  together  when  drop  touches  drop  (for  the 
two  cases  are  precisely  parallel)?  On  the  other 
hand  (ii)  if  they  fall  into  differing  sets,  how 
[35]  are  these  characterized?  It  is  clear,  too, 
that  these,  rather  than  the  ‘figures’,  ought  to  be 
326b  postulated  as  ‘original  reals’,  i.e.  causes 
from  which  the  phenomena  result.  Moreover, 
if  they  differed  in  substance,  they  would  both 
act  and  suffer  action  on  coming  into  reciprocal 
contact. 

v.  Again,  what  is  it  which  sets  them  mov¬ 
ing?  For  if  their  ‘mover’  is  other  than  them¬ 
selves,  they  are  such  as  to  ‘suffer  action’.  If,  on 
the  other  hand,  each  of  them  sets  itself  in  mo¬ 


425 

tion,  either  (a)  it  will  be  divisible  (‘imparting 
motion’  qua  this,  ‘being  moved’  qua  that),  or 
[5]  (£)  contrary  properties  will  attach  to  it  in 
the  same  respect — i.e.  ‘matter’  will  be  identical- 
in-potentiality  as  well  as  numerically-identical. 

As  to  the  thinkers  who  explain  modification 
of  property  through  the  movement  facilitated 
by  the  pores,  if  this  is  supposed  to  occur  not¬ 
withstanding  the  fact  that  the  pores  are  filled, 
their  postulate  of  pores  is  superfluous.  For  if 
the  whole  body  suffers  action  under  these  con¬ 
ditions,  it  would  suffer  action  in  the  same  way 
[io]  even  if  it  had  no  pores  but  were  just  its 
own  continuous  self.  Moreover,  how  can  their 
account  of  ‘vision  through  a  medium ’  be  cor¬ 
rect?  It  is  impossible  for  (the  visual  ray)  to 
penetrate  the  transparent  bodies  at  their  ‘con¬ 
tacts’;  and  impossible  for  it  to  pass  through 
their  pores  if  every  pore  be  full.  For  how  will 
that  differ  from  having  no  pores  at  all?  The 
body  will  be  uniformly  ‘full’  throughout.  But, 
[75]  further,  even  if  these  passages,  though 
they  must  contain  bodies,  are  ‘void’,  the  same 
consequence  will  follow  once  more.  And  if 
they  are  ‘too  minute  to  admit  any  body’,  it  is 
absurd  to  suppose  there  is  a  ‘minute’  void  and 
yet  to  deny  the  existence  of  a  ‘big’  one  (no 
matter  how  small  the  ‘big’  may  be),  or  to  imag¬ 
ine  ‘the  void’  means  anything  else  than  a  body’s 
[20]  place — whence  it  deafly  follows  that  to 
every  body  there  will  correspond  a  void  of 
equal  cubic  capacity. 

As  a  general  criticism  we  must  urge  that  to 
postulate  pores  is  superfluous.  For  if  the  agent 
produces  no  effect  by  touching  the  patient,  nei¬ 
ther  will  it  produce  any  by  passing  through  its 
pores.  On  the  other  hand,  if  it  acts  by  contact, 
then — even  without  pores — some  things  will 
‘suffer  action’  and  others  will  ‘act’,  provided 
they  are  by  nature  adapted  for  reciprocal  ac¬ 
tion  and  passion.  Our  arguments  have  shown 
[25]  that  it  is  either  false  or  futile  to  advocate 
pores  in  the  sense  in  which  some  thinkers  con¬ 
ceive  them.  But  since  bodies  are  divisible 
through  and  through,  the  postulate  of  pores  is 
ridiculous:  for,  qua  divisible,  a  body  can  fall 
into  separate  parts. 

9 

Let  us  explain  the  way  in  which  things  in 
[30]  fact  possess  the  power  of  generating,  and 
of  acting  and  suffering  action:  and  let  us  start 
from  the  principle  we  have  often  enunciated. 
For,  assuming  the  distinction  between  (a)  that 
which  is  potentially  and  ( b )  that  which  is  ac¬ 
tually  such-and-such,  it  is  the  nature  of  the 


BOOK  I,  CHAPTERS  8-9 


426  ON  GENERATION 

first,  precisely  in  so  far  as  it  is  what  it  is,  to  suf¬ 
fer  action  through  and  through,  not  merely  to 
be  susceptible  in  some  parts  while  insuscepti¬ 
ble  in  others.  But  its  susceptibility  varies  in  de¬ 
gree,  according  as  it  is  more  or  les  such-and- 
such,  and  one  would  be  more  justified  in 
speaking  of  ‘pores’  in  this  connexion:  for  in¬ 
stance,  in  the  metals  there  are  veins  of  ‘the  sus- 
[js]  ceptible’  stretching  continuously  through 
32 7a  the  substance. 

So  long,  indeed,  as  any  body  is  naturally  co¬ 
herent  and  one,  it  is  insusceptible.  So,  too,  bod¬ 
ies  are  insusceptible  so  long  as  they  are  not  in 
contact  either  with  one  another  or  with  other 
bodies  which  are  by  nature  such  as  to  act  and 
suffer  action.  (To  illustrate  my  meaning:  Fire 
heats  not  only  when  in  contact,  but  also  from 
a  distance.  For  the  fire  heats  the  air,  and  the 
[5]  air — being  by  nature  such  as  both  to  act 
and  suffer  action — heats  the  body.)  But  the 
supposition  that  a  body  is  ‘susceptible  in  some 
parts,  but  insusceptible  in  others’  (is  only  pos¬ 
sible  for  those  who  hold  an  erroneous  view 
concerning  the  divisibility  of  magnitudes.  For 
us)  the  following  account  results  from  the 
distinctions  we  established  at  the  beginning.1 
For  (i)  if  magnitudes  are  not  divisible  through 
and  through — if,  on  the  contrary,  there  are  in¬ 
divisible  solids  or  planes — then  indeed  no  body 
would  be  susceptible  through  and  through: 
[/o]  but  neither  would  any  be  continuous. 
Since,  however,  (ii)  this  is  false,  i.e.  since  every 
body  is  divisible,  there  is  no  difference  between 
‘having  been  divided  into  parts  which  remain 
in  contact’  and  ‘being  divisible’.  For  if  a  body 
' can  be  separated  at  the  contacts’  (as  some 
thinkers  express  it),  then,  even  though  it  has 
not  yet  been  divided,  it  will  be  in  a  state  of 
dividedness — since,  as  it  can  be  divided,  noth¬ 
ing  inconceivable  results.  And  (iii)  the  sup¬ 
position  is  open  to  this  general  objection — it  is 
[75]  a  paradox  that  ‘passion’  should  occur  in 
this  manner  only,  viz.  by  the  bodies  being 
split.  For  this  theory  abolishes  ‘alteration’:  but 
we  see  the  same  body  liquid  at  one  time  and 
solid  at  another,  without  losing  its  continuity. 
It  has  suffered  this  change  not  by  ‘division’  and 
composition’,  nor  yet  by  ‘turning’  and  ‘inter- 
[20]  contact’  as  Democritus  asserts;  for  it  has 
passed  from  the  liquid  to  the  solid  state  with¬ 
out  any  change  of  ‘grouping’  or  ‘position’  in 
the  constituents  of  its  substance.  Nor  are  there 
contained  within  it  those  ‘hard’  (i.e.  con¬ 
gealed)  particles  ‘indivisible  in  their  bulk’:  on 
the  contrary,  it  is  liquid — and  again,  solid  and 
1  Cf.  above,  3i6a  14-317**  17. 


AND  CORRUPTION  327b 

congealed — uniformly  all  through.  This  theory, 
it  must  be  added,  makes  growth  and  diminu¬ 
tion  impossible  also.  For  if  there  is  to  be  oppo¬ 
sition  (instead  of  the  growing  thing  having 
[25]  changed  as  a  whole,  either  by  the  admix¬ 
ture  of  something  or  by  its  own  transforma¬ 
tion),  increase  of  size  will  not  have  resulted  in 
any  and  every  part. 

So  much,  then,  to  establish  that  things  gen¬ 
erate  and  are  generated,  act  and  suffer  action, 
reciprocally;  and  to  distinguish  the  way  in 
which  these  processes  can  occur  from  the  (im¬ 
possible)  way  in  which  some  thinkers  say  they 
occur. 

10 

[30]  But  we  have  still  to  explain  ‘combina¬ 
tion’,  for  that  was  the  third  of  the  subjects  we 
originally  proposed  to  discuss.  Our  explana¬ 
tion  will  proceed  on  the  same  method  as  be¬ 
fore.  We  must  inquire:  What  is  ‘combination’, 
and  what  is  that  which  can  ‘combine’?  Of 
what  things,  and  under  what  conditions,  is 
‘combination’  a  property?  And,  further,  does 
‘combination’  exist  in  fact,  or  is  it  false  to  as¬ 
sert  its  existence? 

[55]  For,  according  to  some  thinkers,  it  is  im¬ 
possible  for  one  thing  to  be  combined  with 
another.  They  argue  that  (i)  if  both  the  ‘corn- 
32715  bined’  constituents  persist  unaltered,  they 
are  no  more  ‘combined’  now  than  they  were 
before,  but  are  in  the  same  condition:  while 
(ii)  if  one  has  been  destroyed,  the  constituents 
have  not  been  ‘combined’ — on  the  contrary, 
one  constituent  is  and  the  other  is  not,  whereas 
‘combination’  demands  uniformity  of  condi¬ 
tion  in  them  both:  and  on  the  same  principle 
[5]  (iii)  even  if  both  the  combining  constitu¬ 
ents  have  been  destroyed  as  the  result  of  their 
coalescence,  they  cannot  ‘have  been  combined’ 
since  they  have  no  being  at  all. 

What  we  have  in  this  argument  is,  it  would 
seem,  a  demand  for  the  precise  distinction  of 
‘combination’  from  coming-to-be  and  passing- 
away  (for  it  is  obvious  that  ‘combination’,  if 
it  exists,  must  differ  from  these  processes)  and 
for  the  precise  distinction  of  the  ‘combinable’ 
from  that  which  is  such  as  to  come-to-be  and 
ass-away.  As  soon,  therefore,  as  these  distinc- 
/o]  tions  are  clear,  the  difficulties  raised  by 
the  argument  would  be  solved. 

Now  (i)  we  do  not  speak  of  the  wood  as 
‘combined’  with  the  fire,  nor  of  its  burning  as 
a  ‘combining’  either  of  its  particles  with  one  an¬ 
other  or  of  itself  with  the  fire:  what  we  say  is 
that  ‘the  fire  is  coming-to-be,  but  the  wood  is 


328a  BOOK  I,  CHAPTERS  9-10  427 


passing-away\  Similarly,  we  speak  neither  (ii) 
[75]  of  the  food  as  ‘combining’  with  the  body, 
nor  (iii)  of  the  shape  as  ‘combining’  with  the 
wax  and  thus  fashioning  the  lump.  Nor  can 
body  ‘combine’  with  white,  nor  (to  generalize) 
‘properties’  and  ‘states’  with  ‘things’:  for  we 
see  them  persisting  unaltered.  But  again  (iv) 
white  and  knowledge  cannot  be  ‘combined’ 
either,  nor  any  other  of  the  ‘adjectivals’.  (In- 
[20]  deed,  this  is  a  blemish  in  the  theory  of 
those  who  assert  that  ‘once  upon  a  time  all 
things  were  together  and  combined’.  For  not 
everything  can  ‘combine’  with  everything.  On 
the  contrary,  both  of  the  constituents  that  are 
combined  in  the  compound  must  originally 
have  existed  in  separation:  but  no  property  can 
have  separate  existence.) 

Since,  however,  some  things  are-potentially 
while  others  are -actually ,  the  constituents  com¬ 
bined  in  a  compound  can  ‘be’  in  a  sense  and 
yet  ‘not-be’.  The  compound  may  be-actually 
[25]  other  than  the  constituents  from  which  it 
has  resulted;  nevertheless  each  of  them  may 
still  be-potentially  what  it  was  before  they  were 
combined,  and  both  of  them  may  survive  un¬ 
destroyed.  (For  this  was  the  difficulty  that 
emerged  in  the  previous  argument:  and  it  is 
evident  that  the  combining  constituents  not 
only  coalesce,  having  formerly  existed  in  sep¬ 
aration,  but  also  can  again  be  separated  out 
from  the  compound.)  The  constituents,  there¬ 
to]  fore,  neither  (a)  persist  actually,  as  ‘body’ 
and  ‘white’  persist:  nor  ( b )  are  they  destroyed 
(either  one  of  them  or  both),  for  their  ‘power 
of  action’  is  preserved.  Hence  these  difficulties 
may  be  dismissed:  but  the  problem  immedi¬ 
ately  connected  with  them — ‘whether  combi¬ 
nation  is  something  relative  to  perception’ — 
must  be  set  out  and  discussed. 

When  the  combining  constituents  have  been 
divided  into  parts  so  small,  and  have  been 
juxtaposed  in  such  a  manner,  that  perception 
[55]  fails  to  discriminate  them  one  from  an- 
328a  other,  have  they  then  ‘been  combined’? 
Or  ought  we  to  say  ‘No,  not  until  any  and 
every  part  of  one  constituent  is  juxtaposed  to  a 
part  of  the  other’?  The  term,  no  doubt,  is  ap¬ 
plied  in  the  former  sense:  we  speak,  e.g.  of 
wheat  having  been  ‘combined’  with  barley 
when  each  grain  of  the  one  is  juxtaposed  to  a 
grain  of  the  other.  But  every  body  is  divisible 
and  therefore,  since  body  ‘combined’  with  body 
is  uniform  in  texture  throughout,  any  and 
[5]  every  part  of  each  constituent  ought  to  be 
juxtaposed  to  a  part  of  the  other. 

No  body,  however,  can  be  divided  into  its 


‘least’  parts:  and  ‘composition’  is  not  identical 
with  ‘combination’,  but  other  than  it.  From 
these  premises  it  clearly  follows  (i)  that  so  long 
as  the  constituents  are  preserved  in  small  par¬ 
ticles,  we  must  not  speak  of  them  as  ‘com¬ 
bined’.  (For  this  will  be  a  ‘composition’  in¬ 
stead  of  a  ‘blending’  or  ‘combination’:  nor  will 
every  portion  of  the  resultant  exhibit  the  same 
[/o]  ratio  between  its  constituents  as  the 
whole.  But  we  maintain  that,  if  ‘combination’ 
has  taken  place,  the  compound  must  be  uni¬ 
form  in  texture  throughout — any  part  of  such 
a  compound  being  the  same  as  the  whole,  just 
as  any  part  of  water  is  water:  whereas,  if  ‘com¬ 
bination’  is  ‘composition  of  the  small  particles’, 
nothing  of  the  kind  will  happen.  On  the  con¬ 
trary,  the  constituents  will  only  be  ‘combined’ 
relatively  to  perception:  and  the  same  thing 
will  be  ‘combined’  to  one  percipient,  if  his 
[75]  sight  is  not  sharp,  (but  not  to  another,) 
while  to  the  eye  of  Lynceus  nothing  will  be 
‘combined’.)  It  clearly  follows  (ii)  that  we 
must  not  speak  of  the  constituents  as  ‘com¬ 
bined  in  virtue  of  a  division  such  that  any  and 
every  part  of  each  is  juxtaposed  to  a  part  of 
the  other:  for  it  is  impossible  for  them  to  be 
thus  divided.  Either,  then,  there  is  no  ‘com¬ 
bination’,  or  we  have  still  to  explain  the  man¬ 
ner  in  which  it  can  take  place. 

Now,  as  we  maintain,  some  things  are  such 
as  to  act  and  others  such  as  to  suffer  action 
from  them.  Moreover,  some  things — viz.  those 
[20]  which  have  the  same  matter — ‘recipro¬ 
cate’,  i.e.  are  such  as  to  act  upon  one  another 
and  to  suffer  action  from  one  another;  while 
other  things,  viz.  agents  which  have  not  the 
same  matter  as  their  patients,  act  without 
themselves  suffering  action.  Such  agents  can¬ 
not  ‘combine’ — that  is  why  neither  the  art  of 
healing  nor  health  produces  health  by  ‘combin¬ 
ing’  with  the  bodies  of  the  patients.  Amongst 
those  things,  however,  which  are  reciprocally 
active  and  passive,  some  are  easily-divisible. 
Now  (i)  if  a  great  quantity  (or  a  large  bulk) 
of  one  of  these  easily-divisible  ‘reciprocating’ 
[25]  materials  be  brought  together  with  a  little 
(or  with  a  small  piece)  of  another,  the  effect 
produced  is  not  ‘combination’,  but  increase 
of  the  dominant:  for  the  other  material  is 
transformed  into  the  dominant.  (That  is  why 
a  drop  of  wine  does  not  ‘combine’  with  ten 
thousand  gallons  of  water:  for  its  form  is  dis¬ 
solved,  and  it  is  changed  so  as  to  merge  in  the 
total  volume  of  water.)  On  the  other  hand  (ii) 
when  there  is  a  certain  equilibrium  between 
[30]  their  ‘powers  of  action’,  then  each  of 


428  ON  GENERATION  AND  CORRUPTION  329* 


them  changes  out  of  its  own  nature  towards 
the  dominant:  yet  neither  becomes  the  other, 
but  both  become  an  intermediate  with  prop¬ 
erties  common  to  both. 

Thus  it  is  clear  that  only  those  agents  are 
‘combinable’  which  involve  a  contrariety — for 
these  are  such  as  to  suffer  action  reciprocally. 
And,  further,  they  combine  more  freely  if  small 
pieces  of  each  of  them  are  juxtaposed.  For  in 
that  condition  they  change  one  another  more 
[55]  easily  and  more  quickly;  whereas  this 
effect  takes  a  long  time  when  agent  and  pa¬ 
tient  are  present  in  bulk. 

328b  Hence,  amongst  the  divisible  susceptible 
materials,  those  whose  shape  is  readily  adapta¬ 
ble  have  a  tendency  to  combine:  for  they  are 
easily  divided  into  small  particles,  since  that 
is  precisely  what  ‘being  readily  adaptable  in 
shape’  implies.  For  instance,  liquids  are  the 
most  ‘combinable’  of  all  bodies — because,  of 
all  divisible  materials,  the  liquid  is  most  readily 
adaptable  in  shape,  unless  it  be  viscous.  Vis- 
15]  cous  liquids,  it  is  true,  produce  no  effect 
except  to  increase  the  volume  and  bulk.  But 
when  one  of  the  constituents  is  alone  sus¬ 
ceptible — or  superlatively  susceptible,  the  other 
being  susceptible  in  a  very  slight  degree — the 
compound  resulting  from  their  combination  is 
either  no  greater  in  volume  or  only  a  little 
greater.  This  is  what  happens  when  tin  is  com¬ 
bined  with  bronze.  For  some  things  display  a 


hesitating  and  ambiguous  attitude  towards  one 
[/o]  another — showing  a  slight  tendency  to 
combine  and  also  an  inclination  to  behave  as 
‘receptive  matter’  and  ‘form’  respectively.  The 
behaviour  of  these  metals  is  a  case  in  point. 
For  the  tin  almost  vanishes,  behaving  as  if  it 
were  an  immaterial  property  of  the  bronze: 
having  been  combined,  it  disappears,  leaving 
no  trace  except  the  colour  it  has  imparted  to  the 
bronze.  The  same  phenomenon  occurs  in  other 
instances  too. 

[75]  It  is  clear,  then,  from  the  foregoing  ac¬ 
count,  that  ‘combination’  occurs,  what  it  is,  to 
what  it  is  due,  and  what  kind  of  thing  is  ‘com- 
binable’.  The  phenomenon  depends  upon  the 
fact  that  some  things  are  such  as  to  be  (a) 
reciprocally  susceptible  and  (b)  readily  adapt¬ 
able  in  shape,  i.e.  easily  divisible.  For  such 
things  can  be  ‘combined’  without  its  being  nec¬ 
essary  either  that  they  should  have  been  de¬ 
stroyed  or  that  they  should  survive  absolutely 
unaltered:  and  their  ‘combination’  need  not  be 
[20]  a  ‘composition’,  nor  merely  ‘relative  to 
perception’.  On  the  contrary:  anything  is  ‘com- 
binable’  which,  being  readily  adaptable  in 
shape,  is  such  as  to  suffer  action  and  to  act; 
and  it  is  ‘combinable  with’  another  thing  sim¬ 
ilarly  characterized  (for  the  ‘combinable’  is 
relative  to  the  ‘combinable’);  and  ‘combina¬ 
tion’  is  unification  of  the  ‘combinables’,  result¬ 
ing  from  their  ‘alteration’. 


BOOK  II 


1 

We  have  explained  under  what  conditions 
‘combination’,  ‘contact’,  and  ‘action-passion’ 
are  attributable  to  the  things  which  undergo 
natural  change.  Further,  we  have  discussed 
‘unqualified’  coming-to-be  and  passing-away, 
and  explained  under  what  conditions  they  are 

f  redicable,  of  what  subject,  and  owing  to  what 
50]  cause.  Similarly,  we  have  also  discussed 
‘alteration’,  and  explained  what  ‘altering’  is 
and  how  it  differs  from  coming-to-be  and 
passing-away.  But  we  have  still  to  investigate 
the  so-called  ‘elements’  of  bodies. 

For  the  complex  substances  whose  forma¬ 
tion  and  maintenance  are  due  to  natural  proc¬ 
esses  all  presuppose  the  perceptible  bodies  as 
the  condition  of  their  coming-to-be  and  pass¬ 
ing-away:  but  philosophers  disagree  in  regard 
to  the  matter  which  underlies  these  perceptible 
bodies.  Some  maintain  it  is  single,  supposing 
it  to  be,  e.g.  Air  or  Fire,  or  an  ‘intermediate’ 


[55]  between  these  two  (but  still  a  body  with 
329a  a  separate  existence).  Others,  on  the  con¬ 
trary,  postulate  two  or  more  materials — ascrib¬ 
ing  to  their  ‘association’  and  ‘dissociation’,  or 
to  their  ‘alteration’,  the  coming-to-be  and  pass¬ 
ing-away  of  things.  (Some,  for  instance,  postu¬ 
late  Fire  and  Earth:  some  add  Air,  making 
three:  and  some,  like  Empedocles,  reckon 
Water  as  well,  thus  postulating  four.) 

[5]  Now  we  may  agree  that  the  primary  ma¬ 
terials,  whose  change  (whether  it  be  ‘associa¬ 
tion  and  dissociation’  or  a  process  of  another 
kind)  results  in  coming-to-be  and  passing- 
away,  are  rightly  described  as  ‘originative 
sources,  i.e.  elements’.  But  (i)  those  thinkers 
are  in  error  who  postulate,  beside  the  bodies 
we  have  mentioned,  a  single  matter — and  that 
[/o]  a  corporeal  and  separable  matter.  For  this 
‘body’  of  theirs  cannot  possibly  exist  without 
a  ‘perceptible  contrariety’:  this  ‘Boundless’, 
which  some  thinkers  identify  with  the  ‘orig¬ 
inal  real’,  must  be  either  light  or  heavy,  either 


329b  BOOK  I,  CHAPTER  10- 

cold  or  hot.  And  (ii)  what  Plato  has  written 
in  the  Timaeus  is  not  based  on  any  precisely- 
articulated  conception.  For  he  has  not  stated 
[75]  clearly  whether  his  ‘Omnirecipient’1  ex¬ 
ists  in  separation  from  the  ‘elements’;  nor  does 
he  make  any  use  of  it.  He  says,  indeed,  that  it 
is  a  substratum  prior  to  the  so-called  ‘elements’ 
— underlying  them,  as  gold  underlies  the 
things  that  are  fashioned  of  gold.  (And  yet 
this  comparison,  if  thus  expressed,  is  itself  open 
[20]  to  criticism.  Things  which  come-to-be 
and  pass-away  cannot  be  called  by  the  name  of 
the  material  out  of  which  they  have  come-to- 
be:  it  is  only  the  results  of  ‘alteration’  which 
retain  the  name  of  the  substratum  whose  ‘al¬ 
terations’  they  are.  However,  he  actually  says2 
that  ‘far  the  truest  account  is  to  affirm  that 
each  of  them  is  “gold”  ’.)  Nevertheless  he  car¬ 
ries  his  analysis  of  the  ‘elements’ — solids 
though  they  are — back  to  ‘planes’,3  and  it  is 
impossible  for  ‘the  Nurse’4  (i.e.  the  primary 
matter)  to  be  identical  with  ‘the  planes’. 

Our  own  doctrine  is  that  although  there  is 
[25]  a  matter  of  the  perceptible  bodies  (a  mat¬ 
ter  out  of  which  the  so-called  ‘elements’  come- 
to-be),  it  has  no  separate  existence,  but  is  al¬ 
ways  bound  up  with  a  contrariety.  A  more 
precise  account  of  these  presuppositions  has 
been  given  in  another  work5:  we  must,  how¬ 
ever,  give  a  detailed  explanation  of  the  pri¬ 
mary  bodies  as  well,  since  they  too  are  simi- 
[50]  larly  derived  from  the  matter.  We  must 
reckon  as  an  ‘originative  source’  and  as  ‘pri¬ 
mary’  the  matter  which  underlies,  though  it  is 
inseparable  from,  the  contrary  qualities:  for 
‘the  hot’  is  not  matter  for  ‘the  cold’  nor  ‘the 
cold’  for  ‘the  hot’,  but  the  substratum  is  mat¬ 
ter  for  them  both.  We  therefore  have  to  rec¬ 
ognize  three  ‘originative  sources’:  firstly  that 
which  is  potentially  perceptible  body,  secondly 
[35]  the  contrarieties  (I  mean,  e.g.  heat  and 
cold),  and  thirdly  Fire,  Water,  and  the  like. 
Only  ‘thirdly’,  however:  for  these  bodies  change 
329b  into  one  another  (they  are  not  immuta¬ 
ble  as  Empedocles  and  other  thinkers  assert, 
since  ‘alteration’  would  then  have  been  im¬ 
possible),  whereas  the  contrarieties  do  not 
change. 

Nevertheless,  even  so  the  question  remains: 
What  sorts  of  contrarieties,  and  how  many  of 
them,  are  to  be  accounted  ‘originative  sources’ 

1  Cf.  Timaeus ,  51. 

2  Cf.  Timaeus ,  49-50 

3  Cf.  Timaeus,  53  ff. 

4  Cf.  Timaeus ,  e.g.  49,  52 

6  Cf.  Physics ,  1,  6-9. 


BOOK  II,  CHAPTERS  1-2  429 

of  body?  For  all  the  other  thinkers  assume 
[5]  and  use  them  without  explaining  why  they 
are  these  or  why  they  are  just  so  many . 

2 

Since,  then,  we  are  looking  for  ‘originative 
sources’  of  perceptible  body;  and  since  ‘percep¬ 
tible’  is  equivalent  to  ‘tangible’,  and  ‘tangible’ 
is  that  of  which  the  perception  is  touch;  it  is 
clear  that  not  all  the  contrarieties  constitute 
[/o]  ‘forms’  and  ‘originative  sources’  of  body, 
but  only  those  which  correspond  to  touch.  For 
it  is  in  accordance  with  a  contrariety — a  con¬ 
trariety,  moreover,  of  tangible  qualities — that 
the  primary  bodies  are  differentiated.  That  is 
why  neither  whiteness  (and  blackness),  nor 
sweetness  (and  bitterness),  nor  (similarly) 
any  quality  belonging  to  the  other  perceptible 
contrarieties  either,  constitutes  an  ‘element’. 
And  yet  vision  is  prior  to  touch,  so  that  its 
[75]  object  also  is  prior  to  the  object  of  touch. 
The  object  of  vision,  however,  is  a  quality  of 
tangible  body  not  qua  tangible,  but  qua  some¬ 
thing  else — qua  something  which  may  well  be 
naturally  prior  to  the  object  of  touch. 

Accordingly,  we  must  segregate  the  tangible 
differences  and  contrarieties,  and  distinguish 
which  amongst  them  are  primary.  Contrarie¬ 
ties  correlative  to  touch  are  the  following:  hot- 
[20]  cold,  dry-moist,  heavy-light,  hard-soft, 
viscous-brittle,  rough-smooth,  coarse-fine.  Of 
these  (i)  heavy  and  light  are  neither  active  nor 
susceptible.  Things  are  not  called  ‘heavy’  and 
‘light’  because  they  act  upon,  or  suffer  action 
from,  other  things.  But  the  ‘elements’  must  be 
reciprocally  active  and  susceptible,  since  they 
‘combine’  and  are  transformed  into  one  an¬ 
other.  On  the  other  hand  (ii)  hot  and  cold, 
[25]  and  dry  and  moist,  are  terms,  of  which 
the  first  pair  implies  power  to  act  and  the  sec¬ 
ond  pair  susceptibility .  ‘Hot’  is  that  which 
‘associates’  things  of  the  same  kind  (for  ‘dis¬ 
sociating’,  which  people  attribute  to  Fire  as  its 
function,  is  ‘associating’  things  of  the  same 
class,  since  its  effect  is  to  eliminate  what  is  for¬ 
eign),  while  ‘cold’  is  that  which  brings  to- 
[3°\  gether,  i.e.  ‘associates’,  homogeneous  and 
heterogeneous  things  alike.  And  ‘moist’  is  that 
which,  being  readily  adaptable  in  shape,  is  not 
determinable  by  any  limit  of  its  own:  while 
‘dry’  is  that  which  is  readily  determinable  by 
its  own  limit,  but  not  readily  adaptable  in 
shape. 

From  moist  and  dry  are  derived  (iii)  the  fine 
and  coarse,  viscous  and  brittle,  hard  and  soft, 
and  the  remaining  tangible  differences.  For 


43o  ON  GENERATION 

[35]  (a)  since  the  moist  has  no  determinate 
shape,  but  is  readily  adaptable  and  follows  the 
330®  outline  of  that  which  is  in  contact  with 
it,  it  is  characteristic  of  it  to  be  ‘such  as  to  fill 
up’.  Now  ‘the  fine’  is  ‘such  as  to  fill  up’.  For 
‘the  fine’  consists  of  subtle  particles;  but  that 
which  consists  of  small  particles  is  ‘such  as  to 
fill  up’,  inasmuch  as  it  is  in  contact  whole  with 
whole — and  ‘the  fine’  exhibits  this  character  in 
a  superlative  degree.  Hence  it  is  evident  that 
the  fine  derives  from  the  moist,  while  the 
[5]  coarse  derives  from  the  dry.  Again  ( b ) 
‘the  viscous’  derives  from  the  moist:  for  ‘the 
viscous’  (e.g.  oil)  is  a  ‘moist’  modified  in  a 
certain  way.  ‘The  brittle’,  on  the  other  hand, 
derives  from  the  dry:  for  ‘brittle’  is  that  which 
is  completely  dry — so  completely,  that  its  solid¬ 
ification  has  actually  been  due  to  failure  of 
moisture.  Further  (c)  ‘the  soft’  derives  from 
the  moist.  For  ‘soft’  is  that  which  yields  to 
pressure  by  retiring  into  itself,  though  it  does 
not  yield  by  total  displacement  as  the  moist 
[/o]  does — which  explains  why  the  moist  is 
not  ‘soft’,  although  ‘the  soft’  derives  from  the 
moist.  ‘The  hard’,  on  the  other  hand,  derives 
from  the  dry:  for  ‘hard’  is  that  which  is  solid¬ 
ified,  and  the  solidified  is  dry. 

The  terms  ‘dry’  and  ‘moist’  have  more  senses 
than  one.  For  ‘the  damp’,  as  well  as  the  moist, 
is  opposed  to  the  dry:  and  again  ‘the  solidified’, 
as  well  as  the  dry,  is  opposed  to  the  moist.  But 
[75]  all  these  qualities  derive  from  the  dry  and 
moist  we  mentioned  first.1  For  (i)  the  dry  is 
opposed  to  the  damp:  i.e.  ‘damp’  is  that  which 
has  foreign  moisture  on  its  surface  (‘sodden’ 
being  that  which  is  penetrated  to  its  core), 
while  ‘dry’  is  that  which  has  lost  foreign 
moisture.  Hence  it  is  evident  that  the  damp 
will  derive  from  the  moist,  and  ‘the  dry’  which 
is  opposed  to  it  will  derive  from  the  primary 
[20]  dry.  Again  (ii)  the  ‘moist’  and  the  solid¬ 
ified  derive  in  the  same  way  from  the  primary 
pair.  For  ‘moist’  is  that  which  contains  mois¬ 
ture  of  its  own  deep  within  it  (‘sodden’  being 
that  which  is  deeply  penetrated  by  foreign 
mosture),  whereas  ‘solidified’  is  that  which  has 
lost  this  inner  moisture.  Hence  these  too  derive 
from  the  primary  pair,  the  ‘solidified’  from  the 
dry  and  the  ‘liquefiable’  from  the  moist. 

[25]  It  is  clear,  then,  that  all  the  other  differ¬ 
ences  reduce  to  the  first  four,  but  that  these  ad¬ 
mit  of  no  further  reduction.  For  the  hot  is  not 
essentially  moist  or  dry,  nor  the  moist  essen¬ 
tially  hot  or  cold:  nor  are  the  cold  and  the  dry 
derivative  forms,  either  of  one  another  or  of 
1  Cf.  above,  329k  30-2. 


AND  CORRUPTION  330b 

the  hot  and  the  moist.  Hence  these  must  be 
four. 

3 

[30]  The  elementary  qualities  are  four,  and 
any  four  terms  can  be  combined  in  six  couples. 
Contraries,  however,  refuse  to  be  coupled:  for 
it  is  impossible  for  the  same  thing  to  be  hot 
and  cold,  or  moist  and  dry.  Hence  it  is  evident 
that  the  ‘couplings’  of  the  elementary  qualities 
330b  will  be  four:  hot  with  dry  and  moist 
with  hot,  and  again  cold  with  dry  and  cold 
with  moist.  And  these  four  couples  have  at¬ 
tached  themselves  to  the  apparently  ‘simple’ 
bodies  (Fire,  Air,  Water,  and  Earth)  in  a  man¬ 
ner  consonant  with  theory.  For  Fire  is  hot  and 
dry,  whereas  Air  is  hot  and  moist  (Air  being 
[5]  a  sort  of  aqueous  vapour);  and  Water  is 
cold  and  moist,  while  Earth  is  cold  and  dry. 
Thus  the  differences  are  reasonably  distributed 
among  the  primary  bodies,  and  the  number  of 
the  latter  is  consonant  with  theory.  For  all  who 
make  the  simple  bodies  ‘elements’  postulate 
either  one,  or  two,  or  three,  or  four.  Now  (i) 
[/o]  those  who  assert  there  is  one  only,  and 
then  generate  everything  else  by  condensation 
and  rarefaction,  are  in  effect  making  their 
‘originative  sources’  two,  viz.  the  rare  and  the 
dense,  or  rather  the  hot  and  the  cold:  for  it  is 
these  which  are  the  moulding  forces,  while 
the  ‘one’  underlies  them  as  a  ‘matter’.  But  (ii) 
those  who  postulate  two  from  the  start — as 
Parmenides  postulated  Fire  and  Earth — make 
[75]  the  intermediates  (e.g.  Air  and  Water) 
blends  of  these.  The  same  course  is  followed 
(iii)  by  those  who  advocate  three.  (We  may 
compare  what  Plato  does  in  ‘The  Divisions’: 
for  he  makes  ‘the  middle’  a  blend.)  Indeed, 
there  is  practically  no  difference  between  those 
who  postulate  two  and  those  who  postulate 
three,  except  that  the  former  split  the  middle 
‘element’  into  two,  while  the  latter  treat  it 
[20]  as  only  one.  But  (iv)  some  advocate  four 
from  the  start,  e.g.  Empedocles:  yet  he  too 
draws  them  together  so  as  to  reduce  them  to 
the  two,  for  he  opposes  all  the  others  to  Fire. 

In  fact,  however,  fire  and  air,  and  each  of 
the  bodies  we  have  mentioned,  are  not  simple, 
but  blended.  The  ‘simple’  bodies  are  indeed 
similar  in  nature  to  them,  but  not  identical 
with  them.  Thus  the  ‘simple’  body  corres¬ 
ponding  to  fire  is  ‘such-as-fire’,  not  fire:  that 
which  corresponds  to  air  is  ‘such-as-air’:  and 
[25]  so  on  with  the  rest  of  them.  But  fire  is  an 
excess  of  heat,  just  as  ice  is  an  excess  of  cold. 
For  freezing  and  boiling  are  excesses  of  heat 


33 lb  BOOK  II,  CHAPTERS  2-4  431 


and  cold  respectively.  Assuming,  therefore, 
that  ice  is  a  freezing  of  moist  and  cold,  fire 
analogously  will  be  a  boiling  of  dry  and  hot: 
a  fact,  by  the  way,  which  explains  why  nothing 
[^o]  comes-to-be  either  out  of  ice  or  out  of  fire. 

The  ‘simple’  bodies,  since  they  are  four,  fall 
into  two  pairs  which  belong  to  the  two  regions, 
each  to  each:  for  Fire  and  Air  are  forms  of  the 
body  moving  towards  the  ‘limit’,  while  Earth 
and  Water  are  forms  of  the  body  which  moves 
towards  the  ‘centre’.  Fire  and  Earth,  moreover, 
33 la  are  extremes  and  purest:  Water  and  Air, 
on  the  contrary  are  intermediates  and  more 
like  blends.  And,  further,  the  members  of 
either  pair  are  contrary  to  those  of  the  other, 
Water  being  contrary  to  Fire  and  Earth  to 
Air;  for  the  qualities  constituting  Water  and 
Earth  are  contrary  to  those  that  constitute  Fire 
and  Air.  Nevertheless,  since  they  are  four, 
each  of  them  is  characterized  par  excellence 
by  a  single  quality:  Earth  by  dry  rather  than 
[5]  by  cold,  Water  by  cold  rather  than  by 
moist,  Air  by  moist  rather  than  by  hot,  and 
Fire  by  hot  rather  than  by  dry. 

4 

It  has  been  established  before1  that  the  coming- 
to-be  of  the  ‘simple’  bodies  is  reciprocal.  At 
the  same  time,  it  is  manifest,  even  on  the  evi¬ 
dence  of  perception,  that  they  do  come-to-be: 
for  otherwise  there  would  not  have  been  ‘al- 
[/o]  teration’,  since  ‘alteration’  is  change  in 
respect  to  the  qualities  of  the  objects  of  touch. 
Consequently,  we  must  explain  (i)  what  is 
the  manner  of  their  reciprocal  transformation, 
and  (ii)  whether  every  one  of  them  can  come- 
to-be  out  of  every  one — or  whether  some  can 
do  so,  but  not  others. 

Now  it  is  evident  that  all  of  them  are  by  na¬ 
ture  such  as  to  change  into  one  another:  for 
coming-to-be  is  a  change  into  contraries  and 
[75]  out  of  contraries,  and  the  ‘elements’  all 
involve  a  contrariety  in  their  mutual  relations 
because  their  distinctive  qualities  are  contrary. 
For  in  some  of  them  both  qualities  are  con¬ 
trary — e.g.  in  Fire  and  Water,  the  first  of  these 
being  dry  and  hot,  and  the  second  moist  and 
cold:  while  in  others  one  of  the  qualities 
(though  only  one)  is  contrary — e.g.  in  Air  and 
Water,  the  first  being  moist  and  hot,  and  the 
[20]  second  moist  and  cold.  It  is  evident, 
therefore,  if  we  consider  them  in  general,  that 
every  one  is  by  nature  such  as  to  come-to-be 
out  of  every  one:  and  when  we  come  to  con- 

1  The  reference  is  probably  to  On  the  Heavens ,  304**  23 


sider  them  severally,  it  is  not  difficult  to  see 
the  manner  in  which  their  transformation  is 
effected.  For,  though  all  will  result  from  all, 
both  the  speed  and  the  facility  of  their  conver¬ 
sion  will  differ  in  degree. 

[25]  Thus  (i)  the  process  of  conversion  will  be 
quick  between  those  which  have  interchange¬ 
able  ‘complementary  factors’,  but  slow  between 
those  which  have  none.  The  reason  is  that  it  is 
easier  for  a  single  thing  to  change  than  for 
many.  Air,  e.g.  will  result  from  Fire  if  a  sin¬ 
gle  quality  changes:  for  Fire,  as  we  saw,  is 
hot  and  dry  while  Air  is  hot  and  moist,  so  that 
there  will  be  Air  if  the  dry  be  overcome  by  the 
[30]  moist.  Again,  Water  will  result  from  Air 
if  the  hot  be  overcome  by  the  cold:  for  Air,  as 
we  saw,  is  hot  and  moist  while  Water  is  cold 
and  moist,  so  that,  if  the  hot  changes,  there 
will  be  Water.  So  too,  in  the  same  manner, 
Earth  will  result  from  Water  and  Fire  from 
Earth,  since  the  two  ‘elements’  in  both  these 
couples  have  interchangeable  ‘complementary 
factors’.  For  Water  is  moist  and  cold  while 
[35]  Earth  is  cold  and  dry — so  that,  if  the 
moist  be  overcome,  there  will  be  Earth:  and 
again,  since  Fire  is  dry  and  hot  while  Earth  is 
33 lb  cold  and  dry,  Fire  will  result  from  Earth 
if  the  cold  pass-away. 

It  is  evident,  therefore,  that  the  coming-to-be 
of  the  ‘simple’  bodies  will  be  cyclical;  and  that 
this  cyclical  method  of  transformation  is  the 
easiest,  because  the  consecutive  ‘elements’  con¬ 
tain  interchangeable  ‘complementary  factors’. 
On  the  other  hand  (ii)  the  transformation  of 
[5]  Fire  into  Water  and  of  Air  into  Earth, 
and  again  of  Water  and  Earth  into  Fire  and 
Air  respectively,  though  possible,  is  more  diffi¬ 
cult  because  it  involves  the  change  of  more 
qualities.  For  if  Fire  is  to  result  from  Water, 
both  the  cold  and  the  moist  must  pass-away: 
and  again,  both  the  cold  and  the  dry  must 
pass-away  if  Air  is  to  result  from  Earth.  So, 
[/o]  too,  if  Water  and  Earth  are  to  result  from 
Fire  and  Air  respectively — both  qualities  must 
change. 

This  second  method  of  coming-to-be,  then, 
takes  a  longer  time.  But  (iii)  if  one  quality  in 
each  of  two  ‘elements’  pass-away,  the  transfor¬ 
mation,  though  easier,  is  not  reciprocal.  Still, 
from  Fire  plus  Water  there  will  result  Earth 
and  Air,  and  from  Air  plus  Earth  Fire  and 
[75]  Water.  For  there  will  be  Air,  when  the 
cold  of  the  Water  and  the  dry  of  the  Fire  have 
passed-away  (since  the  hot  of  the  latter  and 
the  moist  of  the  former  are  left):  whereas, 
when  the  hot  of  the  Fire  and  the  moist  of  the 


432 

Water  have  passed-away,  there  will  be  Earth, 
owing  to  the  survival  of  the  dry  of  the  Fire 
and  the  cold  of  the  Water.  So,  too,  in  the  same 
way,  Fire  and  Water  will  result  from  Air  plus 
[20]  Earth.  For  there  will  be  Water,  when  the 
hot  of  the  Air  and  the  dry  of  the  Earth  have 
passed-away  (since  the  moist  of  the  former  and 
the  cold  of  the  latter  are  left):  whereas,  when 
the  moist  of  the  Air  and  the  cold  of  the  Earth 
have  passed-away,  there  will  be  Fire,  owing 
to  the  survival  of  the  hot  of  the  Air  and  the 
dry  of  the  Earth — qualities  essentially  constitu¬ 
tive  of  Fire.  Moreover,  this  mode  of  Fire’s 
[25]  coming-to-be  is  confirmed  by  perception. 
For  flame  is  par  excellence  Fire:  but  flame  is 
burning  smoke,  and  smoke  consists  of  Air  and 
Earth. 

No  transformation,  however,  into  any  of  the 
‘simple’  bodies  can  result  from  the  passing- 
away  of  one  elementary  quality  in  each  of  two 
‘elements’  when  they  are  taken  in  their  consec¬ 
utive  order,  because  either  identical  or  contrary 
[jo]  qualities  are  left  in  the  pair:  but  no  ‘sim¬ 
ple’  body  can  be  formed  either  out  of  identical, 
or  out  of  contrary,  qualities.  Thus  no  ‘simple’ 
body  would  result,  if  the  dry  of  Fire  and  the 
moist  of  Air  were  to  pass-away:  for  the  hot  is 
left  in  both.  On  the  other  hand,  if  the  hot 
pass-away  out  of  both,  the  contraries — dry  and 
moist — are  left.  A  similar  result  will  occur  in 
all  the  others  too:  for  all  the  consecutive  ‘ele¬ 
ments’  contain  one  identical,  and  one  contrary, 
[35]  quality.  Hence,  too,  it  clearly  follows  that, 
when  one  of  the  consecutive  ‘elements’  is  trans¬ 
formed  into  one,  the  coming-to-be  is  effected 
by  the  passing-away  of  a  single  quality:  where¬ 
as,  when  two  of  them  are  transformed  into  a 
third,  more  than  one  quality  must  have  passed- 
away. 

332a  We  have  stated  that  all  the  ‘elements’ 
come-to-be  out  of  any  one  of  them;  and  we 
have  explained  the  manner  in  which  their  mu¬ 
tual  conversion  takes  place.  Let  us  nevertheless 
supplement  our  theory  by  the  following  specu¬ 
lations  concerning  them. 

5 

[5]  If  Water,  Air,  and  the  like  are  a  ‘matter’ 
of  which  the  natural  bodies  consist,  as  some 
thinkers  in  fact  believe,  these  ‘elements’  must 
be  either  one,  or  two,  or  more.  Now  they  can¬ 
not  all  of  them  be  one — they  cannot,  e.g.  all 
be  Air  or  Water  or  Fire  or  Earth — because 
‘Change  is  into  contraries’.  For  if  they  all  were 
Air,  then  (assuming  Air  to  persist)  there  will 
be  ‘alteration’  instead  of  coming-to-be.  Be- 


332a 

sides,  nobody  supposes  a  single  ‘element’  to 
[/o]  persist,  as  the  basis  of  all,  in  such  a  way 
that  it  is  Water  as  well  as  Air  (or  any  other 
‘element’)  at  the  same.  time.  So  there  will  be 
a  certain  contrariety,  i.e.  a  differentiating  qual¬ 
ity:  and  the  other  member  of  this  contrariety, 
e.g.  heat,  will  belong  to  some  other  ‘element’, 
e.g.  to  Fire.  But  Fire  will  certainly  not  be  ‘hot 
Air’.  For  a  change  of  that  kind  (a)  is  ‘altera¬ 
tion’,  and  ( h )  is  not  what  is  observed.  More¬ 
over  (c)  if  Air  is  again  to  result  out  of  the  Fire, 
[75]  it  will  do  so  by  the  conversion  of  the  hot 
into  its  contrary:  this  contrary,  therefore,  will 
belong  to  Air,  and  Air  will  be  a  cold  some¬ 
thing:  hence  it  is  impossible  for  Fire  to  be  ‘hot 
Air’,  since  in  that  case  the  same  thing  will  be 
simultaneously  hot  and  cold.  Both  Fire  and 
Air,  therefore,  will  be  something  else  which  is 
the  same;  i.e.  there  will  be  some  ‘matter’,  other 
than  either,  common  to  both. 

The  same  argument  applies  to  all  the  ‘ele- 
[20]  ments’,  proving  that  there  is  no  single  one 
of  them  out  of  which  they  all  originate.  But 
neither  is  there,  beside  these  four,  some  other 
body  from  which  they  originate — a  something 
intermediate,  e.g.  between  Air  and  Water 
(coarser  than  Air,  but  finer  than  Water),  or 
between  Air  and  Fire  (coarser  than  Fire,  but 
finer  than  Air).  For  the  supposed  ‘intermedi¬ 
ate’  will  be  Air  and  Fire  when  a  pair  of  con¬ 
trasted  qualities  is  added  to  it:  but,  since  one 
of  every  two  contrary  qualities  is  a  ‘privation’, 
the  ‘intermediate’  never  can  exist — as  some 
[25]  thinkers  assert  the  ‘Boundless’  or  the 
‘Environing’  exists — in  isolation.  It  is,  there¬ 
fore,  equally  and  indifferently  any  one  of  the 
‘elements’,  or  else  it  is  nothing. 

Since,  then,  there  is  nothing — at  least,  noth¬ 
ing  perceptible — prior  to  these,  they  must  be 
all.  That  being  so,  either  they  must  always  per¬ 
sist  and  not  be  transformable  into  one  another: 
or  they  must  undergo  transformation — either 
[jo]  all  of  them,  or  some  only  (as  Plato  wrote 
in  the  Timaeus).1  Now  it  has  been  proved  be¬ 
fore  that  they  must  undergo  reciprocal  trans¬ 
formation.  It  has  also  been  proved  that  the 
speed  with  which  they  come-to-be,  one  out  of 
another,  is  not  uniform — since  the  process  of 
reciprocal  transformation  is  relatively  quic\ 
between  the  ‘elements’  with  a  ‘complementary 
factor’,  but  relatively  slow  between  those 
which  possess  no  such  factor.  Assuming,  then, 
that  the  contrariety,  in  respect  to  which  they 
are  transformed,  is  one,  the  ‘elements’  will 
[ J5]  inevitably  be  two:  for  it  is  ‘matter’  that  is 
1  Cf.  Timaeus ,  54  . 


ON  GENERATION  AND  CORRUPTION 


333a 

the  ‘mean’  between  the  two  contraries,  and 
332b  matter  is  imperceptible  and  inseparable 
from  them.  Since,  however,  the  ‘elements’  are 
seen  to  be  more  than  two,  the  contrarieties 
must  at  the  least  be  two.  But  the  contrarieties 
being  two,  the  ‘elements’  must  be  four  (as  they 
evidently  are)  and  cannot  be  three:  for  the 
‘couplings’  are  four,  since,  though  six  are  pos¬ 
sible,  the  two  in  which  the  qualities  are  con- 
[5]  trary  to  one  another  cannot  occur. 

These  subjects  have  been  discussed  before:1 
but  the  following  arguments  will  make  it  clear 
that,  since  the  ‘elements’  are  transformed  into 
one  another,  it  is  impossible  for  any  one  of 
them — whether  it  be  at  the  end  or  in  the  mid¬ 
dle — to  be  an  ‘originative  source’  of  the  rest. 
There  can  be  no  such  ‘originative  element’  at 
the  ends:  for  all  of  them  would  then  be  Fire 
or  Earth,  and  this  theory  amounts  to  the  asser¬ 
tion  that  all  things  are  made  of  Fire  or  Earth, 
[/o]  Nor  can  a  ‘middle-element’  be  such  an 
‘originative  source’ — as  some  thinkers  suppose 
that  Air  is  transformed  both  into  Fire  and  into 
Water,  and  Water  both  into  Air  and  into 
Earth,  while  the  ‘end-elements’  are  not  further 
transformed  into  one  another.  For  the  process 
must  come  to  a  stop,  and  cannot  continue  ad 
infinitum  in  a  straight  line  in  either  direction, 
since  otherwise  an  infinite  number  of  contrar- 
[75]  ieties  would  attach  to  the  single  ‘element’. 
Let  E  stand  for  Earth,  W  for  Water,  A  for  Air, 
and  F  for  Fire.  Then  (i)  since  A  is  transformed 
into  F  and  W,  there  will  be  a  contrariety  be¬ 
longing  to  A  F.  Let  these  contraries  be  white¬ 
ness  and  blackness.  Again  (ii)  since  A  is  trans¬ 
formed  into  W,  there  will  be  another  contrar¬ 
iety:  for  W  is  not  the  same  as  F.  Let  this  second 
contrariety  be  dryness  and  moistness,  D  being 
[20]  dryness  and  M  moistness.  Now  if,  when 
A  is  transformed  into  W,  the  ‘white’  persists, 
Water  will  be  moist  and  white:  but  if  it  does 
not  persist,  Water  will  be  black  since  change 
is  into  contraries.  Water,  therefore,  must  be 
either  white  or  black.  Let  it  then  be  the  first. 
On  similar  grounds,  therefore,  D  (dryness) 
will  also  belong  to  F.  Consequently  F  (Fire) 
as  well  as  Air  will  be  able  to  be  transformed 
[25]  into  Water:  for  it  has  qualities  contrary 
to  those  of  Water,  since  Fire  was  first  taken  to 
be  black  and  then  to  be  dry,  while  Water  was 
moist  and  then  showed  itself  white.  Thus  it  is 
evident  that  all  the  ‘elements’  will  be  able  to 
be  transformed  out  of  one  another;  and  that, 
in  the  instances  we  have  taken,  E  (Earth)  also 
[30]  will  contain  the  remaining  two  ‘comple- 

1  Cf.  above,  11.  2  and  3. 


433 

mentary  factors’,  viz.  the  black  and  the  moist 
(for  these  have  not  yet  been  coupled). 

We  have  dealt  with  this  last  topic  before  the 
thesis  we  set  out  to  prove.2  That  thesis — viz. 
that  the  process  cannot  continue  ad  infinitum 
— will  be  clear  from  the  following  considera¬ 
tions.  If  Fire  (which  is  represented  by  F)  is  not 
to  revert,  but  is  to  be  transformed  in  turn  into 
some  other  ‘element’  (e.g.  into  Q),  a  new  con¬ 
trariety,  other  than  those  mentioned,  will  be- 
[55]  long  to  Fire  and  Q:  for  it  has  been  as- 
333a  sumed  that  Q  is  not  the  same  as  any  of 
the  four,  E  W  A  and  F.  Let  K,  then,  belong 
to  F  and  Y  to  Q.  Then  K  will  belong  to  all 
four,  E  W  A  and  F:  for  they  are  transformed 
into  one  another.  This  last  point,  however,  we 
may  admit,  has  not  yet  been  proved:  but  at 
any  rate  it  is  clear  that  if  Q  is  to  be  transformed 
in  turn  into  yet  another  ‘element’,  yet  another 
[5]  contrariety  will  belong  not  only  to  Q  but 
also  to  F  (Fire).  And,  similarly,  every  addition 
of  a  new  ‘element’  will  carry  with  it  the  at¬ 
tachment  of  a  new  contrariety  to  the  preceding 
‘elements’.  Consequently,  if  the  ‘elements’  are 
infinitely  many,  there  will  also  belong  to  the 
single  ‘element’  an  infinite  number  of  con¬ 
trarieties.  But  if  that  be  so,  it  will  be  impos¬ 
sible  to  define  any  ‘element’:  impossible  also 
for  any  to  come-to-be.  For  if  one  is  to  result 
from  another,  it  will  have  to  pass  through 
[/o]  such  a  vast  number  of  contrarieties — and 
indeed  even  more  than  any  determinate  num¬ 
ber.  Consequently  (i)  into  some  ‘elements’ 
transformation  will  never  be  effected — viz.  if 
the  intermediates  are  infinite  in  number,  as 
they  must  be  if  the  ‘elements’  are  infinitely 
many:  further  (ii)  there  will  not  even  be  a 
transformation  of  Air  into  Fire,  if  the  con¬ 
trarieties  are  infinitely  many:  moreover  (iii) 
all  the  ‘elements’  become  one.  For  all  the 
contrarieties  of  the  ‘elements’  above  F  must  be- 
[75]  long  to  those  below  F,  and  vice  versa : 
hence  they  will  all  be  one. 

6 

As  for  those  who  agree  with  Empedocles  that 
the  ‘elements’  of  body  are  more  than  one,  so 
that  they  are  not  transformed  into  one  an¬ 
other — one  may  well  wonder  in  what  sense  it 
is  open  to  them  to  maintain  that  the  ‘elements’ 
are  comparable.  Yet  Empedocles  says  ‘For 
[20]  these  are  all  not  only  equal  .  .  .’3 

If  (i)  it  is  meant  that  they  are  comparable  in 
their  amount,  all  the  ‘comparables’  must  pos- 

2  Cf.  above,  332b  12-13. 

3  Empedocles,  fr.  1 7. 1,  27,  Diels,  p.  1 79. 


BOOK  II,  CHAPTERS  4-6 


434 


ON  GENERATION 

sess  an  identical  something  whereby  they  are 
measured.  If,  e.g.  one  pint  of  Water  yields 
ten  of  Air,  both  are  measured  by  the  same  unit; 
and  therefore  both  were  from  the  first  an  iden¬ 
tical  something.  On  the  other  hand,  suppose 
(ii)  they  are  not  ‘comparable  in  their  amount’ 
in  the  sense  that  so-much  of  the  one  yields  so- 
much  of  the  other,  but  comparable  in  ‘power 
[25]  of  action  (a  pint  of  Water,  e.g.  having  a 
power  of  cooling  equal  to  that  of  ten  pints  of 
Air);  even  so,  they  are  ‘comparable  in  their 
amount’,  though  not  qua  ‘amount’  but  qua 
‘so-much  power’.  There  is  also  (iii)  a  third  pos¬ 
sibility.  Instead  of  comparing  their  powers  by 
the  measure  of  their  amount,  they  might  be 
compared  as  terms  in  a  ‘correspondence’:  e.g. 
‘as  x  is  hot,  so  correspondingly  y  is  white’.  But 
[30]  ‘correspondence’,  though  it  means  equal¬ 
ity  in  the  quantum,  means  similarity  in  a 
quale.  Thus  it  is  manifestly  absurd  that  the 
‘simple’  bodies,  though  they  are  not  transform¬ 
able,  are  comparable  not  merely  as  ‘corres¬ 
ponding’,  but  by  a  measure  of  their  powers; 
i.e.  that  so-much  Fire  is  comparable  with  many- 
times-that-amount  of  Air,  as  being  ‘equally’  or 
‘similarly’  hot.  For  the  same  thing,  if  it  be 
greater  in  amount,  will,  since  it  belongs  to  the 
same  kind,  have  its  ratio  correspondingly  in¬ 
creased. 

[35]  A  further  objection  to  the  theory  of  Em¬ 
pedocles  is  that  it  makes  even  growth  impos¬ 
sible,  unless  it  be  increase  by  addition.  For  his 
333b  Fire  increases  by  Fire:  ‘And  Earth  in¬ 
creases  its  own  frame  and  Ether  increases 
Ether.’1  These,  however,  are  cases  of  addition: 
but  it  is  not  by  addition  that  growing  things 
are  believed  to  increase.  And  it  is  far  more 
difficult  for  him  to  account  for  the  coming-to- 
[5]  be  which  occurs  in  nature.  For  the  things 
which  come-to-be  by  natural  process  all  exhibit, 
in  their  coming-to-be,  a  uniformity  either  abso¬ 
lute  or  highly  regular:  while  any  exceptions — 
any  results  which  are  in  accordance  neither 
with  the  invariable  nor  with  the  general  rule — 
are  products  of  chance  and  luck.  Then  what  is 
the  cause  determining  that  man  comes-to-be 
from  man,  that  wheat  (instead  of  an  olive) 
comes-to-be  from  wheat,  either  invariably  or 
generally  ?  Are  we  to  say  ‘Bone  comes-to-be  if 
the  “elements”  be  put  together  in  such-and- 
such  a  manner’?  For,  according  to  his  own 
[/o]  statements,  nothing  comes-to-be  from  their 
‘fortuitous  consilience’,  but  only  from  their 
‘consilience’  in  a  certain  proportion.  What, 
then,  is  the  cause  of  this  proportional  con- 
1  Cf.  Empedocles,  fr.  37,  Diels,  p.  186. 


AND  CORRUPTION  334a 

silience?  Presumably  not  Fire  or  Earth.  But 
neither  is  it  Love  and  Strife:  for  the  former  is 
a  cause  of  ‘association’  only,  and  the  latter  only 
of  ‘dissociation’.  No:  the  cause  in  question  is 
the  essential  nature  of  each  thing — not  merely 
(to  quote  his  words)  ‘a  mingling  and  a  divorce 
[75]  of  what  has  been  mingled’.2  And  chance, 
not  proportion,  ‘is  the  name  given  to  these 
occurrences’:  for  things  can  be  ‘mingled’  for¬ 
tuitously. 

The  cause,  therefore,  of  the  coming-to-be  of 
the  things  which  owe  their  existence  to  nature 
is  that  they  are  in  such-and-such  a  determinate 
condition:  and  it  is  this  which  constitutes  the 
‘nature’  of  each  thing — a  ‘nature’  about  which 
he  says  nothing.  What  he  says,  therefore,  is  no 
explanation  of  ‘nature’.  Moreover,  it  is  this 
which  is  both  ‘the  excellence’  of  each  thing  and 
its  ‘good’:  whereas  he  assigns  the  whole  credit 
[20]  to  the  ‘mingling’.  (And  yet  the  ' elements ' 
at  all  events  are  ‘dissociated’  not  by  Strife,  but 
by  Love:  since  the  ‘elements’  are  by  nature 
prior  to  the  Deity,  and  they  too  are  Deities.) 

Again,  his  account  of  motion  is  vague.  For 
it  is  not  an  adequate  explanation  to  say  that 
‘Love  and  Strife  set  things  moving’,  unless  the 
very  nature  of  Love  is  a  movement  of  this  kind 
and  the  very  nature  of  Strife  a  movement  of 
[25]  that  kind.  He  ought,  then,  either  to  have 
defined  or  to  have  postulated  these  character¬ 
istic  movements,  or  to  have  demonstrated 
them — whether  strictly  or  laxly  or  in  some 
other  fashion.  Moreover,  since  (a)  the  ‘simple’ 
bodies  appear  to  move  ‘naturally’  as  well  as  by 
compulsion,  i.e.  in  a  manner  contrary  to  nature 
(fire,  e.g.  appears  to  move  upwards  without 
compulsion,  though  it  appears  to  move  by  com¬ 
pulsion  downwards);  and  since  ( b )  what  is 
‘natural’  is  contrary  to  that  which  is  due  to 
compulsion,  and  movement  by  compulsion  ac¬ 
tually  occurs;  it  follows  that  ‘natural  movement’ 
[30]  can  also  occur  in  fact.  Is  this,  then,  the 
movement  that  Love  sets  going?  No:  for,  on 
the  contrary,  the  ‘natural  movement’  moves 
Earth  downwards  and  resembles  ‘dissociation’, 
and  Strife  rather  than  Love  is  its  cause — so 
that  in  general,  too,  Love  rather  than  Strife 
would  seem  to  be  contrary  to  nature.  And  un¬ 
less  Love  or  Strife  is  actually  setting  them  in 
motion,  the  ‘simple’  bodies  themselves  have 
[33]  absolutely  no  movement  or  rest.  But  this 
is  paradoxical:  and  what  is  more,  they  do  in 
334a  fact  obviously  move.  For  though  Strife 
‘dissociated’,  it  was  not  by  Strife  that  the 
‘Ether’  was  borne  upwards.  On  the  contrary, 

2Cf.  Empedocles,  fr.  8,  Diels,  p.  175. 


334b 

sometimes  he  attributes  its  movement  to  some¬ 
thing  like  chance  (‘For  thus,  as  it  ran',  it  hap¬ 
pened  to  meet  them  then,  though  often  other¬ 
wise’1),  while  at  other  times  he  says  it  is  the 
nature  of  Fire  to  be  borne  upwards,  but  ‘the 
[5]  Ether’  (to  quote  his  words)  ‘sank  down 
upon  the  Earth  with  long  roots’.2  With  such 
statements,  too,  he  combines  the  assertion  that 
the  Order  of  the  World  is  the  same  now,  in 
the  reign  of  Strife,  as  it  was  formerly  in  the 
reign  of  Love.  What,  then,  is  the  ‘first  mover’ 
of  the  ‘elements’?  What  causes  their  motion? 
Presumably  not  Love  and  Strife:  on  the  con¬ 
trary,  these  are  causes  of  a  particular  motion, 
if  at  least  we  assume  that  ‘first  mover’  to  be  an 
‘originative  source’. 

[/o]  An  additional  paradox  is  that  the  soul 
should  consist  of  the  ‘elements’,  or  that  it 
should  be  one  of  them.  How  are  the  soul’s  ‘al¬ 
terations’  to  take  place?  How,  e.g.  is  the 
change  from  being  musical  to  being  unmusical, 
or  how  is  memory  or  forgetting,  to  occur?  For 
clearly,  if  the  soul  be  Fire,  only  such  modifica¬ 
tions  will  happen  to  it  as  characterize  Fire 
qua  Fire:  while  if  it  be  compounded  out  of  the 
‘elements’,  only  the  corporeal  modifications 
will  occur  in  it.  But  the  changes  we  have  men- 
[75]  tioned  are  none  of  them  corporeal. 

7 

The  discussion  of  these  difficulties,  however,  is 
a  task  appropriate  to  a  different  investigation:3 
let  us  return  to  the  ‘elements’  of  which  bodies 
are  composed.  The  theories  that  ‘there  is  some¬ 
thing  common  to  all  the  “elements”  ’,  and  that 
‘they  are  reciprocally  transformed’,  are  so  re¬ 
lated  that  those  who  accept  either  are  bound 
to  accept  the  other  as  well.  Those,  on  the  other 
hand,  who  do  not  make  their  coming-to-be 
reciprocal — who  refuse  to  suppose  that  any  one 
of  the  ‘elements’  comes-to-be  out  of  any  other 
[20]  ta\en  singly,  except  in  the  sense  in  which 
bricks  come-to-be  out  of  a  wall — are  faced  with 
a  paradox.  How,  on  their  theory,  are  flesh  and 
bones  or  any  of  the  other  compounds  to  result 
from  the  ‘elements’  ta\en  together ? 

Indeed,  the  point  we  have  raised  constitutes 
a  problem  even  for  those  who  generate  the  ‘ele¬ 
ments’  out  of  one  another.  In  what  manner  does 
anything  other  than,  and  beside,  the  ‘elements’ 
come-to-be  out  of  them?  Let  me  illustrate  my 
meaning.  Water  can  come-to-be  out  of  Fire 

1  Cf.  Empedocles,  fr.  53,  Diels,  p.  180. 

2  Cf.  fr.  54,  ibid. 

3  Cf.  On  the  Soul ,  1.  4  and  5,  especially  408s  18-23  a°d 
4°9b  23  ff- 


435 

and  Fire  out  of  Water;  for  their  substratum  is 
[25]  something  common  to  them  both.  But 
flesh  too,  presumably,  and  marrow  come-to-be 
out  of  them.  How,  then,  do  such  things  come- 
to-be?  For  (a)  how  is  the  manner  of  their  com¬ 
ing-to-be  to  be  conceived  by  those  who  main¬ 
tain  a  theory  like  that  of  Empedocles?  They 
must  conceive  it  as  composition — just  as  a  wall 
comes-to-be  out  of  bricks  and  stones:  and  the 
‘Mixture’,  of  which  they  speak,  will  be  com¬ 
posed  of  the  ‘elements’,  these  being  preserved 
[jo]  in  it  unaltered  but  with  their  small  par¬ 
ticles  juxtaposed  each  to  each.  That  will  be  the 
manner,  presumably,  in  which  flesh  and  every 
other  compound  results  from  the  ‘elements’. 
Consequently,  it  follows  that  Fire  and  Water 
do  not  come-to-be  ‘out  of  any  and  every  part  of 
flesh’.  For  instance,  although  a  sphere  might 
come-to-be  out  of  this  part  of  a  lump  of  wax 
and  a  pyramid  out  of  some  other  part,  it  was 
nevertheless  possible  for  either  figure  to  have 
[35]  come-to-be  out  of  either  part  indifferently: 
that  is  the  manner  of  coming-to-be  when  ‘both 
Fire  and  Water  come-to-be  out  of  any  and  every 
part  of  flesh’.  Those,  however,  who  maintain 
334b  the  theory  in  question,  are  not  at  liberty 
to  conceive  that  ‘both  come-to-be  out  of  flesh’ 
in  that  manner,  but  only  as  a  stone  and  a  brick 
‘both  come-to-be  out  of  a  wall’ — viz.  each  out 
of  a  different  place  or  part.  Similarly  ( b )  even 
for  those  who  postulate  a  single  matter  of  their 
‘elements’  there  is  a  certain  difficulty  in  ex¬ 
plaining  how  anything  is  to  result  from  two 
of  them  taken  together — e.g.  from  ‘cold’  and 
[5]  ‘hot’,  or  from  Fire  and  Earth.  For  if  flesh 
consists  of  both  and  is  neither  of  them,  nor 
again  is  a  ‘composition’  of  them  in  which  they 
are  preserved  unaltered,  what  alternative  is 
left  except  to  ^identify  the  resultant  of  the  two 
‘elements’  with  their  matter?  For  the  passing- 
away  of  either  ‘element’  produces  either  the 
other  or  the  matter. 

Perhaps  we  may  suggest  the  following  solu¬ 
tion.  (i)  There  are  differences  of  degree  in  hot 
and  cold.  Although,  therefore,  when  either  is 
fully  real  without  qualification,  the  other  will 
[/o]  exist  potentially;  yet,  when  neither  exists 
in  the  full  completeness  of  its  being,  but  both 
by  combining  destroy  one  another’s  excesses  so 
that  there  exist  instead  a  hot  which  (for  a 
‘hot’)  is  cold  and  a  cold  which  (for  a  ‘cold’)  is 
hot;  then  what  results  from  these  two  con¬ 
traries  will  be  neither  their  matter,  nor  either 
of  them  existing  in  its  full  reality  without 
qualification.  There  will  result  instead  an  ‘in¬ 
termediate’:  and  this  ‘intermediate’,  according 


BOOK  II,  CHAPTERS  6-7 


436  ON  GENERATION  AND  CORRUPTION  335a 


[75]  as  it  is  potentially  more  hot  than  cold  or 
vice  versa,  will  possess  a  power-of-heating  that 
is  double  or  triple  its  power-of-cooling,  or 
otherwise  related  thereto  in  some  similar  ratio. 
Thus  all  the  other  bodies  will  result  from  the 
contraries,  or  rather  from  the  ‘elements’,  in  so 
far  as  these  have  been  ‘combined’:  while  the 
‘elements’  will  result  from  the  contraries,  in 
so  far  as  these  ‘exist  potentially’  in  a  special 
sense — not  as  matter  ‘exists  potentially’,  but  in 
the  sense  explained  above.  And  when  a  thing 
comes-to-be  in  this  manner,  the  process  is  ‘com- 
[20]  bination’;  whereas  what  comes-to-be  in 
the  other  manner  is  matter.  Moreover  (ii)  con¬ 
traries  also  ‘suffer  action’,  in  accordance  with 
the  disjunctively-articulated  definition  estab¬ 
lished  in  the  early  part  of  this  work.1  For  the 
actually-hot  is  potentially-cold  and  the  actually- 
cold  potentially-hot;  so  that  hot  and  cold,  un¬ 
less  they  are  equally  balanced,  are  transformed 
into  one  another  (and  all  the  other  contraries 
[25]  behave  in  a  similar  way).  It  is  thus,  then, 
that  in  the  first  place  the  ‘elements’  are  trans¬ 
formed;  and  that  ( in  the  second  place)  out  of 
the  ‘elements’  there  come-to-be  flesh  and  bones 
and  the  like — the  hot  becoming  cold  and  the 
cold  becoming  hot  when  they  have  been  brought 
to  the  ‘mean’.  For  at  the  ‘mean’  is  neither  hot 
nor  cold.  The  ‘mean’,  however,  is  of  consider¬ 
able  extent  and  not  indivisible.  Similarly,  it  is 
qua  reduced  to  a  ‘mean’  condition  that  the  dry 
and  the  moist,  as  well  as  the  contraries  we  have 
used  as  examples,  produce  flesh  and  bone  and 
[30]  the  remaining  compounds. 

8 

All  the  compound  bodies — all  of  which  exist  in 
the  region  belonging  to  the  central  body — are 
composed  of  all  the  ‘simple’  bodies.  For  they  all 
contain  Earth  because  every  ‘simple’  body  is  to 
be  found  specially  and  most  abundantly  in  its 
own  place.  And  they  all  contain  Water  be- 
[^5]  cause  (a)  the  compound  must  possess  a 
definite  outline  and  Water,  alone  of  the  ‘sim- 
335a  pie’  bodies,  is  readily  adaptable  in  shape: 
moreover  (b)  Earth  has  no  power  of  cohesion 
without  the  moist.  On  the  contrary,  the  moist 
is  what  holds  it  together;  for  it  would  fall  to 
pieces  if  the  moist  were  eliminated  from  it 
completely. 

They  contain  Earth  and  Water,  then,  for  the 
reasons  we  have  given:  and  they  contain  Air 
and  Fire,  because  these  are  contrary  to  Earth 
[5]  and  Water  (Earth  being  contrary  to  Air 
and  Water  to  Fire,  in  so  far  as  one  Substance 

1  Cf.  above,  1.  7. 


can  be  ‘contrary’  to  another).  Now  all  com¬ 
pounds  presuppose  in  their  coming-to-be  con¬ 
stituents  which  are  contrary  to  one  another: 
and  in  all  compounds  there  is  contained  one 
set  of  the  contrasted  extremes.  Hence  the  other 
set  must  be  contained  in  them  also,  so  that 
every  compound  will  include  all  the  ‘simple’ 
bodies. 

[/o]  Additional  evidence  seems  to  be  fur¬ 
nished  by  the  food  each  compound  takes.  For 
all  of  them  are  fed  by  substances  which  are 
the  same  as  their  constituents,  and  all  of  them 
are  fed  by  more  substances  than  one.  Indeed, 
even  the  plants,  though  it  might  be  thought 
they  are  fed  by  one  substance  only,  viz.  by 
Water,  are  fed  by  more  than  one:  for  Earth 
has  been  mixed  with  the  Water.  That  is  why 
farmers  too  endeavour  to  mix  before  watering. 
[75]  Although  food  is  akin  to  the  matter,  that 
which  is  fed  is  the  ‘figure’ — i.e.  the  ‘form’ — 
taken  along  with  the  matter.  This  fact  enables 
us  to  understand  why,  whereas  all  the  ‘simple’ 
bodies  come-to-be  out  of  one  another,  Fire 
is  the  only  one  of  them  which  (as  our  prede¬ 
cessors  also  assert)  ‘is  fed’.  For  Fire  alone — or 
more  than  all  the  rest — is  akin  to  the  ‘form’ 
because  it  tends  by  nature  to  be  borne  towards 
[20]  the  limit.  Now  each  of  them  naturally 
tends  to  be  borne  towards  its  own  place;  but 
the  ‘figure’ — i.e.  the  ‘form’ — of  them  all  is  at 
the  limits. 

Thus  we  have  explained  that  all  the  com¬ 
pound  bodies  are  composed  of  all  the  ‘simple’ 
bodies. 

9 

Since  some  things  are  such  as  to  come-to-be 
[25]  and  pass-away,  and  since  coming-to-be  in 
fact  occurs  in  the  region  about  the  centre,  we 
must  explain  the  number  and  the  nature  of  the 
‘originative  sources’  of  all  coming-to-be  alike: 
for  a  grasp  of  the  true  theory  of  any  universal 
facilitates  the  understanding  of  its  specific 
forms. 

The  ‘originative  sources’,  then,  of  the  things 
which  come-to-be  are  equal  in  number  to,  and 
identical  in  kind  with,  those  in  the  sphere  of 
the  eternal  and  primary  things.  For  there  is  one 
[jo]  in  the  sense  of  ‘matter’,  and  a  second  in 
the  sense  of  ‘form’:  and,  in  addition,  the  third 
‘originative  source’  must  be  present  as  well. 
For  the  two  first  are  not  sufficient  to  bring 
things  into  being,  any  more  than  they  are 
adequate  to  account  for  the  primary  things. 

Now  cause,  in  the  sense  of  material  origin, 
for  the  things  which  are  such  as  to  come-to-be 


336‘ 

is  'that  which  can  be-and-not-be’:  and  this  is 
identical  with  'that  which  can  come-to-be-and- 
pass-away’,  since  the  latter,  while  it  is  at  one 
time,  at  another  time  is  not.  (For  whereas 
some  things  are  of  necessity,  viz.  the  eternal 
things,  others  of  necessity  are  not .  And  of  these 
[35]  two  sets  things,  since  they  cannot 
335b  diverge  from  the  necessity  of  their  na¬ 
ture,  it  is  impossible  for  the  first  not  to  be  and 
impossible  for  the  second  to  be.  Other  things, 
however,  can  both  be  and  not  be.)  Hence 
coming-to-be  and  passing-away  must  occur 
[5]  within  the  field  of  ‘that  which  can  be-and- 
not-be\  This,  therefore,  is  cause  in  the  sense 
of  material  origin  for  the  things  which  are 
such  as  to  come-to-be;  while  cause,  in  the  sense 
of  their  'end',  is  their  'figure*  or  'form* — and 
that  is  the  formula  expressing  the  essential 
nature  of  each  of  them. 

But  the  third  'originative  source*  must  be 
present  as  well — the  cause  vaguely  dreamed  of 
by  all  our  predecessors,  definitely  stated  by 
none  of  them.  On  the  contrary  ( a )  some 
[/o]  amongst  them  thought  the  nature  of  'the 
Forms*  was  adequate  to  account  for  coming-to- 
be.  Thus  Socrates  in  the  Phaedo  first  blames 
everybody  else  for  having  given  no  explana¬ 
tion;1  and  then  lays  it  down  that  'some  things 
are  Forms,  others  Participants  in  the  Forms*, 
and  that  'while  a  thing  is  said  to  ''be**  in  virtue 
of  the  Form,  it  is  said  to  "come-to-be**  qua 
"sharing  in,**  to  "pass-away**  qua  "losing,**  the 
[75]  Form*.  Hence  he  thinks  that  'assuming 
the  truth  of  these  theses,  the  Forms  must  be 
causes  both  of  coming-to-be  and  of  passing- 
away*.2  On  the  other  hand  ( b )  there  were 
others  who  thought  ‘the  matter*  was  adequate 
by  itself  to  account  for  coming-to-be,  since  'the 
movement  originates  from  the  matter*. 

Neither  of  these  theories,  however,  is  sound. 
For  (a)  if  the  Forms  are  causes,  why  is  their 
generating  activity  intermittent  instead  of  per- 

fetual  and  continuous — since  there  always  are 
20]  Participants  as  well  as  Forms?  Besides,  in 
some  instances  we  see  that  the  cause  is  other 
than  the  Form.  For  it  is  the  doctor  who  im¬ 
plants  health  and  the  man  of  science  who  im¬ 
plants  science,  although  ‘Health  itself*  and 
'Science  itself*  are  as  well  as  the  Participants: 
and  the  same  principle  applies  to  everything 
else  that  is  produced  in  accordance  with  an  art. 
On  the  other  hand  (b)  to  say  that  'matter 
[25]  generates  owing  to  its  movement*  would 
be,  no  doubt,  more  scientific  than  to  make  such 

1  Cf.  Plato,  Phaedo ,  96-99. 

2  Cf.  Plato,  Phaedo ,  100-10 1. 


437 

statements  as  are  made  by  the  thinkers  we 
have  been  criticizing.  For  what  'alters*  and 
transfigures  plays  a  greater  part  in  bringing 
things  into  being;  and  we  are  everywhere  ac¬ 
customed,  in  the  products  of  nature  and  of  art 
alike,  to  look  upon  that  which  can  initiate 
movement  as  the  producing  cause.  Neverthe¬ 
less  this  second  theory  is  not  right  either. 

[50]  For,  to  begin  with,  it  is  characteristic  of 
matter  to  suffer  action,  i.e.  to  be  moved:  but 
to  move,  i.e.  to  act,  belongs  to  a  different 
'power*.  This  is  obvious  both  in  the  things 
that  come-to-be  by  art  and  in  those  that  come- 
to-be  by  nature.  Water  does  not  of  itself  pro¬ 
duce  out  of  itself  an  animal:  and  it  is  the  art, 
not  the  wood,  that  makes  a  bed.  Nor  is  this 
their  only  error.  They  make  a  second  mistake 
[^5]  in  omitting  the  more  controlling  cause: 
336a  for  they  eliminate  the  essential  nature, 
i.e.  the  'form*.  And  what  is  more,  since  they 
remove  the  formal  cause,  they  invest  the  forces 
they  assign  to  the  'simple*  bodies — the  forces 
which  enable  these  bodies  to  bring  things  into 
being — with  too  instrumental  a  character.  For 
'since*  (as  they  say)  'it  is  the  nature  of  the  hot 
to  dissociate,  of  the  cold  to  bring  together,  and 
[5]  of  each  remaining  contrary  either  to  act  or 
to  suffer  action*,  it  is  out  of  such  materials  and 
by  their  agency  (so  they  maintain)  that  every¬ 
thing  else  comes-to-be  and  passes-away.  Yet 
(a)  it  is  evident  that  even  Fire  is  itself  moved, 
i.e.  suffers  action.  Moreover  (b)  their  pro¬ 
cedure  is  virtually  the  same  as  if  one  were  to 
treat  the  saw  (and  the  various  instruments  of 
carpentry)  as  'the  cause*  of  the  things  that 
[/o]  come-to-be:  for  the  wood  must  be  divided 
if  a  man  saws,  must  become  smooth  if  he 
planes,  and  so  on  with  the  remaining  tools. 
Hence,  however  true  it  may  be  that  Fire  is 
active,  i.e.  sets  things  moving,  there  is  a  further 
point  they  fail  to  observe-— viz.  that  Fire  is  in¬ 
ferior  to  the  tools  or  instruments  in  the  manner 
in  which  it  sets  things  moving. 

10 

As  to  our  own  theory — we  have  given  a  gen¬ 
eral  account  of  the  causes  in  an  earlier  work,3 
and  we  have  now  explained  and  distinguished 
the  'matter*  and  the  'form*.4  Further,  since  the 
[75]  change  which  is  motion  has  been  proved5 
to  be  eternal,  the  continuity  of  the  occurrence 
of  coming-to-be  follows  necessarily  from  what 
we  have  established:  for  the  eternal  motion, 
by  causing  'the  generator*  to  approach  and 

8  Cf.  Physics ,  11.  3-9.  4  Cf.  above,  335“  32-b  7. 

6  Cf.  Physics ,  vm.  7-9. 


BOOK  II,  CHAPTERS  7-10 


433  ON  GENERATION 

retire,  will  produce  coming-to-be  uninterrupt¬ 
edly.  At  the  same  time  it  is  clear  that  we  were 
[20]  also  right  when,  in  an  earlier  work,1  we 
called  motion  (not  coming-to-be)  ‘the  primary 
form  of  change’.  For  it  is  far  more  reasonable 
that  what  is  should  cause  the  coming-to-be  of 
what  is  not,  than  that  what  is  not  should  cause 
the  being  of  what  is.  Now  that  which  is  being 
moved  is,  but  that  which  is  coming-to-be  is 
not:  hence,  also,  motion  is  prior  to  coming-to-be. 

We  have  assumed,  and  have  proved,  that 
[25]  coming-to-be  and  passing-away  happen  to 
things  continuously;  and  we  assert  that  motion 
causes  coming-to-be.  That  being  so,  it  is  evi¬ 
dent  that,  if  the  motion  be  single,  both  proc¬ 
esses  cannot  occur  since  they  are  contrary  to 
one  another:  for  it  is  a  law  of  nature  that  the 
same  cause,  provided  it  remain  in  the  same 
condition,  always  produces  the  same  effect,  so 
that,  from  a  single  motion,  either  coming-to- 
be  or  passing-away  will  always  result.  The 
movements  must,  on  the  contrary,  be  more 
[30]  than  one,  and  they  must  be  contrasted 
with  one  another  either  by  the  sense  of  their 
motion  or  by  its  irregularity:  for  contrary 
effects  demand  contraries  as  their  causes. 

This  explains  why  it  is  not  the  primary  mo¬ 
tion  that  causes  coming-to-be  and  passing- 
away,  but  the  motion  along  the  inclined  circle: 
for  this  motion  not  only  possesses  the  necessary 
continuity,  but  includes  a  duality  of  move- 
336b  ments  as  well.  For  if  coming-to-be  and 
passing-away  are  always  to  be  continuous,  there 
must  be  some  body  always  being  moved  (in  or¬ 
der  that  these  changes  may  not  fail)  and 
moved  with  a  duality  of  movements  (in  order 
that  both  changes,  not  one  only,  may  result). 
Now  the  continuity  of  this  movement  is  caused 
by  the  motion  of  the  whole:  but  the  approach¬ 
ing  and  retreating  of  the  moving  body  are 
caused  by  the  inclination.  For  the  consequence 
[5]  of  the  inclination  is  that  the  body  becomes 
alternately  remote  and  near;  and  since  its  dis¬ 
tance  is  thus  unequal,  its  movement  will  be  ir¬ 
regular.  Therefore,  if  it  generates  by  approach¬ 
ing  and  by  its  proximity,  it — this  very  same 
body — destroys  by  retreating  and  becoming  re¬ 
mote:  and  if  it  generates  by  many  successive 
approaches,  it  also  destroys  by  many  successive 
retirements.  For  contrary  effects  demand  con- 
[/o]  traries  as  their  causes;  and  the  natural 
processes  of  passing-away  and  coming-to-be  oc¬ 
cupy  equal  periods  of  time.  Hence,  too,  the 
times — i.e.  the  lives — of  the  several  kinds  of 
living  things  have  a  number  by  which  they  are 
1  Cf.  Physics ,  260*26-26  ia26. 


AND  CORRUPTION  337a 

distinguished:  for  there  is  an  Order  controlling 
all  things,  and  every  time  (i.e.  every  life)  is 
measured  by  a  period.  Not  all  of  them,  how¬ 
ever,  are  measured  by  the  same  period,  but 
some  by  a  smaller  and  others  by  a  greater  one: 
for  to  some  of  them  the  period,  which  is  their 
[75]  measure,  is  a  year,  while  to  some  it  is 
longer  and  to  others  shorter. 

And  there  are  facts  of  observation  in  mani¬ 
fest  agreement  with  our  theories.  Thus  we  see 
that  coming-to-be  occurs  as  the  sun  approaches 
and  decay  as  it  retreats;  and  we  see  that  the  two 
processes  occupy  equal  times.  For  the  dura¬ 
tions  of  the  natural  processes  of  passing-away 
and  coming-to-be  are  equal.  Nevertheless  it 
[20]  often  happens  that  things  pass-away  in 
too  short  a  time.  This  is  due  to  the  ‘intermin¬ 
gling’  by  which  the  things  that  come-to-be  and 
pass-away  are  implicated  with  one  another.  For 
their  matter  is  ‘irregular’,  i.e.  is  not  everywhere 
the  same:  hence  the  processes  by  which  they 
come-to-be  must  be  ‘irregular’  too,  i.e.  some  too  1 
quick  and  others  too  slow.  Consequently  the 
phenomenon  in  question  occurs,  because  the 
‘irregular’  coming-to-be  of  these  things  is  the 
passing-away  of  other  things. 

[25]  Coming-to-be  and  passing-away  will,  as 
we  have  said,  always  be  continuous,  and  will 
never  fail  owing  to  the  cause  we  stated.2  And 
this  continuity  has  a  sufficient  reason  on  our 
theory.  For  in  all  things,  as  we  affirm,  Nature 
always  strives  after  ‘the  better’.  Now  ‘being’ 
(we  have  explained  elsewhere3  the  exact  vari¬ 
ety  of  meanings  we  recognize  in  this  term)  is 
[30]  better  than  ‘not-being’:  but  not  all  things 
can  possess  ‘being’,  since  they  are  too  far  re¬ 
moved  from  the  ‘originative  source.’  God  there¬ 
fore  adopted  the  remaining  alternative,  and 
fulfilled  the  perfection  of  the  universe  by  mak¬ 
ing  coming-to-be  uninterrupted:  for  the  great¬ 
est  possible  coherence  would  thus  be  secured  to 
existence,  because  that  ‘coming-to-be  should  it¬ 
self  come-to-be  perpetually’  is  the  closest  ap¬ 
proximation  to  eternal  being. 

The  cause  of  this  perpetuity  of  coming-to-be,  1 
337a  as  we  have  often  said,  is  circular  motion: 
for  that  is  the  only  motion  which  is  continuous. 
That,  too,  is  why  all  the  other  things — the 
things,  I  mean,  which  are  reciprocally  trans-  | 
formed  in  virtue  of  their  ‘passions’  and  their 
‘powers  of  action’,  e.g.  the  ‘simple’  bodies — 
imitate  circular  motion.  For  when  Water  is 
[5]  transformed  into  Air,  Air  into  Fire,  and 
the  Fire  back  into  Water,  we  say  the  coming- 

2  Cf.  above,  318*  9  fif. 

3  Cf.,  e.g.  Metaphysics ,  1  o  1 7®  7  ff. 


33  7b 

to-be  ‘has  completed  the  circle’,  because  it  re¬ 
verts  again  to  the  beginning.  Hence  it  is  by 
imitating  circular  motion  that  rectilinear  mo¬ 
tion  too  is  continuous. 

These  considerations  serve  at  the  same  time 
to  explain  what  is  to  some  people  a  baffling 
problem — viz.  why  the  ‘simple’  bodies,  since 
each  them  is  travelling  towards  its  own  place, 
[/o]  have  not  become  dissevered  from  one  an¬ 
other  in  the  infinite  lapse  of  time.  The  reason 
is  their  reciprocal  transformation.  For,  had 
each  of  them  persisted  in  its  own  place  instead 
of  being  transformed  by  its  neighbour,  they 
would  have  got  dissevered  long  ago.  They  are 
transformed,  however,  owing  to  the  motion 
with  its  dual  character:  and  because  they  are 
transformed,  none  of  them  is  able  to  persist  in 
[75]  any  place  allotted  to  it  by  the  Order. 

It  is  clear  from  what  has  been  said  (i)  that 
coming-to-be  and  passing-away  actually  occur, 
(ii)  what  causes  them,  and  (iii)  what  subject 
undergoes  them.  But  (a)  if  there  is  to  be  move¬ 
ment  (as  we  have  explained  elsewhere,  in  an 
earlier  work1)  there  must  be  something  which 
initiates  it;  if  there  is  to  be  movement  always, 
there  must  always  be  something  which  initiates 
it;  if  the  movement  is  to  be  continuous,  what 
[20]  initiates  it  must  be  single,  unmoved,  un¬ 
generated,  and  incapable  of  ‘alteration’;  and  if 
the  circular  movements  are  more  than  one, 
their  initiating  causes  must  all  of  them,  in  spite 
of  their  plurality,  be  in  some  way  subordinated 
to  a  single  ‘originative  source’.  Further  (b) 
since  time  is  continuous,  movement  must  be 
continuous,  inasmuch  as  there  can  be  no  time 
without  movement.  Time,  therefore,  is  a  ‘num¬ 
ber’  of  some  continuous  movement — a  ‘num- 
[25]  ber’,  therefore,  of  the  circular  movement, 
as  was  established  in  the  discussions  at  the  be¬ 
ginning.2  But  (c)  is  movement  continuous  be¬ 
cause  of  the  continuity  of  that  which  is  moved, 
or  because  that  in  which  the  movement  occurs 
(I  mean,  e.g.  the  place  or  the  quality)  is  con¬ 
tinuous?  The  answer  must  clearly  be  ‘because 
that  which  is  moved  is  continuous’.  (For  how 
can  the  quality  be  continuous  except  in  virtue 
of  the  continuity  of  the  thing  to  which  it  be¬ 
longs?  But  if  the  continuity  of  ‘that  in  which’ 
contributes  to  make  the  movement  continuous, 
[50]  this  is  true  only  of  ‘the  place  in  which’; 
for  that  has  ‘magnitude’  in  a  sense.)  But  ( d ) 
amongst  continuous  bodies  which  are  moved, 
only  that  which  is  moved  in  a  circle  is  ‘continu¬ 
ous’  in  such  a  way  that  it  preserves  its  continu- 

1  Physics ,  255b  31-260®  10. 

2  Physics ,  21715  29-224®  17. 


439 

ity  with  itself  throughout  the  movement.  The 
conclusion  therefore  is  that  this  is  what  pro¬ 
duces  continuous  movement,  viz.  the  body 
which  is  being  moved  in  a  circle;  and  its  move¬ 
ment  makes  time  continuous. 

11 

Wherever  there  is  continuity  in  any  process 
[35]  (coming-to-be  or  ‘alteration’  or  any  kind 
of  change  whatever)  we  observe  ‘consecutive- 
337b  ness’,  i.e.  this  coming-to-be  after  that 
without  any  interval.  Hence  we  must  investi¬ 
gate  whether,  amongst  the  consecutive  mem¬ 
bers,  there  is  any  whose  future  being  is  neces¬ 
sary;  or  whether,  on  the  contrary,  every  one  of 
them  may  fail  to  come-to-be.  For  that  some  of 
them  may  fail  to  occur,  is  clear,  (a)  We  need 
only  appeal  to  the  distinction  between  the 
statements  ‘x  will  be’  and  'x  is  about  to  .  .  .’, 
which  depends  upon  this  fact.  For  if  it  be  true 
[5]  to  say  of  x  that  it  ‘will  be’,  it  must  at  some 
time  be  true  to  say  of  it  that  ‘it  is’:  whereas, 
though  it  be  true  to  say  of  x  now  that  ‘it  is 
about  to  occur’,  it  is  quite  possible  for  it  not  to 
come-to-be — thus  a  man  might  not  walk, 
though  he  is  now  ‘about  to’  walk.  And  ( b ) 
since  (to  appeal  to  a  general  principle) 
amongst  the  things  which  ‘are’  some  are  capa¬ 
ble  also  of  ‘not-being’,  it  is  clear  that  the  same 
ambiguous  character  will  attach  to  them  no 
less  when  they  are  coming-to-be:  in  other  words, 
their  coming-to-be  will  not  be  necessary. 

[/o]  Then  are  all  the  things  that  come-to-be  of 
this  contingent  character?  Or,  on  the  contrary, 
is  it  absolutely  necessary  for  some  of  them  to 
come-to-be?  Is  there,  in  fact,  a  distinction  in 
the  field  of  ‘coming-to-be’  corresponding  to  the 
distinction,  within  the  field  of  ‘being’,  between 
things  that  cannot  possibly  ‘not-be’  and  things 
that  can  ‘not-be’?  For  instance,  is  it  necessary 
that  solstices  shall  come-to-be,  i.e.  impossible 
that  they  should  fail  to  be  able  to  occur? 

Assuming  that  the  antecedent  must  have 
come-to-be  if  the  consequent  is  to  be  (e.g.  that 
[75]  foundations  must  have  come-to-be  if  there 
is  to  be  a  house:  clay,  if  there  are  to  be  founda¬ 
tions),  is  the  converse  also  true?  If  foundations 
have  come-to-be,  must  a  house  come-to-be? 
The  answer  seems  to  be  that  the  necessary 
nexus  no  longer  holds,  unless  it  is  ‘necessary’ 
for  the  consequent  (as  well  as  for  the  antece¬ 
dent)  to  come-to-be — ‘necessary’  absolutely.  If 
that  be  the  case,  however,  ‘a  house  must  come- 
to-be  if  foundations  have  come-to-be’,  as  well  as 
vice  versa .  For  the  antecedent  was  assumed  to 
be  so  related  to  the  consequent  that,  if  the  lat- 


BOOK  II,  CHAPTERS  10-11 


44o  ON  GENERATION 

ter  is  to  be,  the  antecedent  must  have  come-to- 
[20]  be  before  it.  If,  therefore,  it  is  necessary 
that  the  consequent  should  come-to-be,  the  an¬ 
tecedent  also  must  have  come-to-be:  and  if  the 
antecedent  has  come-to-be,  then  the  consequent 
also  must  come-to-be — not,  however,  because  of 
the  antecedent,  but  because  the  future  being  of 
the  consequent  was  assumed  as  necessary. 
Hence,  in  any  sequence,  when  the  being  of  the 
consequent  is  necessary,  the  nexus  is  reciprocal 
— in  other  words,  when  the  antecedent  has 
[25]  come-to-be  the  consequent  must  always 
come-to-be  too. 

Now  (i)  if  the  sequence  of  occurrences  is  to 
proceed  ad  infinitum  ‘downwards’,  the  coming- 
to-be  of  any  determinate  ‘this’  amongst  the  later 
members  of  the  sequence  will  not  be  absolute - 
ly,  but  only  conditionally,  necessary.  For  it  will 
always  be  necessary  that  some  other  member 
shall  have  come-to-be  before  ‘this’  as  the  pre¬ 
supposed  condition  of  the  necessity  that  ‘this’ 
should  come-to-be:  consequently,  since  what  is 
‘infinite’  has  no  ‘originative  source’,  neither 
will  there  be  in  the  infinite  sequence  any  ‘pri¬ 
mary’  member  which  will  make  it  ‘necessary’ 
for  the  remaining  members  to  come-to-be. 

[30]  Nor  again  (ii)  will  it  be  possible  to  say 
with  truth,  even  in  regard  to  the  members  of  a 
limited  sequence,  that  it  is  ‘absolutely  neces¬ 
sary’  for  any  one  of  them  to  come-to-be.  We 
cannot  truly  say,  e.g.  that  ‘it  is  absolutely  nec¬ 
essary  for  a  house  to  come-to-be  when  founda¬ 
tions  have  been  laid’:  for  (unless  it  is  always 
necessary  for  a  house  to  be  coming-to-be)  we 
should  be  faced  with  the  consequence  that, 
when  foundations  have  been  laid,  a  thing, 
which  need  not  always  be,  must  always  be.  No: 
if  its  coming-to-be  is  to  be  ‘necessary’,  it  must 
[35]  be  ‘always’  in  its  coming-to-be.  For  what 
is  ‘of  necessity’  coincides  with  what  is  ‘always’, 
338a  since  that  which  ‘must  be’  cannot  possi¬ 
bly  ‘not-be’.  Hence  a  thing  is  eternal  if  its  ‘be¬ 
ing’  is  necessary:  and  if  it  is  eternal,  its  ‘being’ 
is  necessary.  And  if,  therefore,  the  ‘coming-to- 
be’  of  a  thing  is  necessary,  its  ‘coming-to-be’  is 
eternal;  and  if  eternal,  necessary. 

It  follows  that  the  coming-to-be  of  anything, 
[5]  if  it  is  absolutely  necessary,  must  be  cycli¬ 
cal — i.e.  must  return  upon  itself.  For  coming- 
to-be  must  either  be  limited  or  not  limited:  and 
if  not  limited,  it  must  be  either  rectilinear  or 
cyclical.  But  the  first  of  these  last  two  alterna¬ 
tives  is  impossible  if  coming-to-be  is  to  be  eter¬ 
nal,  because  there  could  not  be  any  ‘originative 
source’  whatever  in  an  infinite  rectilinear  se¬ 
quence,  whether  its  members  be  taken  ‘down- 


AND  CORRUPTION  338b 

wards’  (as  future  events)  or  ‘upwards’  (as  past 
events).  Yet  coming-to-be  must  have  an  ‘origi¬ 
native  source’  (if  it  is  to  be  necessary  and  there- 
[/o]  fore  eternal),  nor  can  it  be  eternal  if  it  is 
limited.  Consequently  it  must  be  cyclical. 
Hence  the  nexus  must  be  reciprocal.  By  this  I 
mean  that  the  necessary  occurrence  of  ‘this’  in¬ 
volves  the  necessary  occurrence  of  its  antece¬ 
dent:  and  conversely  that,  given  the  antece¬ 
dent,  it  is  also  necessary  for  the  consequent  to 
come-to-be.  And  this  reciprocal  nexus  will  hold 
continuously  throughout  the  sequence:  for  it 
makes  no  difference  whether  the  reciprocal 
nexus,  of  which  we  are  speaking,  is  mediated 
by  two,  or  by  many,  members. 

[75]  It  is  in  circular  movement,  therefore,  and 
in  cyclical  coming-to-be  that  the  ‘absolutely 
necessary’  is  to  be  found.  In  other  words,  if  the 
coming-to-be  of  any  things  is  cyclical,  it  is  ‘nec¬ 
essary’  that  each  of  them  is  coming-to-be  and 
has  come-to-be:  and  if  the  coming-to-be  of  any 
things  is  ‘necessary’,  their  coming-to-be  is  cycli¬ 
cal. 

The  result  we  have  reached  is  logically  con¬ 
cordant  with  the  eternity  of  circular  motion, 
i.e.  the  eternity  of  the  revolution  of  the  heavens 
(a  fact  which  approved  itself  on  other  and  in¬ 
dependent  evidence),1  since  precisely  those 
338b  movements  which  belong  to,  and  depend 
upon,  this  eternal  revolution  ‘come-to-be’  of 
necessity,  and  of  necessity  ‘will  be’.  For  since 
the  revolving  body  is  always  setting  something 
else  in  motion,  the  movement  of  the  things  it 
moves  must  also  be  circular.  Thus,  from  the  be¬ 
ing  of  the  ‘upper  revolution’  it  follows  that  the 
sun  revolves  in  this  determinate  manner;  and 
since  the  sun  revolves  thus,  the  seasons  in  con¬ 
sequence  come-to-be  in  a  cycle,  i.e.  return  upon 
[5]  themselves;  and  since  they  come-to-be  cy¬ 
clically,  so  in  their  turn  do  the  things  whose 
coming-to-be  the  seasons  initiate. 

Then  why  do  some  things  manifestly  come- 
to-be  in  this  cyclical  fashion  (as,  e.g.  showers 
and  air,  so  that  it  must  rain  if  there  is  to  be  a 
cloud  and,  conversely,  there  must  be  a  cloud  if 
it  is  to  rain),  while  men  and  animals  do  not 
‘return  upon  themselves’  so  that  the  same  indi- 
[/o]  vidual  comes-to-be  a  second  time  (for 
though  your  coming-to-be  presupposes  your 
father’s,  his  coming-to-be  does  not  presuppose 
yours)?  Why,  on  the  contrary,  does  this  com¬ 
ing-to-be  seem  to  constitute  a  rectilinear  se¬ 
quence? 

In  discussing  this  new  problem,  we  must  be¬ 
gin  by  inquiring  whether  all  things  ‘return 

1  Cf.  Physics ,  vm.  7-9. 


338b 

upon  themselves’  in  a  uniform  manner;  or 
whether,  on  the  contrary,  though  in  some  se¬ 
quences  what  recurs  is  numerically  the  same, 
in  other  sequences  it  is  the  same  only  in  species . 
In  consequence  of  this  distinction,  it  is  evident 
that  those  things,  whose  ‘substance’ — that 
which  is  undergoing  the  process — is  imperish- 
[75]  able,  will  be  numerically,  as  well  as  specifi¬ 
cally,  the  same  in  their  recurrence:  for  the  char¬ 
acter  of  the  process  is  determined  by  the  char¬ 
acter  of  that  which  undergoes  it.  Those  things, 


441 

on  the  other  hand,  whose  ‘substance’  is  perish¬ 
able  (not  imperishable)  must  ‘return  upon 
themselves’  in  the  sense  that  what  recurs, 
though  specifically  the  same,  is  not  the  same 
numerically.  That  is  why,  when  Water  comes- 
to-be  from  Air  and  Air  from  Water,  the  Air  is 
the  same  ‘specifically’,  not  ‘numerically’:  and 
if  these  too  recur  numerically  the  same,  at  any 
rate  this  does  not  happen  with  things  whose 
‘substance’  comes-to-be — whose  ‘substance’  is 
such  that  it  is  essentially  capable  of  not-being. 


BOOK  II,  CHAPTER  11 


CONTENTS:  METEOROLOGY 


BOOK  I 


BOOK  III 


CHAP.  BERLIN  NOS. 

1.  Summary  of  subject-matter  of  338s  20 
meteorology 

2.  The  material  and  the  efficient  cause  339**  1 1 
of  the  phenomena  to  be  studied 

3.  The  position  of  air  and  fire  rela-  339a32 
tively  to  the  celestial  sphere.  Why  clouds  and 
water  do  not  form  in  ether 

4.  The  cause  of  shooting-stars  and  34ib  1 

the  like 

5.  The  cause  of  the  appearance  of  342s1 35 

‘chasms’,  &c.,  in  the  sky 

6.  Refutation  of  earlier  theories  of  342b  25 
comets 

7.  The  cause  of  comets  344a5 

8.  The  milky  way  345a  1 1 

9.  The  causes  of  rain,  and  the  differ-  346b  16 
ence  between  cloud  and  mist 

10.  The  causes  of  dew  and  hoar-frost  347s  13 

11.  The  causes  and  concomitants  of  347b  13 

snow 

12.  Hail — where  and  when  it  is  pro-  347b34 
duced 

13.  Winds,  rivers,  and  springs  349a  11 

14.  Why  the  same  parts  of  the  earth  35 ia  19 


are  not  always  watered  by  rivers,  or  always 
dry.  Floods 

BOOK  II 

1.  Three  theories  of  the  origin  of  353a  30 
the  sea.  It  cannot  have  springs.  Why  it  flows 
as  it  does 

2.  Its  place.  It  is  the  end  rather  than  354b  1 
the  beginning  of  water.  Why  it  is  not  in¬ 
creased  by  the  influx  of  rivers 

3.  Why  is  it  salt?  Is  it  eternal?  The  356b  2 
cause  of  different  tastes  and  colours  in  water 

4.  The  causes  of  winds  359b  26 

5.  Why  winds  blow  at  some  times  36 ib  14 
and  not  at  others.  From  where,  and  when, 
each  wind  blows 

6.  The  direction  of  the  winds;  which  363a  21 
are  contrary;  and  which  can  blow  together. 
Their  number,  concomitants,  and  natures 

7.  Three  theories  of  earthquakes  365a  13 

8.  The  causes  of  earthquakes.  Indi-  365b2i 
cations  that  they  are  due  to  exhalation 

9.  Early  theories  of  thunder  and  369a  10 
lightning 


CHAP.  BERLIN  NOS. 

1.  The  causes  of,  and  difference  be-  37ob  1 
tween,  ecnephias,  typhon,  and  prester.  The 
kinds  of  thunderbolt 

2.  The  causes  and  concomitants  of  37ib  18 
halos 

3.  Why  halos  are  circular,  and  what  372b  11 
they  indicate 

4.  The  rainbow — how  it  is  produced  373a  32 

by  reflection,  and  the  causes  of  its  properties 
(e.g  its  colours).  How  it  differs  from  the  halo 

5.  Some  properties  of  the  rainbow  375b  16 

6.  The  causes  of  ‘rods’  and  mock  suns  3 77s*  28 

BOOK  IV 

1.  Hot  and  cold  are  active,  dry  and  378b  10 
moist  passive  principles.  True  or  natural  gen¬ 
eration  is  due  to  these.  The  contrary  of  true 
generation  is  putrefaction.  Putrefaction  fur¬ 
ther  considered 

2.  Concoction  and  inconcoction  379b  10 

3.  Three  kinds  of  concoction — ripen-  380s  1 1 

ing,  boiling,  broiling;  and  their  contraries 

4.  Dry  and  moist,  and  the  properties  381b  23 
consequent  on  them  in  composite  bodies — 
hard  and  soft 

5.  Every  well-defined  body  must  be  382s  22 
hard  or  soft,  and  solid.  Solidification  and  its 
causes 

6.  Things  that  can  be  solidified  are  382b  28 
made  either  of  water,  or  of  earth  and  water. 
Various  modes  of  solidification  and  solution 

7.  Things  are  thickened  by  fire  or  by  383b  17 
cold  according  as  they  have  more  water  or 
earth  in  them 

8.  The  properties  of  composite  bodies  384b  24 
— nineteen  positive  and  nineteen  negative. 
What  can  and  what  cannot  be  solidified;  what 


can  and  what  cannot  be  melted 
9.  The  remaining  seventeen  properties  385b  7 

10.  Homoeomerous  bodies  388a  10 

11.  Which  mixtures  are  warm  and  389**  23 
which  are  cold 

12.  Homoeomerous  bodies  are  com-  389b  22 


posed  of  the  elements.  End  and  function  more 
evident  in  non-homoeomerous  bodies  than  in 
the  homoeomerous  bodies  which  compose 
them,  and  in  these  than  in  the  elements 


443 


. 


. 


* 


METEOROLOGY 

BOOK  I 


338a  [20]  We  have  already  discussed  the  first 
causes  of  nature,  and  all  natural  motion,1  also 
the  stars  ordered  in  the  motion  of  the  heavens,2 
and  the  physical  elements — enumerating  and 
specifying  them  and  showing  how  they  change 
into  one  another — and  becoming  and  perish¬ 
ing  in  general.3  There  remains  for  considera¬ 
tion  a  part  of  this  inquiry  which  all  our  prede¬ 
cessors  called  meteorology.  It  is  concerned  with 
338b  events  that  are  natural,  though  their  or- 
[2/]  der  is  less  perfect  than  that  of  the  first  of 
the  elements  of  bodies.  They  take  place  in  the 
region  nearest  to  the  motion  of  the  stars.  Such 
are  the  milky  way,  and  comets,  and  the  move¬ 
ments  of  meteors.  It  studies  also  all  the  affec¬ 
tions  we  may  call  common  to  air  and  water, 
and  the  kinds  and  parts  of  the  earth  and  the  af¬ 
fections  of  its  parts.  These  throw  light  on  the 
339a  causes  of  winds  and  earthquakes  and  all 
the  consequences  the  motions  of  these  kinds 
and  parts  involve.  Of  these  things  some  puzzle 
us,  while  others  admit  of  explanation  in  some 
degree.  Further,  the  inquiry  is  concerned  with 
the  falling  of  thunderbolts  and  with  whirl¬ 
winds  and  fire-winds,  and  further,  the  recur- 
[5]  rent  affections  produced  in  these  same  bod¬ 
ies  by  concretion.  When  the  inquiry  into  these 
matters  is  concluded  let  us  consider  what  ac¬ 
count  we  can  give,  in  accordance  with  the 
method  we  have  followed,  of  animals  and 
plants,  both  generally  and  in  detail.  When  that 
has  been  done  we  may  say  that  the  whole  of 
our  original  undertaking  will  have  been  car¬ 
ried  out. 

[/o]  After  this  introduction  let  us  begin  by 
discussing  our  immediate  subject. 

2 

We  have  already  laid  down  that  there  is  one 
physical  element  which  makes  up  the  system 
1  Physics.  2  On  the  Heavens ,  especially  1  and  11. 

3  On  Generation  and  Corruption,  and  perhaps  On 
the  Heavens,  in  and  iv. 

Note:  The  bold  face  numbers  and  letters  are  approxi¬ 
mate  indications  of  the  pages  and  columns  of  the  stand¬ 
ard  Berlin  Greek  text;  the  bracketed  numbers,  of  the 
lines  in  the  Greek  text;  they  are  here  assigned  as  they 
are  assigned  in  the  Oxford  translation. 


of  the  bodies  that  move  in  a  circle,  and  besides 
this  four  bodies  owing  their  existence  to  the 
four  principles,  the  motion  of  these  latter  bod- 
[75]  ies  being  of  two  kinds:  either  from  the 
centre  or  to  the  centre.  These  four  bodies  are 
fire,  air,  water,  earth.  Fire  occupies  the  highest 
place  among  them  all,  earth  the  lowest,  and 
two  elements  correspond  to  these  in  their  rela¬ 
tion  to  one  another,  air  being  nearest  to  fire, 
water  to  earth.  The  whole  world  surrounding 
[20]  the  earth,  then,  the  affections  of  which 
are  our  subject,  is  made  up  of  these  bodies. 
This  world  necessarily  has  a  certain  continuity 
with  the  upper  motions:  consequently  all  its 
power  and  order  is  derived  from  them.  (For 
the  originating  principle  of  all  motion  is  the 
[25]  first  cause.  Besides,  that  element  is  eter¬ 
nal  and  its  motion  has  no  limit  in  space,  but  is 
always  complete;  whereas  all  these  other  bodies 
have  separate  regions  which  limit  one  anoth¬ 
er.)  So  we  must  treat  fire  and  earth  and  the 
elements  like  them  as  the  material  causes  of  the 
[so]  events  in  this  world  (meaning  by  mate¬ 
rial  what  is  subject  and  is  affected),  but  must 
assign  causality  in  the  sense  of  the  originating 
principle  of  motion  to  the  influence  of  the  eter¬ 
nally  moving  bodies. 

3 

Let  us  first  recall  our  original  principles  and 
the  distinctions  already  drawn  and  then  explain 
[35]  the  ‘rnilky  way’  and  comets  and  the  other 
phenomena  akin  to  these. 

Fire,  air,  water,  earth,  we  assert,  originate 
339b  from  one  another,  and  each  of  them  ex¬ 
ists  potentially  in  each,  as  all  things  do  that  can 
be  resolved  into  a  common  and  ultimate  sub¬ 
strate. 

The  first  difficulty  is  raised  by  what  is  called 
the  air.  What  are  we  to  take  its  nature  to  be  in 
[5]  the  world  surrounding  the  earth?  And 
what  is  its  position  relatively  to  the  other  physi¬ 
cal  elements.  (For  there  is  no  question  as  to  the 
relation  of  the  bulk  of  the  earth  to  the  size  of 
the  bodies  which  exist  around  it,  since  astro¬ 
nomical  demonstrations  have  by  this  time 
proved  to  us  that  it  is  actually  far  smaller  than 
some  individual  stars.  As  for  the  water,  it  is 
[/o]  not  observed  to  exist  collectively  and  sepa- 


445 


44  6  METEOROLOGY  340b 


rately,  nor  can  it  do  so  apart  from  that  volume 
of  it  which  has  its  seat  about  the  earth:  the  sea, 
that  is,  and  rivers,  which  we  can  see,  and  any 
subterranean  water  that  may  be  hidden  from 
our  observation.)  The  question  is  really  about 
that  which  lies  between  the  earth  and  the  near¬ 
est  stars.  Are  we  to  consider  it  to  be  one  kind 
[75]  of  body  or  more  than  one?  And  if  more 
than  one,  how  many  are  there  and  what  are  the 
bounds  of  their  regions? 

We  have  already  described  and  character¬ 
ized  the  first  element,  and  explained  that  the 
whole  world  of  the  upper  motions  is  full  of 
that  body.1 

[20]  This  is  an  opinion  we  are  not  alone  in 
holding:  it  appears  to  be  an  old  assumption 
and  one  which  men  have  held  in  the  past,  for 
the  word  ether  has  long  been  used  to  denote 
that  element.  Anaxagoras,  it  is  true,  seems  to 
me  to  think  that  the  word  means  the  same  as 
fire.  For  he  thought  that  the  upper  regions  were 
full  of  fire,  and  that  men  referred  to  those  re¬ 
gions  when  they  spoke  of  ether.  In  the  latter 
[25]  point  he  was  right,  for  men  seem  to  have 
assumed  that  a  body  that  was  eternally  in 
motion  was  also  divine  in  nature;  and,  as 
such  a  body  was  different  from  any  of  the 
terrestrial  elements,  they  determined  to  call  it 
‘ether’. 

For  the  same  opinions  appear  in  cycles 
among  men  not  once  nor  twice,  but  infinitely 
often. 

[jo]  Now  there  are  some  who  maintain  that 
not  only  the  bodies  in  motion  but  that  which 
contains  them  is  pure  fire,  and  the  interval  be¬ 
tween  the  earth  and  the  stars  air:  but  if  they 
had  considered  what  is  now  satisfactorily  es¬ 
tablished  by  mathematics,  they  might  have 
given  up  this  puerile  opinion.  For  it  is  alto¬ 
gether  childish  to  suppose  that  the  moving 
[  J5]  bodies  are  all  of  them  of  a  small  size,  be¬ 
cause  they  seem  so  to  us,  looking  at  them 
from  the  earth. 

This  a  matter  which  we  have  already  dis¬ 
cussed  in  our  treatment  of  the  upper  region, 
but  we  may  return  to  the  point  now. 

340a  If  the  intervals  were  full  of  fire  and  the 
bodies  consisted  of  fire  every  one  of  the  other 
elements  would  long  ago  have  vanished. 

However,  they  cannot  simply  be  said  to  be 
full  of  air  either;  for  even  if  there  were  two  ele¬ 
ments  to  fill  the  space  between  the  earth  and 
the  heavens,  the  air  would  far  exceed  the  quan¬ 
tity  required  to  maintain  its  proper  proportion 
[5]  to  the  other  elements.  For  the  bulk  of  the 

1  On  the  Heavens ,  1.  3. 


earth  (which  includes  the  whole  volume  of  wa¬ 
ter)  is  infinitesimal  in  comparison  with  the 
whole  world  that  surrounds  it.  Now  we  find 
that  the  excess  in  volume  is  not  proportionate- 
[/o]  ly  great  where  water  dissolves  into  air  or 
air  into  fire.  Whereas  the  proportion  between 
any  given  small  quantity  of  water  and  the  air 
that  is  generated  from  it  ought  to  hold  good 
between  the  total  amount  of  air  and  the  total 
amount  of  water.  Nor  does  it  make  any  differ¬ 
ence  if  any  one  denies  that  the  elements  origi¬ 
nate  from  one  another,  but  asserts  that  they 
[75]  are  equal  in  power.  For  on  this  view  it  is 
certain  amounts  of  each  that  are  equal  in  pow¬ 
er,  just  as  would  be  the  case  if  they  actually 
originated  from  one  another. 

So  it  is  clear  that  neither  air  nor  fire  alone 
fills  the  intermediate  space. 

It  remains  to  explain,  after  a  preliminary  dis¬ 
cussion  of  difficulties,  the  relation  of  the  two 
elements  air  and  fire  to  the  position  of  the  first 
[20]  element,  and  the  reason  why  the  stars  in 
the  upper  region  impart  heat  to  the  earth  and 
its  neighbourhood.  Let  us  first  treat  of  the  air, 
as  we  proposed,  and  then  go  on  to  these  ques¬ 
tions. 

Since  water  is  generated  from  air,  and  air 
from  water,  why  are  clouds  not  formed  in  the 
[25]  upper  air?  They  ought  to  form  there  the 
more,  the  further  from  the  earth  and  the  colder 
that  region  is.  For  it  is  neither  appreciably  near 
to  the  heat  of  the  stars,  nor  to  the  rays  reflected 
[jo]  from  the  earth.  It  is  these  that  dissolve  any 
formation  by  their  heat  and  so  prevent  clouds 
from  forming  near  the  earth.  For  clouds  gath¬ 
er  at  the  point  where  the  reflected  rays  disperse 
in  the  infinity  of  space  and  are  lost.  To  explain 
this  we  must  suppose  either  that  it  is  not  all 
air  from  which  water  is  generated,  or,  if  it  is 
produced  from  all  air  alike,  that  what  immedi¬ 
ately  surrounds  the  earth  is  not  mere  air,  but  a 
sort  of  vapour,  and  that  its  vaporous  nature  is 
[  J5]  the  reason  why  it  condenses  back  to  water 
again.  But  if  the  whole  of  that  vast  region  is 
vapour,  the  amount  of  air  and  of  water  will  be 
disproportionately  great.  For  the  spaces  left  by 
340b  the  heavenly  bodies  must  be  filled  by 
some  element.  This  cannot  be  fire,  for  then  all 
the  rest  would  have  been  dried  up.  Consequent¬ 
ly,  what  fills  it  must  be  air  and  the  water  that 
surrounds  the  whole  earth — vapour  being  wa¬ 
ter  dissolved. 

After  this  exposition  of  the  difficulties  in¬ 
volved,  let  us  go  on  to  lay  down  the  truth,  with 
[5]  a  view  at  once  to  what  follows  and  to  what 
has  already  been  said.  The  upper  region  as  far 


341b 

as  the  moon  we  affirm  to  consist  of  a  body  dis¬ 
tinct  both  from  fire  and  from  air,  but  varying 
[/o]  in  degree  of  purity  and  in  kind,  especially 
towards  its  limit  on  the  side  of  the  air,  and  of 
the  world  surrounding  the  earth.  Now  the  cir¬ 
cular  motion  of  the  first  element  and  of  the 
bodies  it  contains  dissolves,  and  inflames  by  its 
motion,  whatever  part  of  the  lower  world  is 
nearest  to  it,  and  so  generates  heat.  From  an¬ 
other  point  of  view  we  may  look  at  the  motion 
[75]  as  follows.  The  body  that  lies  below  the 
circular  motion  of  the  heavens  is,  in  a  sort,  mat¬ 
ter,  and  is  potentially  hot,  cold,  dry,  moist,  and 
possessed  of  whatever  other  qualities  are  de¬ 
rived  from  these.  But  it  actually  acquires  or  re¬ 
tains  one  of  these  in  virtue  of  motion  or  rest, 
the  cause  and  principle  of  which  has  already 
been  explained.1  So  at  the  centre  and  round  it 
[20]  we  get  earth  and  water,  the  heaviest  and 
coldest  elements,  by  themselves;  round  them 
and  contiguous  with  them,  air  and  what  we 
commonly  call  fire.  It  is  not  really  fire,  for  fire 
is  an  excess  of  heat  and  a  sort  of  ebullition;  but 
in  reality,  of  what  we  call  air,  the  part  sur- 
[25]  rounding  the  earth  is  moist  and  warm, 
because  it  contains  both  vapour  and  a  dry  ex¬ 
halation  from  the  earth.  But  the  next  part, 
above  that,  is  warm  and  dry.  For  vapour  is 
naturally  moist  and  cold,  but  the  exhalation 
warm  and  dry;  and  vapour  is  potentially  like 
water,  the  exhalation  potentially  like  fire.  So 
we  must  take  the  reason  why  clouds  are  not 
[30]  formed  in  the  upper  region  to  be  this: 
that  it  is  filled  not  with  mere  air  but  rather 
with  a  sort  of  fire. 

However,  it  may  well  be  that  the  formation 
of  clouds  in  that  upper  region  is  also  prevented 
by  the  circular  motion.  For  the  air  round  the 
earth  is  necessarily  all  of  it  in  motion,  except 
[35]  that  which  is  cut  off  inside  the  circumfer¬ 
ence  which  makes  the  earth  a  complete  sphere. 
In  the  case  of  winds  it  is  actually  observable 
that  they  originate  in  marshy  districts  of  the 
341a  earth;  and  they  do  not  seem  to  blow 
above  the  level  of  the  highest  mountains.  It  is 
the  revolution  of  the  heaven  which  carries 
the  air  with  it  and  causes  its  circular  motion, 
fire  being  continuous  with  the  upper  element 
and  air  with  fire.  Thus  its  motion  is  a  second 
reason  why  that  air  is  not  condensed  into 
water. 

[5]  But  whenever  a  particle  of  air  grows  heavy, 
the  warmth  in  it  is  squeezed  out  into  the  upper 
region  and  it  sinks,  and  other  particles  in  turn 
are  carried  up  together  with  the  fiery  exhala- 

1  On  Generation  and  Corruption,  11. 10. 


447 

tion.  Thus  the  one  region  is  always  full  of  air 
and  the  other  of  fire,  and  each  of  them  is  per- 
etually  in  a  state  of  change. 

/o]  So  much  to  explain  why  clouds  are  not 
formed  and  why  the  air  is  not  condensed  into 
water,  and  what  account  must  be  given  of  the 
space  between  the  stars  and  the  earth,  and  what 
is  the  body  that  fills  it. 

As  for  the  heat  derived  from  the  sun,  the 
right  place  for  a  special  and  scientific  account 
of  it  is  in  the  treatise  about  sense,  since  heat  is 
[75]  an  affection  of  sense,  but  we  may  now 
explain  how  it  can  be  produced  by  the  heavenly 
bodies  which  are  not  themselves  hot. 

We  see  that  motion  is  able  to  dissolve  and  in¬ 
flame  the  air;  indeed,  moving  bodies  are  often 
actually  found  to  melt.  Now  the  sun’s  motion 
alone  is  sufficient  to  account  for  the  origin  of 
[20]  terrestrial  warmth  and  heat.  For  a  motion 
that  is  to  have  this  effect  must  be  rapid  and 
near,  and  that  of  the  stars  is  rapid  but  distant, 
while  that  of  the  moon  is  near  but  slow,  where¬ 
as  the  sun’s  motion  combines  both  conditions 
in  a  sufficient  degree.  That  most  heat  should  be 
[25]  generated  where  the  sun  is  present  is  easy 
to  understand  if  we  consider  the  analogy  of 
terrestrial  phenomena,  for  here,  too,  it  is  the  air 
that  is  nearest  to  a  thing  in  rapid  motion  which 
is  heated  most.  This  is  just  what  we  should 
expect,  as  it  is  the  nearest  air  that  is  most  dis¬ 
solved  by  the  motion  of  a  solid  body. 

[jo]  This  then  is  one  reason  why  heat  reaches 
our  world.  Another  is  that  the  fire  surround¬ 
ing  the  air  is  often  scattered  by  the  motion  of 
the  heavens  and  driven  downwards  in  spite  of 
itself. 

Shooting-stars  further  suffice  to  prove  that 
the  celestial  sphere  is  not  hot  or  fiery:  for  they 
do  not  occur  in  that  upper  region  but  below: 
yet  the  more  and  the  faster  a  thing  moves, 
[55]  the  more  apt  it  is  to  take  fire.  Besides,  the 
sun,  which  most  of  all  the  stars  is  considered 
to  be  hot,  is  really  white  and  not  fiery  in  col¬ 
our. 

4 

341b  Having  determined  these  principles  let 
us  explain  the  cause  of  the  appearance  in  the 
sky  of  burning  flames  and  of  shooting-stars, 
and  of  ‘torches’,  and  ‘goats’,  as  some  people  call 
them.  All  these  phenomena  are  one  and  the 
[5]  same  thing,  and  are  due  to  the  same  cause, 
the  difference  between  them  being  one  of  de¬ 
gree. 

The  explanation  of  these  and  many  other 
phenomena  is  this.  When  the  sun  warms  the 


BOOK  I,  CHAPTERS  3-4 


448  METEOROLOGY  342b 


earth  the  evaporation  which  takes  place  is  nec¬ 
essarily  of  two  kinds,  not  of  one  only  as  some 
think.  One  kind  is  rather  of  the  nature  of  va¬ 
pour,  the  other  of  the  nature  of  a  windy  exhala¬ 
tion.  That  which  rises  from  the  moisture  con¬ 
tained  in  the  earth  and  on  its  surface  is  vapour, 
[/o]  while  that  rising  from  the  earth  itself, 
which  is  dry,  is  like  smoke.  Of  these  the  windy 
exhalation,  being  warm,  rises  above  the  moister 
vapour,  which  is  heavy  and  sinks  below  the 
other.  Hence  the  world  surrounding  the  earth 
is  ordered  as  follows.  First  below  the  circular 
motion  comes  the  warm  and  dry  element, 
which  we  call  fire,  for  there  is  no  word  fully 
[75]  adequate  to  every  state  of  the  fumid  evap¬ 
oration:  but  we  must  use  this  terminology  since 
this  element  is  the  most  inflammable  of  all 
bodies.  Below  this  comes  air.  We  must  think 
of  what  we  just  called  fire  as  being  spread 
[20]  round  the  terrestrial  sphere  on  the  outside 
like  a  kind  of  fuel,  so  that  a  little  motion  often 
makes  it  burst  into  flame  just  as  smoke  does: 
for  flame  is  the  ebullition  of  a  dry  exhalation. 
So  whenever  the  circular  motion  stirs  this  stuff 
up  in  any  way,  it  catches  fire  at  the  point  at 
which  it  is  most  inflammable.  The  result  dif¬ 
fers  according  to  the  disposition  and  quantity 
[25]  of  the  combustible  material.  If  this  is 
broad  and  long,  we  often  see  a  flame  burning 
as  in  a  field  of  stubble:  if  it  burns  lengthwise 
only,  we  see  what  are  called  ‘torches'  and 
‘goats'  and  shooting-stars.  Now  when  the  in¬ 
flammable  material  is  longer  than  it  is  broad 
[jo]  sometimes  it  seems  to  throw  off  sparks  as 
it  burns.  (This  happens  because  matter  catches 
fire  at  the  sides  in  small  portions  but  continu¬ 
ously  with  the  main  body.)  Then  it  is  called  a 
‘goat’.  When  this  does  not  happen  it  is  a 
‘torch'.  But  if  the  whole  length  of  the  exhala¬ 
tion  is  scattered  in  small  parts  and  in  many  di¬ 
rections  and  in  breadth  and  depth  alike,  we 
[55]  get  what  are  called  shooting-stars. 

The  cause  of  these  shooting-stars  is  some¬ 
times  the  motion  which  ignites  the  exhalation. 
342a  At  other  times  the  air  is  condensed  by 
cold  and  squeezes  out  and  ejects  the  hot  ele¬ 
ment;  making  their  motion  look  more  like  that 
of  a  thing  thrown  than  like  a  running  fire. 
For  the  question  might  be  raised  whether  the 
‘shooting’  of  a  ‘star’  is  the  same  thing  as  when 
[5]  you  put  an  exhalation  below  a  lamp  and 
it  lights  the  lower  lamp  from  the  flame  above. 
For  here  too  the  flame  passes  wonderfully 
quickly  and  looks  like  a  thing  thrown,  and  not 
as  if  one  thing  after  another  caught  fire.  Or  is 
a  ‘star’  when  it  ‘shoots'  a  single  body  that  is 


thrown?  Apparently  both  cases  occur:  some¬ 
times  it  is  like  the  flame  from  the  lamp  and 
sometimes  bodies  are  projected  by  being 
[/o]  squeezed  out  (like  fruit  stones  from  one’s 
fingers)  and  so  are  seen  to  fall  into  the  sea  and 
on  the  dry  land,  both  by  night  and  by  day 
when  the  sky  is  clear.  They  are  thrown  down¬ 
wards  because  the  condensation  which  propels 
them  inclines  downwards.  Thunderbolts  fall 
downwards  for  the  same  reason:  their  origin 
[75]  is  never  combustion  but  ejection  under 
pressure,  since  naturally  all  heat  tends  upwards. 

When  the  phenomenon  is  formed  in  the  up¬ 
per  region  it  is  due  to  the  combustion  of  the 
exhalation.  When  it  takes  place  at  a  lower  level 
it  is  due  to  the  ejection  of  the  exhalation  by  the 
condensing  and  cooling  of  the  moister  evapo- 
[20]  ration:  for  this  latter  as  it  condenses  and 
inclines  downward  contracts,  and  thrusts  out 
the  hot  element  and  causes  it  to  be  thrown 
downwards.  The  motion  is  upwards  or  down¬ 
wards  or  sideways  according  to  the  way  in 
which  the  evaporation  lies,  and  its  disposition 
in  respect  of  breadth  and  depth.  In  most  cases 
the  direction  is  sideways  because  two  motions 
[25]  are  involved,  a  compulsory  motion  down¬ 
wards  and  a  natural  motion  upwards,  and  un¬ 
der  these  circumstances  an  object  always  moves 
obliquely.  Hence  the  motion  of  ‘shooting-stars' 
is  generally  oblique. 

So  the  material  cause  of  all  these  phenomena  is 
the  exhalation,  the  efficient  cause  sometimes  the 
[jo]  upper  motion,  sometimes  the  contraction 
and  condensation  of  the  air.  Further,  all  these 
things  happen  below  the  moon.  This  is  shown 
by  their  apparent  speed,  which  is  equal  to 
that  of  things  thrown  by  us;  for  it  is  because 
they  are  close  to  us,  that  these  latter  seem  far 
to  exceed  in  speed  the  stars,  the  sun,  and  the 
moon. 

5 

[  J5]  Sometimes  on  a  fine  night  we  see  a  variety 
of  appearances  that  form  in  the  sky:  ‘chasms’ 
for  instance  and  ‘trenches'  and  blood-red  col¬ 
ours.  These,  too,  have  the  same  cause.  For  we 
342b  have  seen  that  the  upper  air  condenses 
into  an  inflammable  condition  and  that  the 
combustion  sometimes  takes  on  the  appearance 
of  a  burning  flame,  sometimes  that  of  moving 
[5]  torches  and  stars.  So  it  is  not  surprising 
that  this  same  air  when  condensing  should  as¬ 
sume  a  variety  of  colours.  For  a  weak  light 
shining  through  a  dense  air,  and  the  air  when 
it  acts  as  a  mirror,  will  cause  all  kinds  of  col¬ 
ours  to  appear,  but  especially  crimson  and  pur- 


343b 


BOOK  I,  CHAPTERS  4-6 


449 


pie.  For  these  colours  generally  appear  when 
fire-colour  and  white  are  combined  by  -superpo¬ 
sition.  Thus  on  a  hot  day,  or  through  a  smoky 
[/o]  medium,  the  stars  when  they  rise  and  set 
look  crimson.  The  light  will  also  create  colours 
by  reflection  when  the  mirror  is  such  as  to  re¬ 
flect  colour  only  and  not  shape. 

These  appearances  do  not  persist  long,  be¬ 
cause  the  condensation  of  the  air  is  transient. 
[75]  ‘Chasms’  get  their  appearance  of  depth 
from  light  breaking  out  of  a  dark  blue  or  black 
mass  of  air.  When  the  process  of  condensation 
goes  further  in  such  a  case  we  often  find 
‘torches’  ejected.  When  the  ‘chasm’  contracts 
it  presents  the  appearance  of  a  ‘trench’. 

In  general,  white  in  contrast  with  black  cre¬ 
ates  a  variety  of  colours;  like  flame,  for  in¬ 
stance,  through  a  medium  of  smoke.  But  by 
[20]  day  the  sun  obscures  them,  and,  with  the 
exception  of  crimson,  the  colours  are  not  seen 
at  night  because  they  are  dark. 

These  then  must  be  taken  to  be  the  causes  of 
‘shooting-stars’  and  the  phenomena  of  combus¬ 
tion  and  also  of  the  other  transient  appearances 
of  this  kind. 

6 

[25]  Let  us  go  on  to  explain  the  nature  of  com¬ 
ets  and  the  ‘milky  way’,  after  a  preliminary  dis¬ 
cussion  of  the  views  of  others. 

Anaxagoras  and  Democritus  declare  that 
comets  are  a  conjunction  of  the  planets  ap¬ 
proaching  one  another  and  so  appearing  to 
touch  one  another. 

[jo]  Some  of  the  Italians  called  Pythagoreans 
say  that  the  comet  is  one  of  the  planets,  but 
that  it  appears  at  great  intervals  of  time  and 
only  rises  a  little  above  the  horizon.  This  is  the 
case  with  Mercury  too;  because  it  only  rises  a 
little  above  the  horizon  it  often  fails  to  be  seen 
[55]  and  consequently  appears  at  great  inter¬ 
vals  of  time. 

A  view  like  theirs  was  also  expressed  by 
Hippocrates  of  Chios  and  his  pupil  Aeschylus. 
343a  Only  they  say  that  the  tail  does  not  be¬ 
long  to  the  comet  iself,  but  is  occasionally  as¬ 
sumed  by  it  on  its  course  in  certain  situations, 
when  our  sight  is  reflected  to  the  sun  from  the 
moisture  attracted  by  the  comet.  It  appears  at 
greater  intervals  than  the  other  stars  because  it 
[5]  is  slowest  to  get  clear  of  the  sun  and  has 
been  left  behind  by  the  sun  to  the  extent  of  the 
whole  of  its  circle  before  it  reappears  at  the 
same  point.  It  gets  clear  of  the  sun  both  to¬ 
wards  the  north  and  towards  the  south.  In  the 
space  between  the  tropics  it  does  not  draw  wa¬ 


ter  to  itself  because  that  region  is  dried  up  by 
[  zo]  the  sun  on  its  course.  When  it  moves  to¬ 
wards  the  south  it  has  no  lack  of  the  necessary 
moisture,  but  because  the  segment  of  its  circle 
which  is  above  the  horizon  is  small,  and  that 
below  it  many  times  as  large,  it  is  impossible 
for  the  sun  to  be  reflected  to  our  sight,  either 
[75]  when  it  approaches  the  southern  tropic, 
or  at  the  summer  solstice.  Hence  in  these  re¬ 
gions  it  does  not  develop  a  tail  at  all.  But  when 
it  is  visible  in  the  north  it  assumes  a  tail  be¬ 
cause  the  arc  above  the  horizon  is  large  and 
that  below  it  small.  For  under  these  circum¬ 
stances  there  is  nothing  to  prevent  our  vision 
[20]  from  being  reflected  to  the  sun. 

These  views  involve  impossibilities,  some  of 
which  are  common  to  all  of  them,  while  others 
are  peculiar  to  some  only. 

This  is  the  case,  first,  with  those  who  say 
that  the  comet  is  one  of  the  planets.  For  all  the 
lanets  appear  in  the  circle  of  the  zodiac, 
25]  whereas  many  comets  have  been  seen  out¬ 
side  that  circle.  Again  more  comets  than  one 
have  often  appeared  simultaneously.  Besides, 
if  their  tail  is  due  to  reflection,  as  Aeschylus 
and  Hippocrates  say,  this  planet  ought  some¬ 
times  to  be  visible  without  a  tail  since,  as  they 
[30}  say,  it  does  not  possess  a  tail  in  every  place 
in  which  it  appears.  But,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  no 
planet  has  been  observed  besides  the  five.  And 
all  of  them  are  often  visible  above  the  horizon 
together  at  the  same  time.  Further,  comets  are 
often  found  to  appear,  as  well  when  all  the 
planets  are  visible  as  when  some  are  not,  but 
are  obscured  by  the  neighbourhood  of  the  sun. 
[55]  Moreover  the  statement  that  a  comet  only 
appears  in  the  north,  with  the  sun  at  the  sum- 
343b  mer  solstice,  is  not  true  either.  The  great 
comet  which  appeared  at  the  time  of  the  earth¬ 
quake  in  Achaea  and  the  tidal  wave  rose  due 
west;  and  many  have  been  known  to  appear  in 
the  south.  Again  in  the  archonship  of  Euclees, 
[5]  son  of  Molon,  at  Athens  there  appeared  a 
comet  in  the  north  in  the  month  Gamelion,  the 
sun  being  about  the  winter  solstice.  Yet  they 
themselves  admit  that  reflection  over  so  great 
a  space  is  an  impossibility. 

An  objection  that  tells  equally  against  those 
who  hold  this  theory  and  those  who  say  that 
comets  are  a  coalescence  of  the  planets  is,  first, 
the  fact  that  some  of  the  fixed  stars  too  get  a 
[70]  tail.  For  this  we  must  not  only  accept  the 
authority  of  the  Egyptians  who  assert  it,  but  we 
have  ourselves  observed  the  fact.  For  a  star  in 
the  thigh  of  the  Dog  had  a  tail,  though  a  faint 
one.  If  you  fixed  your  sight  on  it  its  light  was 


450  METEOROLOGY  344b 


dim,  but  if  you  just  glanced  at  it,  it  appeared 
[75]  brighter.  Besides,  all  the  comets  that  have 
been  seen  in  our  day  have  vanished  without 
setting,  gradually  fading  away  above  the  hori¬ 
zon;  and  they  have  not  left  behind  them  either 
one  or  more  stars.  For  instance  the  great  comet 
we  mentioned  before1  appeared  to  the  west  in 
winter  in  frosty  weather  when  the  sky  was 
clear,  in  the  archonship  of  Asteius.  On  the  first 
[20]  day  it  set  before  the  sun  and  was  then  not 
seen.  On  the  next  day  it  was  seen,  being  ever  so 
little  behind  the  sun  and  immediately  setting. 
But  its  light  extended  over  a  third  part  of  the 
sky  like  a  leap,  so  that  people  called  it  a  ‘path’. 
[25]  This  comet  receded  as  far  as  Orion’s  belt 
and  there  dissolved.  Democritus  however,  in¬ 
sists  upon  the  truth  of  his  view  and  affirms  that 
certain  stars  have  been  seen  when  comets  dis¬ 
solve.  But  on  his  theory  this  ought  not  to  occur 
occasionally  but  always.  Besides,  the  Egyptians 
affirm  that  conjunctions  of  the  planets  with  one 
another,  and  with  the  fixed  stars,  take  place, 
[50]  and  we  have  ourselves  observed  Jupiter 
coinciding  with  one  of  the  stars  in  the  Twins 
and  hiding  it,  and  yet  no  comet  was  formed. 
Further,  we  can  also  give  a  rational  proof  of 
our  point.  It  is  true  that  some  stars  seem  to  be 
bigger  than  others,  yet  each  one  by  itself  looks 
indivisible.  Consequently,  just  as,  if  they  really 
[35]  had  been  indivisible,  their  conjunction 
could  not  have  created  any  greater  magnitude, 
344a  so  now  that  they  are  not  in  fact  indivisi¬ 
ble  but  look  as  if  they  were,  their  conjunction 
will  not  make  them  look  any  bigger. 

Enough  has  been  said,  without  further  argu¬ 
ment,  to  show  that  the  causes  brought  forward 
to  explain  comets  are  false. 

7 

[5]  We  consider  a  satisfactory  explanation  of 
phenomena  inaccessible  to  observation  to  have 
been  given  when  our  account  of  them  is  free 
from  impossibilities.  The  observations  before 
us  suggest  the  following  account  of  the  phe¬ 
nomena  we  are  now  considering.  We  know 
[jo]  that  the  dry  and  warm  exhalation  is  the 
outermost  part  of  the  terrestrial  world  which 
falls  below  the  circular  motion.  It,  and  a  great 
part  of  the  air  that  is  continuous  with  it  below, 
is  carried  round  the  earth  by  the  motion  of  the 
circular  revolution.  In  the  course  of  this  motion 
it  often  ignites  wherever  it  may  happen  to  be 
of  the  right  consistency,  and  this  we  maintain 
[75]  to  be  the  cause  of  the  ‘shooting’  of  scat¬ 


tered  ‘stars’.  We  may  say,  then,  that  a  comet  is 
formed  when  the  upper  motion  introduces  into 
a  gathering  of  this  kind  a  fiery  principle  not  of 
such  excessive  strength  as  to  burn  up  much  of 
the  material  quickly,  nor  so  weak  as  soon  to  be 
extinguished,  but  stronger  and  capable  of  burn- 
[20]  ing  up  much  material,  and  when  exhala¬ 
tion  of  the  right  consistency  rises  from  below 
and  meets  it.  The  kind  of  comet  varies  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  shape  which  the  exhalation  happens 
to  take.  If  it  is  diffused  equally  on  every  side 
the  star  is  said  to  be  fringed,  if  it  stretches  out 
in  one  direction  it  is  called  bearded.  We  have 
seen  that  when  a  fiery  principle  of  this  kind 
[25]  moves  we  seem  to  have  a  shooting-star: 
similarly  when  it  stands  still  we  seem  to  have 
a  star  standing  still.  We  may  compare  these 
phenomena  to  a  heap  or  mass  of  chaff  into 
which  a  torch  is  thrust,  or  a  spark  thrown. 
That  is  what  a  shooting-star  is  like.  The  fuel 
is  so  inflammable  that  the  fire  runs  through  it 
[jo]  quickly  in  a  line.  Now  if  this  fire  were  to 
persist  instead  of  running  through  the  fuel  and 
perishing  away,  its  course  through  the  fuel 
would  stop  at  the  point  where  the  latter  was 
densest,  and  then  the  whole  might  begin  to 
move.  Such  is  a  comet — like  a  shooting-star 
that  contains  its  beginning  and  end  in  itself. 

When  the  matter  begins  to  gather  in  the  low¬ 
er  region  independently  the  comet  appears  by 
[^5]  itself.  But  when  the  exhalation  is  consti¬ 
tuted  by  one  of  the  fixed  stars  or  the  planets, 
owing  to  their  motion,  one  of  them  becomes  a 
344b  comet.  The  fringe  is  not  close  to  the  stars 
themselves.  Just  as  haloes  appear  to  follow  the 
sun  and  the  moon  as  they  move,  and  encircle 
[5]  them,  when  the  air  is  dense  enough  for 
them  to  form  along  under  the  sun’s  course,  so 
too  the  fringe.  It  stands  in  the  relation  of  a  halo 
to  the  stars,  except  that  the  colour  of  the  halo 
is  due  to  reflection,  whereas  in  the  case  of  com¬ 
ets  the  colour  is  something  that  appears  actu¬ 
ally  on  them. 

Now  when  this  matter  gathers  in  relation  to 
[70]  a  star  the  comet  necessarily  appears  to  fol¬ 
low  the  same  course  as  the  star.  But  when  the 
comet  is  formed  independently  it  falls  behind 
the  motion  of  the  universe,  like  the  rest  of 
the  terrestrial  world.  It  is  this  fact,  that  a  comet 
often  forms  independently,  indeed  oftener  than 
round  one  of  the  regular  stars,  that  makes  it 
impossible  to  maintain  that  a  comet  is  a  sort  of 
[75]  reflection,  not  indeed,  as  Hippocrates  and 
his  school  say,  to  the  sun,  but  to  the  very  star 
it  is  alleged  to  accompany — in  fact,  a  kind  of 
halo  in  the  pure  fuel  of  fire. 


345b 

As  for  the  halo  we  shall  explain  its  cause 
later.1 

The  fact  that  comets  when  frequent  fore- 
[20]  shadow  wind  and  drought  must  be  taken 
as  an  indication  of  their  fiery  constitution.  For 
their  origin  is  plainly  due  to  the  plentiful  sup¬ 
ply  of  that  secretion.  Hence  the  air  is  necessari¬ 
ly  drier  and  the  moist  evaporation  is  so  dis¬ 
solved  and  dissipated  by  the  quantity  of  the  hot 
exhalation  as  not  readily  to  condense  into  water. 
[25] — But  this  phenomenon  too  shall  be  ex¬ 
plained  more  clearly  later  when  the  time  comes 
to  speak  of  the  winds. — So  when  there  are 
many  comets  and  they  are  dense,  it  is  as  we  say, 
and  the  years  are  clearly  dry  and  windy.  When 
they  are  fewer  and  fainter  this  effect  does  not 
appear  in  the  same  degree,  though  as  a  rule  the 
[jo]  wind  is  found  to  be  excessive  either  in  du¬ 
ration  or  strength.  For  instance  when  the  stone 
at  Aegospotami  fell  out  of  the  air — it  had  been 
carried  up  by  a  wind  and  fell  down  in  the  day¬ 
time — then  too  a  comet  happened  to  have  ap¬ 
peared  in  the  west.  And  at  the  time  of  the  great 
[35]  comet  the  winter  was  dry  and  north 
winds  prevailed,  and  the  wave  was  due  to  an 
opposition  of  winds.  For  in  the  gulf  a  north 
345*  wind  blew  and  outside  it  a  violent  south 
wind.  Again  in  the  archonship  of  Nicomachus 
a  comet  appeared  for  a  few  days  about  the 
equinoctial  circle  (this  one  had  not  risen  in  the 
west),  and  simultaneously  with  it  there  hap- 
[5]  pened  the  storm  at  Corinth. 

That  there  are  few  comets  and  that  they  ap¬ 
pear  rarely  and  outside  the  tropic  circles  more 
than  within  them  is  due  to  the  motion  of  the 
sun  and  the  stars.  For  this  motion  does  not 
only  cause  the  hot  principle  to  be  secreted  but 
also  dissolves  it  when  it  is  gathering.  But  the 
chief  reason  is  that  most  of  this  stuff  collects  in 
[/o]  the  region  of  the  milky  way. 

8 

Let  us  now  explain  the  origin,  cause,  and  na¬ 
ture  of  the  milky  way.  And  here  too  let  us  be¬ 
gin  by  discussing  the  statements  of  others  on 
the  subject. 

( 1 )  Of  the  so-called  Pythagoreans  some  say 
that  this  is  the  path  of  one  of  the  stars  that  fell 
[75]  from  heaven  at  the  time  of  Phaethon’s 
downfall.  Others  say  that  the  sun  used  once  to 
move  in  this  circle  and  that  this  region  was 
scorched  or  met  with  some  other  affection  of 
this  kind,  because  of  the  sun  and  its  motion. 

But  it  is  absurd  not  to  see  that  if  this  were 
the  reason  the  circle  of  the  Zodiac  ought  to  be 

1  hi.  2. 


45 1 

affected  in  the  same  way,  and  indeed  more  so 
[20]  than  that  of  the  milky  way,  since  not  the 
sun  only  but  all  the  planets  move  in  it.  We  can 
see  the  whole  of  this  circle  (half  of  it  being  vis¬ 
ible  at  any  time  of  the  night),  but  it  shows  no 
signs  of  any  such  affection  except  where  a  part 
of  it  touches  the  circle  of  the  milky  way. 

[25]  (2)  Anaxagoras,  Democritus,  and  their 
schools  say  that  the  milky  way  is  the  light  of 
certain  stars.  For,  they  say,  when  the  sun  passes 
below  the  earth  some  of  the  stars  are  hidden 
from  it.  Now  the  light  of  those  on  which  the 
sun  shines  is  invisible,  being  obscured  by  the 
rays  of  the  sun.  But  the  milky  way  is  the  pecu- 
[30]  liar  light  of  those  stars  which  are  shaded 
by  the  earth  from  the  sun’s  rays. 

This,  too,  is  obviously  impossible.  The  milky 
way  is  always  unchanged  and  among  the  same 
constellations  (for  it  is  clearly  a  greatest  circle), 
whereas,  since  the  sun  does  not  remain  in  the 
same  place,  what  is  hidden  from  it  differs  at 
[35]  different  times.  Consequently  with  the 
change  of  the  sun’s  position  the  milky  way 
345 b  ought  to  change  its  position  too:  but  we 
find  that  this  does  not  happen.  Besides,  if  astro¬ 
nomical  demonstrations  are  correct  and  the  size 
of  the  sun  is  greater  than  that  of  the  earth  and  the 
distance  of  the  stars  from  the  earth  many  times 
greater  than  that  of  the  sun  (just  as  the  sun  is 
further  from  the  earth  than  the  moon),  then 
[5] the  cone  made  by  the  rays  of  the  sun  would 
terminate  at  no  great  distance  from  the  earth, 
and  the  shadow  of  the  earth  (what  we  call 
night)  would  not  reach  the  stars.  On  the  con¬ 
trary,  the  sun  shines  on  all  the  stars  and  the 
earth  screens  none  of  them. 

[/o]  (3)  There  is  a  third  theory  about  the 
milky  way.  Some  say  that  it  is  a  reflection  of 
our  sight  to  the  sun,  just  as  they  say  that  the 
comet  is. 

But  this  too  is  impossible.  For  if  the  eye  and 
the  mirror  and  the  whole  of  the  object  were 
severally  at  rest,  then  the  same  part  of  the  im¬ 
age  would  appear  at  the  same  point  in  the  mir- 
[75]  ror.  But  if  the  mirror  and  the  object  move, 
keeping  the  same  distance  from  the  eye  which 
is  at  rest,  but  at  different  rates  of  speed  and  so 
not  always  at  the  same  interval  from  one  an¬ 
other,  then  it  is  impossible  for  the  same  image 
always  to  appear  in  the  same  part  of  the  mirror. 
Now  the  constellations  included  in  the  circle  of 
the  milky  way  move;  and  so  does  the  sun,  the 
object  to  which  our  sight  is  reflected;  but  we 
[20]  stand  still.  And  the  distance  of  those  two 
from  us  is  constant  and  uniform,  but  their  dis¬ 
tance  from  one  another  varies.  For  the  Dolphin 


BOOK  I,  CHAPTERS  6-8 


452 

sometimes  rises  at  midnight,  sometimes  in  the 
morning.  But  in  each  case  the  same  parts  of  the 
milky  way  are  found  near  it.  But  if  it  were  a 
reflection  and  not  a  genuine  affection  of  these 
regions,  this  ought  not  to  be  the  case. 

[25]  Again,  we  can  see  the  milky  way  reflected 
at  night  in  water  and  similar  mirrors.  But  un¬ 
der  these  circumstances  it  is  impossible  for  our 
sight  to  be  reflected  to  the  sun. 

These  considerations  show  that  the  milky 
way  is  not  the  path  of  one  of  the  planets,  nor 
the  light  of  imperceptible  stars,  nor  a  reflection, 
[jo]  And  those  are  the  chief  theories  handed 
down  by  others  hitherto. 

Let  us  recall  our  fundamental  principle  and 
then  explain  our  views.  We  have  already  laid 
down1  that  the  outermost  part  of  what  is  called 
the  air  is  potentially  fire  and  that  therefore 
when  the  air  is  dissolved  by  motion,  there  is 
separated  off  a  kind  of  matter — and  of  this 
matter  we  assert  that  comets  consist.  We  must 
[55]  suppose  that  what  happens  is  the  same  as 
in  the  case  of  the  comets  when  the  matter  does 
346a  not  form  independently  but  is  formed  by 
one  of  the  fixed  stars  or  the  planets.  Then  these 
stars  appear  to  be  fringed,  because  matter  of 
this  kind  follows  their  course.  In  the  same  way, 
a  certain  kind  of  matter  follows  the  sun,  and 
[5]  we  explain  the  halo  as  a  reflection  from  it 
when  the  air  is  of  the  right  constitution.  Now 
we  must  assume  that  what  happens  in  the  case 
of  the  stars  severally  happens  in  the  case  of  the 
whole  of  the  heavens  and  all  the  upper  motion. 
For  it  is  natural  to  suppose  that,  if  the  motion 
of  a  single  star  excites  a  flame,  that  of  all  the 
stars  should  have  a  similar  result,  and  espe- 
[/o]  dally  in  that  region  in  which  the  stars  are 
biggest  and  most  numerous  and  nearest  to  one 
another.  Now  the  circle  of  the  zodiac  dissolves 
this  kind  of  matter  because  of  the  motion  of  the 
sun  and  the  planets,  and  for  this  reason  most 
comets  are  found  outside  the  tropic  circles. 
Again,  no  fringe  appears  round  the  sun  or 
[75]  moon:  for  they  dissolve  such  matter  too 
quickly  to  admit  of  its  formation.  But  this  cir¬ 
cle  in  which  the  milky  way  appears  to  our 
sight  is  the  greatest  circle,  and  its  position  is 
such  that  it  extends  far  outside  the  tropic  cir¬ 
cles.  Besides  the  region  is  full  of  the  biggest 
and  brightest  constellations  and  also  of  what 
[20]  are  called  ‘scattered’  stars  (you  have  only 
to  look  to  see  this  clearly).  So  for  these  reasons 
all  this  matter  is  continually  and  ceaselessly  col¬ 
lecting  there.  A  proof  of  the  theory  is  this:  In 
the  circle  itself  the  light  is  stronger  in  that  half 

1 34^4-32- 


346b 

where  the  milky  way  is  divided,  and  in  it  the 
constellations  are  more  numerous  and  closer  to 
[25]  one  another  than  in  the  other  half;  which 
shows  that  the  cause  of  the  light  is  the  motion 
of  the  constellations  and  nothing  else.  For  if  it 
is  found  in  the  circle  in  which  there  are  most 
constellations  and  at  that  point  in  the  circle  at 
which  they  are  densest  and  contain  the  biggest 
and  the  most  stars,  it  is  natural  to  suppose  that 
[30]  they  are  the  true  cause  of  the  affection  in 
question.  The  circle  and  the  constellations  in 
it  may  be  seen  in  the  diagram.2  The  so-called 
‘scattered’  stars  it  is  not  possible  to  set  down  in 
the  same  way  on  the  sphere  because  none  of 
them  have  an  evident  permanent  position;  but 
if  you  look  up  to  the  sky  the  point  is  clear.  For 
[35]  in  this  circle  alone  are  the  intervals  full 
of  these  stars:  in  the  other  circles  there  are  ob- 
346b  vious  gaps.  Hence  if  we  accept  the  cause 
assigned  for  the  appearance  of  comets  as  plaus¬ 
ible  we  must  assume  that  the  same  kind  of 
thing  holds  good  of  the  milky  way.  For  the 
fringe  which  in  the  former  case  is  an  affection 
of  a  single  star  here  forms  in  the  same  way  in 
[5]  relation  to  a  whole  circle.  So  if  we  are  to 
define  the  milky  way  we  may  call  it  ‘a  fringe 
attaching  to  the  greatest  circle,  and  due  to  the 
matter  secreted’.  This,  as  we  said  before,3  ex¬ 
plains  why  there  are  few  comets  and  why  they 
appear  rarely;  it  is  because  at  each  revolution  of 
the  heavens  this  matter  has  always  been  and  is 
always  being  separated  off  and  gathered  into 
this  region. 

[/o]  We  have  now  explained  the  phenomena 
that  occur  in  that  part  of  the  terrestrial  world 
which  is  continuous  with  the  motions  of  the 
heavens,  namely,  shooting-stars  and  the  burn¬ 
ing  flame,  comets  and  the  milky  way,  these  be- 
[75]  ing  the  chief  affections  that  appear  in  that 
region. 

9 

Let  us  go  on  to  treat  of  the  region  which  fol¬ 
lows  next  in  order  after  this  and  which  imme¬ 
diately  surrounds  the  earth.  It  is  the  region 
common  to  water  and  air,  and  the  processes  at¬ 
tending  the  formation  of  water  above  take 
place  in  it.  We  must  consider  the  principles 
and  causes  of  all  these  phenomena  too  as  before. 
[20]  The  efficient  and  chief  and  first  cause  is 
the  circle  in  which  the  sun  moves.  For  the  sun 

2  Aristotle  must  be  supposed  to  have  illustrated  "his 
theory  here  by  a  diagram  of  the  milky  way,  but  the 
Greek  commentators  have  not  preserved  any  tradition 
of  the  particular  diagram  used. 

3  345a  7* 


METEOROLOGY 


453 


34 7b  BOOK  I,  CHAPTERS  8-11 


as  it  approaches  or  recedes,  obviously  causes 
dissipation  and  condensation  and  so  gives  rise 
to  generation  and  destruction.  Now  the  earth 
remains  but  the  moisture  surrounding  it  is 
made  to  evaporate  by  the  sun's  rays  and  the 
[25]  other  heat  from  above,  and  rises.  But 
when  the  heat  which  was  raising  it  leaves  it,  in 
part  dispersing  to  the  higher  region,  in  part 
quenched  through  rising  so  far  into  the  upper 
air,  then  the  vapour  cools  because  its  heat  is 
gone  and  because  the  place  is  cold,  and  con- 
[50]  denses  again  and  turns  from  air  into  wa¬ 
ter.  And  after  the  water  has  formed  it  falls 
down  again  to  the  earth. 

The  exhalation  of  water  is  vapour:  air  con¬ 
densing  into  water  is  cloud.  Mist  is  what  is  left 
over  when  a  cloud  condenses  into  water,  and  is 
therefore  rather  a  sign  of  fine  weather  than  of 
rain;  for  mist  might  be  called  a  barren  cloud. 
[ss\  So  we  get  a  circular  process  that  follows 
347a  the  course  of  the  sun.  For  according  as 
the  sun  moves  to  this  side  or  that,  the  mois¬ 
ture  in  this  process  rises  or  falls.  We  must 
think  of  it  as  a  river  flowing  up  and  down  in  a 
circle  and  made  up  partly  of  air,  partly  of  wa¬ 
ter.  When  the  sun  is  near,  the  stream  of  vapour 
flows  upwards;  when  it  recedes,  the  stream  of 
[5]  water  flows  down:  and  the  order  of  se¬ 
quence,  at  all  events,  in  this  process  always  re¬ 
mains  the  same.  So  if  ‘Oceanus*  had  some  se¬ 
cret  meaning  in  early  writers,  perhaps  they 
may  have  meant  this  river  that  flows  in  a  circle 
about  the  earth. 

So  the  moisture  is  always  raised  by  the  heat 
and  descends  to  the  earth  again  when  it  gets 
[70]  cold.  These  processes  and,  in  some  cases, 
their  varieties  are  distinguished  by  special 
names.  When  the  water  falls  in  small  drops  it 
is  called  a  drizzle;  when  the  drops  are  larger  it 
is  rain. 

10 

Some  of  the  vapour  that  is  formed  by  day 
does  not  rise  high  because  the  ratio  of  the  fire 
that  is  raising  it  to  the  water  that  is  being 
[75]  raised  is  small.  When  this  cools  and  de¬ 
scends  at  night  it  is  called  dew  and  hoar-frost. 
When  the  vapour  is  frozen  before  it  has  con¬ 
densed  to  water  again  it  is  hoar-frost;  and  this 
appears  in  winter  and  is  commoner  in  cold 
places.  It  is  dew  when  the  vapour  has  con¬ 
densed  into  water  and  the  heat  is  not  so  great 
as  to  dry  up  the  moisture  that  has  been  raised, 
[20]  nor  the  cold  sufficient  (owing  to  the 
warmth  of  the  climate  or  season)  for  the  va¬ 
pour  itself  to  freeze.  For  dew  is  more  common¬ 


ly  found  when  the  season  or  the  place  is  warm, 
whereas  the  opposite,  as  has  been  said,  is  the 
case  with  hoar-frost.  For  obviously  vapour  is 
warmer  than  water,  having  still  the  fire  that 
[25]  raised  it:  consequently  more  cold  is  need¬ 
ed  to  freeze  it. 

Both  dew  and  hoar-frost  are  found  when  the 
sky  is  clear  and  there  is  no  wind.  For  the  va¬ 
pour  could  not  be  raised  unless  the  sky  were 
clear,  and  if  a  wind  were  blowing  it  could  not 
condense. 

The  fact  that  hoar-frost  is  not  found  on 
mountains  contributes  to  prove  that  these  phe¬ 
nomena  occur  because  the  vapour  does  not  rise 
[50]  high.  One  reason  for  this  is  that  it  rises 
from  hollow  and  watery  places,  so  that  the  heat 
that  is  raising  it,  bearing  as  it  were  too  heavy  a 
burden  cannot  lift  it  to  a  great  height  but  soon 
lets  it  fall  again.  A  second  reason  is  that  the 
motion  of  the  air  is  more  pronounced  at  a 
height,  and  this  dissolves  a  gathering  of  this 
kind. 

[^5]  Everywhere,  except  in  Pontus,  dew  is 
found  with  south  winds  and  not  with  north 
winds.  There  the  opposite  is  the  case  and  it  is 
found  with  north  winds  and  not  with  south. 
347b  The  reason  is  the  same  as  that  which  ex¬ 
plains  why  dew  is  found  in  warm  weather  and 
not  in  cold.  For  the  south  wind  brings  warm, 
and  the  north,  wintry  weather.  For  the  north 
wind  is  cold  and  so  quenches  the  heat  of  the 
evaporation.  But  in  Pontus  the  south  wind  does 
not  bring  warmth  enough  to  cause  evapora- 
[5]  tion,  whereas  the  coldness  of  the  north 
wind  concentrates  the  heat  by  a  sort  of  recoil, 
so  that  there  is  more  evaporation  and  not  less. 
This  is  a  thing  which  we  can  often  observe  in 
other  places  too.  Wells,  for  instance,  give  off 
more  vapour  in  a  north  than  in  a  south  wind. 
Only  the  north  winds  quench  the  heat  before 
[/o]  any  considerable  quantity  of  vapour  has 
gathered,  while  in  a  south  wind  the  evapora¬ 
tion  is  allowed  to  accumulate. 

Water,  once  formed,  does  not  freeze  on  the 
surface  of  the  earth,  in  the  way  that  it  does  in 
the  region  of  the  clouds. 

11 

From  the  latter  there  fall  three  bodies  con¬ 
densed  by  cold,  namely  rain,  snow,  hail.  Two 
of  these  correspond  to  the  phenomena  on  the 
lower  level  and  are  due  to  the  same  causes, 
[75]  differing  from  them  only  in  degree  and 
quantity. 

Snow  and  hoar-frost  are  one  and  the  same 
thing,  and  so  are  rain  and  dew:  only  there  is  a 


454 

great  deal  of  the  former  and  little  of  the  latter. 
For  rain  is  due  to  the  cooling  of  a  great  amount 
of  vapour,  for  the  region  from  which  and  the 
time  during  which  the  vapour  is  collected  are 
[20]  considerable.  But  of  dew  there  is  little: 
for  the  vapour  collects  for  it  in  a  single  day  and 
from  a  small  area,  as  its  quick  formation  and 
scanty  quantity  show. 

The  relation  of  hoar-frost  and  snow  is  the 
same:  when  cloud  freezes  there  is  snow,  when 
vapour  freezes  there  is  hoar-frost.  Hence  snow 
is  a  sign  of  a  cold  season  or  country.  For  a  great 
[25]  deal  of  heat  is  still  present  and  unless  the 
cold  were  overpowering  it  the  cloud  would  not 
freeze.  For  there  still  survives  in  it  a  great  deal 
of  the  heat  which  caused  the  moisture  to  rise  as 
vapour  from  the  earth. 

Hail  on  the  other  hand  is  found  in  the  up¬ 
per  region,  but  the  corresponding  phenomenon 
in  the  vaporous  region  near  the  earth  is  lack- 
[30]  ing.  For,  as  we  said,  to  snow  in  the  upper 
region  corresponds  hoar-frost  in  the  lower,  and 
to  rain  in  the  upper  region,  dew  in  the  lower. 
But  there  is  nothing  here  to  correspond  to  hail 
in  the  upper  region.  Why  this  is  so  will  be  clear 
when  we  have  explained  the  nature  of  hail. 

12 

But  we  must  go  on  to  collect  the  facts  bear- 
[35]  on  the  origin  of  it,  both  those  which 
raise  no  difficulties  and  those  which  seem  para¬ 
doxical. 

348a  Hail  is  ice,  and  water  freezes  in  winter; 
yet  hailstorms  occur  chiefly  in  spring  and 
autumn  and  less  often  in  the  late  summer,  but 
rarely  in  winter  and  then  only  when  the  cold 
is  less  intense.  And  in  general  hailstorms  occur 
in  warmer,  and  snow  in  colder  places.  Again, 
[5]  there  is  a  difficulty  about  water  freezing 
in  the  upper  region.  It  cannot  have  frozen  be¬ 
fore  becoming  water:  and  water  cannot  re¬ 
main  suspended  in  the  air  for  any  space  of 
time.  Nor  can  we  say  that  the  case  is  like  that 
of  particles  of  moisture  which  are  carried  up 
owing  to  their  small  size  and  rest  on  the  air 
[/o]  (the  water  swimming  on  the  air  just  as 
small  particles  of  earth  and  gold  often  swim  on 
water).  In  that  case  large  drops  are  formed  by 
the  union  of  many  small,  and  so  fall  down. 
This  cannot  take  place  in  the  case  of  hail,  since 
solid  bodies  cannot  coalesce  like  liquid  ones. 
Clearly  then  drops  of  that  size  were  suspended 
in  the  air  or  else  they  could  not  have  been  so 
large  when  frozen. 

Some  think  that  the  cause  and  origin  of  hail 
[75]  is  this.  The  cloud  is  thrust  up  into  the 


348b 

upper  atmosphere,  which  is  colder  because  the 
reflection  of  the  sun’s  rays  from  the  earth 
ceases  there,  and  upon  its  arrival  there  the  wa¬ 
ter  freezes.  They  think  that  this  explains  why 
hailstorms  are  commoner  in  summer  and  in 
warm  countries;  the  heat  is  greater  and  it 
thrusts  the  clouds  further  up  from  the  earth. 
[20]  But  the  fact  is  that  hail  does  not  occur  at 
all  at  a  great  height:  yet  it  ought  to  do  so,  on 
their  theory,  just  as  we  see  that  snow  falls  most 
on  high  mountains.  Again  clouds  have  often 
been  observed  moving  with  a  great  noise  close 
[25]  to  the  earth,  terrifying  those  who  heard 
and  saw  them  as  portents  of  some  catastrophe. 
Sometimes,  too,  when  such  clouds  have  been 
seen,  without  any  noise,  there  follows  a  violent 
hailstorm,  and  the  stones  are  of  incredible 
size,  and  angular  in  shape.  This  shows  that 
they  have  not  been  falling  for  long  and  that 
they  were  frozen  near  to  the  earth,  and  not  as 
[50]  that  theory  would  have  it.  Moreover, 
where  the  hailstones  are  large,  the  cause  of  their 
freezing  must  be  present  in  the  highest  degree: 
for  hail  is  ice  as  every  one  can  see.  Now  those 
hailstones  are  large  which  are  angular  in 
shape.  And  this  shows  that  they  froze  close  to 
[35]  ^  earth,  for  those  that  fall  far  are  worn 
away  by  the  length  of  their  fall  and  become 
round  and  smaller  in  size. 

348b  It  clearly  follows  that  the  congelation 
does  not  take  place  because  the  cloud  is  thrust 
up  into  the  cold  upper  region. 

Now  we  see  that  warm  and  cold  react  upon 
one  another  by  recoil.  Hence  in  warm  weather 
the  lower  parts  of  the  earth  are  cold  and  in  a 
[5]  frost  they  are  warm.  The  same  thing,  we 
must  suppose,  happens  in  the  air,  so  that  in 
the  warmer  seasons  the  cold  is  concentrated  by 
the  surrounding  heat  and  causes  the  cloud  to 
go  over  into  water  suddenly.  (For  this  reason 
rain-drops  are  much  larger  on  warm  days  than 
in  winter,  and  showers  more  violent.  A  shower 
[/o]  is  said  to  be  more  violent  in  proportion 
as  the  water  comes  down  in  a  body,  and  this 
happens  when  the  condensation  takes  place 
quickly, — though  this  is  just  the  opposite  of 
what  Anaxagoras  says.  He  says  that  this  hap¬ 
pens  when  the  cloud  has  risen  into  the  cold 
air;  whereas  we  say  that  it  happens  when  the 
cloud  has  descended  into  the  warm  air,  and 
that  the  more  the  further  the  cloud  has  de- 
[75]  scended).  But  when  the  cold  has  been 
concentrated  within  still  more  by  the  outer 
heat,  it  freezes  the  water  it  has  formed  and 
there  is  hail.  We  get  hail  when  the  process  of 
freezing  is  quicker  than  the  descent  of  the 


METEOROLOGY 


349b 

water.  For  if  the  water  falls  in  a  certain  time 
and  the  cold  is  sufficient  to  freeze  it  in  less, 
[20]  there  is  no  difficulty  about  its  having 
frozen  in  the  air,  provided  that  the  freezing 
takes  place  in  a  shorter  time  than  its  fall.  The 
nearer  to  the  earth,  and  the  more  suddenly, 
this  process  takes  place,  the  more  violent  is  the 
rain  that  results  and  the  larger  the  raindrops 
[25]  and  the  hailstones  because  of  the  short¬ 
ness  of  their  fall.  For  the  same  reason  large 
raindrops  do  not  fall  thickly.  Hail  is  rarer  in 
summer  than  in  spring  and  autumn,  though 
commoner  than  in  winter,  because  the  air  is 
drier  in  summer,  whereas  in  spring  it  is  still 
moist,  and  in  autumn  it  is  beginning  to  grow 
moist.  It  is  for  the  same  reason  that  hailstorms 
sometimes  occur  in  the  late  summer  as  we 
have  said.1 

[jo]  The  fact  that  the  water  has  previously 
been  warmed  contributes  to  its  freezing  quick¬ 
ly:  for  so  it  cools  sooner.  Hence  many  people, 
when  they  want  to  cool  hot  water  quickly,  be¬ 
gin  by  putting  it  in  the  sun.  So  the  inhabitants 
[55]  of  Pontus  when  they  encamp  on  the  ice  to 
fish  (they  cut  a  hole  in  the  ice  and  then  fish) 
pour  warm  water  round  their  reeds  that  it  may 
349a  freeze  the  quicker,  for  they  use  the  ice 
like  lead  to  fix  the  reeds.  Now  it  is  in  hot 
countries  and  seasons  that  the  water  which 
forms  soon  grows  warm. 

It  is  for  the  same  reason  that  rain  falls  in 
[5]  summer  and  not  in  winter  in  Arabia  and 
Ethiopia  too,  and  that  in  torrents  and  repeat¬ 
edly  on  the  same  day.  For  the  concentration  or 
recoil  due  to  the  extreme  heat  of  the  country 
cools  the  clouds  quickly. 

[/o]  So  much  for  an  account  of  the  nature 
and  causes  of  rain,  dew,  snow,  hoar-frost,  and 
hail. 

Let  us  explain  the  nature  of  winds,  and  all 
windy  vapours,  also  of  rivers  and  of  the  sea. 
But  here,  too,  we  must  first  discuss  the  diffi¬ 
culties  involved:  for,  as  in  other  matters,  so  in 
[75]  this  no  theory  has  been  handed  down  to 
us  that  the  most  ordinary  man  could  not  have 
thought  of. 

Some  say  that  what  is  called  air,  when  it  is  in 
motion  and  flows,  is  wind,  and  that  this  same 
air  when  it  condenses  again  becomes  cloud 
and  water,  implying  that  the  nature  of  wind 
and  water  is  the  same.  So  they  define  wind  as 
[20]  a  motion  of  the  air.  Hence  some,  wishing 
to  say  a  clever  thing,  assert  that  all  the  winds 

lai. 


455 

are  one  wind,  because  the  air  that  moves  is  in 
fact  all  of  it  one  and  the  same;  they  maintain 
that  the  winds  appear  to  differ  owing  to  the 
region  from  which  the  air  may  happen  to  flow 
[25]  on  each  occasion,  but  really  do  not  differ 
at  all.  This  is  just  like  thinking  that  all  rivers 
are  one  and  the  same  river,  and  the  ordinary 
unscientific  view  is  better  than  a  scientific 
theory  like  this.  If  all  rivers  flow  from  one 
source,  and  the  same  is  true  in  the  case  of  the 
[30]  winds,  there  might  be  some  truth  in  this 
theory;  but  if  it  is  no  more  true  in  the  one  case 
than  in  the  other,  this  ingenious  idea  is  plainly 
false.  What  requires  investigation  is  this:  the 
nature  of  wind  and  how  it  originates,  its  effi¬ 
cient  cause  and  whence  they  derive  their 
source;  whether  one  ought  to  think  of  the  wind 
as  issuing  from  a  sort  of  vessel  and  flowing 
[35]  until  the  vessel  is  empty,  as  if  let  out  of  a 
349 3  wineskin,  or,  as  painters  represent  the 
winds,  as  drawing  their  source  from  them¬ 
selves. 

We  find  analogous  views  about  the  origin 
of  rivers.  It  is  thought  that  the  water  is  raised 
by  the  sun  and  descends  in  rain  and  gathers 
below  the  earth  and  so  flows  from  a  great 
reservoir,  all  the  rivers  from  one,  or  each  from 
[5]  a  different  one.  No  water  at  all  is  gen¬ 
erated,  but  the  volume  of  the  rivers  consists  of 
the  water  that  is  gathered  into  such  reservoirs 
in  winter.  Hence  rivers  are  always  fuller  in 
winter  than  in  summer,  and  some  are  peren¬ 
nial,  others  not.  Rivers  are  perennial  where  the 
[10]  reservoir  is  large  and  so  enough  water  has 
collected  in  it  to  last  out  and  not  be  used  up 
before  the  winter  rain  returns.  Where  the  res¬ 
ervoirs  are  smaller  there  is  less  water  in  the 
rivers,  and  they  are  dried  up  and  their  vessel 
empty  before  the  fresh  rain  comes  on. 

[75]  But  if  any  one  will  picture  to  himself  a 
reservoir  adequate  to  the  water  that  is  con¬ 
tinuously  flowing  day  by  day,  and  consider  the 
amount  of  the  water,  it  is  obvious  that  a  re¬ 
ceptacle  that  is  to  contain  all  the  water  that 
flows  in  the  year  would  be  larger  than  the 
earth,  or,  at  any  rate,  not  much  smaller. 

[20]  Though  it  is  evident  that  many  reservoirs 
of  this  kind  do  exist  in  many  parts  of  the 
earth,  yet  it  is  unreasonable  for  any  one  to  re¬ 
fuse  to  admit  that  air  becomes  water  in  the 
earth  for  the  same  reason  as  it  does  above  it. 
If  the  cold  causes  the  vaporous  air  to  condense 
into  water  above  the  earth  we  must  suppose 
the  cold  in  the  earth  to  produce  this  same  ef- 
[25]  feet,  and  recognize  that  there  not  only 
exists  in  it  and  flows  out  of  it  actually  formed 


BOOK  I,  CHAPTERS  11-13 


456  METEOROLOGY  350b 


water,  but  that  water  is  continually  forming 
in  it  too. 

Again,  even  in  the  case  of  the  water  that  is 
not  being  formed  from  day  to  day  but  exists 
as  such,  we  must  not  suppose  as  some  do  that 
[jo]  rivers  have  their  source  in  definite  sub¬ 
terranean  lakes.  On  the  contrary,  just  as  above 
the  earth  small  drops  form  and  these  join 
others,  till  finally  the  water  descends  in  a  body 
as  rain,  so  too  we  must  suppose  that  in  the 
earth  the  water  at  first  trickles  together  little 
by  little,  and  that  the  sources  of  the  rivers  drip, 
[J5l  as  it  were,  out  of  the  earth  and  then 
unite.  This  is  proved  by  facts.  When  men  con- 
350*  struct  an  aqueduct  they  collect  the  water 
in  pipes  and  trenches,  as  if  the  earth  in  the 
higher  ground  were  sweating  the  water  out. 
Hence,  too,  the  head-waters  of  rivers  are  found 
to  flow  from  mountains,  and  from  the  greatest 
mountains  there  flow  the  most  numerous  and 
[5]  greatest  rivers.  Again,  most  springs  are  in 
the  neighbourhood  of  mountains  and  of  high 
ground,  whereas  if  we  except  rivers,  water 
rarely  appears  in  the  plains.  For  mountains  and 
high  ground,  suspended  over  the  country  like 
a  saturated  sponge,  make  the  water  ooze  out 
and  trickle  together  in  minute  quantities  but 
in  many  places.  They  receive  a  great  deal  of 
[/o]  water  falling  as  rain  (for  it  makes  no 
difference  whether  a  spongy  receptacle  is  con¬ 
cave  and  turned  up  or  convex  and  turned 
down:  in  either  case  it  will  contain  the  same 
volume  of  matter)  and  they  also  cool  the 
vapour  that  rises  and  condense  it  back  into 
water. 

Hence,  as  we  said,  we  find  that  the  greatest 
[75]  rivers  flow  from  the  greatest  mountains. 
This  can  be  seen  by  looking  at  itineraries:  what 
is  recorded  in  them  consists  either  of  things 
which  the  writer  has  seen  himself  or  of  such  as 
he  has  compiled  after  inquiry  from  those  who 
have  seen  them. 

In  Asia  we  find  that  the  most  numerous  and 
[20]  greatest  rivers  flow  from  the  mountain 
called  Parnassus,  admittedly  the  greatest  of  all 
mountains  towards  the  south-east.  When  you 
have  crossed  it  you  see  the  outer  ocean,  the  fur¬ 
ther  limit  of  which  is  unknown  to  the  dwellers 
in  our  world.  Besides  other  rivers  there  flow 
from  it  the  Bactrus,  the  Choaspes,  the  Araxes: 
from  the  last  a  branch  separates  off  and  flows 
[25]  into  lake  Maeotis  as  the  Tanais.  From  it, 
too,  flows  the  Indus,  the  volume  of  whose 
stream  is  greatest  of  all  rivers.  From  the  Cau¬ 
casus  flows  the  Phasis,  and  very  many  other 
great  rivers  besides.  Now  the  Caucasus  is  the 


greatest  of  the  mountains  that  lie  to  the  north- 
[jo]  east,  both  as  regards  its  extent  and  its 
height.  A  proof  of  its  height  is  the  fact  that  it 
can  be  seen  from  the  so-called  ‘deeps’  and  from 
the  entrance  to  the  lake.  Again,  the  sun  shines 
on  its  peaks  for  a  third  part  of  the  night  before 
sunrise  and  again  after  sunset.  Its  extent  is 
proved  by  the  fact  that  though  it  contains 
many  inhabitable  regions  which  are  occupied 
by  many  nations  and  in  which  there  are  said 
[  J5]  to  be  great  lakes,  yet  they  say  that  all  these 
350b  regions  are  visible  up  to  the  last  peak. 
From  Pyrene  (this  is  a  mountain  towards  the 
west  in  Celtice)  there  flow  the  Istrus  and  the 
Tartessus.  The  latter  flows  outside  the  pillars, 
while  the  Istrus  flows  through  all  Europe  into 
the  Euxine.  Most  of  the  remaining  rivers  flow 
[5]  northwards  from  the  Hercynian  moun¬ 
tains,  which  are  the  greatest  in  height  and  ex¬ 
tent  about  that  region.  In  the  extreme  north, 
beyond  furthest  Scythia,  are  the  mountains 
called  Rhipae.  The  stories  about  their  size  are 
altogether  too  fabulous:  however,  they  say  that 
the  most  and  (after  the  Istrus)  the  greatest 
[/o]  rivers  flow  from  them.  So,  too,  in  Libya 
there  flow  from  the  Aethiopian  mountains  the 
Aegon  and  the  Nyses;  and  from  the  so-called 
Silver  Mountain  the  two  greatest  of  named 
rivers,  the  river  called  Chremetes  that  flows 
[75]  into  the  outer  ocean,  and  the  main  source 
of  the  Nile.  Of  the  rivers  in  the  Greek  world, 
the  Achelous  flows  from  Pindus,  the  Inachus 
from  the  same  mountain;  the  Strymon,  the 
Nestus,  and  the  Hebrus  all  three  from  Scom- 
brus;  many  rivers,  too,  flow  from  Rhodope. 

All  other  rivers  would  be  found  to  flow  in 
[20]  the  same  way,  but  we  have  mentioned 
these  as  examples.  Even  where  rivers  flow  from 
marshes,  the  marshes  in  almost  every  case  are 
found  to  lie  below  mountains  or  gradually 
rising  ground. 

It  is  clear  then  that  we  must  not  suppose 
rivers  to  originate  from  definite  reservoirs:  for 
the  whole  earth,  we  might  almost  say,  would 
[25]  not  be  sufficient  (any  more  than  the  re¬ 
gion  of  the  clouds  would  be)  if  we  were  to 
suppose  that  they  were  fed  by  actually  existing 
water  only  and  it  were  not  the  case  that  as 
some  water  passed  out  of  existence  some  more 
came  into  existence,  but  rivers  always  drew 
their  stream  from  an  existing  store.  Secondly, 
the  fact  that  rivers  rise  at  the  foot  of  moun¬ 
tains  proves  that  a  place  transmits  the  water  it 
contains  by  gradual  percolation  of  many  drops, 
little  by  little,  and  that  this  is  how  the  sources 
[jo]  of  rivers  originate.  However,  there  is 


351b 

nothing  impossible  about  the  existence  of  such 
places  containing  a  quantity  of  water  like 
lakes:  only  they  cannot  be  big  enough  to  pro¬ 
duce  the  supposed  effect.  To  think  that  they 
are  is  just  as  absurd  as  if  one  were  to  suppose 
that  rivers  drew  all  their  water  from  the  sources 
we  see  (for  most  rivers  do  flow  from  springs). 
So  it  is  no  more  reasonable  to  suppose  those 
lakes  to  contain  the  whole  volume  of  water 
than  these  springs. 

35 la  That  there  exist  such  chasms  and  cavities 
in  the  earth  we  are  taught  by  the  rivers  that 
are  swallowed  up.  They  are  found  in  many 
parts  of  the  earth:  in  the  Peloponnesus,  for 
instance,  there  are  many  such  rivers  in  Arcadia. 
The  reason  is  that  Arcadia  is  mountainous  and 
[5]  there  are  no  channels  from  its  valleys  to 
the  sea.  So  these  places  get  full  of  water,  and 
this,  having  no  outlet,  under  the  pressure  of 
the  water  that  is  added  above,  finds  a  way  out 
for  itself  underground.  In  Greece  this  kind  of 
thing  happens  on  quite  a  small  scale,  but  the 
lake  at  the  foot  of  the  Caucasus,  which  the  in¬ 
habitants  of  these  parts  call  a  sea,  is  consider- 
[/o]  able.  Many  great  rivers  fall  into  it  and  it 
has  no  visible  outlet  but  issues  below  the  earth 
off  the  land  of  the  Coraxi  about  the  so-called 
‘deeps  of  Pontus’.  This  is  a  place  of  unfathom¬ 
able  depth  in  the  sea:  at  any  rate  no  one  has 
yet  been  able  to  find  bottom  there  by  sounding. 
At  this  spot,  about  three  hundred  stadia  from 
[75]  land,  there  comes  up  sweet  water  over  a 
large  area,  not  all  of  it  together  but  in  three 
places.  And  in  Liguria  a  river  equal  in  size 
to  the  Rhodanus  is  swallowed  up  and  appears 
again  elsewhere:  the  Rhodanus  being  a  naviga¬ 
ble  river. 

x4 

The  same  parts  of  the  earth  are  not  always 
[20]  moist  or  dry,  but  they  change  according 
as  rivers  come  into  existence  and  dry  up.  And 
so  the  relation  of  land  to  sea  changes  too  and 
a  place  does  not  always  remain  land  or  sea 
throughout  all  time,  but  where  there  was  dry 
land  there  comes  to  be  sea,  and  where  there  is 
now  sea,  there  one  day  comes  to  be  dry  land. 
[25]  But  we  must  suppose  these  changes  to 
follow  some  order  and  cycle.  The  principle 
and  cause  of  these  changes  is  that  the  interior 
of  the  earth  grows  and  decays,  like  the  bodies 
of  plants  and  animals.  Only  in  the  case  of  these 
latter  the  process  does  not  go  on  by  parts,  but 
[jo]  each  of  them  necessarily  grows  or  decays 
as  a  whole,  whereas  it  does  go  on  by  parts  in 
the  case  of  the  earth.  Here  the  causes  are  cold 


457 

and  heat,  which  increase  and  diminish  on  ac¬ 
count  of  the  sun  and  its  course.  It  is  owing  to 
them  that  the  parts  of  the  earth  come  to  have  a 
different  character,  that  some  parts  remain 
moist  for  a  certain  time,  and  then  dry  up  and 
[J5]  grow  old,  while  other  parts  in  their  turn 
are  filled  with  life  and  moisture.  Now  when 
places  become  drier  the  springs  necessarily 
35 lb  give  out,  and  when  this  happens  the 
rivers  first  decrease  in  size  and  then  finally  be¬ 
come  dry;  and  when  rivers  change  and  disap¬ 
pear  in  one  part  and  come  into  existence  cor¬ 
respondingly  in  another,  the  sea  must  needs  be 
affected. 

[5]  If  the  sea  was  once  pushed  out  by  rivers 
and  encroached  upon  the  land  anywhere,  it 
necessarily  leaves  that  place  dry  when  it  re¬ 
cedes;  again,  if  the  dry  land  has  encroached  on 
the  sea  at  all  by  a  process  of  silting  set  up  by 
the  rivers  when  at  their  full,  the  time  must 
come  when  this  place  will  be  flooded  again. 

But  the  whole  vital  process  of  the  earth  takes 
lace  so  gradually  and  in  periods  of  time  which 
/o]  are  so  immense  compared  with  the  length 
of  our  life,  that  these  changes  are  not  observed, 
and  before  their  course  can  be  recorded  from 
beginning  to  end  whole  nations  perish  and  are 
destroyed.  Of  such  destructions  the  most  utter 
and  sudden  are  due  to  wars;  but  pestilence  or 
famine  cause  them  too.  Famines,  again,  are 
[75]  either  sudden  and  severe  or  else  gradual. 
In  the  latter  case  the  disappearance  of  a  na¬ 
tion  is  not  noticed  because  some  leave  the  coun¬ 
try  while  others  remain;  and  this  goes  on  until 
the  land  is  unable  to  maintain  any  inhabitants 
at  all.  So  a  long  period  of  time  is  likely  to 
[20]  elapse  from  the  first  departure  to  the  last, 
and  no  one  remembers  and  the  lapse  of  time 
destroys  all  record  even  before  the  last  inhab¬ 
itants  have  disappeared.  In  the  same  way  a 
nation  must  be  supposed  to  lose  account  of  the 
time  when  it  first  settled  in  a  land  that  was 
changing  from  a  marshy  and  watery  state  and 
[25]  becoming  dry.  Here,  too,  the  change  is 
gradual  and  lasts  a  long  time  and  men  do  not 
remember  who  came  first,  or  when,  or  what 
the  land  was  like  when  they  came.  This  has 
been  the  case  with  Egypt.  Here  it  is  obvious 
that  the  land  is  continually  getting  drier  and 
that  the  whole  country  is  a  deposit  of  the  river 
[jo]  Nile.  But  because  the  neighbouring  peo¬ 
ples  settled  in  the  land  gradually  as  the 
marshes  dried,  the  lapse  of  time  has  hidden  the 
beginning  of  the  process.  However,  all  the 
mouths  of  the  Nile,  with  the  single  exception 
of  that  at  Canopus,  are  obviously  artificial  and 


BOOK  I,  CHAPTERS  13-14 


45#  METEOROLOGY  352b 


not  natural.  And  Egypt  was  nothing  more  than 
[35]  what  is  called  Thebes,  as  Homer,  too, 
shows,  modern  though  he  is  in  relation  to  such 
352a  changes.  For  Thebes  is  the  place  that  he 
mentions;  which  implies  that  Memphis  did  not 
yet  exist,  or  at  any  rate  was  not  as  important 
as  it  is  now.  That  this  should  be  so  is  natural, 
since  the  lower  land  came  to  be  inhabited  later 
than  that  which  lay  higher.  For  the  parts  that 
lie  nearer  to  the  place  where  the  river  is  de¬ 
positing  the  silt  are  necessarily  marshy  for  a 
longer  time  since  the  water  always  lies  most 
[5]  in  the  newly  formed  land.  But  in  time  this 
land  changes  its  character,  and  in  its  turn  en¬ 
joys  a  period  of  prosperity.  For  these  places  dry 
up  and  come  to  be  in  good  condition  while  the 
places  that  were  formerly  well-tempered  some 
day  grow  excessively  dry  and  deteriorate.  This 
happened  to  the  land  of  Argos  and  Mycenae  in 
Greece.  In  the  time  of  the  Trojan  wars  the 
[/o]  Argive  land  was  marshy  and  could  only 
support  a  small  population,  whereas  the  land 
of  Mycenae  was  in  good  condition  (and  for 
this  reason  Mycenae  was  the  superior).  But 
now  the  opposite  is  the  case,  for  the  reason  we 
have  mentioned:  the  land  of  Mycenae  has  be¬ 
come  completely  dry  and  barren,  while  the 
Argive  land  that  was  formerly  barren  owing 
to  the  water  has  now  become  fruitful.  Now 
the  same  process  that  has  taken  place  in  this 
[75]  small  district  must  be  supposed  to  be  go¬ 
ing  on  over  whole  countries  and  on  a  large 
scale. 

Men  whose  outlook  is  narrow  suppose  the 
cause  of  such  events  to  be  change  in  the  uni¬ 
verse,  in  the  sense  of  a  coming  to  be  of  the 
world  as  a  whole.  Hence  they  say  that  the  sea 
[20]  is  being  dried  up  and  is  growing  less,  be¬ 
cause  this  is  observed  to  have  happened  in 
more  places  now  than  formerly.  But  this  is 
only  partially  true.  It  is  true  that  many  places 
are  now  dry,  that  formerly  were  covered  with 
water.  But  the  opposite  is  true  too:  for  if  they 
look  they  will  find  that  there  are  many  places 
where  the  sea  has  invaded  the  land.  But  we 
[25]  must  not  suppose  that  the  cause  of  this 
is  that  the  world  is  in  process  of  becoming. 
For  it  is  absurd  to  make  the  universe  to  be  in 
process  because  of  small  and  trifling  changes, 
when  the  bulk  and  size  of  the  earth  are  surely 
as  nothing  in  comparison  with  the  whole 
world.  Rather  we  must  take  the  cause  of  all 
these  changes  to  be  that,  just  as  winter  occurs 
in  the  seasons  of  the  year,  so  in  determined 
[jo]  periods  there  comes  a  great  winter  of  a 
great  year  and  with  it  excess  of  rain.  But  this 


excess  does  not  always  occur  in  the  same  place. 
The  deluge  in  the  time  of  Deucalion,  for  in- 
[35]  stance,  took  place  chiefly  in  the  Greek 
world  and  in  it  especially  about  ancient  Hellas, 
the  country  about  Dodona  and  the  Achelous,  a 
352b  river  which  has  often  changed  its  course. 
Here  the  Selli  dwelt  and  those  who  were  for¬ 
merly  called  Graeci  and  now  Hellenes.  When, 
therefore,  such  an  excess  of  rain  occurs  we  must 
suppose  that  it  suffices  for  a  long  time.  We  have 
[5]  seen  that  some1  say  that  the  size  of  the  sub¬ 
terranean  cavities  is  what  makes  some  rivers 
perennial  and  others  not,  whereas  we  maintain 
that  the  size  of  the  mountains  is  the  cause,  and 
their  density  and  coldness;  for  great,  dense,  and 
cold  mountains  catch  and  keep  and  create  most 
water:  whereas  if  the  mountains  that  overhang 
[/o]  the  sources  of  rivers  are  small  or  porous 
and  stony  and  clayey,  these  rivers  run  dry 
earlier.  We  must  recognize  the  same  kind  of 
thing  in  this  case  too.  Where  such  abundance 
of  rain  falls  in  the  great  winter  it  tends  to  make 
the  moisture  of  those  places  almost  everlasting. 
But  as  time  goes  on  places  of  the  latter  type 
dry  up  more,  while  those  of  the  former,  moist 
[75]  type,  do  so  less:  until  at  last  the  beginning 
of  the  same  cycle  returns. 

Since  there  is  necessarily  some  change  in  the 
whole  world,  but  not  in  the  way  of  coming 
into  existence  or  perishing  (for  the  universe 
is  permanent),  it  must  be,  as  we  say,  that  the 
same  places  are  not  for  ever  moist  through  the 
presence  of  sea  and  rivers,  nor  for  ever  dry. 
And  the  facts  prove  this.  The  whole  land  of 
[20]  the  Egyptians,  whom  we  take  to  be  the 
most  ancient  of  men,  has  evidently  gradually 
come  into  existence  and  been  produced  by  the 
river.  This  is  clear  from  an  observation  of  the 
country,  and  the  facts  about  the  Red  Sea  suf¬ 
fice  to  prove  it  too.  One  of  their  kings  tried 
[25]  to  make  a  canal  to  it  (for  it  would  have 
been  of  no  little  advantage  to  them  for  the 
whole  region  to  have  become  navigable;  Ses- 
ostris  is  said  to  have  been  the  first  of  the  ancient 
kings  to  try),  but  he  found  that  the  sea  was 
higher  than  the  land.  So  he  first,  and  Darius 
afterwards,  stopped  making  the  canal,  lest  the 
sea  should  mix  with  the  river  water  and  spoil 
[jo]  it.  So  it  is  clear  that  all  this  part  was  once 
unbroken  sea.  For  the  same  reason  Libya — the 
country  of  Ammon — is,  strangely  enough, 
lower  and  hollower  than  the  land  to  the  sea¬ 
ward  of  it.  For  it  is  clear  that  a  barrier  of  silt 
[35]  was  formed  and  after  it  lakes  and  dry 
land,  but  in  course  of  time  the  water  that  was 

1 349b  3- 


354*  BOOK  I,  CHAPTER  14 

left  behind  in  the  lakes  dried  up  and  is  now  all 
353*  gone.  Again  the  silting  up  of  the  lake 
Maeotis  by  the  rivers  has  advanced  so  much 
that  the  limit  to  the  size  of  the  ships  which  can 
now  sail  into  it  to  trade  is  much  lower  than  it 
was  sixty  years  ago.  Hence  it  is  easy  to  infer 
[5]  that  it,  too,  like  most  lakes,  was  originally 
produced  by  the  rivers  and  that  it  must  end 
by  drying  up  entirely. 

Again,  this  process  of  silting  up  causes  a 
continuous  current  through  the  Bosporus;  and 
in  this  case  we  can  directly  observe  the  nature 
of  the  process.  Whenever  the  current  from  the 
Asiatic  shore  threw  up  a  sandbank,  there  first 
[/o]  formed  a  small  lake  behind  it.  Later  it 
dried  up  and  a  second  sandbank  formed  in 
front  of  the  first  and  a  second  lake.  This  proc¬ 
ess  went  on  uniformly  and  without  interrup¬ 
tion.  Now  when  this  has  been  repeated  often 
enough,  in  the  course  of  time  the  strait  must  be- 


— BOOK  II,  CHAPTER  1  459 

come  like  a  river,  and  in  the  end  the  river 
itself  must  dry  up. 

[75]  So  it  is  clear,  since  there  will  be  no  end 
to  time  and  the  world  is  eternal,  that  neither 
the  Tanais  nor  the  Nile  has  always  been  flow¬ 
ing,  but  that  the  region  whence  they  flow  was 
once  dry:  for  their  effect  may  be  fulfilled,  but 
time  cannot.  And  this  will  be  equally  true  of 
[20]  all  other  rivers.  But  if  rivers  come  into 
existence  and  perish  and  the  same  parts  of  the 
earth  were  not  always  moist,  the  sea  must 
needs  change  correspondingly.  And  if  the  sea 
is  always  advancing  in  one  place  and  receding 
in  another  it  is  clear  that  the  same  parts  of  the 
whole  earth  are  not  always  either  sea  or  land, 
but  that  all  this  changes  in  course  of  time. 

[25]  So  we  have  explained  that  the  same  parts 
of  the  earth  are  not  always  land  or  sea  and  why 
that  is  so:  and  also  why  some  rivers  are  peren¬ 
nial  and  others  not. 


BOOK  II 


1 

Let  us  explain  the  nature  of  the  sea  and  the 
reason  why  such  a  large  mass  of  water  is  salt 
and  the  way  in  which  it  originally  came  to  be. 

The  old  writers  who  invented  theogonies  say 
[55]  that  the  sea  has  springs,  for  they  want 
earth  and  sea  to  have  foundations  and  roots  of 
353b  their  own.  Presumably  they  thought  that 
this  view  was  grander  and  more  impressive  as 
implying  that  our  earth  was  an  important  part 
of  the  universe.  For  they  believed  that  the 
whole  world  had  been  built  up  round  our 
earth  and  for  its  sake,  and  that  the  earth  was 
the  most  important  and  primary  part  of  it. 
[5]  Others,  wiser  in  human  knowledge,  give 
an  account  of  its  origin.  At  first,  they  say,  the 
earth  was  surrounded  by  moisture.  Then  the 
sun  began  to  dry  it  up,  part  of  it  evaporated 
and  is  the  cause  of  winds  and  the  turnings  back 
of  the  sun  and  the  moon,  while  the  remainder 
[/o]  forms  the  sea.  So  the  sea  is  being  dried  up 
and  is  growing  less,  and  will  end  by  being  some 
day  entirely  dried  up.  Others  say  that  the  sea 
is  a  kind  of  sweat  exuded  by  the  earth  when 
the  sun  heats  it,  and  that  this  explains  its  salt¬ 
ness:  for  all  sweat  is  salt.  Others  say  that  the 
saltness  is  due  to  the  earth.  Just  as  water 
strained  through  ashes  becomes  salt,  so  the  sea 
[75]  owes  its  saltness  to  the  admixture  of  earth 
with  similar  properties. 

We  must  now  consider  the  facts  which  prove 
that  the  sea  cannot  possibly  have  springs.  The 


waters  we  find  on  the  earth  either  flow  or  are 
stationary.  All  flowing  water  has  springs.  (By 
[20]  a  spring,  as  we  have  explained  above,1 
we  must  not  understand  a  source  from  which 
waters  are  ladled  as  it  were  from  a  vessel,  but 
a  first  point  at  which  the  water  which  is  con¬ 
tinually  forming  and  percolating  gathers.)  Sta¬ 
tionary  water  is  either  that  which  has  collected 
and  has  been  left  standing,  marshy  pools,  for 
instance,  and  lakes,  which  differ  merely  in 
size,  or  else  it  comes  from  springs.  In  this  case 
[25]  it  is  always  artificial,  I  mean  as  in  the 
case  of  wells,  otherwise  the  spring  would  have 
to  be  above  the  outlet.  Hence  the  water  from 
fountains  and  rivers  flows  of  itself,  whereas 
wells  need  to  be  worked  artificially.  All  the 
waters  that  exist  belong  to  one  or  other  of 
these  classes. 

[50]  On  the  basis  of  this  division  we  can  see 
that  the  sea  cannot  have  springs.  For  it  falls 
under  neither  of  the  two  classes;  it  does  not 
flow  and  it  is  not  artificial;  whereas  all  water 
from  springs  must  belong  to  one  or  other  of 
them.  Natural  standing  water  from  springs  is 
never  found  on  such  a  large  scale. 

[35]  Again,  there  are  several  seas  that  have  no 
354*  communication  with  one  another  at  all. 
The  Red  Sea,  for  instance,  communicates  but 
slightly  with  the  ocean  outside  the  straits,  and 
the  Hyrcanian  and  Caspian  seas  are  distinct 
from  this  ocean  and  people  dwell  all  round 
them.  Hence,  if  these  seas  had  had  any  springs 
1 349b  27* 


460  METEOROLOGY  355* 


anywhere  they  must  have  been  discovered. 

[5]  It  is  true  that  in  straits,  where  the  land  on 
either  side  contracts  an  open  sea  into  a  small 
space,  the  sea  appears  to  flow.  But  this  is  be¬ 
cause  it  is  swinging  to  and  fro.  In  the  open  sea 
this  motion  is  not  observed,  but  where  the 
[10]  land  narrows  and  contracts  the  sea  the 
motion  that  was  imperceptible  in  the  open  nec¬ 
essarily  strikes  the  attention. 

The  whole  of  the  Mediterranean  does  actu¬ 
ally  flow.  The  direction  of  this  flow  is  de¬ 
termined  by  the  depth  of  the  basins  and  by  the 
number  of  rivers.  Maeotis  flows  into  Pontus 
and  Pontus  into  the  Aegean.  After  that  the 
[75]  flow  of  the  remaining  seas  is  not  so  easy 
to  observe.  The  current  of  Maeotis  and  Pontus 
is  due  to  the  number  of  rivers  (more  rivers 
flow  into  the  Euxine  and  Maeotis  than  into 
the  whole  Mediterranean  with  its  much  larger 
basin),  and  to  their  own  shallowness.  For  we 
[20]  find  the  sea  getting  deeper  and  deeper. 
Pontus  is  deeper  than  Maeotis,  the  Aegean 
than  Pontus,  the  Sicilian  sea  than  the  Aegean; 
the  Sardinian  and  Tyrrhenic  being  the  deepest 
of  all.  (Outside  the  pillars  of  Heracles  the  sea 
is  shallow  owing  to  the  mud,  but  calm,  for  it 
lies  in  a  hollow.)  We  see,  then,  that  just  as 
single  rivers  flow  from  mountains,  so  it  is  with 
[25]  the  earth  as  a  whole:  the  greatest  volume 
of  water  flows  from  the  higher  regions  in  the 
north.  Their  alluvium  makes  the  northern 
seas  shallow,  while  the  outer  seas  are  deeper. 
Some  further  evidence  of  the  height  of  the 
northern  regions  of  the  earth  is  afforded  by  the 
view  of  many  of  the  ancient  meteorologists. 
They  believed  that  the  sun  did  not  pass  below 
[jo]  the  earth,  but  round  its  northern  part, 
and  that  it  was  the  height  of  this  which  ob¬ 
scured  the  sun  and  caused  night. 

So  much  to  prove  that  there  cannot  be 
sources  of  the  sea  and  to  explain  its  observed 
flow. 

2 

354b  we  must  now  discuss  the  origin  of  the 
sea,  if  it  has  an  origin,  and  the  cause  of  its  salt 
and  bitter  taste. 

What  made  earlier  writers  consider  the  sea 
to  be  the  original  and  main  body  of  water  is 
this.  It  seems  reasonable  to  suppose  that  to  be 
[5]  the  case  on  the  analogy  of  the  other  ele¬ 
ments.  Each  of  them  has  a  main  bulk  which 
by  reason  of  its  mass  is  the  origin  of  that  ele¬ 
ment,  and  any  parts  which  change  and  mix 
with  the  other  elements  come  from  it.  Thus  the 
main  body  of  fire  is  in  the  upper  region;  that 


of  air  occupies  the  place  next  inside  the  region 
of  fire;  while  the  mass  of  the  earth  is  that 
[/o]  round  which  the  rest  of  the  elements  are 
seen  to  lie.  So  we  must  clearly  look  for  some¬ 
thing  analogous  in  the  case  of  water.  But  here 
we  can  find  no  such  single  mass,  as  in  the  case 
of  the  other  elements,  except  the  sea.  River 
water  is  not  a  unity,  nor  is  it  stable,  but  is 
seen  to  be  in  a  continuous  process  of  becoming 
[75]  from  day  to  day.  It  was  this  difficulty 
which  made  people  regard  the  sea  as  the  origin 
and  source  of  moisture  and  of  all  water.  And 
so  we  find  it  maintained  that  rivers  not  only 
flow  into  the  sea  but  originate  from  it,  the  salt 
water  becoming  sweet  by  filtration. 

But  this  view  involves  another  difficulty.  If 
[20]  this  body  of  water  is  the  origin  and 
source  of  all  water,  why  is  it  salt  and  not 
sweet?  The  reason  for  this,  besides  answering 
this  question,  will  ensure  our  having  a  right 
first  conception  of  the  nature  of  the  sea. 

The  earth  is  surrounded  by  water,  just  as 
that  is  by  the  sphere  of  air,  and  that  again  by 
the  sphere  called  that  of  fire  (which  is  the 
[25]  outermost  both  on  the  common  view  and 
on  ours).  Now  the  sun,  moving  as  it  does,  sets 
up  processes  of  change  and  becoming  and 
decay,  and  by  its  agency  the  finest  and  sweet¬ 
est  water  is  every  day  carried  up  and  is  dis¬ 
solved  into  vapour  and  rises  to  the  upper  re- 
[30]  gion,  where  it  is  condensed  again  by  the 
cold  and  so  returns  to  the  earth.  This,  as  we 
have  said  before,1  is  the  regular  course  of 
nature. 

Hence  all  my  predecessors  who  supposed 
that  the  sun  was  nourished  by  moisture  are 
absurdly  mistaken.  Some  go  on  to  say  that  the 
355*  solstices  are  due  to  this,  the  reason  being 
that  the  same  places  cannot  always  supply  the 
sun  with  nourishment  and  that  without  it  he 
[5]  must  perish.  For  the  fire  we  are  familiar 
with  lives  as  long  as  it  is  fed,  and  the  only 
food  for  fire  is  moisture.  As  if  the  moisture 
that  is  raised  could  reach  the  sun!  or  this  ascent 
were  really  like  that  performed  by  flame  as  it 
comes  into  being,  and  to  which  they  supposed 
the  case  of  the  sun  to  be  analogous!  Really 
there  is  no  similarity.  A  flame  is  a  process  of 
becoming,  involving  a  constant  interchange  of 
[70]  moist  and  dry.  It  cannot  be  said  to  be 
nourished  since  it  scarcely  persists  as  one  and 
the  same  for  a  moment.  This  cannot  be  true  of 
the  sun;  for  if  it  were  nourished  like  that,  as 
they  say  it  is,  we  should  obviously  not  only 
have  a  new  sun  every  day,  as  Heraclitus  says, 
1 1-  9- 


356*  BOOK  II,  CHAPTERS  1-2  461 


[75]  but  a  new  sun  every  moment.  Again, 
when  the  sun  causes  the  moisture  to  rise,  this 
is  like  fire  heating  water.  So,  as  the  fire  is  not 
fed  by  the  water  above  it,  it  is  absurd  to  suppose 
that  the  sun  feeds  on  that  moisture,  even  if 
its  heat  made  all  the  water  in  the  world 
evaporate.  Again,  it  is  absurd,  considering  the 
number  and  size  of  the  stars,  that  these  think- 
[20]  ers  should  consider  the  sun  only  and 
overlook  the  question  how  the  rest  of  the  heav¬ 
enly  bodies  subsist.  Again,  they  are  met  by  the 
same  difficulty  as  those  who  say  that  at  first 
the  earth  itself  was  moist  and  the  world  round 
the  earth  was  warmed  by  the  sun,  and  so  air 
was  generated  and  the  whole  firmament  grew, 
and  the  air  caused  winds  and  solstices.  The 
[25]  objection  is  that  we  always  plainly  see  the 
water  that  has  been  carried  up  coming  down 
again.  Even  if  the  same  amount  does  not  come 
back  in  a  year  or  in  a  given  country,  yet  in  a 
certain  period  all  that  has  been  carried  up  is 
returned.  This  implies  that  the  celestial  bodies 
do  not  feed  on  it,  and  that  we  cannot  dis¬ 
tinguish  between  some  air  which  preserves  its 
character  once  it  is  generated  and  some  other 
[jo]  which  is  generated  but  becomes  water 
again  and  so  perishes;  on  the  contrary,  all  the 
moisture  alike  is  dissolved  and  all  of  it  con¬ 
densed  back  into  water. 

The  drinkable,  sweet  water,  then,  is  light 
and  is  all  of  it  drawn  up:  the  salt  water  is  heavy 
and  remains  behind,  but  not  in  its  natural 
place.  For  this  is  a  question  which  has  been 
[55]  sufficiently  discussed  (I  mean  about  the 
natural  place  that  water,  like  the  other  ele¬ 
ments,  must  in  reason  have),  and  the  answer 
355b  is  this.  The  place  which  we  see  the  sea 
filling  is  not  its  natural  place  but  that  of  water. 
[5]  It  seems  to  belong  to  the  sea  because  the 
weight  of  the  salt  water  makes  it  remain  there, 
while  the  sweet,  drinkable  water  which  is 
light  is  carried  up.  The  same  thing  happens  in 
animal  bodies.  Here,  too,  the  food  when  it 
enters  the  body  is  sweet,  yet  the  residuum  and 
dregs  of  liquid  food  are  found  to  be  bitter  and 
salt.  This  is  because  the  sweet  and  drinkable 
[/o]  part  of  it  has  been  drawn  away  by  the 
natural  animal  heat  and  has  passed  into  the 
flesh  and  the  other  parts  of  the  body  according 
to  their  several  natures.  Now  just  as  here  it 
would  be  wrong  for  any  one  to  refuse  to  call 
the  belly  the  place  of  liquid  food  because  that 
disappears  from  it  soon,  and  to  call  it  the  place 
of  the  residuum  because  this  is  seen  to  remain, 
so  in  the  case  of  our  present  subject.  This 
[75]  place,  we  say,  is  the  place  of  water.  Hence 


all  rivers  and  all  the  water  that  is  generated 
flow  into  it:  for  water  flows  into  the  deepest 
place,  and  the  deepest  part  of  the  earth  is  filled 
by  the  sea.  Only  all  the  light  and  sweet  part  of 
it  is  quickly  carried  off  by  the  sun,  while  the 
[20]  rest  remains  for  the  reason  we  have  ex¬ 
plained.  It  is  quite  natural  that  some  people 
should  have  been  puzzled  by  the  old  question 
why  such  a  mass  of  water  leaves  no  trace  any¬ 
where  (for  the  sea  does  not  increase  though 
innumerable  and  vast  rivers  are  flowing  into  it 
every  day).  But  if  one  considers  the  matter 
[25]  the  solution  is  easy.  The  same  amount 
of  water  does  not  take  as  long  to  dry  up  when 
it  is  spread  out  as  when  it  is  gathered  in  a 
body,  and  indeed  the  difference  is  so  great 
that  in  the  one  case  it  might  persist  the  whole 
day  long  while  in  the  other  it  might  all  dis¬ 
appear  in  a  moment — as  for  instance  if  one 
[jo]  were  to  spread  out  a  cup  of  water  over  a 
large  table.  This  is  the  case  with  the  rivers: 
all  the  time  they  are  flowing  their  water  forms 
a  compact  mass,  but  when  it  arrives  at  a  vast 
wide  place  it  quickly  and  imperceptibly  evap¬ 
orates. 

But  the  theory  of  the  Phaedo 1  about  rivers 
and  the  sea  is  impossible.  There  it  is  said  that 
the  earth  is  pierced  by  intercommunicating 
[^5]  channels  and  that  the  original  head  and 
356*  source  of  all  waters  is  what  is  called 
Tartarus — a  mass  of  water  about  the  centre, 
from  which  all  waters,  flowing  and  standing, 
are  derived.  This  primary  and  original  water 
is  always  surging  to  and  fro,  and  so  it  causes 
the  rivers  to  flow  on  this  side  of  the  earth’s  cen¬ 
tre  and  on  that;  for  it  has  no  fixed  seat  but  is 
always  oscillating  about  the  centre.  Its  motion 
[5]  up  and  down  is  what  fills  rivers.  Many  of 
these  form  lakes  in  various  places  (our  sea  is  an 
instance  of  one  of  these),  but  all  of  them  come 
round  again  in  a  circle  to  the  original  source 
of  their  flow,  many  at  the  same  point,  but 
some  at  a  point  opposite  to  that  from  which 
[70]  they  issued;  for  instance,  if  they  started 
from  the  other  side  of  the  earth’s  centre,  they 
might  return  from  this  side  of  it.  They  descend 
only  as  far  as  the  centre,  for  after  that  all  mo¬ 
tion  is  upwards.  Water  gets  its  tastes  and  col¬ 
ours  from  the  kind  of  earth  the  rivers  hap¬ 
pened  to  flow  through. 

But  on  this  theory  rivers  do  not  always  flow 
[75]  in  the  same  sense.  For  since  they  flow  to 
the  centre  from  which  they  issue  forth  they 
will  not  be  flowing  down  any  more  than  up, 
but  in  whatever  direction  the  surging  of  Tar- 
1  Phaedo ,  iii  sq. 


462  METEOROLOGY  357* 


tarus  inclines  to.  But  at  this  rate  we  shall  get 
the  proverbial  rivers  flowing  upwards,  which 
is  impossible.  Again,  where  is  the  water  that 
is  generated  and  what  goes  up  again  as 
vapour  to  come  from?  For  this  must  all  of  it 
[20]  simply  be  ignored,  since  the  quantity  of 
water  is  always  the  same  and  all  the  water 
that  flows  out  from  the  original  source  flows 
back  to  it  again.  This  itself  is  not  true,  since 
all  rivers  are  seen  to  end  in  the  sea  except 
where  one  flows  into  another.  Not  one  of  them 
ends  in  the  earth,  but  even  when  one  is  swal- 
[25]  lowed  up  it  comes  to  the  surface  again. 
And  those  rivers  are  large  which  flow  for  a 
long  distance  through  a  low-lying  country,  for 
by  their  situation  and  length  they  cut  off  the 
course  of  many  others  and  swallow  them  up. 
This  is  why  the  Istrus  and  the  Nile  are  the 
greatest  of  the  rivers  which  flow  into  our  sea. 
Indeed,  so  many  rivers  fall  into  them  that  there 
[jo]  is  disagreement  as  to  the  sources  of  them 
both.  All  of  which  is  plainly  impossible  on  the 
theory,  and  the  more  so  as  it  derives  the  sea 
from  Tartarus. 

Enough  has  been  said  to  prove  that  this  is 
the  natural  place  of  water  and  not  of  the  sea, 
and  to  explain  why  sweet  water  is  only  found 
[35}  in  rivers,  while  salt  water  is  stationary, 
356b  and  to  show  that  the  sea  is  the  end  rather 
than  the  source  of  water,  analogous  to  the 
residual  matter  of  all  food,  and  especially 
liquid  food,  in  animal  bodies. 

3 

We  must  now  explain  why  the  sea  is  salt,  and 
ask  whether  it  eternally  exists  as  identically 
the  same  body,  or  whether  it  did  not  exist  at  all 
once  and  some  day  will  exist  no  longer,  but 
[5]  will  dry  up  as  some  people  think. 

Every  one  admits  this,  that  if  the  whole 
world  originated  the  sea  did  too;  for  they  make 
them  come  into  being  at  the  same  time.  It  fol¬ 
lows  that  if  the  universe  is  eternal  the  same 
must  be  true  of  the  sea.  Any  one  who  thinks 
[/o]  like  Democritus  that  the  sea  is  diminish¬ 
ing  and  will  disappear  in  the  end  reminds  us 
of  Aesop’s  tales.  His  story  was  that  Charybdis 
had  twice  sucked  in  the  sea:  the  first  time  she 
made  the  mountains  visible;  the  second  time 
the  islands;  and  when  she  sucks  it  in  for  the 
[75]  last  time  she  will  dry  it  up  entirely.  Such 
a  tale  is  appropriate  enough  to  Aesop  in  a  rage 
with  the  ferryman,  but  not  to  serious  inquirers. 
Whatever  made  the  sea  remain  at  first,  wheth¬ 
er  it  was  its  weight,  as  some  even  of  those  who 


hold  these  views  say  (for  it  is  easy  to  see  the 
cause  here),  or  some  other  reason — clearly  the 
[20]  same  thing  must  make  it  persist  for  ever. 
They  must  either  deny  that  the  water  raised  by 
the  sun  will  return  at  all,  or,  if  it  does,  they 
must  admit  that  the  sea  persists  for  ever  or  as 
long  as  this  process  goes  on,  and  again,  that 
for  the  same  period  of  time  that  sweet  water 
must  have  been  carried  up  beforehand.  So  the 
[25]  sea  will  never  dry  up:  for  before  that  can 
happen  the  water  that  has  gone  up  beforehand 
will  return  to  it:  for  if  you  say  that  this  hap¬ 
pens  once  you  must  admit  its  recurrence.  If 
you  stop  the  sun’s  course  there  is  no  drying 
agency.  If  you  let  it  go  on  it  will  draw  up  the 
sweet  water  as  we  have  said  whenever  it  ap- 
[jo]  proaches,  and  let  it  descend  again  when 
it  recedes.  This  notion  about  the  sea  is  derived 
from  the  fact  that  many  places  are  found  to  be 
drier  now  than  they  once  were.  Why  this  is  so 
we  have  explained.1  The  phenomenon  is  due 
to  temporary  excess  of  rain  and  not  to  any 
process  of  becoming  in  which  the  universe  or 
[55]  its  parts  are  involved.  Some  day  the  oppo- 
357*  site  will  take  place  and  after  that  the 
earth  will  grow  dry  once  again.  We  must 
recognize  that  this  process  always  goes  on  thus 
in  a  cycle,  for  that  is  more  satisfactory  than  to 
suppose  a  change  in  the  whole  world  in  order 
to  explain  these  facts.  But  we  have  dwelt 
longer  on  this  point  than  it  deserves. 

[5]  To  return  to  the  saltness  of  the  sea:  those 
who  create  the  sea  once  for  all,  or  indeed  gen¬ 
erate  it  at  all,  cannot  account  for  its  saltness. 
It  makes  no  difference  whether  the  sea  is  the 
residue  of  all  the  moisture  that  is  about  the 
earth  and  has  been  drawn  up  by  the  sun,  or 
whether  all  the  flavour  existing  in  the  whole 
mass  of  sweet  water  is  due  to  the  admixture  of 
a  certain  kind  of  earth.  Since  the  total  volume 
[/o]  of  the  sea  is  the  same  once  the  water  that 
evaporated  has  returned,  it  follows  that  it  must 
either  have  been  salt  at  first  too,  or,  if  not  at 
first,  then  not  now  either.  If  it  was  salt  from 
the  very  beginning,  then  we  want  to  know  why 
that  was  so;  and  why,  if  salt  water  was  drawn 
up  then,  that  is  not  the  case  now. 

Again,  if  it  is  maintained  that  an  admixture 
[75]  of  earth  makes  the  sea  salt  (for  they  say 
that  earth  has  many  flavours  and  is  washed 
down  by  the  rivers  and  so  makes  the  sea  salt 
by  its  admixture),  it  is  strange  that  rivers 
should  not  be  salt  too.  How  can  the  admixture 
[20]  of  this  earth  have  such  a  striking  effect 
in  a  great  quantity  of  water  and  not  in  each 
1i.  14. 


358a  BOOK  II,  CHAPTERS  2-3  463 


river  singly?  For  the  sea,  differing  in  nothing 
from  rivers  but  in  being  salt,  is  evidently  sim¬ 
ply  the  totality  of  river  water,  and  the  rivers 
are  the  vehicle  in  which  that  earth  is  carried 
to  their  common  destination. 

It  is  equally  absurd  to  suppose  that  anything 
[25]  has  been  explained  by  calling  the  sea  ‘the 
sweat  of  the  earth’,  like  Empedocles.1  Meta¬ 
phors  are  poetical  and  so  that  expression  of 
his  may  satisfy  the  requirements  of  a  poem,  but 
as  a  scientific  theory  it  is  unsatisfactory.  Even 
in  the  case  of  the  body  it  is  a  question  how 
the  sweet  liquid  drunk  becomes  salt  sweat — 
whether  it  is  merely  by  the  departure  of  some 
[30]  element  in  it  which  is  sweetest,  or  by  the 
admixture  of  something,  as  when  water  is 
strained  through  ashes.  Actually  the  saltness 
seems  to  be  due  to  the  same  cause  as  in  the 
case  of  the  residual  liquid  that  gathers  in  the 
bladder.  That,  too,  becomes  bitter  and  salt 
though  the  liquid  we  drink  and  that  contained 
35 7b  in  our  food  is  sweet.  If  then  the  bitter¬ 
ness  is  due  in  these  cases  (as  with  the  water 
strained  through  lye)  to  the  presence  of  a  cer¬ 
tain  sort  of  stuff  that  is  carried  along  by  the 
urine  (as  indeed  we  actually  find  a  salt  de¬ 
posit  settling  in  chamber-pots)  and  is  secreted 
[5]  from  the  flesh  in  sweat  (as  if  the  departing 
moisture  were  washing  the  stuff  out  of  the 
body),  then  no  doubt  the  admixture  of  some¬ 
thing  earthy  with  the  water  is  what  makes  the 
sea  salt. 

Now  in  the  body  stuff  of  this  kind,  viz.  the 
sediment  of  food,  is  due  to  failure  to  digest:  but 
how  there  came  to  be  any  such  thing  in  the 
[/o]  earth  requires  explanation.  Besides,  how 
can  the  drying  and  warming  of  the  earth  cause 
the  secretion  of  such  a  great  quantity  of  water; 
especially  as  that  must  be  a  mere  fragment  of 
what  is  left  in  the  earth?  Again,  waiving  the 
question  of  quantity,  why  does  not  the  earth 
sweat  now  when  it  happens  to  be  in  process  of 
[75]  drying?  If  it  did  so  then,  it  ought  to  do 
so  now.  But  it  does  not:  on  the  contrary,  when 
it  is  dry  it  grows  moist,  but  when  it  is  moist 
it  does  not  secrete  anything  at  all.  How  then 
was  it  possible  for  the  earth  at  the  beginning 
when  it  was  moist  to  sweat  as  it  grew  dry? 
Indeed,  the  theory  that  maintains  that  most  of 
the  moisture  departed  and  was  drawn  up  by 
[20]  the  sun  and  that  what  was  left  over  is  the 
sea  is  more  reasonable;  but  for  the  earth  to 
sweat  when  it  is  moist  is  impossible. 

Since  all  the  attempts  to  account  for  the  salt¬ 
ness  of  the  sea  seem  unsuccessful  let  us  ex- 

1  Diels,  2 1  a.  66;  B.  55. 


plain  it  by  the  help  of  the  principle  we  have 
used  already.2 

[25]  Since  we  recognize  two  kinds  of  evapora¬ 
tion,  one  moist,  the  other  dry,  it  is  clear  that 
the  latter  must  be  recognized  as  the  source  of 
phenomena  like  those  we  are  concerned  with. 

But  there  is  a  question  which  we  must  dis¬ 
cuss  first.  Does  the  sea  always  remain  numeri¬ 
cally  one  and  consisting  of  the  same  parts,  or  is 
it,  too,  one  in  form  and  volume  while  its  parts 
are  in  continual  change,  like  air  and  sweet 
[30]  water  and  fire?  All  of  these  are  in  a  con¬ 
stant  state  of  change,  but  the  form  and  the 
quantity  of  each  of  them  are  fixed,  just  as  they 
are  in  the  case  of  a  flowing  river  or  a  burning 
flame.  The  answer  is  clear,  and  there  is  no 
doubt  that  the  same  account  holds  good  of  all 
these  things  alike.  They  differ  in  that  some  of 
358a  them  change  more  rapidly  or  more  slow¬ 
ly  than  others;  and  they  all  are  involved  in  a 
process  of  perishing  and  becoming  which  yet 
affects  them  all  in  a  regular  course. 

This  being  so  we  must  go  on  to  try  to  ex¬ 
plain  why  the  sea  is  salt.  There  are  many  facts 
which  make  it  clear  that  this  taste  is  due  to  the 
[5]  admixture  of  something.  First,  in  animal 
bodies  what  is  least  digested,  the  residue  of 
liquid  food,  is  salt  and  bitter,  as  we  said  be¬ 
fore.  All  animal  excreta  are  undigested,  but 
especially  that  which  gathers  in  the  bladder 
its  extreme  lightness  proves  this;  for  every- 
/o]  thing  that  is  digested  is  condensed),  and 
also  sweat;  in  these  then  is  excreted  (along 
with  other  matter)  an  identical  substance  to 
which  this  flavour  is  due.  The  case  of  things 
burnt  is  analogous.  What  heat  fails  to  assim¬ 
ilate  becomes  the  excrementary  residue  in  ani¬ 
mal  bodies,  and,  in  things  burnt,  ashes.  That 
is  why  some  people  say  that  it  was  burnt  earth 
that  made  the  sea  salt.  To  say  that  it  was  burnt 
[75]  earth  is  absurd;  but  to  say  that  it  was 
something  like  burnt  earth  is  true.  We  must 
suppose  that  just  as  in  the  cases  we  have  de¬ 
scribed,  so  in  the  world  as  a  whole,  everything 
that  grows  and  is  naturally  generated  always 
leaves  an  undigested  residue,  like  that  of 
things  burnt,  consisting  of  this  sort  of  earth.  All 
[20]  the  earthy  stuff  in  the  dry  exhalation  is  of 
this  nature,  and  it  is  the  dry  exhalation  which 
accounts  for  its  great  quantity.  Now  since,  as 
we  have  said,  the  moist  and  the  dry  evapora¬ 
tions  are  mixed,  some  quantity  of  this  stuff 
must  always  be  included  in  the  clouds  and  the 
water  that  are  formed  by  condensation,  and 
[25]  must  redescend  to  the  earth  in  rain.  This 

2  34i  b6fF. 


464  METEOROLOGY  359* 


process  must  always  go  on  with  such  regularity 
as  the  sublunary  world  admits  of,  and  it  is  the 
answer  to  the  question  how  the  sea  comes  to  be 
salt. 

It  also  explains  why  rain  that  comes  from 
the  south,  and  the  first  rains  of  autumn,  are 
brackish.  The  south  is  the  warmest  of  winds 
[jo]  and  it  blows  from  dry  and  hot  regions. 
Hence  it  carries  little  moist  vapour  and  that  is 
why  it  is  hot.  (It  makes  no  difference  even  if 
this  is  not  its  true  character  and  it  is  originally 
a  cold  wind,  for  it  becomes  warm  on  its  way 
by  incorporating  with  itself  a  great  quantity  of 
dry  evaporation  from  the  places  it  passes  over.) 
[^5]  The  north  wind,  on  the  other  hand,  com* 
358b  ing  from  moist  regions,  is  full  of  vapour 
and  therefore  cold.  It  is  dry  in  our  part  of  the 
world  because  it  drives  the  clouds  away  be¬ 
fore  it,  but  in  the  south  it  is  rainy;  just  as  the 
south  is  a  dry  wind  in  Libya.  So  the  south  wind 
charges  the  rain  that  falls  with  a  great  quan¬ 
tity  of  this  stuff.  Autumn  rain  is  brackish  be- 
[5]  cause  the  heaviest  water  must  fall  first; 
so  that  that  which  contains  the  greatest  quan¬ 
tity  of  this  kind  of  earth  descends  quickest. 

This,  too,  is  why  the  sea  is  warm.  Every¬ 
thing  that  has  been  exposed  to  fire  contains 
heat  potentially,  as  we  see  in  the  case  of  lye 
and  ashes  and  the  dry  and  liquid  excreta  of 
[/o]  animals.  Indeed  those  animals  which  are 
hottest  in  the  belly  have  the  hottest  excreta. 

The  action  of  this  cause  is  continually  mak¬ 
ing  the  sea  more  salt,  but  some  part  of  its 
saltness  is  always  being  drawn  up  with  the 
sweet  water.  This  is  less  than  the  sweet  water 
in  the  same  ratio  in  which  the  salt  and  brackish 
[75]  element  in  rain  is  less  than  the  sweet,  and 
so  the  saltness  of  the  sea  remains  constant  on 
the  whole.  Salt  water  when  it  turns  into  vapour 
becomes  sweet,  and  the  vapour  does  not  form 
salt  water  when  it  condenses  again.  This  I 
know  by  experiment.  The  same  thing  is  true 
in  every  case  of  the  kind:  wine  and  all  fluids 
that  evaporate  and  condense  back  into  a  liquid 
[20]  state  become  water.  They  all  are  water 
modified  by  a  certain  admixture,  the  nature  of 
which  determines  their  flavour.  But  this  sub¬ 
ject  must  be  considered  on  another  more  suit¬ 
able  occasion. 

For  the  present  let  us  say  this.  The  sea  is 
[25]  there  and  some  of  it  is  continually  being 
drawn  up  and  becoming  sweet;  this  returns 
from  above  with  the  rain.  But  it  is  now  dif¬ 
ferent  from  what  it  was  when  it  was  drawn  up, 
and  its  weight  makes  it  sink  below  the  sweet 
water.  This  process  prevents  the  sea,  as  it  does 


rivers,  from  drying  up  except  from  local  causes 
this  must  happen  to  sea  and  rivers  alike), 
jo]  On  the  other  hand  the  parts  neither  of 
the  earth  nor  of  the  sea  remain  constant  but 
only  their  whole  bulk.  For  the  same  thing  is 
true  of  the  earth  as  of  the  sea:  some  of  it  is 
carried  up  and  some  comes  down  with  the 
rain,  and  both  that  which  remains  on  the  sur¬ 
face  and  that  which  comes  down  again  change 
their  situations. 

There  is  more  evidence  to  prove  that  salt¬ 
ness  is  due  to  the  admixture  of  some  substance, 
[J5]  besides  that  which  we  have  adduced. 
359*  Make  a  vessel  of  wax  and  put  it  in  the 
sea,  fastening  its  mouth  in  such  a  way  as  to 
prevent  any  water  getting  in.  Then  the  water 
that  percolates  through  the  wax  sides  of  the 
vessel  is  sweet,  the  earthy  stuff,  the  admixture 
of  which  makes  the  water  salt,  being  sep¬ 
arated  off  as  it  were  by  a  filter.  It  is  this  stuff 
[5]  which  make  salt  water  heavy  (it  weighs 
more  than  fresh  water)  and  thick.  The  dif¬ 
ference  in  consistency  is  such  that  ships  with 
the  same  cargo  very  nearly  sink  in  a  river 
when  they  are  quite  fit  to  navigate  in  the  sea. 
[/o]  This  circumstance  has  before  now  caused 
loss  to  shippers  freighting  their  ships  in  a  river. 
That  the  thicker  consistency  is  due  to  an  ad¬ 
mixture  of  something  is  proved  by  the  fact 
that  if  you  make  strong  brine  by  the  admix¬ 
ture  of  salt,  eggs,  even  when  they  are  full, 
float  in  it.  It  almost  becomes  like  mud;  such  a 
[75]  quantity  of  earthy  matter  is  there  in  the 
sea.  The  same  thing  is  done  in  salting  fish. 

Again  if,  as  is  fabled,  there  is  a  lake  in  Pal¬ 
estine,  such  that  if  you  bind  a  man  or  beast  and 
throw  it  in  it  floats  and  does  not  sink,  this 
[20]  would  bear  out  what  we  have  said.  They 
say  that  this  lake  is  so  bitter  and  salt  that  no 
fish  live  in  it  and  that  if  you  soak  clothes  in 
it  and  shake  them  it  cleans  them.  The  fol¬ 
lowing  facts  all  of  them  support  our  theory 
that  it  is  some  earthy  stuff  in  the  water  which 
[25]  makes  it  salt.  In  Chaonia  there  is  a  spring 
of  brackish  water  that  flows  into  a  neighbour¬ 
ing  river  which  is  sweet  but  contains  no  fish. 
The  local  story  is  that  when  Heracles  came 
from  Erytheia  driving  the  oxen  and  gave  the 
inhabitants  the  choice,  they  chose  salt  in  pref- 
[jo]  erence  to  fish.  They  get  the  salt  from  the 
spring.  They  boil  off  some  of  the  water  and  let 
the  rest  stand;  when  it  has  cooled  and  the  heat 
and  moisture  have  evaporated  together  it  gives 
them  salt,  not  in  lumps  but  loose  and  light 
like  snow.  It  is  weaker  than  ordinary  salt  and 
[ J5]  added  freely  gives  a  sweet  taste,  and  it  is 


360b  BOOK  II,  CHAPTERS  3-4  465 


not  as  white  as  salt  generally  is.  Another  in- 
359b  stance  of  this  is  found  in  Umbria.  There 
is  a  place  there  where  reeds  and  rushes  grow. 
They  burn  some  of  these,  put  the  ashes  into 
water  and  boil  it  off.  When  a  little  water  is  left 
and  has  cooled  it  gives  a  quantity  of  salt. 

[5]  Most  salt  rivers  and  springs  must  once 
have  been  hot.  Then  the  original  fire  in  them 
was  extinguished  but  the  earth  through  which 
they  percolate  preserves  the  character  of  lye  or 
ashes.  Springs  and  rivers  with  all  kinds  of 
flavours  are  found  in  many  places.  These 
flavours  must  in  every  case  be  due  to  the  fire 
[70]  that  is  or  was  in  them,  for  if  you  expose 
eafth  to  different  degrees  of  heat  it  assumes 
various  kinds  and  shades  of  flavour.  It  becomes 
full  of  alum  and  lye  and  other  things  of  the 
kind,  and  the  fresh  water  percolates  through 
these  and  changes  its  character.  Sometimes  it 
[75]  becomes  acid  as  in  Sicania,  a  part  of 
Sicily.  There  they  get  a  salt  and  acid  water 
which  they  use  as  vinegar  to  season  some  of 
their  dishes.  In  the  neighbourhood  of  Lyncus, 
too,  there  is  a  spring  of  acid  water,  and  in 
Scythia  a  bitter  spring.  The  water  from  this 
makes  the  whole  of  the  river  into  which  it 
flows  bitter.  These  differences  are  explained 
[20]  by  a  knowledge  of  the  particular  mixtures 
that  determine  different  savours.  But  these 
have  been  explained  in  another  treatise.1 

We  have  now  given  an  account  of  waters 
and  the  sea,  why  they  persist,  how  they 
change,  what  their  nature  is,  and  have  ex- 
[25]  plained  most  of  their  natural  operations 
and  affections. 

4 

Let  us  proceed  to  the  theory  of  winds.  Its 
basis  is  a  distinction  we  have  already  made.2 
We  recognize  two  kinds  of  evaporation,  one 
moist,  the  other  dry.  The  former  is  called 
[50]  vapour:  for  the  other  there  is  no  general 
name  but  we  must  call  it  a  sort  of  smoke, 
applying  to  the  whole  of  it  a  word  that  is 
proper  to  one  of  its  forms.  The  moist  cannot 
exist  without  the  dry  nor  the  dry  without  the 
moist:  whenever  we  speak  of  either  we  mean 
that  it  predominates.  Now  when  the  sun  in 
its  circular  course  approaches,  it  draws  up  by 
[55]  its  heat  the  moist  evaporation:  when  it 
360*  recedes  the  cold  makes  the  vapour  that 
had  been  raised  condense  back  into  water 
which  falls  and  is  distributed  through  the 
earth.  (This  explains  why  there  is  more  rain 

1  Perhaps  On  Sense  and  Sensibility ,  chapter  4. 

234ib  6  ff. 


in  winter  and  more  by  night  than  by  day: 
though  the  fact  is  not  recognized  because  rain 
by  night  is  more  apt  to  escape  observation  than 
[5]  by  day.)  But  there  is  a  great  quantity  of 
fire  and  heat  in  the  earth,  and  the  sun  not  only 
draws  up  the  moisture  that  lies  on  the  surface 
of  it,  but  warms  and  dries  the  earth  itself. 
Consequently,  since  there  are  two  kinds  of 
evaporation,  as  we  have  said,  one  like  vapour, 
[/o]  the  other  like  smoke,  both  of  them  are 
necessarily  generated.  That  in  which  mois¬ 
ture  predominates  is  the  source  of  rain,  as  we 
explained  before,3  while  the  dry  evaporation 
is  the  source  and  substance  of  all  winds.  That 
things  must  necessarily  take  this  course  is 
clear  from  the  resulting  phenomena  them- 
[75]  selves,  for  the  evaporation  that  is  to  pro¬ 
duce  them  must  necessarily  differ;  and  the  sun 
and  the  warmth  in  the  earth  not  only  can  but 
must  produce  these  evaporations. 

Since  the  two  evaporations  are  specifically 
distinct,  wind  and  rain  obviously  differ  and 
their  substance  is  not  the  same,  as  those  say 
[20]  who  maintain  that  one  and  the  same  air 
when  in  motion  is  wind,  but  when  it  condenses 
again  is  water.  Air,  as  we  have  explained  in 
an  earlier  book,4  is  made  up  of  these  as  con¬ 
stituents.  Vapour  is  moist  and  cold  (for  its 
fluidity  is  due  to  its  moistness,  and  because  it 
derives  from  water  it  is  naturally  cold,  like 
water  that  has  not  been  warmed):  whereas 
[25]  the  smoky  evaporation  is  hot  and  dry. 
Hence  each  contributes  a  part,  and  air  is  moist 
and  hot.  It  is  absurd  that  this  air  that  sur¬ 
rounds  us  should  become  wind  when  in  mo¬ 
tion,  whatever  be  the  source  of  its  motion — 
on  the  contrary  the  case  of  winds  is  like  that 
[50]  of  rivers.  We  do  not  call  water  that  flows 
anyhow  a  river,  even  if  there  is  a  great  quan¬ 
tity  of  it,  but  only  if  the  flow  comes  from  a 
spring.  So  too  with  the  winds;  a  great  quantity 
of  air  might  be  moved  by  the  fall  of  some  large 
object  without  flowing  from  any  source  or 
spring. 

The  facts  bear  out  our  theory.  It  is  because 
[35]  the  evaporation  takes  place  uninterrupt¬ 
edly  but  differs  in  degree  and  quantity  that 
360b  clouds  and  winds  appear  in  their  natural 
proportion  according  to  the  season;  and  it  is 
because  there  is  now  a  great  excess  of  the  va¬ 
porous,  now  of  the  dry  and  smoky  exhalation, 
that  some  years  are  rainy  and  wet,  others 
[5]  windy  and  dry.  Sometimes  there  is  much 
drought  or  rain,  and  it  prevails  over  a  great 

3 1. 9. 

4  On  Generation  and  Corruption ,  n.  4. 


a66  METEOROLOGY  361b 


and  continuous  stretch  of  country.  At  other 
times  it  is  local;  the  surrounding  country  often 
getting  seasonable  or  even  excessive  rains  while 
[/o]  there  is  drought  in  a  certain  part;  or, 
contrariwise,  all  the  surrounding  country  gets 
little  or  even  no  rain  while  a  certain  part  gets 
rain  in  abundance.  The  reason  for  all  this  is 
that  while  the  same  affection  is  generally  apt  to 
prevail  over  a  considerable  district  because 
adjacent  places  (unless  there  is  something  spe¬ 
cial  to  differentiate  them)  stand  in  the  same 
[75]  relation  to  the  sun,  yet  on  occasion  the  dry 
evaporation  will  prevail  in  one  part  and  the 
moist  in  another,  or  conversely.  Again  the  rea¬ 
son  for  this  latter  is  that  each  evaporation  goes 
over  to  that  of  the  neighbouring  district:  for 
instance,  the  dry  evaporation  circulates  in  its 
[20]  own  place  while  the  moist  migrates  to 
the  next  district  or  is  even  driven  by  winds  to 
some  distant  place:  or  else  the  moist  evapora¬ 
tion  remains  and  the  dry  moves  away.  Just 
as  in  the  case  of  the  body  when  the  stomach  is 
dry  the  lower  belly  is  often  in  the  contrary 
state,  and  when  it  is  dry  the  stomach  is  moist 
[25]  and  cold,  so  it  often  happens  that  the 
evaporations  reciprocally  take  one  another’s 
place  and  interchange. 

Further,  after  rain  wind  generally  rises  in 
those  places  where  the  rain  fell,  and  when 
rain  has  come  on  the  wind  ceases.  These  are 
necessary  effects  of  the  principles  we  have  ex- 
[30]  plained.  After  rain  the  earth  is  being 
dried  by  its  own  heat  and  that  from  above 
and  gives  off  the  evaporation  which  we  saw  to 
be  the  material  cause  of  wind.  Again,  suppose 
this  secretion  is  present  and  wind  prevails;  the 
heat  is  continually  being  thrown  off,  rising  to 
[35]  the  upper  region,  and  so  the  wind  ceases; 
then  the  fall  in  temperature  makes  vapour 
361a  form  and  condense  into  water.  Water 
also  forms  and  cools  the  dry  evaporation  when 
the  clouds  are  driven  together  and  the  cold 
concentrated  in  them.  These  are  the  causes 
that  make  wind  cease  on  the  advent  of  rain, 
and  rain  fall  on  the  cessation  of  wind. 

[5]  The  cause  of  the  predominance  of  winds 
from  the  north  and  from  the  south  is  the  same. 
(Most  winds,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  are  north 
winds  or  south  winds.)  These  are  the  only  re¬ 
gions  which  the  sun  does  not  visit:  it  approach¬ 
es  them  and  recedes  from  them,  but  its  course 
is  always  over  the  west  and  the  east.  Hence 
[/o]  clouds  collect  on  either  side,  and  when 
the  sun  approaches  it  provokes  the  moist  evap¬ 
oration,  and  when  it  recedes  to  the  opposite 
side  there  are  storms  and  rain.  So  summer  and 


winter  are  due  to  the  sun’s  motion  to  and  from 
the  solstices,  and  water  ascends  and  falls  again 
for  the  same  reason.  Now  since  most  rain  falls 
[75]  in  those  regions  towards  which  and  from 
which  the  sun  turns  and  these  are  the  north 
and  the  south,  and  since  most  evaporation 
must  take  place  where  there  is  the  greatest 
rainfall,  just  as  green  wood  gives  most  smoke, 
[20]  and  since  this  evaporation  is  wind,  it  is 
natural  that  the  most  and  most  important 
winds  should  come  from  these  quarters.  (The 
winds  from  the  north  are  called  Boreae,  those 
from  the  south  Noti.) 

The  course  of  winds  is  oblique:  for  though 
the  evaporation  rises  straight  up  from  the 
earth,  they  blow  round  it  because  all  the  sur¬ 
rounding  air  follows  the  motion  of  the  heav- 
[25]  ens.  Hence  the  question  might  be  asked 
whether  winds  originate  from  above  or  from 
below.  The  motion  comes  from  above:  before 
we  feel  the  wind  blowing  the  air  betrays  its 
presence  if  there  are  clouds  or  a  mist,  for  their 
motion  shows  that  the  wind  has  begun  to  blow 
before  it  has  actually  reached  us;  and  this  im- 

flies  that  the  source  of  winds  is  above.  But 
3o]  since  wind  is  defined  as  ‘a  quantity  of 
dry  evaporation  from  the  earth  moving  round 
the  earth’,  it  is  clear  that  while  the  origin  of 
the  motion  is  from  above,  the  matter  and  the 
generation  of  wind  come  from  below.  The 
oblique  movement  of  the  rising  evaporation  is 
caused  from  above:  for  the  motion  of  the  heav¬ 
ens  determines  the  processes  that  are  at  a 
distance  from  the  earth,  and  the  motion  from 
[35]  below  is  vertical  and  every  cause  is  more 
active  where  it  is  nearest  to  the  effect;  but  in 
its  generation  and  origin  wind  plainly  derives 
from  the  earth. 

361b  The  facts  bear  out  the  view  that  winds 
are  formed  by  the  gradual  union  of  many 
evaporations  just  as  rivers  derive  their  sources 
from  the  water  that  oozes  from  the  earth. 
Every  wind  is  weakest  in  the  spot  from  which 
it  blows;  as  they  proceed  and  leave  their  source 
at  a  distance  they  gather  strength.  Thus  the 
[5]  winter  in  the  north  is  windless  and  calm: 
that  is,  in  the  north  itself;  but  the  breeze 
that  blows  from  there  so  gently  as  to  escape 
observation  becomes  a  great  wind  as  it 
passes  on. 

We  have  explained  the  nature  and  origin  of 
[70]  wind,  the  occurrence  of  drought  and 
rains,  the  reason  why  rain  stops  wind  and 
wind  rises  after  rain,  the  prevalence  of  north 
and  south  winds  and  also  why  wind  moves  in 
the  way  it  does. 


362b 


BOOK  II,  CHAPTERS  4-5  467 


5 

The  sun  both  checks  the  formation  of  winds 
[75]  and  stimulates  it.  When  the  evaporation 
is  small  in  amount  and  faint  the  sun  wastes  it 
and  dissipates  by  its  greater  heat  the  lesser  heat 
contained  in  the  evaporation.  It  also  dries  up 
the  earth,  the  source  of  the  evaporation,  be¬ 
fore  the  latter  has  appeared  in  bulk:  just  as, 
when  you  throw  a  little  fuel  into  a  great  fire,  it 
is  often  burnt  up  before  giving  off  any  smoke. 
[20]  In  these  ways  the  sun  checks  winds  and 
prevents  them  from  rising  at  all:  it  checks  them 
by  wasting  the  evaporation,  and  prevents  their 
rising  by  drying  up  the  earth  quickly.  Hence 
calm  is  very  apt  to  prevail  about  the  rising  of 
Orion  and  lasts  until  the  coming  of  the  Etesiae 
and  their  ‘forerunners’. 

[25]  Calm  is  due  to  two  causes.  Either  cold 
quenches  the  evaporation,  for  instance  a  sharp 
frost:  or  excessive  heat  wastes  it.  In  the  inter¬ 
mediate  periods,  too,  the  causes  are  generally 
either  that  the  evaporation  has  not  had  time  to 
develop  or  that  it  has  passed  away  and  there  is 
none  as  yet  to  replace  it. 

[jo]  Both  the  setting  and  the  rising  of  Orion 
are  considered  to  be  treacherous  and  stormy, 
because  they  take  place  at  a  change  of  season 
(namely  of  summer  or  winter;  and  because 
the  size  of  the  constellation  makes  its  rise  last 
over  many  days)  and  a  state  of  change  is  al¬ 
ways  indefinite  and  therefore  liable  to  dis¬ 
turbance. 

[55]  The  Etesiae  blow  after  the  summer  sol¬ 
stice  and  the  rising  of  the  dog-star:  not  at  the 
362a  time  when  the  sun  is  closest  nor  when  it 
is  distant;  and  they  blow  by  day  and  cease  at 
night.  The  reason  is  that  when  the  sun  is  near 
it  dries  up  the  earth  before  evaporation  has 
taken  place,  but  when  it  has  receded  a  little  its 
heat  and  the  evaporation  are  present  in  the 
[5]  right  proportion;  so  the  ice  melts  and  the 
earth,  dried  by  its  own  heat  and  that  of  the  sun, 
smokes  and  vapours.  They  abate  at  night  be¬ 
cause  the  cold  of  the  nights  checks  the  melting 
of  the  ice.  What  is  frozen  gives  off  no  evapora- 
[  jo]  tion,  nor  does  that  which  contains  no  dry¬ 
ness  at  all:  it  is  only  where  something  dry  con¬ 
tains  moisture  that  it  gives  off  evaporation  un¬ 
der  the  influence  of  heat. 

The  question  is  sometimes  asked:  why  do 
the  north  winds  which  we  call  the  Etesiae  blow 
continuously  after  the  summer  solstice,  when 
there  are  no  corresponding  south  winds  after 
the  winter  solstice?  The  facts  are  reasonable 
enough:  for  the  so-called  ‘white  south  winds’ 


do  blow  at  the  corresponding  season,  though 
they  are  not  equally  continuous  and  so  escape 
[75]  observation  and  give  rise  to  this  inquiry. 
The  reason  for  this  is  that  the  north  wind  blows 
from  the  arctic  regions  which  are  full  of  water 
and  snow.  The  sun  thaws  them  and  so  the 
Etesiae  blow:  after  rather  than  at  the  summer 
[20]  solstice.  (For  the  greatest  heat  is  devel¬ 
oped  not  when  the  sun  is  nearest  to  the  north, 
but  when  its  heat  has  been  felt  for  a  consider¬ 
able  period  and  it  has  not  yet  receded  far.  The 
‘bird  winds’  blow  in  the  same  way  after  the 
winter  solstice.  They,  too,  are  weak  Etesiae, 
but  they  blow  less  and  later  than  the  Etesiae. 
[25]  They  begin  to  blow  only  on  the  seventieth 
day  because  the  sun  is  distant  and  therefore 
weaker.  They  do  not  blow  so  continuously  be¬ 
cause  only  things  on  the  surface  of  the  earth 
and  offering  little  resistance  evaporate  then,  the 
thoroughly  frozen  parts  requiring  greater  heat 
to  melt  them.  So  they  blow  intermittently  till 
the  true  Etesiae  come  on  again  at  the  summer 
[jo]  solstice:  for  from  that  time  onwards  the 
wind  tends  to  blow  continuously.)  But  the 
south  wind  blows  from  the  tropic  of  Cancer 
and  not  from  the  antarctic  region.  - 

There  are  two  inhabitable  sections  of  the 
earth:  one  near  our  upper,  or  nothern  pole,  the 
other  near  the  other  or  southern  pole;  and  their 
[J5]  shape  is  like  that  of  a  tambourine.  If 
362b  you  draw  lines  from  the  centre  of  the 
earth  they  cut  out  a  drum-shaped  figure.  The 
lines  form  two  cones;  the  base  of  the  one  is  the 
tropic,  of  the  other  the  ever  visible  circle,  their 
vertex  is  at  the  centre  of  the  earth.  Two  other 
cones  towards  the  south  pole  give  correspond¬ 
ing  segments  of  the  earth.  These  sections  alone 
[5]  are  habitable.  Beyond  the  tropics  no  one 
can  live:  for  there  the  shade  would  not  fall  to 
the  north,  whereas  the  earth  is  known  to  be  un¬ 
inhabitable  before  the  sun  is  in  the  zenith  or 
the  shade  is  thrown  to  the  south:  and  the  re¬ 
gions  below  the  Bear  are  uninhabitable  be¬ 
cause  of  the  cold. 

[70]  [The  Crown,  too,  moves  over  this  region: 
for  it  is  in  the  zenith  when  it  is  on  our  merid¬ 
ian]. 

So  we  see  that  the  way  in  which  they  now 
describe  the  geography  of  the  earth  is  ridicu¬ 
lous.  They  depict  the  inhabited  earth  as  round, 
but  both  ascertained  facts  and  general  consid¬ 
erations  show  this  to  be  impossible.  If  we  re¬ 
flect  we  see  that  the  inhabited  region  is  limited 
[75]  in  breadth,  while  the  climate  admits  of  its 
extending  all  round  the  earth.  For  we  meet 
with  no  excessive  heat  or  cold  in  the  direction 


468 


METEOROLOGY 


363b 


of  its  length  but  only  in  that  of  its  breadth;  so 
that  there  is  nothing  to  prevent  our  travelling 
round  the  earth  unless  the  extent  of  the  sea 
presents  an  obstacle  anywhere.  The  records  of 
journeys  by  sea  and  land  bear  this  out.  They 
[20]  make  the  length  far  greater  than  the 
breadth.  If  we  compute  these  voyages  and  jour¬ 
neys  the  distance  from  the  Pillars  of  Heracles 
to  India  exceeds  that  from  Aethiopia  to  Maeo- 
tis  and  the  northernmost  Scythians  by  a  ratio 
of  more  than  5  to  3,  as  far  as  such  matters  ad- 
[25]  mit  of  accurate  statement.  Yet  we  know 
the  whole  breadth  of  the  region  we  dwell  in  up 
to  the  uninhabited  parts:  in  one  direction  no 
one  lives  because  of  the  cold,  in  the 
other  because  of  the  heat. 

But  it  is  the  sea  which  divides  as 
it  seems  the  parts  beyond  India 
from  those  beyond  the  Pillars  of 
Heracles  and  prevents  the  earth 
from  being  inhabited  all  round. 

[30]  Now  since  there  must  be  a 
region  bearing  the  same  relation  to 
the  southern  pole  as  the  place  we 
live  in  bears  to  our  pole,  it  will 
clearly  correspond  in  the  ordering 
of  its  winds  as  well  as  in  other 
things.  So  just  as  we  have  a  north 
wind  here,  they  must  have  a  corre¬ 
al  sponding  wind  from  the  ant¬ 
arctic.  This  wind  cannot  reach  us 
since  our  own  north  wind  is  like 
363a  a  land  breeze  and  does  not 
even  reach  the  limits  of  the  region  we  live  in. 
The  prevalence  of  north  winds  here  is  due  to 
[5]  our  lying  near  the  north.  Yet  even  here 
they  give  out  and  fail  to  penetrate  far:  in  the 
southern  sea  beyond  Libya  east  and  west  winds 
are  always  blowing  alternately,  like  north  and 
south  winds  with  us.  So  it  is  clear  that  the 
south  wind  is  not  the  wind  that  blows  from  the 
south  pole.  It  is  neither  that  nor  the  wind  from 
[/o]  the  winter  tropic.  For  symmetry  would 
require  another  wind  blowing  from  the  sum¬ 
mer  tropic,  which  there  is  not,  since  we  know 
that  only  one  wind  blows  from  that  quarter.  So 
the  south  wind  clearly  blows  from  the  torrid 
region.  Now  the  sun  is  so  near  to  that  region 
[75]  that  it  has  no  water,  or  snow  which  might 
melt  and  cause  Etesiae.  But  because  that  place 
is  far  more  extensive  and  open  the  south  wind 
is  greater  and  stronger  and  warmer  than  the 
north  and  penetrates  farther  to  the  north  than 
the  north  wind  does  to  the  south. 

The  origin  of  these  winds  and  their  relation 
[20]  to  one  another  has  now  been  explained. 


Let  us  now  explain  the  position  of  the  winds, 
their  oppositions,  which  can  blow  simultane¬ 
ously  with  which,  and  which  cannot,  their 
names  and  number,  and  any  other  of  their  af¬ 
fections  that  have  not  been  treated  in  the  ‘par- 
[25]  ticular  questions’.  What  we  say  about 
their  position  must  be  followed  with  the  help 
of  the  figure.  For  clearness’  sake  we  have 
drawn  the  circle  of  the  horizon,  which  is 
round,  but  it  represents  the  zone  in  which  we 
[30]  live;  for  that  can  be  divided  in  the  same 


Aparctias 

Boreas 


way.  Let  us  also  begin  by  laying  down  that 
those  things  are  locally  contrary  which  are  lo¬ 
cally  most  distant  from  one  another,  just  as 
things  specifically  most  remote  from  one 
another  are  specific  contraries.  Now  things 
that  face  one  another  from  opposite  ends  of 
a  diameter  are  locally  most  distant  from  one 
another. 

Let  A  be  the  point  where  the  sun  sets  at  the 
equinox  and  B,  the  point  opposite,  the  place 
where  it  rises  at  the  equinox.  Let  there  be  an- 
363b  other  diameter  cutting  this  at  right  an¬ 
gles,  and  let  the  point  H  on  it  be  the  north  and 
its  diametrical  opposite  9  the  south.  Let  Z  be 
the  rising  of  the  sun  at  the  summer  solstice  and 
E  its  setting  at  the  summer  solstice;  A  its  rising 
[5]  at  the  winter  solstice,  and  T  its  setting  at 
the  winter  solstice.  Draw  a  diameter  from  Z  to 
T  and  from  A  to  E.  Then  since  those  things  are 
locally  contrary  which  are  most  distant  from 
one  another  in  space,  and  points  diametrically 
opposite  are  most  distant  from  one  another, 
those  winds  must  necessarily  be  contrary  to  one 


364b  BOOK  II,  CHAPTERS  5-6  469 


[10]  another  that  blow  from  opposite  ends  of 
a  diameter. 

The  names  of  the  winds  according  to  their 
position  are  these.  Zephyrus  is  the  wind  that 
blows  from  A,  this  being  the  point  where  the 
sun  sets  at  the  equinox.  Its  contrary  is  Apelio- 
tes  blowing  from  B  the  point  where  the  sun 
rises  at  the  equinox.  The  wind  blowing  from 
H,  the  north,  is  the  true  north  wind,  called 
[75]  Aparctias:  while  Notus  blowing  from  0 
is  its  contrary;  for  this  point  is  the  south  and 
0  is  contrary  to  H,  being  diametrically  oppo¬ 
site  to  it.  Caecias  blows  from  Z,  where  the  sun 
rises  at  the  summer  solstice.  Its  contrary  is  not 
the  wind  blowing  from  E  but  Lips  blowing 
from  T.  For  Lips  blows  from  the  point  where 
the  sun  sets  at  the  winter  solstice  and  is  dia- 
[20]  metrically  opposite  to  Caecias:  so  it  is  its 
contrary.  Eurus  blows  from  A,  coming  from 
the  point  where  the  sun  rises  at  the  winter  sol¬ 
stice.  It  borders  on  Notus,  and  so  we  often  find 
that  people  speak  of  ‘Euro-Noti’.  Its  contrary  is 
not  Lips  blowing  from  T  but  the  wind  that 
blows  from  E  which  some  call  Argestes,  some 
[25]  Olympias,  and  some  Sciron.  This  blows 
from  the  point  where  the  sun  sets  at  the  sum¬ 
mer  solstice,  and  is  the  only  wind  that  is  dia¬ 
metrically  opposite  to  Eurus.  These  are  the 
winds  that  are  diametrically  opposite  to  one 
another  and  their  contraries. 

There  are  other  winds  which  have  no  con¬ 
traries.  The  wind  they  call  Thrascias,  which 
lies  between  Argestes  and  Aparctias,  blows 
[30]  from  I;  and  the  wind  called  Meses,  which 
lies  between  Caecias  and  Aparctias,  from  K. 
(The  line  IK  nearly  coincides  with  the  ever 
visible  circle,  but  not  quite.)  These  winds  have 
no  contraries.  Meses  has  not,  or  else  there 
would  be  a  wind  blowing  from  the  point  M 
364a  which  is  diametrically  opposite.  Thras¬ 
cias  corresponding  to  the  point  I  has  not,  for 
then  there  would  be  a  wind  blowing  from  N, 
the  point  which  is  diametrically  opposite.  (But 
perhaps  a  local  wind  which  the  inhabitants  of 
those  parts  call  Phoenicias  blows  from  that 
point.) 

These  are  the  most  important  and  definite 
winds  and  these  their  places. 

[5]  There  are  more  winds  from  the  north  than 
from  the  south.  The  reason  for  this  is  that  the 
region  in  which  we  live  lies  nearer  to  the 
north.  Also,  much  more  water  and  snow  is 
ushed  aside  into  this  quarter  because  the  oth- 
/o]  er  lies  under  the  sun  and  its  course. 
When  this  thaws  and  soaks  into  the  earth  and 
is  exposed  to  the  heat  of  the  sun  and  the  earth 


it  necessarily  causes  evaporation  to  rise  in  great¬ 
er  quantities  and  over  a  greater  space. 

Of  the  winds  we  have  described  Aparctias 
is  the  north  wind  in  the  strict  sense.  Thrascias 
and  Meses  are  north  winds  too.  (Caecias  is 
[75]  half  north  and  half  east.)  South  are  that 
which  blows  from  due  south  and  Lips.  East, 
the  wind  from  the  rising  of  the  sun  at  the  equi¬ 
nox  and  Eurus.  Phoenicias  is  half  south  and 
half  east.  West,  the  wind  from  the  true  west 
and  that  called  Argestes.  More  generally  these 
winds  are  classified  as  northerly  or  southerly. 
[20]  The  west  winds  are  counted  as  northerly, 
for  they  blow  from  the  place  of  sunset  and  are 
therefore  colder;  the  east  winds  as  southerly, 
for  they  are  warmer  because  they  blow  from 
the  place  of  sunrise.  So  the  distinction  of  cold 
and  hot  or  warm  is  the  basis  for  the  division 
of  the  winds  into  northerly  and  southerly. 
East  winds  are  warmer  than  west  winds  be- 
[25]  cause  the  sun  shines  on  the  east  longer, 
whereas  it  leaves  the  west  sooner  and  reaches 
it  later. 

Since  this  is  the  distribution  of  the  winds  it 
is  clear  that  contrary  winds  cannot  blow  simul¬ 
taneously.  They  are  diametrically  opposite  to 
one  another  and  one  of  the  two  must  be  over¬ 
powered  and  cease.  Winds  that  are  not  diamet¬ 
rically  opposite  to  one  another  may  blow  simul- 
[50]  taneously:  for  instance  the  winds  from 
Z  and  from  A.  Hence  it  sometimes  happens 
that  both  of  them,  though  different  winds 
and  blowing  from  different  quarters,  are 
favourable  to  sailors  making  for  the  same 
point. 

Contrary  winds  commonly  blow  at  opposite 
364b  seasons.  Thus  Caecias  and  in  general  the 
winds  north  of  the  summer  solstice  blow  about 
the  time  of  the  spring  equinox,  but  about  the 
autumn  equinox  Lips;  and  Zephyrus  about  the 
summer  solstice,  but  about  the  winter  solstice 
Eurus. 

Aparctias,  Thrascias,  and  Argestes  are  the 
[5]  winds  that  fall  on  others  most  and  stop 
them.  Their  source  is  so  close  to  us  that  they 
are  greater  and  stronger  than  other  winds. 
They  bring  fair  weather  most  of  all  winds  for 
the  same  reason,  for,  blowing  as  they  do,  from 
close  at  hand,  they  overpower  the  other  winds 
and  stop  them;  they  also  blow  away  the  clouds 
that  are  forming  and  leave  a  clear  sky — unless 
[70]  they  happen  to  be  very  cold.  Then  they  do 
not  bring  fair  weather,  but  being  colder  than 
they  are  strong  they  condense  the  clouds  be¬ 
fore  driving  them  away. 

Caecias  does  not  bring  fair  weather  because 


470 

it  returns  upon  itself.  Hence  the  saying:  ‘Bring¬ 
ing  it  on  himself  as  Caecias  does  clouds/ 

When  they  cease,  winds  are  succeeded  by 
[75]  their  neighbours  in  the  direction  of  the 
movement  of  the  sun.  For  an  effect  is  most  apt 
to  be  produced  in  the  neighbourhood  of  its 
cause,  and  the  cause  of  winds  moves  with  the 
sun. 

Contrary  winds  have  either  the  same  or  con¬ 
trary  effects.  Thus  Lips  and  Caecias,  some¬ 
times  called  Hellespontias,  are  both  rainy.  Ar- 
[20]  gestes  and  Eurus  are  dry:  the  latter  being 
dry  at  first  and  rainy  afterwards.  Meses  and 
Aparctias  are  coldest  and  bring  most  snow. 
Aparctias,  Thrascias,  and  Argestes  bring  hail. 
Notus,  Zephyrus,  and  Eurus  are  hot.  Caecias 
covers  the  sky  with  heavy  clouds,  Lips  with 
[25]  lighter  ones.  Caecias  does  this  because  it 
returns  upon  itself  and  combines  the  qualities 
of  Boreas  and  Eurus.  By  being  cold  it  con¬ 
denses  and  gathers  the  vaporous  air,  and  be¬ 
cause  it  is  easterly  it  carries  with  it  and  drives 
before  it  a  great  quantity  of  such  matter.  Ap¬ 
arctias,  Thrascias,  and  Argestes  bring  fair 
weather  for  the  reason  we  have  explained  be- 
[jo]  fore.1  These  winds  and  Meses  are  most 
commonly  accompanied  by  lightning.  They 
are  cold  because  they  blow  from  the  north,  and 
lightning  is  due  to  cold,  being  ejected  when  the 
clouds  contract.  Some  of  these  same  winds 
365a  bring  hail  with  them  for  the  same  rea¬ 
son;  namely,  that  they  cause  a  sudden  conden¬ 
sation. 

Hurricanes  are  commonest  in  autumn,  and 
next  in  spring:  Aparctias,  Thrascias,  and  Ar¬ 
gestes  give  rise  to  them  most.  This  is  because 
hurricanes  are  generally  formed  when  some 
winds  are  blowing  and  others  fall  on  them; 
and  these  are  the  winds  which  are  most  apt  to 
fall  on  others  that  are  blowing;  the  reason  for 
[5]  which,  too,  we  have  explained  before.2 

The  Etesiae  veer  round:  they  begin  from 
the  north,  and  become  for  dwellers  in  the  west 
Thrasciae,  Ar gestae,  and  Zephyrus  (for  Zeph¬ 
yrus  belongs  to  the  north).  For  dwellers  in  the 
east  they  veer  round  as  far  as  Apeliotes. 

[/o]  So  much  for  the  winds,  their  origin  and 
nature  and  the  properties  common  to  them  all 
or  peculiar  to  each. 

7 

We  must  go  on  to  discuss  earthquakes  next, 
for  their  cause  is  akin  to  our  last  subject. 

[75]  The  theories  that  have  been  put  forward 
up  to  the  present  date  are  three,  and  their  au- 

lb6.  2364b3- 


365b 

thors  three  men,  Anaxagoras  of  Clazomenae, 
and  before  him  Anaximenes  of  Miletus,  and 
later  Democritus  of  Abdera. 

Anaxagoras  says  that  the  ether,  which  natu¬ 
rally  moves  upwards,  is  caught  in  hollows  be- 
[20J  low  the  earth  and  so  shakes  it,  for  though 
the  earth  is  really  all  of  it  equally  porous,  its 
surface  is  clogged  up  by  rain.  This  implies  that 
part  of  the  whole  sphere  is  ‘above’  and  part  ‘be¬ 
low’:  ‘above’  being  the  part  on  which  we  live, 
‘below’  the  other. 

[25]  This  theory  is  perhaps  too  primitive  to 
require  refutation.  It  is  absurd  to  think  of  up 
and  down  otherwise  than  as  meaning  that 
heavy  bodies  move  to  the  earth  from  every 
quarter,  and  light  ones,  such  as  fire,  away  from 
[30]  it;  especially  as  we  see  that,  as  far  as  our 
knowledge  of  the  earth  goes,  the  horizon  al¬ 
ways  changes  with  a  change  in  our  position, 
which  proves  that  the  earth  is  convex  and  spher¬ 
ical.  It  is  absurd,  too,  to  maintain  that  the 
earth  rests  on  the  air  because  of  its  size,  and 
then  to  say  that  impact  upwards  from  below 
shakes  it  right  through.  Besides  he  gives  no  ac¬ 
count  of  the  circumstances  attendant  on  earth¬ 
ly]  quakes:  for  not  every  country  or  every 
season  is  subject  to  them. 

365b  Democritus  says  that  the  earth  is  full  of 
water  and  that  when  a  quantity  of  rain-water 
is  added  to  this  an  earthquake  is  the  result.  The 
hollows  in  the  earth  being  unable  to  admit 
the  excess  of  water  it  forces  its  way  in  and  so 
causes  an  earthquake.  Or  again,  the  earth  as 
it  dries  draws  the  water  from  the  fuller  to  the 
[5]  emptier  parts,  and  the  inrush  of  the 
water  as  it  changes  its  place  causes  the  earth¬ 
quake. 

Anaximenes  says  that  the  earth  breaks  up 
when  it  grows  wet  or  dry,  and  earthquakes  are 
due  to  the  fall  of  these  masses  as  they  break 
away.  Hence  earthquakes  take  place  in  times 
[70]  of  drought  and  again  of  heavy  rain,  since, 
as  we  have  explained,  the  earth  grows  dry  in 
time  of  drought  and  breaks  up,  whereas  the 
rain  makes  it  sodden  and  destroys  its  cohesion. 

But  if  this  were  the  case  the  earth  ought  to 
be  found  to  be  sinking  in  many  places.  Again, 
why  do  earthquakes  frequently  occur  in  places 
which  are  not  excessively  subject  to  drought  or 
[75]  rain,  as  they  ought  to  be  on  the  theory? 
Besides,  on  this  view,  earthquakes  ought  al¬ 
ways  to  be  getting  fewer,  and  should  come  to 
an  end  entirely  some  day:  the  notion  of  con¬ 
traction  by  packing  together  implies  this.  So 
[20]  if  this  is  impossible  the  theory  must  be 
impossible  too. 


METEOROLOGY 


366b 


BOOK  II,  CHAPTERS  6-8  471 


8 

We  have  already  shown1  that  wet  and  dry 
must  both  give  rise  to  an  evaporation:  earth¬ 
quakes  are  a  necessary  consequence  of  this  fact. 
The  earth  is  essentially  dry,  but  rain  fills  it 
[25]  with  moisture.  Then  the  sun  and  its  own 
fire  warm  it  and  give  rise  to  a  quantity  of  wind 
both  outside  and  inside  it.  This  wind  some¬ 
times  flows  outwards  in  a  single  body,  some¬ 
times  inwards,  and  sometimes  it  is  divided.  All 
these  are  necessary  laws.  Next  we  must  find 
[jo]  out  what  body  has  the  greatest  motive 
force.  This  will  certainly  be  the  body  that  natu¬ 
rally  moves  farthest  and  is  most  violent.  Now 
that  which  has  the  most  rapid  motion  is  neces¬ 
sarily  the  most  violent;  for  its  swiftness  gives 
its  impact  the  greatest  force.  Again,  the  rarest 
body,  that  which  can  most  readily  pass  through 
every  other  body,  is  that  which  naturally  moves 
[jj]  farthest.  Wind  satisfies  these  conditions 
366a  in  the  highest  degree  (fire  only  becomes 
flame  and  moves  rapidly  when  wind  accompa¬ 
nies  it):  so  that  not  water  nor  earth  is  the  cause 
of  earthquakes  but  wind — that  is,  the  inrush  of 
the  external  evaporation  into  the  earth. 

[5]  Hence,  since  the  evaporation  generally  fol¬ 
lows  in  a  continuous  body  in  the  direction  in 
which  it  first  started,  and  either  all  of  it  flows 
inwards  or  all  outwards,  most  earthquakes  and 
the  greatest  are  accompanied  by  calm.  It  is  true 
that  some  take  place  when  a  wind  is  blowing, 
but  this  presents  no  difficulty.  We  sometimes 
find  several  winds  blowing  simultaneously.  If 
[/o]  one  of  these  enters  the  earth  we  get  an 
earthquake  attended  by  wind.  Only  these  earth¬ 
quakes  are  less  severe  because  their  source  and 
cause  is  divided. 

Again,  most  earthquakes  and  the  severest  oc¬ 
cur  at  night  or,  if  by  day,  about  noon,  that  be¬ 
ing  generally  the  calmest  part  of  the  day.  For 
[75]  when  the  sun  exerts  its  full  power  (as  it 
does  about  noon)  it  shuts  the  evaporation  into 
the  earth.  Night,  too,  is  calmer  than  day.  The 
absence  of  the  sun  makes  the  evaporation  re¬ 
turn  into  the  earth  like  a  sort  of  ebb  tide,  corre¬ 
sponding  to  the  outward  flow;  especially  to- 
[20]  wards  dawn,  for  the  winds,  as  a  rule,  be¬ 
gin  to  blow  then,  and  if  their  source  changes 
about  like  the  Euripus  and  flows  inwards  the 
quantity  of  wind  in  the  earth  is  greater  and  a 
more  violent  earthquake  results. 

[25]  The  severest  earthquakes  take  place 
where  the  sea  is  full  of  currents  or  the  earth 
spongy  and  cavernous:  so  they  occur  near  the 
1 34lb  6. 


Hellespont  and  in  Achaea  and  Sicily,  and  those 
parts  of  Euboea  which  correspond  to  our  de¬ 
scription — where  the  sea  is  supposed  to  flow  in 
channels  below  the  earth.  The  hot  springs,  too, 
near  Aedepsus  are  due  to  a  cause  of  this  kind. 
It  is  the  confined  character  of  these  places  that 
[jo]  makes  them  so  liable  to  earthquakes.  A 
great  and  therefore  violent  wind  is  developed, 
which  would  naturally  blow  away  from  the 
earth:  but  the  onrush  of  the  sea  in  a  great  mass 
thrusts  it  back  into  the  earth.  The  countries 
366b  that  are  spongy  below  the  surface  are 
exposed  to  earthquakes  because  they  have  room 
for  so  much  wind. 

For  the  same  reason  earthquakes  usually 
take  place  in  spring  and  autumn  and  in  times 
of  wet  and  of  drought — because  these  are  the 
windiest  seasons.  Summer  with  its  heat  and 
[5]  winter  with  its  frost  cause  calm:  winter  is 
too  cold,  summer  too  dry  for  winds  to  form. 
In  time  of  drought  the  air  is  full  of  wind; 
drought  is  just  the  predominance  of  the  dry 
over  the  moist  evaporation.  Again,  excessive 
[/o]  rain  causes  more  of  the  evaporation  to 
form  in  the  earth.  Then  this  secretion  is  shut 
up  in  a  narrow  compass  and  forced  into  a 
smaller  space  by  the  water  that  fills  the  cavi¬ 
ties.  Thus  a  great  wind  is  compressed  into  a 
smaller  space  and  so  gets  the  upper  hand,  and 
then  breaks  out  and  beats  against  the  earth  and 
shakes  it  violently. 

[75]  We  must  suppose  the  action  of  the  wind 
in  the  earth  to  be  analogous  to  the  tremors  and 
throbbings  caused  in  us  by  the  force  of  the 
wind  contained  in  our  bodies.  Thus  some 
earthquakes  are  a  sort  of  tremor,  others  a  sort 
of  throbbing.  Again,  we  must  think  of  an 
earthquake  as  something  like  the  tremor  that 
often  runs  through  the  body  after  passing  wa- 
[20]  ter  as  the  wind  returns  inwards  from 
without  in  one  volume. 

The  force  wind  can  have  may  be  gathered 
not  only  from  what  happens  in  the  air  (where 
one  might  suppose  that  it  owed  its  power  to 
produce  such  effects  to  its  volume),  but  also 
[25]  from  what  is  observed  in  animal  bodies. 
Tetanus  and  spasms  are  motions  of  wind,  and 
their  force  is  such  that  the  united  efforts  of 
many  men  do  not  succeed  in  overcoming  the 
movements  of  the  patients.  We  must  suppose, 
then  (to  compare  great  things  with  small), 
that  what  happens  in  the  earth  is  just  like  that, 
[jo]  Our  theory  has  been  verified  by  actual  ob¬ 
servation  in  many  places.  It  has  been  known  to 
happen  that  an  earthquake  has  continued  until 
the  wind  that  caused  it  burst  through  the  earth 


472 

into  the  air  and  appeared  visibly  like  a  hurri- 
3 67a  cane.  This  happened  lately  near  Hera- 
cleia  in  Pontus  and  some  time  past  at  the  island 
Hiera,  one  of  the  group  called  the  Aeolian  is¬ 
lands.  Here  a  portion  of  the  earth  swelled  up 
and  a  lump  like  a  mound  rose  with  a  noise: 
[5]  finally  it  burst,  and  a  great  wind  came  out 
of  it  and  threw  up  live  cinders  and  ashes  which 
buried  the  neighbouring  town  of  Lipara  and 
reached  some  of  the  towns  in  Italy.  The  spot 
where  this  eruption  occurred  is  still  to  be  seen. 

Indeed,  this  must  be  recognized  as  the  cause 
[/o]  of  the  fire  that  is  generated  in  the  earth: 
the  air  is  first  broken  up  in  small  particles  and 
then  the  wind  is  beaten  about  and  so  catches 
fire. 

A  phenomenon  in  these  islands  affords  fur¬ 
ther  evidence  of  the  fact  that  winds  move  be¬ 
low  the  surface  of  the  earth.  When  a  south 
wind  is  going  to  blow  there  is  a  premonitory 
indication:  a  sound  is  heard  in  the  places  from 
[75]  which  the  eruptions  issue.  This  is  be¬ 
cause  the  sea  is  being  pushed  on  from  a  dis¬ 
tance  and  its  advance  thrusts  back  into  the 
earth  the  wind  that  was  issuing  from  it.  The 
reason  why  there  is  a  noise  and  no  earthquake 
is  that  the  underground  spaces  are  so  extensive 
in  proportion  to  the  quantity  of  the  air  that  is 
being  driven  on  that  the  wind  slips  away  into 
the  void  beyond. 

[20]  Again,  our  theory  is  supported  by  the 
facts  that  the  sun  appears  hazy  and  is  darkened 
in  the  absence  of  clouds,  and  that  there  is  some¬ 
times  calm  and  sharp  frost  before  earthquakes 
at  sunrise.  The  sun  is  necessarily  obscured  and 
darkened  when  the  evaporation  which  dis¬ 
solves  and  rarefies  the  air  begins  to  withdraw 
into  the  earth.  The  calm,  too,  and  the  cold  to- 
[25]  wards  sunrise  and  dawn  follow  from  the 
theory.  The  calm  we  have  already  explained. 
There  must  as  a  rule  be  calm  because  the  wind 
flows  back  into  the  earth:  again,  it  must  be 
most  marked  before  the  more  violent  earth¬ 
quakes,  for  when  the  wind  is  not  part  outside 
[30]  the  earth,  part  inside,  but  moves  in  a  single 
body,  its  strength  must  be  greater.  The  cold 
comes  because  the  evaporation  which  is  natu¬ 
rally  and  essentially  hot  enters  the  earth.  (Wind 
is  not  recognized  to  be  hot,  because  it  sets  the 
air  in  motion,  and  that  is  full  of  a  quantity  of 
367b  cold  vapour.  It  is  the  same  with  the  breath 
we  blow  from  our  mouth:  close  by  it  is  warm, 
as  it  is  when  we  breathe  out  through  the  mouth, 
but  there  is  so  little  of  it  that  it  is  scarcely  no¬ 
ticed,  whereas  at  a  distance  it  is  cold  for  the 
same  reason  as  wind.)  Well,  when  this  evapo- 


368a 

ration  disappears  into  the  earth  the  vaporous 
[5]  exhalation  concentrates  and  causes  cold  in 
any  place  in  which  this  disappearance  occurs. 

A  sign  which  sometimes  precedes  earth¬ 
quakes  can  be  explained  in  the  same  way.  Ei¬ 
ther  by  day  or  a  little  after  sunset,  in  fine 
weather,  a  little,  light,  long-drawn  cloud  is 
[/o]  seen,  like  a  long  very  straight  line.  This  is 
because  the  wind  is  leaving  the  air  and  dying 
down.  Something  analogous  to  this  happens  on 
the  sea-shore.  When  the  sea  breaks  in  great 
waves  the  marks  left  on  the  sand  are  very  thick 
[75]  and  crooked,  but  when  the  sea  is  calm 
they  are  slight  and  straight  (because  the  secre¬ 
tion  is  small).  As  the  sea  is  to  the  shore  so  the 
wind  is  to  the  cloudy  air;  so,  when  the  wind 
drops,  this  very  straight  and  thin  cloud  is  left, 
a  sort  of  wave-mark  in  the  air. 

[20]  An  earthquake  sometimes  coincides  with 
an  eclipse  of  the  moon  for  the  same  reason. 
When  the  earth  is  on  the  point  of  being  inter¬ 
posed,  but  the  light  and  heat  of  the  sun  has  not 
quite  vanished  from  the  air  but  is  dying  away, 
the  wind  which  causes  the  earthquake  before 
the  eclipse,  turns  off  into  the  earth,  and  calm 
[25]  ensues.  For  there  often  are  winds  before 
eclipses:  at  nightfall  if  the  eclipse  is  at  mid¬ 
night,  and  at  midnight  if  the  eclipse  is  at  dawn. 
They  are  caused  by  the  lessening  of  the  warmth 
from  the  moon  when  its  sphere  approaches  the 
point  at  which  the  eclipse  is  going  to  take 
[30]  place.  So  the  influence  which  restrained 
and  quieted  the  air  weakens  and  the  air  moves 
again  and  a  wind  rises,  and  does  so  later,  the 
later  the  eclipse. 

A  severe  earthquake  does  not  stop  at  once  or 
after  a  single  shock,  but  first  the  shocks  go  on, 
often  for  about  forty  days;  after  that,  for  one  or 
even  two  years  it  gives  premonitory  indications 
368a  in  the  same  place.  The  severity  of  the 
earthquake  is  determined  by  the  quantity  of 
wind  and  the  shape  of  the  passages  through 
which  it  flows.  Where  it  is  beaten  back  and 
cannot  easily  find  its  way  out  the  shocks  are 
most  violent,  and  there  it  must  remain  in  a 
[5]  cramped  space  like  water  that  cannot  es¬ 
cape.  Any  throbbing  in  the  body  does  not  cease 
suddenly  or  quickly,  but  by  degrees  according 
as  the  affection  passes  off.  So  here  the  agency 
which  created  the  evaporation  and  gave  it  an 
impulse  to  motion  clearly  does  not  at  once  ex- 
[70]  haust  the  whole  of  the  material  from 
which  it  forms  the  wind  which,  we  call  an 
earthquake.  So  until  the  rest  of  this  is  exhaust¬ 
ed  the  shocks  must  continue,  though  more  gen¬ 
tly,  and  they  must  go  on  until  there  is  too  little 


METEOROLOGY 


369s 

of  the  evaporation  left  to  have  any  perceptible 
effect  on  the  earth  at  all. 

Subterranean  noises,  too,  are  due  to  the 
wind;  sometimes  they  portend  earthquakes  but 
[75]  sometimes  they  have  been  heard  without 
any  earthquake  following.  Just  as  the  air  gives 
off  various  sounds  when  it  is  struck,  so  it  does 
when  it  strikes  other  things;  for  striking  in¬ 
volves  being  struck  and  so  the  two  cases  are  the 
same.  The  sound  precedes  the  shock  because 
[20]  sound  is  thinner  and  passes  through  things 
more  readily  than  wind.  But  when  the  wind  is 
too  weak  by  reason  of  thinness  to  cause  an 
earthquake  the  absence  of  a  shock  is  due  to  its 
filtering  through  readily,  though  by  striking 
hard  and  hollow  masses  of  different  shapes  it 
makes  various  noises,  so  that  the  earth  some- 
[25]  times  seems  to  ‘bellow'  as  the  portent- 
mongers  say. 

Water  has  been  known  to  burst  out  during 
an  earthquake.  But  that  does  not  make  water 
the  cause  of  the  earthquake.  The  wind  is  the 
efficient  cause  whether  it  drives  the  water  along 
the  surface  or  up  from  below:  just  as  winds  are 
[50]  the  causes  of  waves  and  not  waves  of 
winds.  Else  we  might  as  well  say  that  earth  was 
the  cause;  for  it  is  upset  in  an  earthquake,  just 
like  water  (for  effusion  is  a  form  of  upsetting). 
No,  earth  and  water  are  material  causes  (being 
patients,  not  agents):  the  true  cause  is  the 
wind. 

The  combination  of  a  tidal  wave  with  an 
[55]  earthquake  is  due  to  the  presence  of  con¬ 
trary  winds.  It  occurs  when  the  wind  which  is 
368b  shaking  the  earth  does  not  entirely  suc¬ 
ceed  in  driving  off  the  sea  which  another  wind 
is  bringing  on,  but  pushes  it  back  and  heaps  it 
up  in  a  great  mass  in  one  place.  Given  this  sit¬ 
uation  it  follows  that  when  this  wind  gives 
[5]  way  the  whole  body  of  the  sea,  driven 
on  by  the  other  wind,  will  burst  out  and  over¬ 
whelm  the  land.  This  is  what  happened  in 
Achaea.  There  a  south  wind  was  blowing,  but 
outside  a  north  wind;  then  there  was  a  calm 
and  the  wind  entered  the  earth,  and  then  the 
tidal  wave  came  on  and  simultaneously  there 
was  an  earthquake.  This  was  the  more  violent 
as  the  sea  allowed  no  exit  to  the  wind  that  had 
entered  the  earth,  but  shut  it  in.  So  in  their 
[/o]  struggle  with  one  another  the  wind 
caused  the  earthquake,  and  the  wave  by  its  set¬ 
tling  down  the  inundation. 

Earthquakes  are  local  and  often  affect  a  small 
district  only;  whereas  winds  are  not  local.  Such 
phenomena  are  local  when  the  evaporations  at 
\.IS\  a  given  place  are  joined  by  those  from  the 


473 

next  and  unite;  this,  as  we  explained,  is  what 
happens  when  there  is  drought  or  excessive 
rain  locally.  Now  earthquakes  do  come  about 
in  this  way  but  winds  do  not.  For  earthquakes, 
rains,  and  droughts  have  their  source  and  ori¬ 
gin  inside  the  earth,  so  that  the  sun  is  not 
[20]  equally  able  to  direct  all  the  evaporations 
in  one  direction.  But  on  the  evaporations  in  the 
air  the  sun  has  more  influence  so  that,  when 
once  they  have  been  given  an  impulse  by  its 
motion,  which  is  determined  by  its  various  po¬ 
sitions,  they  flow  in  one  direction. 

When  the  wind  is  present  in  sufficient  quan¬ 
tity  there  is  an  earthquake.  The  shocks  are 
horizontal  like  a  tremor;  except  occasionally, 
in  a  few  places,  where  they  act  vertically,  up- 
[25]  wards  from  below,  like  a  throbbing.  It  is 
the  vertical  direction  which  makes  this  kind  of 
earthquake  so  rare.  The  motive  force  does  not 
easily  accumulate  in  great  quantity  in  the  posi¬ 
tion  required,  since  the  surface  of  the  earth  se¬ 
cretes  far  more  of  the  evaporation  than  its 
depths.  Wherever  an  earthquake  of  this  kind 
does  occur  a  quantity  of  stones  comes  to  the 
surface  of  the  earth  (as  when  you  throw  up 
[50]  things  in  a  winnowing  fan),  as  we  see 
from  Sipylus  and  the  Phlegraean  plain  and  the 
district  in  Liguria,  which  were  devastated  by 
this  kind  of  earthquake. 

Islands  in  the  middle  of  the  sea  are  less  ex¬ 
posed  to  earthquakes  than  those  near  land. 
First,  the  volume  of  the  sea  cools  the  evapora- 
[35]  tions  and  overpowers  them  by  its  weight 
369a  and  so  crushes  them.  Then,  currents  and 
not  shocks  are  produced  in  the  sea  by  the  ac¬ 
tion  of  the  winds.  Again,  it  is  so  extensive  that 
evaporations  do  not  collect  in  it  but  issue  from 
it,  and  these  draw  the  evaporations  from  the 
earth  after  them.  Islands  near  the  continent 
really  form  part  of  it:  the  intervening  sea  is  not 
enough  to  make  any  difference;  but  those  in 
[5]  the  open  sea  can  only  be  shaken  if  the  whole 
of  the  sea  that  surrounds  them  is  shaken  too. 

We  have  now  explained  earthquakes,  their 
nature  and  cause,  and  the  most  important  of  the 
circumstances  attendant  on  their  appearance. 

9 

[70]  Let  us  go  on  to  explain  lightning  and 
thunder,  and  further  whirlwind,  fire-wind,  and 
thunderbolts:  for  the  cause  of  them  all  is  the 
same. 

As  we  have  said,1  there  are  two  kinds  of  ex¬ 
halation,  moist  and  dry,  and  the  atmosphere 
contains  them  both  potentially.  It,  as  we  have 

1£.  g.  34ib6. 


BOOK  II,  CHAPTERS  8-9 


474 

[75]  said  before,1  condenses  into  cloud,  and  the 
density  of  the  clouds  is  highest  at  their  upper 
limit.  (For  they  must  be  denser  and  colder  on 
the  side  where  the  heat  escapes  to  the  upper  re¬ 
gion  and  leaves  them.  This  explains  why  hurri¬ 
canes  and  thunderbolts  and  all  analogous  phe- 
[20]  nomena  move  downwards  in  spite  of  the 
fact  that  everything  hot  has  a  natural  tendency 
upwards.  Just  as  the  pips  that  we  squeeze  be¬ 
tween  our  fingers  are  heavy  but  often  jump  up¬ 
wards:  so  these  things  are  necessarily  squeezed 
out  away  from  the  densest  part  of  the  cloud.) 
Now  the  heat  that  escapes  disperses  to  the  up- 

fer  region.  But  if  any  of  the  dry  exhalation  is 
25]  caught  in  the  process  as  the  air  cools,  it  is 
squeezed  out  as  the  clouds  contract,  and  col¬ 
lides  in  its  rapid  course  with  the  neighbouring 
clouds,  and  the  sound  of  this  collision  is  what 
we  call  thunder.  This  collision  is  analogous,  to 
[jo]  compare  small  with  great,  to  the  sound 
we  hear  in  a  flame  which  men  call  the  laughter 
or  the  threat  of  Hephaestus  or  of  Hestia.  This 
occurs  when  the  wood  dries  and  cracks  and  the 
exhalation  rushes  on  the  flame  in  a  body.  So  in 
[^5]  the  clouds,  the  exhalation  is  projected  and 
369b  its  impact  on  dense  clouds  causes  thun¬ 
der:  the  variety  of  the  sound  is  due  to  the  ir¬ 
regularity  of  the  clouds  and  the  hollows  that 
intervene  where  their  density  is  interrupted. 
This,  then,  is  thunder,  and  this  its  cause. 

[5]  It  usually  happens  that  the  exhalation  that 
is  ejected  is  inflamed  and  burns  with  a  thin  and 
faint  fire:  this  is  what  we  call  lightning,  where 
we  see  as  it  were  the  exhalation  coloured  in  the 
act  of  its  ejection.  It  comes  into  existence  after 
the  collision  and  the  thunder,  though  we  see  it 
earlier  because  sight  is  quicker  than  hearing. 
The  rowing  of  triremes  illustrates  this:  the  oars 
[/o]  are  going  back  again  before  the  sound  of 
their  striking  the  water  reaches  us. 

However,  there  are  some  who  maintain  that 
there  is  actually  fire  in  the  clouds.  Empedocles 
says  that  it  consists  of  some  of  the  sun’s  rays 
which  are  intercepted:  Anaxagoras  that  it  is 
art  of  the  upper  ether  (which  he  calls  fire) 
75]  which  has  descended  from  above.  Light¬ 
ning,  then,  is  the  gleam  of  this  fire,  and  thun¬ 
der  the  hissing  noise  of  its  extinction  in  the 
cloud. 

But  this  involves  the  view  that  lightning  ac¬ 
tually  is  prior  to  thunder  and  does  not  merely 
appear  to  be  so.  Again,  this  intercepting  of  the 
fire  is  impossible  on  either  theory,  but  especially 
[20]  when  it  is  said  to  be  drawn  down  from 
the  upper  ether.  Some  reason  ought  to  be  given 
1  E.  g.  34ib  36  sqq.,  346b  23  sqq. 


370a 

why  that  which  naturally  ascends  should  de¬ 
scend,  and  why  it  should  not  always  do  so,  but 
only  when  it  is  cloudy.  When  the  sky  is  clear 
there  is  no  lightning:  to  say  that  there  is,  is  al¬ 
together  wanton. 

[25]  The  view  that  the  heat  of  the  sun’s  rays 
intercepted  in  the  clouds  is  the  cause  of  these 
phenomena  is  equally  unattractive:  this,  too,  is 
a  most  careless  explanation.  Thunder,  light¬ 
ning,  and  the  rest  must  have  a  separate  and  de- 
[jo]  terminate  cause  assigned  to  them  on 
which  they  ensue.  But  this  theory  does  nothing 
of  the  sort.  It  is  like  supposing  that  water, 
snow,  and  hail  existed  all  along  and  were  pro¬ 
duced  when  the  time  came  and  not  generated 
at  all,  as  if  the  atmosphere  brought  each  to 
hand  out  of  its  stock  from  time  to  time.  They 
are  concretions  in  the  same  way  as  thunder  and 
[35]  lightning  are  discretions,  so  that  if  it  is 
true  of  either  that  they  are  not  generated  but 
pre-exist,  the  same  must  be  true  of  the  other. 
370a  Again,  how  can  any  distinction  be  made 
about  the  intercepting  between  this  case  and 
that  of  interception  in  denser  substances  such 
as  water?  Water,  too,  is  heated  by  the  sun  and 
by  fire:  yet  when  it  contracts  again  and  grows 
cold  and  freezes  no  such  ejection  as  they  de- 
[5]  scribe  occurs,  though  it  ought  on  their  the¬ 
ory  to  take  place  on  a  proportionate  scale.  Boil¬ 
ing  is  due  to  the  exhalation  generated  by  fire: 
but  it  is  impossible  for  it  to  exist  in  the  water 
beforehand;  and  besides  they  call  the  noise 
‘hissing’,  not  ‘boiling’.  But  hissing  is  really  boil¬ 
ing  on  a  small  scale:  for  when  that  which  is 
brought  into  contact  with  moisture  and  is  in 
process  of  being  extinguished  gets  the  better  of 
it,  then  it  boils  and  makes  the  noise  in  question. 
[70]  Some — Cleidemus  is  one  of  them — say 
that  lightning  is  nothing  objective  but  merely 
an  appearance.  They  compare  it  to  what  hap¬ 
pens  when  you  strike  the  sea  with  a  rod  by 
night  and  the  water  is  seen  to  shine.  They  say 
that  the  moisture  in  the  cloud  is  beaten  about 
in  the  same  way,  and  that  lightning  is  the  ap- 
[75]  pearance  of  brightness  that  ensues. 

This  theory  is  due  to  ignorance  of  the  theory 
of  reflection,  which  is  the  real  cause  of  that 
phenomenon.  The  water  appears  to  shine  when 
struck  because  our  sight  is  reflected  from  it  to 
some  bright  object:  hence  the  phenomenon  oc- 
[20]  curs  mainly  by  night:  the  appearance  is 
not  seen  by  day  because  the  daylight  is  too  in¬ 
tense  and  obscures  it. 

These  are  the  theories  of  others  about  thun¬ 
der  and  lightning:  some  maintaining  that  light¬ 
ning  is  a  reflection,  the  others  that  lightning  is 


METEOROLOGY 


371a  BOOK  II,  CHAPTER  9- 

fire  shining  through  the  cloud  and  thunder  its 
extinction,  the  fire  not  being  generated  in  each 
[25]  case  but  existing  beforehand.  We  say  that 
the  same  stuff  is  wind  on  the  earth,  and  earth¬ 
quake  under  it,  and  in  the  clouds  thunder.  The 
essential  constituent  of  all  these  phenomena  is 
the  same:  namely,  the  dry  exhalation.  If  it 


— BOOK  III,  CHAPTER  1  475 

flows  in  one  direction  it  is  wind,  in  another  it 
causes  earthquakes;  in  the  clouds,  when  they 
are  in  a  process  of  change  and  contract  and 
[jo]  condense  into  water,  it  is  ejected  and 
causes  thunder  and  lightning  and  the  other 
phenomena  of  the  same  nature. 

So  much  for  thunder  and  lightning. 


BOOK  III 


1 

370b  Let  us  explain  the  remaining  operations 
of  this  secretion  in  the  same  way  as  we  have 
treated  the  rest.  When  this  exhalation  is  secret- 
[5]  ed  in  small  and  scattered  quantities  and 
frequently,  and  is  transitory,  and  its  constitu¬ 
tion  rare,  it  gives  rise  to  thunder  and  lightning. 
But  if  it  is  secreted  in  a  body  and  is  denser,  that 
is,  less  rare,  we  get  a  hurricane.  The  fact  that  it 
issues  in  a  body  explains  its  violence:  it  is  due 
[/o]  to  the  rapidity  of  the  secretion.  Now 
when  this  secretion  issues  in  a  great  and  con¬ 
tinuous  current  the  result  corresponds  to  what 
we  get  when  the  opposite  development  takes 
place  and  rain  and  a  quantity  of  water  are  pro¬ 
duced.  As  far  as  the  matter  from  which  they 
are  developed  goes  both  sets  of  phenomena  are 
the  same.  As  soon  as  a  stimulus  to  the  develop¬ 
ment  of  either  potentiality  appears,  that  of 
[75]  which  there  is  the  greater  quantity  pres¬ 
ent  in  the  cloud  is  at  once  secreted  from  it,  and 
there  results  either  rain,  or,  if  the  other  exhala¬ 
tion  prevails,  a  hurricane. 

Sometimes  the  exhalation  in  the  cloud,  when 
it  is  being  secreted,  collides  with  another  un¬ 
der  circumstances  like  those  found  when  a 
wind  is  forced  from  an  open  into  a  narrow 
space  in  a  gateway  or  a  road.  It  often  happens 
[20]  in  such  cases  that  the  first  part  of  the  mov¬ 
ing  body  is  deflected  because  of  the  resistance 
due  either  to  the  narrowness  or  to  a  contrary 
current,  and  so  the  wind  forms  a  circle  and 
eddy.  It  is  prevented  from  advancing  in  a 
straight  line:  at  the  same  time  it  is  pushed  on 
from  behind;  so  it  is  compelled  to  move  side¬ 
ways  in  the  direction  of  least  resistance.  The 
[25]  same  thing  happens  to  the  next  part,  and 
the  next,  and  so  on,  till  the  series  becomes  one, 
that  is,  till  a  circle  is  formed:  for  if  a  figure  is 
described  by  a  single  motion  that  figure  must 
itself  be  one.  This  is  how  eddies  are  generated 
on  the  earth,  and  the  case  is  the  same  in  the 
clouds  as  far  as  the  beginning  of  them  goes. 
Only  here  (as  in  the  case  of  the  hurricane 
which  shakes  off  the  cloud  without  cessation 


[jo]  and  becomes  a  continuous  wind)  the  cloud 
follows  the  exhalation  unbroken,  and  the  ex¬ 
halation,  failing  to  break  away  from  the  cloud 
because  of  its  density,  first  moves  in  a  circle  for 
the  reason  given  and  then  descends,  because 
clouds  are  always  densest  on  the  side  where  the 
371a  heat  escapes.  This  phenomenon  is  called 
a  whirlwind  when  it  is  colourless;  and  it  is  a 
sort  of  undigested  hurricane.  There  is  never  a 
whirlwind  when  the  weather  is  northerly,  nor 
a  hurricane  when  there  is  snow.  The  reason  is 
that  all  these  phenomena  are  ‘wind5,  and  wind 
[5]  is  a  dry  and  warm  evaporation.  Now  frost 
and  cold  prevail  over  this  principle  and  quench 
it  at  its  birth:  that  they  do  prevail  is  clear  or 
there  could  be  no  snow  or  northerly  rain,  since 
these  occur  when  the  cold  does  prevail. 

[/o]  So  the  whirlwind  originates  in  the  failure 
of  an  incipient  hurricane  to  escape  from  its 
cloud:  it  is  due  to  the  resistance  which  gener¬ 
ates  the  eddy,  and  it  consists  in  the  spiral  which 
descends  to  the  earth  and  drags  with  it  the  cloud 
which  it  cannot  shake  off.  It  moves  things  by 
its  wind  in  the  direction  in  which  it  is  blowing 
in  a  straight  line,  and  whirls  round  by  its  cir¬ 
cular  motion  and  forcibly  snatches  up  what¬ 
ever  it  meets. 

[75]  When  the  cloud  burns  as  it  is  drawn 
downwards,  that  is,  when  the  exhalation  be¬ 
comes  rarer,  it  is  called  a  fire-wind,  for  its  fire 
colours  the  neighbouring  air  and  inflames  it. 

When  there  is  a  great  quantity  of  exhalation 
and  it  is  rare  and  is  squeezed  out  in  the  cloud 
itself  we  get  a  thunderbolt.  If  the  exhalation  is 
[20]  exceedingly  rare  this  rareness  prevents  the 
thunderbolt  from  scorching  and  the  poets  call 
it  ‘bright’:  if  the  rareness  is  less  it  does  scorch 
and  they  call  it  ‘smoky’.  The  former  moves 
rapidly  because  of  its  rareness,  and  because  of 
its  rapidity  passes  through  an  object  before  set¬ 
ting  fire  to  it  or  dwelling  on  it  so  as  to  blacken 
it:  the  slower  one  does  blacken  the  object,  but 
passes  through  it  before  it  can  actually  burn  it. 
[25]  Further,  resisting  substances  are  affected, 
unresisting  ones  are  not.  For  instance,  it  has 
happened  that  the  bronze  of  a  shield  has  been 


476  METEOROLOGY  372* 


melted  while  the  woodwork  remained  intact 
because  its  texture  was  so  loose  that  the  exhala¬ 
tion  filtered  through  without  affecting  it.  So  it 
has  passed  through  clothes,  too,  without  burn¬ 
ing'  them,  and  has  merely  reduced  them  to 
shreds. 

Such  evidence  is  enough  by  itself  to  show 
[jo]  that  the  exhalation  is  at  work  in  all  these 
cases,  but  we  sometimes  get  direct  evidence  as 
well,  as  in  the  case  of  the  conflagration  of  the 
temple  at  Ephesus  which  we  lately  witnessed. 
There  independent  sheets  of  flame  left  the 
main  fire  and  were  carried  bodily  in  many  di¬ 
rections.  Now  that  smoke  is  exhalation  and 
that  smoke  burns  is  certain,  and  has  been  stated 
371b  in  another  place  before1;  but  when  the 
flame  moves  bodily,  then  we  have  ocular  proof 
that  smoke  is  exhalation.  On  this  occasion  what 
is  seen  in  small  fires  appeared  on  a  much  larger 
scale  because  of  the  quantity  of  matter  that  was 
burning.  The  beams  which  were  the  source  of 
[5]  the  exhalation  split,  and  a  quantity  of  it 
rushed  in  a  body  from  the  place  from  which  it 
issued  forth  and  went  up  in  a  blaze:  so  that  the 
flame  was  actually  seen  moving  through  the  air 
away  and  falling  on  the  houses.  For  we  must 
recognize  that  exhalation  accompanies  and  pre¬ 
cedes  thunderbolts  though  it  is  colourless  and 
so  invisible.  Hence,  where  the  thunderbolt  is 
[/o]  going  to  strike,  the  object  moves  before 
it  is  struck,  showing  that  the  exhalation  leads 
the  way  and  falls  on  the  object  first.  Thunder, 
too,  splits  things  not  by  its  noise  but  because 
the  exhalation  that  strikes  the  object  and  that 
which  makes  the  noise  are  ejected  simultane¬ 
ously.  This  exhalation  splits  the  thing  it  strikes 
but  does  not  scorch  it  at  all. 

We  have  now  explained  thunder  and  light- 
[75]  ning  and  hurricane,  and  further  fire- 
winds,  whirlwinds,  and  thunderbolts,  and 
shown  that  they  are  all  of  them  forms  of  the 
same  thing  and  wherein  they  all  differ. 

2 

Let  us  now  explain  the  nature  and  cause  of 
halo,  rainbow,  mock  suns,  and  rods,  since  the 
[20]  same  account  applies  to  them  all. 

We  must  first  describe  the  phenomena  and 
the  circumstances  in  which  each  of  them  oc¬ 
curs.  The  halo  often  appears  as  a  complete  cir¬ 
cle:  it  is  seen  round  the  sun  and  the  moon  and 
bright  stars,  by  night  as  well  as  by  day,  and  at 
[25]  midday  or  in  the  afternoon,  more  rarely 
about  sunrise  or  sunset. 

1  Cf.  34 1 b  21,  388®  2,  and  On  Generation  and  Corrup¬ 
tion ,  33 1 b  25. 


The  rainbow  never  forms  a  full  circle,  nor 
any  segment  greater  than  a  semicircle.  At  sun¬ 
set  and  sunrise  the  circle  is  smallest  and  the 
segment  largest:  as  the  sun  rises  higher  the  cir- 
[30]  cle  is  larger  and  the  segment  smaller. 
After  the  autumn  equinox  in  the  shorter  days  it 
is  seen  at  every  hour  of  the  day,  in  the  summer 
not  about  midday.  There  are  never  more  than 
two  rainbows  at  one  time.  Each  of  them  is 
372a  three-coloured;  the  colours  are  the  same 
in  both  and  their  number  is  the  same,  but  in 
the  outer  rainbow  they  are  fainter  and  their  po¬ 
sition  is  reversed.  In  the  inner  rainbow  the  first 
and  largest  band  is  red;  in  the  outer  rainbow 
the  band  that  is  nearest  to  this  one  and  small¬ 
est  is  of  the  same  colour:  the  other  bands  cor¬ 
respond  on  the  same  principle.  These  are  al- 
[5]  most  the  only  colours  which  painters  can¬ 
not  manufacture:  for  there  are  colours  which 
they  create  by  mixing,  but  no  mixing  will  give 
red,  green,  or  purple.  These  are  the  colours  of 
the  rainbow,  though  between  the  red  and  the 
green  an  orange  colour  is  often  seen. 

[/o]  Mock  suns  and  rods  are  always  seen  by 
the  side  of  the  sun,  not  above  or  below  it  nor  in 
the  opposite  quarter  of  the  sky.  They  are  not 
seen  at  night  but  always  in  the  neighbourhood 
of  the  sun,  either  as  it  is  rising  or  setting  but 
more  commonly  towards  sunset.  They  have 
scarcely  ever  appeared  when  the  sun  was  on 
the  meridian,  though  this  once  happened  in 
[75]  Bosporus  where  two  mock  suns  rose  with 
the  sun  and  followed  it  all  through  the  day  till 
sunset. 

These  are  the  facts  about  each  of  these  phe¬ 
nomena:  the  cause  of  them  all  is  the  same,  for 
they  are  all  reflections.  But  they  are  different 
varieties,  and  are  distinguished  by  the  surface 
[20]  from  which  and  the  way  in  which  the  re¬ 
flection  to  the  sun  or  some  other  bright  object 
takes  place. 

The  rainbow  is  seen  by  day,  and  it  was  for¬ 
merly  thought  that  it  never  appeared  by  night 
as  a  moon  rainbow.  This  opinion  was  due  to 
the  rarity  of  the  occurrence:  it  was  not  ob¬ 
served,  for  though  it  does  happen  it  does  so 
rarely.  The  reason  is  that  the  colours  are  not  so 
easy  to  see  in  the  dark  and  that  many  other 
[25]  conditions  must  coincide,  and  all  that  in 
a  single  day  in  the  month.  For  if  there  is  to  be 
one  it  must  be  at  full  moon,  and  then  as  the 
moon  is  either  rising  or  setting.  So  we  have 
only  met  with  two  instances  of  a  moon  rainbow 
in  more  than  fifty  years. 

We  must  accept  from  the  theory  of  optics  the 
[30]  fact  that  sight  is  reflected  from  air  and 


373* 


BOOK  III,  CHAPTERS  1-3 


477 


any  object  with  a  smooth  surface  just  as  it  is 
from  water;  also  that  in  some  mirrors  the 
forms  of  things  are  reflected,  in  others  only 
372b  their  colours.  Of  the  latter  kind  are  those 
mirrors  which  are  so  small  as  to  be  indivisible 
for  sense.  It  is  impossible  that  the  figure  of  a 
thing  should  be  reflected  in  them,  for  if  it  is 
the  mirror  will  be  sensibly  divisible  since  divisi¬ 
bility  is  involved  in  the  notion  of  figure.  But 
since  something  must  be  reflected  in  them  and 
[5]  figure  cannot  be,  it  remains  that  colour 
alone  should  be  reflected.  The  colour  of  a  bright 
object  sometimes  appears  bright  in  the  reflec¬ 
tion,  but  it  sometimes,  either  owing  to  the  ad¬ 
mixture  of  the  colour  of  the  mirror  or  to  weak¬ 
ness  of  sight,  gives  rise  to  the  appearance  of  an¬ 
other  colour. 

However,  we  must  accept  the  account  we 
have  given  of  these  things  in  the  theory  of  sen- 
[/o]  sation,  and  take  some  things  for  granted 
while  we  explain  others. 

3 

Let  us  begin  by  explaining  the  shape  of  the 
halo;  why  it  is  a  circle  and  why  it  appears 
round  the  sun  or  the  moon  or  one  of  the  other 
stars:  the  explanation  being  in  all  these  cases 
the  same. 

[75]  Sight  is  reflected  in  this  way  when  air  and 
vapour  are  condensed  into  a  cloud  and  the  con¬ 
densed  matter  is  uniform  and  consists  of  small 
parts.  Hence  in  itself  it  is  a  sign  of  rain,  but  if  it 
fades  away,  of  fine  weather,  if  it  is  broken  up, 
[20]  of  wind.  For  if  it  does  not  fade  away  and 
is  not  broken  up  but  is  allowed  to  attain  its  nor¬ 
mal  state,  it  is  naturally  a  sign  of  rain  since  it 
shows  that  a  process  of  condensation  is  pro¬ 
ceeding  which  must,  when  it  is  carried  to  an 
end,  result  in  rain.  For  the  same  reason  these 
haloes  are  the  darkest.  It  is  a  sign  of  wind  when 
[25]  it  is  broken  up  because  its  breaking  up  is 
due  to  a  wind  which  exists  there  but  has  not 
reached  us.  This  view  finds  support  in  the  fact 
that  the  wind  blows  from  the  quarter  in  which 
the  main  division  appears  in  the  halo.  Its  fad¬ 
ing  away  is  a  sign  of  fine  weather  because  if  the 
[jo]  air  is  not  yet  in  a  state  to  get  the  better  of 
the  heat  it  contains  and  proceed  to  condense 
into  water,  this  shows  that  the  moist  vapour  has 
not  yet  separated  from  the  dry  and  firelike  ex¬ 
halation:  and  this  is  the  cause  of  fine  weather. 

So  much  for  the  atmospheric  conditions  un- 
373*  der  which  the  reflection  takes  place.  The 
reflection  is  from  the  mist  that  forms  round  the 
sun  or  the  moon,  and  that  is  why  the  halo  is 
not  seen  opposite  the  sun  like  the  rainbow. 


Since  the  reflection  takes  place  in  the  same  way 
from  every  point  the  result  is  necessarily  a  cir¬ 
cle  or  a  segment  of  a  circle:  for  if  the  lines  start 
from  the  same  point  and  end  at  the  same  point 
and  are  equal,  the  points  where  they  form  an 
[5]  angle  will  always  lie  on  a  circle. 

Let  ArB  and  AZB  and  AAB  be  lines  each 
of  which  goes  from  the  point  A  to  the  point  B 
and  forms  an  angle.  Let  the  lines  AI\  AZ,  AA 
be  equal  and  those  at  B,  TB,  ZB,  AB  equal  too. 


B 


Draw  the  line  AEB.  Then  the  triangles  are 
[/o]  equal;  for  their  base  AEB  is  equal.  Draw 
perpendiculars  to  AEB  from  the  angles;  TE 
from  T,  ZE  from  Z,  AE  from  A.  Then  these 
perpendiculars  are  equal,  being  in  equal  trian¬ 
gles.  And  they  are  all  in  one  plane,  being  all  at 
[75]  right  angles  to  AEB  and  meeting  at  a  sin¬ 
gle  point  E.  So  if  you  draw  the  line  it  will  be  a 
circle  and  E  its  centre.  Now  B  is  the  sun,  A  the 
eye,  and  the  circumference  passing  through  the 
points  rZA  the  cloud  from  which  the  line  of 
sight  is  reflected  to  the  sun. 

The  mirrors  must  be  thought  of  as  contigu- 
[20]  ous:  each  of  them  is  too  small  to  be  visi¬ 
ble,  but  their  contiguity  makes  the  whole  made 
up  of  them  all  to  seem  one.  The  bright  band  is 
the  sun,  which  is  seen  as  a  circle,  appearing 
successively  in  each  of  the  mirrors  as  a  point  in¬ 
divisible  to  sense.  The  band  of  cloud  next  to  it 
[25]  is  black,  its  colour  being  intensified  by 
contrast  with  the  brightness  of  the  halo.  The 
halo  is  formed  rather  near  the  earth  because 
that  is  calmer:  for  where  there  is  wind  it  is 
clear  that  no  halo  can  maintain  its  position. 

Haloes  are  commoner  round  the  moon  be- 


478  METEOROLOGY  374b 


cause  the  greater  heat  of  the  sun  dissolves  the 
condensations  of  the  air  more  rapidly. 

[jo]  Haloes  are  formed  round  stars  for  the 
same  reasons,  but  they  are  not  prognostic  in 
the  same  way  because  the  condensation  they 
imply  is  so  insignificant  as  to  be  barren. 

4 

We  have  already  stated  that  the  rainbow  is  a 
reflection:  we  have  now  to  explain  what  sort  of 
reflection  it  is,  to  describe  its  various  concomi¬ 
tants,  and  to  assign  their  causes. 

[35]  Sight  is  reflected  from  all  smooth  sur¬ 
faces,  such  as  are  air  and  water  among  others. 
373b  Air  must  be  condensed  if  it  is  to  act  as  a 
mirror,  though  it  often  gives  a  reflection  even 
uncondensed  when  the  sight  is  weak.  Such  was 
[5]  the  case  of  a  man  whose  sight  was  faint 
and  indistinct.  He  always  saw  an  image  in 
front  of  him  and  facing  him  as  he  walked.  This 
was  because  his  sight  was  reflected  back  to  him. 
Its  morbid  condition  made  it  so  weak  and  deli¬ 
cate  that  the  air  close  by  acted  as  a  mirror,  just 
as  distant  and  condensed  air  normally  does, 
[/o]  and  his  sight  could  not  push  it  back.  So 
promontories  in  the  sea  loom’  when  there  is  a 
south-east  wind,  and  everything  seems  bigger, 
and  in  a  mist,  too,  things  seem  bigger:  so,  too, 
the  sun  and  the  stars  seem  bigger  when  rising 
and  setting  than  on  the  meridian.  But  things 
are  best  reflected  from  water,  and  even  in  proc- 
[75]  ess  of  formation  it  is  a  better  mirror  than 
air,  for  each  of  the  particles,  the  union  of  which 
constitutes  a  raindrop,  is  necessarily  a  better 
mirror  than  mist.  Now  it  is  obvious  and  has 
already  been  stated1  that  a  mirror  of  this  kind 
renders  the  colour  of  an  object  only,  but  not  its 
[20]  shape.  Hence  it  follows  that  when  it  is  on 
the  point  of  raining  and  the  air  in  the  clouds  is 
in  process  of  forming  into  raindrops  but  the 
rain  is  not  yet  actually  there,  if  the  sun  is  oppo¬ 
site,  or  any  other  object  bright  enough  to  make 
the  cloud  a  mirror  and  cause  the  sight  to  be  re¬ 
flected  to  the  object  then  the  reflection  must 
render  the  colour  of  the  object  without  its 
shape.  Since  each  of  the  mirrors  is  so  small  as 
[25]  to  be  invisible  and  what  we  see  is  the  con¬ 
tinuous  magnitude  made  up  of  them  all,  the 
reflection  necessarily  gives  us  a  continuous 
magnitude  made  up  of  one  colour;  each  of  the 
mirrors  contributing  the  same  colour  to  the 
whole.  We  may  deduce  that  since  these  condi¬ 
tions  are  realizable  there  will  be  an  appearance 
[30]  due  to  reflection  whenever  the  sun  and 
the  cloud  are  related  in  the  way  described  and 
1 372*34- 


we  are  between  them.  But  these  are  just  the 
conditions  under  which  the  rainbow  appears. 
So  it  is  clear  that  the  rainbow  is  a  reflection  of 
sight  to  the  sun. 

So  the  rainbow  always  appears  opposite  the 
[35]  sun  whereas  the  halo  is  round  it.  They  are 
both  reflections,  but  the  rainbow  is  distin- 
374a  guished  by  the  variety  of  its  colours.  The 
reflection  in  the  one  case  is  from  water  which 
is  dark  and  from  a  distance;  in  the  other  from 
air  which  is  nearer  and  lighter  in  colour.  White 
light  through  a  dark  medium  or  on  a  dark  sur¬ 
face  (it  makes  no  difference)  looks  red.  We 
[5]  know  how  red  the  flame  of  green  wood  is: 
this  is  because  so  much  smoke  is  mixed  with 
the  bright  white  firelight:  so,  too,  the  sun  ap¬ 
pears  red  through  smoke  and  mist.  That  is  why 
in  the  rainbow  reflection  the  outer  circumfer¬ 
ence  is  red  (the  reflection  being  from  small  par¬ 
ticles  of  water),  but  not  in  the  case  of  the  halo, 
[/o]  The  other  colours  shall  be  explained  later. 
Again,  a  condensation  of  this  kind  cannot  per¬ 
sist  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  sun:  it  must 
either  turn  to  rain  or  be  dissolved,  but  opposite 
to  the  sun  there  is  an  interval  during  which  the 
water  is  formed.  If  there  were  not  this  distinc- 
[75]  tion  haloes  would  be  coloured  like  the 
rainbow.  Actually  no  complete  or  circular  halo 
presents  this  colour,  only  small  and  fragmen¬ 
tary  appearances  called  ‘rods’.  But  if  a  haze  due 
to  water  or  any  other  dark  substance  formed 
there  we  should  have  had,  as  we  maintain,  a 
complete  rainbow  like  that  which  we  do  find 
[20]  round  lamps.  A  rainbow  appears  round 
these  in  winter,  generally  with  southerly  winds. 
Persons  whose  eyes  are  moist  see  it  most  clear¬ 
ly  because  their  sight  is  weak  and  easily  reflect¬ 
ed.  It  is  due  to  the  moistness  of  the  air  and  the 
soot  which  the  flame  gives  off  and  which  mixes 
[25]  with  the  air  and  makes  it  a  mirror,  and  to 
the  blackness  which  that  mirror  derives  from 
the  smoky  nature  of  the  soot.  The  light  of  the 
lamp  appears  as  a  circle  which  is  not  white  but 
purple.  It  shows  the  colours  of  the  rainbow; 
but  because  the  sight  that  is  reflected  is  too 
weak  and  the  mirror  too  dark,  red  is  absent, 
[jo]  The  rainbow  that  is  seen  when  oars  are 
raised  out  of  the  sea  involves  the  same  relative 
positions  as  that  in  the  sky,  but  its  colour  is 
more  like  that  round  the  lamps,  being  purple 
rather  than  red.  The  reflection  is  from  very 
small  particles  continuous  with  one  another, 
and  in  this  case  the  particles  are  fully  formed 
[i5]  water.  We  get  a  rainbow,  too,  if  a  man 
374b  sprinkles  fine  drops  in  a  room  turned  to 
the  sun  so  that  the  sun  is  shining  in  part  of  the 


3 75b  BOOK  III,  CHAPTERS  3-4  479 


room  and  throwing  a  shadow  in  the  rest.  Then 
if  one  man  sprinkles  in  the  room,-  another, 
standing  outside,  sees  a  rainbow  where  the 
[5]  sun’s  rays  cease  and  make  the  shadow.  Its 
nature  and  colour  is  like  that  from  the  oars  and 
its  cause  is  the  same,  for  the  sprinkling  hand 
corresponds  to  the  oar. 

That  the  colours  of  the  rainbow  are  those  we 
described1  and  how  the  other  colours  come  to 
appear  in  it  will  be  clear  from  the  following 
considerations.  We  must  recognize,  as  we  have 
[10]  said,2  and  lay  down:  first,  that  white  col¬ 
our  on  a  black  surface  or  seen  through  a  black 
medium  gives  red;  second,  that  sight  when 
strained  to  a  distance  becomes  weaker  and  less; 
third,  that  black  is  in  a  sort  the  negation  of 
sight:  an  object  is  black  because  sight  fails;  so 
everything  at  a  distance  looks  blacker,  because 
sight  does  not  reach  it.  The  theory  of  these 
[75]  matters  belongs  to  the  account  of  the 
senses,  which  are  the  proper  subjects  of  such  an 
inquiry;  we  need  only  state  about  them  what 
is  necessary  for  us.  At  all  events,  that  is  the  rea¬ 
son  why  distant  objects  and  objects  seen  in  a 
mirror  look  darker  and  smaller  and  smoother, 
[20]  and  why  the  reflection  of  clouds  in  water 
is  darker  than  the  clouds  themselves.  This  lat¬ 
ter  is  clearly  the  case:  the  reflection  diminishes 
the  sight  that  reaches  them.  It  makes  no  differ¬ 
ence  whether  the  change  is  in  the  object  seen 
or  in  the  sight,  the  result  being  in  either  case 
the  same.  The  following  fact  further  is  worth 
[25]  noticing.  When  there  is  a  cloud  near  the 
sun  and  we  look  at  it  it  does  not  look  coloured 
at  all  but  white,  but  when  we  look  at  the  same 
cloud  in  water  it  shows  a  trace  of  rainbow  col¬ 
ouring.  Clearly,  then,  when  sight  is  reflected  it 
is  weakened  and,  as  it  makes  dark  look  darker, 
so  it  makes  white  look  less  white,  changing  it 
[30]  and  bringing  it  nearer  to  black.  When  the 
sight  is  relatively  strong  the  change  is  to  red; 
the  next  stage  is  green,  and  a  further  degree  of 
weakness  gives  violet.  No  further  change  is 
visible,  but  three  completes  the  series  of  colours 
(as  we  find  three  does  in  most  other  things), 
and  the  change  into  the  rest  is  imperceptible  to 
sense.  Hence  also  the  rainbow  appears  with 
375a  three  colours;  this  is  true  of  each  of  the 
two,  but  in  a  contrary  way.  The  outer  band  of 
the  primary  rainbow  is  red:  for  the  largest 
band  reflects  most  sight  to  the  sun,  and  the 
outer  band  is  largest.  The  middle  band  and  the 
third  go  on  the  same  principle.  So  if  the  princi¬ 
ples  we  laid  down3  about  the  appearance  of 

1  372*  7>  cf-  375a  28  below.  2  374®  3. 

3  374b  9  above. 


[5]  colours  are  true  the  rainbow  necessarily  has 
three  colours,  and  these  three  and  no  others. 
The  appearance  of  yellow  is  due  to  contrast,  for 
the  red  is  whitened  by  its  juxtaposition  with 
green.  We  can  see  this  from  the  fact  that  the 
[70]  rainbow  is  purest  when  the  cloud  is  black¬ 
est;  and  then  the  red  shows  most  yellow.  (Yel¬ 
low  in  the  rainbow  comes  between  red  and 
green.)  So  the  whole  of  the  red  shows  white  by 
contrast  with  the  blackness  of  the  cloud  around: 
for  it  is  white  compared  to  the  cloud  and  the 
green.  Again,  when  the  rainbow  is  fading  away 
[75]  and  the  red  is  dissolving,  the  white  cloud 
is  brought  into  contact  with  the  green  and  be¬ 
comes  yellow.  But  the  moon  rainbow  affords 
the  best  instance  of  this  colour  contrast.  It  looks 
quite  white:  this  is  because  it  appears  on  the 
dark  cloud  and  at  night.  So,  just  as  fire  is  in- 
120]  tensified  by  added  fire,  black  beside  black 
makes  that  which  is  in  some  degree  white  look 
quite  white.  Bright  dyes  too  show  the  effect  of 
contrast.  In  woven  and  embroidered  stuffs  the 
appearance  of  colours  is  profoundly  affected  by 
their  juxtaposition  with  one  another  (purple, 
[25]  for  instance,  appears  different  on  white 
and  on  black  wool),  and  also  by  differences 
of  illumination.  Thus  embroiderers  say  that 
they  often  make  mistakes  in  their  colours 
when  they  work  by  lamplight,  and  use  the 
wrong  ones. 

We  have  now  shown  why  the  rainbow  has 
three  colours  and  that  these  are  its  only  colours. 
[30]  The  same  cause  explains  the  double  rain¬ 
bow  and  the  faintness  of  the  colours  in  the  out¬ 
er  one  and  their  inverted  order.  When  sight  is 
strained  to  a  great  distance  the  appearance  of 
the  distant  object  is  affected  in  a  certain  way: 
and  the  same  thing  holds  good  here.  So  the  re- 
37513  flection  from  the  outer  rainbow  is  weak¬ 
er  because  it  takes  place  from  a  greater  distance 


e8y  y8c 

y=  Red)  8=  Green  \  e  =  Violet;  f- Yellow 


and  less  of  it  reaches  the  sun,  and  so  the  colours 
seen  are  fainter.  Their  order  is  reversed  because 
more  reflection  reaches  the  sun  from  the  small- 
[5]  er,  inner  band.  For  that  reflection  is  nearer 


48o  METEOROLOGY  3 76b 

to  our  sight  which  is  reflected  from  the  band  3 76a  is  produced).  Now  the  lines  drawn  from 
which  is  nearest  to  the  primary  rainbow.  Now  H  and  K  to  a  point  on  the  semicircle  A  are  in 
the  smallest  band  in  the  outer  rainbow  is  that  a  certain  ratio  to  one  another,  and  no  lines 


which  is  nearest,  and  so  it  will  be  red;  and  the 
second  and  the  third  will  follow  the  same  prin¬ 
ciple.  Let  B  be  the  outer  rainbow,  A  the  inner 
[io]  one;  let  y  stand  for  the  red  colour,  A  for 
green,  E  for  violet;  yellow  appears  at  the  point 
f.  Three  rainbows  or  more  are  not  found  be¬ 
cause  even  the  second  is  fainter,  so  that  the 
third  reflection  can  have  no  strength  whatever 
[75]  and  cannot  reach  the  sun  at  all. 

5 

The  rainbow  can  never  be  a  circle  nor  a  seg¬ 
ment  of  a  circle  greater  than  a  semicircle.  The 
consideration  of  the  diagram  will  prove  this 
and  the  other  properties  of  the  rainbow. 

Let  A  be  a  hemisphere  resting  on  the  circle 
[20]  of  the  horizon,  let  its  centre  be  K  and  let 
H  be  another  point  appearing  on  the  horizon. 
Then,  if  the  lines  that  fall  in  a  cone  from  K 
have  HK  as  their  axis,  and,  K  and  M  being 
joined,  the  lines  KM  are  reflected  from  the 
hemisphere  to  H  over  the  greater  angle,  the 
lines  from  K  will  fall  on  the  circumference  of 
[25]  a  circle.  If  the  reflection  takes  place  when 
the  luminous  body  is  rising  or  setting  the  seg¬ 
ment  of  the  circle  above  the  earth  which  is  cut 
off  by  the  horizon  will  be  a  semi-circle;  if  the 


t  A_ f  B  j  Z 

luminous  body  is  above  the  horizon  it  will  al¬ 
ways  be  less  than  a  semicircle,  and  it  will  be 
smallest  when  the  luminous  body  culminates, 
[jo]  First  let  the  luminous  body  be  appearing 
on  the  horizon  at  the  point  H,  and  let  KM  be 
reflected  to  H,  and  let  the  plane  in  which  A  is, 
determined  by  the  triangle  HKM,  be  pro¬ 
duced.  Then  the  section  of  the  sphere  will  be  a 
great  circle.  Let  it  be  A  (for  it  makes  no  differ¬ 
ence  which  of  the  planes  passing  through  the 
line  HK  and  determined  by  the  triangle  KMH 


drawn  from  the  same  points  to  another  point 
on  that  semicircle  can  have  the  same  ratio.  For 
since  both  the  points  H  and  K  and  the  line  KH 
are  given,  the  line  MH  will  be  given  too;  con¬ 
sequently  the  ratio  of  the  line  MH  to  the  line 
[5]  MK  will  be  given  too.  So  M  will  touch  a 
given  circumference.  Let  this  be  NM.  Then 
the  intersection  of  the  circumferences  is  given, 
and  the  same  ratio  cannot  hold  between  lines 
in  the  same  plane  drawn  from  the  same  points 
to  any  other  circumference  but  MN. 

[jo]  Draw  a  line  AB  outside  of  the  figure  and 
divide  it  so  that  A:B  =  MH:MK.  But  MH  is 
greater  than  MK  since  the  reflection  of  the  cone 
is  over  the  greater  angle  (for  it  subtends  the 
greater  angle  of  the  triangle  KMH).  Therefore 
[75]  A  is  greater  than  B.  Then  add  to  B  a  line 
Z  such  that  B+Z:A  =  A:B.  Then  make  an¬ 
other  line  KII  having  the  same  ratio  to  B  as 
KH  has  to  Z,  and  join  MIL 
Then  II  is  the  pole  of  the  circle  on  which  the 
[20]  lines  from  K  fall.  For  the  ratio  of  A  to 
IIM  is  the  same  as  that  of  Z  to  KH  and  of  B  to 
KII.  If  not,  let  A  be  in  the  same  ratio  to  a  line 
indifferently  lesser  or  greater  than  IIM,  and  let 
this  line  be  IIP.  Then  HK  and  KII  and  IIP  will 
have  the  same  ratios  to  one  another  as  Z,  B, 
and  A.  But  the  ratios  between  Z,  B, 
and  A  were  such  that  Z+B:  A  =  A  :B. 
[25]  Therefore  IIH  :  IIP  =  IIP :  UK. 
Now,  if  the  points  K,  H  be  joined  with 
the  point  P  by  the  lines  HP,  KP,  these 
lines  will  be  to  one  another  as  IIH  is 
to  IIP,  for  the  sides  of  the  triangles 
HIIP,  KPn  about  the  angle  II  are 
[30]  homologous.  Therefore,  HP  too 
will  be  to  KP  as  HII  is  to  IIP.  But  this 
is  also  the  ratio  of  MH  to  MK,  for  the 
ratio  both  of  HII  to  IIP  and  of  MH  to 
MK  is  the  same  as  that  of  A  to  B. 

- 1  376b  Therefore,  from  the  points  H,  K 

there  will  have  been  drawn  lines  with 
the  same  ratio  to  one  another,  not  only  to  the 
circumference  MN  but  to  another  point  as  well, 
which  is  impossible.  Since  then  A  cannot  bear 
that  ratio  to  any  line  either  lesser  or  greater 
[5]  than  IIM  (the  proof  being  in  either  case  the 
same),  it  follows  that  it  must  stand  in  that  ratio 
to  Mil  itself.  Therefore  as  Mil  is  to  IIK  so  IIH 
will  be  to  Mil  and  finally  MH  to  MK. 

If,  then,  a  circle  be  described  with  II  as  pole 
at  the  distance  Mil  it  will  touch  all  the  angles 
which  the  lines  from  H  and  K  make  by  their 


377b  BOOK  III,  CHAPTERS  4-6  481 


[70]  reflection.  If  not,  it  can  be  shown,  as  be¬ 
fore,  that  lines  drawn  to  different  points  in  the 
semicircle  will  have  the  same  ratio  to  one  an¬ 
other,  which  was  impossible.  If,  then,  the  semi¬ 
circle  A  be  revolved  about  the  diameter  HKII, 
the  lines  reflected  from  the  points  H,  K  at  the 
[75]  point  M  will  have  the  same  ratio,  and  will 
make  the  angle  KMH  equal,  in  every  plane. 
Further,  the  angle  which  HM  and  Mil  make 
with  HII  will  always  be  the  same.  So  there  are 
a  number  of  triangles  on  HII  and  KII  equal 
to  the  triangles  HMII  and  KMII.  Their  per¬ 
pendiculars  will  fall  on  HII  at  the  same  point 
[20]  and  will  be  equal.  Let  O  be  the  point  on 
which  they  fall.  Then  O  is  the  centre  of  the 
circle,  half  of  which,  MN,  is  cut  off  by  the  hori¬ 
zon. 

Next  let  the  horizon  be  ABT  but  let  H  have 
[jo]  risen  above  the  horizon.  Let  the  axis  now 
be  HII.  The  proof  will  be  the  same  for  the  rest 
as  before,  but  the  pole  II  of  the  circle  will  be 
below  the  horizon  AT  since  the  point  H  has 
377*  risen  above  the  horizon.  But  the  pole,  and 
the  centre  of  the  circle,  and  the  centre  of  that 
circle  (namely  HII)  which  now  determines  the 
position  of  the  sun  are  on  the  same  line.  But 
since  KH  lies  above  the  diameter  AT,  the  cen- 
[5]  tre  will  be  at  O  on  the  line  KII  below  the 
plane  of  the  circle  Ar  which  determined  the 
position  of  the  sun  before.  So  the  segment  SPT 
which  is  above  the  horizon  will  be  less  than  a 
semicircle.  For  SPTQ  was  a  semicircle  and  it 
has  now  been  cut  off  by  the  horizon  AT.  So 
part  of  it,  Tfi,  will  be  invisible  when  the  sun 
has  risen  above  the  horizon,  and  the  segment 


visible  will  be  smallest  when  the  sun  is  on  the 
[10]  meridian;  for  the  higher  H  is  the  lower 
the  pole  and  the  centre  of  the  circle  will  be. 

In  the  shorter  days  after  the  autumn  equi¬ 
nox  there  may  be  a  rainbow  at  any  time  of  the 
day,  but  in  the  longer  days  from  the  spring  to 


the  autumn  equinox  there  cannot  be  a  rainbow 
[75]  about  midday.  The  reason  for  this  is  that 
when  the  sun  is  north  of  the  equator  the  visible 
arcs  of  its  course  are  all  greater  than  a  semi¬ 
circle,  and  go  on  increasing,  while  the  invisi¬ 
ble  arc  is  small,  but  when  the  sun  is  south  of 
the  equator  the  visible  arc  is  small  and  the  in¬ 
visible  arc  great,  and  the  farther  the  sun  moves 
south  of  the  equator  the  greater  is  the  invisible 
[20]  arc.  Consequently,  in  the  days  near  the 
summer  solstice,  the  size  of  the  visible  arc  is 
such  that  before  the  point  H  reaches  the  mid¬ 
dle  of  that  arc,  that  is  its  point  of  culmination, 
the  point  II  is  well  below  the  horizon;  the  rea¬ 
son  for  this  being  the  great  size  of  the  visible 
arc,  and  the  consequent  distance  of  the  point  of 
culmination  from  the  earth.  But  in  the  days 
[25]  near  the  winter  solstice  the  visible  arcs  are 
small,  and  the  contrary  is  necessarily  the  case: 
for  the  sun  is  on  the  meridian  before  the  point 
H  has  risen  far. 

6 

Mock  suns,  and  rods  too,  are  due  to  the 
[jo]  causes  we  have  described.  A  mock  sun  is 
caused  by  the  reflection  of  sight  to  the  sun. 
Rods  are  seen  when  sight  reaches  the  sun  un¬ 
der  circumstances  like  those  which  we  de¬ 
scribed,1  when  there  are  clouds  near  the  sun 
and  sight  is  reflected  from  some  liquid  surface 
to  the  cloud.  Here  the  clouds  themselves  are 
377b  colourless  when  you  look  at  them  direct¬ 
ly,  but  in  the  water  they  are  full  of  rods.  The 
only  difference  is  that  in  this  latter  case  the  col¬ 
our  of  the  cloud  seems  to  reside  in  the  water, 
but  in  the  case  of  rods  on  the  cloud  itself.  Rods 
[5]  appear  when  the  composition  of  the  cloud 
is  uneven,  dense  in  part  and  in  part  rare,  and 
more  and  less  watery  in  different  parts.  Then 
the  sight  is  reflected  to  the  sun:  the  mirrors  are 
too  small  for  the  shape  of  the  sun  to  appear, 
but,  the  bright  white  light  of  the  sun,  to  which 
the  sight  is  reflected,  being  seen  on  the  uneven 
mirror,  its  colour  appears  partly  red,  partly 
[70]  green  or  yellow.  It  makes  no  difference 
whether  sight  passes  through  or  is  reflected 
from  a  medium  of  that  kind;  the  colour  is  the 
same  in  both  cases;  if  it  is  red  in  the  first  case  it 
must  be  the  same  in  the  other. 

Rods  then  are  occasioned  by  the  unevenness 
[75]  of  the  mirror — as  regards  colour,  not 
form.  The  mock  sun,  on  the  contrary,  appears 
when  the  air  is  very  uniform,  and  of  the  same 
density  throughout.  This  is  why  it  is  white: 
the  uniform  character  of  the  mirror  gives  the 
1  374b  24. 


482  METEOROLOGY  3 78b 


reflection  in  it  a  single  colour,  while  the  fact 
that  the  sight  is  reflected  in  a  body  and  is 
thrown  on  the  sun  all  together  by  the  mist, 
[20]  which  is  dense  and  watery  though  not  yet 
quite  water,  causes  the  sun’s  true  colour  to  ap¬ 
pear  just  as  it  does  when  the  reflection  is  from 
the  dense,  smooth  surface  of  copper.  So  the 
sun’s  colour  being  white,  the  mock  sun  is  white 
too.  This,  too,  is  the  reason  why  the  mock  sun 
is  a  surer  sign  of  rain  than  the  rods;  it  indi- 
[25]  cates,  more  than  they  do,  that  the  air  is 
ripe  for  the  production  of  water.  Further  a 
mock  sun  to  the  south  is  a  surer  sign  of  rain 
than  one  to  the  north,  for  the  air  in  the  south 
is  readier  to  turn  into  water  than  that  in  the 
north. 

Mock  suns  and  rods  are  found,  as  we  stated,1 
about  sunset  and  sunrise,  not  above  the  sun  nor 
[jo]  below  it,  but  beside  it.  They  are  not  found 
very  close  to  the  sun,  nor  very  far  from  it,  for 
the  sun  dissolves  the  cloud  if  it  is  near,  but  if  it 
is  far  off  the  reflection  cannot  take  place,  since 
sight  weakens  when  it  is  reflected  from  a  small 
mirror  to  a  very  distant  object.  (This  is  why  a 
halo  is  never  found  opposite  to  the  sun.)  If  the 
3 78a  cloud  is  above  the  sun  and  close  to  it  the 
sun  will  dissolve  it;  if  it  is  above  the  sun  but  at 
a  distance  the  sight  is  too  weak  for  the  reflec¬ 
tion  to  take  place,  and  so  it  will  not  reach  the 
sun.  But  at  the  side  of  the  sun,  it  is  possible  for 
the  mirror  to  be  at  such  an  interval  that  the  sun 
does  not  dissolve  the  cloud,  and  yet  sight  reaches 
[5]  it  undiminished  because  it  moves  close  to 
the  earth  and  is  not  dissipated  in  the  immensity 
of  space.  It  cannot  subsist  below  the  sun  be¬ 
cause  close  to  the  earth  the  sun’s  rays  would 
dissolve  it,  but  if  it  were  high  up  and  the  sun 
in  the  middle  of  the  heavens,  sight  would  be 
dissipated.  Indeed,  even  by  the  side  of  the  sun, 
it  is  not  found  when  the  sun  is  in  the  middle 
of  the  sky,  for  then  the  line  of  vision  is  not  close 
[/o]  to  the  earth,  and  so  but  little  sight  reaches 


the  mirror  and  the  reflection  from  it  is  alto¬ 
gether  feeble. 

Some  account  has  now  been  given  of  the  ef- 
[75]  fects  of  the  secretion  above  the  surface  of 
the  earth;  we  must  go  on  to  describe  its  opera¬ 
tions  below,  when  it  is  shut  up  in  the  parts  of 
the  earth. 

Just  as  its  twofold  nature  gives  rise  to  vari¬ 
ous  effects  in  the  upper  region,  so  here  it  causes 
two  varieties  of  bodies.  We  maintain  that  there 
are  two  exhalations,  one  vaporous  the  other 
smoky,  and  there  correspond  two  kinds  of 
[20]  bodies  that  originate  in  the  earth,  ‘fossiles’ 
and  metals.  The  heat  of  the  dry  exhalation  is 
the  cause  of  all  ‘fossiles’.  Such  are  the  kinds  of 
stones  that  cannot  be  melted,  and  realgar,  and 
ochre,  and  ruddle,  and  sulphur,  and  the  other 
[25]  things  of  that  kind,  most  ‘fossiles’  being 
either  coloured  lye  or,  like  cinnabar,  a  stone 
compounded  of  it.  The  vaporous  exhalation  is 
the  cause  of  all  metals,  those  bodies  which  are 
either  fusible  or  malleable  such  as  iron,  copper, 
gold.  All  these  originate  from  the  imprison¬ 
ment  of  the  vaporous  exhalation  in  the  earth, 
[30]  and  especially  in  stones.  Their  dryness 
compresses  it,  and  it  congeals  just  as  dew  or 
hoar-frost  does  when  it  has  been  separated  off, 
though  in  the  present  case  the  metals  are  gen¬ 
erated  before  that  segregation  occurs.  Hence, 
they  are  water  in  a  sense,  and  in  a  sense  not. 
Their  matter  was  that  which  might  have  be¬ 
come  water,  but  it  can  no  longer  do  so:  nor  are 
3  78b  they,  like  savours,  due  to  a  qualitative 
change  in  actual  water.  Copper  and  gold  are 
not  formed  like  that,  but  in  every  case  the  evap¬ 
oration  congealed  before  water  was  formed. 
Hence,  they  all  (except  gold)  are  affected  by 
fire,  and  they  possess  an  admixture  of  earth; 
for  they  still  contain  the  dry  exhalation. 

[5]  This  is  the  general  theory  of  all  these  bod¬ 
ies,  but  we  must  take  up  each  kind  of  them  and 
discuss  it  separately. 


BOOK  IV 


1 

[/o]  We  have  explained  that  the  qualities  that 
constitute  the  elements  are  four,  and  that  their 
combinations  determine  the  number  of  the  ele¬ 
ments  to  be  four. 

Two  of  the  qualities,  the  hot  and  the  cold, 
are  active;  two,  the  dry  and  the  moist,  passive. 
We  can  satisfy  ourselves  of  this  by  looking  at 
instances.  In  every  case  heat  and  cold  deter- 

1  372®  10. 


[75]  mine,  conjoin,  and  change  things  of  the 
same  kind  and  things  of  different  kinds,  mois¬ 
tening,  drying,  hardening,  and  softening  them. 
Things  dry  and  moist,  on  the  other  hand,  both 
in  isolation  and  when  present  together  in  the 
same  body  are  the  subjects  of  that  determina- 
[20]  tion  and  of  the  other  affections  enumerat¬ 
ed.  The  account  we  give  of  the  qualities  when 
we  define  their  character  shows  this  too.  Hot 
and  cold  we  describe  as  active,  for  ‘congregat¬ 
ing’  is  essentially  a  species  of  ‘being  active’: 


379b  BOOK  III,  CHAPTER  6 — BOOK  IV,  CHAPTERS  1-2  483 


moist  and  dry  are  passive,  for  it  is  in  virtue  of 
its  being  acted  upon  in  a  certain  way  that  a 
thing  is  said  to  be  ‘easy  to  determine’  or  ‘diffi- 
[25]  cult  to  determine’.  So  it  is  clear  that  some 
of  the  qualities  are  active  and  some  passive. 

Next  we  must  describe  the  operations  of  the 
active  qualities  and  the  forms  taken  by  the  pas¬ 
sive.  First  of  all,  true  becoming,  that  is,  natural 
change,  is  always  the  work  of  these  powers  and 
so  is  the  corresponding  natural  destruction; 
[30]  and  this  becoming  and  this  destruction 
are  found  in  plants  and  animals  and  their  parts. 
True  natural  becoming  is  a  change  introduced 
by  these  powers  into  the  matter  underlying  a 
given  thing  when  they  are  in  a  certain  ratio  to 
that  matter,  which  is  the  passive  qualities  we 
379a  have  mentioned.  When  the  hot  and  the 
cold  are  masters  of  the  matter  they  generate  a 
thing:  if  they  are  not,  and  the  failure  is  partial, 
the  object  is  imperfectly  boiled  or  otherwise  un¬ 
concocted.  But  the  strictest  general  opposite  of 
true  becoming  is  putrefaction.  All  natural  de¬ 
struction  is  on  the  way  to  it,  as  are,  for  instance, 
growing  old  or  growing  dry.  Putrescence  is  the 
[5]  end  of  all  these  things,  that  is  of  all  natu¬ 
ral  objects,  except  such  as  are  destroyed  by  vio¬ 
lence:  you  can  burn,  for  instance,  flesh,  bone, 
or  anything  else,  but  the  natural  course  of  their 
destruction  ends  in  putrefaction.  Hence  things 
that  putrefy  begin  by  being  moist  and  end  by 
being  dry.  For  the  moist  and  the  dry  were  their 
[/o]  matter,  and  the  operation  of  the  active 
qualities  caused  the  dry  to  be  determined  by 
the  moist. 

Destruction  supervenes  when  the  determined 
gets  the  better  of  the  determining  by  the  help 
of  the  environment  (though  in  a  special  sense 
the  word  putrefaction  is  applied  to  partial  de¬ 
struction,  when  a  thing’s  nature  is  perverted). 
[75]  Hence  everything,  except  fire,  is  liable  to 
putrefy;  for  earth,  water,  and  air  putrefy,  be¬ 
ing  all  of  them  matter  relatively  to  fire.  The 
definition  of  putrefaction  is:  the  destruction  of 
the  peculiar  and  natural  heat  in  any  moist  sub¬ 
ject  by  external  heat,  that  is,  by  the  heat  of  the 
environment.  So  since  lack  of  heat  is  the  ground 
of  this  affection  and  everything  in  as  far  as  it 
[20]  lacks  heat  is  cold,  both  heat  and  cold  will 
be  the  causes  of  putrefaction,  which  will  be  due 
indifferently  to  cold  in  the  putrefying  subject 
or  to  heat  in  the  environment. 

This  explains  why  everything  that  putrefies 
grows  drier  and  ends  by  becoming  earth  or 
dung.  The  subject’s  own  heat  departs  and 
causes  the  natural  moisture  to  evaporate  with 
it,  and  then  there  is  nothing  left  to  draw  in 


[25]  moisture,  for  it  is  a  thing’s  peculiar  heat 
that  attracts  moisture  and  draws  it  in.  Again, 
putrefaction  takes  place  less  in  cold  that  in  hot 
seasons,  for  in  winter  the  surrounding  air  and 
water  contain  but  little  heat  and  it  has  no  pow¬ 
er,  but  in  summer  there  is  more.  Again,  what 
is  frozen  does  not  putrefy,  for  its  cold  is  greater 
[30]  that  the  heat  of  the  air  and  so  is  not  mas¬ 
tered,  whereas  what  affects  a  thing  does  master 
it.  Nor  does  that  which  is  boiling  or  hot  putre¬ 
fy,  for  the  heat  in  the  air  being  less  than  that  in 
the  object  does  not  prevail  over  it  or  set  up  any 
change.  So  too  anything  that  is  flowing  or  in 
motion  is  less  apt  to  putrefy  than  a  thing  at 
[35]  rest,  f°r  the  motion  set  up  by  the  heat  in 
379b  the  air  is  weaker  than  that  pre-existing 
in  the  object,  and  so  it  causes  no  change.  For 
the  same  reason  a  great  quantity  of  a  thing  pu¬ 
trefies  less  readily  than  a  little,  for  the  greater 
quantity  contains  too  much  proper  fire  and 
cold  for  the  corresponding  qualities  in  the  en¬ 
vironment  to  get  the  better  of.  Hence,  the  sea 
[5]  putrefies  quickly  when  broken  up  into 
parts,  but  not  as  a  whole;  and  all  other  waters 
likewise.  Animals  too  are  generated  in  putre¬ 
fying  bodies,  because  the  heat  that  has  been  se¬ 
creted,  being  natural,  organizes  the  particles  se¬ 
creted  with  it. 

So  much  for  the  nature  of  becoming  and  of 
destruction. 

2 

[/o]  We  must  now  describe  the  next  kinds  of 
processes  which  the  qualities  already  men¬ 
tioned  set  up  in  actually  existing  natural  objects 
as  matter. 

Of  these  concoction  is  due  to  heat;  its  spe¬ 
cies  are  ripening,  boiling,  broiling.  Inconcoc¬ 
tion  is  due  to  cold  and  its  species  are  rawness, 
imperfect  boiling,  imperfect  broiling.  (We 
must  recognize  that  the  things  are  not  prop- 
[75]  erly  denoted  by  these  words:  the  various 
classes  of  similar  objects  have  no  names  univer¬ 
sally  applicable  to  them;  consequently  we  must 
think  of  the  species  enumerated  as  being  not 
what  those  words  denote  but  something  like 
it.)  Let  us  say  what  each  of  them  is.  Concoc¬ 
tion  is  a  process  in  which  the  natural  and  prop¬ 
er  heat  of  an  object  perfects  the  corresponding 
passive  qualities,  which  are  the  proper  matter 
[20]  of  any  given  object.  For  when  concoction 
has  taken  place  we  say  that  a  thing  has  been 
perfected  and  has  come  to  be  itself.  It  is  the 
proper  heat  of  a  thing  that  sets  up  this  perfect¬ 
ing,  though  external  influences  may  contribute 
in  some  degrees  to  its  fulfilment.  Baths,  for  in- 


484  METEOROLOGY  380b 


stance,  and  other  things  of  the  kind  contribute 
to  the  digestion  of  food,  but  the  primary  cause 
[25]  is  the  proper  heat  of  the  body.  In  some 
cases  of  concoction  the  end  of  the  process  is  the 
nature  of  the  thing — nature,  that  is,  in  the 
sense  of  the  formal  cause  and  essence.  In  other 
cases  it  leads  to  some  presupposed  state  which 
is  attained  when  the  moisture  has  acquired  cer¬ 
tain  properties  or  a  certain  magnitude  in  the 
process  of  being  broiled  or  boiled  or  of  putre¬ 
fying,  or  however  else  it  is  being  heated.  This 
state  is  the  end,  for  when  it  has  been  reached 
the  thing  has  some  use  and  we  say  that  concoc¬ 
tion  has  taken  place.  Must  is  an  instance  of  this, 
[3o]  and  the  matter  in  boils  when  it  becomes 
purulent,  and  tears  when  they  become  rheum, 
and  so  with  the  rest. 

Concoction  ensues  whenever  the  matter,  the 
moisture,  is  mastered.  For  the  matter  is  what 
is  determined  by  the  heat  connatural  to  the 
[55]  object,  and  as  long  as  the  ratio  between 
them  exists  in  it  a  thing  maintains  its  nature. 
380a  Hence  things  like  the  liquid  and  solid 
excreta  and  ejecta  in  general  are  signs  of 
health,  and  concoction  is  said  to  have  taken 
place  in  them,  for  they  show  that  the  proper 
heat  has  got  the  better  of  the  indeterminate 
matter. 

Things  that  undergo  a  process  of  concoction 
necessarily  become  thicker  and  hotter,  for  the 
action  of  heat  is  to  make  things  more  compact, 
[5]  thicker,  and  drier. 

This  then  is  the  nature  of  concoction:  but  in¬ 
concoction  is  an  imperfect  state  due  to  lack  of 
proper  heat,  that  is,  to  cold.  That  of  which  the 
imperfect  state  is,  is  the  corresponding  passive 
qualities  which  are  the  natural  matter  of  any¬ 
thing. 

[/o]  So  much  for  the  definition  of  concoction 
and  inconcoction. 

3 

Ripening  is  a  sort  of  concoction;  for  we  call 
it  ripening  when  there  is  a  concoction  of  the 
nutriment  in  fruit.  And  since  concoction  is  a 
sort  of  perfecting,  the  process  of  ripening  is 
erfect  when  the  seeds  in  fruit  are  able  to  re- 
75]  produce  the  fruit  in  which  they  are  found; 
for  in  all  other  cases  as  well  this  is  what  we 
mean  by  ‘perfect’.  This  is  what  ‘ripening’ 
means  when  the  word  is  applied  to  fruit.  How¬ 
ever,  many  other  things  that  have  undergone 
concoction  are  said  to  be  ‘ripe’,  the  general 
character  of  the  process  being  the  same,  though 
the  word  is  applied  by  an  extension  of  mean¬ 
ing.  The  reason  for  this  extension  is,  as  we  ex¬ 


plained  before,1  that  the  various  modes  in 
which  natural  heat  and  cold  perfect  the  matter 
they  determine  have  not  special  names  appro- 
[20]  priated  to  them.  In  the  case  of  boils  and 
phlegm,  and  the  like,  the  process  of  ripening  is 
the  concoction  of  the  moisture  in  them  by  their 
natural  heat,  for  only  that  which  gets  the  better 
of  matter  can  determine  it.  So  everything  that 
ripens  is  condensed  from  a  spirituous  into  a 
watery  state,  and  from  a  watery  into  an  earthy 
state,  and  in  general  from  being  rare  becomes 
[25]  dense.  In  this  process  the  nature  of  the 
thing  that  is  ripening  incorporates  some  of  the 
matter  in  itself,  and  some  it  rejects.  So  much 
for  the  definition  of  ripening. 

Rawness  is  its  opposite  and  is  therefore  an 
imperfect  concoction  of  the  nutriment  in  the 
fruit,  namely,  of  the  undetermined  moisture. 
Consequently  a  raw  thing  is  either  spirituous 
or  watery  or  contains  both  spirit  and  water, 
[jo]  Ripening  being  a  kind  of  perfecting,  raw¬ 
ness  will  be  an  imperfect  state,  and  this  state 
is  due  to  a  lack  of  natural  heat  and  its  dispro¬ 
portion  to  the  moisture  that  is  undergoing  the 
process  of  ripening.  (Nothing  moist  ripens 
without  the  admixture  of  some  dry  matter:  wa¬ 
ter  alone  of  liquids  does  not  thicken.)  This  dis- 
380b  proportion  may  be  due  either  to  defect  of 
heat  or  to  excess  of  the  matter  to  be  determined: 
hence  the  juice  of  raw  things  is  thin,  cold  rath¬ 
er  than  hot,  and  unfit  for  food  or  drink.  Raw¬ 
ness,  like  ripening,  is  used  to  denote  a  variety 
[5]  of  states.  Thus  the  liquid  and  solid  excreta 
and  catarrhs  are  called  raw  for  the  same  reason, 
for  in  every  case  the  word  is  applied  to  things 
because  their  heat  has  not  got  the  mastery  in 
them  and  compacted  them.  If  we  go  further, 
brick  is  called  raw  and  so  is  milk  and  many 
other  things  too  when  they  are  such  as  to  ad¬ 
mit  of  being  changed  and  compacted  by  heat 
but  have  remained  unaffected.  Hence,  while 
[10]  we  speak  of  ‘boiled’  water,  we  cannot 
speak  of  raw  water,  since  it  does  not  thicken. 
We  have  now  defined  ripening  and  rawness 
and  assigned  their  causes. 

Boiling  is,  in  general,  a  concoction  by  moist 
heat  of  the  indeterminate  matter  contained  in 
the  moisture  of  the  thing  boiled,  and  the  word 
is  strictly  applicable  only  to  things  boiled  in  the 
[75]  way  of  cooking.  The  indeterminate  mat¬ 
ter,  as  we  said,2  will  be  either  spirituous  or  wa¬ 
tery.  The  cause  of  the  concoction  is  the  fire 
contained  in  the  moisture;  for  what  is  cooked 
in  a  frying-pan  is  broiled:  it  is  the  heat  outside 
that  affects  it  and,  as  for  the  moisture  in  which 

*37 9bl4-  2&29- 


381b  BOOK  IV,  CHAPTERS  2-3  485 


it  is  contained,  it  dries  this  up  and  draws  it  into 
itself.  But  a  thing  that  is  being  boiled*  behaves 
in  the  opposite  way:  the  moisture  contained  in 
[20]  it  is  drawn  out  of  it  by  the  heat  in  the  liq¬ 
uid  outside.  Hence  boiled  meats  are  drier  than 
broiled;  for,  in  boiling,  things  do  not  draw  the 
moisture  into  themselves,  since  the  external 
heat  gets  the  better  of  the  internal:  if  the  inter¬ 
nal  heat  had  got  the  better  it  would  have  drawn 
the  moisture  to  itself.  Not  every  body  admits  of 
[25]  the  process  of  boiling:  if  there  is  no  mois¬ 
ture  in  it,  it  does  not  (for  instance,  stones),  nor 
does  it  if  there  is  moisture  in  it  but  the  density 
of  the  body  is  too  great  for  it  to  be  mastered,  as 
in  the  case  of  wood.  But  only  those  bodies  can 
be  boiled  that  contain  moisture  which  can  be 
acted  on  by  the  heat  contained  in  the  liquid 
outside.  It  is  true  that  gold  and  wood  and  many 
other  things  are  said  to  be  ‘boiled’:  but  this  is  a 
stretch  of  the  meaning  of  the  word,  though  the 
[jo]  kind  of  thing  intended  is  the  same,  the 
reason  for  the  usage  being  that  the  various 
cases  have  no  names  appropriated  to  them. 
Liquids  too,  like  milk  and  must,  are  said  to 
undergo  a  process  of  ‘boiling’  when  the  exter¬ 
nal  fire  that  surrounds  and  heats  them  changes 
the  savour  in  the  liquid  into  a  given  form,  the 
process  being  thus  in  a  way  like  what  we  have 
called  boiling. 

381*  The  end  of  the  things  that  undergo  boil¬ 
ing,  or  indeed  any  form  of  concoction,  is  not 
always  the  same:  some  are  meant  to  be  eaten, 
some  drunk,  and  some  are  intended  for  other 
uses;  for  instance  dyes,  too,  are  said  to  be 
‘boiled’. 

All  those  things  then  admit  of  ‘boiling’  which 
[5]  can  grow  denser,  smaller,  or  heavier;  also 
those  which  do  that  with  a  part  of  themselves 
and  with  a  part  do  the  opposite,  dividing  in 
such  a  way  that  one  portion  thickens  while  the 
other  grows  thinner,  like  milk  when  it  divides 
into  whey  and  curd.  Oil  by  itself  is  affected  in 
none  of  these  ways,  and  therefore  cannot  be 
said  to  admit  of  ‘boiling’.  Such  then  is  the  spe- 
M  cies  of  concoction  known  as  ‘boiling’,  and 
the  process  is  the  same  in  an  artificial  and  in  a 
natural  instrument,  for  the  cause  will  be  the 
same  in  every  case. 

Imperfect  boiling  is  the  form  of  inconcoction 
opposed  to  boiling.  Now  the  opposite  of  boiling 
properly  so  called  is  an  inconcoction  of  the  un¬ 
determined  matter  in  a  body  due  to  lack  of 
heat  in  the  surrounding  liquid.  (Lack  of  heat 
[75]  implies,  as  we  have  pointed  out,  the  pres¬ 
ence  of  cold.)  The  motion  which  causes  imper¬ 
fect  boiling  is  different  from  that  which  causes 


boiling,  for  the  heat  which  operates  the  con¬ 
coction  is  driven  out.  The  lack  of  heat  is  due 
either  to  the  amount  of  cold  in  the  liquid  or  to 
the  quantity  of  moisture  in  the  object  under¬ 
going  the  process  of  boiling.  Where  either  of 
these  conditions  is  realized  the  heat  in  the  sur¬ 
rounding  liquid  is  too  great  to  have  no  effect  at 
all,  but  too  small  to  carry  out  the  process  of 
concoction  uniformly  and  thoroughly.  Hence 
[20]  things  are  harder  when  they  are  imper¬ 
fectly  boiled  than  when  they  are  boiled,  and 
the  moisture  in  them  more  distinct  from  the 
solid  parts.  So  much  for  the  definition  and 
causes  of  boiling  and  imperfect  boiling. 

Broiling  is  concoction  by  dry  foreign  heat. 
Hence  if  a  man  were  to  boil  a  thing  but  the 
change  and  concoction  in  it  were  due,  not  to 
[25]  the  heat  of  the  liquid  but  to  that  of  the 
fire,  the  thing  will  have  been  broiled  and  not 
boiled  when  the  process  has  been  carried  to 
completion:  if  the  process  has  gone  too  far  we 
use  the  word  ‘scorched’  to  describe  it.  If  the 
process  leaves  the  thing  drier  at  the  end  the 
agent  has  been  dry  heat.  Hence  the  outside  is 
drier  than  the  inside,  the  opposite  being  true 
[jo]  of  things  boiled.  Where  the  process  is  ar¬ 
tificial,  broiling  is  more  difficult  than  boiling, 
for  it  is  difficult  to  heat  the  inside  and  the  out¬ 
side  uniformly,  since  the  parts  nearer  to  the 
fire  are  the  first  to  get  dry  and  consequently 
38 lb  get  more  intensely  dry.  In  this  way  the 
outer  pores  contract  and  the  moisture  in  the 
thing  cannot  be  secreted  but  is  shut  in  by  the 
closing  of  the  pores.  Now  broiling  and  boiling 
are  artificial  processes,  but  the  same  general 
kind  of  thing,  as  we  said,1  is  found  in  nature 
[5]  too.  The  affections  produced  are  similar 
though  they  lack  a  name;  for  art  imitates  na¬ 
ture.  For  instance,  the  concoction  of  food  in  the 
body  is  like  boiling,  for  it  takes  place  in  a  hot 
and  moist  medium  and  the  agent  is  the  heat  of 
the  body.  So,  too,  certain  forms  of  indigestion 
are  like  imperfect  boiling.  And  it  is  not  true 
that  animals  are  generated  in  the  concoction  of 
[/o]  food,  as  some  say.  Really  they  are  generat¬ 
ed  in  the  excretion  which  putrefies  in  the  lower 
belly,  and  they  ascend  afterwards.  For  concoc¬ 
tion  goes  on  in  the  upper  belly  but  the  excre¬ 
tion  putrefies  in  the  lower:  the  reason  for  this 
has  been  explained  elsewhere. 

We  have  seen  that  the  opposite  of  boiling  is 
imperfect  boiling:  now  there  is  something  cor¬ 
respondingly  opposed  to  the  species  of  concoc- 
[75]  tion  called  broiling,  but  it  is  more  difficult 
to  find  a  name  for  it.  It  would  be  the  kind  of 

1 379b  f4>  380s  16. 


48 6  METEOROLOGY  382b 


thing  that  would  happen  if  there  were  imper¬ 
fect  broiling  instead  of  broiling  proper  through 
lack  of  heat  due  to  deficiency  in  the  external 
fire  or  to  the  quantity  of  water  in  the  thing 
undergoing  the  process.  For  then  we  should 
get  too  much  heat  for  no  effect  to  be  produced, 
but  too  little  for  concoction  to  take  place. 

[ 20 ]  We  have  now  explained  concoction  and 
inconcoction,  ripening  and  rawness,  boiling 
and  broiling,  and  their  opposites. 

4 

We  must  now  describe  the  forms  taken  by 
the  passive  qualities  the  moist  and  the  dry.  The 
elements  of  bodies,  that  is,  the  passive  ones,  are 
[25]  the  moist  and  the  dry;  the  bodies  them¬ 
selves  are  compounded  of  them  and  whichever 
predominates  determines  the  nature  of  the 
body;  thus  some  bodies  partake  more  of  the 
dry,  others  of  the  moist.  All  the  forms  to  be  de¬ 
scribed  will  exist  either  actually,  or  potentially 
and  in  their  opposite:  for  instance,  there  is  ac¬ 
tual  melting  and  on  the  other  hand  that  which 
admits  of  being  melted. 

Since  the  moist  is  easily  determined  and  the 
[jo]  dry  determined  with  difficulty,  their  rela¬ 
tion  to  one  another  is  like  that  of  a  dish  and  its 
condiments.  The  moist  is  what  makes  the  dry 
determinable,  and  each  serves  as  a  sort  of  glue 
382a  to  the  other — as  Empedocles  said  in  his 
poem  on  Nature,1  ‘glueing  meal  together  by 
means  of  water.’  Thus  the  determined  body  in¬ 
volves  them  both.  Of  the  elements  earth  is  espe¬ 
cially  representative  of  the  dry,  water  of  the 
moist,  and  therefore  all  determinate  bodies  in 
our  world  involve  earth  and  water.  Every  body 
[5]  shows  the  quality  of  that  element  which 
predominates  in  it.  It  is  because  earth  and  wa¬ 
ter  are  the  material  elements  of  all  bodies  that 
animals  live  in  them  alone  and  not  in  air  or  fire. 

Of  the  qualities  of  bodies  hardness  and  soft¬ 
ness  are  those  which  must  primarily  belong  to 
[/o]  a  determined  thing,  for  anything  made 
up  of  the  dry  and  the  moist  is  necessarily  either 
hard  or  soft.  Hard  is  that  the  surface  of  which 
does  not  yield  into  itself;  soft  that  which  does 
yield  but  not  by  interchange  of  place:  water, 
for  instance,  is  not  soft,  for  its  surface  does  not 
yield  to  pressure  or  sink  in  but  there  is  an  inter¬ 
change  of  place.  Those  things  are  absolutely 
[75]  hard  and  soft  which  satisfy  the  definition 
absolutely,  and  those  things  relatively  so  which 
do  so  compared  with  another  thing.  Now  rela¬ 
tively  to  one  another  hard  and  soft  are  indefin¬ 
able,  because  it  is  a  matter  of  degree,  but  since 
1  Diels,  21  b.  34. 


all  the  objects  of  sense  are  determined  by  ref¬ 
erence  to  the  faculty  of  sense  it  is  clearly  the 
relation  to  touch  which  determines  that  which 
is  hard  and  soft  absolutely,  and  touch  is  that 
which  we  use  as  a  standard  or  mean.  So  we  call 
[20]  that  which  exceeds  it  hard  and  that  which 
falls  short  of  it  soft. 

5 

A  body  determined  by  its  own  boundary 
must  be  either  hard  or  soft;  for  it  either  yields 
or  does  not. 

It  must  also  be  concrete:  or  it  could  not  be 
so  determined.  So  since  everything  that  is  de¬ 
termined  and  solid  is  either  hard  or  soft  and 
[25]  these  qualities  are  due  to  concretion,  all 
composite  and  determined  bodies  must  involve 
concretion.  Concretion  therefore  must  be  dis¬ 
cussed. 

Now  there  are  two  causes  besides  matter,  the 
agent  and  the  quality  brought  about,  the  agent 
being  the  efficient  cause,  the  quality  the  formal 
cause.  Hence  concretion  and  disaggregation, 
[30]  drying  and  moistening,  must  have  these 
two  causes. 

382b  But  since  concretion  is  a  form  of  drying 
let  us  speak  of  the  latter  first. 

382a  As  we  have  explained,  the  agent  operates 
by  means  of  two  qualities  and  the  patient  is 
acted  on  in  virtue  of  two  qualities:  action  takes 
place  by  means  of  heat  or  cold,  and  the  quality 
is  produced  either  by  the  presence  or  by  the  ab- 
382b  sence  of  heat  or  cold;  but  that  which  is 
acted  upon  is  moist  or  dry  or  a  compound  of 
both.  Water  is  the  element  characterized  by  the 
moist,  earth  that  characterized  by  the  dry,  for 
these  among  the  elements  that  admit  the  quali¬ 
ties  moist  and  dry  are  passive.  Therefore  cold, 
too,  being  found  in  water  and  earth  (both  of 
[5]  which  we  recognize  to  be  cold),  must  be 
reckoned  rather  as  a  passive  quality.  It  is  active 
only  as  contributing  to  destruction  or  inciden¬ 
tally  in  the  manner  described  before2;  for  cold 
is  sometimes  actually  said  to  burn  and  to  warm, 
but  not  in  the  same  way  as  heat  does,  but  by 
collecting  and  concentrating  heat. 

[/o]  The  subjects  of  drying  are  water  and  the 
various  watery  fluids  and  those  bodies  which 
contain  water  either  foreign  or  connatural.  By 
foreign  I  mean  like  the  water  in  wool,  by  con¬ 
natural,  like  that  in  milk.  The  watery  fluids 
are  wine,  urine,  whey,  and  in  general  those 
fluids  which  have  no  sediment  or  only  a  little, 
except  where  this  absence  of  sediment  is  due  to 
[75]  viscosity.  For  in  some  cases,  in  oil  and 
2  347b  4'9* 


383b  BOOK  IV,  CHAPTERS  3-7  487 


pitch  for  instance,  it  is  the  viscosity  which  pre¬ 
vents  any  sediment  from  appearing.. 

It  is  always  a  process  of  heating  or  cooling 
that  dries  things,  but  the  agent  in  both  cases  is 
heat,  either  internal  or  external.  For  even  when 
things  are  dried  by  cooling,  like  a  garment, 
[20]  where  the  moisture  exists  separately  it  is 
the  internal  heat  that  dries  them.  It  carries  off 
the  moisture  in  the  shape  of  vapour  (if  there  is 
not  too  much  of  it),  being  itself  driven  out  by 
the  surrounding  cold.  So  everything  is  dried, 
as  we  have  said,  by  a  process  either  of  heating 
or  cooling,  but  the  agent  is  always  heat,  either 
[25]  internal  or  external,  carrying  off  the  mois¬ 
ture  in  vapour.  By  external  heat  I  mean  as 
where  things  are  boiled:  by  internal  where  the 
heat  breathes  out  and  takes  away  and  uses  up 
its  moisture.  So  much  for  drying. 

6 

Liquefaction  is,  first,  condensation  into  wa¬ 
ter;  second,  the  melting  of  a  solidified  body. 
The  first,  condensation,  is  due  to  the  cooling  of 
[50]  vapour:  what  melting  is  will  appear  from 
the  account  of  solidification. 

Whatever  solidifies  is  either  water  or  a  mix¬ 
ture  of  earth  and  water,  and  the  agent  is  either 
dry  heat  or  cold.  Hence  those  of  the  bodies  so¬ 
lidified  by  heat  or  cold  which  are  soluble  at  all 
383a  are  dissolved  by  their  opposites.  Bodies 
solidified  by  the  dry-hot  are  dissolved  by  wa¬ 
ter,  which  is  the  moist-cold,  while  bodies  solidi¬ 
fied  by  cold  are  dissolved  by  fire,  which  is  hot. 
Some  things  seem  to  be  solidified  by  water,  e.g. 
[5]  boiled  honey,  but  really  it  is  not  the  water 
but  the  cold  in  the  water  which  effects  the  so¬ 
lidification.  Aqueous  bodies  are  not  solidified 
by  fire:  for  it  is  fire  that  dissolves  them,  and 
the  same  cause  in  the  same  relation  cannot 
have  opposite  effects  upon  the  same  thing. 
Again,  water  solidifies  owing  to  the  departure 
of  heat;  so  it  will  clearly  be  dissolved  by  the  en¬ 
try  into  it  of  heat:  cold,  therefore,  must  be  the 
agent  in  solidifying  it. 

[/o]  Hence  aqueous  bodies  do  not  thicken 
when  they  solidify;  for  thickening  occurs  when 
the  moisture  goes  off  and  the  dry  matter  comes 
together,  but  water  is  the  only  liquid  that  does 
not  thicken.  Those  bodies  that  are  made  up  of 
both  earth  and  water  are  solidified  both  by  fire 
and  by  cold  and  in  either  case  are  thickened. 
The  operation  of  the  two  is  in  a  way  the  same 
[75]  and  in  a  way  different.  Heat  acts  by  draw¬ 
ing  off  the  moisture,  and  as  the  moisture  goes 
off  in  vapour  the  dry  matter  thickens  and  col¬ 
lects.  Cold  acts  by  driving  out  the  heat,  which 


is  accompanied  by  the  moisture  as  this  goes  off 
in  vapour  with  it.  Bodies  that  are  soft  but  not 
[20]  liquid  do  not  thicken  but  solidify  when 
the  moisture  leaves  them,  e.g.  potter’s  clay  in 
process  of  baking:  but  those  mixed  bodies  that 
are  liquid  thicken  besides  solidifying,  like  milk. 
Those  bodies  which  have  first  been  thickened 
or  hardened  by  cold  often  begin  by  becoming 
moist:  thus  potter’s  clay  at  first  in  the  process 
of  baking  steams  and  grows  softer,  and  is  liable 
[25]  to  distortion  in  the  ovens  for  that  reason. 

Now  of  the  bodies  solidified  by  cold  which 
are  made  up  both  of  earth  and  water  but  in 
which  the  earth  preponderates,  those  which  so¬ 
lidify  by  the  departure  of  heat  melt  by  heat 
when  it  enters  into  them  again;  this  is  the  case 
[jo]  with  frozen  mud.  But  those  which  solidi¬ 
fy  by  refrigeration,  where  all  the  moisture  has 
gone  off  in  vapour  with  the  heat,  like  iron  and 
horn,  cannot  be  dissolved  except  by  excessive 
heat,  but  they  can  be  softened — though  manu¬ 
factured  iron  does  melt,  to  the  point  of  becom¬ 
ing  fluid  and  then  solidifying  again.  This  is 
how  steel  is  made.  The  dross  sinks  to  the  bot- 
383b  tom  and  is  purged  away:  when  this  has 
been  done  often  and  the  metal  is  pure  we  have 
steel.  The  process  is  not  repeated  often  because 
the  purification  of  the  metal  involves  great 
waste  and  loss  of  weight.  But  the  iron  that  has 
[5]  less  dross  is  the  better  iron.  The  stone  pyri- 
machus,  too,  melts  and  forms  into  drops  and 
becomes  fluid;  after  having  been  in  a  fluid  state 
it  solidifies  and  becomes  hard  again.  Millstones, 
too,  melt  and  become  fluid:  when  the  fluid 
mass  begins  to  solidify  it  is  black  but  its  consist¬ 
ency  comes  to  be  like  that  of  lime.  [Mud  and 
earth,  too,  melt]. 

[/o]  Of  the  bodies  which  are  solidified  by  dry 
heat  some  are  insoluble,  others  are  dissolved  by 
liquid.  Pottery  and  some  kinds  of  stone  that 
are  formed  out  of  earth  burnt  up  by  fire,  such 
as  millstones,  cannot  be  dissolved.  Natron  and 
salt  are  soluble  by  liquid,  but  not  all  liquid  but 
only  such  as  is  cold.  Hence  water  and  any  of  its 
varieties  melt  them,  but  oil  does  not.  For  the 
[75]  opposite  of  the  dry-hot  is  the  cold- 
moist  and  what  the  one  solidified  the  other  will 
dissolve,  and  so  opposites  will  have  opposite 
effects. 

7 

If  a  body  contains  more  water  than  earth  fire 
only  thickens  it:  if  it  contains  more  earth  fire 
solidifies  it.  Hence  natron  and  salt  and  stone 
and  potter’s  clay  must  contain  more  earth. 

[20]  The  nature  of  oil  presents  the  greatest 


488  METEOROLOGY  384b 


problem.  If  water  preponderated  in  it,  cold 
ought  to  solidify  it;  if  earth  preponderated, 
then  fire  ought  to  do  so.  Actually  neither  solidi¬ 
fies,  but  both  thicken  it.  The  reason  is  that  it 
[25]  is  full  of  air  (hence  it  floats  on  the  top  of 
water,  since  air  tends  to  rise).  Cold  thickens  it 
by  turning  the  air  in  it  into  water,  for  any 
mixture  of  oil  and  water  is  thicker  than  either. 
Fire  and  the  lapse  of  time  thicken  and  whiten 
it.  The  whitening  follows  on  the  evaporation 
of  any  water  that  may  have  been  in  it;  the 
[jo]  thickening  is  due  to  the  change  of  the  air 
into  water  as  the  heat  in  the  oil  is  dissipated. 
The  effect  in  both  cases  is  the  same  and  the 
cause  is  the  same,  but  the  manner  of  its  opera¬ 
tion  is  different.  Both  heat  and  cold  thicken  it, 
but  neither  dries  it  (neither  the  sun  nor  cold 
384a  dries  oil),  not  only  because  it  is  gluti¬ 
nous  but  because  it  contains  air.  Its  glutinous 
nature  prevents  it  from  giving  off  vapour  and 
so  fire  does  not  dry  it  or  boil  it  off. 

Those  bodies  which  are  made  up  of  earth 
and  water  may  be  classified  according  to  the 
preponderance  of  either.  There  is  a  kind  of 
wine,  for  instance,  which  both  solidifies  and 
[5]  thickens  by  boiling — I  mean,  must.  All 
bodies  of  this  kind  lose  their  water  as  they  dry. 
That  it  is  their  water  may  be  seen  from  the 
fact  that  the  vapour  from  them  condenses  into 
water  when  collected.  So  wherever  some  sedi¬ 
ment  is  left  this  is  of  the  nature  of  earth.  Some 
of  these  bodies,  as  we  have  said,1  are  also  thick¬ 
ened  and  dried  by  cold.  For  cold  not  only  solid- 
[/o]  ifies  but  also  dries  water,  and  thickens 
things  by  turning  air  into  water.  (Solidifying, 
as  we  have  said,2  is  a  form  of  drying.)  Now 
those  things  that  are  not  thickened  by  cold, 
but  solidified,  belong  rather  to  water,  e.g.  wine, 
urine,  vinegar,  lye,  whey.  But  those  things 
that  are  thickened  (not  by  evaporation  due  to 
[75]  fire)  are  made  up  either  of  earth  or  of 
water  and  air:  honey  of  earth,  while  oil  con¬ 
tains  air.  Milk  and  blood,  too,  are  made  up  of 
both  water  and  earth,  though  earth  generally 
predominates  in  them.  So,  too,  are  the  liquids 
out  of  which  natron  and  salt  are  formed;  and 
stones  are  also  formed  from  some  mixtures  of 
this  kind.  Hence,  if  the  whey  has  not  been 
separated,  it  burns  away  if  you  boil  it  over  a 
[20]  fire.  But  the  earthy  element  in  milk  can 
also  be  coagulated  by  the  help  of  fig-juice,  if 
you  boil  it  in  a  certain  way  as  doctors  do  when 
they  treat  it  with  fig-juice,  and  this  is  how  the 
whey  and  the  cheese  are  commonly  separated. 
Whey,  once  separated,  does  not  thicken,  as  the 
1 383s  13*  2382bi. 


milk  did,  but  boils  away  like  water.  Some¬ 
times,  however,  there  is  little  or  no  cheese  in 
milk,  and  such  milk  is  not  nutritive  and  is 
[25]  more  like  water.  The  case  of  blood  is  sim¬ 
ilar:  cold  dries  and  so  solidifies  it.  Those  kinds 
of  blood  that  do  not  solidify,  like  that  of  the 
stag,  belong  rather  to  water  and  are  very  cold. 
Hence  they  contain  no  fibres:  for  the  fibres  are 
of  earth  and  solid,  and  blood  from  which  they 
have  been  removed  does  not  solidify.  This  is 
because  it  cannot  dry;  for  what  remains  is  wa- 
[30]  ter,  just  as  what  remains  of  milk  when 
cheese  has  been  removed  is  water.  The  fact 
that  diseased  blood  will  not  solidify  is  evi¬ 
dence  of  the  same  thing,  for  such  blood  is  of 
the  nature  of  serum  and  that  is  phlegm  and 
water,  the  nature  of  the  animal  having  failed 
to  get  the  better  of  it  and  digest  it. 

Some  of  these  bodies  are  soluble,  e.g.  natron, 
384b  some  insoluble,  e.g.  pottery:  of  the  latter, 
some,  like  horn,  can  be  softened  by  heat, 
others,  like  pottery  and  stone,  cannot.  The  rea¬ 
son  is  that  opposite  causes  have  opposite  ef¬ 
fects:  consequently,  if  solidification  is  due  to 
two  causes,  the  cold  and  the  dry,  solution  must 
be  due  to  the  hot  and  the  moist,  that  is,  to  fire 
[5]  and  to  water  (these  being  opposites):  wa¬ 
ter  dissolving  what  was  solidified  by  fire 
alone,  fire  what  was  solidified  by  cold  alone. 
Consequently,  if  any  things  happen  to  be  solid¬ 
ified  by  the  action  of  both,  these  are  least  apt 
to  be  soluble.  Such  a  case  we  find  where  things 
have  been  heated  and  are  then  solidified  by 
cold.  When  the  heat  in  leaving  them  has 
caused  most  of  the  moisture  to  evaporate,  the 
cold  so  compacts  these  bodies  together  again 
[/o]  as  to  leave  no  entrance  even  for  moisture. 
Therefore  heat  does  not  dissolve  them  (for  it 
only  dissolves  those  bodies  that  are  solidified 
by  cold  alone),  nor  does  water  (for  it  does  not 
dissolve  what  cold  solidifies,  but  only  what  is 
solidified  by  dry  heat).  But  iron  is  melted  by 
[75]  heat  and  solidified  by  cold.  Wood  consists 
of  earth  and  air  and  is  therefore  combustible 
but  cannot  be  melted  or  softened  by  heat.  (For 
the  same  reason  it  floats  in  water — all  except 
ebony.  This  does  not,  for  other  kinds  of  wood 
contain  a  preponderance  of  air,  but  in  black 
ebony  the  air  has  escaped  and  so  earth  pre- 
onderates  in  it.)  Pottery  consists  of  earth 
20]  alone  because  it  solidified  gradually  in  the 
process  of  drying.  Water  cannot  get  into  it,  for 
the  pores  were  only  large  enough  to  admit  of 
vapour  escaping:  and  seeing  that  fire  solidified 
it,  that  cannot  dissolve  it  either. 

So  solidification  and  melting,  their  causes, 


385b  BOOK  IV,  CHAPTERS  7-9  489 


and  the  kinds  of  subjects  in  which  they  occur 
have  been  described. 

8 

All  this  makes  it  clear  that  bodies  are  formed 
[25]  by  heat  and  cold  and  that  these  agents 
operate  by  thickening  and  solidifying.  It  is  be¬ 
cause  these  qualities  fashion  bodies  that  we 
find  heat  in  all  of  them,  and  in  some  cold  in  so 
far  as  heat  is  absent.  These  qualities,  then,  are 
present  as  active,  and  the  moist  and  the  dry  as 
passive,  and  consequently  all  four  are  found  in 
[jo]  mixed  bodies.  So  water  and  earth  are  the 
constituents  of  homogeneous  bodies  both  in 
plants  and  in  animals  and  of  metals  such  as 
gold,  silver,  and  the  rest — water  and  earth  and 
their  respective  exhalations  shut  up  in  the 
compound  bodies,  as  we  have  explained  else¬ 
where.1 

385a  All  these  mixed  bodies  are  distinguished 
from  one  another,  firstly  by  the  qualities  spe¬ 
cial  to  the  various  senses,  that  is,  by  their  ca¬ 
pacities  of  action.  (For  a  thing  is  white,  fra¬ 
grant,  sonant,  sweet,  hot,  cold  in  virtue  of  a 
power  of  acting  on  sense).  Secondly  by  other 
more  characteristic  affections  which  express 
[5]  their  aptitude  to  be  affected:  I  mean,  for 
instance,  the  aptitude  to  melt  or  solidify  or 
bend  and  so  forth,  all  these  qualities,  like  moist 
and  dry,  being  passive.  These  are  the  qualities 
that  differentiate  bone,  flesh,  sinew,  wood, 
bark,  stone  and  all  other  homogeneous  natural 
[/o]  bodies.  Let  us  begin  by  enumerating 
these  qualities  expressing  the  aptitude  or  in¬ 
aptitude  of  a  thing  to  be  affected  in  a  certain 
way.  They  are  as  follows:  to  be  apt  or  inapt  to 
solidify,  melt,  be  softened  by  heat,  be  softened 
[75]  by  water,  bend,  break,  be  comminuted, 
impressed,  moulded,  squeezed;  to  be  tractile 
or  non-tractile,  malleable  or  non-malleable,  to 
be  fissile  or  non-fissile,  apt  or  inapt  to  be  cut; 
to  be  viscous  or  friable,  compressible  or  incom¬ 
pressible,  combustible  or  incombustible;  to  be 
apt  or  inapt  to  give  off  fumes.  These  affections 
differentiate  most  bodies  from  one  another.  Let 
us  go  on  to  explain  the  nature  of  each  of  them. 
[20]  We  have  already  given  a  general  account 
of  that  which  is  apt  or  inapt  to  solidify  or  to 
melt,  but  let  us  return  to  them  again  now.  Of 
all  the  bodies  that  admit  of  solidification  and 
hardening,  some  are  brought  into  this  state  by 
heat,  others  by  cold.  Heat  does  this  by  drying 
[25]  up  their  moisture,  cold  by  driving  out  their 
heat.  Consequently  some  bodies  are  affected  in 
this  way  by  defect  of  moisture,  some  by  defect 
1  E.  g.  378*  i5-b  6,  in  relation  to  metals. 


of  heat:  watery  bodies  by  defect  of  heat,  earthy 
bodies  of  moisture.  Now  those  bodies  that  are 
so  affected  by  defect  of  moisture  are  dissolved 
by  water,  unless  like  pottery  they  have  so  con¬ 
tracted  that  their  pores  are  too  small  for  the 
[30]  particles  of  water  to  enter.  All  those 
bodies  in  which  this  is  not  the  case  are  dis¬ 
solved  by  water,  e.g.  natron,  salt,  dry  mud. 
Those  bodies  that  solidified  through  defect  of 
heat  are  melted  by  heat,  e.g.  ice,  lead,  copper. 
So  much  for  the  bodies  that  admit  of  solidifi¬ 
cation  and  of  melting,  and  those  that  do  not 
admit  of  melting. 

385b  The  bodies  which  do  not  admit  of  solid¬ 
ification  are  those  which  contain  no  aqueous 
moisture  and  are  not  watery,  but  in  which 
heat  and  earth  preponderate,  like  honey  and 
must  (for  these  are  in  a  sort  of  state  of  effer¬ 
vescence),  and  those  which  do  possess  some 
water  but  have  a  preponderance  of  air,  like  oil 
[5]  and  quicksilver,  and  all  viscous  substances 
such  as  pitch  and  birdlime. 

9 

Those  bodies  admit  of  softening  which  are  not 
(like  ice)  made  up  of  water,  but  in  which 
earth  predominates.  All  their  moisture  must 
not  have  left  them  (as  in  the  case  of  natron 
and  salt),  nor  must  the  relation  of  dry  to  moist 
[/o]  in  them  be  incongruous  (as  in  the  case  of 
pottery).  They  must  be  tractile  (without  ad¬ 
mitting  water)  or  malleable  (without  consist¬ 
ing  of  water),  and  the  agent  in  softening  them 
is  fire.  Such  are  iron  and  horn. 

Both  of  bodies  that  can  melt  and  of  bodies 
that  cannot,  some  do  and  some  do  not  admit 
of  softening  in  water.  Copper,  for  instance, 
which  can  be  melted,  cannot  be  softened  in  wa¬ 
ter,  whereas  wool  and  earth  can  be  softened 
in  water,  for  they  can  be  soaked.  (It  is  true  that 
[75]  though  copper  can  be  melted  the  agent 
in  its  case  is  not  water,  but  some  of  the  bodies 
that  can  be  melted  by  water  too  such  as  natron 
and  salt  cannot  be  softened  in  water:  for  noth¬ 
ing  is  said  to  be  so  affected  unless  the  water 
soaks  into  it  and  makes  it  softer.)  Some  things, 
on  the  other  hand,  such  as  wool  and  grain,  can 
be  softened  by  water  though  they  cannot  be 
melted.  Any  body  that  is  to  be  softened  by 
water  must  be  of  earth  and  must  have  its  pores 
larger  than  the  particles  of  water,  and  the  pores 
[20]  themselves  must  be  able  to  resist  the  ac¬ 
tion  of  water,  whereas  bodies  that  can  be 
‘melted’  by  water  must  have  pores  throughout. 

[Why  is  it  that  earth  is  both  ‘melted’  and 
softened  by  moisture,  while  natron  is  ‘melted* 


490 

but  not  softened?  Because  natron  is  pervaded 
throughout  by  pores  so  that  the  parts  are  im- 
[25]  mediately  divided  by  the  water,  but  earth 
has  also  pores  which  do  not  connect  and  is 
therefore  differently  affected  according  as  the 
water  enters  by  one  or  the  other  set  of  pores.] 

Some  bodies  can  be  bent  or  straightened,  like 
the  reed  or  the  withy,  some  cannot,  like  pot¬ 
tery  and  stone.  Those  bodies  are  apt  to  be  bent 
and  straightened  which  can  change  from  being 
[jo]  curved  to  being  straight  and  from  being 
straight  to  being  curved,  and  bending  and 
straightening  consist  in  the  change  or  motion 
to  the  straight  or  to  a  curve,  for  a  thing  is  said 
to  be  in  process  of  being  bent  whether  it  is  be- 
386a  ing  made  to  assume  a  convex  or  a  con¬ 
cave  shape.  So  bending  is  defined  as  motion  to 
the  convex  or  the  concave  without  a  change  of 
length.  For  if  we  added  ‘or  to  the  straight’,  we 
should  have  a  thing  bent  and  straight  at  once, 
and  it  is  impossible  for  that  which  is  straight 
to  be  bent.  And  if  all  bending  is  a  bending 
back  or  a  bending  down,  the  former  being  a 
[5]  change  to  the  convex,  the  latter  to  the  con¬ 
cave,  a  motion  that  leads  to  the  straight  cannot 
be  called  bending,  but  bending  and  straight¬ 
ening  are  two  different  things.  These,  then, 
are  the  things  that  can,  and  those  that  cannot 
be  bent,  and  be  straightened. 

Some  things  can  be  both  broken  and  com¬ 
minuted,  others  admit  only  one  or  the  other. 
Wood,  for  instance,  can  be  broken  but  not 
[/o]  comminuted,  ice  and  stone  can  be  com¬ 
minuted  but  not  broken,  while  pottery  may 
either  be  comminuted  or  broken.  The  distinc¬ 
tion  is  this:  breaking  is  a  division  and  separa¬ 
tion  into  large  parts,  comminution  into  parts 
of  any  size,  but  there  must  be  more  of  them 
than  two.  Now  those  solids  that  have  many 
pores  not  communicating  with  one  another  are 
[75]  comminuible  (for  the  limit  to  their  sub¬ 
division  is  set  by  the  pores),  but  those  whose 
pores  stretch  continuously  for  a  long  way  are 
breakable,  while  those  which  have  pores  of 
both  kinds  are  both  comminuible  and  break¬ 
able. 

Some  things,  e.g.  copper  and  wax,  are  im¬ 
pressible,  others,  e.g.  pottery  and  water,  are 
not.  The  process  of  being  impressed  is  the  sink¬ 
ing  of  a  part  of  the  surface  of  a  thing  in 
response  to  pressure  or  a  blow,  in  general  to 
[20]  contact.  Such  bodies  are  either  soft,  like 
wax,  where  part  of  the  surface  is  depressed 
while  the  rest  remains,  or  hard,  like  copper. 
Non-impressible  bodies  are  either  hard,  like 
pottery  (its  surface  does  not  give  way  and  sink 


386b 

in),  or  liquid,  like  water  (for  though  water 
does  give  way  it  is  not  in  a  part  of  it,  for  there 
is  a  reciprocal  change  of  place  of  all  its  parts). 
[25]  Those  impressibles  that  retain  the  shape 
impressed  on  them  and  are  easily  moulded  by 
the  hand  are  called  ‘plastic’;  those  that  are  not 
easily  moulded,  such  as  stone  or  wood,  or  are 
easily  moulded  but  do  not  retain  the  shape 
impressed,  like  wool  or  a  sponge,  are  not  plas¬ 
tic.  The  last  group  are  said  to  be  ‘squeezable’. 
Things  are  ‘squeezable’  when  they  can  con¬ 
tract  into  themselves  under  pressure,  their  sur- 
[  jo]  face  sinking  in  without  being  broken  and 
without  the  parts  interchanging  position  as 
happens  in  the  case  of  water.  (We  speak  of 
pressure  when  there  is  movement  and  the 
386b  motor  remains  in  contact  with  the  thing 
moved,  of  impact  when  the  movement  is  due 
to  the  local  movement  of  the  motor.)  Those 
bodies  are  subject  to  squeezing  which  have 
empty  pores — empty,  that  is,  of  the  stuff  of 
which  the  body  itself  consists — and  that  can 
sink  upon  the  void  spaces  within  them,  or 
rather  upon  their  pores.  For  sometimes  the 
pores  upon  which  a  body  sinks  in  are  not 
[5]  empty  (a  wet  sponge,  for  instance,  has  its 
pores  full).  But  the  pores,  if  full,  must  be  full 
of  something  softer  than  the  body  itself  which 
is  to  contract.  Examples  of  things  squeezable 
are  the  sponge,  wax,  flesh.  Those  things  are 
not  squeezable  which  cannot  be  made  to  con¬ 
tract  upon  their  own  pores  by  pressure,  either 
because  they  have  no  pores  or  because  their 
[/o]  pores  are  full  of  something  too  hard. 
Thus  iron,  stone,  water  and  all  liquids  are  in¬ 
capable  of  being  squeezed. 

Things  are  tractile  when  their  surface  can  be 
made  to  elongate,  for  being  drawn  out  is  a 
movement  of  the  surface,  remaining  unbroken, 
in  the  direction  of  the  mover.  Some  things  are 
tractile,  e.g.  hair,  thongs,  sinew,  dough,  bird- 
[75]  lime,  and  some  are  not,  e.g.  water,  stone. 
Some  things  are  both  tractile  and  squeezable, 
e.g.  wool;  in  other  cases  the  two  qualities  do 
not  coincide;  phlegm,  for  instance,  is  tractile 
but  not  squeezable,  and  a  sponge  squeezable 
but  not  tractile. 

Some  things  are  malleable,  like  copper.  Some 
are  not,  like  stone  and  wood.  Things  are  malle¬ 
able  when  their  surface  can  be  made  to  move 
[20]  (but  only  in  part)  both  downwards  and 
sideways  with  one  and  the  same  blow:  when 
this  is  not  possible  a  body  is  not  malleable.  All 
malleable  bodies  are  impressible,  but  not  all 
impressible  bodies  are  malleable,  e.g.  wood, 
though  on  the  whole  the  two  go  together.  Of 


METEOROLOGY 


3 87b 

squeezable  things  some  are  malleable  and  some 
not:  wax  and  mud  are  malleable,  wool  is  not. 
[25]  Some  things  are  fissile,  e.g.  wood,  some 
are  not,  e.g.  potter’s  clay.  A  thing  is  fissile  when 
it  is  apt  to  divide  in  advance  of  the  instrument 
dividing  it,  for  a  body  is  said  to  split  when  it 
divides  to  a  further  point  than  that  to  which 
the  dividing  instrument  divides  it  and  the  act 
of  division  advances:  which  is  not  the  case  with 
[jo]  cutting.  Those  bodies  which  cannot  be¬ 
have  like  this  are  non-fissile.  Nothing  soft  is 
fissile  (by  soft  I  mean  absolutely  soft  and  not 
relatively:  for  iron  itself  may  be  relatively 
3 87a  soft);  nor  are  all  hard  things  fissile,  but 
only  such  as  are  neither  liquid  nor  impressible 
nor  comminuible.  Such  are  the  bodies  that 
have  the  pores  along  which  they  cohere  length¬ 
wise  and  not  crosswise. 

Those  hard  or  soft  solids  are  apt  to  be  cut 
[5]  which  do  not  necessarily  either  split  in  ad¬ 
vance  of  the  instrument  or  break  into  minute 
fragments  when  they  are  being  divided.  Those 
that  necessarily  do  so  and  liquids  cannot  be  cut. 
Some  things  can  be  both  split  and  cut,  like 
wood,  though  generally  it  is  lengthwise  that  a 
thing  can  be  split  and  crosswise  that  it  can  be 
cut.  For,  a  body  being  divided  into  many  parts, 
[/o]  in  so  far  as  its  unity  is  made  up  of  many 
lengths  it  is  apt  to  be  split,  in  so  far  as  it  is 
made  up  of  many  breadths  it  is  apt  to  be  cut. 

A  thing  is  viscous  when,  being  moist  or 
soft,  it  is  tractile.  Bodies  owe  this  property  to 
the  interlocking  of  their  parts  when  they  are 
composed  like  chains,  for  then  they  can  be 
drawn  out  to  a  great  length  and  contracted 
again.  Bodies  that  are  not  like  this  are  friable. 
[75]  Bodies  are  compressible  when  they  are 
squeezable  and  retain  the  shape  they  have  been 
squeezed  into;  incompressible  when  they  are 
either  inapt  to  be  squeezed  at  all  or  do  not 
retain  the  shape  they  have  been  squeezed  into. 

Some  bodies  are  combustible  and  some  are 
not.  Wood,  wool,  bone  are  combustible;  stone, 
ice  are  not.  Bodies  are  combustible  when  their 
[20]  pores  are  such  as  to  admit  fire  and  their 
longitudinal  pores  contain  moisture  weaker 
than  fire.  If  they  have  no  moisture,  or  if,  as  in 
ice  or  very  green  wood,  the  moisture  is  stronger 
than  fire,  they  are  not  combustible. 

Those  bodies  give  off  fumes  which  contain 
moisture,  but  in  such  a  form  that  it  does  not  go 
off  separately  in  vapour  when  they  are  ex- 
osed  to  fire.  For  vapour  is  a  moist  secretion 
25]  tending  to  the  nature  of  air  produced 
from  a  liquid  by  the  agency  of  burning  heat. 
Bodies  that  give  off  fumes  give  off  secretions  of 


491 

the  nature  of  air  by  the  lapse  of  time:  as  they 
perish  away  they  dry  up  or  become  earth.  But 
the  kind  of  secretion  we  are  concerned  with 
now  differs  from  others  in  that  it  is  not  moist 
nor  does  it  become  wind  (which  is  a  continu¬ 
ous  flow  of  air  in  a  given  direction).  Fumes  are 
[jo]  a  common  secretion  of  dry  and  moist  to¬ 
gether  caused  by  the  agency  of  burning  heat. 
Hence  they  do  not  moisten  things  but  rather 
colour  them. 

3 87b  The  fumes  of  a  woody  body  are  called 
smoke.  (I  mean  to  include  bones  and  hair  and 
everything  of  this  kind  in  the  same  class.  For 
there  is  no  name  common  to  all  the  objects  that 
I  mean,  but,  for  all  that,  these  things  are  all  in 
the  same  class  by  analogy.  Compare  what  Em¬ 
pedocles  says:  They  are  one  and  the  same,  hair 
[5]  and  leaves  and  the  thick  wings  of  birds 
and  scales  that  grow  on  stout  limbs.1)  The 
fumes  of  fat  are  a  sooty  smoke  and  those  of  oily 
substances  a  greasy  steam.  Oil  does  not  boil 
away  or  thicken  by  evaporation  because  it  does 
not  give  off  vapour  but  fumes.  Water  on  the 
other  hand  does  not  give  off  fumes,  but  vapour. 
Sweet  wine  does  give  off  fumes,  for  it  contains 
[/o]  fat  and  behaves  like  oil.  It  does  not  solid¬ 
ify  under  the  influence  of  cold  and  it  is  apt  to 
burn.  Really  it  is  not  wine  at  all  in  spite  of  its 
name:  for  it  does  not  taste  like  wine  and  conse¬ 
quently  does  not  inebriate  as  ordinary  wine 
does.  It  contains  but  little  fumigable  stuff  and 
consequently  is  inflammable. 

All  bodies  are  combustible  that  dissolve  into 
[75]  ashes,  and  all  bodies  do  this  that  solidify 
under  the  influence  either  of  heat  or  of  both 
heat  and  cold;  for  we  find  that  all  these  bodies 
are  mastered  by  fire.  Of  stones  the  precious 
stone  called  carbuncle  is  least  amenable  to  fire. 

Of  combustible  bodies  some  are  inflammable 
and  some  are  not,  and  some  of  the  former  are 
reduced  to  coals.  Those  are  called  ‘inflamma- 
[20]  ble’  which  produce  flame  and  those  which 
do  not  are  called  ‘non-inflammable’.  Those 
fumigable  bodies  that  are  not  liquid  are  in¬ 
flammable,  but  pitch,  oil,  wax  are  inflammable 
in  conjunction  with  other  bodies  rather  than 
by  themselves.  Most  inflammable  are  those 
bodies  that  give  off  smoke.  Of  bodies  of  this 
kind  those  that  contain  more  earth  than  smoke 
are  apt  to  be  reduced  to  coals.  Some  bodies  that 
can  be  melted  are  not  inflammable,  e.g.  cop- 
[25]  per;  and  some  bodies  that  cannot  be 
melted  are  inflammable,  e.g.  wood;  and  some 
bodies  can  be  melted  and  are  also  inflammable, 
e.g.  frankincense.  The  reason  is  that  wood  has 

1  Diels,  21  B.  82. 


BOOK  IV,  CHAPTER  9 


METEOROLOGY 


492 

its  moisture  all  together  and  this  is  continuous 
throughout  and  so  it  burns  up:  whereas  copper 
has  it  in  each  part  but  not  continuous,  and  in- 
[jo]  sufficient  in  quantity  to  give  rise  to  flame. 
In  frankincense  it  is  disposed  in  both  of  these 
ways.  Fumigable  bodies  are  inflammable  when 
earth  predominates  in  them  and  they  are  con¬ 
sequently  such  as  to  be  unable  to  melt.  These 
3 88a  are  inflammable  because  they  are  dry  like 
fire.  When  this  dry  comes  to  be  hot  there  is  fire. 
This  is  why  flame  is  burning  smoke  or  dry  ex¬ 
halation.  The  fumes  of  wood  are  smoke,  those 
of  wax  and  frankincense  and  such-like,  and 
pitch  and  whatever  contains  pitch  or  such-like 
are  sooty  smoke,  while  the  fumes  of  oil  and 
[5]  oily  substances  are  a  greasy  steam;  so  are 
those  of  all  substances  which  are  not  at  all 
combustible  by  themselves  because  there  is  too 
little  of  the  dry  in  them  (the  dry  being  the 
means  by  which  the  transition  to  fire  is  ef¬ 
fected),  but  burn  very  readily  in  conjunction 
with  something  else.  (For  the  fat  is  just  the 
conjunction  of  the  oily  with  the  dry.)  So  those 
bodies  that  give  off  fumes,  like  oil  and  pitch, 
belong  rather  to  the  moist,  but  those  that  burn 
to  the  dry. 

10 

[/o]  Homogeneous  bodies  differ  to  touch  by 
these  affections  and  differences,  as  we  have 
said.1  They  also  differ  in  respect  of  their  smell, 
taste,  and  colour. 

By  homogeneous  bodies  I  mean,  for  instance, 
‘metals’,  gold,  copper,  silver,  tin,  iron,  stone, 
[75]  and  everything  else  of  this  kind  and  the 
bodies  that  are  extracted  from  them;  also  the 
substances  found  in  animals  and  plants,  for  in¬ 
stance,  flesh,  bones,  sinew,  skin,  viscera,  hair, 
fibres,  veins  (these  are  the  elements  of  which 
the  non-homogeneous  bodies  like  the  face,  a 
hand,  a  foot,  and  everything  of  that  kind  are 
made  up),  and  in  plants,  wood,  bark,  leaves, 
roots,  and  the  rest  like  them. 

[20]  The  homogeneous  bodies,  it  is  true,  are 
constituted  by  a  different  cause,  but  the  matter 
of  which  they  are  composed  is  the  dry  and  the 
moist,  that  is,  water  and  earth  (for  these  bodies 
exhibit  those  qualities  most  clearly).  The 
agents  are  the  hot  and  the  cold,  for  they  con¬ 
stitute  and  make  concrete  the  homogeneous 
bodies  out  of  earth  and  water  as  matter.  Let 
[25]  us  consider,  then,  which  of  the  homo¬ 
geneous  bodies  are  made  of  earth  and  which 
of  water,  and  which  of  both. 

Of  organized  bodies  some  are  liquid,  some 

*385*8. 


388b 

soft,  some  hard.  The  soft  and  the  hard  are 
constituted  by  a  process  of  solidification,  as  we 
have  already  explained. 

Those  liquids  that  go  off  in  vapour  are  made 
[jo]  of  water,  those  that  do  not  are  either  of 
the  nature  of  earth,  or  a  mixture  either  of 
earth  and  water,  like  milk,  or  of  earth  and  air, 
like  wood,  or  of  water  and  air,  like  oil.  Those 
liquids  which  are  thickened  by  heat  are  a  mix- 
388b  ture.  (Wine  is  a  liquid  which  raises  a 
difficulty:  for  it  is  both  liable  to  evaporation 
and  it  also  thickens;  for  instance  new  wine 
does.  The  reason  is  that  the  word  ‘wine’  is 
ambiguous  and  different  ‘wines’  behave  in 
different  ways.  New  wine  is  more  earthy  than 
old,  and  for  this  reason  it  is  more  apt  to  be 
thickened  by  heat  and  less  apt  to  be  congealed 
[5]  hy  cold.  For  it  contains  much  heat  and  a 
great  proportion  of  earth,  as  in  Arcadia,  where 
it  is  so  dried  up  in  its  skins  by  the  smoke  that 
you  scrape  it  to  drink.  If  all  wine  has  some 
sediment  in  it  then  it  will  belong  to  earth  or 
to  water  according  to  the  quantity  of  the  sedi¬ 
ment  it  possesses.)  The  liquids  that  are  thick¬ 
ened  by  cold  are  of  the  nature  of  earth;  those 
that  are  thickened  either  by  heat  or  by  cold  con¬ 
sist  of  more  than  one  element,  like  oil  and 
honey  and  ‘sweet  wine’. 

[/o]  Of  solid  bodies  those  that  have  been  solid¬ 
ified  by  cold  are  of  water,  e.g.  ice,  snow,  hail, 
hoar-frost.  Those  solidified  by  heat  are  of 
earth,  e.g.  pottery,  cheese,  natron,  salt.  Some 
bodies  are  solidified  by  both  heat  and  cold.  Of 
this  kind  are  those  solidified  by  refrigeration, 
that  is  by  the  privation  both  of  heat  and  of  the 
moisture  which  departs  with  the  heat.  For  salt 
[75]  and  the  bodies  that  are  purely  of  earth 
solidify  by  the  privation  of  moisture  only,  ice 
by  that  of  heat  only,  these  bodies  by  that  of 
both.  So  both  the  active  qualities  and  both 
kinds  of  matter  were  involved  in  the  process. 
Of  these  bodies  those  from  which  all  the  mois¬ 
ture  has  gone  are  all  of  them  of  earth,  like 
pottery  or  amber.  (For  amber,  also,  and  the 
bodies  called  ‘tears’  are  formed  by  refrigera- 
[20]  tion,  like  myrrh,  frankincense,  gum. 
Amber,  too,  appears  to  belong  to  this  class  of 
things:  the  animals  enclosed  in  it  show  that  it 
is  formed  by  solidification.  The  heat  is  driven 
out  of  it  by  the  cold  of  the  river  and  causes  the 
moisture  to  evaporate  with  it,  as  in  the  case  of 
honey  when  it  has  been  heated  and  is  im¬ 
mersed  in  water.)  Some  of  these  bodies  cannot 
[25]  be  melted  or  softened;  for  instance,  am¬ 
ber  and  certain  stones,  e.g.  the  stalactites  in 
caves.  (For  these  stalactites,  too,  are  formed  in 


389b  BOOK  IV,  CHAPTERS  9-12  493 


the  same  way:  the  agent  is  not  fire,  but  cold 
which  drives  out  the  heat,  which,  as  it  leaves 
the  body,  draws  out  the  moisture  with  it:  in 
the  other  class  of  bodies  the  agent  is  external 
[30]  fire.)  In  those  from  which  the  moisture 
has  not  wholly  gone  earth  still  preponderates, 
but  they  admit  of  softening  by  heat,  e.g.  iron 
and  horn. 

Now  since  we  must  include  among  ‘melt- 
ables’  those  bodies  which  are  melted  by  fire, 
these  contain  some  water:  indeed  some  of  them, 
like  wax,  are  common  to  earth  and  water  alike. 
389a  But  those  that  are  melted  by  water  are  of 
earth.  Those  that  are  not  melted  either  by  fire 
or  water  are  of  earth,  or  of  earth  and  water. 

Since,  then,  all  bodies  are  either  liquid  or 
solid,  and  since  the  things  that  display  the  af¬ 
fections  we  have  enumerated  belong  to  these 
two  classes  and  there  is  nothing  intermediate, 
it  follows  that  we  have  given  a  complete  ac- 
[5]  count  of  the  criteria  for  distinguishing 
whether  a  body  consists  of  earth  or  of  water  or 
of  more  elements  than  one,  and  whether  fire 
was  the  agent  in  its  formation,  or  cold,  or  both. 

Gold,  then,  and  silver  and  copper  and  tin 
and  lead  and  glass  and  many  nameless  stones 
[/o]  are  of  water:  for  they  are  all  melted  by 
heat.  Of  water,  too,  are  some  wines  and  urine 
and  vinegar  and  lye  and  whey  and  serum:  for 
they  are  all  congealed  by  cold.  In  iron,  horn, 
nails,  bones,  sinews,  wood,  hair,  leaves,  bark, 
earth  preponderates.  So,  too,  in  amber,  myrrh, 
frankincense,  and  all  the  substances  called 
[75]  ‘tears',  and  stalactites,  and  fruits,  such  as 
leguminous  plants  and  corn.  For  things  of  this 
kind  are,  to  a  greater  or  less  degree,  of  earth. 
For  of  all  these  bodies  some  admit  of  softening 
by  heat,  the  rest  give  off  fumes  and  are  formed 
by  refrigeration.  So  again  in  natron,  salt,  and 
those  kinds  of  stones  that  are  not  formed  by  re¬ 
frigeration  and  cannot  be  melted.  Blood,  on 
the  other  hand,  and  semen,  are  made  up  of 
[20]  earth  and  water  and  air.  If  the  blood  con¬ 
tains  fibres,  earth  preponderates  in  it:  conse¬ 
quently  its  solidifies  by  refrigeration  and  is 
melted  by  liquids;  if  not,  it  is  of  water  and 
therefore  does  not  solidify.  Semen  solidifies  by 
refrigeration,  its  moisture  leaving  it  together 
with  its  heat. 

11 

We  must  investigate  in  the  light  of  the  re¬ 
sults  we  have  arrived  at  what  solid  or  liquid 
bodies  are  hot  and  what  cold. 

[25]  Bodies  consisting  of  water  are  commonly 
cold,  unless  (like  lye,  urine,  wine)  they  con¬ 


tain  foreign  heat.  Bodies  consisting  of  earth, 
on  the  other  hand,  are  commonly  hot  because 
heat  was  active  in  forming  them:  for  instance 
lime  and  ashes. 

We  must  recognize  that  cold  is  in  a  sense  the 
matter  of  bodies.  For  the  dry  and  the  moist  are 
matter  (being  passive)  and  earth  and  water  are 
[30]  the  elements  that  primarily  embody  them, 
and  they  are  characterized  by  cold.  Conse- 
389b  quently  cold  must  predominate  in  every 
body  that  consists  of  one  or  other  of  the  ele¬ 
ments  simply,  unless  such  a  body  contains  for¬ 
eign  heat  as  water  does  when  it  boils  or  when 
it  has  been  strained  through  ashes.  This  latter, 
too,  has  acquired  heat  from  the  ashes,  for  ev¬ 
erything  that  has  been  burnt  contains  more  or 
[5]  less  heat.  This  explains  the  generation  of 
animals  in  putrefying  bodies:  the  putrefying 
body  contains  the  heat  which  destroyed  its 
proper  heat. 

Bodies  made  up  of  earth  and  water  are  hot, 
for  most  of  them  derive  their  existence  from 
concoction  and  heat,  though  some,  like  the 
waste  products  of  the  body,  are  products  of 
putrefaction.  Thus  blood,  semen,  marrow,  fig- 
juice,  and  all  things  of  the  kinds  are  hot  as  long 
[/o]  as  they  are  in  their  natural  state,  but  when 
they  perish  and  fall  away  from  that  state  they 
are  so  no  longer.  For  what  is  left  of  them  is 
their  matter  and  that  is  earth  and  water.  Hence 
both  views  are  held  about  them,  some  people 
maintaining  them  to  be  cold  and  others  to  be 
warm;  for  they  are  observed  to  be  hot  when 
they  are  in  their  natural  state,  but  to  solidify 
[75]  when  they  have  fallen  away  from  it.  That, 
then,  is  the  case  of  mixed  bodies.  However,  the 
distinction  we  laid  down  holds  good:  if  its 
matter  is  predominantly  water  a  body  is  cold 
(water  being  the  complete  opposite  of  fire), 
but  if  earth  or  air  it  tends  to  be  warm. 

It  sometimes  happens  that  the  coldest  bodies 
can  be  raised  to  the  highest  temperature  by 
foreign  heat;  for  the  most  solid  and  the  hardest 
[20]  bodies  are  coldest  when  deprived  of  heat 
and  most  burning  after  exposure  to  fire:  thus 
water  is  more  burning  than  smoke  and  stone 
than  water. 

12 

Having  explained  all  this  we  must  describe 
the  nature  of  flesh,  bone,  and  the  other  homo¬ 
geneous  bodies  severally. 

Our  account  of  the  formation  of  the  homo¬ 
geneous  bodies  has  given  us  the  elements  out 
of  which  they  are  compounded  and  the  classes 
[25]  into  which  they  fall,  and  has  made  it  clear 


494 

to  which  class  each  of  those  bodies  belongs.  The 
homogeneous  bodies  are  made  up  of  the  ele¬ 
ments,  and  all  the  works  of  nature  in  turn  of 
the  homogeneous  bodies  as  matter.  All  the  ho¬ 
mogeneous  bodies  consist  of  the  elements  de¬ 
scribed,  as  matter,  but  their  essential  nature  is 
determined  by  their  definition.  This  fact  is  al¬ 
ways  clearer  in  the  case  of  the  later  products, 
[jo]  of  those,  in  fact,  that  are  intruments,  as 
it  were,  and  have  an  end:  it  is  clearer,  for  in¬ 
stance,  that  a  dead  man  is  a  man  only  in  name. 
And  so  the  hand  of  a  dead  man,  too,  will  in  the 
same  way  be  a  hand  in  name  only,  just  as  stone 
390*  flutes  might  still  be  called  flutes:  for  these 
members,  too,  are  instruments  of  a  kind.  But 
in  the  case  of  flesh  and  bone  the  fact  is  not  so 
clear  to  see,  and  in  that  of  fire  and  water  even 
less.  For  the  end  is  least  obvious  there  where 
matter  predominates  most.  If  you  take  the  ex- 
[5]  tremes,  matter  is  pure  matter  and  the  es¬ 
sence  is  pure  definition;  but  the  bodies  inter¬ 
mediate  between  the  two  are  matter  or  defini¬ 
tion  in  proportion  as  they  are  near  to  either. 
For  each  of  those  elements  has  an  end  and  is 
not  water  or  fire  in  any  and  every  condition  of 
itself,  just  as  flesh  is  not  flesh  nor  viscera  viscera, 
and  the  same  is  true  in  a  higher  degree  with 
[/o]  face  and  hand.  What  a  thing  is  is  always 
determined  by  its  function:  a  thing  really  is  it¬ 
self  when  it  can  perform  its  function;  an  eye, 
for  instance,  when  it  can  see.  When  a  thing 
cannot  do  so  it  is  that  thing  only  in  name,  like 
a  dead  eye  or  one  made  of  stone,  just  as  a  wood¬ 
en  saw  is  no  more  a  saw  than  one  in  a  picture. 
The  same,  then,  is  true  of  flesh,  except  that  its 
[75]  function  is  less  clear  than  that  of  the 
tongue.  So,  too,  with  fire;  but  its  function  is 
perhaps  even  harder  to  specify  by  physical  in¬ 
quiry  than  that  of  flesh.  The  parts  of  plants, 
and  inanimate  bodies  like  copper  and  silver, 
are  in  the  same  case.  They  all  are  what  they  are 
in  virtue  of  a  certain  power  of  action  or  passion 
— just  like  flesh  and  sinew.  But  we  cannot  state 


390b 

[20]  their  form  accurately,  and  so  it  is  not  easy 
to  tell  when  they  are  really  there  and  when 
they  are  not  unless  the  body  is  thoroughly  cor¬ 
rupted  and  its  shape  only  remains.  So  ancient 
corpses  suddenly  become  ashes  in  the  grave 
390b  and  very  old  fruit  preserves  its  shape  only 
but  not  its  taste:  so,  too,  with  the  solids  that 
form  from  milk. 

Now  heat  and  cold  and  the  motions  they  set 
up  as  the  bodies  are  solidified  by  the  hot  and 
the  cold  are  sufficient  to  form  all  such  parts  as 
[5]  are  the  homogeneous  bodies,  flesh,  bone, 
hair,  sinew,  and  the  rest.  For  they  are  all  of 
them  differentiated  by  the  various  qualities 
enumerated  above,  tension,  tractility,  commi- 
nuibility,  hardness,  softness,  and  the  rest  of 
them:  all  of  which  are  derived  from  the  hot 
and  the  cold  and  the  mixture  of  their  motions. 
But  no  one  would  go  as  far  as  to  consider  them 
sufficient  in  the  case  of  the  non-homogeneous 
[/o]  parts  (like  the  head,  the  hand,  or  the 
foot)  which  these  homogeneous  parts  go  to 
make  up.  Cold  and  heat  and  their  motion 
would  be  admitted  to  account  for  the  forma¬ 
tion  of  copper  or  silver,  but  not  for  that  of  a 
saw,  a  bowl,  or  a  box.  So  here,  save  that  in  the 
examples  given  the  cause  is  art,  but  in  the  non- 
homogeneous  bodies  nature  or  some  other 
cause. 

Since,  then,  we  know  to  what  element  each 
[75]  of  the  homogeneous  bodies  belongs,  we 
must  now  find  the  definition  of  each  of  them, 
the  answer,  that  is,  to  the  question,  ‘what  is’ 
flesh,  semen,  and  the  rest?  For  we  know  the 
cause  of  a  thing  and  its  definition  when  we 
know  the  material  or  the  formal  or,  better, 
both  the  material  and  the  formal  conditions  of 
its  generation  and  destruction,  and  the  efficient 
cause  of  it. 

After  the  homogeneous  bodies  have  been  ex- 
[20]  plained  we  must  consider  the  non-homo¬ 
geneous  too,  and  lastly  the  bodies  made  up  of 
these,  such  as  man,  plants,  and  the  rest. 


METEOROLOGY 


CONTENTS:  METAPHYSICS 


BOOK  I 

CHAP.  BERLIN  NOS. 

1.  The  advance  from  sensation  980s  22 

through  memory,  experience,  and  art,  to  theo¬ 
retical  knowledge 

2.  Characteristics  of  ‘wisdom’  982s  5 

(philosophy) 

3.  The  successive  recognition  by  983s  24 

earlier  philosophers  of  the  material,  efficient, 
and  final  causes 

4.  Inadequacy  of  the  treatment  of  984b  23 

these  causes 

5.  The  Pythagorean  and  Eleatic  985b  23 

schools;  the  former  recognizes  vaguely  the 
formal  cause 

6.  The  Platonic  philosophy;  it  uses  987a  29 
only  the  material  and  formal  causes 

7.  The  relation  of  the  various  systems  988s  18 
to  the  four  causes 

8.  Criticism  of  the  pre-Platonic  phi-  988b  22 
losophers 

9.  Criticism  of  the  doctrine  of  Ideas  990s  33 

10.  The  history  of  philosophy  reveals  993s  11 

no  causes  other  than  the  four 

BOOK  II 

1.  General  considerations  about  the  993a3° 
study  of  philosophy 

2.  There  cannot  be  an  infinite  series,  994a  1 


2.  There  cannot  be  an  infinite  series,  994a  1 
nor  an  infinite  variety  of  kinds,  of  causes 


3.  Different  methods  are  appropriate 
to  different  studies 

BOOK  III 

994b  32 

1.  Sketch  of  the  main  problems  of 
philosophy 

995a  24 

2.  Fuller  statement  of  the  problems: 

996a  l8 

(i)  Can  one  science  treat  of  all 
causes  ? 

the  four 

(ii)  Are  the  primary  axioms 

996b  26 

treated  of  by  the  science  of  substance, 
and  if  not,  by  what  science? 

(iii)  Can  one  science  treat  of 
all  substances? 

997a 15 

(iv)  Does  the  science  of  sub-  997a  25 
stance  treat  also  of  its  attributes? 

(v)  Are  there  any  non-sensible  997s  34 
substances,  and  if  so,  of  how  many 
kinds? 

3.  (vi)  Are  the  genera,  or  the  con-  998s  20 
stituent  parts,  of  things  their  first  prin¬ 
ciples  ? 

(vii)  If  the  genera,  is  it  the  high-  998b  14 
est  genera  or  the  lowest? 


Is  there  anything  apart  999s  24 

from  individual  things? 

Is  each  of  the  first  principles  999b  24 
one  in  kind,  or  in  number? 

Are  the  principles  of  perish-  ioooa  5 
able  and  of  imperishable  things  the 
same? 

Are  being  and  unity  sub-  iooia  4 
stances  or  attributes? 

Are  the  objects  of  mathe-  100 ib  26 

matics  substances? 

Do  Ideas  exist,  as  well  as  ioo2b  12 
sensible  things  and  the  objects  of  math¬ 
ematics? 

Do  the  first  principles  exist  ioo2b  32 
potentially  or  actually? 

Are  the  first  principles  uni-  ioo3a  5 
versal  or  individual? 

BOOK  IV 

1.  Our  object  is  the  study  of  being  as  ioo3a  21 
such 

2.  We  must  therefore  study  primary  ioo3a  33 
being  (viz.  substance),  unity  and  plurality, 
and  the  derivative  contraries,  and  the  attri¬ 
butes  of  being  and  of  substance 

3.  We  must  study  also  the  primary  ioo5a  19 
axioms,  and  especially  the  law  of  contradiction 

4.  Fatal  difficulties  involved  in  the  ioo5b  35 
denial  of  this  law 

5.  The  connexion  of  such  denial  with  ioo9a  6 
Protagoras’  doctrine  of  relativity;  the  doctrine 
refuted 

6.  Further  refutation  of  Protagoras  iona3 

7.  The  law  of  excluded  middle  de-  ionb  23 
fended 

8.  All  judgements  are  not  true,  nor  ioi2a  29 
are  all  false;  all  things  are  not  at  rest,  nor  are 
all  in  motion 

BOOK  V 

Philosophical  Lexicon 

1.  ‘Beginning’ 

2.  ‘Cause’ 

3.  ‘Element’ 

4.  ‘Nature’ 

5.  ‘Necessary’ 

6.  ‘One,’  ‘Many’ 

7.  ‘Being’ 

8.  ‘Substance’ 

9.  The  Same,’  ‘Other,’  ‘Different,’ 

‘Like,’  ‘Unlike’ 

10.  ‘Opposite,’  ‘Contrary,’  ‘Other  in 
species,’  ‘The  same  in  species’ 

11.  ‘Prior,’  ‘Posterior’ 


4.  (viii) 

(ix) 

(x) 

(xi) 

5.  (xii) 

6.  (xiii) 

(xiv) 

(xv) 


I0I2b  34 
ioi3a  24 
ioi4a  26 
ioi4b  16 
ioi5a  20 
ioi5b  16 
1017s  7 
ioi7b  10 
ioi7b  27 

ioi8a  20 

ioi8b  9 


495 


496  CONTENTS 


12.  ‘Potency,’  ‘Capable,’  ‘Incapacity,’ 

1019s  15 

‘Possible,’  Impossible’ 

13.  ‘Quantum* 

1020s  7 

14.  ‘Quality’ 

1020s  33 

15.  ‘Relative’ 

I020b  26 

16.  ‘Complete’ 

I02Ib  12 

17.  ‘Limit’ 

1022s  4 

18.  ‘That  in  virtue  of  which,’  ‘In 

1022s  14 

virtue  of  itself’ 

19.  ‘Disposition’ 

I022b  I 

20.  ‘Having’  or  ‘habit’  (if£ts) 

I022b 4 

21.  ‘Affection’ 

I022b  15 

22.  ‘Privation’ 

I022b  22 

23.  ‘Have’  or  ‘hold’  (Zxeiy),  ‘Be  in’ 

1023s  8 

24.  ‘From’ 

1023s  26 

25.  ‘Part’ 

I023b  12 

26.  ‘Whole,’  ‘Total,’  ‘All* 

I023b  26 

27.  ‘Mutilated* 

1024s  11 

28.  ‘Race’  or  ‘genus’  (7ews),  ‘Other  in 

1024s  29 

genus’ 

29.  ‘False’ 

i024b  17 

30.  ‘Accident’ 

1025s  I4 

BOOK  VI 

1.  Distinction  of  ‘theology,’  the  sci- 

io25b  3 

ence  of  being  as  such,  from  the  other  theoreti¬ 

cal  sciences,  mathematics  and  physics 

2.  Four  senses  of  ‘being’;  of  these  (i) 

1026s  33 

accidental  being  is  the  object  of  no  science 


3.  The  nature  and  origin  of  accident  I027a  29 

4.  (ii)  Being  as  truth  is  not  primary  io27b  17 

being 

BOOK  VII 

1.  The  study  of  being  is  primarily  i028a  10 
the  study  of  substance 

2.  Various  opinions  on  the  question,  I028b  8 
what  things  are  substances? 

3.  Four  things  are  commonly  held  I028b  33 


to  be  substantial — the  essence,  the  universal, 
the  genus,  the  substratum.  The  last  may  be 
conceived  as  matter,  form,  or  the  concrete  in¬ 
dividual.  Reasons  why  matter  and  the  concrete 
individual  cannot  be  primary  substance.  Form 
to  be  studied  first  in  sensible  things 

4.  What  is  essence  and  to  what  does  I029b  1 
it  belong,  i.e.  what  things  can  be  defined?  Pri¬ 
marily  substance 

5.  Combinations  of  a  subject  with  I030b  14 
one  of  its  proper  attributes  have  no  definition 
nor  essence 

6.  Is  a  thing  the  same  as  its  essence?  103 ia  15 
Yes,  if  it  is  a  substance 

(7.  Analysis  of  generation,  whether  I032a  12 
by  nature,  art,  or  spontaneity 

8.  Form  is  not  generated,  but  put  I033a  24 
into  matter;  yet  it  did  not  previously  exist 
apart — the  agent  in  generation  is  form  em¬ 
bodied  in  another  individual  of  the  same 
species 

9.  Why  spontaneous  generation  i034a  9 

sometimes  takes  place.  The  conditions  of  gen¬ 


eration  in  the  categories  other  than  substance) 

10.  When  are  definitions  of  the  parts  io34b  20 
included  in  the  definition  of  the  whole?  When 
the  parts  are  parts  of  the  form 

11.  Which  parts  are  parts  of  the  form,  io36a  26 
which  of  the  concrete  individual? 

12.  Wherein  consists  the  unity  of  an  io37b  8 
object  of  definition?  In  the  appropriateness  of 
the  differentia  to  the  genus 

13.  A  universal  cannot  be  either  the  I038b  1 
substance  or  an  element  in  the  substance  of 
anything  (yet  how  else  can  a  thing  be  defined?) 

14.  Hence  it  is  fatal  to  make  Ideas  1039s  24 
substances  and  yet  hold  that  they  are  com¬ 
posed  of  other  Ideas 

15.  No  individual  can  be  defined,  i039b  20 
whether  sensible  or,  like  the  Ideas,  intelligible 

16.  The  parts  of  sensible  things  are  I040b  5 
only  potencies.  Unity  and  being  are  not  the 
substance  of  tilings 

17.  Substance  is  the  cause  or  form  1041s  6 

which  puts  matter  into  a  determinate  state;  it 
is  that  in  a  thing  which  is  distinct  from  its 
material  elements 

BOOK  VIII 

1.  The  discussion  of  sensible  sub-  1042s  3 
stances  continued.  Their  matter  is  itself  sub¬ 
stance 

2.  The  main  types  of  form  or  actual-  io42b  9 
ity.  Definitions  of  matter,  of  form,  and  of  the 
concrete  individual  distinguished 

3.  Form  distinguished  from  the  ma-  1043s  29 
terial  elements;  Antisthenes’  attack  on  defini¬ 
tion;  definition  analogous  to  number 

4.  Remote  and  proximate  matter;  1044s  l5 
the  substratum  of  attributes  not  matter  but 
the  concrete  individual 

5.  The  relation  of  matter  to  its  con-  i044b2i 
trary  states 

6.  What  gives  unity  to  a  definition?  1045s  7 
The  fact  that  the  genus  is  simply  the  potency 
of  the  differentia,  the  differentia  the  actuality 
of  the  genus 

BOOK  IX 

1.  Being  as  potency  and  actuality.  I045b  27 
Potency  in  the  strict  sense,  as  potency  of  mo¬ 
tion,  active  or  passive 

2.  Non-rational  potencies  are  single,  1046s  36 
rational  potencies  twofold 

3.  Potency  defended  against  the  at-  I046b  29 
tack  of  the  Megaric  school 

4.  Potency  as  possibility  I047b  3 

5.  How  potency  is  acquired,  and  the  I047b  31 
conditions  of  its  actualization 

6.  Actuality  distinguished  from  po-  1048s  25 
tency;  a  special  type  of  potency  described;  ac¬ 
tuality  distinguished  from  movement 

7.  When  one  thing  may  be  called  104813  35 
the  potency  or  matter  of  another;  how  things 


CONTENTS 


497 


derived  from  their 


8. 


i049b  4 


I053b 9 


3- 

4- 

5- 
6. 

7- 

8. 

9- 

io. 


are  described  by  names 
matter  or  their  accidents 
Actuality  prior  to  potency  in  defi¬ 
nition,  time,  and  substantiality;  nothing  eter¬ 
nal  or  necessary  is  a  mere  potency 
Good  actuality  better  than  potency,  105 ia  4 
and  bad  actuality  worse;  therefore  no  separate 
evil  principle  in  the  universe.  Geometrical 
truths  found  by  actualization  of  potencies 
Being  as  truth,  with  regard  to  i05ia  34 

both  composite  and  simple  objects 

BOOK  X 

Four  kinds  of  unit;  the  essence  I052a  15 
of  a  unit  is  to  be  a  measure  of  quantity  or  of 
quality;  various  types  of  measure 
Unity  not  a  substance  but  a  uni¬ 
versal  predicate;  its  denotation  the  same  as 
that  of  being 

Unity  and  plurality;  identity;  io54a  20 

likeness;  otherness;  difference 
Contrariety  is  complete  difference;  i055a  3 
how  related  to  privation  and  contradiction 
The  opposition  of  the  equal  to 
the  great  and  the  small 
The  opposition  of  the  one  to  the 
many 

Intermediates  are  homogeneous 
with  each  other  and  with  the  extremes,  stand 
between  contraries,  and  are  compounded  out 
of  these  contraries 
Otherness  in  species  is  otherness 
of  the  genus  and  is  contrariety;  its  nature  fur¬ 
ther  described 

What  contrarieties  constitute  oth- 


i055b  30 
io56b  3 
i057a  18 


I057b  35 


io58a  29 
io58b  26 


9- 

10. 


11. 

12. 


erness  in  species 

The  perishable  and  the  imperish¬ 
able  differ  in  kind 

BOOK  XI 

Shorter  form  of  III.  2,  3  I059a  18 

Shorter  form  of  III.  4-6  io6oa  3 

Shorter  form  of  IV.  1,2  io6ob  31 

Shorter  form  of  IV.  3,  4  io6ib  17 

Shorter  form  of  IV.  3,  4  io6ib  34 

Shorter  form  of  IV.  5-8  io62b  12 

Shorter  form  of  VI.  1  io63b  36 

Shorter  form  of  VI.  2-4  io64b  15 

Extracts  from  Physics: 

II.  5,  6,  on  luck  io64b  30 

III.  1-3,  on  potency,  actuality,  io65b  5 

and  movement 

III.  4,  5,  7,  on  the  infinite;  there  io66a  35 
is  no  actual  infinite,  and  especially  no  in¬ 
finite  body 

V.  1,  on  change  and  movement  io67b  1 

V.  2,  on  the  three  kinds  of  move-  io68a  8 

ment 

V.  3,  definitions  of  ‘together  in  io68b  26 
place,’  ‘apart,’  ‘touch,’  ‘between,’  ‘contra¬ 
ry  in  place,’  ‘successive,’  ‘contiguous,’ 
‘continuous’ 


BOOK  XII 


io7ib  3 


1.  Substance  the  primary  subject  of  io69a  18 
inquiry.  Three  kinds  of  substance — perishable 
sensible,  eternal  sensible,  and  unmovable  (non- 
sensible) 

2.  Change  implies  not  only  form  and  io69b  3 
privation  but  matter 

3.  Neither  matter  nor  form  comes  io69b  35 
into  being.  Whatever  comes  into  being  comes 
from  a  substance  of  the  same  kind.  If  form 
ever  exists  apart  from  the  concrete  individual, 
it  is  in  the  case  of  natural  objects 

4.  Different  things  have  elements  I070a  31 
numerically  different  but  the  same  in  kind; 
they  all  have  form,  privation,  and  matter. 
They  also  have  a  proximate  and  an  ultimate 
moving  cause 

5.  Again  actuality  and  potency  are  I070b  36 
principles  common  to  all  things,  though  they 
apply  differently  in  different  cases.  The  princi¬ 
ples  of  all  things  are  only  analogous,  not  iden¬ 
tical 

6.  Since  movement  must  be  eternal, 
there  must  be  an  eternal  mover,  and  one  whose 
essence  is  actuality  (actuality  being  prior  to 
potency).  To  account  for  the  uniform  change 
in  the  universe,  there  must  be  one  principle 
which  acts  always  alike,  and  one  whose  action 
varies 

7.  The  eternal  mover  originates  mo-  io72a  19 
tion  by  being  the  primary  object  of  desire  (as 
it  is  of  thought) ;  being  thoroughly  actual,  it 
cannot  change  or  move;  it  is  a  living  being, 
perfect,  separate  from  sensible  things,  and 
without  parts 

8.  Besides  the  first  mover  there  must  io73a  13 
be  as  many  unmoved  movers  as  there  are  sim¬ 
ple  motions  involved  in  the  motions  of  the 
planets.  The  number  is  probably  either  55  or 
47.  As  there  is  but  one  prime  mover,  there 
must  be  but  one  heaven 

9.  The  divine  thought  must  be  con¬ 
cerned  with  the  most  divine  object,  which  is 
itself.  Thought  and  the  object  of  thought  are 
never  different  when  the  object  is  immaterial 

10.  How  the  good  is  present  in  the  io75a  11 
universe  both  as  the  order  of  the  parts  and 
(more  primarily)  as  their  ruler.  Difficulties 
which  attend  the  views  of  other  philosophers 

BOOK  XIII 

1.  We  pass  to  immaterial  substance.  ioy6a  8 
Two  kinds  of  immaterial  substances  have  been 
believed  in,  mathematical  objects  and  Ideas. 
We  shall  discuss  first  the  former,  then  the  lat¬ 
ter,  then  the  view  that  numbers  and  Ideas  are 
the  substance  of  sensible  things 

2.  (i)  Mathematical  objects  cannot  1076s  38 
exist  as  distinct  substances  either  in  or  apart 
from  sensible  things 

3.  They  can  be  separated  only  in  io77b  17 


io74b  15 


CONTENTS 


498 

thought.  Mathematics  is  not  entirely  divorced 
from  consideration  of  the  beautiful,  as  is  some¬ 
times  alleged 

4.  (ii)  Arguments  which  led  to  the  i078b  7 
belief  in  Ideas.  Some  prove  too  little,  others  too 
much 

5.  Even  if  there  were  Ideas,  they  I079b  12 
would  not  explain  the  changes  in  the  sensible 
world 

6.  (iii)  Various  ways  in  which  io8oa  12 

numbers  may  be  conceived  as  the  substance  of 
things 

7.  (a)  If  all  units  are  associable,  this  io8ob  37 
gives  only  mathematical,  not  ideal  number. 
(b)  If  all  units  are  inassociable,  this  gives  nei¬ 
ther  mathematical  nor  ideal  number.  ( c )  If 
only  the  units  in  the  same  number  are  associa¬ 
ble,  this  leads  to  equal  difficulties;  units  must 
have  no  difference  of  kind 

8.  The  views  of  Platonists  who  dis-  io83a  1 
agree  with  Plato,  and  those  of  the  Pythagore¬ 
ans,  lead  to  equal  difficulties.  Further  objec¬ 
tions  to  ideal  numbers:  (a)  How  are  the  units 
derived  from  the  indefinite  dyad?  (b)  Is  the 
series  of  numbers  infinite  or  finite;  and  if  fi¬ 
nite,  what  is  its  limit?  ( c )  What  sort  of  prin¬ 
ciple  is  the  One? 

9.  Discussion  of  the  principles  of  geo-  io85a  3 
metrical  objects.  Criticism  of  the  generation  of 
numbers  from  unity  and  plurality,  and  of  spa¬ 


tial  magnitudes  from  similar  principles.  The 
criticism  of  ideal  numbers  summed  up.  The 
upholders  of  Ideas  make  them  at  once  uni¬ 
versal  and  individual 

10.  Are  the  first  principles  of  sub-  io86b  14 
stances  individual  or  universal? 

BOOK  XIV 

1.  The  principles  cannot  be  contra-  io87a  29 
ries.  The  Platonists  in  making  them  contraries 
treated  one  of  the  contraries  as  matter.  Vari¬ 
ous  forms  of  this  theory.  The  nature  of  unity 
and  plurality  expounded 

2.  Eternal  substances  cannot  be  com-  io88b  14 
pounded  out  of  elements.  The  object  of  the 
Platonists  is  to  explain  the  presence  of  plural¬ 
ity  in  the  world,  but  in  this  they  do  not  suc¬ 
ceed.  What  justifies  the  belief  in  the  separate 
existence  of  numbers? 

3.  Difficulties  in  the  various  theories  I090a  16 
of  number.  The  Pythagoreans  ascribe  genera¬ 
tion  to  numbers,  which  are  eternal 

4.  The  relation  between  the  first  I09ia  23 
principles  and  the  good 

5.  How  is  number  supposed  to  be  io92a  9 
derived  from  its  elements?  How  is  it  the  cause 
of  substances? 

6.  The  causal  agency  ascribed  to  i092b  26 

numbers  is  purely  fanciful 


METAPHYSICS 

BOOK  I 


980*  All  men  by  nature  desire  to  know.  An 
indication  of  this  is  the  delight  we  take  in  our 
senses;  for  even  apart  from  their  usefulness 
they  are  loved  for  themselves;  and  above  all 
others  the  sense  of  sight.  For  not  only  with  a 
[25]  view  to  action,  but  even  when  we  are  not 
going  to  do  anything,  we  prefer  seeing  (one 
might  say)  to  everything  else.  The  reason  is 
that  this,  most  of  all  the  senses,  makes  us  know 
and  brings  to  light  many  differences  between 
things. 

By  nature  animals  are  born  with  the  faculty 
of  sensation,  and  from  sensation  memory  is 
produced  in  some  of  them,  though  not  in  oth- 
980b  ers.  And  therefore  the  former  are  more 
intelligent  and  apt  at  learning  than  those  which 
cannot  remember;  those  which  are  incapable  of 
hearing  sounds  are  intelligent  though  they  can¬ 
not  be  taught,  e.g.  the  bee,  and  any  other  race 
of  animals  that  may  be  like  it;  and  those  which 
besides  memory  have  this  sense  of  hearing  can 
be  taught. 

[25]  The  animals  other  than  man  live  by  ap¬ 
pearances  and  memories,  and  have  but  little  of 
connected  experience;  but  the  human  race  lives 
also  by  art  and  reasonings.  Now  from  memory 
experience  is  produced  in  men;  for  the  several 
memories  of  the  same  thing  produce  finally  the 
98 la  capacity  for  a  single  experience.  And  ex¬ 
perience  seems  pretty  much  like  science  and 
art,  but  really  science  and  art  come  to  men 
through  experience;  for  ‘experience  made  art’, 

[5]  as  Polus  says,1  ‘but  inexperience  luck’.  Now 
art  arises  when  from  many  notions  gained  by 
experience  one  universal  judgement  about  a 
class  of  objects  is  produced.  For  tohave  a  judge¬ 
ment  that  when  Callias  was  ill  of  this  disease 
this  did  him  good,  and  similarly  in  the  case  of 
Socrates  and  in  many  individual  cases,  is  a  mat- 
[/o]  ter  of  experience;  but  to  judge  that  it  has 
done  good  to  all  persons  of  a  certain  constitu¬ 
tion,  marked  off  in  one  class,  when  they  were 
1  Cf.  Plato,  Gorgias,  448,  462. 

Note:  The  bold  face  numbers  and  letters  are  approxi¬ 
mate  indications  of  the  pages  and  columns  of  the  stand¬ 
ard  Berlin  Greek  text;  the  bracketed  numbers,  of  the 
lines  in  the  Greek  text;  they  are  here  assigned  as  they 
are  assigned  in  the  Oxford  translation. 

499 


ill  of  this  disease,  e.g.  to  phlegmatic  or  bilious 
people  when  burning  with  fever, — this  is  a 
matter  of  art. 

With  a  view  to  action  experience  seems  in  no 
respect  inferior  to  art,  and  men  of  experience 
succeed  even  better  than  those  who  have  theory 
[75]  without  experience.  (The  reason  is  that 
experience  is  knowledge  of  individuals,  art  of 
universals,  and  actions  and  productions  are  all 
concerned  with  the  individual;  for  the  physi¬ 
cian  does  not  cure  man,  except  in  an  incidental 
way,  but  Callias  or  Socrates  or  some  other 
called  by  some  such  individual  name,  who  hap- 
[20]  pens  to  be  a  man.  If,  then,  a  man  has  the 
theory  without  the  experience,  and  recognizes 
the  universal  but  does  not  know  the  individual 
included  in  this,  he  will  often  fail  to  cure;  for 
it  is  the  individual  that  is  to  be  cured.)  But  yet 
we  think  that  \nowledge  and  understanding 
[25]  belong  to  art  rather  than  to  experience, 
and  we  suppose  artists  to  be  wiser  than  men  of 
experience  (which  implies  that  Wisdom  de¬ 
pends  in  all  cases  rather  on  knowledge);  and 
this  because  the  former  know  the  cause,  but 
the  latter  do  not.  For  men  of  experience  know 
that  the  thing  is  so,  but  do  not  know  why, 
[30]  while  the  others  know  the  ‘why’  and  the 
cause.  Hence  we  think  also  that  the  master- 
workers  in  each  craft  are  more  honourable  and 
know  in  a  truer  sense  and  are  wiser  than  the 
98  lb  manual  workers,  because  they  know  the 
causes  of  the  things  that  are  done  (we  think 
the  manual  workers  are  like  certain  lifeless 
things  which  act  indeed,  but  act  without  know¬ 
ing  what  they  do,  as  fire  burns, — but  while  the 
lifeless  things  perform  each  of  their  functions 
by  a  natural  tendency,  the  labourers  perform 
[5]  them  through  habit);  thus  we  view  them 
as  being  wiser  not  in  virtue  of  being  able  to  act, 
but  of  having  the  theory  for  themselves  and 
knowing  the  causes.  And  in  general  it  is  a  sign 
of  the  man  who  knows  and  of  the  man  who 
does  not  know,  that  the  former  can  teach,  and 
therefore  we  think  art  more  truly  knowledge 
than  experience  is;  for  artists  can  teach,  and 
men  of  mere  experience  cannot. 

[10]  Again,  we  do  not  regard  any  of  the  senses 
as  Wisdom;  yet  surely  these  give  the  most  au¬ 
thoritative  knowledge  of  particulars.  But  they 


500 

do  not  tell  us  the  ‘why’  of  anything — < 
fire  is  hot;  they  only  say  that  it  is  hot. 

At  first  he  who  invented  any  art  whatever 
that  went  beyond  the  common  perceptions  of 
man  was  naturally  admired  by  men,  not  only 
[75]  because  there  was  something  useful  in  the 
inventions,  but  because  he  was  thought  wise 
and  superior  to  the  rest.  But  as  more  arts  were 
invented,  and  some  were  directed  to  the  neces¬ 
sities  of  life,  others  to  recreation,  the  inventors 
of  the  latter  were  naturally  always  regarded  as 
wiser  than  the  inventors  of  the  former,  because 
their  branches  of  knowledge  did  not  aim  at 
[20]  utility.  Hence  when  all  such  inventions 
were  already  established,  the  sciences  which  do 
not  aim  at  giving  pleasure  or  at  the  necessities 
of  life  were  discovered,  and  first  in  the  places 
where  men  first  began  to  have  leisure.  This  is 
why  the  mathematical  arts  were  founded  in 
Egypt;  for  there  the  priestly  caste  was  allowed 
to  be  at  leisure. 

[25]  We  have  said  in  the  Ethics 1  what  the  dif¬ 
ference  is  between  art  and  science  and  the  oth¬ 
er  kindred  faculties;  but  the  point  of  our  pres¬ 
ent  discussion  is  this,  that  all  men  suppose 
what  is  called  Wisdom  to  deal  with  the  first 
causes  and  the  principles  of  things;  so  that,  as 
[jo]  has  been  said  before,  the  man  of  experi¬ 
ence  is  thought  to  be  wiser  than  the  possessors 
of  any  sense-perception  whatever,  the  artist 
wiser  than  the  men  of  experience,  the  master- 
worker  than  the  mechanic,  and  the  theoretical 
kinds  of  knowledge  to  be  more  of  the  nature  of 
Wisdom  than  the  productive.  Clearly  then 
982a  Wisdom  is  knowledge  about  certain  prin¬ 
ciples  and  causes. 

2 

[5]  Since  we  are  seeking  this  knowledge,  we 
must  inquire  of  what  kind  are  the  causes  and 
the  principles,  the  knowledge  of  which  is  Wis¬ 
dom.  If  one  were  to  take  the  notions  we  have 
about  the  wise  man,  this  might  perhaps  make 
the  answer  more  evident.  We  suppose  first, 
then,  that  the  wise  man  knows  all  things,  as 
far  as  possible,  although  he  has  not  knowledge 
[/o]  of  each  of  them  in  detail;  secondly,  that 
he  who  can  learn  things  that  are  difficult,  and 
not  easy  for  man  to  know,  is  wise  (sense-per¬ 
ception  is  common  to  all,  and  therefore  easy 
and  no  mark  of  Wisdom);  again,  that  he  who 
is  more  exact  and  more  capable  of  teaching  the 
causes  is  wiser,  in  every  branch  of  knowledge; 
and  that  of  the  sciences,  also,  that  which  is  de- 
[75]  sirable  on  its  own  account  and  for  the 

1  ii39b  14-1  i4ib  8. 


982b 

sake  of  knowing  it  is  more  of  the  nature  of 
Wisdom  than  that  which  is  desirable  on  ac¬ 
count  of  its  results,  and  the  superior  science  is 
more  of  the  nature  of  Wisdom  than  the  ancil¬ 
lary;  for  the  wise  man  must  not  be  ordered  but 
must  order,  and  he  must  not  obey  another,  but 
the  less  wise  must  obey  him. 

[20]  Such  and  so  many  are  the  notions,  then, 
which  we  have  about  Wisdom  and  the  wise. 
Now  of  these  characteristics  that  of  knowing 
all  things  must  belong  to  him  who  has  in  the 
highest  degree  universal  knowledge;  for  he 
knows  in  a  sense  all  the  instances  that  fall  un¬ 
der  the  universal.  And  these  things,  the  most 
universal,  are  on  the  whole  the  hardest  for  men 
to  know;  for  they  are  farthest  from  the  senses. 
[25]  And  the  most  exact  of  the  sciences  are 
those  which  deal  most  with  first  principles;  for 
those  which  involve  fewer  principles  are  more 
exact  than  those  which  involve  additional  prin¬ 
ciples,  e.g.  arithmetic  than  geometry.  But  the 
science  which  investigates  causes  is  also  instruc¬ 
tive,  in  a  higher  degree,  for  the  people  who  in¬ 
struct  us  are  those  who  tell  the  causes  of  each 
[30]  thing.  And  understanding  and  knowl¬ 
edge  pursued  for  their  own  sake  are  found 
most  in  the  knowledge  of  that  which  is  most 
knowable  (for  he  who  chooses  to  know  for  the 
sake  of  knowing  will  choose  most  readily  that 
982b  which  is  most  truly  knowledge,  and  such 
is  the  knowledge  of  that  which  is  most  know- 
able);  and  the  first  principles  and  the  causes 
are  most  knowable;  for  by  reason  of  these, 
and  from  these,  all  other  things  come  to  be 
known,  and  not  these  by  means  of  the  things 
subordinate  to  them.  And  the  science  which 
knows  to  what  end  each  thing  must  be  done  is 
[5]  the  most  authoritative  of  the  sciences,  and 
more  authoritative  than  any  ancillary  science; 
and  this  end  is  the  good  of  that  thing,  and  in 
general  the  supreme  good  in  the  whole  of  na¬ 
ture.  Judged  by  all  the  tests  we  have  mentioned, 
then,  the  name  in  question  falls  to  the  same 
science;  this  must  be  a  science  that  investigates 
[70]  the  first  principles  and  causes;  for  the 
good,  i.e.  the  end,  is  one  of  the  causes. 

That  it  is  not  a  science  of  production  is  clear 
even  from  the  history  of  the  earliest  philoso¬ 
phers.  For  it  is  owing  to  their  wonder  that  men 
both  now  begin  and  at  first  began  to  philoso¬ 
phize;  they  wondered  originally  at  the  obvious 
difficulties,  then  advanced  little  by  little  and 
[75]  stated  difficulties  about  the  greater  mat¬ 
ters,  e.g.  about  the  phenomena  of  the  moon  and 
those  of  the  sun  and  of  the  stars,  and  about  the 
genesis  of  the  universe.  And  a  man  who  is  puz- 


METAPHYSICS 
:.g.  why 


983b 

zled  and  wonders  thinks  himself.  ignorant 
(whence  even  the  lover  of  myth  is  in  a  sense  a 
lover  of  Wisdom,  for  the  myth  is  composed  of 
wonders);  therefore  since  they  philosophized 
[ 20 ]  in  order  to  escape  from  ignorance,  evi¬ 
dently  they  were  pursuing  science  in  order  to 
know,  and  not  for  any  utilitarian  end.  And 
this  is  confirmed  by  the  facts;  for  it  was  when 
almost  all  the  necessities  of  life  and  the  things 
that  make  for  comfort  and  recreation  had  b°en 
secured,  that  such  knowledge  began  to  be 
sought.  Evidently  then  we  do  not  seek  it  for 
[25]  the  sake  of  any  other  advantage;  but  as 
the  man  is  free,  we  say,  who  exists  for  his  own 
sake  and  not  for  another’s,  so  we  pursue  this 
as  the  only  free  science,  for  it  alone  exists  for 
its  own  sake. 

Hence  also  the  possession  of  it  might  be  just¬ 
ly  regarded  as  beyond  human  power;  for  in 
many  ways  human  nature  is  in  bondage,  so 
[jo]  that  according  to  Simonides1  ‘God  alone 
can  have  this  privilege’,  and  it  is  unfitting  that 
man  should  not  be  content  to  seek  the  knowl¬ 
edge  that  is  suited  to  him.  If,  then,  there  is 
something  in  what  the  poets  say,  and  jealousy 
983a  is  natural  to  the  divine  power,  it  would 
probably  occur  in  this  case  above  all,  and  all 
who  excelled  in  this  knowledge  would  be  un¬ 
fortunate.  But  the  divine  power  cannot  be  jeal¬ 
ous  (nay,  according  to  the  proverb,  ‘bards  tell 
many  a  lie’),  nor  should  any  other  science  be 
[5]  thought  more  honourable  than  one  of  this 
sort.  For  the  most  divine  science  is  also  most 
honourable;  and  this  science  alone  must  be,  in 
two  ways,  most  divine.  For  the  science  which 
it  would  be  most  meet  for  God  to  have  is  a  di¬ 
vine  science,  and  so  is  any  science  that  deals 
with  divine  objects;  and  this  science  alone  has 
both  these  qualities;  for  (1)  God  is  thought  to 
be  among  the  causes  of  all  things  and  to  be  a 
first  principle,  and  (2)  such  a  science  either 
God  alone  can  have,  or  God  above  all  oth- 
[/o]  ers.  All  the  sciences,  indeed,  are  more  nec¬ 
essary  than  this,  but  none  is  better. 

Yet  the  acquisition  of  it  must  in  a  sense  end 
in  something  which  is  the  opposite  of  our  orig¬ 
inal  inquiries.  For  all  men  begin,  as  we  said, 
by  wondering  that  things  are  as  they  are,  as 
[75]  they  do  about  self-moving  marionettes,  or 
about  the  solstices  or  the  incommensurability 
of  the  diagonal  of  a  square  with  the  side;  for  it 
seems  wonderful  to  all  who  have  not  yet  seen 
the  reason,  that  there  is  a  thing  which  cannot 
be  measured  even  by  the  smallest  unit.  But  we 
must  end  in  the  contrary  and,  according  to  the 

1  Fr.  3,  Hiller. 


501 

proverb,  the  better  state,  as  is  the  case  in  these 
instances  too  when  men  learn  the  cause;  for 
there  is  nothing  which  would  surprise  a  geome- 
[20]  ter  so  much  as  if  the  diagonal  turned  out 
to  be  commensurable. 

We  have  stated,  then,  what  is  the  nature  of 
the  science  we  are  searching  for,  and  what  is 
the  mark  which  our  search  and  our  whole  in¬ 
vestigation  must  reach. 

3 

Evidently  we  have  to  acquire  knowledge  of 
[25]  the  original  causes  (for  we  say  we  know 
each  thing  only  when  we  think  we  recognize 
its  first  cause),  and  causes  are  spoken  of  in  four 
senses.  In  one  of  these  we  mean  the  substance, 
i.e.  the  essence  (for  the  ‘why’  is  reducible  final¬ 
ly  to  the  definition,  and  the  ultimate  ‘why’  is  a 
cause  and  principle);  in  another  the  matter 
[30]  or  substratum,  in  a  third  the  source  of 
the  change,  and  in  a  fourth  the  cause  opposed 
to  this,  the  purpose  and  the  good  (for  this  is 
the  end  of  all  generation  and  change).  We  have 
studied  these  causes  sufficiently  in  our  work  on 
983b  nature,2  but  yet  let  us  call  to  our  aid  those 
who  have  attacked  the  investigation  of  being 
and  philosophized  about  reality  before  us.  For 
obviously  they  too  speak  of  certain  principles 
and  causes;  to  go  over  their  views,  then,  will 
[5]  be  of  profit  to  the  present  inquiry,  for  we 
shall  either  find  another  kind  of  cause,  or  be 
more  convinced  of  the  correctness  of  those 
which  we  now  maintain. 

Of  the  first  philosophers,  then,  most  thought 
the  principles  which  were  of  the  nature  of  mat¬ 
ter  were  the  only  principles  of  all  things.  That 
of  which  all  things  that  are  consist,  the  first 
from  which  they  come  to  be,  the  last  into  which 
they  are  resolved  (the  substance  remaining,  but 
[70]  changing  in  its  modifications),  this  they 
say  is  the  element  and  this  the  principle  of 
things,  and  therefore  they  think  nothing  is  ei¬ 
ther  generated  or  destroyed,  since  this  sort  of 
entity  is  always  conserved,  as  we  say  Socrates 
neither  comes  to  be  absolutely  when  he  comes 
to  be  beautiful  or  musical,  nor  ceases  to  be 
[75]  when  he  loses  these  characteristics,  be¬ 
cause  the  substratum,  Socrates  himself  re¬ 
mains.  Just  so  they  say  nothing  else  comes  to 
be  or  ceases  to  be;  for  there  must  be  some  en¬ 
tity — either  one  or  more  than  one — from  which 
all  other  things  come  to  be,  it  being  conserved. 

Yet  they  do  not  all  agree  as  to  the  number 
[20]  and  the  nature  of  these  principles.  Thales, 
the  founder  of  this  type  of  philosophy,  says  the 

2  Physics ,  11.  3,  7. 


BOOK  I,  CHAPTERS  1-3 


502 

principle  is  water  (for  which  reason  he  de¬ 
clared  that  the  earth  rests  on  water),  getting 
the  notion  perhaps  from  seeing  that  the  nutri¬ 
ment  of  all  things  is  moist,  and  that  heat  itself 
is  generated  from  the  moist  and  kept  alive  by 
it  (and  that  from  which  they  come  to  be  is  a 
[25]  principle  of  all  things).  He  got  his  notion 
from  this  fact,  and  from  the  fact  that  the  seeds 
of  all  things  have  a  moist  nature,  and  that  wa¬ 
ter  is  the  origin  of  the  nature  of  moist  things. 

Some  think  that  even  the  ancients  who  lived 
long  before  the  present  generation,  and  first 
framed  accounts  of  the  gods,  had  a  similar 
[3o]  view  of  nature;  for  they  made  Ocean  and 
Tethys  the  parents  of  creation,  and  described 
the  oath  of  the  gods  as  being  by  water,  to  which 
they  give  the  name  of  Styx;  for  what  is  oldest 
is  most  honourable,  and  the  most  honourable 
thing  is  that  by  which  one  swears.  It  may  per- 
984a  haps  be  uncertain  whether  this  opinion 
about  nature  is  primitive  and  ancient,  but 
Thales  at  any  rate  is  said  to  have  declared  him¬ 
self  thus  about  the  first  cause.  Hippo  no  one 
would  think  fit  to  include  among  these  think¬ 
ers,  because  of  the  paltriness  of  his  thought. 
[5]  Anaximenes  and  Diogenes  make  air  prior 
to  water,  and  the  most  primary  of  the  simple 
bodies,  while  Hippasus  of  Metapontium  and 
Heraclitus  of  Ephesus  say  this  of  fire,  and  Em¬ 
pedocles  says  it  of  the  four  elements  (adding  a 
fourth — earth — to  those  which  have  been 
named);  for  these,  he  says,  always  remain  and 
do  not  come  to  be,  except  that  they  come  to  be 
[10]  more  or  fewer,  being  aggregated  into  one 
and  segregated  out  of  one. 

Anaxagoras  of  Clazomenae,  who,  though 
older  than  Empedocles,  was  later  in  his  philo¬ 
sophical  activity,  says  the  principles  are  infinite 
in  number;  for  he  says  almost  all  the  things 
that  are  made  of  parts  like  themselves,  in  the 
manner  of  water  or  fire,  are  generated  and  de¬ 
stroyed  in  this  way,  only  by  aggregation  and 
[/ 5]  segregation,  and  are  not  in  any  other  sense 
generated  or  destroyed,  but  remain  eternally. 

From  these  facts  one  might  think  that  the 
only  cause  is  the  so-called  material  cause;  but 
as  men  thus  advanced,  the  very  facts  opened 
the  way  for  them  and  joined  in  forcing  them  to 
investigate  the  subject.  However  true  it  may 
[20]  be  that  all  generation  and  destruction  pro¬ 
ceed  from  some  one  or  (for  that  matter)  from 
more  elements,  why  does  this  happen  and 
what  is  the  cause?  For  at  least  the  substratum 
itself  does  not  make  itself  change;  e.g.  neither 
the  wood  nor  the  bronze  causes  the  change  of 
either  of  them,  nor  does  the  wood  manufacture 


984b 

a  bed  and  the  bronze  a  statue,  but  something 
[25]  else  is  the  cause  of  the  change.  And  to  seek 
this  is  to  seek  the  second  cause,  as  we  should 
say, — that  from  which  comes  the  beginning  of 
the  movement.  Now  those  who  at  the  very  be¬ 
ginning  set  themselves  to  this  kind  of  inquiry, 
and  said  the  substratum  was  one,  were  not  at 
all  dissatisfied  with  themselves;  but  some  at 
least  of  those  who  maintain  it  to  be  one — as 
[jo]  though  defeated  by  this  search  for  the 
second  cause — say  the  one  and  nature  as  a 
whole  is  unchangeable  not  only  in  respect  of 
generation  and  destruction  (for  this  is  a  primi¬ 
tive  belief,  and  all  agreed  in  it),  but  also  of  all 
other  change;  and  this  view  is  peculiar  to  them. 
984b  Of  those  who  said  the  universe  was  one, 
then  none  succeeded  in  discovering  a  cause  of 
this  sort,  except  perhaps  Parmenides,  and  he 
only  inasmuch  as  he  supposes  that  there  is  not 
only  one  but  also  in  some  sense  two  causes.  But 
[5]  for  those  who  make  more  elements  it  is 
more  possible  to  state  the  second  cause,  e.g.  for 
those  who  make  hot  and  cold,  or  fire  and  earth, 
the  elements;  for  they  treat  fire  as  having  a  na¬ 
ture  which  fits  it  to  move  things,  and  water 
and  earth  and  such  things  they  treat  in  the  con¬ 
trary  way. 

When  these  men  and  the  principles  of  this 
kind  had  had  their  day,  as  the  latter  were  found 
inadequate  to  generate  the  nature  of  things 
[/o]  men  were  again  forced  by  the  truth  itself, 
as  we  said,1  to  inquire  into  the  next  kind  of 
cause.  For  it  is  not  likely  either  that  fire  or 
earth  or  any  such  element  should  be  the  reason 
why  things  manifest  goodness  and  beauty  both 
in  their  being  and  in  their  coming  to  be,  or  that 
those  thinkers  should  have  supposed  it  was; 
nor  again  could  it  be  right  to  entrust  so  great  a 
[75]  matter  to  spontaneity  and  chance.  When 
one  man  said,  then,  that  reason  was  present — 
as  in  animals,  so  throughout  nature — as  the 
cause  of  order  and  of  all  arrangement,  he 
seemed  like  a  sober  man  in  contrast  with  the 
random  talk  of  his  predecessors.  We  know  that 
Anaxagoras  certainly  adopted  these  views,  but 
Hermotimus  of  Clazomenae  is  credited  with 
[20]  expressing  them  earlier.  Those  who 
thought  thus  stated  that  there  is  a  principle  of 
things  which  is  at  the  same  time  the  cause  of 
beauty,  and  that  sort  of  cause  from  which 
things  acquire  movement. 

4 

One  might  suspect  that  Hesiod  was  the  first 
to  look  for  such  a  thing — or  some  one  else  who 

lai8. 


METAPHYSICS 


985b 

put  love  or  desire  among  existing  things  as  a 
rinciple,  as  Parmenides,  too,  does; ‘for  he,  in 
25]  constructing  the  genesis  of  the  universe, 
says1: — 

Love  first  of  all  the  Gods  she  planned. 

And  Hesiod  says2: — 

First  of  all  things  was  chaos  made,  and  then 

Broad-breasted  earth,  .  .  . 

And  love,  ' mid  all  the  gods  pre-eminent, 
[3o]  which  implies  that  among  existing  things 
there  must  be  from  the  first  a  cause  which  will 
move  things  and  bring  them  together.  How 
these  thinkers  should  be  arranged  with  regard 
to  priority  of  discovery  let  us  be  allowed  to  de¬ 
cide  later;  but  since  the  contraries  of  the  vari¬ 
ous  forms  of  good  were  also  perceived  to  be 
present  in  nature — not  only  order  and  the 
beautiful,  but  also  disorder  and  the  ugly,  and 
985a  bad  things  in  greater  number  than  good, 
and  ignoble  things  than  beautiful — therefore 
another  thinker  introduced  friendship  and 
strife,  each  of  the  two  the  cause  of  one  of  these 
two  sets  of  qualities.  For  if  we  were  to  follow 
out  the  view  of  Empedocles,  and  interpret  it 
according  to  its  meaning  and  not  to  its  lisping 
[5]  expression,  we  should  find  that  friendship 
is  the  cause  of  good  things,  and  strife  of  bad. 
Therefore,  if  we  said  that  Empedocles  in  a 
sense  both  mentions,  and  is  the  first  to  mention, 
the  bad  and  the  good  as  principles,  we  should 
perhaps  be  right,  since  the  cause  of  all  goods 
is  the  good  itself. 

[/o]  These  thinkers,  as  we  say,  evidently 
grasped,  and  to  this  extent,  two  of  the  causes 
which  we  distinguished  in  our  work  on  na¬ 
ture3 — the  matter  and  the  source  of  the  move¬ 
ment — vaguely,  however,  and  with  no  clear¬ 
ness,  but  as  untrained  men  behave  in  fights; 
for  they  go  round  their  opponents  and  often 
[75]  strike  fine  blows,  but  they  do  not  fight  on 
scientific  principles,  and  so  too  these  thinkers 
do  not  seem  to  know  what  they  say;  for  it  is 
evident  that,  as  a  rule,  they  make  no  use  of 
their  causes  except  to  a  small  extent.  For  Anax¬ 
agoras  uses  reason  as  a  deus  ex  machina  for  the 
making  of  the  world,  and  when  he  is  at  a  loss 
[20]  to  tell  from  what  cause  something  nec¬ 
essarily  is,  then  he  drags  reason  in,  but  in  all 
other  cases  ascribes  events  to  anything  rather 
than  to  reason.  And  Empedocles,  though  he 
uses  the  causes  to  a  greater  extent  than  this, 
neither  does  so  sufficiently  nor  attains  con¬ 
sistency  in  their  use.  At  least,  in  many  cases  he 
makes  love  segregate  things,  and  strife  ag- 

1  Fr.  13.  2  Theogony ,  116-120. 

8  Physics ,  11.  3,  7. 


503 

[25]  gregate  them.  For  whenever  the  universe 
is  dissolved  into  its  elements  by  strife,  fire  is 
aggregated  into  one,  and  so  is  each  of  the  other 
elements;  but  whenever  again  under  the  in¬ 
fluence  of  love  they  come  together  into  one, 
the  parts  must  again  be  segregated  out  of  each 
element. 

Empedocles,  then,  in  contrast  with  his  pred- 
[30]  ecessors,  was  the  first  to  introduce  the 
dividing  of  this  cause,  not  positing  one  source 
of  movement,  but  different  and  contrary 
sources.  Again,  he  was  the  first  to  speak  of 
four  material  elements;  yet  he  does  not  use 
985b  four,  but  treats  them  as  two  only;  he 
treats  fire  by  itself,  and  its  opposites — earth, 
air,  and  water — as  one  kind  of  thing.  We  may 
learn  this  by  study  of  his  verses. 

This  philosopher  then,  as  we  say,  has  spoken 
of  the  principles  in  this  way,  and  made  them 
[5]  of  this  number.  Leucippus  and  his  associ¬ 
ate  Democritus  say  that  the  full  and  the  empty 
are  the  elements,  calling  the  one  being  and  the 
other  non-being — the  full  and  solid  being  be¬ 
ing,  the  empty  non-being  (whence  they  say 
being  no  more  is  than  non-being,  because  the 
solid  no  more  is  .than  the  empty);  and  they 
[/o]  make  these  the  material  causes  of  things. 
And  as  those  who  make  the  underlying  sub¬ 
stance  one  generate  all  other  things  by  its  modi¬ 
fications,  supposing  the  rare  and  the  dense  to 
be  the  sources  of  the  modifications,  in  the  same 
way  these  philosophers  say  the  differences  in 
the  elements  are  the  causes  of  all  other  qual¬ 
ities.  These  differences,  they  say,  are  three — 
[75]  shape  and  order  and  position.  For  they 
say  the  real  is  differentiated  only  by  ‘rhythm’ 
and  ‘inter-contact’  and  ‘turning’;  and  of  these 
rhythm  is  shape,  inter-contact  is  order,  and  turn¬ 
ing  is  position;  for  A  differs  from  N  in  shape, 
AN  from  NA  in  order,  E  from  H  in  position. 
The  question  of  movement — whence  or  how  it 
is  to  belong  to  things — these  thinkers,  like  the 
others,  lazily  neglected. 

[20]  Regarding  the  two  causes,  then,  as  we 
say,  the  inquiry  seems  to  have  been  pushed 
thus  far  by  the  early  philosophers. 

5 

Contemporaneously  with  these  philosophers 
and  before  them,  the  so-called  Pythagoreans, 
who  were  the  first  to  take  up  mathematics,  not 
only  advanced  this  study,  but  also  having  been 
[25]  brought  up  in  it  they  thought  its  prin¬ 
ciples  were  the  principles  of  all  things.  Since 
of  these  principles  numbers  are  by  nature  the 


BOOK  I,  CHAPTERS  3-5 


5°4 

first,  and  in  numbers  they  seemed  to  see  many 
resemblances  to  the  things  that  exist  and  come 
into  being — more  than  in  fire  and  earth  and 
water  (such  and  such  a  modification  of  num- 
[jo]  bers  being  justice,  another  being  soul  and 
reason,  another  being  opportunity — and  sim¬ 
ilarly  almost  all  other  things  being  numerically 
expressible);  since,  again,  they  saw  that  the 
modifications  and  the  ratios  of  the  musical 
scales  were  expressible  in  numbers; — since, 
then,  all  other  things  seemed  in  their  whole 
nature  to  be  modelled  on  numbers,  and  num¬ 
bers  seemed  to  be  the  first  things  in  the  whole 
986a  of  nature,  they  supposed  the  elements  of 
numbers  to  be  the  elements  of  all  things,  and 
the  whole  heaven  to  be  a  musical  scale  and  a 
number.  And  all  the  properties  of  numbers  and 
scales  which  they  could  show  to  agree  with 
[5]  the  attributes  and  parts  and  the  whole  ar¬ 
rangement  of  the  heavens,  they  collected  and 
fitted  into  their  scheme;  and  if  there  was  a 
gap  anywhere,  they  readily  made  additions  so 
as  to  make  their  whole  theory  coherent.  E.g. 
as  the  number  10  is  thought  to  be  perfect  and 
to  comprise  the  whole  nature  of  numbers,  they 
[/o]  say  that  the  bodies  which  move  through 
the  heavens  are  ten,  but  as  the  visible  bodies 
are  only  nine,  to  meet  this  they  invent  a  tenth 
— the  ‘counter-earth’.  We  have  discussed  these 
matters  more  exactly  elsewhere.1 

But  the  object  of  our  review  is  that  we  may 
learn  from  these  philosophers  also  what  they 
suppose  to  be  the  principles  and  how  these  fall 
[75]  under  the  causes  we  have  named.  Evi¬ 
dently,  then,  these  thinkers  also  consider  that 
number  is  the  principle  both  as  matter  for 
things  and  as  forming  both  their  modifications 
and  their  permanent  states,  and  hold  that  the 
elements  of  number  are  the  even  and  the  odd, 
and  that  of  these  the  latter  is  limited,  and  the 
former  unlimited;  and  that  the  One  proceeds 
from  both  of  these  (for  it  is  both  even  and 
[20]  odd),  and  number  from  the  One;  and 
that  the  whole  heaven,  as  has  been  said,  is 
numbers. 

Other  members  of  this  same  school  say  there 
are  ten  principles,  which  they  arrange  in  two 
columns  of  cognates — limit  and  unlimited,  odd 
and  even,  one  and  plurality,  right  and  left, 
[25]  male  and  female,  resting  and  moving, 
straight  and  curved,  light  and  darkness,  good 
and  bad,  square  and  oblong.  In  this  way  Alc- 
maeon  of  Croton  seems  also  to  have  conceived 
the  matter,  and  either  he  got  this  view  from 
[jo]  them  or  they  got  it  from  him;  for  he  ex- 

1  On  the  Heavens ,  11.  13. 


986b 

pressed  himself  similarly  to  them.  For  he  says 
most  human  affairs  go  in  pairs,  meaning  not 
definite  contrarieties  such  as  the  Pythagoreans 
speak  of,  but  any  chance  contrarieties,  e.g. 
white  and  black,  sweet  and  bitter,  good  and 
bad,  great  and  small.  He  threw  out  indefinite 
suggestions  about  the  other  contrarieties,  but 
986b  the  Pythagoreans  declared  both  how 
many  and  which  their  contrarieties  are. 

From  both  these  schools,  then,  we  can  learn 
this  much,  that  the  contraries  are  the  principles 
of  things;  and  how  many  these  principles  are 
and  which  they  are,  we  can  learn  from  one  of 
the  two  schools.  But  how  these  principles  can 
[5]  be  brought  together  under  the  causes  we 
have  named  has  not  been  clearly  and  articu¬ 
lately  stated  by  them;  they  seem,  however,  to 
range  the  elements  under  the  head  of  matter; 
for  out  of  these  as  immanent  parts  they  say 
substance  is  composed  and  moulded. 

From  these  facts  we  may  sufficiently  per¬ 
ceive  the  meaning  of  the  ancients  who  said  the 
elements  of  nature  were  more  than  one;  but 
[/o]  there  are  some  who  spoke  of  the  universe 
as  if  it  were  one  entity,  though  they  were  not 
all  alike  either  in  the  excellence  of  their  state¬ 
ment  or  in  its  conformity  to  the  facts  of  nature. 
The  discussion  of  them  is  in  no  way  appro¬ 
priate  to  our  present  investigation  of  causes, 
for  they  do  not,  like  some  of  the  natural  philos¬ 
ophers,  assume  being  to  be  one  and  yet  gen- 
[75]  erate  it  out  of  the  one  as  out  of  matter, 
but  they  speak  in  another  way;  those  others 
add  change,  since  they  generate  the  universe, 
but  these  thinkers  say  the  universe  is  un¬ 
changeable.  Yet  this  much  is  germane  to  the 
present  inquiry:  Parmenides  seems  to  fasten 
on  that  which  is  one  in  definition,  Melissus  on 
[20]  that  which  is  one  in  matter,  for  which 
reason  the  former  says  that  it  is  limited,  the 
latter  that  it  is  unlimited;  while  Xenophanes, 
the  first  of  these  partisans  of  the  One  (for 
Parmenides  is  said  to  have  been  his  pupil), 
gave  no  clear  statement,  nor  does  he  seem  to 
have  grasped  the  nature  of  either  of  these 
causes,  but  with  reference  to  the  whole  ma- 
[25]  terial  universe  he  says  the  One  is  God. 
Now  these  thinkers,  as  we  said,  must  be  neg¬ 
lected  for  the  purposes  of  the  present  inquiry 
— two  of  them  entirely,  as  being  a  little  too 
naive,  viz.  Xenophanes  and  Melissus;  but  Par¬ 
menides  seems  in  places  to  speak  with  more 
insight.  For,  claiming  that,  besides  the  ex¬ 
istent,  nothing  non-existent  exists,  he  thinks 
that  of  necessity  one  thing  exists,  viz.  the  ex- 
[jo]  istent  and  nothing  else  (on  this  we  have 


METAPHYSICS 


9 87b 

spoken  more  clearly  in  our  work  on  nature),1 
but  being  forced  to  follow  the  observed  facts, 
and  supposing  the  existence  of  that  which  is 
one  in  definition,  but  more  than  one  according 
to  our  sensations,  he  now  posits  two  causes  and 
two  principles,  calling  them  hot  and  cold,  i.e. 
fire  and  earth;  and  of  these  he  ranges  the  hot 
9 87a  with  the  existent,  and  the  other  with  the 
non-existent. 

From  what  has  been  said,  then,  and  from 
the  wise  men  who  have  now  sat  in  council  with 
us,  we  have  got  thus  much — on  the  one  hand 
from  the  earliest  philosophers,  who  regard  the 
first  principle  as  corporeal  (for  water  and  fire 
[5]  and  such  things  are  bodies),  and  of  whom 
some  suppose  that  there  is  one  corporeal  prin¬ 
ciple,  others  that  there  are  more  than  one,  but 
both  put  these  under  the  head  of  matter;  and 
on  the  other  hand  from  some  who  posit  both 
this  cause  and  besides  this  the  source  of  move¬ 
ment,  which  we  have  got  from  some  as  single 
and  from  others  as  twofold. 

Down  to  the  Italian  school,  then,  and  apart 
[/o]  from  it,  philosophers  have  treated  these 
subjects  rather  obscurely,  except  that,  as  we 
said,  they  have  in  fact  used  two  kinds  of  cause, 
and  one  of  these — the  source  of  movement — 
some  treat  as  one  and  others  as  two.  But  the 
Pythagoreans  have  said  in  the  same  way  that 
there  are  two  principles,  but  added  this  much, 
[75]  which  is  peculiar  to  them,  that  they 
thought  that  finitude  and  infinity  were  not 
attributes  of  certain  other  things,  e.g.  of  fire 
or  earth  or  anything  else  of  this  kind,  but  that 
infinity  itself  and  unity  itself  were  the  sub¬ 
stance  of  the  things  of  which  they  are  predi¬ 
cated.  This  is  why  number  was  the  substance  of 
all  things.  On  this  subject,  then,  they  expressed 
[20]  themselves  thus;  and  regarding  the  ques¬ 
tion  of  essence  they  began  to  make  statements 
and  definitions,  but  treated  the  matter  too  sim¬ 
ply.  For  they  both  defined  superficially  and 
thought  that  the  first  subject  of  which  a  given 
definition  was  predicable  was  the  substance  of 
the  thing  defined,  as  if  one  supposed  that  ‘dou¬ 
ble’  and  ‘2’  were  the  same,  because  2  is  the 
[25]  first  thing  of  which  ‘double’  is  predicable. 
But  surely  to  be  double  and  to  be  2  are  not  the 
same;  if  they  are,  one  thing  will  be  many — a 
consequence  which  they  actually  drew.  From 
the  earlier  philosophers,  then,  and  from  their 
successors  we  can  learn  thus  much. 

6 

After  the  systems  we  have  named  came  the 

1  Physics ,  1.  3. 


505 

[50]  philosophy  of  Plato,  which  in  most  re¬ 
spects  followed  these  thinkers,  but  had  pe¬ 
culiarities  that  distinguished  it  from  the  philos¬ 
ophy  of  the  Italians.  For,  having  in  his  youth 
first  become  familiar  with  Cratylus  and  with 
the  Heraclitean  doctrines  (that  all  sensible 
things  are  ever  in  a  state  of  flux  and  there  is 
no  knowledge  about  them),  these  views  he 
held  even  in  later  years.  Socrates,  however, 
9 87b  was  busying  himself  about  ethical  mat¬ 
ters  and  neglecting  the  world  of  nature  as  a 
whole  but  seeking  the  universal  in  these  ethical 
matters,  and  fixed  thought  for  the  first  time  on 
definitions;  Plato  accepted  his  teaching,  but 
[5]  held  that  the  problem  applied  not  to  sensi¬ 
ble  things  but  to  entities  of  another  kind — for 
this  reason,  that  the  common  definition  could 
not  be  a  definition  of  any  sensible  thing,  as 
they  were  always  changing.  Things  of  this 
other  sort,  then,  he  called  Ideas,  and  sensible 
things,  he  said,  were  all  named  after  these,  and 
in  virtue  of  a  relation  to  these;  for  the  many 
existed  by  participation  in  the  Ideas  that  have 
[/o]  the  same  name  as  they.  Only  the  name 
‘participation’  was  new;  for  the  Pythagoreans 
say  that  things  exist  by  ‘imitation’  of  numbers, 
and  Plato  says  they  exist  by  participation, 
changing  the  name.  But  what  the  participation 
or  the  imitation  of  the  Forms  could  be  they 
left  an  open  question. 

Further,  besides  sensible  things  and  Forms 
[75]  he  says  there  are  the  objects  of  mathe¬ 
matics,  which  occupy  an  intermediate  position, 
differing  from  sensible  things  in  being  eternal 
and  unchangeable,  from  Forms  in  that  there 
are  many  alike,  while  the  Form  itself  is  in  each 
case  unique. 

Since  the  Forms  were  the  causes  of  all  other 
[20]  things,  he  thought  their  elements  were 
the  elements  of  all  things.  As  matter,  the  great 
and  the  small  were  principles;  as  essential 
reality,  the  One;  for  from  the  great  and  the 
small,  by  participation  in  the  One,  come  the 
Numbers. 

But  he  agreed  with  the  Pythagoreans  in  say¬ 
ing  that  the  One  is  substance  and  not  a  predi¬ 
cate  of  something  else;  and  in  saying  that  the 
Numbers  are  the  causes  of  the  reality  of  other 
[25]  things  he  agreed  with  them;  but  positing 
a  dyad  and  constructing  the  infinite  out  of 
great  and  small,  instead  of  treating  the  infinite 
as  one,  is  peculiar  to  him;  and  so  is  his  view 
that  the  Numbers  exist  apart  from  sensible 
things,  while  they  say  that  the  things  them¬ 
selves  are  Numbers,  and  do  not  place  the  ob¬ 
jects  of  mathematics  between  Forms  and  sensi- 


BOOK  I,  CHAPTERS  5-6 


5o6  METAPHYSICS  988b 


[30]  ble  things.  His  divergence  from  the  Pyth¬ 
agoreans  in  making  the  One  and  the  Numbers 
separate  from  things,  and  his  introduction  of 
the  Forms,  were  due  to  his  inquiries  in  the 
region  of  definitions  (for  the  earlier  thinkers 
had  no  tincture  of  dialectic),  and  his  making 
the  other  entity  besides  the  One  a  dyad  was 
due  to  the  belief  that  the  numbers,  except  those 
which  were  prime,  could  be  neatly  produced 
out  of  the  dyad  as  out  of  some  plastic  material. 
988a  Yet  what  happens  is  the  contrary;  the 
theory  is  not  a  reasonable  one.  For  they  make 
many  things  out  of  the  matter,  and  the  form 
generates  only  once,  but  what  we  observe  is 
that  one  table  is  made  from  one  matter,  while 
the  man  who  applies  the  form,  though  he  is 
[5]  one,  makes  many  tables.  And  the  relation 
of  the  male  to  the  female  is  similar;  for  the 
latter  is  impregnated  by  one  copulation,  but 
the  male  impregnates  many  females;  yet  these 
are  analogues  of  those  first  principles. 

Plato,  then,  declared  himself  thus  on  the 
points  in  question;  it  is  evident  from  what  has 
been  said  that  he  has  used  only  two  causes,  that 
of  the  essence  and  the  material  cause  (for  the 
[/o]  Forms  are  the  causes  of  the  essence  of  all 
other  things,  and  the  One  is  the  cause  of  the 
essence  of  the  Forms);  and  it  is  evident  what 
the  underlying  matter  is,  of  which  the  Forms 
are  predicated  in  the  case  of  sensible  things, 
and  the  One  in  the  case  of  Forms,  viz.  that  this 
is  a  dyad,  the  great  and  the  small.  Further,  he 
has  assigned  the  cause  of  good  and  that  of  evil 
to  the  elements,  one  to  each  of  the  two,  as  we 
[75]  say  some  of  his  predecessors  sought  to  do, 
e.g.  Empedocles  and  Anaxagoras. 

7 

Our  review  of  those  who  have  spoken  about 
first  principles  and  reality  and  of  the  way  in 
which  they  have  spoken,  has  been  concise  and 
[20]  summary;  but  yet  we  have  learnt  this 
much  from  them,  that  of  those  who  speak 
about  ‘principle’  and  ‘cause’  no  one  has  men¬ 
tioned  any  principle  except  those  which  have 
been  distinguished  in  our  work  on  nature,1 
but  all  evidently  have  some  inkling  of  them, 
though  only  vaguely.  For  some  speak  of  the 
first  principle  as  matter,  whether  they  suppose 
[25]  one  or  more  first  principles,  and  whether 
they  suppose  this  to  be  a  body  or  to  be  in¬ 
corporeal;  e.g.  Plato  spoke  of  the  great  and  the 
small,  the  Italians  of  the  infinite,  Empedocles 
of  fire,  earth,  water,  and  air,  Anaxagoras  of 
the  infinity  of  things  composed  of  similar  parts. 

1  Physics ,  11.  3,  7. 


These,  then,  have  all  had  a  notion  of  this  kind 
of  cause,  and  so  have  all  who  speak  of  air  or 
[30]  fire  or  water,  or  something  denser  than 
fire  and  rarer  than  air;  for  some  have  said  the 
prime  element  is  of  this  kind. 

These  thinkers  grasped  this  cause  only;  but 
certain  others  have  mentioned  the  source  of 
movement,  e.g.  those  who  make  friendship 
and  strife,  or  reason,  or  love,  a  principle. 

The  essence,  i.e.  the  substantial  reality,  no 
[^5]  one  has  expressed  distinctly.  It  is  hinted 
at  chiefly  by  those  who  believe  in  the  Forms; 
988b  for  they  do  not  suppose  either  that  the 
Forms  are  the  matter  of  sensible  things,  and 
the  One  the  matter  of  the  Forms,  or  that  they 
are  the  source  of  movement  (for  they  say  these 
are  causes  rather  of  immobility  and  of  being 
at  rest),  but  they  furnish  the  Forms  as  the  es- 
[5]  sence  of  every  other  thing,  and  the  One  as 
the  essence  of  the  Forms. 

That  for  whose  sake  actions  and  changes 
and  movements  take  place,  they  assert  to  be  a 
cause  in  a  way,  but  not  in  this  way,  i.e.  not  in 
the  way  in  which  it  is  its  nature  to  be  a  cause. 
For  those  who  speak  of  reason  or  friendship 
class  these  causes  as  goods;  they  do  not  speak, 
however,  as  if  anything  that  exists  either  ex¬ 
isted  or  came  into  being  for  the  sake  of  these, 
[/o]  but  as  if  movements  started  from  these. 
In  the  same  way  those  who  say  the  One  or  the 
existent  is  the  good,  say  that  it  is  the  cause  of 
substance,  but  not  that  substance  either  is  or 
comes  to  be  for  the  sake  of  this.  Therefore  it 
turns  out  that  in  a  sense  they  both  say  and  do 
[75]  not  say  the  good  is  a  cause;  for  they  do  not 
call  it  a  cause  qua  good  but  only  incidentally. 

All  these  thinkers,  then,  as  they  cannot  pitch 
on  another  cause,  seem  to  testify  that  we  have 
determined  rightly  both  how  many  and  of 
what  sort  the  causes  are.  Besides  this  it  is  plain 
that  when  the  causes  are  being  looked  for, 
either  all  four  must  be  sought  thus  or  they 
must  be  sought  in  one  of  these  four  ways.  Let 
[20]  us  next  discuss  the  possible  difficulties 
with  regard  to  the  way  in  which  each  of  these 
thinkers  has  spoken,  and  with  regard  to  his 
situation  relatively  to  the  first  principles. 

8 

Those,  then,  who  say  the  universe  is  one  and 
posit  one  kind  of  thing  as  matter,  and  as  cor¬ 
poreal  matter  which  has  spatial  magnitude, 
evidently  go  astray  in  many  ways.  For  they 
[25]  posit  the  elements  of  bodies  only,  not  of 
incorporeal  things,  though  there  are  also  in¬ 
corporeal  things.  And  in  trying  to  state  the 


989b  BOOK  I,  CHAPTERS  6-8  507 


causes  of  generation  and  destruction,  and  in 
giving  a  physical  account  of  all  things,  they  do 
away  with  the  cause  of  movement.  Further, 
they  err  in  not  positing  the  substance,  i.e.  the 
essence,  as  the  cause  of  anything,  and  besides 
this  in  lightly  calling  any  of  the  simple  bodies 
[50]  except  earth  the  first  principle,  without 
inquiring  how  they  are  produced  out  of  one 
another, — I  mean  fire,  water,  earth,  and  air. 
For  some  things  are  produced  out  of  each  other 
by  combination,  others  by  separation,  and  this 
makes  the  greatest  difference  to  their  priority 
[  J5]  and  posteriority.  For  ( 1 )  in  a  way  the  prop¬ 
erty  of  being  most  elementary  of  all  would  seem 
to  belong  to  the  first  thing  from  which  they  are 
989a  produced  by  combination,  and  this  prop¬ 
erty  would  belong  to  the  most  fine-grained  and 
subtle  of  bodies.  For  this  reason  those  who 
make  fire  the  principle  would  be  most  in 
agreement  with  this  argument.  But  each  of  the 
other  thinkers  agrees  that  the  element  of  cor- 
[5]  poreal  things  is  of  this  sort.  At  least  none 
of  those  who  named  one  element  claimed  that 
earth  was  the  element,  evidently  because  of 
the  coarseness  of  its  grain.  (Of  the  other  three 
elements  each  has  found  some  judge  on  its 
side;  for  some  maintain  that  fire,  others  that 
water,  others  that  air  is  the  element.  Yet  why, 
after  all,  do  they  not  name  earth  also,  as  most 
men  do?  For  people  say  all  things  are  earth. 
[jo]  And  Hesiod  says  earth  was  produced  first 
of  corporeal  things;  so  primitive  and  popular 
has  the  opinion  been.)  According  to  this  argu¬ 
ment,  then,  no  one  would  be  right  who  either 
says  the  first  principle  is  any  of  the  elements 
other  than  fire,  or  supposes  it  to  be  denser  than 
[75]  air  but  rarer  than  water.  But  (2)  if  that 
which  is  later  in  generation  is  prior  in  nature, 
and  that  which  is  concocted  and  compounded 
is  later  in  generation,  the  contrary  of  what  we 
have  been  saying  must  be  true, — water  must  be 
prior  to  air,  and  earth  to  water. 

So  much,  then,  for  those  who  posit  one  cause 
such  as  we  mentioned;  but  the  same  is  true  if 
one  supposes  more  of  these,  as  Empedocles  says 
[20]  the  matter  of  things  is  four  bodies.  For  he 
too  is  confronted  by  consequences  some  of 
which  are  the  same  as  have  been  mentioned, 
while  others  are  peculiar  to  him.  For  we  see 
these  bodies  produced  from  one  another,  which 
implies  that  the  same  body  does  not  always  re¬ 
main  fire  or  earth  (we  have  spoken  about  this 
[25]  in  our  works  on  nature1);  and  regarding 
the  cause  of  movement  and  the  question  wheth¬ 
er  we  must  posit  one  or  two,  he  must  be 

1  On  the  Heavens ,  in.  7. 


thought  to  have  spoken  neither  correctly  nor 
altogether  plausibly.  And  in  general,  change 
of  quality  is  necessarily  done  away  with  for 
those  who  speak  thus,  for  on  their  view  cold 
will  not  come  from  hot  nor  hot  from  cold.  For 
if  it  did  there  would  be  something  that  ac¬ 
cepted  the  contraries  themselves,  and  there 
would  be  some  one  entity  that  became  fire  and 
water,  which  Empedocles  denies. 

[jo]  As  regards  Anaxagoras,  if  one  were  to 
suppose  that  he  said  there  were  two  elements, 
the  supposition  would  accord  thoroughly  with 
an  argument  which  Anaxagoras  himself  did 
not  state  articulately,  but  which  he  must  have 
accepted  if  any  one  had  led  him  on  to  it.  True, 
to  say  that  in  the  beginning  all  things  were 
mixed  is  absurd  both  on  other  grounds  and  be¬ 
cause  it  follows  that  they  must  have  existed 
989b  before  in  an  unmixed  form,  and  because 
nature  does  not  allow  any  chance  thing  to  be 
mixed  with  any  chance  thing,  and  also  because 
on  this  view  modifications  and  accidents  could 
be  separated  from  substances  (for  the  same 
things  which  are  mixed  can  be  separated);  yet 
if  one  were  to  follow  him  up,  piecing  together 
[5]  what  he  means,  he  would  perhaps  be  seen 
to  be  somewhat  modern  in  his  views.  For  when 
nothing  was  separated  out,  evidently  nothing 
could  be  truly  asserted  of  the  substance  that 
then  existed.  I  mean,  e.g.  that  it  was  neither 
white  nor  black,  nor  grey  nor  any  other  colour, 
but  of  necessity  colourless;  for  if  it  had  been 
coloured,  it  would  have  had  one  of  these  col- 
[/o]  ours.  And  similarly,  by  this  same  argu¬ 
ment,  it  was  flavourless,  nor  had  it  any  similar 
attribute;  for  it  could  not  be  either  of  any 
quality  or  of  any  size,  nor  could  it  be  any 
definite  kind  of  thing.  For  if  it  were,  one  of  the 
particular  forms  would  have  belonged  to  it, 
and  this  is  impossible,  since  all  were  mixed 
together;  for  the  particular  form  would  neces¬ 
sarily  have  been  already  separated  out,  but  he 
[75]  says  all  were  mixed  except  reason,  and 
this  alone  was  unmixed  and  pure.  From  this 
it  follows,  then,  that  he  must  say  the  principles 
are  the  One  (for  this  is  simple  and  unmixed) 
and  the  Other,  which  is  of  such  a  nature  as  we 
suppose  the  indefinite  to  be  before  it  is  de¬ 
fined  and  partakes  of  some  form.  Therefore, 
while  expressing  himself  neither  rightly  nor 
clearly,  he  means  something  like  what  the  later 
[20]  thinkers  say  and  what  is  now  more  clearly 
seen  to  be  the  case. 

But  these  thinkers  are,  after  all,  at  home 
only  in  arguments  about  generation  and  de¬ 
struction  and  movement;  for  it  is  practically 


5o8  METAPHYSICS  990b 


only  of  this  sort  of  substance  that  they  seek  the 
rinciples  and  the  causes.  But  those  who  ex- 
25]  tend  their  vision  to  all  things  that  exist, 
and  of  existing  things  suppose  some  to  be  per¬ 
ceptible  and  others  not  perceptible,  evidently 
study  both  classes,  which  is  all  the  more  reason 
why  one  should  devote  some  time  to  seeing 
what  is  good  in  their  views  and  what  bad  from 
the  standpoint  of  the  inquiry  we  have  now 
before  us. 

The  ‘Pythagoreans’  treat  of  principles  and 
[50]  elements  stranger  than  those  of  the  phys¬ 
ical  philosophers  (the  reason  is  that  they  got 
the  principles  from  non-sensible  things,  for 
the  objects  of  mathematics,  except  those  of 
astronomy,  are  of  the  class  of  things  without 
movement);  yet  their  discussions  and  investi¬ 
gations  are  all  about  nature;  for  they  generate 
990*  the  heavens,  and  with  regard  to  their 
parts  and  attributes  and  functions  they  observe 
the  phenomena,  and  use  up  the  principles  and 
the  causes  in  explaining  these,  which  implies 
that  they  agree  with  the  others,  the  physical 
philosophers,  that  the  real  is  just  all  that  which 
[5]  is  perceptible  and  contained  by  the  so- 
called  ‘heavens’.  But  the  causes  and  the  prin¬ 
ciples  which  they  mention  are,  as  we  said,1 
sufficient  to  act  as  steps  even  up  to  the  higher 
realms  of  reality,  and  are  more  suited  to  these 
than  to  theories  about  nature.  They  do  not  tell 
us  at  all,  however,  how  there  can  be  movement 
if  limit  and  unlimited  and  odd  and  even  are 
[jo]  the  only  things  assumed,  or  how  without 
movement  and  change  there  can  be  generation 
and  destruction,  or  the  bodies  that  move 
through  the  heavens  can  do  what  they  do. 

Further,  if  one  either  granted  them  that  spa¬ 
tial  magnitude  consists  of  these  elements,  or 
this  were  proved,  still  how  would  some  bodies 
be  light  and  others  have  weight?  To  judge 
[75]  from  what  they  assume  and  maintain  they 
are  speaking  no  more  of  mathematical  bodies 
than  of  perceptible;  hence  they  have  said  noth¬ 
ing  whatever  about  fire  or  earth  or  the  other 
bodies  of  this  sort,  I  suppose  because  they  have 
nothing  to  say  which  applies  peculiarly  to  per¬ 
ceptible  things. 

Further,  how  are  we  to  combine  the  beliefs 
[20]  that  the  attributes  of  number,  and  num¬ 
ber  itself,  are  causes  of  what  exists  and  hap¬ 
pens  in  the  heavens  both  from  the  beginning 
and  now,  and  that  there  is  no  other  number 
than  this  number  out  of  which  the  world  is 
composed  ?  When  in  one  particular  region  they 
place  opinion  and  opportunity,  and,  a  little 

1 989b  3i-3- 


above  or  below,  injustice  and  decision  or  mix¬ 
ture,  and  allege,  as  proof,  that  each  of  these  is 
[25]  a  number,  and  that  there  happens  to  be 
already  in  this  place  a  plurality  of  the  extended 
bodies  composed  of  numbers,  because  these  at¬ 
tributes  of  number  attach  to  the  various  places, 
— this  being  so,  is  this  number,  which  we  must 
suppose  each  of  these  abstractions  to  be,  the 
same  number  which  is  exhibited  in  the  material 
universe,  or  is  it  another  than  this?  Plato  says 
[50]  it  is  different;  yet  even  he  thinks  that  both 
these  bodies  and  their  causes  are  numbers,  but 
that  the  intelligible  numbers  are  causes,  while 
the  others  are  sensible . 

9 

Let  us  leave  the  Pythagoreans  for  the  present; 
for  it  is  enough  to  have  touched  on  them  as 
much  as  we  have  done.  But  as  for  those  who 
990b  posit  the  Ideas  as  causes,  firstly,  in  seek¬ 
ing  to  grasp  the  causes  of  the  things  around  us, 
they  introduced  others  equal  in  number  to 
these,  as  if  a  man  who  wanted  to  count  things 
thought  he  would  not  be  able  to  do  it  while 
they  were  few,  but  tried  to  count  them  when 
he  had  added  to  their  number.  For  the  Forms 
[5]  are  practically  equal  to — or  not  fewer  than 
— the  things,  in  trying  to  explain  which  these 
thinkers  proceeded  from  them  to  the  Forms. 
For  to  each  thing  there  answers  an  entity  which 
has  the  same  name  and  exists  apart  from  the 
substances,  and  so  also  in  the  case  of  all  other 
groups  there  is  a  one  over  many,  whether  the 
many  are  in  this  world  or  are  eternal. 

Further,  of  the  ways  in  which  we  prove  that 
[jo]  the  Forms  exist,  none  is  convincing;  for 
from  some  no  inference  necessarily  follows, 
and  from  some  arise  Forms  even  of  things  of 
which  we  think  there  are  no  Forms.  For  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  arguments  from  the  existence  of 
the  sciences  there  will  be  Forms  of  all  things 
of  which  there  are  sciences  and  according  to 
the  ‘one  over  many’  argument  there  will  be 
Forms  even  of  negations,  and  according  to  the 
argument  that  there  is  an  object  for  thought 
even  when  the  thing  has  perished,  there  will 
be  Forms  of  perishable  things;  for  we  have 
[75]  an  image  of  these.  Further,  of  the  more 
accurate  arguments,  some  lead  to  Ideas  of 
relations,  of  which  we  say  there  is  no  inde¬ 
pendent  class,  and  others  introduce  the  ‘third 
man’. 

And  in  general  the  arguments  for  the  Forms 
destroy  the  things  for  whose  existence  we  are 
more  zealous  than  for  the  existence  of  the 
Ideas;  for  it  follows  that  not  the  dyad  but 


991b 


BOOK  I,  CHAPTERS  8-9 


5°9 


[20]  number  is  first,  i.e.  that  the  relative  is 
prior  to  the  absolute, — besides  all  the  other 
points  on  which  certain  people  by  following 
out  the  opinions  held  about  the  Ideas  have 
come  into  conflict  with  the  principles  of  the 
theory. 

Further,  according  to  the  assumption  on 
which  our  belief  in  the  Ideas  rests,  there  will  be 
Forms  not  only  of  substances  but  also  of  many 
other  things  (for  the  concept  is  single  not  only 
[25]  in  the  case  of  substances  but  also  in  the 
other  cases,  and  there  are  sciences  not  only  of 
substance  but  also  of  other  things,  and  a  thou¬ 
sand  other  such  difficulties  confront  them). 
But  according  to  the  necessities  of  the  case  and 
the  opinions  held  about  the  Forms,  if  Forms 
can  be  shared  in  there  must  be  Ideas  of  sub- 
[30]  stances  only.  For  they  are  not  shared  in 
incidentally,  but  a  thing  must  share  in  its  Form 
as  in  something  not  predicated  of  a  subject  (by 
‘being  shared  in  incidentally*  I  mean  that  e.g. 
if  a  thing  shares  in  ‘double  itself*,  it  shares  also 
in  ‘eternal*,  but  incidentally;  for  ‘eternal*  hap¬ 
pens  to  be  predicable  of  the  ‘double*).  There¬ 
fore  the  Forms  will  be  substance;  but  the  same 
terms  indicate  substance  in  this  and  in  the  ideal 
991a  world  (or  what  will  be  the  meaning  of 
saying  that  there  is  something  apart  from  the 
particulars — the  one  over  many?).  And  if  the 
Ideas  and  the  particulars  that  share  in  them 
have  the  same  form,  there  will  be  something 
common  to  these;  for  why  should  ‘2*  be  one 
and  the  same  in  the  perishable  2*s  or  in  those 
which  are  many  but  eternal,  and  not  the  same 
[5]  in  the  ‘2*  itself’  as  in  the  particular  2?  But 
if  they  have  not  the  same  form,  they  must  have 
only  the  name  in  common,  and  it  is  as  if  one 
were  to  call  both  Callias  and  a  wooden  image 
a  ‘man’,  without  observing  any  community 
between  them. 

Above  all  one  might  discuss  the  question 
what  on  earth  the  Forms  contribute  to  sensible 
things,  either  to  those  that  are  eternal  or  to 
[/o]  those  that  come  into  being  and  cease  to 
be.  For  they  cause  neither  movement  nor  any 
change  in  them.  But  again  they  help  in  no  wise 
either  towards  the  knowledge  of  the  other 
things  (for  they  are  not  even  the  substance  of 
these,  else  they  would  have  been  in  them),  or 
towards  their  being,  if  they  are  not  in  the  par¬ 
ticulars  which  share  in  them;  though  if  they 
were,  they  might  be  thought  to  be  causes,  as 
[75]  white  causes  whiteness  in  a  white  object 
by  entering  into  its  composition.  But  this  argu¬ 
ment,  which  first  Anaxagoras  and  later  Eudox¬ 
us  and  certain  others  used,  is  very  easily  upset; 


for  it  is  not  difficult  to  collect  many  insuperable 
objections  to  such  a  view. 

But,  further,  all  other  things  cannot  come 
[20]  from  the  Forms  in  any  of  the  usual  senses 
of  ‘from*.  And  to  say  that  they  are  patterns  and 
the  other  things  share  in  them  is  to  use  empty 
words  and  poetical  metaphors.  For  what  is  it 
that  works,  looking  to  the  Ideas?  And  any¬ 
thing  can  either  be,  or  become,  like  another 
without  being  copied  from  it,  so  that  whether 
[25]  Socrates  exists  or  not  a  man  like  Socrates 
might  come  to  be;  and  evidently  this  might  be 
so  even  if  Socrates  were  eternal.  And  there  will 
be  several  patterns  of  the  same  thing,  and 
therefore  several  Forms;  e.g.  ‘animal*  and  ‘two- 
footed’  and  also  ‘man  himself*  will  be  Forms 
of  man.  Again,  the  Forms  are  patterns  not  only 
[jo]  of  sensible  things,  but  of  Forms  them¬ 
selves  also;  i.e.  the  genus,  as  genus  of  various 
species,  will  be  so;  therefore  the  same  thing 
will  be  pattern  and  copy. 

991b  Again,  it  would  seem  impossible  that  the 
substance  and  that  of  which  it  is  the  substance 
should  exist  apart;  how,  therefore,  could  the 
Ideas,  being  the  substances  of  things,  exist 
apart?  In  the  Phaedo 1  the  case  is  stated  in  this 
way — that  the  Forms  are  causes  both  of  being 
and  of  becoming;  yet  when  the  Forms  exist, 
still  the  things  that  share  in  them  do  not  come 
[5]  into  being,  unless  there  is  something  to 
originate  movement;  and  many  other  things 
come  into  being  (e.g.  a  house  or  a  ring)  of 
which  we  say  there  are  no  Forms.  Clearly, 
therefore,  even  the  other  things  can  both  be 
and  come  into  being  owing  to  such  causes  as 
produce  the  things  just  mentioned. 

Again,  if  the  Forms  are  numbers,  how  can 
[/o]  they  be  causes?  Is  it  because  existing 
things  are  other  numbers,  e.g.  one  number  is 
man,  another  is  Socrates,  another  Callias?  Why 
then  are  the  one  set  of  numbers  causes  of  the 
other  set?  It  will  not  make  any  difference  even 
if  the  former  are  eternal  and  the  latter  are  not. 
But  if  it  is  because  things  in  this  sensible  world 
(e.g.  harmony)  are  ratios  of  numbers,  evident¬ 
ly  the  things  between  which  they  are  ratios  are 
some  one  class  of  things.  If,  then,  this — the 
[75]  matter — is  some  definite  thing,  evidently 
the  numbers  themselves  too  will  be  ratios  of 
something  to  something  else.  E.g.  if  Callias  is  a 
numerical  ratio  between  fire  and  earth  and 
water  and  air,  his  Idea  also  will  be  a  number  of 
certain  other  underlying  things;  and  man-him- 
self,  whether  it  is  a  number  in  a  sense  or  not, 
will  still  be  a  numerical  ratio  of  certain  things 

1 100. 


5io 

and  not  a  number  proper,  nor  will  it  be  a  kind 
[20]  of  number  merely  because  it  is  a  numer¬ 
ical  ratio. 

Again,  from  many  numbers  one  number  is 
produced,  but  how  can  one  Form  come  from 
many  Forms?  And  if  the  number  comes  not 
from  the  many  numbers  themselves  but  from 
the  units  in  them,  e.g.  in  10,000,  how  is  it  with 
the  units?  If  they  are  specifically  alike,  numer- 
[25]  ous  absurdities  will  follow,  and  also  if 
they  are  not  alike  (neither  the  units  in  one 
number  being  themselves  like  one  another  nor 
those  in  other  numbers  being  all  like  to  all); 
for  in  what  will  they  differ,  as  they  are  without 
quality?  This  is  not  a  plausible  view,  nor  is  it 
consistent  with  our  thought  on  the  matter. 

Further,  they  must  set  up  a  second  kind  of 
number  (with  which  arithmetic  deals),  and  all 
the  objects  which  are  called  ‘intermediate’  by 
some  thinkers;  and  how  do  these  exist  or  from 
what  principles  do  they  proceed?  Or  why  must 
[jo]  they  be  intermediate  between  the  things 
in  this  sensible  world  and  the  things-them- 
selves  ? 

Further,  the  units  in  2  must  each  come  from 
a  prior  2;  but  this  is  impossible. 

992a  Further,  why  is  a  number,  when  taken 
all  together,  one? 

Again,  besides  what  has  been  said,  if  the 
units  are  diverse  the  Platonists  should  have 
spoken  like  those  who  say  there  are  four,  or 
two,  elements;  for  each  of  these  thinkers  gives 
the  name  of  element  not  to  that  which  is  com- 
[5]  mon,  e.g.  to  body,  but  to  fire  and  earth, 
whether  there  is  something  common  to  them, 
viz.  body,  or  not.  But  in  fact  the  Platonists 
speak  as  if  the  One  were  homogeneous  like 
fire  or  water;  and  if  this  is  so,  the  numbers  will 
not  be  substances.  Evidently,  if  there  is  a  One- 
itself  and  this  is  a  first  principle,  ‘one’  is  being 
used  in  more  than  one  sense;  for  otherwise  the 
theory  is  impossible. 

[/o]  When  we  wish  to  reduce  substances  to 
their  principles,  we  state  that  lines  come  from 
the  short  and  long  (i.e.  from  a  kind  of  small 
and  great),  and  the  plane  from  the  broad  and 
narrow,  and  body  from  the  deep  and  shallow. 
Yet  how  then  can  either  the  plane  contain  a 
line,  or  the  solid  a  line  or  a  plane?  For  the 
broad  and  narrow  is  a  different  class  from  the 
[75]  deep  and  shallow.  Therefore,  just  as  num¬ 
ber  is  not  present  in  these,  because  the  many 
and  few  are  different  from  these,  evidently  no 
other  of  the  higher  classes  will  be  present  in 
the  lower.  But  again  the  broad  is  not  a  genus 
which  includes  the  deep,  for  then  the  solid 


992b 

would  have  been  a  species  of  plane.  Further, 
from  what  principle  will  the  presence  of  the 
points  in  the  line  be  derived?  Plato  even  used 
[20]  to  object  to  this  class  of  things  as  being 
a  geometrical  fiction.  He  gave  the  name  of 
principle  of  the  line — and  this  he  often  posited 
— to  the  indivisible  lines.  Yet  these  must  have 
a  limit;  therefore  the  argument  from  which 
the  existence  of  the  line  follows  proves  also 
the  existence  of  the  point. 

In  general,  though  philosophy  seeks  the 
[25]  cause  of  perceptible  things,  we  have  given 
this  up  (for  we  say  nothing  of  the  cause  from 
which  change  takes  its  start),  but  while  we 
fancy  we  are  stating  the  substance  of  percepti¬ 
ble  things,  we  assert  the  existence  of  a  second 
class  of  substances,  while  our  account  of  the 
way  in  which  they  are  the  substances  of  per¬ 
ceptible  things  is  empty  talk;  for  ‘sharing’,  as 
we  said  before,1  means  nothing. 

Nor  have  the  Forms  any  connexion  with 
[30]  what  we  see  to  be  the  cause  in  the  case 
of  the  arts,  that  for  whose  sake  both  all  mind 
and  the  whole  of  nature  are  operative, — with 
this  cause  which  we  assert  to  be  one  of  the 
first  principles;  but  mathematics  has  come  to 
be  identical  with  philosophy  for  modern  think¬ 
ers,  though  they  say  that  it  should  be  studied 
for  the  sake  of  other  things.2 
992b  Further,  one  might  suppose  that  the  sub¬ 
stance  which  according  to  them  underlies  as 
matter  is  too  mathematical,  and  is  a  predicate 
and  differentia  of  the  substance,  i.e.  of  the 
matter,  rather  than  matter  itself;  i.e.  the  great 
and  the  small  are  like  the  rare  and  the  dense 
which  the  physical  philosophers  speak  of,  call- 
[5]  ing  these  the  primary  differentiae  of  the 
substratum;  for  these  are  a  kind  of  excess  and 
defect.  And  regarding  movement,  if  the  great 
and  the  small  are  to  he  movement,  evidently 
the  Forms  will  be  moved;  but  if  they  are  not 
to  be  movement,  whence  did  movement  come? 
The  whole  study  of  nature  has  been  anni¬ 
hilated. 

And  what  is  thought  to  be  easy — to  show 
[/o]  that  all  things  are  one — is  not  done;  for 
what  is  proved  by  the  method  of  setting  out 
instances  is  not  that  all  things  are  one  but  that 
there  is  a  One  itself, — if  we  grant  all  the  as¬ 
sumptions.  And  not  even  this  follows,  if  we  do 
not  grant  that  the  universal  is  a  genus;  and 
this  in  some  cases  it  cannot  be. 

Nor  can  it  be  explained  either  how  the  lines 
and  planes  and  solids  that  come  after  the  num- 

1  99  ia  20-22. 

2  Cf.  Plato,  Republic ,  vii.  531,  533. 


METAPHYSICS 


993b 

[75]  bers  exist  or  can  exist,  or  what  significance 
they  have;  for  these  can  neither  be  Forms  (for 
they  are  not  numbers),  nor  the  intermediates 
(for  those  are  the  objects  of  mathematics),  nor 
the  perishable  things.  This  is  evidently  a  dis¬ 
tinct  fourth  class. 

In  general,  if  we  search  for  the  elements  of 
existing  things  without  distinguishing  the 
many  senses  in  which  things  are  said  to  exist, 
we  cannot  find  them,  especially  if  the  search 
[20]  for  the  elements  of  which  things  are  made 
is  conducted  in  this  manner.  For  it  is  surely  im¬ 
possible  to  discover  what  ‘acting'  or  ‘being 
acted  on',  or  ‘the  straight’,  is  made  of,  but  if 
elements  can  be  discovered  at  all,  it  is  only  the 
elements  of  substances;  therefore  either  to  seek 
the  elements  of  all  existing  things  or  to  think 
one  has  them  is  incorrect. 

And  how  could  we  learn  the  elements  of  all 
[25]  things?  Evidently  we  cannot  start  by 
knowing  anything  before.  For  as  he  who  is 
learning  geometry,  though  he  may  know  other 
things  before,  knows  none  of  the  things  with 
which  the  science  deals  and  about  which  he  is 
to  learn,  so  is  it  in  all  other  cases.  Therefore  if 
there  is  a  science  of  all  things,  such  as  some 
assert  to  exist,  he  who  is  learning  this  will 
[jo]  know  nothing  before.  Yet  all  learning  is 
by  means  of  premisses  which  are  (either  all  or 
some  of  them)  known  before, — whether  the 
learning  be  by  demonstration  or  by  definitions; 
for  the  elements  of  the  definition  must  be 
known  before  and  be  familiar;  and  learning 
by  induction  proceeds  similarly.  But  again,  if 
993a  the  science  were  actually  innate,  it  were 
strange  that  we  are  unaware  of  our  possession 
of  the  greatest  of  sciences. 

Again,  how  is  one  to  come  to  \now  what  all 
things  are  made  of,  and  how  is  this  to  be  made 
evident ?  This  also  affords  a  difficulty;  for  there 


511 

might  be  a  conflict  of  opinion,  as  there  is  about 
[5]  certain  syllables;  some  say  za  is  made 
out  of  s  and  d  and  a,  while  others  say  it  is 
a  distinct  sound  and  none  of  those  that  are 
familiar. 

Further,  how  could  we  know  the  objects  of 
sense  without  having  the  sense  in  question? 
Yet  we  ought  to,  if  the  elements  of  which  all 
things  consist,  as  complex  sounds  consist  of 
[/o]  the  elements  proper  to  sound,  are  the 
same. 

10 

It  is  evident,  then,  even  from  what  we  have 
said  before,  that  all  men  seem  to  seek  the  causes 
named  in  the  Physics ,l  and  that  we  cannot 
name  any  beyond  these;  but  they  seek  these 
vaguely;  and  though  in  a  sense  they  have  all 
been  described  before,  in  a  sense  they  have  not 
been  described  at  all.  For  the  earliest  philos- 
[75]  ophy  is,  on  all  subjects,  like  one  who  lisps, 
since  it  is  young  and  in  its  beginnings.  For 
even  Empedocles  says  bone  exists  by  virtue  of 
the  ratio  in  it.  Now  this  is  the  essence  and  the 
substance  of  the  thing.  But  it  is  similarly  nec¬ 
essary  that  flesh  and  each  of  the  other  tissues 
should  be  the  ratio  of  its  elements,  or  that  not 
[20]  one  of  them  should;  for  it  is  on  account 
of  this  that  both  flesh  and  bone  and  everything 
else  will  exist,  and  not  on  account  of  the  mat¬ 
ter,  which  he  names, — fire  and  earth  and  water 
and  air.  But  while  he  would  necessarily  have 
agreed  if  another  had  said  this,  he  has  not  said 
it  clearly. 

On  these  questions  our  views  have  been  ex- 
[25]  pressed  before;  but  let  us  return  to  enu¬ 
merate  the  difficulties  that  might  be  raised  on 
these  same  points;2  for  perhaps  we  may  get 
from  them  some  help  towards  our  later  diffi¬ 
culties. 


BOOK  I,  CHAPTERS  9-10— BOOK  II,  CHAPTER  1 


BOOK  II 


1 

[30]  The  investigation  of  the  truth  is  in  one 
way  hard,  in  another  easy.  An  indication  of 
this  is  found  in  the  fact  that  no  one  is  able  to 
attain  the  truth  adequately,  while,  on  the  other 
993b  hand,  we  do  not  collectively  fail,  but 
every  one  says  something  true  about  the  nature 
of  things,  and  while  individually  we  contribute 
little  or  nothing  to  the  truth,  by  the  union  of 
all  a  considerable  amount  is  amassed.  There¬ 
fore,  since  the  truth  seems  to  be  like  the  pro- 
[5]  verbial  door,  which  no  one  can  fail  to  hit, 


in  this  respect  it  must  be  easy,  but  the  fact  that 
we  can  have  a  whole  truth  and  not  the  par¬ 
ticular  part  we  aim  at  shows  the  difficulty  of  it. 

Perhaps,  too,  as  difficulties  are  of  two  kinds, 
the  cause  of  the  present  difficulty  is  not  in  the 
facts  but  in  us.  For  as  the  eyes  of  bats  are  to 
[70]  the  blaze  of  day,  so  is  the  reason  in  our 
soul  to  the  things  which  are  by  nature  most 
evident  of  all. 

It  is  just  that  we  should  be  grateful,  not  only 
to  those  with  whose  views  we  may  agree,  but 

1  »•  3>  7- 

2  The  reference  is  to  Book  iii. 


METAPHYSICS  994b 


also  to  those  who  have  expressed  more  super¬ 
ficial  views;  for  these  also  contributed  some¬ 
thing,  by  developing  before  us  the  powers  of 
[75]  thought.  It  is  true  that  if  there  had  been 
no  Timotheus  we  should  have  been  without 
much  of  our  lyric  poetry;  but  if  there  had  been 
no  Phrynis  there  would  have  been  no  Timo¬ 
theus.  The  same  holds  good  of  those  who  have 
expressed  views  about  the  truth;  for  from  some 
thinkers  we  have  inherited  certain  opinions, 
while  the  others  have  been  responsible  for  the 
appearance  of  the  former. 

It  is  right  also  that  philosophy  should  be 
[20]  called  knowledge  of  the  truth.  For  the 
end  of  theoretical  knowledge  is  truth,  while 
that  of  practical  knowledge  is  action  (for  even 
if  they  consider  how  things  are,  practical  men 
do  not  study  the  eternal,  but  what  is  relative 
and  in  the  present).  Now  we  do  not  know  a 
truth  without  its  cause;  and  a  thing  has  a 
quality  in  a  higher  degree  than  other  things  if 
in  virtue  of  it  the  similar  quality  belongs  to 
the  other  things  as  well  (e.g.  fire  is  the  hottest 
[25]  of  things;  for  it  is  the  cause  of  the  heat  of 
all  other  things);  so  that  that  which  causes 
derivative  truths  to  be  true  is  most  true.  Hence 
the  principles  of  eternal  things  must  be  always 
most  true  (for  they  are  not  merely  sometimes 
true,  nor  is  there  any  cause  of  their  being,  but 
they  themselves  are  the  cause  of  the  being  of 
[jo]  other  things),  so  that  as  each  thing  is  in 
respect  of  being,  so  is  it  in  respect  of  truth. 

2 

994a  But  evidently  there  is  a  first  principle, 
and  the  causes  of  things  are  neither  an  infinite 
series  nor  infinitely  various  in  kind.  For  (1) 
neither  can  one  thing  proceed  from  another,  as 
from  matter,  ad  infinitum  (e.g.  flesh  from 
[5]  earth,  earth  from  air,  air  from  fire,  and  so 
on  without  stopping),  nor  can  the  sources  of 
movement  form  an  endless  series  (man  for  in¬ 
stance  being  acted  on  by  air,  air  by  the  sun, 
the  sun  by  Strife,  and  so  on  without  limit). 
Similarly  the  final  causes  cannot  go  on  ad  in¬ 
finitum, — walking  being  for  the  sake  of 
health,  this  for  the  sake  of  happiness,  happiness 
for  the  sake  of  something  else,  and  so  one  thing 
always  for  the  sake  of  another.  And  the  case  of 
[/o]  the  essence  is  similar.  For  in  the  case  of 
intermediates,  which  have  a  last  term  and  a 
term  prior  to  them,  the  prior  must  be  the  cause 
of  the  later  terms.  For  if  we  had  to  say  which 
of  the  three  is  the  cause,  we  should  say  the  first; 
surely  not  the  last,  for  the  final  term  is  the 
[75]  cause  of  none;  nor  even  the  intermediate, 


for  it  is  the  cause  only  of  one.  (It  makes  no 
difference  whether  there  is  one  intermediate  or 
more,  nor  whether  they  are  infinite  or  finite  in 
number.)  But  of  series  which  are  infinite  in  this 
way,  and  of  the  infinite  in  general,  all  the  parts 
down  to  that  now  present  are  alike  intermedi¬ 
ates;  so  that  if  there  is  no  first  there  is  no  cause 
at  all. 

Nor  can  there  be  an  infinite  process  down- 
[20]  wards,  with  a  beginning  in  the  upward 
direction,  so  that  water  should  proceed  from 
fire,  earth  from  water,  and  so  always  some 
other  kind  should  be  produced.  For  one  thing 
comes  from  another  in  two  ways — not  in  the 
sense  in  which  ‘from’  means  ‘after’  (as  we  say 
‘from  the  Isthmian  games  come  the  Olym¬ 
pian’),  but  either  (i)  as  the  man  comes  from 
the  boy,  by  the  boy’s  changing,  or  (ii)  as  air 
[25]  comes  from  water.  By  ‘as  the  man  comes 
from  the  boy’  we  mean  ‘as  that  which  has  come 
to  be  from  that  which  is  coming  to  be,  or  as 
that  which  is  finished  from  that  which  is  being 
achieved’  (for  as  becoming  is  between  being 
and  not  being,  so  that  which  is  becoming  is  al¬ 
ways  between  that  which  is  and  that  which  is 
not;  for  the  learner  is  a  man  of  science  in  the 
making,  and  this  is  what  is  meant  when  we  say 
[30]  that  from  a  learner  a  man  of  science  is  be¬ 
ing  made);  on  the  other  hand,  coming  from 
another  thing  as  water  comes  from  air  implies 
the  destruction  of  the  other  thing.  This  is  why 
changes  of  the  former  kind  are  not  reversible, 
and  the  boy  does  not  come  from  the  man  (for 
it  is  not  that  which  comes  to  be  something  that 
comes  to  be  as  a  result  of  coming  to  be,  but  that 
994b  which  exists  after  the  coming  to  be;  for 
it  is  thus  that  the  day,  too,  comes  from  the 
morning — in  the  sense  that  it  comes  after  the 
morning;  which  is  the  reason  why  the  morning 
cannot  come  from  the  day);  but  changes  of  the 
other  kind  are  reversible.  But  in  both  cases  it  is 
impossible  that  the  number  of  terms  should  be 
infinite.  For  terms  of  the  former  kind,  being 
intermediates,  must  have  an  end,  and  terms  of 
[5]  the  latter  kind  change  back  into  one  anoth¬ 
er;  for  the  destruction  of  either  is  the  genera¬ 
tion  of  the  other. 

At  the  same  time  it  is  impossible  that  the 
first  cause,  being  eternal,  should  be  destroyed; 
for  since  the  process  of  becoming  is  not  infinite 
in  the  upward  direction,  that  which  is  the  first 
thing  by  whose  destruction  something  came  to 
be  must  be  non-eternal. 

Further,  the  final  cause  is  an  end,  and  that 
sort  of  end  which  is  not  for  the  sake  of  some¬ 
thing  else,  but  for  whose  sake  everything  else 


995b  BOOK  II,  CHAPTERS  1-3- 

[/o]  is;  so  that  if  there  is  to  be  a  last  term  of 
this  sort,  the  process  will  not  be  infinite;  but  if 
there  is  no  such  term,  there  will  be  no  final 
cause,  but  those  who  maintain  the  infinite  se¬ 
ries  eliminate  the  Good  without  knowing  it 
(yet  no  one  would  try  to  do  anything  if  he  were 
not  going  to  come  to  a  limit);  nor  would  there 
be  reason  in  the  world;  the  reasonable  man, 
[75]  at  least,  always  acts  for  a  purpose,  and 
this  is  a  limit;  for  the  end  is  a  limit. 

But  the  essence ,  also,  cannot  be  reduced  to 
another  definition  which  is  fuller  in  expression. 
For  the  original  definition  is  always  more  of  a 
definition,  and  not  the  later  one;  and  in  a  series 
in  which  the  first  term  has  not  the  required 
[20]  character,  the  next  has  not  it  either. — 
Further,  those  who  speak  thus  destroy  science; 
for  it  is  not  possible  to  have  this  till  one  comes 
to  the  unanalysable  terms.  And  knowledge  be¬ 
comes  impossible;  for  how  can  one  apprehend 
things  that  are  infinite  in  this  way?  For  this  is 
not  like  the  case  of  the  line,  to  whose  divisibil¬ 
ity  there  is  no  stop,  but  which  we  cannot  think 
if  we  do  not  make  a  stop  (for  which  reason  one 
who  is  tracing  the  infinitely  divisible  line  can¬ 
not  be  counting  the  possibilities  of  section),  but 
[25]  the  whole  line  also  must  be  apprehended 
by  something  in  us  that  does  not  move  from 
part  to  part. — Again,  nothing  infinite  can  exist; 
and  if  it  could,  at  least  the  notion  of  infinity  is 
not  infinite. 

But  (2)  if  the  \inds  of  causes  had  been  infi¬ 
nite  in  number,  then  also  knowledge  would 
have  been  impossible;  for  we  think  we  know, 
only  when  we  have  ascertained  the  causes,  but 
[jo]  that  which  is  infinite  by  addition  cannot 
be  gone  through  in  a  finite  time. 


—BOOK  III,  CHAPTER  1  513 

3 

The  effect  which  lectures  produce  on  a  hear¬ 
er  depends  on  his  habits;  for  we  demand  the 
language  we  are  accustomed  to,  and  that  which 
995a  is  different  from  this  seems  not  in  keep¬ 
ing  but  somewhat  unintelligible  and  foreign  be¬ 
cause  of  its  unwontedness.  For  it  is  the  custom¬ 
ary  that  is  intelligible.  The  force  of  habit  is 
shown  by  the  laws,  in  which  the  legendary  and 
[5]  childish  elements  prevail  over  our  knowl¬ 
edge  about  them,  owing  to  habit.  Thus  some 
people  do  not  listen  to  a  speaker  unless  he 
speaks  mathematically,  others  unless  he  gives 
instances,  while  others  expect  him  to  cite  a  poet 
as  witness.  And  some  want  to  have  everything 
done  accurately,  while  others  are  annoyed  by 
accuracy,  either  because  they  cannot  follow  the 
connexion  of  thought  or  because  they  regard  it 
[/o]  as  pettifoggery.  For  accuracy  has  some¬ 
thing  of  this  character,  so  that  as  in  trade  so  in 
argument  some  people  think  it  mean.  Hence 
one  must  be  already  trained  to  know  how  to 
take  each  sort  of  argument,  since  it  is  absurd  to 
seek  at  the  same  time  knowledge  and  the  way 
of  attaining  knowledge;  and  it  is  not  easy  to 
get  even  one  of  the  two. 

[75]  The  minute  accuracy  of  mathematics  is 
not  to  be  demanded  in  all  cases,  but  only  in  the 
case  of  things  which  have  no  matter.  Hence 
its  method  is  not  that  of  natural  science;  for 
presumably  the  whole  of  nature  has  matter. 
Hence  we  must  inquire  first  what  nature  is: 
for  thus  we  shall  also  see  what  natural  science 
treats  of  [and  whether  it  belongs  to  one  science 
or  to  more  to  investigate  the  causes  and  the 
[20]  principles  of  things]. 


BOOK  III 


1 

We  must,  with  a  view  to  the  science  which 
we  are  seeking,  first  recount  the  subjects  that 
should  be  first  discussed.  These  include  both 
[25]  the  other  opinions  that  some  have  held  on 
the  first  principles,  and  any  point  besides  these 
that  happens  to  have  been  overlooked.  For 
those  who  wish  to  get  clear  of  difficulties  it  is 
advantageous  to  discuss  the  difficulties  well;  for 
the  subsequent  free  play  of  thought  implies  the 
solution  of  the  previous  difficulties,  and  it  is 
[jo]  not  possible  to  untie  a  knot  of  which  one 
does  not  know.  But  the  difficulty  of  our  think¬ 
ing  points  to  a  ‘knot’  in  the  object;  for  in  so 
far  as  our  thought  is  in  difficulties,  it  is  in  like 


case  with  those  who  are  bound;  for  in  either 
case  it  is  impossible  to  go  forward.  Hence  one 
should  have  surveyed  all  the  difficulties  before¬ 
hand,  both  for  the  purposes  we  have  stated  and 
because  people  who  inquire  without  first  stat- 
[ J5]  ing  the  difficulties  are  like  those  who  do 
not  know  where  they  have  to  go;  besides,  a 
man  does  not  otherwise  know  even  whether  he 
has  at  any  given  time  found  what  he  is  looking 
995b  for  or  not;  for  the  end  is  not  clear  to  such 
a  man,  while  to  him  who  has  first  discussed  the 
difficulties  it  is  clear.  Further,  he  who  has  heard 
all  the  contending  arguments,  as  if  they  were 
the  parties  to  a  case,  must  be  in  a  better  position 
for  judging. 

The  first  problem  concerns  the  subject  which 


5*4 

[5]  we  discussed  in  our  prefatory  remarks.  It 
is  this — (1)  whether  the  investigation  of  the 
causes  belongs  to  one  or  to  more  sciences,  and 
(2)  whether  such  a  science  should  survey  only 
the  first  principles  of  substance,  or  also  the 
principles  on  which  all  men  base  their  proofs, 
e.g.  whether  it  is  possible  at  the  same  time  to 
assert  and  deny  one  and  the  same  thing  or  not, 
[/o]  and  all  other  such  questions;  and  (3)  if 
the  science  in  question  deals  with  substance, 
whether  one  science  deals  with  all  substances, 
or  more  than  one,  and  if  more,  whether  all  are 
akin,  or  some  of  them  must  be  called  forms  of 
Wisdom  and  the  others  something  else.  And 
(4)  this  itself  is  also  one  of  the  things  that 
must  be  discussed — whether  sensible  sub¬ 
stances  alone  should  be  said  to  exist  or  others 
[75]  also  besides  them,  and  whether  these  oth¬ 
ers  are  of  one  kind  or  there  are  several  classes 
of  substances,  as  is  supposed  by  those  who  be¬ 
lieve  both  in  Forms  and  in  mathematical  ob¬ 
jects  intermediate  between  these  and  sensible 
things.  Into  these  questions,  then,  as  we  say, 
we  must  inquire,  and  also  (5)  whether  our  in¬ 
vestigation  is  concerned  only  with  substances 
or  also  with  the  essential  attributes  of  sub- 
[20]  stances.  Further,  with  regard  to  the  same 
and  other  and  like  and  unlike  and  contrariety, 
and  with  regard  to  prior  and  posterior  and  all 
other  such  terms  about  which  the  dialecticians 
try  to  inquire,  starting  their  investigation  from 
probable  premises  only, — whose  business  is  it 
to  inquire  into  all  these?  Further,  we  must  dis- 
[25]  cuss  the  essential  attributes  of  these  them¬ 
selves;  and  we  must  ask  not  only  what  each  of 
these  is,  but  also  whether  one  thing  always  has 
one  contrary.  Again  (6),  are  the  principles  and 
elements  of  things  the  genera,  or  the  parts  pres¬ 
ent  in  each  thing,  into  which  it  is  divided;  and 
(7)  if  they  are  the  genera,  are  they  the  genera 
that  are  predicated  proximately  of  the  individ¬ 
uals,  or  the  highest  genera,  e.g.  is  animal  or 
[30]  man  the  first  principle  and  the  more  inde¬ 
pendent  of  the  individual  instance?  And  (8) 
we  must  inquire  and  discuss  especially  whether 
there  is,  besides  the  matter,  any  thing  that  is  a 
cause  in  itself  or  not,  and  whether  this  can  ex¬ 
ist  apart  or  not,  and  whether  it  is  one  or  more 
in  number,  and  whether  there  is  something 
[35]  apart  from  the  concrete  thing  (by  the  con¬ 
crete  thing  I  mean  the  matter  with  something 
already  predicated  of  it),  or  there  is  nothing 
apart,  or  there  is  something  in  some  cases 
though  not  in  others,  and  what  sort  of  cases 
996a  these  are.  Again  (9)  we  ask  whether  the 
principles  are  limited  in  number  or  in  kind, 


996a 

both  those  in  the  definitions  and  those  in  the 
substratum;  and  (10)  whether  the  principles 
of  perishable  and  of  imperishable  things  are 
the  same  or  different;  and  whether  they  are  all 
imperishable  or  those  of  perishable  things  are 

ferishable.  Further  (11)  there  is  the  question 
5]  which  is  hardest  of  all  and  most  perplex¬ 
ing,  whether  unity  and  being,  as  the  Pythag¬ 
oreans  and  Plato  said,  are  not  attributes  of 
something  else  but  the  substance  of  existing 
things,  or  this  is  not  the  case,  but  the  substra¬ 
tum  is  something  else, — as  Empedocles  says, 
love;  as  some  one  else  says,  fire;  while  another 
says  water  or  air.  Again  (12)  we  ask  whether 
the  principles  are  universal  or  like  individual 
[/o]  things,  and  (13)  whether  they  exist  po¬ 
tentially  or  actually,  and  further,  whether  they 
are  potential  or  actual  in  any  other  sense  than 
in  reference  to  movement;  for  these  questions 
also  would  present  much  difficulty.  Further 
(14),  are  numbers  and  lines  and  figures  and 
points  a  kind  of  substance  or  not,  and  if  they 
are  substances  are  they  separate  from  sensible 
[75]  things  or  present  in  them?  With  regard 
to  all  these  matters  not  only  is  it  hard  to  get 
possession  of  the  truth,  but  it  is  not  easy  even 
to  think  out  the  difficulties  well. 

2 

(1)  First  then  with  regard  to  what  we  men¬ 
tioned  first,  does  it  belong  to  one  or  to  more 
sciences  to  investigate  all  the  kinds  of  causes? 
[20]  How  could  it  belong  to  one  science  to 
recognize  the  principles  if  these  are  not  con¬ 
trary  ? 

Further,  there  are  many  things  to  which  not 
all  the  principles  pertain.  For  how  can  a  princi¬ 
ple  of  change  or  the  nature  of  the  good  exist 
for  unchangeable  things,  since  everything  that 
in  itself  and  by  its  own  nature  is  good  is  an 
[25]  end,  and  a  cause  in  the  sense  that  for  its 
sake  the  other  things  both  come  to  be  and  are, 
and  since  an  end  or  purpose  is  the  end  of  some 
action,  and  all  actions  imply  change?  So  in  the 
case  of  unchangeable  things  this  principle  could 
not  exist,  nor  could  there  be  a  good-itself.  This 
is  why  in  mathematics  nothing  is  proved  by 
means  of  this  kind  of  cause,  nor  is  there  any 
[30]  demonstration  of  this  kind — ‘because  it  is 
better,  or  worse’ ;  indeed  no  one  even  men¬ 
tions  anything  of  the  kind.  And  so  for  this  rea¬ 
son  some  of  the  Sophists,  e.g.  Aristippus,  used 
to  ridicule  mathematics;  for  in  the  arts  (he 
maintained),  even  in  the  industrial  arts,  e.g.  in 
carpentry  and  cobbling,  the  reason  always  given 
[35]  is  ‘because  it  is  better,  or  worse,’  but  the 


METAPHYSICS 


997*  BOOK  III,  CHAPTERS  1-2  515 


mathematical  sciences  take  no  account  of  goods 
and  evils. 

996b  But  if  there  are  several  sciences  of  the 
causes,  and  a  different  science  for  each  different 
principle,  which  of  these  sciences  should  be 
said  to  be  that  which  we  seek,  or  which  of  the 

feople  who  possess  them  has  the  most  scientific 
5]  knowledge  of  the  object  in  question?  The 
same  thing  may  have  all  the  kinds  of  causes, 
e.g.  the  moving  cause  of  a  house  is  the  art  or 
the  builder,  the  final  cause  is  the  function  it 
fulfils,  the  matter  is  earth  and  stones,  and  the 
form  is  the  definition.  To  judge  from  our  pre¬ 
vious  discussion1  of  the  question  which  of  the 
sciences  should  be  called  Wisdom,  there  is  rea¬ 
son  for  applying  the  name  to  each  of  them.  For 
[/o]  inasmuch  as  it  is  most  architectonic  and 
authoritative  and  the  other  sciences,  like  slave- 
women,  may  not  even  contradict  it,  the  science 
of  the  end  and  of  the  good  is  of  the  nature  of 
Wisdom  (for  the  other  things  are  for  the  sake 
of  the  end).  But  inasmuch  as  it  was  described* 
as  dealing  with  the  first  causes  and  that  which 
is  in  the  highest  sense  object  of  knowledge,  the 
science  of  substance  must  be  of  the  nature  of 
Wisdom.  For  since  men  may  know  the  same 
[75]  thing  in  many  ways,  we  say  that  he  who 
recognizes  what  a  thing  is  by  its  being  so  and 
so  knows  more  fully  than  he  who  recognizes  it 
by  its  not  being  so  and  so,  and  in  the  former 
class  itself  one  knows  more  fully  than  another, 
and  he  knows  most  fully  who  knows  what  a 
thing  is,  not  he  who  knows  its  quantity  or  qual¬ 
ity  or  what  it  can  by  nature  do  or  have  done  to  it. 
And  further  in  all  cases  also  we  think  that  the 
knowledge  of  each  even  of  the  things  of  which 
demonstration  is  possible  is  present  only  when 
[20]  we  know  what  the  thing  is,  e.g.  what 
squaring  a  rectangle  is,  viz.  that  it  is  the  find¬ 
ing  of  a  mean;  and  similarly  in  all  other  cases. 
And  we  know  about  becomings  and  actions 
and  about  every  change  when  we  know  the 
source  of  the  movement;  and  this  is  other  than 
and  opposed  to  the  end.  Therefore  it  would 
[25]  seem  to  belong  to  different  sciences  to  in¬ 
vestigate  these  causes  severally. 

But  (2),  taking  the  starting-points  of  demon¬ 
stration  as  well  as  the  causes,  it  is  a  disputable 
question  whether  they  are  the  object  of  one  sci¬ 
ence  or  of  more  (by  the  starting-points  of  dem¬ 
onstration  I  mean  the  common  beliefs,  on 
which  all  men  base  their  proofs);  e.g.  that  ev¬ 
erything  must  be  either  affirmed  or  denied,  and 
that  a  thing  cannot  at  the  same  time  be  and  not 
[jo]  be,  and  all  other  such  premisses: — the 
1Cf.  1.  982s  8- 1 9. 2  Ibid.  3o-b2.  3  Problem  nos.  as  in  ch.  1. 


question  is  whether  the  same  science  deals  with 
them  as  with  substance,  or  a  different  science, 
and  if  it  is  not  one  science,  which  of  the 
two  must  be  identified  with  that  which  we  now 
seek. — It  is  not  reasonable  that  these  topics 
should  be  the  object  of  one  science;  for  why 
should  it  be  peculiarly  appropriate  to  geometry 
or  to  any  other  science  to  understand  these  mat- 
[55]  ters?  If  then  it  belongs  to  every  science 
997*  alike,  and  cannot  belong  to  all,  it  is  not 
peculiar  to  the  science  which  investigates  sub¬ 
stances,  any  more  than  to  any  other  science,  to 
know  about  these  topics. — And,  at  the  same 
time,  in  what  way  can  there  be  a  science  of  the 
first  principles?  For  we  are  aware  even  now 
what  each  of  them  in  fact  is  (at  least  even  other 
[5]  sciences  use  them  as  familiar) ;  but  if  there  is 
a  demonstrative  science  which  deals  with  them, 
there  will  have  to  be  an  underlying  kind,  and 
some  of  them  must  be  demonstrable  attributes 
and  others  must  be  axioms  (for  it  is  impossible 
that  there  should  be  demonstration  about  all  of 
them);  for  the  demonstration  must  start  from 
certain  premisses  and  be  about  a  certain  subject 
and  prove  certain  attributes.  Therefore  it  fol¬ 
lows  that  all  attributes  that  are  proved  must 
[10]  belong  to  a  single  class;  for  all  demon¬ 
strative  sciences  use  the  axioms. 

But  if  the  science  of  substance  and  the  sci¬ 
ence  which  deals  with  the  axioms  are  different, 
which  of  them  is  by  nature  more  authoritative 
and  prior?  The  axioms  are  most  universal  and 
are  principles  of  all  things.  And  if  it  is  not  the 
business  of  the  philosopher,  to  whom  else  will 
it  belong  to  inquire  what  is  true  and  what  is 
untrue  about  them? 

[/ 5]  (3)  In  general,  do  all  substances  fall  un¬ 
der  one  science  or  under  more  than  one?  If  the 
latter,  to  what  sort  of  substance  is  the  present 
science  to  be  assigned? — On  the  other  hand,  it 
is  not  reasonable  that  one  science  should  deal 
with  all.  For  then  there  would  be  one  demon¬ 
strative  science  dealing  with  all  attributes.  For 
every  demonstrative  science  investigates  with 
[20]  regard  to  some  subject  its  essential  attri¬ 
butes,  starting  from  the  common  beliefs.  There¬ 
fore  to  investigate  the  essential  attributes  of  one 
class  of  things,  starting  from  one  set  of  beliefs, 
is  the  business  of  one  science.  For  the  subject 
belongs  to  one  science,  and  the  premisses  be¬ 
long  to  one,  whether  to  the  same  or  to  another; 
so  that  the  attributes  do  so  too,  whether  they 
are  investigated  by  these  sciences  or  by  one 
compounded  out  of  them. 

[25]  (5)3  Further,  does  our  investigation  deal 
with  substances  alone  or  also  with  their  attri- 


1 6  METAPHYSICS  998* 


butes?  I  mean  for  instance,  if  the  solid  is  a  sub¬ 
stance  and  so  are  lines  and  planes,  is  it  the  busi¬ 
ness  of  the  same  science  to  know  these  and  to 
know  the  attributes  of  each  of  these  classes 
(the  attributes  about  which  the  mathematical 
sciences  offer  proofs),  or  of  a  different  science? 
[jo]  If  of  the  same,  the  science  of  substance 
also  must  be  a  demonstrative  science,  but 
it  is  thought  that  there  is  no  demonstration 
of  the  essence  of  things.  And  if  of  another, 
what  will  be  the  science  that  investigates  the 
attributes  of  substance?  This  is  a  very  difficult 
question. 

(4)  Further,  must  we  say  that  sensible  sub¬ 
stances  alone  exist,  or  that  there  are  others  be- 
[35]  s^es  these?  And  are  substances  of  one 
kind  or  are  there  in  fact  several  kinds  of  sub- 
99715  stances,  as  those  say  who  assert  the  exist¬ 
ence  both  of  the  Forms  and  of  the  intermedi¬ 
ates,  with  which  they  say  the  mathematical 
sciences  deal? — The  sense  in  which  we  say  the 
Forms  are  both  causes  and  self-dependent  sub¬ 
stances  has  been  explained  in  our  first  remarks 
[5]  about  them;1  while  the  theory  presents  dif¬ 
ficulties  in  many  ways,  the  most  paradoxical 
thing  of  all  is  the  statement  that  there  are  cer¬ 
tain  things  besides  those  in  the  material  uni¬ 
verse,  and  that  these  are  the  same  as  sensible 
things  except  that  they  are  eternal  while  the 
latter  are  perishable.  For  they  say  there  is  a 
man-himself  and  a  horse-itself  and  health-itself, 
with  no  further  qualification, — a  procedure 
like  that  of  the  people  who  said  there  are  gods, 
[/o]  but  in  human  form.  For  they  were  posit¬ 
ing  nothing  but  eternal  men,  nor  are  the  Pla- 
tonists  making  the  Forms  anything  other  than 
eternal  sensible  things. 

Further,  if  we  are  to  posit  besides  the  Forms 
and  the  sensibles  the  intermediates  between 
them,  we  shall  have  many  difficulties.  For  clear¬ 
ly  on  the  same  principle  there  will  be  lines  be¬ 
sides  the  lines-themselves  and  the  sensible  lines, 
[75]  and  so  with  each  of  the  other  classes  of 
things;  so  that  since  astronomy  is  one  of  these 
mathematical  sciences  there  will  also  be  a  heav¬ 
en  besides  the  sensible  heaven,  and  a  sun  and  a 
moon  (and  so  with  the  other  heavenly  bodies) 
besides  the  sensible.  Yet  how  are  we  to  believe 
in  these  things?  It  is  not  reasonable  even  to  sup¬ 
pose  such  a  body  immovable,  but  to  suppose  it 
moving  is  quite  impossible. — And  similarly 
[20]  with  the  things  of  which  optics  and  math¬ 
ematical  harmonics  treat;  for  these  also  cannot 
exist  apart  from  the  sensible  things,  for  the 
same  reasons.  For  if  there  are  sensible  things 

1  Cf.  1.  6  and  9. 


and  sensations  intermediate  between  Form  and 
individual,  evidently  there  will  also  be  animals 
intermediate  between  animals-themselves  and 
[25]  the  perishable  animals. — We  might  also 
raise  the  question,  with  reference  to  which 
hjnd  of  existing  things  we  must  look  for  these 
sciences  of  intermediates.  If  geometry  is  to  dif¬ 
fer  from  mensuration  only  in  this,  that  the  lat¬ 
ter  deals  with  things  that  we  perceive,  and  the 
former  with  things  that  are  not  perceptible,  evi¬ 
dently  there  will  also  be  a  science  other  than 
medicine,  intermediate  between  medical-sci- 
ence-itself  and  this  individual  medical  science, 
and  so  with  each  of  the  other  sciences.  Yet  how 
[jo]  is  this  possible?  There  would  have  to  be 
also  healthy  things  besides  the  perceptible 
healthy  things  and  the  healthy-itself. — And  at 
the  same  time  not  even  this  is  true,  that  men¬ 
suration  deals  with  perceptible  and  perishable 
magnitudes;  for  then  it  would  have  perished 
when  they  perished. 

But  on  the  other  hand  astronomy  cannot  be 
dealing  with  perceptible  magnitudes  nor  with 
this  heaven  above  us.  For  neither  are  percepti- 
[33]  ble  lines  such  lines  as  the  geometer  speaks 
998*  of  (for  no  perceptible  thing  is  straight  or 
round  in  the  way  in  which  he  defines  ‘straight* 
and  ‘round’;  for  a  hoop  touches  a  straight 
edge  not  at  a  point,  but  as  Protagoras  used  to 
say  it  did,  in  his  refutation  of  the  geometers), 
nor  are  the  movements  and  spiral  orbits  in  the 
[5]  heavens  like  those  of  which  astronomy 
treats,  nor  have  geometrical  points  the  same 
nature  as  the  actual  stars. — Now  there  are  some 
who  say  that  these  so-called  intermediates  be¬ 
tween  the  Forms  and  the  perceptible  things  ex¬ 
ist,  not  apart  from  the  perceptible  things,  how¬ 
ever,  but  in  these;  the  impossible  results  of  this 
[  /o]  view  would  take  too  long  to  enumerate,  but 
it  is  enough  to  consider  even  such  points  as  the 
following: — It  is  not  reasonable  that  this  should 
be  so  only  in  the  case  of  these  intermediates, 
but  clearly  the  Forms  also  might  be  in  the  per¬ 
ceptible  things;  for  both  statements  are  parts 
of  the  same  theory.  Further,  it  follows  from 
this  theory  that  there  are  two  solids  in  the  same 
place,  and  that  the  intermediates  are  not  im¬ 
movable,  since  they  are  in  the  moving  percep- 
[75]  tible  things.  And  in  general  to  what  pur¬ 
pose  would  one  suppose  them  to  exist  indeed, 
but  to  exist  in  perceptible  things?  For  the  same 
paradoxical  results  will  follow  which  we  have 
already  mentioned;  there  will  be  a  heaven  be¬ 
sides  the  heaven,  only  it  will  be  not  apart  but 
in  the  same  place;  which  is  still  more  impos¬ 
sible. 


999s 


BOOK  III,  CHAPTERS  2-3 


[20]  (6)  Apart  from  the  great  difficulty  of 
stating  the  case  truly  with  regard  to  these  mat¬ 
ters,  it  is  very  hard  to  say,  with  regard  to  the 
first  principles,  whether  it  is  the  genera  that 
should  be  taken  as  elements  and  principles,  or 
rather  the  primary  constituents  of  a  thing;  e.g. 
it  is  the  primary  parts  of  which  articulate 
sounds  consist  that  are  thought  to  be  elements 
and  principles  of  articulate  sound,  not  the 
[25]  common  genus — articulate  sound;  and  we 
give  the  name  of  ‘elements’  to  those  geomet¬ 
rical  propositions,  the  proofs  of  which  are  im¬ 
plied  in  the  proofs  of  the  others,  either  of  all  or 
of  most.  Further,  both  those  who  say  there  are 
several  elements  of  corporeal  things  and  those 
who  say  there  is  one,  say  the  parts  of  which 
bodies  are  compounded  and  consist  are  princi- 
[jo]  pies;  e.g.  Empedocles  says  fire  and  water 
and  the  rest  are  the  constituent  elements  of 
things,  but  does  not  describe  these  as  genera  of 
existing  things.  Besides  this,  if  we  want  to  ex¬ 
amine  the  nature  of  anything  else,  we  examine 
998b  the  parts  of  which,  e.g.  a  bed  consists  and 
how  they  are  put  together,  and  then  we  know 
its  nature. 

To  judge  from  these  arguments,  then,  the 
principles  of  things  would  not  be  the  genera; 
but  if  we  know  each  thing  by  its  definition,  and 
[5]  the  genera  are  the  principles  or  starting- 
points  of  definitions,  the  genera  must  also  be 
the  principles  of  definable  things.  And  if  to  get 
the  knowledge  of  the  species  according  to 
which  things  are  named  is  to  get  the  knowl¬ 
edge  of  things,  the  genera  are  at  least  starting- 
points  of  the  species.  And  some  also  of  those 
who  say  unity  or  being,  or  the  great  and  the 
[/o]  small,  are  elements  of  things,  seem  to 
treat  them  as  genera. 

But,  again,  it  is  not  possible  to  describe  the 
principles  in  both  ways.  For  the  formula  of  the 
essence  is  one;  but  definition  by  genera  will  be 
different  from  that  which  states  the  constituent 
parts  of  a  thing. 

(7)  Besides  this,  even  if  the  genera  are  in  the 
[75]  highest  degree  principles,  should  one  re¬ 
gard  the  first  of  the  genera  as  principles,  or 
those  which  are  predicated  directly  of  the  indi¬ 
viduals?  This  also  admits  of  dispute.  For  if  the 
universal  are  always  more  of  the  nature  of 
principles,  evidently  the  uppermost  of  the 
genera  are  the  principles;  for  these  are  predi¬ 
cated  of  all  things.  There  will,  then,  be  as 
many  principles  of  things  as  there  are  primary 
[20]  genera,  so  that  both  being  and  unity  will 


5T7 

be  principles  and  substances;  for  these  are 
most  of  all  predicated  of  all  existing  things. 
But  it  is  not  possible  that  either  unity  or  being 
should  be  a  single  genus  of  things;  for  the  dif¬ 
ferentiae  of  any  genus  must  each  of  them  both 
have  being  and  be  one,  but  it  is  not  possible 
for  the  genus  taken  apart  from  its  species  (any 
[25]  more  than  for  the  species  of  the  genus) 
to  be  predicated  of  its  proper  differentiae;  so 
that  if  unity  or  being  is  a  genus,  no  differentia 
will  either  have  being  or  be  one.  But  if  unity 
and  being  are  not  genera,  neither  will  they  be 
principles,  if  the  genera  are  the  principles. — 
Again,  the  intermediate  kinds,  in  whose  na¬ 
ture  the  differentiae  are  included,  will  on  this 
theory  be  genera,  down  to  the  indivisible  spe¬ 
cies;  but  as  it  is,  some  are  thought  to  be  genera 
[30]  and  others  are  not  thought  to  be  so.  Be¬ 
sides  this,  the  differentiae  are  principles  even 
more  than. the  genera;  and  if  these  also  are 
principles,  there  comes  to  be  practically  an  in¬ 
finite  number  of  principles,  especially  if  we 
999a  suppose  the  highest  genus  to  be  a  prin¬ 
ciple. — But  again,  if  unity  is  more  of  the  nature 
of  a  principle,  and  the  indivisible  is  one,  and 
everything  indivisible  is  so  either  in  quantity 
or  in  species,  and  that  which  is  so  in  species  is 
the  prior,  and  genera  are  divisible  into  species 
for  man  is  not  the  genus  of  individual  men), 
5]  that  which  is  predicated  directly  of  the 
individuals  will  have  more  unity. — Further,  in 
the  case  of  things  in  which  the  distinction  of 
prior  and  posterior  is  present,  that  which  is 
predicable  of  these  things  cannot  be  something 
apart  from  them  (e.g.  if  two  is  the  first  of 
numbers,  there  will  not  be  a  Number  apart 
from  the  kinds  of  numbers;  and  similarly  there 
will  not  be  a  Figure  apart  from  the  kinds  of 
[/o]  figures;  and  if  the  genera  of  these  things 
do  not  exist  apart  from  the  species,  the  genera 
of  other  things  will  scarcely  do  so;  for  genera 
of  these  things  are  thought  to  exist  if  any  do). 
But  among  the  individuals  one  is  not  prior  and 
another  posterior.  Further,  where  one  thing  is 
better  and  another  worse,  the  better  is  always 
rior;  so  that  of  these  also  no  genus  can  exist. 
75]  From  these  considerations,  then,  the  spe¬ 
cies  predicated  of  individuals  seem  to  be  prin¬ 
ciples  rather  than  the  genera.  But  again,  it  is 
not  easy  to  say  in  what  sense  these  are  to  be 
taken  as  principles.  For  the  principle  or  cause 
must  exist  alongside  of  the  things  of  which 
it  is  the  principle,  and  must  be  capable  of  exist¬ 
ing  in  separation  from  them;  but  for  what  rea¬ 
son  should  we  suppose  any  such  thing  to  exist 
[20]  alongside  of  the  individual,  except  that  it 


1 8  METAPHYSICS  1000* 


is  predicated  universally  and  of  all?  But  if  this 
is  the  reason,  the  things  that  are  more  universal 
must  be  supposed  to  be  more  of  the  nature  of 
principles;  so  that  the  highest  genera  would  be 
the  principles. 

4 

8)  There  is  a  difficulty  connected  with  these, 

25]  the  hardest  of  all  and  the  most  necessary 
to  examine,  and  of  this  the  discussion  now 
awaits  us.  If,  on  the  one  hand,  there  is  nothing 
apart  from  individual  things,  and  the  indi¬ 
viduals  are  infinite  in  number,  how  then  is  it 
possible  to  get  knowledge  of  the  infinite  indi¬ 
viduals?  For  all  things  that  we  come  to  know, 
we  come  to  know  in  so  far  as  they  have  some 
unity  and  identity,  and  in  so  far  as  some  attri¬ 
bute  belongs  to  them  universally. 

But  if  this  is  necessary,  and  there  must  be 
[jo]  something  apart  from  the  individuals,  it 
will  be  necessary  that  the  genera  exist  apart 
from  the  individuals, — either  the  lowest  or  the 
highest  genera;  but  we  found  by  discussion 
just  now  that  this  is  impossible.1 

Further,  if  we  admit  in  the  fullest  sense  that 
something  exists  apart  from  the  concrete  thing, 
whenever  something  is  predicated  of  the  mat¬ 
ter,  must  there,  if  there  is  something  apart,  be 
something  apart  from  each  set  of  individuals, 
999b  or  from  some  and  not  from  others,  or 
from  none?  (A)  If  there  is  nothing  apart  from 
individuals,  there  will  be  no  object  of  thought, 
but  all  things  will  be  objects  of  sense,  and  there 
will  not  be  knowledge  of  anything,  unless  we 
say  that  sensation  is  knowledge.  Further,  noth¬ 
ing  will  be  eternal  or  unmovable;  for  all  per¬ 
ceptible  things  perish  and  are  in  movement. 
[5]  But  if  there  is  nothing  eternal,  neither  can 
there  be  a  process  of  coming  to  be;  for  there 
must  be  something  that  comes  to  be,  i.e.  from 
which  something  comes  to  be,  and  the  ultimate 
term  in  this  series  cannot  have  come  to  be,  since 
the  series  has  a  limit  and  since  nothing  can 
come  to  be  out  of  that  which  is  not.  Further, 
if  generation  and  movement  exist  there  must 
[/o]  also  be  a  limit;  for  no  movement  is  in¬ 
finite,  but  every  movement  has  an  end,  and 
that  which  is  incapable  of  completing  its  com¬ 
ing  to  be  cannot  be  in  process  of  coming  to  be; 
and  that  which  has  completed  its  coming  to 
be  must  be  as  soon  as  it  has  come  to  be.  Further, 
since  the  matter  exists,  because  it  is  ungener¬ 
ated,  it  is  a  fortiori  reasonable  that  the  sub¬ 
stance  or  essence,  that  which  the  matter  is  at 
any  time  coming  to  be,  should  exist;  for  if 

1  Chapter  3. 


neither  essence  nor  matter  is  to  be,  nothing 
[75]  will  be  at  all,  and  since  this  is  impossible 
there  must  be  something  besides  the  concrete 
thing,  viz.  the  shape  or  form. 

But  again  (B)  if  we  are  to  suppose  this,  it  is 
hard  to  say  in  which  cases  we  are  to  suppose 
it  and  in  which  not.  For  evidently  it  is  not  pos¬ 
sible  to  suppose  it  in  all  cases;  we  could  not 
suppose  that  there  is  a  house  besides  the  par- 
[20]  ticular  houses. — Besides  this,  will  the  sub¬ 
stance  of  all  the  individuals,  e.g.  of  all  men,  be 
one?  This  is  paradoxical,  for  all  the  things 
whose  substance  is  one  are  one.  But  are  the 
substances  many  and  different?  This  also  is  un¬ 
reasonable. — At  the  same  time,  how  does  the 
matter  become  each  of  the  individuals,  and 
how  is  the  concrete  thing  these  two  elements? 

(9)  Again,  one  might  ask  the  following 
[25]  question  also  about  the  first  principles.  If 
they  are  one  in  \ind  only,  nothing  will  be 
numerically  one,  not  even  unity-itself  and  be- 
ing-itself ;  and  how  will  knowing  exist,  if  there 
is  not  to  be  something  common  to  a  whole  set 
of  individuals? 

But  if  there  is  a  common  element  which  is 
numerically  one,  and  each  of  the  principles  is 
one,  and  the  principles  are  not  as  in  the  case 
of  perceptible  things  different  for  different 
things  (e.g.  since  this  particular  syllable  is  the 
same  in  kind  whenever  it  occurs,  the  elements 
[jo]  of  it  are  also  the  same  in  kind;  only  in 
kind,  for  these  also,  like  the  syllable,  are  nu¬ 
merically  different  in  different  contexts), — if  it 
is  not  like  this  but  the  principles  of  things  are 
numerically  one,  there  will  be  nothing  else  be¬ 
sides  the  elements  (for  there  is  no  difference  of 
meaning  between  ‘numerically  one’  and  ‘indi¬ 
vidual’;  for  this  is  just  what  we  mean  by  the 
individual — the  numerically  one,  and  by  the 
1000*  universal  we  mean  that  which  is  predi¬ 
cable  of  the  individuals).  Therefore  it  will  be 
just  as  if  the  elements  of  articulate  sound  were 
limited  in  number;  all  the  language  in  the 
world  would  be  confined  to  the  ABC,  since 
there  could  not  be  two  or  more  letters  of  the 
same  kind. 

[5]  ( 10)  One  difficulty  which  is  as  great  as  any 
has  been  neglected  both  by  modern  philos¬ 
ophers  and  by  their  predecessors — whether  the 
principles  of  perishable  and  those  of  imperish¬ 
able  things  are  the  same  or  different.  If  they 
are  the  same,  how  are  some  things  perishable 
and  others  imperishable,  and  for  what  reason? 
The  school  of  Hesiod  and  all  the  theologians 
thought  only  of  what  was  plausible  to  them- 
[/o]  selves,  and  had  no  regard  to  us.  For, 


1001a  BOOK  III,  CHAPTERS  3-4 


asserting  the  first  principles  to  be  gods  and 
born  of  gods,  they  say  that  the  beings  which 
did  not  taste  of  nectar  and  ambrosia  became 
mortal;  and  clearly  they  are  using  words  which 
are  familiar  to  themselves,  yet  what  they  have 
said  about  the  very  application  of  these  causes 
is  above  our  comprehension.  For  if  the  gods 
[75]  taste  of  nectar  and  ambrosia  for  their 
pleasure,  these  are  in  no  wise  the  causes  of 
their  existence;  and  if  they  taste  them  to  main¬ 
tain  their  existence,  how  can  gods  who  need 
food  be  eternal? — But  into  the  subtleties  of 
the  mythologists  it  is  not  worth  our  while  to 
inquire  seriously;  those,  however,  who  use  the 
language  of  proof  we  must  cross-examine  and 
[20]  ask  why,  after  all,  things  which  consist 
of  the  same  elements  are,  some  of  them,  eternal 
in  nature,  while  others  perish.  Since  these  phi¬ 
losophers  mention  no  cause,  and  it  is  unreason¬ 
able  that  things  should  be  as  they  say,  evidently 
the  principles  or  causes  of  things  cannot  be  the 
same.  Even  the  man  whom  one  might  sup- 
[25]  pose  to  speak  most  consistently — Emped¬ 
ocles, — even  he  has  made  the  same  mistake; 
for  he  maintains  that  strife  is  a  principle  that 
causes  destruction,  but  even  strife  would  seem 
no  less  to  produce  everything,  except  the  One; 
for  all  things  excepting  God  proceed  from 
strife.  At  least  he  says: — 

From  which  all  that  was  and  is  and  will  be 
hereafter — 

[jo]  Trees,  and  men  and  women,  too\  their 
growth, 

And  beasts  and  birds  and  water-nourished 
fish, 

And  long-aged  gods} 

The  implication  is  evident  even  apart  from 
1000b  these  words;  for  if  strife  had  not  been 
present  in  things,  all  things  would  have  been 
one,  according  to  him;  for  when  they  have 
come  together,  ‘then  strife  stood  outermost.’2 
Hence  it  also  follows  on  his  theory  that  God 
most  blessed  is  less  wise  than  all  others;  for  he 
[5]  does  not  know  all  the  elements;  for  he  has 
in  him  no  strife,  and  knowledge  is  of  the  like 
by  the  like.  ‘For  by  earth,’  he  says, 

we  see  earth,  by  water  water, 
By  ether  godli\e  ether,  by  fire  wasting  fire, 
Love  by  love,  and  strife  by  gloomy  strife } 
But — and  this  is  the  point  we  started  from — 
[/o]  this  at  least  is  evident,  that  on  his  theory 
it  follows  that  strife  is  as  much  the  cause  of 
existence  as  of  destruction.  And  similarly  love 
is  not  specially  the  cause  of  existence;  for  in 
collecting  things  into  the  One  it  destroys  all 
1Fr.  21.  2  Fr.  36.  3  Fr.  109. 


other  things.  And  at  the  same  time  Empedocles 
mentions  no  cause  of  the  change  itself,  except 
that  things  are  so  by  nature. 

But  when  strife  at  last  waxed  great  in  the 
limbs  of  the  Sphere, 

And  sprang  to  assert  its  rights  as  the  time 
was  fulfilled 

[75]  Which  is  fixed  for  them  in  turn  by  a 
mighty  oath } 

This  implies  that  change  was  necessary;  but  he 
shows  no  cause  of  the  necessity.  But  yet  so  far 
at  least  he  alone  speaks  consistently;  for  he 
does  not  make  some  things  perishable  and 
others  imperishable,  but  makes  all  perishable 
[20]  except  the  elements.  The  difficulty  we  are 
speaking  of  now  is,  why  some  things  are  per¬ 
ishable  and  others  are  not,  if  they  consist  of  the 
same  principles. 

Let  this  suffice  as  proof  of  the  fact  that  the 
principles  cannot  be  the  same.  But  if  there  are 
different  principles,  one  difficulty  is  whether 
these  also  will  be  imperishable  or  perishable. 
For  if  they  are  perishable,  evidently  these  also 
[25]  must  consist  of  certain  elements  (for  all 
things  that  perish,  perish  by  being  resolved  into 
the  elements  of  which  they  consist);  so  that  it 
follows  that  prior  to  the  principles  there  are 
other  principles.  But  this  is  impossible,  whether 
the  process  has  a  limit  or  proceeds  to  infinity. 
Further,  how  will  perishable  things  exist,  if 
their  principles  are  to  be  annulled?  But  if  the 
principles  are  imperishable,  why  will  things 
composed  of  some  imperishable  principles  be 
[30]  perishable,  while  those  composed  of  the 
others  are  imperishable?  This  is  not  probable, 
but  is  either  impossible  or  needs  much  proof. 
Further,  no  one  has  even  tried  to  maintain  dif¬ 
ferent  principles;  they  maintain  the  same  prin¬ 
ciples  for  all  things.  But  they  swallow  the  diffi- 
1001a  culty  we  stated  first5  as  if  they  took  it  to 
be  something  trifling. 

( 1 1 )  The  inquiry  that  is  both  the  hardest  of 
[5]  all  and  the  most  necessary  for  knowledge 
of  the  truth  is  whether  being  and  unity  are 
the  substances  of  things,  and  whether  each  of 
them,  without  being  anything  else,  is  being  or 
unity  respectively,  or  we  must  inquire  what  be¬ 
ing  and  unity  are,  with  the  implication  that 
they  have  some  other  underlying  nature.  For 
some  people  think  they  are  of  the  former, 
others  think  they  are  of  the  latter  character. 
Plato  and  the  Pythagoreans  thought  being  and 
[70]  unity  were  nothing  else,  but  this  was  their 
nature,  their  essence  being  just  unity  and  be¬ 
ing.  But  the  natural  philosophers  take  a  dif- 

4  Fr.  30.  6 1  oooa  5-b  2 1 . 


520 

ferent  line;  e.g.  Empedocles — as  though  reduc¬ 
ing  it  to  something  more  intelligible — says 
what  unity  is;  for  he  would  seem  to  say  it  is 
love:  at  least,  this  is  for  all  things  the  cause  of 
[75]  their  being  one.  Others  say  this  unity  and 
being,  of  which  things  consist  and  have  been 
made,  is  fire,  and  others  say  it  is  air.  A  similar 
view  is  expressed  by  those  who  make  the  ele¬ 
ments  more  than  one;  for  these  also  must  say 
that  unity  and  being  are  precisely  all  the  things 
which  they  say  are  principles. 

(A)  If  we  do  not  suppose  unity  and  being  to 
[20]  be  substances,  it  follows  that  none  of  the 
other  universal  is  a  substance;  for  these  are 
most  universal  of  all,  and  if  there  is  no  unity- 
itself  or  being-itself,  there  will  scarcely  be  in 
any  other  case  anything  apart  from  what  are 
[25]  called  the  individuals.  Further,  if  unity  is 
not  a  substance,  evidently  number  also  will 
not  exist  as  an  entity  separate  from  the  indi¬ 
vidual  things;  for  number  is  units,  and  the  unit 
is  precisely  a  certain  kind  of  one. 

But  (B)  if  there  is  a  unity-itself  and  a  being- 
itself,  unity  and  being  must  be  their  substance; 
for  it  is  not  something  else  that  is  predicated 
universally  of  the  things  that  are  and  are  one, 
but  just  unity  and  being.  But  if  there  is  to  be 
[30]  a  being-itself  and  a  unity-itself,  there  is 
much  difficulty  in  seeing  how  there  will  be  any¬ 
thing  else  besides  these, — I  mean,  how  things 
will  be  more  than  one  in  number.  For  what  is 
different  from  being  does  not  exist,  so  that  it 
necessarily  follows,  according  to  the  argument 
of  Parmenides,  that  all  things  that  are  are  one 
and  this  is  being. 

1001b  There  are  objections  to  both  views.  For 
whether  unity  is  not  a  substance  or  there  is  a 
unity-itself,  number  cannot  be  a  substance.  We 
have  already1  said  why  this  result  follows  if 
unity  is  not  a  substance;  and  if  it  is,  the  same 
difficulty  arises  as  arose  with  regard  to  being. 
[5]  For  whence  is  there  to  be  another  one  be¬ 
sides  unity-itself?  It  must  be  not-one;  but  all 
things  are  either  one  or  many,  and  of  the  many 
each  is  one. 

Further,  if  unity-itself  is  indivisible,  accord¬ 
ing  to  Zeno’s  postulate  it  will  be  nothing.  For 
that  which  neither  when  added  makes  a  thing 
greater  nor  when  subtracted  makes  it  less,  he 
asserts  to  have  no  being,  evidently  assuming 
[/o]  that  whatever  has  being  is  a  spatial  mag¬ 
nitude.  And  if  it  is  a  magnitude,  it  is  corporeal; 
for  the  corporeal  has  being  in  every  dimension, 
while  the  other  objects  of  mathematics,  e.g.  a 
plane  or  a  line,  added  in  one  way  will  increase 

la  24-27. 


1002* 

what  they  are  added  to,  but  in  another  way 
will  not  do  so,  and  a  point  or  a  unit  does  so  in 
no  way.  But,  since  his  theory  is  of  a  low  order, 
and  an  indivisible  thing  can  exist  in  such  a  way 
[75]  as  to  have  a  defence  even  against  him  (for 
the  indivisible  when  added  will  make  the  num¬ 
ber,  though  not  the  size,  greater), — yet  how 
can  a  magnitude  proceed  from  one  such  indi¬ 
visible  or  from  many?  It  is  like  saying  that  the 
line  is  made  out  of  points. 

[20]  But  even  if  one  supposes  the  case  to  be 
such  that,  as  some  say,  number  proceeds  from 
unity-itself  and  something  else  which  is  not 
one,  none  the  less  we  must  inquire  why  and 
how  the  product  will  be  sometimes  a  number 
and  sometimes  a  magnitude,  if  the  not-one  was 
inequality  and  was  the  same  principle  in 
either  case.  For  it  is  not  evident  how  magni¬ 
tudes  could  proceed  either  from  the  one  and 
[25]  this  principle,  or  from  some  number  and 
this  principle. 

5 

(14)  A  question  connected  with  these  is 
whether  numbers  and  bodies  and  planes  and 
points  are  substances  of  a  kind,  or  not.  If  they 
are  not,  it  baffles  us  to  say  what  being  is  and 
what  the  substances  of  things  are.  For  modifica- 
[30]  tions  and  movements  and  relations  and 
dispositions  and  ratios  do  not  seem  to  indicate 
the  substance  of  anything;  for  all  are  predicated 
of  a  subject,  and  none  is  a  ‘this’.  And  as  to  the 
things  which  might  seem  most  of  all  to  indi¬ 
cate  substance,  water  and  earth  and  fire  and 
air,  of  which  composite  bodies  consist,  heat  and 
1002a  cold  and  the  like  are  modifications  of 
these,  not  substances,  and  the  body  which  is 
thus  modified  alone  persists  as  something  real 
and  as  a  substance.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  the 
body  is  surely  less  of  a  substance  than  the  sur- 
[5]  face,  and  the  surface  than  the  line,  and  the 
line  than  the  unit  and  the  point.  For  the  body  is 
bounded  by  these;  and  they  are  thought  to  be 
capable  of  existing  without  body,  but  body  in¬ 
capable  of  existing  without  these.  This  is  why, 
while  most  of  the  philosophers  and  the  earlier 
among  them  thought  that  substance  and  being 
were  identical  with  body,  and  that  all  other 
[70]  things  were  modifications  of  this,  so  that 
the  first  principles  of  the  bodies  were  the  first 
principles  of  being,  the  more  recent  and  those 
who  were  held  to  be  wiser  thought  numbers 
were  the  first  principles.  As  we  said,  then,  if 
these  are  not  substance,  there  is  no  substance 
and  no  being  at  all;  for  the  accidents  of  these  it 
cannot  be  right  to  call  beings. 


METAPHYSICS 


1003*  BOOK  III,  CHAPTERS  4-6  521 


[75]  But  if  this  is  admitted,  that  lines  and 
points  are  substance  more  than  bodies*  but  we 
do  not  see  to  what  sort  of  bodies  these  could 
belong  (for  they  cannot  be  in  perceptible 
bodies),  there  can  be  no  substance. — Further, 
these  are  all  evidently  divisions  of  body, — one 
in  breadth,  another  in  depth,  another  in  length. 
[20]  — Besides  this,  no  sort  of  shape  is  present 
in  the  solid  more  than  any  other;  so  that  if  the 
Hermes  is  not  in  the  stone,  neither  is  the  half 
of  the  cube  in  the  cube  as  something  deter¬ 
minate;  therefore  the  surface  is  not  in  it  either; 
for  if  any  sort  of  surface  were  in  it,  the  surface 
which  marks  off  the  half  of  the  cube  would 
[25]  be  in  it  too.  And  the  same  account  ap¬ 
plies  to  the  line  and  to  the  point  and  the  unit. 
Therefore,  if  on  the  one  hand  body  is  in  the 
highest  degree  substance,  and  on  the  other 
hand  these  things  are  so  more  than  body,  but 
these  are  not  even  instances  of  substance,  it 
baffles  us  to  say  what  being  is  and  what  the 
substance  of  things  is. — For  besides  what  has 
been  said,  the  questions  of  generation  and  de- 
[30]  struction  confront  us  with  further  para¬ 
doxes.  For  if  substance,  not  having  existed  be¬ 
fore,  now  exists,  or  having  existed  before,  after¬ 
wards  does  not  exist,  this  change  is  thought  to 
be  accompanied  by  a  process  of  becoming  or 
perishing;  but  points  and  lines  and  surfaces 
cannot  be  in  process  either  of  becoming  or  of 
perishing,  when  they  at  one  time  exist  and  at 
another  do  not.  For  when  bodies  come  into 
1002b  contact  or  are  divided,  their  boundaries 
simultaneously  become  one  in  the  one  case — 
when  they  touch,  and  two  in  the  other — when 
they  are  divided;  so  that  when  they  have  been 
put  together  one  boundary  does  not  exist  but 
has  perished,  and  when  they  have  been  divided 
the  boundaries  exist  which  before  did  not  exist 
(for  it  cannot  be  said  that  the  point,  which  is 
indivisible,  was  divided  into  two).  And  if  the 
boundaries  come  into  being  and  cease  to  be, 
from  what  do  they  come  into  being?  A  sim- 
[5]  ilar  account  may  also  be  given  of  the  ‘now’ 
in  time;  for  this  also  cannot  be  in  process  of 
coming  into  being  or  of  ceasing  to  be,  but  yet 
seems  to  be  always  different,  which  shows  that 
it  is  not  a  substance.  And  evidently  the  same  is 
true  of  points  and  lines  and  planes;  for  the 
[/o]  same  argument  applies,  since  they  are 
all  alike  either  limits  or  divisions. 

6 

In  general  one  might  raise  the  question  why 
after  all,  besides  perceptible  things  and  the 
intermediates,  we  have  to  look  for  another 


class  of  things,  i.e.  the  Forms  which  we  posit. 
If  it  is  for  this  reason,  because  the  objects  of 
mathematics,  while  they  differ  from  the  things 
[75]  in  this  world  in  some  other  respect,  differ 
not  at  all  in  that  there  are  many  of  the  same 
kind,  so  that  their  first  principles  cannot  be 
limited  in  number  (just  as  the  elements  of  all 
the  language  in  this  sensible  world  are  not  lim¬ 
ited  in  number,  but  in  kind,  unless  one  takes 
the  elements  of  this  individual  syllable  or  of 
[20]  this  individual  articulate  sound — whose 
elements  will  be  limited  even  in  number;  so  is 
it  also  in  the  case  of  the  intermediates;  for 
there  also  the  members  of  the  same  kind  are 
infinite  in  number),  so  that  if  there  are  not — 
besides  perceptible  and  mathematical  objects 
— others  such  as  some  maintain  the  Forms  to 
be,  there  will  be  no  substance  which  is  one  in 
number,  but  only  in  kind,  nor  will  the  first 
rinciples  of  things  be  determinate  in  number, 
25]  but  only  in  kind: — if  then  this  must  be  so, 
the  Forms  also  must  therefore  be  held  to  exist. 
Even  if  those  who  support  this  view  do  not 
express  it  articulately,  still  this  is  what  they 
mean,  and  they  must  be  maintaining  the  Forms 
just  because  each  of  the  Forms  is  a  substance 
and  none  is  by  accident. 

[jo]  But  if  we  are  to  suppose  both  that  the 
Forms  exist  and  that  the  principles  are  one  in 
number,  not  in  kind,  we  have  mentioned1  the 
impossible  results  that  necessarily  follow. 

(13)  Closely  connected  with  this  is  the  ques¬ 
tion  whether  the  elements  exist  potentially  or 
in  some  other  manner.  If  in  some  other  way, 
there  will  be  something  else  prior  to  the  first 
1003*  principles;  for  the  potency  is  prior  to 
the  actual  cause,  and  it  is  not  necessary  for 
everything  potential  to  be  actual. — But  if  the 
elements  exist  potentially,  it  is  possible  that 
everything  that  is  should  not  be.  For  even  that 
which  is  not  yet  is  capable  of  being;  for  that 
which  is  not  comes  to  be,  but  nothing  that  is 
incapable  of  being  comes  to  be. 

[5]  (12)  We  must  not  only  raise  these  ques¬ 
tions  about  the  first  principles,  but  also  ask 
whether  they  are  universal  or  what  we  call 
individuals.  If  they  are  universal,  they  will  not 
be  substances;  for  everything  that  is  common 
indicates  not  a  ‘this’  but  a  ‘such’,  but  substance 
is  a  ‘this’.  And  if  we  are  to  be  allowed  to  lay  it 
down  that  a  common  predicate  is  a  ‘this’  and 
[70]  a  single  thing,  Socrates  will  be  several 
animals — himself  and  ‘man’  and  ‘animal’,  if 
each  of  these  indicates  a  ‘this’  and  a  single 
thing. 

1 999b  27-I00011 4. 


522 

If,  then,  the  principles  are  universals,  these 
results  follow;  if  they  are  not  universals  but  of 
the  nature  of  individuals,  they  will  not  be 
knowable;  for  the  knowledge  of  anything  is 


1003b 

[75]  universal.  Therefore  if  there  is  to  be 
knowledge  of  the  principles  there  must  be 
other  principles  prior  to  them,  namely  those 
that  are  universally  predicated  of  them. 


METAPHYSICS 


BOOK  IV 


1 

There  is  a  science  which  investigates  being  as 
being  and  the  attributes  which  belong  to  this 
in  virtue  of  its  own  nature.  Now  this  is  not  the 
same  as  any  of  the  so-called  special  sciences; 
for  none  of  these  others  treats  universally  of  be¬ 
ing  as  being.  They  cut  off  a  part  of  being  and 
[25]  investigate  the  attribute  of  this  part;  this 
is  what  the  mathematical  sciences  for  instance 
do.  Now  since  we  are  seeking  the  first  prin¬ 
ciples  and  the  highest  causes,  clearly  there 
must  be  some  thing  to  which  these  belong  in 
virtue  of  its  own  nature.  If  then  those  who 
sought  the  elements  of  existing  things  were 
seeking  these  same  principles,  it  is  necessary 
[jo]  that  the  elements  must  be  elements  of 
being  not  by  accident  but  just  because  it  is 
being.  Therefore  it  is  of  being  as  being  that 
we  also  must  grasp  the  first  causes. 

2 

There  are  many  senses  in  which  a  thing  may 
be  said  to  ‘be’,  but  all  that  ‘is’  is  related  to  one 
central  point,  one  definite  kind  of  thing,  and 
is  not  said  to  'be’  by  a  mere  ambiguity.  Every¬ 
thing  which  is  healthy  is  related  to  health,  one 
[35]  thing  in  the  sense  that  it  preserves  health, 
another  in  the  sense  that  it  produces  it,  an¬ 
other  in  the  sense  that  it  is  a  symptom  of  health, 
another  because  it  is  capable  of  it.  And  that 
1003b  which  is  medical  is  relative  to  the  med¬ 
ical  art,  one  thing  being  called  medical  because 
it  possesses  it,  another  because  it  is  naturally 
adapted  to  it,  another  because  it  is  a  function 
of  the  medical  art.  And  we  shall  find  other 
[5]  words  used  similarly  to  these.  So,  too,  there 
are  many  senses  in  which  a  thing  is  said  to  be, 
but  all  refer  to  one  starting-point;  some  things 
are  said  to  be  because  they  are  substances, 
others  because  they  are  affections  of  substance, 
others  because  they  are  a  process  towards  sub¬ 
stance,  or  destructions  or  privations  or  qual¬ 
ities  of  substance,  or  productive  or  generative 
of  substance,  or  of  things  which  are  relative  to 
substance,  or  negations  of  one  of  these  things 
[/o]  or  of  substance  itself.  It  is  for  this  reason 
that  we  say  even  of  non-being  that  it  is  non- 
being.  As,  then,  there  is  one  science  which 


deals  with  all  healthy  things,  the  same  applies 
in  the  other  cases  also.  For  not  only  in  the 
case  of  things  which  have  one  common  notion 
does  the  investigation  belong  to  one  science, 
but  also  in  the  case  of  things  which  are  re¬ 
lated  to  one  common  nature;  for  even  these  in 
[75]  a  sense  have  one  common  notion.  It  is 
clear  then  that  it  is  the  work  of  one  science 
also  to  study  the  things  that  are,  qua  being. — 
But  everywhere  science  deals  chiefly  with  that 
which  is  primary,  and  on  which  the  other 
things  depend,  and  in  virtue  of  which  they  get 
their  names.  If,  then,  this  is  substance,  it  will 
be  of  substances  that  the  philosopher  must 
grasp  the  principles  and  the  causes. 

Now  for  each  one  class  of  things,  as  there  is 
[20]  one  perception,  so  there  is  one  science,  as 
for  instance  grammar,  being  one  science,  in¬ 
vestigates  all  articulate  sounds.  Hence  to  in¬ 
vestigate  all  the  species  of  being  qua  being  is 
the  work  of  a  science  which  is  generically  one, 
and  to  investigate  the  several  species  is  the 
work  of  the  specific  parts  of  the  science. 

If,  now,  being  and  unity  are  the  same  and 
are  one  thing  in  the  sense  that  they  are  implied 
in  one  another  as  principle  and  cause  are,  not  in 
the  sense  that  they  are  explained  by  the  same 
[25]  definition  (though  it  makes  no  difference 
even  if  we  suppose  them  to  be  like  that — in 
fact  this  would  even  strengthen  our  case);  for 
'one  man’  and  ‘man’  are  the  same  thing,  and 
so  are  ‘existent  man’  and  ‘man’,  and  the 
doubling  of  the  words  in  ‘one  man  and  one 
existent  man’  does  not  express  anything  differ¬ 
ent  (it  is  clear  that  the  two  things  are  not 
separated  either  in  coming  to  be  or  in  ceasing 
[30]  to  be);  and  similarly  ‘ one  existent  man’ 
adds  nothing  to  ‘existent  man’,  and  that  it  is 
obvious  that  the  addition  in  these  cases  means 
the  same  thing,  and  unity  is  nothing  apart 
from  being;  and  if,  further,  the  substance  of 
each  thing  is  one  in  no  merely  accidental  way, 
and  similarly  is  from  its  very  nature  something 
that  is: — all  this  being  so,  there  must  be  exactly 
as  many  species  of  being  as  of  unity.  And  to 
investigate  the  essence  of  these  is  the  work  of  a 
[35]  science  which  is  generically  one — I  mean, 
for  instance,  the  discussion  of  the  same  and  the 
similar  and  the  other  concepts  of  this  sort;  and 


1004b  BOOK  III,  CHAPTER  6— BOOK  IV,  CHAPTERS  1-2 


nearly  all  contraries  may  be  referred  to  this 
1004a  origin;  let  us  take  them  as  having  been 
investigated  in  the  ‘Selection  of  Contraries’. 

And  there  are  as  many  parts  of  philosophy 
as  there  are  kinds  of  substance,  so  that  there 
must  necessarily  be  among  them  a  first  phi¬ 
losophy  and  one  which  follows  this.  For  being 
[5]  falls  immediately  into  genera;  for  which 
reason  the  sciences  too  will  correspond  to  these 
genera.  For  the  philosopher  is  like  the  mathe¬ 
matician,  as  that  word  is  used;  for  mathematics 
also  has  parts,  and  there  is  a  first  and  a  second 
science  and  other  successive  ones  within  the 
sphere  of  mathematics. 

Now  since  it  is  the  work  of  one  science  to 
[10]  investigate  opposites,  and  plurality  is  op¬ 
posed  to  unity — and  it  belongs  to  one  science 
to  investigate  the  negation  and  the  privation 
because  in  both  cases  we  are  really  investigat¬ 
ing  the  one  thing  of  which  the  negation  or  the 
privation  is  a  negation  or  privation  (for  we 
either  say  simply  that  that  thing  is  not  present, 
or  that  it  is  not  present  in  some  particular  class; 
in  the  latter  case  difference  is  present  over  and 
above  what  is  implied  in  negation;  for  nega¬ 
tion  means  just  the  absence  of  the  thing  in 
[75]  question,  while  in  privation  there  is  also 
employed  an  underlying  nature  of  which  the 
privation  is  asserted): — in  view  of  all  these 
facts,  the  contraries  of  the  concepts  we  named 
above,  the  other  and  the  dissimilar  and  the  un¬ 
equal,  and  everything  else  which  is  derived 
either  from  these  or  from  plurality  and  unity, 
must  fall  within  the  province  of  the  science 
[20]  above  named.  And  contrariety  is  one  of 
these  concepts;  for  contrariety  is  a  kind  of  dif¬ 
ference,  and  difference  is  a  kind  of  otherness. 
Therefore,  since  there  are  many  senses  in 
which  a  thing  is  said  to  be  one,  these  terms 
also  will  have  many  senses,  but  yet  it  belongs 
to  one  science  to  know  them  all;  for  a  term 
belongs  to  different  sciences  not  if  it  has  dif¬ 
ferent  senses,  but  if  it  has  not  one  meaning 
[25]  and  its  definitions  cannot  be  referred  to 
one  central  meaning.  And  since  all  things  are 
referred  to  that  which  is  primary,  as  for  in¬ 
stance  all  things  which  are  called  one  are  re¬ 
ferred  to  the  primary  one,  we  must  say  that  this 
holds  good  also  of  the  same  and  the  other  and 
of  contraries  in  general;  so  that  after  distin¬ 
guishing  the  various  senses  of  each,  we  must 
then  explain  by  reference  to  what  is  primary 
in  the  case  of  each  of  the  predicates  in  ques¬ 
tion,  saying  how  they  are  related  to  it;  for 
[50]  some  will  be  called  what  they  are  called 
because  they  possess  it,  others  because  they 


produce  it,  and  others  in  other  such  ways. 

It  is  evident,  then,  that  it  belongs  to  one  sci¬ 
ence  to  be  able  to  give  an  account  of  these  con¬ 
cepts  as  well  as  of  substance  (this  was  one  of 
the  questions  in  our  book  of  problems),  and 
that  it  is  the  function  of  the  philosopher  to  be 
1004b  able  to  investigate  all  things.  For  if  it  is 
not  the  function  of  the  philosopher,  who  is  it 
who  will  inquire  whether  Socrates  and  Soc¬ 
rates  seated  are  the  same  thing,  or  whether  one 
thing  has  one  contrary,  or  what  contrariety  is, 
or  how  many  meanings  it  has?  And  similarly 
with  all  other  such  questions.  Since,  then,  these 
[5]  are  essential  modifications  of  unity  qua 
unity  and  of  being  qua  being,  not  qua  num¬ 
bers  or  lines  or  fire,  it  is  clear  that  it  belongs 
to  this  science  to  investigate  both  the  essence 
of  these  concepts  and  their  properties.  And 
those  who  study  these  properties  err  not  by 
leaving  the  sphere  of  philosophy,  but  by  for¬ 
getting  that  substance,  of  which  they  have  no 
correct  idea,  is  prior  to  these  other  things.  For 
[/o]  number  qua  number  has  peculiar  attri¬ 
butes,  such  as  oddness  and  evenness,  commen- 
surability  and  equality,  excess  and  defect,  and 
these  belong  to  numbers  either  in  themselves 
or  in  relation  to  one  another.  And  similarly 
the  solid  and  the  motionless  and  that  which  is 
in  motion  and  the  weightless  and  that  which 
has  weight  have  other  peculiar  properties.  So 
[75]  too  there  are  certain  properties  peculiar 
to  being  as  such,  and  it  is  about  these  that  the 
philosopher  has  to  investigate  the  truth. — An 
indication  of  this  may  be  mentioned: — dialec¬ 
ticians  and  sophists  assume  the  same  guise  as 
the  philosopher,  for  sophistic  is  Wisdom  which 
exists  only  in  semblance,  and  dialecticians  em- 
[20]  brace  all  things  in  their  dialectic,  and  be¬ 
ing  is  common  to  all  things;  but  evidently  their 
dialectic  embraces  these  subjects  because  these 
are  proper  to  philosophy. — For  sophistic  and 
dialectic  turn  on  the  same  class  of  things  as 
philosophy,  but  this  differs  from  dialectic  in 
the  nature  of  the  faculty  required  and  from 
sophistic  in  respect  of  the  purpose  of  the  phil- 
[25]  osophic  life.  Dialectic  is  merely  critical 
where  philosophy  claims  to  know,  and  sophis¬ 
tic  is  what  appears  to  be  philosophy  but  is  not. 

Again,  in  the  list  of  contraries  one  of  the 
two  columns  is  privative,  and  all  contraries  are 
reducible  to  being  and  non-being,  and  to  unity 
and  plurality,  as  for  instance  rest  belongs  to 
unity  and  movement  to  plurality.  And  nearly 
[jo]  all  thinkers  agree  that  being  and  sub¬ 
stance  are  composed  of  contraries;  at  least  all 
name  contraries  as  their  first  principles — some 


524  METAPHYSICS  1005b 


name  odd  and  even,  some  hot  and  cold,  some 
limit  and  the  unlimited,  some  love  and  strife. 
And  all  the  others  as  well  are  evidently  reduci¬ 
ble  to  unity  and  plurality  (this  reduction  we 
1005a  must  take  for  granted),  and  the  prin¬ 
ciples  stated  by  other  thinkers  fall  entirely  un¬ 
der  these  as  their  genera.  It  is  obvious  then 
from  these  considerations  too  that  it  belongs 
to  one  science  to  examine  being  qua  being. 
For  all  things  are  either  contraries  or  com¬ 
posed  of  contraries,  and  unity  and  plurality 
are  the  starting-points  of  all  contraries.  And 
[5]  these  belong  to  one  science,  whether  they 
have  or  have  not  one  single  meaning.  Prob¬ 
ably  the  truth  is  that  they  have  not;  yet  even 
if  ‘one’  has  several  meanings,  the  other  mean¬ 
ings  will  be  related  to  the  primary  meaning 
(and  similarly  in  the  case  of  the  contraries), 
even  if  being  or  unity  is  not  a  universal  and 
the  same  in  every  instance  or  is  not  separable 
[/o]  from  the  particular  instances  (as  in  fact 
it  probably  is  not;  the  unity  is  in  some  cases 
that  of  common  reference,  in  some  cases  that  of 
serial  succession).  And  for  this  reason  it  does 
not  belong  to  the  geometer  to  inquire  what  is 
contrariety  or  completeness  or  unity  or  being 
or  the  same  or  the  other,  but  only  to  presup¬ 
pose  these  concepts  and  reason  from  this 
starting-point. — Obviously  then  it  is  the  work 
of  one  science  to  examine  being  qua  being,  and 
the  attributes  which  belong  to  it  qua  being,  and 
the  same  science  will  examine  not  only  sub- 
[75]  stances  but  also  their  attributes,  both 
those  above  named  and  the  concepts  ‘prior’  and 
‘posterior’,  ‘genus’  and  ‘species’,  ‘whole’  and 
‘part’,  and  the  others  of  this  sort. 

3 

We  must  state  whether  it  belongs  to  one  or  to 
different  sciences  to  inquire  into  the  truths 
which  are  in  mathematics  called  axioms,  and 
[20]  into  substance.  Evidently,  the  inquiry  into 
these  also  belongs  to  one  science,  and  that  the 
science  of  the  philosopher;  for  these  truths  hold 
good  for  everything  that  is,  and  not  for  some 
special  genus  apart  from  others.  And  all  men 
use  them,  because  they  are  true  of  being  qua 
[25]  being  and  each  genus  has  being.  But  men 
use  them  just  so  far  as  to  satisfy  their  purposes; 
that  is,  as  far  as  the  genus  to  which  their  dem¬ 
onstrations  refer  extends.  Therefore  since  these 
truths  clearly  hold  good  for  all  things  qua 
being  (for  this  is  what  is  common  to  them), 
to  him  who  studies  being  qua  being  belongs 
the  inquiry  into  these  as  well.  And  for  this  rea¬ 
son  no  one  who  is  conducting  a  special  inquiry 


[jo]  tries  to  say  anything  about  their  truth  or 
falsity, — neither  the  geometer  nor  the  arith¬ 
metician.  Some  natural  philosophers  indeed 
have  done  so,  and  their  procedure  was  intel¬ 
ligible  enough;  for  they  thought  that  they 
alone  were  inquiring  about  the  whole  of  na¬ 
ture  and  about  being.  But  since  there  is  one 
kind  of  thinker  who  is  above  even  the  natural 
hilosopher  (for  nature  is  only  one  particular 
35]  genus  of  being),  the  discussion  of  these 
truths  also  will  belong  to  him  whose  inquiry 
is  universal  and  deals  with  primary  substance. 
1005b  Physics  also  is  a  kind  of  Wisdom,  but 
it  is  not  the  first  kind. — And  the  attempts  of 
some  of  those  who  discuss  the  terms  on  which 
truth  should  be  accepted,  are  due  to  a  want  of 
training  in  logic;  for  they  should  know  these 
things  already  when  they  come  to  a  special 
study,  and  not  be  inquiring  into  them  while 
they  are  listening  to  lectures  on  it. 

[5]  Evidently  then  it  belongs  to  the  philos¬ 
opher,  i.e.  to  him  who  is  studying  the  nature 
of  all  substance,  to  inquire  also  into  the  prin¬ 
ciples  of  syllogism.  But  he  who  knows  best 
about  each  genus  must  be  able  to  state  the  most 
[/o]  certain  principles  of  his  subject,  so  that 
he  whose  subject  is  existing  things  qua  exist¬ 
ing  must  be  able  to  state  the  most  certain  prin¬ 
ciples  of  all  things.  This  is  the  philosopher,  and 
the  most  certain  principle  of  all  is  that  regard¬ 
ing  which  it  is  impossible  to  be  mistaken;  for 
such  a  principle  must  be  both  the  best  known 
(for  all  men  may  be  mistaken  about  things 
which  they  do  not  know),  and  non-hypothet- 
[75]  ical.  For  a  principle  which  every  one  must 
have  who  understands  anything  that  is,  is  not 
a  hypothesis;  and  that  which  every  one  must 
know  who  knows  anything,  he  must  already 
have  when  he  comes  to  a  special  study.  Evi¬ 
dently  then  such  a  principle  is  the  most  certain 
of  all;  which  principle  this  is,  let  us  proceed  to 
say.  It  is,  that  the  same  attribute  cannot  at  the 
same  time  belong  and  not  belong  to  the  same 
[20]  subject  and  in  the  same  respect;  we  must 
presuppose,  to  guard  against  dialectical  objec¬ 
tions,  any  further  qualifications  which  might 
be  added.  This,  then,  is  the  most  certain  of  all 
principles,  since  it  answers  to  the  definition 
given  above.  For  it  is  impossible  for  any  one  to 
believe  the  same  thing  to  be  and  not  to  be,  as 
[25]  some  think  Heraclitus  says.  For  what  a 
man  says,  he  does  not  necessarily  believe;  and 
if  it  is  impossible  that  contrary  attributes  should 
belong  at  the  same  time  to  the  same  subject 
(the  usual  qualifications  must  be  presupposed 
in  this  premiss  too),  and  if  an  opinion  which 


1006b 

contradicts  another  is  contrary  to  it,  obviously 
it  is  impossible  for  the  same  man  at  the  same 
time  to  believe  the  same  thing  to  be  and  not  to 
[3o\  be;  for  if  a  man  were  mistaken  on  this 
point  he  would  have  contrary  opinions  at  the 
same  time.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  all  who  are 
carrying  out  a  demonstration  reduce  it  to  this 
as  an  ultimate  belief;  for  this  is  naturally  the 
starting-point  even  for  all  the  other  axioms. 

4 

[55]  There  are  some  who,  as  we  said,1  both 
themselves  assert  that  it  is  possible  for  the 
same  thing  to  be  and  not  to  be,  and  say  that 
1006*  people  can  judge  this  to  be  the  case. 
And  among  others  many  writers  about  nature 
use  this  language.  But  we  have  now  posited 
that  it  is  impossible  for  anything  at  the  same 
time  to  be  and  not  to  be,  and  by  this  means 
have  shown  that  this  is  the  most  indisputable 
[5]  of  all  principles. — Some  indeed  demand 
that  even  this  shall  be  demonstrated,  but  this 
they  do  through  want  of  education,  for  not  to 
know  of  what  things  one  should  demand  dem¬ 
onstration,  and  of  what  one  should  not,  argues 
want  of  education.  For  it  is  impossible  that 
there  should  be  demonstration  of  absolutely 
everything  (there  would  be  an  infinite  regress, 
[/o]  so  that  there  would  still  be.no  demonstra¬ 
tion);  but  if  there  are  things  of  which  one 
should  not  demand  demonstration,  these  per¬ 
sons  could  not  say  what  principle  they  main¬ 
tain  to  be  more  self-evident  than  the  present 
one. 

We  can,  however,  demonstrate  negatively 
even  that  this  view  is  impossible,  if  our  op¬ 
ponent  will  only  say  something;  and  if  he  says 
nothing,  it  is  absurd  to  seek  to  give  an  account 
of  our  views  to  one  who  cannot  give  an  ac¬ 
count  of  anything,  in  so  far  as  he  cannot  do  so. 
[75]  For  such  a  man,  as  such,  is  from  the  start 
no  better  than  a  vegetable.  Now  negative  dem¬ 
onstration  I  distinguish  from  demonstration 
proper,  because  in  a  demonstration  one  might 
be  thought  to  be  begging  the  question,  but  if 
another  person  is  responsible  for  the  assump¬ 
tion  we  shall  have  negative  proof,  not  demon¬ 
stration.  The  starting-point  for  all  such  argu¬ 
ments  is  not  the  demand  that  our  opponent 
[20]  shall  say  that  something  either  is  or  is  not 
(for  this  one  might  perhaps  take  to  be  a  beg¬ 
ging  of  the  question),  but  that  he  shall  say 
something  which  is  significant  both  for  him¬ 
self  and  for  another;  for  this  is  necessary,  if  he 
really  is  to  say  anything.  For,  if  he  means  noth- 

1  Apparently  a  loose  reference  to  ioo5b  23-5. 


525 

ing,  such  a  man  will  not  be  capable  of  reason¬ 
ing,  either  with  himself  or  with  another.  But 
if  any  one  grants  this,  demonstration  will  be 
[25]  possible;  for  we  shall  already  have  some¬ 
thing  definite.  The  person  responsible  for  the 
proof,  however,  is  not  he  who  demonstrates 
but  he  who  listens;  for  while  disowning  reason 
he  listens  to  reason.  And  again  he  who  admits 
this  has  admitted  that  something  is  true  apart 
from  demonstration  [so  that  not  everything 
will  be  ‘so  and  not  so’]. 

First  then  this  at  least  is  obviously  true,  that 
[50]  the  word  ‘be’  or  ‘not  be’  has  a  definite 
meaning,  so  that  not  everything  will  be  ‘so  and 
not  so’.2 — Again,  if  ‘man’  has  one  meaning,  let 
this  be  ‘two-footed  animal’;  by  having  one 
meaning  I  understand  this: — if  ‘man’  means 
*X',  then  if  A  is  a  man  ‘X’  will  be  what  ‘being 
a  man’  means  for  him.  (It  makes  no  difference 
even  if  one  were  to  say  a  word  has  several  mean¬ 
ings,  if  only  they  are  limited  in  number;  for  to 
1006b  each  definition  there  might  be  assigned 
a  different  word.  For  instance,  we  might  say 
that  ‘man’  has  not  one  meaning  but  several,  one 
of  which  would  have  one  definition,  viz.  ‘two- 
footed  animal’,  while  there  might  be  also  sev¬ 
eral  other  definitions  if  only  they  were  limited 
in  number;  for  a  peculiar  name  might  be  as¬ 
signed  to  each  of  the  definitions.  If,  however, 
[5]  they  were  not  limited  but  one  were  to  say 
that  the  word  has  an  infinite  number  of  mean¬ 
ings,  obviously  reasoning  would  be  impossible; 
for  not  to  have  one  meaning  is  to  have  no 
meaning,  and  if  words  have  no  meaning  our 
reasoning  with  one  another,  and  indeed  with 
[/o]  ourselves,  has  been  annihilated;  for  it  is 
impossible  to  think  of  anything  if  we  do  not 
think  of  one  thing;  but  if  this  is  possible,  one 
name  might  be  assigned  to  this  thing.) 

Let  it  be  assumed  then,  as  was  said  at  the 
beginning,3  that  the  name  has  a  meaning  and 
has  one  meaning;  it  is  impossible,  then,  that 
‘being  a  man’  should  mean  precisely  ‘not  be¬ 
ing  a  man’,  if  ‘man’  not  only  signifies  some- 
[75]  thing  about  one  subject  but  also  has  one 
significance  (for  we  do  not  identify  ‘having 
one  significance’  with  ‘signifying  something 
about  one  subject’,  since  on  that  assumption 
even  ‘musical’  and  ‘white’  and  ‘man’  would 
have  had  one  significance,  so  that  all  things 
would  have  been  one;  for  they  would  all  have 
had  the  same  significance). 

And  it  will  not  be  possible  to  be  and  not  to 
be  the  same  thing,  except  in  virtue  of  an  am¬ 
biguity,  just  as  if  one  whom  we  call  ‘man’, 

2  Cf.  Plato,  Theaetetusy  183.  3  a2 1 ,  3 1 . 


BOOK  IV,  CHAPTERS  2-4 


526  METAPHYSICS  1007b 


[20]  others  were  to  call  ‘not-man’;  but  the 
point  in  question  is  not  this,  whether  the  same 
thing  can  at  the  same  time  be  and  not  be  a 
man  in  name,  but  whether  it  can  in  fact. — 
Now  if  ‘man’  and  ‘not-man’  mean  nothing  dif¬ 
ferent,  obviously  ‘not  being  a  man’  will  mean 
nothing  different  from  ‘being  a  man’;  so  that 
‘being  a  man’  will  be  ‘not  being  a  man’;  for 
[25]  they  will  be  one.  For  being  one  means 
this — being  related  as  ‘raiment’  and  ‘dress’  are, 
if  their  definition  is  one.  And  if  ‘being  a  man’ 
and  ‘being  a  not-man’  are  to  be  one,  they  must 
mean  one  thing.  But  it  was  shown  earlier1  that 
they  mean  different  things. — Therefore,  if  it  is 
true  to  say  of  anything  that  it  is  a  man,  it 
must  be  a  two-footed  animal  (for  this  was  what 
[jo]  ‘man’  meant);  and  if  this  is  necessary,  it 
is  impossible  that  the  same  thing  should  not  at 
that  time  be  a  two-footed  animal;  for  this 
is  what  ‘being  necessary’  means — that  it  is 
impossible  for  the  thing  not  to  be.  It  is,  then, 
impossible  that  it  should  be  at  the  same  time 
true  to  say  the  same  thing  is  a  man  and  is  not 
a  man. 

The  same  account  holds  good  with  regard 
1007a  to  ‘not  being  a  man’,  for  ‘being  a  man’ 
and  ‘being  a  not-man’  mean  different  things, 
since  even  ‘being  white’  and  ‘being  a  man’  are 
different;  for  the  former  terms  are  much  more 
opposed,  so  that  they  must  a  fortiori  mean 
different  things.  And  if  any  one  says  that 
‘white’  means  one  and  the  same  thing  as  ‘man’, 
[5]  again  we  shall  say  the  same  as  what  was 
said  before,2  that  it  would  follow  that  all 
things  are  one,  and  not  only  opposites.  But  if 
this  is  impossible,  then  what  we  have  main¬ 
tained  will  follow,  if  our  opponent  will  only 
answer  our  question. 

And  if,  when  one  asks  the  question  simply, 
[jo]  he  adds  the  contradictories,  he  is  not 
answering  the  question.  For  there  is  nothing 
to  prevent  the  same  thing  from  being  both  a 
man  and  white  and  countless  other  things:  but 
still,  if  one  asks  whether  it  is  or  is  not  true  to 
say  that  this  is  a  man,  our  opponent  must  give 
an  answer  which  means  one  thing,  and  not  add 
that  ‘it  is  also  white  and  large’.  For,  besides 
other  reasons,  it  is  impossible  to  enumerate  its 
[75]  accidental  attributes,  which  are  infinite 
in  number;  let  him,  then,  enumerate  either  all 
or  none.  Similarly,  therefore,  even  if  the  same 
thing  is  a  thousand  times  a  man  and  a  not- 
man,  he  must  not,  in  answering  the  question 
whether  this  is  a  man,  add  that  it  is  also  at  the 
same  time  a  not-man,  unless  he  is  bound  to  add 

1 11. 1 1-15.  2  ioo6b  17. 


also  all  the  other  accidents,  all  that  the  subject 
is  or  is  not;  and  if  he  does  this,  he  is  not  observ¬ 
ing  the  rules  of  argument. 

[20]  And  in  general  those  who  say  this  do 
away  with  substance  and  essence.  For  they 
must  say  that  all  attributes  are  accidents,  and 
that  there  is  no  such  thing  as  ‘being  essentially 
a  man’  or  ‘an  animal’.  For  if  there  is  to  be  any 
such  thing  as  ‘being  essentially  a  man’  this  will 
not  be  ‘being  a  not-man’  or  ‘not  being  a  man’ 
[25]  (yet  these  are  negations  of  it);  for  there 
was  one  thing  which  it  meant,  and  this  was 
the  substance  of  something.  And  denoting  the 
substance  of  a  thing  means  that  the  essence  of 
the  thing  is  nothing  else.  But  if  its  being  essen¬ 
tially  a  man  is  to  be  the  same  as  either  being 
essentially  a  not-man  or  essentially  not  being  a 
man,  then  its  essence  will  be  something  else. 
Therefore  our  opponents  must  say  that  there 
[30]  cannot  be  such  a  definition  of  anything, 
but  that  all  attributes  are  accidental;  for  this  is 
the  distinction  between  substance  and  accident 
— ‘white’  is  accidental  to  man,  because  though 
he  is  white,  whiteness  is  not  his  essence.  But  if 
all  statements  are  accidental,  there  will  be  noth¬ 
ing  primary  about  which  they  are  made,  if  the 
[55]  accidental  always  implies  predication 
1007b  about  a  subject.  The  predication,  then, 
must  go  on  ad  infinitum.  But  this  is  impossible; 
for  not  even  more  than  two  terms  can  be  com¬ 
bined  in  accidental  predication.  For  (1)  an 
accident  is  not  an  accident  of  an  accident,  un¬ 
less  it  be  because  both  are  accidents  of  the  same 
subject.  I  mean,  for  instance,  that  the  white 
is  musical  and  the  latter  is  white,  only  because 
[5]  both  are  accidental  to  man.  But  (2)  Soc¬ 
rates  is  musical,  not  in  this  sense,  that  both 
terms  are  accidental  to  something  else.  Since 
then  some  predicates  are  accidental  in  this  and 
some  in  that  sense,  (a)  those  which  are  acci¬ 
dental  in  the  latter  sense,  in  which  white  is 
accidental  to  Socrates,  cannot  form  an  infinite 
series  in  the  upward  direction;  e.g.  Socrates 
the  white  has  not  yet  another  accident;  for  no 
[jo]  unity  can  be  got  out  of  such  a  sum.  Nor 
again  (b)  will  ‘white’  have  another  term  acci¬ 
dental  to  it,  e.g.  ‘musical’.  For  this  is  no  more 
accidental  to  that  than  that  is  to  this;  and  at  the 
same  time  we  have  drawn  the  distinction,  that 
while  some  predicates  are  accidental  in  this 
sense,  others  are  so  in  the  sense  in  which  ‘mu¬ 
sical’  is  accidental  to  Socrates;  and  the  accident 
is  an  accident  of  an  accident  not  in  cases  of 
[75]  the  latter  kind,  but  only  in  cases  of  the 
other  kind,  so  that  not  all  terms  will  be  acci¬ 
dental.  There  must,  then,  even  so  be  some- 


1008b 

thing  which  denotes  substance.  And  if  this  is 
so,  it  has  been  shown  that  contradictories  can¬ 
not  be  predicated  at  the  same  time. 

Again,  if  all  contradictory  statements  are 
true  of  the  same  subject  at  the  same  time,  evi¬ 
dently  all  things  will  be  one.  For  the  same 
[20]  thing  will  be  a  trireme,  a  wall,  and  a  man, 
if  of  everything  it  is  possible  either  to  affirm  or 
to  deny  anything  (and  this  premiss  must  be  ac¬ 
cepted  by  those  who  share  the  views  of  Pro¬ 
tagoras).  For  if  any  one  thinks  that  the  man  is 
not  a  trireme,  evidently  he  is  not  a  trireme;  so 
that  he  also  is  a  trireme,  if,  as  they  say,  con- 
[25]  tradictory  statements  are  both  true.  And 
we  thus  get  the  doctrine  of  Anaxagoras,  that 
all  things  are  mixed  together;  so  that  nothing 
really  exists.  They  seem,  then,  to  be  speaking  of 
the  indeterminate,  and,  while  fancying  them¬ 
selves  to  be  speaking  of  being,  they  are  speak¬ 
ing  about  non-being;  for  it  is  that  which  exists 
potentially  and  not  in  complete  reality  that  is 
indeterminate.  But  they  must  predicate  of 
every  subject  the  affirmation  or  the  negation 
[50]  of  every  attribute.  For  it  is  absurd  if  of 
each  subject  its  own  negation  is  to  be  predi¬ 
cable,  while  the  negation  of  something  else 
which  cannot  be  predicated  of  it  is  not  to  be 
predicable  of  it;  for  instance,  if  it  is  true  to  say 
of  a  man  that  he  is  not  a  man,  evidently  it  is 
also  true  to  say  that  he  is  either  a  trireme  or  not 
a  trireme.  If,  then,  the  affirmative  can  be  predi- 
[55]  cated,  the  negative  must  be  predicable 
too;  and  if  the  affirmative  is  not  predicable,  the 
negative,  at  least,  will  be  more  predicable  than 
1008a  the  negative  of  the  subject  itself.  If, 
then,  even  the  latter  negative  is  predicable, 
the  negative  of  ‘trireme’  will  be  also  predicable; 
and,  if  this  is  predicable,  the  affirmative  will 
be  so  too. 

Those,  then,  who  maintain  this  view  are 
driven  to  this  conclusion,  and  to  the  further 
conclusion  that  it  is  not  necessary  either  to  as¬ 
sert  or  to  deny.  For  if  it  is  true  that  a  thing  is  a 
[5]  man  and  a  not-man,  evidently  also  it  will 
be  neither  a  man  nor  a  not-man.  For  to  the  two 
assertions  there  answer  two  negations,  and  if 
the  former  is  treated  as  a  single  proposition 
compounded  out  of  two,  the  latter  also  is  a  sin¬ 
gle  proposition  opposite  to  the  former. 

Again,  either  the  theory  is  true  in  all  cases, 
and  a  thing  is  both  white  and  not-white,  and 
existent  and  non-existent,  and  all  other  asser¬ 
tions  and  negations  are  similarly  compatible, 
[/o]  or  the  theory  is  true  of  some  statements 
and  not  of  others.  And  if  not  of  all,  the  excep¬ 
tions  will  be  contradictories  of  which  admit- 


527 

cedly  only  one  is  true;  but  if  of  all,  again  either 
the  negation  will  be  true  wherever  the  asser¬ 
tion  is,  and  the  assertion  true  wherever  the  ne¬ 
gation  is,  or  the  negation  will  be  true  where 
the  assertion  is,  but  the  assertion  not  always 
[75]  true  where  the  negation  is.  And  (a)  in 
the  latter  case  there  will  be  something  which 
fixedly  is  not,  and  this  will  be  an  indisputable 
belief;  and  if  non-being  is  something  indis¬ 
putable  and  knowable,  the  opposite  assertion 
will  be  more  knowable.  But  ( b )  if  it  is  equally 
possible  also  to  assert  all  that  it  is  possible  to 
deny,  one  must  either  be  saying  what  is  true 
when  one  separates  the  predicates  (and  says, 
for  instance,  that  a  thing  is  white,  and  again 
[20]  that  it  is  not-white),  or  not.  And  if  (i) 
it  is  not  true  to  apply  the  predicates  separately, 
our  opponent  is  not  saying  what  he  professes 
to  say,  and  also  nothing  at  all  exists;  but  how 
could  non-existent  things  speak  or  walk,  as  he 
does?  Also  all  things  would  on  this  view  be 
one,  as  has  been  already  said,1  and  man  and 
God  and  trireme  and  their  contradictories  will 
[25]  be  the  same.  For  if  contradictories  can  be 
predicated  alike  of  each  subject,  one  thing  will 
in  no  wise  differ  from  another;  for  if  it  differ, 
this  difference  will  be  something  true  and 
peculiar  to  it.  And  (ii)  if  one  may  with  truth 
apply  the  predicates  separately,  the  above- 
mentioned  result  follows  none  the  less,  and, 
further,  it  follows  that  all  would  then  be  right 
and  all  would  be  in  error,  and  our  opponent 
himself  confesses  himself  to  be  in  error. — And 
[30]  at  the  same  time  our  discussion  with 
him  is  evidently  about  nothing  at  all;  for  he 
says  nothing.  For  he  says  neither  ‘yes’  nor 
‘no’,  but  ‘yes  and  no’;  and  again  he  denies  both 
of  these  and  says  ‘neither  yes  nor  no’;  for 
otherwise  there  would  already  be  something 
definite. 

Again,  if  when  the  assertion  is  true,  the  nega¬ 
te]  tion  is  false,  and  when  this  is  true,  the 
affirmation  is  false,  it  will  not  be  possible  to 
assert  and  deny  the  same  thing  truly  at  the 
1008b  same  time.  But  perhaps  they  might  say 
this  was  the  very  question  at  issue. 

Again,  is  he  in  error  who  judges  either  that 
the  thing  is  so  or  that  it  is  not  so,  and  is  he 
right  who  judges  both?  If  he  is  right,  what 
can  they  mean  by  saying  that  the  nature  of 
[5]  existing  things  is  of  this  kind?  And  if  he 
is  not  right,  but  more  right  than  he  who  judges 
in  the  other  way,  being  will  already  be  of  a 
definite  nature,  and  this  will  be  true,  and  not 
at  the  same  time  also  not  true.  But  if  all  are 
1  ioo6b  17, 1007*  6. 


BOOK  IV,  CHAPTER  4 


528  METAPHYSICS  1009b 


alike  both  wrong  and  right,  one  who  is  in  this 
condition  will  not  be  able  either  to  speak  or  to 
say  anything  intelligible;  for  he  says  at  the 
[/o]  same  time  both  ‘yes’  and  ‘no.’  And  if  he 
makes  no  judgement  but  ‘thinks’  and  ‘does 
not  think’,  indifferently,  what  difference  will 
there  be  between  him  and  a  vegetable? — Thus, 
then,  it  is  in  the  highest  degree  evident  that 
neither  any  one  of  those  who  maintain  this 
view  nor  any  one  else  is  really  in  this  position. 
For  why  does  a  man  walk  to  Megara  and  not 
stay  at  home,  when  he  thinks  he  ought  to  be 
[75]  walking  there?  Why  does  he  not  walk 
early  some  morning  into  a  well  or  over  a  preci¬ 
pice,  if  one  happens  to  be  in  his  way?  Why  do 
we  observe  him  guarding  against  this,  evi¬ 
dently  because  he  does  not  think  that  falling 
in  is  alike  good  and  not  good?  Evidently,  then, 
he  judges  one  thing  to  be  better  and  another 
worse.  And  if  this  is  so,  he  must  also  judge 
one  thing  to  be  a  man  and  another  to  be  not- 
[20]  a-man,  one  thing  to  be  sweet  and  another 
to  be  not-sweet.  For  he  does  not  aim  at  and 
judge  all  things  alike,  when,  thinking  it  desir¬ 
able  to  drink  water  or  to  see  a  man,  he  pro¬ 
ceeds  to  aim  at  these  things;  yet  he  ought,  if 
the  same  thing  were  alike  a  man  and  not-a- 
man.  But,  as  was  said,  there  is  no  one  who  does 
[25]  not  obviously  avoid  some  things  and  not 
others.  Therefore,  as  it  seems,  all  men  make 
unqualified  judgements,  if  not  about  all  things, 
still  about  what  is  better  and  worse.  And  if 
this  is  not  knowledge  but  opinion,  they  should 
be  all  the  more  anxious  about  the  truth,  as  a 
sick  man  should  be  more  anxious  about  his 
[jo]  health  than  one  who  is  healthy;  for  he 
who  has  opinions  is,  in  comparison  with  the 
man  who  knows,  not  in  a  healthy  state  as  far 
as  the  truth  is  concerned. 

Again,  however  much  all  things  may  be  ‘so 
and  not  so’,  still  there  is  a  more  and  a  less  in 
the  nature  of  things;  for  we  should  not  say 
that  two  and  three  are  equally  even,  nor  is  he 
who  thinks  four  things  are  five  equally  wrong 
[35]  with  him  who  thinks  they  are  a  thou¬ 
sand.  If  then  they  are  not  equally  wrong,  ob¬ 
viously  one  is  less  wrong  and  therefore  more 
right.  If  then  that  which  has  more  of  any 
1009a  quality  is  nearer  the  norm,  there  must 
be  some  truth  to  which  the  more  true  is 
nearer.  And  even  if  there  is  not,  still  there  is 
already  something  better  founded  and  liker 
the  truth,  and  we  shall  have  got  rid  of  the 
[5]  unqualified  doctrine  which  would  pre¬ 
vent  us  from  determining  anything  in  our 
thought. 


5 

From  the  same  opinion  proceeds  the  doctrine 
of  Protagoras,  and  both  doctrines  must  be  alike 
true  or  alike  untrue.  For  on  the  one  hand,  if 
all  opinions  and  appearances  are  true,  all  state¬ 
ments  must  be  at  the  same  time  true  and  false. 
For  many  men  hold  beliefs  in  which  they  con- 
[/o]  flict  with  one  another,  and  think  those 
mistaken  who  have  not  the  same  opinions  as 
themselves;  so  that  the  same  thing  must  both 
be  and  not  be.  And  on  the  other  hand,  if  this 
is  so,  all  opinions  must  be  true;  for  those  who 
are  mistaken  and  those  who  are  right  are  op¬ 
posed  to  one  another  in  their  opinions;  if,  then, 
reality  is  such  as  the  view  in  question  sup- 

oses,  all  will  be  right  in  their  beliefs. 

75]  Evidently,  then,  both  doctrines  proceed 
from  the  same  way  of  thinking.  But  the  same 
method  of  discussion  must  not  be  used  with  all 
opponents;  for  some  need  persuasion,  and 
others  compulsion.  Those  who  have  been  driv¬ 
en  to  this  position  by  difficulties  in  their  think¬ 
ing  can  easily  be  cured  of  their  ignorance;  for 
it  is  not  their  expressed  argument  but  their 
[20]  thought  that  one  has  to  meet.  But  those 
who  argue  for  the  sake  of  argument  can  be 
cured  only  by  refuting  the  argument  as  ex¬ 
pressed  in  speech  and  in  words. 

Those  who  really  feel  the  difficulties  have  been 
led  to  this  opinion  by  observation  of  the  sensi¬ 
ble  world.  (1)  They  think  that  contradictories 
or  contraries  are  true  at  the  same  time,  because 
they  see  contraries  coming  into  existence  out 
[25]  of  the  same  thing.  If,  then,  that  which  is 
not  cannot  come  to  be,  the  thing  must  have 
existed  before  as  both  contraries  alike,  as 
Anaxagoras  says  all  is  mixed  in  all,  and  Demo¬ 
critus  too;  for  he  says  the  void  and  the  full  ex¬ 
ist  alike  in  every  part,  and  yet  one  of  these  is 
being,  and  the  other  non-being.  To  those,  then, 
[jo]  whose  belief  rests  on  these  grounds,  we 
shall  say  that  in  a  sense  they  speak  rightly  and 
in  a  sense  they  err.  For  ‘that  which  is’  has  two 
meanings,  so  that  in  some  sense  a  thing  can 
come  to  be  out  of  that  which  is  not,  while  in 
some  sense  it  cannot,  and  the  same  thing  can 
at  the  same  time  be  in  being  and  not  in  being — 
but  not  in  the  same  respect.  For  the  same  thing 
[ J5*]  can  be  potentially  at  the  same  time  two 
contraries,  but  it  cannot  actually.  And  again  we 
shall  ask  them  to  believe  that  among  existing 
things  there  is  also  another  kind  of  substance 
to  which  neither  movement  nor  destruction 
nor  generation  at  all  belongs. 

1009b  And  (2)  similarly  some  have  inferred 


1010a 

from  observation  of  the  sensible  world  the 
truth  of  appearances.  For  they  think  that  the 
truth  should  not  be  determined  by  the  large  or 
small  number  of  those  who  hold  a  belief,  and 
that  the  same  thing  is  thought  sweet  by  some 
when  they  taste  it,  and  bitter  by  others,  so  that 
[5]  if  all  were  ill  or  all  were  mad,  and  only  two 
or  three  were  well  or  sane,  these  would  be 
thought  ill  and  mad,  and  not  the  others. 

And  again,  they  say  that  many  of  the  other 
animals  receive  impressions  contrary  to  ours; 
and  that  even  to  the  senses  of  each  individual, 
things  do  not  always  seem  the  same.  Which, 
then,  of  these  impressions  are  true  and  which 
[/o]  are  false  is  not  obvious;  for  the  one  set  is 
no  more  true  than  the  other,  but  both  are  alike. 
And  this  is  why  Democritus,  at  any  rate,  says 
that  either  there  is  no  truth  or  to  us  at  least  it 
is  not  evident. 

And  in  general  it  is  because  these  thinkers 
suppose  knowledge  to  be  sensation,  and  this  to 
be  a  physical  alteration,  that  they  say  that  what 
appears  to  our  senses  must  be  true;  for  it  is  for 
[75]  these  reasons  that  both  Empedocles  and 
Democritus  and,  one  may  almost  say,  all  the 
others  have  fallen  victims  to  opinions  of  this 
sort.  For  Empedocles  says  that  when  men 
change  their  condition  they  change  their 
knowledge; 

For  wisdom  increases  in  men  according  to 
what  is  before  them} 

And  elsewhere  he  says  that 
[20]  So  far  as  their  nature  changed ,  so  far  to 
them  always 

Came  changed  thoughts  into  mind ? 

And  Parmenides  also  expresses  himself  in  the 
same  way: 

For  as  at  each  time  the  much-bent  limbs  are 
composed, 

So  is  the  mind  of  men;  for  in  each  and  all 
men  $ 

' Tis  one  thing  things — the  substance  of  their 
limbs: 

For  that  of  which  there  is  more  is  thought? 
[25]  A  saying  of  Anaxagoras  to  some  of  his 
friends  is  also  related, — that  things  would  be 
for  them  such  as  they  supposed  them  to  be.  And 
they  say  that  Homer  also  evidently  had  this 
opinion,  because  he  made  Hector,  when  he  was 
unconscious  from  the  blow,  lie  ‘thinking  other 
[jo]  thoughts’,4 — which  implies  that  even  those 
who  are  bereft  of  thought  have  thoughts, 
though  not  the  same  thoughts.  Evidently,  then, 

*Fr.  106.  2  Fr.  108.  3Fr.  16. 

4  Cf.  Iliad ,  xxm.  698,  which  does  not,  however,  refer 
to  Hector. 


529 

if  both  are  forms  of  knowledge,  the  real  things 
also  are  at  the  same  time  ‘both  so  and  not  so’. 
And  it  is  in  this  direction  that  the  consequences 
are  most  difficult.  For  if  those  who  have  seen 
most  of  such  truth  as  is  possible  for  us  (and 
[  J5]  these  are  those  who  seek  and  love  it  most) 
— if  these  have  such  opinions  and  express  these 
views  about  the  truth,  is  it  not  natural  that  be¬ 
ginners  in  philosophy  should  lose  heart?  For 
to  seek  the  truth  would  be  to  follow  flying 
game. 

1010a  But  the  reason  why  these  thinkers  held 
this  opinion  is  that  while  they  were  inquiring 
into  the  truth  of  that  which  is,  they  thought, 
‘that  which  is’  was  identical  with  the  sensible 
world;  in  this,  however,  there  is  largely  present 
the  nature  of  the  indeterminate — of  that  which 
exists  in  the  peculiar  sense  which  we  have  ex¬ 
plained;5  and  therefore,  while  they  speak  plau¬ 
sibly,  they  do  not  say  what  is  true  (for  it  is  fit- 
[5]  ting  to  put  the  matter  so  rather  than  as  Epi- 
charmus  put  it  against  Xenophanes).  And 
again,  because  they  saw  that  all  this  world  of 
nature  is  in  movement,  and  that  about  that 
which  changes  no  true  statement  can  be  made, 
they  said  that  of  course,  regarding  that  which 
everywhere  in  every  respect  is  changing,  noth¬ 
ing  could  truly  be  affirmed.  It  was  this  belief 
[/o]  that  blossomed  into  the  most  extreme  of 
the  views  above  mentioned,  that  of  the  pro¬ 
fessed  Heracliteans,  such  as  was  held  by  Craty- 
lus,  who  finally  did  not  think  it  right  to  say 
anything  but  only  moved  his  finger,  and  criti¬ 
cized  Heraclitus  for  saying  that  it  is  impossible 
to  step  twice  into  the  same  river;  for  he  thought 
one  could  not  do  it  even  once. 

[75]  But  we  shall  say  in  answer  to  this  argu¬ 
ment  also,  that  while  there  is  some  justification 
for  their  thinking  that  the  changing,  when  it  is 
changing,  does  not  exist,  yet  it  is  after  all  dis¬ 
putable;  for  that  which  is  losing  a  quality  has 
something  of  that  which  is  being  lost,  and  of 
that  which  is  coming  to  be,  something  must 
already  be.  And  in  general  if  a  thing  is  perish¬ 
ing,  there  will  be  present  something  that  exists; 
[20]  and  if  a  thing  is  coming  to  be,  there  must 
be  something  from  which  it  comes  to  be  and 
something  by  which  it  is  generated,  and  this 
process  cannot  go  on  ad  infinitum . — But,  leav¬ 
ing  these  arguments,  let  us  insist  on  this,  that  it 
is  not  the  same  thing  to  change  in  quantity  and 
in  quality.  Grant  that  in  quantity  a  thing  is  not 
constant;  still  it  is  in  respect  of  its  form  that  we 
[25]  know  each  thing. — And  again,  it  would 
be  fair  to  criticize  those  who  hold  this  view  for 
6  Cf .  1 009*  32. 


BOOK  IV,  CHAPTERS  4-5 


530  METAPHYSICS  101  la 


asserting  about  the  whole  material  universe 
what  they  saw  only  in  a  minority  even  of  sensi¬ 
ble  things.  For  only  that  region  of  the  sensible 
world  which  immediately  surrounds  us  is  al- 
[30]  ways  in  process  of  destruction  and  gener¬ 
ation;  but  this  is — so  to  speak — not  even  a 
fraction  of  the  whole,  so  that  it  would  have 
been  juster  to  acquit  this  part  of  the  world  be¬ 
cause  of  the  other  part,  than  to  condemn  the 
other  because  of  this. — And  again,  obviously 
we  shall  make  to  them  also  the  same  reply  that 
we  made  long  ago;1  we  must  show  them  and 

fersuade  them  that  there  is  something  whose 
55]  nature  is  changeless.  Indeed,  those  who 
say  that  things  at  the  same  time  are  and  are 
not,  should  in  consequence  say  that  all  things 
are  at  rest  rather  than  that  they  are  in  move¬ 
ment;  for  there  is  nothing  into  which  they  can 
change,  since  all  attributes  belong  already  to  all 
subjects. 

1010b  Regarding  the  nature  of  truth,  we  must 
maintain  that  not  everything  which  appears  is 
true;  firstly,  because  even  if  sensation — at  least 
of  the  object  peculiar  to  the  sense  in  question 
— is  not  false,  still  appearance  is  not  the  same  as 
sensation. — Again,  it  is  fair  to  express  surprise 
at  our  opponents’  raising  the  question  whether 
magnitudes  are  as  great,  and  colours  are  of 
[5]  such  a  nature,  as  they  appear  to  people  at 
a  distance,  or  as  they  appear  to  those  close  at 
hand,  and  whether  they  are  such  as  they  ap¬ 
pear  to  the  healthy  or  to  the  sick,  and  whether 
those  things  are  heavy  which  appear  so  to  the 
weak  or  those  which  appear  so  to  the  strong, 
and  those  things  true  which  appear  to  the 
sleeoing  or  to  the  waking.  For  obviously  they 
[w]  do  not  think  these  to  be  open  questions; 
no  one,  at  least,  if  when  he  is  in  Libya  he  has 
fancied  one  night  that  he  is  in  Athens,  starts 
for  the  concert  hall. — And  again  with  regard 
to  the  future,  as  Plato  says,2  surely  the  opinion 
of  the  physician  and  that  of  the  ignorant  man 
are  not  equally  weighty,  for  instance,  on  the 
question  whether  a  man  will  get  well  or  not. — 
[75]  And  again,  among  sensations  themselves 
the  sensation  of  a  foreign  object  and  that  of  the 
appropriate  object,  or  that  of  a  kindred  object 
and  that  of  the  object  of  the  sense  in  question, 
are  not  equally  authoritative,  but  in  the  case  of 
colour  sight,  not  taste,  has  the  authority,  and  in 
the  case  of  flavour  taste,  not  sight;  each  of 
which  senses  never  says  at  the  same  time  of  the 
same  object  that  it  simultaneously  is  ‘so  and  not 
so’. — But  not  even  at  different  times  does  one 
[20]  sense  disagree  about  the  quality,  but  only 
*Cf.  ioo9a36-8.  2  Cf.  Theaetetus ,  178-179. 


about  that  to  which  the  quality  belongs.  I  mean, 
for  instance,  that  the  same  wine  might  seem, 
if  either  it  or  one’s  body  changed,  at  one  time 
sweet  and  at  another  time  not  sweet;  but  at 
least  the  sweet,  such  as  it  is  when  it  exists,  has 
[25]  never  yet  changed,  but  one  is  always  right 
about  it,  and  that  which  is  to  be  sweet  is  of  ne¬ 
cessity  of  such  and  such  a  nature.  Yet  all  these 
views  destroy  this  necessity,  leaving  nothing  to 
be  of  necessity,  as  they  leave  no  essence  of  any¬ 
thing;  for  the  necessary  cannot  be  in  this  way 
and  also  in  that,  so  that  if  anything  is  of  neces¬ 
sity,  it  will  not  be  ‘both  so  and  not  so’. 

[30]  And,  in  general,  if  only  the  sensible  exists, 
there  would  be  nothing  if  animate  things  were 
not;  for  there  would  be  no  faculty  of  sense. 
Now  the  view  that  neither  the  sensible  quali¬ 
ties  nor  the  sensations  would  exist  is  doubtless 
true  (for  they  are  affections  of  the  perceiver), 
but  that  the  substrata  which  cause  the  sensa¬ 
tion  should  not  exist  even  apart  from  sensation 
[35]  is  impossible.  For  sensation  is  surely  not 
the  sensation  of  itself,  but  there  is  something 
beyond  the  sensation,  which  must  be  prior  to 
the  sensation;  for  that  which  moves  is  prior  in 
1011a  nature  to  that  which  is  moved,  and  if 
they  are  correlative  terms,  this  is  no  less  the 
case. 

6 

There  are,  both  among  those  who  have  these 
convictions  and  among  those  who  merely  pro¬ 
fess  these  views,  some  who  raise  a  difficulty  by 
[5]  asking,  who  is  to  be  the  judge  of  the  healthy 
man,  and  in  general  who  is  likely  to  judge 
rightly  on  each  class  of  questions.  But  such  in¬ 
quiries  are  like  puzzling  over  the  question 
whether  we  are  now  asleep  or  awake.  And  all 
such  questions  have  the  same  meaning.  These 
people  demand  that  a  reason  shall  be  given  for 
everything;  for  they  seek  a  starting-point,  and 
they  seek  to  get  this  by  demonstration,  while  it 
[/o]  is  obvious  from  their  actions  that  they 
have  no  conviction.  But  their  mistake  is  what 
we  have  stated  it  to  be;  they  seek  a  reason  for 
things  for  which  no  reason  can  be  given;  for 
the  starting-point  of  demonstration  is  not  dem¬ 
onstration. 

These,  then,  might  be  easily  persuaded  of 
this  truth,  for  it  is  not  difficult  to  grasp;  but 
[75]  those  who  seek  merely  compulsion  in  ar¬ 
gument  seek  what  is  impossible;  for  they  de¬ 
mand  to  be  allowed  to  contradict  themselves — 
a  claim  which  contradicts  itself  from  the  very 
first. — But  if  not  all  things  are  relative,  but 
some  are  self-existent,  not  everything  that  ap- 


1012*  BOOK  IV,  CHAPTERS  5-7  531 


pears  will  be  true;  for  that  which  appears  is 
apparent  to  some  one;  so  that  he  who.  says  all 
[20]  things  that  appear  are  true,  makes  all 
things  relative.  And,  therefore,  those  who  ask 
for  an  irresistible  argument,  and  at  the  same 
time  demand  to  be  called  to  account  for  their 
views,  must  guard  themselves  by  saying  that  the 
truth  is  not  that  what  appears  exists,  but  that 
what  appears  exists  for  him  to  whom  it  ap¬ 
pears,  and  when ,  and  to  the  sense  to  which,  and 
under  the  conditions  under  which  it  appears. 
And  if  they  give  an  account  of  their  view,  but 
do  not  give  it  in  this  way,  they  will  soon  find 
themselves  contradicting  themselves.  For  it  is 
[25]  possible  that  the  same  thing  may  appear 
to  be  honey  to  the  sight,  but  not  to  the  taste, 
and  that,  since  we  have  two  eyes,  things  may 
not  appear  the  same  to  each,  if  their  sight  is  un¬ 
like.  For  to  those  who  for  the  reasons  named 
[50]  some  time  ago1  say  that  what  appears  is 
true,  and  therefore  that  all  things  are  alike  false 
and  true,  for  things  do  not  appear  either  the 
same  to  all  men  or  always  the  same  to  the  same 
man,  but  often  have  contrary  appearances  at 
the  same  time  (for  touch  says  there  are  two  ob¬ 
jects  when  we  cross  our  fingers,  while  sight 
says  there  is  one), — to  these  we  shall  say  ‘yes, 
but  not  to  the  same  sense  and  in  the  same  part 
[55]  of  it  and  under  the  same  conditions  and 
at  the  same  time’,  so  that  what  appears  will  be 
101  lb  with  these  qualifications  true.  But  per¬ 
haps  for  this  reason  those  who  argue  thus  not 
because  they  feel  a  difficulty  but  for  the  sake  of 
argument,  should  say  that  this  is  not  true,  but 
true  for  this  man.  And  as  has  been  said2  before, 
they  must  make  everything  relative — relative 
[5]  to  opinion  and  perception,  so  that  nothing 
either  has  come  to  be  or  will  be  without  some 
one’s  first  thinking  so.  But  if  things  have  come 
to  be  or  will  be,  evidently  not  all  things  will  be 
relative  to  opinion. — Again,  if  a  thing  is  one,  it 
is  in  relation  to  one  thing  or  to  a  definite  num¬ 
ber  of  things;  and  if  the  same  thing  is  both  half 
and  equal,  it  is  not  to  the  double  that  the  equal 
is  correlative.  If,  then,  in  relation  to  that  which 
thinks,  man  and  that  which  is  thought  are  the 
[/o]  same,  man  will  not  be  that  which  thinks, 
but  only  that  which  is  thought.  And  if  each 
thing  is  to  be  relative  to  that  which  thinks,  that 
which  thinks  will  be  relative  to  an  infinity  of 
specifically  different  things. 

Let  this,  then,  suffice  to  show  (1)  that  the 
most  indisputable  of  all  beliefs  is  that  contra¬ 
dictory  statements  are  not  at  the  same  time 
true,  and  (2)  what  consequences  follow  from 

1  Cf.  1009®  38-1010®  15.  2ai9f. 


the  assertion  that  they  are,  and  (3)  why  people 
[75]  do  assert  this.  Now  since  it  is  impossible 
that  contradictories  should  be  at  the  same  time 
true  of  the  same  thing,  obviously  contraries 
also  cannot  belong  at  the  same  time  to  the  same 
thing.  For  of  contraries,  one  is  a  privation  no 
less  than  it  is  a  contrary — and  a  privation  of 
the  essential  nature;  and  privation  is  the  denial 
of  a  predicate  to  a  determinate  genus.  If,  then, 
[20]  it  is  impossible  to  affirm  and  deny  truly  at 
the  same  time,  it  is  also  impossible  that  con¬ 
traries  should  belong  to  a  subject  at  the  same 
time,  unless  both  belong  to  it  in  particular  re¬ 
lations,  or  one  in  a  particular  relation  and  one 
without  qualification. 

7 

But  on  the  other  hand  there  cannot  be  an  inter¬ 
mediate  between  contradictories,  but  of  one 
subject  we  must  either  affirm  or  deny  any  one 
[25]  predicate.  This  is  clear,  in  the  first  place, 
if  we  define  what  the  true  and  the  false  are.  To 
say  of  what  is  that  it  is  not,  or  of  what  is  not 
that  it  is,  is  false,  while  to  say  of  what  is  that  it 
is,  and  of  what  is  not  that  it  is  not,  is  true;  so 
that  he  who  says  of  anything  that  it  is,  or  that 
it  is  not,  will  say  either  what  is  true  or  what  is 
false;  but  neither  what  is  nor  what  is  not  is  said 
to  be  or  not  to  be. — Again,  the  intermediate  be¬ 
tween  the  contradictories  will  be  so  either  in 
[jo]  the  way  in  which  grey  is  between  black 
and  white,  or  as  that  which  is  neither  man  nor 
horse  is  between  man  and  horse,  (a)  If  it  were 
of  the  latter  kind,  it  could  not  change  into  the 
extremes  (for  change  is  from  not-good  to  good, 
or  from  good  to  not-good),  but  as  a  matter  of 
fact  when  there  is  an  intermediate  it  is  always 
observed  to  change  into  the  extremes.  For  there 
is  no  change  except  to  opposites  and  to  their 
[55]  intermediates,  (b)  But  if  it  is  really  inter¬ 
mediate,  in  this  way  too  there  would  have  to  be 
a  change  to  white,  which  was  not  from  not- 
white;  but  as  it  is,  this  is  never  seen. — Again, 
1012*  every  object  of  understanding  or  reason 
the  understanding  either  affirms  or  denies — 
this  is  obvious  from  the  definition — whenever 
it  says  what  is  true  or  false.  When  it  connects 
in  one  way  by  assertion  or  negation,  it  says 
what  is  true,  and  when  it  does  so  in  another 
[5]  way,  what  is  false. — Again,  there  must  be 
an  intermediate  between  all  contradictories,  if 
one  is  not  arguing  merely  for  the  sake  of  argu¬ 
ment;  so  that  it  will  be  possible  for  a  man  to  say 
what  is  neither  true  nor  untrue,  and  there  will 
be  a  middle  between  that  which  is  and  that 
which  is  not,  so  that  there  will  also  be  a  kind 


532  METAPHYSICS  1012b 


of  change  intermediate  between  generation  and 
destruction. — Again,  in  all  classes  in  which  the 
negation  of  an  attribute  involves  the  assertion 
[/o]  of  its  contrary,  even  in  these  there  will  be 
an  intermediate;  for  instance,  in  the  sphere  of 
numbers  there  will  be  number  which  is  neither 
odd  nor  not-odd.  But  this  is  impossible,  as  is 
obvious  from  the  definition. — Again,  the  proc¬ 
ess  will  go  on  ad  infinitum,  and  the  number  of 
realities  will  be  not  only  half  as  great  again,  but 
even  greater.  For  again  it  will  be  possible  to 
deny  this  intermediate  with  reference  both  to 
its  assertion  and  to  its  negation,  and  this  new 
term  will  be  some  definite  thing;  for  its  essence 
[75]  is  something  different. — Again,  when  a 
man,  on  being  asked  whether  a  thing  is  white, 
says  ‘no’,  he  has  denied  nothing  except  that  it 
is;  and  its  not  being  is  a  negation. 

Some  people  have  acquired  this  opinion  as 
other  paradoxical  opinions  have  been  acquired; 
when  men  cannot  refute  eristical  arguments, 
they  give  in  to  the  argument  and  agree  that  the 
[20]  conclusion  is  true.  This,  then,  is  why  some 
express  this  view;  others  do  so  because  they  de¬ 
mand  a  reason  for  everything.  And  the  start¬ 
ing-point  in  dealing  with  all  such  people  is  defi¬ 
nition.  Now  the  definition  rests  on  the  neces¬ 
sity  of  their  meaning  something;  for  the  form 
of  words  of  which  the  word  is  a  sign  will  be  its 
definition. — While  the  doctrine  of  Heraclitus, 
that  all  things  are  and  are  not,  seems  to  make 
[25]  everything  true,  that  of  Anaxagoras,  that 
there  is  an  intermediate  between  the  terms  of 
a  contradiction,  seems  to  make  everything 
false;  for  when  things  are  mixed,  the  mixture  is 
neither  good  nor  not-good,  so  that  one  cannot 
say  anything  that  is  true. 

8 

In  view  of  these  distinctions  it  is  obvious  that 
[30]  the  one-sided  theories  which  some  people 
express  about  all  things  cannot  be  valid — on 
the  one  hand  the  theory  that  nothing  is  true 
(for,  say  they,  there  is  nothing  to  prevent  every 
statement  from  being  like  the  statement  ‘the 
diagonal  of  a  square  is  commensurate  with  the 
side’),  on  the  other  hand  the  theory  that  every¬ 
thing  is  true.  These  views  are  practically  the 
same  as  that  of  Heraclitus;  for  he  who  says  that 
[35]  things  are  true  and  all  are  false’  also 
makes  each  of  these  statements  separately,  so 


1012b  that  since  they  are  impossible,  the  double 
statement  must  be  impossible  too. — Again, 
there  are  obviously  contradictories  which  can¬ 
not  be  at  the  same  time  true — nor  on  the  other 
hand  can  all  statements  be  false;  yet  this  would 
seem  more  possible  in  the  light  of  what  has 
[5]  been  said. — But  against  all  such  views  we 
must  postulate,  as  we  said  above,1  not  that 
something  is  or  is  not,  but  that  something  has 
a  meaning,  so  that  we  must  argue  from  a  defi¬ 
nition,  viz.  by  assuming  what  falsity  or  truth 
means.  If  that  which  it  is  true  to  affirm  is  noth¬ 
ing  other  than  that  which  it  is  false  to  deny,  it 
[/o]  is  impossible  that  all  statements  should  be 
false;  for  one  side  of  the  contradiction  must  be 
true.  Again,  if  it  is  necessary  with  regard  to 
everything  either  to  assert  or  to  deny  it,  it  is  im¬ 
possible  that  both  should  be  false;  for  it  is  one 
side  of  the  contradiction  that  is  false. — There¬ 
fore  all  such  views  are  also  exposed  to  the  often 
expressed  objection,  that  they  destroy  them- 
[75]  selves.  For  he  who  says  that  everything  is 
true  makes  even  the  statement  contrary  to  his 
own  true,  and  therefore  his  own  not  true  (for 
the  contrary  statement  denies  that  it  is  true), 
while  he  who  says  everything  is  false  makes 
himself  also  false. — And  if  the  former  person 
excepts  the  contrary  statement,  saying  it  alone 
is  not  true,  while  the  latter  excepts  his  own  as 
[20]  being  not  false,  none  the  less  they  are 
driven  to  postulate  the  truth  or  falsity  of  an  in¬ 
finite  number  of  statements;  for  that  which 
says  the  true  statement  is  true  is  true,  and  this 
process  will  go  on  to  infinity. 

Evidently,  again,  those  who  say  all  things  are 
at  rest  are  not  right,  nor  are  those  who  say  all 
things  are  in  movement.  For  if  all  things  are  at 
rest,  the  same  statements  will  always  be  true 
and  the  same  always  false, — but  this  obviously 
[25]  changes;  for  he  who  makes  a  statement, 
himself  at  one  time  was  not  and  again  will  not 
be.  And  if  all  things  are  in  motion,  nothing 
will  be  true;  everything  therefore  will  be  false. 
But  it  has  been  shown  that  this  is  impossible. 
Again,  it  must  be  that  which  is  that  changes; 
for  change  is  from  something  to  something. 
But  again  it  is  not  the  case  that  all  things  are 
at  rest  or  in  motion  sometimes,  and  nothing  for 
[30]  ever;  for  there  is  something  which  always 
moves  the  things  that  are  in  motion,  and  the 
first  mover  is  itself  unmoved. 

1  Cf.  ioo6a  18-22. 


1013b 


BOOK  IV,  CHAPTERS  7-8— BOOK  V,  CHAPTERS  1-2 


533 


BOOK  V 


1 

‘Beginning’  means  (i)  that  part  of  a  thing 
[35]  from  which  one  would  start  first,  e.g.  a 
line  or  a  road  has  a  beginning  in  either  of  the 
1013a  contrary  directions.  (2)  That  from 
which  each  thing  would  best  be  originated,  e.g. 
even  in  learning  we  must  sometimes  begin  not 
from  the  first  point  and  the  beginning  of  the 
subject,  but  from  the  point  from  which  we 
should  learn  most  easily.  (3)  That  from  which, 
as  an  immanent  part,  a  thing  first  comes  to  be, 
e.g.  as  the  keel  of  a  ship  and  the  foundation  of 
[5]  a  house,  while  in  animals  some  suppose  the 
heart,  others  the  brain,  others  some  other  part, 
to  be  of  this  nature.  (4)  That  from  which,  not 
as  an  immanent  part,  a  thing  first  comes  to  be, 
and  from  which  the  movement  or  the  change 
naturally  first  begins,  as  a  child  comes  from  its 
father  and  its  mother,  and  a  fight  from  abusive 
[/o]  language.  (5)  That  at  whose  will  that 
which  is  moved  is  moved  and  that  which 
changes  changes,  e.g.  the  magistracies  in  cities, 
and  oligarchies  and  monarchies  and  tyrannies, 
are  called  dpxcu,  and  so  are  the  arts,  and  of 
these  especially  the  architectonic  arts.  (6)  That 
[75]  from  which  a  thing  can  first  be  known, — 
this  also  is  called  the  beginning  of  the  thing, 
e.g.  the  hypotheses  are  the  beginnings  of  dem¬ 
onstrations.  (Causes  are  spoken  of  in  an  equal 
number  of  senses;  for  all  causes  are  begin¬ 
nings.)  It  is  common,  then,  to  all  beginnings  to 
be  the  first  point  from  which  a  thing  either  is 
or  comes  to  be  or  is  known;  but  of  these  some 
are  immanent  in  the  thing  and  others  are  out- 
[20]  side.  Hence  the  nature  of  a  thing  is  a  be¬ 
ginning,  and  so  is  the  element  of  a  thing,  and 
thought  and  will,  and  essence,  and  the  final 
cause — for  the  good  and  the  beautiful  are  the 
beginning  both  of  the  knowledge  and  of  the 
movement  of  many  things. 

2 

‘Cause’  means  ( 1 )  that  from  which,  as  imma- 
[25]  nent  material,  a  thing  comes  into  being, 
e.g.  the  bronze  is  the  cause  of  the  statue  and 
the  silver  of  the  saucer,  and  so  are  the  classes 
which  include  these.  (2)  The  form  or  pattern, 
i.e.  the  definition  of  the  essence,  and  the  classes 
which  include  this  (e.g.  the  ratio  2:1  and  num¬ 
ber  in  general  are  causes  of  the  octave),  and  the 
parts  included  in  the  definition.  (3)  That  from 
which  the  change  or  the  resting  from  change 


[30]  first  begins;  e.g.  the  adviser  is  a  cause  of 
the  action,  and  the  father  a  cause  of  the  child, 
and  in  general  the  maker  a  cause  of  the  thing 
made  and  the  change-producing  of  the  chang¬ 
ing.  (4)  The  end,  i.e.  that  for  the  sake  of  which 
a  thing  is;  e.g.  health  is  the  cause  of  walking. 
For  ‘Why  does  one  walk?’  we  say;  ‘that  one 
may  be  healthy’;  and  in  speaking  thus  we  think 
[35]  we  have  given  the  cause.  The  same  is  true 
of  all  the  means  that  intervene  before  the  end, 
when  something  else  has  put  the  process  in 
motion,  as  e.g.  thinning  or  purging  or  drugs  or 
1013b  instruments  intervene  before  health  is 
reached;  for  all  these  are  for  the  sake  of  the  end, 
though  they  differ  from  one  another  in  that 
some  are  instruments  and  others  are  actions. 

These,  then,  are  practically  all  the  senses  in 
which  causes  are  spoken  of,  and  as  they  are 
spoken  of  in  several  senses  it  follows  both  that 
[5]  there  are  several  causes  of  the  same  thing, 
and  in  no  accidental  sense  (e.g.  both  the  art  of 
sculpture  and  the  bronze  are  causes  of  the  stat¬ 
ue  not  in  respect  of  anything  else  but  qua  stat¬ 
ue;  not,  however,  in  the  same  way,  but  the  one 
as  matter  and  the  other  as  source  of  the  move¬ 
ment),  and  that  things  can  be  causes  of  one  an¬ 
other  (e.g.  exercise  of  good  condition,  and  the 
latter  of  exercise;  not,  however,  in  the  same 
[/o]  way,  but  the  one  as  end  and  the  other  as 
source  of  movement). — Again,  the  same  thing 
is  the  cause  of  contraries;  for  that  which  when 
present  causes  a  particular  thing,  we  sometimes 
charge,  when  absent,  with  the  contrary,  e.g. 
we  impute  the  shipwreck  to  the  absence  of  the 
steersman,  whose  presence  was  the  cause  of 
[75]  safety;  and  both — the  presence  and  the 
privation — are  causes  as  sources  of  movement. 

All  the  causes  now  mentioned  fall  under  four 
senses  which  are  the  most  obvious.  For  the  let¬ 
ters  are  the  cause  of  syllables,  and  the  material 
is  the  cause  of  manufactured  things,  and  fire 
and  earth  and  all  such  things  are  the  causes  of 
bodies,  and  the  parts  are  causes  of  the  whole, 
and  the  hypotheses  are  causes  of  the  conclusion, 
[20]  in  the  sense  that  they  are  that  out  of  which 
these  respectively  are  made;  but  of  these  some 
are  cause  as  the  substratum  (e.g.  the  parts), 
others  as  the  essence  (the  whole,  the  synthesis, 
and  the  form).  The  semen,  the  physician,  the 
adviser,  and  in  general  the  agent,  art  2W  sources 
[25]  of  change  or  of  rest.  The  remainder  are 
causes  as  the  end  and  the  good  of  the  other 
things;  for  that  for  the  sake  of  which  other 


534 

things  are  tends  to  be  the  best  and  the  end  of 
the  other  things;  let  us  take  it  as  making  no 
difference  whether  we  call  it  good  or  apparent 
good. 

These,  then,  are  the  causes,  and  this  is  the 
number  of  their  kinds,  but  the  varieties  of 
causes  are  many  in  number,  though  when  sum¬ 
marized  these  also  are  comparatively  few. 
[  jo]  Causes  are  spoken  of  in  many  senses,  and 
even  of  those  which  are  of  the  same  kind  some 
are  causes  in  a  prior  and  others  in  a  posterior 
sense,  e.g.  both  ‘the  physician’  and  ‘the  profes¬ 
sional  man’  are  causes  of  health,  and  both  ‘the 
ratio  2:  T  and  ‘number’  are  causes  of  the  octave, 
and  the  classes  that  include  any  particular  cause 
are  always  causes  of  the  particular  effect. 
Again,  there  are  accidental  causes  and  the 
[55]  classes  which  include  these;  e.g.  while  in 
one  sense  ‘the  sculptor’  causes  the  statue,  in  an¬ 
other  sense  ‘Polyclitus’  causes  it,  because  the 
sculptor  happens  to  be  Polyclitus;  and  the 
1014a  classes  that  include  the  accidental  cause 
are  also  causes,  e.g.  ‘man’ — or  in  general  ‘ani¬ 
mal’ — is  the  cause  of  the  statue,  because  Poly¬ 
clitus  is  a  man,  and  man  is  an  animal.  Of  acci¬ 
dental  causes  also  some  are  more  remote  or 
[5]  nearer  than  others,  as,  for  instance,  if  ‘the 
white’  and  ‘the  musical’  were  called  causes  of 
the  statue,  and  not  only  ‘Polyclitus’  or  ‘man’. 
But  besides  all  these  varieties  of  causes,  wheth¬ 
er  proper  or  accidental,  some  are  called  causes 
as  being  able  to  act,  others  as  acting;  e.g.  the 
cause  of  the  house’s  being  built  is  a  builder,  or 
a  builder  who  is  building. — The  same  variety 
[/o]  of  language  will  be  found  with  regard  to 
the  effects  of  causes;  e.g.  a  thing  may  be  called 
the  cause  of  this  statue  or  of  a  statue  or  in  gen¬ 
eral  of  an  image,  and  of  this  bronze  or  of 
bronze  or  of  matter  in  general;  and  similarly 
in  the  case  of  accidental  effects.  Again,  both 
accidental  and  proper  causes  may  be  spoken  of 
in  combination;  e.g.  we  may  say  not  ‘Polyclitus’ 
nor  ‘the  sculptor’,  but  ‘Polyclitus  the  sculptor’. 
[75]  Yet  all  these  are  but  six  in  number,  while 
each  is  spoken  of  in  two  ways;  for  (A)  they  are 
causes  either  as  the  individual,  or  as  the  genus, 
or  as  the  accidental,  or  as  the  genus  that  in¬ 
cludes  the  accidental,  and  these  either  as  com¬ 
bined,  or  as  taken  simply;  and  (B)  all  may  be 
taken  as  acting  or  as  having  a  capacity.  But 
[20]  they  differ  inasmuch  as  the  acting  causes, 
i.e.  the  individuals,  exist,  or  do  not  exist,  simul¬ 
taneously  with  the  things  of  which  they  are 
causes,  e.g.  this  particular  man  who  is  healing, 
with  this  particular  man  who  is  recovering 
health,  and  this  particular  builder  with  this 


1014b 

particular  thing  that  is  being  built;  but  the  po¬ 
tential  causes  are  not  always  in  this  case;  for 
the  house  does  not  perish  at  the  same  time  as 
[25]  the  builder. 

3 

‘Element’  means  (1)  the  primary  component 
immanent  in  a  thing,  and  indivisible  in  kind 
into  other  kinds;  e.g.  the  elements  of  speech 
are  the  parts  of  which  speech  consists  and  into 
which  it  is  ultimately  divided,  while  they  are 
no  longer  divided  into  other  forms  of  speech 
[jo]  different  in  kind  from  them.  If  they  are 
divided,  their  parts  are  of  the  same  kind,  as  a 
part  of  water  is  water  (while  a  part  of  the  syl¬ 
lable  is  not  a  syllable).  Similarly  those  who 
speak  of  the  elements  of  bodies  mean  the  things 
into  which  bodies  are  ultimately  divided,  while 
they  are  no  longer  divided  into  other  things 
differing  in  kind;  and  whether  the  things  of 
[^5]  this  sort  are  one  or  more,  they  call  these 
elements.  The  so-called  elements  of  geometri¬ 
cal  proofs,  and  in  general  the  elements  of  dem¬ 
onstrations,  have  a  similar  character;  for  the 
primary  demonstrations,  each  of  which  is 
1014b  implied  in  many  demonstrations,  are 
called  elements  of  demonstrations;  and  the 
primary  syllogisms,  which  have  three  terms 
and  proceed  by  means  of  one  middle,  are  of 
this  nature. 

(2)  People  also  transfer  the  word  ‘element’ 
from  this  meaning  and  apply  it  to  that  which, 
being  one  and  small,  is  useful  for  many  pur- 
[5]  poses;  for  which  reason  what  is  small  and 
simple  and  indivisible  is  called  an  element. 
Hence  come  the  facts  that  the  most  universal 
things  are  elements  (because  each  of  them  be¬ 
ing  one  and  simple  is  present  in  a  plurality  of 
things,  either  in  all  or  in  as  many  as  possible), 
and  that  unity  and  the  point  are  thought  by 
some  to  be  first  principles.  Now,  since  the  so- 
called  genera  are  universal  and  indivisible  (for 
there  is  no  definition  of  them),  some  say  the 
[/o]  genera  are  elements,  and  more  so  than 
the  differentia,  because  the  genus  is  more  uni¬ 
versal;  for  where  the  differentia  is  present,  the 
genus  accompanies  it,  but  where  the  genus  is 
present,  the  differentia  is  not  always  so.  It  is 
common  to  all  the  meanings  that  the  element 
[75]  of  each  thing  is  the  first  component  im¬ 
manent  in  each. 

4 

‘Nature’  means  (1)  the  genesis  of  growing 
things — the  meaning  which  would  be  suggest¬ 
ed  if  one  were  to  pronounce  the  v  in  <f>v<ns 


METAPHYSICS 


1015b  BOOK  V,  CHAPTERS  2-5  535 


long.  (2)  That  immanent  part  of  a  growing 
thing,  from  which  its  growth  first  proceeds. 
(3)  The  source  from  which  the  primary  move¬ 
ment  in  each  natural  object  is  present  in  it  in 
[20]  virtue  of  its  own  essence.  Those  things  are 
said  to  grow  which  derive  increase  from  some¬ 
thing  else  by  contact  and  either  by  organic 
unity,  or  by  organic  adhesion  as  in  the  case  of 
embryos.  Organic  unity  differs  from  contact; 
for  in  the  latter  case  there  need  not  be  any¬ 
thing  besides  the  contact,  but  in  organic  unities 
there  is  something  identical  in  both  parts, 
[25]  which  makes  them  grow  together  instead 
of  merely  touching,  and  be  one  in  respect  of 
continuity  and  quantity,  though  not  of  quality. 
— (4)  ‘Nature’  means  the  primary  material  of 
which  any  natural  object  consists  or  out  of 
which  it  is  made,  which  is  relatively  unshaped 
and  cannot  be  changed  from  its  own  potency, 
as  e.g.  bronze  is  said  to  be  the  nature  of  a 
statue  and  of  bronze  utensils,  and  wood  the  na¬ 
ture  of  wooden  things;  and  so  in  all  other 
[30]  cases;  for  when  a  product  is  made  out  of 
these  materials,  the  first  matter  is  preserved 
throughout.  For  it  is  in  this  way  that  people 
call  the  elements  of  natural  objects  also  their 
nature,  some  naming  fire,  others  earth,  others 
air,  others  water,  others  something  else  of  the 
sort,  and  some  naming  more  than  one  of  these, 
and  others  all  of  them. — (5)  ‘Nature’  means 
[35]  the  essence  of  natural  objects,  as  with 
those  who  say  the  nature  is  the  primary  mode 
1015a  of  composition,  or  as  Empedocles1 
says: — 

Nothing  that  is  has  a  nature, 
But  only  mixing  and  parting  of  the  mixed, 
And  nature  is  but  a  name  given  them  by 
men . 

Hence  as  regards  the  things  that  are  or  come 
to  be  by  nature,  though  that  from  which  they 
naturally  come  to  be  or  are  is  already  present, 
we  say  they  have  not  their  nature  yet,  unless 
[5]  they  have  their  form  or  shape.  That  which 
comprises  both  of  these  exists  by  nature,  e.g. 
the  animals  and  their  parts;  and  not  only  is  the 
first  matter  nature  (and  this  in  two  senses,  ei¬ 
ther  the  first,  counting  from  the  thing,  or  the 
first  in  general;  e.g.  in  the  case  of  works  in 
bronze,  bronze  is  first  with  reference  to  them, 
but  in  general  perhaps  water  is  first,  if  all 
things  that  can  be  melted  are  water),  but  also 
[/o]  the  form  or  essence,  which  is  the  end  of 
the  process  of  becoming. — (6)  By  an  extension 
of  meaning  from  this  sense  of  ‘nature’  every  es¬ 
sence  in  general  has  come  to  be  called  a  ‘na- 
1  Fr.  8. 


ture’,  because  the  nature  of  a  thing  is  one  kind 
of  essence. 

From  what  has  been  said,  then,  it  is  plain 
that  nature  in  the  primary  and  strict  sense  is 
the  essence  of  things  which  have  in  themselves, 
[75]  as  such,  a  source  of  movement;  for  the 
matter  is  called  the  nature  because  it  is  quali¬ 
fied  to  receive  this,  and  processes  of  becoming 
and  growing  are  called  nature  because  they  are 
movements  proceeding  from  this.  And  nature 
in  this  sense  is  the  source  of  the  movement  of 
natural  objects,  being  present  in  them  some¬ 
how,  either  potentially  or  in  complete  reality. 

5 

[20]  We  call  ‘necessary’  (1)  ( a )  that  without 
which,  as  a  condition,  a  thing  cannot  live;  e.g. 
breathing  and  food  are  necessary  for  an  ani¬ 
mal;  for  it  is  incapable  of  existing  without 
these;  ( b )  the  conditions  without  which  good 
cannot  be  or  come  to  be,  or  without  which  we 
cannot  get  rid  or  be  freed  of  evil;  e.g.  drinking 
the  medicine  is  necessary  in  order  that  we  may 
[25]  be  cured  of  disease,  and  a  man’s  sailing  to 
Aegina  is  necessary  in  order  that  he  may  get 
his  money. — (2)  The  compulsory  and  compul¬ 
sion,  i.e.  that  which  impedes  and  tends  to  hin¬ 
der,  contrary  to  impulse  and  purpose.  For  the 
compulsory  is  called  necessary  (whence  the 
necessary  is  painful,  as  Evenus2  says:  ‘For  every 
[jo]  necessary  thing  is  ever  irksome’),  and  com¬ 
pulsion  is  a  form  of  necessity,  as  Sophocles3 
says:  ‘But  force  necessitates  me  to  this  act’. 
And  necessity  is  held  to  be  something  that  can¬ 
not  be  persuaded — and  rightly,  for  it  is  con¬ 
trary  to  the  movement  which  accords  with  pur¬ 
pose  and  with  reasoning. — (3)  We  say  that 
that  which  cannot  be  otherwise  is  necessarily 
[35]  as  it  is.  And  from  this  sense  of  ‘necessary’ 
all  the  others  are  somehow  derived;  for  a  thing 
is  said  to  do  or  suffer  what  is  necessary  in  the 
1015b  sense  of  compulsory,  only  when  it  can¬ 
not  act  according  to  its  impulse  because  of  the 
compelling  force, — which  implies  that  necessity 
is  that  because  of  which  a  thing  cannot  be  oth¬ 
erwise;  and  similarly  as  regards  the  conditions 
of  life  and  of  good;  for  when  in  the  one  case 
[5]  good,  in  the  other  life  and  being,  are  not 
possible  without  certain  conditions,  these  are 
necessary,  and  this  kind  of  cause  is  a  sort  of  ne¬ 
cessity.  Again,  demonstration  is  a  necessary 
thing  because  the  conclusion  cannot  be  other¬ 
wise,  if  there  has  been  demonstration  in  the 
unqualified  sense;  and  the  causes  of  this  neces¬ 
sity  are  the  first  premisses,  i.e.  the  fact  that  the 
2  Fr.  8,  Hiller.  3  Electra ,  256. 


536  METAPHYSICS  1016a 


propositions  from  which  the  syllogism  pro¬ 
ceeds  cannot  be  otherwise. 

Now  some  things  owe  their  necessity  to 
something  other  than  themselves;  others  do 
[/o]  not,  but  are  themselves  the  source  of  ne¬ 
cessity  in  other  things.  Therefore  the  necessary 
in  the  primary  and  strict  sense  is  the  simple;  for 
this  does  not  admit  of  more  states  than  one,  so 
that  it  cannot  even  be  in  one  state  and  also  in 
another;  for  if  it  did  it  would  already  be  in 
more  than  one.  If,  then,  there  are  any  things 
[75]  that  are  eternal  and  unmovable,  nothing 
compulsory  or  against  their  nature  attaches  to 
them. 

6 

‘One’  means  (1)  that  which  is  one  by  accident, 
(2)  that  which  is  one  by  its  own  nature.  (1)  In¬ 
stances  of  the  accidentally  one  are  ‘Coriscus  and 
what  is  musical’,  and  ‘musical  Coriscus’  (for  it 
is  the  same  thing  to  say  ‘Coriscus  and  what  is 
musical’,  and  ‘musical  Coriscus’),  and  ‘what  is 
musical  and  what  is  just’,  and  ‘musical  Coris¬ 
cus  and  just  Coriscus’.  For  all  of  these  are  called 
[20]  one  by  virtue  of  an  accident,  ‘what  is  just 
and  what  is  musical’  because  they  are  accidents 
of  one  substance,  ‘what  is  musical  and  Coris¬ 
cus’  because  the  one  is  an  accident  of  the  other; 
and  similarly  in  a  sense  ‘musical  Coriscus’  is 
one  with  ‘Coriscus’  because  one  of  the  parts  of 
[25]  the  phrase  is  an  accident  of  the  other,  i.e. 
‘musical’  is  an  accident  of  Coriscus;  and  ‘musi¬ 
cal  Coriscus’  is  one  with  ‘just  Coriscus’  because 
one  part  of  each  is  an  accident  of  one  and  the 
same  subject.  The  case  is  similar  if  the  accident 
is  predicated  of  a  genus  or  of  any  universal 
[30]  name,e.g.  if  one  says  that  man  is  the  same 
as  ‘musical  man’;  for  this  is  either  because  ‘mu¬ 
sical’  is  an  accident  of  man,  which  is  one  sub¬ 
stance,  or  because  both  are  accidents  of  some 
individual,  e.g.  Coriscus.  Both,  however,  do 
not  belong  to  him  in  the  same  way,  but  one 
presumably  as  genus  and  included  in  his  sub¬ 
stance,  the  other  as  a  state  or  affection  of  the 
substance. 

[35]  The  things,  then,  that  are  called  one  in 
virtue  of  an  accident,  are  called  so  in  this  way. 
(2)  Of  things  that  are  called  one  in  virtue  of 
their  own  nature  some  (a)  are  so  called  because 
1016a  they  are  continuous,  e.g.  a  bundle  is 
made  one  by  a  band,  and  pieces  of  wood  are 
made  one  by  glue;  and  a  line,  even  if  it  is  bent, 
is  called  one  if  it  is  continuous,  as  each  part  of 
the  body  is,  e.g.  the  leg  or  the  arm.  Of  these 
themselves,  the  continuous  by  nature  are  more 
one  than  the  continuous  by  art.  A  thing  is 


[5]  called  continuous  which  has  by  its  own  na¬ 
ture  one  movement  and  cannot  have  any  other; 
and  the  movement  is  one  when  it  is  indivisible, 
and  it  is  indivisible  in  respect  of  time.  Those 
things  are  continuous  by  their  own  nature 
which  are  one  not  merely  by  contact;  for  if  you 
put  pieces  of  wood  touching  one  another,  you 
will  not  say  these  are  one  piece  of  wood  or  one 
body  or  one  continuum  of  any  other  sort. 
Things,  then,  that  are  continuous  in  any  way 
[/o]  are  called  one,  even  if  they  admit  of  being 
bent,  and  still  more  those  which  cannot  be 
bent;  e.g.  the  shin  or  the  thigh  is  more  one  than 
the  leg,  because  the  movement  of  the  leg  need 
not  be  one.  And  the  straight  line  is  more  one 
than  the  bent;  but  that  which  is  bent  and  has 
an  angle  we  call  both  one  and  not  one,  because 
its  movement  may  be  either  simultaneous  or 
[75]  not  simultaneous;  but  that  of  the  straight 
line  is  always  simultaneous,  and  no  part  of  it 
which  has  magnitude  rests  while  another 
moves,  as  in  the  bent  line. 

{b)  (i)  Things  are  called  one  in  another 
sense  because  their  substratum  does  not  differ 
in  kind;  it  does  not  differ  in  the  case  of  things 
whose  kind  is  indivisible  to  sense.  The  substra¬ 
tum  meant  is  either  the  nearest  to,  or  the  far- 
[20]  thest  from,  the  final  state.  For,  one  the  one 
hand,  wine  is  said  to  be  one  and  water  is  said  to 
be  one,  qua  indivisible  in  kind;  and,  on  the 
other  hand,  all  juices,  e.g.  oil  and  wine,  are 
said  to  be  one,  and  so  are  all  things  that  can  be 
melted,  because  the  ultimate  substratum  of  all 
is  the  same;  for  all  of  these  are  water  or  air. 

(ii)  Those  things  also  are  called  one  whose 
[25]  genus  is  one  though  distinguished  by  op¬ 
posite  differentiae — these  too  are  all  called  one 
because  the  genus  which  underlies  the  differ¬ 
entiae  is  one  (e.g.  horse,  man,  and  dog  form  a 
unity,  because  all  are  animals'),  and  indeed  in 
a  way  similar  to  that  in  which  the  matter  is 
one.  These  are  sometimes  called  one  in  this 
way,  but  sometimes  it  is  the  higher  genus  that 
is  said  to  be  the  same  (if  they  are  infimae  spe- 
[30]  cies  of  their  genus) — the  genus  above  the 
proximate  genera;  e.g.  the  isosceles  and  the 
equilateral  are  one  and  the  same  figure  because 
both  are  triangles;  but  they  are  not  the  same 
triangles. 

( c )  Two  things  are  called  one,  when  the 
definition  which  states  the  essence  of  one  is 
indivisible  from  another  definition  which 
shows  us  the  other  (though  in  itself  every 
[35]  definition  is  divisible).  Thus  even  that 
which  has  increased  or  is  diminishing  is  one, 
because  its  definition  is  one,  as,  in  the  case  of 


1017*  BOOK  V,  CHAPTERS  5-7  537 


1016b  plane  figures,  is  the  definition  of  their 
form.  In  general  those  things  the  thought  of 
whose  essence  is  indivisible,  and  cannot  sep¬ 
arate  them  either  in  time  or  in  place  or  in 
definition,  are  most  of  all  one,  and  of  these  es¬ 
pecially  those  which  are  substances.  For  in  gen¬ 
eral  those  things  that  do  not  admit  of  division 
are  called  one  in  so  far  as  they  do  not  admit  of 
[5]  h;  e.g.  if  two  things  are  indistinguishable 
qua  man,  they  are  one  kind  of  man;  if  qua 
animal,  one  kind  of  animal;  if  qua  magnitude, 
one  kind  of  magnitude. — Now  most  things 
are  called  one  because  they  either  do  or  have 
or  suffer  or  are  related  to  something  else  that  is 
one,  but  the  things  that  are  primarily  called 
one  are  those  whose  substance  is  one, — and 
one  either  in  continuity  or  in  form  or  in  defini¬ 
tion;  for  we  count  as  more  than  one  either 
[/o]  things  that  are  not  continuous,  or  those 
whose  form  is  not  one,  or  those  whose  defini¬ 
tion  is  not  one. 

While  in  a  sense  we  call  anything  one  if  it  is 
a  quantity  and  continuous,  in  a  sense  we  do 
not  unless  it  is  a  whole,  i.e.  unless  it  has  unity 
of  form;  e.g.  if  we  saw  the  parts  of  a  shoe  put 
together  anyhow  we  should  not  call  them  one 
[75]  all  the  same  (unless  because  of  their  con¬ 
tinuity);  we  do  this  only  if  they  are  put  to¬ 
gether  so  as  to  be  a  shoe  and  to  have  already 
a  certain  single  form.  This  is  why  the  circle  is 
of  all  lines  most  truly  one,  because  it  is  whole 
and  complete. 

(3)  The  essence  of  what  is  one  is  to  be  some 
kind  of  beginning  of  number;  for  the  first 
measure  is  the  beginning,  since  that  by  which 
we  first  know  each  class  is  the  first  measure 
[20]  of  the  class;  the  one,  then,  is  the  beginning 
of  the  knowable  regarding  each  class.  But  the 
one  is  not  the  same  in  all  classes.  For  here  it  is 
a  quarter-tone,  and  there  it  is  the  vowel  or  the 
consonant;  and  there  is  another  unit  of  weight 
and  another  of  movement.  But  everywhere  the 
one  is  indivisible  either  in  quantity  or  in  kind. 
[25]  Now  that  which  is  indivisible  in  quantity 
is  called  a  unit  if  it  is  not  divisible  in  any 
dimension  and  is  without  position,  a  point  if 
it  is  not  divisible  in  any  dimension  and  has 
position,  a  line  if  it  is  divisible  in  one  dimen¬ 
sion,  a  plane  if  in  two,  a  body  if  divisible  in 
quantity  in  all — i.e.  in  three — dimensions.  And, 
reversing  the  order,  that  which  is  divisible  in 
two  dimensions  is  a  plane,  that  which  is  divis¬ 
ible  in  one  a  line,  that  which  is  in  no  way  di- 
[30]  visible  in  quantity  is  a  point  or  a  unit, — 
that  which  has  not  position  a  unit,  that  which 
has  position  a  point. 


Again,  some  things  are  one  in  number, 
others  in  species,  others  in  genus,  others  by 
analogy;  in  number  those  whose  matter  is  one, 
in  species  those  whose  definition  is  one,  in 
genus  those  to  which  the  same  figure  of  predi¬ 
cation  applies,  by  analogy  those  which  are  re¬ 
lated  as  a  third  thing  is  to  a  fourth.  The  latter 
[35]  kinds  of  unity  are  always  found  when 
the  former  are;  e.g.  things  that  are  one  in  num¬ 
ber  are  also  one  in  species,  while  things  that 
are  one  in  species  are  not  all  one  in  number; 
101 7a  but  things  that  are  one  in  species  are  all 
one  in  genus,  while  things  that  are  so  in  genus 
are  not  all  one  in  species  but  are  all  one  by 
analogy;  while  things  that  are  one  by  analogy 
are  not  all  one  in  genus. 

Evidently  ‘many’  will  have  meanings  oppo¬ 
site  to  those  of  ‘one’;  some  things  are  many  be¬ 
cause  they  are  not  continuous,  others  because 
[5]  their  matter — either  the  proximate  matter 
or  the  ultimate — is  divisible  in  kind,  others  be¬ 
cause  the  definitions  which  state  their  essence 
are  more  than  one. 

7 

Things  are  said  to  ‘be’  (1)  in  an  accidental 
sense,  (2)  by  their  own  nature. 

(1)  In  an  accidental  sense,  e.g.  we  say  ‘the 
righteous  doer  is  musical’,  and  ‘the  man  is  mu¬ 
sical’,  and  ‘the  musician  is  a  man’,  just  as  we 
[/o]  say  ‘the  musician  builds’,  because  the 
builder  happens  to  be  musical  or  the  musician 
to  be  a  builder;  for  here  ‘one  thing  is  another’ 
means  ‘one  is  an  accident  of  another’.  So  in  the 
cases  we  have  mentioned;  for  when  we  say  ‘the 
man  is  musical’  and  ‘the  musician  is  a  man’, 
[75]  or  ‘he  who  is  pale  is  musical’  or  ‘the  mu¬ 
sician  is  pale’,  the  last  two  mean  that  both  at¬ 
tributes  are  accidents  of  the  same  thing;  the 
first  that  the  attribute  is  an  accident  of  that 
which  is;  while  ‘the  musical  is  a  man’  means 
that  ‘musical’  is  an  accident  of  a  man.  (In  this 
sense,  too,  the  not-pale  is  said  to  be,  because 
that  of  which  it  is  an  accident  is.)  Thus  when 
one  thing  is  said  in  an  accidental  sense  to  be 
[20]  another,  this  is  either  because  both  belong 
to  the  same  thing,  and  this  is,  or  because  that 
to  which  the  attribute  belongs  is,  or  because 
the  subject  which  has  as  an  attribute  that  of 
which  it  is  itself  predicated,  itself  is. 

(2)  The  kinds  of  essential  being  are  precisely 
those  that  are  indicated  by  the  figures  of  predi¬ 
cation;  for  the  senses  of  ‘being’  are  just  as 
many  as  these  figures.  Since,  then,  some  pred- 
[25]  icates  indicate  what  the  subject  is,  others 
its  quality,  others  quantity,  others  relation, 


538  METAPHYSICS  1018a 


others  activity  or  passivity,  others  its  ‘where’, 
others  its  ‘when’,  ‘being’  has  a  meaning  answer¬ 
ing  to  each  of  these.  For  there  is  no  difference 
between  ‘the  man  is  recovering’  and  ‘the  man 
recovers’,  nor  between  ‘the  man  is  walking’  or 
[30]  ‘cutting’  and  ‘the  man  walks’  or  ‘cuts’; 
and  similarly  in  all  other  cases. 

(3)  Again,  ‘being’  and  ‘is’  mean  that  a 
statement  is  true,  ‘not  being’  that  it  is  not  true 
but  false, — and  this  alike  in  the  case  of  affirma¬ 
tion  and  of  negation;  e.g.  ‘Socrates  is  musical’ 
means  that  this  is  true,  or  ‘Socrates  is  not-pale’ 
means  that  this  is  true;  but  ‘the  diagonal  of 
the  square  is  not  commensurate  with  the  side’ 
means  that  it  is  false  to  say  it  is. 

[35]  (4)  Again,  ‘being’  and  ‘that  which  is’ 
mean  that  some  of  the  things  we  have  men- 
1017b  tioned  ‘are’  potentially,  others  in  com¬ 
plete  reality.  For  we  say  both  of  that  which 
sees  potentially  and  of  that  which  sees  actually, 
that  it  is  ‘seeing’,  and  both  of  that  which  can 
actualize  its  knowledge  and  of  that  which  is 
[5]  actualizing  it,  that  it  knows,  and  both  of 
that  to  which  rest  is  already  present  and  of 
that  which  can  rest,  that  it  rests.  And  similarly 
in  the  case  of  substances;  we  say  the  Hermes 
is  in  the  stone,  and  the  half  of  the  line  is  in  the 
line,  and  we  say  of  that  which  is  not  yet  ripe 
that  it  is  corn.  When  a  thing  is  potential  and 
when  it  is  not  yet  potential  must  be  explained 
elsewhere.1 

8 

[/o]  We  call  ‘substance’  (1)  the  simple  bodies, 
i.e.  earth  and  fire  and  water  and  everything  of 
the  sort,  and  in  general  bodies  and  the  things 
composed  of  them,  both  animals  and  divine 
beings,  and  the  parts  of  these.  All  these  are 
called  substance  because  they  are  not  predi¬ 
cated  of  a  subject  but  everything  else  is  predi¬ 
cated  of  them. — (2)  That  which,  being  pres- 
[75]  ent  in  such  things  as  are  not  predicated  of 
a  subject,  is  the  cause  of  their  being,  as  the  soul 
is  of  the  being  of  an  animal. — (3)  The  parts 
which  are  present  in  such  things,  limiting  them 
and  marking  them  as  individuals,  and  by 
whose  destruction  the  whole  is  destroyed,  as 
the  body  is  by  the  destruction  of  the  plane,  as 
some  say,  and  the  plane  by  the  destruction  of 
[20]  the  line; and  in  general  number  is  thought 
by  some  to  be  of  this  nature;  for  if  it  is  de¬ 
stroyed,  they  say,  nothing  exists,  and  it  limits 
all  things. — (4)  The  essence,  the  formula  of 
which  is  a  definition,  is  also  called  the  sub¬ 
stance  of  each  thing. 

1  ix.  7. 


It  follows,  then,  that  ‘substance’  has  two 
senses,  (A)  the  ultimate  substratum,  which  is 
no  longer  predicated  of  anything  else,  and  ( B ) 
that  which,  being  a  ‘this’,  is  also  separable — 
[25]  and  of  this  nature  is  the  shape  or  form 
of  each  thing. 

9 

‘The  same’  means  ( 1 )  that  which  is  the  same 
in  an  accidental  sense,  e.g.  ‘the  pale’  and  ‘the 
musical’  are  the  same  because  they  are  acci¬ 
dents  of  the  same  thing,  and  ‘a  man’  and  ‘mu¬ 
sical’  because  the  one  is  an  accident  of  the 
other;  and  ‘the  musical’  is  ‘a  man’  because  it 
is  an  accident  of  the  man.  (The  complex  entity 
[30]  is  the  same  as  either  of  the  simple  ones 
and  each  of  these  is  the  same  as  it;  for  both 
‘the  man’  and  ‘the  musical’  are  said  to  be  the 
same  as  ‘the  musical  man’,  and  this  the  same 
as  they.)  This  is  why  all  of  these  statements 
are  made  not  universally;  for  it  is  not  true  to 
[35]  say  that  every  man  is  the  same  as  ‘the  mu¬ 
sical’  (for  universal  attributes  belong  to  things 
in  virtue  of  their  own  nature,  but  accidents  do 
not  belong  to  them  in  virtue  of  their  own  na- 
1018a  ture);  but  of  the  individuals  the  state¬ 
ments  are  made  without  qualification.  For 
‘Socrates’  and  ‘musical  Socrates’  are  thought 
to  be  the  same;  but  ‘Socrates’  is  not  predicable 
of  more  than  one  subject,  and  therefore  we  do 
not  say  ‘every  Socrates’  as  we  say  ‘every  man’. 

Some  things  are  said  to  be  the  same  in  this 
sense,  others  (2)  are  the  same  by  their  own 
nature,  in  as  many  senses  as  that  which  is  one 
[5]  by  its  own  nature  is  so;  for  both  the  things 
whose  matter  is  one  either  in  kind  or  in  num¬ 
ber,  and  those  whose  essence  is  one,  are  said  to 
be  the  same.  Clearly,  therefore,  sameness  is  a 
unity  of  the  being  either  of  more  than  one 
thing  or  of  one  thing  when  it  is  treated  as  more 
than  one,  i.e.  when  we  say  a  thing  is  the  same 
as  itself;  for  we  treat  it  as  two. 

[70]  Things  are  called  ‘other’  if  either  their 
kinds  or  their  matters  or  the  definitions  of 
their  essence  are  more  than  one;  and  in  gen¬ 
eral  ‘other’  has  meanings  opposite  to  those  of 
‘the  same’. 

‘Different’  is  applied  (1)  to  those  things 
which  though  other  are  the  same  in  some  re¬ 
spect,  only  not  in  number  but  either  in  species 
or  in  genus  or  by  analogy;  (2)  to  those  whose 
genus  is  other,  and  to  contraries,  and  to  all 
things  that  have  their  otherness  in  their  es¬ 
sence. 

[75]  Those  things  are  called  ‘like’  which  have 
the  same  attributes  in  every  respect,  and  those 


1018b 

which  have  more  attributes  the  same  than  dif¬ 
ferent,  and  those  whose  quality  is  one;  and 
that  which  shares  with  another  thing  the 
greater  number  or  the  more  important  of  the 
attributes  (each  of  them  one  of  two  contraries) 
in  respect  of  which  things  are  capable  of  alter¬ 
ing,  is  like  that  other  thing.  The  senses  of 
‘unlike'  are  opposite  to  those  of  ‘like'. 

io 

[20]  The  term  ‘opposite’  is  applied  to  contra¬ 
dictories,  and  to  contraries,  and  to  relative 
terms,  and  to  privation  and  possession,  and  to 
the  extremes  from  which  and  into  which  gen¬ 
eration  and  dissolution  take  place;  and  the  at¬ 
tributes  that  cannot  be  present  at  the  same 
time  in  that  which  is  receptive  of  both,  are  said 
to  be  opposed,— either  themselves  of  their  con¬ 
stituents.  Grey  and  white  colour  do  not  belong 
at  the  same  time  to  the  same  thing;  hence  their 
constituents  are  opposed. 

[25]  The  term  ‘contrary’  is  applied  (1)  to 
those  attributes  differing  in  genus  which  can¬ 
not  belong  at  the  same  time  to  the  same  sub¬ 
ject,  (2)  to  the  most  different  of  the  things  in 
the  same  genus,  (3)  to  the  most  different  of 
the  attributes  in  the  same  recipient  subject, 

(4)  to  the  most  different  of  the  things  that  fall 
[30]  under  the  same  faculty,  (5)  to  the  things 
whose  difference  is  greatest  either  absolutely 
or  in  genus  or  in  species.  The  other  things  that 
are  called  contrary  are  so  called,  some  because 
they  possess  contraries  of  the  above  kind,  some 
because  they  are  receptive  of  such,  some  be¬ 
cause  they  are  productive  of  or  susceptible  to 
such,  or  are  producing  or  suffering  them,  or 
are  losses  or  acquisitions,  or  possessions  or 
[55]  privations,  of  such.  Since  ‘one’  and 
‘being’  have  many  senses,  the  other  terms 
which  are  derived  from  these,  and  therefore 
‘same’,  ‘other’,  and  ‘contrary’,  must  corre¬ 
spond,  so  that  they  must  be  different  for  each 
category. 

The  term  ‘other  in  species’  is  applied  to 
things  which  being  of  the  same  genus  are 
not  subordinate  the  one  to  the  other,  or  which 
1018b  being  in  the  same  genus  have  a  differ¬ 
ence,  or  which  have  a  contrariety  in  their  sub¬ 
stance;  and  contraries  are  other  than  one  an¬ 
other  in  species  (either  all  contraries  or  those 
which  are  so  called  in  the  primary  sense),  and 
so  are  those  things  whose  definitions  differ  in 

[5]  the  infima  species  of  the  genus  (e.g.  man 
and  horse  are  indivisible  in  genus,  but  their 
definitions  are  different),  and  those  which  be¬ 
ing  in  the  same  substance  have  a  difference. 


539 

‘The  same  in  species’  has  the  various  mean¬ 
ings  opposite  to  these. 

11 

The  words  ‘prior’  and  ‘posterior’  are  applied 
(1)  to  some  things  (on  the  assumption  that 
there  is  a  first,  i.e.  a  beginning,  in  each  class) 
[/o]  because  they  are  nearer  some  beginning 
determined  either  absolutely  and  by  nature,  or 
by  reference  to  something  or  in  some  place  or 
by  certain  people;  e.g.  things  are  prior  in  place 
because  they  are  nearer  either  to  some  place 
determined  by  nature  (e.g.  the  middle  or  the 
last  place),  or  to  some  chance  object;  and  that 
which  is  farther  is  posterior. — Other  things  are 
[75]  prior  in  time;  some  by  being  farther  from 
the  present,  i.e.  in  the  case  of  past  events  (for 
the  Trojan  war  is  prior  to  the  Persian,  because 
it  is  farther  from  the  present),  others  by  being 
nearer  the  present,  i.e.  in  the  case  of  future 
events  (for  the  Nemean  games  are  prior  to  the 
Pythian,  if  we  treat  the  present  as  beginning 
and  first  point,  because  they  are  nearer  the 
present). — Other  things  are  prior  in  move- 
[20]  ment;  for  that  which  is  nearer  the  first 
mover  is  prior  (e.g.  the  boy  is  prior  to  the 
man);  and  the  prime  mover  also  is  a  begin¬ 
ning  absolutely. — Others  are  prior  in  power; 
for  that  which  exceeds  in  power,  i.e.  the  more 
powerful,  is  prior;  and  such  is  that  according 
to  whose  will  the  other — i.e.  the  posterior — 
must  follow,  so  that  if  the  prior  does  not  set  it 
in  motion  the  other  does  not  move,  and  if  it  sets 
[25]  it  in  motion  it  does  move;  and  here  will 
is  a  beginning. — Others  are  prior  in  arrange¬ 
ment;  these  are  the  things  that  are  placed  at 
intervals  in  reference  to  some  one  definite 
thing  according  to  some  rule,  e.g.  in  the  chorus 
the  second  man  is  prior  to  the  third,  and  in 
the  lyre  the  second  lowest  string  is  prior  to 
the  lowest;  for  in  the  one  case  the  leader  and  in 
the  other  the  middle  string  is  the  beginning. 
[30]  These,  then,  are  called  prior  in  this  sense, 
but  (2)  in  another  sense  that  which  is  prior 
for  knowledge  is  treated  as  also  absolutely 
prior;  of  these,  the  things  that  are  prior  in 
definition  do  not  coincide  with  those  that  are 
prior  in  relation  to  perception.  For  in  defini¬ 
tion  universals  are  prior,  in  relation  to  percep¬ 
tion  individuals.  And  in  definition  also  the  ac¬ 
cident  is  prior  to  the  whole,  e.g.  ‘musical’  to 
[35]  ‘musical  man’,  for  the  definition  cannot 
exist  as  a  whole  without  the  part;  yet  musical¬ 
ness  cannot  exist  unless  there  is  some  one  who 
is  musical. 

(3)  The  attributes  of  prior  things  are  called 


BOOK  V,  CHAPTERS  7-11 


540 

prior,  e.g.  straightness  is  prior  to  smoothness; 
for  one  is  an  attribute  of  a  line  as  such,  and  the 
other  of  a  surface. 

1019a  Some  things  then  are  called  prior  and 
posterior  in  this  sense,  others  (4)  in  respect  of 
nature  and  substance,  i.e.  those  which  can  be 
without  other  things,  while  the  others  cannot 
be  without  them, — a  distinction  which  Plato 
used.  (If  we  consider  the  various  senses  of  ‘be- 
[5]  mg’,  firstly  the  subject  is  prior,  so  that  sub¬ 
stance  is  prior;  secondly,  according  as  potency 
or  complete  reality  is  taken  into  account,  dif¬ 
ferent  things  are  prior,  for  some  things  are 
prior  in  respect  of  potency,  others  in  respect  of 
complete  reality,  e.g.  in  potency  the  half  line  is 
prior  to  the  whole  line,  and  the  part  to  the 
whole,  and  the  matter  to  the  concrete  sub¬ 
stance,  but  in  complete  reality  these  are  pos- 
[/o]  terior;  for  it  is  only  when  the  whole  has 
been  dissolved  that  they  will  exist  in  complete 
reality.)  In  a  sense,  therefore,  all  things  that 
are  called  prior  and  posterior  are  so  called  with 
reference  to  this  fourth  sense;  for  some  things 
can  exist  without  others  in  respect  of  genera¬ 
tion,  e.g.  the  whole  without  the  parts,  and 
others  in  respect  of  dissolution,  e.g.  the  part 
without  the  whole.  And  the  same  is  true  in  all 
other  cases. 

12 

[75]  ‘Potency’  means  (1)  a  source  of  move¬ 
ment  or  change,  which  is  in  another  thing 
than  the  thing  moved  or  in  the  same  thing 
qua  other;  e.g.  the  art  of  building  is  a  potency 
which  is  not  in  the  thing  built,  while  the  art 
of  healing,  which  is  a  potency,  may  be  in  the 
man  healed,  but  not  in  him  qua  healed.  ‘Po¬ 
tency’  then  means  the  source,  in  general,  of 
change  or  movement  in  another  thing  or  in  the 
[20]  same  thing  qua  other,  and  also  (2)  the 
source  of  a  thing’s  being  moved  by  another 
thing  or  by  itself  qua  other.  For  in  virtue  of 
that  principle,  in  virtue  of  which  a  patient 
suffers  anything,  we  call  it  ‘capable’  of  suffer¬ 
ing;  and  this  we  do  sometimes  if  it  suffers 
anything  at  all,  sometimes  not  in  respect  of 
everything  it  suffers,  but  only  if  it  suffers  a 
change  for  the  better. — (3)  The  capacity  of 
performing  this  well  or  according  to  intention; 
for  sometimes  we  say  of  those  who  merely  can 
walk  or  speak  but  not  well  or  not  as  they  in- 
[25]  tend,  that  they  cannot  speak  or  walk.  So 
too  (4)  in  the  case  of  passivity. — (5)  The  states 
in  virtue  of  which  things  are  absolutely  im¬ 
passive  or  unchangeable,  or  not  easily  changed 
for  the  worse,  are  called  potencies;  for  things 


1019b 

are  broken  and  crushed  and  bent  and  in  gen- 
[30]  eral  destroyed  not  by  having  a  potency 
but  by  not  having  one  and  by  lacking  some¬ 
thing,  and  things  are  impassive  with  respect 
to  such  processes  if  they  are  scarcely  and  slight¬ 
ly  affected  by  them,  because  of  a  ‘potency’  and 
because  they  ‘can’  do  something  and  are  in 
some  positive  state. 

‘Potency’  having  this  variety  of  meanings,  so 
too  the  ‘potent’  or  ‘capable’  in  one  sense  will 
mean  that  which  can  begin  a  movement  (or  a 
change  in  general,  for  even  that  which  can 
bring  things  to  rest  is  a  ‘potent’  thing)  in  an- 
[35]  other  thing  or  in  itself  qua  other;  and  in 
1019b  one  sense  that  over  which  something 
else  has  such  a  potency;  and  in  one  sense  that 
which  has  a  potency  of  changing  into  some¬ 
thing,  whether  for  the  worse  or  for  the  better 
(for  even  that  which  perishes  is  thought  to  be 
‘capable’  of  perishing,  for  it  would  not  have 
perished  if  it  had  not  been  capable  of  it;  but, 
as  a  matter  of  fact,  it  has  a  certain  disposition 
[5]  and  cause  and  principle  which  fits  it  to 
suffer  this;  sometimes  it  is  thought  to  be  of 
this  sort  because  it  has  something,  sometimes 
because  it  is  deprived  of  something;  but  if  pri¬ 
vation  is  in  a  sense  ‘having’  or  ‘habit’,  every¬ 
thing  will  be  capable  by  having  something,  so 
that  things  are  capable  both  by  having  a  posi¬ 
tive  habit  and  principle,  and  by  having  the  pri¬ 
vation  of  this,  if  it  is  possible  to  have  a  priva¬ 
tion;  and  if  privation  is  not  in  a  sense  ‘habit’, 
[/o]  ‘capable’  is  used  in  two  distinct  senses); 
and  a  thing  is  capable  in  another  sense  because 
neither  any  other  thing,  nor  itself  qua  other, 
has  a  potency  or  principle  which  can  destroy 
it.  Again,  all  of  these  are  capable  either  merely 
because  the  thing  might  chance  to  happen  or 
not  to  happen,  or  because  it  might  do  so  well. 
This  sort  of  potency  is  found  even  in  lifeless 
things,  e.g.  in  instruments;  for  we  say  one  lyre 
can  speak,  and  another  cannot  speak  at  all,  if  it 
has  not  a  good  tone. 

[75]  Incapacity  is  privation  of  capacity — i.e. 
of  such  a  principle  as  has  been  described — 
either  in  general  or  in  the  case  of  something 
that  would  naturally  have  the  capacity,  or  even 
at  the  time  when  it  would  naturally  already 
have  it;  for  the  senses  in  which  we  should  call 
a  boy  and  a  man  and  a  eunuch  ‘incapable  of  be¬ 
getting’  are  distinct. — Again,  to  either  kind  of 
capacity  there  is  an  opposite  incapacity — both 
[20]  to  that  which  only  can  produce  move¬ 
ment  and  to  that  which  can  produce  it  well. 

Some  things,  then,  are  called  abbvara  in 
virtue  of  this  kind  of  incapacity,  while  others 


METAPHYSICS 


1020b 

are  so  in  another  sense;  i.e.  both  dwarov  and 
advva tov  are  used  as  follows.  The  impossible 
is  that  of  which  the  contrary  is  of  necessity 
true,  e.g.  that  the  diagonal  of  a  square  is  com¬ 
mensurate  with  the  side  is  impossible,  because 
[25]  such  a  statement  is  a  falsity  of  which  the 
contrary  is  not  only  true  but  also  necessary; 
that  it  is  commensurate,  then,  is  not  only  false 
but  also  of  necessity  false.  The  contrary  of  this, 
the  possible,  is  found  when  it  is  not  necessary 
that  the  contrary  is  false,  e.g.  that  a  man  should 
be  seated  is  possible;  for  that  he  is  not  seated 
[50]  is  not  of  necessity  false.  The  possible,  then, 
in  one  sense,  as  has  been  said,  means  that  which 
is  not  of  necessity  false;  in  one,  that  which  is 
true;  in  one,  that  which  may  be  true. — A  ‘po¬ 
tency’  or  ‘power’  in  geometry  is  so  called  by  a 
change  of  meaning. — These  senses  of  ‘capable’ 
[j5]  or  ‘possible’  involve  no  reference  to  po¬ 
tency.  But  the  senses  which  involve  a  reference 
to  potency  all  refer  to  the  primary  kind  of 
1020a  potency;  and  this  is  a  source  of  change 
in  another  thing  or  in  the  same  thing  qua 
other.  For  other  things  are  called  ‘capable’, 
some  because  something  else  has  such  a  po¬ 
tency  over  them,  some  because  it  has  not,  some 
because  it  has  it  in  a  particular  way.  The  same 
is  true  of  the  things  that  are  incapable.  There¬ 
fore  the  proper  definition  of  the  primary  kind 
[5]  of  potency  will  be  ‘a  source  of  change  in 
another  thing  or  in  the  same  thing  qua  other’. 

*3 

‘Quantum’  means  that  which  is  divisible  into 
two  or  more  constituent  parts  of  which  each  is 
by  nature  a  ‘one’  and  a  ‘this’.  A  quantum  is  a 
plurality  if  it  is  numerable,  a  magnitude  if  it  is 
[/o]  measurable.  ‘Plurality’  means  that  which 
is  divisible  potentially  into  non-continuous 
parts,  ‘magnitude’  that  which  is  divisible  into 
continuous  parts;  of  magnitude,  that  which  is 
continuous  in  one  dimension  is  length;  in  two 
breadth,  in  three  depth.  Of  these,  limited 
plurality  is  number,  limited  length  is  a  line, 
breadth  a  surface,  depth  a  solid. 

Again,  some  things  are  called  quanta  in  vir- 
[75]  tue  of  their  own  nature,  others  inci¬ 
dentally;  e.g.  the  line  is  a  quantum  by  its  own 
nature,  the  musical  is  one  incidentally.  Of  the 
things  that  are  quanta  by  their  own  nature 
some  are  so  as  substances,  e.g.  the  line  is  a 
quantum  (for  ‘a  certain  kind  of  quantum’  is 
present  in  the  definition  which  states  what  it 
is),  and  others  are  modifications  and  states  of 
this  kind  of  substance,  e.g.  much  and  little, 
[20]  long  and  short,  broad  and  narrow,  deep 


54i 

and  shallow,  heavy  and  light,  and  all  other 
such  attributes.  And  also  great  and  small,  and 
greater  and  smaller,  both  in  themselves  and 
when  taken  relatively  to  each  other,  are  by 
their  own  nature  attributes  of  what  is  quantita- 
[25]  tive;  but  these  names  are  transferred  to 
other  things  also.  Of  things  that  are  quanta 
incidentally,  some  are  so  called  in  the  sense  in 
which  it  was  said  that  the  musical  and  the 
white  were  quanta,  viz.  because  that  to  which 
musicalness  and  whiteness  belong  is  a  quan¬ 
tum,  and  some  are  quanta  in  the  way  in  which 
movement  and  time  are  so;  for  these  also  are 
[jo]  called  quanta  of  a  sort  and  continuous  be¬ 
cause  the  things  of  which  these  are  attributes 
are  divisible.  I  mean  not  that  which  is  moved, 
but  the  space  through  which  it  is  moved;  for 
because  that  is  a  quantum  movement  also  is  a 
quantum,  and  because  this  is  a  quantum  time 
is  one. 

14 

‘Quality’  means  (1)  the  differentia  of  the  es¬ 
sence,  e.g.  man  is  an  animal  of  a  certain  quality 
because  he  is  two-footed,  and  the  horse  is  so 
[55]  because  it  is  four-footed;  and  a  circle  is  a 
figure  of  particular  quality  because  it  is  with- 
1020b  out  angles, — which  shows  that  the  es¬ 
sential  differentia  is  a  quality. — This,  then,  is 
one  meaning  of  quality — the  differentia  of  the 
essence,  but  (2)  there  is  another  sense  in  which 
it  applies  to  the  unmovable  objects  of  mathe¬ 
matics,  the  sense  in  which  the  numbers  have  a 
certain  quality,  e.g.  the  composite  numbers 
which  are  not  in  one  dimension  only,  but  of 
[5]  which  the  plane  and  the  solid  are  copies 
(these  are  those  which  have  two  or  three  fac¬ 
tors);  and  in  general  that  which  exists  in  the 
essence  of  numbers  besides  quantity  is  quality; 
for  the  essence  of  each  is  what  it  is  once,  e.g. 
that  of  6  is  not  what  it  is  twice  or  thrice,  but 
what  it  is  once;  for  6  is  once  6. 

(5)  All  the  modifications  of  substances  that 
[jo]  move  (e.g.  heat  and  cold,  whiteness  and 
blackness,  heaviness  and  lightness,  and  the 
others  of  the  sort)  in  virtue  of  which,  when 
they  change,  bodies  are  said  to  alter.  (4)  Qual¬ 
ity  in  respect  of  virtue  and  vice,  and  in  general, 
of  evil  and  good. 

Quality,  then,  seems  to  have  practically  two 
meanings,  and  one  of  these  is  the  more  proper. 
The  primary  quality  is  the  differentia  of  the 
[75]  essence,  and  of  this  the  quality  in  num¬ 
bers  is  a  part;  for  it  is  a  differentia  of  essences, 
but  either  not  of  things  that  move  or  not  of 
them  qua  moving.  Secondly,  there  are  the 


BOOK  V,  CHAPTERS  11-14 


542 


METAPHYSICS 


1021b 


modifications  of  things  that  move,  qua  mov¬ 
ing,  and  the  differentiae  of  movements.  Virtue 
and  vice  fall  among  these  modifications;  for 
they  indicate  differentiae  of  the  movement  or 
[20]  activity,  according  to  which  the  things  in 
motion  act  or  are  acted  on  well  or  badly;  for 
that  which  can  be  moved  or  act  in  one  way  is 
good,  and  that  which  can  do  so  in  another — 
the  contrary — way  is  vicious.  Good  and  evil 
indicate  quality  especially  in  living  things,  and 
[25]  among  these  especially  in  those  which 
have  purpose. 


J5 

Things  are  ‘relative’  (1)  as  double  to  half,  and 
treble  to  a  third,  and  in  general  that  which 
contains  something  else  many  times  to  that 
which  is  contained  many  times  in  something 
else,  and  that  which  exceeds  to  that  which  is 
exceeded;  (2)  as  that  which  can  heat  to  that 
which  can  be  heated,  and  that  which  can  cut 
to  that  which  can  be  cut,  and  in  general  the 
[30]  active  to  the  passive;  (3)  as  the  measur¬ 
able  to  the  measure,  and  the  knowable  to 
knowledge,  and  the  perceptible  to  perception. 

(1)  Relative  terms  of  the  first  kind  are  nu¬ 
merically  related  either  indefinitely  or  defi¬ 
nitely,  to  numbers  themselves  or  to  1.  E.g.  the 
double  is  in  a  definite  numerical  relation  to  1, 
and  that  which  is  ‘many  times  as  great’  is  in 
[35]  a  numerical,  but  not  a  definite,  relation  to 
1,  i.e.  not  in  this  or  in  that  numerical  relation 
1021a  to  it;  the  relation  of  that  which  is  half 
as  big  again  as  something  else  to  that  some¬ 
thing  is  a  definite  numerical  relation  to  a  num- 

^  J.  j 

ber;  that  which  is  times  something  else 

is  in  an  indefinite  relation  to  that  something, 
as  that  which  is  ‘many  times  as  great’  is  in  an 
indefinite  relation  to  1;  the  relation  of  that 
which  exceeds  to  that  which  is  exceeded  is  nu- 
[5]  merically  quite  indefinite;  for  number  is 
always  commensurate,  and  ‘number’  is  not 
predicated  of  that  which  is  not  commensurate, 
but  that  which  exceeds  is,  in  relation  to  that 
which  is  exceeded,  so  much  and  something 
more;  and  this  something  is  indefinite;  for  it 
can,  indifferently,  be  either  equal  or  not  equal 
to  that  which  is  exceeded. — All  these  relations, 
then,  are  numerically  expressed  and  are  deter¬ 
minations  of  number,  and  so  in  another  way 
are  the  equal  and  the  like  and  the  same.  For 
[/o]  all  refer  to  unity.  Those  things  are  the 
same  whose  substance  is  one;  those  are  like 
whose  quality  is  one;  those  are  equal  whose 
quantity  is  one;  and  1  is  the  beginning  and 


measure  of  number,  so  that  all  these  relations 
imply  number,  though  not  in  the  same  way. 
[75]  (2)  Things  that  are  active  or  passive  im¬ 
ply  an  active  or  a  passive  potency  and  the 
actualizations  of  the  potencies;  e.g.  that  which 
is  capable  of  heating  is  related  to  that  which  is 
capable  of  being  heated,  because  it  can  heat  it, 
and,  again,  that  which  heats  is  related  to  that 
which  is  heated  and  that  which  cuts  to  that 
which  is  cut,  in  the  sense  that  they  actually  do 
these  things.  But  numerical  relations  are  not 
actualized  except  in  the  sense  which  has  been 
[20]  elsewhere  stated;  actualizations  in  the 
sense  of  movement  they  have  not.  Of  relations 
which  imply  potency  some  further  imply  par¬ 
ticular  periods  of  time,  e.g.  that  which  has 
made  is  relative  to  that  which  has  been  made, 
and  that  which  will  make  to  that  which  will 
be  made.  For  it  is  in  this  way  that  a  father 
is  called  the  father  of  his  son;  for  the  one 
has  acted  and  the  other  has  been  acted  on 
[25]  in  a  certain  way.  Further,  some  rela¬ 
tive  terms  imply  privation  of  potency,  i.e. 
‘incapable’  and  terms  of  this  sort,  e.g.  ‘in¬ 
visible’. 

Relative  terms  which  imply  number  or  po¬ 
tency,  therefore,  are  all  relative  because  their 
very  essence  includes  in  its  nature  a  reference 
to  something  else,  not  because  something  else 
involves  a  reference  to  it;  but  (3)  that  which  is 
[30]  measurable  or  knowable  or  thinkable  is 
called  relative  because  something  else  involves 
a  reference  to  it.  For  ‘that  which  is  thinkable’ 
implies  that  the  thought  of  it  is  possible,  but 
the  thought  is  not  relative  to  ‘that  of  which  it  is 
the  thought’;  for  we  should  then  have  said  the 
same  thing  twice.  Similarly  sight  is  the  sight 
of  something,  not  ‘of  that  of  which  it  is  the 
sight’  (though  of  course  it  is  true  to  say  this); 
1021b  in  fact  it  is  relative  to  colour  or  to 
something  else  of  the  sort.  But  according  to  the 
other  way  of  speaking  the  same  thing  would 
be  said  twice, — ‘the  sight  is  of  that  of  which 
it  is.’ 

Things  that  are  by  their  own  nature  called 
relative  are  called  so  sometimes  in  these  senses, 
sometimes  if  the  classes  that  include  them  are 
[5]  of  this  sort;  e.g.  medicine  is  a  relative  term 
because  its  genus,  science,  is  thought  to  be  a 
relative  term.  Further,  there  are  the  properties 
in  virtue  of  which  the  things  that  have  them 
are  called  relative,  e.g.  equality  is  relative  be¬ 
cause  the  equal  is,  and  likeness  because  the  like 
is.  Other  things  are  relative  by  accident;  e.g.  a 
man  is  relative  because  he  happens  to  be  double 
[/o]  of  something  and  double  is  a  relative 


1022b 

term;  or  the  white  is  relative,  if  the  same  thing 
happens  to  be  double  and  white. 

16 

What  is  called  ‘complete'  is  (i)  that  outside 
which  it  is  not  possible  to  find  any,  even  one, 
of  its  parts;  e.g.  the  complete  time  of  each 
thing  is  that  outside  which  it  is  not  possible  to 
find  any  time  which  is  a  part  proper  to  it. — 
[75]  (2)  That  which  in  respect  of  excellence 
and  goodness  cannot  be  excelled  in  its  kind; 
e.g.  we  have  a  complete  doctor  or  a  complete 
flute-player,  when  they  lack  nothing  in  respect 
of  the  form  of  their  proper  excellence.  And 
thus,  transferring  the  word  to  bad  things,  we 
speak  of  a  complete  scandal-monger  and  a  com¬ 
plete  thief;  indeed  we  even  call  them  good,  i.e. 
[20]  a  good  thief  and  a  good  scandal-monger. 
And  excellence  is  a  completion;  for  each  thing 
is  complete  and  every  substance  is  complete, 
when  in  respect  of  the  form  of  its  proper  ex¬ 
cellence  it  lacks  no  part  of  its  natural  magni¬ 
tude. — (3)  The  things  which  have  attained 
their  end,  this  being  good,  are  called  complete; 
for  things  are  complete  in  virtue  of  having  at- 
[25]  tained  their  end.  Therefore,  since  the  end 
is  something  ultimate,  we  transfer  the  word  to 
bad  things  and  say  a  thing  has  been  completely 
spoilt,  and  completely  destroyed,  when  it  in  no 
wise  falls  short  of  destruction  and  badness,  but 
is  at  its  last  point.  This  is  why  death,  too,  is  by 
a  figure  of  speech  called  the  end,  because  both 
are  last  things.  But  the  ultimate  purpose  is  also 
[30]  an  end. — Things,  then,  that  are  called 
complete  in  virtue  of  their  own  nature  are  so 
called  in  all  these  senses,  some  because  in  re¬ 
spect  of  goodness  they  lack  nothing  and  can¬ 
not  be  excelled  and  no  part  proper  to  them  can 
be  found  outside  them,  others  in  general  be¬ 
cause  they  cannot  be  exceeded  in  their  several 
classes  and  no  part  proper  to  them  is  outside 
1022a  them;  the  others  presuppose  these  first 
two  kinds,  and  are  called  complete  because 
they  either  make  or  have  something  of  the  sort 
or  are  adapted  to  it  or  in  some  way  or  other 
involve  a  reference  to  the  things  that  are  called 
complete  in  the  primary  sense. 

17 

‘Limit'  means  (1)  the  last  point  of  each  thing, 
i.e.  the  first  point  beyond  which  it  is  not  possi¬ 
ble  to  find  any  part,  and  the  first  point  within 
[5]  which  every  part  is;  (2)  the  form,  what¬ 
ever  it  may  be,  of  a  spatial  magnitude  or  of  a 
thing  that  has  magnitude;  (3)  the  end  of  each 
thing  (and  of  this  nature  is  that  towards  which 


543 

the  movement  and  the  action  are,  not  that  from 
which  they  are, — though  sometimes  it  is  both, 
that  from  which  and  that  to  which  the  move¬ 
ment  is,  i.e.  the  final  cause);  (4)  the  substance 
of  each  thing,  and  the  essence  of  each;  for  this 
is  the  limit  of  knowledge;  and  if  of  knowledge, 
[/o]  of  the  object  also.  Evidently,  therefore, 
‘limit'  has  as  many  senses  as  ‘beginning',  and 
yet  more;  for  the  beginning  is  a  limit,  but  not 
every  limit  is  a  beginning. 

18 

‘That  in  virtue  of  which’  has  several  mean- 
[75]  ings: — (1)  the  form  or  substance  of  each 
thing,  e.g.  that  in  virtue  of  which  a  man  is 
good  is  the  good  itself,  (2)  the  proximate  sub¬ 
ject  in  which  it  is  the  nature  of  an  attribute  to 
be  found,  e.g.  colour  in  a  surface.  ‘That  in  vir¬ 
tue  of  which',  then,  in  the  primary  sense  is  the 
form,  and  in  a  secondary  sense  the  matter  of 
each  thing  and  the  proximate  substratum  of 
each. — In  general  ‘that  in  virtue  of  which'  will 
[20]  be  found  in  the  same  number  of  senses 
as  ‘cause';  for  we  say  indifferently  (3)  ‘in  virtue 
of  what  has  he  come?’  or  ‘for  what  end  has  he 
come?';  and  (4)  ‘in  virtue  of  what  has  he  in¬ 
ferred  wrongly,  or  inferred?'  or  ‘what  is  the 
cause  of  the  inference,  or  of  the  wrong  infer¬ 
ence?’ — Further  (5)  Kad ’  6  is  used  in  refer¬ 
ence  to  position,  e.g.  ‘at  which  he  stands'  or 
‘along  which  he  walks;  for  all  such  phrases 
indicate  place  and  position. 

Therefore  ‘in  virtue  of  itself'  must  likewise 
[25]  have  several  meanings.  The  following  be¬ 
long  to  a  thing  in  virtue  of  itself: — (1)  the  es¬ 
sence  of  each  thing,  e.g.  Callias  is  in  virtue  of 
himself  Callias  and  what  it  was  to  be  Callias; 
(2)  whatever  is  present  in  the  ‘what’,  e.g.  Cal¬ 
lias  is  in  virtue  of  himself  an  animal.  For  ‘ani¬ 
mal’  is  present  in  his  definition;  Callias  is  a 
particular  animal. — (3)  Whatever  attribute  a 
thing  receives  in  itself  directly  or  in  one  of  its 
[30]  parts;  e.g.  a  surface  is  white  in  virtue  of 
itself,  and  a  man  is  alive  in  virtue  of  himself; 
for  the  soul,  in  which  life  directly  resides,  is  a 
part  of  the  man. — (4)  That  which  has  no 
cause  other  than  itself;  man  has  more  than  one 
cause — animal,  two-footed — but  yet  man  is 
man  in  virtue  of  himself. — (5)  Whatever  attri- 
[35]  butes  belong  to  a  thing  alone,  and  in  so 
far  as  they  belong  to  it  merely  by  virtue  of 
itself  considered  apart  by  itself. 

1 9 

1022b  ‘Disposition’  means  the  arrangement  of 
that  which  has  parts,  in  respect  either  of  place 


BOOK  V,  CHAPTERS  14-19 


544 

or  of  potency  or  of  kind;  for  there  must  be  a 
certain  position,  as  even  the  word  ‘disposition’ 
shows. 

20 

‘Having’  means  (i)  a  kind  of  activity  of  the 
haver  and  of  what  he  has — something  like  an 
action  or  movement.  For  when  one  thing  makes 
[5]  and  one  is  made,  between  them  there  is  a 
making;  so  too  between  him  who  has  a  gar¬ 
ment  and  the  garment  which  he  has  there  is  a 
having.  This  sort  of  having,  then,  evidently  we 
cannot  have;  for  the  process  will  go  on  to  in¬ 
finity,  if  it  is  to  be  possible  to  have  the  having 
[/o]  of  what  we  have. — (2)  ‘Having’  or  ‘habit’ 
means  a  disposition  according  to  which  that 
which  is  disposed  is  either  well  or  ill  disposed, 
and  either  in  itself  or  with  reference  to  some¬ 
thing  else;  e.g.  health  is  a  ‘habit’;  for  it  is  such 
a  disposition. — (3)  We  speak  of  a  ‘habit’  if 
there  is  a  portion  of  such  a  disposition;  and  so 
even  the  excellence  of  the  parts  is  a  ‘habit’  of 
the  whole  thing. 

21 

[75]  ‘Affection’  means  (1)  a  quality  in  respect 
of  which  a  thing  can  be  altered,  e.g.  white  and 
black,  sweet  and  bitter,  heaviness  and  light¬ 
ness,  and  all  others  of  the  kind. — (2)  The 
actualization  of  these — the  already  accom¬ 
plished  alterations. — (3)  Especially,  injurious 
alterations  and  movements,  and,  above  all, 
[20]  painful  injuries. — (4)  Misfortunes  and 
painful  experiences  when  on  a  large  scale  are 
called  affections. 

22 

We  speak  of  ‘privation’  ( 1 )  if  something  has 
not  one  of  the  attributes  which  a  thing  might 
naturally  have,  even  if  this  thing  itself  would 
not  naturally  have  it;  e.g.  a  plant  is  said  to  be 
‘deprived’  of  eyes. — (2)  If,  though  either  the 
thing  itself  or  its  genus  would  naturally  have 
[25]  an  attribute,  it  has  it  not;  e.g.  a  blind 
man  and  a  mole  are  in  different  senses  ‘de¬ 
prived’  of  sight;  the  latter  in  contrast  with  its 
genus,  the  former  in  contrast  with  his  own 
normal  nature. — (3)  If,  though  it  would  nat¬ 
urally  have  the  attribute,  and  when  it  would 
naturally  have  it,  it  has  it  not;  for  blindness  is 
a  privation,  but  one  is  not  ‘blind’  at  any  and 
every  age,  but  only  if  one  has  not  sight  at  the 
[30]  age  at  which  one  would  naturally  have  it. 
Similarly  a  thing  is  called  blind  if  it  has  not 
sight  in  the  medium  in  which,  and  in  respect  of 
the  organ  in  respect  of  which,  and  with  refer- 


1023* 

ence  to  the  object  with  reference  to  which,  and 
in  the  circumstances  in  which,  it  would  nat¬ 
urally  have  it. — (4)  The  violent  taking  away 
of  anything  is  called  privation. 

Indeed  there  are  just  as  many  kinds  of  pri¬ 
vations  as  there  are  of  words  with  negative 
prefixes;  for  a  thing  is  called  unequal  because 
it  has  not  equality  though  it  would  naturally 
have  it,  and  invisible  either  because  it  has  no 
[35]  colour  at  all  or  because  it  has  a  poor  col¬ 
our,  and  apodous  either  because  it  has  no  feet 
at  all  or  because  it  has  imperfect  feet.  Again,  a 
privative  term  may  be  used  because  the  thing 
1023*  has  little  of  the  attribute  (and  this 
means  having  it  in  a  sense  imperfectly),  e.g. 
‘kernel-less’;  or  because  it  has  it  not  easily  or 
not  well  (e.g.  we  call  a  thing  uncuttable  not 
only  if  it  cannot  be  cut  but  also  if  it  cannot  be 
cut  easily  or  well);  or  because  it  has  not  the 
attribute  at  all;  for  it  is  not  the  one-eyed  man 
but  he  who  is  sightless  in  both  eyes  that  is 
[5]  called  blind.  This  is  why  not  every  man  is 
‘good’  or  ‘bad’,  ‘just’  or  ‘unjust’,  but  there  is 
also  an  intermediate  state. 

23 

To  ‘have’  or  ‘hold’  means  many  things: — (1) 
to  treat  a  thing  according  to  one’s  own  nature 
or  according  to  one’s  own  impulse;  so  that 
[/o]  fever  is  said  to  have  a  man,  and  tyrants 
to  have  their  cities,  and  people  to  have  the 
clothes  they  wear. — (2)  That  in  which  a  thing 
is  present  as  in  something  receptive  of  it  is 
said  to  have  the  thing;  e.g.  the  bronze  has  the 
form  of  the  statue,  and  the  body  has  the  dis¬ 
ease. — (3)  As  that  which  contains  holds  the 
things  contained;  for  a  thing  is  said  to  be  held 
by  that  in  which  it  is  as  in  a  container;  e.g. 
[75]  we  say  that  the  vessel  holds  the  liquid  and 
the  city  holds  men  and  the  ship  sailors;  and  so 
too  that  the  whole  holds  the  parts. — (4)  That 
which  hinders  a  thing  from  moving  or  acting 
according  to  its  own  impulse  is  said  to  hold  it, 
as  pillars  hold  the  incumbent  weights,  and  as 
[20]  the  poets  make  Atlas  hold  the  heavens, 
implying  that  otherwise  they  would  collapse 
on  the  earth,  as  some  of  the  natural  philoso¬ 
phers  also  say.  In  this  way  also  that  which 
holds  things  together  is  said  to  hold  the  things 
it  holds  together,  since  they  would  other¬ 
wise  separate,  each  according  to  its  own  im¬ 
pulse. 

‘Being  in  something’  has  similar  and  cor- 
[25]  responding  meanings  to  ‘holding’  or  ‘hav¬ 
ing’. 


METAPHYSICS 


1024* 


BOOK  V,  CHAPTERS  19-27  545 


24 

‘To  come  from  something’  means  (1)  to  come 
from  something  as  from  matter,  and  this  in 
two  senses,  either  in  respect  of  the  highest 
genus  or  in  respect  of  the  lowest  species;  e.g. 
in  a  sense  all  things  that  can  be  melted  come 
from  water,  but  in  a  sense  the  statue  comes 
[jo]  from  bronze. — (2)  As  from  the  first  mov¬ 
ing  principle;  e.g.  ‘what  did  the  fight  come 
from?’  From  abusive  language,  because  this 
was  the  origin  of  the  fight. — (3)  From  the 
compound  of  matter  and  shape,  as  the  parts 
come  from  the  whole,  and  the  verse  from  the 
Iliad,  and  the  stones  from  the  house;  (in  every 
such  case  the  whole  is  a  compound  of  matter 
and  shape,)  for  the  shape  is  the  end,  and  only 
that  which  attains  an  end  is  complete. — (4) 
[35]  As  the  form  from  its  part,  e.g.  man 
from  ‘two-footed’  and  syllable  from  ‘letter’;  for 
this  is  a  different  sense  from  that  in  which  the 
1023b  statue  comes  from  bronze;  for  the  com¬ 
posite  substance  comes  from  the  sensible  mat¬ 
ter,  but  the  form  also  comes  from  the  matter  of 
the  form. — Some  things,  then,  are  said  to  come 
from  something  else  in  these  senses;  but  (5) 
others  are  so  described  if  one  of  these  senses  is 
applicable  to  a  part  of  that  other  thing;  e.g.  the 
child  comes  from  its  father  and  mother,  and 
plants  come  from  the  earth,  because  they  come 
[5]  from  a  part  of  those  things. — (6)  It  means 
coming  after  a  thing  in  time,  e.g.  night  comes 
from  day  and  storm  from  fine  weather,  because 
the  one  comes  after  the  other.  Of  these  things 
some  are  so  described  because  they  admit  of 
change  into  one  another,  as  in  the  cases  now 
mentioned;  some  merely  because  they  are  suc¬ 
cessive  in  time,  e.g.  the  voyage  took  place  ‘from’ 
the  equinox,  because  it  took  place  after  the 
[/o]  equinox,  and  the  festival  of  the  Thargelia 
comes  ‘from’  the  Dionysia,  because  after  the 
Dionysia. 

25 

‘Part’  means  ( 1 )  (a)  that  into  which  a  quantum 
can  in  any  way  be  divided;  for  that  which  is 
taken  from  a  quantum  qua  quantum  is  always 
called  a  part  of  it,  e.g.  two  is  called  in  a  sense  a 
[75]  part  of  three.  It  means  ( b ),  of  the  parts  in 
the  first  sense,  only  those  which  measure  the 
whole;  this  is  why  two,  though  in  one  sense  it 
is,  in  another  is  not,  called  a  part  of  three. — 
(2)  The  elements  into  which  a  kind  might  be 
divided  apart  from  the  quantity  are  also  called 
parts  of  it;  for  which  reason  we  say  the  species 
are  parts  of  the  genus. — (3)  The  elements  into 


which  a  whole  is  divided,  or  of  which  it  con¬ 
sists — the  ‘whole’  meaning  either  the  form  or 
[20]  that  which  has  the  form;  e.g.  of  the  bronze 
sphere  or  of  the  bronze  cube  both  the  bronze — 
i.e.  the  matter  in  which  the  form  is — and  the 
characteristic  angle  are  parts. — (4)  The  ele¬ 
ments  in  the  definition  which  explains  a  thing 
are  also  parts  of  the  whole;  this  is  why  the  genus 
is  called  a  part  of  the  species,  though  in  another 
[25]  sense  the  species  is  part  of  the  genus. 

26 

‘A  whole’  means  (1)  that  from  which  is  absent 
none  of  the  parts  of  which  it  is  said  to  be  natu¬ 
rally  a  whole,  and  (2)  that  which  so  contains 
the  things  it  contains  that  they  form  a  unity; 
and  this  in  two  senses — either  as  being  each 
severally  one  single  thing,  or  as  making  up  the 
unity  between  them.  For  (a)  that  which  is  true 
of  a  whole  class  and  is  said  to  hold  good  as  a 
whole  (which  implies  that  it  is  a  kind  of 
[jo]  whole)  is  true  of  a  whole  in  the  sense  that 
it  contains  many  things  by  being  predicated  of 
each,  and  by  all  of  them,  e.g.  man,  horse,  god, 
being  severally  one  single  thing,  because  all  are 
living  things.  But  ( b )  the  continuous  and  lim¬ 
ited  is  a  whole,  when  it  is  a  unity  consisting  of 
several  parts,  especially  if  they  are  present  only 
potentially,  but,  failing  this,  even  if  they  are 
present  actually.  Of  these  things  themselves, 
those  which  are  so  by  nature  are  wholes  in  a 
[35]  higher  degree  than  those  which  are  so  by 
art,  as  we  said1  in  the  case  of  unity  also,  whole¬ 
ness  being  in  fact  a  sort  of  oneness. 

1024*  Again  (3),  of  quanta  that  have  a  begin¬ 
ning  and  a  middle  and  an  end,  those  to  which 
the  position  does  not  make  a  difference  are 
called  totals,  and  those  to  which  it  does,  wholes. 
Those  which  admit  of  both  descriptions  are 
both  wholes  and  totals.  These  are  the  things 
whose  nature  remains  the  same  after  transpo¬ 
sition,  but  whose  form  does  not,  e.g.  wax  or  a 
[5]  coat;  they  are  called  both  wholes  and  to¬ 
tals;  for  they  have  both  characteristics.  Water 
and  all  liquids  and  number  are  called  totals, 
but  ‘the  whole  number’  or  ‘the  whole  water’ 
one  does  not  speak  of,  except  by  an  extension  of 
meaning.  To  things,  to  which  qua  one  the  term 
‘total’  is  applied,  the  term  ‘all’  is  applied  when 
[/o]  they  are  treated  as  separate;  ‘this  total 
number,’  ‘all  these  units.’ 

27 

It  is  not  any  chance  quantitative  thing  that  can 
be  said  to  be  ‘mutilated’;  it  must  be  a  whole  as 
1  Cf.  ioi6a  4. 


546  METAPHYSICS  1024b 


well  as  divisible.  For  not  only  is  two  not  ‘muti¬ 
lated’  if  one  of  the  two  ones  is  taken  away  (for 
the  part  removed  by  mutilation  is  never  equal 
to  the  remainder),  but  in  general  no  number  is 
thus  mutilated;  for  it  is  also  necessary  that  the 
essence  remain;  if  a  cup  is  mutilated,  it  must 
[75]  still  be  a  cup;  but  the  number  is  no  longer 
the  same.  Further,  even  if  things  consist  of  un¬ 
like  parts,  not  even  these  things  can  all  be  said 
to  be  mutilated,  for  in  a  sense  a  number  has 
unlike  parts  (e.g.  two  and  three)  as  well  as 
like;  but  in  general  of  the  things  to  which  their 
position  makes  no  difference,  e.g.  water  or  fire, 
none  can  be  mutilated;  to  be  mutilated,  things 
must  be  such  as  in  virtue  of  their  essence  have 
a  certain  position.  Again,  they  must  be  continu- 
[20]  ous;  for  a  musical  scale  consists  of  unlike 
parts  and  has  position,  but  cannot  become  mu¬ 
tilated.  Besides,  not  even  the  things  that  are 
wholes  are  mutilated  by  the  privation  of  any 
part.  For  the  parts  removed  must  be  neither 
those  which  determine  the  essence  nor  any 
chance  parts,  irrespective  of  their  position;  e.g. 
a  cup  is  not  mutilated  if  it  is  bored  through,  but 
[25]  only  if  the  handle  or  a  projecting  part  is 
removed,  and  a  man  is  mutilated  not  if  the  flesh 
or  the  spleen  is  removed,  but  if  an  extremity  is, 
and  that  not  every  extremity  but  one  which 
when  completely  removed  cannot  grow  again. 
Therefore  baldness  is  not  a  mutilation. 

28 

The  term  ‘race’  or  ‘genus’  is  used  ( 1 )  if  genera- 
[50]  tion  of  things  which  have  the  same  form 
is  continuous,  e.g.  ‘while  the  race  of  men  lasts’ 
means  ‘while  the  generation  of  them  goes  on 
continuously’. — (2)  It  is  used  with  reference  to 
that  which  first  brought  things  into  existence; 
for  it  is  thus  that  some  are  called  Hellenes  by 
race  and  others  Ionians,  because  the  former 
proceed  from  Hellen  and  the  latter  from  Ion 
as  their  first  begetter.  And  the  word  is  used  in 
[35]  reference  to  the  begetter  more  than  to  the 
matter,  though  people  also  get  a  race-name 
from  the  female,  e.g.  ‘the  descendants  of  Pyr- 
rha’. — (3)  There  is  genus  in  the  sense  in  which 
1024b  ‘plane’  is  the  genus  of  plane  figures  and 
‘solid’  of  solids;  for  each  of  the  figures  is  in  the 
one  case  a  plane  of  such  and  such  a  kind,  and 
in  the  other  a  solid  of  such  and  such  a  kind; 
and  this  is  what  underlies  the  differentiae. 
Again  (4),  in  definitions  the  first  constituent 
element,  which  is  included  in  the  ‘what’,  is  the 
[5]  genus,  whose  differentiae  the  qualities  are 
said  to  be. — ‘Genus’  then  is  used  in  all  these 
ways,  (1)  in  reference  to  continuous  genera¬ 


tion  of  the  same  kind,  (2)  in  reference  to  the 
first  mover  which  is  of  the  same  kind  as  the 
things  it  moves,  (3)  as  matter;  for  that  to 
which  the  differentia  or  quality  belongs  is  the 
substratum,  which  we  call  matter. 

[10]  Those  things  are  said  to  be  ‘other  in  ge¬ 
nus’  whose  proximate  substratum  is  different, 
and  which  are  not  analysed  the  one  into  the 
other  nor  both  into  the  same  thing  (e.g.  form 
and  matter  are  different  in  genus);  and  things 
which  belong  to  different  categories  of  being 
(for  some  of  the  things  that  are  said  to  ‘be’  sig¬ 
nify  essence,  others  a  quality,  others  the  other 
categories  we  have  before  distinguished1); 
[75]  these  also  are  not  analysed  either  into  one 
another  or  into  some  one  thing. 

29 

‘The  false’  means  (1)  that  which  is  false  as  a 
thing,  and  that  ( a )  because  it  is  not  put  togeth¬ 
er  or  cannot  be  put  together,  e.g.  ‘that  the  diag¬ 
onal  of  a  square  is  commensurate  with  the  side’ 
[20]  or  ‘that  you  are  sitting’;  for  one  of  these  is 
false  always,  and  the  other  sometimes;  it  is  in 
these  two  senses  that  they  are  non-existent.  ( b ) 
There  are  things  which  exist,  but  whose  nature 
it  is  to  appear  either  not  to  be  such  as  they  are 
or  to  be  things  that  do  not  exist,  e.g.  a  sketch  or 
a  dream;  for  these  are  something,  but  are  not 
the  things  the  appearance  of  which  they  pro¬ 
duce  in  us.  We  call  things  false  in  this  way, 
[25]  then, — either  because  they  themselves  do 
not  exist,  or  because  the  appearance  which  re¬ 
sults  from  them  is  that  of  something  that  does 
not  exist. 

(2)  A  false  account  is  the  account  of  non-ex¬ 
istent  objects,  in  so  far  as  it  is  false.  Hence  every 
account  is  false  when  applied  to  something  oth¬ 
er  than  that  of  which  it  is  true;  e.g.  the  account 
of  a  circle  is  false  when  applied  to  a  triangle. 
In  a  sense  there  is  one  account  of  each  thing, 
i.e.  the  account  of  its  essence,  but  in  a  sense 
there  are  many,  since  the  thing  itself  and  the 
[30]  thing  itself  with  an  attribute  are  in  a  sense 
the  same,  e.g.  Socrates  and  musical  Socrates  (a 
false  account  is  not  the  account  of  anything,  ex¬ 
cept  in  a  qualified  sense).  Hence  Antisthenes 
was  too  simple-minded  when  he  claimed  that 
nothing  could  be  described  except  by  the  ac¬ 
count  proper  to  it, — one  predicate  to  one  sub¬ 
ject;  from  which  the  conclusion  used  to  be 
drawn  that  there  could  be  no  contradiction,  and 
almost  that  there  could  be  no  error.  But  it  is  pos¬ 
sible  to  describe  each  thing  not  only  by  the  ac- 
[35]  count  of  itself,  but  also  by  that  of  some- 

1 1017®  24-27. 


1025b 

thing  else.  This  may  be  done  altogether  falsely 
indeed,  but  there  is  also  a  way  in  which  it  may 
be  done  truly;  e.g.  eight  may  be  described  as  a 
double  number  by  the  use  of  the  definition  of 
two. 

1025a  These  things,  then,  are  called  false  in 
these  senses,  but  (3)  a  false  man  is  one  who  is 
ready  at  and  fond  of  such  accounts,  not  for  any 
other  reason  but  for  their  own  sake,  and  one  who 
is  good  at  impressing  such  accounts  on  other 
[5]  people,  just  as  we  say  things  are  false,  which 
produce  a  false  appearance.  This  is  why  the 
proof  in  the  Hippias  that  the  same  man  is  false 
and  true  is  misleading.  For  it  assumes  that  he 
is  false  who  can  deceive  (i.e.  the  man  who 
knows  and  is  wise);  and  further  that  he  who  is 
willingly  bad  is  better.  This  is  a  false  result  of 
[/o]  induction — for  a  man  who  limps  willing¬ 
ly  is  better  than  one  who  does  so  unwillingly 
— by  ‘limping’  Plato  means  ‘mimicking  a 
limp’,  for  if  the  man  were  lame  willingly,  he 
would  presumably  be  worse  in  this  case  as  in 
the  corresponding  case  of  moral  character. 

30 

‘Accident’  means  (1)  that  which  attaches  to 
something  and  can  be  truly  asserted,  but  nei¬ 
ther  of  necessity  nor  usually,  e.g.  if  some  one  in 
[75]  digging  a  hole  for  a  plant  has  found  treas¬ 
ure.  This — the  finding  of  treasure — is  for  the 


547 

man  who  dug  the  hole  an  accident;  for  neither 
does  the  one  come  of  necessity  from  the  other 
or  after  the  other,  nor,  if  a  man  plants,  does  he 
usually  find  treasure.  And  a  musical  man 
[20]  might  be  pale;  but  since  this  does  not  hap¬ 
pen  of  necessity  nor  usually,  we  call  it  an  acci¬ 
dent.  Therefore  since  there  are  attributes  and 
they  attach  to  subjects,  and  some  of  them  attach 
to  these  only  in  a  particular  place  and  at  a  par¬ 
ticular  time,  whatever  attaches  to  a  subject,  but 
not  because  it  was  this  subject,  or  the  time  this 
time,  or  the  place  this  place,  will  be  an  acci¬ 
dent.  Therefore,  too,  there  is  no  definite  cause 
for  an  accident,  but  a  chance  cause,  i.e.  an  in- 
[25]  definite  one.  Going  to  Aegina  was  an  ac¬ 
cident  for  a  man,  if  he  went  not  in  order  to  get 
there,  but  because  he  was  carried  out  of  his 
way  by  a  storm  or  captured  by  pirates.  The  ac¬ 
cident  has  happened  or  exists, — not  in  virtue  of 
the  subject’s  nature,  however,  but  of  something 
else;  for  the  storm  was  the  cause  of  his  coming 
to  a  place  for  which  he  was  not  sailing,  and  this 
was  Aegina. 

[30]  ‘Accident’  has  also  (2)  another  meaning, 
i.e.  all  that  attaches  to  each  thing  in  virtue  of 
itself  but  is  not  in  its  essence,  as  having  its  an¬ 
gles  equal  to  two  right  angles  attaches  to  the 
triangle.  And  accidents  of  this  sort  may  be 
eternal,  but  no  accident  of  the  other  sort  is.  This 
is  explained  elsewhere.1 


BOOK  V,  CHAPTERS  27-30— BOOK  VI,  CHAPTER  1 


BOOK  VI 


1 

1025b  We  are  seeking  the  principles  and  the 
causes  of  the  things  that  are,  and  obviously  of 
them  qua  being.  For,  while  there  is  a  cause  of 
health  and  of  good  condition,  and  the  objects 
of  mathematics  have  first  principles  and  ele- 
[5]  ments  and  causes,  and  in  general  every  sci¬ 
ence  which  is  ratiocinative  or  at  all  involves  rea¬ 
soning  deals  with  causes  and  principles,  more 
or  less  precise,  all  these  sciences  mark  off  some 
articular  being — some  genus,  and  inquire  into 
70]  this,  but  not  into  being  simply  nor  qua 
being,  nor  do  they  offer  any  discussion  of  the 
essence  of  the  things  of  which  they  treat;  but 
starting  from  the  essence — some  making  it 
plain  to  the  senses,  others  assuming  it  as  a  hy¬ 
pothesis — they  then  demonstrate,  more  or  less 
cogently,  the  essential  attributes  of  the  genus 
with  which  they  deal.  It  is  obvious,  therefore, 
that  such  an  induction  yields  no  demonstra- 
[75]  tion  of  substance  or  of  the  essence,  but 
some  other  way  of  exhibiting  it.  And  similarly 


the  sciences  omit  the  question  whether  the  ge¬ 
nus  with  which  they  deal  exists  or  does  not  ex¬ 
ist,  because  it  belongs  to  the  same  kind  of  think¬ 
ing  to  show  what  it  is  and  that  it  is. 

And  since  natural  science,  like  other  sciences, 
is  in  fact  about  one  class  of  being,  i.e.  to  that 
sort  of  substance  which  has  the  principle  of  its 
[20]  movement  and  rest  present  in  itself,  evi¬ 
dently  it  is  neither  practical  nor  productive. 
For  in  the  case  of  things  made  the  principle  is 
in  the  maker — it  is  either  reason  or  art  or  some 
faculty,  while  in  the  case  of  things  done  it  is  in 
the  doer — viz.  will,  for  that  which  is  done  and 
[25]  that  which  is  willed  are  the  same.  There¬ 
fore,  if  all  thought  is  either  practical  or  produc¬ 
tive  or  theoretical,  physics  must  be  a  theoreti¬ 
cal  science,  but  it  will  theorize  about  such  be¬ 
ing  as  admits  of  being  moved,  and  about  sub¬ 
stance-as-defined  for  the  most  part  only  as  not 
separable  from  matter.  Now,  we  must  not  fail  to 
notice  the  mode  of  being  of  the  essence  and  of 
its  definition,  for,  without  this,  inquiry  is  but 

1  Posterior  Ana ly tics,  1.  75®  18-22,  39-41,  7615  11-16. 


548  METAPHYSICS  1026b  11 


[jo]  idle.  Of  things  defined,  i.e.  of  ‘whats’, 
some  are  like  ‘snub’,  and  some  like  ‘concave’. 
And  these  differ  because  ‘snub’  is  bound  up 
with  matter  (for  what  is  snub  is  a  concave 
nose),  while  concavity  is  independent  of  per¬ 
ceptible  matter.  If  then  all  natural  things  are 
1026a  analogous  to  the  snub  in  their  nature — 
e.g.  nose,  eye,  face,  flesh,  bone,  and,  in  general, 
animal;  leaf,  root,  bark,  and,  in  general,  plant 
(for  none  of  these  can  be  defined  without  ref¬ 
erence  to  movement — they  always  have  mat¬ 
ter),  it  is  clear  how  we  must  seek  and  define 
the  ‘what’  in  the  case  of  natural  objects,  and 
[5]  also  that  it  belongs  to  the  student  of  nature 
to  study  even  soul  in  a  certain  sense,  i.e.  so 
much  of  it  as  is  not  independent  of  matter. 

That  physics,  then,  is  a  theoretical  science,  is 
plain  from  these  considerations.  Mathematics 
also,  however,  is  theoretical;  but  whether  its 
objects  are  immovable  and  separable  from  mat¬ 
ter,  is  not  at  present  clear;  still,  it  is  clear  that 
some  mathematical  theorems  consider  them 
[/o]  qua  immovable  and  qua  separable  from 
matter.  But  if  there  is  something  which  is  eter¬ 
nal  and  immovable  and  separable,  clearly  the 
knowledge  of  it  belongs  to  a  theoretical  science, 
— not,  however,  to  physics  (for  physics  deals 
with  certain  movable  things)  nor  to  mathemat¬ 
ics,  but  to  a  science  prior  to  both.  For  physics 
deals  with  things  which  exist  separately  but  are 
not  immovable,  and  some  parts  of  mathematics 
deal  with  things  which  are  immovable  but  pre- 
[75]  sumably  do  not  exist  separately,  but  as 
embodied  in  matter;  while  the  first  science 
deals  with  things  which  both  exist  separately 
and  are  immovable.  Now  all  causes  must  be 
eternal,  but  especially  these;  for  they  are  the 
causes  that  operate  on  so  much  of  the  divine  as 
appears  to  us.  There  must,  then,  be  three  theo¬ 
retical  philosophies,  mathematics,  physics,  and 
what  we  may  call  theology,  since  it  is  obvious 
[20]  that  if  the  divine  is  present  anywhere,  it 
is  present  in  things  of  this  sort.  And  the  highest 
science  must  deal  with  the  highest  genus.  Thus, 
while  the  theoretical  sciences  are  more  to  be  de¬ 
sired  than  the  other  sciences,  this  is  more  to  be 
desired  than  the  other  theoretical  sciences.  For 
one  might  raise  the  question  whether  first  phi¬ 
losophy  is  universal,  or  deals  with  one  genus, 
i.e.  some  one  kind  of  being;  for  not  even  the 
[25]  mathematical  sciences  are  all  alike  in  this 
respect, — geometry  and  astronomy  deal  with  a 
certain  particular  kind  of  thing,  while  univer¬ 
sal  mathematics  applies  alike  to  all.  We  answer 
that  if  there  is  no  substance  other  than  those 
which  are  formed  by  nature,  natural  science 


will  be  the  first  science;  but  if  there  is  an  im-  J 

movable  substance,  the  science  of  this  must  be  1 

[30]  prior  and  must  be  first  philosophy,  and  ? 

universal  in  this  way,  because  it  is  first.  And  it  11 

will  belong  to  this  to  consider  being  qua  being  w 

— both  what  it  is  and  the  attributes  which  be¬ 
long  to  it  qua  being.  w 

n 

2  v 

But  since  the  unqualified  term  ‘being’  has  sev-  ^ 
eral  meanings,  of  which  one  was  seen1  to  be  the  '  I 
accidental,  and  another  the  true  (‘non-being’  1 

[35]  being  the  false),  while  besides  these  there  c 

are  the  figures  of  predication  (e.g.  the  ‘what’,  * 

quality,  quantity,  place,  time,  and  any  similar  !  I 
meanings  which  ‘being’  may  have),  and  again 
1026b  besides  all  these  there  is  that  which  ‘is’  ;  t 
potentially  or  actually: — since ‘being’ has  many 
meanings,  we  must  say  regarding  the  acciden¬ 
tal,  that  there  can  be  no  scientific  treatment  of 
it.  This  is  confirmed  by  the  fact  that  no  science 
[5]  — practical,  productive,  or  theoretical — 
troubles  itself  about  it.  For  on  the  one  hand  he  I 
who  produces  a  house  does  not  produce  all  the 
attributes  that  come  into  being  along  with  the 
house;  for  these  are  innumerable;  the  house 
that  has  been  made  may  quite  well  be  pleasant 
for  some  people,  hurtful  for  some,  and  useful 
to  others,  and  different — to  put  it  shortly — 
from  all  things  that  are;  and  the  science  of 
building  does  not  aim  at  producing  any  of  these 
[/o]  attributes.  And  in  the  same  way  the  ge¬ 
ometer  does  not  consider  the  attributes  which 
attach  thus  to  figures,  nor  whether  ‘triangle’  is 
different  from  ‘triangle  whose  angles  are  equal 
to  two  right  angles’. — And  this  happens  natu¬ 
rally  enough;  for  the  accidental  is  practically  a 
mere  name.  And  so  Plato  was  in  a  sense  not 
wrong  in  ranking  sophistic  as  dealing  with  that 
[75]  which  is  not.  For  the  arguments  of  the 
sophists  deal,  we  may  say,  above  all  with  the 
accidental;  e.g.  the  question  whether  ‘musical’ 
and  ‘lettered’  are  different  or  the  same,  and 
whether  ‘musical  Coriscus’  and  ‘Coriscus’  are 
the  same,  and  whether  ‘everything  which  is, 
but  is  not  eternal,  has  come  to  be’,  with  the 
paradoxical  conclusion  that  if  one  who  was  mu¬ 
sical  has  come  to  be  lettered,  he  must  also  have 
been  lettered  and  have  come  to  be  musical, — 

[20]  and  all  the  other  arguments  of  this  sort; 
the  accidental  is  obviously  akin  to  non-being. 

And  this  is  clear  also  from  arguments  such  as 
the  following:  things  which  are  in  another 
sense  come  into  being  and  pass  out  of  being  by 
a  process,  but  things  which  are  accidentally  do 
1  Cf.  v.  7. 


102 7b 

not.  But  still  we  must,  as  far  as  we  can,  say  fur- 
[25]  ther,  regarding  the  accidental,  what  its 
nature  is  and  from  what  cause  it  proceeds;  for 
it  will  perhaps  at  the  same  time  become  clear 
why  there  is  no  science  of  it. 

Since,  among  things  which  are,  some  are  al¬ 
ways  in  the  same  state  and  are  of  necessity  (not 
necessity  in  the  sense  of  compulsion  but  that 
which  we  assert  of  things  because  they  cannot 
be  otherwise),  and  some  are  not  of  necessity 
[50]  nor  always,  but  for  the  most  part,  this  is 
the  principle  and  this  the  cause  of  the  existence 
of  the  accidental;  for  that  which  is  neither  al¬ 
ways  nor  for  the  most  part,  we  call  accidental. 
For  instance,  if  in  the  dog-days  there  is  wintry 
and  cold  weather,  we  say  this  is  an  accident, 
but  not  if  there  is  sultry  heat,  because  the  latter 
is  always  or  for  the  most  part  so,  but  not  the 
[35]  former.  And  it  is  an  accident  that  a  man 
is  pale  (for  this  is  neither  always  nor  for  the 
most  part  so),  but  it  is  not  by  accident  that  he  is 
an  animal.  And  that  the  builder  produces 
1027a  health  is  an  accident,  because  it  is  the 
nature  not  of  the  builder  but  of  the  doctor  to 
do  this, — but  the  builder  happened  to  be  a  doc¬ 
tor.  Again,  a  confectioner,  aiming  at  giving 
pleasure,  may  make  something  wholesome,  but 
not  in  virtue  of  the  confectioner’s  art;  and 
therefore  we  say  ‘it  was  an  accident’,  and  while 
there  is  a  sense  in  which  he  makes  it,  in  the  un¬ 
qualified  sense  he  does  not.  For  to  other  things 
[5]  answer  faculties  productive  of  them,  but  to 
accidental  results  there  corresponds  no  deter¬ 
minate  art  nor  faculty;  for  of  things  which  are 
or  come  to  be  by  accident,  the  cause  also  is  ac¬ 
cidental.  Therefore,  since  not  all  things  either 
are  or  come  to  be  of  necessity  and  always,  but 
the  majority  of  things  are  for  the  most  part , 
[70]  the  accidental  must  exist;  for  instance  a 
pale  man  is  not  always  nor  for  the  most  part 
musical,  but  since  this  sometimes  happens,  it 
must  be  accidental  (if  not,  everything  will  be 
of  necessity).  The  matter,  therefore,  which  is 
capable  of  being  otherwise  than  as  it  usually  is, 
[75]  must  be  the  cause  of  the  accidental.  And 
we  must  take  as  our  starting-point  the  question 
whether  there  is  nothing  that  is  neither  always 
nor  for  the  most  part.  Surely  this  is  impossible. 
There  is,  then,  besides  these  something  which 
is  fortuitous  and  accidental.  But  while  the  usual 
exists,  can  nothing  be  said  to  be  always,  or  are 
there  eternal  things?  This  must  be  considered 
later,1  but  that  there  is  no  science  of  the  acci- 
[20]  dental  is  obvious;  for  all  science  is  either 
of  that  which  is  always  or  of  that  which  is  for 

1  Cf.  xii.  6-8. 


549 

the  most  part.  (For  how  else  is  one  to  learn  or 
to  teach  another?  The  thing  must  be  deter¬ 
mined  as  occurring  either  always  or  for  the 
most  part,  e.g.  that  honey-water  is  useful  for  a 
patient  in  a  fever  is  true  for  the  most  part.)  But 
that  which  is  contrary  to  the  usual  law  science 
will  be  unable  to  state,  i.e.  when  the  thing  does 
not  happen,  e.g.  ‘on  the  day  of  new  moon’;  for 
[25]  even  that  which  happens  on  the  day  of 
new  moon  happens  then  either  always  or  for 
the  most  part;  but  the  accidental  is  contrary  to 
such  laws.  We  have  stated,  then,  what  the  acci¬ 
dental  is,  and  from  what  cause  it  arises,  and 
that  there  is  no  science  which  deals  with  it. 

3 

That  there  are  principles  and  causes  which  are 
generable  and  destructible  without  ever  being 
in  course  of  being  generated  or  destroyed,  is 
[jo]  obvious.  For  otherwise  all  things  will  be 
of  necessity,  since  that  which  is  being  generat¬ 
ed  or  destroyed  must  have  a  cause  which  is  not 
accidentally  its  cause.  Will  A  exist  or  not?  It 
will  if  B  happens;  and  if  not,  not.  And  B  will 
exist  if  C  happens.  And  thus  if  time  is  con¬ 
stantly  subtracted  from  a  limited  extent  of  time, 
one  will  obviously  come  to  the  present.  This 
1027b  man,  then,  will  die  by  violence,  if  he 
goes  out;  and  he  will  do  this  if  he  gets  thirsty; 
and  he  will  get  thirsty  if  something  else  hap¬ 
pens;  and  thus  we  shall  come  to  that  which  is 
now  present,  or  to  some  past  event.  For  in¬ 
stance,  he  will  go  out  if  he  gets  thirsty;  and  he 
will  get  thirsty  if  he  is  eating  pungent  food; 
and  this  is  either  the  case  or  not;  so  that  he  will 
[5]  of  necessity  die,  or  of  necessity  not  die.  And 
similarly  if  one  jumps  over  to  past  events,  the 
same  account  will  hold  good;  for  this — I  mean 
the  past  condition — is  already  present  in  some¬ 
thing.  Everything,  therefore,  that  will  be,  will 
be  of  necessity;  e.g.  it  is  necessary  that  he  who 
lives  shall  one  day  die;  for  already  some  condi¬ 
tion  has  come  into  existence,  e.g.  the  presence 
of  contraries  in  the  same  body.  But  whether  he 
[/o]  is  to  die  by  disease  or  by  violence  is  not 
yet  determined,  but  depends  on  the  happening 
of  something  else.  Clearly  then  the  process  goes 
back  to  a  certain  starting-point,  but  this  no 
longer  points  to  something  further.  This  then 
will  be  the  starting-point  for  the  fortuitous, 
and  will  have  nothing  else  as  cause  of  its  com¬ 
ing  to  be.  But  to  what  sort  of  starting-point 
[75]  and  what  sort  of  cause  we  thus  refer  the 
fortuitous — whether  to  matter  or  to  the  pur¬ 
pose  or  to  the  motive  power,  must  be  carefully 
considered. 


BOOK  VI,  CHAPTERS  1-3 


55° 

Let  us  dismiss  accidental  being;  for  we  have 
sufficiently  determined  its  nature.  But  since 
that  which  is  in  the  sense  of  being  true,  or  is 
not  in  the  sense  of  being  false,  depends  on  com¬ 
bination  and  separation,  and  truth  and  falsity 
together  depend  on  the  allocation  of  a  pair  of 
[20]  contradictory  judgements  (for  the  true 
judgement  affirms  where  the  subject  and  pred¬ 
icate  really  are  combined,  and  denies  where 
they  are  separated,  while  the  false  judgement 
has  the  opposite  of  this  allocation;  it  is  another 
question,  how  it  happens  that  we  think  things 
together  or  apart;  by  ‘together’  and  ‘apart’  I 
mean  thinking  them  so  that  there  is  no  succes- 
[25]  sion  in  the  thoughts  but  they  become  a 
unity);  for  falsity  and  truth  are  not  in  things — 
it  is  not  as  if  the  good  were  true,  and  the  bad 
were  in  itself  false — but  in  thought;  while  with 
regard  to  simple  concepts  and  ‘whats’  falsity 
and  truth  do  not  exist  even  in  thought: — this 


1028b 

being  so,  we  must  consider  later2  what  has  to  be 
discussed  with  regard  to  that  which  is  or  is  not 
in  this  sense.  But  since  the  combination  and  the 
[30]  separation  are  in  thought  and  not  in  the 
things,  and  that  which  is  in  this  sense  is  a  dif¬ 
ferent  sort  of  ‘being’  from  the  things  that  are  in 
the  full  sense  (for  the  thought  attaches  or  re¬ 
moves  either  the  subject’s  ‘what’  or  its  having  a 
certain  quality  or  quantity  or  something  else), 
that  which  is  accidentally  and  that  which  is  in 
the  sense  of  being  true  must  be  dismissed.  For 
the  cause  of  the  former  is  indeterminate,  and 
that  of  the  latter  is  some  affection  of  the 
1028a  thought,  and  both  are  related  to  the  re¬ 
maining  genus  of  being,  and  do  not  indicate 
the  existence  of  any  separate  class  of  being. 
Therefore  let  these  be  dismissed,  and  let  us 
consider  the  causes  and  the  principles  of  being 
itself,  qua  being.  [It  was  clear  in  our  discussion 
of  the  various  meanings  of  terms,  that  ‘being’ 
[5]  has  several  meanings.] 


METAPHYSICS 


BOOK  VII 


1 

[/o]  There  are  several  senses  in  which  a  thing 
may  be  said  to  ‘be’,  as  we  pointed  out  previous¬ 
ly  in  our  book  on  the  various  senses  of  words;1 
for  in  one  sense  the  ‘being’  meant  is  ‘what  a 
thing  is’  or  a  ‘this’,  and  in  another  sense  it 
means  a  quality  or  quantity  or  one  of  the  other 
things  that  are  predicated  as  these  are.  While 
‘being’  has  all  these  senses,  obviously  that 
which  ‘is’  primarily  is  the  ‘what’,  which  indi- 
[75]  cates  the  substance  of  the  thing.  For  when 
we  say  of  what  quality  a  thing  is,  we  say  that  it 
is  good  or  bad,  not  that  it  is  three  cubits  long  or 
that  it  is  a  man;  but  when  we  say  what  it  is,  we 
do  not  say  ‘white’  or  ‘hot’  or  ‘three  cubits  long’, 
but  ‘a  man’  or  ‘a  god’.  And  all  other  things  are 
said  to  be  because  they  are,  some  of  them,  quan¬ 
tities  of  that  which  is  in  this  primary  sense,  oth¬ 
ers  qualities  of  it,  others  affections  of  it,  and 
others  some  other  determination  of  it.  And 
[20]  so  one  might  even  raise  the  question 
whether  the  words  ‘to  walk’,  ‘to  be  healthy’, 
‘to  sit’  imply  that  each  of  these  things  is  ex¬ 
istent,  and  similarly  in  any  other  case  of  this 
sort;  for  none  of  them  is  either  self-subsist- 
ent  or  capable  of  being  separated  from  sub¬ 
stance,  but  rather,  if  anything,  it  is  that  which 
walks  or  sits  or  is  healthy  that  is  an  exist- 
[25]  ent  thing.  Now  these  are  seen  to  be  more 
1  Cf.  v.  7. 


real  because  there  is  something  definite  which 
underlies  them  (i.e.  the  substance  or  indi¬ 
vidual),  which  is  implied  in  such  a  predicate; 
for  we  never  use  the  word  ‘good’  or  ‘sitting’ 
without  implying  this.  Clearly  then  it  is  in  vir¬ 
tue  of  this  category  that  each  of  the  others  also 
is.  Therefore  that  which  is  primarily,  i.e.  not  in 
[30]  a  qualified  sense  but  without  qualifica¬ 
tion,  must  be  substance. 

Now  there  are  several  senses  in  which  a  thing 
is  said  to  be  first;  yet  substance  is  first  in  every 
sense — ( 1 )  in  definition,  (2)  in  order  of  knowl- 
edge,  (3)  in  time.  For  (3)  of  the  other  catego¬ 
ries  none  can  exist  independently,  but  only  sub- 
[35]  stance.  And  (1)  in  definition  also  this  is 
first;  for  in  the  definition  of  each  term  the  defi¬ 
nition  of  its  substance  must  be  present.  And 
(2)  we  think  we  know  each  thing  most  fully, 
when  we  know  what  it  is,  e.g.  what  man  is  or 
what  fire  is,  rather  than  when  we  know  its 
1028b  quality,  its  quantity,  or  its  place;  since 
we  know  each  of  these  predicates  also,  only 
when  we  know  what  the  quantity  or  the  qual¬ 
ity  is. 

And  indeed  the  question  which  was  raised 
of  old  and  is  raised  now  and  always,  and  is  al¬ 
ways  the  subject  of  doubt,  viz.  what  being  is,  is 
just  the  question,  what  is  substance?  For  it  is 
this  that  some  assert  to  be  one,  others  more 
[5]  than  one,  and  that  some  assert  to  be  limit- 
2  Cf.  ix.  10. 


1029*  BOOK  VI,  CHAPTER  4— BOOK  VII,  CHAPTERS  1-3 


ed  in  number,  others  unlimited.  And  so  we  also 
must  consider  chiefly  and  primarily  and  almost 
exclusively  what  that  is  which  is  in  this  sense. 

2 

Substance  is  thought  to  belong  most  obviously 
to  bodies;  and  so  we  say  that  not  only  animals 
and  plants  and  their  parts  are  substances,  but 
[/o]  also  natural  bodies  such  as  fire  and  water 
and  earth  and  everything  of  the  sort,  and  all 
things  that  are  either  parts  of  these  or  com¬ 
posed  of  these  (either  of  parts  or  of  the  whole 
bodies),  e.g.  the  physical  universe  and  its  parts, 
stars  and  moon  and  sun.  But  whether  these 
alone  are  substances,  or  there  are  also  others, 
or  only  some  of  these,  or  others  as  well,  or  none 
[75]  of  these  but  only  some  other  things,  are 
substances,  must  be  considered.  Some  think  the 
limits  of  body,  i.e.  surface,  line,  point,  and 
unit,  are  substances,  and  more  so  than  body  or 
the  solid. 

Further,  some  do  not  think  there  is  anything 
substantial  besides  sensible  things,  but  others 
think  there  are  eternal  substances  which  are 
more  in  number  and  more  real;  e.g.  Plato  posit¬ 
ed  two  kinds  of  substance — the  Forms  and  the 
[20]  objects  of  mathematics — as  well  as  a  third 
kind,  viz.  the  substance  of  sensible  bodies.  And 
Speusippus  made  still  more  kinds  of  substance, 
beginning  with  the  One,  and  assuming  princi¬ 
ples  for  each  kind  of  substance,  one  for  num¬ 
bers,  another  for  spatial  magnitudes,  and  then 
another  for  the  soul;  and  by  going  on  in  this 
way  he  multiplies  the  kinds  of  substance.  And 
[25]  some  say  Forms  and  numbers  have  the 
same  nature,  and  the  other  things  come  after 
them — lines  and  planes — until  we  come  to  the 
substance  of  the  material  universe  and  to  sensi¬ 
ble  bodies. 

Regarding  these  matters,  then,  we  must  in¬ 
quire  which  of  the  common  statements  are 
right  and  which  are  not  right,  and  what  sub¬ 
stances  there  are,  and  whether  there  are  or  are 
not  any  besides  sensible  substances,  and  how 
[jo]  sensible  substances  exist,  and  whether 
there  is  a  substance  capable  of  separate  exist¬ 
ence  (and  if  so  why  and  how)  or  no  such  sub¬ 
stance,  apart  from  sensible  substances;  and  we 
must  first  sketch  the  nature  of  substance. 

3 

The  word  ‘substance*  is  applied,  if  not  in  more 
senses,  still  at  least  to  four  main  objects;  for 
both  the  essence  and  the  universal  and  the  ge¬ 
nus  are  thought  to  be  the  substance  of  each 
[55]  thing,  and  fourthly  the  substratum.  Now 


the  substratum  is  that  of  which  everything  else 
is  predicated,  while  it  is  itself  not  predicated  of 
anything  else.  And  so  we  must  first  determine 
1029*  the  nature  of  this;  for  that  which  under¬ 
lies  a  thing  primarily  is  thought  to  be  in  the 
truest  sense  its  substance.  And  in  one  sense 
matter  is  said  to  be  of  the  nature  of  substra¬ 
tum,  in  another,  shape,  and  in  a  third,  the 
compound  of  these.  (By  the  matter  I  mean,  for 
instance,  the  bronze,  by  the  shape  the  pattern 
of  its  form,  and  by  the  compound  of  these  the 
[5]  statue,  the  concrete  whole.)  Therefore  if 
the  form  is  prior  to  the  matter  and  more  real,  it 
will  be  prior  also  to  the  compound  of  both,  for 
the  same  reason. 

We  have  now  outlined  the  nature  of  sub¬ 
stance,  showing  that  it  is  that  which  is  not  pred¬ 
icated  of  a  stratum,  but  of  which  all  else  is 
predicated.  But  we  must  not  merely  state  the 
matter  thus;  for  this  is  not  enough.  The  state¬ 
ment  itself  is  obscure,  and  further,  on  this 
view,  matter  becomes  substance.  For  if  this  is 
[70]  not  substance,  it  baffles  us  to  say  what  else 
is.  When  all  else  is  stripped  off  evidently  noth¬ 
ing  but  matter  remains.  For  while  the  rest  are 
affections,  products,  and  potencies  of  bodies, 
length,  breadth,  and  depth  are  quantities  and 
not  substances  (for  a  quantity  is  not  a  sub- 
[75]  stance),  but  the  substance  is  rather  that 
to  which  these  belong  primarily.  But  when 
length  and  breadth  and  depth  are  taken  away 
we  see  nothing  left  unless  there  is  something 
that  is  bounded  by  these;  so  that  to  those  who 
consider  the  question  thus  matter  alone  must 
seem  to  be  substance.  By  matter  I  mean  that 
[20]  which  in  itself  is  neither  a  particular 
thing  nor  of  a  certain  quantity  nor  assigned  to 
any  other  of  the  categories  by  which  being  is 
determined.  For  there  is  something  of  which 
each  of  these  is  predicated,  whose  being  is  dif¬ 
ferent  from  that  of  each  of  the  predicates  (for 
the  predicates  other  than  substance  are  predi¬ 
cated  of  substance,  while  substance  is  predi¬ 
cated  of  matter).  Therefore  the  ultimate  sub¬ 
stratum  is  of  itself  neither  a  particular  thing 
nor  of  a  particular  quantity  nor  otherwise  posi- 
[25]  tively  characterized;  nor  yet  is  it  the  nega¬ 
tions  of  these,  for  negations  also  will  belong  to 
it  only  by  accident. 

If  we  adopt  this  point  of  view,  then,  it  fol¬ 
lows  that  matter  is  substance.  But  this  is  im¬ 
possible;  for  both  separability  and  ‘thisness*  are 
thought  to  belong  chiefly  to  substance.  And  so 
form  and  the  compound  of  form  and  matter 
[30]  would  be  thought  to  be  substance,  rather 
than  matter.  The  substance  compounded  of 


552 

both,  i.e.  of  matter  and  shape,  may  be  dismissed ; 
for  it  is  posterior  and  its  nature  is  obvious.  And 
matter  also  is  in  a  sense  manifest.  But  we  must 
inquire  into  the  third  kind  of  substance;  for 
this  is  the  most  perplexing. 

Some  of  the  sensible  substances  are  gener¬ 
ally  admitted  to  be  substances,  so  that  we  must 
look  first  among  these.  For  it  is  an  advantage 
1029b  [j]  to  advance  to  that  which  is  more 
knowable.  For  learning  proceeds  for  all  in  this 
way — through  that  which  is  less  knowable  by 
[5]  nature  to  that  which  is  more  knowable;  and 
just  as  in  conduct  our  task  is  to  start  from  what 
is  good  for  each  and  make  what  is  without 
qualification  good  good  for  each,  so  it  is  our 
task  to  start  from  what  is  more  knowable  to 
oneself  and  make  what  is  knowable  by  nature 
knowable  to  oneself.  Now  what  is  knowable 
and  primary  for  particular  sets  of  people  is 
often  knowable  to  a  very  small  extent,  and  has 
[/o]  little  or  nothing  of  reality.  But  yet  one 
must  start  from  that  which  is  barely  knowable 
but  knowable  to  oneself,  and  try  to  know 
what  is  knowable  without  qualification,  pass¬ 
ing,  as  has  been  said,  by  way  of  those  very 
things  which  one  does  know. 

4 

[7]  Since  at  the  start1  we  distinguished  the  va¬ 
rious  marks  by  which  we  determine  substance, 
and  one  of  these  was  thought  to  be  the  essence, 
[/j]  we  must  investigate  this.  And  first  let  us 
make  some  linguistic  remarks  about  it.  The  es¬ 
sence  of  each  thing  is  what  it  is  said  to  be  prop¬ 
ter  se  For  being  you  is  not  being  musical,  since 
[75]  you  are  not  by  your  very  nature  musical. 
What,  then,  you  are  by  your  very  nature  is 
your  essence. 

Nor  yet  is  the  whole  of  this  the  essence  of  a 
thing;  not  that  which  is  propter  se  as  white  is 
to  a  surface,  because  being  a  surface  is  not 
identical  with  being  white.  But  again  the  com¬ 
bination  of  both — ‘being  a  white  surface’ — is 
not  the  essence  of  surface,  because  ‘surface’  it¬ 
self  is  added.  The  formula,  therefore,  in  which 
the  term  itself  is  not  present  but  its  meaning  is 
[20]  expressed,  this  is  the  formula  of  the 
essence  of  each  thing.  Therefore  if  to  be  a 
white  surface  is  to  be  a  smooth  surface,  to 
be  white  and  to  be  smooth  are  one  and  the 
same. 

But  since  there  are  also  compounds  answer¬ 
ing  to  the  other  categories  (for  there  is  a  sub¬ 
stratum  for  each  category,  e.g.  for  quality, 

1  io28b  33-6. 


1030* 

[25]  quantity,  time,  place,  and  motion),  we 
must  inquire  whether  there  is  a  formula  of  the 
essence  of  each  of  them,  i.e.  whether  to  these 
compounds  also  there  belongs  an  essence,  e.g. 
to  ‘white  man’.  Let  the  compound  be  denoted 
by  ‘cloak’.  What  is  the  essence  of  cloak?  But, 
it  may  be  said,  this  also  is  not  a  propter  se  ex¬ 
pression.  We  reply  that  there  are  just  two 
ways  in  which  a  predicate  may  fail  to  be  true 
[jo]  of  a  subject  propter  se,  and  one  of  these 
results  from  the  addition,  and  the  other  from 
the  omission,  of  a  determinant.  One  kind  of 
predicate  is  not  propter  se  because  the  term 
that  is  being  defined  is  combined  with  another 
determinant,  e.g.  if  in  defining  the  essence  of 
white  one  were  to  state  the  formula  of  white 
man;  the  other  because  in  the  subject  another 
determinant  is  combined  with  that  which  is 
expressed  in  the  formula,  e.g.  if  ‘cloak’  meant 
‘white  man’,  and  one  were  to  define  cloak  as 
1030*  white;  white  man  is  white  indeed,  but 
its  essence  is  not  to  be  white. 

But  is  being-a-cloak  an  essence  at  all  ?  Prob¬ 
ably  not.  For  the  essence  is  precisely  what 
something  is;  but  when  an  attribute  is  asserted 
of  a  subject  other  than  itself,  the  complex  is  not 

f  recisely  what  some  ‘this’  is,  e.g.  white  man  is 
5]  not  precisely  what  some  ‘this’  is,  since 
thisness  belongs  only  to  substances.  Therefore 
there  is  an  essence  only  of  those  things  whose 
formula  is  a  definition.  But  we  have  a  defini¬ 
tion  not  where  we  have  a  word  and  a  formula 
identical  in  meaning  (for  in  that  case  all  for¬ 
mulae  or  sets  of  words  would  be  definitions; 
for  there  will  be  some  name  for  any  set  of 
words  whatever,  so  that  even  the  Iliad  will  be 
a  definition),  but  where  there  is  a  formula  of 
[/o]  something  primary;  and  primary  things 
are  those  which  do  not  imply  the  predication 
of  one  element  in  them  of  another  element. 
Nothing,  then,  which  is  not  a  species  of  a  genus 
will  have  an  essence — only  species  will  have  it, 
for  these  are  thought  to  imply  not  merely  that 
the  subject  participates  in  the  attribute  and  has 
it  as  an  affection,  or  has  it  by  accident;  but  for 
everything  else  as  well,  if  it  has  a  name,  there 
[75]  will  be  a  formula  of  its  meaning — viz. 
that  this  attribute  belongs  to  this  subject;  or  in¬ 
stead  of  a  simple  formula  we  shall  be  able  to 
give  a  more  accurate  one;  but  there  will  be  no 
definition  nor  essence. 

Or  has  ‘definition’,  like  ‘what  a  thing  is’, 
several  meanings?  ‘What  a  thing  is’  in  one 
sense  means  substance  and  the  ‘this’,  in  another 
[20]  one  or  other  of  the  predicates,  quantity, 
quality,  and  the  like.  For  as  ‘is’  belongs  to  all 


METAPHYSICS 


1031 


553 


BOOK  VII,  CHAPTERS  3-5 


a 

things,  not  however  in  the  same  sense,  but  to 
one  sort  of  thing  primarily  and  to  others  in  a 
secondary  way,  so  too  ‘what  a  thing  is’  belongs 
in  the  simple  sense  to  substance,  but  in  a  lim¬ 
ited  sense  to  the  other  categories.  For  even  of 
a  quality  we  might  ask  what  it  is,  so  that  quai¬ 
ls]  ity  also  is  a  ‘what  a  thing  is’, — not  in  the 
simple  sense,  however,  but  just  as,  in  the  case  of 
that  which  is  not,  some  say,1  emphasizing  the 
linguistic  form,  that  that  which  is  not  is — not 
is  simply,  but  is  non-existent;  so  too  with 
quality. 

We  must  no  doubt  inquire  how  we  should 
express  ourselves  on  each  point,  but  certainly 
not  more  than  how  the  facts  actually  stand. 
And  so  now  also,  since  it  is  evident  what  lan¬ 
guage  we  use,  essence  will  belong,  just  as  ‘what 
a  thing  is’  does,  primarily  and  in  the  simple 
sense  to  substance,  and  in  a  secondary  way  to 
| 30]  the  other  categories  also, — not  essence  in 
the  simple  sense,  but  the  essence  of  a  quality  or 
of  a  quantity.  For  it  must  be  either  by  an  equiv¬ 
ocation  that  we  say  these  are,  or  by  adding  to 
and  taking  from  the  meaning  of  ‘are’  (in  the 
way  in  which  that  which  is  not  known  may  be 
said  to  be  known), — the  truth  being  that  we 
use  the  word  neither  ambiguously  nor  in  the 
[35]  same  sense,  but  just  as  we  apply  the  word 
‘medical’  by  virtue  of  a  reference  to  one  and 
the  same  thing,  not  meaning  one  and  the  same 
1030b  thing,  nor  yet  speaking  ambiguously; 
for  a  patient  and  an  operation  and  an  instru¬ 
ment  are  called  medical  neither  by  an  am¬ 
biguity  nor  with  a  single  meaning,  but  with 
reference  to  a  common  end.  But  it  does  not 
matter  at  all  in  which  of  the  two  ways  one 
[5]  likes  to  describe  the  facts;  this  is  evident, 
that  definition  and  essence  in  the  primary  and 
simple  sense  belong  to  substances.  Still  they 
belong  to  other  things  as  well,  only  not  in  the 
primary  sense.  For  if  we  suppose  this  it  does 
not  follow  that  there  is  a  definition  of  every 
word  which  means  the  same  as  any  formula; 
it  must  mean  the  same  as  a  particular  kind  of 
formula;  and  this  condition  is  satisfied  if  it  is 
a  formula  of  something  which  is  one,  not  by 
continuity  like  the  Iliad  or  the  things  that  are 
[/o]  one  by  being  bound  together,  but  in  one 
of  the  main  senses  of  ‘one’,  which  answer  to 
the  senses  of  ‘is’;  now  ‘that  which  is’  in  one 
sense  denotes  a  ‘this’,  in  another  a  quantity,  in 
another  a  quality.  And  so  there  can  be  a  for¬ 
mula  or  definition  even  of  white  man,  but  not 
in  the  sense  in  which  there  is  a  definition 
either  of  white  or  of  a  substance. 

1  Cf.  Plato,  Sophist ,  237,  256  fF. 


5 

It  is  a  difficult  question,  if  one  denies  that  a 
formula  with  an  added  determinant  is  a  defi- 
[75]  nition,  whether  any  of  the  terms  that  are 
not  simple  but  coupled  will  be  definable.  For 
we  must  explain  them  by  adding  a  determin¬ 
ant.  E.g.  there  is  the  nose,  and  concavity,  and 
snubness,  which  is  compounded  out  of  the  two 
by  the  presence  of  the  one  in  the  other,  and  it  is 
not  by  accident  that  the  nose  has  the  attribute 
either  of  concavity  or  of  snubness,  but  in  virtue 
[20]  of  its  nature;  nor  do  they  attach  to  it  as 
whiteness  does  to  Callias,  or  to  man  (because 
Callias,  who  happens  to  be  a  man,  is  white), 
but  as  ‘male’  attaches  to  animal  and  ‘equal’  to 
quantity,  and  as  all  so-called  ‘attributes  prop¬ 
ter  se’  attach  to  their  subjects.  And  such  attri¬ 
butes  are  those  in  which  is  involved  either  the 
formula  or  the  name  of  the  subject  of  the  par¬ 
ticular  attribute,  and  which  cannot  be  ex- 
[25]  plained  without  this;  e.g.  white  can  be 
explained  apart  from  man,  but  not  female  apart 
from  animal.  Therefore  there  is  either  no  es¬ 
sence  and  definition  of  any  of  these  things,  or 
if  there  is,  it  is  in  another  sense,  as  we  have 
said.2 

But  there  is  also  a  second  difficulty  about 
them.  For  if  snub  nose  and  concave  nose  are 
the  same  thing,  snub  and  concave  will  be  the 
[30]  same  thing;  but  if  snub  and  concave  are 
not  the  same  (because  it  is  impossible  to  speak 
of  snubness  apart  from  the  thing  of  which  it  is 
an  attribute  propter  se,  for  snubness  is  con- 
cavhy-in-a-nose) ,  either  it  is  impossible  to  say 
‘snub  nose’  or  the  same  thing  will  have  been 
said  twice,  concave-nose  nose;  for  snub  nose 
will  be  concave-nose  nose.  And  so  it  is  absurd 
that  such  things  should  have  an  essence;  if  they 
[33]  have,  there  will  be  an  infinite  regress;  for 
in  snub-nose  nose  yet  another  ‘nose’  will  be  in¬ 
volved. 

103 la  Clearly,  then,  only  substance  is  defin¬ 
able.  For  if  the  other  categories  also  are  de¬ 
finable,  it  must  be  by  addition  of  a  determinant, 
e.g.  the  qualitative  is  defined  thus,  and  so  is 
the  odd,  for  it  cannot  be  defined  apart  from 
number;  nor  can  female  be  defined  apart  from 
animal.  (When  I  say  ‘by  addition’  I  mean  the 
expressions  in  which  it  turns  out  that  we  are 
saying  the  same  thing  twice,  as  in  these  in- 
[5]  stances.)  And  if  this  is  true,  coupled  terms 
also,  like  ‘odd  number’,  will  not  be  definable 
(but  this  escapes  our  notice  because  our  for¬ 
mulae  are  not  accurate.).  But  if  these  also  are 

2  a  1y_b 


554 

definable,  either  it  is  in  some  other  way  or,  as 
we  said,1  definition  and  essence  must  be  said 
to  have  more  than  one  sense.  Therefore  in  one 
[/o]  sense  nothing  will  have  a  definition  and 
nothing  will  have  an  essence,  except  sub¬ 
stances,  but  in  another  sense  other  things  will 
have  them.  Clearly,  then,  definition  is  the  for¬ 
mula  of  the  essence,  and  essence  belongs  to 
substances  either  alone  or  chiefly  and  primarily 
and  in  the  unqualified  sense. 

6 

[75]  We  must  inquire  whether  each  thing  and 
its  essence  are  the  same  or  different.  This  is  of 
some  use  for  the  inquiry  concerning  substance; 
for  each  thing  is  thought  to  be  not  different 
from  its  substance,  and  the  essence  is  said  to  be 
the  substance  of  each  thing. 

Now  in  the  case  of  accidental  unities  the  two 
[20]  would  be  generally  thought  to  be  differ¬ 
ent,  e.g.  white  man  would  be  thought  to  be 
different  from  the  essence  of  white  man.  For 
if  they  are  the  same,  the  essence  of  man  and 
that  of  white  man  are  also  the  same;  for  a  man 
and  a  white  man  are  the  same  thing,  as  people 
say,  so  that  the  essence  of  white  man  and  that 
of  man  would  be  also  the  same.  But  perhaps  it 
does  not  follow  that  the  essence  of  accidental 
unities  should  be  the  same  as  that  of  the  sim¬ 
ple  terms.  For  the  extreme  terms  are  not  in  the 
same  way  identical  with  the  middle  term.  But 
[25]  perhaps  this  might  be  thought  to  follow, 
that  the  extreme  terms,  the  accidents,  should 
turn  out  to  be  the  same,  e.g.  the  essence  of 
white  and  that  of  musical;  but  this  is  not 
actually  thought  to  be  the  case. 

But  in  the  case  of  so-called  self-subsistent 
things,  is  a  thing  necessarily  the  same  as  its 
essence?  E.g.  if  there  are  some  substances 
which  have  no  other  substances  nor  entities 
[jo]  prior  to  them — substances  such  as  some 
assert  the  Ideas  to  be? — If  the  essence  of  good 
is  to  be  different  from  good-itself,  and  the  es¬ 
sence  of  animal  from  animal-itself,  and  the  es- 
1031b  sence  of  being  from  being-itself,  there 
will,  firstly,  be  other  substances  and  entities 
and  Ideas  besides  those  which  are  asserted,  and, 
secondly,  these  others  will  be  prior  substances, 
if  essence  is  substance.  And  if  the  posterior  sub¬ 
stances  and  the  prior  are  severed  from  each 
other,  (a)  there  will  be  no  knowledge  of  the 
[5]  former,  and  (/3)  the  latter  will  have  no  be¬ 
ing.  (By  ‘severed’  I  mean,  if  the  good-itself 
has  not  the  essence  of  good,  and  the  latter  has 
not  the  property  of  being  good.)  For  (a)  there 
1 1030  ai7-bi3. 


1032* 

is  knowledge  of  each  thing  only  when  we 
know  its  essence.  And  (/3  )  the  case  is  the  same 
for  other  things  as  for  the  good;  so  that  if  the 
essence  of  good  is  not  good,  neither  is  the  es¬ 
sence  of  reality  real,  nor  the  essence  of  unity 
[/o]  one.  And  all  essences  alike  exist  or  none 
of  them  does;  so  that  if  the  essence  of  reality  is 
not  real,  neither  is  any  of  the  others.  Again, 
that  to  which  the  essence  of  good  does  not  be¬ 
long  is  not  good. — The  good,  then,  must  be  one 
with  the  essence  of  good,  and  the  beautiful 
with  the  essence  of  beauty,  and  so  with  all 
things  which  do  not  depend  on  something  else 
but  are  self-subsistent  and  primary.  For  it  is 
enough  if  they  are  this,  even  if  they  are  not 
Forms;  or  rather,  perhaps,  even  if  they  are 
[75]  Forms.  (At  the  same  time  it  is  clear  that 
if  there  are  Ideas  such  as  some  people  say  there 
are,  it  will  not  be  substratum  that  is  substance; 
for  these  must  be  substances,  but  not  predicable 
of  a  substratum;  for  if  they  were  they  would 
exist  only  by  being  participated  in.) 

Each  thing  itself,  then,  and  its  essence  are 
one  and  the  same  in  no  merely  accidental  way, 
[20]  as  is  evident  both  from  the  preceding  ar¬ 
guments  and  because  to  \now  each  thing,  at 
least,  is  just  to  know  its  essence,  so  that  even  by 
the  exhibition  of  instances  it  becomes  clear  that 
both  must  be  one. 

(But  of  an  accidental  term,  e.g.  ‘the  musical’ 
or  ‘the  white’,  since  it  has  two  meanings,  it  is 
not  true  to  say  that  it  itself  is  identical  with  its 
essence;  for  both  that  to  which  the  accidental 
quality  belongs,  and  the  accidental  quality,  are 
[25]  white,  so  that  in  a  sense  the  accident  and 
its  essence  are  the  same,  and  in  a  sense  they  are 
not;  for  the  essence  of  white  is  not  the  same  as 
the  man  or  the  white  man,  but  it  is  the  same  as 
the  attribute  white.) 

The  absurdity  of  the  separation  would  ap¬ 
pear  also  if  one  were  to  assign  a  name  to  each 
of  the  essences;  for  there  would  be  yet  another 
[30]  essence  besides  the  original  one,  e.g.  to  the 
essence  of  horse  there  will  belong  a  second 
essence.  Yet  why  should  not  some  things  be 
their  essences  from  the  start,  since  essence  is 
substance?  But  indeed  not  only  are  a  thing 
and  its  essence  one,  but  the  formula  of  them  is 
1032*  also  the  same,  as  is  clear  even  from  what 
has  been  said;  for  it  is  not  by  accident  that  the 
essence  of  one,  and  the  one,  are  one.  Further, 
if  they  are  to  be  different,  the  process  will  go 
on  to  infinity;  for  we  shall  have  (1)  the  essence 
of  one,  and  (2)  the  one,  so  that  to  terms  of  the 
former  kind  the  same  argument  will  be  ap¬ 
plicable. 


METAPHYSICS 


1032b  BOOK  VII,  CHAPTERS  5-7  555 


[5]  Clearly,  then,  each  primary  and  self-sub- 
sistent  thing  is  one  and  the  same  as  its  essence. 
The  sophistical  objections  to  this  position,  and 
the  question  whether  Socrates  and  to  be  Soc¬ 
rates  are  the  same  thing,  are  obviously  an¬ 
swered  by  the  same  solution;  for  there  is  no 
difference  either  in  the  standpoint  from  which 
the  question  would  be  asked,  or  in  that  from 
[/o]  which  one  could  answer  it  successfully. 
We  have  explained,  then,  in  what  sense  each 
thing  is  the  same  as  its  essence  and  in  what 
sense  it  is  not. 

7 

Of  things  that  come  to  be,  some  come  to  be  by 
nature,  some  by  art,  some  spontaneously.  Now 
everything  that  comes  to  be  comes  to  be  by  the 
agency  of  something  and  from  something  and 
comes  to  be  something.  And  the  something 
which  I  say  it  comes  to  be  may  be  found  in  any 
category;  it  may  come  to  be  either  a  ‘this’  or  of 
some  size  or  of  some  quality  or  somewhere. 
[75]  Now  natural  comings  to  be  are  the  com¬ 
ings  to  be  of  those  things  which  come  to  be  by 
nature;  and  that  out  of  which  they  come  to  be 
is  what  we  call  matter;  and  that  by  which  they 
come  to  be  is  something  which  exists  naturally; 
and  the  something  which  they  come  to  be  is  a 
man  or  a  plant  or  one  of  the  things  of  this 
kind,  which  we  say  are  substances  if  anything 
[20]  is — all  things  produced  either  by  nature 
or  by  art  have  matter;  for  each  of  them  is 
capable  both  of  being  and  of  not  being,  and  this 
capacity  is  the  matter  in  each — and,  in  general, 
both  that  from  which  they  are  produced  is 
nature,  and  the  type  according  to  which  they 
are  produced  is  nature  (for  that  which  is  pro¬ 
duced,  e.g.  a  plant  or  an  animal,  has  a  nature), 
and  so  is  that  by  which  they  are  produced — 
the  so-called  ‘formal’  nature,  which  is  specific¬ 
ally  the  same  (though  this  is  in  another  indi¬ 
vidual);  for  man  begets  man. 

[25]  Thus,  then,  are  natural  products  pro¬ 
duced;  all  other  productions  are  called  ‘mak¬ 
ings’.  And  all  makings  proceed  either  from  art 
or  from  a  faculty  or  from  thought.  Some  of 
them  happen  also  spontaneously  or  by  luck 
[30]  just  as  natural  products  sometimes  do; 
for  there  also  the  same  things  sometimes  are 
produced  without  seed  as  well  as  from  seed. 
Concerning  these  cases,  then,  we  must  inquire 
later,1  but  from  art  proceed  the  things  of  which 
the  form  is  in  the  soul  of  the  artist.  (By  form 
1032b  I  mean  the  essence  of  each  thing  and 
its  primary  substance.)  For  even  contraries 
1  Cf.  *>23-30, 1034s  9-21, b  4-7. 


have  in  a  sense  the  same  form;  for  the  sub¬ 
stance  of  a  privation  is  the  opposite  substance, 
e.g.  health  is  the  substance  of  disease  (for  dis- 
[5]  ease  is  the  absence  of  health);  and  health 
is  the  formula  in  the  soul  or  the  knowledge  of 
it.  The  healthy  subject  is  produced  as  the  re¬ 
sult  of  the  following  train  of  thought: — since 
this  is  health,  if  the  subject  is  to  be  healthy  this 
must  first  be  present,  e.g.  a  uniform  state  of 
body,  and  if  this  is  to  be  present,  there  must  be 
heat;  and  the  physician  goes  on  thinking  thus 
until  he  reduces  the  matter  to  a  final  something 
which  he  himself  can  produce.  Then  the  proc- 
[/o]  ess  from  this  point  onward,  i.e.  the  proc¬ 
ess  towards  health,  is  called  a  ‘making’.  There¬ 
fore  it  follows  that  in  a  sense  health  comes 
from  health  and  house  from  house,  that  with 
matter  from  that  without  matter;  for  the  med¬ 
ical  art  and  the  building  art  are  the  form  of 
health  and  of  the  house,  and  when  I  speak  of 
substance  without  matter  I  mean  the  essence. 
[75]  Of  the  productions  or  processes  one  part 
is  called  thinking  and  the  other  making, — that 
which  proceeds  from  the  starting-point  and  the 
form  is  thinking,  and  that  which  proceeds  from 
the  final  step  of  the  thinking  is  making.  And 
each  of  the  other,  intermediate,  things  is  pro¬ 
duced  in  the  same  way.  I  mean,  for  instance,  if 
the  subject  is  to  be  healthy  his  bodily  state  must 
be  made  uniform.  What  then  does  being  made 
uniform  imply?  This  or  that.  And  this  de- 
[20]  pends  on  his  being  made  warm.  What 
does  this  imply?  Something  else.  And  this 
something  is  present  potentially;  and  what  is 
present  potentially  is  already  in  the  physician’s 
power. 

The  active  principle  then  and  the  starting 
point  for  the  process  of  becoming  healthy  is,  if 
it  happens  by  art,  the  form  in  the  soul,  and  if 
spontaneously,  it  is  that,  whatever  it  is,  which 
starts  the  making,  for  the  man  who  makes  by 
[25]  art,  as  in  healing  the  starting-point  is 
perhaps  the  production  of  warmth  (and  this 
the  physician  produces  by  rubbing).  Warmth 
in  the  body,  then,  is  either  a  part  of  health  or  is 
followed  (either  directly  or  through  several 
intermediate  steps)  by  something  similar  which 
is  a  part  of  health;  and  this,  viz.  that  which 
produces  the  part  of  health,  is  the  limiting- 
point, — and  so  too  with  a  house  (the  stones  are 
the  limiting-point  here)  and  in  all  other  cases, 
[jo]  Therefore,  as  the  saying  goes,  it  is  im¬ 
possible  that  anything  should  be  produced  if 
there  were  nothing  existing  before.  Obviously 
then  some  part  of  the  result  will  pre-exist  of 
necessity;  for  the  matter  is  a  part;  for  this  is 


556  METAPHYSICS  1033b 


present  in  the  process  and  it  is  this  that  becomes 
1033a  something.  But  is  the  matter  an  ele¬ 
ment  even  in  the  formula?  We  certainly  de¬ 
scribe  in  both  ways  what  brazen  circles  are;  we 
describe  both  the  matter  by  saying  it  is  brass, 
and  the  form  by  saying  that  it  is  such  and  such 
a  figure;  and  figure  is  the  proximate  genus  in 
which  it  is  placed.  The  brazen  circle,  then,  has 
its  matter  in  its  formula . 

[5]  As  for  that  out  of  which  as  matter  they  are 
produced,  some  things  are  said,  when  they 
have  been  produced,  to  be  not  that  but  ‘thaten’; 
e.g.  the  statue  is  not  gold  but  golden.  And  a 
healthy  man  is  not  said  to  be  that  from  which 
he  has  come.  The  reason  is  that  though  a  thing 
comes  both  from  its  privation  and  from  its  sub¬ 
stratum,  which  we  call  its  matter  (e.g.  what 
[70]  becomes  healthy  is  both  a  man  and  an 
invalid),  it  is  said  to  come  rather  from  its  pri¬ 
vation  (e.g.  it  is  from  an  invalid  rather  than 
from  a  man  that  a  healthy  subject  is  produced). 
And  so  the  healthy  subject  is  not  said  to  be  an 
invalid,  but  to  be  a  man,  and  the  man  is  said 
to  be  healthy.  But  as  for  the  things  whose  pri¬ 
vation  is  obscure  and  nameless,  e.g.  in  brass 
the  privation  of  a  particular  shape  or  in  bricks 
and  timber  the  privation  of  arrangement  as  a 
[75]  house,  the  thing  is  thought  to  be  produced 
from  these  materials,  as  in  the  former  case  the 
healthy  man  is  produced  from  an  invalid.  And 
so,  as  there  also  a  thing  is  not  said  to  be  that 
from  which  it  comes,  here  the  statue  is  not  said 
to  be  wood  but  is  said  by  a  verbal  change  to  be 
wooden,  not  brass  but  brazen,  not  gold  but 
golden,  and  the  house  is  said  to  be  not  bricks 
[20]  but  bricken  (though  we  should  not  say 
without  qualification,  if  we  looked  at  the  mat¬ 
ter  carefully,  even  that  a  statue  is  produced 
from  wood  or  a  house  from  bricks,  because 
coming  to  be  implies  change  in  that  from 
which  a  thing  comes  to  be,  and  not  perma¬ 
nence).  It  is  for  this  reason,  then,  that  we  use 
this  way  of  speaking. 

8 

Since  anything  which  is  produced  is  produced 
by  something  (and  this  I  call  the  starting-point 
of  the  production),  and  from  something  (and 
[25]  let  this  be  taken  to  be  not  the  privation 
but  the  matter;  for  the  meaning  we  attach  to 
this  has  already1  been  explained),  and  since 
something  is  produced  (and  this  is  either  a 
sphere  or  a  circle  or  whatever  else  it  may 
chance  to  be),  just  as  we  do  not  make  the  sub¬ 
stratum  (the  brass),  so  we  do  not  make  the 
1  Cf.  io32a  17. 


sphere,  except  incidentally,  because  the  brazen 
sphere  is  a  sphere  and  we  make  the  former. 
[^0]  For  to  make  a  ‘this’  is  to  make  a  ‘this’  out 
of  the  substratum  in  the  full  sense  of  the  word. 
(I  mean  that  to  make  the  brass  round  is  not  to 
make  the  round  or  the  sphere,  but  something 
else,  i.e.  to  produce  this  form  in  something  dif¬ 
ferent  from  itself.  For  if  we  make  the  form, 
we  must  make  it  out  of  something  else;  for 
1033b  this  was  assumed.2  E.g.  we  make  a 
brazen  sphere;  and  that  in  the  sense  that  out  of 
this,  which  is  brass,  we  make  this  other,  which 
is  a  sphere.)  If,  then,  we  also  make  the  sub¬ 
stratum  itself,  clearly  we  shall  make  it  in  the 
same  way,  and  the  processes  of  making  will 
[5]  regress  to  infinity.  Obviously  then  the  form 
also,  or  whatever  we  ought  to  call  the  shape 
present  in  the  sensible  thing,  is  not  produced, 
nor  is  there  any  production  of  it,  nor  is  the  es¬ 
sence  produced;  for  this  is  that  which  is  made 
to  be  in  something  else  either  by  art  or  by  na¬ 
ture  or  by  some  faculty.  But  that  there  is  a 
brazen  sphere ,  this  we  make.  For  we  make  it 
out  of  brass  and  the  sphere;  we  bring  the  form 
[70]  into  this  particular  matter,  and  the  result 
is  a  brazen  sphere.  But  if  the  essence  of  sphere 
in  general  is  to  be  produced,  something  must 
be  produced  out  of  something.  For  the  product 
will  always  have  to  be  divisible,  and  one  part 
must  be  this  and  another  that;  I  mean  the  one 
must  be  matter  and  the  other  form.  If,  then,  a 
sphere  is  ‘the  figure  whose  circumference  is  at 
all  points  equidistant  from  the  centre’,  part  of 
[75]  this  will  be  the  medium  in  which  the 
thing  made  will  be,  and  part  will  be  in  that 
medium,  and  the  whole  will  be  the  thing  pro¬ 
duced,  which  corresponds  to  the  brazen  sphere. 
It  is  obvious,  then,  from  what  has  been  said, 
that  that  which  is  spoken  of  as  form  or  sub¬ 
stance  is  not  produced,  but  the  concrete  thing 
which  gets  its  name  from  this  is  produced,  and 
that  in  everything  which  is  generated  matter 
is  present,  and  one  part  of  the  thing  is  matter 
and  the  other  form. 

Is  there,  then,  a  sphere  apart  from  the  indi- 
[20]  vidual  spheres  or  a  house  apart  from  the 
bricks?  Rather  we  may  say  that  no  ‘this’  would 
ever  have  been  coming  to  be,  if  this  had  been 
so,  but  that  the  ‘form’  means  the  ‘such’,  and  is 
not  a  ‘this’ — a  definite  thing;  but  the  artist 
makes,  or  the  father  begets,  a  ‘such’  out  of  a 
‘this’;  and  when  it  has  been  begotten,  it  is  a 
‘this  such’.  And  the  whole  ‘this’,  Callias  or  Soc¬ 
rates,  is  analogous  to  ‘this  brazen  sphere’,  but 
[25]  man  and  animal  to  ‘brazen  sphere’  in  gen- 
2a  25. 


1034b  BOOK  VII,  CHAPTERS  7-9  557 


eral.  Obviously,  then,  the  cause  which  consists 
of  the  Forms  (taken  in  the  sense  in  which  some 
maintain  the  existence  of  the  Forms,  i.e.  if 
they  are  something  apart  from  the  individuals) 
is  useless,  at  least  with  regard  to  comings-to-be 
and  to  substances;  and  the  Forms  need  not,  for 
this  reason  at  least,  be  self-subsistent  sub¬ 
stances.  In  some  cases  indeed  it  is  even  obvious 
[jo]  that  the  begetter  is  of  the  same  kind  as  the 
begotten  (not,  however,  the  same  nor  one  in 
number,  but  in  form),  i.e.  in  the  case  of  nat¬ 
ural  products  (for  man  begets  man),  unless 
something  happens  contrary  to  nature,  e.g.  the 
production  of  a  mule  by  a  horse.  (And  even 
these  cases  are  similar;  for  that  which  would  be 
found  to  be  common  to  horse  and  ass,  the 
genus  next  above  them,  has  not  received  a 
1034a  name,  but  it  would  doubtless  be  both 
in  fact  something  like  a  mule.)  Obviously, 
therefore,  it  is  quite  unnecessary  to  set  up  a 
Form  as  a  pattern  (for  we  should  have  looked 
for  Forms  in  these  cases  if  in  any;  for  these 
are  substances  if  anything  is  so);  the  begetter 
is  adequate  to  the  making  of  the  product  and 
[5]  to  the  causing  of  the  form  in  the  matter. 
And  when  we  have  the  whole,  such  and  such  a 
form  in  this  flesh  and  in  these  bones,  this  is 
Callias  or  Socrates;  and  they. are  different  in 
virtue  of  their  matter  (for  that  is  different), 
but  the  same  in  form;  for  their  form  is  indi¬ 
visible. 

9 

The  question  might  be  raised,  why  some  things 
are  produced  spontaneously  as  well  as  by  art, 
[/o]  e.g.  health,  while  others  are  not,  e.g.  a 
house.  The  reason  is  that  in  some  cases  the 
matter  which  governs  the  production  in  the 
making  and  producing  of  any  work  of  art,  and 
in  which  a  part  of  the  product  is  present, — 
some  matter  is  such  as  to  be  set  in  motion  by 
itself  and  some  is  not  of  this  nature,  and  of  the 
former  kind  some  can  move  itself  in  the  par¬ 
ticular  way  required,  while  other  matter  is  in¬ 
capable  of  this;  for  many  things  can  be  set  in 
motion  by  themselves  but  not  in  some  par- 
[75]  ticular  way,  e.g.  that  of  dancing.  The 
things,  then,  whose  matter  is  of  this  sort,  e.g. 
stones,  cannot  be  moved  in  the  particular  way 
required,  except  by  something  else,  but  in  an¬ 
other  way  they  can  move  themselves — and  so 
it  is  with  fire.  Therefore  some  things  will  not 
exist  apart  from  some  one  who  has  the  art  of 
making  them,  while  others  will;  for  motion 
will  be  started  by  these  things  which  have  not 
[20]  the  art  but  can  themselves  be  moved  by 


other  things  which  have  not  the  art  or  with  a 
motion  starting  from  a  part  of  the  product. 

And  it  is  clear  also  from  what  has  been  said 
that  in  a  sense  every  product  of  art  is  produced 
from  a  thing  which  shares  its  name  (as  nat¬ 
ural  products  are  produced),  or  from  a  part  of 
itself  which  shares  its  name  (e.g.  the  house  is 
produced  from  a  house,  qua  produced  by  rea¬ 
son;  for  the  art  of  building  is  the  form  of  the 
house),  or  from  something  which  contains  a 

fart  of  it, — if  we  exclude  things  produced  by 
25]  accident;  for  the  cause  of  the  thing’s  pro¬ 
ducing  the  product  directly  per  se  is  a  part  of 
the  product.  The  heat  in  the  movement  caused 
heat  in  the  body,  and  this  is  either  health,  or  a 
part  of  health,  or  is  followed  by  a  part  of  health 
or  by  health  itself.  And  so  it  is  said  to  cause 
health,  because  it  causes  that  to  which  health 
attaches  as  a  consequence. 

[jo]  Therefore,  as  in  syllogisms,  substance  is 
the  starting-point  of  everything.  It  is  from 
‘what  a  thing  is’  that  syllogisms  start;  and 
from  it  also  we  now  find  processes  of  produc¬ 
tion  to  start. 

Things  which  are  formed  by  nature  are  in 
the  same  case  as  these  products  of  art.  For  the 
seed  is  productive  in  the  same  way  as  the  things 
that  work  by  art;  for  it  has  the  form  potentially, 
and  that  from  which  the  seed  comes  has  in  a 
1034b  sense  the  same  name  as  the  offspring — 
only  in  a  sense,  for  we  must  not  expect  parent 
and  offspring  always  to  have  exactly  the  same 
name,  as  in  the  production  of  ‘human  being’ 
from  ‘human  being’;  for  a  ‘woman’  also  can  be 
produced  by  a  ‘man’ — unless  the  offspring  be 
an  imperfect  form;  which  is  the  reason  why 
the  parent  of  a  mule  is  not  a  mule.  The  natural 
things  which  (like  the  artificial  objects  previ- 
[5]  ously  considered1)  can  be  produced  spon¬ 
taneously  are  those  whose  matter  can  be  moved 
even  by  itself  in  the  way  in  which  the  seed 
usually  moves  it;  those  things  which  have  not 
such  matter  cannot  be  produced  except  from 
the  parent  animals  themselves. 

But  not  only  regarding  substance  does  our 
argument  prove  that  its  form  does  not  come  to 
be,  but  the  argument  applies  to  all  the  primary 
classes  alike,  i.e.  quantity,  quality,  and  the 
[/o]  other  categories.  For  as  the  brazen  sphere 
comes  to  be,  but  not  the  sphere  nor  the  brass, 
and  so  too  in  the  case  of  brass  itself,  if  it  comes 
to  be,  it  is  its  concrete  unity  that  comes  to  be 
(for  the  matter  and  the  form  must  always  ex¬ 
ist  before),  so  is  it  both  in  the  case  of  sub¬ 
stance  and  in  that  of  quality  and  quantity  and 
1  Cf.  a9-32. 


558  METAPHYSICS  1035b 


the  other  categories  likewise;  for  the  quality 
does  not  come  to  be,  but  the  wood  of  that  qual- 
[75]  ity,  and  the  quantity  does  not  come  to  be, 
but  the  wood  or  the  animal  of  that  size.  But 
we  may  learn  from  these  instances  a  pecu¬ 
liarity  of  substance,  that  there  must  exist  before¬ 
hand  in  complete  reality  another  substance 
which  produces  it,  e.g.  an  animal  if  an  animal 
is  produced;  but  it  is  not  necessary  that  a  qual¬ 
ity  or  quantity  should  pre-exist  otherwise  than 
potentially. 

10 

[20]  Since  a  definition  is  a  formula,  and  every 
formula  has  parts,  and  as  the  formula  is  to  the 
thing,  so  is  the  part  of  the  formula  to  the  part 
of  the  thing,  the  question  is  already  being 
asked  whether  the  formula  of  the  parts  must 
be  present  in  the  formula  of  the  whole  or  not. 
For  in  some  cases  the  formulae  of  the  parts 
are  seen  to  be  present,  and  in  some  not.  The 
formula  of  the  circle  does  not  include  that  of 
[25]  the  segments,  but  that  of  the  syllable  in¬ 
cludes  that  of  the  letters;  yet  the  circle  is  di¬ 
vided  into  segments  as  the  syllable  is  into  let¬ 
ters. — And  further  if  the  parts  are  prior  to  the 
whole,  and  the  acute  angle  is  a  part  of  the  right 
angle  and  the  finger  a  part  of  the  animal,  the 
acute  angle  will  be  prior  to  the  right  angle  and 
[jo]  the  finger  to  the  man.  But  the  latter  are 
thought  to  be  prior;  for  in  formula  the  parts 
are  explained  by  reference  to  them,  and  in  re¬ 
spect  also  of  the  power  of  existing  apart  from 
each  other  the  wholes  are  prior  to  the  parts. 

Perhaps  we  should  rather  say  that  ‘part’  is 
used  in  several  senses.  One  of  these  is  ‘that 
which  measures  another  thing  in  respect  of 
quantity’.  But  let  this  sense  be  set  aside;  let  us 
inquire  about  the  parts  of  which  substance 
1035a  consists.  If  then  matter  is  one  thing, 
form  another,  the  compound  of  these  a  third, 
and  both  the  matter  and  the  form  and  the  com¬ 
pound  are  substance,  even  the  matter  is  in  a 
sense  called  part  of  a  thing,  while  in  a  sense 
it  is  not,  but  only  the  elements  of  which  the 
formula  of  the  form  consists.  E.g.  of  concavity 
flesh  (for  this  is  the  matter  in  which  it  is  pro- 
[5]  duced)  is  not  a  part,  but  of  snubness  it  is  a 
part;  and  the  bronze  is  a  part  of  the  concrete 
statue,  but  not  of  the  statue  when  this  is  spoken 
of  in  the  sense  of  the  form.  (For  the  form,  or 
the  thing  as  having  form,  should  be  said  to  be 
the  thing,  but  the  material  element  by  itself 
must  never  be  said  to  be  so.)  And  so  the  for¬ 
mula  of  the  circle  does  not  include  that  of  the 
[/o]  segments,  but  the  formula  of  the  syllable 


includes  that  of  the  letters;  for  the  letters  are 
parts  of  the  formula  of  the  form,  and  not  mat¬ 
ter,  but  the  segments  are  parts  in  the  sense  of 
matter  on  which  the  form  supervenes;  yet 
they  are  nearer  the  form  than  the  bronze  is 
when  roundness  is  produced  in  bronze.  But  in 
a  sense  not  even  every  kind  of  letter  will  be 
resent  in  the  formula  of  the  syllable,  e.g.  par- 
75]  ticular  waxen  letters  or  the  letters  as  move¬ 
ments  in  the  air;  for  in  these  also  we  have  al¬ 
ready  something  that  is  part  of  the  syllable 
only  in  the  sense  that  it  is  its  perceptible  mat¬ 
ter.  For  even  if  the  line  when  divided  passes 
away  into  its  halves,  or  the  man  into  bones  and 
muscles  and  flesh,  it  does  not  follow  that  they 
are  composed  of  these  as  parts  of  their  essence, 
[20]  but  rather  as  matter;  and  these  are  parts 
of  the  concrete  thing,  but  not  also  of  the  form, 
i.e.  of  that  to  which  the  formula  refers;  where¬ 
fore  also  they  are  not  present  in  the  formulae. 
In  one  kind  of  formula,  then,  the  formula  of 
such  parts  will  be  present,  but  in  another  it 
must  not  be  present,  where  the  formula  does 
not  refer  to  the  concrete  object.  For  it  is  for 
this  reason  that  some  things  have  as  their  con¬ 
stituent  principles  parts  into  which  they  pass 
away,  while  some  have  not.  Those  things 
[25]  which  are  the  form  and  the  matter  taken 
together,  e.g.  the  snub,  or  the  bronze  circle, 
pass  away  into  these  materials,  and  the  matter 
is  a  part  of  them;  but  those  things  which  do 
not  involve  matter  but  are  without  matter,  and 
whose  formulae  are  formulae  of  the  form  only, 
do  not  pass  away, — either  not  at  all  or  at  any 
[jo]  rate  not  in  this  way.  Therefore  these  ma¬ 
terials  are  principles  and  parts  of  the  concrete 
things,  while  of  the  form  they  are  neither  parts 
nor  principles.  And  therefore  the  clay  statue 
is  resolved  into  clay  and  the  ball  into  bronze 
and  Callias  into  flesh  and  bones,  and  again  the 
circle  into  its  segments;  for  there  is  a  sense  of 
‘circle’  in  which  it  involves  matter.  For  ‘circle’ 
1035b  is  used  ambiguously,  meaning  both  the 
circle,  unqualified,  and  the  individual  circle, 
because  there  is  no  name  peculiar  to  the  indi¬ 
viduals. 

The  truth  has  indeed  now  been  stated,  but 
still  let  us  state  it  yet  more  clearly,  taking  up 
the  question  again.  The  parts  of  the  formula, 
[5]  into  which  the  formula  is  divided,  are 
prior  to  it,  either  all  or  some  of  them.  The  for¬ 
mula  of  the  right  angle,  however,  does  not  in¬ 
clude  the  formula  of  the  acute,  but  the  formula 
of  the  acute  includes  that  of  the  right  angle; 
for  he  who  defines  the  acute  uses  the  right 
angle;  for  the  acute  is  ‘less  than  a  right  angle’. 


1036s 

The  circle  and  the  semicircle  also  are  in  a  like 
relation;  for  the  semicircle  is  defined  by  the 
[/o]  circle;  and  so  is  the  finger  by  the  whole 
body,  for  a  finger  is  ‘such  and  such  a  part  of  a 
man’.  Therefore  the  parts  which  are  of  the 
nature  of  matter,  and  into  which  as  its  matter 
a  thing  is  divided,  are  posterior;  but  those 
which  are  of  the  nature  of  parts  of  the  formula, 
and  of  the  substance  according  to  its  formula, 
are  prior,  either  all  or  some  of  them.  And  since 
the  soul  of  animals  (for  this  is  the  substance 
[75]  of  a  living  being)  is  their  substance  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  formula,  i.e.  the  form  and  the 
essence  of  a  body  of  a  certain  kind  (at  least  we 
shall  define  each  part,  if  we  define  it  well,  not 
without  reference  to  its  function,  and  this  can¬ 
not  belong  to  it  without  perception),  so  that 
the  parts  of  soul  are  prior,  either  all  or  some 
of  them,  to  the  concrete  ‘animal’,  and  so  too 
with  each  individual  animal;  and  the  body  and 
[20]  its  parts  are  posterior  to  this,  the  essential 
substance,  and  it  is  not  the  substance  but  the 
concrete  thing  that  is  divided  into  these  parts 
as  its  matter: — this  being  so,  to  the  concrete 
thing  these  are  in  a  sense  prior,  but  in  a  sense 
they  are  not.  For  they  cannot  even  exist  if  sev¬ 
ered  from  the  whole;  for  it  is  not  a  finger  in 
any  and  every  state  that  is  the  finger  of  a  liv- 
[25]  ing  thing,  but  a  dead  finger  is  a  finger 
only  in  name.  Some  parts  are  neither  prior  nor 
posterior  to  the  whole,  i.e.  those  which  are 
dominant  and  in  which  the  formula,  i.e.  the  es¬ 
sential  substance,  is  immediately  present,  e.g. 
perhaps  the  heart  or  the  brain;  for  it  does  not 
matter  in  the  least  which  of  the  two  has  this 
quality.  But  man  and  horse  and  terms  which 
are  thus  applied  to  individuals,  but  universally, 
are  not  substance  but  something  composed  of 
this  particular  formula  and  this  particular  mat- 
[50]  ter  treated  as  universal;  and  as  regards 
the  individual,  Socrates  already  includes  in 
him  ultimate  individual  matter;  and  similarly 
in  all  other  cases.  ‘A  part’  may  be  a  part  either 
of  the  form  (i.e.  of  the  essence),  or  of  the  com¬ 
pound  of  the  form  and  the  matter,  or  of  the 
matter  itself.  But  only  the  parts  of  the  form  are 
parts  of  the  formula,  and  the  formula  is  of  the 
1036a  universal;  for  ‘being  a  circle’  is  the  same 
as  the  circle,  and  ‘being  a  soul’  the  same  as  the 
soul.  But  when  we  come  to  the  concrete  thing, 
e.g.  this  circle,  i.e.  one  of  the  individual  circles, 
whether  perceptible  or  intelligible  (I  mean  by 
intelligible  circles  the  mathematical,  and  by 
[5]  perceptible  circles  those  of  bronze  and  of 
wood), — of  these  there  is  no  definition,  but 
they  are  known  by  the  aid  of  intuitive  think- 


559 

ing  or  of  perception;  and  when  they  pass  out  of 
this  complete  realization  it  is  not  clear  whether 
they  exist  or  not;  but  they  are  always  stated 
and  recognized  by  means  of  the  universal  for¬ 
mula.  But  matter  is  unknowable  in  itself.  And 
[/o]  some  matter  is  perceptible  and  some  intel¬ 
ligible,  perceptible  matter  being  for  instance 
bronze  and  wood  and  all  matter  that  is  change¬ 
able,  and  intelligible  matter  being  that  which 
is  present  in  perceptible  things  not  qua  per¬ 
ceptible,  i.e.  the  objects  of  mathematics. 

We  have  stated,  then,  how  matters  stand 
with  regard  to  whole  and  part,  and  their  prior¬ 
ity  and  posteriority.  But  when  any  one  asks 
whether  the  right  angle  and  the  circle  and  the 
[75]  animal  are  prior,  or  the  things  into  which 
they  are  divided  and  of  which  they  consist,  i.e. 
the  parts,  we  must  meet  the  inquiry  by  saying 
that  the  question  cannot  be  answered  simply. 
For  if  even  bare  soul  is  the  animal  or  the  living 
thing,  or  the  soul  of  each  individual  is  the  indi¬ 
vidual  itself,  and  ‘being  a  circle’  is  the  circle, 
and  ‘being  a  right  angle’  and  the  essence  of  the 
right  angle  is  the  right  angle,  then  the  whole 
in  one  sense  must  be  called  posterior  to  the 
part  in  one  sense,  i.e.  to  the  parts  included  in  the 
[20]  formula  and  to  the  parts  of  the  individual 
right  angle  (for  both  the  material  right  angle 
which  is  made  of  bronze,  and  that  which  is 
formed  by  individual  lines,  are  posterior  to 
their  parts);  while  the  immaterial  right  angle 
is  posterior  to  the  parts  included  in  the  for¬ 
mula,  but  prior  to  those  included  in  the  par¬ 
ticular  instance,  and  the  question  must  not  be 
answered  simply.  If,  however,  the  soul  is  some¬ 
thing  different  and  is  not  identical  with  the  ani¬ 
mal,  even  so  some  parts  must,  as  we  have  main- 
[25]  tained,  be  called  prior  and  others  must 
not. 

11 

Another  question  is  naturally  raised,  viz.  what 
sort  of  parts  belong  to  the  form  and  what 
sort  not  to  the  form,  but  to  the  concrete  thing. 
Yet  if  this  is  not  plain  it  is  not  possible  to  define 
any  thing;  for  definition  is  of  the  universal  and 
of  the  form.  If  then  it  is  not  evident  what  sort 
[50]  of  parts  are  of  the  nature  of  matter  and 
what  sort  are  not,  neither  will  the  formula  of 
the  thing  be  evident.  In  the  case  of  things 
which  are  found  to  occur  in  specifically  differ¬ 
ent  materials,  as  a  circle  may  exist  in  bronze  or 
stone  or  wood,  it  seems  plain  that  these,  the 
bronze  or  the  stone,  are  no  part  of  the  essence 
of  the  circle,  since  it  is  found  apart  from  them. 
[35]  Of  things  which  are  not  seen  to  exist 


BOOK  VII,  CHAPTERS  9-11 


560  METAPHYSICS  1037* 


1036b  apart,  there  is  no  reason  why  the  same 
may  not  be  true,  just  as  if  all  circles  that  had 
ever  been  seen  were  of  bronze;  for  none  the 
less  the  bronze  would  be  no  part  of  the  form; 
but  it  is  hard  to  eliminate  it  in  thought.  E.g. 
the  form  of  man  is  always  found  in  flesh  and 
bones  and  parts  of  this  kind;  are  these  then 
[5]  also  parts  of  the  form  and  the  formula? 
No,  they  are  matter;  but  because  man  is  not 
found  also  in  other  matters  we  are  unable  to 
perform  the  abstraction. 

Since  this  is  thought  to  be  possible,  but  it  is 
not  clear  when  it  is  the  case,  some  people  al¬ 
ready  raise  the  question  even  in  the  case  of  the 
circle  and  the  triangle,  thinking  that  it  is  not 
right  to  define  these  by  reference  to  lines  and  to 
[70]  the  continuous,  but  that  all  these  are  to 
the  circle  or  the  triangle  as  flesh  and  bones  are 
to  man,  and  bronze  or  stone  to  the  statue;  and 
they  reduce  all  things  to  numbers,  and  they  say 
the  formula  of  ‘line’  is  that  of  ‘two’.  And  of 
those  who  assert  the  Ideas  some  make  ‘two’  the 
[75]  line-itself,  and  others  make  it  the  Form  of 
the  line;  for  in  some  cases  they  say  the  Form 
and  that  of  which  it  is  the  Form  are  the  same, 
e.g.  ‘two’  and  the  Form  of  two;  but  in  the  case 
of  ‘line’  they  say  this  is  no  longer  so. 

It  follows  then  that  there  is  one  Form  for 
many  things  whose  form  is  evidently  different 
(a  conclusion  which  confronted  the  Pythago¬ 
reans  also) ;  and  it  is  possible  to  make  one  thing 
the  Form-itself  of  all,  and  to  hold  that  the  oth- 
[20]  ers  are  not  Forms;  but  thus  all  things  will 
be  one. 

We  have  pointed  out,  then,  that  the  question 
of  definitions  contains  some  difficulty,  and  why 
this  is  so.  And  so  to  reduce  all  things  thus  to 
Forms  and  to  eliminate  the  matter  is  useless 
labour;  for  some  things  surely  are  a  particular 
form  in  a  particular  matter,  or  particular 
things  in  a  particular  state.  And  the  compari¬ 
son  which  Socrates  the  younger  used  to  make 
[25]  in  the  case  of  ‘animal’  is  not  sound;  for  it 
leads  away  from  the  truth,  and  makes  one  sup¬ 
pose  that  man  can  possibly  exist  without  his 
parts,  as  the  circle  can  without  the  bronze.  But 
the  case  is  not  similar;  for  an  animal  is  some¬ 
thing  perceptible,  and  it  is  not  possible  to  de¬ 
fine  it  without  reference  to  movement — nor, 
therefore,  without  reference  to  the  parts’  being 
[jo]  in  a  certain  state.  For  it  is  not  a  hand  in 
any  and  every  state  that  is  a  part  of  man,  but 
only  when  it  can  fulfil  its  work,  and  therefore 
only  when  it  is  alive;  if  it  is  not  alive  it  is  not  a 
part. 

Regarding  the  objects  of  mathematics,  why 


are  the  formulae  of  the  parts  not  parts  of  the 
formulae  of  the  wholes;  e.g.  why  are  not  the 
semicircles  included  in  the  formula  of  the  cir¬ 
cle?  It  cannot  be  said,  ‘because  these  parts  are 

ferceptible  things’;  for  they  are  not.  But  per- 
J5]  haps  this  makes  no  difference;  for  even 
1037a  some  things  which  are  not  perceptible 
must  have  matter;  indeed  there  is  some  matter 
in  everything  which  is  not  an  essence  and  a 
bare  form  but  a  ‘this’.  The  semicircles,  then, 
will  not  be  parts  of  the  universal  circle,  but  will 
be  parts  of  the  individual  circles,  as  has  been 
said  before1;  for  while  one  kind  of  matter  is 
perceptible,  there  is  another  which  is  intelligi¬ 
ble. 

[5]  it  is  clear  also  that  the  soul  is  the  primary 
substance  and  the  body  is  matter,  and  man  or 
animal  is  the  compound  of  both  taken  univer¬ 
sally;  and  ‘Socrates’  or  ‘Coriscus’,  if  even  the 
soul  of  Socrates  may  be  called  Socrates,  has  two 
meanings  (for  some  mean  by  such  a  term  the 
soul,  and  others  mean  the  concrete  thing),  but 
if  ‘Socrates’  or  ‘Coriscus’  means  simply  this 
particular  soul  and  this  particular  body,  the  in¬ 
dividual  is  analogous  to  the  universal  in  its 
composition. 

[/o]  Whether  there  is,  apart  from  the  matter  of 
such  substances,  another  kind  of  matter,  and 
one  should  look  for  some  substance  other  than 
these,  e.g.  numbers  or  something  of  the  sort, 
must  be  considered  later.2  For  it  is  for  the  sake 
of  this  that  we  are  trying  to  determine  the  na¬ 
ture  of  perceptible  substances  as  well,  since  in 
a  sense  the  inquiry  about  perceptible  substances 
[75]  is  the  work  of  physics,  i.e.  of  second  phi¬ 
losophy;  for  the  physicist  must  come  to  know 
not  only  about  the  matter,  but  also  about  the 
substance  expressed  in  the  formula,  and  even 
more  than  about  the  other.  And  in  the  case  of 
definitions,  how  the  elements  in  the  formula 
are  parts  of  the  definition,  and  why  the  defini¬ 
tion  is  one  formula  (for  clearly  the  thing  is  one, 
but  in  virtue  of  what  is  the  thing  one,  although 
[20]  it  has  parts?), — this  must  be  considered 
later.3 

What  the  essence  is  and  in  what  sense  it  is 
independent,  has  been  stated  universally  in  a 
way  which  is  true  of  every  case,  and  also  why 
the  formula  of  the  essence  of  some  things  con¬ 
tains  the  parts  of  the  thing  defined,  while  that 
of  others  does  not.  And  we  have  stated  that  in 
[25]  the  formula  of  the  substance  the  material 
parts  will  not  be  present  (for  they  are  not  even 
parts  of  the  substance  in  that  sense,  but  of  the 

1  1035a  3°'b  3-  2  Cf.  xin,  xiv. 

3  Cf.  vn.  12,  viii.  6. 


1038*  BOOK  VII,  CHAPTERS  11-12  561 


concrete  substance;  but  of  this  there  is  in  a 
sense  a  formula,  and  in  a  sense  there  is  not;  for 
there  is  no  formula  of  it  with  its  matter,  for 
this  is  indefinite,  but  there  is  a  formula  of  it 
with  reference  to  its  primary  substance — e.g.  in 
the  case  of  man  the  formula  of  the  soul — ,  for 
the  substance  is  the  indwelling  form,  from 
which  and  the  matter  the  so-called  concrete 
substance  is  derived;  e.g.  concavity  is  a  form  of 
[30]  this  sort,  for  from  this  and  the  nose  arise 
‘snub  nose’  and  ‘snubness’);  but  in  the  concrete 
substance,  e.g.  a  snub  nose  or  Callias,  the  mat¬ 
ter  also  will  be  present.  And  we  have  stated 
that  the  essence  and  the  thing  itself  are  in  some 
103 7b  cases  the  same;  i.e.  in  the  case  of  pri¬ 
mary  substances,  e.g.  curvature  and  the  essence 
of  curvature,  if  this  is  primary.  (By  a  ‘primary’ 
substance  I  mean  one  which  does  not  imply  the 
presence  of  something  in  something  else,  i.e. 
in  something  that  underlies  it  which  acts  as 
matter.)  But  things  which  are  of  the  nature  of 
matter,  or  of  wholes  that  include  matter,  are 
not  the  same  as  their  essences,  nor  are  acciden- 
[5]  tal  unities  like  that  of  ‘Socrates’  and  ‘musi¬ 
cal’;  for  these  are  the  same  only  by  accident. 

12 

Now  let  us  treat  first  of  definition,  in  so  far  as 
we  have  not  treated  of  it  in  the  Analytics l;  for 
the  problem  stated  in  them  is  useful  for  our  in¬ 
quiries  concerning  substance.  I  mean  this  prob- 
[/o]  lem: — wherein  can  consist  the  unity  of 
that,  the  formula  of  which  we  call  a  definition, 
as  for  instance,  in  the  case  of  man,  ‘two-footed 
animal’;  for  let  this  be  the  formula  of  man. 
Why,  then,  is  this  one,  and  not  many,  viz. 
‘animal’  and  ‘two-footed’?  For  in  the  case  of 
[75]  ‘man’  and  ‘pale’  there  is  a  plurality  when 
one  term  does  not  belong  to  the  other,  but  a 
unity  when  it  does  belong  and  the  subject,  man, 
has  a  certain  attribute;  for  then  a  unity  is  pro¬ 
duced  and  we  have  ‘the  pale  man’.  In  the  pres¬ 
ent  case,  on  the  other  hand,  one  does  not  share 
in  the  other;  the  genus  is  not  thought  to  share 
in  its  differentiae  (for  then  the  same  thing 
would  share  in  contraries;  for  the  differentiae 
[20]  by  which  the  genus  is  divided  are  con¬ 
trary).  And  even  if  the  genus  does  share  in 
them,  the  same  argument  applies,  since  the  dif¬ 
ferentiae  present  in  man  are  many,  e.g.  en¬ 
dowed  with  feet,  two-footed,  featherless.  Why 
are  these  one  and  not  many?  Not  because  they 
are  present  in  one  thing;  for  on  this  principle 
a  unity  can  be  made  out  of  all  the  attributes  of 
a  thing.  But  surely  all  the  attributes  in  the  defi- 
1  Cf.  Posterior  Analytics,  n.  3-10,  13. 


[25]  nition  must  be  one;  for  the  definition  is  a 
single  formula  and  a  formula  of  substance,  so 
that  it  must  be  a  formula  of  some  one  thing; 
for  substance  means  a  ‘one’  and  a  ‘this’,  as  we 
maintain. 

We  must  first  inquire  about  definitions 
reached  by  the  method  of  divisions.  There  is 
nothing  in  the  definition  except  the  first-named 
[30]  genus  and  the  differentiae.  The  other  gen¬ 
era  are  the  first  genus  and  along  with  this  the 
differentiae  that  are  taken  with  it,  e.g.  the  first 
may  be  ‘animal’,  the  next  ‘animal  which  is  two- 
footed’,  and  again  ‘animal  which  is  two-footed 
and  featherless’,  and  similarly  if  the  definition 
1038*  includes  more  terms.  And  in  general  it 
makes  no  difference  whether  it  includes  many 
or  few  terms, — nor,  therefore,  whether  it  in¬ 
cludes  few  or  simply  two;  and  of  the  two  the 
one  is  differentia  and  the  other  genus;  e.g.  in 
‘two-footed  animal’  ‘animal’  is  genus,  and  the 
other  is  differentia. 

[5]  If  then  the  genus  absolutely  does  not  exist 
apart  from  the  species-of-a-genus,  or  if  it  exists 
but  exists  as  matter  (for  the  voice  is  genus  and 
matter,  but  its  differentiae  make  the  species, 
i.e.  the  letters,  out  of  it),  clearly  the  definition 
is  the  formula  which  comprises  the  differentiae. 

But  it  is  also  necessary  that  the  division  be 
by  the  differentia  of  the  differentia;  e.g.  ‘en¬ 
dowed  with  feet’  is  a  differentia  of  ‘animal’; 
[/o]  again  the  differentia  of  ‘animal  endowed 
with  feet’  must  be  of  it  qua  endowed  with  feet. 
Therefore  we  must  not  say,  if  we  are  to  speak 
rightly,  that  of  that  which  is  endowed  with  feet 
one  part  has  feathers  and  one  is  featherless  (if 
we  do  this  we  do  it  through  incapacity);  we 
must  divide  it  only  into  cloven-footed  and  not- 
cloven;  for  these  are  differentiae  in  the  foot; 
cloven-footedness  is  a  form  of  footedness.  And 
[75]  the  process  wants  always  to  go  on  so  till 
it  reaches  the  species  that  contain  no  differ¬ 
ences.  And  then  there  will  be  as  many  kinds  of 
foot  as  there  are  differentiae,  and  the  kinds  of 
animals  endowed  with  feet  will  be  equal  in 
number  to  the  differentiae.  If  then  this  is  so, 
clearly  the  last  differentia  will  be  the  substance 
[20]  of  the  thing  and  its  definition,  since  it  is 
not  right  to  state  the  same  things  more  than 
once  in  our  definitions;  for  it  is  superfluous. 
And  this  does  happen;  for  when  we  say  ‘ani¬ 
mal  endowed  with  feet  and  two-footed’  we 
have  said  nothing  other  than  ‘animal  having 
feet,  having  two  feet’;  and  if  we  divide  this  by 
the  proper  division,  we  shall  be  saying  the  same 
thing  more  than  once — as  many  times  as  there 
are  differentiae. 


562  METAPHYSICS  1039* 


[25]  If  then  a  differentia  of  a  differentia  be 
taken  at  each  step,  one  differentia — the  last — 
will  be  the  form  and  the  substance;  but  if  we  di¬ 
vide  according  to  accidental  qualities,  e.g.  if 
we  were  to  divide  that  which  is  endowed  with 
feet  into  the  white  and  the  black,  there  will  be 
as  many  differentiae  as  there  are  cuts.  There¬ 
fore  it  is  plain  that  the  definition  is  the  formula 
which  contains  the  differentiae,  or,  according  to 
[jo]  the  right  method,  the  last  of  these.  This 
would  be  evident,  if  we  were  to  change  the  or¬ 
der  of  such  definitions,  e.g.  of  that  of  man,  say¬ 
ing  ‘animal  which  is  two-footed  and  endowed 
with  feet';  for  ‘endowed  with  feet’  is  superflu¬ 
ous  when  ‘two-footed'  has  been  said.  But  there 
is  no  order  in  the  substance;  for  how  are  we  to 
think  the  one  element  posterior  and  the  other 
prior?  Regarding  the  definitions,  then,  which 
are  reached  by  the  method  of  divisions,  let  this 
[35]  suffice  as  our  first  attempt  at  stating  their 
nature. 

13 

1038b  Let  us  return  to  the  subject  of  our  in¬ 
quiry,  which  is  substance.  As  the  substratum 
and  the  essence  and  the  compound  of  these  are 
called  substance,  so  also  is  the  universal.  About 
two  of  these  we  have  spoken;  both  about  the 
essence1  and  about  the  substratum,2  of  which 
[5]  we  have  said3  that  it  underlies  in  two 
senses,  either  being  a  ‘this' — which  is  the  way 
in  which  an  animal  underlies  its  attributes — 
or  as  the  matter  underlies  the  complete  reality. 
The  universal  also  is  thought  by  some  to  be  in 
the  fullest  sense  a  cause,  and  a  principle;  there¬ 
fore  let  us  attack  the  discussion  of  this  point 
also.  For  it  seems  impossible  that  any  universal 
term  should  be  the  name  of  a  substance.  For 
firstly  the  substance  of  each  thing  is  that  which 
[/o]  is  peculiar  to  it,  which  does  not  belong  to 
anything  else;  but  the  universal  is  common, 
since  that  is  called  universal  which  is  such  as 
to  belong  to  more  than  one  thing.  Of  which  in¬ 
dividual  then  will  this  be  the  substance?  Either 
of  all  or  of  none;  but  it  cannot  be  the  substance 
of  all.  And  if  it  is  to  be  the  substance  of  one, 
this  one  will  be  the  others  also;  for  things 
whose  substance  is  one  and  whose  essence  is 
one  are  themselves  also  one. 

[75]  Further,  substance  means  that  which  is 
not  predicable  of  a  subject,  but  the  universal  is 
predicable  of  some  subject  always. 

But  perhaps  the  universal,  while  it  cannot 
be  substance  in  the  way  in  which  the  essence  is 

1  Chapters  4-6,  10-12.  2  Chapter  3. 

3  io29a  2-3,  23-4. 


so,  can  be  present  in  this;  e.g.  ‘animal’  can  be 
present  in  ‘man’  and  ‘horse’.  Then  clearly  it  is 
a  formula  of  the  essence.  And  it  makes  no  dif¬ 
ference  even  if  it  is  not  a  formula  of  every¬ 
thing  that  is  in  the  substance;  for  none  the  less 
[20]  the  universal  will  be  the  substance  of 
something,  as  ‘man’  is  the  substance  of  the  in¬ 
dividual  man  in  whom  it  is  present,  so  that  the 
same  result  will  follow  once  more;  for  the  uni¬ 
versal,  e.g.  ‘animal’,  will  be  the  substance  of 
that  in  which  it  is  present  as  something  pecu¬ 
liar  to  it.  And  further  it  is  impossible  and  ab¬ 
surd  that  the  ‘this',  i.e.  the  substance,  if  it  con- 
[25]  sists  of  parts,  should  not  consist  of  sub¬ 
stances  nor  of  what  is  a  ‘this’,  but  of  quality; 
for  that  which  is  not  substance,  i.e.  the  quality, 
will  then  be  prior  to  substance  and  to  the  ‘this'. 
Which  is  impossible;  for  neither  in  formula  nor 
in  time  nor  in  coming  to  be  can  the  modifica¬ 
tions  be  prior  to  the  substance;  for  then  they 
will  also  be  separable  from  it.  Further,  Socra¬ 
tes  will  contain  a  substance  present  in  a  sub¬ 
stance,  so  that  this  will  be  the  substance  of  two 
[30]  things.  And  in  general  it  follows,  if  man 
and  such  things  are  substance,  that  none  of  the 
elements  in  their  formulae  is  the  substance  of 
anything,  nor  does  it  exist  apart  from  the  spe¬ 
cies  or  in  anything  else;  I  mean,  for  instance, 
that  no  ‘animal’  exists  apart  from  the  particu¬ 
lar  kinds  of  animal,  nor  does  any  other  of  the 
elements  present  in  formulae  exist  apart. 

If,  then,  we  view  the  matter  from  these 
standpoints,  it  is  plain  that  no  universal  attri- 
[33]  bute  is  a  substance,  and  this  is  plain  also 
from  the  fact  that  no  common  predicate  indi- 
1039*  cates  a  ‘this’,  but  rather  a  ‘such’.  If  not, 
many  difficulties  follow  and  especially  the 
‘third  man’. 

The  conclusion  is  evident  also  from  the  fol¬ 
lowing  consideration.  A  substance  cannot  con¬ 
sist  of  substances  present  in  it  in  complete  real¬ 
ity;  for  things  that  are  thus  in  complete  reality 
[5]  two  are  never  in  complete  reality  one, 
though  if  they  are  potentially  two,  they  can  be 
one  (e.g.  the  double  line  consists  of  two  halves 
— potentially;  for  the  complete  realization  of 
the  halves  divides  them  from  one  another); 
therefore  if  the  substance  is  one,  it  will  not  con¬ 
sist  of  substances  present  in  it  and  present  in 
this  way,  which  Democritus  describes  rightly; 
he  says  one  thing  cannot  be  made  out  of  two 
[/o]  nor  two  out  of  one;  for  he  identifies  sub¬ 
stances  with  his  indivisible  magnitudes.  It  is 
clear  therefore  that  the  same  will  hold  good  of 
number,  if  number  is  a  synthesis  of  units,  as  is 
said  by  some;  for  two  is  either  not  one,  or  there 


1040*  BOOK  VII,  CHAPTERS  12-15  563 


is  no  unit  present  in  it  in  complete  reality. 
[75]  But  our  result  involves  a  difficulty.  If  no 
substance  can  consist  of  universals  because  a 
universal  indicates  a  ‘such’,  not  a  ‘this’,  and  if 
no  substance  can  be  composed  of  substances  ex¬ 
isting  in  complete  reality,  every  substance 
would  be  incomposite,  so  that  there  would  not 
even  be  a  formula  of  any  substance.  But  it  is 
thought  by  all  and  was  stated  long  ago1  that  it 
is  either  only,  or  primarily,  substance  that  can 
[20]  be  defined;  yet  now  it  seems  that  not  even 
substance  can.  There  cannot,  then,  be  a  defini¬ 
tion  of  anything;  or  in  a  sense  there  can  be,  and 
in  a  sense  there  cannot.  And  what  we  are  say¬ 
ing  will  be  plainer  from  what  follows.2 

x4 

It  is  clear  also  from  these  very  facts  what  con¬ 
sequence  confronts  those  who  say  the  Ideas  are 
substances  capable  of  separate  existence,  and  at 
[25]  the  same  time  make  the  Form  consist  of 
the  genus  and  the  differentiae.  For  if  the  Forms 
exist  and  ‘animal’  is  present  in  ‘man’  and 
‘horse’,  it  is  either  one  and  the  same  in  number, 
or  different.  (In  formula  it  is  clearly  one;  for 
he  who  states  the  formula  will  go  through  the 
[30]  same  formula  in  either  case.)  If  then  there 
is  a  ‘man-in-himself’  who  is  a  ‘this’  and  exists 
apart,  the  parts  also  of  which  he  consists,  e.g. 
‘animal’  and  ‘two-footed’,  must  indicate  ‘thises’, 
and  be  capable  of  separate  existence,  and  sub¬ 
stances;  therefore  ‘animal’,  as  well  as  ‘man’, 
must  be  of  this  sort. 

Now  (1)  if  the  ‘animal’  in  ‘the  horse’  and  in 
‘man’  is  one  and  the  same,  as  you  are  with 
yourself,  (a)  how  will  the  one  in  things  that 
1039b  exist  apart  be  one,  and  how  will  this 
‘animal’  escape  being  divided  even  from  itself? 

Further,  ( b )  if  it  is  to  share  in  ‘two-footed’ 
and  ‘many-footed’,  an  impossible  conclusion 
follows;  for  contrary  attributes  will  belong  at 
the  same  time  to  it  although  it  is  one  and  a 
‘this’.  If  it  is  not  to  share  in  them,  what  is  the 
relation  implied  when  one  says  the  animal  is 
two-footed  or  possessed  of  feet?  But  perhaps 
[5]  the  two  things  are  ‘put  together’  and  are  ‘in 
contact’,  or  are  ‘mixed’.  Yet  all  these  expres¬ 
sions  are  absurd. 

But  (2)  suppose  the  Form  to  be  different  in 
each  species.  Then  there  will  be  practically  an 
infinite  number  of  things  whose  substance  is 
‘animal’;  for  it  is  not  by  accident  that  ‘man’ 
has  ‘animal’  for  one  of  its  elements.  Further, 
many  things  will  be  ‘animal-itself’.  For  (i)  the 
‘animal’  in  each  species  will  be  the  substance  of 
JCf.  103  ia  1 1- 14.  2  Cf.  vii.  15,  vin.  6. 


[/o]  the  species;  for  it  is  after  nothing  else  that 
the  species  is  called;  if  it  were,  that  other  would 
be  an  element  in  ‘man’,  i.e.  would  be  the  genus 
of  man.  And  further,  (ii)  all  the  elements  of 
which  ‘man’  is  composed  will  be  Ideas.  None 
of  them,  then,  will  be  the  Idea  of  one  thing  and 
the  substance  of  another;  this  is  impossible. 
The  ‘animal’,  then,  present  in  each  species  of 
animals  will  be  animal-itself.  Further,  from 
what  is  this  ‘animal’  in  each  species  derived, 
and  how  will  it  be  derived  from  animal-itself? 
[75]  Or  how  can  this  ‘animal’,  whose  essence 
is  simply  animality,  exist  apart  from  animal- 
itself  ? 

Further,  (3)  in  the  case  of  sensible  things 
both  these  consequences  and  others  still  more 
absurd  follow.  If,  then,  these  consequences  are 
impossible,  clearly  there  are  not  Forms  of  sen¬ 
sible  things  in  the  sense  in  which  some  main¬ 
tain  their  existence. 

J5 

[20]  Since  substance  is  of  two  kinds,  the  con¬ 
crete  thing  and  the  formula  (I  mean  that  one 
kind  of  substance  is  the  formula  taken  with  the 
matter,  while  another  kind  is  the  formula  in  its 
generality),  substances  in  the  former  sense  are 
capable  of  destruction  (for  they  are  capable  also 
of  generation),  but  there  is  no  destruction  of 
the  formula  in  the  sense  that  it  is  ever  in  course 
of  being  destroyed  (for  there  is  no  generation 
of  it  either;  the  being  of  house  is  not  generated, 
[25]  but  only  the  being  of  this  house),  but 
without  generation  and  destruction  formulae 
are  and  are  not;  for  it  has  been  shown3  that  no 
one  begets  nor  makes  these.  For  this  reason, 
also,  there  is  neither  definition  of  nor  demon¬ 
stration  about  sensible  individual  substances, 
because  they  have  matter  whose  nature  is  such 
[30]  that  they  are  capable  both  of  being  and  of 
not  being;  for  which  reason  all  the  individual 
instances  of  them  are  destructible.  If  then 
demonstration  is  of  necessary  truths  and  defi¬ 
nition  is  a  scientific  process,  and  if,  just  as 
knowledge  cannot  be  sometimes  knowledge 
and  sometimes  ignorance,  but  the  state  which 
varies  thus  is  opinion,  so  too  demonstration 
and  definition  cannot  vary  thus,  but  it  is  opin¬ 
ion  that  deals  with  that  which  can  be  other- 
1040a  wise  than  as  it  is,  clearly  there  can 
neither  be  definition  of  nor  demonstration 
about  sensible  individuals.  For  perishing  things 
are  obscure  to  those  who  have  the  relevant 
knowledge,  when  they  have  passed  from  our 
perception;  and  though  the  formulae  remain 

8  Chapter  8. 


564  METAPHYSICS  1040b 


in  the  soul  unchanged,  there  will  no  longer  be 
[5]  either  definition  or  demonstration.  And  so 
when  one  of  the  definition-mongers  defines 
any  individual,  he  must  recognize  that  his  defi¬ 
nition  may  always  be  overthrown;  for  it  is  not 
possible  to  define  such  things. 

Nor  is  it  possible  to  define  any  Idea.  For  the 
Idea  is,  as  its  supporters  say,  an  individual, 
and  can  exist  apart;  and  the  formula  must  con- 
[/o]  sist  of  words;  and  he  who  defines  must 
not  invent  a  word  (for  it  would  be  unknown), 
but  the  established  words  are  common  to  all 
the  members  of  a  class;  these  then  must  apply 
to  something  besides  the  thing  defined;  e.g.  if 
one  were  defining  you,  he  would  say  ‘an  animal 
which  is  lean’  or  ‘pale’,  or  something  else  which 
will  apply  also  to  some  one  other  than  you.  If 
any  one  were  to  say  that  perhaps  all  the  attri¬ 
butes  taken  apart  may  belong  to  many  sub¬ 
jects,  but  together  they  belong  only  to  this  one, 
[75]  we  must  reply  first  that  they  belong  also 
to  both  the  elements;  e.g.  ‘two-footed  animal’ 
belongs  to  animal  and  to  the  two-footed.  (And 
in  the  case  of  eternal  entities  this  is  even  neces¬ 
sary,  since  the  elements  are  prior  to  and  parts 
of  the  compound;  nay  more,  they  can  also  exist 
apart,  if  ‘man’  can  exist  apart.  For  either 
[20]  neither  or  both  can.  If,  then,  neither  can, 
the  genus  will  not  exist  apart  from  the  various 
species;  but  if  it  does,  the  differentia  will  also.) 
Secondly,  we  must  reply  that  ‘animal’  and  ‘two- 
footed’  are  prior  in  being  to  ‘two-footed  ani¬ 
mal’;  and  things  which  are  prior  to  others  are 
not  destroyed  when  the  others  are. 

Again,  if  the  Ideas  consist  of  Ideas  (as  they 
must,  since  elements  are  simpler  than  the  com¬ 
pound),  it  will  be  further  necessary  that  the 
elements  also  of  which  the  Idea  consists,  e.g. 
‘animal’  and  ‘two-footed’,  should  be  predicated 
[25]  of  many  subjects.  If  not,  how  will  they 
come  to  be  known?  For  there  will  then  be  an 
Idea  which  cannot  be  predicated  of  more  sub¬ 
jects  than  one.  But  this  is  not  thought  possible 
— every  Idea  is  thought  to  be  capable  of  being 
shared. 

As  has  been  said,1  then,  the  impossibility  of 
defining  individuals  escapes  notice  in  the  case 
of  eternal  things,  especially  those  which  are 
unique,  like  the  sun  or  the  moon.  For  people 
[jo]  err  not  only  by  adding  attributes  whose 
removal  the  sun  would  survive,  e.g.  ‘going 
round  the  earth’  or  ‘night-hidden’  (for  from 
their  view  it  follows  that  if  it  stands  still  or  is 
visible,  it  will  no  longer  be  the  sun;  but  it  is 
strange  if  this  is  so;  for  ‘the  sun’  means  a  cer- 
1  Cf.  1. 17. 


tain  substance );  but  also  by  the  mention  of  at¬ 
tributes  which  can  belong  to  another  subject; 
e.g.  if  another  thing  with  the  stated  attributes 
comes  into  existence,  clearly  it  will  be  a  sun; 
1040b  the  formula  therefore  is  general.  But  the 
sun  was  supposed  to  be  an  individual,  like 
Cleon  or  Socrates.  After  all,  why  does  not  one 
of  the  supporters  of  the  Ideas  produce  a  defini¬ 
tion  of  an  Idea?  It  would  become  clear,  if  they 
tried,  that  what  has  now  been  said  is  true. 

16 

[5]  Evidently  even  of  the  things  that  are 
thought  to  be  substances,  most  are  only  po¬ 
tencies, — both  the  parts  of  animals  (for  none 
of  them  exists  separately;  and  when  they  are 
separated,  then  too  they  exist,  all  of  them, 
merely  as  matter)  and  earth  and  fire  and  air; 
for  none  of  them  is  a  unity,  but  as  it  were  a 
mere  heap,  till  they  are  worked  up  and  some 
[/o]  unity  is  made  out  of  them.  One  might 
most  readily  suppose  the  parts  of  living  things 
and  the  parts  of  the  soul  nearly  related  to 
them  to  turn  out  to  be  both,  i.e.  existent  in 
complete  reality  as  well  as  in  potency,  because 
they  have  sources  of  movement  in  something 
in  their  joints;  for  which  reason  some  animals 
live  when  divided.  Yet  all  the  parts  must  exist 
only  potentially,  when  they  are  one  and  con- 
[75]  tinuous  by  nature, — not  by  force  or  by 
growing  into  one,  for  such  a  phenomenon  is  an 
abnormality. 

Since  the  term  ‘unity’  is  used  like  the  term 
‘being’,  and  the  substance  of  that  which  is  one 
is  one,  and  things  whose  substance  is  numer¬ 
ically  one  are  numerically  one,  evidently  neither 
unity  nor  being  can  be  the  substance  of  things, 
just  as  being  an  element  or  a  principle  cannot 
[20]  be  the  substance,  but  we  ask  what,  then, 
the  principle  is,  that  we  may  reduce  the  thing 
to  something  more  knowable.  Now  of  these 
concepts  ‘being’  and  ‘unity’  are  more  substan¬ 
tial  than  ‘principle’  or  ‘element’  or  ‘cause’,  but 
not  even  the  former  are  substance,  since  in  gen¬ 
eral  nothing  that  is  common  is  substance;  for 
substance  does  not  belong  to  anything  but  to  it¬ 
self  and  to  that  which  has  it,  of  which  it  is  the 
[25]  substance.  Further,  that  which  is  one  can¬ 
not  be  in  many  places  at  the  same  time,  but 
that  which  is  common  is  present  in  many  places 
at  the  same  time;  so  that  clearly  no  universal 
exists  apart  from  its  individuals. 

But  those  who  say  the  Forms  exist,  in  one 
respect  are  right,  in  giving  the  Forms  separate 
existence,  if  they  are  substances;  but  in  another 
respect  they  are  not  right,  because  they  say  the 


1041b  BOOK  VII,  CHAPTERS  15-17  565 


[jo]  one  over  many  is  a  Form.  The  reason  for 
their  doing  this  is  that  they  cannot'  declare 
what  are  the  substances  of  this  sort,  the  im¬ 
perishable  substances  which  exist  apart  from 
the  individual  and  sensible  substances.  They 
make  them,  then,  the  same  in  kind  as  the 
perishable  things  (for  this  kind  of  substance 
we  know) — ‘man-himself’  and  ‘horse-itself’, 
adding  to  the  sensible  things  the  word  ‘itself. 
1041a  Yet  even  if  we  had  not  seen  the  stars, 
none  the  less,  I  suppose,  would  they  have  been 
eternal  substances  apart  from  those  which  we 
knew;  so  that  now  also  if  we  do  not  know 
what  non-sensible  substances  there  are,  yet  it 
is  doubtless  necessary  that  there  should  be 
some. — Clearly,  then,  no  universal  term  is  the 
name  of  a  substance,  and  no  substance  is  com- 
[5]  posed  of  substances. 

l7 

Let  us  state  what,  i.e.  what  kind  of  thing,  sub¬ 
stance  should  be  said  to  be,  taking  once  more 
another  starting-point;  for  perhaps  from  this 
we  shall  get  a  clear  view  also  of  that  substance 
which  exists  apart  from  sensible  substances. 
Since,  then,  substance  is  a  principle  and  a 
cause,  let  us  pursue  it  from  this  starting-point, 
[/o]  The  ‘why’  is  always  sought  in  this  form — 
‘why  does  one  thing  attach  to  some  other?’  For 
to  inquire  why  the  musical  man  is  a  musical 
man,  is  either  to  inquire — as  we  have  said — 
why  the  man  is  musical,  or  it  is  something  else. 
Now  ‘why  a  thing  is  itself  is  a  meaningless  in- 
[75]  quiry  (for  (to  give  meaning  to  the  ques¬ 
tion  ‘why’)  the  fact  or  the  existence  of  the 
thing  must  already  be  evident — e.g.  that  the 
moon  is  eclipsed — but  the  fact  that  a  thing  is 
itself  is  the  single  reason  and  the  single  cause 
to  be  given  in  answer  to  all  such  questions  as 
‘why  the  man  is  man,  or  the  musician  musical’, 
unless  one  were  to  answer  ‘because  each  thing 
is  inseparable  from  itself,  and  its  being  one  just 
meant  this’;  this,  however,  is  common  to  all 
things  and  is  a  short  and  easy  way  with  the 
[20]  question).  But  we  can  inquire  why  man 
is  an  animal  of  such  and  such  a  nature.  This, 
then,  is  plain,  that  we  are  not  inquiring  why 
he  who  is  a  man  is  a  man.  We  are  inquiring, 
then,  why  something  is  predicable  of  some¬ 
thing  (that  it  is  predicable  must  be  clear;  for  if 
not,  the  inquiry  is  an  inquiry  into  nothing). 
E.g.  why  does  it  thunder?  This  is  the  same  as 
‘why  is  sound  produced  in  the  clouds?’  Thus 
[25]  the  inquiry  is  about  the  predication  of  one 
thing  of  another.  And  why  are  these  things, 


i.e.  bricks  and  stones,  a  house?  Plainly  we  are 
seeking  the  cause.  And  this  is  the  essence  (to 
speak  abstractly),  which  in  some  cases  is  the 
end,  e.g.  perhaps  in  the  case  of  a  house  or  a 
[jo]  bed,  and  in  some  cases  is  the  first  mover; 
for  this  also  is  a  cause.  But  while  the  efficient 
cause  is  sought  in  the  case  of  genesis  and  de¬ 
struction,  the  final  cause  is  sought  in  the  case 
of  being  also. 

The  object  of  the  inquiry  is  most  easily  over¬ 
looked  where  one  term  is  not  expressly  predi¬ 
cated  of  another  (e.g.  when  we  inquire  ‘what 
1041b  man  is’),  because  we  do  not  distin¬ 
guish  and  do  not  say  definitely  that  certain  ele¬ 
ments  make  up  a  certain  whole.  But  we  must 
articulate  our  meaning  before  we  begin  to  in¬ 
quire;  if  not,  the  inquiry  is  on  the  border-line 
between  being  a  search  for  something  and  a 
search  for  nothing.  Since  we  must  have  the 
existence  of  the  thing  as  something  given,  clear¬ 
ly  the  question  is  why  the  matter  is  some  defi¬ 
nite  thing;  e.g.  why  are  these  materials  a 
[5]  house?  Because  that  which  was  the  essence 
of  a  house  is  present.  And  why  is  this  indi¬ 
vidual  thing,  or  this  body  having  this  form,  a 
man?  Therefore  what  we  seek  is  the  cause,  i.e. 
the  form,  by  reason  of  which  the  matter  is 
some  definite  thing;  and  this  is  the  substance 
of  the  thing.  Evidently,  then,  in  the  case  of 
[/o]  simple  terms  no  inquiry  nor  teaching  is 
possible;  our  attitude  towards  such  things  is 
other  than  that  of  inquiry. 

Since  that  which  is  compounded  out  of 
something  so  that  the  whole  is  one,  not  like  a 
heap  but  like  a  syllable, — now  the  syllable  is 
not  its  elements,  ba  is  not  the  same  as  b  and  a, 
nor  is  flesh  fire  and  earth  (for  when  these  are 
separated  the  wholes,  i.e.  the  flesh  and  the  syl¬ 
lable,  no  longer  exist,  but  the  elements  of  the 
[/ 5]  syllable  exist,  and  so  do  fire  and  earth); 
the  syllable,  then,  is  something — not  only  its 
elements  (the  vowel  and  the  consonant)  but 
also  something  else,  and  the  flesh  is  not  only 
fire  and  earth  or  the  hot  and  the  cold,  but  also 
something  else: — if,  then,  that  something  must 
itself  be  either  an  element  or  composed  of  ele- 
[20]  ments,  (1)  if  it  is  an  element  the  same 
argument  will  again  apply;  for  flesh  will  con¬ 
sist  of  this  and  fire  and  earth  and  something 
still  further,  so  that  the  process  will  go  on  to 
infinity.  But  (2)  if  it  is  a  compound,  clearly  it 
will  be  a  compound  not  of  one  but  of  more 
than  one  (or  else  that  one  will  be  the  thing 
itself),  so  that  again  in  this  case  we  can  use  the 
same  argument  as  in  the  case  of  flesh  or  of  the 
[25]  syllable.  But  it  would  seem  that  this 


566  METAPHYSICS  1042*> 


‘other’  is  something,  and  not  an  element,  and 
that  it  is  the  cause  which  makes  this  thing  flesh 
and  that  a  syllable.  And  similarly  in  all  other 
cases.  And  this  is  the  substance  of  each  thing 
(for  this  is  the  primary  cause  of  its  being) ;  and 
since,  while  some  things  are  not  substances,  as 
many  as  are  substances  are  formed  in  accord¬ 


ance  with  a  nature  of  their  own  and  by  a  proc- 
[30]  ess  of  nature,  their  substance  would  seem 
to  be  this  kind  of  ‘nature’,  which  is  not  an  ele¬ 
ment  but  a  principle.  An  element,  on  the  other 
hand,  is  that  into  which  a  thing  is  divided  and 
which  is  present  in  it  as  matter;  e.g.  a  and  b 
are  the  elements  of  the  syllable. 


BOOK  VIII 


1 

1042a  We  must  reckon  up  the  results  arising 
from  what  has  been  said,  and  compute  the  sum 
of  them,  and  put  the  finishing  touch  to  our 
[5]  inquiry.  We  have  said  that  the  causes, 
principles,  and  elements  of  substances  are  the 
object  of  our  search.  And  some  substances  are 
recognized  by  every  one,  but  some  have  been 
advocated  by  particular  schools.  Those  gener¬ 
ally  recognized  are  the  natural  substances,  i.e. 
fire,  earth,  water,  air,  &c.,  the  simple  bodies; 
secondly,  plants  and  their  parts,  and  animals 
[10]  and  the  parts  of  animals;  and  finally  the 
physical  universe  and  its  parts;  while  some  par¬ 
ticular  schools  say  that  Forms  and  the  objects 
of  mathematics  are  substances.  But  there  are 
arguments  which  lead  to  the  conclusion  that 
there  are  other  substances,  the  essence  and  the 
substratum.  Again,  in  another  way  the  genus 
seems  more  substantial  than  the  various  spe- 
[75]  cies,  and  the  universal  than  the  particu¬ 
lars.  And  with  the  universal  and  the  genus  the 
Ideas  are  connected;  it  is  in  virtue  of  the  same 
argument  that  they  are  thought  to  be  sub¬ 
stances.  And  since  the  essence  is  substance,  and 
the  definition  is  a  formula  of  the  essence,  for 
this  reason  we  have  discussed  definition  and 
essential  predication.  Since  the  definition  is  a 
formula,  and  a  formula  has  parts,  we  had  to 
[20]  consider  also  with  respect  to  the  notion 
of  ‘part’,  what  are  parts  of  the  substance  and 
what  are  not,  and  whether  the  parts  of  the  sub¬ 
stance  are  also  parts  of  the  definition.  Further, 
too,  neither  the  universal  nor  the  genus  is  a 
substance;  we  must  inquire  later  into  the  Ideas 
and  the  objects  of  mathematics;  for  some  say 
these  are  substances  as  well  as  the  sensible  sub¬ 
stances. 

But  now  let  us  resume  the  discussion  of  the 
[25]  generally  recognized  substances.  These 
are  the  sensible  substances,  and  sensible  sub¬ 
stances  all  have  matter.  The  substratum  is  sub¬ 
stance,  and  this  is  in  one  sense  the  matter  (and 
by  matter  I  mean  that  which,  not  being  a  ‘this’ 
actually,  is  potentially  a  ‘this’),  and  in  another 


sense  the  formula  or  shape  (that  which  being  a 
‘this’  can  be  separately  formulated),  and  third- 
[jo]  ly  the  complex  of  these  two,  which  alone 
is  generated  and  destroyed,  and  is,  without 
qualification,  capable  of  separate  existence;  for 
of  substances  completely  expressible  in  a  for¬ 
mula  some  are  separable  and  some  are  not. 

But  clearly  matter  also  is  substance;  for  in  all 
the  opposite  changes  that  occur  there  is  some¬ 
thing  which  underlies  the  changes,  e.g.  in  re¬ 
spect  of  place  that  which  is  now  here  and  again 
[35]  elsewhere,  and  in  respect  of  increase  that 
which  is  now  of  one  size  and  again  less  or 
greater,  and  in  respect  of  alteration  that  which 
is  now  healthy  and  again  diseased;  and  sim- 
1042b  ilarly  in  respect  of  substance  there  is 
something  that  is  now  being  generated  and 
again  being  destroyed,  and  now  underlies  the 
process  as  a  ‘this’  and  again  underlies  it  in  re¬ 
spect  of  a  privation  of  positive  character.  And 
in  this  change  the  others  are  involved.  But  in 
either  one  or  two  of  the  others  this  is  not  in- 
[5]  volved;  for  it  is  not  necessary  if  a  thing  has 
matter  for  change  of  place  that  it  should  also 
have  matter  for  generation  and  destruction. 

The  difference  between  becoming  in  the  full 
sense  and  becoming  in  a  qualified  sense  has 
been  stated  in  our  physical  works.1 

2 

Since  the  substance  which  exists  as  underlying 
and  as  matter  is  generally  recognized,  and  this 
[10]  is  that  which  exists  potentially,  it  remains 
for  us  to  say  what  is  the  substance,  in  the  sense 
of  actuality,  of  sensible  things.  Democritus 
seems  to  think  there  are  three  kinds  of  dif¬ 
ference  between  things;  the  underlying  body, 
the  matter,  is  one  and  the  same,  but  they  differ 
either  in  rhythm,  i.e.  shape,  or  in  turning,  i.e. 

osition,  or  in  inter-contact,  i.e.  order.  But 

75]  evidently  there  are  many  differences;  for 
instance,  some  things  are  characterized  by  the 
mode  of  composition  of  their  matter,  e.g.  the 
things  formed  by  blending,  such  as  honey- 

1  Cf.  Physics ,  225*  12-20;  On  Generation  and  Corrup¬ 
tion ,  317*  17-31. 


1043b  BOOK  VII,  CHAPTER  17— BOOK  VIII,  CHAPTERS  1-3  567 


water;  and  others  by  being  bound  together,  e.g. 
a  bundle;  and  others  by  being  glued  together, 
e.g.  a  book;  and  others  by  being  nailed  to¬ 
gether,  e.g.  a  casket;  and  others  in  more  than 
one  of  these  ways;  and  others  by  position,  e.g. 
threshold  and  lintel  (for  these  differ  by  being 
[20]  placed  in  a  certain  way);  and  others  by 
time,  e.g.  dinner  and  breakfast;  and  others  by 
place,  e.g.  the  winds;  and  others  by  the  affec¬ 
tions  proper  to  sensible  things,  e.g.  hardness 
and  softness,  density  and  rarity,  dryness  and 
wetness;  and  some  things  by  some  of  these 
qualities,  others  by  them  all,  and  in  general 
some  by  excess  and  some  by  defect.  Clearly, 
[25]  then,  the  word  ‘is’  has  just  as  many  mean¬ 
ings;  a  thing  is  a  threshold  because  it  lies  in 
such  and  such  a  position,  and  its  being  means 
its  lying  in  that  position,  while  being  ice  means 
having  been  solidified  in  such  and  such  a  way. 
And  the  being  of  some  things  will  be  defined 
by  all  these  qualities,  because  some  parts  of 
them  are  mixed,  others  are  blended,  others  are 
[3o]  bound  together,  others  are  solidified,  and 
others  use  the  other  differentiae;  e.g.  the  hand 
or  the  foot  requires  such  complex  definition. 
We  must  grasp,  then,  the  kinds  of  differentiae 
(for  these  will  be  the  principles  of  the  being  of 
things),  e.g.  the  things  characterized  by  the 
more  and  the  less,  or  by  the  dense  and  the  rare, 
and  by  other  such  qualities;  for  all  these  are 
[i5]  forms  of  excess  and  defect.  And  anything 
that  is  characterized  by  shape  or  by  smooth¬ 
ness  and  roughness  is  characterized  by  the 
straight  and  the  curved.  And  for  other  things 
1043a  their  being  will  mean  their  being  mixed, 
and  their  not  being  will  mean  the  opposite. 

It  is  clear,  then,  from  these  facts  that,  since 
its  substance  is  the  cause  of  each  thing’s  being, 
we  must  seek  in  these  differentiae  what  is  the 
cause  of  the  being  of  each  of  these  things.  Now 
none  of  these  differentiae  is  substance,  even 
when  coupled  with  matter,  yet  it  is  what  is 
[5]  analogous  to  substance  in  each  case;  and  as 
in  substances  that  which  is  predicated  of  the 
matter  is  the  actuality  itself,  in  all  other  defi¬ 
nitions  also  it  is  what  most  resembles  full  ac¬ 
tuality.  E.g.  if  we  had  to  define  a  threshold, 
we  should  say  ‘wood  or  stone  in  such  and  such 
a  position’,  and  a  house  we  should  define  as 
‘bricks  and  timbers  in  such  and  such  a  posi¬ 
tion’  (or  a  purpose  may  exist  as  well  in  some 
cases),  and  if  we  had  to  define  ice  we  should 
say  ‘water  frozen  or  solidified  in  such  and  such 
[/o]  a  way’,  and  harmony  is  ‘such  and  such  a 
blending  of  high  and  low’;  and  similarly  in 
all  other  cases. 


Obviously,  then,  the  actuality  or  the  formula 
is  different  when  the  matter  is  different;  for 
in  some  cases  it  is  the  composition,  in  others 
the  mixing,  and  in  others  some  other  of  the 
attributes  we  have  named.  And  so,  of  the  peo¬ 
ple  who  go  in  for  defining,  those  who  define  a 
house  as  stones,  bricks,  and  timbers  are  speak- 
[75]  ing  of  the  potential  house,  for  these  are 
the  matter;  but  those  who  propose  ‘a  receptacle 
to  shelter  chattels  and  living  beings’,  or  some¬ 
thing  of  the  sort,  speak  of  the  actuality.  Those 
who  combine  both  of  these  speak  of  the  third 
kind  of  substance,  which  is  composed  of  mat¬ 
ter  and  form  (for  the  formula  that  gives  the 
differentiae  seems  to  be  an  account  of  the  form 
[20]  or  actuality,  while  that  which  gives  the 
components  is  rather  an  account  of  the  mat¬ 
ter);  and  the  same  is  true  of  the  kind  of  defi¬ 
nitions  which  Archytas  used  to  accept;  they 
are  accounts  of  the  combined  form  and  matter. 
E.g.  what  is  still  weather?  Absence  of  motion 
in  a  large  expanse  of  air;  air  is  the  matter,  and 
absence  of  motion  is  the  actuality  and  sub- 
125]  stance.  What  is  a  calm?  Smoothness  of 
sea;  the  material  substratum  is  the  sea,  and  the 
actuality  or  shape  is  smoothness.  It  is  obvious 
then,  from  what  has  been  said,  what  sensible 
substance  is  and  how  it  exists — one  kind  of  it 
as  matter,  another  as  form  or  actuality,  while 
the  third  kind  is  that  which  is  composed  of 
these  two. 

3 

We  must  not  fail  to  notice  that  sometimes  it  is 
[50]  not  clear  whether  a  name  means  the  com* 
posite  substance,  or  the  actuality  or  form,  e.g. 
whether  ‘house’  is  a  sign  for  the  composite 
thing,  ‘a  covering  consisting  of  bricks  and 
stones  laid  thus  and  thus’,  or  for  the  actuality 
or  form,  ‘a  covering’,  and  whether  a  line  is 
‘twoness  in  length’  or  ‘twoness’,  and  whether 
[35]  an  animal  is  ‘a  soul  in  a  body’  or  ‘a  soul’; 
for  soul  is  the  substance  or  actuality  of  some 
body.  ‘Animal’  might  even  be  applied  to  both, 
not  as  something  definable  by  one  formula,  but 
as  related  to  a  single  thing.  But  this  question, 
while  important  for  another  purpose,  is  of  no 
importance  for  the  inquiry  into  sensible  sub- 
1043b  stance;  for  the  essence  certainly  attaches 
to  the  form  and  the  actuality.  For  ‘soul’  and 
‘to  be  soul’  are  the  same,  but  ‘to  be  man’  and 
‘man’  are  not  the  same,  unless  even  the  bare 
soul  is  to  be  called  man;  and  thus  on  one  in¬ 
terpretation  the  thing  is  the  same  as  its  essence, 
and  on  another  it  is  not. 

[5]  If  we  examine  we  find  that  the  syllable 


568 

does  not  consist  of  the  letters  +  juxtaposition, 
nor  is  the  house  bricks  +  juxtaposition.  And 
this  is  right;  for  the  juxtaposition  or  mixing 
does  not  consist  of  those  things  of  which  it  is 
the  juxtaposition  or  mixing.  And  the  same  is 
true  in  all  other  cases;  e.g.  if  the  threshold  is 
characterized  by  its  position,  the  position  is 
not  constituted  by  the  threshold,  but  rather  the 
[/o]  latter  is  constituted  by  the  former.  Nor  is 
man  animal  +  biped,  but  there  must  be  some¬ 
thing  besides  these,  if  these  are  matter, — some¬ 
thing  which  is  neither  an  element  in  the  whole 
nor  a  compound,  but  is  the  substance;  but  this 
people  eliminate,  and  state  only  the  matter.  If, 
then,  this  is  the  cause  of  the  thing’s  being,  and 
if  the  cause  of  its  being  is  its  substance,  they 
will  not  be  stating  the  substance  itself. 

[75]  (This,  then,  must  either  be  eternal  or  it 
must  be  destructible  without  being  ever  in 
course  of  being  destroyed,  and  must  have  come 
to  be  without  ever  being  in  course  of  coming 
to  be.  But  it  has  been  proved  and  explained 
elsewhere1  that  no  one  makes  or  begets  the 
form,  but  it  is  the  individual  that  is  made,  i.e. 
the  complex  of  form  and  matter  that  is  gen¬ 
erated.  Whether  the  substances  of  destructible 
things  can  exist  apart,  is  not  yet  at  all  dear; 
[20]  except  that  obviously  this  is  impossible  in 
some  cases — in  the  case  of  things  which  can¬ 
not  exist  apart  from  the  individual  instances, 
e.g.  house  or  utensil.  Perhaps,  indeed,  neither 
these  things  themselves,  nor  any  of  the  other 
things  which  are  not  formed  by  nature,  are 
substances  at  all;  for  one  might  say  that  the 
nature  in  natural  objects  is  the  only  substance 
to  be  found  in  destructible  things.) 

Therefore  the  difficulty  which  used  to  be 
raised  by  the  school  of  Antisthenes  and  other 
such  uneducated  people  has  a  certain  timeli- 
[25]  ness.  They  said  that  the  ‘what’  cannot  be 
defined  (for  the  definition  so  called  is  a  ‘long 
rigmarole’)  but  of  what  sort  a  thing,  e.g.  silver, 
is,  they  thought  it  possible  actually  to  explain, 
not  saying  what  it  is,  but  that  it  is  like  tin. 
Therefore  one  kind  of  substance  can  be  defined 
and  formulated,  i.e.  the  composite  kind,  wheth- 
[30]  er  it  be  perceptible  or  intelligible;  but  the 
primary  parts  of  which  this  consists  cannot  be 
defined,  since  a  definitory  formula  predicates 
something  of  something,  and  one  part  of  the 
definition  must  play  the  part  of  matter  and 
the  other  that  of  form. 

It  is  also  obvious  that,  if  substances  are  in  a 
sense  numbers,  they  are  so  in  this  sense  and 
not,  as  some  say,  as  numbers  of  units.  For  a 

1  Cf.  vii.  8. 


1044a 

definition  is  a  sort  of  number;  for  (1)  it  is 
[55]  divisible,  and  into  indivisible  parts  (for 
definitory  formulae  are  not  infinite),  and  num¬ 
ber  also  is  of  this  nature.  And  (2)  as,  when  one 
of  the  parts  of  which  a  number  consists  has 
been  taken  from  or  added  to  the  number,  it  is 
no  longer  the  same  number,  but  a  different  one, 
even  if  it  is  the  very  smallest  part  that  has  been 
1044a  taken  away  or  added,  so  the  definition 
and  the  essence  will  no  longer  remain  when 
anything  has  been  taken  away  or  added.  And 
(3)  the  number  must  be  something  in  virtue  of 
which  it  is  one,  and  this  these  thinkers  cannot 
state,  what  makes  it  one,  if  it  is  one  (for  either 
it  is  not  one  but  a  sort  of  heap,  or  if  it  is,  we 
ought  to  say  what  it  is  that  makes  one  out  of 
[5]  many);  and  the  definition  is  one,  but  sim¬ 
ilarly  they  cannot  say  what  makes  it  one.  And 
this  is  a  natural  result;  for  the  same  reason  is 
applicable,  and  substance  is  one  in  the  sense 
which  we  have  explained,  and  not,  as  some 
say,  by  being  a  sort  of  unit  or  point;  each  is 
a  complete  reality  and  a  definite  nature.  And 
[/o]  (4)  as  number  does  not  admit  of  the  more 
and  the  less,  neither  does  substance,  in  the 
sense  of  form,  but  if  any  substance  does,  it  is 
only  the  substance  which  involves  matter.  Let 
this,  then,  suffice  for  an  account  of  the  genera¬ 
tion  and  destruction  of  so-called  substances — 
in  what  sense  it  is  possible  and  in  what  sense 
impossible — and  of  the  reduction  of  things  to 
number. 

4 

[75]  Regarding  material  substance  we  must 
not  forget  that  even  if  all  things  come  from 
the  same  first  cause  or  have  the  same  things 
for  their  first  causes,  and  if  the  same  matter 
serves  as  starting-point  for  their  generation, 
yet  there  is  a  matter  proper  to  each,  e.g.  for 
phlegm  the  sweet  or  the  fat,  and  for  bile  the 
bitter,  or  something  else;  though  perhaps  these 
[20]  come  from  the  same  original  matter.  And 
there  come  to  be  several  matters  for  the  same 
thing,  when  the  one  matter  is  matter  for  the 
other;  e.g.  phlegm  comes  from  the  fat  and 
from  the  sweet,  if  the  fat  comes  from  the  sweet; 
and  it  comes  from  bile  by  analysis  of  the  bile 
into  its  ultimate  matter.  For  one  thing  comes 
from  another  in  two  senses,  either  because  it 
will  be  found  at  a  later  stage,  or  because  it  is 
roduced  if  the  other  is  analysed  into  its  orig- 
25]  inal  constituents.  When  the  matter  is  one, 
different  things  may  be  produced  owing  to 
difference  in  the  moving  cause;  e.g.  from  wood 
may  be  made  both  a  chest  and  a  bed.  But  some 


METAPHYSICS 


1045a  BOOK  VIII,  CHAPTERS  3-6  569 


different  things  must  have  their  matter  differ¬ 
ent;  e.g.  a  saw  could  not  be  made  of  wood,  nor 
is  this  in  the  power  of  the  moving  cause;  for  it 
could  not  make  a  saw  of  wool  or  of  wood.  But 
if,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  the  same  thing  can  be 
[jo]  made  of  different  material,  clearly  the  art, 
i.e.  the  moving  principle,  is  the  same;  for  if 
both  the  matter  and  the  moving  cause  were 
different,  the  product  would  be  so  too. 

When  one  inquires  into  the  cause  of  some¬ 
thing,  one  should,  since  ‘causes’  are  spoken  of 
in  several  senses,  state  all  the  possible  causes. 
E.g.  what  is  the  material  cause  of  man?  Shall 
[35]  we  say  ‘the  menstrual  fluid’?  What  is  the 
moving  cause?  Shall  we  say  ‘the  seed’?  The 
formal  cause?  His  essence.  The  final  cause? 
His  end.  But  perhaps  the  latter  two  are  the 
1044b  same. — It  is  the  proximate  causes  we 
must  state.  What  is  the  material  cause?  We 
must  name  not  fire  or  earth,  but  the  matter 
peculiar  to  the  thing. 

Regarding  the  substances  that  are  natural 
and  generable,  if  the  causes  are  really  these  and 
of  this  number  and  we  have  to  learn  the  causes, 
[5]  we  must  inquire  thus,  if  we  are  to  inquire 
rightly.  But  in  the  case  of  natural  but  eternal 
substances  another  account  must 'be  given.  For 
perhaps  some  have  no  matter,  or  not  matter  of 
this  sort  but  only  such  as  can  be  moved  in  re¬ 
spect  of  place.  Nor  does  matter  belong  to  those 
things  which  exist  by  nature  but  are  not  sub¬ 
stances;  their  substratum  is  the  substance .  E.g. 
[/o]  what  is  the  cause  of  eclipse?  What  is  its 
matter?  There  is  none;  the  moon  is  that  which 
suffers  eclipse.  What  is  the  moving  cause  which 
extinguished  the  light?  The  earth.  The  final 
cause  perhaps  does  not  exist.  The  formal  prin¬ 
ciple  is  the  definitory  formula,  but  this  is  ob¬ 
scure  if  it  does  not  include  the  cause.  E.g. 
what  is  eclipse?  Deprivation  of  light.  But  if  we 
add  ‘by  the  earth’s  coming  in  between’,  this  is 
[75]  the  formula  which  includes  the  cause.  In 
the  case  of  sleep  it  is  not  clear  what  it  is  that 
proximately  has  this  affection.  Shall  we  say 
that  it  is  the  animal?  Yes,  but  the  animal  in 
virtue  of  what,  i.e.  what  is  the  proximate  sub¬ 
ject?  The  heart  or  some  other  part.  Next,  by 
what  is  it  produced?  Next,  what  is  the  affection 
— that  of  the  proximate  subject,  not  of  the 
whole  animal?  Shall  we  say  that  it  is  immobil¬ 
ity  of  such  and  such  a  kind?  Yes,  but  to  what 
[20]  process  in  the  proximate  subject  is  this 
due? 

5 

Since  some  things  are  and  are  not,  without 
coming  to  be  and  ceasing  to  be,  e.g.  points,  if 


they  can  be  said  to  be,  and  in  general  forms 
(for  it  is  not  ‘white’  that  comes  to  be,  but  the 
wood  comes  to  be  white,  if  everything  that 
comes  to  be  comes  from  something  and  comes 
to  be  something),  not  all  contraries  can  come 
[25]  from  one  another,  but  it  is  in  different 
senses  that  a  pale  man  comes  from  a  dark  man, 
and  pale  comes  from  dark.  Nor  has  everything 
matter,  but  only  those  things  which  come  to  be 
and  change  into  one  another.  Those  things 
which,  without  ever  being  in  course  of  chang¬ 
ing,  are  or  are  not,  have  no  matter. 

There  is  difficulty  in  the  question  how  the 
[jo]  matter  of  each  thing  is  related  to  its  con¬ 
trary  states.  E.g.  if  the  body  is  potentially 
healthy,  and  disease  is  contrary  to  health,  is  it 
potentially  both  healthy  and  diseased?  And  is 
water  potentially  wine  and  vinegar?  We  an¬ 
swer  that  it  is  the  matter  of  one  in  virtue  of  its 
positive  state  and  its  form,  and  of  the  other  in 
virtue  of  the  privation  of  its  positive  state  and 
the  corruption  of  it  contrary  to  its  nature.  It  is 
also  hard  to  say  why  wine  is  not  said  to  be  the 
matter  of  vinegar  nor  potentially  vinegar 
[35]  (though  vinegar  is  produced  from  it), 
and  why  a  living  man  is  not  said  to  be  po¬ 
tentially  dead.  In  fact  they  are  not,  but  the  cor¬ 
ruptions  in  question  are  accidental,  and  it  is 
1045a  the  matter  of  the  animal  that  is  itself  in 
virtue  of  its  corruption  the  potency  and  matter 
of  a  corpse,  and  it  is  water  that  is  the  matter 
of  vinegar.  For  the  corpse  comes  from  the  ani¬ 
mal,  and  vinegar  from  wine,  as  night  from 
day.  And  all  the  things  which  change  thus 
into  one  another  must  go  back  to  their  matter; 
e.g.  if  from  a  corpse  is  produced  an  animal,  the 
corpse  first  goes  back  to  its  matter,  and  only 
[5]  then  becomes  an  animal;  and  vinegar  first 
goes  back  to  water,  and  only  then  becomes 
wine. 

6 

To  return  to  the  difficulty  which  has  been 
stated1  with  respect  both  to  definitions  and  to 
numbers,  what  is  the  cause  of  their  unity?  In 
the  case  of  all  things  which  have  several  parts 
and  in  which  the  totality  is  not,  as  it  were,  a 
mere  heap,  but  the  whole  is  something  besides 
[/o]  the  parts,  there  is  a  cause;  for  even  in 
bodies  contact  is  the  cause  of  unity  in  some 
cases,  and  in  others  viscosity  or  some  other 
such  quality.  And  a  definition  is  a  set  of  words 
which  is  one  not  by  being  connected  together, 
like  the  Iliad,  but  by  dealing  with  one  object. 
— What  then,  is  it  that  makes  man  one;  why  is 

1  Cf.  vii.  12,  viii.  1044s  2-6. 


570  METAPHYSICS  1046a 


he  one  and  not  many,  e.g.  animal  +  biped,  es- 
[75]  pecially  if  there  are,  as  some  say,  an  ani- 
mal-itself  and  a  biped-itself  ?  Why  are  not  those 
Forms  themselves  the  man,  so  that  men  would 
exist  by  participation  not  in  man,  nor  in  one 
Form,  but  in  two,  animal  and  biped,  and  in 
general  man  would  be  not  one  but  more  than 
one  thing,  animal  and  biped? 

[20]  Clearly,  then,  if  people  proceed  thus  in 
their  usual  manner  of  definition  and  speech, 
they  cannot  explain  and  solve  the  difficulty. 
But  if,  as  we  say,  one  element  is  matter  and 
another  is  form,  and  one  is  potentially  and  the 
[25]  other  actually,  the  question  will  no  longer 
be  thought  a  difficulty.  For  this  difficulty  is  the 
same  as  would  arise  if  ‘round  bronze’  were 
the  definition  of  ‘cloak’;  for  this  word  would 
be  a  sign  of  the  definitory  formula,  so  that  the 
question  is,  what  is  the  cause  of  the  unity  of 
‘round’  and  ‘bronze’?  The  difficulty  disappears, 
because  the  one  is  matter,  the  other  form. 
[30]  What,  then,  causes  this — that  which  was 
potentially  to  be  actually — except,  in  the  case 
of  things  which  are  generated,  the  agent?  For 
there  is  no  other  cause  of  the  potential  sphere’s 
becoming  actually  a  sphere,  but  this  was  the 
essence  of  either.  Of  matter  some  is  intelligible, 
some  perceptible,  and  in  a  formula  there  is  al- 
lj5]  ways  an  element  of  matter  as  well  as  one 
of  actuality;  e.g.  the  circle  is  ‘a  plane  figure’. 
But  of  the  things  which  have  no  matter,  either 
intelligible  or  perceptible,  each  is  by  its  nature 
1045b  essentially  a  kind  of  unity,  as  it  is  essen¬ 
tially  a  kind  of  being — individual  substance, 
quality,  or  quantity  (and  so  neither  ‘existent’ 
nor  ‘one’  is  present  in  their  definitions),  and 
the  essence  of  each  of  them  is  by  its  very  nature 


a  kind  of  unity  as  it  is  a  kind  of  being — and 
so  none  of  these  has  any  reason  outside  itself, 
[5]  for  being  one,  nor  for  being  a  kind  of 
being;  for  each  is  by  its  nature  a  kind  of 
being  and  a  kind  of  unity,  not  as  being  in 
the  genus  ‘being’  or  ‘one’  nor  in  the  sense 
that  being  and  unity  can  exist  apart  from  par¬ 
ticulars. 

Owing  to  the  difficulty  about  unity  some 
speak  of  ‘participation’,  and  raise  the  question, 
what  is  the  cause  of  participation  and  what  is 
it  to  participate;  and  others  speak  of  ‘com* 
[/o]  munion’,  as  Lycophron  says  knowledge  is 
a  communion  of  knowing  with  the  soul;  and 
others  say  life  is  a  ‘composition’  or  ‘connexion’ 
of  soul  with  body.  Yet  the  same  account  ap¬ 
plies  to  all  cases;  for  being  healthy,  too,  will 
on  this  showing  be  either  a  ‘communion’  or  a 
‘connexion’  or  a  ‘composition’  of  soul  and 
health,  and  the  fact  that  the  bronze  is  a  triangle 
will  be  a  ‘composition’  of  bronze  and  triangle, 
[75]  and  the  fact  that  a  thing  is  white  will  be 
a  ‘composition’  of  surface  and  whiteness.  The 
reason  is  that  people  look  for  a  unifying  for¬ 
mula,  and  a  difference,  between  potency  and 
complete  reality.  But,  as  has  been  said,2  the 
proximate  matter  and  the  form  are  one  and  the 
same  thing,  the  one  potentially,  and  the  other 
actually.  Therefore  it  is  like  asking  what  in 
general  is  the  cause  of  unity  and  of  a  thing’s 
[20]  being  one;  for  each  thing  is  a  unity,  and 
the  potential  and  the  actual  are  somehow  one. 
Therefore  there  is  no  other  cause  here  unless 
there  is  something  which  caused  the  movement 
from  potency  into  actuality.  And  all  things 
which  have  no  matter  are  without  qualification 
essentially  unities. 


BOOK  IX 


1 

We  have  treated  of  that  which  is  primarily 
and  to  which  all  the  other  categories  of  being 
are  referred — i.e.  of  substance.  For  it  is  in  vir¬ 
tue  of  the  concept  of  substance  that  the  others 
[50]  also  are  said  to  be — quantity  and  quality 
and  the  like;  for  all  will  be  found  to  involve 
the  concept  of  substance,  as  we  said  in  the  first 
part  of  our  work.1  And  since  ‘being’  is  in  one 
way  divided  into  individual  thing,  quality,  and 
quantity,  and  is  in  another  way  distinguished 
in  respect  of  potency  and  complete  reality,  and 
of  function,  let  us  now  add  a  discussion  of  po- 
[33]  tency  and  complete  reality.  And  first  let 
1  Cf.  vii.  1. 


us  explain  potency  in  the  strictest  sense,  which 
1046a  is,  however,  not  the  most  useful  for  our 
present  purpose.  For  potency  and  actuality  ex¬ 
tend  beyond  the  cases  that  involve  a  reference 
to  motion.  But  when  we  have  spoken  of  this 
first  kind,  we  shall  in  our  discussions  of  actu¬ 
ality3  explain  the  other  kinds  of  potency  as  well. 

We  have  pointed  out  elsewhere4  that  ‘po¬ 
tency’  and  the  word  ‘can’  have  several  senses. 
[5]  Of  these  we  may  neglect  all  the  potencies 
that  are  so  called  by  an  equivocation.  For  some 
are  called  so  by  analogy,  as  in  geometry  we  say 
one  thing  is  or  is  not  a  ‘power’  of  another  by 
virtue  of  the  presence  or  absence  of  some  rela- 

2  Cf. a  23-  jj.  3  Cf.  ix,  1048®  27-15  6. 

4  Cf.  v.  12. 


1046b  BOOK  VIII,  CHAPTER  6-BOOK  IX,  CHAPTERS  1-2 


tion  between  them.  But  all  potencies  that  con¬ 
form  to  the  same  type  are  originative  sources 
[/o]  of  some  kind,  and  are  called  potencies  in 
reference  to  one  primary  kind  of  potency, 
which  is  an  originative  source  of  change  in  an¬ 
other  thing  or  in  the  thing  itself  qua  other. 
For  one  kind  is  a  potency  of  being  acted  on, 
i.e.  the  originative  source,  in  the  very  thing 
acted  on,  of  its  being  passively  changed  by  an¬ 
other  thing  or  by  itself  qua  other;  and  another 
kind  is  a  state  of  insusceptibility  to  change 
for  the  worse  and  to  destruction  by  another 
thing  or  by  the  thing  itself  qua  other  by  vir- 
[75]  tue  of  an  originative  source  of  change. 
In  all  these  definitions  is  implied  the  formula 
of  potency  in  the  primary  sense. — And  again 
these  so-called  potencies  are  potencies  either 
of  merely  acting  or  being  acted  on,  or  of  act¬ 
ing  or  being  acted  on  well,  so  that  even  in 
the  formulae  of  the  latter  the  formulae  of 
the  prior  kinds  of  potency  are  somehow  im¬ 
plied. 

Obviously,  then,  in  a  sense  the  potency  of 
[20]  acting  and  of  being  acted  on  is  one  (for 
a  thing  may  be  ‘capable’  either  because  it  can 
itself  be  acted  on  or  because  something  else 
can  be  acted  on  by  it),  but  in  a  sense  the  po¬ 
tencies  are  different.  For  the  one  is  in  the  thing 
acted  on;  it  is  because  it  contains  a  certain  or¬ 
iginative  source,  and  because  even  the  matter 
is  an  originative  source,  that  the  thing  acted 
on  is  acted  on,  and  one  thing  by  one,  another 
by  another;  for  that  which  is  oily  can  be  burnt, 
and  that  which  yields  in  a  particular  way  can 
[25]  be  crushed;  and  similarly  in  all  other 
cases.  But  the  other  potency  is  in  the  agent, 
e.g.  heat  and  the  art  of  building  are  present, 
one  in  that  which  can  produce  heat  and  the 
other  in  the  man  who  can  build.  And  so,  in  so 
far  as  a  thing  is  an  organic  unity,  it  cannot  be 
acted  on  by  itself;  for  it  is  one  and  not  two  dif¬ 
ferent  things.  And  ‘impotence’  and  ‘impotent’ 
stand  for  the  privation  which  is  contrary  to 
[jo]  potency  of  this  sort,  so  that  every  potency 
belongs  to  the  same  subject  and  refers  to  the 
same  process  as  a  corresponding  impotence. 
Privation  has  several  senses;  for  it  means  (1) 
that  which  has  not  a  certain  quality  and  (2) 
that  which  might  naturally  have  it  but  has  not 
it,  either  (a)  in  general  or  (b)  when  it  might 
naturally  have  it,  and  either  (a)  in  some  par¬ 
ticular  way,  e.g.  when  it  has  not  it  completely, 
or  (0)  when  it  has  not  it  at  all.  And  in  certain 
[jj]  cases  if  things  which  naturally  have  a 
quality  lose  it  by  violence,  we  say  they  have 
suffered  privation. 


2 

Since  some  such  originative  sources  are  pres¬ 
ent  in  soulless  things,  and  others  in  things 
possessed  of  soul,  and  in  soul,  and  in  the  ra- 
1046b  tional  part  of  the  soul,  clearly  some  po¬ 
tencies  will  be  non-rational  and  some  will  be 
accompanied  by  a  rational  formula.  This  is 
why  all  arts,  i.e.  all  productive  forms  of  knowl¬ 
edge,  are  potencies;  they  are  originative  sources 
of  change  in  another  thing  or  in  the  artist  him¬ 
self  considered  as  other. 

And  each  of  those  which  are  accompanied  by 
[5]  a  rational  formula  is  alike  capable  of  con¬ 
trary  effects,  but  one  non-rational  power  pro¬ 
duces  one  effect;  e.g.  the  hot  is  capable  only  of 
heating,  but  the  medical  art  can  produce  both 
disease  and  health.  The  reason  is  that  science 
is  a  rational  formula,  and  the  same  rational 
formula  explains  a  thing  and  its  privation,  only 
not  in  the  same  way;  and  in  a  sense  it  applies 
to  both,  but  in  a  sense  it  applies  rather  to  the 
[70]  positive  fact.  Therefore  such  sciences  must 
deal  with  contraries,  but  with  one  in  virtue  of 
their  own  nature  and  with  the  other  not  in 
virtue  of  their  nature;  for  the  rational  formula 
applies  to  one  object  in  virtue  of  that  object’s 
nature,  and  to  the  other,  in  a  sense,  accident¬ 
ally.  For  it  is  by  denial  and  removal  that  it  ex¬ 
hibits  the  contrary;  for  the  contrary  is  the 
primary  privation,  and  this  is  the  removal  of 
[75]  the  positive  term.  Now  since  contraries 
do  not  occur  in  the  same  thing,  but  science  is  a 
potency  which  depends  on  the  possession  of  a 
rational  formula,  and  the  soul  possesses  an 
originative  source  of  movement;  therefore, 
while  the  wholesome  produces  only  health  and 
the  calorific  only  heat  and  the  frigorific  only 
cold,  the  scientific  man  produces  both  the  con- 
[20]  trary  effects.  For  the  rational  formula  is 
one  which  applies  to  both,  though  not  in  the 
same  way,  and  it  is  in  a  soul  which  possesses 
an  originative  source  of  movement;  so  that  the 
soul  will  start  both  processes  from  the  same 
originative  source,  having  linked  them  up  with 
the  same  thing.  And  so  the  things  whose  po¬ 
tency  is  according  to  a  rational  formula  act 
contrariwise  to  the  things  whose  potency  is 
non-rational;  for  the  products  of  the  former  are 
included  under  one  originative  source,  the  ra¬ 
tional  formula. 

[25]  it  is  obvious  also  that  the  potency  of 
merely  doing  a  thing  or  having  it  done  to  one 
is  implied  in  that  of  doing  it  or  having  it  done 
well,  but  the  latter  is  not  always  implied  in 
the  former:  for  he  who  does  a  thing  well  must 


5  J2  METAPHYSICS  1047b 


also  do  it,  but  he  who  does  it  merely  need  not 
also  do  it  well. 

3 

There  are  some  who  say,  as  the  Megaric  school 
does,  that  a  thing  ‘can’  act  only  when  it  is  act¬ 
ing,  and  when  it  is  not  acting  it  ‘cannot’  act, 
[j°]  e.g.  ^at  he  who  is  not  building  cannot 
build,  but  only  he  who  is  building,  when  he 
is  building;  and  so  in  all  other  cases.  It  is  not 
hard  to  see  the  absurdities  that  attend  this  view. 

For  it  is  clear  that  on  this  view  a  man  will 
not  be  a  builder  unless  he  is  building  (for  to 
be  a  builder  is  to  be  able  to  build),  and  so  with 
[^5]  the  other  arts.  If,  then,  it  is  impossible  to 
have  such  arts  if  one  has  not  at  some  time 
learnt  and  acquired  them,  and  it  is  then  im¬ 
possible  not  to  have  them  if  one  has  not  some- 
1047a  time  lost  them  (either  by  forgetfulness 
or  by  some  accident  or  by  time;  for  it  cannot 
be  by  the  destruction  of  the  object,  for  that 
lasts  for  ever),  a  man  will  not  have  the  art 
when  he  has  ceased  to  use  it,  and  yet  he  may 
immediately  build  again;  how  then  will  he 
have  got  the  art?  And  similarly  with  regard  to 
[5]  lifeless  things;  nothing  will  be  either  cold 
or  hot  or  sweet  or  perceptible  at  all  if  people 
are  not  perceiving  it;  so  that  the  upholders  of 
this  view  will  have  to  maintain  the  doctrine  of 
Protagoras.  But,  indeed,  nothing  will  even 
have  perception  if  it  is  not  perceiving,  i.e.  ex¬ 
ercising  its  perception.  If,  then,  that  is  blind 
which  has  not  sight  though  it  would  naturally 
have  it,  when  it  would  naturally  have  it  and 
when  it  still  exists,  the  same  people  will  be 
blind  many  times  in  the  day — and  deaf  too. 
[/o]  Again,  if  that  which  is  deprived  of  po¬ 
tency  is  incapable,  that  which  is  not  happening 
will  be  incapable  of  happening;  but  he  who 
says  of  that  which  is  incapable  of  happening 
either  that  it  is  or  that  it  will  be  will  say  what 
is  untrue;  for  this  is  what  incapacity  meant. 
Therefore  these  views  do  away  with  both  move- 
[75]  ment  and  becoming.  For  that  which 
stands  will  always  stand,  and  that  which  sits 
will  always  sit,  since  if  it  is  sitting  it  will  not 
get  up;  for  that  which,  as  we  are  told,  cannot 
get  up  will  be  incapable  of  getting  up.  But  we 
cannot  say  this,  so  that  evidently  potency  and 
actuality  are  different  (but  these  views  make 
potency  and  actuality  the  same,  and  so  it  is  no 
[20]  small  thing  they  are  seeking  to  annihi¬ 
late),  so  that  it  is  possible  that  a  thing  may  be 
capable  of  being  and  not  be,  and  capable  of 
not  being  and  yet  be,  and  similarly  with  the 
other  kinds  of  predicate;  it  may  be  capable  of 


walking  and  yet  not  walk,  or  capable  of  not 
walking  and  yet  walk.  And  a  thing  is  capable 
of  doing  something  if  there  will  be  nothing  im- 
[25]  possible  in  its  having  the  actuality  of  that 
of  which  it  is  said  to  have  the  capacity.  I  mean, 
for  instance,  if  a  thing  is  capable  of  sitting  and 
it  is  open  to  it  to  sit,  there  will  be  nothing  im¬ 
possible  in  its  actually  sitting;  and  similarly  if 
it  is  capable  of  being  moved  or  moving,  or  of 
standing  or  making  to  stand,  or  of  being  or 
coming  to  be,  or  of  not  being  or  not  coming 
to  be. 

[30]  The  word  ‘actuality’,  which  we  connect 
with  ‘complete  reality’,  has,  in  the  main,  been 
extended  from  movements  to  other  things;  for 
actuality  in  the  strict  sense  is  thought  to  be 
identical  with  movement.  And  so  people  do  not 
assign  movement  to  non-existent  things,  though 
they  do  assign  some  other  predicates.  E.g.  they 
say  that  non-existent  things  are  objects  of 
thought  and  desire,  but  not  that  they  are 
[33]  moved;  and  this  because,  while  ex  hy- 
pothesi  they  do  not  actually  exist,  they  would 
have  to  exist  actually  if  they  were  moved.  For 
1047bof  non-existent  things  some  exist  poten¬ 
tially;  but  they  do  not  exist,  because  they  do 
not  exist  in  complete  reality. 

4 

If  what  we  have  described1  is  identical  with 
the  capable  or  convertible  with  it,  evidently  it 
cannot  be  true  to  say  ‘this  is  capable  of  being 
[5]  but  will  not  be’,  which  would  imply  that 
the  things  //^capable  of  being  would  on  this 
showing  vanish.  Suppose,  for  instance,  that  a 
man — one  who  did  not  take  account  of  that 
which  is  incapable  of  being — were  to  say  that 
the  diagonal  of  the  square  is  capable  of  being 
measured  but  will  not  be  measured,  because  a 
thing  may  well  be  capable  of  being  or  coming 
to  be,  and  yet  not  be  or  be  about  to  be.  But  from 
the  premisses  this  necessarily  follows,  that  if 
[10]  we  actually  supposed  that  which  is  not, 
hut  is  capable  of  being,  to  be  or  to  have  come 
to  be,  there  will  be  nothing  impossible  in  this; 
but  the  result  will  be  impossible,  for  the  meas¬ 
uring  of  the  diagonal  is  impossible.  For  the 
false  and  the  impossible  are  not  the  same;  that 
you  are  standing  now  is  false,  but  that  you 
should  be  standing  is  not  impossible. 

At  the  same  time  it  is  clear  that  if,  when  A 
[75]  is  real,  B  must  be  real,  then,  when  A  is 
possible,  B  also  must  be  possible.  For  if  B  need 
not  be  possible,  there  is  nothing  to  prevent  its 
not  being  possible.  Now  let  A  be  supposed  pos- 
1  Cf.  1047®  24-26. 


1048b  BOOK  IX,  CHAPTERS  2-6  573 


sible.  Then,  when  A  was  possible,  we  agreed 
that  nothing  impossible  followed  if  A  were 
supposed  to  be  real;  and  then  B  must  of  course 
[20 J  be  real.  But  we  supposed  B  to  be  impos¬ 
sible.  Let  it  be  impossible  then.  If,  then,  B  is 
impossible,  A  also  must  be  so.  But  the  first 
was  supposed  impossible;  therefore  the  second 
also  is  impossible.  If,  then,  A  is  possible,  B  also 
will  be  possible,  if  they  were  so  related  that  if 
A  is  real,  B  must  be  real.  If,  then,  A  and  B 
[25]  being  thus  related,  B  is  not  possible  on  this 
condition,  A  and  B  will  not  be  related  as  was 
supposed.  And  if  when  A  is  possible,  B  must 
be  possible,  then  if  A  is  real,  B  also  must  be 
real.  For  to  say  that  B  must  be  possible,  if  A  is 
possible,  means  this,  that  if  A  is  real  both  at 
the  time  when  and  in  the  way  in  which  it  was 
supposed  capable  of  being  real,  B  also  must 
[30]  then  and  in  that  way  be  real. 

5 

As  all  potencies  are  either  innate,  like  the 
senses,  or  come  by  practice,  like  the  power  of 
playing  the  flute,  or  by  learning,  like  artistic 
power,  those  which  come  by  practice  or  by 
rational  formula  we  must  acquire  by  previous 
exercise  but  this  is  not  necessary  with  those 
which  are  not  of  this  nature  and  which  imply 
passivity. 

[35]  Since  that  which  is  ‘capable’  is  capable  of 
something  and  at  some  time  in  some  way  (with 
1048a  all  the  other  qualifications  which  must 
be  present  in  the  definition),  and  since  some 
things  can  produce  change  according  to  a  ra¬ 
tional  formula  and  their  potencies  involve 
such  a  formula,  while  other  things  are  non- 
rational  and  their  potencies  are  non-rational, 
and  the  former  potencies  must  be  in  a  living 
[5]  thing,  while  the  latter  can  be  both  in  the 
living  and  in  the  lifeless;  as  regards  potencies 
of  the  latter  kind,  when  the  agent  and  the 
patient  meet  in  the  way  appropriate  to  the  po¬ 
tency  in  question,  the  one  must  act  and  the 
other  be  acted  on,  but  with  the  former  kind 
of  potency  this  is  not  necessary.  For  the  non- 
rational  potencies  are  all  productive  of  one  ef¬ 
fect  each,  but  the  rational  produce  contrary 
effects,  so  that  if  they  produced  their  effects 
necessarily  they  would  produce  contrary  effects 
[/o]  at  the  same  time;  but  this  is  impossible. 
There  must,  then,  be  something  else  that  de¬ 
cides;  I  mean  by  this,  desire  or  will.  For  which¬ 
ever  of  two  things  the  animal  desires  decisively, 
it  will  do,  when  it  is  present,  and  meets  the 
passive  object,  in  the  way  appropriate  to  the 
potency  in  question.  Therefore  everything 


which  has  a  rational  potency,  when  it  desires 
that  for  which  it  has  a  potency  and  in  the 
circumstances  in  which  it  has  the  potency, 
[75]  must  do  this.  And  it  has  the  potency  in 
question  when  the  passive  object  is  present  and 
is  in  a  certain  state;  if  not  it  will  not  be  able 
to  act.  (To  add  the  qualification  ‘if  nothing 
external  prevents  it’  is  not  further  necessary; 
for  it  has  the  potency  on  the  terms  on  which 
this  is  a  potency  of  acting,  and  it  is  this  not  in 
all  circumstances  but  on  certain  conditions, 
among  which  will  be  the  exclusion  of  external 
[20]  hindrances;  for  these  are  barred  by  some 
of  the  positive  qualifications.)  And  so  even  if 
one  has  a  rational  wish,  or  an  appetite,  to  do 
two  things  or  contrary  things  at  the  same  time, 
one  will  not  do  them;  for  it  is  not  on  these 
terms  that  one  has  the  potency  for  them,  nor  is 
it  a  potency  of  doing  both  at  the  same  time, 
since  one  will  do  the  things  which  it  is  a  po¬ 
tency  of  doing,  on  the  terms  on  which  one  has 
the  potency. 

6 

[25]  Since  we  have  treated1  of  the  kind  of  po¬ 
tency  which  is  related  to  movement,  let  us 
discuss  actuality — what,  and  what  kind  of 
thing,  actuality  is.  For  in  the  course  of  our 
analysis  it  will  also  become  clear,  with  regard 
to  the  potential,  that  we  not  only  ascribe 
potency  to  that  whose  nature  it  is  to  move 
something  else,  or  to  be  moved  by  something 
else,  either  without  qualification  or  in  some 
particular  way,  but  also  use  the  word  in  an¬ 
other  sense,  which  is  the  reason  of  the  inquiry 
[30]  in  the  course  of  which  we  have  discussed 
these  previous  senses  also.  Actuality,  then,  is 
the  existence  of  a  thing  not  in  the  way  which 
we  express  by  ‘potentially’;  we  say  that  po¬ 
tentially,  for  instance,  a  statue  of  Hermes  is  in 
the  block  of  wood  and  the  half-line  is  in  the 
whole,  because  it  might  be  separated  out,  and 
we  call  even  the  man  who  is  not  studying  a 
man  of  science,  if  he  is  capable  of  studying; 
[35]  the  thing  that  stands  in  contrast  to  each 
of  these  exists  actually.  Our  meaning  can  be 
seen  in  the  particular  cases  by  induction,  and 
we  must  not  seek  a  definition  of  everything 
but  be  content  to  grasp  the  analogy,  that  it  is  as 
that  which  is  building  is  to  that  which  is  cap- 
104815  able  of  building,  and  the  waking  to  the 
sleeping,  and  that  which  is  seeing  to  that  which 
has  its  eyes  shut  but  has  sight,  and  that  which 
has  been  shaped  out  of  the  matter  to  the  matter, 
and  that  which  has  been  wrought  up  to  the 
1  Cl.  ix.  1-5. 


574  METAPHYSICS  1049‘ 


unwrought.  Let  actuality  be  defined  by  one 
[5]  member  of  this  antithesis,  and  the  potential 
by  the  other.  But  all  things  are  not  said  in  the 
same  sense  to  exist  actually,  but  only  by  analogy 
— as  A  is  in  B  or  to  B,  C  is  in  D  or  to  D;  for 
some  are  as  movement  to  potency,  and  the 
others  as  substance  to  some  sort  of  matter. 

But  also  the  infinite  and  the  void  and  all 
[/o]  similar  things  are  said  to  exist  poten¬ 
tially  and  actually  in  a  different  sense  from 
that  which  applies  to  many  other  things,  e.g. 
to  that  which  sees  or  walks  or  is  seen.  For  of 
the  latter  class  these  predicates  can  at  some 
time  be  also  truly  asserted  without  qualifica¬ 
tion;  for  the  seen  is  so  called  sometimes  because 
it  is  being  seen,  sometimes  because  it  is  cap¬ 
able  of  being  seen.  But  the  infinite  does  not 
exist  potentially  in  the  sense  that  it  will  ever 
actually  have  separate  existence;  it  exists  po- 
[75]  tentially  only  for  knowledge.  For  the  fact 
that  the  process  of  dividing  never  comes  to  an 
end  ensures  that  this  activity  exists  potentially, 
but  not  that  the  infinite  exists  separately. 

Since  of  the  actions  which  have  a  limit  none 
is  an  end  but  all  are  relative  to  the  end,  e.g. 
the  removing  of  fat,  or  fat-removal,  and  the 
[20]  bodily  parts  themselves  when  one  is  mak¬ 
ing  them  thin  are  in  movement  in  this  way 
(i.e.  without  being  already  that  at  which  the 
movement  aims),  this  is  not  an  action  or  at 
least  not  a  complete  one  (for  it  is  not  an  end); 
but  that  movement  in  which  the  end  is  present 
is  an  action.  E.g.  at  the  same  time  we  are  seeing 
and  have  seen,  are  understanding  and  have 
understood,  are  thinking  and  have  thought 
(while  it  is  not  true  that  at  the  same  time  we 
are  learning  and  have  learnt,  or  are  being  cured 
[25]  and  have  been  cured).  At  the  same  time 
we  are  living  well  and  have  lived  well,  and 
are  happy  and  have  been  happy.  If  not,  the 
process  would  have  had  sometime  to  cease,  as 
the  process  of  making  thin  ceases:  but,  as 
things  are,  it  does  not  cease;  we  are  living  and 
have  lived.  Of  these  processes,  then,  we  must 
call  the  one  set  movements,  and  the  other  actu¬ 
alities.  For  every  movement  is  incomplete — 
making  thin,  learning,  walking,  building; 
[jo]  these  are  movements,  and  incomplete  at 
that.  For  it  is  not  true  that  at  the  same  time  a 
thing  is  walking  and  has  walked,  or  is  build¬ 
ing  and  has  built,  or  is  coming  to  be  and  has 
come  to  be,  or  is  being  moved  and  has  been 
moved,  but  what  is  being  moved  is  different 
from  what  has  been  moved,  and  what  is  mov¬ 
ing  from  what  has  moved.  But  it  is  the  same 
thing  that  at  the  same  time  has  seen  and  is 


seeing,  or  is  thinking  and  has  thought.  The 
latter  sort  of  process,  then,  I  call  an  actuality, 
and  the  former  a  movement. 

7 

[j5]  What,  and  what  kind  of  thing,  the  actual 

is,  may  be  taken  as  explained  by  these  and  sim¬ 
ilar  considerations.  But  we  must  distinguish 
when  a  thing  exists  potentially  and  when  it 
does  not;  for  it  is  not  at  any  and  every  time. 
1049a  E.g.  is  earth  potentially  a  man?  No — 
but  rather  when  it  has  already  become  seed, 
and  perhaps  not  even  then.  It  is  just  as  it  is 
with  being  healed;  not  everything  can  be 
healed  by  the  medical  art  or  by  luck,  but  there 
is  a  certain  kind  of  thing  which  is  capable  of 

it,  and  only  this  is  potentially  healthy.  And  (1) 
[5]  the  delimiting  mark  of  that  which  as  a 
result  of  thought  comes  to  exist  in  complete 
reality  from  having  existed  potentially  is  that 
if  the  agent  has  willed  it  it  comes  to  pass  if 
nothing  external  hinders,  while  the  condition 
on  the  other  side — viz.  in  that  which  is  healed 
— is  that  nothing  in  it  hinders  the  result.  It  is 
on  similar  terms  that  we  have  what  is  poten¬ 
tially  a  house;  if  nothing  in  the  thing  acted  on 
[/o]  — i.e.  in  the  matter — prevents  it  from  be¬ 
coming  a  house,  and  if  there  is  nothing  which 
must  be  added  or  taken  away  or  changed,  this 
is  potentially  a  house;  and  the  same  is  true  of  all 
other  things  the  source  of  whose  becoming  is  ex¬ 
ternal.  And  (2)  in  the  cases  in  which  the  source 
of  the  becoming  is  in  the  very  thing  which 
comes  to  be,  a  thing  is  potentially  all  those 
things  which  it  will  be  of  itself  if  nothing  ex¬ 
ternal  hinders  it.  E.g.  the  seed  is  not  yet  poten¬ 
tially  a  man;  for  it  must  be  deposited  in  some- 
[/5J  thing  other  than  itself  and  undergo  a 
change.  But  when  through  its  own  motive 
principle  it  has  already  got  such  and  such  attri¬ 
butes,  in  this  state  it  is  already  potentially  a 
man;  while  in  the  former  state  it  needs  another 
motive  principle,  just  as  earth  is  not  yet  poten¬ 
tially  a  statue  (for  it  must  first  change  in  order 
to  become  brass.) 

It  seems  that  when  we  call  a  thing  not  some¬ 
thing  else  but  ‘thaten’ — e.g.  a  casket  is  not 
[20]  ‘wood'  but  ‘wooden’,  and  wood  is  not 
‘earth’  but  ‘earthen’,  and  again  earth  will  illus¬ 
trate  our  point  if  it  is  similarly  not  something 
else  but  ‘thaten’ — that  other  thing  is  always 
potentially  (in  the  full  sense  of  that  word)  the 
thing  which  comes  after  it  in  this  series.  E.g.  a 
casket  is  not  ‘earthen’  nor  ‘earth’,  but  ‘wooden’; 
for  this  is  potentially  a  casket  and  this  is  the 
matter  of  a  casket,  wood  in  general  of  a  casket 


1050*  BOOK  IX,  CHAPTERS  6-8  575 


in  general,  and  this  particular  wood,  of  this 
particular  casket.  And  if  there  is  a  first  thing, 
which  is  no  longer,  in  reference  to  something 
[25]  else,  called  ‘thaten’,  this  is  prime  matter; 
e.g.  if  earth  is  ‘airy’  and  air  is  not  ‘fire’  but 
‘fiery’,  fire  is  prime  matter,  which  is  not  a  ‘this’. 
For  the  subject  or  substratum  is  differentiated 
by  being  a  ‘this’  or  not  being  one;  i.e.  the  sub¬ 
stratum  of  modifications  is,  e.g.  a  man,  i.e.  a 
body  and  a  soul,  while  the  modification  is 
[jo]  ‘musical’  or  ‘pale’.  (The  subject  is  called, 
when  music  comes  to  be  present  in  it,  not 
‘music’  but  ‘musical’,  and  the  man  is  not 
‘paleness’  but  ‘pale’,  and  not  ‘ambulation’  or 
‘movement’  but  ‘walking’  or  ‘moving’, — which 
is  akin  to  the  ‘thaten’.)  Wherever  this  is  so, 
then,  the  ultimate  subject  is  a  substance;  but 
when  this  is  not  so  but  the  predicate  is  a  form 
[35]  and  a  ‘this’,  the  ultimate  subject  is  matter 
and  material  substance.  And  it  is  only  right 
that  ‘thaten’  should  be  used  with  reference 
1049b  both  to  the  matter  and  to  the  accidents; 
for  both  are  indeterminates. 

We  have  stated,  then,  when  a  thing  is  to  be 
said  to  exist  potentially  and  when  it  is  not. 

8 

From  our  discussion  of  the  various  senses  of 
[5]  ‘prior’,1  it  is  clear  that  actuality  is  prior  to 
potency.  And  I  mean  by  potency  not  only  that 
definite  kind  which  is  said  to  be  a  principle  of 
change  in  another  thing  or  in  the  thing  itself 
regarded  as  other,  but  in  general  every  prin¬ 
ciple  of  movement  or  of  rest.  For  nature  also 
is  in  the  same  genus  as  potency;  for  it  is  a 
[/o]  principle  of  movement — not,  however,  in 
something  else  but  in  the  thing  itself  qua  itself. 
To  all  such  potency,  then,  actuality  is  prior 
both  in  formula  and  in  substantiality;  and  in 
time  it  is  prior  in  one  sense,  and  in  another  not. 

(1)  Clearly  it  is  prior  in  formula;  for  that 
which  is  in  the  primary  sense  potential  is  po¬ 
tential  because  it  is  possible  for  it  to  become  ac¬ 
tive;  e.g.  I  mean  by  ‘capable  of  building’  that 
[75]  which  can  build,  and  by  ‘capable  of  see¬ 
ing’  that  which  can  see,  and  by  ‘visible’  that 
which  can  be  seen.  And  the  same  account  ap¬ 
plies  to  all  other  cases,  so  that  the  formula  and 
the  knowledge  of  the  one  must  precede  the 
knowledge  of  the  other. 

(2)  In  time  it  is  prior  in  this  sense:  the  actual 
which  is  identical  in  species  though  not  in 
number  with  a  potentially  existing  thing  is 

frior  to  it.  I  mean  that  to  this  particular  man 
20]  who  now  exists  actually  and  to  the  corn 
^  Cf.  v.  1 1 . 


and  to  the  seeing  subject  the  matter  and  the 
seed  and  that  which  is  capable  of  seeing,  which 
are  potentially  a  man  and  corn  and  seeing,  but 
not  yet  actually  so,  are  prior  in  time;  but  prior 
in  time  to  these  are  other  actually  existing 
things,  from  which  they  were  produced.  For 
from  the  potentially  existing  the  actually  exist¬ 
ing  is  always  produced  by  an  actually  existing 
[25]  thing,  e.g.  man  from  man,  musician  by 
musician;  there  is  always  a  first  mover,  and 
the  mover  already  exists  actually.  We  have 
said  in  our  account  of  substance2  that  every¬ 
thing  that  is  produced  is  something  produced 
from  something  and  by  something,  and  that 
the  same  in  species  as  it. 

This  is  why  it  is  thought  impossible  to  be  a 
[jo]  builder  if  one  has  built  nothing  or  a 
harper  if  one  has  never  played  the  harp;  for 
he  who  learns  to  play  the  harp  learns  to  play 
it  by  playing  it,  and  all  other  learners  do  sim¬ 
ilarly.  And  thence  arose  the  sophistical  quibble, 
that  one  who  does  not  possess  a  science  will  be 
doing  that  which  is  the  object  of  the  science; 
for  he  who  is  learning  it  does  not  possess  it. 
[55]  But  since,  of  that  which  is  coming  to  be, 
some  part  must  have  come  to  be,  and,  of  that 
which,  in  general,  is  changing,  some  part  must 
have  changed  (this  is  shown  in  the  treatise  on 
1050*  movement3),  he  who  is  learning  must, 
it  would  seem,  possess  some  part  of  the  sci¬ 
ence.  But  here  too,  then,  it  is  clear  that  actuality 
is  in  this  sense  also,  viz.  in  order  of  generation 
and  of  time,  prior  to  potency. 

But  (3)  it  is  also  prior  in  substantiality; 
firstly,  (a)  because  the  things  that  are  posterior 
in  becoming  are  prior  in  form  and  in  sub- 
[5]  stantiality  (e.g.  man  is  prior  to  boy  and 
human  being  to  seed;  for  the  one  already  has  its 
form,  and  the  other  has  not),  and  because 
everything  that  comes  to  be  moves  towards  a 
principle,  i.e.  an  end  (for  that  for  the  sake  of 
which  a  thing  is,  is  its  principle,  and  the  be¬ 
coming  is  for  the  sake  of  the  end),  and  the 
actuality  is  the  end,  and  it  is  for  the  sake  of 
[/o]  this  that  the  potency  is  acquired.  For  ani¬ 
mals  do  not  see  in  order  that  they  may  have 
sight,  but  they  have  sight  that  they  may  see. 
And  similarly  men  have  the  art  of  building  that 
they  may  build,  and  theoretical  science  that 
they  may  theorize;  but  they  do  not  theorize 
that  they  may  have  theoretical  science,  except 
those  who  are  learning  by  practice;  and  these 
do  not  theorize  except  in  a  limited  sense,  or 
[75]  because  they  have  no  need  to  theorize. 
Further,  matter  exists  in  a  potential  state,  just 
2  Cf.  vii.  7,  8.  8  Cf.  Physics ,  vi.  6. 


576  METAPHYSICS  1051* 


because  it  may  come  to  its  form;  and  when  it 
exists  actually,  then  it  is  in  its  form.  And  the 
same  holds  good  in  all  cases,  even  those  in 
which  the  end  is  a  movement.  And  so,  as 
teachers  think  they  have  achieved  their  end 
when  they  have  exhibited  the  pupil  at  work, 
nature  does  likewise.  For  if  this  is  not  the  case, 
[20]  we  shall  have  Pauson’s  Hermes  over 
again,  since  it  will  be  hard  to  say  about  the 
knowledge,  as  about  the  figure  in  the  picture, 
whether  it  is  within  or  without.  For  the  action 
is  the  end,  and  the  actuality  is  the  action. 
And  so  even  the  word  ‘actuality’  is  derived 
from  ‘action’,  and  points  to  the  complete 
reality. 

And  while  in  some  cases  the  exercise  is  the 
ultimate  thing  (e.g.  in  sight  the  ultimate  thing 
[25]  is  seeing,  and  no  other  product  besides 
this  results  from  sight),  but  from  some  things 
a  product  follows  (e.g.  from  the  art  of  build¬ 
ing  there  results  a  house  as  well  as  the  act  of 
building),  yet  none  the  less  the  act  is  in  the 
former  case  the  end  and  in  the  latter  more  of 
an  end  than  the  potency  is.  For  the  act  of 
building  is  realized  in  the  thing  that  is  being 
built,  and  comes  to  be,  and  is,  at  the  same 
time  as  the  house. 

[jo]  Where,  then,  the  result  is  something 
apart  from  the  exercise,  the  actuality  is  in  the 
thing  that  is  being  made,  e.g.  the  act  of  build¬ 
ing  is  in  the  thing  that  is  being  built  and  that 
of  weaving  in  the  thing  that  is  being  woven, 
and  similarly  in  all  other  cases,  and  in  general 
the  movement  is  in  the  thing  that  is  being 
moved;  but  where  there  is  no  product  apart 
[^5]  from  the  actuality,  the  actuality  is  pres¬ 
ent  in  the  agents,  e.g.  the  act  of  seeing  is  in 
the  seeing  subject  and  that  of  theorizing  in 
the  theorizing  subject  and  the  life  is  in  the  soul 
1050b  (and  therefore  well-being  also;  for  it 
is  a  certain  kind  of  life). 

Obviously,  therefore,  the  substance  or  form 
is  actuality.  According  to  this  argument,  then, 
it  is  obvious  that  actuality  is  prior  in  substantial 
being  to  potency;  and  as  we  have  said,1  one 
actuality  always  precedes  another  in  time  right 
[5]  back  to  the  actuality  of  the  eternal  prime 
mover. 

But  (b)  actuality  is  prior  in  a  stricter  sense 
also;  for  eternal  things  are  prior  in  substance  to 
perishable  things,  and  no  eternal  thing  exists 
potentially.  The  reason  is  this.  Every  potency 
is  at  one  and  the  same  time  a  potency  of  the 
opposite;  for,  while  that  which  is  not  capable 
[/o]  of  being  present  in  a  subject  cannot  be 

1  ic>49b  17-29. 


present,  everything  that  is  capable  of  being 
may  possibly  not  be  actual.  That,  then,  which 
is  capable  of  being  may  either  be  or  not  be; 
the  same  thing,  then,  is  capable  both  of  being 
and  of  not  being.  And  that  which  is  capable  of 
not  being  may  possibly  not  be;  and  that  which 
may  possibly  not  be  is  perishable,  either  in  the 
full  sense,  or  in  the  precise  sense  in  which  it  is 
[75]  said  that  it  possibly  may  not  be,  i.e.  in 
respect  either  of  place  or  of  quantity  or  qual¬ 
ity;  ‘in  the  full  sense’  means  ‘in  respect  of  sub¬ 
stance’.  Nothing,  then,  which  is  in  the  full 
sense  imperishable  is  in  the  full  sense  poten¬ 
tially  existent  (though  there  is  nothing  to  pre¬ 
vent  its  being  so  in  some  respect,  e.g.  poten¬ 
tially  of  a  certain  quality  or  in  a  certain  place); 
all  imperishable  things,  then,  exist  actually. 
Nor  can  anything  which  is  of  necessity  exist 
potentially;  yet  these  things  are  primary;  for 
if  these  did  not  exist,  nothing  would  exist.  Nor 
[20]  does  eternal  movement,  if  there  be  such, 
exist  potentially;  and,  if  there  is  an  eternal 
mobile,  it  is  not  in  motion  in  virtue  of  a  poten¬ 
tiality,  except  in  respect  of  ‘whence’  and  ‘whith¬ 
er’  (there  is  nothing  to  prevent  its  having  mat¬ 
ter  which  makes  it  capable  of  movement  in 
various  directions).  And  so  the  sun  and  the 
stars  and  the  whole  heaven  are  ever  active,  and 
there  is  no  fear  that  they  may  sometime  stand 
still,  as  the  natural  philosophers  fear  they  may. 
Nor  do  they  tire  in  this  activity;  for  movement 
[25]  is  not  for  them,  as  it  is  for  perishable 
things,  connected  with  the  potentiality  for  op¬ 
posites,  so  that  the  continuity  of  the  movement 
should  be  laborious;  for  it  is  that  kind  of  sub¬ 
stance  which  is  matter  and  potency,  not  actu¬ 
ality,  that  causes  this. 

Imperishable  things  are  imitated  by  those 
that  are  involved  in  change,  e.g.  earth  and  fire. 
For  these  also  are  ever  active;  for  they  have 
their  movement  of  themselves  and  in  them- 
[jo]  selves.  But  the  other  potencies,  according 
to  our  previous  discussion,2  are  all  potencies 
for  opposites;  for  that  which  can  move  another 
in  this  way  can  also  move  it  not  in  this  way, 
i.e.  if  it  acts  according  to  a  rational  formula; 
and  the  same  non-rational  potencies  will  pro¬ 
duce  opposite  results  by  their  presence  or  ab¬ 
sence. 

[^5]  If,  then,  there  are  any  entities  or  sub¬ 
stances  such  as  the  dialecticians  say  the  Ideas 
are,  there  must  be  something  much  more  sci¬ 
entific  than  science-itself  and  something  more 
1051*  mobile  than  movement-itself;  for  these 
will  be  more  of  the  nature  of  actualities,  while 

*Cf.b8-i2. 


1051b 

science-itself  and  movement-itself  are  potencies 
for  these. 

Obviously,  then,  actuality  is  prior  both  to 
potency  and  to  every  principle  of  change. 

9 

That  the  actuality  is  also  better  and  more  valu¬ 
able  than  the  good  potency  is  evident  from  the 
following  argument.  Everything  of  which  we 
[5]  say  that  it  can  do  something,  is  alike 
capable  of  contraries,  e.g.  that  of  which  we  say 
that  it  can  be  well  is  the  same  as  that  which 
can  be  ill,  and  has  both  potencies  at  once;  for 
the  same  potency  is  a  potency  of  health  and 
illness,  of  rest  and  motion,  of  building  and 
throwing  down,  of  being  built  and  being 
[/o]  thrown  down.  The  capacity  for  contraries, 
then,  is  present  at  the  same  time;  but  con¬ 
traries  cannot  be  present  at  the  same  time,  and 
the  actualities  also  cannot  be  present  at  the 
same  time,  e.g.  health  and  illness.  Therefore, 
while  the  good  must  be  one  of  them,  the  capa¬ 
city  is  both  alike,  or  neither;  the  actuality,  then, 
[75]  is  better.  Also  in  the  case  of  bad  things 
the  end  or  actuality  must  be  worse  than  the 
potency;  for  that  which  ‘can’  is  both  contraries 
alike.  Clearly,  then,  the  bad  does  not  exist  apart 
from  bad  things;  for  the  bad  is  in  its  nature 
posterior  to  the  potency.  And  therefore  we  may 
also  say  that  in  the  things  which  are  from  the 
[20]  beginning,  i.e.  in  eternal  things,  there  is 
nothing  bad,  nothing  defective,  nothing  per¬ 
verted  (for  perversion  is  something  bad). 


It  is  by  an  activity  also  that  geometrical  con¬ 
structions  are  discovered;  for  we  find  them  by 
dividing.  If  the  figures  had  been  already  di¬ 
vided,  the  constructions  would  have  been  obvi¬ 
ous;  but  as  it  is  they  are  present  only  poten- 


5  77 

daily.  Why  are  the  angles  of  the  triangle  equal 
to  two  right  angles?  Because  the  angles  about 
one  point  are  equal  to  two  right  angles.  If,  then, 
[25]  the  line  parallel  to  the  side  had  been  al¬ 
ready  drawn  upwards,  the  reason  would  have 
been  evident  to  any  one  as  soon  as  he  saw  the 
figure.  Why  is  the  angle  in  a  semicircle  in  all 
cases  a  right  angle?  If  three  lines  are  equal — 
the  two  which  form  the  base,  and  the  perpen¬ 
dicular  from  the  centre — the  conclusion  is  evi¬ 
dent  at  a  glance  to  one  who  knows  the  former 
proposition.  Obviously,  therefore,  the  poten¬ 
tially  existing  constructions  are  discovered  by 
[jo]  being  brought  to  actuality;  the  reason  is 
that  the  geometer’s  thinking  is  an  actuality; 
so  that  the  potency  proceeds  from  an  actuality; 
and  therefore  it  is  by  making  constructions 
that  people  come  to  know  them  (though  the 
single  actuality  is  later  in  generation  than  the 
corresponding  potency). 

10 

The  terms  ‘being*  and  ‘non-being*  are  employed 
[^5]  firstly  with  reference  to  the  categories, 
and  secondly  with  reference  to  the  potency  or 
actuality  of  these  or  their  non-potency  or  non- 
105  lb  actuality,  and  thirdly  in  the  sense  of 
true  and  false.  This  depends,  on  the  side  of 
the  objects,  on  their  being  combined  or  sep¬ 
arated,  so  that  he  who  thinks  the  separated  to 
be  separated  and  the  combined  to  be  combined 
has  the  truth,  while  he  whose  thought  is  in  a 
[5]  state  contrary  to  that  of  the  objects  is  in 
error.  This  being  so,  when  is  what  is  called 
truth  or  falsity  present,  and  when  is  it  not?  We 
must  consider  what  we  mean  by  these  terms. 
It  is  not  because  we  think  truly  that  you  are 
pale,  that  you  are  pale,  but  because  you  are  pale 
we  who  say  this  have  the  truth.  If,  then,  some 
things  are  always  combined  and  cannot  be 
[/o]  separated,  and  others  are  always  separated 
and  cannot  be  combined,  while  others  are  capa¬ 
ble  either  of  combination  or  of  separation,  ‘be¬ 
ing’  is  being  combined  and  one,  and  ‘not  being* 
is  being  not  combined  but  more  than  one.  Re¬ 
garding  contingent  facts,  then,  the  same  opin¬ 
ion  or  the  same  statement  comes  to  be  false  and 
true,  and  it  is  possible  for  it  to  be  at  one  time 
[75]  correct  and  at  another  erroneous;  but  re¬ 
garding  things  that  cannot  be  otherwise  opin¬ 
ions  are  not  at  one  time  true  and  at  another 
false,  but  the  same  opinions  are  always  true  or 
always  false. 

But  with  regard  to  incomposites,  what  is  be¬ 
ing  or  not  being,  and  truth  or  falsity?  A  thing 
of  this  sort  is  not  composite,  so  as  to  ‘be’  when 


BOOK  IX,  CHAPTERS  8-10 


57»  METAPHYSICS  1052b 


it  is  compounded,  and  not  to  ‘be’  if  it  is  sep- 
[20]  arated,  like  ‘that  the  wood  is  white*  or 
‘that  the  diagonal  is  incommensurable’;  nor 
will  truth  and  falsity  be  still  present  in  the  same 
way  as  in  the  previous  cases.  In  fact,  as  truth  is 
not  the  same  in  these  cases,  so  also  being  is 
not  the  same;  but  (a)  truth  or  falsity  is  as  fol¬ 
lows — contact  and  assertion  are  truth  (asser- 
[25]  tion  not  being  the  same  as  affirmation), 
and  ignorance  is  non-contact.  For  it  is  not  pos¬ 
sible  to  be  in  error  regarding  the  question 
what  a  thing  is,  save  in  an  accidental  sense; 
and  the  same  holds  good  regarding  non-com¬ 
posite  substances  (for  it  is  not  possible  to  be 
in  error  about  them).  And  they  all  exist  actu¬ 
ally,  not  potentially;  for  otherwise  they  would 
have  come  to  be  and  ceased  to  be;  but,  as  it  is, 
being  itself  does  not  come  to  be  (nor  cease  to 
be) ;  for  if  it  had  done  so  it  would  have  had  to 
[jo]  come  out  of  something.  About  the  things, 
then,  which  are  essences  and  actualities,  it  is 
not  possible  to  be  in  error,  but  only  to  know 
them  or  not  to  know  them.  But  we  do  inquire 
what  they  are,  viz.  whether  they  are  of  such 
and  such  a  nature  or  not. 

( b )  As  regards  the  ' being ’  that  answers  to 
truth  and  the  ‘non-being’  that  answers  to  fal¬ 
sity,  in  one  case  there  is  truth  if  the  subject 


and  the  attribute  are  really  combined,  and  fal- 
[35]  sity  if  they  are  not  combined;  in  the  other 
case,  if  the  object  is  existent  it  exists  in  a  par¬ 
ticular  way,  and  if  it  does  not  exist  in  this  way 
1052a  it  does  not  exist  at  all.  And  truth  means 
knowing  these  objects,  and  falsity  does  not  ex¬ 
ist,  nor  error,  but  only  ignorance — and  not  an 
ignorance  which  is  like  blindness;  for  blind¬ 
ness  is  akin  to  a  total  absence  of  the  faculty  of 
thinking. 

It  is  evident  also  that  about  unchangeable 
[5]  things  there  can  be  no  error  in  respect  of 
time,  if  we  assume  them  to  be  unchangeable. 
E.g.  if  we  suppose  that  the  triangle  does  not 
change,  we  shall  not  suppose  that  at  one  time 
its  angles  are  equal  to  two  right  angles  while  at 
another  time  they  are  not  (for  that  would  im¬ 
ply  change).  It  is  possible,  however,  to  suppose 
that  one  member  of  such  a  class  has  a  certain 
attribute  and  another  has  not;  e.g.  while  we 
may  suppose  that  no  even  number  is  prime,  we 
may  suppose  that  some  are  and  some  are  not. 
But  regarding  a  numerically  single  number  not 
even  this  form  of  error  is  possible;  for  we  can- 
[/o]  not  in  this  case  suppose  that  one  instance 
has  an  attribute  and  another  has  not,  but 
whether  our  judgement  be  true  or  false,  it  is 
implied  that  the  fact  is  eternal. 


BOOK  X 


1 

[75]  We  have  said  previously,  in  our  distinc¬ 
tion  of  the  various  meanings  of  words,1  that 
‘one*  has  several  meanings;  the  things  that  are 
directly  and  of  their  own  nature  and  not  acci¬ 
dentally  called  one  may  be  summarized  under 
four  heads,  though  the  word  is  used  in  more 
senses.  (1)  There  is  the  continuous,  either  in 
general,  or  especially  that  which  is  continuous 
by  nature  and  not  by  contact  nor  by  being  tied 
[20]  together;  and  of  these,  that  has  more 
unity  and  is  prior,  whose  movement  is  more 
indivisible  and  simpler.  (2)  That  which  is  a 
whole  and  has  a  certain  shape  and  form  is  one 
in  a  still  higher  degree;  and  especially  if  a 
thing  is  of  this  sort  by  nature,  and  not  by  force 
like  the  things  which  are  unified  by  glue  or 
nails  or  by  being  tied  together,  i.e.  if  it  has  in 
[25]  itself  the  cause  of  its  continuity.  A  thing 
is  of  this  sort  because  its  movement  is  one  and 
indivisible  in  place  and  time;  so  that  evidently 
if  a  thing  has  by  nature  a  principle  of  move¬ 
ment  that  is  of  the  first  kind  (i.e.  local  move- 
1  v.  6. 


ment)  and  the  first  in  that  kind  (i.e.  circular 
movement),  this  is  in  the  primary  sense  one 
extended  thing.  Some  things,  then,  are  one  in 
this  way,  qua  continuous  or  whole,  and  the 
other  things  that  are  one  are  those  whose  defi¬ 
ne]  nition  is  one.  Of  this  sort  are  the  things 
the  thought  of  which  is  one,  i.e.  those  the 
thought  of  which  is  indivisible;  and  it  is  indi¬ 
visible  if  the  thing  is  indivisible  in  kind  or  in 
number.  (3)  In  number,  then,  the  individual  is 
indivisible,  and  (4)  in  kind,  that  which  in  in¬ 
telligibility  and  in  knowledge  is  indivisible,  so 
that  that  which  causes  substances  to  be  one 
must  be  one  in  the  primary  sense.  ‘One’,  then, 
has  all  these  meanings — the  naturally  continu- 
[33]  ous  and  the  whole,  and  the  individual  and 
the  universal.  And  all  these  are  one  because  in 
some  cases  the  movement,  in  others  the  thought 
or  the  definition  is  indivisible. 

1052b  But  it  must  be  observed  that  the  ques¬ 
tions,  what  sort  of  things  are  said  to  be  one, 
and  what  it  is  to  be  one  and  what  is  the  defini¬ 
tion  of  it,  should  not  be  assumed  to  be  the  same. 
‘One’  has  all  these  meanings,  and  each  of  the 
[5]  things  to  which  one  of  these  kinds  of  unity 


1053®  BOOK  IX,  CHAPTER  10— BOOK  X,  CHAPTER  1 


belongs  will  be  one;  but  ‘to  be  one’  will  some¬ 
times  mean  being  one  of  these  things,  and 
sometimes  being  something  else  which  is  even 
nearer  to  the  meaning  of  the  word  ‘one’  while 
these  other  things  approximate  to  its  applica¬ 
tion.  This  is  also  true  of  ‘element’  or  ‘cause’,  if 
one  had  both  to  specify  the  things  of  which  it  is 
redicable  and  to  render  the  definition  of  the 
jo]  word.  For  in  a  sense  fire  is  an  element 
(and  doubtless  also  ‘the  indefinite’  or  some¬ 
thing  else  of  the  sort  is  by  its  own  nature  the 
element),  but  in  a  sense  it  is  not;  for  it  is  not 
the  same  thing  to  be  fire  and  to  be  an  element, 
but  while  as  a  particular  thing  with  a  nature  of 
its  own  fire  is  an  element,  the  name  ‘element’ 
means  that  it  has  this  attribute,  that  there  is 
something  which  is  made  of  it  as  a  primary 
[75]  constituent.  And  so  with  ‘cause’  and  ‘one’ 
and  all  such  terms.  For  this  reason,  too,  ‘to  be 
one’  means  ‘to  be  indivisible,  being  essentially 
a  “this”  and  capable  of  being  isolated  either  in 
place,  or  in  form  or  thought’;  or  perhaps  ‘to  be 
whole  and  indivisible’;  but  it  means  especially 
‘to  be  the  first  measure  of  a  kind’,  and  most 
strictly  of  quantity;  for  it  is  from  this  that  it 
has  been  extended  to  the  other  categories.  For 
[20]  measure  is  that  by  which  quantity  is 
known;  and  quantity  qua  quantity  is  known 
either  by  a  ‘one’  or  by  a  number,  and  all  num¬ 
ber  is  known  by  a  ‘one’.  Therefore  all  quantity 
qua  quantity  is  known  by  the  one,  and  that  by 
which  quantities  are  primarily  known  is  the 
one  itself;  and  so  the  one  is  the  starting-point 
of  number  qua  number.  And  hence  in  the  other 
classes  too  ‘measure’  means  that  by  which  each 
[25]  is  first  known,  and  the  measure  of  each  is 
a  unit — in  length,  in  breadth,  in  depth,  in 
weight,  in  speed.  (The  words  ‘weight’  and 
‘speed’  are  common  to  both  contraries;  for  each 
of  them  has  two  meanings — ‘weight’  means 
both  that  which  has  any  amount  of  gravity  and 
that  which  has  an  excess  of  gravity,  and  ‘speed’ 
both  that  which  has  any  amount  of  movement 
and  that  which  has  an  excess  of  movement;  for 
[jo]  even  the  slow  has  a  certain  speed  and  the 
comparatively  light  a  certain  weight.) 

In  all  these,  then,  the  measure  and  starting- 
point  is  something  one  and  indivisible,  since 
even  in  lines  we  treat  as  indivisible  the  line  a 
foot  long.  For  everywhere  we  seek  as  the  meas¬ 
ure  something  one  and  indivisible;  and  this  is 
[35]  that  which  is  simple  either  in  quality  or  in 
quantity.  Now  where  it  is  thought  impossible 
to  take  away  or  to  add,  there  the  measure  is  ex¬ 
act  (hence  that  of  number  is  most  exact;  for  we 
1053®  posit  the  unit  as  indivisible  in  every  re¬ 


spect);  but  in  all  other  cases  we  imitate  this 
sort  of  measure.  For  in  the  case  of  a  furlong  or 
a  talent  or  of  anything  comparatively  large  any 
addition  or  subtraction  might  more  easily  es¬ 
cape  our  notice  than  in  the  case  of  something 
[5]  smaller;  so  that  the  first  thing  from  which, 
as  far  as  our  perception  goes,  nothing  can  be 
subtracted,  all  men  make  the  measure,  whether 
of  liquids  or  of  solids,  whether  of  weight  or 
of  size;  and  they  think  they  know  the  quantity 
when  they  know  it  by  means  of  this  measure. 
And  indeed  they  know  movement  too  by  the 
simple  movement  and  the  quickest;  for  this 
[jo]  occupies  least  time.  And  so  in  astronomy 
a  ‘one’  of  this  sort  is  the  starting-point  and 
measure  (for  they  assume  the  movement  of  the 
heavens  to  be  uniform  and  the  quickest,  and 
judge  the  others  by  reference  to  it),  and  in  mu¬ 
sic  the  quarter-tone  (because  it  is  the  least  in¬ 
terval),  and  in  speech  the  letter.  And  all  these 
are  ones  in  this  sense — not  that  ‘one’  is  some¬ 
thing  predicable  in  the  same  sense  of  all  of 
these,  but  in  the  sense  we  have  mentioned. 

But  the  measure  is  not  always  one  in  num¬ 
ber — sometimes  there  are  several;  e.g.  the  quar- 
[75]  ter-tones  (not  to  the  ear,  but  as  deter¬ 
mined  by  the  ratios)  are  two,  and  the  articulate 
sounds  by  which  we  measure  are  more  than 
one,  and  the  diagonal  of  the  square  and  its  side 
are  measured  by  two  quantities,  and  all  spatial 
magnitudes  reveal  similar  varieties  of  unit. 
Thus,  then,  the  one  is  the  measure  of  all  things, 
because  we  come  to  know  the  elements  in  the 
substance  by  dividing  the  things  either  in  re¬ 
spect  of  quantity  or  in  respect  of  kind.  And  the 
[20]  one  is  indivisible  just  because  the  first  of 
each  class  of  things  is  indivisible.  But  it  is  not 
in  the  same  way  that  every  ‘one’  is  indivisible 
e.g.  a  foot  and  a  unit;  the  latter  is  indivisible  in 
every  respect,  while  the  former  must  be  placed 
among  things  which  are  undivided  to  percep¬ 
tion,  as  has  been  said  already1 — only  to  percep¬ 
tion,  for  doubtless  every  continuous  thing  is 
divisible. 

The  measure  is  always  homogeneous  with 
[25]  the  thing  measured;  the  measure  of  spa¬ 
tial  magnitudes  is  a  spatial  magnitude,  and  in 
particular  that  of  length  is  a  length,  that  of 
breadth  a  breadth,  that  of  articulate  sound  an 
articulate  sound,  that  of  weight  a  weight,  that 
of  units  a  unit.  (For  we  must  state  the  matter 
so,  and  not  say  that  the  measure  of  numbers  is 
a  number;  we  ought  indeed  to  say  this  if  we 
were  to  use  the  corresponding  form  of  words, 
but  the  claim  does  not  really  correspond — it  is 

xCf.  io52b33,  io53a5. 


580  METAPHYSICS  1054* 


[30]  as  if  one  claimed  that  the  measure  of  units 
is  units,  and  not  a  unit;  number  is  a  plurality  of 
units.) 

Knowledge,  also,  and  perception,  we  call  the 
measure  of  things  for  the  same  reason,  because 
we  come  to  know  something  by  them — while 
as  a  matter  of  fact  they  are  measured  rather 
than  measure  other  things.  But  it  is  with  us  as 
if  some  one  else  measured  us  and  we  came  to 
know  how  big  we  are  by  seeing  that  he  applied 
the  cubit-measure  to  such  and  such  a  fraction 
[33]  of  us.  But  Protagoras  says  ‘man  is  the 
measure  of  all  things’,1  as  if  he  had  said  ‘the 
man  who  knows’  or  ‘the  man  who  perceives’; 
1053b  and  these  because  they  have  respectively 
knowledge  and  perception,  which  we  say  are 
the  measures  of  objects.  Such  thinkers  are  say¬ 
ing  nothing,  then,  while  they  appear  to  be  say¬ 
ing  something  remarkable. 

Evidently,  then,  unity  in  the  strictest  sense,  if 
[5]  we  define  it  according  to  the  meaning  of 
the  word,  is  a  measure,  and  most  properly  of 
quantity,  and  secondly  of  quality.  And  some 
things  will  be  one  if  they  are  indivisible  in 
quantity,  and  others  if  they  are  indivisible  in 
quality;  and  so  that  which  is  one  is  indivisible, 
either  absolutely  or  qua  one. 

2 

With  regard  to  the  substance  and  nature  of  the 
[/o]  one  we  must  ask  in  which  of  two  ways  it 
exists.  This  is  the  very  question  that  we  re¬ 
viewed2  in  our  discussion  of  problems,  viz. 
what  the  one  is  and  how  we  must  conceive  of 
it,  whether  we  must  take  the  one  itself  as  be¬ 
ing  a  substance  (as  both  the  Pythagoreans  say 
in  earlier  and  Plato  in  later  times),  or  there  is, 
rather,  an  underlying  nature  and  the  one 
should  be  described  more  intelligibly  and  more 
in  the  manner  of  the  physical  philosophers,  of 
[75]  whom  one  says  the  one  is  love,  another 
says  it  is  air,  and  another  the  indefinite. 

If,  then,  no  universal  can  be  a  substance,  as 
has  been  said3  in  our  discussion  of  substance 
and  being,  and  if  being  itself  cannot  be  a  sub¬ 
stance  in  the  sense  of  a  one  apart  from  the 
many  (for  it  is  common  to  the  many),  but  is 
only  a  predicate,  clearly  unity  also  cannot  be  a 
[20]  substance;  for  being  and  unity  are  the 
most  universal  of  all  predicates.  Therefore,  on 
the  one  hand,  genera  are  not  certain  entities 
and  substances  separable  from  other  things; 
and  on  the  other  hand  the  one  cannot  be  a  ge- 

1  Fr.  1.  2  hi.  iooia  4-b25.  3  vii.  13. 


nus,  for  the  same  reasons  for  which  being  and 
substance  cannot  be  genera. 

Further,  the  position  must  be  similar  in  all 
the  kinds  of  unity.  Now  ‘unity’  has  just  as 
many  meanings  as  ‘being’;  so  that  since  in  the 
[25]  sphere  of  qualities  the  one  is  something 
definite — some  particular  kind  of  thing — and 
similarly  in  the  sphere  of  quantities,  clearly  we 
must  in  every  category  ask  what  the  one  is,  as 
we  must  ask  what  the  existent  is,  since  it  is  not 
enough  to  say  that  its  nature  is  just  to  be  one  or 
existent.  But  in  colours  the  one  is  a  colour,  e.g. 
white,  and  then  the  other  colours  are  observed 
to  be  produced  out  of  this  and  black,  and  black 
[30]  is  the  privation  of  white,  as  darkness  of 
light.  Therefore  if  all  existent  things  were  col¬ 
ours,  existent  things  would  have  been  a  num¬ 
ber,  indeed,  but  of  what?  Clearly  of  colours; 
and  the  ‘one’  would  have  been  a  particular  ‘one’, 
i.e.  white.  And  similarly  if  all  existing  things 
were  tunes,  they  would  have  been  a  number, 
[55]  but  a  number  of  quarter-tones,  and  their 
essence  would  not  have  been  number;  and  the 
one  would  have  been  something  whose  sub¬ 
stance  was  not  to  be  one  but  to  be  the  quarter- 
1054*  tone.  And  similarly  if  all  existent  things 
had  been  articulate  sounds,  they  would  have 
been  a  number  of  letters,  and  the  one  would 
have  been  a  vowel.  And  if  all  existent  things 
were  rectilinear  figures,  they  would  have  been 
a  number  of  figures,  and  the  one  would  have 
been  the  triangle.  And  the  same  argument  ap¬ 
plies  to  all  other  classes.  Since,  therefore,  while 
[5]  there  are  numbers  and  a  one  both  in  affec¬ 
tions  and  in  qualities  and  in  quantities  and  in 
movement,  in  all  cases  the  number  is  a  number 
of  particular  things  and  the  one  is  one  some¬ 
thing,  and  its  substance  is  not  just  to  be  one, 
the  same  must  be  true  of  substances  also;  for  it 
is  true  of  all  cases  alike. 

[70]  That  the  one,  then,  in  every  class  is  a  defi¬ 
nite  thing,  and  in  no  case  is  its  nature  just  this, 
unity,  is  evident;  but  as  in  colours  the  one-itself 
which  we  must  seek  is  one  colour,  so  too  in  sub¬ 
stance  the  one-itself  is  one  substance.  That  in  a 
sense  unity  means  the  same  as  being  is  clear 
from  the  facts  that  its  meanings  correspond  to 
the  categories  one  to  one,  and  it  is  not  com- 
[75]  prised  within  any  category  (e.g.  it  is  com¬ 
prised  neither  in  ‘what  a  thing  is’  nor  in  qual¬ 
ity,  but  is  related  to  them  just  as  being  is);  that 
in  ‘one  man’  nothing  more  is  predicated  than  in 
‘man’  (just  as  being  is  nothing  apart  from  sub¬ 
stance  or  quality  or  quantity);  and  that  to  be 
one  is  just  to  be  a  particular  thing. 


1055- 


BOOK  X,  CHAPTERS  1-4  581 


3 

[20]  The  one  and  the  many  are  opposed  in  sev¬ 
eral  ways,  of  which  one  is  the  opposition  of  the 
one  and  plurality  as  indivisible  and  divisible; 
for  that  which  is  either  divided  or  divisible  is 
called  a  plurality,  and  that  which  is  indivisible 
or  not  divided  is  called  one.  Now  since  opposi¬ 
tion  is  of  four  kinds,  and  one  of  these  two  terms 
is  privative  in  meaning,  they  must  be  contra- 
[25]  ries,  and  neither  contradictory  nor  correla¬ 
tive  in  meaning.  And  the  one  derives  its  name 
and  its  explanation  from  its  contrary,  the  indi¬ 
visible  from  the  divisible,  because  plurality  and 
the  divisible  is  more  perceptible  than  the  indi¬ 
visible,  so  that  in  definition  plurality  is  prior  to 
the  indivisible,  because  of  the  conditions  of  per¬ 
ception. 

[jo]  To  the  one  belong,  as  we  indicated  graph¬ 
ically  in  our  distinction  of  the  contraries,1  the 
same  and  the  like  and  the  equal,  and  to  plural¬ 
ity  belong  the  other  and  the  unlike  and  the  un¬ 
equal.  ‘The  same’  has  several  meanings;  (1) 
we  sometimes  mean  ‘the  same  numerically’; 
again,  (2)  we  call  a  thing  the  same  if  it  is  one 
both  in  definition  and  in  number,  e.g.  you  are 
one  with  yourself  both  in  form  and  in  matter; 
[55]  and  again,  (3)  if  the  definition  of  its  pri- 
1054b  mary  essence  is  one;  e.g.  equal  straight 
lines  are  the  same,  and  so  are  equal  and  equal¬ 
angled  quadrilaterals;  there  are  many  such,  but 
in  these  equality  constitutes  unity. 

Things  are  like  if,  not  being  absolutely  the 
same,  nor  without  difference  in  respect  of  their 
concrete  substance,  they  are  the  same  in  form; 
[5]  e.g.  the  larger  square  is  like  the  smaller, 
and  unequal  straight  lines  are  like;  they  are 
like,  but  not  absolutely  the  same.  Other  things 
are  like,  if,  having  the  same  form,  and  being 
things  in  which  difference  of  degree  is  possible, 
they  have  no  difference  of  degree.  Other  things, 
if  they  have  a  quality  that  is  in  form  one  and 
[10]  the  same — e.g.  whiteness — in  a  greater  or 
less  degree,  are  called  like  because  their  form 
is  one.  Other  things  are  called  like  if  the  quali¬ 
ties  they  have  in  common  are  more  numerous 
than  those  in  which  they  differ — either  the 
qualities  in  general  or  the  prominent  qualities; 
e.g.  tin  is  like  silver,  qua  white,  and  gold  is  like 
fire,  qua  yellow  and  red. 

Evidently,  then,  ‘other’  and  ‘unlike’  also  have 
several  meanings.  And  the  other  in  one  sense  is 
the  opposite  of  the  same  (so  that  everything  is 
[75]  either  the  same  as  or  other  than  every- 

1  Cf.  iv,  1004*  2. 


thing  else).  In  another  sense  things  are  other 
unless  both  their  matter  and  their  definition 
are  one  (so  that  you  are  other  than  your  neigh¬ 
bour).  The  other  in  the  third  sense  is  exempli¬ 
fied  in  the  objects  of  mathematics.  ‘Other  or 
the  same’  can  therefore  be  predicated  of  every¬ 
thing  with  regard  to  everything  else — but  only 
if  the  things  are  one  and  existent,  for  ‘other’  is 
not  the  contradictory  of  ‘the  same’;  which  is 
[20]  why  it  is  not  predicated  of  non-existent 
things  (while  ‘not  the  same’  is  so  predicated). 
It  is  predicated  of  all  existing  things;  for  every¬ 
thing  that  is  existent  and  one  is  by  its  very  na¬ 
ture  either  one  or  not  one  with  anything  else. 

The  other,  then,  and  the  same  are  thus  op¬ 
posed.  But  difference  is  not  the  same  as  other¬ 
ness.  For  the  other  and  that  which  it  is  other 
than  need  not  be  other  in  some  definite  respect 
(for  everything  that  is  existent  is  either  other 
[25]  or  the  same),  but  that  which  is  different 
is  different  from  some  particular  thing  in  some 
particular  respect,  so  that  there  must  be  some¬ 
thing  identical  whereby  they  differ.  And  this 
identical  thing  is  genus  or  species;  for  every¬ 
thing  that  differs  differs  either  in  genus  or  in 
species,  in  genus  if  the  things  have  not  their 
matter  in  common  and  are  not  generated  out 
of  each  other  (i.e.  if  they  belong  to  different 
figures  of  predication),  and  in  species  if  they 
have  the  same  genus  (‘genus’  meaning  that 
[30]  identical  thing  which  is  essentially  predi¬ 
cated  of  both  the  different  things). 

Contraries  are  different,  and  contrariety  is  a 
kind  of  difference.  That  we  are  right  in  this 
supposition  is  shown  by  induction.  For  all  of 
these  too  are  seen  to  be  different;  they  are  not 
[35]  merely  other,  but  some  are  other  in  genus, 
1055a  and  others  are  in  the  same  line  of  predi¬ 
cation,  and  therefore  in  the  same  genus,  and 
the  same  in  genus.  We  have  distinguished2 
elsewhere  what  sort  of  things  are  the  same  or 
other  in  genus. 

4 

Since  things  which  differ  may  differ  from  one 
another  more  or  less,  there  is  also  a  greatest  dif¬ 
ference,  and  this  I  call  contrariety.  That  con- 
[5]  trariety  is  the  greatest  difference  is  made 
clear  by  induction.  For  things  which  differ  in 
genus  have  no  way  to  one  another,  but  are  too 
far  distant  and  are  not  comparable;  and  for 
things  that  differ  in  species  the  extremes  from 
which  generation  takes  place  are  the  contra¬ 
ries,  and  the  distance  between  extremes — and 

2  v.  9. 


582  METAPHYSICS  1055b 


therefore  that  between  the  contraries — is  the 
greatest. 

[/o]  But  surely  that  which  is  greatest  in  each 
class  is  complete.  For  that  is  greatest  which 
cannot  be  exceeded,  and  that  is  complete  be¬ 
yond  which  nothing  can  be  found.  For  the 
complete  difference  marks  the  end  of  a  series 
(just  as  the  other  things  which  are  called  com¬ 
plete  are  so  called  because  they  have  attained 
an  end),  and  beyond  the  end  there  is  nothing; 
[75]  for  in  everything  it  is  the  extreme  and  in¬ 
cludes  all  else,  and  therefore  there  is  nothing 
beyond  the  end,  and  the  complete  needs  noth¬ 
ing  further.  From  this,  then,  it  is  clear  that  con¬ 
trariety  is  complete  difference;  and  as  contra¬ 
ries  are  so  called  in  several  senses,  their  modes 
of  completeness  will  answer  to  the  various 
modes  of  contrariety  which  attach  to  the  con¬ 
traries. 

This  being  so,  it  is  clear  that  one  thing  can- 
[20]  not  have  more  than  one  contrary  (for  nei¬ 
ther  can  there  be  anything  more  extreme  than 
the  extreme,  nor  can  there  be  more  than  two 
extremes  for  the  one  interval),  and,  to  put  the 
matter  generally,  this  is  clear  if  contrariety  is  a 
difference,  and  if  difference,  and  therefore  also 
the  complete  difference,  must  be  between  two 
things. 

And  the  other  commonly  accepted  defini¬ 
tions  of  contraries  are  also  necessarily  true.  For 
not  only  is  (1)  the  complete  difference  the 
[25]  greatest  difference  (for  we  can  get  no  dif¬ 
ference  beyond  it  of  things  differing  either  in 
genus  or  in  species;  for  it  has  been  shown1  that 
there  is  no  ‘difference’  between  anything  and 
the  things  outside  its  genus ,  and  among  the 
things  which  differ  in  species  the  complete  dif¬ 
ference  is  the  greatest);  but  also  (2)  the  things 
in  the  same  genus  which  differ  most  are  con¬ 
trary  (for  the  complete  difference  is  the  great¬ 
est  difference  between  species  of  the  same  ge¬ 
nus);  and  (3)  the  things  in  the  same  receptive 
[30]  material  which  differ  most  are  contrary 
(for  the  matter  is  the  same  for  contraries);  and 
(4)  of  the  things  which  fall  under  the  same 
faculty  the  most  different  are  contrary  (for  one 
science  deals  with  one  class  of  things,  and  in 
these  the  complete  difference  is  the  greatest). 

The  primary  contrariety  is  that  between  pos¬ 
itive  state  and  privation — not  every  privation, 
however  (for  ‘privation’  has  several  meanings), 
but  that  which  is  complete.  And  the  other  con- 
[35]  traries  must  be  called  so  with  reference  to 
these,  some  because  they  possess  these,  others 
because  they  produce  or  tend  to  produce  them, 

*Cf.»6. 


others  because  they  are  acquisitions  or  losses  of 
these  or  of  other  contraries.  Now  if  the  kinds 
of  opposition  are  contradiction  and  privation 
1055b  and  contrariety  and  relation,  and  of 
these  the  first  is  contradiction,  and  contradic¬ 
tion  admits  of  no  intermediate,  while  contra¬ 
ries  admit  of  one,  clearly  contradiction  and  con¬ 
trariety  are  not  the  same.  But  privation  is  a 
kind  of  contradiction;  for  what  suffers  priva¬ 
tion,  either  in  general  or  in  some  determinate 
way,  is  either  that  which  is  quite  incapable  of 
[  5]  having  some  attribute  or  that  which,  being 
of  such  a  nature  as  to  have  it,  has  it  not;  here 
we  have  already  a  variety  of  meanings,  which 
have  been  distinguished2  elsewhere.  Privation, 
therefore,  is  a  contradiction  or  incapacity  which 
is  determinate  or  taken  along  with  the  recep¬ 
tive  material.  This  is  the  reason  why,  while 
contradiction  does  not  admit  of  an  intermedi¬ 
ate,  privation  sometimes  does;  for  everything 
[/o]  is  equal  or  not  equal,  but  not  everything 
is  equal  or  unequal,  or  if  it  is,  it  is  only  within 
the  sphere  of  that  which  is  receptive  of  equal¬ 
ity.  If,  then,  the  comings-to-be  which  happen  to 
the  matter  start  from  the  contraries,  and  pro¬ 
ceed  either  from  the  form  and  the  possession 
of  the  form  or  from  a  privation  of  the  form  or 
shape,  clearly  all  contrariety  must  be  privation, 
but  presumably  not  all  privation  is  contrariety 
[75]  (the  reason  being  that  that  which  has  suf¬ 
fered  privation  may  have  suffered  it  in  several 
ways);  for  it  is  only  the  extremes  from  which 
changes  proceed  that  are  contraries. 

And  this  is  obvious  also  by  induction.  For 
every  contrariety  involves,  as  one  of  its  terms, 
a  privation,  but  not  all  cases  are  alike;  inequal¬ 
ity  is  the  privation  of  equality  and  unlikeness 
of  likeness,  and  on  the  other  hand  vice  is  the 
[20]  privation  of  virtue.  But  the  cases  differ  in 
a  way  already  described;3  in  one  case  we  mean 
simply  that  the  thing  has  suffered  privation,  in 
another  case  that  it  has  done  so  either  at  a  cer¬ 
tain  time  or  in  a  certain  part  (e.g.  at  a  certain 
age  or  in  the  dominant  part),  or  throughout. 
This  is  why  in  some  cases  there  is  a  mean  (there 
are  men  who  are  neither  good  nor  bad),  and  in 
others  there  is  not  (a  number  must  be  either 
[25]  odd  or  even).  Further,  some  contraries 
have  their  subject  defined,  others  have  not. — 
Therefore  it  is  evident  that  one  of  the  con¬ 
traries  is  always  privative;  but  it  is  enough  if 
this  is  true  of  the  first — i.e.  the  generic — con¬ 
traries,  e.g.  the  one  and  the  many;  for  the 
others  can  be  reduced  to  these. 

2  v.  22. 

3  io*qsb  4-6. 


1056b 


BOOK  X,  CHAPTERS  4-6  583 


5 

[30]  Since  one  thing  has  one  contrary,  we 
might  raise  the  question  how  the  one  is  op¬ 
posed  to  the  many,  and  the  equal  to  the  great 
and  the  small.  For  if  we  used  the  word  ‘wheth¬ 
er’  only  in  an  antithesis  such  as  ‘whether  it  is 
white  or  black’,  or  ‘whether  it  is  white  or  not 
white’  (we  do  not  ask  ‘whether  it  is  a  man  or 
white’),  unless  we  are  proceeding  on  a  prior 
[35]  assumption  and  asking  something  such 
as  ‘whether  it  was  Cleon  or  Socrates  that  came' 
— but  this  is  not  a  necessary  disjunction  in  any 
class  of  things;  yet  even  this  is  an  extension 
from  the  case  of  opposites;  for  opposites  alone 
cannot  be  present  together;  and  we  assume  this 
incompatibility  here  too  in  asking  which  of  the 
1056a  two  came;  for  if  they  might  both  have 
come,  the  question  would  have  been  absurd; 
but  if  they  might,  even  so  this  falls  just  as  much 
into  an  antithesis,  that  of  the  ‘one  or  many’,  i.e. 
‘whether  both  came  or  one  of  the  two’: — if, 
then,  the  question  ‘whether’  is  always  con¬ 
cerned  with  opposites,  and  we  can  ask  ‘wheth¬ 
er  it  is  greater  or  less  or  equal’,  what  is  the  op- 
[5]  position  of  the  equal  to  the  other  two?  It  is 
not  contrary  either  to  one  alone  or  to  both; 
for  why  should  it  be  contrary  to  the  greater 
rather  than  to  the  less?  Further,  the  equal  is 
contrary  to  the  unequal.  Therefore  if  it  is  con¬ 
trary  to  the  greater  and  the  less,  it  will  be  con¬ 
trary  to  more  things  than  one.  But  if  the  un¬ 
equal  means  the  same  as  both  the  greater  and 
the  less  together,  the  equal  will  be  opposite  to 
[/o]  both  (and  the  difficulty  supports  those 
who  say  the  unequal  is  a  ‘two’),  but  it  follows 
that  one  thing  is  contrary  to  two  others,  which 
is  impossible.  Again,  the  equal  is  evidently  in¬ 
termediate  between  the  great  and  the  small,  but 
no  contrariety  is  either  observed  to  be  interme¬ 
diate,  or,  from  its  definition,  can  be  so;  for  it 
would  not  be  complete  if  it  were  intermediate 
between  any  two  things,  but  rather  it  always 
has  something  intermediate  between  its  own 
terms. 

[75]  It  remains,  then,  that  it  is  opposed  either 
as  negation  or  as  privation.  It  cannot  be  the  ne¬ 
gation  or  privation  of  one  of  the  two;  for  why 
of  the  great  rather  than  of  the  small?  It  is,  then, 
the  privative  negation  of  both.  This  is  why 
‘whether’  is  said  with  reference  to  both,  not  to 
one  of  the  two  (e.g.  ‘whether  it  is  greater  or 
equal’  or  ‘whether  it  is  equal  or  less’);  there  are 
[20]  always  three  cases.  But  it  is  not  a  neces¬ 
sary  privation;  for  not  everything  which  is  not 
greater  or  less  is  equal,  but  only  the  things 


which  are  of  such  a  nature  as  to  have  these  at¬ 
tributes. 

The  equal,  then,  is  that  which  is  neither 
great  nor  small  but  is  naturally  fitted  to  be  ei¬ 
ther  great  or  small;  and  it  is  opposed  to  both 
as  a  privative  negation  (and  therefore  is  also 
intermediate).  And  that  which  is  neither  good 
[25]  nor  bad  is  opposed  to  both,  but  has  no 
name;  for  each  of  these  has  several  meanings 
and  the  recipient  subject  is  not  one;  but  that 
which  is  neither  white  nor  black  has  more 
claim  to  unity.  Yet  even  this  has  not  one  name, 
though  the  colours  of  which  this  negation  is 
privatively  predicated  are  in  a  way  limited;  for 
they  must  be  either  grey  or  yellow  or  some- 
[30]  thing  else  of  the  kind.  Therefore  it  is  an 
incorrect  criticism  that  is  passed  by  those  who 
think  that  all  such  phrases  are  used  in  the  same 
way,  so  that  that  which  is  neither  a  shoe  nor  a 
hand  would  be  intermediate  between  a  shoe 
and  a  hand,  since  that  which  is  neither  good 
nor  bad  is  intermediate  between  the  good  and 
the  bad — as  if  there  must  be  an  intermediate  in 
all  cases.  But  this  does  not  necessarily  follow. 
[35]  For  the  one  phrase  is  a  joint  denial  of  op¬ 
posites  between  which  there  is  an  intermediate 
and  a  certain  natural  interval;  but  between  the 
1056b  other  two  there  is  no  ‘difference’;  for 
the  things,  the  denials  of  which  are  combined, 
belong  to  different  classes,  so  that  the  substra¬ 
tum  is  not  one. 

6 

We  might  raise  similar  questions  about  the  one 
and  the  many.  For  if  the  many  are  absolutely 
opposed  to  the  one,  certain  impossible  results 
[5]  follow.  One  will  then  be  few,  whether  few 
be  treated  here  as  singular  or  plural;  for  the 
many  are  opposed  also  to  the  few.  Further,  two 
will  be  many,  since  the  double  is  multiple  and 
‘double’  derives  its  meaning  from  ‘two’;  there¬ 
fore  one  will  be  few;  for  what  is  that  in  com¬ 
parison  with  which  two  are  many,  except  one, 
which  must  therefore  be  few?  For  there  is 
[/o]  nothing  fewer.  Further,  if  the  much  and 
the  little  are  in  plurality  what  the  long  and  the 
short  are  in  length,  and  whatever  is  much  is 
also  many,  and  the  many  are  much  (unless,  in¬ 
deed,  there  is  a  difference  in  the  case  of  an 
easily-bounded  continuum),  the  little  (or  few) 
will  be  a  plurality.  Therefore  one  is  a  plurality 
if  it  is  few;  and  this  it  must  be,  if  two  are  many. 
But  perhaps,  while  the  ‘many’  are  in  a  sense 
[75]  said  to  be  also  ‘much’,  it  is  with  a  differ¬ 
ence;  e.g.  water  is  much  but  not  many.  But 
‘many’  is  applied  to  the  things  that  are  divisi- 


584  METAPHYSICS  1057b 


ble;  in  the  one  sense  it  means  a  plurality  which 
is  excessive  either  absolutely  or  relatively 
(while  ‘few’  is  similarly  a  plurality  which  is  de¬ 
ficient),  and  in  another  sense  it  means  number, 
in  which  sense  alone  it  is  opposed  to  the  one. 
[20]  For  we  say  ‘one  or  many’,  just  as  if  one 
were  to  say  ‘one  and  ones’  or  ‘white  thing  and 
white  things’,  or  to  compare  the  things  that 
have  been  measured  with  the  measure.  It  is  in 
this  sense  also  that  multiples  are  so  called.  For 
each  number  is  said  to  be  many  because  it  con¬ 
sists  of  ones  and  because  each  number  is  meas¬ 
urable  by  one;  and  it  is  ‘many’  as  that  which  is 
opposed  to  one,  not  to  the  few.  In  this  sense, 
[25]  then,  even  two  is  many — not,  however,  in 
the  sense  of  a  plurality  which  is  excessive  either 
relatively  or  absolutely;  it  is  the  first  plurality. 
But  without  qualification  two  is  few;  for  it  is 
first  plurality  which  is  deficient  (for  this  reason 
Anaxagoras  was  not  right  in  leaving  the  subject 
with  the  statement1  that  ‘all  things  were  to¬ 
gether,  boundless  both  in  plurality  and  in 
smallness’ — where  for  ‘and  in  smallness’  he 
[50]  should  have  said  ‘and  in  fewness’;  for 
they  could  not  have  been  boundless  in  few¬ 
ness),  since  it  is  not  one,  as  some  say,  but  two, 
that  make  a  few. 

The  one  is  opposed  then  to  the  many  in  num¬ 
bers  as  measure  to  thing  measurable;  and  these 
are  opposed  as  are  the  relatives  which  are  not 
from  their  very  nature  relatives.  We  have  dis¬ 
tinguished2  elsewhere  the  two  senses  in  which 
[35]  relatives  are  so  called: — (1)  as  contraries; 
(2)  as  knowledge  to  thing  known,  a  term  be¬ 
ing  called  relative  because  another  is  relative  to 
1057a  it.  There  is  nothing  to  prevent  one  from 
being  fewer  than  something,  e.g.  than  two;  for 
if  one  is  fewer,  it  is  not  therefore  few.  Plurality 
is  as  it  were  the  class  to  which  number  belongs; 
for  number  is  plurality  measurable  by  one,  and 
one  and  number  are  in  a  sense  opposed,  not  as 
contrary,  but  as  we  have  said  some  relative 
[5]  terms  are  opposed;  for  inasmuch  as  one  is 
measure  and  the  other  measurable,  they  are  op¬ 
posed.  This  is  why  not  everything  that  is  one  is 
a  number;  i.e.  if  the  thing  is  indivisible  it  is  not 
a  number.  But  though  knowledge  is  similarly 
spoken  of  as  relative  to  the  knowable,  the  rela¬ 
tion  does  not  work  out  similarly;  for  while 
knowledge  might  be  thought  to  be  the  meas¬ 
ure,  and  the  knowable  the  thing  measured,  the 
[/o]  fact  is  that  all  knowledge  is  knowable,  but 
not  all  that  is  knowable  is  knowledge,  because 
in  a  sense  knowledge  is  measured  by  the  know- 
able. — Plurality  is  contrary  neither  to  the  few 

1  Fr.  1.  2  v,  102  ia  26-30. 


(the  many  being  contrary  to  this  as  excessive 
plurality  to  plurality  exceeded),  nor  to  the  one 
in  every  sense;  but  in  the  one  sense  these  are 
contrary,  as  has  been  said,  because  the  former 
is  divisible  and  the  latter  indivisible,  while  in 
[75]  another  sense  they  are  relative  as  knowl¬ 
edge  is  to  knowable,  if  plurality  is  number  and 
the  one  is  a  measure. 

7 

Since  contraries  admit  of  an  intermediate  and 
in  some  cases  have  it,  intermediates  must  be 
composed  of  the  contraries.  For  (1)  all  inter- 
120]  mediates  are  in  the  same  genus  as  the 
things  between  which  they  stand.  For  we  call 
those  things  intermediates,  into  which  that 
which  changes  must  change  first;  e.g.  if  we 
were  to  pass  from  the  highest  string  to  the  low¬ 
est  by  the  smallest  intervals,  we  should  come 
sooner  to  the  intermediate  notes,  and  in  colours 
if  we  were  to  pass  from  white  to  black,  we 
[25]  should  come  sooner  to  crimson  and  grey 
than  to  black;  and  similarly  in  all  other  cases. 
But  to  change  from  one  genus  to  another  genus 
is  not  possible  except  in  an  incidental  way,  as 
from  colour  to  figure.  Intermediates,  then, 
must  be  in  the  same  genus  both  as  one  another 
and  as  the  things  they  stand  between. 

[jo]  But  (2)  all  intermediates  stand  between 
opposites  of  some  kind;  for  only  between  these 
can  change  take  place  in  virtue  of  their  own 
nature  (so  that  an  intermediate  is  impossible 
between  things  which  are  not  opposite;  for  then 
there  would  be  change  which  was  not  from  one 
opposite  towards  the  other).  Of  opposites,  con¬ 
tradictories  admit  of  no  middle  term;  for  this 
[35]  is  what  contradiction  is — an  opposition, 
one  or  other  side  of  which  must  attach  to  any¬ 
thing  whatever,  i.e.  which  has  no  intermediate. 
Of  other  opposites,  some  are  relative,  others 
privative,  others  contrary.  Of  relative  terms, 
those  which  are  not  contrary  have  no  interme¬ 
diate;  the  reason  is  that  they  are  not  in  the 
same  genus.  For  what  intermediate  could  there 
be  between  knowledge  and  knowable?  But 
1057b  between  great  and  small  there  is  one. 

(3)  If  intermediates  are  in  the  same  genus, 
as  has  been  shown,  and  stand  between  contra¬ 
ries,  they  must  be  composed  of  these  contraries. 
For  either  there  will  be  a  genus  including  the 
contraries  or  there  will  be  none.  And  if  (a) 
there  is  to  be  a  genus  in  such  a  way  that  it  is 
[5]  something  prior  to  the  contraries,  the  dif¬ 
ferentiae  which  constituted  the  contrary  spe- 
cies-of-a-genus  will  be  contraries  prior  to  the 
species;  for  species  are  composed  of  the  genus 


1058*  BOOK  X,  CHAPTERS  6-8  585 


and  the  differentiae.  (E.g.  if  white  and  black 
are  contraries,  and  one  is  a  piercing  colour  and 
the  other  a  compressing  colour,  these  differen¬ 
tiae — ‘piercing’  and  ‘compressing’ — are  prior; 
[10]  so  that  these  are  prior  contraries  of  one 
another.)  But,  again,  the  species  which  differ 
contrariwise  are  the  more  truly  contrary  spe¬ 
cies.  And  the  other  species,  i.e.  the  intermedi¬ 
ates,  must  be  composed  of  their  genus  and  their 
differentiae.  (E.g.  all  colours  which  are  be¬ 
tween  white  and  black  must  be  said  to  he  com- 

fosed  of  the  genus,  i.e.  colour,  and  certain  dif- 
75]  ferentiae.  But  these  differentiae  will  not 
be  the  primary  contraries;  otherwise  every  col¬ 
our  would  be  either  white  or  black.  They  are 
different,  then,  from  the  primary  contraries; 
and  therefore  they  will  be  between  the  primary 
contraries;  the  primary  differentiae  are  ‘pierc¬ 
ing’  and  ‘compressing’.) 

Therefore  it  is  (b)  with  regard  to  these  con¬ 
traries  which  do  not  fall  within  a  genus  that 
we  must  first  ask  of  what  their  intermediates 
[20]  are  composed.  (For  things  which  are  in 
the  same  genus  must  be  composed  of  terms  in 
which  the  genus  is  not  an  element,  or  else  be 
themselves  incomposite.)  Now  contraries  do 
not  involve  one  another  in  their  composition, 
and  are  therefore  first  principles;  but  the  inter¬ 
mediates  are  either  all  incomposite,  or  none  of 
them.  But  there  is  something  compounded  out 
of  the  contraries,  so  that  there  can  be  a  change 
from  a  contrary  to  it  sooner  than  to  the  other 
[25]  contrary;  for  it  will  have  less  of  the  quality 
in  question  than  the  one  contrary  and  more 
than  the  other.  This  also,  then,  will  come  be¬ 
tween  the  contraries.  All  the  other  intermediates 
also,  therefore,  are  composite;  for  that  which 
has  more  of  a  quality  than  one  thing  and  less 
than  another  is  compounded  somehow  out  of 
the  things  than  which  it  is  said  to  have  more 
and  less  respectively  of  the  quality.  And  since 
there  are  no  other  things  prior  to  the  contraries 
[jo]  and  homogeneous  with  the  intermediates, 
all  intermediates  must  be  compounded  out  of 
the  contraries .  Therefore  also  all  the  inferior 
classes,  both  the  contraries  and  their  interme¬ 
diates,  will  be  compounded  out  of  the  primary 
contraries.  Clearly,  then,  intermediates  are  ( 1 ) 
all  in  the  same  genus  and  (2)  intermediate  be¬ 
tween  contraries,  and  (3)  all  compounded  out 
of  the  contraries. 

8 

[35]  That  which  is  other  in  species  is  other 
than  something  in  something,  and  this  must 
belong  to  both;  e.g.  if  it  is  an  animal  other  in 


species,  both  are  animals.  The  things,  then, 
which  are  other  in  species  must  be  in  the  same 
genus.  For  by  genus  I  mean  that  one  identical 
thing  which  is  predicated  of  both  and  is  differ¬ 
entiated  in  no  merely  accidental  way,  whether 
1058*  conceived  as  matter  or  otherwise.  For 
not  only  must  the  common  nature  attach  to  the 
different  things,  e.g.  not  only  must  both  be  ani¬ 
mals,  but  this  very  animality  must  also  be  dif¬ 
ferent  for  each  (e.g.  in  the  one  case  equinity, 
in  the  other  humanity),  and  so  this  common 
nature  is  specifically  different  for  each  from 
what  it  is  for  the  other.  One,  then,  will  be  in 
[5]  virtue  of  its  own  nature  one  sort  of  animal, 
and  the  other  another,  e.g.  one  a  horse  and  the 
other  a  man.  This  difference,  then,  must  be  an 
otherness  of  the  genus.  For  I  give  the  name  of 
‘difference  in  the  genus’  to  an  otherness  which 
makes  the  genus  itself  other. 

This,  then,  will  be  a  contrariety  (as  can  be 
shown  also  by  induction).  For  all  things  are 
[/o]  divided  by  opposites,  and  it  has  been 
proved  that  contraries  are  in  the  same  genus1. 
For  contrariety  was  seen2  to  be  complete  differ¬ 
ence;  and  all  difference  in  species  is  a  difference 
from  something  in  something;  so  that  this  is 
the  same  for  both  and  is  their  genus.  (Hence 
also  all  contraries  which  are  different  in  species 
and  not  in  genus  are  in  the  same  line  of  predi 
[75]  cation,  and  other  than  one  another  in 
the  highest  degree — for  the  difference  is  com¬ 
plete — ,  and  cannot  be  present  along  with 
one  another.)  The  difference,  then,  is  a  con¬ 
trariety. 

This,  then,  is  what  it  is  to  be  ‘other  in  spe¬ 
cies’ — to  have  a  contrariety,  being  in  the  same 
genus  and  being  indivisible  (and  those  things 
are  the  same  in  species  which  have  no  contra¬ 
riety,  being  indivisible);  we  say  ‘being  indivisi¬ 
ble’,  for  in  the  process  of  division  contrarieties 
[20]  arise  in  the  intermediate  stages  before  we 
come  to  the  indivisibles.  Evidently,  therefore, 
with  reference  to  that  which  is  called  the  genus, 
none  of  the  species-of-a-genus  is  either  the  same 
as  it  or  other  than  it  in  species  (and  this  is  fit¬ 
ting;  for  the  matter  is  indicated  by  negation, 
and  the  genus  is  the  matter  of  that  of  which  it 
is  called  the  genus,  not  in  the  sense  in  which  we 
speak  of  the  genus  or  family  of  the  Heraclidae, 
but  in  that  in  which  the  genus  is  an  element  in 
a  thing’s  nature),  nor  is  it  so  with  reference  to 
[25]  things  which  are  not  in  the  same  genus, 
but  it  will  differ  in  genus  from  them,  and  in 
species  from  things  in  the  same  genus.  For  a 
thing’s  difference  from  that  from  which  it  dif- 

1  Chapter  4.  2  1055®  16. 


586  METAPHYSICS  1059a 


fers  in  species  must  be  a  contrariety;  and  this 
belongs  only  to  things  in  the  same  genus. 

9 

One  might  raise  the  question,  why  woman 
does  not  differ  from  man  in  species,  when  fe- 
[jo]  male  and  male  are  contrary  and  their  dif¬ 
ference  is  a  contrariety;  and  why  a  female  and 
a  male  animal  are  not  different  in  species, 
though  this  difference  belongs  to  animal  in  vir¬ 
tue  of  its  own  nature,  and  not  as  paleness  or 
darkness  does;  both  ‘female’  and  ‘male’  belong 
to  it  qua  animal.  This  question  is  almost  the 
same  as  the  other,  why  one  contrariety  makes 
[35]  things  different  in  species  and  another 
does  not,  e.g.  ‘with  feet’  and  ‘with  wings’  do, 
but  paleness  and  darkness  do  not.  Perhaps  it  is 
because  the  former  are  modifications  peculiar 
to  the  genus,  and  the  latter  are  less  so.  And 
since  one  element  is  definition  and  one  is  mat- 
1058b  ter,  contrarieties  which  are  in  the  defi¬ 
nition  make  a  difference  in  species,  but  those 
which  are  in  the  thing  taken  as  including  its 
matter  do  not  make  one.  And  so  paleness  in  a 
man,  or  darkness,  does  not  make  one,  nor  is 
there  a  difference  in  species  between  the  pale 
man  and  the  dark  man,  not  even  if  each  of 
[5]  them  be  denoted  by  one  word.  For  man  is 
here  being  considered  on  his  material  side,  and 
matter  does  not  create  a  difference;  for  it  does 
not  make  individual  men  species  of  man, 
though  the  flesh  and  the  bones  of  which  this 
man  and  that  man  consist  are  other.  The  con¬ 
crete  thing  is  other,  but  not  other  in  species, 
because  in  the  definition  there  is  no  contrariety. 
This  is  the  ultimate  indivisible  kind.  Callias  is 
[/o]  definition + matter;  the  pale  man,  then,  is 
so  also,  because  it  is  the  individual  Callias  that 
is  pale;  man,  then,  is  pale  only  incidentally. 
Neither  do  a  brazen  and  a  wooden  circle,  then, 
differ  in  species;  and  if  a  brazen  triangle  and  a 
wooden  circle  differ  in  species,  it  is  not  because 
of  the  matter,  but  because  there  is  a  contrariety 
[75]  in  the  definition.  But  does  the  matter  not 
make  things  other  in  species,  when  it  is  other 
in  a  certain  way,  or  is  there  a  sense  in  which  it 
does?  For  why  is  this  horse  other  than  this  man 
in  species,  although  their  matter  is  included 
with  their  definitions?  Doubtless  because  there 
is  a  contrariety  in  the  definition.  For  while 
there  is  a  contrariety  also  between  pale  man 
and  dark  horse,  and  it  is  a  contrariety  in  spe- 
[20]  cies,  it  does  not  depend  on  the  paleness  of 
the  one  and  the  darkness  of  the  other,  since 
even  if  both  had  been  pale,  yet  they  would 


have  been  other  in  species.  But  male  and  fe¬ 
male,  while  they  are  modifications  peculiar  to 
‘animal’,  are  so  not  in  virtue  of  its  essence  but 
in  the  matter,  i.e.  the  body.  This  is  why  the 
same  seed  becomes  female  or  male  by  being 
acted  on  in  a  certain  way.  We  have  stated, 
[25]  then,  what  it  is  to  be  other  in  species,  and 
why  some  things  differ  in  species  and  others 
do  not. 

10 

Since  contraries  are  other  in  form,  and  the  per¬ 
ishable  and  the  imperishable  are  contraries  (for 
privation  is  a  determinate  incapacity),  the  per¬ 
ishable  and  the  imperishable  must  be  different 
in  kind. 

Now  so  far  we  have  spoken  of  the  general 
terms  themselves,  so  that  it  might  be  thought 
[jo]  not  to  be  necessary  that  every  imperish¬ 
able  thing  should  be  different  from  every  per¬ 
ishable  thing  in  form,  just  as  not  every  pale 
thing  is  different  in  form  from  every  dark 
thing.  For  the  same  thing  can  be  both,  and 
even  at  the  same  time  if  it  is  a  universal  (e.g. 
man  can  be  both  pale  and  dark),  and  if  it  is  an 
individual  it  can  still  be  both;  for  the  same  man 
[35]  can  though  not  at  the  same  time,  pale 
and  dark.  Yet  pale  is  contrary  to  dark. 

But  while  some  contraries  belong  to  certain 
things  by  accident  (e.g.  both  those  now  men¬ 
tioned  and  many  others),  others  cannot,  and 
among  these  are  ‘perishable’  and  ‘imperish- 
1059a  able’.  For  nothing  is  by  accident  perish¬ 
able.  For  what  is  accidental  is  capable  of  not  be¬ 
ing  present,  but  perishableness  is  one  of  the  at¬ 
tributes  that  belong  of  necesstiy  to  the  things  to 
which  they  belong;  or  else  one  and  the  same 
[5]  thing  may  be  perishable  and  imperishable, 
if  perishableness  is  capable  of  not  belonging  to 
it.  Perishableness  then  must  either  be  the  es¬ 
sence  or  be  present  in  the  essence  of  each  per¬ 
ishable  thing.  The  same  account  holds  good  for 
imperishableness  also;  for  both  are  attributes 
which  are  present  of  necessity.  The  character¬ 
istics,  then,  in  respect  of  which  and  in  direct 
consequence  of  which  one  thing  is  perishable 
and  another  imperishable,  are  opposite,  so  that 
the  things  must  be  different  in  kind. 

[70]  Evidently,  then,  there  cannot  be  Forms 
such  as  some  maintain,  for  then  one  man  would 
be  perishable  and  another  imperishable.  Yet 
the  Forms  are  said  to  be  the  same  in  form  with 
the  individuals  and  not  merely  to  have  the 
same  name;  but  things  which  differ  in  kind 
are  farther  apart  than  those  which  differ  in 
form. 


1059b 


BOOK  X,  CHAPTERS  8-10— BOOK  XI,  CHAPTER  1 


587 


BOOK  XI 


I 

That  Wisdom  is  a  science  of  first  principles 
is  evident  from  the  introductory  chapters,1  in 
which  we  have  raised  objections  to  the  state¬ 
ments  of  others  about  the  first  principles;  but 
[20]  one  might  ask  the  question  whether  Wis¬ 
dom  is  to  be  conceived  as  one  science  or  as  sev¬ 
eral.  If  as  one,  it  may  be  objected  that  one  sci¬ 
ence  always  deals  with  contraries,  but  the  first 
principles  are  not  contrary.  If  it  is  not  one,  what 
sort  of  sciences  are  those  with  which  it  is  to  be 
identified  ? 

Further,  is  it  the  business  of  one  science,  or  of 
more  than  one,  to  examine  the  first  principles 
of  demonstration?  If  of  one,  why  of  this  rather 
[25]  than  of  any  other?  If  of  more,  what  sort 
of  sciences  must  these  be  said  to  be  ? 

Further,  does  Wisdom  investigate  all  sub¬ 
stances  or  not?  If  not  all,  it  is  hard  to  say  which; 
but  if,  being  one,  it  investigates  them  all,  it  is 
doubtful  how  the  same  science  can  embrace 
several  subject-matters. 

Further,  does  it  deal  with  substances  only  or 
also  with  their  attributes?  If  in  the  case  of  attri- 
[30]  butes  demonstration  is  possible,  in  that  of 
substances  it  is  not.  But  if  the  two  sciences  are 
different,  what  is  each  of  them  and  which  is 
Wisdom?  If  we  think  of  it  as  demonstrative, 
the  science  of  the  attributes  is  Wisdom,  but  if  as 
dealing  with  what  is  primary,  the  science  of 
substances  claims  the  tide. 

But  again  the  science  we  are  looking  for 
must  not  be  supposed  to  deal  with  the  causes 
which  have  been  mentioned  in  the  Physics } 
[35]  For  (A)  it  does  not  deal  with  the  final 
cause  (for  that  is  the  nature  of  the  good,  and 
this  is  found  in  the  field  of  action  and  move¬ 
ment;  and  it  is  the  first  mover — for  that  is  the 
nature  of  the  end — but  in  the  case  of  things 
unmovable  there  is  nothing  that  moved  them 
first),  and  (B)  in  general  it  is  hard  to  say 
whether  perchance  the  science  we  are  now 
looking  for  deals  with  perceptible  substances 
or  not  with  them,  but  with  certain  others.  If 
1059b  with  others,  it  must  deal  either  with  the 
Forms  or  with  the  objects  of  mathematics.  Now 
(a)  evidently  the  Forms  do  not  exist.  (But  it  is 
hard  to  say,  even  if  one  suppose  them  to  exist, 
why  in  the  world  the  same  is  not  true  of  the 
other  things  of  which  there  are  Forms,  as  of 
[5]  the  objects  of  mathematics.  I  mean  that 

1  Cf.  1.  3-10.  2  Physics ,  n.  3. 


these  thinkers  place  the  objects  of  mathematics 
between  the  Forms  and  perceptible  things,  as  a 
kind  of  third  set  of  things  apart  both  from  the 
Forms  and  from  the  things  in  this  world;  but 
there  is  not  a  third  man  or  horse  besides  the 
ideal  and  the  individuals.  If  on  the  other  hand 
it  is  not  as  they  say,  with  what  sort  of  things 
must  the  mathematician  be  supposed  to  deal? 
[/o]  Certainly  not  with  the  things  in  this 
world;  for  none  of  these  is  the  sort  of  thing 
which  the  mathematical  sciences  demand.) 
Nor  (b)  does  the  science  which  we  are  now 
seeking  treat  of  the  objects  of  mathematics;  for 
none  of  them  can  exist  separately.  But  again  it 
does  not  deal  with  perceptible  substances;  for 
they  are  perishable. 

[75]  In  general  one  might  raise  the  question, 
to  what  kind  of  science  it  belongs  to  discuss  the 
difficulties  about  the  matter  of  the  objects  of 
mathematics.  Neither  to  physics  (because  the 
whole  inquiry  of  the  physicist  is  about  the 
things  that  have  in  themselves  a  principle  of 
movement  and  rest),  nor  yet  to  the  science 
which  inquires  into  demonstration  and  science; 
for  this  is  just  the  subject  which  it  investigates. 
[20]  It  remains  then  that  it  is  the  philosophy 
which  we  have  set  before  ourselves  that  treats 
of  those  subjects. 

One  might  discuss  the  question  whether  the 
science  we  are  seeking  should  be  said  to  deal 
with  the  principles  which  are  by  some  called 
elements;  all  men  suppose  these  to  be  present 
in  composite  things.  But  it  might  be  thought 
[25]  that  the  science  we  seek  should  treat 
rather  of  universal;  for  every  definition  and 
every  science  is  of  universals  and  not  of  infimae 
species,  so  that  as  far  as  this  goes  it  would  deal 
with  the  highest  genera.  These  would  turn  out 
to  be  being  and  unity;  for  these  might  most  of 
all  be  supposed  to  contain  all  things  that  are, 
and  to  be  most  like  principles  because  they  are 
[30]  first  by  nature;  for  if  they  perish  all  other 
things  are  destroyed  with  them;  for  everything 
is  and  is  one.  But  inasmuch  as,  if  one  is  to  sup¬ 
pose  them  to  be  genera,  they  must  be  predica¬ 
ble  of  their  differentiae,  and  no  genus  is  predi¬ 
cable  of  any  of  its  differentiae,  in  this  way  it 
would  seem  that  we  should  not  make  them 
genera  nor  principles.  Further,  if  the  simpler 
is  more  of  a  principle  than  the  less  simple,  and 
[35]  the  ultimate  members  of  the  genus  are 
simpler  than  the  genera  (for  they  are  indivisi¬ 
ble,  but  the  genera  are  divided  into  many  and 


588  METAPHYSICS  1060b 


differing  species),  the  species  might  seem  to  be 
the  principles,  rather  than  the  genera.  But  in¬ 
asmuch  as  the  species  are  involved  in  the  de¬ 
struction  of  the  genera,  the  genera  are  more 
like  principles;  for  that  which  involves  another 
in  its  destruction  is  a  principle  of  it.  These  and 
1060a  others  of  the  kind  are  the  subjects  that 
involve  difficulties. 

2 

Further,  must  we  suppose  something  apart 
from  individual  things,  or  is  it  these  that  the 
science  we  are  seeking  treats  of?  But  these  are 
[5]  infinite  in  number.  Yet  the  things  that  are 
apart  from  the  individuals  are  genera  or  spe¬ 
cies;  but  the  science  we  now  seek  treats  of  nei¬ 
ther  of  these.  The  reason  why  this  is  impossible 
has  been  stated.1  Indeed,  it  is  in  general  hard  to 
say  whether  one  must  assume  that  there  is  a 
separable  substance  besides  the  sensible  sub¬ 
stances  (i.e.  the  substances  in  this  world),  or 
that  these  are  the  real  things  and  Wisdom  is 
[/o]  concerned  with  them.  For  we  seem  to  seek 
another  kind  of  substance,  and  this  is  our  prob¬ 
lem,  i.e.  to  see  if  there  is  something  which  can 
exist  apart  by  itself  and  belongs  to  no  sensible 
thing. — Further,  if  there  is  another  substance 
apart  from  and  corresponding  to  sensible  sub¬ 
stances,  which  kinds  of  sensible  substance  must 
be  supposed  to  have  this  corresponding  to 
[75]  them?  Why  should  one  suppose  men  or 
horses  to  have  it,  more  than  either  the  other 
animals  or  even  all  lifeless  things?  On  the  other 
hand  to  set  up  other  and  eternal  substances 
equal  in  number  to  the  sensible  and  perishable 
substances  would  seem  to  fall  beyond  the 
bounds  of  probability. — But  if  the  principle 
we  now  seek  is  not  separable  from  corporeal 
things,  what  has  a  better  claim  to  the  name 
[20]  than  matter?  This,  however,  does  not  ex¬ 
ist  in  actuality,  but  exists  in  potency.  And  it 
would  seem  rather  that  the  form  or  shape  is  a 
more  important  principle  than  this;  but  the 
form  is  perishable,  so  that  there  is  no  eternal 
substance  at  all  which  can  exist  apart  and  inde¬ 
pendent.  But  this  is  paradoxical;  for  such  a 
rinciple  and  substance  seems  to  exist  and  is 
25]  sought  by  nearly  all  the  most  refined 
thinkers  as  something  that  exists;  for  how  is 
there  to  be  order  unless  there  is  something  eter¬ 
nal  and  independent  and  permanent? 

Further,  if  there  is  a  substance  or  principle 
of  such  a  nature  as  that  which  we  are  now 
seeking,  and  if  this  is  one  for  all  things,  and  the 
same  for  eternal  and  for  perishable  things,  it  is 
1  ic>59b  24-38. 


hard  to  say  why  in  the  world,  if  there  is  the 
[30]  same  principle,  some  of  the  things  that 
fall  under  the  principle  are  eternal,  and  others 
are  not  eternal;  this  is  paradoxical.  But  if  there 
is  one  principle  of  perishable  and  another  of 
eternal  things,  we  shall  be  in  a  like  difficulty  if 
the  principle  of  perishable  things,  as  well  as 
that  of  eternal,  is  eternal;  for  why,  if  the  princi¬ 
ple  is  eternal,  are  not  the  things  that  fall  under 
the  principle  also  eternal?  But  if  it  is  perishable 
another  principle  is  involved  to  account  for  it, 
[35]  and  another  to  account  for  that,  and  this 
will  go  on  to  infinity. 

If  on  the  other  hand  we  are  to  set  up  what 
are  thought  to  be  the  most  unchangeable  prin¬ 
ciples,  being  and  unity,  firstly,  if  each  of  these 
does  not  indicate  a  ‘this’  or  substance,  how  will 
1060b  they  be  separable  and  independent?  Yet 
we  expect  the  eternal  and  primary  principles  to 
be  so.  But  if  each  of  them  does  signify  a  ‘this’ 
or  substance,  all  things  that  are  are  substances; 
[5]  for  being  is  predicated  of  all  things  (and 
unity  also  of  some);  but  that  all  things  that  are 
are  substance  is  false.  Further,  how  can  they  be 
right  who  say  that  the  first  principle  is  unity 
and  this  is  substance,  and  generate  number  as 
the  first  product  from  unity  and  from  matter, 
[/o]  and  assert  that  number  is  substance?  How 
are  we  to  think  of  ‘two’,  and  each  of  the  other 
numbers  composed  of  units,  as  one?  On  this 
point  neither  do  they  say  anything  nor  is  it  easy 
to  say  anything.  But  if  we  are  to  suppose  lines 
or  what  comes  after  these  (I  mean  the  primary 
surfaces)  to  be  principles,  these  at  least  are  not 
separable  substances,  but  sections  and  divisions 
— the  former  of  surfaces,  the  latter  of  bodies 
(while  points  are  sections  and  divisions  of 
[75]  lines);  and  further  they  are  limits  of  these 
same  things;  and  all  these  are  in  other  things 
and  none  is  separable.  Further,  how  are  we  to 
suppose  that  there  is  a  substance  of  unity  and 
the  point?  Every  substance  comes  into  being 
by  a  gradual  process,  but  a  point  does  not;  for 
the  point  is  a  division. 

[20]  A  further  difficulty  is  raised  by  the  fact 
that  all  knowledge  is  of  universals  and  of  the 
‘such’,  but  substance  is  not  a  universal,  but  is 
rather  a  ‘this’ — a  separable  thing,  so  that  if 
there  is  knowledge  about  the  first  principles, 
the  question  arises,  how  are  we  to  suppose  the 
first  principle  to  be  substance? 

Further,  is  there  anything  apart  from  the 
concrete  thing  (by  which  I  mean  the  matter 
and  that  which  is  joined  with  it),  or  not?  If 
[25]  not,  we  are  met  by  the  objection  that  all 
things  that  are  in  matter  are  perishable.  But  if 


1061b  BOOK  XI,  CHAPTERS  1-4  589 


there  is  something,  it  must  be  the  form  or 
shape.  Now  it  is  hard  to  determine  in  which 
cases  this  exists  apart  and  in  which  it  does  not; 
for  in  some  cases  the  form  is  evidently  not  sep¬ 
arable,  e.g.  in  the  case  of  a  house. 

Further,  are  the  principles  the  same  in  kind 
or  in  number?  If  they  are  one  in  number,  all 
[jo]  things  will  be  the  same. 

3 

Since  the  science  of  the  philosopher  treats  of 
being  qua  beitig  universally  and  not  in  respect 
of  a  part  of  it,  and  ‘being’  has  many  senses  and 
is  not  used  in  one  only,  it  follows  that  if  the 
word  is  used  equivocally  and  in  virtue  of  noth¬ 
ing  common  to  its  various  uses,  being  does  not 
fall  under  one  science  (for  the  meanings  of  an 
equivocal  term  do  not  form  one  genus);  but  if 
[35]  the  word  is  used  in  virtue  of  something 
common,  being  will  fall  under  one  science.  The 
term  seems  to  be  used  in  the  way  we  have  men¬ 
tioned,  like  ‘medical’  and  ‘healthy’.  For  each  of 
these  also  we  use  in  many  senses.  Terms  are 
1061a  used  in  this  way  by  virtue  of  some  kind 
of  reference,  in  the  one  case  to  medical  science, 
in  the  other  to  health,  in  others  to  something 
else,  but  in  each  case  to  one  identical  concept. 
For  a  discussion  and  a  knife  are  called  medical 
because  the  former  proceeds  from  medical  sci- 
[5]  ence,  and  the  latter  is  useful  to  it.  And  a 
thing  is  called  healthy  in  a  similar  way;  one 
thing  because  it  is  indicative  of  health,  another 
because  it  is  productive  of  it.  And  the  same  is 
true  in  the  other  cases.  Everything  that  is,  then, 
is  said  to  ‘be’  in  this  same  way;  each  thing  that 
is  is  said  to  ‘be’  because  it  is  a  modification  of 
being  qua  being  or  a  permanent  or  a  transient 
state  or  a  movement  of  it,  or  something  else  of 
[/o]  the  sort.  And  since  everything  that  is  may 
be  referred  to  something  single  and  common, 
each  of  the  contrarieties  also  may  be  referred  to 
the  first  differences  and  contrarieties  of  being, 
whether  the  first  differences  of  being  are  plu¬ 
rality  and  unity,  or  likeness  and  unlikeness,  or 
some  other  differences;  let  these  be  taken  as  al- 
[75]  ready  discussed.  It  makes  no  difference 
whether  that  which  is  be  referred  to  being  or 
to  unity.  For  even  if  they  are  not  the  same  but 
different,  at  least  they  are  convertible;  for  that 
which  is  one  is  also  somehow  being,  and  that 
which  is  being  is  one. 

But  since  every  pair  of  contraries  falls  to  be 
examined  by  one  and  the  same  science,  and  in 
each  pair  one  term  is  the  privative  of  the  other 
[20]  — though  one  might  regarding  some  con¬ 
traries  raise  the  question,  how  they  can  be  pri¬ 


vately  related,  viz.  those  which  have  an  inter¬ 
mediate,  e.g.  unjust  and  just — in  all  such  cases 
one  must  maintain  that  the  privation  is  not  of 
the  whole  definition,  but  of  the  infima  species . 
E.g.  if  the  just  man  is  ‘by  virtue  of  some  per- 
[25]  manent  disposition  obedient  to  the  laws’,1 
the  unjust  man  will  not  in  every  case  Have  the 
whole  definition  denied  of  him,  but  may  be 
merely  ‘in  some  respect  deficient  in  obedience 
to  the  laws’,  and  in  this  respect  the  privation 
will  attach  to  him;  and  similarly  in  all  other 
cases. 

As  the  mathematician  investigates  abstrac¬ 
tions  (for  before  beginning  his  investigation  he 
[jo]  strips  off  all  the  sensible  qualities,  e.g. 
weight  and  lightness,  hardness  and  its  con¬ 
trary,  and  also  heat  and  cold  and  the  other  sen¬ 
sible  contrarieties,  and  leaves  only  the  quantita¬ 
tive  and  continuous,  sometimes  in  one,  some¬ 
times  in  two,  sometimes  in  three  dimensions, 
[jj]  and  the  attributes  of  these  qua  quantita¬ 
tive  and  continuous,  and  does  not  consider 
them  in  any  other  respect,  and  examines  the 
relative  positions  of  some  and  the  attributes  of 
1061b  these,  and  the  commensurabilities  and 
incommensurabilities  of  others,  and  the  ratios 
of  others;  but  yet  we  posit  one  and  the  same 
science  of  all  these  things — geometry), — the 
same  is  true  with  regard  to  being.  For  the  at- 
[5]  tributes  of  this  in  so  far  as  it  is  being,  and 
the  contrarieties  in  it  qua  being,  it  is  the  busi¬ 
ness  of  no  other  science  than  philosophy  to  in¬ 
vestigate;  for  to  physics  one  would  assign  the 
study  of  things  not  qua  being,  but  rather  qua 
sharing  in  movement;  while  dialectic  and  so¬ 
phistic  deal  with  the  attributes  of  things  that 
are,  but  not  of  things  qua  being,  and  not  with 
[/o]  being  itself  in  so  far  as  it  is  being;  there¬ 
fore  it  remains  that  it  i$  the  philosopher  who 
studies  the  things  we  have  named,  in  so  far  as 
they  are  being.  Since  all  that  is  is  said  to  ‘be’ 
in  virtue  of  something  single  and  common, 
though  the  term  has  many  meanings,  and  con¬ 
traries  are  in  the  same  case  (for  they  are  re¬ 
ferred  to  the  first  contrarieties  and  differences 
of  being),  and  things  of  this  sort  can  fall  un- 
[75]  der  one  science,  the  difficulty  we  stated  at 
the  beginning2  appears  to  be  solved, — I  mean 
the  question  how  there  can  be  a  single  science 
of  things  which  are  many  and  different  in 
genus. 

4 

Since  even  the  mathematician  uses  the  com¬ 
mon  axioms  only  in  a  special  application,  it 

1  Cf.  Plato,  Def.  41 1  f..  2  1059s  20-23. 


S9°  METAPHYSICS  1062b 


must  be  the  business  of  first  philosophy  to  ex¬ 
amine  the  principles  of  mathematics  also.  That 
when  equals  are  taken  from  equals  the  remain- 
[20]  ders  are  equal,  is  common  to  all  quanti¬ 
ties,  but  mathematics  studies  a  part  of  its  prop¬ 
er  matter  which  it  has  detached,  e.g.  lines  or 
angles  or  numbers  or  some  other  kind  of  quan¬ 
tity — not,  however,  qua  being  but  in  so  far  as 
[25]  each  of  them  is  continuous  in  one  or  two 
or  three  dimensions;  but  philosophy  does  not 
inquire  about  particular  subjects  in  so  far  as 
each  of  them  has  some  attribute  or  other,  but 
speculates  about  being,  in  so  far  as  each  par¬ 
ticular  thing  is. — Physics  is  in  the  same  posi¬ 
tion  as  mathematics;  for  physics  studies  the  at¬ 
tributes  and  the  principles  of  the  things  that 
[jo]  are,  qua  moving  and  not  qua  being 
(whereas  the  primary  science,  we  have  said, 
deals  with  these,  only  in  so  far  as  the  underly¬ 
ing  subjects  are  existent,  and  not  in  virtue  of 
any  other  character);  and  so  both  physics  and 
mathematics  must  be  classed  as  parts  of  Wis¬ 
dom. 

5 

There  is  a  principle  in  things,  about  which  we 
[55]  cannot  be  deceived,  but  must  always,  on 
the  contrary  recognize  the  truth, — viz.  that  the 
same  thing  cannot  at  one  and  the  same  time  be 
1062a  and  not  be,  or  admit  any  other  similar 
pair  of  opposites.  About  such  matters  there  is 
no  proof  in  the  full  sense,  though  there  is  proof 
ad  hominem.  For  it  is  not  possible  to  infer  this 
truth  itself  from  a  more  certain  principle,  yet 
this  is  necessary  if  there  is  to  be  completed 
[5]  proof  of  it  in  the  full  sense.  But  he  who 
wants  to  prove  to  the  asserter  of  opposites  that 
he  is  wrong  must  get  from  him  an  admission 
which  shall  be  identical  with  the  principle  that 
the  same  thing  cannot  be  and  not  be  at  one  and 
the  same  time,  but  shall  not  seem  to  be  identi¬ 
cal;  for  thus  alone  can  his  thesis  be  demon- 
[/o]  strated  to  the  man  who  asserts  that  oppo¬ 
site  statements  can  be  truly  made  about  the 
same  subject.  Those,  then,  who  are  to  join  in 
argument  with  one  another  must  to  some  ex¬ 
tent  understand  one  another;  for  if  this  does 
not  happen  how  are  they  to  join  in  argument 
with  one  another?  Therefore  every  word  must 
be  intelligible  and  indicate  something,  and  not 
[75]  many  things  but  only  one;  and  if  it  signi¬ 
fies  more  than  one  thing,  it  must  be  made  plain 
to  which  of  these  the  word  is  being  applied. 
He,  then,  who  says  ‘this  is  and  is  not’  denies 
what  he  affirms,  so  that  what  the  word  signi¬ 
fies,  he  says  it  does  not  signify;  and  this  is  im¬ 


possible.  Therefore  if  ‘this  is’  signifies  some¬ 
thing,  one  cannot  truly  assert  its  contradictory. 

Further,  if  the  word  signifies  something  and 
[20]  this  is  asserted  truly,  this  connexion  must 
be  necessary;  and  it  is  not  possible  that  that 
which  necessarily  is  should  ever  not  be;  it  is 
not  possible  therefore  to  make  the  opposed  af¬ 
firmations  and  negations  truly  of  the  same  sub¬ 
ject.  Further,  if  the  affirmation  is  no  more  true 
than  the  negation,  he  who  says  ‘man’  will  be 
no  more  right  than  he  who  says  ‘not-man’.  It 
[25]  would  seem  also  that  in  saying  the  man  is 
not  a  horse  one  would  be  either  more  or  not  less 
right  than  in  saying  he  is  not  a  man,  so  that  one 
will  also  be  right  in  saying  that  the  same  per¬ 
son  is  a  horse;  for  it  was  assumed  to  be  possible 
to  make  opposite  statements  equally  truly.  It 
follows  then  that  the  same  person  is  a  man  and 
a  horse,  or  any  other  animal. 

[30]  While,  then,  there  is  no  proof  of  these 
things  in  the  full  sense,  there  is  a  proof  which 
may  suffice  against  one  who  will  make  these 
suppositions.  And  perhaps  if  one  had  ques¬ 
tioned  Heraclitus  himself  in  this  way  one 
might  have  forced  him  to  confess  that  opposite 
statements  can  never  be  true  of  the  same  sub¬ 
jects.  But,  as  it  is,  he  adopted  this  opinion  with- 
[35]  out  understanding  what  his  statement  in¬ 
volves.  But  in  any  case  if  what  is  said  by  him  is 
true,  not  even  this  itself  will  be  true — viz.  that 
1062b  the  same  thing  can  at  one  and  the  same 
time  both  be  and  not  be.  For  as,  when  the  state¬ 
ments  are  separated,  the  affirmation  is  no  more 
true  than  the  negation,  in  the  same  way — the 
combined  and  complex  statement  being  like  a 
[5]  single  affirmation — the  whole  taken  as  an 
affirmation  will  be  no  more  true  than  the  nega¬ 
tion.  Further,  if  it  is  not  possible  to  affirm  any¬ 
thing  truly,  this  itself  will  be  false — the  asser¬ 
tion  that  there  is  no  true  affirmation.  But  if  a 
true  affirmation  exists,  this  appears  to  refute 
[10]  what  is  said  by  those  who  raise  such  objec¬ 
tions  and  utterly  destroy  rational  discourse. 

6 

The  saying  of  Protagoras  is  like  the  views  we 
have  mentioned;  he  said  that  man  is  the  meas¬ 
ure  of  all  things,  meaning  simply  that  that 
which  seems  to  each  man  also  assuredly  is.  If 
[75]  this  is  so,  it  follows  that  the  same  thing 
both  is  and  is  not,  and  is  bad  and  good,  and 
that  the  contents  of  all  other  opposite  state¬ 
ments  are  true,  because  often  a  particular  thing 
appears  beautiful  to  some  and  the  contrary  of 
beautiful  to  others,  and  that  which  appears  to 
[20]  each  man  is  the  measure.  This  difficulty 


1063b  BOOK  XI,  CHAPTERS  4-6  591 


may  be  solved  by  considering  the  source  of 
this  opinion.  It  seems  to  have  arisen  in  some 
cases  from  the  doctrine  of  the  natural  philoso¬ 
phers,  and  in  others  from  the  fact  that  all  men 
have  not  the  same  views  about  the  same  things, 
but  a  particular  thing  appears  pleasant  to  some 
and  the  contrary  of  pleasant  to  others. 

That  nothing  comes  to  be  out  of  that  which 
[25]  is  not,  but  everything  out  of  that  which 
is,  is  a  dogma  common  to  nearly  all  the  nat¬ 
ural  philosophers.  Since,  then,  white  cannot 
come  to  be  if  the  perfectly  white  and  in  no  re¬ 
spect  not-white  existed  before,  that  which  be¬ 
comes  white  must  come  from  that  which  is  not 
white;  so  that  it  must  come  to  be  out  of  that 
which  is  not  (so  they  argue),  unless  the  same 
[50]  thing  was  at  the  beginning  white  and 
not-white.  But  it  is  not  hard  to  solve  this  diffi¬ 
culty;  for  we  have  said  in  our  works  on  physics1 
in  what  sense  things  that  come  to  be  come  to  be 
from  that  which  is  not,  and  in  what  sense  from 
that  which  is. 

But  to  attend  equally  to  the  opinions  and 
the  fancies  of  disputing  parties  is  childish;  for 
clearly  one  of  them  must  be  mistaken.  And 
[35]  this  is  evident  from  what  happens  in  re¬ 
spect  of  sensation;  for  the  same  thing  never 
appears  sweet  to  some  and  the  contrary  of 
1063a  sweet  to  others,  unless  in  the  one  case 
the  sense-organ  which  discriminates  the  afore¬ 
said  flavours  has  been  perverted  and  injured. 
And  if  this  is  so  the  one  party  must  be  taken 
to  be  the  measure,  and  the  other  must  not.  And 
[5]  I  say  the  same  of  good  and  bad,  and  beau¬ 
tiful  and  ugly,  and  all  other  such  qualities.  For 
to  maintain  the  view  we  are  opposing  is  just 
like  maintaining  that  the  things  that  appear  to 
people  who  put  their  finger  under  their  eye 
and  make  the  object  appear  two  instead  of  one 
must  be  two  (because  they  appear  to  be  of  that 
number)  and  again  one  (for  to  those  who  do 
not  interfere  with  their  eye  the  one  object  ap- 

ears  one). 

/o]  In  general,  it  is  absurd  to  make  the  fact 
that  the  things  of  this  earth  are  observed  to 
change  and  never  to  remain  in  the  same  state, 
the  basis  of  our  judgement  about  the  truth. 
For  in  pursuing  the  truth  one  must  start  from 
the  things  that  are  always  in  the  same  state  and 
[75]  suffer  no  change.  Such  are  the  heavenly 
bodies;  for  these  do  not  appear  to  be  now  of 
one  nature  and  again  of  another,  but  are  mani¬ 
festly  always  the  same  and  share  in  no  change. 

Further,  if  there  is  movement,  there  is  also 

1  Physics ,  1.  7-9;  On  Generation  and  Corruption ,  i,  3i7b 
I4'3I9b  5* 


something  moved,  and  everything  is  moved 
out  of  something  and  into  something;  it  fol¬ 
lows  that  that  which  is  moved  must  first  be  in 
that  out  of  which  it  is  to  be  moved,  and  then 
[20]  not  be  in  it,  and  move  into  the  other  and 
come  to  be  in  it,  and  that  the  contradictory 
statements  are  not  true  at  the  same  time,  as 
these  thinkers  assert  they  are. 

And  if  the  things  of  this  earth  continuously 
flow  and  move  in  respect  of  quantity — if  one 
were  to  suppose  this,  although  it  is  not  true — 
why  should  they  not  endure  in  respect  of  qual¬ 
ity?  For  the  assertion  of  contradictory  state¬ 
ments  about  the  same  thing  seems  to  have 
[25]  arisen  largely  from  the  belief  that  the 
quantity  of  bodies  does  not  endure,  which,  our 
opponents  hold,  justifies  them  in  saying  that 
the  same  thing  both  is  and  is  not  four  cubits 
long.  But  essence  depends  on  quality,  and  this 
is  of  determinate  nature,  though  quantity  is  of 
indeterminate. 

Further,  when  the  doctor  orders  people  to 
[jo]  take  some  particular  food,  why  do  they 
take  it?  In  what  respect  is  ‘this  is  bread’  truer 
than  ‘this  is  not  bread’?  And  so  it  would  make 
no  difference  whether  one  ate  or  not.  But  as  a 
matter  of  fact  they  take  the  food  which  is  or¬ 
dered,  assuming  that  they  know  the  truth 
about  it  and  that  it  is  bread.  Yet  they  should 
not,  if  there  were  no  fixed  constant  nature  in 
sensible  things,  but  all  natures  moved  and 
flowed  for  ever. 

[35]  Again,  if  we  are  always  changing  and 
never  remain  the  same,  what  wonder  is  it  if 
to  us,  as  to  the  sick,  things  never  appear  the 
1063b  same?  (For  to  them  also,  because  they 
are  not  in  the  same  condition  as  when  they 
were  well,  sensible  qualities  do  not  appear 
alike;  yet,  for  all  that,  the  sensible  things 
themselves  need  not  share  in  any  change, 
though  they  produce  different,  and  not  iden¬ 
tical,  sensations  in  the  sick.  And  the  same  must 
[5]  surely  happen  to  the  healthy  if  the  afore¬ 
said2  change  takes  place.)  But  if  we  do  not 
change  but  remain  the  same,  there  will  be 
something  that  endures. 

As  for  those  to  whom  the  difficulties  men¬ 
tioned  are  suggested  by  reasoning ,  it  is  not 
easy  to  solve  the  difficulties  to  their  satisfaction, 
unless  they  will  posit  something  and  no  longer 
[/o]  demand  a  reason  for  it;  for  it  is  only  thus 
that  all  reasoning  and  all  proof  is  accomplished; 
if  they  posit  nothing,  they  destroy  discussion 
and  all  reasoning.  Therefore  with  such  men 
there  is  no  reasoning.  But  as  for  those  who  are 

2  Cf.  1063*35. 


592 

perplexed  by  the  traditional  difficulties,  it  is 
easy  to  meet  them  and  to  dissipate  the  causes 
of  their  perplexity.  This  is  evident  from  what 
has  been  said.1 

[75]  It  is  manifest,  therefore,  from  these  argu¬ 
ments  that  contradictory  statements  cannot  be 
truly  made  about  the  same  subject  at  one  time, 
nor  can  contrary  statements,  because  every 
contrariety  depends  on  privation.  This  is  evi¬ 
dent  if  we  reduce  the  definitions  of  contraries 
to  their  principle. 

Similarly,  no  intermediate  between  con¬ 
traries  can  be  predicated  of  one  and  the  same 
subject,  of  which  one  of  the  contraries  is  predi- 
[20]  cated.  If  the  subject  is  white  we  shall  be 
wrong  in  saying  it  is  neither  black  nor  white, 
for  then  it  follows  that  it  is  and  is  not  white; 
for  the  second  of  the  two  terms  we  have  put 
together  is  true  of  it,  and  this  is  the  contra¬ 
dictory  of  white. 

We  could  not  be  right,  then,  in  accepting  the 
[25]  views  either  of  Heraclitus  or  of  Anaxa¬ 
goras.  If  we  were,  it  would  follow  that  contrar¬ 
ies  would  be  predicated  of  the  same  subject;  for 
when  Anaxagoras  says  that  in  everything  there 
is  a  part  of  everything,  he  says  nothing  is  sweet 
any  more  than  it  is  bitter,  and  so  with  any 
other  pair  of  contraries,  since  in  everything 
everything  is  present  not  potentially  only,  but 
[jo]  actually  and  separately.  And  similarly  all 
statements  cannot  be  false  nor  all  true,  both  be¬ 
cause  of  many  other  difficulties  which  might  be 
adduced  as  arising  from  this  position,  and  be¬ 
cause  if  all  are  false  it  will  not  be  true  to  say 
even  this,  and  if  all  are  true  it  will  not  be  false 
[35]  to  say  all  are  false. 

7 

Every  science  seeks  certain  principles  and 
1064a  causes  for  each  of  its  objects — e.g.  medi¬ 
cine  and  gymnastics  and  each  of  the  other  sci¬ 
ences,  whether  productive  or  mathematical. 
For  each  of  these  marks  off  a  certain  class  of 
things  for  itself  and  busies  itself  about  this  as 
about  something  existing  and  real, — not  how¬ 
ever  qua  real;  the  science  that  does  this  is 
another  distinct  from  these.  Of  the  sciences 
[5]  mentioned  each  gets  somehow  the  ‘what' 
in  some  class  of  things  and  tries  to  prove  the 
other  truths,  with  more  or  less  precision.  Some 
get  the  ‘what’  through  perception,  others  by 
hypothesis;  so  that  it  is  clear  from  an  induction 
of  this  sort  that  there  is  no  demonstration  of 
the  substance  or  ‘what’. 

[jo]  There  is  a  science  of  nature,  and  evidently 

1  In  io62b  20-io63b  7. 


1064b 

it  must  be  different  both  from  practical  and 
from  productive  science.  For  in  the  case  of 
productive  science  the  principle  of  movement 
is  in  the  producer  and  not  in  the  product,  and 
is  either  an  art  or  some  other  faculty.  And 
similarly  in  practical  science  the  movement  is 
not  in  the  thing  done,  but  rather  in  the  doers. 
[75]  But  the  science  of  the  natural  philosopher 
deals  with  the  things  that  have  in  themselves 
a  principle  of  movement.  It  is  clear  from  these 
facts,  then,  that  natural  science  must  be  neither 
practical  nor  productive,  but  theoretical  (for  it 
must  fall  into  some  one  of  these  classes).  And 
since  each  of  the  sciences  must  somehow  know 
[20]  the  ‘what’  and  use  this  as  a  principle,  we 
must  not  fail  to  observe  how  the  natural  phi¬ 
losopher  should  define  things  and  how  he 
should  state  the  definition  of  the  essence — 
whether  as  akin  to  ‘snub’  or  rather  to  ‘concave’. 
For  of  these  the  definition  of  ‘snub’  includes 
the  matter  of  the  thing,  but  that  of  ‘concave’  is 
[25]  independent  of  the  matter;  for  snubness 
is  found  in  a  nose,  so  that  we  look  for  its  defini¬ 
tion  without  eliminating  the  nose,  for  what  is 
snub  is  a  concave  nose.  Evidently  then  the  defi¬ 
nition  of  flesh  also  and  of  the  eye  and  of  the 
other  parts  must  always  be  stated  without 
eliminating  the  matter. 

Since  there  is  a  science  of  being  qua  being 
and  capable  of  existing  apart,  we  must  con¬ 
sider  whether  this  is  to  be  regarded  as  the  same 
as  physics  or  rather  as  different.  Physics  deals 
[30]  with  the  things  that  have  a  principle  of 
movement  in  themselves;  mathematics  is  theo¬ 
retical,  and  is  a  science  that  deals  with  things 
that  are  at  rest,  but  its  subjects  cannot  exist 
apart.  Therefore  about  that  which  can  exist 
apart  and  is  unmovable  there  is  a  science  dif¬ 
ferent  from  both  of  these,  if  there  is  a  sub¬ 
stance  of  this  nature  (I  mean  separable  and  un- 
[35]  movable),  as  we  shall  try  to  prove  there  is. 
And  if  there  is  such  a  kind  of  thing  in  the 
world,  here  must  surely  be  the  divine,  and  this 
must  be  the  first  and  most  dominant  principle. 
1064b  Evidently,  then,  there  are  three  kinds 
of  theoretical  sciences — physics,  mathematics, 
theology.  The  class  of  theoretical  sciences  is 
the  best,  and  of  these  themselves  the  last  named 
is  best;  for  it  deals  with  the  highest  of  existing 
[5]  things,  and  each  science  is  called  better  or 
worse  in  virtue  of  its  proper  object. 

One  might  raise  the  question  whether  the 
science  of  being  qua  being  is  to  be  regarded  as 
universal  or  not.  Each  of  the  mathematical  sci¬ 
ences  deals  with  some  one  determinate  class  of 
things,  but  universal  mathematics  applies  alike 


METAPHYSICS 


1065b 

to  all.  Now  if  natural  substances  are  the  first  of 
[70]  existing  things,  physics  must  be  the  first 
of  sciences;  but  if  there  is  another  entity  and 
substance,  separable  and  unmovable,  the 
knowledge  of  it  must  be  different  and  prior  to 
physics  and  universal  because  it  is  prior. 

8 

[75]  Since  ‘being’  in  general  has  several  senses, 
of  which  one  is  ‘being  by  accident’,  we  must 
consider  first  that  which  ‘is’  in  this  sense.  Evi¬ 
dently  none  of  the  traditional  sciences  busies 
itself  about  the  accidental.  For  neither  does 
architecture  consider  what  will  happen  to  those 
who  are  to  use  the  house  (e.g.  whether  they 
[20]  will  have  a  painful  life  in  it  or  not),  nor 
does  weaving,  or  shoemaking,  or  the  confec¬ 
tioner’s  art,  do  the  like;  but  each  of  these  sci¬ 
ences  considers  only  what  is  peculiar  to  it,  i.e. 
its  proper  end.  And  as  for  the  argument  that 
‘when  he  who  is  musical  becomes  lettered  he 
will  be  both  at  once,  not  having  been  both  be- 
[25]  fore;  and  that  which  is,  not  always  having 
been,  must  have  come  to  be;  therefore  he  must 
have  at  once  become  musical  and  lettered’, — 
this  none  of  the  recognized  sciences  considers, 
but  only  sophistic;  for  this  alone  busies  itself 
about  the  accidental,  so  that  Plato  is  not  far 
wrong  when  he  says1  that  the  sophist  spends 
his  time  on  non-being. 

[jo]  That  a  science  of  the  accidental  is  not  even 
possible  will  be  evident  if  we  try  to  see  what 
the  accidental  really  is.  We  say  that  everything 
either  is  always  and  of  necessity  (necessity  not 
in  the  sense  of  violence,  but  that  which  we  ap- 
[35]  Peal  to  in  demonstrations),  or  is  for  the 
most  part,  or  is  neither  for  the  most  part,  nor 
always  and  of  necessity,  but  merely  as  it 
chances;  e.g.  there  might  be  cold  in  the  dog- 
days,  but  this  occurs  neither  always  and  of  ne- 
1065a  cessity,  nor  for  the  most  part,  though  it 
might  happen  sometimes.  The  accidental,  then, 
is  what  occurs,  but  not  always  nor  of  necessity, 
nor  for  the  most  part.  Now  we  have  said  what 
the  accidental  is,  and  it  is  obvious  why  there  is 
no  science  of  such  a  thing;  for  all  science  is  of 
that  which  is  always  or  for  the  most  part,  but 
[5]  the  accidental  is  in  neither  of  these  classes. 

Evidently  there  are  not  causes  and  principles 
of  the  accidental,  of  the  same  kind  as  there  are 
of  the  essential;  for  if  there  were,  everything 
would  be  of  necessity.  If  A  is  when  B  is,  and 
B  is  when  C  is,  and  if  C  exists  not  by  chance 
[/o]  but  of  necessity,  that  also  of  which  C  was 
cause  will  exist  of  necessity,  down  to  the  last 

1  Cf.  Sophist,  254, 


593 

causatum  as  it  is  called  (but  this  was  supposed 
to  be  accidental).  Therefore  all  things  will  be 
of  necessity,  and  chance  and  the  possibility  of 
a  thing’s  either  occurring  or  not  occurring  are 
removed  entirely  from  the  range  of  events.  And 
if  the  cause  be  supposed  not  to  exist  but  to  be 
coming  to  be,  the  same  results  will  follow; 
[75]  everything  will  occur  of  necessity.  For 
to-morrow’s  eclipse  will  occur  if  A  occurs,  and 
A  if  B  occurs,  and  B  if  C  occurs;  and  in  this 
way  if  we  subtract  time  from  the  limited  time 
between  now  and  to-morrow  we  shall  come 
sometime  to  the  already  existing  condition. 
[20]  Therefore  since  this  exists,  everything 
after  this  will  occur  of  necessity,  so  that  all 
things  occur  of  necessity. 

As  to  that  which  ‘is’  in  the  sense  of  being 
true  or  of  being  by  accident,  the  former  de¬ 
pends  on  a  combination  in  thought  and  is  an 
affection  of  thought  (which  is  the  reason  why 
it  is  the  principles,  not  of  that  which  ‘is’  in 
this  sense,  but  of  that  which  is  outside  and  can 
exist  apart,  that  are  sought);  and  the  latter  is 
not  necessary  but  indeterminate  (I  mean  the 
[25]  accidental);  and  of  such  a  thing  the 
causes  are  unordered  and  indefinite. 

Adaptation  to  an  end  is  found  in  events  that 
happen  by  nature  or  as  the  result  of  thought. 
It  is  ‘luck’  when  one  of  these  events  happens 
by  accident.  For  as  a  thing  may  exist,  so  it  may 
be  a  cause,  either  by  its  own  nature  or  by  acci- 
[30]  dent.  Luck  is  an  accidental  cause  at  work 
in  such  events  adapted  to  an  end  as  are  usually 
effected  in  accordance  with  purpose.  And  so 
luck  and  thought  are  concerned  with  the  same 
sphere;  for  purpose  cannot  exist  without 
thought.  The  causes  from  which  lucky  results 
might  happen  are  indeterminate;  and  so  luck 
is  obscure  to  human  calculation  and  is  a  cause 
by  accident,  but  in  the  unqualified  sense  a  cause 
[55]  of  nothing.  It  is  good  or  bad  luck  when 
1065b  the  result  is  good  or  evil;  and  prosperity 
or  misfortune  when  the  scale  of  the  results  is 
large. 

Since  nothing  accidental  is  prior  to  the  essen¬ 
tial,  neither  are  accidental  causes  prior.  If, 
then,  luck  or  spontaneity  is  a  cause  of  the  ma¬ 
terial  universe,  reason  and  nature  are  causes 
before  it. 

9 

[5]  Some  things  are  only  actually,  some  poten¬ 
tially,  some  potentially  and  actually,  what  they 
are,  viz.  in  one  case  a  particular  reality,  in  an¬ 
other,  characterized  by  a  particular  quantity, 
or  the  like.  There  is  no  movement  apart  from 


BOOK  XI,  CHAPTERS  6-9 


594 

things;  for  change  is  always  according  to  the 
categories  of  being,  and  there  is  nothing  com¬ 
mon  to  these  and  in  no  one  category.  But  each 
of  the  categories  belongs  to  all  its  subjects  in 
[w]  either  of  two  ways  (e.g.  ‘this-ness’ — for 
one  kind  of  it  is  ‘positive  form’,  and  the  other 
is  ‘privation’;  and  as  regards  quality  one  kind  is 
‘white’  and  the  other  ‘black’,  and  as  regards 
quantity  one  kind  is  ‘complete’  and  the  other 
‘incomplete’,  and  as  regards  spatial  movement 
one  is  ‘upwards’  and  the  other  ‘downwards’, 
or  one  thing  is  ‘light’  and  another  ‘heavy’);  so 
that  there  are  as  many  kinds  of  movement  and 
change  as  of  being.  There  being  a  distinction 
[75]  in  each  class  of  things  between  the  poten¬ 
tial  and  the  completely  real,  I  call  the  actu¬ 
ality  of  the  potential  as  such,  movement.  That 
what  we  say  is  true,  is  plain  from  the  following 
facts.  When  the  ‘buildable’,  in  so  far  as  it  is 
what  we  mean  by  ‘buildable’,  exists  actually,  it 
is  being  built,  and  this  is  the  process  of  build¬ 
ing.  Similarly  with  learning,  healing,  walk¬ 
ing,  leaping,  ageing,  ripening.  Movement  takes 
[20]  place  when  the  complete  reality  itself  ex¬ 
ists,  and  neither  earlier  nor  later.  The  complete 
reality,  then,  of  that  which  exists  potentially, 
when  it  is  completely  real  and  actual,  not  qua 
itself,  but  qua  movable,  is  movement.  By  qua  I 
mean  this:  bronze  is  potentially  a  statue;  but 
yet  it  is  not  the  complete  reality  of  bronze  qua 
[25]  bronze  that  is  movement.  For  it  is  not  the 
same  thing  to  be  bronze  and  to  be  a  certain  po¬ 
tency.  If  it  were  absolutely  the  same  in  its  defi¬ 
nition,  the  complete  reality  of  bronze  would 
have  been  a  movement.  But  it  is  not  the  same. 
(This  is  evident  in  the  case  of  contraries;  for  to 
be  capable  of  being  well  and  to  be  capable  of 
being  ill  are  not  the  same — for  if  they  were,  be¬ 
ing  well  and  being  ill  would  have  been  the 
[jo]  same — it  is  that  which  underlies  and  is 
healthy  or  diseased,  whether  it  is  moisture  or 
blood,  that  is  one  and  the  same.)  And  since  it  is 
not  the  same,  as  colour  and  the  visible  are  not 
the  same,  it  is  the  complete  reality  of  the  poten¬ 
tial,  and  as  potential,  that  is  movement.  That  it 
is  this,  and  that  movement  takes  place  when 
[35]  the  complete  reality  itself  exists,  and  nei- 
1066*  ther  earlier  nor  later,  is  evident.  For  each 
thing  is  capable  of  being  sometimes  actual, 
sometimes  not,  e.g.  the  buildable  qua  builda¬ 
ble;  and  the  actuality  of  the  buildable  qua 
buildable  is  building.  For  the  actuality  is  either 
this — the  act  of  building — or  the  house.  But 
when  the  house  exists,  it  is  no  longer  buildable; 
the  buildable  is  what  is  being  built.  The  actual- 
[5]  ity,  then,  must  be  the  act  of  building,  and 


1066* 

this  is  a  movement.  And  the  same  account  ap¬ 
plies  to  all  other  movements. 

That  what  we  have  said  is  right  is  evident 
from  what  all  others  say  about  movement,  and 
from  the  fact  that  it  is  not  easy  to  define  it 
otherwise.  For  firstly  one  cannot  put  it  in  any 
[70]  other  class.  This  is  evident  from  what  peo¬ 
ple  say.  Some  call  it  otherness  and  inequality 
and  the  unreal;  none  of  these,  however,  is  nec¬ 
essarily  moved,  and  further,  change  is  not 
either  to  these  or  from  these  any  more  than 
from  their  opposites.  The  reason  why  people 
put  movement  in  these  classes  is  that  it  is 
thought  to  be  something  indefinite,  and  the 
principles  in  one  of  the  two  ‘columns  of  con- 
[75]  trades’  are  indefinite  because  they  are 
privative,  for  none  of  them  is  either  a  ‘this’  or 
a  ‘such’  or  in  any  of  the  other  categories.  And 
the  reason  why  movement  is  thought  to  be  in¬ 
definite  is  that  it  cannot  be  classed  either  with 
the  potency  of  things  or  with  their  actuality; 
for  neither  that  which  is  capable  of  being  of  a 
certain  quantity,  nor  that  which  is  actually  of  a 
certain  quantity,  is  of  necessity  moved,  and 
[20]  movement  is  thought  to  be  an  actuality, 
but  incomplete;  the  reason  is  that  the  potential, 
whose  actuality  it  is,  is  incomplete.  And  there¬ 
fore  it  is  hard  to  grasp  what  movement  is;  for 
it  must  be  classed  either  under  privation  or  un¬ 
der  potency  or  under  absolute  actuality,  but 
evidently  none  of  these  is  possible.  Therefore 
[25]  what  remains  is  that  it  must  be  what  we 
said — both  actuality  and  the  actuality  we  have 
described — which  is  hard  to  detect  but  capable 
of  existing. 

And  evidently  movement  is  in  the  movable; 
for  it  is  the  complete  realization  of  this  by 
that  which  is  capable  of  causing  movement. 
And  the  actuality  of  that  which  is  capable  of 
causing  movement  is  no  other  than  that  of  the 
movable.  For  it  must  be  the  complete  reality  of 
both.  For  while  a  thing  is  capable  of  causing 
movement  because  it  can  do  this,  it  is  a  mover 
[jo]  because  it  is  active ;  but  it  is  on  the  mov¬ 
able  that  it  is  capable  of  acting,  so  that  the  actu¬ 
ality  of  both  is  one,  just  as  there  is  the  same 
interval  from  one  to  two  as  from  two  to  one, 
and  as  the  steep  ascent  and  the  steep  descent 
are  one,  but  the  being  of  them  is  not  one;  the 
case  of  the  mover  and  the  moved  is  similar. 

10 

[J5]  The  infinite  is  either  that  which  is  in¬ 
capable  of  being  traversed  because  it  is  not  its 
nature  to  be  traversed  (this  corresponds  to  the 
sense  in  which  the  voice  is  ‘invisible’),  or  that 


METAPHYSICS 


1067*  BOOK  XI,  CHAPTERS  9-10  595 


which  admits  only  of  incomplete  traverse  or 
scarcely  admits  of  traverse,  or  that  which, 
though  it  naturally  admits  of  traverse,  is  not 
traversed  or  limited;  further,  a  thing  may  be 
infinite  in  respect  of  addition  or  of  subtraction, 
1066b  or  both.  The  infinite  cannot  be  a  sep¬ 
arate,  independent  thing.  For  if  it  is  neither  a 
spatial  magnitude  nor  a  plurality,  but  infinity 
itself  is  its  substance  and  not  an  accident  of  it,  it 
will  be  indivisible;  for  the  divisible  is  either 
magnitude  or  plurality.  But  if  indivisible,  it  is 
[5]  not  infinite,  except  as  the  voice  is  invisible; 
but  people  do  not  mean  this,  nor  are  we  exam¬ 
ining  this  sort  of  infinite,  but  the  infinite  as 
untraversable.  Further,  how  can  an  infinite 
exist  by  itself,  unless  number  and  magnitude 
also  exist  by  themselves, — since  infinity  is  an 
attribute  of  these?  Further,  if  the  infinite  is  an 
accident  of  something  else,  it  cannot  be  qua 
[/o]  infinite  an  element  in  things,  as  the  in¬ 
visible  is  not  an  element  in  speech,  though  the 
voice  is  invisible.  And  evidently  the  infinite 
cannot  exist  actually.  For  then  any  part  of  it 
that  might  be  taken  would  be  infinite  (for  ‘to 
be  infinite’  and  ‘the  infinite’  are  the  same,  if  the 
infinite  is  substance  and  not  predicated  of  a 
subject).  Therefore  it  is  either  indivisible,  or  if 
it  is  partible,  it  is  divisible  into  infinites;  but 
[75]  the  same  thing  cannot  be  many  infinites 
(as  a  part  of  air  is  air,  so  a  part  of  the  infinite 
would  be  infinite,  if  the  infinite  is  substance 
and  a  principle).  Therefore  it  must  be  imparti¬ 
ble  and  indivisible.  But  the  actually  infinite 
cannot  be  indivisible;  for  it  must  be  of  a  certain 
quantity.  Therefore  infinity  belongs  to  its  sub¬ 
ject  incidentally.  But  if  so,  then  (as  we  have 
[20]  said1)  it  cannot  be  it  that  is  a  principle, 
but  that  of  which  it  is  an  accident — the  air  or 
the  even  number. 

This  inquiry  is  universal;  but  that  the  in¬ 
finite  is  not  among  sensible  things,  is  evident 
from  the  following  argument.  If  the  defini¬ 
tion  of  a  body  is  ‘that  which  is  bounded  by 
planes’,  there  cannot  be  an  infinite  body  either 
[25]  sensible  or  intelligible;  nor  a  separate  and 
infinite  number,  for  number  or  that  which  has 
a  number  is  numerable.  Concretely,  the  truth 
is  evident  from  the  following  argument.  The 
infinite  can  neither  be  composite  nor  simple. 
For  (a)  it  cannot  be  a  composite  body,  since 
the  elements  are  limited  in  multitude.  For  the 
contraries  must  be  equal  and  no  one  of  them 
must  be  infinite;  for  if  one  of  the  two  bodies 
[30]  falls  at  all  short  of  the  other  in  potency, 
the  finite  will  be  destroyed  by  the  infinite. 

1 1-  9* 


And  that  each  should  be  infinite  is  impossible. 
For  body  is  that  which  has  extension  in  all 
directions,  and  the  infinite  is  the  boundlessly 
extended,  so  that  if  the  infinite  is  a  body  it 
will  be  infinite  in  every  direction.  Nor  ( b )  can 
the  infinite  body  be  one  and  simple — neither, 
[55]  as  some  say,  something  apart  from  the  ele¬ 
ments,  from  which  they  generate  these  (for 
there  is  no  such  body  apart  from  the  elements; 
for  everything  can  be  resolved  into  that  of 
which  it  consists,  but  no  such  product  of  analy- 
1067*  sis  is  observed  except  the  simple  bodies), 
nor  fire  nor  any  other  of  the  elements.  For 
apart  from  the  question  how  any  of  them 
could  be  infinite,  the  All,  even  if  it  is  finite, 
cannot  either  be  or  become  any  one  of  them,  as 
[5]  Heraclitus  says  all  things  sometime  become 
fire.  The  same  argument  applies  to  this  as  to 
the  One  which  the  natural  philosophers  posit 
besides  the  elements.  For  everything  changes 
from  contrary  to  contrary,  e.g.  from  hot  to  cold. 

Further,  a  sensible  body  is  somewhere,  and 
whole  and  part  have  the  same  proper  place, 
e.g.  the  whole  earth  and  part  of  the  earth. 
Therefore  if  (a)  the  infinite  body  is  homo¬ 
geneous,  it  will  be  unmovable  or  it  will  be 
[/o]  always  moving.  But  this  is  impossible; 
for  why  should  it  rather  rest,  or  move,  down, 
up,  or  anywhere,  rather  than  anywhere  else? 
E.g.  if  there  were  a  clod  which  were  part  of  an 
infinite  body,  where  will  this  move  or  rest? 
The  proper  place  of  the  body  which  is  homo¬ 
geneous  with  it  is  infinite.  Will  the  clod  occupy 
the  whole  place,  then?  And  how?  (This  is  im¬ 
possible.)  What  then  is  its  rest  or  its  move¬ 
ment?  It  will  either  rest  everywhere,  and  then 
[75]  it  cannot  move;  or  it  will  move  every¬ 
where,  and  then  it  cannot  be  still.  But  (b)  if  the 
All  has  unlike  parts,  the  proper  places  of  the 
parts  are  unlike  also,  and,  firstly,  the  body  of 
the  All  is  not  one  except  by  contact,  and,  sec¬ 
ondly,  the  parts  will  be  either  finite  or  infinite 
in  variety  of  kind.  Finite  they  cannot  be;  for 
then  those  of  one  kind  will  be  infinite  in  quan¬ 
tity  and  those  of  another  will  not  (if  the  All  is 
infinite),  e.g.  fire  or  water  would  be  infinite,  but 
such  an  infinite  element  would  be  destruction 
to  the  contrary  elements.  But  if  the  parts  are  in- 
[20]  finite  and  simple,  their  places  also  are  in¬ 
finite  and  there  will  be  an  infinite  number  of 
elements;  and  if  this  is  impossible,  and  the 
places  are  finite,  the  All  also  must  be  limited. 

In  general,  there  cannot  be  an  infinite  body 
and  also  a  proper  place  for  bodies,  if  every 
sensible  body  has  either  weight  or  lightness. 
[25]  For  it  must  move  either  towards  the  mid- 


596  METAPHYSICS  1068* 


die  or  upwards,  and  the  infinite — either  the 
whole  or  the  half  of  it — cannot  do  either;  for 
how  will  you  divide  it?  Or  how  will  part  of  the 
infinite  be  down  and  part  up,  or  part  extreme 
and  part  middle?  Further,  every  sensible  body 
is  in  a  place,  and  there  are  six  kinds  of  place, 
[jo]  but  these  cannot  exist  in  an  infinite  body. 
In  general,  if  there  cannot  be  an  infinite  place, 
there  cannot  be  an  infinite  body;  (and  there 
cannot  be  an  infinite  place.)  for  that  which  is 
in  a  place  is  somewhere,  and  this  means  either 
up  or  down  or  in  one  of  the  other  directions, 
and  each  of  these  is  a  limit. 

The  infinite  is  not  the  same  in  the  sense  that 
it  is  a  single  thing  whether  exhibited  in  dis¬ 
tance  or  in  movement  or  in  time,  but  the  pos¬ 
terior  among  these  is  called  infinite  in  virtue 
[55]  of  its  relation  to  the  prior;  i.e.  a  move¬ 
ment  is  called  infinite  in  virtue  of  the  distance 
covered  by  the  spatial  movement  or  alteration 
or  growth,  and  a  time  is  called  infinite  because 
of  the  movement  which  occupies  it. 

ii 

1067b  Of  things  which  change,  some  change 
in  an  accidental  sense,  like  that  in  which  ‘the 
musical’  may  be  said  to  walk,  and  others  are 
said,  without  qualification,  to  change,  because 
something  in  them  changes,  i.e.  the  things 
that  change  in  parts;  the  body  becomes  healthy, 
because  the  eye  does.  But  there  is  something 
which  is  by  its  own  nature  moved  directly,  and 
[5]  this  is  the  essentially  movable.  The  same 
distinction  is  found  in  the  case  of  the  mover; 
for  it  causes  movement  either  in  an  accidental 
sense  or  in  respect  of  a  part  of  itself  or  essen¬ 
tially.  There  is  something  that  directly  causes 
movement;  and  there  is  something  that  is 
moved,  also  the  time  in  which  it  is  moved,  and 
that  from  which  and  that  into  which  it  is 
moved.  But  the  forms  and  the  affections  and 
the  place,  which  are  the  terminals  of  the  move- 
[/o]  ment  of  moving  things,  are  unmovable, 
e.g.  knowledge  or  heat;  it  is  not  heat  that  is  a 
movement,  but  heating.  Change  which  is  not 
accidental  is  found  not  in  all  things,  but  be¬ 
tween  contraries,  and  their  intermediates,  and 
between  contradictories.  We  may  convince 
ourselves  of  this  by  induction. 

[75]  That  which  changes  changes  either  from 
positive  into  positive,  or  from  negative  into 
negative,  or  from  positive  into  negative,  or 
from  negative  into  positive.  (By  positive  I 
mean  that  which  is  expressed  by  an  affirmative 
term.)  Therefore  there  must  be  three  changes; 
[20]  for  that  from  negative  into  negative  is 


not  change,  because  (since  the  terms  are  neither 
contraries  nor  contradictories)  there  is  no  op¬ 
position.  The  change  from  the  negative  into 
the  positive  which  is  its  contradictory  is  gen¬ 
eration — absolute  change  absolute  generation, 
and  partial  change  partial  generation;  and  the 
change  from  positive  to  negative  is  destruction 
— absolute  change  absolute  destruction,  and 
[25]  partial  change  partial  destruction.  If, 
then,  ‘that  which  is  not’  has  several  senses,  and 
movement  can  attach  neither  to  that  which 
implies  putting  together  or  separating,  nor  to 
that  which  implies  potency  and  is  opposed  to 
that  which  is  in  the  full  sense  (true,  the  not- 
white  or  not-good  can  be  moved  incidentally , 
for  the  not- white  might  be  a  man;  but  that 
which  is  not  a  particular  thing  at  all  can  in 
[jo]  no  wise  be  moved),  that  which  is  not 
cannot  be  moved  (and  if  this  is  so,  generation 
cannot  be  movement;  for  that  which  is  not  is 
generated;  for  even  if  we  admit  to  the  full  that 
its  generation  is  accidental,  yet  it  is  true  to  say 
that  ‘not-being’  is  predicable  of  that  which  is 
generated  absolutely).  Similarly  rest  cannot  be 
long  to  that  which  is  not.  These  consequences, 
[ J5]  then,  turn  out  to  be  awkward,  and  also 
this,  that  everything  that  is  moved  is  in  a 
place,  but  that  which  is  not  is  not  in  a  place; 
for  then  it  would  be  somewhere.  Nor  is  de¬ 
struction  movement;  for  the  contrary  of  move¬ 
ment  is  movement  or  rest,  but  the  contrary  of 
1068*  destruction  is  generation.  Since  every 
movement  is  a  change,  and  the  kinds  of  change 
are  the  three  named  above,1  and  of  these  those 
in  the  way  of  generation  and  destruction  are 
not  movements,  and  these  are  the  changes 
from  a  thing  to  its  contradictory,  it  follows 
that  only  the  change  from  positive  into  posi- 
[5]  tive  is  movement.  And  the  positives  are 
either  contrary  or  intermediate  (for  even  priva¬ 
tion  must  be  regarded  as  contrary),  and  are 
expressed  by  an  affirmative  term,  e.g.  ‘naked’  or 
‘toothless’  or  ‘black’. 

12 

If  the  categories  are  classified  as  substance, 
quality,  place,  acting  or  being  acted  on,  rela¬ 
tion,  quantity,  there  must  be  three  kinds  of 
movement — of  quality,  of  quantity,  of  place. 
[70]  There  is  no  movement  in  respect  of  sub¬ 
stance  (because  there  is  nothing  contrary  to 
substance),  nor  of  relation  (for  it  is  possible 
that  if  one  of  two  things  in  relation  changes, 
the  relative  term  which  was  true  of  the  other 
thing  ceases  to  be  true,  though  this  other  does 
1  In  io67b  19. 


1069*  BOOK  XI,  CHAPTERS  10-12  597 


not  change  at  all, — so  that  their  movement  is 
accidental),  nor  of  agent  and  patient,  or  mover 
and  moved,  because  there  is  no  movement  of 
[75]  movement  nor  generation  of  generation, 
nor,  in  general,  change  of  change.  For  there 
might  be  movement  of  movement  in  two 
senses;  (1)  movement  might  be  the  subject 
moved,  as  a  man  is  moved  because  he  changes 
from  pale  to  dark, — so  that  on  this  showing 
movement,  too,  may  be  either  heated  or  cooled 
or  change  its  place  or  increase.  But  this  is  im¬ 
possible;  for  change  is  not  a  subject.  Or  (2) 
[20]  some  other  subject  might  change  from 
change  into  some  other  form  of  existence  (e.g. 
a  man  from  disease  into  health).  But  this  also 
is  not  possible  except  incidentally.  For  every 
movement  is  change  from  something  into 
[25]  something.  (And  so  are  generation  and 
destruction;  only,  these  are  changes  into  things 
opposed  in  certain  ways  while  the  other,  move¬ 
ment,  is  into  things  opposed  in  another  way.) 
A  thing  changes,  then,  at  the  same  time  from 
health  into  illness,  and  from  this  change  itself 
into  another.  Clearly,  then,  if  it  has  become  ill, 
it  will  have  changed  into  whatever  may  be  the 
other  change  concerned  (though  it  may  be  at 
rest),  and,  further,  into  a  determinate  change 
each  time;  and  that  new  change  will  be  from 
[jo]  something  definite  into  some  other  defi¬ 
nite  thing;  therefore  it  will  be  the  opposite 
change,  that  of  growing  well.  We  answer  that 
this  happens  only  incidentally;  e.g.  there  is  a 
change  from  the  process  of  recollection  to  that 
of  forgetting,  only  because  that  to  which  the 
process  attaches  is  changing,  now  into  a  state 
of  knowledge,  now  into  one  of  ignorance. 

Further,  the  process  will  go  on  to  infinity,  if 
there  is  to  be  change  of  change  and  coming  to 
be  of  coming  to  be.  What  is  true  of  the  later, 
[^5]  then,  must  be  true  of  the  earlier;  e.g.  if 
the  simple  coming  to  be  was  once  coming  to  be, 
1068b  that  which  comes  to  be  something  was 
also  once  coming  to  be;  therefore  that  which 
simply  comes  to  be  something  was  not  yet  in 
existence,  but  something  which  was  coming  to 
be  coming  to  be  something  was  already  in  ex¬ 
istence.  And  this  was  once  coming  to  be,  so 
that  at  that  time  it  was  not  yet  coming  to  be 
something  else.  Now  since  of  an  infinite  num¬ 
ber  of  terms  there  is  not  a  first,  the  first  in  this 
series  will  not  exist,  and  therefore  no  following 
term  will  exist.  Nothing,  then,  can  either  come 
[5]  to  be  or  move  or  change.  Further,  that 
which  is  capable  of  a  movement  is  also  capable 
of  the  contrary  movement  and  rest,  and  that 
which  comes  to  be  also  ceases  to  be.  Therefore 


that  which  is  coming  to  be  is  ceasing  to  be 
when  it  has  come  to  be  coming  to  be;  for  it 
cannot  cease  to  be  as  soon  as  it  is  coming  to  be 
coming  to  be,  nor  after  it  has  come  to  be;  for 
[10]  that  which  is  ceasing  to  be  must  be.  Fur¬ 
ther,  there  must  be  a  matter  underlying  that 
which  comes  to  be  and  changes.  What  will  this 
be,  then, — what  is  it  that  becomes  movement 
or  becoming,  as  body  or  soul  is  that  which  suf¬ 
fers  alteration?  And,  again,  what  is  it  that  they 
move  into?  For  it  must  be  the  movement  or 
becoming  of  something  from  something  into 
something.  How,  then,  can  this  condition  be 
fulfilled?  There  can  be  no  learning  of  learn¬ 
ing,  and  therefore  no  becoming  of  becoming. 
[75]  Since  there  is  not  movement  either  of 
substance  or  of  relation  or  of  activity  and  pas¬ 
sivity,  it  remains  that  movement  is  in  respect 
of  quality  and  quantity  and  place;  for  each  of 
these  admits  of  contrariety.  By  quality  I  mean 
not  that  which  is  in  the  substance  (for  even 
the  differentia  is  a  quality),  but  the  passive 
quality,  in  virtue  of  which  a  thing  is  said  to  be 
acted  on  or  to  be  incapable  of  being  acted  on. 
[20]  The  immobile  is  either  that  which  is 
wholly  incapable  of  being  moved,  or  that  which 
is  moved  with  difficulty  in  a  long  time  or  be¬ 
gins  slowly,  or  that  which  is  of  a  nature  to  be 
moved  and  can  be  moved  but  is  not  moved 
when  and  where  and  as  it  would  naturally  be 
moved.  This  alone  among  immobiles  I  de¬ 
scribe  as  being  at  rest;  for  rest  is  contrary  to 
[25]  movement,  so  that  it  must  be  a  privation 
in  that  which  is  receptive  of  movement. 

Things  which  are  in  one  proximate  place 
are  together  in  place,  and  things  which  are  in 
different  places  are  apart:  things  whose  ex¬ 
tremes  are  together  touch:  that  at  which  a 
changing  thing,  if  it  changes  continuously  ac¬ 
cording  to  its  nature,  naturally  arrives  before 
it  arrives  at  the  extreme  into  which  it  is  chang- 
[jo]  ing,  is  between.  That  which  is  most  dis¬ 
tant  in  a  straight  line  is  contrary  in  place.  That 
is  successive  which  is  after  the  beginning  (the 
order  being  determined  by  position  or  form  or 
in  some  other  way)  and  has  nothing  of  the 
same  class  between  it  and  that  which  it  suc¬ 
ceeds,  e.g.  lines  in  the  case  of  a  line,  units  in 
that  of  a  unit,  or  a  house  in  that  of  a  house. 
(There  is  nothing  to  prevent  a  thing  of  some 
other  class  from  being  between.)  For  the  suc- 
[^5]  cessive  succeeds  something  and  is  some¬ 
thing  later;  ‘one’  does  not  succeed  ‘two’,  nor 
the  first  day  of  the  month  the  second.  That 
1069*  which,  being  successive,  touches,  is  con - 
tiguous.  (Since  all  change  is  between  oppo- 


598  METAPHYSICS  1069b 


sites,  and  these  are  either  contraries  or  con¬ 
tradictories,  and  there  is  no  middle  term  for 
contradictories,  clearly  that  which  is  between 
is  between  contraries.)  The  continuous  is  a 
[5]  species  of  the  contiguous.  I  call  two  things 
continuous  when  the  limits  of  each,  with  which 
they  touch  and  by  which  they  are  kept  to¬ 
gether,  become  one  and  the  same,  so  that 
plainly  the  continuous  is  found  in  the  things 
out  of  which  a  unity  naturally  arises  in  virtue 
of  their  contact.  And  plainly  the  successive  is 


the  first  of  these  concepts  (for  the  successive 
does  not  necessarily  touch,  but  that  which 
[/o]  touches  is  successive;  and  if  a  thing  is 
continuous,  it  touches,  but  if  it  touches,  it  is 
not  necessarily  continuous;  and  in  things  in 
which  there  is  no  touching,  there  is  no  organic 
unity);  therefore  a  point  is  not  the  same  as  a 
unit;  for  contact  belongs  to  points,  but  not  to 
units,  which  have  only  succession;  and  there 
is  something  between  two  of  the  former,  but 
not  between  two  of  the  latter. 


BOOK  XII 


1 

The  subject  of  our  inquiry  is  substance;  for 
the  principles  and  the  causes  we  are  seeking 
are  those  of  substances.  For  if  the  universe  is 
of  the  nature  of  a  whole,  substance  is  its  first 
[20]  part;  and  if  it  coheres  merely  by  virtue  of 
serial  succession,  on  this  view  also  substance  is 
first,  and  is  succeeded  by  quality,  and  then  by 
quantity.  At  the  same  time  these  latter  are  not 
even  being  in  the  full  sense,  but  are  qualities 
and  movements  of  it, — or  else  even  the  not- 
white  and  the  not-straight  would  be  being;  at 
least  we  say  even  these  are ,  e.g.  ‘there  is  a  not- 
white\  Further,  none  of  the  categories  other 
[25]  than  substance  can  exist  apart.  And  the 
early  philosophers  also  in  practice  testify  to  the 
primacy  of  substance;  for  it  was  of  substance 
that  they  sought  the  principles  and  elements 
and  causes.  The  thinkers  of  the  present  day 
tend  to  rank  universals  as  substances  (for 
genera  are  universals,  and  these  they  tend  to 
describe  as  principles  and  substances,  owing 
to  the  abstract  nature  of  their  inquiry);  but  the 
thinkers  of  old  ranked  particular  things  as 
substances,  e.g.  fire  and  earth,  not  what  is  com¬ 
mon  to  both,  body. 

[30]  There  are  three  kinds  of  substance — one 
that  is  sensible  (of  which  one  subdivision  is 
eternal  and  another  is  perishable;  the  latter  is 
recognized  by  all  men,  and  includes  e.g.  plants 
and  animals),  of  which  we  must  grasp  the 
elements,  whether  one  or  many;  and  another 
that  is  immovable,  and  this  certain  thinkers 
assert  to  be  capable  of  existing  apart,  some  di* 
[35]  viding  it  into  two,  others  identifying 
the  Forms  and  the  objects  of  mathematics, 
and  others  positing,  of  these  two,  only  the 
objects  of  mathematics.  The  former  two 
kinds  of  substance  are  the  subject  of  physics 
1069b  (for  they  imply  movement);  but  the 
third  kind  belongs  to  another  science,  if  there 


is  no  principle  common  to  it  and  to  the  other 
kinds. 

2 

Sensible  substance  is  changeable.  Now  if  change 
proceeds  from  opposites  or  from  intermedi¬ 
ates,  and  not  from  all  opposites  (for  the 
voice  is  not-white  (,  but  it  does  not  therefore 
[5]  change  to  white)),  but  from  the  contrary, 
there  must  be  something  underlying  which 
changes  into  the  contrary  state;  for  the  con¬ 
traries  do  not  change.  Further,  something  per¬ 
sists,  but  the  contrary  does  not  persist;  there 
is,  then,  some  third  thing  besides  the  con¬ 
traries,  viz.  the  matter.  Now  since  changes  are 
of  four  kinds — either  in  respect  of  the  ‘what* 
or  of  the  quality  or  of  the  quantity  or  of  the 
[/o]  place,  and  change  in  respect  of  ‘thisness' 
is  simple  generation  and  destruction,  and 
change  in  quantity  is  increase  and  diminution, 
and  change  in  respect  of  an  affection  is  altera¬ 
tion,  and  change  of  place  is  motion,  changes 
will  be  from  given  states  into  those  contrary  to 
them  in  these  several  respects.  The  matter, 
[75]  then,  which  changes  must  be  capable  of 
both  states.  And  since  that  which  ‘is*  has  two 
senses,  we  must  say  that  everything  changes 
from  that  which  is  potentially  to  that  which  is 
actually,  e.g.  from  potentially  white  to  actually 
white,  and  similarly  in  the  case  of  increase  and 
diminution.  Therefore  not  only  can  a  thing 
come  to  be,  incidentally,  out  of  that  which  is 
not,  but  also  all  things  come  to  be  out  of  that 
[20]  which  is,  but  is  potentially,  and  is  not 
actually.  And  this  is  the  ‘One’  of  Anaxagoras; 
for  instead  of  ‘all  things  were  together'1 — and 
the  ‘Mixture*  of  Empedocles  and  Anaximander 
and  the  account  given  by  Democritus — it  is 
better  to  say  ‘all  things  were  together  poten¬ 
tially  but  not  actually'.  Therefore  these  think¬ 
ers  seem  to  have  had  some  notion  of  matter. 

1  Anaxagoras,  fr.  1. 


1070b  BOOK  XI,  CHAPTER  12- 

Now  all  things  that  change  have  matter,  but 
[25]  different  matter;  and  of  eternal  things 
those  which  are  not  generable  but  are  mov¬ 
able  in  space  have  matter — not  matter  for  gen¬ 
eration,  however,  but  for  motion  from  one 
place  to  another. 

One  might  raise  the  question  from  what  sort 
of  non-being  generation  proceeds;  for  ‘non- 
being*  has  three  senses.  If,  then,  one  form  of 
non-being  exists  potentially,  still  it  is  not  by  vir¬ 
tue  of  a  potentiality  for  any  and  every  thing, 
but  different  things  come  from  different  things; 
[50]  nor  is  it  satisfactory  to  say  that  ‘all  things 
were  together*;  for  they  differ  in  their  matter, 
since  otherwise  why  did  an  infinity  of  things 
come  to  be,  and  not  one  thing?  For  ‘reason*  is 
one,  so  that  if  matter  also  were  one,  that  must 
have  come  to  be  in  actuality  which  the  matter 
was  in  potency.  The  causes  and  the  principles, 
then,  are  three,  two  being  the  pair  of  contraries 
of  which  one  is  definition  and  form  and  the 
other  is  privation,  and  the  third  being  the  mat¬ 
ter. 

3 

[35]  Note,  next,  that  neither  the  matter  nor  the 
form  comes  to  be — and  I  mean  the  last  matter 
and  form.  For  everything  that  changes  is  some¬ 
thing  and  is  changed  by  something  and  into 
1070a  something.  That  by  which  it  is  changed 
is  the  immediate  mover;  that  which  is  changed, 
the  matter;  that  into  which  it  is  changed,  the 
form.  The  process,  then,  will  go  on  to  infinity, 
if  not  only  the  bronze  comes  to  be  round  but 
also  the  round  or  the  bronze  comes  to  be; 
therefore  there  must  be  a  stop. 

Note,  next,  that  each  substance  comes  into 
[5]  being  out  of  something  that  shares  its 
name.  (Natural  objects  and  other  things  both 
rank  as  substances.)  For  things  come  into  be¬ 
ing  either  by  art  or  by  nature  or  by  luck  or  by 
spontaneity.  Now  art  is  a  principle  of  move¬ 
ment  in  something  other  than  the  thing  moved, 
nature  is  a  principle  in  the  thing  itself  (for 
man  begets  man),  and  the  other  causes  are  pri¬ 
vations  of  these  two. 

There  are  three  kinds  of  substance — the  mat- 
[/o]  ter,  which  is  a  ‘this*  in  appearance  (for 
all  things  that  are  characterized  by  contact  and 
not  by  organic  unity  are  matter  and  sub- 
[19]  stratum,  e.g.  fire,  flesh,  head;  for  these 
are  all  matter,  and  the  last  matter  is  the  matter 
of  that  which  is  in  the  full  sense  substance); 
[//]  the  nature,  which  is  a  ‘this*  or  positive 
state  towards  which  movement  takes  place; 
and  again,  thirdly,  the  particular  substance 
which  is  composed  of  these  two,  e.g.  Socrates 


BOOK  Xff,  CHAPTERS  1~4  599 

or  Callias.  Now  in  some  cases  the  ‘this*  does 
not  exist  apart  from  the  composite  substance, 
e.g.  the  form  of  house  does  not  so  exist,  unless 
[75]  the  art  of  building  exists  apart  (nor  is 
there  generation  and  destruction  of  these 
forms,  but  it  is  in  another  way  that  the  house 
apart  from  its  matter,  and  health,  and  all 
ideals  of  art,  exist  and  do  not  exist);  but  if  the 
‘this*  exists  apart  from  the  concrete  thing,  it  is 
only  in  the  case  of  natural  objects.  And  so 
Plato  was  not  far  wrong  when  he  said  that 
there  are  as  many  Forms  as  there  are  kinds  of 
natural  object  (if  there  are  Forms  distinct 
from  the  things  of  this  earth).  The  moving 
[21]  causes  exist  as  things  preceding  the  ef¬ 
fects,  but  causes  in  the  sense  of  definitions  are 
simultaneous  with  their  effects.  For  when  a 
man  is  healthy,  then  health  also  exists;  and  the 
shape  of  a  bronze  sphere  exists  at  the  same 
time  as  the  bronze  sphere.  (But  we  must  ex- 
[25]  amine  whether  any  form  also  survives 
afterwards.  For  in  some  cases  there  is  nothing 
to  prevent  this;  e.g.  the  soul  may  be  of  this 
sort — not  all  soul  but  the  reason;  for  pre¬ 
sumably  it  is  impossible  that  all  soul  should 
survive.)  Evidently  then  there  is  no  necessity, 
on  this  ground  at  least,  for  the  existence  of  the 
Ideas.  For  man  is  begotten  by  man,  a  given 
man  by  an  individual  father;  and  similarly  in 
[30]  the  arts;  for  the  medical  art  is  the  formal 
cause  of  health. 

4 

The  causes  and  the  principles  of  different 
things  are  in  a  sense  different,  but  in  a  sense,  if 
one  speaks  universally  and  analogically,  they 
are  the  same  for  all.  For  one  might  raise  the 
question  whether  the  principles  and  elements 
are  different  or  the  same  for  substances  and 
for  relative  terms,  and  similarly  in  the  case  of 
[55]  each  of  the  categories.  But  it  would  be 
paradoxical  if  they  were  the  same  for  all.  For 
then  from  the  same  elements  will  proceed  rela- 
1070b  tive  terms  and  substances.  What  then 
will  this  common  element  be?  For  (1)  (a) 
there  is  nothing  common  to  and  distinct  from 
substance  and  the  other  categories,  viz.  those 
which  are  predicated;  but  an  element  is  prior 
to  the  things  of  which  it  is  an  element.  But 
again  ( b )  substance  is  not  an  element  in  rela¬ 
tive  terms,  nor  is  any  of  these  an  element  in 
substance.  Further,  (2)  how  can  all  things  have 
[5]  the  same  elements?  For  none  of  the  ele¬ 
ments  can  be  the  same  as  that  which  is  com¬ 
posed  of  elements,  e.g.  b  or  a  cannot  be  the  same 
as  ba.  (None,  therefore,  of  the  intelligibles,  e.g. 


6oo 

being  or  unity,  is  an  element;  for  these  are 
predicable  of  each  of  the  compounds  as  well.) 
None  of  the  elements,  then,  will  be  either  a  sub¬ 
stance  or  a  relative  term;  but  it  must  be  one 
or  other.  All  things,  then,  have  not  the  same 
elements. 

[io]  Or,  as  we  are  wont  to  put  it,  in  a  sense 
they  have  and  in  a  sense  they  have  not;  e.g. 
perhaps  the  elements  of  perceptible  bodies  are, 
as  form ,  the  hot,  and  in  another  sense  the  cold, 
which  is  the  privation ;  and,  as  matter ,  that 
which  directly  and  of  itself  potentially  has  these 
attributes;  and  substances  comprise  both  these 
and  the  things  composed  of  these,  of  which 
these  are  the  principles,  or  any  unity  which  is 
roduced  out  of  the  hot  and  the  cold,  e.g.  flesh 
75]  or  bone;  for  the  product  must  be  differ¬ 
ent  from  the  elements.  These  things  then  have 
the  same  elements  and  principles  (though  spe¬ 
cifically  different  things  have  specifically  dif¬ 
ferent  elements);  but  all  things  have  not  the 
same  elements  in  this  sense,  but  only  analogical¬ 
ly;  i.e.  one  might  say  that  there  are  three  prin¬ 
ciples — the  form,  the  privation,  and  the  mat- 
120]  ter.  But  each  of  these  is  different  for  each 
class;  e.g.  in  colour  they  are  white,  black,  and 
surface,  and  in  day  and  night  they  are  light, 
darkness,  and  air. 

Since  not  only  the  elements  present  in  a 
thing  are  causes,  but  also  something  external, 
i.e.  the  moving  cause,  clearly  while  ‘principle* 
and  ‘element*  are  different  both  are  causes, 
and  ‘principle*  is  divided  into  these  two  kinds; 
and  that  which  acts  as  producing  movement  or 
rest  is  a  principle  and  a  substance.  Therefore 
[25]  analogically  there  are  three  elements,  and 
four  causes  and  principles;  but  the  elements 
are  different  in  different  things,  and  the  proxi¬ 
mate  moving  cause  is  different  for  different 
things.  Health,  disease,  body;  the  moving  cause 
is  the  medical  art.  Form,  disorder  of  a  par¬ 
ticular  kind,  bricks;  the  moving  cause  is  the 
[jo]  building  art.  And  since  the  moving  cause 
in  the  case  of  natural  things  is — for  man,  for 
instance,  man,  and  in  the  products  of  thought 
the  form  or  its  contrary,  there  will  be  in  a 
sense  three  causes,  while  in  a  sense  there  are 
four.  For  the  medical  art  is  in  some  sense 
health,  and  the  building  art  is  the  form  of  the 
house,  and  man  begets  man;  further,  besides 
these  there  is  that  which  as  first  of  all  things 
[35]  moves  all  things. 

5 

Some  things  can  exist  apart  and  some  cannot, 
1071a  and  it  is  the  former  that  are  substances. 


1071“ 

And  therefore  all  things  have  the  same  causes, 
because,  without  substances,  modifications  and 
movements  do  not  exist.  Further,  these  causes 
will  probably  be  soul  and  body,  or  reason  and 
desire  and  body. 

And  in  yet  another  way,  analogically  iden- 
[5]  tical  things  are  principles,  i.e.  actuality  and 
potency;  but  these  also  are  not  only  different 
for  different  things  but  also  apply  in  different 
ways  to  them.  For  in  some  cases  the  same 
thing  exists  at  one  time  actually  and  at  another 
potentially,  e.g.  wine  or  flesh  or  man  does  so. 
(And  these  too  fall  under  the  above-named 
causes.  For  the  form  exists  actually,  if  it  can 
exist  apart,  and  so  does  the  complex  of  form 
and  matter,  and  the  privation,  e.g.  darkness  or 
[/o]  disease;  but  the  matter  exists  potentially; 
for  this  is  that  which  can  become  qualified 
either  by  the  form  or  by  the  privation.)  But 
the  distinction  of  actuality  and  potentiality  ap¬ 
plies  in  another  way  to  cases  where  the  matter 
of  cause  and  of  effect  is  not  the  same,  in  some 
of  which  cases  the  form  is  not  the  same  but 
different;  e.g.  the  cause  of  man  is  (1)  the  ele¬ 
ments  in  man  (viz.  fire  and  earth  as  matter, 
and  the  peculiar  form),  and  further  (2)  some¬ 
thing  else  outside,  i.e.  the  father,  and  (3)  be- 
[75]  sides  these  the  sun  and  its  oblique  course, 
which  are  neither  matter  nor  form  nor  priva¬ 
tion  of  man  nor  of  the  same  species  with  him, 
but  moving  causes. 

Further,  one  must  observe  that  some  causes 
can  be  expressed  in  universal  terms,  and  some 
cannot.  The  proximate  principles  of  all  things 
are  the  ‘this’  which  is  proximate  in  actuality, 
and  another  which  is  proximate  in  potentiality. 
The  universal  causes,  then,  of  which  we  spoke 
[20]  do  not  exist.  For  it  is  the  individual  that 
is  the  originative  principle  of  the  individuals. 
For  while  man  is  the  originative  principle  of 
man  universally,  there  is  no  universal  man,  but 
Peleus  is  the  originative  principle  of  Achilles, 
and  your  father  of  you,  and  this  particular  b 
of  this  particular  ba,  though  b  in  general  is  the 
originative  principle  of  ba  taken  without  qual¬ 
ification. 

Further,  if  the  causes  of  substances  are  the 
causes  of  all  things,  yet  different  things  have 
different  causes  and  elements,  as  was  said1;  the 
[25]  causes  of  things  that  are  not  in  the  same 
class,  e.g.  of  colours  and  sounds,  of  substances 
and  quantities,  are  different  except  in  an  ana¬ 
logical  sense;  and  those  of  things  in  the  same 
species  are  different,  not  in  species,  but  in  the 
sense  that  the  causes  of  different  individuals 
1  In  io7ob  17. 


METAPHYSICS 


1072* 

are  different,  your  matter  and  form  and  mov¬ 
ing  cause  being  different  from  mine,  while  in 
their  universal  definition  they  are  the  same, 
[jo]  And  if  we  inquire  what  are  the  principles 
or  elements  of  substances  and  relations  and 
qualities — whether  they  are  the  same  or  dif¬ 
ferent — clearly  when  the  names  of  the  causes 
are  used  in  several  senses  the  causes  of  each 
are  the  same,  but  when  the  senses  are  distin- 
guishd  the  causes  are  not  the  same  but  differ¬ 
ent,  except  that  in  the  following  senses  the 
causes  of  all  are  the  same.  They  are  (i)  the 
same  or  analogous  in  this  sense,  that  matter, 
form,  privation,  and  the  moving  cause  are 
common  to  all  things;  and  (2)  the  causes  of 
substances  may  be  treated  as  causes  of  all  things 
in  this  sense,  that  when  substances  are  removed 
[55]  all  things  are  removed;  further,  (3)  that 
which  is  first  in  respect  of  complete  reality  is 
the  cause  of  all  things.  But  in  another  sense 
there  are  different  first  causes,  viz.  all  the  con¬ 
traries  which  are  neither  generic  nor  ambigu¬ 
ous  terms;  and,  further,  the  matters  of  differ- 
1071b  ent  things  are  different.  We  have  stated, 
then,  what  are  the  principles  of  sensible  things 
and  how  many  they  are,  and  in  what  sense 
they  are  the  same  and  in  what  sense  different. 

6 

Since  there  were  three  kinds  of  substance,  two 
of  them  physical  and  one  unmovable,  regard¬ 
ing  the  latter  we  must  assert  that  it  is  necessary 
that  there  should  be  an  eternal  unmovable 
[5]  substance.  For  substances  are  the  first  of 
existing  things,  and  if  they  are  all  destructible, 
all  things  are  destructible.  But  it  is  impossible 
that  movement  should  either  have  come  into 
being  or  cease  to  be  (for  it  must  always  have 
existed),  or  that  time  should.  For  there  could 
not  be  a  before  and  an  after  if  time  did  not 
exist.  Movement  also  is  continuous,  then,  in 
the  sense  in  which  time  is;  for  time  is  either 
the  same  thing  as  movement  or  an  attribute  of 
[jo]  movement.  And  there  is  no  continuous 
movement  except  movement  in  place,  and  of 
this  only  that  which  is  circular  is  continuous. 

But  if  there  is  something  which  is  capable  of 
moving  things  or  acting  on  them,  but  is  not 
actually  doing  so,  there  will  not  necessarily  be 
movement;  for  that  which  has  a  potency  need 
not  exercise  it.  Nothing,  then,  is  gained  even 
if  we  suppose  eternal  substances,  as  the  be- 
[75]  lievers  in  the  Forms  do,  unless  there  is  to 
be  in  them  some  principle  which  can  cause 
change;  nay,  even  this  is  not  enough,  nor  is 
another  substance  besides  the  Forms  enough; 


601 

for  if  it  is  not  to  act,  there  will  be  no  move¬ 
ment.  Further  even  if  it  acts,  this  will  not  be 
enough,  if  its  essence  is  potency;  for  there  will 
not  be  eternal  movement,  since  that  which  is 
potentially  may  possibly  not  be.  There  must, 
[20]  then,  be  such  a  principle,  whose  very  es¬ 
sence  is  actuality.  Further,  then,  these  substan¬ 
ces  must  be  without  matter;  for  they  must  be 
eternal,  if  anything  is  eternal.  Therefore  they 
must  be  actuality. 

Yet  there  is  a  difficulty;  for  it  is  thought 
that  everything  that  acts  is  able  to  act,  but  that 
not  everything  that  is  able  to  act  acts,  so  that 
[25]  the  potency  is  prior.  But  if  this  is  so, 
nothing  that  is  need  be;  for  it  is  possible  for 
all  things  to  be  capable  of  existing  but  not 
yet  to  exist. 

Yet  if  we  follow  the  theologians  who  gen¬ 
erate  the  world  from  night,  or  the  natural 
philosophers  who  say  that  ‘all  things  were  to¬ 
gether’,1  the  same  impossible  result  ensues. 
For  how  will  there  be  movement,  if  there  is  no 
actually  existing  cause?  Wood  will  surely  not 
move  itself — the  carpenter’s  art  must  act  on  it; 
[jo]  nor  will  the  menstrual  blood  nor  the 
earth  set  themselves  in  motion,  but  the  seeds 
must  act  on  the  earth  and  the  semen  on  the 
menstrual  blood. 

This  is  why  some  suppose  eternal  actuality 
— e.g.  Leucippus  and  Plato2;  for  they  say  there 
is  always  movement.  But  why  and  what  this 
movement  is  they  do  not  say,  nor,  if  the  world 
moves  in  this  way  or  that,  do  they  tell  us  the 
cause  of  its  doing  so.  Now  nothing  is  moved 
at  random,  but  there  must  always  be  something 

f resent  to  move  it;  e.g.  as  a  matter  of  fact  a 
J5]  thing  moves  in  one  way  by  nature,  and  in 
another  by  force  or  through  the  influence  of 
reason  or  something  else.  (Further,  what  sort 
of  movement  is  primary?  This  makes  a  vast 
difference.)  But  again  for  Plato,  at  least,  it  is 
not  permissible  to  name  here  that  which  he 
1072*  sometimes  supposes  to  be  the  source  of 
movement — that  which  moves  itself;3  for  the 
soul  is  later,  and  coeval  with  the  heavens,  ac¬ 
cording  to  his  account.4  To  suppose  potency 
prior  to  actuality,  then,  is  in  a  sense  right,  and 
in  a  sense  not;  and  we  have  specified  these 
senses.5  That  actuality  is  prior  is  testified  by 
[5]  Anaxagoras  (for  his  ‘reason’  is  actuality) 
and  by  Empedocles  in  his  doctrine  of  love  and 
strife,  and  by  those  who  say  that  there  is  al¬ 
ways  movement,  e.g.  Leucippus.  Therefore 

1  Anaxagoras,  fr.  1.  2  Cf.  Timaeus ,  30. 

3  Cf.  Phaedrus,  245;  Laws ,  894. 

4  Cf.  Timaeus ,  34.  5  cf.  io7ib  22-26. 


BOOK  XII,  CHAPTERS  4-6 


602 

chaos  or  night  did  not  exist  for  an  infinite  time, 
but  the  same  things  have  always  existed  (either 
passing  through  a  cycle  of  changes  or  obeying 
some  other  law),  since  actuality  is  prior  to 
potency.  If,  then,  there  is  a  constant  cycle, 
something  must  always  remain,  acting  in  the 
[/o]  same  way.  And  if  there  is  to  be  generation 
and  destruction,  there  must  be  something  else 
which  is  always  acting  in  different  ways.  This 
must,  then,  act  in  one  way  in  virtue  of  itself, 
and  in  another  in  virtue  of  something  else — 
either  of  a  third  agent,  therefore,  or  of  the  first. 
Now  it  must  be  in  virtue  of  the  first.  For  other¬ 
wise  this  again  causes  the  motion  both  of  the 
second  agent  and  of  the  third.  Therefore  it  is 
[75]  better  to  say  ‘the  first’.  For  it  was  the 
cause  of  eternal  uniformity;  and  something  else 
is  the  cause  of  variety,  and  evidently  both  to¬ 
gether  are  the  cause  of  eternal  variety.  This, 
accordingly,  is  the  character  which  the  mo¬ 
tions  actually  exhibit.  What  need  then  is  there 
to  seek  for  other  principles? 

7 

Since  ( 1 )  this  is  a  possible  account  of  the  mat¬ 
ter,  and  (2)  if  it  were  not  true,  the  world 
would  have  proceeded  out  of  night  and  ‘all 
things  together’1  and  out  of  non-being,  these 
[20]  difficulties  may  be  taken  as  solved.  There 
is,  then,  something  which  is  always  moved 
with  an  unceasing  motion,  which  is  motion  in 
a  circle;  and  this  is  plain  not  in  theory  only 
but  in  fact.  Therefore  the  first  heaven  must  be 
eternal.  There  is  therefore  also  something 
which  moves  it.  And  since  that  which  moves 
and  is  moved  is  intermediate,  there  is  some¬ 
thing  which  moves  without  being  moved,  be- 
[25]  ing  eternal,  substance,  and  actuality.  And 
the  object  of  desire  and  the  object  of  thought 
move  in  this  way;  they  move  without  being 
moved.  The  primary  objects  of  desire  and  of 
thought  are  the  same.  For  the  apparent  good 
is  the  object  of  appetite,  and  the  real  good  is 
the  primary  object  of  rational  wish.  But  desire 
is  consequent  on  opinion  rather  than  opinion 
on  desire;  for  the  thinking  is  the  starting-point, 
[jo]  And  thought  is  moved  by  the  object  of 
thought,  and  one  of  the  two  columns  of  oppo¬ 
sites  is  in  itself  the  object  of  thought;  and  in 
this,  substance  is  first,  and  in  substance,  that 
which  is  simple  and  exists  actually.  (The  one 
and  the  simple  are  not  the  same;  for  ‘one’ 
means  a  measure,  but  ‘simple’  means  that  the 
thing  itself  has  a  certain  nature.)  But  the  beau¬ 
tiful,  also,  and  that  which  is  in  itself  desirable 
1  Anaxagoras,  fr.  1. 


1072b 

[35]  are  in  the  same  column;  and  the  first  in 
any  class  is  always  best,  or  analogous  to  the 
best. 

1072b  That  a  final  cause  may  exist  among  un¬ 
changeable  entities  is  shown  by  the  distinction 
of  its  meanings.  For  the  final  cause  is  (a) 
some  being  for  whose  good  an  action  is  done, 
and  ( b )  something  at  which  the  action  aims; 
and  of  these  the  latter  exists  among  unchange¬ 
able  entities  though  the  former  does  not.  The 
final  cause,  then,  produces  motion  as  being 
loved,  but  all  other  things  move  by  being 
moved.  Now  if  something  is  moved  it  is  capa¬ 
ble  of  being  otherwise  than  as  it  is.  Therefore 
[5]  if  its  actuality  is  the  primary  form  of  spa¬ 
tial  motion,  then  in  so  far  as  it  is  subject  to 
change,  in  this  respect  it  is  capable  of  being 
otherwise, — in  place,  even  if  not  in  substance. 
But  since  there  is  something  which  moves 
while  itself  unmoved,  existing  actually,  this 
can  in  no  way  be  otherwise  than  as  it  is.  For 
motion  in  space  is  the  first  of  the  kinds  of 
change,  and  motion  in  a  circle  the  first  kind 
of  spatial  motion;  and  this  the  first  mover  pro- 
[/o]  duces .  The  first  mover,  then,  exists  of 
necessity;  and  in  so  far  as  it  exists  by  necessity, 
its  mode  of  being  is  good,  and  it  is  in  this 
sense  a  first  principle.  For  the  necessary  has 
all  these  senses — that  which  is  necessary  per¬ 
force  because  it  is  contrary  to  the  natural  im¬ 
pulse,  that  without  which  the  good  is  impos¬ 
sible,  and  that  which  cannot  be  otherwise  but 
can  exist  only  in  a  single  way. 

On  such  a  principle,  then,  depend  the  heav¬ 
ens  and  the  world  of  nature.  And  it  is  a  life 
such  as  the  best  which  we  enjoy,  and  enjoy  for 
[75]  but  a  short  time  (for  it  is  ever  in  this 
state,  which  we  cannot  be),  since  its  actuality  is 
also  pleasure.  (And  for  this  reason  are  waking, 
perception,  and  thinking  most  pleasant,  and 
hopes  and  memories  are  so  on  account  of 
these.)  And  thinking  in  itself  deals  with  that 
which  is  best  in  itself,  and  that  which  is  think¬ 
ing  in  the  fullest  sense  with  that  which  is  best 
in  the  fullest  sense.  And  thought  thinks  on  it¬ 
self  because  it  shares  the  nature  of  the  object 
[20]  of  thought;  for  it  becomes  an  object  of 
thought  in  coming  into  contact  with  and  think¬ 
ing  its  objects,  so  that  thought  and  object  of 
thought  are  the  same.  For  that  which  is  capa¬ 
ble  of  receiving  the  object  of  thought,  i.e.  the 
essence,  is  thought.  But  it  is  active  when  it 
possesses  this  object.  Therefore  the  possession 
rather  than  the  receptivity  is  the  divine  ele¬ 
ment  which  thought  seems  to  contain,  and  the 
act  of  contemplation  is  what  is  most  pleasant 


METAPHYSICS 


1073b  BOOK  XII,  CHAPTERS  6-8  603 


and  best.  If,  then,  God  is  always  in  that  good 
state  in  which  we  sometimes  are,  this  compels 
[25]  our  wonder;  and  if  in  a  better  this  com¬ 
pels  it  yet  more.  And  God  is  in  a  better  state. 
And  life  also  belongs  to  God;  for  the  actuality 
of  thought  is  life,  and  God  is  that  actuality;  and 
God’s  self-dependent  actuality  is  life  most  good 
and  eternal.  We  say  therefore  that  God  is  a 
living  being,  eternal,  most  good,  so  that  life 
and  duration  continuous  and  eternal  belong  to 
God;  for  this  is  God. 

[30]  Those  who  suppose,  as  the  Pythagoreans 
and  Speusippus  do,  that  supreme  beauty  and 
goodness  are  not  present  in  the  beginning,  be¬ 
cause  the  beginnings  both  of  plants  and  of  ani¬ 
mals  are  causes,  but  beauty  and  completeness 
[35]  are  m  the  effects  of  these,  are  wrong  in 
their  opinion.  For  the  seed  comes  from  other 
individuals  which  are  prior  and  complete,  and 
the  first  thing  is  not  seed  but  the  complete  be- 
1073*  ing;  e.g.  we  must  say  that  before  the 
seed  there  is  a  man, — not  the  man  produced 
from  the  seed,  but  another  from  whom  the  seed 
comes. 

It  is  clear  then  from  what  has  been  said  that 
there  is  a  substance  which  is  eternal  and  un¬ 
movable  and  separate  from  sensible  things.  It 
[5]  has  been  shown  also  that  this  substance 
cannot  have  any  magnitude,  but  is  without 
parts  and  indivisible  (for  it  produces  move¬ 
ment  through  infinite  time,  but  nothing  finite 
has  infinite  power;  and,  while  every  magni¬ 
tude  is  either  infinite  or  finite,  it  cannot,  for 
[70]  the  above  reason,  have  finite  magnitude, 
and  it  cannot  have  infinite  magnitude  because 
there  is  no  infinite  magnitude  at  all).  But  it 
has  also  been  shown  that  it  is  impassive  and 
unalterable;  for  all  the  other  changes  are  pos¬ 
terior  to  change  of  place. 

8 

It  is  clear,  then,  why  these  things  are  as  they 
are.  But  we  must  not  ignore  the  question 
whether  we  have  to  suppose  one  such  substance 
or  more  than  one,  and  if  the  latter,  how  many; 
[75]  we  must  also  mention,  regarding  the 
opinions  expressed  by  others,  that  they  have 
said  nothing  about  the  number  of  the  sub¬ 
stances  that  can  even  be  clearly  stated.  For  the 
theory  of  Ideas  has  no  special  discussion  of  the 
subject;  for  those  who  speak  of  Ideas  say  the 
Ideas  are  numbers,  and  they  speak  of  numbers 
now  as  unlimited,  now  as  limited  by  the  num- 
[20]  ber  10;  but  as  for  the  reason  why  there 
should  be  just  so  many  numbers,  nothing  is 


said  with  any  demonstrative  exactness.  We 
however  must  discuss  the  subject,  starting 
from  the  presuppositions  and  distinctions  we 
have  mentioned.  The  first  principle  or  primary 
being  is  not  movable  either  in  itself  or  accident- 
[25]  ally,  but  produces  the  primary  eternal  and 
single  movement.  But  since  that  which  is 
moved  must  be  moved  by  something,  and  the 
first  mover  must  be  in  itself  unmovable,  and 
eternal  movement  must  be  produced  by  some¬ 
thing  eternal  and  a  single  movement  by  a  sin¬ 
gle  thing,  and  since  we  see  that  besides  the 
simple  spatial  movement  of  the  universe,  which 
[30]  we  say  the  first  and  unmovable  substance 
produces,  there  are  other  spatial  movements — 
those  of  the  planets — which  are  eternal  (for  a 
body  which  moves  in  a  circle  is  eternal  and 
unresting;  we  have  proved  these  points  in  the 
physical  treatises1),  each  of  these  movements 
also  must  be  caused  by  a  substance  both  un¬ 
movable  in  itself  and  eternal.  For  the  nature  of 
the  stars  is  eternal  just  because  it  is  a  certain 
[35]  kind  of  substance,  and  the  mover  is 
eternal  and  prior  to  the  moved,  and  that  which 
is  prior  to  a  substance  must  be  a  substance. 
Evidently,  then,  there  must  be  substances 
which  are  of  the  same  number  as  the  move¬ 
ments  of  the  stars,  and  in  their  nature  eternal, 
and  in  themselves  unmovable,  and  without 
magnitude,  for  the  reason  before  mentioned.2 
1073b  That  the  movers  are  substances,  then, 
and  that  one  of  these  is  first  and  another  sec¬ 
ond  according  to  the  same  order  as  the  move¬ 
ments  of  the  stars,  is  evident.  But  in  the  num¬ 
ber  of  the  movements  we  reach  a  problem 
which  must  be  treated  from  the  standpoint  of 
that  one  of  the  mathematical  sciences  which  is 
most  akin  to  philosophy — viz.  of  astronomy; 
[5]  for  this  science  speculates  about  substance 
which  is  perceptible  but  eternal,  but  the  other 
mathematical  sciences,  i.e.  arithmetic  and  ge¬ 
ometry,  treat  of  no  substance.  That  the  move¬ 
ments  are  more  numerous  than  the  bodies  that 
are  moved  is  evident  to  those  who  have  given 
even  moderate  attention  to  the  matter;  for  each 
[/o]  of  the  planets  has  more  than  one  move¬ 
ment.  But  as  to  the  actual  number  of  these 
movements,  we  now — to  give  some  notion  of 
the  subject — quote  what  some  of  the  mathe¬ 
maticians  say,  that  our  thought  may  have 
some  definite  number  to  grasp;  but,  for  the 
rest,  we  must  partly  investigate  for  ourselves, 
[75]  partly  learn  from  other  investigators,  and 
if  those  who  study  this  subject  form  an  opinion 

1  Cf.  Physics ,  viii.  8,  o;  On  the  Heavens ,  i.  2,  n.  3-8. 

2  Cf.  11.  5-1 1. 


6o4  METAPHYSICS  1074b 


contrary  to  what  we  have  now  stated,  we  must 
esteem  both  parties  indeed,  but  follow  the 
more  accurate. 

Eudoxus  supposed  that  the  motion  of  the 
sun  or  of  the  moon  involves,  in  either  case, 
three  spheres,  of  which  the  first  is  the  sphere 
of  the  fixed  stars,  and  the  second  moves  in  the 
[20]  circle  which  runs  along  the  middle  of  the 
zodiac,  and  the  third  in  the  circle  which  is  in¬ 
clined  across  the  breadth  of  the  zodiac;  but 
the  circle  in  which  the  moon  moves  is  inclined 
at  a  greater  angle  than  that  in  which  the  sun 
moves.  And  the  motion  of  the  planets  involves, 
in  each  case,  four  spheres,  and  of  these  also  the 
first  and  second  are  the  same  as  the  first  two 
[25]  mentioned  above  (for  the  sphere  of  the 
fixed  stars  is  that  which  moves  all  the  other 
spheres,  and  that  which  is  placed  beneath  this 
and  has  its  movement  in  the  circle  which  bi¬ 
sects  the  zodiac  is  common  to  all),  but  the 
poles  of  the  third  sphere  of  each  planet  are  in 
the  circle  which  bisects  the  zodiac,  and  the  mo¬ 
tion  of  the  fourth  sphere  is  in  the  circle  which 
is  inclined  at  an  angle  to  the  equator  of  the 
[jo]  third  sphere;  and  the  poles  of  the  third 
sphere  are  different  for  each  of  the  other  plan¬ 
ets,  but  those  of  Venus  and  Mercury  are  the 
same. 

Callippus  made  the  position  of  the  spheres 
the  same  as  Eudoxus  did,  but  while  he  as¬ 
signed  the  same  number  as  Eudoxus  did  to 
[35]  Jupiter  and  to  Saturn,  he  thought  two 
more  spheres  should  be  added  to  the  sun  and 
two  to  the  moon,  if  one  is  to  explain  the  ob¬ 
served  facts;  and  one  more  to  each  of  the  other 
planets. 

But  it  is  necessary,  if  all  the  spheres  com- 
1074a  bined  are  to  explain  the  observed  facts, 
that  for  each  of  the  planets  there  should  be 
other  spheres  (one  fewer  than  those  hitherto 
assigned)  which  counteract  those  already  men¬ 
tioned  and  bring  back  to  the  same  position  the 
outermost  sphere  of  the  star  which  in  each  case 
is  situated  below  the  star  in  question;  for  only 
[5]  thus  can  all  the  forces  at  work  produce  the 
observed  motion  of  the  planets.  Since,  then,  the 
spheres  involved  in  the  movement  of  the  plan¬ 
ets  themselves  are — eight  for  Saturn  and  Ju¬ 
piter  and  twenty-five  for  the  others,  and  of 
these  only  those  involved  in  the  movement  of 
the  lowest-situated  planet  need  not  be  counter¬ 
acted,  the  spheres  which  counteract  those  of  the 
outermost  two  planets  will  be  six  in  number, 
and  the  spheres  which  counteract  those  of  the 
[/o]  next  four  planets  will  be  sixteen;  there¬ 
fore  the  number  of  all  the  spheres — both  those 


which  move  the  planets  and  those  which  coun¬ 
teract  these — will  be  fifty-five.  And  if  one  were 
not  to  add  to  the  moon  and  to  the  sun  the 
movements  we  mentioned,1  the  whole  set  of 
spheres  will  be  forty-seven  in  number. 

Let  this,  then,  be  taken  as  the  number  of  the 
[75]  spheres,  so  that  the  unmovable  substances 
and  principles  also  may  probably  be  taken  as 
just  so  many;  the  assertion  of  necessity  must  be 
left  to  more  powerful  thinkers.  But  if  there  can 
be  no  spatial  movement  which  does  not  con¬ 
duce  to  the  moving  of  a  star,  and  if  further 
every  being  and  every  substance  which  is  im¬ 
mune  from  change  and  in  virtue  of  itself  has 
attained  to  the  best  must  be  considered  an  end, 
[20]  there  can  be  no  other  being  apart  from 
these  we  have  named,  but  this  must  be  the 
number  of  the  substances.  For  if  there  are 
others,  they  will  cause  change  as  being  a  final 
cause  of  movement;  but  there  cannot  be  other 
movements  besides  those  mentioned.  And  it  is 
reasonable  to  infer  this  from  a  consideration  of 
the  bodies  that  are  moved;  for  if  everything 
[25]  that  moves  is  for  the  sake  of  that  which 
is  moved,  and  every  movement  belongs  to 
something  that  is  moved,  no  movement  can  be 
for  the  sake  of  itself  or  of  another  movement, 
but  all  the  movements  must  be  for  the  sake  of 
the  stars.  For  if  there  is  to  be  a  movement  for 
the  sake  of  a  movement,  this  latter  also  will 
have  to  be  for  the  sake  of  something  else;  so 
that  since  there  cannot  be  an  infinite  regress, 
[jo]  the  end  of  every  movement  will  be  one 
of  the  divine  bodies  which  move  through  the 
heaven. 

(Evidently  there  is  but  one  heaven.  For  if 
there  are  many  heavens  as  there  are  many  men, 
the  moving  principles,  of  which  each  heaven 
will  have  one,  will  be  one  in  form  but  in  num¬ 
ber  many.  But  all  things  that  are  many  in 
number  have  matter;  for  one  and  the  same 
definition,  e.g.  that  of  man,  applies  to  many 
[35]  things,  while  Socrates  is  one.  But  the  pri¬ 
mary  essence  has  not  matter;  for  it  is  complete 
reality.  So  the  unmovable  first  mover  is  one 
both  in  definition  and  in  number;  so  too,  there¬ 
fore,  is  that  which  is  moved  always  and  con¬ 
tinuously;  therefore  there  is  one  heaven  alone.) 
1074b  Our  forefathers  in  the  most  remote  ages 
have  handed  down  to  their  posterity  a  tradi¬ 
tion,  in  the  form  of  a  myth,  that  these  bodies 
are  gods,  and  that  the  divine  encloses  the  whole 
of  nature.  The  rest  of  the  tradition  has  been 
added  later  in  mythical  form  with  a  view  to 
the  persuasion  of  the  multitude  and  to  its  legal 
xIn  io73b  35, 38-1074*  4. 


1075a  BOOK  XII,  CHAPTERS  8-10  605 


[5]  and  utilitarian  expediency;  they  say  these 
gods  are  in  the  form  of  men  or  like  some  of 
the  other  animals,  and  they  say  other  things 
consequent  on  and  similar  to  these  which  we 
have  mentioned.  But  if  one  were  to  separate 
the  first  point  from  these  additions  and  take 
it  alone — that  they  thought  the  first  substances 
[/o]  to  be  gods,  one  must  regard  this  as  an  in¬ 
spired  utterance,  and  reflect  that,  while  prob¬ 
ably  each  art  and  each  science  has  often  been 
developed  as  far  as  possible  and  has  again  per¬ 
ished,  these  opinions,  with  others,  have  been 
preserved  until  the  present  like  relics  of  the  an¬ 
cient  treasure.  Only  thus  far,  then,  is  the  opin¬ 
ion  of  our  ancestors  and  of  our  earliest  pred¬ 
ecessors  clear  to  us. 

9 

[75]  The  nature  of  the  divine  thought  involves 
certain  problems;  for  while  thought  is  held  to 
be  the  most  divine  of  things  observed  by  us, 
the  question  how  it  must  be  situated  in  order 
to  have  that  character  involves  difficulties.  For 
if  it  thinks  of  nothing,  what  is  there  here  of 
dignity?  It  is  just  like  one  who  sleeps.  And  if 
it  thinks,  but  this  depends  on  something  else, 
then  (since  that  which  is  its  substance  is  not 
the  act  of  thinking,  but  a  potency)  it  cannot  be 
[20]  the  best  substance;  for  it  is  through  think¬ 
ing  that  its  value  belongs  to  it.  Further,  wheth¬ 
er  its  substance  is  the  faculty  of  thought  or  the 
act  of  thinking,  what  does  it  think  of?  Either 
of  itself  or  of  something  else;  and  if  of  some¬ 
thing  else,  either  of  the  same  thing  always  or 
of  something  different.  Does  it  matter,  then, 
or  not,  whether  it  thinks  of  the  good  or  of  any 
[25]  chance  thing?  Are  there  not  some  things 
about  which  it  is  incredible  that  it  should 
think?  Evidently,  then,  it  thinks  of  that  which 
is  most  divine  and  precious,  and  it  does  not 
change;  for  change  would  be  change  for  the 
worse,  and  this  would  be  already  a  movement. 
First,  then,  if  ‘thought’  is  not  the  act  of  think¬ 
ing  but  a  potency,  it  would  be  reasonable  to 
suppose  that  the  continuity  of  its  thinking  is 
wearisome  to  it.  Secondly,  there  would  evi¬ 
dently  be  something  else  more  precious  than 
[jo]  thought,  viz.  that  which  is  thought  of. 
For  both  thinking  and  the  act  of  thought  will 
belong  even  to  one  who  thinks  of  the  worst 
thing  in  the  world,  so  that  if  this  ought  to  be 
avoided  (and  it  ought,  for  there  are  even  some 
things  which  it  is  better  not  to  see  than  to  see), 
the  act  of  thinking  cannot  be  the  best  of  things. 
Therefore  it  must  be  of  itself  that  the  divine 
thought  thinks  (since  it  is  the  most  excellent 


of  things),  and  its  thinking  is  a  thinking  on 
thinking. 

[^5]  But  evidently  knowledge  and  perception 
and  opinion  and  understanding  have  always 
something  else  as  their  object,  and  themselves 
only  by  the  way.  Further,  if  thinking  and  be¬ 
ing  thought  of  are  different,  in  respect  of  which 
does  goodness  belong  to  thought?  For  to  be 
an  act  of  thinking  and  to  be  an  object  of 
thought  are  not  the  same  thing.  We  answer 
1075a  that  in  some  cases  the  knowledge  is  the 
object.  In  the  productive  sciences  it  is  the  sub¬ 
stance  or  essence  of  the  object,  matter  omitted, 
and  in  the  theoretical  sciences  the  definition  or 
the  act  of  thinking  is  the  object.  Since,  then, 
thought  and  the  object  of  thought  are  not  dif¬ 
ferent  in  the  case  of  things  that  have  not  mat¬ 
ter,  the  divine  thought  and  its  object  will  be 
the  same,  i.e.  the  thinking  will  be  one  with  the 
object  of  its  thought. 

[5]  A  further  question  is  left — whether  the  ob¬ 
ject  of  the  divine  thought  is  composite;  for  if 
it  were,  thought  would  change  in  passing  from 
part  to  part  of  the  whole.  We  answer  that 
everything  which  has  not  matter  is  indivisible 
— as  human  thought,  or  rather  the  thought  of 
composite  beings,  is  in  a  certain  period  of  time 
(for  it  does  not  possess  the  good  at  this  moment 
or  at  that,  but  its  best,  being  something  dif- 
[70]  fcrent  from  it,  is  attained  only  in  a  whole 
period  of  time),  so  throughout  eternity  is  the 
thought  which  has  itself  for  its  object. 

10 

We  must  consider  also  in  which  of  two  ways 
the  nature  of  the  universe  contains  the  good 
and  the  highest  good,  whether  as  something 
separate  and  by  itself,  or  as  the  order  of  the 
parts.  Probably  in  both  ways,  as  an  army  does; 
for  its  good  is  found  both  in  its  order  and  in 
[75]  its  leader,  and  more  in  the  latter;  for  he 
does  not  depend  on  the  order  but  it  depends  on 
him.  And  all  things  are  ordered  together  some¬ 
how,  but  not  all  alike, — both  fishes  and  fowls 
and  plants;  and  the  world  is  not  such  that  one 
thing  has  nothing  to  do  with  another,  but  they 
are  connected.  For  all  are  ordered  together  to 
one  end,  but  it  is  as  in  a  house,  where  the  free- 
[20]  men  are  least  at  liberty  to  act  at  random, 
but  all  things  or  most  things  are  already  or¬ 
dained  for  them,  while  the  slaves  and  the  ani¬ 
mals  do  little  for  the  common  good,  and  for 
the  most  part  live  at  random;  for  this  is  the 
sort  of  principle  that  constitutes  the  nature  of 
each.  I  mean,  for  instance,  that  all  must  at 
least  come  to  be  dissolved  into  their  elements, 


6o6 

and  there  are  other  functions  similarly  in 
which  all  share  for  the  good  of  the  whole. 

[25]  We  must  not  fail  to  observe  how  many 
impossible  or  paradoxical  results  confront 
those  who  hold  different  views  from  our  own, 
and  what  are  the  views  of  the  subtler  thinkers, 
and  which  views  are  attended  by  fewest  diffi¬ 
culties.  All  make  all  things  out  of  contraries. 
But  neither  ‘all  things’  nor  ‘out  of  contraries’ 
is  right;  nor  do  these  thinkers  tell  us  how  all 
the  things  in  which  the  contraries  are  present 
[jo]  can  be  made  out  of  the  contraries;  for 
contraries  are  not  affected  by  one  another. 
Now  for  us  this  difficulty  is  solved  naturally  by 
the  fact  that  there  is  a  third  element.  These 
thinkers  however  make  one  of  the  two  con¬ 
traries  matter;  this  is  done  for  instance  by 
those  who  make  the  unequal  matter  for  the 
equal,  or  the  many  matter  for  the  one.  But 
this  also  is  refuted  in  the  same  way;  for  the  one 
matter  which  underlies  any  pair  of  contraries 
is  contrary  to  nothing.  Further,  all  things,  ex¬ 
cept  the  one,  will,  on  the  view  we  are  criticiz- 
[35]  in£>  partake  of  evil;  for  the  bad  itself  is 
one  of  the  two  elements.  But  the  other  school 
does  not  treat  the  good  and  the  bad  even  as 
principles;  yet  in  all  things  the  good  is  in  the 
highest  degree  a  principle.  The  school  we  first 
mentioned  is  right  in  saying  that  it  is  a  princi¬ 
ple,  but  how  the  good  is  a  principle  they  do  not 
say — whether  as  end  or  as  mover  or  as  form. 
1075b  Empedocles  also  has  a  paradoxical 
view;  for  he  identifies  the  good  with  love,  but 
this  is  a  principle  both  as  mover  (for  it  brings 
things  together)  and  as  matter  (for  it  is  part 
of  the  mixture).  Now  even  if  it  happens  that 
[5]  the  same  thing  is  a  principle  both  as  mat¬ 
ter  and  as  mover,  still  the  being,  at  least,  of  the 
two  is  not  the  same.  In  which  respect  then  is  love 
a  principle?  It  is  paradoxical  also  that  strife 
should  be  imperishable;  the  nature  of  his  ‘evil’ 
is  just  strife. 

Anaxagoras  makes  the  good  a  motive  prin¬ 
ciple;  for  his  ‘reason’  moves  things.  But  it 
moves  them  for  an  end,  which  must  be  some¬ 
thing  other  than  it,  except  according  to  our 
way  of  stating  the  case;  for,  on  our  view,  the 
[/o]  medical  art  is  in  a  sense  health.  It  is  para¬ 
doxical  also  not  to  suppose  a  contrary  to  the 
good,  i.e.  to  reason.  But  all  who  speak  of  the 
contraries  make  no  use  of  the  contraries,  unless 
we  bring  their  views  into  shape.  And  why  some 
things  are  perishable  and  others  imperishable, 
no  one  tells  us;  for  they  make  all  existing 
things  out  of  the  same  principles.  Further, 
[75]  some  make  existing  things  out  of  the  non- 


1076“ 

existent;  and  others  to  avoid  the  necessity  of 
this  make  all  things  one. 

Further,  why  should  there  always  be  becom¬ 
ing,  and  what  is  the  cause  of  becoming? — this 
no  one  tells  us.  And  those  who  suppose  two 
principles  must  suppose  another,  a  superior 
principle,  and  so  must  those  who  believe  in 
the  Forms;  for  why  did  things  come  to  par¬ 
ticipate,  or  why  do  they  participate,  in  the 
[20]  Forms?  And  all  other  thinkers  are  con¬ 
fronted  by  the  necessary  consequence  that 
there  is  something  contrary  to  Wisdom,  i.e.  to 
the  highest  knowledge;  but  we  are  not.  For 
there  is  nothing  contrary  to  that  which  is  pri¬ 
mary;  for  all  contraries  have  matter,  and  things 
that  have  matter  exist  only  potentially;  and 
the  ignorance  which  is  contrary  to  any  knowl¬ 
edge  leads  to  an  object  contrary  to  the  object 
of  the  knowledge;  but  what  is  primary  has  no 
contrary. 

[25]  Again,  if  besides  sensible  things  no  others 
exist,  there  will  be  no  first  principle,  no  order, 
no  becoming,  no  heavenly  bodies,  but  each 
principle  will  have  a  principle  before  it,  as  in 
the  accounts  of  the  theologians  and  all  the  nat¬ 
ural  philosophers.  But  if  the  Forms  or  the  num¬ 
bers  are  to  exist,  they  will  be  causes  of  nothing; 
or  if  not  that,  at  least  not  of  movement.  Fur¬ 
ther,  how  is  extension,  i.e.  a  continuum ,  to  be 
produced  out  of  unextended  parts?  For  num¬ 
ber  will  not,  either  as  mover  or  as  form,  pro- 
[30]  duce  a  continuum.  But  again  there  cannot 
be  any  contrary  that  is  also  essentially  a  pro¬ 
ductive  or  moving  principle;  for  it  would  be 
possible  for  it  not  to  be.  Or  at  least  its  action 
would  be  posterior  to  its  potency.  The  world, 
then,  would  not  be  eternal.  But  it  is;  one  of 
these  premisses,  then,  must  be  denied.  And  we 
have  said  how  this  must  be  done.  Further,  in 
virtue  of  what  the  numbers,  or  the  soul  and 
[^5]  the  body,  or  in  general  the  form  and  the 
thing,  are  one — of  this  no  one  tells  us  anything; 
nor  can  any  one  tell,  unless  he  says,  as  we  do, 
that  the  mover  makes  them  one.  And  those 
who  say  mathematical  number  is  first  and  go 
on  to  generate  one  kind  of  substance  after  an- 
1076“  other  and  give  different  principles  for 
each,  make  the  substance  of  the  universe  a  mere 
series  of  episodes  (for  one  substance  has  no 
influence  on  another  by  its  existence  or  non¬ 
existence),  and  they  give  us  many  governing 
principles;  but  the  world  refuses  to  be  gov¬ 
erned  badly. 

‘The  rule  of  many  is  not  good;  one  ruler  let 
there  be!1 

1  Cf.  Iliad ,  11.  204. 


METAPHYSICS 


10 76b  BOOK  XII,  CHAPTER  10— BOOK  XIII,  CHAPTERS  1-2  607 

BOOK  XIII 


1 

We  have  stated  what  is  the  substance  of  sensi¬ 
ble  things,  dealing  in  the  treatise  on  physics1 
with  matter,  and  later2  with  the  substance 
[/o]  which  has  actual  existence.  Now  since 
our  inquiry  is  whether  there  is  or  is  not  besides 
the  sensible  substances  any  which  is  immovable 
and  eternal,  and,  if  there  is,  what  it  is,  we  must 
first  consider  what  is  said  by  others,  so  that, 
if  there  is  anything  which  they  say  wrongly, 
we  may  not  be  liable  to  the  same  objections, 
while,  if  there  is  any  opinion  common  to  them 
and  us,  we  shall  have  no  private  grievance 
[75]  against  ourselves  on  that  account;  for  one 
must  be  content  to  state  some  points  better  than 
one’s  predecessors,  and  others  no  worse. 

Two  opinions  are  held  on  this  subject;  it  is 
said  that  the  objects  of  mathematics — i.e.  num¬ 
bers  and  lines  and  the  like — are  substances,  and 
again  that  the  Ideas  are  substances.  And  since 
(1)  some  recognize  these  as  two  different 
[20]  classes — the  Ideas  and  the  mathematical 
numbers,  and  (2)  some  recognize  both  as  hav¬ 
ing  one  nature,  while  (3)  some  others  say  that 
the  mathematical  substances  are  the  only  sub¬ 
stances,  we  must  consider  first  the  objects  of 
mathematics,  not  qualifying  them  by  any 
other  characteristic — not  asking,  for  instance, 
whether  they  are  in  fact  Ideas  or  not,  or 
whether  they  are  the  principles  and  substances 
[25]  of  existing  things  or  not,  but  only  wheth¬ 
er  as  objects  of  mathematics  they  exist  or  not, 
and  if  they  exist,  how  they  exist.  Then  after 
this  we  must  separately  consider  the  Ideas 
themselves  in  a  general  way,  and  only  as  far  as 
the  accepted  mode  of  treatment  demands;  for 
most  of  the  points  have  been  repeatedly  made 
even  by  the  discussions  outside  our  school,  and, 
further,  the  greater  part  of  our  account  must 
[30]  finish  by  throwing  light  on  that  inquiry, 
viz.  when  we  examine3  whether  the  substances 
and  the  principles  of  existing  things  are  num¬ 
bers  and  Ideas;  for  after  the  discussion  of  the 
Ideas  this  remains  as  a  third  inquiry. 

If  the  objects  of  mathematics  exist,  they  must 
exist  either  in  sensible  objects,  as  some  say,  or 
[35]  separate  from  sensible  objects  (and  this 
also  is  said  by  some);  or  if  they  exist  in  neither 
of  these  ways,  either  they  do  not  exist,  or  they 
exist  only  in  some  special  sense.  So  that  the 

1  Physics ,  1.  2  Metaphysics ,  vn,  vm,  ix. 

3  Cf.  chapters  6-9. 


subject  of  our  discussion  will  be  not  whether 
they  exist  but  how  they  exist. 

2 

That  it  is  impossible  for  mathematical  objects 
to  exist  in  sensible  things,  and  at  the  same 
time  that  the  doctrine  in  question  is  an  artificial 
one,  has  been  said  already  in  our  discussion  of 
difficulties4;  we  have  pointed  out  that  it  is  im- 
10 76b  possible  for  two  solids  to  be  in  the  same 
place,  and  also  that  according  to  the  same  argu¬ 
ment  the  other  powers  and  characteristics  also 
should  exist  in  sensible  things  and  none  of 
them  separately.  This  we  have  said  already. 
But,  further,  it  is  obvious  that  on  this  theory  it 
is  impossible  for  any  body  whatever  to  be  di- 
[5]  vided;  for  it  would  have  to  be  divided  at  a 
plane,  and  the  plane  at  a  line,  and  the  line  at 
a  point,  so  that  if  the  point  cannot  be  divided, 
neither  can  the  line,  and  if  the  line  cannot, 
neither  can  the  plane  nor  the  solid.  What  dif¬ 
ference,  then,  does  it  make  whether  sensible 
things  are  such  indivisible  entities,  or,  without 
[/o]  being  so  themselves,  have  indivisible  en¬ 
tities  in  them?  The  result  will  be  the  same;  if 
the  sensible  entities  are  divided  the  others  will 
be  divided  too,  or  else  not  even  the  sensible 
entities  can  be  divided. 

But,  again,  it  is  not  possible  that  such  entities 
should  exist  separately .  For  if  besides  the  sensi¬ 
ble  solid s  there  are  to  be  other  solids  which  are 
separate  from  them  and  prior  to  the  sensible 
solids,  it  is  plain  that  besides  the  planes  also 
[75]  there  must  be  other  and  separate  planes 
and  points  and  lines;  for  consistency  requires 
this.  But  if  these  exist,  again  besides  the  planes 
and  lines  and  points  of  the  mathematical  solid 
there  must  be  others  which  are  separate.  (For 
incomposites  are  prior  to  compounds;  and  if 
there  are,  prior  to  the  sensible  bodies,  bodies 
[20]  which  are  not  sensible,  by  the  same  argu¬ 
ment  the  planes  which  exist  by  themselves 
must  be  prior  to  those  which  are  in  the  motion¬ 
less  solids.  Therefore  these  will  be  planes  and 
lines  other  than  those  that  exist  along  with  the 
mathematical  solids  to  which  these  thinkers 
assign  separate  existence;  for  the  latter  exist 
along  with  the  mathematical  solids,  while  the 
others  are  prior  to  the  mathematical  solids.) 
[25]  Again,  therefore,  there  will  be,  belonging 
to  these  planes,  lines,  and  prior  to  them  there 
will  have  to  be,  by  the  same  argument,  other 
4  Cf.  hi.  998*  7-19. 


6o8 

lines  and  points;  and  prior  to  these  points  in 
the  prior  lines  there  will  have  to  be  other 
points,  though  there  will  be  no  others  prior  to 
these.  Now  ( i )  the  accumulation  becomes  ab¬ 
surd;  for  we  find  ourselves  with  one  set  of 
[jo]  solids  apart  from  the  sensible  solids; 
three  sets  of  planes  apart  from  the  sensible 
planes — those  which  exist  apart  from  the  sensi¬ 
ble  planes,  and  those  in  the  mathematical  sol¬ 
ids,  and  those  which  exist  apart  from  those  in 
the  mathematical  solids;  four  sets  of  lines,  and 
five  sets  of  points.  With  which  of  these,  then, 
will  the  mathematical  sciences  deal?  Certainly 
not  with  the  planes  and  lines  and  points  in  the 
[jj]  motionless  solid;  for  science  always  deals 
with  what  is  prior.  And  (2)  the  same  account 
will  apply  also  to  numbers;  for  there  will  be  a 
different  set  of  units  apart  from  each  set  of 
points,  and  also  apart  from  each  set  of  realities, 
from  the  objects  of  sense  and  again  from  those 
of  thought;  so  that  there  will  be  various  classes 
of  mathematical  numbers. 

Again,  how  is  it  possible  to  solve  the  ques¬ 
tions  which  we  have  already  enumerated  in  our 
discussion  of  difficulties1?  For  the  objects  of 
10 77a  astronomy  will  exist  apart  from  sensible 
things  just  as  the  objects  of  geometry  will; 
but  how  is  it  possible  that  a  heaven  and  its 
parts — or  anything  else  which  has  movement — 
should  exist  apart?  Similarly  also  the  objects 
of  optics  and  of  harmonics  will  exist  apart;  for 
[5]  there  will  be  both  voice  and  sight  besides 
the  sensible  or  individual  voices  and  sights. 
Therefore  it  is  plain  that  the  other  senses  as 
well,  and  the  other  objects  of  sense,  will  exist 
apart;  for  why  should  one  set  of  them  do  so  and 
another  not?  And  if  this  is  so,  there  will  also 
be  animals  existing  apart,  since  there  will  be 
senses. 

Again,  there  are  certain  mathematical  theo- 
[/o]  rems  that  are  universal,  extending  be¬ 
yond  these  substances.  Here  then  we  shall  have 
another  intermediate  substance  separate  both 
from  the  Ideas  and  from  the  intermediates, — 
a  substance  which  is  neither  number  nor  points 
nor  spatial  magnitude  nor  time.  And  if  this  is 
impossible,  plainly  it  is  also  impossible  that 
the  former  entities  should  exist  separate  from 
sensible  things. 

And,  in  general,  conclusion  contrary  alike 
[75]  to  the  truth  and  to  the  usual  views  follow, 
if  one  is  to  suppose  the  objects  of  mathematics 
to  exist  thus  as  separate  entities.  For  because 
they  exist  thus  they  must  be  prior  to  sensible 
spatial  magnitudes,  but  in  truth  they  must  be 

1  hi.  997b  12-34. 


10 77b 

posterior;  for  the  incomplete  spatial  magnitude 
is  in  the  order  of  generation  prior,  but  in  the 
order  of  substance  posterior,  as  the  lifeless  is 
to  the  living. 

[20]  Again,  by  virtue  of  what,  and  when,  will 
mathematical  magnitudes  be  one?  For  things 
in  our  perceptible  world  are  one  in  virtue  of 
soul,  or  of  a  part  of  soul,  or  of  something  else 
that  is  reasonable  enough;  when  these  are  not 
present,  the  thing  is  a  plurality,  and  splits  up 
into  parts.  But  in  the  case  of  the  subjects  of 
mathematics,  which  are  divisible  and  are 
quantities,  what  is  the  cause  of  their  being  one 
and  holding  together? 

Again,  the  modes  of  generation  of  the  ob¬ 
jects  of  mathematics  show  that  we  are  right. 
For  the  dimension  first  generated  is  length, 
[25]  then  comes  breadth,  lastly  depth,  and  the 
process  is  complete.  If,  then,  that  which  is 
posterior  in  the  order  of  generation  is  prior  in 
the  order  of  substantiality,  the  solid  will  be 
prior  to  the  plane  and  the  line.  And  in  this  way 
also  it  is  both  more  complete  and  more  whole, 
because  it  can  become  animate.  How,  on  the 
other  hand,  could  a  line  or  a  plane  be  animate? 
[jo]  The  supposition  passes  the  power  of  our 
senses. 

Again,  the  solid  is  a  sort  of  substance;  for  it 
already  has  in  a  sense  completeness.  But  how 
can  lines  be  substances?  Neither  as  a  form  or 
shape,  as  the  soul  perhaps  is,  nor  as  matter, 
like  the  solid;  for  we  have  no  experience  of 
anything  that  can  be  put  together  out  of  lines 
[  J5]  or  planes  or  points,  while  if  these  had  been 
a  sort  of  material  substance,  we  should  have 
observed  things  which  could  be  put  together 
out  of  them. 

1077b  Grant,  then,  that  they  are  prior  in  defi- 
nition.  Still  not  all  things  that  are  prior  in 
definition  are  also  prior  in  substantiality.  For 
those  things  are  prior  in  substantiality  which 
when  separated  from  other  things  surpass  them 
in  the  power  of  independent  existence,  but 
things  are  prior  in  definition  to  those  whose 
definitions  are  compounded  out  of  their  defi¬ 
nitions;  and  these  two  properties  are  not  co- 
[5]  extensive.  For  if  attributes  do  not  exist 
apart  from  the  substances  (e.g.  a  ‘mobile’  or  a 
‘pale’),  pale  is  prior  to  the  pale  man  in  defini¬ 
tion,  but  not  in  substantiality.  For  it  cannot 
exist  separately,  but  is  always  along  with  the 
concrete  thing;  and  by  the  concrete  thing  I 
mean  the  pale  man.  Therefore  it  is  plain  that 
neither  is  the  result  of  abstraction  prior  nor 
that  which  is  produced  by  adding  determinants 
[/o]  posterior;  for  it  is  by  adding  a  determi- 


METAPHYSICS 


1078*  BOOK  XIII,  CHAPTERS  2-3  609 


nant  to  pale  that  we  speak  of  the  pale  man. 

It  has,  then,  been  sufficiently  pointed  out  that 
the  objects  of  mathematics  are  not  substances 
in  a  higher  degree  than  bodies  are,  and  that 
they  are  not  prior  to  sensibles  in  being,  but 
only  in  definition,  and  that  they  cannot  exist 
somewhere  apart.  But  since  it  was  not  possible 
[75]  for  them  to  exist  in  sensibles  either,  it  is 
plain  that  they  either  do  not  exist  at  all  or 
exist  in  a  special  sense  and  therefore  do  not 
‘exist’  without  qualification.  For  ‘exist’  has 
many  senses. 

3 

For  just  as  the  universal  propositions  of  mathe¬ 
matics  deal  not  with  objects  which  exist  sep¬ 
arately,  apart  from  extended  magnitudes  and 
from  numbers,  but  with  magnitudes  and  num¬ 
bers,  not  however  qua  such  as  to  have  magni- 
[20]  tude  or  to  be  divisible,  clearly  it  is  pos¬ 
sible  that  there  should  also  be  both  propositions 
and  demonstrations  about  sensible  magnitudes, 
not  however  qua  sensible  but  qua  possessed  of 
certain  definite  qualities.  For  as  there  are  many 

f  ropositions  about  things  merely  considered  as 
25]  in  motion,  apart  from  what  each  such 
thing  is  and  from  their  accidents,  and  as  it  is  not 
therefore  necessary  that  there  should  be  either 
a  mobile  separate  from  sensibles,  or  a  distinct 
mobile  entity  in  the  sensibles,  so  too  in  the  case 
of  mobiles  there  will  be  propositions  and  sci¬ 
ences,  which  treat  them  however  not  qua  mo¬ 
bile  but  only  qua  bodies,  or  again  only  qua 
[jo]  planes,  or  only  qua  lines,  or  qua  divisibles, 
or  qua  indivisibles  having  position,  or  only 
qua  indivisibles.  Thus  since  it  is  true  to  say 
without  qualification  that  not  only  things 
which  are  separable  but  also  things  which  are 
inseparable  exist  (for  instance,  that  mobiles 
exist),  it  is  true  also  to  say  without  qualifica¬ 
tion  that  the  objects  of  mathematics  exist,  and 
with  the  character  ascribed  to  them  by  mathe¬ 
maticians.  And  as  it  is  true  to  say  of  the  other 
sciences  too,  without  qualification,  that  they 
deal  with  such  and  such  a  subject — not  with 
[35]  what  is  accidental  to  it  (e.g.  not  with  the 
pale,  if  the  healthy  thing  is  pale,  and  the  sci¬ 
ence  has  the  healthy  as  its  subject),  but  with 
that  which  is  the  subject  of  each  science — with 
1078*  the  healthy  if  it  treats  its  object  qua 
healthy,  with  man  if  qua  man: — so  too  is  it 
with  geometry;  if  its  subjects  happen  to  be 
sensible,  though  it  does  not  treat  them  qua 
sensible,  the  mathematical  sciences  will  not  for 
that  reason  be  sciences  of  sensibles — nor,  on  the 
[5]  other  hand,  of  other  things  separate  from 


sensibles.  Many  properties  attach  to  things  in 
virtue  of  their  own  nature  as  possessed  of  each 
such  character;  e.g.  there  are  attributes  peculiar 
to  the  animal  qua  female  or  qua  male  (yet 
there  is  no  ‘female’  nor  ‘male’  separate  from 
animals);  so  that  there  are  also  attributes  which 
belong  to  things  merely  as  lengths  or  as  planes. 
And  in  proportion  as  we  are  dealing  with 
things  which  are  prior  in  definition  and  sim- 
[/o]  pier,  our  knowledge  has  more  accuracy, 
i.e.  simplicity.  Therefore  a  science  which  ab¬ 
stracts  from  spatial  magnitude  is  more  precise 
than  one  which  takes  it  into  account;  and  a 
science  is  most  precise  if  it  abstracts  from 
movement,  but  if  it  takes  account  of  move¬ 
ment,  it  is  most  precise  if  it  deals  with  the  pri¬ 
mary  movement,  for  this  is  the  simplest;  and 
of  this  again  uniform  movement  is  the  sim¬ 
plest  form. 

The  same  account  may  be  given  of  har- 
[75]  monies  and  optics;  for  neither  considers 
its  objects  qua  sight  or  qua  voice,  but  qua  lines 
and  numbers;  but  the  latter  are  attributes 
proper  to  the  former.  And  mechanics  too  pro¬ 
ceeds  in  the  same  way.  Therefore  if  we  sup¬ 
pose  attributes  separated  from  their  fellow- 
attributes  and  make  any  inquiry  concerning 
them  as  such,  we  shall  not  for  this  reason  be 
in  error,  any  more  than  when  one  draws  a  line 
on  the  ground  and  calls  it  a  foot  long  when  it 
[20]  is  not;  for  the  error  is  not  included  in  the 
premisses. 

Each  question  will  be  best  investigated  in 
this  way — by  setting  up  by  an  act  of  separation 
what  is  not  separate,  as  the  arithmetician  and 
the  geometer  do.  For  a  man  qua  man  is  one  in¬ 
divisible  thing;  and  the  arithmetician  supposed 
one  indivisible  thing,  and  then  considered 
whether  any  attribute  belongs  to  a  man  qua 
indivisible.  But  the  geometer  treats  him  neither 
[25]  qua  man  nor  qua  indivisible,  but  as  a 
solid.  For  evidently  the  properties  which  would 
have  belonged  to  him  even  if  perchance  he  had 
not  been  indivisible,  can  belong  to  him  even 
apart  from  these  attributes.  Thus,  then,  geom¬ 
eters  speak  correctly;  they  talk  about  existing 
[30]  things,  and  their  subjects  do  exist;  for  be¬ 
ing  has  two  forms — it  exists  not  only  in  com¬ 
plete  reality  but  also  materially. 

Now  since  the  good  and  the  beautiful  are 
different  (for  the  former  always  implies  con¬ 
duct  as  its  subject,  while  the  beautiful  is  found 
also  in  motionless  things),  those  who  assert  that 
the  mathematical  sciences  say  nothing  of  the 
beautiful  or  the  good  are  in  error.  For  these 
[55]  sciences  say  and  prove  a  great  deal  about 


6  io 

them;  if  they  do  not  expressly  mention  them, 
but  prove  attributes  which  are  their  results  or 
their  definitions,  it  is  not  true  to  say  that  they 
tell  us  nothing  about  them.  The  chief  forms  of 
beauty  are  order  and  symmetry  and  definite- 
1078b  ness,  which  the  mathematical  sciences 
demonstrate  in  a  special  degree.  And  since 
these  (e.g.  order  and  definiteness)  are  obvi¬ 
ously  causes  of  many  things,  evidently  these 
sciences  must  treat  this  sort  of  causative  prin¬ 
ciple  also  (i.e.  the  beautiful)  as  in  some  sense 
[5]  a  cause.  But  we  shall  speak  more  plainly 
elsewhere  about  these  matters. 

4 

So  much  then  for  the  objects  of  mathematics; 
we  have  said  that  they  exist  and  in  what  sense 
they  exist,  and  in  what  sense  they  are  prior 
and  in  what  sense  not  prior.  Now,  regarding 
the  Ideas,  we  must  first  examine  the  ideal 
[/o]  theory  itself,  not  connecting  it  in  any  way 
with  the  nature  of  numbers,  but  treating  it  in 
the  form  in  which  it  was  originally  under¬ 
stood  by  those  who  first  maintained  the  ex¬ 
istence  of  the  Ideas.  The  supporters  of  the  ideal 
theory  were  led  to  it  because  on  the  question 
about  the  truth  of  things  they  accepted  the 
Heraclitean  sayings  which  describe  all  sensible 
[75]  things  as  ever  passing  away,  so  that  if 
knowledge  or  thought  is  to  have  an  object, 
there  must  be  some  other  and  permanent  enti¬ 
ties,  apart  from  those  which  are  sensible;  for 
there  could  be  no  knowledge  of  things  which 
were  in  a  state  of  flux.  But  when  Socrates  was 
occupying  himself  with  the  excellences  of  char¬ 
acter,  and  in  connexion  with  them  became  the 
first  to  raise  the  problem  of  universal  defini¬ 
tion  (for  of  the  physicists  Democritus  only 
[20]  touched  on  the  subject  to  a  small  extent, 
and  defined,  after  a  fashion,  the  hot  and  the 
cold;  while  the  Pythagoreans  had  before  this 
treated  of  a  few  things,  whose  definitions — 
e.g.  those  of  opportunity,  justice,  or  marriage 
— they  connected  with  numbers;  but  it  was  nat¬ 
ural  that  Socrates  should  be  seeking  the  es¬ 
sence,  for  he  was  seeking  to  syllogize,  and 
'what  a  thing  is’  is  the  starting-point  of  syllo- 
[25]  gisms;  for  there  was  as  yet  none  of  the 
dialectical  power  which  enables  people  even 
without  knowledge  of  the  essence  to  speculate 
about  contraries  and  inquire  whether  the  same 
science  deals  with  contraries;  for  two  things 
may  be  fairly  ascribed  to  Socrates — inductive 
arguments  and  universal  definition,  both  of 
which  are  concerned  with  the  starting-point 
[30]  of  science): — but  Socrates  did  not  make 


1079a 

the  universals  or  the  definitions  exist  apart: 
they,  however,  gave  them  separate  existence, 
and  this  was  the  kind  of  thing  they  called 
Ideas.  Therefore  it  followed  for  them,  almost 
by  the  same  argument,  that  there  must  be 
Ideas  of  all  things  that  are  spoken  of  univer¬ 
sally,  and  it  was  almost  as  if  a  man  wished  to 
count  certain  things,  and  while  they  were  few 
[^5]  thought  he  would  not  be  able  to  count 
them,  but  made  more  of  them  and  then 
counted  them;  for  the  Forms  are,  one  may  say, 
more  numerous  than  the  particular  sensible 
1079a  things,  yet  it  was  in  seeking  the  causes 
of  these  that  they  proceeded  from  them  to  the 
Forms.  For  to  each  thing  there  answers  an 
entity  which  has  the  same  name  and  exists 
apart  from  the  substances,  and  so  also  in  the 
case  of  all  other  groups  there  is  a  one  over 
many,  whether  these  be  of  this  world  or  eternal. 

Again,  of  the  ways  in  which  it  is  proved 
[5]  that  the  Forms  exist,  none  is  convincing; 
for  from  some  no  inference  necessarily  follows, 
and  from  some  arise  Forms  even  of  things  of 
which  they  think  there  are  no  Forms.  For  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  arguments  from  the  sciences 
there  will  be  Forms  of  all  things  of  which 
there  are  sciences,  and  according  to  the  argu¬ 
ment  of  the  'one  over  many’  there  will  be 
[/o]  Forms  even  of  negations,  and  according 
to  the  argument  that  thought  has  an  object 
when  the  individual  object  has  perished,  there 
will  be  Forms  of  perishable  things;  for  we  have 
an  image  of  these.  Again,  of  the  most  accurate 
arguments,  some  lead  to  Ideas  of  relations,  of 
which  they  say  there  is  no  independent  class, 
and  others  introduce  the  ‘third  man’. 

And  in  general  the  arguments  for  the  Forms 
destroy  things  for  whose  existence  the  believers 
in  Forms  are  more  zealous  than  for  the  exist- 
[75]  ence  of  the  Ideas;  for  it  follows  that  not 
the  dyad  but  number  is  first,  and  that  prior  to 
number  is  the  relative,  and  that  this  is  prior  to 
the  absolute — besides  all  the  other  points  on 
which  certain  people,  by  following  out  the 
opinions  held  about  the  Forms,  came  into  con¬ 
flict  with  the  principles  of  the  theory. 

Again,  according  to  the  assumption  on 
[20]  which  the  belief  in  the  Ideas  rests,  there 
will  be  Forms  not  only  of  substances  but  also 
of  many  other  things;  for  the  concept  is  single 
not  only  in  the  case  of  substances,  but  also  in 
that  of  non-substances,  and  there  are  sciences 
of  other  things  than  substance;  and  a  thousand 
other  such  difficulties  confront  them.  But  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  necessities  of  the  case  and  the 
[25]  opinions  about  the  Forms,  if  they  can  be 


METAPHYSICS 


1080* 

shared  in  there  must  be  Ideas  of  substances 
only.  For  they  are  not  shared  in  incidentally, 
but  each  Form  must  be  shared  in  as  something 
not  predicated  of  a  subject.  (By  ‘being  shared 
in  incidentally’  I  mean  that  if  a  thing  shares  in 
‘double  itself’,  it  shares  also  in  ‘eternal’,  but 
incidentally;  for  ‘the  double’  happens  to  be 
[50]  eternal.)  Therefore  the  Forms  will  be 
substance.  But  the  same  names  indicate  sub¬ 
stance  in  this  and  in  the  ideal  world  (or  what 
will  be  the  meaning  of  saying  that  there  is 
something  apart  from  the  particulars — the 
one  over  many?).  And  if  the  Ideas  and  the 
things  that  share  in  them  have  the  same  form, 
there  will  be  something  common:  for  why 
should  ‘2’  be  one  and  the  same  in  the  perish- 
[55]  able  2’s,  or  in  the  2’s  which  are  many  but 
eternal,  and  not  the  same  in  the  ‘2  itself’  as  in 
the  individual  2?  But  if  they  have  not  the  same 
1079b  form,  they  will  have  only  the  name 
in  common,  and  it  is  as  if  one  were  to  call 
both  Callias  and  a  piece  of  wood  a  ‘man’, 
without  observing  any  community  between 
them. 

But  if  we  are  to  suppose  that  in  other  re¬ 
spects  the  common  definitions  apply  to  the 
Forms,  e.g.  that  ‘plane  figure’  and  the  other 
[5]  parts  of  the  definition  apply  to  the  circle- 
itself,  but  ‘what  really  is’  has  to  be  added,  we 
must  inquire  whether  this  is  not  absolutely 
meaningless.  For  to  what  is  this  to  be  added? 
To  ‘centre’  or  to  ‘plane’  or  to  all  the  parts  of 
the  definition?  For  all  the  elements  in  the  es¬ 
sence  are  Ideas,  e.g.  ‘animal’  and  ‘two-footed’, 
[/o]  Further,  there  must  be  some  Ideal  answer¬ 
ing  to  ‘plane’  above,  some  nature  which  will 
be  present  in  all  the  Forms  as  their  genus. 

5 

Above  all  one  might  discuss  the  question  what 
in  the  world  the  Forms  contribute  to  sensible 
things,  either  to  those  that  are  eternal  or  to 
those  that  come  into  being  and  cease  to  be;  for 
they  cause  neither  movement  nor  any  change 
[75]  in  them.  But  again  they  help  in  no  wise 
either  towards  the  knowledge  of  other  things 
(for  they  are  not  even  the  substance  of  these, 
else  they  would  have  been  in  them),  or  towards 
their  being,  if  they  are  not  in  the  individuals 
which  share  in  them;  though  if  they  were, 
they  might  be  thought  to  be  causes,  as  white 
causes  whiteness  in  a  white  object  by  entering 
[20]  into  its  composition.  But  this  argument, 
which  was  used  first  by  Anaxagoras,  and  later 
by  Eudoxus  in  his  discussion  of  difficulties  and 
by  certain  others,  is  very  easily  upset;  for  it  is 


611 

easy  to  collect  many  and  insuperable  objections 
to  such  a  view. 

But,  further,  all  other  things  cannot  come 
[25]  from  the  Forms  in  any  of  the  usual  senses 
of  ‘from’.  And  to  say  that  they  are  patterns  and 
the  other  things  share  in  them  is  to  use  empty 
words  and  poetical  metaphors.  For  what  is  it 
that  works,  looking  to  the  Ideas?  And  any 
thing  can  both  be  and  come  into  being  without 
being  copied  from  something  else,  so  that, 
whether  Socrates  exists  or  not,  a  man  like  Soc- 
[jo]  rates  might  come  to  be.  And  evidently 
this  might  be  so  even  if  Socrates  were  eternal. 
And  there  will  be  several  patterns  of  the  same 
thing,  and  therefore  several  Forms;  e.g.  ‘ani¬ 
mal’  and  ‘two-footed’,  and  also  ‘man-himself’, 
will  be  Forms  of  man.  Again,  the  Forms  are 
patterns  not  only  of  sensible  things,  but  of 
Forms  themselves  also;  i.e.  the  genus  is  the 
pattern  of  the  various  forms-of-a-genus;  there¬ 
fore  the  same  thing  will  be  pattern  and  copy. 
[35]  Again,  it  would  seem  impossible  that  sub- 
1080*  stance  and  that  whose  substance  it  is 
should  exist  apart;  how,  therefore,  could  the 
Ideas,  being  the  substances  of  things,  exist 
apart? 

In  the  Phaedo 1  the  case  is  stated  in  this  way 
— that  the  Forms  are  causes  both  of  being  and 
of  becoming.  Yet  though  the  Forms  exist,  still 
things  do  not  come  into  being,  unless  there  is 
something  to  originate  movement;  and  many 
other  things  come  into  being  (e.g.  a  house  or  a 
[5]  ring)  of  which  they  say  there  are  no  Forms. 
Clearly  therefore  even  the  things  of  which 
they  say  there  are  Ideas  can  both  be  and  come 
into  being  owing  to  such  causes  as  produce  the 
things  just  mentioned,  and  not  owing  to  the 
Forms.  But  regarding  the  Ideas  it  is  possible, 
both  in  this  way  and  by  more  abstract  and 
[/o]  accurate  arguments,  to  collect  many  ob¬ 
jections  like  those  we  have  considered. 

6 

Since  we  have  discussed  these  points,  it  is  well 
to  consider  again  the  results  regarding  num¬ 
bers  which  confront  those  who  say  that  num¬ 
bers  are  separable  substances  and  first  causes 
[75]  of  things.  If  number  is  an  entity  and  its 
substance  is  nothing  other  than  just  number, 
as  some  say,  it  follows  that  either  (1)  there  is 
a  first  in  it  and  a  second,  each  being  different 
in  species, — and  either  (a)  this  is  true  of  the 
units  without  exception,  and  any  unit  is  inas- 
[20]  sociable  with  any  unit,  or  ( b )  they  are  all 
without  exception  successive,  and  any  of  them 

*  100. 


BOOK  XIII,  CHAPTERS  3-6 


6 12 

are  associable  with  any,  as  they  say  is  the  case 
with  mathematical  number;  for  in  mathemat¬ 
ical  number  no  one  unit  is  in  any  way  different 
from  another.  Or  (r)  some  units  must  be  as¬ 
sociable  and  some  not;  e.g.  suppose  that  2  is 
first  after  1,  and  then  comes  3  and  then  the  rest 
[25]  of  the  number  series,  and  the  units  in 
each  number  are  associable,  e.g.  those  in  the 
first  2  are  associable  with  one  another,  and 
those  in  the  first  3  with  one  another,  and  so 
with  the  other  numbers;  but  the  units  in  the 
‘2-itself’  are  inassociable  with  those  in  the  ‘3- 
itself;  and  similarly  in  the  case  of  the  other 
[30]  successive  numbers.  And  so  while  mathe¬ 
matical  number  is  counted  thus — after  1,  2 
(which  consists  of  another  1  besides  the  former 
1),  and  3  (which  consists  of  another  1  besides 
these  two),  and  the  other  numbers  similarly, 
ideal  number  is  counted  thus — after  1,  a  dis¬ 
tinct  2  which  does  not  include  the  first  1,  and 
a  3  which  does  not  include  the  2,  and  the  rest 
of  the  number  series  similarly.  Or  (2)  one  kind 
[35]  of  number  must  be  like  the  first  that  was 
named,1  one  like  that  which  the  mathemati¬ 
cians  speak  of,  and  that  which  we  have  named 
last2  must  be  a  third  kind. 

Again,  these  kinds  of  numbers  must  either 
1080b  be  separable  from  things,  or  not  sep¬ 
arable  but  in  objects  of  perception  (not  how¬ 
ever  in  the  way  which  we  first  considered,3  but 
in  the  sense  that  objects  of  perception  consists 
of  numbers  which  are  present  in  them) — either 
one  kind  and  not  another,  or  all  of  them. 

[5]  These  are  of  necessity  the  only  ways  in 
which  the  numbers  can  exist.  And  of  those  who 
say  that  the  1  is  the  beginning  and  substance 
and  element  of  all  things,  and  that  number  is 
formed  from  the  1  and  something  else,  almost 
every  one  has  described  number  in  one  of 
these  ways;  only  no  one  has  said  all  the  units 
are  inassociable.  And  this  has  happened  reason- 
[10]  ably  enough;  for  there  can  be  no  way 
besides  those  mentioned.  Some  say  both  kinds 
of  number  exist,  that  which  has  a  before  and 
after  being  identical  with  the  Ideas,  and  mathe¬ 
matical  number  being  different  from  the  Ideas 
and  from  sensible  things,  and  both  being  sep¬ 
arable  from  sensible  things;  and  others  say 
[75]  mathematical  number  alone  exists,  as  the 
first  of  realities,  separate  from  sensible  things. 
And  the  Pythagoreans,  also,  believe  in  one  kind 
of  number — the  mathematical;  only  they  say  it 
is  not  separate  but  sensible  substances  are 
formed  out  of  it.  For  they  construct  the  whole 
universe  out  of  numbers — only  not  numbers 
1 11. 15-20.  2 11.  23-35.  3  Cf.  1076**  38-b  11. 


1081* 

consisting  of  abstract  units;  they  suppose  the 
[20]  units  to  have  spatial  magnitude.  But  how 
the  first  1  was  constructed  so  as  to  have  magni¬ 
tude,  they  seem  unable  to  say. 

Another  thinker  says  the  first  kind  of  num¬ 
ber,  that  of  the  Forms,  alone  exists,  and  some 
say  mathematical  number  is  identical  with  this. 

The  case  of  lines,  planes,  and  solids  is  sim¬ 
ilar.  For  some  think  that  those  which  are  the 
objects  of  mathematics  are  different  from  those 
[25]  which  come  after  the  Ideas;  and  of  those 
who  express  themselves  otherwise  some  speak 
of  the  objects  of  mathematics  and  in  a  mathe¬ 
matical  way — viz.  those  who  do  not  make  the 
Ideas  numbers  nor  say  that  Ideas  exist;  and 
others  speak  of  the  objects  of  mathematics,  but 
not  mathematically;  for  they  say  that  neither 
is  every  spatial  magnitude  divisible  into  magni- 
[30]  tudes,  nor  do  any  two  units  taken  at  ran¬ 
dom  make  2.  All  who  say  the  1  is  an  element 
and  principle  of  things  suppose  numbers  to 
consist  of  abstract  units,  except  the  Pythago¬ 
reans;  but  they  suppose  the  numbers  to  have 
magnitude,  as  has  been  said  before.4  It  is  clear 
from  this  statement,  then,  in  how  many  ways 
numbers  may  be  described,  and  that  all  the 
[35]  ways  have  been  mentioned;  and  all  these 
views  are  impossible,  but  some  perhaps  more 
than  others. 

7 

First,  then,  let  us  inquire  if  the  units  are  associ- 
1081a  able  or  inassociable,  and  if  inassociable, 
in  which  of  the  two  ways  we  distinguished. 
For  it  is  possible  that  any  unity  is  inassociable 
with  any,  and  it  is  possible  that  those  in  the  ‘2- 
itself*  are  inassociable  with  those  in  the  ‘3- 
itself,  and,  generally,  that  those  in  each  ideal 
number  are  inassociable  with  those  in  other 
[5]  ideal  numbers.  Now  (1)  if  all  units  are  as¬ 
sociable  and  without  difference,  we  get  mathe¬ 
matical  number — only  one  kind  of  number, 
and  the  Ideas  cannot  be  the  numbers.  For 
what  sort  of  number  will  man-himself  or  ani- 
mal-itself  or  any  other  Form  be?  There  is  one 
Idea  of  each  thing,  e.g.  one  of  man-himself  and 
[/o]  another  one  of  animal-itself;  but  the  sim¬ 
ilar  and  undifferentiated  numbers  are  infinite¬ 
ly  many,  so  that  any  particular  3  is  no  more 
man-himself  than  any  other  3.  But  if  the  Ideas 
are  not  numbers,  neither  can  they  exist  at  all. 
For  from  what  principles  will  the  Ideas  come? 
[75]  It  is  number  that  comes  from  the  1  and 
the  indefinite  dyad,  and  the  principles  or  ele¬ 
ments  are  said  to  be  principles  and  elements  of 
41.  19. 


METAPHYSICS 


1082*  BOOK  XIII,  CHAPTERS  6-7  613 


number,  and  the  Ideas  cannot  be  ranked  as 
either  prior  or  posterior  to  the  numbers. 

But  (2)  if  the  units  are  inassociable,  and  in¬ 
associable  in  the  sense  that  any  is  inassociable 
with  any  other,  number  of  this  sort  cannot  be 
mathematical  number;  for  mathematical  num* 
[20]  ber  consists  of  undifferentiated  units, 
and  the  truths  proved  of  it  suit  this  character. 
Nor  can  it  be  ideal  number.  For  2  will  not 
proceed  immediately  from  1  and  the  indefinite 
dyad,  and  be  followed  by  the  successive  num¬ 
bers,  as  they  say  ‘2,  3,  4’ — for  the  units  in  the 
ideal  2  are  generated  at  the  same  time,  whether, 
as  the  first  holder  of  the  theory  said,  from  un¬ 
equals  (coming  into  being  when  these  were 
[25]  equalized)  or  in  some  other  way — since, 
if  one  unit  is  to  be  prior  to  the  other,  it  will  be 
prior  also  to  the  2  composed  of  these;  for  when 
there  is  one  thing  prior  and  another  posterior, 
the  resultant  of  these  will  be  prior  to  one  and 
posterior  to  the  other. 

[30]  Again,  since  the  i-itself  is  first,  and  then 
there  is  a  particular  1  which  is  first  among  the 
others  and  next  after  the  i-itself,  and  again  a 
third  which  is  next  after  the  second  and  next 
but  one  after  the  first  1, — so  the  units  must  be 
prior  to  the  numbers  after  which  they  are 
named  when  we  count  them ;  e.g.  there  will  be 
a  third  unit  in  2  before  3  exists,  and  a  fourth 
and  a  fifth  in  3  before  the  numbers  4  and  5 
[35]  exist. — Now  none  of  these  thinkers  has 
said  the  units  are  inassociable  in  this  way,  but 
according  to  their  principles  it  is  reasonable 
that  they  should  be  so  even  in  this  way,  though 
1081b  in  truth  it  is  impossible.  For  it  is  rea¬ 
sonable  both  that  the  units  should  have  pri¬ 
ority  and  posteriority  if  there  is  a  first  unit  or 
first  1,  and  also  that  the  2*s  should  if  there  is 
a  first  2;  for  after  the  first  it  is  reasonable  and 
[5]  necessary  that  there  should  be  a  second, 
and  if  a  second,  a  third,  and  so  with  the  others 
successively.  (And  to  say  both  things  at  the 
same  time,  that  a  unit  is  first  and  another  unit 
is  second  after  the  ideal  1,  and  that  a  2  is  first 
after  it,  is  impossible.)  But  they  make  a  first 
unit  or  1,  but  not  also  a  second  and  a  third, 
and  a  first  2,  but  not  also  a  second  and  a  third. 
[jo]  Clearly,  also,  it  is  not  possible,  if  all  the 
units  are  inassociable,  that  there  should  be  a 
2-itself  and  a  3-itself;  and  so  with  the  other 
numbers.  For  whether  the  units  are  undiffer¬ 
entiated  or  different  each  from  each,  number 
must  be  counted  by  addition,  e.g.  2  by  adding 
[75]  another  1  to  the  one,  3  by  adding  another 
1  to  the  two,  and  4  similarly.  This  being  so, 
numbers  cannot  be  generated  as  they  generate 


them,  from  the  2  and  the  1 ;  for  2  becomes  part 
[20]  of  3,  and  3  of  4,  and  the  same  happens  in 
the  case  of  the  succeeding  numbers,  but  they 
say  4  came  from  the  first  2  and  the  indefinite 
2, — which  makes  it  two  2’s  other  than  the 
2-itself;  if  not,  the  2-itself  will  be  a  part  of  4 
and  one  other  2  will  be  added.  And  similarly  2 
[25]  will  consist  of  the  i-itself  and  another  1; 
but  if  this  is  so,  the  other  element  cannot  be  an 
indefinite  2;  for  it  generates  one  unit,  not,  as 
the  indefinite  2  does,  a  definite  2. 

Again,  besides  the  3-itself  and  the  2-itself 
how  can  there  be  other  3’s  and  2’s?  And  how 
do  they  consist  of  prior  and  posterior  units? 
[30]  All  this  is  absurd  and  fictitious,  and  there 
cannot  be  a  first  2  and  then  a  3-itself.  Yet  there 
must,  if  the  1  and  the  indefinite  dyad  are  to  be 
the  elements.  But  if  the  results  are  impossible, 
it  is  also  impossible  that  these  are  the  gen¬ 
erating  principles. 

If  the  units,  then,  are  differentiated,  each 
from  each,  these  results  and  others  similar  to 
[35]  these  follow  of  necessity.  But  (3)  if  those 
in  different  numbers  are  differentiated,  but 
those  in  the  same  number  are  alone  undiffer¬ 
entiated  from  one  another,  even  so  the  difficul¬ 
ties  that  follow  are  no  less.  E.g.  in  the  10-itself 
1082*  there  are  ten  units,  and  the  10  is  com¬ 
posed  both  of  them  and  of  two  5’s.  But  since 
the  10-itself  is  not  any  chance  number  nor 
composed  of  any  chance  5’s — or,  for  that  mat¬ 
ter,  units — the  units  in  this  10  must  differ.  For 
[5]  if  they  do  not  differ,  neither  will  the  5’s 
of  which  the  10  consists  differ;  but  since  these 
differ,  the  units  also  will  differ.  But  if  they  dif¬ 
fer,  will  there  be  no  other  5’s  in  the  10  but  only 
these  two,  or  will  there  be  others?  If  there  are 
not,  this  is  paradoxical;  and  if  there  are,  what 
[10]  sort  of  10  will  consist  of  them?  For  there 
is  no  other  10  in  the  10  but  itself.  But  it  is  actu¬ 
ally  necessary  on  their  view  that  the  4  should 
not  consist  of  any  chance  2,s;  for  the  indefinite 
2,  as  they  say,  received  the  definite  2  and  made 
two  2’s;  for  its  nature  was  to  double  what  it 
received. 

[75]  Again,  as  to  the  2  being  an  entity  apart 
from  its  two  units,  and  the  3  an  entity  apart 
from  its  three  units,  how  is  this  possible? 
Either  by  one’s  sharing  in  the  other,  as  ‘pale 
man’  is  different  from  ‘pale’  and  ‘man’  (for  it 
shares  in  these),  or  when  one  is  a  differentia 
of  the  other,  as  ‘man’  is  different  from  ‘animal’ 
and  ‘two-footed’. 

[20]  Again,  some  things  are  one  by  contact, 
some  by  intermixture,  some  by  position;  none 
of  which  can  belong  to  the  units  of  which  the  2 


6 14  METAPHYSICS  1083* 


or  the  3  consists;  but  as  two  men  are  not  a 
unity  apart  from  both,  so  must  it  be  with  the 
units.  And  their  being  indivisible  will  make 
[25]  no  difference  to  them;  for  points  too  are 
indivisible,  but  yet  a  pair  of  them  is  nothing 
apart  from  the  two. 

But  this  consequence  also  we  must  not  for¬ 
get,  that  it  follows  that  there  are  prior  and 
posterior  2*s,  and  similarly  with  the  other  num¬ 
bers.  For  let  the  2*s  in  the  4  be  simultaneous; 
[30]  yet  these  are  prior  to  those  in  the  8,  and 
as  the  2  generated  them,  they  generated  the  4*s 
in  the  8-itself.  Therefore  if  the  first  2  is  an 
Idea,  these  2*s  also  will  be  Ideas  of  some  kind. 
And  the  same  account  applies  to  the  units; 
[35]  f°r  units  in  the  first  2  generate 
the  four  in  4,  so  that  all  the  units  come  to  be 
Ideas  and  an  Idea  will  be  composed  of  Ideas. 
Clearly  therefore  those  things  also  of  which 
these  happen  to  be  the  Ideas  will  be  com¬ 
posite,  e.g.  one  might  say  that  animals  are 
composed  of  animals,  if  there  are  Ideas  of 
them. 

1082b  In  general,  to  differentiate  the  units  in 
any  way  is  an  absurdity  and  a  fiction;  and  by  a 
fiction  I  mean  a  forced  statement  made  to  suit 
a  hypothesis.  For  neither  in  quantity  nor  in 
[5]  quality  do  we  see  unit  differing  from  unit, 
and  number  must  be  either  equal  or  unequal — 
all  number  but  especially  that  which  consists 
of  abstract  units — so  that  if  one  number  is 
neither  greater  nor  less  than  another,  it  is  equal 
to  it;  but  things  that  are  equal  and  in  no  wise 
differentiated  we  take  to  be  the  same  when  we 
are  speaking  of  numbers.  If  not,  not  even  the 
2*s  in  the  10-itself  will  be  undifferentiated, 
[/o]  though  they  are  equal;  for  what  reason 
will  the  man  who  alleges  that  they  are  not 
differentiated  be  able  to  give? 

Again,  if  every  unit  +  another  unit  makes 
two,  a  unit  from  the  2-itself  and  one  from  the 
3-itself  will  make  a  2.  Now  (a)  this  will  con¬ 
sist  of  differentiated  units;  and  (j3)  will  it  be 
prior  to  the  3  or  posterior  ?  It  rather  seems  that 
[75]  it  must  be  prior;  for  one  of  the  units  is 
simultaneous  with  the  3,  and  the  other  is  simul¬ 
taneous  with  the  2.  And  we,  for  our  part,  sup¬ 
pose  that  in  general  1  and  1,  whether  the  things 
are  equal  or  unequal,  is  2,  e.g.  the  good  and 
the  bad,  or  a  man  and  a  horse;  but  those  who 
hold  these  views  say  that  not  even  two  units 
are  2. 

[20]  If  the  number  of  the  3-itself  is  not  greater 
than  that  of  the  2,  this  is  surprising;  and  if  it  is 
greater,  clearly  there  is  also  a  number  in  it 
equal  to  the  2,  so  that  this  is  not  different  from 


the  2-itself.  But  this  is  not  possible,  if  there  is 
a  first  and  a  second  number. 

Nor  will  the  Ideas  be  numbers.  For  in  this 
particular  point  they  are  right  who  claim  that 
the  units  must  be  different,  if  there  are  to  be 
[25]  Ideas;  as  has  been  said  before.1  For  the 
Form  is  unique;  but  if  the  units  are  not  differ¬ 
ent,  the  2*s  and  the  3*s  also  will  not  be  different. 
This  is  also  the  reason  why  they  must  say  that 
when  we  count  thus — T,  2 — we  do  not  pro¬ 
ceed  by  adding  to  the  given  number;  for  if  we 
[30]  do,  neither  will  the  numbers  be  generated 
from  the  indefinite  dyad,  nor  can  a  number  be 
an  Idea;  for  then  one  Idea  will  be  in  another, 
and  all  Forms  will  be  parts  of  one  Form.  And 
so  with  a  view  to  their  hypothesis  their  state¬ 
ments  are  right,  but  as  a  whole  they  are  wrong; 
for  their  view  is  very  destructive,  since  they  will 
[35]  admit  that  this  question  itself  affords 
some  difficulty — whether,  when  we  count  and 
say  *i,  2,  3/  we  count  by  addition  or  by  sep¬ 
arate  portions.  But  we  do  both;  and  so  it  is 
absurd  to  reason  back  from  this  problem  to  so 
great  a  difference  of  essence. 

8 

1083*  First  of  all  it  is  well  to  determine  what 
is  the  differentia  of  a  number — and  of  a  unit, 
if  it  has  a  differentia.  Units  must  differ  either 
in  quantity  or  in  quality;  and  neither  of  these 
seems  to  be  possible.  But  number  qua  number 
differs  in  quantity.  And  if  the  units  also  did 
differ  in  quantity,  number  would  differ  from 
[5]  number,  though  equal  in  number  of  units. 
Again,  are  the  first  units  greater  or  smaller,  and 
do  the  later  ones  increase  or  diminish?  All 
these  are  irrational  suppositions.  But  neither 
can  they  differ  in  quality .  For  no  attribute  can 
[/o]  attach  to  them;  for  even  to  numbers  qual¬ 
ity  is  said  to  belong  after  quantity.  Again, 
quality  could  not  come  to  them  either  from 
the  1  or  the  dyad;  for  the  former  has  no  quality, 
and  the  latter  gives  quantity;  for  this  entity  is 
what  makes  things  to  be  many.  If  the  facts  are 
[75]  really  otherwise,  they  should  state  this 
quite  at  the  beginning  and  determine  if  pos¬ 
sible,  regarding  the  differentia  of  the  unit,  why 
it  must  exist,  and,  failing  this,  what  differentia 
they  mean. 

Evidently  then,  if  the  Ideas  are  numbers,  the 
units  cannot  all  be  associable,  nor  can  they  be 
[20]  inassociable  in  either  of  the  two  ways. 
But  neither  is  the  way  in  which  some  others 
speak  about  numbers  correct.  These  are  those 

1  io8ib  5-17. 


1084*  BOOK  XIII,  CHAPTERS  7-8  615 


who  do  not  think  there  are  Ideas,  either  with¬ 
out  qualification  or  as  identified  with  certain 
numbers,  but  think  the  objects  of  mathematics 
exist  and  the  numbers  are  the  first  of  existing 
things,  and  the  i-itself  is  the  starting-point  of 
them.  It  is  paradoxical  that  there  should  be  a 
1  which  is  first  of  i’s,  as  they  say,  but  not  a  2 
[25]  which  is  first  of  2’s,  nor  a  3  of  3’s;  for  the 
same  reasoning  applies  to  all.  If,  then,  the  facts 
with  regard  to  number  are  so,  and  one  sup¬ 
poses  mathematical  number  alone  to  exist,  the 
1  is  not  the  starting-point  (for  this  sort  of  1 
[30]  must  differ  from  the  other  units;  and  if 
this  is  so,  there  must  also  be  a  2  which  is  first  of 
2’s,  and  similarly  with  the  other  successive 
numbers).  But  if  the  1  is  the  starting-point,  the 
truth  about  the  numbers  must  rather  be  what 
Plato  used  to  say,  and  there  must  be  a  first  2 
and  3,  and  the  numbers  must  not  be  associable 
[35]  with  one  another.  But  if  on  the  other  hand 
one  supposes  this,  many  impossible  results,  as 
we  have  said,1  follow.  But  either  this  or  the 
other  must  be  the  case,  so  that  if  neither  is, 
number  cannot  exist  separately. 

1083b  It  is  evident,  also,  from  this  that  the 
third  version  is  the  worst, — the  view  ideal  and 
mathematical  number  is  the  same.  For  two 
mistakes  must  then  meet  in  the  one  opinion. 
[5]  (1)  Mathematical  number  cannot  be  of 
this  sort,  but  the  holder  of  this  view  has  to 
spin  it  out  by  making  suppositions  peculiar  to 
himself.  And  (2)  he  must  also  admit  all  the 
consequences  that  confront  those  who  speak  of 
number  in  the  sense  of  ‘Forms’. 

The  Pythagorean  version  in  one  way  affords 
fewer  difficulties  than  those  before  named,  but 
in  another  way  has  others  peculiar  to  itself, 
[/o]  For  not  thinking  of  number  as  capable  of 
existing  separately  removes  many  of  the  im¬ 
possible  consequences;  but  that  bodies  should 
be  composed  of  numbers,  and  that  this  should 
be  mathematical  number,  is  impossible.  For  it 
is  not  true  to  speak  of  indivisible  spatial  mag¬ 
nitudes;  and  however  much  there  might  be 
magnitudes  of  this  sort,  units  at  least  have  not 
[15]  magnitude;  and  how  can  a  magnitude  be 
composed  of  indivisibles?  But  arithmetical 
number,  at  least,  consists  of  units,  while  these 
thinkers  identify  number  with  real  things;  at 
any  rate  they  apply  their  propositions  to  bodies 
as  if  they  consisted  of  those  numbers. 

If,  then,  it  is  necessary,  if  number  is  a  self- 
[20]  subsistent  real  thing,  that  it  should  exist 
in  one  of  these  ways  which  have  been  men¬ 
tioned,2  and  if  it  cannot  exist  in  any  of  these, 
1  Cf.  io8ob  37-1 083**  17.  2  kjSo®  i5“b  36. 


evidently  number  has  no  such  nature  as  those 
who  make  it  separable  set  up  for  it. 

Again,  does  each  unit  come  from  the  great 
and  the  small,  equalized,  or  one  from  the 
small,  another  from  the  great?  (a)  If  the  latter, 
[25]  neither  does  each  thing  contain  all  the  ele¬ 
ments,  nor  are  the  units  without  difference; 
for  in  one  there  is  the  great  and  in  another  the 
small,  which  is  contrary  in  its  nature  to  the 
great.  Again,  how  is  it  with  the  units  in  the 
3-itself?  One  of  them  is  an  odd  unit.  But  per¬ 
haps  it  is  for  this  reason  that  they  give  i-itself 
the  middle  place  in  odd  numbers.  ( b )  But  if 
[30]  each  of  the  two  units  consists  of  both  the 
great  and  the  small,  equalized,  how  will  the  2, 
which  is  a  single  thing,  consist  of  the  great  and 
the  small?  Or  how  will  it  differ  from  the  unit? 
Again,  the  unit  is  prior  to  the  2;  for  when  it  is 
destroyed  the  2  is  destroyed.  It  must,  then,  be 
the  Idea  of  an  Idea  since  it  is  prior  to  an  Idea, 
[35]  and  it  must  have  come  into  being  before 
it.  From  what,  then?  Not  from  the  indefinite 
dyad,  for  its  function  was  to  double. 

Again,  number  must  be  either  infinite  or 
finite;  for  these  thinkers  think  of  number  as 
capable  of  existing  separately,  so  that  it  is  not 
1084a  possible  that  neither  of  those  alterna¬ 
tives  should  be  true.  Clearly  it  cannot  be  in¬ 
finite;  for  infinite  number  is  neither  odd  nor 
even,  but  the  generation  of  numbers  is  always 
the  generation  either  of  an  odd  or  of  an  even 
number;  in  one  way,  when  1  operates  on  an 
even  number,  an  odd  number  is  produced;  in 
[5]  another  way,  when  2  operates,  the  num¬ 
bers  got  from  1  by  doubling  are  produced;  in 
another  way,  when  the  odd  numbers  operate, 
the  other  even  numbers  are  produced.  Again, 
if  every  Idea  is  an  Idea  of  something,  and  the 
numbers  are  Ideas,  infinite  number  itself  will 
be  an  Idea  of  something,  either  of  some  sensible 
thing  or  of  something  else.  Yet  this  is  not  pos¬ 
sible  in  view  of  their  thesis  any  more  than  it  is 
reasonable  in  itself,  at  least  if  they  arrange  the 
Ideas  as  they  do. 

[10]  But  if  number  is  finite ,  how  far  does  it 
go?  With  regard  to  this  not  only  the  fact  but 
the  reason  should  be  stated.  But  if  number  goes 
only  up  to  10,  as  some  say,  firstly  the  Forms 
vrill  soon  run  short;  e.g.  if  3  is  man-himself, 
what  number  will  be  the  horse-itself  ?  The  series 
[75]  of  the  numbers  which  are  the  several 
things-themselves  goes  up  to  10.  It  must,  then, 
be  one  of  the  numbers  within  these  limits;  for 
it  is  these  that  are  substances  and  Ideas.  Yet 
they  will  run  short;  for  the  various  forms  of  an¬ 
imal  will  outnumber  them.  At  the  same  time  it 


6i6 

is  clear  that  if  in  this  way  the  3  is  man-himself, 
the  other  3’s  are  so  also  (for  those  in  identical 
[20]  numbers  are  similar),  so  that  there  will 
bi  an  infinite  number  of  men;  if  each  3  is  an 
Idea,  each  of  the  numbers  will  be  man-himself, 
and  if  not,  they  will  at  least  be  men.  And  if 
the  smaller  number  is  part  of  the  greater  (be¬ 
ing  number  of  such  a  sort  that  the  units  in  the 
same  number  are  associable),  then  if  the  4-itself 
is  an  Idea  of  something,  e.g.  of  ‘horse’  or  of 
‘white’,  man  will  be  a  part  of  horse,  if  man  is 
[25]  2.  It  is  paradoxical  also  that  there  should 
be  an  Idea  of  10,  but  not  of  11,  nor  of  the  suc¬ 
ceeding  numbers.  Again,  there  both  are  and 
come  to  be  certain  things  of  which  there  are 
no  Forms;  why,  then,  are  there  not  Forms  of 
them  also?  We  infer  that  the  Forms  are  not 
causes.  Again,  it  is  paradoxical  if  the  number- 
series  up  to  10  is  more  of  a  real  thing  and  a 
[30]  Form  than  10  itself.  There  is  no  genera¬ 
tion  of  the  former  as  one  thing,  and  there  is  of 
the  latter.  But  they  try  to  work  on  the  assump¬ 
tion  that  the  series  of  numbers  up  to  10  is  a 
complete  series.  At  least  they  generate  the  de¬ 
rivatives — e.g.  the  void,  proportion,  the  odd, 
and  the  others  of  this  kind — within  the  decade. 
For  some  things,  e.g.  movement  and  rest,  good 
and  bad,  they  assign  to  the  originative  prin- 
[35]  ciples,  and  the  others  to  the  numbers.  This 
is  why  they  identify  the  odd  with  1 ;  for  if  the 
odd  implied  3,  how  would  5  be  odd?  Again, 
spatial  magnitudes  and  all  such  things  are  ex¬ 
plained  without  going  beyond  a  definite  num- 
1084b  ber;  e.g.  the  first,  the  indivisible,  line, 
then  the  2,  &c.;  these  entities  also  extend  only 
up  to  10. 

Again,  if  number  can  exist  separately,  one 
might  ask  which  is  prior — 1,  or  3  or  2?  Inas¬ 
much  as  the  number  is  composite,  1  is  prior, 
but  inasmuch  as  the  universal  and  the  form  is 
[5]  prior,  the  number  is  prior;  for  each  of  the 
units  is  part  of  the  number  as  its  matter,  and 
the  number  acts  as  form.  And  in  a  sense  the 
right  angle  is  prior  to  the  acute,  because  it  is 
determinate  and  in  virtue  of  its  definition;  but 
in  a  sense  the  acute  is  prior,  because  it  is  a  part 
and  the  right  angle  is  divided  into  acute  angles, 
[/o]  As  matter,  then,  the  acute  angle  and  the 
element  and  the  unit  are  prior,  but  in  respect 
of  the  form  and  of  the  substance  as  expressed 
in  the  definition,  the  right  angle,  and  the  whole 
consisting  of  the  matter  and  the  form,  are 
prior;  for  the  concrete  thing  is  nearer  to  the 
form  and  to  what  is  expressed  in  the  defini¬ 
tion,  though  in  generation  it  is  later.  How  then 
is  1  the  starting-point?  Because  it  is  not  divisi- 


1085* 

ble,  they  say;  but  both  the  universal,  and  the 
articular  or  the  element,  are  indivisible.  But 
/ 5]  they  are  starting-points  in  different  ways, 
one  in  definition  and  the  other  in  time.  In 
which  way,  then,  is  1  the  starting-point?  As 
has  been  said,  the  right  angle  is  thought  to  be 
prior  to  the  acute,  and  the  acute  to  the  right, 
and  each  is  one.  Accordingly  they  make  1  the 
starting-point  in  both  ways.  But  this  is  impos¬ 
sible.  For  the  universal  is  one  as  form  or  sub¬ 
stance,  while  the  element  is  one  as  a  part  or  as 
[20]  matter.  For  each  of  the  two  is  in  a  sense 
one — in  truth  each  of  the  two  units  exists  po¬ 
tentially  (at  least  if  the  number  is  a  unity  and 
not  like  a  heap,  i.e.  if  different  numbers  con¬ 
sist  of  differentiated  units,  as  they  say),  but 
not  in  complete  reality;  and  the  cause  of  the 
error  they  fell  into  is  that  they  were  conduct¬ 
ing  their  inquiry  at  the  same  time  from  the 
standpoint  of  mathematics  and  from  that  of 
[25]  universal  definitions,  so  that  (1)  from  the 
former  standpoint  they  treated  unity,  their 
first  principle,  as  a  point;  for  the  unit  is  a  point 
without  position.  They  put  things  together 
out  of  the  smallest  parts,  as  some  others  also 
have  done.  Therefore  the  unit  becomes  the 
matter  of  numbers  and  at  the  same  time  prior 
to  2;  and  again  posterior,  2  being  treated  as  a 
[30]  whole,  a  unity,  and  a  form.  But  (2)  be¬ 
cause  they  were  seeking  the  universal  they 
treated  the  unity  which  can  be  predicated  of  a 
number,  as  in  this  sense  also  a  part  of  the  num¬ 
ber.  But  these  characteristics  cannot  belong  at 
the  same  time  to  the  same  thing. 

If  the  i-itself  must  be  unitary  (for  it  differs 
in  nothing  from  other  i’s  except  that  it  is  the 
starting-point),  and  the  2  is  divisible  but  the 
unit  is  not,  the  unit  must  be  liker  the  i-itself 
[35]  than  the  2  is.  But  if  the  unit  is  liker  it,  it 
must  be  liker  to  the  unit  than  to  the  2;  there¬ 
fore  each  of  the  units  in  2  must  be  prior  to  the 
2.  But  they  deny  this;  at  least  they  generate 
1085*  the  2  first.  Again,  if  the  2-itself  is  a 
unity  and  the  3-itself  is  one  also,  both  form  a 
2.  From  what,  then,  is  this  2  produced? 

9 

Since  there  is  not  contact  in  numbers,  but  suc¬ 
cession,  viz.  between  the  units  between  which 
there  is  nothing,  e.g.  between  those  in  2  or  in 
[5]  3>  one  might  ask  whether  these  succeed  the 
i-itself  or  not,  and  whether,  of  the  terms  that 
succeed  it,  2  or  either  of  the  units  in  2  is  prior. 

Similar  difficulties  occur  with  regard  to  the 
classes  of  things  posterior  to  number, — the  line, 
the  plane,  and  the  solid.  For  some  construct 


METAPHYSICS 


1086*  BOOK  XIII,  CHAPTERS  8-9  617 


these  out  of  the  species  of  the  ‘great  and  small’; 
[/o]  e.g.  lines  from  the  ‘long  and  short’,  planes 
from  the  ‘broad  and  narrow’,  masses  from  the 
‘deep  and  shallow’;  which  are  species  of  the 
‘great  and  small’.  And  the  originative  principle 
of  such  things  which  answers  to  the  1  different 
thinkers  describe  in  different  ways.  And  in 
[75]  these  also  the  impossibilities,  the  fictions, 
and  the  contradictions  of  all  probability  are 
seen  to  be  innumerable.  For  (i)  the  geometrical 
classes  are  severed  from  one  another,  unless 
the  principles  of  these  are  implied  in  one  an¬ 
other  in  such  a  way  that  the  ‘broad  and  nar¬ 
row’  is  also  ‘long  and  short’  (but  if  this  is  so, 
the  plane  will  be  line  and  the  solid  a  plane; 
again,  how  will  angles  and  figures  and  such 
[20]  things  be  explained?).  And  (ii)  the  same 
happens  as  in  regard  to  number;  for  ‘long  and 
short’,  &c.,  are  attributes  of  magnitude,  but 
magnitude  does  not  consist  of  these,  any  more 
than  the  line  consists  of  ‘straight  and  curved’, 
or  solids  of  ‘smooth  and  rough’. 

(All  these  views  share  a  difficulty  which  oc¬ 
curs  with  regard  to  species-of-a-genus,  when 
one  posits  the  universals,  viz.  whether  it  is 
[25]  animal-itself  or  something  other  than 
animal-itself  that  is  in  the  particular  animal. 
True,  if  the  universal  is  not  separable  from 
sensible  things,  this  will  present  no  difficulty; 
but  if  the  1  and  the  numbers  are  separable,  as 
those  who  express  these  views  say,  it  is  not 
easy  to  solve  the  difficulty,  if  one  may  apply 
the  words  ‘not  easy’  to  the  impossible.  For 
when  we  apprehend  the  unity  in  2,  or  in  gen- 
[50]  eral  in  a  number,  do  we  apprehend  a 
thing-itself  or  something  else?). 

Some,  then,  generate  spatial  magnitudes 
from  matter  of  this  sort,  others  from  the  point 
— and  the  point  is  thought  by  them  to  be  not  1 
but  something  like  1 — and  from  other  matter 
like  plurality,  but  not  identical  with  it;  about 
[55]  which  principles  none  the  less  the  same 
difficulties  occur.  For  if  the  matter  is  one,  line 
and  plane  and  solid  will  be  the  same;  for  from 
the  same  elements  will  come  one  and  the  same 
1085b  thing.  But  if  the  matters  are  more  than 
one,  and  there  is  one  for  the  line  and  a  sec¬ 
ond  for  the  plane  and  another  for  the  solid, 
they  either  are  implied  in  one  another  or  not,  so 
that  the  same  results  will  follow  even  so;  for 
either  the  plane  will  not  contain  a  line  or  it  will 
be  a  line. 

Again,  how  number  can  consist  of  the  one 
[5]  and  plurality,  they  make  no  attempt  to  ex¬ 
plain;  but  however  they  express  themselves, 
the  same  objections  arise  as  confront  those  who 


construct  number  out  of  the  one  and  the  in¬ 
definite  dyad.  For  the  one  view  generates  num¬ 
ber  from  the  universally  predicated  plurality, 
and  not  from  a  particular  plurality;  and  the 
other  generates  it  from  a  particular  plurality, 
but  the  first;  for  2  is  said  to  be  a  ‘first  plurality’. 
[70]  Therefore  there  is  practically  no  differ¬ 
ence,  but  the  same  difficulties  will  follow, — 
is  it  intermixture  or  position  or  blending  or 
generation?  and  so  on.  Above  all  one  might 
press  the  question  ‘if  each  unit  is  one,  what 
does  it  come  from?’  Certainly  each  is  not  the 
one-itself.  It  must,  then,  come  from  the  one- 
itself  and  plurality,  or  a  part  of  plurality.  To 
[75]  say  that  the  unit  is  a  plurality  is  impos¬ 
sible,  for  it  is  indivisible;  and  to  generate  it 
from  a  part  of  plurality  involves  many  other 
objections;  for  (a)  each  of  the  parts  must  be 
indivisible  (or  it  will  be  a  plurality  and  the 
unit  will  be  divisible)  and  the  elements  will 
[20]  not  be  the  one  and  plurality;  for  the  single 
units  do  not  come  from  plurality  and  the  one. 
Again,  (/3)  the  holder  of  this  view  does  noth¬ 
ing  but  presuppose  another  number;  for  his 
plurality  of  indivisibles  is  a  number.  Again, 
we  must  inquire,  in  view  of  this  theory  also, 
whether  the  number  is  infinite  or  finite.  For 
there  was  at  first,  as  it  seems,  a  plurality  that 
[25]  was  itself  finite,  from  which  and  from  the 
one  comes  the  finite  number  of  units.  And 
there  is  another  plurality  that  is  plurality-itself 
and  infinite  plurality;  which  sort  of  plurality, 
then,  is  the  element  which  co-operates  with 
the  one?  One  might  inquire  similarly  about 
the  point,  i.e.  the  element  out  of  which  they 
make  spatial  magnitudes.  For  surely  this  is 
not  the  one  and  only  point;  at  any  rate,  then, 
let  them  say  out  of  what  each  of  the  other 
[3°]  points  is  formed.  Certainly  not  of  some 
distance  +  the  point-itself.  Nor  again  can 
there  be  indivisible  parts  of  a  distance,  as  the 
elements  out  of  which  the  units  are  said  to  be 
made  are  indivisible  parts  of  plurality;  for 
number  consists  of  indivisibles,  but  spatial 
magnitudes  do  not. 

All  these  objections,  then,  and  others  of  the 
[55]  sort  make  it  evident  that  number  and 
spatial  magnitudes  cannot  exist  apart  from 
things.  Again,  the  discord  about  numbers  be- 
1086*  tween  the  various  versions  is  a  sign  that 
it  is  the  incorrectness  of  the  alleged  facts  them¬ 
selves  that  brings  confusion  into  the  theories. 
For  those  who  make  the  objects  of  mathe¬ 
matics  alone  exist  apart  from  sensible  things, 
seeing  the  difficulty  about  the  Forms  and  their 
[5]  fictitiousness,  abandoned  ideal  number  and 


618  METAPHYSICS  1086b 


posited  mathematical.  But  those  who  wished  to 
make  the  Forms  at  the  same  time  also  num¬ 
bers,  but  did  not  see,  if  one  assumed  these  prin¬ 
ciples,  how  mathematical  number  was  to  exist 
apart  from  ideal,  made  ideal  and  mathematical 
number  the  same — in  words,  since  in  fact 
[/o]  mathematical  number  has  been  destroyed; 
for  they  state  hypotheses  peculiar  to  themselves 
and  not  those  of  mathematics.  And  he  who  first 
supposed  that  the  Forms  exist  and  that  the 
Forms  are  numbers  and  that  the  objects  of 
mathematics  exist,  naturally  separated  the  two. 
Therefore  it  turns  out  that  all  of  them  are  right 
in  some  respect,  but  on  the  whole  not  right.  And 
they  themselves  confirm  this,  for  their  state- 
[75]  ments  do  not  agree  but  conflict.  The  cause 
is  that  their  hypotheses  and  their  principles  are 
false.  And  it  is  hard  to  make  a  good  case  out  of 
bad  materials,  according  to  Epicharmus1:  ‘as 
soon  as  ’tis  said,  ’tis  seen  to  be  wrong/ 

But  regarding  numbers  the  questions  we 
have  raised  and  the  conclusions  we  have 
reached  are  sufficient  (for  while  he  who  is  al¬ 
ready  convinced  might  be  further  convinced 
[20]  by  a  longer  discussion,  one  not  yet  con¬ 
vinced  would  not  come  any  nearer  to  convic¬ 
tion);  regarding  the  first  principles  and  the 
first  causes  and  elements,  the  views  expressed 
by  those  who  discuss  only  sensible  substance 
have  been  partly  stated  in  our  works  on  na¬ 
ture,2  and  partly  do  not  belong  to  the  present 
inquiry;  but  the  views  of  those  who  assert  that 
[25]  there  are  other  substances  besides  the 
sensible  must  be  considered  next  after  those  we 
have  been  mentioning.  Since,  then,  some  say 
that  the  Ideas  and  the  numbers  are  such  sub¬ 
stances,  and  that  the  elements  of  these  are  ele¬ 
ments  and  principles  of  real  things,  we  must  in¬ 
quire  regarding  these  what  they  say  and  in 
what  sense  they  say  it. 

Those  who  posit  numbers  only,  and  these 
[jo]  mathematical,  must  be  considered  later; 
but  as  regards  those  who  believe  in  the  Ideas 
one  might  survey  at  the  same  time  their  way 
of  thinking  and  the  difficulty  into  which  they 
fall.  For  they  at  the  same  time  make  the  Ideas 
universal  and  again  treat  them  as  separable 
and  as  individuals.  That  this  is  not  possible  has 
[^5]  been  argued  before.3  The  reason  why 
those  who  described  their  substances  as  uni¬ 
versal  combined  these  two  characteristics  in 
one  thing,  is  that  they  did  not  make  substances 

1  Fr.  14,  Diels,  Vorsokrati\er. 

2  Physics ,  1.  4-6;  On  the  Heavens ,  in.  3-4;  On  Generation 
and  Corruption ,  1.  1. 

3  hi.  ioc>3a  7-17. 


identical  with  sensible  things.  They  thought 
that  the  particulars  in  the  sensible  world  were 
1086b  in  a  state  of  flux  and  none  of  them  re¬ 
mained,  but  that  the  universal  was  apart  from 
these  and  something  different.  And  Socrates 
gave  the  impulse  to  this  theory,  as  we  said  in 
our  earlier  discussion,4  by  reason  of  his  defini¬ 
tions,  but  he  did  not  separate  universal  from 
individuals;  and  in  this  he  thought  rightly,  in 
[5]  not  separating  them.  This  is  plain  from  the 
results;  for  without  the  universal  it  is  not  pos¬ 
sible  to  get  knowledge,  but  the  separation  is 
the  cause  of  the  objections  that  arise  with  re¬ 
gard  to  the  Ideas.  His  successors,  however, 
treating  it  as  necessary,  if  there  are  to  be  any 
substances  besides  the  sensible  and  transient 
substances,  that  they  must  be  separable,  had  no 
others,  but  gave  separate  existence  to  these  uni- 
[10]  versally  predicated  substances,  so  that  it 
followed  that  universals  and  individuals  were 
almost  the  same  sort  of  thing.  This  in  itself, 
then,  would  be  one  difficulty  in  the  view  we 
have  mentioned. 

10 

Let  us  now  mention  a  point  which  presents  a 
certain  difficulty  both  to  those  who  believe  in 
the  Ideas  and  to  those  who  do  not,  and  which 
[75]  was  stated  before,  at  the  beginning, 
among  the  problems.  If  we  do  not  suppose  sub¬ 
stances  to  be  separate,  and  in  the  way  in  which 
individual  things  are  said  to  be  separate,  we 
shall  destroy  substance  in  the  sense  in  which 
we  understand  ‘substance’;  but  if  we  conceive 
substances  to  be  separable,  how  are  we  to  con¬ 
ceive  their  elements  and  their  principles? 

[20]  If  they  are  individual  and  not  universal, 
(a)  real  things  will  be  just  of  the  same  number 
as  the  elements,  and  ( b )  the  elements  will  not 
be  knowable.  For  (a)  let  the  syllables  in  speech 
be  substances,  and  their  elements  elements  of 
substances;  then  there  must  be  only  one  ba  and 
[25]  one  of  each  of  the  syllables,  since  they  are 
not  universal  and  the  same  in  form  but  each  is 
one  in  number  and  a  ‘this’  and  not  a  kind 
possessed  of  a  common  name  (and  again  they 
suppose  that  the  ‘just  what  a  thing  is’  is  in 
each  case  one).  And  if  the  syllables  are  unique, 
so  too  are  the  parts  of  which  they  consist;  there 
will  not,  then,  be  more  as  than  one,  nor  more 
[jo]  than  one  of  any  of  the  other  elements,  on 
the  same  principle  on  which  an  identical  syl¬ 
lable  cannot  exist  in  the  plural  number.  But 
if  this  is  so,  there  will  not  be  other  things  exist¬ 
ing  besides  the  elements,  but  only  the  elements. 

4  io78b  17-30. 


10 87b  BOOK  XIII,  CHAPTERS  9- 

( b )  Again,  the  elements  will  not  he  even  know- 
able;  for  they  are  not  universal,  and  knowl¬ 
edge  is  of  universal.  This  is  clear  from  demon¬ 
strations  and  from  definitions;  for  we  do  not 
conclude  that  this  triangle  has  its  angles  equal 
[55]  to  two  right  angles,  unless  every  triangle 
has  its  angles  equal  to  two  right  angles,  nor 
that  this  man  is  an  animal,  unless  every  man 
is  an  animal. 

But  if  the  principles  are  universal,  either  the 
1087*  substances  composed  of  them  are  also 
universal,  or  non-substance  will  be  prior  to 
substance;  for  the  universal  is  not  a  substance, 
but  the  element  or  principle  is  universal,  and 
the  element  or  principle  is  prior  to  the  things 
of  which  it  is  the  principle  or  element. 

[5]  All  these  difficulties  follow  naturally,  when 
they  make  the  Ideas  out  of  elements  and  at  the 
same  time  claim  that  apart  from  the  substances 
which  have  the  same  form  there  are  Ideas,  a 
single  separate  entity.  But  if,  e.g.  in  the  case  of 
the  elements  of  speech,  the  as  and  the  b's  may 
quite  well  be  many  and  there  need  be  no  a - 
itself  and  ^-itself  besides  the  many,  there  may 

BOOK 

1 

Regarding  this  kind  of  substance,  what  we 
have  said  must  be  taken  as  sufficient.  All  phi¬ 
losophers  make  the  first  principles  contraries: 
[jo]  as  in  natural  things,  so  also  in  the  case  of 
unchangeable  substances.  But  since  there  can¬ 
not  be  anything  prior  to  the  first  principle  of 
all  things,  the  principle  cannot  be  the  principle 
and  yet  be  an  attribute  of  something  else.  To 
suggest  this  is  like  saying  that  the  white  is  a 
first  principle,  not  qua  anything  else  but  qua 
white,  but  yet  that  it  is  predicable  of  a  subject, 
[55]  i.e.  that  its  being  white  presupposes  its 
being  something  else;  this  is  absurd,  for  then 
that  subject  will  be  prior.  But  all  things  which 
are  generated  from  their  contraries  involve  an 
underlying  subject;  a  subject,  then,  must  be 
present  in  the  case  of  contraries,  if  anywhere. 
1087b  All  contraries,  then,  are  always  predi¬ 
cable  of  a  subject,  and  none  can  exist  apart,  but 
just  as  appearances  suggest  that  there  is  noth¬ 
ing  contrary  to  substance,  argument  confirms 
this.  No  contrary,  then,  is  the  first  principle  of 
all  things  in  the  full  sense;  the  first  principle 
is  something  different. 

But  these  thinkers  make  one  of  the  con- 
[5]  traries  matter,  some  making  the  unequal — 
which  they  take  to  be  the  essence  of  plurality 


)— BOOK  XIV,  CHAPTER  1  619 

be,  so  far  as  this  goes,  an  infinite  number  of 
[/o]  similar  syllables.  The  statement  that  all 
knowledge  is  universal,  so  that  the  principles  of 
things  must  also  be  universal  and  not  separate 
substances,  presents  indeed,  of  all  the  points  we 
have  mentioned,  the  greatest  difficulty,  but  yet 
the  statement  is  in  a  sense  true,  although  in  a 
[75]  sense  it  is  not.  For  knowledge,  like  the 
verb  ‘to  know’,  means  two  things,  of  which  one 
is  potential  and  one  actual.  The  potency,  being, 
as  matter,  universal  and  indefinite,  deals  with 
the  universal  and  indefinite;  but  the  actuality, 
being  definite,  deals  with  a  definite  object, — 
being  a  ‘this’,  it  deals  with  a  ‘this’.  But  per 
accidens  sight  sees  universal  colour,  because 
this  individual  colour  which  it  sees  is  colour; 
[20]  and  this  individual  a  which  the  gram¬ 
marian  investigates  is  an  a.  For  if  the  principles 
must  be  universal,  what  is  derived  from  them 
must  also  be  universal,  as  in  demonstrations; 
and  if  this  is  so,  there  will  be  nothing  capable 
of  separate  existence — i.e.  no  substance.  But 
evidently  in  a  sense  knowledge  is  universal, 
[25]  and  in  a  sense  it  is  not. 

XIV 

— matter  for  the  One,  and  others  making  plu¬ 
rality  matter  for  the  One.  (The  former  gener¬ 
ate  numbers  out  of  the  dyad  of  the  unequal,  i.e. 
of  the  great  and  small,  and  the  other  thinker 
we  have  referred  to  generates  them  out  of 
plurality,  while  according  to  both  it  is  generated 
by  the  essence  of  the  One.)  For  even  the  philos¬ 
opher  who  says  the  unequal  and  the  One  are 
[/o]  the  elements,  and  the  unequal  is  a  dyad 
composed  of  the  great  and  small,  treats  the 
unequal,  or  the  great  and  the  small,  as  being 
one,  and  does  not  draw  the  distinction  that  they 
are  one  in  definition,  but  not  in  number.  But 
they  do  not  describe  rightly  even  the  principles 
which  they  call  elements,  for  some  name  the 
great  and  the  small  with  the  One  and  treat 
[75]  these  three  as  elements  of  numbers,  two 
being  matter,  one  the  form;  while  others  name 
the  many  and  few,  because  the  great  and  the 
small  are  more  appropriate  in  their  nature  to 
magnitude  than  to  number;  and  others  name 
rather  the  universal  character  common  to  these 
— ‘that  which  exceeds  and  that  which  is  ex¬ 
ceeded’.  None  of  these  varieties  of  opinion 
makes  any  difference  to  speak  of,  in  view  of 
some  of  the  consequences;  they  affect  only  the 
[20]  abstract  objections,  which  these  thinkers 
take  care  to  avoid  because  the  demonstrations 
they  themselves  offer  are  abstract, — with  this 


620 

exception,  that  if  the  exceeding  and  the  ex¬ 
ceeded  are  the  principles,  and  not  the  great 
and  the  small,  consistency  requires  that  num¬ 
ber  should  come  from  the  elements  before  2 
does;  for  number  is  more  universal  than  2,  as 
the  exceeding  and  the  exceeded  are  more  uni- 
[25]  versal  than  the  great  and  the  small.  But  as 
it  is,  they  say  one  of  these  things  but  do  not 
say  the  other.  Others  oppose  the  different  and 
the  other  to  the  One,  and  others  oppose  plural¬ 
ity  to  the  One.  But  if,  as  they  claim,  things 
consist  of  contraries,  and  to  the  One  either 
there  is  nothing  contrary,  or  if  there  is  to  be 
anything  it  is  plurality,  and  the  unequal  is  con¬ 
trary  to  the  equal,  and  the  different  to  the  same, 
[jo]  and  the  other  to  the  thing  itself,  those  who 
oppose  the  One  to  plurality  have  most  claim  to 
plausibility,  but  even  their  view  is  inadequate, 
for  the  One  would  on  their  view  be  a  few;  for 
plurality  is  opposed  to  fewness,  and  the  many 
to  the  few. 

‘The  one’  evidently  means  a  measure.  And  in 
every  case  there  is  some  underlying  thing  with 
[^5]  a  distinct  nature  of  its  own,  e.g.  in  the 
scale  a  quarter-tone,  in  spatial  magnitude  a 
finger  or  a  foot  or  something  of  the  sort,  in 
rhythms  a  beat  or  a  syllable;  and  similarly  in 
1088a  gravity  it  is  a  definite  weight;  and  in 
the  same  way  in  all  cases,  in  qualities  a  quality, 
in  quantities  a  quantity  (and  the  measure  is 
indivisible,  in  the  former  case  in  kind,  and  in 
the  latter  to  the  sense);  which  implies  that  the 
one  is  not  in  itself  the  substance  of  anything. 
And  this  is  reasonable;  for  ‘the  one'  means  the 
[5]  measure  of  some  plurality,  and  ‘number’ 
means  a  measured  plurality  and  a  plurality  of 
measures.  (Thus  it  is  natural  that  one  is  not  a 
number;  for  the  measure  is  not  measures,  but 
both  the  measure  and  the  one  are  starting- 
points.)  The  measure  must  always  be  some 
identical  thing  predicable  of  all  the  things  it 
measures,  e.g.  if  the  things  are  horses,  the  meas¬ 
ure  is  ‘horse’,  and  if  they  are  men,  ‘man’.  If 
[/o]  they  are  a  man,  a  horse,  and  a  god,  the 
measure  is  perhaps  ‘living  being’,  and  the  num¬ 
ber  of  them  will  be  a  number  of  living  beings. 
If  the  things  are  ‘man’  and  ‘pale’  and  ‘walking’, 
these  will  scarcely  have  a  number,  because 
all  belong  to  a  subject  which  is  one  and  the 
same  in  number,  yet  the  number  of  these 
will  be  a  number  of  ‘kinds’  or  of  some  such 
term. 

[75]  Those  who  treat  the  unequal  as  one  thing, 
and  the  dyad  as  an  indefinite  compound  of 
great  and  small,  say  what  is  very  far  from  be¬ 
ing  probable  or  possible.  For  (a)  these  are 


1088b 

modifications  and  accidents,  rather  than  sub¬ 
strata,  of  numbers  and  magnitudes — the  many 
and  few  of  number,  and  the  great  and  small 
of  magnitude — like  even  and  odd,  smooth  and 
[20]  rough,  straight  and  curved.  Again,  ( b ) 
apart  from  this  mistake,  the  great  and  the 
small,  and  so  on,  must  be  relative  to  something; 
but  what  is  relative  is  least  of  all  things  a  kind 
of  entity  or  substance,  and  is  posterior  to  qual¬ 
ity  and  quantity;  and  the  relative  is  an  accident 
[25]  of  quantity,  as  was  said,  not  its  matter, 
since  something  with  a  distinct  nature  of  its 
own  must  serve  as  matter  both  to  the  relative 
in  general  and  to  its  parts  and  kinds.  For  there 
is  nothing  either  great  or  small,  many  or  few, 
or,  in  general,  relative  to  something  else,  which 
without  having  a  nature  of  its  own  is  many  or 
few,  great  or  small,  or  relative  to  something 
else.  A  sign  that  the  relative  is  least  of  all  a 
[30]  substance  and  a  real  thing  is  the  fact  that 
it  alone  has  no  proper  generation  or  destruc¬ 
tion  or  movement,  as  in  respect  of  quantity 
there  is  increase  and  diminution,  in  respect  of 
quality  alteration,  in  respect  of  place  locomo¬ 
tion,  in  respect  of  substance  simple  generation 
and  destruction.  In  respect  of  relation  there  is 
no  proper  change;  for,  without  changing,  a 
thing  will  be  now  greater  and  now  less  or 
[35]  equal,  if  that  with  which  it  is  compared 
1088b  has  changed  in  quantity.  And  (c)  the 
matter  of  each  thing,  and  therefore  of  sub¬ 
stance,  must  be  that  which  is  potentially  of  the 
nature  in  question;  but  the  relative  is  neither 
potentially  nor  actually  substance.  It  is  strange, 
then,  or  rather  impossible,  to  make  not-sub- 
stance  an  element  in,  and  prior  to,  substance; 
for  all  the  categories  are  posterior  to  substance. 
Again,  (d)  elements  are  not  predicated  of  the 
things  of  which  they  are  elements,  but  many 
[5]  and  few  are  predicated  both  apart  and  to¬ 
gether  of  number,  and  long  and  short  of  the 
line,  and  both  broad  and  narrow  apply  to  the 
plane.  If  there  is  a  plurality,  then,  of  which  the 
one  term,  viz.  few,  is  always  predicated,  e.g.  2 
(which  cannot  be  many,  for  if  it  were  many,  1 
would  be  few),  there  must  be  also  one  which  is 
[/o]  absolutely  many,  e.g.  10  is  many  (if  there 
is  no  number  which  is  greater  than  10),  or 
10,000.  How  then,  in  view  of  this,  can  number 
consist  of  few  and  many?  Either  both  ought 
to  be  predicated  of  it,  or  neither;  but  in  fact 
only  the  one  or  the  other  is  predicated. 

2 

We  must  inquire  generally,  whether  eternal 
[75]  things  can  consist  of  elements.  If  they  do. 


METAPHYSICS 


1089b  BOOK  XIV,  CHAPTERS  1-2  621 


they  will  have  matter;  for  everything  that  con¬ 
sists  of  elements  is  composite.  Since,  then,  even 
if  a  thing  exists  for  ever,  out  of  that  of  which 
it  consists  it  would  necessarily  also,  if  it  had 
come  into  being,  have  come  into  being,  and 
since  everything  comes  to  be  what  it  comes  to 
be  out  of  that  which  is  it  potentially  (for  it 
could  not  have  come  to  be  out  of  that  which 
had  not  this  capacity,  nor  could  it  consist  of 
such  elements),  and  since  the  potential  can  be 
[20]  either  actual  or  not, — this  being  so,  how¬ 
ever  everlasting  number  or  anything  else  that 
has  matter  is,  it  must  be  capable  of  not  existing, 
just  as  that  which  is  any  number  of  years  old 
is  as  capable  of  not  existing  as  that  which  is  a 
day  old;  if  this  is  capable  of  not  existing,  so  is 
that  which  has  lasted  for  a  time  so  long  that 
it  has  no  limit.  They  cannot,  then,  be  eternal, 
since  that  which  is  capable  of  not  existing  is 
not  eternal,  as  we  had  occasion  to  show  in 
[25]  another  context.1  If  that  which  we  are 
now  saying  is  true  universally — that  no  sub¬ 
stance  is  eternal  unless  it  is  actuality — and  if 
the  elements  are  matter  that  underlies  sub¬ 
stance,  no  eternal  substance  can  have  elements 
present  in  it,  of  which  it  consists. 

There  are  some  who  describe  the  element 
which  acts  with  the  One  as  an  indefinite  dyad, 
and  object  to  ‘the  unequal’,  reasonably  enough, 
[jo]  because  of  the  ensuing  difficulties;  but 
they  have  got  rid  only  of  those  objections  which 
inevitably  arise  from  the  treatment  of  the  un¬ 
equal,  i.e.  the  relative,  as  an  element;  those 
which  arise  apart  from  this  opinion  must  con¬ 
front  even  these  thinkers,  whether  it  is  ideal 
number,  or  mathematical,  that  they  construct 
out  of  those  elements. 

[^5]  There  are  many  causes  which  led  them  off 
1089a  into  these  explanations,  and  especially 
the  fact  that  they  framed  the  difficulty  in  an 
obsolete  form.  For  they  thought  that  all  things 
that  are  would  be  one  (viz.  Being  itself),  if  one 
did  not  join  issue  with  and  refute  the  saying  of 
Parmenides:2 

‘For  never  will  this  be  proved ,  that  things 
that  are  not  are.’ 

They  thought  it  necessary  to  prove  that  that 
[5]  which  is  not  is;  for  only  thus — of  that 
which  is  and  something  else — could  the  things 
that  are  be  composed,  if  they  are  many. 

But,  first,  if  ‘being’  has  many  senses  (for  it 
means  sometimes  substance,  sometimes  that  it 
is  of  a  certain  quality,  sometimes  that  it  is  of  a 
certain  quantity,  and  at  other  times  the  other 

1  Cf.  ix,  I050b  7  ff. ;  On  the  Heavens ,  i.  12. 

2Fr.  7. 


categories),  what  sort  of  ‘one’,  then,  are  all  the 
things  that  are,  if  non-being  is  to  be  supposed 
[/o]  not  to  be?  Is  it  the  substances  that  are 
one,  or  the  affections  and  similarly  the  other 
categories  as  well,  or  all  together — so  that  the 
‘this’  and  the  ‘such’  and  the  ‘so  much’  and  the 
other  categories  that  indicate  each  some  one 
class  of  being  will  all  be  one?  But  it  is  strange, 
or  rather  impossible,  that  the  coming  into  play 
of  a  single  thing  should  bring  it  about  that  part 
of  that  which  is  is  a  ‘this’,  part  a  ‘such’,  part  a 
‘so  much’,  part  a  ‘here’. 

[75]  Secondly,  of  what  sort  of  non-being  and 
being  do  the  things  that  are  consist?  For  ‘non- 
being’  also  has  many  senses,  since  ‘being’  has; 
and  ‘not  being  a  man’  means  not  being  a  cer¬ 
tain  substance,  ‘not  being  straight’  not  being 
of  a  certain  quality,  ‘not  being  three  cubits 
long’  not  being  of  a  certain  quantity.  What 
sort  of  being  and  non-being,  then,  by  their 
union  pluralize  the  things  that  are?  This 
[20]  thinker3  means  by  the  non-being  the  un¬ 
ion  of  which  with  being  pluralizes  the  things 
that  are,  the  false  and  the  character  of  falsity. 
This  is  also  why  it  used  to  be  said  that  we  must 
assume  something  that  is  false,  as  geometers 
assume  the  line  which  is  not  a  foot  long  to  be  a 
foot  long.  But  this  cannot  be  so.  For  neither  do 
geometers  assume  anything  false  (for  the  enun¬ 
ciation  is  extraneous  to  the  inference),  nor  is  it 
[25]  non-being  in  this  sense  that  the  things  that 
are  are  generated  from  or  resolved  into.  But 
since  ‘non-being’  taken  in  its  various  cases  has 
as  many  senses  as  there  are  categories,  and  be¬ 
sides  this  the  false  is  said  not  to  be,  and  so  is 
the  potential,  it  is  from  this  that  generation 
proceeds,  man  from  that  which  is  not  man  but 
[jo]  potentially  man,  and  white  from  that 
which  is  not  white  but  potentially  white,  and 
this  whether  it  is  some  one  thing  that  is  gen¬ 
erated  or  many. 

The  question  evidently  is,  how  being,  in  the 
sense  of  ‘the  substance s\  is  many;  for  the 
things  that  are  generated  are  numbers  and 
lines  and  bodies.  Now  it  is  strange  to  inquire 
how  being  in  the  sense  of  the  ‘what’  is  many, 
[  J5]  and  not  how  either  qualities  or  quantities 
are  many.  For  surely  the  indefinite  dyad  or 
‘the  great  and  the  small’  is  not  a  reason  why 
there  should  be  two  kinds  of  white  or  many 
1089b  colours  or  flavours  or  shapes;  for  then 
these  also  would  be  numbers  and  units.  But  if 
they  had  attacked  these  other  categories,  they 
would  have  seen  the  cause  of  the  plurality  in 
substances  also;  for  the  same  thing  or  some- 

3  Plato;  cf.  Sophist ,  237,  240. 


622 

thing  analogous  is  the  cause.  This  aberration 
is  the  reason  also  why  in  seeking  the  opposite 
[5]  of  being  and  the  one,  from  which  with 
being  and  the  one  the  things  that  are  proceed, 
they  posited  the  relative  term  (i.e.  the  un¬ 
equal),  which  is  neither  the  contrary  nor  the 
contradictory  of  these,  and  is  one  kind  of  be¬ 
ing  as  ‘what’  and  quality  also  are. 

They  should  have  asked  this  question  also, 
how  relative  terms  are  many  and  not  one.  But 
as  it  is,  they  inquire  how  there  are  many  units 
[/o]  besides  the  first  1,  but  do  not  go  on  to 
inquire  how  there  are  many  unequals  besides 
the  unequal.  Yet  they  use  them  and  speak  of 
great  and  small,  many  and  few  (from  which 
proceed  numbers),  long  and  short  (from  which 
proceeds  the  line),  broad  and  narrow  (from 
which  proceeds  the  plane),  deep  and  shallow 
(from  which  proceed  solids);  and  they  speak 
of  yet  more  kinds  of  relative  term.  What  is 
the  reason,  then,  why  there  is  a  plurality  of 
these? 

[75]  It  is  necessary,  then,  as  we  say,  to  pre¬ 
suppose  for  each  thing  that  which  is  it  poten¬ 
tially;  and  the  holder  of  these  views  further 
declared  what  that  is  which  is  potentially  a 
‘this’  and  a  substance  but  is  not  in  itself  being 
— viz.  that  it  is  the  relative  (as  if  he  had  said 
‘the  qualitative’),  which  is  neither  potentially 
the  one  or  being,  nor  the  negation  of  the  one 
[20]  nor  of  being,  but  one  among  beings.  And 
it  was  much  more  necessary,  as  we  said,1  if  he 
was  inquiring  how  beings  are  many,  not  to  in¬ 
quire  about  those  in  the  same  category — how 
there  are  many  substances  or  many  qualities — 
but  how  beings  as  a  whole  are  many;  for  some 
are  substances,  some  modifications,  some  rela¬ 
tions.  In  the  categories  other  than  substance 
there  is  yet  another  problem  involved  in  the 
[25]  existence  of  plurality.  Since  they  are  not 
separable  from  substances,  qualities  and  quan¬ 
tities  are  many  just  because  their  substratum 
becomes  and  is  many;  yet  there  ought  to  be  a 
matter  for  each  category;  only  it  cannot  be 
separable  from  substances.  But  in  the  case  of 
‘thises’,  it  is  possible  to  explain  how  the  ‘this’ 
is  many  things,  unless  a  thing  is  to  be  treated 
[30]  as  both  a  ‘this’  and  a  general  character. 
The  difficulty  arising  from  the  facts  about  sub¬ 
stances  is  rather  this,  how  there  are  actually 
many  substances  and  not  one. 

But  further,  if  the  ‘this’  and  the  quantitative 
are  not  the  same,  we  are  not  told  how  and  why 
the  things  that  are  are  many,  but  how  quan¬ 
tities  are  many.  For  all  ‘number’  means  a 

1  a34* 


1090® 

[35]  quantity,  and  so  does  the  ‘unit’,  unless  it 
means  a  measure  or  the  quantitatively  indi¬ 
visible.  If,  then,  the  quantitative  and  the  ‘what’ 
are  different,  we  are  not  told  whence  or  how 
1090®  the  ‘what’  is  many;  but  if  any  one  says 
they  are  the  same,  he  has  to  face  many  incon¬ 
sistencies. 

One  might  fix  one’s  attention  also  on  the 
question,  regarding  the  numbers,  what  justi¬ 
fies  the  belief  that  they  exist.  To  the  believer 
in  Ideas  they  provide  some  sort  of  cause  for  ex- 
[5]  isting  things,  since  each  number  is  an  Idea, 
and  the  Idea  is  to  other  things  somehow  or 
other  the  cause  of  their  being;  for  let  this  sup¬ 
position  be  granted  them.  But  as  for  him  who 
does  not  hold  this  view  because  he  sees  the  in¬ 
herent  objections  to  the  Ideas  (so  that  it  is  not 
for  this  reason  that  he  posits  numbers),  but 
who  posits  mathematical  number,  why  must 
[/o]  we  believe  his  statement  that  such  num¬ 
ber  exists,  and  of  what  use  is  such  number  to 
other  things?  Neither  does  he  who  says  it  ex¬ 
ists  maintain  that  it  is  the  cause  of  anything 
(he  rather  says  it  is  a  thing  existing  by  itself), 
nor  is  it  observed  to  be  the  cause  of  anything; 
for  the  theorems  of  arithmeticians  will  all  be 
[75]  found  true  even  of  sensible  things,  as  was 
said  before.2 

3 

As  for  those,  then,  who  suppose  the  Ideas  to 
exist  and  to  be  numbers,  by  their  assumption — 
in  virtue  of  the  method  of  setting  out  each 
term  apart  from  its  instances — of  the  unity  of 
each  general  term  they  try  at  least  to  explain 
somehow  why  number  must  exist.  Since  their 
reasons,  however,  are  neither  conclusive  nor  in 
themselves  possible,  one  must  not,  for  these 
reasons  at  least,  assert  the  existence  of  number. 
[20]  Again,  the  Pythagoreans,  because  they 
saw  many  attributes  of  numbers  belonging  to 
sensible  bodies,  supposed  real  things  to  be  num¬ 
bers — not  separable  numbers,  however,  but 
numbers  of  which  real  things  consist.  But  why? 
Because  the  attributes  of  numbers  are  present 
in  a  musical  scale  and  in  the  heavens  and  in 
[25]  many  other  things.  Those,  however,  who 
say  that  mathematical  number  alone  exists 
cannot  according  to  their  hypotheses  say  any¬ 
thing  of  this  sort,  but  it  used  to  be  urged  that 
these  sensible  things  could  not  be  the  subject 
of  the  sciences.  But  we  maintain  that  they  are, 
as  we  said  before.3  And  it  is  evident  that  the 
objects  of  mathematics  do  not  exist  apart;  for 

2  Cf.  xiii.  3,  esp.  io77b  17-22. 

3  Cf.  xiii.  3. 


METAPHYSICS 


1091a  BOOK  XIV,  CHAPTERS  2-3  623 


if  they  existed  apart  their  attributes  would  not 
[30]  have  been  present  in  bodies.  Now  the 
Pythagoreans  in  this  point  are  open  to  no  ob¬ 
jection;  but  in  that  they  construct  natural 
bodies  out  of  numbers,  things  that  have  light¬ 
ness  and  weight  out  of  things  that  have  not 
weight  or  lightness,  they  seem  to  speak  of  an¬ 
other  heaven  and  other  bodies,  not  of  the  sensi- 
[35]  ble.  But  those  who  make  number  separa¬ 
ble  assume  that  it  both  exists  and  is  separable 
because  the  axioms  would  not  be  true  of  sensi¬ 
ble  things,  while  the  statements  of  mathematics 
are  true  and  ‘greet  the  soul’;  and  similarly  with 
the  spatial  magnitudes  of  mathematics.  It  is 
1090b  evident,  then,  both  that  the  rival  theory 
will  say  the  contrary  of  this,  and  that  the  diffi¬ 
culty  we  raised  just  now,1  why  if  numbers  are 
in  no  way  present  in  sensible  things  their  at¬ 
tributes  are  present  in  sensible  things,  has  to  be 
solved  by  those  who  hold  these  views. 

[5]  There  are  some  who,  because  the  point  is 
the  limit  and  extreme  of  the  line,  the  line  of 
the  plane,  and  the  plane  of  the  solid,  think 
there  must  be  real  things  of  this  sort.  We  must 
therefore  examine  this  argument  too,  and  see 
whether  it  is  not  remarkably  weak.  For  (i)  ex¬ 
tremes  are  not  substances,  but  rather  all  these 
[/o]  things  are  limits.  For  even  walking,  and 
movement  in  general,  has  a  limit,  so  that  on 
their  theory  this  will  be  a  ‘this’  and  a  substance. 
But  that  is  absurd.  Not  but  what  (ii)  even  if 
they  are  substances,  they  will  all  be  the  sub¬ 
stances  of  the  sensible  things  in  this  world; 
for  it  is  to  these  that  the  argument  applied. 
Why  then  should  they  be  capable  of  existing 
apart? 

Again,  if  we  are  not  too  easily  satisfied,  we 
may,  regarding  all  number  and  the  objects  of 
mathematics,  press  this  difficulty,  that  they  con- 
[75]  tribute  nothing  to  one  another,  the  prior 
to  the  posterior;  for  if  number  did  not  exist, 
none  the  less  spatial  magnitudes  would  exist  for 
those  who  maintain  the  existence  of  the  objects 
of  mathematics  only,  and  if  spatial  magnitudes 
did  not  exist,  soul  and  sensible  bodies  would 
exist.  But  the  observed  facts  show  that  nature 
[20]  is  not  a  series  of  episodes,  like  a  bad 
tragedy.  As  for  the  believers  in  the  Ideas,  this 
difficulty  misses  them;  for  they  construct  spatial 
magnitudes  out  of  matter  and  number,  lines 
out  of  the  number  2,  planes  doubtless  out  of 
3,  solids  out  of  4, — or  they  use  other  numbers, 
which  makes  no  difference.  But  will  these  mag¬ 
nitudes  be  Ideas,  or  what  is  their  manner  of 
[25]  existence,  and  what  do  they  contribute  to 

la29. 


things?  These  contribute  nothing,  as  the  ob¬ 
jects  of  mathematics  contribute  nothing.  But 
not  even  is  any  theorem  true  of  them,  unless 
we  want  to  change  the  objects  of  mathematics 
and  invent  doctrines  of  our  own.  But  it  is  not 
[30]  hard  to  assume  any  random  hypotheses 
and  spin  out  a  long  string  of  conclusions.  These 
thinkers,  then,  are  wrong  in  this  way,  in  want¬ 
ing  to  unite  the  objects  of  mathematics  with 
the  Ideas.  And  those  who  first  posited  two 
kinds  of  number,  that  of  the  Forms  and  that 
which  is  mathematical,  neither  have  said  nor 
can  say  how  mathematical  number  is  to  exist 
and  of  what  it  is  to  consist.  For  they  place  it 
[35]  between  ideal  and  sensible  number.  If 
(i)  it  consists  of  the  great  and  small,  it  will  be 
the  same  as  the  other — ideal — number  (he 
makes  spatial  magnitudes  out  of  some  other 
small  and  great).  And  if  (ii)  he  names  some 
1091a  other  element,  he  will  be  making  his 
elements  rather  many.  And  if  the  principle  of 
each  of  the  two  kinds  of  number  is  a  1,  unity 
will  be  something  common  to  these,  and  we 
must  inquire  how  the  one  is  these  many  things, 
while  at  the  same  time  number ,  according  to 
him,  cannot  be  generated  except  from  one  and 
an  indefinite  dyad, 

[5]  All  this  is  absurd,  and  conflicts  both  with 
itself  and  with  the  probabilities,  and  we  seem 
to  see  in  it  Simonides’  ‘long  rigmarole’2;  for 
the  long  rigmarole  comes  into  play,  like  those 
of  slaves,  when  men  have  nothing  sound  to  say. 
And  the  very  elements — the  great  and  the 
small — seem  to  cry  out  against  the  violence 
[/o]  that  is  done  to  them;  for  they  cannot  in 
any  way  generate  numbers  other  than  those 
got  from  1  by  doubling. 

It  is  strange  also  to  attribute  generation  to 
things  that  are  eternal,  or  rather  this  is  one  of 
the  things  that  are  impossible.  There  need  be 
no  doubt  whether  the  Pythagoreans  attribute 
[75]  generation  to  them  or  not;  for  they  say 
plainly  that  when  the  one  had  been  con¬ 
structed,  whether  out  of  planes  or  of  surface  or 
of  seed  or  of  elements  which  they  cannot  ex¬ 
press,  immediately  the  nearest  part  of  the  un¬ 
limited  began  to  be  constrained  and  limited  by 
the  limit.  But  since  they  are  constructing  a 
world  and  wish  to  speak  the  language  of  nat¬ 
ural  science,  it  is  fair  to  make  some  examina¬ 
tion  of  their  physical  theories,  but  to  let  them 
[20]  off  from  the  present  inquiry;  for  we  are 
investigating  the  principles  at  work  in  un- 
changeable  things,  so  that  it  is  numbers  of  this 
kind  whose  genesis  we  must  study. 

2  Simonides  CeTus,  Fr.  189.  Bergk. 


624  METAPHYSICS  1092* 


4 

These  thinkers  say  there  is  no  generation  of 
the  odd  number,  which  evidently  implies  that 
there  is  generation  of  the  even;  and  some  pre¬ 
sent  the  even  as  produced  first  from  unequals 
— the  great  and  the  small — when  these  are 
[25]  equalized.  The  inequality,  then,  must  be¬ 
long  to  them  before  they  are  equalized.  If  they 
had  always  been  equalized,  they  would  not 
have  been  unequal  before;  for  there  is  nothing 
before  that  which  is  always.  Therefore  evident¬ 
ly  they  are  not  giving  their  account  of  the  gen¬ 
eration  of  numbers  merely  to  assist  contempla¬ 
tion  of  their  nature. 

A  difficulty,  and  a  reproach  to  any  one  who 
[^0]  finds  it  no  difficulty,  are  contained  in  the 
question  how  the  elements  and  the  principles 
are  related  to  the  good  and  the  beautiful;  the 
difficulty  is  this,  whether  any  of  the  elements 
is  such  a  thing  as  we  mean  by  the  good  itself 
and  the  best,  or  this  is  not  so,  but  these  are  later 
in  origin  than  the  elements.  The  theologians 
seem  to  agree  with  some  thinkers  of  the  pres- 
[55]  ent  day,  who  answer  the  question  in  the 
negative,  and  say  that  both  the  good  and  the 
beautiful  appear  in  the  nature  of  things  only 
when  that  nature  has  made  some  progress. 
(This  they  do  to  avoid  a  real  objection  which 
confronts  those  who  say,  as  some  do,  that  the 
1091b  one  is  a  first  principle.  The  objection 
arises  not  from  their  ascribing  goodness  to  the 
first  principle  as  an  attribute,  but  from  their 
making  the  one  a  principle — and  a  principle  in 
the  sense  of  an  element — and  generating  num¬ 
ber  from  the  one.)  The  old  poets  agree  with 
this  inasmuch  as  they  say  that  not  those  who 
[5]  are  first  in  time,  e.g.  Night  and  Heaven  or 
Chaos  or  Ocean,  reign  and  rule,  but  Zeus. 
These  poets,  however,  are  led  to  speak  thus 
only  because  they  think  of  the  rulers  of  the 
world  as  changing;  for  those  of  them  who  com¬ 
bine  the  two  characters  in  that  they  do  not  use 
mythical  language  throughout,  e.g.  Pherecydes 
[/o]  and  some  others,  make  the  original  gen¬ 
erating  agent  the  Best,  and  so  do  the  Magi,  and 
some  of  the  later  sages  also,  e.g.  both  Emped¬ 
ocles  and  Anaxagoras,  of  whom  one  made 
love  an  element,  and  the  other  made  reason  a 
principle.  Of  those  who  maintain  the  existence 
of  the  unchangeable  substances  some  say  the 
One  itself  is  the  good  itself;  but  they  thought 
its  substance  lay  mainly  in  its  unity. 

[75]  This,  then,  is  the  problem, — which  of  the 
two  ways  of  speaking  is  right.  It  would  be 
strange  if  to  that  which  is  primary  and  eternal 


and  most  self-sufficient  this  very  quality — self- 
sufficiency  and  self-maintenance — belongs  pri¬ 
marily  in  some  other  way  than  as  a  good . 
But  indeed  it  can  be  for  no  other  reason  inde¬ 
structible  or  self-sufficient  than  because  its  na¬ 
ture  is  good.  Therefore  to  say  that  the  first 
[20]  principle  is  good  is  probably  correct;  but 
that  this  principle  should  be  the  One  or,  if 
not  that,  at  least  an  element,  and  an  element  of 
numbers,  is  impossible.  Powerful  objections 
arise,  to  avoid  which  some  have  given  up  the 
theory  (viz.  those  who  agree  that  the  One  is  a 
first  principle  and  element,  but  only  of  mathe¬ 
matical  number).  For  on  this  view  all  the  units 
[25]  become  identical  with  species  of  good, 
and  there  is  a  great  profusion  of  goods.  Again, 
if  the  Forms  are  numbers,  all  the  Forms  are 
identical  with  species  of  good.  But  let  a  man 
assume  Ideas  of  anything  he  pleases.  If  these 
are  Ideas  only  of  goods,  the  Ideas  will  not  be 
substances;  but  if  the  Ideas  are  also  Ideas  of 
substances,  all  animals  and  plants  and  all  indi¬ 
viduals  that  share  in  Ideas  will  be  good. 

[30]  These  absurdities  follow,  and  it  also  fol¬ 
lows  that  the  contrary  element,  whether  it  is 
plurality  or  the  unequal,  i.e.  the  great  and 
small,  is  the  bad-itself.  (Hence  one  thinker 
avoided  attaching  the  good  to  the  One,  be¬ 
cause  it  would  necessarily  follow,  since  genera¬ 
tion  is  from  contraries,  that  badness  is  the 
fundamental  nature  of  plurality;  while  others 
[35]  saY  inequality  is  the  nature  of  the  bad.)  It 
follows,  then,  that  all  things  partake  of  the  bad 
except  one — the  One  itself,  and  that  numbers 
partake  of  it  in  a  more  undiluted  form  than 
1092*  spatial  magnitudes,  and  that  the  bad  is 
the  space  in  which  the  good  is  realized,  and 
that  it  partakes  in  and  desires  that  which  tends 
to  destroy  it;  for  contrary  tends  to  destroy  con¬ 
trary.  And  if,  as  we  were  saying,  the  matter  is 
that  which  is  potentially  each  thing,  e.g.  that  of 
actual  fire  is  that  which  is  potentially  fire,  the 
bad  will  be  just  the  potentially  good. 

[5]  All  these  objections,  then,  follow,  partly 
because  they  make  every  principle  an  element, 
partly  because  they  make  contraries  principles, 
partly  because  they  make  the  One  a  principle, 
partly  because  they  treat  the  numbers  as  the  first 
substances,  and  as  capable  of  existing  apart, 
and  as  Forms. 

5 

If,  then,  it  is  equally  impossible  not  to  put  the 
good  among  the  first  principles  and  to  put  it 
among  them  in  this  way,  evidently  the  prin- 
[/o]  ciples  are  not  being  correctly  described, 


1092b  BOOK  XIV,  CHAPTERS  4-6  625 


nor  are  the  first  substances.  Nor  does  any  one 
conceive  the  matter  correctly  if  he  compares 
the  principles  of  the  universe  to  that  of  animals 
and  plants,  on  the  ground  that  the  more  com¬ 
plete  always  comes  from  the  indefinite  and  in¬ 
complete — which  is  what  leads  this  thinker  to 
say  that  this  is  also  true  of  the  first  principles  of 
reality,  so  that  the  One  itself  is  not  even  an 
[75]  existing  thing.  This  is  incorrect,  for  even 
in  this  world  of  animals  and  plants  the  prin¬ 
ciples  from  which  these  come  are  complete;  for 
it  is  a  man  that  produces  a  man,  and  the  seed  is 
not  first. 

It  is  out  of  place,  also,  to  generate  place  si¬ 
multaneously  with  the  mathematical  solids  (for 
place  is  peculiar  to  the  individual  things,  and 
hence  they  are  separate  in  place;  but  mathe- 
[20]  matical  objects  are  nowhere),  and  to  say 
that  they  must  be  somewhere,  but  not  say  what 
kind  of  thing  their  place  is. 

Those  who  say  that  existing  things  come 
from  elements  and  that  the  first  of  existing 
things  are  the  numbers,  should  have  first  dis¬ 
tinguished  the  senses  in  which  one  thing  comes 
from  another,  and  then  said  in  which  sense 
number  comes  from  its  first  principles. 

By  intermixture?  But  (1)  not  everything  is 
[25]  capable  of  intermixture,  and  (2)  that 
which  is  produced  by  it  is  different  from  its 
elements,  and  on  this  view  the  one  will  not 
remain  separate  or  a  distinct  entity;  but  they 
want  it  to  be  so. 

By  juxtaposition,  like  a  syllable?  But  then 
(1)  the  elements  must  have  position;  and  (2) 
he  who  thinks  of  number  will  be  able  to  think 
of  the  unity  and  the  plurality  apart;  number 
then  will  be  this — a  unit  and  plurality,  or  the 
one  and  the  unequal. 

Again,  coming  from  certain  things  means  in 
one  sense  that  these  are  still  to  be  found  in  the 

froduct,  and  in  another  that  they  are  not;  in 
jo]  which  sense  does  number  come  from 
these  elements?  Only  things  that  are  gener¬ 
ated  can  come  from  elements  which  are  pres¬ 
ent  in  them.  Does  number  come,  then,  from  its 
elements  as  from  seed?  But  nothing  can  be 
excreted  from  that  which  is  indivisible.  Does 
it  come  from  its  contrary,  its  contrary  not  per¬ 
sisting?  But  all  things  that  come  in  this  way 
come  also  from  something  else  which  does  per- 
[55]  sist.  Since,  then,  one  thinker  places  the  1 
as  contrary  to  plurality,  and  another  places  it 
1092b  as  contrary  to  the  unequal,  treating  the 
1  as  equal,  number  must  be  being  treated  as 
coming  from  contraries.  There  is,  then,  some¬ 
thing  else  that  persists,  from  which  and  from 


one  contrary  the  compound  is  or  has  come  to 
be.  Again,  why  in  the  world  do  the  other 
things  that  come  from  contraries,  or  that  have 
contraries,  perish  (even  when  all  of  the  con¬ 
trary  is  used  to  produce  them),  while  number 
[5]  does  not?  Nothing  is  said  about  this.  Yet 
whether  present  or  not  present  in  the  com¬ 
pound  the  contrary  destroys  it,  e.g.  ‘strife’  de¬ 
stroys  the  ‘mixture’1  (yet  it  should  not;  for  it 
is  not  to  that  that  it  is  contrary). 

Once  more,  it  has  not  been  determined  at  all 
in  which  way  numbers  are  the  causes  of  sub¬ 
stances  and  of  being — whether  (1)  as  bound¬ 
aries  (as  points  are  of  spatial  magnitudes). 
[70]  This  is  how  Eurytus  decided  what  was 
the  number  of  what  (e.g.  one  of  man  and  an¬ 
other  of  horse),  viz.  by  imitating  the  figures 
of  living  things  with  pebbles,  as  some  people 
bring  numbers  into  the  forms  of  triangle  and 
square.  Or  (2)  is  it  because  harmony  is  a  ratio 
[75]  of  numbers,  and  so  is  man  and  every¬ 
thing  else?  But  how  are  the  attributes — white 
and  sweet  and  hot — numbers?  Evidently  it  is 
not  the  numbers  that  are  the  essence  or  the 
causes  of  the  form;  for  the  ratio  is  the  essence, 
while  the  number  is  the  matter.  E.g.  the  es¬ 
sence  of  flesh  or  bone  is  number  only  in  this 
way,  ‘three  parts  of  fire  and  two  of  earth’.2 
And  a  number,  whatever  number  it  is,  is  al¬ 
ways  a  number  of  certain  things,  either  of 

farts  of  fire  or  earth  or  of  units;  but  the  es- 
20]  sence  is  that  there  is  so  much  of  one 
thing  to  so  much  of  another  in  the  mixture; 
and  this  is  no  longer  a  number  but  a  ratio  of 
mixture  of  numbers,  whether  these  are  cor¬ 
poreal  or  of  any  other  kind. 

Number,  then,  whether  it  be  number  in  gen¬ 
eral  or  the  number  which  consists  of  abstract 
units,  is  neither  the  cause  as  agent,  nor  the  mat¬ 
ter,  nor  the  ratio  and  form  of  things.  Nor,  of 
[25]  course,  is  it  the  final  cause. 

6 

One  might  also  raise  the  question  what  the 
good  is  that  things  get  from  numbers  because 
their  composition  is  expressible  by  a  number, 
either  by  one  which  is  easily  calculable  or  by 
an  odd  number.  For  in  fact  honey-water  is  no 
more  wholesome  if  it  is  mixed  in  the  propor¬ 
tion  of  three  times  three,  but  it  would  do  more 
good  if  it  were  in  no  particular  ratio  but  well 
diluted  than  if  it  were  numerically  expressible 
[30]  but  strong.  Again,  the  ratios  of  mixtures 
are  expressed  by  the  adding  of  numbers,  not 

1  Cf.  Empedocles,  Fr.  17. 

2  Cf.  Empedocles,  Fr.  96. 


626 

by  mere  numbers;  e.g.  it  is  ‘three  parts  to  two’, 
not  ‘three  times  two’.  For  in  any  multiplica¬ 
tion  the  genus  of  the  things  multiplied  must  be 
the  same;  therefore  the  product  1x2x3  must  be 
measurable  by  1,  and  4x5x6  by  4,  and  therefore 
all  products  into  which  the  same  factor  enters 
[35]  must  be  measurable  by  that  factor.  The 
number  of  fire,  then,  cannot  be  2X5X3X6,  and 
at  the  same  time  that  of  water  2x3. 

1093a  If  all  things  must  share  in  number,  it 
must  follow  that  many  things  are  the  same, 
and  the  same  number  must  belong  to  one  thing 
and  to  another.  Is  number  the  cause,  then,  and 
does  the  thing  exist  because  of  its  number,  or 
is  this  not  certain?  E.g.  the  motions  of  the  sun 
[5]  have  a  number,  and  again  those  of  the 
moon, — yes,  and  the  life  and  prime  of  each 
animal.  Why,  then,  should  not  some  of  these 
numbers  be  squares,  some  cubes,  and  some 
equal,  others  double?  There  is  no  reason  why 
they  should  not,  and  indeed  they  must  move 
within  these  limits,  since  all  things  were  as¬ 
sumed  to  share  in  number.  And  it  was  assumed 
that  things  that  differed  might  fall  under  the 
[/o]  same  number.  Therefore  if  the  same  num¬ 
ber  had  belonged  to  certain  things,  these  would 
have  been  the  same  as  one  another,  since  they 
would  have  had  the  same  form  of  number; 
e.g.  sun  and  moon  would  have  been  the  same. 
But  why  need  these  numbers  be  causes?  There 
are  seven  vowels,  the  scale  consists  of  seven 
strings,  the  Pleiades  are  seven,  at  seven  animals 
lose  their  teeth  (at  least  some  do,  though  some 
[75]  do  not),  and  the  champions  who  fought 
against  Thebes  were  seven.  Is  it  then  because 
the  number  is  the  kind  of  number  it  is,  that 
the  champions  were  seven  or  the  Pleiad  consists 
of  seven  stars?  Surely  the  champions  were 
seven  because  there  were  seven  gates  or  for 
some  other  reason,  and  the  Pleiad  we  count  as 
seven,  as  we  count  the  Bear  as  twelve,  while 
other  peoples  count  more  stars  in  both.  Nay, 
[20]  they  even  say  that  S,  and  Z  are 
concords  and  that  because  there  are  three  con¬ 
cords,  the  double  consonants  also  are  three. 
They  quite  neglect  the  fact  that  there  might  be 
a  thousand  such  letters;  for  one  symbol  might 
be  assigned  to  TP.  But  if  they  say  that  each  of 
these  three  is  equal  to  two  of  the  other  letters, 
and  no  other  is  so,  and  if  the  cause  is  that 
there  are  three  parts  of  the  mouth  and  one 
letter  is  in  each  applied  to  sigma,  it  is  for  this 
reason  that  there  are  only  three,  not  because 
[25]  the  concords  are  three;  since  as  a  matter 
of  fact  the  concords  are  more  than  three,  but 
of  double  consonants  there  cannot  be  more. 


1093b 

These  people  are  like  the  old-fashioned  Ho¬ 
meric  scholars,  who  see  small  resemblances  but 
neglect  great  ones.  Some  say  that  there  are 
many  such  cases,  e.g.  that  the  middle  strings 
[30]  are  represented  by  nine  and  eight,  and 
that  the  epic  verse  has  seventeen  syllables, 
which  is  equal  in  number  to  the  two  strings, 
and  that  the  scansion  is,  in  the  right  half  of 
1093b  the  line  nine  syllables,  and  in  the  left 
eight.  And  they  say  that  the  distance  in  the 
letters  from  alpha  to  omega  is  equal  to  that 
from  the  lowest  note  of  the  flute  to  the  highest, 
and  that  the  number  of  this  note  is  equal  to 
[5]  that  of  the  whole  choir  of  heaven.  It  may 
be  suspected  that  no  one  could  find  difficulty 
either  in  stating  such  analogies  or  in  finding 
them  in  eternal  things,  since  they  can  be  found 
even  in  perishable  things. 

But  the  lauded  characteristics  of  numbers, 
and  the  contraries  of  these,  and  generally  the 
mathematical  relations,  as  some  describe  them, 
making  them  causes  of  nature,  seem,  when  we 
[/o]  inspect  them  in  this  way,  to  vanish;  for 
none  of  them  is  a  cause  in  any  of  the  senses 
that  have  been  distinguished  in  reference  to 
the  first  principles.1  In  a  sense,  however,  they 
make  it  plain  that  goodness  belongs  to  num¬ 
bers,  and  that  the  odd,  the  straight,  the  square, 
the  potencies  of  certain  numbers,  are  in  the 
column  of  the  beautiful.  For  the  seasons  and  a 
articular  kind  of  number  go  together;  and 
75]  the  other  agreements  that  they  collect 
from  the  theorems  of  mathematics  all  have 
this  meaning.  Hence  they  are  like  coincidences. 
For  they  are  accidents,  but  the  things  that 
agree  are  all  appropriate  to  one  another,  and 
one  by  analogy.  For  in  each  category  of  being 
an  analogous  term  is  found — as  the  straight  is 
[20]  in  length,  so  is  the  level  in  surface,  per¬ 
haps  the  odd  in  number,  and  the  white  in 
colour. 

Again,  it  is  not  the  ideal  numbers  that  are 
the  causes  of  musical  phenomena  and  the  like 
(for  equal  ideal  numbers  differ  from  one  an¬ 
other  in  form;  for  even  the  units  do);  so  that 
we  need  not  assume  Ideas  for  this  reason  at 
least. 

These,  then,  are  the  results  of  the  theory,  and 
[25]  yet  more  might  be  brought  together.  The 
fact  that  our  opponnts  have  much  trouble  with 
the  generation  of  numbers  and  can  in  no  way 
make  a  system  of  them,  seems  to  indicate  that 
the  objects  of  mathematics  are  not  separable 
from  sensible  things,  as  some  say,  and  that 
they  are  not  the  first  principles. 
lCf.  V.  1,2. 


METAPHYSICS 


ON  THE  SOUL 


. 


■ 


' 


CONTENTS:  ON  THE  SOUL 


BOOK  I 

CHAP.  BERLIN  NOS. 

1.  The  dignity,  usefulness,  and  diffi-  402s  1 
culty  of  Psychology 

2.  The  opinions  of  early  thinkers  403k  20 
about  the  soul 

3.  Refutation  of  the  view  which  as-  405b32 
signs  movement  to  the  soul 

4.  The  soul  not  a  harmony  407b  27 

(407b  27-408*  34) 

The  soul  not  moved  with  non-local  movement 
(408s  34~4o8b  29) 

The  soul  not  a  self-moving  number  (4o8b  30- 

5.  409b  18) 

5.  The  soul  not  composed  of  409s  31 

elements  (409b  19-41  ia  7) 

The  soul  not  present  in  all  things  (41  ia  7-23) 
The  unity  of  the  soul  (41  ia  24-41  ib  30) 


BOOK  II 


1.  First  definition  of  soul 

4I2a  1 

2.  Second  definition  of  soul 

4i3a  11 

3.  The  faculties  of  the  soul 

4Ma  27 

4.  The  nutritive  faculty 

4i5a  14 

5.  Sense-perception 

4i6b  32 

6.  The  different  kinds  of  sensible 

4i8a6 

object 

7.  Sight  and  its  object 

418®  26 

8.  Hearing  and  its  object  4i9b  3 

9.  Smell  and  its  object  421s  6 

10.  Taste  and  its  object  422s  8 

11.  Touch  and  its  object  422b  17 

12.  General  characteristics  of  the  ex-  424s  16 
ternal  senses 

BOOK  III 

1-2.  The  number  of  the  external  424b  20 

senses  (424b  20-2.  426b  7) 

2.  Common  sense  (426b  8-427a  16)  425bn 

3.  Thinking,  perceiving,  and  imagin-  427s1 16 

ing  distinguished  (42 7a  i7~427b26) 
Imagination  (427b  27~429a  9) 

4.  Passive  mind  429s  10 

5.  Active  mind  43oa  10 

6.  The  double  operation  of  mind  43oa26 

7.  The  practical  mind,  and  the  differ-  43 ia  1 
ence  between  it  and  the  contemplative 

8.  Comparison  of  mind  with  sense  43 ib  20 
and  with  imagination 

9.  Problems  about  the  motive  faculty  432s  15 

10.  The  cause  of  the  movement  of  liv-  433s  8 
ing  things 

11.  ( Continued )  433b3i 

12.  The  mutual  relations  of  the  facul-  434s  23 

ties  of  soul,  and  their  fitness  for  the  conditions 
of  life 

13.  ( Continued )  435s  11 


629 


ON  THE  SOUL 

BOOK  I 


402a  Holding  as  we  do  that,  while  knowledge 
of  any  kind  is  a  thing  to  be  honoured  and 
prized,  one  kind  of  it  may,  either  by  reason  of 
its  greater  exactness  or  of  a  higher  dignity  and 
greater  wonderfulness  in  its  objects,  be  more 
honourable  and  precious  than  another,  on  both 
accounts  we  should  naturally  be  led  to  place  in 
the  front  rank  the  study  of  the  soul.  The 
knowledge  of  the  soul  admittedly  contributes 
[5]  greatly  to  the  advance  of  truth  in  general, 
and,  above  all,  to  our  understanding  of  Nature, 
for  the  soul  is  in  some  sense  the  principle  of 
animal  life.  Our  aim  is  to  grasp  and  under¬ 
stand,  first  its  essential  nature,  and  secondly  its 
properties;  of  these  some  are  taught  to  be  af¬ 
fections  proper  to  the  soul  itself,  while  others 
are  considered  to  attach  to  the  animal  owing 
to  the  presence  within  it  of  soul. 

[/o]  To  attain  any  assured  knowledge  about 
the  soul  is  one  of  the  most  difficult  things  in 
the  world.  As  the  form  of  question  which  here 
presents  itself,  viz.  the  question  ‘What  is  it?’, 
recurs  in  other  fields,  it  might  be  supposed  that 
there  was  some  single  method  of  inquiry  ap- 
licable  to  all  objects  whose  essential  nature 
75]  we  are  endeavouring  to  ascertain  (as 
there  is  for  derived  properties  the  single  meth¬ 
od  of  demonstration);  in  that  case  what  we 
should  have  to  seek  for  would  be  this  unique 
method.  But  if  there  is  no  such  single  and  gen¬ 
eral  method  for  solving  the  question  of  essence, 
our  task  becomes  still  more  difficult;  in  the 
case  of  each  different  subject  we  shall  have  to 
determine  the  appropriate  process  of  investiga¬ 
tion.  If  to  this  there  be  a  clear  answer,  e.g.  that 
the  process  is  demonstration  or  division,  or 
[20]  some  other  known  method,  difficulties 
and  hesitations  still  beset  us — with  what  facts 
shall  we  begin  the  inquiry?  For  the  facts  which 
form  the  starting-points  in  different  subjects 
must  be  different,  as  e.g.  in  the  case  of  num¬ 
bers  and  surfaces. 

Note:  The  bold  face  numbers  and  letters  are  approxi¬ 
mate  indications  of  the  pages  and  columns  of  the  stand¬ 
ard  Berlin  Greek  text;  the  bracketed  numbers,  of  the 
lines  in  the  Greek  text;  they  are  here  assigned  as  they 
are  assigned  in  the  Oxford  translation. 


First,  no  doubt,  it  is  necessary  to  determine 
in  which  of  the  summa  genera  soul  lies,  what 
it  is;  is  it  ‘a  this-somewhat,’  a  substance,  or  is  it 
a  quale  or  a  quantum,  or  some  other  of  the 
remaining  kinds  of  predicates  which  we  have 
[25]  distinguished?  Further,  does  soul  belong 
to  the  class  of  potential  existents,  or  is  it  not 
rather  an  actuality?  Our  answer  to  this  ques¬ 
tion  is  of  the  greatest  importance. 

402b  We  must  consider  also  whether  soul  is 
divisible  or  is  without  parts,  and  whether  it  is 
everywhere  homogeneous  or  not;  and  if  not 
homogeneous,  whether  its  various  forms  are 
different  specifically  or  generically:  up  to  the 
present  time  those  who  have  discussed  and  in¬ 
vestigated  soul  seem  to  have  confined  them- 
[5]  selves  to  the  human  soul.  We  must  be  care¬ 
ful  not  to  ignore  the  question  whether  soul  can 
be  defined  in  a  single  unambiguous  formula, 
as  is  the  case  with  animal,  or  whether  we  must 
not  give  a  separate  formula  for  each  sort  of  it, 
as  we  do  for  horse,  dog,  man,  god  (in  the  latter 
case  the  ‘universal’  animal — and  so  too  every 
other  ‘common  predicate’ — being  treated  ei¬ 
ther  as  nothing  at  all  or  as  a  later  product). 
Further,  if  what  exists  is  not  a  plurality  of  souls, 
but  a  plurality  of  parts  of  one  soul,  which 
ought  we  to  investigate  first,  the  whole  soul  or 
[/o]  its  parts?  (It  is  also  a  difficult  problem  to 
decide  which  of  these  parts  are  in  nature  dis¬ 
tinct  from  one  another.)  Again,  which  ought 
we  to  investigate  first,  these  parts  or  their  func¬ 
tions,  mind  or  thinking,  the  faculty  or  the  act 
of  sensation,  and  so  on?  If  the  investigation  of 
the  functions  precedes  that  of  the  parts,  the 
further  question  suggests  itself:  ought  we  not 
before  either  to  consider  the  correlative  objects, 
[/ 5]  e.g.  of  sense  or  thought?  It  seems  not  only 
useful  for  the  discovery  of  the  causes  of  the 
derived  properties  of  substances  to  be  acquaint¬ 
ed  with  the  essential  nature  of  those  substances 
(as  in  mathematics  it  is  useful  for  the  under¬ 
standing  of  the  property  of  the  equality  of  the 
[20]  interior  angles  of  a  triangle  to  two  right 
angles  to  know  the  essential  nature  of  the 
straight  and  the  curved  or  of  the  line  and  the 
plane)  but  also  conversely,  for  the  knowledge 
of  the  essential  nature  of  a  substance  is  largely 
promoted  by  an  acquaintance  with  its  proper- 


632  ON  THE  SOUL  403b 


ties:  for,  when  we  are  able  to  give  an  account 
conformable  to  experience  of  all  or  most  of  the 
properties  of  a  substance,  we  shall  be  in  the 
most  favourable  position  to  say  something 
worth  saying  about  the  essential  nature  of  that 
[25]  subject;  in  all  demonstration  a  definition 
of  the  essence  is  required  as  a  starting-point,  so 
that  definitions  which  do  not  enable  us  to  dis¬ 
cover  the  derived  properties,  or  which  fail  to 
403a  facilitate  even  a  conjecture  about  them, 
must  obviously,  one  and  all,  be  dialectical  and 
futile. 

A  further  problem  presented  by  the  affec¬ 
tions  of  soul  is  this:  are  they  all  affections  of  the 
complex  of  body  and  soul,  or  is  there  any  one 
among  them  peculiar  to  the  soul  by  itself?  To 
determine  this  is  indispensable  but  difficult.  If 
[5]  we  consider  the  majority  of  them,  there 
seems  to  be  no  case  in  which  the  soul  can  act 
or  be  acted  upon  without  involving  the  body; 
e.g.  anger,  courage,  appetite,  and  sensation 
generally.  Thinking  seems  the  most  probable 
exception;  but  if  this  too  proves  to  be  a  form  of 
imagination  or  to  be  impossible  without  imagi¬ 
nation,  it  too  requires  a  body  as  a  condition  of 
[10]  its  existence.  If  there  is  any  way  of  acting 
or  being  acted  upon  proper  to  soul,  soul  will  be 
capable  of  separate  existence;  if  there  is  none, 
its  separate  existence  is  impossible.  In  the  latter 
case,  it  will  be  like  what  is  straight,  which  has 
many  properties  arising  from  the  straightness 
in  it,  e.g.  that  of  touching  a  bronze  sphere  at  a 
point,  though  straightness  divorced  from  the 
other  constituents  of  the  straight  thing  cannot 
touch  it  in  this  way;  it  cannot  be  so  divorced  at 
[75]  all,  since  it  is  always  found  in  a  body.  It 
therefore  seems  that  all  the  affections  of  soul 
involve  a  body — passion,  gentleness,  fear,  pity, 
courage,  joy,  loving,  and  hating;  in  all  these 
there  is  a  concurrent  affection  of  the  body.  In 
support  of  this  we  may  point  to  the  fact  that, 
while  sometimes  on  the  occasion  of  violent 
and  striking  occurrences  there  is  no  excite- 
[20]  ment  or  fear  felt,  on  others  faint  and 
feeble  stimulations  produce  these  emotions, 
viz.  when  the  body  is  already  in  a  state  of 
tension  resembling  its  condition  when  we  are 
angry.  Here  is  a  still  clearer  case:  in  the  ab¬ 
sence  of  any  external  cause  of  terror  we  find 
ourselves  experiencing  the  feelings  of  a  man 
in  terror.  From  all  this  it  is  obvious  that  the 
affections  of  soul  are  enmattered  formulable 
essences. 

[25]  Consequently  their  definitions  ought  to 
correspond,  e.g.  anger  should  be  defined  as  a 


certain  mode  of  movement  of  such  and  such  a 
body  (or  part  or  faculty  of  a  body)  by  this  or 
that  cause  and  for  this  or  that  end.  That  is  pre¬ 
cisely  why  the  study  of  the  soul  must  fall  with¬ 
in  the  science  of  Nature,  at  least  so  far  as  in  its 
affections  it  manifests  this  double  character. 
Hence  a  physicist  would  define  an  affection  of 
[30]  soul  differently  from  a  dialectician;  the 
latter  would  define  e.g.  anger  as  the  appetite 
for  returning  pain  for  pain,  or  something  like 
that,  while  the  former  would  define  it  as  a  boil¬ 
ing  of  the  blood  or  warm  substance  surround- 
403b  ing  the  heart.  The  latter  assigns  the 
material  conditions,  the  former  the  form  or 
formulable  essence;  for  what  he  states  is  the 
formulable  essence  of  the  fact,  though  for  its 
actual  existence  there  must  be  embodiment  of  it 
in  a  material  such  as  is  described  by  the  other. 
Thus  the  essence  of  a  house  is  assigned  in  such 
a  formula  as  ‘a  shelter  against  destruction  by 
[5]  wind,  rain,  and  heat’;  the  physicist  would 
describe  it  as  ‘stones,  bricks,  and  timbers’;  but 
there  is  a  third  possible  description  which 
would  say  that  it  was  that  form  in  that  mate¬ 
rial  with  that  purpose  or  end.  Which,  then, 
among  these  is  entitled  to  be  regarded  as  the 
genuine  physicist?  The  one  who  confines  him¬ 
self  to  the  material,  or  the  one  who  restricts 
himself  to  the  formulable  essence  alone?  Is  it 
not  rather  the  one  who  combines  both  in  a  sin¬ 
gle  formula?  If  this  is  so,  how  are  we  to  char¬ 
acterize  the  other  two?  Must  we  not  say  that 
there  is  no  type  of  thinker  who  concerns  him¬ 
self  with  those  qualities  or  attributes  of  the 
material  which  are  in  fact  inseparable  from  the 
material,  and  without  attempting  even  in 
[/o]  thought  to  separate  them?  The  physicist 
is  he  who  concerns  himself  with  all  the  prop¬ 
erties  active  and  passive  of  bodies  or  materials 
thus  or  thus  defined;  attributes  not  considered 
as  being  of  this  character  he  leaves  to  others,  in 
certain  cases  it  may  be  to  a  specialist,  e.g.  a  car¬ 
penter  or  a  physician,  in  others  (a)  where  they 
are  inseparable  in  fact,  but  are  separable  from 
any  particular  kind  of  body  by  an  effort  of  ab- 
[75]  straction,  to  the  mathematician,  ( b ) 
where  they  are  separate  both  in  fact  and  in 
thought  from  body  altogether,  to  the  First 
Philosopher  or  metaphysician.  But  we  must  re¬ 
turn  from  this  digression,  and  repeat  that  the 
affections  of  soul  are  inseparable  from  the  ma¬ 
terial  substratum  of  animal  life,  to  which  we 
have  seen  that  such  affections,  e.g.  passion  and 
fear,  attach,  and  have  not  the  same  mode  of 
being  as  a  line  or  a  plane. 


404b 


BOOK  I,  CHAPTERS  1-2  633 


2 

[20]  For  our  study  of  soul  it  is  necessary,  while 
formulating  the  problems  of  which  in  our  fur¬ 
ther  advance  we  are  to  find  the  solutions,  to 
call  into  council  the  views  of  those  of  our  pred¬ 
ecessors  who  have  declared  any  opinion  on  this 
subject,  in  order  that  we  may  profit  by  what¬ 
ever  is  sound  in  their  suggestions  and  avoid 
their  errors. 

The  starting-point  of  our  inquiry  is  an  ex¬ 
position  of  those  characteristics  which  have 
chiefly  been  held  to  belong  to  soul  in  its  very 
[25]  nature.  Two  characteristic  marks  have 
above  all  others  been  recognized  as  distinguish¬ 
ing  that  which  has  soul  in  it  from  that  which 
has  not — movement  and  sensation.  It  may  be 
said  that  these  two  are  what  our  predecessors 
have  fixed  upon  as  characteristic  of  soul. 

Some  say  that  what  originates  movement  is 
both  pre-eminently  and  primarily  soul;  believ¬ 
ing  that  what  is  not  itself  moved  cannot  origi- 
[jo]  nate  movement  in  another,  they  arrived 
at  the  view  that  soul  belongs  to  the  class  of 
things  in  movement.  This  is  what  led  Democ¬ 
ritus  to  say  that  soul  is  a  sort  of  fire  or  hot  sub- 
404*  stance;  his  ‘forms’  or  atoms  are  infinite 
in  number;  those  which  are  spherical  he  calls 
fire  and  soul,  and  compares  them  to  the  motes 
in  the  air  which  we  see  in  shafts  of  light  com¬ 
ing  through  windows;  the  mixture  of  seeds  of 
all  sorts  he  calls  the  elements  of  the  whole  of 
[5]  Nature  (Leucippus  gives  a  similar  ac¬ 
count);  the  spherical  atoms  are  identified  with 
soul  because  atoms  of  that  shape  are  most 
adapted  to  permeate  everywhere,  and  to  set  all 
the  others  moving  by  being  themselves  in 
movement.  This  implies  the  view  that  soul  is 
identical  with  what  produces  movement  in 
animals.  That  is  why,  further,  they  regard  res- 
[/o]  piration  as  the  characteristic  mark  of  life; 
as  the  environment  compresses  the  bodies  of 
animals,  and  tends  to  extrude  those  atoms 
which  impart  movement  to  them,  because  they 
themselves  are  never  at  rest,  there  must  be  a 
reinforcement  of  these  by  similar  atoms  com¬ 
ing  in  from  without  in  the  act  of  respiration; 
for  they  prevent  the  extrusion  of  those  which 
are  already  within  by  counteracting  the  com¬ 
pressing  and  consolidating  force  of  the  en¬ 
vironment;  and  animals  continue  to  live  only 
[75]  so  long  as  they  are  able  to  maintain  this 
resistance. 

The  doctrine  of  the  Pythagoreans  seems  to 
rest  upon  the  same  ideas;  some  of  them  de¬ 


clared  the  motes  in  air,  others  what  moved 
them,  to  be  soul.  These  motes  were  referred  to 
because  they  are  seen  always  in  movement, 
even  in  a  complete  calm. 

[20]  The  same  tendency  is  shown  by  those 
who  define  soul  as  that  which  moves  itself;  all 
seem  to  hold  the  view  that  movement  is  what 
is  closest  to  the  nature  of  soul,  and  that  while 
all  else  is  moved  by  soul,  it  alone  moves  itself. 
This  belief  arises  from  their  never  seeing  any¬ 
thing  originating  movement  which  is  not  first 
itself  moved. 

[25]  Similarly  also  Anaxagoras  (and  whoever 
agrees  with  him  in  saying  that  mind  set  the 
whole  in  movement)  declares  the  moving 
cause  of  things  to  be  soul.  His  position  must, 
however,  be  distinguished  from  that  of  De¬ 
mocritus.  Democritus  roundly  identifies  soul 
and  mind,  for  he  identifies  what  appears  with 
what  is  true — that  is  why  he  commends  Ho¬ 
mer  for  the  phrase  ‘Hector  lay  with  thought 
[jo]  distraught’1;  he  does  not  employ  mind  as 
a  special  faculty  dealing  with  truth,  but  identi- 
404b  fies  soul  and  mind.  What  Anaxagoras 
says  about  them  is  more  obscure;  in  many 
places  he  tells  us  that  the  cause  of  beauty  and 
order  is  mind,  elsewhere  that  it  is  soul;  it  is 
found,  he  says,  in  all  animals,  great  and  small, 
[5]  high  and  low,  but  mind  (in  the  sense  of 
intelligence)  appears  not  to  belong  alike  to  all 
animals,  and  indeed  not  even  to  all  human  be¬ 
ings. 

All  those,  then,  who  had  special  regard  to  the 
fact  that  what  has  soul  in  it  is  moved,  adopted 
the  view  that  soul  is  to  be  identified  with  what 
is  eminently  originative  of  movement.  All,  on 
the  other  hand,  who  looked  to  the  fact  that 
what  has  soul  in  it  knows  or  perceives  what  is, 
identify  soul  with  the  principle  or  principles 
[/o]  of  Nature,  according  as  they  admit  sev¬ 
eral  such  principles  or  one  only.  Thus  Em¬ 
pedocles  declares  that  it  is  formed  out  of  all  his 
elements,  each  of  them  also  being  soul;  his 
words  are: 

For  ’tis  by  Earth  we  see  Earth ,  by  Water 
Water, 

By  Ether  Ether  divine,  by  Fire  destructive 
Fire, 

[  75]  By  Love  Love,  and  Hate  by  cruel  Hate } 

In  the  same  way  Plato  in  the  Timaeusz  fash¬ 
ions  the  soul  out  of  his  elements;  for  like,  he 
holds,  is  known  by  like,  and  things  are  formed 
out  of  the  principles  or  elements,  so  that  soul 

1  Iliad ,  xxiii.  698.  2  Fr.  109,  Diels.  3  35  ff. 


634  ON  THE  SOUL  405b 


must  be  so  too.  Similarly  also  in  his  lectures 
‘On  Philosophy’  it  was  set  forth  that  the 
[20]  Animal-itself  is  compounded  of  the  Idea 
itself  of  the  One  together  with  the  primary 
length,  breadth,  and  depth,  everything  else,  the 
objects  of  its  perception,  being  similarly  consti¬ 
tuted.  Again  he  puts  his  view  in  yet  other 
terms:  Mind  is  the  monad,  science  or  knowl¬ 
edge  the  dyad  (because  it  goes  undeviatingly 
from  one  point  to  another),  opinion  the  num¬ 
ber  of  the  plane,  sensation  the  number  of  the 
solid;  the  numbers  are  by  him  expressly  identi¬ 
fied  with  the  Forms  themselves  or  principles, 
and  are  formed  out  of  the  elements;  now 
[25]  things  are  apprehended  either  by  mind  or 
science  or  opinion  or  sensation,  and  these  same 
numbers  are  the  Forms  of  things. 

Some  thinkers,  accepting  both  premisses, 
viz.  that  the  soul  is  both  originative  of  move¬ 
ment  and  cognitive,  have  compounded  it  of 
both  and  declared  the  soul  to  be  a  self-moving 
number. 

[30]  As  to  the  nature  and  number  of  the  first 
principles  opinions  differ.  The  difference  is 
greatest  between  those  who  regard  them  as 
corporeal  and  those  who  regard  them  as  incor- 
405a  poreal,  and  from  both  dissent  those  who 
make  a  blend  and  draw  their  principles  from 
both  sources.  The  number  of  principles  is  also 
in  dispute;  some  admit  one  only,  others  assert 
several.  There  is  a  consequent  diversity  in  their 
several  accounts  of  soul;  they  assume,  naturally 
enough,  that  what  is  in  its  own  nature  origi¬ 
native  of  movement  must  be  among  what  is 
[5]  primordial.  That  has  led  some  to  regard  it 
as  fire,  for  fire  is  the  subtlest  of  the  elements 
and  nearest  to  incorporeality;  further,  in  the 
most  primary  sense,  fire  both  is  moved  and 
originates  movement  in  all  the  others. 

Democritus  has  expressed  himself  more  in¬ 
geniously  than  the  rest  on  the  grounds  for 
ascribing  each  of  these  two  characters  to  soul; 
soul  and  mind  are,  he  says,  one  and  the  same 
[/o]  thing,  and  this  thing  must  be  one  of  the 
primary  and  indivisible  bodies,  and  its  power 
of  originating  movement  must  be  due  to  its 
fineness  of  grain  and  the  shape  of  its  atoms; 
he  says  that  of  all  the  shapes  the  spherical  is 
the  most  mobile,  and  that  this  is  the  shape  of 
the  particles  of  both  fire  and  mind. 

Anaxagoras,  as  we  said  above,1  seems  to  dis¬ 
tinguish  between  soul  and  mind,  but  in  prac¬ 
tice  he  treats  them  as  a  single  substance,  except 
[75]  that  it  is  mind  that  he  specially  posits  as 
the  principle  of  all  things;  at  any  rate  what  he 
1 4ob  1-6. 


says  is  that  mind  alone  of  all  that  is  is  simple, 
unmixed,  and  pure.  He  assigns  both  character¬ 
istics,  knowing  and  origination  of  movement, 
to  the  same  principle,  when  he  says  that  it  was 
mind  that  set  the  whole  in  movement. 

Thales,  too,  to  judge  from  what  is  recorded 
about  him,  seems  to  have  held  soul  to  be  a  mo- 
[20]  tive  force,  since  he  said  that  the  magnet 
has  a  soul  in  it  because  it  moves  the  iron. 

Diogenes  (and  others)  held  the  soul  to  be  air 
because  he  believed  air  to  be  finest  in  grain  and 
a  first  principle;  therein  lay  the  grounds  of  the 
soul’s  powers  of  knowing  and  originating 
movement.  As  the  primordial  principle  from 
which  all  other  things  are  derived,  it  is  cogni¬ 
tive;  as  finest  in  grain,  it  has  the  power  to  origi¬ 
nate  movement. 

[25]  Heraclitus  too  says  that  the  first  princi¬ 
ple — the  ‘warm  exhalation’  of  which,  accord¬ 
ing  to  him,  everything  else  is  composed — is 
soul;  further,  that  this  exhalation  is  most  in¬ 
corporeal  and  in  ceaseless  flux;  that  what  is  in 
movement  requires  that  what  knows  it  should 
be  in  movement;  and  that  all  that  is  has  its  be¬ 
ing  essentially  in  movement  (herein  agreeing 
with  the  majority). 

Alcmaeon  also  seems  to  have  held  a  similar 
[30]  view  about  soul;  he  says  that  it  is  immor¬ 
tal  because  it  resembles  ‘the  immortals/  and 
that  this  immortality  belongs  to  it  in  virtue  of 
its  ceaseless  movement;  for  all  the  ‘things  di¬ 
vine,’  moon,  sun,  the  planets,  and  the  whole 
heavens,  are  in  perpetual  movement. 

405b  Of  more  superficial  writers,  some,  e.g. 
Hippo,  have  pronounced  it  to  be  water;  they 
seem  to  have  argued  from  the  fact  that  the 
seed  of  all  animals  is  fluid,  for  Hippo  tries  to 
refute  those  who  say  that  the  soul  is  blood,  on 
the  ground  that  the  seed,  which  is  the  primor¬ 
dial  soul,  is  not  blood. 

[5]  Another  group  (Critias,  for  example)  did 
hold  it  to  be  blood;  they  take  perception  to  be 
the  most  characteristic  attribute  of  soul,  and 
hold  that  perceptiveness  is  due  to  the  nature 
of  blood. 

Each  of  the  elements  has  thus  found  its  par¬ 
tisan,  except  earth — earth  has  found  no  sup¬ 
porter  unless  we  count  as  such  those  who  have 
[/o]  declared  soul  to  be,  or  to  be  compounded 
of,  all  the  elements.  All,  then,  it  may  be  said, 
characterize  the  soul  by  three  marks,  Move¬ 
ment,  Sensation,  Incorporeality,  and  each  of 
these  is  traced  back  to  the  first  principles.  That 
is  why  (with  one  exception)  all  those  who  de¬ 
fine  the  soul  by  its  power  of  knowing  make  it 
either  an  element  or  constructed  out  of  the  ele- 


406b  BOOK  I,  CHAPTERS  2-3  635 


merits.  The  language  they  all  use  is  similar; 
[75]  like,  they  say,  is  known  by  like;  as  the 
soul  knows  everything,  they  construct  it  out  of 
all  the  principles.  Hence  all  those  who  admit 
but  one  cause  or  element,  make  the  soul  also 
one  (e.g.  fire  or  air),  while  those  who  admit  a 
multiplicity  of  principles  make  the  soul  also 
multiple.  The  exception  is  Anaxagoras;  he 
[20]  alone  says  that  mind  is  impassible  and  has 
nothing  in  common  with  anything  else.  But, 
if  this  is  so,  how  or  in  virtue  of  what  cause  can 
it  know?  That  Anaxagoras  has  not  explained, 
nor  can  any  answer  be  inferred  from  his 
words.  All  who  acknowledge  pairs  of  opposites 
among  their  principles,  construct  the  soul  also 
out  of  these  contraries,  while  those  who  admit 
as  principles  only  one  contrary  of  each  pair, 
[25]  e.g.  either  hot  or  cold,  likewise  make  the 
soul  some  one  of  these.  That  is  why,  also,  they 
allow  themselves  to  be  guided  by  the  names; 
those  who  identify  soul  with  the  hot  argue  that 
tfv  (to  live)  is  derived  from  $tiv  (to  boil), 
while  those  who  identify  it  with  the  cold  say 
that  soul  ( \pvxy  )  is  so  called  from  the  process 
of  respiration  and  refrigeration  ( /carditis  ). 
[30]  Such  are  the  traditional  opinions  con¬ 
cerning  soul,  together  with  the  grounds  on 
which  they  are  maintained. 

3 

We  must  begin  our  examination  with  move¬ 
ment;  for  doubtless,  not  only  is  it  false  that  the 
essence  of  soul  is  correctly  described  by  those 
40 6a  who  say  that  it  is  what  moves  (or  is  cap¬ 
able  of  moving)  itself,  but  it  is  an  impossibil¬ 
ity  that  movement  should -be  even  an  attribute 
of  it. 

We  have  already1  pointed  out  that  there*  is 
no  necessity  that  what  originates  movement 
should  itself  be  moved.  There  are  two  senses  in 
which  anything  may  be  moved — either  (a)  in¬ 
directly,  owing  to  something  other  than  itself, 
[5]  or  (^)  directly,  owing  to  itself.  Things  are 
‘indirectly  moved’  which  are  moved  as  being 
contained  in  something  which  is  moved,  e.g. 
sailors  in  a  ship,  for  they  are  moved  in  a  differ¬ 
ent  sense  from  that  in  which  the  ship  is  moved; 
the  ship  is  ‘directly  moved’,  they  are  ‘indi¬ 
rectly  moved’,  because  they  are  in  a  moving 
vessel.  This  is  clear  if  we  consider  their  limbs; 
the  movement  proper  to  the  legs  (and  so  to 
man)  is  walking,  and  in  this  case  the  sailors 
[/o]  are  not  walking.  Recognizing  the  double 
sense  of  ‘being  moved’,  what  we  have  to  con¬ 
sider  now  is  whether  the  soul  is  ‘directly 

1  Physics ,  viii.  5,  especially  257*  3i-258b  9. 


moved’  and  participates  in  such  direct  move¬ 
ment. 

There  are  four  species  of  movement — loco¬ 
motion,  alteration,  diminution,  growth;  con¬ 
sequently  if  the  soul  is  moved,  it  must  be 
moved  with  one  or  several  or  all  of  these  spe¬ 
cies  of  movement.  Now  if  its  movement  is  not 
[75]  incidental,  there  must  be  a  movement 
natural  to  it,  and,  if  so,  as  all  the  species  enu¬ 
merated  involve  place,  place  must  be  natural  to 
it.  But  if  the  essence  of  soul  be  to  move  itself, 
its  being  moved  cannot  be  incidental  to  it,  as 
it  is  to  what  is  white  or  three  cubits  long;  they 
too  can  be  moved,  but  only  incidentally — what 
is  moved  is  that  of  which  ‘white’  and  ‘three 
cubits  long’  are  the  attributes,  the  body  in 
[20]  which  they  inhere;  hence  they  have  no 
place:  but  if  the  soul  naturally  partakes  in 
movement,  it  follows  that  it  must  have  a  place. 

Further,  if  there  be  a  movement  natural  to 
the  soul,  there  must  be  a  counter-movement 
unnatural  to  it,  and  conversely.  The  same  ap¬ 
plies  to  rest  as  well  as  to  movement;  for  the 
terminus  ad  quem  of  a  thing’s  natural  move- 
[25]  ment  is  the  place  of  its  natural  rest,  and 
similarly  the  terminus  ad  quem  of  its  enforced 
movement  is  the  place  of  its  enforced  rest.  But 
what  meaning  can  be  attached  to  enforced 
movements  or  rests  of  the  soul,  it  is  difficult 
even  to  imagine. 

Further,  if  the  natural  movement  of  the  soul 
be  upward,  the  soul  must  be  fire;  if  downward, 
it  must  be  earth;  for  upward  and  downward 
movements  are  the  definitory  characteristics  of 
these  bodies.  The  same  reasoning  applies  to  the 
intermediate  movements,  termini,  and  bodies. 
[30]  Further,  since  the  soul  is  observed  to  orig¬ 
inate  movement  in  the  body,  it  is  reasonable  to 
suppose  that  it  transmits  to  the  body  the  move¬ 
ments  by  which  it  itself  is  moved,  and  so,  re¬ 
versing  the  order,  we  may  infer  from  the 
movements  of  the  body  back  to  similar  move- 
406b  ments  of  the  soul.  Now  the  body  is 
moved  from  place  to  place  with  movements  of 
locomotion.  Hence  it  would  follow  that  the 
soul  too  must  in  accordance  with  the  body 
change  either  its  place  as  a  whole  or  the  rela¬ 
tive  places  of  its  parts.  This  carries  with  it  the 
possibility  that  the  soul  might  even  quit  its 
body  and  re-enter  it,  and  with  this  would  be 
involved  the  possibility  of  a  resurrection  of  ani- 
[5]  mals  from  the  dead.  But,  it  may  be  con¬ 
tended,  the  soul  can  be  moved  indirectly  by 
something  else;  for  an  animal  can  be  pushed 
out  of  its  course.  Yes,  but  that  to  whose  essence 
belongs  the  power  of  being  moved  by  itself, 


636 

cannot  be  moved  by  something  else  except  in¬ 
cidentally,  just  as  what  is  good  by  or  in  itself 
cannot  owe  its  goodness  to  something  external 
to  it  or  to  some  end  to  which  it  is  a  means, 
[/o]  If  the  soul  is  moved,  the  most  probable 
view  is  that  what  moves  it  is  sensible  things. 

We  must  note  also  that,  if  the  soul  moves 
itself,  it  must  be  the  mover  itself  that  is  moved, 
so  that  it  follows  that  if  movement  is  in  every 
case  a  displacement  of  that  which  is  in  move¬ 
ment,  in  that  respect  in  which  it  is  said  to  be 
moved,  the  movement  of  the  soul  must  be  a 
departure  from  its  essential  nature,  at  least  if 
its  self-movement  is  essential  to  it,  not  inci¬ 
dental. 

[75]  Some  go  so  far  as  to  hold  that  the  move¬ 
ments  which  the  soul  imparts  to  the  body  in 
which  it  is  are  the  same  in  kind  as  those  with 
which  it  itself  is  moved.  An  example  of  this  is 
Democritus,  who  uses  language  like  that  of  the 
comic  dramatist  Philippus,  who  accounts  for 
the  movements  that  Daedalus  imparted  to  his 
wooden  Aphrodite  by  saying  that  he  poured 
quicksilver  into  it;  similarly  Democritus  says 
[20]  that  the  spherical  atoms  which  according 
to  him  constitute  soul,  owing  to  their  own 
ceaseless  movements  draw  the  whole  body  aft¬ 
er  them  and  so  produce  its  movements.  We 
must  urge  the  question  whether  it  is  these  very 
same  atoms  which  produce  rest  also — how 
they  could  do  so,  it  is  difficult  and  even  impos¬ 
sible  to  say.  And,  in  general,  we  may  object 
that  it  is  not  in  this  way  that  the  soul  appears 
[25]  to  originate  movement  in  animals — it  is 
through  intention  or  process  of  thinking. 

It  is  in  the  same  fashion  that  the  Timaeus1 
also  tries  to  give  a  physical  account  of  how  the 
soul  moves  its  body;  the  soul,  it  is  there  said,  is 
in  movement,  and  so  owing  to  their  mutual 
implication  moves  the  body  also.  After  com¬ 
pounding  the  soul-substance  out  of  the  ele¬ 
ments  and  dividing  it  in  accordance  with  the 
harmonic  numbers,  in  order  that  it  may  pos- 
[3o]  sess  a  connate  sensibility  for  ‘harmony’ 
and  that  the  whole  may  move  in  movements 
well  attuned,  the  Demiurge  bent  the  straight 
line  into  a  circle;  this  single  circle  he  divided 
into  two  circles  united  at  two  common  points; 
40 7a  one  of  these  he  subdivided  into  seven 
circles.  All  this  implies  that  the  movements  of 
the  soul  are  identified  with  the  local  move¬ 
ments  of  the  heavens. 

Now,  in  the  first  place,  it  is  a  mistake  to  say 
that  the  soul  is  a  spatial  magnitude.  It  is  evi¬ 
dent  that  Plato  means  the  soul  of  the  whole  to 


407* 

be  like  the  sort  of  soul  which  is  called  mind — 
[5]  not  like  the  sensitive  or  the  desiderative 
soul,  for  the  movements  of  neither  of  these  are 
circular.  Now  mind  is  one  and  continuous  in 
the  sense  in  which  the  process  of  thinking  is 
so,  and  thinking  is  identical  with  the  thoughts 
which  are  its  parts;  these  have  a  serial  unity 
like  that  of  number,  not  a  unity  like  that  of  a 
spatial  magnitude.  Hence  mind  cannot  have 
that  kind  of  unity  either;  mind  is  either  with¬ 
out  parts  or  is  continuous  in  some  other  way 
than  that  which  characterizes  a  spatial  magni¬ 
tude.  How,  indeed,  if  it  were  a  spatial  magni- 
[/o]  tude,  could  mind  possibly  think P  Will  it 
think  with  any  one  indifferently  of  its  parts? 
In  this  case,  the  ‘part’  must  be  understood  ei¬ 
ther  in  the  sense  of  a  spatial  magnitude  or  in 
the  sense  of  a  point  (if  a  point  can  be  called  a 
part  of  a  spatial  magnitude).  If  we  accept  the 
latter  alternative,  the  points  being  infinite  in 
number,  obviously  the  mind  can  never  exhaus¬ 
tively  traverse  them;  if  the  former,  the  mind 
must  think  the  same  thing  over  and  over  again, 
indeed  an  infinite  number  of  times  (whereas 
[75]  it  is  manifestly  possible  to  think  a  thing 
once  only).  If  contact  of  any  part  whatsoever  of 
itself  with  the  object  is  all  that  is  required, 
why  need  mind  move  in  a  circle,  or  indeed  pos¬ 
sess  magnitude  at  all?  On  the  other  hand,  if 
contact  with  the  whole  circle  is  necessary, 
what  meaning  can  be  given  to  the  contact  of  the 
parts?  Further,  how  could  what  has  no  parts 
think  what  has  parts,  or  what  has  parts  think 
what  has  none?  We  must  identify  the  circle 
referred  to  with  mind;  for  it  is  mind  whose 
[20]  movement  is  thinking,  and  it  is  the  circle 
whose  movement  is  revolution,  so  that  if  think¬ 
ing  is  a  movement  of  revolution,  the  circle 
which  has  this  characteristic  movement  must 
be  mind. 

If  the  circular  movement  is  eternal,  there 
must  be  something  which  mind  is  always 
thinking — what  can  this  be?  For  all  practical 
processes  of  thinking  have  limits — they  all  go 
on  for  the  sake  of  something  outside  the  proc¬ 
ess,  and  all  theoretical  processes  come  to  a 
close  in  the  same  way  as  the  phrases  in  speech 
which  express  processes  and  results  of  think- 
[25]  ing.  Every  such  linguistic  phrase  is  either 
definitory  or  demonstrative.  Demonstration 
has  both  a  starting-point  and  may  be  said  to 
end  in  a  conclusion  or  inferred  result;  even  if 
the  process  never  reaches  final  completion,  at 
any  rate  it  never  returns  upon  itself  again  to  its 
starting-point,  it  goes  on  assuming  a  fresh  mid¬ 
dle  term  or  a  fresh  extreme,  and  moves  straight 


ON  THE  SOUL 


BOOK  I,  CHAPTERS  3-4 


637 


408® 

forward,  but  circular  movement  returns  to  its 
[jo]  starting-point.  Definitions,  too,  are  closed 
groups  of  terms. 

Further,  if  the  same  revolution  is  repeat¬ 
ed,  mind  must  repeatedly  think  the  same 
object. 

Further,  thinking  has  more  resemblance  to 
a  coming  to  rest  or  arrest  than  to  a  movement; 
the  same  may  be  said  of  inferring. 

It  might  also  be  urged  that  what  is  difficult 
and  enforced  is  incompatible  with  blessedness; 
40 7b  if  the  movement  of  the  soul  is  not  of  its 
essence,  movement  of  the  soul  must  be  con¬ 
trary  to  its  nature.  It  must  also  be  painful  for 
the  soul  to  be  inextricably  bound  up  with  the 
body;  nay  more,  if,  as  is  frequently  said  and 
widely  accepted,  it  is  better  for  mind  not  to  be 
embodied,  the  union  must  be  for  it  undesir¬ 
able. 

[5]  Further,  the  cause  of  the  revolution  of  the 
heavens  is  left  obscure.  It  is  not  the  essence  of 
soul  which  is  the  cause  of  this  circular  move¬ 
ment — that  movement  is  only  incidental  to 
soul — nor  is,  a  fortiori ,  the  body  its  cause. 
Again,  it  is  not  even  asserted  that  it  is  better 
that  soul  should  be  so  moved;  and  yet  the  rea¬ 
son  for  which  God  caused  the  soul  to  move  in 
[/o]  a  circle  can  only  have  been  that  move¬ 
ment  was  better  for  it  than  rest,  and  movement 
of  this  kind  better  than  any  other.  But  since 
this  sort  of  consideration  is  more  appropriate 
to  another  field  of  speculation,  let  us  dismiss  it 
for  the  present. 

The  view  we  have  just  been  examining,  in 
company  with  most  theories  about  the  soul,  in¬ 
volves  the  following  absurdity:  they  all  join 
[75]  the  soul  to  a  body,  or  place  it  in  a  body, 
without  adding  any  specification  of  the  reason 
of  their  union,  or  of  the  bodily  conditions  re¬ 
quired  for  it.  Yet  such  explanation  can  scarce¬ 
ly  be  omitted;  for  some  community  of  nature 
is  presupposed  by  the  fact  that  the  one  acts  and 
the  other  is  acted  upon,  the  one  moves  and  the 
other  is  moved;  interaction  always  implies  a 
special  nature  in  the  two  interagents.  All,  how- 
[20]  ever,  that  these  thinkers  do  is  to  describe 
the  specific  characteristics  of  the  soul;  they  do 
not  try  to  determine  anything  about  the  body 
which  is  to  contain  it,  as  if  it  were  possible,  as 
in  the  Pythagorean  myths,  that  any  soul  could 
be  clothed  upon  with  any  body — an  absurd 
view,  for  each  body  seems  to  have  a  form  and 
shape  of  its  own.  It  is  as  absurd  as  to  say  that 
the  art  of  carpentry  could  embody  itself  in 
[25]  flutes;  each  art  must  use  its  tools,  each 
soul  its  body. 


4 

There  is  yet  another  theory  about  soul,  which 
has  commended  itself  to  many  as  no  less 
probable  than  any  of  those  we  have  hither¬ 
to  mentioned,  and  has  rendered  public  account 
[jo]  of  itself  in  the  court  of  popular  discus¬ 
sion.  Its  supporters  say  that  the  soul  is  a  kind 
of  harmony,  for  (a)  harmony  is  a  blend  or 
composition  of  contraries,  and  ( b )  the  body  is 
compounded  out  of  contraries.  Harmony, 
however,  is  a  certain  proportion  or  composition 
of  the  constituents  blended,  and  soul  can  be 
neither  the  one  nor  the  other  of  these.  Further, 
the  power  of  originating  movement  cannot  be¬ 
long  to  a  harmony,  while  almost  all  concur  in 
regarding  this  as  a  principal  attribute  of  soul. 
408a  It  is  more  appropriate  to  call  health  (or 
generally  one  of  the  good  states  of  the  body)  a 
harmony  than  to  predicate  it  of  the  soul.  The 
absurdity  becomes  most  apparent  when  we  try 
to  attribute  the  active  and  passive  affections  of 
the  soul  to  a  harmony;  the  necessary  readjust¬ 
ment  of  their  conceptions  is  difficult.  Further, 
[5]  in  using  the  word  ‘harmony’  we  have  one 
or  other  of  two  cases  in  our  mind;  the  most 
proper  sense  is  in  relation  to  spatial  magnitudes 
which  have  motion  and  position,  where  har¬ 
mony  means  the  disposition  and  cohesion  of 
their  parts  in  such  a  manner  as  to  prevent  the 
introduction  into  the  whole  of  anything  homo¬ 
geneous  with  it,  and  the  secondary  sense,  de¬ 
rived  from  the  former,  is  that  in  which  it 
means  the  ratio  between  the  constituents  so 
blended;  in  neither  of  these  senses  is  it  plausi- 
[/o]  ble  to  predicate  it  of  soul.  That  soul  is  a 
harmony  in  the  sense  of  the  mode  of  composi¬ 
tion  of  the  parts  of  the  body  is  a  view  easily 
refutable;  for  there  are  many  composite  parts 
and  those  variously  compounded;  of  what 
bodily  part  is  mind  or  the  sensitive  or  the  ap¬ 
petitive  faculty  the  mode  of  composition?  And 
what  is  the  mode  of  composition  which  con¬ 
stitutes  each  of  them?  It  is  equally  absurd  to 
identify  the  soul  with  the  ratio  of  the  mixture; 
[75]  for  the  mixture  which  makes  flesh  has  a 
different  ratio  between  the  elements  from  that 
which  makes  bone.  The  consequence  of  this 
view  will  therefore  be  that  distributed  through¬ 
out  the  whole  body  there  will  be  many  souls, 
since  every  one  of  the  bodily  parts  is  a  dif¬ 
ferent  mixture  of  the  elements,  and  the  ra¬ 
tio  of  mixture  is  in  each  case  a  harmony,  i.e. 
a  soul. 

From  Empedocles  at  any  rate  we  might  de¬ 
mand  an  answer  to  the  following  question — 


63 8  ON  THE  SOUL  409a 


for  he  says  that  each  of  the  parts  of  the  body 
is  what  it  is  in  virtue  of  a  ratio  between  the 
[20]  elements:  is  the  soul  identical  with  this 
ratio,  or  is  it  not  rather  something  over  and 
above  this  which  is  formed  in  the  parts?  Is 
love  the  cause  of  any  and  every  mixture,  or 
only  of  those  that  are  in  the  right  ratio?  Is 
love  this  ratio  itself,  or  is  love  something  over 
and  above  this?  Such  are  the  problems  raised 
by  this  account.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  if  the 
soul  is  different  from  the  mixture,  why  does  it 
[25]  disappear  at  one  and  the  same  moment 
with  that  relation  between  the  elements  which 
constitutes  flesh  or  the  other  parts  of  the  ani¬ 
mal  body?  Further,  if  the  soul  is  not  identical 
with  the  ratio  of  mixture,  and  it  is  conse¬ 
quently  not  the  case  that  each  of  the  parts  has 
a  soul,  what  is  that  which  perishes  when  the 
soul  quits  the  body? 

That  the  soul  cannot  either  be  a  harmony, 
or  be  moved  in  a  circle,  is  clear  from  what  we 
[30]  have  said.  Yet  that  it  can  be  moved  inci¬ 
dentally  is,  as  we  said  above,1  possible,  and 
even  that  in  a  sense  it  can  move  itself,  i.e.  in 
the  sense  that  the  vehicle  in  which  it  is  can  be 
moved,  and  moved  by  it;  in  no  other  sense  can 
the  soul  be  moved  in  space. 

More  legitimate  doubts  might  remain  as  to 
its  movement  in  view  of  the  following  facts. 
408b  We  speak  of  the  soul  as  being  pained  or 
pleased,  being  bold  or  fearful,  being  angry,  per¬ 
ceiving,  thinking.  All  these  are  regarded  as 
modes  of  movement,  and  hence  it  might  be  in¬ 
ferred  that  the  soul  is  moved.  This,  however, 
does  not  necessarily  follow.  We  may  admit  to 
[5]  the  full  that  being  pained  or  pleased,  or 
thinking,  are  movements  (each  of  them  a  ‘be¬ 
ing  moved’),  and  that  the  movement  is  origi¬ 
nated  by  the  soul.  For  example  we  may  regard 
anger  or  fear  as  such  and  such  movements  of 
the  heart,  and  thinking  as  such  and  such  an¬ 
other  movement  of  that  organ,  or  of  some  oth¬ 
er;  these  modifications  may  arise  either  from 
changes  of  place  in  certain  parts  or  from  quali- 
[/o]  tative  alterations  (the  special  nature  of 
the  parts  and  the  special  modes  of  their 
changes  being  for  our  present  purpose  irrele¬ 
vant).  Yet  to  say  that  it  is  the  soul  which  is 
angry  is  as  inexact  as  it  would  be  to  say  that 
it  is  the  soul  that  weaves  webs  or  builds  houses. 
It  is  doubtless  better  to  avoid  saying  that  the 
soul  pities  or  learns  or  thinks  and  rather  to  say 
that  it  is  the  man  who  does  this  with  his  soul. 
[/ 5]  What  we  mean  is  not  that  the  movement 
is  in  the  soul,  but  that  sometimes  it  terminates 

1 406®  30  fF.,  b5-8. 


in  the  soul  and  sometimes  starts  from  it,  sensa¬ 
tion  e.g.  coming  from  without  inwards,  and 
reminiscence  starting  from  the  soul  and  ter¬ 
minating  with  the  movements,  actual  or  resid¬ 
ual,  in  the  sense  organs. 

The  case  of  mind  is  different;  it  seems  to  be 
an  independent  substance  implanted  within 
the  soul  and  to  be  incapable  of  being  de¬ 
stroyed.  If  it  could  be  destroyed  at  all,  it  would 
be  under  the  blunting  influence  of  old  age. 
[20]  What  really  happens  in  respect  of  mind 
in  old  age  is,  however,  exactly  parallel  to  what 
happens  in  the  case  of  the  sense  organs;  if  the 
old  man  could  recover  the  proper  kind  of  eye, 
he  would  see  just  as  well  as  the  young  man. 
The  incapacity  of  old  age  is  due  to  an  affec¬ 
tion  not  of  the  soul  but  of  its  vehicle,  as  occurs 
in  drunkenness  or  disease.  Thus  it  is  that  in 
old  age  the  activity  of  mind  or  intellectual  ap¬ 
prehension  declines  only  through  the  decay  of 
some  other  inward  part;  mind  itself  is  impas- 
[25]  sible.  Thinking,  loving,  and  hating  are 
affections  not  of  mind,  but  of  that  which  has 
mind,  so  far  as  it  has  it.  That  is  why,  when  this 
vehicle  decays,  memory  and  love  cease;  they 
were  activities  not  of  mind,  but  of  the  com¬ 
posite  which  has  perished;  mind  is,  no  doubt, 
something  more  divine  and  impassible.  That 
[30]  the  soul  cannot  be  moved  is  therefore 
clear  from  what  we  have  said,  and  if  it  cannot 
be  moved  at  all,  manifestly  it  cannot  be  moved 
by  itself. 

Of  all  the  opinions  we  have  enumerated,  by 
far  the  most  unreasonable  is  that  which  de¬ 
clares  the  soul  to  be  a  self-moving  number;  it 
involves  in  the  first  place  all  the  impossibilities 
which  follow  from  regarding  the  soul  as 
moved,  and  in  the  second  special  absurdities 
which  follow  from  calling  it  a  number.  How 
409a  are  we  to  imagine  a  unit  being  moved? 
By  what  agency?  What  sort  of  movement  can 
be  attributed  to  what  is  without  parts  or  in¬ 
ternal  differences?  If  the  unit  is  both  origina¬ 
tive  of  movement  and  itself  capable  of  being 
moved,  it  must  contain  difference. 

Further,  since  they  say  a  moving  line  gen¬ 
erates  a  surface  and  a  moving  point  a  line, 
[5]  the  movements  of  the  psychic  units  must 
be  lines  (for  a  point  is  a  unit  having  position, 
and  the  number  of  the  soul  is,  of  course,  some¬ 
where  and  has  position). 

Again,  if  from  a  number  a  number  or  a  unit 
is  subtracted,  the  remainder  is  another  num¬ 
ber;  but  plants  and  many  animals  when  di¬ 
vided  continue  to  live,  and  each  segment  is 
thought  to  retain  the  same  kind  of  soul. 


410*  BOOK  I,  CHAPTERS  4-5  639 


[70]  It  must  be  all  the  same  whether  we  speak 
of  units  or  corpuscles;  for  if  the  spherical 
atoms  of  Democritus  became  points,  nothing 
being  retained  but  their  being  a  quantum, 
there  must  remain  in  each  a  moving  and  a 
moved  part,  just  as  there  is  in  what  is  continu¬ 
ous;  what  happens  has  nothing  to  do  with  the 
size  of  the  atoms,  it  depends  solely  upon  their 
[75]  being  a  quantum.  That  is  why  there  must 
be  something  to  originate  movement  in  the 
units.  If  in  the  animal  what  originates  move¬ 
ment  is  the  soul,  so  also  must  it  be  in  the  case 
of  the  number,  so  that  not  the  mover  and  the 
moved  together,  but  the  mover  only,  will  be 
the  soul.  But  how  is  it  possible  for  one  of  the 
units  to  fulfil  this  function  of  originating 
movement?  There  must  be  some  difference  be- 
[20]  tween  such  a  unit  and  all  the  other  units, 
and  what  difference  can  there  be  between  one 
placed  unit  and  another  except  a  difference  of 
position?  If  then,  on  the  other  hand,  these  psy¬ 
chic  units  within  the  body  are  different  from 
the  points  of  the  body,  there  will  be  two  sets 
of  units  both  occupying  the  same  place;  for 
each  unit  will  occupy  a  point.  And  yet,  if  there 
can  be  two,  why  cannot  there  be  an  infinite 
number?  For  if  things  can  occupy  an  indivisi¬ 
ble  place,  they  must  themselves  be  indivisible. 
[25]  If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  points  of  the 
body  are  identical  with  the  units  whose  num¬ 
ber  is  the  soul,  or  if  the  number  of  the  points 
in  the  body  is  the  soul,  why  have  not  all  bodies 
souls?  For  all  bodies  contain  points  or  an  in¬ 
finity  of  points. 

Further,  how  is  it  possible  for  these  points 
to  be  isolated  or  separated  from  their  bodies, 
[30]  seeing  that  lines  cannot  be  resolved  into 
points  ? 

5 

The  result  is,  as  we  have  said,1  that  this 
view,  while  on  the  one  side  identical  with  that 
of  those  who  maintain  that  soul  is  a  subtle 
kind  of  body,  is  on  the  other  entangled  in  the 
absurdity  peculiar  to  Democritus’  way  of  de¬ 
scribing  the  manner  in  which  movement  is 
409b  originated  by  soul.  For  if  the  soul  is 
present  throughout  the  whole  percipient  body, 
there  must,  if  the  soul  be  a  kind  of  body,  be 
two  bodies  in  the  same  place;  and  for  those 
who  call  it  a  number,  there  must  be  many 
[5]  points  at  one  point,  or  every  body  must 
have  a  soul,  unless  the  soul  be  a  different  sort 
of  number — other,  that  is,  than  the  sum  of  the 
points  existing  in  a  body.  Another  conse- 

1 4o8b  33  fF. 


quence  that  follows  is  that  the  animal  must  be 
moved  by  its  number  precisely  in  the  way  that 
Democritus  explained  its  being  moved  by  his 
spherical  psychic  atoms.  What  difference  does 
it  make  whether  we  speak  of  small  spheres  or 
of  large  units,  or,  quite  simply,  of  units  in 
[/o]  movement?  One  way  or  another,  the 
movements  of  the  animal  must  be  due  to  their 
movements.  Hence  those  who  combine  move¬ 
ment  and  number  in  the  same  subject  lay 
themselves  open  to  these  and  many  other  simi¬ 
lar  absurdities.  It  is  impossible  not  only  that 
these  characters  should  give  the  definition  of 
soul — it  is  impossible  that  they  should  even 
be  attributes  of  it.  The  point  is  clear  if  the 
[75]  attempt  be  made  to  start  from  this 
as  the  account  of  soul  and  explain  from  it 
the  affections  and  actions  of  the  soul,  e.g. 
reasoning,  sensation,  pleasure,  pain,  &c.  For, 
to  repeat  what  we  have  said  earlier,2  move¬ 
ment  and  number  do  not  facilitate  even  con¬ 
jecture  about  the  derivative  properties  of 
soul. 

Such  are  the  three  ways  in  which  soul  has 
traditionally  been  defined;  one  group  of  think¬ 
ers  declared  it  to  be  that  which  is  most  orig- 
[20]  inative  of  movement  because  it  moves  it¬ 
self,  another  group  to  be  the  subtlest  and  most 
nearly  incorporeal  of  all  kinds  of  body.  We 
have  now  sufficiently  set  forth  the  difficulties 
and  inconsistencies  to  which  these  theories 
are  exposed.  It  remains  now  to  examine 
the  doctrine  that  soul  is  composed  of  the 
elements. 

The  reason  assigned  for  this  doctrine  is  that 
thus  the  soul  may  perceive  or  come  to  know 
everything  that  is,  but  the  theory  necessarily 
[25]  involves  itself  in  many  impossibilities.  Its 
upholders  assume  that  like  is  known  only  by 
like,  and  imagine  that  by  declaring  the  soul  to 
be  composed  of  the  elements  they  succeed  in 
identifying  the  soul  with  all  the  things  it  is 
capable  of  apprehending.  But  the  elements  are 
not  the  only  things  it  knows;  there  are  many 
others,  or,  more  exactly,  an  infinite  number  of 
others,  formed  out  of  the  elements.  Let  us  ad- 
[30]  mit  that  the  soul  knows  or  perceives  the 
elements  out  of  which  each  of  these  compos¬ 
ites  is  made  up;  but  by  what  means  will  it 
know  or  perceive  the  composite  whole,  e.g. 
what  God,  man,  flesh,  bone  (or  any  other  com¬ 
pound)  is?  For  each  is,  not  merely  the  ele- 
410*  ments  of  which  it  is  composed,  but  those 
elements  combined  in  a  determinate  mode  or 
ratio,  as  Empedocles  himself  says  of  bone, 

2  402b  25-403®  2. 


6ao  ON  THE  SOUL  410b 


The  1{indly  Earth  in  its  broad-bosomed  moulds1 

[5]  Won  of  clear  Water  two  parts  out  of  eight 

And  four  of  Fire;  and  so  white  bones  were 
formed. 

Nothing,  therefore,  will  be  gained  by  the 
presence  of  the  elements  in  the  soul,  unless 
there  be  also  present  there  the  various  formu¬ 
lae  of  proportion  and  the  various  compositions 
in  accordance  with  them.  Each  element  will 
indeed  know  its  fellow  outside,  but  there  will 
be  no  knowledge  of  bone  or  man,  unless  they 
too  are  present  in  the  constitution  of  the  soul, 
[/o]  The  impossibility  of  this  needs  no  point¬ 
ing  out;  for  who  would  suggest  that  stone  or 
man  could  enter  into  the  constitution  of  the 
soul  ?  The  same  applies  to  ‘the  good’  and  ‘the 
not-good’,  and  so  on. 

Further,  the  word  ‘is’  has  many  meanings: 
it  may  be  used  of  a  ‘this’  or  substance,  or  of  a 
quantum,  or  of  a  quale,  or  of  any  other  of  the 
kinds  of  predicates  we  have  distinguished. 
[75]  Does  the  soul  consist  of  all  of  these  or 
not?  It  does  not  appear  that  all  have  common 
elements.  Is  the  soul  formed  out  of  those  ele¬ 
ments  alone  which  enter  into  substances  ?  If  so, 
how  will  it  be  able  to  know  each  of  the  other 
kinds  of  thing?  Will  it  be  said  that  each  kind 
of  thing  has  elements  or  principles  of  its  own, 
and  that  the  soul  is  formed  out  of  the  whole  of 
[20]  these?  In  that  case,  the  soul  must  be  a 
quantum  and  a  quale  and  a  substance.  But  all 
that  can  be  made  out  of  the  elements  of  a 
quantum  is  a  quantum,  not  a  substance.  These 
(and  others  like  them)  are  the  consequences 
of  the  view  that  the  soul  is  composed  of  all  the 
elements. 

It  is  absurd,  also,  to  say  both  (a)  that  like  is 
not  capable  of  being  affected  by  like,  and  (b) 
that  like  is  perceived  or  known  by  like,  for 
[25]  perceiving,  and  also  both  thinking  and 
knowing,  are,  on  their  own  assumption,  ways 
of  being  affected  or  moved. 

There  are  many  puzzles  and  difficulties 
raised  by  saying,  as  Empedocles  does,  that 
each  set  of  things  is  known  by  means  of  its 
corporeal  elements  and  by  reference  to  some¬ 
thing  in  soul  which  is  like  them,  and  addition- 
[  jo]  al  testimony  is  furnished  by  this  new  con¬ 
sideration;  for  all  the  parts  of  the  animal  body 
which  consist  wholly  of  earth  such  as  bones, 
410b  sinews,  and  hair  seem  to  be  wholly  in¬ 
sensitive  and  consequently  not  perceptive  even 
of  objects  earthy  like  themselves,  as  they  ought 
to  have  been. 

1  Fr.  96,  Diels. 


Further,  each  of  the  principles  will  have  far 
more  ignorance  than  knowledge,  for  though 
each  of  them  will  know  one  thing,  there  will 
be  many  of  which  it  will  be  ignorant.  Emped¬ 
ocles  at  any  rate  must  conclude  that  his  God 
[5]  is  the  least  intelligent  of  all  beings,  for  of 
him  alone  is  it  true  that  there  is  one  thing, 
Strife,  which  he  does  not  know,  while  there  is 
nothing  which  mortal  beings  do  not  know,  for 
there  is  nothing  which  does  not  enter  into 
their  composition. 

In  general,  we  may  ask,  Why  has  not  every¬ 
thing  a  soul,  since  everything  either  is  an  ele¬ 
ment,  or  is  formed  out  of  one  or  several  or  all 
of  the  elements?  Each  must  certainly  know 
one  or  several  or  all. 

[10]  The  problem  might  also  be  raised,  What 
is  that  which  unifies  the  elements  into  a  soul? 
The  elements  correspond,  it  would  appear,  to 
the  matter;  what  unites  them,  whatever  it  is, 
is  the  supremely  important  factor.  But  it  is  im¬ 
possible  that  there  should  be  something  supe¬ 
rior  to,  and  dominant  over,  the  soul  (and  a 
fortiori  over  the  mind);  it  is  reasonable  to  hold 
that  mind  is  by  nature  most  primordial 
[75]  and  dominant,  while  their  statement 
is  that  it  is  the  elements  which  are  first  of  all 
that  is. 

All,  both  those  who  assert  that  the  soul,  be¬ 
cause  of  its  knowledge  or  perception  of  what 
is,  is  compounded  out  of  the  elements,  and 
those  who  assert  that  it  is  of  all  things  the  most 
originative  of  movement,  fail  to  take  into  con¬ 
sideration  all  kinds  of  soul.  In  fact  (1)  not  all 
beings  that  perceive  can  originate  movement; 
there  appear  to  be  certain  animals  which  are 
[20]  stationary,  and  yet  local  movement  is  the 
only  one,  so  it  seems,  which  the  soul  originates 
in  animals.  And  (2)  the  same  objection  holds 
against  all  those  who  construct  mind  and  the 
perceptive  faculty  out  of  the  elements;  for  it 
appears  that  plants  live,  and  yet  are  not  en¬ 
dowed  with  locomotion  or  perception,  while 
a  large  number  of  animals  are  without  dis¬ 
course  of  reason.  Even  if  these  points  were 
waived  and  mind  admitted  to  be  a  part  of  the 
[25]  soul  (and  so  too  the  perceptive  faculty), 
still,  even  so,  there  would  be  kinds  and  parts 
of  soul  of  which  they  had  failed  to  give  any  ac¬ 
count. 

The  same  objection  lies  against  the  view  ex¬ 
pressed  in  the  ‘Orphic’  poems:  there  it  is  said 
that  the  soul  comes  in  from  the  whole  when 
breathing  takes  place,  being  borne  in  upon  the 
[jo]  winds.  Now  this  cannot  take  place  in  the 
case  of  plants,  nor  indeed  in  the  case  of  cer- 


41  lb  BOOK  I,  CHAPTER  5  641 


tain  classes  of  animal,  for  not  all  classes  of 
41  la  animal  breathe.  This  fact  has  escaped  the 
notice  of  the  holders  of  this  view. 

If  we  must  construct  the  soul  out  of  the 
elements,  there  is  no  necessity  to  suppose 
that  all  the  elements  enter  into  its  construc¬ 
tion;  one  element  in  each  pair  of  contraries 
will  suffice  to  enable  it  to  know  both  that  ele- 
[5]  ment  itself  and  its  contrary.  By  means 
of  the  straight  line  we  know  both  itself  and 
the  curved — the  carpenter’s  rule  enables  us  to 
test  both — but  what  is  curved  does  not  en¬ 
able  us  to  distinguish  either  itself  or  the 
straight. 

Certain  thinkers  say  that  soul  is  intermin¬ 
gled  in  the  whole  universe,  and  it  is  perhaps 
for  that  reason  that  Thales  came  to  the  opin¬ 
ion  that  all  things  are  full  of  gods.  This  pre¬ 
sents  some  difficulties:  Why  does  the  soul 
[/o]  when  it  resides  in  air  or  fire  not  form  an 
animal,  while  it  does  so  when  it  resides  in  mix¬ 
tures  of  the  elements,  and  that  although  it  is 
held  to  be  of  higher  quality  when  contained 
in  the  former?  (One  might  add  the  question, 
why  the  soul  in  air  is  maintained  to  be  higher 
and  more  immortal  than  that  in  animals.) 
Both  possible  ways  of  replying  to  the  former 
uestion  lead  to  absurdity  or  paradox;  for  it 
75]  is  beyond  paradox  to  say  that  fire  or  air 
is  an  animal,  and  it  is  absurd  to  refuse  the 
name  of  animal  to  what  has  soul  in  it.  The 
opinion  that  the  elements  have  soul  in  them 
seems  to  have  arisen  from  the  doctrine  that  a 
whole  must  be  homogeneous  with  its  parts.  If 
it  is  true  that  animals  become  animate  by 
drawing  into  themselves  a  portion  of  what  sur¬ 
rounds  them,  the  partisans  of  this  view  are 
bound  to  say  that  the  soul  of  the  Whole  too  is 
[20]  homogeneous  with  all  its  parts.  If  the  air 
sucked  in  is  homogeneous,  but  soul  heteroge¬ 
neous,  clearly  while  some  part  of  soul  will  exist 
in  the  inbreathed  air,  some  other  part  will  not. 
The  soul  must  either  be  homogeneous,  or  such 
that  there  are  some  parts  of  the  Whole  in 
which  it  is  not  to  be  found. 

From  what  has  been  said  it  is  now  clear  that 
knowing  as  an  attribute  of  soul  cannot  be  ex- 
[25]  plained  by  soul’s  being  composed  of  the 
elements,  and  that  it  is  neither  sound  nor  true 
to  speak  of  soul  as  moved.  But  since  (a)  know¬ 
ing,  perceiving,  opining,  and  further  ( b )  de¬ 
siring,  wishing,  and  generally  all  other  modes 
of  appetition,  belong  to  soul,  and  (r)  the  local 
[30]  movements  of  animals,  and  ( d )  growth, 
maturity,  and  decay  are  produced  by  the  soul, 
we  must  ask  whether  each  of  these  is  an  attri¬ 


bute  of  the  soul  as  a  whole,  i.e.  whether  it  is 
41  lb  with  the  whole  soul  we  think,  perceive, 
move  ourselves,  act  or  are  acted  upon,  or 
whether  each  of  them  requires  a  different  part 
of  the  soul  ?  So  too  with  regard  to  life.  Does  it 
depend  on  one  of  the  parts  of  soul  ?  Or  is  it  de¬ 
pendent  on  more  than  one?  Or  on  all?  Or  has 
it  some  quite  other  cause? 

[5]  Some  hold  that  the  soul  is  divisible,  and 
that  one  part  thinks,  another  desires.  If,  then, 
its  nature  admits  of  its  being  divided,  what 
can  it  be  that  holds  the  parts  together?  Surely 
not  the  body;  on  the  contrary  it  seems  rather 
to  be  the  soul  that  holds  the  body  together;  at 
any  rate  when  the  soul  departs  the  body  disin¬ 
tegrates  and  decays.  If,  then,  there  is  some¬ 
thing  else  which  makes  the  soul  one,  this  uni¬ 
fying  agency  would  have  the  best  right  to  the 
[/oj  name  of  soul,  and  we  shall  have  to  repeat 
for  it  the  question:  Is  it  one  or  multipartite? 
If  it  is  one,  why  not  at  once  admit  that  ‘the 
soul’  is  one?  If  it  has  parts,  once  more  the  ques¬ 
tion  must  be  put:  What  holds  its  parts  to¬ 
gether,  and  so  ad  infinitum? 

The  question  might  also  be  raised  about  the 
parts  of  the  soul:  What  is  the  separate  role  of 
each  in  relation  to  the  body?  For,  if  the  whole 
[75]  soul  holds  together  the  whole  body,  we 
should  expect  each  part  of  the  soul  to  hold  to¬ 
gether  a  part  of  the  body.  But  this  seems  an 
impossibility;  it  is  difficult  even  to  imagine 
what  sort  of  bodily  part  mind  will  hold  to¬ 
gether,  or  how  it  will  do  this. 

It  is  a  fact  of  observation  that  plants  and  cer- 
[20]  tain  insects  go  on  living  when  divided 
into  segments;  this  means  that  each  of  the  seg¬ 
ments  has  a  soul  in  it  identical  in  species, 
though  not  numerically  identical  in  the  differ¬ 
ent  segments,  for  both  of  the  segments  for  a 
time  possess  the  power  of  sensation  and  local 
movement.  That  this  does  not  last  is  not  sur¬ 
prising,  for  they  no  longer  possess  the  organs 
necessary  for  self-maintenance.  But,  all  the 
same,  in  each  of  the  bodily  parts  there  are  pres- 
[25]  ent  all  the  parts  of  soul,  and  the  souls  so 
present  are  homogeneous  with  one  another 
and  with  the  whole;  this  means  that  the  sev¬ 
eral  parts  of  the  soul  are  indisseverable  from 
one  another,  although  the  whole  soul  is  divisi¬ 
ble.  It  seems  also  that  the  principle  found  in 
plants  is  also  a  kind  of  soul;  for  this  is  the 
only  principle  which  is  common  to  both  ani¬ 
mals  and  plants;  and  this  exists  in  isolation 
from  the  principle  of  sensation,  though  there 
[jo]  is  nothing  which  has  the  latter  without 
the  former. 


642 


ON  THE  SOUL 


412b 


BOOK  II 


1 

412a  Let  the  foregoing  suffice  as  our  account 
of  the  views  concerning  the  soul  which  have 
been  handed  on  by  our  predecessors;  let  us 
now  dismiss  them  and  make  as  it  were  a  com¬ 
pletely  fresh  start,  endeavouring  to  give  a  pre- 
[5]  cise  answer  to  the  question,  What  is  soul? 
i.e.  to  formulate  the  most  general  possible  defi¬ 
nition  of  it. 

We  are  in  the  habit  of  recognizing,  as  one 
determinate  kind  of  what  is,  substance,  and 
that  in  several  senses,  (a)  in  the  sense  of  mat¬ 
ter  or  that  which  in  itself  is  not  ‘a  this’,  and 
(b)  in  the  sense  of  form  or  essence,  which  is 
that  precisely  in  virtue  of  which  a  thing  is 
called  ‘a  this’,  and  thirdly  (c)  in  the  sense  of 
that  which  is  compounded  of  both  (a)  and 
[70]  (b).  Now  matter  is  potentiality,  form  ac¬ 
tuality;  of  the  latter  there  are  two  grades  re¬ 
lated  to  one  another  as  e.g.  knowledge  to  the 
exercise  of  knowledge. 

Among  substances  are  by  general  consent 
reckoned  bodies  and  especially  natural  bodies; 
for  they  are  the  principles  of  all  other  bodies. 
Of  natural  bodies  some  have  life  in  them,  oth¬ 
ers  not;  by  life  we  mean  self-nutrition  and 
[75]  growth  (with  its  correlative  decay).  It 
follows  that  every  natural  body  which  has  life 
in  it  is  a  substance  in  the  sense  of  a  composite. 

But  since  it  is  also  a  body  of  such  and  such  a 
kind,  viz.  having  life,  the  body  cannot  be  soul; 
the  body  is  the  subject  or  matter,  not  what  is 
attributed  to  it.  Hence  the  soul  must  be  a  sub- 
[20]  stance  in  the  sense  of  the  form  of  a  nat¬ 
ural  body  having  life  potentially  within  it.  But 
substance  is  actuality,  and  thus  soul  is  the  ac¬ 
tuality  of  a  body  as  above  characterized.  Now 
the  word  actuality  has  two  senses  correspond¬ 
ing  respectively  to  the  possession  of  knowledge 
and  the  actual  exercise  of  knowledge.  It  is  ob¬ 
vious  that  the  soul  is  actuality  in  the  first  sense, 
viz.  that  of  knowledge  as  possessed,  for  both 
[25]  sleeping  and  waking  presuppose  the  ex¬ 
istence  of  soul,  and  of  these  waking  corre¬ 
sponds  to  actual  knowing,  sleeping  to  knowl¬ 
edge  possessed  but  not  employed,  and,  in  the 
history  of  the  individual,  knowledge  comes  be¬ 
fore  its  employment  or  exercise. 

That  is  why  the  soul  is  the  first  grade  of  ac¬ 
tuality  of  a  natural  body  having  life  poten¬ 
tially  in  it.  The  body  so  described  is  a  body 
412b  which  is  organized.  The  parts  of  plants 


in  spite  of  their  extreme  simplicity  are  ‘organs’; 
e.g.  the  leaf  serves  to  shelter  the  pericarp,  the 
pericarp  to  shelter  the  fruit,  while  the  roots  of 
plants  are  analogous  to  the  mouth  of  animals, 
both  serving  for  the  absorption  of  food.  If, 
then,  we  have  to  give  a  general  formula  ap- 
[5]  plicable  to  all  kinds  of  soul,  we  must  de¬ 
scribe  it  as  the  first  grade  of  actuality  of  a  nat¬ 
ural  organized  body.  That  is  why  we  can 
wholly  dismiss  as  unnecessary  the  question 
whether  the  soul  and  the  body  are  one:  it  is  as 
meaningless  as  to  ask  whether  the  wax  and 
the  shape  given  to  it  by  the  stamp  are  one,  or 
generally  the  matter  of  a  thing  and  that  of 
which  it  is  the  matter.  Unity  has  many  senses 
(as  many  as  ‘is’  has),  but  the  most  proper  and 
fundamental  sense  of  both  is  the  relation  of 
an  actuality  to  that  of  which  it  is  the  actuality. 
[70]  We  have  now  given  an  answer  to  the 
question,  What  is  soul? — an  answer  which  ap¬ 
plies  to  it  in  its  full  extent.  It  is  substance  in 
the  sense  which  corresponds  to  the  definitive 
formula  of  a  thing’s  essence.  That  means  that 
it  is  ‘the  essential  whatness’  of  a  body  of  the 
character  just  assigned.  Suppose  that  what  is 
literally  an  ‘organ’,  like  an  axe,  were  a  natural 
body,  its  ‘essential  whatness’,  would  have  been 
its  essence,  and  so  its  soul;  if  this  disappeared 
from  it,  it  would  have  ceased  to  be  an  axe,  ex- 
[75]  cept  in  name.  As  it  is,  it  is  just  an  axe; 
it  wants  the  character  which  is  required  to 
make  its  whatness  or  formulable  essence  a  soul; 
for  that,  it  would  have  had  to  be  a  natural 
body  of  a  particular  kind,  viz.  one  having  in 
itself  the  power  of  setting  itself  in  movement 
and  arresting  itself.  Next,  apply  this  doctrine 
in  the  case  of  the  ‘parts’  of  the  living  body. 
Suppose  that  the  eye  were  an  animal — sight 
would  have  been  its  soul,  for  sight  is  the  sub¬ 
stance  or  essence  of  the  eye  which  corresponds 
[20]  to  the  formula,  the  eye  being  merely 
the  matter  of  seeing;  when  seeing  is  removed 
the  eye  is  no  longer  an  eye,  except  in  name — it 
is  no  more  a  real  eye  than  the  eye  of  a  statue 
or  of  a  painted  figure.  We  must  now  extend 
our  consideration  from  the  ‘parts’  to  the  whole 
living  body;  for  what  the  departmental  sense 
is  to  the  bodily  part  which  is  its  organ,  that  the 
whole  faculty  of  sense  is  to  the  whole  sensitive 
body  as  such. 

[25]  We  must  not  understand  by  that  which 
is  ‘potentially  capable  of  living’  what  has  lost 
the  soul  it  had,  but  only  what  still  retains  it; 


413b  BOOK  II,  CHAPTERS  1-2  643 


but  seeds  and  fruits  are  bodies  which  possess 
the  qualification.  Consequently,  while  waking 
is  actuality  in  a  sense  corresponding  to  the  cut- 
413a  ting  and  the  seeing,  the  soul  is  actuality 
in  the  sense  corresponding  to  the  power  of 
sight  and  the  power  in  the  tool;  the  body  cor¬ 
responds  to  what  exists  in  potentiality;  as  the 
pupil  plus  the  power  of  sight  constitutes  the 
eye,  so  the  soul  plus  the  body  constitutes  the 
animal. 

From  this  it  indubitably  follows  that  the 
soul  is  inseparable  from  its  body,  or  at  any  rate 
that  certain  parts  of  it  are  (if  it  has  parts) — 
[5]  for  the  actuality  of  some  of  them  is  noth¬ 
ing  but  the  actualities  of  their  bodily  parts.  Yet 
some  may  be  separable  because  they  are  not 
the  actualities  of  any  body  at  all.  Further,  we 
have  no  light  on  the  problem  whether  the  soul 
may  not  be  the  actuality  of  its  body  in  the 
sense  in  which  the  sailor  is  the  actuality  of  the 
ship. 

This  must  suffice  as  our  sketch  or  outline 
[70]  determination  of  the  nature  of  soul. 

2 

Since  what  is  clear  or  logically  more  evident 
emerges  from  what  in  itself  is  confused  but 
more  observable  by  us,  we  must  reconsider  our 
results  from  this  point  of  view.  For  it  is  not 
enough  for  a  definitive  formula  to  express  as 
[75]  most  now  do  the  mere  fact;  it  must  in¬ 
clude  and  exhibit  the  ground  also.  At  present 
definitions  are  given  in  a  form  analogous  to 
the  conclusion  of  a  syllogism;  e.g.  What  is 
squaring?  The  construction  of  an  equilateral 
rectangle  equal  to  a  given  oblong  rectangle. 
Such  a  definition  is  in  form  equivalent  to  a 
conclusion.  One  that  tells  us  that  squaring  is 
the  discovery  of  a  line  which  is  a  mean  pro¬ 
portional  between  the  two  unequal  sides  of  the 
given  rectangle  discloses  the  ground  of  what  is 
defined. 

[20]  We  resume  our  inquiry  from  a  fresh 
starting-point  by  calling  attention  to  the  fact 
that  what  has  soul  in  it  differs  from  what  has 
not,  in  that  the  former  displays  life.  Now  this 
word  has  more  than  one  sense,  and  provided 
any  one  alone  of  these  is  found  in  a  thing  we 
say  that  thing  is  living.  Living,  that  is,  may 
mean  thinking  or  perception  or  local  move¬ 
ment  and  rest,  or  movement  in  the  sense  of 
[25]  nutrition,  decay  and  growth.  Hence  we 
think  of  plants  also  as  living,  for  they  are  ob¬ 
served  to  possess  in  themselves  an  originative 
power  through  which  they  increase  or  decrease 
in  all  spatial  directions;  they  grow  up  and 


down,  and  everything  that  grows  increases  its 
bulk  alike  in  both  directions  or  indeed  in  all, 
[30]  and  continues  to  live  so  long  as  it  can  ab¬ 
sorb  nutriment. 

This  power  of  self-nutrition  can  be  isolated 
from  the  other  powers  mentioned,  but  not  they 
from  it — in  mortal  beings  at  least.  The  fact  is 
obvious  in  plants;  for  it  is  the  only  psychic 
power  they  possess. 

413b  This  is  the  originative  power  the  posses¬ 
sion  of  which  leads  us  to  speak  of  things  as 
living  at  all,  but  it  is  the  possession  of  sensa¬ 
tion  that  leads  us  for  the  first  time  to  speak  of 
living  things  as  animals;  for  even  those  beings 
which  possess  no  power  of  local  movement  but 
do  possess  the  power  of  sensation  we  call  ani¬ 
mals  and  not  merely  living  things. 

The  primary  form  of  sense  is  touch,  which 
[5]  belongs  to  all  animals.  Just  as  the  power  of 
self-nutrition  can  be  isolated  from  touch  and 
sensation  generally,  so  touch  can  be  isolated 
from  all  other  forms  of  sense.  (By  the  power 
of  self-nutrition  we  mean  that  departmental 
power  of  the  soul  which  is  common  to  plants 
and  animals:  all  animals  whatsoever  are  ob¬ 
served  to  have  the  sense  of  touch.)  What  the 
[jo]  explanation  of  these  two  facts  is,  we  must 
discuss  later.1  At  present  we  must  confine  our¬ 
selves  to  saying  that  soul  is  the  source  of  these 
phenomena  and  is  characterized  by  them,  viz. 
by  the  powers  of  self-nutrition,  sensation, 
thinking,  and  motivity. 

Is  each  of  these  a  soul  or  a  part  of  a  soul? 
And  if  a  part,  a  part  in  what  sense?  A  part 
merely  distinguishable  by  definition  or  a  part 
[75]  distinct  in  local  situation  as  well?  In  the 
case  of  certain  of  these  powers,  the  answers  to 
these  questions  are  easy,  in  the  case  of  others 
we  are  puzzled  what  to  say.  Just  as  in  the  case 
of  plants  which  when  divided  are  observed  to 
continue  to  live  though  removed  to  a  distance 
from  one  another  (thus  showing  that  in  their 
case  the  soul  of  each  individual  plant  before 
division  was  actually  one,  potentially  many), 
so  we  notice  a  similar  result  in  other  varieties 
[20]  of  soul,  i.e.  in  insects  which  have  been 
cut  in  two;  each  of  the  segments  possesses  both 
sensation  and  local  movement;  and  if  sensa¬ 
tion,  necessarily  also  imagination  and  appeti- 
tion;  for,  where  there  is  sensation,  there  is  also 
pleasure  and  pain,  and,  where  these,  necessar¬ 
ily  also  desire. 

We  have  no  evidence  as  yet  about  mind  or 
[25]  the  power  to  think;  it  seems  to  be  a  wide¬ 
ly  different  kind  of  soul,  differing  as  what  is 
1  hi.  12,  esp.  434®  22-30,  bio  ff. 


644  ON  THE  SOUL  414b 


eternal  from  what  is  perishable;  it  alone  is  ca¬ 
pable  of  existence  in  isolation  from  all  other 
psychic  powers.  All  the  other  parts  of  soul,  it 
is  evident  from  what  we  have  said,  are,  in  spite 
of  certain  statements  to  the  contrary,  incapable 
of  separate  existence  though,  of  course,  distin¬ 
guishable  by  definition.  If  opining  is  distinct 
[jo]  from  perceiving,  to  be  capable  of  opining 
and  to  be  capable  of  perceiving  must  be  dis¬ 
tinct,  and  so  with  all  the  other  forms  of  living 
above  enumerated.  Further,  some  animals 
possess  all  these  parts  of  soul,  some  certain  of 
them  only,  others  one  only  (this  is  what  en¬ 
ables  us  to  classify  animals);  the  cause  must 
414a  be  considered  later.1  A  similar  arrange¬ 
ment  is  found  also  within  the  field  of  the 
senses;  some  classes  of  animals  have  all  the 
senses,  some  only  certain  of  them,  others  only 
one,  the  most  indispensable,  touch. 

Since  the  expression  ‘that  whereby  we  live 
[5]  and  perceive’  has  two  meanings,  just  like 
the  expression  ‘that  whereby  we  know’ — that 
may  mean  either  (a)  knowledge  or  ( b )  the 
soul,  for  we  can  speak  of  knowing  by  or  with 
either,  and  similarly  that  whereby  we  are  in 
health  may  be  either  ( a )  health  or  ( b )  the 
body  or  some  part  of  the  body;  and  since  of 
the  two  terms  thus  contrasted  knowledge  or 
health  is  the  name  of  a  form,  essence,  or  ratio, 
or  if  we  so  express  it  an  actuality  of  a  recipient 
[/o]  matter — knowledge  of  what  is  capable  of 
knowing,  health  of  what  is  capable  of  being 
made  healthy  (for  the  operation  of  that  which 
is  capable  of  originating  change  terminates 
and  has  its  seat  in  what  is  changed  or  altered); 
further,  since  it  is  the  soul  by  or  with  which 
primarily  we  live,  perceive,  and  think: — it  fol¬ 
lows  that  the  soul  must  be  a  ratio  or  formula- 
ble  essence,  not  a  matter  or  subject.  For,  as  we 
said,2  the  word  substance  has  three  meanings — 
[75]  form,  matter,  and  the  complex  of  both — 
and  of  these  three  what  is  called  matter  is  po¬ 
tentiality,  what  is  called  form  actuality.  Since 
then  the  complex  here  is  the  living  thing,  the 
body  cannot  be  the  actuality  of  the  soul;  it  is 
the  soul  which  is  the  actuality  of  a  certain  kind 
of  body.  Hence  the  rightness  of  the  view  that 
the  soul  cannot  be  without  a  body,  while  it  can- 
[20]  not  be  a  body;  it  is  not  a  body  but  some¬ 
thing  relative  to  a  body.  That  is  why  it  is  in  a 
body,  and  a  body  of  a  definite  kind.  It  was  a 
mistake,  therefore,  to  do  as  former  thinkers 
did,  merely  to  fit  it  into  a  body  without  adding 
a  definite  specification  of  the  kind  or  character 
[25]  of  that  body.  Reflection  confirms  the  ob- 

1  hi.  12,  13.  2  412®  7. 


served  fact;  the  actuality  of  any  given  thing 
can  only  be  realized  in  what  is  already  poten¬ 
tially  that  thing,  i.e.  in  a  matter  of  its  own  ap¬ 
propriate  to  it.  From  all  this  it  follows  that 
soul  is  an  actuality  or  formulable  essence  of 
something  that  possesses  a  potentiality  of  being 
besouled. 

3 

Of  the  psychic  powers  above  enumerated3 
some  kinds  of  living  things,  as  we  have  said,4 
possess  all,  some  less  than  all,  others  one  only. 
[30]  Those  we  have  mentioned  are  the  nutri¬ 
tive,  the  appetitive,  the  sensory,  the  locomo¬ 
tive,  and  the  power  of  thinking.  Plants  have 
none  but  the  first,  the  nutritive,  while  another 
order  of  living  things  has  this  plus  the  sensory. 
414b  If  any  order  of  living  things  has  the  sen¬ 
sory,  it  must  also  have  the  appetitive;  for  ap¬ 
petite  is  the  genus  of  which  desire,  passion, 
and  wish  are  the  species;  now  all  animals  have 
one  sense  at  least,  viz.  touch,  and  whatever  has 
a  sense  has  the  capacity  for  pleasure  and  pain 
and  therefore  has  pleasant  and  painful  objects 

resent  to  it,  and  wherever  these  are  present, 

5]  there  is  desire,  for  desire  is  just  appetition 
of  what  is  pleasant.  Further,  all  animals  have 
the  sense  for  food  (for  touch  is  the  sense  for 
food);  the  food  of  all  living  things  consists  of 
what  is  dry,  moist,  hot,  cold,  and  these  are  the 
qualities  apprehended  by  touch;  all  other  sen¬ 
sible  qualities  are  apprehended  by  touch  only 
[70]  indirectly.  Sounds,  colours,  and  odours 
contribute  nothing  to  nutriment;  flavours  fall 
within  the  field  of  tangible  qualities.  Hunger 
and  thirst  are  forms  of  desire,  hunger  a  desire 
for  what  is  dry  and  hot,  thirst  a  desire  for  what 
is  cold  and  moist;  flavour  is  a  sort  of  seasoning 
added  to  both.  We  must  later5  clear  up  these 
[75]  points,  but  at  present  it  may  be  enough 
to  say  that  all  animals  that  possess  the  sense  of 
touch  have  also  appetition.  The  case  of  imagi¬ 
nation  is  obscure;  we  must  examine  it  later.6 
Certain  kinds  of  animals  possess  in  addition 
the  power  of  locomotion,  and  still  another  or¬ 
der  of  animate  beings,  i.e.  man  and  possibly 
another  order  like  man  or  superior  to  him,  the 
[20]  power  of  thinking,  i.e.  mind.  It  is  now 
evident  that  a  single  definition  can  be  given  of 
soul  only  in  the  same  sense  as  one  can  be  given 
of  figure.  For,  as  in  that  case  there  is  no  figure 
distinguishable  and  apart  from  triangle,  &c., 

3  4i3a  23'5»  bi  i-i3>  21-4.  4  4I3b  32'4i4a 

5  Chapter  n,  111.  12  (434b  18-21);  Sense  and  the  Sensi¬ 
ble ,  4. 

6  m.  3,  11  (433b  31-434®  7). 


415b  BOOK  II,  CHAPTERS  2-4  645 


so  here  there  is  no  soul  apart  from  the  forms 
of  soul  just  enumerated.  It  is  true  that  a  highly 
general  definition  can  be  given  for  figure 
which  will  fit  all  figures  without  expressing 
the  peculiar  nature  of  any  figure.  So  here  in 
the  case  of  soul  and  its  specific  forms.  Hence 
[25]  it  is  absurd  in  this  and  similar  cases  to 
demand  an  absolutely  general  definition 
which  will  fail  to  express  the  peculiar  nature 
of  anything  that  is,  or  again,  omitting  this,  to 
look  for  separate  definitions  corresponding  to 
each  infima  species .  The  cases  of  figure  and 
soul  are  exactly  parallel;  for  the  particulars  sub¬ 
sumed  under  the  common  name  in  both  cases 
— figures  and  living  beings — constitute  a  se- 
[jo]  ries,  each  successive  term  of  which  poten¬ 
tially  contains  its  predecessor,  e.g.  the  square 
the  triangle,  the  sensory  power  the  self-nutri¬ 
tive.  Hence  we  must  ask  in  the  case  of  each  or¬ 
der  of  living  things,  What  is  its  soul,  i.e.  What 
is  the  soul  of  plant,  animal,  man?  Why  the 
terms  are  related  in  this  serial  way  must  form 
415a  the  subject  of  later  examination.1  But  the 
facts  are  that  the  power  of  perception  is  never 
found  apart  from  the  power  of  self-nutrition, 
while — in  plants — the  latter  is  found  isolated 
from  the  former.  Again,  no  sense  is  found 
apart  from  that  of  touch,  while  touch  is  found 
[5]  by  itself;  many  animals  have  neither  sight, 
hearing,  nor  smell.  Again,  among  living  things 
that  possess  sense  some  have  the  power  of  loco¬ 
motion,  some  not.  Lastly,  certain  living  beings 
— a  small  minority — possess  calculation  and 
thought,  for  (among  mortal  beings)  those 
which  possess  calculation  have  all  the  other 
[/o]  powers  above  mentioned,  while  the  con¬ 
verse  does  not  hold — indeed  some  live  by 
imagination  alone,  while  others  have  not 
even  imagination.  The  mind  that  knows 
with  immediate  intuition  presents  a  different 
problem. 

It  is  evident  that  the  way  to  give  the  most 
adequate  definition  of  soul  is  to  seek  in  the 
case  of  each  of  its  forms  for  the  most  appropri¬ 
ate  definition. 

4 

It  is  necessary  for  the  student  of  these  forms 
of  soul  first  to  find  a  definition  of  each,  ex- 
[75]  pressive  of  what  it  is,  and  then  to  investi¬ 
gate  its  derivative  properties,  &c.  But  if  we  are 
to  express  what  each  is,  viz.  what  the  thinking 
power  is,  or  the  perceptive,  or  the  nutritive, 
we  must  go  farther  back  and  first  give  an  ac¬ 
count  of  thinking  or  perceiving,  for  in  the  or- 

1  hi.  12, 13. 


der  of  investigation  the  question  of  what  an 
agent  does  precedes  the  question,  what  enables 
[20]  it  to  do  what  it  does.  If  this  is  correct,  we 
must  on  the  same  ground  go  yet  another  step 
farther  back  and  have  some  clear  view  of  the 
objects  of  each;  thus  we  must  start  with  these 
objects,  e.g.  with  food,  with  what  is  percepti¬ 
ble,  or  with  what  is  intelligible. 

It  follows  that  first  of  all  we  must  treat  of 
nutrition  and  reproduction,  for  the  nutritive 
soul  is  found  along  with  all  the  others  and  is 
the  most  primitive  and  widely  distributed 
power  of  soul,  being  indeed  that  one  in  virtue 
[25]  of  which  all  are  said  to  have  life.  The  acts 
in  which  it  manifests  itself  are  reproduction 
and  the  use  of  food — reproduction,  I  say,  be¬ 
cause  for  any  living  thing  that  has  reached  its 
normal  development  and  which  is  unmutilat¬ 
ed,  and  whose  mode  of  generation  is  not  spon¬ 
taneous,  the  most  natural  act  is  the  production 
of  another  like  itself,  an  animal  producing  an 
animal,  a  plant  a  plant,  in  order  that,  as  far  as 
its  nature  allows,  it  may  partake  in  the  eternal 
415b  and  divine.  That  is  the  goal  towards 
which  all  things  strive,  that  for  the  sake  of 
which  they  do  whatsoever  their  nature  renders 
possible.  The  phrase  ‘for  the  sake  of  which’  is 
ambiguous;  it  may  mean  either  (a)  the  end  to 
achieve  which,  or  (b)  the  being  in  whose  in¬ 
terest,  the  act  is  done.  Since  then  no  living 
thing  is  able  to  partake  in  what  is  eternal  and 
divine  by  uninterrupted  continuance  (for  noth¬ 
ing  perishable  can  for  ever  remain  one  and 
[5]  the  same),  it  tries  to  achieve  that  end  in 
the  only  way  possible  to  it,  and  success  is  pos¬ 
sible  in  varying  degrees;  so  it  remains  not  in¬ 
deed  as  the  self-same  individual  but  continues 
its  existence  in  something  like  itself — not  nu¬ 
merically  but  specifically  one. 

The  soul  is  the  cause  or  source  of  the  living 
body.  The  terms  cause  and  source  have  many 
senses.  But  the  soul  is  the  cause  of  its  body 
alike  in  all  three  senses  which  we  explicitly 
[/o]  recognize.  It  is  (a)  the  source  or  origin  of 
movement,  it  is  (b)  the  end,  it  is  (c)  the  es¬ 
sence  of  the  whole  living  body. 

That  it  is  the  last,  is  clear;  for  in  everything 
the  essence  is  identical  with  the  ground  of  its 
being,  and  here,  in  the  case  of  living  things, 
their  being  is  to  live,  and  of  their  being  and 
their  living  the  soul  in  them  is  the  cause  or 
source.  Further,  the  actuality  of  whatever  is 
potential  is  identical  with  its  formulable  es¬ 
sence. 

[75]  It  is  manifest  that  the  soul  is  also  the 
final  cause  of  its  body.  For  Nature,  like  mind. 


646  ON  THE  SOUL  416b 


always  does  whatever  it  does  for  the  sake  of 
something,  which  something  is  its  end.  To 
that  something  corresponds  in  the  case  of  ani¬ 
mals  the  soul  and  in  this  it  follows  the  order 
of  nature;  all  natural  bodies  are  organs  of  the 
soul.  This  is  true  of  those  that  enter  into  the 
constitution  of  plants  as  well  as  of  those  which 
enter  into  that  of  animals.  This  shows  that  that 
[20]  for  the  sake  of  which  they  are  is  soul.  We 
must  here  recall  the  two  senses  of  ‘that  for  the 
sake  of  which’,  viz.  (a)  the  end  to  achieve 
which,  and  ( b )  the  being  in  whose  interest, 
anything  is  or  is  done. 

We  must  maintain,  further,  that  the  soul  is 
also  the  cause  of  the  living  body  as  the  original 
source  of  local  movement.  The  power  of  loco¬ 
motion  is  not  found,  however,  in  all  living 
things.  But  change  of  quality  and  change  of 
quantity  are  also  due  to  the  soul.  Sensation  is 
held  to  be  a  qualitative  alteration,  and  nothing 
except  what  has  soul  in  it  is  capable  of  sensa- 
[25]  tion.  The  same  holds  of  the  quantitative 
changes  which  constitute  growth  and  decay; 
nothing  grows  or  decays  naturally  except  what 
feeds  itself,  and  nothing  feeds  itself  except 
what  has  a  share  of  soul  in  it. 

Empedocles  is  wrong  in  adding  that  growth 
in  plants  is  to  be  explained,  the  downward 
rooting  by  the  natural  tendency  of  earth  to 
416a  travel  downwards,  and  the  upward 
branching  by  the  similar  natural  tendency  of 
fire  to  travel  upwards.  For  he  misinterprets  up 
and  down;  up  and  down  are  not  for  all  things 
what  they  are  for  the  whole  Cosmos:  if  we  are 
to  distinguish  and  identify  organs  according 
[5]  to  their  functions,  the  roots  of  plants  are 
analogous  to  the  head  in  animals.  Further,  we 
must  ask  what  is  the  force  that  holds  together 
the  earth  and  the  fire  which  tend  to  travel  in 
contrary  directions;  if  there  is  no  counteract¬ 
ing  force,  they  will  be  torn  asunder;  if  there  is, 
this  must  be  the  soul  and  the  cause  of  nutrition 
and  growth.  By  some  the  element  of  fire  is 
held  to  be  the  cause  of  nutrition  and  growth, 
[/o]  for  it  alone  of  the  primary  bodies  or  ele¬ 
ments  is  observed  to  feed  and  increase  itself . 
Hence  the  suggestion  that  in  both  plants  and 
animals  it  is  it  which  is  the  operative  force.  A 
concurrent  cause  in  a  sense  it  certainly  is,  but 
[75]  not  the  principal  cause,  that  is  rather  the 
soul;  for  while  the  growth  of  fire  goes  on  with¬ 
out  limit  so  long  as  there  is  a  supply  of  fuel,  in 
the  case  of  all  complex  wholes  formed  in  the 
course  of  nature  there  is  a  limit  or  ratio  which 
determines  their  size  and  increase,  and  limit 
and  ratio  are  marks  of  soul  but  not  of  fire,  and 


belong  to  the  side  of  formulable  essence  rather 
than  that  of  matter. 

Nutrition  and  reproduction  are  due  to  one 
and  the  same  psychic  power.  It  is  necessary 
first  to  give  precision  to  our  account  of,  food, 
[20]  for  it  is  by  this  function  of  absorbing 
food  that  this  psychic  power  is  distinguished 
from  all  the  others.  The  current  view  is  that 
what  serves  as  food  to  a  living  thing  is  what  is 
contrary  to  it — not  that  in  every  pair  of  con¬ 
traries  each  is  food  to  the  other:  to  be  food  a 
contrary  must  not  only  be  transformable  into 
the  other  and  vice  versa,  it  must  also  in  so  do¬ 
ing  increase  the  bulk  of  the  other.  Many  a  con¬ 
trary  is  transformed  into  its  other  and  vice 
versa,  where  neither  is  even  a  quantum  and  so 
cannot  increase  in  bulk,  e.g.  an  invalid  into  a 
[25]  healthy  subject.  It  is  clear  that  not  even 
those  contraries  which  satisfy  both  the  condi¬ 
tions  mentioned  above  are  food  to  one  another 
in  precisely  the  same  sense;  water  may  be  said 
to  feed  fire,  but  not  fire  water.  Where  the 
members  of  the  pair  are  elementary  bodies 
only  one  of  the  contraries,  it  would  appear,  can 
be  said  to  feed  the  other.  But  there  is  a  diffi¬ 
culty  here.  One  set  of  thinkers  assert  that  like 
[50]  is  fed,  as  well  as  increased  in  amount,  by 
like.  Another  set,  as  we  have  said,  maintain 
the  very  reverse,  viz.  that  what  feeds  and  what 
is  fed  are  contrary  to  one  another;  like,  they 
argue,  is  incapable  of  being  affected  by  like; 
but  food  is  changed  in  the  process  of  digestion, 
and  change  is  always  to  what  is  opposite  or  to 
[55]  what  is  intermediate.  Further,  food  is 
41 6b  acted  upon  by  what  is  nourished  by  it, 
not  the  other  way  round,  as  timber  is  worked 
by  a  carpenter  and  not  conversely;  there  is  a 
change  in  the  carpenter  but  it  is  merely  a 
change  from  not-working  to  working.  In  an¬ 
swering  this  problem  it  makes  all  the  differ¬ 
ence  whether  we  mean  by  ‘the  food’  the  ‘fin¬ 
ished’  or  the  ‘raw’  product.  If  we  use  the  word 
food  of  both,  viz.  of  the  completely  undigested 
and  the  completely  digested  matter,  we  can 
[5]  justify  both  the  rival  accounts  of  it;  taking 
food  in  the  sense  of  undigested  matter,  it  is 
the  contrary  of  what  is  fed  by  it,  taking  it  as 
digested  it  is  like  what  is  fed  by  it.  Conse¬ 
quently  it  is  clear  that  in  a  certain  sense  we 
may  say  that  both  parties  are  right,  both 
wrong. 

Since  nothing  except  what  is  alive  can  be 
fed,  what  is  fed  is  the  besouled  body  and  just 
because  it  has  soul  in  it.  Hence  food  is  essen- 
[/o]  tially  related  to  what  has  soul  in  it.  Food 
has  a  power  which  is  other  than  the  power  to 


417*  BOOK  II,  CHAPTERS  4-5  647 


increase  the  bulk  of  what  is  fed  by  it;  so  far 
forth  as  what  has  soul  in  it  is  a  quantum,  food 
may  increase  its  quantity,  but  it  is  only  so  far 
as  what  has  soul  in  it  is  a  ‘this-somewhat’  or 
substance  that  food  acts  as  food;  in  that  case 
it  maintains  the  being  of  what  is  fed,  and  that 
continues  to  be  what  it  is  so  long  as  the  process 
[75]  of  nutrition  continues.  Further,  it  is  the 
agent  in  generation,  i.e.  not  the  generation  of 
the  individual  fed  but  the  reproduction  of  an¬ 
other  like  it;  the  substance  of  the  individual 
fed  is  already  in  existence;  the  existence  of  no 
substance  is  a  self-generation  but  only  a  self¬ 
maintenance. 

Hence  the  psychic  power  which  we  are  now 
studying  may  be  described  as  that  which  tends 
to  maintain  whatever  has  this  power  in  it  of 
continuing  such  as  it  was,  and  food  helps  it  to 
do  its  work.  That  is  why,  if  deprived  of  food, 
it  must  cease  to  be. 

[20]  The  process  of  nutrition  involves  three 
factors,  (a)  what  is  fed,  (b)  that  wherewith  it 
is  fed,  (c)  what  does  the  feeding;  of  these  (r) 
is  the  first  soul,  (a)  the  body  which  has  that 
soul  in  it,  (b)  the  food.  But  since  it  is  right  to 
call  things  after  the  ends  they  realize,  and  the 
end  of  this  soul  is  to  generate  another  being 
like  that  in  which  it  is,  the  first  soul  ought  to 
[25]  be  named  the  reproductive  soul.  The  ex¬ 
pression  (b)  ‘wherewith  it  is  fed’  is  ambigu¬ 
ous  just  as  is  the  expression  ‘wherewith  the 
ship  is  steered’;  that  may  mean  either  (i)  the 
hand  or  (ii)  the  rudder,  i.e.  either  (i)  what  is 
moved  and  sets  in  movement,  or  (ii)  what  is 
merely  moved.  We  can  apply  this  analogy  here 
if  we  recall  that  all  food  must  be  capable  of 
being  digested,  and  that  what  produces  diges¬ 
tion  is  warmth;  that  is  why  everything  that  has 
soul  in  it  possesses  warmth. 

[50]  We  have  now  given  an  outline  account  of 
the  nature  of  food;  further  details  must  be 
given  in  the  appropriate  place. 

5 

Having  made  these  distinctions  let  us  now 
speak  of  sensation  in  the  widest  sense.  Sensa¬ 
tion  depends,  as  we  have  said,1  on  a  process  of 
movement  or  affection  from  without,  for  it  is 
held  to  be  some  sort  of  change  of  quality.  Now 
[35]  some  thinkers  assert  that  like  is  affected 
only  by  like;  in  what  sense  this  is  possible  and 
417*  in  what  sense  impossible,  we  have  ex¬ 
plained  in  our  general  discussion  of  acting  and 
being  acted  upon.2 

1  41 5b  24,  cf.  410®  25. 

2  On  Generation  and  Corruption ,  323b  i8ff. 


Here  arises  a  problem:  why  do  we  not  per¬ 
ceive  the  senses  themselves  as  well  as  the  ex¬ 
ternal  objects  of  sense,  or  why  without  the 
stimulation  of  external  objects  do  they  not  pro¬ 
duce  sensation,  seeing  that  they  contain  in 
[5]  themselves  fire,  earth,  and  all  the  other  ele¬ 
ments,  which  are  the  direct  or  indirect  objects 
of  sense?  It  is  clear  that  what  is  sensitive  is  so 
only  potentially,  not  actually.  The  power  of 
sense  is  parallel  to  what  is  combustible,  for  that 
never  ignites  itself  spontaneously,  but  requires 
an  agent  which  has  the  power  of  starting  igni¬ 
tion;  otherwise  it  could  have  set  itself  on  fire, 
and  would  not  have  needed  actual  fire  to  set 
it  ablaze. 

In  reply  we  must  recall  that  we  use  the  word 
[70]  ‘perceive’  in  two  ways,  for  we  say  (a) 
that  what  has  the  power  to  hear  or  see,  ‘sees’  or 
‘hears’,  even  though  it  is  at  the  moment  asleep, 
and  also  (b)  that  what  is  actually  seeing  or 
hearing,  ‘sees’  or  ‘hears’.  Hence  ‘sense’  too 
must  have  two  meanings,  sense  potential,  and 
sense  actual.  Similarly  ‘to  be  a  sentient’  means 
either  (a)  to  have  a  certain  power  or  (b)  to 
manifest  a  certain  activity.  To  begin  with,  for 
[75]  a  time,  let  us  speak  as  if  there  were  no 
difference  between  (i)  being  moved  or  affect¬ 
ed,  and  (ii)  being  active,  for  movement  is  a 
kind  of  activity — an  imperfect  kind,  as  has 
elsewhere  been  explained.3  Everything  that  is 
acted  upon  or  moved  is  acted  upon  by  an  agent 
which  is  actually  at  work.  Hence  it  is  that  in 
one  sense,  as  has  already  been  stated,4  what 
[20]  acts  and  what  is  acted  upon  are  like, 
in  another  unlike,  i.e.  prior  to  and  during 
the  change  the  two  factors  are  unlike,  after 
it  like. 

But  we  must  now  distinguish  not  only  be¬ 
tween  what  is  potential  and  what  is  actual  but 
also  different  senses  in  which  things  can  be 
said  to  be  potential  or  actual;  up  to  now  we 
have  been  speaking  as  if  each  of  these  phrases 
had  only  one  sense.  We  can  speak  of  some¬ 
thing  as  ‘a  knower’  either  (a)  as  when  we  say 
that  man  is  a  knower,  meaning  that  man  falls 
within  the  class  of  beings  that  know  or  have 
[25]  knowledge,  or  ( b )  as  when  we  are  speak¬ 
ing  of  a  man  who  possesses  a  knowledge  of 
grammar;  each  of  these  is  so  called  as  having 
in  him  a  certain  potentiality,  but  there  is  a  dif¬ 
ference  between  their  respective  potentialities, 
the  one  (a)  being  a  potential  knower,  because 
his  kind  or  matter  is  such  and  such,  the  other 
(b)y  because  he  can  in  the  absence  of  any  ex¬ 
ternal  counteracting  cause  realize  his  knowl- 

8  Physics ,  20ib  31 , 257b  8.  4  416**  29^9. 


648  ON  THE  SOUL  418a 


edge  in  actual  knowing  at  will.  This  implies  a 
third  meaning  of  ‘a  knower’  (c),  one  who  is 
already  realizing  his  knowledge — he  is  a 
knower  in  actuality  and  in  the  most  proper 
[jo]  sense  is  knowing,  e.g.  this  A.  Both  the 
former  are  potential  knowers,  who  realize 
their  respective  potentialities,  the  one  (a)  by 
change  of  quality,  i.e.  repeated  transitions 
from  one  state  to  its  opposite  under  instruc¬ 
tion,  the  other  ( b )  by  the  transition  from  the 
41 7b  inactive  possession  of  sense  or  grammar 
to  their  active  exercise.  The  two  kinds  of  tran¬ 
sition  are  distinct. 

Also  the  expression  ‘to  be  acted  upon’  has 
more  than  one  meaning;  it  may  mean  either 
(a)  the  extinction  of  one  of  two  contraries  by 
the  other,  or  (b)  the  maintenance  of  what  is 
potential  by  the  agency  of  what  is  actual  and 
already  like  what  is  acted  upon,  with  such  like¬ 
ness  as  is  compatible  with  one’s  being  actual 
[5]  and  the  other  potential.  For  what  possesses 
knowledge  becomes  an  actual  knower  by  a 
transition  which  is  either  not  an  alteration  of 
it  at  all  (being  in  reality  a  development  into 
its  true  self  or  actuality)  or  at  least  an  altera¬ 
tion  in  a  quite  different  sense  from  the  usual 
meaning. 

Hence  it  is  wrong  to  speak  of  a  wise  man  as 
being  ‘altered’  when  he  uses  his  wisdom,  just 
as  it  would  be  absurd  to  speak  of  a  builder  as 
being  altered  when  he  is  using  his  skill  in 
building  a  house. 

[/o]  What  in  the  case  of  knowing  or  under¬ 
standing  leads  from  potentiality  to  actuality 
ought  not  to  be  called  teaching  but  something 
else.  That  which  starting  with  the  power  to 
know  learns  or  acquires  knowledge  through 
the  agency  of  one  who  actually  knows  and  has 
the  power  of  teaching  either  (a)  ought  not  to 
be  said  ‘to  be  acted  upon’  at  all  or  ( b )  we 
[75]  must  recognize  two  senses  of  alteration, 
viz.  (i)  the  substitution  of  one  quality  for  an¬ 
other,  the  first  being  the  contrary  of  the  sec¬ 
ond,  or  (ii)  the  development  of  an  existent 
quality  from  potentiality  in  the  direction  of  fix¬ 
ity  or  nature. 

In  the  case  of  what  is  to  possess  sense,  the 
first  transition  is  due  to  the  action  of  the  male 
parent  and  takes  place  before  birth  so  that  at 
birth  the  living  thing  is,  in  respect  of  sensation, 
at  the  stage  which  corresponds  to  the  posses¬ 
sion  of  knowledge.  Actual  sensation  corre¬ 
sponds  to  the  stage  of  the  exercise  of  knowl¬ 
edge.  But  between  the  two  cases  compared 
[20]  there  is  a  difference;  the  objects  that  ex¬ 
cite  the  sensory  powers  to  activity,  the  seen,  the 


heard,  &c.,  are  outside.  The  ground  of  this  dif¬ 
ference  is  that  what  actual  sensation  appre¬ 
hends  is  individuals,  while  what  knowledge 
apprehends  is  universal,  and  these  are  in  a 
sense  within  the  soul.  That  is  why  a  man  can 
exercise  his  knowledge  when  he  wishes,  but 
his  sensation  does  not  depend  upon  himself — 
[25]  a  sensible  object  must  be  there.  A  similar 
statement  must  be  made  about  our  \nowledge 
of  what  is  sensible — on  the  same  ground,  viz. 
that  the  sensible  objects  are  individual  and  ex¬ 
ternal. 

A  later  more  appropriate  occasion  may  be 
found1  thoroughly  to  clear  up  all  this.  At  pres- 
[30]  ent  it  must  be  enough  to  recognize  the 
distinctions  already  drawn;  a  thing  may  be 
said  to  be  potential  in  either  of  two  senses,  (a) 
in  the  sense  in  which  we  might  say  of  a  boy 
that  he  may  become  a  general  or  (b)  in  the 
sense  in  which  we  might  say  the  same  of  an 
adult,  and  there  are  two  corresponding  senses 
418a  of  the  term  ‘a  potential  sentient’.  There 
are  no  separate  names  for  the  two  stages  of 
potentiality;  we  have  pointed  out  that  they  are 
different  and  how  they  are  different.  We  can¬ 
not  help  using  the  incorrect  terms  ‘being  acted 
upon  or  altered’  of  the  two  transitions  in¬ 
volved.  As  we  have  said,2  what  has  the  power 
of  sensation  is  potentially  like  what  the  per¬ 
ceived  object  is  actually;  that  is,  while  at  the 
beginning  of  the  process  of  its  being  acted  up¬ 
on  the  two  interacting  factors  are  dissimilar, 
[5]  at  the  end  the  one  acted  upon  is  assimi¬ 
lated  to  the  other  and  is  identical  in  quality 
with  it. 

6 

In  dealing  with  each  of  the  senses  we  shall 
have  first  to  speak  of  the  objects  which  are  per¬ 
ceptible  by  each.  The  term  ‘object  of  sense’ 
covers  three  kinds  of  objects,  two  kinds  of 
which  are,  in  our  language,  directly  percepti¬ 
ble,  while  the  remaining  one  is  only  inciden¬ 
tally  perceptible.  Of  the  first  two  kinds  one  (a) 
consists  of  what  is  perceptible  by  a  single  sense, 
[/o]  the  other  (b)  of  what  is  perceptible  by 
any  and  all  of  the  senses.  I  call  by  the  name  of 
special  object  of  this  or  that  sense  that  which 
cannot  be  perceived  by  any  other  sense  than 
that  one  and  in  respect  of  which  no  error  is 
possible;  in  this  sense  colour  is  the  special  ob¬ 
ject  of  sight,  sound  of  hearing,  flavour  of  taste. 
Touch,  indeed,  discriminates  more  than  one 
set  of  different  qualities.  Each  sense  has  one 
[75]  kind  of  object  which  it  discerns,  and  nev- 
*111.4,5.  2  417®  12-20. 


419*  BOOK  II,  CHAPTERS  5-7  649 


er  errs  in  reporting  that  what  is  before  it  is 
colour  or  sound  (though  it  may  err  as  to  what 
it  is  that  is  coloured  or  where  that  is,  or  what 
it  is  that  is  sounding  or  where  that  is.)  Such 
objects  are  what  we  propose  to  call  the  special 
objects  of  this  or  that  sense. 

‘Common  sensibles’  are  movement,  rest, 
number,  figure,  magnitude;  these  are  not  pe¬ 
culiar  to  any  one  sense,  but  are  common  to  all. 
There  are  at  any  rate  certain  kinds  of  move¬ 
ment  which  are  perceptible  both  by  touch  and 
by  sight. 

[20]  We  speak  of  an  incidental  object  of  sense 
where  e.g.  the  white  object  which  we  see  is  the 
son  of  Diares;  here  because  ‘being  the  son  of 
Diares’  is  incidental  to  the  directly  visible 
white  patch  we  speak  of  the  son  of  Diares  as 
being  (incidentally)  perceived  or  seen  by  us. 
Because  this  is  only  incidentally  an  object  of 
sense,  it  in  no  way  as  such  affects  the  senses. 
Of  the  two  former  kinds,  both  of  which  are  in 
their  own  nature  perceptible  by  sense,  the  first 
kind — that  of  special  objects  of  the  several 
senses — constitute  the  objects  of  sense  in  the 
[25]  strictest  sense  of  the  term  and  it  is  to 
them  that  in  the  nature  of  things  the  structure 
of  each  several  sense  is  adapted. 

7 

The  object  of  sight  is  the  visible,  and  what 
is  visible  is  (a)  colour  and  (b)  a  certain  kind 
of  object  which  can  be  described  in  words  but 
which  has  no  single  name;  what  we  mean  by 
( b )  will  be  abundantly  clear  as  we  proceed. 
Whatever  is  visible  is  colour  and  colour  is 
what  lies  upon  what  is  in  its  own  nature  visi- 
[50]  ble;  ‘in  its  own  nature’  here  means  not 
that  visibility  is  involved  in  the  definition  of 
what  thus  underlies  colour,  but  that  that  sub¬ 
stratum  contains  in  itself  the  cause  of  visibil¬ 
ity.  Every  colour  has  in  it  the  power  to  set  in 
movement  what  is  actually  transparent;  that 
418b  power  constitutes  its  very  nature.  That 
is  why  it  is  not  visible  except  with  the  help  of 
light;  it  is  only  in  light  that  the  colour  of  a 
thing  is  seen.  Hence  our  first  task  is  to  explain 
what  light  is. 

Now  there  clearly  is  something  which  is 
transparent,  and  by  ‘transparent’  I  mean  what 
[5]  is  visible,  and  yet  not  visible  in  itself,  but 
rather  owing  its  visibility  to  the  colour  of 
something  else ;  of  this  character  are  air,  water, 
and  many  solid  bodies.  Neither  air  nor  water 
is  transparent  because  it  is  air  or  water;  they 
are  transparent  because  each  of  them  has  con¬ 
tained  in  it  a  certain  substance  which  is  the 


same  in  both  and  is  also  found  in  the  eternal 
body  which  constitutes  the  uppermost  shell  of 
the  physical  Cosmos.  Of  this  substance  light 
is  the  activity — the  activity  of  what  is  trans- 
arent  so  far  forth  as  it  has  in  it  the  determi- 
70]  nate  power  of  becoming  transparent; 
where  this  power  is  present,  there  is  also  the 
potentiality  of  the  contrary,  viz.  darkness. 
Light  is  as  it  were  the  proper  colour  of  what  is 
transparent,  and  exists  whenever  the  potential¬ 
ly  transparent  is  excited  to  actuality  by  the  in¬ 
fluence  of  fire  or  something  resembling  ‘the 
uppermost  body’;  for  fire  too  contains  some¬ 
thing  which  is  one  and  the  same  with  the  sub¬ 
stance  in  question. 

We  have  now  explained  what  the  transpar¬ 
ent  is  and  what  light  is;  light  is  neither  fire  nor 
any  kind  whatsoever  of  body  nor  an  efflux 
[75]  from  any  kind  of  body  (if  it  were,  it 
would  again  itself  be  a  kind  of  body) — it  is  the 
presence  of  fire  or  something  resembling  fire 
in  what  is  transparent.  It  is  certainly  not  a 
body,  for  two  bodies  cannot  be  present  in  the 
same  place.  The  opposite  of  light  is  darkness; 
darkness  is  the  absence  from  what  is  transpar¬ 
ent  of  the  corresponding  positive  state  above 
characterized;  clearly  therefore,  light  is  just 
the  presence  of  that. 

[20]  Empedocles  (and  with  him  all  others 
who  used  the  same  forms  of  expression)  was 
wrong  in  speaking  of  light  as  ‘travelling’  or 
being  at  a  given  moment  between  the  earth 
and  its  envelope,  its  movement  being  unob¬ 
servable  by  us;  that  view  is  contrary  both  to 
the  clear  evidence  of  argument  and  to  the  ob¬ 
served  facts;  if  the  distance  traversed  were 
[25]  short,  the  movement  might  have  been  un¬ 
observable,  but  where  the  distance  is  from  ex¬ 
treme  East  to  extreme  West,  the  draught  upon 
our  powers  of  belief  is  too  great. 

What  is  capable  of  taking  on  colour  is  what 
in  itself  is  colourless,  as  what  can  take  on 
sound  is  what  is  soundless;  what  is  colourless 
includes  (a)  what  is  transparent  and  (b)  what 
is  invisible  or  scarcely  visible,  i.e.  what  is 
[50]  ‘dark’.  The  latter  (b)  is  the  same  as  what 
is  transparent,  when  it  is  potentially,  not  of 
course  when  it  is  actually  transparent;  it  is  the 
same  substance  which  is  now  darkness,  now 
light. 

419*  Not  everything  that  is  visible  depends 
upon  light  for  its  visibility.  This  is  only  true  of 
the  ‘proper’  colour  of  things.  Some  objects  of 
sight  which  in  light  are  invisible,  in  darkness 
stimulate  the  sense;  that  is,  things  that  appear 
fiery  or  shining.  This  class  of  objects  has  no 


65 o  ON  THE  SOUL  419b 


simple  common  name,  but  instances  of  it  are 
[5]  fungi,  flesh,  heads,  scales,  and  eyes  of  fish. 
In  none  of  these  is  what  is  seen  their  own 
‘proper’  colour.  Why  we  see  these  at  all  is  an¬ 
other  question.  At  present  what  is  obvious  is 
that  what  is  seen  in  light  is  always  colour. 
That  is  why  without  the  help  of  light  colour 
remains  invisible.  Its  being  colour  at  all  means 
[/o]  precisely  its  having  in  it  the  power  to  set 
in  movement  what  is  already  actually  trans¬ 
parent,  and,  as  we  have  seen,  the  actuality  of 
what  is  transparent  is  just  light. 

The  following  experiment  makes  the  neces¬ 
sity  of  a  medium  clear.  If  what  has  colour  is 
placed  in  immediate  contact  with  the  eye,  it 
cannot  be  seen.  Colour  sets  in  movement  not 
the  sense  organ  but  what  is  transparent,  e.g. 
the  air,  and  that,  extending  continuously  from 
[75]  the  object  to  the  organ,  sets  the  latter  in 
movement.  Democritus  misrepresents  the  facts 
when  he  expresses  the  opinion  that  if  the  in¬ 
terspace  were  empty  one  could  distinctly  see  an 
ant  on  the  vault  of  the  sky;  that  is  an  impos¬ 
sibility.  Seeing  is  due  to  an  affection  or  change 
of  what  has  the  perceptive  faculty,  and  it  can¬ 
not  be  affected  by  the  seen  colour  itself;  it  re¬ 
mains  that  it  must  be  affected  by  what  comes 
between.  Hence  it  is  indispensable  that  there 
[20]  be  something  in  between — if  there  were 
nothing,  so  far  from  seeing  with  greater  dis¬ 
tinctness,  we  should  see  nothing  at  all. 

We  have  now  explained  the  cause  why  col¬ 
our  cannot  be  seen  otherwise  than  in  light. 
Fire  on  the  other  hand  is  seen  both  in  dark¬ 
ness  and  in  light;  this  double  possibility  fol¬ 
lows  necessarily  from  our  theory,  for  it  is  just 
fire  that  makes  what  is  potentially  transparent 
actually  transparent. 

[25]  The  same  account  holds  also  of  sound 
and  smell;  if  the  object  of  either  of  these  senses 
is  in  immediate  contact  with  the  organ  no  sen¬ 
sation  is  produced.  In  both  cases  the  object  sets 
in  movement  only  what  lies  between,  and  this 
in  turn  sets  the  organ  in  movement:  if  what 
sounds  or  smells  is  brought  into  immediate 
contact  with  the  organ,  no  sensation  will  be 
[50]  produced.  The  same,  in  spite  of  all  ap¬ 
pearances,  applies  also  to  touch  and  taste;  why 
there  is  this  apparent  difference  will  be  clear 
later.1  What  comes  between  in  the  case  of 
sounds  is  air;  the  corresponding  medium  in 
the  case  of  smell  has  no  name.  But,  corre¬ 
sponding  to  what  is  transparent  in  the  case  of 
colour,  there  is  a  quality  found  both  in  air  and 
water,  which  serves  as  a  medium  for  what  has 

1422b34ff. 


[55]  smell — I  say  ‘in  water’  because  animals 
that  live  in  water  as  well  as  those  that  live  on 
419b  land  seem  to  possess  the  sense  of  smell, 
and  ‘in  air’  because  man  and  all  other  land  ani¬ 
mals  that  breathe,  perceive  smells  only  when 
they  breathe  air  in.  The  explanation  of  this  too 
will  be  given  later.2 

8 

Now  let  us,  to  begin  with,  make  certain  dis¬ 
tinctions  about  sound  and  hearing. 

[5]  Sound  may  mean  either  of  two  things — 
(a)  actual,  and  (b)  potential,  sound.  There  are 
certain  things  which,  as  we  say,  ‘have  no 
sound’,  e.g.  sponges  or  wool,  others  which 
have,  e.g.  bronze  and  in  general  all  things 
which  are  smooth  and  solid — the  latter  are 
said  to  have  a  sound  because  they  can  make  a 
sound,  i.e.  can  generate  actual  sound  between 
themselves  and  the  organ  of  hearing. 

Actual  sound  requires  for  its  occurrence 
i,  ii)  two  such  bodies  and  (iii)  a  space  be- 
jo]  tween  them;  for  it  is  generated  by  an  im¬ 
pact.  Hence  it  is  impossible  for  one  body  only 
to  generate  a  sound — there  must  be  a  body 
impinging  and  a  body  impinged  upon;  what 
sounds  does  so  by  striking  against  something 
else,  and  this  is  impossible  without  a  move¬ 
ment  from  place  to  place. 

As  we  have  said,  not  all  bodies  can  by  im¬ 
pact  on  one  another  produce  sound;  impact  on 
wool  makes  no  sound,  while  the  impact  on 
[75]  bronze  or  any  body  which  is  smooth  and 
hollow  does.  Bronze  gives  out  a  sound  when 
struck  because  it  is  smooth;  bodies  which  are 
hollow  owing  to  reflection  repeat  the  original 
impact  over  and  over  again,  the  body  original¬ 
ly  set  in  movement  being  unable  to  escape 
from  the  concavity. 

Further,  we  must  remark  that  sound  is 
heard  both  in  air  and  in  water,  though  less  dis¬ 
tinctly  in  the  latter.  Yet  neither  air  nor  water 
is  the  principal  cause  of  sound.  What  is  re- 
120]  quired  for  the  production  of  sound  is  an 
impact  of  two  solids  against  one  another  and 
against  the  air.  The  latter  condition  is  satisfied 
when  the  air  impinged  upon  does  not  retreat 
before  the  blow,  i.e.  is  not  dissipated  by  it. 

That  is  why  it  must  be  struck  with  a  sudden 
sharp  blow,  if  it  is  to  sound — the  movement 
of  the  whip  must  outrun  the  dispersion  of  the 
air,  just  as  one  might  get  in  a  stroke  at  a  heap 
or  whirl  of  sand  as  it  was  traveling  rapidly 

fast. 

25]  An  echo  occurs,  when,  a  mass  of  air  hav- 

*  42Ib  I3-422ft6. 


420b 

in g  been  unified,  bounded,  and  prevented 
from  dissipation  by  the  containing  walls  of  a 
vessel,  the  air  originally  struck  by  the  imping¬ 
ing  body  and  set  in  movement  by  it  rebounds 
from  this  mass  of  air  like  a  ball  from  a  wall.  It 
is  probable  that  in  all  generation  of  sound  echo 
takes  place,  though  it  is  frequently  only  in¬ 
distinctly  heard.  What  happens  here  must  be 
analogous  to  what  happens  in  the  case  of  light; 
light  is  always  reflected — otherwise  it  would 
[jo]  not  be  diffused  and  outside  what  was  di¬ 
rectly  illuminated  by  the  sun  there  would  be 
blank  darkness;  but  this  reflected  light  is  not 
always  strong  enough,  as  it  is  when  it  is  re¬ 
flected  from  water,  bronze,  and  other  smooth 
bodies,  to  cast  a  shadow,  which  is  the  distin¬ 
guishing  mark  by  which  we  recognize  light. 

It  is  rightly  said  that  an  empty  space  plays 
the  chief  part  in  the  production  of  hearing,  for 
what  people  mean  by  ‘the  vacuum’  is  the  air, 
which  is  what  causes  hearing,  when  that  air  is 
set  in  movement  as  one  continuous  mass;  but 
[35]  owing  to  its  friability  it  emits  no  sound, 
being  dissipated  by  impinging  upon  any  sur- 
420a  face  which  is  not  smooth.  When  the  sur¬ 
face  on  which  it  impinges  is  quite  smooth, 
what  is  produced  by  the  original  impact  is  a 
united  mass,  a  result  due  to  the  smoothness  of 
the  surface  with  which  the  air  is  in  contact  at 
the  other  end. 

What  has  the  power  of  producing  sound  is 
what  has  the  power  of  setting  in  movement  a 
single  mass  of  air  which  is  continuous  from 
the  impinging  body  up  to  the  organ  of  hear¬ 
ing.  The  organ  of  hearing  is  physically  united 
with  air,  and  because  it  is  in  air,  the  air  inside 
[5]  is  moved  concurrently  with  the  air  outside. 
Hence  animals  do  not  hear  with  all  parts  of 
their  bodies,  nor  do  all  parts  admit  of  the  en¬ 
trance  of  air;  for  even  the  part  which  can  be 
moved  and  can  sound  has  not  air  everywhere 
in  it.  Air  in  itself  is,  owing  to  its  friability, 
quite  soundless;  only  when  its  dissipation  is 
prevented  is  its  movement  sound.  The  air  in 
the  ear  is  built  into  a  chamber  just  to  prevent 
this  dissipating  movement,  in  order  that  the 
[/o]  animal  may  accurately  apprehend  all  va¬ 
rieties  of  the  movements  of  the  air  outside. 
That  is  why  we  hear  also  in  water,  viz.  be¬ 
cause  the  water  cannot  get  into  the  air  cham¬ 
ber  or  even,  owing  to  the  spirals,  into  the  outer 
ear.  If  this  does  happen,  hearing  ceases,  as  it 
also  does  if  the  tympanic  membrane  is  dam¬ 
aged,  just  as  sight  ceases  if  the  membrane  cov¬ 
ering  the  pupil  is  damaged.  It  is  also  a  test  of 
[75]  deafness  whether  the  ear  does  or  does  not 


651 

reverberate  like  a  horn;  the  air  inside  the  ear 
has  always  a  movement  of  its  own,  but  the 
sound  we  hear  is  always  the  sounding  of  some¬ 
thing  else,  not  of  the  organ  itself.  That  is  why 
we  say  that  we  hear  with  what  is  empty  and 
echoes,  viz.  because  what  we  hear  with  is  a 
chamber  which  contains  a  bounded  mass  of  air. 

Which  is  it  that  ‘sounds’,  the  striking  body 
or  the  struck?  Is  not  the  answer  ‘it  is  both,  but 
[20]  each  in  a  different  way’?  Sound  is  a 
movement  of  what  can  rebound  from  a  smooth 
surface  when  struck  against  it.  As  we  have  ex¬ 
plained1  not  everything  sounds  when  it  strikes 
or  is  struck,  e.g.  if  one  needle  is  struck  against 
another,  neither  emits  any  sound.  In  order, 
[25]  therefore,  that  sound  may  be  generated; 
what  is  struck  must  be  smooth,  to  enable  the 
air  to  rebound  and  be  shaken  off  from  it  in  one 
piece. 

The  distinctions  between  different  sounding 
bodies  show  themselves  only  in  actual  sound; 
as  without  the  help  of  light  colours  remain  in¬ 
visible,  so  without  the  help  of  actual  sound  the 
distinctions  between  acute  and  grave  sounds 
remain  inaudible.  Acute  and  grave  are  here 
metaphors,  transferred  from  their  proper 
sphere,  viz.  that  of  touch,  where  they  mean 
[30]  respectively  (a)  what  moves  the  sense 
much  in  a  short  time,  ( b )  what  moves  the 
sense  little  in  a  long  time.  Not  that  what  is 
sharp  really  moves  fast,  and  what  is  grave, 
slowly,  but  that  the  difference  in  the  qualities 
of  the  one  and  the  other  movement  is  due  to 
their  respective  speeds.  There  seems  to  be  a 
420b  sort  of  parallelism  between  what  is  acute 
or  grave  to  hearing  and  what  is  sharp  or  blunt 
to  touch;  what  is  sharp  as  it  were  stabs,  while 
what  is  blunt  pushes,  the  one  producing  its  ef¬ 
fect  in  a  short,  the  other  in  a  long  time,  so  that 
the  one  is  quick,  the  other  slow. 

[5]  Let  the  foregoing  suffice  as  an  analysis  of 
sound.  Voice  is  a  kind  of  sound  characteristic 
of  what  has  soul  in  it;  nothing  that  is  without 
soul  utters  voice,  it  being  only  by  a  metaphor 
that  we  speak  of  the  voice  of  the  flute  or  the 
lyre  or  generally  of  what  (being  without  soul) 
possesses  the  power  of  producing  a  succession 
of  notes  which  differ  in  length  and  pitch  and 
timbre.  The  metaphor  is  based  on  the  fact  that 
all  these  differences  are  found  also  in  voice. 
Many  animals  are  voiceless,  e.g.  all  non-san- 
uineous  animals  and  among  sanguineous  ani- 
jo]  mals  fish.  This  is  just  what  we  should  ex¬ 
pect,  since  voice  is  a  certain  movement  of  air. 
The  fish,  like  those  in  the  Achelous,  which  are 

1  4i9b  6,  13. 


BOOK  II,  CHAPTERS  7-8 


65 2  ON  THE  SOUL  421b 


said  to  have  voice,  really  make  the  sounds  with 
their  gills  or  some  similar  organ.  Voice  is  the 
sound  made  by  an  animal,  and  that  with  a  spe¬ 
cial  organ.  As  we  saw,  everything  that  makes  a 
sound  does  so  by  the  impact  of  something  (a) 
[75]  against  something  else,  (b)  across  a  space, 
( c )  filled  with  air;  hence  it  is  only  to  be  ex¬ 
pected  that  no  animals  utter  voice  except  those 
which  take  in  air.  Once  air  is  inbreathed,  Na¬ 
ture  uses  it  for  two  different  purposes,  as  the 
tongue  is  used  both  for  tasting  and  for  articu¬ 
lating;  in  that  case  of  the  two  functions  tasting 
is  necessary  for  the  animal’s  existence  (hence 
it  is  found  more  widely  distributed),  while 
articulate  speech  is  a  luxury  subserving  its  pos¬ 
sessor’s  well-being;  similarly  in  the  former  case 
[20]  Nature  employs  the  breath  both  as  an  in¬ 
dispensable  means  to  the  regulation  of  the  in¬ 
ner  temperature  of  the  living  body  and  also  as 
the  matter  of  articulate  voice,  in  the  interests 
of  its  possessor’s  well-being.  Why  its  former 
use  is  indispensable  must  be  discussed  else¬ 
where.1 

The  organ  of  respiration  is  the  windpipe, 
and  the  organ  to  which  this  is  related  as 
means  to  end  is  the  lungs.  The  latter  is  the  part 
of  the  body  by  which  the  temperature  of  land 
[25]  animals  is  raised  above  that  of  all  others. 
But  what  primarily  requires  the  air  drawn  in 
by  respiration  is  not  only  this  but  the  region 
surrounding  the  heart.  That  is  why  when  ani¬ 
mals  breathe  the  air  must  penetrate  inwards. 

Voice  then  is  the  impact  of  the  inbreathed 
air  against  the  ‘windpipe’,  and  the  agent  that 
produces  the  impact  is  the  soul  resident  in 
these  parts  of  the  body.  Not  every  sound,  as  we 
[50]  said,  made  by  an  animal  is  voice  (even 
with  the  tongue  we  may  merely  make  a  sound 
which  is  not  voice,  or  without  the  tongue  as  in 
coughing);  what  produces  the  impact  must 
have  soul  in  it  and  must  be  accompanied  by  an 
act  of  imagination,  for  voice  is  a  sound  with  a 
meaning,  and  is  not  merely  the  result  of  any 
impact  of  the  breath  as  in  coughing;  in  voice 
the  breath  in  the  windpipe  is  used  as  an  instru¬ 
ment  to  knock  with  against  the  walls  of  the 
421a  windpipe.  This  is  confirmed  by  our  in¬ 
ability  to  speak  when  we  are  breathing  either 
out  or  in — we  can  only  do  so  by  holding  our 
breath;  we  make  the  movements  with  the 
breath  so  checked.  It  is  clear  also  why  fish  are 
voiceless;  they  have  no  windpipe.  And  they 
have  no  windpipe  because  they  do  not  breathe 
1  On  Breathing ,  478**  28;  On  the  Parts  of  Animals ,  642s 
3i'b4- 


[5]  or  take  in  air.  Why  they  do  not  is  a  ques¬ 
tion  belonging  to  another  inquiry.2 

9 

Smell  and  its  object  are  much  less  easy  to  de¬ 
termine  than  what  we  have  hitherto  discussed; 
the  distinguishing  characteristic  of  the  object 
of  smell  is  less  obvious  than  those  of  sound  or 
colour.  The  ground  of  this  is  that  our  power 
of  smell  is  less  discriminating  and  in  general 
[/o]  inferior  to  that  of  many  species  of  ani¬ 
mals;  men  have  a  poor  sense  of  smell  and  our 
apprehension  of  its  proper  objects  is  insepara¬ 
bly  bound  up  with  and  so  confused  by  pleas¬ 
ure  and  pain,  which  shows  that  in  us  the  or¬ 
gan  is  inaccurate.  It  is  probable  that  there  is  a 
parallel  failure  in  the  perception  of  colour  by 
animals  that  have  hard  eyes:  probably  they 
discriminate  differences  of  colour  only  by  the 
presence  or  absence  of  what  excites  fear,  and 
[75]  that  it  is  thus  that  human  beings  distin¬ 
guish  smells.  It  seems  that  there  is  an  analogy 
between  smell  and  taste,  and  that  the  species  of 
tastes  run  parallel  to  those  of  smells — the  only 
difference  being  that  our  sense  of  taste  is  more 
discriminating  than  our  sense  of  smell,  be¬ 
cause  the  former  is  a  modification  of  touch, 
which  reaches  in  man  the  maximum  of  dis¬ 
criminative  accuracy.  While  in  respect  of  all 
[20]  the  other  senses  we  fall  below  many  spe¬ 
cies  of  animals,  in  respect  of  touch  we  far  excel 
all  other  species  in  exactness  of  discrimination. 
That  is  why  man  is  the  most  intelligent  of  all 
animals.  This  is  confirmed  by  the  fact  that  it 
is  to  differences  in  the  organ  of  touch  and  to 
nothing  else  that  the  differences  between  man 
and  man  in  respect  of  natural  endowment  are 
due;  men  whose  flesh  is  hard  are  ill-endowed 
[25]  by  nature,  men  whose  flesh  is  soft,  well- 
endowed. 

As  flavours  may  be  divided  into  ( a )  sweet, 
( b )  bitter,  so  with  smells.  In  some  things  the 
flavour  and  the  smell  have  the  same  quality, 
i.e.  both  are  sweet  or  both  bitter,  in  others  they 
diverge.  Similarly  a  smell,  like  a  flavour,  may 
[30]  be  pungent,  astringent,  acid,  or  succulent. 
But,  as  we  said,  because  smells  are  much  less 
easy  to  discriminate  than  flavours,  the  names 
of  these  varieties  are  applied  to  smells  only 
421 b  metaphorically;  for  example  ‘sweet’  is 
extended  from  the  taste  to  the  smell  of  saffron 
or  honey,  ‘pungent’  to  that  of  thyme,  and  so  on. 

In  the  same  sense  in  which  hearing  has  for 

2  Cf.  On  Breathing ,  474b  25-9,  4 76®  6- 15;  On  the  Parts  of 
Animals ,  669®  2-5. 


422a  BOOK  II,  CHAPTERS  8-10  653 


its  object  both  the  audible  and  the  inaudible, 
[5]  sight  both  the  visible  and  the  invisible, 
smell  has  for  its  object  both  the  odorous  and 
the  inodorous.  ‘Inodorous’  may  be  either  (a) 
what  has  no  smell  at  all,  or  (b)  what  has  a 
small  or  feeble  smell.  The  same  ambiguity 
lurks  in  the  word  ‘tasteless’. 

Smelling,  like  the  operation  of  the  senses 
previously  examined,  takes  place  through  a 
medium,  i.e.  through  air  or  water — I  add  wa- 
[/o]  ter,  because  water-animals  too  (both  san¬ 
guineous  and  non-sanguineous)  seem  to  smell 
just  as  much  as  land-animals;  at  any  rate  some 
of  them  make  directly  for  their  food  from  a 
distance  if  it  has  any  scent.  That  is  why  the 
following  facts  constitute  a  problem  for  us.  All 
animals  smell  in  the  same  way,  but  man  smells 
only  when  he  inhales;  if  he  exhales  or  holds  his 
breath,  he  ceases  to  smell,  no  difference  being 
[75]  made  whether  the  odorous  object  is  dis¬ 
tant  or  near,  or  even  placed  inside  the  nose 
and  actually  on  the  wall  of  the  nostril;  it  is  a 
disability  common  to  all  the  senses  not  to  per¬ 
ceive  what  is  in  immediate  contact  with  the 
organ  of  sense,  but  our  failure  to  apprehend 
what  is  odorous  without  the  help  of  inhalation 
is  peculiar  (the  fact  is  obvious  on  making  the 
experiment).  Now  since  bloodless  animals  do 
[20]  not  breathe,  they  must,  it  might  be  ar¬ 
gued,  have  some  novel  sense  not  reckoned 
among  the  usual  five.  Our  reply  must  be  that 
this  is  impossible,  since  it  is  scent  that  is  per¬ 
ceived;  a  sense  that  apprehends  what  is  odor¬ 
ous  and  what  has  a  good  or  bad  odour  cannot 
be  anything  but  smell.  Further,  they  are  ob¬ 
served  to  be  deleteriously  effected  by  the  same 
strong  odours  as  man  is,  e.g.  bitumen,  sulphur, 
[25]  and  the  like.  These  animals  must  be  able 
to  smell  without  being  able  to  breathe.  The 
probable  explanation  is  that  in  man  the  organ 
of  smell  has  a  certain  superiority  over  that  in 
all  other  animals  just  as  his  eyes  have  over 
those  of  hard-eyed  animals.  Man’s  eyes  have 
in  the  eyelids  a  kind  of  shelter  or  envelope, 
which  must  be  shifted  or  drawn  back  in  order 
[30]  that  we  may  see,  while  hardeyed  animals 
have  nothing  of  the  kind,  but  at  once  see  what¬ 
ever  presents  itself  in  the  transparent  medium. 
Similarly  in  certain  species  of  animals  the  or¬ 
gan  of  smell  is  like  the  eye  of  hard-eyed  ani- 
422a  mals,  uncurtained,  while  in  others  which 
take  in  air  it  probably  has  a  curtain  over  it, 
which  is  drawn  back  in  inhalation,  owing  to 
the  dilating  of  the  veins  or  pores.  That  ex¬ 
plains  also  why  such  animals  cannot  smell  un- 


[5]  der  water;  to  smell  they  must  first  inhale, 
and  that  they  cannot  do  under  water. 

Smells  come  from  what  is  dry  as  flavours 
from  what  is  moist.  Consequently  the  organ 
of  smell  is  potentially  dry. 

10 

What  can  be  tasted  is  always  something  that 
can  be  touched,  and  just  for  that  reason  it  can¬ 
not  be  perceived  through  an  interposed  foreign 
body,  for  touch  means  the  absence  of  any  in- 
[/o]  tervening  body.  Further,  the  flavoured 
and  tasteable  body  is  suspended  in  a  liquid 
matter,  and  this  is  tangible.  Hence,  if  we  lived 
in  water,  we  should  perceive  a  sweet  object 
introduced  into  the  water,  but  the  water 
would  not  be  the  medium  through  which  we 
perceived;  our  perception  would  be  due  to 
the  solution  of  the  sweet  substance  in  what  we 
imbibed,  just  as  if  it  were  mixed  with  some 
drink.  There  is  no  parallel  here  to  the  percep¬ 
tion  of  colour,  which  is  due  neither  to  any 
blending  of  anything  with  anything,  nor  to 
any  efflux  of  anything  from  anything.  In  the 
[75]  case  of  taste,  there  is  nothing  correspond¬ 
ing  to  the  medium  in  the  case  of  the  senses 
previously  discussed;  but  as  the  object  of  sight 
is  colour,  so  the  object  of  taste  is  flavour.  But 
nothing  excites  a  perception  of  flavour  without 
the  help  of  liquid;  what  acts  upon  the  sense  of 
taste  must  be  either  actually  or  potentially  liq¬ 
uid  like  what  is  saline;  it  must  be  both  (a)  it¬ 
self  easily  dissolved,  and  (b)  capable  of  dis- 
[20]  solving  along  with  itself  the  tongue.  Taste 
apprehends  both  (a)  what  has  taste  and  (b) 
what  has  no  taste,  if  we  mean  by  (b)  what 
has  only  a  slight  or  feeble  flavour  or  what 
tends  to  destroy  the  sense  of  taste.  In  this  it  is 
exactly  parallel  to  sight,  which  apprehends  both 
what  is  visible  and  what  is  invisible  (for  dark¬ 
ness  is  invisible  and  yet  is  discriminated  by 
sight;  so  is,  in  a  different  way,  what  is  over¬ 
brilliant),  and  to  hearing,  which  apprehends 
both  sound  and  silence,  of  which  the  one  is 
[25]  audible  and  the  other  inaudible,  and  also 
over-loud  sound.  This  corresponds  in  the  case 
of  hearing  to  over-bright  light  in  the  case  of 
sight.  As  a  faint  sound  is  ‘inaudible’,  so  in  a 
sense  is  a  loud  or  violent  sound.  The  word  ‘in¬ 
visible’  and  similar  privative  terms  cover  not 
only  (a)  what  is  simply  without  some  power, 
but  also  (b)  what  is  adapted  by  nature  to  have 
it  but  has  not  it  or  has  it  only  in  a  very  low 
degree,  as  when  we  say  that  a  species  of  swal¬ 
low  is  ‘footless’  or  that  a  variety  of  fruit  is 


654 

‘stoneless’.  So  too  taste  has  as  its  object  both 
[jo]  what  can  be  tasted  and  the  tasteless — the 
latter  in  the  sense  of  what  has  little  flavour  or 
a  bad  flavour  or  one  destructive  of  taste.  The 
difference  between  what  is  tasteless  and  what 
is  not  seems  to  rest  ultimately  on  that  between 
what  is  drinkable  and  what  is  undrinkable — 
both  are  tasteable,  but  the  latter  is  bad  and 
tends  to  destroy  taste,  while  the  former  is  the 
normal  stimulus  of  taste.  What  is  drinkable  is 
the  common  object  of  both  touch  and  taste. 
422b  Since  what  can  be  tasted  is  liquid,  the 
organ  for  its  perception  cannot  be  either  (a) 
actually  liquid  or  ( b )  incapable  of  becoming 
liquid.  Tasting  means  a  being  affected  by 
what  can  be  tasted  as  such;  hence  the  organ  of 
taste  must  be  liquefied,  and  so  to  start  with 
must  be  non-liquid  but  capable  of  liquefaction 
without  loss  of  its  distinctive  nature.  This  is 
[5]  confirmed  by  the  fact  that  the  tongue  can¬ 
not  taste  either  when  it  is  too  dry  or  when  it  is 
too  moist;  in  the  latter  case  what  occurs  is  due 
to  a  contact  with  the  pre-existent  moisture  in 
the  tongue  itself,  when  after  a  foretaste  of 
some  strong  flavour  we  try  to  taste  another 
flavour;  it  is  in  this  way  that  sick  persons  find 
everything  they  taste  bitter,  viz.  because,  when 
they  taste,  their  tongues  are  overflowing  with 
bitter  moisture. 

[/o]  The  species  of  flavour  are,  as  in  the  case 
of  colour,  (a)  simple,  i.e.  the  two  contraries, 
the  sweet  and  the  bitter,  ( b )  secondary,  viz. 
(i)  on  the  side  of  the  sweet,  the  succulent,  (ii) 
on  the  side  of  the  bitter,  the  saline,  (iii)  be¬ 
tween  these  come  the  pungent,  the  harsh,  the 
astringent,  and  the  acid;  these  pretty  well  ex¬ 
haust  the  varieties  of  flavour.  It  follows  that 
[75]  what  has  the  power  of  tasting  is  what  is 
potentially  of  that  kind,  and  that  what  is  taste- 
able  is  what  has  the  power  of  making  it  actu¬ 
ally  what  it  itself  already  is. 

11 

Whatever  can  be  said  of  what  is  tangible, 
can  be  said  of  touch,  and  vice  versa;  if  touch  is 
not  a  single  sense  but  a  group  of  senses,  there 
must  be  several  kinds  of  what  is  tangible.  It  is 
a  problem  whether  touch  is  a  single  sense  or  a 
[20]  group  of  senses.  It  is  also  a  problem, 
what  is  the  organ  of  touch;  is  it  or  is  it  not 
the  flesh  (including  what  in  certain  animals  is 
homologous  with  flesh)?  On  the  second  view, 
flesh  is  ‘the  medium’  of  touch,  the  real  organ 
being  situated  farther  inward.  The  problem 
arises  because  the  field  of  each  sense  is  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  accepted  view  determined  as  the 


423* 

range  between  a  single  pair  of  contraries, 
white  and  black  for  sight,  acute  and  grave  for 
[25]  hearing,  bitter  and  sweet  for  taste;  but  in 
the  field  of  what  is  tangible  we  find  several 
such  pairs,  hot  cold,  dry  moist,  hard  soft,  &c. 
This  problem  finds  a  partial  solution,  when  it 
is  recalled  that  in  the  case  of  the  other  senses 
more  than  one  pair  of  contraries  are  to  be  met 
with,  e.g.  in  sound  not  only  acute  and  grave 
[30]  but  loud  and  soft,  smooth  and  rough,  &c.; 
there  are  similar  contrasts  in  the  field  of  colour. 
Nevertheless  we  are  unable  clearly  to  detect  in 
the  case  of  touch  what  the  single  subject  is 
which  underlies  the  contrasted  qualities  and 
corresponds  to  sound  in  the  case  of  hearing. 

To  the  question  whether  the  organ  of  touch 
lies  inward  or  not  (i.e.  whether  we  need  look 
any  farther  than  the  flesh),  no  indication  in 
423*  favour  of  the  second  answer  can  be 
drawn  from  the  fact  that  if  the  object  comes 
into  contact  with  the  flesh  it  is  at  once  per¬ 
ceived.  For  even  under  present  conditions  if 
the  experiment  is  made  of  making  a  web  and 
stretching  it  tight  over  the  flesh,  as  soon  as  this 
web  is  touched  the  sensation  is  reported  in  the 
same  manner  as  before,  yet  it  is  clear  that  the 
organ  is  not  in  this  membrane.  If  the  mem- 
[5]  brane  could  be  grown  on  to  the  flesh,  the 
report  would  travel  still  quicker.  The  flesh 
plays  in  touch  very  much  the  same  part  as 
would  be  played  in  the  other  senses  by  an  air- 
envelope  growing  round  our  body;  had  we 
such  an  envelope  attached  to  us  we  should 
have  supposed  that  it  was  by  a  single  organ 
that  we  perceived  sounds,  colours,  and  smells, 
and  we  should  have  taken  sight,  hearing,  and 
[/o]  smell  to  be  a  single  sense.  But  as  it  is,  be¬ 
cause  that  through  which  the  different  move¬ 
ments  are  transmitted  is  not  naturally  at¬ 
tached  to  our  bodies,  the  difference  of  the  va¬ 
rious  sense-organs  is  too  plain  to  miss.  But  in 
the  case  of  touch  the  obscurity  remains. 

There  must  be  such  a  naturally  attached 
‘medium’  as  flesh,  for  no  living  body  could  be 
constructed  of  air  or  water;  it  must  be  some¬ 
thing  solid.  Consequently  it  must  be  com¬ 
posed  of  earth  along  with  these,  which  is  just 
what  flesh  and  its  analogue  in  animals  which 
have  no  true  flesh  tend  to  be.  Hence  of  neces- 
[75]  sity  the  medium  through  which  are  trans¬ 
mitted  the  manifoldly  contrasted  tactual  qual¬ 
ities  must  be  a  body  naturally  attached  to  the 
organism.  That  they  are  manifold  is  clear 
when  we  consider  touching  with  the  tongue; 
we  apprehend  at  the  tongue  all  tangible  quali¬ 
ties  as  well  as  flavour.  Suppose  all  the  rest  of 


ON  THE  SOUL 


424*  BOOK  II,  CHAPTERS  10-11  655 


our  flesh  was,  like  the  tongue,  sensitive  to  fla¬ 
vour,  we  should  have  identified  the  sense  of 
[20]  taste  and  the  sense  of  touch;  what  saves 
us  from  this  identification  is  the  fact  that  touch 
and  taste  are  not  always  found  together  in  the 
same  part  of  the  body.  The  following  problem 
might  be  raised.  Let  us  assume  that  every  body 
has  depth,  i.e.  has  three  dimensions,  and  that 
if  two  bodies  have  a  third  body  between  them 
they  cannot  be  in  contact  with  one  another; 
let  us  remember  that  what  is  liquid  is  a  body 
[25]  and  must  be  or  contain  water,  and  that  if 
two  bodies  touch  one  another  under  water, 
their  touching  surfaces  cannot  be  dry,  but 
must  have  water  between,  viz.  the  water 
which  wets  their  bounding  surfaces;  from  all 
this  it  follows  that  in  water  two  bodies  cannot 
be  in  contact  with  one  another.  The  same 
holds  of  two  bodies  in  air — air  being  to  bodies 
in  air  precisely  what  water  is  to  bodies  in  wa- 
[jo]  ter — but  the  facts  are  not  so  evident  to 
our  observation,  because  we  live  in  air,  just  as 
animals  that  live  in  water  would  not  notice 
that  the  things  which  touch  one  another  in 
423b  water  have  wet  surfaces.  The  problem, 
then,  is:  does  the  perception  of  all  objects  of 
sense  take  place  in  the  same  way,  or  does  it 
not,  e.g.  taste  and  touch  requiring  contact  (as 
they  are  commonly  thought  to  do),  while  all 
other  senses  perceive  over  a  distance?  The  dis¬ 
tinction  is  unsound;  we  perceive  what  is  hard 
[5]  or  soft,  as  well  as  the  objects  of  hearing, 
sight,  and  smell,  through  a  ‘medium’,  only  that 
the  latter  are  perceived  over  a  greater  distance 
than  the  former;  that  is  why  the  facts  escape 
our  notice.  For  we  do  perceive  everything 
through  a  medium;  but  in  these  cases  the  fact 
escapes  us.  Yet,  to  repeat  what  we  said  before, 
if  the  medium  for  touch  were  a  membrane 
separating  us  from  the  object  without  our  ob¬ 
serving  its  existence,  we  should  be  relatively  to 
[70]  it  in  the  same  condition  as  we  are  now  to 
air  or  water  in  which  we  are  immersed;  in 
their  case  we  fancy  we  can  touch  objects,  noth¬ 
ing  coming  in  between  us  and  them.  But  there 
remains  this  difference  between  what  can  be 
touched  and  what  can  be  seen  or  can  sound;  in 
the  latter  two  cases  we  perceive  because  the 
medium  produces  a  certain  effect  upon  us, 
whereas  in  the  perception  of  objects  of  touch 
we  are  affected  not  by  but  along  with  the  me- 
[75]  dium;  it  is  as  if  a  man  were  struck 
through  his  shield,  where  the  shock  is  not  first 
given  to  the  shield  and  passed  on  to  the  man, 
but  the  concussion  of  both  is  simultaneous. 

In  general,  flesh  and  the  tongue  are  related 


to  the  real  organs  of  touch  and  taste,  as  air  and 
water  are  to  those  of  sight,  hearing,  and  smell. 
[20]  Hence  in  neither  the  one  case  nor  the 
other  can  there  be  any  perception  of  an  object 
if  it  is  placed  immediately  upon  the  organ,  e.g. 
if  a  white  object  is  placed  on  the  surface  of  the 
eye.  This  again  shows  that  what  has  the  pow¬ 
er  of  perceiving  the  tangible  is  seated  inside. 
Only  so  would  there  be  a  complete  analogy 
with  all  the  other  senses.  In  their  case  if  you 

lace  the  object  on  the  organ  it  is  not  per- 

25]  ceived,  here  if  you  place  it  on  the  flesh  it 
is  perceived;  therefore  flesh  is  not  the  organ 
but  the  medium  of  touch. 

What  can  be  touched  are  distinctive  quali¬ 
ties  of  body  as  body;  by  such  differences  I 
mean  those  which  characterize  the  elements, 
viz,  hot  cold,  dry  moist,  of  which  we  have 
[jo]  spoken  earlier  in  our  treatise  on  the  ele¬ 
ments.1  The  organ  for  the  perception  of  these 
is  that  of  touch — that  part  of  the  body  in  which 
primarily  the  sense  of  touch  resides.  This  is 
that  part  which  is  potentially  such  as  its  object 
is  actually:  for  all  sense-perception  is  a  process 
of  being  so  affected;  so  that  that  which  makes 
424a  something  such  as  it  itself  actually  is 
makes  the  other  such  because  the  other  is  al¬ 
ready  potentially  such.  That  is  why  when  an 
object  of  touch  is  equally  hot  and  cold  or  hard 
and  soft  we  cannot  perceive;  what  we  perceive 
must  have  a  degree  of  the  sensible  quality  ly¬ 
ing  beyond  the  neutral  point.  This  implies  that 
the  sense  itself  is  a  ‘mean’  between  any  two  op- 

osite  qualities  which  determine  the  field  of 

5]  that  sense.  It  is  to  this  that  it  owes  its 
power  of  discerning  the  objects  in  that  field. 
What  is  ‘in  the  middle’  is  fitted  to  discern; 
relatively  to  either  extreme  it  can  put  itself 
in  the  place  of  the  other.  As  what  is  to  per¬ 
ceive  both  white  and  black  must,  to  begin 
with,  be  actually  neither  but  potentially  ei¬ 
ther  (and  so  with  all  the  other  sense-organs), 
so  the  organ  of  touch  must  be  neither  hot 
nor  cold. 

[/o]  Further,  as  in  a  sense  sight  had  for  its 
object  both  what  was  visible  and  what  was 
invisible  (and  there  was  a  parallel  truth  about 
all  the  other  senses  discussed),2  so  touch  has 
for  its  object  both  what  is  tangible  and  what 
is  intangible.  Here  by  ‘intangible’  is  meant 
(a)  what  like  air  possesses  some  quality  of 
tangible  things  in  a  very  slight  degree  and  (b) 
what  possesses  it  in  an  excessive  degree,  as  de¬ 
structive  things  do. 

1  On  Generation  and  Corruption ,  n.  2,  3. 

2  42  ib  3-6,  42 2a  29. 


656  ON  THE  SOUL  424b 


[75]  We  have  now  given  an  outline  account 
of  each  of  the  several  senses. 

12 

The  following  results  applying  to  any  and 
every  sense  may  now  be  formulated. 

(A)  By  a  ‘sense’  is  meant  what  has  the  pow¬ 
er  of  receiving  into  itself  the  sensible  forms  of 
things  without  the  matter.  This  must  be  con¬ 
ceived  of  as  taking  place  in  the  way  in  which 
a  piece  of  wax  takes  on  the  impress  of  a  signet- 
[20]  ring  without  the  iron  or  gold;  we  say  that 
what  produces  the  impression  is  a  signet  of 
bronze  or  gold,  but  its  particular  metallic  con¬ 
stitution  makes  no  difference:  in  a  similar  way 
the  sense  is  affected  by  what  is  coloured  or  fla¬ 
voured  or  sounding,  but  it  is  indifferent  what 
in  each  case  the  substance  is;  what  alone  mat¬ 
ters  is  what  quality  it  has,  i.e.  in  what  ratio  its 
constituents  are  combined. 

(B)  By  ‘an  organ  of  sense’  is  meant  that  in 
which  ultimately  such  a  power  is  seated. 

[25]  The  sense  and  its  organ  are  the  same  in 
fact,  but  their  essence  is  not  the  same.  What 
perceives  is,  of  course,  a  spatial  magnitude,  but 
we  must  not  admit  that  either  the  having  the 
power  to  perceive  or  the  sense  itself  is  a  mag¬ 
nitude;  what  they  are  is  a  certain  ratio  or  pow¬ 
er  in  a  magnitude.  This  enables  us  to  explain 
why  objects  of  sense  which  possess  one  of  two 
opposite  sensible  qualities  in  a  degree  largely 
in  excess  of  the  other  opposite  destroy  the  or- 
[jo]  gans  sense*>  if  the  movement  set  up  by 
an  object  is  too  strong  for  the  organ,  the  equi¬ 
poise  of  contrary  qualities  in  the  organ,  which 
just  is  its  sensory  power,  is  disturbed;  it  is  pre¬ 
cisely  as  concord  and  tone  are  destroyed  by  too 
violently  twanging  the  strings  of  a  lyre.  This 
explains  also  why  plants  cannot  perceive,  in 
spite  of  their  having  a  portion  of  soul  in  them 
and  obviously  being  affected  by  tangible  ob¬ 
jects  themselves;  for  undoubtedly  their  tem- 


424b  perature  can  be  lowered  or  raised.  The 
explanation  is  that  they  have  no  mean  of  con¬ 
trary  qualities,  and  so  no  principle  in  them 
capable  of  taking  on  the  forms  of  sensible  ob¬ 
jects  without  their  matter;  in  the  case  of  plants 
the  affection  is  an  affection  by  form-and-matter 
together.  The  problem  might  be  raised:  Can 
what  cannot  smell  be  said  to  be  affected  by 
[5]  smells  or  what  cannot  see  by  colours,  and 
so  on?  It  might  be  said  that  a  smell  is  just  what 
can  be  smelt,  and  if  it  produces  any  effect  it 
can  only  be  so  as  to  make  something  smell  it, 
and  it  might  be  argued  that  what  cannot  smell 
cannot  be  affected  by  smells  and  further  that 
what  can  smell  can  be  affected  by  it  only  in  so 
far  as  it  has  in  it  the  power  to  smell  (similarly 
with  the  proper  objects  of  all  the  other  senses). 
Indeed  that  this  is  so  is  made  quite  evident  as 
[/o]  follows.  Light  or  darkness,  sounds  and 
smells  leave  bodies  quite  unaffected;  what  does 
affect  bodies  is  not  these  but  the  bodies  which 
are  their  vehicles,  e.g.  what  splits  the  trunk  of 
a  tree  is  not  the  sound  of  the  thunder  but  the 
air  which  accompanies  thunder.  Yes,  but,  it 
may  be  objected,  bodies  are  affected  by  what  is 
tangible  and  by  flavours.  If  not,  by  what  are 
things  that  are  without  soul  affected,  i.e.  al¬ 
tered  in  quality?  Must  we  not,  then,  admit  that 
the  objects  of  the  other  senses  also  may  affect 
them?  Is  not  the  true  account  this,  that  all 
bodies  are  capable  of  being  affected  by  smells 
[75]  and  sounds,  but  that  some  on  being  acted 
upon,  having  no  boundaries  of  their  own,  dis¬ 
integrate,  as  in  the  instance  of  air,  which  does 
become  odorous,  showing  that  some  effect  is 
produced  on  it  by  what  is  odorous?  But  smell¬ 
ing  is  more  than  such  an  affection  by  what  is 
odorous — what  more?  Is  not  the  answer  that, 
while  the  air  owing  to  the  momentary  dura¬ 
tion  of  the  action  upon  it  of  what  is  odorous 
does  itself  become  perceptible  to  the  sense  of 
smell,  smelling  is  an  observing  of  the  result 
produced? 


BOOK  III 


1 

[20]  That  there  is  no  sixth  sense  in  addition 
to  the  five  enumerated — sight,  hearing,  smell, 
taste,  touch — may  be  established  by  the  follow¬ 
ing  considerations: 

If  we  have  actually  sensation  of  everything 
of  which  touch  can  give  us  sensation  (for  all 
[25]  the  qualities  of  the  tangible  qua  tangible 
are  perceived  by  us  through  touch);  and  if  ab¬ 


sence  of  a  sense  necessarily  involves  absence  of 
a  sense-organ;  and  if  (1)  all  objects  that  we 
perceive  by  immediate  contact  with  them  are 
perceptible  by  touch,  which  sense  we  actually 
possess,  and  (2)  all  objects  that  we  perceive 
through  media,  i.e.  without  immediate  contact, 
[jo]  are  perceptible  by  or  through  the  sim¬ 
ple  elements,  e.g.  air  and  water  (and  this  is  so 
arranged  that  (a)  if  more  than  one  kind  of  sen¬ 
sible  object  is  perceivable  through  a  single  me- 


425 b  BOOK  II,  CHAPTERS  11-12 

dium,  the  possessor  of  a  sense-organ  homoge¬ 
neous  with  that  medium  has  the  power  of  per¬ 
ceiving  both  kinds  of  objects;  for  example,  if 
the  sense-organ  is  made  of  air,  and  air  is  a  me¬ 
dium  both  for  sound  and  for  colour;  and  that 
(b)  if  more  than  one  medium  can  transmit 
425a  the  same  kind  of  sensible  objects,  as  e.g. 
water  as  well  as  air  can  transmit  colour,  both 
being  transparent,  then  the  possessor  of  either 
alone  will  be  able  to  perceive  the  kind  of  ob¬ 
jects  transmissible  through  both);  and  if  of  the 
simple  elements  two  only,  air  and  water,  go  to 
form  sense-organs  (for  the  pupil  is  made  of 
water,  the  organ  of  hearing  is  made  of  air, 
and  the  organ  of  smell  of  one  or  other  of  these 
[5]  two,  while  fire  is  found  either  in  none  or 
in  all — warmth  being  an  essential  condition  of 
all  sensibility — and  earth  either  in  none  or,  if 
anywhere,  specially  mingled  with  the  compo¬ 
nents  of  the  organ  of  touch;  wherefore  it 
would  remain  that  there  can  be  no  sense-organ 
formed  of  anything  except  water  and  air);  and 
if  these  sense-organs  are  actually  found  in  cer¬ 
tain  animals; — then  all  the  possible  senses  are 
[/o]  possessed  by  those  animals  that  are  not 
imperfect  or  mutilated  (for  even  the  mole  is 
observed  to  have  eyes  ’beneath  its  skin);  so 
that,  if  there  is  no  fifth  element  and  no  prop¬ 
erty  other  than  those  which  belong  to  the  four 
elements  of  our  world,  no  sense  can  be  want¬ 
ing  to  such  animals. 

Further,  there  cannot  be  a  special  sense- 
[75]  organ  for  the  common  sensibles  either, 
i.e.  the  objects  which  we  perceive  incidentally 
through  this  or  that  special  sense,  e.g.  move¬ 
ment,  rest,  figure,  magnitude,  number,  unity; 
for  all  these  we  perceive  by  movement,  e.g. 
magnitude  by  movement,  and  therefore  also 
figure  (for  figure  is  a  species  of  magnitude), 
what  is  at  rest  by  the  absence  of  movement: 
number  is  perceived  by  the  negation  of  conti¬ 
nuity,  and  by  the  special  sensibles;  for  each 
sense  perceives  one  class  of  sensible  objects.  So 
[20]  that  it  is  clearly  impossible  that  there 
should  be  a  special  sense  for  any  one  of  the 
common  sensibles,  e.g.  movement;  for,  if  that 
were  so,  our  perception  of  it  would  be  exactly 
parallel  to  our  present  perception  of  what  is 
sweet  by  vision.  That  is  so  because  we  have  a 
sense  for  each  of  the  two  qualities,  in  virtue 
of  which  when  they  happen  to  meet  in  one 
sensible  object  we  are  aware  of  both  contem- 

foraneously.  If  it  were  not  like  this  our  per- 
25]  ception  of  the  common  qualities  would 
always  be  incidental,  i.e.  as  is  the  perception  of 
Cleon’s  son,  where  we  perceive  him  not  as 


—BOOK  III,  CHAPTERS  1-2  657 

Cleon’s  son  but  as  white,  and  the  white  thing 
which  we  really  perceive  happens  to  be  Cleon’s 
son. 

But  in  the  case  of  the  common  sensibles 
there  is  already  in  us  a  general  sensibility 
which  enables  us  to  perceive  them  directly; 
there  is  therefore  no  special  sense  required  for 
their  perception:  if  there  were,  our  perception 
of  them  would  have  been  exactly  like  what  has 
been  above1  described. 

[50]  The  senses  perceive  each  other’s  special 
objects  incidentally;  not  because  the  percipient 
sense  is  this  or  that  special  sense,  but  because 
all  form  a  unity:  this  incidental  perception 
takes  place  whenever  sense  is  directed  at  one 
and  the  same  moment  to  two  disparate  quali¬ 
ties  in  one  and  the  same  object,  e.g.  to  the  bit- 
425b  terness  and  the  yellowness  of  bile,  the  as¬ 
sertion  of  the  identity  of  both  cannot  be  the 
act  of  either  of  the  senses;  hence  the  illusion  of 
sense,  e.g.  the  belief  that  if  a  thing  is  yellow  it 
is  bile. 

It  might  be  asked  why  we  have  more  senses 
[5]  than  one.  Is  it  to  prevent  a  failure  to  ap¬ 
prehend  the  common  sensibles,  e.g.  movement, 
magnitude,  and  number,  which  go  along  with 
the  special  sensibles?  Had  we  no  sense  but 
sight,  and  that  sense  no  object  but  white,  they 
would  have  tended  to  escape  our  notice  and 
everything  would  have  merged  for  us  into  an 
indistinguishable  identity  because  of  the  con¬ 
comitance  of  colour  and  magnitude.  As  it  is, 
the  fact  that  the  common  sensibles  are  given 
in  the  objects  of  more  than  one  sense  reveals 
[/o]  their  distinction  from  each  and  all  of  the 
special  sensibles. 

2 

Since  it  is  through  sense  that  we  are  aware 
that  we  are  seeing  or  hearing,  it  must  be  either 
by  sight  that  we  are  aware  of  seeing,  or  by 
some  sense  other  than  sight.  But  the  sense  that 
gives  us  this  new  sensation  must  perceive  both 
sight  and  its  object,  viz.  colour:  so  that  either 
( 1 )  there  will  be  two  senses  both  percipient  of 
the  same  sensible  object,  or  (2)  the  sense  must 
[75]  be  percipient  of  itself.  Further,  even  if 
the  sense  which  perceives  sight  were  different 
from  sight,  we  must  either  fall  into  an  infinite 
regress,  or  we  must  somewhere  assume  a  sense 
which  is  aware  of  itself.  If  so,  we  ought  to  do 
this  in  the  first  case. 

This  presents  a  difficulty:  if  to  perceive  by 
sight  is  just  to  see,  and  what  is  seen  is  colour 
(or  the  coloured),  then  if  we  are  to  see  that 

1 11.  24-7. 


65 8  ON  THE  SOUL  426b 


which  sees,  that  which  sees  originally  must  be 
[20]  coloured.  It  is  clear  therefore  that  ‘to  per¬ 
ceive  by  sight’  has  more  than  one  meaning;  for 
even  when  we  are  not  seeing,  it  is  by  sight  that 
we  discriminate  darkness  from  light,  though 
not  in  the  same  way  as  we  distinguish  one  col¬ 
our  from  another.  Further,  in  a  sense  even  that 
which  sees  is  coloured;  for  in  each  case  the 
sense-organ  is  capable  of  receiving  the  sensible 
object  without  its  matter.  That  is  why  even 
[25]  when  the  sensible  objects  are  gone  the 
sensings  and  imaginings  continue  to  exist  in 
the  sense-organs. 

The  activity  of  the  sensible  object  and  that 
of  the  percipient  sense  is  one  and  the  same  ac¬ 
tivity,  and  yet  the  distinction  between  their 
being  remains.  Take  as  illustration  actual 
sound  and  actual  hearing:  a  man  may  have 
hearing  and  yet  not  be  hearing,  and  that  which 
has  a  sound  is  not  always  sounding.  But  when 
that  which  can  hear  is  actively  hearing  and 
[jo]  that  which  can  sound  is  sounding,  then 
the  actual  hearing  and  the  actual  sound  are 
merged  in  one  (these  one  might  call  respec- 
426a  tively  hearkening  and  sounding). 

If  it  is  true  that  the  movement,  both  the  act¬ 
ing  and  the  being  acted  upon,  is  to  be  found 
in  that  which  is  acted  upon,  both  the  sound 
and  the  hearing  so  far  as  it  is  actual  must  be 
found  in  that  which  has  the  faculty  of  hearing; 
for  it  is  in  the  passive  factor  that  the  actuality 
of  the  active  or  motive  factor  is  realized;  that 
[5]  is  why  that  which  causes  movement  may  be 
at  rest.  Now  the  actuality  of  that  which  can 
sound  is  just  sound  or  sounding,  and  the  actu¬ 
ality  of  that  which  can  hear  is  hearing  or 
hearkening;  ‘sound’  and  ‘hearing’  are  both  am¬ 
biguous.  The  same  account  applies  to  the  other 
senses  and  their  objects.  For  as  the-acting-and- 
[/o]  being-acted-upon  is  to  be  found  in  the 
passive,  not  in  the  active  factor,  so  also  the  ac¬ 
tuality  of  the  sensible  object  and  that  of  the 
sensitive  subject  are  both  realized  in  the  latter. 
But  while  in  some  cases  each  aspect  of  the  total 
actuality  has  a  distinct  name,  e.g.  sounding  and 
hearkening,  in  some  one  or  other  is  nameless, 
e.g.  the  actuality  of  sight  is  called  seeing,  but 
the  actuality  of  colour  has  no  name:  the  actu¬ 
ality  of  the  faculty  of  taste  is  called  tasting,  but 
the  actuality  of  flavour  has  no  name.  Since  the 
[75]  actualities  of  the  sensible  object  and  of 
the  sensitive  faculty  are  one  actuality  in  spite 
of  the  difference  between  their  modes  of  being, 
actual  hearing  and  actual  sounding  appear  and 
disappear  from  existence  at  one  and  the  same 
moment,  and  so  actual  savour  and  actual  tast¬ 


ing,  &c.,  while  as  potentialities  one  of  them 
[20]  may  exist  without  the  other.  The  earlier 
students  of  nature  were  mistaken  in  their  view 
that  without  sight  there  was  no  white  or  black, 
without  taste  no  savour.  This  statement  of 
theirs  is  partly  true,  partly  false:  ‘sense’  and 
‘the  sensible  object’  are  ambiguous  terms,  i.e. 
may  denote  either  potentialities  or  actualities: 
[25]  the  statement  is  true  of  the  latter,  false 
of  the  former.  This  ambiguity  they  wholly 
failed  to  notice. 

If  voice  always  implies  a  concord,  and  if  the 
voice  and  the  hearing  of  it  are  in  one  sense  one 
and  the  same,  and  if  concord  always  implies  a 
ratio,  hearing  as  well  as  what  is  heard  must 
[jo]  be  a  ratio.  That  is  why  the  excess  of  ei¬ 
ther  the  sharp  or  the  flat  destroys  the  hearing. 
426b  (So  also  in  the  case  of  savours  excess  de¬ 
stroys  the  sense  of  taste,  and  in  the  case  of  col¬ 
ours  excessive  brightness  or  darkness  destroys 
the  sight,  and  in  the  case  of  smell  excess  of 
strength  whether  in  the  direction  of  sweetness 
or  bitterness  is  destructive.)  This  shows  that 
the  sense  is  a  ratio. 

That  is  also  why  the  objects  of  sense  are  (1) 
pleasant  when  the  sensible  extremes  such  as 
acid  or  sweet  or  salt  being  pure  and  unmixed 
are  brought  into  the  proper  ratio;  then  they  are 
[5]  pleasant:  and  in  general  what  is  blended 
is  more  pleasant  than  the  sharp  or  the  flat 
alone;  or,  to  touch,  that  which  is  capable  of  be¬ 
ing  either  warmed  or  chilled:  the  sense  and 
the  ratio  are  identical:  while  (2)  in  excess  the 
sensible  extremes  are  painful  or  destructive. 

Each  sense  then  is  relative  to  its  particular 
group  of  sensible  qualities:  it  is  found  in  a 
sense-organ  as  such  and  discriminates  the  dif¬ 
ferences  which  exist  within  that  group;  e.g. 
[/o]  sight  discriminates  white  and  black,  taste 
sweet  and  bitter,  and  so  in  all  cases.  Since  we 
also  discriminate  white  from  sweet,  and  indeed 
each  sensible  quality  from  every  other,  with 
what  do  we  perceive  that  they  are  different? 
It  must  be  by  sense;  for  what  is  before  us  is 
[75]  sensible  objects.  (Hence  it  is  also  obvious 
that  the  flesh  cannot  be  the  ultimate  sense-or¬ 
gan:  if  it  were,  the  discriminating  power  could 
not  do  its  work  without  immediate  contact 
with  the  object.) 

Therefore  ( 1 )  discrimination  between  white 
and  sweet  cannot  be  effected  by  two  agencies 
which  remain  separate;  both  the  qualities  dis¬ 
criminated  must  be  present  to  something  that 
is  one  and  single.  On  any  other  supposition 
even  if  I  perceived  sweet  and  you  perceived 
[20]  white,  the  difference  between  them  would 


42 7b  BOOK  III,  CHAPTERS  2-3  659 


be  apparent.  What  says  that  two  things  are  dif¬ 
ferent  must  be  one;  for  sweet  is  different  from 
white.  Therefore  what  asserts  this  difference 
must  be  self-identical,  and  as  what  asserts,  so 
also  what  thinks  or  perceives.  That  it  is  not 
possible  by  means  of  two  agencies  which  re¬ 
main  separate  to  discriminate  two  objects 
which  are'  separate,  is  therefore  obvious;  and 
that  (2)  it  is  not  possible  to  do  this  in  separate 
movements  of  time  may  be  seen  if  we  look  at 
it  as  follows.  For  as  what  asserts  the  difference 
between  the  good  and  the  bad  is  one  and  the 
[25]  same,  so  also  the  time  at  which  it  asserts 
the  one  to  be  different  and  the  other  to  be  dif¬ 
ferent  is  not  accidental  to  the  assertion  (as  it  is 
for  instance  when  I  now  assert  a  difference  but 
do  not  assert  that  there  is  now  a  difference); 
it  asserts  thus — both  now  and  that  the  objects 
are  different  now;  the  objects  therefore  must 
be  present  at  one  and  the  same  moment.  Both 
the  discriminating  power  and  the  time  of  its 
exercise  must  be  one  and  undivided. 

But,  it  may  be  objected,  it  is  impossible  that 
[jo]  what  is  self-identical  should  be  moved  at 
one  and  the  same  time  with  contrary  move¬ 
ments  in  so  far  as  it  is  undivided,  and  in  an 
undivided  moment  of  time.  For  if  what  is 
sweet  be  the  quality  perceived,  it  moves  the 
sense  or  thought  in  this  determinate  way, 
42 7a  while  what  is  bitter  moves  it  in  a  contrary 
way,  and  what  is  white  in  a  different  way.  Is  it 
the  case  then  that  what  discriminates,  though 
both  numerically  one  and  indivisible,  is  at  the 
same  time  divided  in  its  being?  In  one  sense, 
it  is  what  is  divided  that  perceives  two  sepa¬ 
rate  objects  at  once,  but  in  another  sense  it  does 
so  qua  undivided;  for  it  is  divisible  in  its  be¬ 
ing,  but  spatially  and  numerically  undivided. 
[5]  But  is  not  this  impossible?  For  while  it  is 
true  that  what  is  self-identical  and  undivided 
may  be  both  contraries  at  once  potentially,  it 
cannot  be  self-identical  in  its  being — it  must 
lose  its  unity  by  being  put  into  activity.  It  is 
not  possible  to  be  at  once  white  and  black,  and 
therefore  it  must  also  be  impossible  for  a  thing 
to  be  affected  at  one  and  the  same  moment  by 
the  forms  of  both,  assuming  it  to  be  the  case 
that  sensation  and  thinking  are  properly  so  de¬ 
scribed. 

[jo]  The  answer  is  that  just  as  what  is  called 
a  ‘point*  is,  as  being  at  once  one  and  two,  prop¬ 
erly  said  to  be  divisible,  so  here,  that  which 
discriminates  is  qua  undivided  one,  and  active 
in  a  single  moment  of  time,  while  so  far  forth 
as  it  is  divisible  it  twice  over  uses  the  same  dot 
at  one  and  the  same  time.  So  far  forth  then  as 


it  takes  the  limit  as  two,  it  discriminates  two 
separate  objects  with  what  in  a  sense  is  divid¬ 
ed:  while  so  far  as  it  takes  it  as  one,  it  does  so 
with  what  is  one  and  occupies  in  its  activity  a 
single  moment  of  time. 

About  the  principle  in  virtue  of  which  we 
[/ 5]  say  that  animals  are  percipient,  let  this 
discussion  suffice. 

3 

There  are  two  distinctive  peculiarities  by  ref¬ 
erence  to  which  we  characterize  the  soul — 
(1)  local  movement  and  (2)  thinking,  dis¬ 
criminating,  and  perceiving.  Thinking  both 
speculative  and  practical  is  regarded  as  akin  to 
[20]  a  form  of  perceiving;  for  in  the  one  as 
well  as  the  other  the  soul  discriminates  and  is 
cognizant  of  something  which  is.  Indeed  the 
ancients  go  so  far  as  to  identify  thinking  and 
perceiving;  e.g.  Empedocles  says1  Tor  ’tis  in 
respect  of  what  is  present  that  man’s  wit  is  in¬ 
creased’,  and  again2  ‘Whence  it  befalls  them 
from  time  to  time  to  think  diverse  thoughts’, 
[25]  and  Homer’s  phrase3  ‘For  suchlike  is 
man’s  mind’  means  the  same.  They  all  look 
upon  thinking  as  a  bodily  process  like  per¬ 
ceiving,  and  hold  that  like  is  \nown  as  well  as 
perceived  by  like,  as  I  explained  at  the  begin¬ 
ning  of  our  discussion.4  Yet  they  ought  at  the 
same  time  to  have  accounted  for  error  also;  for 
42 7b  it  is  more  intimately  connected  with 
animal  existence  and  the  soul  continues  longer 
in  the  state  of  error  than  in  that  of  truth.  They 
cannot  escape  the  dilemma:  either  (1)  what¬ 
ever  seems  is  true  (and  there  are  some  who  ac¬ 
cept  this)  or  (2)  error  is  contact  with  the  un¬ 
like;  for  that  is  the  opposite  of  the  knowing  of 
like  by  like. 

[5]  But  it  is  a  received  principle  that  error  as 
well  as  knowledge  in  respect  to  contraries  is 
one  and  the  same. 

That  perceiving  and  practical  thinking  are 
not  identical  is  therefore  obvious;  for  the  for¬ 
mer  is  universal  in  the  animal  world,  the  lat¬ 
ter  is  found  in  only  a  small  division  of  it.  Fur¬ 
ther,  speculative  thinking  is  also  distinct  from 
perceiving — I  mean  that  in  which  we  find 
rightness  and  wrongness — rightness  in  pru- 
[jo]  dence,  knowledge,  true  opinion,  wrong¬ 
ness  in  their  opposites;  for  perception  of  the 
special  objects  of  sense  is  always  free  from  er¬ 
ror,  and  is  found  in  all  animals,  while  it  is  pos¬ 
sible  to  think  falsely  as  well  as  truly,  and 
thought  is  found  only  where  there  is  discourse 

1  Fr.  106.  2  Fr.  108. 

8  Odyssey ,  xvm.  136.  4  404b  8-18. 


66o  ON  THE  SOUL  428b 


of  reason  as  well  as  sensibility.  For  imagina¬ 
tion  is  different  from  either  perceiving  or  dis- 
[75]  cursive  thinking,  though  it  is  not  found 
without  sensation,  or  judgement  without  it. 
That  this  activity  is  not  the  same  kind  of  think¬ 
ing  as  judgement  is  obvious.  For  imagining 
lies  within  our  own  power  whenever  we  wish 
(e.g.  we  can  call  up  a  picture,  as  in  the  prac¬ 
tice  of  mnemonics  by  the  use  of  mental  im- 
[20]  ages),  but  in  forming  opinions  we  are 
not  free:  we  cannot  escape  the  alternative  of 
falsehood  or  truth.  Further,  when  we  think 
something  to  be  fearful  or  threatening,  emo¬ 
tion  is  immediately  produced,  and  so  too  with 
what  is  encouraging;  but  when  we  merely  im¬ 
agine  we  remain  as  unaffected  as  persons  who 
are  looking  at  a  painting  of  some  dreadful 
or  encouraging  scene.  Again  within  the  field 
[25]  of  judgement  itself  we  find  varieties — « 
knowledge,  opinion,  prudence,  and  their  op¬ 
posites;  of  the  differences  between  these  I  must 
speak  elsewhere. 

Thinking  is  different  from  perceiving  and 
is  held  to  be  in  part  imagination,  in  part  judge¬ 
ment:  we  must  therefore  first  mark  off  the 
sphere  of  imagination  and  then  speak  of  judge- 
428a  ment.  If  then  imagination  is  that  in  vir¬ 
tue  of  which  an  image  arises  for  us,  excluding 
metaphorical  uses  of  the  term,  is  it  a  single 
faculty  or  disposition  relative  to  images,  in  vir¬ 
tue  of  which  we  discriminate  and  are  either  in 
error  or  not?  The  faculties  in  virtue  of  which 
we  do  this  are  sense,  opinion,  science,  intelli- 

fence. 

5]  That  imagination  is  not  sense  is  clear  from 
the  following  considerations:  Sense  is  either  a 
faculty  or  an  activity,  e.g.  sight  or  seeing:  im¬ 
agination  takes  place  in  the  absence  of  both, 
as  e.g.  in  dreams.  (2)  Again,  sense  is  always 
present,  imagination  not.  If  actual  imagination 
and  actual  sensation  were  the  same,  imagina¬ 
tion  would  be  found  in  all  the  brutes:  this  is 
[/o]  held  not  to  be  the  case;  e.g.  it  is  not  found 
in  ants  or  bees  or  grubs.  (3)  Again,  sensations 
are  always  true,  imaginations  are  for  the  most 
part  false.  (4)  Once  more,  even  in  ordinary 
speech,  we  do  not,  when  sense  functions  pre¬ 
cisely  with  regard  to  its  object,  say  that  we  im¬ 
agine  it  to  be  a  man,  but  rather  when  there  is 
some  failure  of  accuracy  in  its  exercise.  And 
[75]  (5),  as  we  were  saying  before,1  visions  ap¬ 
pear  to  us  even  when  our  eyes  are  shut.  Nei¬ 
ther  is  imagination  any  of  the  things  that  are 
never  in  error:  e.g.  knowledge  or  intelligence; 
for  imagination  may  be  false. 

1 11. 7-8. 


It  remains  therefore  to  see  if  it  is  opinion, 
for  opinion  may  be  either  true  or  false. 

[20]  But  opinion  involves  belief  (for  without 
belief  in  what  we  opine  we  cannot  have  an 
opinion),  and  in  the  brutes  though  we  often 
find  imagination  we  never  find  belief.  Fur¬ 
ther,  every  opinion  is  accompanied  by  belief, 
belief  by  conviction,  and  conviction  by  dis¬ 
course  of  reason:  while  there  are  some  of  the 
brutes  in  which  we  find  imagination,  without 
discourse  of  reason.  It  is  clear  then  that  imagi- 
[25]  nation  cannot,  again,  be  (1)  opinion  plus 
sensation,  or  (2)  opinion  mediated  by  sensa¬ 
tion,  or  (3)  a  blend  of  opinion  and  sensation; 
this  is  impossible  both  for  these  reasons  and 
because  the  content  of  the  supposed  opinion 
cannot  be  different  from  that  of  the  sensation 
(I  mean  that  imagination  must  be  the  blend¬ 
ing  of  the  perception  of  white  with  the  opin¬ 
ion  that  it  is  white:  it  could  scarcely  be  a  blend 
[30]  of  the  opinion  that  it  is  good  with  the  per¬ 
ception  that  it  is  white):  to  imagine  is  there- 
428b  fore  (on  this  view)  identical  with  the 
thinking  of  exactly  the  same  as  what  one  in 
the  strictest  sense  perceives.  But  what  we  imag¬ 
ine  is  sometimes  false  though  our  contempora¬ 
neous  judgement  about  it  is  true;  e.g.  we 
imagine  the  sun  to  be  a  foot  in  diameter 
though  we  are  convinced  that  it  is  larger 
than  the  inhabited  part  of  the  earth,  and  the 
following  dilemma  presents  itself.  Either 
(a)  while  the  fact  has  not  changed  and  the 
[5]  observer  has  neither  forgotten  nor  lost 
belief  in  the  true  opinion  which  he  had,  that 
opinion  has  disappeared,  or  (b)  if  he  re¬ 
tains  it  then  his  opinion  is  at  once  true  and 
false.  A  true  opinion,  however,  becomes  false 
only  when  the  fact  alters  without  being 
noticed. 

Imagination  is  therefore  neither  any  one  of 
the  states  enumerated,  nor  compounded  out  of 
them. 

[70]  But  since  when  one  thing  has  been  set  in 
motion  another  thing  may  be  moved  by  it,  and 
imagination  is  held  to  be  a  movement  and  to 
be  impossible  without  sensation,  i.e.  to  occur 
in  beings  that  are  percipient  and  to  have  for  its 
content  what  can  be  perceived,  and  since 
movement  may  be  produced  by  actual  sensa¬ 
tion  and  that  movement  is  necessarily  similar 
in  character  to  the  sensation  itself,  this  move¬ 
ment  must  be  (1)  necessarily  (a)  incapable  of 
[75]  existing  apart  from  sensation,  ( b )  inca¬ 
pable  of  existing  except  when  we  perceive,  (2) 
such  that  in  virtue  of  its  possession  that  in 
which  it  is  found  may  present  various  phe- 


429b 

nomena  both  active  and  passive,  and  (3)  such 
that  it  may  be  either  true  or  false. 

The  reason  of  the  last  characteristic  is  as  fol¬ 
lows.  Perception  (1)  of  the  special  objects  of 
sense  is  never  in  error  or  admits  the  least  pos¬ 
sible  amount  of  falsehood.  (2)  That  of  the 
concomitance  of  the  objects  concomitant  with 
the  sensible  qualities  comes  next:  in  this  case 
[20]  certainly  we  may  be  deceived;  for  while 
the  perception  that  there  is  white  before  us 
cannot  be  false,  the  perception  that  what  is 
white  is  this  or  that  may  be  false.  (3)  Third 
comes  the  perception  of  the  universal  attri¬ 
butes  which  accompany  the  concomitant  ob¬ 
jects  to  which  the  special  sensibles  attach  (I 
mean  e.g.  of  movement  and  magnitude);  it  is 
in  respect  of  these  that  the  greatest  amount  of 
sense-illusion  is  possible. 

[25]  The  motion  which  is  due  to  the  activity 
of  sense  in  these  three  modes  of  its  exercise  will 
differ  from  the  activity  of  sense;  (1)  the  first 
kind  of  derived  motion  is  free  from  error 
while  the  sensation  is  present;  (2)  and  (3)  the 
others  may  be  erroneous  whether  it  is  present 
or  absent,  especially  when  the  object  of  per- 
[30]  ception  is  far  off.  If  then  imagination  pre¬ 
sents  no  other  features  than  those  enumerated 
and  is  what  we  have  described,  then  imagina- 
429a  tion  must  be  a  movement  resulting  from 
an  actual  exercise  of  a  power  of  sense. 

As  sight  is  the  most  highly  developed  sense, 
the  name  (pavraaLa  (imagination)  has  been 
formed  from  <t>aos  (light)  because  it  is  not 
possible  to  see  without  light. 

And  because  imaginations  remain  in  the 
organs  of  sense  and  resemble  sensations,  ani- 
[5]  mals  in  their  actions  are  largely  guided  by 
them,  some  (i.e.  the  brutes)  because  of  the 
non-existence  in  them  of  mind,  others  (i.e. 
men)  because  of  the  temporary  eclipse  in 
them  of  mind  by  feeling  or  disease  or  sleep. 

About  imagination,  what  it  is  and  why  it  ex¬ 
ists,  let  so  much  suffice. 

4 

[jo]  Turning  now  to  the  part  of  the  soul  with 
which  the  soul  knows  and  thinks  (whether 
this  is  separable  from  the  others  in  definition 
only,  or  spatially  as  well)  we  have  to  inquire 
(1)  what  differentiates  this  part,  and  (2)  how 
thinking  can  take  place. 

If  thinking  is  like  perceiving,  it  must  be  ei¬ 
ther  a  process  in  which  the  soul  is  acted  upon 
by  what  is  capable  of  being  thought,  or  a  proc¬ 
ess  different  from  but  analogous  to  that.  The 
[75]  thinking  part  of  the  soul  must  therefore 


661 

be,  while  impassible,  capable  of  receiving  the 
form  of  an  object;  that  is,  must  be  potentially 
identical  in  character  with  its  object  without 
being  the  object.  Mind  must  be  related  to  what 
is  thinkable,  as  sense  is  to  what  is  sensible. 

Therefore,  since  everything  is  a  possible  ob¬ 
ject  of  thought,  mind  in  order,  as  Anaxagoras 
says,  to  dominate,  that  is,  to  know,  must  be 
[20]  pure  from  all  admixture;  for  the  co¬ 
presence  of  what  is  alien  to  its  nature  is  a  hin¬ 
drance  and  a  block:  it  follows  that  it  too,  like 
the  sensitive  part,  can  have  no  nature  of  its 
own,  other  than  that  of  having  a  certain  capac¬ 
ity.  Thus  that  in  the  soul  which  is  called  mind 
(by  mind  I  mean  that  whereby  the  soul  thinks 
and  judges)  is,  before  it  thinks,  not  actually 
any  real  thing.  For  this  reason  it  cannot  rea¬ 
sonably  be  regarded  as  blended  with  the  body: 
[25]  if  so,  it  would  acquire  some  quality,  e.g. 
warmth  or  cold,  or  even  have  an  organ  like 
the  sensitive  faculty:  as  it  is,  it  has  none.  It  was 
a  good  idea  to  call  the  soul  ‘the  place  of  forms’, 
though  (1)  this  description  holds  only  of  the 
intellective  soul,  and  (2)  even  this  is  the  forms 
only  potentially,  not  actually. 

Observation  of  the  sense-organs  and  their 
employment  reveals  a  distinction  between  the 
[30]  impassibility  of  the  sensitive  and  that  of 
the  intellective  faculty.  After  strong  stimula¬ 
tion  of  a  sense  we  are  less  able  to  exercise  it 
than  before,  as  e.g.  in  the  case  of  a  loud  sound 
429b  we  cannot  hear  easily  immediately  after, 
or  in  the  case  of  a  bright  colour  or  a  powerful 
odour  we  cannot  see  or  smell,  but  in  the  case 
of  mind  thought  about  an  object  that  is  highly 
intelligible  renders  it  more  and  not  less  able 
afterwards  to  think  objects  that  are  less  intelli¬ 
gible:  the  reason  is  that  while  the  faculty  of 
sensation  is  dependent  upon  the  body,  mind  is 
separable  from  it. 

[5]  Once  the  mind  has  become  each  set  of  its 
possible  objects,  as  a  man  of  science  has,  when 
this  phrase  is  used  of  one  who  is  actually  a  man 
of  science  (this  happens  when  he  is  now  able 
to  exercise  the  power  on  his  own  initiative),  its 
condition  is  still  one  of  potentiality,  but  in  a 
different  sense  from  the  potentiality  which 
preceded  the  acquisition  of  knowledge  by 
learning  or  discovery:  the  mind  too  is  then 
able  to  think  itself. 

[jo]  Since  we  can  distinguish  between  a  spa¬ 
tial  magnitude  and  what  it  is  to  be  such,  and 
between  water  and  what  it  is  to  be  water,  and 
so  in  many  other  cases  (though  not  in  all;  for 
in  certain  cases  the  thing  and  its  form  are 
identical),  flesh  and  what  it  is  to  be  flesh  are 


BOOK  III,  CHAPTERS  3-4 


662 

discriminated  either  by  different  faculties,  or 
by  the  same  faculty  in  two  different  states:  for 
flesh  necessarily  involves  matter  and  is  like 
what  is  snub-nosed,  a  this  in  a  this.  Now  it  is 
by  means  of  the  sensitive  faculty  that  we  dis¬ 
criminate  the  hot  and  the  cold,  i.e.  the  factors 
[75]  which  combined  in  a  certain  ratio  consti¬ 
tute  flesh:  the  essential  character  of  flesh  is  ap¬ 
prehended  by  something  different  either 
wholly  separate  from  the  sensitive  faculty  or 
related  to  it  as  a  bent  line  to  the  same  line 
when  it  has  been  straightened  out. 

Again  in  the  case  of  abstract  objects  what 
is  straight  is  analogous  to  what  is  snub-nosed; 
for  it  necessarily  implies  a  continuum  as  its 
matter:  its  constitutive  essence  is  different,  if 
we  may  distinguish  between  straightness  and 
what  is  straight:  let  us  take  it  to  be  two-ness. 
[20]  It  must  be  apprehended,  therefore,  by  a 
different  power  or  by  the  same  power  in  a  dif¬ 
ferent  state.  To  sum  up,  in  so  far  as  the  reali¬ 
ties  it  knows  are  capable  of  being  separated 
from  their  matter,  so  it  is  also  with  the  powers 
of  mind. 

The  problem  might  be  suggested:  if  think¬ 
ing  is  a  passive  affection,  then  if  mind  is  sim¬ 
ple  and  impassible  and  has  nothing  in  com¬ 
mon  with  anything  else,  as  Anaxagoras  says, 
[25]  how  can  it  come  to  think  at  all?  For  in¬ 
teraction  between  two  factors  is  held  to  require 
a  precedent  community  of  nature  between  the 
factors.  Again  it  might  be  asked,  is  mind  a  pos¬ 
sible  object  of  thought  to  itself?  For  if  mind  is 
thinkable  per  se  and  what  is  thinkable  is  in 
kind  one  and  the  same,  then  either  (a)  mind 
will  belong  to  everything,  or  (b)  mind  will 
contain  some  element  common  to  it  with  all 
other  realities  which  makes  them  all  thinkable. 

(1)  Have  not  we  already  disposed  of  the 
difficulty  about  interaction  involving  a  com- 
[30]  mon  element,  when  we  said1  that  mind  is 
in  a  sense  potentially  whatever  is  thinkable, 
though  actually  it  is  nothing  until  it  has 
thought?  What  it  thinks  must  be  in  it  just  as 
430*  characters  may  be  said  to  be  on  a  writing- 
tablet  on  which  as  yet  nothing  actually  stands 
written:  this  is  exactly  what  happens  with 
mind. 

(2)  Mind  is  itself  thinkable  in  exactly  the 
same  way  as  its  objects  are.  For  (a)  in  the  case 
of  objects  which  involve  no  matter,  what 
thinks  and  what  is  thought  are  identical;  for 
speculative  knowledge  and  its  object  are  iden¬ 
tical.  (Why  mind  is  not  always  thinking  we 
[5]  must  consider  later.)2  (b)  In  the  case  of 

1  *15-24.  2  Chapter  5. 


430* 

those  which  contain  matter  each  of  the  objects 
of  thought  is  only  potentially  present.  It  fol¬ 
lows  that  while  they  will  not  have  mind  in 
them  (for  mind  is  a  potentiality  of  them  only 
in  so  far  as  they  are  capable  of  being  disen¬ 
gaged  from  matter)  mind  may  yet  be  think¬ 
able. 

5 

[/o]  Since  in  every  class  of  things,  as  in  na¬ 
ture  as  a  whole,  we  find  two  factors  involved, 
(1)  a  matter  which  is  potentially  all  the  par¬ 
ticulars  included  in  the  class,  (2)  a  cause  which 
is  productive  in  the  sense  that  it  makes  them 
all  (the  latter  standing  to  the  former,  as  e.g. 
an  art  to  its  material),  these  distinct  elements 
must  likewise  be  found  within  the  soul. 

And  in  fact  mind  as  we  have  described  it3 
is  what  it  is  by  virtue  of  becoming  all  things, 
[75]  while  there  is  another  which  is  what  it  is 
by  virtue  of  making  all  things:  this  is  a  sort  of 
positive  state  like  light;  for  in  a  sense  light 
makes  potential  colours  into  actual  colours. 

Mind  in  this  sense  of  it  is  separable,  impas¬ 
sible,  unmixed,  since  it  is  in  its  essential  na¬ 
ture  activity  (for  always  the  active  is  superior 
to  the  passive  factor,  the  originating  force  to 
the  matter  which  it  forms). 

[20]  Actual  knowledge  is  identical  with  its 
object:  in  the  individual,  potential  knowledge 
is  in  time  prior  to  actual  knowledge,  but  in  the 
universe  as  a  whole  it  is  not  prior  even  in  time. 
Mind  is  not  at  one  time  knowing  and  at  an¬ 
other  not.  When  mind  is  set  free  from  its  pres¬ 
ent  conditions  it  appears  as  just  what  it  is  and 
nothing  more:  this  alone  is  immortal  and  eter¬ 
nal  (we  do  not,  however,  remember  its  former 
activity  because,  while  mind  in  this  sense  is 
impassible,  mind  as  passive  is  destructible), 
[25]  and  without  it  nothing  thinks. 

6 

The  thinking  then  of  the  simple  objects  of 
thought  is  found  in  those  cases  where  false¬ 
hood  is  impossible:  where  the  alternative  of 
true  or  false  applies,  there  we  always  find  a 
putting  together  of  objects  of  thought  in  a 
quasi-unity.  As  Empedocles  said  that  ‘where 
heads  of  many  a  creature  sprouted  without 
necks’4  they  afterwards  by  Love’s  power  were 
[30]  combined,  so  here  too  objects  of  thought 
which  were  given  separate  are  combined,  e.g. 
‘incommensurate’  and  ‘diagonal’:  if  the  com¬ 
bination  be  of  objects  past  or  future  the  com¬ 
bination  of  thought  includes  in  its  content  the 

3  In  chapter  4.  4  Fr.  57. 


ON  THE  SOUL 


43  la  BOOK  III,  CHAPTERS  4-7  663 


43 0b  date.  For  falsehood  always  involves  a 
synthesis;  for  even  if  you  assert  that  what  is 
white  is  not  white  you  have  included  not- 
white  in  a  synthesis.  It  is  possible  also  to  call 
all  these  cases  division  as  well  as  combination. 
However  that  may  be,  there  is  not  only  the 
true  or  false  assertion  that  Cleon  is  white  but 
also  the  true  or  false  assertion  that  he  was  or 
[5]  will  be  white.  In  each  and  every  case  that 
which  unifies  is  mind. 

Since  the  word  ‘simple’  has  two  senses,  i.e. 
may  mean  either  (a)  ‘not  capable  of  being  di¬ 
vided’  or  (b)  ‘not  actually  divided’,  there  is 
nothing  to  prevent  mind  from  knowing  what 
is  undivided,  e.g.  when  it  apprehends  a  length 
(which  is  actually  undivided)  and  that  in  an 
undivided  time;  for  the  time  is  divided  or  un¬ 
divided  in  the  same  manner  as  the  line.  It  is 
[/o]  not  possible,  then,  to  tell  what  part  of  the 
line  it  was  apprehending  in  each  half  of  the 
time:  the  object  has  no  actual  parts  until  it  has 
been  divided:  if  in  thought  you  think  each  half 
separately,  then  by  the  same  act  you  divide  the 
time  also,  the  half-lines  becoming  as  it  were 
new  wholes  of  length.  But  if  you  think  it  as  a 
whole  consisting  of  these  two  possible  parts, 
then  also  you  think  it  in  a  time  which  corre¬ 
sponds  to  both  parts  together.  (But  what  is 
[75]  not  quantitatively  but  qualitatively  sim¬ 
ple  is  thought  in  a  simple  time  and  by  a  sim¬ 
ple  act  of  the  soul.) 

But  that  which  mind  thinks  and  the  time  in 
which  it  thinks  are  in  this  case  divisible  only 
incidentally  and  not  as  such.  For  in  them  too 
there  is  something  indivisible  (though,  it  may 
be,  not  isolable)  which  gives  unity  to  the  time 
and  the  whole  of  length;  and  this  is  found 
equally  in  every  continuum  whether  temporal 
or  spatial. 

[20]  Points  and  similar  instances  of  things 
that  divide,  themselves  being  indivisible,  are 
realized  in  consciousness  in  the  same  manner 
as  privations. 

A  similar  account  may  be  given  of  all  other 
cases,  e.g.  how  evil  or  black  is  cognized;  they 
are  cognized,  in  a  sense,  by  means  of  their 
contraries.  That  which  cognizes  must  have  an 
element  of  potentiality  in  its  being,  and  one  of 
the  contraries  must  be  in  it-  But  if  there  is  any¬ 
thing  that  has  no  contrary,  then  it  knows  it- 
[25]  self  and  is  actually  and  possesses  inde¬ 
pendent  existence. 

Assertion  is  the  saying  of  something  con¬ 
cerning  something,  e.g.  affirmation,  and  is  in 
every  case  either  true  or  false:  this  is  not  al¬ 
ways  the  case  with  mind:  the  thinking  of  the 


definition  in  the  sense  of  the  constitutive  es¬ 
sence  is  never  in  error  nor  is  it  the  assertion  of 
something  concerning  something,  but,  just  as 
while  the  seeing  of  the  special  object  of  sight 
can  never  be  in  error,  the  belief  that  the  white 
object  seen  is  a  man  may  be  mistaken,  so  too 
[30]  in  the  case  of  objects  which  are  without 
matter. 

7 

43  la  Actual  knowledge  is  identical  with  its 
object:  potential  knowledge  in  the  individual 
is  in  time  prior  to  actual  knowledge  but  in  the 
universe  it  has  no  priority  even  in  time;  for  all 
things  that  come  into  being  arise  from  what 
actually  is.  In  the  case  of  sense  clearly  the  sen¬ 
sitive  faculty  already  was  potentially  what  the 
[5]  object  makes  it  to  be  actually;  the  faculty 
is  not  affected  or  altered.  This  must  therefore 
be  a  different  kind  from  movement;  for  move¬ 
ment  is,  as  we  saw,1  an  activity  of  what  is  im¬ 
perfect,  activity  in  the  unqualified  sense,  i.e. 
that  of  what  has  been  perfected,  is  different 
from  movement. 

To  perceive  then  is  like  bare  asserting  or 
knowing;  but  when  the  object  is  pleasant  or 
painful,  the  soul  makes  a  quasi-affirmation  or 
negation,  and  pursues  or  avoids  the  object.  To 
[/o]  feel  pleasure  or  pain  is  to  act  with  the  sen¬ 
sitive  mean  towards  what  is  good  or  bad  as 
such.  Both  avoidance  and  appetite  when  actual 
are  identical  with  this:  the  faculty  of  appetite 
and  avoidance  are  not  different,  either  from 
one  another  or  from  the  faculty  of  sense-per¬ 
ception;  but  their  being  is  different. 

To  the  thinking  soul  images  serve  as  if  they 
[75]  were  contents  of  perception  (and  when  it 
asserts  or  denies  them  to  be  good  or  bad  it 
avoids  or  pursues  them).  That  is  why  the  soul 
never  thinks  without  an  image.  The  process  is 
like  that  in  which  the  air  modifies  the  pupil  in 
this  or  that  way  and  the  pupil  transmits  the 
modification  to  some  third  thing  (and  similar¬ 
ly  in  hearing),  while  the  ultimate  point  of  ar¬ 
rival  is  one,  a  single  mean,  with  different  man¬ 
ners  of  being. 

[20]  With  what  part  of  itself  the  soul  discrimi¬ 
nates  sweet  from  hot  I  have  explained  before2 
and  must  now  describe  again  as  follows:  That 
with  which  it  does  so  is  a  sort  of  unity,  but  in 
the  way  just  mentioned,  i.e.  as  a  connecting 
term.  And  the  two  faculties  it  connects,  being 
one  by  analogy  and  numerically,  are  each  to 
each  as  the  qualities  discerned  are  to  one  an¬ 
other  (for  what  difference  does  it  make  wheth- 
1  Cf.  417b  2-16.  2  426b  12-427®  14. 


664  ON  THE  SOUL  432a 


er  we  raise  the  problem  of  discrimination  be¬ 
tween  disparates  or  between  contraries,  e.g. 
[25]  white  and  black  P).  Let  then  C  be  to  D 
as  A  is  to  B:  it  follows  alternando  that  C  :  A  :: 
D  :  B.  If  then  C  and  D  belong  to  one  subject, 
the  case  will  be  the  same  with  them  as  with  A 
and  B;  A  and  B  form  a  single  identity  with 
different  modes  of  being;  so  too  will  the  for- 
43  lb  mer  pair.  The  same  reasoning  holds  if  A 
be  sweet  and  B  white. 

The  faculty  of  thinking  then  thinks  the 
forms  in  the  images,  and  as  in  the  former  case 
what  is  to  be  pursued  or  avoided  is  marked  out 
for  it,  so  where  there  is  no  sensation  and  it  is 
engaged  upon  the  images  it  is  moved  to  pur- 
[5]  suit  or  avoidance.  E.g.  perceiving  by  sense 
that  the  beacon  is  fire,  it  recognizes  in  virtue 
of  the  general  faculty  of  sense  that  it  signifies 
an  enemy,  because  it  sees  it  moving;  but  some¬ 
times  by  means  of  the  images  or  thoughts 
which  are  within  the  soul,  just  as  if  it  were 
seeing,  it  calculates  and  deliberates  what  is  to 
come  by  reference  to  what  is  present;  and 
when  it  makes  a  pronouncement,  as  in  the  case 
of  sensation  it  pronounces  the  object  to  be 
pleasant  or  painful,  in  this  case  it  avoids  or 

fursues;  and  so  generally  in  cases  of  action. 

10]  That  too  which  involves  no  action,  i.e. 
that  which  is  true  or  false,  is  in  the  same  prov¬ 
ince  with  what  is  good  or  bad:  yet  they  differ 
in  this,  that  the  one  set  imply  and  the  other  do 
not  a  reference  to  a  particular  person. 

The  so-called  abstract  objects  the  mind 
thinks  just  as,  if  one  had  thought  of  the  snub¬ 
nosed  not  as  snub-nosed  but  as  hollow,  one 
would  have  thought  of  an  actuality  without 
[75]  the  flesh  in  which  it  is  embodied:  it  is 
thus  that  the  mind  when  it  is  thinking  the  ob¬ 
jects  of  Mathematics  thinks  as  separate  ele¬ 
ments  which  do  not  exist  separate.  In  every 
case  the  mind  which  is  actively  thinking  is  the 
objects  which  it  thinks.  Whether  it  is  possible 
for  it  while  not  existing  separate  from  spatial 
conditions  to  think  anything  that  is  separate, 
or  not,  we  must  consider  later. 

8 

[20]  Let  us  now  summarize  our  results  about 
soul,  and  repeat  that  the  soul  is  in  a  way  all 
existing  things;  for  existing  things  are  either 
sensible  or  thinkable,  and  knowledge  is  in  a 
way  what  is  knowable,  and  sensation  is  in  a 
way  what  is  sensible:  in  what  way  we  must 
inquire. 

Knowledge  and  sensation  are  divided  to  cor¬ 
respond  with  the  realities,  potential  knowledge 


[25]  and  sensation  answering  to  potentialities, 
actual  knowledge  and  sensation  to  actualities. 
Within  the  soul  the  faculties  of  knowledge  and 
sensation  are  potentially  these  objects,  the  one 
what  is  knowable,  the  other  what  is  sensible. 
They  must  be  either  the  things  themselves  or 
their  forms.  The  former  alternative  is  of  course 
impossible:  it  is  not  the  stone  which  is  present 
in  the  soul  but  its  form. 

432a  It  follows  that  the  soul  is  analogous  to  the 
hand;  for  as  the  hand  is  a  tool  of  tools,  so  the 
mind  is  the  form  of  forms  and  sense  the  form 
of  sensible  things. 

Since  according  to  common  agreement  there 
is  nothing  outside  and  separate  in  existence 
from  sensible  spatial  magnitudes,  the  objects 
of  thought  are  in  the  sensible  forms,  viz.  both 
[5]  the  abstract  objects  and  all  the  states  and 
affections  of  sensible  things.  Hence  (1)  no  one 
can  learn  or  understand  anything  in  the  ab¬ 
sence  of  sense,  and  (2)  when  the  mind  is  ac¬ 
tively  aware  of  anything  it  is  necessarily  aware 
of  it  along  with  an  image;  for  images  are  like 
sensuous  contents  except  in  that  they  contain 
no  matter. 

Imagination  is  different  from  assertion  and 
[/o]  denial;  for  what  is  true  or  false  involves  a 
synthesis  of  concepts.  In  what  will  the  prima¬ 
ry  concepts  differ  from  images?  Must  we  not 
say  that  neither  these  nor  even  our  other  con¬ 
cepts  are  images,  though  they  necessarily  in¬ 
volve  them? 

9 

[75]  The  soul  of  animals  is  characterized  by 
two  faculties,  (a)  the  faculty  of  discrimination 
which  is  the  work  of  thought  and  sense,  and 
(h)  the  faculty  of  originating  local  movement. 
Sense  and  mind  we  have  now  sufficiently  ex¬ 
amined.  Let  us  next  consider  what  it  is  in  the 
soul  which  originates  movement.  Is  it  a  single 
part  of  the  soul  separate  either  spatially  or  in 
[20]  definition?  Or  is  it  the  soul  as  a  whole? 
If  it  is  a  part,  is  that  part  different  from  those 
usually  distinguished  or  already  mentioned  by 
us,  or  is  it  one  of  them?  The  problem  at  once 
presents  itself,  in  what  sense  we  are  to  speak 
of  parts  of  the  soul,  or  how  many  we  should 
distinguish.  For  in  a  sense  there  is  an  infinity 
of  parts:  it  is  not  enough  to  distinguish,  with 
[25]  some  thinkers,1  the  calculative,  the  pas¬ 
sionate,  and  the  desiderative,  or  with  others 
the  rational  and  the  irrational;  for  if  we  take 
the  dividing  lines  followed  by  these  thinkers 
we  shall  find  parts  far  more  distinctly  separat- 
1  Plato,  Republic ,  435-41. 


433*  BOOK  III,  CHAPTERS  7-10  665 


ed  from  one  another  than  these,  namely  those 
we  have  just  mentioned:  (1)  the  nutritive, 
which  belongs  both  to  plants  and  to  all  ani- 
[50]  mals,  and  (2)  the  sensitive,  which  can¬ 
not  easily  be  classed  as  either  irrational  or  ra¬ 
tional;  further  (3)  the  imaginative,  which  is, 
432b  in  its  being,  different  from  all,  while  it 
is  very  hard  to  say  with  which  of  the  others  it 
is  the  same  or  not  the  same,  supposing  we  de¬ 
termine  to  posit  separate  parts  in  the  soul;  and 
lastly  (4)  the  appetitive,  which  would  seem  to 
be  distinct  both  in  definition  and  in  power 
from  all  hitherto  enumerated. 

[5]  it  is  absurd  to  break  up  the  last-mentioned 
faculty:  as  these  thinkers  do,  for  wish  is  found 
in  the  calculative  part  and  desire  and  passion 
in  the  irrational;  and  if  the  soul  is  tripartite  ap¬ 
petite  will  be  found  in  all  three  parts.  Turning 
our  attention  to  the  present  object  of  discus¬ 
sion,  let  us  ask  what  that  is  which  originates 
local  movement  of  the  animal. 

The  movement  of  growth  and  decay,  being 
found  in  all  living  things,  must  be  attributed  to 
[/o]  the  faculty  of  reproduction  and  nutrition, 
which  is  common  to  all:  inspiration  and  ex¬ 
piration,  sleep  and  waking,  we  must  consider 
later:1  these  too  present  much  difficulty:  at 
present  we  must  consider  local  movement,  ask¬ 
ing  what  it  is  that  originates  forward  move¬ 
ment  in  the  animal. 

[75]  That  it  is  not  the  nutritive  faculty  is  ob¬ 
vious;  for  this  kind  of  movement  is  always  for 
an  end  and  is  accompanied  either  by  imagina¬ 
tion  or  by  appetite;  for  no  animal  moves  ex¬ 
cept  by  compulsion  unless  it  has  an  impulse 
towards  or  away  from  an  object.  Further,  if  it 
were  the  nutritive  faculty,  even  plants  would 
have  been  capable  of  originating  such  move¬ 
ment  and  would  have  possessed  the  organs 
necessary  to  carry  it  out.  Similarly  it  cannot 
be  the  sensitive  faculty  either;  for  there  are 
many  animals  which  have  sensibility  but  re¬ 
main  fast  and  immovable  throughout  their 
[20]  lives. 

If  then  Nature  never  makes  anything  with¬ 
out  a  purpose  and  never  leaves  out  what  is 
necessary  (except  in  the  case  of  mutilated  or 
imperfect  growths;  and  that  here  we  have  nei¬ 
ther  mutilation  nor  imperfection  may  be  ar¬ 
gued  from  the  facts  that  such  animals  (a)  can 
reproduce  their  species  and  ( b )  rise  to  com- 

fleteness  of  nature  and  decay  to  an  end),  it 
25]  follows  that,  had  they  been  capable  of 
originating  forward  movement,  they  would 
have  possessed  the  organs  necessary  for  that 
1  Cf.  On  Breathing,  On  Sleep  and  Sleeplessness. 


purpose.  Further,  neither  can  the  calculative 
faculty  or  what  is  called  ‘mind’  be  the  cause  of 
such  movement;  for  mind  as  speculative  never 
thinks  what  is  practicable,  it  never  says  any¬ 
thing  about  an  object  to  be  avoided  or  pur¬ 
sued,  while  this  movement  is  always  in  some¬ 
thing  which  is  avoiding  or  pursuing  an  object. 
[30]  No,  not  even  when  it  is  aware  of  such  an 
object  does  it  at  once  enjoin  pursuit  or  avoid¬ 
ance  of  it;  e.g.  the  mind  often  thinks  of  some¬ 
thing  terrifying  or  pleasant  without  enjoining 
the  emotion  of  fear.  It  is  the  heart  that  is  moved 
(or  in  the  case  of  a  pleasant  object  some  other 
433*  part).  Further,  even  when  the  mind  does 
command  and  thought  bids  us  pursue  or  avoid 
something,  sometimes  no  movement  is  pro¬ 
duced;  we  act  in  accordance  with  desire,  as  in 
the  case  of  moral  weakness.  And,  generally,  we 
observe  that  the  possessor  of  medical  knowl¬ 
edge  is  not  necessarily  healing,  which  shows 
that  something  else  is  required  to  produce  ac¬ 
tion  in  accordance  with  knowledge;  the  knowl- 
[5]  edge  alone  is  not  the  cause.  Lastly,  appetite 
too  is  incompetent  to  account  fully  for  move¬ 
ment;  for  those  who  successfully  resist  tempta¬ 
tion  have  appetite  and  desire  and  yet  follow 
mind  and  refuse  to  enact  that  for  which  they 
have  appetite. 

10 

These  two  at  all  events  appear  to  be  sources 
of  movement:  appetite  and  mind  (if  one  may 
venture  to  regard  imagination  as  a  kind  of 
[10]  thinking;  for  many  men  follow  their  im¬ 
aginations  contrary  to  knowledge,  and  in  all 
animals  other  than  man  there  is  no  thinking 
or  calculation  but  only  imagination). 

Both  of  these  then  are  capable  of  originating 
local  movement,  mind  and  appetite:  (1)  mind, 
that  is,  which  calculates  means  to  an  end,  i.e. 
mind  practical  (it  differs  from  mind  specula¬ 
te]  tive  in  the  character  of  its  end);  while 
(2)  appetite  is  in  every  form  of  it  relative  to 
an  end:  for  that  which  is  the  object  of  appe¬ 
tite  is  the  stimulant  of  mind  practical;  and  that 
which  is  last  in  the  process  of  thinking  is  the 
beginning  of  the  action.  It  follows  that  there  is 
a  justification  for  regarding  these  two  as  the 
sources  of  movement,  i.e.  appetite  and  prac¬ 
tical  thought;  for  the  object  of  appetite  starts  a 
movement  and  as  a  result  of  that  thought  gives 
rise  to  movement,  the  object  of  appetite  being 
[20]  to  it  a  source  of  stimulation.  So  too  when 
imagination  originates  movement,  it  neces¬ 
sarily  involves  appetite. 

That  which  moves  therefore  is  a  single  fac- 


666 

ulty  and  the  faculty  of  appetite;  for  if  there 
had  been  two  sources  of  movement — mind 
and  appetite — they  would  have  produced 
movement  in  virtue  of  some  common  charac¬ 
ter.  As  it  is,  mind  is  never  found  producing 
movement  without  appetite  (for  wish  is  a  form 
of  appetite;  and  when  movement  is  produced 
according  to  calculation  it  is  also  according  to 
[25]  wish),  but  appetite  can  originate  move¬ 
ment  contrary  to  calculation,  for  desire  is  a 
form  of  appetite.  Now  mind  is  always  right, 
but  appetite  and  imagination  may  he  either 
right  or  wrong.  That  is  why,  though  in  any 
case  it  is  the  object  of  appetite  which  originates 
movement,  this  object  may  be  either  the  real 
or  the  apparent  good.  To  produce  movement 
the  object  must  be  more  than  this:  it  must  be 
good  that  can  be  brought  into  being  by  action; 
and  only  what  can  be  otherwise  than  as  it  is 
[jo]  can  thus  be  brought  into  being.  That 
then  such  a  power  in  the  soul  as  has  been  de¬ 
scribed,  i.e.  that  called  appetite,  originates 
movement  is  clear.  Those  who  distinguish 
433b  parts  in  the  soul,  if  they  distinguish  and 
divide  in  accordance  with  differences  of  pow¬ 
er,  find  themselves  with  a  very  large  number 
of  parts,  a  nutritive,  a  sensitive,  an  intellective, 
a  deliberative,  and  now  an  appetitive  part;  for 
these  are  more  different  from  one  another  than 
the  faculties  of  desire  and  passion. 

[5]  Since  appetites  run  counter  to  one  another, 
which  happens  when  a  principle  of  reason  and 
a  desire  are  contrary  and  is  possible  only  in  be¬ 
ings  with  a  sense  of  time  (for  while  mind  bids 
us  hold  back  because  of  what  is  future,  desire 
is  influenced  by  what  is  just  at  hand:  a  pleasant 
object  which  is  just  at  hand  presents  itself  as 
both  pleasant  and  good,  without  condition  in 
either  case,  because  of  want  of  foresight  into 
[/o]  what  is  farther  away  in  time),  it  follows 
that  while  that  which  originates  movement 
must  be  specifically  one,  viz.  the  faculty  of  ap¬ 
petite  as  such  (or  rather  farthest  back  of  all  the 
object  of  that  faculty;  for  it  is  it  that  itself  re¬ 
maining  unmoved  originates  the  movement 
by  being  apprehended  in  thought  or  imagina¬ 
tion),  the  things  that  originate  movement  are 
numerically  many. 

All  movement  involves  three  factors,  (1) 
that  which  originates  the  movement,  (2)  that 
by  means  of  which  it  originates  it,  and  (3) 
that  which  is  moved.  The  expression  ‘that 
which  originates  the  movement’  is  ambiguous: 
it  may  mean  either  (a)  something  which  itself 
is  unmoved  or  ( b )  that  which  at  once  moves 
[75]  and  is  moved.  Here  that  which  moves 


434a 

without  itself  being  moved  is  the  realizable 
good,  that  which  at  once  moves  and  is  moved  is 
the  faculty  of  appetite  (for  that  which  is  influ¬ 
enced  by  appetite  so  far  as  it  is  actually  so  in¬ 
fluenced  is  set  in  movement,  and  appetite  in 
the  sense  of  actual  appetite  is  a  kind  of  move¬ 
ment),  while  that  which  is  in  motion  is  the 
animal.  The  instrument  which  appetite  em¬ 
ploys  to  produce  movement  is  no  longer  psy- 
[20]  chical  but  bodily:  hence  the  examination 
of  it  falls  within  the  province  of  the  functions 
common  to  body  and  soul.  To  state  the  matter 
summarily  at  present,  that  which  is  the  instru¬ 
ment  in  the  production  of  movement  is  to  be 
found  where  a  beginning  and  an  end  coincide 
as  e.g.  in  a  ball  and  socket  joint;  for  there  the 
convex  and  the  concave  sides  are  respectively 
an  end  and  a  beginning  (that  is  why  while  the 
one  remains  at  rest,  the  other  is  moved):  they 
are  separate  in  definition  but  not  separable 
[25]  spatially.  For  everything  is  moved  by 
pushing  and  pulling.  Hence  just  as  in  the  case 
of  a  wheel,  so  here  there  must  be  a  point  which 
remains  at  rest,  and  from  that  point  the  move¬ 
ment  must  originate. 

To  sum  up,  then,  and  repeat  what  I  have 
said,  inasmuch  as  an  animal  is  capable  of  ap¬ 
petite  it  is  capable  of  self-movement;  it  is  not 
capable  of  appetite  without  possessing  imagi¬ 
nation;  and  all  imagination  is  either  (1)  cal- 
culative  or  (2)  sensitive.  In  the  latter  all  ani- 
[30]  mals,  and  not  only  man,  partake. 

11 

We  must  consider  also  in  the  case  of  imper¬ 
fect  animals,  sc.  those  which  have  no  sense  but 
touch,  what  it  is  that  in  them  originates  move- 
434a  ment.  Can  they  have  imagination  or  not? 
or  desire?  Clearly  they  have  feelings  of  pleas¬ 
ure  and  pain,  and  if  they  have  these  they  must 
have  desire.  But  how  can  they  have  imagina¬ 
tion?  Must  not  we  say  that,  as  their  move¬ 
ments  are  indefinite,  they  have  imagination 
and  desire,  but  indefinitely? 

[5]  Sensitive  imagination,  as  we  have  said,1  is 
found  in  all  animals,  deliberative  imagination 
only  in  those  that  are  calculative:  for  whether 
this  or  that  shall  be  enacted  is  already  a  task 
requiring  calculation;  and  there  must  be  a  sin¬ 
gle  standard  to  measure  by,  for  that  is  pur¬ 
sued  which  is  greater.  It  follows  that  what  acts 
in  this  way  must  be  able  to  make  a  unity  out 
of  several  images. 

[/o]  This  is  the  reason  why  imagination  is 
held  not  to  involve  opinion,  in  that  it  does  not 
1  433b  29. 


ON  THE  SOUL 


435*  BOOK  III,  CHAPTERS  10-12  667 


involve  opinion  based  on  inference,  though 
opinion  involves  imagination.  Hence ‘appetite 
contains  no  deliberative  element.  Sometimes  it 
overpowers  wish  and  sets  it  in  movement:  at 
times  wish  acts  thus  upon  appetite,  like  one 
sphere  imparting  its  movement  to  another,  or 
appetite  acts  thus  upon  appetite,  i.e.  in  the  con¬ 
dition  of  moral  weakness  (though  by  nature 
the  higher  faculty  is  always  more  authoritative 
and  gives  rise  to  movement).  Thus  three 
[75]  modes  of  movement  are  possible. 

The  faculty  of  knowing  is  never  moved  but 
remains  at  rest.  Since  the  one  premiss  or  judge¬ 
ment  is  universal  and  the  other  deals  with  the 
particular  (for  the  first  tells  us  that  such  and 
such  a  kind  of  man  should  do  such  and  such  a 
kind  of  act,  and  the  second  that  this  is  an  act 
of  the  kind  meant,  and  I  a  person  of  the  type 
intended),  it  is  the  latter  opinion  that  really 
[20]  originates  movement,  not  the  universal; 
or  rather  it  is  both,  but  the  one  does  so  while 
it  remains  in  a  state  more  like  rest,  while  the 
other  partakes  in  movement. 

12 

The  nutritive  soul  then  must  be  possessed 
by  everything  that  is  alive,  and  every  such 
thing  is  endowed  with  soul  from  its  birth  to  its 
death.  For  what  has  been  born  must  grow, 
reach  maturity,  and  decay — all  of  which  are 
impossible  without  nutrition.  Therefore  the 
[25]  nutritive  faculty  must  be  found  in  every¬ 
thing  that  grows  and  decays. 

But  sensation  need  not  be  found  in  all 
things  that  live.  For  it  is  impossible  for  touch 
to  belong  either  (1)  to  those  whose  body  is  un¬ 
compounded  or  (2)  to  those  which  are  incap¬ 
able  of  taking  in  the  forms  without  their  mat¬ 
ter. 

[jo]  But  animals  must  be  endowed  with  sensa¬ 
tion,  since  Nature  does  nothing  in  vain.  For  all 
things  that  exist  by  Nature  are  means  to  an 
end,  or  will  be  concomitants  of  means  to  an 
end.  Every  body  capable  of  forward  movement 
would,  if  unendowed  with  sensation,  perish 
and  fail  to  reach  its  end,  which  is  the  aim  of 
434b  Nature;  for  how  could  it  obtain  nutri¬ 
ment?  Stationary  living  things,  it  is  true,  have 
as  their  nutriment  that  from  which  they  have 
arisen;  but  it  is  not  possible  that  a  body  which 
is  not  stationary  but  produced  by  generation 
should  have  a  soul  and  a  discerning  mind 
without  also  having  sensation.  (Nor  yet  even 
if  it  were  not  produced  by  generation.  Why 
should  it  not  have  sensation?  Because  it  were 
[5]  better  so  either  for  the  body  or  for  the 


soul?  But  clearly  it  would  not  be  better  for  ei¬ 
ther:  the  absence  of  sensation  will  not  enable 
the  one  to  think  better  or  the  other  to  exist  bet¬ 
ter.)  Therefore  no  body  which  is  not  station¬ 
ary  has  soul  without  sensation. 

But  if  a  body  has  sensation,  it  must  be  either 
simple  or  compound.  And  simple  it  cannot  be; 
[70]  for  then  it  could  not  have  touch,  which  is 
indispensable.  This  is  clear  from  what  follows. 
An  animal  is  a  body  with  soul  in  it:  every  body 
is  tangible,  i.e.  perceptible  by  touch;  hence 
necessarily,  if  an  animal  is  to  survive,  its  body 
[75]  must  have  tactual  sensation.  All  the  other 
senses,  e.g.  smell,  sight,  hearing,  apprehend 
through  media;  but  where  there  is  immediate 
contact  the  animal,  if  it  has  no  sensation,  will 
be  unable  to  avoid  some  things  and  take  oth¬ 
ers,  and  so  will  find  it  impossible  to  survive. 
That  is  why  taste  also  is  a  sort  of  touch;  it  is 
relative  to  nutriment,  which  is  just  tangible 
body;  whereas  sound,  colour,  and  odour  are 
innutritious,  and  further  neither  grow  nor  de- 
[20]  cay.  Hence  it  is  that  taste  also  must  be  a 
sort  of  touch,  because  it  is  the  sense  for  what 
is  tangible  and  nutritious. 

Both  these  senses,  then,  are  indispensable  to 
the  animal,  and  it  is  clear  that  without  touch 
it  is  impossible  for  an  animal  to  be.  All  the 
other  senses  subserve  well-being  and  for  that 
very  reason  belong  not  to  any  and  every  kind 
[25]  of  animal,  but  only  to  some,  e.g.  those 
capable  of  forward  movement  must  have 
them;  for,  if  they  are  to  survive,  they  must  per¬ 
ceive  not  only  by  immediate  contact  but  also 
at  a  distance  from  the  object.  This  will  be  pos¬ 
sible  if  they  can  perceive  through  a  medium, 
the  medium  being  affected  and  moved  by  the 
perceptible  object,  and  the  animal  by  the 
[jo]  medium.  Just  as  that  which  produces 
local  movement  causes  a  change  extending  to 
a  certain  point,  and  that  which  gave  an  im¬ 
pulse  causes  another  to  produce  a  new  impulse 
so  that  the  movement  traverses  a  medium — ■ 
the  first  mover  impelling  without  being  im¬ 
pelled,  the  last  moved  being  impelled  without 
impelling,  while  the  medium  (or  media,  for 
435a  there  are  many)  is  both — so  is  it  also  in 
the  case  of  alteration,  except  that  the  agent  pro¬ 
duces  it  without  the  patient’s  changing  its 
place.  Thus  if  an  object  is  dipped  into  wax,  the 
movement  goes  on  until  submersion  has  taken 
place,  and  in  stone  it  goes  no  distance  at  all, 
while  in  water  the  disturbance  goes  far  beyond 
the  object  dipped:  in  air  the  disturbance  is  pro¬ 
pagated  farthest  of  all,  the  air  acting  and  being 
acted  upon,  so  long  as  it  maintains  an  un- 


ON  THE  SOUL 


668 

broken  unity.  That  is  why  in  the  case  of  re- 
[5]  flection  it  is  better,  instead  of  saying  that 
the  sight  issues  from  the  eye  and  is  reflected, 
to  say  that  the  air,  so  long  as  it  remains  one,  is 
affected  by  the  shape  and  colour.  On  a  smooth 
surface  the  air  possesses  unity;  hence  it  is  that 
it  in  turn  sets  the  sight  in  motion,  just  as  if  the 
impression  on  the  wax  were  transmitted  as 
[/o]  far  as  the  wax  extends. 

13 

It  is  clear  that  the  body  of  an  animal  cannot 
be  simple,  i.e.  consist  of  one  element  such  as 
fire  or  air.  For  without  touch  it  is  impossible  to 
have  any  other  sense;  for  every  body  that  has 
soul  in  it  must,  as  we  have  said,1  be  capable  of 
touch.  All  the  other  elements  with  the  excep- 
[75]  tion  of  earth  can  constitute  organs  of 
sense,  but  all  of  them  bring  about  perception 
only  through  something  else,  viz.  through  the 
media.  Touch  takes  place  by  direct  contact 
with  its  objects,  whence  also  its  name.  All  the 
other  organs  of  sense,  no  doubt,  perceive  by 
contact,  only  the  contact  is  mediate:  touch 
alone  perceives  by  immediate  contact.  Conse¬ 
quently  no  animal  body  can  consist  of  these 
other  elements. 

[20]  Nor  can  it  consist  solely  of  earth.  For 
touch  is  as  it  were  a  mean  between  all  tangible 
qualities,  and  its  organ  is  capable  of  receiving 
not  only  all  the  specific  qualities  which  charac¬ 
terize  earth,  but  also  the  hot  and  the  cold  and 
all  other  tangible  qualities  whatsoever.  That 
[25]  is  why  we  have  no  sensation  by  means  of 
bones,  hair,  &c.,  because  they  consist  of  earth. 
435b  So  too  plants,  because  they  consist  of 
earth,  have  no  sensation.  Without  touch  there 
can  be  no  other  sense,  and  the  organ  of  touch 
cannot  consist  of  earth  or  of  any  other  single 
element. 


435b 

It  is  evident,  therefore,  that  the  loss  of  this 
one  sense  alone  must  bring  about  the  death  of 
[5]  an  animal.  For  as  on  the  one  hand  nothing 
which  is  not  an  animal  can  have  this  sense,  so 
on  the  other  it  is  the  only  one  which  is  indis¬ 
pensably  necessary  to  what  is  an  animal.  This 
explains,  further,  the  following  difference  be¬ 
tween  the  other  senses  and  touch.  In  the  case  of 
all  the  others  excess  of  intensity  in  the  quali¬ 
ties  which  they  apprehend,  i.e.  excess  of  inten¬ 
sity  in  colour,  sound,  and  smell,  destroys  not 
[jo]  the  animal  but  only  the  organs  of  the 
sense  (except  incidentally,  as  when  the  sound 
is  accompanied  by  an  impact  or  shock,  or 
where  through  the  objects  of  sight  or  of  smell 
certain  other  things  are  set  in  motion,  which 
destroy  by  contact);  flavour  also  destroys  only 
in  so  far  as  it  is  at  the  same  time  tangible.  But 
excess  of  intensity  in  tangible  qualities,  e.g. 
[75]  heat,  cold,  or  hardness,  destroys  the  ani¬ 
mal  itself.  As  in  the  case  of  every  sensible  qual¬ 
ity  excess  destroys  the  organ,  so  here  what  is 
tangible  destroys  touch,  which  is  the  essential 
mark  of  life;  for  it  has  been  shown  that  with¬ 
out  touch  it  is  impossible  for  an  animal  to  be. 
That  is  why  excess  in  intensity  of  tangible 
qualities  destroys  not  merely  the  organ,  but 
the  animal  itself,  because  this  is  the  only  sense 
which  it  must  have. 

All  the  other  senses  are  necessary  to  animals, 
[20]  as  we  have  said,2  not  for  their  being,  but 
for  their  well-being.  Such,  e.g.  is  sight,  which, 
since  it  lives  in  air  or  water,  or  generally  in 
what  is  pellucid,  it  must  have  in  order  to  see, 
and  taste  because  of  what  is  pleasant  or  pain¬ 
ful  to  it,  in  order  that  it  may  perceive  these 
qualities  in  its  nutriment  and  so  may  desire  to 
be  set  in  motion,  and  hearing  that  it  may  have 
[25]  communication  made  to  it,  and  a  tongue 
that  it  may  communicate  with  its  fellows. 


SHORT  PHYSICAL  TREATISES 


CONTENTS:  SHORT  PHYSICAL  TREATISES 


ON  SENSE  AND  THE  SENSIBLE 

CHAp>  BERLIN  NOS. 

i.  Source  of  sensation.  Sensations  as  43 6a  i 

means  of  preservation.  Effect  of  sensation  on 


intelligence 

2.  Characteristics  of  bodily  organs  of  437a  17 
sensation  as  connected  with  the  four 
elements 

3.  Natures  of  sensible  objects:  439a6 

Theories  of  colour 

4.  Theories  of  savours  44°b 

5.  Theories  of  odours  442b  27 

6.  Divisibility  and  movement  of  sen-  445b3 
sible  qualities.  Simultaneous  perception  of  one 
object  by  many.  Affection  of  parts  of  the 
medium 

7.  Reactions  to  simultaneous  sensory  447s  13 
stimuli.  Magnitudes  and  divisibility  of  per¬ 
ceptible  objects 


ON  MEMORY  AND  REMINISCENCE 

1.  Objects  of  memory.  Definition  of  449b  1 
nature  and  faculty  of  memory 

2.  Definition,  manner,  and  causes  of  45ia  19 
recollection 

ON  SLEEP  AND  SLEEPLESSNESS 

1.  Nature  and  effects  of  sleeping  and  453b  12 
waking 

2.  Reason  and  need  of  sleeping  and  455a3 
waking 

3.  Processes  and  causes  of  sleeping  456a30 
and  waking 

ON  DREAMS 

1.  Faculty  of  the  soul  to  which  dreams  458b  1 
pertain 

2.  Nature  of  perceptions  in  a  dream  459s  23 

3.  Nature  of  the  dream  itself  46ob  28 

ON  PROPHESYING  BY  DREAMS 

1.  Dreams  as  tokens,  coincidences,  462b  12 
causes  of  future  events 

2.  Consummation  of  dreams.  Men-  463b  1 1 

tality  of  dreamers  and  interpreters  of  dreams 

ON  LONGEVITY  AND  THE  SHORTNESS 
OF  LIFE 

1.  Introductory  464b  19 

2.  Dissolution  of  the  soul  465s  12 


3.  Perishability  of  opposites.  State  of  465b  1 
transition  of  all  things.  Reaction  to  environ¬ 
ment 

4.  Longevity  as  immunity  from  decay  466s1 1 

5.  Reasons  for  longevity  in  animals  466a  17 

6.  Reasons  for  longevity  in  plants  and  467a  6 
insects 


ON  YOUTH  AND  OLD  AGE,  ON  LIFE  AND 


DEATH,  ON  BREATHING 

1.  The  organ  of  sensation,  or  source  467b  10 
of  nutritive  soul 

2.  The  position  of  the  source  of  nu-  468a  12 
tritive  soul.  The  unity  and  divisibility  of  ani¬ 
mals  and  plants 

3.  The  genesis  of  plants.  The  growth  468b  16 
of  animals.  The  position  of  the  organ  of  per¬ 
ception 

4.  Life  and  the  maintenance  of  heat  469**  23 

5.  The  two  manners  of  death.  The  469b2i 

need  for  refrigeration 

6.  The  need  for  refrigeration  of  ani-  47oa  20 
mals  and  plants 

ON  BREATHING 

7.  (1)  Comparative  need  for  breath-  47ob6 
ing  in  animals 

8.  (2)  Comparative  need  for  breath-  47ob  28 
ing  in  fishes 

9.  (3)  ( Continued )  471s  20 

10.  (4)  Connexion  between  breath-  47^30 

ing  and  life 

11.  (5)  Hot  and  cold  air  in  breathing  4 y2hy 

12.  (6)  Connexion  between  nutrition  473a3 
and  breathing 

13.  (7)  Connexion  between  breath-  473s  15 
ing  and  the  flux  of  blood 

14.  (8)  The  need  for  refrigeration  of  474s  25 
body  heat 

15.  (9)  ( Continued )  474b25 

16.  (10)  The  organs  of  breathing  475b  15 

1 7.  (11)  ( Continued )  476s  16 

18.  (12)  {Continued)  4 y6h  13 

19.  (13)  The  higher  nature  of  man  477s  12 

20.  (14)  The  character  of  substances  477a32 

and  their  necessary  environment 

21.  (15)  The  necessary  degree  of  re-  478a  11 
frigeration 

22.  (16)  The  relative  position  and  478s  26 


movement  of  heart  and  lungs  in  fishes  and 
animals 
671 


CONTENTS 


672 

ON  LIFE  AND  DEATH  I 

23.  (17)  The  single  cause  of  death  478b  21 

24.  (18)  Account  and  reason  of  gen-  479s  28 

eration,  life,  and  death 

25.  (19)  The  change  of  natural  en-  479b  8 


vironment.  The  cause  of  motion  of  gills  and 
lungs 

ON  LIFE  AND  DEATH  II 

26.  (20)  Nature  of  motion  of  the  heart  479b  16 

27.  (21)  Nature  of  motion  of  the  lungs  48oa  16 


On  Sense  and  the  Sensible 


43 6a  Having  now  definitely  considered  the 
soul,  by  itself,  and  its  several  faculties,  we  must 
next  make  a  survey  of  animals  and  all  living 
things,  in  order  to  ascertain  what  functions  are 
peculiar,  and  what  functions  are  common,  to 
{5]  them.  What  has  been  already  determined 
respecting  the  soul  [sc.  by  itself]  must  be  as¬ 
sumed  throughout.  The  remaining  parts  [sc. 
the  attributes  of  soul  and  body  conjointly]  of 
our  subject  must  be  now  dealt  with,  and  we 
may  begin  with  those  that  come  first. 

The  most  important  attributes  of  animals, 
whether  common  to  all  or  peculiar  to  some, 
are,  manifestly,  attributes  of  soul  and  body  in 
conjunction,  e.g.  sensation ,  memory,  passion, 
appetite  and  desire  in  general,  and,  in  addition 
pleasure  and  pain.  For  these  may,  in  fact,  be 
[  /o]  said  to  belong  to  all  animals.  But  there  are, 
besides  these,  certain  other  attributes,  of  which 
some  are  common  to  all  living  things,  while 
others  are  peculiar  to  certain  species  of  ani¬ 
mals.  The  most  important  of  these  may  be 
summed  up  in  four  pairs,  viz.  wa\ing  and 
sleeping,  youth  and  old  age,  inhalation  and 
exhalation,  life  and  death.  We  must  endeav- 
[75]  our  to  arrive  at  a  scientific  conception  of 
these,  determining  their  respective  natures, 
and  the  causes  of  their  occurrence. 

But  it  behoves  the  Physical  Philosopher  to 
obtain  also  a  clear  view  of  the  first  principles  of 
health  and  disease,  inasmuch  as  neither  health 
nor  disease  can  exist  in  lifeless  things.  Indeed 
[20]  we  may  say  of  most  physical  inquirers, 
and  of  those  physicians  who  study  their 
art  philosophically,  that  while  the  former 
complete  their  works  with  a  disquisition 
43 6b  on  medicine,  the  latter  usually  base 
their  medical  theories  on  principles  derived 
from  Physics. 

That  all  the  attributes  above  enumerated  be¬ 
long  to  soul  and  body  in  conjunction,  is  obvi¬ 
ous;  for  they  all  either  imply  sensation  as  a 
concomitant,  or  have  it  as  their  medium.  Some 

Note:  The  bold  face  numbers  and  letters  are  approxi¬ 
mate  indications  of  the  pages  and  columns  of  the  stand¬ 
ard  Berlin  Greek  text;  the  bracketed  numbers,  of  the 
lines  in  the  Greek  text ;  they  are  here  assigned  as  they 
are  assigned  in  the  Oxford  translation. 


[5]  are  either  affections  or  states  of  sensation, 
others,  means  of  defending  and  safe-guarding 
it,  while  others,  again,  involve  its  destruction 
or  negation.  Now  it  is  clear,  alike  by  reason¬ 
ing  and  observation,  that  sensation  is  gener¬ 
ated  in  the  soul  through  the  medium  of  the 
body. 

We  have  already,  in  our  treatise  On  the 
Soul,  explained  the  nature  of  sensation  and  the 
act  of  perceiving  by  sense,  and  the  reason  why 
[70]  this  affection  belongs  to  animals.  Sensa¬ 
tion  must,  indeed,  be  attributed  to  all  animals 
as  such,  for  by  its  presence  or  absence  we  dis¬ 
tinguish  essentially  between  what  is  and  what 
is  not  an  animal. 

But  coming  now  to  the  special  senses  sever¬ 
ally,  we  may  say  that  touch  and  taste  necessari¬ 
ly  appertain  to  all  animals,  touch,  for  the  rea¬ 
son  given  in  On  the  Soul,1  and  taste,  be- 
[75]  cause  of  nutrition.  It  is  by  taste  that  one 
distinguishes  in  food  the  pleasant  from  the  un¬ 
pleasant,  so  as  to  flee  from  the  latter  and  pur¬ 
sue  the  former:  and  savour  in  general  is  an 
affection  of  nutrient  matter. 

The  senses  which  operate  through  external 
media,  viz.  smelling,  hearing,  seeing,  are 
found  in  all  animals  which  possess  the  faculty 
of  locomotion.  To  all  that  possess  them  they 
are  a  means  of  preservation;  their  final  cause 
[20]  being  that  such  creatures  may,  guided  by 
antecedent  perception,  both  pursue  their  food, 
and  shun  things  that  are  bad  or  destructive. 
437a  But  in  animals  which  have  also  intelli¬ 
gence  they  serve  for  the  attainment  of  a  higher 
perfection.  They  bring  in  tidings  of  many  dis¬ 
tinctive  qualities  of  things,  from  which  the 
knowledge  of  truth,  speculative  and  practical, 
is  generated  in  the  soul. 

Of  the  two  last  mentioned,  seeing,  regarded 
as  a  supply  for  the  primary  wants  of  life,  and 
in  its  direct  effects,  is  the  superior  sense;  but 
[5]  for  developing  intelligence,  and  in  its  in¬ 
direct  consequences,  hearing  takes  the  prece¬ 
dence.  The  faculty  of  seeing,  thanks  to  the  fact 
that  all  bodies  are  coloured,  brings  tidings  of 
multitudes  of  distinctive  qualities  of  all  sorts; 
whence  it  is  through  this  sense  especially  that 
we  perceive  the  common  sensibles,  viz.  figure, 
magnitude ,  motion,  number:  while  hearing 

1  Cf.  On  the  Soul,  434k  10-24. 


673 


674  SENSE  AND  THE  SENSIBLE  438* 


announces  only  the  distinctive  qualities  of 
[/o]  sound,  and,  to  some  few  animals,  those 
also  of  voice.  Indirectly,  however,  it  is  hearing 
that  contributes  most  to  the  growth  of  intelli¬ 
gence.  For  rational  discourse  is  a  cause  of  in¬ 
struction  in  virtue  of  its  being  audible,  which 
it  is,  not  directly,  but  indirectly;  since  it  is 
[75]  composed  of  words,  and  each  word  is  a 
thought-symbol.  Accordingly,  of  persons  desti¬ 
tute  from  birth  of  either  sense,  the  blind  are 
more  intelligent  than  the  deaf  and  dumb. 

2 

Of  the  distinctive  potency  of  each  of  the  fac¬ 
ulties  of  sense  enough  has  been  said  already. 

But  as  to  the  nature  of  the  sensory  organs,  or 
parts  of  the  body  in  which  each  of  the  senses 
is  naturally  implanted,  inquirers  now  usually 
[20]  take  as  their  guide  the  fundamental  ele¬ 
ments  of  bodies.  Not,  however,  finding  it  easy 
to  coordinate  five  senses  with  four  elements, 
they  are  at  a  loss  respecting  the  fifth  sense.  But 
they  hold  the  organ  of  sight  to  consist  of  fire, 
being  prompted  to  this  view  by  a  certain  sen¬ 
sory  affection  of  whose  true  cause  they  are 
ignorant.  This  is  that,  when  the  eye  is  pressed 
or  moved,  fire  appears  to  flash  from  it.  This 
[25]  naturally  takes  place  in  darkness,  or  when 
the  eyelids  are  closed,  for  then,  too,  darkness 
is  produced. 

This  theory,  however,  solves  one  question 
only  to  raise  another;  for,  unless  on  the  hy¬ 
pothesis  that  a  person  who  is  in  his  full  senses 
can  see  an  object  of  vision  without  being  aware 
of  it,  the  eye  must  on  this  theory  see  itself.  But 
then  why  does  the  above  affection  not  occur 
also  when  the  eye  is  at  rest?  The  true  explana- 
[30]  tion  of  this  affection,  which  will  contain 
the  answer  to  our  question,  and  account 
for  the  current  notion  that  the  eye  consists 
of  fire,  must  be  determined  in  the  following 
way: — 

Things  which  are  smooth  have  the  natural 
property  of  shining  in  darkness,  without,  how¬ 
ever,  producing  light.  Now,  the  part  of  the 
43 7b  eye  called  ‘the  black’,  i.e.  its  central  part, 
is  manifestly  smooth.  The  phenomenon  of  the 
flash  occurs  only  when  the  eye  is  moved,  be¬ 
cause  only  then  could  it  possibly  occur  that  the 
same  one  object  should  become  as  it  were  two. 
The  rapidity  of  the  movement  has  the  effect  of 
making  that  which  sees  and  that  which  is  seen 
[5]  seem  different  from  one  another.  Hence 
the  phenomenon  does  not  occur  unless  the  mo¬ 
tion  is  rapid  and  takes  place  in  darkness.  For 
it  is  in  the  dark  that  that  which  is  smooth,  e.g. 


the  heads  of  certain  fishes,  and  the  sepia  of  the 
cuttle-fish,  naturally  shines,  and,  when  the 
movement  of  the  eye  is  slow,  it  is  impossible 
that  that  which  sees  and  that  which  is  seen 
should  appear  to  be  simultaneously  two  and 
one.  But,  in  fact,  the  eye  sees  itself  in  the  above 
[/o]  phenomenon  merely  as  it  does  so  in  ordi¬ 
nary  optical  reflexion. 

If  the  visual  organ  proper  really  were  fire, 
which  is  the  doctrine  of  Empedocles,  a  doctrine 
taught  also  in  the  Timaeus,1  and  if  vision  were 
the  result  of  light  issuing  from  the  eye  as  from 
a  lantern,  why  should  the  eye  not  have  had 
the  power  of  seeing  even  in  the  dark?  It  is 
totally  idle  to  say,  as  the  Timaeus  does,  that 
[75]  the  visual  ray  coming  forth  in  the  dark¬ 
ness  is  quenched.  What  is  the  meaning  of  this 
‘quenching’  of  light?  That  which,  like  a  fire 
of  coals  or  an  ordinary  flame,  is  hot  and  dry  is, 
indeed,  quenched  by  the  moist  or  cold;  but 
heat  and  dryness  are  evidently  not  attributes 
of  light.  Or  if  they  are  attributes  of  it,  but  be¬ 
long  to  it  in  a  degree  so  slight  as  to  be  imper- 
[20]  ceptible  to  us,  we  should  have  expected 
that  in  the  daytime  the  light  of  the  sun  should 
be  quenched  when  rain  falls,  and  that  darkness 
should  prevail  in  frosty  weather.  Flame,  for  ex¬ 
ample,  and  ignited  bodies  are  subject  to  such 
extinction,  but  experience  shows  that  nothing 
of  this  sort  happens  to  the  sunlight. 

Empedocles  at  times  seems  to  hold  that  vi¬ 
sion  is  to  be  explained  as  above  stated  by  light 
[25]  issuing  forth  from  the  eye,  e.g.  in  the  fol¬ 
lowing  passage: — 

As  when  one  who  purposes  going  abroad  pre¬ 
pares  a  lantern , 

A  gleam  of  fire  blazing  through  the  stormy 
night , 

Adjusting  thereto,  to  screen  it  from  all  sorts  of 
winds,  transparent  sides, 

Which  scatter  the  breath  of  the  winds  as  they 
blow, 

[30]  While,  out  through  them  leaping,  the  fire, 
i.e.  all  the  more  subtile  part  of  this. 

Shines  along  his  threshold  with  incessant  beams: 
438*  So  [Divine  love]  embedded  the  round 
“lens” ,  [viz.]  the  primaeval  fire  fenced  with¬ 
in  the  membranes, 

In  [its  own]  delicate  tissues ; 

And  these  fended  off  the  deep  surrounding 
flood, 

While  leaping  forth  the  fire,  i.e.  all  its  more 
subtile  part — . 

Sometimes  he  accounts  for  vision  thus,  but 
at  other  times  he  explains  it  by  emanations 
from  the  visible  objects. 

1 45- 


439* 

[5]  Democritus,  on  the  other  hand,  is  right  in 
his  opinion  that  the  eye  is  of  water;  not,  how¬ 
ever,  when  he  goes  on  to  explain  seeing  as 
mere  mirroring.  The  mirroring  that  takes 
place  in  an  eye  is  due  to  the  fact  that  the  eye 
is  smooth,  and  it  really  has  its  seat  not  in  the 
eye  which  is  seen ,  but  in  that  which  sees .  For 
the  case  is  merely  one  of  reflexion.  But  it 
would  seem  that  even  in  his  time  there  was  no 
[/o]  scientific  knowledge  of  the  general  sub¬ 
ject  of  the  formation  of  images  and  the  phe¬ 
nomena  of  reflexion.  It  is  strange  too,  that  it 
never  occurred  to  him  to  ask  why,  if  his  theory 
be  true,  the  eye  alone  sees,  while  none  of 
the  other  things  in  which  images  are  reflected 
do  so. 

True,  then,  the  visual  organ  proper  is  com¬ 
posed  of  water,  yet  vision  appertains  to  it  not 
because  it  is  so  composed,  but  because  it  is 
translucent — a  property  common  alike  to  wa- 
[75]  ter  and  to  air.  But  water  is  more  easily 
confined  and  more  easily  condensed  than  air; 
wherefore  it  is  that  the  pupil,  i.e.  the  eye  prop¬ 
er,  consists  of  water.  That  it  does  so  is  proved 
by  facts  of  actual  experience.  The  substance 
which  flows  from  eyes  when  decomposing  is 
seen  to  be  water,  and  this  in  undeveloped  em¬ 
bryos  is  remarkably  cold  and.  glistening.  In 
[20]  sanguineous  animals  the  white  of  the  eye 
is  fat  and  oily,  in  order  that  the  moisture  of 
the  eye  may  be  proof  against  freezing.  Where¬ 
fore  the  eye  is  of  all  parts  of  the  body  the  least 
sensitive  to  cold:  no  one  ever  feels  cold  in  the 
part  sheltered  by  the  eyelids.  The  eyes  of  blood¬ 
less  animals  are  covered  with  a  hard  scale 
which  gives  them  similar  protection. 

[25]  It  is,  to  state  the  matter  generally,  an  ir¬ 
rational  notion  that  the  eye  should  see  in  vir¬ 
tue  of  something  issuing  from  it;  that  the  visu¬ 
al  ray  should  extend  itself  all  the  way  to  the 
stars,  or  else  go  out  merely  to  a  certain  point, 
and  there  coalesce,  as  some  say,  with  rays 
which  proceed  from  the  object.  It  would  be 
better  to  suppose  this  coalescence  to  take  place 
in  the  fundament  of  the  eye  itself.  But  even 
this  would  be  mere  trifling.  For  what  is  meant 
[jo]  by  the  ‘coalescence’  of  light  with  light? 
Or  how  is  it  possible?  Coalescence  does  not 
occur  between  any  two  things  taken  at  ran¬ 
dom.  And  how  could  the  light  within  the 
438b  eye  coalesce  with  that  outside  it?  For 
the  environing  membrane  comes  between 
them. 

That  without  light  vision  is  impossible  has 
been  stated  elsewhere;1  but,  whether  the  medi- 

1  Cf.  On  the  Soul,  4i8b  1  sqq. 


675 

um  between  the  eye  and  its  objects  is  air  or 
light,  vision  is  caused  by  a  process  through  this 
medium. 

[5]  Accordingly,  that  the  inner  part  of  the 
eye  consists  of  water  is  easily  intelligible,  wa¬ 
ter  being  translucent. 

Now,  as  vision  outwardly  is  impossible  with¬ 
out  [extra-organic]  light,  so  also  it  is  impossi¬ 
ble  inwardly  [without  light  within  the  organ]. 
There  must,  therefore,  be  some  translucent  me¬ 
dium  within  the  eye,  and,  as  this  is  not  air,  it 
must  be  water.  The  soul  or  its  perceptive  part 
is  not  situated  at  the  external  surface  of  the 
eye,  but  obviously  somewhere  within:  whence 
[/o]  the  necessity  of  the  interior  of  the  eye  be¬ 
ing  translucent,  i.e.  capable  of  admitting  light. 
And  that  it  is  so  is  plain  from  actual  occur¬ 
rences.  It  is  matter  of  experience  that  soldiers 
wounded  in  battle  by  a  sword  slash  on  the  tem¬ 
ple,  so  inflicted  as  to  sever  the  passages  of  [i.e. 
inward  from]  the  eye,  feel  a  sudden  onset  of 
darkness,  as  if  a  lamp  had  gone  out;  because 
what  is  called  the  pupil,  i.e.  the  translucent, 
[75]  which  is  a  sort  of  inner  lamp,  is  then  cut 
off  [from  its  connexion  with  the  soul]. 

Hence,  if  the  facts  be  at  all  as  here  stated,  it 
is  clear  that — if  one  should  explain  the  nature 
of  the  sensory  organs  in  this  way,  i.e.  by  cor¬ 
relating  each  of  them  with  one  of  the  four  ele¬ 
ments, — we  must  conceive  that  the  part  of  the 
eye  immediately  concerned  in  vision  consists 
of  water,  that  the  part  immediately  concerned 
[20]  in  the  perception  of  sound  consists  of 
air,  and  that  the  sense  of  smell  consists  of  fire. 
(I  say  the  sense  of  smell,  not  the  organ.)  For 
the  organ  of  smell  is  only  potentially  that 
which  the  sense  of  smell,  as  realized,  is  actu¬ 
ally;  since  the  object  of  sense  is  what  causes 
the  actualization  of  each  sense,  so  that  it  (the 
sense)  must  (at  the  instant  of  actualization) 
be  (actually)  that  which  before  (the  moment 
of  actualization)  it  was  potentially.  Now, 
odour  is  a  smoke-like  evaporation,  and  smoke¬ 
like  evaporation  arises  from  fire.  This  also 
[25]  helps  us  to  understand  why  the  olfactory 
organ  has  its  proper  seat  in  the  environment  of 
the  brain,  for  cold  matter  is  potentially  hot.  In 
the  same  way  must  the  genesis  of  the  eye  be  ex¬ 
plained.  Its  structure  is  an  offshoot  from  the 
brain,  because  the  latter  is  the  moistest  and 
coldest  of  all  the  bodily  parts. 

[30]  The  organ  of  touch  proper  consists  of 
439*  earth,  and  the  faculty  of  taste  is  a  partic¬ 
ular  form  of  touch.  This  explains  why  the  sen¬ 
sory  organ  of  both  touch  and  taste  is  closely  re¬ 
lated  to  the  heart.  For  the  heart,  as  being  the 


CHAPTERS  1-2 


676  SENSE  AND  THE  SENSIBLE  439b 


hottest  of  all  the  bodily  parts,  is  the  counter¬ 
poise  of  the  brain. 

This  then  is  the  way  in  which  the  character- 
[5]  istics  of  the  bodily  organs  of  sense  must  be 
determined. 

3 

Of  the  sensibles  corresponding  to  each  sen¬ 
sory  organ,  viz.  colour,  sound,  odour,  savour, 
touch,  we  have  treated  in  On  the  Soul 1  in  gen¬ 
eral  terms,  having  there  determined  what  their 
function  is,  and  what  is  implied  in  their  be¬ 
coming  actualized  in  relation  to  their  respec- 
[/o]  tive  organs.  We  must  next  consider  what 
account  we  are  to  give  of  any  one  of  them; 
what,  for  example,  we  should  say  colour  is,  or 
sound,  or  odour,  or  savour;  and  so  also  re¬ 
specting  [the  object  of]  touch .  We  begin  with 
colour . 

Now,  each  of  them  may  be  spoken  of  from 
two  points  of  view,  i.e.  either  as  actual  or  as 
potential.  We  have  in  On  the  SouP  explained 
in  what  sense  the  colour,  or  sound,  regarded  as 
actualized  [for  sensation],  is  the  same  as,  and 
[75]  in  what  sense  it  is  different  from,  the 
correlative  sensation,  the  actual  seeing  or  hear¬ 
ing.  The  point  of  our  present  discussion  is, 
therefore,  to  determine  what  each  sensible  ob¬ 
ject  must  be  in  itself,  in  order  to  be  perceived 
as  it  is  in  actual  consciousness. 

We  have3  already  in  On  the  Soul  stated  of 
Light  that  it  is  the  colour  of  the  Translucent, 
[being  so  related  to  it]  incidentally;  for  when¬ 
ever  a  fiery  element  is  in  a  translucent  medium 
[20]  its  presence  there  is  Light;  while  the  pri¬ 
vation  of  it  is  Darkness.  But  the  ‘Translucent’, 
as  we  call  it,  is  not  something  peculiar  to  air, 
or  water,  or  any  other  of  the  bodies  usually 
called  translucent,  but  is  a  common  ‘nature* 
and  power,  capable  of  no  separate  existence  of 
its  own,  but  residing  in  these,  and  subsisting 
likewise  in  all  other  bodies  in  a  greater  or  less 
[25]  degree.  As  the  bodies  in  which  it  subsists 
must  have  some  extreme  bounding  surface,  so 
too  must  this.  Here,  then,  we  may  say  that 
Light  is  a  ‘nature’  inhering  in  the  Translucent 
when  the  latter  is  without  determinate  bound¬ 
ary.  But  it  is  manifest  that,  when  the  Trans¬ 
lucent  is  in  determinate  bodies,  its  bounding 
extreme  must  be  something  real;  and  that  col¬ 
our  is  just  this  ‘something’  we  are  plainly 
taught  by  facts — colour  being  actually  either 

1Cf.  On  the  Soul ,  418®  26  sqq.,  4i9b  5  sqq.,  421®  7 
sqq.,  422®  8  sqq.,  422b  17  sqq.,  for  Aristotle’s  treat¬ 
ment  of  these  sensibles  respectively. 

2  On  the  Soul ,  425b  25'426b  8. 

3  On  the  Soul,  4 1 8®  26  sqq. 


[30]  at  the  external  limit,  or  being  itself  that 
limit,  in  bodies.  Hence  it  was  that  the  Pythag¬ 
oreans  named  the  superficies  of  a  body  its 
‘hue’,  for  ‘hue’,  indeed,  lies  at  the  limit  of  the 
body;  but  the  limit  of  the  body  is  not  a  real 
thing;  rather  we  must  suppose  that  the  same 
natural  substance  which,  externally,  is  the  ve¬ 
hicle  of  colour  exists  [as  such  a  possible  vehi¬ 
cle]  also  in  the  interior  of  the  body. 

439b  Air  and  water,  too  [i.e.  as  well  as  deter- 
minately  bounded  bodies],  are  seen  to  possess 
colour;  for  their  brightness  is  of  the  nature  of 
colour.  But  the  colour  which  air  or  sea  pre¬ 
sents,  since  the  body  in  which  it  resides  is  not 
determinately  bounded,  is  not  the  same  when 
one  approaches  and  views  it  close  by  as  it  is 
[5]  when  one  regards  it  from  a  distance; 
whereas  in  determinate  bodies  the  colour  pre¬ 
sented  is  definitely  fixed,  unless,  indeed,  when 
the  atmospheric  environment  causes  it  to 
change.  Hence  it  is  clear  that  that  in  them 
which  is  susceptible  of  colour  is  in  both  cases 
the  same.  It  is  therefore  the  Translucent,  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  degree  to  which  it  subsists  in 
bodies  (and  it  does  so  in  all  more  or  less),  that 
[/o]  causes  them  to  partake  of  colour.  But 
since  the  colour  is  at  the  extremity  of  the  body, 
it  must  be  at  the  extremity  of  the  Translucent 
in  the  body.  Whence  it  follows  that  we  may  de¬ 
fine  colour  as  the  limit  of  the  Translucent  in 
determinately  bounded  body.  For  whether  we 
consider  the  special  class  of  bodies  called  trans¬ 
lucent,  as  water  and  such  others,  or  determi¬ 
nate  bodies,  which  appear  to  possess  a  fixed  col¬ 
our  of  their  own,  it  is  at  the  exterior  bounding 
surface  that  all  alike  exhibit  their  colour. 

Now,  that  which  when  present  in  air  pro¬ 
duces  light  may  be  present  also  in  the  Translu- 
[75]  cent  which  pervades  determinate  bodies; 
or  again,  it  may  not  be  present,  but  there  may 
be  a  privation  of  it.  Accordingly,  as  in  the  case 
of  air  the  one  condition  is  light,  the  other  dark¬ 
ness,  in  the  same  way  the  colours  White  and 
Black  are  generated  in  determinate  bodies. 

We  must  now  treat  of  the  other  colours,  re¬ 
viewing  the  several  hypotheses  invented  to  ex- 
lain  their  genesis. 

20]  (1.)  It  is  conceivable  that  the  White  and 
the  Black  should  be  juxtaposed  in  quantities 
so  minute  that  [a  particle  of]  either  separately 
would  be  invisible,  though  the  joint  product 
[of  two  particles,  a  black  and  a  white]  would 
be  visible;  and  that  they  should  thus  have  the 
other  colours  for  resultants.  Their  product 
could,  at  all  events,  appear  neither  white  nor 
black;  and,  as  it  must  have  some  colour,  and 


440b 

can  have  neither  of  these,  this  colour  must  be 
[25]  of  a  mixed  character — in  fact,  a  species  of 
colour  different  from  either.  Such,  then,  is  a 
possible  way  of  conceiving  the  existence  of  a 
plurality  of  colours  besides  the  White  and 
Black;  and  we  may  suppose  that  [of  this  ‘plu¬ 
rality’]  many  are  the  result  of  a  [numerical] 
ratio;  for  the  blacks  and  whites  may  be  juxta¬ 
posed  in  the  ratio  of  3  to  2,  or  of  3  to  4,  or  in 
ratios  expressible  by  other  numbers;  while 
some  may  be  juxtaposed  according  to  no  nu- 
[30]  merically  expressible  ratio,  but  according 
to  some  relation  of  excess  or  defect  in  which 
the  blacks  and  whites  involved  would  be  in¬ 
commensurable  quantities;  and,  accordingly, 
we  may  regard  all  these  colours  [viz.  all  those 
based  on  numerical  ratios]  as  analogous  to  the 
sounds  that  enter  into  music,  and  suppose  that 
those  involving  simple  numerical  ratios,  like 
the  concords  in  music,  may  be  those  generally 
regarded  as  most  agreeable;  as,  for  example, 
purple,  crimson,  and  some  few  such  colours, 
their  fewness  being  due  to  the  same  causes 
440*  which  render  the  concords  few.  The  oth¬ 
er  compound  colours  may  be  those  which  are 
not  based  on  numbers.  Or  it  may  be  that, 
while  all  colours  whatever  [except  black  and 
white]  are  based  on  numbers,  some  are  regu¬ 
lar  in  this  respect,  others  irregular;  and  that 
the  latter  [though  now  supposed  to  be  all 
based  on  numbers],  whenever  they  are  not 
pure,  owe  this  character  to  a  corresponding 
impurity  in  [the  arrangement  of]  their  nu- 
[5]  merical  ratios.  This  then  is  one  conceiva¬ 
ble  hypothesis  to  explain  the  genesis  of  inter¬ 
mediate  colours. 

(2.)  Another  is  that  the  Black  and  White 
appear  the  one  through  the  medium  of  the  oth¬ 
er,  giving  an  effect  like  that  sometimes  pro¬ 
duced  by  painters  overlaying  a  less  vivid  upon 
a  more  vivid  colour,  as  when  they  desire  to 
[w\  represent  an  object  appearing  under  wa¬ 
ter  or  enveloped  in  a  haze,  and  like  that  pro¬ 
duced  by  the  sun,  which  in  itself  appears 
white,  but  takes  a  crimson  hue  when  beheld 
through  a  fog  or  a  cloud  of  smoke.  On  this 
hypothesis,  too,  a  variety  of  colours  may  be  con¬ 
ceived  to  arise  in  the  same  way  as  that  already 
described;  for  between  those  at  the  surface  and 
those  underneath  a  definite  ratio  might  some¬ 
times  exist;  in  other  cases  they  might  stand  in 
no  determinate  ratio.  To  [introduce  a  theory 
of  colour  which  would  set  all  these  hypotheses 
[15]  aside,  and]  say  with  the  ancients  that  col¬ 
ours  are  emanations,  and  that  the  visibility  of 
objects  is  due  to  such  a  cause,  is  absurd.  For 


677 

they  must,  in  any  case,  explain  sense-perception 
through  Touch;  so  that  it  were  better  to  say 
at  once  that  visual  perception  is  due  to  a  proc¬ 
ess  set  up  by  the  perceived  object  in  the  medi¬ 
um  between  this  object  and  the  sensory  organ; 
due,  that  is,  to  contact  [with  the  medium  af¬ 
fected],  not  to  emanations. 

[20]  If  we  accept  the  hypothesis  of  juxtaposi¬ 
tion,  we  must  assume  not  only  invisible  mag¬ 
nitude,  but  also  imperceptible  time,  in  order 
that  the  succession  in  the  arrival  of  the  stimu¬ 
latory  movements  may  be  unperceived,  and 
that  the  compound  colour  seen  may  appear  to 
be  one,  owing  to  its  successive  parts  seeming 
to  present  themselves  at  once.  On  the  hypothe¬ 
sis  of  superposition,  however,  no  such  assump¬ 
tion  is  needful:  the  stimulatory  process  pro¬ 
duced  in  the  medium  by  the  upper  colour, 
when  this  is  itself  unaffected,  will  be  different 
[25]  in  kind  from  that  produced  by  it  when  af¬ 
fected  by  the  underlying  colour.  Hence  it  pre¬ 
sents  itself  as  a  different  colour,  i.e.  as  one 
which  is  neither  white  nor  black.  So  that,  if  it 
is  impossible  to  suppose  any  magnitude  to  be 
invisible,  and  we  must  assume  that  there  is 
some  distance  from  which  every  magnitude  is 
visible,  this  superposition  theory,  too  [i.e.  as 
well  as  No.  3  infra],  might  pass  as  a  real 
theory  of  colour-mixture.  Indeed,  in  the  previ¬ 
ous  case  also  there  is  no  reason  why,  to  persons 
at  a  distance  from  the  juxtaposed  blacks  and 
whites,  some  one  colour  should  not  appear  to 
[30]  present  itself  as  a  blend  of  both.  [But  it 
would  not  be  so  on  a  nearer  view],  for  it  will 
be  shown,  in  a  discussion  to  be  undertaken 
later  on,  that  there  is  no  magnitude  absolutely 
invisible. 

(3.)  There  is  a  mixture  of  bodies,  however, 
not  merely  such  as  some  suppose,  i.e.  by  juxta- 
440b  position  of  their  minimal  parts,  which, 
owing  to  [the  weakness  of  our]  sense,  are  im¬ 
perceptible  by  us,  but  a  mixture  by  which  they 
[i.e.  the  ‘matter’  of  which  they  consist]  are 
wholly  blent  together  by  interpenetration,  as 
we  have  described  it  in  the  treatise  on  Mix¬ 
ture,1  where  we  dealt  with  this  subject  gener¬ 
ally  in  its  most  comprehensive  aspect.  For, 
on  the  supposition  we  are  criticizing,  the  only 
[5]  totals  capable  of  being  mixed  are  those 
which  are  divisible  into  minimal  parts,  [e.g. 
genera  into  individuals]  as  men,  horses,  or  the 
[various  kinds  of]  seeds.  For  of  mankind  as  a 
whole  the  individual  man  is  such  a  least  part; 
of  horses  [as  an  aggregate],  the  individual 
horse.  Hence  by  the  juxtaposition  of  these  we 

1  Cf.  328*  5  sqq. 


CHAPTERS  2-3 


678  SENSE  AND  THE  SENSIBLE  441a 


obtain  a  mixed  total,  consisting  [like  a  troop 
of  cavalry]  of  both  together;  but  we  do  not 
say  that  by  such  a  process  any  individual  man 
has  been  mixed  with  any  individual  horse.  Not 
[/o]  in  this  way,  but  by  complete  interpenetra¬ 
tion  [of  their  matter],  must  we  conceive  those 
things  to  be  mixed  which  are  not  divisible  into 
minima;  and  it  is  in  the  case  of  these  that  nat¬ 
ural  mixture  exhibits  itself  in  its  most  perfect 
form.  We  have  explained  already  in  our  dis¬ 
course  ‘On  Mixture’  how  such  mixture  is  pos¬ 
sible.  This  being  the  true  nature  of  mixture,  it 
is  plain  that  when  bodies  are  mixed  their  col¬ 
ours  also  are  necessarily  mixed  at  the  same 
[75]  time;  and  [it  is  no  less  plain]  that  this  is 
the  real  cause  determining  the  existence  of  a 
plurality  of  colours — not  superposition  or  jux¬ 
taposition.  For  when  bodies  are  thus  mixed, 
their  resultant  colour  presents  itself  as  one  and 
the  same  at  all  distances  alike;  not  varying  as 
it  is  seen  nearer  or  farther  away. 

Colours  will  thus,  too  [as  well  as  on  the  for¬ 
mer  hypotheses],  be  many  in  number  on  ac¬ 
count  of  the  fact  that  the  ingredients  may  be 
[20]  combined  with  one  another  in  a  multi¬ 
tude  of  ratios;  some  will  be  based  on  determi¬ 
nate  numerical  ratios,  while  others  again  will 
have  as  their  basis  a  relation  of  quantitative 
excess  or  defect  not  expressible  in  integers. 
And  all  else  that  was  said  in  reference  to  the 
colours,  considered  as  juxtaposed  or  super¬ 
posed,  may  be  said  of  them  likewise  when  re¬ 
garded  as  mixed  in  the  way  just  described. 

Why  colours,  as  well  as  savours  and  sounds, 
consist  of  species  determinate  [in  themselves] 
and  not  infinite  [in  number]  is  a  question 
[25]  which  we  shall  discuss  hereafter.1 

4 

We  have  now  explained  what  colour  is,  and 
the  reason  why  there  are  many  colours;  while 
before,  in  our  work  On  the  Soul,2  we  ex¬ 
plained  the  nature  of  sound  and  voice.  We 
have  next  to  speak  of  Odour  and  Savour,  both 
of  which  are  almost  the  same  physical  affec¬ 
tion,  although  they  each  have  their  being  in 
[jo]  different  things.  Savours,  as  a  class,  dis¬ 
play  their  nature  more  clearly  to  us  than 
Odours,  the  cause  of  which  is  that  the  olfac- 
441a  tory  sense  of  man  is  inferior  in  acuteness 
to  that  of  the  lower  animals,  and  is,  when  com¬ 
pared  with  our  other  senses,  the  least  perfect  of 
all.  Man’s  sense  of  Touch,  on  the  contrary,  ex- 

1  Chapter  6,  445b  21-29,  44^a  16-20. 

2  On  the  Soul ,  419b  5  sqq.  (sound),  and  420b  ^  Sqq. 
(voice). 


cels  that  of  all  other  animals  in  fineness,  and 
Taste  is  a  modification  of  Touch. 

Now  the  natural  substance  water  per  se 
tends  to  be  tasteless.  But  [since  without  water 
tasting  is  impossible]  either  (a)  we  must  sup¬ 
pose  that  water  contains  in  itself  [uniformly 
diffused  through  it]  the  various  kinds  of  sa¬ 
vour,  already  formed,  though  in  amounts  so 
[5]  small  as  to  be  imperceptible,  which  is  the 
doctrine  of  Empedocles;  or  ( b )  the  water  must 
be  a  sort  of  matter,  qualified,  as  it  were,  to  pro¬ 
duce  germs  of  savours  of  all  kinds,  so  that  all 
kinds  of  savour  are  generated  from  the  water, 
though  different  kinds  from  its  different  parts, 
or  else  (r)  the  water  is  in  itself  quite  undif¬ 
ferentiated  in  respect  of  savour  [whether  de¬ 
veloped  or  undeveloped],  but  some  agent,  such 
for  example  as  one  might  conceive  Heat  or  the 
Sun  to  be,  is  the  efficient  cause  of  savour. 

[jo]  (a)  Of  these  three  hypotheses,  the  falsity 
of  that  held  by  Empedocles  is  only  too  evident. 
For  we  see  that  when  pericarpal  fruits  are 
plucked  [from  the  tree]  and  exposed  in  the 
sun,  or  subjected  to  the  action  of  fire,  their 
sapid  juices  are  changed  by  the  heat,  which 
shows  that  their  qualities  are  not  due  to  their 
drawing  anything  from  the  water  in  the 
ground,  but  to  a  change  which  they  undergo 
within  the  pericarp  itself;  and  we  see,  more¬ 
over,  that  these  juices,  when  extracted  and  al- 
[75]  lowed  to  lie,  instead  of  sweet  become  by 
lapse  of  time  harsh  or  bitter,  or  acquire  savours 
of  any  and  every  sort;  and  that,  again,  by  the 
process  of  boiling  or  fermentation  they  are 
made  to  assume  almost  all  kinds  of  new  sa¬ 
vours. 

(b)  It  is  likewise  impossible  that  water 
should  be  a  material  qualified  to  generate  all 
kinds  of  Savour  germs  [so  that  different  sa¬ 
vours  should  arise  out  of  different  parts  of  the 
water];  for  we  see  different  kinds  of  taste  gen¬ 
erated  from  the  same  water,  having  it  as  their 
nutriment. 

[20]  (c)  It  remains,  therefore,  to  suppose  that 
the  water  is  changed  by  passively  receiving 
some  affection  from  an  external  agent.  Now,  it 
is  manifest  that  water  does  not  contract  the 
quality  of  sapidity  from  the  agency  of  Heat 
alone.  For  water  is  of  all  liquids  the  thinnest, 
thinner  even  than  oil  itself,  though  oil,  owing 
[25]  to  its  viscosity,  is  more  ductile  than  wa¬ 
ter,  the  latter  being  uncohesive  in  its  particles; 
whence  water  is  more  difficult  than  oil  to  hold 
in  the  hand  without  spilling.  But  since  perfect¬ 
ly  pure  water  does  not,  when  subjected  to  the 
action  of  Heat,  show  any  tendency  to  acquire 


442*  CHAPTERS  3-4  679 


consistency,  we  must  infer  that  some  other 
agency  than  heat  is  the  cause  of  sapidity.  For 
all  savours  [i.e.  sapid  liquors]  exhibit  a  com¬ 
parative  consistency.  Heat  is,  however,  a  co¬ 
agent  in  the  matter. 

441b  Now  the  sapid  juices  found  in  pericar- 
pal  fruits  evidently  exist  also  in  the  earth. 
Hence  many  of  the  old  natural  philosophers 
assert  that  water  has  qualities  like  those  of  the 
earth  through  which  it  flows,  a  fact  especially 
manifest  in  the  case  of  saline  springs,  for  salt 
is  a  form  of  earth.  Hence  also  when  liquids  are 
[5]  filtered  through  ashes,  a  bitter  substance, 
the  taste  they  yield  is  bitter.  There  are  many 
wells,  too,  of  which  some  are  bitter,  others 
acid,  while  others  exhibit  other  tastes  of  all 
kinds. 

As  was  to  be  anticipated,  therefore,  it  is  in 
the  vegetable  kingdom  that  tastes  occur  in 
richest  variety.  For,  like  all  things  else,  the 
Moist,  by  nature’s  law,  is  affected  only  by  its 
contrary;  and  this  contrary  is  the  Dry.  Thus  we 
[/o]  see  why  the  Moist  is  affected  by  Fire, 
which  as  a  natural  substance,  is  dry.  Heat  is, 
however,  the  essential  property  of  Fire,  as  Dry¬ 
ness  is  of  Earth,  according  to  what  has  been 
said  in  our  treatise1  on  the  elements.  Fire  and 
Earth,  therefore,  taken  absolutely  as  such,  have 
no  natural  power  to  affect,  or  be  affected  by, 
one  another;  nor  have  any  other  pair  of  sub- 
[75]  stances.  Any  two  things  can  affect,  or  be 
affected  by,  one  another  only  so  far  as  con¬ 
trariety  to  the  other  resides  in  either  of  them. 

As,  therefore,  persons  washing  Colours  or 
Savours  in  a  liquid  cause  the  water  in  which 
they  wash  to  acquire  such  a  quality  [as  that  of 
the  colour  or  savour],  so  nature,  too,  by  wash¬ 
ing  the  Dry  and  Earthy  in  the  Moist,  and  by 
filtering  the  latter,  that  is,  moving  it  on  by  the 
agency  of  heat  through  the  dry  and  earthy,  im¬ 
parts  to  it  a  certain  quality.  This  affection, 
[20]  wrought  by  the  aforesaid  Dry  in  the 
Moist,  capable  of  transforming  the  sense  of 
Taste  from  potentiality  to  actuality,  is  Savour. 
Savour  brings  into  actual  exercise  the  percep¬ 
tive  faculty  which  pre-existed  only  in  potency. 
The  activity  of  sense-perception  in  general  is 
analogous,  not  to  the  process  of  acquiring 
knowledge,  but  to  that  of  exercising  knowl¬ 
edge  already  acquired. 

That  Savours,  either  as  a  quality  or  as  the 
[25]  privation  of  a  quality,  belong  not  to  every 
form  of  the  Dry  but  to  the  Nutrient,  we  shall 
see  by  considering  that  neither  the  Dry  with¬ 
out  the  Moist,  nor  the  Moist  without  the  Dry, 

1  Cf.  On  Generation  and  Corruption ,  328b  33  sqq. 


is  nutrient.  For  no  single  element,  but  only 
composite  substance,  constitutes  nutriment  for 
animals.  Now,  among  the  perceptible  ele¬ 
ments  of  the  food  which  animals  assimilate,  the 
tangible  are  the  efficient  causes  of  growth  and 
decay;  it  is  qua  hot  or  cold  that  the  food  assim- 
[30]  ilated  causes  these;  for  the  heat  or  cold 
is  the  direct  cause  of  growth  or  decay.  It  is  qua 
442*  gustable,  however,  that  the  assimilated 
food  supplies  nutrition.  For  all  organisms  are 
nourished  by  the  Sweet  [i.e.  the  ‘gustable’ 
proper],  either  by  itself  or  in  combination  with 
other  savours.  Of  this  we  must  speak  with 
more  precise  detail  in  our  work  on  Genera¬ 
tion:2  for  the  present  we  need  touch  upon  it 
only  so  far  as  our  subject  here  requires.  Heat 
causes  growth,  and  fits  the  food-stuff  for  ali- 
[5]  mentation;  it  attracts  [into  the  organic 
system]  that  which  is  light  [viz.  the  sweet], 
while  the  salt  and  bitter  it  rejects  because  of 
their  heaviness.  In  fact,  whatever  effects  ex¬ 
ternal  heat  produces  in  external  bodies,  the 
same  are  produced  by  their  internal  heat  in 
animal  and  vegetable  organisms.  Hence  it  is 
[i.e.  by  the  agency  of  heat  as  described]  that 
nourishment  is  effected  by  the  sweet.  The  oth¬ 
er  savours  are  introduced  into  and  blended  in 
[10]  food  [naturally]  on  a  principle  analo¬ 
gous  to  that  on  which  the  saline  or  the  acid  is 
used  artificially,  i.e.  for  seasoning.  These  latter 
are  used  because  they  counteract  the  tendency 
of  the  sweet  to  be  too  nutrient,  and  to  float  on 
the  stomach. 

As  the  intermediate  colours  arise  from  the 
mixture  of  white  and  black,  so  the  inter¬ 
mediate  savours  arise  from  the  Sweet  and  Bit¬ 
ter;  and  these  savours,  too,  severally  involve 
either  a  definite  ratio,  or  else  an  indefinite  re¬ 
lation  of  degree,  between  their  components, 
[75]  either  having  certain  integral  numbers 
at  the  basis  of  their  mixture,  and,  consequently, 
of  their  stimulative  effect,  or  else  being  mixed 
in  proportions  not  arithmetically  expressible. 
The  tastes  which  give  pleasure  in  their  com¬ 
bination  are  those  which  have  their  compo¬ 
nents  joined  in  a  definite  ratio. 

The  sweet  taste  alone  is  Rich,  [therefore 
the  latter  may  be  regarded  as  a  variety  of  the 
former],  while  [so  far  as  both  imply  privation 
of  the  Sweet]  the  Saline  is  fairly  identical 
with  the  Bitter.  Between  the  extremes  of 
sweet  and  bitter  come  the  Harsh,  the  Pungent, 
the  Astringent,  and  the  Acid.  Savours  and 
Colours,  it  will  be  observed,  contain  respec¬ 
tively  about  the  same  number  of  species.  For 

2  On  Generation  of  Animals,  76215  12  sqq. 


680  SENSE  AND  THE  SENSIBLE  443* 


[ 20 ]  there  are  seven  species  of  each,  if,  as  is 
reasonable,  we  regard  Dun  [or  Grey]  as  a 
variety  of  Black  (for  the  alternative  is  that 
Yellow  should  be  classed  with  White,  as  Rich 
with  Sweet);  while  [the  irreducible  colours, 
viz.]  Crimson,  Violet,  leek-Green,  and  deep 
Blue,  come  between  White  and  Black,  and 
from  these  all  others  are  derived  by  mix- 
125]  ture. 

Again,  as  Black  is  a  privation  of  White  in 
the  Translucent,  so  Saline  or  Bitter  is  a  priva¬ 
tion  of  Sweet  in  the  Nutrient  Moist.  This  ex¬ 
plains  why  the  ash  of  all  burnt  things  is  bitter; 
for  the  potable  [sc.  the  sweet]  moisture  has* 
been  exuded  from  them. 

[50]  Democritus  and  most  of  the  natural 
philosophers  who  treat  of  sense-perception 
442b  proceed  quite  irrationally,  for  they  re¬ 
present  all  objects  of  sense  as  objects  of  Touch. 
Yet,  if  this  is  really  so,  it  clearly  follows  that 
each  of  the  other  senses  is  a  mode  of  Touch; 
but  one  can  see  at  a  glance  that  this  is  impos¬ 
sible. 

Again,  they  treat  the  percepts  common  to 
all  senses  as  proper  to  one.  For  [the  qualities 
[5]  by  which  they  explain  taste,  viz.]  Magni¬ 
tude  and  Figure,  Roughness  and  Smoothness, 
and,  moreover,  the  Sharpness  and  Bluntness 
found  in  solid  bodies,  are  percepts  common  to 
all  the  senses,  or  if  not  to  all,  at  least  to  Sight 
and  Touch.  This  explains  why  it  is  that  the 
senses  are  liable  to  err  regarding  them,  while 
no  such  error  arises  respecting  their  proper 
sensibles;  e.g.  the  sense  of  Seeing  is  not  de¬ 
ceived  as  to  Colour,  nor  is  that  of  Hearing  as 
to  Sound. 

[/o]  On  the  other  hand,  they  reduce  the 
proper  to  common  sensibles,  as  Democritus 
does  with  White  and  Black;  for  he  asserts  that 
the  latter  is  [a  mode  of  the]  rough,  and  the 
former  [a  mode  of  the]  smooth,  while  he  re¬ 
duces  Savours  to  the  atomic  figures.  Yet  surely 
no  one  sense,  or,  if  any,  the  sense  of  Sight 
rather  than  any  other,  can  discern  the  common 
sensibles.  But  if  we  suppose  that  the  sense  of 
Taste  is  better  able  to  do  so,  then — since  to  dis- 
[75]  cern  the  smallest  objects  in  each  kind  is 
what  marks  the  acutest  sense — Taste  should 
have  been  the  sense  which  best  perceived  the 
common  sensibles  generally,  and  showed  the 
most  perfect  power  of  discerning  figures  in 
general. 

Again,  all  the  sensibles  involve  contrariety; 
e.g.  in  Colour  White  is  contrary  to  Black,  and 
in  Savours  Bitter  is  contrary  to  Sweet;  but  no 
[20]  one  figure  is  reckoned  as  contrary  to  any 


other  figure.  Else,  to  which  of  the  possible 
polygonal  figures  [to  which  Democritus  re¬ 
duces  Bitter]  is  the  spherical  figure  [to  which 
he  reduces  Sweet]  contrary? 

Again,  since  figures  are  infinite  in  number, 
savours  also  should  be  infinite;  [the  possible 
rejoinder — ‘that  they  are  so,  only  that  some 
are  not  perceived’ — cannot  be  sustained]  for 
why  should  one  savour  be  perceived,  and  an¬ 
other  not? 

This  completes  our  discussion  of  the  object 
of  Taste,  i.e.  Savour;  for  the  other  affections  of 
[25]  Savours  are  examined  in  their  proper 
place  in  connection  with  the  natural  history 
of  Plants. 

5 

Our  conception  of  the  nature  of  Odours  must 
be  analogous  to  that  of  Savours;  inasmuch  as 
the  Sapid  Dry  effects  in  air  and  water  alike, 
but  in  a  different  province  of  sense,  precisely 
what  the  Dry  effects  in  the  Moist  of  water  only. 
We  customarily  predicate  Translucency  of 
[30]  both  air  and  water  in  common;  but  it  is 
not  qua  translucent  that  either  is  a  vehicle  of 
443a  odour,  but  qua  possessed  of  a  power  of 
washing  or  rinsing  [and  so  imbibing]  the  Sap¬ 
id  Dryness. 

For  the  object  of  Smell  exists  not  in  air  only: 
it  also  exists  in  water.  This  is  proved  by  the 
case  of  fishes  and  testacea,  which  are  seen  to 
[5]  possess  the  faculty  of  smell,  although 
water  contains  no  air  (for  whenever  air  is 
generated  within  water  it  rises  to  the  surface), 
and  these  creatures  do  not  respire.  Hence,  if 
one  were  to  assume  that  air  and  water  are  both 
moist,  it  would  follow  that  Odour  is  the  natu¬ 
ral  substance  consisting  of  the  Sapid  Dry  dif¬ 
fused  in  the  Moist,  and  whatever  is  of  this 
kind  would  be  an  object  of  Smell. 

That  the  property  of  odorousness  is  based 
upon  the  Sapid  may  be  seen  by  comparing  the 
things  which  possess  with  those  which  do  not 
[/o]  possess  odour.  The  elements,  viz.  Fire, 
Air,  Earth,  Water,  are  inodorous,  because  both 
the  dry  and  the  moist  among  them  are  with¬ 
out  sapidity,  unless  some  added  ingredient 
produces  it.  This  explains  why  sea-water  pos¬ 
sesses  odour,  for  [unlike  ‘elemental’  water] 
it  contains  savour  and  dryness.  Salt,  too,  is 
more  odorous  than  natron,  as  the  oil  which 
[75]  exudes  from  the  former  proves,  for  nat¬ 
ron  is  allied  to  [‘elemental’]  earth  more  nearly 
than  salt.  Again,  a  stone  is  inodorous,  just 
because  it  is  tasteless,  while,  on  the  contrary, 
wood  is  odorous,  because  it  is  sapid.  The  kinds 


444* 

of  wood,  too,  which  contain  more  [‘elemen¬ 
tal’]  water  are  less  odorous  than  others4.  More¬ 
over,  to.  take  the  case  of  metals,  gold  is  in¬ 
odorous  because  it  is  without  taste,  but  bronze 
and  iron  are  odorous;  and  when  the  [sapid] 
moisture  has  been  burnt  out  of  them,  their  slag 
is,  in  all  cases,  less  odorous  [than  the  metals 
themselves].  Silver  and  tin  are  more  odorous 
than  the  one  class  of  metals,  less  so  than  the 
other,  inasmuch  as  they  are  watery  [to  a 
[20]  greater  degree  than  the  former,  to  a  less 
degree  than  the  latter]. 

Some  writers  look  upon  Fumid  exhalation, 
which  is  a  compound  of  Earth  and  Air,  as  the 
essence  of  Odour.  [Indeed  all  are  inclined  to 
rush  to  this  theory  of  Odour.]  Heraclitus  im¬ 
plied  his  adherence  to  it  when  he  declared 
that  if  all  existing  things  were  turned  into 
Smoke,  the  nose  would  be  the  organ  to  dis¬ 
cern  them  with.  All  writers  incline  to  refer 
odour  to  this  cause  [sc.  exhalation  of  some 
[25]  sort],  but  some  regard  it  as  aqueous, 
others  as  fumid,  exhalation;  while  others, 
again,  hold  it  to  be  either.  Aqueous  exhala¬ 
tion  is  merely  a  form  of  moisture,  but  fumid 
exhalation  is,  as  already  remarked,  composed  of 
Air  and  Earth.  The  former  when  condensed 
turns  into  water;  the  latter,  in  a  particular  spe¬ 
cies  of  earth.  Now,  it  is  unlikely  that  odour  is 
[jo]  either  of  these.  For  vaporous  exhalation 
consists  of  mere  water  [which,  being  tasteless, 
is  inodorous] ;  and  fumid  exhalation  cannot  oc¬ 
cur  in  water  at  all,  though,  as  has  been  before 
stated,  aquatic  creatures  also  have  the  sense  of 
smell. 

443b  Again,  the  exhalation  theory  of  odour 
is  analogous  to  the  theory  of  emanations.  If, 
therefore,  the  latter  is  untenable,  so,  too,  is  the 
former. 

It  is  clearly  conceivable  that  the  Moist, 
whether  in  air  (for  air,  too,  is  essentially 
moist)  or  in  water,  should  imbibe  the  influ- 
[5]  ence  of,  and  have  effects  wrought  in  it  by, 
the  Sapid  Dryness.  Moreover,  if  the  Dry  pro¬ 
duces  in  moist  media,  i.e.  water  and  air,  an 
effect  as  of  something  washed  out  in  them,  it  is 
manifest  that  odours  must  be  something 
analogous  to  savours.  Nay,  indeed,  this  anal¬ 
ogy  is,  in  some  instances,  a  fact  [registered  in 
language];  for  odours  as  well  as  savours  are 
spoken  of  as  pungent ,  sweet ,  harsh ,  astringent , 
[/o]  rich  [=  *  savoury  \\  and  one  might  re¬ 
gard  fetid  smells  as  analogous  to  bitter  tastes; 
which  explains  why  the  former  are  offensive 
to  inhalation  as  the  latter  are  to  deglutition. 
It  is  clear,  therefore,  that  Odour  is  in  both 


681 

water  and  air  what  Savour  is  in  water  alone. 
This  explains  why  coldness  and  freezing 
[75]  render  Savours  dull,  and  abolish  odours 
altogether;  for  cooling  and  freezing  tend  to 
annul  the  kinetic  heat  which  helps  to  fabricate 
sapidity. 

There  are  two  species  of  the  Odorous.  For 
the  statement  of  certain  writers  that  the  odor¬ 
ous  is  not  divisible  into  species  is  false;  it  is  so 
divisible.  We  must  here  define  the  sense  in 
which  these  species  are  to  be  admitted  or 
denied. 

One  class  of  odours,  then,  is  that  which  runs 
parallel,  as  has  been  observed,  to  savours:  to 
[20]  odours  of  this  class  their  pleasantness  or 
unpleasantness  belongs  incidentally.  For  ow¬ 
ing  to  the  fact  that  Savours  are  qualities  of  nu¬ 
trient  matter,  the  odours  connected  with  these 
[e.g.  those  of  a  certain  food]  are  agreeable  as 
long  as  animals  have  an  appetite  for  the  food, 
but  they  are  not  agreeable  to  them  when  sated 
and  no  longer  in  want  of  it;  nor  are  they  agree¬ 
able,  either,  to  those  animals  that  do  not  like 
the  food  itself  which  yields  the  odours.  Hence, 
[25]  as  we  observed,  these  odours  are  pleasant 
or  unpleasant  incidentally,  and  the  same  rea¬ 
soning  explains  why  it  is  that  they  are  per¬ 
ceptible  to  all  animals  in  common. 

The  other  class  of  odours  consists  of  those 
agreeable  in  their  essential  nature,  e.g.  those 
of  flowers.  For  these  do  not  in  any  degree 
stimulate  animals  to  food,  nor  do  they  contrib¬ 
ute  in  any  way  to  appetite;  their  effect  upon 
it,  if  any,  is  rather  the  opposite.  For  the  verse 
[?o]  of  Strattis  ridiculing  Euripides — 

Use  not  perfumery  to  flavour  soup, 
contains  a  truth. 

Those  who  nowadays  introduce  such  fla¬ 
vours  into  beverages  deforce  oursense  of  plea- 
444*  sure  by  habituating  us  to  them,  until, 
from  two  distinct  kinds  of  sensations  com¬ 
bined,  pleasure  arises  as  it  might  from  one 
simple  kind. 

Of  this  species  of  odour  man  alone  is  sensi¬ 
ble;  the  other,  viz.  that  correlated  with  Tastes, 
is,  as  has  been  said  before,  perceptible  also  to 
[5]  the  lower  animals.  And  odours  of  the  lat¬ 
ter  sort,  since  their  pleasureableness  depends 
upon  taste,  are  divided  into  as  many  species  as 
there  are  different  tastes;  but  we  cannot  go  on 
to  say  this  of  the  former  kind  of  odour,  since 
its  nature  is  agreeable  or  disagreeable  per  se. 
The  reason  why  the  perception  of  such  odours 
is  peculiar  to  man  is  found  in  the  character- 
[zo]  istic  state  of  man’s  brain.  For  his  brain  is 
naturally  cold,  and  the  blood  which  it  contains 


CHAPTERS  4-5 


682 


SENSE  AND  THE  SENSIBLE 


in  its  vessels  is  thin  and  pure  but  easily  cooled 
(whence  it  happens  that  the  exhalation  arising 
from  food,  being  cooled  by  the  coldness  of 
this  region,  produces  unhealthy  rheums); 
therefore  it  is  that  odours  of  such  a  species 
have  been  generated  for  human  beings,  as  a 
[75]  safeguard  to  health.  This  is  their  sole 
function,  and  that  they  perform  it  is  evident. 
For  food,  whether  dry  or  moist,  though  sweet 
to  taste,  is  often  unwholesome;  whereas  the 
odour  arising  from  what  is  fragrant,  that 
odour  which  is  pleasant  in  its  own  right,  is, 
so  to  say,  always  beneficial  to  persons  in  any 
state  of  bodily  health  whatever. 

For  this  reason,  too,  the  perception  of  odour 
[in  general]  is  effected  through  respiration, 
[20]  not  in  all  animals,  but  in  man  and  cer¬ 
tain  other  sanguineous  animals,  e.g.  quad¬ 
rupeds,  and  all  that  participate  freely  in  the 
natural  substance  air;  because  when  odours, 
on  account  of  the  lightness  of  the  heat  in  them, 
mount  to  the  brain,  the  health  of  this  region 
is  thereby  promoted.  For  odour,  as  a  power, 
is  naturally  heat-giving.  Thus  Nature  has  em- 
[25]  ployed  respiration  for  two  purposes: 
primarily  for  the  relief  thereby  brought  to  the 
thorax,  secondarily  for  the  inhalation  of  odour. 
For  while  an  animal  is  inhaling,  odour  moves 
in  through  its  nostrils,  as  it  were  ‘from  a  side- 
entrance/ 

But  the  perception  of  the  second  class  of 
odours  above  described  [does  not  belong  to 
all  animals,  but]  is  confined  to  human  beings, 
[30]  because  man’s  brain  is,  in  proportion  to 
his  whole  bulk,  larger  and  moister  than  the 
brain  of  any  other  animal.  This  is  the  reason 
of  the  further  fact  that  man  alone,  so  to  speak, 
among  animals  perceives  and  takes  pleasure 
in  the  odours  of  flowers  and  such  things.  For 
the  heat  and  stimulation  set  up  by  these 
odours  are  commensurate  with  the  excess  of 
444b  moisture  and  coldness  in  his  cerebral  re¬ 
gion.  On  all  the  other  animals  which  have 
lungs,  Nature  has  bestowed  their  due  percep¬ 
tion  of  one  of  the  two  kinds  of  odour  [i.e. 
that  connected  with  nutrition]  through  the 
act  of  respiration,  guarding  against  the  need¬ 
less  creation  of  two  organs  of  sense;  for  in  the 
fact  that  they  respire  the  other  animals  have 
already  sufficient  provision  for  their  perception 
of  the  one  species  of  odour  only,  as  human 
[5]  beings  have  for  their  perception  of  both. 

But  that  creatures  which  do  not  respire  have 
the  olfactory  sense  is  evident.  For  fishes,  and 
all  insects  as  a  class,  have,  thanks  to  the  species 
of  odour  correlated  with  nutrition,  a  keen 


445* 

olfactory  sense  of  their  proper  food  from  a 
[/o]  distance,  even  when  they  are  very  far 
away  from  it;  such  is  the  case  with  bees,  and 
also  with  the  class  of  small  ants,  which  some 
denominate  knipes.  Among  marine  animals, 
too,  the  murex  and  many  other  similar  animals 
have  an  acute  perception  of  their  food  by  its 
odour. 

It  is  not  equally  certain  what  the  organ  is 
whereby  they  so  perceive.  This  question,  of 
[75]  the  organ  whereby  they  perceive  odour, 
may  well  cause  a  difficulty,  if  we  assume  that 
smelling  takes  place  in  animals  only  while 
respiring  (for  that  this  is  the  fact  is  manifest  in 
all  the  animals  which  do  respire),  whereas 
none  of  those  just  mentioned  respires,  and  yet 
they  have  the  sense  of  smell — unless,  indeed, 
they  have  some  other  sense  not  included  in  the 
ordinary  five.  This  supposition  is,  however, 
[20]  impossible.  For  any  sense  which  per¬ 
ceives  odour  is  a  sense  of  smell,  and  this  they 
do  perceive,  though  probably  not  in  the  same 
way  as  creatures  which  respire,  but  when  the 
latter  are  respiring  the  current  of  breath  re¬ 
moves  something  that  is  laid  like  a  lid  upon 
the  organ  proper  (which  explains  why  they  do 
not  perceive  odours  when  not  respiring); 
while  in  creatures  which  do  not  respire  this 
is  always  off:  just  as  some  animals  have  eye- 
[25]  lids  on  their  eyes,  and  when  these  are  not 
raised  they  cannot  see,  whereas  hard-eyed  ani¬ 
mals  have  no  lids,  and  consequently  do  not 
need,  besides  eyes,  an  agency  to  raise  the  lids, 
but  see  straightway  [without  intermission] 
from  the  actual  moment  at  which  it  is  first 
possible  for  them  to  do  so  [i.e.  from  the  mo¬ 
ment  when  an  object  first  comes  within  their 
field  of  vision]. 

Consistently  with  what  has  been  said  above, 
not  one  of  the  lower  animals  shows  repug¬ 
nance  to  the  odour  of  things  which  are  es- 
[50]  sentially  ill-smelling,  unless  one  of  the 
latter  is  positively  pernicious.  They  are  de¬ 
stroyed,  however,  by  these  things,  just  as 
human  beings  are;  i.e.  as  human  beings  get 
headaches  from,  and  are  often  asphyxiated 
by,  the  fumes  of  charcoal,  so  the  lower  animals 
perish  from  the  strong  fumes  of  brimstone  and 
bituminous  substances;  and  it  is  owing  to 
445*  experience  of  such  effects  that  they  shun 
these.  For  the  disagreeable  odour  in  itself  they 
care  nothing  whatever  (though  the  odours  of 
many  plants  are  essentially  disagreeable),  un¬ 
less,  indeed,  it  has  some  effect  upon  the  taste 
of  their  food. 

[5]  The  senses  making  up  an  odd  number, 


445b  CHAPTERS  5-6  683 


and  an  odd  number  having  always  a  middle 
unit,  the  sense  of  smell  occupies  in  itself  as  it 
were  a  middle  position  between  the  tactual 
senses,  i.e.  Touch  and  Taste,  and  those  which 
perceive  through  a  medium,  i.e.  Sight  and 
Hearing.  Hence  the  object  of  smell,  too,  is  an 
affection  of  nutrient  substances  (which  fall 
within  the  class  of  Tangibles),  and  is  also  an 
[10]  affection  of  the  audible  and  the  visible; 
whence  it  is  that  creatures  have  the  sense  of 
smell  both  in  air  and  water.  Accordingly,  the 
object  of  smell  is  something  common  to  both 
of  these  provinces,  i.e.  it  appertains  both  to  the 
tangible  on  the  one  hand,  and  on  the  other 
to  the  audible  and  translucent.  Hence  the 
propriety  of  the  figure  by  which  it  has  been 
described  by  us  as  an  immersion  or  washing 
of  dryness  in  the  Moist  and  Fluid.  Such  then 
[75]  must  be  our  account  of  the  sense  in 
which  one  is  or  is  not  entitled  to  speak  of  the 
odorous  as  having  species. 

The  theory  held  by  certain  of  the  Pythagore¬ 
ans,  that  some  animals  are  nourished  by 
odours  alone,  is  unsound.  For,  in  the  first 
place,  we  see  that  food  must  be  composite, 
since  the  bodies  nourished  by  it  are  not  sim¬ 
ple.  This  explains  why  waste  matter  is  secreted 
from  food,  either  within  the  organisms,  or,  as 
[20]  in  plants,  outside  them.  But  since  even 
water  by  itself  alone,  that  is,  when  unmixed, 
will  not  suffice  for  food — for  anything  which 
is  to  form  a  consistency  must  be  corporeal — , 
it  is  still  much  less  conceivable  that  air  should 
be  so  corporealized  [and  thus  fitted  to  be  food] . 
But,  besides  this,  we  see  that  all  animals  have 
a  receptacle  for  food,  from  which,  when  it  has 
entered,  the  body  absorbs  it.  Now,  the  organ 
[25]  which  perceives  odour  is  in  the  head,  and 
odour  enters  with  the  inhalation  of  the  breath; 
so  that  it  goes  to  the  respiratory  region.  It  is 
plain,  therefore,  that  odour,  qua  odour,  does 
not  contribute  to  nutrition;  that,  however,  it  is 
serviceable  to  health  is  equally  plain,  as  well 
by  immediate  perception  as  from  the  argu¬ 
ments  above  employed;  so  that  odour  is  in  re- 
[30]  lation  to  general  health  what  savour  is  in 
the  province  of  nutrition  and  in  relation  to  the 
bodies  nourished. 

445b  This  then  must  conclude  our  discussion 
of  the  several  organs  of  sense -perception. 

6 

One  might  ask:  if  every  body  is  infinitely  di- 
[5]  visible,  are  its  sensible  qualities — Colour, 
Savour,  Odour,  Sound,  Weight,  Cold  or  Heat, 
[Heaviness  or]  Lightness,  Hardness  or  Soft¬ 


ness — also  infinitely  divisible?  Or,  is  this  im¬ 
possible  ? 

[One  might  well  ask  this  question],  because 
each  of  them  is  productive  of  sense-perception, 
since,  in  fact,  all  derive  their  name  [of  ‘sensi¬ 
ble  qualities']  from  the  very  circumstance  of 
their  being  able  to  stimulate  this.  Hence,  [if 
this  is  so]  both  our  perception  of  them  should 
likewise  be  divisible  to  infinity,  and  every  part 
[/o]  of  a  body  [however  small]  should  be  a 
perceptible  magnitude.  For  it  is  impossible, 
e.g.  to  see  a  thing  which  is  white  but  not  of  a 
certain  magnitude. 

Since  if  it  were  not  so,  [if  its  sensible  quali¬ 
ties  were  not  divisible,  pari  passu  with  body], 
we  might  conceive  a  body  existing  but  having 
no  colour,  or  weight,  or  any  such  quality;  ac¬ 
cordingly  not  perceptible  at  all.  For  these  qual¬ 
ities  are  the  objects  of  sense-perception.  On 
this  supposition,  every  perceptible  object 
should  be  regarded  as  composed  not  of  per¬ 
ceptible  [but  of  imperceptible]  parts.  Yet  it 
[75]  must  [be  really  composed  of  perceptible 
parts],  since  assuredly  it  does  not  consist  of 
mathematical  [and  therefore  purely  abstract 
and  non-sensible]  quantities.  Again,  by  what 
faculty  should  we  discern  and  cognize  these 
[hypothetical  real  things  without  sensible 
qualities]?  Is  it  by  Reason?  But  they  are  not 
objects  of  Reason;  nor  does  reason  apprehend 
objects  in  space,  except  when  it  acts  in  con¬ 
junction  with  sense-perception.  At  the  same 
time,  if  this  be  the  case  [that  there  are  magni¬ 
tudes,  physically  real,  but  without  sensible 
quality],  it  seems  to  tell  in  favour  of  the  atom¬ 
istic  hypothesis;  for  thus,  indeed,  [by  accept¬ 
ing  this  hypothesis],  the  question  [with  which 
this  chapter  begins]  might  be  solved  [nega¬ 
tively].  But  it  is  impossible  [to  accept  this  hy- 
[20]  pothesis].  Our  views  on  the  subject  of 
atoms  are  to  be  found  in  our  treatise  on  Move¬ 
ment.1 

The  solution  of  these  questions  will  bring 
with  it  also  the  answer  to  the  question  why  the 
species  of  Colour,  Taste,  Sound,  and  other  sen¬ 
sible  qualities  are  limited.  For  in  all  classes  of 
things  lying  between  extremes  the  intermedi¬ 
ates  must  be  limited.  But  contraries  are  ex¬ 
tremes,  and  every  object  of  sense-perception  in- 
[25]  volves  contrariety:  e.g.  in  Colour,  White 
x  Black;  in  Savour,  Sweet x Bitter,  and  in  all  the 
other  sensibles  also  the  contraries  are  extremes. 
Now,  that  which  is  continuous  is  divisible  into 
an  infinite  number  of  unequal  parts,  but  into 
a  finite  number  of  equal  parts,  while  that 

1  See  Physics ,  vi,  1-2  (231*  21-232*  25). 


684 


SENSE  AND  THE  SENSIBLE 


446b 


which  is  not  /vr  ^  continuous  is  divisible  into 
species  which  are  finite  in  number.  Since  then, 
the  several  sensible  qualities  of  things  are  to  be 
[jo]  reckoned  as  species,  while  continuity  al¬ 
ways  subsists  in  these,  we  must  take  account 
of  the  difference  between  the  Potential  and  the 
Actual.  It  is  owing  to  this  difference  that  we  do 
446a  not  [actually]  see  its  ten-thousandth  part 
in  a  grain  of  millet,  although  sight  has  em¬ 
braced  the  whole  grain  within  its  scope;  and  it 
is  owing  to  this,  too,  that  the  sound  contained 
in  a  quarter-tone  escapes  notice,  and  yet  one 
hears  the  whole  strain,  inasmuch  as  it  is  a  con¬ 
tinuum;  but  the  interval  between  the  extreme 
sounds  [that  bound  the  quarter-tone]  escapes 
the  ear  [being  only  potentially  audible,  not  ac¬ 
tually].  So,  in  the  case  of  other  objects  of  sense, 
extremely  small  constituents  are  unnoticed; 
[5]  because  they  are  only  potentially  not  actu¬ 
ally  [perceptible,  e.g.]  visible,  unless  when  they 
have  been  parted  from  the  wholes.  So  the  foot- 
length  too  exists  potentially  in  the  two-foot 
length,  but  actually  only  when  it  has  been  sep¬ 
arated  from  the  whole.  But  objective  incre¬ 
ments  so  small  as  those  above  might  well,  if 
separated  from  their  totals,  [instead  of  achiev¬ 
ing  ‘actual’  existence]  be  dissolved  in  their  en¬ 
vironments,  like  a  drop  of  sapid  moisture 
poured  out  into  the  sea.  But  even  if  this  were 
not  so  [sc.  with  the  objective  magnitude],  still, 
[10]  since  the  [subjective]  increment  of  sense- 
perception  is  not  perceptible  in  itself,  nor  ca¬ 
pable  of  separate  existence  (since  it  exists  only 
potentially  in  the  more  distinctly  perceivable 
whole  of  sense-perception),  so  neither  will  it 
be  possible  to  perceive  [actually]  its  correla- 
tively  small  object  [sc.  its  quantum  of  iradi^na 
or  sensible  quality]  when  separated  from  the 
object-total.  But  yet  this  [small  object]  is  to  be 
considered  as  perceptible:  for  it  is  both  poten¬ 
tially  so  already  [i.e.  even  when  alone],  and 
destined  to  be  actually  so  when  it  has  become 
[75]  part  of  an  aggregate.  Thus,  therefore,  we 
have  shown  that  some  magnitudes  and  their 
sensible  qualities  escape  notice,  and  the  reason 
why  they  do  so,  as  well  as  the  manner  in 
which  they  are  still  perceptible  or  not  percep¬ 
tible  in  such  cases.  Accordingly  then,  when 
these  [minutely  subdivided]  sensibles  have 
once  again  become  aggregated  in  a  whole  in 
such  a  manner,  relatively  to  one  another,  as  to 
be  perceptible  actually,  and  not  merely  because 
they  are  in  the  whole,  but  even  apart  from  it,  it 
follows  necessarily  [from  what  has  been  al¬ 
ready  stated1]  that  their  sensible  qualities, 
1  Sc.  in  44515  25-29. 


[20]  whether  colours  or  tastes  or  sounds,  are 
limited  in  number. 

One  might  ask: — do  the  objects  of  sense- 
perception,  or  the  movements  proceeding  from 
them  ([since  movements  there  are,]  in  which¬ 
ever  of  the  two  ways  [viz.  by  emanations  or  by 
stimulatory  idvrjaLs]  sense-perception  takes 
place),  when  these  are  actualized  for  percep¬ 
tion,  always  arrive  first  at  a  spatial  middle 
point  [between  the  sense-organ  and  its  ob¬ 
ject],  as  Odour  evidently  does,  and  also 
Sound?  For  he  who  is  nearer  [to  the  odorous 
object]  perceives  the  Odour  sooner  [than  he 
[25]  who  is  farther  away],  and  the  Sound  of 
a  stroke  reaches  us  some  time  after  it  has  been 
struck.  Is  it  thus  also  with  an  object  seen,  and 
with  Light?  Empedocles,  for  example,  says 
that  the  Light  from  the  Sun  arrives  first  in  the 
intervening  space  before  it  comes  to  the  eye,  or 
reaches  the  Earth.  This  might  plausibly  seem 
to  be  the  case.  For  whatever  is  moved  [in 
space],  is  moved  from  one  place  to  another; 
hence  there  must  be  a  corresponding  interval 
[30]  of  time  also  in  which  it  is  moved  from  the 
446b  one  place  to  the  other.  But  any  given 
time  is  divisible  into  parts;  so  that  we  should 
assume  a  time  when  the  sun’s  ray  was  not  as 
yet  seen,  but  was  still  travelling  in  the  middle 
space. 

Now,  even  if  it  be  true  that  the  acts  of  ‘hear¬ 
ing’  and  ‘having  heard’,  and,  generally,  those 
of  ‘perceiving’  and  ‘having  perceived’,  form 
co-instantaneous  wholes,  in  other  words,  that 
acts  of  sense-perception  do  not  involve  a  proc¬ 
ess  of  becoming,  but  have  their  being  none  the 
[5]  less  without  involving  such  a  process;  yet, 
just  as,  [in  the  case  of  sound],  though  the 
stroke  which  causes  the  Sound  has  been  al¬ 
ready  struck,  the  Sound  is  not  yet  at  the  ear 
(and  that  this  last  is  a  fact  is  further  proved 
by  the  transformation  which  the  letters  [viz. 
the  consonants  as  heard]  undergo  [in  the  case 
of  words  spoken  from  a  distance],  implying 
that  the  local  movement  [involved  in  Sound] 
takes  place  in  the  space  between  [us  and  the 
speaker];  for  the  reason  why  [persons  ad¬ 
dressed  from  a  distance]  do  not  succeed  in 
catching  the  sense  of  what  is  said  is  evidently 
that  the  air  [sound  wave]  in  moving  towards 
them  has  its  form  changed)  [granting  this, 
then,  the  question  arises] :  is  the  same  also  true 
in  the  case  of  Colour  and  Light?  For  certainly 
[/o]  it  is  not  true  that  the  beholder  sees,  and 
the  object  is  seen,  in  virtue  of  some  merely  ab¬ 
stract  relationship  between  them,  such  as  that 
between  equals.  For  if  it  were  so,  there  would 


447*  CHAPTERS  6-7  685 


be  no  need  [as  there  is]  that  either  [the  behold¬ 
er  or  the  thing  beheld]  should  occupy  some  par¬ 
ticular  place;  since  to  the  equalization  of 
things  their  being  near  to,  or  far  from,  one 
another  makes  no  difference. 

Now  this  [travelling  through  successive  po¬ 
sitions  in  the  medium]  may  with  good  reason 
take  place  as  regards  Sound  and  Odour,  for 
[75]  these,  like  [their  media]  Air  and  Water, 
are  continuous,  but  the  movement  of  both  is 
divided  into  parts.  This  too  is  the  ground  of 
the  fact  that  the  object  which  the  person  first 
in  order  of  proximity  hears  or  smells  is  the 
same  as  that  which  each  subsequent  person 
perceives,  while  yet  it  is  not  the  same. 

Some,  indeed,  raise  a  question  also  on  these 
very  points;  they  declare  it  impossible  that  one 
person  should  hear,  or  see,  or  smell,  the  same 
object  as  another,  urging  the  impossibility  of 
[20]  several  persons  in  different  places  hearing 
or  smelling  [the  same  object],  for  the  one 
same  thing  would  [thus]  be  divided  from  it¬ 
self.  The  answer  is  that,  in  perceiving  the  ob¬ 
ject  which  first  set  up  the  motion — e.g.  a  bell, 
or  frankincense,  or  fire — all  perceive  an  object 
numerically  one  and  the  same;  while,  of 
course,  in  the  special  object  perceived  they  per¬ 
ceive  an  object  numerically  different  for  each, 
though  specifically  the  same  for  all;  and  this, 
accordingly,  explains  how  it  is  that  many  per¬ 
sons  together  see,  or  smell,  or  hear  [the  same 
object].  These  things  [the  odour  or  sound 
[25]  proper]  are  not  bodies,  but  an  affection  or 
process  of  some  kind  (otherwise  this  [viz.  si¬ 
multaneous  perception  of  the  one  object  by 
many]  would  not  have  been,  as  it  is,  a  fact  of 
experience),  though,  on  the  other  hand,  they 
each  imply  a  body  [as  their  cause]. 

But  [though  sound  and  odour  may  travel,] 
with  regard  to  Light  the  case  is  different.  For 
Light  has  its  raison  d'etre  in  the  being  [not 
becoming]  of  something,  but  it  is  not  a  move¬ 
ment.  And  in  general,  even  in  qualitative 
change  the  case  is  different  from  what  it  is  in 
local  movement  [both  being  different  species 
[30]  of  Kivrjcns].  Local  movements,  of  course, 
arrive  first  at  a  point  midway  before  reaching 
their  goal  (and  Sound,  it  is  currently  believed, 
is  a  movement  of  something  locally  moved), 
447a  but  we  cannot  go  on  to  assert  this  [arrival 
at  a  point  midway]  in  like  manner  of  things 
which  undergo  qualitative  change.  For  this 
kind  of  change  may  conceivably  take  place  in  a 
thing  all  at  once,  without  one  half  of  it  being 
changed  before  the  other;  e.g.  it  is  conceivable 
that  water  should  be  frozen  simultaneously  in 


every  part.  But  still,  for  all  that,  if  the  body 
which  is  heated  or  frozen  is  extensive,  each 
part  of  it  successively  is  affected  by  the  part 
contiguous,  while  the  part  first  changed  in 
[5]  quality  is  so  changed  by  the  cause  itself 
which  originates  the  change,  and  thus  the 
change  throughout  the  whole  need  not  take 
place  coinstantaneously  and  all  at  once.  Tast¬ 
ing  would  have  been  as  smelling  now  is,  if  we 
lived  in  a  liquid  medium,  and  perceived  [the 
sapid  object]  at  a  distance,  before  touching  it. 

Naturally,  then,  the  parts  of  media  between 
[/o]  a  sensory  organ  and  its  object  are  not  all 
affected  at  once — except  in  the  case  of  Light 
[illumination],  for  the  reason1  above  stated, 
and  also  in  the  case  of  seeing,  for  the  same  rea¬ 
son;  for  Light  is  an  efficient  cause  of  seeing. 

7 

Another  question  respecting  sense-perception 
is  as  follows:  assuming,  as  is  natural,  that 
of  two  [simultaneous]  sensory  stimuli  the 
stronger  always  tends  to  extrude  the  weaker 
[from  consciousness],  is  it  conceivable  or  not 
that  one  should  be  able  to  discern  two  objects 
coinstantaneously  in  the  same  individual  time? 
[75]  The  above  assumption  explains  why  per¬ 
sons  do  not  perceive  what  is  brought  before 
their  eyes,  if  they  are  at  the  time  deep  in 
thought,  or  in  a  fright,  or  listening  to  some 
loud  noise.  This  assumption,  then,  must  be 
made,  and  also  the  following:  that  it  is  easier 
to  discern  each  object  of  sense  when  in  its  sim¬ 
ple  form  than  when  an  ingredient  in  a  mix¬ 
ture;  easier,  for  example,  to  discern  wine  when 
neat  than  when  blended,  and  so  also  honey, 
and  [in  other  provinces]  a  colour,  or  to  dis¬ 
cern  the  nite  by  itself  alone,  than  [when 
[20]  sounded  with  the  hypate]  in  the  octave; 
the  reason  being  that  component  elements 
tend  to  efface  [the  distinctive  characteristics 
of]  one  another.  Such  is  the  effect  [on  one  an¬ 
other]  of  all  ingredients  of  which,  when  com¬ 
pounded,  some  one  thing  is  formed. 

If,  then,  the  greater  stimulus  tends  to  expel 
the  less,  it  necessarily  follows  that,  when  they 
concur,  this  greater  should  itself  too  be  less 
distinctly  perceptible  than  if  it  were  alone, 
since  the  less  by  blending  with  it  has  removed 
some  of  its  individuality,  according  to  our  as¬ 
sumption  that  simple  objects  are  in  all  cases 
more  distinctly  perceptible. 

[25]  Now,  if  the  two  stimuli  are  equal  but  het¬ 
erogeneous,  no  perception  of  either  will  ensue; 
they  will  alike  efface  one  another’s  character- 

1  That  is,  the  reason  given  446b  27. 


686 

istics.  But  in  such  a  case  the  perception  of  ei¬ 
ther  stimulus  in  its  simple  form  is  impossible. 
Hence  either  there  will  then  be  no  sense-per¬ 
ception  at  all,  or  there  will  be  a  perception 
compounded  of  both  and  differing  from  ei¬ 
ther.  The  latter  is  what  actually  seems  to  re¬ 
sult  from  ingredients  blended  together,  what¬ 
ever  may  be  the  compound  in  which  they  are 
so  mixed. 

Since,  then,  from  some  concurrent  [sensory 
stimuli]  a  resultant  object  is  produced,  while 
from  others  no  such  resultant  is  produced,  and 
[50]  of  the  latter  sort  are  those  things  which 
belong  to  different  sense  provinces  (for  only 
those  things  are  capable  of  mixture  whose  ex- 
44  7b  tremes  are  contraries,  and  no  one  com¬ 
pound  can  be  formed  from,  e.g.  White  and 
Sharp,  except  indirectly,  i.e.  not  as  a  concord 
is  formed  of  Sharp  and  Grave);  there  follows 
logically  the  impossibility  of  discerning  such 
concurrent  stimuli  coinstantaneously.  For  we 
must  suppose  that  the  stimuli,  when  equal, 
[5]  tend  alike  to  efface  one  another,  since  no 
one  [form  of  stimulus]  results  from  them; 
while,  if  they  are  unequal,  the  stronger  alone  is 
distinctly  perceptible. 

Again,  the  soul  would  be  more  likely  to  per¬ 
ceive  coinstantaneously,  with  one  and  the  same 
sensory  act,  two  things  in  the  same  sensory 
province,  such  as  the  Grave  and  the  Sharp  in 
sound;  for  the  sensory  stimulation  in  this  one 
province  is  more  likely  to  be  unitemporal  than 
that  involving  two  different  provinces,  as  Sight 
[/o]  and  Hearing.  But  it  is  impossible  to  per¬ 
ceive  two  objects  coinstantaneously  in  the  same 
sensory  act  unless  they  have  been  mixed, 
[when,  however,  they  are  no  longer  two],  for 
their  amalgamation  involves  their  becoming 
one,  and  the  sensory  act  related  to  one  object 
is  itself  one,  and  such  act,  when  one,  is,  of 
course,  coinstantaneous  with  itself.  Hence, 
when  things  are  mixed  we  of  necessity  per¬ 
ceive  them  coinstantaneously:  for  we  perceive 
them  by  a  perception  actually  one.  For  an  ob¬ 
ject  numerically  one  means  that  which  is  per¬ 
ceived  by  a  perception  actually  one,  whereas 
an  object  specifically  one  means  that  which  is 
[75]  perceived  by  a  sensory  act  potentially  one 
[i.e.  by  an  kvkpytia  of  the  same  sensuous  fac¬ 
ulty].  If  then  the  actualized  perception  is  one, 
it  will  declare  its  data  to  be  one  object;  they 
must,  therefore,  have  been  mixed.  According¬ 
ly,  when  they  have  not  been  mixed,  the  actual¬ 
ized  perceptions  which  perceive  them  will  be 
two;  but  [if  so,  their  perception  must  be  suc¬ 
cessive  not  coinstantaneous,  for]  in  one  and 


448* 

the  same  faculty  the  perception  actualized  at 
any  single  moment  is  necessarily  one,  only  one 
stimulation  or  exertion  of  a  single  faculty  be¬ 
ing  possible  at  a  single  instant,  and  in  the  case 
supposed  here  the  faculty  is  one.  It  follows, 
therefore,  that  we  cannot  conceive  the  possi- 
[20]  bility  of  perceiving  two  distinct  objects  co¬ 
instantaneously  with  one  and  the  same  sense. 

But  if  it  be  thus  impossible  to  perceive  coin¬ 
stantaneously  two  objects  in  the  same  province 
of  sense  if  they  are  really  two ,  manifestly  it  is 
still  less  conceivable  that  we  should  perceive 
coinstantaneously  objects  in  two  different  sen¬ 
sory  provinces,  as  White  and  Sweet.  For  it  ap¬ 
pears  that  when  the  Soul  predicates  numerical 
[25]  unity  it  does  so  in  virtue  of  nothing  else 
than  such  coinstantaneous  perception  [of  one 
object,  in  one  instant,  by  one  evkpyeia] :  while 
it  predicates  specific  unity  in  virtue  of  [the 
unity  of]  the  discriminating  faculty  of  sense 
together  with  [the  unity  of]  the  mode  in 
which  this  operates.  What  I  mean,  for  exam¬ 
ple,  is  this;  the  same  sense  no  doubt  discerns 
White  and  Black,  [which  are  hence  generical- 
ly  one]  though  specifically  different  from  one 
another,  and  so,  too,  a  faculty  of  sense  self¬ 
identical,  but  different  from  the  former,  dis¬ 
cerns  Sweet  and  Bitter;  but  while  both  these 
faculties  differ  from  one  another  [and  each 
from  itself]  in  their  modes  of  discerning  either 
of  their  respective  contraries,  yet  in  perceiving 
[30]  the  co-ordinates  in  each  province  they 
proceed  in  manners  analogous  to  one  another; 
448a  for  instance,  as  Taste  perceives  Sweet,  so 
Sight  perceives  White;  and  as  the  latter  per¬ 
ceives  Black,  so  the  former  perceives  Bitter. 

Again,  if  the  stimuli  of  sense  derived  from 
Contraries  are  themselves  Contrary,  and  if 
Contraries  cannot  be  conceived  as  subsisting 
together  in  the  same  individual  subject,  and  if 
Contraries,  e.g.  Sweet  and  Bitter,  come  under 
one  and  the  same  sense-faculty,  we  must  con- 
[5]  elude  that  it  is  impossible  to  discern  them 
coinstantaneously.  It  is  likewise  clearly  impos¬ 
sible  so  to  discern  such  homogeneous  sensibles 
as  are  not  [indeed]  Contrary,  [but  are  yet  of 
different  species].  For  these  are,  [in  the  sphere 
of  colour,  for  instance],  classed  some  with 
White,  others  with  Black,  and  so  it  is,  likewise, 
in  the  other  provinces  of  sense;  for  example,  of 
savours,  some  are  classed  with  Sweet,  and  oth¬ 
ers  with  Bitter.  Nor  can  one  discern  the  com¬ 
ponents  in  compounds  coinstantaneously  (for 
[/o]  these  are  ratios  of  Contraries,  as  e.g.  the 
Octave  or  the  Fifth);  unless,  indeed,  on  con¬ 
dition  of  perceiving  them  as  one.  For  thus,  and 


SENSE  AND  THE  SENSIBLE 


448b  CHAPTER  7  687 


not  otherwise,  the  ratios  of  the  extreme  sounds 
are  compounded  into  one  ratio;  since  we 
should  have  together  the  ratio,  on  the  one 
hand,  of  Many  to  Few  or  of  Odd  to  Even,  on 
the  other,  that  of  Few  to  Many  or  of  Even  to 
Odd  [and  these,  to  be  perceived  together,  must 
be  unified]. 

If,  then,  the  sensibles  denominated  co-ordi¬ 
nates  though  in  different  provinces  of  sense 
[75]  (e.g.  I  call  Sweet  and  White  co-ordinates 
though  in  different  provinces)  stand  yet  more 
aloof,  and  differ  more,  from  one  another  than 
do  any  sensibles  in  the  same  province;  while 
Sweet  differs  from  White  even  more  than 
Black  does  from  White,  it  is  still  less  conceiva¬ 
ble  that  one  should  discern  them  [viz.  sensi¬ 
bles  in  different  sensory  provinces  whether  co¬ 
ordinates  or  not]  coinstantaneously  than  sensi¬ 
bles  which  are  in  the  same  province.  There¬ 
fore,  if  coinstantaneous  perception  of  the  latter 
be  impossible,  that  of  the  former  is  a  fortiori 
impossible. 

[20]  Some  of  the  writers  who  treat  of  concords 
assert  that  the  sounds  combined  in  these  do  not 
reach  us  simultaneously,  but  only  appear  to  do 
so,  their  real  successiveness  being  unnoticed 
whenever  the  time  it  involves  is  [so  small  as 
to  be]  imperceptible.  Is  this  true  or  not?  One 
might  perhaps,  following  this  up,  go  so  far  as 
to  say  that  even  the  current  opinion  that  one 
sees  and  hears  coinstantaneously  is  due  merely 
to  the  fact  that  the  intervals  of  time  [between 
the  really  successive  perceptions  of  sight  and 
hearing]  escape  observation.  But  this  can 
scarcely  be  true,  nor  is  it  conceivable  that  any 
[25]  portion  of  time  should  be  [absolutely] 
imperceptible,  or  that  any  should  be  absolute¬ 
ly  unnoticeable;  the  truth  being  that  it  is  pos¬ 
sible  to  perceive  every  instant  of  time.  [This  is 
so];  because,  if  it  is  inconceivable  that  a  per¬ 
son  should,  while  perceiving  himself  or  aught 
else  in  a  continuous  time,  be  at  any  instant  un¬ 
aware  of  his  own  existence;  while,  obviously, 
the  assumption,  that  there  is  in  the  time-con¬ 
tinuum  a  time  so  small  as  to  be  absolutely  im¬ 
perceptible,  carries  the  implication  that  a  per¬ 
son  would,  during  such  time,  be  unaware  of 
his  own  existence,  as  well  as  of  his  seeing  and 
perceiving;  [this  assumption  must  be  false]. 

Again,  if  there  is  any  magnitude,  whether 
time  or  thing,  absolutely  imperceptible  owing 
[jo]  to  its  smallness,  it  follows  that  there 
would  not  be  either  a  thing  which  one  per¬ 
ceives,  or  a  time  in  which  one  perceives  it,  un¬ 
less  in  the  sense  that  in  some  part  of  the 
given  time  he  sees  some  part  of  the  given 


448b  thing.  For  [let  there  be  a  line  a/3,  divid¬ 
ed  into  two  parts  at  7,  and  let  this  line  repre¬ 
sent  a  whole  object  and  a  corresponding  whole 
time.  Now,]  if  one  sees  the  whole  line,  and 
perceives  it  during  a  time  which  forms  one 
and  the  same  continuum,  only  in  the  sense  that 
he  does  so  in  some  portion  of  this  time,  let  us 
[5]  suppose  the  part  7/3,  representing  a  time  in 
which  by  supposition  he  was  perceiving  noth¬ 
ing,  cut  off  from  the  whole.  Well,  then,  he 
perceives  in  a  certain  part  [viz.  in  the  remain¬ 
der]  of  the  time,  or  perceives  a  part  [viz.  the 
remainder]  of  the  line,  after  the  fashion  in 
which  one  sees  the  whole  earth  by  seeing  some 
given  part  of  it,  or  walks  in  a  year  by  walking 
in  some  given  part  of  the  year.  But  [by  hy¬ 
pothesis]  in  the  part  Py  he  perceives  nothing: 
therefore,  in  fact,  he  is  said  to  perceive  the 
whole  object  and  during  the  whole  time  sim¬ 
ply  because  he  perceives  [some  part  of  the  ob¬ 
ject]  in  some  part  of  the  time  a/3.  But  the  same 
argument  holds  also  in  the  case  of  a7  [the  re- 
[70]  mainder,  regarded  in  its  turn  as  a 
whole];  for  it  will  be  found  [on  this  theory  of 
vacant  times  and  imperceptible  magnitudes] 
that  one  always  perceives  only  in  some  part  of 
a  given  whole  time,  and  perceives  only  some 
part  of  a  whole  magnitude,  and  that  it  is  im¬ 
possible  to  perceive  any  [really]  whole  [object 
in  a  really  whole  time;  a  conclusion  which  is 
absurd,  as  it  would  logically  annihilate  the 
perception  of  both  Objects  and  Time]. 

Therefore  we  must  conclude  that  all  magni¬ 
tudes  are  perceptible,  but  their  actual  dimen¬ 
sions  do  not  present  themselves  immediately 
in  their  presentation  as  objects.  One  sees  the 
sun,  or  a  four-cubit  rod  at  a  distance,  as  a  mag¬ 
nitude,  but  their  exact  dimensions  are  not  giv¬ 
en  in  their  visual  presentation:  nay,  at  times  an 
object  of  sight  appears  indivisible,  but  [vision, 
like  other  special  senses,  is  fallible  respecting 
‘common  sensibles’,  e.g.  magnitude,  and] 
nothing  that  one  sees  is  really  indivisible.  The 
[75]  reason  of  this  has  been  previously  ex¬ 
plained.1  It  is  clear  then,  from  the  above  argu¬ 
ments,  that  no  portion  of  time  is  imperceptible. 

But  we  must  here  return  to  the  question 
proposed  above  for  discussion,  whether  it  is 
possible  or  impossible  to  perceive  several  ob¬ 
jects  coinstantaneously;  by  ‘coinstantaneously’ 
I  mean  perceiving  the  several  objects  in  a  time 
one  and  indivisible  relatively  to  one  another, 
i.e.  indivisible  in  a  sense  consistent  with  its  be¬ 
ing  all  a  continuum. 

[20]  First,  then,  is  it  conceivable  that  one 

1  Viz.  in  the  passage  445**  2-446**  20. 


688 

should  perceive  the  different  things  coinstan- 
taneously,  but  each  with  a  different  part  of  the 
Soul?  Or  [must  we  object]  that,  in  the  first 
place,  to  begin  with  the  objects  of  one  and  the 
same  sense,  e.g.  Sight,  if  we  assume  it  [the 
Soul  qua  exercising  Sight]  to  perceive  one  col¬ 
our  with  one  part,  and  another  colour  with  a 
different  part,  it  will  have  a  plurality  of  parts 
the  same  in  species,  [as  they  must  be,]  since 
the  objects  which  it  thus  perceives  fall  with¬ 
al  in  the  same  genus? 

Should  any  one  [to  illustrate  how  the  Soul 
might  have  in  it  two  different  parts  specifical¬ 
ly  identical,  each  directed  to  a  set  of  aiadrjra 
the  same  in  genus  with  that  to  which  the  other 
is  directed]  urge  that,  as  there  are  two  eyes,  so 
there  may  be  in  the  Soul  something  analogous, 
[the  reply  is]  that  of  the  eyes,  doubtless,  some 
one  organ  is  formed,  and  hence  their  actuali¬ 
zation  in  perception  is  one;  but  if  this  is  so  in 
the  Soul,  then,  in  so  far  as  what  is  formed  of 
both  [i.e.  of  any  two  specifically  identical  parts 
as  assumed]  is  one,  the  true  perceiving  subject 
also  will  be  one,  [and  the  contradictory  of  the 
above  hypothesis  (of  different  parts  of  Soul  re¬ 
maining  engaged  in  simultaneous  perception 
with  one  sense)  is  what  emerges  from  the  anal¬ 
ogy]  ;  while  if  the  two  parts  of  Soul  remain 
separate,  the  analogy  of  the  eyes  will  fail,  [for 
of  these  some  one  is  really  formed]. 

Furthermore,  [on  the  supposition  of  the 
need  of  different  parts  of  Soul,  co-operating  in 
[30]  each  sense,  to  discern  different  objects 
coinstantaneously],  the  senses  will  be  each  at 
the  same  time  one  and  many,  as  if  we  should 
say  that  they  were  each  a  set  of  diverse  sci¬ 
ences;  for  neither  will  an  ‘activity’  exist  with¬ 
out  its  proper  faculty,  nor  without  activity  will 
there  be  sensation. 

449a  But  if  the  Soul  does  not,  in  the  way  sug¬ 
gested  [i.e.  with  different  parts  of  itself  acting 
simultaneously],  perceive  in  one  and  the  same 
individual  time  sensibles  of  the  same  sense,  a 
fortiori  it  is  not  thus  that  it  perceives  sensibles 
of  different  senses.  For  it  is,  as  already  stated, 
more  conceivable  that  it  should  perceive  a  plu¬ 
rality  of  the  former  together  in  this  way  than 
a  plurality  of  heterogeneous  objects. 

[5]  If  then,  as  is  the  fact,  the  Soul  with  one 
part  perceives  Sweet,  with  another,  White,  ei¬ 
ther  that  which  results  from  these  is  some  one 
part,  or  else  there  is  no  such  one  resultant.  But 
there  must  be  such  an  one,  inasmuch  as  the 
general  faculty  of  sense-perception  is  one. 
What  one  object,  then,  does  that  one  faculty 
[when  perceiving  an  object,  e.g.  as  both 


449a 

White  and  Sweet]  perceive?  [None];  for  as¬ 
suredly  no  one  object  arises  by  composition  of 
these  [heterogeneous  objects,  such  as  White 
and  Sweet].  We  must  conclude,  therefore,  that 
there  is,  as  has  been  stated  before,  some  one 
faculty  in  the  soul  with  which  the  latter  per- 
[/o]  ceives  all  its  percepts,  though  it  perceives 
each  different  genus  of  sensibles  through  a  dif¬ 
ferent  organ. 

May  we  not,  then,  conceive  this  faculty 
which  perceives  White  and  Sweet  to  be  one 
qua  indivisible  [sc.  qua  combining  its  different 
simultaneous  objects]  in  its  actualization,  but 
different,  when  it  has  become  divisible  [sc.  qua 
distinguishing  its  different  simultaneous  ob¬ 
jects]  in  its  actualization? 

Or  is  what  occurs  in  the  case  of  the  perceiv¬ 
ing  Soul  conceivably  analogous  to  what  holds 
true  in  that  of  the  things  themselves?  For  the 
[75]  same  numerically  one  thing  is  white  and 
sweet,  and  has  many  other  qualities,  [while 
its  numerical  oneness  is  not  thereby  preju¬ 
diced]  if  the  fact  is  not  that  the  qualities  are 
really  separable  in  the  object  from  one  another, 
but  that  the  being  of  each  quality  is  different 
[from  that  of  every  other].  In  the  same  way 
therefore  we  must  assume  also,  in  the  case  of 
the  Soul,  that  the  faculty  of  perception  in  gen¬ 
eral  is  in  itself  numerically  one  and  the  same, 
but  different  [differentiated]  in  its  being;  dif¬ 
ferent,  that  is  to  say,  in  genus  as  regards  some 
of  its  objects,  in  species  as  regards  others. 
Hence  too,  we  may  conclude  that  one  can  per¬ 
ceive  [numerically  different  objects]  coinstan¬ 
taneously  with  a  faculty  which  is  numerically 
[20]  one  and  the  same,  but  not  the  same  in  its 
relationship  [sc.  according  as  the  objects  to 
which  it  is  directed  are  not  the  same]. 

That  every  sensible  object  is  a  magnitude, 
and  that  nothing  which  it  is  possible  to  per¬ 
ceive  is  indivisible,  may  be  thus  shown.  The 
distance  whence  an  object  could  not  be  seen 
is  indeterminate,  but  that  whence  it  is  visible 
is  determinate.  We  may  say  the  same  of  the  ob¬ 
jects  of  Smelling  and  Hearing,  and  of  all  sen¬ 
sibles  not  discerned  by  actual  contact.  Now, 
there  is,  in  the  interval  of  distance,  some  ex- 
[25]  treme  place,  the  last  from  which  the  ob¬ 
ject  is  invisible,  and  the  first  from  which  it  is 
visible.  This  place,  beyond  which  if  the  object 
be  one  cannot  perceive  it,  while  if  the  object 
be  on  the  hither  side  one  must  perceive  it,  is, 
I  presume,  itself  necessarily  indivisible.  There¬ 
fore,  if  any  sensible  object  be  indivisible,  such 
object,  if  set  in  the  said  extreme  place  whence 
imperceptibility  ends  and  perceptibility  be- 


SENSE  AND  THE  SENSIBLE 


449*  CHAPTER  7  689 


f  ins,  will  have  to  be  both  visible  and  invisible 
30]  at  the  same  time;  but  this  is  impossible. 
This  concludes  our  survey  of  the  character¬ 
istics  of  the  organs  of  Sense-perception  and 


their  objects,  whether  regarded  in  general  or 
in  relation  to  each  organ.  Of  the  remaining 
subjects,  we  must  first  consider  that  of  mem¬ 
ory  and  remembering. 


On  Memory  and  Reminiscence 


449b  We  have,  in  the  next  place,  to  treat  of 
Memory  and  Remembering,  considering  its 
nature,  its  cause,  and  the  part  of  the  soul  to 
[5]  which  this  experience,  as  well  as  that  of 
Recollecting,  belongs.  For  the  persons  who 
possess  a  retentive  memory  are  not  identical 
with  those  who  excel  in  power  of  recollection; 
indeed,  as  a  rule,  slow  people  have  a  good 
memory,  whereas  those  who  are  quick-witted 
and  clever  are  better  at  recollecting. 

We  must  first  form  a  true  conception  of  the 
[/o]  objects  of  memory,  a  point  on  which  mis¬ 
takes  are  often  made.  Now  to  remember  the 
future  is  not  possible,  but  this  is  an  object  of 
opinion  or  expectation  (and  indeed  there 
might  be  actually  a  science  of  expectation,  like 
that  of  divination,  in  which  some  believe);  nor 
is  there  memory  of  the  present,  but  only  sense- 
perception.  For  by  the  latter  we  know  not  the 
future,  nor  the  past,  but  the  present  only.  But 
[75]  memory  relates  to  the  past.  No  one  would 
say  that  he  remembers  the  present,  when  it  is 
present,  e.g.  a  given  white  object  at  the  mo¬ 
ment  when  he  sees  it;  nor  would  one  say  that 
he  remembers  an  object  of  scientific  contem¬ 
plation  at  the  moment  when  he  is  actually  con¬ 
templating  it,  and  has  it  full  before  his  mind; 
— of  the  former  he  would  say  only  that  he  per¬ 
ceives  it,  of  the  latter  only  that  he  knows  it. 
But  when  one  has  scientific  knowledge,  or 
perception,  apart  from  the  actualizations  of  the 
20]  faculty  concerned,  he  thus  ‘remembers’ 
that  the  angles  of  a  triangle  are  together  equal 
to  two  right  angles] ;  as  to  the  former,  that  he 
learned  it,  or  thought  it  out  for  himself,  as  to 
the  latter,  that  he  heard,  or  saw,  it,  or  had  some 
such  sensible  experience  of  it.  For  whenever 
one  exercises  the  faculty  of  remembering,  he 
must  say  within  himself,  ‘I  formerly  heard  (or 
otherwise  perceived)  this,’  or  ‘I  formerly  had 
this  thought’. 

Memory  is,  therefore,  neither  Perception 
nor  Conception,  but  a  state  or  affection  of  one 
[25]  of  these,  conditioned  by  lapse  of  time.  As 
already  observed,  there  is  no  such  thing  as 
memory  of  the  present  while  present,  for  the 
present  is  object  only  of  perception,  and  the 
future,  of  expectation,  but  the  object  of  mem¬ 


ory  is  the  past.  All  memory,  therefore,  implies 
a  time  elapsed;  consequently  only  those  ani¬ 
mals  which  perceive  time  remember,  and  the 
organ  whereby  they  perceive  time  is  also  that 
whereby  they  remember. 

[jo]  The  subject  of  ‘presentation’  has  been  al¬ 
ready  considered  in  our  work  On  the  Soul.1 
Without  a  presentation  intellectual  activity  is 
450a  impossible.  For  there  is  in  such  activity 
an  incidental  affection  identical  with  one  also 
incidental  in  geometrical  demonstrations.  For 
in  the  latter  case,  though  we  do  not  for  the 
purpose  of  the  proof  make  any  use  of  the  fact 
that  the  quantity  in  the  triangle  [for  example, 
which  we  have  drawn]  is  determinate,  we  nev¬ 
ertheless  draw  it  determinate  in  quantity.  So 
likewise  when  one  exerts  the  intellect  [e.g.  on 
the  subject  of  first  principles],  although  the 
[5]  object  may  not  be  quantitative,  one  en¬ 
visages  it  as  quantitative,  though  he  thinks  it 
in  abstraction  from  quantity;  while,  on  the 
other  hand,  if  the  object  of  the  intellect  is  es¬ 
sentially  of  the  class  of  things  that  are  quanti¬ 
tative,  but  indeterminate,  one  envisages  it  as  if 
it  had  determinate  quantity,  though  subse¬ 
quently,  in  thinking  it,  he  abstracts  from  its 
determinateness.  Why  we  cannot  exercise  the 
intellect  on  any  object  absolutely  apart  from 
the  continuous,  or  apply  it  even  to  non-tem¬ 
poral  things  unless  in  connexion  with  time,  is 
[/o]  another  question.  Now,  one  must  cognize 
magnitude  and  motion  by  means  of  the  same 
faculty  by  which  one  cognizes  time  [i.e.  by 
that  which  is  also  the  faculty  of  memory],  and 
the  presentation  [involved  in  such  cognition] 
is  an  affection  of  the  sensus  communis;  whence 
this  follows,  viz.  that  the  cognition  of  these 
objects  [magnitude,  motion,  time]  is  effected 
by  the  [said  sensus  communis,  i.e.  the]  pri¬ 
mary  faculty  of  perception.  Accordingly,  mem¬ 
ory  [not  merely  of  sensible,  but]  even  of  in¬ 
tellectual  objects  involves  a  presentation:  hence 
we  may  conclude  that  it  belongs  to  the  faculty 
of  intelligence  only  incidentally,  while  directly 
and  essentially  it  belongs  to  the  primary  fac¬ 
ulty  of  sense-perception. 

[75]  Hence  not  only  human  beings  and  the 
beings  which  possess  opinion  or  intelligence, 
but  also  certain  other  animals,  possess  memory. 

1  Cf.  427b  29  sqq. 


45  la  CHAPTER  1  691 


If  memory  were  a  function  of  [pure]  intellect, 
it  would  not  have  been  as  it  is  an  attribute  of 
many  of  the  lower  animals,  but  probably,  in 
that  case,  no  mortal  beings  would  have  had 
memory;  since,  even  as  the  case  stands,  it  is  not 
an  attribute  of  them  all,  just  because  all  have 
not  the  faculty  of  perceiving  time.  Whenever 
one  actually  remembers  having  seen  or  heard, 
[20]  or  learned,  something,  he  includes  in  this 
act  (as  we  have  already  observed)  the  con¬ 
sciousness  of  ‘formerly’;  and  the  distinction  of 
‘former’  and  ‘latter’  is  a  distinction  in  time. 

Accordingly  if  asked,  of  which  among  the 
parts  of  the  soul  memory  is  a  function,  we  re¬ 
ply:  manifestly  of  that  part  to  which  ‘presen¬ 
tation’  appertains;  and  all  objects  capable  of 
being  presented  [viz.  aiadrjra ]  are  immedi¬ 
ately  and  properly  objects  of  memory,  while 
those  [viz.  vorjTa ]  which  necessarily  involve 
[25]  [but  only  involve]  presentation  are  ob¬ 
jects  of  memory  incidentally. 

One  might  ask  how  it  is  possible  that  though 
the  affection  [the  presentation]  alone  is  pres¬ 
ent,  and  the  [related]  fact  absent,  the  latter — 
that  which  is  not  present — is  remembered. 
[This  question  arises],  because  it  is  clear  that 
we  must  conceive  that  which  is  generated 
through  sense-perception  in  the  sentient  soul, 
and  in  the  part  of  the  body  which  is  its  seat, — 
viz.  that  affection  the  state  whereof  we  call 
memory — to  be  some  such  thing  as  a  picture, 
[jo]  The  process  of  movement  [sensory  stim¬ 
ulation]  involved  in  the  act  of  perception 
stamps  in,  as  it  were,  a  sort  of  impression  of 
the  percept,  just  as  persons  do  who  make,  an 
450b  impression  with  a  seal.  This  explains 
why,  in  those  who  are  strongly  moved  owing 
to  passion,  or  time  of  life,  no  mnemonic  im¬ 
pression  is  formed;  just  as  no  impression 
would  be  formed  if  the  movement  of  the  seal 
were  to  impinge  on  running  water;  while 
there  are  others  in  whom,  owing  to  the  re- 
[5]  ceiving  surface  being  frayed,  as  happens 
to  [the  stucco  on]  old  [chamber]  walls,  or  ow¬ 
ing  to  the  hardness  of  the  receiving  surface, 
the  requisite  impression  is  not  implanted  at 
all.  Hence  both  very  young  and  very  old  per¬ 
sons  are  defective  in  memory;  they  are  in  a 
state  of  flux,  the  former  because  of  their 
growth,  the  latter,  owing  to  their  decay.  In 
like  manner,  also,  both  those  who  are  too  quick 
[/o]  and  those  who  are  too  slow  have  bad 
memories.  The  former  are  too  soft,  the  latter 
too  hard  [in  the  texture  of  their  receiving  or¬ 
gans],  so  that  in  the  case  of  the  former  the  pre¬ 
sented  image  [though  imprinted]  does  not  re¬ 


main  in  the  soul,  while  on  the  latter  it  is  not 
imprinted  at  all. 

But  then,  if  this  truly  describes  what  hap¬ 
pens  in  the  genesis  of  memory,  [the  question 
stated  above  arises:]  when  one  remembers,  is 
it  this  impressed  affection  that  he  remembers, 
or  is  it  the  objective  thing  from  which  this 
was  derived?  If  the  former,  it  would  follow 
that  we  remember  nothing  which  is  absent;  if 
[75]  the  latter,  how  is  it  possible  that,  though 
perceiving  directly  only  the  impression,  we  re¬ 
member  that  absent  thing  which  we  do  not 
perceive?  Granted  that  there  is  in  us  some¬ 
thing  like  an  impression  or  picture,  why 
should  the  perception  of  the  mere  impression 
be  memory  of  something  else,  instead  of  being 
related  to  this  impression  alone?  For  when  one 
actually  remembers,  this  impression  is  what  he 
contemplates,  and  this  is  what  he  perceives. 
How  then  does  he  remember  what  is  not  pres¬ 
ent?  One  might  as  well  suppose  it  possible  also 
to  see  or  hear  that  which  is  not  present.  In  re- 
[20]  ply,  we  suggest  that  this  very  thing  is 
quite  conceivable,  nay,  actually  occurs  in  ex¬ 
perience.  A  picture  painted  on  a  panel  is  at 
once  a  picture  and  a  likeness:  that  is,  while 
one  and  the  same,  it  is  both  of  these,  although 
the  ‘being’  of  both  is  not  the  same,  and  one 
may  contemplate  it  either  as  a  picture,  or  as  a 
likeness.  Just  in  the  same  way  we  have  to  con¬ 
ceive  that  the  mnemonic  presentation  within 
[25]  us  is  something  which  by  itself  is  merely 
an  object  of  contemplation,  while,  in  relation 
to  something  else,  it  is  also  a  presentation  of 
that  other  thing.  In  so  far  as  it  is  regarded  in 
itself,  it  is  only  an  object  of  contemplation,  or 
a  presentation;  but  when  considered  as  relative 
to  something  else,  e.g.  as  its  likeness,  it  is  also 
a  mnemonic  token.  Hence,  whenever  the  resid¬ 
ual  sensory  process  implied  by  it  is  actualized 
in  consciousness,  if  the  soul  perceives  this  in  so 
far  as  it  is  something  absolute,  it  appears  to  oc¬ 
cur  as  a  mere  thought  or  presentation;  but  if 
the  soul  perceives  it  qua  related  to  something 
else,  then, — just  as  when  one  contemplates  the 
painting  in  the  picture  as  being  a  likeness,  and 
[jo]  without  having  [at  the  moment]  seen  the 
actual  Koriskos,  contemplates  it  as  a  likeness 
of  Koriskos,  and  in  that  case  the  experience 
45 la  involved  in  this  contemplation  of  it  [as 
relative]  is  different  from  what  one  has  when 
he  contemplates  it  simply  as  a  painted  figure — 
[so  in  the  case  of  memory  we  have  the  anal¬ 
ogous  difference,  for],  of  the  objects  in  the 
soul,  the  one  [the  unrelated  object]  presents 
itself  simply  as  a  thought,  but  the  other  [the 


692  ON  MEMORY  AND  REMINISCENCE  451*> 


related  object],  just  because,  as  in  the  painting, 
it  is  a  likeness,  presents  itself  as  a  mnemonic 
token. 

We  can  now  understand  why  it  is  that  some¬ 
times,  when  we  have  such  processes,  based  on 
some  former  act  of  perception,  occurring  in  the 
soul,  we  do  not  know  whether  this  really  im- 
[5]  plies  our  having  had  perceptions  corre¬ 
sponding  to  them,  and  we  doubt  whether  the 
case  is  or  is  not  one  of  memory.  But  occasional¬ 
ly  it  happens  that  [while  thus  doubting]  we 
get  a  sudden  idea  and  recollect  that  we  heard 
or  saw  something  formerly.  This  [occurrence 
of  the  ‘sudden  idea’]  happens  whenever,  from 
contemplating  a  mental  object  as  absolute,  one 
changes  his  point  of  view,  and  regards  it  as 
relative  to  something  else. 

The  opposite  [sc.  to  the  case  of  those  who  at 
first  do  not  recognize  their  phantasms  as  mne¬ 
monic]  also  occurs,  as  happened  in  the  cases 
of  Antipheron  of  Oreus  and  others  suffering 
[/o]  from  mental  derangement;  for  they  were 
accustomed  to  speak  of  their  mere  phantasms 
as  facts  of  their  past  experience,  and  as  if  re¬ 
membering  them.  This  takes  place  whenever 
one  contemplates  what  is  not  a  likeness  as  if  it 
were  a  likeness. 

Mnemonic  exercises  aim  at  preserving  one’s 
memory  of  something  by  repeatedly  remind¬ 
ing  him  of  it;  which  implies  nothing  else  [on 
the  learner’s  part]  than  the  frequent  contem¬ 
plation  of  something  [viz.  the  ‘mnemonic’, 
whatever  it  may  be]  as  a  likeness,  and  not  as 
out  of  relation. 

[75]  As  regards  the  question,  therefore,  what 
memory  or  remembering  is,  it  has  now  been 
shown  that  it  is  the  state  of  a  presentation,  re¬ 
lated  as  a  likeness  to  that  of  which  it  is  a  pres¬ 
entation;  and  as  to  the  question  of  which  of 
the  faculties  within  us  memory  is  a  function, 
[it  has  been  shown]  that  it  is  a  function  of  the 
primary  faculty  of  sense-perception,  i.e.  of  that 
faculty  whereby  we  perceive  time. 

2 

Next  comes  the  subject  of  Recollection,  in 
[20]  dealing  with  which  we  must  assume  as 
fundamental  the  truths  elicited  above  in  our 
introductory  discussions.  For  recollection  is 
not  the  ‘recovery’  or  ‘acquisition’  of  memory; 
since  at  the  instant  when  one  at  first  learns  [a 
fact  of  science]  or  experiences  [a  particular 
fact  of  sense],  he  does  not  thereby  ‘recover’  a 
memory,  inasmuch  as  none  has  preceded,  nor 
does  he  acquire  one  ab  initio.  It  is  only  at  the 
instant  when  the  aforesaid  state  or  affection 


[of  the  aiaOrjCTLS  or  vir see  44915  24]  is 
implanted  in  the  soul  that  memory  exists,  and 
[25]  therefore  memory  is  not  itself  implanted 
concurrently  with  the  continuous  implantation 
of  the  [original]  sensory  experience. 

Further:  at  the  very  individual  and  con¬ 
cluding  instant  when  first  [the  sensory  ex¬ 
perience  or  scientific  knowledge]  has  been 
completely  implanted,  there  is  then  already 
established  in  the  person  affected  the  [sensory] 
affection,  or  the  scientific  knowledge  (if  one 
ought  to  apply  the  term  ‘scientific  knowledge’ 
to  the  [mnemonic]  state  or  affection;  and  in¬ 
deed  one  may  well  remember,  in  the  ‘inciden¬ 
tal’  sense,  some  of  the  things  [i.e.  ra  Ka0o\ot>] 
which  are  properly  objects  of  scientific  knowl¬ 
edge);  but  to  remember,  strictly  and  properly 
[j°]  speaking,  is  an  activity  which  will  not  be 
immanent  until  the  original  experience  has  un¬ 
dergone  lapse  of  time.  For  one  remembers 
now  what  one  saw  or  otherwise  experienced 
formerly;  the  moment  of  the  original  experi¬ 
ence  and  the  moment  of  the  memory  of  it  are 
never  identical. 

Again,  [even  when  time  has  elapsed,  and 
one  can  be  said  really  to  have  acquired  mem¬ 
ory,  this  is  not  necessarily  recollection,  for 
45 lb  firstly]  it  is  obviously  possible,  without 
any  present  act  of  recollection,  to  remember  as 
a  continued  consequence  of  the  original  per¬ 
ception  or  other  experience;  whereas  when 
[after  an  interval  of  obliviscence]  one  recov¬ 
ers  some  scientific  knowledge  which  he  had 
before,  or  some  perception,  or  some  other  ex¬ 
perience,  the  state  of  which  we  above  declared 
to  be  memory,  it  is  then,  and  then  only,  that 
this  recovery  may  amount  to  a  recollection  of 
any  of  the  things  aforesaid.  But,  [though,  as 
[5]  observed  above,  remembering  does  not 
necessarily  imply  recollecting],  recollecting  al¬ 
ways  implies  remembering,  and  actualized 
memory  follows  [upon  the  successful  act  of 
recollecting]. 

But  secondly,  even  the  assertion  that  recol¬ 
lection  is  the  reinstatement  in  consciousness  of 
something  which  was  there  before  but  had  dis¬ 
appeared  requires  qualification.  This  assertion 
may  be  true,  but  it  may  also  be  false;  for  the 
same  person  may  twice  learn  [from  some 
teacher],  or  twice  discover  [i.e.  excogitate], 
the  same  fact.  Accordingly,  the  act  of  recol¬ 
lecting  ought  [in  its  definition]  to  be  distin¬ 
guished  from  these  acts;  i.e.  recollecting  must 
imply  in  those  who  recollect  the  presence  of 
some  spring  over  and  above  that  from  which 
they  originally  learn. 


452®  CHAPTERS  1-2  693 


[jo]  Acts  of  recollection,  as  they  occur  in  ex¬ 
perience,  are  due  to  the  fact  that  one  move¬ 
ment  has  by  nature  another  that  succeeds  it  in 
regular  order. 

If  this  order  be  necessary,  whenever  a  sub¬ 
ject  experiences  the  former  of  two  movements 
thus  connected,  it  will  [invariably],  experi¬ 
ence  the  latter;  if,  however,  the  order  be  not 
necessary,  but  customary,  only  in  the  majority 
of  cases  will  the  subject  experience  the  latter 
of  the  two  movements.  But  it  is  a  fact  that 
there  are  some  movements,  by  a  single  experi¬ 
ence  of  which  persons  take  the  impress  of  cus¬ 
tom  more  deeply  than  they  do  by  experiencing 
[75]  others  many  times;  hence  upon  seeing 
some  things  but  once  we  remember  them  bet¬ 
ter  than  others  which  we  may  have  been  fre¬ 
quently. 

Whenever,  therefore,  we  are  recollecting, 
we  are  experiencing  certain  of  the  antecedent 
movements  until  finally  we  experience  the  one 
after  which  customarily  comes  that  which  we 
seek.  This  explains  why  we  hunt  up  the  series 
[of  KLvrjaets],  having  started  in  thought  either 
from  a  present  intuition  or  some  other,  and 
from  something  either  similar,  or  contrary,  to 
[20]  what  we  seek,  or  else  from  that  which  is 
contiguous  with  it.  Such  is  the  empirical 
ground  of  the  process  of  recollection;  for  the 
mnemonic  movements  involved  in  these  start¬ 
ing-points  are  in  some  cases  identical,  in  others, 
again,  simultaneous,  with  those  of  the  idea  we 
seek,  while  in  others  they  comprise  a  portion 
of  them,  so  that  the  remnant  which  one  ex¬ 
perienced  after  that  portion  [and  which  still 
requires  to  be  excited  in  memory]  is  compara¬ 
tively  small. 

Thus,  then,  it  is  that  persons  seek  to  recol¬ 
lect,  and  thus,  too,  it  is  that  they  recollect  even 
without  the  effort  of  seeking  to  do  so,  viz. 
when  the  movement  implied  in  recollection 
[25]  has  supervened  on  some  other  which  is 
its  condition.  For,  as  a  rule,  it  is  when  ante¬ 
cedent  movements  of  the  classes  here  described 
have  first  been  excited,  that  the  particular 
movement  implied  in  recollection  follows.  We 
need  not  examine  a  series  of  which  the  begin¬ 
ning  and  end  lie  far  apart,  in  order  to  see  how 
[by  recollection]  we  remember;  one  in  which 
they  lie  near  one  another  will  serve  equally 
well.  For  it  is  clear  that  the  method  is  in  each 
case  the  same,  that  is,  one  hunts  up  the  objec¬ 
tive  series,  without  any  previous  search  or  pre¬ 
vious  recollection.  For  [there  is,  besides  the 
natural  order,  viz.  the  order  of  the  irpaypaTa , 
or  events  of  the  primary  experience,  also  a  cus¬ 


tomary  order,  and]  by  the  effect  of  custom  the 
mnemonic  movements  tend  to  succeed  one  an¬ 
other  in  a  certain  order.  Accordingly,  therefore, 
[30]  when  one  wishes  to  recollect,  this  is  what 
he  will  do:  he  will  try  to  obtain  a  beginning  of 
movement  whose  sequel  shall  be  the  move¬ 
ment  which  he  desires  to  reawaken.  This  ex¬ 
plains  why  attempts  at  recollection  succeed 
soonest  and  best  when  they  start  from  a  begin- 
452a  ning  [of  some  objective  series].  For,  in 
order  of  succession,  the  mnemonic  movements 
are  to  one  another  as  the  objective  facts  [from 
which  they  are  derived].  Accordingly,  things 
arranged  in  a  fixed  order,  like  the  successive 
demonstrations  in  geometry,  are  easy  to  re¬ 
member  [or  recollect],  while  badly  arranged 
subjects  are  remembered  with  difficulty. 

Recollecting  differs  also  in  this  respect  from 
relearning,  that  one  who  recollects  will  be  able, 
[5]  somehow,  to  move,  solely  by  his  own  ef¬ 
fort,  to  the  term  next  after  the  starting-point. 
When  one  cannot  do  this  of  himself,  but  only 
by  external  assistance,  he  no  longer  remem¬ 
bers  [i.e.  he  has  totally  forgotten,  and  there¬ 
fore  of  course  cannot  recollect].  It  often  hap¬ 
pens  that,  though  a  person  cannot  recollect  at 
the  moment,  yet  by  seeking  he  can  do  so,  and 
discovers  what  he  seeks.  This  he  succeeds  in 
doing  by  setting  up  many  movements,  until 
finally  he  excites  one  of  a  kind  which  will  have 
for  its  sequel  the  fact  he  wishes  to  recollect. 
[jo]  For  remembering  [which  is  the  condicio 
sine  qua  non  of  recollecting]  is  the  existence, 
potentially,  in  the  mind  of  a  movement  capa¬ 
ble  of  stimulating  it  to  the  desired  movement, 
and  this,  as  has  been  said,  in  such  a  way  that 
the  person  should  be  moved  [prompted  to  rec¬ 
ollection]  from  within  himself,  i.e.  in  conse¬ 
quence  of  movements  wholly  contained  within 
himself. 

But  one  must  get  hold  of  a  starting-point. 
This  explains  why  it  is  that  persons  are  sup¬ 
posed  to  recollect  sometimes  by  starting  from 
mnemonic  loci .  The  cause  is  that  they  pass 
[75]  swiftly  in  thought  from  one  point  to  an¬ 
other,  e.g.  from  milk  to  white,  from  white  to 
mist,  and  thence  to  moist,  from  which  one  re¬ 
members  Autumn  [the  ‘season  of  mists’],  if 
this  be  the  season  he  is  trying  to  recollect. 

It  seems  true  in  general  that  the  middle  point 
also  among  all  things  is  a  good  mnemonic 
starting-point  from  which  to  reach  any  of 
them.  For  if  one  does  not  recollect  before,  he 
will  do  so  when  he  has  come  to  this,  or,  if  not, 
nothing  can  help  him;  as,  e.g.  if  one  were  to 
have  in  mind  the  numerical  series  denoted  by 


694  ON  MEMORY  AND  REMINISCENCE  452b 


[20]  the  symbols  A,  B,  I\  A,  E,  Z,  I,  H,  0. 
For,  if  he  does  not  remember  what  he  wants 
at  E,  then  at  E  he  remembers  0;  because  from 
E  movement  in  either  direction  is  possible,  to 
A  or  to  Z.  But,  if  it  is  not  for  one  of  these 
that  he  is  searching,  he  will  remember  [what 
he  is  searching  for]  when  he  has  come  to  T 
if  he  is  searching  for  H  or  I.  But  if  [it  is] 
not  [for  H  or  I  that  he  is  searching,  but  for 
one  of  the  terms  that  remain],  he  will  remem¬ 
ber  by  going  to  A,  and  so  in  all  cases  [in 
which  one  starts  from  a  middle  point].  The 
[25]  cause  of  one’s  sometimes  recollecting  and 
sometimes  not,  though  starting  from  the  same 
point,  is,  that  from  the  same  starting-point  a 
movement  can  be  made  in  several  directions, 
as,  for  instance,  from  V  to  I  or  to  A.  If,  then, 
the  mind  has  not  [when  starting  from  E] 
moved  in  an  old  path  [i.e.  one  in  which  it 
moved  when  first  having  the  objective  experi¬ 
ence,  and  that,  therefore,  in  which  un-‘ethized’ 
<t>vaLS  would  have  it  again  move],  it  tends  to 
move  to  the  more  customary;  for  [the  mind 
having,  by  chance  or  otherwise,  missed  mov¬ 
ing  in  the  ‘old’  way]  Custom  now  assumes  the 
role  of  Nature.  Hence  the  rapidity  with  which 
we  recollect  what  we  frequently  think  about. 
For  as  regular  sequence  of  events  is  in  accord¬ 
ance  with  nature,  so,  too,  regular  sequence  is 
observed  in  the  actualization  of  Kivrjaeis  [in 
consciousness],  and  here  frequency  tends  to 
[jo]  produce  [the  regularity  of]  nature.  And 
since  in  the  realm  of  nature  occurrences  take 
452b  place  which  are  even  contrary  to  nature, 
or  fortuitous,  the  same  happens  a  fortiori  in 
the  sphere  swayed  by  custom,  since  in  this 
sphere  natural  law  is  not  similarly  established. 
Hence  it  is  that  [from  the  same  starting-point] 
the  mind  receives  an  impulse  to  move  some¬ 
times  in  the  required  direction,  and  at  other 
times  otherwise,  [doing  the  latter]  particularly 
when  something  else  somehow  deflects  the 
mind  from  the  right  direction  and  attracts  it 
to  itself.  This  last  consideration  explains  too 
[5]  how  it  happens  that,  when  we  want  to  re¬ 
member  a  name,  we  remember  one  somewhat 
like  it,  indeed,  but  blunder  in  reference  to  [i.e. 
in  pronouncing]  the  one  we  intended. 

Thus,  then,  recollection  takes  place. 

But  the  point  of  capital  importance  is  that 
[for  the  purpose  of  recollection]  one  should 
cognize,  determinately  or  indeterminately,  the 
time-relation  [of  that  which  he  wishes  to  rec¬ 
ollect].  There  is, — let  it  be  taken  as  a  fact, — 
something  by  which  one  distinguishes  a  great¬ 
er  and  a  smaller  time;  and  it  is  reasonable  to 


think  that  one  does  this  in  a  way  analogous  to 
that  in  which  one  discerns  [spatial]  magni- 
[10]  tudes.  For  it  is  not  by  the  mind’s  reach¬ 
ing  out  towards  them,  as  some  say  a  visual  ray 
from  the  eye  does  [in  seeing],  that  one  thinks 
of  large  things  at  a  distance  in  space  (for  even 
if  they  are  not  there,  one  may  similarly  think 
them);  but  one  does  so  by  a  proportionate  men¬ 
tal  movement.  For  there  are  in  the  mind  the 
like  figures  and  movements  [i.e.  ‘like’  to  those 
of  objects  and  events].  Therefore,  when  one 
thinks  the  greater  objects,  in  what  will  his 
thinking  those  differ  from  his  thinking  the 
smaller?  [In  nothing,]  because  all  the  internal 
though  smaller  are  as  it  were  proportional  to 
the  external.  Now,  as  we  may  assume  within 
[75]  a  person  something  proportional  to  the 
forms  [of  distant  magnitudes],  so,  too,  we  may 
doubtless  assume  also  something  else  propor¬ 
tional  to  their  distances.  As,  therefore,  if  one 
has  [psychically]  the  movement  in  AB,  BE,  he 
constructs  in  thought  [i.e.  knows  objectively] 
TA,  since  Ar  and  TA  bear  equal  ratios  re¬ 
spectively  [to  AB  and  BE],  [so  he  who  recol¬ 
lects  also  proceeds].  Why  then  does  he  con¬ 
struct  TA  rather  than  ZH?  Is  it  not  because 
as  Ar  is  to  AB,  so  is  0  to  I?  These  move- 
[20]  ments  therefore  [sc.  in  AB,  BE,  and  in 
0  :  I]  he  has  simultaneously.  But  if  he  wishes 
to  construct  to  thought  ZH,  he  has  in  mind 


BE  in  like  manner  as  before  [when  construct¬ 
ing  FA],  but  now,  instead  of  [the  movements 
of  the  ratio]  0:  I,  he  has  in  mind  [those  of  the 
ratio]  K  :  A;  for  K  :  A  •  •  ZA  :  BA. 

When,  therefore,  the  ‘movement’  corre¬ 
sponding  to  the  object  and  that  corresponding 
to  its  time  concur,  then  one  actually  remem¬ 
bers.  If  one  supposes  [himself  to  move  in  these 
different  but  concurrent  ways]  without  really 
doing  so,  he  supposes  himself  to  remember. 


453b  CHAPTER  2  695 


[25]  For  one  may  be  mistaken,  and  think  that 
he  remembers  when  he  really  does  not.  But  it 
is  not  possible,  conversely,  that  when  one  ac¬ 
tually  remembers  he  should  not  suppose  him¬ 
self  to  remember,  but  should  remember  un¬ 
consciously.  For  remembering,  as  we  have  con¬ 
ceived  it,  essentially  implies  consciousness  of 
itself.  If,  however,  the  movement  correspond¬ 
ing  to  the  objective  fact  takes  place  without 
that  corresponding  to  the  time,  or,  if  the  latter 
takes  place  without  the  former,  one  does  not 
remember. 

[jo\  The  movement  answering  to  the  time  is 
of  two  kinds.  Sometimes  in  remembering  a 
fact  one  has  no  determinate  time-notion  of  it, 
453a  no  such  notion  as  that  e.g.  he  did  some¬ 
thing  or  other  on  the  day  before  yesterday; 
while  in  other  cases  he  has  a  determinate  no¬ 
tion  of  the  time.  Still,  even  though  one  does 
not  remember  with  actual  determination  of 
the  time,  he  genuinely  remembers,  none  the 
less.  Persons  are  wont  to  say  that  they  remem¬ 
ber  [something],  but  yet  do  not  know  when 
[it  occurred,  as  happens]  whenever  they  do 
not  know  determinately  the  exact  length  of 
time  implied  in  the  ‘when’. 

[5]  It  has  been  already  stated  that  those  who 
have  a  good  memory  are  not  identical  with 
those  who  are  quick  at  recollecting.  But  the  act 
of  recollecting  differs  from  that  of  remember¬ 
ing,  not  only  chronologically,  but  also  in  this, 
that  many  also  of  the  other  animals  [as  well  as 
man]  have  memory,  but,  of  all  that  we  are  ac¬ 
quainted  with,  none,  we  venture  to  say,  except 
man,  shares  in  the  faculty  of  recollection.  The 
cause  of  this  is  that  recollection  is,  as  it  were, 
[10]  a  mode  of  inference.  For  he  who  endeav¬ 
ours  to  recollect  infers  that  he  formerly  saw, 
or  heard,  or  had  some  such  experience,  and 
the  process  [by  which  he  succeeds  in  recollect¬ 
ing]  is,  as  it  were,  a  sort  of  investigation.  But 
to  investigate  in  this  way  belongs  naturally  to 
those  animals  alone  which  are  also  endowed 
with  the  faculty  of  deliberation;  [which  proves 
what  was  said  above],  for  deliberation  is  a 
form  of  inference. 

[75]  That  the  affection  is  corporeal,  i.e.  that 
recollection  is  a  searching  for  an  ‘image’  in  a 
corporeal  substrate,  is  proved  by  the  fact  that 
in  some  persons,  when,  despite  the  most  strenu¬ 
ous  application  of  thought,  they  have  been  un¬ 
able  to  recollect,  it  [viz.  the  avafjLvrj<ns  =  the  ef¬ 
fort  at  recollection]  excites  a  feeling  of  discom¬ 


fort,  which,  even  though  they  abandon  the  ef¬ 
fort  at  recollection,  persists  in  them  none  the 
less;  and  especially  in  persons  of  melancholic 
temperament.  For  these  are  most  powerfully 
moved  by  presentations.  The  reason  why  the 
[20]  effort  of  recollection  is  not  under  the  con¬ 
trol  of  their  will  is  that,  as  those  who  throw  a 
stone  cannot  stop  it  at  their  will  when  thrown, 
so  he  who  tries  to  recollect  and  ‘hunts’  [after 
an  idea]  sets  up  a  process  in  a  material  part, 
[that]  in  which  resides  the  affection.  Those 
who  have  moisture  around  that  part  which  is 
the  centre  of  sense-perception  suffer  most  dis¬ 
comfort  of  this  kind.  For  when  once  the  mois¬ 
ture  has  been  set  in  motion  it  is  not  easily 
[25]  brought  to  rest,  until  the  idea  which  was 
sought  for  has  again  presented  itself,  and  thus 
the  movement  has  found  a  straight  course.  For 
a  similar  reason  bursts  of  anger  or  fits  of  terror, 
when  once  they  have  excited  such  motions,  are 
not  at  once  allayed,  even  though  the  angry  or 
terrified  persons  [by  efforts  of  will]  set  up 
counter  motions,  but  the  passions  continue  to 
move  them  on,  in  the  same  direction  as  at  first, 
in  opposition  to  such  counter  motions.  The  af¬ 
fection  resembles  also  that  in  the  case  of  words, 
tunes,  or  sayings,  whenever  one  of  them  has 
become  inveterate  on  the  lips.  People  give  them 
up  and  resolve  to  avoid  them;  yet  again  and 
[^ojagain  they  find  themselves  humming  the 
forbidden  air,  or  using  the  prohibited  word. 
453b  Those  whose  upper  parts  are  abnormal¬ 
ly  large,  as  is  the  case  with  dwarfs,  have  ab¬ 
normally  weak  memory,  as  compared  with 
their  opposites,  because  of  the  great  weight 
which  they  have  resting  upon  the  organ  of  per¬ 
ception,  and  because  their  mnemonic  move¬ 
ments  are,  from  the  very  first,  not  able  to  keep 
[5]  true  to  a  course,  but  are  dispersed,  and  be¬ 
cause,  in  the  effort  at  recollection,  these  move¬ 
ments  do  not  easily  find  a  direct  onward  path. 
Infants  and  very  old  persons  have  bad  mem¬ 
ories,  owing  to  the  amount  of  movement  going 
on  within  them;  for  the  latter  are  in  process  of 
rapid  decay,  the  former  in  process  of  vigorous 
growth;  and  we  may  add  that  children,  until 
considerably  advanced  in  years,  are  dwarf-like 
in  their  bodily  structure.  Such  then  is  our 
theory  as  regards  memory  and  remembering — 
their  nature,  and  the  particular  organ  of  the 
[/o]  soul  by  which  animals  remember;  also  as 
regards  recollection,  its  formal  definition,  and 
the  manner  and  causes  of  its  performance. 


On  Sleep  and  Sleeplessness 


With  regard  to  sleep  and  waking,  we  must 
consider  what  they  are:  whether  they  are  pe¬ 
culiar  to  soul  or  to  body,  or  common  to  both; 
and  if  common,  to  what  part  of  soul  or  body 
they  appertain:  further,  from  what  cause  it 
arises  that  they  are  attributes  of  animals,  and 
[75]  whether  all  animals  share  in  them  both, 
or  some  partake  of  the  one  only,  others  of  the 
other  only,  or  some  partake  of  neither  and 
some  of  both. 

Further,  in  addition  to  these  questions,  we 
must  also  inquire  what  the  dream  is,  and  from 
what  cause  sleepers  sometimes  dream,  and 
sometimes  do  not;  or  whether  the  truth  is  that 
sleepers  always  dream  but  do  not  always  re- 
[20]  member  (their  dream);  and  if  this  oc¬ 
curs,  what  its  explanation  is. 

Again,  [we  must  inquire]  whether  it  is  pos¬ 
sible  or  not  to  foresee  the  future  (in  dreams), 
and  if  it  be  possible,  in  what  manner;  further, 
whether,  supposing  it  possible,  it  extends  only 
to  things  to  be  accomplished  by  the  agency  of 
Man,  or  to  those  also  of  which  the  cause  lies  in 
supra-human  agency,  and  which  result  from 
the  workings  of  Nature,  or  of  Spontaneity. 
[25]  First,  then,  this  much  is  clear,  that  wak¬ 
ing  and  sleep  appertain  to  the  same  part  of  an 
animal,  inasmuch  as  they  are  opposites,  and 
sleep  is  evidently  a  privation  of  waking.  For 
contraries,  in  natural  as  well  as  in  all  other 
matters,  are  seen  always  to  present  themselves 
in  the  same  subject,  and  to  be  affections  of  the 
[jo]  same:  examples  are — health  and  sickness, 
beauty  and  ugliness,  strength  and  weakness, 
sight  and  blindness,  hearing  and  deafness. 
This  is  also  clear  from  the  following  considera- 
454a  tions.  The  criterion  by  which  we  know 
the  waking  person  to  be  awake  is  identical 
with  that  by  which  we  know  the  sleeper  to  be 
asleep;  for  we  assume  that  one  who  is  exercis¬ 
ing  sense-perception  is  awake,  and  that  every 
one  who  is  awake  perceives  either  some  exter¬ 
nal  movement  or  else  some  movement  in  his 
own  consciousness.  If  waking,  then,  consists  in 
[5]  nothing  else  than  the  exercise  of  sense- 
perception,  the  inference  is  clear,  that  the  or¬ 
gan,  in  virtue  of  which  animals  perceive,  is 


that  by  which  they  wake,  when  they  are  awake, 
or  sleep,  when  they  are  asleep. 

But  since  the  exercise  of  sense-perception 
does  not  belong  to  soul  or  body  exclusively, 
then  (since  the  subject  of  actuality  is  in  every 
case  identical  with  that  of  potentiality,  and 
what  is  called  sense-perception,  as  actuality,  is 
a  movement  of  the  soul  through  the  body)  it  is 
[10]  clear  that  its  affection  is  not  an  affection 
of  soul  exclusively,  and  that  a  soulless  body  has 
not  the  potentiality  of  perception.  [Thus  sleep 
and  waking  are  not  attributes  of  pure  intelli¬ 
gence,  on  the  one  hand,  or  of  inanimate  bod¬ 
ies,  on  the  other.] 

Now,  whereas  we  have  already  elsewhere 
distinguished  what  are  called  the  parts  of  the 
soul,  and  whereas  the  nutrient  is,  in  all  living 
bodies,  capable  of  existing  without  the  other 
parts,  while  none  of  the  others  can  exist  with¬ 
out  the  nutrient;  it  is  clear  that  sleep  and  wak- 
[75]  ing  are  not  affections  of  such  living 
things  as  partake  only  of  growth  and  decay, 
e.g.  not  of  plants,  because  these  have  not  the 
faculty  of  sense-perception,  whether  or  not  this 
be  capable  of  separate  existence;  in  its  poten¬ 
tiality,  indeed,  and  in  its  relationships,  it  is 
separable. 

Likewise  it  is  clear  that  [of  those  which  ei¬ 
ther  sleep  or  wake]  there  is  no  animal  which 
is  always  awake  or  always  asleep,  but  that  both 
[20]  these  affections  belong  [alternately]  to  the 
same  animals.  For  if  there  be  an  animal  not 
endued  with  sense-perception,  it  is  impossible 
that  this  should  either  sleep  or  wake;  since 
both  these  are  affections  of  the  activity  of  the 
primary  faculty  of  sense-perception.  But  it  is 
equally  impossible  also  that  either  of  these 
two  affections  should  perpetually  attach  itself 
to  the  same  animal,  e.g.  that  some  species  of 
[25]  animal  should  be  always  asleep  or  al¬ 
ways  awake,  without  intermission;  for  all  or¬ 
gans  which  have  a  natural  function  must  lose 
power  when  they  work  beyond  the  natural 
time-limit  of  their  working  period;  for  instance, 
the  eyes  [must  lose  power]  from  [too-long 
continued]  seeing,  and  must  give  it  up;  and  so 
it  is  with  the  hand  and  every  other  member 
[jo]  which  has  a  function.  Now,  if  sense-per¬ 
ception  is  the  function  of  a  special  organ,  this 
also,  if  it  continues  perceiving  beyond  the  ap- 


455*  CHAPTERS  1-2  697 


pointed  time-limit  of  its  continuous  working 
period,  will  lose  its  power,  and  will  do  its 
work  no  longer.  Accordingly,  if  the  waking 
period  is  determined  by  this  fact,  that  in  it 
454b  sense-perception  is  free;  if  in  the  case  of 
some  contraries  one  of  the  two  must  be  pres¬ 
ent,  while  in  the  case  of  others  this  is  not  nec¬ 
essary;  if  waking  is  the  contrary  of  sleeping, 
and  one  of  these  two  must  be  present  to  every 
animal:  it  must  follow  that  the  state  of  sleep¬ 
ing  is  necessary.  Finally,  if  such  affection  is 
Sleep,  and  this  is  a  state  of  powerlessness  aris- 
[5]  ing  from  excess  of  waking,  and  excess  of 
waking  is  in  its  origin  sometimes  morbid, 
sometimes  not,  so  that  the  powerlessness  or 
dissolution  of  activity  will  be  so  or  not;  it  is  in¬ 
evitable  that  every  creature  which  wakes  must 
also  be  capable  of  sleeping,  since  it  is  impossi¬ 
ble  that  it  should  continue  actualizing  its  pow¬ 
ers  perpetually. 

So,  also,  it  is  impossible  for  any  animal  to 
continue  always  sleeping.  For  sleep  is  an  affec- 
[/o]  tion  of  the  organ  of  sense-perception — a 
sort  of  tie  or  inhibition  of  function  imposed  on 
it,  so  that  every  creature  that  sleeps  must  needs 
have  the  organ  of  sense-perception.  Now,  that 
alone  which  is  capable  of  sense-perception  in 
actuality  has  the  faculty  of  sense-perception; 
but  to  realize  this  faculty,  in  the  proper  and 
unqualified  sense,  is  impossible  while  one  is 
asleep.  All  sleep,  therefore,  must  be  susceptible 
of  awakening.  Accordingly,  almost  all  other 
[75]  animals  are  clearly  observed  to  partake 
in  sleep,  whether  they  are  aquatic,  aerial,  or 
terrestrial,  since  fishes  of  all  kinds,  and  mol¬ 
luscs,  as  well  as  all  others  which  have  eyes, 
have  been  seen  sleeping.  ‘Hard-eyed’  creatures 
and  insects  manifestly  assume  the  posture  of 
sleep;  but  the  sleep  of  all  such  creatures  is  of 
brief  duration,  so  that  often  it  might  well  baffle 
[20]  one’s  observation  to  decide  whether  they 
sleep  or  not.  Of  testaceous  animals,  on  the 
contrary,  no  direct  sensible  evidence  is  as  yet 
forthcoming  to  determine  whether  they  sleep, 
but  if  the  above  reasoning  be  convincing  to  any 
one,  he  who  follows  it  will  admit  this  [viz. 
that  they  do  so.] 

That,  therefore,  all  animals  sleep  may  be 
gathered  from  these  considerations.  For  an  ani¬ 
mal  is  defined  as  such  by  its  possessing  sense- 
[25]  perception;  and  we  assert  that  sleep  is,  in  a 
certain  way,  an  inhibition  of  function,  or,  as  it 
were,  a  tie,  imposed  on  sense-perception,  while 
its  loosening  or  remission  constitutes  the  being 
awake.  But  no  plant  can  partake  in  either  of 
these  affections,  for  without  sense-perception 


there  is  neither  sleeping  nor  waking.  But  crea¬ 
tures  which  have  sense-perception  have  like- 
[jo]  wise  the  feeling  of  pain  and  pleasure, 
while  those  which  have  these  have  appetite  as 
well;  but  plants  have  none  of  these  affections. 
A  mark  of  this  is  that  the  nutrient  part  does  its 
455*  own  work  better  when  (the  animal)  is 
asleep  than  when  it  is  awake.  Nutrition  and 
growth  are  then  especially  promoted,  a  fact 
which  implies  that  creatures  do  not  need  sense- 
perception  to  assist  these  processes. 

2 

We  must  now  proceed  to  inquire  into  the 
cause  why  one  sleeps  and  wakes,  and  into  the 
particular  nature  of  the  sense-perception,  or 
sense-perceptions,  if  there  be  several,  on  which 
[5]  these  affections  depend.  Since,  then,  some 
animals  possess  all  the  modes  of  sense-percep¬ 
tion,  and  some  not  all,  not,  for  example,  sight, 
while  all  possess  touch  and  taste,  except  such 
animals  as  are  imperfectly  developed,  a  class 
of  which  we  have  already  treated  in  our  work 
on  the  soul;  and  since  an  animal  when  asleep 
is  unable  to  exercise,  in  the  simple  sense,  any 
[/o]  particular  sensory  faculty  whatever,  it 
follows  that  in  the  state  called  sleep  the  same 
affection  must  extend  to  all  the  special  senses; 
because,  if  it  attaches  itself  to  one  of  them  but 
not  to  another,  then  an  animal  while  asleep 
may  perceive  with  the  latter;  but  this  is  im¬ 
possible. 

Now,  since  every  sense  has  something  pe¬ 
culiar,  and  also  something  common;  peculiar, 
as,  e.g.  seeing  is  to  the  sense  of  sight,  hearing 
[75]  to  the  auditory  sense,  and  so  on  with  the 
other  senses  severally;  while  all  are  accom¬ 
panied  by  a  common  power,  in  virtue  whereof 
a  person  perceives  that  he  sees  or  hears  (for, 
assuredly,  it  is  not  by  the  special  sense  of  sight 
that  one  sees  that  he  sees;  and  it  is  not  by  mere 
taste,  or  sight,  or  both  together  that  one  dis¬ 
cerns,  and  has  the  faculty  of  discerning,  that 
sweet  things  are  different  from  white  things, 
but  by  a  faculty  connected  in  common  with  all 
the  organs  of  sense;  for  there  is  one  sensory 
[20]  function,  and  the  controlling  sensory  fac¬ 
ulty  is  one,  though  differing  as  a  faculty  of 
perception  in  relation  to  each  genus  of  sensi- 
bles,  e.g.  sound  or  colour);  and  since  this 
[common  sensory  activity]  subsists  in  associa¬ 
tion  chiefly  with  the  faculty  of  touch  (for  this 
[touch]  can  exist  apart  from  all  the  other  or¬ 
gans  of  sense,  but  none  of  them  can  exist  apart 
from  it — a  subject  of  which  we  have  treated  in 
[25]  our  speculations  concerning  the  Soul);  it 


69 8  ON  SLEEP  AND 

is  therefore  evident  that  waking  and  sleeping 
are  an  affection  of  this  [common  and  controll- 
ing  organ  of  sense-perception].  This  explains 
why  they  belong  to  all  animals,  for  touch  [with 
which  this  common  organ  is  chiefly  connect¬ 
ed],  alone,  [is  common]  to  all  [animals]. 

For  if  sleeping  were  caused  by  the  special 
senses  having  each  and  all  undergone  some  af¬ 
fection,  it  would  be  strange  that  these  senses, 
for  which  it  is  neither  necessary  nor  in  a  man¬ 
ner  possible  to  realize  their  powers  simultan- 
[30]  eously,  should  necessarily  all  go  idle  and 
become  motionless  simultaneously.  For  the 
contrary  experience,  viz.  that  they  should  not 
go  to  rest  altogether,  would  have  been  more 
reasonably  anticipated.  But,  according  to  the 
explanation  just  given,  all  is  quite  clear  regard¬ 
ing  those  also.  For,  when  the  sense  organ 
which  controls  all  the  others,  and  to  which  all 
the  others  are  tributary,  has  been  in  some  way 
455b  affected,  that  these  others  should  be  all 
affected  at  the  same  time  is  inevitable,  where¬ 
as,  if  one  of  the  tributaries  becomes  powerless, 
that  the  controlling  organ  should  also  become 
powerless  need  in  no  wise  follow. 

It  is  indeed  evident  from  many  considera¬ 
tions  that  sleep  does  not  consist  in  the  mere 
fact  that  the  special  senses  do  not  function  or 
that  one  does  not  employ  them;  and  that  it 
does  not  consist  merely  in  an  inability  to  exer- 
[5]  cise  the  sense-perceptions;  for  such  is  what 
happens  in  cases  of  swooning.  A  swoon  means 
just  such  impotence  of  perception,  and  certain 
other  cases  of  unconsciousness  also  are  of  this 
nature.  Moreover,  persons  who  have  the  blood¬ 
vessels  in  the  neck  compressed  become  insensi¬ 
ble.  But  sleep  supervenes  when  such  incapacity 
of  exercise  has  neither  arisen  in  some  casual  or- 
an  of  sense,  nor  from  some  chance  cause,  but 
70]  when,  as  has  been  just  stated,  it  has  its 
seat  in  the  primary  organ  with  which  one  per¬ 
ceives  objects  in  general.  For  when  this  has  be¬ 
come  powerless  all  the  other  sensory  organs 
also  must  lack  power  to  perceive;  but  when 
one  of  them  has  become  powerless,  it  is  not 
necessary  for  this  also  to  lose  its  power. 

We  must  next  state  the  cause  to  which  it  is 
due,  and  its  quality  as  an  affection.  Now, 
since  there  are  several  types  of  cause  (for  we 
[75]  assign  equally  the  ‘final’,  the  ‘efficient’, 
the  ‘material’,  and  the  ‘formal’  as  causes),  in 
the  first  place,  then,  as  we  assert  that  Nature 
operates  for  the  sake  of  an  end,  and  that  this 
end  is  a  good;  and  that  to  every  creature  which 
is  endowed  by  nature  with  the  power  to  move, 
but  cannot  with  pleasure  to  itself  move  always 


SLEEPLESSNESS  456* 

and  continuously,  rest  is  necessary  and  benefi- 
[20]  cial;  and  since,  taught  by  experience,  men 
apply  to  sleep  this  metaphorical  term,  calling 
it  a  ‘rest’  [from  the  strain  of  movement  im¬ 
plied  in  sense-perception]:  we  conclude  that 
its  end  is  the  conservation  of  animals.  But  the 
waking  state  is  for  an  animal  its  highest  end, 
since  the  exercise  of  sense-perception  or  of 
thought  is  the  highest  end  for  all  beings  to 
which  either  of  these  appertains;  inasmuch  as 
these  are  best,  and  the  highest  end  is  what  is 
[25]  best:  whence  it  follows  that  sleep  belongs 
of  necessity  to  each  animal.  I  use  the  term  ‘ne¬ 
cessity’  in  its  conditional  sense,  meaning  that  if 
an  animal  is  to  exist  and  have  its  own  proper 
nature,  it  must  have  certain  endowments;  and, 
if  these  are  to  belong  to  it,  certain  others  like¬ 
wise  must  belong  to  it  [as  their  condition]. 

The  next  question  to  be  discussed  is  that  of 
the  kind  of  movement  or  action,  taking  place 
within  their  bodies,  from  which  the  affection 
[30]  of  waking  or  sleeping  arises  in  animals. 
Now,  we  must  assume  that  the  causes  of  this 
affection  in  all  other  animals  are  identical 
with,  or  analogous  to,  those  which  operate  in 
sanguineous  animals;  and  that  the  causes  op¬ 
erating  in  sanguineous  animals  generally  are 
identical  with  those  operating  in  man.  Hence 
we  must  consider  the  entire  subject  in  the  light 
of  these  instances  [afforded  by  sanguineous 
456a  animals,  especially  man].  Now,  it  has 
been  definitely  settled  already  in  another  work 
that  sense-perception  in  animals  originates  in 
the  same  part  of  the  organism  in  which  move¬ 
ment  originates.  This  locus  of  origination  is 
one  of  three  determinate  loci,  viz.  that  which 
lies  midway  between  the  head  and  the  abdo¬ 
men.  This  is  sanguineous  animals  is  the  region 
of  the  heart;  for  all  sanguineous  animals  have 
[5]  a  heart;  and  from  this  it  is  that  both  mo¬ 
tion  and  the  controlling  sense-perception  origi¬ 
nate.  Now,  as  regards  movement,  it  is  obvious 
that  that  of  breathing  and  of  the  cooling  proc¬ 
ess  generally  takes  its  rise  there;  and  it  is  with 
a  view  to  the  conservation  of  the  [due  amount 
of]  heat  in  this  part  that  nature  has  formed  as 
she  has  both  the  animals  which  respire,  and 
those  which  cool  themselves  by  moisture.  Of 
[70]  this  [cooling  process]  perse  we  shall  treat 
hereafter.  In  bloodless  animals,  and  insects, 
and  such  as  do  not  respire,  the  ‘connatural  spir¬ 
it’  is  seen  alternately  puffed  up  and  subsiding 
in  the  part  which  is  in  them  analogous  [to  the 
region  of  the  heart  in  sanguineous  animals]. 
This  is  clearly  observable  in  the  holoptera  [in¬ 
sects  with  undivided  wings]  as  wasps  and 


45  7a  CHAPTERS  2-3  699 


bees;  also  in  flies  and  such  creatures.  And  since 
[75]  to  move  anything,  or  do  anything,  is  im¬ 
possible  without  strength,  and  holding  the 
breath  produces  strength — in  creatures  which 
inhale,  the  holding  of  that  breath  which  comes 
from  without,  but,  in  creatures  which  do  not 
respire,  of  that  which  is  connatural  (which  ex¬ 
plains  why  winged  insects  of  the  class  holop- 
tera,  when  they  move,  are  perceived  to  make  a 
humming  noise,  due  to  the  friction  of  the  con¬ 
natural  spirit  colliding  with  the  diaphragm); 
[20]  and  since  movement  is,  in  every  animal, 
attended  with  some  sense-perception,  either  in¬ 
ternal  or  external,  in  the  primary  organ  of 
sense,  [we  conclude]  accordingly  that  if  sleep¬ 
ing  and  waking  are  affections  of  this  organ, 
the  place  in  which,  or  the  organ  in  which, 
[25]  sleep  and  waking  originate,  is  self-evident 
[being  that  in  which  movement  and  sense-per¬ 
ception  originate,  viz.  the  heart]. 

Some  persons  move  in  their  sleep,  and  per¬ 
form  many  acts  like  waking  acts,  but  not  with¬ 
out  a  phantasm  or  an  exercise  of  sense-percep¬ 
tion;  for  a  dream  is  in  a  certain  way  a  sense- 
impression.  But  of  them  we  have  to  speak  later 
on.  Why  it  is  that  persons  when  aroused  re¬ 
member  their  dreams,  but  do  not  remember 
these  acts  which  are  like  waking  acts,  has  been 
already  explained  in  the  work  ‘Of  Problems’. 

3 

[jo]  The  point  for  consideration  next  in  order 
to  the  preceding  is: — What  are  the  processes 
in  which  the  affection  of  waking  and  sleeping 
originates,  and  whence  do  they  arise?  Now, 
since  it  is  when  it  has  sense-perception  that  an 
animal  must  first  ta\e  food  and  receive 
growth,  and  in  all  cases  food  in  its  ultimate 
[55]  form  is,  in  sanguineous  animals,  the  nat¬ 
ural  substance  blood,  or,  in  bloodless  animals, 
that  which  is  analogous  to  this;  and  since  the 
456b  veins  are  the  place  of  the  blood,  while 
the  origin  of  these  is  the  heart — an  assertion 
which  is  proved  by  anatomy — it  is  manifest 
that,  when  the  external  nutriment  enters  the 
parts  fitted  for  its  reception,  the  evaporation 
arising  from  it  enters  into  the  veins,  and  there, 
undergoing  a  change,  is  converted  into  blood, 
[5]  and  makes  its  way  to  their  source  [the 
heart].  We  have  treated  of  all  this  when  dis¬ 
cussing  the  subject  of  nutrition,  but  must  here 
recapitulate  what  was  there  said,  in  order  that 
we  may  obtain  a  scientific  view  of  the  begin¬ 
nings  of  the  process,  and  come  to  know  what 
exactly  happens  to  the  primary  organ  of  sense- 
perception  to  account  for  the  occurrence  of 


waking  and  sleep.  For  sleep,  as  has  been 
[70]  shown,  is  not  any  given  impotence  of  the 
perceptive  faculty;  for  unconsciousness,  a  cer¬ 
tain  form  of  asphyxia,  and  swooning,  all  pro¬ 
duce  such  impotence.  Moreover  it  is  an  estab¬ 
lished  fact  that  some  persons  in  a  profound 
trance  have  still  had  the  imaginative  faculty  in 
play.  This  last  point,  indeed,  gives  rise  to  a  dif¬ 
ficulty;  for  if  it  is  conceivable  that  one  who 
had  swooned  should  in  this  state  fall  asleep, 
the  phantasm  also  which  then  presented  itself 
to  his  mind  might  be  regarded  as  a  dream. 
[75]  Persons,  too,  who  have  fallen  into  a  deep 
trance,  and  have  come  to  be  regarded  as  dead, 
say  many  things  while  in  this  condition.  The 
same  view,  however,  is  to  be  taken  of  all  these 
cases,  [i.e.  that  they  are  not  cases  of  sleeping 
or  dreaming]. 

As  we  observed  above,  sleep  is  not  co-exten- 
sive  with  any  and  every  impotence  of  the  per¬ 
ceptive  faculty,  but  this  affection  is  one  which 
arises  from  the  evaporation  attendant  upon  the 
[20]  process  of  nutrition.  The  matter  evapo¬ 
rated  must  be  driven  onwards  to  a  certain 
point,  then  turn  back,  and  change  its  current 
to  and  fro,  like  a  tide-race  in  a  narrow  strait. 
Now,  in  every  animal  the  hot  naturally  tends 
to  move  [and  carry  other  things]  upwards,  but 
when  it  has  reached  the  parts  above  [becoming 
cool],1  it  turns  back  again,  and  moves  down¬ 
wards  in  a  mass.  This  explains  why  fits  of 
drowsiness  are  especially  apt  to  come  on  after 
meals;  for  the  matter,  both  the  liquid  and  the 
[25]  corporeal,  which  is  borne  upwards  in  a 
mass,  is  then  of  considerable  quantity.  When, 
therefore,  this  comes  to  a  stand  it  weighs  a  per¬ 
son  down  and  causes  him  to  nod,  but  when  it 
has  actually  sunk  downwards,  and  by  its  re¬ 
turn  has  repulsed  the  hot,  sleep  comes  on,  and 
the  animal  so  affected  is  presently  asleep.  A 
confirmation  of  this  appears  from  considering 
[jo]  the  things  which  induce  sleep;  they  all, 
whether  potable  or  edible,  for  instance  poppy, 
mandragora,  wine,  darnel,  produce  a  heaviness 
in  the  head;  and  persons  borne  down  [by 
sleepiness]  and  nodding  [drowsily]  all  seem 
affected  in  this  way,  i.e.  they  are  unable  to  lift 
up  the  head  or  the  eye-lids.  And  it  is  after 
meals  especially  that  sleep  comes  on  like  this, 
for  the  evaporation  from  the  foods  eaten  is 
then  copious.  It  also  follows  certain  forms  of 
fatigue;  for  fatigue  operates  as  a  solvent,  and 
[J5]  the  dissolved  matter  acts,  if  not  cold,  like 
45 7a  food  prior  to  digestion.  Moreover,  some 
kinds  of  illness  have  this  same  effect;  those 

1  See  457b  30. 


700  ON  SLEEP  AND 

arising  from  moist  and  hot  secretions,  as  hap¬ 
pens  with  fever-patients  and  in  cases  of  leth¬ 
argy.  Extreme  youth  also  has  this  effect;  in¬ 
fants,  for  example,  sleep  a  great  deal,  because 
of  the  food  being  all  borne  upwards — a  mark 
[5]  whereof  appears  in  the  disproportionately 
large  size  of  the  upper  parts  compared  with  the 
lower  during  infancy,  which  is  due  to  the  fact 
that  growth  predominates  in  the  direction  of 
the  former.  Hence  also  they  are  subject  to  epi¬ 
leptic  seizures;  for  sleep  is  like  epilepsy,  and, 
[/o]  in  a  sense,  actually  is  a  seizure  of  this  sort. 
Accordingly,  the  beginning  of  this  malady 
takes  place  with  many  during  sleep,  and  their 
subsequent  habitual  seizures  occur  in  sleep,  not 
in  waking  hours.  For  when  the  spirit  [evapo¬ 
ration]  moves  upwards  in  a  volume,  on  its  re¬ 
turn  downwards  it  distends  the  veins,  and 
forcibly  compresses  the  passage  through  which 
respiration  is  effected.  This  explains  why  wines 
are  not  good  for  infants  or  for  wet  nurses  (for 
[75]  it  makes  no  difference,  doubtless,  whether 
the  infants  themselves,  or  their  nurses,  drink 
them),  but  such  persons  should  drink  them  [if 
at  all]  diluted  with  water  and  in  small  quan¬ 
tity.  For  wine  is  spirituous,  and  of  all  wines 
the  dark  more  so  than  any  other.  The  upper 
parts,  in  infants,  are  so  filled  with  nutriment 
that  within  five  months  [after  birth]  they  do 
not  even  turn  the  neck  [sc.  to  raise  the  head]; 
for  in  them,  as  in  persons  deeply  intoxicated, 
[20]  there  is  ever  a  large  quantity  of  moisture 
ascending.  It  is  reasonable,  too,  to  think  that 
this  affection  is  the  cause  of  the  embryo's  re¬ 
maining  at  rest  in  the  womb  at  first.  Also,  as  a 
general  rule,  persons  whose  veins  are  incon¬ 
spicuous,  as  well  as  those  who  are  dwarf-like, 
or  have  abnormally  large  heads,  are  addicted 
to  sleep.  For  in  the  former  the  veins  are  nar¬ 
row,  so  that  it  is  not  easy  for  the  moisture  to 
flow  down  through  them;  while  in  the  case  of 
dwarfs  and  those  whose  heads  are  abnormally 
[25]  large,  the  impetus  of  the  evaporation  up¬ 
wards  is  excessive.  Those  [on  the  contrary] 
whose  veins  are  large  are,  thanks  to  the  easy 
flow  through  the  veins,  not  addicted  to  sleep, 
unless,  indeed,  they  labour  under  some  other 
affection  which  counteracts  [this  easy  flow]. 
Nor  are  the  ‘atrabilious'  addicted  to  sleep,  for 
in  them  the  inward  region  is  cooled  so  that  the 
quantity  of  evaporation  in  their  case  is  not 
great.  For  this  reason  they  have  large  appe¬ 
tites,  though  spare  and  lean;  for  their  bodily 
[jo]  condition  is  as  if  they  derived  no  benefit 
from  what  they  eat.  The  dark  bile,  too,  being 
itself  naturally  cold,  cools  also  the  nutrient 


SLEEPLESSNESS  45 7b 

tract,  and  the  other  parts  wheresoever  such  se¬ 
cretion  [bile]  is  potentially  present  [i.e.  tends 
to  be  formed]. 

457b  Hence  it  is  plain  from  what  has  been 
said  that  sleep  is  a  sort  of  concentration,  or  nat¬ 
ural  recoil,  of  the  hot  matter  inwards  [towards 
its  centre],  due  to  the  cause  above  mentioned. 
Hence  restless  movement  is  a  marked  feature 
in  the  case  of  a  person  when  drowsy.  But 
where  it  [the  heat  in  the  upper  and  outer 
parts]  begins  to  fail,  he  grows  cool,  and  owing 
to  this  cooling  process  his  eye-lids  droop.  Ac- 
[5]  cordingly  [in  sleep]  the  upper  and  out¬ 
ward  parts  are  cool,  but  the  inward  and  lower, 
i.e.  the  parts  at  the  feet  and  in  the  interior  of 
the  body,  are  hot. 

Yet  one  might  found  a  difficulty  on  the  facts 
that  sleep  is  most  oppressive  in  its  onset  after 
meals,  and  that  wine,  and  other  such  things, 
though  they  possess  heating  properties,  are 
productive  of  sleep,  for  it  is  not  probable  that 
sleep  should  be  a  process  of  cooling  while  the 
[/o]  things  that  cause  sleeping  are  themselves 
hot.  Is  the  explanation  of  this,  then,  to  be  found 
in  the  fact  that,  as  the  stomach  when  empty  is 
hot,  while  replenishment  cools  it  by  the  move¬ 
ment  it  occasions,  so  the  passages  and  tracts  in 
the  head  are  cooled  as  the  ‘evaporation'  ascends 
thither?  Or,  as  those  who  have  hot  water 
[75]  poured  on  them  feel  a  sudden  shiver  of 
cold,  just  so  in  the  case  before  us,  may  it  be 
that,  when  the  hot  substance  ascends,  the  cold 
rallying  to  meet  it  cools  [the  aforesaid  parts], 
deprives  their  native  heat  of  all  its  power,  and 
compels  it  to  retire?  Moreover,  when  much 
food  is  taken,  which  [i.e.  the  nutrient  evapo¬ 
ration  from  which]  the  hot  substance  carries 
upwards,  this  latter,  like  a  fire  when  fresh 
logs  are  laid  upon  it,  is  itself  cooled,  until  the 
food  has  been  digested. 

[20]  For,  as  has  been  observed  elsewhere,1 
sleep  comes  on  when  the  corporeal  element  [in 
the  ‘evaporation']  is  conveyed  upwards  by  the 
hot,  along  the  veins,  to  the  head.  But  when 
that  which  has  been  thus  carried  up  can  no 
longer  ascend,  but  is  too  great  in  quantity  [to 
do  so],  it  forces  the  hot  back  again  and  flows 
downwards.  Hence  it  is  that  men  sink  down 
[as  they  do  in  sleep]  when  the  heat  which 
tends  to  keep  them  erect  (man  alone,  among 
[25]  animals,  being  naturally  erect)  is  with¬ 
drawn;  and  this,  when  it  befalls  them,  causes 
unconsciousness,  and  afterwards  phantasy. 

Or  are  the  solutions  thus  proposed  barely 
conceivable  accounts  of  the  refrigeration 

1  On  the  Farts  of  Animals ,  u,  653®  10. 


458*  CHAPTER  3  701 


which  takes  place,  while,  as  a  matter  of  fact, 
the  region  of  the  brain  is,  as  stated  elsewhere, 
the  main  determinant  of  the  matter?  For  the 
[jo]  brain,  or  in  creatures  without  a  brain  that 
which  corresponds  to  it,  is  of  all  parts  of  the 
body  the  coolest.  Therefore,  as  moisture  turned 
into  vapour  by  the  sun’s  heat  is,  when  it  has 
ascended  to  the  upper  regions,  cooled  by  the 
coldness  of  the  latter,  and  becoming  con¬ 
densed,  is  carried  downwards,  and  turned  into 
458*  water  once  more;  just  so  the  excrementi- 
tious  evaporation,  when  carried  up  by  the  heat 
to  the  region  of  the  brain,  is  condensed  into  a 
‘phlegm’  (which  explains  why  catarrhs  are 
seen  to  proceed  from  the  head);  while  that 
evaporation  which  is  nutrient  and  not  un- 
[5]  wholesome,  becoming  condensed,  descends 
and  cools  the  hot.  The  tenuity  or  narrowness 
of  the  veins  about  the  brain  itself  contributes 
to  its  being  kept  cool,  and  to  its  not  readily  ad¬ 
mitting  the  evaporation.  This,  then,  is  a  suffi¬ 
cient  explanation  of  the  cooling  which  takes 
place,  despite  the  fact  that  the  evaporation  is 
exceedingly  hot. 

[jo]  A  person  awakes  from  sleep  when  diges¬ 
tion  is  completed:  when  the  heat,  which  had 
been  previously  forced  together  in  large  quan¬ 
tity  within  a  small  compass  from  out  the  sur¬ 
rounding  part,  has  once  more  prevailed,  and 
when  a  separation  has  been  effected  between 
the  more  corporeal  and  the  purer  blood.  The 
finest  and  purest  blood  is  that  contained  in  the 
head,  while  the  thickest  and  most  turbid  is 


that  in  the  lower  parts.  The  source  of  all  the 
[75]  blood  is,  as  has  been  stated  both  here  and 
elsewhere,  the  heart.  Now  of  the  chambers  in 
the  heart  the  central  communicates  with  each 
of  the  two  others.  Each  of  the  latter  again  acts 
as  receiver  from  each,  respectively,  of  the  two 
vessels,  called  the  ‘great’  and  the  ‘aorta’.  It  is 
in  the  central  chamber  that  the  [above-men- 
[20]  tioned]  separation  takes  place.  To  go  into 
these  matters  in  detail  would,  however,  be 
more  properly  the  business  of  a  different  trea¬ 
tise  from  the  present.  Owing  to  the  fact  that 
the  blood  formed  after  the  assimilation  of  food 
is  especially  in  need  of  separation,  sleep  [then 
especially]  occurs  [and  lasts]  until  the  purest 
part  of  this  blood  has  been  separated  off  into 
the  upper  parts  of  the  body,  and  the  most  tur¬ 
bid  into  the  lower  parts.  When  this  has  taken 
place  animals  awake  from  sleep,  being  released 
from  the  heaviness  consequent  on  taking  food. 
[25]  We  have  now  stated  the  cause  of  sleep¬ 
ing,  viz.  that  it  consists  in  the  recoil  by  the 
corporeal  element,  upborne  by  the  connatural 
heat,  in  a  mass  upon  the  primary  sense-organ; 
we  have  also  stated  what  sleep  is,  having  shown 
that  it  is  a  seizure  of  the  primary  sense-organ, 
rendering  it  unable  to  actualize  its  powers; 
[30]  arising  of  necessity  (for  it  is  impossible 
for  an  animal  to  exist  if  the  conditions  which 
render  it  an  animal  be  not  fulfilled),  i.e.  for 
the  sake  of  its  conservation;  since  remission  of 
movement  tends  to  the  conservation  of  ani¬ 
mals. 


On  Dreams 


458b  We  must,  in  the  next  place,  investigate 
the  subject  of  the  dream,  and  first  inquire  to 
which  of  the  faculties  of  the  soul  it  presents 
itself,  i.e.  whether  the  affection  is  one  which 
pertains  to  the  faculty  of  intelligence  or  to  that 
of  sense-perception;  for  these  are  the  only  fac¬ 
ulties  within  us  by  which  we  acquire  knowl¬ 
edge. 

If,  then,  the  exercise  of  the  faculty  of  sight 
is  actual  seeing,  that  of  the  auditory  faculty, 
hearing,  and,  in  general  that  of  the  faculty  of 
sense-perception,  perceiving;  and  if  there  are 
[5]  some  perceptions  common  to  the  senses, 
such  as  figure,  magnitude,  motion,  &c.,  while 
there  are  others,  as  colour,  sound,  taste,  pecu¬ 
liar  [each  to  its  own  sense] ;  and  further,  if  all 
creatures,  when  the  eyes  are  closed  in  sleep, 
are  unable  to  see,  and  the  analogous  statement 
is  true  of  the  other  senses,  so  that  manifestly 
we  perceive  nothing  when  asleep;  we  may  con¬ 
clude  that  it  is  not  by  sense-perception  we  per¬ 
ceive  a  dream. 

But  neither  is  it  by  opinion  that  we  do  so. 
[/o]  For  [in  dreams]  we  not  only  assert,  e.g. 
that  some  object  approaching  is  a  man  or  a 
horse  [which  would  be  an  exercise  of  opinion], 
but  that  the  object  is  white  or  beautiful,  points 
on  which  opinion  without  sense-perception  as¬ 
serts  nothing  either  truly  or  falsely.  It  is,  how¬ 
ever,  a  fact  that  the  soul  makes  such  assertions 
in  sleep.  We  seem  to  see  equally  well  that  the 
approaching  figure  is  a  man,  and  that  it  is 
[75]  white.  [In  dreams],  too,  we  think  some¬ 
thing  else,  over  and  above  the  dream  presen¬ 
tation,  just  as  we  do  in  waking  moments  when 
we  perceive  something;  for  we  often  also  rea¬ 
son  about  that  which  we  perceive.  So,  too,  in 
sleep  we  sometimes  have  thoughts  other  than 
the  mere  phantasms  immediately  before  our 
minds.  This  would  be  manifest  to  any  one 
who  should  attend  and  try,  immediately  on 
arising  from  sleep,  to  remember  [his  dreaming 
[20]  experiences].  There  are  cases  of  persons 
who  have  seen  such  dreams,  those,  for  exam¬ 
ple,  who  believe  themselves  to  be  mentally  ar¬ 
ranging  a  given  list  of  subjects  according  to  the 
mnemonic  rule.  They  frequently  find  them¬ 
selves  engaged  in  something  else  besides  the 


dream,  viz.  in  setting  a  phantasm  which  they 
envisage  into  its  mnemonic  position.  Hence  it 
is  plain  that  not  every  ‘phantasm’  in  sleep  is 
[25]  a  mere  dream-image,  and  that  the  further 
thinking  which  we  perform  then  is  due  to  an 
excercise  of  the  faculty  of  opinion. 

So  much  at  least  is  plain  on  all  these  points, 
viz.  that  the  faculty  by  which,  in  waking 
hours,  we  are  subject  to  illusion  when  affected 
by  disease,  is  identical  with  that  which  pro¬ 
duces  illusory  effects  in  sleep.  So,  even  when 
persons  are  in  excellent  health,  and  know  the 
facts  of  the  case  perfectly  well,  the  sun,  never¬ 
theless,  appears  to  them  to  be  only  a  foot  wide. 
Now,  whether  the  presentative  faculty  of  the 
[jo]  soul  be  identical  with,  or  different  from, 
the  faculty  of  sense-perception,  in  either  case 
the  illusion  does  not  occur  without  our  actual¬ 
ly  seeing  or  [otherwise]  perceiving  something. 
Even  to  see  wrongly  or  to  hear  wrongly  can 
happen  only  to  one  who  sees  or  hears  some¬ 
thing  real,  though  not  exactly  what  he  sup¬ 
poses.  But  we  have  assumed  that  in  sleep  one 
459a  neither  sees,  nor  hears,  nor  exercises  any 
sense  whatever.  Perhaps  we  may  regard  it  as 
true  that  the  dreamer  sees  nothing,  yet  as  false 
that  his  faculty  of  sense-perception  is  unaffect¬ 
ed,  the  fact  being  that  the  sense  of  seeing  and 
the  other  senses  may  possibly  be  then  in  a  cer¬ 
tain  way  affected,  while  each  of  these  affec¬ 
tions,  as  duly  as  when  he  is  awake,  gives  its 
impulse  in  a  certain  manner  to  his  [primary] 
[5]  faculty  of  sense,  though  not  in  precisely 
the  same  manner  as  when  he  is  awake.  Some¬ 
times,  too,  opinion  says  [to  dreamers]  just  as 
to  those  who  are  awake,  that  the  object  seen  is 
an  illusion;  at  other  times  it  is  inhibited,  and 
becomes  a  mere  follower  of  the  phantasm. 

It  is  plain  therefore  that  this  affection,  which 
we  name  ‘dreaming’,  is  no  mere  exercise  of 
opinion  or  intelligence,  but  yet  is  not  an  af- 
[/o]  fection  of  the  faculty  of  perception  in  the 
simple  sense.  If  it  were  the  latter  it  would  be 
possible  [when  asleep]  to  hear  and  see  in  the 
simple  sense. 

How  then,  and  in  what  manner,  it  takes 
place,  is  what  we  have  to  examine.  Let  us  as¬ 
sume,  what  is  indeed  clear  enough,  that  the  af¬ 
fection  [of  dreaming]  pertains  to  sense-per¬ 
ception  as  surely  as  sleep  itself  does.  For  sleep 


460*  CHAPTERS  1-2  703 


does  not  pertain  to  one  organ  in  animals  and 
dreaming  to  another;  both  pertain  to*  the  same 
organ. 

[75]  But  since  we  have,  in  our  work  On  the 
Soul,1  treated  of  presentation,  and  the  faculty 
of  presentation  is  identical  with  that  of  sense- 
perception,  though  the  essential  notion  of  a 
faculty  of  presentation  is  different  from  that  of 
a  faculty  of  sense-perception;  and  since  pre¬ 
sentation  is  the  movement  set  up  by  a  sensory 
faculty  when  actually  discharging  its  function, 
while  a  dream  appears  to  be  a  presentation 
[20]  (for  a  presentation  which  occurs  in  sleep 
— whether  simply  or  in  some  particular  way 
— is  what  we  call  a  dream):  it  manifestly  fol¬ 
lows  that  dreaming  is  an  activity  of  the  faculty 
of  sense-perception,  but  belongs  to  this  faculty 
qua  presentative. 

2 

We  can  best  obtain  a  scientific  view  of  the 
nature  of  the  dream  and  the  manner  in  which 
it  originates  by  regarding  it  in  the  light  of  the 
[25]  circumstances  attending  sleep.  The  ob¬ 
jects  of  sense-perception  corresponding  to  each 
sensory  organ  produce  sense-perception  in  us, 
and  the  affection  due  to  their  operation  is  pres¬ 
ent  in  the  organs  of  sense  not  only  when  the 
perceptions  are  actualized,  but  even  when  they 
have  departed. 

What  happens  in  these  cases  may  be  com¬ 
pared  with  what  happens  in  the  case  of  pro¬ 
jectiles  moving  in  space.  For  in  the  case  of 
these  the  movement  continues  even  when  that 
[30]  which  set  up  the  movement  is  no  longer 
in  contact  [with  the  things  that  are  moved]. 
For  that  which  set  them  in  motion  moves  a 
certain  portion  of  air,  and  this,  in  turn,  being 
moved  excites  motion  in  another  portion;  and 
so,  accordingly,  it  is  in  this  way  that  [the  bod¬ 
ies],  whether  in  air  or  in  liquids,  continue 
moving,  until  they  come  to  a  standstill. 

459b  This  we  must  likewise  assume  to  hap¬ 
pen  in  the  case  of  qualitative  change;  for  that 
part  which  [for  example]  has  been  heated  by 
something  hot,  heats  [in  turn]  the  part  next  to 
it,  and  this  propagates  the  affection  continuous¬ 
ly  onwards  until  the  process  has  come  round  to 
its  point  of  origination.  This  must  also  happen 
[5]  in  the  organ  wherein  the  exercise  of  sense- 
perception  takes  place,  since  sense-perception, 
as  realized  in  actual  perceiving,  is  a  mode  of 
qualitative  change.  This  explains  why  the  af¬ 
fection  continues  in  the  sensory  organs,  both 
in  their  deeper  and  in  their  more  superficial 
1 427b  27-429“  9. 


parts,  not  merely  while  they  are  actually  en¬ 
gaged  in  perceiving,  but  even  after  they  have 
ceased  to  do  so.  That  they  do  this,  indeed,  is 
obvious  in  cases  where  we  continue  for  some 
time  engaged  in  a  particular  form  of  percep¬ 
tion,  for  then,  when  we  shift  the  scene  of  our 
perceptive  activity,  the  previous  affection  re¬ 
mains;  for  instance,  when  we  have  turned  our 
gaze  from  sunlight  into  darkness.  For  the  re¬ 
sult  of  this  is  that  one  sees  nothing,  owing  to  the 
[/o] motion  excited  by  the  light  still  subsisting 
in  our  eyes.  Also,  when  we  have  looked  steadily 
for  a  long  while  at  one  colour,  e.g.  at  white 
or  green,  that  to  which  we  next  transfer  our 
gaze  appears  to  be  of  the  same  colour.  Again  if, 
after  having  looked  at  the  sun  or  some  other 
brilliant  object,  we  close  the  eyes,  then,  if  we 
[75]  watch  carefully,  it  appears  in  a  right  line 
with  the  direction  of  vision  (whatever  this 
may  be),  at  first  in  its  own  colour;  then  it 
changes  to  crimson,  next  to  purple,  until  it  be¬ 
comes  black  and  disappears.  And  also  when 
persons  turn  away  from  looking  at  objects  in 
motion,  e.g.  rivers,  and  especially  those  which 
flow  very  rapidly,  they  find  that  the  visual 
[20]  stimulations  still  present  themselves,  for 
the  things  really  at  rest  are  then  seen  moving: 
persons  become  very  deaf  after  hearing  loud 
noises,  and  after  smelling  very  strong  odours 
their  power  of  smelling  is  impaired;  and 
similarly  in  other  cases.  These  phenomena 
manifestly  take  place  in  the  way  above  de¬ 
scribed. 

That  the  sensory  organs  are  acutely  sensitive 
to  even  a  slight  qualitative  difference  [in  their 
objects]  is  shown  by  what  happens  in  the  case 
[25]  of  mirrors;  a  subject  to  which,  even  tak¬ 
ing  it  independently,  one  might  devote  close 
consideration  and  inquiry.  At  the  same  time 
it  becomes  plain  from  them  that  as  the  eye  [in 
seeing]  is  affected  [by  the  object  seen],  so  also 
it  produces  a  certain  effect  upon  it.  ‘If  a  wom¬ 
an  chances  during  her  menstrual  period  to 
look  into  a  highly  polished  mirror,  the  surface 
[30]  of  it  will  grow  cloudy  with  a  blood-col¬ 
oured  haze.  It  is  very  hard  to  remove  this  stain 
from  a  new  mirror,  but  easier  to  remove  from 
460*  an  older  mirror.  As  we  have  said  before, 
the  cause  of  this  lies  in  the  fact  that  in  the  act 
of  sight  there  occurs  not  only  a  passion  in  the 
sense  organ  acted  on  by  the  polished  surface, 
but  the  organ,  as  an  agent,  also  produces  an  ac¬ 
tion,  as  is  proper  to  a  brilliant  object.  For  sight 
is  the  property  of  an  organ  possessing  brilliance 
and  colour.  The  eyes,  therefore,  have  their 
[5]  proper  action  as  have  other  parts  of  the 


704 

body.  Because  it  is  natural  to  the  eye  to  be  filled 
with  blood-vessels,  a  woman’s  eyes,  during  the 
period  of  menstrual  flux  and  inflammation,  will 
undergo  a  change,  although  her  husband  will 
not  note  this  since  his  seed  is  of  the  same  na¬ 
ture  as  that  of  his  wife.  The  surrounding  at¬ 
mosphere,  through  which  operates  the  action 
[70]  of  sight,  and  which  surrounds  the  mirror 
also,  will  undergo  a  change  of  the  same  sort 
that  occurred  shortly  before  in  the  woman’s 
eyes,  and  hence  the  surface  of  the  mirror  is 
likewise  affected.  And  as  in  the  case  of  a  gar¬ 
ment.  the  cleaner  it  is  the  more  quickly  it  is 
soiled,  so  the  same  holds  true  in  the  case  of  the 
mirror.  For  anything  that  is  clean  will  show 
quite  clearly  a  stain  that  it  chances  to  receive, 
and  the  cleanest  object  shows  up  even  the 
slightest  stain.  A  bronze  mirror,  because  of  its 
shininess,  is  especially  sensitive  to  any  sort  of 
[75]  contact  (the  movement  of  the  surround¬ 
ing  air  acts  upon  it  like  a  rubbing  or  pressing 
or  wiping);  on  that  account,  therefore,  what  is 
clean  will  show  up  clearly  the  slightest  touch 
on  its  surface.  It  is  hard  to  cleanse  smudges  off 
new  mirrors  because  the  stain  penetrates  deep- 
[20]  ly  and  is  suffused  to  all  parts;  it  pene¬ 
trates  deeply  because  the  mirror  is  not  a  dense 
medium,  and  is  suffused  widely  because  of  the 
smoothness  of  the  object.  On  the  other  hand, 
in  the  case  of  old  mirrors,  stains  do  not  remain 
because  they  do  not  penetrate  deeply,  but  only 
smudge  the  surface.’ 

From  this  therefore  it  is  plain  that  stimula¬ 
tory  motion  is  set  up  even  by  slight  differences, 
and  that  sense-perception  is  quick  to  respond 
to  it;  and  further  that  the  organ  which  per- 
[25]  ceives  colour  is  not  only  affected  by  its  ob¬ 
ject,  but  also  reacts  upon  it.  Further  evidence 
to  the  same  point  is  afforded  by  what  takes 
place  in  wines,  and  in  the  manufacture  of  un¬ 
guents.  For  both  oil,  when  prepared,  and  wine 
become  rapidly  infected  by  the  odours  of  the 
[jo]  things  near  them;  they  not  only  acquire 
the  odours  of  the  things  thrown  into  or  mixed 
with  them,  but  also  those  of  the  things  which 
are  placed,  or  which  grow,  near  the  vessels 
containing  them. 

In  order  to  answer  our  original  question,  let 
460b  us  now,  therefore,  assume  one  proposi¬ 
tion,  which  is  clear  from  what  precedes,  viz. 
that  even  when  the  external  object  of  percep¬ 
tion  has  departed,  the  impressions  it  has  made 
persist,  and  are  themselves  objects  of  percep¬ 
tion;  and  [let  us  assume],  besides,  that  we  are 
easily  deceived  respecting  the  operations  of 
sense-perception  when  we  are  excited  by  emo- 


460b 

tions,  and  different  persons  according  to  their 
different  emotions;  for  example,  the  coward 
[5]  when  excited  by  fear,  the  amorous  person 
by  amorous  desire;  so  that,  with  but  little  re¬ 
semblance  to  go  upon,  the  former  thinks  he 
sees  his  foes  approaching,  the  latter,  that  he 
sees  the  object  of  his  desire;  and  the  more  deep¬ 
ly  one  is  under  the  influence  of  the  emotion, 
the  less  similarity  is  required  to  give  rise  to 
these  illusory  impressions.  Thus  too,  both  in 
fits  of  anger,  and  also  in  all  states  of  appetite, 
[/o]  all  men  become  easily  deceived,  and  more 
so  the  more  their  emotions  are  excited.  This  is 
the  reason  too  why  persons  in  the  delirium  of 
fever  sometimes  think  they  see  animals  on 
their  chamber  walls,  an  illusion  arising  from 
the  faint  resemblance  to  animals  of  the  mark¬ 
ings  thereon  when  put  together  in  patterns; 
and  this  sometimes  corresponds  with  the  emo¬ 
tional  states  of  the  sufferers,  in  such  a  way  that, 
if  the  latter  be  not  very  ill,  they  know  well 
enough  that  it  is  an  illusion;  but  if  the  illness 
[75]  is  more  severe  they  actually  move  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  appearances.  The  cause  of  these  oc¬ 
currences  is  that  the  faculty  in  virtue  of  which 
the  controlling  sense  judges  is  not  identical 
with  that  in  virtue  of  which  presentations 
come  before  the  mind.  A  proof  of  this  is,  that 
the  sun  presents  itself  as  only  a  foot  in  diame¬ 
ter,  though  often  something  else  gainsays  the 
[20]  presentation.  Again,  when  the  fingers  are 
crossed,  the  one  object  [placed  between  them] 
is  felt  [by  the  touch]  as  two;  but  yet  we  deny 
that  it  is  two;  for  sight  is  more  authoritative 
than  touch.  Yet,  if  touch  stood  alone,  we 
should  actually  have  pronounced  the  one  ob¬ 
ject  to  be  two.  The  ground  of  such  false  judge¬ 
ments  is  that  any  appearances  whatever  pre¬ 
sent  themselves,  not  only  when  its  object  stim¬ 
ulates  a  sense,  but  also  when  the  sense  by  itself 
alone  is  stimulated,  provided  only  it  be  stimu- 
[25]  lated  in  the  same  manner  as  it  is  by  the 
object.  For  example,  to  persons  sailing  past  the 
land  seems  to  move,  when  it  is  really  the  eye 
that  is  being  moved  by  something  else  [the 
moving  ship]. 

3 

From  this  it  is  manifest  that  the  stimulatory 
movements  based  upon  sensory  impressions, 
whether  the  latter  are  derived  from  external 
objects  or  from  causes  within  the  body,  present 
[jo]  themselves  not  only  when  persons  are 
awake,  but  also  then,  when  this  affection  which 
is  called  sleep  has  come  upon  them,  with  even 
greater  impressiveness.  For  by  day,  while  the 


ON  DREAMS 


461b  CHAPTERS  2-3  705 


senses  and  the  intellect  are  working  together, 
they  (i.e.  such  movements)  are  extruded  from 
461a  consciousness  or  obscured,  just  as  a  small¬ 
er  is  beside  a  larger  fire,  or  as  small  beside 
great  pains  or  pleasures,  though,  as  soon  as  the 
latter  have  ceased,  even  those  which  are  trifling 
emerge  into  notice.  But  by  night  [i.e.  in  sleep] 
owing  to  the  inaction  of  the  particular  senses, 
and  their  powerlessness  to  realize  themselves, 
[5]  which  arises  from  the  reflux  of  the  hot 
from  the  exterior  parts  to  the  interior,  they  [i.e. 
the  above  ‘movements’]  are  borne  in  to  the 
head  quarters  of  sense-perception,  and  there 
display  themselves  as  the  disturbance  (of 
waking  life)  subsides.  We  must  suppose  that, 
like  the  little  eddies  which  are  being  ever 
formed  in  rivers,  so  the  sensory  movements 
are  each  a  continuous  process,  often  remaining 
[10]  like  what  they  were  when  first  started, 
but  often,  too,  broken  into  other  forms  by  col¬ 
lisions  with  obstacles.  This  [last  mentioned 
point],  moreover,  gives  the  reason  why  no 
dreams  occur  in  sleep  immediately  after  meals, 
or  to  sleepers  who  are  extremely  young,  e.g. 
to  infants.  The  internal  movement  in  such 
cases  is  excessive,  owing  to  the  heat  generated 
from  the  food.  Hence,  just  as  in  a  liquid,  if  one 
[75]  vehemently  disturbs  it,  sometimes  no  re¬ 
flected  image  appears,  while  at  other  times  one 
appears,  indeed,  but  utterly  distorted,  so  as  to 
seem  quite  unlike  its  original;  while,  when 
once  the  motion  has  ceased,  the  reflected  im¬ 
ages  are  clear  and  plain;  in  the  same  manner 
during  sleep  the  phantasms,  or  residuary 
movements,  which  are  based  upon  the  sensory 
impressions,  become  sometimes  quite  obliter- 
[20]  ated  by  the  above  described  motion  when 
too  violent;  while  at  other  times  the  sights  are 
indeed  seen,  but  confused  and  weird,  and  the 
dreams  [which  then  appear]  are  unhealthy,  like 
those  of  persons  who  are  atrabilious,  or  fever¬ 
ish,  or  intoxicated  with  wine.  For  all  such  affec¬ 
tions,  being  spirituous,  cause  much  commotion 
and  disturbance.  In  sanguineous  animals,  in 
[25]  proportion  as  the  blood  becomes  calm, 
and  as  its  purer  are  separated  from  its  less  pure 
elements,  the  fact  that  the  movement,  based  on 
impressions  derived  from  each  of  the  organs 
of  sense,  is  preserved  in  its  integrity,  renders 
the  dreams  healthy,  causes  a  [clear]  image  to 
present  itself,  and  makes  the  dreamer  think, 
owing  to  the  effects  borne  in  from  the  organ  of 
sight,  that  he  actually  sees,  and  owing  to  those 
which  come  from  the  organ  of  hearing,  that  he 
[jo]  really  hears;  and  so  on  with  those  also 
which  proceed  from  the  other  sensory  organs. 


For  it  is  owing  to  the  fact  that  the  movement 
which  reaches  the  primary  organ  of  sense 
comes  from  them,  that  one  even  when  awake 
461b  believes  himself  to  see,  or  hear,  or  other¬ 
wise  perceive;  just  as  it  is  from  a  belief  that  the 
organ  of  sight  is  being  stimulated,  though  in 
reality  not  so  stimulated,  that  we  sometimes 
erroneously  declare  ourselves  to  see,  or  that, 
from  the  fact  that  touch  announces  two  move¬ 
ments,  we  think  that  the  one  object  is  two.  For, 
as  a  rule,  the  governing  sense  affirms  the  report 
of  each  particular  sense,  unless  another  partic¬ 
ular  sense,  more  authoritative,  makes  a  contra- 
[5]  dictory  report.  In  every  case  an  appearance 
presents  itself,  but  what  appears  does  not  in 
every  case  seem  real,  unless  when  the  deciding 
faculty  is  inhibited,  or  does  not  move  with  its 
proper  motion.  Moreover,  as  we  said  that  dif¬ 
ferent  men  are  subject  to  illusions,  each  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  different  emotion  present  in  him,  so 
it  is  that  the  sleeper,  owing  to  sleep,  and  to  the 
movements  then  going  on  in  his  sensory  or- 
ans,  as  well  as  to  the  other  facts  of  the  sensory 
/o]  process,  [is  liable  to  illusion],  so  that  the 
dream  presentation,  though  but  little  like  it, 
appears  as  some  actual  given  thing.  For  when 
one  is  asleep,  in  proportion  as  most  of  the 
blood  sinks  inwards  to  its  fountain  [the  heart], 
the  internal  [sensory]  movements,  some  po¬ 
tential,  others  actual  accompany  it  inwards. 
They  are  so  related  [in  general]  that,  if  any¬ 
thing  move  the  blood,  some  one  sensory  move¬ 
ment  will  emerge  from  it,  while  if  this  perishes 
[75]  another  will  take  its  place;  while  to  one 
another  also  they  are  related  in  the  same  way 
as  the  artificial  frogs  in  water  which  severally 
rise  [in  fixed  succession]  to  the  surface  in  the 
order  in  which  the  salt  [which  keeps  them 
down]  becomes  dissolved.  The  residuary 
movements  are  like  these:  they  are  within  the 
soul  potentially,  but  actualize  themselves  only 
when  the  impediment  to  their  doing  so  has 
been  relaxed;  and  according  as  they  are  thus 
set  free,  they  begin  to  move  in  the  blood  which 
remains  in  the  sensory  organs,  and  which  is 
now  but  scanty,  while  they  possess  verisimili¬ 
tude  after  the  manner  of  cloud-shapes,  which 
[20]  in  their  rapid  metamorphoses  one  com¬ 
pares  now  to  human  beings  and  a  moment  aft¬ 
erwards  to  centaurs.  Each  of  them  is  however, 
as  has  been  said,  the  remnant  of  a  sensory  im¬ 
pression  taken  when  sense  was  actualizing  it¬ 
self;  and  when  this,  the  true  impression,  has 
departed,  its  remnant  is  still  immanent,  and  it 
is  correct  to  say  of  it,  that  though  not  actually 
Koriskos,  it  is  like  Koriskos.  For  when  the  per- 


yo6  ON  DREAMS  462b 


[25]  son  was  actually  perceiving,  his  control¬ 
ling  and  judging  sensory  faculty  did  not  call  it 
Koriskos,  but,  prompted  by  this  [impression], 
called  the  genuine  person  yonder  Koriskos. 
Accordingly,  this  sensory  impulse,  which, 
when  actually  perceiving,  it  [the  controlling 
faculty]  so  describes  (unless  completely  inhib¬ 
ited  by  the  blood),  it  now  [in  dreams],  when 
quasi-perceiving,  receives  from  the  movements 
persisting  in  the  sense-organs,  and  mistakes  it 
— an  impulse  that  is  merely  like  the  true  [ob¬ 
jective]  impression — for  the  true  impression  it¬ 
self,  while  the  effect  of  sleep  is  so  great  that  it 
[jo]  causes  this  mistake  to  pass  unnoticed.  Ac¬ 
cordingly,  just  as  if  a  finger  be  inserted  be¬ 
neath  the  eyeball  without  being  observed,  one 
object  will  not  only  present  two  visual  images, 
462a  but  will  create  an  opinion  of  its  being 
two  objects;  while  if  it  [the  finger]  be  ob¬ 
served,  the  presentation  will  be  the  same,  but 
the  same  opinion  will  not  be  formed  of  it;  ex¬ 
actly  so  it  is  in  states  of  sleep:  if  the  sleeper 
perceives  that  he  is  asleep,  and  is  conscious  of 
the  sleeping  state  during  which  the  perception 
comes  before  his  mind,  it  presents  itself  still, 
[5]  but  something  within  him  speaks  to  this 
effect:  ‘the  image  of  Koriskos  presents  itself, 
but  the  real  Koriskos  is  not  present’;  for  often, 
when  one  is  asleep,  there  is  something  in  con¬ 
sciousness  which  declares  that  what  then  pre¬ 
sents  itself  is  but  a  dream.  If,  however,  he  is 
not  aware  of  being  asleep,  there  is  nothing 
which  will  contradict  the  testimony  «of  the 
bare  presentation. 

That  what  we  here  urge  is  true,  i.e.  that 
there  are  such  presentative  movements  in  the 
sensory  organs,  any  one  may  convince  himself, 
[/o]  if  he  attends  to  and  tries  to  remember  the 
affections  we  experience  when  sinking  into 
slumber  or  when  being  awakened.  He  will 
sometimes,  in  the  moment  of  awakening,  sur¬ 
prise  the  images  which  present  themselves  to 
him  in  sleep,  and  find  that  they  are  really  but 
movements  lurking  in  the  organs  of  sense. 
And  indeed  some  very  young  persons,  if  it  is 
dark,  though  looking  with  wide  open  eyes, 
see  multitudes  of  phantom  figures  moving  be¬ 
fore  them,  so  that  they  often  cover  up  their 
heads  in  terror. 

[75]  From  all  this,  then,  the  conclusion  to  be 
drawn  is,  that  the  dream  is  a  sort  of  presenta¬ 


tion,  and,  more  particularly,  one  which  occurs 
in  sleep;  since  the  phantoms  just  mentioned 
are  not  dreams,  nor  is  any  other  a  dream  which 
presents  itself  when  the  sense-perceptions  are 
in  a  state  of  freedom.  Nor  is  every  presenta¬ 
tion  which  occurs  in  sleep  necessarily  a  dream. 
For  in  the  first  place,  some  persons  [when 
[20]  asleep]  actually,  in  a  certain  way,  per¬ 
ceive  sounds,  light,  savour,  and  contact;  feebly, 
however,  and,  as  it  were,  remotely.  For  there 
have  been  cases  in  which  persons  while  asleep, 
but  with  the  eyes  partly  open,  saw  faintly  in 
their  sleep  (as  they  supposed)  the  light  of  a 
lamp,  and  afterwards,  on  being  awakened, 
straightway  recognized  it  as  the  actual  light  of 
a  real  lamp;  while,  in  other  cases,  persons  who 
faintly  heard  the  crowing  of  cocks  or  the  bark- 
[25]  ing  of  dogs  identified  these  clearly  with 
the  real  sounds  as  soon  as  they  awoke.  Some 
persons,  too,  return  answers  to  questions  put 
to  them  in  sleep.  For  it  is  quite  possible  that, 
of  waking  or  sleeping,  while  the  one  is  present 
in  the  ordinary  sense,  the  other  also  should  be 
present  in  a  certain  way.  But  none  of  these  oc¬ 
currences  should  be  called  a  dream.  Nor  should 
the  true  thoughts,  as  distinct  from  the  mere 
presentations,  which  occur  in  sleep  [be  called 
dreams].  The  dream  proper  is  a  presentation 
[jo]  based  on  the  movement  of  sense  impres¬ 
sions,  when  such  presentation  occurs  during 
sleep,  taking  sleep  in  the  strict  sense  of  the 
term. 

There  are  cases  of  persons  who  in  their 
whole  lives  have  never  had  a  dream,  while  oth- 
462b  ers  dream  when  considerably  advanced 
in  years,  having  never  dreamed  before.  The 
cause  of  their  not  having  dreams  appears  some¬ 
what  like  that  which  operates  in  the  case  of  in¬ 
fants,  and  [that  which  operates]  immediately 
after  meals.  It  is  intelligible  enough  that  no 
[5]  dream-presentation  should  occur  to  per¬ 
sons  whose  natural  constitution  is  such  that  in 
them  copious  evaporation  is  borne  upwards, 
which,  when  borne  back  downwards,  causes  a 
large  quantity  of  motion.  But  it  is  not  surpris¬ 
ing  that,  as  age  advances,  a  dream  should  at 
length  appear  to  them.  Indeed,  it  is  inevitable 
[/o]  that,  as  a  change  is  wrought  in  them  in 
proportion  to  age  or  emotional  experience,  this 
reversal  [from  non-dreaming  to  dreaming] 
should  occur  also. 


On  Prophesying  by  Dreams 


As  to  the  divination  which  takes  place  in 
sleep,  and  is  said  to  be  based  on  dreams,  we 
cannot  lightly  either  dismiss  it  with  contempt 
or  give  it  implicit  confidence.  The  fact  that  all 
persons,  or  many,  suppose  dreams  to  possess  a 
special  significance,  tends  to  inspire  us  with  be- 
[75]  lief  in  it  [such  divination],  as  founded  on 
the  testimony  of  experience;  and  indeed  that 
divination  in  dreams  should,  as  regards  some 
subjects,  be  genuine,  is  not  incredible,  for  it  has 
a  show  of  reason;  from  which  one  might  form 
a  like  opinion  also  respecting  all  other  dreams. 
Yet  the  fact  of  our  seeing  no  probable  cause  to 
account  for  such  divination  tends  to  inspire  us 
[20]  with  distrust.  For,  in  addition  to  its  fur¬ 
ther  unreasonableness,  it  is  absurd  to  combine 
the  idea  that  the  sender  of  such  dreams  should 
be  God  with  the  fact  that  those  to  whom  he 
sends  them  are  not  the  best  and  wisest,  but 
merely  commonplace  persons..  If,  however,  we 
abstract  from  the  causality  of  God,  none  of  the 
other  causes  assigned  appears  probable.  For 
that  certain  persons  should  have  foresight  in 
dreams  concerning  things  destined  to  take 

flace  at  the  Pillars  of  Hercules,  or  on  the 
25]  banks  of  the  Borysthenes,  seems  to  be 
something  to  discover  the  explanation  of 
which  surpasses  the  wit  of  man.  Well  then,  the 
dreams  in  question  must  be  regarded  either  as 
causes ,  or  as  tokens,  of  the  events,  or  else  as  co¬ 
incidences;  either  as  all,  or  some,  of  these,  or  as 
one  only.  I  use  the  word  ‘cause’  in  the  sense  in 
which  the  moon  is  [the  cause]  of  an  eclipse  of 
the  sun,  or  in  which  fatigue  is  [a  cause]  of  fe- 
[jo]  ver;  ‘token’  [in  the  sense  in  which]  the 
entrance  of  a  star  [into  the  shadow]  is  a  token 
of  the  eclipse,  or  [in  which]  roughness  of  the 
tongue  [is  a  token]  of  fever;  while  by  ‘coinci¬ 
dence’  I  mean,  for  example,  the  occurrence  of 
an  eclipse  of  the  sun  while  some  one  is  taking 
a  walk;  for  the  walking  is  neither  a  token  nor 
463a  a  cause  of  the  eclipse,  nor  the  eclipse  [a 
cause  or  token]  of  the  walking.  For  this  rea¬ 
son  no  coincidence  takes  place  according  to  a 
universal  or  general  rule.  Are  we  then  to  say 
that  some  dreams  are  causes,  others  tokens,  e.g. 
of  events  taking  place  in  the  bodily  organism? 
At  all  events,  even  scientific  physicians  tell  us 


[5]  that  one  should  pay  diligent  attention  to 
dreams,  and  to  hold  this  view  is  reasonable  also 
for  those  who  are  not  practitioners,  but  specu¬ 
lative  philosophers.  For  the  movements  which 
occur  in  the  daytime  [within  the  body]  are, 
unless  very  great  and  violent,  lost  sight  of  in 
contrast  with  the  waking  movements,  which 
[/o]  are  more  impressive.  In  sleep  the  oppo¬ 
site  takes  place,  for  then  even  trifling  move¬ 
ments  seem  considerable.  This  is  plain  in  what 
often  happens  during  sleep;  for  example, 
dreamers  fancy  that  they  are  affected  by  thun¬ 
der  and  lightning,  when  in  fact  there  are  only 
faint  ringings  in  their  ears;  or  that  they  are 
enjoying  honey  or  other  sweet  savours,  when 
only  a  tiny  drop  of  phlegm  is  flowing  down 
[,5]  [the  oesophagus] ;  or  that  they  are  walk¬ 
ing  through  fire,  and  feeling  intense  heat, 
when  there  is  only  a  slight  warmth  affecting 
certain  parts  of  the  body.  When  they  are  awak¬ 
ened,  these  things  appear  to  them  in  this  their 
true  character.  But  since  the  beginnings  of  all 
events  are  small,  so,  it  is  clear,  are  those  also  of 
the  diseases  or  other  affections  about  to  occur 
[20]  in  our  bodies.  In  conclusion,  it  is  mani¬ 
fest  that  these  beginnings  must  be  more  evi¬ 
dent  in  sleeping  than  in  waking  moments. 

Nay,  indeed,  it  is  not  improbable  that  some 
of  the  presentations  whidi  come  before  the 
mind  in  sleep  may  even  be  causes  of  the  ac¬ 
tions  cognate  to  each  of  them.  For  as  when  we 
are  about  to  act  [in  waking  hours],  or  are  en¬ 
gaged  in  any  course  of  action,  or  have  already 
performed  certain  actions,  we  often  find  our- 
[25]  selves  concerned  with  these  actions,  or 
performing  them,  in  a  vivid  dream;  the  cause 
whereof  is  that  the  dream-movement  has  had 
a  way  paved  for  it  from  the  original  move¬ 
ments  set  up  in  the  daytime;  exactly  so,  but 
conversely,  it  must  happen  that  the  movements 
set  up  first  in  sleep  should  also  prove  to  be  start¬ 
ing-points  of  actions  to  be  performed  in  the 
daytime,  since  the  recurrence  by  day  of  the 
thought  of  these  actions  also  has  had  its  way 
[jo]  paved  for  it  in  the  images  before  the 
mind  at  night.  Thus  then  it  is  quite  conceiva¬ 
ble  that  some  dreams  may  be  tokens  and  causes 
[of  future  events] . 

Most  [so-called  prophetic]  dreams  are,  how- 
46315  ever,  to  be  classed  as  mere  coincidences, 


708  ON  PROPHESYING  BY  DREAMS  464* 


especially  all  such  as  are  extravagant,  and  those 
in  the  fulfilment  of  which  the  dreamers  have 
no  initiative,  such  as  in  the  case  of  a  sea-fight, 
or  of  things  taking  place  far  away.  As  regards 
these  it  is  natural  that  the  fact  should  stand  as 
it  does  whenever  a  person,  on  mentioning 
[5]  something,  finds  the  very  thing  mentioned 
come  to  pass.  Why,  indeed,  should  this  not 
happen  also  in  sleep?  The  probability  is,  rath¬ 
er,  that  many  such  things  should  happen.  As, 
then,  one’s  mentioning  a  particular  person  is 
neither  token  nor  cause  of  this  person’s  pre¬ 
senting  himself,  so,  in  the  parallel  instance,  the 
dream  is,  to  him  who  has  seen  it,  neither  token 
nor  cause  of  its  [so-called]  fulfilment,  but  a 
mere  coincidence.  Hence  the  fact  that  many 
dreams  have  no  ‘fulfilment’,  for  coincidences 
[/o]  do  not  occur  according  to  any  universal 
or  general  law. 

2 

On  the  whole,  forasmuch  as  certain  of  the 
lower  animals  also  dream,  it  may  be  conclud¬ 
ed  that  dreams  are  not  sent  by  God,  nor  are 
they  designed  for  this  purpose  [to  reveal  the 
future].  They  have  a  divine  aspect,  however, 
for  Nature  [their  cause]  is  divinely  planned, 
[75]  though  not  itself  divine.  A  special  proof 
[of  their  not  being  sent  by  God]  is  this:  the 
power  of  foreseeing  the  future  and  of  having 
vivid  dreams  is  found  in  persons  of  inferior 
type,  which  implies  that  God  does  not  send 
their  dreams;  but  merely  that  all  those  whose 
physical  temperament  is,  as  it  were,  garrulous 
and  excitable,  see  sights  of  all  descriptions;  for, 
inasmuch  as  they  experience  many  movements 
of  every  kind,  they  just  chance  to  have  visions 
resembling  objective  facts,  their  luck  in  these 
[20]  matters  being  merely  like  that  of  persons 
who  play  at  even  and  odd.  For  the  principle 
which  is  expressed  in  the  gambler’s  maxim: 
‘If  you  make  many  throws  your  luck  must 
change,’  holds  good  in  their  case  also. 

That  many  dreams  have  no  fulfilment  is 
not  strange,  for  it  is  so  too  with  many  bodily 
symptoms  and  weather-signs,  e.g.  those  of 
[25]  rain  or  wind.  For  if  another  movement 
occurs  more  influential  than  that  from  which, 
while  [the  event  to  which  it  pointed  was]  still 
future,  the  given  token  was  derived,  the  event 
[to  which  such  token  pointed]  does  not  take 
place.  So,  of  the  things  which  ought  to  be  ac¬ 
complished  by  human  agency,  many,  though 
well-planned,  are  by  the  operation  of  other 
principles  more  powerful  [than  man’s  agency] 
brought  to  nought.  For,  speaking  generally, 


that  which  was  about  to  happen  is  not  in  every 
case  what  now  is  happening;  nor  is  that  which 
shall  hereafter  be  identical  with  that  which  is 
now  going  to  be.  Still,  however,  we  must  hold 
[30]  that  the  beginnings  from  which,  as  we 
said,  no  consummation  follows,  are  real  be¬ 
ginnings,  and  these  constitute  natural  tokens 
of  certain  events,  even  though  the  events  do 
not  come  to  pass. 

As  for  [prophetic]  dreams  which  involve 
not  such  beginnings  [sc.  of  future  events]  as 
we  have  here  described,  but  such  as  are  extrav¬ 
agant  in  times,  or  places,  or  magnitudes;  or 
464*  those  involving  beginnings  which  are  not 
extravagant  in  any  of  these  respects,  while  yet 
the  persons  who  see  the  dream  hold  not  in 
their  own  hands  the  beginnings  [of  the  event 
to  which  it  points] :  unless  the  foresight  which 
such  dreams  give  is  the  result  of  pure  coinci¬ 
dence,  the  following  would  be  a  better  expla¬ 
nation  of  it  than  that  proposed  by  Democritus, 
[5]  who  alleges  ‘images’  and  ‘emanations’  as 
its  cause.  As,  when  something  has  caused  mo¬ 
tion  in  water  or  air,  this  [the  portion  moved] 
moves  another  [portion  of  water  or  air],  and, 
though  the  cause  has  ceased  to  operate,  such 
motion  propagates  itself  to  a  certain  point, 
though  there  the  prime  movement  is  not  pres¬ 
ent;  just  so  it  may  well  be  that  a  movement  and 
a  consequent  sense-perception  should  reach 
[/o]  sleeping  souls  from  the  objects  from 
which  Democritus  represents  ‘images’  and 
‘emanations’  as  coming;  that  such  movements, 
in  whatever  way  they  arrive,  should  be  more 
perceptible  at  night  [than  by  day],  because 
when  proceeding  thus  in  the  daytime  they  are 
more  liable  to  dissolution  (since  at  night  the 
air  is  less  disturbed,  there  being  then  less 
[75]  wind);  and  that  they  shall  be  perceived 
within  the  body  owing  to  sleep,  since  persons 
are  more  sensitive  even  to  slight  sensory  move¬ 
ments  when  asleep  than  when  awake.  It  is 
these  movements  then  that  cause  ‘presenta¬ 
tions’,  as  a  result  of  which  sleepers  foresee  the 
future  even  relatively  to  such  events  as  those 
referred1  to  above.  These  considerations  also 
[20]  explain  why  this  experience  befalls  com¬ 
monplace  persons  and  not  the  most  intelligent. 
For  it  would  have  regularly  occurred  both  in 
the  daytime  and  to  the  wise  had  it  been  God 
who  sent  it;  but,  as  we  have  explained  the  mat¬ 
ter,  it  is  quite  natural  that  commonplace  per¬ 
sons  should  be  those  who  have  foresight  [in 
dreams].  For  the  mind  of  such  persons  is  not 
given  to  thinking,  but,  as  it  were,  derelict,  or 
1 1.e.  those  referred  to  464®  1-4. 


464b 

totally  vacant,  and,  when  once  set  moving,  is 
borne  passively  on  in  the  direction  taken  by 
that  which  moves  it.  With  regard  to  the  fact 
[25]  that  some  persons  who  are  liable  to  de¬ 
rangement  have  this  foresight,  its  explanation 
is  that  their  normal  mental  movements  do  not 
impede  [the  alien  movements],  but  are  beaten 
off  by  the  latter.  Therefore  it  is  that  they  have 
an  especially  keen  perception  of  the  alien 
movements. 

That  certain  persons  in  particular  should 
have  vivid  dreams,  e.g.  that  familiar  friends 
should  thus  have  foresight  in  a  special  degree 
respecting  one  another,  is  due  to  the  fact  that 
such  friends  are  most  solicitous  on  one  anoth¬ 
er’s  behalf.  For  as  acquaintances  in  particular 
[3o]  recognize  and  perceive  one  another  a  long 
way  off,  so  also  they  do  as  regards  the  sensory 
movements  respecting  one  another;  for  sensory 
movements  which  refer  to  persons  familiarly 
known  are  themselves  more  familiar.  Atrabili¬ 
ous  persons,  owing  to  their  impetuosity,  are, 
when  they,  as  it  were,  shoot  from  a  distance, 
expert  at  hitting;  while,  owing  to  their  muta- 
464b  bility,  the  series  of  movements  deploys 
quickly  before  their  minds.  For  even  as  the  in¬ 
sane  recite,  or  con  over  in  thought,  the  poems 
of  Philaegides,  e.g.  the  Aphrodite,  whose  parts 
succeed  in  order  of  similitude,  just  so  do  they 
[the  ‘atrabilious’]  go  on  and  on  stringing  sen- 


709 

sory  movements  together.  Moreover,  owing  to 
their  aforesaid  impetuosity,  one  movement 
[5]  within  them  is  not  liable  to  be  knocked  out 
of  its  course  by  some  other  movement. 

The  most  skilful  interpreter  of  dreams  is  he 
who  has  the  faculty  of  observing  resemblances. 
Any  one  may  interpret  dreams  which  are  vivid 
and  plain.  But,  speaking  of  ‘resemblances’,  I 
mean  that  dream  presentations  are  analogous 
to  the  forms  reflected  in  water,  as  indeed  we 
have  already  stated.  In  the  latter  case,  if  the 
[/o]  motion  in  the  water  be  great,  the  reflex¬ 
ion  has  no  resemblance  to  its  original,  nor  do 
the  forms  resemble  the  real  objects.  Skilful,  in¬ 
deed,  would  he  be  in  interpreting  such  reflex¬ 
ions  who  could  rapidly  discern,  and  at  a 
glance  comprehend,  the  scattered  and  distort¬ 
ed  fragments  of  such  forms,  so  as  to  perceive 
that  one  of  them  represents  a  man,  or  a  horse, 
[75]  or  anything  whatever.  Accordingly,  in 
the  other  case  also,  in  a  similar  way,  some  such 
thing  as  this  [blurred  image]  is  all  that  a 
dream  amounts  to;  for  the  internal  movement 
effaces  the  clearness  of  the  dream. 

The  questions,  therefore,  which  we  pro¬ 
posed  as  to  the  nature  of  sleep  and  the  dream, 
and  the  cause  to  which  each  of  them  is 
due,  and  also  as  to  divination  as  a  result  of 
dreams,  in  every  form  of  it,  have  now  been 
discussed. 


CHAPTERS  1-2 


On  Longevity  and  Shortness  of  Life 


The  reasons  for  some  animals  being  long- 
lived  and  others  short-lived,  and,  in  a  word, 
[20]  the  causes  of  the  length  and  brevity  of 
life  call  for  investigation. 

The  necessary  beginning  to  our  inquiry  is 
a  statement  of  the  difficulties  about  these 
points.  For  it  is  not  clear  whether  in  animals 
and  plants  universally  it  is  a  single  or  diverse 
cause  that  makes  some  to  be  long-lived,  others 
[25]  short-lived.  Plants  too  have  in  some  cases 
a  long  life,  while  in  others  it  lasts  but  for  a 
year. 

Further,  in  a  natural  structure  are  longevity 
and  a  sound  constitution  coincident,  or  is 
shortness  of  life  independent  of  unhealthiness? 
Perhaps  in  the  case  of  certain  maladies  a  dis¬ 
eased  state  of  the  body  and  shortness  of  life  are 
[jo]  interchangeable,  while  in  the  case  of  oth¬ 
ers  ill-health  is  perfectly  compatible  with  long 
life. 

Of  sleep  and  waking  we  have  already  treat¬ 
ed;  about  life  and  death  we  shall  speak  later 
on,  and  likewise  about  health  and  disease,  in 
so  far  as  it  belongs  to  the  science  of  nature  to 
465a  do  so.  But  at  present  we  have  to  investi¬ 
gate  the  causes  of  some  creatures  being  long- 
lived,  and  others  short-lived.  We  find  this  dis¬ 
tinction  affecting  not  only  entire  genera  op¬ 
posed  as  wholes  to  one  another,  but  applying 
also  to  contrasted  sets  of  individuals  within  the 
same  species.  As  an  instance  of  the  difference 
[5]  applying  to  the  genus  I  give  man  and  horse 
(for  mankind  has  a  longer  life  than  the  horse), 
while  within  the  species  there  is  the  difference 
between  man  and  man;  for  of  men  also  some 
are  long-lived,  others  short-lived,  differing  from 
each  other  in  respect  of  the  different  regions  in 
which  they  dwell.  Races  inhabiting  warm 
[jo]  countries  have  longer  life,  those  living  in 
a  cold  climate  live  a  shorter  time.  Likewise 
there  are  similar  differences  among  individuals 
occupying  the  same  locality. 

2 

In  order  to  find  premisses  for  our  argument, 
we  must  answer  the  question,  What  is  that 
which,  in  natural  objects,  makes  them  easily 
destroyed,  or  the  reverse?  Since  fire  and  water, 


[75]  and  whatsoever  is  akin  thereto,  do  not 
possess  identical  powers  they  are  reciprocal 
causes  of  generation  and  decay.  Hence  it  is 
natural  to  infer  that  everything  else  arising 
from  them  and  composed  of  them  should  share 
in  the  same  nature,  in  all  cases  where  things 
are  not,  like  a  house,  a  composite  unity  formed 
by  the  synthesis  of  many  things. 

In  other  matters  a  different  account  must  be 
given;  for  in  many  things  their  mode  of  disso¬ 
lution  is  something  peculiar  to  themselves,  e.g. 
[20]  in  knowledge  and  health  and  disease. 
These  pass  away  even  though  the  medium  in 
which  they  are  found  is  not  destroyed  but  con¬ 
tinues  to  exist;  for  example,  take  the  termina¬ 
tion  of  ignorance,  which  is  recollection  or 
learning,  while  knowledge  passes  away  into 
forgetfulness,  or  error.  But  accidentally  the 
disintegration  of  a  natural  object  is  accompan¬ 
ied  by  the  destruction  of  the  non-physical  re- 
[25]  ality;  for,  when  the  animal  dies,  the 
health  or  knowledge  resident  in  it  passes  away 
too.  Hence  from  these  considerations  we  may 
draw  a  conclusion  about  the  soul  too;  for,  if 
the  inherence  of  soul  in  body  is  not  a  matter  of 
nature  but  like  that  of  knowledge  in  the  soul, 
there  would  be  another  mode  of  dissolution 
pertaining  to  it  besides  that  which  occurs 
[30]  when  the  body  is  destroyed.  But  since  ev¬ 
idently  it  does  not  admit  of  this  dual  dissolu¬ 
tion,  the  soul  must  stand  in  a  different  case  in 
respect  of  its  union  with  the  body. 

3 

465b  Perhaps  one  might  reasonably  raise  the 
question  whether  there  is  any  place  where 
what  is  corruptible  becomes  incorruptible,  as 
fire  does  in  the  upper  regions  where  it  meets 
with  no  opposite.  Opposites  destroy  each  other, 
and  hence  accidentally,  by  their  destruction, 
[5]  whatsoever  is  attributed  to  them  is  de¬ 
stroyed.  But  no  opposite  in  a  real  substance  is 
accidentally  destroyed,  because  real  substance 
is  not  predicated  of  any  subject.  Hence  a  thing 
which  has  no  opposite,  or  which  is  situated 
where  it  has  no  opposite,  cannot  be  destroyed. 
For  what  will  that  be  which  can  destroy  it,  if 
destruction  comes  only  through  contraries,  but 
[jo]  no  contrary  to  it  exists  either  absolutely  or 
in  the  particular  place  where  it  is?  But  perhaps 


466b 

this  is  in  one  sense  true,  in  another  sense  not 
true,  for  it  is  impossible  that  anything  con¬ 
taining  matter  should  not  have  in  any  sense  an 
opposite.  Heat  and  straightness  can  be  present 
in  every  part  of  a  thing,  but  it  is  impossible 
that  the  thing  should  be  nothing  but  hot  or 
white  or  straight;  for,  if  that  were  so,  attri¬ 
butes  would  have  an  independent  existence. 
[75]  Hence  if,  in  all  cases,  whenever  the  ac¬ 
tive  and  the  passive  exist  together,  the  one  acts 
and  the  other  is  acted  on,  it  is  impossible  that 
no  change  should  occur.  Further,  this  is  so  if 
a  waste  product  is  an  opposite,  and  waste  must 
always  be  produced;  for  opposition  is  always 
the  source  of  change,  and  refuse  is  what  re¬ 
mains  of  the  previous  opposite.  But,  after  ex¬ 
pelling  everything  of  a  nature  actually  op¬ 
posed,  would  an  object  in  this  case  also  be  im- 
[20]  perishable?  No,  it  would  be  destroyed  by 
the  environment. 

If  then  that  is  so,  what  we  have  said  suffi¬ 
ciently  accounts  for  the  change;  but,  if  not,  we 
must  assume  that  something  of  actually  oppo¬ 
site  character  is  in  the  changing  object,  and  re¬ 
fuse  is  produced. 

Hence  accidentally  a  lesser  flame  is  con¬ 
sumed  by  a  greater  one,  for  the  nutriment,  to 
[25]  wit  the  smoke,  which  the  former  takes  a 
long  period  to  expend,  is  used  up  by  the  big 
flame  quickly. 

Hence  [too]  all  things  are  at  all  times  in  a 
state  of  transition  and  are  coming  into  being 
and  passing  away.  The  environment  acts  on 
them  either  favourably  or  antagonistically, 
and,  owing  to  this,  things  that  change  their 
situation  become  more  or  less  enduring  than 
their  nature  warrants,  but  never  are  they  eter¬ 
nal  when  they  contain  contrary  qualities;  for 
[jo]  their  matter  is  an  immediate  source  of 
contrariety,  so  that  if  it  involves  locality  they 
show  change  of  situation,  if  quantity,  increase 
and  diminution,  while  if  it  involves  qualita¬ 
tive  affection  we  find  alteration  of  character. 

4 

4 66a  We  find  that  a  superior  immunity  from 
decay  attaches  neither  to  the  largest  animals 
(the  horse  has  shorter  life  than  man)  nor  to 
those  that  are  small  (for  most  insects  live  but 
for  a  year).  Nor  are  plants  as  a  whole  less  lia¬ 
ble  to  perish  than  animals  (many  plants  are 
annuals),  nor  have  sanguineous  animals  the 

? re-eminence  (for  the  bee  is  longer-lived  than 
5]  certain  sanguineous  animals).  Neither  is  it 
the  bloodless  animals  that  live  longest  (for 
molluscs  live  only  a  year,  though  bloodless), 


711 

nor  terrestrial  organisms  (there  are  both  plants 
and  terrestrial  animals  of  which  a  single  year 
is  the  period),  nor  the  occupants  of  the  sea  (for 
there  we  find  the  crustaceans  and  the  molluscs, 
which  are  short-lived). 

Speaking  generally,  the  longest-lived  things 
occur  among  the  plants,  e.g.  the  date-palm, 
[/o]  Next  in  order  we  find  them  among  the 
sanguineous  animals  rather  than  among  the 
bloodless,  and  among  those  with  feet  rather 
than  among  the  denizens  of  the  water.  Hence, 
taking  these  two  characters  together,  the  long¬ 
est-lived  animals  fall  among  sanguineous  ani¬ 
mals  which  have  feet,  e.g.  man  and  elephant. 
As  a  matter  of  fact  also  it  is  a  general  rule  that 
[75]  the  larger  live  longer  than  the  smaller,  for 
the  other  long-lived  animals  too  happen  to  be 
of  a  large  size,  as  are  also  those  I  have  men¬ 
tioned. 

5 

The  following  considerations  may  enable  us 
to  understand  the  reasons  for  all  these  facts. 
We  must  remember  that  an  animal  is  by  na- 
[20]  ture  humid  and  warm,  and  to  live  is  to 
be  of  such  a  constitution,  while  old  age  is  dry 
and  cold,  and  so  is  a  corpse.  This  is  plain  to 
observation.  But  the  material  constituting  the 
bodies  of  all  things  consists  of  the  following — 
the  hot  and  the  cold,  the  dry  and  the  moist. 
Hence  when  they  age  they  must  become  dry, 
and  therefore  the  fluid  in  them  requires  to  be 
not  easily  dried  up.  Thus  we  explain  why  fat 
things  are  not  liable  to  decay.  The  reason  is 
that  they  contain  air;  now  air  relatively  to  the 
[25]  other  elements  is  fire,  and  fire  never  be¬ 
comes  corrupted. 

Again  the  humid  element  in  animals  must 
not  be  small  in  quantity,  for  a  small  quantity 
is  easily  dried  up.  This  is  why  both  plants  and 
animals  that  are  large  are,  as  a  general  rule, 
longer-lived  than  the  rest,  as  was  said  before; 
it  is  to  be  expected  that  the  larger  should  con¬ 
tain  more  moisture.  But  it  is  not  merely  this 
that  makes  them  longer  lived;  for  the  cause  is 
[jo]  twofold,  to  wit,  the  quality  as  well  as  the 
quantity  of  the  fluid.  Hence  the  moisture  must 
be  not  only  great  in  amount  but  also  warm,  in 
order  to  be  neither  easily  congealed  nor  easily 
dried  up. 

It  is  for  this  reason  also  that  man  lives  long¬ 
er  than  some  animals  which  are  larger;  for  ani¬ 
mals  live  longer  though  there  is  a  deficiency  in 
4 66b  the  amount  of  their  moisture,  if  the  ratio 
of  its  qualitative  superiority  exceeds  that  of  its 
quantitative  deficiency. 


CHAPTERS  1-5 


712  ON  LONGEVITY  AND 

In  some  creatures  the  warm  element  is  their 
fatty  substance,  which  prevents  at  once  desic¬ 
cation  and  congelation;  but  in  others  it  as¬ 
sumes  a  different  flavour.  Further,  that  which 
is  designed  to  be  not  easily  destroyed  should 
[5]  not  yield  waste  products.  Anything  of 
such  a  nature  causes  death  either  by  disease  or 
naturally,  for  the  potency  of  the  waste  product 
works  adversely  and  destroys  now  the  entire 
constitution,  now  a  particular  member. 

This  is  why  salacious  animals  and  those 
abounding  in  seed  age  quickly;  the  seed  is  a 
residue,  and  further,  by  being  lost,  it  produces 
dryness.  Hence  the  mule  lives  longer  than  ei¬ 
ther  the  horse  or  the  ass  from  which  it  sprang, 
[10]  and  females  live  longer  than  males  if  the 
males  are  salacious.  Accordingly  cock-spar¬ 
rows  have  a  shorter  life  than  the  females. 
Again  males  subject  to  great  toil  are  short¬ 
lived  and  age  more  quickly  owing  to  the  la¬ 
bour;  toil  produces  dryness  and  old  age  is  dry. 
But  by  natural  constitution  and  as  a  general 
[15]  rule  males  live  longer  than  females,  and 
the  reason  is  that  the  male  is  an  animal  with 
more  warmth  than  the  female. 

The  same  kind  of  animals  are  longer-lived 
in  warm  than  in  cold  climates  for  the  same 
reason,  on  account  of  which  they  are  of  larger 
size.  The  size  of  animals  of  cold  constitution 
[20]  illustrates  this  particularly  well,  and 
hence  snakes  and  lizards  and  scaly  reptiles  are 
of  great  size  in  warm  localities,  as  also  are  tes- 
tacea  in  the  Red  Sea:  the  warm  humidity  there 
is  the  cause  equally  of  their  augmented  size 
and  of  their  life.  But  in  cold  countries  the  hu¬ 
midity  in  animals  is  more  of  a  watery  nature, 
and  hence  is  readily  congealed.  Consequently  it 
[25]  happens  that  animals  with  little  or  no  blood 
are  in  northerly  regions  either  entirely  absent 
(both  the  land  animals  with  feet  and  the  wa¬ 
ter  creatures  whose  home  is  the  sea)  or,  when 
they  do  occur,  they  are  smaller  and  have  short¬ 
er  life;  for  the  frost  prevents  growth. 

Both  plants  and  animals  perish  if  not  fed, 
for  in  that  case  they  consume  themselves;  just 
[50]  as  a  large  flame  consumes  and  burns  up  a 
small  one  by  using  up  its  nutriment,  so  the 
natural  warmth  which  is  the  primary  cause  of 
digestion  consumes  the  material  in  which  it  is 
located. 

Water  animals  have  a  shorter  life  than  ter¬ 
restrial  creatures,  not  strictly  because  they  are 
4 67a  humid,  but  because  they  are  watery,  and 
watery  moisture  is  easily  destroyed,  since  it  is 
cold  and  readily  congealed.  For  the  same  rea¬ 
son  bloodless  animals  perish  readily  unless  pro- 


SHORTNESS  OF  LIFE  4 67a 

tected  by  great  size,  for  there  is  neither  fat¬ 
ness  nor  sweetness  about  them.  In  animals  fat 
[5]  is  sweet,  and  hence  bees  are  longer-lived 
than  other  animals  of  larger  size. 

6 

It  is  amongst  the  plants  that  we  find  the 
longest  life — more  than  among  the  animals, 
for,  in  the  first  place,  they  are  less  watery  and 
hence  less  easily  frozen.  Further  they  have  an 
oiliness  and  a  viscosity  which  makes  them  re¬ 
tain  their  moisture  in  a  form  not  easily  dried 
up,  even  though  they  are  dry  and  earthy. 

[ 10 ]  But  we  must  discover  the  reason  why 
trees  are  of  an  enduring  constitution,  for  it  is 
peculiar  to  them  and  is  not  found  in  any  ani¬ 
mals  except  the  insects. 

Plants  continually  renew  themselves  and 
hence  last  for  a  long  time.  New  shoots  con¬ 
tinually  come  and  the  others  grow  old,  and 
with  the  roots  the  same  thing  happens.  But 
both  processes  do  not  occur  together.  Rather  it 
happens  that  at  one  time  the  trunk  and  the 
[75]  branches  alone  die  and  new  ones  grow  up 
beside  them,  and  it  is  only  when  this  has  taken 
place  that  the  fresh  roots  spring  from  the  sur¬ 
viving  part.  Thus  it  continues,  one  part  dying 
and  the  other  growing,  and  hence  also  it  lives 
a  long  time. 

There  is  a  similarity,  as  has  been  already 
said,  between  plants  and  insects,  for  they  live, 
though  divided,  and  two  or  more  may  be  de- 
[20]  rived  from  a  single  one.  Insects,  however, 
though  managing  to  live,  are  not  able  to  do  so 
long,  for  they  do  not  possess  organs;  nor  can 
the  principle  resident  in  each  of  the  separated 
parts  create  organs.  In  the  case  of  a  plant, 
however,  it  can  do  so;  every  part  of  a  plant 
contains  potentially  both  root  and  stem.  Hence 
it  is  from  this  source  that  issues  that  continued 
[25]  growth  when  one  part  is  renewed  and  the 
other  grows  old;  it  is  practically  a  case  of 
longevity.  The  taking  of  slips  furnishes  a  simi¬ 
lar  instance,  for  we  might  say  that,  in  a  way, 
when  we  take  a  slip  the  same  thing  happens; 
the  shoot  cut  off  is  part  of  the  plant.  Thus  in 
taking  slips  this  perpetuation  of  life  occurs 
though  their  connexion  with  the  plant  is  sev¬ 
ered,  but  in  the  former  case  it  is  the  continuity 
that  is  operative.  The  reason  is  that  the  life 
[50]  principle  potentially  belonging  to  them 
is  present  in  every  part. 

Identical  phenomena  are  found  both  in 
plants  and  in  animals.  For  in  animals  the  males 
are,  in  general,  the  longer-lived.  They  have 
their  upper  parts  larger  than  the  lower  (the 


4 67b 

male  is  more  of  the  dwarf  type  of  build  than 
the  female),  and  it  is  in  the  upper  part  that 
warmth  resides,  in  the  lower  cold.  In  plants 
also  those  with  great  heads  are  longer-lived, 
4 67b  and  such  are  those  that  are  not  annual 
but  of  the  tree-type,  for  the  roots  are  the  head 
and  upper  part  of  a  plant,  and  among  the  an¬ 
nuals  growth  occurs  in  the  direction  of  their 
lower  parts  and  the  fruit. 


713 

These  matters  however  will  be  specially  in- 
[5]  vestigated  in  the  work  On  Plants .  But  this 
is  our  account  of  the  reasons  for  the  duration 
of  life  and  for  short  life  in  animals.  It  remains 
for  us  to  discuss  youth  and  age,  and  life  and 
death.  To  come  to  a  definite  understanding 
about  these  matters  would  complete  our  course 
of  study  on  animals. 


CHAPTERS  5-6 


On  Youth  and  Old  Age, 

On  Life  and  Death,  On  Breathing 


[/o]  We  must  now  treat  of  youth  and  old  age 
and  life  and  death.  We  must  probably  also  at 
the  same  time  state  the  causes  of  respiration  as 
well,  since  in  some  cases  living  and  the  reverse 
depend  on  this. 

We  have  elsewhere  given  a  precise  account 
of  the  soul,  and  while  it  is  clear  that  its  essen¬ 
tial  reality  cannot  be  corporeal,  yet  manifestly 
[75]  it  must  exist  in  some  bodily  part  which 
must  be  one  of  those  possessing  control  over 
the  members.  Let  us  for  the  present  set  aside 
the  other  divisions  or  faculties  of  the  soul 
(whichever  of  the  two  be  the  correct  name). 
But  as  to  being  what  is  called  an  animal  and  a 
living  thing,  we  find  that  in  all  beings  endowed 
with  both  characteristics  (viz.  being  an  animal 
[20]  and  being  alive)  there  must  be  a  single 
identical  part  in  virtue  of  which  they  live  and 
are  called  animals;  for  an  animal  qua  animal 
cannot  avoid  being  alive.  But  a  thing  need  not, 
though  alive,  be  animal,  for  plants  live  with¬ 
out  having  sensation,  and  it  is  by  sensation  that 
[25]  we  distinguish  animal  from  what  is  not 
animal. 

This  organ,  then,  must  be  numerically  one 
and  the  same  and  yet  possess  multiple  and  dis¬ 
parate  aspects,  for  being  animal  and  living  are 
not  identical.  Since  then  the  organs  of  special 
sensation  have  one  common  organ  in  which 
the  senses  when  functioning  must  meet,  and 
[jo]  this  must  be  situated  midway  between 
what  is  called  before  and  behind  (we  call  'be¬ 
fore’  the  direction  from  which  sensation  comes, 
'behind’  the  opposite),  further,  since  in  all  liv¬ 
ing  things  the  body  is  divided  into  upper  and 
lower  (they  all  have  upper  and  lower  parts,  so 
that  this  is  true  of  plants  as  well),  clearly  the 
nutritive  principle  must  be  situated  midway 
468a  between  these  regions.  That  part  where 
food  enters  we  call  upper,  considering  it  by  it¬ 
self  and  not  relatively  to  the  surrounding  uni¬ 
verse,  while  downward  is  that  part  by  which 
the  primary  excrement  is  discharged. 

[5]  Plants  are  the  reverse  of  animals  in  this 
respect.  To  man  in  particular  among  the  ani¬ 
mals,  on  account  of  his  erect  stature,  belongs 

7*4 


the  characteristic  of  having  his  upper  parts 
pointing  upwards  in  the  sense  in  which  that 
applies  to  the  universe,  while  in  the  others 
these  are  in  an  intermediate  position.  But  in 
plants,  owing  to  their  being  stationary  and 
drawing  their  sustenance  from  the  ground, 
the  upper  part  must  always  be  down;  for  there 
is  a  correspondence  between  the  roots  in  a 
[/o]  plant  and  what  is  called  the  mouth  in  ani¬ 
mals,  by  means  of  which  they  take  in  their 
food,  whether  the  source  of  supply  be  the 
earth  or  each  other’s  bodies. 

2 

All  perfectly  formed  animals  are  to  be  divid¬ 
ed  into  three  parts,  one  that  by  which  food  is 
taken  in,  one  that  by  which  excrement  is  dis- 
[75]  charged,  and  the  third  the  region  inter¬ 
mediate  between  them.  In  the  largest  animals 
this  latter  is  called  the  chest  and  in  the  others 
something  corresponding;  in  some  also  it  is 
more  distinctly  marked  off  than  in  others.  All 
those  also  that  are  capable  of  progression  have 
additional  members  subservient  to  this  pur¬ 
pose,  by  means  of  which  they  bear  the  whole 
trunk,  to  wit  legs  and  feet  and  whatever  parts 
[20]  are  possessed  of  the  same  powers.  Now 
it  is  evident  both  by  observation  and  by  infer¬ 
ence  that  the  source  of  the  nutritive  soul  is  in 
the  midst  of  the  three  parts.  For  many  animals, 
when  either  part — the  head  or  the  receptacle 
[25]  of  the  food — is  cut  off,  retain  life  in  that 
member  to  which  the  middle  remains  attached. 
This  can  be  seen  to  occur  in  many  insects,  e.g. 
wasps  and  bees,  and  many  animals  also  besides 
insects  can,  though  divided,  continue  to  live  by 
means  of  the  part  connected  with  nutrition. 

While  this  member  is  indeed  in  actuality 
single,  yet  potentially  it  is  multiple,  for  these 
animals  have  a  constitution  similar  to  that  of 
[jo]  plants;  plants  when  cut  into  sections  con¬ 
tinue  to  live,  and  a  number  of  trees  can  be  de¬ 
rived  from  one  single  source.  A  separate  ac¬ 
count  will  be  given  of  the  reason  why  some 
plants  cannot  live  when  divided,  while  others 
468b  can  be  propagated  by  the  taking  of  slips. 
In  this  respect,  however,  plants  and  insects  are 
alike. 


469®  CHAPTERS  1-4  715 


It  is  true  that  the  nutritive  soul,  in  beings 
possessing  it,  while  actually  single  must  be  po¬ 
tentially  plural.  And  so  it  is  too  with  the  prin¬ 
ciple  of  sensation,  for  evidently  the  divided 
[5]  segments  of  these  animals  have  sensation. 
They  are  unable,  however,  to  preserve  their 
constitution,  as  plants  can,  not  possessing  the 
organs  on  which  the  continuance  of  life  de¬ 
pends,  for  some  lack  the  means  for  seizing, 
others  for  receiving  their  food;  or  again  they 
may  be  destitute  of  other  organs  as  well. 

Divisible  animals  are  like  a  number  of  ani¬ 
mals  grown  together,  but  animals  of  superior 
[/o]  construction  behave  differently  because 
their  constitution  is  a  unity  of  the  highest  pos¬ 
sible  kind.  Hence  some  of  the  organs  on  divi¬ 
sion  display  slight  sensitiveness  because  they 
retain  some  psychical  susceptibility;  the  ani¬ 
mals  continue  to  move  after  the  vitals  have 
[75]  been  abstracted:  tortoises,  for  example, 
do  so  even  after  the  heart  has  been  removed. 

3 

The  same  phenomenon  is  evident  both  in 
plants  and  in  animals,  and  in  plants  we  note  it 
both  in  their  propagation  by  seed  and  in  grafts 
and  cuttings.  Genesis  from  seeds  always  starts 
from  the  middle.  All  seeds  are  bivalvular,  and 
[20]  the  place  of  junction  is  situated  at  the 
point  of  attachment  (to  the  plant),  an  inter¬ 
mediate  part  belonging  to  both  halves.  It  is 
from  this  part  that  both  root  and  stem  of  grow¬ 
ing  things  emerge;  the  starting-point  is  in  a 
central  position  between  them.  In  the  case  of 
grafts  and  cuttings  this  is  particularly  true  of 
the  buds;  for  the  bud  is  in  a  way  the  starting- 
point  of  the  branch,  but  at  the  same  time  it  is 
[25] in  a  central  position.  Hence  it  is  either  this 
that  is  cut  off,  or  into  this  that  the  new  shoot  is 
inserted,  when  we  wish  either  a  new  branch  or 
a  new  root  to  spring  from  it;  which  proves  that 
the  point  of  origin  in  growth  is  intermediate 
between  stem  and  root. 

Likewise  in  sanguineous  animals  the  heart 
is  the  first  organ  developed;  this  is  evident 
from  what  has  been  observed  in  those  cases 
where  observation  of  their  growth  is  possible. 
[50]  Hence  in  bloodless  animals  also  what 
corresponds  to  the  heart  must  develop  first. 
We  have  already  asserted  in  our  treatise  on 
The  Parts  of  Animals 1  that  it  is  from  the  heart 
469®  that  the  veins  issue,  and  that  in  sanguin¬ 
eous  animals  the  blood  is  the  final  nutriment 
from  which  the  members  are  formed.  Hence 
it  is  clear  that  there  is  one  function  in  nutrition 

1  Cf.  On  the  Parts  of  Animals ,  iii,  66 5b  15. 


which  the  mouth  has  the  faculty  of  perform¬ 
ing,  and  a  different  one  appertaining  to  the 
stomach.  But  it  is  the  heart  that  has  supreme 
control,  exercising  an  additional  and  complet¬ 
ing  function.  Hence  in  sanguineous  animals 
[5]  the  source  both  of  the  sensitive  and  of  the 
nutritive  soul  must  be  in  the  heart,  for  the 
functons  relative  to  nutrition  exercised  by  the 
other  parts  are  ancillary  to  the  activity  of  the 
heart.  It  is  the  part  of  the  dominating  organ 
to  achieve  the  final  result,  as  of  the  physician’s 
efforts  to  be  directed  towards  health,  and  not 
to  be  occupied  with  subordinate  offices. 

[/o]  Certainly,  however,  all  saguineous  ani¬ 
mals  have  the  supreme  organ  of  the  sense- 
faculties  in  the  heart,  for  it  is  here  that  we 
must  look  for  the  common  sensorium  belong¬ 
ing  to  all  the  sense-organs.  These  in  two  cases, 
taste  and  touch,  can  be  clearly  seen  to  extend 
to  the  heart,  and  hence  the  others  also  must 
[75]  lead  to  it,  for  in  it  the  other  organs  may 
possibly  initiate  changes,  whereas  with  the 
upper  region  of  the  body  taste  and  touch  have 
no  connexion.  Apart  from  these  considera¬ 
tions,  if  the  life  is  always  located  in  this  part, 
evidently  the  principle  of  sensation  must  be 
situated  there  too,  for  it  is  qua  animal  that  an 
animal  is  said  to  be  a  living  thing,  and  it  is 
called  animal  because  endowed  with  sensation. 
[20]  Elsewhere  in  other  works2  we  have  stated 
the  reasons  why  some  of  the  sense-organs  are, 
as  is  evident,  connected  with  the  heart,  while 
others  are  situated  in  the  head.  (It  is  this  fact 
that  causes  some  people  to  think  that  it  is  in 
virtue  of  the  brain  that  the  function  of  percep¬ 
tion  belongs  to  animals.) 

4 

Thus  if,  on  the  one  hand,  we  look  to  the  ob¬ 
served  facts,  what  we  have  said  makes  it  clear 
that  the  source  of  the  sensitive  soul,  together 
with  that  connected  with  growth  and  nutri- 
[25]  tion,  is  situated  in  this  organ  and  in  the 
central  one  of  the  three  divisions  of  the  body. 
But  it  follows  by  deduction  also;  for  we  see 
that  in  every  case,  when  several  results  are 
open  to  her,  Nature  always  brings  to  pass  the 
best.  Now  if  both  principles  are  located  in  the 
[50]  midst  of  the  substance,  the  two  parts  of 
the  body,  viz.  that  which  elaborates  and  that 
which  receives  the  nutriment  in  its  final  form 
will  best  perform  their  appropriate  function; 
for  the  soul  will  then  be  close  to  each,  and  the 
central  situation  which  it  will,  as  such,  occupy 
is  the  position  of  a  dominating  power. 

2  Ibid.,  1 1,  656b  5. 


7i 6  ON  YOUTH  AND  OLD  AGE,  ETC.  470*> 


469b  Further,  that  which  employs  an  instru¬ 
ment  and  the  instrument  it  employs  must  be 
distinct  (and  must  be  spatially  diverse  too,  if 
possible,  as  in  capacity),  just  as  the  flute  and 
that  which  plays  it — the  hand — are  diverse. 
Thus  if  animal  is  defined  by  the  possession  of 
sensitive  soul,  this  soul  must  in  the  sanguin- 
[5]  eous  animals  be  in  the  heart,  and,  in  the 
bloodless  ones,  in  the  corresponding  part  of 
their  body.  But  in  animals  all  the  members 
and  the  whole  body  possess  some  connate 
warmth  of  constitution,  and  hence  when  alive 
they  are  observed  to  be  warm,  but  when  dead 
and  deprived  of  life  they  are  the  opposite,  ln- 
[/o]  deed,  the  source  of  this  warmth  must  be 
in  the  heart  in  sanguineous  animals,  and  in  the 
case  of  bloodless  animals  in  the  corresponding 
organ,  for,  though  all  parts  of  the  body  by 
means  of  their  natural  heat  elaborate  and 
concoct  the  nutriment,  the  governing  organ 
takes  the  chief  share  in  this  process.  Hence, 
though  the  other  members  become  cold,  life 
remains;  but  when  the  warmth  here  is 
quenched,  death  always  ensues,  because  the 
source  of  heat  in  all  the  other  members  de- 
[75]  pends  on  this,  and  the  soul  is,  as  it  were, 
set  aglow  with  fire  in  this  part,  which  in  san¬ 
guineous  animals  is  the  heart  and  in  the  blood¬ 
less  order  the  analogous  member.  Hence,  of 
necessity,  life  must  be  coincident  with  the 
maintenance  of  heat,  and  what  we  call  death 
[20]  is  its  destruction. 

5 

However,  it  is  to  be  noticed  that  there  are 
two  ways  in  which  fire  ceases  to  exist;  it  may 
go  out  either  by  exhaustion  or  by  extinction. 
That  which  is  self-caused  we  call  exhaustion, 
that  due  to  its  opposites  extinction.  [The  for¬ 
mer  is  that  due  to  old  age,  the  latter  to  vio¬ 
lence.]  But  either  of  these  ways  in  which  fire 
ceases  to  be  may  be  brought  about  by  the  same 
cause,  for,  when  there  is  a  deficiency  of  nutri- 
[25]  ment  and  the  warmth  can  obtain  no 
maintenance,  the  fire  fails;  and  the  reason  is 
that  the  opposite,  checking  digestion,  prevents 
the  fire  from  being  fed.  But  in  other  cases  the 
result  is  exhaustion, — when  the  heat  accumu¬ 
lates  excessively  owing  to  lack  of  respiration 
and  of  refrigeration.  For  in  this  case  what  hap¬ 
pens  is  that  the  heat,  accumulating  in  great 

Quantity,  quickly  uses  up  its  nutriment  and 
30]  consumes  it  all  before  more  is  sent  up  by 
evaporation.  Hence  not  only  is  a  smaller  fire 
readily  put  out  by  a  large  one,  but  of  itself  the 
candle  flame  is  consumed  when  inserted  in  a 


470®  large  blaze,  just  as  is  the  case  with  any 
other  combustible.  The  reason  is  that  the  nutri¬ 
ment  in  the  flame  is  seized  by  the  larger  one 
before  fresh  fuel  can  be  added,  for  fire  is  ever 
coming  into  being  and  rushing  just  like  a  riv¬ 
er,  but  so  speedily  as  to  elude  observation. 

[5]  Clearly  therefore,  if  the  bodily  heat  must 
be  conserved  (as  is  necessary  if  life  is  to  con¬ 
tinue),  there  must  be  some  way  of  cooling  the 
heat  resident  in  the  source  of  warmth.  Take  as 
an  illustration  what  occurs  when  coals  are  con¬ 
fined  in  a  brazier.  If  they  are  kept  covered  up 
continuously  by  the  so-called  ‘choker’,  they  are 
[10]  quickly  extinguished,  but,  if  the  lid  is  in 
rapid  alternation  lifted  up  and  put  on  again 
they  remain  glowing  for  a  long  time.  Banking 
up  a  fire  also  keeps  it  in,  for  the  ashes,  being 
porous,  do  not  prevent  the  passage  of  air,  and 
again  they  enable  it  to  resist  extinction  by  the 
surrounding  air  by  means  of  the  supply  of  heat 
which  it  possesses.  However,  we  have  stated 
[75]  in  The  Problems  the  reasons  why  these 
operations,  namely  banking  up  and  covering 
up  a  fire,  have  the  opposite  effects  (in  the  one 
case  the  fire  goes  out,  in  the  other  it  continues 
alive  for  a  considerable  time). 

6 

[20]  Everything  living  has  soul,  and  it,  as  we 
have  said,  cannot  exist  without  the  presence  of 
heat  in  the  constitution.  In  plants  the  natural 
heat  is  sufficiently  well  kept  alive  by  the  aid 
which  their  nutriment  and  the  surrounding 
air  supply.  For  the  food  has  a  cooling  effect  [as 
it  enters,  just  as  it  has  in  man]  when  first  it  is 
taken  in,  whereas  abstinence  from  food  pro- 
[25]  duces  heat  and  thirst.  The  air,  if  it  be 
motionless,  becomes  hot,  but  by  the  entry  of 
food  a  motion  is  set  up  which  lasts  until  di¬ 
gestion  is  completed  and  so  cools  it.  If  the  sur¬ 
rounding  air  is  excessively  cold  owing  to  the 
time  of  year,  there  being  severe  frost,  plants 
shrivel,  or  if,  in  the  extreme  heats  of  summer 
the  moisture  drawn  from  the  ground  cannot 
[^o]  produce  its  cooling  effect,  the  heat  comes 
to  an  end  by  exhaustion.  Trees  suffering  at 
such  seasons  are  said  to  be  blighted  or  star- 
stricken.  Hence  the  practice  of  laying  beneath 
the  roots  stones  of  certain  species  or  water  in 
pots,  for  the  purpose  of  cooling  the  roots  of 
the  plants. 

470b  Some  animals  pass  their  life  in  the  wa¬ 
ter,  others  in  the  air,  and  therefore  these  media 
furnish  the  source  and  means  of  refrigeration, 
water  in  the  one  case,  air  in  the  other.  We 
must  proceed — and  it  will  require  further  ap- 


471b  CHAPTERS  4-9  (3)  717 


plication  on  our  part — to  give  an  account  of 
[5]  the  way  and  manner  in  which  this  refrig¬ 
eration  occurs. 

{Chapter  1  of  that  part  which  deals  specially 
with  Breathing) 

7 

A  few  of  the  previous  physical  philosophers 
have  spoken  of  respiration.  The  reason,  how¬ 
ever,  why  it  exists  in  animals  they  have  either 
not  declared  or,  when  they  have,  their  state¬ 
ments  are  not  correct  and  show  a  comparative 
lack  of  acquaintance  with  the  facts.  Moreover 
they  assert  that  all  animals  respire — which  is 
[/o]  untrue.  Hence  these  points  must  first 
claim  our  attention,  in  order  that  we  may  not 
be  thought  to  make  unsubstantiated  charges 
against  authors  no  longer  alive. 

First  then,  it  is  evident  that  all  animals  with 
lungs  breathe,  but  in  some  cases  breathing  ani¬ 
mals  have  a  bloodless  and  spongy  lung,  and 
then  there  is  less  need  for  respiration.  These 
[75]  animals  can  remain  under  water  for  a 
time,  which  relatively  to  their  bodily  strength, 
is  considerable.  All  oviparous  animals,  e.g.  the 
frog-tribe,  have  a  spongy  lung.  Also  hemydes 
and  tortoises  can  remain  for  a  long  time  im- 
[20]  mersed  in  water;  for  their  lung,  contain¬ 
ing  little  blood,  has  not  much  heat.  Hence, 
when  once  it  is  inflated,  it  itself,  by  means  of 
its  motion,  produces  a  cooling  effect  and  en¬ 
ables  the  animal  to  remain  immersed  for  a 
long  time.  Suffocation,  however,  always  en¬ 
sues  if  the  animal  is  forced  to  hold  its  breath 
for  too  long  a  time,  for  none  of  this  class  take 
in  water  in  the  way  fishes  do.  On  the  other 
hand,  animals  which  have  the  lung  charged 
[25]  with  blood  have  greater  need  of  respira¬ 
tion  on  account  of  the  amount  of  their  heat, 
while  none  at  all  of  the  others  which  do  not 
possess  lungs  breathe. 

8(2) 

Democritus  of  Abdera  and  certain  others  who 
have  treated  of  respiration,  while  saying 
nothing  definite  about  the  lungless  animals, 
[jo]  nevertheless  seem  to  speak  as  if  all 
breathed.  But  Anaxagoras  and  Diogenes  both 
maintain  that  all  breathe,  and  state  the  man¬ 
ner  in  which  fishes  and  oysters  respire.  Anaxa¬ 
goras  says  that  when  fishes  discharge  water 
through  their  gills,  air  is  formed  in  the  mouth, 
471a  for  there  can  be  no  vacuum,  and  that  it 
is  by  drawing  in  this  that  they  respire.  Dioge¬ 
nes’  statement  is  that,  when  they  discharge 


water  through  their  gills,  they  suck  the  air  out 
of  the  water  surrounding  the  mouth  by  means 
of  the  vacuum  formed  in  the  mouth,  for  he  be¬ 
lieves  there  is  air  in  the  water. 

[5]  But  these  theories  are  untenable.  Firstly, 
they  state  only  what  is  the  common  element  in 
both  operations  and  so  leave  out  the  half  of 
the  matter.  For  what  goes  by  the  name  of  res¬ 
piration  consists,  on  the  one  hand,  of  inhala¬ 
tion,  and,  on  the  other,  of  the  exhalation  of 
breath;  but,  about  the  latter  they  say  nothing, 
nor  do  they  describe  how  such  animals  emit 
their  breath.  Indeed,  explanation  is  for  them 
[/o]  impossible  for,  when  the  creatures  respire, 
they  must  discharge  their  breath  by  the  same 
passage  as  that  by  which  they  draw  it  in,  and 
this  must  happen  in  alternation.  Hence,  as  a 
result,  they  must  take  the  water  into  their 
mouth  at  the  same  time  as  they  breathe  out. 
But  the  air  and  the  water  must  meet  and  ob¬ 
struct  each  other.  Further,  when  they  dis¬ 
charge  the  water  they  must  emit  their  breath 
[75]  by  the  mouth  or  the  gills,  and  the  result 
will  be  that  they  will  breathe  in  and  breathe 
out  at  the  same  time,  for  it  is  at  that  moment 
that  respiration  is  said  to  occur.  But  it  is  im¬ 
possible  that  they  should  do  both  at  the  same 
time.  Hence,  if  respiring  creatures  must  both 
exhale  and  inhale  the  air,  and  if  none  of  these 
animals  can  breathe  out,  evidently  none  can 
respire  at  all. 

9  (3) 

[20]  Further,  the  assertion  that  they  draw  in 
air  out  of  the  mouth  or  out  of  the  water  by 
means  of  the  mouth  is  an  impossibility,  for, 
not  having  a  lung,  they  have  no  windpipe; 
rather  the  stomach  is  closely  juxtaposed  to  the 
mouth,  so  that  they  must  do  the  sucking  with 
the  stomach.  But  in  that  case  the  other  animals 
would  do  so  also,  which  is  not  the  truth;  and 
the  water-animals  also  would  be  seen  to  do  it 
[25]  when  out  of  the  water,  whereas  quite 
evidently  they  do  not.  Further,  in  all  animals 
that  respire  and  draw  breath  there  is  to  be 
observed  a  certain  motion  in  the  part  of  the 
body  which  draws  in  the  air,  but  in  the  fishes 
this  does  not  occur.  Fishes  do  not  appear  to 
move  any  of  the  parts  in  the  region  of  the 
stomach,  except  the  gills  alone,  and  these  move 
both  when  they  are  in  the  water  and  when 
[30]  they  are  thrown  on  to  dry  land  and  gasp. 
471b  Moreover,  always  when  respiring  ani¬ 
mals  are  killed  by  being  suffocated  in  water, 
bubbles  are  formed  of  the  air  which  is  forci¬ 
bly  discharged,  as  happens,  e.g.  when  one 


18  ON  BREATHING  472b 


forces  a  tortoise  or  a  frog  or  any  other  animal 
of  a  similar  class  to  stay  beneath  water.  But 
with  fishes  this  result  never  occurs,  in  what¬ 
soever  way  we  try  to  obtain  it,  since  they  do 
[5]  not  contain  air  drawn  from  an  external 
source.  Again,  the  manner  of  respiration  said 
to  exist  in  them  might  occur  in  the  case  of  men 
also  when  they  are  under  water.  For  if  fishes 
draw  in  air  out  of  the  surrounding  water  by 
means  of  their  mouth  why  should  not  men  too 
and  other  animals  do  so  also;  they  should  also, 
in  the  same  way  as  fishes,  draw  in  air  out  of 
[/o]  the  mouth.  If  in  the  former  case  it  were 
possible,  so  also  should  it  be  in  the  latter.  But, 
since  in  the  one  it  is  not  so,  neither  does  it  oc¬ 
cur  in  the  other.  Furthermore,  why  do  fishes, 
if  they  respire,  die  in  the  air  and  gasp  (as  can 
be  seen)  as  in  suffocation?  It  is  not  want  of 
food  that  produces  this  effect  upon  them,  and 
[75]  the  reason  given  by  Diogenes  is  foolish, 
for  he  says  that  in  air  they  take  in  too  much 
air  and  hence  die,  but  in  the  water  they  take 
in  a  moderate  amount.  But  that  should  be  a 
possible  occurrence  with  land  animals  also;  as 
facts  are,  however,  no  land  animal  seems  to  be 
suffocated  by  excessive  respiration.  Again,  if 
all  animals  breathe,  insects  must  do  so  also. 
[20]  But  many  of  them  seem  to  live  though  di¬ 
vided  not  merely  into  two,  but  into  several 
parts,  e.g.  the  class  called  Scolopendra.  But 
how  can  they,  when  thus  divided,  breathe,  and 
what  is  the  organ  they  employ?  The  main  rea¬ 
son  why  these  writers  have  not  given  a  good 
account  of  these  facts  is  that  they  have  no  ac- 
uaintance  with  the  internal  organs,  and  that 
25]  they  did  not  accept  the  doctrine  that 
there  is  a  final  cause  for  whatever  Nature  does. 
If  they  had  asked  for  what  purpose  respiration 
exists  in  animals,  and  had  considered  this  with 
reference  to  the  organs,  e.g.  the  gills  and  the 
lungs,  they  would  have  discovered  the  reason 
more  speedily. 

10(4) 

[30]  Democritus,  however,  does  teach  that  in 
the  breathing  animals  there  is  a  certain  result 
produced  by  respiration;  he  asserts  that  it  pre¬ 
vents  the  soul  from  being  extruded  from  the 
472a  body.  Nevertheless,  he  by  no  means  as¬ 
serts  that  it  is  for  this  purpose  that  Nature  so 
contrives  it,  for  he,  like  the  other  physical  phi¬ 
losophers,  altogether  fails  to  attain  to  any  such 
explanation.  His  statement  is  that  the  soul  and 
the  hot  element  are  identical,  being  the  prima¬ 
ry  forms  among  the  spherical  particles.  Hence, 
[5]  when  these  are  being  crushed  together  by 


the  surrounding  atmosphere  thrusting  them 
out,  respiration,  according  to  his  account, 
comes  in  to  succour  them.  For  in  the  air  there 
are  many  of  those  particles  which  he  calls 
mind  and  soul.  Hence,  when  we  breathe  and 
the  air  enters,  these  enter  along  with  it,  and  by 
their  action  cancel  the  pressure,  thus  prevent¬ 
ing  the  expulsion  of  the  soul  which  resides  in 
the  animal. 

[/o]  This  explains  why  life  and  death  are 
bound  up  with  the  taking  in  and  letting  out  of 
the  breath;  for  death  occurs  when  the  compres¬ 
sion  by  the  surrounding  air  gains  the  upper 
hand,  and,  the  animal  being  unable  to  respire, 
the  air  from  outside  can  no  longer  enter  and 
counteract  the  compression.  Death  is  the  de- 
[75]  parture  of  those  forms  owing  to  the  ex¬ 
pulsive  pressure  exerted  by  the  surrounding 
air.  Death,  however,  occurs  not  by  haphazard 
but,  when  natural,  owing  to  old  age,  and, 
when  unnatural,  to  violence. 

But  the  reason  for  this  and  why  all  must  die 
Democritus  has  by  no  means  made  clear.  And 
yet,  since  evidently  death  occurs  at  one  time  of 
life  and  not  at  another,  he  should  have  said 
[20]  whether  the  cause  is  external  or  internal. 
Neither  does  he  assign  the  cause  of  the  begin¬ 
ning  of  respiration,  nor  say  whether  it  is  inter¬ 
nal  or  external.  Indeed,  it  is  not  the  case  that 
the  external  mind  superintends  the  reinforce¬ 
ment;  rather  the  origin  of  breathing  and  of  the 
respiratory  motion  must  be  within:  it  is  not 
due  to  pressure  from  around.  It  is  absurd  also 
that  what  surrounds  should  compress  and  at 
the  same  time  by  entering  dilate.  This  then  is 
[25]  practically  his  theory,  and  how  he  puts  it. 

But  if  we  must  consider  that  our  previous 
account  is  true,  and  that  respiration  does  not 
occur  in  every  animal,  we  must  deem  that  this 
explains  death  not  universally,  but  only  in  re¬ 
spiring  animals.  Yet  neither  is  it  a  good  ac- 
[30]  count  of  these  even,  as  may  clearly  be 
seen  from  the  facts  and  phenomena  of  which 
we  all  have  experience.  For  in  hot  weather  we 
grow  warmer,  and,  having  more  need  of  res¬ 
piration,  we  always  breathe  faster.  But,  when 
the  air  around  is  cold  and  contracts  and  solidi¬ 
fies  the  body,  retardation  of  the  breathing  re- 
[35]  suits.  Yet  this  was  just  the  time  when  the 
external  air  should  enter  and  annul  the  expul- 
472b  sive  movement,  whereas  it  is  the  opposite 
that  occurs.  For  when  the  breath  is  not  let  out 
and  the  heat  accumulates  too  much  then  we 
need  to  respire,  and  to  respire  we  must  draw 
in  the  breath.  When  hot,  people  breathe  rap- 
[5]  icily,  because  they  must  do  so  in  order  to 


473b  CHAPTERS 

cool  themselves,  just  when  the  theory  of  De¬ 
mocritus  would  make  them  add  fire  to  fire. 

ii  (5) 

The  theory  found  in  the  Timaeus,  of  the 
passing  round  of  the  breath  by  pushing,  by  no 
means  determines  how,  in  the  case  of  the  ani¬ 
mals  other  than  land-animals,  their  heat  is  pre¬ 
served,  and  whether  it  is  due  to  the  same  or  a 
different  cause.  For  if  respiration  occurs  only 
in  land-animals  we  should  be  told  what  is  the 
[/o]  reason  of  that.  Likewise,  if  it  is  found  in 
others  also,  but  in  a  different  form,  this  form 
of* respiration,  if  they  all  can  breathe,  must  also 
be  described. 

Further,  the  method  of  explaining  involves 
a  fiction.  It  is  said  that  when  the  hot  air  issues 
from  the  mouth  it  pushes  the  surrounding  air, 
which  being  carried  on  enters  the  very  place 
[75]  whence  the  internal  warmth  issued, 
through  the  interstices  of  the  porous  flesh;  and 
this  reciprocal  replacement  is  due  to  the  fact 
that  a  vacuum  cannot  exist.  But  when  it  has 
become  hot  the  air  passes  out  again  by  the 
same  route,  and  pushes  back  inwards  through 
the  mouth  the  air  that  had  been  discharged  in 
a  warm  condition.  It  is  said  that  it  is  this  ac¬ 
tion  which  goes  on  continuously  when  the 
breath  is  taken  in  and  let  out. 

[20]  But  according  to  this  way  of  thinking  it 
will  follow  that  we  breathe  out  before  we 
breathe  in.  But  the  opposite  is  the  case,  as  evi¬ 
dence  shows,  for  though  these  two  functions 
go  on  in  alternation,  yet  the  last  act  when  life 
comes  to  a  close  is  the  letting  out  of  the  breath, 
and  hence  its  admission  must  have  been  the 
beginning  of  the  process. 

Once  more,  those  who  give  this  kind  of  ex¬ 
planation  by  no  means  state  the  final  cause  of 
the  presence  in  animals  of  this  function  (to 
[25]  wit  the  admission  and  emission  of  the 
breath),  but  treat  it  as  though  it  were  a  con¬ 
tingent  accompaniment  of  life.  Yet  it  evidently 
has  control  over  life  and  death,  for  it  results 
synchronously  that  when  respiring  animals  are 
unable  to  breathe  they  perish.  Again,  it  is  ab- 
[30]  surd  that  the  passage  of  the  hot  air  out 
through  the  mouth  and  back  again  should  be 
quite  perceptible,  while  we  were  not  able  to 
detect  the  thoracic  influx  and  the  return  out¬ 
wards  once  more  of  the  heated  breath.  It  is  also 
nonsense  that  respiration  should  consist  in  the 
entrance  of  heat,  for  the  evidence  is  to  the  con¬ 
trary  effect;  what  is  breathed  out  is  hot,  and 
[35]  what  is  breathed  in  is  cold.  When  it  is  hot 
we  pant  in  breathing,  for,  because  what  enters 


9  (3)— 13  (7)  719 

473a  does  not  adequately  perform  its  cooling 
function,  we  have  as  a  consequence  to  draw 
the  breath  frequently. 

12(6) 

It  is  certain,  however,  that  we  must  not  en¬ 
tertain  the  notion  that  it  is  for  purposes  of  nu¬ 
trition  that  respiration  is  designed,  and  be¬ 
lieve  that  the  internal  fire  is  fed  by  the  breath; 
[5]  respiration,  as  it  were,  adding  fuel  to  the 
fire,  while  the  feeding  of  the  flame  results  in 
the  outward  passage  of  the  breath.  To  combat 
this  doctrine  I  shall  repeat  what  I  said  in  op¬ 
position  to  the  previous  theories.  This,  or 
something  analogous  to  it,  should  occur  in  the 
other  animals  also  (on  this  theory),  for  all  pos- 
[/o]  sess  vital  heat.  Further,  how  are  we  to 
describe  this  fictitious  process  of  the  genera¬ 
tion  of  heat  from  the  breath?  Observation 
shows  rather  that  it  is  a  product  of  the  food.  A 
consequence  also  of  this  theory  is  that  the  nu¬ 
triment  would  enter  and  the  refuse  be  dis¬ 
charged  by  the  same  channel,  but  this  does  not 
appear  to  occur  in  the  other  instances. 

13  (7) 

[75]  Empedocles  also  gives  an  account  of  res¬ 
piration  without,  however,  making  clear  what 
its  purpose  is,  or  whether  or  not  it  is  universal 
in  animals.  Also  when  dealing  with  respiration 
by  means  of  the  nostrils  he  imgaines  he  is  deal¬ 
ing  with  what  is  the  primary  kind  of  respira¬ 
tion.  Even  the  breath  which  passes  through 
the  nostrils  passes  through  the  windpipe  out 
[20]  of  the  chest  as  well,  and  without  the  lat¬ 
ter  the  nostrils  cannot  act.  Again,  when  ani¬ 
mals  are  bereft  of  respiration  through  the  nos¬ 
trils,  no  detrimental  result  ensues,  but,  when 
prevented  from  breathing  through  the  wind¬ 
pipe,  they  die.  Nature  employs  respiration 
through  the  nostrils  as  a  secondary  function  in 
[25]  certain  animals  in  order  to  enable  them 
to  smell.  But  the  reason  why  it  exists  in  some 
only  is  that  though  almost  all  animals  are  en¬ 
dowed  with  the  sense  of  smell,  the  sense-organ 
is  not  the  same  in  all. 

A  more  precise  account  has  been  given  about 
473b  this  elsewhere.1  Empedocles,  however, 
explains  the  passage  inwards  and  outwards  of 
the  breath,  by  the  theory  that  there  are  certain 
blood-vessels,  which,  while  containing  blood, 
are  not  filled  by  it,  but  have  passages  leading 
to  the  outer  air,  the  calibre  of  which  is  fine  in 

1Cf.  On  the  Soul ,  111,  42 ia  10;  Sense  and  the  Sensible , 
chapter  5,  443*  4,  444b  7-15;  History  of  Animals ,  iv, 
534®  1 6;  On  the  Parts  of  Animals ,  11,  659b  15. 


J20 

contrast  to  the  size  of  the  solid  particles,  but 
[5]  large  relatively  to  those  in  the  air.  Hence, 
since  it  is  the  nature  of  the  blood  to  move  up¬ 
wards  and  downwards,  when  it  moves  down 
the  air  rushes  in  and  inspiration  occurs;  when 
the  blood  rises,  the  air  is  forced  out  and  the 
outward  motion  of  the  breath  results.  He  com¬ 
pares  this  process  to  what  occurs  in  a  clepsydra. 

Thus  all  things  outwards  breathe  and  in; — 
their  flesh  has  tubes 

[/o]  Bloodless,  that  stretch  towards  the  body's 
outmost  edge, 

Which,  at  their  mouths,  full  many  frequent 
channels  pierce, 

Cleaving  the  extreme  nostrils  through;  thus, 
while  the  gore 

Lies  hid,  for  air  is  cut  a  thoroughfare  most 
plain. 

And  thence,  whenever  shrinks  away  the  ten¬ 
der  blood, 

[75]  Enters  the  blustering  wind  with  swelling 
billow  wild. 

But  when  the  blood  leaps  up,  backward  it 
breathes.  As  when 

With  water-cloc\  of  polished  bronze  a  maiden 
sporting, 

Sets  on  her  comely  hand  the  narrow  of  the  tube 
And  dips  it  in  the  frail-formed  water  s  silvery 
sheen; 

[20]  Not  then  the  flood  the  vessel  enters,  but 
the  air, 

Pressing  within  on  the  dense  orifices,  checks  it, 
Until  she  frees  the  crowded  stream.  But  then 
indeed 

Upon  the  air's  escape  runs  in  the  water  meet . 
So  also  when  within  the  vessel's  deeps  the  wa¬ 
ter 

[25]  Remains,  the  opening  by  the  hand  of 
flesh  being  closed, 

The  outer  air  that  entrance  craves  restrains  the 
flood 

At  the  gates  of  the  sounding  narrow,  upon  the 
surface  pressing, 

474a  Until  the  maid  withdraws  her  hand.  But 
then  in  contrariwise 

Once  more  the  air  comes  in  and  water  meet 
flows  out. 

Thus  to  the  subtle  blood,  surging  throughout 
the  limbs, 

Whene'er  it  shrinks  away  into  the  far  recesses 
Admits  a  stream  of  air  rushing  with  swelling 
wave, 

[5]  But,  when  it  bac\ward  leaps,  in  li\e  bul\ 
air  flows  out. 

This  then  is  what  he  says  of  respiration.  But, 


474b 

as  we  said,  all  animals  that  evidentily  respire 
do  so  by  means  of  the  windpipe,  when  they 
breathe  either  through  the  mouth  or  through 
the  nostrils.  Hence,  if  it  is  of  this  kind  of  res- 
[/o]  piration  that  he  is  talking,  we  must  ask 
how  it  tallies  with  the  explanation  given.  But 
the  facts  seem  to  be  quite  opposed.  The  chest  is 
raised  in  the  manner  of  a  forge-bellows  when 
the  breath  is  drawn  in — it  is  quite  reasonable 
that  it  should  be  heat  which  raises  up  and  that 
the  blood  should  occupy  the  hot  region — but  it 
collapses  and  sinks  down,  like  the  bellows  once 
[75]  more,  when  the  breath  is  let  out.  The 
difference  is  that  in  a  bellows  it  is  not  by  the 
same  channel  that  the  air  is  taken  in  and  let 
out,  but  in  breathing  it  is. 

But,  if  Empedocles  is  accounting  only  for 
respiration  through  the  nostrils,  he  is  much  in 
error,  for  that  does  not  involve  the  nostrils 
alone,  but  passes  by  the  channel  beside  the 
[20]  uvula  where  the  extremity  of  the  roof  of 
the  mouth  is,  some  of  the  air  going  this  way 
through  the  apertures  of  the  nostrils  and  some 
through  the  mouth,  both  when  it  enters  and 
when  it  passes  out.  Such  then  is  the  nature 
and  magnitude  of  the  difficulties  besetting  the 
theories  of  other  writers  concerning  respira- 
tion.  ,Qv 

[25]  We  have  already  stated  that  life  and  the 
presence  of  soul  involve  a  certain  heat.  Not 
even  the  digesting  process  to  which  is  due  the 
nutrition  of  animals  occurs  apart  from  soul 
and  warmth,  for  it  is  to  fire  that  in  all  cases 
elaboration  is  due.  It  is  for  this  reason,  pre¬ 
cisely,  that  the  primary  nutritive  soul  also  must 
[50]  be  located  in  that  part  of  the  body  and  in 
that  division  of  this  region  which  is  the  im- 
474b  mediate  vehicle  of  this  principle.  The 
region  in  question  is  intermediate  between  that 
where  food  enters  and  that  where  excrement  is 
discharged.  In  bloodless  animals  it  has  no 
name,  but  in  the  sanguineous  class  this  organ 
is  called  the  heart.  The  blood  constitutes  the 
nutriment  from  which  the  organs  of  the  ani¬ 
mal  are  directly  formed.  Likewise  the  blood- 
[5]  vessels  must  have  the  same  originating 
source,  since  the  one  exists  for  the  other’s  be¬ 
hoof — as  a  vessel  or  receptacle  for  it.  In  san¬ 
guineous  animals  the  heart  is  the  starting-point 
of  the  veins;  they  do  not  traverse  it,  but  are 
found  to  stretch  out  from  it,  as  dissections  en¬ 
able  us  to  see. 

[70]  Now  the  other  psychical  faculties  cannot 
exist  apart  from  the  power  of  nutrition  (the 
reason  has  already  been  stated  in  the  treatise 


ON  BREATHING 


475b 

On  the  Soul),1  and  this  depends  on  the  natural 
fire,  by  the  union  with  which  Nature  has  set 
it  aglow.  But  fire,  as  we  have  already  stated, 
is  destroyed  in  two  ways,  either  by  extinction 
or  by  exhaustion.  It  suffers  extinction  from  its 
[75]  opposites.  Hence  it  can  be  extinguished 
by  the  surrounding  cold  both  when  in  mass 
and  (though  more  speedily)  when  scattered. 
Now  this  way  of  perishing  is  due  to  violence 
equally  in  living  and  in  lifeless  objects,  for  the 
division  of  an  animal  by  instruments  and  con¬ 
sequent  congelation  by  excess  of  cold  cause 
death.  But  exhaustion  is  due  to  excess  of  heat; 
[20]  for,  if  there  is  too  much  heat  close  at  hand 
and  the  thing  burning  does  not  have  a  fresh 
supply  of  fuel  added  to  it,  it  goes  out  by  ex¬ 
haustion,  not  by  the  action  of  cold.  Hence,  if  it 
is  going  to  continue  it  must  be  cooled,  for 
cold  is  a  preventive  against  this  form  of  extinc¬ 
tion. 

15  (9) 

[25]  Some  animals  occupy  the  water,  others 
live  on  land,  and,  that  being  so,  in  the  case  of 
those  which  are  very  small  and  bloodless  the 
refrigeration  due  to  the  surrounding  water  or 
air  is  sufficient  to  prevent  destruction  from  this 
cause.  Having  little  heat,  they  require  little 
[jo]  cold  to  combat  it.  Hence  too  such  animals 
are  almost  all  short-lived,  for,  being  small, 
they  have  less  scope  for  deflection  towards  ei¬ 
ther  extreme.  But  some  insects  are  longer-lived 
475a  (though  bloodless,  like  all  the  others), 
and  these  have  a  deep  indentation  beneath 
the  waist,  in  order  to  secure  cooling  through 
the  membrane,  which  there  is  thinner.  They 
are  warmer  animals  and  hence  require  more 
refrigeration,  and  such  are  bees  (some  of  which 
[5]  live  as  long  as  seven  years)  and  all  that 
make  a  humming  noise,  like  wasps,  cockchaf¬ 
ers,  and  crickets.  They  make  a  sound  as  if  of 
panting  by  means  of  air,  for,  in  the  middle 
section  itself,  the  air  which  exists  internally 
and  is  involved  in  their  construction,  causing 
a  rising  and  falling  movement,  produces  friction 
against  the  membrane.  The  way  in  which  they 
[/o]  move  this  region  is  like  the  motion  due 
to  the  lungs  in  animals  that  breathe  the  outer 
air,  or  to  the  gills  in  fishes.  What  occurs  is  com¬ 
parable  to  the  suffocation  of  a  respiring  animal 
by  holding  its  mouth,  for  then  the  lung  causes 
a  heaving  motion  of  this  kind.  In  the  case  of 
these  animals  this  internal  motion  is  not  suffi¬ 
cient  for  refrigeration,  but  in  insects  it  is.  It  is 
[75]  by  friction  against  the  membrane  that 
1  On  the  Soul ,  1,  41  ib  18;  11,  4i3b  1. 


721 

they  produce  the  humming  sound,  as  we  said, 
in  the  way  that  children  do  by  blowing 
through  the  holes  of  a  reed  covered  by  a  fine 
membrane.  It  is  thus  that  the  singing  crickets 
too  produce  their  song;  they  possess  greater 
warmth  and  are  indented  at  the  waist,  but  the 
songless  variety  have  no  fissure  there. 

[20]  Animals  also  which  are  sanguineous  and 
possess  a  lung,  though  that  contains  little  blood 
and  is  spongy,  can  in  some  cases,  owing  to  the 
latter  fact,  live  a  long  time  without  breathing; 
for  the  lung,  containing  little  blood  or  fluid, 
can  rise  a  long  way:  its  own  motion  can  for  a 
long  time  produce  sufficient  refrigeration.  But 
[25]  at  last  it  ceases  to  suffice,  and  the  ani¬ 
mal  dies  of  suffocation  if  it  does  not  respire — 
as  we  have  already  said.  For  of  exhaustion  that 
kind  which  is  destruction  due  to  lack  of  refrig¬ 
eration  is  called  suffocation,  and  whatsoever  is 
thus  destroyed  is  said  to  be  suffocated. 

We  have  already  stated  that  among  animals 
insects  do  not  respire,  and  the  fact  is  open  to 
[jo]  observation  in  the  case  of  even  small 
creatures  like  flies  and  bees,  for  they  can  swim 
about  in  a  fluid  for  a  long  time  if  it  is  not  too 
475b  hot  or  too  cold.  Yet  animals  with  little 
strength  tend  to  breathe  more  frequently. 
These,  however,  die  of  what  is  called  suffoca¬ 
tion  when  the  stomach  becomes  filled  and  the 
heat  in  the  central  segment  is  destroyed.  This 
explains  also  why  they  revive  after  being 
among  ashes  for  a  time. 

[5]  Again  among  water-animals  those  that  are 
bloodless  remain  alive  longer  in  air  than  those 
that  have  blood  and  admit  the  sea-water,  as, 
for  example,  fishes.  Since  it  is  a  small  quantity 
of  heat  they  possess,  the  air  is  for  a  long  time 
adequate  for  the  purposes  of  refrigeration  in 
[70]  such  animals  as  the  Crustacea  and  the 
polyps.  It  does  not  however  suffice,  owing  to 
their  want  of  heat,  to  keep  them  finally  in  life, 
for  most  fishes  also  live  though  among  earth, 
yet  in  a  motionless  state,  and  are  to  be  found 
by  digging.  For  all  animals  that  have  no  lung 
at  all  or  have  a  bloodless  one  require  less  re¬ 
frigeration. 

16  (10) 

[75]  Concerning  the  bloodless  animals  we 
have  declared  that  in  some  cases  it  is  the  sur¬ 
rounding  air,  in  others  fluid,  that  aids  the 
maintenance  of  life.  But  in  the  case  of  animals 
possessing  blood  and  heart,  all  which  have  a 
lung  admit  the  air  and  produce  the  cooling  ef¬ 
fect  by  breathing  in  and  out.  All  animals  have 
[20]  a  lung  that  are  viviparous  and  are  so  in- 


CHAPTERS  13  (7)-16  (10) 


722  ON  BREATHING  476b 


ternally,  not  externally  merely  (the  Selachia 
are  viviparous,  but  not  internally),  and  of  the 
oviparous  class  those  that  have  wings,  e.g. 
birds,  and  those  with  scales,  e.g.  tortoises,  liz¬ 
ards,  and  snakes.  The  former  class  have  a  lung 
charged  with  blood,  but  in  the  most  part  of 
the  latter  it  is  spongy.  Hence  they  employ  res- 
[25]  piration  more  sparingly  as  already  said. 
The  function  is  found  also  in  all  that  frequent 
and  pass  their  life  in  the  water,  e.g.  the  class  of 
water-snakes  and  frogs  and  crocodiles  and 
hemydes,  both  sea-  and  land-tortoises,  and 
seals. 

All  these  and  similar  animals  both  bring 
[jo]  forth  on  land  and  sleep  on  shore  or, 
when  they  do  so  in  the  water,  keep  the  head 
4 76a  above  the  surface  in  order  to  respire.  But 
all  with  gills  produce  refrigeration  by  taking 
in  water;  the  Selachia  and  all  other  footless  an¬ 
imals  have  gills.  Fish  are  footless,  and  the 
limbs  they  have  get  their  name  ( wrepvyLOv ) 
[5]  from  their  similarity  to  wings  (7 rrepvt;). 
But  of  those  with  feet  one  only,  so  far  as  ob¬ 
served,  has  gills.  It  is  called  the  tadpole. 

No  animal  yet  has  been  seen  to  possess  both 
lungs  and  gills,  and  the  reason  for  this  is  that 
the  lung  is  designed  for  the  purpose  of  refrig¬ 
eration  by  means  of  the  air  (it  seems  to  have 
derived  its  name  (TvevfjLCOv)  from  its  function 
[10]  as  a  receptacle  of  the  breath  ( Trvedfxa )  ), 
while  gills  are  relevant  to  refrigeration  by  wa¬ 
ter.  Now  for  one  purpose  one  organ  is  adapted 
and  one  single  means  of  refrigeration  is  suffi¬ 
cient  in  every  case.  Hence,  since  we  see  that 
Nature  does  nothing  in  vain,  and  if  there  were 
two  organs  one  would  be  purposeless,  this  is 
[75]  the  reason  why  some  animals  have  gills, 
others  lungs,  but  none  possess  both. 

17  (n) 

Every  animal  in  order  to  exist  requires  nu¬ 
triment,  in  order  to  prevent  itself  from  dying, 
refrigeration;  and  so  Nature  employs  the  same 
organ  for  both  purposes.  For,  as  in  some  cases 
the  tongue  serves  both  for  discerning  tastes 
[20]  and  for  speech,  so  in  animals  with  lungs 
the  mouth  is  employed  both  in  working  up 
the  food  and  in  the  passage  of  the  breath  out¬ 
wards  and  inwards.  In  lungless  and  non-respir¬ 
ing  animals  it  is  employed  in  working  up  the 
food,  while  in  those  of  them  that  require  refrig¬ 
eration  it  is  the  gills  that  are  created  for  this 
purpose. 

[25]  We  shall  state  further  on  how  it  is  that 
these  organs  have  the  faculty  of  producing  re¬ 
frigeration.  But  to  prevent  their  food  from  im¬ 


peding  these  operations  there  is  a  similar  con¬ 
trivance  in  the  respiring  animals  and  in  those 
that  admit  water.  At  the  moment  of  respira¬ 
tion  they  do  not  take  in  food,  for  otherwise 
[jo]  suffocation  results  owing  to  the  food, 
whether  liquid  or  dry,  slipping  in  through  the 
windpipe  and  lying  on  the  lung.  The  wind¬ 
pipe  is  situated  before  the  oesophagus,  through 
which  food  passes  into  what  is  called  the  stom¬ 
ach,  but  in  quadrupeds  which  are  sanguineous 
there  is,  as  it  were,  a  lid  over  the  windpipe — 
the  epiglottis.  In  birds  and  oviparous  quadru- 
4 76b  peds  this  covering  is  absent,  but  its  office 
is  discharged  by  a  contraction  of  the  windpipe. 
The  latter  class  contract  the  windpipe  when 
swallowing  their  food;  the  former  close  down 
the  epiglottis.  When  the  food  has  passed,  the 
epiglottis  is  in  the  one  case  raised,  and  in  the 
other  the  windpipe  is  expanded,  and  the  air 
enters  to  effect  refrigeration.  In  animals  with 
[5]  gills  the  water  is  first  discharged  through 
them  and  then  the  food  passes  in  through  the 
mouth;  they  have  no  windpipe  and  hence  can 
take  no  harm  from  liquid  lodging  in  this  or¬ 
gan,  only  from  its  entering  the  stomach.  For 
these  reasons  the  expulsion  of  water  and  the 
[/o]  seizing  of  their  food  is  rapid,  and  their 
teeth  are  sharp  and  in  almost  all  cases  arranged 
in  a  saw-like  fashion,  for  they  are  debarred 
from  chewing  their  food. 

18  (12) 

Among  water-animals  the  cetaceans  may  give 
rise  to  some  perplexity,  though  they  too  can  be 
rationally  explained. 

[75]  Examples  of  such  animals  are  dolphins 
and  whales,  and  all  others  that  have  a  blow¬ 
hole.  They  have  no  feet,  yet  possess  a  lung 
though  admitting  the  sea-water.  The  reason  for 
possessing  a  lung  is  that  which  we  have  now 
stated  [refrigeration] ;  the  admission  of  water  is 
not  for  the  purpose  of  refrigeration.  That  is  ef¬ 
fected  by  respiration,  for  they  have  a  lung. 
[20]  Hence  they  sleep  with  their  head  out  of 
the  water,  and  dolphins,  at  any  rate,  snore. 
Further,  if  they  are  entangled  in  nets  they  soon 
die  of  suffocation  owing  to  lack  of  respiration, 
and  hence  they  can  be  seen  to  come  to  the  sur¬ 
face  owing  to  the  necessity  of  breathing.  But, 
since  they  have  to  feed  in  the  water,  they  must 
[25]  admit  it,  and  it  is  in  order  to  discharge 
this  that  they  all  have  a  blow-hole;  after  ad¬ 
mitting  the  water  they  expel  it  through  the 
blow-hole  as  the  fishes  do  through  the  gills. 
The  position  of  the  blow-hole  is  an  indication 
of  this,  for  it  leads  to  none  of  the  organs  which 


4 77b  CHAPTERS  16  (10)-20  (14)  723 


are  charged  with  blood;  but  it  lies  before  the 
brain  and  thence  discharges  water. 

[30]  It  is  for  the  very  same  reason  that  mol¬ 
luscs  and  crustaceans  admit  water —  I  mean 
such  animals  as  Carabi  and  Carcini.  For  none 
of  these  is  refrigeration  a  necessity,  for  in  ev¬ 
ery  case  they  have  little  heat  and  are  bloodless, 
and  hence  are  sufficiently  cooled  by  the  sur- 
4 77*  rounding  water.  But  in  feeding  they  ad¬ 
mit  water,  and  hence  must  expel  it  in  order  to 
prevent  its  being  swallowed  simultaneously 
with  the  food.  Thus  crustaceans,  like  the  Car¬ 
cini  and  Carabi,  discharge  water  through  the 
folds  beside  their  shaggy  parts,  while  cuttle¬ 
fish  and  the  polyps  employ  for  this  purpose  the 
hollow  above  the  head.  There  is,  however,  a 
[5]  more  precise  account  of  these  in  the  His¬ 
tory  of  Animals} 

Thus  it  has  been  explained  that  the  cause  of 
the  admission  of  the  water  is  refrigeration,  and 
[/o]  the  fact  that  animals  constituted  for  a  life 
in  water  must  feed  in  it. 

19  (13) 

An  account  must  next  be  given  of  refrigera¬ 
tion  and  the  manner  in  which  it  occurs  in  re¬ 
spiring  animals  and  those  possessed  of  gills.  We 
have  already  said  that  all  animals  with  lungs 
respire.  The  reason  why  some  creatures  have 
[75]  this  organ,  and  why  those  having  it  need 
respiration,  is  that  the  higher  animals  have  a 
greater  proportion  of  heat,  for  at  the  same  time 
they  must  have  been  assigned  a  higher  soul 
and  they  have  a  higher  nature  than  plants. 
Hence  too  those  with  most  blood  and  most 
warmth  in  the  lung  are  of  greater  size,  and 
[20]  that  animal  in  which  the  blood  in  the 
lung  is  purest  and  most  plentiful  is  the  most 
erect,  namely  man;  and  the  reason  why  he 
alone  has  his  upper  part  directed  to  the  upper 
part  of  the  universe  is  that  he  possesses  such  a 
lung.  Hence  this  organ  as  much  as  any  other 
must  be  assigned  to  the  essence  of  the  animal 
both  in  man  and  in  other  cases. 

[25]  This  then  is  the  purpose  of  refrigeration. 
As  for  the  constraining  and  efficient  cause,  we 
must  believe  that  it  created  animals  like  this, 
just  as  it  created  many  others  also  not  of  this 
constitution.  For  some  have  a  greater  propor¬ 
tion  of  earth  in  their  composition,  like  plants, 
and  others,  e.g.  aquatic  animals,  contain  a 
larger  amount  of  water;  while  winged  and  ter¬ 
restrial  animals  have  an  excess  of  air  and  fire 
[30]  respectively.  It  is  always  in  the  region 

1  Cf.  History  of  Animals ,  u.  2;  iv.  1-3. 


proper  to  the  element  preponderating  in  the 
scheme  of  their  constitution  that  things  exist. 

20  (14) 

Empedocles  is  then  in  error  when  he  says 
4 77b  that  those  animals  which  have  the  most 
warmth  and  fire  live  in  the  water  to  counter¬ 
balance  the  excess  of  heat  in  their  constitution, 
in  order  that,  since  they  are  deficient  in  cold 
and  fluid,  they  may  be  kept  in  life  by  the  con¬ 
trary  character  of  the  region  they  occupy;  for 
water  has  less  heat  than  air.  But  it  is  wholly 
[5]  absurd  that  the  water-animals  should  in 
every  case  originate  on  dry  land,  and  after¬ 
wards  change  their  place  of  abode  to  the  wa¬ 
ter;  for  they  are  almost  all  footless.  He,  how¬ 
ever,  when  describing  their  original  structure 
says  that,  though  originating  on  dry  land,  they 
have  abandoned  it  and  migrated  to  the  water. 
But  again  it  is  evident  that  they  are  not  warm- 
[/o]  er  than  land-animals,  for  in  some  cases 
they  have  no  blood  at  all,  in  others  little. 

The  question,  however,  as  to  what  sorts  of 
animals  should  be  called  warm  and  what  cold, 
has  in  each  special  case  received  consideration. 
Though  in  one  respect  there  is  reason  in  the 
explanation  which  Empedocles  aims  at  estab¬ 
lishing,  yet  his  account  is  not  correct.  Excess  in 
[75]  a  bodily  state  is  cured  by  a  situation  or 
season  of  opposite  character,  but  the  constitu¬ 
tion  is  best  maintained  by  an  environment  akin 
to  it.  There  is  a  difference  between  the  materi¬ 
al  of  which  any  animal  is  constituted  and  the 
states  and  dispositions  of  that  material.  For 
example,  if  nature  were  to  constitute  a  thing  of 
wax  or  of  ice,  she  would  not  preserve  it  by 
[20]  putting  it  in  a  hot  place,  for  the  opposing 
quality  would  quickly  destroy  it,  seeing  that 
heat  dissolves  that  which  cold  congeals.  Again, 
a  thing  composed  of  salt  or  nitre  would  not 
be  taken  and  placed  in  water,  for  fluid  dis¬ 
solves  that  of  which  the  consistency  is  due  to 
the  hot  and  the  dry. 

Hence  if  the  fluid  and  the  dry  supply  the 
material  for  all  bodies,  it  is  reasonable  that 
things  the  composition  of  which  is  due  to  the 
fluid  and  the  cold  should  have  liquid  for  their 
[25]  medium  [and,  if  they  are  cold,  they  will 
exist  in  the  cold],  while  that  which  is  due  to 
the  dry  will  be  found  in  the  dry.  Thus  trees 
grow  not  in  water  but  on  dry  land.  But  the 
same  theory  would  relegate  them  to  the  wa¬ 
ter,  on  account  of  their  excess  of  dryness,  just 
as  it  does  the  things  that  are  excessively  fiery. 
They  would  migrate  thither  not  on  account  of 
its  cold  but  owing  to  its  fluidity. 


724  ON  LIFE  AND  DEATH  I  4 78b 


[30]  Thus  the  natural  character  of  the  materi¬ 
al  of  objects  is  of  the  same  nature  as  the  region 
in  which  they  exist;  the  liquid  is  found  in 
4 78a  liquid,  the  dry  on  land,  the  warm  in  air. 
With  regard,  however,  to  states  of  body,  a  cold 
situation  has,  on  the  other  hand,  a  beneficial 
effect  on  excess  of  heat,  and  a  warm  environ¬ 
ment  on  excess  of  cold,  for  the  region  reduces 
to  a  mean  the  excess  in  the  bodily  condition. 
The  regions  appropriate  to  each  material  and 
the  revolutions  of  the  seasons  which  all  expe¬ 
ls]  rience  supply  the  means  which  must  be 
sought  in  order  to  correct  such  excesses;  but, 
while  states  of  the  body  can  be  opposed  in 
character  to  the  environment,  the  material  of 
which  it  is  composed  can  never  be  so.  This, 
then,  is  a  sufficient  explanation  of  why  it  is 
not  owing  to  the  heat  in  their  constitution  that 
some  animals  are  aquatic,  others  terrestrial,  as 
Empedocles  maintains,  and  of  why  some  pos- 
[/o]  sess  lungs  and  others  do  not. 

21  (15) 

The  explanation  of  the  admission  of  air  and 
respiration  in  those  animals  in  which  a  lung 
is  found,  and  especially  in  those  in  which  it  is 
full  of  blood,  is  to  be  found  in  the  fact  that  it 
is  of  a  spongy  nature  and  full  of  tubes,  and 
that  it  is  the  most  fully  charged  with  blood  of 
all  the  visceral  organs.  All  animals  with  a  full- 
[75]  blooded  lung  require  rapid  refrigeration 
because  there  is  little  scope  for  deviation  from 
the  normal  amount  of  their  vital  fire;  the  air 
also  must  penetrate  all  through  it  on  account  of 
the  large  quantity  of  blood  and  heat  it  con¬ 
tains.  But  both  these  operations  can  be  easily 
performed  by  air,  for,  being  of  a  subtle  nature, 
it  penetrates  everywhere  and  that  rapidly,  and 
so  performs  its  cooling  function;  but  water  has 
[20]  the  opposite  characteristics. 

The  reason  why  animals  with  a  full-blooded 
lung  respire  most  is  hence  manifest;  the  more 
heat  there  is,  the  greater  is  the  need  for  refrig¬ 
eration,  and  at  the  same  time  breath  can  easily 
[25]  pass  to  the  source  of  heat  in  the  heart. 

22  (16) 

In  order  to  understand  the  way  in  which  the 
heart  is  connected  with  the  lung  by  means  of 
passages,  we  must  consult  both  dissections  and 
the  account  in  the  History  of  Animals}  The 
universal  cause  of  the  need  which  the  animal 
has  for  refrigeration,  is  the  union  of  the  soul 
with  fire  that  takes  place  in  the  heart.  Respira- 
[30]  tion  is  the  means  of  effecting  refrigera- 
1  History  of  Animals ,  i.  17;  111,  2-3. 


tion,  of  which  those  animals  make  use  that 
possess  a  lung  as  well  as  a  heart.  But  when 
they,  as  for  example  the  fishes,  which  on  ac¬ 
count  of  their  aquatic  nature  have  no  lung, 
possess  the  latter  organ  without  the  former,  the 
cooling  is  effected  through  the  gills  by  means 
of  water.  For  ocular  evidence  as  to  how  the 
[^5]  heart  is  situated  relatively  to  the  gills  we 
must  employ  dissections,  and  for  precise  details 
4 78b  we  must  refer  to  Natural  History.2  As  a 
summarizing  statement,  however,  and  for 
present  purposes,  the  following  is  the  account 
of  the  matter. 

It  might  appear  that  the  heart  has  not  the 
same  position  in  terrestrial  animals  and  in 
fishes,  but  the  position  really  is  identical,  for 
the  apex  of  the  heart  is  in  the  direction  in 
[5]  which  they  incline  their  heads.  But  it  is  to¬ 
wards  the  mouth  in  fishes  that  the  apex  of  the 
heart  points,  seeing  that  they  do  not  incline 
their  heads  in  the  same  direction  as  land-ani¬ 
mals  do.  Now  from  the  extremity  of  the  heart 
a  tube  of  a  sinewy,  arterial  character  runs  to 
the  centre  where  the  gills  all  join.  This  then 
[/o]  is  the  largest  of  those  ducts,  but  on  either 
side  of  the  heart  others  also  issue  and  run  to 
the  extremity  of  each  gill,  and  by  means  of  the 
ceaseless  flow  of  water  through  the  gills,  effect 
the  cooling  which  passes  to  the  heart. 

In  similar  fashion  as  the  fish  move  their  gills, 
respiring  animals  with  rapid  action  raise  and 
let  fall  the  chest  according  as  the  breath  is  ad- 
[75]  mitted  or  expelled.  If  air  is  limited  in 
amount  and  unchanged  they  are  suffocated, 
for  either  medium,  owing  to  contact  with  the 
blood,  rapidly  becomes  hot.  The  heat  of  the 
blood  counteracts  the  refrigeration  and,  when 
respiring  animals  can  no  longer  move  the  lung 
[20]  or  aquatic  animals  their  gills,  whether 
owing  to  disease  or  old  age,  their  death  ensues. 

(On  Life  and  Death  /) 

23  (*7> 

To  be  born  and  to  die  are  common  to  all  ani¬ 
mals,  but  there  are  specifically  diverse  ways  in 
which  these  phenomena  occur;  of  destruction 
there  are  different  types,  though  yet  something 
is  common  to  them  all.  There  is  violent  death 
[25]  and  again  natural  death,  and  the  former 
occurs  when  the  cause  of  death  is  external,  the 
latter  when  it  is  internal,  and  involved  from 
the  beginning  in  the  constitution  of  the  organ, 
and  not  an  affection  derived  from  a  foreign 
2  Ibid.,  11,  507b  3. 


479b  CHAPTERS  20 

source.  In  the  case  of  plants  the  name  given  to 
this  is  withering,  in  animals  senility.  Death 
and  decay  pertain  to  all  things  that  are  not  im¬ 
perfectly  developed;  to  the  imperfect  also  they 
[30]  may  be  ascribed  in  nearly  the  same  but 
not  an  identical  sense.  Under  the  imperfect  I 
class  eggs  and  seeds  of  plants  as  they  are  be¬ 
fore  the  root  appears. 

It  is  always  to  some  lack  of  heat  that  death 
is  due,  and  in  perfect  creatures  the  cause  is  its 
failure  in  the  organ  containing  the  source  of 
the  creature’s  essential  nature.  This  member  is 
situate,  as  has  been  said,  at  the  junction  of  the 
upper  and  lower  parts;  in  plants  it  is  interme¬ 
diate  between  the  root  and  the  stem,  in  san- 
[35]  gtiineous  animals  it  is  the  heart,  and  in 
those  that  are  bloodless  the  corresponding  part 
479a  of  their  body.  But  some  of  these  animals 
have  potentially  many  sources  of  life,  though 
in  actuality  they  possess  only  one.  This  is  why 
some  insects  live  when  divided,  and  why,  even 
among  sanguineous  animals,  all  whose  vitality 
is  not  intense  live  for  a  long  time  after  the 
heart  has  been  removed.  Tortoises,  for  exam- 
[5]  pie,  do  so  and  make  movements  with  their 
feet,  so  long  as  the  shell  is  left,  a  fact  to  be  ex¬ 
plained  by  the  natural  inferiority  of  their  con¬ 
stitution,  as  it  is  in  insects  also. 

The  source  of  life  is  lost  to  its  possessors 
when  the  heat  with  which  it  is  bound  up  is 
no  longer  tempered  by  cooling,  for,  as  I  have 
[/o]  often  remarked,  it  is  consumed  by  itself. 
Hence  when,  owing  to  lapse  of  time,  the  lung 
in  the  one  class  and  the  gills  in  the  other  get 
dried  up,  these  organs  become  hard  and  earthy 
and  incapable  of  movement,  and  cannot  be  ex¬ 
panded  or  contracted.  Finally  things  come  to 
a  climax,  and  the  fire  goes  out  from  exhaus¬ 
tion. 

[75]  Hence  a  small  disturbance  will  speedily 
cause  death  in  old  age.  Little  heat  remains,  for 
the  most  of  it  has  been  breathed  away  in  the 
long  period  of  life  preceding,  and  hence  any 
increase  of  strain  on  the  organ  quickly  causes 
extinction.  It  is  just  as  though  the  heart  con¬ 
tained  a  tiny  feeble  flame  which  the  slightest 
[20]  movement  puts  out.  Hence  in  old  age 
death  is  painless,  for  no  violent  disturbance  is 
required  to  cause  death,  and  there  is  an  entire 
absence  of  feeling  when  the  soul’s  connexion 
is  severed.  All  diseases  which  harden  the  lung 
by  forming  tumours  or  waste  residues,  or  by 
excess  of  morbid  heat,  as  happens  in  fevers, 
[25]  accelerate  the  breathing  owing  to  the  in¬ 
ability  of  the  lung  to  move  far  either  upwards 
or  downwards.  Finally,  when  motion  is  no 


( 14)— 26  (20)  725 

longer  possible,  the  breath  is  given  out  and 

death  ensues.  , 

24  (18) 

Generation  is  the  initial  participation,  medi¬ 
ated  by  warm  substance,  in  the  nutritive  soul, 
and  life  is  the  maintenance  of  this  participa¬ 
te]  tion.  Youth  is  the  period  of  the  growth  of 
the  primary  organ  of  refrigeration,  old  age  of 
its  decay,  while  the  intervening  time  is  the 
prime  of  life. 

A  violent  death  or  dissolution  consists  in  the 
extinction  or  exhaustion  of  the  vital  heat  (for 
either  of  these  may  cause  dissolution),  while 
479b  natural  death  is  the  exhaustion  of  the 
heat  owing  to  lapse  of  time,  and  occurring  at 
the  end  of  life.  In  plants  this  is  to  wither,  in 
animals  to  die.  Death,  in  old  age,  is  the  ex¬ 
haustion  due  to  inability  on  the  part  of  the  or¬ 
gan,  owing  to  old  age,  to  produce  refrigeration. 
[5]  This  then  is  our  account  of  generation  and 
life  and  death,  and  the  reason  for  their  occur¬ 
rence  in  animals. 

25  (19) 

It  is  hence  also  clear  why  respiring  animals 
are  suffocated  in  water  and  fishes  in  air.  For  it 
[jo]  is  by  water  in  the  latter  class,  by  air  in 
the  former  that  refrigeration  is  effected,  and 
either  of  these  means  of  performing  the  func¬ 
tion  is  removed  by  a  change  of  environment. 

There  is  also  to  be  explained  in  either  case 
the  cause  of  the  motion  of  the  gills  and  of  the 
lungs,  the  rise  and  fall  of  which  effects  the  ad¬ 
mission  and  expulsion  of  the  breath  or  of  wa- 
[75]  ter.  The  following,  moreover,  is  the  man¬ 
ner  of  the  constitution  of  the  organ. 

(On  Life  and  Death  II) 

26  (20) 

In  connexion  with  the  heart  there  are  three 
phenomena,  which,  though  apparently  of  the 
same  nature,  are  really  not  so,  namely  palpita¬ 
tion,  pulsation,  and  respiration. 

Palpitation  is  the  rushing  together  of  the  hot 
substance  in  the  heart  owing  to  the  chilling  in- 
[20]  fluence  of  residual  or  waste  products.  It 
occurs,  for  example,  in  the  ailment  known  as 
‘spasms’  and  in  other  diseases.  It  occurs  also  in 
fear,  for  when  one  is  afraid  the  upper  parts  be¬ 
come  cold,  and  the  hot  substance,  fleeing  away, 
by  its  concentration  in  the  heart  produces  pal- 
[25]  pitation.  It  is  crushed  into  so  small  a  space 
that  sometimes  life  is  extinguished,  and  the 
animals  die  of  the  fright  and  morbid  distur¬ 
bance. 


726  ON  LIFE  AND  DEATH  II  480b 


The  beating  of  the  heart,  which,  as  can  be 
seen,  goes  on  continuously,  is  similar  to  the 
throbbing  of  an  abscess.  That,  however,  is  ac¬ 
companied  by  pain,  because  the  change  pro- 
[jo]  duced  in  the  blood  is  unnatural,  and  it 
goes  on  until  the  matter  formed  by  concoction 
is  discharged.  There  is  a  similarity  between 
this  phenomenon  and  that  of  boiling;  for  boil¬ 
ing  is  due  to  the  volatilization  of  fluid  by  heat 
and  the  expansion  consequent  on  increase  of 
bulk.  But  in  an  abscess,  if  there  is  no  evapora¬ 
tion  through  the  walls,  the  process  terminates 
480a  in  suppuration  due  to  the  thickening  of 
the  liquid,  while  in  boiling  it  ends  in  the  es¬ 
cape  of  the  fluid  out  of  the  containing  vessel. 

In  the  heart  the  beating  is  produced  by  the 
heat  expanding  the  fluid,  of  which  the  food 
furnishes  a  constant  supply.  It  occurs  when  the 
fluid  rises  to  the  outer  wall  of  the  heart,  and 
[5]  it  goes  on  continuously;  for  there  is  a  con¬ 
stant  flow  of  the  fluid  that  goes  to  constitute 
the  blood,  it  being  in  the  heart  that  the  blood 
receives  its  primary  elaboration.  That  this  is 
so  we  can  perceive  in  the  initial  stages  of  gen¬ 
eration,  for  the  heart  can  be  seen  to  contain 
blood  before  the  veins  become  distinct.  This 
explains  why  pulsation  in  youth  exceeds  that 
in  older  people,  for  in  the  young  the  forma¬ 
tion  of  vapour  is  more  abundant. 

[/o]  All  the  veins  pulse,  and  do  so  simultan¬ 
eously  with  each  other,  owing  to  their  con¬ 
nexion  with  the  heart.  The  heart  always  beats, 
and  hence  they  also  beat  continuously  and  si¬ 
multaneously  with  each  other  and  with  it. 

Palpitation,  then,  is  the  recoil  of  the  heart 
against  the  compression  due  to  cold;  and  pul- 
[75]  sation  is  the  volatilization  of  the  heated 
fluid. 

27  (21) 

Respiration  takes  place  when  the  hot  sub¬ 
stance  which  is  the  seat  of  the  nutritive  prin¬ 
ciple  increases.  For  it,  like  the  rest  of  the  body, 
requires  nutrition,  and  more  so  than  the  mem¬ 
bers,  for  it  is  through  it  that  they  are  nour¬ 
ished.  But  when  it  increases  it  necessarily 
causes  the  organ  to  rise.  This  organ  we  must 
[20]  take  to  be  constructed  like  the  bellows 
in  a  smithy,  for  both  heart  and  lungs  conform 
pretty  well  to  this  shape.  Such  a  structure  must 
be  double,  for  the  nutritive  principle  must  be 
situated  in  the  centre  of  the  natural  force. 

[25]  Thus  on  increase  of  bulk  expansion  re¬ 
sults,  which  necessarily  causes  the  surrounding 


parts  to  rise.  Now  this  can  be  seen  to  occur 
v/hen  people  respire;  they  raise  their  chest  be¬ 
cause  the  motive  principle  of  the  organ  de¬ 
scribed  resident  within  the  chest  causes  an 
identical  expansion  of  this  organ.  When  it  di¬ 
lates  the  outer  air  must  rush  in  as  into  a  bel- 
[jo]  lows,  and,  being  cold,  by  its  chilling  in¬ 
fluence  reduces  by  extinction  the  excess  of  the 
480b  fire.  But,  as  the  increase  of  bulk  causes 
the  organ  to  dilate,  so  diminution  causes  con¬ 
traction,  and  when  it  collapses  the  air  which 
entered  must  pass  out  again.  When  it  enters 
the  air  is  cold,  but  on  issuing  it  is  warm  owing 
[5]  to  its  contact  with  the  heat  resident  in  this 
organ,  and  this  is  specially  the  case  in  those  an¬ 
imals  that  possess  a  full-blooded  lung.  The  nu¬ 
merous  canal-like  ducts  in  the  lung,  into  which 
it  passes,  have  each  a  blood-vessel  lying  along¬ 
side,  so  that  the  whole  lung  is  thought  to  be 
full  of  blood.  The  inward  passage  of  the  air 
[/o]  is  called  respiration,  the  outward  expira¬ 
tion,  and  this  double  movement  goes  on  con¬ 
tinuously  just  so  long  as  the  animal  lives  and 
keeps  this  organ  in  continuous  motion;  it  is 
for  this  reason  that  life  is  bound  up  with  the 
passage  of  the  breath  outwards  and  inwards. 

It  is  in  the  same  way  that  the  motion  of  the 
gills  in  fishes  takes  place.  When  the  hot  sub¬ 
stance  in  the  blood  throughout  the  members 
[75]  rises,  the  gills  rise  too,  and  let  the  water 
pass  through,  but  when  it  is  chilled  and  re¬ 
treats  through  its  channels  to  the  heart,  they 
contract  and  eject  the  water.  Continually  as  the 
heat  in  the  heart  rises,  continually  on  being 
chilled  it  returns  thither  again.  Hence,  as  in 
respiring  animals  life  and  death  are  bound  up 
[20]  with  respiration,  so  in  the  other  animals 
class  they  depend  on  the  admission  of  water. 

Our  discussion  of  life  and  death  and  kin¬ 
dred  topics  is  now  practically  complete.  But 
health  and  disease  also  claim  the  attention  of 
the  scientist,  and  not  merely  of  the  physician, 
in  so  far  as  an  account  of  their  causes  is  con¬ 
cerned.  The  extent  to  which  these  two  differ 
and  investigate  diverse  provinces  must  not  es- 
[25]  cape  us,  since  facts  show  that  their  in¬ 
quiries  are,  to  a  certain  extent,  at  least  conter¬ 
minous.  For  physicians  of  culture  and  refine¬ 
ment  make  some  mention  of  natural  science, 
and  claim  to  derive  their  principles  from  it, 
while  the  most  accomplished  investigators  into 
nature  generally  push  their  studies  so  far  as  to 
[jo]  conclude  with  an  account  of  medical 
principles. 


PRINTED  IN  THE  U.  S.  A. 


ARCHBISHIP  MITTY  HIGH  SCHOOL 

Library 

SOOO  Misty  Avenue 

San  Jose,  CA  95129-1867 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS,  Volumes  2  and  3 


ANGEL 

ANIMAL 

ARISTOCRACY 

ART 

ASTRONOMY 
BEAUTY 
BEING 
CAUSE 
CHANCE 
CHANGE 
CITIZEN 
CONSTITUTION 
COURAGE 
CUSTOM  AND 
CONVENTION 
DEFINITION 
DEMOCRACY 
DESIRE 
DIALECTIC 
DUTY 

EDUCATION 

ELEMENT 

EMOTION 

ETERNITY 

EVOLUTION 

EXPERIENCE 


FAMILY 

FATE 

FORM 

GOD 

GOOD  AND  EVIL 

GOVERNMENT 

HABIT 

HAPPINESS 

HISTORY 

HONOR 

HYPOTHESIS 

IDEA 

IMMORTALITY 

INDUCTION 

INFINITY 

JUDGMENT 

JUSTICE 

KNOWLEDGE 

LABOR 

LANGUAGE 

LAW 

LIBERTY 

LIFE  AND  DEATH 

LOGIC 

LOVE 

MAN 

MATHEMATICS 


pi 


v^pv^p^al  7 i 


■p^p^r^p  pi 


- — —  ^ 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS,  Volumes  2  and  3 


MATTER 

RELATION 

MECHANICS 

RELIGION 

MEDICINE 

REVOLUTION 

MEMORY  AND 

RHETORIC 

IMAGINATION 

SAME  AND  OTHER 

METAPHYSICS 

SCIENCE 

MIND 

SENSE 

MONARCHY 

SIGN  AND  SYMBOL 

NATURE 

SIN 

NECESSITY  AND 

SLAVERY 

CONTINGENCY 

SOUL 

OLIGARCHY 

SPACE 

ONE  AND  MANY 

STATE 

OPINION 

TEMPERANCE 

OPPOSITION 

THEOLOGY 

PHILOSOPHY 

TIME 

PHYSICS 

TRUTH 

PLEASURE  AND  PAIN 

TYRANNY 

POETRY 

UNIVERSAL  AND 

PRINCIPLE 

PARTICULAR 

^SF^ 

PROGRESS 

VIRTUE  AND  VICE 

PROPHECY 

WAR  AND  PEACE 

PRUDENCE 

WEALTH 

PUNISHMENT 

WILL 

^F^ 

QUALITY 

WISDOM 

QUANTITY 

WORLD 

REASONING 

